Title: De Ecclesia. The Church
Creator: Jan Hus (c. 1369-1415) (David S. Schaff, Translator)
Publisher: New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1915
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Explicit `NOT_IN_COPYRIGHT` possible-copyright-status
  confirmed directly against the Internet Archive item's own metadata,
  2026-09-25, this session.
Source: Internet Archive item deecclesiachurc00hussgoog
  (archive.org/details/deecclesiachurc00hussgoog), fetched directly
  (curl, raw bytes, direct datanode) from the item's own _djvu.txt
  full-text file, 2026-09-25, this session.
Provenance note: Body text unaltered including its own OCR errors; not
  independently spot-checked for OCR quality beyond the opening pages,
  a mid-document sample, and the opening of Chapter I this session. Hus's
  central ecclesiological treatise - the work whose condemnation at
  Constance led directly to his execution.

Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for general ions on library shelves before il was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

Il has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often diflicult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parlies, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the plus We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a b<x>k is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 

countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means il can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's hooks while helping authors ami publishers reach new audiences. You can search through I lie lull text of this book on I lie web 
at |http : //books . qooqle . com/| 



THE CHURCH 



JOHN HUSS 

-HIS LIFE, TEACHINGS, AND DEATH- 
AFTER FIVE HUNDRED YEARS 

By DAVID S. SCHAFF, D.D. 



Published by 
CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS 

$2.50 net 



9>e (tttlttia 



THE CHURCH 



BY 

r P _ 



JOHN HUSS 



TRANSLATED, WITH NOTES AND INTRODUCTION 

BY 

DAVID S. SCHAFF, D.D. 

*R0TX880ft OV CHUSCB RJ&XWt tBh WSSrZRN. IBBOTyCGICAL SEldKAEY 



... 



• • • • • 






Nemo tenetm auulquG** cvilttt nisi ad quod move! eum deus 
credere sed deus mm movei homtoem ad credendum falsum. 

No one is held to believe anything except what he is 

moved by God to believe but God moves no man to 

believe what is false. 

—John Hum, this treatise, p. 40. 



NEW YORK 
CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS 

1915 



TH H!'..;V i'ORK 

PUi-LT!" i:.:-kAKY 

705089 

Til t^i n fooNOA' ;ons 
R I'j't: L 



COPYWOHT, 1915, BY 

CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS 



Published June, 19x5 






• • • • • ••••, 

• • ••• •*> 
•• • •• • • • • . 

• •• •• • •» 

• • • • • • • 



••• 



••• 



••• • 



• ••• • 
• •• 



• •• •• • •• 



• ••? 

• • • 

• •• 



• •••• 

• • •.: 









••• ••• • 

• • • • • 




WYCLIF— 

Vita et doctrina Christi sunt optimum speculum . . . cum mam- 
festum sit quod omnis homo et solum talis qui est in vita et doctrina 
Ckristo contrarius est kereticus, et omnis ckristianus et solum talis qui 
est in vita et doctrina Ckristo conformis est ut sic ab keresi dongatus. 
— De Ecclesia, p. 41. 

The life and teaching of Christ are the best mirror ... for it is 

evident that every man who in life and teaching is contrary to Christ 

and only such a man is a heretic: and every Christian who in life and 

turning |g conformed to Christ and only such a Christian is removed 

. from heresy. 

HUSS— 

Spero, ex Dei gratia, quod sum ckristianus ex integro, a fide non 
devians, et quod potius veUem pati dirce mortis supplicium, quam aliquid 
veUem prater fidem asserere t vd transgredi mandate Domini Jesu Christi. 
— Ad P alecs, Mon., 1 : 325. 

I hope, by God's £i$cp, t6at\t'an>£r(il)s & Christian, not deviating 
from the faith, and that I* would rather Salle* thVpenalty of a terrible 
death than wish to affirm J*nytHifcg:out2i(fo of the faith or transgress 
^ the commandments of our Isppj Je^us Christ. 






»• • 



• » 






• •• 



LUTHER— 

Varum qui, in agone mortis, Jesum filium Dei possum pro nobis, 
invocat et oh talent causam tanta fiducia ac constantia in ignem conjicit 
sese, si is non magnanimum et fortem Christi martyrem sese prabet, 
kaud facile quisquam salvus erit. — Preface to some of Huss's writings, 
1527. 

Truly he — Huss— who in the agony of death invoked Jesus Christ, 

the Son of God, who suffered for us, and for such a cause and with 

such faith and steadfastness threw himself into the fire, if he did not 

show himself a noble and brave martyr of Christ, then will scarcely 

s any one be saved. 





# • 


• _ 


• • 


• • • » ♦ • 


• • 


c • 

• • 

• • 
• • 


» 


• • 


• • 


4 4 • • 


« • 


• • 


• • 

• • 


< • 

• 


• »• • • « 

• t » • * 


•: 


• • 


••• 


4 


« 4 • • • 


• 






• « • 


• 


.» • • • -• • 






• 


'. • 


• 


• « * *; • 








• 


» 


• • «. • « • « 








• 


• 


• 1 • 4 • 






4 


» • • 


• 


•*• * 1 1 






• • • « 


• • 


. . • • 






• • 


••• 


• » 


*»• •' • • 






• 
• 


• • 


• • • K * • • • 
, » • 4 • 4 ••» 





INTRODUCTION 

Of the writings of John Huss of Bohemia, the Treatise 
an the Church is the most important. 1 From its pages the 
charges were drawn upon which the author was pronounced 
a heretic by the council of Constance and the same day, 
July 6, 141 5, burned at the stake. It was written in Latin 
and the translation, here offered, is the first that has ap- 
peared in English and seems to be the first to be issued in 
any language. It is offered as a help in the appreciation 
of a memorable man who deserves well of Western Christen- 
dom and as a contribution to the study of ecclesiology. 

I. The Author. John Huss is the chief religious char- 
acter of Bohemia, as Luther is of Germany, and John Knox 
of Scotland; and he is the one contribution his country has 
made to the progress of religious thought and of culture in 
Western Christendom. His fame it has been possible for 
several centuries to obscure through the semi-mythical per- 
sonality of the Roman Catholic saint, John Nepomuk, but 
recently Huss's eminence as a notable preacher and an un- 
selfish patriot has come to recognition among his people, and 
in Southern Bohemia, though it is loyal to the Roman Catho- 
lic church, his memory is yearly celebrated. 1 

Born in 1373, Huss studied at the university of Prague — 
then in the golden period of its history. In 1403, he was 
made its rector, holding the position six months and later, 

1 Loeerth, who pronounces the same judgment, says that the treatise has 
inspired friends and foes alike with deep respect, Wiclif and Hus, p. 182. 
Huss's main treatise attacking John XXHTs bulls of indulgences and his Reply 
to the Eight Doctors, Monumenta, x : 215-237; 366-402, are more spirited and 
make the impression of being more direct, because they are less encumbered 
by quotations from the canon law and other sources. 

1 For details of Huss's life, see Schafif, Life of John Huss, N. Y., 19x5. 

vu 



viii INTRODUCTION 

in 1409, for the term of a year. In 1403, he was also ap- 
pointed preacher at Bethlehem chapel which had been 
founded ten years before to afford preaching in the native 
Czech tongue. Under Huss the chapel became the most 
conspicuous religious centre of the city., next to the cathedral 
of St. Vite and the centre of a national movement His 
sermons at once attracted attention by their Scriptural 
fervor and by their attacks upon the abuses of the clergy. 
As /Eneas Sylvius bears witness, 1 he was forcible in speech; 
and his purity of character was such that no charge was ever 
made against it in Bohemia or during his trial in Constance. 
The hostility of the clergy, which his attacks aroused, fol- 
lowed him till his death. 

There were three specific movements, which involved 
Huss in trouble and brought on violent dissension in Prague. 

The first was the spread of Wyclif's views. Soon after 
Wyclif's death, 1384, his writings were carried to Bohemia, 
where they made as deep an impression as in Wyclif's own 
country. His views had been pronounced heretical by Gregory 
XI and what was heresy in England was heresy in Bohemia. 
By some of the Prague clergy XLV Articles said to contain 
Wyclif's views were brought to the attention of the uni- 
versity, 1403, for its decision. In spite of Huss's protest and 
the protest of Palecz and Stanislaus of Znaim, Huss's inti- 
mate friends, and other members of the theological faculty, 
the writings were forbidden to be read or taught. Huss de- 
clined to accept the decision, and was charged with declar- 
ing for the remanence of the bread and wine after the words 
of institution and with publicly announcing the pious hope, 
that Wyclif's soul was among the saved. Vigilant for the 
interests of the orthodox faith, the clergy hostile to Huss 
appealed to Rome, and first Innocent VII and later the Pisan 
pontiff, Alexander V, instructed Zbynek, archbishop of Prague, 
to proceed against Wyclifite heresy, and Alexander ordered 

1 Hist, of Bohemia, chap. XXXV. 



INTRODUCTION ix 

chapels, such as Huss preached in, to be closed. Against 
Huss's open protest the archbishop seized two hundred of 
Wyclifs writings and made a bonfire of them in the court- 
yard of his palace, 1410. After this event, Huss publicly 
defended one of Wyclifs writings, the tract on the Trinity. 
4 A second movement which involved Huss in violent con- 
troversy and trouble was the change in the charter of the 
university, 1409. By this change the Czech element was 
given three votes, and the foreign nations reduced from 
three to one. Against Huss, the recognized leader of the 
movement, was aroused the bitter opposition of the German 
population which exercised an influence in the city out of 
all proportion to its numbers. In this issue the court party 
was on Huss's side, but the hostility of the Germans, so Huss 
felt, thenceforth threatened even his very life. 

The third cause of trouble for Huss was his attack, in 
141 2, upon the sale of indulgences authorized by John XXIII 
to enable him to carry on a crusade against Ladislaus, king 
of Naples. Deserted over this issue by most of his intimate 
friends at the university, Huss nevertheless spoke out as 
boldly as Luther did a hundred years later against the un- 
holy traffic. He had already refused to obey a citation to 
Rome and was now placed under the ban of excommunica- 
tion by the curia. This proving ineffective, the city of 
Prague was put under the interdict. In the meantime, Huss 
had appealed from the apostolic see to Christ himself, as 
.the just judge and the supreme ruler of the church. 1 
-- The interdict meant moral and religious starvation. In 
part to avert the calamity of a cessation of divine minis- 
tries and heeding the friendly counsel of the king, Wenzel, 
Huss withdrew from Prague and spent the next two years, 
from the fall of 1412 to October, 1414, in the rural districts 
'of Bohemia, protected by powerful members of the nobility, 

1 Palacky, Documcnta, 192, 464-466, 726. See Schaff, Life of Huss, pp. 
158, etc. 



x INTRODUCTION 

and preaching in the villages and on the fields and active 
with his pen. 

The oecumenical council, which was appointed to meet 
at Constance in 1414, seemed to offer an opportunity for a 
fair hearing of Huss's case and the removal from Bohemia 
of the ill-fame of heresy which now attached to it. For 
Huss's name was spread all through Europe and was scarcely 
less notorious than Wyclif's. Provided with a safe-conduct 
by Sigismund, heir of his brother Wenzel and of the empire, 
Huss proceeded to the council but, soon after his arrival in 
Constance, was seized by the cardinals and consigned to 
prison, where he languished till death put an end to his trials. 

Examined by one commission after another, including 
among its members such eminent men as d'Ailly and Car- 
dinal Zabarella, he persistently refused to abjure, unwilling, 
as he professed, to offend against God and his conscience. 
On July 6, 1415, the council in full session charged him with 
thirty errors and turned him over to the civil authority to * 
suffer the penalty appointed for heretics, death in the flames. 

II. The Circumstances under which the treatise was 
written. The immediate occasion of the writing of the 
Treatise on the Church was a document signed by eight 
doctors belonging to the theological faculty of the univer- 
sity, dated February 6, 1413. Its immediate occasion was 
the papal bulls calling for a crusade against that refractory 
Christian prince, Ladislaus of Naples, and the sale of indul- 
gences on the streets of Prague. It asserted the duty of 
absolute submission to the commands of pope and other 
ecclesiastical superiors, condemned the XLV Wyclifite Arti- 
cles as scandalous and heretical and demanded that the 
kingdom of Bohemia be cleared of heresy, if necessary by 
the severest ecclesiastical and also civil punishments. 1 The 
Bohemian clergy and nation, it affirmed, were in complete 
accord in all matters of belief and worship with the Roman 

1 For the text in Latin and Czech, Doc., 475-485. 



INTRODUCTION xi 

church — tenet et credit fideliter sicut Ramana ecclesia et nan 
aliter — the pope being the head of the Roman church and 
the college of cardinals its body. Of all names, so the doc- 
tors confessed, the name heretic is the most to be abhorred. 
As for the sentences pronounced by Rome upon Huss, it was 
not within the province of the clergy of Prague to sit in 
judgment upon them — nee est cleri in Praga judicare si justa 
vet injusta est M. J. Hus excommunicatio et aggravatio a curia 
ramana. 

These and other positions of the eight doctors the Treatise 
on the Church takes up one by one and discusses. Huss's 
work called forth replies from Palecz and Stanislaus of Znaim, 
two of the signers of the document, and to each Huss made 
a rejoinder as he also wrote a more elaborate and very vig- 
orous rejoinder addressed to the eight doctors as a body. 1 
In the first two of these rejoinders Huss cites his Treatise 
on the Church by name at least eleven times, and in the 
Reply to the Eight Doctors at least five times. 1 The Treatise 
on the Church grows in interest as it is read in connection 
with these three cognate works, which further elucidate some 
of its principles and add items of personal interest. 

Intended as a reply to the document issued by the eight 
theological doctors, this treatise became Huss's apologia pro 
sua vita, the defense of the views which he had drawn from 
Wyclif and advocated. With Cajetan before Luther at Augs- 
burg, the eight doctors knew of only one word applicable 
to Huss, the word recant. His case was not arguable. Un- 
questioning submission was imperative. Rome had spoken: 
\ "Yield and obey," they wrote — obediendum et pariendum 

jst.* Huss's final reply was not recorded with pen or ex- 
pressed by word of mouth. He sealed his convictions with 

'his life at Constance. 

'The text is given in Mon. t i : 318-331; 33i-3<>5; 3 6 5~4o8. 
*M<m. t i : 320, 321, 323, 328, 329, 33s, etc. In the rejoinder to the eight 
doctors the Reply to Stanislaus is quoted at least twice. 
' Doc., 1 : 480. 



r 



i« 



xii INTRODUCTION 

III. Contents. Huss's line of thought runs as follows: 
First, the author defines the church and its headship. He 
proceeds by discussing the authority of the pope and the 
college of cardinals. The power of the keys is then taken up 
at length, and the limits in ecclesiastical matters of the au- 
thority of superiors over inferiors examined. Finally, the 
Scriptures are set forth as the sufficient standard of faith^ 
and conduct. The conclusions, thus reached, Huss then 
applies to his own case of alleged contumacy to the man- 
dates of his ecclesiastical superiors with the result that a 
Christian's supreme duty is to the Scriptures and God, for, 
as he often repeats: "We ought to obey God rather than 
men. 

Not only are these main principles also discussed in the 
three rejoinders referred to above, but they are taken up in 
other works such as his Six Errors, — de sex Erroribus — his 
Attack on the Bulls of Indulgence, his Reply to an Occult 
Adversary and in his letters written during the period of 
his semi-voluntary exile from Prague and his imprisonment 
at Constance, especially his letters to Christian Prachaticz, 
rector of the university of Prague. 1 

In the following fundamental positions the Treatise on 
the Church opposed the accredited ecclesiastical system 
which the fifteenth century had inherited from the age of 
the Schoolmen. 

i. The Church. 1 The holy catholic — or universal — church 
is the body of the predestinate in heaven, earth and purga- 
tory. The church is either general or particular. Wherever 
two or three are gathered together in Christ's name there 
is the church, whether in India, Greece, Spain, Rome or 
any other locality. The church is one throughout the world.. 
The bond of unity is predestinating grace or, as Huss also 
put it, faith, hope and love. 1 The pope, as he affirmed dis-i 

1 Doc., 54-63. " Especially chaps. I- VII. 

» Pp. 14, 49, 59 etc. 



INTRODUCTION xiu 

finctly, is not the bond of Christian unity, and nowhere does 
1 lie represent the sacraments as the bond of unity. 

Following Augustine, Huss proceeds to show that the 
church is a mixed body, made up of predestinate and prasciti, 
or reprobate, and he uses the parable of the net and other 
parables to prove it. Although according to the popular 
opinion — vocalionem vulgarem et reputationem ecclesiasUcam — 
all Christians are members of the church militant, yet it is 
one thing, Huss affirmed, to be in the church and another to 
be of the church. Judas was in the church for a season, but 
ultimately lost, and Paul by predestination was of it even 
during the period of his persecuting activity, when he was 
not in it. 1 

These definitions set aside the following views which pre- 
vailed in Huss's time. 

^ The pope and the cardinals do not constitute the church. 
This was a wide-spread popular conception and Huss is at 
great pains to prove its fallacy. The document of the eight 
doctors had so defined the church. Wyclif , before Huss, had 
said that "the public understands by the Roman church the 
v pope and the cardinals." * 

The church is not confined to the body over which the 
apostolic see has jurisdiction. The particular Roman church 
is a company of the faithful living under the obedience of 
Rome, as the companies of the faithful living under the obe- 
dience of Antioch and Constantinople were called the church 
of Antioch and the church of Constantinople. In a notable 
passage in one of his letters to Prachaticz, Huss said suc- 
cinctly: "The Roman church is not the catholic apostolic 
♦church, for no partial church can be the holy catholic church* 

«* Pp. 16 sq. y 21, 30 sqq., 41 sqq., 58, etc. Huss's word prasciti, or foreknown, 
does' not contain all that the word reprobate means, although they are one in this 
that they both imply ultimate perdition. The first word does not involve an 
active decree of reprobation which the word reprobate is usually taken to 
involve. 

'Pp. 58, etc., Wyclif 3 words are: Communiias intdligit per Rom. cedes, 
papam et cardinaUs quibus est necessarium omnibus aliis obedire. de Eccles., 92. 



ariv INTRODUCTION 

However, among the militant churches the Roman church is 
the principal one." l 

The church is not inerrant One of the proofs given is 
that the church chose Agnes, a woman, pope and consented } 
to be ruled over by her. Indeed, the Roman church with 
the pope and cardinals may be transformed into Sodom, , 
but against the Church of Christ the gates of hell cannot i 
prevail. 1 

Pope and prelates are not necessarily in authority by 
reason of appointment or election to office. 9 They only are 
true officials, and only the authority of those prelates is to 
be acknowledged, whose lives are in accordance with Christ's 
precepts. The standard of judgment is found in the words, 
"by their fruits ye shall know them," a passage Huss quoted , 
again and again. 4 

All these assertions make straight in the direction of the 
rights of private judgment. On that principle Huss justi- 
fied his refusal to obey the Roman pontiff and other ecclesi- ** 
astical superiors. 

2. The Papacy. The Roman pontiff is not the head 
of the church on earth. Christ is the head. Not by dele- 
gated authority does Christ's promise, "Lo, I am with you* 
alway, " become effective. Every predestinate person is im- . 
mediately joined to him and receives from him grace and 
religious power even as the body receives sensation and 
guidance from the head. Were this not the case, the church 
would have many times been acephalous, without a head, as 
in the interims between the death of one pontiff and the 
election of his successor. The pope, so the doctors affirmed, 
is the head of the whole militant church, its heart, its navel, 
its unfailing fountain, and its all-sufficient refuge — caput, cor, 

1 Pp. 62, 63, etc., Doc., 59. 

t FaUU etfallitur, pp. 133 sq. t etc.; Doc., 59; also ad P alecs, Mon. t 1 : 323, 
336; Doc., 61, etc.; tola mUUans eccles. errai in multis qua concernunt div. judi- 
cium d slaium, Man., 1 : 227, 233, 358 sq. 

• Especially chap. XIV, 4 Pp. 136, 143, 145, 160, 182. 



INTRODUCTION xv 

akeus, fans indeficiens et refugium sufficientissimum. In view 
of such statements, Huss affirms that the doctors treated the 
Roman pontiff as a fourth person in divine things and placed 
'him on an equality with the Holy Spirit. 1 

In the course of his discussion on the papal office, Huss 
presents the following views: 

. The rock upon which the church is built, Matt. 16 : 18, 

/is Christ and not Peter. 1 The Apostles called Christ the 

• foundation. To Christ, not to Peter, did the patriarchs look 

forward; and the early Christians did not base their faith 

ion the Apostle. 

The Roman pontiff shares authority with other bishops 
of the church, as Peter shared authority with the other 
Apostles. Christ did not give the care of all the sheep to 
Peter even as he did not exclusively give him the power to 
preach and administer the sacraments.' 

The word pope is not a Scriptural word and in the early 
* history of the church there were a number of popes. 4 Orig- 
inally all bishops were called popes, and these were equally 
the immediate vicars of Christ. 

The pope is not infallible. In matters of faith popes 
may err and have erred— faili et fallere possunt. They may 
.'be led astray by avarice or be deceived by ignorance. 5 

The pope may also be a heretic and, as a matter of fact, 
before the fifteenth century there had been both wicked 
men and heretics on the papal chair. Here Huss drew for 

1 Especially chap. Xm. See ad Palea, ad Stanisi., and ad odo doctt., Man., 
x : 320 sq., 326, 350, 353, 385, etc.; Ponat doctor papain omnino sufficient refu- 
gium omnibus filiis ecdesue sicut est Spiritus s. et dicam quod posuit quartern 
personam in divinis, 1 : 354. 

1 Pp. 59 sq., etc., especially chap. IX. This formed the subject of the ninth 
charge made against Huss at Constance. In his Super IV. Sent., Huss did 
not refer to the famous passage, Matt. 16 : 18. Comp. p. 559. 

J Comp. ad Palca, etc., Mon., 1 : 320, 353, 356, etc 

A Plures papa, ad Palea, Mon., 1 : 326, 342. Pope means father and was 
' first limited to the Roman pontiff by order of Gregory VII. 

• Pp. 61, 66, 71. See also Mon., 1 : 227, 233, 343, 359, etc.; Doc., 
58, etc. 



xvi INTRODUCTION 

historical data upon the Chronicles of Ranulph Higden, Mar- 
tinus Polonus, and Rudolph Glaber. 1 

Repeatedly did Huss return to the list of popes heretical 
and popes flagitious. The rudest layman, a woman, a here- 
tic, yea antichrist himself may be a pope. 1 But in none 
of these lists does the name of Honorius I appear, the pon- 
tiff on whose case Bishop Hefele, in 1870, rested the argu- 
ment against the doctrine of papal infallibility. 

Among the heretical popes Huss included Boniface VIII 
and Clement VII of the fourteenth century and, as more 
recent cases of papal errors, he cited the acts of Boniface IX 
setting aside Wenzel as king of the Romans and Sigismund 
as king of Hungary. During his trial Huss had another in- 
stance at hand of a disreputable pontiff in John XXIII, , 
accepted by almost the whole of Western Christendom and 
then deposed for crimes and iniquities unspeakable. Huss 
also recalled that Gregory XII and Benedict XHI were pro- 
nounced heretics by the council of Pisa.* 

But the case on which Huss laid most stress was the pa- 
pissa Agnes who, according to the universal opinion of his 
time, occupied under the name of John VHI the papal office 
for more than two years. Gerson used her as a proof that 
it is possible for the church to err. It was monstrous, so . 
Huss thought, for a female to rule Christendom, and such a 
female — a woman of unsavory repute before she was made 
pope and revealing her sex by the sudden birth of a child 
on one of the streets of the holy city. 4 

1 Especially chap. XVII. Huss also presented these views from the pulpit. 
See Life of Huss, p. 38. 

* Mon. t x : 342. In his Theol. Symbolics, p. 231, Doctor Briggs brushes 
aside the case of Honorius I as not pertinent, without even mentioning the 
names of Dollinger, Hefele, and other eminent Catholic historians who have 
taken the view that he was manifestly a heretic. 

* Mon. t 1 : 232. Though the council of Pisa was treated as oecumenical 
by the council of Constance and was formerly accepted by accredited Roman 
Catholic historians, it is now universally disowned in the Catholic church. 

4 Some of the other references to Agnes outside this treatise are: Mon^ 
x : 324, 326, 336, 339, 343, 344, 347, etc.; Doc., 58, 6x, etc 



INTRODUCTION xvii 

Huss went still further, in declaring that popes may be 
prczsctii, reprobates, though legitimately elected to their of- 
fice. Without definitely assigning by name this or that pon- 
tiff to hell, as did Dante, yet Huss declared that popes there 
have been who had conferred ample indulgences by word — 
verbaUkr — and are damned. Christ chose a thief as an 
Apostle: so may the cardinals choose an antichrist as Roman 
pontiff. The only standard by which it can be judged 
whether a pope is a vicar of Christ or antichrist is by his 
conformity to the law of Christ in daily life and ministries. 1 
The outward display assumed by popes, the kissing of 
their feet, the name most holy — sanctissimus — by which they 

' allowed themselves to be addressed, Huss stigmatized, as 
Luther did a hundred years later, as incompatible with_ their 
holy office. 1 

The origin of all this false pomp Huss found, as Wyclif did 
before him, in the donation of Constantine, the fictitious gift 
passed off upon credulous Europe by the pseudo-Isidorian 
Decretals in the ninth century and to which appeal con- 
tinued to be made down to Alexander VI in his bull dis- 
tributing America between Spain and Portugal "forever," 

'and later. As a compensation for being healed of leprosy 
by Sylvester, Constantine bequeathed to that pontiff and 
his successors civil rule over Rome and all the regions of the 
West and conferred upon them the crown and the other 
insignia of temporal lordship and glory. This imperial gift, 
Wyclif and Huss contended, was the beginning of the de- 
cline of the church from its pristine purity, and modern — 
moderni — popes and cardinals who protruded their feet to 

/be kissed and gloried in the address "most holy" did not 
possess a scintilla of sanctity and utterly lacked the power 

1 Pp. 6a, ia8, also Mon. t i : 229, 322, 328, 335, 339 sqq. t 3431 etc.; Doc., 58, 
60, etc. The term antichrist Huss defined as " one who acts contrary to Christ" 

'Chaps. Xm, XIV, etc; Afo*., 322, 323, etc. Huss nowhere alluded to 
the divine titles assumed by Roman emperors such as "Lord God" by Domi- 
tian and our most holy lord—sacratissimus domnus nosier— by Diocletian. 



xviii INTRODUCTION 

of the early rulers of the church, so that the demons could 
say of them: "Paul I know and Peter I know, but who are 
you?" With Gregory the Great, Huss affirmed that the . 
name does not make the bishop but the life. 1 <S> 

One of the conclusions drawn in this treatise, as also in 
other treatises from Huss's hand, is that the church once 
got along very well without popes. And she might get along 
well without them again, Chapter XV. 

A second conclusion was that papal decrees are not al- 
ways to be obeyed. To rebel against an erring pope Huss 
boldly said was to obey God. So clear and emphatic were 
Huss's views on this subject that Luther declared that "Huss 
committed no more atrocious sin than to profess that a pope 
of an impious life is not the head of the church catholic. 
He conceded he was the head of a church, but not of the 
catholic church. Truly he ought to have said: 'No matter 
how criminal and wicked the pontifex maximus is yet ought 
he to be venerated for sanctity. He cannot err and all that 
he says and does is to be accepted and treated as an article 
of the faith. ' The good men at Constance disposed of three 
wicked popes and would not allow them to be taken to the 
fire: but Huss was sentenced to death." 2 

3. The Power of the Keys. Huss's chief statements are 
as follows: The Apostles, as has already been said, were all 
the immediate vicars of Christ, Peter's authority not being 
universal and total but partial and particular. Without 
recourse to Peter the remaining Apostles ordained bishops 
and presbyters, taught and pastured. 1 Thomas, the Apostle 
to India, was not appointed by Peter, nor was Matthias. 



1 Pp. 143, 153, also Mon., 1 : 320, 383, etc.; Doc., 291, etc. In this connec- 
tion we easily think of Thomas Aquinas who, visiting the pope, was shown the 
treasures of the Vatican with the words: "See, Thomas, Peter could no more 
say, 'Silver and gold have I none'"; to which Thomas replied: "Nor could 
he now say, * Rise upon thy feet and walk.'" 

* Preface to Huss's writings, 1537. 

» Pp. 82, no, also Mon. t 1 : 345, 353, 356, etc. 



INTRODUCTION xix 

James presided as a superior over the conclave at Jerusalem 
and Paul required no human license — sine licentia — to preach 
and to rule. 

Not only all bishops but all presbyters are successors of 
the Apostles, as originally the church was governed by pres- 
byters. For this view Huss quoted Jerome's famous state- 
ment. 1 

It must be remembered that in the Middle Ages the 
episcopate was not looked upon as a distinct order. The 
three orders, according to Thomas Aquinas, were the sub- 
/ deacon, deacon and priest. 

The keys were conferred upon the church, Matt. 18 : 17, 
18, and in binding and loosing, Peter acted as a representa- 
tive of the church. The church is the final tribunal. In 
giving the power to Peter, Christ gave it in his person to 
every presbyter whatsoever.' 

Priestly acts of all kinds are invalid except as the priest's 
.,life is conformed to Christ's law. 8 No one has ever more 
clearly laid stress on the necessity of purity of life to the 
clerical office than Huss. 

The power of the keys, or of remitting sins and retaining 
them, is a declaratory power such as the priest under the old 
dispensation exercised in pronouncing the leper clean and as 
the disciples exercised in loosing Lazarus, John n : 44. The 
priest did not make the leper clean nor did the disciples re- 
lease Lazarus from the bonds of death. Neither pope nor 
priest can absolve from sin except where God has before 
absolved. As Huss said in his attack against John XXIII's 
bulls, the pope's act in absolving is nothing more than the 
announcement of a herald— factum papa ad maximum non est 
nisi praconis Dei promulgation Peter bade Simon Magus 

'P. 155. 

* Chap. X, Ckristus dicii Petro et in persona ejus cuicunque suo fresbytero: 
quodcunque solveris, etc., ad ocio doctor es, Man., i : 387. 

• Pp. 47-5°i also Af0»., 1 : 378, 383, 387 sq., 392, etc. 

4 Mon.y x : 227, also 228, 378, 392. This treatise, p. xox sqq. 



INTRODUCTION 

call upon the Lord for indulgence which he could not himself 
grant. 

In his Commentary on the Sentences of the Lombard Huss 
presents substantially the same view that he presents in this 
treatise and the cognate writings, but not so boldly. There, 
he says, no one can be excommunicated unless he is first 
excommunicated by himself and except he offends against 
Christ's law. 1 In his treatise on The Six Errors, Huss quotes 
Peter the Lombard to show that the remission by a priest is 
a different thing from remission by God who remits of Him- 
self, purifying the soul of guilt and loosing it from the debt 
of eternal death. Did the pope possess the power of the 
keys in the way generally supposed, as a thing of his own, 
then he might empty purgatory itself, and, if he neglected 
to do so, he would be guilty of ill-will or indifference. On 
the question of absolution Huss is most emphatic, and he 
restates his views again and again. No saint, he says, could 
be found who had the presumption to say: "I have forgiven 
thee thy sins," or "I have absolved thee."' With Wyclif, 
and upon the basis of the Lord's Prayer, Huss said that in a 
real sense every Christian has the right to absolve. 

The two keys which are put into the hands of the church 
are knowledge and authority. The chief power given to the 
Apostles and their successors was to preach or evangelize. 
No prelatic authority has the right to inhibit one ordained 
from preaching the Gospel any more than it has the right 
to prohibit the giving of alms. As for the use of the prerog- 
ative to censure, Huss insisted that it should be exercised 
sparingly. Christ did not call down fire from heaven on the 

1 Pp., 607, 610. 

* Pp. 103, 106, also Man., x : 229, 232, 239, etc. Wyclif declared that un- 
just excommunication was worse than the murder of the body, de Ecclts., p. 153. 
In the course of his treatment of this subject, Huss gives an exposition of Jer. 
1 : 10, the famous passage which Gregory VII was wont to use for the suprem- 
acy of the papal power over the civil. Ad octo doctor ts, Mon., 1 : 391. In 
this treatise Huss elaborated at greatest length the subject of the keys, M on. , 
1 : 385 sqq. 



INTRODUCTION 

Samaritan city. By tears and prayers and Christian minis- 
tries should the supreme pontiff and priests fulfil their 
office. 1 

Along the same line of curbing the assumptions of the 
priesthood, Huss insists in this treatise upon the right of in- 
feriors, including laymen, to examine the mandates of the 
clergy and ecclesiastical superiors before giving them heed. 
Even the civil realm has the right to punish priests and to 
remove them from their offices as did, so Huss affirms, 
Charles IV, king of Bohemia, and as Titus and Vespasian at 
God's command had done in destroying Jerusalem and the 
priests. 1 

4. The Scriptures. They are the supreme rule of faith 
and conduct. This treatise and all Huss's writings abound 
in Scripture quotations. A charge made against him by 
Stephen Palecz was that more than any heretic before him, 
he had fortified his heresies by appeals to the sacred volume. 1 
Huss expressed his hope to die in the faith, but also that at 
the great judgment bar he might be found not to have denied 
a single iota of their contents. 4 Charged with following 
Wyclif, he replied that if he accepted Wyclifs statements, 
it was because they were drawn from the Scriptures. The 
holy volume, he maintained, is a book of life, an animate 
thing. The priest's main duty is to set forth its truths and, 
in being true to it, it is not possible to incur damnation 

1 Chap. XXI, also Mon., 1 : 220, 389, etc. 

t Mon. i 1 : 170, etc. So far as I know, Huss nowhere took up the case of 
the emperor Trajan, a topic of constant discussion in the Middle Ages, in which 
Wyclif also joined. According to the story, Trajan was prayed by Gregory the 
Great out of hell into heaven, the only pagan to get to the abode of bliss. The 
solemn question was whether he had gone direct to heaven as John of Damascus 
claimed, or whether he first was brought back to the earth in order to be bap- 
tized, then dying over again before being taken up to the abode of the blessed 
as Thomas Aquinas, Durandus, and others asserted. Wyclif, de Eccles., 531 
sqq., accepted the story but was concerned to show that Trajan's going to 
heaven was by virtue of predestination. BeUarmine, de Purg., 2 : 8, discusses 
the subject. 

* See Schaff, Life of Huss, p. 140. 

4 if**.. 1 : 325. 330* 335; Doc. 9 293, 319, etc. 



I 



xxii INTRODUCTION 

through any prelatical command. 1 Huss's own following 
was called the evangelical clergy — clerus evangdicus} 

In repeated discussions, Huss made the clear distinction 
between apostolic commands, as contained in the Scriptures, 
and papal mandates. No bidding is obligatory which is not 
distinctly based on the Scripture — prater expressam scrip- 
luram — and, where usage and Scripture disagree, usage is to 

'be set aside. In deciding what the Scriptures teach, reason 
is to be employed. But the safest refuge of the church, Huss 

^declared, is no human authority but the Holy Spirit. 8 

In view of these positions on the supreme authority of 
Scripture and the right of individual judgment, Bishop Hefele 
rightly declares that Huss was fully out of accord with the 
Catholic church and a true precursor of the Reformation. 4 

5. To these fundamental principles Huss, in this treatise, 
adds another in which he also took solemn issue with the prac- 
tice and the theory of the mediaeval church, — the death 

% penalty for heresy. He calls it the "sanguinary corollary." 
In repudiating it, Chapter XVI, he was setting himself against 
Innocent III and the great pontiffs who came after him and 
also against the theological statement of the Schoolmen. The 
execution of religious dissenters was begun in 385 with the 

: death of the Priscillianists at Treves. Fathers of the ancient 
church exhausted the dictionary for severe words to stigma- 
tize heretics. Athanasius called them dogs, wolves and 
worse. When ecclesiastical dissent reappeared in Western 
Europe in the twelfth century, the words, "compel them to 
come in, " which St. Augustine used to justify physical mea- 
sures to coerce the Donatists, were explained to justify the 
putting of dissenters out of the world. They were likened 
to scabby sheep and to the locusts of Joel hidden in the 

"dust. Heresy was a cancer to be cut out by the extermina- 

1 Especially chap. XVI, also Mon., 1 : 326, 327, 331; Doc., 297, etc. 

*Afo»., 1 : 331. 

J Pp., 71, 163; Mon., 1 : 354 sq. 

4 Schaff , Life of Huss, 284, 297. 



INTRODUCTION xxiii 

4 tion of the heretic. Innocent III set on foot the organized 
crusades for the extirpation of heresy with the sword in 
.Southern France. Thomas Aquinas, d. 1274, made the sol^ 
emn statement that as coin-dippers, who offend against the 
majesty of the state, are put to death, so heretics, who 
offend against the church, deserve to be put out of the 
world. 

This principle was incorporated in the civil codes of the 
Schwabenspiegel and Sachsenspiegel and in the laws of Fred- 
erick II who proscribed death in the flames for heretics. In 
accordance with the old axiom that the church does not de- 
sire blood — ecclesiam non sitit sanguinem — it did not of itself 
execute the death sentence. However, it was participant in 
the execution, for it threatened civil magistrates with severest 
spiritual penalties who hesitated to execute it. Gregory IX 
demanded from the Roman senator a promise to search out 
heretics and to put them to death within eight days of their 
condemnation by the ecclesiastical tribunal. Louis IX, in 
France, and parliament by its act of 1401, in England, in- 
troduced the law of death. The horrors of the system of 
torture were authorized by Innocent IV, the successor of 
^Gregory IX. Later, it remained for Sixtus IV in 1478 to 
/Open the second volume in the history of the horrors of the 
mediaeval inquisition by sanctioning the holy office of 
' Spain. 1 

Thus, by papal assumption and scholastic definition and 
state legislation, the claim was made to the awful power of 
shutting up dissenters eternally in hell and of depriving them 
of life on the earth. 

In opposing this usage, Huss appealed to the example of 
Christ and the purpose of the Gospel. Christ did not as- 
sume civil authority. He refused the title of king. He did 

' 1 Lord Acton says of Pius V that "he held that it was sound Catholic doc- 
trine that any man may stab a heretic condemned by Rome, and that every 
man is a heretic who attacks the papal prerogatives," Letters of Lord Acton to 
^ Mary Gladstone, p. 135. 



{ 



xxii INTRODUCTION 

through any prelatical command. 1 Huss's own following 
was called the evangelical clergy — clerus evangdicus} 

In repeated discussions, Huss made the clear distinction 
between apostolic commands, as contained in the Scriptures, 
and papal mandates. No bidding is obligatory which is not 
distinctly based on the Scripture — prefer expressam scrip- 
turam — and, where usage and Scripture disagree, usage is to 

• be set aside. In deciding what the Scriptures teach, reason 
is to be employed. But the safest refuge of the church, Huss 

i declared, is no human authority but the Holy Spirit. 8 

In view of these positions on the supreme authority of 
Scripture and the right of individual judgment, Bishop Hefele 
rightly declares that Huss was fully out of accord with the 
Catholic church and a true precursor of the Reformation. 4 

5. To these fundamental principles Huss, in this treatise, 
adds another in which he also took solemn issue with the prac- 
tice and the theory of the mediaeval church, — the death 

% penalty for heresy. He calls it the "sanguinary corollary." 
In repudiating it, Chapter XVI, he was setting himself against 
Innocent III and the great pontiffs who came after him and 
also against the theological statement of the Schoolmen. The 
execution of religious dissenters was begun in 385 with the 

1 death of the Priscillianists at Treves. Fathers of the ancient 
church exhausted the dictionary for severe words to stigma- 
tize heretics. Athanasius called them dogs, wolves and 
worse. When ecclesiastical dissent reappeared in Western 
Europe in the twelfth century, the words, "compel them to 
come in," which St. Augustine used to justify physical mea- 
sures to coerce the Donatists, were explained to justify the 
putting of dissenters out of the world. They were likened 
to scabby sheep and to the locusts of Joel hidden in the 

*dust. Heresy was a cancer to be cut out by the extermina- 

1 Especially chap. XVI, also Mon. y x : 326, 327, 331; Doc., 297, etc. 

*Mon. t 1 : 331. 

• Pp., 71, 163; Mon., 1 : 354 sq. 

4 Schaff , Life of Huss, 284, 297. 



INTRODUCTION xxiii 

4 tion of the heretic. Innocent III set on foot the organized 
crusades for the extirpation of heresy with the sword in 
. Southern France. Thomas Aquinas, d. 1274, made the sol^ 
emn statement that as coin-dippers, who offend against the 
majesty of the state, are put to death, so heretics, who 
offend against the church, deserve to be put out of the 
world. 

This principle was incorporated in the civil codes of the 
Schwabenspiegel and Sachsenspiegel and in the laws of Fred- 
erick II who proscribed death in the flames for heretics. In 
accordance with the old axiom that the church does not de- 
sire blood — ecdesiatn nan sitit sanguinem — it did not of itself 
execute the death sentence. However, it was participant in 
the execution, for it threatened civil magistrates with severest 
spiritual penalties who hesitated to execute it. Gregory IX 
demanded from the Roman senator a promise to search out 
heretics and to put them to death within eight days of their 
condemnation by the ecclesiastical tribunal. Louis IX, in 
France, and parliament by its act of 1401, in England, in- 
troduced the law of death. The horrors of the system of 
torture were authorized by Innocent IV, the successor of 
'Gregory IX. Later, it remained for Sixtus IV in 1478 to 
•open the second volume in the history of the horrors of the 
mediaeval inquisition by sanctioning the holy office of 
'Spain. 1 

Thus, by papal assumption and scholastic definition and 
state legislation, the claim was made to the awful power of 
shutting up dissenters eternally in hell and of depriving them 
of life on the earth. 

In opposing this usage, Huss appealed to the example of 
Christ and the purpose of the Gospel. Christ did not as- 
sume civil authority. He refused the title of king. He did 

' * Lord Acton says of Pius V that " he held that it was sound Catholic doc- 
trine that any man may stab a heretic condemned by Rome, and that every 
man is a heretic who attacks the papal prerogatives," Letters of Lord Acton to 
^ Mary Gladstone, p. 135. 



xxiv INTRODUCTION 

not wish that men should be put to death — nee voluii civilUer 
judicare nee morte corporis condemnors voluti. 1 It is true that / 
before d'Ailly and the commission at Constance Huss modi- 
fied this statement, declaring that the suspected heretic 
should be labored with and instructed and only then, if neces- 
sary, punished corporally. As thus modified, the statement 
started a tumult among those present. And, when Huss 
went on to say that the priests and scribes who delivered 
Christ to Pilate had the greater sin, the tumult was repeated. 
It is possible that Huss was moved by the sufferings he was 
undergoing to make this modification, but exactly what he 
meant is not clear. 1 

In his attack against John XXHTs bulls calling for the 
crusade against Ladislaus, he repudiated the right of a pon- 
,tiff to call for war against Christians in the absence of a 
special command from God. He denied the application of 
the cases of the Old Testament and Sapphira to Christian 
officials in the ordinary exercise of their authority. Only an 
express command from above would justify the use of the 
death penalty. Nor is torture to be applied to Christians. 
When Christ wished to defend himself against his enemies, 
he "meekly bore their attacks and did good to his detrac-/ 
tors," an example priests should follow. By word and ex- 
ample Christ commended peace — ad pacem duett verbo et 
exemplo.* 

In dealing with Augustine's use of the passage "compel » 
them to come in," Huss affirmed that it is one thing to compel 
and quite another to exterminate or kill. The death penalty 
for heretics was never expressly recommended by Augustine, 
and it is probable that Huss more nearly represented the views 
and spirit of the African Father than did the Schoolmen 
and the council of Constance. The armor of the church, 
Huss insisted, is not carnal but spiritual as set forth in the 

*P. 170. *Doc. t 204. 

• Mon, f z : 395, also 393, 394, 397, etc., and chap. XXI of this treatise. 



INTRODUCTION 

last chapter of the Ephesians, a passage he frequently ex- 
' pounded. 1 

Indeed, heresy has its uses, and heretics are to be re- 
claimed to Christ's sheepfold by methods of persuasion, so 
Huss affirmed. As for himself, he professed that excommu- 
nication and the harshest treatment are rather to be chosen 
than a pretended absolution from guilt and punishment, for 
he is more likely to be absolved from guilt and punishment 
who, in God's cause, suffers malediction and contumely even 
unto death, than he who prevaricates to himself or persecutes 
Christians.* 

Thus, a hundred years before Luther wrote his famous 
words against the burning of heretics, Huss took the same 
position. But, so far as we know, there was not a single 
individual in the great council of Constance who had any 
sympathy with the views of the Bohemian heretic. Nay, 
the council went further than to burn Huss: it supplemented 
its verdict by a solemn declaration that faith is not to be 
kept with a heretic. The pity is that Bullinger — in the 
Second Helvetic Confession, John Calvin and other leaders 
of the emancipation of the sixteenth century did not fully 
conform to the principle set forth by Huss and Luther and 
fthake themselves free from the method of the inquisition 
practised by our religious ancestors of the Middle Ages. 

These fundamental principles, in regard to the church, 
the papal office, the keys and the Scriptures, for which 
Huss stood were adapted to shake the ecclesiastical organiza- 
tion of his day to its very foundations. The council of 
Constance when it stated them in its thirty charges fully 
appreciated the grave menace. Had that solemn assembly 
accepted Huss's principles it would have set aside the con- 
struction built up by the pride of the mediaeval hierarchy 
and the laborious reasoning of the Schoolmen. 

IV. Huss's Debt to Wyclip. The leading principles 

l M<m. t z : 405, etc. * P. 25; Mo*., 1 : 234, 393. 



INTRODUCTION 

set forth in his Treatise on the Church, Huss found in the 
writings of Wyclif and particularly in Wyclifs treatise on 
the same subject. Not only has he the main principles in 
common with Wyclif, and also many of his quotations from 
the Fathers and the canon law and his proofs from Scrip- 
ture. Huss appropriated paragraph after paragraph from his 
predecessor and transferred them often with little verbal 
change to his own pages. The agreement has been convinc- 
ingly shown by Loserth, who prints the corresponding para- 
graphs side by side. It is not necessary here to repeat what 
he has done. 1 

Huss's reverend respect for Wyclif has already been indi- 
cated. Whereas Stephen Palecz, Stanislaus of Znaim and 
other theological colleagues, who at first shared his admira- 
tion for the English teacher, came to regard his teaching as 
honeyed poison — mellatum venerium — Huss continued to bow 
before him as the "master of deep thoughts." And it was 
for Wyclif 's doctrines and, in a sense, in his stead he died at 
Constance. 1 

The recent publication of Wyclifs works beginning with 
1883, under the auspices of the Wyclif society, has made 
possible a full estimate of the obligation which Huss owed 
to his English predecessor. Up to that date only a compara- 
tively small number of his writings, English as well as 
Latin, were in print, and Wyclifs Treatise on the Church 
appeared for the first time, 1886. In the light of Wyclifs 
printed text, the theory advocated at length by Neander 
that Huss was indebted to Matthias of Janow for his view 
on the authority of Scripture and other topics is found to be 
wholly without foundation. And, in fact, nowhere does Huss 
express any debt to that writer of Prague who, by the way, 
recanted his views which were pronounced erroneous. Never 

1 Wiclif and Hus, 181-225. The two sources upon which Huss drew were 
Wyclifs de Ecdesia and his de potestate Papa, ed. by Loserth, 1907. 

1 J/0*., 1 : 33 1 , 334, 335, etc. For a larger statement of Huss's debt to Wyclif, 
see Schaff , Life of Huss, chap. m. 



INTRODUCTION xxvii 

did a man owe more to mortal teacher than Huss did to John 
Wyclif. 1 In the fundamental doctrines concerning the pre- 
destinate, the church, the papacy, the power of the keys 
and the authority of the Bible Huss agrees exactly with his 
predecessor.* They are one in their denunciation of Boniface 
VUPs bull, Unam sanctam, and of Constantine's donation. 
All the reformatory — and we may say revolutionary — 
principles affirmed by the former will be found in Wyclif. 

However, Huss was not a servile imitator of Wyclif and 
it seems never to have occurred to his opponents in Prague 
to twit him on the use he made of Wyclif's writings. It 
must be borne in mind, that from no other source outside 
the pages of Scripture could Huss have learned what he came 
to believe as from the pages of Wyclif. Reading him was 
like taking clear water from a vessel filled at a spring re- 
discovered. And, it must be remembered, that Huss had no 
sooner left the university than he found himself in an 
atmosphere charged with the controversial spirit, himself 
the chief figure. 

To these considerations the following must also be taken 
into account Instead of transferring to his pages paragraphs 
from Wyclif bodily, Huss might easily have introduced into 
them words of his own or taken the meaning and re-expressed 
it in his own language. That he did not pursue this method 
is evidence that he had no intention of using the garments 
of his great teacher to make a reputation for himself. He 
was ready to die for his convictions and in this treatise the 
chief consideration was to give the most forcible expression 
possible to the views he and Wyclif were known to hold in 

"A succinct and authoritative statement of the extent to which Wyclif s 
writings were put into print before 1883 may be found in Loserth's thorough 
article on Wyclif in the German Herzog, 21 : 225 sq. With that year the 
printing of the Latin writings was begun. The Trialogus, however, which 
gives Wyclif s distinctive views was published in Basel, 1525. The English 
writings had been gathered by two editors, Thomas Arnold, 1869-71, 3 vols., 
and F. D. Mathew, 1880, 1 vol. 

•See Schaff, Ck. Hist., V, part 2 : 325-349. 



xxviii INTRODUCTION 

common. The chief weapon of attack against him was 
Wyclif's system as set forth in the XLV Articles, condemned 
by ecclesiastical authority and recently by the eight doctors 
to whom he was replying. 

The materials, taken from Wyclif, are under Huss's hand 
subjected to altogether new collocations, and in matters of 
detail, where we would expect Huss to have drawn from his 
predecessor, he does not For example, he does not repeat 
Wyclif's use of the ark and the seamless coat of Christ as 
figures for the unity of the church nor make reference to 
Solomon and the temple. Nor does he introduce David at 
the side of Peter as an example of one who is predestinate and 
yet is lacking for a time in righteousness. Huss omits many 
of the authors quoted by Wyclif such as Bradwardine, Henry 
of Gauda and, as already stated, Bonaventura. There is 
evidence, as Schwab long ago suggested, that Huss was well 
read in the canon law and used it independently. As for 
Augustine, Loserth has expressed the opinion that Huss 
knew his copy well. With Luther, at a later time, he felt 
profound respect for this father's theological learning and 
piety. In this treatise he designates Augustine now the 
"holy man" now the "great doctor" and pronounced him 
the foremost of biblical expositors, the man who was more 
profitable to the church than many popes. 1 As for materials 
from Scripture Huss's treatise contains much that Wyclif 
does not give as also fresh considerations from reason. His 
references to Christ, whom he frequently calls "the best of 
masters" will at times be found to be charged with true 
eloquence as well as piety. 

If it were necessary to point to the custom of his age to 
justify Huss's procedure, the cases of John Gerson and 
Cardinal d'Ailly might be cited. Gerson, rector of the uni- 
versity of Paris, without making acknowledgment, appro- 
priated a considerable part of one of Henry of Langenstein's 

1 Pp., 78, 149, 154. aoi. 



INTRODUCTION 

works and d'AHly pursued the same method with Ockam's 
Dialogus. 1 

Huss's Commentary on the Sentences of Peter the Lombard, 
recently published in a volume of eight hundred pages, has 
re-established the author's claims to be a sane and well- 
balanced theological student. Here he expresses himself 
independently and shows himself conversant with those 
phases of theological thought which were a subject of special 
discussion in his day as well as with the fundamental catholic 
principles. 2 

Comparing the two treatises on the church along gen- 
eral lines this may be said: 

Huss is the more clear and direct of the two writers. Much 
as he seems to repeat himself, he nevertheless pursues a defi- 
nite aim. Wyclif , as was his custom, was drawn aside by the 
exuberance of his intellect into all sorts of discussions ger- 
mane and not strictly germane. His treatise has extended 
paragraphs on canonization, mathematics, alms, relic worship, 
the evils of ecclesiastical endowments.' He shows his scholas- 
tic bent by that peculiar use of Latin terminology charac- 
teristic of mediaeval scholasticism. Although Huss employs 
some of Wyclif s characteristic words, as antonomasia, yet 
he is comparatively free in this respect. 4 

1 Schwab, /. Get son, p. 121, says that Orson's Dedatatio compendiosa, 
etc, Du Pin, 2 : 314-318, is a literal copy — wortlich — of chapters XVI-XX 
of Langenstein's Consilium pacts de union* et reform, cedes. Tschackert, 
P. (TAilli, p. 43, says of d'Ailly that he copied Ockam almost literally— : fast 
wortlich. 

, Flajshans, Super IV. Sententiarum, Prague, 1905. In his Introduction 
Flajshans, a liberal Catholic, pronounces Huss Bohemia's chief religious char- 
acter. On the appearance of this work Loserth declared that his former judg- 
ment disparaging Huss's originality would have to be revised. 

*De Eccles.f 44599., 07594., 162 sqq., 274599., 465599. In saying this, 
however, the occasion which led to the composition of Wyclif s work must 
be taken into account, that is the case of alleged sacrilege committed in West- 
minster Abbey. See Loserth's Introd. to his ed. 

4 See the glossary in Wyclifs de dom. civ., ed. by Poole, pp. 470-483- Of 
the one hundred and fifty-nine words there given, Huss seems to use only 
seven in his de Eccks. 



INTRODUCTION 

We come now to the temper in which the two works are 
written as indicated by particular statements as well as the 
general drift. Huss is much less severe in his judgments of 
individuals than is Wyclif. The latter called Gregory XI a 
terrible devil — horrendus diabolus — and blessed God for 
bringing him to his death when He did. The cardinals he 
stigmatized as the very synagogue and nest of Satan and a 
nest of heretics. 1 

At times, in his English writings, he calls the pope the 
vicar of the fiend — the devil. Huss joins with Wyclif in 
saying that it might be well to get along without a pope,, 
though not in such strong language, but nowhere uses such 
an expression as Wyclifs, enormous pride of the Western 
church — monstruosa superbia ecclesuz occidentals — or plainly 
denounces the last clause of Boniface's bull as to be detested.* 
Nor did Huss in his treatise directly repudiate the authority 
of church teachers such as Thomas Aquinas and Bonaventura, 
as Wyclif did, although, as his pages show, he put strange in- 
terpretations on some of the statements of the canon law and 
seems to have been at times under the constraint of usage 
in clinging to those statements rather than of conviction. 

Huss, in other words, was much less severe in his judg- 
ment of individuals and more moderate in his language than 
his predecessor. Wyclif used a sharp blade and sometimes 
the acrimony of the pamphleteer. The Bohemian carried 
to his desk the homiletic instinct of the preacher addressing 
an audience whose welfare he held in mind. The one was 
governed somewhat by the love of the truth as a matter of 
intellectual determination; the other altogether by the love 
of the truth as a practical force in daily life. 

In his last months in prison, Huss definitely accepted the 
distribution of the cup to the laity and exclaimed against 
the impiety of the council's act when it threatened every 
priest with the ban who dared to distribute it. On the other 

1 De Ecclcs., *8 9 186, 358, 366. « Wyclif, de Eccles., 38, 362. 



INTRODUCTION 

hand, he did not adopt Wyclif's doctrine of the eucharist 
but to the end insisted that he was wrongly charged with 
denying the church's dogma of transubstantiation. 

V. Importance. Huss's treatise has a place of first 
importance among works on the church. Its treatment is 
clear, elaborate and professedly based on Scripture. It is 
the best known work on the subject issued from Augus- 
/tine to the Reformation perod. It was the basis of charges 
in the most famous formal trial of a single individual in the 
history of the Christian church. 1 It was cherished and used 
by a large section of the Bohemian people. It has had a 
permanent influence upon the development of the idea of 
the church. 

Upon the council assembled at Constance Huss's vol- 
ume made a deep impression as a work calculated to be 
disastrous in its effects, unless counteracted by the severest 
measures within the church's reach. One of its foremost 
leaders, that eminent man Cardinal d'Ailly, who had prob- 
ably more to do than any other man of the council with Huss, 
declared that by an abundance of proofs Huss's treatise com- 
bated the plenary authority of the church as much as the 
Koran combats Christ. 2 

Wyclif's Treatise on the Church was hidden away in man- 
y . uscript until a generation ago. His followers at Oxford, soon 
after his death, repudiated his views. His name was a mem- 
ory except as his English version of the Bible was read in 
narrowing groups of Lollards. That memory, indeed, was 
powerful, for the early Protestant Reformers looked back to 
dm and Tyndale wrote: "They said it in Wyclif's day and 
le hypocrites say it now, that God's Word arouseth in- 



[m 



>I do not forget the trials of Abadard, Savonarola, etc. Arius's views, 
rather than Arius himself, were on trial at the council of Nice, though Arius 
became personally involved, being restored, however, after he had been ban- 
ished and his books burned. Of course, Savonarola's trial lacked the imposing 
element involved in the trial of Huss, an oecumenical council. 

1 Du Pin, Works of Gcrson, 2 : 901. 



INTRODUCTION 

surrection." l And Bishop Tonstall, writing to Erasmus, 
1524, said that the new views were "not a question of some 
pernicious novelty, but only that new arms were being added 
to the great band of Wyclifite heretics." 

But what Wyclif's Bible was to the small company of 
dissenters in England, Huss's Treatise on the Church was 
to the large body of Bohemians who respected Huss's memory 
and followed, in part or in whole, his views. 

In Luther's time, Huss's name and also his treatise were 
a live power. As for his treatise, a copy of it was sent by 
Hussites to the German Reformer on the ground that he and 
Huss were agreed and, in 1520, an edition was printed in 
Mainz by Ulrich von Hutten.* Wyclif was not quoted by 
the Reformers. They knew him through Huss. 

The ancient church produced two writers on the spe- 
cific topic of the church, Cyprian and Augustine. The Unity / 
of the Church written by the bishop of Carthage, though 
small in compass, is of much importance for its view of the 
episcopate. Augustine, in the controversy with the Donatist 
dissenters, furnished material of great moment for the defi- 
nition of the church without giving a succinct definition. 1 
The nearest approach to it were his statements that the 
church is the holy body of all the faithful, to be saved — 
sancia cong. omnium fidelium salvandorum — and the body of 
the faithful who are elect and justified— fidelium predestina- 
iorum et justificatorum.* The term catholic, or universal, 
first used by Ignatius, was employed by these Fathers in con- 
formity with the usage which had become general. 

During the Middle Ages, the topic was not a matter of 
special treatment. The ideas of Augustine were not ques- 
tioned that baptism is essential to salvation and that all 

1 Preface to Exposition of St. John, Parker ed., p. 235. 

1 Under the title de imitate Ecclesia cujus autor Perot in concilio ConsUmtiensi, 
For the influence of Huss's name and death upon Luther, see Schaff, Life of 
Huss, pp. 291 sqq. 

s See Loofs, Dogmengtsch., 4th ed., p. 370. 4 P. 36, Super IV. Sent., 616. 



INTRODUCTION xxxiii 

those, not in communion with the visible church, are lost. 
The church was looked upon as a tangible, palpable institu- 
tion, as much so as the duchy of Spoleto or the kingdom of 
France. The Schoolman, who came nearest giving a defini- 
tion, was Hugo of St. Victor who, in his work on the sacra- 
ments, called the holy catholic church the body of Christ 
vivified by one Spirit, united in one faith and sanctified. It 
is the number of the faithful, the totality of all Christians. 1 
Thomas Aquinas passed it by except as he discussed the 
pope's absolute supremacy. The fourth Lateran indeed 
spoke of the church as "the one universal church of the 
faithful outside of which there cannot be any salvation 19 — 
extra quatn nullus otnnino salvatur — a statement which nar- 
rowed the church down to the limits of the Roman communion 
in the profession demanded of the Waldenses, namely, "we 
believe with the heart and confess that the one church is 
not of the heretics but the holy Roman catholic church out- 
side of which no one can be saved." * 
^ In his Rule of Princes and Errors of the Greeks, Thomas 
[Aquinas gave his assent to Innocent Ill's assumption claim- 
ling for the Roman pontiff plenitude of power and declared 
/that obedience was due to the Roman church as to the Lord 
ijesus himself — cui obediendutn est tanquam Domino Deo, Jesu. 
He used also the words: " subjection to the Roman pontiff 
fis of necessity to salvation" — subesse romano pontifici est de 
[necessitate salutis? 

A new period in the history of the conception of the 

,j church opened with Boniface's bull, Unam sanctam, and was 

forced by it, the text on which other writers as well as Wy- 

clif and Huss comment frequently. 4 This notorious document 

might have been relegated to the archives of innocuous legal 

l DcSaer., i : a, Migne's ed., 176 : 416 : cedes, s. corpus est Ckristi, uno spiriiu 
vivificata ct unita fide una, etc. 

* See Sch wane, Dogmertgcsch. d. miiti. Zeit., p. 504. 

'Reusch's ed., p. 9; also Mirbt, QueUen, 3d ed., p. 157. 

4 For Huss, see index of this vol. Wyclif, de Eecles., 14, 26, 38, 112, 114, 314. 
Wydif speaks of Boniface as having entered the papacy as a fox, by craft, p. 34. 



INTRODUCTION 

papers, had it not been for the fact that it confirmed Louis 
the Fair of France in his opposition to the temporal abso- 
lutism of the papal throne and united his kingdom around 
him in this interest. Groups of pamphleteers in Italy and 
France attacked now the claims of the papacy to secular 
authority, as Dante, and now its spiritual claims, as Peter Du- 
bois and Marsiglius of Padua. These men agreed in repu- 
diating Constantine's donation on the ground that Constant 
tine had no right to bestow upon the Roman pontiff any 
such power; and Marsiglius went far along the line of making 
the claims which the Protestant Reformers afterwards united 
in making. 1 This keen critic, who was anathematized by 
John XXII for asserting that Peter was not the head of the 
church, also asserted that the distinction between bishops 
and priests is not founded in Scripture and that the church 
has no authority to coerce by physical measures. Con- 
temporary with him, Ockam was also affirming that Christ 
did not appoint a primacy at Rome and that the pope is not 
essential to the church but is of human appointment — ex 
ordinatione humana? This English Schoolman defined the, 
church as "the community of the faithful comprehending 
clerics and laymen." It may be reduced to one person as it 
was to Mary when the disciples fled. A generation before, 
Philip the Fair had proudly reminded Boniface that the 
church was made up of laymen as well as priests. 

The removal of the papacy to Avignon and the papal 
schism which followed, 1377-1415, were adapted to intensify^ 
the controversy over the nature and functions of the church, 

1 For this most interesting tract literature, see Riezler, Die likrariscken 
Widersacker der P&pste zur ZeU Ludwig des Balers. Finke, Aus den Tagen 
Bonifaz VIII. Haller, PapsUhum und Kirchenreform. Scholz, Die Publi- 
zistik zur ZeU Pkilipps des Schenen und Bonifaz VIII. Schaff , Ch. History V., 
1 : 674, 777. 

1 See David E. Culley, Konrad von Gtlnhausen, seine Lekre, seine Werke und 
seine QueUen. Halle, 1913, p. 84 sqq. Hugo de St. Victor, as in the passage 
above quoted, also said that "the church is comprised of laymen and clerics, as 
it were the two sides of one body." To the laity, Hugo goes on to say, are 
committed terrestrial possessions, etc. 



INTRODUCTION 

questions which had seemed to be forever settled before 
Boniface issued his bull. The discussions were participated 
in by a class of men of whom Eonrad of Gelnhausen was 
one of the very first, and by Wyclif followed by Huss who 
constitute a much more advanced group. The opinions of 
the former group found expression in the Reformatory coun- 
cils, notably the council of Constance. The opinions of the 
latter involved an ecclesiastical revolution and led straight 
forward to the Protestant Reformation. 
, The opening clause of Boniface's bull asserting the unity 
of the church, Wyclif and Huss both accepted, but they put 
upon it another interpretation from that intended by Boni- 
face. The unity was not in the apostolic see but in predes- 
tinating grace as manifesting itself in the exercise of the 
Christian virtues. The other clauses they wholly repudiated, 
Jiamely the clause that to the church is given both swords 
^nd the clause that it is altogether necessary for salvation 
,ihat every creature be subject to the Roman pontiff. The 
'latter repeats the very language of Thomas Aquinas. In re- 
nouncing these two propositions, Wyclif and Huss set them- 

^ selves against the fabric of the mediaeval system. 
~ It was Huss's merit that he kept open the subject of 
the church by his death and this treatise. He passed Wyclif 's 
views on to a later time, and his volume was the avenue for 
their transmission. Huss's tenets and his memory, embodied 
in the Christian dissenters known as " the Bohemians," were 
a constant source of interest and of controversy down to the 
age of Luther. At the close of the fifteenth century, Wessel 
^exclaimed: "The church cannot err, but what is the church? 
It is the communion of the saints to which all true believers 
belong who are bound together by one faith, one love, one 
'hope." The definition of the nature and the functions of 
the church was awaiting settlement, and the staggering blow 

•*to Boniface VHI's arrogance was given by the Reformation. 
In view of our authorities, it would be false to say that 



INTRODUCTION 

Luther learned directly from Huss, but Luther's assertions 
show that he not only took Huss under his protection, but 
that he was confirmed in his opposition to the pope by his re- 
gard for Huss and by his writings. Not to quote again what 
I have quoted in another place, Luther said: "I rejoice that 
Huss, a true martyr, is rising before this, our century, that 
is to be properly canonized even if the papists are broken 
to pieces. Oh! that my name were worthy to be associated \ 
with such a man. 1 

Luther's definition of the church is embodied in the Augs- 
burg Confession. It was due to Luther and Zwingli that the 
terms visible and invisible were used to designate the true 
church from the body of the baptized.* 

True to the mediaeval conception and only six months 
before the nailing up of the XCV Theses, Leo X confirmed 
Boniface's Unatn sanctam, and in reply to Luther Prierias 
declared the church to be in essence the community of be- 
lievers but virtually the Roman church and the Roman pon- 
tiff— ecclesia universalis esserUialiter est convocatio credentiutn, 
virtualiter ecclesia Romana et pontifex maximus. The catholic 
polemic of the seventeenth century, with Bellarmine at its 
head, made the rule of the papacy of the essence of the defini- 
tion of the church. He expressly repudiated as heretical the 
definition of Wyclif, Huss and Calvin. 1 Still true to the 
mediaeval idea, Pius IX, in 1873, "* a communication ad--> 
dressed to the German emperor, William I, declared that all 
the baptized are in some sense subject to the Roman pontiff. 4 

Several matters in Huss's treatment call for passing note*' 

1 Letter to Otto Brunfels, 1524, who edited some of Huss's writings, 1524. 
See Mon. y 1 : 423. 

1 In his Com. on Galatians, Luther spoke of the church invisible, est in- 
visibilis kabUans in Spiritu, etc., and Zwingli seems to have been the first to 
use both terms, in his Expos, fidei, 1531 — est autem ecdes. aut visibUis and in* 
visibUis. The XXXIX Articles use the term invisible. Schwane, Dogmen- 
gesch., p. 510, says: "Huss rejected the definition that the church is a visible 
community of believers in Christ." 

• Lib. Ill de Ecdes., chap. II. 

*Jeder welcher die Taufe empfangen hoi, gckort in irgend einer Aft und m 
ugend einer Weise . . • dim Pafste an Mirbt, Quellen, p. 371. 



INTRODUCTION 

The first is that Huss, as also Wyclif before him, con- 
tinued to call the church mother and holy mother. Although 
this designation has the prestige of high antiquity, it is to 
be used with great caution. The church is not a personality, 
giving birth to spiritual children. The designation is drawn 
from Paul's placing Christ and the church figuratively in 
the relation of bridegroom and bride. But nowhere in the 
New Testament is the church called mother or bringing forth 
ascribed to it The term is bound up with the conception of 
the church as a saving institution and its use developed with 
the development of the sacramental system. From the 
Protestant standpoint it is fallacious. Wyclif and Huss, 
again and again, pronounce it a metaphor and so prepared 
the way for its rejection by the Reformers. 1 

Another remark is that Huss makes not a little of church 
history. He had the historical sense and less of the scho- 
lastic than we might expect. The age of criticism was dawn- 
ing not only among the men of the Renaissance but in the 
church. It is interesting to compare Luther's conception 
of the use of history to do away with bad usages. In 
his Introduction to Dr. Barnes's History of the Lives of the 
Popes , issued in 1536, he said that, in the beginning, not 
being much versed in the lives of the popes, he attacked the 
papacy a priori, that is, from holy Scripture, but was won- 
derfully delighted that others were doing the same a poste- 
riori y that is, from history. 2 Huss used history to prove the 
truth of Scripture. 

A third remark is that nowhere in this treatise does Huss 
use the passage, John 17, "that they may be one as thou, 

1 In his Super IV. Sent., p. 469, Huss speaks of the church as our most 
dear mother, the most worthy mother of predestination, etc. In his Com. 
on the Decalogue, Flajshans's ed., p. 19, he says of the fifth commandment: 
By some "thy spiritual father" is said to be the priest and truly " thy mother" 
is the church. He then went on to speak of another interpretation by which 
the Christian has three mothers, a mother after the flesh, a spiritual mother, 
the church, and a celestial mother, Mary. Cyprian presented the mediaeval 
view when he said: "He cannot have God for his father who does not have 
the church for his mother." Schaff, Ch. Hist., II, 173. 

* See Jacobs, Lvtkeranism in England, p. 18a. 



xxxviii INTRODUCTION 

Father, art in me and I in thee/' so much quoted in this 
present age as if corporate union were the test of the ful- 
filment of the words. Huss's treatise presents an entirely 
different test of Christian unity. He must not be pressed too 
far. Nevertheless, it is plain that he laid stress on particu- 
lar churches 1 and made the bond of union between them 
and between their members predestinating grace and an 
active life of Christian virtue. 

VI. The Canon Law. The authorities used in this 
treatise are the Scriptures, accredited writers of the church, 
the canon law and Wyclif. Among the accredited writers 
frequently quoted are Augustine, Ambrose, Jerome, Gregory 
the Great, Bernard, and Peter the Lombard. It is notice- 
able that Bonaventura's name is not mentioned at all, whereas 
Wyclif 's Treatise on the Church quotes him at least sixteen 
times, and, for some reason, Huss draws upon Thomas 
Aquinas much less than did his English precursor. 

With few exceptions the places where these quotations 
are found in the volumes of Migne and the Nicene Fathers 
series have been noted, and also the references to the canon 
law as they are found in Friedberg's edition. 2 The verses 
of the Scripture texts, which in Huss's time had not yet been 
marked, have been supplied. All this matter, which the 
translator is responsible for, is enclosed in brackets, as also 
an occasional brief explanation. 

Like the sacramental system, the universities and the 
cathedrals, the body of the canon law was one of the im- 
posing constructions of the Middle Ages. It had as its first 
and chief compiler Gratian who, about 1150, was teaching 
church law in Bologna as Irnerius was teaching Roman law. 

•The XXXDC Articles of Religion speak of "every particular or national 
church" as having authority, etc. 

*A. Friedberg, Corpus juris canonici, 1879-1881, 2 vols., pp. 1468, 1340, b 
pronounced by the Catholic canonical writer, P. Hergenrdther, Lehrbuch d. katk. 
K. -rechts, p. 192, " the best edition." A description of the canon law will be found 
in Friedberg's Introd. to vol. I and in HergenrOther, pp. 1 72-196. For a history 
of the subject of the treatment, see the elaborate work of J. F. von Schulte, 
Die Gesck. der QueUen md Lit, des canon. Rectos, Stutt., 3 vols., 1 875-1 880. 



INTRODUCTION 

From the university of Bologna, which became the celebrated 
centre of the study of both laws, such eminent popes went 
out as Alexander III and Innocent EH, and the advice of 
its jurisconsults was sought on questions of first import, as 
by Frederick Barbarossa on the plain of Roncaglia, 1158. 

In his ConcordatUia canonum discordantium, usually called 
Decretum Gratiani, Gratian attempted to bring into a har- 
monious code the statements of councils, popes, and eminent 
Fathers bearing on all manner of questions concerning the 
government of the church and its usages. This digest had 
even greater authority in its department than Peter the 
Lombard's Sentences in the department of systematic theol- 
ogy. In its sections are also contained the fictitious materials 
of the pseudo-Isidorian decretals, the most notorious portion 
of which is the donation of Constantine. 

As time wore on, the need was felt of supplements to 
Gratian's work, which were furnished in the Decretals, 
so-called, collected by order of Gregory IX, 1234, 1 the Liber 
Sextos or Sext, by Boniface VHI, 1298, the Liber Septimus or 
Clementine Constitutions, by Clement V, 1314,* and the so- 
called Extravagantes, or fugitive decretals, twenty in number, 
issued by John XXII and incorporated into the code by John 
Chappuis in his edition of 1 500. Chappuis also added seventy 
other decretals issued between the pontificates of Boniface 
Vm and Sixtus IV, 1294-1484. The completed digest, con- 
sisting of these parts, was authoritatively issued by Gregory 
Xm, 1582.* 

The Glosses and Little Glosses, which Huss frequently 
quotes — the Glossa ordinaria — are comments made upon the 
original texts by glossators, among whom Cardinal Zabarella, 

1 For Gregory's bull sanctioning the ed. which was made by Raymund of 
Pennaforte, see Wetzer-Welte, 3 : 1446-1450. 

1 In numbering the supplements of Boniface and Clement the VI and the 
VII, reference was had to four compilations made during the reign of Innocent 
HI, which constitute the Decretals. 

* For Gregory's bulls, see Friedberg, 1 : 79 sqq. 



xl INTRODUCTION 

so prominent in Huss's trial at Constance, d. 1417, occupies 
a place of distinction. 1 

In this treatise and elsewhere Huss was concerned first 
of all to base his views upon plain Scripture, and then to 
find their confirmation in the pages of the canon law. In 
doing so, he quoted the spurious decretals of pseudo-Isidore, 
their genuineness in that age being still universally accepted. 

It will be seen that, for Huss, the canon law at times was 
a heavy load to carry. He did the best he could to explain 
away its language which taught the high-church views which 
he distinctly repudiated, and to bring its statements into 
harmony with the teachings of Scripture he adduced. He 
speaks of the respect due to the body of canon law in a tone 
which leads us to infer that he accepted it in places with 
mental reservation. 1 A single case in which he is seen to 
have absolutely set aside its plain meaning is his exposition 
of the last clause of the Unam sanctam to the effect, that 
there is no salvation except for those who fully submit to 
the Roman pontiff, pp. 120, 121. In a fine passage Huss 
makes the Roman pontiff refer to Christ, the supreme Pon- 
tiff and Shepherd, but Boniface had no such idea in mind 
when he issued his arrogant deliverance. 

In regard to Constantine's donation, which established the 
most pretentious claims made for the papal monarchy and 
for the sacerdotal office, Huss took the position Dante had 
taken before him, that Constantine had no right to bestow 
the privileges he did. For the first time, a generation or 
two after him, the genuineness of this document was seri- 
ously doubted by Lauren tius Valla. It was not until 1520 
that Valla's destructive criticism was brought to Luther's 
attention by Ulrich von Hutten. 

To have been consistent, Huss would have been obliged 

'See Schulte, 1 : 216, 226-229; 2 : 89, 217 sqq., etc.; and for Zabarella, 
2 : 283 sqq. 

* Pp. 94, 211 sq., 215, etc. 



INTRODUCTION xli 

to discard Gratian's compilation as Luther did, who, in 1520, 
threw the ponderous volume into the same flames at Witten- 
berg which consumed Leo X's bull. And the marvel is that 
Huss, and Wyclif before him, should have been able to take 
the advanced views they did with this heavy load of the 
traditions of men — some good and some utterly anti-Scrip- 
tural — weighing them down. 

VIE. The Translation. This translation has been 
made from the second edition of Huss's writings, entitled 
Eistoria et Monumenta J. Hus, published in two volumes 
at Frankfurt, 1715, with respectively 627 and 542 pages. 
The edition is a reprint of the earlier edition, Frankfurt, 
1558, also in two volumes. 1 The translator has had both 
editions on his table, using the second on account of the 
greater clearness of the print. After comparing the two 
editions almost paragraph by paragraph, he has failed to 
find a single verbal difference in the text. The only dif- 
ferences are an occasional case of capitalization and punc- 
tuation. 

With exceptions, Huss's quotations are found to con- 
form exactly to the Vulgate, the text of the canon law and 
the other texts which he quotes. It was the translator's 
desire to examine one or more of the original manuscripts 
of the treatise and through the courtesy of the eminent Huss 
expert, Dr. Flajshans, of Prague, he received a list of the 
more important manuscripts. 2 It was found impossible to 
realize this desire; but from the accuracy with which Huss 
has transferred quotations to his pages as found in the Frank- 

>The de Ecclesia fills 75 double-columned pages, Man., i : 243-317. To 
the librarian of Lane Theological Seminary the translator owes his thanks for 
the use of the original edition as well as other valuable works as he is also 
indebted to Dr. Henry Preserved Smith for the use of volumes from the 
library of Union Theological Seminary, of which he is the librarian. 

1 The list of manuscripts, which includes exact descriptions, gives seven 
in the Royal Library of Vienna, one in the Royal Library of Munich, one 
in the Cathedral Gymnasium Library of Magdeburg, dated 1414, and four in 
the university library of Prague. For a list of Huss's works edited by Flajs- 
hans, see Schaff, Life of Huss, p. 8. 



xlii INTRODUCTION 

furt text, it is fair to presume that the manuscript would show 
no change in any essential matter. It is to be hoped that Dr. 
Flajshans will add to his other editions of Huss's writings a 
new edition of this, Huss's most important treatise. 

Huss's Treatise on the Church is now within the reach 
of readers who have known it chiefly by its fame. Its pages 
will enable him who reads to feel some of the pious and heroic 
spirit of its author, the preacher of Bethlehem chapel, and 
at the same time to appreciate more fully what was the 
doctrinal and hierarchical system handed down from the 
classic period of the Middle Ages to the age of Wyclif and 
Huss. According to the letter of this system these two men 
were justly pronounced heretics, but not according to the 
Scriptures to which they appealed. 1 

To follow Huss's own presentation, the principle upon 
which Christ was put to death was stated in the words, 
" We have a law and by that law he ought to die." On x 
the same principle of ecclesiastical usage Huss suffered at 
the stake at Constance. When the two principles empha- 
sized in this treatise are given proper recognition — personal 
devotion to Christ and a daily life conformed to his teach- 
ings and example — the practice of Christian tolerance and all 
human tolerance will be advanced. Then will creedal union 
and ritualistic prepossessions be softened and the barriers 
of denominational self-sufficiency be broken down, barriers 
which, at least in part, have been erected on metaphysical 
definitions in theological matters or uncertain assumptions 
drawn from history concerning the ministry and the sacra- 
ments, for which no distinct warrant can be found in the 
pages of the New Testament This treatise will have a 
mission to-day, if its pages promote the idea that devotion 
to Christ is the condition and the surety of Christian fellow- 
ship and co-operation. 

1 This treatise quotes the New Testament at least 347 times and the Old 
Testament 72 times. The two books most frequently quoted are the Gospels 
of Matthew, 93 times ; and John, 67 times. 



I 



CONTENTS 

PACK 

I. The Unity of the Church i-io 

The church an article of faith — Meaning of church in Greek — In the 
New Testament — The church a mother — The dove of the Canticles — 
The strong woman of Proverbs— Not to be believed in as God. 

II. The One Universal Church Divided into Three 

Parts 11-15 

The church triumphant, militant, and dormant— The Apostles' 
Creed — Wherein the unity consists. 

m. All Christians Are Not Members of the Church 16-26 

Parables of the net, etc. — The human body and the spiritual body — 
Essential parts of the body — Four kinds of persons related to the church 
— Predestinated according to present righteousness — Christ's other 
sheep. 

IV. Christ the Only Head of the Church . . . 27-38 

Head by reason of his divinity and humanity — Head from the be- 
ginning — No reprobate a member of the church — Present goodness no 
proof of predestination — Tychonius — The word Christian. 

V. Good and Bad in the Church 39-51 

Belief and faith — Parables of the marriage-supper, etc. — The least in 
the kingdom of heaven — Prelates may be reprobate— Clergy and church 
used interchangeably — Paying tithes to the clergy for their works' sake 
— The nominal and the real church. 

VI. Christ the Head of the Elect 52-55 

Devil the head of the reprobate — Sin continues in the reprobate but 
disjoins them — Christ head of the world as well as of the predestinate. 

VII. The Roman Pontiff and the Cardinals Not the 

Universal Church 56-66 

Matt. 16 : 18 — The church a mixed body — Particular churches — 
Reasons for calling the Roman church the church. 

VIII. The Faith Which Is the Foundation of the 

Church 67-72 

Three meanings of faith — Faith formed in love — Faith and vision — 
Heb. 11 : 1 — Faith and hope — Fallibility of the pope — Infallibility of 
the Scriptures. *~ " 

xliii 



I 



xliv CONTENTS 

CHAPTUL FACE 

IX. The Church Founded on Christ, the Rock . 73-90 

Christ and not Peter the rock — Paul on the church's foundation — 
Texts showing Christ to be the rock — Augustine on the rock — Patriarchs 
looked forward not to Peter — The apostles the foundations of the church 
— Peter captain and primate — Peter's virtues — The priest makes the 
chair, not the chair the priest — Christ the way, the truth, the life. 

X. The Power of Binding and Loosing .... 91-110 

Spiritual and civil power — Power of the key9 — Penance — Forgiveness 
granted only by him sinned against — How far the priest binds and 
looses — Things Peter could not loose — Lazarus loosed — Binding and 
loosing belong to all the apostles. 

XI. The Abuse of Scripture in the Interest of Cler- 

ical Power 111-118 

Claiming the power of Christ and not following him — The devil the 
worst of sophists-— Christ came to minister — Fictitious clerical authority 
— Christ's true followers — Simoniac priests — The contention of the 
eight doctors. 

XII. Christ the True Roman Pontiff upon Whom Sal- 

vation Depends 119-124 

Belief in Christ alone of necessity to salvation — Christ the eternal 
high priest — Gregory Fs letter on the papal prerogative — Assumptions 
and ostentation of modern pontiffs. 

XILL The Pope Not the Head of the Church but 

Christ's Vicar 125-136 

The alleged successors of Peter and the apostles — Unlettered popes — 
The papissa Joan — Heretic popes— Constantine's donation — Pope and 
cardinals not necessarily successors of the apostles — The pope may be 
head of the Roman church if his life is worthy — If he is predestinate. 

XIV. When the Cardinals Are the Trite Successors 

of the Apostles 137-146 

Cardinals not the body of Christ — Not all the predestinate — Prelates 
often do not seek the things of Christ — The name does not make the 
bishop — The pope's display — Kissing the pope's feet — Prelates to be 
tested by their works. 

XV. The Church May Be Ruled Without Pope and 

Cardinals 147-160 

Unworthy prelates — Duties of Christ's apostles — Ambrose, Augustine, 
etc., true vicars of Christ — Constantine's donation — Lewis's grant to 
Pascal — No such grant from Christ — Original identity of bishops and 
presbyters — Gregory XII condemned by the cardinals — The church at 
first without a pope — The two orders of bishop and deacon — The 



clergy discerned by their works. 



CONTENTS xlv 



XVI. The Law of the Standard of Ecclesiastical 

Judgments 161-182 

Pope and caH»"»l« as judges — Jerome on the Roman see — Christ 
falsely condemned by statute law — Popes to be disobeyed if their judg- 
ments are contrary to the truth: — Christ did not pronounce civil judg- 
ments — Nor put to death — Old Testament examples not to be followed 
— The sanguinary corollary — The abomination of desolation — Cases of 
strife over the papacy — Wicked popes— The Avignon schism— Con- 
stantine's donation announced by an angel, bad or good. 

XVII. Huss's Resistance to Papal Authority . 183-194 

Religious superiors not always to be obeyed — Christ's obedience to a 
superior — To an inferior — Obedience of the greater to the l eas Of an 
equal to an equal— Of the less to the greater— Obedience only virtuous 
as it is of God— Commands and counsels — Ecclesiastical laws not com- 
manded in Scripture. 

XVHL The Apostolic See, or Cathedra Petri . 195-216 

The true priest does good works — Preaching — Pope is apostolic when 
he follows the apostles — Moses' seat was Moses' authority — Augus- 
tine on the apostolic see — Papal commands to be tested— Huss's appeal 
to Christ — Pope may err — Solemn responsibility of priests who kill the 
sheep — Augustine on cathedras — Marcellus made mistakes — The pri- 
macy of Antioch and Rome. 

XIX. When Ecclesiastical Superiors Are to Be 

Obeyed 217-228 

The absolutely food always to be obeyed — Commands that are inter- 
mediate — Neutrality impossible where moral action is concerned- 
Superiors to be obeyed always when they teach Christ's command- 
ments — St Paul's example — Bernard on the duty of obedience — Clerics 
and laics to scrutinize the commands of superiors — No blind obedience. 

XX. Obedience Not Always to Be Rendered to the 

Church or Its Prelates 229-240 

"Prelates to be obeyed in all things" — Excommunication only for 
mortal sin — In matters intermediate the church sometimes to be dis- 
obeyed — Commands to be weighed by the reasons-Ecclesiastical bur- 
dens hard to be borne — Christ's yoke easy — The Christian to follow 
Christ's commands — Capable priests ought to preach as much as the 
rich to give alms. 

XXI. Circumstances under Which Obedience Is to Be 

Rendered to Prelates 241-262 

Popes and prelates compared to the scribes and Pharisees — Divine 
counsels — Circumstances modifying commands— Huss's reasons for not 
going to Rome — Commands repugnant to reason — Christ the first ex- 
emplar to be followed — Deaths of John, Martin, and Stafcon — An in- 
ferior may rebuke a superior — Objections from the canon law against 
rebuking a pope — Inferiors should examine commands before they obey 
tneos. 



I 



xlvi CONTENTS 

CSAPTSK PAGE 

XXII. Excommunications, Just and Unjust . . 263-274 

"A censure from the pope not to be questioned" — Pilate's treatment 
of the censure of Christ — Excommunication, suspension, interdict — Ex- 
communication does not hurt the righteous— God must first excommu- 
nicate — The wicked already excommunicated from the body of the 
righteous. 

XXIII. Suspension and the Interdict .... 275-299 

Suspension must be from God to be valid — Eli and his sons — Old 
Testament priests less guilty than New Testament priests— Prelates 
more guilty than the people if they do not warn the people — Not to re- 
prove is to consent to sin — The interdict — Christ imposed none — 
Unjust to the innocent community — Reasons for the interdict on Prague 
—The curia's method— Boniface VTII's bull— "The customs of the 
fathers" — The apostles did not fulminate interdicts — Condemnation of 
the XLV Wyclifite Articles— The effect 



THE CHURCH 



THE CHURCH 



CHAPTER I 

THE UNITY OF THE CHURCH 

As every earthly pilgrim 1 ought faithfully to believe the 
holy catholic church just as he ought to love Jesus Christ, 
the Lord, the bridegroom of that church, and also the church 
herself, his bride; but as he does not love this, his spiritual 
mother, except he also know her by faith — therefore ought he 
to learn to know her by faith, and thus to honor her as his 
chief mother. 2 

Therefore, in order to reach a proper knowledge of her, it 
is to be noted, (i) That the church signifies the house of God, 
constituted for the very purpose that in it the people may 
worship its God, as it is written, I Cor. n : 22 : "Have ye not 
houses to eat and to drink in?" Or, to speak with Augustine: 
"Do you despise the church of God, the house of prayer?" 
(2) The church signifies the ministers belonging to the house 
of God. Thus the clerics belonging to one material church 
call themselves the church. But according to the Greeks, a 
church — ecclesia — is a congregation — congregatio — held to- 

1 Viator, a current word. See Wyclif, de Eccles., 4, 42, 350. Gerson, Du 
Pin's ed., 2 : 22. 

* See also chap. II, etc. The designation mother is nowhere given to the 
church in the N. T. It is derived from the relation the church bears to Christ 
as his bride. Later on in this chapter Augustine represents her as giving birth 
to children. So Wyclif, de Eccles., 117: "The church is a virgin since she is 
the bride of the virgin Jesus Christ, by whom as a mother we are born after a 
spiritual manner." It followed that Christ was the spiritual father or "father 
by faith/' Wyclif, p. 1, and Grosseteste in this treatise, chap. IV. In his 
Com. on the Lombard, p. 469, Huss speaks of the church as "our most dear 
mother, the most worthy mother of the predestinate." 



2 THE CHURCH 

gether under one rule, as Aristotle teaches, Polit. 2 : 7 *, when 
he says: "All have part in the church." In view of this 
meaning, therefore, the congregation of all men is called the 
church — ecclesia. This appears in Matt. 25 : 31-33, which 
says: "When the Son of Man shall come in his glory and all 
his angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his 
glory and before him shall be congregated all nations." What 
a great congregation of all men under the rule of Christ the 
king that will be ! Because, however, the whole of that con- 
gregation is not the holy church it is added, "and he will sepa- 
rate them, the one from the other, as a shepherd separates the 
sheep from the goats." 

From this it is evident that there is one church — ecclesia 
— of the sheep and another of the goats, one church of the 
righteous and another of the reprobate — prcBSciti* Likewise 
the church of the righteous is on the one hand catholic, that 
is, universal, which is not a part of anything else. Of this I 
am now treating. On the other hand, it is particular, a part 
with other parts, as the Saviour said, Matt. 18 : 20: "Where 
two or three are congregated together in my name, there am 
I in the midst of them." From this it follows that two right- 
eous persons congregated together in Christ's name constitute, 
with Christ as the head, a particular holy church, and like- 
wise three or four and so on to the whole number of the pre- 
destinate without admixture. In this sense the term church 
is often used in Scripture, as when the apostle says, I Cor. 1:1: 
"To the church which is in Corinth, to the sanctified in Jesus 

1 Aristotle, the authority of the Schoolmen in philosophy, and called, in the 
Middle Age*, The Philosopher. So Huss in this treatise, chap. IV, and often 
In hU Com* on tk$ Lombard, p. 112, etc. 

1 The foreknown, that is, those of whom God knows beforehand that they 
are not in a state of permanent grace. Their condition is not the result of an 
active decree, though it is a subject of God's previous knowledge. The fore- 
known an? in grace according to present righteousness and desire through merit 
at oik* eternal bliss and at the same time their damnation. This apparent 
contradiction Huss explains to lie in this, that they are not willing to use the 
means to the attainment of eternal bliss, just as a person may wish a coat and 
yet not possess it. Sufi* IV. Sent., 188. 



THE UNITY OF THE CHURCH 3 

Christ." Likewise Acts 20 : 28: "Take heed to yourselves 
and to the whole flock in which the Holy Spirit hath made 
you bishops, to feed the church which he hath purchased with 
his own blood." And in this sense, all the righteous now 
living under Christ's rule in the city of Prague, and more par- 
ticularly the predestinate, are the holy church of Prague, and 
the same is true of other particular churches of saints of which 
Ecclesiasticus 24 : 2, speaks: "In the congregations — ecdesiis 
— of the Most High shall she [wisdom] open her mouth," and 
also 31 : n: "All the congregation of the saints shall declare 
his alms." l 

But the holy catholic — that is, universal — church is the 
totality of the predestinate — omnium predestinatorum univer- 
siias — or all the predestinate, 2 present, past, and future. This 
definition follows St. Augustine on John, C. Recur. 32 : 4 
[Friedberg, 1 : 11 26], who shows how it is that one and the 
same church of the predestinate, starting at the beginning of 
the world, runs on to the apostles, and thence to the day of 
judgment. For Augustine says: "The church which brought 
forth Abel, Enoch, Noah and Abraham, also brought forth 
Moses, and at a later time the prophets before the Lord's 
advent and she, which brought forth these, also brought forth 
the apostles and our martyrs and all good Christians. For 
she has brought forth all who have been born and lived at 
different periods, but they have all been comprised in a com- 
pany of one people. And the citizens of this city have ex- 
perienced the toils of this pilgrimage. Some are experiencing 
them now, and some will be experiencing them, even to the end 
of the world." How clearly that holy man shows what the 

1 See Bissell, Corn, on Apocrypha, Lange Series, 343, 359. Also Apocrypha 
trsl. out of the Greek and Latin, Cambr., 1895. 

1 Huss takes up the decree of predestination in his Super IV. Sent., 153-188. 
He makes a slight distinction between elect and predestinate, although he says 
the Masters use the terms interchangeably. Election may only be for the pres- 
ent life, as in the case of Judas, of whom Christ said: " Did not I elect you twelve, 
yet one of you is a devil?" John 6 : 70. The predestinate cannot fall, and 
yet no necessity is placed upon their free will, pp. 165, 168. 



4 THE CHURCH 

holy catholic church is! And, in the same place and in a 
similar way, he speaks of the church of the wicked. This, he 
says, "brought forth Cain, Ham, Ishmael, and Esau, and also 
Dathan and other like persons of that people. And she, 
which brought forth these, also brought forth Judas, the false 
apostles, Simon Magus, and other pseudo-Christians, down 
to these days — all obstinately hardened in fleshly lusts, 
whether they are mixed together 1 in a union or are clearly 
distinguished the one from the other." So much, Augus- 
tine. 

From this statement it appears that the holy universal 
church is one, the church which is the totality of the predes- 
tinate, including all, from the first righteous man to the last 
one to be saved in the future. And it includes all who are 
to be saved who make up the number, in respect to the filling 
up of which number all the saints slain under the altar had 
the divine assurance that they should wait for a time until 
the number should be filled up of their fellow servants and 
brethren, Rev. 6 : 9-1 1. For the omniscient God, who has 
given to all things their weight, measure and number, has 
foredetermined how many shall ultimately be saved. There- 
fore, the universal church is also Christ's bride about whom 
the Canticles speak, and about whom Isaiah, 61 : 10, "as a 
bridegroom decked with a crown, and as a bride adorned with 
jewels." She is the one dove of which Christ said: "My dove 
is one, my excellent one," Canticles 6 : 9.* She is also the 

1 Pcrmixti, which the Decretum has instead of proximi, Huss's text. 

* This text una est columba, una perfecta mea, was a chief biblical proof used 
by the Schoolmen for the unity of the church. The Song of Solomon had a 
great fascination for the Schoolmen — the book upon which, one after another, 
they exercised their allegorical skill. It was regarded as an inspired anthology 
of the bodily and spiritual excellences of the Virgin Mary, and the perfections 
of the church. They found in it a storehouse of devotional meditation, as did 
Bernard, whose sermons on the Canticles are full of tropical effusions to Christ 
and to Mary, and the chief source of his mystical theology. Paschasius Rad- 
bertus, de corpore et sanguine, Migne 120 : 1295, says, " The Canticles treat of 
the holy church of God, which is called in the Canticles the paradise of de- 
lights." Damiani represented God as inflamed with love for Mary, singing 



THE UNITY OF THE CHURCH 5 

strong woman whose maidens are clothed with double gar- 
ments, Prov. 21:2. She is the queen, of whom the Psalmist 
says: "The queen stands at thy right hand in vestments of 
gold " [Psalms 45 : 9]. This is Jerusalem, our mother, the tem- 
ple of the Lord, the kingdom of heaven and the city of the 
Great King; and this whole church, as Augustine, Enchiridion, 
41 [Nic. Fathers, 3 : 255, 256], says, "is to be understood not 
only of that part which sojourns here, praising God from the 
rising to the setting of the sun, and which, after its old cap- 
tivity, is singing the new song, but also of that part in heaven 
which, continuing true to the purpose for which it was con- 
stituted, has always been loyal to God, and has never felt 
misery from any fall. This part among the holy angels re- 
mains blessed and, as it behooves it to do, helps the part so- 
journing upon the earth, because she who is to be one by the 
companionship of eternity is now also one by the bond of 
love. And this whole church was constituted to worship 
God. Therefore, neither the whole nor any part of it wishes 
to be worshipped as God." So far, Augustine. 

This is the holy catholic church which Christians profess 
immediately after professing their faith in the Holy Spirit. 1 
First, because, as Augustine says,* she is the highest creature, 

the Canticles to her praise. Albert us Magnus, in his elaborate panegyric of 
Mary, dwells again and again upon its passages, devoting no less than two 
hundred and forty pages to the words, "a garden shut up is my sister, my 
bride," Cant. 4 : 12. Alanus ab Insulis speaks of the Canticles as referring 
to the church, but in the highest spiritual sense to Mary, and another of the 
saner Schoolmen, Rupert of Deutz, fills his commentary on the Canticles with 
the most tropical language. 

'The reference is to the Apostles' Creed, "I believe in the holy catholic 
church," which is preceded by the confession of God the Father, Son and 
Holy Ghost. Also the Nicene creed. See Schaff, Creeds, 2 : 57 sq. With 
regard to the intercession of the saints in heaven and on earth, the council of 
Trent, XXV, says: "That the saints who reign together with Christ offer up 
their own prayers to God for men, and it is good and useful suppliantly to in- 
voke them, and to have recourse to their prayers and help for obtaining bene- 
fits from God through his Son, Jesus Christ, our Lord, who is our only Redeemer 
and Saviour." 

* In the Enchiridion, as quoted above. Augustine makes a similar statement 
in his sermon to catechumens, Nic. Fathers, 3 : 375. 



6 THE CHURCH 

therefore she is placed immediately after the Trinity, which is 
uncreate, and second, because she is bound to Christ in a 
never-ending matrimony, and by the love of the Holy Spirit. 
And third, because, the Trinity being once acknowledged, it 
is proper that it should have her as a temple in which to dwell. 1 
Therefore Augustine, as above [Enchiridion, 41] concludes: 
"That God dwells in his temple — not only the Holy Spirit, 
but the Father likewise, and also the Son. And of his body 
— by virtue of which he is made head of the church of God 
which is among men, in order that in all things he might have 
the pre-eminence — the Son said: 'Destroy this temple and in 
three days I will build it up again' " [John 2 : 21]. From these 
words of Augustine we deduce (1) that the universal church is 
one, praising God from the beginning of the world to the end ; 

(2) that the holy angels are a part of the holy catholic church; 

(3) that the part of the church called pilgrim or militant is 
helped by the church triumphant; (4) that the church trium- 
phant and the church militant are bound together by the 
bond of love; (5) that the whole church and every part of it 
are to worship God, and that neither she nor any part of it 
wishes to be worshipped as God. 

From all this the conclusion follows, that the faithful 
ought not to believe in the church, for she is not God, but the 

1 The writers of the M. A. also made Mary the dwelling-place of the Trinity, 
especially the hymn-writers. So the great hymnist, Adam of St. Victor, in the 
lines 

Salve mater pietatis 
EX totius trinitatis 
Nobile triclinium. 

Hail, mother of piety; 
And of the whole Trinity 

Excellent refectory (monastic hall). 

As the church is the bride of Christ, so Mary was also represented as the 
spouse of the Holy Spirit. Alfonso da Liguori delights so to represent her, as 
for example, in the prayer: "I thank thee, O eternal Spirit, for the love given 
to Mary, thy spouse." In his encyclical to the French bishops, Jan. 15, 1007, 
Pius X spoke "of his full confidence in the Virgin Immaculate, daughter of 
our Father, mother of the Word and spouse of the Holy Ghost," etc. 



THE UNITY OF THE CHURCH 7 

house of God, as Augustine in his Exposition of the Creed says, 1 
but they should believe that the catholic church is the bride 
of the Lord Jesus Christ — bride, I say, chaste, incorrupt, and 
never capable of being corrupted. For St. Cyprian, the bishop 
and glorious martyr, 24 : 1, C. Loquitur [Friedberg, 1 : 971, 
de Unitate Eecles., 5; Ante-Nic. Fathers, 5 : 423], says: "The 
church is one, which is spread abroad far and wide by the in- 
crease of her fruitfulness." And he adds: "nevertheless the 
head is one, the origin is one, and one is the copious mother of 
fruitfulness. The bride of Christ cannot be defiled. She is 
incorrupt and chaste. She knows one house and guards with 
chaste modesty the sanctity of one couch." * The holy church 
is also the husbandman's vineyard, of which Gregory in his 
Homilies [Migne, 76 : 1154] says: "Our Maker has a vine- 
yard, namely the universal church, which starts from right- 
eous Abel and goes down to the last elect person who shall 
be born in the end of the world, which bears as many saints 
as the vineyard sends forth branches." Of the church St. 
Remigius 8 also says in his Homily Quadragesima on the 
text: "'The men of Nineveh shall rise up in judgment with 
this generation and condemn it/ The holy church is made up 
of two parts, those who have not sinned and those who have 
ceased to sin." St. Isidore also, in speaking of the church, 
de Summo Bono, 14 [Migne, 83 : 572]* says: "The holy 

1 Scrmo de symbolo, falsely ascribed to Augustine and given in the Appendix 
to his Works (Migne, 40 : 1106). Three of Augustine's genuine treatises on 
the creed are given in translation, Nic. Fathers, vol. Ill, 282-314; 321-333; 

360-37S. 

* Cubilis. The Decretum has cubiculi, bedchamber. 

* Remigius, d. about 908, a Benedictine monk of Auxerre, who also taught 
at Paris. He wrote commentaries on the Psalms, Genesis, etc., and 12 Hom- 
ilies on Matthew, all found in Migne, 131. He supported Paschasius's view 
of the change of the eucharistic elements. 

4 Usually known as the de sententiis, the first Latin compend of theology, 
and a forerunner of the Sentences of Peter the Lombard and the systems of 
the summists of the Middle Ages. Isidore, archbishop of Seville (d. 636), 
exercised a large influence over the scholastic studies of the Middle Ages, 
especially by his encyclopedic works, the Etymologue and the de natura rerum. 
The former is a general encyclopedia giving curious information derived from 



8 THE CHURCH 

church is called catholic for the reason that it is universally 
distributed over all the world." Augustine and Ambrose 
likewise in their canticle, Praising God, say: "The holy 
church throughout all the world doth acknowledge Thee." l 
And Ambrose, 24 : 1 [Friedberg, 1 : 976] speaks thus of 
her: "What house is more worthy of the entrance of apostolic 
preaching than is the holy church ? Or who else is to be pre- 
ferred above all others than Christ, who was accustomed to 
wash the feet of his guests and did not suffer any whom he 
received into his house to dwell there with soiled steps, that 
is, works?" And, speaking of this church, Pope Pelagius, 
24 : 1, C. Sckisma [Friedberg 1 : 980,]* cites Augustine as 
saying, "There cannot be two churches," and then adds: 
"Truly, as it has often been said, there can be only one church, 
the church which is Christ's body, which cannot be divided 
into two or more bodies." Jerome also says of the church, 

ancient authors, classic and ecclesiastical, on a large variety of subjects: medi- 
cine, law, the Bible, grammar, warfare, etc. See Br6haut, An Encyclopedist of 
the Dark Ages, New York, 191 2. Isidore was one of the very first to write a 
treatise designed to convince the Jews, de fide catholica c. Judaos. The high 
church fraud, the pseudo-Isidorian Decretals, which appeared about 853, was 
for centuries ascribed to Isidore. In the chapter quoted by Huss Isidore 
says, "The holy catholic church tolerates with patience in herself those who live 
ill, but casts out from herself those who believe 01," and again, "They are here- 
tics who, leaving the church of God, have chosen private societies, that is, 
they have hewn out broken cisterns for themselves." 

1 The Te Deum, or canticle to the Trinity, beginning, "We praise Thee, O 
God." According to the legend, first noted by Hincmar in the ninth century, 
Augustine and Ambrose at Augustine's baptism, 387, under supernatural in- 
spiration, improvised the hymn. In the West it became a part of the church 
service as early as the sixth century, if not earlier. See Julian, Hymnology, 
p. 1 1 19 sqq,; Augustine, Conff., 9 : 7, refers to the moving impression made 
upon him by the "hymns and canticles" sung in the church of Milan. For 
these reasons, Raphael gave Augustine a place in his painting of St. Cecilia, 
in Bologna. 

* Pelagius I, pope, 555-561, witnessed the ravages of the Goth, Totila, in 
Rome, and helped to repair them during his pontificate. He was Justinian's 
choice for the papal office. The quotation is from Pelagius's letter to a certain 
patrician, John, condemning the ordination of Paulinus of Aquileja by the 
schismatic bishop of Milan as something to be execrated rather than to be re- 
garded as sacred. See Jaffa, Regesta pontificum, p. 88. In this letter, Pelagius 
also quotes for the unity of the church Cant. 6:9: "My dove is one." 



THE UNITY OF THE CHURCH 9 

de Pcm., Dist. i : C. Ecd. [Friedberg i : 1179]: "The church 
of Christ has no spot or wrinkle or anything of that sort, 
but he who is a sinner or is soiled with any filth cannot be 
said to be of Christ's church." This holy universal church 
is Christ's mystical body, as the apostle says, Eph. 1 : 22: 
"He gave himself to be the head over all the church, which 
is his body." Again he said, Col. 1 : 18, "He is the head of 
the body, which is the church," and again, Col. 1 : 24, "For 
his body's sake, which is the church," and Eph. 5 : 23, "Christ 
is the head of the church and himself is the Saviour of his 
body," and further on: "Christ loved the church and gave 
himself for it that he might sanctify it, washing it with the 
washing of water in the word of life that he might present it 
to himself a glorious church, not having spot or wrinkle or 
anything of that kind, but that it should be holy and without 
spot." 

Upon this text the holy doctors lean, as when Augustine 
says, de doctrina Ckristi [3 : 37, Nic. Fathers, 2 : 573]: "Christ 
is the head of the church, which is his body destined in 
the future to be with him in his kingdom and unending 
glory." Gregory, M or alia, 35 : 9 [Migne, 76 : 762] says: 
"Because Christ and the church are one, the head and the 
body are one person." And on Ezekiel, homily 15, he says: 
"The church is one substance with Christ, its head." And 
Bernard on the Canticles, homily 12 [Migne, 183 : 831]: 
"The church is Christ's body, more dear than the body he 
gave over to death." l And Paschasius, de sacra, corporis 
Ckristi [Migne, 120 : 1284]* says: "Even as it is found in 

'The passage runs: "The church lives and eats of the living bread which 
came down from heaven. She is the more precious body of Christ, and lest 
she should taste of death the other was given over to death." 

•This treatise of Paschasius, d. 865, usually quoted as de cor pore et sanguine 
Ckristi, is one of the most important treatises bearing on the development of 
the doctrine of transubstantiation. Without using the word, Paschasius set 
forth the view that in the Lord's Supper the very body "which was born of 
the Virgin Mary, suffered on the cross and rose again," is distributed by the 
priest. He supports this view by the literal interpretation of John 6 : 54: 



io THE CHURCH 

the Scriptures — the church of Christ, or the bride of God, 
is truly called Christ's body, truly because the general church 
of Christ is his body and Christ is called the head and all 
the elect are called members. From these members the one 
body of the church is brought unto a perfect man and the 
measure of the fulness of Christ. But the body of Christ, 
that is, the bride of God, is called in law the church. This 
is according to the apostle's words: 'And they twain shall be 
one flesh. 9 This, he says, is a great sacrament in Christ and 
the church. 1 For, if Christ and the church are one flesh, then 
certainly there is one body, one head, one bridegroom, but 
different elect persons, members the one of the other." So 
far, Paschasius. 

These quotations from the saints show that the holy 
catholic church is the number of all the predestinate 1 and 
Christ's mystical body — Christ being himself the head — and 
the bride of Christ, whom he of his great love redeemed with 
his blood that he might at last possess her as glorious, not 
having wrinkle of mortal sin or spot of venial sin, or anything 
else defiling her, but that she might be holy and without spot, 
perpetually embracing Christ, the bridegroom. 

"Whoso eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood." Taschasius was a monk 
and then, 844-851, abbot of the convent of Corbie, nearer Amiens. His tract 
was written 831 and sent to Charles the Bald 844. His doctrine was opposed 
by the monk Ratramnus, and others. The next controversy over the Lord's 
Supper was led by Berengar, d. 1088. Transubstantiation was made a dogma 
of the church at the fourth Lateran council, 121 5. Wyclif denied it, declaring 
that transubstantiation would involve transacddentation. Huss was also 
charged with denying the doctrine, but emphatically repudiated the charge. 
Ratramnus's work was put on the Index by the council of Trent. 

1 Eph. 5 : 32. The false translation of Jerome, rendering the Greek word 
mystery by sacrament, a rendering used to justify the inclusion of marriage 
among the sacraments and repeated in the Rheims version. 

'Wyclif, Congregatio omnium predcstinatorum, solum numerus predestina- 
torum, de Eccles., 2, 5, etc. In his Com. on the Lombard, p. 36, Huss demies 
the church as " the congregation of all the faithful about to be saved. It is the 
mystical body of Christ, that is now hidden to us, of which body the damned 
do not really have part, but they are like dung which in the day of judgment 
are to be separated from the body of Christ." 



CHAPTER H 

THE ONE UNIVERSAL CHURCH DIVIDED INTO 

THREE PARTS 

It having been said what the holy universal church if 
that she is only one just as the number of all the predestinate 
is one, and also that she is distributed in her members through- 
out all the word — it must be known that this holy universal 
church is tripartite, that is, divided into the church trium- 
phant, militant and dormient. 

The church militant is the number of the predestinate 
now on its pilgrimage to the heavenly country, and is called 
militant because it wages Christ's warfare against the flesh, 
the world and the devil. 

The church dormient is the number of the predestinate 
suffering in purgatory. It is called dormient because being 
there she does not enjoy the blessedness which in the present 
life through God's prevenient and assisting grace she merited 
that she might get her reward in the heavenly country after 
the satisfaction made in purgatory. 

The church triumphant consists of the blessed at rest in 
the heavenly country who kept up Christ's warfare against 
Satan and have finally triumphed. There will, however, be 
one great church on the day of judgment, made up of all 
these. And as a symbol of these three parts the doctors say 
the sacrament of the eucharist is broken into three parts. 
The first part, the part immersed in the liquid sacrament, 
they say, signifies the church triumphant which is absorbed 
and inebriate with the dipping 1 of the divine essence, as says 

l Intindio t the word used of Judas's dipping the sop, Matt. 26 : 23; John 
13 : 26. The custom is for the priest to break the host into two equal parts. 
He then drops a fragment of one of these parts into the chalice, whose contents 

zz 



12 THE CHURCH 

the head of the church, Cant. 5:1, making merry with his 
friends and companions: "Let us be drunken, my beloved," 
[drink abundantly, Rev. Vers.]. But the two other parts in the 
hand of the Lord and to be purged through the merit of the 
church are set forth by those two parts which the priest holds 
in his hands, the greater, being laid down, signifies the militant 
church and the lesser, resting upon it, signifies the church 
waiting in purgatory. For this church in purgatory depends 
upon the suffrages of the church militant. And for these two 
parts we pour out our double prayers to the Lamb, who is 
the head of the church, that he may have mercy upon us. 
But as for the third part, to whose dwelling-place and rest 
we look forward, we pray that the same Lamb of the three- 
fold nature may at last give us peace. For this reason, Christ 
in his state of humiliation visited three places of the church, 
(1) the navel of our habitable world, dwelling thirty-three 
years in Judea and Jerusalem; (2) the limbus, in which the 
Fathers were purified, by bringing out a fragment of his 
church in the spirit, and (3) ascending to heaven he led 
captivity captive, which, after his triumph, he crowned by 
placing it at God's right hand. 1 This, therefore, is the three- 
fold division of this one universal or catholic church, al- 
though, however, there are particular churches. 

he drinks. The priest holds the two larger parts so that the smaller of the two 
lies upon the other. Thomas Aquinas, Summa, 3 : 84 [Migne, 3 : 851], mentions 
the custom of dropping a fragment into the cup. 

1 Jerusalem was regarded in the Middle Ages as the navel of the earth. The 
cross, according to Jerome, was erected over Adam's skull, which Shem had 
carried to Jerusalem after the Flood, and buried on the future Mount Calvary. 
Noah, according to Jacob of Edessa, had taken Adam's bones with him into 
the ark. The region limbus pairum was, according to the Schoolmen, the 
future abode, where the patriarchs and faithful Jews were detained until Christ's 
" descent into Hades." The future world is divided into five abodes, hell, the 
" place of dolors " (Th. Aquinas) , and " the deep prison into whose smoky atmos- 
phere the demons are cast " (Alb. Magnus) ; purgatory, a sort of reformatory 
school, where the baptized are purged of sins clinging to them at death; heaven; 
and the abodes of the fathers and infants, limbus infantum. The last is the 
final dwelling-place of all unbaptized children dying in infancy, where they 
abide forever without hope of beatitude, without change, and without vision 
of God or physical light. 



THE ONE UNIVERSAL CHURCH 13 

But this universal church is a virgin, the bride of Christ 
— who is a virgin — from whom as from a true mother we are 
spiritually born. A virgin, I say, all beautiful and in whom 
there is no spot [Cant. 4 : 7.], " having neither spot nor 
wrinkle" [Eph. 5 : 27], holy and immaculate, and so most 
chaste even as she is in the heavenly country. Nevertheless 
by fornicating with the adulterant devil and with many of 
his children she is partially corrupt by wrong-doing. How- 
ever, she is never received as the bride to be embraced, 
beatifically at the right hand and in the bed of the bride- 
groom, until she has become a pure virgin, altogether with- 
out wrinkle. For Christ is the bridegroom of virginity, who, 
as he lives forever, can not allow the bride to desert him and 
fornicate spiritually. Thus it is said of the multitude of the 
heavenly denizens that they are virgins and follow the Lamb 
wheresoever he goeth [Rev. 14 : 4]. But in the very first 
moment of the world Christ was predestinated to be the bride- 
groom of the church, and by establishing the angels [in glory] 
he gave a dowry to one part of the bride. And so also by es- 
tablishing righteous Abel and other saints, up to the time of 
the incarnation, the church remained continually in her es- 
pousals. At the incarnation he made his second marriage by 
creating to be a queen a part of the whole church, which by 
a certain fitness is called the Christian church. For then 
our leader and legislator familiarly addressed his bride, as 
the apostle says, Heb. 1. By assuming human nature he put 
on our armor and as a giant overcame the enemies of the 
church and taught how a part of the church, as a jealous bride, 
ought to follow him. 

Therefore, the whole of Christian doctrine is involved in 
that prayer of the church in which we pray the bridegroom, 
by his coming into the flesh, that he may teach us to despise 
earthly things and love heavenly things — to despise, that is, 
to subordinate, terrestrial things in our affections and to love 
Christ the bridegroom above all things. 



14 THE CHURCH 

Hence, it is evident that the universal holy church is 
Christ's one and only bride, the virgin to be in the end most 
chaste, whom the Son of God bound to himself in matrimony 
out of eternal love and by the grace of adoption, and the 
church we firmly believe, saying with the Creed, "I believe 
one holy catholic church," and about which the word is 
added in the second Creed, " and apostolic [church]." It is 
called apostolic for the reason that the apostles are full par- 
ticipants of this same mother church, which is fully purified 
in the Spirit, and which they themselves planted with the 
teaching and blood of Christ; and by whose teaching (i. e., of 
the apostles) and authority their vicars now rule the young 
bride, who seeks only the bridegroom of the church. So runs 
the Decretal 24 [Friedberg, 1 : 968] where pope Leo says: 
"Peter's authority has its seat wherever its just sentence is 
carried." For Peter himself dwells in heaven, seeing and 
looking after what God binds and looses. Hence Boniface 
VO, Extravagante, says: "We are bound with living faith to 
believe and hold that the holy catholic and apostolic church 
is one." l 

The unity of the catholic church consists in the unity 
of predestination, inasmuch as her separate members are one 
by predestination 2 and in the unity of blessedness, and in- 
asmuch as her separate sons are finally united in bliss. For, 
in the present time, her unity consists in the unity of faith 
and the Christian virtues and in the unity of love, even as 

1 Boniface's famous bull, Unam sanctam, issued 1302 against Philip the Fair 
of France, which commands subjection to the Roman pontiff as the condition 
of salvation for every creature. The text goes on, "and we firmly believe it 
and sincerely confess that outside of it there is no salvation or remission of 
sins, as the bridegroom announced in the Canticles: 'My bride is one.'" 
See Schaff, Ch. Hist., V, part 2 : 25 sqq. for the original and translation; Fried- 
berg, 2 : 1245; Mirbt, 162. In this treatise Huss quotes this bull a number of 
times, even to the last chapter. 

* In his Reply to Palecz, Mon., 1 . 321, Huss says again: "The grace of pre- 
destination is the chain by which the body of the church and every member of 
it are joined to Christ." He also speaks of the unity through love, faith, and 
hope, Mon., 1 : 326. 



THE ONE UNIVERSAL CHURCH 15 

Augustine draws forth in expounding John 17 : 21, "that 
they all may be one," and in his letter to Dardanus, 1 where 
he expounds the text "it is expedient that one man die for 
the people" [John 18 : 14]. " Caiaphas," Augustine says: 
"prophesied that God would gather together in one his chil- 
dren" [John 11 : 52], that is, not in one material locality; 
" but he has gathered them together into one spirit and one 
body, whose only head is Christ." To this unity the apostle 
refers, Eph. 4:3: " endeavoring to keep the unity of the 
Spirit in the bond of peace. There is one body, one Spirit, 
one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all." 
Nor is it to be doubted that without this union, as indicated 
before, is there any salvation. 

1 Dardanus Claudianus Postumus, a Christian prefect of Gaul, the same 
to whom, probably, Jerome also addressed a letter. For Augustine's letter, 
Migne, 33 ; 832. 



v/ CHAPTER m 

ALL CHRISTIANS ARE NOT MEMBERS OF THE CHURCH 

Against what has already been said the objection is 
raised (i) that if the treatment is correct then no reprobate 
would be a part of our holy mother, the universal church. 
But the consequence is false, for every Christian is a part of 
\that church, as appears from the parable, Matt. 13 : 47: 
} " The kingdom of heaven is like unto a net cast into the sea 
1 which gathered in all manner of fish." On this St. Gregory 
in his Homilies [Migne, 76 : n 16] says: "The holy church 
is compared to a net cast into the sea because she is com- 
mitted to fishers and because every one is drawn up through 
her from the waves of this present world to the eternal king- 
dom lest they sink in the depths of eternal death." (2) The 
falsehood of the treatment is confirmed by Matt. 22 : 2: 
"The kingdom of heaven is likened to a king, who made a 
marriage feast for his son and sent forth his servants to call 
them that were bidden to the marriage feast." Going out, 
they gathered in all whom they found, both good and bad, 
and the marriage feast was full of guests. Here Gregory says: 
"By the very quality of the guests it is evident that by this 
royal marriage the present church is meant, in which the bad 
meet with the good, a mixed church made up of a diversity of 
children." l (3) It is confirmed by what is said, Matt. 13 : 41, 
"The Son of man shall send forth his angels and gather to- 
gether out of his kingdom all things that offend and them 
that do iniquity"; and (4) by Matt. 5 : 20: "Whoso shall 

1 Migne, 76 : 1285. Gregory continues by saying that, though the church 
brings forth to faith, nevertheless she doesnot lead all to the liberty of spiritual 
grace, etc 

16 



ALL CHRISTIANS ARE NOT MEMBERS 17 

break one of the least of these commandments and teach 
men so, shall be least in the kingdom of heaven." Comment- 
ing on both these passages, Gregory, homily 12, says: "The 
kingdom of heaven is the present church" [Migne, 76 : n 19]. 

(5) The falsehood appears from Luke 3 : 1 7 : " He shall bap- 
tize you with the Holy Spirit and with fire : whose fan is in his 
hand, and he will cleanse his threshing-floor and gather the 
wheat into his garner; but the chaff he will burn with fire un- 
quenchable." Here threshing-floor stands for the catholic 
church as the doctors expound, especially Augustine, who says 
of faith, ad Petrutn: "Hold most tenaciously and in no wise 
doubt that God's threshing-floor is the catholic church and that 
in it the chaff will remain mixed with the wheat till the end of 
the world." l And this judgment of Augustine is confirmed 
by Christ's words: "The kingdom of heaven is like unto a 
man who sows good seed in his field," and Christ afterward 
says: "Let both grow until the harvest," Matt. 13 : 30. 

Now for the right understanding of these things and the 
things to be said, we must lay down out of the apostle's words 
that Christ is the head of the universal church, that she is 

1 The quotation is taken from the de fide ad Pctrum sive de regula vera fidei, 
wrongly ascribed to Augustine, but printed by Migne, 40 : 753-780, in the 
Appendix to Augustine's works, and with a Preface stating its genuineness to 
be a matter of doubt. The work was written by Fulgentius, bishop of Ruspe, 
in North Africa, not far from Carthage, d. about 533; a vigorous writer against 
Arianism and semi-Pelagianism. The treatise was addressed to Peter the 
Deacon, and not to Peter the Apostle, as Huss seems to think. For Peter the 
Deacon who was sent on a mission to Pope Hormisdas, see Wetzer-Welte, 
9 : 1907 sq. The treatise is a high church document, and is quoted at least 
three times in the Corp. jur. can., and under the name of Augustine, viz., C. 
1 : i» 55; C. 15 : 1, 3', de consol., D. 4 : 3, Friedberg, 1 : 379, 746, 1376. The 
writer follows up the words cited above by saying: "The wicked are mixed 
with the good in the communion of the sacraments; and in every profession, 
whether it be the profession of clerics, monastics, or laics, the wicked and the 
good are mingled. . . . The wicked are to be tolerated for the sake of the 
good so far as the reason of faith and love demand." Fulgentius declared that 
"A heretic or a schismatic, though they had been baptized in the name of the 
Trinity, are outside the catholic church, no matter how much they might give 
in charity and even though they sweat blood for the name of Christ, yet they 
could not be saved unless they became incorporated into the catholic church/' 
p. 776. 



18 THE CHURCH 

his body and that every one who is predestinate is one of her 
members and consequently a part of this church, which is 
Christ's mystical body, that is, hidden body, ruled by the 
power and influence of Christ, the Head, and compacted and 
welded together by the bond of predestination. This under- 
lying proposition follows from that saying of the apostle: 
"He gave him to be head over all the church which is his 
body," Eph. i : 22. It also follows from the words when, 
speaking as the representative of the predestinate, he says: 
"We being many are one body in Christ," Romans 12 : 5. It 
also follows from Eph. 4 : 1 1 , 1 5 : " He gave some apostles, some 
prophets, some evangelists, and some pastors and teachers, 
for the perfecting of the saints for the work of the ministry 
unto the edifying of the body of Christ." And further on 
it is said: "Doing the truth in love, let us grow up in all things 
into him who is the head, even Christ, for whom all the body 
compacted together by that which every joint supplieth, 
according to the working in the measure of each several part, 
maketh increase of the body unto the edifying of itself in 
love." 

Further it is to be noted that Christ is called the head of 
the church for the reason that he is the most exalted individual 
of the human family, imparting to all its members motion 
and feeling. For as in a man the most excellent part is the 
head, which gives to the body and to its parts motion and 
feeling, and without which neither the body nor any of its 
members could live the life of nature, so Christ is the in- 
dividual, the true God and man, imparting spiritual life and 
motion to the church and every one of its members and 
without whose influence it could not live or feel. And as 
in a man's head are all the senses, so in Christ are hid all the 
treasures of the wisdom and knowledge of God. Col. 2:3. 
The above judgment is also involved in the apostle's words 
when he says, Col. 1 : 20: "All things were created by him 
and in him; and he is before all, and in him do all things consist 



ALL CHRISTIANS ARE NOT MEMBERS 19 

and he is the head of the body, the church who is the begin- 
ning and the first born from the dead; that in all things he 
might have the pre-eminence — primatum — for in him it was 
pleasing that all fulness should dwell and through hi™ to 
reconcile all things to himself." 

This unity of the body — that is the church — the apostle 
proves by showing, I Cor. 12 .'3, that the diversity of graces, 
ministries and operations proceeds from the one spiritual Lord 
who works in all. For grace must precede: it is the beginning 
of ministration for clerics and of operation for laymen. The 
Spirit gives grace, the Lord receives ministration, and God 
demands ministration. " To one," the apostle says, "is given 
by the Spirit the word of wisdom, to another the word of 
knowledge by the same Spirit; to one faith in the same Spirit, 
to another the grace of healing, to another the working of mira- 
cles, to another prophecy, to another discerning of spirits, to 
another divers sorts of tongues, to another the interpretation 
of words." These nine the apostle seems to express one after 
the other, each in its own logical order in the men who 
receive the gifts. God, he says, has placed some in the church, 
first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, then 
miracles, then gifts of healings, interpretations of words, helps, 
governments, divers sorts of tongues, all nine of which seem 
to be correlated to the former nine. And in the same passage, 
comparing the body of Christ and its members to the body 
of the natural man, the apostle says, I Cor. 12 : 12: "As 
the body is one and hath many members, but all the members 
of the body, though they are many, are one body; so also is 
Christ." 

There is to be noted a threefold correspondence and a 
threefold difference between the members of the mystical 
body and the human body. For as the members compose 
one body to which the soul is joined, and again as each member 
is necessary to every other, the one helping the other in the 
performance of its functions, so it is true of the members of 



20 THE CHURCH 

the church by virtue of the power of communion and the 
bond of love. Again as the members of the body keep them- 
selves in their own function, so do also the members of the 
church. For, according to Chrysostom, de opere imperfecta, 
a man is as a book in whom the whole Christian religion 
is written, therefore, just as there is an affinity from the 
head down to the feet, so reason and feeling are bound to- 
gether. Also, just as every member, comely or uncomely, 
serves the spirit without strife, so every member of the church 
serves Christ, without any strife concerning supremacy and 
obedience. And, just as the superior members do not boast 
of their comeliness but perform their functions and follow 
the soul's rule unto the help of each single member, so ought 
it to be with members of the church. And just as the eyes 
and the countenance are in their activities without a covering 
lest, if veiled, they might defile and prepare for destruction, 
so Christ and the apostles, out of the fervor of their love and 
by reason of their exemption from the fervor of lust, were not 
involved in temporal interests in a secular way; and their 
vicars, yea, all clerics ought to be like eyes. But the mem- 
bers, less comely, as the secret parts, are more concealed and 
more tender and multiplex, and so it is with mean 1 persons, 
by whom the dregs of the church are gotten rid of. But the 
difference between the members of these bodies is to be stated 
thus: (i) Since the parts of the church persist by grace, 
they are not concerned as to their place or corporal location, 
as are the members of the human body. (2) As the members 
are mystical, it is not inconsistent but fitting that single 
members should have functions of different kinds. For a man 
is, as it were, a totality — universitas — so that it is fitting that 
he should act all at once, so far as he is able. (3) The mem- 
bers of the church should have vital forces flowing into them 
from Christ, just as the members of the body have vital forces 

1 Conlemptibtiibus, a departure from the Vulgate word for " uncomely " used 
above — ignobik. 



ALL CHRISTIANS ARE NOT MEMBERS 21 

flowing into them from the soul, from which these forces be- 
come part of the very essence of the members; neverthe- 
less, the inflowing comes first, and the operation of the 
members is voluntary and gracious and meritorious. 1 

Further, it is to be noted that, as there is in the human 
body an element which is not of the body itself, as spittle, 
phlegm, ordure, 2 and fluid or urine, and this element is not 
of the body because it is not a part of the body — and it is an- 
other thing to be a part of the human body, as is every one of 
its members — so also there is something in the mystical body 
of Christ, which is the church, that is nevertheless not of the 
church, since it is not a part of it; and in this way every 
reprobate Christian is of the body just as ordure is of the body 
and to be finally separated from it. And so it is one thing to 
be of the church and another thing to be in the church — aliud 
esse de ecclesia, aliud esse in ecclesia. And it is clear that it does 
not follow of all pilgrims who are in the church, that they 
are then of the church, but the opposite. For we know that 
the tares grow together with the wheat, the raven feeds on 
the same threshing-floor as the dove, and the chaff is gathered 
into the same garner with the grain. Nevertheless, there is 
an incommunicable distinction between them, just as has 
been illustrated by the human body. In this way we ought 
to think of holy mother church, and to these things I John 
2 : 18 has reference where it is said: "Now have there arisen 
many antichrists. They went out from us, but were not of us; 
for, if they had been of us, they would have continued with us." 
For just as superfluity proceeds from food and the solid mem- 
bers and yet is not of them, so the purgaments of the church, 
namely the reprobate, proceed from her and yet are not of her 
as parts; for none of her parts can fall away from her finally, 
because predestinating love, which binds her together, does 
not fail. This the apostle asserts, I Cor. 13, and this he 

1 The same thoughts are developed in the Reply to Palecz, Mon., 1 : 321* 
•Jerome's word, Phil., 3 : 8. 



22 THE CHURCH 

proves, Romans 8 : 28 sqq. 9 when he says: "We know that 
to them that love God all things work together for good, even 
to them that are called to be righteous according to his pur- 
pose," that is, the purpose of predestination. "For whom he 
foreknew, them he also predestinated to be conformed to the 
image of his Son, that he might be the first-born among many 
brethren. And whom he predestinated, them he also called; 
and whom he called, them he also justified." And he con- 
cludes by calling them predestinate after suffering a long trial 
when he said: "I am persuaded that neither death nor life, 
nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, 
nor things to come, nor might, 1 nor depth, nor any creature 
shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is 
in Christ Jesus our Lord." 

Besides, it is to be noted that, as many say, the relation 
of pilgrims to holy mother church is fourfold. Some are in 
the church in name and in fact, as are predestinate Catholics, 
obedient to Christ; some are neither in fact nor in name, as 
are the reprobate heathen; some in name only, as are reprobate 
hypocrites; and some are in the church in fact, although they 
may seem in name to be outside, as are predestinate Christians 
whom the satraps of antichrist seem to be damning before the 
very eyes of the church, for so pontiffs and Pharisees con- 
demned by bitter death our Redeemer as a blasphemer, and 
consequently as an heretic, "who was predestinated to be 
the Son of God " (Romans 1:4). 

Further, it is to be noted that no place, or human election, 
makes a person a member of the holy universal church, but 
divine predestination does in the case of every one who per- 
sists in following Christ in love. And, according to Augustine 
— de predestinatione sanctorum [Nic. Fathers, 5 : 498 sqq] — 
predestination is the election of the divine will through grace; 
or, as it is commonly said, predestination is the preparation 

1 Fortiiudo with the Vulgate, but Huss omits the Vulgate's neque attitude— 
"nor height." 



ALL CHRISTIANS ARE NOT MEMBERS 23 

of grace — making ready — in the present time, and of glory 
in the future. But the position is taken, de Penitentia, Dist. 
4 [Friedberg, 1 : 1234], Hinc propheta, that predestination is 
twofold: First, the one predestination by which a person is 
foreordained here to righteousness and the acceptance of the 
remission of sins, but not for the obtaining of the life of glory. 1 
To this predestination the second definition, as given above, 
does not apply. The other predestination is that whereby 
a person is predestinated to obtain eternal life in the future. 
The first kind of predestination follows this, and not vice 
versa. For, if any one is predestinated to eternal life, it 
necessarily follows that he is predestinated unto righteousness, 
and, if he follows life eternal, he has also followed righteous- 
ness. But the converse is not true. For, many are made 
partakers of present righteousness but, from want of per- 
severance, are not partakers of life eternal. Hence it is said, 
de Penitentia, 4, Hoc ergo: "Many seem to be predestinate 
by the merit of present righteousness and not by the pre- 
destination of eternal glory." And Gratian grounds this 
position in the words of the apostle, Eph. 1 : 3-7: "Blessed be 
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ who has blessed 
us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places in 
Christ: even as He chose us in Him before the foundation of 
the world, that we should be holy and without blemish before 
Him in love: who predestinated us unto the adoption of sons 
through Jesus Christ, according to the good pleasure of His 
will to the praise of the glory of His grace, which is freely 
bestowed on us in His beloved Son, in whom we have our re- 
demption through His blood unto 2 the remission of sins." 

Further, it is evident that men may be of holy mother 
church in two ways — either by predestination to life eternal, 
the way all who are finally holy are of holy mother church, 

Augustine is quoted at length in the de Penitentia, 4 : 7-12 [Friedberg, 
z : 1229 sqq.]; Huss does not quote Augustine, but Gratian's comment. 

*/» is lacking in the Vulgate, which, following the Greek, puts "remis- 
sion" into apposition with "redemption." 



24 THE CHURCH 

or by predestination to present righteousness only, as are all 
such who at one time or another accept the grace of the re- 
mission of sins but do not persevere unto the end. 

And, further, it is evident that grace is twofold — namely, 
the grace of predestination unto eternal life, from which a 
person foreordained cannot finally fall away. The other is 
the grace related to present righteousness, which now is 
present and now is absent, now comes and now goes. The 
first kind of grace makes sons for the holy universal church 
and makes a man infinitely more perfect than the second 
kind, because it bestows an infinite good to be enjoyed forever. 
But not so the second kind of grace. Again, the first makes 
sons of an eternal heritage, while the second makes officials 
acceptable to God only for time. Hence it seems probable 
that just as Paul was at the same time a blasphemer accord- 
ing to present unrighteousness and yet of holy mother church, 
and, consequently, one of the faithful and in grace in virtue 
of predestination unto eternal life — so Iscariot was at one and 
the same time in grace according to present righteousness 
and yet never of holy mother church by predestination unto 
life eternal, for that predestination was wanting in his case. 
And so Iscariot, howbeit he was an apostle and bishop elected 
by Christ — "bishop" being the name of an office — was never- 
theless never a part of holy mother church. Even so Paul 
was never a member of the devil, howbeit he committed some 
acts which were like the acts of the church of the wicked. 
Similar was the case of Peter, who, by the Lord's permission, 
fell into grave perjury, but in order that he might rise the 
stronger; for, as Augustine says: It is expedient that the 
predestinate fall into sins of that sort. 

From what has been said, it is evident that there is a 
twofold separation from holy church. The first is perma- 
nent [cannot be lost — indeperdibttis], and here belong the 
reprobate who are separated from the church. The second 
may be lost — deperdibilis — and here belong heretics, who are 



ALL CHRISTIANS ARE NOT MEMBERS 25 

separated by ruinous sin from holy church itself, but, neverthe- 
less, are able by God's grace to come to the sheepfold of the 
Lord Jesus Christ. Of the latter Christ says: "Other sheep I 
have which are not of this fold, and them I must bring," John 
10 : 16. Other sheep he had by virtue of predestination, 
which are not of this fold and of his church according to 
present righteousness, which sheep of his grace he brought 
to life. 

This distinction between predestination and present grace 
deserves to be strongly emphasized, for some are sheep by 
predestination and ravening wolves according to present right- 
eousness, as Augustine deduces in his Commentary on John 
[Nic. Fathers, 7 : 253 sq.]: "In like manner some are sons 
by predestination and not yet by present grace." And 
this same distinction in both its parts Augustine touches 
upon in his Exposition of John 11 : 52 [Nic. Fathers, 7 : 278], 
where it is said: "That they might gather together into one 
the children of God who are scattered abroad." "Caiaphas," 
Augustine says, "was prophesying of the Jewish people only, 
to whom the sheep belonged whom the Lord had in mind 
when he said : ' I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the 
house of Israel, ' but the Evangelist knew that there were other 
sheep who were not of this fold which he had to bring. There- 
fore, he added: 'And not for that nation only, but that he 
might gather together into one the sons of God who are 
scattered abroad.' These things, moreover, were said accord- 
ing to the law of predestination. For, up to that time, they 
were neither his sheep nor the sons of God." So much Augus- 
tine. And in reference to these things it is said, de Penitentia, 
Dist. 4, Hoc ergo [Friedberg, 1 : 1235]: "In this way they are 
not children except as they are partakers of eternal blessed- 
ness." And it is added: "They are called children in three 
ways: either by predestination alone, as those of whom John 
spoke that ' he might gather into one the children of God who 
are scattered abroad'; or by predestination and the hope of 



26 THE CHURCH 

eternal blessedness, as were those to whom the Lord said: 
1 Little children, yet a little while I am with you'; or, thirdly, 
by the merit of faith and present righteousness, but not by 
predestination to eternal glory, as was the case with those of 
whom the Lord said: 'If his sons forsook my law and walked 
not in my statutes' [Psalm 89 : 31]." 



CHAPTER IV 
CHRIST THE ONLY HEAD OF THE CHURCH 

In view of what has been said, the conclusion is (i) that 
Christ alone is the head of the universal church, which church 
is not a part of anything else. This is clear because, if any one 
is the head of the universal church, then is he made better 
than the angels and than any blessed created spirit, Heb. 
1:4; but this befits Christ alone, for it behooved him to be 
the first-born among many brethren, Romans, 8 : 29, and 
consequently it behooves him to be the chief by the right of 
the law of primogeniture, Col. 1 : 15. This conclusion also 
follows from the apostle's words, Eph. 1 : 20: "Which God 
wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead and 
made him to sit at his right hand in the heavenly places, far 
above all rule and authority, power and dominion, and every 
name which is named not only in this world but also in the 
world which is to come, and has put all things under his feet 
and gave him to be head over all things to the church, which 
is his body." From this it is clear that, if any Christian were 
to be the head of the universal church with Christ (for the 
church cannot be a monster having two heads, as is set forth 
in Boniface VIITs bull, beginning Unam sanctam; therefore, 
the bull says, "the church is one body and has one head, 
not two heads, like a monster "), it would be necessary to 
concede that the Christian who was the head of that church 
was Christ himself, or otherwise it would be necessary to 
concede that Christ is inferior to that Christian and a lowly 
member of him. The conclusion shows that the thing is im- 
possible. Hence, the holy apostles agreed in confessing that 

27 



28 THE CHURCH 

they were servants of that one Head and humble ministers 
of the church, his bride. No one of the apostles ever pre- 
sumed to claim that he was the head or the bridegroom of 
the church, for this would have meant to adulterate with 
the queen of heaven and to arrogate the name of dignity 
and office — the dignity by which, according to the eternal 
predestination, and the office through which, by eternal ap- 
pointment, God ordained that Christ should be supreme ruler 
of his bride. This also appears from St. Augustine's letter 
to Dardanus [Migne's ed., 33 : 832 sqq.], where he says: 
"She only has one head, namely him who rules over her, ex- 
celling all and typifying in one union the spiritual and secular 
rule." 

Therefore, it is possible to understand the " Head of the 
Church" in a twofold sense: inward and outward. In the 
inward sense, as the chief person of his church, and he is this 
in two ways: either by superintendence over the material 
goods of his church or by ruling over its spiritual things. As 
outward head he is a person that superintends persons inferior 
to his nature, but he is called the head to those outside of 
this number whom he rules by his influence in virtue of his 
nature. And so Christ is the outward head of every par- 
ticular church and of the universal church by virtue of his 
divinity, and he is the inward head of the universal church by 
virtue of his humanity; and these two natures, divinity and 
humanity, are one Christ, who is the only head of his bride, 
the universal church, and this is the totality of the predesti- 
nate. For this divinity is the man who descended from 
heaven and who ascended again into heaven, as is said in John 
3 : 13, not the whole of the divinity considered as divinity, 
but according to the headship whose descent was not a local 
movement but an incarnation or self-emptying. And the as- 
cent was a local movement by which he took with himself 
the other parts of the body. 

Hence, it is plain that there is nothing inconsistent in a 



CHRIST THE ONLY HEAD OF THE CHURCH 29 

particular church having several heads. For it may have 
three heads, namely the divinity of Christ, his humanity, and 
the chief appointed by God to rule over it. But there are 
degrees of subordination in these heads, because the divinity 
is supreme, Christ's humanity is intermediate, and the chief 
is the lowest. But the universal church, as has been said, 
has two heads, the outward head which is the divinity and 
the inward which is the humanity. 

Further, from these things it is seen that Christ from the 
very beginning of the world down to his incarnation was, 
in virtue of his divinity, the outward head of the church, 
but from the incarnation on he is the inward head of the 
church, by virtue of his humanity. And so the whole holy 
catholic church always has had and now has Christ as its 
head, from whom it cannot fall away, for she is the bride 
knit to him, her head, by a love that never ends, for the 
bridegroom says to the church herself, Jer. 31 : 3: "I have 
loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore with loving 
kindness have I drawn thee." Therefore, always, from the 
very beginning, the bridegroom has been present with the 
whole church by virtue of his divinity, who later was with 
the holy fathers by virtue of his humanity. Hence Augustine 
says, commenting on Psalm 37 : 25, "I have been young 
[junior, younger] and now I am old": "The Lord himself in 
his heart, that is, his church, was younger than the first men. 
And, behold, now that he is old, ye know and do not know, 
and ye understand because ye are fixed in this, and so ye 
have believed, because Christ is our head, we are the body 
of the head. Are we alone the body and not those also who 
were before us? All who were righteous from the begin- 
ning of the world have Christ for their head. For they be- 
lieved that he was for to come whom we now believe to have 
come, and in the faith in him they were healed, in which faith 
we also are healed; that he verily might be the head of the 
whole city of Jerusalem, all the faithful being included from 



30 THE CHURCH 

the beginning even unto the end, and all the legions and 
armies of the angels being also added — that so there might 
be one city under one king, and one province under one 
emperor, happy, lauding God in its never-ending peace and 
salvation, and blessed without end. Christ's body, which is 
the church, is, as it were, like a young man. And now in the 
end of the world the church is of plump old age, because, with 
reference to this, it was said of her: 'They shall be multiplied 
in her plump old age.' She has been multiplied among all 
nations." So much Augustine, in whose words it appears how 
Christ is the head of the holy church, in whom the fathers 
believed as the one who was for to come in virtue of 
his humanity that he might be their head in his humanity 
as he had always been present with them in his divinity. 
And in this head all the elect are united, together with the 
holy angels. 

(2) . The second point concerns the objection that no rep- 
robate is a member of our holy mother, the Catholic church. 
For, not only is our holy mother, the Catholic church, one 
from the beginning of the world, which without mixture has 
been embraced with never-ending love by the right hand of 
the bridegroom, as is plain from what has been said above 
and on Augustine's authority: Inasmuch as the church, after 
the day of judgment, will have no other members than she has 
and will have before the day of judgment, but all who are 
to be saved after that day of judgment are predestinate, 
therefore none of them, before that day of judgment are rep- 
robate. And consequently no reprobates have ever been 
members of the church, the bride of Christ. By the same kind 
of reasoning this will always be true, that no reprobate what- 
soever is a member of our holy mother, the Catholic church. 

Likewise, it is not possible that at any time Christ does 
not love his bride or any part of her, for he necessarily loves 
her as he loves himself. But it is not possible that he should 
love any reprobate in this way; therefore it is not possible 



CHRIST THE ONLY HEAD OF THE CHURCH 31 

that any reprobate should be a member of the church. The 
antecedent is clear from that notable principle, "that God 
is not able to know or love anything de novo" as Augustine 
says, de Trintiote, 6 [Nic. Fathers, 3 : 103]. For God is not 
able to begin to know anything or to give up knowing any- 
thing or to call forth an act of his will, for he is unchangeable 
and also because the divine knowledge or volition is not con- 
ditioned by anything from without 

From this it is evident that Christ loves the whole church 
as he loves himself, because he loves her now, just as he will 
love her after the day of judgment, when she will reign with 
him as is plain from the Canticles. For, otherwise, there 
would not be a true marriage out of the never-ending love of 
Christ, a party to the divine nuptials, if the bridegroom who 
is one person with the bride did not love her even as he loves 
himself. To this the apostle was speaking when he said: 
"Christ loved the church and gave himself for it that he 
might purify it, washing it in the laver of water, the word of 
life, that he might present it unto himself a glorious church, 
not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing, but that it 
should be holy and without blemish," Eph. 5 : 26, 27. For 
this reason Bernard, in his 12 th homily on the Canticles 
[Migne, 183 : 831] says: "The church is Christ's body, 
dearer to him than the body he gave to the grave." It is 
plain, therefore, that it is befitting that Christ always love 
his bride, the holy church, just as he will love her after the 
day of judgment; and in the same way he hates every rep- 
robate, just as he will hate him after the day of judgment. 
For, inasmuch as God knows fully what the end of every 
reprobate will be, and what penance every predestinate 
person who falls will, with God's unending grace, do — it is 
evident that God loves a predestinate person who sins more 
than he loves any reprobate person, no matter what measure 
of grace the latter may enjoy in time, because God wills that 
the predestinate have perpetual blessedness and the repro- 



32 THE CHURCH 

bate eternal fire. Thus, the Psalmist [5 : 6] says: "Thou 
hatest all who work iniquity." Hence, because the pride 
of the reprobate, in proportion as they hate God, always 
ascends after final impenitence, they are not of Christ's 
body. For St. Augustine says: Sermon on the Lord's Words, 
53 [Migne's ed., 354, vol. 39 : 1568]: "A lowly head and a 
proud member ! Nay. He who loves pride does not wish to 
be of the body of Christ the head." And again, Sermon 50 
[Migne's ed., 138, vol. 38 : 765], he says: "Christ spoke truly 
in regard to certain shepherds, for he holds all good shepherds 
in himself, when he said: 'I am the chief Shepherd and all ye 
are one in me.' 1 But the reprobate, who is a member of the 
devil, is not duly joined together in the same structure with his 
head." Augustine also, de docL Christi, 3 : 32 [Nic. Fathers, 
2 : 569], after he shows that Christ and his body, which is the 
church, are one person, censures Tychonius, 2 who in his second 
rule calls the whole human family the twofold — bipartitum — 
body of the Lord. This, he says, "was no proper name to apply 
to the body of Christ. That in truth is not the Lord's body 
that will not be with him through eternity. Tychonius ought 

1 Huss's text differs from Augustine's, which runs: ego sum pastor bonus, etc. — 
"I am the good Shepherd. I am, I am one. All are one with me in unity. 
He who feeds apart from me, feeds against me. He who gathers not with me, 
scattereth abroad. Hear how greatly this unity is commended! ' I have other 
sheep which are not of this fold.' " Augustine then goes on to say that " among 
the nations there were predestinate persons, who were not of the people of 
Israel according to the flesh. These will not be outside of that fold — ovile — 
for he must bring them also that there may be one flock — grex — and one shep- 
herd." Here Augustine departs from the text of the Vulgate, which has unum 
ovile — fold — in both places, and conforms to the Greek original, which has two 
different words. 

'Tychonius, a scholarly North African belonging to the Donatist party, 
flourished about 400 and was an extensive author. Bede quotes him as es- 
sentially orthodox except on the question of the Donatist schism. He departed 
from the Donatist teachings, however, in denying the visible millennial reign 
of one thousand years and in accepting non-Donatist baptism. Both he and 
Augustine were involved in the confusion of identifying the true church with 
a visible communion, although both made the church a mixed body. Tycho- 
nius set forth seven rules of exegesis. Huss's quotation is drawn from Augus- 
tine's treatment of the second rule. Tychonius's Book of Rules has been pub- 
lished by Burkitt in Texts and Studies, 4:1, 1894. 



CHRIST THE ONLY HEAD OF THE CHURCH 33 

to have spoken about the real body and the mixed body of 
Christ, or about the real body and the simulated body, for, 
not only through eternity but now, hypocrites cannot be said 
to be with him." How plainly does that holy man show that 
the reprobate are not truly of Christ's church! To refer to 
Augustine again, de Pen., 4 [Friedberg, 1 : 1230], he draws the 
conclusion that no one belongs to Christ's kingdom, which is 
the church, except the son whom the Father gave to him, 
about whom it is said, John 3 : 16: "That he should not 
perish but have everlasting life." Therefore, he says: "Let it 
not move us that God does not give to some sons that gift of 
perseverance, for surely this could not be the case if these were 
of the predestinate and of those who are the called according 
to his purpose, who are truly the sons of promise. But, be- 
cause these live piously, they are called sons of God; but those 
who shall continue to live wickedly and shall die in their 
wickedness, these he does not call sons." 

And again Augustine, treating the words of I John 2 : 18 
[Friedberg, 1 : 1231], "They went out from us but were not 
of us," says: "They were not of the number of sons, and when 
did they have the faith of sons ? Because those who are true 
sons are foreknown and predestinate to be conformed to the 
image of God's Son and according to His purpose are called 
to be holy even as they are elect. For not does the son of the 
promise perish, but the son of perdition. These, therefore, 
were of the multitude who were called and not of the few who 
were chosen." A little further on he remarks: "For he knew 
from the beginning who would believe on him and who would 
betray him, and he said: 'Therefore, have I spoken to you, 
because no one can come to me, except it be given him of my 
Father. ' After that, many of his disciples went back and no 
longer walked with him. They were for a time called disciples 
in the Gospel, nevertheless they were not true disciples, for 
they did not abide in his words as he said: 'If ye shall abide 
in my words, then are ye my disciples.' Therefore, as they 



34 THE CHURCH 

did not have perseverance, they were not Christ's true dis- 
ciples, and so they were not true children of God, although 
for a time they seemed to be so and were called so. There- 
fore, we call those the elect, disciples of Christ and God's 
children, and they are to be called children whom we see liv- 
ing regenerate and pious lives. And then they truly are what 
they are called when they abide in that on account of which 
they were so called [which is the ground of their receiving 
these names]. But if they have not the gift of perseverance, 
that is, do not abide in that on account of which they started 
out to be, then they are not truly called on account of that 
which they are called [for that which gives them their name], 
and such they are not [that is, they are not what their names 
indicate] ; for those things do not exist with Him to whom is 
known what they will be in the future, that is, evil persons 
who have proceeded from being good" [that is, from being by 
name and in appearance good they will at last appear to be 
what they really are, namely, evil]. Thus much St. Augus- 
tine. How clearly does not he show that many are in the 
church who are nominally called "sons" by men, who never- 
theless are not of the church, for they are not truly sons of 
God predestinated unto the life of glory! 

This also is made plain by St. Chrysostom in his de opere 
imperfecta, Horn. 9, who says: "Those who are of God can- 
not perish, because no one can pluck them out of God's hand." 
This appears also from John 10 : 28: "My sheep hear my 
voice and I know them and they follow me, and I give unto 
them eternal life and no one shall pluck them out of my hand." 
And later Christ, the best of teachers, proves by the greatness 
of God's gift, which is the Holy Spirit, that no one is able to 
do this, because his Father is almighty, and from his hand 
no one is able to pluck anything. But, because Christ and 
his Father are one with the Holy Spirit — who is Christ's gift, 
by whom the church is knit together with him — therefore, 
no one is able to pluck his sheep out of his hand. For he him- 



CHRIST THE ONLY HEAD OF THE CHURCH 35 

self from eternity has chosen every member of his church into 
the bridal relation. Therefore he will desert no such member; 
because, if this were not so, he would choose without foresight 
and proper provision to glory. And to this the conclusion of 
the great philosopher applies when he says of the reprobate 
who abode for a time in grace: "If they had been of us, they 
would have continued with us," I John 2 : 19. For this con- 
ditional clause cannot be impossible or heretical, for it is 
formulated by the Holy Spirit. To this text may be added 
Matt. 10 : 20, "It is not ye who speak, but the Spirit of 
your Father which speaketh in you " ; and also Romans 8 : 35, 
where the apostle, as I have quoted above, speaking of him- 
self and of the predestinate who are members of the church, 
proves that no creature shall be able to separate them from 
the love which is in Christ Jesus. And he gathers his mem- 
bers together gently, for the love of predestination does not 
fail, I Cor. 13. Hence the apostle says: "Ye are not in the 
flesh but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwelleth 
in you. But if any one hath not the Spirit of Christ, he is 
none of his," Roman 8 : 9. And he understands that such 
an one is not a part of his body. 

And if, after all, it be objected that the reprobate living 
in this present time in love has this bond [of perfectness] and 
consequently is united with Christ, and the predestinate 
living in sin lacks this bond and consequently is not united 
with Christ, it is evident that, as in the human body there 
is fluid moisture and a radical moisture, so in Christ's mystical 
body there is, so it must be granted, a grace according to 
present righteousness and also a perfecting grace. As ulcers 
develop and display themselves through the moist fluid and 
are not continuous on account of a difference of nature [from 
the body itself], so for the present it is with the members of the 
devil who are known according to present righteousness. But 
the predestinate, although they may be for a time deprived 
of fluent grace, nevertheless have radical and abiding grace, 



36 THE CHURCH 

from which they cannot fall away, and so the predestinate, 
being now righteous and having twofold grace, are bound by 
a twofold bond. 

But here the objection is made that, in view of the things 
said above, we ought to grant that at one and the same 
time the same person may be righteous and unrighteous, 
one of the faithful and an unbeliever, a true Christian and a 
heretic, in abounding grace and without grace 1 (not to use 
other such contradictory expressions), it follows that there 
is a manifest contradiction. In this objection it is said that 
it should be granted that the same person is at one and the 
same time both righteous and unrighteous; but it is in- 
consistent with the truth, that the same person is at one and 
the same time both righteous and unrighteous in respect to the 
same thing. Even as contraries cannot at one and the same 
time inhere in the same person in respect to the same thing, 
so the names given above are, on account of their ambiguity, 
not contrary one to the other, for, according to the Philoso- 
pher 1 only one thing can be opposed to one thing, and so the 
same man is righteous by virtue of predestinating grace and 
unrighteous by virtue of destructive vice, as was Peter in his 
denial of Christ and Paul in his persecution of him. For they 
were at that time not fallen away from the love of predesti- 
nation. Consequently they were, in view of this love, in grace 
and therefore righteous; and because they were at that time 
in sin they were deprived of fluent temporal grace and there- 
fore were unrighteous. And if the inference be drawn: there- 
fore they were at that time not righteous and consequently 
were not righteous at all, the inference is drawn by denying 
the first consequence. For a consequence which is drawn by 
proceeding from a denial to a negation does not hold except 
with modification as follows in this proposition, namely: 

1 Here, as a little further down, Huss uses the Greek acharis. 

1 Aristotle, whom the Schoolmen regarded as the forerunner of Christian 
truth in method and knowledge of natural thing?— precursor Ckristi in natural*- 
bus. 



CHRIST THE ONLY HEAD OF THE CHURCH 37 

Peter and Paul were unrighteous; therefore, according to 
present grace, they were not righteous. This conclusion is 
true. As it was properly conceded that they were righteous 
according to the grace of predestination and were not righteous 
according to present grace, so, in a similar way, Paul was one 
of the faithful in view of predestination and one of the un- 
faithful by reason of his persecution, an Israelite by predes- 
tination and a blasphemer by the law of present unrighteous- 
ness, was in the love of predestination and yet was without 
grace, that is, without the love of present righteousness. 

Paul's own words, drawn from Hosea, confirm this: "I 
will call that my people which was not my people, and her my 
beloved that was not my beloved; and her to have acquired 
mercy which did not acquire mercy, and in the place where it 
was said unto them, Ye are not my people, there shall they 
be called the sons of the living God," Romans 9 : 25, 27. 
Hence it is evident that this Scripture and other Scripture 
like it are not understood except by those who know that there 
is not a contradiction, unless opposites are predicated of the 
same person according to the same thing and for the same 
instant of time. Those who know how to carry on such dis- 
cussion acknowledge that Christ was both dead and alive 
during the three days; yea, as Ambrose says: "He was dead 
and was not dead, for he lived in the spirit and was dead in 
the flesh; died as a man and did not die as God." So the 
apostle says, I Tim. 5 : 6, that "a widow living in pleasure is 
dead while she liveth," because she lives in the flesh but does 
not live in the spirit. It is clear that neither what is contrary 
nor self-contradictory follows. 

Finally, to sum up what has been said, it is evident that 
no reprobate is truly a part of holy mother church. For, if 
St. Thomas 1 or any one else should be found to call a repro- 
bate who is in grace a member of the church, then he is speak- 
ing ambiguously with Augustine and sacred Scripture, giving 

1 Thomas Aquinas, the angelic doctor, d. 1274. 



38 THE CHURCH 

heed to the popular mode of speech and the popular notion 
of the militant church. Hence it was stated above that St. 
Augustine said [Dist. 4 : 8, de Pen.; Friedberg, 1 : 1232]: 
"If they have not perseverance, that is, if they do not abide 
in that for which they started out to be, then they are not 
truly called what they are called, and they are not what they 
are called. For these things do not exist for Him who knows 
what they will be in the future, that is, evil persons who have 
proceeded from being good" — ex bonis tnali. This saying of 
Augustine should stand against all objections wherein am- 
biguity is to be noted. 



CHAPTER V 
GOOD AND BAD IN THE CHURCH 

In answer to the proofs cited in Chapter III, urging the 
contrary to what is here laid down, this is to be said: To 
understand them we must be on our guard to note that men 
are said to be in holy church in different senses. For some are 
said to be in it by virtue of an unformed faith 1 only, as are 
reprobate Christians involved in sins, to whom the Lord said : 
"Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I 
bid you?" Luke 6 : 46. And of them he also said, "Many 
will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy 
by thy name, and by thy name cast out demons, and by thy 
name do many mighty works? and then will I profess unto 
them, I never knew you," namely, as persons to be saved, 
Matt. 7 : 22. Hence Psalm 6 : 9 says: "Depart from me all 
ye workers of iniquity." 

Some are in the church only according to present faith 

1 Fides informis, as opposed to fides formate, that is, faith working by love, 
or, as we might say, intellectual belief and living faith. The distinction oi for- 
mate and informis was first made by Peter the Lombard. In his Cam. on Peter the 
Lombard, Huss treats the subject at length, pp. 452-455, defining the different 
sorts of faith. He says, to believe God, credere Deo, is to believe that the 
things He says are true. Such faith the wicked have. To believe God, credere 
Deum, is to believe that He is God. To believe in God, credere in Deum, is by 
believing to love Him. The faith which the demons and bad men have is a 
quality of the intellect, but it is unformed, informis, faith because it is unac- 
companied by love, and this unformed faith is an acquired habit and not a 
habit infused from above. This fides informis precedes hope and love, but the 
fides formate is contemporary with hope and love. Peter the Lombard, 4 : 23, 
quotes Ambrose as saying: "Love is the mother of all virtues, which forms all 
within us — informal — and without which there is no virtue." Luther de- 
nounces this distinction as a pestilential ecclesiastical invention. Denifle, in 
his Life of Luther, 1 : 637 sqq. t makes the astounding assertion that the faith 
which Luther required was simply an intellectual assent — faith without love and 
the works of love. 

39 



40 THE CHURCH 

and grace, as the reprobate righteous, who are not in the 
church by virtue of predestination to life eternal. Others 
are in the church by virtue of predestination only, as are un- 
baptized children of Christian parents and pagans, or Jews 
destined to be Christians in the future. Others are in the 
church by virtue of an unformed faith and predestination, 
as are predestinate Christians who are now in sins, but will 
return to grace. Others are in the church by virtue of pre- 
destination and present grace, as are all predestinate Christians 
who imitate Christ in their lives, who, however, may in this 
life fall away from fluent [operating] grace. Still others are 
in the church now triumphant, confirmed in grace. But all 
are divided into the reprobate and the predestinate, the former 
being ultimately the members of the devil and the others 
members of the mystical body which is the holy church, the 
bride of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Therefore, in the first proof taken from the net, the pre- 
destinate are represented by the good fish, and the reprobate 
by the bad fish which they cast out. On this Gregory [Migne, 
76 : 1 1 16] has this to say: "Holy church is compared to a 
net cast into the sea, for she also is committed to fishermen. 
This is the first resemblance, and by her every one is drawn 
from the waves of this present age into the eternal kingdom, 
namely by call, lest he be drowned in the depths of eternal 
death. This is the second resemblance. She gathers together 
fish of every kind, because she calls to the forgiveness of sins 
the wise and the foolish, the free and the bond, the poor and 
the rich, the strong and the weak. This is the third re- 
semblance." 

Therefore, let the false writer be on his guard against 
inferring that, because holy church gathers together by her 
call men of every kind, therefore all men are called to faith 
which is in Christ and are members of holy church, Christ's 
bride. Hence St. Gregory conclusively shows who are the 
elect and who are the reprobate, when he says that "at the end 



GOOD AND BAD IN THE CHURCH 41 

of the world the good fish will be gathered into vessels, but 
the bad cast out, because every elect person is received into 
everlasting habitations, and the reprobate, having lost the 
light of the eternal realm, are cast into outer darkness. For 
now the net of faith holds the good — that is, the elect — and 
the evil — that is, the reprobate — mingled together, like the 
fishes. This is the fourth resemblance. And the net which 
she drew, namely, by the call of faith, represents the shore of 
holy church." And St. Gregory adds: "And the fish of the 
sea which were caught cannot be numbered. But we who are 
bad when we are caught are thoroughly changed in the ele- 
ment of goodness." In this he finds a sign that the wicked 
who are predestinate are permanently and thoroughly changed 
into what is good. Therefore, the voice of St. Gregory is the 
voice of the predestinate who, being smitten with badness, are 
through baptism and penance called back by holy church to 
goodness. 

From these things is evident the exposition of the second 
proof from the parable of the marriage supper, in which are 
gathered by faith the good and the bad, who are mingled in 
holy church. But the bad are not true sons, just as those are 
not true friends, because they lack the marriage garment, 
which is predestinating love. Hence the king of the wedding 
will say to them, as he said to the one: "Friend, why did'st 
thou come in hither not having a wedding-garment?" At 
this point Gregory says: "It is very remarkable, my dear 
friends, that he at one and the same time calls this one friend 
and condemns him, as if he might more aptly say: ' Friend and 
no-friend — friend by faith and no-friend by works.'" Thus 
much Gregory [Migne, 76 : 1289]. 

The exposition of the third proof is clear because they 
gather up from the kingdom of holy church all that offend, 
that is, those who commit iniquity, namely, the sin of final im- 
penitence [the parable of the tares, Matt. 13 : 41]. Here the 
reprobate are referred to. 




42 THE CHURCH 

As to the fourth proof, which runs, "Whosoever therefore 
shall do one of these least commandments" — to this St. 
Augustine aptly replies, Com. on John 21 : 11 [Nic. Fathers, 
7 • 443L where Simon Peter is said to draw "the net to 
land full of great fishes, a hundred and fifty and three." St. 
Augustine says: "' Whosoever will break one of these least 
commandments and shall teach men so, shall be called least 
in the kingdom of heaven; but whoso shall do and teach them 
shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven/ The latter, 
therefore, would belong to the number of the great fishes. 
But the former, that is, ' the least, ' who in act breaks what he 
teaches in word, may be in such a church, which contains 
those who are represented by that first catch of fishes, which 
had both bad and good, because this catch is also called the 
kingdom of heaven — for he said, 'The kingdom of heaven is 
like unto a net cast into the sea, which gathers in all kinds of 
fish, ' a parable by which he wishes both the good and the bad 
to be understood. And of these he says that they are to be 
separated on the shore, namely, at the end of the world. 
Then, in order to show that these 'least* are the reprobate, who 
teach good things with their lips and break them by their bad 
living, and will not be as the ' least' in the future in the life 
eternal, yea will not be there at all, for he had said, 'He shall 
be called least in the kingdom of heaven/ — Christ went on 
to say: 'For I say unto you, except your righteousness shall 
exceed the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall 
not enter into the kingdom of heaven.' Certainly, these are 
the scribes and Pharisees who sit in Moses' seat and of whom 
Christ said: 'Whatsoever things they say, these do ye, but 
whatsoever things they do, these do not ye, for they say and 
do not,' Matt. 23 : 2. They teach in words what they break 
in their lives. Therefore the conclusion is that he i^ho is 
' least in the kingdom of heaven, ' the church now being made 
up of such as it is, will not enter into the kingdom of heaven, 
the church being then what it is to be; because, in teaching 




GOOD AND BAD IN THE CHURCH 43 

the things which he is in the habit of breaking, he will not 
belong to the company of those who practise what they teach. 
Therefore, will this one not be of the number of the great 
fishes, for he who both practises and teaches, he shall be 
called great in the kingdom of heaven. And because he was 
great here, therefore he will be in the place where that least 
person is not. Yea, and so very great will they be there [that 
is, in heaven] that the one who there is the least is greater 
than he than whom here no one is greater. Nevertheless those 
who are great here, that is, those who are in the kingdom of 
heaven, where the net gathers together the good and the bad, 
and do the good things they teach — these shall be the greater 
in that eternal kingdom of heaven, even those who belong at 
God's right hand and to the resurrection of life, and those are 
they whom the fish represent." Thus far Augustine. 

Augustine's words have the same meaning as the words 
of Gregory, namely, that the church gathers together the elect 
and the reprobate in the faith; and, secondly, that those who 
teach in the church and fill its seats of dignity and break God's 
commandments are reprobate. For he says: "Finally, in 
order to show that those least are the reprobate, who teach 
good things with their lips and break them with bad living, 
they will not only not be as the least in the eternal life in the 
future, but will not be there at all." In the third place, 
he teaches that faithful Christians, doing God's commands, 
indeed are great in God's holy church, and that prelates who 
occupy commanding offices and break the commandments 
are the least; and, if they are reprobate, then they will not be 
in the kingdom of God. Therefore, let the disciples of anti- 
christ blush who live contrary to Christ and yet say they are 
the greatest in God's holy church and are most proud, and who, 
flourishing in public places by the covetousness and haughti- 
ness of this world, are called the heads and the body of holy 
church, but who, according to the Gospel of Christ, deserve 
to be called the least. The fourth teaching is that the him- 



44 THE CHURCH 

dred and fifty and three great fishes, caught on the right side 
of the boat, stand for the predestinate, amongst whom, other 
things being equal, are the greater ones who teach and do 
God's commandments. 

As for the fifth proof from the Gospel: "He shall baptize 
you in the Holy Spirit, etc.," it is conceded that holy church 
is the Lord's threshing-floor in which are now mingled together 
in virtue of faith the good and the bad, predestinate and 
reprobate; the predestinate as the wheat, and the reprobate 
as the chaff. The first shall be gathered into the heavenly 
garner, the rest burnt with fire unquenchable, as say the 
Gospel and Augustine's exposition. And as the chaff always 
remains chaff, so a reprobate always remains reprobate, even 
though for a time he may be in grace according to present 
righteousness. Nevertheless, he is never a part of holy church. 
And just as the wheat always remains wheat, so the predesti- 
nate always remains predestinate and a member of the church, 
howbeit for a time he may fall away from accidental grace, 
but never from the grace of predestination. On this subject 
Augustine, 32 : 4, C. Recurrat [Friedberg, 1 : 11 27], thus 
expresses himself: "Therefore, whether they seem to be turned 
over within or are evidently outside, what is flesh is flesh; 1 
or whether they continue in their sterility on the threshing- 
floor or are carried away on occasion of temptation as by a 
wind without, what is chaff is chaff; and he will always be 
separated from the unity of the church, which is without spot 
and wrinkle, who continues in carnal obduracy and is mingled 
with the company of the saints. Nevertheless, of no one 
should we despair, neither of him who appears to be of this 
kind and is within, nor of him who is outside and is more 
manifestly whirled about." 2 Thus much Augustine. 

1 1 have corrected Huss's text from the text of the Corp. jur. can. For ex- 
ample, Huss has qui carior est, carior est for quod caro est caro est, and veritate 
for unUate. The first part of the passage, " to turn within," has some reference 
to the time before birth, in the womb. Augustine has been speaking of Re- 
becca and the births of Jacob and Esau, and also of Sarah and Hagar. 

* Huss text has manifestos and above veritate for unitate — unity of the church. 



GOOD AND BAD IN THE CHURCH 45 



ft 



Hence, John the Baptist aptly says that "he will purge, 
that is, on the day of judgment, "his threshing-floor," that is, 
holy church, and "gather the wheat into the garner," namely, 
the predestinate into the heavenly country; but "the chaff," 
namely, the reprobate, "he will burn with fire unquench- 
able." And Augustine, commenting in his Letter to Peter on 
Faith [Migne, 40 : 777], as already quoted, says: "Hold fast 
most tenaciously and never doubt that God's threshing-floor 
is the catholic church, and that unto the end of the world will 
be found in it chaff mixed with wheat. Here also the wicked 
and the good are mingled in the communion of the sacraments; 
and in every calling, whether of clerics or laymen, there are 
both good and bad." And further on he says: "But in the 
end of the world the good are to be separated with the body 
from the bad, when Christ shall come with his fan in his hand 
and shall purge his threshing-floor and gather the wheat into 
the garner and burn the chaff with fire unquenchable, yea, 
when by righteous judgment he shall separate the righteous 
from the unrighteous, the good from the wicked, the strait 
from the crooked. The good he will place at his right hand, 
and the wicked at his left. And from his mouth will go forth 
a sentence, unending and immutable, of righteous and eternal 
judgment, and all the wicked will go into eternal burning, but 
the righteous into life eternal. The wicked will always be 
burning with the devil, the righteous be reigning without 
end [with Christ]." 1 Thus far Augustine. From the ex- 
position of the saints it is clear how in Christ's parables the 
reprobate are symbolized by the bad fishes, by the bad guests 
at the wedding, by the man not clad in a wedding-garment 
at the feast, by the chaff, by the tares, by the bad seed, by the 
evil tree, by the foolish virgins, and by the goats. On the 
other hand, in an opposite way, the predestinate are sym- 
bolized by the good fishes, the good guests, the man clad in a 

1 "With Christ," a part of the original, is omitted by Huss. The quotation 
is not from Augustine, but from Fulgentius's Letter to Peter the Deacon. See 
note, chap. m. 



46 THE CHURCH 

wedding-garment, by the wheat, the good seed, the good tree, 
the wise virgins, and the sheep. 

Reflecting upon these things, the faithful should be on 
his guard against this conclusion : the reprobate are in God's 
holy church, therefore they are a part of it. For it has al- 
ready been said that it is one thing to be in the church and 
another to be of the church or to be a part or member of the 
church. For as it does not follow, because the chaff and the 
tares are among the wheat or mixed up with the wheat, 
therefore the chaff is the wheat, so the conclusion does not 
follow in the above proposition. Similarly as it does not 
follow that, because ordure or a sore is in the body of a man, 
therefore it is a part of his body, so it does not follow that 
because a reprobate is in Christ's mystical body of the church, 
therefore he is a part of it. Again, the following conclusion 
is not valid, namely: he is in grace according to righteous- 
ness, therefore he is a member or a part of the holy catholic 
church. But this is right reasoning, namely: a man is in the 
grace of predestination, therefore he is a part or member of 
holy church. And again this reasoning is not valid: Peter 
is in sin, therefore he is not a part or member of the holy 
church. But it is good reasoning to say that at that time 
he was not in the church according to the grace of present 
righteousness. Arguing of this kind will be understood by re- 
flecting what it is to be in the church and what it is to be a 
member or part of the church; and that it is predestination 
which makes one a member of the holy catholic church, which 
predestination is the preparation of grace in the present 
time and of glory in the future. No place of dignity, no 
human election, and no other outward sign makes one a 
member of the church. For the devil Iscariot, who did not 
refuse Christ's election and the temporal charisms given 
unto him by virtue of his apostolate and episcopate— reven 
though the people believed that he was one of Christ's true 
disciples — was not a true disciple of Christ, but a wolf clad 



GOOD AND BAD IN THE CHURCH 47 

in sheep's clothing, as Augustine says; and consequently 
he was not predestinate and so not a part of the church, the 
bride of Christ. 

From this it is clear that it would be a great presumption 
for any one without revelation and godly fear to assert of 
himself that he is a member of that holy church. For no one 
except the predestinate, in his time without spot or wrinkle, 
is a member of that church. No one, however, without godly 
fear or revelation may assert of himself that he is predes- 
tinate, and holy without spot or wrinkle. Hence the con- 
clusion is properly drawn. Wherefore it is exceedingly won- 
derful with what effrontery they who are given up to the world, 
live completely a worldly and vicious life, removed from 
companionship with Christ, and even more barren in the ful- 
filment of Christ's counsels and precepts — that they assert 
without godly fear that they are heads or the body or the 
chief members of the church, which is Christ's bride. Do we 
ever think that these are without spot of mortal sin or wrinkle 
of venial sin? By forsaking Christ's counsels, by neglect 
of their sacred office, and by their works they teach that we 
should rather feel the opposite, for the bridegroom of the 
church says, "By their fruits ye shall know them," Matt. 
7 : 20, and "believe the works," John 10 : 38, and "do not 
after their works, for they say and do not," Matt. 23 : 2. 

But against these things the objection is raised, first, on 
the ground that every cleric, being stamped with the clerical 
character or the outward sign by a prelate in the judgment 
of the church, is a part of holy mother church, and alone the 
body of such clerics is by antonomasia 1 called the church, 
which (body) we ought especially to honor, because otherwise 
it would follow that Christians would not recognize their 
mother. Yea, and, thus not being recognized, they would not 

1 A rhetorical term for the substitution of a title for a general term, as " his 
honor" for "judge." Wyclif also uses it, de Eccles., i : 400. In the first case 
he says: "Christ's bride is antonomatically our mother." 



48 THE CHURCH 

pay to it the material gifts due, such as oblations and tithes, 
and in consequence inordinate confusion would follow in the 
church militant. 

Here, by way of denying the antecedent statement, it is 
said : An instance is furnished in the case of Judas, chosen for 
the service of the episcopate by Christ, who could not err. 
For that reprobate never was Christ's true disciple, as Augus- 
tine shows, but a wolf clad in sheep's clothing, and he was al- 
ways chaff and a grain of weed or tares. Similarly, the second 
part of the antecedent is denied. For the church is by an- 
tonomasia called the bride of Christ, which is the totality 
of the predestinate, as has already been said. For, if that 
totality is in the highest sense the bride of Christ, then the 
church herself is holy, for she is the one dove and the queen 
standing at the King's right hand, to whom the young virgins 
are led. Wherefore, as in the days when Christ walked on 
the earth and companied with the clergy, the high priests, 
priests and Pharisees — the different grades of the priesthood — 
observing the traditions of their own making, and asserting 
that they had God for their Father and that they were of 
Abraham's seed, and at no time served any man and en- 
joying a reputation among the people, did not do all these 
things, so that the clergy might by antonomasia and truly be 
called the holy church, inasmuch as Christ himself said of 
them, Matt. 15 : 14, that the disciples should allow them to 
take offense, because "they were blind leaders of the blind," 
so also it is certain that a particular multitude of the clergy 
is not the holy church simply because it chooses to affirm it- 
self to be the holy church. Such conclusions, it is plain, do 
not follow. In the first, the inference was drawn [that the 
clergy is the church] because otherwise it would follow that 
Christians would not be able to recognize their mother. For 
we must know our mother by faith, just as we know the 
church triumphant, Christ and also his mother by faith, and 
likewise Christ's apostles and all the blessed angels and the 



GOOD AND BAD IN THE CHURCH 49 

multitude of saints. But we know imperfectly and indis- 
tinctly enough those who are now pilgrims and those who are 
sleeping. But when that which is perfect is come that which 
is in part shall vanish away, because in heaven we shall dis- 
tinguish our mother clearly and also her individual members. 
And let not the faithful [Christian] complain but rejoice in 
the truth that holy mother church is to so great a degree un- 
known to him here on the way, because over him stands the 
merit of Christian faith. For, according to the apostle, Heb. 
11 : 1, "Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the as- 
surance of things which do not appear," that is, which do not 
appear palpably to our senses here on the pilgrim way. And 
the ground of predestination or of charity, which never f aileth 
and which is the nuptial garment, distinguishing a member of 
the church from a member of the devil, we do not here by our 
senses discern. For, according to Augustine, "an act of faith 
is believing what thou dost not see." And the very opposite 
of the second conclusion is clear. For we pay what is due to 
holy church when we, who have Christ as our supreme pofltiff , 
provide with temporal gifts for their material support Christ's 
ministers, whom by an indistinct faith we respect as ministers 
and fathers for their works' sake, and whom we by uncertain 
knowledge regard as members of Christ. 

And, if it be objected that a layman is expected and bound 
to believe of his prelates that they are the heads of the church 
and parts of the church either by virtue of predestination or 
present righteousness, it is to be said in reply that a layman 
is not expected to believe anything of his superior except what 
is true. It is clear that no one is held to believe anything 
which he is not moved by God to believe. But God does 
not move a man to believe what is false. Howbeit good may 
come by a false faith under certain circumstances, and how- 
beit God moves to the essence of an act, nevertheless, God 
does not so move a man that the man is deceived. There- 
fore, if a layman believes about his prelate that he is a holy 



5 o THE CHURCH 

member of the church while in fact he is not, his faith or his 
believing will be false. Therefore, a pastor is expected, by 
giving instruction in works that are more virtuous, to in- 
fluence those under him to believe that he is such. Hence, 
if an inferior does not discern the works of his superior to be 
virtuous, he is not bound to believe that he is a member of 
the church by the law of present righteousness, or to believe 
with godly fear and conditionally that he is such genuinely, 
simpliciter, namely by virtue of predestination. And, if he 
certainly knows his sin, then he ought to conclude from his 
works that at that time he is not righteous but an enemy of 
Jesus Christ. . And so it is clear that the third conclusion is 
false. For there is no confusion in the church militant, by 
reason of the fact that without revelation we do not know 
certainly who are members of Christ's mystical body on earth. 
Up to this point the objection is: Seeing that grace makes 
sons of the church, just so sin makes members of the devil 
and also unbelievers, it is clear that a man may become a 
member of the church after being an unbeliever, just as from 
being a member of the church one may become a member 
of the devil. For who doubts that Iscariot, when he was a 
true apostle, was not also a member of the church? 1 Even 
so Paul, when he was a blasphemer, was separate from 
holy mother church. What is here said is said because the 
church is conceived of in a true sense or in a nominal sense — 
in the true sense she is, as has been said, identical with the 
predestinate; in the nominal sense the church is called the 

1 Huss is constantly using Judas as an example of how a prescitus, a repro- 
bate, may be a pope or a bishop, having present righteousness, it may be, but 
not among the elect. Judas was legitimately elected, as Christ says, John 6 : 70, 
and yet he had a devil. So a pope may well be elected according to the ritual, 
and yet be of the lost, Replies to Palecz and Stanislaus, Mon., 322, 323, 339, 
340, etc. In his Com, on Peter the Lombard, Huss says, p. 188: "In truth, 
Judas Iscarioth wanted to be a bishop, and it pleased God to choose him to the 
episcopate. But what good did he get thereby? Certainly he lost his episco- 
pate because he committed simony; and he gave himself up body and soul to 
damnation because he would not conform his will to the will of God. 1 ' 



GOOD AND BAD IN THE CHURCH 51 

assembly of the reprobate. It is by a sheer error that men 
living on the earth speak in this way of the true holy mother 
church, and so many according to common fame are called 
heads or members of the church, although according to God's 
foreknowledge they are members of the devil, who for a time 
believe and afterwards fall away or are now and always were 
unbelievers, and of this sort, as already said above and to 
follow Augustine, were those disciples of Christ who went 
back and no longer walked with him. Similarly, it was with 
Iscariot who was falsely reputed to be a disciple of Christ, 
about whom Augustine, in his Commentary on John [Nic. 
Fathers, 7 : 253], speaks when he shows how the sheep 
heard Christ's voice. "But what," he says, "are we to think? 
Those who heard — were they the sheep? Did not Judas 
hear and he was a wolf? He followed but was clothed in 
sheep's clothing and plotted against the Shepherd." In 
this way, therefore, many are reputed according to present 
righteousness to be of the church, but they are not really so 
by virtue of predestination unto glory. And who these are 
Augustine teaches in his Commentary on John, when he says: 
"The Lord knows who are his. He knows who will hold out 
till the conferring of the crown, who will hold out unto the 
flames. He knows in his threshing-floor the wheat, he knows 
the chaff, he knows the good seed, he knows the tares. But 
to the rest it is unknown who are doves and who are ravens." 



CHAPTER VI 
CHRIST THE HEAD OF THE ELECT 

Treatment having been made of the holy catholic church, 
which is Christ's mystical body and of which Christ is the head, 
a statement must also be made of the church of the wicked — 
malignantium — which is the body of the devil, he being its 
head. 1 For St. Gregory says, Mot alia, 4 : 9 [Migne, 75 : 647] : 
"As our Redeemer is one person with the assembly of the 
good (for He is the head of the body and we the body of that 
head), so is the old enemy one person with all the company 
of the reprobate, for he as their head presides over them unto 
iniquity. Hence it is evident that all the reprobate constitute 
one body. For Christ said to the Jews, the high priests and 
Pharisees, who were called the chiefs — capitales — of the church : 
1 Ye are of your father, the devil, and the lusts of your father 
ye will do/" John 8 : 44. This shows that there must be one 
generation — brood — which was bad in the case of the common 
people, worse in the case of secular rulers, but worst of all in 
the case of the prelates, just as the generation of the righteous 
has three opposite classes, corresponding grade for grade to 
these three classes. If, therefore, the generation of the per- 
verse is one, it is fitting that there should be one evil man 
[being] with parts, who are the members of the devil. And as 
there cannot be a head or a member except as these are related 
to the entire body, it is plain that there is one body of the devil. 

1 In his Super IV. Sent., 36, 733, Huss also calls the kingdom of Satan ecclesia 
malignancium, or civilas diaboli. " This is the congregation of all the damned, as 
the holy church is the congregation of all the faithful — those who are to be 
saved. In the present time this church of the wicked is dispensing its evil 
odor and infection and the virus of false doctrine." 

5* 



CHRIST THE HEAD OF THE ELECT 53 

When, however, the body of Christ is called the mystical 
body on account of the mystery of the heavenly marriage 
between Christ and the church, the body of the devil is not 
likewise mystical but dark, because to be joined with the 
devil as one of his members does not express itself directly 
in mystery but in the scourge. Thus the body of the devil 
has something natural about it, because, as Augustine says, 
de natura Boni, all evil must root itself in the good, so all evil 
in morals is founded in what is good by nature. And besides 
having that which is natural, the body of the devil has the 
essence of vice, just as the mystical body of Christ has the 
essence of virtue. Hence St. Augustine denies, de doct. Ckristi, 
ILL [Nic. Fathers, 2 : 569], that the body and members of 
Christ are one in the same sense as the members of the devil 
are one. 

Now, if it be asked what is the form in which the members 
of the devil are united in that body, the answer is that there is 
an outer form and an inner deformity. The outer form is 
God's eternal foreknowledge which knows and ordains all the 
foreknown members of that diabolical body to be bound to 
perpetual punishment. But the inner deformity is the final 
disobedience or pride, which the saints call the guilt of final 
impenitence or the sin against the Holy Spirit. And so the 
same sin both continues on and disjoins. For it holds on in the 
members of the devil, binding them together in their wicked- 
ness for Tartarus and separating them from the companion- 
ship of the blessed, just as heat, first dissolving a mixture, 
gathers together the homogeneous parts, making each element 
of the dissolved mixture to seek its own place. But it sepa- 
rates the heterogeneous constituents, when it dissolves what 
seems on the surface to be harmonious by resolving the parts 
of the mixture, each into its original, separate element. For 
in the day of judgment, by the contrary principles, the cold- 
ness of the devil's body and the heat of the love of Christ's 
body, the bipartite body must be dissolved according to the 



54 THE CHURCH 

law of the final form, when the light parts will hasten upward 
with their head, who is a consuming fire, to their appropriate 
mansions among the saints, but the parts terrestrial, weighted, 
as of lead, will go down to hell, even as John said, 21 : 13: 
"In a moment they went down into hell" [sheol]. 

But the objection is drawn from St. Thomas [Summa, 
HI, q. 8 : 3-7, Migne], 3 : 100 sqq., when he says: "Christ is 
the head of all men, both the faithful who are united unto 
himself in deed through grace, and also the unbelieving who 
are his members only potentially" — in potentia. And later 
on, he makes a division according to the predestinate and rep- 
robate who, passing away from this world, cease wholly to be 
members of Christ. This he thus explains : As for this state- 
ment of St. Thomas, it seems to me he speaks ambiguously, 
saying truly that in virtue of his deity, Christ is the outward 
head of the whole human race which, taken as an aggregate, 
may be termed one natural body on which Christ confers 
benefits as he does on the whole world. In virtue of his 
humanity a secondary perfection was won by the merit of 
Christ's passion for the whole world, and so in virtue of his 
humanity he does good to the whole human race — when he 
punishes all the damned, whether they are damned (1) be- 
cause of unbelief, like those who did not believe in the Lord 
Jesus Christ, or (2) because of despair which they ought to 
have put aside, aspiring to heavenly things, or (3) because of a 
rash and foolish judgment, which they ought to have put 
aside, and finally accepted the Lord Jesus Christ in love. 

Thus it appears how Christ is head of all men and how he 
is also head of the predestinate; and how it is not contra- 
dictory to speak of the body of the devil (which is the syna- 
gogue of Satan) and at the same time to speak of the church 
of Christ on the ground of creation, beneficence, and preserva- 
tion, but not on the ground of a union based on love, on which 
ground it is called Christ's church which he loved, that he 
might present it as his bride without spot and to be cherished 



CHRIST THE HEAD OF THE ELECT 55 

forever. But what the church of Christ or the synagogue of 
Satan are or will be — whether in the case of men or — more 
numerously — in the case of the angels — we shall fully know 
after Christ the Lord has pronounced the final judgment. For 
he himself says: "Enter ye in at the strait gate, for wide is 
the gate and broad is the way which leadeth unto perdition 
and many there are who go in thereat, for strait is the gate 
and narrow is the way which leadeth unto life and few there 
are who find it." Matt. 7 : 13. On this passage Chrysostom 
says, Homil. 18 [Nic. Fathers 10 : 163]: "The way of Christ 
is said to be strait and narrow, because Christ received to 
himself only those who divested themselves of all sins, laid 
down all the care of this world and were made refined and 
spiritual — subtiks et spirituales." 

Almighty Lord, who art the way, the truth, and the life, 
Thou knowest how few in this present time walk in Thee, 
how few imitate Thee as their head, in humility, poverty, 
chastity, diligence, and patience. Open is the way of Satan; 
many walk therein. Help Thy weak flock, that it may not 
forsake Thee, but follow Thee unto the end in the narrow 
way. 



CHAPTER VII 

THE ROMAN PONTIFF AND THE CARDINALS NOT 

THE UNIVERSAL CHURCH 

It has been said that Christ is the sole Head of the holy 
universal church and all the predestinate, past and future, 
are his mystical body and every one of them members of that 
body. It remains now briefly to examine whether the Roman 
church is that holy universal church, the bride of Christ. 
This seems to be the case because the holy catholic apostolic 
church is one, and this is none other than the Roman church. 
What seemed a matter of question is therefore true. The 
first part of the statement appears from Pope Boniface's 
bull: "By the urgency of faith we are compelled to believe and 
hold that the holy catholic apostolic church is one." l Like- 
wise, the second statement appears from the same decretal, 
which says: "Of the one and only church there is one body, 
one head, and not two heads like a monster, namely, Christ 
and Christ's vicar, Peter, and Peter's successors, even as, 
when the Lord said to Peter himself, 'Feed my sheep,' he 
spoke in a general sense, not of individuals, of these or those 
sheep. It is plain that he regarded all the sheep as committed 
to him. Therefore, if the Greeks and others say that they 
were not committed to Peter and his successors, they thereby 
confess that it is not necessary to be of Christ's sheep; for 
did not the Lord say, in John: 'They shall become one fold 
and one shepherd'?" Is it not evident, therefore, that the 
holy Roman church is that holy universal church, because 

1 The first clause of Boniface's bull, Unam sanctam, Friedberg, 2 : 1245; 
Schaff, Ch. Hist., V, part 2, p. 25. 

56 



ROMAN PONTIFF AND CARDINALS 57 

all are Christ's sheep, and the one fold is of one shepherd? 
This is the meaning of the aforesaid decretal of Boniface, 
which closes with these words: "Further we declare, say and 
determine that to be subject to the Roman pontiff is for every 
human being altogether necessary for salvation" — subesse 
Romano pontifici omni humana creatures . . . omnino esse de 
necessitate salutis. If, therefore, every man is of necessity 
subjected by this declaration to the Roman pontiff, the afore- 
said proposition will follow as true, and, on the other hand, 
the proposition that the Roman church is the church, whose 
head is the pope and whose body the cardinals, and these to- 
gether constitute that church. But that church is not the 
holy catholic and apostolic church. Therefore, what seemed 
a matter of doubt is false. The first proposition is made out 
by the statements of certain doctors — among the statements 
being that the pope is the head of the Roman church and the 
body is the college of cardinals. The second is manifest from 
the fact that the pope with the cardinals is not the totality 
of all the elect. ^ 

For the understanding of this subject the notable passage 
of the Gospel must be meditated upon, namely, Matt. 16 : 16- 
19: "And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the 
Christ, the Son of the living God. And Jesus answered and 
said, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar- Jonah: for flesh and blood 
hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in 
heaven. And I also say unto thee, that thou art Peter, and 
upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell 
shall not prevail against it. I will give unto thee the keys of 
the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on 
earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt 
loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." In this passage are 
designated Christ's church, its faith, the foundation, and the 
authority. In these words Christ's church is designated, "I 
will build my church"; in these Peter's faith, "Thou art the 
Christ, the Son of the living God"; in these the foundation, 



58 THE CHURCH 



<< 



on this rock I will build"; and in these the authority, "I 
will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven." 
These four are to be touched upon briefly, namely, the church, 
faith, the foundation, the church's power. 

As for the first point, in view of the things set forth above 
the proposition is to be laid down that, if we put aside the 
church, nominally so called and as she is generally esteemed to 
be, then the church is said to be threefold. In one sense it is 
the congregation or company of the faithful in respect to 
what is for a time or in respect to present righteousness alone, 
and in this sense the reprobate are of the church for the time 
in which they are in grace. But this church is not Christ's 
mystical body nor the holy catholic church nor any part of it. 
In the second sense the church is taken to be the admixture 
of the predestinate and the reprobate while they are in grace 
in respect to present righteousness. And this church is in 
part but not in whole identical with God's holy church. And 
this church is called mixed in character— grain and chaff, 
wheat and tares — the kingdom of heaven like unto a net cast 
into the sea and gathering fish of every kind and the king- 
dom of heaven like unto ten virgins, of whom five were foolish 
and five wise, as was said above. This church, Tychonius 
falsely called the bipartite body of the Lord, as appears in de 
docL Christi, 3 : 32 [Nic. Fathers, 2 : 569]. For the repro- 
bate are not the body of the Lord or any part of it. 

In the third sense the church is taken for the company 
of the predestinate, whether they are in grace in respect to 
present righteousness or not. In this sense the church is an 
article of faith, about which the apostle was speaking when 
he said, Eph. 5 : 26: "Christ loved the church and gave him- 
self for it, cleansing it by the washing of water in the word of 
life, that he might present it to himself a glorious church not 
having spot or wrinkle or any such thing, but that it might be 
holy and without spot." 

This church the Saviour calls his church in the Gospel 



ROMAN PONTIFF AND CARDINALS 59 

quoted, when he said: "On this rock I will build my church." 
And that he means this church is plain from the words which 
follow: "And the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." 
For seeing that Christ is the rock of that church and also the 
foundation on whom she is builded in respect to predestina- 
tion, she cannot finally be overthrown by the gates of hell, 
that is, by the power and the assaults of tyrants who per- 
secute her or the assaults of wicked spirits. For mightier is 
Christ the king of heaven, the bridegroom of the church, 
than the prince of this world. Therefore, in order to show his 
power and foreknowledge and the predestination wherewith 
he builds, protects, foreknows, and predestinates his church, 
and to give persevering hope to his church, he added: "And 
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." Here Lyra 
says: "From this it appears that the church is not composed 
of men by virtue of any power of ecclesiastical and secular 
dignity, because there are many princes and high priests and 
others of lower degree who have been found apostates from 
the faith." This comment has its proof, in part, in the case of 
Judas Iscariot, both apostle and bishop, who was present when 
Christ said: "On this rock I will build my church and the 
gates of hell shall not prevail against it." But he himself 
was not built upon the rock in respect of predestination and 
therefore the gates of hell prevailed against him. 

From the aforesaid words of Christ it is evident that the 
church is taken to mean all, in a special sense, who after his 
resurrection were to be built upon him and in him by faith 
and perfecting grace. For Christ commended Peter, who 
bore [represented] the person of the universal church and 
confessed his faith in the words: "Thou art the Christ, the 
Son of the living God." And Christ said to him, "Blessed art 
thou, Simon Bar- Jonah." This commendation befits Peter 
and the whole church, which from the beginning was blessed 
in the way, by confessing humbly, obediently, heartily, and 
constantly that Christ is the Son of the living God. This 



60 THE CHURCH 

faith in regard to that most hidden article, the flesh — that is, 
the wisdom of the world — does not reveal; nor does blood 
reveal it, that is, pure philosophical science — but alone God, 
the Father. And because the confession was so clear and 
positive, the Rock — Petra — said to Peter — the rock: "And 
I say unto thee that thou art Peter," that is, the confessor of 
the true Rock — Petra — who is Christ, and "on this Rock," 
which thou hast confessed — that is, upon me — "I will build" 
by strong faith and perfecting grace "my church" — that is, 
the company of the predestinate who, the probation being 
over, are appointed to glory. Wherefore, "the gates of hell 
shall not prevail against it." Up to this point it has been de- 
duced from the Saviour's words that there is (i) one church — 
namely, from the very word "church"; (2) that it is Christ's 
church — from the word "my"; (3) that it is holy — from the 
words, "the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." The 
conclusion, therefore, is that there is one holy church of Christ, 
which in Greek is katholike and in Latin universalis. She is 
also called apostolic, apostolike, because she was established by 
the words and deeds of the apostles and founded upon the 
Rock, Christ, as Jerome says in the Prologue to his Com- 
mentary on the Apocalypse. 1 

Hence I lay it down that it is to be called the holy Roman 
church, for the Decretum, DisL 21 [Friedberg, 1 : 70], says 
that "although there is only one bridal couch 2 of the uni- 
versal catholic church of Christ 8 throughout the world, never- 

1 Jerome referred the rock now to Christ, Com. on Amos, 6:12, now to Peter, 
now to Peter and his confession. The notable passages in which he makes 
Peter the rock are his letter to Marcella, and especially hb letter to Damasus, 
bishop of Rome, Nic. Fathers, 6 : 18, 55. In commenting on Matt. 16 : 16, 
Jerome combined the interpretations Christ and Peter. He can, therefore, be 
cited for both interpretations. 

*The word transl. couch — thalamus — is used in the Vulgate, Deut. 33 : 12: 
"He will abide the whole day on his couch," where the proper transl. of the 
Hebrew is: "He covereth him all the day long." Gilbert of Holland, Sermon 
on the Cant., Migne 184 : 64, says: " There is a couch on the breast of Jesus, 
yea and also a treasure," in pectore Jesu thalamus, etc. 

* I have substituted for Huss's text, Chris tus, the text of the Decretum, Christi. 



ROMAN PONTIFF AND CARDINALS 61 

theless the holy Roman catholic and apostolic church is by 
the decisions of no synods 1 set above the other churches." 
This it proves by the passage already cited, Matt. 16 — 
namely: "Thou art Peter and upon this rock I will build 
my church." And a little later it calls this church "the 
Roman church, the primal seat of the apostle, which has 
neither spot nor wrinkle." This church, however, cannot 
be understood to mean the pope with his cardinals and his 
household, for they alike come and go. Therefore, the Gloss 
on this text has this to say: "The argument is, that wherever 
the good are, there is the Roman church." And so the De- 
cretum, 24 : 1 [Friedberg 1 : 970] : a recta is to be understood. 
Where the canon on the Roman church speaks in this way: 
"This is the holy and apostolic mother church of all the 
churches of Christ, which* by God's omnipotent grace is 
proved never to have erred from the path of apostolic tra- 
dition, nor has ever been corrupted by or succumbed to 
heretical novelties." This, it must here be noted, cannot 
be understood of any pope or the members of his household, 
on which point the Gloss also says: "I ask, therefore, of which 
church do you understand that it cannot err?" But it is 
certain that the pope can err. See Decretum, Anastasius, 19, 
and Si papa, 40 [Friedberg, 1 : 64, 146]. Therefore, neither 
the pope himself nor his family is that church of which it is 
here said, she cannot err. Hence the Gloss says: "The 
company of the faithful itself is called this church." So also 
is to be understood St. Jerome's statement, Dist. 25: 1, Hoc 
est fides [Friedberg 1 : 970]: "The Roman church is holy, 
which always has remained thoroughly unspotted, will in the 
future by the Lord's providence and the blessed Apostle 
Peter's care remain without any dent from heretics and abide 

1 Instead of "no synods" Huss's text has "many — multis — synods." The 
text of the Decretum is nullis. This was the famous decree of Gelasius, pope 
about 495 or 496, and I have substituted the right reading above; for the mis- 
take of the editor makes Huss prove the very opposite of what he was intending. 

* Huss here has qui, the Decretum qua. 



6a THE CHURCH 

unmoved and immovable for all time." Here no pope with 
his college of cardinals can be understood. For often these 
are as soiled with wicked, deceitful depravity and sin, as at 
the time of pope Joanna, the Englishwoman, who was called 
Agnes. How, therefore, did that Roman church — that Agnes, 
pope Joanna with college — remain always unspotted, seeing 
she bore ? And the same is true of other popes who were here- 
tics and deposed on account of their manifold enormities. 

Since, therefore, according to the Decretals, the Roman 
church has the primacy and the dignity, so far as God is 
concerned, over all other churches, it is evident that she is 
the whole militant church, which God loves more than any 
of its parts. And so it is evidently of faith that not that 
college [of the cardinals] but the whole mother dispersed 
among all peoples and tongues is that holy Roman church 
of which the laws [the canon law] accord in speaking with 
the holy doctors. Hence, in order to impress upon us this 
judgment by St. Augustine and St. Ambrose, the hymn is 
ordained for the church, "The holy church throughout the 
world doth acknowledge thee." And in the canon of the 
mass, first and chiefly, we offer prayer for the holy catholic 
church, that God would condescend to give her peace, to 
keep her, and to grant her unity in all the world. Hence 
prayer is undoubtedly offered for the principal — princi- 
palissima — militant church, which, I lay down, is the Roman 
church. And truly among its parts, when we compare in 
the matter of greatness, the pope and his college are in 
dignity its chief part, so long as they follow Christ closely 
and, putting away the pomp and ambition of the primacy, 
serve their mother diligently and humbly. For in doing the 
opposite they are turned into the desolation of abomination 
— into a college at direct variance with the humble college 
of the apostles and our Lord Jesus Christ. 

But it is to be noted that the Roman church was properly 
called a company of Christ's faithful, living under the obe- 



ROMAN PONTIFF AND CARDINALS 63 

dience of the Roman bishop, just as the Antiochian church 
was called the company of Christ's faithful, under the bishop 
of Antioch. The same also was true of the faithful in Alex- 
andria and Constantinople. And in this way Peter, Christ's 
apostle and Roman bishop, speaks of the church when, ad- 
dressing the faithful in Christ in Pontus, Galatia, Cappa- 
docia, Asia, and Bithynia, he says: "The church which is 
gathered together 1 in Babylon saluteth you," I Peter 5 : 13. 
Is not the church here taken to mean the faithful of Christ 
who were at Rome with St. Peter? After the same manner 
also, the apostle designated particular churches when he 
wrote from Corinth to the Romans, "all the churches of Christ 
salute you," and a little further on: "I, Tertius, salute you, 
who wrote the epistle in the Lord. Gaius my host and the 
whole church saluteth you." Romans 16 : 16, 23. Here the 
whole church is taken for all Christ's faithful, who with Paul 
were waging warfare in Corinth. Likewise we have the 
words: "To the church of God which is in Corinth, sancti- 
fied in Christ Jesus," I Cor. 1 : 2, and "Paul and Sylvanus 
and Timotheus to the church of the Thessalonians," I Thess. 
1:2. We have the same often in other places, so that those 
are properly called particular churches which separately are 
parts of the universal church, which is the church of Jesus 
Christ. 

But the Christian church had its beginning in Judea and 
was first called the church of Jerusalem, as it is said: "In 
that day there arose a great persecution in the church which 
was in Jerusalem, and they were all scattered throughout the 
regions of Judea and Samaria, except the apostles," Acts 
8:1. The second church was the Antiochian, in which Peter, 
the apostle, resided, and there, for the first time, the name 
Christian was employed. Hence, the faithful were first 
called disciples and brethren, and later Christians, for we 
read: "The apostles and brethren which were in Judea," 

1 CcUecta. The Vulgate has codecta with the Greek. 



64 THE CHURCH 

and at the close of the chapter it is stated how Barnabas led 
Paul to Antioch and they were together for a whole year in 
the church and taught great multitudes, so that "the disciples 
were called Christians first in Antioch," Acts n : i, 26. 

In the second sense, the Roman church is taken to mean 
any pope together with any cardinals, wherever they may 
happen to reside, whether their lives are good or evil. And 
in the third sense, it is taken for the pope. These two last 
senses are wrested by scholars. For there is no good reason 
for calling the Roman church our mother either (1) on ac- 
count of its pride or (2) on account of the emperor's clement 
goodness in endowing the church or on account of the pope's 
haughtiness and self-assertion because of imperial rule drawn 
from the pope's primacy or dominion, (3) or, again, is this 
a good reason that men should believe that it is incumbent 
upon every Christian to have recourse to the pope and that 
it is of necessity for salvation to recognize him as the head 
and as the most holy father, but for other reasons than this. 
For since the term Roman church was established aside from 
any foundation in sacred Scripture, it is enough to give a 
probable reason. For the holy church of Christ flourished 
first in Jerusalem during the days of the apostles, who com- 
panied with Christ, and afterwards in Antioch at the time of 
Peter's incumbence as bishop — caihedraiionis — and afterwards 
in Rome at the time of the preaching and martyrdom of 
Peter and Paul. And so is to be understood the Saviour's 
saying, Matt. 12 : 28, "Finally is the kingdom of God come 
unto you," and also Luke 17 : 21, 37, "The kingdom of God 
is within you ... for where the body is, thither will the eagles 
also be gathered together." For, although the Christian 
church began in Judea and Christ suffered martyrdom in 
Jerusalem, nevertheless with reason Christ's church is called 
the Roman church in view of a certain pre-eminence and for 
three causes: (1) Christ knew that the peoples under the 
Roman empire would be brought in in the place of the unbe- 



ROMAN PONTIFF AND CARDINALS 65 

lieving Jews, as the apostle says, Romans 11 : 2, 12. (2) A 
larger multitude of martyrs triumphed there than in any other 
city, for so, where a man is born from the womb and triumphs 
gloriously, from that place he takes his name. Inasmuch, 
therefore, as holy church, so far as many of its parts go, was 
born in Rome, having been gathered out of the womb of the 
synagogue, and there triumphed, growing among the nations, 
so it was thought proper that she should take her name from 
the metropolitan city which is Rome. Hence DisL 22 [Fried- 
berg, 1 : 74] runs: "She is called most holy, because Peter 
and Paul on the same day and at one and the same time con- 
secrated the whole Roman church and exalted her above all 
other cities in the whole world by their presence and by their 
glorious triumph." (3) Not the locality or the antiquity, 
but the formulated faith establishes the church of Christ, for, 
both as regards personalities and time, Christ's church had 
existed before in its earlier seats. And in this sense it is said: 
"The Lord did not choose people on account of the place, 
but the place on account of the people," II Mace. 5 : 19. For 
this cause, I believe it is permitted to name Christ's church 
from any locality which the righteous faithful inhabit, just 
as Christ was called the Nazarene on account of his concep- 
tion which occurred in Nazareth, and as he may be called a 
Bethlehemite from the place of his nativity, and a Caper- 
naumite from Capernaum where he worked miracles, and a 
Jerusalemite from his most glorious passion in Jerusalem. 

In view of these things it is plain what ought to be said 
with regard to the doubtful statement made at the beginning 
of this chapter. For it should be granted that the Roman 
church is the holy mother, the catholic church, the bride of 
Christ. To the argument in favor of the opposite, by which 
it is argued that the Roman church is the church of which 
the pope is the head and the cardinals the body — this is said 
by way of concession and by defining the church in the second 
way, that is, as the pope — whoever he may be — in conjunction 



66 THE CHURCH 

with the cardinals — whoever they may be and wheresoever 
they may live. But it is denied that this church is the holy, 
catholic and apostolic church. And so both parts of the 
argument are granted, but the conclusion is denied. But if 
this be said, namely, "I lay down that the pope is holy to- 
gether with all the twelve cardinals living with him," this 
being laid down and admitted as highly possible, it follows 
that the pope himself in conjunction with the cardinals is 
the holy, catholic and apostolic church. This conclusion is 
denied, but it follows well that a holy pope in conjunction 
with holy cardinals are a holy church which is a part of the 
holy, catholic and apostolic church. Therefore Christ's faith- 
ful must hold firmly as a matter of faith to the first conclusion 
and not to the second; for the first is confirmed by Christ's 
words: "The gates of hell shall not prevail against it" But 
the second is a matter of doubt to me and to every other pil- 
grim, unless a divine revelation makes it plain. Hence neither 
is the pope the head nor are the cardinals the whole body of 
the holy, universal, catholic church. For Christ alone is the 
head of that church, and his predestinate are the body and 
each one is a member, because his bride is one person with 
Jesus Christ. 1 

1 It was a popular definition which regarded the pope in conjunction with 
the body of the cardinals as the church. So Wyclif, "the public — cammunitas 
— holds the church to be the pope and the cardinals, which it is necessary for 
all to believe. 11 De Eccles., p. 92, and often. In his Replies to Palecz and 
Stanislaus, Huss represents these two magisters as denning the church in the 
same way, the "pope is the head and the cardinals the body of the church. 1 ' 
M on., 1 : pp. 333, 335- 



CHAPTER Vm 

THE FAITH WHICH IS THE FOUNDATION OF THE 

CHURCH 

So fax as the second thing is concerned [involved in Matt. 
16 : 16-18], that is, faith, which is touched upon in the words, 
"Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God" — it is to be 
noted that faith is now taken for the act of believing by which 
we believe, now for the inward state or disposition — habitus 1 — 
of believing through which we believe, and now for the truth 
which we believe, as Augustine lays down, de Trinitate, 13 
[Nic. Fathers, 3 : 166 sqq.]. 

In the second place, it is to be noted that there is one faith 
which is the explicit belief of a faithful man and that there is 
another faith which is implicit faith as the catholic, who has 
the disposition — habitus — of faith infused or explicitly ac- 
quired, believes in the catholic church in common with others 
and by reason of that common faith believes implicitly what- 
ever single thing is included under holy mother church. 1 Like- 
wise in believing whatsoever Christ wished to be believed 

1 In his Super IV. Sent., 452, Huss defines the meaning of the word when he 
says "fides est habitus vel virtus — provided faith is formed in love." 

* The distinction between implicit and explicit faith, which starts with Augus- 
tine, is the distinction between acceptance of doctrines on the ground of obedi- 
ence to the church and a real assent to them as doctrines. So Thomas Aquinas, 
who says, in essence, that implicit faith is acceptance of things to be believed as 
things contained in the Scriptures, and explicit faith is their acceptance with 
the understanding and heart. Summa, 2 : 2, q. 2, 5. Innocent IV, in his 
Com. on the Decretals, said that it is enough for laymen to believe in God as 
the God of justice and in all other matters, dogmas, and morals — impliciie — that 
is, to think and say, I believe what the church believes. Innocent went on to 
say that clerics were under obligation to follow the commands of a pope that 
were unrighteous. D611inger, Akad. Vort., 2 : 49. 

67 



68 THE CHURCH 

about himself and refusing to believe what he did not wish 
to be believed about himself, he believes every article, af- 
firmative or negative, which is to be believed about Christ 
This faith Peter had implicitly when he expressly confessed 
Christ to be true God and true man, saying: "Thou art Christ, 
the Son of the living God." And yet the same Peter explicitly 
set himself against Christ and his Gospel when, after Christ 
had said, "All ye shall be offended in me this night" [Matt 
26 : 31], he denied and said: "Though all be offended in thee, 
yet will I never be offended." Thus also many of the faith- 
ful in common [that is, as a body] believe implicitly all the 
truth of Scripture, and when a truth unknown to them is 
proposed, they search to see if it is laid down in holy Scripture, 
and if this is shown to be the case they at once acknowledge 
the sense which the Holy Spirit insists on. Therefore, whoever 
has in common with others, faith formed in love, this suffices 
for salvation when accompanied with the grace of persever- 
ance. For God, who gave the first faith, will give to his soldier 
clearer faith, unless he puts some hindrance in the way. For 
God does not demand of all his children that they should con- 
tinuously during their sojourn here be in the particular act 
of thought about any particular point of faith, but it is enough 
that, putting aside inertia and callousness, they have faith 
formed as a habit. 

Faith, therefore, we must understand, is twofold : the one 
unformed, which is exercised by the demons who believe and 
tremble; the other faith formed in love. The latter, accom- 
panied with perseverance, saves, but not the former. Hence 
with reference to the faith formed in love the words were 
spoken: "Whosoever believeth in the Son of God, hath 
eternal life," John 3 : 15. And the Saviour said to Peter, 
who had that faith and professed it: "Blessed art thou, Simon 
Bar- Jonah." This faith is the foundation 1 of the other virtues 

1 It would seem that Huss gets his expression fundamenlum, foundation, 
from the word substantia, used in the Vulgate, Heb. 11 : 1 (hupostasis), sub- 



FAITH 69 

which the church of Christ practises. Likewise it is to be 
noted that, inasmuch as faith is not of things which appear 
to the senses but of hidden things and inasmuch as it is dif- 
ficult to believe hidden things, therefore two elements are 
necessary to faith in order that we may believe anything 
truly: (1) the truth which illumines the mind, (2) the author- 
ity [evidence] which confirms the mind. Here belongs one 
property of faith, that it is concerned alone with the truth — all 
falsehood being excluded — the truth which the faithful ought 
to defend even unto death. The second property of faith is, 
that without proof and special knowledge it is obscure to the 
faithful, for what we see with the eye we cannot be said to 
believe. And the saints in heaven who see the articles clearly, 
which we know obscurely, are not said to believe them but 
to see. In the place of faith they have clear vision and in the 
place of hope unending fruition. The third property of faith 
is, that it is the foundation [assurance] of the things which 
are to be believed for the pilgrim who is to come to the peaceful 
dwelling. Therefore, the apostle says that faith is "the sub- 
stance," that is, the foundation, "of things hoped for": "the 
evidence of things which do not appear," that is, to the senses, 
Heb. 11 : 1. For now we hope for our blessedness and believe, 
but do not see with the eyes of the flesh. And, because it is 
not possible without faith to please God, therefore every one 
who is to be saved ought first of all to be faithful— fidelis — 
[have faith]. A faithful person, however, is he who has faith 
infused by God and has no fear of ill to himself mixed with 
his faith. But all open offenders according to the law of 
present unrighteousness are unfaithful — infideles — [without 
faith], for it is impossible for any one to sin mortal sin except 

stantia rerum, that which underlies, and trsl. "assurance" in the Rev. Vers. 
The same word substantia is used in the Vulgate, II Cor. 9 : 4, 11 : 17; Heb. 
3 : 14. Huss may also have been influenced by the Vulgate fundamentum, 
Heb. 6:1, "not laying the foundation of repentance and good works and of 
faith toward God." Huss quotes Heb. 11 : 1 in his Com. on Peter the Lombard, 

P. 453- 



70 THE CHURCH 

in so fax as he lacks faith. For, if he were mindful of the 
penalty to be inflicted on those sinning in that way and 
fully believed it and had the faith which comes from divine 
knowledge — wherewith God knows all things clearly and is 
present with such sinners — then, without doubt, he would not 
sin mortal sin. 

A person may lack faith in three ways: (i) By weak- 
ness, and in this way he is lacking who vacillates in believing 
and does not persist unto death in the defense of faith. (2) 
He is lacking in faith who firmly believes the many things 
which are to be believed and yet is lacking in many things to 
be believed, which unbelieved things are as holes, and thus he 
has a shield of faith which is full of holes. (3) He is lacking 
in faith who lacks in the use of this shield; and this happens 
in this way: that, though he has the firm habit of things to be 
believed, he nevertheless lacks in acts of meritorious living 
because of an undisciplined life. These things are referred 
to in Titus 1 : 16: "They confess that they know God, but 
in deeds deny him." Every one, therefore, who is lacking in 
faith in any of these three ways is wanting in the abiding 
strength of faith. 

And we must remember that faith differs from hope: (1) 
In this, that hope has reference to the future prize to be ob- 
tained, but faith concerns the past, namely such things as that 
God created the world, that Christ was incarnate, etc. And it 
concerns also the present, as that God is, that the saints are 
in heaven, and that Christ sits at the right hand of the Father. 
Faith also concerns the future, as that Christ will come again 
in judgment; that all who have not arisen at that time will 
arise in the day of judgment; and that God will finally re- 
ward in bliss all the saints who finish this present life in grace. 
(2) Hope does not reach the knowledge of faith in that which 
it hopes for, but it rests in a certain middle act between doubt 
and belief, so that there are many things which are to be set 
before the faithful to accept which, when the distinction is 



FAITH 71 

removed, they should neither doubt, nor grant, nor deny but 
only hope for. For example, if it were proposed to me, "Thou 
shalt be saved," I ought not to grant it, for I do not know 
whether it is true, nor should I deny it, for I do not know 
whether it is false, nor should I doubt it — but I should hope 
for it. (3) Faith also differs from hope in this, that hope is 
only of good which is possible to him who hopeth, but faith 
is about the evil as well as about the good, for we believe the 
forgiveness of sin, which is most certainly a good thing for 
all who are to be saved; and we believe also that the sin of 
blasphemy will not be forgiven either in this world or in that 
which is to come. 

And for the reason that believing is an act of faith, that 
is, to put trust m—fidere — therefore know that to believe that 
which is necessary for a man to secure blessedness is to adhere 
firmly and without wavering to the truth spoken as by God. 
For this truth, because of its certitude, a man ought to expose 
his life to the danger of death. And, in this way, every 
Christian is expected to believe explicitly and implicitly all 
the truth which the Holy Spirit has put in Scripture, and in 
this way a man is not bound to believe the sayings of the 
saints which are apart from Scripture, nor should he believe 
papal bulls, except in so far as they speak out of Scripture, 
or in so far as what they say is founded in Scripture simply. 
But a man may believe bulls as probable, for both the pope 
and his curia make mistakes from ignorance of the truth. 
And, with reference to this ignorance, it can be substantiated 
that the pope makes mistakes and may be deceived. Lucre 
deceives the pope, and he is deceived through ignorance. How 
far, however, faith ought to be placed in the letters of princes, 
the instruments of notaries, and the descriptions of men, ex- 
perience, which is the teacher of things, teaches. For she 
teaches that these three often make mistakes. Of one kind 
is the faith which is placed in God. He cannot deceive or 
be deceived; of another is the faith placed in the pope, who 



72 THE CHURCH 

may deceive and be deceived. Of one kind is the faith placed 
in holy Scripture; and another, faith in a bull thought out 
in a human way. For to holy Scripture exception may not 
be taken, nor may it be gainsaid; but it is proper at times 
to take exception to bulls and gainsay them when they 
either commend the unworthy or put them in authority, or 
savor of avarice, or honor the unrighteous or oppress the in- 
nocent, or implicitly contradict the commands or counsels of 
God. 

It is, therefore, plain which faith is the foundation of the 
church — the faith with which the church is built upon the 
Rock, Christ Jesus, for it is that by which the church confesses 
that "Jesus Christ is the Son of the living God." For Peter 
spoke for all the faithful, when he said: "Thou art the Christ, 
the Son of the living God." "This is the victory," says John, 
" which overcometh the world — even our faith. Who is he 
that overcometh the world but he that believeth that Jesus 
is the Son of God?" I John 5 : 4. 



CHAPTER IX 
THE CHURCH FOUNDED ON CHRIST, THE ROCK 

The third foundation, included in the proposition (Matt 
16 : 1 8) is touched upon in the words: "On this rock I will 
build my church." And in view of the fact that in their ut- 
terances the popes most of all use this saying of Christ, wish- 
ing to draw from it that they themselves are the rock or the 
foundation upon which the church stands, namely upon Peter, 
to whom it was said, "Thou art Peter," — in view of this fact, 
in order to understand the Lord's word it must be noted that 
the foundation of the church by whom it is founded is touched 
upon in the words: "I will build," and the foundation in which 
it is laid is referred to in the words, "on this Rock," and the 
foundation wherewith the church is founded is referred to in 
the words, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." 
Christ is therefore the foundation by whom primarily and 
in whom primarily the holy catholic church is founded, and 
faith is the foundation with which it is founded — that faith 
which works through love, which Peter set forth when he 
said: "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." The 
foundation, therefore, of the church is Christ, and he said: 
"Apart from me ye can do nothing," John 15 : 5; that is, 
apart from me as the prime and principal foundation. But 
Christ grounds and builds his church on himself, the Rock, 
when he so influences her that she hears and does his words, 
for then the gates of hell do not prevail against her. Hence 
Christ says: "Every one that cometh unto me and heareth my 
words and doeth them, I will show you to whom he is like: 
he is like a man building a house, who built a house deep and 

73 



74 THE CHURCH 

laid the foundation on a rock: and when the flood arose, the 
stream brake against that house, and could not shake it: for 
it was founded on the rock/' Luke 6 : 47. And what this foun- 
dation is, the apostle Paul shows in I Cor. 3 : 11: "Other 
foundation can no man lay than that which is laid, which is 
Christ Jesus"; and I Cor. 10 : 4: "But the rock was Christ." 
Therefore, it is in this foundation and on this rock and from 
this rock up that the holy church is built, for he says: "Upon 
this Rock I will build my church." 

And on this foundation the apostles built the church of 
Christ. For not to themselves did they call the people, but 
to Christ, who is the first, the essential and most effectual 
foundation. For this reason the apostle said : "Other founda- 
tion can no man lay." Therefore this apostle, seeing how 
the Corinthians might err concerning the foundation, con- 
demned them, saying: "Each one of you saith I am indeed 
of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ. 
Is therefore Christ divided, or was Paul crucified for you, or 
were ye baptized in the name of Paul?" I Cor. 1 : 12, 13. 
It is as if he said, No ! Therefore, neither Peter nor Paul nor 
any other besides Christ is the chief foundation or head of 
the church, so that later the holy apostle said: "What then 
is Apollos and what is Paul ? His ministers whom ye believed 
and each one as the Lord gave to him" to minister to the 
church, I Cor. 3 : 5. He said: "I planted," that is by preach- 
ing; "Apollos watered," that is by baptizing; "but God gave 
the increase," that is through the founding by faith, hope, and 
love. Therefore, "neither he that planteth," as Paul, "is 
anything, nor he that watereth," like Apollos, "is anything," 
that is anything upon which the church may be founded, but 
only God who giveth the increase; He is the church's founda- 
tion. And the words follow: "Let every one take heed how 
he buildeth thereon, for other foundation can no man lay 
than that is laid, which is Christ Jesus." 

Now, this foundation is the rock of righteousness of which 



THE CHURCH FOUNDED ON CHRIST 75 

Christ spoke in the Gospel to St. Peter: "Thou art Peter, 
and upon this Rock I will build my church." On these words 
St. Augustine says, in his Sermons on the Words of the Lord, 13 
[Nic. Fathers, 6 : 340]: "Our Lord Jesus Christ thus spake 
to Peter, Thou art Peter and upon this rock I will build my 
church — on this Rock, which thou hast confessed, on this Rock 
which thou hast recognized, when thou saidst, 'Thou art 
Christ, the Son of the living God' — 'I will build my church': 
I will build thee upon myself, not myself upon thee. For 
wishing that men should be built upon men, they were saying, 
'I am of Paul, I of Apollos, and I of Cephas/ that is, Peter. 
And others who did not wish to be built upon Peter — Petrum — 
but upon the Rock — Petram — said, 'I am of Christ.' " Again, 
in his last Homily on John [Nic. Fathers, 7 : 450], Augustine 
says: "Peter the apostle, because of the primacy of his apos- 
tleship, had a symbolic and representative personality, for 
what belonged to him as an individual was that by nature 
he was one man, by grace one Christian, and by a more 
abundant grace he was one and the same chief apostle. But 
when it was said to him: 'I will give unto thee the keys of 
the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt bind on 
earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt 
loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven,' he represented the 
universal church which in this world is shaken by divers 
temptations, even as by torrents of rain, by rivers, and tem- 
pests, and yet doth not fall, because it is founded upon the 
Rock, the word from which Peter got his name. For Rock 
— Petra — does not come from Peter — Petrus — but Peter from 
Rock, just as the word Christ is not derived from Christian, 
but Christian from Christ. 

"Hence the Lord said: 'On this Rock I will build my 
church,' because Peter had said before, 'Thou art the Christ, 
the Son of the living God.' Upon this Rock which thou hast 
confessed, he said, 'I will build my church.' For Christ was 
the Rock. Therefore, the church, which is founded on Christ, 



76 THE CHURCH 

received from him the keys of the kingdom of heaven in 
the person of Peter, that is, the power of binding and loosing 
sins. For what the church is essentially in Christ, that Peter 
is symbolically in the Rock — Petra — by which symbolism 
Christ is understood to be the Rock and Peter the church. 
Therefore, this church which Peter represented, so long as she 
prospers among evil men, is by loving and by following Christ 
freed from evil, but much more does she follow in the case of 
those who fight for the truth even unto death." 

These things Augustine teaches throughout, in agreement 
with the apostle, that Christ alone is the foundation and 
Rock upon which the church is built. To this the apostle 
Peter speaks, when he says: "Unto whom coming, a living 
stone, rejected indeed of men, but of God elect and precious, 
ye also, as living stones, are built upon into spiritual houses 1 
to be a holy priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices unto God 
through Jesus Christ," I Peter 2:4^. For this reason the 
Scripture continues: "Behold I lay in Zion a chief corner- 
stone, elect, precious, and he that believeth on Him shall not 
be put to shame. For you, therefore, that believe is the honor, 
but for such as disbelieve, the stone which the builders re- 
jected, the same was made the head of the corner and a stone 
of stumbling and a Rock of offense. For they stumble at the 
word and do not believe that whereunto they were appointed." 
Paid also said: "Israel following 2 after a law of righteousness 
did not arrive at the law of righteousness. Wherefore? Be- 
cause they sought it not by faith but 3 by works. They stum- 
bled at the stone of stumbling, as is written, Behold I lay in 
Zion a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense, and he that be- 
lieveth on him shall not be put to shame," Romans 9:31 sqq. 
Behold how these two Roman apostles and bishops, Peter 
and Paul, prove from Scripture that the Lord Jesus Christ is 

1 In domos spiriluales. The Vulgate: damus spiritualis, etc. 

* The text here has non, not, which must be a mistake for the Vulgate's vero. 

• Vulgate adds quasi. 



THE CHURCH FOUNDED ON CHRIST 77 

himself the stone and the Rock of foundation, for the Lord 
says: "Behold I will lay for a foundation in Zion a corner- 
stone tried and precious, a stone of sure foundation/' Isaiah 
28 : 16. And also in the Psalms 118 : 22. "The stone which 
the builders rejected has been made the head of the corner." 1 
Therefore, Christ himself is the foundation of the apostles 
and the whole church, and in him it is fitly framed to- 
gether. 

For this reason the apostle says: "So then ye are no more 
strangers and sojourners, but ye are fellow citizens with the 
saints and of the household of God, being built upon the 
foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ him- 
self being the chief corner-stone, in whom each several build- 
ing fitly framed together groweth into a holy temple unto 
the Lord," Eph. 2 : 19-21. Here St. Remigius says [Migne's 
ed., 117 : 711]: "The foundation of the apostles and prophets 
and of all the faithful is Christ because they are established 
and grounded in faith in him, just as he himself said, 'On 
this Rock' that is, 'on myself, I will build my church/ 
which consists of angels and righteous men. For every one 
that hath faith in Christ is founded upon him, Christ Jesus 
himself being the chief corner-stone. How, then, is Christ 
the foundation and the chief stone? For this reason, that 
faith begins with him and is perfected and completed in him 
and by him so that all the elect are grounded in him." Thus 
Remigius Haymo.* 

From these things it is plain that Christ alone is the 
chief foundation of the church, and in this sense the apostle 
thought of that foundation, because he did not dare to speak 
of anything except what was built upon that foundation. 
Hence he says: "I will not dare to speak of any thing save 
those which Christ wrought through me by the obedience 

1 1 Cor. 10 : 4, the Rock that followed them was Christ, is the only passage 
of the sort Huss applies to Christ in the Super IV. Sent., p. 559. 

' Remigius, bishop of Auxerre, d. about 910, wrote in part under the pseu- 
donym of Haymo of Halberstadt. 



78 THE CHURCH 

of God 1 in word, and in deeds, and in the power of signs and 
wonders, in the power of the Holy Spirit. And so I have 
preached this Gospel not where Christ was already known, 
that I might not build upon another man's foundation," 
Romans 15: 18-20. Was not this that apostle, a vessel of 
election, who said he did not dare to preach anything save 
those things which Christ spoke through him; for otherwise 
he would not be building on Christ, the most effectual foun- 
dation, if perchance he should say and teach or do anything 
which did not have its foundation in Jesus Christ And from 
this it is plain, that not Peter but the Rock, Christ, was in- 
tended in Christ's Gospel, when Christ said: "On this Rock 
I will build my church." 

But the objection is drawn from Ambrose, Dist. 50 [Fried- 
berg* 1 : 198], where he says: "Peter became more faithful 
after he had wept over having relinquished his faith and so 
he found greater grace than he lost. For as a good shepherd 
he received the flock to care for it so that, as he had been weak 
to himself, he might become a buttress— -firmametUum — to all, 
and he who faltered, 2 under the temptation of a question, 
might establish others by the steadfastness of his faith. 
Finally, in order to strengthen the devotion of the churches, 
he was called rock, as the Lord said: 'thou art Peter and 
upon this rock I will build my church.' For he is called 
petra — rock — because he was to be the first to lay the foun- 
dations of the faith among the nations, 8 and, as an immov- 
able bowlder — saxum — he held up the structure and weighty 
edifice of the whole of Christ's work." So much Ambrose, 
showing that Peter is called the rock. The exposition of 
Augustine, the foremost of Scripture expositors, seems to me 
here to be more efficacious and is more efficacious because it 

1 The Vulgate: in obedientiam gentium. 

1 Nutaverat. Huss here has muUnerat se. The se is retained in Friedberg's 
ed. of the Corp. jur. can., although, as there indicated, many MSS. and editors 
omit it. 

9 In notionibus; Huss's text has wrongly imUationis. 



THE CHURCH FOUNDED ON CHRIST 79 

is founded in the very words of Scripture which says that 
Christ is the Rock and the corner-stone and the effectual 
foundation. But nowhere in Scripture do we expressly read 
that Peter is a rock. Nor did Christ, who was able to say it 
easily — leviter — say: "Thou art the Rock, and on thee, the 
Rock, I will build my church." What he said was: "Thou 
art Peter," that is the confessor of the true Rock, "and 
upon this Rock," which thou hast confessed, "I will build 
my church." But Christ builds the church upon himself, 
by faith, hope, and love. Hence we believe and hope in 
Christ and not in Peter, and we are bound to have more 
love and affection for Christ than for Peter. For the fathers 
of the Old Testament did not believe or hope in Peter, who 
was to come, but in the Rock. Nor did the saints of the 
New Testament believe and hope in Peter but in Christ, 
who is objectively [the object of] our faith and hope. 

It must be granted that the apostles are foundations of 
the church but not in the same way as Christ is the foun- 
dation. For Christ is the foundation of foundations, as he 
also is the holiest of the holy. This is expressed by St. Au- 
gustine on Psalm 86 [Nic. Fathers, 8 : 420]: "His foundations 
are in the mountains," etc. Here he shows that the chief 
foundation of the New Jerusalem, the city of Zion, and also 
its corner-stone is Christ; and the mountains are the proph- 
ets and apostles in whom are the foundations of the church. 
And Augustine says: "That ye may come to know that 
Christ is the first and the great foundation, the apostle says, 
'other foundation can no man lay than that which is laid, 
which is Christ Jesus.'" How, then, can the prophets and 
the apostles be foundations and at the same time Christ 
be the foundation beyond whom there is nothing? How do 
we think but figuratively of the foundation of foundations, 
except as he is expressly called the holiest of the holy? If, 
therefore, thou thinkest of the sacraments, Christ is the holi- 
est of the holy; if thou thinkest of an obedient flock, Christ 



80 THE CHURCH 

is the shepherd of shepherds; if thou thinkest of the edifice, 
Christ is the foundation of foundations. 

And later he [Augustine] gives the reason for the prophets 
and apostles being called the foundations of the structure of 
the city of Jerusalem, and asks: "Why are they the foun- 
dations? Because their authority bears up — portal — our in- 
firmity. How are they gates — forke ? Because by them we 
go into the kingdom of God, for they preach to us. And 
as we go in by them, so we go in by Christ, for he is the 
door. And there are said to be twelve gates of Jerusalem, 
and Christ is the one gate and Christ is the twelve gates, 
because Christ is in the twelve gates." Thus much Augus- 
tine. And on that text of Rev. 21 : 14, "The wall of the 
city having twelve foundations," the Gloss says: "that is 
the prophets in whose faith the apostles were grounded, for 
from them faith passed on by succession to the apostles, 
whose preaching had the same belief as had the prophets 
who also said the same thing. Or let us accept the apostles 
as the foundations in whom the whole fortification of the 
church is grounded. Again, in this passage it is said: "All 
the foundations of the wall of the city are adorned with a 
precious stone, and the first foundation was jasper." The 
Gloss says: "The foundations, that is, the prophets and apos- 
tles, are adorned in themselves with graces of every kind." 

Behold how Christ is the foundation of the church and 
the apostles are the foundations! Christ is by a figure of 
speech — antonomastice — the foundation because the edifice of 
the church begins from him and is finished in him and through 
him. But the prophets and apostles are the foundations be- 
cause their authority bears up our weakness. And this was the 
sense intended by Ambrose when he said: "That Peter was 
called the rock because he was the first to lay in the nations l 
the foundations of the faith; and, like an immovable rock," 
that is, by the steadfastness with which he endured to the 

1 Huss's text has imitatoribus instead of in naHonibus. 



THE CHURCH FOUNDED ON CHRIST 81 

end, "he held together the structure and weighty edifice of 
the whole of Christ's work." For truly the foundation with 
which the church is grounded in Christ is the faith which 
Peter confessed, when he said: "Thou art the Christ, the 
Son of the living God." And of this foundation Paul said, 
I Cor. 3 : 10: "According to the grace which is given unto 
me, as a wise master builder, I laid the foundation," that 
is to say, by teaching the faith of Christ. And he adds: 
"And another buildeth thereon," that is, he does good works 
on the basis of faith. " But let each man take heed how he 
buildeth thereon," that is, his spiritual life in Christ. For 
Paul adds: "Other foundation can no man lay than that is 
laid, which is Christ. And if any man build upon this foun- 
dation gold" — that is, the doctrine of deity and heavenly 
things — "silver" — that is, the doctrine of the humanity of 
Christ and created things — "precious stones" — graces which 
adorn the soul and its faculties — he without doubt is built 
upon Christ. So the apostles built when they taught with 
clearness and fervor the doctrine of the deity and humanity 
and the Christian graces and, when they lived in the flesh, 
planted with their blood the church of Christ But which 
of them built upon Christ and planted the church on Christ 
more industriously, this we shall no doubt know when we 
reach the heavenly country, the Lord himself being our 
leader. 

It is conceded, however, that Peter had his humility, pov- 
erty, steadfastness of faith, and, consequently, his blessed- 
ness from the Rock of the church, which is Christ. But that 
by the words "On this Rock I will build my church" Christ 
should have intended to build the whole militant church upon 
the person of Peter, the faith of the Gospel, as expounded 
by Augustine, and reason declare untrue. For on the Rock, 
which is Christ, from whom Peter received his strength, 
Christ was to build his church, since Christ is the head and 
the foundation of the whole church, and not Peter. On the 



82 THE CHURCH 

other hand, St. Dionysius, 1 de divinis nominibus, 3, calls St. 
Peter the peak, that is, the capital or captain. And in his 
book which he wrote on the death of the apostles Peter and 
Paul, he thus addresses Titus: "As Peter and Paul were 
being led to the place of martyrdom and were about to be 
separated, one from the other, Paul addressed to Peter these 
words: 'Peace be to thee, O foundation of the churches and 
shepherd of Christ's sheep and lambs ! ' " In the same way 
Augustine, in his Questions an the Old and New Law, says 
that "Peter was the first among the apostles." So likewise 
Pope Marcellus, 24 : 1, Rogamus [Friedberg, 1 : 970], 1 says: 
"We beseech you, brethren, that ye teach no otherwise than 
as ye have received from St. Peter and the other apostles, 
for he is the head of the whole church, to whom the Lord 
said: 'Thou art Peter and upon this rock I will build my 
church. ' " Likewise Pope Anacletus, Dist. 21 fin novo [Fried- 
berg, 1 : 69]: "In the New Testament after Christ's death, 
the priestly order began with Peter, because to him as the 
first was given the pontificate in Christ's church even as the 
Lord said to him: 'Thou art Peter and upon this rock I will 
build my church.' He, therefore, was the first to receive 
from the Lord the power of binding and loosing and he was 
the first to lead the people to the faith by the power of his 
preaching. And truly the other apostles received with him 
in virtue of equal fellowship honor and power." Likewise, 
it is commonly said that Peter was the head of the church 
because he was called Cephas, which by interpretation is head. 

1 Dionysius the Areopagite, once identified with St. Denis and regarded 
as first bishop of Athens, wrote probably about 500, as he is first quoted 533, 
and shows the influence of Alexandrian neo-Platonism. He was much quoted 
in the Middle Ages and has a strong mystical vein. His Eccles. Hierarchy and 
his Heavenly Hierarchy were issued by John Colet and reissued by Lupton with 
trsl., London, 1869. 

* Marcellus, pope, 308-309. The quotation is from Pseudo-Isidore. 

'Anacletus, 797-91?, placed by the Catholics in the list of popes second 
after Peter. Linus, Anacletus, Clement were probably contemporary presby- 
ters in Rome, as Lipsius says. This quotation is from Pseudo-Isidore. Thirty 
quotations are ascribed to Anacletus in the Corp. jur. can. 



THE CHURCH FOUNDED ON CHRIST 83 

By what was said above in Chapters II, III, IV, namely, 
that the holy universal church is one and consists of all the 
predestinate that are to be saved and that Christ alone is 
the head of the church, just as he alone is the most exalted 
person in the church, imparting to it and to its members 
motion and understanding unto the life of grace, so it is evi- 
dent that Peter never was and is not now the head of the 
holy catholic church. And the dictum of St. Dionysius is 
true, that Peter was the captain among the apostles and was 
the foundation of churches, as is said in the next chapter 
of the apostles. And the dictum of Augustine is also true, 
that by a certain prerogative Peter was the first among the 
apostles. And the dictum of Marcellus is also true, that 
Peter was the head of the whole church which he ruled by 
his teaching and example. But he was not a person higher 
in dignity than Christ's mother; nor was he equal to Christ 
or made the governor of the angels who, at that time, were 
the church triumphant. 

Therefore, it is not a matter of much doubt to the simple 
Christian — faithful — that Peter did not dare to claim to be 
the head of the holy catholic church, for the reason that he 
did not rule over the whole church and did not excel above 
the whole church in dignity, nor was he the bridegroom of 
the catholic church. John the Baptist, than whom, according 
to the testimony of the truth in Matt. 11 : 11, "There hath 
not risen a greater among those born of women," did not 
dare to call himself the bridegroom, but in humility confessed 
himself the bridegroom's friend. And when his disciples in 
their zeal for him said, "Rabbi, he that was with thee 
beyond Jordan to whom thou hast borne witness, behold 
the same baptizeth and all men come to him," John an- 
swered them and said: "A man can receive nothing except 
it have been given from heaven. Ye yourselves bear me wit- 
ness I have said I am not the Christ, but that I am sent 
before him. He that hath the bride is the bridegroom: but 



84 THE CHURCH 

it is sufficient for me that I am the bridegroom's friend 
that standeth and heareth with joy 1 the bridegroom's voice," 
John 3 : 27-29. And the bridegroom said: "Ye are my 
friends if ye do whatsoever I command you," John 15 : 14. 
Thus it is evident that it would be the highest arrogance 
and folly for any man, Christ excepted, to call himself the 
head and the bridegroom of the holy catholic church. 

But the reason for Christ's appointing Peter after himself 
as captain and shepherd was the pre-eminence of virtues fit- 
ting him to rule the church. For otherwise the Wisdom 1 of 
the Father would have unwisely appointed him the bishop 
of his church. And as all moral virtues are bound together 
in a class — in genere — it is evident that Peter had a certain 
pre-eminence in the entire class of virtues. But there were 
three virtues in which Peter excelled, namely, faith, humil- 
ity, and love. Faith, which properly is the foundation of 
the church, excelled in Peter because of what the best of 
Masters ordained, Matt. 16 : 16, in answer to that question 
which he asked about himself: "Whom do men say that I 
the Son of man am?" To this Peter replied for all, saying: 
"Thou art the Son of the living God." Here he confessed 
Christ's humanity by which he meant that Christ was the 
Messiah promised to the fathers. The second part confesses 
Christ as the natural Son of the living God, and so Peter 
confessed Christ to be very God and very man. And among 
all the articles of faith, this one appertains most to the edi- 
fication of the church, for, according to St. John, the Son of 
God overcometh the world: "Who is he that overcome th 
the world but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of 
God?" I John 5 : 5. For, when this foundation is laid, the 
belief follows that all things which Christ did or taught are 
to be accepted without any detraction by the whole church. 

1 Audiens cum gaudio. The Vulgate: audial eum, gaudio gaudct propter vocem. 

2 Referring to Pro v. 8, Wisdom being interpreted to mean the second per- 
son of the Trinity by the old commentators. 



THE CHURCH FOUNDED ON CHRIST 85 

And so Peter heard from the Lord's lips the words: "Blessed 
art thou, Simon Bar- Jonah, for flesh and blood hath not re- 
vealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven." 
And because of this faith Peter received the burden of the 
church's prefecture. And the Rock said: "I say that thou 
art Peter and upon this Rock I will build my church." Hence, 
on account of these things Peter's vicars and those appointed 
to rule in the church are bound to preach the church's faith. 
Therefore, the Saviour said: "I have prayed for thee, that 
thy faith fail not; and do thou, when once thou hast turned 
again, establish thy brethren," Luke 22:32. Therefore, 
praying for faith, "he was heard for his godly fear," Heb. 

5:7. 

In the second place the Lord joined with him the pri- 
macy of office. After my death, he said: "I will give to thee 
the keys of the kingdom of heaven," that is, the keys of the 
church, which I will strengthen and defend against the church 
of the wicked by giving to thee the power of binding and loos- 
ing that thou mayest, not without avail, hold the keys of the 
church which I have given thee for thy meritorious confession 
of my humanity and deity, of which, taught by the Father, 
after a heavenly manner, thou didst say: "Thou art the 
Christ, the Son of the living God." Therefore, because of 
his confession, so confident and profound, he was called 
Cephas, which is by interpretation Peter, John 1 : 42. For 
this reason Jerome, expert in languages, says: "that Cephas 
means Peter, or firmness, and that it is a Syriac not a He- 
brew word." This affords the solution of the last objec- 
tion; for Cephas does not mean head, according to the 
Gospel and Jerome, but Peter. 

Peter's second virtue was humility. Inasmuch as Peter 
heard from his Master the words, "Learn of me, for I am 
meek and lowly of heart," Matt. 11 : 29 and, "whosoever 
will be great among you, let him be your minister; and who- 
soever will be first among you, let him be your servant," Matt 



86 THE CHURCH 

23 : 11; Mark 10 : 43 — how should he not be of an humble 
spirit, above others, in regard to the prerogative which he 
had from the Lord Jesus Christ? Hence it is said with prob- 
ability that Peter asked questions and answered questions 
with humility just as he bore himself, above others, in hu- 
mility to perform his ministry in the church. For, sent by 
the apostles to Samaria, he went humbly with John, Acts 
8 : 14. And so, called to Joppa, he went humbly, and there 
for many days he tarried with Simon the tanner. Called 
by Cornelius from Joppa, he proceeded humbly to Caesarea, 
Acts 10 : 18. And also at the council of the apostles and 
the church [at Jerusalem, 51 A. D.], after he had finished 
his speech, when James stated the case and said: "Hearken 
unto me; Simon hath declared/' etc. And then James adds 
a statement: "Wherefore my judgment is that we trouble 
not them that from among the Gentiles turn unto God," 
Acts 15 : 19. It is also narrated how Peter went every- 
where throughout all parts, preaching humbly the Word of 
God, Acts 9 : 32. Being sharply rebuked by Paul, he bore 
it humbly, Gal. 2:11. And all these things he did, not for 
worldly honor and advantage but in an humble and obedi- 
ent spirit and to support the honor of the law of Christ. 
Therefore, in these things we read the full greatness of Peter 
the apostle which is to be measured by the humility of his 
service, as appears from the definition of the Master: "Whoso 
humbleth himself shall be exalted," Matt. 23 : 12. 

As for the third virtue, love, it is plain that Peter had 
this in certain respects above the others, as appears from the 
fervor of his acts which fittingly proceed from greater love. 
This is confirmed by the fact that otherwise he would have 
been ungrateful, if he had not loved his Master, in a way 
corresponding to Him who had loved him in so peculiar a 
way, and wiped him clean from his great blasphemy and 
graciously placed him over his sheep. Again it is confirmed 
by this, that otherwise there would have been no fitness in the 



THE CHURCH FOUNDED ON CHRIST 87 

Master asking him, "Simon, son of John, lovest thou me more 
than these?" and then immediately committing to him his 
sheep to feed, John 21 : 15. Bat here it should be noted 
that the reasons for loving Christ are manifold. Some love 
Christ more than others on the ground of his divinity, as 
is believed to have been the case with John the Evangelist; 
others because of his humanity, as is believed to have been 
the case with Philip; and others love Christ because of his 
body which is the church, and so men love him for many 
other reasons, for which, in the case of a certain saint, they 
quote Ecclesiasticus 42: "No one has been found like unto 
him in keeping the law of the Most High." Peter's pre-emi- 
nence is manifest from his faith, humility, love, yea, and also 
from his poverty and endurance. For he said to the man 
asking an alms: "Silver and gold have I none, but such as 
I have give I thee," Acts 3 : 6. And, because he heard from 
the Master the words, "In your patience possess ye your 
souls," Luke 21 : 19, it seems probable that, after his de- 
nial of the Master, Peter stood for that very reason more 
ready to endure martyrdom and especially for the reason 
that, recognizing his weakness, he had fresh in his mind the 
memory of his own frailty in denying his Master. And for 
this reason he stooped in humility to others and was more 
ready to suffer imprisonments, even unto death, for the Lord 
whom he denied. Nor is it to be doubted that he bore with 
an humble mind Herod's prison in Jerusalem, the prison of 
Theophilus in Antioch, and Nero's prison at Rome. 

If he, who is called to be Peter's vicar, follows in the 
paths of the virtues just spoken of, we believe that he is 
his true vicar and the chief pontiff of the church over which 
he rules. But, if he walks in the opposite paths, then he is 
the legate of antichrist at variance with Peter and Jesus 
Christ. Therefore, St. Bernard, de consider atione, IV, 1 writes 

1 The most famous book ever written on the papal office, prepared at the 
request of Eugenius III, by St. Bernard of Clairvaux, d. 1153. It was much 



88 THE CHURCH 

as follows: "Among these things thou walkest in the van a 
shepherd overornamented with gold even in the midst of 
an environment so varied. Why do they seize the sheep? 
If I may dare, I will say that these are the pasture grounds 
of demons rather than of sheep. Not in this way 1 did Peter 
act, or Paul frisk about." And he adds: "Either deny to 
the people that thou art shepherd or show thyself such. 
Thou wilt not deny it lest he whose place thou holdest deny 
thee to be the heir. He is Peter who is not known to go 
about in processions, ornamented with gems or silks, not clad 
in gold or carried by a white horse, or compassed about with 
soldiers, and surrounded by bustling servants. Without such 
things, Peter believed he was able to fulfil sufficiently the 
salutary commandment: 'If thou lovest me, feed my sheep. 1 
In things like these thou hast followed not Peter, but Con- 
stantine." Thus far Bernard. 

That holy man knew that Pope Eugenius ought to be a 
vicar in poverty and humility, not in pride but in feeding 
the sheep, following Peter. For that man is a true vicar 
of him whose place he fills and from whom he has lawfully 
received the procuratorial power. But no one can truly and 
acceptably to Christ rule in Christ's stead or the stead of 
Peter without following him in his life — moribus 1 — since there 
is no other fitting way of following him except he receive 
subject to this condition from God procuratorial power. Thus 

quoted by Huss, also in other writings, and by the title ad Eugenium. Although 
Eugenius was his spiritual son, Bernard addressed him as "most holy father." 
He recalls the pope from the love of pomp and wealth to spiritual humility 
and the proper business of the pope who, although pastor of pastors, is greatest 
when he is servant of all. He is in the line of the primacy of Abel, Abraham, 
Moses, Aaron, and Peter. Both Ultramontanes and Gallicans claim the treatise 
for their position. Bp. Reinkens's trsl., MUnster, 1870, pp. 1 70, the Old Catholic 
divine, represented the second view. Besides the ed. of Migne, Schneider's ed., 
Berlin, 1850. The passage quoted is Schneider, pp. 75 sq. Reinkens, pp. 114, 
116. See Schaff, Ch. Hist., V, pt. 1 : 776 sq. 

1 Non sic. Bernard has scilicet, the words being spoken in irony. Below 
Huss has neges instead of negct, deny. 

1 Literally, morals denoting the disposition or principles as well as the out- 
ward act. 



THE CHURCH FOUNDED ON CHRIST 89 

there is required for such an office as that of vicar conformity 
of life and authority from the person instituting it, and to 
this one [such a vicar] the Saviour at the Last Supper com- 
mitted the institution of the venerable sacrament. And con- 
stituting his disciples his vicars that they might so do in 
remembrance of him, he said: "I have given you an ex- 
ample that ye also should do as I have done to you/' John 
13 : 15. He also said: "Whosoever shall do and teach them 
he shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven/' Matt 

On this point St. Jerome ad Heliodorum, also Decretum, 
Dist. 40 [Friedberg, 1 : 145], says: "It is not easy to fill the 
place of Peter and Paul in occupying the chair — cathedra — 
of those who reign with Christ, because it was said, 'they 
are not the children of saints who hold the places of saints, 
but they who do their good works.'" St. Gregory [Fried- 
berg, 1 : 146] says the same: "Neither places nor orders 
make us near to our Creator, but our good works bind us 
together or our evil works separate us." Likewise Chrys- 
ostom, Dist. 40 : 12 [Friedberg, 1 : 147], says: "Many 
priests there are, and few; many in name, and few in works. 
See, therefore, how ye sit in the official chair, for the chair 
does not make the priest, but the priest makes the chair: 
the place does not sanctify the man, but the man the place. 
Not every priest is holy; but every holy person is a priest. 
He who sits well in the official chair gives 1 honor to the 
chair; he who sits there ill does injury to it. Therefore 
a bad priest gets criminality from his priesthood not dig- 
nity." 

Likewise, we have this from the Acts of Boniface-Martyr 
[Friedberg, 1 : 146]: "If a pope neglect his own and his 
brother's salvation and be reproved as useless, remiss in his 
acts, and above all keeping silent about the good 2 because 

1 Tacit. In the Decretum, accipit, "has received the honor of the chair." 
s Dt bono, omitted by Huss. 



90 THE CHURCH 

he serves himself rather than the sheep, 1 none the less he 
leads an innumerable company of people in flocks with him- 
self to be beaten together with himself, as the property of 
hell, with many stripes throughout eternity." Nor is it nec- 
essary to refer to many saints, for the Chief Pontiff, the holiest 
of the holy said: "All that came before me are thieves and 
robbers," John 10 : 8. Again he said to his disciples: "Ye 
are the salt of the earth; but if the salt hath lost its savor, 
wherewith shall it be salted ... it is neither useful for the 
land nor for the dunghill, but it is cast out," Matt. 5 : 13; 
Luke 14 : 34. 

Wishing to impose this judgment upon the minds of men, 
that most good Saviour and best of masters immediately added : 
"Who hath ears to hear let him hear." Therefore, let every 
priest see to it, if he has entered well, that he live pure 
of offense, with the sincere purpose of honoring God and 
profiting the church, and in case he demean himself well, 
that he lay little store by mundane honors and the world's 
lucre. For, otherwise, he is a lying antichrist, and the 
higher his office the greater antichrist he is. Let the hum- 
ble pilgrim look at Christ who said: "I am the way, the 
truth, and the life," John 14 : 6. Behold he who wants to 
go, hath the way, for Christ is the way, and whither he wants 
to go, for Christ is the truth, and where he wants to abide, 
for Christ is the life. 

1 The Dccretum has omnibus instead of <mbus. 



CHAPTER X 
THE POWER OF BINDING AND LOOSING 

Now as to the power — authority — of Christ, given by 
himself to his vicars, which is touched upon in the words, 
"I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven," 
that is, the power to bind and to loose sins, — Augustine says, 
Com. on John 21: "The effects of this power are shown, 
when Christ adds, 'And whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth, 
shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt loose 
on earth shall be loosed in heaven.' This power is a spiritual 
power. Therefore, it is to be noted, that spiritual power is a 
power of the spirit, determining its acts of itself so that a ra- 
tional creature, so far as gracious gifts go, may be guided and 
have his own distinctive place both as determined from the 
standpoint of the subject and the object." Every man, how- 
ever, is a spirit, since he has two natures; as the Saviour in 
speaking to his disciples said: "Ye know not what spirit ye 
are of" [Luke 9 : 55], and "every spirit that confesseth not 
Jesus is not of God," I John 4 : 3. Here the spirit is subtle 
and heretical, denying Jesus to be very God and very man. 
And it is evident that whether power in respect to God and 
power in respect to rational creatures are analogous or the 
analogy is to be restricted to the powers of men and the 
powers of angels, it is true that all spiritual power is a power 
of the spirit. And, although a man does not give grace, he 
nevertheless administers the sacraments, so that the inferior 
is guided as to gifts of grace. 

But although bodily power may be the result of gifts of 
grace, nevertheless it is immediate, so that the creature of 

91 



92 THE CHURCH 

God is ruled according to the law of natural things or of 
fortune. So every man is seen to have a double power; for 
every man ought to have the power over the movements of 
his members, and therefore has the power of walking in 
grace, so also the spiritual power has manifold subdivisions, 
for there is one power of orders and another common to all. 
The power of orders is called the spiritual power. This is 
that which the clergy has to administer the sacraments of 
the church that the clergy may profit itself and the laity, 
and such power is the power of consecrating the mass, ab- 
solving and performing the other sacramental acts — sacra- 
mentalia. For the power of consecrating the mass exists 
of itself and immediately, that the priest may consecrate just 
as dispositions of moral virtue are ordained because of acts 
better than the dispositions. And as the priest, in order 
that he may consecrate worthily, is guided as to the gifts of 
grace, the above description holds. 

But the spiritual power, which is common, is the power 
which every priest 1 has in doing spiritual works whether in 
his own person or among others, and about these the verse 
reminds us: 

Doce, consule, castiga, solar e, remitte, fer, ora. 

Teach, counsel, punish, console, remit, bear, pray. 1 

For as many as received Christ by faith to these hath 
he given the power to become the sons of God, so that they 
may guide themselves and their brethren in the way of their 
Father Christ, and by rebuking in love as Christ said: "If 
thy brother sin against thee, go show him his fault between 
thee and him alone," Matt. 18 : 15. 

1 Plebanus, the term common in the M. A. for the parish priest. 

* The seven spiritual gifts of mercy, namely, teach the ignorant, direct the 
doubting, reprove the erring, console the sorrowing, forgive those indebted to 
thee, bear the infirmities of others, pray for all — in opposition to the seven 
bodily works of mercy: Visito, poto, cibo, redimo, iego y colli go > condo, namely, I 
visit the sick, give drink to the thirsty, feed the hungry, release the impris- 
oned, clothe the naked, care for the stranger, bury the dead. Set Huss, Supw 
IV. Sent., p. 596. 



POWER OF BINDING AND LOOSING 93 

Secular power is twofold, civil and common. Civil power, 
which is authoritative, belongs only to the civil lord. But 
civil power, which is vicarious, belongs to officials or servants. 
But secular power, which is common to all, is the power by 
which a man is able to rule himself and his own according 
to the gifts of nature and of fortune. And thus, just as a 
man cannot be a whole man without body and soul, nor is 
the adopted child of God complete without the gifts of na- 
ture and of grace, so the pilgrim cannot get along as a pil- 
grim unless he has both secular and spiritual power which 
are common to all, although this is bound in the case of 
infants and the dead. But spiritual power is everywhere 
the more perfect and the sacerdotal power exceeds the power 
of kings in dignity, as appears from Heb. 7:7: " Greater is 
he that blesses and less is he who is blest." 

Hence the spiritual power, which is sacerdotal, excels the 
royal in age, dignity, and usefulness. In age it excels, be- 
cause the priesthood was instituted by God's command, as 
appears from Ex. 28. Later at God's command the kingly 
power was instituted by the priesthood, as appears from 
Deut 17 and I Sam. 12. In dignity it excels, as already 
said, because the priest as the greater blesses, consecrates 
and anoints the king. And the usefulness is evidently greater 
for the reason that the spiritual power is in and of itself suf- 
ficient for the ruling of the people, as appears from the his- 
tory of Israel, which down to the time of Saul was salubri- 
ously administered independent of the kingly authority. 
Therefore, the spiritual power, inasmuch as it concerns the 
best things — things having their sufficiency in themselves — 
excels the earthly power, since the latter is of no avail inde- 
pendent of the spiritual power which is the chief regulative 
force. On the other hand, the spiritual power may act by 
itself without the aid of the earthly power. And, for this 
reason, the priests who abuse this power, which is so exalted, 
by pride or other open sin, fall all the lower with the devil 



94 THE CHURCH 

into hell, and this is in accord with the rule of St. Gregory 
and other saints: "The higher the position the deeper the 

falL" 

And it is to be noted, that power now means absolutely 
the ability to regulate and rule and now collectively such 
ability through authoritative notification and announcement. 
And when these senses are equally known, it is evident, there 
is nothing contradictory in the principles that there is no 
power but of God and yet to give power from God, that is, 
make an authoritative announcement before the church that a 
created being has from God power of this sort. Indeed such 
a bestowal, so far as part of it is concerned, is given by man 
but not unless God primarily authorizes it. And from this 
we may further understand that power is not relaxed or stiff- 
ened, increased or diminished, so far as its essence goes, but 
only in respect to the exercise of the act which proceeds from 
the power itself. And this exercise ought only to be used 
when a reasonable ground exists for it from the side of God. 
This meaning is set forth in Decretum 24 : 1, Miratnur [Fried- 
berg, 1 : 981], which says: "The official power is one thing, 
the exercise of it another. And official power is for the most 
part held in restraint in the case of monks and of others, such 
as those under suspension, who are inhibited from minister- 
ing, though the power itself is not taken away from them. ,, l 
In like manner it is conceded that the natural power, which 
is free will, may now be relaxed by grace and now tightened 
[i. e. y increased and lessened]. And in this way the seeming 
discordances of the doctors which arise by ambiguity of lan- 
guage are solved, some of whom, as Anselm, say, " that free 
will cannot be lost or increased or diminished," while others, 

1 In regard to the bishop, Thomas Aquinas made the distinction between 
the power — potestas — of doing episcopal acts and jurisdiction. Even a bishop 
who becomes schismatic or heretic retains the former, but loses the latter. 
Summa Supplem., 39 : 2 [Migne, 4 : 1065]. The problem of the validity of acts 
done by priests who have become schismatic or heretic was so difficult that 
Peter the Lombard and Gratian thought it well-nigh if not altogether insoluble. 



POWER OF BINDING AND LOOSING 95 

like Augustine, Enchiridion [Nic. Fathers, 3 : 247], say, that 
free will may be lost through sin and increased through grace. 
On this account there is in the church great strife about the 
power of bestowment, withdrawal or restriction. Neverthe- 
less, it is known that when God and reason make it neces- 
sary for the profit of the church that a thing should be done 
by man, then and not otherwise does God give or withdraw 
or restrict power of this sort 

Hence, when Christ said to Peter: "I will give thee the 
keys of the kingdom of heaven," that is the power of binding 
and loosing sins, he said in the person of Peter to the whole 
church militant, that not does any person whatever of the 
church without distinction hold those keys, but that the whole 
church, as made up of its individual parts, as far as they are 
suitable for this, holds the keys. These keys, however, are 
not material things, but they are spiritual power and acquain- 
tance with evangelical knowledge, and it was on account of 
this power and knowledge, as we believe, that Christ used the 
plural "keys." For this reason the Master of Sentences, 12 : 
18, cap. 2 [Migne's ed., p. 375], says: "He speaks in the 
plural ' keys/ for one is not sufficient. These keys are the 
wisdom of discernment and the power of judging, whereby 
the ecclesiastical judge is bound to receive the worthy and ex- 
clude the unworthy from the kingdom." And it is to be 
noted, that to the Trinity alone does it belong to have the 
chief power of this kind. And the humanity of Christ alone 
has chief subordinate power from within himself, for Christ 
is at the same time God and man. Nevertheless, prelates of 
the church have committed unto them instrumental or min- 
isterial power, which is a judicial power, consisting chiefly 
of two things, namely, the power of knowing how to dis- 
criminate, and the power of judging judicially. The former 
of these is called in the court of penance the key of the con- 
science, reasonably disposing the mind to the exercise of the 
second function, that is, the judicial; for no one legally has 



g6 THE CHURCH 

the power of pronouncing a definite sentence unless he has 
the prior power of discerning in a case in which he is called 
upon to discriminate and pronounce sentence. 

The first key, therefore, is neither an act nor a state of 
knowledge, but the power of antecedent discernment. Con- 
sequently, all the power of the sacerdotal order, namely, of 
being the instrument in opening to man the gate, which is 
Christ, or of shutting to an inferior the said kingdom, is the 
key of the church given to Peter and to others, as appears from 
the Saviour's words: "Verily I say unto you whatsoever ye 
bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye 
shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven," Matt. 18 : 18. 
He also said : " Receive ye the Holy Spirit. Whosesoever sins 
ye forgive they are forgiven unto them; and whosesoever sins 
ye retain they are retained," John 20 : 22. To Peter and the 
church in him were the words spoken: "Whatsoever thou 
shalt loose on earth," etc., Matt. 16 : 19. 

These words, because of a defect in their understanding, 
frighten many Christians so that they are filled with servile 
fear, while others are deceived by them and presume because 
of the fulness of power [they are supposed to convey]. There- 
fore, the following things are to be laid down: (1) That the 
Saviour's dictum about the virtue of the words is necessary, 
because it is not possible for a priest to loose or bind anything, 
unless such loosing and binding take place in heaven, not 
only in the heavenly realm which also comprises the sublu- 
nary world and all things which are therein, but also take 
place with the divine approval and the approval of angelic 
beings which are heavenly. Hence, it is to be noted, that 
guilt inheres in the soul of him who sins mortally and grace 
is corrupted or ceases to be, for which reason he who sins mor- 
tally is under the debt of eternal damnation, provided he 
does not do penance, and, if he persists in this guilt, he is 
separated from the companionship of pilgrims in grace. But 
in penance there is a remedy, by which guilt is deleted, grace 



POWER OF BINDING AND LOOSING 97 

conferred, the chain of damnation broken, and man reunited 
with the church. This penance is performed by contrition, 
confession and satisfaction. 1 Contrition, which is sorrow or 
full pain for sin committed, must include displeasure with the 
sin already committed, and the sin which may be committed 
and, in the case — articulo—oi necessity, such contrition is 
enough for salvation. Hence the Saviour, knowing that the 
mind of the adulteress was full of sorrow, added the words: 
"Go and sin no more," John 8 : n. For this reason St. 
Augustine, St. Ambrose and St. Gregory agree in saying 
that to be penitent is to lament evils done and not to wish 
to do evils that are to be lamented. 

Secondly, it is to be noted that, for the justification of 
the wicked man there is needed infinite power by which 
God cleanses from spot and stain and grants grace. Again, 
God's mercy is needed whereby he relaxes the offense done 
his Majesty, and the eternal punishment for the debt which 
would follow if he did not do penance. Therefore, the church 
often prays, "Almighty and most merciful God," urging the 
infinite power and mercy of God. But that infinite power 
is required for the justification of a wicked man is evident 
because, as Augustine says, "it is easier to create a world 
than to justify the wicked; the first demands infinite power 
and consequently also the second [act], and this is the reason 
why, in the justification of the wicked, the active bestowal 

1 Penance is treated by Thomas Aquinas as a restoration to health. This 
sacrament is the second plank thrown out for the sinner, as baptism is the first. 
After the close of the twelfth century the four elements were considered neces- 
sary parts of penance: contrition, confession to the priest, satisfaction, and 
absolution. Peter the Lombard still taught that confession to God was suffi- 
cient for forgiveness. Alexander of Hales, d. 1245, made confession to the 
priest essential, and he was followed by Thomas Aquinas. Absolution, which 
from 1200 on has been regarded in the Catholic church as a judicial act, was 
treated by Peter the Lombard as a declarative act, and the petitionary form 
was still common in his day. Schwane, Dogmengesch. d. m. Z. f p. 670, pro- 
nounces it the most important part of the sacrament of penance. In his Com. 
on Ike Lombard, p. 598 sqq., Huss takes a moderate view, and on the basis of 
the cases of the penitent thief and publican, leans toward the opinion that con- 
trition of heart and confession to God are sufficient 



98 THE CHURCH 

of the Holy Spirit is required, which cannot be secured ex- 
cept from God," as Augustine proves in many places, as I 
have shown in my Trad on Indulgences. And the Master 
of Sentences, i : 14 [Migne's ed., p. 49], concludes from these 
words of Augustine and says, "Therefore no men, however 
holy, can give the Holy Spirit," and the same reasoning 
applies to the active remission of sins. 1 

Hence in a unique sense the Baptist said of Christ: "Be- 
hold the Lamb of God that taketh away the sins of the world," 
John 1 : 29. On these words Augustine says, Horn, on John, 
4 [Nic. Fathers, 7 : 28]: "Let no one presume and say of him- 
self that he takes away the sins of the world. Now, observe 
the proud against whom John lifted his finger were not yet 
heretics and yet they were already shown to be such against 



whom he, cried from the river." Wherefore the Jews often 
ascribed blasphemy to Christ because, esteeming him, though 
falsely, to be a mere man, they said he was not able of him- 
self to forgive sins, because sin is not forgiven by a mere 
word except only as the offense against God is relaxed. But 
who forgives an injury except the person against whom it is 
done or against whose subject it is done? For God, in giv- 
ing power of this kind, first forgives the injury against Him- 
self before His vicar can forgive. Hence on this point Am- 
brose says: "He alone forgives sins who alone died for us. 
The Word of God forgives sins. The priest is the judge. 
The priest performs his function and does not exercise the 

1 The Treatises on Papal Indulgences, Man., 1 : 215-237, was called forth 
by John XXIITs two bulls, calling for a crusade against Ladislaus, king of 
Naples, 141 2, and promising liberal indulgence for participation in the cam- 
paign. The bulls created a great sensation in Prague, where the billets of par- 
don were openly sold at three different places. Huss attacked the whole system 
of wars against fellow Christians started at the pope's instance, and entered 
into the question of papal and priestly absolution. He declared that if the 
pope had the right to give indulgences, he was a criminal if he did not empty 
purgatory. He took up the same position as here that the priest cannot ab- 
solve whom God has not before absolved, and that the priest's power is essen- 
tially the same as the priest's power under the O. T. in pronouncing a leper 
clean. See Huss, Super IV. Sent., 606 sqq., and Introd. to this volume. 



POWER OF BINDING AND LOOSING 99 

way 1 of any power," de Penitentia, 1 [Friedberg, 1 : 1170]. 
To the same purport speaks Jerome, whom the Master of 
Sentences quotes (see above), and Gregory, 1 : 1, Paulus. 
The same holds good for the retention and binding of sins. 
Hence the Master of Sentences, 4 : 18, 4 [Migne, p. 376], ad- 
ducing these authorities and reasons, concludes, that "God 
alone washes a man within clean from the stain of sin and 
from the debt of eternal punishment," and he closes thus: 
"By these and many other testimonies it is taught that God 
alone and of Himself forgives sins; and just as He forgives 
some so He retains the sins of others." 

But some one will say, if God alone can forgive and re- 
tain sins, why did He say to the apostles and their vicars: 
"Whatsoever ye shall loose," etc., . . . and "whosesoever sins 
ye retain," etc.? What, therefore, is it for a priest to loose or 
bind sins, to remit or retain? To the first the Master of 
Sentences (see above) gives answer and says: "Priests also 
bind when they impose the satisfaction of penance upon 
those who confess. They loose when in view of the satis- 
faction they forgive anything or admit those purged by it 
to participation in the sacraments." To the second Richard 
answers well in his Power of Loosing and Binding [Migne, 
196 : 1164 sq.] f when he says: 1 "What is it to remit sins 
except to relax the sentence of punishment which is due for 
sins, and by relaxing to absolve ? And what is it to retain sins 
but not to absolve those not truly penitent? For many of 
those who confess seek absolution who nevertheless do not 



1 Viam. The Decretum has jura, rights. 

* Richard of St. Victor, d. 1173, was born in Scotland, and was the pupil of 
Hugo of St. Victor. Both were mystics, but their mysticism differed from that 
of St. Bernard by being developed into a scientific system and brought within 
the limits of careful definition. In addition to the book above quoted, Richard 
wrote commentaries on the Canticles, the Apocalypse, etc., Emmanuel, a treatise 
directed to the Jews, Preparation of the Mind for Contemplation, etc. While 
he was prior of St. Victor, Alexander III and Thomas a Becket visited the 
convent. It was located within the present bounds of Paris, and its buildings 
were destroyed during the French Revolution. 



705G8*. 



ioo THE CHURCH 

want to wholly abandon their sins. Many promise caution 
for the future but do not want to make satisfaction. All of 
this sort, in so far as they do not truly repent, beyond doubt 
ought not to be forgiven. For truly to repent is to be sorry 
for past wrong-doing, to confess with a strong purpose, to 
make satisfaction, and to take heed to oneself with all cau- 
tion. Those who do penance in this way, they ought to be 
forgiven; and to be remitted in any other way without ab- 
solution, this is to retain sins. Now, from the things already 
said we may clearly understand that, in the forgiveness of 
sins, the Lord does by and of Himself what is done through 
his minister, that is, he does not by Himself and through the 
office of ministers, but He fully of Himself looses the bond 
of obduracy; and He looses by Himself and His minister 
the debt of eternal damnation; truly He looses by his min- 
isters the debt of future purgation. The power of the first 
kind of forgiveness He reserves for Himself alone. The 
second kind of forgiveness He imparts by Himself and His 
minister. But the third kind, the Lord is accustomed to 
impart not as much by Himself as by his minister. Properly, 
indeed, is it said that the Lord absolves the truly penitent 
from the bond of damnation. None the less it is true that 
the priest does this and the Lord, 1 the Lord in view of 
the conversion of the heart, and the priest in view of the 
confession of the mouth. For the confession of the heart 
alone suffices in the case of the truly penitent unto salva- 
tion. And the case — articulus — of necessity excludes both 
the confession of the mouth and absolution by the priest." 
Thus much Richard. 

From these things the conclusion is drawn that God pre- 
destinates from eternity, and He executes in time the abso- 
lution of a person who is to be saved and the remission of 
his sin, before such a person is absolved on earth by the min- 

1 The expression, "and the Lord" is not in Richard's text. Otherwise 
Huss's quotation is exact. 



POWER OF BINDING AND LOOSING 101 

ister of the church. Again the minister of the church, the 
vicar of Christ, is not able to absolve or to bind, to for- 
give sins or to retain them, unless God has done this pre- 
viously. This appears from John 15 : 5: "Apart from me 
ye can do no thing. ' ' That vessel of election knew this, and 
so he said: "Not that we are sufficient of ourselves to ac- 
count anything as from ourselves, but our sufficiency is from 
God," II Cor. 3 : 5. Therefore, if we are not sufficient to 
think except as God imparts the thought, how are we suf- 
ficient to bind and loose except God have previously loosed 
and bound? And this the philosophers recognize when they 
say that a second cause can effect nothing without the 
coagency of a first cause. 

Further, it is clear that no man may be loosed from sin 
or receive the remission of sins, unless God have loosed him or 
given him remission. Hence the Baptist says: "A man can 
receive nothing except it first be given him from heaven," John 
3:27. Hence as an earthly lord first forgives in spirit the sin 
committed against himself, before this is announced by him- 
self or by another, so it is necessary for God to do. Therefore, 
the presbyters are wildly beside themselves who think and say 
that they may of their own initiative loose and bind, without 
the absolution or binding of Jesus Christ preceding their act. 
For loosing and binding are in the first instance the simple 
[absolute] act of God. Therefore, the Gospel says, "Whatso- 
ever is bound on earth shall be bound in heaven," but it does 
not say that it is bound in heaven at a later time and not 
r previously. 

Hence, the ignorant think that the priest binds and looses 
in time first and after him God. It is folly to have this 
opinion. But the logicians know well that priority is two- 
fold: the one, priority of origin, taken from the material cause, 
and the other the priority of dignity, taken from the final 
cause. And these two priorities meet at one and the same 
time, and in this way the binding and loosing of the church 



102 THE CHURCH 

militant is in a sense prior to the binding and loosing of the 
church triumphant and vice versa. 

But God's act of binding or loosing is absolutely first. 
And it is evident, it would be blasphemy to assert that a 
man may remit an offense done to so great a Lord, with the 
Lord himself approving the remission. For by the universal 
law and practice followed by the Lord, He himself must 
loose or bind first, if any vicar looses or binds. And for us 
no article of the faith ought to be more certain than the 
impossibility of any one of the church militant to absolve or 
bind except in so far as he is conformed to the head of the 
church, our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Hence, the faithful should be on his guard against this 
form of statement: "If the pope or any other pretends that 
he binds or looses by a particular sign, then by that very 
fact the offender is loosed or bound." For by conceding 
this, they have to concede that the pope is impeccable as is 
God, for otherwise he is able to err and to misuse the key of 
Christ. And it is certain that as impossible as it is for the 
figure of a material key to open anything when the substance 
is wanting, so impossible is it for Christ's vicar to open or 
shut except as he conforms himself to the key of Christ 
which first opens and shuts. For just as Christ the first- 
born of many brethren and the first-fruits of them that sleep 
was the first to enter the kingdom, so he alone and above 
all could have had committed to him the spiritual kingdom l 
which was altogether closed from the time our first parents 
lied until he himself came. And the same is to be said in 
regard to any opening or closing whatever which pertains 
to the heavenly country. And it is plain that every vicar 
of Christ, so long as he continues to walk in this world, may 
err, even in those things which concern the faith and the 

1 The kingdom of bliss to which the worthies of the Old .Testament dispen- 
sation were not admitted till they were released from the limbus patrum dur- 
ing the three days after Christ's crucifixion. 



POWER OF BINDING AND LOOSING 103 

keys of the church as those knew who wrote the Chronicles ; l 
for Peter himself, Christ's first vicar, sinned in these regards. 

Likewise, God is the only being who cannot be ignorant 
as to whose sins may be remitted, and He the only being who 
cannot be moved by a wrong motive and judge unjust judg- 
ment. But any vicar may be ignorant as to whose sins ought 
to be remitted, and he may be moved by a wrong motive in 
binding or loosing. Therefore, if he refuse to impart absolu- 
tion to one truly penitent and confessing, moved by anger or 
greed, he cannot by his act bind such a person in guilt. Sim- 
ilar would be the case with one who came with a lying con- 
fession, as happens very often, and the priest, not knowing 
his hypocrisy, should impart to him the words of absolution. 
Undoubtedly he does not thereby absolve, for the Scriptures 
say, Wisdom [of Solomon] 1:4: "The Holy Spirit evades 
a feigned act of worship." In the first case, just noted, the 
vicar alleges that he bound or forgave sins and did not; and 
in the second case he alleges that he loosed or remitted sins and 
did not. And it is evident how great the illusion may be of 
those who administer the keys and of those who do not truly 
repent. For it is necessary that a person, wishing to be ab- 
solved, be first so disposed in his will that he is sorry for his 
guilt, and then have the purpose to sin no more. Hence, 
all priests combined — who are at the same time vicars — are 
not able to absolve from sins him who wishes to go on sin- 
ning and who does not wish to lament his sins. 

So all together are not able to bind a righteous man or 
retain his sins when he humbles himself with his whole heart 
and has a contrite heart, a thing which God does not despise. 
Wherefore St. Jerome, commenting on Matt. 16 : 19 [Migne's 
ed., 26 : 118], "I will give unto thee the keys of the king- 
dom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth 
shall be loosed in heaven," etc., says: "Some not under- 

1 The histories of the church of Ranulph Higden, Martinus Polonus, etc., 
mentioned by name in a subsequent chapter. 



104 THE CHURCH 

standing this passage appropriate something of the arrogance 
of the Pharisees so as to think that they can damn the guilt- 
less and loose offenders, for with God not the judgment of 
priests is sought but the life of the guilty." 1 To these words 
the Master of Sentences, 4 : 18, cap. 6, adds [Migne's ed., 
P- 37S] : "Here it is plainly shown, that God does not follow 
the sentence of the church which judges in ignorance and 
deceitfully." He also adds, cap. 8: "Sometimes he who is 
sent outdoors, that is, outside of holy church, by the priest, 
is, nevertheless, inside. And he who, by virtue of the truth, 
is outside, seems to be kept inside by the priest's false sen- 
tence." And again he says, 4 : 19, cap. 4 [Migne, p. 382]: 
That the priest who binds and looses others ought himself 
to be prudent and just, for otherwise he will put to death 
souls who do not die and revive souls which do not live, and 
in this way he turns his power of pronouncing judgment into 
an instrument of cursing — so that it is said in Mai. 2:2: 
"I will bless your cursings and curse your blessings." There- 
fore the vicars of Christ ought to take heed that they do 
not lightly presume to bind or loose whenever it pleases 
them. 

But the objection is offered concerning higher rank and 
obedience from the Canon Solito [Friedberg, 2 : 196-199], 
where Pope Innocent [in] says: "The Lord said to Peter, 
and in Peter to his successors, ' Whatsoever thou shalt bind 
on earth shall be bound in heaven,' making no exception 
when he said, 'Whatsoever/ etc." Here it is to be noted 
that in virtue of the words, "Whatsoever thou shalt loose," 
Peter could not loosen the Scriptures, for Christ our Saviour 
said: "The Scripture cannot be broken," John 10 : 35. 

1 Jerome adds that, according to Lev. 14, the lepers were commanded to 
show themselves to the priest and, if they had leprosy, they became unclean 
by the priest — a sacerdoU immundi fiani — "not that the priests made them 
leprous and unclean, but that the leprous and those who were not might have 
the knowledge of their condition." For Huss's treatment of the power of the 
keys as set forth in his Com, on Peter the Lombard, see Introduction to this 
volume. 



POWER OF BINDING AND LOOSING 105 

Nor, secondly, could he loose one who would not repent, and 
so he said to Simon Magus: "Repent, therefore, of this 
thy wickedness and pray the Lord if perhaps it may be for- 
given you," Acts 8 : 22. Thirdly, Peter had no power to 
loose the marriage bond, for the Saviour said: "What God 
hath joined together, let not man put asunder," Matt. 19 : 6. 
And fourthly, he was not able to absolve Judas from sin, 
because the Saviour said: " Not one of them perished but the 
son of perdition, that the Scripture might be fulfilled," 
John 17 : 12. 

Therefore, if Peter in virtue of that saying of Christ, 
"Whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in 
heaven," had presumed to have power to loose in any of 
the four cases just adduced, would they have been loosed 
in heaven? Certainly not! For the will of God would have 
opposed it in the case of the Scriptures, marriage, Judas, 
and in the case of the one refusing in his pertinacity to re- 
pent. Therefore, it does not follow that the vicar, who 
thinks that he is able to loose or to bind whomsoever he 
chooses, really does it. On this point, St. Augustine, de 
vera et falsa Penitentia, 1 speaks, when he says: "God, who 
had already raised up Lazarus from the grave, offered Laza- 
rus to the disciples that they might loose him, 2 thereby show- 
ing the power of loosing imparted to priests: and God said, 
'Whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven/ 
that is, I, God, and all the ranks of the heavenly army and 
all the saints who give praise in that heavenly glory join 
with you in confirming those whom ye bind and loose. He did 
not say, 'whom ye think ye bind and loose, but those to- 
wards whom ye exercise works of righteousness or mercy. 
But your other works done towards sinners I do not recog- 

1 Migne, 40 : 11 22. The work is printed in the Appendix of Augustine's 
Works. It is quoted by Gratian and Peter the Lombard as Augustine's. That 
the work was not from Augustine's hand, Erasmus showed. 

* "Jesus said unto them, loose him and let him go/' John 11 -.44. Richard 
of St. Victor also uses Lazarus, Migne, 196 : 1x66. 



106 THE CHURCH 

nize.* " Thus much Augustine, who limits the clergy's power 
to loose or bind as it stands in their own estimation. 

To the same purport are the words of Richard, de potest, 
ligandi et solvendi [Migne, 196 : 1167]. He says: "So far thou 
goest and say est: if I am not able to bind or absolve anything 
or to retain and remit the sins of all persons whatsoever, what 
does that mean, which was said in a general way unto Peter: 
' Whatsoever thou shalt bind, whatsoever thou shalt loose' ? 
Just as it was also laid down as a general rule spoken to the 
apostles in common: 'Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are re- 
mitted unto them; and whosesoever sins ye retain, they are re- 
tained.' Properly should this question move you had the Lord 
said to Peter, 'Whatsoever thou shalt wish to bind shall be 
bound, and whatsoever thou shalt wish to loose shall be loosed,' 
but he did not say this nor did he wish to be understood in 
this way — namely, if any one shall wish to bind what he is not 
able to bind, shall that sin, therefore, be bound ? Who said 
this? Therefore, he did not say, whatsoever thou shalt 
wish to bind, but whatsoever thou shalt bind, shall be bound 
in heaven. He verily is bound who is bound by the just 
debt of satisfaction in accordance with the nature of his con- 
fession. That person is really absolved by the sacerdotal 
office whose sin is justly remitted in view of a deserved sat- 
isfaction. God, therefore, binds and absolves those who by 
a priest's sentence justly deserve absolution, 1 but, beyond any 
doubt, the sins of those are retained to whom the absolution 
of sins has been justly denied and not those to whom it has 
been unjustly denied. 

"What the Lord, therefore, said to Peter means the same 
as if he had said in other words: 'What has been bound or 
loosed by thee, shall be bound or loosed with me. He who 
is held with thee by the command of a required satisfaction 
is held with me as a debtor owing the same satisfaction. 
And because 2 he deserved from thee the just absolution for 

1 An important clause is here omitted from Richard's treatise. 
* Quia. Richard has qui. 



POWER OF BINDING AND LOOSING 107 

his sins he shall not at my bar be held bound any further.' 
After this manner we should also understand that which 
Christ said to all his apostles: ' Whosesoever sins ye remit, 
they shall be remitted unto them, and whosesoever sins ye re- 
tain, they are retained. ' Assuredly the sins of offenders will 
be remitted or retained with the Lord which have been prop- 
erly remitted or retained by his ministers, the priests — both of 
which are truly and really done by them when done in accord 
with the canonical rite; nevertheless, neither of these things 
can priests do at their personal pleasure, but only for desert 
— meriio — and according to the rite as instituted." Thus 
much Richard. 

From Augustine and from this declaration by Richard, 
it is plain that it does not follow: Christ said to Peter or 
to any vicar of his: "Whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth, " 
that is, in the church militant, "shall be loosed also in heaven," 
that is, in the church triumphant — therefore, whatsoever thou 
shalt wish to loose on earth shall be loosed also in heaven. 
And it is evident that by this clause the bestowment falls on 
every person that is truly penitent. And also, in view of the 
words, "Whatsoever thou shalt bind," the bestowment falls 
upon the impenitent, for the loosing applies to every truly 
penitent person, the binding to the impenitent. The same is 
true of retaining and remitting. 

Therefore, Christ's disciple ought to be on his guard 
against the fallacy of antichrist, when the following course 
of argument is pursued: Whatsoever Christ's vicar shall bind 
upon earth shall be bound also in heaven, but this faithful 
layman who does not wish to give money for his absolution, 
him he binds on earth. Therefore, this layman is bound in 
heaven. Likewise, whatsoever Christ's vicar shall loose on 
earth shall be loosed also in heaven, but him who is not 
contrite and yet is willing to give money, him he looses on 
earth. Therefore, is he loosed also in heaven. The case is 
similar if it be argued: Whatsoever Christ's vicar looses on 



io8 THE CHURCH 

earth shall be loosed also in heaven, but him, who is evi- 
dently a reprobate, he looses on earth in the agony of death, 
therefore he is loosed also in heaven. In these arguments 
the minor premise is wanting in strength; for unless the said 
man, in the case of the minor premise, binds himself by a 
bad will or looses himself by true contrition, the minor prem- 
ise is false. And, according to Richard, the argument is 
to be rectified in this way: "Whatsoever Christ's vicar shall 
properly bind on earth shall be bound also in heaven. But 
this faithful layman who does not wish to give money, him 
he binds properly on earth." Thus the falsehood of the 
minor premise is made to appear. In a similar way the 
other arguments are to be corrected. And, if the objection 
be raised that a Christian ought to be in doubt as to when 
a priest binds and looses according to the rite and when not, 
the reply is to be made that the opposite follows [we should 
not be in doubt], since we ought to believe that the priest 
binds and absolves only in cases when he ministers according 
to the rules of Christ's law. And when he exceeds that law, 
then he alleges that he is binding and loosing, but does not 
bind and loose. 

Then as to Innocent's words: "The Lord made no ex- 
ception when he said to Peter: 'Whatsoever,' etc." If Inno- 
cent understands a bestowment in any case whatsoever, when 
Peter or his vicar might allege they were binding, then Inno- 
cent's meaning would be false. For then, through a subordi- 
nate assumption, an improper conclusion would follow, the 
argument running thus: whatsoever Peter or his vicar shall 
bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven. But this holy man 
he alleges he is binding on earth: therefore he is bound in 
heaven. The conclusion is false and impossible. The minor 
proposition is true or may be true. Therefore the application 
of Innocent's major proposition would be false. But, if Inno- 
cent means with Richard, Augustine, and Gregory that the 
bestowment is for that for which binding and loosing are in- 



POWER OF BINDING AND LOOSING 109 

tended then it is true that when the Lord said, "whatsoever," 
he made no exception. For it means this: Whatsoever that 
is of true penitence thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed 
in heaven. Likewise, whatsoever that is of impenitence thou 
shalt bind on earth shall be bound also in heaven. And with 
this the Little Glosses 1 of the Decretists agree, which say that, 
when the key does not make a mistake, and consequently when 
a righteous thing is done on earth, it shall be confirmed in 
heaven. 

For every man who, being penitent, is according to the 
rite loosed on earth by Christ's vicar on the earth, he also 
is loosed in heaven — just as he who has believed and is bap- 
tized shall be saved, and he who has believed in love shall 
be saved finally. For " believe " here is to be accepted as 
in John 3 : 36, "He that believeth on the Son hath eternal 
life," and if it shall be argued that whosoever believeth on 
the Son hath eternal life: every Christian believes on the 
Son of God, therefore every Christian hath eternal life — or, 
again, if it be argued that whosoever believeth on the Son of 
God hath eternal life but that reprobate, who is in grace, be- 
lieves on the Son of God, therefore that reprobate has eternal 
life — in these cases the conclusion is false. And both these 
conclusions are invalid, because "to believe" is one thing in 
the major premise and another thing in the minor. Hence, 
in order to correct the statement the argument must run 
in this way: Whosoever believes with love in the Son of 
God and perseveres. In this case the consequence is good 
[he shall be finally saved]. But the minor statement the 
objector should prove [namely, that every Christian believes 
with love of God]. Similar is the case with the second con- 
clusion and its minor premise: namely, " that reprobate who 
is in grace believes with love in the Son of God and perse- 
veres." This reasoning is false. 

From the things already said, it is clear what the power 

1 See Introduction. 



no THE CHURCH 

of the keys is and what is catholic belief on the subject, 
namely, that every priest of Christ ordained according to 
the rite has the sufficient power to confer the sacraments ap- 
pertaining to him and consequently to absolve a person truly 
contrite from sin, howbeit power of this kind, so far as the 
exercise of it goes, is for good reasons bound in the case of 
many persons, as appears near the beginning of this chapter. 
But how this power belonged to the apostles equally is stated 
in the Decretutn, Dist. 21 , in novo [Friedberg, 1 : 69], where 
it is said: 1 "The other apostles with him, that is, Peter, by 
reason of equal fellowship received honor and power. . . . 
When these died, the bishops arose in their place. 11 And 
here the Gloss, Argumentum, says that the bishops are all 
equal in apostolic power, so far as the order and ground of 
consecration go. St. Cyprian, 24 : 1, cap. Loquitur [Fried- 
berg, 1 : 971], says: "He gave to all the apostles after his 
resurrection equal power." 

Hence it would be foolish to believe that the apostles re- 
ceived from Christ no spiritual gifts except what were de- 
rived by them immediately and purely — simpliciter — from 
Peter, for Christ said to all: "Whatsoever ye shall loose on 
earth," Matt. 18 : 18; also, "Receive ye the Holy Spirit: 
whosesoever sins ye remit they are remitted unto them," John 
20 : 23; and again, "This do ye in remembrance of me," 
Luke 22 : 19; and still again, "All power is given unto me 
in heaven and on earth. Go ye therefore and teach all 
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and the 
Son, and the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all things 
whatsoever I have commanded* you; and lo, I am with you 
all the days, even unto the consummation of the ages," 
Matt. 28 : 19, 20. 

1 A letter of Pope Anacletus to the bishops of Italy asserting the gift of the 
primacy to the Roman church. 
% Praccpi. Vulgate: Mondavi. 



CHAPTER XI 

THE ABUSE OF SCRIPTURE IN THE INTEREST OF 

CLERICAL POWER 

Because many priests abandon the imitation of Christ, 
the high priest, and boast of the power committed to the 
church, without doing works that correspond, therefore up 
to this time we have been speaking of the power of this 
kind. For they extract out of Matt. 18 : 16, "Whatsoever 
thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven," that 
whatsoever they do, every man ought altogether to approve. 
And from the words of Matt. 23 : 2, "The scribes and Phari- 
sees sit on Moses' seat, therefore all things whatsoever they 
bid you, these do," they extract that every inferior is to obey 
them in all things. And so these priests clamorously apply 
to themselves at their own pleasure whatsoever appeals to 
them out of Christ's Gospel, and without any ministry of 
love on their part to correspond. But what plainly calls for 
toil and worldly self-abnegation and the imitation of Christ, 
that they spurn away as something inapplicable to them- 
selves, or make believe they hold it when they do not. 

Hence, because Jesus said to Peter, "I will give unto thee 
the keys of the kingdom of heaven and whatsoever thou shalt 
bind on earth, etc.," this they lay hold of with great compla- 
cency for the exaltation of their own power. But what the 
Lord said to Peter, John 21 : 17, "Follow me and feed my 
sheep," this they flee from as poison. Likewise, what he 
said to his disciples, Matt. 18 : 18, "What things soever ye 
shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven," they grate- 
fully seize upon and glory in. But what he says, Matt. 

in 



ii2 THE CHURCH 

10 : 9, " Get you no gold nor silver, " they shun as hurtful. 
In the same way what he said to his disciples, John 20 : 23, 
"Receive ye the Holy Ghost. Whosesoever sins ye remit 
they are remitted unto them; and whosesoever sins ye re- 
tain they are retained," very placidly they accept. But what 
he says in Matt. 11 : 29, "Learn of me for I am meek and 
lowly of heart, " even the gentleness and meekness, which pre- 
pare a place for the Holy Spirit, they do not admit to their 
hearts. 

Also what the Lord said to his disciples, Luke 10 : 16, 
"He that heareth you heareth me," they seize upon as mean- 
ing obedience to themselves, but what the Lord says in Matt. 
20 : 25, "Ye know that the rulers of the Gentiles do lord it 
over them and their great ones exercise authority over them. 
Not so shall it be among you, but, whosoever would become 
great among you, shall be your minister, and whosoever 
would be first among you shall be your servant: even as the 
Son of Man came not to be ministered unto but to minister," 
— this most weighty saying they repudiate in word and deed 
— in word, saying that they ought to rule, and in deed because 
they do not wish to minister to the church after the custom 
of Jesus Christ the Lord. 

And that I may gather up briefly all that the Scripture 
says, and especially the Gospel: what seems to indicate to 
them that they ought to be rich, live delicately, be famous 
in the world, and suffer no reproach for Christ, these sayings 
they ruminate over, proclaim aloud and make known all too 
extensively. But whatever calls for the imitation of Christ, 
as poverty, gentleness, humility, endurance, chastity, toil or 
patience — these passages they suppress or gloss over at their 
pleasure or expressly set aside as not pertaining to salva- 
tion. And the devil, who is the worst of sophists, leads 
them astray by their ignorance of the logical consequences, 
arguing in this way: "Christ gave such authority to Peter 
and the rest of the apostles, therefore also to you." And 



THE ABUSE OF SCRIPTURE 113 

from this they draw the inference that it is lawful for them 
to do whatsoever they please, and so, by reasoning of the 
same kind, they are most blessed fathers together with Christ 
in pronouncing judgment in the church and because they are 
to be crowned later with an everlasting crown. But blessed 
be Christ, the omniscient, who said these things to his apos- 
tles, knowing that the authority which was given to them 
they would use according to his good pleasure in ministering 
to his bride. 

So far, therefore, as the power — authority — is concerned 
in which the clergy glories it is to be noted, that power is 
sometimes taken to mean lordship or real power, as in Ro- 
mans 13 : 1: "Let every soul be in subjection to the higher 
powers." Sometimes it is taken in an ambiguous sense to 
mean assumed or simulated power, as Christ said to his cap- 
tors sent by the power of the high priests, Luke 22 : 53: 
"This is your hour and the power of darkness." And it is 
said, Rev. 6 : 8: "Lo, a pale horse: and he that sat upon 
him, his name was Death: and hell followed him, and there 
was given unto him power over the four parts of the earth 
to kill with sword, famine, and death, and by the wild beasts 
of the earth." Also it is said, Rev. 13 : 4, that the " dragon 
gave his authority — power — unto the beast, and they wor- 
shipped the beast saying, Who is like unto the beast? who 
is able to war with him? . . . And it was given unto him 
to make war with the saints and to overcome them, and there 
was given to him authority over every tribe and people and 
every tongue and nation; and all that dwell on the earth 
shall worship him, every one whose name hath not been writ- 
ten in the book of life and of the Lamb, 1 that hath been 
slain." Who is this beast whom men worship out of fear of 
his power? He who reads let him understand and resist as- 
sumed power of this kind and let him not fear, as they did, 
because it was given to that beast to make war against the 

1 The Vulgate has libro vita Agni, the Lamb's Book of Life. 



ii4 THE CHURCH 

saints and to overcome by the death of this body — the saints 
who, dying for the law of Christ, finally overcome that beast 
For to these very ones the Saviour said, "Fear not them 
which kill the body/' Matt. 10 : 28, and "In the world ye 
shall have tribulation, but be of good cheer, I have over- 
come the world," John 16 : 33. Here Augustine, in his 
Com. on John [Nic. Fathers, 7 : 393], says: "In whom do 
they have good cheer and overcome except in Him? For 
he would not have overcome the world if the world over- 
came his members. Hence the apostle says: 'Thanks be to 
God which giveth us the victory/ and adds, 'through our 
Lord Jesus Christ/ who said to his disciples, 'Be of good 
cheer for I have overcome the world. ,,, Thus much Augus- 
tine. But they overcome the power of the dragon and the 
beast who have the power of predestination which is the chief 
of powers and of which John speaks: "To them gave he 
the power to become the sons of God/' John 1 : 12. And 
to this power is added perfecting power, and that is the power 
which God gives to the blessed in the heavenly country to 
fully enjoy the Lord and every creature in Him. 

Therefore, the true worshippers of Christ, wishing to ob- 
tain that power, ought to resist every assumed power which 
seeks to remove them from the imitation of Christ by force 
or craft, for, in thus resisting such power we do not resist 
the ordinance of God but the abuse of power. And such 
abuse, in respect to the power of the keys, the simoniacs 1 

1 Huss constantly attacked the simony of the clergy and regarded his legal 
troubles as a result of these assaults. He wrote a special tract on the sub- 
ject in Czech entitled, The Traffic in Holy Things, which he closed by exalting 
Christ as the only way, truth and life. In his de sex Erroribus, Mon. t i : 240- 
243, he also gave the subject elaborate treatment, quoting at length from the 
canon law and declaring that prelates guilty of it are in mortal sin, and so their 
acts invalid. He speaks there of the sale of baptisms, confirmations, chrism, 
the marrriage blessing, the mass and sepulture. Laymen also were guilty of 
it who abet or wink at the practise in their priests. He returned to this vice 
in almost all his writings. He speaks of Prague clerics selling consecrated oil 
at a higher price than common oil and charging thirty groschen for thirty 
masses, and says that if priests would attempt to say all the masses they as- 



THE ABUSE OF SCRIPTURE 115 

exercise who allege that they can either damn the deserving 
or loose those who are bound, and they do this because the 
obedience they falsely demand is refused them or for the 
sake of the gain they derive. Of such priests the Lord said: 
"They polluted me among my people for a handful of barley 
and a piece of bread that they might slay souls, which do 
not die, and make alive souls, which do not live, lying to 
my people which believes lies," Ezek. 13 : 19. On this 
passage Gregory comments, 11:3, Plerisque 1 [Friedberg, 
1 : 667], and says: "Rightly does the prophet say they put 
souls to death which do not die and make alive souls which 
do not live. For, indeed, he puts to death one who does 
not die when he condemns the righteous, and he attempts to 
make alive him who does not live 2 when he seeks to loose 
the guilty from the sentence of death." This abuse of power 
they exercise who sell and buy the sacred orders, episcopates, 
canonries, and parishes — plebanias. They secure and sell 
simoniacally who make spoil out of the sacraments, living in 
pleasure, avarice, and luxury or who, by any other kind of 
criminality, defile the power of the priesthood. For even if 
they declare that they know God, they, nevertheless, deny 
Him by their deeds, Titus 1 : 16. Consequently, they do 
not believe in God, and so, as unbelieving children, they 
have unbelieving thoughts about the seven sacraments of the 
church and also about the keys, the ministries, censures, the 
customs, ceremonies, and sacred things of the church and 
likewise the worship of relics, indulgences, and sacred orders. 
This is clear because such despise God's name. Hence it 
is said in Mai. 1 : 6, 10: "Unto you, O priests, that despise 
my name. And ye say, Wherein have we despised thy name ? 
Ye offer polluted bread upon my altar. . . . Oh, that there 
were one among you that would shut the doors and kindle 

sumed to say, saying fifteen a day, they would not have gotten through in fif- 
teen years. One of Gregory VII's reform movements was to do away with 
clerical simony. Dante put simoniacal popes in hell, including Boniface VIII. 
1 Mistake for pkrumquc. ' Vivum, a mistake for ricturum. 



n6 THE CHURCH 

fire upon my altar in vain! I have no pleasure in you, saith 
the Lord of hosts, neither will I accept an offering at your 
hand." Behold how the Lord speaks to the wicked priests be- 
cause they despise His name and offer polluted bread. Hence 
Gregory, i : i, Multi sec. [Friedberg, i : 388], follows up his 
statement about the sacraments and power by saying: "So we 
defile the bread, that is, Christ's body, when we approach un- 
worthily the altar, and with filthy lips drink his pure blood." 
And the apostle says: "He who despised Moses' law, died 
without any mercy under two or three witnesses. Of how 
much sorer punishment, think ye, shall he be judged worthy 
who hath trodden under foot the Son of God and accounted 
the blood of the covenant wherewith he was sanctified an un- 
holy thing?" Heb. 10 : 28, 29. 

In the second place, such crucify the Son of God. For 
the apostle says: "Crucifying to themselves afresh the Son 
of God, they put him to an open shame," Heb. 6 : 6. Thirdly, 
such deal wickedly with the law of Christ, of whom St 
Jerome in Sophoniam Proph., 1 : 1 [Com. on Zephaniah, 
Friedberg, 1 : 391], says: "The priests who minister in the 
eucharist and distribute the Lord's flesh to his people, deal 
wickedly with Christ's law in thinking that the words of the 
one who curses make the eucharist and not his life, and that 
such a solemn address is all that is necessary and not the merits 
of priests." Of these he says: "A priest who is assoiled by any 
stain of sin should not approach the table to offer sacrifices 
to the Lord." Fourthly, the persons spoken of above blas- 
pheme the Lord's majesty. Hence we read: "Who walk 
after the flesh in the lusts of defilement and despise damna- 
tion," II Peter 2 : 10. Further on Peter says: "But these 
as creatures without reason to be taken and destroyed, rail- 
ing in matters whereof they are ignorant." On this point 
St. Augustine, on Psalm 147 [Nic. Fathers, 8 : 665], says: 
"If thou dost exceed the due measure of nature by glutton- 
ous immoderation and satest thyself with wine-bibbing, so 



THE ABUSE OF SCRIPTURE 117 

often as thy tongue sounds the praises of God, so often thy 
life blasphemes." How, then, shall the avaricious, simoniacs, 
the self-indulgent and those guilty of other crimes think in 
goodness of heart about the Lord or about his sacraments 
when they, like infidels, despise the Lord's name, defile his 
bread, crucify to themselves the Son of God and put him 
to an open shame, deal wickedly with God's law and despise 
government and blaspheme ? 

It is also clear that to this class belong the pestiferous 
clergy who, in an infidel way, think of the seven sacraments 
of the church and of the keys and of other things belonging 
to Christ's law. It is also clear that the dictum of the doc- 
tors — whose leader at that time was Stephen Palecz, supported 
by Stanislaus, who led after them Peter of Znaim, John He- 
liae, Andrew Broda, John Hildissen, Matthew the Monk, 
Herman the Hermit, George Boras, and Simon Vuenda — 
laid down as a statement of the matter of disagreement, is 
to be verified by the conduct of the clergy who were living 
in sin. 1 For, in the beginning of their writing, they say: 
"The matter of this disagreement is manifest from the lives 
of some of the clergy who are pestiferous." Because Christ's 

1 The document referred to (Doc, 475 sqq.) was signed by eight doctors of the 
theological faculty of the university of Prague against the XLV Articles of Wyclif 
and seven other articles alleged to give Huss's views, such as that the priest 
does no more than announce the forgiveness of sins in the sacrament of pen- 
ance. It was an attack upon Huss for the hostile position he had assumed to 
the sale of indulgences ordered by John XXIII, 141 1. The disturbances which 
followed in Prague led the king, Wenzel, to call the eight magisters and Huss 
before him at his summer residence of Zebrak. There, after a meeting in the 
parish house at which Palecz read a paper charging Huss with disobedience to 
the university authorities, they appeared before the king. Huss offered to 
submit himself to the ordeal of fire provided that the others did and that the 
party not proving its case from Scripture should undergo it. The proposition 
was not accepted, the meeting seems to have come to naught, and the disturb- 
ances in Prague went on, and the three men were murdered to whom reference is 
made in a succeeding chapter. Huss made an elaborate Reply to the Eight 
Doctors, Man.f 1 : 366-408, in which he goes into the scriptural authority 
limiting the papal power of indulgence and the priestly power of remission of 
sins. The eight doctors included the names given above with the exception 
of Boras and Vuenda. See ad StanisL, Men., 1 : 331. 



n8 THE CHURCH 

priests preach against the offenses of pestiferous clerics, 
therefore has this disagreement arisen, for the reason that 
the clergy in imparting to the people the plague of criminal 
living and refusing to tolerate the preaching of those who 
preach against their plague, which is at variance with the 
Gospel and who seek to cure their infection by the Word of 
the Lord, has conspired together and desires in malice to sup- 
press preaching. But the purpose of the said doctors was 
to prove that those who evangelize against the wickedness of 
the pestiferous clergy were heretical on the subject of the keys, 
which, with the help of the Lord, during the term of their 
lives, they will not prove. 



CHAPTER XH 

CHRIST THE TRUE ROMAN PONTIFF UPON WHOM 

SALVATION DEPENDS 

To the honor of our Lord Jesus Christ, which honor and 
also Christ the aforesaid doctors nowhere mention in their 
writing, this conclusion is proved, namely, "to be subject to 
the Roman pontiff is necessary for salvation for every human 
being." l From this it is clear, that no one can be saved 
unless he is meritoriously subject to Jesus Christ. But 
Christ is the Roman pontiff, just as he is the head of the 
universal church and every particular church. Therefore 
the conclusion is a true one. The consequence is clear from 
the major premise. And the minor premise is clear from the 
things said above and from what is said in I Peter 2 : 25, 
"For ye were sometime going astray like sheep but are now 
returned unto the shepherd and bishop of your souls," and 
also from Heb. 7 : 22: "By so much also hath Jesus become 
the surety of a better covenant and they indeed have been 
made free, many in number, according to the law because 
that by death they are hindered from continuing. But this 
man, because he continueth forever, hath his priesthood un- 
changeable, wherefore also he is able to save to the utter- 
most, drawing near through himself 2 to the Lord and always 
living to intercede for us. For such a high priest became 
us holy, guileless, undefiled, separated from sinners and made 
higher than the heavens, who needeth not daily like those 

1 From Boniface VTII's bull Unam sandam. The expression in the next 
sentence, "meritoriously," refers to the mediaeval doctrine of merit in propor- 
tion to our good works. 

1 Accedens refers the drawing near to Christ. The Vulgate has the plural, 
accidcntcs, those who draw near through Christ. 

119 



120 THE CHURCH 

priests, to offer up sacrifices first for his own sins and then 
for the sins of the people, for this he did once for all when 
he offered himself." 

Truly this is the most holy and chief Roman pontiff, sit- 
ting at God's right hand and dwelling with us, for he said: 
"And lo, I am with you all the days, even unto the consum- 
mation of the age," Matt. 28 : 20. For that person, Christ, 
is everywhere present, since he is very God whose right it is 
to be everywhere without limitation. He is the bishop, who 
baptizes and takes away the sins of the world, John 1 : 29. 
He is the one who joins in marriage so that no man may put 
asunder: "What God hath joined together, let not man put 
asunder," Matt. 19 : 6. He is the one who makes us priests: 
"He made us a kingdom and priests," Rev. 1:6. He per- 
forms the sacrament of the eucharist, saying: "This is my 
body," Luke 22 : 19. This is he who confirms his faithful 
ones: "I will give you a mouth of wisdom which all your 
adversaries will not be able to withstand or gainsay," Luke 
21 : 15. He it is who feeds his sheep by his word and ex- 
ample and by the food of his body. All these things, how- 
ever, he does on his part indefectibly, because he is a holy 
priest, guileless, undefiled, separated from sinners and made 
higher than the heavens. He is the bishop holding supreme 
guardianship over his flock, because he sleeps not nor is he, 
that watches over Israel, weary. He is the pontiff who in 
advance makes the way easy for us to the heavenly country. 
He is the pope — papa — because he is the wonderful Prince 
of Peace, the Father of the future age. For, indeed, such a 
pontiff became us who, since he was in the form of God, did 
not think it robbery to be equal with God but emptied him- 
self, taking upon him the form of a servant, because he hum- 
bled himself by being made obedient unto death, even the 
death of the cross. Wherefore God hath highly exalted 
him and given him a name which is above every name, 
that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things 



CHRIST THE TRUE ROMAN PONTIFF 121 

in heaven, of things on the earth, and things in hell [Phil. 
2 : 6 sqq]. 

To this the conclusion follows, namely: "To be subject 
to the Roman pontiff is necessary for salvation for every 
human being." But there is no other such pontiff except 
the Lord Jesus Christ himself, our pontiff. This is so because 
the humanity of Christ is not subject to any other pontiff 
as of necessity to salvation, inasmuch as God hath exalted 
him and given him a name which is to be the most worthy 
above every other name, that at the name of Jesus every 
knee should bow and every power bend in obedience to him 
"of things in heaven," that is, the angels; " things on the 
earth," that is, all men; and "of things in hell," that is, the 
devils. And it is also so because Christ's mother was a human 
being; John the Baptist also, Peter the apostle, and other 
saints now in heaven, and for none of these was it necessary 
for salvation to be subject to any other Roman pontiff besides 
Christ, seeing that they are already saved, persons whom no 
Roman pontiff can loose or bind. Therefore, Pope Clement 
extended his authority all too far when in his bull The An- 
gels of Paradise, he commanded the angels to lead into the 
everlasting joys the soul of one who had died on a journey to 
Rome to secure indulgence, and who had been absolved from 
purgatory. For this pope wished that at his command the 
heavenly angels should bow their knees. And he added, 
"We wish that the pain of hell be not inflicted upon that 
soul in any degree," and so he commanded that the power 
or the knees of the spirits in hell should also bow at his 
command. Not so did the apostles presume, for John wished 
not to command but to worship at the feet of angels, as he 
said, Rev. 22 : 8: "I, John, fell down to worship before the 
feet of the angel, and he said to me, see thou do it not, for 
I am a fellow servant with thee and with thy brethren the 
prophets and with them that keep the words of the prophecy 
of this book. Worship God." See how great is this apostle 



122 THE CHURCH 

and prophet, beloved of God, who without doubt excelled 
modern popes and notably Clement, who gave command to 
the angels. He did not wish to give any command to an 
angel but, falling down, wished to worship before his feet, and 
the holy angel forbade him, showing him that he ought to 
worship God. 

But in view of Heb. 7 : 23, "many indeed are made priests 
according to the law," it is to be noted that every high priest 
of the old law prefigured Christ in all his legal acts. There- 
fore he is called, uniquely, the High Priest and Bishop of our 
souls, and for this reason that multitude of priests and their 
offices are fulfilled in Christ alone, as the apostle says in 
Heb. 7 and 9. And this is the reason why the apostles did not 
call themselves most holy popes, heads of the universal church, 
or universal pontiffs; but, having with them the High Priest 
even unto the consummation of the age, they called them- 
selves servants of Christ, his companions in tribulation and 
ministers of the church. Hence this holy custom was ob- 
served in the time of St. Gregory, Decretutn, Dist. 92 [Fried- 
berg, 1 : 318]; and in the preface of his letter [Nic. Fathers, 
2d Ser., 12 : 241] Gregory says: "See how, so far as I am 
concerned, I forbade that thou shouldst use that word of 
proud entitlement. Thou wert concerned to confer upon me 
the title of universal pope which I beg thy most sweet holi- 
ness not to do any more, for in this way would be taken 
away from thee and shown to another more authority than 
reason allows. I do not seek to be advanced with words — 
[titles] — but by my good life — moribus. Nor do I regard that 
to be an honor wherein I would know that my brethren had 
lost their honor. For mine is also the honor of the universal 
church; my honor is the solid stability of my brethren. 
Then am I honored, when the honor due is not denied to 
any single one of them, for if thy holiness entitles me uni- 
versal pope, it denies that thou art this, because thy holiness 
professes that I am the whole — universum. But far be that 



CHRIST THE TRUE ROMAN PONTIFF 123 

from us! Away with words which puff up vanity 1 and wound 
love!" From the words of this holy pope the deduction is 
to be drawn that he may be easily puffed up who is called 
most holy father, though he perhaps lives in sin and is struck 
through with flattery or through ignorance lies. 

Therefore, Gregory most notably says: "I desire not to 
be advanced with words but by a good life." Alas ! not thus 
do modern pontiffs think who, destitute of good lives — 
morals — glory in a bare title, imagining to themselves that the 
name, Holiness, befits them in virtue of their office or ecclesi- 
astical dignity. But if this reasoning held, then Judas would 
have had to be called holy apostle. But blessed be the 
Lord, who, in order to remove this cloak, said to his disciples: 
"Have I not chosen you and one of you is a devil?" John 
6 : 70. This he said before Iscariot had betrayed his master. 

Hence holy men, when they have been praised by men, 
have humbled themselves and have burdened their minds 
with fear, lest praise should cast them down from a merit 
still more worthy. Therefore, Peter, Christ's apostle, when 
he was called by messengers went humbly to the Gentile, 
Cornelius, and when he was on the way, Cornelius went to 
meet him, instructed by an angel of Peter's holiness, and wor- 
shipped at Peter's feet. And Peter, taught of God about 
Cornelius and assured through revelation of his blessedness, 
did not permit Cornelius to lie at his feet as do modern pon- 
tiffs in whom not a scintilla of holiness is seen. Nay, often 
they are conscious of their sin in allowing themselves to be 
reverenced and, on that account, make the more ostentation, 
and if the ostentatious title — titulus pompositatis — be omitted, 
they at once shake with anger. 

1 Vanitatem, Huss's text has wrongly unitatem, unity. This famous letter 
(see Mirbt, p. 77, for the full text), addressed to Eulogius, patriarch of Alexan- 
dria, by Gregory the Great, 598, is a strong testimony, constantly appealed to, 
against the exorbitant claims of the papacy. Six hundred years later, one of 
Gregory's successors, Innocent III, added to the other papal titles that of 
Vicar of God. 



i2 4 THE CHURCH 

Wishing to put an end to this pride, the African council/ 
Dist. 99 [Friedberg, i : 350], says: "Let not the bishop of 
the first see be called the prince of priests or high priest or 
anything of this kind, but only bishop of the first see. And 
the Roman pontiff is not to be called universal bishop." 
Proscribed are all these things which proceed from ostenta- 
tions, pride, flattery, avarice, and from the blind deception 
of the unlearned. Returning, therefore, to our most lowly 
High Priest, Jesus Christ, who bade him that was called to 
the wedding take the lowest place [Luke 14 : 9], let us con- 
fess to him according to his precept that we are unprofitable 
servants, Luke 17 : 10. For he said: "When ye shall have 
done all those things which are commanded you, say, We are 
unprofitable servants." For, when we have kept all his pre- 
cepts, and shall have humbled our souls before this High 
Priest — knowing that it is possible that our pontiffs may be 
thieves and robbers — this Bishop of our souls will not fail 
us in things necessary to salvation, but will pasture, guard, 
and feed his sheep as a truly good Shepherd. 

1 Third council of Carthage, 397, which fixed the catholic canon of the O. T. 
and the canon of the N. T. as then accepted by all Western Christendom. 



CHAPTER Xin 

THE POPE NOT THE HEAD OF THE CHURCH BUT 

CHRIST'S VICAR 

Further, the aforesaid doctors lay down in their writ- 
ing that " the pope is head of the Roman church and the 
college of cardinals the body, and that they are very suc- 
cessors and princes of the apostle Peter and the college of 
Christ's other apostles in ecclesiastical office for the purpose 
of discerning and defining all catholic and church matters, 
correcting and purging all errors in respect to them and, in 
all these matters, to have the care of all the churches and of 
all the faithful of Christ. For in order to govern the church 
throughout the whole world it is fitting there should always 
continue to be such manifest and true successors in the office 
of Peter, the prince of the apostles, and of the college of the 
other apostles of Christ. And such successors cannot be 
found or procured on the earth other than the pope, the ex- 
isting head, and the college of cardinals, the existing body, of 
the aforesaid Roman church." 

These follies, long drawn out, which, I think, proceeded 
for the most part from the brain of Stanislaus, overcome and 
terrified by the Roman curia, involve many points. And in 
regard to these, I note that in their writing the church is 
taken to mean all Christian pilgrims. They seem to admit 
this when they say that " the body of the clergy in the king- 
dom of Bohemia, not only with the whole body of clergy 
in the world but also with the whole body of Christendom, 
always feels and believes as the faith dictates, just as the 
Roman church does." Or, secondly, these doctors call the 



126 THE CHURCH 

pope, together with his cardinals, alone the Roman church, 
when they say that they believe just as the Roman church 
believes and not otherwise, the pope being the head of this 
Roman church and the cardinals the body. In these ways 
only, so far as I can see, do the doctors designate the church 
in their writing. 

I assume that the pope stands for that spiritual bishop 
who, in the highest way and in the most similar way, occu- 
pies the place of Christ, just as Peter did after the ascen- 
sion. But if any person whatsoever is to be called pope — 
whom the Western church accepts as Roman bishop — ap- 
pointed to decide as the final court ecclesiastical cases and to 
teach the faithful whatever he wishes, then there is an abuse 
of the term, because according to this view, it would be nec- 
essary in cases to concede that the most unlettered layman 
or a female, or a heretic and antichrist, may be pope. This 
is plain, for Constantine H, an unlettered layman, was sud- 
denly ordained a priest and through ambition made pope 
and then was deposed and all the things which he ordained 
were declared invalid, about A. D. 707. l And the same is 
plain from the case of Gregory, who was unlettered and con- 
secrated another in addition to himself. And as the people 
were displeased with the act, a third pope was superinduced. 
Then these quarrelling among themselves, the emperor came 
to Rome and elected another as sole pope. 1 As for a female, 

1 Constantine II, 767-768 — not 707 — was elected through the influence of 
his brother Toto, duke of Nepi. He was rushed through the various grades of 
ordination and then forced out of the papal chair by a military insurrection, 
thrown into prison, and blinded. Huss often cites his case. Mon., 1 : 342, etc. 

* Huss seems to refer to Gregory VI, 1045-1046 (see also Reply to Stanislaus, 
Man., 1 : 342), although a part of his statement cannot be verified. Gregory 
bought the papacy from the flagitious Benedict IX for one thousand or, accord- 
ing to another account, two thousand pounds silver. There were then three 
popes, Benedict IX, Sylvester III, and Gregory, all three elected by the Roman 
people. At the synod of Sutri, 1046, two of these popes were deposed and 
Gregory abdicated and, at the instance of the Emperor Henry III, the bishop 
of Bamberg was elected and took the name Clement II. Gregory was taken 
to Germany as a prisoner and died about 1048. 



THE POPE NOT THE CHURCH'S HEAD 127 

it is plain in the case of Agnes, who was called John Angli- 
cus, 1 and of her Castrensis, 5:3,* writes: "A certain woman 
sat in the papal chair two years and five months, following 
Leo. She is said to have been a girl, called Agnes, of the 
nation of Mainz, was led about by her paramour in a man's 
dress in Athens and named John Anglicus. She made such 
progress in different studies that, coming to Rome, she read 
the trivium to an audience of great teachers. Finally, elected 
pope, she was with child by her paramour, and, as she was 
proceeding from St. Peter's to the Lateran, she had the pains 
of labor in a narrow street between the Colosseum and St 
Clement's and gave birth to a child. Shortly afterward she 
died there and was buried. For this reason it is said that 
all the popes avoid this street. Therefore, she is not put 
down in the catalogue of popes." 

As for a heretic occupying the papal chair we have an in- 
stance in Liberius, of whom Castrensis writes, IV [Rolls Ser., 
5 : 158], that at Constantius's command he was exiled for 

1 This story of the female Pope Agnes (John VTH, about 855), to which Huss 
refers again and again in his writings (Doc., 59, 61 ; Mon., 1 : 323, 324, 326, 336, 
339> 343» 345> 347) M a proof that the papacy is not necessary to the being of the 
church, was fully believed in his time. Gerson used it to prove that the church 
may err in matters of fact, and a bust of Agnes was included among the busts 
of the other popes in the cathedral of Siena in the beginning of the fifteenth 
century. Dietrich of Nieheim names the very school in which she taught. 
So far as the story can be traced, it was first told by Martin von Troppau — 
Martinus Polonus— d. 1278, in his Chronicles. It is now discredited, and the 
invention regarded as a satire upon the rule of meretricious women over worth- 
less and wicked popes in the ninth and tenth centuries. See Mirbt, p. 97; 
DttUinger: FaMes of the Middle Ages. 

* Castrensis or Cestrensis, a derivative of Chester — castra, the name by 
which Ranidph Higden was often quoted, the author of the Polychronicon or 
Universal History, in seven books, ed. by Babington and Lumby in Rolls Series, 
1865 sqq.y 9 vols. The ed. gives the Latin text and also two Engl, translations, 
one by Trevisa and the other by an unknown writer of the fifteenth century. 
Nothing is known of the author except that he was a Benedictine monk of St. 
Werburgh, Chester. He wrote probably after the middle of the fourteenth cen- 
tury. The historical part begins with Abraham and continues to the reign of 
Edward III, 131 2-1377. The work was widely circulated and the author gives 
a list of the writers upon whom he has drawn. The quotation in regard to 
Joan, vol. VI, 330, Cestrensis draws from Martinus Polonus. 



128 THE CHURCH 

three years because he wished 1 to favor the Arians. At 
the counsel of the same Constantius, the Roman clergy or- 
dained Felix pope who, during the sessions of a synod con- 
demned and cast out two Arian presbyters, Ursacius and 
Valens, and when this became known, Liberius was recalled 
from exile, and being wearied by his long exile and exhilarated 
by the reoccupation of the papal chair, he yielded to heret- 
ical depravity; and when Felix was cast down, Liberius 
with violence held the church of Peter and Paul and St 
Lawrence so that the clergy and priests who favored Felix 
were murdered in the church, and Felix was martyred, Li- 
berius not preventing. 

As for antichrist occupying the papal chair, it is evi- 
dent that a pope living contrary to Christ, like any other 
perverted person, is called by common consent antichrist. 
In accordance with John 2 : 22, many are become anti- 
christs. And the faithful will not dare to deny persistently 
that it is possible for the man of sin to sit in the holy place. 
Of him the Saviour prophesied when he said: "When ye see 
the abomination of desolation, which is spoken of by Daniel, 

1 VUuit, that is, Constantius wished. The original has notvit "he would 
not/' referring to Liberius's refusal to consent to heresy. Cestrensis inter- 
jects the statement, which Huss omits, that "Constantius recalled Liberius 
from exile as one who treated the Arians more mildly." The implication is 
that during his exile in Thrace Liberius yielded to heretical views, or perhaps 
on his way back to Rome, where he remained very popular and whither he 
was recalled by the emperor. The statement of the text represents the 
view which prevailed during the Middle Ages. Felix's martyrdom was as- 
cribed to his being cast into a hole where he died after languishing for seven 
months. The history of Liberius and Felix is a matter of historical uncertainty. 
D5llinger, Fables of the Middle Ages, Engl, translation, 183-209, pronounced 
the mediaeval view an invention of the sixth or seventh century, and rejected 
the charge of heresy made against Liberius as well as the story of Felix's mar- 
tyrdom. Liberius was pope 352-366 with an interim of three years. Felix 
died a natural death, 365. It is difficult to exempt Liberius altogether from the 
taint of heresy in spite of Sozomen's spirited denial of it. Athanasius implies 
that he was a heretic and Jerome distinctly called him one. In a document, 
whose genuineness is questioned, Hilary anathematized the unfortunate pon- 
tiff. Felix's name was included in the Breviary from which it has been ex- 
punged and his bust was given a place in the Siena cathedral among other 
popes. 



THE POPE NOT THE CHURCH'S HEAD 129 

standing in the holy place/' Matt. 24 : 15. The apostle also 
says: "Let no man beguile you in any wise, for it will not 
be except the falling away come first and the man of sin be 
revealed, the son of perdition; he that oppose th and exalteth 
himself against all that is called God or is worshipped; so 
that he sitteth in the temple of God setting himself forth 
as God," H Thess. 2 : 3-4. And it is apparent from the 
Chronicles how the papal dignity has sunk. 

For the emperor Constantine, about A. D. 301, thought 
and commanded that the highest bishop should be called by 
all pope and in his dotation that name also sprang up. The 
emperor Phocas likewise, about the year 600, at the instance 
of the clergy confirmed this same thing, as may be read in 
his Annals. Therefore, Castrensis, 4 : 14, describes how the 
excellency of the Roman empire helped the papacy of the 
Roman pontiff above others. He says: "The Nicene coun- 
cil conferred this prerogative on the Roman pontiff, that, 
just as Augustus had rank above other kings, so the Roman 
pontiff should be held as bishop, and the pope be called chief 
father — principalis pater" l The origin, however, of this name 
and this excellency is to be found in the dotation of the 
church, as is indicated in the Decretum, 96, Dist. Constant. 1 

1 Rolls Series, 5 : 140, Castrensis prefaces the words quoted by Huss with 
the statement that "in the early church there were only three patriarchs, corre- 
sponding to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, namely Antioch, Alexandria, and 
Rome. Peter constructed these three seats by his occupancy — sua sessione. 
Over two of them he himself was president and his disciple, Mark, occupied the 
third, Alexandria." Of course the Nicene council, 325, did no such thing but 
in its sixth canon makes the three bishops of Alexandria, Rome, and Antioch, 
each supreme in his own diocese. See Schaff, Ch. Hist., Ill, 275. 

* Constantine's donation was the reputed gift to Pope Sylvester of dominion 
over the city of Rome, Italy, and all the provinces, cities, and territories of 
the West. The gift, it was alleged, was made out of gratitude to Sylvester for 
having healed the emperor of leprosy and baptized him. In view of Sylvester's 
healing power, Constantine was assured of the divine power given to Peter 
and his successors. In addition, the emperor also acknowledged the Roman 
bishop as universal pope and his supremacy over Antioch, Alexandria, Jeru- 
salem and Constantinople., called him the vicar of the Son of God, and as Huss 
notes, Mon. y 1 : 337, gave him the Lateran palace. This colossal fraud of the 
middle of the eighth century was a part of the Pseudo-Isidorian decretals, and 



i 3 o THE CHURCH 

These things being noted, in order to remove ambiguity, 
I assume that the doctors in their writing designate by the 
Roman church that church of which the Saviour said to Peter: 
"On this rock I will build my church" (see Chapter VII). 
The holy writers and the Decretals speak of it as the Roman 
church, Dist. 21:3 [Friedberg, 1 : 70], 24 : 1, cap p. 9, 14 [Fried- 
berg, 1 : 969, 970]. And in the Clementines, de Jurejur- 
ando [Friedberg, 2 : 1147], 1 it is said: "The Romans, princes, 
professors of the orthodox faith, venerate with warm faith 
and pure devotion the holy Roman church, whose head is 
Christ, our Saviour, and the Roman pontiff, the Saviour's 
vicar." ' And in the Sextus it is said: "Our alma mater, the 
church" [Friedberg, 2 : 1106], and in the Extravagante of Boni- 
face VIH, "The holy Roman church." And the same is true 
of the other statements made in other places and alleged above. 

In regard to these follies of the Unlearned — indoctorum — I 
find these points: (1) The pope is the head of the holy Ro- 
man church. (2) The college of cardinals is the body of the 
holy Roman church. (3) The pope is manifestly and truly 

was more influential than anything else in building up the arrogant claims of the 
papacy. Dante denied the right of Constantine to grant secular power to the 
pope, but did not call in question the authenticity of Constantine's gift. He 
expressed himself in the lines: 

Ah, Constantine, of how much ill was cause 
Not thy conversion, but those rich domains 
Which the first wealthy pope received of thee. 

The fraud was not shown up till the middle of the fifteenth century by Lauren- 
tius Valla, and a profound impression was made upon Luther in 1520 when he 
was informed of the fraudulent character of the document by von Hutten. Of 
course, Constantine was baptized by Eusebius of Nicomedia, and not till the 
very last year of his life and never had the leprosy. Huss fully believed the story 
and often refers to the donation as the beginning of papal wealth, pomp, and 
corruption. The text in Mirbt, pp. 81-87. Also Boehmer's art. in Herzog, 
XI, 1-7. 

1 The first of these decretals is by Gelasius, 495, and states that the "holy 
Roman catholic and apostolic church is placed at the head of the other churches 
not by virtue of the action of synods but by the appointment of Christ.' 1 The 
second is by Lucius, the third by Jerome writing to Pope Damasus. 

2 Clement V, 13 14, the first of the Avignon popes. He declares that the "Ro- 
man church transferred the empire from the Greeks to the Germans." 



THE POPE NOT THE CHURCH'S HEAD 131 

the successor of the prince of the apostles, Peter. (4) Cardi- 
nals are manifest and true successors of the college of Christ's 
other apostles. (5) For the government of the church 
throughout the whole world, there should always be manifest 
and true successors of the same kind in the office of the prince 
of the apostles and in the office of Christ's other apostles. 
(6) Such successors are not to be found or procured on the 
earth, other than the pope, the existing head and the college 
of cardinals, the existing body of the church. 

Against all these six points, the argument in brief runs 
thus: all truth in the religion of Christ is to be followed and 
only that is truth which is known by the bodily senses, or 
discovered by an infallible intelligence, or made known through 
revelation, or laid down in sacred Scripture. But none of 
these six points is truth known by the bodily senses or dis- 
covered by an infallible intelligence or known through rev- 
elation, or laid down in divine Scripture. Therefore, no one 
of these six points is truth in the religion of Jesus Christ 
which is to be followed. The major premise is seen in what 
St. Augustine says, Enchiridion, 4 [Nic. Fathers, 3 : 238]: 
"These things chiefly, yea almost exclusively, are to be fol- 
lowed in religion, and he who contradicts them is altogether 
a stranger to the name of Christ or he is a heretic. . . . 
These things are to be defended by the reason whether they 
start from the bodily senses or are discovered by the intelli- 
gence of the mind. But these things, which we have not 
been aware of through the bodily senses or been able to reach 
with the mind, nor now are able — these are beyond doubt to 
be believed on the testimony of those witnesses by whom the 
Scriptures, deservedly called divine, were written, because, 
assisted with divine help, they were able to see these things 
or to foresee them either through the bodily senses or through 
the mind." Thus much St. Augustine. 

The minor premise, however, the doctors are unable to 
disprove unless one of these six points should be revealed to 




i 3 2 THE CHURCH 

them by divine revelation. For neither by the bodily senses, 
nor by the reason, nor from sacred Scripture do these points 
appear. Yea, the doctors in making these points authori- 
tative, so that they must be believed, are seen to be anath- 
ema by the authority of Augustine himself which they 
adduce in their writing. If any one venerate any other 
scriptures than those which the catholic church has received 
or has handed down to be held as authoritative, let him be 
anathema. This is clear because these doctors have offered 
their own writings as authoritative and to be believed and 
the catholic church has not received them for they are found 
neither in the divine law nor in the code of canons. Therefore, 
it follows that these doctors are themselves anathema, and 
it is clear that religious faith is not held by them so far as 
these points are concerned unless they prove them plainly 
or show them to be founded in sacred Scripture or in clear 
reasoning, for Augustine says, Ep. ad Ever on., Decretum, DisL 
9 : 5 [Friedberg, i : 17]: "I have learned to give only to 
those writers, who are now called canonical, honor and re- 
gard, so that I would not dare to believe that any of them 
erred in writing. But other writers I will read 1 as far as 
they seem to excel by sanctity or true doctrine but I will not 
regard as true what they say because they have felt it to be 
true, but because they have been able to convince me by other 
writers, or by canonical or probable reasons, that they do 
not differ from the truth. ,, 

Inasmuch as these doctors are not writers of sacred Scrip- 
ture — it being granted that they excel by their sanctity — 
the faithful are not, therefore, to think a thing is true be- 
cause they feel it to be true unless by other writers of Scrip- 
ture or for canonical or probable reasons they prove that 
these points do not deviate from the truth. Then, similarly, 
as to the point that the pope is always and uniformly to be 
regarded as the head of the Roman church, and that the 

1 Legam. The original has lego. 



THE POPE NOT THE CHURCH'S HEAD 133 

church is the bride of Christ built upon Christ "against 
which the gates of hell cannot prevail/' we must argue thus: 
No pope is the most exalted person of the catholic church 
but Christ himself; therefore no pope is the head of the cath- 
olic church besides Christ. The conclusion is valid reason- 
ing from description to the thing described. Inasmuch as 
the head of the church is the capital or chief person of the 
church, yea, inasmuch as the head is a name of dignity and 
of office — dignity in view of predestination, and office in view 
of the administration of the whole church — it follows that no 
one may reasonably assert of himself or of another without 
revelation that he is the head of a particular holy church, 
although if he live well he ought to hope that he is a member 
of the holy catholic church, the bride of Christ. Therefore, 
we should not contend in regard to the reality of the in- 
cumbency whether any one, whoever he may be, living with 
us is the head of a particular holy church but, on the ground 
of his works, we ought assume that, if he is a superior, ruling 
over a particular holy church, then he is the superior in that 
particular church, and this ought to be assumed of the 
Roman pontiff, unless his works gainsay it, for the Saviour 
said: "Beware of false prophets which come unto you in 
sheep's clothing but inwardly they are ravening wolves. By 
their fruits ye shall know them," Matt. 7 : 15. Also John 
10 : 38: "Believe the works." 

Likewise, it is not necessary to believe that every Roman 
pontiff whatsoever is the head of any particular holy church 
unless God has predestinated him. This is clear because 
otherwise the Christian faith would be perverted and a 
Christian would have to believe a lie. For the church was 
deceived in the case of Agnes, and for the sake of His own, 
and without doubt for the better, God permits that he who 
is chosen pope should not forthwith and without reverent 
hesitancy be regarded as holy or such as he assumes himself 
to be. Hence I could wish that the doctors would openly 



134 THE CHURCH 

teach the people whether for the whole clergy that lived at 
that time and held Agnes to be a true pope, Agnes was really 
the head of the church; or, if the church was at that time 
without a head — acephalous 1 — with only a nominal pope in 
the church militant for two years and five months, the faith- 
ful for that reason ought not to think that it is not of the 
substance of the catholic faith to believe expressly [beyond 
a doubt] that Liberius, Joanna, Boniface, Clement, or Urban 
were predestinate or members of holy mother church — in 
view of the judgment given above. 

In the same way, it is not of necessity to salvation for 
all Christians, living together, that they should believe ex- 
pressly that any one is head of any church whatsoever unless 
his evangelical life and works plainly moved them to believe 
this. For it would be all too much presumption to affirm 
that we are heads of any particular church which perhaps 
might be a part of holy mother church. How, therefore, may 
any one of us without revelation presume to assert of himself 
or of another that he is the head, since it is said truly, Ecclesi- 
asticus 9, that "no one knows, so far as predestination goes, 
whether one is worthy of love or hatred." 

Likewise, if we examine in the light of the feeling and 
influence with which we influence inferiors and, on the other 
hand, examine by the mirror of Scripture, according to which 
we should regulate our whole life, then we would choose 
rather to be called servants and ministers of the church than 
its heads. For it is certain that if we do not fulfil the office 
of a head, we are not heads, as Augustine, de decern chordis 
[Migne's ed., 38 : 75-91], says: that a perverse husband is 
not the head of his wife, much less is a prelate of the church, 
who alone from God could have a dignity of this kind, the 
head of a particular church in case he fall away from Christ. 1 

1 Huss uses the same Greek word a number of times as in his Replies to 
Palecz and Stanislaus, Mon., 1 : 320, 347. 

* Not an exact quotation. The inference is drawn by Huss. The Sermon on 
the Ten Strings, Psalms 144 : 9, has much to say on the relation of husband 
and wife on the basis of "Thou shalt not commit adultery." 



THE POPE NOT THE CHURCH'S HEAD 135 

Therefore, after Augustine has shown that a truly Chris- 
tian wife ought to mourn over the fornication of her hus- 
band, not for carnal reasons, but out of love and for the 
chastity due to the man Christ — he says consequentially 
that Christ speaks in the hearts of good women, where the 
husband does not hear, and he goes on to say: "Mourn over 
the injuries done by thy husband, but do not imitate them 
that he may rather imitate you in that which is good. For 
in that wherein he does wrong, do not regard him as thy 
head but me, thy Lord." And he proves that this ought to 
be the case and says: "If he is the head in that wherein he 
does wrong and the body follow its head, they both go over 
the precipice. But that the Christian may not follow this bad 
head, let him keep himself to the head of the church, Christ, 
to whom he owes his chastity, to whom he yields his honor, 
no longer a single man but now a man wedded to his mother, 
the church." Blessed, therefore, be the head of the church, 
Christ, who cannot be separated from his bride which is his 
mystical body, as the popes have often been separated from 
the church by heresy. 

But some of the aforesaid doctors say that the pope is 
the bodily head of the church militant and this head ought 
always to be here with the church, but in this sense Christ 
is not the bodily head. Here is meant that the same diffi- 
culty remains, namely, that they prove the first part of the 
statement. For it remains for them to prove that the pope 
is the head of holy church, a thing they have not proved. 
And, before that, it remains for them to prove that Christ 
is not the bodily head of the church militant, inasmuch as 
Christ is a bodily person, because the man who is the head 
of the church militant, who is Christ, is present through all 
time with his qhurch unto the consummation of the age, in 
virtue of his divine personality. Similarly, he is present by 
grace, giving his body to the church to be eaten in a sacra- 
mental and spiritual way. Wherefore, is not that bridegroom, 



136 THE CHURCH 

who is the head of the church, much more present with us 
than the pope, who is removed from us two thousand miles 
and incapable of influencing of himself our feeling or move- 
ments? Let it suffice, therefore, to say, that the pope may 
be the vicar of Christ and may be so to his profit, if he is a 
faithful minister predestinated unto the glory of the head, 
Jesus Christ. 1 

1 The same thought is expressed in Reply to Palecz, Mon. t x : 321: "God 
gave Christ to be the head over the militant church, that he might preside over 
it most excellently without any hindrance of local distance . . . and pour into it, 
as the head pours into the body, movement, feeling and a gracious life whether 
there be no pope or a woman be pope." 



CHAPTER XIV 

WHEN THE CARDINALS ARE THE TRUE 
SUCCESSORS OF THE APOSTLES 

The second point is this: the college of cardinals is the 
body of the holy Roman church. This being so, then the 
college of the cardinals is the holy Roman church. The 
conclusion follows from Eph. i : 22: "He gave him to be 
head over the whole church, which is his body." And as the 
church, which is Christ's mystical body, cannot be damned, 
as when Christ said, "on this rock I will build my church 
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it" — it follows, 
that the college of cardinals cannot be damned; and since 
this conclusion is false or, at least, for the doctors doubtful, 
it follows that in this particular point they have laid down 
as truth what is doctrinally false or doubtful. What is the 
fruit of teaching the worshippers of Christ in this way? 

Likewise, the college of cardinals is either the true body 
of the holy Roman church or the pretended body. Not the 
second, according to the doctors. Therefore they must be 
the true body, and consequently that college is predestinated 
unto glory, and, as the doctors have not the revelation of 
predestination with reference to that college, it follows, that 
they ought not to have affirmed that the college is the body 
of the Roman church. 

Again, the body of the holy Roman church is made up 
of all the predestinate, and the college by itself does not in- 
clude all these. The first part of this statement appears 
from the words of the apostle, who spoke as the representa- 
tive of the predestinate: "We being many are one body in 
Christ," Romans 12:5. And, showing the unity of the body, 

*37 



138 THE CHURCH 

he does not make the college of the apostles the body of the 
church, I Cor. 12 : 28, but he says: "God hath set some in 
the church, first apostles, second prophets, thirdly teachers, 
then miracles, then gifts of healings," etc. And making a 
comparison of the body of the church with a man's natural 
body, he says, "For as there is one body and it has many 
members but all the members of the body being many are 
one body: so also is Christ/' namely, he is one, because he is 
one person with his holy church, which is his body. 

The second part of this statement, that all the predesti- 
nate are not that college, is evident of itself. Therefore, better 
would the doctors have said that Christ is the head of the 
holy Roman church, and each of the predestinate a member 
and that all together are the body, which is the church, than 
to have said that the pope is the head of the Roman church 
and the college of cardinals the body, for in this case they 
would have agreed with the apostles and with the saints 
quoted in Chapter I, especially with St. Augustine, de doct. 
christ. HI [Nic. Fathers, 2 : 569], who says: "For, in truth, 
that is not the Lord's body which will not remain with him 
through eternity." l If, therefore, the college of cardinals 
will not remain through eternity, a thing which is hidden 
from me, how is it the body of the holy Roman church or 
of Christ? In a similar way, how is the pope with the afore- 
said college the holy Roman church against which the gates 
of hell cannot prevail? 

Therefore, we will speak more safely with St. Augustine 
who, Commentary on Psalms, 80 : 1 [Nic. Fathers, 7 : 386], 
says: "Finally by this testimony, the confession is made 
both of Christ and the vine that is the head and the body, 
king and people, shepherd and flock, and the whole mystery 

1 Augustine here, in reply to Tychonius, the Donatist, denies that the "body 
of the Lord" can be properly said to be "twofold." The full quotation is: 
"Twofold is not 'a suitable word, for that is really no part of the body of Christ 
which will not be with him in eternity.' " Hypocrites may be said to belong 
to the mixed church, but not to be of "the body of Christ." 



THE CARDINALS 139 

of all Christians, Christ and the church." See, how the 
doctor of holy church shows us another holy church with 
its head than the one defined of the [eight] doctors who, 
without support of Scripture, say that the body of the holy 
Roman church is the college of cardinals, for which college 
it were well if its parts were members of the holy church of 
Jesus Christ. And we ought to think how St. Augustine 
himself feared to call Christ Lord-man, for the reason that 
this sense does not appear in Scripture; therefore much more 
ought we to fear to call any Christian head of the holy church 
militant, lest Christ perhaps be blasphemed, to whom this 
name is reserved by the Nicene council, TrinikUis concttio, 
as proper to him. How, then, do the doctors, without any 
Scripture proof, teach that the pope is head of holy church 
and the college its body? Since it is enough for the faithful 
Christian with inwrought faith and perseverance to believe 
the article of faith concerning the catholic church that it is 
the one totality of all the predestinate faithful who are to 
be saved by virtue of the merit of Christ — who is the head 
of the catholic church — it is not permissible for us expressly 
to descend to any particular vicar whom the Christian 
might recognize as the chief — capitalis. For many have been 
saved in Judea, Asia and Ethiopia who have believed in 
Christ, following the teaching of the apostles, and who did 
not expressly recognize Peter, nay, or expressly believe what 
concerns Peter, just as they did not hear anything about 
him. 

The third point is this: the pope is the manifest and 
true successor of the prince of the apostles, and about this 
I have treated in Chapter VH near the close. It is, however, 
to be said again that the doctors do not prove this point. 
And, as the vicar ought to occupy the place of his superior 
from whom he has received vicarial power, therefore, oc- 
cupying his place, he ought more directly to be conformed 
to him in his works or otherwise the power would be frus- 



140 THE CHURCH 

trated in him. From this, then, the argument is constructed: 
a man is the vicar of the person whose place he fills and 
from whom, in a legitimate way, he receives procuratorial 
power [delegated as with the Roman procurators]. But no one 
truly occupies the place of Christ, or Peter, unless he fol- 
lows him in his life, for no other kind of following is more 
fitting; nor does any one otherwise receive procuratorial 
power. The requirements, therefore, of the vicarial office 
are conformity of life and authority from him who appoints. 
If, therefore, the pope is a most humble man, depending 
little upon mundane honors and the gain of this world, if 
he is a shepherd deriving his name from the pasturage of 
God's Word, of which pasturage the Lord said to Peter, 
"Pasture my sheep," John 21 : 17, if he pasture the sheep 
by the Word and the example of his virtues being made en- 
sample of the flock with his whole heart, as Peter says, I 
Peter 5 : 3, if he is meek, patient, chaste, laboring anxiously 
and solicitously in the service of the church, esteeming all 
temporal things as dung — then, without doubt, is he the true 
vicar of Jesus Christ, manifest to God and men, so far as the 
judgment of the outward senses can determine. But, if he 
lives at discord with these virtues — for there is "no com- 
munion 1 between Christ and Belial," II Cor. 6 : 15, and, as 
Christ himself said, "He that is not with me is against," 
Matt. 12 : 30 — how can he be the true and manifest vicar 
of Christ or of Peter and not rather the vicar of antichrist, 
seeing he resists Christ in morals and in life? 

Therefore, when Peter was opposed to Christ in will and 
words and after Christ had promised him the keys, Christ 
called Peter Satan, that is, "adversary," and said: "Get 
thee behind me, Satan, thou art an offence to me, because 
thou savorest not the things that be of God but the things 
that be of men." If, therefore, Peter, chosen to be Christ's 
first vicar by Christ and deputed to serve the church in 

1 Communicatio. The Vulgate: convcntio. 



THE CARDINALS 141 

spiritual matters, was called by Christ Satan, Peter out of 
affectionate love having tried to dissuade him from submit- 
ting to the sentence of death, why should not another one, 
more opposed to Christ in his life, not be called Satan and 
consequently antichrist or antichrist's vicar or antichrist's 
chief minister? Hence, St. Bernard, Cam. on Canticles, 
says: "Evil has gone out from thy elder judges, who seem 
to be ruling the poeple. Alas ! alas ! O Lord God, for they 
were the first to persecute thee who seemed to hold primacy 
in thy church and to rule the spiritual princedom. Likewise 
all friends are all foes, all clients are all adversaries, all ser- 
vants are no peaceful men, all who seek the things which are 
their own, they are ministers of Christ and yet the servants 
of antichrist." See how plainly that holy man brings out 
that bad prelates are in pretence friends, servants, and minis- 
ters of Christ. But in fact they are the foes of Christ and the 
servants of antichrist. 

Likewise, Augustine, Com. on John, also Decretum, 8 : 1 
[Nic. Fathers, 7 : 446; Friedberg, 1 : 596], pointing out who 
are not true shepherds, but mercenaries, says: "There are 
some superiors in the church about whom the apostle Paul 
says: * they seek their own things and not the things of Christ. ' 
What is it, therefore, 'to seek one's own things'? Not to 
love Christ freely, not to seek God for His own sake, 1 to 
follow after temporal comforts, to heap up riches, to hanker 
after honors from men. When these are loved by the supe- 
rior, and when God is served for such things, whoever he 
may be that serves, he is a mercenary and he does not count 
himself among the children." For about such the Lord also 
says: 'Verily, verily, I say unto you, they received their re- 
ward.' Hence the same Augustine says: "That just as Peter, 
the apostle, was the type of all good men and especially good 
bishops, so Judas represented all bad men, especially bad 
priests." 

1 Propter se ipsum ; the original, propter Deism. 



142 THE CHURCH 

Therefore, commenting on John 12 : 8 [Nic. Fathers, 
7 • 283], "The poor ye have always with you, but me ye 
have not always," he says: "What does he wish for himself? 
How is this to be understood, — 'me ye have not always'? 
Do not fear. The words were spoken to Judas. Why, 
therefore, did Christ not say, 'thou hast/ but 'ye have'? 
Because there is not one Judas or one wicked person, but 
Judas represents the body of the wicked, just as Peter rep- 
resents the body of the good." Further on he says: "In 
Peter's person the good in the church are represented; in 
Judas's person the evil in the church are represented. To 
them it was said: 'But me ye have not always.' What is 
this 'not always/ and what is this 'always'? If thou art 
good, if thou belongest to the body which Peter represents, 
then thou hast Christ both now and in the future — now, 
by faith; now, figuratively; now, by the sacrament of bap- 
tism; now, by the food and drink of the altar. Thou hast 
Christ now, and thou hast him always, because when thou 
goest hence thou wilt go to him who said to the thief: 'To-day 
thou shalt be with me in paradise.' But if thou livest wick- 
edly, thou seemest now to have Christ because thou enter- 
est into the church, signest thyself with the sign of Christ, 
art baptized with the baptism of Christ, dost mingle with the 
members of Christ — now thou hast Christ, but on account 
of wicked living thou wilt not always have him." Thus 
much Augustine, who shows that Peter's true vicars are the 
righteous and Judas Iscariot's vicars are the wicked, and 
especially wicked priests, hypocrites and blasphemers. And 
he shows the same when he comments upon Psalm 109: 
"Deus laudem meam ne tacueris." And Ambrose, 22 : 20 
[Friedberg, 1 : 888], says: "Beware, my brethren, against lies. 1 
. . . For it is a lie to say one is a Christian and not to do 
the works of Christ. It is a lie to profess oneself to be a 

1 Ambrose continues: "For all who love a lie are children of the devil. 
For a lie is found not only in false words but also in hypocritical works." 



THE CARDINALS 143 

bishop, a priest, or a cleric, and to act at variance with this 
order." Again, 2 : 1 [Friedberg, 1 : 438]. All prelates are 
not to be esteemed as prelates. Not the name makes the 
bishop, but the life. And, Dist. IV sub rubric a, under "He 
is not truly a priest who is called a priest," Chrysostom also 
says [Dist. 40 : 12; Friedberg, 1 : 147]: "There are many 
priests and few priests." 

From these and other sayings it is evident that no pope 
is the manifest and true successor of Peter, the prince of the 
apostles, if in morals he lives at variance with the principles 
of Peter; and, if he is avaricious, then is he the vicar of Judas, 
who loved the reward of iniquity and sold Jesus Christ. And 
by the same kind of proof the cardinals are not the manifest 
and true successors of the college of Christ's other apostles 
unless the cardinals live after the manner of the apostles 
and keep the commands and counsels of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
For, if they climb up by another way than by the door of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, then are they thieves and robbers, 
just as the Saviour himself declared when of all such he said: 
"All that came before me are thieves and robbers," John 
10 : 8. Whosoever, therefore, say that they are Christ's true 
and manifest vicars, knowing that they are living in sin, lie. 
Therefore the apostle says: How "do they of the synagogue 
of Satan say that they are Jews, and they are not, but lie"? 
[Rev. 2 : 9.] 

Hence, if the cardinals heap up to themselves ecclesias- 
tical livings and barter with them and take money for their 
sale either themselves or through others, and so devour and 
consume in luxurious living the goods of the poor, and if 
they do not do miracles or preach the Word of God to the 
people or pray sincerely or fill the place of deacons — whom 
the apostles appointed, Acts 6 — by not performing their du- 
ties or living their lives — in how far, I ask, are they the vicars 
of the apostles? In this that they heap up livings or, like 
Gehazi, seize upon gifts, or because very early in the morn-. 



144 THE CHURCH 

ing they come into the pope's presence dad in the most 
splendid apparel, and attended with the most sumptuous 
retinue of horsemen — thus attended, not on account of the 
distance of place or difficulty of the journey but to show 
their magnificence to the world and their contrariety to 
Christ and his apostles, who went about among the towns, 
cities, and castles clad in humble garb, on foot, preaching — 
evangelizando — the kingdom of God. 1 

Nor in this are they the true and manifest vicars of Christ 
that they permit themselves to be adored of men on bended 
knee or that they surround the pope with visitors from 
abroad, that while he sits on high, splendidly apparelled 
even down to his feet, yea and far beyond his chair, they 
with bended knee humbly seek the kisses of his blessed feet, 
as if the sanctity of this father, the pope, would descend even 
to the place where his foot is planted? But do they, them- 
selves weak, receive from those feet health? For Christ 
suffered his feet to be kissed by a woman, but did not pro- 
trude them, as appears in Luke 7, because sincere contrition 
and the care and washing of Christ's feet, that is, of the 
poor, deletes the sins of pilgrims. But that kiss profits no 
part [of the body] unto salvation. For, he who kisses, moved 
by guilty greed or fear or flattery, or deceived by blind de- 
votion, will be altogether chargeable with guilt, he bending 
his knees and approaching the pope's feet 2 more solicitously 
and reverentially than he would do before the sacrament 

1 In his Postilla, Doe., 720 Huss said: "Jesus went about preaching on foot, 
and did not drive about in a splendid carriage as nowadays our priests drive. 
I, alas, also drive about . . . and I do not know whether it will be a sufficient 
excuse in the future that I have not been able to cover the long distances on 
foot and with sufficient speed." 

*The emperor Caligula seems to have been the first Roman emperor to 
introduce the custom of kissing the foot from the East. The pope wears a 
red slipper, but when the custom of kissing his feet entered is not known. In 
the Address to the German Nobility Luther denounced the custom whereby 
'a poor sinful man suffev his foot to be kissed by one who may be a hundred 
times better than he.' In chapter XXI Huss again refers to the custom of 
adoring the pope. 



THE CARDINALS 145 

of the body of the Saviour. But in allowing himself to 
be kissed the pope is altogether guilty, because he cannot 
make himself equal to Christ so as to deserve such honor. 
And if he may equal Christ (though he will not quickly 
equal the apostles), yet should he not exceed in honors of 
this kind what they received, unto the increase of his merit, 
and by a similar confession, for the profit of the people doing 
honor. Therefore, they, like Christ, began to do good by 
excelling in good works and not by receiving kisses, given as 
unto God. For they despised mundane honors and for that 
reason forbade men to make genuflections in their presence. 
For they kept in memory Christ's words: "When thou art 
bidden to a marriage feast, sit not down in the chief seat, 
lest a more honorable man than thou be bidden of him, and 
he that bade thee and him shall come to thee and say, Friend, 
give this man place; and then thou shalt begin with shame 
to take the lowest place," Luke 14 : 8, 9. 

But it is certain from the sayings of the saints that Christ 
is speaking of the spiritual and not the corporal vocation, 
place and meal, for by the wedding is intended the marriage 
of Christ and the church which will be fulfilled perpetually 
in the last supper. To this marriage feast many are called, 
and few are chosen, as Christ said, Matt. 22 : 14, but he 
sits in the lowest place who, with a good heart, esteems him- 
self the least of the elect, just as did Christ's apostle, who 
saw into the secret things which it is not lawful for a man 
to utter and esteemed himself the least of the apostles. If, 
therefore, the pope esteems himself to be the most holy father, 
or consents to receive from his inferiors the address, "Most 
Holy Father," does he not in presumption choose the first 
place? Therefore, if he had humility, such as St. Gregory 
had, he would with all haste put a stop to this style of ad- 
dress or seek to put a stop to it. Not because he holds the 
place of Peter and because he holds the great dotation, is he 
most holy — sanctissimus — but if he follows Christ in humility, 



146 THE CHURCH 

in waging warfare, in patience and toil, and out of the great 
bond of love, then is he holy. But far be it that he is most 
holy, because then he would be God almighty and conse- 
quently not the vicar of Jesus Christ. For Christ did not 
want the woman to kiss his feet after the resurrection — im- 
mortal and undoubtedly blessed — so that he keep from blas- 
phemous presumption the miserable persons who, for the 
time, falsely assume that they are Christ's vicars. But the 
feet of Christ and those ascending with Christ are blessed 
and not the food of worms, a putrid member and a fetid sweat 
of mundane fluids. By these things we should be persuaded 
in regard to the fourth point — namely, that the cardinals 
are the manifest and true successors of the apostles, that it 
does not contain the truth. For by the fruits which it bears, 
is the tree known. 



CHAPTER XV 

THE CHURCH MAY BE RULED WITHOUT POPE 

AND CARDINALS 

The fifth point is this: " for the government of the church 
throughout the whole world, there ought always to be car- 
dinals as the manifest and true successors in the office of 
Peter, the prince of the apostles, and of Christ's other apos- 
tles." Here that word "ought" does not mean opportuneness 
— opportunities — on the side of God who rules the church, 
and who is able to rule the church scattered throughout the 
world, without such successors, nor does it mean fitness on 
the side of the church which can be properly ruled by holy 
priests, even if those twelve cardinals were removed; just 
as it was ruled for three hundred years and more after Christ's 
ascension, unless perhaps it be said that that word "ought" 
means necessity, a thing which the Saviour indicated when he 
said: "It must needs be that offences come, but woe to that 
man by whom the offence cometh," Matt. 18 : 7. For these 
words the Saviour spoke after his rebuke of his disciples who 
asked who was the greatest among them, when he commanded 
them, saying: "Verily I say unto you, except ye turn and 
become as little children, ye shall in no wise enter into the 
kingdom of heaven," Matt. 18 : 3. And, that they might 
not offend by pride those who believed in Christ, he added: 
"Whoso shall cause one of these little ones that believe on 
me to stumble, it is profitable for him that a great millstone 
should be hanged about his neck, and that he should be sunk 
in the depth of the sea," Matt. 18 : 6. 

Commenting on these words, St. Gregory, Pastoral Rule 
1 : 2 [Nic. Fathers, 2d Ser., 12 : 2], says: "Pastors, perverse 
in their lives, impugn in their morals what they preach in 

X47 



148 THE CHURCH 

words. Therefore, it happens when a pastor walks along 
steep places, the flock follows him to the precipice"; because, 
when laymen have learned the sayings of prelates, they are 
perverted by their works. "Hence, it is written by the 
prophet: 'Wicked priests are the cause of the people's down- 
fall/ and of these the Lord said through the prophet: 'They 
are made to be a stumbling-block of iniquity to the house 
of Israel ' [Hosea 5:8]. For indeed no one does more injury in 
the church than he who acts perversely and yet has the name 
and order of sanctity. For no one dares to oppose and re- 
fute such a delinquent, and his guilt is greatly extended, be- 
coming an example, when the sinner is honored on account 
of the reverence paid to his order. For the unworthy would 
flee the dangers of such a burden of guilt if they would care- 
fully consider the meaning of the truth, namely, ' Whoso shall 
cause one of these little ones who believe on me to stum- 
ble, it is profitable for him that a great millstone should be 
hung about his neck, and he should be sunk in the depth of 
the sea,' Matt. 18 : 6. By * a great millstone ' is meant the 
treadmill and sorrow of the secular life; and by the 'depth 
of the sea' is meant utmost damnation. He, therefore, who, 
led along by the appearance of sanctity, destroys others 
either by word or example, would truly be far better off if 
his worldly acts under an external cloak bound such an one 
to death, rather than that the ministries of his sacred office 
performed in guilt should show to others that he was change- 
able, because, doubtless, if he was the only one to fall, a 
more tolerable pain of hell would torment him." 

That Holy Pope knew the conditions and dangers inci- 
dent to a prelate's life and especially incident to the position 
of the Roman pontiff, inasmuch as his sin of commission and 
omission would be a scandal to the wnole Christian people. 
For it is said goodness in a pope is like salt for all, and 
badness in him inures to the damnation of persons without 
number, Dist. 40, Si Papa [Friedberg, 1 : 146]. If, therefore, 



THE CHURCH WITHOUT POPE 149 

the pope and the cardinals by pompous equipages, resplen- 
dence of dress, exquisite and wonderful furnishings, by ex- 
cessive anxiety to heap up benefices or money, and by the 
manifest ambition for honor in greater measure than secu- 
lar laymen — if they offend those who believe in Christ — how 
is it that they always and necessarily continue to be essen- 
tial " for the government of the universal church as manifest 
and true successors in the office of Peter and Christ's other 
apostles"? Never was the office of the apostles other than 
one of following Christ in good living and in teaching the 
church, baptizing men, healing the sick, casting out devils, 
offering up the sacrifice of Christ's body and everywhere ex- 
ercising the power connected with their office for the per- 
fecting of the church. If, therefore, the pope and his cardi- 
nals exercise that office, then the pope holds the office of 
Peter. But, if he with the cardinals falls away from it, who 
doubts that he falls away from the true vicariate of Christ 
and his apostles? 

By the same method of proof the sixth point is set forth 
which is: " there are not to be found or given [by God] on 
earth other such successors than the pope, the present head, 
and the college of cardinals, the present body of the Roman 
church." On this point I note in the first place that Christ 
is a most sufficient head as he proved during three hundred 
years or more, when his church prospered and his law was 
most efficient for the closing of ecclesiastical cases, the end 
for which God gave his law. For Christ and his law did 
not fail for the governing of the church, seeing devoted priests 
ministered this law unto the people, who followed the judg- 
ment of holy doctors, which judgment they issued by the in- 
dwelling of the Holy Spirit as is clear from the cases of St. 
Augustine, St. Jerome, St. Gregory and St. Ambrose, who 
were given after the apostles' death to the church to teach 
her. Hence, it is not to be doubted that St. Augustine was 
more profitable to the church than many popes, and in mat- 



ISO THE CHURCH 

ters of doctrine much more profitable than all the cardinals, 
from the first cardinals down to those now in office. For, in 
the government of the church, he knew the Scriptures of 
Christ better than they and also defined the nature of the 
catholic faith better by clearing the church of heretical errors 
and correcting them. Why, therefore, were those four doc- 
tors not true vicars of the apostles and their manifest suc- 
cessors, nay, even more true and reliable, so far as the people 
go, than any modern pope with his cardinals who shine be- 
fore the people neither by virtue of a holy life nor by doc- 
trine? Therefore, do I boldly assert that, if in any point 
these four doctors agree, the pope and his cardinals may 
not lawfully declare the opposite as the faith of the people. 
And the same is true of other saints, such as John Chrysos- 
tom, John of Damascus and Dionysius the Areopagite, who, 
taught by the Holy Spirit, illuminated the church of Christ 
by their knowledge and piety. 

Against this point it is argued chiefly in this way: God is 
omnipotent, therefore, God may give other true successors of 
the apostles than are the pope and the cardinals. Therefore, 
other true successors of the apostles can be found or given 
who are not the pope or the cardinals. Hence that [sixth] 
point is false and the first consequence is proved. For, if 
God is not able to give other true successors, than are the 
pope and the cardinals, it follows that the power of Caesar, 
a man and not God, in setting up the pope and cardinals 
limited God's power, a thing which is false. Hence the con- 
sequence is proven, for Constantine, the Caesar, three hun- 
dred years after Christ, instituted the pope; because the 
Roman pontiff was an associate of other pontiffs until the 
donation of Caesar by whose authority the pope began to 
rule as head. Hence the Decretum, DisL 96 : 14 [Friedberg, 
1 : 342 sq.] 9 l which out of reverence we cannot deny, thus 

1 Huss's text gives the citation wrongly as Dist. 98. Huss quotes a small 
part of the spurious decretal of Pope Gelasius. The preceding decretal con- 



THE CHURCH WITHOUT POPE 151 

speaks: "The emperor Constantine on the fourth day after 
his baptism conferred on the pontiff the grant — privilegium 
— of the Roman church that the pontiffs might have head- 
ship in all the earth, as judges over the king." In this grant, 
this among other things is read: "We have bestowed upon 
him power and ability and imperial honor, seeing that he is 
thus to hold the government over the four sees, Alexandria, 
Antioch, Jerusalem and Constantinople, and is the highest 
ruler over all priests in the whole world," etc. See how the 
institution and pre-eminence of the pope emanated from 
Caesar's power, which, however, cannot limit God's power. 
For this reason later pontiffs, fearing that they might lose 
their pre-eminence, sought confirmation from other Caesars, 
as the Decretum, DisL 63 [Friedberg, 1 : 244], says: "I, Lewis, 
Roman emperor, Augustus, do decree and bestow by this our 
act of confirmation upon thee, blessed Peter, prince of the 
apostles, and through thee upon thy vicar, Lord Pascal, su- 
preme pontiff, and upon thy successors forever, even as by our 
[your] predecessors ye have up to this time held in our [your] 
power and gift alone and controlled the Roman state." 1 

But there need be no anxiety over this grant of words 
when Caesar says: "I, Lewis, concede unto thee, blessed 
Peter." Never did Peter, who at that time was already in 
possession of the kingdom of heaven, stand in need of civil 
possession over Rome, and never was Lewis greater than 
Peter and more truly in possession than Peter. Would that 
Peter, if it had been God's will, had said: I do not accept 

tains the express assertion of Constantine's donation: "The emperor Constan- 
tine bestowed upon the apostolic see the crown and all royal authority in the 
city of Rome and in Italy and in the regions of the West." 

1 Huss's text departs from the original substituting noslris for vestris, and 
nostra for vestra, the original reading, "even as by your predecessors ye have 
held in your own power and gift and disposed of the city of Rome with its 
duchy and all the suburban regions and towns, its hilly territory, and its sea- 
coast line and harbors and all cities, strongholds, walled towns and villas in the 
regions of Tuscany," etc. This pact between Lewis and Pascal, 817-824, is 
first found in Anselm of Lucca, d. 1073, and is deemed altogether spurious or at 
least largely interpolated. 



152 THE CHURCH 

thy grant because, when I was Roman bishop, I had already 
forsaken all and did not crave from Nero dominion over Rome; 
nor do I stand in need of it. And I see that it greatly hurts 
my descendants, for it hinders them in the preaching of the 
Gospel and in salutary prayer and in the performance of God's 
counsels and commandments and makes many of them proud 
and arrogant. Since, therefore, the good — optimus — God is 
able to take away the grant — privilegiutn — made by those em- 
perors and to bring His church back to a state where pontiffs 
are on a parity, even as it was before the donation — it follows, 
that God is able to give to His church other true successors 
than the pope and the cardinals that they may minister even 
as did the holy apostles. 

But against this the objection is brought: "The pope 
has this very appointment from the Lord," as the Decreium 
states, DisL 22 [Friedberg, 1 : 73], where Pope Anacletus 
says: "The holy Roman church obtained the primacy not 
from the apostles but from the Lord himself." From this 
it follows, that the pope was not appointed to his high office 
by the emperor or man but immediately by God. And this 
is clear [22] 2, 3 from the submission rendered by kings and 
also from the testimony of doctors where they treat of the 
pope's authority. 

As for the first statement, it is to be laid down that that 
pope, Anacletus, understood by the holy Roman church not 
the basilica of stone or wood, but St. Peter and St. Paul, 
and the other saints who dwelt in that place. For this rea- 
son, in this same decretal, he says, that Peter and Paul were 
associates in the city of Rome, wherefore it is said figura- 
tively that he obtained the primacy. 

In regard to the second statement it is to be laid down that 
he is speaking about the primacy over men from God's stand- 
point, by virtue of the primacy of virtues and in view of the 
edification of the church and not about a primacy of tem- 
poral riches or human glory — a primacy which the apostles 



THE CHURCH WITHOUT POPE 153 

of Christ spurned. It is thus clear how weak the argumen- 
tation is: namely, the Roman church obtained the primacy 
not from the apostles, but from the Lord himself. For this 
reason every Roman pontiff ought to have pre-eminence in 
the matter of mundane glory and have secular rule, when, 
in fact, it ought rather to follow from the Decretum that 
the Roman pontiff is charged with serving the people not 
by ruling for his own ends, or suspending the people, but 
by praying efficiently for the people, as according to the 
Decretum [Friedberg, 1 : 74] Paul did, Romans 1:8. He 
says: "A prayer may be poured out for all to the Lord of 
all the saints, and in these words Paul, most blessed, prom- 
ised the Romans over his own signature, 'God is my wit- 
ness whom I serve in my spirit, in the Gospel of his Son, how 
unceasingly I make mention of you always in my prayers.'" 
From this decretal it is seen that Pope Anacletus did not 
intend to affirm that he himself was to have civil rule over 
all others or hold a primacy of government over all other 
persons of the church militant. Because, in thus seeking 
his own glory he would show most clearly the mark of anti- 
christ. John 5 : 41 sqq. Yea, even Boniface VIII, in his 
bull Unam sanctam, did not dare expressly to affirm this, for 
then he alone would have borne witness that he was the 
most holy man and, in this case, the faithful as well as un- 
believers might appositely object against him: "Thou bear- 
est witness of thyself; thy witness is not true" [John 5 : 31]. 
Therefore, the Roman pontiffs have become involved in 
this difficulty by reason of the dotation and exaltation de- 
rived from Caesar, because, when the emperor asks them, 
whether, in the matter of government, they excel all mortals 
living, in power, primacy and dignity, they have to admit 
it to be so, for otherwise, as they say, no one is under obli- 
gation to believe that they are popes. But Peter and Paul 
did not make any such statement about themselves, for they 
did not have any power given them by Caesar. For this 



154 THE CHURCH 

reason, Paul truly and humbly made this confession con- 
cerning himself: "I am least of all the apostles, who am not 
worthy to be called an apostle," I Cor. 15 : 9. On this ac- 
count, therefore, the Roman pontiff would not make such a 
profession if the imperial dignity were not in the way. Where- 
fore, the conclusion holds that from God direct and not from 
a man — who is not God — or from a mere man, does the 
pope hold the excellency of his rank. But he should make 
himself deserving of that rank by an humble demeanor and 
without pomp. And if Caesar's dignity exalts the pope in 
the eyes of the world when he is without humility and a 
holy life, how can this exaltation fit in with the life and glory 
of Christ, when antichrist is exalted in the same worldly 
way? 

As for the second point — the subjection of the kingdoms — 
it is said that at first it was rendered without the pope's 
seeking, but arose out of fear of the emperor's command, 
according to which all peoples did not owe subjection to him, 
that he should have secular rule over them, and therefore 
that subjection does not argue for the necessity that a Roman 
pontiff and his cardinals govern until the end of time. 

Thirdly, concerning the testimony of the doctors who 
treat of the pope's power, it is alleged, that all who thus 
magnify the pope's power and say that he can do without 
guilt whatsoever he wills and that nobody has the right to 
ask why he does this or that — all these are mendacious rhet- 
oricians, leading the people of our Lord Jesus Christ astray. 
Nor ought such to be believed except as their words are 
founded in Scripture. For thus the great doctor, Augustine, 
often asserted of himself that he ought to be believed only so 
far as he had grounded himself in Scripture. It is evident, 
that God may give other successors of the apostles than the 
pope and the cardinals, just as he was able to give others in 
the place of the pontiffs of the old law, the scribes and the 
Pharisees with their traditions. And to these, who did not 



THE CHURCH WITHOUT POPE 155 

keep God's law, the Lord said: "I say unto you, the king- 
dom of heaven shall be taken away from you and shall be 
given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof/' Matt. 
21 : 43. These words the Saviour spoke to the priests when 
they alone bore sentence against themselves in that they said: 
"He will miserably destroy those wicked men and will let out 
the vineyard to other husbandmen who shall render him the 
fruits in their seasons." How, therefore, is the hand of the 
Lord shortened that He is not able to cast out the pope and 
the cardinals and appoint others in their places who, though 
they have no titles, will build up the church as the Lord did 
with the apostles? 

Likewise all bishops of Christ's church, who follow Christ 
in their lives, they are true vicars of the apostles and they 
are not pope or cardinals. Therefore, other true successors 
of the apostles can be found and given besides the pope and 
the cardinals. The consequence is given with the minor 
premise, and the first part of it is clear from Decretum, 21, 
in novo [Friedberg, 1 : 69, 70], where Pope Anacletus says 
that "the rest of the apostles, by reason of an equal fellow- 
ship [with Christ], received with Peter honor and authority." 
And later on he says: "When they were deceased, bishops 
arose in their places." And here the Gloss says, Argumentum, 
that "every bishop is equal in apostolic power by virtue of 
his ordination and the ground of his consecration." The same 
is clear from Decretum, 24 : 1, Loquitur ad Petrum [Fried- 
berg, 1 : 971], where Cyprian, the bishop and martyr, says 
that "after his resurrection Christ conferred on all the apos- 
tles equal power." This also appears from what Jerome 
says, DisL 95, Olim [Friedberg, 1 : 332]: "The same person 
formerly was both presbyter and bishop, before rivalries had 
been started by the insinuation of the devil, and before it 
was said amongst the people, ' I am of Paul and I of Apollos.' " 

Likewise, all archbishops, patriarchs and bishops, at the 
council of Pisa who recognized, determined and condemned 



156 THE CHURCH 

Pope Gregory XH, as a heretic, 1 these were and now are 
true successors of the apostles, and these are other persons 
than the pope and cardinals. Hence the sixth point is false. 
The consequence follows together with the part spoken of 
above. And the doctors did not dare to deny the first part. 

Likewise, it should be evangelical wisdom that all priests 
are consecrated and guided directly by the one and only 
pontiff, our Lord Jesus Christ. For this was so at the time 
of the apostles, when the church grew, and this statement 
accords with Scripture. Therefore, God is able to bring his 
church back to its pristine state by taking away the govern- 
ment from the pope and cardinals. And so it stands that 
others besides these may be vicars of the apostles. 

Likewise the designation of the power and the office, 
"minister of the church," is indicated lest he wander away, 
into forbidden ground, but no other one is indicated save 
the one whom Christ appointed. For, since Christ is al- 
mighty, omniscient, and all-merciful, it is clear that reason 
requires that he ordain finally and unchangeably, and more 
especially in view of the fact that in the primitive church 
the harvest was larger, and God ordained more copiously dif- 
ferent kinds of ministers as laborers in the harvest. But 
then he only ordained deacons and presbyters and the pres- 
byter and the bishop was the same person, as says Jerome 
and as appears from Paul's epistles to Timothy and Titus. 
From these Jerome draws the conclusion in his letter to the 

1 Gregory XII, Angelo Correr, fourth and last pope of the Roman line, 
1406-1415, and contemporary with Benedict XIII, of the Avignon line, was 
together with Benedict deposed as a schismatic and heretic by the council 
of Pisa, June, 1409. He still claimed to be pope till 1415, when he resigned 
his office to the council of Constance. He died 141 7. Bohemia was true to 
the Roman obedience till King Wenzel acknowledged the council of Pisa and 
the pope it elected, Alexander V. Gregory and his two predecessors had seemed 
to favor WenzeFs rival for the imperial crown — Ruprecht. The archbishop 
of Prague, Zbynek, continued to acknowledge Gregory until the fall of 1409, 
and Huss's alleged indorsement of WenzeFs action and acknowledgment of 
Alexander was one of the immediate causes of the archbishop's strained rela- 
tions with Huss. 



THE CHURCH WITHOUT POPE 157 

presbyter Evagrius, Dist. 93, Legimus [Friedberg, 1 : 328], when 
he says: "What does the bishop do, except ordain, that the 
presbyter does not do ? Nor is the church of the city of Rome 
one thing, and the church of the whole world another. And 
the church of Gaul and of Britain and Africa and Persia and 
the Orient and India and all the barbarous nations adore 
one Christ and observe one rule of truth. If authority is 
sought, the world is greater than the city. Wherever there 
may be a bishop, either at Rome, Constantinople or Alex- 
andria, the bishop is of the same merit and of the same priest- 
hood. The power of riches and the lowliness of poverty make 1 
the bishop either higher or lower. Besides," he says, " all are 
successors of the apostles." So we see that the pope and his 
cardinals are not the only successors of Christ. 

The same is made to appear by Bede who, commenting 
on Luke 10 : 1 [Com. on Luke, Migne's ed., 92 : 461], "The 
Lord hath appointed seventy-two others," says: "There is 
no one who doubts that just as the twelve apostles prefig- 
ured the class of bishops, so these seventy-two the class of 
presbyters and bore the mark of the second order of the 
priesthood." 3 From the things already said it is shown 
that others than the pope and cardinals may be given and 
found as true successors of the apostles. Inasmuch, there- 
fore, as by Christ's appointment in the days of the apostles, 
two orders of the clergy sufficed for his church, that is, the 
deacon and the priest, as the saints say, and also the De- 
er etum, 93, Dotninus Nosier [Friedberg, 1 : 329], where it runs: 
"The Lord chose apostles, disciples, bishops and presbyters, 

1 Huss's text omits non and also Rhegium and other cities of whose bishops 
Jerome makes mention. 

'The number, seventy-two, is given by some MSS. and in the Vulgate. 
Bede goes on to say that in the first period of the church, as the Scriptures 
bear witness, the terms bishop and presbyter were used interchangeably. The 
Venerable Bede, d. 735, the first English scholar, wrote commentaries, and on 
many subjects, but is more particularly known by his Eccles. History, a history 
of England from the time of Caesar to 731. Huss as well as Wyclif quote 
Bede frequently. 



158 THE CHURCH 

and the apostles appointed for themselves after the Lord's 
ascension deacons to be ministers of their episcopate and 
of the church," 1 — why should it be wondered at if God al- 
mighty, putting the pope and his cardinals to death and 
giving them also eternal life — in case they merit it — should 
allow His church throughout the whole world to wage war 
with these same orders now as originally, namely, without 
the cardinals, and should ordain that the church should be 
ruled again as she was ruled by His own indestructible law, 
by giving bishops and priests who, by evangelizing and prayer 
and the exemplification of good lives, would diligently feed 
Christ's sheep. For this office alone was given to Peter by 
Christ, as appears in John 21. 

Hence Augustine notes, Ep. 141, ad Paulinum [Migne's 
ed., xxxiii : 635], how in the apostolic passage, Eph. 4 : 11, 
the office of pastor and the office of teacher are joined. 
"Pastors," he says, " and teachers whom thou hast appointed 
to discern above all the truth, are, I think, the same, and 
not the pastors one and the teachers another. And so, as 
he had spoken previously of pastors, he added teachers that 
pastors might understand that teaching — doctrina — belonged 
to their office. And, therefore, he did not say, 'some pas- 
tors and some teachers' — the form of speech used in the 
former part of the preceding verse — but 'some pastors and 
teachers,' as if one office were embraced under the two words: 
'some,' he said, 'pastors and teachers.'" 

Hence, if that which is superfluous be taken away, it 
would appear what pope, cardinal or bishop would remain 
a true shepherd out of the treasury of the Lord, and per- 
haps more would be found useless thieves and robbers rather 
than true vicars of the Lord Jesus Christ. 

But against what has been said the objection is brought, 

1 Cyprian's text, which Huss is quoting, runs thus: "The deacons should 
remember how the Lord chose the apostles, that is, the bishops and presbyters, 
but after the Lord's ascension, the apostles appointed them as ministers of their 
episcopate and the church." 



THE CHURCH WITHOUT POPE 159 

that, if the pope and cardinals are not the true and manifest 
successors of the apostles, then for the same reason others 
are not, inasmuch as the power of discrimination cannot be 
based upon the fact that they may be clad in sheep's clothing, 
and yet may be inwardly ravening wolves, as stated, Matt. 
7 : 15. Here it becomes us to consider the two sects of the 
clergy, namely, the clergy of Christ and the clergy of anti- 
christ. Christ's clergy rests in its head, Christ, and in his 
laws; but antichrist's clergy leans wholly or chiefly on human 
laws and the laws of antichrist, and yet it is clothed upon 
like the clergy of Christ and the church with the design that 
the people may be led astray by its simulation. And so it 
is fitting that these two things which are so contrary to each 
other obey two contrary heads with their laws. The out- 
ward evidence teaches the class to which the members belong. 
Indeed, it is established that the clergy of the church falls 
away 1 into two parts and for this reason laymen cannot help 
but waver who are borne along by those who are so different 
from Christ in opinion and in life. 

But these parts may be commonly best discerned from 
the fact that the clergy of antichrist is zealously intent upon 
human traditions and rights which savor of pride and the 
greed of this world, and that it wishes to live ostentatiously 
and in pleasure and in a way contrary to Christ, wholly neg- 
lecting the imitation of the Lord Jesus Christ in its living. 
But Christ's clergy labors diligently for Christ's laws and his 
rights, whereby spiritual good is acquired that it may be 
shown, and it flees pride and the pleasure of this world, and 
seeks to live in conformity with Christ, giving itself up most 
zealously, following the Lord Jesus Christ. Nor is it right 
for the faithful to doubt that this part is the true clergy, 
and the other part is the false. And although in the absence 
of revelation, the pilgrim is not able clearly and with cer- 

1 Claudicat, literally limps or falters; DuCange derives it from daudeo and 
claudo. 



160 THE CHURCH 

tainty to determine who the holy pastor really is, neverthe- 
less we ought to decide by his works, which are conformed to 
Christ's law, that he is such a pastor. 

If, however, the pilgrim sees him living at variance with 
Christ, to what other judgment can he come than that he 
is antichrist's vicar, for Christ says: "Ye shall know them 
by their fruits," Matt. 7 : 16, and "He that is not with me 
is against me," Matt. 12 : 30. Here the Glossa ordinaria 
says: "He that is not with me" — that is, does works dis- 
similar to mine — "he is against me." If, therefore, a prel- 
ate is proud, lives in luxury, follows after greed, is impa- 
tient, does not feed the sheep, but oppresses and scatters 
them, is he not antichrist? Hence men may easily recog- 
nize the wicked by their outward works which are contrary 
to Christ; but the good cannot be so known because hypocrisy 
may lurk in them. 



CHAPTER XVI 

THE LAW OF GOD THE STANDARD OF ECCLESIASTICAL 

JUDGMENTS 

Further, the aforementioned doctors lay down that " cer- 
tain of the Bohemian clergy, leaning too little on the pope 
and the college of cardinals, do not want to agree to this, 
wishing to have holy Scripture for the only judge in such 
matters, which Scripture they interpret and wish to have in- 
terpreted according to their own heads, not caring for the 
interpretation accepted by the community of wise men in 
the church nor heeding the holy Scripture recorded in Deut. 
17 : 8-12: 'If thou seest that there is a matter in judg- 
ment too uncertain and hard for thee, between blood and 
blood, between plea and plea, between leprous and non- 
leprous, and perceivest that the words of the judges do not 
agree within thy gates; then arise and get thee up unto the 
place which the Lord thy God shall choose and thou shalt 
come unto the priests, the Levites, and unto the judge which 
shall be in those days, and thou shalt inquire from them and 
they shall pronounce for thee a sentence of truth. And thou 
shalt do according to whatever they may say who preside 
in that place which Jehovah hath chosen; and they shall 
teach thee according to his law and thou shalt observe their 
sentence, nor shalt thou turn aside from the sentence to 
the right hand or to the left. And the man that doth pre- 
sumptuously, not willing to obey the priest's jurisdiction 
who at that time standeth to minister before thy God, and 
to obey the sentence of the judge, even that man shall die: 
and thou shalt put away the evil from Israel. And all the 

z6z 



162 THE CHURCH 

people shall hear and fear and do no more presumptuously. 9 l 
It is certain that for all the faithful the Roman church is 
the place which the Lord has chosen, the place where the 
Lord has placed the primacy of the whole church, and the 
high priest who occupies the primacy, and is set over that 
place, is the pope, the true and manifest successor of Peter. 
And the cardinals are the priests of the tribe of Levi who 
are joined with the lord pope in the administration of the 
priestly office, to whom in cases of doubt and difficulty re- 
course must be had in matters, catholic and ecclesiastical, the 
judgment of God being followed. 

"Hence Jerome, Ep. ad papam [Letter to Damasus, Fried- 
berg, i : 970], speaking of the same thing, says: 'This is 
the faith, most blessed pope, 7 which we have learned in the 
catholic church and which we have always held, and, if any- 
thing less proper or anything indiscreet has been placed in 
her, we desire that it be corrected by thee, who holdest Peter's 
seat and faith. And if this, our confession, approves itself 
to the judgment of thy apostleship — whosoever may wish to 
charge me with guilt — he will prove himself to be inexperienced 
or malevolent, or perchance not a catholic but a heretic.' " 

This exposition, so far as the principles go, I think flowed 
chiefly from the head of Stephen Palecz, for by it he attempts 
first to arouse the pope and the cardinals against the party 
opposed to him, when he says: "Certain of the clergy of 
Bohemia, leaning too little on the pope and the cardinals, do 
not wish to agree to this " : namely, that the pope is the head 
of the Roman church and the cardinals its body, the true 
and manifest vicars of Christ. However, in regard to this 
too little dependence, I say that, so far as their vanity, greed 
and illegal commands go, the pope with the cardinals ought 
to be depended upon little. For so the Saviour put little 
dependence upon the savorless salt, which was good for noth- 

1 The translation follows the Vulgate which Huss gives exactly. 
5 Beaiissime papa. Huss has beatissitni papa. Damasus, pope 366-384, 
is said to have called upon Jerome to make his Vulgate translation. 



THE LAW OF GOD 163 

ing except to be trodden under foot of man/ Matt. 5 : 13, 1 
and he added: "Nor is it fit for the dunghill," Luke 14 : 35. 
And Judas Iscariot he depended upon little, for he called 
him a devil and the son of perdition, John 6 : 71; 17 : 12. 
Peter he also called Satan, when Peter opposed him, Matt. 
16 : 22. 

Later on that doctor heaps together many lies against 
us. The first lie is that we wish to have the holy Scrip- 
tures alone for our judge in such matters. And in this state- 
ment he affirms that we would not wish to have for our judge 
God, the apostles, the holy doctors, or the universal church. 
But he draws this lie from a certain disputation in which we 
were engaged, when it was said that he would offer Scrip- 
ture for his statements and for the reason that we would 
not agree to the positions of our opponents. The doctor, 
however, ought to know that neither with him nor with any 
of his adherents do we agree in matters of faith unless they 
ground themselves in Scripture or reason. But revelation I 
do not expect from them, and if it did perchance come to 
them, we would feel that it taught otherwise than the Scrip- 
ture teaches. 

The second lie that he ascribes to us is that we interpret 
holy Scripture according to our heads, that is — as he him- 
self and the other doctors allege — that we expound holy 
Scripture according to our erroneous understanding or ac- 
cording to our pleasure, and in this he charges upon us the 
arrogance of wisdom and also heresy, but mendaciously, be- 
cause, with God's help, we do not intend to explain Scripture 
otherwise than the Holy Spirit requires and than it is ex- 
plained by the holy doctors to whom the Holy Spirit gave 
understanding. And I could wish that that doctor and all 
his colleagues might show which Scripture it is which we 
expound ill. Hence, he is the more to be suspected of lying 

1 In his Reply to Palecz, Mon., i : 352, Huss says Christians must judge 
by the effects or fruits whether the pope and cardinals are the salt of the earth 
and the light of the world. 



i6 4 THE CHURCH 

when he adds, "And they wish to interpret," because if he 
is not a knower of hearts how does he dare to say that we 
wish to expound Scripture otherwise than we ought? But 
this statement is vented forth because we do not follow his 
pleasure and the pleasure of his colleague Stanislaus, and 
stand with them who deem themselves, with the doctors 
agreeing with them, the wise in the church. And even much 
more are they to be suspected of lying for they have not 
dared to charge us with not giving heed to the interpreta- 
tion of the holy doctors. 

But they add the biggest lie of all when they speak with- 
out applying the holy Scripture as written in Deut. 17 : 8-12. 
For this these doctors ought to know that we turn to sacred 
Scripture and affirm that it is the true Word of God, which 
also confirms our judgment. For that diligent expounder of 
Scripture, Nicholas of Lyra, on Deut. 17, says: "The opin- 
ion of no man, whatever his authority may be, is to be held 
if it plainly contains falsehood or error, and this appears by 
the promise made in the text, 'They shall pronounce for thee 
a sentence of truth/ and * they shall teach thee according to 
His law.' From this it appears that, if they said what was 
false or plainly fell away from God's law they were not to 
be heard. " Thus much Lyra. And what has been said is 
confirmed by that word of the Lord: "Thou shalt not fol- 
low the multitude to do evil; neither shalt thou acquiesce in 
the judgment of the many to depart from the truth," Ex. 
23 : 2. On this Lyra says that in the Hebrew it runs: " Thou 
shalt not fall away after the rabbins — that is, teachers or the 
great men — to commit sin." And further on, he says: "As 
you are not to fall away from the truth on account of the 
larger number who sit in judgment, and fall away from the 
truth, so you are not to fall away on account of those who 
have greater authority in giving judgment." Thus much Lyra. 1 

1 Nicholas of Lyra, born in France, d. Paris, 1340, member of the Franciscan 
order, a notable exegete, who knew Hebrew and in his Postilla gave a running 



THE LAW OF GOD 165 

Certainly I confide in this expounder, so far as this opin- 
ion goes, more than in all the aforesaid doctors. For Lyra 
aptly draws from Scripture (1) that the opinion of no man, 
whatever his authority may be — and consequently the opinion 
of no pope — is to be held if it plainly contains falsehood or 
error. It seems to me to be certain that Palecz and Stanis- 
laus are so afraid of the pope and the cardinals that they 
would not dare publicly to avow this holy saying. (2) Lyra 
declares that God's law is the standard according to which 
individual judges and especially ecclesiastical judges ought 
to pronounce sentence and not otherwise. For this law shows 
what ought to be accepted as true. Hence he says that this 
appears from the words: "They shall pronounce for thee a 
sentence of truth." And the words follow: "They shall 
teach thee according to His law." O doctors, why do you 
not hold to this Scripture? You were asked and for God's 
sake publicly besought in the convocation of the university to 
pronounce a sentence of truth according to God's law, whether 
the bulls for the raising of the cross obligated the scholars 
of the university to give of the goods collected by God sub- 
sidies to the pope against Ladislaus and against his allies at 
the pope's command. 1 And you responded that you did not 

comment on all the books of the Bible. He was much used by the Reformers, 
especially Luther, so that it was said: "If Lyra had not harped, Luther would 
not have danced." Lyra quotes Raschi at length on the O. T. 

1 Ladislaus, king of Naples, by occupying the city of Rome, called forth 
against himself the severest papal censures from John XXIII. John's two bulls 
calling for a crusade against the refractory prince promised full forgiveness 
from "guilt and punishment" to all who went to the holy war or helped others 
to go. Three places were set up in Prague where the pardons were sold. Huss 
lifted his voice and used his pen against the crusade as Wyclif had done against 
the crusade preached by Henry de Spenser. Palecz and seven other members 
of the theological faculty of the university, that is, the Eight Doctors, took 
sides against Huss and defended John's bulls. Huss took the ground that 
the pope has no right to forgive sins unless he surely knows that God in these 
cases has forgiven, that the pope does no more than announce God's decisions, 
and that, instead of calling upon Christians to make war against Christians, 
he ought to imitate Christ, who did not call down fire upon his enemies, 
and with tears and prayers seek to overcome opposition to the church. Huss, 
in his Reply to Palecz, Man., i : 330, says that Palecz was at first opposed to 



166 THE CHURCH 

wish to instruct them [the convocation] nor pronounce judg- 
ment upon the pope's bulls, and interpret them. But in 
corners you have written differently, and especially have I 
heard Palecz say about the articles which were handed to 
him by the pope's legates that they contained plain errors 
evident to the eye, which articles, nevertheless, were taken 
from the bull and were handed out to the preachers by these 
legates as the first deputies under the authority of the pope 
to be promulgated. Hence, as I have heard, the preacher, 
Master Bricdus, in their lecture-room said to those masters 
that he would rather die than announce those articles. But 
when Palecz receded and was followed by others, Briccius 
also receded, for letters from the lord king frightened them, 
which letters the legates used for their financial support — 
subsidium. 

(3) Lyra deduces from the aforesaid Scripture of the 
Lord that if judges say what is false or plainly fall away 
from God's law they are not to be heard, because God said, 
as I have quoted: "Thou shalt not follow the multitude to 
do evil; neither shalt thou acquiesce in the judgment of the 
many to depart from the truth" [Ex. 23 : 2]. How, there- 
fore, can we be bound contrary to that most holy mandate 
of God to follow the multitude which the doctors gathered 
together and led to the city hall that they might overcome 
by fright those whom they were not able to overcome by 
Scripture or reason? The priests, scribes and Pharisees did 
not dare to go into the praetorium and accuse Jesus for fear 
of being polluted. But these, when the scribes and Phar- 
isees and elders of the people were assembled, gladly went 
in and one of them, named Palecz, read, while all listened, 
the words of Deut. 17 : 8-12: "But that man that doeth 
presumptuously, not willing to obey the judge's decree, even 

the sale of the indulgences and declared the pope's bull to his legates was full 
of evident errors. For the bulls and Huss's treatise, Mon., 1 : 212-235, see 
Schaff: John Huss, p. in sq., 11 6-1 22. 



THE LAW OF GOD 167 

that man shall die." He did not fear to incur irregularity, 
and if perchance he had been with the Jews in accusing 
Christ, perhaps he would have said: "His blood be upon 
us and upon our children; for we have a law and by that 
law he ought to die." Pilate was not, therefore, excused be- 
cause he heard the high priests and the magistrates, scribes 
and elders of the people, for God said: "Thou shalt not fol- 
low the multitude to do evil," etc. Here Lyra says the 
Hebrew is, "Thou shalt not fall away after the rabbins," 
that is, the teachers or great men, "to commit sin" — who- 
ever the great men and teachers in the city hall were who 
condemned and decreed many things which down to this 
day they have not shown should be condemned at their 
pleasure. 

And according to the purpose of the doctors, in the Scrip- 
ture quoted, some might Judaize and say that under the 
rule of Caiaphas, the high priest, or Annas, who then pre- 
sided in the holy place which the Lord had chosen, and 
by Pilate's decree the judge, Jesus Christ, was justly con- 
demned, a thing which is against what Paul says: "They 
that dwell in Jerusalem and their rulers, because they knew 
not him or the voices of the prophets which are read every 
Sabbath, fulfilled them by condemning him. And though 
they found no cause of death in him, yet asked they of Pi- 
late that they might slay him," Acts 13 : 27, 28. And it is 
clear that, in condemning Christ, the high priest was pres- 
ent, the priests of the house of Levi were present, and Pilate, 
the judge, was present in the place which the Lord had chosen; 
and these persons Christ Jesus did not wish to obey in the 
evil they were doing, although he obeyed God, his Father, and 
Pilate, submitting to death meekly. Did, therefore, the high 
priest, followed by the priests, the Levites, the magistrates 
and elders of the people, Pilate and the soldiers, yea, and 
by the crowd shouting, "Crucify Him, crucify Him!" did 
they justly condemn Christ the Lord? Yea, truly, because 



168 THE CHURCH 

not love but hate, not truth but lying, urged them on and 
ignorance of God's law led them astray, did they err gravely. 
Equally, there may be a leading astray in the case of the 
pope and cardinals, our doctors themselves being included, 
that they should condemn some truth or other. For if the 
apostles, chosen by Christ, who received the Holy Spirit, 
fell into heresy, as St. Augustine and Bede affirm, how is 
it that the pope and cardinals have received greater gifts of 
the Spirit, making it impossible for them to stray off in the 
same degree or even in a larger degree ? And it is not a mat- 
ter of doubt that obedience should be rendered to pope and 
cardinals so long as they teach the truth according to God's 
law, as the authority says: "They shall pronounce for thee 
a sentence of truth, and thou shalt do whatsoever they say 
and whatsoever they teach thee according to His law." But 
if the rabbins, that is, the teachers or great men, as Lyra says, 
or popes or cardinals charge or admonish anything besides 
the truth, even though the whole Roman curia is on their 
side, the faithful is not to obey when he knows the truth, 
for God says: "Thou shalt not follow after the multitude 
to do evil." l Daniel, Nicodemus and the thief on the cross 
put this principle into practise, who would not fall in with 
the crowds in condemning the truth, as the Scripture states. 
For Daniel condemned as naught the sentence of the elders 
of the children of Israel by liberating Susanna and pronounc- 
ing against the senior elders from whom the iniquity started, 
Daniel 13.' Nicodemus in the council of the Pharisees and 

1 In his treatises against John XXIH's bulls, Mon., 215-235, Huss asserts 
the fallibility of popes and that they are not always to be obeyed. Popes 
do not know whether they themselves are among the predestinate, not to 
speak of others. Many popes who gave indulgences are lost. 

'The History of Susanna, Lange: Apocrypha, 45659. This apocryphal 
work gives the story of the attempt on the virtue of a beautiful married woman, 
Susanna, by two elders of Israel. Rejecting their proposal rather than incur 
God's condemnation, she was nevertheless accused by her would-be seducers 
and sentenced to death. Daniel then intervened, proved the charges false, 
and Susanna's accusers were put to death. 



THE LAW OF GOD 169 

priests, when they had sent the servants to bring Jesus, wish- 
ing to put him to death, and when they said to the servants, 
" Hath any of the rulers believed on him or of the Pharisees ? 
But this multitude that knoweth not the law are accursed " — 
then Nicodemus said to them : " Doth our law judge a man, 
except it first hear from himself and know what he doeth ? " 
John 7 : 47-51. O blessed Nicodemus, thou didst accord 
such force to God's law; thou didst bear witness to the law 
that it should be the judge of man. 

See, how inconvenient the statements of our doctors are 
when they pronounce the sentence that we wish to have the 
law as judge — a judge which judges most justly and does 
not judge otherwise than does God, the most just judge. 
Thou sayest, "Doth our law judge a man, except it first 
hear from him and know what he doeth?" as if he would 
say, No, because it judges justly. To that judge Christ re- 
ferred the priests, Pharisees, scribes and Jews, who accused 
him of sin because he kept not the Sabbath day, and called 
God his Father, saying: "Ye search the Scriptures. These 
are they which bear witness of me," John 5 : 39. Did not, 
therefore, Christ wish the Scriptures to judge the Jews which 
believed not on Christ? Certainly, he wished it. In pro- 
portion, therefore, as the doctors wish that the Scriptures 
be not the judge, in that proportion they wish themselves 
to be believed that whatever they condemn should be con- 
demned and that whatever they approve should be approved. 
For this they asked and begged in the city hall; for this they 
sought the signatures of the magisters who gainsaid their opin- 
ions. But the counsel of the Pharisees, scribes and priests 
has come to naught, because the faithful who gainsaid them 
were not willing to agree without hearing the proof from the 
law, which holds wrapped up in itself all truth that is to 
be believed. If the pontiffs, Pharisees, priests and elders 
of the people had known this law they would not have con- 
demned Christ — but they did condemn and blaspheme. More 




170 THE CHURCH 

learned than they was the thief, who, hanging on the cross, 
bare witness to Christ, saying: "This man hath done nothing 
amiss," Luke 23 : 41. 

And, so far as the chief purpose of the doctors goes, who 
intend that the pope ought to be the judge of all cases and 
that whoso does not obey him ought to die the death of the 
body, these doctors ought to be reverenced for their apish 
and cruel comparison [that is, to those who put Christ to 
death], especially as our Lord Jesus Christ, priest of both 
Testaments, neither wished to pronounce civil judgment nor 
to condemn the disobedient to bodily death. For, so far as 
the first goes, he said: "Man, who made me a judge or di- 
vider over you?" Luke 12 : 14. And so far as the second, 
he said to the woman taken in adultery, whom the Pharisees 
pronounced worthy of death according to the law: "Neither 
do I condemn thee; go thy way; from henceforth sin no 
more," John 8 : 11. 

But, perhaps it may be said by the doctors that this is 
not to the point, that the law says: "He who does presump- 
tuously, not willing to obey the rule of the priest. " See, I 
will give a case in form — for, Christ said: "If thy brother 
sin against thee, go show him his fault between thee and him 
alone: if he hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother, but if 
he hear thee not, take with thee one or two, that at the mouth 
of two witnesses or three every word may be established; 
and if he refuse to hear them, tell it to the church: and if 
he refuse to hear the church let him be unto thee as the 
gentile and the publican," Matt. 18 : 15-17. See, to whom 
the supreme lord of the law and the supreme pontiff speaks ? 
Certainly to Peter, the future Roman pontiff, next after 
himself, that he might kindly correct the erring and convince 
the disobedient person before witnesses, and if he remained 
hardened in disobedience he spoke to the church, that is, he 
announced to the multitude, not to put to death the per- 
verse and disobedient with corporal death, but to avoid him 



THE LAW OF GOD 171 

as a publican and gentile. What ground, therefore, is there 
for the argument from comparison [with those who put Christ 
to death]? Under the old law the disobedient person was 
to be put to death, therefore, also under the law of grace. 
Even Christ's disciples have been deceived by this argument 
from comparison, for after the manner of Elijah the prophet, 
they wanted the Samaritans who refused to receive Christ 
to be consumed by fire from heaven, saying: "Lord, wilt 
thou that we bid fire to come down from heaven and con- 
sume them?" That most good priest and best of masters 
reproved them, for the words follow that he, turning around, 
rebuked them, saying: "Ye know not what spirit ye are of, 
for the Son of Man came not to destroy souls but to save 
them, ,, Luke 9 : 54-56. 

This good Gospel the doctors did not turn to and so they 
have joined to their statements this sanguinary corollary — 
sanguinolentum corollarium 1 — and say: "If any of the clergy 
be found in Bohemia acting contrary to these premises or 
a single one of them, such an one is to be corrected by ecclesi- 
astical censure and, if he refuses to be corrected, he is to be 
turned over to the secular tribunal." For a certainty in this 

1 This is one of the rare protests before the Reformation against the bloody 
practice of putting heretics to death. In his Reply to Eight Doctors, Mm., 
1 : 38a sqq. t Huss takes up again at length the treatment of heresy. The 
definite position taken by the church was that they should be put out of the 
world. The laws of Frederick II ordered death by burning for all heretics 
and the church well knew that when it turned a heretic over to the civil power, 
though its sentence asked for mercy, the death penalty would follow. In 
fact, as Vacandard has shown, the ecclesiastical court sometimes actually pro- 
nounced the death penalty and carried it out, and popes and other eccle- 
siastics demanded on pain of excommunication the summary treatment by the 
civil authorities of persons condemned by the church. See Schaff: John Huss. 
It would have been well if Calvin and Beza had made the same distinction 
between the Old Testament and the New which Huss makes in the preceding 
paragraph. In this case, they would not have justified the execution of here- 
tics upon the basis of the examples given in the Old Testament. A strong 
passage in Huss's treatise against indulgences, Mon., i : 223, runs: "The 
Saviour taught Peter and in him his vicars and pontiffs in their necessities to 
flee to God in prayer and not to money or physical battle." For a more 
elaborate treatment of putting heretics to death, etc., see ad octo Doctor cs, 
Mon., 1 : 393 sqq. f 399 sqq. 



172 THE CHURCH 

they follow the pontiffs, scribes and Pharisees who, when 
Christ refused to obey them in all things, said : " It is not law- 
ful for us to put any man to death/' and then delivered him 
over to the secular tribunal. Are they not murderers ? Truly 
they are worse murderers than Pilate. The Saviour bore wit- 
ness and said to Pilate: "He who delivered me to thee hath 
the greater sin." These are they to whom Peter spoke when 
he said : " Ye denied the Holy and Righteous One and asked 
for a murderer to be granted unto you and killed the Prince 
of Life," Acts 3 : 14. 

Then the doctors add: "It is fixed for every one of the 
faithful that the Roman church is the place which the Lord 
hath chosen, where the Lord placed the headship of the 
whole church. And the high priest who presides there is the 
pope, the true and manifest successor of Peter, and the car- 
dinals are the priests of the tribe of Levi." In this state- 
ment, the doctors heap together many things that they do 
not prove. For when did they prove that it is fixed for every 
one of the faithful to accept that legal loaf of theirs ? — brodium 
— [see DuCange, Glossorium, vol. 1]. For many of their party 
are without doubt among the faithful and know nothing 
about Rome, the pope, and the cardinals, and especially 
whether the pope is the true successor of Peter, and the car- 
dinals the priests of the order of Levi. But these doctors 
call the church perhaps that place of which the Saviour 
prophesied when he said: "When ye see the abomination of 
desolation standing in the holy place (let him that heareth 
understand) " Matt. 24 : 15. Or the doctors call the Roman 
church a place, the basilica of St. Peter, or the apostolical 
dignity, for in these two senses "the place" in their state- 
ment may be understood, for there the Lord located the 
chief government — principatus — of the whole church because 
he wanted the apostles Peter and Paul to undergo their chief 
sufferings there, men who were appointed to be the spiritual 
rulers over the whole church and in whom, after Christ's 



THE LAW OF GOD 173 

death, the spiritual government of the church chiefly in- 
hered. And in this church not the pope but Christ is the 
chief ruler who presides over that place, that is, the basilica 
or apostolic dignity, and he rules the church which is his 
bride. But, if in the pope is discovered a life at variance 
with Christ, lived in pride, greed, restless impatience, ambi- 
tion, and in the flaunting of power and giving preponderance 
to his own law over the law of Christ — then is seen the abom- 
ination of the desolation of Christ's virtues standing in the 
holy place, where it ought not to stand, as Christ said, Mark 
13 : 14. Wherefore, if faithful souls should observe any- 
where the spiritual state of the church set up, where one head 
of a family 1 was accustomed to preside over his house, who 
graciously received all his servants whom he had invited, 
took care of them by warming them, and defended them 
by helping them, but if in that same house he should find 
that one presides over a condition altogether the opposite, 
it would not be wondered at if many were confounded, just 
as though a traveller wished to be entertained by a true 
head of a household, a man of large hospitality, goodness 
and good nature, and of an altogether virtuous life, and 
afterward should find a monstrous wild beast which was 
wont to tyrannize over the guests by giving them cold com- 
fort and by craft, cruelty and avarice and betrayal — the 
traveller, entering the house and seeing such an one sitting 
in the chair of the good head of the household, would won- 
der, be troubled and not a little confounded at his looks. 
So the abomination of desolation may be understood in ac- 
cord with Zech. 11 : 15: "Take unto thee yet again the in- 
struments of a foolish shepherd, for I will raise up a shep- 
herd in the land which will not visit those which are cut 
off, neither seek those which are scattered nor heal that 
which is broken nor feed that which is sound; but he will 
eat the flesh of the fat sheep and will tear their hoofs in 

1 This is taken from Gregory the Great, Migne, 76 : 1154. 



174 THE CHURCH 

pieces. Woe to the shepherd and idol 1 that leaveth the 
flock!" If, therefore, this description of "the idol" and this 
forsaking of the flock fit the pope, how could the saying of 
the doctors be true of any possible pope in the future, that 
he is the high priest, the true and manifest successor of Peter, 
presiding over the church which is the bride of Christ? For 
it does not follow, — he is the idol [worthless shepherd] who 
forsakes the flock; therefore, he is the high priest, the true 
and manifest successor of Peter. And it also does not follow, — 
he is the pseudo-Christ, therefore, he is the true and mani- 
fest Christ; for the true Christ said: "If any one shall say 
to you, Lo here is Christ or there ! believe it not, for there 
shall arise pseudo-Christs and pseudo-prophets." Let, there- 
fore, the faithful beware lest, moved by flattery, they call the 
pseudo-Christs most holy and the worthless shepherd high 
priest and true successor of St. Peter, the apostle. For, in 
so calling Agnes most holy father and high priest, presiding 
over the whole church — Agnes who gave birth to a child — 
they are deceived. 

Then, to turn to the saying of Jerome, " This is the faith, 
most blessed pope," Deer. 24 : 1 [Friedberg, 1 : 970], it is 
said that presumably he spoke of the apostolic works of Pope 
Damasus as he wrote to St. Augustine in letters addressing 
him "Augustine, our lord and most holy and blessed pope." 1 
And so likewise the saints are reported to have spoken of 
prelates when they saw them straying away from the steps 
of Christ, and said they were to be condemned or were mem- 
bers of the devil. But, woe to them who see the pope doing 
works directly at variance with Christ and yet call him most 
holy father, for it is written, "Woe unto them that call 
evil good and good evil," Isaiah 5 : 20, for by their lying 
flattery they deceive both themselves and him. For, again, 

1 Pastor ei idolum. So the Vulgate. The Rev. Vs. has " worthless shep- 
herd." 

'Augustine's Letters [Nic. Fathers, 1: 272, 324, 545]. 



THE LAW OF GOD 175 

it is written: "O my people, they that call thee blessed, 
they deceive thee, and destroy the way of thy paths. The 
Lord standeth to judge," Isaiah 3:12. For, if those learned 
in the law would boldly speak the truth about the pope and 
the cardinals and not flatter them out of fear or in hope of 
promotion to benefices, then the popes might at times recog- 
nize themselves and not allow themselves to be venerated 
as gods. But, because both parties sin in hypocritically re- 
joicing over honors and beatification [allowing themselves to 
be called and treated as blessed], and are tickled over such 
lying adulation, so necessarily both parties shall be hurled 
down. For the prophet says, Isaiah 9 : 16: "They that 
bless this people and lead them astray and they that are 
blessed will be hurled down." And who these are, the prophet 
shows in the verses immediately preceding: "The Lord 
will destroy in one day from Israel head and tail, crooked 
and refractory. The elder and honorable man, he is the 
head and the prophet who teaches lies, he is the tail." Lo, 
the one prophet expounds the head and the tail. Let him, 
therefore, that will, take note that he is called honorable 
and elder father whom they call head. And with probabil- 
ity it may be said of every pope, from the first one to the 
last, who lives at variance with Christ and whom they have 
called or will call head and holy father — that he is that hon- 
orable and elder one, because this succession began a long 
time ago. But the tail, which by flattery or false show or 
by vain excuses covers the works of that elder father, and 
the prophet who teaches lies, represent the learned clergy 
which teaches that the pope is neither God nor man but a 
mixed God or an earthly God and also teaches that the 
pope is able to give me another's good and that I will be 
safe, because the pope is able to depose a bishop without 
cause, is able to dispense at variance with the apostles' teach- 
ing, at variance with his oath, his vow and with natural law, 
and no one has a right to say to him, Why doest thou this ? 



176 THE CHURCH 

For he himself may lawfully say: "Thus I will, thus I com- 
mand; let my will be the reason." And so he is impeccable; 
and he cannot commit simony because all things are his. 
Therefore, he may do with his as he pleases, for he is able 
even to command angels and to save men or damn them as 
he chooses, and, what is more, he is able to bend not only 
the pope but the subject people and those who will not 
bow themselves in flattery and in a worldly way before 
him as the head and the honorable one and bend their 
knees to him. For the pope, the people and themselves 
also they lead astray into wrong paths by sowing such lies. 
And it is about them, as is probable, that Christ spoke the 
words : " There shall arise pseudo-Christs and pseudo-prophets 
and shall show great signs and wonders so as to lead astray 
if possible even the elect," Matt. 24 : 24. 

But, returning to the statement of St. Jerome, it is said 
that " it was, presumably, of his good works that he spoke in 
addressing that pope" [Damasus]. But whether St. Jerome 
had a revelation with regard to this pope's predestination 
and the righteousness of his works is unknown. In the second 
place, it is said that St. Jerome addressed the pope in this 
way, secure about the faith of which he wrote, because in 
that letter he wrote expressly what is contained in Scripture 
and in the symbols of the church, as appears to one who 
wishes to read the letter. And hence he says : " This is the 
faith which we have learned in the catholic church, and which 
we have always held." It is clear how the conditional element 
in St. Jerome's statement is to be understood. For, if that 
confession of his was confirmed by the judgment of that pope, 
whosoever might impugn it would be a heretic. For presum- 
ably he said and affirmed nothing by revelation or certitude 
of the faith he was setting forth which the pope would not con- 
firm except it were true, and he would not change anything 
rightly held in the church long before. But it would be in- 
sane to believe that a conclusion is to be drawn from this con- 
cerning every Roman pope, for it is certain that many of them 



THE LAW OF GOD 177 

have ratified errors and heresies, for they were heretics them- 
selves. 

Hence the text, Disi. 24, in nomine Domini [Friedberg, 
1 : 78], describes how the pope laments because that [apos- 
tolical] seat has often been smitten with the frequent din 1 
of simoniacal heresy. Therefore, wishing to provide a rem- 
edy for the future, he [Nicolas H] decreed that, at the pope's 
death, the cardinals, the religious, clerics and laymen, shall 
meet together for the election of a suitable pope from the 
bosom of that church or from the bosom of some other, wher- 
ever the most fit might happen to be found, and that the 
privilege of the emperor, Henry, should always be honored, 
namely, that he and his successors shall have the right to 
be present at the pope's election. 1 But a true pope being 
elected, he shall have before his consecration, following the 
example of St. Gregory, power to dispose of the goods of the 
church, and every one who should hinder this ordinance he 
might anathematize as a most wicked antichrist. Here the 
Glossa ordinaria says, that at this point is plainly touched 
upon what is read in the Chronicles, how Benedict, who suc- 
ceeded Stephen, was ejected from the pontifical office, and 
for a money consideration John, bishop of Sabina, was made 
pope, to whom the name Sylvester was given. But he in 
turn was cast down and Benedict restored, and Benedict was 
again ejected and the papacy given to John, archpriest at 
the Latin Gate, on whom was imposed the name Gregory. 
And he was cast down by the emperor Henry and trans- 
ferred beyond the mountains; and these things all happened 
in a single year. On account of these things that privilege 
was given to Henry. 8 Thus much the Glossa of the Decretum. 

1 Tunsionibus; probably from tundo, to beat, to thump. I do not find the 
word in DuCange. 

* The decree of Nicolas II, 1059, confining election of the pope to the col- 
lege of cardinals. The rule was soon after set aside in the case of the election 
of Gregory VII, 1073. The emperor, Henry III, at Sutri, 1046, dictated the 
election of his chaplain as Clement II. For Nicolas's edict, Mirbt, p. no. 

' The reference here is to the synod of Sutri, 1046, when Henry III was 
present, having come south to Rome to rid the church of the scandal of having 



I 



178 THE CHURCH 

And, as is gathered from the Chronicles of Martin, Cas- 
trensis and Rudolph/ (1) Pope Boniface was presiding at 
Rome A. D. 420, and Eulalius having been ordained in 
opposition to him and the church being divided on the ques- 
tion, both by the command of Honorius Augustus left the 
city; and, Eulalius being condemned, Boniface, who had pre- 
viously been ordained, was by the command of Augustus re- 
stored to the apostolic seat. 1 

(2) A. D. 493 Laurentius was ordained over against 
Pope Symmachus by a dissident faction. 8 

(3) A. D. 768 the schismatic pope Constantine was de- 
prived of his eyes, and Stephen was made pope. The latter 
assembled a synod at Rome and reordained those who had 
been ordained by the schismatic Constantine. 4 

(4) A. D. 873 Pope Anastasius invaded the praesulate as 
against Benedict. 5 

three contemporary popes and to receive the imperial crown. As before said, 
Benedict DC, a dissolute fellow, was opposed by an antipope, Sylvester III, 
elected by the Romans, and, wishing to marry, sold the papacy to Gregory VL 
All three were disposed of at Sutri and Clement II elected. 

1 Martinus Polonus, d. 1278, whose work, de Imperatonbus et Panlificibus, 
was one of the most esteemed chronicles of the later M. A. Rudolph is Radul- 
phus Glaber, a monk of Cluny, about 1050, who wrote Historia sui tern parts, 
Migne, vol. 142. Castrensis was Ranulph of Higden. 

* After the death of Zosimus, Eulalius was chosen pope by a part of the 
clergy and consecrated 418. The day before the consecration Boniface I 
was elected by another part of the clergy. Honorius recognized Boniface and 
expelled Eulalius, who died 423, a year after Boniface, refusing to stand again 
for election to the papal chair. 

* Symmachus, 498-514. Both were consecrated, one in the Lateran and 
Laurentius in the S. Maria Magg. Laurentius at first submitted and was 
made bishop of Nocera, Campania, but his party pressed his case, and it was 
not till four years had passed that, forced by the decrees of synods and the 
attitude of Theodoric, he withdrew permanently from Rome. 

4 Stephen III, 768-772. The antipope Constantine II, the creature of his 
brother, Duke Toto, was deposed by a Lateran synod, 769, which also enacted 
a rule against the election of laymen to the papal chair. Constantine's eyes 
were put out, as Huss has said before. 

•Benedict III, 855-858. Anastasius had resisted Benedict's predecessor, 
Leo IV, and, receiving the support of the imperial legates, forced his way into 
the Lateran and had Benedict torn from his throne. The clergy and people 
of Rome were against him and he was obliged to withdraw. Of his end there 
is no credible account. 



THE LAW OF GOD 179 

(5) A. D. 907 Pope Leo presided, and against him rose 
up Christophorus. 1 

(6) A. D. 968 a synod of bishops was collected from all 
Italy, and Pope John was disgraced for nefarious crimes, and, 
because he excused himself and delayed to come, another, 
Leo, up to that time a layman, was made pope by a unani- 
mous election and with the emperor's consent. And so Leo 
performed ordinations and did other acts which were apos- 
tolic. Not long afterward the Romans, proving faithless 
to the emperor, received Pope John. He assembled a synod 
and deposed Leo and set aside his acts, and it was decreed 
by Leo that the synod was not to be called a synod but a 
brothel because it favored adultery. Whoever, therefore, 
were condemned by his decree were commanded to present 
his proscription of them in a writing containing these things, 
"My father had nothing for himself, gave nothing to me," 
and so these remained deposed from those positions which 
they had who had not been ordained by Leo. This Pope 
John was found lying with a man's wife, was struck through 
during the commission of adultery, and died without the 
Lord's viaticum. 1 

(7) It happened that the Romans — violating the oath 
which they had made to the emperor never to elect a pope with- 
out his consent or the consent of his son Otto — made Bene- 
dict pope. But the emperor, besieging Rome, so afflicted 
the Romans that they promised to receive Leo as pope, and 
so Benedict was dismissed. 9 

1 Leo V, 903, pope, died in prison. Christophorus was deposed by Leo 
and seems to have been murdered. 

* John XII, one of the dissolute popes, 955-064, was condemned by a Roman 
synod for perjury, murder, sacrilege and almost every crime and his place 
filled by the election of Leo VIII, but John was received again by the Roman 
people. While the emperor Otto was on his way to Rome to settle matters, 
John, as Huss says, was put to death while he was in the act of adultery, an 
act worthy of Marozia, whose grandson he was. 

• Benedict V, 964-966. Leo VIII, at Otto Ps instance, was elected pope. 
After Otto's departure from Rome, John XII entered the city and expelled 
Leo. John died 964, and the Romans elected Benedict V. The emperor set 



A 



180 THE CHURCH 

(8) A. D. 1047 Benedict, who got into the papacy by 
simony, an illiterate man, had another consecrated pope with 
himself to perform the ecclesiastical duties for him — namely, 
Sylvester; and, as this did not please many, a third was brought 
in who was to fill the places of the other two. 

(9) A. D. 1046, when at Rome one pope was contending 
against two and two against one over the papacy, King 
Henry proceeded to Rome against them; and when they were 
deposed, Clement was chosen to preside. By him Henry 
was consecrated emperor, and the Romans swore never again 
to elect a pope without the emperor's consent. Then was 
constituted the law, III Reg., 2, that, following the example 
of Solomon, the king in case of necessity is bound to depose 
the pontiff. Then King Henry humbly received at the hands 
of Clement consecration, and thereafter without such con- 
firmation no other was to be regarded as emperor. But 
why was this necessary in accordance with the law of God, 
since, prior to the institution of the cardinals, it was held that 
the pope was elected by the people of Rome ? l 

(10) A. D. 1068, while two were contending at Rome for 
the papacy and Alexander, after he had established his inno- 
cence against the charge of simony, was received and Cada- 
lus, bishop of Parma, condemned. Hence, it was said: "Ca- 
dalus, in Parma, was made by me bow and arms. Cadalus 
died; Parma was made a ruin. ,,2 

(n) A. D. 1083 Henry broke into the city of Rome and 
placed Wibert in the apostolic chair. Hildebrand departed 
to Beneventum, where he remained till his death. 8 

him aside and restored Leo VIII, Benedict being placed under charge of the 
archbishop of Hamburg and dying in Germany. 

1 The three popes disposed of at Sutri, 1046. 

1 Alexander II, 1061-1073, gave offense by being elected by the cardinals 
and entering upon the papacy without the emperor's confirmation. Agnes, 
the queen regent and mother of Henry IV, called a synod, which elected Cad- 
alus, of Parma, known as Honorius II. The latter died 1072. 

* This is the famous Wibert of Ravenna, Clement III, who was elected anti- 
pope at the instance of Henry IV against Henry's opponent, Gregory VII. 



THE LAW OF GOD 181 

(12) A. D. 1087 Desiderius, called also Victor, was made 
pope against Clement. 1 

(13) A. D. 1091 there were, it is said, two, who were called 
Roman pontiffs, at discord one with the other and drawing 
about the church of God, divided between themselves, Urban, 
who first had been bishop of Ostia, and Clement, called Wibert, 
who had been bishop of Ravenna. 

(14) A. D. 1 130, when Innocent was ruling as pope, Peter 
Leoni thrust himself in and was called Anacletus, and In- 
nocent passed over into France. 2 Hence it is said: 

" Peter has Rome, Gregory the whole world." 

(15) A. D. 1 1 89 Pope Albert ruled, against whom Octa- 
vian thrust himself in, but he died in schism, and so also 
Guido of Crema; but John, who had thrust himself in, was 
reconciled. 8 

And so within a centenary of years from the time of the 
dotation of the church a notable contention occurred between 
popes; and in our times there was begun the two-headed 
schism between Urban VI, who lived at Rome, and Robert 
of Geneva, who held his seat in Avignon; and this two-headed 
split lasted between their successors until A. D. 1409. In 
that year both popes were condemned at the council of 
Pisa as heretics, namely Gregory and Benedict, and Alex- 
ander, of the Franciscan order, was elected pope. 4 And when 

Wibert, "the usurper of the holy see/' was the only one of his enemies that 
Gregory refused to forgive on his death-bed. Henry was crowned emperor by 
Wibert in St. Peter's. Hildebrand died 1085 at Salerno, not at Beneventum. 

1 Victor III, 1087, was the legitimate pope as against Wibert. 

2 Anacletus II, antipope 1130-1138, the son of a Jew of Rome and elected 
by the majority of the cardinals. Innocent II, 1130-1143, elected by a minor- 
ity had the support of Bernard and the emperor. Anacletus's last supporter 
was Roger of Sicily. See Schaff, Ch. Hist., V, part 1, 94 sq. 

' Albert was antipope at the time of Pascal II; Octavian, Victor IV, under 
Alexander III in the days of Barbarossa, and Guido at Victor's death, 11 64, 
elected antipope under the name of Pascal III. 

4 At the death of Gregory XI, the Avignon pope, in Rome, 1378, Urban VI, 
an Italian, was made pope under circumstances the most sensational. See 
Schaff, Ch. Hist., V, part a, 117 sqq. This election was followed by the election 




i82 THE CHURCH 

he died there remained three to contend for the papacy, 
Pope John XXIII, Gregory in Sicily and Benedict in Spain. 
But from what moving cause this diabolical strife originally 
came, even the blind can discern, namely, from the dotation. 
Hence, St. Jerome, in his Lives of the Fathers, wrote: "As 
the church increased in possessions, she decreased in vir- 
tues." And what is set down as a probability by the Chron- 
icles seems clear, as narrated by Castrensis, 4 : 86, who de- 
scribes how, ' at the time of the dotation of the church, an 
angelic voice 1 was heard in the air, saying, that day poison 
was infused in the holy church of God. For, however it 
came to be, this is true: either a good angel or a devil uttered 
the voice, because it is certain that demons, who rejoice when 
they do evil, are bound to serve God and to be messengers 
of the truth, and it becomes God by the mammon of iniquity 
to announce in advance to the people their danger.' From 
these things the faithful are able to form a judgment whether 
any one, by the mere fact that he is called pope, is indeed 
the chief pontiff of the church and the most blessed father, 
and in matters of the faith learned above all worshippers of 
Christ, and whether he is the head of God's holy church. 

of the notorious French cardinal, Robert of Geneva, by the Avignonese car- 
dinals, and the papal schism followed, lasting 13 78-141 7, with one pope at 
Rome and another at Avignon. The council of Pisa, 1409, attempted to bring 
the schism to an end by the election of Peter Philargi, cardinal of Milan, Alex- 
ander V, who appears prominently in the history of Huss. He lived only a year 
after his election, and was followed by John XXIII, who was deposed by the 
council of Constance, 1415. After receiving the resignation of Gregory XII, of 
the Roman line, and deposing Benedict XIII, the last of the Avignon popes, 
the council, 141 7, finally terminated the schism by the election of Martin V. 

1 Rolls Series, 5 : 130. Trevisa's translation runs: "The olde enemy cryde 
openliche in the ayer." Castrensis quotes Jerome's words as given by Huss, 
and he adds that "when Constantine was baptized of Sylvester, he opened 
the prisons, destroyed the temples of the idols, built new and restored old 
churches, endowing them with spiritual privileges and immunities and assigned 
one-tenth of all his possessions to the churches and, at the repairing of St. 
Peter's, turned the first spade of earth and carried ten baskets full of earth 
on his shoulders/' etc 



CHAPTER XVH 

HUSS'S RESISTANCE TO PAPAL AUTHORITY 

Further, as for the principal thing according to which 
they believe all their sayings to be necessary or true, the 
afore-mentioned doctors lay down that " obedience is due to 
the apostolic see and to prelates from inferiors in all things 
whatsoever, where the purely good is not prohibited or the 
purely evil commanded, but also in that which is intermediate, 
which, in view of the mode, place, time or person, may be 
either good or bad in accordance with the Saviour's state- 
ment, Matt. 23 : 2 : ' Whatsoever they bid you, these do and 
observe.' " And they add the following from Bernard's Letter 
to Adam the Monk [Migne's ed., 182 : 95], which begins 
thus: " 'If thou remain in love, the law for obedience is fixed 
as in the tree of the knowledge of good and evil which was 
in the midst of paradise.' In such things certainly it is not 
right to submit our interpretation to the opinion of the mag- 
isters, and in such things neither the command nor the pro- 
hibition of prelates is in any wise to be spurned." 

And they add: "But some of the clergy in the kingdom 
of Bohemia refuse to agree to this, endeavoring, as much as 
in them lies, to lead the faithful people to disobedience to- 
wards prelates and to irreverence towards the papal, epis- 
copal, sacerdotal and clerical dignities, not giving attention 
to that which St. Augustine says in the words (Sermon 
8): 'If thou hast fasted, hast made prayer night and day, 
if thou hast been in ashes or begging, if thou hast done noth- 
ing else except what is prescribed for thee in the law and 
thou hast been wise in thine own sight and not obedient to 

183 



184 THE CHURCH 

thy father — understand, not bodily father, but spiritual — 
thou hast lost all virtues. Therefore obedience is worth 
more than all the other moral virtues.'" 

By the combination of the above sayings the doctors 
mix up the false with the true, flattery with fear, and these 
three things are involved in these words: "Certain of the 
clergy" — here having in mind our party — "refuse to agree 
to this, endeavoring as much as in them lies to lead the faith- 
ful people to disobedience." See what a false lie this is, by 
which they indicate that we are become seducers of the 
people, when it is (i) not the purpose of our side to seduce the 
people from real obedience, but that the people may be one, 
governed harmoniously by the law of Christ. (2) The pur- 
pose of our side is that the rules of antichrist shall not 
seduce or separate the people from Christ, but that the law 
of Christ shall honestly rule in connection with the customs 
of the people so far as they are approved by God's law. (3) 
The purpose of our side is that the clergy live honestly ac- 
cording to the doctrine of Jesus Christ, laying aside pomp, 
avarice and luxury. (4) Our side wishes and preaches that 
the church militant, in its different parts which God has 
ordained, be honestly commingled, namely, of Christ's priests 
those who administer his law in purity, and from the world 
the nobles who press for the observance of the ordinances of 
Christ and the common people, both these parts serving in 
accordance with Christ's law. Therefore, let the doctors be- 
stow this wrong on our side. But the flattery which they 
show to prelates and the fear with which they would affright 
our side are involved in the words: "endeavouring to lead 
the faithful people to disobedience towards prelates, and ir- 
reverence towards the papal, episcopal, sacerdotal and cler- 
ical dignities." Blessed be Christ Jesus that they have not 
dared to lay on us the calumny of disobedience to Jesus 
Christ — or perhaps they have forgotten to do so, for to serve 
him is to reign, and obedience rendered to him avails so much 



HUSS'S RESISTANCE TO THE POPE 185 

that it is of no advantage to obey any one except in so far 
as such obedience is obedience to our God. 

Wherefore, as to that saying of the doctors, "that obe- 
dience is due to the apostolic see of the Roman church and 
to prelates by inferiors in all things," etc. [we proceed as fol- 
lows]: 

As for obedience, this is to be said : It is to be noted that 
obedience first is to be understood by analogy or in a very 
general sense, as is the loyalty of any created thing whatso- 
ever, in respect to the divine will which all created things 
obey, without resistance — repugnantia — even as a stone obeys 
by falling or tending downwards, or fire by rising and the sun 
by illuminating, and so in regard to all other created things. 
Or else obedience is rendered with resistance, as the devil or 
a damned man who obeys by suffering because he must. And 
in this way the saints speak when they say that all things 
obey their Creator, and man alone, the sinner, does not obey; 
that is, the sinner does not submit to the rule of the Creator 
without resistance on the part of his will. But obedience, 
so far as it is an act of virtue or is virtue, is thus de- 
scribed by some, namely, obedience is the subjection of our 
own will to the will and judgment of a superior in things 
lawful and honest — or obedience is the disposition to fol- 
low voluntarily a superior's command in things lawful and 
honest. 

The first kind is exhibited in acts, the second in the dis- 
position. And from these definitions, it follows that there is no 
such thing as obedience in the case of things unlawful. And 
so obedience is correlated to that which is good, disobedience 
to that which is evil. But the first definition seems to 
me to be wanting in this, that obedience is a more gen- 
eral thing than submission, since obedience is becoming in 
God and submission is not, for God obeyed a man's voice, 
for it is said, Joshua 10 : 14: "There was no day like to it 
before or after, that God hearkened unto the voice of a man 



186 THE CHURCH 

and fought for Israel." Nevertheless God, the Trinity, was 
not subject to man, or under a man as a lesser to a greater. 
Nor is all obedience to the will of a superior, for Christ was 
subject to his parents, Luke 2:51. And it is certain that, 
as among others born of women a greater than John the 
Baptist hath not arisen, so Christ was infinitely greater than 
Joseph or Mary. 

Therefore, as Christ did nothing but what he ought to 
have done, it is plain that the greater ought to be subject 
to the lesser, that is, be obedient to him; for whatever the 
fountain of religion, as the chief of all, may teach, that is 
to be held. Hence Christ, who was of a twofold nature, 
was obedient in a twofold sense, for (1) he obeyed God, his 
Father, in all things, as being on the side of his humanity 
less than the Father, for he himself said: "The Father is 
greater than I," John 14 : 28. And (2) he was obedient to his 
parents as to the lesser. And he was also obedient to others 
and endured willingly at their hands, and he is obedient to 
true and holy Christians, supplying their need and filling up 
their desires. And it is clear that the conclusion does not 
follow: because one obeys another, therefore he is less than 
the other. Similarly, it does not follow that, because one 
serves another, therefore he is less than the other. For 
Christ obeyed another man and served him, wherefore he 
said, Isaiah 43 : 24: "Thou hast made me to serve in thy 
sins, thou hast put upon me toil in thy iniquities. I am he 
that blotteth out thy iniquities for my own sake, and I will 
not remember thy sins. Put me in remembrance that we 
may be judged together." He also said: "The Son of Man 
came not to be ministered unto but to minister," Matt. 20 : 28. 
And the apostle was speaking of him when he said : " Christ 
emptied himself, taking the form of a servant," Phil. 2:7. 
And it is also said, John 13 : 4: "He girded himself with a 
towel, poured water in a basin and washed his disciples' feet." 
Hence he is not falsely but truly a bishop, a servant of the 



HUSS'S RESISTANCE TO THE POPE 187 

servants of God/ not only a Roman bishop but, in a general 
way he is the bishop of all the churches. He is himself the 
bishop of Prague. But, as he is a servant or minister not 
by the compulsion of civil law, because a life where activi- 
ties are moved by compulsion did not befit him, so he is the 
bishop of souls, not of secular riches or possessions, for he 
as bishop, lowly and meek, mounted the foal of an ass, as is 
attested by Zech. 9 : 9. And he said: "Foxes have holes, 
and the birds of heaven have nests, but the Son of Man hath 
not where to lay his head," Matt. 8 : 20. Why was this? 
The apostle gives the reason when he says: "Ye know the 
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, who* for our sakes became 
poor, that we through his poverty might be made rich," 
H Cor. 8 : 9. 

The second definition of obedience is also defective, as is 
seen from what has already been said, because it states that 
obedience is the disposition to follow the command of a su- 
perior. For all obedience is not with respect to a superior 
to whom the obedience is rendered, or with respect to a com- 
mand. For sometimes obedience is with respect to an in- 
ferior, as has been said already. And obedience is also related 
to counsel, as when a man obeys the counsels of God, which he 
is not under obligation to obey under any pain of mortal sin. 
Obedience is also related to entreaty, as when God obeyed at 
Joshua's entreaty, bidding the sun stand still over Gibeon and 
not be moved towards its setting. Hence Jerome, Ep. 1 13, says : 
"God sometimes seems to obey the prayers of the saints." 
And it is clear that obedience is sometimes a fulfilment of 
a command, sometimes of a counsel, and sometimes of an 
entreaty, which is neither a command nor a counsel. And 
sometimes it is the result of persuasion, the way in which 
the devil persuaded Christ, Matt. 4:5, to go with him to 

1 A title used by Gregory the Great in his letters, and common in Huss's 
time; Boniface's bull Unam sanctam opens in that way: "Bon., bishop, the 
servant of the servants of God." 

*Qui. Vulgate: quoniam, because. 



188 THE CHURCH 

the holy city and to a very high mountain, and Christ in a 
most virtuous way consented to this and fulfilled the devil's 
will. And so in view of this distinction, it is to be said that 
to obey is to truly fulfil another's will, and for this reason 
obedience always involves the relation of one to another. 
But this is not the case with other virtues, as for example, 
continence and temperance. 

From these things it is gathered that obedience, like 
humility, is of three kinds: namely, of the greater to the 
less — which is the highest form of obedience; — of an equal to 
an equal — which is the intermediate form; — and of the less 
to the greater — which is the lowest form. To the last the 
first definition of obedience applies — namely, that obedience 
is the subjection of one's own will to the will of a superior 
in things lawful and right. And it may be defined thus: 
obedience is an act of the will of a rational creature by vir- 
tue of which he voluntarily and intelligently submits him- 
self to his superior: and such obedience is related to what 
is good, just as disobedience is related to what is evil. In 
both cases, however, it pertains to the rational creature and 
his subjection. And secondly, it refers fundamentally to ac- 
tivity, suffering, silence or any other activity of this sort to 
which the command is directed. 

Hence, as all sin is disobedience and as disobedience is 
related to sin, and as every good man obeys God, so every 
sinner is disobedient. But obedience may be in the under- 
standing and the will— in the understanding, which discerns 
that obedience ought to be rendered in given cases; and in 
the will, which yields consent to him who commands. But 
its results are shown in certain powers within and in an ex- 
ternal effect. And, because there is found in Scripture good 
obedience and evil disobedience, it is clear what the good is; 
and of the evil it was said to Adam, Gen. 3 : 17: "Because 
thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife rather than 
unto my voice, cursed is the ground for thy sake." It is 



HUSS'S RESISTANCE TO THE POPE 189 

also said, "Why do ye also transgress the commandments of 
God, because of your traditions," Matt. 15 : 3, and, "We 
must obey God rather than men," Acts 5 : 29. 

Hence, whenever obedience is rendered to man rather 
than God, as Adam obeyed Eve, then it is always evil obe- 
dience, so that every one obeying evilly is disobedient to God; 
and so it is that the same man may be obedient and disobe- 
dient, with respect to the different persons commanding or 
to different commands. And it does not follow that, because 
a beloved man 1 is disobedient, therefore he is not obedient, 
but it does follow that the man is not obedient to him with 
respect to whom he is disobedient or with respect to whose 
commands he is disobedient. And it is clear that to obey 
in one's brotherhood [religious community] is to fulfil the will 
of the one giving commands, and this is well, as when a man 
or a created spirit living in grace fulfils the lawful will of 
the one giving commands. But to obey is bad when either 
living in sin one fulfils the will of a superior as to a given 
command, as when one who lives in luxury, fasts from re- 
spect to the command; or, secondly, when one fulfils a bad 
command against God. In view of these things it is clear 
that it is impossible for a rational creature to be virtuous 
morally unless he is obedient to his God. 

And so it must be known that, according to St. Thomas 
[Aquinas] 2 : 104, art. 5 [Migne's ed., 3 : 798],* obedience 
is threefold, namely, sufficient, perfect and unreasoning. Suf- 
ficient obedience is that which obeys only in those things 
where the obligation is of natural law and does not go be- 

1 " Beloved man/' literally, Sorlcs, an abbreviation for Socrates and a general 
term common with writers in the Middle Ages for a person dear to us. Huss 
uses it in his de Cor pore, Flajshans, ed., p. 22, and very frequently in his Com. 
on the Lombard's Sentences. "This human species is Sortes [Socrates], this 
Plato/' p. 47. " Sortes and Plato are one and the same thing, res — and so do 
not really — realiter — differ," p. 54. " The body of Christ is not in the sacrament 
as Sortes is in a definite place and only in one place at one time," p. 566, etc. 

'The distinction is taken from Th. Aquinas. Huss gives in his own lan- 
guage the substance of Thomas's treatment. 



igo THE CHURCH 

yond the limits of its own station. That is sufficient obe- 
dience by which any one obeys in those things to which he 
is expressly obligated, and examples of this there are in 
holy Scripture. For children are bound to obey their par- 
ents, according to the apostle where he says: "Children, 
obey your parents in all things," Col. 3 : 20. This is to be 
understood only to apply to those things which concern the 
outer course of life and household care, as Thomas says. 
Similarly, servants are bound to obey their masters: "Obey 
your masters according to the flesh in all things," Col. 3 : 22, 
and, " Servants, be in subjection to your masters in all fear, 
not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward," 

1 Peter 2 : 18. These texts are to be understood only of 
those things which apply to servile acts lawful to be per- 
formed, as Thomas also says. Wives are held to obey their 
husbands according to the words of the apostle, as above, 
and also of Peter [I Peter 3:1]: "Wives, be in subjection 
to your husbands in the Lord." This is to be understood 
only of those things which pertain to external marital con- 
duct so far as such conduct is lawful. 

Similarly, all Christians are bound to obey the secular 
power, each in his own rank, as the apostle says, Titus 
3:1: "Put them in mind to be in subjection to rulers and 
powers," and, Romans 13 : 1, "Let every soul be subject 
unto the higher powers." Here the apostle proves that 
every man is in duty bound to obey his superiors, both in 
secular and spiritual affairs, because God's servants are or- 
dained, the good to be guided, purged and to praise; but 
the evil to be corrected, punished and to wrath, because 
there is no power but of God, and he that resisteth the power 
resisteth the ordinance of God. With this Thomas agrees, 

2 : 14, art. 6 [Migne's ed., 3 : 798]. And all this subjection 
or obedience is understood among those ranks over which 
the superiors have lawful authority, and in those cases when 
they command righteous commands and not otherwise. The 



HUSS'S RESISTANCE TO THE POPE 191 

Glossa ordinaria also agrees in its comment on the words: 
"the powers that be are ordained of God" [Romans 13 : 1]. 
The Master of Sentences also agrees, 2 : 44 [Migne's ed., p. 
246]. 

Perfect obedience is that whereby the person obeying 
places all his willing and not willing — velle et nolle — in the 
will of his prelate, to do the acts commanded, so long as the 
command does not gainsay the divine will or good morals 
or the necessities of life, and so long as it does not conflict 
with the commands and counsels of the Lord Jesus Christ. 
And because obedience appertains to commands and coun- 
sels, the difference is to be noted between a command and an 
evangelical counsel, so far as they may be distinguished as 
opposites. 1 

A precept or command is a general teaching of God, obli- 
gating every man under pain of mortal sin — namely, in cases 
in which he has fallen away from the command. Hence the 
saints who for a period of their life lived hypocritically sinned 
mortally for that period. So also the damned, by persist- 
ent false living sin persistently in hell. 

A counsel is a special teaching of God, obligating under 
pain only of venial sin and for the period of this life. And 
so the doctors say that precepts are for the imperfect, ob- 
ligating them for the reason that they are servants. But 

1 Huss is making the distinction between the mandates of the Scriptures — 
pracepta — such as the duties enjoined by the Ten Commandments and the 
evangelical counsels or counsels of perfection, evangelica consilia. He takes 
it up in his Com. on the Lombard, pp. 482, 488 sqq. The counsels are voluntary 
poverty, voluntary chastity and absolute obedience to the earthly ecclesias- 
tical superior, as to an abbot or a bishop. Origen made the distinction in the 
third century and based it on two kinds of morality. The mandates are for all 
Christians and must be kept in order to salvation; the counsels of perfection 
for the higher Christians or saints. By observing the counsels of perfection one 
secures a higher grade of merit and a higher place in heaven. I Cor. 7 : 25 
and Christ's words to the rich man are taken to justify the distinction. The 
Protestant Reformers set it aside as unscriptural and tending to place those 
who take the three vows above all ordinary mortals who follow Christ in the 
usual daily avocations of life. Thomas Aquinas sets it forth at length, Summa, 
1 : 2 sq. t zo8 sqq. [Migne's ed., 2 : 894 sqq.]. 



i 9 2 THE CHURCH 

counsels axe for the perfect which obligate above what is 
commonly required by reason and everywhere and always un- 
der pain of mortal sin. And that they may shun the occasion 
of sin, counsels advise them as friends. Hence, if a saint 
should make a divine counsel an occasion of falling from his 
height into mortal sin — that would be by the breaking of 
the first command and not by a refusal to obey the divine 
counsel. But in the heavenly country where the danger and 
occasion of sin do not exist, the counsel is not spoken of in 
this way. For in the heavenly country there is no voluntary 
poverty nor is there any savor of indigence. This Christ 
counselled when he said, Matt. 19 : 21: "If thou wilt be per- 
fect, go and sell all 1 that thou hast." 

The second obedience is by co-operative submission to a 
superior, of which it is said, " If any one would come after me, 
let him deny himself," Luke 9 : 23, as does the beloved disciple. 
And in heaven there is no struggling against chastity, of which 
it is said : " There are eunuchs who have made themselves eu- 
nuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake," Matt. 19 : 12. Nor 
is there found there any retaliation against adversaries, of which 
it is said: "Do good to them which hate you," Matt. 5 : 44. 
Nor is there any patient endurance of those who smite vio- 
lently, of which it is said: "Whosoever shall smite thee on 
the right cheek, turn to him the other also," Matt. 5 : 39. 
Nor are there any supererogatory works of mercy there, about 
which it is said, "Give to every one that asketh of thee," 
Luke 6 : 30; nor any refraining from words and oaths, of 
which it is written: "For every idle word which men shall 
speak they shall give account in the day of judgment," 
Matt. 12 : 36, and, "I say unto you, swear not at all," Matt. 
5 ' 33. Nor will there be left the occasion to commit sin, 
of which it is said: "If thine eye cause thee to stumble, or 
foot, or hand, pluck it out and cut it off and cast it from 
thee," Matt. 5 : 29. Nor will there be any easement of ac- 

1 Omnia is not given in the Vulgate. 



HUSS'S RESISTANCE TO THE POPE 193 

tivity, lest by defect of pure purpose we fall into hypocrisy, of 
which it is said: "Take heed that ye do not your alms to 
be seen of men/' Matt. 6 : 1. Nor will there be any example 
of conforming one's works to one's words such as Christ spoke 
of: "The Pharisees say and do not," Matt. 23 : 3. And so he 
counselled the hypocrite to "first cast out the beam out of 
his own eye," Luke 6 : 42. Nor will there be there the care of 
this world, choking out the Word, of which it is said: "Be 
not anxious, saying what shall we eat," etc., Matt. 6 : 31. 
Nor will there be any reproving of the brother, of which it 
is said: "If thy brother sin against thee, go and rebuke him 
between thyself and him alone," Matt. 18 : 15. All these 
twelve counsels, in their primary form, they will not hold 
it necessary to put into practice, but they will observe them 
in a secondary sense and form, as eternal commands, which 
are healthful in the way unto life. 

And would that the clergy, and especially the religious 
who value the counsels of men, and that all others who de- 
pend on human counsel might hearken unto these counsels 
of the heavenly physician, for undoubtedly they are pre- 
servatives against possible sins, purgatives for sins already 
committed, and conservatives of health already attained. 
Therefore, all pilgrims are obligated to keep these counsels 
or some of them, as occasion demands, on the pain of venial 
sin. And in order to pronounce judgment in these cases the 
best judge will be cautious in regard to himself when he is 
watching out that he may not fall into sin by failure to ob- 
serve any one of these twelve — that he does not act quickly, 
lest he contemn a divine counsel. 

And it is to be noted that the twelfth counsel, namely, 
the rebuke of a brother, sometimes is a counsel when it con- 
cerns venial offences, and sometimes a command when it 
concerns the rebuke of mortal sins. And this second kind 
of rebuke it belongs to every one to exercise, and it is al- 
ways obligatory, but not on all occasions, for, as to place 



194 THE CHURCH 

and time, rebuke should be made when it seems likely to be 
useful. 

Up to this point it is to be noted that human obedience 
is threefold — spiritual, secular and ecclesiastical — spiritual, 
which is due purely according to God's law, and under this 
kind of obedience Christ and the apostles lived and each 
Christian should live. Secular obedience is obedience due 
according to the secular code. Ecclesiastical obedience is 
obedience according to the regulations of the priests of the 
church aside from the express authority of Scripture. The 
first kind of obedience always excludes what is of itself evil, 
both on the part of the person giving the command and on 
the part of the person obeying. For he who commands ac- 
cording to God's law and he who obeys act rightly, and of 
both it is said: "Thou shalt do whatsoever the priests the 
Levites have taught, according to all I have taught them," 
Deut. 29 [Deut. 24 : 8]. 

Here it is affirmed that he who commands ought only 
to command things in agreement with the law, and the per- 
son obeying ought to the same extent to obey them and 
never act contrary to the will of God Almighty. On this I 
have in another place quoted Augustine, Gregory, Jerome, 
Chrysostom, Isidore, Bernard and Bede, as well as the 
Scripture and the canons. These for the sake of brevity I 
will pass. Only let the saying of Isidore be given, 11 : 3 
[Friedberg, 1 : 672]: "He who presides, if he command any- 
thing or say anything otherwise than in accordance to God's 
will or what is plainly commanded in Holy Scripture, he 
shall be regarded as a false witness of God, or as committing 
sacrilege." 



CHAPTER XVHI 
THE APOSTOLIC SEE, OR CATHEDRA PETRI 

Now that certain statements have been made about 
obedience, I want to return to the statement of the doc- 
tors, in which it appears that " obedience is to be rendered 
by inferiors to the apostolic see 1 of the Roman church, and 
to the prelates in all things whatsoever, Where that which 
is purely good is not forbidden and that which is not purely 
evil is commanded, but also in that which is intermediate,' 9 
etc. 

And here consideration must be had of the apostolic see, 
about which many, and especially the canonists, predicate 
many things, who, nevertheless, are ignorant what the apos- 
tolic see is. For some think that it really is a seat of wood 
or stone in which the pope is wont to sit bodily. Others 
think that it is the Roman curia; others that it is the seat 
of St. Peter, in which he sat bodily; others that it is Rome; 
others that it is the pope's power; others still that it is the 
church or basilica of St. Peter. But it is to be noted that 
apostolic is derived from apostle, and apostle means one sent 
from God. The Saviour, whom God sent, said, John 3 : 34: 
"I speak the words of God." Hence, he also said to his dis- 
ciples that " as the Father sent me, so also send I you," John 
20 : 21 — namely, to bear testimony to the truth, to preach 
the word of salvation, and, by life and teaching, to show 
the way of blessedness to the people. 

Hence, every priest who is not seeking his own glory but 

, The word "see" comes from sedes, a seat, and was interchangeable with 
the Greek word thronas, seat, and Latin cathedra, chair. 

I9S 



196 THE CHURCH 

the honor of God, the prosperity of the church and the sal- 
vation of the people, and who does God's will and uncovers 
the wiles of antichrist, preaching the law of Christ — he has 
the marks which show that God sent him. 

As to "glory," Christ said: "I receive not glory from 
men," John 5 : 41, and, "I seek not mine own glory," John 
8 : 50. As to the second thing, he said: "I came in my 
Father's name and ye received me not. If another would 
come in his own name, him ye will receive," John 5 : 43. 
In regard to the third thing, Christ sai,d: "I am come down 
from heaven not to do mine own will but the will of him 
that sent me," John 6 : 38. Christ so did because he sought 
the prosperity of the church and the people's salvation. As 
for the fourth thing, he said: "The world hateth me, be- 
cause I testify of it that its works are evil," John 7 : 7. And 
finally Christ shows that he was sent from God to do the 
works of the Father: " If I do not the works of my Father, 
believe me not; but if I do them, though ye believe not 
me, believe the works," John 10 : 37. 

And it is clear that the righteous conduct of a priest and 
his fruitful labor in Christ's Word show to the people that 
he is sent from God, because he does the works of the Father. 
Nor should a man be pope, bishop, priest or deacon unless 
he be so sent of God, and hence the apostle says: "How 
shall they preach unless they be sent?" Romans 10 : 15. 
Therefore, St. Augustine, Quastiones Orosii, 65, thus answers 
the question of Orosius how we may know who are sent by God: 
"Recognize that one as sent by God whom the praise of a 
few men or rather their flattery did not choose, but him 
whom the best life and morals and examination have ap- 
proved to the judgment of apostolic priests or all the people — 
the man who does not hanker after pre-eminence, who does 
not give money as the price of the episcopal honor. For he 
who hastens to secure pre-eminence, as one of the Fathers 
finely expresses it, 'Let him know that it does not profit 



THE APOSTOLIC SEE 197 

him to be a bishop, who desires pre-eminence.'" Thus 
much Augustine. 

It being understood by general consent what an apostle 
is, we can understand what "apostolic" means. For apos- 
tolic means keeping the way of an apostle. Just as, there- 
fore, a true Christian is one who follows Christ in his life, 
so a truly apostolic man is the priest who follows the teach- 
ing of the apostles, living the life of an apostle and teaching 
his doctrine. Hence, any pope is to be called apostolic so 
far as he teaches the doctrine of the apostles and follows 
them in works. But, if he puts the teaching of the apostles 
aside, teaching in word or works what is contrary, then he 
is properly called pseudo-apostolic or an apostate. Hence 
DisL 97 [79 : 9, Friedberg, 1 : 278]: If any one shall be en- 
throned in the papal seat on account of money or human 
favor or by the help of a popular or military uprising, with- 
out a harmonious and canonical election, he is not to be 
considered apostolic but apostate. Since, therefore, the error 
is greater in an active election when those electing are forced 
by the devil to elect an individual whom God condemns — a 
thing manifestly certain from his works and his neglect of 
the spiritual office, that he is at variance with the life of the 
apostles — much more does it follow that such an individual 
is to be deemed not apostolic but an apostate. 

Therefore, in view of these statements, the apostolic seat 
may be called the life of the priest who efficiently maintains 
the life of an apostle, just as the seat of an apostle is the 
life of an apostle. Hence Chrysostom, Horn. 25, says [Nic. 
Fathers, 10 : 395]: "That virtue of any apostle whereby he 
may have been more perfect than the rest, that is his throne. 
But all the virtues of Christ together are, as it were, one seat, 
because he was equally perfect in all the virtues, and he 
alone." See how well that saint perceives that the individual 
life of each of Christ's apostles is his seat in which he reposes 
by reason of his merits and for which reason he now sits in 



198 THE CHURCH 

the glory of Jesus Christ, as it is said : " Ye also shall sit upon 
twelve seats/ 9 Matt. 19 : 28. Here Augustine understands 
by seats the location of the apostles and of all holy predes- 
tinated prelates which, since it is in blessedness, cannot cease 
to be or suffer destruction at the hand of tyrants. But the 
Twelve — duodenarius — which is the whole number, does not 
indicate those twelve apostles man for man, for Iscariot 
ruled at that time and Paul was yet to become a part of 
the number. 

But the seat of Christ's majesty is to be understood as 
the location of the eternal kingdom from which none can 
be removed. And that seat of Christ is his seat intrinsically, 
but his external seat in which he reposes, dwells and resides 
by grace is all the saints, just as, on the other hand, the 
seats of Satan in which Satan reposes, dwells and resides are 
all the wicked. Hence it is said : " To the angel which is in 
the church of Pergamos write, One like unto the Son 
of Man who hath a sharp two-edged sword saith, I know 
where thou dwellest, even where Satan's seat is," Rev. 2:12, 
13. Here the Gloss says: " Understand, this means the places 
where Satan reposes." And, "Thou holdest fast my name 
and didst not deny my faith [even in the days of Antipas 
who was killed] among you, where Satan dwelleth." But as 
to the principal proposition, the apostolic see is the same as 
the cathedra — seat — of Moses, of which the Saviour said: 
"The scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses' cathedra," Matt. 
23 : 2. But Moses' cathedra was not Moses nor an old 
stone or wooden seat on which Moses sat as a presiding 
judge. Nor is it the synagogue, but that cathedra is the 
authority to teach and judge the people. And this is shown 
by Christ's words, when he said, "in Moses' cathedra." 
And the words follow, "Whatsoever they say," that is, teach 
by the authority and doctrine of Moses, " that do." There- 
fore the apostolic see is the authority to teach and judge 
according to Christ's law, which the apostles taught, and 



THE APOSTOLIC SEE 199 

in which men, wise and fearing the Lord, ought to sit, men 
in whom is the truth and who hate covetousness. For so 
Ex. 18 : 15 has it: "And Moses said to his father-in-law, 
Jethro, The people come unto me seeking the sentence of 
God, and when any act of false dealing has occurred they 
come unto me that I may judge between them and show 
them God's statutes and his laws." Here is meant the au- 
thority to pronounce judgment and to teach God's laws. 
And Jethro said to Moses: "Provide out of all the people 
able men who fear God, in whom is the truth and who hate 
covetousness, and Moses did so." At this place Lyra says: 
"Able to judge by reason of wisdom and experience. On 
this account another translation has 'wise' where we have 
'able men who fear God' more than men 'in whom is the 
truth,' that is, the truth of life, of doctrine and righteousness, 
and men ' who hate covetousness,' because covetous men are 
easily turned away from righteousness by gifts." So much 
Lyra. 

Would that that cathedra now had such men. And where 
are they to be found ? Certainly in the Roman curia, where 
they preside over the cathedra of St. Peter, that is, sit in 
the authority of the apostles, which is the authority to pro- 
nounce judgment in spiritual things and teach the law of the 
Lord Jesus Christ, provided covetousness, unrighteousness 
and pride are kept out and holy living flourishes. The Sa- 
viour himself testified, saying: "Scribes and Pharisees sit 
in Moses' cathedra. Therefore all things whatsoever they 
bid you, these do and observe, but do not ye after their 
works, for they say and do not," Matt. 23 : 2, 3. Here cer- 
tainly a life lacking the works of the law is referred to. For 
" they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be borne and lay 
them on men's shoulders." Certainly unreasonable doctrine 
and unrighteousness are here referred to. "But they them- 
selves will not move them with their finger." Certainly 
an easy-going life 1 "All their works they do to be seen 



200 THE CHURCH 

of men" — certainly vainglory ! "For they make broad their 
phylacteries" in bulls distributed throughout the whole world, 
as if they were pre-eminent in keeping God's law. Here 
is hypocrisy. They enlarge the fringes with which they 
cover their asses. 1 They love the chief places at feasts, seek- 
ing pleasure and honor of men, and "the chief cathedras 
— seats — in the synagogues," that is, accumulations of church 
livings, for this one wants to be a cardinal, this one a patri- 
arch, this one an archbishop. "And they love salutations 
in the market-places," with genuflexions — that is, in public — 
"and to be called of men, Rabbin" [Matt. 23 : 4 sqq.] } that is, 
our Master, and to rule the whole church of Christ. 

Therefore, they also call the Roman curia the mistress 
and teacher of churches. And granting the possibility of this, 
these persons are seats not of Christ but of Satan, sitting 
in view of their own life in the cathedra of pestilence. And 
of this the Psalmist, speaking of Christ, said: "Blessed is 
the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, 
nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the cathe- 
dra of pestilence," Psalm 1 : 1. Here Augustine says [Com. 
an Psalms, Nic. Fathers, 8 : 1]: "This is to be understood of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord-man, who does not sit in 
the cathedra of pestilence. He did not desire an earthly 
kingdom with its pride, which is rightly understood to be the 
cathedra of pestilence, because there is hardly a single one 
who is wanting in the love of dominion and does not hanker 
after glory. The pestilence is a disease widely pervasive 
and involving all or nearly all people. More amply, how- 
ever, the cathedra stands for pernicious doctrine whose words 
work as doth a cancer." Thus much Augustine, who calls 
the cathedra of pestilence the lust of dominion and perni- 
cious doctrine, a cathedra in which the elders of the church 
sit, wishing to exercise secular dominion and teaching men 
to keep their doctrines more carefully than the command- 
ments of God. 

l QuSms operimt mulas. 



THE APOSTOLIC SEE 201 

In the cathedra, however, that is, in the authority and 
in the teaching of the law, he verily sits who teaches the 
law and keeps the commandments of the law. Hence Au- 
gustine says on Psalm 1 : 3: "'And his delight is in the law 
of the Lord.' It is one thing to be in the law and another 
to be under the law; he who is in the law acts and does 
according to the law; he who is under the law is acted upon 
according to the law." See how clear the exposition of this 
holy man is. Whoso, therefore, "does and teaches, he shall 
be great in the kingdom of heaven," says the Saviour, Matt. 
5 : 19. Truly, therefore, he sits in the cathedra of Moses 
or Peter who lives well and teaches well in the authority 
of Scripture, who adds nothing extraneous to the law, nor 
seeks gain or profit from the cathedra. 

On the other hand, he sits ill in the cathedra who either 
teaches ill or lives ill, or who teaches good things and lives 
ill, or who neither teaches good things nor lives well. And 
such, alas, are many who seek the things that are their own 
and not the things of Jesus Christ. Of these our Saviour 
said: "The scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses' cathedra, for 
they say and do not." And a little later he says: "Woe 
unto you scribes and Pharisees, who shut up the kingdom 
of heaven against men, for ye enter not in yourselves, neither 
suffer ye them that are entering in to enter," Matt. 23 : 13. 

And see the other part. " Ye have made void the com- 
mandment of God because of your tradition. Ye hypocrites, 
well did Isaiah prophesy of you, saying, This people hon- 
oreth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. But 
in vain do they worship me, teaching the doctrines and com- 
mandments of men," Matt. 15 : 6. They, therefore, sit ill 
in the cathedra of Moses and Peter, or of Christ, who teach 
good things and do them not. Worse are those who neither 
teach nor do. Worst are those who prevent the teaching of 
good things. And still worst of all are they who live ill, 
forbid the teaching of good things and teach their own things. 



2oa THE CHURCH 

All such are thieves and robbers, as said the Shepherd truly, 
"As many as came before me are thieves and robbers/' for 
all such, the aforesaid, came to the sheepfold apart from 
Christ, ascended to the cathedra by some other way, sought 
the things that are their own and so they are to be called 
hirelings, not shepherds. Therefore, the Saviour, showing 
who is an hireling and not a shepherd, said: "An hireling, 
and he who is not the shepherd and whose own the sheep 
are not, beholdeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, 
and fleeth away, and the wolf snatcheth and scattereth the 
sheep," John 10 : 12. Here Augustine, Homilies on John 
[Nic. Fathers, 7 : 257-259], says: "An hireling here does not 
bear a good character, yet h£ is useful in some respects, and 
he is not called an hireling, unless he receives the reward 
from the one guiding him. Who is, therefore, that hireling 
who is at once both guilty and necessary? Here, brethren, 
let the Lord himself give us light that we may understand 
who is the hireling and that we be not ourselves hirelings. 
What is, therefore, an hireling? There are in the church 
certain officials of whom Paul says that they seek their own 
and not the things of Jesus Christ. What is it, then, to 
seek one's own? They who seek their own are those that 
do not love Christ freely, do not seek God for God's sake, 
who pursue after temporal goods, coveting lucre and hanker- 
ing after honors from men. When these things are loved by 
a superior, and when he serves God for the sake of these 
things, whoever he may be, he is an hireling; let him not 
count himself among the children. For of such the Lord 
says: 'Verily I say unto you, they have received their re- 
ward.' " Thus far Augustine. But because men of this kind 
sit in the cathedra, Augustine, after interposing some things, 
says at the same place: "But take note how the hirelings 
are necessary. Many, forsooth, in the church who pursue 
after worldly comforts nevertheless preach Christ and through 
them Christ's voice is heard, and the sheep follow not the 



THE APOSTOLIC SEE 203 

hirelings but the voice of the Shepherd at the call of the hire- 
ling. Listen to the hirelings as they are set forth by the 
Lord himself. ' Scribes/ he said, ' and Pharisees sit in Moses' 
seat. Whatsoever they bid you, those things do, but what- 
soever they do, do not ye.' What else did he say except 
hear the voice of the shepherd when the hireling calls? For, 
sitting in Moses' seat, they teach God's law; therefore God 
teaches through them. But, if they seek to teach their own 
things, hear them not, do them not, for certainly such people 
seek their own things and not the things of Jesus Christ. 
No hireling, however, has dared to say to the people of God: 
' I seek thy things and not the things of Jesus Christ.' " Thus 
much Augustine. At the close of this homily he uses these 
words: "See, how the hireling is said to flee when he seeth 
the wolf. Why? Because he careth not for the sheep. 
Why does he not care for the sheep? Because he is an hire- 
ling. What is an hireling? He is one that seeketh temporal 
gain, but will not dwell in the house forever." Thus much 
Augustine, who shows that there are now hirelings in the 
church and they sit in the cathedras, that is, in the authority 
of teaching God's law. 

And again Augustine, on the words, " Simon Peter drew 
in the net full of great fishes," John 21 : 11 [Nic. Fathers, 
7 : 443)9 says, "He is least who breaks in deeds what he 
teaches in words"; and further on: "Finally, to show that 
those least ones are reprobates, who teach in words, speak- 
ing good things, which they break by living ill, and that 
they will not be as the least in the life eternal and will not 
even be there, after Christ had said, ' he shall be called least 
in the kingdom of heaven,' Christ added: 'for I say unto you 
except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of 
the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter the kingdom of 
heaven.' These certainly are the scribes and Pharisees who 
sit in Moses' seat, and of these Christ said : ' Whatsoever they 
bid you, do, but whatsoever they do, do not ye, for they 



204 THE CHURCH 

say and do not, they teach in words and break in their lives.' " 
Similarly, it is said, Psalm 119:2: " Blessed are they that keep 
his testimonies, that seek him with a whole heart." 

From what has just been said it is clear that the cath- 
edra of Moses or the apostolic seat is the authority to teach 
God's law, that is, the family of holy popes or of bishops 
succeeding the apostles, which family, as it chiefly thinks of 
God's honor, so it chiefly takes care for it and most prof- 
itably looks out for the holy church and most helpfully for 
both superior and subject— not by preferring the unworthy, 
not in putting aside the more fit, not in confirming without 
examination an ecclesiastical office to any one for gain or blood 
relationship or private personal tie. 

And, further, it is clear, as concerning the apostolic com- 
mands, as said the lord of Lincoln 1 in the following reply to 
the letters of the Roman pontiff about preferring a certain 
relative to a stall in Lincoln church: "The apostolic com- 
mands I fully obey with filial affection, devotedly and rev- 
erently. Indeed, I oppose and resist those who oppose 
themselves to the apostolic commands, myself zealous for 
the paternal honor. To do both I consider myself held by 
reason of my sonship and out of regard to the divine com- 

1 Robert Grosseteste, the famous bishop of Lincoln, 1235-1253, was one of 
the chief English ecclesiastics of the Middle Ages. He was a scholar and pa- 
tron of learning as well as a vigorous and independent episcopal administrator. 
The letters, quoted here and further on, are found in Luard's ed., Rolls Series, 
1864, pp. 435, 437. Grosseteste made bold protest against Innocent IV's 
appointment of his nephew, Fred, of Lavagna to a stall at Lincoln. It was 
one of the boldest protests made against the custom of appointing Italians to 
rich English livings. Matthew Paris referred to the papal exactions upon 
England as "bloodsucking extortion." Shakespeare expressed a wide-spread 
feeling, King John, 3:1: 

"That no Italian priest 
Shall tithe or toil in our dominions." 

Although Grosseteste on more than one occasion resisted the pope, he did 
not at one time deny the pope's right to "dispose freely of all ecclesiastical 
benefices," as he wrote, 1238 to the papal legate Otho, Luard's ed., p. 145. 
But in the letter from which Huss quotes, he said: " I disobey, I resist, I rebel." 
Huss knew of Grosseteste through Wyclifs quotations, but, as is also probable, 
at first hand, as Grosseteste's MSS. are in the Prague library. 



THE APOSTOLIC SEE 205 

mandment. Indeed, apostolic commands are not and can- 
not be other than apostolic teachings and teachings of our 
Lord Jesus Christ himself, the teacher of the apostles." Thus 
far he of Lincoln. Therefore, Christ's faithful disciple ought 
to consider how a command emanates from the pope, whether 
it is the express command of any apostle or of Christ's law 
or whether it has its foundation in Christ's law, and this 
being known to be the case, he ought to obey a command 
of this kind reverently and humbly. But, if he truly knows 
that a pope's command is at variance with Christ's com- 
mand or counsel or tends to any hurt of the church, then he 
ought boldly to resist it lest he become a partaker in crime 
by consent. 

For this reason, trusting in the Lord and in Christ Jesus, 
who mightily and wisely protects the professors of his truth 
and rewards them with the prize of never-ending glory, I 
withstood the bull of Alexander V, which Lord Zbynek, arch- 
bishop of Prague, secured, 1409, and in which he commands 
that there should be no more preaching or sermons to the 
people by any priest whatsoever — even though he might be 
fortified with an apostolic instrument taking precedence of 
such a mandate or by any other written instrument 1 — except 
in cathedrals, parochial or cloistral churches or in their cem- 
eteries. This mandate, being contrary to the words and 
deeds of Christ and his apostles, is not apostolic, for Christ 
preached to the people on the sea, in the desert, in the fields 
and houses, in synagogues, in villages and on the streets, and 
taught his disciples, saying: "Go ye into all the world 

1 Alexander Vs bull, dated Dec. 20, 1409, was in answer to protests sent 
by the part of the Prague clergy hostile to Huss against the spread of Wyclif s 
views in Bohemia. Alexander called upon Zbynek to be solicitous to clear his 
diocese of errors and bade him appoint a commission to detect and summon 
heretics. Huss's text in regard to the prohibition of preaching in chapels is 
taken word for word from Alexander's bull. Palacky, Doc., 347 sqq. Bethle- 
hem chapel was one of the privileged chapels which had papal sanction for 
popular preaching in the Bohemian tongue. Zbynek, at first favorable to Huss, 
was archbishop of Prague, 1403-1411. See Schaff, Life of John Huss. 



206 THE CHURCH 

< 

and preach the Gospel to every creature/' Mark 16 : 15. And 
these, going forth, preached everywhere, that is, in every 
place where the people were willing to listen, God working 
with them. Therefore, this command is to the hurt of the 
church, and binds the Word of God, that it should not run 
freely. And, in the third place, it is prejudicial to the chapels 
which are erected and have with reason been confirmed by 
diocesans, and have been furnished with privileges by the 
apostolic see for the preaching of God's Word in them. For 
no advantage whatever can be seen to accrue from that 
command, but it is a fallacious and faithless irony, be- 
cause the places set apart for divine worship and furnished 
with privileges for the preaching of the divine Word are de- 
prived of their lawful liberties on account of some personal 
feeling or of some injurious appeal or some importunity, or 
on account of some temporal good. Hence, I appealed from 
that command of Alexander to Alexander himself, better in- 
formed. 1 And while I was prosecuting the appeal, that lord 
pope suddenly died. And, no audience being allowed me in 
the Roman curia, the Lord Zbynek, archbishop of Prague 
secured papers aggravating the censure against me, from 
which, A. D. 1410, 1 appealed to Pope John XXTTT, and he 
during two years did not grant audience to my legal advo- 
cates and solicitors. 2 In the meantime I was weighed down 
still more by ecclesiastical proceedings. 8 When, therefore, 
my appeal from one pope to his successor did not profit me 
and to appeal from the pope to a council involves long wait- 
ing and because it is of uncertain advantage to beg for grace 
in the matter of a grievance and censure, therefore I appealed 

1 Huss claimed that Alexander had been misinformed by Zbynek and the 
Prague clergy in regard to the conditions in Prague. 

* John of Jesenicz, Huss's chief legal advocate, remained faithful till Huss's 
death, and after it. He presented Huss's case at Rome and Bologna, was cast 
into prison and afterwards escaped and returned to Prague. See Schaff, Life 
of John Huss, 140 sq. 

* The reference is to the aggravated excommunication issued by the curia 
against Huss, 1412, in view of his contumacy. 



THE APOSTOLIC SEE 207 

finally to the head of the church, Jesus Christ. 1 For he is 
superior to any pope whatever in deciding a case: he cannot 
err, nor to a suppliant, rightfully begging, can he deny justice, 
nor is he able in view of his law to condemn a man who in 
the sight of his law is without demerit. 

Besides, I withstood in the matter of the indulgences is- 
sued or announced A. D. 141 2 through the bulls of Pope 
John XXIII, about which I have said enough in another 
place. 2 For the pope cannot command anything lawfully 
except what makes for the destruction of evil and for the 
edification of the church — a thing which ought to be univer- 
sally held. To this the apostle bore witness when he said: 
"The weapons of our warfare are not of the flesh, but mighty 
before God to the destruction of strongholds, by which we 
cast down counsels, 3 casting down every high thing which 
exalted itself against the knowledge of God," II Cor. 10 : 4, 5. 
And again he says: "That I may not deal sharply accord- 
ing to the authority which the Lord gave me for building up 
and not for destruction," II Cor. 13 : 10. Hence, he of Lin- 
coln in his letters to the pope thus writes: "The apostolic 
see to which is given authority by the holiest of the holies, 
Jesus Christ, the apostle bearing witness, for building up and 
not for casting down, cannot commit schism." And further 
on he says: "For this reason your Discretion cannot ordain 
anything hard against me, because all my words and all my 
actions are not a gainsaying or a rebellion, but a filial hon- 
oring due to the father and mother, that is, Christ and the 
church, because it is the keeping of a divine command. But, 
recalling in brief, I say that the sanctity of the apostolic see 

1 Huss repeatedly refers to the appeal he made to Christ, now putting it on 
the simple ground of the right of a Christian to do so and now citing the case 
of Paul who appealed to the higher power, Oesar. See Letter, Doc., 73; Mon., 
1 : 325-392, etc., as well as later in this treatise. 

* Huss's treatises against Papal Indulgences for the crusade against Ladis- 
laus, king of Naples, Mon., 1 : 215-237. 

• Huss has quibus consilia demolimur, the Vulgate simply consilia deskuentes. 



208 THE CHURCH 

can do nothing except for the building up and not for de- 
stroying, for this is the plenitude of power to be able to do 
all things to build up. These things, however, which they 
call provisions, are not adapted to build up, but clearly to 
destroy. Therefore, the most blessed apostolic see is not 
able to make these provisions." 1 These things by him of 
Lincoln, who appealed from Pope Innocent to the tribunal 
of Christ. 

For this reason Castrensis, VH, tells how when Robert of 
Lincoln was dead, a voice was heard in the papal curia, Come, 
wretch, to thy judgment. And the pope was found the next 
morning dead as if pierced in the side by the point of a staff. 
And he of Lincoln, although noted for striking miracles, is 
nevertheless not admitted to a place in the list of the saints. 1 

And it is clear that the pope may err, and the more griev- 
ously because, in a given case, he may sin more abundantly, 
intensely and irresistibly [than others], as said Bernard in 
his book addressed to Pope Eugenius:* "More abundantly if 
the sin extends to all Christendom, more intensely if his act 
concerns the cure of souls and involves the withdrawal of 
spiritual benefits, and more irresistibly if no one dares to 
gainsay him, now in view of his alliance with the secular 
arms, now in view of the cloaked censures which he fulmi- 

1 A provision is the gift of a spiritual office or living by pope or bishop. The 
theory was that all the livings in Christendom were in the pope's hands for 
bestowment, a theory receiving its full statement from Clement IV, 1265. See 
Schaff, Ch. Hist., V, part 2, 83 sqq. The Avignon popes, 1305-1377, appointed 
two and sometimes three successors with right to succeed living incumbents 
of ecclesiastical positions. A collation is equivalent to a provision. 

* The full quotation runs, Rolls Series, 8 : 242: "Robert was summoned 
to the curia and excommunicated, but he appealed from Innocent's tribunal 
to the bar of Christ. Hence it happened after his death, Robert appeared to 
that pope in the night while he was lying in bed, himself clad as a bishop and 
said, Arise, wretch, and come to thy judgment. And straightway he pierced 
him with his pastoral staff in the left side unto the heart, and so the pope's 
bed was found in the morning full of blood and the pope was dead." Varia- 
tions were given of this popular story. Matthew Paris, who has unbounded 
admiration for Grosseteste, reports that on the night of his death strange bells 
were heard. 

• Quoted in chapter DC by its title, de Considerations. 



THE APOSTOLIC SEE 209 

nates against the children of obedience, now in view of pro- 
motions and ecclesiastical dignities which he provides for his 
accomplices. Hence, as the papal office, when it profits the 
church, is the most deserving, so, when the papal office is 
perverted in that man who abuses his office, if it do injury 
to the church, is most undeserving. The evidence of a pope's 
defect is if he put aside the law and a devout profession of 
the Gospel and give heed to human tradition." It was on 
this subject that Bernard was reasoning with Eugenius. 

This is the first mark. The second is when the pope and 
ecclesiastical superiors abandon the manner of life Christ fol- 
lowed and are involved in a secular way in things of the 
world. The third mark is when the pope advances the traf- 
fickers of this world in the ministry of Christ and gives him- 
self up chiefly to the continued pursuit of the secular life so 
that the poor churches are oppressed. The fourth mark is 
when, by his own command or through the appointment of 
incapable persons in the pastoral cure, he deprives souls 
that are to be saved of the Word of God. Hence he of Lin- 
coln, thinking over this, would not admit one of the pope's 
relatives to a stall in Lincoln, giving in this matter, among 
other things, a probable reason [for his conduct]. "After the 
sin of Lucifer," he said," — and the case will be the same in 
the end of time with the son of perdition, antichrist, whom 
the Lord Jesus will destroy with the breath of his mouth — 
there is not, neither can there be, another class so adverse to 
or at variance with the apostolic and evangelical doctrine, 
so hateful and detestable to the Lord Jesus Christ himself, 
and so abominated by him and so pernicious to the human 
family as the class which kills and destroys by depriving and 
defrauding of pastoral ministries souls which are to be made 
alive and saved by the office and ministry of the pastoral cure. 
And this sin they are known from the very clearest testimonies 
of holy Scripture to commit who, entrusted with the power of 
the pastoral cure, satisfy their own fleshly pleasuring with the 



210 THE CHURCH 

milk and wool of Christ's sheep, and do not minister the things 
due from the pastoral office for the working out of the eternal 
salvation of Christ's sheep. For the non-performance of pas- 
toral ministries is, by Scripture testimony, the killing and per- 
dition of Christ's sheep. And that these two classes of sins, 
although they are distinguished, are the very worst, and 
every other class of sin inestimably excels them, is clear 
from this that, although distinct and dissimilar, they are di- 
rectly contrary to the very best things. For that is the worst 
which is contrary to what is best, etc. And because, in good 
things, the cause of the good is better than the thing caused; 
and, in evil things, the cause of the evil is worse than the thing 
caused — it is clear how those who introduce into the church 
of Christ those worst murderers of godlikeness and divinity 
among Christ's sheep are still worse than those worst mur- 
derers themselves, and more like Lucifer and antichrist 
than they. And in this gradation of badness those do more 
abundantly excel who, in view of the greater and the di- 
viner power given them for edification and not for scatter- 
ing the sheep, are the more held by the church of God in 
duty bound to exclude and exterminate those worst mur- 
derers." Thus much he of Lincoln. 

He wished briefly to establish that the killing and driv- 
ing to perdition of Christ's sheep are the two worst sins, 
although they may be distinguished, even as the making alive 
of the sheep by grace and their glorification are the two best 
things for the sheep, although different, and to them the killing 
and the destroying are opposites. And as killing is the oppo- 
site of making alive and murder of glorification, it follows that 
by as much as these two sins are more serious by so much are 
they opposed to the good things which are more excellent. 
And, as God of himself is the cause of these good things, it 
follows that by as much as the killers and murderers of the 
sheep are worse than others, by so much are the killing and 
murdering of the sheep the worse sins. And it is clear that 



THE APOSTOLIC SEE 211 

those who kill souls are the worst servants of antichrist and 
Satan. 

In view of these things it is to be held that to rebel against 
an erring pope is to obey Christ the Lord, because in mak- 
ing his provisions he chiefly makes those which savor of 
personal affection. Therefore, I call the world to witness that 
the papal distribution of benefices sows in the church hire- 
lings all too widely. On the part of the popes, it gives them 
occasion to exalt their vicarial power, to put an excessive 
value on the world's dignity and to make an extravagant 
show of a fantastic sanctity. But these doctors, who are 
looking for temporal remuneration from the pope or servilely 
fear his power, 1 and also are saying that he has mysterious 
power and is impeccable and inerrant and that he may do 
lawfully whatsoever pleases him — these doctors are pseudo- 
prophets and pseudo-apostles of antichrist. 

From the things already said, it is clear that the apos- 
tolic seat is the authority to judge and teach Christ's law, 
or secondly, as has been said, it is the family of holy popes 
who are successors to Christ. In this sense the apostolic 
seat is understood, Dist. 22 [Friedberg, 1 : 74], where Pope 
Anacletus says: "This apostolic seat has been established 
as the head and hinge by the Lord and not by another; and 
just as a gate is ruled by the hinge, so by the authority of 
the holy apostolic seat all the other churches are ruled, sub- 
ject to the government of the Lord." That pope intended 
that he himself should be the head and hinge, the head 
in presiding and the hinge in ruling, but he has a weak 
enough argument for proving his purpose. For he argues 
from things that are alike, when he says: "As a gate is ruled 
by its hinge, so by the authority of the holy apostolic see 
all the churches are ruled." It would have been sufficient 
to argue that the pope and cardinals rule themselves well. 

1 Huss frequently ascribes the changed attitude of Palecz and Stanislaus to 
the fear of ecclesiastical penalties, Doc., 53, 466, etc 



212 THE CHURCH 

For as by one hinge only one door is ruled, so it would 
be a good thing if by their doctrine and authority they were 
ruled well themselves, so that afterwards other churches should 
be well ruled. For in what manner do they rule our church 
of Prague except by distributing benefices to the covetous and 
collecting monies? But what has become of teaching and 
the other ministrations of power? 

Thirdly, the seat is conceived of as power, and in this way 
it is conceived in Dist. Inferior. [21 : 4, Friedberg, 1 : 70], 
where Pope Nicolas says, "an inferior seat is not com- 
petent to absolve a superior," and he draws the conclusion 
but unfittingly enough from Isaiah 10 : 15, "Shall the axe 
boast itself against him that heweth? Shall the saw mag- 
nify itself against him that wieldeth it?" when he says: 
"Seeing these things are set forth in divine Scripture, we 
have shown more clearly than the sun that no one who is 
of lesser authority is competent to condemn by his judg- 
ments one who is of greater power, or subject him by defini- 
tions of his own." See how he here calls the inferior seat 
the man of lesser authority and the superior seat the man 
of greater authority. But how is the seat to be understood ? 
This Pelagius [a mistake for Gelasius] answers, when he says: 
Dist. 21 [Friedberg, 1 : 70]: "The first seat of the apostle 
Peter is the Roman church, which has neither spot nor 
wrinkle nor any such thing." See how the seat of Peter 
is here called the Roman church. But by this is it verified, 
that it is "without spot and wrinkle"? Since neither is the 
pope that seat nor that church, nor is the pope in conjunc- 
tion with the cardinals, for they are not "without spot." 
Nor is that seat the stone church. Of a truth, I am not able 
otherwise to think of that seat except as it is all those who 
imitate the life of Peter, measured finally by the law of 
Christ. For these will be "without spot and wrinkle" in 
the heavenly country. But whether this is the meaning of 
that pope or not, I do not know. 



THE APOSTOLIC SEE 213 

Hence Augustine, Com. on Psalm 122 : 5 [Nic. Fathers, 
7 : S94]j "The seats sat in judgment," speaks thus of the 
thing in question: "How did those seats sit in judgment? 
Wonderful enigma, wonderful question, if seat does not mean 
what the Greeks call throne ! The Greeks call chairs thrones, 
as something honorable. Therefore, my brethren, it is not 
wonderful if men sit on seats, on chairs, but that the seats 
themselves sit, how are we to understand this? As if some 
one were to say, let the cathedras sit here, or the chairs 
sit here; to sit in a chair, to sit in seats, they sat in cath- 
edras. The seats themselves do not sit. What, therefore, 
is the meaning of this, that the seats sat for judgment ? Surely 
ye are accustomed to hear what the Lord said: 'Heaven is 
my throne and the earth is the footstool of my feet.' But 
in Latin the whole is said to be: 'Heaven is my seat [or 
seats].' Who are these but the righteous? Who are the 
heavens but the righteous? What church? The churches 
are many and yet they are one. So, therefore, it is also with 
the righteous. The righteous are heaven that they may be 
the heavens. On these God sits, and the things pertaining 
to them God judges. And not without reason was it said 
that 'the heavens declare the glory of God.' 

"The apostles, however, are made heaven. Whence are 
they made heaven ? Because they are made righteous. How 
is the sinner made earth, to whom it is said, ' Thou art earth 
and unto earth thou shalt go'? Even so those who have 
been made righteous are made heaven. They have borne 
God; for their sakes God has made wonderful lights to shine, 
thundered terrors, rained consolations. Therefore the right- 
eous were heaven and 'declared the glory of God.' Now 
that ye may know that these are the heavens spoken of, it 
is said in the same Psalm, ' Their sound is gone out through 
all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.' 
You ask, Whose sound? and you will find, the sound of the 
heavens. If, therefore, heaven is God's seat and the apos- 



214 THE CHURCH 

ties are heaven, then they are themselves made God's seat; 
they are God's throne. In another place it is said: 'The 
soul of the righteous man is the throne of wisdom/ This 
is a great thing which is said, namely, in the soul of the 
righteous man wisdom sits as on its throne and from there 
it judges whatever it judges. Therefore, there will be 
thrones of wisdom, and so the Lord said to them: 'Ye shall 
sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.' 
So also they will sit on twelve seats; and they are themselves 
the seats of God. Of them, indeed, it was said: 'For there the 
seats sat.' How will the seats sit there? And who are the 
seats of whom it is said, 'The soul of the righteous man is 
the seat of wisdom'? And who are the seats of heaven? 
The heavens. Who are the heavens? Heaven. What is 
heaven, of which the Lord says, 'Heaven is my seat'? The 
righteous themselves are the seats, and have seats; and 
in that Jerusalem the seats will sit. For what purpose? 
'For judgment, ye shall sit/ he says, 'on twelve seats, 
judging the twelve tribes of Israel.' Judging whom ? Those 
who are below on the earth. Who will judge? Those who 
are made heaven." Thus much Augustine, showing from 
Scripture that the righteous are God's seats and they it is 
who will judge. 

Fourthly, seat is understood of the place in which any 
apostle remains for a given period, ruling the people accord- 
ing to Christ's law, and, in this sense, Jerusalem was not 
the bare city, but with its people it was the seat of James 
the apostle who, elected by the apostles, was there consti- 
tuted by the Lord its first bishop. And Antioch was the 
first seat of the apostle Peter, and so Pope Marcellus says, 
24 : 1 [Friedberg, 1 : 970]: "We beseech you brethren that 
ye teach and think nothing else than what was taught by 
St. Peter the apostle and the remaining apostles and Fathers." 
And further on: "His seat, that is, Peter's, was the primary 
one among you, and it was afterwards, at God's bidding, 



THE APOSTOLIC SEE 215 

transferred to Rome, over which we, with divine grace sup- 
porting ns, preside this very day. B,ut if your Antiochian 
seat, which originally was the first, gave way to the Roman 
seat, there is none which is not subject to its bestowal — 
ditione" See how very finely this pope begins and how 
very confusedly he ends. In the first place, he asks and 
begs that the priests of Antioch teach nothing else than 
what they received from Peter and from other apostles and 
holy Fathers. O that all clerics had done this! Then he 
says, that the seat of Peter was the primary one among 
them, that is, the first place of his residence, in which as 
bishop he taught Christ's law. And this is true. But when 
he says, "Afterwards it was transferred to Rome," that is, 
Peter's seat — I certainly do not know what that seat was 
that was transferred; for no church, no locality, no people 
were transferred. If it be said, it was the authority of Peter 
to teach the law, then that authority was at one and the 
same time in Antioch and in Rome. What then was trans- 
ferred unless it was Peter, when he came from Antioch to 
Rome? But Pope Marcellus did not preside over Peter, nor 
is Peter now the Roman seat. What, therefore, does this 
expression 'Over which/ mean, when he says, "Over which 
we preside." Certainly this pope speaks confusedly. For 
after the dotation, the Roman bishop then living intended 
that the Roman church by the authority of Caesar should 
be called first, that is, the more worthy seat over which he 
himself presides, and so he intended that the priests of An- 
tioch should be subject to himself. If Peter affected this 
superiority while he dwelt in Rome, I do not know. But 
I do know that in his letters he wished that they should 
follow in the steps of Jesus Christ. And I will pass by the 
way in which many popes and canonists speak obscurely 
about the apostolic see. I will, however, not say that the 
city of Rome is the apostolic seat, so necessary that with- 
out it the church of Jesus Christ could not stand. For, if 



216 THE CHURCH 

by a possibility Rome, like Sodom, were destroyed, the Chris- 
tian church would be still standing. And it is not true that, 
wherever the pope is, there is Rome. Howbeit, it is true 
that, wherever the pope shall be so long as he is here on 
the earth, there Peter's authority abides with the pope, so 
long as the pope does not depart from the law of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. So much I have wanted to say about the 
apostolic seat for the present. 



CHAPTER XIX 

WHEN ECCLESIASTICAL SUPERIORS ARE TO BE 

OBEYED 

It having been stated what the apostolic seat is, it is 
now to be stated in what cases obedience is to be rendered 
to this apostolic seat. And the aforesaid doctors say, that 
"it is to be obeyed by inferiors in all things — when the abso- 
lutely good is not forbidden or the absolutely evil is not " 
commanded [but the intermediate also] 1 which in place, way, 
time or person may be either good or bad. 

This they prove by four pertinent witnesses, the Saviour, 
Bernard, Augustine and Jerome. And because the doctors 
took the distinction from Bernard, Ep. ad Adam monachum 
[Migne's ed., 182 : 95 sq.], about the absolutely good and the 
absolutely evil, so it is to be noted that after St. Bernard 
shows that no one is to be obeyed in that which is evil and 
concludes, saying: "Therefore, to do evil, even when any one 
whosoever commands, certainly is not obedience but rather 
disobedience. This deserves soberly to be said, that some 
things are absolutely good, some absolutely evil, and in these 
latter no man owes obedience, just as the former are not to be 
left undone, even when forbidden. Nor are the latter to be 
performed, even though they be enjoined. Further, between 
these two are the things that are intermediate, which may be 
good or evil according to the place, time, mode or person in- 
volved. And in these things the law of obedience is fixed as 
in the tree of knowledge of good and evil, which was in the 

I Thc printed text of the original ed. as well as of the reprint omits the words 
in brackets and " not " before commanded. 

217 



218 1HE CHURCH 

midst of Paradise. In these things, certainly, it is not right 
to prefer our thoughts to the sentence of the teachers. In 
these things neither the command of prelates nor their pro- 
hibition is to be in all cases spurned." And further on, Ber- 
nard says: "Faith, hope and love are absolutely good, and 
other things of this kind; and they may not be either for- 
bidden or not kept. Absolutely evil are sacrilege, adultery, 
theft, and such like, which certainly may neither be properly 
enjoined nor done, and they may not be improperly not 1 
forbidden and not done. For no one's prohibition is valid 
to set aside precepts, and no one's commandments are valid 
to prejudice in favor of things forbidden. 

"Then there are the things intermediate, which indeed of 
themselves are not known to be either good or evil. They 
may, however, indifferently be either good or bad; they 
may be commanded or forbidden, but under no circum- 
stances are they to be obeyed by inferiors, when they are 
evil. Among these are, by way of example, fasting, vigils, 
reading and such like. But it should be known that cer- 
tain things intermediate go beyond the reason of things 
impure or evil. For since marriage may occur or not occur, 
but when once entered into it is not permissible to undo it, 
what, therefore, before marriage was permitted to be, as a 
thing indifferent, obtains in those already married the force 
of the absolutely good. Likewise, it is a matter indifferent 
for a secular man to possess private property, because he 
has the option of not possessing. But for a monk, because 
he is not permitted to have possessions, to possess goods is 
an absolute evil." Thus much Bernard. 

Also it is to be noted that, so far as the sense of those 
speaking about human actions goes, a certain work is called 
neutral among them which, in its primary intent, cannot be 
said to be a good of morals or an evil of vice, as, for example, 
to build or to weave. But works are called good or evil 

1 Huss has improperly inserted this "not" which is not found in Migne. 



ECCLESIASTICAL SUPERIORS 219 

by the standard of their class — de genere — which words des- 
ignate from a moral standpoint the substance or nature of a 
good work or an evil. Nevertheless, they do not involve the 
circumstances which of themselves fix the natures of such 
acts as in the class of virtue or vice, as, for example, giving 
alms or putting a man to death. For both of these can be- 
come good or evil according to the diversity of their causes 
or the purpose of the doer. For to give alms for vainglory 
is evil, just as to kill a man by the authority of God, lest 
he infect the church, is good. 1 But of another kind are col- 
lective works, which from a moral standpoint are called 
purely good or bad, such as committing adultery and thiev- 
ing, which are of vice, and loving God and our neighbor heart- 
ily, which are virtuous. Briefly, as one act is purely good, 
such as loving God with the heart, so another act is purely 
evil, as is hating God. 

Likewise, a thing is good generically which, as it were, 
disposes a man to judge and discover that it is good more 
than to judge that it is evil, as fasting and giving alms. A 
thing is evil generically which, as it were, disposes a man to 
judge and discover what may be evil rather than what may 
be good. Howbeit, the thing may be well done, as the put- 
ting a man to death. But a neutral work is such a work 
which does not dispose a man to judge and discover what is 
good rather than what is evil, as weaving, eating, plough- 
ing, or running. 

Hence, a work absolutely good holds the first rank, a 
work generically good [that is, judged by its class], as it were, 
the middle rank, and a neutral work the lowest rank. Ex- 
amples of these three are loving God, fasting, and weaving. 
The same applies to their opposites, for a work purely evil, 
as is hating God; a work generically evil is putting a man 
to death. But the third or neutral work is not counted as 
evil, for if it were it would not be neutral. For the name 

I The special authority of God is essential. See Introduction. 



220 THE CHURCH 

neutral is used because it does not dispose to virtue more 
than to vice, or the contrary. 

Further, it is to be noted that there is an immediate 
distinction between human works, because whether they are 
virtuous or vicious is manifest, for, if a man is vicious and 
does something, then he acts viciously; and if he is virtu- 
ous and does something, then he acts virtuously, for just 
as vice, which is called crime or mortal sin, infects the acts 
of the whole man, so virtue gives life to all the acts of a vir- 
tuous man, in so far as that, living in grace, he is said to 
be meritorious and pray even in sleeping or in doing any- 
thing whatsoever, as the holy doctors say, especially St. 
Augustine, Gregory, Jerome and others. And this state- 
ment is founded in the words of Jesus Christ our Saviour: 
"If thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light," 
that is, if thy purpose be good and in grace unto the doing 
of good works, then "thy whole body," that is, the sum of 
all thy works, "will be full of light," because they are pure 
in the sight of God. "But if thine eye be evil," that is, 
thy purpose be bad, tainted and incriminate with vice, "thy 
whole body," that is, the sum of thy works, "will be full 
of darkness," that is, will be vicious. Hence, the doctor 
of the Gentiles, the apostle Paul, teaches thus: "Do all to 
the glory of God," II Cor. 10 : 31, and, "Let all your things 
be done in love," I Cor. 16 : 14. Therefore, the whole mode 
of living in love is virtuous, and the whole mode of a man's 
living without love is vicious. 

From this it is clear that, as no one may be neutral, so 
far as virtue and vice go, since it must needs be that one is 
in the grace of Almighty God or outside it, so no conduct 
of any man may be neutral. In the case of virtuous com- 
mands, therefore, the superior is to be obeyed, but of vicious 
commands he is to be boldly withstood. These things hav- 
ing been stated [Chapter XVII, on Obedience], every one of 
Christ's faithful ought truly to be on his guard lest he be- 



ECCLESIASTICAL SUPERIORS 221 

lieve that if the Roman pontiff or a prelate commands any- 
thing whatsoever, it is to be done as though it were a man- 
date of God, and that the prelate cannot err, even as Jesus 
Christ cannot. 

Secondly, let him hold in regard to the commands in 
God's law, how some are commanded us in a mixed way 
and others distinctly. In a mixed way the commands are 
commanded which we ought to do every day and meritori- 
ously, after the manner of which Augustine says, that all 
truth is contained in the Scriptures. But a work that is 
commanded, for which there is no reason or utility to the 
church of Christ, is not contained explicitly or implicitly in 
the Scriptures. And if such be commanded by pope or 
other prelate, the inferior is not bound to perform it, lest, 
in so doing, he offend against the liberty of the Lord's law. 
For we ought to receive as of faith that God commands us 
to do nothing except what is meritorious for us and reason- 
able, and consequently profitable to salvation. 

The conclusion should be this: Subjects are bound to 
obey willingly and cheerfully virtuous, yea, and hard su- 
periors, when they command us to do the mandates of the 
Lord Jesus Christ. This conclusion is evident, for Christ 
says, "The scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses' seat. All 
things, therefore, whatsoever they bid you, these do," Matt. 
23 : 1, that is, all my commandments. Here Augustine, 
Com. on John, 20 [Nic. Fathers, 7 : 443], says: "In sitting in 
Moses' seat, they teach God's law. Therefore God teaches 
through them. But, if they wish to teach their own things, 
do not hear them, do not do them." And on this subject 
Christ also said, "He that heareth you, heareth me, and he 
that despiseth you," etc., Luke 10 : 16, consequently, also, 
God the Father; because such persons are not obeyed as 
men, but as ministers of God, who is to be obeyed above all. 

Therefore, no one should obey man in anything, even 
the least thing, that opposes itself to the divine commands, 



222 THE CHURCH 

which St. Bernard calls divine counsels. For Peter says: 
"We must obey God rather than men," Acts 5 : 29. Hence, 
as we are commanded to obey our superiors in things lawful 
and honorable, with the circumstances taken into considera- 
tion, so we are commanded to resist them to the face when 
they walk contrary to the divine counsels or commandments. 
For Paul, teaching that we should be his imitators, I Cor. 
4 : 16, withstood Peter to the face for a light offence, Gal. 
2 : 11. But much more are we bound to obey Paul and 
every writer of divine Scripture rather than the Roman pon- 
tiff, when it comes to matters indifferent or neutral. And 
as we are not bound to follow any apostle, except in so far 
as he follows Jesus Christ, so it is evident by the limitation 
laid down by the apostle that we are bound to obey no prel- 
ate who has lived since the apostles, except as he commands 
or counsels Christ's counsels or commands. And so the holy 
apostle, I Cor. 4, 11, when he counsels that they be his imi- 
tators immediately announces the manner of such imitation, 
when he says, "even as I also am a follower of Christ." 
Therefore, the wise inferior ought to examine into the com- 
mands of a superior when he seems to deviate from Christ's 
law, or his rule. For no superior is above correction. Hence, 
Christ often commanded us to be watchful in our works: 
"I say unto you all, watch," Mark 13 : 36. And the apostle 
said: "Beloved, do not believe every spirit, but prove the 
spirits whether they be of God, for many false prophets are 
gone out into the world," I John 4:1. The Saviour also 
said: "Many false prophets shall arise 1 and lead many 
astray," Matt. 24 : 5. 

And in this connection, St. Bernard speaks very finely in 
his Letter to Adam the Monk [Migne, 182 : 100 sq.]f when 
he rebukes him because he had unwisely obeyed his abbot 

1 S urgent ; Vulgate has venient. 

* Adam, monk of Morimond, a Cisterdan abbey in the diocese of Langres, 
whose abbot was Arnold. The letter is dated, in Migne, 11 25. 



ECCLESIASTICAL SUPERIORS 223 

contrary to the rule of his vow. Hence, he exclaims, but 
in a playful mood: "0 most obedient of monks, whom of 
all the words of the elders not a single iota escapes, he does 
not heed of what nature the command is which is commanded, 
satisfied if he only obeys, and this obedience is without 
delay! If this ought to be so, let it now tfe scratched out 
from the book of the Gospel, where it is written, 'Be ye 
wise as serpents'; and let that be sufficient which fol- 
lows: 'simple as doves.' And I do not say that the com- 
mandments of superiors are to be examined and judged by 
inferiors when nothing is found to be commanded 1 at vari- 
ance with the divine appointments, but I assert prudence 
to be necessary, by which it may be determined whether 
anything is at variance; and also liberty to be necessary, 
with which we may honestly spurn commands." Further, he 
says: "I have nothing to enquire. Let him see to it, who 
has commanded. 1 Say, I ask, whether, if the sword were 
put in thy hands, he would order thee to be struck in the 
neck, wouldst thou consent?' Would it not be reputed to 
others as homicide, since thou couldst have prevented it? 
Come, therefore, see to it lest, perhaps, under the pretext of 
obedience, thou fall into something more grave." Thus much 
Bernard, who adduces many testimonies from Scripture and 
concludes: "Thou, therefore, in the face of all these things 
and other numberless testimonies of the truth to this same 
purport, dost thou think any one whosoever ought to be 
obeyed ? Hateful perversity, this virtue of obedience, which 
always wars against the truth, and is girded about against 
the truth ! " Thus much Bernard. 

Therefore, this same Bernard in his sermon on the Lord's 
advent lays down five conditions of right obedience; the 
first, when the work is a holy work, for it is not permissible 

1 Huss's text leaves out the juberi, Migne. 

* Migne has quid jusscrit. 

* Migne adds: " If he had been ready by thy act to be thrown into the fire 
or water, wouldst thou have obeyed and done it? " 



224 THE CHURCH 

to obey contrary to God; the second, when the work is vol- 
untary; the third, when it is pure from the standpoint of a 
holy purpose, in accordance with the Saviour's teaching, when 
he said: "If thine eye is single, thy whole body shall be full 
of light," Matt. 6 : 22. The fourth condition is when the 
work is judicious, because neither defect nor excess infects 
it, and the fifth, when it is permanently persevered in, as an 
obligation, even to the end. From this it is clear that an 
inferior, recognizing a superior's injudicious command, that 
it is known or should be known as fitted to hurt the church, 
by drawing away from the worship of God and the profit of 
souls unto salvation, — he ought to resist that superior. For 
such resistance is true obedience done not only to God in 
view of the law of fraternal correction but also to the su- 
perior himself, for no superior has the right to command 
anything except what is good. Since, therefore, an inferior 
is obligated, for obedience's sake, to do that which is gener- 
ically good and commanded by the superior, it follows that 
he is obeying in so resisting him, as he ought; for he thereby 
does what is good, and turns away from what is evil. Hence, 
it is clear that a subject, in obeying his prelate in that which 
is evil, is not excused from sin, for the Saviour says: "If the 
blind guide 1 the blind, both fall into the pit," Matt. 15 : 14. 

This means that if a "blind man," that is, an ignorant 
or bad prelate, guides "a blind man," that is, an ignorant or 
bad subject, by commanding him to do something, they both 
fall into the pit of error. Hence, Christ aptly says to his 
disciples in regard to the scribes and Pharisees — who taught 
that it is a sin to eat bread with unwashen hands, when it 
is nevertheless not a sin: — "Let them alone, they are blind 
leaders of the blind." What does "let them alone" mean? 
The Gloss says, "Leave them to their own will; they are 
blind," that is, they are obscured by traditions. 

And this rule of Christ the very brute animals observe, 

1 Prctbit ducatum. Vulgate: prc&std ducatum. 



ECCLESIASTICAL SUPERIORS 225 

for the horse or the ass, discerning the hole in front of them 
and urged on by spurs, avoid the ditch so far as they can, 
as is clear from the case of the ass, which discerned the angel 
forbidding, lest it go the way Balaam wanted to go [Num. 
22 : 22], and, with a man's voice, admonished the prophet's 
unwisdom. Hence, Bernard says ironically in his letter to 
the monk Adam: "Thou, that most obedient son, thou, that 
most devoted disciple — as for that thy father and teacher, 
whom neither by an instant of time nor a turn of the foot, 
as they say, thou didst suffer to be removed from thee as 
long as he lived — after him not with blind eyes, but after 
the manner of Balaam, with open eyes, thou didst not hesi- 
tate to fall down into the pit !" So much Bernard. 

From these truths, however, it follows further that cler- 
ical inferiors, and much more laics, may sit in judgment on 
the works of their superiors. From this it follows that the 
judgment by discreet and hidden arbitrament in the court 
of conscience is one thing, and the judgment in virtue of the 
empowered jurisdiction in the court of the church is another. 
By the first way the inferior ought chiefly to examine and 
judge himself, as it is written: "If we would judge 1 ourselves, 
we would not be judged," I Cor. n : 31. And again, in the 
same way, he ought to judge all things pertaining to his 
salvation as it is written: "He that is spiritual judgeth all 
things," I Cor. 2 : 15. The laic also ought to examine and 
judge the works of his superior, as the apostle judged the 
works of Peter, when he corrected him and said: "When I 
saw that they walked not uprightly according to the truth 
of the Gospel, I said unto Cephas before them all, If thou, 
who art a Jew, livest as do the Gentiles and not as do the 
Jews, how compellest thou the Gentiles to walk as do the 
Jews ? " Gal. 2 : 14. Secondly, the laic ought to examine and 
judge his superior for the purpose of fleeing, for Christ said: 
"Beware of false prophets which come unto you in sheep's 

1 Judkaremus; the Vulgate dijudicoremus. 



226 THE CHURCH 

clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves," Matt. 7:15. 
Thirdly, he ought to examine and judge that the superior 
may attend to spiritual offices and bodily nourishment or 
other good works to be done. For not otherwise should 
clergymen ever be chosen by laics as their curates and con- 
fessors and the dispensers of their alms. 

Therefore, it is lawful for the rich of this world with 
diligent scrutiny to examine by what and what kind of su- 
periors they shall administer their alms and in what way 
they shall administer them, guarding against rapacious wolves, 
because according to the apostle, in Acts 20 : 29, and accord- 
ing to Chrysostom, in Imperfecto, Homily 20, it is clear that 
in this way they seek more the money of those subject to 
them than their salvation and this is at variance with the 
apostle, who says: "I seek not yours, but you," H Cor. 
12 : 14. And looking ahead with prophetic vision and seeing 
such false apostles, he affirmed, "I know that after my de- 
parting rapacious wolves shall enter in among you, not spar- 
ing the flock," Acts 20 : 29. And because this wolfishness is 
clearly discerned in the robbing of temporal things and in 
the infliction of punishments for the very purpose of plun- 
dering temporal goods more abundantly, he declares that 
he had himself pursued the opposite course. No man's gold 
and silver, he says, or vestments have I coveted, as ye 
yourselves know, because for those things that were need- 
ful for me and for those that were with me these hands have 
ministered. 

Therefore, subjects living piously in Christ ought to pay 
heed to the life of the apostles and see to it whether their 
superiors live conformably to the apostles. For, if in their 
spiritual ministry they are out of accord with the apostles, 
if they are busy in exacting money, spurn evangelical pov- 
erty and incline to the world, nay, if they evidently sow 
offences, then they know by their works that they have de- 
parted from the religion of Jesus Christ the Lord. There- 



ECCLESIASTICAL SUPERIORS 227 

fore, ye who love Christ's law from the heart, first note 
their works and see if they [the superiors] incline to the 
world, second give heed to their commands, whether they 
savor of avarice or the gain of this world, and third consult 
holy Scripture whether they command in accordance with 
Christ's counsel. And in the light of this counsel believe 
them; or disbelieve them, if they command contrary to this 
counsel. But let not curates say to laics, 'What concern 
is it of yours to take note of our life or works,' for did not 
our Saviour say: "Do not according to their works"? Matt. 
23. And afterwards he exposed the works of the prelates 
to the multitude that they might know them and to their 
advantage avoid them. Yea, much more to the prelates, 
who say, 'What concern is it of yours to take note of our 
life and works?' it is pertinent for laics to reply: 'What 
concern is it of yours that ye should receive our alms?' for 
the apostle says: "We command you in the name of Jesus 
Christ that ye withdraw yourselves from every brother that 
walketh disorderly and not after the tradition which they 
received of us, for ye yourselves know how ye ought to imi- 
tate us, for we behaved not ourselves disorderly among you, 
neither did we eat bread for naught at any man's hands, but 
in labor and travail, for even when we were with you, this 
we commanded you, If any man will not work, neither let 
him eat." II Thess. 3 : 6, 10. 

It is clear how inferiors ought to examine and judge in- 
telligently and reasonably in respect to the commands and 
works of superiors, for otherwise they would be in peril of 
eternal death, if they did not judge wisely about these things, 
how far they ought to believe their superiors, how far follow 
them, and in what things they ought intelligently to obey 
them according to the Lord's law. For that best of masters, 
the Lord, admonished us in advance to "beware of false 
prophets and the leaven of the Pharisees," Matt. 7 : 15; 
16 : 11. He also said: "Believe not, go not forth and do 



228 THE CHURCH 

not do their works," Matt. 24 : 26. For he himself exhorted 
the priests and the multitude to examine and judge in re- 
spect to his works, saying, "Which of you convicteth me of 
sin?" John 8 : 46, and, "Though ye believe not me, believe 
the works," John 10 : 38. And what an evil it is of Christ's 
church that our superiors make a larger demand that belief 
be given to all their approving and condemning judgments, 
than that belief be given to the faith of holy Scripture, 
which is the catholic faith. And they punish more severely 
for departure from their traditions than they do those who 
blaspheme against that most excellent faith of Christ. And 
so to them the words of the Psalm [41 : 9] may be applied: 
"He that ate of my bread hath lifted up his heel against 
me." For as they affirm, they themselves eat up Christ's 
patrimony and nevertheless they put a higher value on their 
commandments than on the commandments of our Lord 
Jesus Christ himself. 



CHAPTER XX 

OBEDIENCE NOT ALWAYS TO BE RENDERED TO THE 

CHURCH OR ITS PRELATES 

Again, that the doctors in their double statement may be 
better understood, since they say that "the Roman church 
and the prelates are to be obeyed in all things by their in- 
feriors," etc., 1 and again, "Therefore ought they to be obeyed 
and submitted to/' I take it as true from the rules of grammar 
that this complex statement "are to be obeyed" means as 
much as the complex expression, "ought to obey," and fur- 
ther, that this word "ought" expresses a debt of obligation 
to obey under pain of mortal sin. This supposition appears 
from the affirmation of the doctors derived from the words 
of the Saviour: "All things whatsoever they bid you, these 
do and observe," Matt. 23 : 3. For this word of the Lord 
is a commandment. Secondly, this supposition appears from 
the words of the doctors, when they say: "Certain of the 
clergy in the kingdom of Bohemia who do not agree, striv- 
ing, so far as in their power lies, to lead the faithful people 
to disobedience in respect to their prelates and to irrever- 
ence fQr the papal, episcopal, priestly and clerical dignities." 
It is only noted that there would be mortal sin in disobedi- 
ence, and irreverence would be mortal sin. Thirdly, this sup- 
position appears from the assertion of St. Augustine, when 
he says: "If thou art not obedient to thy father (under- 
stand not thy bodily father but thy spiritual father) thou 
hast lost all the virtues." In this way it is plain that a 
virtuous man is not able to lose all the virtues except by 

1 In his <fe rat Erroribus, Huss has a chapter on obedience, Mon. y 1 : 238 sq., 
in which he denies that it is to be rendered in all cases to ecclesiastical superiors. 
The terms, "inferiors" and "subjects" refer to ecclesiastical rank and orders. 

229 



2 3 o THE CHURCH 

committing mortal sin, and so disobedience to authority in- 
volves a serious offence. Therefore this statement, taken 
from the proposition of the doctors, "the Roman church 
and prelates are to be obeyed by inferiors in all things," 
etc., means this much: "that we ought to obey under pain 
of mortal sin." 

Therefore, following this sense, they now cry out that 
I am disobedient to the Roman church, and for this they 
excommunicate me. And it is clear from God's law and 
from the canons that no one is to be excommunicated except 
for mortal sin, as I have stated in another place. 

Letting this proposition stand, I lay down this conclu- 
sion, that to no apostolic seat of the Roman church, that 
is, to no pope with the cardinals (as these are understood by 
the doctors), and to no prelates do inferiors owe obedience 
in all things which are neither purely good nor purely evil. 

It is proved that king, marquis, duke, baron, soldier, citi- 
zen or rustic is bound to obey under pain of mortal sin no 
Roman church and no prelates so as to be prevented from 
holding worldly possessions or from entering marriage. These 
two things, the possession of goods and the entrance upon 
marriage, belong, in the case of the persons mentioned, neither 
to the class of purely good things nor things purely evil. 
Hence the conclusion. The consequence has been noted and 
the minor premise is presented in St. Bernard's letter to the 
monk Adam [Migne, 182 : 96], when he says: " Truly it must 
be known that things intermediate often cease to be so. For 
marriage may be lawfully contracted or not, but when once 
contracted it cannot be dissolved. Therefore, what before 
marriage is permitted to be a thing intermediate obtains, 
when the parties are married, the force of a thing absolutely 
good. Likewise, the possession of private property is for a 
secular man a thing intermediate for he may or may not have 
property, but for a monk, because he is not permitted to hold 
property, it is a thing absolutely evil." So much Bernard. 



OBEDIENCE TO THE CHURCH 231 

The major premise is proved in this way. No Roman 
church is permitted to command, under pain of mortal sin, 
that king, marquis, duke, baron, soldier, citizen or rustic 
enter upon matrimony or that he may not hold private 
property, therefore none of the persons mentioned are bound 
to obey under pain of mortal sin. The consequence has been 
noted and the antecedent is clear, because the Roman church 
has no right to exalt its commandment above a counsel of 
Christ. In commanding, however, that a king, marquis, 
duke, baron or soldier may not hold property, the Roman 
church would exalt its commandment above Christ's counsel, 
for this is the first among the twelve chief evangelical coun- 
sels, namely, voluntary poverty, which consists in the re- 
nunciation of private property and is related to need. Christ 
counselled, he did not command, when he says to a certain 
young ruler: "If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell all that 
thou hast and give to the poor and follow me," Matt. 19 : 21. 
Similarly, if the Roman church commands king, marquis, 
duke or other secular person to enter upon marriage it 
would be commanding contrary to a counsel of Christ and 
would it, therefore, not be acting contrary to Christ? The 
observance of virginal chastity until death is Christ's third 
evangelical counsel, and of this he says: "There are eunuchs 
that made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's 
sake," Matt. 19 : 12 — because Christ does not command but 
counsels that what is fitting for a person, that he ought with 
good will to hold, and he says: "He that is able to receive 
it, let him receive it." 

Therefore, it would be great presumption for the Roman 
church to bind any one, under pain of mortal sin, above what 
the counsels of his Lord demand. This would be to lay un- 
bearable burdens on men's shoulders, as said the Saviour: 
The things which the scribes and Pharisees, sitting in Moses' 
seat, do not keep they lay upon others. Hence, Christ's 
apostle, who saw the secret things of God, which the Roman 



232 THE CHURCH 

church has not seen, says that he did not dare to command 
any one to marry and not to remain continent, for he says: 
"Every one hath his own gift of God, one after this manner, 
one after that/' I Cor. 7 : 7. The apostle did not wish to 
command anything except what the Lord commanded through 
him and so what was useful to the one obeying. For there 
are many counsels for others which are not counsels for us, 
because of our weakness or ignorance, so that one may marry 
in the Lord without mortal sin, when, however, it would be 
better to keep his virgin state, but he is ignorant, believing 
the opposite. Therefore, the apostle says: "Every one has 
his own gift from God, one after this manner, one after that." 
And the words follow: "But if they cannot contain, let 
them marry, for it is better to marry than to burn." Some 
things, therefore, are more useful to some which for others 
would be less useful. Hence, it would be a notable mistake 
to think that all Christ's counsels would be profitable for all 
men if they fulfilled them to the letter. And hence a son 
is not bound to obey his father under pain of mortal sin, 
when the father commands that the son possess nothing or 
that he marry. In a similar way, it is also with a daughter, 
who cannot lawfully be forced to remain a virgin till death 
or be forced to marry. 

Likewise, if that statement of the doctors be true that 
"the apostolic seat of the Roman church is to be obeyed by 
inferiors in all things," etc., it follows that Wenzel, king of 
the Romans and king of Bohemia, and likewise Sigismund, 
king of Hungary, would be continually sinning mortal sins, 
for they have not given obedience to the commandments of 
the Roman church and Pope Boniface with his cardinals, 
and resigned their kingdoms, the former the kingdom of the 
Romans, the latter the kingdom of Hungary. 1 And this is 

1 This act of Boniface DC, 1403, referred to by the university of Prague, Doc., 
500, was a deposition of Wenzel in favor of Ruprecht, who had been chosen 
king of the Romans by three of the electors, 1400. Ruprecht threatened to 
pass over to the obedience of the Avignon line. See also Huss's Reply to Palecz, 
Mon. f 1 : 329. 



OBEDIENCE TO THE CHURCH 233 

dear because to resign their kingdoms is for the one as for 
the other not a thing absolutely evil, as is seen from the state- 
ment of Bernard. And as these kings have not yet obeyed 
that mandate or been absolved by Boniface, it follows that 
they are still persisting in disobedience. But who of sound 
head would want to say this, seeing that that Pope Boniface, 
according to the Lord's law, ought not to have attempted to 
bring this about? 

Likewise, it follows that certain persons, according to the 
statement of the doctors, to wit, Stanislaus, Peter of Znaim, 
John Helius and yet another, are still under the ban of papal 
excommunication. This seems to be the case, because they 
have not obeyed up to this day the apostolic seat of the 
Roman curia, or, if on account of contentions they have 
secretly obeyed, they are, however, not absolved from the 
curse, as the mandate was placed upon them by the pontiff 
Innocent, under the pains of excommunication, deprivation 
of their benefices and disenablement, that they really should 
give up and assign to Master Mauritius the place which he 
wished. And they themselves, though solemnly warned by 
a notary before witnesses, do not up to this day obey that 
mandate, although the turning over of a place to Master 
Mauritius which was commanded is not a thing absolutely 
evil, although perhaps it is an evil for Master Mauritius 
that they in such an unusual degree like that place. And 
to the doctors themselves perhaps it is also an evil because, 
loving the first place in the synagogues, they do not admit 
Mauritius himself. 1 Oh! that on both sides they may not 
come under the heading of the salutation of that most 
lowly of masters, Christ, which runs: "Woe unto you Phari- 

1 Mauritius-Marik Rwacka found favor with Innocent VII, d. 1406, who 
called upon the theological faculty of Prague to make a place for him in the 
university on pain of excommunication, which it neglected to do, Documenta, 
PP- 53> 500* He was one of a deputation sent to Rome, 1408, by King Wenzel. 
He was then made papal inquisitor, with whom Huss had something to do, Doc., 
164, 184. Huss also refers to the case of Mauritius and the university's dis- 
obedience to the papal mandate in Reply to Palecz, M on., z : 329. 



234 THE CHURCH 

sees, that love the chief seats in the synagogues!" Luke 
ii : 43, "and to be called of men Rabbi!" Matt. 23 : 7. 

Likewise in acts good generically, as are fasting and 
prayer — which are not things absolutely evil — the Roman 
church and prelates are not to be obeyed except as these 
acts are weighed in the balances of reason. This is plain 
because an inferior must continue in prayer and fasting, so 
far that the neglect to do so would mean damage to him- 
self and the church; but this is to be avoided both by him 
who commands and by the inferior; therefore, the antecedent 
is true. For it is certain that it would be tempting God to 
obey a prelate or for me to vow to myself that I would never 
eat or drink but so much and never have but so many clothes 
or wraps. And the same would be true with the other coun- 
sels, wrongly interpreted. And much more would it be folly 
for a prelate to obligate a community to perform such a 
singular measure of conduct as this. For one and the self- 
same individual, in view of the diversity of the times, of weak- 
ness and health, of youth and old age, of heat and cold, must 
vary in practices of this sort; and much more in a commu- 
nity made up of different persons are things that are indiffer- 
ent to be adapted to individuals of different temperaments 
and states of health. According to Aristotle, Ethics, n, that 
which is a matter of indifference does not apply in the same 
way to all. For in the indifferent matter of eating, the 
amount proportioned to Milo, who wished to eat a whole bull 
in a day, would not be the amount proportioned for every 
individual whatsoever, young or decrepit, sound or weak. 

Hence, the Saviour wholly excused his disciples who were 
accused of not fasting, when it is said: "Then came to him 
the disciples of John saying, Why do we and the Pharisees 
fast oft, but thy disciples fast not?" Matt. 9 : 14. To these 
calumniators who joined themselves with the Pharisees in 
reproving Christ, the Saviour replied for his disciples and 
said: "Can the sons of the bridegroom mourn as long as the 



OBEDIENCE TO THE CHURCH 235 

bridegroom is with them? But the days will come when 
the .bridegroom will be taken away from them and then they 
will fast And no man putteth 1 a piece of undressed cloth 
upon an old garment, for that which would fill it up, taketh 
from the garment and a worse rent is made. Neither do men 
put new wine into old wine-skins, or else the wine-skins burst 
and the wine is spilt and the skins perish, but they put new 
wine into new skins and both are preserved," Matt. 9 : 15-17. 
Here the Saviour excuses his disciples for not fasting, first for 
the reason that he, the bridegroom of the church, was at that 
time with his children and providing for them; secondly, be- 
cause that bodily fasting did not befit them for that time, as 
Lyra says: "Wherefore does the bridegroom say, 'Can the 
children of the bridegroom mourn ? ' that is, be sad by afflict- 
ing themselves with fasting ? — which is as if he should say, No, 
for fasting does not befit them now, 'but the days will come/ 
namely, the days of the passion, 'when the bridegroom will 
be taken away from them' by death, and 'then they will 
fast/ that is, with the fasting of grief, as it is written: 'Ye 
shall weep and lament/ John 16 : 20. 'Then shall they 
fast/ namely, at a time when such fasting befits them. And 
then by a double example the Saviour proves that bodily 
fasting did not befit them at that time." Supplications are 
also touched upon in Luke 5 : 33, when they said: "Why 
do the disciples of John fast often and make supplications, 1 
likewise also the disciples of the Pharisees, but thine eat and 
drink? And Jesus said unto them, Can ye make the sons 
of the bridegroom fast when the bridegroom is with them?" 
which is as much as to say, apart from the bridegroom's will 
ye cannot lawfully make his sons to fast. 

Truly Christ is the good prior and abbot, who does not 
burden his disciples but, laying on them an easy yoke and 
a light burden, says of the Pharisees and scribes, sitting in 

l CommiUit. The Vulgate: immiUit. 
*Obsarvatumcs. The Vulgate: obsecrationcs 



236 THE CHURCH 

Moses' seat, that they lay heavy burdens and grievous to 
be borne on men's shoulders, but do not move them with 
one of their own fingers. Even so, modern prelates and 
penitentiaries impose many fastings, many prayers, and other 
hard things upon the people, and they alone do not do the 
least of them. 

Hence, they more often say: "Let us eat and gamble and 
the coarse may do our fasting. ,, Therefore, when the Saviour 
calls such hard commandments as they lay upon men un- 
bearable burdens because they are weighty beyond Christ's 
counsels and commands, what wise man will say that infe- 
riors are bound in such things to obey their prelate under 
pain of mortal sin? Likewise to eat with unwashen hands 
is a neutral work, neither absolutely good nor absolutely 
evil, and Christ's disciples were not obligated by the com- 
mand of those sitting in Moses' seat to do it. Nor are we 
now. The consequence has been stated, for the reasoning 
is the same in the case of traditions of this kind, which are 
not founded in the Lord's law. 

The second part is manifest from Matt. 15 : 2, when the 
Pharisees and scribes said to Jesus, "Why do thy disciples 
transgress the traditions of the elders? for they wash not 
their hands when they eat bread," but he, rebuking them 
for the transgression of God's commandments, showed that 
his disciples did not sin in not keeping their command- 
ments, and he said: "To eat with unwashen hands defileth 
not the man." What, therefore, is the reason now, that any 
inferior in any act whatsoever that is neutral or intermediate 
should be obligated to obey his prelate, if it happens that 
the prelate is callous, who indiscreetly and overmuch bur- 
dens an inferior with such neutral acts? Hence, as said 
above, Bernard well lays down the conditions of obedience, 
one of which is that a work commanded is judicious when 
neither excess nor defect attaches to it. 

Hence, no human commandment or decree is valid or to 



OBEDIENCE TO THE CHURCH 237 

be observed except in so far as it is caused by a divine com- 
mand before exemplifying it. 

And hence, it is, that no obedience made to a superior 
profits for merit except in so far as it leans towards obedi- 
ence of the counsels and commandments of the Lord Jesus 
Christ. This is clear, for obedience to Christ, owed or per- 
formed, is in and by itself a reason of merit which increases 
or diminishes with the degree of obedience or disobedience. 
Hence nothing is more religious than obedience unto God, 
as the Decretum 8:1, Sciendum [Friedberg, 1 : 593], teaches, 
where is noted what Samuel, the prophet, says, I Sam. 15:22: 
"To obey is better than sacrifice, for rebellion is as the sin 
of witchcraft and stubbornness as a crime." 1 "Obedience 
itself," says the Decretum, "is a virtue that possesses the merit 
of faith, and any one who is without it, is convicted of 
being an unbeliever, even though he seem to be of the faith- 
ful. The flesh of others, it says, is slaughtered in the case 
of sacrifices, but by obedience our own will is sacrificed." 
Here it appears, it is clearer than the light, that Samuel is 
speaking about obedience due to God, for he said to Saul: 
"Because thou hast rejected the word of the Lord, the Lord 
hath rejected thee from being king, and Saul said unto Sam- 
uel, 'I have sinned, because I have transgressed the com- 
mandment of the Lord and thy words, for I feared the people 
and obeyed their voice,'" I Sam. 15 : 23, 24. It is clear how 
much prelates of the people blaspheme who on the ground 
of Scripture and ecclesiastical law traffic in such obedience 
for themselves; secondly, from Augustine's authority, which 
the doctors quote for their side, Sermon 86, when he says: 
"If thou wilt fast, make prayer night and day, if thou wilt 
beg, or be in ashes, or if thou wilt do anything else but what 
is commanded in the Lord's law, and thou seemest wise to 
thyself and art not obedient to the Father [understand not 
the corporal Father, but the spiritual Father]— thou hast 
lost all the virtues. This is clear, because he who obeys 

>The Vulgate adds: Idokrtri*, of idolatry. 



238 THE CHURCH 

not God, as his spiritual Father, has lost all the virtues." 
And hence Augustine adds: "Therefore obedience profits 
more than all the other moral virtues." Far-fetched, there- 
fore, is the proof of the doctors who seek to deduce from 
this authority what they propose. 

Further I lay down this conclusion and in spite of the 
pretended — prcttensa — excommunication, threatened or al- 
ready issued, that the Christian ought to follow the com- 
mandments of Christ. This appears from the conclusion of 
St. Peter and the other apostles: "We must obey God rather 
than men," Acts 5 : 29. From this it follows logically that 
Christ's priest, who lives according to his law, and has a 
knowledge of the Scripture and a desire to edify the people, 
ought to preach, a pretended excommunication to the con- 
trary notwithstanding. This is clear, for to preach the Word 
of God is a command to priests, as the apostle Peter bears 
witness, when he says: "God charged us to preach unto the 
people and to testify," Acts 10 : 42. Jesus sent out the 
twelve, commanding them and saying: "Go not into any 
way of the gentiles . . . and as ye go, preach, saying, The 
kingdom of heaven is at hand," Matt. 10 : 5-7. The same 
appears from Luke, chapters 9 and 10, and also from what 
Augustine says, Prologue to his Sermons: "Few are the priests 
who rightly preach God's Word, but many are they who 
accursedly keep silence — some from ignorance, who refuse 
to teach and some from neglect, because they spurn God's 
Word; but neither the former nor the latter may be ex- 
cused from the guilt of keeping silence, since they ought not 
to have a place of authority who do not know how to preach, 
nor ought they to keep silent who know how to preach, how- 
beit they are not in places of authority." 

Likewise is this clear from what St. Jerome says on Ezek. 
3 : 18: "When I say to the wicked, Thou shalt surely die, and 
thou givest him not warning, nor speakest to warn the wicked 
from his wicked way to save his life, the same wicked man 



OBEDIENCE TO THE CHURCH 239 

shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I require of thy 
hand." Here Jerome says: "The priest is bound to preach, 
and let him see to it that fear of man does not make him to 
keep silence. There is a great difference in the keeping of 
the words of God silent for three causes — namely, out of fear, 
stupidity or flattery. ,, Likewise is this clear from Gregory, 
Pastoral Theology, 15 : 43, sit rector [Nic. Fathers, 2d Ser., 
12 : 27, Friedberg, 1 : 154], where he gives most solemn 
proof from many Scripture texts and, among other things, 
says: "Indeed it is written that 'the sound shall be heard 
when he [Aaron] enters into the holy place in the presence 
of the Lord . . . that he die not* [Ex. 28 : 33-35]. For the 
priest, going in or coming out dies if a sound is not heard 
from him, because he gets to himself the anger of the hidden 
judge, if he goes in without the sound of preaching." The 
same is clear from St. Isidore, who says, de Summo Bono, HI: 
"Priests are condemned for the people's iniquity if they do 
not instruct the ignorant or convict sinners." 

When, therefore, in view of what has been said, any one 
who has reached the priesthood has accepted as of com- 
mandment the office of preacher, it is clear that that com- 
mandment ought to be executed, a pretended excommuni- 
cation to the contrary notwithstanding. 

Likewise for no true catholic ought it to become a matter 
of doubt that a man if he be adequately trained in knowl- 
edge is more obligated to teach the ignorant, to advise the 
uncertain, to punish the unbridled, to remit sins to those 
committing injury, than he is to do any works of mercy. 
Since, therefore, when he is fitted for the ministry of alms 
for the body, he is bound to do these things under pain of 
damnation, as appears from Matt. 25 — much more when he 
is fitted to administer spiritual alms [is he under obligation 
to do spiritual ministries]. From this it is evident that 
preaching for the priest and giving alms for the rich are 
not things intermediate but commandments. 



240 THE CHURCH 

Further, it is evident that if pope or other superior com- 
mand the priest not to preach, who is disposed to do so 
(as has been said), or the rich not to give alms, the inferior 
ought not to obey. Wherefore, depending on this command 
of the Lord, I have not obeyed Pope Alexander's command 
in regard to not preaching and hence will humbly bear ex- 
communication/ confident that I will secure to myself the 
benediction of my God. And as to God, the Psalmist says: 
"Let them be accursed, but do thou bless." And he also 
blessed, when he said: "Blessed are ye when men shall re- 
proach you and say all manner of evil against you falsely 
for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is 
your reward in heaven," Matt. 5 : 11, 12. 

1 This was the papal bull of Dec. 20, 1409, which forbade preaching in 
chapels which, like Bethlehem chapel, were not connected with a cathedral, 
collegiate or conventual church or their cemeteries. Doc., p. 375. 



CHAPTER XXI 

CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH OBEDIENCE IS TO 

BE RENDERED TO PRELATES 

Now as to the authorities which the doctors have ad- 
duced to emphasize the necessity of human obedience, the 
following is briefly to be said. For, in the first place, they 
say: "The Roman church and prelates are to be obeyed 
by inferiors in all things, according to the Saviour's state- 
ment, 'All things whatsoever they bid you, these do and 
observe/" Matt. 23 : 2. 1 Here I wonder why the doctors 
openly cut off the Saviour's previous words, for they do not 
quote: "The scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses' seat." 
Nor did they add the later words, "Do not ye according 
to their works," but they only quote the intervening words: 
"All things whatsoever they bid you, these do and observe." 
Here it seems to me that they have so done because the 
pope and other prelates of the church do not wish to be 
compared with scribes and Pharisees, and if anything is 
said of their evil works they are indignant; and because also 
the doctors and masters are flattered by such things, and 
so the former heap up to themselves masters having itching 
ears who turn away from the truth and the masters are 
flattered. Therefore, the apostle's prophecy is fulfilled in 
both particulars, for he adjures Timothy saying: "I charge 
thee in the sight of God and Jesus Christ, who shall judge 
the living and the dead, and by his appearing and his king- 
dom: preach the word; be urgent in season, out of season; 

1 The exegesis of this passage, upon which so much stress is laid, Huss takes 
op again at length, ad octo Doctor cs y Man., 1 : 408. 

241 



242 THE CHURCH 

reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all longsuffering and teach- 
ing. For the time will come, when they will not endure 
sound doctrine, but having itching ears they will heap to 
themselves teachers after their own lusts and will turn away 
their ears from the truth and turn aside unto fables," II Tim. 
4 : 1-4. It is not, therefore, to be wondered at that prel- 
ates gratefully accept the statements of the aforesaid doc- 
tors, for they anoint all those statements with the oil of 
flattery and do not lay down a single word of correction with 
intent to suppress their wickedness. But a Master, a Bishop, 
and most just Judge will come, who will think most right- 
eously of the flattering speaking of the doctors and the 
wickedness of the prelates, even he who said: "The scribes 
and Pharisees sit in Moses' seat, all things, therefore, what- 
soever they bid you, these do and observe, but do not ac- 
cording to their works, for they say and do not." 

Truly this Master never spoke fair of the wickedness of 
prelates and doctors. He spoke the truth, taught his own 
faithful ones and confuted the scribes, sitting in Moses' seat, 
because of their evil works. He spoke truth and taught 
truth, for he sat in Moses' seat, that is, the authority of 
judging and teaching God's law, as has been shown above, 
Chapter XVHI. 

By that authority Moses said: "They come unto me, 
that .1 may judge between them and show them the statutes 
of God and his law," Ex. 18 : 16. "All things, therefore, 
whatsoever they bid you," that is, pertaining to the seat of 
judgment, "do," namely, from the heart, "and observe," 
namely, in deed. "But do not according to their works," 
that is, keep their doctrine, do not follow their life: "for 
they say and do not." Chrysostom says: "They preach the 
faith and act in unbelief, give to others peace and do not 
have it themselves, cry out the truth and love a lie, denounce 
avarice and love covetousness." Augustine, as above, on 
Ex. 18, says: "Sitting in Moses' seat, they teach God's law; 




OBEDIENCE TO PRELATES 243 

therefore, God teaches through them, but, if they wish to 
teach their own things, do not hear them, do not do them." 

Therefore, most true is Christ's saying and command, by 
which it is clear that he does not command the keeping and 
doing of all the precepts of those who sit in Moses' seat, 
for otherwise he would not have said: "They lay heavy 
burdens and grievous to be borne," and consequently bur- 
dens which ought not to be borne. And in the next chapter 
it is seen how he excused his disciples in respect to eating 
with unwashen hands and fasting. 

Then, as for the authority of Augustine (which the doc- 
tors immediately append), the chapter preceding this, near 
the end, gives his statement. As for the statement of St. 
Jerome, on the explanation of faith, see Chapter XVI, where is 
set forth what he had spoken to Pope Damasus. But, after 
having looked at many old books, we have found that he 
wrote to St. Augustine, whom in his letters he often calls 
pope — which Augustine was a true pope — giving one signif- 
icance to Peter's seat and Peter's faith, as appears near the be- 
ginning of Chapter XIII. As to St. Bernard, when he speaks 
of the absolutely good and the absolutely evil, and things in- 
termediate, Chapter XIX treats of that. And it is added : " In 
these things which are intermediate the law of obedience is 
placed as — tanquam — in the tree of the knowledge of good and 
evil which was in the midst of Paradise." Certainly, in these 
things to prescribe our view to the judgment of the Masters 
is not right; and in these things neither the command nor 
the prohibition of prelates is in all cases to be despised. 
Here it is to be observed that the adverb of similitude, "as" 
[as it were] — tanquam — expresses a certain amount of like- 
ness, not full likeness. For in the tree of the knowledge of 
good and evil the law was placed by God, who can neither 
deceive nor be deceived. This law was given under pain of 
mortal sin. For God said unto Adam: "Of the tree of the 
knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it, for 



4 



*44 THE CHURCH 

in the day thou eatest of it, thou shalt surely die/' Gen. 
2 : 18. Here, then, three things are to be thought of — he 
who gives the word of command, the command and the 
condition of the person called upon to obey. He who com- 
manded is God, who cannot err; the command is exceed- 
ingly useful; and man it is who heard God himself com- 
manding. To eat, therefore, of the tree of the knowledge 
of good and evil after the prohibitive command was given, 
was an absolute evil. In accordance with this, let us sup- 
pose that the prelate Peter command John, his inferior, to 
collect strawberries and let it be thought that it is not pos- 
sible for him who commands to err in this, and let it be thought 
of how much value such a work is for the person called upon 
to obey, and also that the man called upon to obey is dis- 
posed to do such a work, as was Adam to do God's command, 
and it is evident that in all these three, the comparison is not 
the same. For a prelate may err and the work commanded 
is not so useful, and the man called upon to obey is not so 
disposed to do that work, as was Adam to do the command 
of God. 

Therefore, Bernard says that a work which is intermediate 
is one which in respect of mode, time, or person may be 
either good or bad; and here that saint insists upon the cir- 
cumstances from the side of him who gives the command, 
from the side of the work, and from the side of him called 
to obey. Therefore, when he says that it is a work which is 
intermediate so far as the mode goes, he urges a due measure 
of the exercise of reason, in such a way that he who com- 
mands does not depart from the divine counsels. For, if a 
prelate should command Peter, a subject, a learned priest in 
God's law, to feed sows on the Lord's day and God for that 
day should counsel him to do for Him a work of superero- 
gation incompatible with that act of feeding, then Peter 
the priest is bound to obey God who counsels rather than 
the prelate who commands. This is clear, for in this case the 



OBEDIENCE TO PRELATES 245 

superior is more to be reverenced, one whom every subject is 
more bound to obey; and the enjoined act also is more use- 
ful. But the act enjoined by the prelate, namely to feed 
sows on the Lord's day, is in respect to merit a thing indif- 
ferent, but the act enjoined by God has of and in itself the 
reason of merit. 

Hence, I could wish that he might reply to St. Bernard 
in respect to this case. If St. Benedict had bid him feed 
sows for himself and, for the same time, God had given him 
a counsel to give advice to persons asking in the church with 
respect to the salvation of their souls, I am of the opinion 
that the authority of him who counsels and the greater use- 
fulness of the counsel, as compared with the commands of 
St. Benedict, would have forced Bernard to hearken rather 
to the divine counsel than to Benedict's command, both to 
the honor of God and to the salvation of those asking coun- 
sel. From this it is seen to follow, that we owe more to 
any divine counsel whatever than to a human command 
which is incompatible with it. Secondly, it is seen to fol- 
low that no one is bound to obey a private command except 
in so far as it admonishes in accordance with the divine counsel 
or command; and it is clear that, as regards the mode, a due 
measure of reason is involved and also the quality of the com- 
mand, both of which he who is called upon to obey and he 
who commands ought to consider. For what reason would 
there be for the command of a dull and fat bishop that a 
priest should feed sows and send away Christ's sheep without 
pasturing them — sheep which Christ purchased with his own 
blood? 

Similarly must the circumstance of place be thought of, 
for, if a prelate should bid a subject to appear in a place 
where enemies are who are planning the subject's death, the 
subject is not bound to obey. Hence Pope Clement V, de 
Sent, et rejud. in Clement. [Friedberg, 2 : 1152], says: "Who 
would dare or by what reason would any one be held bound 



246 THE CHURCH 

to dare to submit to the judgment of such a consistory — 
namely, to place oneself in the bosom of enemies and to 
offer oneself voluntarily to a death from violent injury and 
not by formal justice ? That, indeed, is to be feared from 
the side of the law; that is to be evaded as a matter of morals; 
that human sense and reason flee from; that nature abhors. 
Therefore, he would be a fool who would dream of such a 
citation binding the one cited." Nor ought the means of 
defence to be taken away which come from the law of nature, 
for the emperor himself has no right to withdraw those things 
which are provided by the law of nature. 

Likewise, Pope Nicolas wrote to the emperor Michael, 
3 : s [Friedberg, i : 518]: "That suspects and enemies ought 
not to be judges, reason itself dictates, and it is proved by 
many examples. For what could any one give more ac- 
ceptable and to be desired to an enemy than to commit a 
person to him to be assailed, who might greatly wish to 
hurt him?" This thing also the Cons tan tinopolitan synod, 
Canon 6 [381 A. DJ, is known to prohibit, and in the very 
same chapter [Friedberg, 1 : 518] Pope Gelasius 1 a most 
brave assailer of heretics, says: "I ask for the tribunal to 
which they lay claim. Where can they carry their cases? 
Before those who are enemies and at the same time wit- 
nesses and judges? But to such a tribunal no human busi- 
ness should be committed. And if to a tribunal, where ene- 
mies are the judges, no human business should be carried, 
how much less ought cases of divine import, that is, ecclesi- 
astical cases be carried! He that is wise, let him understand. 
And in truth, for this reason, the good emperor Justinian 
is known to have promulgated in his laws the same, when 
he said: 'He who thinks a judge partial may, before the 
trial begins, accuse him that the case may revert to another. 
For it is just as natural to shun the assaults of judges as to 
wish to flee from the sentence of enemies.' Thus St. John 

1 Mistake for Nicolas. 



OBEDIENCE TO PRELATES 247 

the Golden-mouthed refused to enter the college of the 
council assembled together against him." These things are 
found at the place [Friedberg, 1 : 519] where Gratian draws 
the following conclusion: 1 " Outside the limits of his province 
no man charged with guilt is under any circumstances to be 
summoned." Hence Pope Fabian, 1 3 : 6 [Friedberg, 1 : 519], 
says: "The case is always tried there where the offence oc- 
curred, and he who does not prove his accusation should him- 
self suffer the punishment he would inflict." Likewise Pope 
Stephen,* 3 : 6 [Friedberg, 1 : 519]: "No permission to ac- 
cuse shall be proceeded with outside of the bounds of the 
provinces, but every charge is to be heard within the prov- 
ince." The same thing appears, 3 : 6 [Friedberg, 1 : 523] 
from the action of the Roman synod. 

Therefore, what would be the nature of such obedience, or 
what reason would there be for it, that a person cited three 
hundred miles away — to the pope unknown, accused by ene- 
mies — should go with such concern to himself through enemies 
and come to hostile judges and witnesses and consume ex- 
travagantly the goods of the poor or (not practising extrava- 
gance) that he should go, suffering with hunger and with 

1 This quotation from the canon law gives only a part of the original and, 
as Huss's text has several mistakes, I have followed in the translation the 
text of the canon law. Gratian's conclusion, which Huss quotes, opens a new 
section of the canon law and is preceded by another statement by Gratian 
which it seems strange Huss did not quote as it is so apposite to what he has 
been saying. It runs: "Although a man's guilt be evident, yet is he not to 
be condemned on the accusation of an enemy." John the Golden-mouthed, to 
whom Huss refers, is Chrysostom, patriarch of Constantinople, d. 407, the great- 
est preacher of the early church. The synod to which Huss refers was held 
403 and is called the synod of the Oak. It was held under the direction of 
Theophilus of Alexandria, his enemy, and was made up largely of Chrysostom's 
enemies or disaffected members of his clergy. Chrysostom refused to attend 
unless his enemies were expelled. The court whom he had offended by his 
condemnations of extravagance in dress, etc, then deposed Chrysostom from 
his see. 

* Fabian, pope, 236-250, seems to have been a vigorous administrator, in 
whose reign the schism of Hippolytus was completely put down and the Decian 
persecution vigorously resisted in Rome. 

• Stephen I, pope, 254-257, in the dispute with Cyprian of Carthage over 
the baptism by heretics took ground in favor of its validity. 



248 THE CHURCH 

thirst! And what would be the fruit of such an appear- 
ance? Certainly the neglect of the work enjoined of God, 
so far as his own salvation goes and the salvation of others. 
Nor will he there be taught how to believe well, but how to 
push litigation, which is not permitted to a servant of God. 
There he will be despoiled in the consistory [curia], he will 
grow cold in holy morals, he will be stirred up through op- 
pression to impatience of spirit, and, if he have nothing to 
give, he will be condemned, even if he have justice on his 
side. And what is more serious, he will be compelled to 
adore with bended knees the pope as God. 1 

Blessed, therefore, be God, who says: "I will go down 
and see whether they have done altogether according to the 
cry which is come unto me, and if not, I will know," Gen. 
18 : 21. "Blessed be the Son of God, who came down from 
heaven to seek and to save that which was lost," Luke 19 : 10. 
"And he went about all the cities and the villages, teaching 
in their synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the king- 
dom, and healing all manner of disease and all manner of 
sickness. But when he saw the multitudes, he was moved 
with compassion for them because they were distressed and 
scattered as sheep not having a shepherd," Matt. 9 : 35-36. 
Blessed be Christ who commanded Peter, saying: "If thy 
brother sin against thee, show him his fault between thee 
and him alone," Matt. 18 : 15. Therefore, the pope will 
not find any passages except such as prove the contrary, 

1 Cited by Cardinal Colonna to go to Rome, 1410, Huss, in his official replies, 
his letters and at the council of Constance, constantly gave as a reason for not 
complying the dangers from enemies by the way or, as he also expressed it, 
from traps set by his enemies, especially the Germans whom he had offended 
by his course at the university. Other reasons he gave were that he would have 
to leave his work in Prague, and that the place where the offence was com- 
mitted, Prague, was the proper place for the trial. Wenzel, in a letter to the 
cardinal, suggested that he visit Prague, Documenta, p. 424, and overlook the 
situation with his own eyes. In one place Huss, in urging the distance as a 
reason for not going to Rome, said the distance from Prague to the holy dty 
was as great as the distance from Jerusalem to Tiberius, which, however, hap- 
pens to be only sixty miles. 



OBEDIENCE TO PRELATES 249 

namely, that Christ answered in person citations of this 
kind. For, if popes would depend upon that law of Christ 
as stated, Matt. 7 : 12, "All things whatsoever ye would 
that men should do unto you, even so do ye also unto them; 
for this is the law and the prophets/' I am of the opinion 
that they would not with reason desire to cite men and 
oblige them to make such a perilous and untried journey. 
Therefore, why do they urge others without a patent and 
reasonable cause to go to such pains and labor? 

Oh that they would think of an exemplary life lived as set 
forth according to the authority of the pontiff, Christ, who 
piously went to see the erring and those oppressed by the 
devil, not by citing them to appear, not by excommunicating 
them, nor by imprisoning them, or by burning them — and 
who charged Peter and in him every one of his vicars, saying: 
"If thy brother sin against thee, go show him his fault," 
etc. Here Peter's vicar should take note, first, that when 
he wants to show a brother his fault, he ought to see first 
that he himself is unblamable, for love ought to begin with 
itself. How, then, may a prelate, full through and through 
with simoniacal heresy, pride, self-indulgence or avarice, law- 
fully show a brother his faults? To him the Lord says: 
"Hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye and 
then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy 
brother's eye," Luke 6 : 42. Or how may he condemn any 
one to death, when the Saviour says: "He that is without 
sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her," John 8 : 7. 
In truth, if that law of Christ be thought of, rarely would 
a prelate be found in these times who could lawfully correct 
or condemn for heretical depravity. 

Secondly, Christ's vicar should note how the Saviour 
commands, saying, " Go," for here he commands that judges 
ought in telling subjects of their faults to visit the places 
where the offence is said to have been committed, as even 
law proclaims. For so did Christ and all his apostles. And 



250 THE CHURCH 

so Christ will do at the last judgment, as he alone predicts 
in Matt. 25. In the third place, let Peter's vicar or prelate 
note how in the way of telling one's fault, he ought to be 
prudent, diligent, and intent that he do not excommunicate 
before the close of the third rebuke. Fourthly, he should 
note the number of the faithful witnesses by whom the 
brother's offence is to be established. And fifthly, he ought 
to tell it to the church, as one greater than himself, for so 
the Lord bade Peter: "Tell it to the church." 

From the things already said I summarize: that the 
proposed excommunication does not concern me or bind me 
because hostile judges and witnesses dwell in Rome and the 
case chiefly is a matter touching the judge. The distance 
for me is a long one and, guarded as it is all along the way 
by hostile Germans, I do not see any fruit of my appearance, 
but, on the contrary, only neglect of the people in the Word 
of God. I hope that Christ will guard me, as he said: "Be- 
hold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves, be 
ye, therefore, wise as serpents and harmless as doves. But 
beware of men, for they will deliver you up to councils and 
in their synagogues they will scourge you," Matt. 10 : 16, 17. 
He also said : "Behold, I have told you beforehand. If, there- 
fore, they shall say unto you, behold, he is in the wilderness, 
go not forth: behold, he is in the inner chambers, believe it 
not," Matt. 24 : 25, 26. Therefore, I have committed my- 
self to Christ alone that whether as a result of the false ex- 
communication of men, or, outside that, by natural death or 
through violence he may bring my life to a close. 

Then in respect to the circumstance of time [as bearing 
upon the duty of obedience], it is not doubtful that it is 
necessary for the one who gives a command as well as for 
the one called upon to obey to know when an act good gener- 
ically, or when a neutral act, ought to be performed. For, if 
during the paschal festival a prelate bids a subject fast or, 
if he has a healthy body, on Good Friday not to fast, would 



OBEDIENCE TO PRELATES 251 

it be lawful for a subject to obey contrary to the custom 
approved in the church and contrary to the conscience of 
this subject which resists, or, if he should bid him wander 
in the middle of the night through woods among cruel wild 
beasts when there was no necessity for it? And many are 
the commandments of this kind repugnant to reason. Nor 
should an argument be made in favor of obedience, if it were 
anywhere found in the lives of the Fathers, that subjects in 
the case of works which are without fitness or neutral obeyed, 
even as certain of the holy Fathers did obey, as Hugo of St. 
Victor, LibeUum Intitulatum, speaking of these things which 
may not lawfully be done, said: "Just as we read that cer- 
tain of the holy Fathers commanded subjects many things 
foreign to human reason that they might teach them the vir- 
tue of obedience, such as watering dry parts until they pro- 
duced seeds or softening hard stones by pouring water over 
them and taming ferocious beasts by a word of command." 
So far as the circumstance of the person is concerned, it 
is clear that here reason ought to direct as to a work good 
generically and also neutral. In a work generically good, if 
the prelate should command the subject to give alms by 
pauperizing his boys, or to take up penance by fasting which 
he is not capable of enduring, or to make many prayers even 
as confessors lay hard tasks upon men — certainly in such 
cases a pope is not to be hearkened to, since a parent is 
more bound to nourish his boys than to give alms to others; 
and he is not bound to bear insufferable burdens. The same 
is true in works neutral, for, if ever a pope should command 
me to play on the flute, build towers, to mend or weave 
garments, and to stuff sausages, ought not my reason to 
judge that the pope was foolish in so commanding? Why 
should I not prefer in this matter my common sense to the 
pope's sentence? Yea, if with all our doctors he should 
command me do these things, the reason would judge that 
the sentence of these persons was foolish. 



252 THE CHURCH 

Likewise, if the pope of his own motion should command 
that any one accept a bishopric who was incompetent on 
account of his inexperience of the language of the people 
he was to rule, would he have to obey by accepting? It 
is evident he would not. Similarly, it is evident that the 
people would not have to accept him just as they would 
not want the pope to put over them a shepherd of sows or 
goats — a pastor who would be of no account to feed those 
flocks. 

And it is clear, that Christ's faithful disciple ought to 
look back to the first exemplar, Christ himself, and listen 
to a prelate as far as he teaches Christ's law, things reason- 
able, things to edification, and things lawful for the subject, 
for Cyprian, God's glorious martyr, says: Decretum, Dist. 8 
[Friedberg, i : 15]: "If Christ alone is to be hearkened to, 
then we ought not to listen to what any one before us may 
have thought ought to be done, but what Christ, who is be- 
fore all, did." This soundest of rules antichrist's satraps 
lay aside, who say that disobedience to papal statutes is to 
be punished most severely, and so Christ with his law is 
put aside. Hence, it being laid down that obedience is due 
to the pope and prelates in all things neutral, the pope, in 
treating the law of Christ as difficult to understand, may de- 
cree that no Christian should do any work that is neutral, 
except such works as he himself approves and ratifies, and 
consequently he may ordain that his satraps cite any per- 
sons whatsoever to appear and answer at his tribunal; and 
so they are able to worry the people out till they make a 
promise, and mulct the people as they do in absolutions, in 
reservations and in dispensations. 

And, as is believed, they would practise this more abun- 
dantly if they did not fear that the people, perceiving their 
subtilty, would rebel. For now God is enlightening the 
people that they be not beguiled from Christ's paths. For 
Daniel prophesied, saying: "And arms [forces] shall stand 



OBEDIENCE TO PRELATES 253 

on his part; and they shall profane the sanctuary and they 
shall set up the abomination that maketh for desolation, and 
such as do wickedly against the covenant shall he pervert 
by flatteries, but the people that know their God shall be 
strong and do exploits," Daniel n : 31-32. Antichrist's 
"arms which stand and profane God's sanctuary" are wicked 
prelates who are an abomination on account of their villainies, 
and they are the "desolation" by refusing to imitate Christ. 
Of this abomination Christ says, "when ye see the abomina- 
tion of desolation standing in the holy place which was spoken 
of by Daniel the prophet," Matt. 24 : 15, and, "standing 
where he ought not," Mark 13 : 14. And when the prophet 
adds, "and such as do wickedly against the covenant," for 
they say they keep Christ's covenant, but will not keep it, 
because they obscure and gloss it for their own exaltation 
and to excuse their sin, "but the people that know their 
God," that is, know by the gift of God's grace, will obtain 
Christ by imitation of him and will do the commandments 
of the covenant of the Lord Jesus Christ. But because to 
those that teach these things persecution comes unto death, 
therefore Daniel further says: "And they that are wise 
among the people shall instruct many and shall fall by the 
sword and in the flames and in the captivity and by the 
fall of days. And when these shall fall, they shall be lifted 
up by the help of the little ones and many shall join them- 
selves unto them with flatteries," Dan. 11 : 33-34. 

The experience of the facts enables us to understand this 
text, for simple laymen and priests, taught by God's grace, 
teach very many by the example of a good life and, gainsay- 
ing publicly antichrist's lying words, perish with the sword. 
This is seen in the cases of the laymen, John, Martin, and 
Stafcon, 1 who resisted antichrist's lying disciples, and per- 

1 In the troubles arising in Prague out of the proclamation of John XXUPs 
bulls against Ladislaus and the sale of pardons these three men offered violent 
resistance and were arrested and imprisoned. As they were about to be executed, 
Huss, in company with others, appeared at the city hall, appealed in their behalf 



254 THE CHURCH 

ished together by the sword. And others, exposing their 
necks for the truth have been martyred, being seized, im- 
prisoned, and murdered and yet did not deny Christ's truth 
— priests, and also laymen and women. But those who have 
oppressed them have gone away clandestinely for, terrified 
by antichrist's censures and seizures, they have turned into 
the opposite way. But God, up to this time, multiplies 
the sons of his church who suffer and are patient and pub- 
lish the truth of Christ's law. Therefore, blessed be God 
and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ who has hidden the 
way of truth from the wise and prudent and revealed it unto 
simple laymen and little priests who choose rather to obey 
God than men, who in acts generically good and acts neu- 
tral have the life of Christ before their eyes and obey prel- 
ates so far as these acts, modified by circumstances, can be 
reasonably put into practice for edification through the imi- 
tation of Christ. For they themselves hold that an act, in 
order to be virtuous, must be justified by eight circumstances, 
which are set forth in this line: 

Who, what, where, how much, how many, why, in what 
manner, when. 

Who, thai is, the individual who ought to obey. What, 
namely, he ought to do when he is commanded. Where, be- 
cause in one place it is fitting, in the case of an act good 
generically or neutral to obey, and not so in another place 
or in any place whatsoever. How much, namely, he ought 
to obey, in as far as the command is of something applicable 
to edification according to the counsel of Jesus Christ or his 
command. For one is not bound to obey forever his per- 
sonal superior as the foolish prate, saying, that the pope's 

and secured, as he thought, their immunity from death. But after he was 
once out of sight, the men were taken from prison and quickly beheaded. A 
great crowd coming together gathered up the bodies and carried them amidst 
the singing of sacred hymns to Bethlehem chapel, where they were buried and 
looked upon as martyrs. In one of his sermons, Langsdorff, p. 16, Huss refers 
to the death of these three men as a price for denying that the pope is the God 
of this world and can forgive sins as he will, and to their burial in Bethlehem. 



OBEDIENCE TO PRELATES 255 

authority extends to the right of infinite commanding, and 
whom individual Christians ought to obey even to that ex- 
tent. How many, namely, acts he may lawfully do, since 
it matters not whether the subject, following the command 
of a priest binding him to penance, gives two pennies or two 
denarii or fasts three days weekly; and that he give as many 
pennies or fast as many days as the simple fellow commands 
or limits (unless he fill his confessor's purse), or that he 
give as much for the building of St. Peter as he would 
offer if he lived there and as much by the estimate of the 
pope's camera as he might consume on the journey thither; 
and so of other taxations invented of the devil. The faith- 
ful ought also to think of the circumstance of the end in 
view, namely : why, that is, with what end in view he ought 
to obey by the act which is enjoined, because, if it leads 
to God's honor and directly to the profit of the church, 
then it is a good end. But if another end is held forth, then 
it is against the apostle's words: " Whatsoever ye do, do in 
the name of Jesus Christ." For the end determines all the 
means — media — which are used with that end in view. Hence, 
Aristotle concludes, de Anima, 2, with these words: "It is 
right that all things should be called good by the end, so 
that when the end is good, the means for that end are also 
good." And another circumstance is also added, when it is 
said: how. For it is not enough to do a thing that is good 
generically, but it is demanded that it be done well, for noth- 
ing can be done well by a man except as he abides in love. 
Therefore, the apostle says: "Let all your things be done 
in love." And that nothing is well done by a man without 
love, the apostle proves when he says: "Though I bestow all 
my goods to feed the poor, and have not love, it profiteth 
me nothing," I Cor. 13 : 3. And this is reasonable because 
the branch cannot bear fruit, except it abide in the vine, as 
the Saviour said: "Ye cannot bear fruit, except ye abide in 
me," that is, by love, John 15:4. Hence it is said in a gen- 



256 THE CHURCH 

eral way that a certain philosopher, by name Phantasma — 
Illusion — advanced that God is the rewarder not of nouns 
but adverbs [not names, but qualities], and it is clear that 
for obedience to be true, grace or love is needed. Then 
other circumstances are involved in this adverb, hew, be- 
cause one that is called upon to obey ought to perform the 
work commanded out of love, in humility, wisely, joyfully, 
bravely, and promptly. The last condition is when — namely, 
it is fitting to perform the work commanded, as has been 
said before, with respect to time, for without doubt there 
are many acts good generically and also acts neutral, which 
it is not expedient to command at any time whatever, and 
consequently it is not expedient to yield obedience to them 
at any time. 

However, as for this [namely, that the inferior obey the 
superior in all things], it is argued up to this point thus: 
Suppose that the pope should, by the bond of holy obedience 
and upon the assurance of obtaining absolution from penalty 
and guilt or some other spiritual benefit, bind every cleric 
subject to him to resist the first pope obedient in all things, 
and that he should bind every laic by a similar formula to 
resist the first disobedient pope and let the injunction be 
made under the severest of anathemas — and suppose in ad- 
dition that every cleric or laic subject to our pope was first 
obedient to him and that every cleric resisted every laic 
and vice versa. Here the contradiction would be mani- 
fest because it is allowed that Peter the cleric and Paul the 
laic were not at first in opposition, resisting one another, and 
I ask whether Peter being for the moment obedient is re- 
sisting the pope. If so, then we must say that for that mo- 
ment Paul was disobedient to the pope because, inasmuch 
as he resists Peter who is disobedient to the pope in all things, 
and it was enjoined that he should resist the first disobe- 
dient pope, it follows that Paul incurs the mark of disobe- 
dience, and so also Peter for the moment being disobedient 



OBEDIENCE TO PRELATES 257 

would be resisting the pope. Then we should grant that 
Paul is obedient and Peter also, because before they resisted 
one another they were both obedient, and Peter by resisting, 
was not disobedient but, as follows from what has been said, 
his obedience is confirmed. And it is not valid to deny the 
pertinency of this case on account of the following things, 
namely, (1) because only what was neutral or possible was 
commanded and (2) because a prelate may command what 
in itself is impossible and altogether unreasonable, therefore, 
he may command that thing, and so there remains no reply 
except the truth that neither more nor less on account of 
his commanding do the cleric and the layman incur reward 
or penalty. For a command must be reasonable with God 
if it is to be obeyed. And then it would hold good, pro- 
vided no one under human authority would make that 
command, since otherwise a man would become disobedient 
to reason. And it is clear that, as in the case supposed, 
there would be no possibility left of looking for remission 
or anathema, so in a general way there would not be in 
the case of a papal sentence except so far as one merited 
them in accordance with God's will. This logical objection 
must be solved. And similarly suppose, that Peter the prior 
had a second Twelve made up of conventuals all obedient 
to him, and he should bid the more stable Twelve not to 
speak with the other unless perchance by being disobedient 
it might bring the other to obedience. And it is clear that 
the second Twelve did not talk with the rest except, by 
obeying Peter, to bring the other to obedience, and Paul of 
the former Twelve should speak with Linus of the latter 
Twelve both of them excelling in this that they have regard 
to the injunction of obedience, so that, before the talking 
occurred, both were lawfully obedient to Peter; and the 
contradiction will appear. 1 

1 This is the most difficult passage in Huss's treatise. Wydif , though not 
using the exact form above, so far as I know, uses the general method to prove 



258 THE CHURCH 

Likewise as Bernard in his letter to the monk Adam says 
that things which are intermediate — may equally well or 
equally badly be either commanded or prohibited. Therefore, 
when a superior commands or forbids wrongly, and when the 
subject knows that he has commanded or forbidden wrongly, 
he ought by the law of love to tell the subject his fault as a 
brother because when in so commanding or forbidding he sins 
against God and his brother. This appears by that rule of 
Christ: "If thy brother sin against thee, go and tell him his 
fault between thee and him alone/' Matt. 18 : 15. Nor is 
there any objection to this that he who is superior in virtue 
should tell one inferior in his living his fault, howbeit the latter 
be the superior in rank, for otherwise this law of Christ would 
perish, which ordains that every Christian prelate, when he has 
sinned, should be corrected by another. For the law speaks to 
all men alike when it says: "If thy brother sin against thee, 
go and tell him his fault." But if, to make an impossible 
supposition, Christ had sinned, he would inasmuch as he 
was our brother, Heb. 2 : 17-19, have had to be corrected 
by the church. Hence he indicated this, when he said to 
the multitudes: "Which of you convicteth me of sin?" 
John 8 : 46. 

For this reason the church in the person of our Saviour 
aptly sings: "O my people, what have I done to thee? or 
how have I comforted thee? Answer me," — namely, by a 
reproach. And Isaiah, 1:17, says: "Cease to do evil, learn to 
do well. Seek justice, relieve the oppressed, judge the father- 
less, plead for the widow, and come and let us reason to- 
gether, saith the Lord." Therefore, it is clear that every way- 
faring man ought to have his faults told him by his brother, 
for otherwise the law of Christ would be wanting in provid- 

an utter inconsistency, as in his de Eccles., p. 211. The imaginary characters, 
Peter, Paul, and Linus, are used somewhat in the same way as Richard Roe 
and John Doe. Linus is brought in as a judge, being chosen because he 
belonged to the second generation of presbyters or bishops. See Wyclif, de 
domin. civ., pp. 38, 39, for a similar use of Peter, Paul, and Linus to prove the 
inconsistency of making natural dominion, as opposed to civil dominion, ex- 
empt from spiritual laws. 



OBEDIENCE TO PRELATES 259 

ing a remedy against the spots of his bride, and Paul con- 
tradicts the idea that it is wanting, Gal. 5, for he resisted 
Peter, the pope, to his face for a light offence and also in his 
writing left for those who were to come after, that in cases 
of like falling away they should do the same to their brother. 
Therefore, it is faithless to assert that the higher rank may 
not have its fault told it in matters moral by an inferior. 
Wherefore, in case of a fault, a son may lawfully tell his 
father his fault, a daughter the mother, a subject the prel- 
ate, a disciple his teacher — all following the rule of love. 

However, against these things the objection is made that 
the pope has the place of the Lord Jesus Christ on earth. 
But it is not permitted any one to tell him his fault, as ap- 
pears from Matt. 16. When, on account of Christ's rebuke, 
Peter is called Satan, is it not, therefore, permitted to find 
fault with him that occupies Peter's stead? But this kind 
of reasoning includes too much, for it would necessitate say- 
ing that every vicar of Christ is impeccable, just as Christ 
is impeccable. But it is a good inference that neither pope 
nor other person ought to be found fault with or corrected 
in so far as they follow the Head, Christ. But, if a bishop 
or confessor occupying Christ's stead attempt an act of self- 
indulgence with a virgin or a chaste wife, ought he not to 
be vehemently found fault with as if he were antichrist 
and the faithless enemy of his own soul ? For in committing 
such an illicit act, he does not occupy Christ's stead, but the 
place of antichrist himself and the devil, tempting a woman 
most iniquitously. And it is clear, that that statement of 
St. Bernard which the doctors adduce, namely, that in those 
things, that is, ' things intermediate, it is certainly not right to 
prefer our view to the sentence of the masters, and in these 
neither the command nor the prohibition of prelates are alto- 
gether to be spurned ' — the circumstances must be understood 
fitted to the act of obedience which is owed in respect to 
the mode, place, time and person, as has been said. For often 
the student with reason refuses to obey in an act intermediate 



260 THE CHURCH 

or neutral or even in an act good generically, showing the 
reason why it is not expedient in such a case to obey. This 
has frequently happened to me, when I have commanded; 
and being taught better and even taking gratefully infor- 
mation, I have obeyed the student. And the same reason- 
ing holds in respect to a prelate, for in our times prelates 
often talk wildly in their commands because of ignorance, 
and are to be reasoned with in love, by their subjects, for the 
well-being of the church. 

But it is objected to this that an equal has no rule over 
an equal. Since, therefore, the pope excels every other pil- 
grim and every superior his subject, it seems that it is not 
the business of any pilgrim to correct the pope or any sub- 
ject his prelate. This means that, if the antecedent be 
denied, since necessarily God the Father has no rule over 
the Holy Spirit, and yet they are equal persons, the con- 
sequence does not follow, namely, that of necessity God the 
Father has rule over the Son, according to the humanity 
he assumed and yet necessarily they are absolutely equal. 
Therefore, if no equal has rule over an equal, the catholic 
faith is gainsaid. And again: as is the rule of a vicar, 
so also of the same kind is all human rule, as the apos- 
tle says: "Charge them that are rich in this present world 
that they be not high-minded," I Tim. 6. But such rule 
is either independent, derived from itself, or it is originally 
authorized over some creature, and so it is clear how bare 
this mode of reasoning is both as to its substance and form, 
for he understands by this principle that an equal has no 
authoritative rule over his equal, on the ground by which 
he is equal to one who rules in such a way. But what 
stands in the way of one who excels in virtue telling to one 
inferior in his living his fault, howbeit the latter be the su- 
perior in rank ? 

Besides, the objection is raised from the canon law, 
DisL 21, Nunc autem [Friedberg, i : 71], where it is declared 



OBEDIENCE TO PRELATES 261 

that no one of the holy bishops dared to bring a judgment 
against Pope Marcellinus, but they said: "By thine own 
mouth judge thy case. Thou shalt not subject thyself to 
our decision. " That is to say, that this saying of the bishops 
is not sufficient to nullify God's law according to which 
in the case of Paul he reproved Peter the pope. Secondly, 
it means that it would be most superfluous for them to re- 
prove him in such a case, who observed from his contri- 
tion that he was fully reproved of the Lord. Thirdly, it 
means that he was sufficiently reproved by them when they 
said, "by thine own mouth judge thy case, thou shalt not be 
subject to our decision." And still again, it means, Be not 
heard at our tribunal but gather up thy case in thy own 
bosom and once more thou wilt be declared righteous of thy- 
self, they say, or be condemned out of thine own mouth. 
Certainly that was a great act of reproving, because those 
who reproved cast the duty of reproving back on the pope 
himself. Hence Marcellinus, when he heard these things, de- 
clared the sentence of deposition against himself. 1 

Thus it is clear that a subject following the rule of pru- 
dence and of love may correct an erring superior and lead him 
back to the way of truth. For, if a superior should wander 
away and come into a cave of thieves or into the danger of 
death, it would be proper for the subject to draw him back 
and to preserve him from danger. Therefore, this is the more 
allowable when a superior by a devious path of living runs 
into the cave of demons and into the peril of the worst death 
of sins. If, therefore, in the first case, the superior would 

'Marcellinus, whom Jerome [Migne, 27 : 11 11] puts among the popes, 
probably of the time of Diocletian, is reported to have fallen away in time 
of persecution and sacrificed to the gods. He acknowledged his mistake in 
the presence of a synod of bishops who refused to sit in judgment on him on 
the ground that prima sedes a nemine judicatur — the primal see is judged 
by no one. This was the theory asserted by the mediaeval popes. They were 
subject to no tribunal but God. Higden, 5 : 104-108, reported the tradition 
that Marcellinus deposed himself and anathematized any one that should bury 
his body. 



262 THE CHURCH 

rejoice, why not much more in the second? If he employs 
a guardian in the first case, why not in the second ? 

Nor is there anything to conflict in that saying of St. 
Augustine, de conflictu virtutum et vitiorutn [Migne, 40 : 1094] : l 
"What sort of men they ought to be who rule is not a ques- 
tion to be discussed by subjects." This is true and evident, 
that they ought not to discuss rashly what sort of men they 
ought to be, nevertheless, reason dictates to them that they 
who rule ought to be good, that they ought not to live in 
excess and, if they live badly, subjects ought to take heed 
and to beware of their evil works in advance. Hence Au- 
gustine says: "If human rule is to be obeyed, it is necessary 
that we be subject to divine government, 1 for Christ himself 
says, 'He who heareth you, heareth me, and he that despis- 
eth you, despiseth me.'" And, further on, Augustine adds: 
"Nevertheless, because he foresees that not all will in the 
future be of this kind, he took all kinds of subjects into the 
company of his disciples and said, admonishing them in ad- 
vance, 'The scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses' seat; what- 
soever things they say to you, these do, but what they do, 
do not ye.'" And it is clear that, with the zeal of a good pur- 
pose, subjects should discuss the manner of life of their su- 
periors or think of it, so that, if the superiors are good, the 
subjects may imitate them; if evil, they follow not their works, 
but in an humble spirit pray for them and take heed when 
they command good things. Otherwise, unless they discuss, 
they will fall with the blind leader into the hole, and easily 
it may happen that they will worship antichrist as God, 
and, like the Jewish people who followed their leaders — 
prcdatis — conspire against Christ the Lord. 

1 The treatise was falsely ascribed to Augustine. 

' Huss's text must be wrong or Huss is drawing an inference in his own 
language. The original treatise has si obtemperandum Domini est imptrio hu- 
mano subdi necesse est magisterio. If the Lord's rule is to be obeyed, subjec- 
tion to human government is necessary. Romans 13 : 1-2 is quoted. 



CHAPTER XXH 
EXCOMMUNICATIONS, JUST AND UNJUST 

Finally, the doctors lay down in their writing the follow- 
ing: "At length, because the processes [court proceedings be- 
fore the curia and the archbishop of Prague] against Master 
John Huss have been received by the body of the clergy in 
Prague, and they have obeyed them, therefore these processes 
are to be obeyed, and especially since therein nothing abso- 
lutely good is prohibited nor is anything absolutely evil en- 
joined. 1 But according to the method of the church customary 
with the Roman curia and observed before the fathers of our 
fathers, only things intermediate — things between what is 
purely good and purely evil — are there commanded, which in 
respect to time, place, or mode may be either good or bad — 
and obedience is to be rendered in these things intermediate 
in accordance with the teachings of the Gospel and in accord- 
ance with St. Bernard." And they add: "And it is not the 
business of the clergy in Prague to pronounce judgment on the 
question whether the excommunication of Master John Huss 
is just or unjust." etc. 

I will proceed to the things in the processes [court pro- 
ceedings] about which for the present I chiefly consider three 
matters, namely, excommunication, suspension and interdict. 
And about these I will speak briefly, discussing first of all 
this, that the conclusion which the doctors draw is exceed- 
ingly bad, namely, "because the processes against John Huss 

1 The duty of resisting unjust excommunications Huss takes up in his adv. 
Indulge Man., i : 229-234; de sex Erroribus, 239 sqq.; ad octo Doctor cs, 383 
sqq,, etc. 

263 



264 THE CHURCH 

have been received by the body of the clergy in Prague, and 
they have obeyed them, therefore, they ought to be obeyed." 
It is as if we should argue in this way: because processes 
were received by the body of the clergy in Jerusalem against 
Christ, that he is a seducer, malefactor, and blasphemer 
excommunicate and guilty of death, therefore, those proc- 
esses are to be obeyed by the doctors themselves. The con- 
clusion from the law of similarity holds by that middle term 
of cause, "because the processes were received by the clergy" 
— and the doctors of theology ought to be ashamed for 
that conclusion, and especially Stanislaus, for he is the ablest 
logician amongst them. Perhaps they learned that conclu- 
sion from the chief priests, scribes, and Pharisees who for- 
mulated a like conclusion. For when Pilate said unto them, 
"What accusation bring ye against this man?" they answered 
and said (formulating this conclusion): "If this man were 
not an evil-doer we would not have delivered him up to 
thee," John 18 : 29-30. And again they followed the same 
line of argument when Pilate said, "I find no case against 
him," when they replied, "We have a law and according to 
that law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son 
of God," John 19 : 7. In the first conclusion, formulated by 
the Jews, the doctors implied that they themselves did not 
err when they said: "If this one were not an evil-doer, we 
would not have delivered him up to thee" — that is, because 
he is an evil-doer, therefore have we delivered him up to 
thee. Similarly our doctors reply in the conclusion they 
formulate that the body of the clergy in Prague cannot err; 
otherwise, if they were able to err, their conclusion would 
not be valid. And because that body is able to err in ac- 
cepting the processes, so also it does err in securing them 
and wickedly executing them. Therefore, the conclusion of 
the doctors is not a good one. 

And I wonder how this enormous conclusion — cauda — of 
the doctors, by which they wish to cover up their shame by 



EXCOMMUNICATIONS, JUST AND UNJUST 265 

the statement: processes to the contrary import, if received, 
would have to be obeyed — does not contradict this, when 
the conclusion is added: "Nor is it the business of the clergy 
in Prague to pronounce sentence whether the excommunica- 
tion of Master John Huss is just or unjust." For if those 
processes are to be obeyed with respect to excommunication, 
then they are to be obeyed by them as just and not as un- 
just. Because the clergy together with the doctors obeys 
them and received them, therefore it obeys them as just 
and received them as just, and consequently the doctors to- 
gether with the clergy passed upon them sentence that they 
are just. Nevertheless, their conclusion says that it is not 
for the clergy in Prague to pass sentence whether the ex- 
communication of Master John Huss is just or unjust. And 
an evident contradiction is established, namely, the clergy 
in Prague cries out, affirms and asserts that the excommuni- 
cation of Master John Huss is just, therefore the clergy in 
Prague passes the sentence that that excommunication is 
just; yet the conclusion of the doctors says that it is not 
for the clergy in Prague to pass sentence whether that judg- 
ment of excommunication is just or unjust. It is most clear 
that this conclusion contradicts the facts and the sentence 
of the clergy of Prague. 

Likewise, if it is not for the clergy in Prague to pass 
sentence whether that excommunication is just or unjust, 
and the clergy approves the processes and acts in accordance 
with the processes; therefore the clergy in Prague does not 
know whether it is acting justly or unjustly, nor does it hope 
that it is acting justly. For hope ought to go before the 
sentence. 

Likewise, these doctors themselves pass the sentence that 
the excommunication of Master John Huss is just, and this is 
clear because they pass the sentence that the processes are to 
be obeyed, and not as though they were unjust; hence, as 
though they were just. Consequently, the doctors pronounce 



266 THE CHURCH 

the sentence that the excommunication enjoined in the proc- 
esses is just. 

Likewise, the doctors say that the processes [court pro- 
ceedings] are to be obeyed, especially because in them noth- 
ing that is an absolute good is forbidden, nor is anything 
enjoined which is an absolute evil, but only things which are 
intermediate, in which obedience must be rendered in accord- 
ance with the teaching of the Gospel and in accordance 
with St. Bernard. Therefore the doctors pass sentence that 
the commands in the processes are just, among which is the 
excommunication of Master John Huss. Therefore, these 
doctors pass the sentence that the excommunication of Mas- 
ter John Huss is just. And they themselves are part of the 
clergy in Prague. Therefore, this very conclusion of theirs 
confutes these doctors. 

Likewise, these doctors pronounce judgment that the 
excommunication which is enjoined in the processes is a 
thing intermediate, a thing between that which is absolutely 
good and that which is absolutely evil, and when it is en- 
joined in respect to the mode, time, place and person, then 
it passes over into a thing absolutely good, because it passes 
into an injunction of the pope and prelates. Therefore, the 
doctors, in pronouncing such a judgment about the excom- 
munication, declare that it is just. Nevertheless, in view of 
their conclusion, they ought not to pronounce the judgment 
that it is just. And this they do, a thing they ought not to 
do; yea, they do not know what they are doing, for they say 
that it is not for the clergy in Prague to pronounce judg- 
ment that the excommunication of John Huss is unjust, and 
yet they pronounce judgment that it is just. It is certainly 
worthy of laughter how doctors of the law agree to this con- 
clusion, doctors who pronounce judgment on the decrees, 
decretals and processes [court proceedings] whether they are 
just or justly given or by just men, when they ought by 
reasonable methods to expound the decrees and the decretals 



EXCOMMUNICATIONS, JUST AND UNJUST 267 

and examine the proceedings, whether they are just or un- 
just, and to advise others, when the emergency arises, whether 
processes ought to be admitted and held or whether they 
ought not be admitted and held; or whether it is lawful to 
take appeal from them. This is clear, because the doctors 
have irrationally shut themselves off on both sides from a 
reasonable judgment. 

But how the processes fulminated against me are null 
and erroneous, the Venerable Master John de Jesenicz, doctor 
of canon law, showed most clearly by a public discussion 
and in a decision in the university of Bologna. And because, 
as I have said, processes of this kind chiefly enjoin excom- 
munication, suspension and interdict, for that reason I will 
say something about them briefly. 

Let it be first noted that excommunication means placing 
outside of communication, 11 : 3, Nihil, and cap. Canonica 
[Friedberg, 1 : 653, 674]; 29 : 1, Viduas [Friedberg, 1 : 1091]; 
24 : 3 [Friedberg, 1 : 988]; 11 ."3, Omnis Ckristianus [Fried- 
berg, 1 : 653], and the chapter following. And, because ex- 
communication is better understood through its opposite, 
namely, communication or communion — inasmuch as by the 
opposite of what is good everything good is understood, so 
also of evil and its opposite — therefore it is to be noted that 
communication or good communion is threefold. The first 
is the participation of divine grace, which makes gracious. 
This the apostle wishes for the Corinthians, when he says: 
"The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God 
and the communication of the Holy Spirit be with you all," 
II Cor. 13 : 13. This communication is the communion of 
the saints, who are Christ's mystical body, the body of which 
Christ is the head, and this communion we believe when 
we say: "I believe the communion of saints." The second 
communication or communion is the participation in the 
sacraments. "There is one Lord, one faith, one baptism," 
Eph. 4:5. It is especially taken, however, for the partici- 



268 THE CHURCH 

pation in the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. "The 
cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communication 
of the blood of Christ? And the bread which we break, is 
it not the participation of the body of the Lord?" I Cor. 
10 : 16. Because we, being many, are one bread and one 
body, seeing we partake of one bread and one cup. The 
third communication or communion is the participation in 
suffrages. 1 In this participation the good Lord is glorified: 
"lama companion of all them that fear thee and that keep 
thy commandments," Ps. 119 : 63. And besides this three- 
fold communication is the communication which is the inter- 
course between all Christians, good and bad. The first three 
are only participated in by good men, but of this fourth men 
of the world think more. 

Secondly, it is to be noted that in this statement I speak 
of excommunication, as it corresponds to the fourfold excom- 
munication just spoken of, namely, separation (1) from par- 
ticipation in divine grace which makes gracious, (2) from a 
worthy participation in the sacraments, (3) from participa- 
tion in the suffrages which prepare for the life eternal — these 
three being opposed to the corresponding threefold communion 
— and (4) from intercourse with Christians, either by the 
censure of the spiritual or public exclusion by the secular 
judge. 

From these it follows: (1) that there is not and can never 
be an excommunication of the three first kinds except for 
mortal sins. This is clear, because never is any one separ- 
ated from the communion of the saints, which is the partic- 
ipation in God's grace, and the sacraments and the suffrages, 
preparing for the life eternal, except for mortal sin. For 
mortal sin alone divides or separates from communion of 
this kind, just as it separates from God himself. Nor can 
this happen except through mortal sins, because, so long as 

1 Suffrages are the prayers of the church and other benefits accruing from 
the acts of the church in the mass and indulgences. See Hergenro'ther: K.- 
rcchl, 567; Friedberg: K.-recht, 204. 



EXCOMMUNICATIONS, JUST AND UNJUST 269 

a man is in grace, so long does he remain a partaker of the 
aforementioned threefold communion, in respect to the law 
of present righteousness. And as God is the most righteous 
judge, He cannot damn a man except for his demerit in non- 
participation of this kind. Therefore, the corollary is true. 
(2) It follows that no judge may ever excommunicate in this 
way unless the man himself shall before excommunicate him- 
self by his offences. (3) It follows that no judge ought to 
excommunicate any one except for a criminal offence 1 or on 
account of mortal sin, and this is clear from 11 13 [41, Fried- 
berg, 1 : 655], where it is said: "No bishop except for the 
certain and evident cause of sin shall deprive any one whom- 
soever from ecclesiastical communion by the anathema, 
because the anathema is the eternal damnation of death, 
and only for mortal sin ought it to be imposed and only on 
him who may not be otherwise corrected." And it is also 
said, 24 : 3, His ita respondetur [Friedberg, 1 : 988]: "With 
God not the sentence of priests is sought but the life of the 
guilty, for no one is to be known by the sentence to whom 
the stain of sin does not adhere." Likewise, Lyra, Com. on 
Hosea, 4, at the end, says: "0 Judah, send Israel away, on 
account of his wickedness, for their company is separated, 
that is, excommunicated." And also it is said by Augustine, 
2:1, Multi, 5 [Friedberg, 1 : 446]: "No one ought to be 
excommunicated except for a criminal offence." 

All, however, agree in saying that excommunication is of 
two kinds, major and minor, as is apparent from de Sent. 
Excom. si quern de cleri excommunicato fieri, de except, cap. 2 
[Friedberg, 2 : 912] * where it is stated that a minor excom- 
munication removes from the participation of the sacraments 
but the major separates from the communion of the faithful. 

1 A crimen or criminal offence is a violation of a natural law or a positive 
divine commandment, as, for example, adultery, as opposed to a violation of 
ecclesiastical law, delictum. Hergenrttther, 549*9., 7S0 sq, 

* Gregory DCs Decretals, 5 : 39, c. 59, and also 5 : 39, c. 1, make the dis- 
tinction above made by Huss between major and minor excommunication, the 
canon law running: "If any one pronounces the words, 'I excommunicate 



270 THE CHURCH 

Minor excommunication is separation on account of mortal 
sin from participation in spiritual benefits by which a man 
makes himself unworthy through criminal offence to continue 
to participate in grace, and this excommunication no one may 
impose upon a man who persists in God's grace. Major ex- 
communication is the separation which the prelates of the 
church announce against a man as an open sinner, and by 
which they set him off from intercourse with Christians and 
from participation in the sacraments. 

By this excommunication they now designate me in proc- 
esses and denunciations, shutting me out from all human 
communion. But blessed be God, who did not give such 
force to this [kind of] excommunication as to make it possible 
for it to take away from a good man virtue or righteousness, 
when he endures in humility, nor is it able to impose upon 
him sin [when he refuses to obey it]. Nay, rather when he 
has patiently continued to endure it helps to purify him as 
tools iron, and fire gold, and it helps to increase his reward 
of beatitude, as the Lord said: "Blessed are ye when men 
shall persecute you, and separate you from their company, 
and reproach you and cast out your name as evil for the 
Son of man's sake. Rejoice in that day and leap for joy, for 
behold, great is your reward in heaven, for in the same man- 
ner did their fathers do unto the prophets," Luke 6 : 22, 23. 

But this [major] excommunication ought to be medicinal, 
that is, a remedy to heal a man in his soul and to lead him 

him/ then he is bound not merely by the minor excommunication which sep- 
arates from participation in the sacraments, but also by the major excom- 
munication which separates from the communion of the faithful." This dis- 
tinction is usually resolved into a difference in the solemnities attending the 
announcement. Since Martin Vs decree, 1418, a distinction has been made 
between excommunicated persons to be tolerated and avoided — tolerali ei w- 
tandi. In case one of the latter is present at any meeting, the priest must 
interrupt the service. With those who are to be avoided are forbidden all passing 
of words, prayer, greetings, intercourse and fellowship at the table. See 
HergenrSther, 567 sqq.; Friedberg, K.-rccht, pp. 293 sqq. Wyclif, de Eccks., 
153 sqq. and de dam. civ., 300 sq., gives the conditions justifying excommuni- 
cation and refers to the distinction between minor and major excommunica- 
tion and the solemn extinguishing of candles in the latter. 



EXCOMMUNICATIONS, JUST AND UNJUST 271 

back to Christ's fold and to life eternal as a measure or- 
dained for a final end. Therefore, St. Augustine, HomUia, 
de penitentia, also 2:1, Multi, says: "Excommunication 
ought not to be mortal but medicinal." Again, Cum medi- 
cinalis. de Sent. Excom., liber 6 : 7. 1 A notorious sinner 
after the third warning or public citation, when he refuses 
to be corrected, ought on account of his criminal offence to 
be kept from communication according to the Saviour's com- 
mand, where he said to Peter: "If thy brother sin against 
thee, go show him his fault between thee and him alone. 
If he hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother. But if he 
will not hear thee, take with thee one or two more that at 
the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be es- 
tablished. And if he refuses to hear them, tell it to the 
church. And if he refuses to hear the church also, let him 
be unto thee as the Gentile and the publican," Matt. 18 : 
15-17. This exposition is given above at the beginning of 
Chapter XXI of this treatise, in which the conditions of a 
true prelate are indicated. Nevertheless, this is yet to be 
noted, that Christ said: "If he sin," that is, commit the sin 
of a criminal offence, for on that account he is deserving of 
correction and he is not to be excommunicated for anything 
whatsoever. But if he show himself incorrigible, after the 
third reproof, then he ought to be carefully avoided as a 
heathen Gentile and a publican; otherwise not. Let, there- 
fore, prelates see to it that they act cautiously, lest they ex- 
communicate so easily subjects for temporal gain. 

Hence, St. Augustine, Sermo de Quadragesima: "We can- 
not deprive of the communion, because this prohibition is 
not yet mortal or medicinal, except in the case of one who 
has of his own accord confessed or has been named or con- 
victed in some secular or ecclesiastical tribunal." And he also 
says on these words, "If any man that is named a brother 
be a fornicator or covetous or an idolater or a reviler or 

1 Boniface Vm's Liber Sextus de sent, excom., 5:11; 1 Friedberg, a : 1093. 



272 THE CHURCH 

a drunkard or an extortioner, with such an one no not to eat," 
I Cor. 5 : ii: "Likewise it must be known that every 
one sinning mortally is excommunicated of God, in accord- 
ance with that Psalm, 'Cursed are those who depart from 
thy commandments/ and I Cor. 16 : 22, 'If any man love 
not our Lord Jesus Christ, let him be anathema.' " And al- 
though this excommunication is called minor because it is 
not pronounced solemnly in public by a prelate, neverthe- 
less I fear it more than the major excommunication, with 
which the prelates now assail me. But, besides, I fear the 
greatest excommunication more still with which the high 
priest, sitting in the sight of all the angels and men, will ex- 
communicate the damned from participation in eternal bless- 
edness, as he said: " Go, 1 ye cursed into the eternal fire which 
is prepared for the devil and his angels," Matt. 25 : 41. Of 
this excommunication the judge ought to think and he ought 
to beware lest he excommunicate unjustly. For whoever 
excommunicates another for temporal gain or chiefly for his 
own honor or to revenge an injury against himself or with- 
out any known cause of criminal offence this man excom- 
municates himself. For he ought to excommunicate him 
whom God excommunicates, for criminal offence which he 
knows [the possible offender] has committed and after the 
third warning and out of love, for the honor of God and 
for the salvation of the man whom he excommunicates and 
also for the advantage of others that they may fear and 
that he [the offender] do not infect them. So Paul did when, 
writing to the Corinthians, he charged them to cast out the 
public fornicator lest he should infect others and also that 
his soul might be saved, I Cor. 5:5. 

Now, these things being considered, the faithful should 
know how many prelates, clergy and laity are excommuni- 
cated of God; for all who depart from the Lord's command- 
ments are excommunicated, and also how many excommuni- 

1 lie. Vulgate: discedile a me. 



EXCOMMUNICATIONS, JUST AND UNJUST 273 

cate themselves when they put excommunication on others, 
or publish it, and especially the clerics who, as it were, every 
day at prime sing: ''Cursed are they who depart from thy 
commandments." 

This much, in brief, with respect to excommunication, in 
regard to which that good Christian of holy memory and 
that great zealot of Christ's law, Master Frederick Epinge, 
bachelor of canon law, treating of the first article, said: "No 
prelate ought to excommunicate anybody unless he first knows 
that the person has been excommunicated by God." Of this 
I have written in another place. And, if thou wilt not be- 
lieve it, learn it on the wall in Bethlehem, 1 and there thou 
wilt find how excommunication does not injure the righteous 
but profits and why even the righteous ought to fear unjust 
prelatic or Pilatic excommunication, and for these reasons, (1) 
that he may not be guilty at some other place or time. (2) 
The danger to him who unjustly excommunicates. (3) The 
injury to the brethren which may follow from a foolish ap- 
plication of censures; (4) that they may not become an occa- 
sion of stumbling by going back from the truth; (5) that they 
may not suffer an injury by an excommunicated person's 
curses; (6) that he by impatience may not fall from merit or 
depart from righteousness — and also for other reasons ex- 
plained more fully and pertinently in another place. 1 

1 Huss refers to the six inscriptions on the walls of Bethlehem chapel, 
Mon.y 1 : 237-243, which were intended to counteract six errors about the 
mass — namely, that the priest creates the body of Christ; faith — namely, 
that faith is exercised in Mary, etc., and not in God only; absolution from sin 
— namely, that the priest absolves whomsoever he will; obedience — namely, 
that subjects are bound to obey all commands issued by superiors; excommu- 
nication; and simony, which, so the inscription read, " the clergy for the most 
part, alas I practise." In regard to the fifth, excommunication, the inscrip- 
tion ran: "It is an error that every excommunication, just or unjust, binds 
the excommunicated person and separates him from the communion of Christ's 
faithful and deprives him of the sacraments." Epinge's name I do not find in 
Schulte or Chevalier. 

• These six reasons for standing in fear even of an unjust sentence of ex- 
communication, Huss quotes from memory, leaving out one which he had given 
in his de sex Erroribus, Mon., 1 : 240. Some of these reasons he sets forth 



274 THE CHURCH 

Then, in regard to the excommunication, by which the 
wicked separate the good from themselves, this should be 
said, that the wicked excommunicated Christ and the man 
born blind, as appears in John 9 : 22, 34. This kind of ex- 
communication may be distinguished also from its opposite, 
which is communion in evil, of which it is said: "Have 
no communion with the unfruitful works of darkness/' Eph. 
5:11; and, "He that giveth him greeting communes in his 
evil works," H John 11; and, "What communication has a 
saint with a dog?" Ecclesiasticus 13, as if he had said, None ! 
Therefore, every one being in grace in respect to present 
righteousness is excommunicated [out of communion with] 
from the wicked. And this is that holy excommunication 
by which the righteous is said to be excommunicate, that 
is, placed outside of communication or participation with 
wickedness. Hence, John says: "And I heard another voice 
from heaven saying, Come forth, my people, out of her, that 
ye have no participation with her sins and that ye receive not 
of her plagues, for her sins have reached even unto heaven," 
Rev. 18 : 4, 5. Let us ask the Lord that He may vouch- 
safe to preserve us in His communion and guard us against 
unlawful communion. 

there more clearly, for example, 3, which there reads: "The injury to neigh- 
bors which might easily arise as a result of the excommunication as, for ex- 
ample, the deprivation of wholesome teaching and sacraments, for he who 
wrongly excommunicates sometimes is the cause of the perdition of many 
through the withholding from the excommunicate teaching by which he would 
be instructed most profitably in the law of Christ." And the fifth there reads: 
"That the neighbors may not sin by avoiding him, cursing him, and withhold- 
ing from him the works of charity." Huss's treatment of the subject of ex- 
communication in the de sex Erroribus is more clear and practical than his 
treatment in this chapter. There he introduces many pertinent quotations 
from the Fathers and especially from the Scriptures which are not given here, 
as, for example, Num. 23 : 8: "How shall I curse whom God hath not cursed?" 
On the other hand, he leaves out there the distinction between the major and 
minor excommunications and the prolonged explanations of communication 
and excommunication. The cases of Balaam and Ananias Huss uses often, e. g. 9 
Mon. t 1 : 362, 401. 



CHAPTER XXin 
SUSPENSION AND THE INTERDICT 

Now of suspension this is to be said that, in the state- 
ment, to suspend is an administrative act or to prohibit any 
good thing on account of a criminal offence. Hence, what the 
old decretals call suspension the new law and decretals call 
the interdict, and then they speak of ecclesiastical suspension 
from an office or from a church benefice or of an ecclesias- 
tical interdict from executing an office of the church. 

This definition of suspension, therefore, being laid down, 
it is to be noted that, just as it is proper in itself in the first 
instance for God to excommunicate a man, so also it is proper 
for Him in the first instance to suspend him. Hence it is 
impossible for a pope or bishop to suspend any one justly, 
except as he has been before suspended of God, just as it is 
impossible for the pope to think anything righteously unless 
the thought be before suggested of God. Hence the apostle 
rightly says: "Not that we are sufficient of ourselves to 
think anything as of ourselves, but our sufficiency is of God," 
II Cor. 3:5. And the supreme Bishop himself said: "Apart 
from me ye can do nothing," John 15 : 5. From this it is 
clear that a suspension pronounced by a prelate is only 
worth as much as God almighty makes it to be worth. Hence, 
God's efficient suspension extends itself to priests, kings and 
every one in authority whom He removes from office or whom 
He takes from life by a decree of retribution. Hence, He 
suspends any one from the sacerdotal dignity, as it is written: 
"Because thou hast rejected knowledge, I will also reject 
thee. Thou shalt be no priest to me," Hosea 4:6; "Bring 
no more vain oblations," Isaiah 1 : 13; and "I have no 

27s 



276 THE CHURCH 

pleasure in you, neither will I accept an offering at thy hand/' 
Mai. i : 10. And Christ's apostle suspended all who were 
guilty of criminal offence from the ministry of Christ's body 
and blood and the Lord, as he said: "Wherefore whoso shall 
eat the bread and drink the cup of the Lord in an unworthy 
manner shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord/' 
I Cor. ii : 27. Likewise, we read of the severe suspension 
of Eli and his family, in that he did not duly correct his sons, 
as the Lord said to Eli: " Wherefore kick ye at my sacrifices 
and my offerings which I have commanded that they should 
be offered in my temple and honorest thy sons above me, to 
make yourselves fat with all the chiefest of the offerings of 
Israel my people? Therefore the Lord saith to Israel, I said 
indeed that thy house and the house of thy father should 
minister for ever before me, but now the Lord saith, Be it 
far from me, for he who honoreth me, him will I honor, and 
they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed. Behold the 
days come that I will cut off thy arm and the arm of thy 
father's house . . . and this shall be the sign unto thee that 
shall come upon thy two sons, on Hophni and Phinehas; in 
one day they shall die, both of them. And I will raise me 
up a faithful priest, who shall do according to my heart and 
my mouth," I Sam. 2 : 29-35. Likewise, of the suspension 
of the king, Saul, who, in the face of God's commandments 
had spared God's enemies, we read: "Because thou hast 
rejected the word of the Lord, the Lord also hath rejected 
thee from being king," I Sam. 15 : 23. 

It is plain how suspension varies, for one is a suspen- 
sion from office, one from a benefice or from some other 
good from which the sinner is justly suspended on account 
of open sin. Likewise, there is a suspension in fact and a 
suspension by law and there are other sorts of suspension. 
But, as has been said, suspension by law belongs chiefly to 
God to originate and regulate, but suspension in fact occurs 
when God sometimes through good, sometimes through bad, 



SUSPENSION AND THE INTERDICT 277 

ministers suspends by the natural order of things any offend- 
ing prelate from his office and ministry when he is actually 
in criminal offence. For he sins by the very fact that he 
falls into mortal sin, whatever it be that he may do, and 
consequently he is forbidden of God to sin in that way, and 
consequently he is suspended by God from that office. Hence, 
the prophet says: "God said unto the sinner. What hast 
thou to do, to declare my statutes, and that thou hast taken 
my covenant in thy mouth? seeing thou hatest instruction 
and castest my words behind thee. When thou sawest a thief 
thou rannest with him, and hast been a partaker with adul- 
terers. Thy mouth abounds in evil and thy tongue blabbeth 
deceit. Thou sittest and speakest against thy brother and 
thou settest up slander against thy mother's son," Psalm 
50 : 16-20. Here God enumerates the sins for which He sus- 
pends the sinner from the publication of His covenant which 
is the law of truth. The first sin is disobedience to God, 
the second, rejection of His words; the third, theft; the fourth, 
adultery; the fifth, wickedness of mouth, which divides itself 
into lies, blasphemy, false testimony, deceit, slander, vain 
speaking, malediction, base speaking, and such like; the sixth, 
the sin of taking offence at Christ. 

From this we gather how rare are judges, preachers and 
others who publish God's covenant to the people who should 
not be suspended of God from the publication of that cove- 
nant. Therefore, let the faithful note in the matter of sus- 
pension just spoken of from the office of publishing God's 
covenant and for the threefold example spoken of above 
whether or not our prelates and clerics are suspended of 
God. First, if they thrust from themselves the knowledge 
of Scriptures and the task of evangelization, then are they 
suspended by God, as in the lesser case [that is, preaching 
under the 0. T.] we read in Hosea 4, for our prelates have, 
on the one hand and the other, greater material for preach- 
ing and a better model and also certain reasons for preach- 



278 THE CHURCH 

ing above what the priests of the old law had, and yet 
they exercise this office less. Therefore, as there is a greater 
reason now underlying the duty to preach, and as the same 
Lord is present, who is not able to withhold final vengeance 
in view of the greater sin in not preaching, and the demands 
of His justice, it is clear that if our prelates are of this kind, 
they are under a more severe suspension. Yea, and they 
are under a still more severe suspension in so far as they are 
under more urgent obligation to fervently proclaim Christ's 
law in these times of antichrist. 

So far as the second kind of suspension goes — that of 
Eli pronounced by God — the faithful should note whether 
our prelates either do not punish at all or punish their 
spiritual sons as more guilty than the natural sons of Eli, who 
were punished of God. And in order to discern their greater 
guilt, the faithful ought to note these two things: (i) that a 
prelate is under greater obligation to his spiritual son than 
any one by the law of reason is to his natural son and (2) 
that more detestable is the punishment meted out on ac- 
count of the lack of money for which [pardon for] sin is sold 
than is a punishment remitted for the vindication of an in- 
jury against God out of natural affection, as Eli seems to 
have spared his sons. So far as the third kind of suspen- 
sion goes, as it holds for prelates, kings, and other secular 
princes, let the faithful note that the prelates show more 
favor to the public enemies of God for the sake of their own 
comfort than Saul showed to Amalek moved by lust for his 
temporal goods. If this is so, then there is no doubt but 
that the same God who at all times must exercise the same 
justice punishes the delinquent more severely. Therefore, 
it is an evident mark of the severity of punishment that 
God puts off punishment till after death and does not pun- 
ish them in this life in any other way but permits them 
to wander about in mundane prosperity as reprobates who 
are not reproved. 



SUSPENSION AND THE INTERDICT 279 

But, alas, this threefold suspension men do not think of, 
and especially ought those higher in worldly rank often re- 
volve in their minds the way in which they may be sus- 
pended from office and from benefice forever. Hence, on 
the words, "The Lord in his anger said to Moses, Take all 
the chiefs of the people and hang them up before the sun 
on the gallows/' Num. 25 : 4, Origen, Horn. 20, speaks thus: 
"The Lord said unto Moses that he should take all the chiefs 
and hang them up to the Lord before the sun. The people 
sin and the chiefs are hung up before the sun, that is, they 
are brought forward that they may be examined, and may 
be convicted by the light. Thou seest what was the con- 
dition of the chiefs of the people. Not only were they con- 
victed for their own transgressions but they were also obliged 
to give a reason for the sins of the people lest perhaps the 
guilt was theirs that the people came short, and lest per- 
haps they had not taught nor moved nor been solicitous 
to convict those who were first in the guilt that the conta- 
gion might not be spread among many. For the leaders and 
doctors ought to do all these things, for, if they do not and 
have no concern for the common people, the people sin, 
and they themselves are held up and brought forth to receive 
sentence. Moses, that is, God's law, convicts them as neg- 
lectful and indolent, and the wrath of God is turned against 
them and withdrawn from the people. If men would think 
of these things, they would never desire the chiefs of the 
people or go to them. For it is sufficient for me, if I am con- 
victed of my own sins and shortcomings, it is sufficient for me 
to render a reason for my own self and for my own sins. 
Why is it necessary for me also to be held up for the people's 
sins before the sun, in the face of which nothing can be hid- 
den or kept dark or veiled ?" And Origen adds, "the chiefs 
are held up before the sun and, if guilt is found in them, God's 
anger ceases towards the people." So much Origen, who 
shows how chiefs are heavily censured for the sin of self-in- 
dulgence which the people practise. 



280 THE CHURCH 

Woe, therefore, to the modern spiritual and secular princes 
who themselves practise self-indulgence, who give to their sub- 
jects a bad example and do not reprove them or, if they re- 
prove them, do this out of avarice ! Such, without doubt, are 
suspended from office by God, for it is written in the papal 
law, Decretals, 3, de vita et koneskUe [Friedberg, 2 : 455] : l 
"We command your brotherhood that, as far as the clerics 
of your 2 jurisdiction are concerned, who are in the subdiac- 
onate or the orders above it, if they have mistresses, ye 
should studiously take care to admonish them that they re- 
move from themselves these women who least of all ought 
to have been admitted. But, if they refuse to acquiesce, ye 
shall suspend them from their ecclesiastical benefices until 
they make condign satisfaction, and if they who are sus- 
pended presume to keep these women, ye shall see to it that 
ye remove them permanently from those benefices." Be- 
cause there is no defect in the law but in the superiors who 
ought to practise it, therefore, the pope in the preceding 
chapter says that prelates who may presume to hold on in 
their iniquities to such persons, especially for the sake of 
getting money or some other temporal good, them we wish 
to subject to the same punishment. And it is said by the 
authority of St. Gregory, Dist. 83 [Friedberg, 1 : 293]: "If 
any bishop shall assent to the fornication of clerics for a 
price or at their petitions and not assail their authority, he 
ought to be suspended from his office."' And this suspen- 

1 The heading of the chapter in the Decretals is: "The cohabitation of 
clerics with women." The quotation is from Alexander Ill's letter to the arch- 
bishop of Canterbury. A part of the letter, not quoted by Huss, speaks " of the 
depraved and detestable custom which had prevailed in England for a long 
time, of clerics having mistresses in their houses." William the Conqueror did 
not enforce celibacy and a council at Winchester, 1076, allowed priests already 
married to retain their wives, prohibiting marriages thereafter. Councils under 
Anselm, 1102, 1108, ordered priests to dismiss their concubines, but Eadmer, 
Anselm's biographer, declares that few priests observed the chastity Anselm 
called for, and Pascal II, writing to Anselm, said most of the English priests 
were married. In Bohemia the law of celibacy was also late of enforcement. 

'Huss's text wrongly has nostra — our. 

* I have restored some of the omitted words from the canon law for the 
sake of clearness. 



SUSPENSION AND THE INTERDICT 281 

sion, according to the archdeacon, 1 ought to be permanent, 
equivalent to deposition, because of the difficulty of assem- 
bling the bishops for the purpose of deposing such bishops 
or bishop who simoniacally have sold or sell righteousness. 
And because a metropolitan — as is the Roman pontiff — may 
be slow so far as his cardinals are concerned in the execu- 
tion of this holy duty, therefore, in the third place, they have 
ordained laws intended to remedy the disorders, namely, that 
the mass of the priest shall not be heard from him to whom 
it is notorious that that priest is living in fornication, nor 
shall the goods of the church be administered to him to 
encourage the deed. For Pope Nicolas, DisL 32, Nullus 
[Friedberg, 1 : 117], says: "Let no one hear a mass said by a 
presbyter of whom he knows beyond a peradventure that 
he is keeping a concubine." 2 Hence, Alexander II in the 
same place says: "We charge and command that no one 
hear mass said by a presbyter of whom he knows beyond 
a peradventure that he has a concubine." And he goes on 
to say: "Therefore the holy synod [Roman synod, 1063] 
also decreed this under the head of excommunication, when 
it said: 'Whatsoever priest, deacon, or subdeacon, in view 
of the constitution passed by our predecessor of blessed mem- 
ory, holy Pope Leo [IX] or Nicolas [II], on the chastity of 
the clergy, shall again take a concubine or not give up the 
one he already has, we in the stead of Almighty God and by 
the authority of the princes, Peter and Paul, charge and 
wholly forbid that he sing mass or read the Gospel or the 
Epistle in the missal service or that he remain in the pres- 
bytery with those who, in performance of divine service, have 
been obedient to the aforesaid constitution or that he receive 
anything from the church. 9 " On this the archdeacon says: 
"That the people ought to withhold from such a one vol- 

1 One of the glossators of the Liber Scxtus, Guido de Baysio, archdeacon of 
Bologna, d. 1313. 

* The decretal adds out subintroductam muttcrcm—Si woman secretly intro- 
duced. 



282 THE CHURCH 

untary tithes, because a benefice is not given except for the 
performance of duty. And inasmuch as the same sentence 
or a greater one holds for spiritual fornication, which is a 
greater offence, it is evident that the inferior ought to be 
suspended by the superior prelate, namely, for the spiritual 
sin — which is more grave — whatever it may be. And as it 
is certain that Luciferian pride in a prelate, neglect of evan- 
gelizing and avarice like that of Iscariot are sins more grave 
than carnal fornication, it is plain that the supreme prelate, 
Christ Jesus, to whom these graver sins are chiefly known, 
does not withhold suspension on any excuse proportioned 
to the guilt. From these things, when the condition of the 
church is inquired into, it is gathered that from pope down 
to the lowest priest rarely is one exempt for a given time from 
suspension unless it be he who blamelessly follows the Lord 
Jesus Christ. For it has already been said how fornicators 
are suspended. Likewise of simoniac clerics, Qidcumque by 
Gregory, and Reper. by Ambrose [i: i : cap. 2, 7; Fried- 
berg, 1 : 358, 359]. Likewise clerics are suspended for brood- 
ing over 1 base gains and lucre," Dist. 88 [Friedberg, 1 : 307]. 
And since all these persons, in view of the law of Christ, min- 
ister to the church unworthily, it is clear how manifold are 
the irregularities and profanations which the clergy of the 
church are involved in. 

Of profanation I have treated in the tract contra advcr- 
sarium occultum,* showing how every wicked presbyter pro- 
fanes — that is, violates, curses, and contaminates — God's spir- 
itual temple. For, to follow the saints in their lives is un- 

1 Pope Gelasius uses the word immincrt where Huss uses incubanUs — brood- 
ing. 

* "Against the Hidden Adversary/' Mon. t 1 : 168-179. This treatise, writ- 
ten 141 2 in reply to an attack that Huss was destroying the law and also de- 
stroying the priesthood by his preaching, brings out: (i) That the wickedness 
of the people and the priests brought about the destruction of Jerusalem, and 
(2) that by driving out the hucksters from the temple and by many in- 
stances in the O. T. it was taught that secular princes have the duty of pun- 
ishing simoniac priests by withdrawing from them their livings. 



SUSPENSION AND THE INTERDICT 283 

doubtedly more honorable than all material temples, which 
will not last after the day of judgment. And woe is me, if 
I keep silence, not assailing the avarice or the evident luxury 
of the clergy. For it is said, Dist. 83 [84, 85, Friedberg, 
1 : 292 sq.] y an error not resisted is an error approved and 
the truth, inasmuch as it is defended least, is oppressed. In- 
deed, as one is able to convict 1 perverse persons, to neglect to 
do so is nothing else than to favor them. And there is not 
lacking the suspicion of a hidden fellowship in the case of him 
who neglects to oppose a deed evidently bad. For what does 
it profit him not to be polluted with another's error if he 
gives assent to the one who errs? For he evidently assents 
to him who is in error who does not help him to cut out 
those things that ought to be reproved. 

Hence St. Gregory, Pastoral Theology, cap. 15 [2:4, 
Nic. Fathers, 2d Ser., 12 : n], quotes Lam. 2 : 14, "Thy 
prophets have seen for thee false and foolish visions and 
they have not uncovered thy iniquity to provoke thee to 
repentance," and says: "Indeed in the sacred oracle the 
prophets are sometimes called doctors, who, while they pre- 
sent the present as fleeting, declare the things that are to 
come as evident. And the divine discourse asserts: 'They 
have seen false things,' for while they fear to correct guilt, 
they, in vain, flatter the sinning by promises of safety, be- 
cause they never in any way uncover the iniquity of the 
sinning. For they suppress the voice of chiding. Indeed 
the key which opens is the word of reproof. For by chiding 
the voice uncovers guilt, of which often he himself is not 
aware who is chargeable with it." These words of St. Gregory 
are also found, Dist. 43, sit rector [Friedberg, 1 : 154]. 

Oh that our doctors would turn to these things, for then 
they would not speak fair of the life of prelates and they 
would not be slow to uncover to them their iniquity, that 
they might provoke them to penitence. They would see in 

1 Posset artucre. The original has passis perturb**. 



284 THE CHURCH 

how many ways one may consent to the open sin of another, 
for he consents who co-operates, who defends, who gives 
counsel, and sanctions, and also who neglects to threaten 
and rebuke. 

Now, in regard to the interdict with which, on account 
of the sin of a single man, or of a number, the clergy vex 
Christ's common people — plebs. 1 For by the three censures, 
excommunication, suspension and interdict, for their own 
exaltation they keep the laity at their feet, increase their 
avarice, protect wickedness and prepare the way for anti- 
christ. And all three censures they heap up on the ground 
of [as a punishment for] disobedience in this way, that every 
one that does not obey them and yield to their will, him 
they excommunicate or suspend from office, and when he 
continues to resist their will, they place the interdict over 
the people, interdicting the exercise of divine services, the 
display of the sacrament, burial — and these things they in- 
terdict to men altogether righteous, that they may cany out 
their will by the deliberate imposition of such burdens. 

But this is an evident sign that these censures proceed 
from antichrist; and these they call in their legal proceed- 
ing fulminations when they are directed against those who 
preach Christ's law and who show up the wickedness of the 
clergy. A second sign is that these censures are multiplied on 
account of disobedience done to themselves rather than on 
account of disobedience done to God and, therefore, rather 
on account of the injury done to themselves than for the in- 
jury done to our God. For in this way the old enemy, 
skilled in wickedness, proceeds, by exalting obedience to 
antichrist above obedience to Christ, and so he usurps, for 
disobedience to himself, that excommunication which Christ 
instituted for disobedience to God. 

1 Luther, in his Address to the German Nobility, called for the abolition of 
the interdict altogether on the ground that it is a greater sin to silence God's 
Word and service than if we were to kill twenty popes at once, not to speak 
of a single priest. 



SUSPENSION AND THE INTERDICT 285 

And he proceeds after this fashion: He infames Christ's 
disciple, later accuses, and then cites him, excommunicates 
and suspends him, and, if he cannot bring him into prison 
or death, he then invokes the secular arm and, if he 
cannot vanquish him in this way, he superimposes by his 
wickedness the interdict. Chiefly, however, he proceeds in 
this fashion against those who lay bare the malignity of 
antichrist, who has monopolized the clergy in largest mea- 
sure for himself. Therefore, he launches these censures for 
the sake of his clergy, notably those engaged in litigation out 
of greed for benefices and at such times as the people have 
not given their tithes according to promise, or in case the 
prince has seized or received the temporal things, or if any 
cleric — even though he be the most iniquitous thief or other- 
wise taken in crime — has been held in custody by the secular 
authorities, or if a priest has been wounded to the shedding 
of blood, or even when the people lawfully have withdrawn 
for a time their obedience from their prelates. But Christ, 
the high priest, when the prophet was imprisoned, than whom 
no greater has arisen born of women, did not impose the 
interdict, nay not even when Herod beheaded him. Yea, 
when he himself was stripped, beaten and blasphemed by 
the soldiers, scribes, Pharisees, officers, and priests, not even 
then did he pronounce any malediction, but he prayed, say- 
ing: "Father forgive them, for they know not what they 
do," Luke 23 : 34. And this doctrine he gave to his mem- 
bers, saying: "Love your enemies, do good to them that 
hate you, and pray for them that persecute you, that ye 
may be sons of your Father which is in heaven, for He mak- 
eth His sun to rise on the good and the evil, and sendeth 
rain on the just and the unjust," Matt. 5 : 44, 45. 

Therefore, following this doctrine in word and work, 
Christ's first vicar, the Roman pontiff, also taught the faith- 
ful, saying: "Hereunto were ye called, because Christ also 
suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow 1 

1 The Vulgate has sequamini — ye should follow. 



286 THE CHURCH 

his steps: who did no sin, neither was guile found in his 
mouth: who when he was reviled, reviled not again, and 
when he suffered, threatened not," I Peter 2 : 21-23. And 
Paul traversing the same path, said: "Bless them that per- 
secute you; bless and curse not," Romans 12 : 14. This 
doctrine the other saints also followed, who, in the time of 
persecution did not fulminate excommunication or suspen- 
sion or impose the interdict, but when more serious persecu- 
tion came, the more urgent were they in performing divine 
ministries. 

But after the thousand years, when Satan was loosed and 
the clergy was fat with the refuse 1 of this world and lifted 
up in pleasure, pride, and ease, the interdict had its origin. 
For Pope Hadrian, who began to reign 1153, for a wound 
which one cardinal had received, placed all Rome under the 
interdict. Oh, how patient under trial was that pope — not, 
indeed, as Christ, Peter, or Paul, or the apostle Andrew! 
Later Alexander III also, who began to rule 11 59, placed 
the interdict on the kingdom of England, 2 de Sponsalibus, 
cap. 2, Nan est vobis [Friedberg, 2 : 665]. Pope Celestine HI, 
who began to reign A. D. 1082, says something about the 
interdict in chap. Qtuesivit de majorUaie et obedientia [Fried- 
berg, 2 : 506]. Later Innocent III, who began to rule 1199 
A. D., announced the interdict in many decretals, as in chap. 
in concilio Lateranensi de prabendis, lib. 3 Decretaliutn [5 : 28 
sqq.j Friedberg, 2 : 478 sqq.]. Still later Boniface VIII, In- 
nocent IV and Clement V imposed interdicts of this kind, in 
the Liber Sextus and the Clementines [Friedberg, 2 : 937 sqq.]. 
And in this way many such interdicts have been multiplied, 
while the clergy were inflamed with avarice, the pomp of this 
world and restless ambition. 

1 The word used by the Vulgate, Phil. 3 : 8. 

* Hadrian IV, the only English pope, one of whose cardinals was murdered 
during the excitement caused by the presence and preaching of Arnold of 
Brescia. Henry II of England was threatened with the interdict by Alexander 
III, 1 1 73, in case he did not deliver up to his sons their wives. 



SUSPENSION AND THE INTERDICT 287 

Hence I always wish to know the ground or reason of the 
general interdict by which the righteous without demerit of 
their own are deprived of the sacraments, such as communion, 
confession, and others, and at times infants are deprived of 
baptism; similarly why it is that the divine ministries of 
God are reduced in the case of righteous men by an inter- 
dict issued on account of one single individual. 1 Exceed- 
ingly wonderful would it be if service was withdrawn from 
an earthly king by all good servants on account of one of 
the servants who was opposed to him. And especially won- 
derful would this be if, on account of one that was a good 
and faithful servant of the king, a vassal, wishing to bend 
him to his own will, should interdict all the king's servants 
to do ministry to the king himself. How, therefore, does a 
pope or bishop so inadvisedly, without support of Scripture 
or revelation, interdict with such extraordinary ease ministry 
to the king, Christ? For when a general interdict is laid 
upon a city or diocese, sin does not decrease but rather in- 
creases. For to the righteous, sepulture is denied contrary 
to Scripture: "Thou shalt not withhold favor from the 
dead," Ecclesiasticus 7 : 33. For who doubts but that to bury 
the righteous dead is a work of mercy, for the angel Raphael 
addressed Tobias thus: "When thou didst pray with tears and 
bury thy dead and didst leave thy repast and hiddest the 
dead in thy house, and didst bury them in the night — I car- 
ried thy prayer to the Lord," Tobias 12 : 12, 13. Who even 
doubts that to hear confession and consult unto salvation 
and to preach the Word of God are works of mercy? Sim- 

1 In consequence of the interdict pronounced over Prague by John XXIII, 
1411, Huss withdrew at the advice of King Wenzel from the city and remained 
in semi-voluntary exile for two years, until he started for Constance October, 
1414. He was in doubt whether he had done right in withdrawing, denying 
that he had "fled from the truth" and instancing the case of Christ, "who 
escaped out of the hands" of his enemies. He insisted that he was actuated 
by a purpose not to prevent the ministrations of the Gospel to the innocent 
by his presence in Prague. See Schaff, Life of John Huss, and Huss's let- 
ters written during his exile, Doc., 34-66. 



288 THE CHURCH 

ilarly to present the sacrament of the eucharist to the devout 
people and to baptize are works of mercy. What, therefore, 
is the reason for withdrawing these things from the people 
of God without any demerit on their part ? 

Hence St. Augustine writes to Bishop Maximus, 1 24 : 3 
[Friedberg, 1 : 987 sqq.]: "If thou hast a judgment about 
this matter, based on sure reasoning or Scripture testimonies, 
wilt thou deign to teach us how a son may be righteously 
anathematized for the sins of his father, or a wife for the sin of 
her husband, or a servant for the sin of his master, or how any 
one in the household, yea a child not yet born — if born at 
the time, when the household is held under the band of anath- 
ema — why it should not be healed by the laver of regen- 
eration if it were in danger of death ? For this was bodily 
punishment of which we read that some despisers of God 
with all their households, which had been partakers of the 
same impiety, perished among the saints. 2 Then forsooth, 
that the living might be struck with fear, the mortal bodies 
which were destined sometime to die were destroyed. But 
the spiritual punishment of which it is written, 'Whatso- 
ever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven/ 
binds souls, and of them it is said, As the soul of the father is 
mine, so is the soul of the son mine. 'The soul that sinneth 
it shall die* [Ezek. 18 : 20]. Ye perhaps have heard of some 
priests of great name who anathematized some sinner includ- 
ing his household, but if perchance they were ever asked about 
it, it would be found that they did not give me a fitting 
reason [for the act]. But, if any one should ask me whether 
it was done rightly I do not find anything to reply to them. 
I have never dared to do this thing for any deeds done against 
the church, without having admonished most solemnly. But, 
if God has revealed to thee that this was done righteously, 

1 The Deeretutn and also Nic. Fathers, i : 589 sq., give it as a letter to 
Auxilius, probably bishop of Murco. 

* Periisse inter sanctos. The Decretum has pariter interfectos: "were like- 
wise put to death." 



SUSPENSION AND THE INTERDICT 289 

I will under no circumstances despise your youth or the be- 
ginnings of your ecclesiastical honor, for I am ready to learn, 
an old man from a young, a bishop of so many years' experi- 
ence from my colleague not yet a little year old in his office 
— I am ready to learn how I may give a good reason to God 
or men, if we punish by spiritual punishment innocent souls 
for another's offence which they do not derive from Adam, 
in whom all have sinned. For, although Clazianus, a son, 
drew from his parents the corruption of the first man — which 
is to be expiated in the sacred font of baptism — nevertheless, 
who doubts that some of the sin which his father, after be- 
getting him, confessed did not belong to the child, seeing he 
did not actively partake of it? What shall I say of his wife? 
What of so many souls belonging to the whole family ? There- 
fore, if one soul, through this severity, with which this whole 
household was anathematized, should, in passing out of the 
body, perish without baptism, the death of innumerable 
bodies, if innocent men are to be violently drawn from the 
church and put to death, is not to be compared with this 
damning injury. If, therefore, thou art able to give a reason 
for this event, would that thou wouldst honor us in writing 
back in order that we also may be able to give an answer; 
but if not, it may be possible for thee to give a reason for 
your acting in inconsiderate excitement of mind. Hence, if 
thou shouldst be asked, thou wouldst not be able to present 
a right reply." Thus much Augustine. 

From these things Gratian draws the following conclu- 
sion: "Therefore, it is plainly shown by authority that a 
person is illegally excommunicated who is excommunicated for 
the sin of another." And back of them they have no reason 
whatever who, for the sin of a single person, lay the sen- 
tence of excommunication upon an entire family. An illegal 
excommunication, however, hurts not the person cited, but 
only the person who excommunicates. Hence it is to be 
noted that the Gloss of the Decretum, summarizing the chap- 



290 THE CHURCH 

ter, says concerning these words of St. Augustine: "That 
that bishop had excommunicated Clazianus's whole family 
for Clazianus's sin, and that seemed to him the right thing 
to do, because one is sometimes punished with corporal pun- 
ishment for the sins of another and also because some priests 
of great name have excommunicated certain persons for sins 
' not their own. In the first part of the chapter Augustine 
asks of him [Maximus] the cause and reason of his judgment 
Later he teaches that none of the reasons aforesaid suffice 
to confirm his sentence. Thirdly, he comes down to the spe- 
cific act itself and proves that the sentence issued against 
the family of Clazianus was unjust. And, finally, he advises 
the bishop that if he is not willing to give a reason for the 
judgment, he ought to abandon his error and follow the 
truth" Thus far the Gloss. 

Would, therefore, that those who excommunicate would 
heed the saying of St Augustine together with the Gloss, 
and also they who impose a general interdict for the sake of 
a single man in the church or the state. Why do they af- 
flict with excommunication and the interdict a community 
which is not guilty and altogether deprive the good and de- 
voted presbyters of the exercise of the divine ministry and 
God's devoted people of the sacraments and God Himself, who 
is therein set forth, of honor, the dead of burial, and often in- 
fants of baptism, without which they pass away and are 
damned, according to the judgment of Augustine ? Here the 
Gloss of the Decreium says on these words: "In case one soul 
through this severity, by which that whole household was 
anathematized, should perish, passing out of the body without 
baptism, the death of innumerable bodies, if innocent men are 
violently removed from the church, is not to be compared with 
this injury." The Gloss, Argumentum, says: "Greater is the 
sin if one soul perish through the sin of unbelief than if they 
should put to death the bodies of innumerable martyrs for 
God's sake." This seems to correspond to the very letter, 



SUSPENSION AND THE INTERDICT 291 

namely: "If the innocent axe removed out of the church, and 
the bodies of martyrs perish, it is not an injury but in pop- 
ular speech it is said there has been homicide." Likewise, the 
Gloss says: "More grievously does he sin, by whose guilt a 
boy's soul goes out of this life without baptism, than he who 
should destroy many innocent persons by violently removing 
them from the church." 

But, alas ! all such things as these the clergy, blinded by 
wickedness, do not receive, who, on account of the non-pay- 
ment, now and then, of a little money, deprive by interdict, 
as has been said, the people of the sacraments of the church. 
Not so did Christ teach, who above all taught that the clergy 
ought not to contend by resort to law, when he said: "To 
him that smiteth thee on the one 1 cheek offer also the other; 
and to him that taketh away thy cloak withhold not thy 
coat also. Give to every one that asketh thee and of him 
that taketh away thy goods ask them not again," Luke 

6 : 29-30. But the clergy, at ease, hearing this most salu- 
tary teaching of Christ, ridicule it. Nor is this to be won- 
dered at, for the Saviour says later: "Every one that hear- 
eth these words of mine and doeth them not, shall be likened 
to a foolish man who built his house upon the sand," Matt. 

7 : 26. 

Who, I say, is a more foolish man than the cleric who 
grounds himself in the refuse of this world and holds Christ's 
life and teachings in derision? To such a low pitch is the 
clergy come that they hate those who preach often and call 
Jesus Christ Lord. And, when any one claims Christ for 
himself, immediately with carping mouth and angry face they 
say: Art thou the Christ? and after the manner of the Phar- 
isees denounce and excommunicate those who confess Christ 
Hence, because I have preached Christ and his Gospel and 
have uncovered antichrist, desiring that the clergy may live 
in accord with Christ's law, the prelates first arranged with 

1 Unam is wanting in the Vulgate. 



292 THE CHURCH 

Lord Zbynek, the archbishop of Prague, to secure a bull from 
Pope Alexander that in the chapels the Word of God should 
not be preached to the people. And from this bull I have 
appealed and never have I been able to secure a hearing. 
Therefore, being cited, I have on reasonable grounds not ap- 
peared because this excommunication was secured through 
Michael de Causis, 1 after we had made an agreement, and 
now at last they have procured the interdict with which they 
vex Christ's common people who are without guilt. 

Therefore, I could wish that the doctors, who say that 
in the acts of procedure nothing absolutely good is forbidden, 
nor anything absolutely evil enjoined but only things inter- 
mediate, would prove that these things are so, and that 
they would prove that an interdict so general is a thing in- 
termediate, something between what is absolutely good and 
what is absolutely evil, depriving the innocent of the sacra- 
ments and sepulture, interrupting the exercise of the divine 
ministries and leading to no good, but to offences, distrac- 
tions and hatred. And how would the doctors be able to 
show that it is lawful to excommunicate God's people from 
the sacraments and sepulture and from divine ministries? For 
it was about this, as has been said, that that most able doc- 
tor of the church, St. Augustine, confutes Bishop Auxilius. 
And the proof of the doctors, which is a combination of hypo- 
critical excuse and the reasoning of rustics, would not satisfy 
Augustine as reasonable when they say: "According to the 
method customary with the church and the Roman curia 
and observed by it." See what a hypocritical excuse that 
is! "Before the fathers of our fathers." What a rustic 
method of reasoning that is! "Here only things indifferent 
are commanded." O doctors, of what church is this the 

1 Michael the Pleader, a title given to the Prague magister, Michael of 
Deutschbrod, by the pope. At first Huss's friend, he became one of his most 
bitter and persistent enemies. No sooner had Huss reached Constance than 
Michael posted up charges against him and went about stirring up the members 
of the council against him. 



SUSPENSION AND THE INTERDICT 293 

method? Of the apostolic church? What apostle observed 
this method or what saint after the apostles? Never was 
it the method of Christ, that head of the holy church, in 
whose method all truth useful for the church is contained. 

But I ask where is this saying found: "Every place, 
city, walled town, villa, or castle, privileged or not privileged, 
to which the same John Huss may have gone, and how long 
soever he may remain and how long soever he may tarry, and 
for three natural days after his departure from such places, 
we, by these writings, do put them under such a great ec- 
clesiastical interdict and wish that divine ministries be stopped 
in them"? 

Perhaps that method is founded on these words: "Men 
ought always to pray and not to faint," Luke 18 : 2, or on 
these: "Praise God all ye peoples," and these: "In every 
place praise ye the Lord." And what will the authors of the 
method say, if it should happen that John Huss came to 
the holy city, Jerusalem, in which cherubim and seraphim 
cease not to cry daily with one voice, saying: "Holy, holy, 
holy, Lord God of Sabaoth"? Will they then stop these 
ministries there in obedience to the fulmination, just as if 
Christ, the righteous advocate, would not intercede to God 
the Father for his faithful members or that the angelic choir 
would not sing: "Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabaoth"? 
Will that voice stop of which John says: "I heard a voice 
of many angels round about the throne and the living crea- 
tures and the elders, and the number of them was thousands 
of thousands saying with a great voice, 'Worthy is he 1 that 
hath been slain to receive the power, and the riches, and 
wisdom, and might, and honor, and glory, and blessing'; and 
every created thing which was in the heavens and which is 
on the earth, under the earth, and in the sea and all things 
that are in them," Rev. 5 : 11-13? And let not the doctors 
say that this is not pertinent, for all rational creatures, ac- 

1 The "Lamb," Agnus, of the Vulgate is omitted. 



294 THE CHURCH 

cording to the method practised by the Roman curia, are 
subject to the curia's command, for every human creature 
is subject to the Roman pontiff, so it is said in the Extrava- 
gante of Boniface VIII [the bull Unam sanctatn], namely: 
"Further we declare, say and define that it is altogether 
necessary for salvation for every human creature to be sub- 
ject to the Roman pontiff." Similarly, the angelic world is 
subject to the Roman pontiff, as appears in the bull of Pope 
Clement: "We command the angels of paradise that they 
lead to the glory of paradise the soul of him who has been 
wholly absolved from purgatory." 

Since, therefore, according to this method of the curia, 
every rational creature — angel and man — is subject to the 
commands of the Roman pontiff, and since the method in the 
processes of the same curia states that "whatsoever place, 
privileged or unprivileged, to which John Huss shall go, and 
as long as he may be there, we do subject them to the ecclesi- 
astical interdict" — it follows that if, by the highest possibility, 
John Huss, according to God's absolute power, reached by 
death the heavenly Jerusalem, that city would be subject 
to the ecclesiastical interdict. But blessed be God Almighty, 
who has ordered that the angels and all the saints in that heav- 
enly Jerusalem are not subject to an interdict of this sort ! 
Blessed also be Christ, the chief Roman pontiff, who has 
given grace to his faithful ones that, when there is no Roman 
pontiff for a given time, they may, under Christ as their 
leader, arrive in the heavenly country! For who would say 
that while the woman Agnes, to all appearances, was for 
two years and five months the only pope, no one then could 
be saved ? Or again, who would say that after a pope's death 
and in the interval between the pope's death and the elec- 
tion of his successor, no man dying in that period could be 
saved ? Blessed also be God Almighty, who ordains that His 
militant church shall have such life that, when a pope is 
dead, she is not on that account without a head or dead 1 



SUSPENSION AND THE INTERDICT 295 

Because not upon the pope but upon the head, Christ, does 
her life depend. And blessed be God that, when a pope is 
insane or become a heretic, the church militant remains the 
faithful spouse of the Lord Jesus Christ I 1 Blessed also be 
the Lord, the one living head of the church, who preserves 
her so effectually in unity that, even now, while there are 
three so-called papal heads, she remains the one spouse of 
the Lord Jesus Christ ! 

For now Balthazar, called John XXUI, is in Rome; and 
Angelo Correr, called Gregory XII, is in Rimini; and Peter 
de Luna, called Benedict, is in Aragon. Why does not one 
of them, called most holy father, out of the fulness of power 
constrain the others with their adherents to submit to his 
jurisdiction? By authority of which one does the Roman 
curia speak; which one has fulness of power over every man 
on earth? Therefore, the foundation is feeble enough as a 
foundation and proof, to wit, that anything should be held 
to be inviolable which is announced by the Roman curia. 
For the rule is laid down, de Constitutionibus, lib. 6, [Fried- 
berg, 2 : 937], that, when two persons having letters from 
the pope in regard to the same provision given on the same 
day, he to whom the pope offered the canonical office has 
the preference, to whom he did not give it without the knowl- 
edge of the executor 2 who first besought it But if they 
are equally in grace, so far as the form of the papal brief 
goes, he who first presents it [in the diocese concerned] will 
have the stronger claim over the prebend. And, thirdly, if 
they were equal in these three things then the canons, to 
whom the collation pertains, or the greater part of them, are 
bound to proceed to an election, the one left out being de- 

1 In arguing for the superiority of a general council over the pope, Gerson 
took the ground that a pope may be deposed who is insane or heretical. The 
translator must confess that in this translation he has been inconsistent in 
treating church now as neuter, now as feminine. 

'The executor, usually called procurator, is the legal representative who 
appears before the ecclesiastical superior or puts into execution a papal or 
episcopal mandate. See Hergenrttther, K.-rcchl, 428; Friedberg, K.-rechl, pp. 

3*7, 359. 



296 THE CHURCH 

prived of the fruit of grace — unless from the tenor of the 
papal letters it expressly appear that the pope wished to 
provide for both of them. But this three-membered method 
of the curia seems to be a principle most contrary to Christ, 
because, if it be laid down, as for the most part happens, that 
the one placed in the canonical office, either by reason of the 
time of the presentation or the bestowment of grace or, 
thirdly, the election of the chapter is, in respect to God, some- 
what less worthy than the one left out, then by this greatest 
thing called method, a sentence ought to be pronounced 
contrary to Christ From this it follows that that greatest 
thing called method is contrary to the conscience, and conse- 
quently contrary to Christ. What sort of a proof, there- 
fore, is this: "The method customary with the Roman curia 
and observed by it grants a thing or affirms a thing; there- 
fore, that thing is to be received as consonant with Christ's 
law and as catholic"? 

But this rustic mode of reasoning which the doctors lay 
down, that "before the fathers of our fathers" such and such 
a thing was believed and observed, would lead to the con- 
clusion that the doctors themselves believe and observe false 
customs of the Gentiles and Jews, yea, that they ought to 
worship Baal, as the Bohemians worshipped him when they 
were Gentiles. They have for their case the words of Ezek. 
20 : 18: "Walk ye not in the statutes of your fathers, neither 
observe their ordinances." How shameless, therefore, is this 
argument of the doctors, "before the fathers of our fathers" 
such or such a thing was believed, observed or held, therefore, 
it ought to be believed, observed or held by us. For such in- 
sipid arguments are made by unsanctified — instdsi, unsalted — 
men, to excuse excuses for sins. Of their number is not he 
who said: "We have sinned, O Lord, with our fathers; we have 
committed iniquity; we have done wickedly. Our fathers 
understood not thy wonders in Egypt; they remembered not 
the multitude of thy lovingkindnesses," Psalm 106 : 6, 7. 



SUSPENSION AND THE INTERDICT 297 

And if, perchance, the doctors should say that in their 
statement they mean by "the fathers of the fathers" the 
holy prophets or the apostles or the later saints, then would 
they be able to give their express writings against which no 
one would dare to rebel. And their urgency would cease 
which breaks down argument and reasoning, when they say 
that in the proceedings, following "the method of the church 
customary with the Roman curia and observed by it before 
the fathers of our fathers," only things intermediate are en- 
joined, things between what are absolutely good and what 
are absolutely evil. For which of the holy Fathers, prophets, 
apostles or other saints enjoins that, wherever even the worst 
of men might go, there they ceased from divine ministries? 
For Christ, seeing that most disobedient Judas, who was also 
his betrayer, did not cease from divine ministry at his great 
supper. Yea, with Judas sitting by, he exercised the divine 
ministry and gave to him his most holy and divine body to 
eat and only the more urgently admonished the disciples to 
watch and pray with him lest through the violent assault 
of the scribes, Pharisees and priests they should fall into 
temptation. And that most good pontiff did not withhold 
the most divine prayer when he was being blasphemed and 
crucified, but prayed for those that crucified him, saying: 
"Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do," 
Luke 23 : 34. "Hence, praying with a loud crying and tears, 
he was heard for his godly submission," Heb. 5 : 7. Hence, 
also, his true and real vicars, the apostles and other saints, 
have imitated him in this, and first of all Stephen, who said: 
"Lord Jesus, lay not this sin to their charge," for they know 
not what they do, Acts 7 : 60. 

And it is wonderful how, in view of the Jews, who 
denied Christ to be God and so his whole law, they did not 
impose the interdict or in view of open simoniacs who 
are the chief heretics, and by writings of the apostles and 
other saints cursed, excommunicated, suspended and inter- 



298 THE CHURCH 

dieted and aliens from the holy priesthood. The reason is 
because those simoniacs buy and sell excommunications, sus- 
pensions and interdicts, and with these as their weapons 
they feed and defend their simony most powerfully. And a 
proof is not necessary, for this simoniacal trafficking is patent 
even to the eye of rustics, who are bound, vexed, oppressed 
and plundered by these selfsame simoniacs. For to such 
proportions has this heresy of Simon Magus and Gehazi 
grown that men without compunction in season and out of 
season, and even the unwilling, are impelled on to this sort 
of criminal offence. And all trafficking of this sort arises 
from the method in vogue with the Roman curia, which prac- 
tises it in turn with the curias of the bishops after the man- 
ner of Simon Magus and Gehazi. This appears in the dimis- 
sorial letters for confirmings, pardonings, admissions, and also 
in other things invented to get pecuniary plunders. 1 

Now, as to the condemnation of the XLV Articles, 2 it 
should be said — but I speak briefly — that up to this day the 

1 Lilerct iimissoriales is the name given to licenses by ecclesiastical supe- 
riors, setting aside the usual ecclesiastical practices, whatever they may be, 
from pope down to priest, as, for example, when a bishop grants permission 
to ordain a candidate of his diocese to a bishop of another diocese. Huss is 
referring to licenses given by popes or bishops to agents to perform acts pre- 
sumably for temporal favors. See Hergenrdther, K.-rccht, 236, 239, etc 

1 The XLV Articles of Wyclif , action upon which was first taken at Prague 
by the university, 1403, and more recently and drastically, 141 2, forbidding 
any to hold or teach them, they being heretical, seditious, scandalous and 
erroneous, Doc., 451 sq. At the city hall of the Old Town King Wenzel had 
the prohibition of the articles publicly announced, Doc., 456. It seems 
strange that Huss has not before mentioned these XLV Articles by name, 
which were the first cause of his troubles in Prague. In his Reply to Stanislaus, 
Mon., 1 : 331 sq., he starts out with a prolonged reference to them and re- 
minds Stanislaus that he was one of the doctors of the theological faculty, all 
of whom now condemned the articles as heretical, etc., 141 2, who originally 
had taken most positive ground on the other side and strenuously defended 
them. Likewise in his Reply to Palecz, Huss brings out into prominence the 
discussions over the XLV Articles and makes the statement that Palecz, who 
was one of the eight doctors who declared the articles heretical, at one time 
had defended them, and in a meeting at the university, throwing down one 
of Wyclifs writings on the table, had said that he was ready to defend it against 
any one who might attack even a single word extracted from it. 



SUSPENSION AND THE INTERDICT 299 

doctors of the city hall — prcUarium — have not proved that 
a single one of them is heretical, erroneous or scandalous. 
And I wonder why at the present time the doctors do not 
teach in the city hall that the article about the withdrawal 
of temporal goods should not be put into practice, the reason, 
presumably, being this: that temporal lords may at their 
own discretion take away temporal goods from ecclesiastics 
who are habitually delinquent [in their living and duty]. 
But now they are silent as were the priests and Pharisees, 
and do not assemble at the city hall to condemn those who 
put this article into practice. And certainly because, as they 
feared, it is being applied to them and will be applied in the 
future. Let them lose their temporal goods but God grant 
they may preserve their souls. 

The doctors kept saying that when the articles were once 
condemned, then there would be peace and harmony. But 
this, their prediction, is turned into the very opposite. For 
they rejoiced while they were condemning, and now they 
lament while they have to give up their taxes [ecclesiastical 
incomes]. They condemned this article — namely, that tithes 
are pure alms and only alms, but many coming into the 
city hall begged that their taxes — which are alms — be not 
withheld. 1 But certain lords of the city hall replied and 
said: Behold, ye yourselves before condemned the principle 
that tithes are pure alms and now ye are saying that, 
indeed, they are alms and so ye are acting contrary to your 
condemnation. So much for the present, other things being 
left to be discussed in the future. 

1 Huss is referring here to the dismissal of certain clerics of Prague from their 
positions, and the sequestrations of the incomes of others by the civil authori- 
ties during the troubles between the Huss party and the party opposed to him. 
Tithes had been treated by Huss in a separate treatise, Man., 1 : 156-167. 
Huss defined an alms as "a gift to help the body made for God's sake." 






.4 
1 



> .*: 
I 

r ; 



\ : 
\ 



INDEX 



Abel, 3, 7, 13 

Absolution. See Penance 

Adam the Monk, 183, 2x7, 222, 230, 

Adrian IV, 286 

Agnes, 62, 127, 133 sq., 174 

Alanus ab Insults, 5 

Albertus Magnus, 5 

Alexander III, 280, 286 

Alexander V, x8x, 205, 240, 292 

Alexander of Hales, 97 

Alfonso da Liguori, 6 

Alms, 219, 299 

Ambrose, 8, 37, 62, 78, 142, 282 

Anacletus, 82, no, 150, 153, 2x1 

Anacletus II, 181 

Anselm, 94 

Antichrist, 21, 107; in the papal chair, 
128; clergy, 159, 177, 184, 253, 284, 
291 

Antioch, church of, 63, 151, 214 sq. 

Apostles, foundations of the church, 
80; equal with Peter, 82, no, 
143 sq., 154 sqq.; fell into heresy, 
168; duties, 158, 195 sq. 

Apostolic see, 19s sq., 197 sq., 212, 
230 sqq. 

Appeal to Christ, 207, 208 

Aquinas, Thomas, 12, 37, 54; on faith, 
67» 94; on penance, 97, 189 sq. 

Aristotle, 2, 36, 234, 255 

Augustine quoted, 3, 5, 7, 10, 15, 17, 
23 sqq., 28 sq., 32 sq., 38, 42; mixed 
church, 44, 51. 53, 67; on Peter, 75, 
76, 78, 80, 83; on the keys, 91, 95, 
97 sq-, 105, 114, 116, 131 sq., 132, 
134 sq., 138, 141 ; more useful than 
popes, 149; knowledge of Scripture, 
150, 154, 158, 168; "pope," 174, 
183, 196, 198, 200 sq.; on hirelings, 
202 sq. 9 2x3, 229, 237*9., 242; on 



excommunication, 271 sq., 288, 292; 
"a holy man," 201 

Balaam, 225 

Bede, 157, 168 

Benedict DC, 126 

Benedict XIII, 156, 295 

Benedict, St., 245 

Bernard, xo, 31, 141, 183, 208, 211, 

217 sq., 222 sq., 225, 230, 233, 

242 sq., 258 sqq. 
Bethlehem chapel, 205, 254, 273 
Binding, etc. See Penance 
Boehmer, 130 

Bohemian clergy, 125, 161 sq., 183 sq. 
Boniface VHI. See Unam sanctam 
Boniface DC, 232 sq. 
Boniface-Martyr, 90 

Canticles, 4, 31, 60 

Cardinals, 131, 137 sqq., I43t *46l 
may be heretics, 168, 200 

Christ, head of the church, 9, x8, 27 sq., 
31, 54, 56, 83, 133; the rock, 74 
sqq*$ 77, 82 sqq.; the Roman pontiff, 
59, 119 594., 148 sq., 156, 249; the 
good bishop and best of masters, 
327, 235, 242; to be obeyed, 238; 
and the death penalty, 172; and 
church censures, 275 sq., 291, 297 sq. 

Chrysostom, 20, 34, 55, 89, 150, 197, 
242, 247 

Church, Roman, 56, 61 sq., 64, 130. 
See Apostolic see and Pope 

Church, unity of, 1, 19, 30, 60; gen- 
eral and particular, 2, 3, 63, 133; 
body of the predestinate, 3, 4, 1 1, 22, 
33 sq., So, 63 sqq., 66; the holy 
catholic, 4, 5, 14, 65 sq.; mystical, 
9> 18, 53; mother, 1, 21, 22, 30, 48, 
49, 62; virgin, 13, 14; mixed, 16 sq., 



301 



302 



INDEX 



41 sqq. y 58, 138; puts of, 19 sq.; 
Christ's body, 30, 33; and the hu- 
man body, 35; may have several 
heads, 29; membership unknown, 
47; not the pope and the cardinals, 
138 sqq.; in the church, not of it, 21 

Clement IV, 208 

Clement V, 130, 240 

Clement VII, 121, 294 

Clerics, z, 47, 48; judged by their 
lives, 49 sq., 196, 226, 228, 252, 283; 
to be judged by laics, 225, 227, 258, 

262 sqq.; pride and simony, 228, 
252; apostolic duty, 196, 201 sq.; 
hirelings, 202, 2x0; self-excommuni- 
cated, 272, 277, 285 

Colonna, 248 

Commentary on the Lombard, Huss's, 1, 

*» 3, 7. io, 39i 5©, 5*, 67, 92, 08 
Constantine's donation, 129, 150 sq., 

153. «5, 226 
Constantine II, 126 
Counsels. See Mandates 
Creed, 5 
Custom, 296 sq. 
Cyprian, 7, 158, 25a 

Damasus, 174, 243 

Damiani, 4 

Dante, 130 

De consideraUone, 87 

Denifle, 39 

Desolation of abomination, 62 

Dionysius, 82 

DoMlinger, 67, 127 

DuCange, 159, 172 

Ecclesia, 1, 3 

Eli, 278 sq. 

Epinge, 273 

Eucharist, 10, xx, 89, 288 

Eugenius III, 87 

Evagrius, 157 

Excommunication, 206, 249 sqq., 

263 sqq., 267; minor, 270, 272; 
Scripture on, 285 sq. 

Fabian, 247 

Faith, 39, 48 sq., 67, 68 

Felix, 128 



Fruits, by their, etc., 140, 143, 145, 

146, 148 sq., 160, 173 
Fulgentius, 17, 45 

Gebazi, 143 sq., 208 

Gelasius, 61, 130, 150, 212, 246, 

282 
Germans, 248, 250 
Orson, x, 295 
Gilbert of Holland, 60 
Glosses, 108, 224, 289, etc 
Grace, twofold, 24 
Gratian, 23, 04, 247i 289 
Gregory I, 7, 10, 16, 40 sq., 52, 89, 99, 

116, 122, 14s, 147, i49i 173, 239, 

280, 282 sq. 
Gregory VII, 115, 180 
Gregory XII, 156, 182, 295 
Grosseteste, x, 204, 207 sqq. 
Guido de Baysio, 281 

Henry HI, 179 sq. 

Heretics, 24; death penalty for, 171, 
182 

Hergenr5ther, 268 sq., 295, 298, etc. 

Hidden Adversary, Against the, 282 

Higden, 127, 129, 178, 208, 261 

Holy Spirit, 71, 150, 163 

Hope and faith, 70 sq. 

Hugo de St. Victor, 251 

Huss, depends too little on the pope, 
161 sqq.; on sale of indulgences, 
165; leads the people astray, 184; 
his party, 184; disobeys Alexander 
V, 205 sq.; appeals to pope better 
informed, 206; appeals to Christ, 
207; refuses to go to Rome, 248; 
resists censures, 250, 265 sqq., 293; 
and the murders in Prague, 253; 
withdraws from Prague, 287 

Individual judgment. See Obedience, 
Mandates, Reason, etc. 

Indulgences, 08, 117, 165, 207 

Innocent HI, 104, 108; and the inter- 
dict, 286 

Innocent IV, 67, 204 

Interdict, 284 sqq.; effect of, 287 sq., 
293 sq. 

Intermediate, things, 218 244, 259, 292 



INDEX 



303 



Intindio, 11 
Isidore, 7, 194, *39 

Jerome, 8, 15; on Matt. 16 : 16, 60, 89, 
103 sq., xx6, 128, 140, Z55 sqq., 162, 
174, 176, 182, 187, 242, 261 

Jerusalem, seat of James, 2x4 

Jesenicz, 206, 267 

John XII, 179 

John XXIII, 165, 182, 206 sq., 253, 
287, 295 

Judas, 3, 4, 11, 24, 48, 50; Augustine 
on, si, 59. 123, 141, 297, etc 

Justinian, 246 

Keys, power of, 75 sq., 85, 87, 91 sqq. 9 
X02, 106 sqq., 1 13 sq., 140. See Pen- 
ance 

Kingdom of heaven, 42 sq. 

Ladislaus, 98, 165 , 253 
Laymen, 225 sqq., 253 sq., 262 
Lewis, 151 
Liberius, 127 sq. 
Limbus palrum, 102 
IMera dimis., 298 
Luther, 144, 165, 284 
Lyra, 59, 164 sqq., 199 

Mandates and counsels, 191, 193, 
217 sqq., 220 sqq., 232, 234 sq., 236, 
238, 250 sqq., 258 

Marcellinus, 261 

Marcellus, 82 sq., 214 sq. 

Martin V, 270 

Martinus Polonus, 178 

Mary, 6, 121 

Matthew Paris, 204, 208 

Mauritius, 233 

Michael de Causis, 292 

Mirbt, 14, 123, 127, 130 

Moses* seat, 42, 198 sqq., 201 sqq., 221, 
236, 242 

Nicholas I, 246 
Nicholas II, 177 

Obedience to pope, 183; defined, 185; 
Christ's, 186 sq.; and secular power, 
190, 194, 217 sqq.; to ecclesiastical 



superiors, 229 sqq., 238, 241 sqq., 
253, 258. See Mandates 
Origen, 191, 279 sq. 

Palacky, 205 

Palecz, 117, 162, 165 sq., 211, 278 

Parables of the net, etc, 40 sq. 

Paschasius Radbertus, 1, 10 

Patriarchal sees, 151, 157 

Paul, 24, 36, 50, etc 

Pelagius, pope, 8, 212 

Penance, 96, 08 sqq., 101 sqq., 106 sqq., 

113* 
Peter, 36, 37, 57399.; not the rock, 

73 sqq., 7859.; not to be believed in, 
79-81; not head of the church, 56, 
83, 139; virtues, 84, 86, 123; name, 
85; rebuked by Paul, 86, 259; and 
the keys, 95 sqq., 105; called Satan, 
141; his duty, 170 sq.; his see, 214- 
216; on censures, 285 sq. 

Peter the Lombard, 94, 08 sq., 104, 191 

Pisa, council of, 155, 181 

Pope, name, 145, 182; wicked, 62, 126, 
173, *77 sqq.; 209; fallible, 71, 208, 
231 sq., 261; heretic, 127, 156, 181; 
his pomp, 144; not head of the 
church, 125, 133-136; one among 
popes till Constantine, 150 sq.; must 
approve himself by his life, 87 sq., 
143 sq., 149, i73i 197, a«, 249; 
when apostolic, 259; not judge in all 
cases, 161 sqq., 169; to be told his 
faults, 259; not always to be obeyed, 
183 sqq., 221, 229 sqq., 234, 250 sqq., 
264 sqq.; not necessary to the 
church, 147 sq. 

PrctscUi, 1, 16, 30, 35 sq., 46 

Prague, clergy of, 263 sqq. 

Preaching, 118, 205 sq., 239*9., 2 77 

Predestination, 3, 14, 22, 23, 25, 

33 sqq., 35, 49, 59, 66, 138 
Procurator, 295 
Provisions, 208 
Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals, 8, 82, 129 

Radulphus Glaber, 178 
Reason, 131, 163, 234, 236, 249 
Reinkens, 88 
Remigius, 7, 77 



3°4 

Reprobates. See PntsciU 
Richard of St. Victor, 99, 106 
Rock, the, 59 sq. t 73 sqq. 
Rupert of Deutz, 5 



Sanguinary corollary, 171 

Saul, 93 

Schism, Avignon, 181 

Schoolmen, on Canticles, 4, 36 

Schwane, 97 

Scriptures, 71 sq., 131 sq. f 161 sqq. t 
164; clerics to know, 277; on ex- 
communication, 285 sq., 291, 293 sq. 

See, sedes, 195, 2x3 sq. 

Sigismund, 232 

Simon Magus, 4, 105, 208 

Simoniacs, 114, 291, 298 

Series, 189 

Stafcon, 253 

Stanislaus of Znaim, 117, 233. See 
Palecz 

Stephen I, 247 



INDEX 



Suffrages, 268 
Supererogation, 192 
Superiors, 49 sq. See Mandates, Obe- 
dience 
Susannah, 168 
Sutri, 177, 180 

Tychonius, 32, 58, 138 

Unamsanctam, 14, 27, 56, 57, 1x5, 1x9, 
121, 153, 187, 286, 204 

Vulgate, 20, 22, 23, 32, 60, 63, 76, 78, 
84, ii3» «9» 140, 162, 174, 187, 192, 
224, 225, 23s, 237, 272, 285 sq. t 291, 

*93 

Wenzel, 232 
Wibcrt, 180 
Wydif, 1, 10, ix, 66, 1x7, 257, 298 

Zbynek, 205 sq., 292 






D 



i 



