Title: The Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius
Creator: Ignatius of Loyola (1491-1556) (Elder Mullan, S.J., Translator
  "from the autograph")
Publisher: New York: P. J. Kenedy & Sons, 1914
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Explicit `NOT_IN_COPYRIGHT` possible-copyright-status
  confirmed directly against the Internet Archive item's own metadata,
  2026-09-24, this session.
Source: Internet Archive item spiritualexercis00ignauoft
  (archive.org/details/spiritualexercis00ignauoft), fetched directly
  (curl, raw bytes) from the item's own _djvu.txt full-text file,
  2026-09-24, this session.
Provenance note: Body text unaltered including its own OCR errors; not
  independently spot-checked for OCR quality beyond the opening pages
  this session.

■00^ 


The  Spiritual  Exercises 

of 

St.  Ignatius  of  Loyola 


TRANSLATED    FROM 

THE  AUTOGRAPH 
BY 

FATHER   ELDER   MULLAN,  S.J. 


I.  H.  S.  ^.^t**-"-  - 


^:a 


5^i 


NEW  YORK  V't^n 

P.  J.  KENEDY  &  SONS 

PRINTERS    TO    THE    HOLY    APOSTOLIC    SEE 


Facultatem  concedimus  ut  liber  cui  titulus  "The  Spirit- 
ual Exercises  of  St.  Ignatius  of  Loyola  translated  from 
the  Autograph  by  Father  Elder  Mullan,  S.  J.,"  typis 
edatur,  si  iis  ad  quos  spectat  ita  videbitur. 

Franciscus  Xav.  Wernz 
Praepositus  Generalis  Societatis  Jesu. 


mi^il  2D6)3tat 

Remigius  Lafort,  S.T.D., 
Censor 

Jmprimatur 

John  Cardinal  Farley, 

Archiepiscopus  Neo-Eboracensis, 

Neo-Eboraci 

Die  25  Aprilis,  19 14. 

Jmprimatut 

Fr.  Albert  Lepidi,  O.P., 

Mag.  Sac.  Pal. 

Imprimatur 

Joseph  Ceppetelli, 

Patriarcha  Constantinop. 
Vicesgerens 


COPYRIGHT,    1914 

BY  P.   J.   KENEDY    &    SONS 


OCT  2  9  1952 


APPROBATION  OF  THE  LATIN  TEXTS 

The  Exercises  were  offered  for  ecclesiastical 
censure  at  Rome.  The  text  submitted  was 
not,  however,  the  one  which  is  here  reproduced, 
but  two  Latin  translations,  one  in  more  pol- 
ished Latin  —  since  called  the  Fulgate  Version 
—  and  one  a  literal  rendering.  The  opinions 
expressed  on  these  versions,  as  also  the  formal 
approval  of  Paul  III,  are  given  here,  as  apply- 
ing quite  entirely  to  the  text  from  which  the 
translations  were  made. 

VULGATE  VERSION 

We  have  read  everything  compiled  in  the 
volume:  it  has  greatly  pleased  us  and  seemed 
remarkably  conducive  to  the  salvation  of 
souls. 

The  Cardinal  of  Burgos 

We  grant  leave  to  print  the  work;  it  is 
worthy  of  all  praise  and  very  profitable  to 
the  Christian  profession. 

Philip,  Vicar. 

Such  holy  Exercises  cannot  but  afford  the 
greatest  profit  to  any  one  who  studies  them. 


VI         APPROBATION    OF    THE    LATIN    TEXTS 

They  should  therefore  be  received  with  open 
arms. 

Fr.  Aegidius  Foscararius, 

Master  of  the  Sacred  Palace 

LITERAL  VERSION 

We  have  read  these  Spiritual  Exercises. 
They  greatly  please  us  and  we  judge  them 
worthy  of  being  received  and  highly  esteemed 
by  all  who  practise  the  orthodox  faith. 

The  Cardinal  of  Burgos 

We  grant  leave  to  print  this  work;  it  is 
worthy  of  all  praise  and  very  profitable  to  the 
Christian  profession. 

Philip,  Vicar 

As  the  Christian  religion  cannot  long  subsist 
without  some  spiritual  exercises  and  med- 
itations—  for  the  Psalmist  says:  In  my  med- 
itation a  fire  flames  out  —  I  think  none  more 
appropriate  than  these,  which  undoubtedly 
have  had  their  source  in  the  study  of  the  Scrip- 
tures and  in  long  experience. 

Fr.  Aegidius  Foscararius, 

Master  of  the  Sacred  Palace 


APPROBATION    OF    THE    LATIN    TEXTS        Vll 

PAUL    III,    POPE 
FOR  A  PERPETUAL  REMEMBRANCE 

The  cares  of  the  pastoral  charge  of  the  whole 
flock  of  Christ  entrusted  to  Us  and  Our  devo- 
tion to  the  glory  and  praise  of  God  impel  Us 
to  embrace  what  helps  the  salvation  of  souls 
and  their  spiritual  profit,  and  cause  Us  to 
hearken  to  those  who  petition  Us  for  what 
can  foster  and  nourish  piety  in  the  faithful. 

So  Our  beloved  son,  Francis  de  Borgia, 
Duke  of  Gandia,  has  lately  brought  it  to  Our 
notice  that  Our  beloved  son  Ignatius  de  Loy- 
ola, General  of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  erected 
by  Us  in  Our  beloved  City  and  confirmed  by 
Our  Apostolic  authority,  has  compiled  cer- 
tain instructions,  or  Spiritual  Exercises,  drawn 
from  Holy  Writ  and  from  experience  in  the 
spiritual  life,  and  has  reduced  them  to  an  order 
which  is  excellently  adapted  to  move  piously 
the  souls  of  the  faithful,  and  that  they  are  very 
useful  and  wholesome  for  the  spiritual  conso- 
lation and  profit  of  the  same.  This  the  said 
Duke  Francis  has  come  to  know  by  report 
from  many  places  and  by  clear  evidence  at 
Barcelona,  Valencia  and  Gandia. 

Hence  he  has  humbly  begged  Us  to  cause  the 
aforesaid  instructions  and  Spiritual  Exercises 
to   be  examined,   so   that  their  fruit  may   be 


Vlll      APPROBATION    OF    THE    LATIN   TEXTS 

more  spread,  and  more  of  the  faithful  may  be 
induced  to  use  them  with  greater  devotion. 
And  he  has  begged  Us,  should  We  find  them 
worthy,  to  approve  and  praise  them  and  out 
of  Our  Apostolic  goodness  to  make  other  pro- 
vision in  the  premisses. 

We,  therefore,  have  caused  these  instructions 
and  Exercises  to  be  examined,  and  by  the  tes- 
timony of  and  report  made  to  Us  by  Our 
beloved  son  John  Cardinal  Priest  of  the  Title 
of  St.  Clement,  Bishop  of  Burgos  and  Inquis- 
itor, Our  venerable  Brother  Philip,  Bishop  of 
Saluciae,  and  Our  Vicar  General  in  things 
spiritual  at  Rome,  and  Our  beloved  son  Aegid- 
ius  Foscararius,  Master  of  Our  Sacred  Palace, 
have  found  that  these  Exercises  are  full  of 
piety  and  holiness  and  that  they  are  and  will 
be  extremely  useful  and  salutary  for  the  spir- 
itual profit  of  the  faithful. 

We  have,  besides,  as  We  should,  due  regard 
to  the  rich  fruits  which  Ignatius  and  the  afore- 
said Society  founded  by  him  are  constantly 
producing  everywhere  in  the  Church  of  God, 
and  to  the  very  great  help  which  the  said  Exer- 
cises have  proved  in  this. 

Moved,  then,  by  this  petition,  with  the 
aforesaid  authority,  by  these  presents,  and  of 
Our  certain  knowledge.  We  approve,  praise, 
and  favor  with  the  present  writing  the  afore- 


APPROBATION    OF    THE    LATIN   TEXTS         IX 

said  instructions  and  Exercises  and  all  and 
everything  contained  in  them,  and  We  ear- 
nestly exhort  all  and  each  of  the  faithful  of 
both  sexes  ever5rwhere  to  employ  instructions 
and  Exercises  so  pious  and  to  be  instructed 
by  them. 

{Here  follow  regulations  Jar  the  diffusion  of 
the  book,  and  then  confirmatory  clauses.] 

Given  at  St.  Mark's  in  Rome  under  the  seal 
of  the  Fisherman,  31  July,  1548,  in  the  14th 
year  of  Our  Pontificate. 

Blo.  El.  Fulginen. 


PREFACE 

The  present  translation  of  the  Exercises 
of  St.  Ignatius  has  been  made  from  the 
Spanish  Autograph  of  St.  Ignatius.  The 
copy  so  designated  is  not  indeed  in  the 
handwriting  of  the  Saint,  but  has  a  good 
number  of  corrections  made  by  him  and 
is  known  to  have  been  used  by  him  in  giv- 
ing the  Exercises. 

St.  Ignatius  of  Loyola  was  a  man  with- 
out any  great  pretensions  to  education  at 
the  time  he  wrote  this  book.  His  native 
language  was  not  Spanish,  but  Basque. 
His  lack  of  education  and  his  imperfect 
acquaintance  with  pure  Spanish  are  enough 
to  make  it  clear  that  a  refined  use  of  any 
language,  and  more  especially  of  the 
Spanish,  or,  in  general,  anything  hke  a 
finished  or  even  perfectly  correct,  style  is 
not  to  be  expected  in  his  work.  Literary 
defects  he  removed  to  some  extent, 
perhaps,  as  he  continued  to  use  and  apply 
the  book,  but  he  is  known  never  to  have 
been  fearful  of  such   faults.     His   correc- 


XU  PREFACE 

tions  found  in  this  text  are  clearly  made 
with  a  view  to  precision  more  than  to  any- 
thing  else. 

The  Autograph  of  St.  Ignatius  was 
translated  by  Father  General  Roothaan 
into  Latin  and  was  reproduced  by  Father 
Rodeles  in  his  edition  of  the  Spanish  text. 
But  the  original  was  not  available  to 
ordinary  students.  In  1908,  however, 
Father  General  Wernz  allowed  the  entire 
book  to  be  phototyped,  and  in  this  way  it 
was  spread  throughout  the  Society  of 
Jesus  in  a  large  number  of  copies.  It  is 
one  of  these  which  has  been  chiefly  em- 
ployed by  the  present  translator,  who  has, 
besides,  made  frequent  use  of  the  Manu- 
script itself. 

After  considerable  study  of  the  matter, 
it  seemed  best  to  make  this  translation  as 
faithful  and  close  a  reproduction  of  the 
Spanish  text  as  could  be.  To  do  so  it 
was  necessary  at  times  to  sacrifice  the 
niceties  of  style,  but  it  was  thought  that 
those  who  would  use  the  book  would  easily 
forego  the  elegancies  of  diction  if  they 
could  feel  sure  they  were  reading  the  very 
Words  of  St.  Ignatius.     Any  other  form  of 


PREFACE  XIU 

translation  than  the  one  adopted  could 
hardly  be  kept  from  being  a  partial  ex- 
pansion, illustration  or  development  of 
the  original,  and  would  therefore  have 
proved,  to  some  extent,  a  commentary  as 
well  as  a  translation.  This  the  translator 
has  earnestly  sought  to  avoid,  preferring 
to  leave  the  further  work  of  commentary 
to  another  occasion  or  to  other  hands. 

Another  reason  for  aiming  at  absolute 
fidelity  rather  than  style  was  the  fact  that 
the  Exercises  are  mostly  read,  not  contin- 
uously for  any  time,  but  piecemeal  and 
meditatively.  Literary  finish  would  there- 
fore not  be  much  sought  or  cared  for  in 
the  book,  but  accuracy  is.  For  this  a 
certain  neglect  of  style  seemed  pardonable 
in  the  translation,  if  only  the  real  meaning 
of  the  writer  could  be  made  clear.  Per- 
haps some  may  even  find  a  charm  in  the 
consequent  want  of  finish,  seeing  it  re- 
produces more  completely  the  style  of 
St.  Ignatius. 

The  process  of  translating  in  this  way 
the  Autograph  text  is  not  as  simple  as  it 
might  seem.  The  first  difficulty  is  to 
make  sure  of  the  exact  meaning  of  St. 


XIV  PREFACE 


Ignatius.  This  is  obscured,  at  times,  by 
his  language  being  that  of  nearly  400 
years  ago  and  being  not  pure  Spanish. 
Occasionally,  in  fact,  the  Saint  makes  new 
Spanish  words  from  the  Latin  or  Italian, 
or  uses  Spanish  words  in  an  Itahan  or  Latin 
sense,  or  employs  phrases  not  current 
except  in  the  Schools,  and  sometimes  even 
has  recourse  to  words  in  their  Latin  form. 
To  be  sure,  then,  of  the  meaning,  one  must 
often  go  to  other  languages  and  to  the  terms 
adopted  in  Scholastic  Philosophy  or  The- 
ology. The  meaning  clear,  the  further 
difficulty  comes  of  finding  an  exactly 
equivalent  English  word  or  phrase. 

In  accomplishing  his  task,  the  trans- 
lator has  made  free  use  of  other  transla- 
tions, especially  of  that  of  Father  General 
Roothaan  into  Latin,  that  of  Father 
Venturi  into  Italian,  and  that  of  Father 
Jennesseaux  into  French,  and  has  had  the 
use  of  the  literal  translation  into  Latin 
made,  apparently,  by  St.  Ignatius  himself, 
copied  in  1541,  and  formally  approved  by 
the  Holy  See  in  1548. 

Besides  the  last-mentioned  Manuscript 
and  printed  books,  the  translator  has  to 


PREFACE  XV 


acknowledge,  as  he  does  very  gratefully, 
his  obligations  to  the  Very  Rev.  Pather 
Mathias  Abad,  Father  Achilles  Gerste 
and  particularly  Father  Mariano  Lecina, 
Editor  of  the  Ignatiana  in  the  Monumenta 
HiSTORiCA  S.  J.,  for  aid  in  appreciating 
the  Spanish  text,  to  Fathers  Michael 
Ahern,  Peter  Cusick,  Walter  Drum,  Fran- 
cis Kemper  and  Herbert  Noonan  for 
general  revision  of  the  translation,  and 
above  all  to  Father  Aloysius  Frumveller 
for  an  accurate  collation  of  the  transla- 
tion veith  the  original. 

In  conclusion,  it  is  well  to  warn  the 
reader  that  the  Spiritual  Exercises  of  St. 
Ignatius  are  not  meant  to  be  read  cur- 
sorily, but  to  be  pondered  word  for  word 
and  under  the  direction  of  a  competent 
guide.  Read  straight  on,  it  may  well 
appear  jejune  and  unsatisfactory;  studied 
in  the  actual  making  of  the  Exercises, 
the  very  text  itself  cannot  fail  to  yield  ever 
new  material  for  thought  and  prayer. 

ELDER  MULLAN,  S.  J. 
German  College,  Rome, 
Feast  of  St.  Ignatius,  iQog. 


CONTENTS 

Approbation  of  the  Latin  Text v 

Preface xi 

General  Note xx 

Prayer  of  Father  Diertins xxi 

Annotations 3 

Presupposition 15 

First  Week 17 

Principle  and  Foundation 19 

Particular  and  Daily  Examen 21 

General  Examen 25 

General  Confession  with  Communion 33 

Meditation  on  the  First,  the  Second,  and  the 

Third  Sin 35 

Meditation  on  Sins 40 

First  Repetition 43 

Second  Repetition 43 

Meditation  on  Hell 44 

Note 46 

Additions 47 

Second  Week S3 

The  Call  of  the  Temporal  King 55 

Notes 58 

First  Day 58 

The  Incarnation 58 

The  Nativity 62 

Notes 66 


XVlll  CONTENTS 


Second  Week  —  Continued 

Second  Day 69 

Note 69 

Third  Day 69 

Preamble  to  Consider  States      71 

Fourth  Day 73 

Two  Standards 73 

Note 77 

Three  Pairs  of  Men 77 

Note 79 

Fifth  Day 80 

Sixth -Tenth  Day 81 

Eleventh  -  Twelfth  Day 82 

Notes 82 

Three  Manners  of  Humility 83 

Note 84 

Prelude  for  Making  Election 85 

Matter  of  Election 86 

Note 88 

Times  for  Making  Election 88 

First  Time 88 

Second  Time 88 

Third  Time 88 

First  Way      89 

Second  Way 91 

Note 93 

To  Amend  and  Reform  one's  own  Life  and  State  93 

Third  Week 95 

First  Contemplation 97 

Note 99 

Second  Contemplation 100 

Notes loi 


CONTENTS  XIX 


Third  Week  —  Continued 

Second  -  Fourth  Day 103 

Fifth  -  Seventh  Day 104 

Note 105 

Eating 107 

Fourth  Week      iii 

First  Contemplation 113 

Notes      114 

Contemplation  to  Gain  Love 117 

Three  Methods  of  Prayer 123 

First  Method 123 

Second  Method 126 

Third  Method       129 

Mysteries  of  THE  Life  of  Christ  our  Lord  ...  131 

Rules 169 

Rules   for   Perceiving   the   Movements   Caused 

in  the  Soul 169 

First  Week 169 

Second  Week 177 

Rules  for  Distributing  Alms 181 

J^    Notes    on    Scruples    and    Persuasions    of    the 

Enemy 185 

^  Rules    to   have    the   True   Sentiment    in    the 

Church 189 

General  Index 195 


GENERAL  NOTE 

In  the  reproduction  of  the  text  in  English: 

1.  No  change  whatever  is  made  in  the  wording.  The 
proper  corrections,  however,  of  the  two  unimportant  sHps 
in  quotation  have  been  indicated  in  itahcs. 

It  may  be  remarked  in  passing  that  the  text  of  Holy 
Scripture  is  not  seldom  given  in  the  Spiritual  Exercises 
in  wording  somewhat  different  from  that  of  the  Vulgate. 
Such  divergences  have  not  been  noted  in  this  translation. 
It  will  be  remembered  that,  when  the  book  was  written, 
the  Council  of  Trent  had  not  yet  put  its  seal  on  the  Vulgate. 

2.  The  head  lines  and  the  rubrics  have  been  kept  as 
they  stand  in  the  Manuscript.  Where  they  were  wanting, 
they  have  been  supplied  in  italics. 

3.  Abbreviations  have  been  filled  out. 

4.  Wherever  italics  are  used,  the  words  in  this  character 
belong  to  the  translator  and  not  to  St.  Ignatius. 

5.  In  the  use  of  small  and  capital  letters,  and  in  the 
matter  of  punctuation  and  the  division  into  paragraphs 
the  practice  of  the  copyist  has  usually  not  been  followed. 
Various  kinds  of  type,  also,  are  used  independently  of  the 
Manuscript. 

6.  As  a  matter  of  convenience,  in  citations  from  Holy 
Scripture,  the  modern  method  by  chapter  and  verse  is 
substituted  for  that  of  the  Mss.  chapter  and  letter. 
Besides,  quotations  are  indicated  by  quotation  marks  m 
place  of  the  parentheses  of  the  Mss. 

Elder  Mullan,  S.  J. 


PRAYER 

OF  FATHER  DIERTINS 

ROUSE  up,  O  Lord,  and  foster  the 
spirit  of  the  Exercises  which  Blessed 
Ignatius  labored  to  spread  abroad,  that 
we,  too,  may  be  filled  with  it  and  be  zeal- 
ous to  love  what  he  loved  and  do  what  he 
taught !    Through  Christ  our  Lord. 

Amen. 


SPIRITUAL  EXERCISES  OF 
ST.   IGNATIUS 


IH  S 

ANNOTATIONS 

TO  GIVE  SOME  UNDERSTANDING  OF  THE 
SPIRITUAL  EXERCISES  WHICH  FOLLOW, 
AND  TO  ENABLE  HIM  WHO  IS  TO  GIVE 
AND  HIM  WHO  IS  TO  RECEIVE  THEM 
TO   HELP   THEMSELVES 

First  Annotation.  The  first  Annotation 
is  that  by  this  name  of  Spiritual  Exercises 
is  meant  every  way  of  examining  one's  con- 
science, of  meditating,  of  contemplating,  of 
praying  vocally  and  mentally,  and  of  perform- 
ing other  spiritual  actions,  as  will  be  said  later. 
For  as  strolling,  walking  and  running  are  bodily 
exercises,  so  every  way  of  preparing  and  dis- 
posing the  soul  to  rid  itself  of  all  the  disordered 
tendencies,  and,  after  it  is  rid,  to  seek  and  find 
the  Divine  Will  as  to  the  management  of  one's 
life  for  the  salvation  of  the  soul,  is  called  a 
Spiritual  Exercise. 

Second  Annotation.^  The  second  is  that 
the  person  who  gives  to  another  the  way  and 

1  The  word  Annotation  does  not  occur  in  the  original 
after  the  first  time.  The  same  is  true  of  similar  cases  in 
the  Mss. 


4       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

order  in  which  to  meditate  or  contemplate, 
ought  to  relate  faithfully  the  events  of  such 
Contemplation  or  Meditation,  going  over  the 
Points  with  only  a  short  or  summary  develop- 
ment. For,  if  the  person  who  is  making  the 
Contemplation,  takes  the  true  groundwork 
of  the  narrative,  and,  discussing  and  consider- 
ing for  himself,  finds  something  which  makes 
the  events  a  little  clearer  or  brings  them  a 
little  more  home  to  him  —  whether  this  comes 
through  his  own  reasoning,  or  because  his 
intellect  is  enlightened  by  the  Divine  power  — 
he  will  get  more  spiritual  relish  and  fruit,  than 
if  he  who  is  giving  the  Exercises  had  much 
explained  and  amplified  the  meaning  of  the 
events.  For  it  is  not  knowing  much,  but 
realising  and  relishing  things  interiorly,  that 
contents  and  satisfies  the  soul. 

Third  Annotation.  The  third:  As  in  all 
the  following  Spiritual  Exercises,  we  use  acts 
of  the  intellect  in  reasoning,  and  acts  of  the 
will  in  movements  of  the  feelings:  let  us  re- 
mark that,  in  the  acts  of  the  will,  when  we  are 
speaking  vocally  or  mentally  with  God  our 
Lord,  or  with  His  Saints,  greater  reverence  is 
required  on  our  part  than  when  we  are  using 
the  intellect  in  understanding. 

Fourth  Annotation.  The  fourth:  The  fol- 
lowing Exercises  are  divided  into  four  parts: 


ANNOTATIONS 


First,  the  consideration  and  contemplation 
on  the  sins; 

Second,  the  Hfe  of  Christ  our  Lord  up  to 
Palm  Sunday  inclusively; 

Third,  the  Passion  of  Christ  our  Lord; 

Fourth,  the  Resurrection  and  Ascension, 
with  the  three  Methods  of  Prayer. 

Though  four  weeks,  to  correspond  to  this 
division,  are  spent  in  the  Exercises,  it  is  not  to 
be  understood  that  each  Week  has,  of  necessity, 
seven  or  eight  days.  For,  as  it  happens  that 
in  the  First  Week  some  are  slower  to  find  what 
they  seek  —  namely,  contrition,  sorrow  and 
tears  for  their  sins  —  and  in  the  same  way  some 
are  more  diligent  than  others,  and  more  acted 
on  or  tried  by  different  spirits;  it  is  necessary 
sometimes  to  shorten  the  Week,  and  at  other 
times  to  lengthen  it.  The  same  is  true  of  all 
the  other  subsequent  Weeks,  seeking  out  the 
things  according  to  the  subject  matter.  How- 
ever, the  Exercises  will  be  finished  in  thirty 
days,  a  little  more  or  less. 

Fifth  Annotation.  The  fifth:  It  is  very 
helpful  to  him  who  is  receiving  the  Exercises 
to  enter  into  them  with  great  courage  and 
generosity  towards  his  Creator  and  Lord, 
offering  ^  Him  all  his  will  and  liberty,  that  His 

^  Offering  is  in  St.  Ignatius'  handwriting,  correcting 
giving  or  presenting,  which  is  crossed  out. 


6       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

Divine  Majesty  may  make  use  of  his  person  and 
of  all  he  has  according  -  to  His  most  Holy  Will. 

Sixth  Annotation.  The  sixth:  When  he 
who  is  giving  the  Exercises  sees  that  no  spir- 
itual movements,  such  as  consolations  or 
desolations,  come  to  the  soul  of  him  who  is 
exercising  himself,  and  that  he  is  not  moved 
by  different  spirits,  he  ought  to  inquire  care- 
fully of  him  about  the  Exercises,  whether  he 
does  them  at  their  appointed  times,  and  how. 
So  too  of  the  Additions,  whether  he  observes 
them  with  diligence.  Let  him  ask  in  detail 
about  each  of  these  things. 

Consolation  and  desolation  are  spoken  of 
on  p.  170;   the  Additions  on  p.  22. 

Seventh  Annotation.  The  seventh:  If  he 
who  is  giving  the  Exercises  sees  that  he  who  is 
receiving  them  is  in  desolation  and  tempted, 
let  him  not  be  hard  or  dissatisfied  with  him, 
but  gentle  and  indulgent,  giving  him  courage 
and  strength  for  the  future,  and  laying  bare 
to  him  the  wiles  of  the  enemy  of  human  nature, 
and  getting  him  to  prepare  and  dispose  himself 
for  the  consolation  coming. 

Eighth  Annotation.  The  eighth:  If  he  who 
is  giving   the   Exercises   sees   that  he  who   is 

^  May  make  use  of  .  .  .  according  is  in  the  Saint's  hand- 
writing, correcting  some  word  erased. 


ANNOTATIONS 


receiving  them  is  in  need  of  instruction  about 
the  desolations  and  wiles  of  the  enemy  —  and 
the  same  of  consolations  —  he  may  explain 
to  him,  as  far  as  he  needs  them,  the  Rules 
of  the  First  and  Second  Weeks  for  recognising 
different  spirits,     (p.  177). 

Ninth  Annotation.  The  ninth  is  to  notice, 
when  he  who  is  exercising  himself  is  in  the 
Exercises  of  the  First  Week,  if  he  is  a  person 
who  has  not  been  versed  in  spiritual  things, 
and  is  tempted  grossly  and  openly  —  having, 
for  example,  suggested  to  him  obstacles  to 
going  on  in  the  service  of  God  our  Lord,  such 
as  labors,  shame  and  fear  for  the  honor  of  the 
world  —  let  him  who  is  giving  the  Exercises 
not  explain  to  him  the  Rules  of  the  Second 
Week  for  the  discernment  of  spirits.  Because, 
as  much  as  those  of  the  First  Week  will  be  help- 
ful, those  of  the  Second  will  be  harmful  to  him, 
as  being  matter  too  subtle  and  too  high  for  him 
to  understand. 

Tenth  Annotation.  The  tenth :  When  he 
who  is  giving  the  Exercises  perceives  that 
he  who  is  receiving  them  is  assaulted  and 
tempted  under  the  appearance  of  good,  then 
it  is  proper  to  instruct  him  about  the  Rules 
of  the  Second  Week  already  mentioned.  For, 
ordinarily,  the  enemy  of  human  nature  tempts 
under  the  appearance  of  good  rather  when  the 


8       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

person  is  exercising  himself  in  the  Illuminative 
Life,  which  corresponds  to  the  Exercises  of  the 
Second  Week,  and  not  so  much  in  the  Purga- 
tive Life,  which  corresponds  to  those  of  the 
First. 

Eleventh  Annotation.  The  eleventh:  It  is 
helpful  to  him  who  is  receiving  the  Exercises 
in  the  First  Week,  not  to  know  anything  of 
what  he  is  to  do  in  the  Second,  but  so  to  labor 
in  the  First  to  attain  the  object  he  is  seeking 
as  if  he  did  not  hope  to  find  in  the  Second  any 
good. 

Twelfth  Annotation,  The  twelfth:  As  he 
who  is  receiving  the  Exercises  is  to  give  an  hour 
to  each  of  the  five  Exercises  or  Contemplations 
which  will  be  made  every  day,  he  who  is  giving 
the  Exercises  has  to  warn  him  carefully  to 
always  see  that  his  soul  remains  content  in 
the  consciousness  of  having  been  a  full  hour 
in  the  Exercise,  and  rather  more  than  less. 
For  the  enemy  is  not  a  little  used  to  try  and 
make  one  cut  short  the  hour  of  such  contem- 
plation, meditation  or  prayer. 

Thirteenth  Annotation.  The  thirteenth:  It 
is  likewise  to  be  remarked  that,  as,  in  the  time 
of  consolation,  it  is  easy  and  not  irksome  to 
be  in  contemplation  the  full  hour,  so  it  is  very 
hard  in  the  time  of  desolation  to  fill  it  out. 


ANNOTATIONS 


For  this  reason,  the  person  who  is  exercising 
himself,  in  order  to  act  against  the  desolation 
and  conquer  the  temptations,  ought  always 
to  stay  somewhat  more  than  the  full  hour; 
so  as  to  accustom  himself  not  only  to  resist 
the  adversary,  but  even  to  overthrow  him. 

Fourteenth  Annotation.  The  fourteenth:  If 
he  who  is  giving  the  Exercises  sees  that  he  who 
is  receiving  them  is  going  on  in  consolation 
and  with  much  fervor,  he  ought  to  warn  him 
not  to  make  any  inconsiderate  and  hasty 
promise  or  vow:  and  the  more  light  of  charac- 
ter he  knows  him  to  be,  the  more  he  ought  to 
warn  and  admonish  him.  For,  though  one 
may  justly  influence  another  to  embrace  the 
religious  life,  in  which  he  is  understood  to  make 
vows  of  obedience,  poverty  and  chastity, 
and,  although  a  good  work  done  under  vow 
is  more  meritorious  than  one  done  without 
it,  one  should  carefully  consider  the  circum- 
stances and  personal  qualities  of  the  individ- 
ual and  how  much  help  or  hindrance  he  is 
likely  to  find  in  fulfilling  the  thing  he  would 
want  to  promise. 

Fifteenth  Annotation.  The  fifteenth:  He 
who  is  giving  the  Exercises  ought  not  to  in- 
fluence him  who  is  receiving  them  more  to 
poverty  or  to  a  promise,  than  to  their  oppo- 
sites,  nor  more  to  one  state  or  way  of  life  than 


lO       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

to  another.  For  though,  outside  the  Exer- 
cises, we  can  lawfully  and  with  merit  influence 
every  one  who  is  probably  fit  to  choose  con- 
tinence, virginity,  the  religious  life  and  all 
manner  of  evangelical  perfection,  still  in  the 
Spiritual  Exercises,  when  seeking  the  Divine 
Will,  it  is  more  fitting  and  much  better,  that 
the  Creator  and  Lord  Himself  should  commu- 
nicate Himself  to  His  devout  soul,  inflaming  it 
with  His  love  and  praise,  and  disposing  it  for 
the  way  in  which  it  will  be  better  able  to  serve 
Him  in  future.  So,  he  who  is  giving  the  Exer- 
cises should  not  turn  or  incline  to  one  side 
or  the  other,  but  standing  in  the  centre  like 
a  balance,  leave  the  Creator  to  act  imme- 
diately with  the  creature,  and  the  creature  with 
its  Creator  and  Lord. 

Sixteenth  Annotation.  The  sixteenth:  For 
this  —  namely,  that  the  Creator  and  Lord  may 
work  more  surely  in  His  creature  —  it  is  very 
expedient,  if  it  happens  that  the  soul  is  attached 
or  inclined  to  a  thing  inordinately,  that  one 
should  move  himself,  putting  forth  all  his 
strength,  to  come  to  the  contrary  of  what  he 
is  wrongly  drawn  to.  Thus  if  he  inclines  to 
seeking  and  possessing  an  oflfice  or  benefice, 
not  for  the  honor  and  glory  of  God  our  Lord, 
nor  for  the  spiritual  well-being  of  souls,  but 
for  his  own  temporal  advantage  and  interests, 


ANNOTATIONS  II 


he  ought  to  excite  his  feehngs  to  the  contrary, 
being  instant  in  prayers  and  other  spiritual 
exercises,  and  asking  God  our  Lord  for  the  con- 
trary, namely,  not  to  want  such  office  or  bene- 
fice, or  any  other  thing,  unless  His  Divine 
Majesty,  putting  his  desires  in  order,  change 
his  first  inclination  for  him,  so  that  the  motive 
for  desiring  or  having  one  thing  or  another  be 
only  the  service,  honor,  and  glory  of  His 
Divine  Majesty. 

Seventeenth  Annotation.  The  seventeenth: 
It  is  very  helpful  that  he  who  is  giving  the  Exer- 
cises, without  wanting  to  ask  or  know  from  him 
who  is  receiving  them  his  personal  thoughts 
or  sins,  should  be  faithfully  informed  of  the 
various  movements  and  thoughts  which  tht 
different  spirits  put  in  him.  For,  according  as 
is  more  or  less  useful  for  him,  he  can  give  him 
some  spiritual  Exercises  suited  and  adapted 
to  the  need  of  such  a  soul  so  acted  upon. 

Eighteenth  Annotation.  The  eighteenth: 
The  Spiritual  Exercises  have  to  be  adapted  to 
the  dispositions  of  the  persons  who  wish  to 
receive  them,  that  is,  to  their  age,  education 
or  ability,  in  order  not  to  give  to  one  who  is 
uneducated  or  of  little  intelligence  things  he 
cannot  easily  bear  and  profit  by. 

Again,  that  should  be  given  to  each  one  by 
which,  according  to  his  wish  to  dispose  himself. 


12       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 


he  may  be  better  able  to  help  himself  and  to 
profit. 

So,  to  him  who  wants  help  to  be  instructed 
and  to  come  to  a  certain  degree  of  contentment 
of  soul,  can  be  given  the  Particular  Examen, 
p.  21,  and  then  the  General  Examen,  p.  25;  also, 
for  a  half  hour  in  the  morning,  the  Method 
of  Prayer  on  the  Commandments,  the  Deadly 
Sins,  etc.,  p.  125.  Let  him  be  recommended, 
also,  to  confess  his  sins  every  eight  days,  and,  if 
he  can,  to  receive  the  Blessed  Sacrament  every 
fifteen  days,  and  better,  if  he  be  so  moved, 
every  eight.  This  way  is  more  proper  for  il- 
literate or  less  educated  persons.  Let  each 
of  the  Commandments  be  explained  to  them; 
and  so  of  the  Deadly  Sins,  Precepts  of  the 
Church,  Five  Senses,  and  Works  of  Mercy. 

So,  too,  should  he  who  is  giving  the  Exer- 
cises observe  that  he  who  is  receiving  them  has 
Httle  ability  or  little  natural  capacity,  from 
whom  not  much  fruit  is  to  be  hoped,  it  is  more 
expedient  to  give  him  some  of  these  easy  Ex- 
ercises, until  he  confesses  his  sins.  Then  let 
him  be  given  some  Examens  of  Conscience 
and  some  method  for  going  to  Confession 
oftener  than  was  his  custom,  in  order  to  pre- 
serve what  he  has  gained,  but  let  him  not  go 
on  into  the  matter  of  the  Election,  or  into 
any  other  Exercises  that  are  outside  the 
First  Week,    expecially   when   more   progress 


ANNOTATIONS  I3 


can  be   made  in  other   persons  and   there  Is 
not  time  for  every  thing. 

Nineteenth  Annotation.  The  nineteenth:  A 
person  of  education  or  abihty  who  is  taken  up 
with  pubHc  aflPairsor  suitable  business,  may  tak^ 
an  hour  and  a  half  daily  to  exercise  himself. 

Let  the  end  for  which  man  is  created  be  ex- 
plained to  him,  and  he  can  also  be  given  for 
the  space  of  a  half-hour  the  Particular  Examen 
and  then  the  General  and  the  way  to  confess 
and  to  receive  the  Blessed  Sacrament.  Let 
him,  during  three  days  every  morning,  for  the 
space  of  an  hour,  make  the  meditation  on  the 
First,  Second  and  Third  Sins,  pp.  37,  38;  then, 
three  other  days  at  the  same  hour,  the  medi- 
tation on  the  statement  of  Sins,  p.  40;  then, 
for  three  other  days  at  the  same  hour,  on  the 
punishments  corresponding  to  Sins,  p.  45. 
Let  him  be  given  in  all  three  meditations  the 
ten  Additions,  p.  47. 

For  the  mysteries  of  Christ  our  Lord,  let 
the  same  course  be  kept,  as  is  explained  below 
and  in  full  in  the  Exercises  themselves. 

Twentieth  Annotation.  The  twentieth:  To 
him  who  is  more  disengaged,  and  who  desires 
to  get  all  the  profit  he  can,  let  all  the  Spiritual 
Exercises  be  given  in  the  order  in  which  they 
follow. 

In   these  he  will,  ordinarily,   more  benefit 


14       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 


himself,  the  more  he  separates  himself  from  all 
friends  and  acquaintances  and  from  all  earthly 
care,  as  by  changing  from  the  house  where  he 
was  dwelling,  and  taking  another  house  or 
room  to  live  in,  in  as  much  privacy  as  he  can, 
so  that  it  be  in  his  power  to  go  each  day  to 
Mass  and  to  Vespers,  without  fear  that  his 
acquaintances  will  put  obstacles  in  his  way. 

From  this  isolation  three  chief  benefits, 
among  many  others,  follow. 

The  first  is  that  a  man,  by  separating  him- 
self from  many  friends  and  acquaintances, 
and  likewise  from  many  not  well-ordered 
affairs,  to  serve  and  praise  God  our  Lord, 
merits  no  little  in  the  sight  of  His  Divine 
Majesty. 

The  second  is,  that  being  thus  isolated,  and 
not  having  his  understanding  divided  on  many 
things,  but  concentrating  his  care  on  one  only, 
namely,  on  serving  his  Creator  and  benefiting 
his  own  soul,  he  uses  with  greater  freedom  his 
natural  powers,  in  seeking  with  diligence  what 
he  so  much  desires. 

The  third:  the  more  our  soul  finds  itself 
alone  and  isolated,  the  more  apt  it  makes  itself 
to  approach  and  to  reach  its  Creator  and  Lord, 
and  the  more  it  so  approaches  Him,  the  more 
it  disposes  itself  to  receive  graces  and  gifts 
from  His  Divine  and  Sovereign  Goodness. 


SPIRITUAL   EXERCISES 

TO  CONQUER  ONESELF  AND  REGULATE  ONe's 
LIFE  WITHOUT  DETERMINING  ONESELF 
THROUGH  ^  ANY  TENDENCY  THAT  IS  DIS- 
ORDERED 

PRESUPPOSITION 

In  order  that  both  he  who  is  giving  the 
Spiritual  Exercises,  and  he  who  is  receiving 
them,  may  more  help  and  benefit  themselves, 
let  it  be  presupposed  that  every  good  Chris- 
tian is  to  be  more  ready  to  save  his  neighbor's 
proposition  than  to  condemn  it.  If  he  cannot 
save  it,  let  him  inquire  how  he  means  it;  and 
if  he  means  it  badly,  let  him  correct  him  with 
charity.  If  that  is  not  enough,  let  him  seek 
all  the  suitable  means  to  bring  him  to  mean 
it  well,  and  save  himself. 

1  Without  determining  oneself  through  is  in  the  Saint's 
hand,  the  words  being  inserted  between  life  and  tendency, 
the  word  without  being  cancelled. 


FIRST  WEEK 


PRINCIPLE  AND  FOUNDATION 

Man  is  created  to  praise,  reverence,  and 
serve  God  our  Lord,  and  by  this  means 
to  save  his  soul. 

And  the  other  things  on  the  face  of  the 
earth  are  created  for  man  and  that  they 
may  help  him  in  prosecuting  the  end 
for  which  he  is  created. 

From  this  it  follows  that  man  is  to  use 
them  as  much  as  they  help  him  on  to  his 
end,  and  ought  to  rid  himself  of  them  so 
far  as  they  hinder  him  as  to  it. 

For  this  it  is  necessary  to  make  ourselves 
indifferent  to  all  created  things  in  all  that 
is  allowed  to  the  choice  of  our  free  will  and 
is  not  prohibited  to  it;  so  that,  on  our  part, 
we  want  not  health  rather  than  sickness, 
riches  rather  than  poverty,  honor  rather 
than  dishonor,  long  rather  than  short 
life,  and  so  in  all  the  rest;  desiring  and 
choosing  only  what  is  most  conducive  for 
us  to  the  end  for  which  we  are  created. 


PARTICULAR  AND  DAILY  EXAMEN 

It  contains  in  it  three  times,  and  two  to 
examine  oneself. 

The  first  time  is  in  the  morning,  imme- 
diately on  rising,  when  one  ought  to  pro- 
pose to  guard  himself  with  diligence  against 
that  particular  sin  or  defect  which  he 
wants  to  correct  and  amend. 

The  second  time  is  after  dinner,  when 
one  is  to  ask  of  God  our  Lord  what  one 
wants,  namely,  grace  to  remember  how 
many  times  he  has  fallen  into  that  par- 
ticular sin  or  defect,  and  to  amend  himself 
in  the  future.  Then  let  him  make  the 
first  Examen,  asking  account  of  his  soul 
of  that  particular  thing  proposed,  which 
he  wants  to  correct  and  amend.  Let  him 
go  over  hour  by  hour,  or  period  by  period, 
commencing  at  the  hour  he  rose,  and 
continuing  up  to  the  hour  and  instant  of 
the  present  examen,  and  let  him  make 
in  the  first  line  of  the  G  =  as  many 

dots  as  were  the  times  he  has  fallen  into 
that  particular  sin  or  defect.    Then  let  him 


22       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

resolve  anew  to  amend  himself  up  to  the 
second  Examen  which  he  will  make. 

The  third  time:  After  supper,  the  second 
Examen  will  be  made,  in  the  same  way, 
hour  by  hour,  commencing  at  the  first 
Examen  and  continuing  up  to  the  present 
(second)  one,  and  let  him  make  in  the 
second    line    of    the    same    G  =   as 

many  dots  as  were  the  times  he  has  fallen 
into  that  particular  sin  or  defect. 

FOUR  ADDITIONS 

FOLLOW     TO     RID     ONESELF     SOONER     OF     THAT 
PARTICULAR    SIN    OR    DEFECT 

First  Addition.  The  first  Addition  is  that 
each  time  one  falls  into  that  particular  sin  or 
defect,  let  him  put  his  hand  on  his  breast, 
grieving  for  having  fallen:  which  can  be  done 
even  in  the  presence  of  many,  without  their 
perceiving  what  he  is  doing. 

Second  Addition.  The  second:  As  the  first 
line  of  the  G  —  means  the  first  Examen, 

and  the  second  line  the  second  Examen,  let 
him  look  at  night  if  there  is  amendment  from 
the  first  line  to  the  second,  that  is,  from  the 
first  Examen  to  the  second. 

Third  Addition.  The  third:  To  compare 
the  second  day  with  the  first;   that  is,  the  two 


PARTICULAR    AND    DAILY    EXAMEN  23 

Examens  of  the  present  day  with  the  other  two 
Examens  of  the  previous  day,  and  see  if  he  has 
amended  himself  from  one  day  to  the  other. 

Fourth  Addition.  The  fourth  Addition:  To 
compare  one  week  with  another,  and  see  if  he 
has  amended  himself  in  the  present  week  over 
the  week  past. 

Note.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  first  (large) 
G  ^^  which  follows  means  the   Sunday: 

the  second  (smaller),  the  Monday:  the  third, 
the  Tuesday,  and  so  on. 


G 


GENERAL  EXAMEN  OF   CONSCIENCE 

TO    PURIFY   ONESELF   AND    TO    MAKE    ONe's 
CONFESSION  BETTER 

I  presuppose  that  there  are  three  kinds 
of  thoughts  in  me:  that  is,  one  my  own, 
which  springs  from  my  mere  Hberty  and 
will;  and  two  others,  which  come  from 
without,  one  from  the  good  spirit,  and  the 
other  from  the  bad. 

THOUGHT 

There  are  two  ways  of  meriting  in  the 
bad  thought  which  comes  from  without, 
namely: 

First  Way.  A  thought  of  committing 
a  mortal  sin,  which  thought  I  resist  imme- 
diately and  it  remains  conquered. 

Second  Way.  The  second  way  of  merit- 
ing is:  When  that  same  bad  thought 
comes  to  me  and  I  resist  it,  and  it  returns 
to  me  again  and  again,  and  I  always  resist, 
until  it  is  conquered. 

This  second  way  is  more  meritorious 
than  the  first. 


26       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

A  venial  sin  is  committed  when  the  same 
thought  comes  of  sinning  mortally  and  one 
gives  ear  to  it,  making  some  little  delay, 
or  receiving  some  sensual  pleasure,  or  when 
there  is  some  negligence  in  rejecting  such 
thought. 

There  are  two  ways  of  sinning  mortally: 

First  Way.  The  first  is,  when  one  gives 
consent  to  the  bad  thought,  to  act  after- 
wards as  he  has  consented,  or  to  put  it 
in  act  if  he  could. 

Second  Way.  The  second  way  of  sin- 
ning mortally  is  when  that  sin  is  put  in 
act. 

This  is  a  greater  sin  for  three  reasons: 
first,  because  of  the  greater  time;  second, 
because  of  the  greater  intensity;  third, 
because  of  the  greater  harm  to  the  two 
persons. 

WORD 

One  must  not  swear,  either  by  Creator  or 
creature,  if  it  be  not  with  truth,  necessity 
and  reverence. 

By  necessity  I  mean,  not  when  any  truth 
whatever  is  affirmed  with  oath,  but  when 


GENERAL    EXAMEN    OF    CONSCIENCE  27 


it  is  of  some  importance  for  the  good  of 
the  soul,  or  the  body,  or  for  temporal 
goods. 

By  reverence  I  mean  when,  in  naming 
the  Creator  and  Lord,  one  acts  with  con- 
sideration, so  as  to  render  Him  the  honor 
and  reverence  due. 

It  is  to  be  noted  that,  though  in  an  idle  oath 
one  sins  more  when  he  swears  by  the  Creator 
than  by  the  creature,  it  is  more  difficult  to 
swear  in  the  right  way  with  truth,  necessity 
and  reverence  by  the  creature  than  by  the  Crea- 
tor, for  the  following  reasons. 

First  Reason.  The  first:  When  we  want  to 
swear  by  some  creature,  wanting  to  name  the 
creature  does  not  make  us  so  attentive  or  cir- 
cumspect as  to  telling  the  truth,  or  as  to  affirm- 
ing it  with  necessity,  as  would  wanting  to  name 
the  Lord  and  Creator  of  all  things. 

Second  Reason.  The  second  is  that  in 
swearing  by  the  creature  it  is  not  so  easy  to 
show  reverence  and  respect  to  the  Creator,  as 
in  swearing  and  naming  the  same  Creator  and 
Lord,  because  wanting  to  name  God  our  Lord 
brings  with  it  more  respect  and  reverence  than 
wanting  to  name  the  created  thing.  There- 
fore swearing  by  the  creature  is  more  allowable 


28       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

to  the  perfect  than  to  the  imperfect,  because 
the  perfect,  through  continued  contempla- 
tion and  enhghtenment  of  intellect,  consider, 
meditate  and  contemplate  more  that  God  our 
Lord  is  in  every  creature,  according  to  His 
own  essence,  presence  and  power,  and  so  in 
swearing  by  the  creature  they  are  more  apt  and 
prepared  than  the  imperfect  to  show  respect 
and  reverence  to  their  Creator  and  Lord. 

Third  Reason.  The  third  is  that  in  con- 
tinually swearing  by  the  creature,  idolatry  is 
to  be  more  feared  in  the  imperfect  than  in  the 
perfect. 

One  must  not  speak  an  idle  w^ord.  By 
idle  M^ord  I  mean  one  which  does  not 
benefit  either  me  or  another,  and  is  not 
directed  to  that  intention.  Hence  v^ords 
spoken  for  any  useful  purpose,  or  meant 
to  profit  one's  own  or  another's  soul,  the 
body  or  temporal  goods,  are  never  idle, 
not  even  if  one  were  to  speak  of  something 
foreign  to  one's  state  of  life,  as,  for  instance, 
if  a  religious  speaks  of  wars  or  articles  of 
trade;  but  in  all  that  is  said  there  is  merit 
in  directing  well,  and  sin  in  directing 
badly,  or  in  speaking  idly. 

Nothing  must  be  said  to  injure  another's 


GENERAL    EXAMEN    OF    CONSCIENCE  29 

character  or  to  find  fault,  because  if  I 
reveal  a  mortal  sin  that  is  not  public,  I 
sin  mortally;  if  a  venial  sin,  venially;  and 
if  a  defect,  I  show  a  defect  of  my  own. 

But  if  the  intention  is  right,  in  two 
ways  one  can  speak  of  the  sin  or  fault 
of  another: 

First  Way.  The  first:  When  the  sin 
is  public,  as  in  the  case  of  a  public  pros- 
titute, and  of  a  sentence  given  in  judgment, 
or  of  a  public  error  which  is  infecting  the 
souls  with  whom  one  comes  m  contact. 

Second  Way.  Second:  When  the 
hidden  sin  is  revealed  to  some  person  that 
he  may  help  to  raise  him  who  is  in  sin  — 
supposing,  however,  that  he  has  some  prob- 
able conjectures  or  grounds  for  thinking 
that  he  will  be  able  to  help  him. 

ACT 

Taking  the  Ten  Commandments,  the 
Precepts  of  the  Church  and  the  recommen- 
dations of  Superiors,  every  act  done 
against  any  of  these  three  heads  is,  accord- 
ing to  its  greater  or  less  nature,  a  greater  or 
a  lesser  sin. 


30      SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

By  recommendations  of  Superiors  I 
mean  such  things  as  Bulls  de  Cruzadas 
and  other  Indulgences,  as  for  instance  for 
peace,  granted  under  condition  of  going 
to  Confession  and  receiving  the  Blessed 
Sacrament.  For  one  commits  no  little  sin 
in  being  the  cause  of  others  acting  contrary 
to  such  pious  exhortations  and  recommen- 
dations of  our  Superiors,  or  in  doing  so 
oneself. 

METHOD  FOR  MAKING  THE  GENERAL 

EXAMEN 

It  contains  in  it  five  Points. 

First  Point.  The  first  Point  is  to  give 
thanks  to  God  our  Lord  for  the  benefits 
received. 

Second  Point.  The  second,  to  ask 
grace  to  know  our  sins  and  cast  them  out. 

Third  Point.  The  third,  to  ask  account 
of  our  soul  from  the  hour  that  we  rose  up 
to  the  present  Examen,  hour  by  hour,  or 
period  by  period:  and  first  as  to  thoughts, 
and  then  as  to  words,  and  then  as  to  acts, 
in  the  same  order  as  was  mentioned  in  the 
Particular  Examen. 


GENERAL    EXAMEN    OF    CONSCIENCE  3I 

Fourth  Point.     The     fourth,      to     ask 
pardon  of  God  our  Lord  for  the  faults. 

Fifth     Point.     The     fifth,     to     purpose 
amendment   with    His   grace. 
Our  Father. 


GENERAL  CONFESSION  WITH 
COMMUNION 

Whoever,  of  his  own  accord,  wants  to  make 
a  General  Confession,  will,  among  many  other 
advantages,  find  three  in  making  it  here. 

First.  The  first:  Though  whoever  goes  to 
Confession  every  year  is  not  obliged  to  make  a 
General  Confession,  by  making  it  there  is 
greater  profit  and  merit,  because  of  the  greater 
actual  sorrow  for  all  the  sins  and  wickedness 
of  his  whole  life. 

Second.  The  second:  In  the  Spiritual 
Exercises,  sins  and  their  malice  are  understood 
more  intimately,  than  in  the  time  when  one  was 
not  so  giving  himself  to  interior  things.  Gain- 
ing now  more  knowledge  of  and  sorrow  for 
them,  he  will  have  greater  profit  and  merit 
than  he  had  before. 

Third.  The  third  is:  In  consequence, 
having  made  a  better  Confession  and  being 
better  disposed,  one  finds  himself  in  condition 
and  prepared  to  receive  the  Blessed  Sacrament: 
the  reception  of  which  is  an  aid  not  only  not 
to  fall  into  sin,  but  also  to  preserve  the  increase 
of  grace. 

This  General  Confession  will  be  best  made  im- 
mediately after  the  Exercises  of  the  First  Week 


' 


FIRST  EXERCISE 

IT  IS  A  MEDITATION  WITH  THE  THREE 
POWERS  ON  THE  FIRST,  THE  SECOND 
AND      THE     THIRD     SIN 

It  contains  in  it,  after  one  Preparatory 
Prayer  and  two  Preludes,  three  chief 
Points  and  one  Colloquy. 

Prayer.  The  Preparatory  Prayer  is  to 
ask  grace  of  God  our  Lord  that  all  my 
intentions,  actions  and  operations  may  be 
directed  purely  to  the  service  and  praise 
of  His  Divine  Majesty. 

First  Prelude.  The  First  Prelude  is  a 
composition,  seeing  the  place. 

Here  it  is  to  be  noted  that,  in  a  visible  con- 
templation or  meditation  —  as,  for  instance, 
when  one  contemplates  Christ  our  Lord,  Who 
is  visible  —  the  composition  will  be  to  see  with 
the  sight  of  the  imagination  the  corporeal  place 
where  the  thing  is  found  which  I  want  to  con- 
template. I  say  the  corporeal  place,  as  for 
instance,  a  Temple  or  Mountain  where  Jesus 


36       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

Christ  or  Our  Lady  is  found,  according  to  what 
I  want  to  contemplate.  In  an  invisible  con- 
templation or  meditation  —  as  here  on  the 
Sins  —  the  composition  will  be  to  see  with  the 
sight  of  the  imagination  and  consider  that  my 
soul  is  imprisoned  in  this  corruptible  body, 
and  all  the  compound  in  this  valley,  as  exiled 
among  brute  beasts:  I  say  all  the  compound 
of  soul  and  body. 

Second  Prelude.  The  second  is  to  ask 
God  our  Lord  for  what  I  want  and  desire. 

The  petition  has  to  be  according  to  the  sub- 
ject matter;  that  is,  if  the  contemplation  is 
on  the  Resurrection,  one  is  to  ask  for  joy 
with  Christ  in  joy;  if  it  is  on  the  Passion,  he 
is  to  ask  for  pain,  tears  and  torment  with  Christ 
in  torment. 

Here  it  will  be  to  ask  shame  and  con- 
fusion at  myself,  seeing  how  many  have 
been  damned  for  only  one  mortal  sin,  and 
how  many  times  I  deserved  to  be  con- 
demned forever  for  my  so  many  sins. 

Note.  Before  all  Contemplations  or  Medi- 
tations, there  ought  always  to  be  made  the 
Preparatory  Prayer,  which  is  not  changed,  and 
the    two    Preludes    already   mentioned,   which 


FIRST    EXERCISE  37 


are  sometimes  changed,  according  to  the  sub- 
ject matter. 

First  Point.  The  first  Point  will  be  to 
bring  the  memory  on  the  First  Sin,  which 
was  that  of  the  Angels,  and  then  to  bring 
the  intellect  on  the  same,  discussing  it; 
then  the  will,  wanting  to  recall  and  under- 
stand all  this  in  order  to  make  me  more 
ashamed  and  confound  me  more,  bringing 
into  comparison  with  the  one  sin  of  the 
Angels  my  so  many  sins,  and  reflecting, 
while  they  for  one  sin  were  cast  into  Hell, 
how  often  I  have  deserved  it  for  so  many. 

I  say  to  bring  to  memory  the  sin  of  the 
Angels,  how  they,  being  created  in  grace, 
not  wanting  to  help  themselves  with  their 
liberty  to  reverence  and  obey  their  Creator 
and  Lord,  coming  to  pride,  were  changed 
from  grace  to  malice,  and  hurled  from 
Heaven  to  Hell;  and  so  then  to  discuss 
more  in  detail  with  the  intellect:  and  then 
to  move  the  feelings  more  with  the  will. 

Second  Point.  The  second  is  to  do 
the  same  —  that  is,  to  bring  the  Three 
Powers  —  on  the  sin  of  Adam  and  Eve, 
bringing  to  memory  how  on   account  of 


38       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

that  sin  they  did  penance  for  so  long  a 
time,  and  how  much  corruption  came  on 
the  human  race,  so  many  people  going  the 
way  to  Hell. 

I  say  to  bring  to  memory  the  Second 
Sin,  that  of  our  First  Parents;  how  after 
Adam  was  created  in  the  field  of  Damascus 
and  placed  in  the  Terrestrial  Paradise, 
and  Eve  was  created  from  his  rib,  being 
forbidden  to  eat  of  the  Tree  of  Knowledge, 
they  ate  and  so  sinned,  and  afterwards 
clothed  in  tunics  of  skins  and  cast  from 
Paradise,  they  lived,  all  their  life,  without 
the  original  justice  which  they  had  lost, 
and  in  many  labors  and  much  penance. 
And  then  to  discuss  with  the  understand- 
ing more  in  detail;  and  to  use  the  will 
as  has  been  said. 

Third  Point.  The  third  is  likewise  to 
do  the  same  on  the  Third  particular  Sin 
of  any  one  who  for  one  mortal  sin  is  gone 
to  Hell  —  and  many  others  without 
number,  for  fewer  sins  than  I  have  com- 
mitted. 

I  say  to  do  the  same  on  the  Third  par- 
ticular Sin,  bringing  to  memory  the  gravity 
and  malice  of  the  sin  against  one's  Creator 


FIRST    EXERCISE  39 

and  Lord;  to  discuss  with  the  understand- 
ing how  in  sinning  and  acting  against  the 
Infinite  Goodness,  he  has  been  justly 
condemned  forever;  and  to  finish  with  the 
will  as  has  been  said. 

Colloquy.  Imagining  Christ  our  Lord 
present  and  placed  on  the  Cross,  let  me 
make  a  Colloquy,  how  from  Creator  He 
is  come  to  making  Himself  man,  and  from 
life  eternal  is  come  to  temporal  death,  and 
so  to  die  for  my  sins. 

Likewise,  looking  at  myself,  what  I 
have  done  for  Christ,  what  I  am  doing 
for  Christ,  what  I  ought  to  do  for  Christ. 

And  so,  seeing  Him  such,  and  so  nailed 
on  the  Cross,  to  go  over  that  which  will 
present  itself. 

The  Colloquy  is  made,  properly  speaking, 
as  one  friend  speaks  to  another,  or  as  a  servant 
to  his  master;  now  asking  some  grace,  now 
blaming  oneself  for  some  misdeed,  now  com- 
municating one's  affairs,  and  asking  advice 
in  them. 

And  let  me  say  an  Our  Father. 


40       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 


SECOND  EXERCISE 

IT  IS  A  MEDITATION  ON  THE  SINS  AND  CON- 
TAINS IN  IT  AFTER  THE  PREPARATORY 
PRAYER  AND  TWO  PRELUDES,  FIVE 
POINTS  AND  ONE  COLLOQUY 

Prayer.  Let  the  Preparatory  Prayer 
be  the  same. 

First  Prelude.  The  First  Prelude  will 
be  the  same  composition. 

Second  Prelude.  The  second  is  to  ask 
for  what  I  want.  It  will  be  here  to  beg 
a  great  and  intense  sorrow  and  tears  for 
my  sins. 

First  Point.  The  first  Point  is  the  state- 
ment of  the  sins;  that  is  to  say,  to  bring  to 
memory  all  the  sins  of  life,  looking  from 
year  to  year,  or  from  period  to  period. 
For  this  three  things  are  helpful:  first, 
to  look  at  the  place  and  the  house  where 
I  have  lived;  second,  the  relations  I  have 
had  with  others;  third,  the  occupation 
in  which  I  ha^ 


SECOND    EXERCISE  41 

Second  Point.  The  second,  to  weigh 
the  sins,  looking  at  the  foulness  and  the 
malice  which  any  mortal  sin  committed 
has  in  it,  even  supposing  it  were  not  for- 
bidden. 

Third  Point.  The  third,  to  look  at  who 
I  am,  lessening  myself  by  examples: 

First,  how  much  I  am  in  comparison  to 
all  men; 

Second,  what  men  are  in  comparison  to 
all  the  Angels  and  Saints  of  Paradise; 

Third,  what  all  Creation  is  in  comparison 
to  God:  ( —  Then  I  alone,  what  can  I 
be?) 

Fourth,  to  see  all  my  bodily  corruption 
and  foulness; 

Fifth,  to  look  at  myself  as  a  sore  and 
ulcer,  from  which  have  sprung  so  many 
sins  and  so  many  iniquities  and  so  very 
vile  poison. 

Fourth  Point.  The  fourth,  to  consider 
what  God  is,  against  Whom  I  have  sinned, 
according  to  His  attributes;  comparing 
them  with  their  contraries  in  me  —  His 
Wisdom  with  my  ignorance;  His  Omnip- 
otence  with    my   weakness;    His   Justice 


42       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

with  my  iniquity;    His  Goodness  with  my 
maHce. 

Fifth  Point.  The  fifth,  an  exclamation 
of  wonder  with  deep  feehng,  going  through 
all  creatures,  how  they  have  left  me  in 
life  and  preserved  me  in  it;  the  Angels, 
how,  though  they  are  the  sword  of  the 
Divine  Justice,  they  have  endured  me, 
and  guarded  me,  and  prayed  for  me;  the 
Saints,  how  they  have  been  engaged  in 
interceding  and  praying  for  me;  and  the 
heavens,  sun,  moon,  stars,  and  elements, 
fruits,  birds,  fishes  and  animals  —  and 
the  earth,  how  it  has  not  opened  to  swallow 
me  up,  creating  new  Hells  for  me  to  suffer 
in  them  forever! 

Colloquy.  Let  me  finish  with  a  Collo- 
quy of  mercy,  pondering  and  giving 
thanks  to  God  our  Lord  that  He  has 
given  me  life  up  to  now,  proposing  amend- 
ment, with  His  grace,  for  the  future. 

Our  Father. 


THIRD    EXERCISE  43 


THIRD  EXERCISE 

IT  IS  A  REPETITION  OF  THE  FIRST  AND 
SECOND  EXERCISE,  MAKING  THREE 
COLLOQUIES 

After  the  Preparatory  Prayer  and  two 
Preludes,  it  will  be  to  repeat  the  First 
and  Second  Exercise,  marking  and  dwell- 
ing on  the  Points  in  which  I  have  felt 
greater  consolation  or  desolation,  or  greater 
spiritual  feeling. 

After  this  I  will  make  three  Colloquies 
In  the  following  manner: 

First  Colloquy.  The  first  Colloquy  to 
Our  Lady,  that  she  may  get  me  grace  from 
Her  Son  and  Lord  for  three  things:  first, 
that  I  may  feel  an  interior  knowledge  of  my 
sins,  and  hatred  of  them;  second,  that  I 
may  feel  the  disorder  of  my  actions,  so 
that,  hating  them,  I  may  correct  myself 
and  put  myself  in  order;  third,  to  ask 
knowledge  of  the  world,  in  order  that, 
hating  it,  I  may  put  away  from  me  worldly 
and  vain  things. 

And  with  that  a  Hail  Mary. 


44       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

Second  Colloquy.  The  second:  The 
same  to  the  Son,  begging  Him  to  get  it 
for  me  from  the  Father. 

And  with  that  the  Soul  of  Christ. 

Third  Colloquy.  The  third:  The  same 
to  the  Father,  that  the  Eternal  Lord 
Himself  may  grant  it  to  me. 

And  with  that  an  Our  Father. 
FOURTH  EXERCISE 

IT  IS  A  SUMMARY  OF  THIS   SAME  THIRD 

I  said  a  summary,  that  the  understand- 
ing, without  wandering,  may  assiduously 
go  through  the  memory  of  the  things  con- 
templated in  the  preceding  Exercises. 

I  will  make  the  same  three  Colloquies. 

FIFTH  EXERCISE 

IT  IS  A  MEDITATION  ON  HELL 

It  contains  in  it,  after  the  Preparatory 
Prayer  and  two  Preludes,  five  Points  and 
one  Colloquy: 

Prayer.  Let  the  Preparatory  Prayer 
be  the  usual  one. 


FIFTH    EXERCISE  45 

First  Prelude.  The  first  Prelude  is  the 
composition,  which  is  here  to  see  with  the 
sight  of  the  imagination  the  length,  breadth 
and  depth  of  Hell. 

Second  Prelude.  The  second,  to  ask 
for  what  I  want:  it  will  be  here  to  ask 
for  interior  sense  of  the  pain  which  the 
damned  suffer,  in  order  that,  if,  through 
my  faults,  I  should  forget  the  love  of  the 
Eternal  Lord,  at  least  the  fear  of  the  pains 
may  help  me  not  to  come  into  sin. 

First  Point.  The  first  Point  will  be  to 
see  with  the  sight  of  the  imagination  the 
great  fires,  and  the  souls  as  in  bodies  of 
fire. 

Second  Point.  The  second,  to  hear 
with  the  ears  waitings,  bowlings,  cries, 
blasphemies  against  Christ  our  Lord  and 
against  all  His  Saints. 

Third  Point.  The  third,  to  smell  with 
the  smell  smoke,sulphur,  dregs  and  putrid 
things. 

Fourth  Point.  The  fourth,  to  taste 
with  the  taste  bitter  things,  like  tears, 
sadness  and  the  worm  of  conscience. 


46       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

Fifth  Point.  The  fifth,  to  touch  with  the 
touch;  that  is  to  say,  how  the  fires  touch 
and  burn  the  souls. 

Colloquy.  Making  a  Colloquy  to  Christ 
our  Lord,  I  will  bring  to  memory  the  souls 
that  are  in  Hell,  some  because  they  did 
not  believe  the  Coming,  others  because, 
believing,  they  did  not  act  according  to 
His  Commandments;  making  three  divi- 
sions : 

First,  Second,  and  Third  Divisions.  The 
first,  before  the  Coming;!  the  second, 
during  His  life;  the  third,  after  His  life 
in  this  world;  and  with  this  I  will  give 
Him  thanks  that  He  has  not  let  me  fall  in- 
to any  of  these  divisions,  ending  my  life. 

Likewise,  I  will  consider  how  up  to  now 
He  has  always  had  so  great  pity  and  mercy 
on  me. 

I  will  end  with  an  Our  Father, 

Note.  The  first  Exercise  will  be  made  at 
midnight;  the  second  immediately  on  rising 
in  the  morning;  the  third,  before  or  after  Mass; 
in  any  case,  before  dinner;  the  fourth  at  the 
hour  of  Vespers;  the  fifth,  an  hour  before 
supper. 


ADDITIONS  47 


This  arrangement  of  hours,  more  or  less, 
I  always  mean  in  all  the  four  Weeks,  according 
as  his  age,  disposition  and  physical  condition 
help  the  person  who  is  exercising  himself  to 
make  five  Exercises  or  fewer. 

ADDITIONS 

TO  MAKE  THE    EXERCISES   BETTER  AND  TO  FIND 
BETTER  WHAT  ONE   DESIRES 

First  Addition.  The  first  Addition  is,  after 
going  to  bed,  just  when  I  want  to  go  asleep, 
to  think,  for  the  space  of  a  Hail  Mary,  of  the 
hour  that  I  have  to  rise  and  for  what,  making 
a  resume  of  the  Exercise  which  I  have  to  make. 

Second  Addition.  The  second:  When  I 
wake  up,  not  giving  place  to  any  other 
thought,  to  turn  my  attention  immediately 
to  what  I  am  going  to  contemplate  in  the  first 
Exercise,  at  midnight,  bringing  myself  to 
confusion  for  my  so  many  sins,  setting  ex- 
amples, as,  for  instance,  if  a  knight  found  him- 
self before  his  king  and  all  his  court,  ashamed 
and  confused  at  having  much  offended  him, 
from  whom  he  had  first  received  many  gifts 
and  many  favors:  in  the  same  way,  in  the 
second  Exercise,  making  myself  a  great  sinner 
and  in  chains;  that  is  to  say  going  to  appear 
bound  as  in  chains  before  the  Supreme  Eternal 


48       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

Judge;  taking  for  an  example  how  prisoners 
in  chains  and  already  deserving  death,  appear 
before  their  temporal  judge.  And  I  will  dress 
with  these  thoughts  or  with  others,  according 
to  the  subject  matter. 

Third  Addition.  The  third:  A  step  or  two 
before  the  place  where  I  have  to  contemplate 
or  meditate,  I  will  put  myself  standing  for  the 
space  of  an  Our  Father,  my  intellect  raised 
on  high,  considering  how  God  our  Lord  is 
looking  at  me,  etc.;  and  will  make  an  act  of 
reverence  or  humility. 

Fourth  Addition.  The  fourth:  To  enter  on 
the  contemplation  now  on  my  knees,  now 
prostrate  on  the  earth,  now  lying  face  upwards, 
now  seated,  now  standing,  always  intent  on 
seeking  what  I  want. 

We  will  attend  to  two  things.  The  first  is, 
that  if  I  find  what  I  want  kneeling,  I  will  not 
pass  on;  and  if  prostrate,  likewise,  etc.  The 
second;  in  the  Point  in  which  I  find  what  I 
want,  there  I  will  rest,  without  being  anxious 
to  pass  on,  until  I  content  myself. 

Fifth  Addition.  The  fifth:  After  finishing 
the  Exercise,  I  will,  during  the  space  of  a 
quarter  of  an  hour,  seated  or  walking  leisurely, 
look  how  it  went  with  me  in  the  Contemplation 
or  Meditation;  and  if  badly,  I  will  look  for 
the  cause  from  which  it  proceeds,  and  having  so 


ADDITIONS  49 


seen  it,  will  be  sorry,  in  order  to  correct  myself 
in  future;  and  if  well,  I  will  give  thanks  to 
God  our  Lord,  and  will  do  in  like  manner  an- 
other time. 

Sixth  Addition.  The  sixth:  Not  to  want  to 
think  on  things  of  pleasure  or  joy,  such  as 
heavenly  glory,  the  Resurrection,  etc.  Because 
whatever  consideration  of  joy  and  gladness 
hinders  our  feeling  pain  and  grief  and  shedding 
tears  for  our  sins:  but  to  keep  before  me  that 
I  want  to  grieve  and  feel  pain,  bringing  to 
memory  rather  Death  and  Judgment. 

Seventh  Addition.  The  seventh:  For  the 
same  end,  to  deprive  myself  of  all  light,  closing 
the  blinds  and  doors  while  I  am  in  the  room, 
if  it  be  not  to  recite  prayers,  to  read  and  eat. 

Eighth  Addition.  The  eighth:  Not  to  laugh 
nor  say  a  thing  provocative  of  laughter. 

Ninth  Addition.  The  ninth:  To  restrain 
my  sight,  except  in  receiving  or  dismissing 
the  person  with  whom  I  have  spoken. 

Tenth  Addition.  The  tenth  Addition  is 
penance. 

This  is  divided  into  interior  and  exterior. 
The  interior  is  to  grieve  for  one's  sins,  with  a 
firm  purpose  of  not  committing  them  nor  any 
others.     The    exterior,    or    fruit    of   the    first, 


50       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

is  chastisement  for  the  sins  committed,  and  is 
chiefly  taken  in  three  ways. 

First  Way.  The  first  is  as  to  eating.  That 
is  to  say,  when  we  leave  off  the  superfluous, 
it  is  not  penance,  but  temperance.  It  is  pen- 
ance when  we  leave  off  from  the  suitable;  and 
the  more  and  more,  the  greater  and  better  — 
provided  that  the  person  does  not  injure  him- 
self, and  that  no  notable  illness  follows. 

Second  Way.  The  second,  as  to  the  manner 
of  sleeping.  Here  too  it  is  not  penance  to  leave 
off  the  superfluous  of  delicate  or  soft  things, 
but  it  is  penance  when  one  leaves  off  from  the 
suitable  in  the  manner:  and  the  more  and 
more,  the  better  —  provided  that  the  person 
does  not  injure  himself  and  no  notable  illness 
follows.  Besides,  let  not  anything  of  the  suit- 
able sleep  be  left  off,  unless  in  order  to  come 
to  the  mean,  if  one  has  a  bad  habit  of  sleeping 
too  much. 

Third  Way.  The  third,  to  chastise  the  flesh, 
that  is,  giving  it  sensible  pain,  which  is  given 
by  wearing  haircloth  or  cords  or  iron  chains 
next  to  the  flesh,  by  scourging  or  wounding 
oneself,  and  by  other  kinds  of  austerity. 

Note.  What  appears  most  suitable  and  most 
secure  with  regard  to  penance  is  that  the  pain 
should  be  sensible  in  the  flesh  and  not  enter 


ADDITIONS  51 


within  the  bones,  so  that  it  give  pain  and  not 
illness.  For  this  it  appears  to  be  more  suitable 
to  scourge  oneself  with  thin  cords,  which  give 
pain  exteriorly,  rather  than  in  another  way 
which  would  cause  notable  illness  within. 

First  Note.  The  first  Note  is  that  the  ex- 
terior penances  are  done  chiefly  for  three  ends: 

First,  as  satisfaction  for  the  sins  committed; 

Second,  to  conquer  oneself — that  is,  to 
make  sensuality  obey  reason  and  all  inferior 
parts  be  more  subject  to  the  superior; 

Third,  to  seek  and  find  some  grace  or  gift 
which  the  person  wants  and  desires;  as,  for 
instance,  if  he  desires  to  have  interior  contri- 
tion for  his  sins,  or  to  weep  much  over  them, 
or  over  the  pains  and  sufferings  which  Christ 
our  Lord  suffered  in  His  Passion,  or  to  settle 
some  doubt  in  which  the  person  finds  himself. 

Second  Note.  The  second:  It  is  to  be  noted 
that  the  first  and  second  Addition  have  to  be 
made  for  the  Exercises  of  midnight  and  at 
daybreak,  but  not  for  those  which  will  be  made 
at  other  times;  and  the  fourth  Addition  will 
never  be  made  in  church  in  the  presence  of 
others,  but  in  private,  as  at  home,  etc. 

Third  Note.  The  third:  When  the  person 
who  is  exercising  himself  does  not  yet  find 
what  he  desires  —  as  tears,  consolations,  etc., 


52       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST,    IGNATIUS 

—  it  often  helps  for  him  to  make  a  change  in 
food,  in  sleep  and  in  other  ways  of  doing 
penance,  so  that  he  change  himself,  doing 
penance  two  or  three  days,  and  two  or  three 
others  not.  For  it  suits  some  to  do  more 
penance  and  others  less,  and  we  often  omit 
doing  penance  from  sensual  love  and  from  an 
erroneous  judgment  that  the  human  system 
will  not  be  able  to  bear  it  without  notable 
illness;  and  sometimes,  on  the  contrary,  we 
do  too  much,  thinking  that  the  body  can  bear 
it;  and  as  God  our  Lord  knows  our  nature 
infinitely  better,  often  in  such  changes  He  gives 
each  one  to  perceive  what  is  suitable  for  him. 
Fourth  Note.  The  fourth:  Let  the  Particu- 
lar Examen  be  made  to  rid  oneself  of  defects 
and  negligences  on  the  Exercises  and  Additions. 
And  so  in  the  Second,  Third  and  Fourth 
Weeks. 


SECOND  WEEK 


THE  CALL  OF  THE  TEMPORAL  KING 

IT    HELPS    TO    CONTEMPLATE    THE    LIFE    OF    THE 
KING  ETERNAL 

Prayer.  Let  the  Preparatory  Prayer 
be  the  usual  one. 

First  Prelude.  The  first  Prelude  is  a 
composition,  seeing  the  place:  it  will 
be  here  to  see  with  the  sight  of  the  imagina- 
tion, the  synagogues,^  villages  and  towns 
through  which  Christ  our  Lord  preached. 

Second  Prelude.  The  second,  to  ask 
for  the  grace  which  I  want:  it  will  be  here 
to  ask  grace  of  our  Lord  that  I  may  not 
be  deaf  to  His  call,  but  ready  and  diligent 
to  fulfill  His  most  Holy  Will. 

First  Point.  The  first  Point  is,  to  put 
before  me  a  human  king  chosen  by  God 
our  Lord,  whom  all  Christian  princes  and 
men  reverence  and  obey. 

Second  Point.  The  second,  to  look  how 
this  king  speaks  to  all  his  people,  saying: 
*Tt  is  my  Will  to  conquer  all  the  land  of 

'  Synagogues  is  in  the  Saint's  hand,  replacing  Temples, 
tvhich  is  crossed  out. 


56       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

unbelievers.  Therefore,  whoever  would 
like  to  come  with  me  is  to  be  content  \.o 
eat  as  I,  and  also  to  drink  and  dress,  etc., 
as  I :  likewise  he  is  to  labor  like  me  ^  in  the 
day  and  watch  in  the  night,  etc.,  that  so 
afterwards  he  may  have  part  with  me  in 
the  victory,  as  he  has  had  it  in  the  labors." 
Third  Point.  The  third,  to  consider 
what  the  good  subjects  ought  to  answer 
to  a  King  so  liberal  and  so  kind,  and  hence, 
if  any  one  did  not  accept  the  appeal  of 
such  a  king,  how  deserving  he  would  be  of 
being  censured  by  all  the  world,  and  held 
for  a  mean-spirited  knight. 

IN   PART  2 

The  second  part  of  this  Exercise  con- 
sists in  applying  the  above  parable  of  the 
temporal  King  to  Christ  our  Lord,  con- 
formably to  the  three  Points  mentioned. 

First  Point.  And  as  to  the  first  Point, 
if  we  consider  such  a  call  of  the  temporal 
King  to  his  subjects,  how  much  more 
worthy  of  consideration  is  it  to  see  Christ 
our  Lord,   King  eternal,   and  before  Him 

1  It  is  doubtful  whether  these  words  are  like  me  or  witK 
me. 


THE    CALL    OF    THE    TEMPORAL    KING        57 

all  the  entire  world,  which  and  each  one 
in  particular  He  calls,  and  says:  "It  is 
My  will  to  conquer  all  the  world  and  all 
enemies  and  so  to  enter  into  the  glory  of 
My  Father;  therefore,  whoever  would 
like  to  come  with  Me  is  to  labor  with  Me, 
that  following  Me  in  the  pain,  he  may 
also  follow  Me  in  the  glory." 

Second  Point.  The  second,  to  consider 
that  all  those  who  have  judgment  and 
reason  will  offer  their  entire  selves  to  the 
labor. 

Third  Point.  The  third,  those  who 
will  want  to  be  more  devoted  and  signalise 
themselves  in  all  service  of  their  King 
Eternal  and  universal  Lord,  not  only 
will  offer  their  persons  to  the  labor,  but 
even,  acting  against  their  own  sensuality 
and  against  their  carnal  and  worldly  love, 
will  make  offerings  of  greater  value  and 
greater  importance,  saying: 

"Eternal  Lord  of  all  things,  I  make 
my  oblation  with  Thy  favor  and  help, 
in  presence  of  Thy  infinite  Goodness  and 
in  presence  of  Thy  glorious  Mother  and  of 
all  the  Saints  of  the  heavenly  Court;   that 


58      SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 


I  want  and  desire,  and  it  is  my  deliberate 
determination,  if  only  it  be  Thy  greater 
service  and  praise,  to  imitate  Thee  in  bear- 
ing all  injuries  and  all  abuse  and  all  poverty 
of  spirit,  and  actual  poverty,  too,  if  Thy 
most  Holy  Majesty  wants  to  choose  and 
receive  me  to  such  life  and  state." 

First  Note.  This  Exercise  will  be  made  twice 
in  the  day;  namely,  in  the  morning  on  rising 
and  an  hour  before  dinner  or  before  supper. 

Second  Note.  For  the  Second  Week  and 
so  on,  it  is  very  helpful  to  read  at  intervals  in 
the  books  of  the  Imitation  of  Christ,  or  of  the 
Gospels,  and  of  lives  of  Saints. 

THE  FIRST  DAY  AND    FIRST   CONTEMPLATION 

IT  IS   ON 

THE   INCARNATION 

AND  CONTAINS  THE  PREPARATORY  PRAYER, 

THREE  PRELUDES,  THREE  POINTS 

AND  ONE  COLLOQUY 

Prayer.     The  usual  Preparatory  Prayer. 

First  Prelude.  The  first  Prelude  is  to 
bring  up  the  narrative  of  the  thing  which 
I  have  to  contemplate. 


THE    INCARNATION  59 

Here,  it  is  how  the  Three  Divine  Persons 
looked  at  all  the  plain  or  circuit  of  all  the 
world,  full  of  men,  and  how,  seeing  that 
all  were  going  down  to  Hell,  it  is  determined 
in  Their  Eternity,  ^  that  the  Second 
Person  shall  become  man  to  save  the 
human  race,  and  so,  the  fullness  of  times 
being  come,^  They  sent  the  Angel  St.  Ga- 
briel to  Our  Lady  (p.  133). 

Second  Prelude.  The  second,  a  com- 
position, seeing  the  place:  here  it  will 
be  to  see  the  great  capacity  and  circuit  of 
the  world,  in  which  are  so  many  and  such 
different  people:  then  likewise,  in  partic- 
ular, the  house  and  rooms  of  Our  Lady 
in  the  city  of  Nazareth,  in  the  Province 
of  Galilee. 

Third  Prelude.  The  third,  to  ask  for 
what  I  want:  it  will  be  to  ask  for  interior 
knowledge  of  the  Lord,  Who  for  me  has 
become  man,  that  I  may  more  love  and 
follow  Him. 

^  In  Their  Eternity  is  in  St.  Ignatius'  hand,  replacing 
among  Them,  which  is  cancelled. 

^  And  so,  the  fullness  of  times  being  come  is  in  the 
Saint's  hand,  and  being  crossed  out. 


6o       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

Note.  It  is  well  to  note  here  that  this  same 
Preparatory  Prayer,  without  changing  it,  as 
was  said  in  the  beginning,  and  the  same  three 
Preludes,  are  to  be  made  in  this  Week  and  in 
the  others  following,  changing  the  form  accord-  _ 
ing  to  the  subject  matter.  I 

First  Point.  The  first  Point  is,  to  see 
the  various  persons:  and  first  those  on 
the  surface  of  the  earth,  in  such  variety, 
in  dress  as  in  actions:  some  white  and 
others  black;  some  in  peace  and  others 
in  war;  some  weeping  and  others  laughing; 
some  well,  others  ill;  some  being  born 
and  others  dying,  etc. 

2.  To  see  and  consider  the  Three  Divine 
Persons,  as  on  their  royal  throne  or  seat 
of  Their  Divine  Majesty,  how  They  look 
on  all  the  surface  and  circuit  of  the  earth, 
and  all  the  people  in  such  blindness,  and 
how  they  are  dying  and  going  down  to 
Hell. 

3.  To  see  Our  Lady,  and  the  Angel  who 
is  saluting  her,  and  to  reflect  in  order  to 
get  profit  from  such  a  sight. 

Second  Point.  The  second,  to  hear 
what  the  persons  on  the  face  of  the  earth 


THE    INCARNATION  6l 

are  saying,  that  is,  how  they  are  talking 
with  one  another,  how  they  swear  and 
blaspheme,  etc.;  and  likewise  what  the 
Divine  Persons  are  saying,  that  is:  "Let 
Us  work  the  redemption  of  the  Human 
race,"  etc.;  and  then  what  the  Angel  and 
Our  Lady  are  saying;  and  to  reflect  then 
£o  as  to  draw  profit  from  their  words. 

Third  Point.  The  third,  to  look  then  at 
what  the  persons  on  the  face  of  the  earth 
are  doing,  as,  for  instance,  killing,  going 
to  Heli,  etc.;  likewise  what  the  Divine 
Persons  are  doing,  namely,  working  out 
the  most  holy  Incarnation,  etc.;  and  like- 
wise what  the  Angel  and  Our  Lady  are 
doing,  namely,  the  Angel  doing  his  duty 
as  ambassador,  and  Our  Lady  humbling 
herself  and  giving  thanks  to  the  Divine 
Majesty;  and  then  to  reflect  in  order  to 
draw  some  profit  from  each  of  these 
things. 

Colloquy.  At  the  end  a  Colloquy  is 
to  be  made,  thinking  what  I  ought  to  say 
to  the  Three  Divine  Persons,  or  to  the 
Eternal  Word  incarnate,  or  to  our  Mother 
and   Lady,    asking   according   to   what   I 


62       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

feel  in  me,  in  order  more  to  follow  and  imi- 
tate Our  Lord,  so  lately  incarnate. 
I  will  say  an  Our  Father. 


THE    SECOND   CONTEMPLATION 
IS   ON 

THE  NATIVITY 

Prayer.    The  usual  Preparatory  Prayer. 

First  Prelude.  The  first  Prelude  is  the 
narrative  and  it  will  be  here  how  Our  Lady 
went  forth  from  Nazareth,  about  nine 
months  with  child,  as  can  be  piously 
meditated,^  seated  on  an  ass,  and  accom- 
panied by  Joseph  and  a  maid,  taking  an 
ox,  to  go  to  Bethlehem  to  pay  the  tribute 
which  Caesar  imposed  on  all  those  lands 

(P-  135)- 

Second  Prelude.  The  second,  a  com- 
position, seeing  the  place.  It  will  be  here 
to  see  with  the  sight  of  the  imagination  the 
road  from  Nazareth  to  Bethlehem;  con- 
sidering the  length  and  the  breadth,  and 

^  As  can  be  piously  meditated  is  in  St.  Ignatius'  hand- 
writing  and  is  inserted  before  seated. 


THE    NATIVITY  63 


whether  such  road  is  level  or  through 
valleys  or  over  hills;  likewise  looking 
at  the  place  or  cave  of  the  Nativity,^ 
how  large,  how  small,  how  low,  how  high, 
and  how  it  was  prepared. 

Third  Prelude.  The  third  will  be  the 
same,  and  in  the  same  form,  as  in  the  pre- 
ceding Contemplation. 

First  Point.  The  first  Point  is  to  see 
the  persons;  that  is,  to  see  Our  Lady  and 
Joseph  and  the  maid,  and,  after  His  Birth, 
the  Child  Jesus,  I  making  myself  a  poor 
creature  and  a  wretch  of  an  unworthy  slave, 
looking  at  them  and  serving  them  in  their 
needs,  with  all  possible  respect  and  rev- 
erence, as  if  I  found  myself  present;  and 
then  to  reflect  on  myself  in  order  to  draw 
some  profit. 

Second  Point.  The  second,  to  look, 
mark  and  contemplate  what  they  are  say- 
ing, and,  reflecting  on  myself,  to  draw  some 
profit. 

Third  Point.  The  third,  to  look  and 
consider  what  they  are  doing,  as  going  a 

^  The  place  or  cave  of  the  Nativity  is  in  the  Saint's 
hand,  correcting  the  inn,  which  is  crossed  out. 


64       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

journey  and  laboring,  that  the  Lord  may  be 
born  in  the  greatest  poverty;  and  as 
a  termination  of  so  many  labors  —  of 
hunger,  of  thirst,  of  heat  and  of  cold,  of 
injuries  and  affronts  —  that  He  may  die 
on  the  Cross;  and  all  this  for  me:  then 
reflecting,  to  draw  some  spiritual  profit. 

Colloquy.  I  will  finish  with  a  Colloquy 
as  in  the  preceding  Contemplation,  and 
with  an  Our  Father. 


THE  THIRD  CONTEMPLATION 

WILL  BE  A  REPETITION  OF  THE  FIRST  AND 
SECOND  EXERCISE 

After  the  Preparatory  Prayer  and  the 
three  Preludes,  the  repetition  of  the  first 
and  second  Exercise  will  be  made,  noting 
always  some  more  principal  parts,  where 
the  person  has  felt  some  knowledge,  con- 
solation or  desolation,  making  likewise 
one  Colloquy  at  the  end,  and  saying  an 
Our  Father. 

In  this  repetition,  and  in  all  the  follow- 
ing, the  same  order  of  proceeding  will 
be  taken  as  was  taken  in  the  repetitions 


THE    FIFTH    CONTEMPLATION  65 

of  the   First  Week,   changing  the   matter 
and  keeping  the  form. 


THE  FOURTH  CONTEMPLATION 

WILL  BE  A  REPETITION  OF  THE  FIRST  AND 
SECOND 

In  the  same  way  as  was  done  in  the 
above-mentioned  repetition. 


THE  FIFTH  CONTEMPLATION 

WILL    BE    TO    BRING   THE    FIVE    SENSES    ON    THE 
FIRST    AND    SECOND    CONTEMPLATION 

Prayer.  After  the  Preparatory  Prayer 
and  the  three  Preludes,  it  is  helpful  to 
pass  the  five  senses  of  the  imagination 
through  the  first  and  second  Contempla- 
tion, in  the  following  way: 

First  Point.  The  first  Point  is  to  see 
the  persons  with  the  sight  of  the  imagina- 
tion, meditating  and  contemplating  in 
particular  the  details  about  them  and 
drawing  some  profit  from  the  sight. 


66       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

Second  Point.  The  second,  to  hear 
with  the  hearing  what  they  are,  or  might 
be,  talking  about  and,  reflecting  on  one- 
self, to  draw  some  profit  from  it. 

Third  Point.  The  third,  to  smell  and 
to  taste  with  the  smell  and  the  taste  the 
infinite  fragrance  and  sweetness  of  the 
Divinity,  of  the  soul,  and  of  its  virtues, 
and  of  all,  according  to  the  person  who  is 
being  contemplated;  reflecting  on  oneself 
and  drawing  profit  from  it. 

Fourth  Point.  The  fourth,  to  touch 
with  the  touch,  as  for  instance,  to  embrace 
and  kiss  the  places  where  such  persons  put 
their  feet  and  sit,  always  seeing  to  my 
drawing  profit  from  it. 

Colloquy.  One  has  to  finish  with  one 
Colloquy  as  in  the  first  and  second  Con- 
templation, and  with  an  Our  Father. 

First  Note.  The  first  note  is  to  remark 
for  all  this  and  the  other  following  Weeks, 
that  I  have  only  to  read  the  Mystery  of  the 
Contemplation  which  I  have  immediately  to 
make,  so  that  at  any  time  I  read  no  Mystery 
which  I  have  not  to  make  that  day  or  at  that 
hour,  in  order  that  the  consideration  of  one 


THE    FIFTH    CONTEMPLATION  67 

Mystery  may  not  hinder  the  consideration  of 
the  other. 

Second  Note.  The  second:  The  first  Ex- 
ercise, on  the  Incarnation,  will  be  made  at 
midnight;  the  second  at  dawn;  the  third  at 
the  hour  of  Mass;  the  fourth  at  the  hour  of 
Vespers,  and  the  fifth  before  the  hour  of  supper, 
being  for  the  space  of  one  hour  in  each  one  of 
the  five  Exercises;  and  the  same  order  will  be 
taken  in  all  the  following. 

Third  Note.  The  third:  It  is  to  be  remarked 
that  if  the  person  who  is  making  the  Exercises 
is  old  or  weak,  or,  although  strong,  has  become 
in  some  way  less  strong  from  the  First  Week, 
it  is  better  for  him  in  this  Second  Week,  at  least 
sometimes,  not  rising  at  midnight,  to  make  one 
Contemplation  in  the  morning,  and  another 
at  the  hour  of  Mass,  and  another  before  dinner, 
and  one  repetition  on  them  at  the  hour  of 
Vespers,  and  then  the  Application  of  the  Senses 
before  supper. 

Fourth  Note.  The  fourth:  In  this  Second 
Week,  out  of  all  the  ten  Additions  which  were 
mentioned  in  the  First  Week,  the  second, 
the  sixth,  the  seventh  and  in  part  the  tenth 
have  to  be  changed. 

In  the  second  it  will  be,  immediately  on 
waking  up,  to  put  before  me  the  contempla- 
tion which  I  have  to  make,  desiring  to  know 


68       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

more  the  Eternal  Word  incarnate,  in  order  to 
serve  and  to  follow  Him  more. 

The  sixth  will  be  to  bring  frequently  to  mem- 
ory the  Life  and  Mysteries  of  Christ  our  Lord, 
from  His  Incarnation  down  to  the  place  or 
Mystery  which  I  am  engaged  in  contemplating. 

The  seventh  will  be,  that  one  should  manage 
as  to  keeping  darkness  or  light,  making  use  of 
good  weather  or  bad,  according  as  he  feels  that 
it  can  profit  and  help  him  to  find  what  the 
person  desires  who  is  exercising  himself. 

And  in  the  tenth  Addition,  he  who  is  exer- 
cising himself  ought  to  manage  himself  accord- 
ing to  the  Mysteries  which  he  is  contemplating; 
because  some  demand  penance  and  others 
not. 

All  the  ten  Additions,  then,  are  to  be  made 
with  great  care. 

Fifth  Note.  The  fifth  note:  In  all  the  Exer- 
cises, except  in  that  of  midnight  and  in  that 
of  the  morning,  the  equivalent  of  the  second 
Addition  will  be  taken  in  the  following  way:  — 
Immediately  on  recollecting  that  it  is  the  time 
of  the  Exercise  which  I  have  to  make,  before  I 
go,  putting  before  myself  where  I  am  going  and 
before  Whom,  and  summarizing  a  little  the 
Exercise  which  I  have  to  make,  and  then 
making  the  third  Addition,  I  will  enter  into 
the  Exercise. 


THE    FIFTH    CONTEMPLATION  69 


THE    SECOND    DAY 

Second  Day.  For  first  and  second  Con- 
templation to  take  the  Presentation  in  the 
Temple  (p.  137)  and  the  Fhght  to  Egypt  as 
into  exile  (p.  138),  and  on  these  two  Con- 
templations will  be  made  two  repetitions 
and  the  Application  of  the  Five  Senses  to 
them,  in  the  same  way  as  was  done  the 
preceding  day. 

Note.  Sometimes,  although  the  one  who  is 
exercising  himself  is  strong  and  disposed,  it 
helps  to  make  a  change,  from  this  second  day 
up  to  the  fourth  inclusively,  in  order  better 
to  find  what  he  desires,  taking  only  one  Con- 
templation at  daybreak,  and  another  at  the 
hour  of  Mass,  and  to  repeat  on  them  at  the 
hour  of  Vespers  and  apply  the  senses  before 
supper. 

THE    THIRD    DAY 

Third  Day.  How  the  Child  Jesus  was 
obedient  to  His  Parents  at  Nazareth  (p. 
139),  and  how  afterwards  they  found  Him 
in  the  Temple  (p.  140),  and  so  then  to 
make  the  two  repetitions  and  apply  the 
five  senses. 


PREAMBLE  TO  CONSIDER  STATES 

First  Preamble.  The  example  which 
Christ  our  Lord,  being  under  obedience 
to  His  parents,  has  given  us  for  the  first 
state,  —  which  consists  in  the  observance 
of  the  Commandments  —  having  been  now 
considered;    and  likewise  for  the  second, 

—  which  is  that  of  evangelical  perfection, 

—  when  He  remained  in  the  Temple, 
leaving  His  adoptive  father  and  His  natural 
Mother,  to  attend  to  the  pure  service 
of  His  eternal  Father;  we  will  begin,  at 
the  same  time  contemplating  His  life,  to 
investigate  and  to  ask  in  what  life  or  state 
His  Divine  Majesty  wants  to  be  served 
by  us. 

And  so,  for  some  introduction  of  it,  we 
will,  in  the  first  Exercise  following,  see  the 
intention  of  Christ  our  Lord,  and,  on  the 
contrary,  that  of  the  enemy  of  human 
nature,  and  how  we  ought  to  dispose  our- 
selves in  order  to  come  to  perfection  in 
whatever  state  of  life  God  our  Lord  would 
give  us  to  choose. 


THE    FOURTH    DAY 
FOURTH 
jj^y  MEDITATION    ON 

TWO  STANDARDS 

The  one  of  Christ,  our  Commander-in- 
chief  and  Lord;  the  other  of  Lucifer,  mor- 
tal enemy  of  our  human  nature. 

Prayer.     The  usual  Preparatory  Prayer. 

First  Prelude.  The  First  Prelude  is  the 
narrative.  It  will  be  here  how  Christ 
calls  and  wants  all  under  His  standard; 
and  Lucifer,  on  the  contrary,  under  his. 

Second  Prelude.  The  second,  a  com- 
position, seeing  the  place.  It  will  be  here 
to  see  a  great  field  of  all  that  region  of 
Jerusalem,  where  the  supreme  Commander- 
in-chief  of  the  good  is  Christ  our  Lord; 
another  field  in  the  region  of  Babylon, 
where  the  chief  of  the  enemy  is  Lucifer. 

Third  Prelude.  The  third,  to  ask  for 
what  I  want:  and  it  will  be  here  to  ask 
for  knowledge  of  the  deceits  of  the  bad 


74       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

chief  and  help  to  guard  myself  against 
them,  and  for  knowledge  of  the  true  life 
which  the  supreme  and  true  Captain 
shows  and  grace  to  imitate  Him. 

First  Point.  The  first  Point  is  to  imag- 
ine as  if  the  chief  of  all  the  enemy  seated 
himself  in  that  great  field  of  Babylon, 
as  in  a  great  ^  chair  of  fire  and  smoke,  in 
shape  horrible  and  terrifying. 

Second  Point.  The  second,  to  consider 
how  he  issues  a  summons  to  innumerable 
demons  and  how  he  scatters  them,  some 
to  one  city  and  others  to  another,  and  so 
through  all  the  world,  not  omitting  any 
provinces,  places,  states,  nor  any  persons 
in  particular. 

Third  Point.  The  third,  to  consider  the 
discourse  which  he  makes  them,  and  how 
he  tells  them  to  cast  out  nets  and  chains; 
that  they  have  first  to  tempt  with  a  long- 
ing for  riches  —  as  he  is  accustomed  to  do 
in  most  cases  ^  —  that  men  may  more 
easily  come  to  vain  honor  of  the  world, 

1  Great  is  inserted,  perhaps  in  the  hand  of  St.  Ignatius. 
^  As  he  is  accustomed  to  do  in  most  cases  is  inserted 
in  the  Saint's  handwriting. 


TWO    STANDARDS  75 

and  then  to  vast  pride.  So  that  the  first 
step  shall  be  that  of  riches;  the  second, 
that  of  honor;  the  third,  that  of  pride; 
and  from  these  three  steps  he  draws  on 
to  all  the  other  vices. 

So,  on  the  contrary,  one  has  to  imagine 
as  to  the  supreme  and  true  Captain, 
Who  is  Christ  our  Lord. 

First  Point.  The  first  Point  is  to  con- 
sider how  Christ  our  Lord  puts  Himself 
in  a  great  field  of  that  region  of  Jerusalem, 
in  lowly  place,  beautiful  and  attractive. 

Second  Point.  The  second,  to  consider 
how  the  Lord  of  all  the  world  chooses  so 
many  persons  —  Apostles,  Disciples,  etc., 
—  and  sends  them  through  all  the  world 
spreading  His  sacred  doctrine  through  all 
states  and  conditions  of  persons. 

Third  Point.  The  third,  to  consider 
the  discourse  which  Christ  our  Lord 
makes  to  all  His  servants  and  friends  whom 
He  sends  on  this  expedition,  recommending 
them  to  want  to  help  all,  by  bringing  them 
first  to  the  highest  Sp-ritual  poverty, 
and  —  if  His  Divine  Majesty  would  be 
served  and  would  want  to  choose  them  — 


76       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 


no  less  to  actual  poverty;  the  second  is 
to  be  of  contumely  and  contempt;  because 
from  these  two  things  humility  follows. 
So  that  there  are  to  be  three  steps;  the 
first,  poverty  against  riches;  the  second, 
contumely  or  contempt  against  worldly 
honor;  the  third,  humility  against  pride. 
And  from  these  three  steps  let  them  induce 
to  all  the  other  virtues. 

First  Colloquy.  One  Colloquy  to  Our 
Lady,  that  she  may  get  me  grace  from 
Her  Son  and  Lord  that  I  may  be  received 
under  His  standard;  and  first  in  the  highest 
spiritual  poverty,  and  —  if  His  Divine 
Majesty  would  be  served  and  would  want 
to  choose  and  receive  me  —  not  less  in 
actual  poverty;  second,  in  suffering  con- 
tumely and  injuries,  to  imitate  Him  more 
in  them,  if  only  I  can  suffer  them  with- 
out the  sin  of  any  person,  or  displeasure 
of  His  Divine  Majesty;  and  with  that  a 
Hail  Mary. 

Second  Colloquy.  I  will  ask  the  same 
of  the  Son,  that  He  may  get  it  for  me  of 
the  Father;  and  with  that  say  the  Soul 
OF  Christ. 


THREE    PAIRS    OF    MEN  77 

Third  Colloquy.  I  will  ask  the  same  ot 
the  Father,  that  He  may  grant  it  to  me; 
and  say  an  Our  Father. 

Note.  This  Exercise  will  be  made  at  mid- 
night and  then  a  second  time  in  the  morning, 
and  two  repetitions  of  this  same  will  be  made 
at  the  hour  of  Mass  and  at  the  hour  of  Vespers, 
always  finishing  with  the  three  Colloquies,  to 
Our  Lady,  to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Father;  and 
that  on  The  Pairs  which  follows,  at  the  hour 
before   supper. 


THE    SAME    FOURTH    DAY    LET   MEDITATION    BE 
MADE  ON 

THREE   PAIRS  OF   MEN 

IN   ORDER  TO   EMBRACE   WHAT   IS   BEST 

Prayer.     The  usual  Preparatory  Prayer. 

First  Prelude.  The  first  Prelude  is  the 
narrative,  which  is  of  three  pairs  of  men, 
and  each  one  of  them  has  acquired  ten 
thousand  ducats,  not  solely  or  as  they 
ought  1  for  God's  love,  and  all  want  to  save 

^  Not  solely  or  as  they  ought  is  a  correction  of  not  only, 
which  is  crossed  out.  The  correction  is  perhaps  in  the  hand' 
writing  of  St.  Ignatius. 


78       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 


themselves  and  find  in  peace  God  our  Lord, 
ridding  themselves  of  the  weight  and 
hindrance  to  it  which  they  have  in  the 
attachment  for  the  thing  acquired. 

Second  Prelude.  The  second,  a  com- 
position, seeing  the  place.  It  will  be  here 
to  see  myself,  how  I  stand  before  God  our 
Lord  and  all  His  Saints,  to  desire  and  know 
what  is  more  pleasing  to  His  Divine  Good- 
ness. 

Third  Prelude.  The  third,  to  ask  for 
what  I  want.  Here  it  will  be  to  ask  grace 
to  choose  what  is  more  to  the  glory  of  His 
Divine  Majesty  and  the  salvation  of  my 
soul. 

First  Pair.  The  first  Pair  would  want 
to  rid  themselves  of  the  attachment  which 
they  have  to  the  thing  acquired,  in  order 
to  find  in  peace  God  our  Lord,  and  be  able 
to  save  themselves,  and  they  do  not  place 
the  means  up  to  the  hour  of  death. 

Second  Pair.  The  second  want  to  rid 
themselves  of  the  attachment,  but  want 
so  to  rid  themselves  of  it  as  to  remain  with 
the  thing  acquired,  so  that  God  should 
come  where  they  want,  and  they  do  not 


THREE    PAIRS    OF    MEN  79 

decide  to  leave  it  in  order  to  go  to  God, 
although  it  would  be  the  best  state  for 
them 

Third  Pair.  The  third  want  to  rid  them- 
selves of  the  attachment,  but  want  so  to 
rid  themselves  of  it  that  they  have  even 
no  liking  for  it,  to  keep  the  thing  acquired 
or  not  to  keep  it,  but  only  want  to  want 
it  or  not  want  it  according  as  God  our  Lord 
will  put  in  their  will  and  as  will  appear  to 
them  better  for  the  service  and  praise  of 
His  Divine  Majesty  ;  and  meanwhile  they 
want  to  reckon  that  they  quit  it  all  in  at- 
tachment, forcing  themselves  not  to  want 
that  or  any  other  thing,  unless  only  the 
service  of  God  our  Lord  move  them: 
so  that  the  desire  of  being  better  able  to 
serve  God  our  Lord  moves  them  to  take 
the  thing  or  leave  it. 

Three  Colloquies.  I  will  make  the  same 
three  Colloquies  which  were  made  in  the 
Contemplation  preceding,  on  the  Two 
Standards. 

Note.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  when  we  feel 
a  tendency  or  repugnance  against  actual  pov- 
erty, when  we  are  not  indifferent  to  poverty 


8o       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

or  riches,  it  is  very  helpful,  in  order  to  crush 
such  disordered  tendency,  to  ask  in  the  Collo- 
quies (although  it  be  against  the  flesh)  that 
the  Lord  should  choose  one  to  actual  poverty, 
and  that  one  wants,  asks  and  begs  it,  if  only 
it  be  the  service  and  praise  of  His  Divine 
Goodness. 

THE  FIFTH  DAY 

Fifth  Day.  Contemplation  on  the  De- 
parture of  Christ  our  Lord  from  Nazareth 
to  the  River  Jordan,  and  how  He  was 
baptized  (p.  140). 

First  Note.  This  Contemplation  will  be 
made  once  at  midnight  and  a  second  time  in 
the  morning,  and  two  repetitions  on  it  at  the 
hour  of  Mass  and  Vespers,  and  the  five  senses 
will  be  applied  on  it  before  supper;  in  each  ol 
these  five  Exercises,  putting  first  the  usual 
Preparatory  Prayer  and  the  three  Preludes, 
as  all  this  was  explained  in  the  Contemplation 
of  the  Incarnation  and  of  the  Nativity;  and 
finishing  with  the  three  Colloquies  of  the  three 
Pairs,  or  according  to  the  note  which  follows 
after  the  Pairs. 

Second  Note.  The  Particular  Examen, 
after  dinner  and  after  supper,  will  be  made  on 
the  faults  and  negligences  about  the  Exercises 


THREE    PAIRS    OF    MEN  8l 

and  Additions  of  this  day;   and  so  in  the  days 
that  follow. 

THE  SIXTH  DAY 

Sixth  Day.  Contemplation  how  Christ 
our  Lord  went  forth  from  the  River  Jordan 
to  the  Desert  inclusive,  taking  the  same 
form  in  everything  as  on  the  fifth. 

THE  SEVENTH  DAY 

Seventh  Day.  How  St.  Andrew  and 
others  followed  Christ  our  Lord  (p.  142). 

THE  EIGHTH   DAY 

Eighth  Day.  On  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount,  which  is  on  the  Eight  Beatitudes 
(p.  144). 

THE  NINTH   DAY 

Ninth  Day.  How  Christ  our  Lord  ap- 
peared to  His  disciples  on  the  waves  of  the 
sea  (p.  145). 

THE  TENTH   DAY 

Tenth  Day.  How  the  Lord  preached  in 
the^  Temple  (p.  151). 

^  In  the  is  in  the  Saint's  hand,  over  a  word  erased. 


82       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 
THE  ELEVENTH   DAY 

Eleventh  Day.  On  the  raising  of  Laz- 
arus (p.  149). 

THE  TWELFTH   DAY 

Twelfth  Day.    On  Palm  Sunday  (p.  151). 

First  Note.  The  first  note  is  that  in  the 
Contemplations  of  this  Second  Week,  accord- 
ing to  the  time  each  one  wants  to  spend,  or 
according  as  he  gets  profit,  he  can  lengthen  or 
shorten:  if  he  lengthens,  taking  the  Mysteries 
of  the  Visitation  of  Our  Lady  to  St.  EHzabeth, 
the  Shepherds,  the  Circumcision  of  the  Child 
Jesus,  and  the  Three  Kings,  and  so  of  others; 
and  if  he  shortens,  he  can  even  omit  some  of 
those  which  are  set  down.  Because  this  is  to 
give  an  introduction  and  way  to  contemplate 
better  and  more  completely  afterwards. 

Second  Note.  The  second:  The  matter  of 
the  Elections  will  be  begun  from  the  Contem- 
plation on  Nazareth  to  the  Jordan,  taken  in- 
clusively, which  is  the  fifth  day,  as  is  explained 
in  the  following. 

Third  Note.  The  third:  Before  entering 
on  the  Elections,  that  a  man  may  get  attach- 
ment to  the  true  doctrine  of  Christ  our  Lord, 
it  is  very  helpful  to  consider  and  mark  the  fol- 
lowing three  Manners  of  Humility,  reflecting 


THREE    PAIRS    OF    MEN  83 

on  them  occasionally  through  all  the  day,  and 
also  making  the  Colloquies,  as  will  be  said 
later. 

First  Humility.  The  first  manner  of 
Humility  is  necessary  for  eternal  salvation; 
namely,  that  I  so  lower  and  so  humble 
myself,  as  much  as  is  possible  to  me, 
that  in  everything  I  obey  the  law  of  God, 
so  that,  even  if  they  made  me  lord  of  all 
the  created  things  in  this  world,  nor  for 
my  own  temporal  life,  I  would  not  be  in 
deliberation  about  breaking  a  Command- 
ment, whether  Divine  or  human,  which 
binds  me  under  mortal  sin. 

Second  Humility.  The  second  is  more 
perfect  Humility  than  the  first;  namely, 
if  I  find  myself  at  such  a  stage  that  I  do 
not  want,  and  feel  no  inclination  to  have, 
riches  rather  than  poverty,  to  want  honor 
rather  than  dishonor,  to  desire  a  long 
rather  than  a  short  life  —  the  service  of 
God  our  Lord  and  the  salvation  of  my  soul 
being  equal;  and  so  not  for  all  creation, 
nor  because  they  would  take  away  my 
life,  would  I  be  in  deliberation  about  com- 
mitting a  venial  sin. 


84       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

Third  Humility.  The  third  is  most 
perfect  Humihty;  namely,  when  —  includ- 
ing the  first  and  second,  and  the  praise 
and  glory  of  the  Divine  Majesty  being 
equal  —  in  order  to  imitate  and  be  more 
actually  Hke  Christ  our  Lord,  I  want  and 
choose  poverty  with  Christ  poor  rather 
than  riches,  opprobrium  with  Christ  re- 
plete with  it  rather  than  honors;  and  to 
desire  to  be  rated  as  worthless  and  a  fool 
for  Christ,  Who  first  was  held  as  such, 
rather  than  wise  or  prudent  in  this  world. 

Note.  So,  it  is  very  helpful  for  whoever 
desires  to  get  this  third  Humility,  to  make 
the  three  already  mentioned  Colloquies  of  Thp 
Pairs,  asking  that  Our  Lord  would  be  pleased 
to  choose  him  to  this  third  greater  and  better 
Humility,  in  order  more  to  imitate  and  serve 
Him,  if  it  be  equal  or  greater  service  and  praise 
to  His  Divine  Majesty. 


PRELUDE  FOR   MAKING   ELECTION 

First  Point.  In  every  good  election, 
as  far  as  depends  on  us,  the  eye  of  our  in- 
tention ought  to  be  simple,  only  looking 
at  what  we  are  created  for,  namely,  the 
praise  of  God  our  Lord  and  the  salvation 
of  our  soul.  And  so  I  ought  to  choose 
whatever  I  do,  that  it  may  help  me  for  the 
end  for  which  I  am  created,  not  ordering 
or  bringing  the  end  to  the  means,  but  the 
means  to  the  end:  as  it  happens  that  many 
choose  first  to  marry  —  which  is  a  means 
—  and  secondarily  to  serve  God  our  Lord 
in  the  married  life  —  which  service  of  God 
is  the  end.  So,  too,  there  are  others  who 
first  want  to  have  benefices,  and  then  to 
serve  God  in  them.  So  that  those  do  not 
go  straight  to  God,  but  want  God  to  come 
straight  to  their  disordered  tendencies, 
and  consequently  they  make  a  means  of  the 
end,  and  an  end  of  the  means.  So  that 
what  they  had  to  take  first,  they  take  last; 
because  first  we  have  to  set  as  our  aim  the 
wanting  to  serve  God,  —  which  is  the  end, 


86       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

' — and  secondarily,  to  take  a  benefice, 
or  to  marry,  if  it  is  more  suitable  to  us, 
—  which  is  the  means  for  the  end.  So, 
nothing  ought  to  move  me  to  take  such 
means  or  to  deprive  myself  of  them,  except 
only  the  service  and  praise  of  God  our 
Lord  and  the  eternal  salvation  of  my 
soul. 

TO  GET  KNOWLEDGE  AS  TO  WHAT  MATTERS 
AN  ELECTION  OUGHT  TO  BE  MADE 
ABOUT,  AND  IT  CONTAINS  FOUR  POINTS 
AND  ONE  NOTE 

First  Point.  The  first  Point:  It  is 
necessary  that  everything  about  which  we 
want  to  make  an  election  should  be  in- 
different, or  good,  in  itself,  and  should  be 
allowed  within  our  Holy  Mother  the  hier- 
archical Church,  and  not  bad  nor  opposed 
to  her. 

Second  Point.  Second:  There  are  some 
things  which  fall  under  unchangeable 
election,  such  as  are  the  priesthood,  mar- 
riage, etc.  There  are  others  which  fall 
under  an  election  that  can  be  changed,  such 
as   are   to  take   benefices  or  leave  them, 


PRELUDE    FOR    MAKING    ELECTION  87 

to  take  temporal  goods  or  rid  oneself  of 
them. 

Third  Point.  Third:  In  the  unchange- 
able Election  which  has  already  been  once 
made  —  such  as  marriage,  the  priesthood, 
etc. —  there  is  nothing  more  to  choose, 
because  one  cannot  release  himself;  only 
it  is  to  be  seen  to  that  if  one  have  not  made 
his  election  duly  and  ordinately  and  with- 
out disordered  tendencies,  repenting  let 
him  see  to  living  a  good  life  in  his  election. 
It  does  not  appear  that  this  election  is  a 
Divine  vocation, ^  as  being  an  election  out 
of  order  and  awry.  Many  err  in  this, 
setting  up  a  perverse  or  bad  election  as  a 
Divine^  vocation;  for  every  Divine  vo- 
cation is  always  pure  and  clear,  without 
mixture  of  flesh,  or  of  any  other  inordinate 
tendency. 

Fourth  Point.  Fourth:  If  some  one 
has  duly  and  ordinately  made  election  of 
things  which  are  under  election  that  can 
be  changed,  and  has  not  yielded  to  flesh 

^  It  does  not  appear  that  this  election  is  a  Divine  voca- 
tion is  in  the  Saint's  hand,  correcting  we  can  not  say  that  this 
election  is  His  vocation. 

"^  Divine  is  added  in  St.  Ignatius'  hand. 


88       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

or  world,  there  is  no  reason  for  his  making 
election  anew,  but  let  him  perfect  himself 
as  much  as  he  can  in  that  already  chosen. 

Note.  It  is  to  be  remarked  that  if  such 
election  that  can  be  changed  was  not  made 
sincerely  and  well  in  order,  then  it  helps  to 
make  the  election  duly,  if  one  has  a  desire  that 
fruits  notable  and  very  pleasing  to  God  our 
Lord  should  come  from  him. 

THREE  TIMES 

FOR  MAKING,  IN  ANY  ONE  OF  THEM,  A  SOUND 

AND  GOOD  ELECTION 

First  Time.  The  first  time  is,  when 
God  our  Lord  so  moves  and  attracts  the 
will,  that  without  doubting,  or  being  able 
to  doubt,  such  devout  soul  follows  what  is 
shown  it,  as  St.  Paul  and  St.  Matthew  did 
in  following  Christ  our  Lord. 

Second  Time.  The  second,  when 
enough  light  and  knowledge  is  received 
by  experience  of  consolations  and  deso- 
lations, and  by  the  experience  of  the  dis- 
cernment of  various  spirits. 

Third  Time.  The  third  time  is  quiet, 
when  one  considers,  first,  for  what  man  is 


PRELUDE    FOR    MAKING    ELECTION  89 

born  —  namely,  to  praise  God  our  Lord 
and  save  his  soul  —  and  desiring  this 
chooses  as  means  a  life  or  state  within  the 
limits  of  the  Church,  in  order  that  he  may 
be  helped  in  the  service  of  his  Lord  and  the 
salvation  of  his  soul. 

I  said  time  of  quiet,  when  the  soul  is 
not  acted  on  by  various  spirits,  and  uses 
its  natural  powers  freely  and  tranquilly. 

If  election  is  not  made  in  the  first  or 
the  second  time,  two  ways  follow  as  to 
this  third  time  for  making  it. 

THE  FIRST  WAY 
TO  MAKE  A  SOUND  AND  GOOD  ELECTION 

It  contains  six  Points. 

First  Point.  The  first  Point  is  to  pur 
before  me  the  thing  on  which  I  want  tc 
make  election,  such  as  an  office  or  benefice,, 
either  to  take  or  leave  it;  or  any  other 
thing  whatever  which  falls  under  an  elec- 
tion that  can  be  changed. 

Second  Point.  Second:  It  is  necessary 
to  keep  as  aim  the  end  for  which  I  am 
created,  which  is  to  praise  God  our  Lord 
and  save  my  soul,  and,  this  supposed,  to 


go       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

find  myself  indifferent,  without  any  in- 
ordinate propensity;  so  that  I  be  not  more 
inclined  or  disposed  to  take  the  thing  pro- 
posed than  to  leave  it,  nor  more  to  leave 
it  than  to  take  it,  but  find  myself  as  in  the 
middle  of  a  balance,  to  follow  what  I  feel 
to  be  more  for  the  glory  and  praise  of  God 
our  Lord  and  the  salvation  of  my  soul. 

Third  Point.  Third :  To  ask  of  God  our 
Lord  to  be  pleased  to  move  my  will  and  put 
in  my  soul  what  I  ought  to  do  regarding 
the  thing  proposed,  so  as  to  promote  more 
His  praise  and  glory;  discussing  well  and 
faithfully  with  my  intellect,  and  choosing 
agreeably  to  His  most  holy  pleasure  and 
will. 

Fourth  Point.  Fourth:  To  consider, 
reckoning  up,  how  many  advantages  and 
utilities  follow  for  me  from  holding  the 
proposed  office  or  benefice  for  only  the 
praise  of  God  our  Lord  and  the  salvation 
of  my  soul,  and,  to  consider  likewise,  on  the 
contrary,  the  disadvantages  and  dangers 
which  there  are  in  having  it.  Doing  the 
same  in  the  second  part,  that  is,  looking 
at  the  advantages  and  utilities  there  are 


PRELUDE    FOR    MAKING    ELECTION  QI 

in  not  having  it,  and  likewise,  on  the  con- 
trary, the  disadvantages  and  dangers  in 
not  having  the  same. 

Fifth  Point.  Fifth:  After  I  have  thus 
discussed  and  reckoned  up  on  all  sides 
about  the  thing  proposed,  to  look  where 
reason  more  inclines:  and  so,  according  to 
the  greater  inclination  of  reason,  and  not 
according  to  any  inclination  of  sense, 
deliberation  should  be  made  on  the  thing 
proposed. 

Sixth  Point.  Sixth,  such  election,  or 
deliberation,  made,  the  person  who  has 
made  it  ought  to  go  with  much  diligence 
to  prayer  before  God  our  Lord  and  offer 
Him  such  election,  that  His  Divine  Majesty 
may  be  pleased  to  receive  and  confirm  it, 
if  it  is  to  His  greater  service  and  praise. 

THE  SECOND  WAY 
TO  MAKE  A  GOOD  AND  SOUND  ELECTION 

It  contains  four  Rules  and  one  Note. 

First  Rule.  The  first  is  that  that  love 
which  moves  me  and  makes  me  choose 
such  thing  should  descend  from  above, 
from   the   love   of  God,    so   that   he   who 


92       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

chooses  feel  first  in  himself  that  that  love, 
more  or  less,  which  he  has  for  the  thing 
which  he  chooses,  is  only  for  his  Creator 
and  Lord. 

Second  Rule.  The  second,  to  set  before 
me  a  man  whom  I  have  never  seen  nor 
known,  and  I^  desiring  all  his  perfection, 
to  consider  what  I  would  tell  him  to  do 
and  elect  for  the  greater  glory  of  God  our 
Lord,  and  the  greater  perfection  of  his 
soul,  and  I,  doing  likewise,  to  keep  the 
rule  which  I  set  for  the  other. 

Third  Rule.  The  third,  to  consider,  as 
if  I  were  at  the  point  of  death,  the  form  and 
measure  which  I  would  then  want  to  have 
kept  in  the  way  of  the  present  election, 
and  regulating  myself  by  that  election, 
let  me  make  my  decision  in  everything. 

Fourth  Rule.  The  fourth,  looking  and 
considering  how  I  shall  find  myself  on  the 
Day  of  Judgment,  to  think  how  I  would 
then  want  to  have-  deliberated  about  the 
present  matter,  and  to  take  now  the  rule 
which   I  would  then  wish  to  have  kept, 

1  I  is  added,  perhaps  in  St.  Ignatius'  hand. 

2  To  have  is  apparently  in  St.  Ignatius'  hand. 


PRELUDE    FOR    MAKING    ELECTION  93 

in  order  that  I   may  then  find  myself  in 
entire  pleasure  and  joy. 

Note.  The  above-mentioned  rules  for  my 
eternal  salvation  and  peace  having  been  taken, 
I  will  make  my  election  and  offering  to  God 
our  Lord,  conformably  to  the  sixth  Point  of 
the  First  Way  of  making  election. 

TO  AMEND  AND  REFORM  ONe's  OWN  LIFE 
AND  STATE 

It  is  to  be  noted  that  as  to  those  who  are 
settled  in  ecclesiastical  office  or  in  matri- 
mony —  whether  they  abound  much  or 
not  in  temporal  goods  —  when  they  have 
no  opportunity  or  have  not  a  very  prompt 
will  to  make  election  about  the  things 
which  fall  under  an  election  that  can  be 
changed,  it  is  very  helpful,  in  place  of 
making  election,  to  give  them  a  form  and 
way  to  amend  and  reform  each  his  own 
Hfe  and  state.  That  is,  putting  his  crea- 
tion, life  and  state  for  the  glory  and  praise 
of  God  our  Lord  and  the  salvation  of  his 
own  soul,  to  come  and  arrive  at  this  end, 
he  ought  to  consider  much  and  ponder 
through  the  Exercises  and  Ways  of  Elec- 


94      SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

tion,  as  has  been  explained,  how  large  a 
house  and  household  he  ought  to  keep, 
how  he  ought  to  rule  and  govern  it,  how  he 
ought  to  teach  and  instruct  it  by  word  and 
by  example;  likewise  of  his  means,  how 
much  he  ought  to  take  for  his  household 
and  house;  and  how  much  to  dispense  to 
the  poor  and  to  other  pious  objects,  not 
wanting  nor  seeking  any  other  thing  except 
in  all  and  through  all  the  greater  praise 
and  glory  of  God  our  Lord. 

For  let  each  one  think  that  he  will  bene- 
fit himself  in  all  spiritual  things  in  pro- 
portion as  he  goes  out  of  his  self-love, 
will  and  interest. 


THIRD  WEEK 


THE  FIRST  CONTEMPLATION 
AT  MIDNIGHT  IS 

HOW  CHRIST  OUR  LORD  WENT 
FIRST         FROM   BETHANY  TO  JERU- 
DAY      SALEM  TO   THE    LAST  SUPPER 
INCLUSIVELY 

(p.  152);  and  it  contains  the  Preparatory 
Prayer,  three  Preludes,  six  Points  and  one 
Colloquy. 

Prayer.     The  usual  Preparatory  Prayer. 

First  Prelude.  The  first  Prelude  is  to 
bring  to  memory  the  narrative;  which 
is  here  how  Christ  our  Lord  sent  two 
Disciples  from  Bethany  to  Jerusalem  to 
prepare  the  Supper,  and  then  He  Him- 
self went  there  with  the  other  Disciples; 
and  how,  after  having  eaten  the  Paschal 
Lamb,  and  having  supped,  He  washed  their 
feet  and  gave  His  most  Holy  Body  and 
Precious  Blood  to  His  Disciples,  and  made 
them  a  discourse,  after  Judas  went  to  sell 
his  Lord. 


qS      spiritual    exercises    of    ST.    IGNATIUS 

Second  Prelude.  The  second,  a  com- 
position, seeing  the  place.  It  will  be  here 
to  consider  the  road  from  Bethany  to 
Jerusalem,  whether  broad,  whether  narrow, 
whether  level,  etc.;  likewise  the  place  of 
the  Supper,  whether  large,  whether  small, 
whether  of  one  kind  or  whether  of  another. 

Third  Prelude.  The  third,  to  ask  for 
what  I  want.  It  will  be  here  grief,  feel- 
ing and  confusion  because  for  my  sins  the 
Lord  is  going  to  the  Passion. 

First  Point.  The  first  Point  is  to  see 
the  persons  of  the  Supper,  and,  reflecting 
on  myself,  to  see  to  drawing  some  profit 
from  them. 

Second  Point.  The  second,  to  hear 
what  they  are  talking  about,  and  likewise 
to  draw  some  profit  from  it. 

Third  Point.  The  third,  to  look  at 
what  they  are  doing,  and  draw  some  profit. 

Fourth  Point.  The  fourth,  to  consider 
that  which  Christ  our  Lord  is  sufl^ering 
in  His  Humanity,^  or  wants  to  suffer,  ac- 
cording to  the  passage  which  is  being  con- 

^  In  His  Humanity  is  in  St.  Ignatius'  hand,  correcting 
the  Humanity  of  before  Christ. 


THE    FIRST    CONTEMPLATION  99 

templated,  and  here  to  commence  with 
much  vehemence  and  to  force  myself  to 
grieve,  be  sad  and  weep,  and  so  to  labor 
through  the  other  points  which  follow. 

Fifth  Point.  The  fifth,  to  consider  how 
the  Divinity  hides  Itself,  that  is,  how  It 
could  destroy  Its  enemies  and  does  not 
do  it,  and  how  It  leaves  the  most  sacred 
Humanity  to  suffer  so  very  cruelly. 

Sixth  Point.  The  sixth,  to  consider  how 
He  suffers  all  this  for  my  sins,  etc.;  and 
what  I  ought  to  do  and  suffer  for  Him. 

Colloquy.  I  will  finish  with  a  Colloquy 
to  Christ  our  Lord,  and,  at  the  end,  with 
an  Our  Father. 

Note.  It  is  to  be  noted,  as  was  explained 
before  and  in  part,  that  in  the  Colloquies  I 
ought  to  discuss  and  ask  according  to  the  sub- 
ject matter,  that  is,  according  as  I  find  myself 
tempted  or  consoled,  and  according  as  I  desire 
to  have  one  virtue  or  another,  as  I  want  to 
dispose  of  myself  in  one  direction  or  another, 
as  I  want  to  grieve  or  rejoice  at  the  thing  which 
I  am  contemplating;  in  fine,  asking  that  which 
I  more  efficaciously  desire  as  to  any  particular 
things.  And  in  this  way  I  can  make  one 
Colloquy  only^  to  Christ  our  Lord,  or,  if  the 


lOO       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

matter  or  devotion  move  me,  three  Colloquies, 
one  to  the  Mother,  another  to  the  Son,  another 
to  the  Father,  in  the  same  form  as  was  said  in 
the  Second  Week,  in  the  meditation  of  the 
Three  Pairs,  with  the  Note  which  follows 
The  Pairs. 


SECOND  contemplation 

IN    THE    MORNING 

IT    WILL    BE 

SECOND    PROM  THE  SUPPER  TO  THE 
°^^  GARDEN  INCLUSIVELY 

Prayer.     The  usual  Preparatory  Prayer. 

First  Prelude.  The  first  Prelude  is 
the  narrative  and  it  will  be  here  how  Christ 
our  Lord  went  down  with  His  eleven  Dis- 
ciples from  Mount  Sion,  where  He  made 
the  Supper,  to  the  Valley  of  Josaphat. 
Leaving  the  eight  in  a  part  of  the  Valley 
and  the  other  three  in  a  part  of  the  Garden, 
and  putting  Himself  in  prayer.  He  sweats 
sweat  as  drops  of  blood, ^  and  after  He 
prayed    three    times    to    the    Father   and 

^  As  drops  of  blood  is  in  St.  Ignatius'  hand,  replacing 
like  a  bloody  sweat. 


THE    SECOND    CONTEMPLATION  lOI 

wakened  His  three  Disciples,  and  after  the 
enemies  at  His  voice  fell  down,  Judas 
giving  Him  the  kiss  of  peace,  and  St.  Peter 
cutting  off  the  ear  of  Malchus,  and  Christ 
putting  it  in  its  place;  being  taken  as  a 
malefactor,  they  lead  Him  down  the  valley, 
and  then  up  the  side,  to  the  house  of 
Annas. 

Second  Prelude.  The  second  is  to  see 
the  place.  It  will  be  here  to  consider 
the  road  from  Mount  Sion  to  the  Valley 
of  Josaphat,  and  likewise  the  Garden, 
whether  wide,  whether  large,  whether  of 
one  kind,  whether  of  another. 

Third  Prelude.  The  third  is  to  ask 
for  what  I  want.  It  belongs  to  the  Pas- 
sion to  ask  for  grief  with  Christ  in  grief, 
anguish  with  Christ  in  anguish,  tears  and 
interior  pain  at  such  great  pain  which 
Christ  suffered  for  me. 

First  Note.  In  this  second  Contemplation, 
after  the  Preparatory  Prayer  is  made,  with  the 
three  Preludes  already  mentioned,  the  same 
form  of  proceeding  will  be  kept  through  the 
Points  and  Colloquy  as  was  kept  in  the  first 
Contemplation,  on  the  Supper. 


I02       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

And  at  the  hour  of  Mass  and  Vespers  two 
repetitions  will  be  made  on  the  first  and.secund 
Contemplation,  and  then,  before  supper,  the 
senses  will  be  applied  on  the  two  above-said 
Contemplations,  always  prefixing  the  Prepara- 
tory Prayer  and  the  three  Preludes,  according 
to  the  subject  matter,  in  the  same  form  as  was 
said  and  explained  in  the  Second  Week. 

Second  Note.  According  as  age,  disposi- 
tion and  physical  condition  help  the  person  who 
is  exercising  himself,  he  will  make  each  day  the 
five  Exercises  or  fewer. 

Third  Note.  In  this  Third  Week  the  second 
and  sixth  Additions  will  in  part  be  changed. 

The  second  will  be,  immediately  on  awaking, 
to  set  before  me  where  I  am  going  and  to  what, 
and  summing  up  a  little  the  contemplation 
which  I  want  to  make,  according  as  the  Mystery 
shall  be,  to  force  myself,  while  I  am  getting  up 
and  dressing,  to  be  sad  and  grieve  over  such 
great  grief  and  such  great  suffering  of  Christ 
our  Lord. 

The  sixth  will  be  changed,  so  as  not  to  try 
to  bring  joyful  thoughts,  although  good  and 
holy,  as,  for  instance,  are  those  on  the  Resur- 
rection and  on  heavenly  glory,  but  rather  to 
draw  myself  to  grief  and  to  pain  and  anguish, 
bringing  to  mind  frequently  the  labors,  fatigues 
and  pains  of  Christ  our  Lord,  which  He  suffered 


THE    SECOND    CONTEMPLATION  I03 

from  the  moment  when  He  was  born  up  to  the 
Mystery  of  the  Passion  in  which  I  find  myself 
at  present. 

Fourth  Note.  The  Particular  Examen  on 
the  Exercises  and  present  Additions,  will  be 
made  as  it  was  made  in  the  past  Week. 

Second  Day.  The  second  day  at  mid- 
night, the  Contemplation  will  be  from  the 
Garden  to  the  house  of  Annas  inclusive 
(p.  154),  and  in  the  morning  from  the  house 
of  Annas  to  the  house  of  Caiphas  inclusive 
(p.  155),  and  then  the  two  repetitions  and 
the  application  of  the  senses,  as  has  been 
already  said. 

Third  Day.  The  third  day,  at  midnight, 
from  the  house  of  Caiphas  to  Pilate,  in- 
clusive (p.  155);  and  in  the  morning,  from 
Pilate  to  Herod  inclusive  (p.  156);  and  then 
the  repetitions  and  senses,  in  the  same  form 
as  has  been  already  said. 

Fourth  Day.  The  fourth  day,  at  mid- 
night, from  Herod  to  Pilate  (p.  157),  doing 
and  contemplating  up  to  half  through  the 
Mysteries  of  the  same  house  of  Pilate,  and 
then,  in  the  Exercise  of  the  morning,  the 
other   Mysteries   which    remained    of   the 


I04       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

same  house;   and  the  repetitions  and  the 
senses,  as  has  been  said. 

Fifth  Day.  The  fifth  day,  at  midnight, 
from  the  house  of  Pilate  up  to  the  Crucifix- 
ion (p.  1 58),  and  in  the  morning  from  His  be- 
ing raised  on  the  Cross  until  He  expired  (p. 
1 58),  then  the  two  repetitions,  and  the  senses. 

Sixth  Day.  The  sixth  day,  at  midnight, 
from  the  Descent  from  the  Cross  to  the 
Tomb,  exclusive  (p.  159)  and  in  the  morn- 
ing from  the  Tomb,  inclusive,  to  the  house 
where  Our  Lady  was,  after  her  Son  was 
buried. 

Seventh  Day.  The  seventh  day,  a 
Contemplation  on  the  whole  Passion  to- 
gether, in  the  Exercise  of  midnight  and  of 
the  morning,  and  in  place  of  the  two  repe- 
titions and  of  the  senses  one  will  consider 
all  that  day,  as  frequently  as  he  can,  how 
the  most  holy  Body  of  Christ  our  Lord 
remained  separated  and  apart  from  the 
Soul:  and  where  and  how  It  remained 
buried.  Likewise,  one  will  consider  the 
loneliness  of  Our  Lady,  whose  grief  and 
fatigue  were  so  great:  then,  on  the  other 
side,  the  loneliness  of  the  Disciples. 


THE    SECOND    CONTEMPLATION  105 


Note.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  whoever  wants 
to  dwell  more  on  the  Passion,  has  to  take  in 
each  Contemplation  fewer  Mysteries;  that  is 
to  say,  in  the  first  Contemplation,  the  Supper 
only;  in  the  second,  the  Washing  of  the  Feet; 
in  the  third,  the  giving  of  the  Blessed  Sacrament 
to  them;  in  the  fourth,  the  discourse  which 
Christ  made  to  them;  and  so  through  the  other 
Contemplations  and  Mysteries. 

Likewise,  after  having  finished  the  Passion, 
let  him  take  for  an  entire  day  the  half  of  the 
whole  Passion,  and  the  second  day  the  other 
half,  and  the  third  day  the  whole  Passion. 

On  the  contrary,  whoever  would  want  to 
shorten  more  in  the  Passion,  let  him  take  at 
midnight  the  Supper,  in  the  morning  the 
Garden,  at  the  hour  of  Mass  the  house  of 
Annas,  at  the  hour  of  Vespers  the  house  of 
Caiphas,  in  place  of  the  hour  before  supper 
the  house  of  Pilate;  so  that,  not  making  repe- 
titions, nor  the  Application  of  the  Senses,  he 
make  each  day  five  distinct  Exercises,  and  in 
each  Exercise  take  a  distinct  Mystery  of  Christ 
our  Lord.  And  after  thus  finishing  the  whole 
Passion,  he  can,  another  day,  do  all  the  Passion 
together  in  one  Exercise,  or  in  different  ones, 
as  it  will  seem  to  him  that  he  will  be  better 
able  to  help  himself. 


RULES 
TO  PUT  ONESELF  IN  ORDER  FOR  THE  FUTURE 

AS  TO  EATING 

First  Rule.  The  first  rule  is  that  it  is  well 
to  abstain  less  from  bread,  because  it  is  not  a 
food  as  to  which  the  appetite  is  used  to  act  so 
inordinately,  or  to  which  temptation  urges  as 
In  the  case  of  the  other  foods. 

Second  Rule.  The  second:  Abstinence 
appears  more  convenient  as  to  drinking,  than 
is  to  eating  bread.  So,  one  ought  to  look 
much  what  is  helpful  to  him,  in  order  to  admit 
it,  and  what  does  him  harm,  in  order  to  dis- 
card it. 

Third  Rule.  The  third:'  As  to  foods,  one 
ought  to  have  the  greatest  and  most  entire 
abstinence,  because  as  the  appetite  is  more 
ready  to  act  inordinately,  so  temptation  is 
more  ready  in  making  trial,  on  this  headc 
And  so  abstinence  in  foods,  to  avoid  disorder, 
can  be  kept  in  two  ways,  one  by  accustoming 
oneself  to  eat  coarse  foods;  the  other,  if  one 
takes  delicate  foods,  by  taking  them  in  small 
quantity. 


Io8      SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

Fourth  Rule.  The  fourth:  Guarding 
against  falling  into  sickness,  the  more  a  man 
leaves  off  from  what  is  suitable,  the  more 
quickly  he  will  reach  the  mean  which  he  ought 
to  keep  in  his  eating  and  drinking;  for  two  rea- 
sons: the  first,  because  by  so  helping  and  dis- 
posing himself,  he  will  many  times  experience 
more  the  interior  knowledge,  consolations  and 
Divine  inspirations  to  show  him  the  mean  which 
is  proper  for  him;  the  second,  because  if  the 
person  sees  himself  in  such  abstinence  not  with 
so  great  corporal  strength  or  disposition  for 
the  Spiritual  Exercises,  he  will  easily  come 
to  judge  what  is  more  suitable  to  his  bodily 
support. 

Fifth  Rule.  The  fifth:  While  the  person  is 
eating,  let  him  consider  as  if  he  saw  Christ 
our  Lord  eating  with  His  Apostles,  and  how  He 
drinks  and  how  He  looks  and  how  He  speaks; 
and  let  him  see  to  imitating  Him.  So  that 
the  principal  part  of  the  intellect  shall  occupy 
itself  in  the  consideration  of  Christ  our  Lord, 
and  the  lesser  part  in  the  support  of  the  body; 
because  in  this  way  he  will  get  greater  system 
and  order  as  to  how  he  ought  to  behave  and 
manage  himself. 

Sixth  Rule.  The  sixth:  Another  time,  while 
he  is  eating,  he  can  take  another  consideration, 
either  on  the  life  of  Saints,  or  on  some  pious 


' 


AS    TO    EATING  IO9 


Contemplation,  or  on  some  spiritual  affair 
which  he  has  to  do,  because,  being  intent  on 
such  thing,  he  will  take  less  delight  and  feel- 
ing in  the  corporal  food. 

Seventh  Rule.  The  seventh:  Above  all, 
let  him  guard  against  all  his  soul  being  intent 
on  what  he  is  eating,  and  in  eating  let  him  not 
go  hurriedly,  through  appetite,  but  be  master 
of  himself,  as  well  in  the  manner  of  eating  as  in 
the  quantity  which  he  eats. 

Eighth  Rule.  The  eighth:  To  avoid  dis- 
order. It  is  very  helpful,  after  dinner  or  after 
supper,  or  at  another  hour  when  one  feels  no 
appetite  for  eating,  to  decide  with  oneself 
for  the  coming  dinner  or  supper,  and  so  on, 
each  day,  the  quantity  which  it  is  suitable  that 
he  should  eat.  Beyond  this  let  him  not  go 
because  of  any  appetite  or  temptation,  but 
rather,  in  order  to  conquer  more  all  inordinate 
appetite  and  temptation  of  the  enemy,  if  he 
is  tempted  to  eat  more,  let  him  eat  less. 


FOURTH  WEEK 


THE  FIRST  CONTEMPLATION 

HOW  CHRIST  OUR  LORD   APPEARED 
TO  OUR  LADY 

(p.  1 60);  Prayer.     The  usual  Preparatory 
Prayer. 

First  Prelude.  The  first  Prelude  is  the 
narrative,  which  is  here  how,  after  Christ 
expired  on  the  Cross,  and  the  Body,  always 
united  with  the  Divinity,  remained  sepa- 
rated from  the  Soul,  the  blessed  Soul, 
likewise  united  with  the  Divinity,  went 
down  to  Hell,  and  taking  from  there  the 
just  souls,  and  coming  to  the  Sepulchre  and 
being  risen.  He  appeared  to  His  Blessed 
Mother  in  Body  and  in  Soul. 

Second  Prelude.  The  second,  a  com- 
position, seeing  the  place;  which  will  be 
here  to  see  the  arrangement  of  the  Holy 
Sepulchre  and  the  place  or  house  of  Our 
Lady,  looking  at  its  parts  in  particular; 
likewise  the  room,  the  oratory,  etc. 

Third  Prelude.  The  third,  to  ask  for 
what  I  want,  and  it  will  be  here  to  ask 


114      SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

for  grace  to  rejoice  and  be  glad  intensely 
at  so  great  glory  and  joy  of  Christ  our 
Lord. 

First  Point,  Second  Point,  and  Third 
Point.  Let  the  first,  second  and  third 
Points  be  the  same  usual  ones  which  we 
took  in  the  Supper  of  Christ  our  Lord. 

Fourth  Point.  The  fourth,  to  consider 
how  the  Divinity,  which  seemed  to  hide 
Itself  in  the  Passion,  now  appears  and 
shows  Itself  so  marvellously  in  the  most 
holy  Resurrection  by  Its  true  and  most 
holy  effects. 

Fifth  Point.  The  fifth  is  to  consider  the 
office  of  consoling  which  Christ  our  Lord 
bears,  and  to  compare  how  friends  are 
accustomed  to  console  friends. 

Colloquy.  I  will  finish  with  a  Colloquy, 
or  Colloquies,  according  to  the  subject 
matter,  and  an  Our  Father. 

First  Note.  In  the  following  Contempla- 
tions let  one  go  on  through  all  the  Mysteries 
of  the  Resurrection,  in  the  manner  which  fol- 
lows below,  up  to  the  Ascension  inclusive, 
taking  and  keeping  in  the  rest  the  same  form 
and  manner  in  all  the  Week  of  the  Resurrec- 


THE    FIRST    CONTEMPLATION  II5 

tion  which  was  taken  in  all  the  Week  of  the 
Passion.  So  that,  for  this  first  Contemplation, 
on  the  Resurrection,  let  one  guide  himself 
as  to  the  Preludes  according  to  the  subject 
matter;  and  as  to  the  five  Points,  let  them  be 
the  same;  and  let  the  Additions  which  are 
below  be  the  same;  and  so  in  all  which  remains, 
he  can  guide  himself  by  the  method  of  the  Week 
of  the  Passion,  as  in  repetitions,  the  five  Senses, 
in  shortening  or  lengthening  the  Mysteries. 

Second  Note.  The  second  note:  Commonly 
in  this  Fourth  Week,  it  is  more  suitable  than 
in  the  other  three  past  to  make  four  Exercises, 
and  not  five:  the  first,  immediately  on  rising 
in  the  morning;  the  second,  at  the  hour  of 
Mass,  or  before  dinner,  in  place  of  the  first 
repetition;  the  third,  at  the  hour  of  Vespers, 
in  place  of  the  second  repetition;  the  fourth, 
before  supper,  bringing  the  five  Senses  on  the 
three  Exercises  of  the  same  day,  noting  and 
lingering  on  the  more  principal  parts,  and 
where  one  has  felt  greater  spiritual  movements 
and  relish. 

Third  Note.  The  third:  Though  in  all  the 
Contemplations  so  many  Points  were  given  in 
certain  number  —  as  three,  or  five,  etc.,  — 
the  person  who  is  contemplating  can  set  more 
or  fewer  Points,  according  as  he  finds  it  better 
for  him.     For  which  it  is  very  helpful,  before 


Il6       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

entering  on  the  Contemplation,  to  conjecture 
and  mark  in  certain  number  the  Points  which 
he  is  to  take. 

Fourth  Note.  In  this  fourth  week,  in  all 
the  ten  Additions  the  second,  the  sixth,  the 
seventh  and  the  tenth  are  to  be  changed. 

The  second  will  be,  immediately  on  awaking, 
to  put  before  me  the  Contemplation  which  I 
have  to  make,  wanting  to  arouse  feeling  and 
be  glad  at  the  great  joy  and  gladness  of  Christ 
our  Lord. 

The  sixth,  to  bring  to  memory  and  think 
of  things  that  move  to  spiritual  pleasure, 
gladness  and  joy,  as  of  heavenly  glory. 

The  seventh,  to  use  light  or  temporal  com- 
forts —  as,  in  summer,  the  coolness;  and  in 
winter,  the  sun  or  heat  —  as  far  as  the  soul 
thinks  or  conjectures  that  it  can  help  it  to  be 
joyful  in  its  Creator  and  Redeemer. 

The  tenth:  in  place  of  penance,  let  one  re- 
gard temperance  and  all  moderation;  except 
it  is  question  of  precepts  of  fasting  or  of  ab- 
stinence which  the  Church  commands;  because 
those  are  always  to  be  fulfilled,  if  there  is  no 
just  impediment. 


CONTEMPLATION  TO  GAIN  LOVE 


Note.  First,  it  is  well  to  remark  two  things: 
the  first  is  that  love  ought  to  be  put  more  in 
deeds  than  in  words. 

The  second,  love  consists  in  interchange 
between  the  two  parties;  that  is  to  say  in  the 
lover's  giving  and  communicating  to  the  be- 
loved what  he  has  or  out  of  what  he  has  or 
can;  and  so,  on  the  contrary,  the  beloved  to 
the  lover.  So  that  if  the  one  has  knowledge, 
he  give  to  the  one  who  has  it  not.  The  same 
of  honors,  of  riches;  and  so  the  one  to  the 
other. 


CONTEMPLATION   TO  GAIN  LOVE 

Prayer.     The  usual  Prayer. 

First  Prelude.  The  first  Prelude  is  a 
composition,  which  is  here  to  see  how  I 
am  standing  before  God  our  Lord,  and  of 
the  Angels  and  of  the  Saints  interceding 
for  me. 

Second  Prelude.  The  second,  to  ask 
for  what  I  want.  It  will  be  here  to  ask 
for  interior  knowledge  of  so  great  good 
received,  in  order  that  being  entirely 
grateful,  I  may  be  able  in  all  to  love  and 
serve  His  Divine  Majesty. 

First  Point.  The  First  Point  is,  to  bring 
to  memory  the  benefits  received,  of  Crea- 
tion, Redemption  and  particular  gifts, 
pondering  with  much  feeling  how  much 
God  our  Lord  has  done  for  me,  and  how 
much  He  has  given  me  of  what  He  has, 
and  then  the  same  Lord  desires  to  give 
me  Himself  as  much  as  He  can,  according 
to  His  Divine  ordination. 


I20       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

And  with  this  to  reflect  on  myself,  con- 
sidering with  much  reason  and  justice, 
what  I  ought  on  my  side  to  ofi^er  and  give 
to  His  Divine  Majesty,  that  is  to  say, 
everything  that  is  mine,  and  myself  with 
it,  as  one  who  makes  an  oflPering  with  much 
feeling: 

Take,  Lord,  and  receive  all  my  liberty, 
my  memory,  my  intellect,  and  all  my 
will  —  all  that  I  have  and  possess.  Thou 
gavest  it  to  me:  to  Thee,  Lord,  I  return  it! 
All  is  Thine,  dispose  of  it  according  to  all 
Thy  will.  Give  me  Thy  love  and  grace, 
for  this  is  enough  for  me. 

Second  Point.  The  second,  to  look 
how  God  dwells  in  creatures,  in  the  ele- 
ments, giving  them  being,  in  the  plants 
vegetating,  in  the  animals  feeling  in  them, 
in  men  giving  them  to  understand:  ^  and 
so  in  me,  giving  me  being,  animating  me, 
giving  me  sensation  and  making  me  to 
understand;  -    likewise  making  a  temple  of 

^  Giving  them  to  understand  is  an  addition,  very  prob^ 
ably  in  Si.  Ignatius'  hatid. 

2  Making  me  to  understand;  likewise  is  in  the  Saint's 
handwriting,  correcting  a  word  erased,  probably  understand' 
ing. 


CONTEMPLATION    TO    GAIN    LOVE  121 


me,  being  created  to  the  likeness  and 
image  of  His  Divine  Majesty;  reflecting 
as  much  on  myself  in  the  way  v^hich  is 
said  in  the  first  Point,  or  in  another  w^hich 
I  feel  to  be  better.  In  the  same  manner 
will  be  done  on  each  Point    which  follows. 

Third  Point.  The  third,  to  consider 
how  God  works  and  labors  for  me  in  all 
things  created  on  the  face  of  the  earth  — 
that  is,  behaves  like  one  who  labors  —  as 
in  the  heavens,  elements,  plants,  fruits, 
cattle,  etc.,  giving  them  being,  preserving 
them,  giving  them  vegetation  and  sensa- 
tion, etc. 

Then  to  reflect  on  myself. 

Fourth  Point.  The  fourth,  to  look  how 
all  the  good  things  and  gifts  descend 
from  above,  as  my  poor  power  from  the 
supreme  and  infinite  power  from  above; 
and  so  justice,  goodness,  pity,  mercy,  etc.; 
as  from  the  sun  descend  the  rays,  from  the 
fountain  the  waters,  etc. 

Then  to  finish  reflecting  on  myself,  as 
has  been  said. 

I  will  end  with  a  Colloquy  and  an  Our 
Father. 


THREE  METHODS  OF   PRAYER 

AND  FIRST  ON    THE   COMMANDMENTS 
FIRST  METHOD 

The  first  Method  of  Prayer  is  on  the 
Ten  Commandments,  and  on  the  Seven 
Deadly  Sins,  on  the  Three  Powers  of  the 
Soul  and  on  the  Five  Bodily  Senses.  This 
method  of  prayer  is  meant  more  to  give 
form,  method  and  exercises,  how  the  soul 
may  prepare  itself  and  benefit  in  them, 
and  that  the  prayer  may  be  acceptable, 
rather  than  to  give  any  form  or  way  of 
praying. 

/.     The  Ten  Commandments 

First  let  the  equivalent  of  the  second 
Addition  of  the  Second  Week  be  made; 
that  is,  before  entering  on  the  prayer, 
let  the  spirit  rest  a  little,  the  person  being 
seated  or  walking  about,  as  may  seem  best 
to  him,  considering  where  he  is  going  and 
to  what.  And  this  same  addition  will  be 
made  at  the  beginning  of  all  Methods  of 
Prayer. 


124       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

Prayer.  A  Preparatory  Prayer,  as,  for 
example,  to  ask  grace  of  God  our  Lord 
that  I  may  be  able  to  know  in  what  I  have 
failed  as  to  the  Ten  Commandments;  and 
likewise  to  beg  grace  and  help  to  amend  in 
future,  asking  for  perfect  understanding 
of  them,  to  keep  them  better  and  for  the 
greater  glory  and  praise  of  His  Divine 
Majesty. 

For  the  first  Method  of  Prayer,  it  is 
well  to  consider  and  think  on  the  First 
Commandment,  how  I  have  kept  it  and 
in  what  I  have  failed,  keeping  to  the  rule 
of  spending  the  space  of  time  one  says 
the  Our  Father  and  the  Hail  Mary  three 
times;  and  if  in  this  time  I  find  faults 
of  mine,  to  ask  pardon  and  forgiveness  for 
them,  and  say  an  Our  Father.  Let  this 
same  method  be  followed  on  each  one  of 
the  Ten  Commandments. 

First  Note.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  when  one 
comes  to  think  on  a  Commandment  on  which  he 
finds  he  has  no  habit  of  sinning,  it  is  not  neces- 
sary for  him  to  delay  so  much  time,  but  ac- 
cording as  one  finds  in  himself  that  he  stumbles 
more  or  less  on  that  Commandment  so  he  ought 
to  keep  himself  more  or  less  on  the  consider^ 


THREE    METHODS    OF    PRAYER  1 25 

ation  and  examination  of  it.     And  the  same  is 
to  be  observed  on  the  Deadly  Sins. 

Second  Note.  After  having  finished  the 
discussion  already  mentioned  on  all  the  Com- 
mandments, accusing  myself  on  them  and 
asking  grace  and  help  to  amend  hereafter,  I 
qm  to  finish  with  a  Colloquy  to  God  our  Lord, 
according  to  the  subject  matter. 

//.    On  Deadly  Sins 

About  the  Seven  Deadly  Sins,  after  the 
Addition,  let  the  Preparatory  Prayer  be 
made  in  the  way  already  mentioned,  only 
with  the  difference  that  the  matter  here  is 
of  sins  that  have  to  be  avoided,  and  before 
of  Commandments  that  have  to  be  kept: 
and  likewise  let  the  order  and  rule  already 
mentioned  be  kept,  and  the  Colloquy. 

In  order  to  know  better  the  faults  com- 
mitted in  the  Deadly  Sins,  let  their  con- 
traries be  looked  at:  and  so,  to  avoid 
them  better,  let  the  person  purpose  and 
with  holy  exercises  see  to  acquiring  and 
keeping  the  seven  virtues  contrary  to  them. 

///.    On  the  Powers  of  the  Soul 

Way.  On  the  three  powers  of  the  soul 
let  the  same  order  and  rule  be  kept  as  on 


126       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

the  Commandments,  making  its  Addition, 
Preparatory  Prayer  and  Colloquy. 

IV.    On  the  Bodily  Senses 

Way.  About  the  five  bodily  senses 
the  same  order  always  will  be  kept,  but 
changing  their  matter. 

Note.  Whoever  wants  to  imitate  Christ 
our  Lord  in  the  use  of  his  senses,  let  him  in 
the  Preparatory  Prayer  recommend  himself 
to  His  Divine  Majesty,  and  after  considering 
on  each  sense,  say  a  Hail  Mary  or  an  Our 
Father. 

And  whoever  wants  to  imitate  Our  Lady 
in  the  use  of  the  senses,  let  him  in  the  Prepara- 
tory Prayer  recommend  himself  to  her,  that  she 
may  get  him  grace  from  Her  Son  and  Lord 
for  it;  and  after  considering  on  each  sense, 
say  a  Hail  Mary. 

SECOND  METHOD  OF  PRAYER 

It  is  by  contemplating  the  meaning  of    i 
each  word  of  the  Prayer. 

Addition.     The    same    Addition    which 
was  in  the  First  Method  of  Prayer  will  be   i 
in  this  second. 


THREE    METHODS    OF    PRAYER  127 

Prayer.  The  Preparatory  Prayer  will 
be  made  according  to  the  person  to  whom 
the  prayer  is  addressed. 

Second  Method  of  Prayer.  The  Second 
Method  of  Prayer  is  that  the  person, 
kneeUng  or  seated,  according  to  the  greater 
disposition  in  which  he  finds  himself  and 
as  more  devotion  accompanies  him,  keep- 
ing the  eyes  closed  or  fixed  on  one  place, 
without  going  wandering  with  them,  says 
Father,  and  is  on  the  consideration  of 
this  word  as  long  as  he  finds  meanings, 
comparisons,  relish  and  consolation  in 
considerations  pertaining  to  such  word. 
And  let  him  do  in  the  same  way  on  each 
word  of  the  Our  Father,  or  of  any  other 
prayer  which  he  wants  to  say  in  this  way. 

First  Rule.  The  first  Rule  is  that  he  will 
be  an  hour  on  the  whole  Our  Father  in  the 
manner  already  mentioned.  Which  finished, 
he  will  say  a  Hail  Mary,  Creed,  Soul  of 
Christ,  and  Hail,  Holy  Queen,  vocally  or 
mentally,  according  to  the  usual  way. 

Second  Rule.  The  Second  Rule  is  that, 
should  the  person  who  is  contemplating  the 
Our  Father  find  in  one  word,  or  in  two,  matter 


128       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

SO  good  to  think  over,  and  relish  and  consola- 
tion, let  him  not  care  to  pass  on,  although  the 
hour  ends  on  what  he  finds.  The  hour  finished, 
he  will  say  the  rest  of  the  Our  Father  in  the 
usual  way. 

Third  Rule.  The  third  is  that  if  on  one  word 
or  two  of  the  Our  Father  one  has  lingered 
for  a  whole  hour,  when  he  will  want  to  come 
back  another  day  to  the  prayer,  let  him  say 
the  above-mentioned  word,  or  the  two,  as  he 
is  accustomed;  and  on  the  word  which  imme- 
diately follows  let  him  commence  to  contem- 
plate, according  as  was  said  in  the  second 
Rule. 

First  Note.  It  is  to  be  noted  that,  the  Our 
Father  finished,  in  one  or  in  many  days,  the  i 
same  has  to  be  done  with  the  Hail  Mary  and 
then  with  the  other  prayers,  so  that  for  some 
time  one  is  always  exercising  himself  in  one  of 
them. 

Second  Note.  The  second  note  is  that,  the 
prayer  finished,  turning,  in  few  words,  to  the 
person  to  whom  he  has  prayed,  let  him  ask  for 
the  virtues  or  graces  of  which  he  feels  he  has 
most  need. 


THREE    METHODS    OF    PRAYER  I2g 

THIRD  METHOD  OF  PRAYER 

It  will  be  by  rhythm. 

Addition.  The  Addition  will  be  the 
same  as  in  the  First  and  Second  Methods 
of  Prayer. 

Prayer.  The  Preparatory  Prayer  will 
be  as  in  the  Second  Method  of  Prayer. 

Third  Method  of  Prayer.  The  Third 
Method  of  Prayer  is  that  with  each  breath 
in  or  out,  one  has  to  pray  mentally,  saying 
one  word  of  the  Our  Father,  or  of  another, 
prayer  which  is  being  recited:  so  that 
only  one  word  be  said  between  one  breath 
and  another,  and  while  the  time  from  one 
breath  to  another  lasts,  let  attention  be 
given  chiefly  to  the  meaning  of  such  word, 
or  to  the  person  to  whom  he  recites  it, 
or  to  his  own  baseness,  or  to  the  difi^erence 
from  such  great  height  to  his  own  so  great 
lowness.  And  in  the  same  form  and  rule 
he  will  proceed  on  the  other  words  of  the 
Our  Father;  and  the  other  prayers,  that 
is  to  say,  the  Hail  Mary,  the  Soul  of 
Christ,  the  Creed,  and  the  Hail,  HolV 
Queen,  he  will  make  as  he  is  accustomed. 


^ 


I30       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

First  Rule.  The  First  Rule  is,  on  the  other 
day,  or  at  another  hour,  that  he  wants  to  pray, 
let  him  say  the  Hail  Mary  in  rhythm,  and  the 
other  prayers  as  he  is  accustomed;  and  so  on, 
going  through  the  others. 

Second  Rule.  The  second  is  that  whoever 
wants  to  dwell  more  on  the  prayer  by  rhythm, 
can  say  all  the  above-mentioned  prayers  or 
part  of  them,  keeping  the  same  order  of  the 
breath  by  rhythm,  as  has  been  explained. 


THE  MYSTERIES  OF  THE  LIFE  OF 
CHRIST  OUR  LORD 


Note.  It  is  to  be  noted  in  all  the  following 
Mysteries,  that  all  the  words  which  are  inclosed 
in  parentheses  ^  are  from  the  Gospel  itself  and 
not  those  which  are  outside. 

And  in  each  Mystery,  for  the  most  part, 
three  Points  will  be  found  to  meditate  and  con- 
template on  with  greater  ease. 


*  For  the  parentheses  of  the  Mss.  quotation  marks  have 
been  substituted. 


OF  THE  ANNUNCIATION  OF  OUR 
LADY 

St.  Luke  writes  in  the  first  Chapter 
[26-39]. 

First  Point.  The  first  Point  is  that  the 
Angel  St.  Gabriel,  saluting  Our  Lady, 
announced  to  her  the  Conception  of  Christ 
our  Lord.  "  The  Angel  entering  where 
Mary  was,  saluted  her  saying:  'Hail 
full  of  grace.  Thou  shalt  conceive  in 
thy  womb  and  shalt  bring  forth  a  son.'  " 

Second  Point.  The  second,  the  Angel 
confirms  what  he  said  to  Our  Lady,  telling 
of  the  conception  of  St.  John  Baptist, 
saying  to  her:  '''And  behold  thy  cousin 
Elizabeth  hath  conceived  a  son  in  her 
old  age. 


>  >> 


Third  Point.  The  third.  Our  Lady 
answered  the  Angel:  "  '  Behold  the  hand- 
maid of  the  Lord:  be  it  done  to  me  accord- 
ing to  thy  word!' " 


134       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

OF   THE    VISITATION    OF    OUR  LADY    TO 
ELIZABETH 

St.   Luke  speaks  in   the    first   Chapter 

[39-57]- 

First  Point.  First:  As  Our  Lady  vis- 
ited Elizabeth,  St.  John  Baptist,  being 
in  his  mother's  womb,  felt  the  visitation 
which  Our  Lady  made.  "  And  when  Ehz- 
abeth  heard  the  salutation  of  Our  Lady, 
the  infant  leaped  in  her  womb.  And 
Elizabeth,  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  cried 
out  with  a  loud  voice,  and  said:  'Blessed 
be  thou  among  women  and  blessed  be  the 
fruit  of  thy  womb !'  " 

Second  Point.  Second:  Our  Lady 
sings  the  canticle,  saying:  "  *  My  soul 
doth  magnify  the  Lord!'" 

Third  Point.  Third:  "Mary  abode  with 
Elizabeth  about  three  months:  and  then 
she  returned  to  her  house." 

OF  THE  BIRTH  OF  CHRIST  OUR  LORD 

St.  Luke  speaks  in  the  second  Chapter 
[1-15]. 


OF    THE    SHEPHERDS  135 


First  Point.  First:  Our  Lady  and  her 
husband  Joseph  go  from  Nazareth  to  Beth- 
lehem. "Joseph  went  up  from  Gahlee 
to  Bethlehem,  to  acknowledge  subjection 
to  Caesar,  with  Mary  his  spouse  and  wife, 
already  with  child." 

Second  Point.  Second:  "She  brought 
forth  her  first-born  Son  and  wrapped  Him 
up  with  swaddling  clothes  and  laid  Him  in 
the  manger." 

Third  Point.  Third:  "There  came  a 
multitude  of  the  heavenly  army,  which 
said:  '  Glory  be  to  God  in  the  heavens. '  " 

OF  THE  SHEPHERDS 

St.  Luke  writes  in  the  second  Chapter 
[8-21]. 

First  Point.  First:  The  birth  of  Christ 
our  Lord  is  manifested  to  the  Shepherds 
by  the  Angel.  "  '  I  manifest  to  you  great 
joy,  for  this  day  is  born  the  Saviour  of 
the  world.  '  " 

Second  Point.  Second:  The  Shepherds 
go  to  Bethlehem.  "  They  came  with 
haste  and  they  found  Mary  and  Joseph, 
and  the  infant  put  in  the  manger." 


136       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

Third  Point.  Third:  "  The  Shepherds  re- 
turned glorifying  and  praising  the   Lord." 

OF  THE  CIRCUMCISION 

St.  Luke  writes  in  the  second  Chapter 
[21]. 

First  Point.  First:  They  circumcised 
the  Child  Jesus. 

Second  Point.  Second :  "  His  Name  was 
called  Jesus,  which  was  called  by  the 
Angel,  before  He  was  conceived  in  the 
womb." 

Third  Point.  Third:  They  gave  back 
the  Child  to  His  Mother,  who  had  com- 
passion for  the  Blood  which  came  from  her 
Son. 

OF  THE  THREE  MAGI  KINGS 

St.  Matthew  writes  in  the  second  Chap- 
ter [1-13]. 

First  Point.  First:  The  three  Magi 
Kings,  guiding  themselves  by  the  star, 
came  to  adore  Jesus,  saying:  "'We  have 
seen  His  star  in  the  East  and  are  come  to 
adore  Him.'  " 


PRESENTATION  OF  THE  CHILD  JESUS   137 

Second  Point.  Second:  They  adored 
Him  and  offered  gifts  to  Him.  "  Falling 
down  on  the  earth,  they  adored  Him,  and 
they  offered  Him  gifts,  gold,  frankincense 
and  myrrh." 

Third  Point.  Third:  "They  received 
answer  while  sleeping  that  they  should  not 
return  to  Herod,  and  went  back  by  another 
way  to  their  country." 

OF    THE    PURIFICATION    OF    OUR    LADY    AND 
PRESENTATION  OF  THE  CHILD  JESUS 

St.  Luke  writes,  Chapter  2  [23-39]. 

First  Point.  First:  They  bring  the 
Child  Jesus  to  the  Temple,  that  He  may  be 
presented  to  the  Lord  as  first-born;  and 
they  offer  for  Him  "  a  pair  of  turtle  doves 
or  two  young  pigeons." 

Second  Point.  Second:  Simeon  coming 
to  the  Temple  "  took  Him  into  his  arms  " 
saying:  "'Now  Thou  dost  dismiss  Thy 
servant,  O  Lord,  in  peace!'  " 

Third  Point.  Third:  Anna  "coming 
afterwards  confessed  to  the  Lord,  and 
spoke  of  Him  to  all  that  were  hoping  for 
the  redemption  of  Israel." 


138       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 
OF  THE  FLIGHT  TO  EGYPT 

St.  Matthew  writes  in  the  second  Chap- 
ter [13-16]. 

First  Point.  First:  Herod  wanted  to 
kill  the  Child  Jesus,  and  so  killed  the  Inno- 
cents, and  before  their  death  the  Angel 
warned  Joseph  to  fly  into  Egypt:  "  'Arise 
and  take  the  Child  and  His  Mother,  and 
fly  to  Egypt.'  " 

Second  Point.  Second:  He  departed 
for  Egypt.  "  Who  arising  by  night  de- 
parted to  Egypt." 

Third  Point.  Third:  He  was  there 
until  the  death  of  Herod. 

OF  HOW  CHRIST  OUR  LORD  RETURNED 
FROM  EGYPT 

St.  Matthew  writes  in  the  second 
Chapter  [19-23]. 

First  Point.  First:  The  Angel  warns 
Joseph  to  return  to  Israel.  "  '  Arise  and 
take  the  Child  and  His  Mother  and  go  to 
the  land  of  Israel.'  " 

Second  Point.  Second:  Rising,  he 
came  to  the  land  of  Israel. 


COMING    OF    CHRIST    TO    THE    TEMPLE      139 

Third  Point.  Third:  Because  Arche- 
laus,  son  of  Herod,  was  reigning  in  Judea, 
he  withdrew  into  Nazareth. 

OF    THE    LIFE    OF    CHRIST    OUR    LORD    FROM 
TWELVE  TO  THIRTY  YEARS 

St.  Luke  writes  in  the  second  Chapter 
[51*  52]. 

First  Point.  First:  He  was  obedient  to 
His  parents:  "He  advanced  in  wisdom, 
age  and  grace." 

Second  Point.  Second:  It  appears 
that  ^  He  exercised  the  trade  of  carpenter, 
as  St.  Mark  shows  he  means  ^  in  the  sixth 
chapter.  " '  Perhaps  this  is  that  car- 
penter?' " 

OF  THE   COMING  OF  CHRIST  TO  THE  TEMPLE 

WHEN   HE   WAS   OF  THE   AGE   OF 

TWELVE   YEARS 

St.  Luke  writes  in  the  second  Chapter 
[42-51]- 

^  It  appears  that  is  in  the  Saint's  handwriting,  inserted 
before  He  exercised. 

2  Shows  he  means  is  in  the  Saint's  hand,  correcting 
says. 


I40       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

First  Point.  First:  Christ  our  Lord, 
of  the  age  of  twelve  years,  went  up  from 
Nazareth  to  Jerusalem. 

Second  Point.  Second:  Christ  our  Lord 
remained  in  Jerusalem,  and  His  parents 
did  not  know  it. 

Third  Point.  Third:  The  three  days 
passed,  they  found  Him  disputing  in  the 
Temple,  and  seated  in  the  midst  of  the 
doctors,  and  His  parents  asking  Him 
where  He  had  been.  He  answered :  "  '  Did 
you  not  know  that  it  behooves  Me  to  be  in 
the  things  which  are  My  Father's.^ '  " 

OF  HOW  CHRIST  WAS  BAPTIZED 

St,  Matthew  writes  in  the  third  Chapter 

[13-17]- 

First  Point.  First:  Christ  our  Lord, 
after  having  taken  leave  of  His  Blessed 
Mother,  came  from  Nazareth  to  the  River 
Jordan,  where  St.  John  Baptist  was. 

Second  Point.  Second:  St.  John  bap- 
tized Christ  our  Lord,  and  wanting  to 
excuse  himself,  thinking  himself  unworthy 
of   baptizing    Him,    Christ    said    to   him; 


OF    HOW    CHRIST    WAS    TEMPTED  141 

" '  Do  this  for  the  present,  for  so  it  is  neces- 
sary that  we  fulfill  all  justice.'" 

Third  Point.  Third :  "  The  Holy  Spirit 
came  and  the  voice  of  the  Father  from 
heaven  affirming:  'This  is  My  beloved 
Son,  in  Whom  I  am  well  pleased.'  " 

OF  HOW  CHRIST  WAS  TEMPTED 

St.  Luke  writes  in  the  fourth  Chapter 
[1-14]  and  St.  Matthew  fourth  Chapter 
[1-12]. 

First  Point.  First:  After  being  bap- 
tized, He  went  to  the  Desert,  where  He 
fasted  forty  days  and  forty  nights. 

Second  Point.  Second:  He  was 
tempted  by  the  enemy  three  times.  "  The 
tempter  coming  to  Him  said  to  Him: 
*If  Thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  say  that  these 
stones  be  turned  into  bread.'  'Cast 
Thyself  down  from  here.'  'If  prostrate 
on  the  earth  Thou  wilt  adore  me,  I  will 
give  Thee  all  this  which  Thou  seest.' " 

Third  Point.  Third:  "  The  Angels  came 
and  ministered  to  Him." 


142       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 


OF  THE  CALL  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

First  Point.  First:  it  seems  that  ^ 
St.  Peter  and  St.  Andrew  were  called  three 
times:  first,  to  some  knowledge;  this  is 
clear  from  St.  John  in  the  first  Chapter: 
secondly,  to  follow  Christ  in  some  way 
with  the  purpose  of  returning  to  possess 
what  they  had  left,  as  St.  Luke  says  in  the 
fifth  Chapter:  thirdly,  to  follow  Christ 
our  Lord  forever,  as  St.  Matthew  says  in 
the  fourth  Chapter  and  St.  Mark  in  the 
first. 

Second  Point.  Second:  He  called 
Phihp,  as  is  in  the  first  Chapter  of  St. 
John,  and  Matthew  as  Matthew  himself 
says  in  the  ninth  Chapter. 

Third  Point.  Third:  He  called  the 
other  Apostles,  of  whose  special  call  the 
Gospel  does  not  make  mention. 

And  three  other  things  also  would  be 
to  be  considered: 

The  first,  how  the  Apostles  were  of 
uneducated  and  low  condition; 

^  It  seems  that  is  added  in  the  hand  of  St.  Ignatius. 


HOW    CHRIST    CAST    OUT    OF    THE    TEMPLE       143 

The  second,  the  dignity  to  which  they 
were  so  sweetly  called; 

The  third,  the  gifts  and  graces  by  which 
they  were  raised  above  all  the  Fathers  of 
che  New  and  Old  Testaments. 

OF  THE  FIRST  MIRACLE 
rERFORMED  AT  THE  MARRIAGE  OF  CANA,  GALILEE 

St.  John  writes  Chapter  2  [1-12]. 
First  Point.     First:  Christ  our  Lord  was 
invited  with  His  Disciples  to  the  marriage. 

Second  Point.  Second:  The  Mother 
tells  her  Son  of  the  failure  of  the  wine, 
saying:  "'They  have  no  wine,'"  and  bade 
the  servants:  "'Whatsoever  He  shall 
say  to  you,  do  ye.'  " 

Third  Point.  Third:  "He  changed  the 
water  into  wine  and  manifested  His  glory, 
and  His  Disciples  believed  in  Him." 

OF  HOW  CHRIST  CAST  OUT  OF  THE   TEMPLE 
THOSE  WHO  WERE  SELLING 

St.  John  writes  Chapter  2  [13-18]. 

First  Point.  First:  With  a  whip  made  of 
cords.  He  cast  out  of  the  Temple  all  those 
who  were  selling. 


144       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

Second  Point.  Second:  He  turned  over 
the  tables  and  money  of  the  rich  bank- 
ers who  were  in  the  Temple. 

Third  Point.  Third:  To  the  poor  who 
sold  doves,  He  mildly  said:  "  'Take  these 
things  from  here,  and  make  not  My  house 
a  house  of  traffic'  " 

OF    THE    SERMON    WHICH    CHRIST    MADE    ON 
THE  MOUNT 

St.  Matthew  writes  in  the  fifth  Chapter 
[1-48]. 

First  Point.  First:  To  His  beloved 
Disciples  He  speaks  apart  about  the  Eight 
Beatitudes:  "'Blessed  the  poor  of  spirit, 
the  meek,  the  merciful,  those  who  weep, 
those  who  suffer  hunger  and  thirst  for 
justice,  the  clean  of  heart,  the  peaceful, 
and  those  who  suffer  persecution.'  " 

Second  Point.  Second:  He  exhorts 
them  to  use  their  talents  well:  "'So  let 
your  light  shine  before  men,  that  they  may 
see  your  good  works  and  glorify  your 
Father  Who  is  in  the  heavens.'  " 

Third  Point.  Third:  He  shows  Himself 
not  a  transgressor,  but  a  perfector  of  the 


STILLING    THE    TEMPEST  I4S 

law;  explaining  the  precept  of  not  killing, 
not  committing  fornication,  not  being 
guilty  of  perjury,  and  of  loving  enemies. 
"  '  I  say  to  you  that  you  love  your  enemies 
and  do  good  to  them  that  hate  you.' " 

OF  HOW  CHRIST  OUR  LORD  MADE  THE 
TEMPEST  OF  THE  SEA  BE  CALM 

St.  Matthew  writes  Chapter  8  [23-28]. 

First  Point.  First:  Christ  our  Lord 
being  asleep  at  sea,  a  great  tempest^ 
arose. 

Second  Point.  Second:  His  Disciples, 
frightened,  awakened  Him.  Whom  He 
reprehends  for  the  little  faith  which  they 
had,  saying  to  them:  "  '  What  do  you  fear, 
ye  of  little  faith  ! '  " 

Third  Point.  Third:  He  commanded 
the  winds  and  the  sea  to  cease:  and,  so 
ceasing,  the  sea  became  calm:  at  which  the 
men  wondered,  saying:  "'Who  is  this 
whom  the  wind  and  the  sea  obey? 

^  Great  tempest  is  in  St.  Ignatius'  hand,  correcting  some 
u;ord  erased. 


146       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 
OF   HOW   CHRIST  WALKED   ON   THE    SEA 

St.  Matthew  writes  Chapter  14  [22-34]. 

First  Point.  First:  Christ  our  Lord 
being  on  the  mountain,  made  His  Dis- 
ciples go  to  the  Httle  boat.  And  having 
dismissed  the  multitude,  He  commenced 
to  pray  alone. 

Second  Point.  Second:  The  little  boat 
was  beaten  by  the  waves.  To  which  Christ 
came  walking  on  the  water;  and  the  Dis- 
ciples thought  it  was  an  apparition. 

Third  Point.  Third:  Christ  saying  to 
them:  "  '  It  is  I,  fear  not,'  "  St.  Peter,  by 
His  command,  came  to  Him  walking  on 
the  water.  Doubting,  he  commenced  to 
sink,  but  Christ  our  Lord  freed  him  and 
reprehended  him  for  his  little  faith,  and 
then,  as  He  entered  into  the  little  boat, 
the  wind  ceased. 

OF  HOW  THE  APOSTLES  WERE  SENT 
TO  PREACH 

St.  Matthew  writes  in  the  tenth  Chapter 

[1-17]. 

First  Point.  First:  Christ  called  His 
beloved   Disciples   and   gave   them   powet 


OF   THE    CONVERSION    OF    MAGDALEN       I47 

to  cast  out  the  demons  from  human  bodies 
and  to  cure  all  the  diseases. 

Second  Point.  Second:  He  teaches  them 
of  prudence  and  patience:  "*  Behold,  I 
send  you  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves. 
3e  ye  therefore  wise  as  serpents  and  simple 
as  doves.' v"'' 

Third  Point.  Third :  He  gives  them  the 
way  to  go.  " '  Do  not  want  to  possess 
gold  nor  silver:  what  you  have  freely 
received,  freely  give.'  "  And  He  gave  them 
matter  to  preach.  " '  Going  you  shall 
preach,  saying:  'The  Kingdom  of  Heaven 
has  approached.'  " 

OF  THE  CONVERSION  OF  MAGDALEN 

St.  Luke  writes  in  the  seventh  Chapter 
[36-50]. 

First  Point.  First:  Magdalen  enters 
where  Christ  our  Lord  is  seated  at  the 
table  in  the  house  of  the  Pharisee.  She 
bore  a  vase  of  alabaster  full  of  ointment. 

Second  Point.  Second:  Standing  be- 
hind the  Lord  near  His  feet,  she  com- 
menced to  wash  them  with  tears  and  dried 


148       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

them  with  the  hairs  of  her  head,  and  kissed 
His  feet  and  anointed  them  with  ointment. 

Third  Point.  Third :  When  the  Pharisee 
accused  Magdalen,  Christ  speaks  in  her 
defence,  saying:  "  '  Many  sins  are  forgiven 
her  because  she  loves  much.'  And  He 
said  to  the  woman:  'Thy  faith  hath  made 
thee  safe:  go  in  peace.'  " 

OF    HOW    CHRIST    OUR    LORD    GAVE    TO    EAT 
TO  FIVE  THOUSAND  MEN 

St.  Matthew  writes  in  the  fourteenth 
Chapter  [13-22]. 

First  Point.  First:  The  Disciples,  as  it 
was  getting  late,  ask  Christ  to  dismiss  the 
multitude  of  men  who  were  with  Him. 

Second  Point.  Second:  Christ  our  Lord 
commands  that  they  bring  Him  bread, 
and  commanded  that  they  should  be  seated 
at  the  table,  and  blessed  and  broke  and 
gave  the  bread  to  His  Disciples,  and  the 
Disciples  to  the  multitude. 

Third  Point.  Third:  "They  did  eat  and 
were  filled  and  there  were  twelve  baskets 
over. 


OF    THE    RESURRECTION    OF    LAZARUS       149 
OF  THE  TRANSFIGURATION  OF  CHRIST 

St.  Matthew  writes  in  the  seventeenth 
Chapter  [1-14]. 

First  Point.  First:  Taking  along  His 
beloved  Disciples,  Peter,  James,  John, 
Christ  our  Lord  was  transfigured,  and  His 
face  did  shine  as  the  sun,  and  His  garments 
as  the  snow. 

Second  Point.  Second:  He  was  speak- 
ing with  Moses  and  Elias. 

Third  Point.  Third:  St.  Peter  saying 
that  they  would  make  three  tabernacles, 
a  voice  from  heaven  sounded,  which 
said:  "'This  is  My  beloved  Son,  hear  ye 
Him!'"  When  His  Disciples  heard  this 
voice,  they  fell  for  fear  on  their  faces;  and 
Christ  our  Lord  touched  them  and  said 
to  them:  "  'Arise  and  fear  not.  Tell  this 
vision  to  no  one  until  the  Son  of  Man  be 
risen. 

OF  THE  RESURRECTION  OF  LAZARUS 

John,  Chapter  11  [1-46]. 

First  Point.  First:  Martha  and  Mary 
sent  word  to  Christ  our  Lord  of  the  illness 


150       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

of  Lazarus.  Knowing  it,  He  delayed  for 
two  days,  that  the  miracle  might  be  more 
evident. 

Second  Point.  Second:  Before  Hfe 
raises  him.  He  asks  the  one  and  the  other 
to  believe,  saying:  *' '  I  am  the  resurrec- 
tion and  Ufe;  he  who  believeth  in  Me, 
although  he  be  dead,  shall  hve.'  " 

Third  Point.  Third:  He  raises  him, 
after  having  wept  and  prayed.  And  the 
manner  of  raising  him  was  by  commanding: 
*'  *  Lazarus,  come  forth  ! '  " 

OF  THE  SUPPER  AT  BETHANY 

Matthew,  Chapter  26  [1-14]. 

First  Point.  First:  The  Lord  sups  in  the 
house  of  Simon  the  Leper,  along  with 
Lazarus. 

Second  Point.  Second:  Mary  pours 
the  ointment  on  the  head  of  Christ. 

Third  Point.  Third:  Judas  murmurs, 
saying:  "  '  For  what  is  this  waste  of  oint- 
ment?'" But  He  a  second  time  excuses 
Magdalen,  saying:  "  'Why  are  you  trouble- 
some to  this  woman  ?  for  she  hath  wrought 
a  good  work  upon  Me.'  " 


OF    THE    PREACHING    IN    THE    TEMPLE       151 


PALM  SUNDAY 

Matthew,  Chapter  21  [1-12]. 

First  Point.  First:  The  Lord  sends 
for  the  ass  and  the  foal,  saying:  "Loose 
them  and  bring  them  to  Me,  and  if  any 
one  shall  say  anything  to  you,  say  ye  that 
the  Lord  hath  need  of  them,  and  forth- 
with he  will  let  them  go." 

Second  Point.  Second:  He  mounted 
upon  the  ass,  which  was  covered  with  the 
garments  of  the  Apostles. 

Third  Point.  Third:  They  went  out  to 
receive  Him,  strewing  in  the  way  their 
garments  and  the  branches  of  the  trees, 
saying:  "  '  Save  us.  Son  of  David,  blessed 
is  He  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord:  Save  us  in  the  heights ! '  " 

OF  THE  PREACHING  IN  THE  TEMPLE 

Luke,  Chapter  19  [47,  48]. 

First  Point.  First:  He  was  every  day 
teaching  in  the  Temple. 

Second  Point.  Second:  The  preaching 
finished,  since  there  was  no  one  who  would 


152       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

receive  Him  in  Jerusalem,  He  used  to  re- 
turn to  Bethany. 

OF  THE  SUPPER 

Matthew  26;   John  13. 

First  Point.  First:  He  ate  the  Paschal 
Lamb  with  His  twelve  Apostles,  to  whom 
He  foretold  His  death.  "'In  truth,  I 
say  to  you  that  one  of  you  is  to  sell 
Me.' " 

Second  Point.  Second:  He  washed  the 
Disciples'  feet,  even  those  of  Judas,  com- 
mencing from  St.  Peter,  who,  considering 
the  Majesty  of  the  Lord  and  his  own  base- 
ness, not  wanting  to  consent,  said:  "Lord, 
dost  Thou  wash  my  feet.?"  But  St.  Peter 
did  not  know  that  in  that  He  gave  an 
example  of  humility,  and  for  this  He  said: 
*' '  I  have  given  you  an  example,  that  you 
may  do  as  I  did.' " 

Third  Point.  Third:  He  instituted  the 
most  sacred  sacrifice  of  the  Eucharist, 
to  be  the  greatest  mark  of  His  love,  saying: 
"'Take  and  eat.'"  The  Supper  finished, 
Judas  went  forth  to  sell  Christ  our  Lord. 


FROM    THE    SUPPER    TO    THE    GARDEN       153 

OF  THE  MYSTERIES  DONE  FROM  THE  SUPPER 
TO  THE  GARDEN,  INCLUSIVE 

Matthew,  Chapter  26,  and  Mark,  Chap- 
ter 14. 

First  Point.  First:  The  Supper  finished, 
and  singing  the  hymn,  the  Lord  went 
to  Mount  Ohvet  with  His  Disciples,  who 
were  full  of  fear;  and  leaving  the  eight 
in  Gethsemani,  He  said:  "'Sit  ye  here 
till  I  go  yonder  to  pray.'  " 

Second  Point.  Second:  Accompanied 
by  St.  Peter,  St.  James  and  St.  John, 
He  prayed  three  times  to  the  Lord,  saying: 
"  '  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  chalice 
pass  from  Me.  Nevertheless,  let  not  My 
will  be  done,  but  Thine.'"  And  being  in 
agony.  He  prayed  the  longer. 

Third  Point.  Third:  He  came  into  such 
fear,  that  He  said:  "  '  My  soul  is  sorrowful 
unto  death,' "  and  He  sweated  blood  so 
plentiful,  that  St.  Luke  says:  "His  sweat 
was  as  drops  of  blood  which  were  running 
on  the  earth;"  which  supposes  that  the 
garments  were  already  full  of  blood. 


154       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

OF  THE  MYSTERIES  DONE  FROM  THE  GARDEN 
TO  THE  HOUSE  OF  ANNAS,  INCLUSIVE 

Matthew  26,  Luke  22,   Mark  15. 

First  Point.  First:  The  Lord  lets  Him- 
self be  kissed  by  Judas  and  taken  as  a 
robber,  to  whom  He  said:  "'You  have 
come  out  as  to  a  robber  to  apprehend  Me 
with  clubs  and  arms;  when  I  was  daily 
with  you  in  the  Temple  teaching  and  you 
did  not  take  Me.'"  And  He  saying: 
"'Whom  seek  ye.^'"  the  enemies  fell  on 
the  earth. 

Second  Point.  Second :  St.  Peterwounded 
a  servant  of  the  High  Priest,  and  the  meek 
Lord  said  to  Peter:  "'Return  thy  sword 
into  its  place,' "  and  He  healed  the  wound 
of  the  servant. 

Third  Point.  Third:  Left  by  His  Dis- 
ciples, He  is  taken  to  Annas,  where  St, 
Peter,  who  had  followed  Him  from  afar, 
denied  Him  once,  and  a  blow  was  given 
Christ  by  one  saying  to  Him:  "  'Answeresi 
Thou  the  High  Priest  so  ? '  '* 


FROM    CAIPHAS    TO    PILATE  1 55 


OF  THE  MYSTERIES  DONE  FROM  THE  HOUSE 
OF  ANNAS  TO  THE  HOUSE  OF  CAIPHAS, 
INCLUSIVE 

First  Point.  First:  They  take  Him 
bound  from  the  house  of  Annas  to  the 
house  of  Caiphas,  where  St.  Peter  denied 
Him  twice,  and  looked  at  by  the  Lord, 
going  forth  he  wept  bitterly. 

Second  Point.  Second:  Jesus  was  all 
that  night  bound. 

Third  Point.  Third:  Besides,  those  who 
held  Him  captive  mocked  Him  and  struck 
Him  and  covered  His  face  and  gave  Him 
bufFets  and  asked  Him:  '"  Prophesy  to 
us,  who  is  he  that  struck  Thee? '  "  and  hke 
things,  blaspheming  against  Him. 

OF  THE  MYSTERIES  DONE  FROM  THE  HOUSE 
OF  CAIPHAS  TO  THAT  OF  PILATE,  IN- 
CLUSIVE 

Matthew  26,  Luke  23,  Mark  15. 
First  Point.     First:     The  whole   multi- 
tude of  the  Jews  ^  take  Him  to  Pilate  and 

1  The  whole  multitude  of  the  Jews  is  inserted  here  in 
the  handwriting  of  St.  Ignatius,  a  phrase  being  erased  ajter 
accuse. 


156       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

accuse  Him  before  him,  saying:  "'We 
have  found  that  this  man  tried  to  rain 
our  people  and  forbade  to  pay  tribute  to 
Caesar. 

Second  Point.  Second:  Pilate,  after 
having  examined  Him  once  and  again, 
said:      "*I  find  no  fault.'" 

Third  Point.  Third:  The  robber  Ba- 
rabbas  was  preferred  to  Him.  "  They  all 
cried,  saying:  'Give  us  not  this  man,  but 
Barabbas!'  " 


OF  THE  MYSTERIES  DONE  FROM  THE  HOUSE 
OF  PILATE  TO  THAT  OF  HEROD 

First  Point.  First:  Pilate  sent  Jesus, 
a  Galilean,  to  Herod,  Tetrarch  of  Galilee. 

Second  Point.  Second:  Herod,  curious, 
questioned  Him  much  and  He  answered 
him  nothing,  although  the  Scribes  and 
Priests  were  accusing  Him  constantly. 

Third  Point.  Third:  Herod  despised 
Him  with  his  army,  clothing  Him  with  a 
white  garment. 


FROM    HEROD    TO    PILATE  I57 


OF  THE   MYSTERIES  DONE   FROM  THE   HOUSE 
OF  HEROD  TO  THAT  OF  PILATE 

Matthew  26,1  Luke  23,  Mark  15,  and 
John  19. 

First  Point.  First:  Herod  sends  Him 
back  to  Pilate.  By  this  they  were  made 
friends,  who  before  were  enemies. 

Second  Point.  Second:  Pilate  took 
Jesus  and  scourged  Him;  and  the  soldiers 
made  a  crown  of  thorns  and  put  it  on  His 
head,  and  they  clothed  Him  with  purple 
and  came  to  Him  and  said:  '"Hail,  King 
of  the  Jews!'",  and  they  gave  Him 
buffets. 

Third  Point.  Third:  He  brought  Him 
forth  in  the  presence  of  all.  "  Then  Jesus 
went  forth  crowned  with  thorns  and 
clothed  with  a  purple  garment,  and  Pilate 
said  to  them:  '  Here  is  the  Man!'"  and 
when  the  Priests  saw  Him,  they  shouted, 
saying:    "'Crucify,  crucify  Him!'" 

*   This  should  be  27. 


158       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 


OF  THE  MYSTERIES  DONE   FROM  THE  HOUSE 
OF  PILATE  TO  THE  CROSS,  INCLUSIVE 

John  19  [15-20]. 

First  Point.  First:  Pilate,  seated  as 
judge,  delivered  Jesus  to  them  to  crucify 
Him,  after  the  Jews  had  denied  Him  for 
king,  saying:  "'We  have  no  king  but 
Caesar!'  " 

Second  Point.  Second:  He  took  the 
Cross  on  His  shoulders  and  not  being  able 
to  carry  it,  Simon  of  Cyrene  was  con- 
strained to  carry  it  after  Jesus. 

Third  Point.  Third:  They  crucified 
Him  between  two  thieves,  setting  this 
title:  "Jesus  of  Nazareth,  King  of  the 
Jews.'' 

OF  THE  MYSTERIES  ON  THE  CROSS 

John  19  [25-37]- 

First  Point.  First:  He  spoke  seven 
words  on  the  Cross:  He  prayed  for  those 
who  were  crucifying  Him;  He  pardoned 
the  thief;  He  recommended  St.  John 
to  His  Mother  and  His  Mother  to  St.  John; 
He  said  with  a  loud  voice:  "'I  thirst,'" 
and    they    gave    Him    gall    and    vinegar; 


i 


FROM    THE    CROSS    TO    THE    SEPULCHRE       159 

He  said  that  He  was  abandoned;  He  said: 
"It  is  consummated  ";  He  said:  "Father, 
into  Thy  hands  I  commend  My  spirit!" 

Second  Point.  Second:  The  sun  was 
darkened,  the  stones  broken,  the  graves 
opened,  the  veil  of  the  Temple  was  rent  in 
two  from  above  below. ^ 

Third  Point.  Third:  They  blaspheme 
Him,  saying:  "'Thou  wert  He  who  de- 
stroyest  the  Temple  of  God;  come  down 
from  the  Cross.' "  His  garments  were 
divided;  His  side,  struck  with  the  lance, 
sent  forth  water  and  blood. 

OF  THE  MYSTERIES  FROM  THE  CROSS  TO 
THE  SEPULCHRE, INCLUSIVE 

Ibidem. 

First  Point.  First:  He  was  let  down 
from  the  Cross  by  Joseph  and  Nicodemus, 
in  presence  of  His  sorrowful  Mother. 

Second  Point.  Second:  The  Body  was 
carried  to  the  Sepulchre  and  anointed  and 
buried. 

Third  Point.     Third:   Guards  were  set. 

^  Rent  in  two  from  above  below  is  in  St.  Ignatius* 
handwriting,  correcting  torn  in  pieces,  which  is  crossed  out. 


l6o       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 


OF    THE    RESURRECTION    OF    CHRIST    OUR 

LORD 
OF    HIS     FIRST    APPARITION 

First  Point.  First:  He  appeared  to  the 
Virgin  Mary.  This,  although  it  is  not  said 
in  Scripture,  is  included  in  saying  that  He 
appeared  to  so  many  others,  because 
Scripture  supposes  that  we  have  under- 
standing,!  as  it  is  written:  "  'Are  you  also 
without  understanding? '  " 

OF   THE    SECOND    APPARITION 

Mark,  Chapter  i6  [9]. 

First  Point.  First:  Mary  Magdalen, 
Mary,  the  mother  of  James,  and  Salome 
come  very  2  early  to  the  Sepulchre  saying: 
"  *  Who  shall  lift  for  us  the  stone  from  the 
door  of  the  Sepulchre?'" 

Second  Point.  Second:  They  see  the 
stone  lifted,  and  the  Angel,  who  says: 
"'You  seek  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  He  is 
already  risen,  He  is  not  here.'  " 

1  Understanding  is  added,  apparently  in  St.  Ignatius' 
hand. 

2  Very  is  added,  perhaps  in  Si.  Ignatius'  hand. 


OF    THE    FOURTH    APPARITION  l6l 

Third  Point.  Third:  He  appeared  to 
Mary,  who  remained  about  the  Sepulchre 
after  the  others  had  gone. 

OF  THE  THIRD  APPARITION 

St.  Matthew,  last  Chapter. 

First  Point.  First:  These  Maries  go 
from  the  Sepulchre  with  fear  and  joy, 
wanting  to  announce  to  the  Disciples  the 
Resurrection  of  the  Lord. 

Second  Point.  Second:  Christ  our  Lord 
appeared  to  them  on  the  way,  saying  to 
them:  "Hail:"  and  they  approached  and 
threw  themselves  at  His  feet  and  adored 
Him. 

Thitd  Point.  Third:  Jesus  says  to 
them :  "  '  Fear  not !  Go  and  tell  My  breth- 
ren that  they  go  into  Galilee,  for  there 
they  shall  see  Me.'  " 

OF  THE  FOURTH  APPARITION 

Last  Chapter  of  Luke  [12,  34]. 

First  Point.  First:  Having  heard  from 
the  women  that  Christ  was  risen,  St. 
Peter  went  quickly  to  the  Sepulchre. 


l62       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

Second  Point.  Second:  Entering  into 
the  Sepulchre,  he  saw  only  the  cloths 
with  which  the  Body  of  Christ  our  Lord 
had  been  covered,  and  nothing  else. 

Third  Point.  Third:  As  St.  Peter  was 
thinking  of  these  things,  Christ  appeared 
to  Him,  and  therefore  the  Apostles  said: 
" '  Truly  the  Lord  has  risen  and  appeared 
to   Simon.'  " 

OF  THE  FIFTH  APPARITION 

In  the  last  Chapter  of  St.  Luke. 

First  Point.  First:  He  appeared  to  the 
Disciples  who  were  going  to  Emmaus, 
talking  of  Christ. 

Second  Point.  Second:  He  reproves 
them,  showing  by  the  Scriptures  that 
Christ  had  to  die  and  rise  again:  "'O 
foolish  and  slow  of  heart  to  believe  all  that 
the  Prophets  have  spoken !  Was  it  not 
necessary  that  Christ  should  suffer  and  so 
enter  into  His  glory.? '  " 

Third  Point.  Third:  At  their  prayer, 
He  lingers  there,  and  was  with  them  until, 
in  giving  them  Communion,  He  disap- 
peared.    And    they,    returning,    told    the 


THE    SEVENTH    APPARITION  163 

Disciples   how  they   had   known   Him   in 
the  Communion. 

OF  THE  SIXTH  APPARITION 

John,  Chapter  20  [19-24]. 

First  Point.  First:  The  Disciples,  ex- 
cept St.  Thomas,  were  gathered  together 
for  fear  of  the  Jews. 

Second  Point.  Second:  Jesus  appeared 
to  them,  the  doors  being  shut,  and  being 
in  the  midst  of  them.  He  says:  "'Peace 
be  with  you!'  " 

Third  Point.  Third :  He  gives  them  the 
Holy  Ghost,  saying  to  them:  "'Receive 
ye  the  Holy  Ghost:  to  those  whose  sins 
you  shall  forgive,  to  them  they  shall  be 
forgiven.'  " 

THE  SEVENTH  APPARITION 

John  20  [24-30]. 

First  Point.  First:  St.  Thomas,  in- 
credulous because  he  was  absent  from  the 
preceding  apparition,  says:  "If  I  do  not 
see  Him,  I  will  not  believe." 

Second  Point.  Second:  Jesus  appears 
to  them  eight  days  from  that,  the  doors 
being    shut,    and    says    to     St.    Thomas: 


164       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

"  *  Put  here  thy  finger  and  see  the  truth; 
and  be  not  incredulous,  but  believing.'" 

Third  Point.  Third:  St.  Thomas  be- 
lieved, saying:  "'My  Lord  and  my 
God!'"  Christ  said  to  him:  "'Blessed 
are  those  who  have  not  seen  and  have 
believed.' " 

OF  THE  EIGHTH  APPARITION 

John,  last  Chapter  [1-24]. 

First  Point.  First:  Jesus  appears  to 
seven  of  His  Disciples  ^  who  were  fishing, 
and  had  taken  nothing  all  night;  and 
spreading  the  net  by  His  command,  "They 
were  not  able  to  draw  it  out  for  the  multi- 
tude of  the  fishes." 

Second  Point.  Second:  By  this  miracle 
St.  John  knew  Him  and  said  to  St.  Peter: 
"  '  It  is  the  Lord  ! '  "  He  cast  himself  into 
the  sea  and  came  to  Christ. 

Third  Point.  Third:  He  gave  them  to 
eat  part  of  a  fish  roasted,  and  a  comb  of 
honey,^  and    recommended    the    sheep    to 

*  Of  His  Disciples  is  in  the  handwriting  of  St.  Ignatius^ 
replacing  a  word  erased. 

*  These  words  are  in  St.  Luke  24,  42. 


OF    THE    TENTH    APPARITION  165 

St.  Peter,  having  first  examined  him  three 
times  on  charity,  and  says  to  him:  "  '  Feed 
My  sheep  ! '  " 


or  THE  NINTH  APPARITION 

Matthew,  last  Chapter  [i6-end]. 

First  Point.  First:  The  Disciples,  by 
command  of  the  Lord,  go  to  Mt.  Thabor. 

Second  Point.  Second:  Christ  appears 
to  them  and  says:  '"AH  power  is  given 
to  Me  in  heaven  and  on  earth.'  " 

Third  Point.  Third:  He  sent  them 
through  all  the  world  to  preach,  saying: 
"  '  Go  and  teach  ye  all  nations,  baptizing 
them  in  the  name  of  the  Father  and  of  the 
Son  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.'  " 


OF  THE  TENTH  APPARITION 

In  the  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians, 
Chapter  15  [7].  "Afterwards  He  was 
seen  by  more  than  five  hundred  brethren 
together." 


l66       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 


OF  THE  ELEVENTH  APPARITION 

In  the  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians, 
Chapter  15  [7].  "Afterwards  He  ap- 
peared to  St.  James." 

OF  THE  TWELFTH  APPARITION 

He  appeared  to  Joseph  of  Arimathea, 
as  is  piously  meditated  and  is  read  in  the 
Hves  of  the  Saints.^ 

OF  THE  THIRTEENTH  APPARITION 

First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  Chapter 
15  [8].  He  appeared  to  St.  Paul  after 
the  Ascension.  "  '  Last  of  all,  He  appeared 
to  me,  as  one  born  out  of  due  time.' " 

He  appeared  also  in  soul  to  the  Holy 
Fathers  of  Limbo,  and  after  taking  them 
out  and  having  taken  His  Body  again. 
He  appeared  to  the  Disciples  many  times, 
and  dealt  with  them. 

1  Is  piously  meditated  and  is  read  in  the  lives  of  the 
Saints  is  in  the  hand  of  St.  Ignatius,  replacing  words  which 
were  apparently  says  the  Gospel  of  Judea. 


THE  ASCENSION  OF  CHRIST  OUR  LORD  167 
OF    THE    ASCENSION    OF     CHRIST    OUR    LORD 

Acts  I  [1-12]. 

First  Point.  First:  After  He  appeared 
for  the  space  of  forty  days  to  the  Apostles, 
giving  many  arguments  and  doing  many 
signs,  and  speakmg  of  the  kingdom  of 
God,  He  bade  them  await  in  Jerusalem 
the  Holy  Ghost  promised. 

Second  Point.  Second:  He  brought 
them  out  to  Mt.  Olivet,  and  in  their  pres- 
ence He  was  raised  up  and  a  cloud  made 
Him  disappear  from  their  eyes. 

Third  Point.  Third:  They  looking  to 
heaven,  the  Angels  say  to  them:  "'Men 
of  Galilee,  why  stand  you  looking  to 
heaven  .f'  This  Jesus,  Who  is  taken  from 
your  eyes  to  heaven,  shall  so  come  as  you 
saw  Him  go  into  heaven.' " 


RULES 
FOR  PERCEIVING  AND  KNOWING  IN  SOME  MANNER 

THE   DIFFERENT   MOVEMENTS 
WHICH   ARE   CAUSED   IN   THE    SOUL 

THE  GOOD,  TO  RECEIVE  THEM,  AND  THE  BAD 
TO  REJECT  THEM.  AND  THEY  ARE  MORE 
PROPER  FOR  THE  FIRST  WEEK. 

First  Rule.  The  first  Rule:  In  the  persons 
who  go  from  mortal  sin  to  mortal  sin,  the 
enemy  is  commonly  used  to  propose  to  them 
apparent  pleasures,  making  them  imagine 
sensual  delights  and  pleasures  in  order  to  hold 
them  more  and  make  them  grow  in  their  vices 
and  sins.  In  these  persons  the  good  spirit 
uses  the  opposite  method,  pricking  them  and 
biting  their  consciences  through  the  process 
of  reason. 

Second  Rule.  The  second:  In  the  persons 
who  are  going  on  intensely  cleansing  their 
sins  and  rising  from  good  to  better  in  the  ser- 
vice of  God  our  Lord,  it  is  the  method  con- 
trary to  that  in  the  first  Rule,  for  then  it  is 
the  way  of  the  evil  spirit  to  bite,  sadden  and 
put  obstacles,  disquieting  with  false  reasons. 


170       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

that  one  may  not  go  on;  and  it  is  proper  to 
the  good  to  give  courage  and  strength,  conso- 
lations, tears,  inspirations  and  quiet,  easing, 
and  putting  away  all  obstacles,  that  one  may 
go  on  in  well  doing. 

Third  Rule.  The  third:  Of  Spiritual  Con- 
solation. I  call  it  consolation  when  some  in- 
terior movement  in  the  soul  is  caused,  through 
which  the  soul  comes  to  be  inflamed  with  love 
of  its  Creator  and  Lord;  and  when  it  can  in 
consequence  love  no  created  thing  on  the  face 
of  the  earth  in  itself,  but  in  the  Creator  of 
them  all. 

Likewise,  when  it  sheds  tears  that  move  to 
love  of  its  Lord,  whether  out  of  sorrow  for  one's 
sins,  or  for  the  Passion  of  Christ  our  Lord, 
or  because  of  other  things  directly  connected 
with  His  service  and  praise. 

Finally,  I  call  consolation  every  increase  of 
hope,  faith  and  charity,  and  all  interior  joy 
which  calls  and  attracts  to  heavenly  things  and 
to  the  salvation  of  one's  soul,  quieting  it  and 
giving  it  peace  in  its  Creator  and  Lord. 

Fourth  Rule.  The  fourth:  Of  Spiritual 
Desolation.  I  call  desolation  all  the  contrary 
of  the  third  ^  rule,  such  as  darkness  ^  of  soul, 

1  Third  is  in  the  Saint's  hand,  replacing  first. 
^  Darkness   is  perhaps  in  the  Saint's  handwriting,  re- 
placing blindness. 


RULES  171 

disturbance  in  it,  movement  to  things  low  and 
earthly,  the  unquiet  of  different  agitations  and 
temptations,  moving  to  want  of  confidence, 
without  hope,  without  love,  when  one  finds 
oneself  all  lazy,  tepid,  sad,  and  as  if  separated 
from  his  Creator  and  Lord.  Because,  as 
consolation  is  contrary  to  desolation,  in  the 
same  way  the  thoughts  which  come  from  con- 
solation are  contrary  to  the  thoughts  which 
come  from  desolation. 

Fifth  Rule.  The  fifth:  In  time  of  desolation 
never  to  make  a  change;  but  to  be  firm  and 
constant  in  the  resolutions  and  determination 
in  which  one  was  the  day  preceding  such  deso- 
lation, or  in  the  determination  in  which  he 
was  in  the  preceding  consolation.  Because, 
as  in  consolation  it  is  rather  the  good  spirit 
who  guides  and  counsels  us,  so  in  desolation  it 
is  the  bad,  with  whose  counsels  we  cannot  take 
a  course  to  decide  rightly. 

Sixth  Rule.  The  sixth:  Although  in  deso- 
lation we  ought  not  to  change  our  first  resolu- 
tions, it  is  very  helpful  intensely  to  change 
ourselves  against  the  same  desolation,  as  by 
insisting  more  on  prayer,  meditation,  on  much 
examination,  and  by  giving  ourselves  more 
scope  in  some  suitable  way  of  doing  penance. 

Seventh  Rule.  The  seventh:  Let  him  who 
is  in  desolation  consider  how  the  Lord  has  left 


172       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

him  in  trial  in  his  natural  powers,  in  order  to 
resist  the  different  agitations  and  temptations 
of  the  enemy;  since  he  can  with  the  Divine 
help,  which  always  remains  to  him,  though  he 
does  not  clearly  perceive  it:  because  the  Lord 
has  taken  from  him  his  great  fervor,  great  love 
and  intense  grace,  leaving  him,  however, 
grace  enough  for  eternal  salvation. 

Eighth  Rule.  The  eighth:  Let  him  who  is 
in  desolation  labor  to  be  in  patience,  which  is 
contrary  to  the  vexations  which  come  to  him: 
and  let  him  think  that  he  will  soon  be  consoled, 
employing  against  the  desolation  the  devices, 
as  is  said  in  the  sixth  Rule.^ 

Ninth  Rule.  The  ninth:  There  are  three 
principal  reasons  why  we  find  ourselves  desolate. 

The  first  is,  because  of  our  being  tepid,  lazy 
or  negligent  in  our  spiritual  exercises;  and  so 
through  our  faults,  spiritual  consolation  with- 
draws from  us. 

The  second,  to  try  us  and  see  how  much 
we  are  and  how  much  we  let  ourselves  out  in 
His  service  and  praise  without  such  great  pay 
of  consolation  and  great  graces. 

The  third,  to  give  us  true  acquaintance  and 
knowledge,  that  we  may  interiorly  feel  that  it 
is  not  ours  to  get  or  keep  great  devotion,  in- 

1  Sixth  Rule  is  in  ike  handwriting  of  Si.  Ignatius,  re- 
placing  fourth  Rule. 


RULES  173 

tense  love,  tears,  or  any  other  spiritual  conso- 
lation, but  that  all  is  the  gift  and  grace  of  God 
our  Lord,  and  that  we  may  not  build  a  nest 
in  a  thing  not  ours,  raising  our  intellect  into 
some  pride  or  vainglory,  attributing  to  us  de- 
votion or  the  other  things  of  the  spiritual 
consolation. 

Tenth  Rule.  The  tenth:  Let  him  who  is 
in  consolation  think  how  he  will  be  in  the 
desolation  which  will  come  after,  taking  new 
strength  for  then. 

Eleventh  Rule.  The  eleventh:  Let  him 
who  is  consoled  see  to  humbling  himself  and 
lowering  himself  as  much  as  he  can,  thinking 
how  little  he  is  able  for  in  the  time  of  desola- 
tion without  such  grace  or  consolation. 

On  the  contrary,  let  him  who  is  in  desola- 
tion think  that  he  can  do  much  with  the  grace 
sufficient  to  resist  all  his  enemies,  taking 
strength  in  his  Creator  and  Lord. 

Twelfth  Rule.  The  twelfth:  The  enemy 
acts  hke  a  woman,  in  being  weak  against 
vigor  and  strong  of  will.  Because,  as  it  is  the 
way  of  the  woman  when  she  is  quarrelling  with 
some  man  to  lose  heart,  taking  flight  when 
the  man  shows  her  much  courage:  and  on  the 
contrary,  if  the  man,  losing  heart,  begins  to 
fly,  the  wrath,  revenge,  and  ferocity  of  the 
woman  is  very   great,  and  so  without  bounds; 


174       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

in  the  same  manner,  it  is  the  way  of  the  enemy 
to  weaken  and  lose  heart,  his  temptations  tak- 
ing flight,  when  the  person  who  is  exercising 
himself  in  spiritual  things  opposes  a  bold  front 
against  the  temptations  of  the  enemy,  doing 
diametrically  the  opposite.  And  on  the  con- 
trary, if  the  person  who  is  exercising  himself 
commences  to  have  fear  and  lose  heart  in 
suffering  the  temptations,  there  is  no  beast  so 
wild  on  the  face  of  the  earth  as  the  enemy  of 
human  nature  in  following  out  his  damnable 
intention  with  so  great  malice. 

Thirteenth  Rule.  The  thirteenth:  Like- 
wise, he  acts  as  a  licentious  lover  in  wanting 
to  be  secret  and  not  revealed.  For,  as  the 
licentious  man  who,  speaking  for  an  evil  pur- 
pose, solicits  a  daughter  of  a  good  father  or  a 
wife  of  a  good  husband,  wants  his  words  and 
persuasions  to  be  secret,  and  the  contrary 
displeases  him  much,  when  the  daughter  re- 
veals to  her  father  or  the  wife  to  her  husband 
his  licentious  words  and  depraved  intention^ 
because  he  easily  gathers  that  he  will  not  be 
able  to  succeed  with  the  undertaking  begun: 
in  the  same  way,  when  the  enemy  of  human 
nature  brings  his  wiles  and  persuasions  to  the 
just  soul,  he  wants  and  desires  that  they  be 
received  and  kept  in  secret;  but  when  one 
reveals    them    to    his    good    Confessor   or    to 


I 


RULES  175 

another  spiritual  person  that  knows  his  deceits 
and  evil  ends,  it  is  very  grievous  to  him,  be- 
cause he  gathers,  from  his  manifest  deceits 
being  discovered,  that  he  will  not  be  able  to 
succeed  with  his  wickedness  begun. 

Fourteenth  Rule.  The  fourteenth:  Like- 
wise, he  behaves  as  a  chief  bent  on  conquering 
and  robbing  w'hat  he  desires:  for,  as  a  captain 
and  chief  of  the  army,  pitching  his  camp,  and 
looking  at  the  forces  or  defences  of  a  strong- 
hold, attacks  it  on  the  weakest  side,  in  like 
manner  the  enemy  of  human  nature,  roaming 
about,  looks  in  turn  at  all  our  virtues,  theo- 
logical, cardinal  and  moral;  and  where  he 
finds  us  weakest  and  most  in  need  for  our 
eternal  salvation,  there  he  attacks  us  and  aims 
at   taking   us. 


RULES 
FOR  THE  SAME  EFFECT  WITH 

GREATER  DISCERNMENT  OF  SPIRITS 

AND  THEY  HELP  MORE  FOR  THE  SECOND  WEEK 

First  Rule.  The  first:  It  is  proper  to  God 
and  to  His  Angels  in  their  movements  to  give 
true  spiritual  gladness  and  joy,  taking  away 
all  sadness  and  disturbance  which  the  enemy 
brings  on.  Of  this  latter  it  is  proper  to  fight 
against  the  spiritual  gladness  and  consolation, 
bringing  apparent  reasons,  subtleties  and  con- 
tinual fallacies. 

Second  Rule.  The  second:  It  belongs  to 
God  our  Lord  to  give  consolation  to  the  soul 
without  preceding  cause,  for  it  is  the  property 
of  the  Creator  to  enter,  go  out  and  cause  move- 
ments in  the  soul,  bringing  it  all  into  love  of 
His  Divine  Majesty.  I  say  without  cause: 
without  any  previous  sense  or  knowledge  of 
any  object  through  which  such  consolation 
would  come,  through  one's  acts  of  understand- 
ing and  will. 

Third  Rule.  The  third:  With  cause,  as 
wel^  the  good  Angel  as   the  bad   can  console 


178       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

the  soul,  for  contrary  ends:  the  good  Angel 
for  the  profit  of  the  soul,  that  it  may  grow  and 
rise  from  good  to  better,  and  the  evil  Angel, 
for  the  contrary,  and  later  on  to  draw  it  to  his 
damnable  intention  and  wickedness. 

Fourth  Rule.  The  fourth:  It  is  proper  to 
the  evil  Angel,  who  forms  himself  under  the 
appearance  of  an  angel  of  light,  to  enter  with 
the  devout  soul  and  go  out  with  himself:  that 
is  to  say,  to  bring  good  and  holy  thoughts, 
conformable  to  such  just  soul,  and  then  little 
by  little  he  aims  at  coming  out  drawing  the 
soul  to  his  covert  deceits  and  perverse  inten- 
tions. 

Fifth  Rule.  The  fifth:  We  ought  to  note 
well  the  course  of  the  thoughts,  and  if  the  be- 
ginning, middle  and  end  is  all  good,  inclined 
to  all  good,  it  is  a  sign  of  the  good  Angel;  but 
if  in  the  course  of  the  thoughts  which  he  brings 
it  ends  in  something  bad,  of  a  distracting  ten- 
dency, or  less  good  than  what  the  soul  had 
previously  proposed  to  do,  or  if  it  weakens  it 
or  disquiets  or  disturbs  the  soul,  taking  away 
its  peace,  tranquillity  and  quiet,  which  it  had 
before,  it  is  a  clear  sign  that  it  proceeds  from 
the  evil  spirit,  enemy  of  our  profit  and  eternal 
salvation. 

Sixth  Rule.  The  sixth:  When  the  enemy 
of  human  nature  has  been  perceived  and  known 


RULES  179 

by  his  serpent's  tail  and  the  bad  end  to  which 
he  leads  on,  it  helps  the  person  who  was  tempted 
by  him,  to  look  immediately  at  the  course  of 
the  good  thoughts  which  he  brought  him  at 
their  beginning,  and  how  little  by  little  he 
aimed  at  making  him  descend  from  the  spir- 
itual sweetness  and  joy  in  which  he  was,  so 
far  as  to  bring  him  to  his  depraved  intention; 
in  order  that  with  this  experience,  known  and 
noted,  the  person  may  be  able  to  guard  for  the 
future  against  his  usual  deceits. 

Seventh  Rule.  The  seventh:  In  those  who 
go  on  from  good  to  better,  the  good  Angel 
touches  such  soul  sweetly,  lightly  and  gently, 
like  a  drop  of  water  which  enters  into  a  sponge; 
and  the  evil  touches  it  sharply  and  with  noise 
and  disquiet,  as  when  the  drop  of  water  falls 
on  the  stone. 

And  the  above-said  spirits  touch  in  a  con- 
trary way  those  who  go  on  from  bad  to  worse. 

The  reason  of  this  is  that  the  disposition  of 
the  soul  is  contrary  or  like  to  the  said  Angels. 
Because,  when  it  is  contrary,  they  enter  per- 
ceptibly with  clatter  and  noise;  and  when  it 
is  like,  they  enter  with  silence  as  into  their 
own  home,  through  the  open  door. 

Eighth  Rule.  The  eighth:  When  the  con- 
solation is  without  cause,  although  there  be 
no  deceit  in  it,  as  being  of  God  our  Lord  alone, 


l8o       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

as  was  said;  still  the  spiritual  person  to  whom 
God  gives  such  consolation,  ought,  with  much 
vigilance  and  attention,  to  look  at  and  dis- 
tinguish the  time  itself  of  such  actual  conso- 
lation from  the  following,  in  which  the  soul 
remains  warm  and  favored  with  the  favor  and 
remnants  of  the  consolation  past;  for  often 
in  this  second  time,  through  one's  own  course 
of  habits  and  the  consequences  of  the  concepts 
and  judgments,  or  through  the  good  spirit  or 
through  the  bad,  he  forms  various  resolutions 
and  opinions  which  are  not  given  immediately 
by  God  our  Lord,  and  therefore  they  have 
need  to  be  very  well  examined  before  entire 
credit  is  given  them,  or  they  are  put  into 
effect. 


IN  THE  MINISTRY  OF 

DISTRIBUTING   ALMS 

THE  FOLLOWING  RULES  SHOULD  BE  KEPT 

First  Rule.  The  first:  If  I  make  the  dis- 
tribution to  relatives  or  friends,  or  to  persons 
for  whom  I  have  an  affection,  I  shall  have  four 
things  to  see  to,  of  which  mention  was  made, 
in  part,  in  the  matter  of  Election. 

The  first  is,  that  that  love  which  moves  me 
and  makes  me  give  the  alms,  should  descend 
from  above,  from  the  love  of  God  our  Lord, 
so  that  I  feel  first  in  me  that  the  love,  more 
or  less,  which  I  have  to  such  persons  is  for  God; 
and  that  in  the  reason  why  I  love  them  more, 
God   appears. 

Second  Rule.  The  second:  I  want  to  set 
before  me  a  man  whom  I  have  never  seen  or 
known,  and  desiring  all  his  perfection  in  the 
ministry  and  condition  which  he  has,  as  I 
would  want  him  to  keep  the  mean  in  his  manner 
of  distributing,  for  the  greater  glory  of  God 
our  Lord  and  the  greater  perfection  of  his  soul; 
I,  doing  so,  neither  more  nor  less,  will  keep  the 
rule  and  measure  which  I  should  want  and 
judge  to  be  right  for  the  other. 


l82       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

Third  Rule.  The  third :  I  want  to  consider, 
as  if  I  were  at  the  point  of  death,  the  form 
and  measure  which  then  I  should  want  to  have 
kept  in  the  office  of  my  administration,  and 
regulating  myself  by  that,  to  keep  it  in  the 
acts  of  my  distribution. 

Fourth  Rule.  The  fourth:  Looking  how  I 
shall  find  myself  on  the  Day  of  Judgment,  to 
think  well  how  then  I  should  want  to  have 
used  this  office  and  charge  of  administration; 
and  the  rule  which  then  I  should  want  to  have 
kept,  to  keep  it  now. 

Fifth  Rule.  The  fifth:  When  some  person 
feels  himself  inclined  and  drawn  to  some  per- 
sons to  whom  he  wants  to  distribute  alms, 
let  him  hold  himself  back  and  ponder  well  the 
above-mentioned  four  Rules,  examining  and 
testing  his  affection  by  them;  and  not  give 
the  alms  until,  conformably  to  them,  he  has 
in  all  dismissed  and  cast  out  his  disordered 
inclination. 

Sixth  Rule.  The  sixth:  Although  there  is 
no  fault  in  taking  the  goods  of  God  our  Lord 
to  distribute  them,  when  the  person  is  called 
by  God  our  Lord  to  such  ministry;  still  in  the 
quantity  of  what  he  has  to  take  and  apply 
to  himself  out  of  what  he  has  to  give  to  others, 
there  may  be  doubt  as  to  fault  and  excess. 


DISTRIBUTING    ALMS  183 

Therefore,  he  can  reform  in  his  life  and  condi- 
tion by  the  above-mentioned  Rules. 

Seventh  Rule.  The  seventh:  For  the 
reasons  already  mentioned  and  for  many  others, 
it  is  always  better  and  more  secure  in  what 
touches  one's  person  and  condition  of  life  to 
spare  more  and  diminish  and  approach  more  to 
our  High  Priest,  our  model  and  rule,  who  is 
Christ  our  Lord;  conformably  to  what  the 
third  Council  of  Carthage,  in  which  St.  Augus- 
tine was,  determines  and  orders  —  that  the 
furniture  of  the  Bishop  be  cheap  and  poor. 
The  same  should  be  considered  in  all  manners 
of  life,  looking  at  and  deciding  according  to 
the  condition  and  state  of  the  persons;  as  in 
married  life  we  have  the  example  of  St.  Joachim 
and  of  St.  Ann,  who,  dividing  their  means  into 
three  parts,  gave  the  first  to  the  poor,  and  the 
second  to  the  ministry  and  service  of  the 
Temple,  and  took  the  third  for  the  support 
of  themselves  and  of  their  household. 


THE     FOLLOWING     NOTES     HELP     TO     PERCEIVE 
AND  UNDERSTAND 

SCRUPLES 

AND  PERSUASIONS  OF  OUR  ENEMY 

First  Note.  The  first:  They  commonly 
call  a  scruple  what  proceeds  from  our  own 
judgment  and  freedom:  that  is  to  say,  when 
I  freely  decide  that  that  is  sin  which  is  not 
sin,  as  when  it  happens  that  after  some  one 
has  accidentally  stepped  on  a  cross  of  straw, 
he  decides  with  his  own  judgment  that  he  has 
sinned. 

This  is  properly  an  erroneous  judgment  and 
not  a  real  scruple. 

Second  Note.  The  second:  After  I  have 
stepped  on  that  cross,  or  after  I  have  thought 
or  said  or  done  some  other  thing,  there  comes 
to  me  a  thought  from  without  that  I  have 
sinned,  and  on  the  other  hand  it  appears  to 
me  that  I  have  not  sinned;  still  I  feel  dis- 
turbance in  this;  that  is  to  say,  in  as  much  as 
I  doubt  and  in  as  much  as  I  do  not  doubt. 

That  is  a  real  scruple  and  temptation  which 
the  enemy  sets. 


l86       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

Third  Note.  Third:  The  first  scruple  — 
of  the  first  note  —  is  much  to  be  abhorred, 
because  it  is  all  error;  but  the  second  —  of 
the  second  note  —  for  some  space  of  time  is 
of  no  little  profit  to  the  soul  which  is  giving 
itself  to  spiritual  exercises;  ^  rather  in  great 
manner  it  purifies  and  cleanses  such  a  soul, 
separating  it  much  from  all  appearance  of  sin: 
according  to  that  saying  of  Gregory:  "It  be- 
longs to  good  minds  to  see  a  fault  where  there 
is  no  fault." 

Fourth  Note.  The  fourth:  The  enemy 
looks  much  if  a  soul  is  gross  or  delicate,  and  if 
it  is  delicate,  he  tries  to  make  it  more  delicate 
in  the  extreme,  to  disturb  and  embarrass  it 
more.  For  instance,  if  he  sees  that  a  soul  does 
not  consent  to  either  mortal  sin  or  venial  or  any 
appearance  of  deliberate  sin,  then  the  enemy, 
when  he  cannot  make  it  fall  into  a  thing  that 
appears  sin,  aims  at  making  it  make  out  sin 
where  there  is  not  sin,  as  in  a  word  or  very 
small  thought. 

If  the  soul  is  gross,  the  enemy  tries  to  make 
it  more  gross;  for  instance,  if  before  it  made 
no  account  of  venial  sins,  he  will  try  to  have  it 
make  little  account  of  mortal  sins,  and  if  be- 
fore it  made  some  account,  he  will  try  to  have 
it  now  make  much  less  or  none. 

^  Exercises  is  added  by  Si.  Ignatius. 


' 


SCRUPLES  187 

Fifth  Note.  The  fifth:  The  soul  which 
desires  to  benefit  itself  in  the  spiritual  life, 
ought  always  to  proceed  the  contrary  way  to 
what  the  enemy  proceeds;  that  is  to  say,  if 
the  enemy  wants  to  make  the  soul  gross,  let 
it  aim  at  making  itself  delicate.  Likewise,  if 
the  enemy  tries  to  draw  it  out  to  extreme  fine- 
ness, let  the  soul  try  to  establish  itself  in  the 
mean,  in  order  to  quiet  itself  in  everything. 

Sixth  Note.  The  sixth:  When  such  good 
soul  wants  to  speak  or  do  something  within 
the  Church,  within  the  understanding  of  our 
Superiors,  and  which  should  be  for  the  glory 
of  God  our  Lord,  and  there  comes  to  him  a 
thought  or  temptation  from  without  that  he 
should  neither  say  nor  do  that  thing  —  bring- 
ing to  him  apparent  reasons  of  vainglory  or 
of  another  thing,  etc.,  —  then  he  ought  to 
raise  his  understanding  to  his  Creator  and 
Lord,  and  if  he  sees  that  it  is  His  due  service, 
or  at  the  least  not  contrary  to  it,  he  ought  to 
act  diametrically  against  such  temptation, 
according  to  St.  Bernard,  answering  the  same: 
"Neither  for  thee  did  I  begin,  nor  for  thee  wiU 
I  stop." 


i 


TO   HAVE   THE  TRUE   SENTIMENT 

WHICH    WE    OUGHT    TO    HAVE    IN    THE    CHURCH 

MILITANT 

Let  the  following  Rules  be  observed. 

First  Rule.  The  first:  All  judgment  laid 
aside,  we  ought  to  have  our  mind  ready  and 
prompt  to  obey,  in  all,  the  true  Spouse  of 
Christ  our  Lord,  which  is  our  holy  Mother 
the  Church  Hierarchical. 

Second  Rule.  The  second:  To  praise  con- 
fession to  a  Priest,  and  the  reception  of  the 
most  Holy  Sacrament  of  the  Altar  once  in  the 
year,  and  much  more  each  month,  and  much 
better  from  week  to  week,  with  the  conditions 
required  and  due. 

Third  Rule.  The  third:  To  praise  the  hear- 
ing of  Mass  often,  likewise  ^  hymns,  psalms, 
and  long  prayers,  in  the  church  and  out  of  it; 
likewise  the  hours  set  at  the  time  fixed  for  each 
Divine  Office  and  for  all  prayer  and  all  Canon- 
ical Hours. 

Fourth  Rule.  The  fourth:  To  praise  much 
Religious  Orders,  virginity  and  continence, 
and  not  so  much  marriage  as  any  of  these. 

*  Likewise  is  added  in  St.  Ignatius'  hand. 


igo       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

Fifth  Rule.  The  fifth:  To  praise  vows  of 
Religion,  of  obedience,  of  poverty,  of  chastity 
and  of  other  perfections  of  supererogation. 
And  it  is  to  be  noted  that  as  the  vow  is  about 
the  things  which  approach  to  EvangeHcal  per- 
fection, a  vow  ought  not  to  be  made  in  the 
things  which  withdraw  from  it,  such  as  to  be 
a  merchant,  or  to  be  married,  etc. 

Sixth  Rule.  To  praise  rehcs  of  the  Saints, 
giving  veneration  to  them  and  praying  to  the 
Saints;  and  to  praise  Stations,  pilgrimages, 
Indulgences,  pardons,  Cruzadas,  and  candles 
lighted  in  the  churches. 

Seventh  Rule.  To  praise  Constitutions 
about  fasts  and  abstinence,  as  of  Lent,  Ember 
Days,  Vigils,  Friday  and  Saturday;  likewise 
penances,  not  only  interior,  but  also  exterior. 

Eighth  Rule.  To  praise  the  ornaments  and 
the  buildings  of  churches;  likewise  images, 
and  to  venerate  them  according  to  what  they 
represent. 

Ninth  Rule.  Finally,  to  praise  all  precepts 
of  the  Church,  keeping  the  mind  prompt  to 
find  reasons  in  their  defence  and  in  no  manner 
against  them. 

Tenth  Rule.  We  ought  to  be  more  prompt 
to  find  good  and  praise  as  well  the  Constitu- 
tions and  recommendations  as  the  ways  of  our 


TO  HAVE  THE  TRUE  SENTIMENT    IQI 

Superiors.  Because,  although  some  are  not 
ur  have  not  been  such,  to  speak  against  them, 
whether  preaching  in  pubHc  or  discoursing 
before  the  common  people,  would  rather  give 
rise  to  fault-finding  and  scandal  than  profit; 
and  so  the  people  would  be  incensed  against 
their  Superiors,  whether  temporal  or  spiritual. 
So  that,  as  it  does  harm  to  speak  evil  to  the 
common  people  of  Superiors  in  their  absence, 
so  it  can  make  profit  to  speak  of  the  evil  ways 
to  the  persons  themselves  who  can  remedy 
them. 

Eleventh  Rule.  To  praise  positive  and 
scholastic  learning.  Because,  as  it  is  more 
proper  to  the  Positive  Doctors,  as  St.  Jerome, 
St.  Augustine  and  St.  Gregory,  etc.,  to  move 
the  heart  to  love  and  serve  God  our  Lord  in 
everything;  so  it  is  more  proper  to  the  Scho- 
lastics, as  St.  Thomas,  St.  Bonaventure,  and 
to  the  Master  of  the  Sentences,  etc.,  to  define 
or  explain  for  our  times  ^  the  things  necessary 
for  eternal  salvation;  and  to  combat  and  ex- 
plain better  all  errors  and  all  fallacies.  For 
the  Scholastic  Doctors,  as  they  are  more 
modern,  not  only  help  themselves  with  the 
true  understanding  of  the  Sacred  Scripture 
and  of  the  Positive  and  holy  Doctors,  but  also, 

1  Or  explain  for  our  times  is  added  in  the  Saint's  hand- 
writing. 


192       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

they  being  enlightened  and  clarified  by  the 
Divine  virtue,  help  themselves  by  the  Councils, 
Canons  and  Constitutions  of  our  holy  Mother 
the  Church. 

Twelfth  Rule.  We  ought  to  be  on  our  guard 
in  making  comparison  of  those  of  us  who  are 
alive  to  the  blessed  passed  away,  because  error 
is  committed  not  a  little  in  this;  that  is  to  say, 
in  saying,  this  one  knows  more  than  St.  Augus- 
tine; he  is  another,  or  greater  than,  St.  Francis; 
he  is  another  St.  Paul  in  goodness,  holiness,  etc. 

Thirteenth  Rule.  To  be  right  in  everything, 
we  ought  always  to  hold  that  the  white  which 
I  see,  is  black,  if  the  Hierarchical  Church  so 
decides  it,  believing  that  between  Christ  our 
Lord,  the  Bridegroom,  and  the  Church,  His 
Bride,  there  is  the  same  Spirit  which  governs 
and  directs  us  for  the  salvation  of  our  souls. 
Because  by  the  same  Spirit  and  our  Lord  Who 
gave  the  ten  Commandments,  our  holy  Mother 
the  Church  is  directed  and  governed. 

Fourteenth  Rule.  Although  there  is  much 
truth  in  the  assertion  that  no  one  can  save 
himself  without  being  predestined  and  without 
having  faith  and  grace;  we  must  be  very 
cautious  in  the  manner  of  speaking  and  com- 
municating with  others  about  all  these  things. 

Fifteenth  Rule.  We  ought  not,  by  way  of 
custom,    to    speak    much    of    predestination; 


TO    HAVE    THE    TRUE    SENTIMENT         I93 

but  if  in  some  way  and  at  some  times  one 
speaks,  let  him  so  speak  that  the  common 
people  may  not  come  into  any  error,  as  some- 
times happens,  saying:  Whether  I  have  to 
be  saved  or  condemned  is  already  determined, 
and  no  other  thing  can  now  be,  through  my 
doing  well  or  ill;  and  with  this,  growing  lazy, 
they  become  negligent  in  the  works  which  lead 
to  the  salvation  and  the  spiritual  ^  profit  of 
their  souls. 

Sixteenth  Rule.  In  the  same  way,  we  must 
be  on  our  guard  that  by  talking  much  and  with 
much  insistence  of  faith,  without  any  distinc- 
tion and  explanation,  occasion  be  not  given  to 
the  people  to  be  lazy  and  slothful  in  works, 
whether  before  faith  is  formed  in  charity  or 
after. 

Seventeenth  Rule.  Likewise,  we  ought  not 
to  speak  so  much  with  insistence  on  grace 
that  the  poison  of  discarding  liberty  be  engen- 
dered. 

So  that  of  faith  and  grace  one  can  speak  as 
much  as  is  possible  with  the  Divine  help  for 
the  greater  praise  of  His  Divine  Majesty, 
but  not  in  such  way,  nor  in  such  manners, 
especially  in  our  so  dangerous  times,  that  works 
and  free  will  receive  any  harm,  or  be  held  for 
nothing. 

*  Spiritual  is  added  in  St.  Ignatius'  handwriting. 


194       SPIRITUAL    EXERCISES    OF    ST.    IGNATIUS 

Eighteenth  Rule.  Although  serving  God  our 
Lord  much  out  of  pure  love  is  to  be  esteemed 
above  all;  we  ought  to  praise  much  the  fear 
of  His  Divine  Majesty,  because  not  only 
filial  fear  is  a  thing  pious  and  most  holy,  but 
even  servile  fear  —  when  the  man  reaches 
nothing  else  better  or  more  useful  —  helps 
much  to  get  out  of  mortal  sin.  And  when 
he  is  out,  he  easily  comes  to  filial  fear,  which 
is  all  acceptable  and  grateful  to  God  our  Lord, 
as  being  at  one  with  the  Divine  Love. 


GENERAL   INDEX 

PAGE 

Abstinence,  Constitutions  about  to  be  praised 190 

Adam,  Sin  of 37 

Addition,  Second,  in  Second  Week 68 

Additions,  Changes  in  Fourth  Week 116 

Changes  in  Second  Week 67 

■ Changes  in  Third  Week 102 

for  Exercises 47 

for  Particular  Examen 22 

if  observed  diligently 6 

Alms,  How  to  distribute 181 

Angel  of  light,  Satan  makes  himself  like 178 

Angel,  See  Satan 

Angels,  Sin  of 37 

Annotations 3 

Bed,  before  going  to  sleep  in 47 

Blessed,  No  comparison  of  living  persons  with 192 

Bread,  Rules  for  eating 107 

Candles  in  churches  to  be  praised   190 

Christ  as  Man,  Colloquy  to 7^ 

Triple  Colloquy  of  First  Week  to 44 

Christ,  Description  of    75 

Imitated  in  eating 108 

Church,  Fourth  Addition  not  to  be  made  in 51 

ornaments  and  buildings  to  be  praised 190 

precepts  to  be  praised 190 

rules  for  thinking  with 189 

same  spirit  as  Christ 192 


iqS  general  index 

PAGE 

Colloquy,  How  made in 

of  mercy,  at  end  of  Second  Exercise ,  42 

on  Hell . 46 

on  the  Kingdom  of  Christ ce 

Triple 7g 

Triple,  after  Three  Manners  of  Humility 84 

Triple,  after  Three  Pairs 80 

• Triple,  in  First  Week 43 

Triple,  of  the  Two  Standards 76 

Comforts,  in  Fourth  Week 1 16 

Commandments,  First  Method  of  Prayer  on  the.  ...  123 

Communion  at  end  of  First  Week 33 

to  be  praised 189 

Composition  of  place.  How  to  make 35 

Confession,  General 33 

to  be  praised    189 

Consolation,  How  to  act  in 173 

if  wanting  in  the  Exercises 6 

office  of  Christ  in  Fourth  Week 114 

Spiritual,  description  of 170 

to  be  prepared  for  in  desolation 6 

When  to  explain  Rules  of  discernment  of  spirits 

in 7 

without  cause 177 

Contempt,  Christ  urges  us  to  desire 76 

Continence  to  be  praised 189 

Contumely,  Christ  urges  us  to  desire 76 

Courage  in  beginning  the  Exercises 5 

under  desolation 173 

Creatures,  End  of 19 

Cruzadas  to  be  praised 190 

Daybreak,  First  and  Second  Additions  at 51 

Death  considered  in  distributing  alms 182 

Election  such  as  will  please  at  point  of 92 

Definition 3 


GENERAL    INDEX  I99 

PAGE 

Desolation,  Causes  of 172 

How  to  act  in 171 

How  to  treat  exercitant 6 

if  absent  in  the  Exercises 6 

Spiritual,  description  of 170 

When  to  explain  Rules  of  discernment  of  spirits 

in 7 

Director,  How  to  give  Exercises 3 

' action  of  if  there  are  no  spiritual  movements  .  .  6 

not  to  influence  to  vow  or  state  of  life 9 

to  know  spirits 10 

Discernment  of  spirits.  Rules  for 169 

When  Rules  are  to  be  explained  for 7 

Disposition  determines  Exercises  to  be  given 11 

Doctors,  Positive  and  Scholastic 191 

Drink,  Rules  for 107 

Eating,  Penance  in 50 

Rules  for 107 

Education  determines  Exercises  to  be  given Ii 

Election,  Matters  for 86 

Preamble  to 71 

Prelude  to 85 

sometimes  made  over  again 87 

Times  for  making 88 

Ways  for  making 88 

When  begun 82 

Ember  Days  fast  to  be  praised 190 

End  of  man  considered  in  distributing  alms 181 

to  be  kept  in  view  in  determining  reform 93 

to  be  kept  in  view  in  election 88 

Examen,  General 2$ 

Particular 21 

Particular,  in  First  and  other  Weeks 52 

Particular,  in  Third  Week 130 

Particular,  Subject  of 80 


200  GENERAL    INDEX 

PAGE 

Exercise,  full  hour  given  to 8 

over  the  hour  in  desolation 8 

Exercises,  Duration  of  the,  about  thirty  days 5 

hours  after  Three  Pairs 80 

hours  of  in  Second  Week S'j 

how  to  be  proposed  by  director 4 

■ lengthening  and  shortening  of,   in  Third  Week  105 

not  to  be  concerned  about  future 8 

number  of,  in  Fourth  Week 115 

■ number  of,  in  Third  Week 102 

number  of,  just  before  Election 68 

Spiritual,  meaning  of 3 

to  be  suited  to  Exercitant II 

Eyes  to  be  restrained 49 

Fasts,  Constitutions  about,  to  be  praised 190 

Fear,  filial  and  servile,  helps 194 

Flesh,  penance  of 50 

Food,  Quality  and  quantity  of 107 

Foundation 19 

Generosity  on  beginning  the  Exercises 5 

God,  comparison  of  myself  with.  What  He  is 39 

Good,  What  to  do  when  tempted  under  appearance 

of 7 

Gospels,  in  Weeks  after  First 58 

Grace,  How  to  talk  about 193 

Hell,  Meditation  on 44 

Honor,  a  temptation  to  ambition 75 

Humility,  Christ  urges  to 76 

how  reached 76 

in  consolation 172 

Three  Manners  of 82 

Hymns  to  be  praised 189 

Idle  words,  when  sinful 28 

Illuminative  Life,  Rules  to  Explain 8 


GENERAL    INDEX  20I 

PAGE 

Images  to  be  praised 19° 

Imitation  of  Christ,  in  Weeks  after  First 58 

Incarnation 5^ 

Indifference 19 

Indulgences  to  be  praised 190 

Intellect,  Exercises  of  the,  in  Meditation 37 

Judgment,  Day  of,  to  be  considered  in  distributing 

alms 182 

Judgment,  Election  such  as  will  please  at  Day  of .  .  .  .  92 

Kingdom  of  Christ 55 

Laughter,  when  not  to  be  indulged  in 49 

Learning,  Positive  and  Scholastic  to  be  praised 191 

Lenten  fast  to  be  praised 190 

Liberty  not  to  be  discarded  in  favor  of  grace 193 

Light,  how  to  manage  in  Second  Week 68 

to  be  shut  out  in  First  Week 49 

to  be  used  in  Fourth  Week 116 

Love  consists  in  interchange 118 

contemplation  to  gain 117 

Lucifer,  description  of 73 

Man,  End  of 19 

Marriage  not  to  be  praised  as  much  as  virginity 189 

Mary,  Apparition  to 113 

Blessed  Virgin,  Triple  Colloquy  of  First  Week 

to 43 

Colloquy  to 76 

Imitation  of 126 

Mass  during  Exercises 14 

hearing  of  to  be  praised 189 

Memory,  Exercise  of  in  Meditation 37 

Midnight,  First  and  Second  Additions  at 51 

Meditation  sometimes  omitted  in  Second  Week  67 

Mysteries 131 


202  GENERAL    INDEX 

PAGE 

Nativity 62 

Oath,  Kind  allowed    27 

Office,  Divine,  to  be  praised 189 

Orders,  Religious,  to  be  praised 189 

Pairs,  Three 77 

Patience  to  be  practised  in  desolation 172 

Penance  in  Fourth  Week 1 16 

• in  Second  Week 68 

' Kind  and  purpose  of 49 

Penances  to  be  praised 190 

Perfection  to  be  praised 190 

Pilgrimages  to  be  praised 190 

Points,  extra,  in  Fourth  Week I14 

extra,  in  Third  Week 97 

how  to  be  given 4 

in  Second  Week 60 

to  be  prearranged 1 16 

Posture  in  Meditation 48 

Poverty,  Christ  urges  us  to  desire 75 

What  to  do  in  tendency  against 79 

Powers,  Three,  how  exercised 37 

Prayer,  First  Method  of 123 

Second  Method  of 126 

Prayers,  Long,  to  be  praised 189 

Third  Method  of 129 

Three  Methods  of 123 

Predestination,  How  to  talk  about 192 

Prelude,  First,  How  to  make 35 

' Second,  What  to  ask  for 36 

Preludes  in  Weeks  after  First 60 

Preparatory  Prayer  before  every  meditation 36 

unchanged 58 

Presence  of  God,  Act  before  meditation 48 

Presupposition 15 


GENERAL    INDEX  203 

PAGE 

Pride  a  temptation 75 

Principle 19 

Psalms  to  be  praised 189 

Purgative  Life,  Rules  to  explain 8 

Purpose  of  Exercises 15 

Reading  not  beyond  matter  of  the  time 66 

Reform,  How  to  determine 93 

Relics  to  be  praised 190 

Religious   Life,   caution   about   making  vow   during 

Exercises 9 

Repetition 64 

How  to  Make 43 

Repetition  in  Third  Week lOO 

Repugnance  to  Poverty,  What  to  do  in 80 

Retreat  during  Exercises 14 

Reverence  more  called  for  in  acts  of  the  will 4 

Review  of  Exercise 48 

Rhythm,  Third  Method  of  Prayer 129 

Riches,  a  temptation 74 

Saints'  lives  considered 108 

in  weeks  after  First 58 

Satan  acting  on  souls 186 

attacks  on  weakest  side 175 

fights  against  consolation 178 

Scruples,  Rules  for 185 

Secrecy  to  be  avoided  in  desolation 174 

Self-love,  Progress  measured  by  abandoning 94 

Senses,  Application  of 65 

First  Method  of  Prayer 126 

Sin,  First,  Second  and  Third,  Exercise  on 35 

Mortal  and  Venial 26 

Of  Angels,  Adam,  Particular 37 

Sins,  Exercise  on  personal 39 

First  Method  of  Prayer  on  Deadly 125 


204  GENERAL    INDEX 

PAGE 

Sleep,  Before  going  to 47 

Penance  in 50 

Solitude  recommended 14 

Soul  of  Christ,  Triple  Colloquy  of  First  Week 44 

Spirits,  Discernment  of 169 

Movement  during  Exercises 6 

When  Rules  of  Discernment  of  to  be  explained.  7 

Spirit,  What  to  do  when  tempted  under  appearance 

of  good 7 

Standards,  The  Two 73 

States,  Preamble  to  consider 71 

Stations  to  be  praised 190 

Summary  of  a  Meditation 44 

Superiors'  Recommendations  to  be  obeyed 29 

to  be  approved  of 191 

Suscipe 1 20 

Temperance  in  Fourth  Week 1 19 

Temptation,  what  to  do  in  gross 7 

Tendencies,  Disordered,  to  be  got  rid  of 3 

Tendency  against  poverty 80 

disordered,  absent  from  divine  vocation 87 

in  distributing  alms 182 

to  be  opposed 9 

Thinking  with  the  Church,  Rules  for 189 

Thought  during  Second  Week 68 

Thought,  Kindred,  in  Fourth  Week 116 

in  Second  Week 68 

in  Third  Week 102 

to  meditation  on  Waking 47 

Thought,  Sin  of 25 

Thoughts  to  be  kindred  to  matter  of  Exercises 49 

Vespers  during  Exercises 14 

Vigils,  fast  of,  to  be  praised 190 

Virginity  to  be  praised 189 


GENERAL    INDEX  20$ 

PAGE 

Vocation,  divine,  always  clear  and  pure 87 

Vow,  about  what  matter 190 

caution  on,  during  Exercises 9 

Vows  to  be  praised 19° 

Week,  First,  Matter  of S 

Purpose  of 5 

Fourth Ill 

Method  of I  IS 

Matter  of 5 

Mysteries 160 


Second S3 

lengthening  and  shortening 82 

matter  of S 

Mysteries I33 

Third 9S 

Matter  of 5 

—  Method  of 97 

Mysteries ISS 

Weeks  of  the  Exercises S 

Will,  Exercise  of  in  Meditation 37 

Reverence  more  called  for  in  acts  of 4 

Word,  Sin  of 26 

Works,  How  to  talk  about I93 


Printed  in  United  States  of  America 


BX   2179    .L7E5   1914 

snc 

Ignat  i  us ,  of  Loy o 1  a , 
Saint,  1491-1556. 

The  Spiritual  Exercises 
of  St .  Ignat  i  us  of 

AKD-3375  (awsk) 


l! ' 


