Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 15: Hurons and Quebec, 1638-1639
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1898 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits15jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits15jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits15jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 15 of 73.

---


^^^ 


to 
-n 



ill 



THE JESUIT RELATIONS 

AND 

ALLIED DOCUMENTS 


VOL. XV 



The edition consists of sev- 
en hundred and fifty sets 
all numbered 


No.. 



The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 


Travels and Explorations 

OF THE Jesuit Missionaries 

IN New France 

1610-1791 

THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES ; ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS. MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 

EDITED BY 

REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 


Vol. XV 

HURONS AND QUEBEC: 1638-1639 


CLEVELAND: XLbc JBurtow0 JBtotbers 
Company, publishers, mdcccxcviii 


Copyright, 1898 

BY 

The Burrows Brothers Co 


ALL rights reserved 


The Imperial Press, Cleveland 


EDITORIAL STAFF 


Editor 


Translators 


Assistant Editor 


Reuben Gold Thwaites 
' FiNLOw Alexander 
Percy Favor Bicknell 
William Frederic Giese 
Crawford Lindsay 
William Price 
Hiram Allen Sober 
Emma Helen Blair 


Bibliographical Adviser Victor Hugo Paltsits 


CONTENTS OF VOL XV 


Preface to Volume XV . . . i 

Documents: — 

XXX. Relation de ce qvi s'est pass6 en la 
Novvelle France, en I'ann^e 1638. 
[Second and concluding installment, 
being Part II. of the document.] 
Franqois Joseph le Mercier; Ossossan6, 
June 9, 1638 . . .9 

XXXI. Lettre an P. Joseph-Imbert du Peron. 
Franqois du Peron; Ossossan6, April 
27, 1639 • • • • H7 

XXXII. Lettre ^ M. le Cure de St-Martin, k 
Beauvais. Simon le Moyne; Ossos- 
san^, May 25, 1639 • • • ^9^ 

XXXIII. Lettre au T. R. P. Mutio Vitelleschi. 

Joseph-Marie CJtaumonot; Kebec, Au- 
gust 7, 1639 . . .197 

XXXIV. Relation de ce qvi s'est passe en la 

Novvelle France, en I'annee 1639. 

[First installment, comprising Chap. 

i. of Part I. of the document.] Paul 

le Jeune; Sillery, September 4, 1639 203 
Bibliographical Data : Volume XV . . 239 

Notes ...... 245 



ILLUSTRATIONS TO VOL. XV 

L Photographic facsimile of Le Moyne's 

letter to the Cure . Facing 191 

IL Photographic facsimile of title-page, Le 

Jeune's Relation of 1639 . . 206 


PREFACE TO VOL. XV 


Following is a synopsis of the documents contained 
in this volume : 

XXX. The first section of the Relatioti of 1638, by 
Le Jeune, was given in Vol. XIV. ; Le Mercier's re- 
port upon the Hurons, concluding the document, is 
given in the present volume. Le Mercier recounts 
the persecutions suffered by the missionaries in 1637. 
The plague that had ravaged some Huron villages 
increased with the coming of summer, until it swept 
over the entire nation. The ignorant savages ascribe 
their sufferings to the machinations of the missiona- 
ries — regarding the pictures of Christ and the Virgin 
Mary, used in the religious ceremonies, as the source 
of some wicked spell cast upon the people. Some of 
the baptized natives die from the epidemic, which 
again arouses the old fear that baptism causes death. 
The cabin doors are closed upon the priests ; and one 
war chief, seeing them at his door, "threatened to 
split their heads if they went any farther." 

According to savage custom, a general council is 
held at Angoutenc to consider the state of the coun- 
try, and its relations to the missionaries, who are 
expected to be present thereat. The presiding chief 
invites "his nephews, the French," to speak; they 
do so, explaining the reasons for their entering the 
Huron country, stating that they visit the sick only 


PREFACE TO VOL. XV 


to help and, when possible, to save them — which, 
for the time, favorably impresses the Indians. At 
this point, the council comes to an abrupt end ; for 
some one enters, inviting all present to a feast. 

Complaints and slanders soon revive : the mission- 
aries are accused of practicing charms to kill the na- 
tives — among these, that " they had killed a little 
child in the woods, by pricking it with a bodkin." 
The savages suspect the purpose of a weather vane 
which the Fathers had mounted on a tree ; the Jes- 
uits' clock is regarded as " the demon of death," and 
must be put out of sight ; the litanies sung at vespers 
are thought to be evil incantations. 

August 4, a general council of the Hurons is held, 
at which the missionaries are bitterly attacked as the 
authors of all the miseries that afflict the nation. 
Br^beuf defends the Jesuits as best he can, before 
the enraged multitude, who finally defer their deci- 
sion until the return of the fleet from Quebec. This 
temporary deliverance is ascribed, after the Divine 
Goodness, to a novena of masses in honor of the 
Immaculate Conception (for which their residence at 
Ossossan6 is named). The Hurons who had gone 
down to Three Rivers for the annual trade, return 
with greatly mollified feelings toward the French, 
which for a time relieves the missionaries from their 
persecutions. 

Suddenly, they are summoned to another council, 
with threats of death ; and only their resolute bear- 
ing and courage save them therefrom. In this emer- 
gency, the missionaries draw up " a form of will, to 
leave in the hands of some faithful Christians who 
had offered to take it to Quebec. ' ' This is a letter 
to their superior, Le Jeune, informing him of their 


PREFACE TO VOL. XV 


great danger, resigning themselves to death, and 
mentioning the arrangements made ' ' in case any of 
them survive." Brebeuf says: "I have deemed it 
advisable for our Fathers and our domestics to with- 
draw to the houses of those whom they regard as 
their best friends ; I have charged them to carry to 
the house of Pierre, our first Christian, all that be- 
longs to the Sacristy, — above all, to be especially 
careful to put our Dictionary, and all that we have 
of the language, in a place of safety." The Fathers 
then begin a novena in honor of St. Joseph; and 
they invite the Hurons to an " Atsataion," — that is, 
the farewell feast of those who are about to die. This 
astonishes and mollifies the savages, who for some 
time give them peace. 

Le Mercier then recounts the baptisms for the year, 
which have been numerous at Ossossane, the chief 
mission residence. A long account is given of the 
conversion and Christian behavior of Joseph Chiwa- 
tenhwa, who " has nothing of the savage, except his 
birth, and who will compare favorably with the most 
zealous Catholic of France. " This man and all his 
family are not only converted, but cured of the prev- 
alent disease. Joseph then makes a great feast for 
his relatives and friends, at which he announces that 
his wife now desires baptism, which rite is adminis- 
tered to her in the presence of the whole assembly. 
After this, Joseph and his wife (now named Marie 
Aonnetta) are remarried according to the rites of 
the church; and, after receiving communion, the 
new converts and some of their friends are enter- 
tained by the Fathers with ' ' a little feast of smoked 
fish, seasoned with eloquent discourse by the Father 
Superior. ' ' 


PREFACE TO VOL. XV 


Our author proceeds to relate the methods of work, 
the occupations, and the plans of the missionaries 
during the winter. Their prospects are now much 
brighter, and Joseph proves a great aid to them 
among his countrymen. The Fathers are now 
" struggling to overcome the obstacles raised by the 
devil in their dreams, dances, sweats, and feasts." 
The affairs of the old residence at Ihonatiria, where 
Brebeuf and Chastellain are in charge, are discussed ; 
they are, on the whole, satisfactory. 

Le Mercier records their ' ' harvest and vintage for 
the holy Altar — about half a bushel of good wheat, 
and a small keg of wine." The missionaries are 
about to erect a new chapel. An eclipse of the 
moon, which they had early predicted, gives them 
much credit with the natives. They are soon to 
move the residence of St. Joseph to another vil- 
lage. 

XXXI. This document, dated at Ossossane, April 
27, 1639, is a letter by Franfois du Peron to his 
brother Joseph (also a Jesuit), regarding the labors 
of the narrator among the Hurons. He thanks God 
for being sent to Canada, and especially for his as- 
signment to this special field, "because here God 
alone is our all, and because there is a greater har- 
vest than in any other part of Canada. " He sketches 
the long and toilsome journey thither ; the general 
appearance of the Huron country, the nature of the 
people, the peculiarities of the language, the condi- 
tion and progress of the mission, the daily life and 
work of the Fathers, and their trips to neighboring 
villages, with the conversions and baptisms resulting 
therefrom. Notable among these is that of the Iro- 
quois prisoner mentioned in Vol. XIII. The new 


PREFACE TO VOL. XV 


chapel at Ossossane is mentioned, also the eclipse of 
the moon, December 20. 

The writer then gives some account of the witch- 
craft and tricks practiced by the medicine men , which 
is prefaced by this remark: "On March 2nd, and 
other days following the carnival, the devil was un- 
chained here as well as in France. There was only 
deviltry and masquerading at that time, throughout 
the Huron country ; two or three of our Christians 
were debauched therein, and many others, who were 
inclined to baptism, have become cold." 

Another squad of prisoners is brought to Ossossa- 
ne, twelve in number; and the missionaries succeed 
in baptizing all but one of them — " a Judas," who 
refuses baptism. Du Peron closes by an itemized 
statement of the Huron baptisms for the past year, 
300 in all. 

XXXH. Simon le Moyne, another of the mission- 
aries at Ossossane, writes to his cousin a short letter, 
under date of May 25, 1639, in which he mentions 
with much enthusiasm the zeal and piety of their 
Huron converts. 

XXXni. Chaumonot, in this short letter to the 
general at Rome, dated Quebec, August 7, 1639, i^- 
forms the latter of his arrival at that place, and 
describes the perilous ocean voyage. He announces 
his near departure, with other Fathers, to the Huron 
mission. 

XXXIV. This document, although known as Le 
Jeune's Relation of 1639, is the work of two writers: 
Part I. is the report of the superior, Le Jeune, to the 
provincial at Paris, and chiefly refers to the work on 
the St. Lawrence ; it is dated at Sillery, September 4, 


PREFACE TO VOL. XV 


1639. Part II. is the Huron report, made by Jerome 
Lalemant to Le Jeune, and dated at Ossossan6, June 
7, 1639. In the present volume, we give Chapter i. 
of Part 1. ; the remainder of the document will appear 
in Volumes XVI. and XVII. In his opening chap- 
ter, Le Jeune describes the demonstrations of rejoic- 
ing, at Quebec, over the birth of a son to Louis XIII. — 
cannon salutes, fireworks, and illuminations; also a 
brilliant procession, in which French and Indians 
walk together. Six of the latter are clad in bravery 
of satin, velvet, and cloth of gold — truly royal habits, 
now worn for the first time, but presented by Louis 
the year before to an Indian who was sent to Paris 
by his countrymen to convey their homage to the 
king of France. This procession marches to the 
new hospital, where religious ceremonies are ob- 
served, the aborigines taking prominent part in the 
chants and prayers ; thence to the Ursuline convent 
and the Jesuit church. Montmagny then gives a 
feast to the savages; at its close, the latter hold a 
council, with the customary protracted speechmak- 
ing on both sides. Then the envoy above-mentioned 
relates wonderful tales of what he had seen in Paris — 
the great multitudes of people ; the ' ' rolling cabins 
drawn by moose," as he styles the coaches and their 
teams ; and, most wonderful of all, the king walking 
with his guards, which sight so impressed the tribes- 
man that, according to the Father who accompanied 
him, " he did not speak during the rest of the day." 
In acknowledgment of the king's gifts, these Indians 
send him a little dress, such as their own children 
wear, " as a metawagan, or small toy, to amuse his 
little son." Le Jeune, however, is hesitating to send 


PREFACE TO VOL. XV 


it, lest it convey to "so sacred a personage" even 
" the slightest contagion " from the deadly smallpox, 
which had so raged in Canada the past year. 

R. G. T. 

Madison, Wis., January, 1898. 


XXX (concluded) 

Le Jeune's Relation, 1638 

Paris: SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, 1638 


Part I. appeared in Volume XIV. ; we herewith present 
Part II., thus completing the document. 


10 LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 15 


Relation de ce qvi s'eft 

paffe dans le pays des 

Hvrons es annees 

1637. & 16^8. 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 11 


Relation of what occurred in the 

country of the Hurons 

in the years 16^7 

and 1638. 


12 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.15 


[I] Relation de ce qvi s'eft paffe en la Miff ion 

de la Compagnie de Iesvs dans le Pays 

des Hvrons en I'annee 1637. & 38. 

Enuoyee a Kebec au R. P. Paul le leune, Supei-ieur des Mifsions 
de la Compagnie de Jesvs en la noiiuelle France. 

MON Reverend Pere, 
Pax Chrijii. 
Voflre Reverence, Nous h. tous extremement 
confolez par fes dernieres, de nous mander qu'elle 
nous porte plus d'enuie que de compaffion, nous 
voyant de tous coftez chargez d horribles calomnies ; 
& entendant que nous fommes dans des perils de 
mort [2] prefque continuels. Ce qu'elle en apprift 
I'an paffe, n'eftoit que des difpofitions k ce qui eft 
depuis arriue; ce n'eftoit que des bruits qui cou- 
roient affez confufement dans le pais; & ces dif- 
cours qui s'eftoient tenus fi fouuent pendant tout 
I'hyuer dans les feftins, & les confeils des Sauuages, 
n'auoient efte que de fimples paroles, & des menaces 
de perfonnes affez peu confiderables. Mais depuis 
le depart des canots pour la traite de Kebec ; la ma- 
ladie qui n'auoit en cor accueilly que quelques bour- 
gades, s'eftant repandue vniuerfellement par tout, 
toutes ces Nations fe font declarees ouuertement dans 
des affembl6es generales faites k ce deffein, nous y 
auons comparu en perfonne, nous y auons ouy les 
depofitions faites contre nous de la bouche des chefs 
du pais: nos Amis ne nous auoient point dilTimul^ 


1638-39] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1638 13 


[i] Relation of what occurred in the Mission of 

the Society of Jesus in the Country of 

the Hurons, in the year 16^7 and 38. 

Sent to Kebec to the Reverend Father Paul le feune, Superior of 
the Missions of the Society of Jesus in new France. 

MY Reverend Father, 
Pax Christi. 
Your Reverence greatly comforted us, in your 
last letters, by telling us that you felt towards us more 
envy than compassion, seeing us besieged on all 
sides by horrible slanders, and hearing that we are in 
almost continual danger of death. [2] What you 
learned thereof last year was only the precursor of 
what has occurred since, — that was only the some- 
what confused rumors that were current in the coun- 
try; and those speeches which were made so often 
throughout the winter, in the feasts and the councils 
of the Savages, were merely the words and threats 
of people of but little importance. But, after the 
departure of the canoes for the trading at Kebec,— 
the malady, which had heretofore assailed only a 
few villages, becoming everywhere prevalent, — all 
these Nations declared themselves openly in gen- 
eral assemblies held for this purpose. We appeared 
there in person ; we heard there the depositions made 
against us from the lips of the chiefs of the country. 
Our Friends did not conceal from us their opinion of 
the dangers in which we stood ; they even asked us 


14 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.15 

leur fentiment touchant les dangers aufquels nous 
eftions ; ils nous auoient mefme demande des lettres 
de confiance pour pouuoir par apres en toute feuret^ 
defcendre "k K6bec, & y porter la nouuelle de noflre 
mort, nous anions defia fait noftre teftament, & cou- 
ch6 nos dernieres paroles, pour faire entendre que 
nous nous eflimions trop heureux de mourir enfants 
de la Compagnie, & de repandre noftre fang pour la 
conuerfion de ces pauures peuples. 

Le Diable fe fentoit preffe de pr^s, il ne pouuoit 
fupporter le Baptefme fo[le]nnel de quelques Sau- 
uages des plus fignalez. Mais Dieu luy a enfin lie 
les bras, pour donner cours a fes mifericordes, & nous 
faire voir vn autre lofeph dans cet Egypte, qui eft 
defia fi auant dans fes bonnes [3] graces, qu'il femble 
luy auoir mis entre les mains la difpofition de fes thre- 
fors, pour les ouurir a fes freres, les tirer de la mi- 
fere, & leur donner entr6e dans la cour du Roy du ciel 
& de la terre. Son exemple en a defia toucbe plu- 
fieurs, & des meilleurs efprits, qui penfent ^ I'imiter. 
On fera confol6 de voir que ces peuples font non feule- 
ment capables de nos Saincts myfteres, mais mefme 
d'vne vertu non commune. 

le m'en vay ramaffer ce qui eft de plus memorable 
foubs quelques Cbapitres, que i'eftendray felon le 
temps que Dieu me donnera. 


1 638 - 39] LE J£ UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 15 

for confidential letters, so that afterwards they could 
go down to K6bec in all security and carry thither 
the news of our death. We had already made our 
testament, and set down our last message, in order 
to make known that we considered ourselves too 
happy to die as children of the Society, and to shed 
our blood for the conversion of these poor peoples. 

The Devil saw himself closely pressed ; he could 
not endure the solemn Baptism of some of the more 
notable Savages. But God has finally bound his 
arms, that he may give scope to his mercies, and 
reveal to us another Joseph in this Egypt, who is al- 
ready so far in God's good [3] graces, that he seems to 
have placed in this man's hands the disposition of his 
treasures, that he may open them to his brethren, res- 
cue them from their misery, and give them admission 
to the court of the King of heaven and of earth. His 
example has already touched several of them, among 
the more noble spirits, who bid fair to imitate him. 
It will be consoling to see that these tribes have not 
only capacity for our Holy mysteries, but even for 
an unusual virtue. 

I am going to gather up what is most noteworthy 
under a few Chapters, which I shall extend according 
to the time that God shall give me. 


16 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 15 


CHAPITRE PREMIER. 

DES PERSECUTIONS QUE NOUS AUONS SOUFFERT EN 

l'annee 1637. 

IE dis vn mot I'an paffe de nofkre nouuelle Refidence 
en la bourgade qui eft comme le coeur du pais. 
Noflre cabane n'eftoit pas encore demy-faite 
qu'elle attiroit ces peuples de toutes parts pour nous 
venir voir: la foule y efloit fi grande, que c'eftoit vn 
plus que fuffifant employ que de prendre garde k 
leurs mains, outre le grand nombre de malades qu'il 
falloit continuellement vifiter. 

Nos Peres auoient dreff6 comme vne maniere d' Au- 
tel, ou ils auoient plac6 quelques petits tableaux, pour 
prendre de Yk fujet de leur faire entendre quel eftoit 
le principal motif qui nous amenoit icy, & nous auoit 
attire dans leur bourg. [4] Toute la Cabane reten- 
tift de voix d' admiration a la veue de ces objedts 
extraordinaires ; fur tout ils ne pouuoient f e laff er de 
regarder deux tableaux; I'vn de Noftre Seigneur, & 
r autre de Noflre Dame, nous anions de la peine k leur 
faire croire, que ce ne fuft que des plates peintures, 
auffi les pieces font-elles de grandeur naturelle, car 
les petites figures ne font que fort peu d'impreffion fur 
leurs efprits. II nous les falut laiffer expof^es tout 
le iour, pour contenter tout le monde. 

Cefte premiere veue nous coufta bien cher; car 
fans parler de I'importunite que nous ont depuis caufe 
les curieux, c'eft a dire, tout autant de perfonnes 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ibsS 17 


CHAPTER FIRST. 

OF THE PERSECUTIONS THAT WE SUFFERED IN THE 
YEAR 1637. 

I SAID a word, last year, about our new Residence 
in the village wliicli is almost the heart of the 
country. Our cabin was not yet half finished 
when it attracted these peoples from all directions to 
come and see us ; the crowd there was so great that 
it was a more than sufficient occupation to keep watch 
upon their hands, in addition to the great number of 
sick persons who continually needed our visits. 

Our Fathers had erected a sort of Altar, where 
they had placed some little pictures, in order thus to 
secure opportunity to explain to them what was 
the principal motive that brought us here and had 
attracted us to their village. [4] The whole Cabin 
resounded with expressions of admiration at the 
sight of these extraordinary objects; above all, they 
could not weary of gazing at two pictures — one of 
Our Lord, and the other of Our Lady. We had some 
difficulty in making them believe that these were 
only flat paintings, especially as these pictures were 
of life size, for the small figures make but little im- 
pression upon their minds. We had to leave them 
exposed all day, in order to satisfy all the people. 

This first view cost us very dear; for, without 
speaking of the annoyance that inquisitive persons 
have since caused us, — that is to say, all the people 
who arrive from other villages, — if we derived thence 


18 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol. 15 

qui arriuent des autres bourgades, 11 nous en auons 
tire quelqu'aduantage pour leur parler de nos Saincts 
myfteres, & les difpofer ^ la cognoilTance du vray 
Dieu, plufieurs en ont pris fujet de femer de nou- 
ueaux bruits, & authorifer les premieres calomn[i]es, 
f9auoir eft que nous faifions moiirir ces peuples par 
nos Images. 

Dans peu de iours le pais fe trouua tout k fait im- 
bu de cefte opinion, qu'infailliblement nous eftions 
les autheurs de cefte contagion fi vniuerfelle. II y 
a bien de I'apparence que ceux qui controuuoient 
ces calomnies n'en croyoient rien; neantmoins ils 
parloient en termes fi exprez, que la plufpart n'en 
doutoient plus. Les femmes & les enfans nous regar- 
doient comme des perfonnes qui leur portions mal- 
heur. Dieu foit beny ^ iamais, qui a voulu que I'ef- 
pace de trois ou quatre mois qu'a dur6 le fort de cefte 
perfecutions, [5] nous ayons efle priuez quafi de toute 
confolation humaine. Ceux de noftre bourgade fem- 
bloient nous efpargner plus que les autres; neant- 
moins ces manuals bruits eftoient fi conftants, & fer- 
uoient d'entretien fi ordinaire dans les affembl^es, 
qu'ils entrerent bien fort dans le foup9on; & les plus 
notables qui nous auoient aymez, & auoient couftume 
de parler en noftre faueur, en perdirent tout k fait la 
parole, & quand on les obligeoient de parler, ils 
auoient recours aux excufes, & fe iuitifioient le mieux 
qu'ils pouuoient de ce qu'ils nous auoient bafty vne 
cabane. 

Le 26. luin, la niepce de Pierre noftre premier 
Chreftien mourut, nonobftant les voeux & les prieres 
que nous anions fait pour fa guerifon, ce fut la pre- 
miere fecoulTe de cette famille, qui fut fuiuie quelque 


1638 - 39] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 19 

some advantage for speaking to them of our Holy 
mysteries and disposing them to the knowledge of 
the true God, some of them took occasion to spread 
new reports and to authorize the previous calumnies, 
namely, that we were causing the death of these 
peoples by our Images. 

In a few days the country was completely imbued 
with this opinion, that we were, without any doubt, the 
authors of this so universal contagion. It is very prob- 
able that those who invented these slanders did not 
believe them at all ; yet they spoke in so positive terms 
that the majority no longer doubted them. The 
women and children looked upon us as persons who 
brought them misfortune. God be forever blessed, 
who willed that for the space of three or four months, 
while these persecutions were at their height, [5] we 
should be deprived of nearly all human consolation. 
The people of our village seemed to spare us more 
than the others, yet these evil reports were so persist- 
ent and were such a common subject of conversa- 
tion in their assemblies that suspicion began to take 
hold upon them, and the most prominent ones, who 
had loved us and had been accustomed to speak in 
our favor, became entirely mute, and when they were 
constrained to speak, they had recourse to excuses, 
and justified themselves as well as they could for 
having built us a cabin. 

On the 26th of June, the niece of Pierre, our first 
Christian, died, notwithstanding the vows and pray- 
ers we had offered for her recovery. This was 
the first blow to this family, which was followed 
some time afterward by the death of his wife ; and 
after his return from the trade the malady carried 
off one of his daughters, and his brother-in-law. Sev- 


20 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 15 

temps apres de la mort de fa f emme ; & depuis f on 
retour de la traite, la maladie luy enleua vne fienne 
fille, & fon beau-frere. Plulieurs langues mefdif an- 
tes qui eftoient defia d'elles-mefmes affez fecondes 
en fourbes & calomnies, penfoient anoir vn nouueau 
fujet de nous letter le chat aux jambes: alleguants 
pour raifon, Que I'afflicition n'auoit accueilly cette 
cabane, que depuis le Baptefme folemnel de Pierre. 
En effecft, ils auoient paff^ I'hyuer fort doucement, 
la plufpart des autres cabanes ayant efl6 fort mal 
traitez de la maladie. 

Cette opinion entra fi auant dans I'efprit de quel- 
ques-vns, qu'vne bourgade entiere, felon le rapport 
qu'on nous en fift, prit refolution de ne fe plus feruir 
des chaudieres de France, s'imaginant [6] que tout 
ce qui venoit en quelque fa9on de nous, eftoit capable 
de leur communiquer le mal. 

II vint vne autre nouuelle de la Nation du Petun 
(car ces bruits alloient croiffants, mefme dans les 
Nations circouoiflnes) on alTeura qu'vn Sauuage frappe 
de cette maladie peftilencielle auoit vomy dans du 
fang vne dragee de plomb, d'ou ils concluoient qu'vn 
Franjois I'auoit enforcell6. Nous anions tous les 
iours h. refpondre ^ des porteurs de femblables nou- 
uelles, & s'en trouuoit fort peu de capables des rai- 
fons que nous leur apportions, pour leur faire voir 
combien nous eftions efloignez de ces penf6es noires. 
Leur refponfe ordinaire eftoit, que cela fe difoit con- 
ftamment par tout, & qu'au refte toute I'lfle ou ces 
peuples habitent auoit la ceruelle renuerf^e, que la 
mort d'vn fi grand nombre de leurs parents leur auoit 
trouble I'efprit; & ainfi qu'il ne falloit pas s'eflon- 
ner, fi comme des infenfez ils s'en prenoient h. la vo- 


1638 - 39] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 21 

eral slanderous tongues, which were already of them- 
selves fruitful enough in impostures and calumnies, 
thought they had a new opportunity to throw the cat 
at our legs, — alleging as their motive that affliction 
had not fallen upon this cabin until after the solemn 
Baptism of Pierre. In fact, they had passed the 
winter very comfortably, the majority of the other 
cabins having been very badly treated by the disease. 

This idea so deeply entered the minds of some of 
them that one entire village, according to the report 
made to us, decided no longer to use French kettles, 
imagining [6] that everything which came in any 
way from us was capable of communicating the dis- 
ease to them. 

There came another piece of news from the Tobac- 
co Nation (for these reports continued to increase, 
even in the surrounding Nations). It was asserted 
that a Savage, stricken with this pestilential disease, 
had vomited up in some blood a leaden pellet, whence 
they concluded that a Frenchman had bewitched 
him. We were obliged every day to answer the 
bearers of similar news ; and there were very few of 
them capable of understanding the arguments we 
brought forward to show them how disinclined we 
were to these evil thoughts. Their usual answer was 
that ' ' this was being constantly said everywhere ; 
and that, besides, all the inhabitants of the Island 
where these peoples live had their brains upset, — 
that the death of so many of their relatives had un- 
settled their minds ; and so one need not be surprised 
if, like madmen, they should inconsiderately lay the 
blame on whatever was at hand. ' ' For our own part, 
we consider ourselves too highly honored to wear the 
livery of Our Lord; one thing alone afflicted us — to 


22 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.15 

Me, a tout ce qui fe prefentoit. Pour noflre regard, 
nous nous eflimions trop honorez de porter les livr^es 
de Nollre Seigneur; vne feule chofe nous affligeoit, 
de voir 1 Enfer triompher pour vn temps, & enleuer 
vn fi grand nombre d'Ames, dont nous entendions le 
danger fans leur pouuoir tendre la main, & les mettre 
en voye de falut. Nous ne defiflames neantmoins 
iamais de faire nos courfes ordinaires, qu'k toute ex- 
tremite, lors que nous vifmes que nos faincts Myfleres 
n'eftoient plus receus auec le refpect qu'ils meritent, 
& que nous iugeames que ces vifites pourroient eftre 
[7] preiudiciables au progrez du Sainct Euangile. 

La mortalite eftoit par tout, mais fur tout au bourg 
d'Ang«tenc qui n' eftoit qu'a trois quarts de lieue 
de nous. On y fit deux voyages, mais fans effect : nous 
y retournames le 3. de luillet, nous trouuames vn 
affez bon nombre de malades, mais les vns s'enuelop- 
poient dans leurs robe, & fe couuroient le vifage de 
peur de nous parler, d'autres nous voyant couroient 
fermer la porte de leur cabane : nous anions defia le 
pied fur la porte de deux autres, qu'on nous en chaff at, 
apportant pour raifon qu'il y auoit des malades. Helas 
c'eftoit iuflement ce que nous cherchions ! nous ne 
perdifmes pas courage pour cela ; & d'autant plus que 
le diable joiioit des fiennes, nous nous fentions d'au- 
tant plus infpirez 'k ne point abandonner ce pauure 
bourg. Tout bien confldere, nous iugeames que ce 
manuals vifage ne venoit que de ce qu'ils n'eftoient 
pas encore bien informez de ce que nous preten- 
dions par ces vifites, car ils n'ont pas couftume de 
s'entre-vifiter ainfi les vns les autres das leurs mala- 
dies, flnon entre proches parents. Et ce leur eftoit 
vne grande nouueaute de voir des perfonnes qui ne 


1638 -39 J LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 23 

see Hell triumphing- for a time, and carrying away 
so many Souls, whose danger we realized without 
being able to stretch out our hands and place them 
in the way of salvation. However, we never ceased 
making our usual trips until at the very worst, when 
we saw that our holy Mysteries were not received 
with the respect that they merited, and we judged 
that these visits might be [7] prejudicial to the prog- 
ress of the Holy Gospel. 

The mortality prevailed everywhere, but especially 
in the village of Angoutenc, which was only three- 
quarters of a league from us. We made two visits 
there, but without effect; we returned thither on the 
3rd of July. We found a considerable number of 
sick people, but they wrapped themselves in their 
robes and covered their faces, for fear of speaking to 
us; others, upon seeing us, hastened to close the 
doors of their cabins ; we already had our feet upon 
the threshold of two others, when we were driven 
away, the reason given being that there were sick 
persons there. Ah! this was precisely what we 
sought, nor did we lose courage thereat; and the 
more the devil played his tricks, the more we felt 
ourselves inspired not to abandon this poor village. 
All things considered, we judged that this hostile 
aspect arose only from the fact that they were not yet 
well informed as to our purpose in these visits, — for 
they are not accustomed to visit one another in this 
way during their illnesses, unless they are near rela- 
tives; so it was a great novelty to them to see per- 
sons who sought out only the sick, and, moreover, 
the most wretched and most forsaken. Hence we 
returned there on the 8th of the same [month], not 
so much in behalf of the sick as to see some old men 


24 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.16 

cherchoient que des malades, & encore les plus mi- 
ferables & les plus abandonnez; c'eft pourquoy nous 
y retournames le 8. du mefme, non tant pour les 
malades, que pour voir quelques anciens, & ceux qui 
auoient le maniment des affaires pour tacher de les 
rendre capables de noftre dellein. Nous fifmes ren- 
contre fort heureufement d'vn Capitaine [8] plein 
d'efprit, on luy fit entendre combien nos vifites leur 
deuroient eftre precieuf es ; il nous efcouta volontiers, 
nous donnant parole qu'il en communiqueroit auec 
les Anciens, Que pour luy il nous affeuroit defia qu'il 
nous verroit touf jours de bon oeil. De ce pas nous 
fufmes voir les plus malades, mais nous n'y fufmes 
pas mieux receus qu'au premier voyage. Vn certain 
Capitaine de guerre ne nous vift pas plufloft "k la 
porte de fa cabane, qu'il nous mena9a de nous fendre 
la tefte fi nous palTions outre. 

Sur I'aprefdifn^e Ondeffon, vn des premiers cbefs 
de guerre de tout le pais nous vint voir auec vn autre 
notable d'Angoi^tenc, Sur le fujet de nos courfes ils 
nous aduoiierent que plufieurs auoient peur de nous, 
& que pour leuer ces craintes, il feroit fort "k propos 
de tenir confeil Ik delfus, oil nous nous trouuerions 
en perfonne, nous ne fouhaitions autre chofe. 

De plus, vne des grolTes teftes de noftre bourg nous 
vint tirer k I'efcart, Mes nepueux (nous dit-il) i'ay vne 
chofe d'importance a vous dire, c'efl qu'Antoine (il 
parloit du P. Daniel) a lafche vne parole inconfider^- 
ment, qui donne bien a parler au monde. L'Efle 
paff^ vn ieune homme fe faifant prier pour demeurer 
k Kebec, & eftant fur le point de mettre le pied dans 
le canot. Que penfe-tu faire, luy dit-il, tu vas k la 
mort, la pefte s'en va miner ton pais, croy moy, paffe 


1638-39] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 25 

and those who had the management of affairs, that 
we might try to make them understand our purpose. 
We very fortunately encountered a Captain [8] of 
great intelligence. He was made to understand how 
precious our visits ought to be to them. He listened 
to us willingly, giving us his word that he would 
communicate with the Old Men, — saying that, as for 
himself, he already assured us that he would always 
look upon us kindly. We went immediately to see 
those who were most ill, but we were no better re- 
ceived than on the former visit. A certain war Cap- 
tain no sooner saw us at the door of his cabin than 
he threatened to split our heads if we went any 
further. 

Towards afternoon, Ondesson, one of the first war 
captains of the whole country, came to see us with an- 
other notable of Angoutenc. In regard to our visits, 
they admitted to us that many were afraid of us, and 
that to remove these fears it would be very desirable 
to hold a council thereupon, where we should be 
present in person. We desired nothing else. 

Moreover, one of the head men of our village came 
and drew us aside, " My nephews" (he said to us), 
" I have something important to tell you. It is that 
Antoine ' ' (he was speaking of Father Daniel) ' ' let 
slip an inconsiderate word which is giving people a 
great deal to talk about. Last Summer, a young man 
who was entreated to remain in Kebec was about to 
set foot in the canoe, when he said to him, ' What 
art thou going to do ? Thou art going to thy death ; 
the pestilence is about to ruin thy country, believe 
me ; pass the winter with us, if thou wouldst escape 
this danger.' That is what I have just learned at 
Onnentisati, where you people are spoken of in very 


26 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.16 

rhyuer auec nous, li tu veux te tirer de ce danger. 
Voyla ce que ie viens d'apprendre h. Onnentifati, ou 
on parle de vous autres en fort manuals termes ; on 
tiet tout affeure que vous eftes la caufe de noflre [9] 
raalheur: h. toutes nos ralfons 11 n'euft autre chofe h. 
nous repllquer, linon que cela fe difolt, ce qui lalllolt 
toufiours de fortes Impreffions dans leurs efprlts. 

Eftant retournez k Ang^tenc pour le confell, nous 
y trouuons tous les Capltalnes (car 11 y en a plulieurs 
dans vn mefme bourg, felon la diuerfite des affaires) 
qui nous firent vn affez bon accueil : le plus qualifi6 
inuite les autres ^ raffembl^e, criant h. pleine tefle 
autour de la bourgade. Les Anciens, les femmes, la 
ieuneffe, & les enfans y accourent h. noftre follicita- 
tion. L'ouuerture du coafeil fe fift par vn pain de 
Petun que nous leur prefentafmes das vn plat k la 
mode du pais / vn des Capitaines le rompt, pour le 
diflribuer aux plus confiderables de la troupe ; iamais 
ils ne parlent d'affaires & ne tirent aucune conclu- 
fion que le calumet k la bouche, cefte fum^e qui leur 
monte ati cerueau leur donne, difent-ils, de I'efclair- 
ciffement dans les difficultez qui fe prefentent. Cela 
fait le Prefident hauffe la voix h. peu prez du mefme 
ton que nos crieurs publics font par les carefours de 
France; faifant entendre que fes Nepueux les Fran- 
9ois alloient parler, qu'on les efcoutaft bien, & qu'on 
ne s'ennuyafk pas de la longueur de leur difcours: 
que la chofe efloit d'importance, & meritoit d'eftre 
bien conceue. Nous leur expofafmes ce qui nous 
auoit amen6 en leur pais, & particulierement ce que 
nous pretendions dans les vifites de leurs malades. 
Ils nous efcouterent auec affez d' attention; mais lors 
que nous eftions fur le point de conclure, on vint 


1638-39] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 


bad terms ; they are altogether certain that you are 
the cause of our [9] misfortunes." To all our argu- 
ments he had nothing else to answer except that such 
things were being told, which always left a deep 
impression upon their minds. 

Having returned to Angoutenc for the council, we 
found all the Captains there (for there are several of 
them in the same village, according to the diversity 
of affairs), who gave us a sufficiently kind reception. 
The most influential one invited the others to the 
assembly, crying in a loud voice through the village. 
The Old Men, the women, the young people, and the 
children hastened thither at our solicitation. The 
council was opened by our presenting to them a cake 
of Tobacco in a dish, in the manner of the country; 
one of the Captains broke it, in order to distribute it to 
the more prominent members of the company. They 
never speak of business, nor come to any conclusion, 
except with the pipe in the mouth; this smoke, 
which mounts to their brains, gives them, they say, 
enlightenment amid the difficulties that present them- 
selves. When this was over, the President raised 
his voice to a tone nearly like that used by our pub- 
lic criers in frequented streets in France, giving them 
to understand that his Nephews, the French, were 
about to speak, that they should listen to them atten- 
tively, and that they should not be annoyed by the 
length of their speeches, — that the matter was one 
of importance, and deserved to be well understood. 
We explained to them what had brought us into their 
country, and especially what our purpose was in 
visiting their sick. They listened to us with fair 
attention, but when we were about to conclude some 
one came to invite these Gentlemen to a feast ; and. 


28 LES RELA TIONS DES /J&SUJTES [Vol. 15 

inuiter ces Meflieurs a vn feftin: & par ce [lo] que le 
temps prelloit, il nous fallut brifer; car il n'y a affaire 
d'importance qu'ils ne quittet pour vn feftin. Ayant 
done acheu6, ils fe regardent quelque temps, ^ qui 
parleroit, par deferance. Enfin celuy qui prefidoit 
prenant la parole, repeta h. la hafle le principal de 
noftre difcours, & infifta particulierement fur ce que 
nous les aymions, & que ce n'eftoit que par affection 
que nous les allions vifiter, auec deffein de viure & 
mourir dans leur pais. Vn des plus aagez adioufla 
qu'il feroit a propos que cefte parole retentift par 
toute la terre; qu'au refte nous les obligions grande- 
ment de les conf oler dans leurs larmes : Que nos per- 
fonnes leur eftoient cheres : Que la ieuneffe prift bien 
garde a ne pas faire vn coup dont tout le pais gemi- 
roit. Tous enfin conclurent, auec des termes pleins 
de bien-veillance, nous inuitant h. les vifiter dorefna- 
uant. Voyla le naturel du pais, pour des paroles 
tant que vous en voudrez: nous iugeames pourtant 
que nous anions pour lors tout fujet de fatisf action. 
Depuis, dans nos vifites nous fifmes rencontre 
d'vn vieillard fort malade. Nos Nepueux (nous dit- 
il d'abord) foyez les bien venus; il changea bien- toft 
de compliment quand il fceut ce qui nous amenoit, 
car la colere luy montant au vifage, C'eft vous autres, 
dit-il, qui me faites mourir, depuis fix iours que vous 
miftes le pied ceans ie n'ay pas mang6, & ie vous ay 
veu en fonge comme des perfonnes qui nous portez 
malheur, c'eft vous qui me faites mourir. Notez que 
parmy ces peuples il n'en faut pas dire dauantage 
pour faire fendre la tefte k vn homme. En [ii] 
effect, nonobftant les belles promeffes que ie viens 
de dire, nous remarquames par apres tant de froideur 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ibjS 29 

as [lo] the time was short, we were obliged to break 
off, for there is no affair so important that they 
would not leave it for a feast. Now when we had 
finished, they looked at one another for some time, 
by way of deference, to see who would speak. Fin- 
ally, he who presided took the floor, hurriedly re- 
peated the chief points of our speech, and dwelt par- 
ticularly upon the assertion that we loved them, and 
that it was only through affection that we went about 
to visit them, with the intention of living and dying 
in their country. One of the older ones added that 
it would be well to have this word resound through- 
out the earth; that, furthermore, we were placing 
them under great obligations by consoling them in 
their tears ; that our persons were dear to them ; that 
the young men should be very careful not to strike 
a blow for which the whole country might groan. 
All finally concluded with expressions of the utmost 
good will, inviting us to visit them from that time on. 
Such is the character of this country ; as for words, 
there are as many of them as you desire. Neverthe- 
less, we judged that we had, for the time, every rea- 
son for satisfaction. 

Afterwards, in our visits, we encountered a very 
sick old man. "My Nephews" (he said to us at 
first), " be welcome." He soon reversed the compli- 
ment when he learned what brought us there, for he 
said, the angry blood mounting to his face, "It is 
you people who are making me die; since you set 
foot in this house, six days ago, I have eaten noth- 
ing ; and I have seen you in a dream as persons who 
are bringing us misfortune ; it is you who are mak- 
ing me die." Observe that among these peoples 
nothing more need be said for a man to have his head 


so LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.15 

par tout, & vne fi grande defiance de nous autres, 
que nous iugeames a propos de defifter tout "k fait 
de nos vifites. loint que fur I'aduis que nous enuoya 
N. Pere Superieur, nous demeurafmes quelque temps 
^ I'anchre pendant la tempefte. II nous efcriuoit de 
plus, qu'a I'iffue de ce feftin qui auoit interrompu 
noftre confeil, ils s'eftoient raffemblez, & auoient 
refolu entr'eux de tuer vn Frangois, qui que ce fufl. 

Ils ne laiffoient pas pourtant de nous confoler par 
leurs vifites ; Dieu ce femble nous enuoyoit les Prin- 
cipaux pour eftre informez de noftre precede les vns 
apres les autres. Ce dernier mefme qui nous chalTa 
{\ rudement de fa cabane, ne feignit pas de nous dire 
chez nous qu'en verite il nous croyoit les autheurs de 
leur maladie. Vn autre fe plaignit k nous qu'vn fien 
parent auoit expire incontinent apres noftre vifite. 

Si nous eftions aux prifes en cette habitation de la 
Conception, nos autres Peres ne I'eftoient pas moins 
en celle de S. lof eph : car cette pointe de terre fe re- 
froidiffoit de plus en plus en noftre endroit, k I'occa- 
fion des calomnies que quelques manuals efprits al- 
loiet forgeants de iour en iour. Voicy bien d'autres 
bruits: quatre barques, ce dit-on, de ceux qui ne 
font pas de nos parents (ils vouloient dire les Anglois) 
font montez malgre tons les Fran9ois, iufques a la 
riuiere des prairies: & ceux qui les conduifent main- 
tiennent que les [12] robes noires font la caufe de 
toutes les maladies. Nous anions beau leur remon- 
ftrer par fortes raifons comme quoy la chofe fembloit 
incroyable, ils perfeueroient dans leurs penf^es. 

Noftre premier Chreftien nous aduifa d'vn autre 
bruit femblable k celuy dont nous efcriuifmes I'an 
paff6, qui certes a eu vn grand cours. S9auoir que 


1638-39] LE /FUME'S RELATION, i6s8 31 

split. In [i i] fact, notwithstanding the fine promises 
that I have just mentioned, we noticed afterwards 
so much coldness on all sides, and so great distrust of 
us, that we judged it wise to desist entirely from our 
visits ; more than this, upon the advice that Our Fa- 
ther Superior sent us, we remained for some time at 
anchor, during the tempest. He wrote to us also 
that, at the close of the feast which had interrupted 
our council, they had again assembled, and had re- 
solved to kill some Frenchman, whoever he might be. 

They still continued, however, to console us by 
their visits. It seems as if God sent the Chiefs to 
us, one after another, to be informed of our proceed- 
ings. Even that last one who had so rudely driven 
us from his cabin did not hesitate to tell us in our 
house that he really believed us to be the authors of 
their sickness. Another complained to us that one 
of his relatives had expired immediately after our 
visit. 

If we were engaged in a struggle in this settle- 
ment of la Conception, our other Fathers were not 
less so at that of St. Joseph, for that locality became 
colder and colder towards us, on account of the slan- 
ders that certain evil minds were forging from day 
to day. There were, indeed, other rumors. Four 
barks, it was said, belonging to those who are not 
our relatives (they meant the English) ascended, in 
spite of all the French, as far as the river des prai- 
ries, and those who commanded them maintained 
that the [12] black robes were the cause of all the 
sickness. It was in vain that we remonstrated with 
them, forcibly arguing how incredible the thing 
seemed ; they persevered in their own notions. 

Our first Christian informed us of another report, 
similar to that of which we wrote last vear, which 


32 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.15 

nous anions apport6 de France vn cadaure, & qu'il y 
auoit fans doute dans noftre tabernacle quelque chofe 
qui les faifoit mourir. Ces pauures gens s'en pren- 
nent k vn fort qu'ils cherchent par tout; poffible que 
ce bon homme, ou quelqu'vn de nos Neophytes aura 
parl6 trop cruement de ce precieux depoft ; car pour 
nous nous ne leur en parlous qu'apres vne longue 
efpreuue de leur foy. 

Ce bruit icy n'efloit pas encore eflouffe, qu'il s'en 
efleue vn autre. Noftre crime eftoit, ce difoient-ils, 
que nous nous efiions loge au coeur du pais pour en 
procurer plus aif^ment la mine totale ; pourquoy faire 
nous aurions tue dans les bois vn petit enfant k coups 
d'alefnes, ce qui auroit caufe la mort ^ tout plein 
d'enfans. Le diable enrageoit peut-eflre de ce que 
nous anions plac6 dans le ciel quantite de ces petits 
innocents. Bref nous voyla rebutez par tout ; li que 
taf chant vn iour d'entrer dans I'efprit d'vn de leurs 
malades, qui eft icy des plus confiderables, & luy & 
fes parens nous chanterent poiiilles. lis s'ombragent 
de la moindre de nos actions : qui fe plaint de ce que 
les matins nous tenons noftre porte f ermee ; poffible, 
difent-ils pour quelque fort. Qui nous foupgonne de 
quelque fmiftre deffein, lors que [13] fur le foir nous 
chantons nos Litanies. En vn mot ils concourent 
tous en ce point ; que pour mettre fin k leurs mif eres 
11 falloit fe desfaire de nous au pluflofl, ou bien nous 
reniioyer en France. Ny euft pas iufqu'k vne floiiette 
que nous anions fait mettre au haut d'vn fapin qui ne 
leur donna matiere de parler. Car, oil anez-vons 
I'efprit, ce dit vn des plus qualifiez, vous autres mes 
Nepneux, Que vent dire ce morcean de toile que ie voy 
Ik fi haut mont6 ? mais cefte plainte f e termina plai- 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s8 33 

certainly has had great vogue — namely, that we had 
brought a corpse from France, and that there was, 
without doubt, something in our tabernacle that made 
them die. These poor peoples lay the blame on a 
charm which they seek everywhere. Possibly this 
good man, or one of our Neophytes, may have spok- 
en too freely of this precious deposit, since, for our- 
selves, we never speak to them about it until after a 
long proof of their faith. 

This report was not yet smothered, when another 
one arose. Our crime was, they said, that we had 
established ourselves in the heart of the country that 
we might more easily procure its total ruin; to 
accomplish this, we had killed a little child in the 
woods by stabbing it with a bodkin, which had caused 
the death of a great many children. The devil was 
perhaps enraged because we had placed many of 
these little innocents in heaven. In short, we were 
rebuffed on all sides, so that, one day, when we strove 
to gain the good will of one of their sick people, who 
is among the most influential persons here, both he 
and his relatives began to abuse us. They took um- 
brage at our slightest act, some of them complaining 
that we kept our door closed in the morning, possi- 
bly, they said, for some sorcery; others suspected 
us of some sinister design when [13] in the early even- 
ing we sang our Litanies. In a word, they all agreed 
upon this point — that to put an end to their miseries 
they must make away with us as soon as possible, or 
else send us back to France. There was nothing, 
even to a weather vane that we had had placed on the 
top of a fir tree, which did not give them something 
to talk about. " For where are your wits," said one 
of the chief men, "you Nephews of mine? What 
does that piece of cloth mean, that I see placed so 



34 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.15 

fatnment, quand apres auoir f9eu qu'on la pla9oit-la, 
pour fgauoir de quel cofte fouffloit le vent; il nous 
reprift d'y auoir efpargn^ la toile k ce qu'on la vifb 
de plus loing. 

Noftre horloge ne paroifToit plus, a raifon qu'ils 
le croyoient le Demon qui tue ; & nos images enlu- 
min6es ne leur reprefentoient plus que ce qui arriuoit 
h leurs malades. A nous voir pourmener fans plus, 
on croyoit qu'il y euft de la forcellerie. 

Voicy la nouuelle qui nous effraya le plus ; le bruit 

eft que N. Pere Superieur auoit efte malTacr6. Vn 

Sauuage tout effare nous la vint apporter le premier. 

Deux Capitaines de confideration en dirent les parti- 

cularitez aux autres de nos Peres, iufques a leur nom- 

mer le meurtrier. Nous voyla enfin comme de mife- 

rables excommuniez, car pour lors tout le monde nous 

quitte, & on ne nous regarde plus qu'auec effroy. 

Get affafTmat pretendu fe refpandoit par tout le Pais, 

lors que le Pere pour nous confoler fe hafta de nous 

venir mettre hors de peine. II alia d'abord vifiter 

noftre Capitaine qui raccueillift comme vn [14] 

homme reffufcite. Les Anciens du bourg le vinrent 

bienueigner les vns apres les autres : nous ne pumes 

faire f9auoir de la fante du Pere, a 1' habitation de 

fainct lofeph qu'apres la huictaine, faute de melTager. 

Les lettres qu'ils nous efcriuirent monftrent euidem- 

ment que la chofe paffoit pour veritable ])army ceux 

de leur bourgade. De fait, & le peu d'eftat que ces 

peuples font de la vie d'vn homme, & la reputation 

de forcier qui entraifne infailliblement la mort apres 

foy, nous font toucher au doigt les obligations fen- 

fibles que nous auons a celuy qui eft le Maiftre de 

nos vies. 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 35 

high up there?" But this complaint terminated 
pleasantly, when, after having learned that we placed 
it there to see from what quarter the wind blew, he 
reproached us for not having used a larger piece, that 
it might be seen from a greater distance. 

Our clock was no longer visible, for they believed 
it to be the Demon of death, and our illuminated 
pictures represented to them nothing more than what 
was happening to their sick people. Merely seeing 
us walking about, they thought we were engaged 
in some witchcraft. 

Here is the news that frightened us the most, — 
there was a report that Our Father Superior had been 
murdered. It was first brought to us by a terrified 
Savage, and two Captains of note related its details 
to others of our Fathers, even naming to them the 
murderer. Behold us, finally, miserable outcasts, as 
it were ; for from that time on every one deserted us, 
and we were regarded only with dread. This re- 
ported assassination spread throughout the Country, 
when the Father, to console us, hastened to come 
and relieve us from our anxiety. He went, at the 
outset, to visit our Captain, who welcomed him as a 
[14] man risen from the grave. The Old Men of the 
village came to welcome him, one after another. We 
could not impart the news of the Father's safety to 
the settlement of saint Joseph until a week afterward, 
for lack of a messenger ; the letters that they wrote 
us show plainly that the rumor passed for the truth 
among those of their village. In fact, both the little 
value that these peoples place upon the life of a man, 
and the reputation of being sorcerers, which infalli- 
bly drags death after it, render very palpable to us 
the evident obligations we are under to him who is 
the Master of our lives. 


38 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.15 


CHAPITRE II. 

ASSEMBL^E GENERALE DE TOUT LE PAKS, OU ON DE- 
LIBERE DE NOSTRE MORT. 

IL a pleu ^ Dieu nous exaucer, en ce qu'en fin il a 
fait naifbre I'occafion d'vne affembl^e generale, 
pour informer les Chefs du pais de ce que nous 
pretendons chez eux. 

II fut queflion de deliberer meurement fur vne 
guerre, les Anciens de chaque bourg en concer- 
terent auparauant par enfemble dans leurs confeils 
particuliers. Y eftant inuitez nous leur fifmes vn 
prefent de trois "k quatre cent grains de pourcelaine, 
(ce font les piftoles du pais) c'eftoit pour leur donner 
quelque tefmoignage comme nous prenions part aux 
interefls du public. Or comme nous f9auions bien 
qu'on deuoit parler [15] de nous en cefle aflembl^e 
generale, le Pere Superieur tachoit de nous purger 
aupres des vns & des autres en particulier fur les 
calomnies qu'on nous auoit impof6es, mais ils eftoient 
defja fi aigris que les Capitaines qui nous eftoient les 
plus fauorables, luy difoient nettement que la plus 
grande faueur que nous pouuions efperer eftoit 
d'eflre challes du pais, & renuoyez k K^bec. 

Enfin I'ouuerture de la grande affembl^e fe fifl fur 
le foir du 4. d'Aouft, ou apres les complimens ordi- 
naires on ne toucha pour ce coup que les affaires de 
la paix auec leurs alliez, d'ovi ils confulterent quafi 
toute la nuict, auec la prudence qu'on ne fe pourroit 
imaginer. 


1638-39] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1638 37 


CHAPTER II. 

GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE WHOLE COUNTRY, WHERE 
OUR DEATH IS UNDER DELIBERATION. 

IT pleased God to hearken to us, in so far as finally 
to create an occasion for a general assembly, that 
we might inform the Chiefs of the country of 
our purposes among them. 

It was a question of some war, that was to be taken 
into mature consideration, the Old Men of each vil- 
lage having previously come to a mutual agreement 
upon it in their special councils. Being invited to this 
assembly, we made them a present of three or four 
hundred porcelain beads, (these are the pistoles of 
the country) in order to give them some proof of how 
much we shared in the public interests. Now we 
were well aware that they were to speak [15] of us 
in this general assembly. The Father Superior en- 
deavored to clear us, in private, with various persons, 
from the slanders, that had been loaded upon us; 
but they were already so bitter that the Captains 
most favorable to us told him plainly that the great- 
est favor we could hope for was to be driven from 
the country and sent back to K^bec. 

Finally, the opening of the great assembly took 
place towards evening on the 4th of August, where, 
after the usual compliments, they discussed for that 
time only the subject of peace with their allies, upon 
which they consulted nearly all night, with a pru- 
dence that can hardly be imagined. 


38 LES RELATIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol.15 

Le bon fuft que fur la fin du confeil N. Pere 
Superieur prenant fujet de refpondre, tantofl a I'vn, 
tantoft h. r autre de ces Confeillers fur les poincts 
indifferents du Ciel, du Soleil & des Aflres, il tomba 
infenfiblement fur ceux de noftre foy, & toucha puif- 
famment ces efprits affez indifferents d'ailleurs, par 
la confideration des flammes eternelles. 

L'autre alfemblee s'ouurit fur les huict heures du 
f oir ; ce confeil eftoit compofe de trois Nations, fgauoir 
de celle dire des Ours, nos premiers hoftes, qui font 
en tout quatorze, tant bourgs que villages : ceux-cy 
tenoient vn des coftez de la cabane, on nous pla9a au 
milieu du mefme cofte. A I'oppofite efloient les deux 
autres Nations, au nombre chacun de quatre bour- 
gades bien peupl6es. C'eft icy qu'il s'agift du fait 
des robes noires, que Ton croit par tout eftre [i6] la 
caufe de tons les malheurs du pais. lis deferent tous 
la qualite de Prefident h. vn certain vieillard aueugle, 
vn des plus recommandables de noftre bourg, & le 
plus aage de la compagnie, refpecte parmy les fiens, 
par la reputation qu'il s'efloit acquife d'homme d'ef- 
prit & de conduite. Voicy a peu pres comme tout fe 
paffa. 

Le premier des Capitaines met comme en la bouche 
d'Ontitarac (c'eft ce Prefident aueugle) les termes 
dont il fe deuoit feruir pour faire I'ouuerture du con- 
feil. Alors ce vieillard d'vne voix tremblante, & 
neantmoins afl!ez forte faliia ces Nations en general, 
& chacun des Chefs en particulier, fe conioiiifl^ant auec 
eux de ce qu'ils s'eftoient heureufement afl!emblez 
pour deliberer fur vne affaire la plus importante qui 
fuft dans le puys \sc. pays]. Puis il exhorte toute 
I'alfiflance k proceder ferieufement en cefte occafion, 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s8 39 

It was well that, toward the end of the council, 
Our Father Superior, taking occasion to reply, now 
to one, now to another of these Councilors upon un- 
important questions about the Sky, the Sun, and the 
Stars, fell imperceptibly upon the points of our faith, 
and powerfully affected these minds, otherwise rather 
indifferent, by the contemplation of the eternal fires. 

The other assembly opened about eight o'clock in 
the evening. This council was composed of three 
Nations, namely, of that one called the Bear, — our 
first hosts, who comprise, in all, fourteen villages, 
large and small; they occupied one side of the cabin, 
and we were placed in the middle of the same side. 
Opposite were the two other Nations, each number- 
ing four very populous villages. It was here that 
they were to deal with the affair of the black robes, 
who were everywhere believed to be [i6] the cause 
of all the misfortunes of the country. They all 
yielded the dignity of President to a certain old blind 
man, one of the most commendable of our village, and 
the oldest of the company, respected among his peo- 
ple for the reputation he had acquired as a man of 
intelligence and executive ability. Here is an ac- 
count of it, nearly as all occurred. 

The foremost of the Captains puts in the mouth, as 
it were, of Ontitarac (the blind President) the terms 
he should use in opening the council. Then this old 
man, in a trembling, yet tolerably strong voice, sa- 
luted these Nations in general, and each of the Chiefs 
in particular, rejoicing with them that they had aus- 
piciously assembled to deliberate upon a matter which 
was the most important in the country. Then he 
exhorted all those present to proceed seriously upon 
this occasion, when their preservation was at stake ; 


40 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.15 

o^ il s'agiffoit de leur conferuation ; car il eft queflion 
de defcouurir les autheurs de la maladie publique, 
& de remedier an mal; parlez done franchement, 
difoit-il, & que perfonne ne diffimule ce qu'il f9aura 
eflre de la verity. La delTus le Maiftre de la fefte fo- 
lemnelle des Morts, qui eft le chef du confeil de tout 
le pais prit la parole, & exaggera I'eftat deplorable 
de fa nation ; il conclud f on difcours en nous taxant 
comme perfonnes qui en anions de longue main quel- 
que cognoiffance. II parloit fi pen diftinctement, 
que nous perdions beaucoup de fes paroles; c'eft 
pourquoy N. P. Superieur ayant reprefente que, puis 
qu'il s'agiffoit de nous, il eftoit k propos que nous 
compriffions bien tout ce qui fe diroit, pour y pou- 
uoir refpondre; [17] nous montafmes plus haut, & 
prifmes place aupres de ceux qui auoient les pieces 
les plus fanglantes h. produire contre nous. 

le ne fgache auoir rien veu iamais de plus lugubre 
que cefte affemblee ; du commancement ils fe regar- 
doient les vns les autres comme des cadaures, ou bien 
comme des hommes qui reffentent defia les affres de 
la mort ; ils ne parloient que par f oufpirs, chacun fe 
mettant h. faire le denombrement des morts & des 
malades de fa famille. Tout cela n'eftoit que pour 
s'animer a vomir cotre nous auec plus d'aigreur le 
venin qu'ils cachoient an dedans. II ne fe trouua 
perfonne qui [prift] ouuertement noflre def enf e ; & 
tel penfoit nous auoir grandement oblig6 de s'eftre 
teu tout a fait. lis eftoient tons comme autant d'ac- 
cufateurs qui preffoient viuement I'Arreft de noftre 
condamnation. lis firent leur poffible par leur dites 
& redites de furpredre le Pere en quelqu'vne de 
fes paroles. Deux vieillards nommement nous en- 


1638-39] LE /EU NE'E RELATION, i6s8 41 

for it was a question of discovering the authors of 
the common malady, and of remedying the evil. 
"Speak, then, frankly," said he, "and let no one 
conceal what he knows to be the truth." Thereupon 
the Master of the solemn feast of the Dead,^ who is 
the chief of council for the whole country, began to 
speak, and exaggerated the deplorable condition of 
his nation. He concluded his discourse by taxing 
us with being persons who for a long time had had 
some knowledge of it. He spoke so indistinctly that 
we lost many of his words ; hence, after Our Father 
Superior had represented that, since the matter con- 
cerned us, it was fitting that we should correctly un- 
derstand all that was said, that we might be able to 
answer it, [17] we went farther up, and took our 
places next to those who had the most bloody weap- 
ons to produce against us. 

I do not know that I have ever seen anything more 
lugubrious than this assembly. In the beginning, 
they looked at one another like corpses, or rather 
like men who already feel the terrors of death ; they 
spoke only in sighs, each one undertaking the enu- 
meration of the dead and sick of his family. All 
that was only to incite them to vomit more bitterly 
upon us the venom which they concealed within. 
There was no one present who openly undertook our 
defense, and certain ones thought they were doing 
us a great favor by remaining altogether silent. 
They were all like so many accusers who keenly 
urged on the Decree for our condemnation, doing all 
they could by their words and their repetitions to 
take the Father unawares in some of his utterances. 
Two old men especially attacked us, for the others 
did nothing but eagerly repeat over and over what 


42 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.15 

treprirent, car les autres ne firent que rabattre ^sc. 
rebattre] viuement ce que ceux-cy auoient dit: I'vn 
d'eux parla quafi en ces termes. 

Mes Freres, vous f^auez bien que ie ne parle quafi 
iamais que dans nos confeils de guerre, & que ie ne 
me mefle que des armes : neantmoins il faut que ie 
parle icy, puis que tous les autres Capitaines font 
morts. Auant done que ie les fuiue au tombeau, il 
faut que ie me defcharge, & peut-eftre que ce fera Ie 
bien du pais qui s'en va perdu; tous les iours c'eft 
pis que iamais, cefle cruelle maladie a tantofl couru 
toutes les cabanes de noftre bourg, & a fait vn tel ra- 
uage dans noftre famille, [i8] que nous voyla reduits 
^ deux perfonnes, & encore ne fcay-ie fi nous ef chape- 
rons la furie de ce Demon. I' ay veu autrefois des 
maladies dans Ie pais, mais ie n'ay iamais rien veu de 
femblable, deux ou trois Lunes nous en faifoient 
voir la fin; & en peu d'ann6es nos families s'eftant 
reftablies, nous en perdions quafi la memoire : mais 
maintenant nous comptons defia vne Annee depuis 
que nous fommes afHigez, & ne voyons encore au- 
cune apparence de voir bientoft Ie terme de noftre 
mifere. Ce qui nous a mis iufques ^ prefent Ie plus 
en peine, eft que nous ne voyons goutte en cefte ma- 
ladie, & que nous n'auons peu encore en defcouurir 
la fource. Ie vous diray ce que i'en ay appris depuis 
peu de iours ; mais auparauant il faut que vous f 9a- 
chiez que ie parle fans paffion, & que ie ne fais eftat 
que de dire la pure verity. Ie ne hays ny n'ayme les 
Frangois, iamais ie n'ay rien eu k demefler auec eux, 
& c'eft d'aujourd'huy que nous nous entrevoyons; 
ie ne pretens point leur faire aucun tort, feulement 
ie rapporteray fidelement Ie difcours d'vn de noftre 


1638 - 39] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 43 

these had said. One of them spoke about in these 
terms : 

" My Brothers, you know well that I hardly ever 
speak except in our war councils, and that I concern 
myself only with affairs of arms ; but I am obliged 
to speak here, since all the other Captains are dead. 
Now before I follow them to the grave I must free 
my mind ; and perhaps it will be for the good of the 
country, which is going to ruin. Every day it is 
worse than before ; this cruel malady has now over- 
run all the cabins of our village, and has made such 
ravages in our own family [18] that, lo, we are re- 
duced to two persons, and I do not yet know whether 
we shall escape the fury of this Demon. I have seen 
maladies in the country before, but never have I seen 
anything like this ; two or three Moons sufficed for us 
to see the end of those, and in a few years, our fami- 
lies being restored, we almost lost the memory of 
them. But now we already count a Year since we 
began to be afflicted, and we see as yet no probability 
of soon beholding the end of our misery. What has 
caused us the most uneasiness, up to the present, is 
that we cannot at all understand this disease, and 
that we have not yet been able to discover its origin. 
I will tell you what I have learned about it within a 
few days; but first you must know that I am speak- 
ing without passion, and that I intend to tell only the 
plain truth. I neither hate nor love the French; 
I have never had anything to do with them, and we 
see each other for the first time to-day. I do not 
intend to do them any wrong; I shall only report 
faithfully the speech of one of our nation recently 
returned from the trade at K6bec. ' ' 

It would take too long to report here the chief 


44 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.15 

nation reuenu fraifchement de la traite de Kebec. 

le ferois trop long de rapporter icy les chefs de fon 
accufation, qui confiftoient en ie ne f9ay quels forti- 
leges pretendus, defquels nous aurions la cognoif- 
fance. Au refle il enrichit le tout de tant de belles 
paroles, & le deduilit auec tant de paflion, que toute 
la compagnie receut ces fourbes comme des veritez. 
Notez que c6t efprit malicieux, pour donner plus de 
couleur "k fes contes, faifoit difficulte de receuoir le 
tefmoignage de [19] ceux qu'il f9auoit eftre defcriez 
pour leur menfonges: mais s'il en reiettoit vn, il en 
rapportoit cinquante autres prefts, ce difoit-il, 'k fou- 
ftenir fon dire. 

N. P. Superieur voulant parler, laiffa quelque 
temps letter fon feu k ce Capitaine, puis ay at deman- 
ds audience, luy ferma la bouche en peu de mots, 
par des raifons aufquelles il n'eut point de refponfe; 
la confufion de cet accufateur n'empefcha pas qu'vn 
autre vieillard ne nous prit a partie auec autant de 
fubtilit6, que ce qu'il nous obiectoit eftoit efloign6 
de la verite. Apres tout, les Confeillers preffent 
importunement le Pere de produire ie ne fgay quelle 
piece d'eftoffe enforcel6e qu'il gardoit k la mine du 
pais; auec affeurace de vie fauue, au cas qu'il voulut 
aduoiier qu'elle eftoit chez nous. Le Pere inliftant 
touf jour-fur la negatiue; il n'importe, dit le Preli- 
dent, lafche feulement le mot mon Nepueu, ne crains 
point, il ne te fera fait aucun tort. En fin le Pere fe 
voyant importune & preffe fi opiniaftrement ; Si vous 
ne me croyez, leur dit-il, enuoyez chez nous, qu'on 
y vifite par tout & fi vous craignez de vous tromper, 
comme nous auons diuerfes fortes d'habits «& d'6- 
toffes, iettez tout dans le lac. Voyla iuftement 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 45 

points of his accusation, which consisted in I know 
not what pretended sorceries of which we had knowl- 
edge. Moreover, he embellished it all with so many 
fine words, and argued it so passionately, that the 
whole company received these falsehoods as truths. 
Note that this malicious spirit, to give more color to 
his stories, was reluctant to accept the testimony of 
[19] those who he knew were in disrepute on account 
of their falsehoods ; but if he rejected one of these, 
he mentioned fifty others who were ready, he stated, 
to confirm his statements. 

Our Father Superior, intending to speak, let this 
Captain discharge his rage for some time ; then, hav- 
ing asked a hearing, he closed his mouth in a few 
words, with arguments for which he had no answer. 
The confusion of this accuser did not prevent another 
old man from taking us to task, with as much cun- 
ning as the objections he offered were far from the 
truth. After all this, the Councilors importunately 
urged the Father to produce I know not what piece of 
bewitched cloth that he was keeping to the ruin of 
the country, — assuring him that his life would be 
spared, in case he would admit that it was at our 
house. The Father persisting in denying this, * * That 
does not signify," said the President; " only let fall 
the word, my Nephew ; do not fear, it will do thee 
no harm." Finally, the Father, finding himself im- 
portuned and urged so obstinately, said to them, " If 
you do not believe me, send to our house and let 
every part of it be searched ; and if you are afraid of 
being imposed upon, as we have different kinds of 
clothes and stuffs, throw them all into the lake." 
" There! that is just the way guilty people and sor- 
cerers talk," replied he. " How dost thou wish me 


46 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 15 

comme parlent les coulpables & les forciers, re[p]li- 
qua-il. Comment done veux-tu que ie parle? dit le 
Pere. Encore fi tu nous difois ce qui nous fait mou- 
rir, dit vn autre; c'eft ce que ie ne f9ay pas, & ce 
que ie ne vous puis dire ; mais neantmoins puis que 
vous me preffez fi fort il faut que ie parle. 

Ie vous ay defia dit fouuent, mes Freres, que [20] 
nous n'auions aucune cognoilTance de cefte maladie : & 
veritablemet ie ne croy pas que vous en puiffiez def cou- 
urir la fource, cela vous efl cacli6: mais ie m'en vay 
vous expof er des veritez infaillibles. Apres leur auoir 
parl6 hautement de la gradeur de noftre bon Dieu, de 
fes recompenfes pour les bos, & des chaftiments pour 
les mef chants; il tombe fur le fujet de la contagion, 
les caufes de laquelle il ne deduifit qu'auec peine, 
pour les interruptions que ces Barbares luy faifoient. 
Le pis fut, que le Prelident rompit tout le difcours ; 
en ce que, difoit-il, nous fommes apres pour recognoi- 
ftre les autheurs de nos maladies : & comme fi le Pere 
n'euft encore rien dit, il fe met a le preffer plus que 
iamais de monftrer ceite piece enf orcelee : mais voy- 
ans qu'ils n'auan9oient rien de ce cofte-lk, quelques- 
vns s'endorment, d'autres s'ennuyant s"en vont fans 
rien conclure. Vn vieillard entr'autres fortant, faltia 
le Pere ainfi; Si on te fend la tefle nous n'en dirons 
mot. Les principaux demeurerent, quoy qu'il fut 
defia apres minuict ; bref ils remirent la conclufion 
de tout au retour des Hurons, qui eftoient defcendus 
h. Kebec ; ce fut vn coup de la tres-douce prouidence 
de Dieu en noftre endroit, veu les bonnes nouuelles 
que ceux-cy deuoient rapporter des Fran§ois. Quel- 
ques-vns ayans plus particulierement prefix I'oreille 
aux difcours du Pere, le prierent de les inftruire des 


1638-39] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1638 47 

to talk, then?" said the Father. " But if thou wilt 
only tell us what makes us die, ' ' said another. ' ' That 
is what I do not know, and what I cannot tell you ; 
but, since you urge me so strongly, I must speak. 

" I have often told you, my Brothers, that [20] we 
know nothing about this disease, and truly I do not 
think you could discover its origin, — that is hidden 
from you. But I am going to reveal to you some in- 
fallible truths." After having spoken to them bold- 
ly of the greatness of our good God, of his rewards 
for the good and punishments for the wicked, he 
came to the subject of the contagion, the causes of 
which he had some trouble in explaining on account 
of the interruptions of these Barbarians. The worst 
of it was that the President entirely broke up his 
speech; " For," said he, " we desire to discover the 
authors of our sickness," and as if the Father had not 
yet said anything, he began to urge him more than 
ever to show this bewitched article ; but seeing that 
nothing was gained in that direction, some of them 
fell asleep, others, growing weary, departed without 
reaching any conclusion. One old man, among 
others, upon leaving, saluted the Father thus, " If 
they split thy head for thee, we will not say a word." 
The principal men remained, although it was already 
after midnight. In short, they postponed the con- 
clusion of the whole matter to the return of the Hu- 
rons who had gone down to Kebec. This was an 
act of the most gentle providence of God in our 
behalf, considering the good news the latter were to 
bring back from the French. Some, having listened 
more attentively to the Father's talk, begged him to 
instruct them as to what means they should employ 
to appease God. The Father was still endeavoring 


48 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.15 

moyens qu'ils deuoiet tenir pour appaifer Dieu. Le 
Pere tachoit encore de les cotenter Ik dellus, quand 
voyla tout k coup le Capitaine de noftre bourg (le- 
quel iufques alors auoit garde le filence [21] par 
maxime d'eftat) qui s'^crie, he quelles gens font-ce- 
cy! ils difent toullours le mefme, ils ne fe laffent 
point de nous tenir cent f ois vn mefme langage ; ils 
parlant fans cefTe de leur OkI, c'eft k dire, de ce grand 
Efprit qu'ils adorent, de ce qu'il a commande, de 
ce qu'il defend, de I'Enfer, & du Paradis. 

Voyla toute I'ilTue de ce miferable confeil. Plaife 
h. la diuine Bonte le rendre heureux pour quelques- 
vns, qu'il aura polTible touche de fa faincte Parole; 
fi les effects n'en ont efle plus funefbes, felon qu'ils 
auoient proiette, nous en fommes redeuables apres 
Dieu k la tres-faincte Vierge, noftre recours ordinaire, 
ayant fait voeu en cefle occafion d'vne neufuaine de 
Meffes en I'honneur de fon immacul^e Conception. 

Ce Capitaine de guerre qui parut le plus anim^ 
contre nous, fe voyant fi fort trompe de fon attente, 
ne feignit pas de dire qu'il fe repentoit de n'auoir 
pas retenu celuy des Noftres qui eft arriu6 le der- 
nier, & de ne I'auoir pas mis k la queftion, pour tirer 
de luy, difoit-il, toutes les veritez que fes freres nous 
celent, ie I'euffe fans doute perdu, & pris en quel- 
qu'vne de fes paroles : mais que pouuoit-il tirer d'vn 
homme qui ne pouuoit encore f9auoir ny entendre 
ce qu'on luy eut demande? 

Apres tout cela, vn de ces Meffieurs nos luges fut 
fort heureux de s'en venir paffer chez nous le re fie 
de la nuict, oii nous I'accomodafmes comme nous- 
mefmes, & la plufpart nous vinrent demander, qui 
vne chofe, qui vne autre : mais il n'y a rien de fi com- 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 49 

to give them a satisfactory answer to this, when sud- 
denly the Captain of our village (who until then had 
kept silent [21] for reasons of state) cried out, " Hey! 
what kind of people are these! they are always 
saying the same thing, they are sure to make us the 
very same speech a hundred times. They are forever 
talking about their Oki, — that is, the great Spirit 
they worship, — of what he has commanded, of what 
he forbids, of Hell, and of Paradise." 

Such was the outcome of this wretched council. 
May it please divine Goodness to make it profitable 
to some, whom he may possibly have touched by his 
blessed Word. If the results were not more fatal, 
as they had been planned to be, we are indebted for 
it after God to the most holy Virgin, our usual 
refuge ; for we had made a vow, in this emergency, 
of a novena of Masses in honor of her immaculate 
Conception. 

The war Captain who seemed to be the most in- 
censed at us, finding himself greatly disappointed 
in his expectations, did not hesitate to say that he 
was sorry he had not kept that one of Ours who 
arrived last, and put him to the torture, "to draw 
from him," he said, " the whole truth that his broth- 
ers conceal from us. I would doubtless have ruined 
him, and caught him in some of his words." But 
what could he have gained from a man who could 
not yet know nor understand what was demanded of 
him? 

Notwithstanding all this, one of these Gentlemen, 
our Judges, was very glad to come and pass the rest 
of the night at our house, where we gave Him the 
same accommodations as ourselves ; and most of them 
came to ask us, some for one thing, some for another. 


60 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol. 15 

mun parmy les Sauuages que la [22] mefcognoiffance. 
Par tout le pays on auoit eu fort mauuaife opinion de 
cette alTembl^e; plufieurs eftoient dans I'attente de 
la nouuelle de nofkre mort : & quelques vns firent cou- 
rir le bruit qu'vn des Chefs du confeil auoit leu6 la 
hache fur le Pere. 

Les mauuais bruits s'augmenterent encor apres ce 
confeil. Vn certain de la nation des Arendahronons, 
difoit on, reffufcite depuis peu, dit auoir rencontre 
en I'autre monde deux femmes, lefquelles fe difoient 
d'Angleterre, qui I'auiferent qu'il n'iroit pas encore 
an pais des Ames; mais qu'eflant reuenu en vie il eut 
"k brufler fa robe pour remedier k la maladie: qu'au 
refte les robes noires qui demeuroient auec eux, 
auoient de mauuais delfeins, auec refolution de ne 
s'en retourner en France, que lors qu'ils auront fait 
mourir tout le pais. 

De fraifche date ie ne fcay quel Sauuages a penfe 
eflrangler vn ieune gargon Fran§ois proche noftre ca- 
bane ; mais me voyant courir au bruit, le cruel gaigna 
an pied. Quelques autres ieunes efuentez ont couu6 
de mauuais deffeins fur quelques-vns des Noflres. 
Tout cela nous apprend ^ nous vnir fortement k celuy 
qui s'appelle la Vie par excellence. 


1638 - 39] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 51 


But there is nothing so common among the Savages 
as [22] ingratitude. Throughout the country, people 
had held a very bad opinion of this assembly, and 
many were expecting to hear news of our death; 
some circulated a report that one of the Chiefs of the 
council had raised his hatchet against the Father. 

The evil reports increased yet more after this coun- 
cil. A certain man of the nation of the Arendahro- 
nons, it was reported, having a little while before 
returned to life, stated that he had encountered in 
the other world two women, who said they were from 
England, and who warned him that he should not 
yet go into the land of Souls; but that, having 
returned to life, he had to burn his robe in order to 
cure the disease ; that, furthermore, the black robes 
who lived with them had evil designs, having re- 
solved not to return to France until they had killed 
every one in the country. 

Lately, some Savage, I do not know who, almost 
strangled a young French boy near our cabin, but, 
seeing me hasten at hearing the noise, the cruel 
wretch escaped by running. Some other young 
hot-heads have been hatching evil designs against 
Ours. All this teaches us to unite ourselves closely 
to him who calls himself " the Life indeed." 


52 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.15 


[23] CHAPITRE III. 

ASSISTANCE PARTICULIERE DE DIEU SUR NOUS DANS 
NOSTRE PERSECUTION. 

BIEN que ce Confeil, dont ie viens de parler, ne 
determina rien k I'encontre de Nous, li caufa-il 
de grandes alterations dans les ef prits : en forte 
que ceux qui auoient efcoute iufques icy auec affez 
d'indifference les bruits qu'on femoit de nous, com- 
mencerent k entrer dans de grandes deffiances de nos 
fa9ons de faire. Peu de temps apres vn des Oncles 
de Louys de faincte Foy nous vint voir, & nous ayant 
tire a part nous aduifa ; Que plufieurs des Capitaines 
qui s'eftoient trouuez au confeil, & auoient parle 
contre nous, efloient tombez maladez; qu'il venoit 
de leur part pour fgauoir fur cela nos fentiments, en 
ce qu'ils auoient k faire pour recouurer leur fante; ce 
nous fut vne belle occalion pour I'inftruire. II nous 
adioufta que les Anciens n'eftoient plus en credit, 
mais bie que la ieunefle gouuernoit tout ; tefmoins, 
difoit-il, les deux f orders qu'ils maffacrerent n'y a 
pas long-temps, nous nous apperceumes affez oil il 
vifoit ; mais celuy qui ne craint que Dieu, ne craint 
plus rien. 

Le 3. d'Octobre le feu prit a noftre cabane, nous 
anions fujet de iuger probablemet que c'efloit vn 
coup de quelque mauuais efprit. Et il y auoit defia 
log- temps qu'on nous auoit menace de nous brufler 
tons lors que nous y penferions le moins. Enuiron 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j6s8 53 


[23] CHAPTER III. 

SPECIAL ASSISTANCE OF GOD TO US IN OUR PERSE- 
CUTION. 

ALTHOUGH this Council, of which I have just 
spoken, decided nothing hostile to Us, yet it 
caused great changes in their ideas, so that 
those who had hitherto listened rather indifferently 
to the reports that were current about us, began to 
entertain great mistrust of our ways of doing things. 
A short time afterward, one of the Uncles of Louys 
de sainte Foy came to see us, and, having drawn us 
aside, informed us that several of the Captains who 
had been present at the council, and had spoken 
against us, had fallen sick ; that he came in their 
behalf, to know our opinions on the subject and what 
they should do to recover their health. This was a 
fine opportunity for us to instruct him. He added 
that the Old Men no longer had any influence, but 
that the young men really managed everything. 
" Witness," said he, " the two sorcerers they put to 
death not long ago." We saw clearly what he was 
aiming at ; but he who fears only God, fears nothing 
else. 

On the 3rd of October, our cabin took fire. We 
had reason to think it probable that this was a blow 
from some evil-minded person, as for a long time 
they had threatened to burn us all when we least 
expected it. About this time our bark fleet, [24] I 
mean the Hurons who had gone down to the French, 


64 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.15 

ce temps-lk noflre flotte d'efcorces, [24] i'entend les 
Hurons defcendus aux Frangois arriuerent, ils eftoient 
tons les plus contents du monde ; ils nous conf olerent 
puiffamment, quand ils nous firent entendre comme 
quoy tant de perfonnes fignalees en vertu & [en] me- 
rite s' employ ent auec tant d'ardeur & de zele pour 
le falut de ces pauures abandonnez. Nous vifmes 
des effects admirables de I'accueil qu'on leur fit au 
confeil que vous tinftes aux trois Riuieres. lis ne 
croyent plus, ce difent-ils, que nous les fafTions mou- 
rir, attendu qu'ils n'ont rien veu ny ouy par delk, qui 
ne les efloignaft grandement de ces finiftres foup5ons. 

II eft vray que c'eft vn coup de Dieu qui donne 
iufques dans vn miracle, que vous leur ayez dit fur le 
fujet de leur maladie, non feulement la fubftance des 
chofes que nous leur difons icy, mais aufTi dans le 
mefme ordre, & dans la mefme fuite que nous leur 
inculquons, fi qu'ils ont recognu diftinctement, ce 
que nous auons fouuent en la bouche, que la verite 
eft vne par tout. Ce fut fans doute le fainct Efprit 
qui vous infpira de parler auec tant d'auantage de 
nos faintes Images; que plufieurs d'entr'eux auoient 
prife auparauant pour autant de Demons. Cefte 
image du Sauueur que vous fiftes efleuer en I'air, 
afin qu'ils la peuflent tous voir, leur fit croire qu'vn 
objet que tant de monde refpectoit publiquement ne 
pouuoit feruir k quelque magie noire & cachee. Nous 
beniffons Dieu, de ce que fans nous eftre communi- 
que, rien ne fe pouuoit faire de plus ^ propos dans 
les neceflitez ou nous nous trouuions pour lors. 

[25] Tant y a que Taffliction & le defefpoir auoit fi 
fort trouble I'efprit de ces Barbares, que fi par mal- 
heur ceux qui retournoient des trois Riuieres euffent 


1638-39] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1638 55 

arrived. They all were the most contented men in 
the world. They greatly consoled us when they 
related to us how so many persons, noted for their 
virtue and merit, are employing themselves with so 
much ardor and zeal for the salvation of these poor 
forsaken peoples. We saw admirable results from 
the reception given them at the council that you held 
at the three Rivers. They no longer believe, they 
say, that we caused their death, since they neither saw 
nor heard anything down there which did not mainly 
alienate them from their sinister suspicions. 

It is certainly an act of God which almost amounts 
to a miracle, that you told them, in regard to their 
sickness, not only the substance of the things that 
we told them here, but also in the same order and in 
the same connection that we inculcated them, so that 
they recognized clearly what we often have upon our 
lips, that truth is the same everywhere. It was with- 
out doubt the holy Ghost that inspired you to speak 
with so much profit of our holy Images, which many 
of them had previously taken for so many Demons. 
That image of the Savior which you caused to be 
raised on high, that they might all see it, made them 
believe that an object which so many people publicly 
honored could not be used for any black and secret 
magic. We bless God that, without having had any 
communication with us, this was done, than which 
nothing could have been more opportune, in the 
necessities wherein we then were. 

[25] However, affliction and despair had so greatly 
troubled the minds of these Barbarians, that if, unfor- 
tunately, those who returned from the three Rivers 
had spoken of us in terms less favorable, we would 
have been a prey to their fury. But you had so thor- 


56 


LES RELATIONS PES /^SUITES [Vol.15 


parl6 de nous autres en termes moins fauorables, nous 
eaions en proye ^ leur fureur: mais vous les auiez 
tenement fatisfaits, qu'ils fermoient la bouche k 
ceux qui ne nous aymoient pas, faifant celler pour 
quelque temps la perfecution publique; ie dis publi- 
que, car quelques particuliers ne laifferent pas tou- 
liours de nous donner de I'exercice. Et vn des 
parens du Capitaine Aenons, qui eftoit mort aux trois 
Riuieres penfa faire vn mauuais coup en la perfonne 
d'vn des Noftres, qui auoit fait le voyage dans fon 
canot. Voicy le precis de ce que ce bon Pere nous en 
manda. Quelques Sauuages, dit-il, vinrent chez 
nous, auec vne affez mauuaife volonte, ce me fem- 
bloit ; le plus ieune d'entr'eux tenant fon Arc band^, 
faifoit mine de le vouloir decocher fur moy, difant h 
fes compagnons, c'eft celuy-lk; cependant vn autre, 
pour me donner plus ^ cognoiare m'appella par mon 
nom, luy donnant affeurance que c'eftoit moy: en 
mefme temps vn de la troupe regardant nos Images, 
les monftroit aux autres par mefpris ; 8c lors il fe fit 
vn petit bruit fourd entr'eux; comme s'ils fe fuffent 
animez k quelque mauuaife action. Ie ne fgay qui le 
deftourna de me tirer ceft heureux coup; iufques icy 
le Pere. Mais voicy bien d'autres attaques. 

Nous eufmes bien de la peine a nous desfaire de 
certains Sauuages venus expres de la Nation du 
Petun, lef quels apres auoir veu & admire noflre Cha- 
pelle, nous offrirent vne robe de caftor, [26] k ce que 
(difoient ces pauures gens) nous fiffions ceffer la 
maladie qui faifoit vn fi grand rauage dans leur pais. 
Ce nous fuft vne heureufe rencontre pour leur parler 
de noflre faincte Foy. 

Pen apres vn de nos Amis nous vient dire tout 


1638-39J LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ibjS 57 

oughly satisfied them that they closed the mouths of 
those who did not love us, causing the public perse- 
cution to cease for some time, — I say public, for a 
few individuals never failed to give us exercise ; and 
one of the relatives of Captain Aenons, who had died 
at the three Rivers, almost dealt a fatal blow at 
the person of one of Ours who had made the voyage 
in his canoe. Here is a summary of what this 
good Father wrote us about the matter : ' ' Some Sav- 
ages," said he, " came to our house with rather evil 
intentions, it seemed to me ; the youngest of them 
holding his Bow ^ bent, made pretense of discharging 
it at me, saying to his companions, ' It is that man.' 
Meanwhile, another one, to make me more conspic- 
uous, called me by my name, assuring him that it 
was I ; at the same time one of the crowd, looking 
at our Images, showed them to the others contemp- 
tuously ; and then a low, dull noise was heard among 
them, as if they were inciting one another to some 
wicked action. I do not know what deterred him 
from discharging that fortunate arrow at me." Thus 
far the Father ; but there are many other attacks. 

We had considerable difficulty in getting rid of 
certain Savages who came expressly from the Tobac- 
co Nation, and who, after having seen and admired 
our Chapel, offered us a beaver robe, [26] " in order 
that ' ' (said these poor people) ' ' we should make the 
sickness cease that was causing so great ravages in 
their country." This was a very fortunate oppor- 
tunity to speak to them of our holy Faith. 

A little while afterwards, one of our Friends came 
to us, all out of breath, and said, " My Nephews, you 
are dead men ; the Attigueenongnahac are coming to 
split your heads, while the people of the village are 


58 LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol. 15 

hors d'halene; mes Nepueux vous eftes morts, les 
Attigueenongnahac vous viendrot fendre la tefle, lors 
que ceux du bourg feront allez ^ la pefche, ie I'ay 
appris du Capitaine. Nous iugeafmes cepedant k 
propos de ne pas mefprifer cet aduis, pour la proba- 
bility que nous y voyons. Nous difpofons done nos 
domefliques k ce qu'ils fe conformaffent en tout cas 
aux faintes volontez de Dieu; c'eft la verite qu'ils fe 
difpoferent fainctemet, mais en refolution neant- 
moins, difoient-ils de ne pas mourir les bras croifez, 
ne fe voulans pas lailTer malTacrer fans fe mettre 
en defenfe. Pour nous autres nous eflions refolus 
d'attendre paifiblement la mort deuant le fainct Autel. 
Ie party auffi-tolt de noftre Refidence de la Con- 
ception, pour informer de tout ce qui fe pafloit, noftre 
P. Superieur qui eftoit en la Refidence de fainct 
lofeph, fur le foir de mon depart vn de nos meilleurs 
amis vint querir en hafte les Peres que ie venois de 
quitter pour comparoiftre deuant ceux qui ne nous 
pouuoient fouffrir en vie qu'k regret, il nous parla en 
ces termes, Sus venez refpondre au cofeil, vous eftes 
morts ; ils trouuerent tons les Anciens affemblez auec 
ce Capitaine qui nous auoit fi mal trait6 aux autres 
confeils. D'abord cet homme leur parle brufque- 
ment fur le fait de la contagion, dont il attribue la 
caufe aux robes noires. Sur [27] tout qu'Echon 
remotant au pais, il y a bien quatre ans, auoit dit que 
ce voyage ne feroit que de cinq ans ; que voila le 
terme prefix tatoft expire ; que ce mef chant homme 
auoit defia trop profits de leur mine, & que partant 
on demande vn confeil general pour 1' entendre 1^ 
deffus, & terminer 1' affaire. Nos Peres fans s'efton- 
ner dirent qu'ils filTent a la bonne heur vn autre con- 


1638 - 39] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 


59 


away fishing; I have learned it from the Captain." 
We thought it wise, however, not to disregard this 
information, seeing that there was some probability 
of its truth. Accordingly, we prepared our domes- 
tics to be ready to conform in any event to the holy 
will of God ; in truth they prepared themselves rev- 
erently, but with the determination, nevertheless, 
they said, not to die with their arms folded, unwill- 
ing to let themselves be murdered without making 
some defense. As for ourselves, we were resolved 
calmly to await death before the holy Altar. 

I immediately departed from our Residence of la 
Conception to inform our Father Superior, who was 
at the Residence of saint Joseph, of all that was tak- 
ing place. Upon the evening of my departure, one 
of our best friends came in haste to seek the Fathers 
whom I had just left, in order that they should 
appear before those who could not endure, without re- 
gret, that we should live. He spoke to us in these 
terms: "Come quickly, and answer to the council; 
you are dead men!" They found all the Old Men 
assembled with the Captain who had treated us so 
badly in the other councils. At first, this man spoke 
to them sharply on the subject of the contagion, the 
cause of which he attributed to the black robes, — say- 
ing, above [27] all, that when Echon came up to the 
country again, fully four years ago, he had said that 
this visit would be only for five years, and, lo, the 
appointed time had almost expired ; that this wicked 
man had already profited too much by their ruin, and 
that therefore a general council was demanded, in 
order to hear him thereupon, and to end the matter. 
Our Fathers, without showing any astonishment, told 
them that it was well, and they should hold another 


60 


LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol. 15 


fell quand il leur plairoit, que pour eux ils y affifte- 
roient volontiers. Et certes Dieu les affifla bien en 
cefte rencontre; car s'ils euffent change de vifage, ou 
chancele en leur refponfe, on efloit pour vuider fur le 
champ leur procez, ainfi que depuis ces barbares nous 
ont confeill^. En effect nous auons f9eu que la 
conclufion eftoit prife de nous faire tons inourir. 

N. P. Superieur vint en diligence pour comparoiftre 
en perfonne en cette nouuelle affemblee, eflant bien 
aduerty par ceux de nos meilleurs Amis, que fans 
doute il bafteroit mal pour luy & pour nous dans 
cette confufion d'ennemis. A fon arriuee il va faliier 
les plus remarquables du bourg, qui ne firent que 
baiffer la tefte, donnans 'k entedre par cette poflure 
que c'eftoit fait de nous. Bref, Dieu voulut qu'vn 
feul Capitaine de nos Amis, ^ qui nous pouuions 
auoir recours, fuft pour lors efloigne du bourg, peut- 
eftre ^ ce que toute noflre efperance fufl en celuy 
qui nous veut entierement ^ luy. Le Pere done 
prend fon temps pour dreffer vne forme de teflament, 
qu'il laifferoit entre les mains de quelques Chrelliens 
affidez, ainfi qu'ils s'y offrirent d'eux mefmes, pour 
le porter en fon temps ^ K6bec: voicy les termes: 

[28] jy yi ON Reverend Pere, 

^V* Pax Chrijli. 

Novs fommes peut-eflre fur le point de refpan- 
dre noftre fang, & d'immoler nos vies pour le 
feruice de noftre bon Maiftre lefus-Chrift. II 
femble que fa bont6 vueille accepter ce facrifice de 
moy pour I'expiation de mes grads & innombrables 
pechez ; & pour couronner des cefte heure les f eruices 
paffez, & les grands & enflammez defirs de tous nos 
Peres qui font icy. 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, r6j8 61 

council when they pleased; that, for their own part, 
they would willingly be present thereat. And cer- 
tainly God assisted them indeed, in this crisis ; for if 
they had changed countenance, or wavered in their 
answers, their case would have been settled upon the 
spot, as these barbarians have since informed us. In 
fact, we have learned that it had been decided to put 
us all to death. 

Our Father Superior hastened to appear in person 
in this new assembly, having been informed by some 
of our best Friends that without doubt it would go ill 
with both him and us in this multitude of enemies. 
At his arrival, he went to greet the prominent men 
of the village, who merely bowed their heads, indi- 
cating by this gesture that it was all over with us. 
In short, God willed that the only Captain of our 
Friends to whom we could have had recourse was at 
that time absent from the village, perhaps that all 
our hope might rest in him who desires us to be 
entirely his. Accordingly, the Father chose this 
occasion to draw up a form of testament that he could 
leave in the hands of some faithful Christians, in 
accordance with the offer they had made him, of 
their own accord, to carry it at the proper time to 
K6bec. Here are its terms: 

[28] jy yi Y Reverend Father, 

1 V 1 Pax Christi. 

We are, perhaps, upon the point of shedding 
our blood and of sacrificing our lives to the serv- 
ice of our good Master, Jesus Christ. It seems that 
his goodness consents to accept this sacrifice from 
me for the expiation of my great and innumerable 
sins, and to crown, from this time on, the past services 


62 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.15 

Ce qui me donne la penf^e que cela ne fera pas, 
eft d'vn cofte I'excez de mes malices paffees, qui me 
rendent du tout indigne d'vne li fignal6e faueur; & 
d 'autre coft^, par ce que ie ne croy pas que fa Bonte 
permette qu'on falTe mourir fes ouuriers, puifque par 
fa grace il y a defia quelques bonnes ames, lefquelles 
regoiuent ardemment la femence de I'Euangile, non- 
obftant les mefdifances & perfecutions de tout le 
monde cotre nous. Mais d'ailleurs ie crains que la 
diuine luftice voyant I'opiniaftrete de la plufpart de 
ces Barbares en leurs folies, ne permette tres-iufte- 
ment qu'ils viennent k ofter la vie du corps k ceux 
qui de tout leur coeur fouhaitent & procurent la vie 
de leurs ames. 

Quoy que e'en foit, ie vous diray que tons nos 
Peres attendet le fuccez de cefte affaire auec vn grand 
repos & contentemet d'efprit. Et pour moy ie puis 
dire a V. R. auec toute fincerit6, que ie n'ay pas eu 
encore la moindre apprebenfion de la mort pour vn 
tel fujet. Mais nous fommes [29] tons marris de ce 
que ces pauures Barbares par leur propre malice bou- 
chent la porte a I'Euangile & ^ la grace. Quelque 
conclufion qu'on prenne, & quelque traitement qu'on 
nous faffe, nous tafcheros auec la grace de Noftre 
Seigneur de I'endurer patiemment pour fon feruice. 
C'eft vne faueur fmguliere que fa Bonte nous fait de 
nous faire endurer quelque chofe pour fon amour. 
C'eft maintenant que nous nous eftimos vrayement 
eftre de fa Compagnie. Qu'il foit beny a iamais de 
nous auoir entre plufieurs autres meilleurs que nous 
deftinez en ce pais, pour luy ayder h. porter fa Croix. 
En tout, fa faincte volont6 foit faite; s'il veut que des 
cefte heure nous mourions, 6 la bonne heure pour 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s8 63 

and the great and ardent desires of all our Fathers 
who are here. 

What makes me think that this will not happen is, 
on the one hand, the excess of my past wickedness, 
which renders me utterly unworthy of so signal a 
favor; and, on the other, that I do not believe his 
Goodness will permit his workmen to be put to death, 
since through his grace there are still some good souls 
who eagerly receive the seed of the Gospel, notwith- 
standing the evil speech and persecutions of all men 
against us. And yet I fear that divine Justice, seeing 
the obstinacy of the majority of these Barbarians in 
their follies, may very justly permit them to come and 
take away the life of the body from those who with all 
their hearts desire and procure the life of their souls. 

Be this as it may, I will tell you that all our 
Fathers await the outcome of this affair with great 
calmness and contentment of mind. And, for my- 
self, I can say to Your Reverence with all sincerity 
that I have not yet had the least apprehension of 
death for such a cause. But we are [29] all sorry for 
this — that these poor Barbarians, through their own 
malice, are closing the door to the Gospel and to 
grace. Whatever conclusion they reach, and what- 
ever treatment they give us, we will try, by the grace 
of Our Lord, to endure it patiently for his service. 
It is a singular favor that his Goodness extends to 
us, to make us endure something for his sake. It is 
now that we consider ourselves truly to belong to his 
Society. May he be forever blessed for having ap- 
pointed us to this country, among many others bet- 
ter than we, to aid him in bearing his Cross. In all 
things, may his holy will be done ! If he will that at 
this hour we should die, oh, fortunate hour for us ! If 


64 


LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 15 


nous ! s'il veut nous referuer k d'autres trauaux, qu'il 
foit beny ; fi vous entendez que Dieu ait couronne nos 
petits trauaux, ou pluftofl nos defirs, beniffez-le; 
car c'eft pour luy que nous defirons viure & mourir, 
& c'efl luy qui nous en donne la grace. Au refle fi 
quelques-vns furuiuent, i'ay done ordre de tout ce 
qu'ils doiuent faire. I'ay efte d'aduis que nos Peres 
& nos domefliques fe retirent chez ceux qu'ils croy- 
ront eftre leurs meilleurs amis: i'ay donn^ charge 
qu'on porte chez Pierre noftre premier Chreflien tout 
ce qui eft de la Sacriftie, fur tout qu'on ait vn foin 
particulier de mettre en lieu d'affeurance le Diction- 
naire ; & tout ce que nous auons de la langue. Pour 
moy, fi Dieu me fait la grace d'aller au Ciel, ie prie- 
ray Dieu pour eux, pour les pauures Hurons, & n'ou- 
blieray pas Voftre Reuerence. 

Apres tout, nous fupplions V. R. & tons nos [30] 
Peres de ne nous oublier en leurs faincts Sacrifices & 
prieres, afin qu'en la vie, & apres la mort, il nous 
fade mifericorde ; nous fommes tons en la vie & a 
I'Eternite. 

DE VOSTRE REVERENCE, 

Tres-humbles & tres-affectionnes 
feruiteurs en Nojlre Seigneur, 
En la Refidence Iean de Brebevf. 

de la Conception FRANgois Joseph 

^ Offoffane ce 28. le Mercier. 

Octobre. Pierre Chastellain. 

Charles Garnier. 
Pavl Ragveneav. 
Pay laiffe en la Refidence de fainct lofeph les Peres, 
Pierre Piiart, & Isaac Iogves, dans les mefmes 
fentimens. 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ibjS 6& 

he will to reserve us for other labors, may he be 
blessed! If you hear that God has crowned our 
insignificant labors, or rather our desires, bless him ; 
for it is for him that we desire to live and to die, and 
it is he who gives us grace therefor. For the rest, 
if any survive, I have given orders as to all they are 
to do. I have deemed it advisable for our Fathers 
and our domestics to withdraw to the houses of those 
whom they regard as their best friends; I have 
charged them to carry to the house of Pierre, our 
first Christian, all that belongs to the Sacristy, — 
above all, to be especially careful to put our Diction- 
ary, and all that we have of the language, in a place 
of safety. As for myself, if God grant me the grace 
to go to Heaven, I will pray him for them, for the 
poor Hurons, and I will not forget Your Reverence. 
And finally, we supplicate Your Reverence and all 
our [30] Fathers not to forget us in your holy Sacri- 
fices and prayers, to the end that, in life and after 
death, he may grant us mercy. We are all, in life 
and in Eternity, 

YOUR reverence's 

Very humble and very affectionate 
servants in Our Lord, 

In the Residence Jean de Brebeuf. 

of la Conception Francois Joseph 

at Ossossane, this le Mercier. 

28th of October. Pierre Chastellain. 

Charles Garnier. 
Paul Ragueneau. 
I have left Fathers Pierre Pijart and Isaac 
JOGUES in the Residence of saint Joseph, with the 
same sentiments. 


66 LES RELA TIONS DES JASUITES [Vol. 15 

VOYLA les penf^es que Dieu nous infpiroit alors. 
Or en cefle extremity d'affaires, noflre re- 
cours fuft au grand fainct lof eph ; f aifants tous voeu 
a Dieu de dire neuf iours confecutifs la faincte Meffe 
en fon honneur; lefquelles nous commengafmes le 
iour des Saincts Simon & ludes. De plus, comme il 
eftoit important que ce peuple fgeut I'aflection que 
nous anions a leur bien, & le pen d'eftat que nous 
faifions de cefte vie miferable ; le Pere trouua bon de 
les inuiter h. fon Atfatai'on, c'eft a dire feflin d' Adieu, 
tel qu'ils ont couftume de faire quand ils approchent 
de [31] la mort. Noftre cabane regorgeoit de monde ; 
il eut la vne belle occafion de leur parler de 1 'autre 
vie: le morne filence de ces bonnes gens nous at- 
triftoit plus que noftre propre danger. 

Cependant vn, deux & trois iours s'efcoulerent 
auec I'eflonnement de tout noftre bourg, fans que 
ces MeiTieurs nous mena9ent plus de mourir dans leur 
affembl^e. le ne f9ay pas fi le diable auoit mutine 
ces Barbares contre nous: fi puis-ie dire, que nous 
n'auions pas encor acbeue noftre neufuaine, que 
toutes ces tempeftes s'appaiferent; en forte qu'eux- 
mefme s'en eftonnoient entr'eux auec raifon Pou- 
uons-nous pas efperer qu'vn iour ce grand Patron de 
nos Infideles fera paroiftre des effects encore plus 
admirables dans le changement de leurs coeurs ? Tant 
y a que depuis le 6. de Nouembre que nous acheuafmes 
nos Melfes votiues ^ fon honneur, nous auons ioiiy 
d'vn repos incroyable, nous nous en efmerueillons 
nous-mefmes de iour en iour, quand nous confiderons 
en quel eftat eftoient nos affaires il n'y a que huict 
iours. 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 67 

THESE are the thoughts that God inspired in us 
at that time. Now, in this desperate state of 
affairs, we had recourse to the great saint Joseph, all 
making a vow to God to say the holy Mass in his 
honor for nine consecutive days ; we began this on 
the day of Saints Simon and Jude. Furthermore, as 
it was important that this people should know the 
interest we felt in their welfare, and the little value 
we placed upon this miserable life, the Father thought 
it well to invite them to his Atsataion, — that is to 
say, his Farewell feast, such as they are accustomed 
to give when they are nearing [31] death. Our cab- 
in overflowed with people. It was a good occasion 
to speak to them of the other life. The mournful 
silence of these good people saddened us more than 
our own danger. 

Meanwhile, one, two, and three days slipped away, 
to the astonishment of our entire village, without any 
more threats of death from those Gentlemen in their 
assembly. I do not know whether the devil had 
stirred up these Barbarians against us ; but I can say 
that we had not yet finished our novena before all 
these storms were allayed, so that they even won- 
dered at it among themselves, and with reason. May 
we not hope that this great Patron of our Unbeliev- 
ers will some day cause to appear still more admir- 
able results in the change of their hearts? At all 
events, since the 6th of November, when we finished 
our votive Masses in his honor, we have enjoyed an 
incredible peace, at which we ourselves wonder from 
day to day, when we consider in what condition our 
affairs were only one week ago. 


68 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol.15 


CHAPITRE IV. 

DES HURONS BAPTISEZ CESTE ANNEE 1638. 

SI nous auons troutie la porte fermee aux autres 
bourgades, on les denx & trois cens monroient, 
helas fans affiftance ! Dieu nous a difpof6 en 
ce bourg des efprits & des oreilles qui ont receu tres- 
volontiers fa faincte parole. Nous auons [32] ba- 
ptif6 plus de cent perfonnes tant homes faits, que 
petits enfans, dont quarante-quatre font maintenant, 
come nous croyons dans le Ciel ; au moins f ommes- 
nous bien afleurez de vingt-deux petites Ames inno- 
cetes que la mort a tire du berceau, & la grace du S. 
Baptefme a mis au nombre des bien-heureux. La 
plus grande de nos peines eftoit de f9auoir ceux qui 
efloient malades, tant cefte recherche leur eftoit odi- 
eufe. Vous n'aymez que les malades & les morts, 
nous difoit-on : fi que fans cefTe nous faifions la ronde 
par les cabanes ; car f ouuent tel eftoit pris & emporte 
en moins de deux iours. Le plus ordinaire de nos 
meftiers eftoit celuy de Medecins, en deffein de 
decrediter de plus en plus leurs forciers, auec leurs 
regimes imaginaires ; quoy que pour toute medecine 
nous n'euffions rien a leur donner qu'vn petit mor- 
ceau d'efcorce de citron ou citroiiille de France qu'ils 
appellent, ou quelques grains de raifm dans vn peu 
d'eau tiede, auec vne pincee de fucre: tout cela pour- 
tant, auec la benediction que Dieu y donoit faifoit 
des merueilles, & "k les entendre rendoit la fant^ k 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 69 


CHAPTER IV. 

OF THE HURONS BAPTIZED THIS YEAR, 1638. 

IF we found the doors closed in other villages, — 
where two or three hundred died, alas ! without 
assistance, — God has inclined to us some minds 
and ears in this village, that have very willingly- 
received his blessed word. We have [32] baptized 
more than one hundred persons, both adults and little 
children, forty-four of whom are now, as we believe, 
in Heaven ; at least we are quite sure of twenty-two 
little innocent Souls that death took from the cradle, 
and the grace of Holy Baptism placed among the 
number of the blessed. The greatest of our difficul- 
ties was to find out those who were sick, so distaste- 
ful to them was this search. " You care for only the 
sick and the dead," they said to us; and, indeed, we 
made the rounds of the cabins incessantly, for often 
some one was taken sick and carried away in less 
than two days. The most ordinary of our occupa- 
tions was that of Physician, with the object of dis- 
crediting, more and more, their sorcerers, with their 
imaginary treatments ; although for all medicine we 
had nothing to give them save a little piece of lemon 
peel, — or French squash, as they call it, — or a few 
raisins in a little warm water, with a pinch of sugar. 
All this, however, with the blessing of God added 
thereto, accomplished wonders, and, according to 
them, restored health to many. Finding that we 
had exhausted the small quantity of preserved fruit 


70 LES RELATIONS DESjASUITES [Vol.15 

plufieurs. Nous eflant trouuez au bout d'vn peu de 
conferue de trois ou quatre ans, il nous falut, pour 
contenter ces pauures languiffans, lauer & tordre 
dans vn peu d'eau le papier qui luy auoit feruy d'en- 
ueloppe; cefte eau fentoit plus le papier & I'ancre 
que le fucre: & cependant c'eft vne chofe incroyable 
comme ces pauures gens la trouuoient bonne. Dieu 
benie ces coeurs charitables qui nous enuoyerent il y 
a deux ans quelques onguents, ils feront bien confolez 
d' entendre [33] que ce qui n'eft ordonn^ que pour 
les corps, a feruy pour guerir quantite d'ames aban- 
donnees. le ne f§ay comme cela fe fait, mais on n'a 
icy aucune horreur de ce qui feroit bondir le coeur en 
France. Auffi noftre plus grand creue-coeur efl, 
qu'apres toutes ces affiftances pour le corps, la pluf- 
part de ces ames abandonn^es fe rebutent h. I'ouuer- 
ture de noftre faincte creance ; tant il efl mal-aife de 
ramener vn pauure Sauuage ^ fon Createur. C'eft 
pitie de voir icy le domaine que le Diable va exer- 
§ant fur vn efprit infidelle ! par exemple, [v vous leur 
parlez de I'Enfer, ils vous refpondront froidement, 
qu'ils ne voudroient pas aller ailleurs qu'auec leurs 
Parents qui y font defia: 6 que ces difficultez nous 
font cognoiftre le peu que nous pouuons: c'eft pour- 
quoy noftre refuge ordinaire apres Dieu, eft en la 
bien-heureufe Vierge, fa faincte Mere, & ^ fon tres 
glorieux Efpoux fainct lofeph. Le coeur nous dit, 
que c'eft par ces facrez canaux que Dieu veut faire 
couler fur nous & nos Sauuages les torrens de ces 
graces. 

Voicy les chofes plus notables dans quelques Ba- 
ptefmes. Vn des Noftres venoit de baptifer vne fille, 
que n'attendoit que la mort, quad quelques- vns des 


1638-39] LE JFMNE'S RELATION, i6j8 71 

we had had for three or four years, we were obliged, 
to satisfy these poor invalids, to wet and vsqueeze out 
in a little water the paper which had been used as a 
wrapper for it ; this water tasted more of paper and 
ink than of sugar, and yet it is incredible how much 
these poor people liked it. God bless those chari- 
table hearts who two years ago sent us some oint- 
ments; they will be greatly comforted to hear [33] 
that what was intended only for the body has served 
to heal many abandoned souls. I do not know how 
it happens, but here-one has no horror of what would 
make the heart quail in France. Indeed, our great- 
est grief is that, after all this assistance for the body, 
the majority of these forsaken souls are displeased at 
the first mention of our holy belief, — so hard it is to 
lead a poor Savage back to his Creator. It is pitiful 
to see here the sway the Devil continues to exercise 
over an infidel mind! For example, if you speak to 
them of Hell, they will answer you coldly that they 
do not wish to go elsewhere than with their Rela- 
tives, who are already there. Oh, how these difficul- 
ties reveal to us the little that we can do ! This is 
why our usual refuge, after God, is in the blessed 
Virgin, his holy Mother, and in her most glorious 
Spouse, saint Joseph. Our hearts tell us that it is 
through these sacred channels that God will cause to 
flow, upon us and our Savages, the torrents of his 
mercies. 

I will give the more noteworthy incidents in some 
of the Baptisms. One of Ours had just baptized 
a girl who was only awaiting death, when some of 
her relatives entered, among whom a woman held 
a little child about two months old. He learned that 
it was a poor orphan who could hardly take the breast 


72 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.15 

parents de la malade entrent, parmy lef quels vne 
femme tenoit vn petit enfant d'enuiron deux mois, 
il apprend que c'efl vn pauure orfelin qui ne tette 
quail plus; il le baptife du confentement de celle 
qui le portoit. Le lendemain la malade meurt, & ce 
petit innocent eftant pris de la contagion, s'en alia 
bien-tofl tenir fon rang parmy fes femblables. 

[34] N. Pere Superieur pendant fon dernier voy- 
age pour le confeil, eut aduis qu'vne pauure femme 
d'affez bo naturel luy vouloit parler; il ne fut pas 
pluftoft entre dans la cabane, que cefte pauure ma- 
lade luy dit affez haut, 6 Echon, que i'ay eu cefte 
nuict vn beau fonge! il m'a femble voir vn ieune 
homme veftu d'vne robe blanche come neige, & beau 
comme vn Francois, qui alloit baptifant tout noftre 
bourg ; ie prenois grand plaifir a le voir : & mainte- 
nant ie te prie de me baptifer. Le Pere I'inftruifit 
pour ce qui eftoit du fonge, & luy expliqua le Cate- 
chifme auec beaucoup de confolation de part & d'au- 
tre. La cognoiiTance qu'elle eut des peines de I'En- 
fer, & des joyes du Paradis, luy firent fouhaiter & 
demander le S. Baptefme auec plus d'inftance; il n'y 
auoit rien en apparence qui preffaft du cofte de fa 
maladie, mais le Pere fe fentat infpire fortemet, luy 
accorda fa requefte. Elle ne paffa pas deux iours 
fans aller receuoir dans le Ciel la recopenfe de fa Foy. 

Dans le mefme mois Dieu attira a foy vn ieune en- 
fant de quatre ou cinq ans, par vne faueur bien parti- 
culiere. Nous parcourions les cabanes, lors qu'vne 
fille toute efpleuree nous vient au deuant: helas! 
difoit-elle, le pauure enfant vient de mourir; nous 
rentrons (car nous n'en venions que de fortir) nous 
trouuons le pauure petit qui tiroit a la fin, nous le 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 73 

any longer ; he baptized it, to the satisfaction of her 
who carried it. The next day, the sick girl died ; and 
this little innocent, being seized with the contagion, 
soon departed to take its place among its fellows. 

[34] Our Father Superior, during his last visit to 
the council, was informed that a poor woman, of a 
rather good disposition, wished to speak to him. He 
had no sooner entered the cabin than this poor sick 
woman said to him quite loudly, " Oh, Echon, what 
a beautiful dream I had last night! It seemed to 
me that I saw a young man clothed in a robe as white 
as snow, and as beautiful as a Frenchman, who was 
going about baptizing all our village; I took great 
delight in looking at him ; and now I pray thee to 
baptize me." The Father instructed her as to the 
nature of dreams, and explained to her the Cate- 
chism, with much consolation on the part of both. 
The knowledge she had of the pains of Hell, and of 
the joys of Paradise, made her desire and ask for 
Holy Baptism with more insistence. There was 
nothing urgent as far as the symptoms of her disease 
were concerned, but the Father, feeling himself 
strongly inspired, granted her request. Two days 
did not pass ere she went to receive in Heaven the 
recompense of her Faith. 

In the same month God attracted to himself a young 
child of four or five years, through a very special 
favor. We were visiting among the cabins when a 
girl, all in tears, came toward us; " Alas," said she, 
" the poor child has just died." We reentered (for 
we had just come out), and found the poor little fel- 
low drawing near his end; we baptized him, with 
the consent of his Grandfather, and two hours after- 
ward he was in Heaven. He had been brought back 


^^ LES RELA TIO NS PES jASUITES [Vol. 15 

baptifons du confentement de fon grand Pere, deux 
heures apres il eftoit au Ciel; il auoit efte rapports le 
mefme iour du bord de I'eau; ou fes parents eftoient 
^ la pefche, «& n'eaoit tombe malade que du iour 
precedent. 

[35] Vn petit innocent de deux mois n 'auoit pas la 
mine de la faire bien longue: vne fille qui le portoit 
fur fon dos, felon leur couflume, s'amufant apres le 
Chapellet d'vn des Peres, I'autre le baptife leftement; 
le pauure petit n'attendoit que cefle faueur du Ciel 
pour s'y enuoler. 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 75 

the same day from the shores of the river where his 
relatives were fishing, and had fallen sick only the 
day before. 

[35] A little innocent of two months looked as if 
he would not long survive. While the girl who, 
according to their custom, carried him upon her back, 
was amusing herself with the Rosary of one of the 
Fathers, the other one adroitly baptized him. The 
poor little creature was only awaiting this favor from 
Heaven to fly away thither. 


^^ LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 15 


CHAPITRE V. 

LA CONUERSION DE JOSEPH CHI«ATENH8A NATIF DE 
CE BOURG D'OSSOSSANE. 

IL faut icy que quelques-vns de nos Francois cor- 
rigent rimagination qu'ils ont eu de nos Sau- 
uages, fe les figurant comme des beftes farouches, 
pourn'auoir rien d'humain que I'Economie exteri- 
eure du corps. Voicy vn Neophyte entre les autres 
^ qui Dieu a touche le coeur, qui ne cede en rien au 
plus zele Catholique de la France. 

Ce Sauuage furnomme Clii8atenli8a eflant en dan- 
ger de mort, recent le i6. d'Aouft le nom de lofeph 
au fainct Baptefme/ deflors il ne nous promettoit rien 
de mediocre, mais depuis, fa foy a efle tellement 
efprouu6e par la perfecution, & va tons les iours co- 
operant auec tant de fidelity aux graces de Dieu, que 
fi ceae infinie mifericorde, qui I'a preue[n]u fi auan- 
tageufement de fes benedictions, luy donne la grace 
de perfeuerer, il eft pour feruir de modele h tons les 
croyants de cefte nouuelle Eglife. le me perfuade 
affez que tant d'ames fainctes/ qui par les fecours 
qu'elles [36] rendent continuellement h ces Miffions, 
& par leurs feruentes prieres ont veritablement en- 
gendre en N. Seigneur ces premiers Chreaiens, fe- 
ront bien aifes de f§auoir que leurs enfans fpirituels 
commencent defia k begayer. 

Ce braue Neophyte eft aage de trente-cinq ans ou 
enuiron, & n'a quafi rien de Sauuage que la naiffance. 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s8 IT 


CHAPTER V. 

THE CONVERSION OF JOSEPH CHIWATENHWA, A NATIVE 
OF THIS VILLAGE OF OSSOSSANfi. 

SOME of our Frenchmen must here correct the 
notion they have had of our Savages, imagining 
them as ferocious beasts having nothing human 
about them save the exterior Formation of the body. 
There is one Neophyte, among others, whose heart 
God has touched, who is in no respect inferior to the 
most zealous Catholic of France. 

This Savage, surnamed Chiwatenhwa, being in 
danger of death, on the i6th of August received the 
name Joseph in holy Baptism. Even then he gave 
promise of being no ordinary convert ; but since then 
his faith has been so tried by persecution, and con- 
tinues day after day responding to the favors of God 
with so much fidelity that, — if this infinite mercy, 
which has so advantageously acquainted him with 
its blessings, give him the grace to persevere, — he 
is going to serve as a model to all the believers of this 
new Church. I readily persuade myself that so many 
saintly souls, who, through the help that they [36] 
are continually rendering to these Missions, and who, 
through their fervent prayers, have veritably engen- 
dered in Our Lord these first Christians, will be very 
glad to know that their spiritual children are already 
beginning to lisp. 

This brave Neophyte is thirty-five years old, or 
thereabout, and has almost nothing of the Savage 


78 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.15 

Or quoy qu'il ne foit pas des plus accommodez de ce 
bourg: il eft neantmoins d'vne famille des plus con- 
fiderables, & nepueu du chef de cefte Nation. II a 
I'efprit excellent, non feulement en comparaifon de 
ces compatriotes, mais mefmes, k noftre iugement, il 
pafferoit pour tel en France. Pour fa memoire nous 
I'auons fouuent admir6e, car il n'oublie rien de ce 
que nous luy enfeignons, & c'eft vn contentement de 
I'entendre difcourir fur nos Saincts Myfteres. Des 
fa ieunefle il s'eft engage dans le mariage, & n'a eu 
iamais qu'vne feule femme, contre I'ordinaire des 
Sauuages, qui ont couftume en cet aage d'en changer 
quafi en toutes les faifons de I'ann^e : il n' eft point 
joiieur, & ne fgait mefme manier les pailles, qui font 
les cartes du pais: il n'vfe point de Petun, qui eft 
comme le vin & I'yurongnerie du pais: s'il en fait 
chaque ann6e en vn petit jardin proche fa cabane ; ce 
n'eft, dit-il, que par paffe-temps, ou pour en donner 
k fes amis, ou pour en achepter quelques petites 
commoditez pour fa famille: il ne s'eft iamais feruy 
de fort pour eftre heureux, h. leur opinion, foit au 
jeu, foit ^ la pefche, &c. qui eft toute I'ambition de 
ces pauures Barbares : & mefme fon Pere en ayant 
laiff^ vn apres la mort, dont il s'eftoit, dit-on feruy 
heureufement [37] plufleurs annees, le pouuant pren- 
dre pour luy, il ne s'en eft pas mis en peine, fe con- 
tentant de fa petite fortune: iamais il ne s'eft adonn6 
aux feftins diaboliques. Adjouftez ^ tout cela vn 
beau naturel, docile ^ merueilles, & contre I'humeur 
du pais, curieux de ffauoir. 

Le premier coup de grace qui I'efbranla, ce fuft le 
premier difcours que fit iamais le P. Superieur en vn 
de leurs conf eils au fujet de leur fefte des morts : car 


1638-39] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1638 79 

except his birth. Now, although he is not one of the 
most prosperous men of this village, he belongs, 
nevertheless, to one of the most notable families, being 
the nephew of the captain of this Nation. He is a man 
of superior mind, not only as compared with his coun- 
trymen, but even, in our judgment, he would pass 
as such in France. As for his memory, we have 
often wondered at it, for he forgets nothing of what 
we teach him, and it is a satisfaction to hear him dis- 
course upon our Holy Mysteries. He has been mar- 
ried since his youth, and has never had more than 
one wife, — contrary to the ordinary practice of the 
Savages, who are accustomed at that age to change 
wives at almost every season of the year. He does 
not gamble, not even knowing how to handle the 
straws, which are the cards of the country.^ He does 
not use Tobacco, which is, as it were, the wine and 
the intoxication of the country. If he annually makes 
a small garden near his cabin, it is only for pastime, 
he says, or to give to his friends, or to buy some little 
conveniences for his family. He has never made use 
of a charm to be successful, as they think, in gam- 
ing, fishing, etc., which is the sole ambition of these 
poor Barbarians. And, although his Father left him 
one at his death, — which, it was said, he had used 
very successfully [37] for many years, — and although 
he could have taken it as his own, he gave himself 
no concern about it, contenting himself with his little 
fortune. He never indulged in the diabolical feasts. 
Add to all this a fine disposition, wonderfully docile, 
and, contrary to the humor of the country, anxious 
to learn. 

The first act of grace that moved him was the first 
discourse the Father Superior ever delivered in one 


80 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.15 

il demeura deflors fi fort affectionn6 & ^ nous & k no& 
Saincts Myfteres, que peu apres il prefenta au P. 
Superieur vn fien petit fils pour eftre baptife : & en 
fuite, comme il difoit, pour aller au Ciel. Prefque 
en mefme temps le Pere confolant ceux de fon bourg, 
fur la maladie qui rengregeoit de iour en iour, & leur 
ouurant les moyens les plus efficaces pour appaifer 
Dieu: ce bon Sauuage fuft tellement touch^, que 
deflors il fe rendit k la raifon «&: au S. Efprit. II com- 
mence done k prier Dieu de foy-mefme, k rouler en 
fa penfee fes SS. Commandements, lefquels il iugeoit 
fi raifonnables ; k fe mocquer de fes fonges. Bref il 
paffe defia pour Chreftien parmy les fiens, Beatus 
quern tu erndieris Domine, & de lege tua docueris eum. 

Depuis noftre demeure en fa bourgade il nous eft 
toufiours venu vifiter, auec vne tres-grande confola- 
tion de part & d* autre: fon entretien le plus ordinaire 
n'efloit que de Dieu & de fa loy. Et ce qui eft bien 
rare parmy nos Sauuages, iamais il ne nous deman- 
doit rien, quoy qu'il n'ignoraft pas 1' affection que 
nous anions pour luy : il procuroit aux petits enfans 
le fainct Baptefme, [38] & Dieu le luy procura par le 
danger d'vne fievre peflilentielle, qui fembloit le 
vouloir eftouffer: il ne s'en fentit pas pluftoft frap- 
pe, que tout efmeu qu'il eftoit, il accourt chez-nous, 
nous prie de I'inftruire comme quoy il fe deuoit com- 
porter pendant fa maladie, au cas qu'il pleut h. Dieu, 
ce difoit-il, I'affiiger comme les autres: & de quelle 
forte de remedes il luy feroit permis de fe feruir. 
Ce fut pour nous vne confolation bien fenfible 
d'entendre les beaux actes de refignation que faifoit 
ce bon Profelyte dans noltre Chapelle. 

Le lendemain nous le trouuaf mes affez mal : 6 que 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 81 

of their councils, on the occasion of their feast of the 
dead ; for he remained from that time on so deeply- 
interested in us and in our Holy Mysteries, that, not 
long afterwards, he presented one of his little sons to 
the Father Superior " to be baptized, and consequent- 
ly," as he said, "to go to Heaven." Almost at the 
same time, when the Father was consoling the people 
of his village during the malady, which was increas- 
ing from day to day, and was revealing to them the 
most efficacious means for appeasing God, this good 
Savage was so touched that he thenceforth surren- 
dered to reason and to the Holy Ghost. Then he 
began to pray to God of his own accord; to revolve 
in thought his Holy Commandments, which he con- 
sidered so reasonable ; and to ridicule his dreams. 
In short, he already passed for a Christian among his 
own people. Beatus quern tu erudieris Domine, et de 
lege tua docueris eum. 

After our establishment in his village, he came fre- 
quently to visit us, with very great consolation on 
both sides. His usual conversation was only of God 
and of his law ; and, what is indeed rare among our 
Savages, he never asked us for anything, although 
he was not ignorant of the affection that we had for 
him. He procured holy Baptism for little children, 
[38] and God procured it for him through the danger 
of a pestilential fever which, it seemed, was going to 
destroy him. He no sooner felt himself stricken with 
it than, completely agitated as he was, he ran to our 
house and begged us to instruct him as to how he 
should act during his sickness, — in case it pleased 
God, he said, to afflict him like the others, — and what 
kind of remedies he was permitted to use. It was a 
great comfort to us to hear the noble acts of resigna- 


82 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.15 

Diet! luy auoit touch6 le coeur ! doutant li vn certain 
remede eftoit permis, il nous fait chercher par les 
cabanes. Mes freres, difoit-il, fi vous me dites que 
cette medecine defplaifl k Dieu, i'y renonce des main- 
tenant; & pour rien du monde ie ne m'en veux fer- 
uir. II nous obeiffoit en tout fort ponctuellement, 
non feulement pour la conduite de fon ame, mais 
mefme pour le regime de fa fante. Arriua que 1* ay- 
ant couuert pendant I'accez, il demeura ainfi tout le 
iour auec affez d'incommodite, iufques h. noftre re- 
tour; & lors il nous fit roug-ir, nous demandant auec 
fa candeur naturelle s'il pouuoit fe mettre vn peu 
plus k I'air. lugeants enfin que le mal prelToit, nous 
luy parlafmes de fon Baptefme. Ce n'eft pas ^ moy, 
dit-il, h. parler 1^ delTus, non ce n'eft pas k moy: mais 
la fmcerite de fon coeur parut bien-tofl, en ce qu'il 
adjoufta incontinent ; le vous ay fi fouuent tefmoigne 
que ie croyois, ie vous ay cent fois demande le Ba- 
ptefme : & depuis le temps de ma [39] maladie vous ne 
m'efles iamais venu voir, que ie n'aye dit en moy 
mefme. He que ne me baptifent ils/ c'eft a eux ^ 
en difpofer, car ils f9auent trop bien que i'en feray 
tres-content. Son Baptefme done, & le nom de lo- 
feph luy remplirent le coeur de confolation, fe voyant 
en eftat comme il penfoit d'aller au Ciel. II conti- 
nue dans fa Refignation amoureufe k la faincte vo- 
lont6 de Dieu, pour la vie ou pour la mort. Et c'eft 
par ce beau cbemin que Dieu I'a toufiours conduit 
depuis fa conuerflon ; ne defirant en ce monde que le 
bon plaifir de fon Createur. 

Quel coeur ne fe fut attendry de voir vn Sauuage 
au lict de la mort, parler non feulement en vray 
Chreftien, mais auffi en bon Religieux. Ce fpectacle 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 83 

tion which this good Proselyte offered in our Chapel. 

The next day we found him quite ill. Oh, how 
God had touched his heart ! Doubtful as to whether 
a certain remedy was permitted, he sent through the 
cabins in search of us. " My brothers," said he, " if 
you tell me that this medicine displeases God, I re- 
nounce it from this moment, and would not use it for 
anything in the world. ' ' He obeyed us very exactly 
in everything, not only as to the guidance of his soul, 
but even as to the care of his health. It happened 
that, having covered him while his fever was high, 
he remained so all day, with considerable discomfort, 
until our return; and then he made us blush, asking 
us with his natural frankness if he might give him- 
self a little more air. Finally, concluding that the 
illness was becoming serious, we spoke to him about 
his Baptism. " It is not for me to speak of that," he 
said, "no, it is not for me." But the sincerity of his 
heart was soon made evident when he immediately 
added, " I have often testified to you that I believed, 
I have asked you a hundred times for Baptism ; and 
during the time of my [39] sickness you have never 
come to see me when I have not said to myself, ' Ah, 
why do they not baptize me ? It is for them to ar- 
range that, for they know too well that I shall accept 
it gladly.' His Baptism, then, and the name Joseph, 
filled his heart with consolation, seeing himself pre- 
pared, as he thought, to go to Heaven. He continued 
in his loving Resignation to the holy will of God, 
for life or for death. And it is in this beautiful 
pathway that God has continued to lead him ever 
since his conversion, desiring nothing in this world 
save the good pleasure of his Creator. 

What heart was not melted at seeing a Savage on 


84 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.15 

feul nous elTuyoit le peu de relTentimet que nous pou- 
uions auoir de tout ce qui fe braffoit pour lors contre 
nous. Vn de nos fouhaits efloit, que quelques per- 
fonnes qui font en France eullent le bien de voir ce 
que nous ne pouuions voir fans larmes de deuotion. 
Dans le plus fort de la refuerie on ne luy parloit pas 
pluftofk denoltre bon Dieu, qu'il reuenoit k f oy auec 
des actes de vertu, capables de toucher les plus en- 
durcis. II ne f9auoit quels remerciements nous faire, 
pour les petits feruices que nous luy rendions, felon 
noftre petit pouuoir. 

Nous attribuions fa f ant6 a fon fainct Patron ; car 
il parut hors de danger deux iours apres que nous 
Ten fuppliafmes de bon coeur. Dieu fans doute, di- 
foit-il, aura eu efgard a ma refignation: maintenant 
done, puis qu'il luy k pleu me rendre la fante, ie fuis 
refolu de luy eflre tres-fidele [40] toute ma vie ; ie 
feray en forte que les autres le cognoilTent. Depuis 
nous auons admir6 tous les iours en ce Sauuage les 
effects de la grace de Dieu: c'eft affez de dire que 
I'efcolier va furpalTant de beaucoup I'efperance de fes 
Maiftres. Son feftin de conjoiiiffance qu'il fit, felon 
leur couftume, fut veritablement vn des beaux Audi- 
toires qu'on puiffe voir; 1^ ce nouueau Predicateur fit 
merueilles, commen9ant par le Benedicite des Chre- 
ftiens qu'il dit tout haut en falangue; les loix du 
banquet n'y contribuant pas peu, qui portent que le 
Maiftre du feftin fe contente d'entretenir les con- 
uiez: tous I'admirerent, & difoient entr'eux qu'il 
auoit vn grand efprit, & s'eltonnoient de le voir dans 
la refolution de viure en Chreftien. 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j6s8 86 


his deathbed speaking not only as a true Christian, 
but even as a good Religious. This spectacle alone 
effaced the little resentment we might have felt at 
all that was then being plotted against us. One of 
our wishes was that certain persons in France could 
have the good fortune to see what we could not look 
upon without tears of devotion. In the worst of his 
delirium, we no sooner spoke to him of our good God, 
than he came to himself, with acts of virtue capable 
of touching the most hardened. He did not know 
how to thank us for the little services we had ren- 
dered him according to our limited power. 

We attributed his recovery to his Patron saint, for 
he seemed to be out of danger two days after we had 
supplicated the latter with all our hearts. ' ' No 
doubt God has had regard to my submission," said 
he ; " and now, since it has pleased him to restore 
me to health, I am resolved to be very faithful to him 
[40] all my life ; I will so act that the others will know 
it." Since then, we have daily admired in this Sav- 
age the effects of the grace of God ; it is enough to 
say that the pupil continues to surpass the hopes of 
his Masters. The feast of rejoicing that he held, 
according to their custom, was truly one of the finest 
Audiences one could see ; this new Preacher did won- 
ders there, beginning with the Benedicite of the Chris- 
tians, which he said aloud in his own language, — 
the laws of the banquet, which imply that the Mas- 
ter of the feast shall please himself in entertaining 
his guests, contributing not a little to this. All 
admired him, and said among themselves that he had 
a g^eat mind ; and they wondered to see him resolved 
to live as a Christian. 


86 


LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.15 


CHAPITRE VI. 

LA CONDUITE DE DIEU SUR NOSTRE NOUUEAU 
CHRESTIEN. 


D 


ESLORS que noftre lofeph eut recouuert fes 
forces, il vint remercier Dieu en noflre petite 
Chapelle de la fante qu'il auoit regeu de luy, 
luy promettant de mieux viure cy-apres, & de faire 
profeffion publique de fon feruice. La vie qu'il a 
mene depuis n'a en rien dementy cefle faincte & gene- 
reufe refolution. Vn mot de fes vertus plus infignes. 
Sa Foy. H efl fi bien fonde en la Foy, qu'il fait grand fcru- 

pule de faire quoy que ce foit, deuant que [41] d'a- 
uoir offert a Dieu fon acftion ; iufques-lk qu-il fe plai- 
gnit vn iour k nous de ce qu'il vifitoit par fois fes 
parents, fans confiderer ^i Dieu agr^eroit fes vifites. 
Pendant fa pefche ou fa chalTe il s'adreffe k Dieu, 
luy difant de cceur, Vous qui auez tout fait, vous 
efles le Maiftre des animaux, fi vous en faites tober 
quelqu'vn dans mes pieges, foyez beny; fmon, ie ne 
veux que ce que vous voulez. II ne manque pas de 
venir prier Dieu en noflre Chapelle, le matin & le 
foir, oil il employe chaque fois vn bon quart- d'heure: 
il fait quantite d'acftes d' Adoration, lef quels il ter- 
mine par celuy de la contrition: il n'a pas de honte 
de s'agenoiiiller & prier Dieu en prefence des autres, 
fans s'interrpmpre pour ceux qui fortent & entrent 
dans fa cabane. 

En moins d'vn mois fa cabane & celle de fon Frere 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s8 87 


CHAPTER VI. 

THE GUIDANCE OF GOD RESPECTING OUR NEW 
CHRISTIAN. 

AS soon as our Joseph had recovered his strength, 
he came to our little Chapel to thank God for 
the health he had received from him, promis- 
ing him to live better hereafter, and to make a pub- 
lic profession of his service. The life he has since 
led has in no way overthrown this holy and generous 
resolution. One word about his most conspicuous 
virtues. 

He is so well grounded in the Faith that he is His Faith. 
exceedingly scrupulous about doing anything, what- 
ever it may be, before [41] having offered to God 
his action, even going so far that he complained to 
us one day of having sometimes visited his relatives 
without considering whether God was pleased with 
his visits. During his fishing or hunting, he ad- 
dressed himself to God, saying earnestly, ** You who 
have made all, you are the Master of animals; if you 
make some fall into my traps, may you be blessed ; 
if not, I wish only what you wish." He does not 
fail to come and pray to God in our Chapel, morning 
and evening, where he stays a good quarter of an 
hour, every time. He performs many acts of Adora- 
tion, which he finishes by an act of contrition ; he is 
not ashamed to kneel and pray to God in the presence 
of others, without interrupting his prayer for those 
who enter and leave his cabin. 


88 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.15 

Sen fut pleine de malades ; il perdit quantity des fiens, & 
E/perance. f^j. ^^^^ |g dernier de fes enfans, qui efloit le coeur 
de fon coeur, Ces afflidtions domeftiques ne le trou- 
blerent aucunement, il ne chancela pas dans I'efpe- 
rance qu'il auoit en celuy qui I'efprouuoit : il apprit 
a tous fes malades la pratique de I'entiere refignation 
d'eux-mefmes entre les mains d'vn fi bon Pere. Ja- 
mais il ne permit qu'aucun Sorcier (qui font icy les 
Medecins) mit le pied dans fa cabane. Tout fon re- 
cours efloit k Dieu, qu'il prioit ardemment pour leur 
fant€. II eut bien de la peine k fe roidir contre les 
reproches de fes parents, qui luy remonltroient le 
danger manifefle de mort; enfemble 1' experience 
qu'ils penfent auoir de leurs remedes ou fortileges. 
Son courage anima mefme fon beau-frere [42] k fer- 
mer la boucbe a fa femme languilTante, qui auoit 
fonge ie ne f9ay quel feflin; N'importe, luy dit ce 
bon homme, que tu meure, pourueu que Dieu foit 
obey. Son premier foing qu'il prenoit des malades, 
c'eftoit de les faire baptifer fans attendre I'extremit^. 
Nous baptifafmes fon aifne aage de fix k fept ans, 
croyants qu'il n'en efchaperoit pas, il recent le nom 
de noflre faindt Fondateur, Celuy qui nous contenta 
le plus, ce fut vn lien nepueu k I'aage de dix-neuf 'k 
vingt ans, que nous appelafmes Pierre, il ell Dieu 
mercy I'imitateur de fon bon Oncle. II y auoit du 
plailir k parler de Dieu aux malades dans cette grande 
cabane de cinq families. Trois de fes petites niepces, 
dont la plus aagee efl d'enuiron de dix k douze ans, 
& les deux autres de cinq k fix, toutes filles d'efprit, 
furent du nombres, elles receurent au Baptefme les 
noms des Saindles Agathe, Cecile, & Therefe. II 
procura le nom d'Anne k fa belle-fceur, laquelle, 


1638-39] LE JEUNRS RELATION, 1638 89 

In less than a month, his cabin and that of his His Hope. 
Brother were filled with sick people ; he lost a great 
many of his relatives, and, above all, the last of his 
children, who was the heart of his heart. These 
domestic afflictions did not trouble him at all, he did 
not waver in the hope that he had in him who was 
trying him ; he taught all his sick people the prac- 
tice of entirely resigning themselves into the hands 
of so good a Father. Never would he permit any 
Sorcerer (these are the Physicians here) to set foot 
within his cabin. His sole recourse was to God, 
whom he besought ardently for their recovery. He 
had considerable trouble in withstanding the re- 
proaches of his relatives, who remonstrated with him 
upon the manifest danger of death, together with the 
experience that they thought they had with their own 
remedies or sorceries. His courage even stimulated 
his brother-in-law [42] to stop the mouth of his 
invalid wife, who had dreamed about some sort of 
feast. " It does not matter if thou diest," this good 
man said to her, ' ' provided that God be obeyed. ' ' 
His first care for the sick was to have them baptized, 
without awaiting their last hours. We baptized his 
eldest son, six or seven years old, believing he would 
not escape ; he received the name of our holy Foun- 
der. The one who gave us the greatest satisfaction 
was one of his nephews, nineteen or twenty years old, 
whom we called Pierre ; he is, thank God, following 
the example of his good Uncle. There was a pleas- 
ure in speaking of God to the sick, in this great cabin 
of five families."* Three of his little nieces — the 
eldest ten or twelve years old, and the other two, 
five or six, all intelligent girls — were of this num- 
ber; they received in Baptism the names of Saints 


90 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.15 

Dieu mercy, retourna en fant6, auec vn petit poupon 
a la mammelle, qui furuefcut au grand eftonement 
de tout le monde. Voyla bien des malades dans vne 
cabane, mais auffi voyla de grandes faueurs du Ciel 
en pen de temps ! Or pour reuenir "k noftre Pere de 
famille, il nous creuoit le coeur a tous, en roflfrande 
heroi'que qu'il alloit reiterant de fon Benjamin; car 
pour vaincre le fentiment naturel que luy donnoit le 
danger de ce cher enfant, il s'offroit cent fois le iour 
a Dieu, auec des termes d'vne confiance vrayement 
Chreftienne ; par fois il le prenoit entre fes bras, & 
parloit ^ ce petit, come s'il eut eu bien de la raifon; 
Thomas, [43] mon cher enfant, luy difoit ce bon 
Pere, nous ne fommes pas les Maiftres de ta vie, fi 
Dieu veut que tu allies au Ciel, nous ne fgaurions te 
retenir fur terre, iugeant enfin qu'il alloit mourir: 
Vous m'auez (nous dit-il) enfeign6 ce que ie deuois 
dire ^ Dieu pour fa fante, dites-moy maintenant 
comme ie m'adrefferay k luy quand il feramort: 6 
que cefte demande nous fur \sc. fut] fenflble! Ce 
petit Ange s'eftant enuol^ au Ciel, nous iugions ^ 
propos d'attendre vn peu, & lailler couler les pre- 
mieres larmes: mais il vint luy-mefme nous en 
apporter la nouuelle. Nous le menafmes deuant le 
faindt Sacrement, ou il parla en vray Abraham. Nous 
allafmes pour confoler la pauure Mere, & affifler aux 
funerailles: la faison n'eft pas encore d'obtenir de 
ces peuples que nous ayons vn cimetiere particulier. 
5^ II ayme Dieu auec tant de fmcerite, que nous fom- 

Charite. mes rauis de 1' entendre par fois parler S. Dieu dans 
fes prieres (car nous le faifons encore prie;r k haute 
voix) il les fait auec des fentiments qu'il n'a peu ap- 
prendre que du faindt Efprit. II ne fgait bonnement 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 91 


Ag-atha, Cecilia, and Theresa. He had the name 
Anne given to his sister-in-law, who, thank God, was 
restored to health, with a little baby at her breast, 
which survived, to the great surprise of all. Behold 
many sick people in one cabin ; but behold also great 
favors from Heaven in a short time ! Now to return 
to our Head of the family ; he made all our hearts 
ache, in the heroic offering of his Benjamin that he 
repeatedly made. For, in order to conquer the nat- 
ural feeling that the danger of this dear child in- 
spired in him, he offered him a hundred times a day 
to God, in terms of a truly Christian confidence. 
Sometimes he took him in his arms and spoke to the 
little one as if he had the gift of reason: " Thomas, 
[43] my dear child," said this good Father to him, 
' ' we are not the Masters of thy life ; if God wish 
thee to go to Heaven, we cannot keep thee upon 
earth. " Finally concluding that the child was about 
to die, he said to us, " You taught me what I ought 
to say to God for his recovery ; tell me now how I 
shall address him when my son is dead." Oh, how 
this request affected us ! This little Angel having 
flown away to Heaven, we judged it wise to wait a 
little, and let the first tears flow; but he himself 
came to bring us the news. We conducted him to 
the holy Sacrament, where he spoke like a real Abra- 
ham. We went to console the poor Mother, and to 
attend the funeral. The time has not yet come for 
us to obtain from these peoples a special cemetery for 
ourselves. 

His love for God is so sincere that we are charmed y//^ 
when we sometimes hear him speaking to God in his Charity. 
prayers (for we still have him pray aloud). He offers 
them with sentiments that he can have learned only 


92 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol.15 

de quels termes fe feruir, pour luy faire les remer- 
ciemens de luy auoir donne la foy. II prie Dieu 
tous les jours pour toute fa Nation, de fi bonne grace, 
qu'il faudroit eflre de bronze pour n'en eftre pas 
efmeu. II trouue de foy-mefme de iour en iour de 
nouueaux motifs, pour former des adtes de contrition, 
concluant ainfi d'ordinaire, ouy mon bori Dieu, ie 
vous honoreray toute ma vie, & vous aimeray de tout 
mon coeur ! II nous alTeura vn iour que les penfees 
du Ciel & de la bont6 de Dieu luy touchoient le [44] 
coeur, plus que celles de I'Enfer ne luy donoient de 
crainte. II fut vne autrefois bien furpris, quand 
ayant manqu6 a fe trouuer a la Meffe le Dimanche, 
il nous dit tout efperdu qu'il eftoit; Comment done? 
aurois-ie bien fait vn pech6 grief ? ie ne le penf e pas ! 
car vous ne m'auez pas encore parle de ce peche. 
Auffi, luy difmes-nous, il n'y a que ton ignorance 
qui t' excuse. L'eftant alle voir fur le foir, nous le 
trouuafmes tout penfif : Ah, ce dit-il, mes Freres, i'ay 
fait vne faute ce matin, mais i'en demande pardon k 
Dieu de tout mon coeur. Dans I'explication du faindt 
Sacrement de Penitence, il fut tout confole de la 
bonte de Dieu, qui nous a laiffe vn moyen fi facile 
& fi efficace pour r'entrer en fa grace. II auoit fait 
partie pour aller a quelques lieues d'icy alTiiter vn 
fien nepueu en quelque ouurage, ou il alloit (a fon 
dire) d'autant plus volontiers que Noftre Seigneur 
nous commandoit de nous entr'aymer les vns les 
autres: mais ayant f9eu que le lendemain c'eftoit le 
vray iour (c'efl ainli qu'en leur langue nous expri- 
mons le DimancheQ], il voulut differer ^ vn autre. 
C'efl bien alTez, difoit-il d'auoir fait la premiere faute, 
fans en faire vne f econde : Que {\. on me demande la 


1638 - 39] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 


93 


from the holy Ghost. He does not know exactly 
what expressions to use, in order to offer his thanks 
to him for having given him the faith. He prays 
every day for all his Nation, with so abundant grace 
that one must be of bronze not to be moved thereat. 
From day to day he himself finds new motives for 
performing acts of contrition, usually concluding 
thus, " Yes, my good God, I will honor you all my 
life, and will love you with all my heart! " He as- 
sured us one day that the thoughts of Heaven and of 
the goodness of God touched his [44] heart more than 
those of Hell gave him fear. At another time, he 
was very much taken aback, when he had failed to 
attend Mass one Sunday ; he said to us very distract- 
edly, " How now! have I really committed a griev- 
ous sin ? I do not think so, for you have not yet told 
me of this sin ; " and we answered him, " Then it is 
only thy ignorance that excuses thee." When we 
went to see him towards evening, we found him quite 
thoughtful. " Ah, my Brothers," said he, " I made 
a mistake this morning, but I am asking God's par- 
don for it with all my heart." In the explanation 
of the holy Sacrament of Penance, he was greatly 
consoled by the goodness of God, which has left us 
so easy and so efficacious a means of returning to his 
grace. He had formed a party to go some leagues 
from here, to assist one of his nephews in some 
work, where he was going all the more willingly (as 
he said) since Our Lord had commanded us to love 
one another ; but having learned that the next day 
was the true day (it is thus we express Sunday in 
their language), he decided to defer it until another 
day. " It is quite enough," said he, " to have com- 
mitted the first fault, without being guilty of a 


94 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.16 

caufe de mon retardement, ie veux bien qu'on f9ache 
que i'aime Dieu, & que ie fais eftat de fes faindtes 
Ordonnances. En vn mot, tout fon deduit eft de 
s'entretenir des chofes de Dieu; ce qui nous eft vn 
grand aduancement pour la langue, car il s'enonce 
brauement, & en bons termes. 

Ie ferois trop long, fi ie voulois raconter par Ie 
menu toutes les autres circonftances de fes [45] ver- 
tus ; ie me contenteray de dire ce qui ne fe peut alTez 
dire; i, Qu'il a vne horreur extreme du peche, ne 
nous parlant quail iamais, qu'il ne nouspropofe quel- 
que cas de confcience, laquelle il a tres delicate. 2. 
Qu'il prefche hautement & a toutes rencontres lefus- 
Chrift, & d'exemple & de paroles; il Ie fit bien 
paroiftre dans les confeils dont i'ay parl6 cy-deffus. 
Nomm^ment il eft admirable en I'inftrucilion conti- 
nuelle de fa cabane, leur inculquant k tout propos les 
Saincfts Commandements de Dieu. 3. Qu'il a vne 
particuliere communication auec Dieu, Ie priant cha- 
que iour la larme ^ I'oeil, ^ ce qu'il luy plaife regar- 
der en pitie fon pauure pais. Si que c'eft vne de 
nos plus fenfibles confolations, de nous trouuer 
auprez de luy quand il fait fes prieres; fur tout fon 
acflion de grace apres la Communion. 4. Deuant 
& apres les inftrudtions qu'on luy fait, il y a du plai- 
lir de Ie voir ^ genoux pour demander la grace de 
I'Efprit diuin ; iufques-lk qu'il s'eft captiu6 luy-mefme 
a apprendre cet hyuer k efcrire, pour retenir & repe- 
ter ce qu'on luy dit, mais fur tout pour remarquer, 
difoit-il, plus clairement Ie nombre de fes pechez. 
5. II s'adonne k vne purete de confcience incroy- 
able, fe iettant fouuent k nos pieds pour fe cofefler, 
faifant fcrupule de la moindre chofe. 6. II fe tien- 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, tdjS 95 

second one. If any one asks me tlie reason for my 
delay, I am very willing that he should know that I 
love God, and that I esteem his holy Ordinances." 
In a word, his sole recreation is to converse about the 
things of God, which enables us to make great prog- 
ress in the language, for he pronounces distinctly 
and uses good words. 

It would take too long if I were to recount in detail 
all the other circumstances illustrating his [45] vir- 
tues. I will content myself with saying what cannot 
often enough be said : i , That he has an extreme 
horror of sin, hardly ever speaking to us that he does 
not propose some question of conscience, his being 
very sensitive. 2. That he preaches Jesus Christ 
boldly and on all occasions, both by example and by 
words; he made this conspicuous in the councils 
which I have mentioned above. He is especially 
admirable in the continual instruction of those in his 
cabin, inculcating on them at every opportunity the 
Holy Commandments of God. 3. That he has special 
communication with God, begging him every day, 
with tears in his eyes, that it may please him to look 
with pity upon his poor country, — so that it is one of 
our greatest consolations to be near him when he is 
offering his prayers, above all, his thanksgiving after 
the Communion. 4. Before and after the instruc- 
tions that are given him, it is a pleasure to see him 
on his knees asking grace of the divine Spirit ; even 
going so far as to force himself to learn to write, this 
winter, that he may remember and repeat what was 
said to him ; but, above all, to indicate more clearly, 
he said, the number of his sins. 5. He makes 
habitual an incredible purity of conscience, often 
throwing himself at our feet to confess, exhibiting 


96 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.15 

dra par fois en prieres les trois quarts-d'heure en- 
tiers a deux genoux, qui eft vne pofture tres-difficile 
k vn Sauuage. 7. Au refte c'euft merueille des 
forces que Dieu luy donne pour combattre a tout pro- 
pos les grandes difficultez que le Diable luy va fufci- 
tant par ceux de fa Nation: qui ^ I'inuiter [46] k 
leurs feftins infames & fuperftitieux, qui "k fe moc- 
quer ouuertement de luy. II nous dit vn iour auec 
fa nai'fuet^ ordinaire, Ouy, mes Freres, ie fuis tene- 
ment refolu de garder iufques ^ la mort la fidelite 
que i'ay voii6 a mon Dieu, que fi quelqu'vne me vou- 
loit faire retoumer k mes premieres folies, il m'arra- 
cheroit pluftoft la vie. Bref, le precis de fa deuo- 
tion confifte en vne faindte tendreife de coeur que 
Dieu luy donne pour le grand & amoureux refpec5t 
qu'il porte au faindt Sacrement; pour I'honneur qu'il 
rend k fon Ange gardien & fon grand Patron, pour 
recommander ^ la faindte Vierge fon pais, & les ames 
des fidelles Trefpaffez. 

Du commencement vne feule chofe luy faifoit de 
la peine, c'eftoit quand nous TalTeurions que Dieu a 
de couftume d'efprouuer fes plus fidelles feruiteurs 
par les fouff ranees & les tribulations : de fait il nous 
difoit n'agueres, qu'^ propos de I'hiftoire de lob il 
auoit fouuent dit k Dieu, mon Dieu, ie vous prie ne 
faidtes pas efpreuue de ma foy, vous cognoilTez mes 
plus fecrettes penfees, vous f9auez que c'eft tout de 
bon que ie croy en vous, helas ne m'affligez point. 
Mais cefte infinie bonte qui le comble de iour en 
iour de nouuelles graces, luy fit bien peu apres chan- 
ger de fentiment & de langage. 

Ie finiray ce Chapitre, en difant, que fa conftance 
au bien I'a rendu remarquable luy & toute fa famille, 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 97 

scruples at the least thing. 6. He will sometimes 
continue in prayer for three-quarters of an hour, all 
the time on his knees, which is a very difficult posi- 
tion for a Savage. 7. Finally, it is wonderful how 
much strength God gives him to combat at every 
turn the great difficulties that the Devil continues to 
raise for him through the people of his Nation, — some 
by inviting him [46] to their infamous and supersti- 
tious feasts, others by openly ridiculing him. He said 
to us one day with his usual simplicity, " Yes, my 
Brothers, I am so determined to maintain even unto 
death the fidelity I have vowed to my God, that if 
any one wished to make me return to my former fol- 
lies, he should sooner take away my life. " In short, 
his devotion may be summarized as a holy tenderness 
of heart that God gives him, for the great and loving 
respect that he shows to the holy Sacrament, for the 
honor he renders to his guardian Angel and his great 
Patron, and for commending to the holy Virgin his 
country and the souls of the faithful Departed. 

At the beginning, only one thing caused him per- 
plexity — that was our assertion that God was accus- 
tomed to try his most faithful servants through suf- 
ferings and tribulations. In fact, he said to us but 
recently, in speaking of the story of Job, that he had 
often said to God, " My God, I pray you, do not 
make a trial of my faith; you know my most secret 
thoughts, you know that it is in earnest I believe in 
you ; alas ! do not afflict me. ' ' But that infinite good- 
ness which from day to day overwhelms him with 
new graces, caused him, only a little later, to change 
his sentiments and his language. 

I will finish this Chapter by saying that his con- 
stancy in goodness has made him and all his family 


98 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.15 

non feulement k ceux du bourg, mais mefme ^ tout 
le pais ; en forte qu'on en parle fort diuerfement ; les 
plus raifonnables I'ont admir6, & I'admirent encore 
tous les iours; d'autres s'en [47] mocquent, & appel- 
lent fa famille, par derilion, la famille des Croyants. 
11 s'en eft trouu6 quantity qui luy ont reproch^ les 
dangers ou il fe mettoit luy & les fiens, ne fe vou- 
lant feruir des remedes de tout le pais. Bref, le 
bruit a eft6 quafi vniuerfel, que ces bons Chreftiens 
s'eftoient poflible allociez auec nous pour perdre 
toute leur nation par la maladie. Ou Dieu I'a le 
plus efprouue, eu egard aux langues mef dif antes ; 
ce fut ^ mon aduis en vn voyage qu'il fit pour la 
chaffe de I'Ours: car bien que ceux qui fongent icy 
le mieux, & croyent ce qu'ils ont fonge, palTent par 
vne tromperie diabolique, pour les meilleurs chaf- 
feurs; noflre Chreftien neantmoins qui fe mocquoit 
de tous les fonges retourna les mains vuides, auec le 
mefpris, ce luy fembloit, de noflre faindte Foy dans 
I'efprit de fes compagnons, lef quels attribuans le 
bon-beur de leur challe k leurs fonges, luy donnerent 
bien du fujet de patience, & le gaufferent fanglam- 
ment fur fa croyance ; il tint bon cependant, fe retran- 
chant toufiours dans I'entiere & forte refignation k la 
faindte volonte de EKeu. 


1638 - 39] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 99 

remarkable, not only to the people of the village, 
but also to the whole country, so that they talk about 
him very differently. The most reasonable have 
admired him, and are admiring him still more every 
day ; others [47] ridicule him, and call his family, in 
derision, "the family of Believers." There were 
many who reproached him for the danger in which 
he placed himself and his relatives by not consenting 
to use the remedies of the whole country. In short, 
the report was almost universal that these good Chris- 
tians were possibly associated with us to ruin their 
entire nation by the disease. The occasion upon 
which God most severely tried him, — as far as mali- 
cious tongues were concerned, — was, in my opinion, 
on a journey he made to hunt the Bear. For although 
those who have the best dreams here, and believe 
what they dream, pass, through some diabolical trick, 
for superior hunters, yet our Christian, who scoffs at 
all dreams, returned empty-handed, — with contempt 
for our holy Faith, it seemed to him, in the minds 
of his companions, who, attributing to their dreams 
the success of their hunting, gave him considerable 
occasion for patience by indulging in cutting sneers 
about his belief. He held firm, however, always 
intrenching himself in his complete and unwavering 
resignation to the holy will of God. 


100 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.15 


CHAPITRE VII. 

lOUR DE S. JOSEPH SOLEMNEL DANS LES HURONS 
POUR QUELQUES CIRCONSTANCES. 

DESLORS que nous vifmes noftre bon lofeph 
dans le train d'vn veritable Chreflien, nous 
fouhaitafmes la mefme grace "k fa femme [48] 
pour le bien de toute fa famille: car bien qu'elle 
creut en Dieu, elle ne fe desfit pas fi toft de tout ce 
qui efloit contraire k la loy de Dieu. II pleut done 
enfin, comme nous croyons, au grand S. lofeph, 
Patron de cefle famille, & de tout le pais, luy toucher 
le coeur en forte, que nous iugeafmes k propos de 
difpofer fon Baptefme pour le iour de fa fefte. La 
veille de ce beau iour, fon mary fit vn feftin folemnel 
^ fes parents & k fes amis les plus confiderables du 
bourg, ou nous affiftafmes. II le commence par la 
benedidtion de I'Eglife; & pendant que la chaudiere 
fe vuide il les entretient brauement ; voicy ce qu'il 
leur difoit, Mes Freres, ie veux bien que vous f9achiez 
que ma femme eft entierement refolue de croire en 
Dieu, & le feruir: & que des maintenant elle aban- 
donne pour iamais toutes les fuperflitions du pais, 
pour eftre baptifee. Pour moy, & le refle de noftre 
famille nous auons tous efte baptifez pendant la ma- 
ladie. Echon paracheuera feulement quelque chofe 
qui y manque ; il termina toute la ceremonie auec 
I'adtion de graces des Chreftiens, qu'il fit k haute 
voix. 


1638-39] LE/EUNE'S RELATION, 1638 101 


CHAPTER VII. 

DAY OF ST. JOSEPH A SOLEMN ONE AMONG THE HURONS, 
ON ACCOUNT OF CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES. 

WHEN we saw our good Joseph in the course 
of a true Christian, we desired the same 
grace for his wife, [48] for the good of his 
whole family ; for although she believed in God, she 
did not so soon put away all that was contrary to the 
law of God. Now it pleased, as we believe, the great 
St. Joseph, Patron of this family and of all the coun- 
try, to touch her heart in such a way that we deemed 
it fitting to arrange her Baptism for the day of his 
feast. On the eve of that auspicious day, her hus- 
band made a solemn feast to his relatives and friends, 
the most prominent people of the town, at which we 
were present. He began it with the benediction of 
the Church ; and, while the kettle was being emp- 
tied, he entertained them nobly. This is what he 
said: " My Brothers, I am pleased to have you know 
that my wife is entirely resolved to believe in God 
and to serve him, and that from now on she aban- 
dons forever all the superstitions of the country, in 
order to be baptized. As for myself and the rest of 
my family, we all were baptized during our sickness. 
Echon will only finish a certain thing that remains 
to be done." He ended the whole ceremony with 
the Christian thanksgiving, which he uttered in a 
loud voice. 

The news was no sooner spread through the village 


102 LES RELATIONS DESj£SUITES [Vol.15 

La nouuelle ne fut pas pluftoft refpandue par la 
bourgade, que nous alliens ouurir la Fefte; quand 
noftre cabane fe trouua pleine non feulement des 
plus confiderables, mais d'vne grande partie de la ieu- 
nelle ; en forte que fi elle eut efte capable, ie ne f9ay 
s'il fut refle perfonne dans le bourg. La cabane 
eftoit par6e affez honneftement pour noftre pau- 
uret6 ; fur tout nous y admirions vn filence extraor- 
dinaire pendant toute la ceremonie; foit que 1' eclat 
que nous y apportions [49] leur donna dans les yeux, 
foit que le S. Efprit leur toucha pour lors les cceurs. 
Ce qui nous rauifoit le plus, ce furent nos Neophytes, 
le bon lofeph, Marie fa femme, Pierre fon nepueu, 
& deux de fes petites niepces baptifees en danger de 
mort. Son frere euft efl6 de la partie, ne manquant 
pas de f oy ny de bonne volont6 pour cela ; mais parce 
qu'il auoit de la peine ^ quitter vn meftier diabolique, 
auquel il eft palTe maiftre, nous I'auions remis pour 
vn autre temps ; lors que nous fupplerions les cere- 
monies du baptefme, que nous anions eft6 contraints 
d'obmettre k celuy de fa femme & de fes deux 
enfans: Mais cefte femme (qui n'eftoit venue qu'en 
intention de voir) touch^e, comme il eft k croire, du 
S. Efprit, fendit la prefle auec fon petit gar9on 
qu'elle auoit k la mammelle, & vne petite fille de 
cinq k fix ans, demandant la mefme faueur qu'on 
alloit faire aux autres. Cbofe qui augmenta beau- 
coup la ioye de ce grand iour. 

Nous commengafmes la celebrite par vne priere, 
que nous chantafmes en leur langue, laquelle nous 
anions compof^e exprez, en faueur de cette heureufe 
famille. Ie ne dis rien de la deuotion du Pere de 
famille, qui redoubla en cefte celebre adtion. Apres 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 103 

that we were going to open the Feast, than our cabin 
was filled, not only with the more prominent Sav- 
ages, but also with a great many young people ; so 
that, if it had been large enough, I do not know 
whether there would have been any person left in 
the town. The cabin was adorned quite respectably, 
considering our poverty ; what pleased us above all 
was an extraordinary silence which prevailed through- 
out the ceremony, either because the display we 
made therein [49] suited their fancy, or because the 
Holy Ghost touched their hearts for the time. What 
delighted us most was our Neophytes — the good 
Joseph ; Marie, his wife ; Pierre, his nephew ; and 
two of his little nieces, baptized when in danger of 
death. His brother might have been of the party, 
lacking neither faith nor good will in this matter; 
but as it was difficult for him to give up a diabolical 
trade, in which he is a past master, we had put him 
off until another time, when we could supply the 
ceremonies of baptism that we had been obliged to 
omit in that of his wife and his two children. But 
this woman (who had come intending only to look 
on), touched, as it is to be believed, by the Holy 
Ghost, broke through the crowd with her little boy 
at her breast, and a little girl of five or six years, 
asking for the same favor that was to be conferred 
upon the others, — an event which largely increased 
the joy of this great day. 

We began the celebration with a prayer that we 
chanted in their language, and that we had composed 
expressly in favor of this happy family. I say noth- 
ing of the devotion of this Father of a family, which 
redoubled in this solemn act. After the ceremonies 
of baptism, Our Superior, addressing the whole as- 


104 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.15 

les ceremonies du baptefme N. Superieur s'addrellant 
k toute raffembl^e, leur parla hautement de la fain- 
<5tet^ du Mariage parmy les Chreftiens. Puis inter- 
rogeant 1^ dellus noftre lofeph & Marie fa femme, 
qui luy fatisfirent pleinement, il precede aux cere- 
monies de I'Eglife pour leur mariage, dont il eft k 
croire qu'ils receurent la grace, que fembloit meriter la 
fidelite qu'ils s'eftoient gardez iufques alors. La [50] 
foule eftant efcoulee, nos deux mariez, & leur nepueu 
Pierre approcheret de la Saindte Table; referuant 
cette faueur aux autres, quand elles en feroient ca- 
pables. Nous les bienueignafmes en compagnie de 
fix des plus notables d'vn petit feftin de quelques 
poiffons enfumez. lis monftrerent par leur Ho ho 
ho redoublez le contentement qu'ils en receuret, 
poffible pour les beaux difcours auec lefquels N. Su- 
perieur affaifonnoit ce peu que nous gardions depuis 
I'Automne, 

Dieu nous deftrempa vn peu cette ioye, en ce 
qu'Anne la belle foeur de lofeph (c'eft elle qui fe 
prefenta de fon bon-gre pour accompagner les autres 
au baptefme auec fes deux enfans) fuft prife mefme 
le foir d'vne fiebure fi maligne, que la voila au tom- 
beau en moins de 2. fois 24. heures. Nous anions 
beau nous cofoler fur ce qu'elle eftoit morte apres 
les deuoirs d'vne bonne Chreftienne, car d'vn coft6 
I'afdidtion foudaine de cette bone famille, & d'ail- 
leurs I'eflonement vniuerfel de toutes les cabanes, 
nous donnoient bien dequoy penfer, & recommander 
"k Dieu fon affaire. En effedt il s'en trouua qui de- 
manderent froidement "k vn de nos domeftiques, quel 
pref ent nous anions fait pour fatisfaire aux parens de 
la defundle, que nous anions fait mourir fi toft, en 


1638-39] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s8 105 

sembly, spoke to them boldly of the sanctity of Mar- 
riage among Christians; then questioning on this 
subject Joseph and Marie his wife, who answered 
him very satisfactorily, he proceeded to the cere- 
monies of the Church for their marriage, in which 
it is to be believed they received the grace which the 
fidelity they had kept up to that time seemed to 
merit. The [50] crowd having dispersed, our mar- 
ried pair and their nephew Pierre approached the 
Holy Table, — this favor being withheld from the 
others until they should be qualified therefor. We 
welcomed them, together with six of the more not- 
able persons, with a little feast of some smoked fish ; 
they showed by their repeated " Ho, ho, ho," the 
satisfaction they felt, possibly on account of the elo- 
quent discourse with which Our Superior seasoned 
this little treat that we had kept since Autumn. 

God somewhat tempered this joy, for Anne, the 
sister-in-law of Joseph (she who presented herself of 
her own free will, with her two children, to join the 
others in their baptism), was taken the same even- 
ing with a fever, so malignant that she was in the 
grave in less than 48 hours. It was in vain that we 
consoled ourselves that she had died after perform- 
ing the duties of a good Christian; for, on the one 
hand, the sudden afiiiction of this good family, and 
on the other, the universal amazement of all the cab- 
ins, gave us much whereon to reflect, and to com- 
mend to God as his affair. In fact, there were some 
who coldly asked one of our domestics what present 
we had made to satisfy the relatives of the dead 
woman, whom we had so quickly killed by baptizing 
her. It was an act of Providence that this death 
was not more generally known, which no doubt 


106 LES RELATIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol.15 

la baptifant. Ce fuft vn coup du Ciel, de ce que 
cette mort n'efclata pas dauatage, laquelle fans doute 
euft efte d'vne confequence plus fmiftre, tant y a 
que peu de perfonnes en ont parle, & la famille Chre- 
ftienne n'a rien perdu de la confiance qu'elle auoit 
en nous. Rien ne tenoit tant en ceruelle le bon lo- 
feph fon beau-frere, que I'apprehenfion d'vn cofte, 
Que cette [51] mort fi foudaine, ne fuft la naiffance 
d'vne nouuelle perfecution: d' autre part, Que fon 
petit nepueu, faute de Nourrice (lefquelles on ne ren- 
contre pas icy comme en France) ne la fuiuit toft 
apres. Nous venant voir fur le foir il fit fes prieres 
accouftum^es, lefquelles il accompagna de tout plein 
d'adtes heroiques de refignation. Mon bon Dieu, ie 
ne fuis qu'en peine (difoit ce Chreftien) de mon petit 
nepueu ; conferuez le mon Dieu pour voftre feruice. 
Si vous luy faites la grace d'atteindre I'vfage de rai- 
fon, ie m'oblige des maintenant al'inftruire, car tout 
mon fouhait n'eft autre que de le voir vn iour ca- 
pable de vous recognoiftre, pour vous honorer & vous 
aymer de tout ce que vous luy auez donne. 

Pour dire vn mot de Marie Aonnetta fa feme elle 
eft trop beureufe d'auoir rencotre vn fi bon Pere en 
vn fi fidelle mary. Elle fe confefl!e fouuent; ce qui 
nous fait efperer qu'elle perfeuerera, c'eft qu'elle va 
rondement & k coeur ouuert; de plus elle n'a iamais 
vefcu dans le libertinage oil fe iettent icy les filles & 
les femmes. Ce nous eft vne confolation inexpli- 
cable, de ce que les adlions vertueufes de ces nou- 
ueaux Chreftiens, contraignent en fin ces peuples 
d'aduoiier ce qu'ils ne pouuoit croire. Que les Hu- 
rons aufli bien que les Frangois, peuuent garder la 
loy de Dieu. lis n'ofent plus nous dire que nos pays 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s8 107 

would have resulted in more direful consequences; 
as it was, few persons spoke of it, and the Christian 
family lost none of the confidence they had in us. 
Nothing so engrossed the mind of the good Joseph, 
her brother-in-law, as the fear, on the one hand, that 
this [51] so sudden death might be the source of a 
new persecution; and, on the other, that his little 
nephew, for lack of a Nurse (they are not to be found 
here, as in France), might soon follow her. When 
he came to see us towards evening, he offered his 
accustomed prayers, which he accompanied with 
many heroic acts of resignation. " My good God, I 
am only troubled about my little nephew " (said this 
Christian); "preserve him, my God, for your serv- 
ice. If you grant him the grace to attain to the use 
of reason, I bind myself henceforth to instruct him ; 
for my sole desire is to see him some day capable of 
knowing you, that he may honor and love you for 
all that you have given him." 

Now one word about Marie Aonnetta, his wife. She 
is only too fortunate in having encountered so good 
a Father in so faithful a husband. She confesses 
often ; what makes us hope that she will persevere 
is that she goes on frankly and heartily ; moreover, 
she has never lived in the libertinage to which the 
girls and women here abandon themselves. It is an 
inexpressible consolation to us that the virtuous 
actions of these new Christians finally constrain these 
peoples to admit what they could not believe, that 
the Hurons as well as the French can keep the law 
of God. They no longer dare to tell us that our 
countries are different, and that, as their land cannot 
furnish them the fruits that grow in France, they 
are not (they say) as capable as we are of the virtues 


108 LES RELA TIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol. 16 

font differents ; & que, comme leur terre ne peut pas 
leur foumir les fruidts qui croiff ent en France ; auffi 
ne font-ils pas (^ leur dire) capables comme nous, 
des vertus du Chriftianifme. lis n'ont done plus 
rien, qui les retienne, que leur infirmite, & la foi- 
bleffe de courage, qui manque [52] autant ^ plufieurs 
Chreftiens d' Europe, pour quitter leurs mauuaifes 
inclinations, qu'aux barbares de ce nouueau monde. 
Nous changeons done maintenant de batterie, nous 
refoluant d'entreprendre particulierement les adultes, 
attendu que le chef d'vne famille eflant k Dieu, le 
refte ne nous fera pas beaucoup de refiflence. 


1638 - 39] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 


109 


of Christianity. There is nothing more to hold them 
back, then, but their own weakness and want of cour- 
age,— which is lacking [52] to many European Chris- 
tians as well as to the barbarians of this new world,— 
from renouncing their own evil propensities. Ac- 
cordingly we are now changing our tactics, resolving 
to attack especially the adults; for, if the chief of a 
family is for God, the remaining members will not 
offer us much resistance. 


no LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.15 


CHAPITRE VIII. 

NOSTRE EMPLOY PENDANT TOUT L'HYUER QUAND CES 
PEUPLES SONT PLUS SEDENTAIRES. 

NOVS auons efl^ fept des Noftres cefte annee 
parmy ces Peuples, en deux Refidences. Le 
R. P. lean de Brebeuf noflre Superieur, les 
PP. Charles Gamier, Paul Ragueneau, & moy en 
cefte nouuelle du bourg OffolTane, fous le titre de 
rinimacul6e Coception. Les PP. Pierre Pi j art, Pierre 
Chaflellain, & Ifaac logues h. faindt lofeph k Ihona- 
tiria. 

Le peu de temps que nous a lailT^ rinftruction, & 
le fecours que nous rendons icy aux malades, nous 
I'auons employe a fonder quelques bons efprits, que 
nous iugios les plus dociles & les plus capables d'au- 
thorifer la do(5trine que nous prefchions. Entr'autres 
la famille de lofeph a occup6 vne bonne partie de 
nos foins ; Dieu nous en ayat fait prefent, des noftre 
arriu^e en ce bourg. L' opinion qu'il a de nous luy 
fit naiftre vn grand defir de f9auoir lire & efcrire, 
comme il nous voyoit faire : il trouua incontinet des 
Maiftres tons pleins de bonne volont6. II a paffe 
vne bonne partie de [53] I'hyuer en cet eflude, auec 
vne patience, & vne affiduit^ digne de fon courage : 
au refte, auec vne telle puret6 d'intention, qu'il nous 
demandoit n'agueres, s'il y auroit du pech6, de de- 
firer fgauoir I'efcriture, non feulement pour pouuoir 
coucher par efcrit ce qui regarde I'aduancement de 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 111 


CHAPTER VIII. 

OUR OCCUPATIONS DURING THE ENTIRE WINTER, WHEN 
THESE TRIBES ARE MORE SEDENTARY. 

THERE have been seven of Ours this year among 
these Peoples, in two Residences, — the Rever- 
end Father Jean de Brebeuf, our Superior, 
Fathers Charles Gamier, Paul Ragueneau, and my- 
self, in this new residence in the village of Ossossane, 
under the title of the immaculate Conception: 
Fathers Pierre Pijart, Pierre Chastellain, and Isaac 
Jogues, in saint Joseph at Ihonatiria. 

The little time remaining to us, after instruction 
and the help we render to the sick here, has been 
spent in sounding some good minds, that we consider 
the most docile and the most capable of giving author- 
ity to the doctrine that we preach. Among others, 
Joseph's family has occupied a good part of our 
attention, God having made us a present of them 
since our arrival in this village. The esteem in which 
he holds us inspired in him a strong desire to learn 
to read and write, as he saw us do ; he immediately 
found most willing Masters. He passed a good part 
of [53] the winter in this study, with a patience and 
assiduity worthy of his courage, — moreover, with 
such purity of motive that he recently asked us if 
there would be any sin in wishing to know how to 
write, so that he could set down in writing not only 
what concerned the progress of his soul, but also the 
affairs of the country. This labor has not been in 


112 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUJTES [Vol.15 

fon ame, mais aufTi les affaires du pais. Ce trauail 
n'a pas efle inutile: pour I'efcriture, il y aura vne 
grade facility ; la ledture luy couflera vn peu plus. 
La difficulte que nous auons eu a luy en expliquer le 
fecret, I'a vn peu retarde: neantmoins nous efperons 
que dans peu de teps il en viendra "k bout. Vous 
ferez confol6 de receuoir vne de fes lettres, ie vous 
donne defia parole qu'elle eft toute de fa main. En 
efcliage le profit a efte bien grand pour nous, car en 
luy feruants de Maiftres pour la ledture, nous nous 
fommes fa§onnez vn bon Maiftre en la langue ; quand 
nous luy demandons les initiales ou finales des mots, 
ce qui eft quelquefois quafi imperceptible, il nous les 
dit fort diftindtement ; fi qu'il nous feruira fort, auec 
I'ayde de Dieu, pour les coniuguaifons. II nous a 
mefme didt6 plufieurs beaux difcours fur nos Saindts 
Myfteres, dans vne fuite fort iudicieufe; mais fi 
diftindtement que vous ne perdrez pas vne fyllabe. 

Le 8. de Decembre, nos Sauuages eftants de retour 
de leur pefche, nous prifmes refolution de les enfei- 
gner publiquemet. Or comme les feftins font les 
groffes cloches du pais, nous en fifmes vn, auquel 
nous inuitafmes les Chefs de chaque cabane. La 
compagnie eftoit d'enuiron cent cinquante perfonnes. 
lis approuuerent noftre deffein ; & k les entendre, au 
moindre mot ils fe deuoient rendre chez nous. Mais 
leur pefche ayant [54] efl^ fort heureufe, les feftins 
continuels les occuperent en forte nuidl & iour, que 
nous ne pfifmes les affembler auant le 9. de lanuier. 
Ce iour done le premier Capitaine fecondant noftre 
deffein, fit vn feftin chez luy, ^ I'iffue duquel il arrefta 
la compagnie. Mes Nepueux, leur dit ce bon vieil- 
lard, demeurez icy, nous allons tenir confeil, ie m'en 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s8 113 

vain ; as for the writing, it will be very easy for him, 
but the reading will cost him a little more effort. 
The difficulty we had in explaining to him the secret 
has somewhat delayed him; nevertheless, we hope 
that in a short time he will succeed. You will be 
comforted by receiving one of his letters ; I give you 
my word, at the outset, that it is all written by his 
own hand. In exchange for this, we have profited 
greatly, for, in serving him as Instructors in reading, 
we have made for ourselves a good Master in the 
language. When we ask him the initial or final let- 
ters of the words, which are sometimes hardly dis- 
tinguishable, he utters them for us very distinctly ; 
so he will be of great service to us, with the help of 
God, in the conjugations. He has even dictated to 
us several excellent speeches upon our Holy Mys- 
teries, in a very logical sequence ; but he speaks so 
distinctly that you do not lose a syllable. 

On the 8th of December, our Savages having re- 
turned from their fishing, we decided to teach them 
publicly. Now, since feasts serve as the great bells 
of the country, we made one of these, to which we 
invited the Chiefs of each cabin. The company num- 
bered about one hundred and fifty persons. They 
approved our plan, and, to hear them, they were 
bound to come to our house at the least intimation. 
But their fishing having [54] been very successful, 
they were so occupied in continual feasting night and 
day that we could not call them together before the 
9th of January. On that day, then, the foremost 
Captain, seconding our plan, made a feast at his 
house, at the end of which he detained the company. 
" My Nephews," said this good old man to them, 
' ' remain here ; we are going to hold a council ; I am 


114 LES RELATIONS DBS JASUITES [Vol.15 


vay y inuiter les principaux, qui ne font pas icy. Tons 
ne furent pas pluftoft affemblez, que ce bon homme 
leue fa voix, & dit ; c6t Echon qui affemble icy le 
Cofeil : or bien que ie ne f9ache pas fon dellein, ie 
luge pourtant que 1' affaire qu'il a k nous traiter eft 
importante, c'eft pourquoy que tous I'ef content atten- 
tiuement. 

Le Pere auoit vne belle occafion, aulli s'en feruit-il 
tres k propos, & les toucha fi puiffamment, qu'vn des 
Anciens fembla luy reprocher d'auoir trop differe "k 
leur parler d'vne chofe de telle importance, comme eft 
la vie qui nous attend apres noftre mort : & cela auec 
vne eloquence qui ne fentoit rien du Sauuage. Mais 
come il deffendoit vne mauuaife caufe, on luy mon- 
flra doucement qu'il fe plaignoit "k tort de noftre lllece. 
Et ce que I'affembl^e admira le plus, ce fut la repar- 
tie de noftre lofeph, qui nous feruit icy d'Aduocat: 
car ce braue Chreftien reprit courageufement vn de 
fes coufins, qui fe plaignoit malicieufement, de ce 
que pas vn des Frangois n'eftoit mort pendant la con- 
tagion. Le remede, difoit-il, dot ils fe feruent c'efl 
de croire en celuy qui a tout fait, il ne tient qu'k toy 
de t'en feruir. Nous leur fommes trop obligez de ce 
qu'il font venus de fi loing, pour nous donner la co- 
gnoiffance de ce remede fi. falutaire, lequel, Dieu mer- 
cy, ils m'ont enfeign6; ce [55] m'eft trop de gloire, 
de croire comme les Frangois. Le refte de fon dif- 
cours va de mefme air en faueur de noftre Foy. 
Cette generofit^ fut loii^e des plus fages. Le fuccez 
de ce premier confeil ou affembl^e fut; que ce qu'on 
y auoit deduit touchant I'Enfer & le Paradis, auoit 
grandement remeue les confciences, chacun en tirant 
les coclufions que fa paffions luy fourniffoit. Vn 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 115 

going to invite to it the principal men who are not 
here." No sooner were all assembled than this good 
man raised his voice and said, "It is Echon who 
assembles here this Council ; now although I do not 
know his purpose, I judge, nevertheless, that the 
matter about which he is to treat with us is impor- 
tant ; hence let all listen attentively. ' ' 

The Father had a fine opportunity, and he made 
good use of it, touching them so deeply that one of 
the Old Men seemed to reproach him for having too 
long deferred speaking to them about a matter of so 
much importance as is the life that awaits us after 
our death, — expressing this with an eloquence that 
showed nothing of the Savage, But as he was de- 
fending a wrong cause, it was explained to him kind- 
ly that he was wrong in complaining of our silence. 
What the assembly admired most was the answer 
of our Joseph, who served us here as Advocate; for 
this brave Christian courageously reproved one of his 
cousins, who maliciously complained that not one of 
the French had died during the contagion. " The 
remedy which they use," said he, "is to believe in 
him who has made all ; it only depends upon thee to 
avail thyself of this. We are under too great obliga- 
tions to them for coming from so great a distance to 
give us the knowledge of this so salutary remedy, 
which, thank God, they have taught me; it [55] is 
for me a great glory to believe the same as the French 
do." The rest of his discourse proceeded in the 
same way, in favor of our Faith. This generosity 
was praised by the wiser ones. The outcome of this 
first council or assembly was that what had been 
brought out touching Hell and Paradise had greatly 
stirred up their consciences, each one drawing there- 


116 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 15 

vieillard entr'autres, homme d'efprit, & refpedt^ 
pour fon aage & fa prudence, temoigna au fortir qu'il 
fouhaitoit fort que nous vouluffions les affembler 
ainfi plus fouuent. 

Cependant fi nous eufmes de la peine ^ afsebler ce 
premier, le fecond ne nous coufta pas moins. II nous 
fallut attedre quinze iours, pour obeir aux fonge d'vn 
vieil richard, pour la fante duquel ce bourg eftoit tons 
les iours de fefte. Enfin le Pere gaigna le plus con- 
fiderable de tous les Anciens : il 1' engage fortement 
dans noftre delTein: fgauoir, qu'il auoit k leur dire 
des chofes nouuelles de I'Enfer, & fur tout comme 
ce ne font pas fables, ainfi que la plufpart s'efloit 
imaging. Doc lei.de Feurier, voila I'auditoire plus 
beau que deuant, auec bonne deuotion de prefler 
I'oreille "k noftre Predicateur. II prit le fujet de fon 
difcours, fur ce que, fi pour efchaper les mains des 
Iroquois leurs ennemis, ils n'efpargnoient aucune 
induftrie ; k plus forte raifon deuoient ils fe tenir fur 
leur garde, pour ne tober vn iour entre les mains d'vn 
ennemy cruel, qui les tourmentera pour vn iamais. 
C'efl k mon grand regret que ie ne puis icy rapporter 
la naifuet6 du lagage, que le Pere poflede parfaite- 
ment, fans doute ie iugeay ce difcours capable de 
couaincre le coeur le plus endurcy. Mais [56] ce qui 
f ut, k mon aduis, le plus perfuafif ; ce fut le difcours 
de ce bon Capitaine, qui pour encherir fur ce que le 
Pere leur auoit auace, loiia tout baut noftre lofeph, 
& exhorta ceux du bourg k fe faire inftruire. A tout 
cela ils redoublent leur Ho, Ho, Ho, ce qu'ils font 
quand ils agr^ent la coclufion d'vn Capitaine. Ils 
demeurent en fuite dans vn profond filece ; iufques k 
ce qu'vn autre vieillard s'adrellant au Pere I'aduertit 


1638 - 39] LE JE UNE ' S J? EL A T/ON, 1638 117 

from the conclusions that his own inclinations fur- 
nished. One old man, among others, — a man of 
intelligence, and respected on account of his age and 
prudence, — declared, at leaving, that he earnestly 
wished that we would oftener call them together 
thus. 

However, if we had trouble in assembling this first 
one, the second cost us no less. We had to wait two 
weeks in obedience to the dream of a rich old man, 
for whose health this village was having daily feasts. 
At last, the Father gained over the most influential 
one of all the Old Men, and strongly interested him 
in our plan, — which was that he had something new 
to tell them about Hell; and, above all, that these 
are not fables, as the majority of them had imagined. 
Accordingly, on the ist of February, behold a larger 
audience than before, all disposed to lend ear to our 
Preacher. He took as the subject of his discourse 
this thought, — that if, to escape the hands of the Iro- 
quois, their enemies, they spared no ingenuity, with 
how much more reason should they keep upon their 
guard not to fall some day into the hands of a cruel 
enemy, who will torment them forever. It is my 
great regret that I cannot here reproduce the sim- 
plicity of the language, which the Father possesses 
perfectly ; I considered this discourse without doubt 
capable of conquering the hardest heart. But [56] 
what was, in my opinion, the most persuasive was 
the discourse of that good Captain, — who, in order to 
enhance what the Father had held forth, praised our 
Joseph very highly, and exhorted the people of this 
village to receive instruction. To all this, they re- 
doubled their " Ho, Ho, Ho," which they utter when 
they accept the conclusion of a Captain. Then they 


118 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.15 

de tefmoigner fa ioye en plein confeil, attendu qu'il 
auoit obtenu ce qu'il pretedoit. Nous chatafmes 
alors rHymne, Veni Creator, que nous iug-eafmes le 
plus couenable "k cette rencontre. Les prieres finies, 
chacun s'entretint vn affez long temps fur le fuiet 
du cofeil. Or n'elloit que ie crains d'eftre ennuy- 
eux, ie coucherois icy les diuers fentimes de ces Bar- 
bares ; ils butoient tous ^ ce point, qu'en fin il falloit 
nous croire, & croire en Dieu ! Apres tout, ils adiou- 
fterent d'vn commun confentement, que dorefnauant 
ils recognoftroient le Pere Superieur come vn des 
Capitaines de la bourgade ; & qu'en fuite, il affemble- 
roit le confeil en noftre cabane toutes & quantesfois 
qu'il trouueroit bon. 

Depuis ce Sermon, nous auons remarque vn no- 
table changement das toutes les cabanes : cbacun ne 
parloit plus que de la refolution qu'on auoit prife de 
Croire. II s'en eft trouue mefme qui ont fait des 
feftins expres, pour faire entedre que toute leur fa- 
mille defiroit embraffer noftre foy. Quelques eftran- 
gers mefmes ayant f9eu le tout comme il s'eftoit 
pall^, fe promettoient de fuiure ceux-cy. Mais helas! 
Non omnis qui dicit mihi Domine Domine, intrabit in reg- 
num coelorum : ils reflemblent quafi tous k leur bon 
Capitaine [57] dont ie vies de parler, c6t homme 
goufte veritablement les veritez eternelles de noftre 
faindte creance; mais il n'eft pas pour fe refoudre en 
vn moment k quitter vne vie qu'il meine il y a tant 
d'annees. Ie le recommande, & tous fes fujets ^ ces 
fain<5tes Ames de France, a ce qu'il plaife au Maiflre 
fouuerain des coeurs de regarder enfiln ce bon vieil- 
lard en pitie, car il feroit pour fauorifer cette Eglife, 
naiffante par fon exemple, autant qu'il I'authorife 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 119 

remained in profound silence, until another old man, 
addressing the Father, admonished him to express 
his joy in open council, considering that he had ob- 
tained what he had solicited. We then chanted the 
Hymn Veni Creator, which we considered the most 
suitable to this occasion. The prayers finished, they 
all conversed for a considerable time upon the sub- 
ject of the council. Now if I did not fear to be tedi- 
ous, I would set down here the various opinions of 
these Barbarians; they all aimed at this point, that 
they must, after all, believe us and believe in God ! 
Finally, they added, by common consent, that thence- 
forward they would recognize the Father Superior as 
one of the Captains of the village, and that conse- 
quently he could assemble the council in our cabin 
at any and all times he might choose. 

After this Sermon, we noticed a remarkable change 
in all the cabins ; every family talked about nothing 
except the resolution they had made to Believe. 
There were even some who made feasts expressly to 
announce that all their family desired to embrace 
our faith. Even some strangers, upon learning all 
that had taken place, promised to do likewise. But 
alas ! Non oninis qui dicit tnihi Domine Domine, intrabit 
in regnum coelorum; nearly all are like their good Cap- 
tain [57] of whom I have just spoken ; this man really 
enjoys the eternal truths of our holy belief, but he 
is not inclined to resolve in a moment to give up a 
life that he has led for so many years. I commend 
him and all his subjects to those saintly Souls in 
France, for this — that it may please the sovereign 
Master of hearts finally to look with pity upon this 
good old man ; for he is disposed to favor this infant 
Church by his example, inasmuch as he daily gives 


120 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.15 

tous les iours dans les affemblees, oh. il parle de 
noftre Foy auec aduantage. Helas! s'il e ft difficile 
en Europe de conuertir vn grand Pecheur ; il eft icy 
encore plus mal-aif6 de faire changer de cceur h. vn 
Infidelle; c'eft battre I'air, que de luy parler de I'v- 
nit6 d'vn Dieu. Tous nos motifs de credibility qu'6 
apporte touchant la venue du Fils de Dieu fur terre, 
leur font des tenebres en plein midy. 

Voicy h. peu pres ce qui les fait ioindre k la Verity 
que nous leur prefchons. i. L'art de couch er fur 
le papier les chofes efloignees. 2. La grande con- 
formite auec la raifon qui fe retrouue en toutes nos 
maximes. 3. L'vnit6 de noftre dodtrine; s'efton- 
nans qu'on leur dit k Kebec le mefme que nous leur 
prefchons icy. 4. Noftre affeurance a maintenir ce 
que nous enfeignons. 5. Le mefpris qu'ils nous 
voyet faire de la mort, & de tous les dangers qu'il 
nous faut elluyer. 6. L'auerfion qu'ils admirent 
aux Fran9ois, de toute forte de fenfualite, k laquelle 
ils fe laiffent emporter par vne pente qu'il leur eft 
naturelle. 7. L'opinion qu'ils ont maintenant, que 
nous ne fommes pas gens a nous tromper en chofe 
de fi grade importance. 8. Cette confiance Chre- 
ftienne en la bont6 [58] de Dieu, qu'on leur monftre 
dans les aduerfitez qui fe rencontrent. 9. Ce prin- 
cipe. Que I'homme ne s'eft pas forme foy-mefme: 
& qu'en fuite il faut monter iufques k fon origine, 
qui ne pent eftre qu'vn Eftre independant. 10. La 
vanit6 qu'ils vont defcouurant en leurs refueries ordi- 
naires. 

Depuis le bon fuccez de ce conf eil ; la curiofit^ de 
voir nos Images, & d'entendre noftre chant attire 
ces peuples, les Dimanches & les Feftes en noftre 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 163S 121 

it his support in the assemblies, where he speaks 
highly of our Faith. Alas ! if it is difl&cult in Eu- 
rope to convert a great Sinner, it is still harder here 
to cause a change of heart in an Unbeliever ; it is like 
beating the air to speak to him about the unity of 
God, and all the motives for belief that we adduce, 
in regard to the coming of the Son of God upon 
earth, are to him like darkness at noonday. 

Here is an outline of what inclines them to the 
Truth that we preach to them. i. The art of 
inscribing upon paper matters that are beyond sight. 
2. The strict conformity to reason that is found in 
all our maxims. 3. The unity of our doctrine; 
for they are astonished that the same things are 
told them at K6bec as we preach here. 4. Our own 
certainty in upholding what we teach. 5. The con- 
tempt that they see us show for death and for all 
the dangers we have to incur. 6. The aversion 
among the French, which they admire, to all kinds 
of sensuality, to which they abandon themselves 
through a propensity that is a part of their natures. 
7. The opinion they now have that we are not peo- 
ple to deceive ourselves in a matter of so much im- 
portance. 8. That Christian confidence in the good- 
ness [58] of God that we have shown them in the 
adversities we have suffered. 9. This principle: 
That man did not create himself, and consequently 
must go back to his origin, which can only be an 
independent Being. 10. The vanity they are con- 
tinually discovering in their usual notions. 

Since the successful issue of this council, the curi- 
osity to see our Images and to hear our songs attract 
these peoples to our cabin on Sundays and Feast days, 
where we appear in our surplices to offer public pray- 


122 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 15 

cabane, ou nous paroilTons auec nos furplis pour les 
prieres publiques. En voicy I'ordre. N. Superieur 
commence par vne Oraif on en leur langue , qu'il pro- 
nonce dans le ton ordinaire des Confeils. Elle eft 
vn pen longue, comme eftant faite pour leur inflru- 
ction, auffi bien que pour les recommander k Dieu. 
A mefme deffein nous chantons en fuite le fymbole 
des Apoftres en rhymes du pais. Tout cecy n'efl 
que pour les difpofer au Catechifme, oil il nous faut 
autant de variety qu'en France, car ils ont vniuer- 
fellement I'efprit bon. Icy noftre lofeph fait 
merueilles, car par fois faifant du retif, tantoft de 
r ignorant, ores du Dodleur, il donne fujet ^ Noftre 
Catechifte d'expliquer par Dialogue & auec plus de 
clart6, ce qui d'ailleurs ne fe conceuroit qu'k demy. 
II n' eft pas croyable comme quoy ces demandes & ces 
refponfes leur agr6ent, & les tiennent das 1' attention. 
Suit quelque Hymne de I'Eglife, pour finir le tout 
par vne priere fur le ton de quelque air approcbant 
de leurs chanfons qu'ils aiment fort. Ces Catecbifmes 
leurs plaifent grandemet, & n'en fortent quafi iamais 
fans leur acclamation de ioye & d'approbation, Ho, 
Ho. Ce qui eft le [59] plus admirable pour le pais eft, 
que ny les grands ny les petits ny ont autre atrait que 
le defir d' entendre, & la curiofite de voir, aulTi noftre 
pauuret6 ne fuffiroit pas ou aux prefents, ou aux 
feflins. Vn certain aueugle d'enuiron cent ans, vou- 
lut k fon tour faire fon objec5tio au Catechifme & 
apporta la plufpart de fes refueries; mais noftre 
lofeph luy refpondit auec tant de modeftie & de pru- 
dence qu'il fe fit admirer de tout le monde. Iamais 
il n'eut fi beau jeu, & c'eft de verit6 k regret que ie 
tranche fes beaux difcours. 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s8 123 

ers. This is the order we observe: Our Superior 
begins with a Prayer in their language, which he pro- 
nounces in the tone generally used in the Councils ; 
it is somewhat slow, being employed for their instruc- 
tion, as well as to commend them to God. With the 
same object, we afterwards sing the Apostles' creed 
in the native rhymes. All this is only to prepare 
them for the Catechism, in which we need to have 
as much variety as in France, for they have univer- 
sally good understanding. Here, our Joseph does 
wonders; for acting sometimes as objector, some- 
times as ignoramus, and anon the Doctor, he gives 
opportunity to Our Catechist to explain by Dialogue, 
and with more clearness, what otherwise would be 
only half understood. It is hardly credible how much 
these questions and answers please them, and hold 
their attention. There follows some Church Hymn, 
and then all is ended with a prayer, intoned to some 
tune resembling their own songs, of which they are 
very fond. These Catechisms please them greatly, 
and they seldom go away from them without their 
exclamation of pleasure and approbation, " Ho, Ho." 
What is [59] most creditable to the country is, that 
neither adults nor children have any other attraction 
to this exercise than the desire to hear, and the curi- 
osity to see, as our poverty would not be equal either 
to presents or to feasts. A certain blind man, about 
a hundred years old, tried in his turn, to offer his 
objections to the Catechism, and brought up against 
it the greater part of his theories ; but our Joseph 
answered him with so much modesty and prudence 
that he won the admiration of all. Never had he so 
good an opportunity; and it was with real regret 
that I cut short his admirable discourse. 


IM 


LES RELA TIONS DES /£SUITES [Vol. 15 


^ Celuy de qui nous efperons de plus apres lofeph, 
c'eft vn des plus honorables Capitaines. II parle de 
noftre faindte Foy auec honneur, y exhortant la ieu- 
neffe. II fe mocque de fes fonges, & fe plaift fort k 
prier Dieu, £i qu'il nous inuita n'agueres ^ vn fien 
feflin ; apportant, pour nous y attirer puiffamment, 
que nous y donnerions la benedidlion des Chreftiens,' 
& dirions les graces de I'Eglife: mais nous en eaat 
difpenfez force nous fut de luy doner vn de nos 
domeftiques qui fuppleroit pour nous le Benedicite, & 
les graces qu'il demandoit. Ce fut Ik ou ce bon vieil- 
lard prit fujet de parler honorablement de noare bon 
Dieu & de fa faindte Loy: attribuant k nos prieres la 
bonne pefche qu'il auoit fait cette Automne. Les 
plus touchez d'entr'eux adreffent fouuent cette priere 
au Ciel. O vous qui auez fait le Ciel & la terre 
affiflez-moy, ie defire me desfaire de tout ce que vous 
auez defendu : aydez-moy en cecy & en cela qui me 
donne bien encore de la peine. Dieu vueille benir 
ces belles femences, qui ne nous promettent que de 
bons fruidts, 

Bref quelques ieunes hommes fe rengent chez [60] 
nous conflamment depuis I'Hyuer, I'inftruction def- 
quels nous employe grandement: lis fe font d'eux- 
mefmes offerts k nous, auec beaucoup de tefmoignage 
de bonne volonte. Nous ne precipiterons pas neant- 
moins leur baptefme, k raifon que nous les mettrions 
quafi dans I'impoffibilite de trouuer party, n'y ayant 
point encores icy de ieunes filles bien Chreftiennes. 
lufques k ce que nous ayons vn bourg qui foit tout k 
Dieu, les manages de nos nouueaux Chreftiens nous 
doneront de la peine. Nous recommandons d'affe- 
dtion k V. R. & ^ tons nos Peres & Freres ces bons 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s8 125 

The one on whom we build the strongest hopes, 
after Joseph, is one of the most reputable Captains. 
He speaks of our holy Faith with respect, exhorting 
the young people to receive it. He ridicules his 
dreams and takes great delight in praying to God, — 
so much so that he recently invited us to one of his 
feasts, offering as a powerful inducement for us to 
come, that we should there give the benediction of 
the Christians, and utter the thanksgiving of the 
Church. But as we excused ourselves from doing 
this, we were obliged to give him one of our domes- 
tics, who could supply in our stead the Benedicite 
and the thanks that he asked. It was there that this 
good old man took occasion to speak honorably of 
our good God and of his holy Law, attributing to 
our prayers the success of his fishing this Autumn. 
Those among them who are most interested often 
address this prayer to Heaven : ' ' Oh you who have 
made Heaven and earth, help me ; I wish to free my- 
self from all that you have forbidden; help me in 
this and in that which still causes me trouble. ' ' May 
God be pleased to bless these fine seedlings, which 
promise us good fruit. 

In short, some young men have placed themselves 
on [60] our side, ever since Winter, and their in- 
struction has occupied much of our time ; they 
ojffered themselves to us of their own accord, with 
many evidences of good will. However, we shall 
not hasten their baptism, because this would render 
it almost impossible for them to find wives, since 
there are, as yet, no good young Christian girls here. 
Until we have a village that is entirely devoted to 
God, the marriages of our new Christians will occa- 
sion us difficulty. We affectionately commend to 


126 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 15 

vieillards, lefquels bien qa'ils ne foient pas Chre- 
ftiens, ne laiffent pas de donner vn credit k noftre 
faindte Foy. 

Ce que nous battons maintenant eft, de leur leuer 
les difficultez que le diable leur fait naiftre aux 
rencontres, fur leurs fonges, leurs danfes, fueries & 
f eftins. La raif on que nous leur alleguons de noftre 
propre experience en tout plein d'idolatres & d'infi- 
deles, & come ceux fraifchement du Paraquay, les 
contente le plus ; lefquels enfin ont ouuert les yeux 
^ la verit6 de I'Euangile. Quoy qu'il en foit, le plus 
grand fruidt que nous efperons de ce pays, fera, Dieu 
aydant, dans les conferences particulieres, pour y 
perfuader ceux que nous iugerons pouuoir gaigner 
^ Dieu. Ce qui n'eft pas I'affaire d'vn iour. Si nous 
euffions eft6 le nombre que nous fouhaiterions en ces 
commencemens, ie ne doute pas, que le falut de ces 
peuples n'en fust de beaucoupplus aduanc6. 


1638 - 39] LE JE UNE ' S J? EL A T/ON, i6jS 127 

Your Reverence, and to all our Fathers and Breth- 
ren, these good old men, who, although they are not 
Christians, nevertheless lend their influence to our 
holy Faith. 

What we are contending for now is to overcome 
the obstacles that the devil causes to rise before 
them, at times, concerning their dreams, their dances, 
sweats, and feasts. The argument that satisfies them 
best is that which we advance to them concerning 
our own experience with many idolaters and infidels, 
such as those recently in Paraquay,^ who have finally 
opened their eyes to the truth of the Gospel. How- 
ever this may be, the greatest fruit we hope from 
this country will be, God helping, in conversations 
with individuals, to persuade those whom we shall 
consider it possible to win over to God ; which is not 
the affair of a day. If we had had the number we 
desired at the beginning of our work, I have no doubt 
that the salvation of these peoples would have been 
much farther advanced. 


M8 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 15 


[6i] CHAPITRE IX. 

LA RESIDENCE DE S. JOSEPH A IHONATIRIA. 

NOSTRE P. Superieur, & le P. Chaftellain qui 
ont icy paffe tout I'Eft^, y ont baptize onze 
perfonnes tant adultes que petits enfans. Le 
Baptefme de quelques-vns eft remarquable. lis 
efloient h. la recherche d'vne pauure malade, laquelle 
d'abord on leur fit morte: cependant ces bones gens, 
gaignez qu'ils furet par quelque gratification, appor- 
tent aux Peres deux petits enfans pour eftre baptifez, 
ce qu'ils firent, eu egard a I'eftat deplorable oil efloit 
toute la bourgade. L^ deffus vn d'entr'eux s'apper- 
§oit que celle qu'ils croyoiet defundle auoit le vifage 
extraordinairement vermeil, ils apprennent qu'elle 
n'eftoit pas encore paffee, mais bien qu'elle auoit en- 
tieremet perdu la parole & I'vfage des fens. Le defir 
qu'ils eurent de la baptifer leur fit faire vn voeu de 
trois Meffes en I'honneur de S. lofeph. En vn mot 
elle reuient k foy fuffifamment pour eftre inftruite. 
Bref , interrogee fi elle efloit contente de receuoir le 
Baptefme, ne pouuant parler elle refpodit fauorable- 
ment en portant la main fur fa tefte, ils le luy 
octroyerent, & elle mourut toft apres. 

Vn Sauuage leur vint donner aduis qu'vne pauure 
femme eftoit ^ 1' extremity, qui venoit d'arriuer de 
dix lieues loing. Par vne heureufe rencotre pour 
elle, ils y accouret: ils I'inftruifent autat que le teps 
le pouuoit permettre, elle meurt incontinet apres le 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6sS 129 


[6i] CHAPTER IX. 

THE RESIDENCE OF ST. JOSEPH AT IHONATIRIA. 

OUR Father Superior and Father Chastellain, 
who have passed the entire Summer here, 
have baptized eleven persons, both adults 
and little children. The Baptism of some of them 
is noteworthy. They were searching for a poor sick 
woman, who at first was represented to them as dead ; 
however, these simple people, being won over by 
some gratuity, brought two little children for the 
Fathers to baptize, which they did, considering the 
deplorable condition of the whole village. There- 
upon, one of them perceived that the face of the sup- 
posed dead woman was unusually flushed; they dis- 
covered that she had not yet passed away, but that 
she had entirely lost her speech and the use of her 
senses. Their strong desire to baptize her caused 
them to make a vow of three Masses in honor of St. 
Joseph. In a word, she came to herself sufficiently 
to be instructed ; and, being asked if she was content 
to receive Baptism, not being able to speak, she sig- 
nified her willingness by placing her hand upon her 
head ; they granted it to her, and she died soon after- 
ward. 

A Savage came to inform them that a poor woman 
was dying, who had just arrived from a place ten 
leagues away ; by a happy chance for her, they has- 
tened thither, and instructed her as well as the time 
would permit; she died immediately after Baptism. 


130 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.15 

Baptefme. lis doiuet, ce diset-ils cefte autre faueur 
^ N. Dame, & h. fon glorieux Efpoux. 

Vn des Noftres ayant difpof6 vne petit fille aag6e 
de huidt ans pour mourir Chrefliene, fans [62] toute- 
fois le baptifer, ne voyat rien qui preffat du coft6 de 
la maladie, quelques heures apres fes parens la trou- 
uant extraordinairement mal, vinret appeller le Pere, 
a ce qu'il luy fit la faueur toute entiere. Elle quitta 
bien-toft la vie du corps, pour aller ioiiir de celle de 
I'ame dans le Ciel. Prefque le mefme eft arriue ^ 
vne autre, qui apres fon inftrudtion fembla chanceler 
en fa demande, pour le refped: du vSacrement ; mais 
le lendemain il luy refta encore affez de temps, pour 
fe difpofer au S. Baptefme, & alia voir fa Patrone S. 
Elifabeth. 

Voicy deux mots de confolation. Atfan premier 
Capitaine de guerre dans tout le pais nous vint voir, 
& nous demanda inftamment le Baptefme. Ayant 
eu pour refponfe que se n'eftoit pas vne petite affaire, 
& qu'il falloit eftre bien inftruit auparauant: le le 
f9ay bien, dit-il; c'eft bien mon intention de vous 
voir plus d'vne fois pour ce fujet, mais i'ay efte bien 
aife que vous f§euffiez mes penfees & ma volont^. 
En effedl il fe mocque defia de toutes leurs fuperfti- 
tions, & ne pent fouffrir ce qu'il croit eftre defplai- 
fant ^ Dieu. 

Pierre noftre premier Chreftien eftant frappe de la 
maladie fe coporta toufiours en bon Chreftien ; car il 
n'eut pas recours aux fottifes du pais non plus qu'il 
n'auoit fait pendant I'afflidlion de fa famille, tefmoi- 
gnant toufiours qu'il mettoit toute fa confiance en 
Dieu. Auffi ne luy auons-nous pas manque au be- 
foin, tant fpirituel que temporel, felon noftre heureufe 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 131 

They owed this other favor, they said, to Our Lady 
and her glorious Spouse. 

One of Ours, having prepared a little girl of 
eight years to die a Christian, — without [62] bap- 
tizing her, however, as he saw nothing urgent about 
her illness, — was summoned by her parents to com- 
plete this favor for her, when they saw a few hours 
afterward that she was exceedingly ill. She soon 
parted with the life of the body to go and enjoy in 
Heaven that of the soul. Almost the same thing 
happened to another woman, who, after her instruc- 
tion, seemed to waver in her request, out of rever- 
ence for the Sacrament; but the next day sufficient 
time remained to her to prepare herself for Holy 
Baptism, and then she went to see her Patron, St. 
Elizabeth. 

Now for a few comforting words. Atsan, the fore- 
most war Captain in the whole country, came to see 
us and earnestly requested Baptism. Having re- 
ceived the reply that this was not a trifling matter, 
and that he must first be well instructed, ' ' I know 
that very well," said he; "it is certainly my inten- 
tion to see you more than once about this matter ; but 
I am very glad to have you know my thoughts and 
inclinations." In fact, he already derides all their 
superstitions and cannot endure what he believes to 
be displeasing to God. 

Pierre, our first Christian, being stricken with the 
disease, behaved always like a good Christian ; for he 
did not have recourse to the foolish tricks of the coun- 
try, any more than he had done during the affliction 
of his family, always showing that he put all his con- 
fidence in God. Therefore we did not fail him in 
his needs, spiritual as well as temporal, according to 


132 LES RELA TIONS DES j£SU7TES [Vol. 15 

pauuretd. N'agueres vn de nous I'eftant all^ voir, 
il fit de fon propre mouuement ce qu'on n'eut pas at- 
tedu de luy k Textremite : car ayant trouue fon Cha- 
pellet k taftons il baifa denotement 1' Image de N. Sei- 
gneur [63] & de N. Dame qui eftoient h fa medaille ;. 
puis faifant le figne de la Croix, il comen9a k rouler 
les grains entre fes doigts, difant fur les gros, lefus 
aye pitie de moy : & fur les petits : Marie ayez piti^ 
de moy ; entre-coupant f ouuent fa priere par des adles 
de Refjgnation. Seigneur vous eftes le feul Maiftre 
de nos vies, difpofez de la mienne felon voftre faindte 
volote. Saindte Marie gardez-moy cefte nuidt. II h. 
efte exauce, car il eut vne crife fauorable, qui a efl^ 
le comencemet de fa fante. 

Dans nos vifites nous auons fait rencontre d'vn 
vieillard fi touch^ de ce que nous luy prefchios, qu'il 
fe plaignoit mefme de ce que, difoit-il, on ne pre- 
noit plus h. coeur cefte affaire comme elle meritoit. 
II adjoufla qu'il eftoit refolu de quitter fes fonges, 
danfes & feftins fuperftitieux. Depuis il nous eft 
venu voir fouuent, auec refolution de fe faire Chre- 
ftien auec toute fa famille, qui monte iufques k treize 
perfonnes. Nous auons toufiours remarque de bones 
inclinations en cefte famille : les efpreuues ferot voir 
ce qu'ils ont das le coeur. 


1638 - 39] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 133 

our blessed poverty. Recently, when one of us went 
to see him, he did, of his own accord, what had not 
been expected from him in the last hour ; for, hav- 
ing drawn out his Rosary, he devoutly kissed the 
Image of Our Lord [63] and Our Lady, which was on 
the medal; then making the sign of the Cross, he 
began to pass the beads between his fingers, — saying 
at the large ones, " Jesus, have pity on me;" and at 
the little ones, " Mary, have pity on me," often 
interrupting his prayer by some act of Resignation. 
' ' Lord, you are the sole Master of our lives ; dispose 
of mine according to your holy will. Holy Mary, 
keep me this night." His prayers were answered, 
for he had a favorable crisis that was the beginning 
of his recovery. 

In our visits we encountered an old man, who was 
so affected by what we preached that he even com- 
plained because, he said, this matter was not taken 
more to heart, as it deserved to be. He added that 
he was resolved to give up his dreams, dances, and 
superstitious feasts. Since then he has often come 
to see us, determined to become a Christian with all 
his family, who number as many as thirteen persons. 
We have always noticed tendencies to goodness in 
this family ; trials will show what they have in their 
hearts. 


134 LES RELATIONS DES J£SUITES [Vol.15 


CHAPITRE X. 

BREF JOURNAL DES CHOSES QUI N'ONT PEU ENTRER 
DANS LES CHAPITRES PRECEDENTS. 

VOVS aurez iqeu la rifque que courut le Pere qui 
arriua icy le premier de Septembre ; & comme 
il penfa tomber entre les mains des Iroquois: 
bon Dieu que ces entre-veues font douces ! 

Le Pere qui eft remonte icy cefte annee remarque 
auec raifon, que nos Hurons font loiiables, pour leur 
humanite par deffus les Algonquins, car au lieu que 
ceux-cy s'abandonent pour 1' ordinaire [64] les vns les 
autres dans leur maladie; les Hurons au contraire 
s'incommodent pour affifler vn malade iufques h la 
mort. II dit les auoir veu faire des brancarts, & 
porter par les Sauts leurs carcaffes languiffantes, fi 
que s'il arriuoit que quelqu'vn des leurs mourut, ils 
I'enfeuelilloient & I'enterroient auec autant de foing 
que s'ils eulTent efte fur le pais; au lieu que les 
Algonquins laillent fouuent les leurs fans fepulture. 

II auoit difpofe vn pauure malade d'vn autre canot, 
qui fut baptif^ auant que mourir par vn ieune Fran- 
§ois, qui luy donna le nom de S. Barthelemy h. Toc- 
cafion de fa fefte. II en baptifa vn autre, qu'il eut 
allez de peine k inftruire, pour ce que d'autres Sau- 
uages s'y oppofoient; il mourut toft apres, pour por- 
ter le no d'Auguftin au Ciel. 

Paffant aux Biffiriniens, il trouua cefte pauure 
Nation fort affligee de la maladie. Et vn ArendiSan^ 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 135 


CHAPTER X. 

BRIEF JOURNAL OF THE THINGS WHICH COULD NOT 
BE ENTERED IN THE PRECEDING CHAPTERS. 

YOU have heard of the risk that the Father ran 
who reached here the first of September, and 
how he almost fell into the hands of the Iro- 
quois. Good God, how delightful are these meetings ! 

The Father who returned here this year remarks, 
with reason, that our Hurons are praiseworthy for 
their humanity, as compared with the Algonquins; 
for instead of abandoning, as the latter usually do, 
[64] one another in their illnesses, the Hurons, on 
the contrary, inconvenience themselves to assist a 
person who is sick unto death. He says that he has 
seen them make litters and carry their languishing 
bodies past the Rapids, so that, if it happened that 
one of them died, they might enshroud and bury him 
with as much care as if they had been at home; 
whereas the Algonquins often leave their dead with- 
out burial. 

He had prepared a poor sick man of another canoe, 
who was baptized before dying by a young French- 
man, who gave him the name of St. Bartholomew on 
the occasion of that Saint's feast. He baptized an- 
other man, whom he had considerable difficulty in 
instructing because the other Savages opposed it ; 
he died soon afterwards, to bear in Heaven the name 
of Augustin. 

Passing to the Bissiriniens, he found this poor 


136 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.15 


entr'autres des plus fuiuis, qui fe plaignoit aux autres, 
de ce que le meftier de Sorcier, ce difoit-il, ne valoit 
plus rien, attendu que le Manitou fe mocquoit d'eux, 
les faifant mourir auffi bien que les autres. 

Ahiendafe I'vn de ces ieunes hommes qu[e] I'on 
auoit efleue en N. Seminaire, defcendanc auec fon 
pere aux trois Riuieres pour retourner ^ Kdbec, tomba 
en danger de mort, & fut baptife par vn de nos do- 
mefliques, auec vne marque euidente de fa predefli- 
nation ; car peu apres fon Pere, helas ! fut pris au 
paffage, & tu6 par les Iroquois. Ce ieune homme 
efloit d'vn fort bon naturel, il ne luy manquoit plus 
que la faueur que Dieu luy a faite a la fin de fa vie. 
Que ce petit Seminaire a defia attire de benedidlions 
celeftes. 

[65] Remarquez que pas vn de nos domefliques 
n'eft monte icy cette annee, qui n'ait gaign6 k Dieu 
quelque ame par les chemins. Ce fera vn tres-grand 
bon-heur pour cette miffion, s'il plaift ^ Dieu nous 
donner toufiours des domeftiques qui prennent en 
affedtion de cooperer, comme ils peuuent beaucoup, 
^ la conuerfion de ces peuples. On ne f9auroit croire 
le grand bien qu'a fait le bon exemple de ceux que 
nous auons eu depuis 4. ans. Nos Sauuages en par- 
lent auec admiration ; & voyans que des perfonnes 
qui ne portent pas noflre habit, pratiquent neant- 
moins fi exacl:ement ce que nous enfeignons, ils font 
plus d'eflat de noflre foy: ce leur pourra eflre quel- 
que iour vn motif pour I'embraffer. 

Nous fifmes noftre petite moiffon & nos vanda[n]ges 
pour le faindt Autel, au mois de Septembre. La re- 
colte a efle d'enuiron vn demy boiffau de bo froment, 
c'eftoit trop pour le peu que nous anions femd: & 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s8 187 

Nation sorely afflicted by the disease; and, among 
others of the more influential Arendiwan^, one who 
complained to the others that the profession of Sor- 
cerer was, as he said, no longer of any use, since the 
Manitou was mocking them, causing them as well as 
the others to die. 

Ahiendase, one of the young men who had been 
trained in Our Seminary, going down to the three 
Rivers with his father to return to Kebec, became 
dangerously ill, and was baptized by one of our 
domestics, with very evident signs of his predestina- 
tion ; for a little while afterwards his Father, alas ! was 
captured on the way and slain by the Iroquois. This 
young man had a very good disposition, and nothing 
was lacking to him except the favor that God granted 
him at the end of his life. What heavenly blessings 
this little Seminary has already attracted ! 

[65] Observe that not one of our domestics who 
has come up here this year has failed to gain some 
soul to God on the way. It will be a very great 
blessing for this mission if it please God always to 
give us domestics who are disposed to cooperate 
with us, for they can do a great deal for the conver- 
sion of these peoples. You cannot believe how much 
benefit has resulted from the good example of those 
whom we have had during the last 4 years. Our Sav- 
ages speak of them with admiration ; and when they 
see persons who do not wear our costume, practicing, 
nevertheless, so exactly what we teach, they place a 
higher value upon our faith ; this may some day be 
a motive for them to embrace it. 

We gathered our little harvest and our vintage for 
the holy Altar, in the month of September. The 
harvest was about a half bushel of good wheat, which 


]^ LES RELATIO NS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 15 

d'vn petit barillet de vin, qui s'efl fort bien conferu^ 
pendant tout I'hyuer, on le trouue encore paffable. 
Trois Preftres s'en feruent il y a tantofl fix mois. 

Nous somes fur les termes de leuer noftre nouuelle 
Chapelle: Elle aura 30. pieds de longueur, feize de 
largeur, & 24. de hauteur. Si Dieu nous fait la grace 
de voir c^t ouurage accomply, ce fera non pas vn des 
plus grands, mais vn des plus ioly qui ait encore paru 
en la Nouuelle France. 

Vne eclipfe de Lune, qui arriua le dernier de De- 
cembre au matin, & dura iufques au leuer du Soleil, 
qui fut k 7. heures 4. minutes, nous donna icy vn 
grand credit pour faire approuuer ce que [66] nous 
croyons. Car (leur difions nous) vous avez veu 
comme la Lune efl eclypfee le mefme iour au mefme 
moment que nous anions predit. Au refle, nous 
n'euffios pas voulu mourir pour vous maintenir cette 
verite, come nous fommes prefls de faire, pour vous 
maintenir que Dieu vous brulera etemellement, fi 
vous ne croyez en luy. 

le ne puis icy rapporter fans rougir les beaux eloges 
que certains Capitaines nous donnent en leurs confeils 
de guerres, ou ils ont couaume de nous appeller; 
Nous en efperons de tres-bons effedts. Defia les 
chefs du pais font gloire du Chriflianifme, nous de- 
firans dans leurs bourgades, ils recognoiffent defia les 
torts qu'ils ont eu de nous perfecuter auec fi peu de 
raifon. Ils ont defaduoii^ publiquement ce qu'ils 
auoient controuu6 du P. Antoine Daniel, fi que toute 
I'affemblee agrea fort cette reparation d'honneur. 
Pour le faire court, nos nouueaux Chreftiens conti 
nuent dans leurs premiers fentimens, ils fe confeffent 
& communient auec la deuotion que nous pourrions 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 ia» 

was large for the little that we had sowed ; and a 
small keg of wine, which kept very well during the 
entire winter, and is still passably good. Three 
Priests have been using it for nearly six months. 

We are now about to erect our new Chapel. It 
will be 30 feet long, sixteen wide, and 24 high. If 
God grant us the favor to see this work finished, it 
will not be one of the largest, but one of the pret- 
tiest which has yet appeared in New France. 

An eclipse of the Moon, — which happened on the 
morning of the last day of December, and lasted 
until Sunrise, which was 4 minutes after 7 o'clock, — 
gave us great repute here, securing approval of what 
[66] we believe. "For" (we said to them) "you 
have seen how the Moon was eclipsed on the same 
day and at the same moment that we predicted. Yet 
we would not have been willing to die, in order to 
prove this truth to you, as we are ready to do to 
prove to you that God will burn you eternally if you 
do not believe in him." 

I cannot report here without blushing the fine eu- 
logies that certain Captains pass upon us in their war 
councils, where they are accustomed to summon us. 
We hope for very good results from these. Already 
the chiefs of the country glory in Christianity, and 
wish to have us in their villages, already recogniz- 
ing the wrong they did us by persecuting us with so 
little reason. They have retracted publicly what 
they had invented against Father Antoine Daniel, 
and this honorable reparation was very acceptable to 
the whole assembly. To be brief, our new Chris- 
tians continue in their first sentiments ; they confess 
and take communion with the devotion that we would 


140 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 15 


fouhaiter, ils redoublerent leur piet6 les faindts iours 
de la Pentecofte, & de la fefte Dieu. 

Nous allons en fin tranfporter la refidence de faindt 
lofeph qui eft encores k Ihonattiria, en vne autre 
bourgade plus belle & plus grande. Elle eft comme 
la capitale d'vne nation qui eft eftroitement alli^e 
auec celle des Ours, nos meilleurs amis. Nous vous 
enuoyons le R. Pierre Pijart, qui vous informera de 
tout plus en particulier, come auffi de tout ce qui 
nous touche. Qucb circa nos /unt, quid agamus, omnia 
vobis not a faciei fidelis [76 i.e., 67^ minijier in Domino; 
quem mittimus ad vos in hoc ip/um, vt cognoscatis quce 
circa nos funt, & confoletur cor da vejlra. Nous nous 
recommandons tous bien humblement aux Saindts 
facrifices & prieres de V.R. & de tous nos. R.P. & 
F.F. & moy fur tout. 

De la Refidence de la Conception 

au pays des Hurons 
Au bourg d' Off o fane ce g. luin 
1638. 

Voftre tres-humble & 
tres-obeillant ferui- 
teur en N. Seigneur 

Francois Joseph 
LE Mercier. 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, idjS 141 


desire ; they redoubled their piety on the holy days 
of Pentecost and of Corpus Christi. 

We are finally going to remove the residence of 
saint Joseph, which is still at Ihonattiria, to another 
village, larger and finer. It is, as it were, the capital 
of a nation which is closely allied to that of the Bear, 
our best friends. We have sent the Reverend Pierre 
Pijart to you, who will inform you more in detail of 
all this, as well as of all that concerns us. Qucb circa 
nos sunt, quid agamus, omnia vobis nota faciei fidelis 
[76 i.e., 6^^ minister in Domino; quetn mittimus ad vos in 
hoc ipsum, ut cognoscatis quce circa nos sunt, et consoletur 
corda vestra. We all commend ourselves very hum- 
bly to the Holy sacrifices and prayers of Your Rever- 
ence and of all our Reverend Fathers and Brethren, 
and I, above all. 
From the Residence of la Conception 

in the country of the Hurons, at 
the village of Ossosane, this gth of June, 

1638. 

Your very humble and 
very obedient serv- 
ant in Our Lord, 

FRANgois Joseph 
LE Mercier. 


142 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 15 


Extraid du Priuilege du Roy. 

PAR Grace & Priuilege du Roy, il eft permis k 
Sebaflien Cramoify, Marchad Libraire lure en 
rVniuerfite de Paris, & Imprimeur ordinaire 
du Roy, Bourgeois de Paris, d'imprimer ou faire im- 
primer vn Liure intitule, Relatio de ce qui s' ejl pajf^ en 
la Nouuelle France en V annee 1638. Enuoyee au R. P. 
Prouincial de la Compagnie de Iesvs en la Prouince de 
Frdce. Par le P. Paul le leune de la mefnie Compagnie, 
Superieur de la Rejidence de Kibec : & cependant le 
temps & efpace de dix annees confecutiues. Auec 
defenfes h tons Libraires & Imprimeurs d'imprimer, 
ou faire imprimer ledit Liure, fous pretexte de 6.6- 
guifement, ou changement qu'ils y pourroient faire, 
h peine de confiscation & 1' amende portee par ledit 
Priuilege. Done k Paris le 14. iour de Decebre 1638. 
Par le Roy en fon Confeil. 

Demonceavx. 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s8 143 


Extract from the Royal License. 

BY the Grace and Prerogative of the King, per- 
mission is granted to Sebastien Cramoisy, Book- 
seller under Oath in the University of Paris, 
and Printer in ordinary to the King, Citizen of Paris, 
to print or to have printed a Book entitled, Relation 
de ce qui s' est pass^ en la Nouvelle France en Vann^e 
1638. Envoy^e au R. P. Provincial de la Compagnie de 
Jesus en la Province de France. Par le P. Paul le 
Jeune de la mesme Compagnie, Superieur de la Residence 
de K^bec; during the time and space of ten consecu- 
tive years. Prohibiting all Booksellers and Printers 
from printing, or having printed, the said Book, 
under pretext of disguise or change that they may 
make therein, under penalty of confiscation and the 
fine provided by the said License. Given at Paris 
on the 14th of December, 1638. 

By the King in Council. 

Demonceaux. 


144 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.15 


Permifsion du P. Prouincial. 

NOVS ESTIENNE BiNET, Prouincial de la Compa- 
gnie de Iesvs en la Prouince de France, a- 
nons accorde pour I'aduenir an fieur Sebaftien 
Cramoify, Marchand Libraire, Imprimeur ordinaire 
du Roy, rimpreffion des Relations de la Nouuelle 
France. Faidt k Paris le 26. Mars 1638. 

BSTIENNE EiNET. \sic.'\ 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 146 


Permission of the Father Provincial. 

WE, EsTiENNE BiNET, Provincial of the Society 
of Jesus in the Province of France, have for 
the future accorded to sieur Sebastien Cra- 
moisy, Bookseller, and Printer in ordinary to the 
King, the printing of the Relations of New France. 
Done at Paris, this 26th of March, 1638. 

ESTIENNE BiNET. 


XXXI 

Lettre du P. Francois du Peron au P. Joseph- 
Imbert du Peron 

Ossossane, Avril 27, 1639 


Source : Reprinted from Carayon's Premiere Mission 
des /^suites au Canada, pp. 167-192. 


148 


LES RELA TIONS DES j£SU/TES [Vol. 1^ 


[167] Lettre du P. Francois du Peron, de la Com- 

pagnie de Jesus, au P. Joseph-lmbert 

du Peron, son Frere, Religieux 

de la meme Compagnie. 

(Copiie sur Vautographe conservi aux MSS. Soc. Jesu.) 

Au bourg de la Conception de Nostre-Dame, 

ce 27 avril 1639. 

MON Reverend Pere, 
Pax Christi. 
J'escrivis I'an passe ^ V. R. le succfes de 
mon voyage des mon depart de la France, jnsques ^ 
mon arriv^e dans le Canada : je la prie de me mander 
si elle a receu les quatre lettres que je luy escrivois ; 
je n'auray les responses k celles de I'ann^e passee 
qu'apres I'envoy de la presente. Je luy mandois 
mon employ; Dieu m'en a donne un autre; il m'a 
fait passer au pais des Hurons. J'estime tant ma 
condition que je m'estime grandement oblige a Dieu: 
i°dem'avoir amene en Canada; 2° de m'avoir faict 
passer au pais des Hurons, et j'estime ce second bene- 
fice plus grand que le premier a raison que Dieu seul 
nous est icy nostre tout, et qu'il y a plus grande 
moisson qu'en aucune part du Canada. Doresenavant 
[168] done je ne luy manderay que des nouvelles des 
Hurons; car pour celles des montagnets et algon- 
quins nous n'en recevons les nouvelles que par la 
Relation imprim^e qui nous est envoyee de France 
d'annee en annee. Vous pouv^s faire response a mes 


1638-39] F. DU PERON TO JOSEPH H» 


[167] Letter of Father Francois du Peron of the 
Society of Jesus, to Father Joseph Imbert 
du Peron, his Brother, Religious 
of the same Society. 

(Copied from the autograph preserved in MSS. Soc. Jesu.) 

At the village of la Conception de Nostre Dame, 
this 27th of April, 1639. 

MY Reverend Father, 
Pax Christi. 
I wrote last year to Your Reverence concern- 
ing the events of my journey from the time of my 
departure from France until my arrival in Canada. I 
beg you to inform me whether you have received the 
four letters that I wrote you ; I shall not have answers 
to those of last year until after I have sent this one. 
I told you of my employment ; God gave me a differ- 
ent one ; he sent me to the Huron country. I appre- 
ciate my position so highly that I consider myself 
under great obligations to God; ist, for having 
brought me to Canada ; 2nd, for having sent me to 
the Huron country ; and I value this second privilege 
more than the first, because here God alone is our 
all, and because there is a greater harvest here than 
in any part of Canada. [168] Accordingly, I shall 
henceforth only send you news of the Hurons; for 
as for the Montagnais and Algonquins, we receive 
news of them only through the printed Relation sent 
to us from France from year to year. You can an- 


150 LES RELATIONS DESjiSUITES [Vol.15 

lettres; pour moy, il me fault une annee entre deux, 
^ raison que les Hurons descendent d'icy aux Trois- 
Rivieres, k mesme temps que les navires y arrivent 
de France. Ceste lettre sera commune ^ mes deux 
freres et aux Peres de ma cognoissance que je salue 
tous ex animo. 

Je partis des Trois- Rivieres le 4 septembre et j'ar- 
rivay au pais des Hurons le jour de saint Michel, k 
douze heures du soir : la traite est de 300 lieues par 
eau, par un tres grand nombre de saults tres dange- 
reux et fort longs, quelques uns de deux et trois 
lieues, en sorte que d'autres que des sauvages ne 
S9auroient entreprendre le voyage. lis ont des canots 
d'escorce qui ne font qu'effleurer I'eau, et un homme 
seul en porte un sur I'espaule. Par bonheur je m'em- 
barquay avec un capitaine huron qui me rendit toute 
sorte de courtoisie le long du chemin. Le R. P. Lal- 
lemant, notre superieur, et le P. Lemoyne, qui estoient 
partis devant moi, ne rencontrerent pas si bien. Le 
premier pensa etre etrangle par un sauvage de Tile; 
(c'est une nation algonquine qu'on rencontre sur le 
chemin,) qui s'efforga plusieurs [169] fois de luy 
mettre un lacet au col, pour venger, disoit-il, la mort 
d'un sien petit enfant, qui avait este seigne par un 
de nos hommes qui estoit monte un jour ou deux de- 
vant le Pere. Je rencontray ce mesme sauvage proche 
I'isle, qui d'abord qu'il me vit, dit qu'il m'en falloit 
faire le meme, et fut longtemps a persuader h. nos 
Hurons qu'ils ne devoient point amener des franjois 
en leur pais ; que c'etoit nous qui les faisions tous 
mourir; mon capitaine I'adoucit le mieux qu'il put: 
nonobstant tout ce discours, un de ses camarades me 
vint trouver le matin et le soir, pour le faire prier 
Dieu en sa langue algonquine ; ce que je fis. 


1638-39] F. DU PERON TO JOSEPH 151 

swer my letters ; as for myself, I must leave one year 
between two letters, because the Hurons go down 
from here to Three Rivers at the same time that the 
ships arrive there from France. This letter will be 
shared by my two brothers and the Fathers of my 
acquaintance, all of whom I greet ex animo. 

I left Three Rivers on the 4th of September, and 
reached the Huron country on the day of saint Mi- 
chel, at twelve o'clock at night. The journey is 
one of 300 leagues by water, through many very long 
and dangerous rapids, some two or three leagues in 
length ; consequently no others except savages can 
undertake the journey. They have bark canoes 
which merely skim over the water, and one man can 
carry one of them upon his shoulders. I fortunately 
embarked with a Huron captain, who showed me 
every courtesy along the way. Reverend Father 
Lallemant,^ our superior, and Father Lemoyne, who 
departed before I did, did not fare so well. The for- 
mer was almost strangled by one of the island sav- 
ages (this is an Algonquin nation that is encountered 
upon the way), who tried several [169] times to put 
a bowstring around his neck, — "to avenge," he 
said, " the death of one of his little children," who 
had been bled by one of our men who had gone up 
a day or two before the Father. I encountered this 
same savage near the island, who, when he first saw 
me, said he must do the same to me, and for a long 
time tried to persuade our Hurons that they ought 
not to bring Frenchmen into their country, that it 
was we who made them all die ; my captain pacified 
him as well as he could. Notwithstanding all this 
talk, one of his comrades came to see me morning 
and evening, to have me help him pray to God in his 
Algonquin language ; I did so. 


152 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.15 

Quant au P. Lemoyne, il ffit contraint de quitter 
ses sauvages, n'ayant rien plus de quoy vivre. lis 
le laisserent done au bord de I'eau avec un de nos 
hommes, qui le nourrit durant quinze jours de la 
chasse qu'il faisoit fort heureusement. II s'embarqua 
done dans un canot de notre troupe. Le maitre du 
canot, apres deux journ^es, le voulut laisser sur un 
rocher : il me fallut luy donner ma couverte pour le 
contenter. 

Durant le chemin, notre vivre n'a ete qu'un peu de 
bl6 d'Inde concasse entre deux pierres et bouilly dans 
I'eau ; notre gite sub dio. Cependant je me suis tou- 
jours bien port6, graces ^ Dieu. Le long du chemin 
nous avons rencontr^ trois nations algonquines [170] 
errantes: 1° la petite nation; 2° ceux de I'ile; 3° les 
sorciers; le reste forets et rochers incultes, sauts et 
.precipices; je m'etonne comme les sauvages osent 
entreprendre tel voyage. Pour le pays des Hurons, 
c'est une terre assez unie, force praieries, force lacs, 
force bourgs ; de deux ou nous sommes Tun est de 80 
cabanes, I'autre de 40; dans chaque cabane il y a 
cinq feus, et deux families a chaque feu. Leurs ca- 
banes sont faites de grosses ecorces en berceau, lon- 
gues, larges et hautes a proportion ; il y en a de 70 
pas de long. Leur terre ne produit que du ble d'Inde, 
des feves et des citrouilles. Ce sont les delices du 
pays, qui n'a rien de commun avec notre France, de 
quoy, il jouisse, que les quatre elemens. On y voit 
neannioins pour les oiseaux, poissons et betes deS 
forets presque les memes qu'en France. La terre, 
comme ils ne la cultivent pas, ne porte que dix ou 
douze ans au plus, et ils sont contraints, les dix an- 
nees expirees, de transporter leur bourg en un autre 


1638-39] R DU PERON TO JOSEPH 153 

As for Father Lemoyne, he was obliged to part 
from his savages, as he had no longer any provisions. 
Accordingly, they left him on the bank of the river 
with one of our men, whose hunting, which was 
very successful, furnished him with food for two 
weeks. Then he embarked in one of the canoes of 
our band. The master of this canoe, two days later, 
wished to leave him upon a rock, and I had to give 
him my blanket to satisfy him. 

Our food on the way was only a little Indian corn, 
crushed between two stones and boiled in water ; our 
lodging, sub dio. Nevertheless, I was always very 
well, thank God. Along the way we passed three 
wandering Algonquin tribes; [170] ist, the petite na- 
tion ; 2nd, the people of the island ; 3rd, the sorcer- 
ers ; for the rest, forests and bare rocks, rapids, and 
precipices ; I am surprised that the savages dare to 
undertake such a journey. As for the Huron coun- 
try, it is tolerably level, with many prairies, many 
lakes, many villages; of the two where we are, one 
contains 80 cabins, the other 40. In each cabin there 
are five fireplaces, and two families at each.* Their 
cabins are made of large sheets of bark in the shape 
of an arbor, long, wide, and high in proportion ; some 
of them are 70 feet long. Their land produces noth- 
ing but Indian corn, beans, and squashes. These 
are the delicacies of the country, which has nothing 
in common with our France, as to things to be 
enjoyed, except the four elements. One sees here, 
nevertheless, birds, fish, and forest animals, almost 
the same kinds as in France. The land, as they do 
not cultivate it, produces for only ten or twelve years 
at most; and when the ten years have expired, they 
are obliged to remove their village to another place. 


154 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.15 

endroit. S'ils la cultivoient, elle porteroit comme 
celle de France. Voilk pour ce qui est de la terre, 
qui est r occupation et 1' employ des femmes huronnes : 
celle des hommes, c'est la peche, la chasse, la traite 
aux frangois et autres nations voisines, comme la na- 
tion du petun, la nation Neutre, celle du Sault, celle 
des cheveux relev6s, celle des gents puants, etc. lis 
sont robustes et tous [171] grands de beaucoup plus 
que les fran9ois; ils ne sont converts que d'une peau 
de castor, qu'ils mettent sur les deux epaules en 
forme de manteau ; des chausses et souliers en hy- 
ver, un sac k petun derriere le dos, le chalumet en 
main ; au col et aux bras, des colliers et brasselets de 
porcelaine; ils en pendent aussi aux oreilles et au 
tour de leur moustache. Ils se graissent les cheveux 
et le visage ; ils se balafrent aussi le visage avec de 
la peinture noire et rouge. Leurs recreations con- 
sistent au jeu de paille, jeu de plat, jeu de crosse aux- 
quels ils perdront vaillant les deux et trois cents ecus. 
Le naturel des Sauvages est patient, liberal, hospi- 
talier; mais importun, songeard, pueril, larron, men- 
teur, trompeur, libertin, superbe, faineant; ils ont 
parmi eux plusieurs fous, ou plutot lunatiques et 
frenetiques. Le langage est langue regulifere autant 
qu'il se pent, pleine de composition comme la grec- 
que, differente de celle-cy en ce que les change- 
mens de modes et personnes se font au commence- 
ment, ayant quasi toujours la meme termination ; un 
accent change la signification d'un mot. Elle n'a pas 
la barbaric qu'on se figure: les noms se conjuguent 
aussi bien que les verbes; de syntaxe, je n'en sache 
guere d'autre que celle de la langue fran§oise, aussi 
bien ne S9avent-ils que c'est que cas; ils ont des pe- 


1638-39] F. DU PERON TO JOSEPH 155 

If they cultivated it, it would yield as well as that 
of France. So much for the cultivation of the land, 
which is the occupation and employment of the Hu- 
ron women ; that of the men is fishing, hunting, trad- 
ing with the French and other neighboring tribes^ 
such as the tobacco nation, the Neutral nation, that 
of the Sault, that of the " raised hair," that of the 
" stinking people," etc J They are robust, and all 
[171] are much taller than the French. Their only 
covering is a beaver skin, which they wear upon 
their shoulders in the form of a mantle ; shoes and 
leggings in winter, a tobacco pouch behind the 
back, a pipe in the hand ; around their necks and 
arms bead necklaces and bracelets of porcelain ; they 
also suspend these from their ears, and around their 
locks of hair. They grease their hair and faces; 
they also streak their faces with black and red paint. 
Their recreations are the games of straw, of dish, 
and of crosse, in which they will lose to the value of 
two or three hundred ^cus. 

The nature of the Savage is patient, liberal, hos- 
pitable; but importunate, visionary, childish, thiev- 
ish, lying, deceitful, licentious, proud, lazy; they 
have among them many fools, or rather lunatics and 
insane people. Their language is a regular one, as 
much as it can be, full of constructions like the Greek ; 
differing from the latter in that the changes of mode 
and person come at the beginning, the terminations 
being nearly always the same ; an accent changes the 
meaning of a word. It is not as barbarous as is im- 
agined; the nouns are conjugated as well as the 
verbs; as to syntax, I cannot see that it is very differ- 
ent from that of the French language, especially as 
they do not know what case is ; they have little par- 


156 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 15 

tites particules d'elegance : ils n'ont point [172] I'u- 
sage de ces lettres b, f, /, m, p, q, x, y ; ils ont fort 
la lettre h et le k en usage, ce sont les deux lettres 
qui donnent de la peine pour la prononce, lis ont 
quasi tous plus d'esprit en leurs affaires, discours, 
gentillesses, rencontres, soupplesses et subtilit^s, que 
les plus advises bourgeois et marcliands de France, 
lis reglent les saisons de I'annee par les betes sau- 
vages, par les poissons, les oyseaux et plantes de la 
terre ; ils nombrent les annees, les jours et les mois 
par la lune. lis n'ont point de police du tout: ce 
que les capitaines ont de pouvoir est k peu pres 
comme les crieurs et trompettes ; ils orient "k pleine 
tete par les carrefours. Le ton qu'ils gardent en 
leur harengue est justement le ton des prisonniers 
du petit Chastelet de Paris. La jeunesse est impu- 
dente jusques a non plus, aussi grands maitres les 
uns que les autres. Les mariages sont libres. Ils 
n'ont qu'une maniere de justice pour les torts, qui 
est que tout le bourg doit satisfaire par presens. Un 
grain de ble d'Inde quelquefois rapportera cent 
grains pour un. La famine, cette ann6e, est assez 
grande ; mais davantage en la nation neutre, ou Ton 
vant \sc. vend] les enfans comme esclaves pour avoir 
du ble. 

Nous sommes icy des Notres dix, en deux Resi- 
dences, I'une de la Conception de Notre-Dame, I'au- 
tre de saint Joseph: elles sont eloignees I'une de 
I'autre de cinq ^ six lieues. Mcssis quidem multa; 
[173] operarii autem pauci: nous esperons du renfort, 
I'an qui vient. Bientot nous nous esperons faire une 
troisieme Residence en la nation du petun, sans pre- 
judice des missions volantes. Nous avons avec nous 


1638-39] F. DU PERON TO JOSEPH 157 

tides of elegance; they do not [172] use the follow- 
ing letters, b, /, /, m, p, q, x, y; they make much use 
of the letters h, and k, — these are the two letters 
which they find difficult to pronounce.^ They nearly 
all show more intelligence in their business, speeches, 
courtesies, intercourse, tricks, and subtleties, than do 
the shrewdest citizens and merchants in France. 
They regulate the seasons of the year by the wild 
beasts, the fish, the birds, and the vegetation ; they 
count the years, days, and months by the moon. 
They have no government at all ; such power as the 
captains have is little more than that of criers and 
trumpets; they make their announcements in loud 
voices in the public places. The tone they use in 
their speeches is precisely the tone of the prisoners 
in the petit Chastelet^ at Paris. The young people 
are impudent to the last degree, one being as much 
the grand master as the other. Marriages are free. 
They have only one method of justice for injuries, 
which is that the whole village must make amends 
by presents. The Indian corn sometimes yields one 
hundred grains for one. The famine this year is 
rather serious; but it is worse in the Neutral nation, 
where the children are sold like slaves in order to 
procure corn. 

There are ten of Ours here in two Residences, one 
at la Conception de Notre Dame, the other at saint 
Joseph ; these are distant from each other five or 
six leagues. Messis quidem niulta; [173] operarii autem 
pauci; we hope for reinforcements the coming year. 
We expect soon to establish a third Residence in 
the tobacco nation, without detriment to the itiner- 
ant missions. We have with us twelve Frenchmen, 
who are hired by us; as to others of these, there 


158 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.15 

douze frangois qui sont k nos gages ; car pour d'autres 
il n'y en a point. Nous sommes log6s et vivons ^ la 
fa9on des sauvages; nous n'avons point de terre k 
nous, sinon un petit champ d'emprunt, ou Ton re- 
cueille du ble fran9ois justement pour faire des hos- 
ties pour la sainte messe : nous laissons le reste ^ la 
divine Providence, qui nous envoye plus de ble que 
si nous avions des bonnes terres ; Tun nous apportera 
trois epis de ble, un autre six, I'autre une citrouille; 
un autre donnera du poisson, un autre du pain cuit 
sous la cendre. Nous vivons joyeusement et con- 
tents de la sorte. Pour leur present, on leur donne 
des petits canons de verre, des bagues, des halenes, 
des jambettes, de la ra9ade: c'est 1^ toute notre mon- 
naie. Pour les douceurs de France, nous n'en avons 
point icy; la sauce ordinaire des viandes c'est I'eau 
pure, le jus du ble ou citrouilles; les rafraichisse- 
ments, qui viennent de France, ne montent pas plus 
haut que les Trois-Rivieres; tout ce qu'on pent en- 
voyer, c'est quelques ornemens d'eglise, du vin pour 
la messe (on en met seulement quatre ou cinq gouttes 
dans les calices) et quelques habits, quelques pru- 
neaux et raisins pour les malades du [174] bourg: le 
tout court grand risque par les chemins. Nous avons 
perdu cette ann6e deux de nos pacquets. Nos plats, 
quoyque de bois, nous coutent plus cher que les 
votres; ils sont de la valeur d'une robe de castor, 
c'est-^-dire cent francs. 

Le royaume de Dieu s'avance grandement en ces 
contrees. Nous avons icy une nation etrangere re- 
fugiee, tant a cause des hiroquois leurs ennemis, que 
pour la maladie qui encore les fait icy mourir en 
grand nombre ; ils se font presque tons baptizer avant 


1638-39] R DU PERON TO JOSEPH 169 

are none. We are lodged and fed in the manner of 
the savages ; we have no land of our own, except a 
little borrowed field, where French grain is raised 
just to make the host for the holy mass ; we leave 
the rest to divine Providence, which sends us more 
corn than if we had broad lands; one person will 
bring us three ears of corn, another six, some one 
else a squash ; one will give us some fish, another 
some bread baked under the ashes. In this manner, 
we live happily and contentedly. As their presents, 
we give them little glass beads, rings, awls, small 
pocket knives, and colored beads; this is all our 
money. As for the delicacies of France, we have 
none of them here; the usual sauce with the food 
is pure water, juice of corn or of squashes. The 
fresh food that comes from France does not go far- 
ther up than Three Rivers ; all they can send is some 
church ornaments, some wine for the mass (only four 
or five drops of it is put into the chalice), and some 
clothes, some prunes, and raisins for the sick of the 
[174] village; it all runs great risks on the way. We 
lost this year two of our packages. Our plates, 
although of wood, cost us more than yours ; for they 
are valued at one beaver robe, which is a hundred 
francs. ^° 

The kingdom of God is being greatly advanced in 
these countries. We have here a nation from with- 
out, taking refuge with us both on account of the 
Hiroquois, their enemies, and of the epidemic, which 
is still causing great mortality among them ; nearly 
all of them are baptized before death. I have bap- 
tized some of them, and it is no small task for our 
Fathers, morning and evening, to instruct and visit 
these poor sick people, who seem to have escaped 


160 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.15 

la mort. J 'en ai baptise quelques uns, et nos Peres 
n'ont pas une petite occupation matin et soir d'in- 
struire et visiter ces pauvres malades, qui semblent 
n 'avoir fui la mort cruelle de leurs ennemis, que 
pour mourir de la belle mort des predestines. Je 
vous laisse "k penser, si ce n'est pas bien de la conso- 
lation pour ceux qui contribuent et leurs prieres et 
leurs travaux, k la conversion de ces pauvres ames, 
que Dieu veut sauver icy, si nous n'y mettons de 
rempecbement de notre cote. Je demande et im- 
plore a ce sujet I'assistance des prieres de V. R., et 
celle de tous ceux de ma connaissance ; je les salue 
tous de coeur et d'affection: je crois qu'ils ne me les 
denieront pas. 

Voicy comme un petit journal depuis mon arriv6e. 
Ayant aborde heureusement la terre des Hurons, 
apres un embarquement de vingt-six jours, dans un 
[175] canot ou plutot berceau d'^corce d'un arbre dit 
bouleau, le 29 septembre, k une heure du matin, et 
m'etant mis en chemin pour arriver ^ temps 'k quel- 
qu'une de nos Residences, pour y celebrer ce jour Ik 
la sainte messe, la pluie et la def alliance causee par 
la journee precedente, en laquelle nous nous etions 
mis sur I'eau, depuis une heure du matin jusqu'k 
douze beures et davantage de la nuit, sans pouvoir 
reposer, et meme I'esperance de pouvoir dire la sainte 
messe m'avoit oblige "k ne rien manger k mon aborde- 
ment ; la pluie done et la defaillance, comme aussi la 
distance du lieu de cinq ou six lieues, et I'ignorance 
des chemins, me contraindrent de m'arreter au pre- 
mier bourg et prendre quelque petite nourriture. 
J'entray done dans la cabane d'un capitaine du bourg: 
le compliment qu'on me fit fut d'un chay en leur 


1638-39] F. DU PERON TO JOSEPH 161 

cruel death from their enemies only to die the glori- 
ous death of the elect. I leave you to imagine 
whether this is not full of consolation to those who 
contribute both their prayers and their labors to the 
conversion of these poor souls, whom God will save 
here, unless we, on our part, put some obstacle in 
the way. To this end, I ask and implore the help 
of the prayers of Your Reverence, and that of all 
those of my acquaintance ; I greet them heartily and 
affectionately, believing that they will not deny these 
to me. 

Here is a sort of little journal I have kept since 
my arrival: Having safely landed on Huron soil, — 
after a voyage of twenty-six days in a [175] canoe, or 
rather cradle, made of the bark of a tree called birch, — 
on the 29th of September, at one o'clock in the 
morning, I started so as to arrive at one of our Resi- 
dences in time to celebrate the holy mass that day. 
But the rain, and the exhaustion from the day be- 
fore, — when we remained upon the water from one 
o'clock in the morning until twelve and after at 
night, without being able to take any rest ; and also 
the expectation of being able to say the holy mass 
having constrained me not to eat anything at my 
landing, — the rain, then, and my exhaustion, as well 
as the distance of five or six leagues, and my igno- 
rance of the way, constrained me to stop at the first 
village, and take some little nourishment. Accord- 
ingly, I entered the cabin of a captain of the vil- 
lage; the salutation they offered me was a chay in 
their language, — this is the usual greeting, and 
means ' ' good day. ' ' Then they immediately spread 
a mat upon the ground for me to rest upon, and after- 
ward brought four ears of corn which they roasted 


162 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.15 

langue; c'est le salut ordinaire qui est k dire bon- 
jour, et puis incontinent ils etendirent une natte par 
terre pour m'y mettre dessus, ensuite, ils prirent 
quatre 6pis de ble qu'ils firent rotir et me les presen- 
terent, comme aussi deux citrouilles cuites sous la 
cendre avec un plat de sagamit6. J 'assure V. R. que 
ce manger m'etoit des delices; les petits enfants et 
autres accouroient par admiration dans la cabane pour 
m'y voir. Le defaut de la langue me rendoit muet, et 
leur fa§on de faire, qui est de ne dire mot, sinon un 
chay a celui qui arrive [ i 'j^A^ les rendoit aussi muets ; seu- 
lement ils me consideroient depuis les pieds jusqu'k 
la tete, et tous vouloient 6prouver mes souliers et mon 
chapeau, chacun mettant le chapeau sur la tete et les 
souliers aux pieds. Apres avoir fait remerciement de 
quelque couteau, balene, aiguille, k mon bote, du bon 
accueil et traitement qu'il m'avoit fait, je le priai de 
me donner un sauvage pour porter mon sac et me 
conduire k une de nos Residences; il le fit et j'arri- 
vay ^ six heures du soir chez nos Peres. lis me re- 
ceurent avec toute sorte de charite et bienveillance : 
le traitement ne fut pas meilleur que celui du sau- 
vage ; car les douceurs de la vie nous sont communes 
avec celles des Sauvages, ^ sgavoir un potage de fa- 
rine de ble d'Inde "k I'eau, matin et soir: pour beurre 
un gla9on \sc. boire un flayon] d'eau; quelquefois les 
sauvages y mettent quelques grumeaux de cendre 
pour assaisonner la sagamite ; d' autres fois ils met- 
tent une poignee de petites mouches d'eau. Ce sont 
comme des cousins de Provence ; ils en font grand 
etat; ils en font festin. Les plus sages reservent 
apres la peche quelque poisson pour le piler dans la 
sagamite durant I'annee; pour quatorze personnes, 


1638-39] F. DU PERON TO JOSEPH 16S 

and presented to me, as well as two squashes cooked 
under the ashes, and a dish of sagamite; I assure 
Your Reverence that this food was delicious to me. 
The little children and others ran wonderingly into 
the cabin, to see me. My ignorance of the language 
rendered me mute ; and their custom, which is to say 
not a word except chay, to one who arrives, [176] 
made them silent also; they merely surveyed me 
from head to foot, and all wished to try on my shoes 
and my hat, each one putting the hat on his head 
and the shoes on his feet. After having expressed 
my thanks by giving a knife, an awl, and a needle 
to my host for the good reception and treatment he 
had shown me, I begged him to give me a savage to 
carry my bag and guide me to one of our Residences ; 
he did so, and I reached the house of our Fathers at 
six o'clock in the evening. They received me with 
every evidence of kindness and good will, although 
their entertainment was no better than that of the 
savages, for the comforts of life with us are the same 
as those of the Savages, — that is, a porridge made of 
the meal of Indian corn and water, morning and even- 
ing, and for a drink a flagon of water. Sometimes 
the savages put in pieces of cinders, to season the 
sagamit6, at other times a handful of little water- 
flies, which are like the gnats of Provence ; they es- 
teem these highly, and make feasts of them. The 
more prudent keep some fish after the fishing season, 
to break into the sagamite during the year; about 
half of a large carp is put in for fourteen persons, 
and the more tainted the fish is, the better. As for 
drinks, they do not know what they are, — the saga- 
mite serving as meat and drink ; when not on their 
journeys, they will go six months without drinking. 


164 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.15 

on met la moiti6 d'une grosse carpe environ, et le 
poisson le plus corrompu est le meillenr. Pour le 
boire, on ne salt que c'est, la sagamit^ sert de viande 
et de boisson : on sera six mois sans boire hors de 
voyage. 

[177] L' importunity des sauvages qui sont continu- 
ellement autour de nous dans notre cabane, et qui 
quelquefois rompent une porte, jettent des pierres 
sur la cabane, blessent nos gens; cette importunity 
dis-je, n'empeche que nous n'ayons nos heures aussi 
bien r^glees que dans un de nos colleges de France. 
A quatre heures on sonne le lever; suit I'oraison; h, 
la fin d'icelle commencent les messes jusqu'^ huit 
heures, pendant lequel temps on garde le silence, on 
lit son livre spirituel, on dit ses petites heures; k 
huit heures, on ouvre la porte aux sauvages jusqu'^ 
quatre heures du soir, auquel temps il est permis de 
parler aux sauvages, tant pour les instruire comme 
pour apprendre la langue. Nos Peres aussi, en ce 
temps Ik, vont visiter, dans les cabanes du bourg, les 
malades pour les baptiser, et les sains pour les in- 
struire; pour moi, mon occupation est I'etude de la 
langue, garder la cabane, faire prier Dieu les Chre- 
tiens et catechumenes, tenir ecole h. leurs enfans, de- 
puis midi jusqu'k deux heures; k deux heures on 
Sonne I'examen, suit le diner, pendant lequel on fait 
lecture d'un chapitre de la Bible, et au souper, on lit 
la Philagie de J6sus du R. P. du Barry ; on dit le 
benedicite et graces en huron a cause des sauvages 
qui y sont presents. On dine autour du feu assis sur 
un billot et le plat a terre. A midi je commence 
I'ecole aux enfans qui s'y rencontrent [178] jusqu'k 
deux heures: quelquefois je n'aurai qu'un ou deux 


1638-39] F. DU PERON TO JOSEPH 165 

[177] The importunity of the savages, — who are 
continually about us in our cabin, and who sometimes 
break down a door, throw stones at our cabin, and 
wound our people, — this importunity, I say, does 
not prevent our observance of our hours, as well reg- 
ulated as in one of our colleges in France. At four 
o'clock the rising-bell rings; then follows the orison, 
at the end of which the masses begin and continue 
until eight o'clock ; during this period each one keeps 
silent, reads his spiritual book, and says his lesser 
hours. At eight o'clock, the door is left open to the 
savages, until four in the evening ; it is permitted to 
talk with the savages at this time, as much to instruct 
them as to learn their language. In this time, also, 
our Fathers visit the cabins of the town, to baptize 
the sick and to instruct the well ; as for me, my em- 
ployment is the study of the language, watching the 
cabin, helping the Christians and catechumens pray 
to God, and keeping school for their children from 
noon until two o'clock, when the bell rings for ex- 
amination of conscience. Then follows the dinner, 
during which is read some chapter from the Bible ; 
and at supper Reverend Father du Barry's Philagie 
of Jesus ^^ is read ; the benedicite and grace is said in 
Huron, on account of the savages who are present. 
We dine around the fire, seated on a log, with our 
plates on the ground. At noon I open the school for 
the children who happen to be there [178] up to two 
o'clock; sometimes I only have one, two, or three 
pupils. On Sundays, Tuesdays, and Thursdays, 
school closes at one o'clock, when instruction is giv- 
en to the most prominent people of the village, 
whether Christians or not; on Thursdays, to Chris- 
tians and catechumens only ; on Sunday morning, to 


166 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol. 1.5 

ou trois ecoliers. Les dimanches, mardis et jeudis, 
I'ecole cesse h. une heure, auquel temps on fait une 
instruction aux plus notables du bourg, soit Chretiens 
ou non; le jeudi aux seuls Chretiens et catechu- 
menes; le dimanche au matin aux seuls Chretiens. 
Pendant la messe parrochiale on fait le prone, devant 
la messe on fait I'eau b^nite avec chant, et h. I'offer- 
toire le pain b6nit que les sauvages presentent par 
tour. Les grandes fetes on chante une grande messe. 
L'apres-diner du dimanche, a une heure, on chante 
vepres; suit 1' instruction aux Chretiens et catechu- 
menes ; h. cinq heures on chante complies, et le same- 
di au soir le Salve avec les litanies de la Vierge. Ce 
meme jour, h. Tissue de I'echole on fait un petit cate- 
chisme aux enfans, et une fois le mois on fait un 
catechisme public ^ tout le bourg, outre 1' instruction 
joumaliere qu'on leur donne dans leur cabane. A 
quatre heures du soir on congedie les sauvages non 
Chretiens, et nous disons en repos tous ensemble ma- 
tines et laudes, a Tissue desquelles nous faisons entre 
nous des consultes durant trois quarts d' heure, tou- 
chant Tavancement et Tempechement de la foy en 
ces contrees; en suite nous conferons de la langue 
par ensemble jusqu'au souper qui est h. six heures et 
demie; h. huit heures les litanies, Texamen, et puis 
on se [179] couche. On n"a pas icy son repos entier 
comme en France; tous nos Peres et domestiques, 
excepte un ou deux, dont je suis du nombre, se re- 

levent quatre et cinq fois chaque nuit ; le vivre 

d'icy cause cela, comme la fa9on de coucher qui est 
sur une natte a plate terre et tout vestu. Depuis que 
je suis parti de France, je n'ai point quitte ma sou- 
tane, sinon pour changer de linge. Dieu graces, je 


1638-39] F. DU PERON TO JOSEPH 167 

Christians only. During the parochial mass, the 
sermon is preached; before the mass, the water is 
blessed while they are singing; and at the offertory 
the bread, which the savages present in turn, is 
blessed. On great holy days, high mass is celebrated. 
After dinner on Sundays, at one o'clock, vespers are 
sung ; then follows the instruction of Christians and 
catechumens; at five o'clock complines are sung, and 
on Saturday evening the Salve, with the litanies of 
the Virgin. On this same day, at the close of school, 
a short catechetical instruction is given to the chil- 
dren ; and once a month a public catechism is given 
to the whole village besides the daily instruction 
given them in their cabins. At four o'clock in the 
evening, the savages who are not Christians are sent 
away, and we quietly say, all together, our matins 
and lauds, at the end of which we hold mutual con- 
sultation for three-quarters of an hour about the ad- 
vancement of and the hindrances to the faith in these 
countries; afterwards we confer together about the 
language until supper, which is at half -past six ; at 
eight o'clock, the litanies, examination of conscience, 
and then we [179] retire to sleep. One does not have 
undisturbed rest here, as in France ; all our Fathers 
and domestics, except one or two, I being of the 

number, rise four or five times every night ; 

the food here causes this, as also the manner of sleep- 
ing, which is fiat on the ground, upon a mat, and 
entirely dressed. Since I left France I have not tak- 
en off my gown, except to change my linen. Thank 
God, I have suffered no discomfort, and I am learn- 
ing here every day that nature is satisfied with little, 
and I believe that 'more envy is felt towards us than 
pity. For our part, we envy the condition of no 


168 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 15 


n'ai re9u aucune incommodit^, et j'apprends icy tons 
les jours que la nature se contente de peu, et je crois 
qu'on nous porte plus d'envie que de compassion; 
pour nous, nous n'envions la condition d'aucun de 
notre France: melior est una dies in atriis tuis super 
millia. II est vray que nous voyons en effet ce que 
vous ne voyez qu'en peinture, combien grand est le 
don de la foi. Nous avons affaire ^ une nation qui 
est entierement esclave de Satan depuis le deluge : 
j'en parlerai en temps et lieu. 

Le II novembre, nous baptisames avec les solen- 
nites de I'Eglise, deux families d'Hurons: ce sont 
les premiers de I'Eglise naissante en ces contrees. 
II est vrai que, des I'an passe, Dieu nous donna un 
Chretien, nomm^ Joseph, avec sa famille: il avoit 6te 
baptise en maladie ; nous admirons de jour en jour 
son courage et I'esprit de Dieu en luy ; il parle aux 
conseils hardiement de nos mysteres qu'il con9oit fort 
bien: la Relation parlera de luy et des autres [i8o] 
avec toute verite. J'assure V. R., et vous pouvez 
me croire, qu'il n'y a rien dans icelle qui ne soit 
tres-assure et veritable. 

Le 13 novembre, le R. P. superieur partit d'icy 
avec un de nos Peres pour commencer les missions 
volantes. Le diable sembla vouloir s'opposer k leur 
dessein; la neige tomba en si grande abondance 
qu'elle couvrit tons les chemins. Nos Peres etant 
arrives a 4 heures du soir au lieu de la mission nom- 
me St-Michel et ayant baptist deux petits enfants 
malades, ils se mirent en chemin pour prendre quel- 
que advis de nos Peres de St-Joseph, eloignes de 1^ 
d'une lieue. lis s'egarerent, en sorte qu'ils n'arri- 
verent audit lieu qu'^ quatre heures au matin du 


1638-39] F. DU PERON TO JOSEPH 169 

one in our France ; melior est una dies in atriis tuis super 
millia. Truly, we see in reality what you only see 
painted, how great is the gift of faith. We have to 
do with a nation which has been completely enslaved 
by Satan ever since the deluge ; I shall speak of this 
at the proper time and place. 

On the nth of November, we baptized two Huron 
families with the solemnities of the Church ; these 
are the first members of the infant Church in these 
countries. True, last year God gave us a Christian, 
named Joseph, with his family ; he had been baptized 
in sickness ; we admire from day to day his courage, 
and the spirit of God in him ; he speaks boldly in the 
councils about our mysteries, which he understands 
very well ; the Relation will speak of him and of 
others [i8o] very accurately. I assure Your Rever- 
ence, and you may believe me, that there is nothing 
in this Relation which is not very correct and worthy 
of credence. 

On the 13th of November, the Reverend Father 
superior left here with one of our Fathers, to begin 
the itinerant missions. The devil seemed to try to 
oppose their plan ; the snow fell so abundantly as to 
cover all the paths. Our Fathers, having arrived at 
the mission called St. Michel ^^ at 4 o'clock in the 
evening, and having baptized two little sick children, 
started on their way to advise with our Fathers of 
St. Joseph, distant thence about a league. They 
went astray, so that they did not reach the latter 
place until four o'clock the next morning, after hav- 
ing suffered a great deal in their wanderings. A 
little while afterwards, several children, who had 
also lost their way in the night, were found dead in 
the snow. 


170 


LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 15 


lendemain, apres avoir beaucoup endure durant cet 
egarement : on a trouve un peu de temps aprfes plus 
d'un et deux enfants, morts dans les neiges, qui s'6- 
toient aussi 6gares durant la nuit. 

Pendant deux mois que nos Pferes y ont demeure, 
lis y ont baptise une vingtaine de personnes, des- 
quelles six ou sept I'ont ete solennellement et font 
profession de la foi. Pendant ce temps 1^, il y arri- 
vaune chose remarquable: c'est qu'un de nos pre- 
miers seminaristes, qui sont revenus icy cette ann6e 
de Kebec, ou est le seminaire des Hurons, voyant 
que son beau-frfere rejettoit le conseil qu'il luy don- 
noit en sa maladie de ne point appeler le sorcier 
pour le [i8i] visiter et faire sur luy toutes ses diable- 
ries, le sorcier etant venu et faisant de son cote ses 
invocations, le seminariste se mit a prier Dieu de 
son c6t6, le chapelet a la main, et k conjurer Dieu de 
confondre le sorcier: sa priere fut exauc^e; car le 
sorcier fit reponse que le diable ne lui vouloit rien 
decouvrir, et qu'un tel I'en empechoit avec son cha- 
pelet. Cela fut cause que le malade fut instruit et 
baptise avec toute sa famille. Tout cela se passa au 
bourg dit St-Michel. L'autre seminariste etant all6 
^ la guerre et ayant fait rencontre des ennemis, ils 
en prirent treize qui furent distribu^s en divers 
bourgs pour les faire mourir cruellement, lui pour 
sa part en prit deux, comme on 6toit sur le point d'en 
faire mourir un, il I'exhorta a croire en Dieu et ^ 
vouloir etre baptise : comme il ne se souvenoit plus 
de la forme du bapteme, il le baptisa, recitant le Pa- 
ter. Dieu favorisa le prisonnier baptise de la sorte : 
il permit qu'il survint quelque different qui differa 
l'ex6cution de sa mort, et il fut conduit en un autre 


1638-39] F. DU PERON TO JOSEPH 171 

During the two months that our Fathers remained 
there, they baptized twenty persons, six or seven of 
these with solemnity, who made profession of the 
faith. During that time, a wonderful thing hap- 
pened; one of our first seminarists, — who returned 
here this year from K^bec, where the seminary for 
the Hurons is located, — seeing that his brother-in- 
law rejected the advice which he gave him in his 
sickness, not to summon the sorcerer to [i8i] visit 
him and perform over him his deviltries, when the 
sorcerer had come and was making his incantations, 
the seminarist, on the other hand, began to pray to 
God, his rosary in his hand, and to conjure him to 
confound the sorcerer. His prayer was answered ; for 
the sorcerer replied that the devil refused to reveal 
anything to him, and that some one by his rosary pre- 
vented him from doing so. This resulted in the sick 
man being instructed and baptized, with all his family. 
All this occurred in the village called St. Michel. 
The other seminarist, having gone to war, had an 
encounter with the enemy, thirteen of whom were 
taken, who were distributed in different villages to be 
cruelly put to death. On his part, he captured two; 
and when one of them was about to be put to death, 
he exhorted him to believe in God and to consent to 
be baptized ; as he no longer remembered the form 
of baptism, he repeated the Pater while baptizing 
him. God favored the prisoner baptized in this way ; 
he permitted some dispute to arise which deferred 
the execution of his death sentence, and he was tak- 
en to another village near one of our Residences ; so 
that two of our Fathers, having heard the news of 
this, repaired thither immediately, and instructed 
and baptized him, without knowing what this brave 


172 LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 15 

village proche d'une de nos Residences, en sorte que 
deux de nos Peres, en ayant appris la nouvelle, s'y 
transporterent incontinent, I'instniisirent et bapti- 
sferent sans sgavoir ce que ce brave seminariste avait 
fait. Un peu devant mon arrivee, ils en avaient bap- 
tist dix-sept en divers bourgs : le 4 ou 5 decembre, 
outre les prisonniers susdits, quatre [182] autres 
eurent le meme bonheur du bapteme; trois d'iceux 
furent brules au bourg de St- Michel. Nos Peres 
eurent bien de la peine a les baptiser, les Hurons 
s'opposant a ce qu'ils ne le fussent, disant que le bap- 
teme les rendoit plus contens en la mort. lis ex- 
ercent des cruautes non pareilles sur ces captif s ; ils 
leur coupent les doigts; ils les font passer sept tours 
sur divers brasiers ardents, qui sont allum^s en la 
plus grande cabane du bourg, ou tons ceux du bourg 
sont assembles pour les tourmenter ; chacun le tour- 
mente comme il veut ; tandis qu'il passe sur les feux, 
chacun a un tison allume en main pour lui appliquer 
en quelque partie du corps ; ils se servent de tout ce 
qu'ils peu vent s'imaginer pour le tourmenter, ils font 
rougir des haches, des fleches, des ances de chau- 
diere, qu'ils appliquent sur le patient: en tous ces 
tourments ils I'exhortent ^ avoir du courage, et il 
faut que le patient chante continuellement. L'un 
d'iceux eut les stigmates aux mains et aux pieds. La 
nuit s'etant passee dans ces cruautes, ils le conduisent 
hors du bourg, sur un ^chafaud, oil ils le lient ^ un 
poteau, et 1^ ils le brulent tout vif a petit feu, avec 
des tisons allumes: s'il tombe en defaillance ils le 
font revenir a soi par quelque boisson. On lui ar- 
rache quelquefois les oreilles ^ belles dents et on les 
lui fait manger. Comme la flamme I'a suffoque, ils 


1638-39] K DU PERON TO JOSEPH 173 

seminarist had done. A little while before my 
arrival, they had baptized seventeen in different 
villages. On the 4th or 5th of December, besides the 
above-mentioned prisoners, four [182] others had the 
same blessing of baptism ; three of these were burned 
at the village of St. Michel. Our Fathers had consid- 
erable trouble in baptizing them, the Hurons trying 
to prevent this from being done, saying that baptism 
made them happier in death. They exercise unpar- 
alleled cruelties upon these captives; they cut off 
their fingers, they have them walk seven times over 
various glowing fires, which are lighted in the larg- 
est cabin of the village, where all the inhabitants are 
gathered to torment them ; every one torments the 
prisoner as he chooses ; while he is walking over the 
fires, each one has a firebrand in his hand to apply to 
some part of his body. They use everything they 
can think of to torture him ; they heat hatchets, ar- 
rows, and pothooks till they are red, which they ap- 
ply to the victim ; in all these torments they exhort 
him to have courage, and the victim is obliged con- 
tinually to sing. One of these had scars upon his 
hands and feet. The night having been passed in 
these cruelties, they took him outside the village, to 
a platform, where they bound him to a stake, and 
there burned him alive by inches with their lighted 
torches; if he fell into a swoon, he was restored to 
consciousness by a drink. Sometimes they ferocious- 
ly bit off pieces of his ears and made him eat them. 
When the fire suffocated him, they put him [183] in 
large kettles to cook, and then ate him. 

On the 8th of December, we solemnly baptized 
here five families of savages, all of different nations. 
I had the consolation of saying the mass for them, of 


174 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 15 

le mettent cuire [183] dans des grandes chaudiferes, 
et puis ils le mangent. 

Le 8 decembre, nous baptisames icy solennelle- 
ment cinq families de sauvages, toutes de diverses 
nations. J'eus la consolation de leur dire la messe 
et de les communier, et de benir les bagues de leur 
mariage. Depuis I'absence du R. P. superieur jus- 
qu'k son retour, j'ai ete le chapelain ordinaire des 
sauvages. Pendant la messe on chante le Pater et 
YAvc en langue huronne. 

Le 12 decembre, dimanche de I'octave de la Con- 
ception, j'eus le bien de dire la premiere messe dans 
la premiere chapelle, batie dans les Hurons, et erigee 
en I'honneur de I'lmmaculee Conception de Notre- 
Dame. La chapelle est faite d'une charpente bien 
jolie, semblable presque, en fa9on et grandeur, h. 
notre chapelle de St-Julien. 

Le 19 decembre, on baptisa icy trois families de 
sauvages. Le diable tascha, ce jour 1^, de troubler 
notre solennite et faire voir qu'il etoit le maitre du 
pays; car au sortir de la chapelle, il se trouva dans 
notre cabane un capitaine qui, en presence des nou- 
veaux Chretiens, se mit a debagouler contre Dieu et 
contre nous, et ^ faire des actions impertinentes. 
Nous fumes contraints de le chasser hors la cabane. 
L'apres diner il envoya son frere et autres pour 
interrompre le catechisme public, qu'on faisoit [184] 
de la tyrannic et domaine que satan exerce sur nos 
Sauvages; ils ne manquerent pas de I'interrompre 
par leurs discours sacrileges. 

Le 20 decembre, nous eumes une eclypse de lune 
a neuf heures du soir environ : elle fut totale et de 
dur6e d'environ de deux ^ trois heures. Vous I'eutes 


1638-39] F. DU PERON TO JOSEPH 175 

administering the communion, and of blessing their 
marriage rings. During the absence of the Reverend 
Father superior, I was the regular chaplain of the 
savages. During the mass, the Pater and Ave are 
sung in the Huron language. 

On the 1 2th of December, Sunday of the octave of 
the Conception, I had the good fortune to say the 
first mass in the first chapel built among the Hurons, 
and erected in honor of the Immaculate Conception 
of Our Lady. The chapel is very neatly built of tim- 
berwork, — almost similar, in style and size, to our 
chapel of St. Julien. 

On the 19th of December, three families of savages 
were baptized here. The devil tried, that day, to 
disturb our solemn exercises and to show that he was 
master of the country ; for, upon leaving the chapel 
we found in our cabin a captain who, in the presence 
of the new Christians, began to spit forth abuse 
against God and against us, and to act with insolence. 
We were obliged to drive him out of the cabin. In 
the afternoon he sent his brother and others to inter- 
rupt the public catechism, which was being given 
[184] about the tyranny and dominion that satan 
exercises over our Savages ; they did not hesitate to 
interrupt it with their sacrilegious talk. 

On the 20th of December, at about nine o'clock in 
the evening, we had an eclipse of the moon ; it was 
total, and lasted about two or three hours. You had 
it in France, perhaps, at two o'clock in the morning 
of the 2 1 St of December. It is by these eclipses that 
we know that the sun rises here about four hours 
later than it does in France ; our latitude is about 45 
degrees and a half. 

On the 2nd of January, a head of a family was 


17« LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.15 

peut-etre en France h. deux heures du matin du 2 1 
d^cembre. C'est par les eclypses que nous sjavons 
que le soleil se leve icy quatre heures plus tard en- 
viron qu'en France ; notre Elevation est de 45 degres 
et demi environ. 

Le 2 Janvier on baptisa un chef de famille; le 9 
une famille; le 16 deux families; et le tout fort 
solennellement. 

Le 13 fevrier on baptisa, avec les ceremonies de 
r^glise, une fille de dix k douze ans. 

Le 2 mars et les autres jours en suivant du carna- 
val, le diable est icy d6chaisne aussi bien qu'en 
France. Ce n'est que diablerie et masquarade en ce 
temps la, par tout le pays des Hurons : cela a debau- 
che deux ou trois de nos Chretiens et refroidi plu- 
sieurs autres, qui se disposoient au bapteme. Nous 
eumes recours k Dieu par le saint sacrifice de la messe 
et par les quarante heures, durant lesquelles nous 
exposames le St-Sacrement. La Relation dira fidele- 
ment le reste. J'assure, V. R., qu'elle est tres- 
fidelle: c'est pourquoi je me contenterai de toucher 
[185] en passant les diableries de ces peuples. EUe 
pourra juger par ce qui suit, que ce ne nous est pas 
peu de peine d'^lever et entretenir, au milieu d'une 
nation perverse, ces nouvelles plantes du christia- 
nisme que Dieu nous a commis ; nous pouvons dire 
avec saint Paul : Filioli quos iterumparturio, etc. Nous 
et eux avons bon besoin des prieres de V. R. ; je les 
recommande k sa charite. 

1° Toutes leurs fafons de faire leur sont dictees 
imm6diatement du diable, qui leur parle tantot en 
forme de corbeau ou quelque autre oyseau semblable, 
tantot en forme de flamme ou ame, et tout cela dans 


1638-39] F. DU PERON TO JOSEPH 177 

baptized; on the Qtli, a family; on tlie i6th, two 
families, — and all very solemnly. 

On the 13th of February, a girl of ten or twelve 
years was baptized with the ceremonies of the church. 

On the 2nd of March, and other days following the 
carnival, the devil was unchained here as well as in 
France. There was only deviltry and masquerading 
at that time throughout the Huron country ; two or 
three of our Christians were debauched therein, and 
many others, who were inclined to baptism, have 
become cold. We had recourse to God through the 
holy sacrifice of the mass and through the forty 
hours, during which we exposed the Blessed Sacra- 
ment. The Relation will give a faithful account of 
the rest. I assure Your Reverence that it is very 
accurate ; hence I will content myself with touching 
[185] incidentally upon the deviltries of these peoples. 
You will be able to judge from what follows that it 
is no little task for us to rear and keep in order in 
the midst of a perverse nation, these new plants of 
Christianity that God has committed to us ; we can 
say with saint Paul, Filioli quos iterum parturio, etc. 
We and they have much need of the prayers of Your 
Reverence ; I commend them to your charity. 

I. All their actions are dictated to them directly 
by the devil, who speaks to them, now in the form 
of a crow or some similar bird, now in the form of a 
flame or a ghost, and all this in dreams, to which 
they show great deference, — so great that, if they 
are asked to express their sentiments upon any 
subject, they say, '' Wait until we have consulted the 
dream." For better results, they fast beforehand. 
They consider the dream as the master of their lives, 
it is the God of the country ; it is this which dictates 


178 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.15 

le songe, aiiquel ils d6fferent grandement, en sorte 
que si Ton les prie de dire leur sentiment sur quel- 
que chose, ils disent : Attendez que nous ayons con- 
sults le songe. Pour le mieux faire, ils jeunent 
auparavant. lis tiennent le songe pour le maitre de 
leur vie, et c'est le Dieu de ce pays; c'est luy qui 
leur dicte leurs festins, leur chasse, leur peche, leur 
guerre, leurs traites avec les fran9ois, leurs remfedes, 
leurs dances, leurs jeux, leurs chansons: h. les voir 
dans ces actions, vous jugeriez des ames damnSes. 
lis n'ont qu'un jeu innocent, a s9avoir, le jeu de la 
crosse: il se fait pour se ressouvenir de quelque 
excellent crosseur decede. 

2° Pour gu6rir un malade, ils appellent le sorcier, 
qui, sans s'informer de la maladie du malade, [i86] 
chante et remue sa tortue ; il regarde dans I'eau et 
quelquefois dans le feu pour connaitre la qualite de 
la maladie. L' ay ant connue, il dit: I'ame du malade 
desire, pour sa sant6, qu'on luy fasse present de telle 
ou telle chose, d'un canot, par exemple, d'une robbe 
neuve, d'un collier de porcelaine, d'un festin de feu, 
d'une danse, etc. ; et tout le bourg se met incontinent 
en peine d'accomplir parfaitement tout ce que le sor- 
cier aura dit. D'autres fois, pour gu6rir le malade, 
les anciens du bourg vont trouver le malade, et luy 
demandent qu'est-ce que son ame desire. II respond 
selon son songe, qui sera quelquefois excessif et abo- 
minable. II demandera jusqu'^ vingt-cinq presents 
d' importance, qui luy sont incontinent fournis par le 
bourg, s'ils manquoient k un seul, ils croiroient etre 
cause de la mort du malade. C'est pourquoy nous 
qui crions contre ces diableries et refusons d'y con- 
tribuer quelque chose du notre, le diable, soit qu'il 


1638-39] F. DU PERON TO JOSEPH 179 

to them their feasts, their hunting, their fishing, 
their war, their trade with the French, their reme- 
dies, their dances, their games, their songs; to see 
them in these actions, yon would think they were 
lost souls. They have only one harmless game, it 
is the game of crosse ; they play it in memory of 
some excellent crosse-player who is dead. 

2. To cure a sick person, they summon the 
sorcerer, who, without acquainting himself with the 
disease of the patient, [i86] sings, and shakes his 
tortoise shell ; he gazes into the water and sometimes 
into the fire, to discover the nature of the disease. 
Having learned it, he says that the soul of the 
patient desires, for his recovery, to be given a present 
of such or such a thing, — of a canoe, for example, of 
a new robe, a porcelain collar, a fire-feast, a dance, 
etc., and the whole village straightway sets to work 
to carry out to the letter all the sorcerer may have 
ordered. At other times, to cure the sick, the old 
men of the village go to see the sick man, and ask 
him what his soul desires. • He answers according to 
his dream, which will sometimes be extravagant and 
abominable. He will ask as many as twenty-five 
important presents, which are immediately furnished 
him by the village ; if they failed in a single one, 
they would consider this the cause of the patient's 
death. Hence, — since we cry out against these 
deviltries and refuse to contribute anything of ours 
to them, — the devil, because he would like either to 
exact from us some homage, or to direct upon us all 
their envy, is sure to make the patient dream for 
something that we alone possess, or to make the sor- 
cerer specify it. As I was writing this, on the 13th 
of April, about noon, a Savage, greatly excited, came 


180 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.15 

desireroit avoir de nous quelque hommage, on jeter 
sur nous toute I'envie, ne manque pas de faire songer 
au malade quelque chose que nous ayons tous seuls 
ou de le faire dire par le sorcier. Comme j'ecrivois 
la presente, ce 13 avril, environ midi, voyla un Sau- 
vage qui vient d'un bourg prochain, grandement 
6cliauff6, et nous prie de luy donner quelque earlier 
d'etoffe rouge, parce que le sorcier avoit dit qu'un 
sien fils malade [187] desiroit pour sa guerison ce 
bout d'etoffe. On ne le luy donna pas; mais un de 
nos Peres incontinent se transporta sur le lieu quasi 
aliud agendo et baptisa le petit malade. Ces refus 
continuels font qu'ils nous menacent sou vent de nous 
casser la tete, nous attribuant la cause de leurs mala- 
dies, disant que depuis qu'ils croyent ils ont la mala- 
die. Chaque famille a certaines maladies, et par 
consequent certains remedes abominables. Elle a 
aussi ses armoiries diverses, qui un cerf, qui un ser- 
pent, qui un corbeau, qui le tonnerre, qu'ils estiment 
etre un oiseau, et choses semblables. 

3° Presque tous les Sauvages ont des sorts auxquels 
ils parlent et font festin pour obtenir d'eux ce qu'ils 
d^sirent. 

4° Le diable a ses religieux: ceux qui le servent 
doivent etre d^pouill^s de tout ce qu'ils ont; ils doi- 
vent s'abstenir des femmes ; ils doivent ob^ir parfaite- 
ment a tout ce que le diable leur suggere. Le sor- 
cier de ce bourg nous vint voir le 26 de mars et nous 
tint tout ce discours. 

5° Les femmes grosses parmi eux causent, disent- 
ils, plusieurs malheurs; car elles sont cause que le 
mari ne prend rien ^ la chasse. Si quelqu'une d'elles 
entre en une cabane ou il y aye quelque malade, le 


1638-39] F. DU PERON TO JOSEPH 181 

from a neighboring village, and begged us to give 
bim a piece of red stuff, because the sorcerer had said 
that one of his sons, who was sick, [187] desired for 
his recovery this bit of stuff. It was not given to 
him ; but one of our Fathers immediately repaired to 
the place, quasi aliud agendo, and baptized the little 
patient. These continual refusals cause them often 
to threaten to split our heads, attributing to us the 
cause of their diseases, saying that, since they be- 
lieve, they have sickness among them. Each family 
has certain maladies, and consequently certain abom- 
inable remedies. Each also has its distinct armorial 
bearing, one having a deer, another a serpent, an- 
other a crow, another the thunder, which they con- 
sider a bird; ^^ and like objects. 

3. Nearly all the Savages have charms, to which 
they speak and make feasts, in order to obtain from 
them what they desire. 

4. The devil has his religious; those who serve 
him must be deprived of all their possessions, they 
must abstain from women, they must obey perfectly 
all that the devil suggests to them. The sorcerer of 
this village came to see us on the 26th of March, and 
told us all these things. 

5. Pregnant women among them cause, they say, 
many misfortunes ; ^^ for they cause the husband not 
to take anything in the hunt ; if one of them enters 
a cabin where there is a sick person, he grows worse ; 
if she looks at the animal that is being pursued, it 
can no longer be captured; if people [188] eat with 
her, those who eat thus fall sick. A pregnant wom- 
an, by her presence and the application of a certain 
root, extracts an arrow from a man's body. More- 
over, they rejoice more in the birth of a daughter 


182 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 15 

malade empire ; si elle regarde la bete qu'on pour- 
suit, ou ne la sgiauroit plus prendre; si Ton [i88] 
mange avec elle, ceux qui y mangent tombent ma- 
lades. Une femme grosse, par sa presence et appli- 
cation de quelque racine, tire la fieche du corps d'un 
bomme: toutefois ils se rejouissent da vantage en la 
naissance d'une fille que d'un fils, k cause de la mul- 
tiplication du pays. Les femmes sont icy maitresses 
et servantes. 

6° lis croyent que les ames rentrent dans le corps 
d'un autre apres sa mort. 

Le 19 mars, jour des Cendres, nous donnames les 
cendres k ceux qui se presenterent des Sauvages. II 
y en a qui ont garde le careme pour ce qui est de 
I'abstinence de chair, et qui, se trouvant en des fes- 
tins de cerf, ont refus6 d'en gouter. Ce n'est pas que 
nous les y obligeons pour le present; ils s'en abstien- 
nent de leur plein gre, sachant qu'en France on garde 
de la sorte le careme. II est k remarquer que c'est 
en ce temps de caresme que les chasseurs reviennent 
de la chasse, et, comme elle est tres-rare et fort diffi- 
cile, ils sont grandement avides de chair. lis font 
des deux et trois cents lieues dans les bois pour y 
trouver du gibier, comme quelque ours, ou quelque 
cerf ou vache; du peu qu'ils rapportent ils en font 
un festin. Par grande caresse un pere donne ^ son 
fils un OS S. ronger qu'on luy aura donne au festin. 
La pluspart, non-seulement le careme, mais tout le 
long de I'annee, [189] j'entens ceux qui sont rarement 
aux festins, ne font que deux repas par jour, I'un a 
neuf heures du matin et 1' autre h. cinq heures du soir. 
Si les Sauvages sont dans un continuel careme, le 
notre n'est pas moindre: le jour de Paques et le 


1638-39] F. DU PERON TO JOSEPH 183 

than of a son, for the sake of the multiplication of 
the country's inhabitants. The women here are 
mistresses and servants. 

6. They believe that souls enter other bodies after 
death. 

On the 19th of March, Ash Wednesday,^^ we gave 
ashes to such of the Savages as presented themselves. 
There are some who observed Lent as regards the 
abstinence from meat, and who, being present at 
feasts of venison, refused to taste it. Not that we 
oblige them to do so, for the present; they abstain 
of their own accord, knowing that in France Lent is 
observed in this way. It is to be observed that it is 
at this lenten time that the hunters return from the 
chase, and, as game is very rare and very difficult to 
get, they are exceedingly greedy for meat. They 
will go two or three hundred leagues into the woods 
to find game, such as bears, deer, or cows ; ^^ of the 
little that they bring back, they make a feast. As a 
token of great affection, a father will give his son a 
bone to gnaw which has been given him at the feast. 
The majority of them, not only during Lent, but all 
through the year, [189] I mean those who are rarely 
at feasts, have only two meals a day, one at nine 
o'clock in the morning, the other at five in the even- 
ing. If the Lent of the Savages is continual, ours is 
no less so ; Easter and Good Friday are very often 
the same to us, as far as food is concerned. True, 
the Savages will sometimes bring us, in trade, a quar- 
ter of a bear or deer, at most, once during the entire 
year; sometimes also, but rarely, our Frenchmen 
will kill some bustards or cranes, of which a feast is 
made for the savages, some is given to the sick, and 
occasionally some are put in our sagamite. 


184 


LES RELATIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol.15 


grand vendredy nous sont bien souvent egaux quant 
aux vivres. II est vray que quelquefois les Sauvages 
nous apporteront k traiter un quartier d'ours ou cerf, 
une fois au plus durant toute I'annee; quelquefois 
aussi, mais rarement, nos fran9ois tueront quelque 
outarde ou grue, desquels on fait festin aux sau- 
vages, on en donne aux malades, et on en met quel- 
quefois quelques unes dans notre sagamite. 

Le 23 avril, samedi saint, nous baptisames dans 
notre chapelle, avec les ceremonies de I'Eglise, un 
de nos catechumenes : les autres ont ete remis, pour 
quelques raisons, a la veille de la Pentecote, selon 
I'ordre de I'Eglise. 

Le 24 avril, jour de Paques, deux de nos Peres 
partirent d'icy pour des missions volantes, par la cam- 
pagne. Le 28 du meme mois j'entrai aux exercices 
pour le meme sujet. A la fin d'iceux, depuis la pre- 
sente lettre, datee le 4 de mai, je partis pour aller en 
mission volante. En ces missions, nous sommes 
frustr^s de celebrer la sainte messe (souvenez-vous 
de suppleer pour nous). Le samedi, nous retour- 
nons k la Residence la plus prochaine [190] pour y 
celebrer la sainte messe le lendemain, apres laquelle 
nous retournons a notre mission, Depuis Paques on 
y a baptise environ vingt personnes. 

Le 27 mai, nous retournames "k la Residence de la 
Conception pour assister k la venue de douze prison- 
niers et les disposer au bapteme. II est vrai que ce 
que je vous ai dit cy devant des cruautes, que nos 
barbares exercent sur les prisonniers, n'est rien, pour 
ne les avoir connues que par le rapport de nos Peres 
qui y avoient assist6. J 'ay assiste moi-meme aux 
premiers tourments de ceux-cy ; la rage des demons 


1638-39] R DU PERON TO JOSEPH 185 

On the 23rd of April, Holy Saturday, we baptized 
one of our catechumens in our chapel, with the cere- 
monies of the Church ; the others were put off, for 
certain reasons, until the eve of Pentecost, according 
to the order of the Church. 

On the 24th of April, Easter day, two of our 
Fathers left here on their itinerant missions through 
the country. On the 28th of the same month, I be- 
gan the exercises, with the same object. At the end 
of this preparation, since the present letter, dated 
the 4th of May, I departed to go on an itinerant 
mission. While on these missions, we are prevented 
from celebrating the holy mass (remember to make 
it up for us). On Saturday we return to the nearest 
Residence, [190] in order to celebrate there the holy 
mass the next day, after which we return to our mis- 
sion. Since Easter, we have baptized about twenty 
persons. 

On the 27th of May, we returned to the Residence 
of la Conception, to be present at the coming of 
twelve prisoners, and to prepare them for baptism. 
Truly, what I have told you before about the cruel- 
ties that our barbarians exercise upon prisoners, is 
nothing, as I knew of them only through the report 
of the Fathers who were present. I myself was pres- 
ent at the preliminary tortures of these prisoners; 
the rage of the demons against the damned cannot 
be better represented than by that which these peo- 
ples exercise upon these poor captives. Imagine at 
their arrival the whole village, or rather the whole 
country, going to meet them at five hundred paces 
from the village, and to welcome them, but in a 
strange way; every one is armed — one with a club, 
another with a handful of thorns, another with a 


186 


LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.15 


sur les damn6s ne sauroit etre mieux figur6e que par 
celle que ces peuples exercent sur ces pauvres cap- 
tifs. Figurez-vous qu'^ leur arriv^e tout le bourg, 
ou plutot tout le pays, qui y accourt, leur va au-de- 
vant "k cinq cents pas du bourg les accueillir, mais 
d'une Strange fa9on; chacun s'arme, qui d'un baton, 
qui d'une poignee de ronces, qui d'un couteaU et tison 
de feu; ils se rangent d'un cote et d'autre, et frap- 
pent sans piti^ les prisonniers jusques ^ ce qu'ils sont 
arrives sur I'^chafaud prepare pour etre le spectacle 
de cruaute. Ils marchent I'un aprfes I'autre, ayant 
cbacun derriere soi un sauvage qui les tient lies par 
les bras avec une corde ; ils ont aussi les pieds lies, en 
sorte que ils ne puissent marcher que doucement ; ils 
sont nuds et ont un collier [191] de porcelaine autour 
de la tete pour marque de victime. Arrives qu'ils 
furent sur le theatre, on les fit danser, et chanter I'un 
apres I'autre, et tout en chantant, divers en divers 
temps leur coupoient, qui un doigt, qui trois, qui leur 
6crasoient les doigts ^ coup de baton, d'autres leur 
donnoient des estafilades de couteau jusques aux os, 
au gras des jambes et des bras, la plupart en avoient 
aux deux bras et aux deux jambes. Cela fait, on les 
mena reposer dans une cabane pour les tourmenter 
par aprfes, durant la nuit, plus cruellement par le 
feu. Le lendemain matin, on en mena un sur I'^cha- 
faud, pour achever de le bruler avec des tisons de 
feu. lis lui renouvellerent toutes les plaies de la nuit 
precedente, et enfin n'en pouvant plus, ils luy cou- 
perent la tete. J 'ay assists k ces cruautes: elles sont 
beaucoup plus horribles qu'on ne se S9auroit imaginer. 
De douze qu'ils etoient nous en avons d6jk baptis6 
neuf icy ; reste trois qui vont en d'autres bourgs : je 


1638-39] F. DU PERON TO JOSEPH 187 

knife and a firebrand; they form in lines on both 
sides, and mercilessly strike the prisoners until they 
have reached the platform prepared for the exhibi- 
tion of their cruelty. They walk one after the other, 
each one having behind him a savage, who holds his 
arms bound by a cord ; their feet are bound also, so 
that they can only walk slowly ; they are naked, and 
each has a collar [191] of porcelain around his head 
to designate him as a victim. Now when they ar- 
rived at the stage, they were made to dance and sing, 
one after the other ; and all the time they were sing- 
ing, at intervals, various persons cut them — one cut 
off one finger, another three ; another crushed their 
fingers with a blow from his club; others gashed 
them to the bone with knives in the fleshy part of 
the leg and the arm, most of them in both arms and 
both legs. When this was over, they were taken to 
a cabin to rest, so that they might afterwards be tor- 
mented more cruelly by fire during the night. The 
next morning, one was driven upon the platform, that 
they might finish burning him with firebrands. They 
renewed all the tortures of the preceding night, and, 
when he finally succumbed, they cut off his head. I 
was present at these cruelties; they are far more 
horrible than one can imagine. Of those twelve, we 
have already baptized nine here ; three remain, who 
are going to other villages. I leave presently, with 
one of our Fathers, to go to them, and try to baptize 
them. 

I have just returned. Of the three prisoners who 
remained to be baptized, we have baptized two, the 
third refusing baptism. Among the twelve prisoners 
there was one Judas. The number of those baptized 
this year (1639) reaches fully 300 souls ; in this village 


188 


LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.15 


pars tout a I'heure avec tin de nos Peres pour aller 
apres eux et tacher de les baptiser. 

Me voicy de retour. Des trois prisonniers qui 
restoient ^ baptiser, nous en avons baptist deux ; le 
troisieme a refuse le bapteme : entre les douze prison- 
niers il s'est trouv6 un Judas. Le nombre des bapti- 
ses de cette annee (1639) monte bien k 300 aines; en 
ce bourg de la Conception, on en a baptise [192] en 
maladie, tant enfans qu'autres, cent vingt deux, des- 
quels une partie sont all6s au ciel. Outre les ma- 
lades on en a baptise en sante et solennellement, et 
qui font profession de chretien, cinquante; au bourg 
de St- Joseph cent vingt six, dont vingt cinq I'ont 6t6 
solennellement et font profession du christianisme ; 
en la mission volante de St-Michel une vingtaine, 
desquels six ou sept I'ont ete avec les ceremonies de 
I'Eglise. Je ne parle que de ce pays des Hurons; 
pour ce qui est de Kebec et des trois rivieres, vous 
en avez la Relation devant nous. 

Je me recommande k vos SS. Sacrifices et aux pri- 
eres de tous nos Peres et Freres, je les salue tons nomi- 
natim et les conjure de contribuer par leurs ferveurs 
^ la conversion de nos pauvres Sauvages: c'est 
I'ouvrage de Dieu seul, qui exaucera aussi bien en 
France vos prieres que les nostres. 

Je suis a tous de coeur, 
Mon Reverend Pere, 
le tres-humble et tres-affectionne frfere 
en Notre-Seigneur, 

FRANgois DU PERON, 
surnomme en huron ANONCHIARA, S.J. 


1638-39] F. DU PERON TO JOSEPH 189 

of la Conception, there have been baptized [192] in 
sickness, both children and others, one hundred and 
twenty-two persons, a part of whom have gone to 
heaven. Besides the sick, fifty persons in health 
were solemnly baptized, who made profession as 
Christians. In the village of St. Joseph, one hundred 
and twenty-six, of whom fifty were baptized solemn- 
ly and professed Christianity ; in the itinerant mis- 
sion of St. Michel, twenty, six or seven of whom 
were baptized with the ceremonies of the Church. 
I speak only of this country of the Hurons; as 
concerns Kebec and the three rivers, you have the 
Relation of those before we do. 

I commend myself to your Holy Sacrifices, and to 
the prayers of all our Fathers and Brethren. I greet 
them all nominatim, and conjure them to aid, by their 
pious ardor, in the conversion of our poor Savages ; 
it is the work of God alone, who will hearken to your 
prayers in France as well as to ours. 

I am with all my heart. 
My Reverend Father, 
your very humble and very affectionate 
brother in Our Lord, 

FRANgois DU PERON, 
sumamed in Huron ANONCHIARA, S.J.^^ 


r 


^ 


■^ • vi 


'ri> 






1^ 





•J 


-'j- 
j 


V '-' 4^ ? r i \ "^ H -' » ^ 



^H "^/^i ^^f^ 


u 


ftv 






^ 


SJ 












K^ ^ 






' """.oli^ 


I g 





K 
? ^ 


A 

■i 






^ ^.K 


'^ ^* - - . 

s'"" ':s^^ H: ^':i .^ ^ 




-^ *> ^ i 




^;s?T 


"n^-^^ 








; .. 










A: 




>*• >^ M /I 




•^ 







.^ •- 




Z 

H 
(X 
< 


C/5 

o 

U 
tu 

f- 

O 

f- 

UJ 




> 
O 


o 

-J 


U 
< 


XXXII 

Lettre du P. Simon le Moyne, a M. le Cure 
de St-Martin, a Beauvais 

Residence de la Conception, aux Hurons 
[Ossossane], Mai 25, 1639 


Source : We follow the original MS., in the possession of 
The Burrows Brothers Company, Cleveland, Ohio. 


192 


LES RELATIONS DES J£SUITES [Vol. 15 


Lettre du P. Simon le Moyne, a M. le Cure de St- 
Martin, a Beauvais. 

La Paix & 1' Amour du grand Iesvs. 

MONSIEUR & TRES-CHER COUSIN. 
Merueille ! que ce bout de papier soit venu 
iusques k vous apres tant de Sauts qu'il h. 
franchy, et de dangers qu'il luy ^ fallu essuyer. Nest- 
ce pas que mon esprit luy en auoit fraye le chemin 
plus de mille fois sans la I'"^ O si vous me voyiez 
icy dans ce bout du monde, faire et chanter I'eau 
beniste, et dire la saincte messe aux Paroissiens de 
nostre district, car depuis huict ou neuf moys nous 
contons en cette barbaric deux a trois Eglises ou As- 
semblees des Neophytes. Mais quelle consolation a 
vn bon coeur, de voir icy chaqs iour dans nos cabanes, 
comme quoy nostre bon Iesvs y est adore par vn 
Peuple, dont il n'est encore connu qu'a demy. le 
dy', chaque iour, car bien qu'ils ne viennent pas 
entendre la messe, sinon les festes solennelles et les 
Dimanches, si viennent ils en nre chapelle d escor- 
ces tons les matins, et souuent tons les soirs, pour 
faire leurs prieres. Scauez-vous comment? On a 
mis en leur langue le signe de croix, vn bel Acte 
de contrition de 12. ou 13. lignes, le Pater, I'Aue et 
quelques prieres de la sorte, que ces fidelles Neo- 
phytes, la plus part hommes faits et aagez, disent 
aprez moy auec bien du ressentiment de cost6 et 
d'autre. II falloit bien que du commencement Dieu 


1638-39] LE MOYNE TO THE CURA 193 


Letter from Father Simon le Moyne, to Monsieur 
the Cure of St. Martin, at Beauvais. 

The Peace and Love of the great Jesus. 

MONSIEUR AND DEAREST COUSIN: 
Marvelous ! that this scrap of paper should 
reach you after shooting so many Rapids, 
and encountering, as it must, so many dangers. Is 
it not because my spirit had opened the way for it to 
you not once, but a thousand times and more ? Oh, if 
you could see me here in this end of the world, bless- 
ing the water, singing at the aspersion, and saying 
holy mass for the Parishioners of our district, — for, 
after eight or nine months, we count in this barbaric 
region two or three Churches or Gatherings of Neo- 
phytes. But what consolation it is to a sympathetic 
heart, to see here every day in our cabins how our 
good Jesus is adored by a People to whom he is 
as yet only partially known. I say every day ; for, 
although they do not come to hear the mass, except 
at the solemn feasts and on Sundays, yet they come 
to our bark chapel every morning, and often every 
evening, to offer their prayers. Do you know how? 
We have translated into their language the sign of 
the cross, a suitable Act of contrition, of 12 or 13 
lines, the Pater, the Ave, and several prayers of that 
sort, which these faithful Neophytes — most of them 
adults and aged men — recite after me, on all sides, 
with much feeling. God from the beginning must 
indeed have made good their defects of understand- 


194 LES RELATIONS DBS JESUITES [Vol.15 

suppleast a leurs foiblesses d* esprit, puisq3 eux mes- 
mes dissimuloient si prudemment nos fautes a pro- 
nonfer leur langue. En attendant que vous ayez le 
plaisir de lire nostre Relation de cette annee, qui 
s'imprimera, coe ie croy, a Paris, i'adresse k mon F. 
le lesuite de quoy afifamer plustost que d'assouuir 
vre curiosite. I'espere que ma mere vous le fera 
voir, ie la vous recommande, et moy en vos SS. Sa- 
crifices et Prieres, car ie vous suis cordialement de 
cet autre monde, le mesme qui tousiours, cest a dire 
Monsr et tres cher cousin 

Tresh. et tres-oblige ST et cousin. 
Simon le moyne de la Compag^? de I E s . 

De nre Resid'^? de la conception 
aux Hurons. ce 25. May. 
1639 
[Adressee: — Monsieur le cure de S^ Martin 
A Beauuais.] 


1638-39] LE MOYNE TO THE CURE 195 

ing, since they themselves so discreetly feign not to 
notice our blunders in the pronunciation of their 
language. Until such time as you have the satisfac- 
tion of reading our Relation of this year, which will 
be published, I think, at Paris, I send to my Brother 
the Jesuit what will serve to whet rather than to 
satiate your curiosity. I hope that my mother will 
show it to you ; I recommend her to you, and myself 
in your Holy Sacrifices and Prayers; for I am, from 
this other world, to you cordially the same as ever, 
that is. 

Sir and dearest cousin. 
Your very humble and obliged Servant and cousin, 
Simon le moyne, of the Society of J E s u s .^^ 
From our Residence of la conception, 
among the Hurons, this 25 th of May, 
1639. 
[Addressed: — Monsieur the cure of St. Martin, 
at Beauvais.] 


XXXIII 

Lettre du P. Joseph-Marie Chaumonot, au 
T. R. P. Mutio Vitelleschi 

Kebec, Aout 7, 1639 


Source : Reprinted from Carayon's Premiere Mission 
des Je'siiites au Canada^ pp. 193, 194. 


198 LES RELATIONS DESJESUITES [Vol.15 


[193] Lettre du P. Joseph-Marie Chaumonot, au 

T. R. P. Mutio Vitelleschi, General de la 

Compagnie de Jesus, a Rome, 

(Traduite de Pit alien sur I' original conserve ii Rome.) 

Kebec, 7 aout 1639. 

MON Tres-Reverend Pere, 
Pax Christi. 
Le premier aout je suis arrive en la Nou- 
velle-France avec les PP. Vimont et Poncet et un de 
nos Freres coadjuteurs, apres trois mois d'une navi- 
gation tres-facheuse, a cause des brouillards qui nous 
ont environnes pendant trois semaines, avec danger 
de naufrage contre les enormes gla§ons qui fiottent 
sur ces mers. Le vaisseau du commandant de la 
flotte allait se heurter contre un de ces blocs de glace, 
le jour de la Sainte-Trinite, pendant qu'on disait la 
messe, quand un des marins, en se promenant sur le 
pont, aper9Ut, malgre I'epaisseur du brouillard, I'e- 
clat de la glace qui n'etait plus qu'a deux brasses, et 
s'ecria : Misericorde, misericorde ! Nous sommes tous 
perdus. Le P. Vimont fit voeu de dire deux messes, 
I'une en I'honneur de la sainte Vierge, I'autre [194] 
en I'honneur de saint Joseph, s'ils nous preservaient 
de ce peril. Et voila qu'au meme instant le vent, 
changeant subitement de direction, nous fit eviter, 
comme par miracle, ce danger imminent. Les plus 
habiles pilotes conviennent que cela n'a pu se faire 
naturellement avec tant de rapidite, et que si ce 


1638-39] CHAUMONOT TO THE GENERAL 199 


[193] Letter from Father Joseph Marie Chaumonot, 

to the Very Reverend Father Mutio Vitelleschi, 

General of the Society of Jesus, at Rome. 

(Translated from the Italian original preserved at Rome.) 

Kebec, August 7, 1639. 

MY Very Reverend Father, 
Pax Christi. 
I arrived in New France, on the first of 
August, with Fathers Vimont^^ and Poncet^ and 
one of our lay Brothers, after a voyage of three 
months, which was very difficult on account of the fogs 
which surrounded us for three weeks, with the danger 
of being wrecked against the enormous masses of ice 
that float upon these seas. The ship of the comman- 
dant of the fleet was about to strike against one of 
these blocks of ice, on the day of the Holy Trinity, 
while mass was being said ; when one of the sailors, 
walking upon the bridge, perceived, in spite of the 
thickness of the fog, the glitter of the ice, which was 
no more than two brasses away, and cried, " Mercy, 
mercy ! we are all lost ! " Father Vimont made a vow 
to say two masses, one in honor of the blessed Virgin, 
the other [194] in honor of saint Joseph, if they 
preserved us from this peril. And lo ! at that very 
moment, the wind suddenly changed direction and 
caused us to avoid, as if by a miracle, this imminent 
danger. The most skillful pilots agree that this 
could naturally not have been done with so much 


200 


LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol. 15 


revirement n'eut pas eu lieu a ce moment precis, nous 
^tions perdus sans ressource. 

Je ne puis encore rien ^crire k Votre Paternite sur 
ce qui regarde le pays que je n'ai pas eu le temps 
d'etudier; mais I'annee prochaine, je compte bien 
me dedommager de ce silence force. 

Quatre d'entre nous irons dans le pays des Hurons, 
les PP. Pijart, le Mercier, Poncet et moi. Ceux qui 
reviennent de chez les sauvages nous assurent de 
leurs dispositions a recevoir la foi. Plaise a Dieu 
faire de son serviteur un instrument capable de me- 
ner a bien une si difficile entreprise ! 

Je conjure Votre Paternite de m'accorder le se- 
cours de ses prieres et saints sacrifices, 
Je suis, 

de Votre Paternite, 
I'indigne serviteur en Notre-Seigneur, 
Joseph-Marie CHAUMONOT. 

De K6bec, le 7 aout 1639. 


1638-39] CHAUMONOT TO THE GENERAL 201 

rapidity ; and that, if this sudden tack had not taken 
place at that precise moment, we would have been 
irretrievably lost. 

I cannot as yet write Your Paternity anything 
regarding the country, which I have not had time 
to study ; but I count certainly upon making amends 
for this forced silence, next year. 

Four of us will go into the Huron country. Fathers 
Pijart, le Mercier, Poncet, and myself. Those who 
return from among these savages assure us of their 
disposition to receive the faith. May it please God 
to make of his servant an instrument capable of bring- 
ing to good so difficult an enterprise ! 

I conjure Your Paternity to grant me the help of 
your prayers and holy sacrifices. 
I am 

Your Paternity's 
unworthy servant in Our Lord, 
Joseph Marie CHAUMONOT. 

K^bec, the 7th of August, 1639. 


XXXIV 

Le Jeune's Relation, 1639 

Paris: SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, 1640 


SOURCE : Title-page and text reprinted from the copy of 
the first edition (H. 74), in Lenox Library. 

The preliminary matter and chap. i. of Part \. are given 
in the present volume ; the remainder of the document will 
appear in Volumes XVI. and XVIL 



ELATION 

DE CE QVI S'EST PASS3E' 

E.N LA 

NOVVELLE FRANCE 

EN l' AnNE''e X 5 3^. 

Enuoyecau 

R. PERE PROVINCIAL 

de la Compagnic de I e s v s 

on la Prouincc de France. 

P(srk P, Paul te Uunc-^deU mefme Compagnitl 
SH^er'ituT de U Mefidence de Kehc* 



A p A a IS, 

Chez Sis A ST IBS CitAM©isif, Imprim««l 

ordinaire du Roy , me S. lacqacs, 

aat^Cicogncs. 

M. t)C. %L* 



RELATION 

OF WHAT OCCURRED 

IN 

NEW FRANCE 

IN THE Year 1639. 

Sent to the 
REVEREND FATHER PROVINCIAL 

of the Society of Jesus 
in the Province of France. 

By Father Paul Le Jeune, of the same Society, 
Superior of the Residence of Ke'hec. 


PARIS, 

Sebastien Cramoisy, Printer in ordinary 

to the King, rue St. Jacques, 

at the Sign of the Storks. 

M. DC. XL. 

BY ROYAL LICENSE. 


208 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 15 


Extraid du Priuilege du Roy. 

PAR Grace & Priuilege du Roy, il eft permis k 
Sebastien Cramoisy, Marchand Libraire lure, 
Imprimeur ordinaire du Roy, & Bourgeois de 
Paris, d'imprimer ou faire imprimer vn liure intitu- 
le, Relation de ce qui sejlpaj^^ en la Nouuelle France en 
r anne'e 1639. Enuoye'e au R. P. Proimicial de la Com- 
pagnie de Iesvs en la Prouince de France, Par le P. 
Paul le leune de la me/me Compagnie , Superieur de la 
Rejidence de Kebec, & ce pendant le temps & efpace de 
dix ann^es confecutiues. Auec defenfes a tons Li- 
braires & Imprimeurs d'imprimer, ou faire imprimer 
ledit Liure, fous pretexte de deguifement, ou change - 
ment qu'ils y pourroient faire, a peine de confisca- 
tion, & I'amende portee par ledit Priuilege. Donne 
a Paris le 14. iour de Decembre 1639. 

Par le Roy en Confeil. 

Ceberet. 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, idjg 209 


Extract from the Royal License. 

BY the Grace and Prerogative of the King, per- 
mission is granted to Sebastien Cramoisy, 
Sworn Bookseller, Printer in ordinary to the 
King, and a Burgess of Paris, to print or to have 
printed a book entitled: Relation de ce qui s est passe 
en la Nouvelle France en ranne'e 1639. Envoy e'e au R. 
P. Provincial de la Compagnie de Jesus en la Province 
de France, Par le P. Paul le Jenne de la mesme Com- 
pagnie, Superieur de la Residence de Kdbec; and this to 
remain valid for the period and space of ten con- 
secutive years. All Booksellers and Printers are 
prohibited from printing or causing to be printed the 
said Book, under pretext of any alteration or change 
they may make in the same, under penalty of confis- 
cation and of the fine enacted by the said License. 
Given at Paris on the 14th day of December, 1639. 
By the King in Council. 

Ceberet. 


210 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.15 


Permifsion du P. Prouincial. 

NOVS Iacqves Dinet, Prouincial de la Compagnie 
de Iesvs en la Prouince de Frace, auons ac- 
corde pour I'aduenir au fieur Sebastien Cra- 
MOISY, Marchand Libraire, Imprimeur ordinaire du 
Roy, I'impreffion des Relations de la Nouuelle France. 
Faidt a Paris le 20. Decembre 1639. 

Iacqves Dinet. 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i639 211 


Permission of the Father Provincial. 

WE, Jacques Dinet, Provincial of the Society 
of Jesus in the Province of France, have 
granted for the future to sieur Sebastien 
Cramoisy, Bookseller, Printer in ordinary to the 
King, the printing of the Relations of New France. 
Done at Paris, the 20th of December, 1639. 

Jacques Dinet. 


212 LES RELATIONS DES Jj^SUITES [Vol.15 


Table des Chapitres contenus en ce Liure. 

RELATION de ce qui s'eji paff^ en la Nouuelle 
France en V annee 1639. . . Page i 

Chapitre I. De la joye qua receu la Nouuelle 

France pour la Naiffance de Monfeign. le 

Daulphin, & d'vn confeil que tindrent les 

Sauuages. . . . .2 

Chap. II. Des Religieufes nouuellement arriu^es en 

la Nouuelle France, & de leur employ. . 17 

Chap. III. Des bonnes difpofitions des Sauuages 

pour la Foy. . . . -37 

Chap. IV. Des Chretiens ou Sauuages baptifez en 

general. . . . . .52 

Chap. V. Des premieres Families rendues Seden- 

taires. . . . . -63 

Chap. VI. Du Bapte/me d'vn ieune homme Algon- 
quin. . . . . .91 

Chap. VII. De la Conuerfion d'vn Capitaine, &• 

de toute fa Famille. . . . .107 

Chap. VII. [i.e., viii.] De la Conuerfion & du Bap- 

tefme d'vn Sorcier. . . . .116 

Chap. IX. Du Seminaire des Sauuages. . .130 

Chap. X. De la creance des fuperfiitions, & de 

quelques couflumes des Sauuages. . .145 

Chap. XI. Ramas de diuerfes chofes qui nont pit 

e^re rapport^es fous les Chapitres precedents. . 158 


1638-39] LE JEUNES RELATION, i639 213 


Table of the Chapters contained in this Book. 

RELATION of what occurred in New France, 
in the year 1639. . . . page i 

Chapter 1. Of the joy felt by New France at 
the Birth of Monseigneur the Dauphin, and 
of a council held by the Savages. . . 2 

Chap. II. Of the Nims recently arrived in New 

France, and of their occupation. . • 1 7 

Chap. III. Of the favorable dispositions of the 

Savages towards the Faith. . . -37 

Chap. IV. Of the Christians or baptized Savages 

in general. . . . . • 5^ 

Chap. V. Of the first Families that became Seden- 
tary. . . . . -63 

Chap. VI. Of the Baptism of a yomig Algonquin 

man. . . . • -9^ 

Chap. VII. Of the Conversion of a Captain and of 

his entire Family. . . . .107 

Chap. VII. [i.e.jviii.] Of the Conversion and Bap- 
tism of a Sorcerer. . . . .116 

Chap. IX. Of the Seminary for the Savages. . 130 

Chap. X. Of the belief in superstitions, and of some 

customs of the Savages. . . -145 

Chap. XI. Collection of various matters which 

could not be related in the previous Chapters. . 158 


214 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.16 

Relation de ce qui s'eft paffe dans le Pais des 
Hurons en I'annee 1638. & 1639. 

CHAP. I. De la Jituation du pays, & du nom 
de Huron. . . . .3 

Chap. II. De I' employ en general des Reli- 

gieux de nojire Compagnie en ces guar tiers. 1 3 

Chap. III. De V EJiat general du Chrijiianifme 

en ces contr^es. . . . -25 

Chap. IV. De ce qui ejl arriu^ de plus remarquable 
en la Rejidence de la Conception au bourg 
d' OJfoffane , & particulierement de la nouuelle 
Eglife de ce bourg. . . . '37 

Chap. V. De la Rejidence de Sain6t lofeph au bourg 
de Teanaujiayae. De ce qui s'y ejl pajf^ de 
plus remarquable, & principalement de la Naif- 
fance & ejlabliffement de la Nouuelle Eglife de 
ce bourg. . . . . .61 

Chap. VI. De ce qui s'ejl paf^^ de plus remarquable 

dans les Mijftons. . . . .81 

Chap. VII. De diuerfes trauerfes & difficultez qui 
fe font rencontr^es en la naiffance de ces Nou- 
uelles Eglifes. Et de celles qui fe prefentent 
encore tous les iours en leur ^tabliffement . . 100 

Chap. VIII. Du regne de Sathan en ces contr^es. 
Et des diuerfes diableries qui s'y trouuent in- 
troduites & stabiles, comme premiers principes 
& loix fondamentales de I ' eflat & conferuation 
de ces peuples. . . . .123 

FIN. 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j639 215 

Relation of what occurred in the Country of the 
Hurons in the year 1638 and 1639. 

CHAP. I. Of the situation of the country, and 
the name Huron. . . . .3 

Chap. II. Of the general occupation of the Re- 
ligious of our Society in these quarters. . 13 

Chap. III. Of the general State of Christianity in 

these countries. . . . -25 

Chap. IV. Of the more remarkable events that 
have occurred in the Residence of la Conception 
at the village of Ossossane, and especially of the 
new Church of that village. . . • 37 

Chap. V. Of the Residence of Saint foseph at the 
village of Teanaustayae. Of the more rem.ark- 
ahle events that have occurred there, and espe- 
cially of the Birth and establishment of the 
New Church of that village. . . .61 

Chap. VI. Of the most remarkable events that have 

occurred in the Missions. . . .81 

Chap. VII. Of various obstacles ajid difficulties 
encountered in connection with the birth of these 
New Churches; and of those that still appear 
daily in their establishment. . .100 

Chap. VIII. Of the reign of Satan in these coun- 
tries; and of the various deviltries introduced 
and established therein, as the first principles 
and fundamental laws of the condition and 
preservation of these peoples. . .123 

END. 


216 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 15 


[i] Relation de ce qui s'eft paffe en la Novvelle 
France, en I'Annee 1639. 

MON REVEREND PERE, 
La naillance d'vn Dauphin, les affecftions 
& les prefents de noftre grand Roy pour nos 
Sauuages, les foings de Monfeigneur le Cardinal pour 
ces contrees, & fes aumofnes pour la Miflion des Hu- 
rons: les gratifications de Meflleurs de la Nouuelle 
France pour nos Neophytes, ou nouueaux Chreftiens : 
la continuation de Monfieur le Cheualier de Montma- 
gny dans f on gouuemement: la venue des Religieuf es : 
le fecours qu'il a pleu ^ Voftre Reuerence de nous 
enuoyer: I'affiftance de plufieurs perfonnes de merite 
& de condition : les [2] voeux & les prieres des bonnes 
ames: les faindtes Affociations que Ton fait pour 
attirer les benedidlions du Ciel fur ces peuples, ont 
efl6 les fuiets de nos entretiens k I'abord des vaiffeaux, 
non feulement en public dans la conuerfation des 
hommes, mais encore en fecret deuant Dieu. Toutes 
ces ioyes tn'ont eft6 d'autant plus fenfibles, que ie 
les ay gout^es auec la douce liberte que ie refpirois il 
y a long temps: & qu'en fin V. R. m'a accordee nous 
enuoyant le R. P. Vimont, la vertu duquel reparera 
tous les defauts que i'ay commis dans la charge que 
ie luy ay remife entre les mains. II m'a fait entendre 
que V. R. defiroit que ie tragafle encore cette ann6e 
la Relation, commengons. 


1688-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i639 217 


[I] Relation of what occurred in New France in 
the Year 1639. 

MY REVEREND FATHER, 
The birth of a Dauphin ; the affection and 
gifts of onr great King for our Savages ; the 
solicitude of Monseigneur the Cardinal for these 
countries, and his donations for the Huron Mission; 
the offerings of the Gentlemen of New France for 
our Neophytes or new Christians; the continuation 
of Monsieur the Chevalier de Montmagny in his 
government ; the coming of the Nuns ; the aid Your 
Reverence has been pleased to send us ; the assistance 
of many persons of merit and condition; the [2] 
wishes and prayers of pious souls ; the holy Associa- 
tions that are being formed to call down the blessings 
of Heaven on these nations — all these were the sub- 
jects of our conversations on board the ship, not only 
when speaking publicly with men, but also in secret 
before God. All these pleasures have affected me 
the more sensibly, since I have tasted them with 
the sweet liberty that I enjoyed long ago ; and since 
at last Your Reverence has granted me that the Rev- 
erend Father Vimont should be sent to us, whose 
virtues will make amends for any errors I may have 
committed in the discharge of the office I have hand- 
ed over to him. He has given me to understand that 
Your Reverence desired that I should write the Re- 
lation again this year. Let us commence. 


218 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 15 


CHAPITRE PREMIER. 

DE LA JOYE QU'A RECEU LA NOUUELLE FRANCE POUR 

LA NAISSANCE DE MONSEIGN. LE DAULFHIN, & 

D'VN CONSEIL que TINDRENT LES SAUUAGES. 

LE retardement de la flotte bien extraordinaire 
cette annee nous iettoit [3] dans 1' impatience, 
quand vn vaiffeau paroiffant quarante lieues 
an deffous de Kebec, enuoya vn petit mot de lettre k 
Monfeignenr noflre Gouuerneur. Tout le monde 
accourt pour f9auoir des nouuelles, mais le papier ne 
difant mot de la naiffance de Monfeigneur le Daul- 
pbin arreftoit le cours de noflre joye. Nous anions 
appris I'an paff^ que la Reine eftoit enceinte, & nous 
attendions vn enfant de benedidlion & de miracle ; 
nous croyons tons que les dons de Dieu feroient par- 
faits, & que nous aurions vn Prince. Ce vaiffeau qui 
nous deuoit donner cette premiere nouuelle n'en dit 
mot. II nous aduertit feulement qu'il en venoit 
d'autres def quels il s'^toit fepare fur mer dans des 
brunes fort ^paiffes. En fin les vents fe rendans 
fauorables k nos defirs, nous apprifmes que le Ciel 
nous auoit donne vn Dauphin. Ce mot de Dauphin 
ne fortit pas fi tofl de la bouche des MefTagers, que 
la ioye entra dans nos coeurs, & les adtions de graces 
dedans nos ames. La nouuelle fut bien-tofl repan- 
due par tout ; on chante le Te Deum laudamus, on pre- 
pare des feux de rejouyffance auec tout I'artifice 
pofnble en ces contr^es. Meffieurs de la Nouuelle 


1638 - 39] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1639 219 


CHAPTER FIRST. 

OF THE JOY FELT BY NEW FRANCE AT THE BIRTH 

OF MONSEIGNEUR THE DAUPHIN, AND OF A 

COUNCIL HELD BY THE SAVAGES. 

THE most extraordinary delay in the arrival of 
the fleet this year had made us [3] very uneasy, 
when a ship, appearing forty leagues below 
Kebec, sent a short letter to Monseigneur our Govern- 
or. Every one hastened to learn the news ; but, as 
the paper contained not a word about the birth of 
Monseigneur the Dauphin, it checked the course of 
our joy. We had heard the year before that the 
Queen was enceinte, and we hoped for a child whose 
birth would be at once a blessing and a miracle ; ^^ we 
all thought that God's gifts would be perfected, and 
that we would have a Prince. This ship, which 
should have brought us the first news, said not a word 
of it. It merely informed us that other vessels were 
coming, from which it had been separated at sea in 
a heavy fog. Finally, the winds becoming favorable 
to our wishes, we learned that Heaven had given 
us a Dauphin. Hardly had this word " Dauphin " 
escaped the lips of the Messengers, than joy entered 
into our hearts and thanksgiving into our souls. The 
news soon spread everywhere ; the Te Deuni laudamus 
was chanted, and bonfires and fireworks were pre- 
pared with every device possible in these countries. 
The Gentlemen of New France recommended these 
[4] manifestations of joy, but all their recommenda- 


220 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 15 

France recommandoient les [4] adlions de ioye, mais 
toute leur recommandation ne feruit qu'k donner vne 
preuue de leur amour enuers ce nouueau Prince ; car 
deuant que leurs lettres eulTent paru, la ioye s'eftoit 
defia empar^e de nos coeurs, & tous les ordres eftoient 
donnez par Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur, pour la faire 
paroiftre deuant Dieu, & deuant les hommes. On 
fait voler des feux au Ciel, tomber des pluyes d'or, 
briller des efloilles, les ferpentaux brulans courent 
par tout, les chandelles ardentes ^clairent vne belle 
nuidl : bref , le Canon fait vn grand tonnerre dans les 
Echos de nos grands bois. Les Hurons qui fe trou- 
uerent prefens mettoient la main fur leur bouche en 
figne d'admiration & d'etonnement. Ces pauures 
Sauuages n'ayans iamais rien veu de femblable, croy- 
oient que I'empire des Frangois s'etendoit iufques a 
la Sphere du feu, & que nous faifions de cet Element 
tout ce qui nous venoit en penfee. 

En fuitte de [cette] merueille, on leur fit entendre 
que Monfeign. le Cardinal contribuoit puiffamment k 
I'entretien des Ouuriers Euangeliques qu'on enuoyoit 
en leur pays ; ce qui les fit paffer au del^ de I'eflonne- 
ment; & n'etoit qu'ils font Chrefliens, [5] iamais ils 
n'auroient pu croire qu'on pent rencont[r]er fur la 
terre des hommes qui vouluffent faire des defpenfes 
pour les fecourir au bout du monde, fans autre inte- 
reft que le bien de leurs ames, & de la gloire de 
noflre Seigneur, dont les barbares ne fe foucioient 
guieres deuant que la foy leur euft ouuert les yeux. 

Noftre joye ne fe contint pas dans I'^clat de nos 
feux, nous fifmes quelque temps apres vne proceflion 
qui auroit rauy toute la France fi elle auoit paru dans 
Paris. Deuant que d'en parler il faut que ie dife 


1638-39] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, idjg 221 


tions served only to prove their love for this new 
Prince; for, even before their letters appeared, joy 
had taken possession of our hearts, and all the neces- 
sary orders had been given by Monsieur our Governor 
to manifest it before God and before men. Fire- 
works were shot up towards Heaven, falling in 
golden showers, and glittering with stars ; fiery ser- 
pents ran everywhere ; a fine night was illuminated 
by lighted torches ; while the heavy thunder of the 
Cannon resounded in the Echoes of our great forests. 
The Hurons who were present placed their hands on 
their mouths, in token of admiration and astonish- 
ment. These poor Savages, having never seen any- 
thing of the kind, thought that the dominion of the 
French extended even over the Realms of fire, and 
that we could do what we liked with that Element."^ 
After these wonders, they were informed that 
Monseigneur the Cardinal contributed greatly to the 
maintenance of the Gospel Laborers who were sent 
to their country ; this astonished them beyond meas- 
ure, and, had they not been Christians, [5] they never 
would have believed that on earth men could be found 
willing to incur expense to assist them at the ex- 
tremity of the world, without other object than the 
welfare of their souls and the glory of our Lord, for 
whom these barbarians cared but little before the 
faith had opened their eyes. 

The fireworks were not sufficient for the expres- 
sion of our joy ; some time afterwards, we formed a 
procession which would have delighted all France if 
it had appeared in Paris. Before I speak of it, I 
must say a few words with reference to his Majesty's 
presents, which made their appearance in this very 
holy act of devotion which we offered to God in 


222 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol.15 

deux mots des prefents de fa Maieft6, qui parurent en 
cefte adtion fi faindle, que nous offrifmes h. Dieu en 
adtion de graces de fon Daulphin, & pour vne marque 
que la Nouuelle France reconnoiffoit auec fon Roy- 
la Saindle Vierge, comme la Dame & Protedtrice de 
fa Courone, & de tous fes Eftats. L'annee paffde vn 
Sauuage Canadien, fils d'vn nomme I8anch8, Capi- 
taine Sauuage, bien connu des Fran9ois, eftant paff6 
en France, fut veu d'vn fort bon ceil de fa Majefl6, 
aux pieds de laquelle il pofa fa Couronne de Porce- 
laine, pour marque qu'il reconnoiffoit ce grand Prince 
au nom de tous ces peuples pour leur vray & legitime 
Monarque. [6] Le Roy & la Reine tous remplis d'a- 
mour pour le falut de ces pauures peuples luy firent 
voir leur Daulphin; & apres plufieurs marques de 
bienueillances, luy firent prefents de fix paires d'ha- 
bits vrayment royaux ; Ce n'eft que toile d'or, velours, 
fatin, panne de foye, 6carlatte, & le refle ^ I'adue- 
nant. Ce ieune Sauuage eftant de retour en fon pays, 
monta iufques k Kebec auec vne efcoiiade de fes Com- 
patriotes, vint trouuer monfieur le Cheualier de Mont- 
magny, noflre Gouuerneur, auquel ces prefents furent 
apportez. II fe trouua pour lors des Sauuages Hu- 
rons, des Algonquins, & des Montagnets, qui tous 
enfemble admirerent la bonte de noflre Prince, qu'ils 
appelloient leur Roy. Or comme on vint a faire 
I'ouuerture de ces prefents, on iugea a propos pour 
r6pandre I'honeur du Roy parmi ces peuples ; & pour 
euiter la ialoufie qui pourroit naiftre parmy ces bar- 
bares fi vne feule nation ioiiiffoit de ces faueurs de 
les diftribuer ^ plufieurs, veu meme que ce Sauuage 
efloit all6 rendre hommage au Roy, non pas feule- 
ment au nom de fon pere & de fa nation, mais encore 


1638-39] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6sg 223 

thanksgiving for his Dauphin, and as a token that 
New France, with its King, acknowledged the Blessed 
Virgin as the Lady and Protectress of his Crown and 
of all his Estates. Last year, a Canadian Savage, 
the son of one Iwanckou, a Savage Captain well known 
to the French, went to France and was very well re- 
ceived by his Majesty, at whose feet he laid his Crown 
of Porcelain beads, as a sign that he recognized that 
great Prince, in the name of all these nations, as 
their true and lawful Monarch. [6] The King and 
Queen, full of ardor for the salvation of these needy 
peoples, showed him their Dauphin ; and, after many 
tokens of their kindness, they made him a present of 
six suits of clothing truly royal. They were entire- 
ly of cloth of gold, velvet, satin, silk plush, scarlet, 
and everything else in keeping. When this young 
Savage returned to his own country, he came up to 
K6bec with a party of his Countrymen, and went to 
see monsieur the Chevalier de Montmagny, our Gov- 
ernor, to whom these gifts were brought. There 
happened to be present, at the time, Huron, Algon- 
quin, and Montagnais Savages, who all admired the 
goodness of our Prince, whom they called their King. 
Now, when these packages were opened, it was 
deemed advisable — in order to extend the King's 
honor among these nations, and to avoid any jealousy 
that might arise among these barbarians, if one na- 
tion were the sole recipient of these favors — to dis- 
tribute them to several; especially as this Savage 
had gone to do homage to the King, not only in the 
name of his father and of his nation, but likewise in 
the name of the other nations of this country. There- 
fore, three splendid suits were given to this young 
[7] Savage — one for himself, another for his son, and 


224 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol.15 

au nom des autres nations du pays. On donna done 
trois habits magnifiques ^ ce ieune [7] Sauuage, I'vn 
pour luy, r autre pour fon fils, & le troifieme pour 
fon Pere. Comme on fongeoit S. qui on diftribueroit 
les trois autres, Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur dit qu'il 
falloit choifir trois Chreftiens Sauuages de trois na- 
tions, que fa Maiefle agr^eroit ce deffein, puis qu'elle 
mefme auoit demande a ce Sauuage s"il n'etoit point 
encore baptist, & s'il n'etoit point fedentaire, don- 
nant ^ connoiftre par cette demande I'affedtion qu'elle 
porte aux nouueaux Chreftiens arreflez aupres de 
nous pour profeffer noftre creance. Quand ie vins ^ 
declarer h. trois de nos Chreftiens les prefents que le 
Roy leur faifoit, les exhortans k prier pour fa Ma- 
iefle, & pour fon Dauphin, ils furent tous eflonnez: 
puis en prenant la parole, ils firent vne refponfe que 
ie n'attendois pas de la bouche d'vn Sauuage. NiKa- 
nis, dis k noftre Capitaine qu'il ecriue h. noftre Roy 
(c'eft ainfi qu'ils parloient) que nous le remercions, 
& que nous radmirons; & que quand il ne nous au- 
roit rien enuoye, nous ne laillerions pas de I'aymer. 
Au refte, garde toy mefme ces habits, car nous ne 
nous en voulons point f eruir, fmon quad on marchera 
en priant Dieu pour luy & pour fon fils, & pour fa 
femme, [8] (il vouloit dire qu'ils ne s'en feruiroient 
point, fmon quand on feroit quelque Procefllon pour 
le Roy, pour la Reine, & pour Monfeigneur le Daul- 
phin) & quand nous ferons morts, fi toy ou tes freres, 
faites prier Dieu pour le Roy, faites porter ces ha- 
bits a nos enfans, afin que ceux qui viendront apres 
nous fgachent I'amour que noftre Roy nous a porte. 
Venons maintenant ^ la premiere proceffion qui s'eft 
faite auec ces habits magnifiques. 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i639 225 

a third for his Father. While they were consider- 
ing to whom the three other suits should be given, 
Monsieur our Governor said that three Christian Sav- 
ages should be chosen from three nations; that his 
Majesty would approve this plan, since he himself 
had asked this Savage if he were not baptized and if 
he were not sedentary, — by this question showing 
the affection he bears to the new Christians who have 
settled near us to profess our faith. When I an- 
nounced to three of our Christians the presents which 
the King had sent them, and exhorted them to pray 
for his Majesty and for his Dauphin, they were quite 
astonished ; then, addressing me, they made an an- 
swer I did not expect from the mouth of a Savage. 
" Nikanis, tell our Captain to write to our King" 
(thus they spoke), " that we thank him and admire 
him. Even if he had sent us nothing, we would still 
love him. However, keep these clothes thyself, for 
we do not wish to wear them except when we shall 
walk, praying to God for him, and for his son, and 
for his wife." [8] (He meant that they would wear 
them only when there should be a Procession for the 
King, for the Queen, and for Monseigneur the Dau- 
phin.) " And when we are dead, if thou or thy 
brothers have prayers said to God for the King, 
make our children wear these clothes, so that those 
who shall come after us may know the love our King 
had for us. ' ' We now come to the first procession 
in which these magnificent garments were worn. 

The day dedicated to the glorious and triumphant 
Assumption of the blessed Virgin was chosen. At 
early morn, our Christian Neophytes came to hear 
holy Mass, to confess, and to receive communion. 
All the other Savages who were then in the neigh- 


226 LES RELA TJONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 15 

Le iour d€d.i6 ^ la glorieufe & triomphante Affom- 
ption de la faindte Vierge fut choifl: D6s le grand 
matin nos Neophytes Chreftiens vindrent entendre la 
faindte MelTe, & fe confeffer & communier. Tons 
les autres Sauuages qui eftoient pour lors es enuirons 
de Kebec fe rallemblerent, nous les mifmes dans 
I'ordre qu'ils deuoient tenir. La proceffion commen- 
gant k marcher, la Croix & la banniere paffoient de- 
uant : Monfieur Gand venoit apres, marchant en tefte 
des hommes Sauuages, dont les fix premieres eftoient 
reueftus de ces habits royaux, ils alloient tous deux 
k deux fort pofement, auec vne belle modeftie. Apres 
les hommes marchoit la fondatrice des Vrfulines, te- 
nant k fes coftez trois ou [9] quatre filles Sauuages 
veftues k la fran§oife, & en fuite venoient toutes les 
filles & femmes des Sauuages en leur propre habit, 
gardant parfaitement bien leur rang, fuiuoit le Cler- 
gy, apres lequel marchoit monfieur noftre Gouuer- 
neur, & nos Frangois, & puis nos Fragoifes, fans autre 
ordre que celuy de 1' humility. 

Si toft que la Proceflion commen9a k marcher, les 
Canons firent vn tonnerre qui donna vne fainc5te fray- 
eur ^ ces pauures Sauuages; nous marchafmes k 
I'Hofpital, oil eftans paruenus, tous les Sauuages fe 
mirent k genoux d'vn coft6, les Fran§ois de I'autre, 
& le Clergd au milieu ; alors les Sauuages prierent 
tous enfemble pour le Roy, remercierent Dieu de ce 
qu'il luy auoit donne vn Dauphin : lis prierent encore 
pour la Reine, & pour tous les Frangois, & en fuitte 
pour toute leur nation ; puis fe mirent k chanter les 
principaux articles de noftre creance. Cela fait, le 
Clerge, Monfieur le Gouuerneur, & les principaux de 
nos Fran9ois & des Sauuages entrerent en la Chap- 


1638-39] LE JEUNF/S RELATION, ibsg 227 

borhood of Kebec assembled, and we placed them in 
the order they were to observe. When the procession 
commenced its march, the Cross and the banner were 
carried in front. Monsieur Gand came next, walk- 
ing at the head of the Savage men, the first six of 
whom were clad in these royal garments. They 
went two by two, most sedately, with becoming mod- 
esty. After the men walked the foundress of the 
Ursulines,^^ having beside her three or [9] four Sav- 
age girls, clothed in the french fashion ; then fol- 
lowed all the daughters and wives of the Savages in 
their own costume, keeping their ranks perfectly. 
The Clergy came next ; and after them walked mon- 
sieur our Governor, and our Frenchmen, then our 
French women, without any other order than that 
suggested by humility. 

As soon as the Procession commenced its march, the 
Cannons thundered forth, inspiring these poor Sav- 
ages with a holy awe. We walked to the Hospital, 
and, when we had reached it, all the Savages knelt 
down on one side, the French on the other, and the 
Clergy in the middle. Then the Savages prayed all 
together for the King, thanking God for having 
given him a Dauphin. They likewise prayed for the 
Queen, for all the French, and afterwards for the 
whole of their own nation ; then they chanted the 
principal articles of our creed. This done, the Cler- 
gy, Monsieur the Governor, and the chief among our 
French and the Savages, entered the Chapel dedi- 
cated to the Blood of Jesus Christ, where they prayed 
for the same objects. On leaving the Hospital, we 
went straightway to the Ursulines. Passing before 
the Fort, the [10] Musketeers fired a noble salvo, and 
the Cannon again poured forth its thunder and flame. 


228 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.15 

pelle dediee au Sang de lefus-Chrifl, ou ils prierent 
pour les mefmes fujets. Au fortir de I'Hofpital, on 
tire droit aux Vrfulines: PalTant deuant le Fort, les 
[lo] Moufquetaires firent vne falue fort gentill.e, & le 
Canon redoubla f es f oudres & f es tonnerres ; nous gar- 
dafmes les mefmes ceremonies, les Religieufes chan- 
tants r Exaudiat, rauirent nos Sauuages, & refioiiirent 
fort nos Fran5ois, voyat que deux Choeurs de Vierges 
chantoient les Grandeurs de Dieu en ce nouueau 
monde. Au fortir des Vrfulines, nous tirafmes droit 
^ I'Eglife das la mefme modeftie, & dans le mefme 
ordre que nous en eftions partis. Nous rei'terafmes 
encore les prieres en langue fauuage h. la porte de la 
Chappelle, puis rentrans dans I'Eglife, nous termi- 
nafmes la ProcelTion, laquelle eftant finie, monfieur 
le Gouuerneur fit vn feftin a vne centaine de Sau- 
uages, ou enuiron ; nous prif mes auec nous les ^lyi qui 
eftoient veftus &, la royale, que nous fifmes manger 
en noftre maifon. Apres le difner, ils affifterent a 
Vefpres auec les mefmes liberalitez du Roy; quel- 
ques-vns d'eux n'auoient rien de fauuage que la cou- 
leur bazannee, leur port & leur demarche etoit pleine 
de granite & de bonne grace. Les Vefpres dites, 
nous les penfions congedier, mais I'vn d'eux me dit 
que les plus apparents des Sauuages affemblez dans 
noftre Salle, m'attendoient pour tenir confeil; ie [i i] 
m'y tranfporte pour les ecouter, voyant qu'ils en- 
troient en difcours, ie fis aduertir le R. P. Vimont 
de ce qui fe pafToit, lequel nous amena monfieur le 
Gouuerneur, & Madame de la Pelterie, qui ne fe pou- 
uoit faouler de voir la deuotion de ces bonnes gens. 
Tout le monde eftant alTis, vn Capitaine me parla en 
cette forte: Sois fage, Pere Le leune, demeure en 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1639 229 

We observed the same ceremonies; the Nuns sang 
the Exaudiat, to the delight of our Savages ; and it 
gave our French great joy to hear two Choirs of Vir- 
gins praising the Greatness of God in this new world. 
On leaving the Ursulines, we went directly to the 
Church, with the same modest demeanor and in 
the same order as when we started. We repeated the 
prayers in the savage tongue, at the door of the 
Chapel; then reentering the Church, the Procession 
ended. When it was over, monsieur the Governor 
gave a feast to about one hundred Savages. We took 
with us the six who were clad in the royal robes, 
and gave them to eat in our house. After dinner, 
they attended Vespers, wearing the same liberal gifts 
from the King. Some had nothing savage about 
them but their tanned color ; their demeanor and gait 
were full of dignity and real grace. After Vespers, 
we thought of sending them away ; but one of them 
told me that the chief men of the Savages were as- 
sembled in our Hall, and were waiting for me to hold 
a council. I [ii] went there to listen to them, and, 
seeing that they were beginning to make speeches, I 
sent word to Reverend Father Vimont of what was 
happening. He brought with him monsieur the 
Governor and Madame de la Pelterie, who could not 
sufficiently admire the devotion of these good peo- 
ple. All being seated, a Captain addressed me as 
follows: " Be wise, Father Le Jeune, keep quiet; let 
not thy mind wander, that thou mayest not lose a 
word of what I am about to say." " Ho, ho," I re- 
plied, following their custom. "It is not I who 
speak," said he, " it is all those whom thou seest sit- 
ting there, who have charged me to tell thee that we 
all desire to believe in God, and that we all wish to 


230 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.15 


repos, ne laiffe point egarer ton efprit, afin que tu ne 
perde rien de ce que ie vay dire. Ho, ho, luy fis-ie ! 
m'accommodant ^ leur fagon de faire; Ce n' eft pas 
moy, dit-il, qui parle, ce font tons ceux que tu vois 
Ik affis, lef quels m'ont donne charge de te dire que 
nous defirons tous croire en Dieu, & que nous fou- 
haittons d'eflre aydez k cultiuer la terre pour demeu- 
rer aupres de vous. Tu nous auois fait efperer qu'il 
te viendroit beaucoup de monde, & maintenant tu 
n'en as que fort peu. Sus done, dis k noftre Capi- 
taine qu'il Serine k noftre Roy, & qu'il luy dife ainfi; 
Tous les Sauuages vous remercient, ils s'eftonnent 
que vous penfiez en eux ; ils vous difent ; Prenez cou- 
rage, aydez nous puis que vous nous aymez, nous 
voulons nous arrefter, mais nous ne fgaurions faire 
des maifons comme les voftres, i^i vous ne [12] nous 
aydez: Dis k ton frere qui eft venu en ta place qu'il 
6criue auffi, ecris toy-mefme, afin qu'on croye que 
nous difons vray. Voila le ftile des Sauuages. Ce- 
lui-cy ayant finy fa harangue, vn autre prit la parole, 
& dit; Pere le leune, ie ne fuis pas de ce pays cy, 
voila ma demeure dans ces Montagues vers le Midy, 
il y a fort long temps que ie n'eftois venu h. Kebec : 
Ces hommes que tu vois m'eftans venu vifiter en mon 
pays, m'ont dit que tu faifois batir des maifons pour 
les Sauuages, que tu les aydois k cultiuer la terre : 
Ils m'ont demande fi ie ne te voulois point venir voir 
pour demeurer aupres de toy auec les autres : Ie fuis 
venu, i'ay veu que tu auois commence, mais que tu 
n'as pas fait beaucoup de chofes pour tant de per- 
fonnes que nous fommes. Sus, prend courage, tu 
dis de bonnes chofes, ne ments point, ie m'en vay 
encore dans les froidures de nos Montagues pour cet 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1639 231 

be helped to till the soil, so as to dwell near you. 
Thou didst lead us to hope that many people would 
come out to thee, and now thou hast but very few. 
Well, then, tell our Captain to write to our King and 
tell him this: ' All the Savages thank you; they 
wonder that you should think of them; they say to 
you: "Take courage; help us, since we love you. 
We wish to settle down but we cannot build houses 
like yours unless you [12] help us. " ' Tell thy brother 
who has come in thy place to write also ; write thyself, 
so that it may be known that we speak the truth." 
Such is the style of these Savages. This one having 
finished his harangue, another addressed me as fol- 
lows: " Father le Jeune, I am not of this country. 
There is my home, in those Mountains to the South. 
I had not come to Kebec for a very long time. These 
men whom thou seest came to visit me in my coun- 
try, and told me that thou wert causing houses to be 
built for the Savages, and that thou didst help them 
to till the soil. They asked me if I would not come 
to see thee, to dwell near thee with the others. I 
have come ; I have seen that thou hast commenced 
but that thou hast not done much for so many peo- 
ple as we are. Well, then, take courage, thou sayest 
good things; do not lie. I am going away again to 
the coldness of our Mountains, for this Winter. In 
the Spring, while there will still be snow on the 
ground, I shall come and see if thou dost tell the 
truth, and if thou hast men to help us to till the soil; 
so that we may no longer be like the beasts who seek 
their living in the woods." At these words all were 
touched with compassion. Monsieur the [13] Gov- 
ernor promised to do what he could, on his part. 
Reverend Father Vimont was almost impatient, see- 


232 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.15 

Hyuer, au Printemps qu'il y aura encore de la neige 
fur la terre, ie viendray voir fi tu dis vray, & fi tu as 
des hommes pour nous ayder ^ cultiuer la terre, afin 
que nous ne foyons plus comme les befles qui vont 
chercher leur vie dans les bois. A ces paroles tout 
le rtionde fut touche de compaffion: Monfieur le [13] 
Gouuerneur promit de faire ce qu'il pourroit de fon 
cofle, le Reuerend Pere Vimont eftoit quafi dans 
rimpatience, voyant que faute de fecours temporel, 
Sathan tenoit toufiours ces pauures ames fous fon 
Empire: Madame de la Pelterie s'ecria: Helas, que 
les depenfes d'vne feule collation de Paris, & d'vn 
feul ballet qui ne dure que deux ou trois heures fau- 
ueroient d'ames en ce pays-cy! ie n'ay guiereamene 
d'hommes de trauail, mais ie feray ce que ie pourray 
pour fecourir ces bonnes gens; Mon Pere, me dit- 
elle, alTeurez-les que fl ie les pouuois ayder de mes 
propres bras, ie le ferois de bon coeur, ie tafcheray 
de planter quelque chofe pour eux. Ces bons Sau- 
uages entendans fon difcours, fe mirent "k rire, difans 
que les bleds, qui feroient faits par des bras fi foibles, 
feroient trop tardifs : La conclufion fut qu'on f eroit 
vn effort pour les fecourir au Printemps. 

Ie les confolay merueilleufement, quand ie leur dis 
que le Capitaine qui auoit commence la Refidence de 
Saindt lofeph, auoit donn6 dequoy entretenir tou- 
fiours fix ouuriers pour eux, & que m^me apres fa 
mort, les ouuriers ne [14] laifferoient pas de trauail- 
ler: ils ne pouuoient pas comprendre comment cela 
fe pouuoit faire, ny pourquoy ces ouuriers n'alloient 
pas prendre tout ^ la fois I'argent qu'il laiffoit pour 
eux, ny comme vn homme mort pouuoit faire trauail- 
ler des hommes viuans; car ils ne f§auent que c'eft 


1638-39] LE J EUNE'S RELATION, jbsg 233 


ing that, through lack of temporal assistance, Satan 
ever keeps these poor souls under his Dominion. 
Madame de la Pelterie exclaimed : ' ' Alas ! how many- 
souls could be saved in this country with what is 
spent for a single repast in Paris, or for a single bal- 
let that lasts but two or three hours ! I have brought 
only a few laborers with me but I will do what I can 
to help these good people. " My Father," she said 
to me, " assure them that if I could help them with 
my own arms, I would cheerfully do so. I will try 
to plant something for them. ' ' These good Savages, 
hearing what she had said, began to laugh, saying 
that the corn planted by arms so weak would be too 
late. The conclusion reached was that an effort 
would be made to help them in the Spring. 

I consoled them wonderfully when I told them 
that the Captain who had commenced the Residence 
of Saint Joseph, had provided the means wherewith 
always to keep six workmen for them ; and that, even 
after his death the workmen would not [14] cease to 
work. They could not understand how this could be 
done, nor why these workmen could not at once take 
the money he left for them, nor how a dead man 
could make living men work ; for they know not what 
it is to have rents and revenues. Would to God that 
several persons of abundant wealth would imitate the 
devoutness of that great man ! There is no loss in 
exchanging earth for Heaven. 

At the same time loanchou, and his son who had 
been in France, were asked if they would not join 
the others. They replied that they would go and 
consult their people, and, if they wished to come up 
here, they would bring them. 

Now, I was glad to speak of the great things to be 


234 LES REL ATIONS PES /^SUITES [Vol.15 

de laiffer des rentes ny des reuenus. Pleut ^ Dieu 
que plufieurs perfonnes abondantes en richeffes vou- 
luffent prendre la deuotion de ce grand homme, ce 
n'eft pas perdre an change de donner la terre pour 
le Ciel. 

On demanda h. mefme temps h loanch^, & ^ fon 
fils qui auoit efte en France, s'ils ne vouloient point 
eftre de la partie, ils refpondirent qu'ils s'en iroient 
confulter leurs gens, que s'ils auoient de I'affedtion 
de monter qk haut, ils les ameneroient. 

Or ie fus bien aife de parler des grandeurs de la 
France deuant vn Sauuage qui en reuenoit. Repro- 
chez moy maintenant mes menfonges, leur difois-ie, 
demandez a voftre Compatriote fi ce que ie vous ay 
dit de la grandeur de noflre Roy, & de la beauts de 
noftre pais, n'eft pas veritable? & ne reuoquez plus 
[15] en doute ce que ie vous diray d'orefnauant. Ce 
bon Sauuage dif oit des merueilles ; mais felon fa por- 
tee, & quoy qu'il eut bien admire des cbofes, & entre 
autres le grand peuple de Paris, grand nombre de ro- 
tifferies, ce grand Saincl Chriftophle de Noftre Dame 
qui luy donna de la terreur a fon premier regard, les 
Caroffes qu'il appelloit des cabannes roulantes tirees 
par des Orignaux, fi eft-ce qu'il auoiioit que rien ne 
1 'auoit tant touche que le Roy, le voyant marcher le 
premier iour de I'an auec fes gardes, il regardoit at- 
tentiuement tous les foldats marchants en bon ordre, 
les Suiffes luy donnerent fort dans la veue, & leur 
tambour dans la tefte ; Au f ortir de 1^, il demeura le 
refte du iour fans parler, a ce que m'a dit le Pere qui 
I'accompagnoit, ne faifant que penfer a ce qu'il auoit 
veu. II racontoit tout cela a fes gens qui I'ecoutoient 
auec auidite. La piete du Roy nous feruit puiffam- 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i639 236 

seen in France in the presence of a Savage just re- 
turned from there. " Reproach me now with false- 
hood," I said to them; "ask your Countryman if 
what I told you of the greatness of our King and of 
the beauty of our country be not true? And do not 
any more call [15] in question what I shall hereafter 
tell you. * ' This good Savage related marvels, but ac- 
cording to his own range of understanding. Although 
he had greatly admired many things, — among others, 
the great multitude in Paris ; the great number of 
cookshops; the colossal Saint Christophle of Nostre 
Dame, which, at first sight, caused him much terror; 
the Coaches, which he called " rolling cabins drawn 
by Moose," — he admitted that nothing had so inter- 
ested him as the King, when he saw him on the first 
day of the year, walking with his guards. He atten- 
tively observed all the soldiers, marching in good 
order; the Swiss produced a great impression on his 
eyes, and the sound of their drum on his head. When 
he went away thence, he did not speak for the re- 
mainder of the day — so the Father who accompanied 
him told me — doing nothing but reflect upon what 
he had seen. He related all this to his people, who 
listened to him with avidity. The King's piety was 
of powerful assistance to us in doing honor to our 
faith ; for this good Canadian admitted that the first 
time he saw the King was in the house of prayer, 
where he prayed to Jesus as he is prayed to here. 
He also stated publicly [16] that the King had asked 
him if he had been baptized. This has helped us 
and will again help us to make these poor peoples un- 
derstand the esteem in which that great Prince holds 
the doctrine that we teach them. In fact, as soon 
as this Savage had seen the King, he said to the Fa- 


286 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.15 

ment pour honorer noflre creance, car ce bon Cana- 
dien confefia que la premiere fois qu'il veit le Roy, 
ce fut en la maifon de prieres, oti il prioit Iesvs 
comme on le fait prier icy. II dit encore publique- 
ment [i6] que le Roy luy auoit demande s'il eftoit 
baptize, ce qui nous feruit & feruira encore pour faire 
entendre k ces pauures peuples I'^tat que fait ce grand 
Prince de la dodtrine qu'on leur enf eigne. Bref, fi 
toft que ce Sauuage eut veu le Roy, il dit au Pere 
qui le conduifoit, allons nous en, i'ay tout veu, puif- 
que i'ay veu le Roy. 

Pour conclufion de ce Chapitre, nos Sauuages, no- 
tamment les Chreftiens, voyans que fa Maiefte leur 
auoit enuoy6 des habits k la Franfoife, fe determine- 
rent d'enuoyer vne petite robe k la Sauuage ^ Mon- 
feigneur le Daulphin. Comme ils me la prefenterent, 
ils eurent bien I'efprit de me dire, ce n'eft pas vn 
prefent que nous luy faifons, car il a bien d'autres 
richeiles que les noftres, mais c'eft vn meta8agan, 
vn petit ioiiet pour recreer fon petit Fils qui prendra 
peut-eftre plaifir de voir comme nos enfans font 
veftus. Nous enuoyons cefte petite robe ^ V. R. 
neantmoins comme la petite verolle attaque viuement 
nos Sauuages, ie ne f§ay s'il eft ^ propos de la pre- 
f enter, de peur qu'elle ne porte tant foit peu de mau- 
uais air auec foy; il eft [17] vray que ie I'auois entre 
mes mains deuant que le mal attaquaft ceux qui me 
I'ont confine, mais quand il s'agift d'vne perfonne li 
facree, il faut craindre de mille lieues loing. 


1638-39] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, idjg 237 

ther who conducted him : ' * Let us go away. I have 
seen all, since I have seen the King." 

To conclude this Chapter ; our Savages, especially 
the Christians, seeing that his Majesty had sent them 
clothes in the French fashion, determined to send a 
little dress, such as is worn by Savages, to Monsei- 
gneur the Dauphin. When they handed it to me, 
they had the wit to say : "It is not a present that 
we make him, for his riches are far greater than 
ours ; but it is a metawagan — a small toy to amuse 
his little Son, who may perhaps take pleasure in see- 
ing how our children are dressed. ' ' We send this 
little dress to Your Reverence. However, as small- 
pox greatly prevails among our Savages, I do not 
know whether it is advisable to present it, for fear 
that it may carry even the slightest contagion with 
it. It is [17] true that I had it in my possession 
before the disease broke out among those who gave it 
to me ; but, when so sacred a personage is concerned, 
a danger even a thousand leagues distant is to be 
dreaded. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL XV 

XXX 

For particulars of this document, see Vol. XIV. 
XXXI 

Fran9ois du Peron's letter to his brother and fel- 
low-priest, Joseph Imbert du Peron, is dated April 
27, 1639, from the Residence of the Conception, or 
Ossossane, in the Huron country. The original MS. 
is preserved in the MSS. Soc. Jes. We follow the 
version in Carayon's Premiere Mission, pp. 167-192. 

XXXII 

The original MS. of Simon le Moyne's letter to 
the Cure of St. Martin at Beauvais, — dated at the 
same place as the preceding letter, May 25, 1639, — is 
the property of The Burrows Brothers Company, 
Cleveland, Ohio. This is, so far as we are aware, 
the first publication of the document. 

XXXIII 

The letter of Joseph- Marie Chaumonot to the gen- 
eral of the order, at Rome, was written in Italian, 
being dated at Quebec, August 7, 1639. The orig- 
inal MS. is preserved in the MSS. Soc. Jes. We fol- 
low Father Felix Martin's French version (made in 
1858) in Carayon's Premiere Mission, pp. 193, 194. 

XXXIV 
In reprinting the text of Le Jeune's Relation of 


^40 LES RELA TIONS DES J&SUITES 

1639, we follow a copy of the first edition in the Lenox 
Library, known there as the Lamoignon copy. It 
is generally referred to as " H. 74, " because described 
in Harrisse's Notes, no. 74. The " Privilege," which 
is signed " Par le Roy en Confeil. Ceberet," is 
dated December 14, 1639, ^ind the " Permiffion." 
with the signature " Iacqves Dinet," is dated the 
20th of the same month. 

Collation of first edition: Title, with verso blank, i 
leaf; " Extraict du Priuilege du Roy," p. (i); " Per- 
mifsion du P. Prouincial," p. (i); " Table des Cha- 
pitres " to the first part, pp. (2); Table to the second 
part, with heading " Relation de ce qui s'eft paffe 
dans le Pais des Hurons en I'annee 1638. & 1639.," 
pp. (2); Le Jeune's Relation, pp. i - 166 (misnumbered 
116); Lalemant's Huron Relation: Half-title, with 
verso blank, i leaf; text, pp. 1-174, followed by one 
blank leaf. The signatures are : a in four, A - K in 
eights, L in four, and a-1 in eights. The pagination 
is quite erratic; pp. 80, 81, 125, 130, 143, and 166 of 
the first part are mispaged 50, 71, 225, 30, 145, and 
116, respectively; and in some copies the 3 of pp. 
43. 53> and 73 is blurred, due, evidently, to " bites " 
of the frisket. In the second part, pp. 31, "j"], and 146 
are misnumbered 13, ^6, and 148, respectively. The 
first leaf of sig. G is misprinted C, and Chapter xi. of 
Part I. is misnumbered viii. 

There is another, a second, edition of this Relation 
of 1639 in which the line-endings and wording of the 
title-page agree with those of the first edition ; but 
the entire volume is a reset, and a comparison re- 
veals typographical differences on every page with 
respect to contractions, line-endings, head-ornaments, 
mispagination, and otherwise. This edition is gen- 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XV 


241 


erally referred to in catalogues as " H. 75," because 
noted in Harrisse's Notes, no. 75. We have discov- 
ered two issues of the second edition, which are 
described below. 

Collation of second edition, first issue: Title, with 
verso blank, i leaf; "Table des Chapitres " to the 
first part, pp. (2); Table to the second part, with 
heading " Relation," etc., pp. (2); Le Jeune's Rela- 
tion, pp. I -166; Lalemant's Huron Relation: Half- 
title, with verso blank, i leaf; text, pp. 1-174; 
" Extraict du Priuilege du Roy," signed " Par le 
Roy en /on Confeil," p. (i); " Permifsion," p. (i). 
The signatures are : d in three {d^ having been can- 
celled for reasons described below), A-K in eights, 
L in four, and a-1 in eights. Page 21 of the first 
part, and pp. 23 and 128 of the second part, are mis- 
paged 2, 2, and 218, respectively; and Chapter xi. of 
Part I. is misnumbered ii. 

The second issue agrees very largely with the 
first; but several signatures in Le Jeune's Relation 
have been reset, and we give a few examples in elu- 
cidation. 


SECOND EDITION 



B- 

F] 

[RST 

Issue. 

Sig. 



p- 

18, 

1. 

3: ' 

honnefle 

p- 

23. 

1. 

2: ' 

donner" 

Sig. 

c- 

- 



p- 

35, 

1. 

24: 

' ' France ' 

p- 

42. 

1. 

18: 

' ' out ' ' 

Sig. 

D- 

- 



p- 

Sig. 

49. 
E- 

1. 

15: 

"caufons 

p- 

65. 

1. 

15: 

"loy" 


Second Issue. 


Sig. B- 
p. 18, 1. 3: "honefle " 
p. 23, 1. 2: "dofier" 

Sig. C- 
p. 35, 1. 24: 'Frace" 
p. 42, 1. 18: "oiiy" 

Sig. D- 

p. 49, 1. 15: "cauf5s" 

Sig. E — 
p. 65, 1. 15: "Loy" 


242 LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES 

Page 2 1 in Part I. of the second issue is paged 
correctly — the page being part of sig. B which was 
reset. The Quebec reprint, vol. i. (1858), seems to 
have followed a copy of the first issue of the second 
edition. 

In the British Museum there is a copy of the sec- 
ond edition (H. 75) which has two different leaves, 
each with a Permission and Privilege. The first, 
which follows the title-page, forms sig. d^ , and is 
lacking in most copies. It was cancelled by the print- 
ers because the Permission was dated erroneously, 
March 26, 1638. It is in a different setting of type 
than the other leaf, which comes at the end of the 
volume, and which agrees with the Lenox copies in 
having the Permission dated December 20, 1639. 
In the Lenox copies the stub of the cancelled leaf 
(sig. d.^) is still visible. The John Carter Brown col- 
lection of Providence has also a copy with the can- 
celled leaf. 

Mr. James Lenox had noted a copy of H. 75 in 
Paris which has " at the beginning a leaf with half- 
title before the full title, completing the signature 
there ; ' ' but we have not been able to verify this 
statement. 

Copies of the 1639 Relation have been sold or 
priced as follows: Leclerc (1878), item 780, priced 
at 160 francs; Harrassowitz (1882), priced at 125 
marks; O'Callaghan (1882), no. 12 18, sold for $12.50, 
and had cost him a like amount; Dufosse, of Paris, 
priced (189 1 -94) at 125 to 150 francs; Dodd, Mead 
& Co. (1896), a cropped copy offered for $35. 

Copies in libraries: Lenox (first edition, and two 
issues of second edition); Brown (two editions); 
British Museum (two editions); Harvard (first edi- 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XV 243 


tion); Laval University, Quebec (second edition); 
Library of Parliament, Ottawa (second edition) ; and 
Biblioth^que Nationale, Paris. 


NOTES TO VOL. XV 

(Figures in parentheses, following number of note, refer to pages 
of English text.) 

1 (p. 41). — See Br^beuf 's detailed and picturesque description of 
the Feast of the Dead (vol. x., pp. 279-307). Cf. Sagard's account 
of this solemnity ( Voy. Hurons, part i., chap, xxii.); also Yarrow's 
Mortuary Customs among N. Amer. Indians (Smithsonian Insti- 
tution, 1880). 

2 (p. 57). — Chief among the offensive weapons of the North Ameri- 
can Indians were the bow and arrow. Though still used to some 
extent, among various tribes, they have been mainly superseded by 
the firearms of the whites. 

The bows used among various tribes are divided by Mason into 
three classes, — "self," or plain (made of one piece), backed (with 
sinew or veneers), and compound (of two or more pieces of wood 
fastened together). Those of the first class characterize the region 
east of the Rocky Mountains and south of Hudson's Bay. The ma- 
terial of the bow was generally wood, of the hardest and most elas- 
tic kind obtainable in any given area, — oak, ash, hickory, etc. ; or, in 
Canada, maple, birch, spruce, cedar, and even osier. The elasticity 
and toughness were increased, especially in the softer kinds of wood, 
by various processes — scraping, rubbing down, dipping in oil, and 
heating before a fire, and sometimes boiling. The bowstrings were 
made, sometimes from fibers of hemp or similar plants ; sometimes 
from strips of rawhide twisted together, or intestines of animals; 
but most often from sinews. Usually, the Indian wore on the left 
wrist, as a guard against the bowstring, a band of rawhide two or 
three inches in width. 

The arrow was composed of a shaft of reed or wood, feathered at 
one end, and armed at the other with a head — sometimes of bone, 
horn, or wood; sometimes of shell, or copper; but perhaps oftenest 
of flint, quartz, or slate ; for these, after the coming of white men, 
were often substituted iron arrow-points of European manufacture. 
These arrowheads were sometimes barbed, and sometimes serrated. 
All these parts were bound together with the sinews of animals, 
which, shrinking as they became dry, held all firmly in place. In 
some cases, pine-pitch was also used for the same purpose. 


246 LES RELA TJONS DES j£SUITES 


The arrows, and sometimes the bow also, were kept in a case, or 
quiver, usually of skin — but sometimes of cedar wood ; these quivers 
were often trimmed with fur, embroidered with beads or porcupine 
quills, or painted in various colors and designs. See Mason's 
"North American Bows, Arrows, and Quivers," copiously illus- 
trated, in Smithsonian Report, 1893, pp. 631-679. Cf. Champlain's 
illustrations of the arms carried by the Ottawas, in Voyages 
(Laverdiere's ed.), p. 513; also Lafitau's description of Iroquois 
weapons {Mceurs des Sauvages, t. ii., p. 196). 

3 (P- 79)- — For account of the game of straws, see vol. x., note 5; 
cf. Davis's monograph on "Indian Games," va. Bulletin of Essex 
Institute, vol, 17. (Salem, Mass., 1885), pp. 89-144. 

4 (p. 89). — The Huron cabins are thus described by Champlain in 
\t\t {Voyages, Laverdiere's ed., p. 562): "Their cabins are fash- 
ioned like arbors or bowers, covered with the bark of trees ; these 
are in length 25 to 30 toises, more or less, and six in width, leaving 
through the middle a passage ten or twelve feet wide, which extends 
from one end to the other. On each side of this passage is a sort of 
bench, 4 feet in height, on which they sleep in Summer, to avoid the 
annoyance of the multitudes of fleas ; in winter, they sleep below, on 
mats, close to the fire, as being much warmer than upon the 
bench, . , . At the end of these cabins is a space where they 
keep their corn, which they place in large casks, made of the bark 
of trees. In the middle of their lodging are suspended pieces of 
wood, on which they place their garments, provisions, and other 
articles, for fear of the mice, which are very numerous. In many 
a cabin, there will be twelve fires, which mean twenty-four families ; 
the smoke reeks from these in earnest, and, as a result, many per- 
sons receive therefrom serious injuries to the eyes, . . , there 
being no window or opening, save that at the top of their cabins, by 
which the smoke escapes." Sagard {Canada, p. 248), appropriates 
bodily Champlain's account, adding a few minor details, the chief of 
which is this: " These cabins have neither chamber nor partition to 
hinder a view from one end to the other, and the sight of whatever 
takes place therein ; nevertheless they all dwell there in peace, with- 
out any confusion or quarrels, each in the part that belongs to him, 
which is neither enclosed, nor shut with locks or keys," Cf, Bre- 
beuf's account of the Huron dwellings (vol, viii., pp. 105-109); and 
Parkman's graphic description *(yi?j«//'.y, pp. xxvi, — xxviii,). See 
also chapter on ' ' Houses of Indian Tribes North of New Mexico, ' ' 
in Morgan's Houses and House-Life of American Aborigines 
(U. S. Geog. and Geol. Surv., 1881), pp. 104- 131. 

5 (p. 127). — For sketch of Paraguayan missions, see vol. xii., 
note 28, 


NOTES TO VOL. XV 247 

6 (p. 151). — Jerome Lalemant, brother of Charles (vol. iv., note 
20), was born at Paris, April 27, 1593; and Oct. 20, 1610, he there 
entered the Jesuit novitiate. His student life was spent at the col- 
leges of Pont-a-Mousson, Clermont, and Rouen, with intervals 
devoted to the duties of instructor, at Verdun (1615- 16) and Amiens 
(1616-19). After completing his probation, he filled various 
responsible positions in the colleges — at Clermont, as minister 
(1627-29), and spiritual director (1636-38); and at Blois, as rector 
(1632-36). He was sent to Canada in 1638, as superior of the Huron 
mission, where he remained seven years. In September, 1645, he 
returned to Quebec, having been appointed superior of the mis- 
sions in New France, which post he held until November, 1650 (when 
he made a journey to France, to obtain aid for the needy colonists 
and straitened religious orders of Quebec). According to Laver- 
diere (Quebec ed. of Relations, p. vii.) Lalemant was made rector of 
the college at La Fleche, in 1656; but, after three years, he returned 
to Canada with Mgr. Laval (June, 1659). ^^^ September following, 
he was again appointed superior of the missions of New France, in 
which authority he continued six years. He died at Quebec, Jan. 
26, 1673. 

Lalemant wrote the Relations of the Huron missions, 1639-43; 
and those of New France, 1646-48 and 1660-64. 

7 (p. 155). — For sketch of Petun tribe, see vol. v., note 18; of 
Neutrals, vol. viii.. itote 41; of Cheveux-Releves, vol. xiv.. note 9, 
The Sauteurs (Ojibwas) were visited in 1641 by Jogues and Raym- 
bault (vol. xi., note 16). 

Gens puants : the French appellation of a tribe called, by the Al- 
gonkins, Ouinipigou (modernized as Winnebago). Le Jeune thus 
explains the origin of the name {Relation of 1640, chap. x. ) : " Some 
Frenchmen call them the Nation of Stinkards \^Puans\ because the 
Algonquin word ouinipeg signifies bad-smelling water, and they 
apply this name to the water of the salt sea, — so that these peoples 
are called Ouinipigou, because they come from the shores of a sea 
about which we have no knowledge ; consequently they ought not 
to be called the nation of Stinkards, but the nation of the sea. ' ' — Cf . 
Butterfield's Disc, of N. W., p. 38. Shea was the first to identify 
the gens de mer, of the Relations, with the Winnebagoes ; see his 
Discovery of Mississippi Valley (N. Y., 1853), pp. xx., xxi. 

The Winnebago tribe — of Dakota stock, and thus tribally isolated 
among their Algonkin'neighbors — inhabited the Fox River valley of 
Eastern Wisconsin, and the shores of Green Bay. They were 
known to early writers, by report, as engaged in trade with the 
Canadian tribes. Champlain's map of 1632 locates the Nation des 
Puans on a lake of the same name, northwest of Lake Huron ; they 


248 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES 

may have been thus placed only through ignorance of the region 
west of Lake Huron, — or Lac des Puans may have been intended 
for Lake Winnipeg, the modern form of ouinipeg. Sagard {Canada, 
p. 201) mentions the Cheveux-Releves (Ottawas) as enterprising 
traders, whose voyages extended as far as the Nation des Puants, a 
distance of more than 500 leagues. Du Creux's map names Lake 
Michigan Magnus Lacus algonquinorum, seu Lacus Foetentiutn, 
"the Great Lake of the Algonquins, or Lake of Stinkards." The 
first white man to visit the Winnebagoes, so far as known, was Jean 
Nicolet (vol. viii., note 29), possibly in 1634-35. Brebeuf tells us 
(vol. X., p. 83, and note 6) that in 1636 the Aweatsiwaenrrhonons 
(the Huron equivalent for gens puants) were on hostile terms with 
theAmikoues, " having broken the treaty of peace" that had been 
made (presumably through Nicolet's agency) between those tribes. 
They were also frequently at war with the Hurons and other tribes ; 
and the Relation of 1671 (chap, v.) states that the Winnebagoes had 
at one time been almost exterminated by the Illinois. 

In 1669, the Jesuits began their labors with this tribe, the mission 
of St. Francis Xavier (vol. i., note 57) being founded by AUouez. 
This mission was sustained during more than half a century ; among 
its laborers were Jean Andre, Antoine Silvy, Charles Albanel, Jean 
Enjalran, and Jean Chardon. 

8 (p. 157). — Cf. Brebeuf 's chapter on the Huron language (vol. x., 
pp. 117-123). 

9 (p. 157). — The Petit Chatelet (apart of which was used, after 
1398, as a prison) was a building at the southern end of the Petit Pont, 
in Paris, of very early date, and originally erected as a fortress to 
command the bridge. It was washed away by a flood in the Seine, 
Dec. 20, 1296; but in 1369 was rebuilt by Charles V., "for the pur- 
pose of restraining the turbulence of the scholars of the university, 
who were frequently in a state of insurrection." This fortress was, 
in 1402, assigned to the prevot of Paris as his residence; in 1782, it 
was demolished. — See History of Paris (London ; Whittaker, 1827), 
vol. ii., pp. loi, 102, 365. 

10 (p. 159). — For values of furs at that period, see vol. iv., p. 207, 
2Lr\A. note'_\(). .7 

11 (p. 165). — Paul de Barry (1587- 1661), successively rector of the 
Jesuit colleges at Aix and Nimes, and provincial of Lyons, was the 
author of numerous popular religious books, mostly devotional. The 
earliest of these was Le Paradis ovvert a Philagie par cetit devo- 
tions d, la Mere de Dieu (Lyons, 1636). According to Sommer- 
vogel, this book reached its seventeenth edition by 1665 ; and a 
"twentieth reprint" was issued at Paris, in 1868. 

It is probable, however, that the book mentioned in the text is 


NOTES TO VOL. XV 249 


De Barry's La solitvde de Philagie, ov Vadresse povr s'occvper 
avec profit aux exercices spirituels (Lyons, 1638),— a work intended 
for the use of priests in their annual retreat. This book also was 
highly popular ; Sommervogel mentions at least eleven editions is- 
sued before 1692, besides translations into the Italian, Dutch, Polish, 
and Bohemian languages. A "new edition, revised and corrected," 
was issued at Paris (1854) and Le Puy (1859). 

12 (p. 169).— For location of Scanonaenrat (St. Michel), see vol. 

viii., note 38. 

13 (p. 181).— Regarding the superstition of the "thunder-bird," 

see vol. X., note 3. 

14 (p. 181).— This is but a variant of the superstition mentioned in 
vol. ix., note 23,— originating in the mystery which, to the mind of 
the savage, has always surrounded the generative and reproductive 
processes in nature, which therefore, like all other phenomena that 
are unintelligible to him, inspire him with fear and dread. Cf. 
Brinton's Myths of New World {^r^ ed.), pp. i73> 174-'!' '.'..' 'I. 

15 (p. 183).— This date is a misprint, and should be March 9, since 
on that date Ash Wednesday fell in the year 1639, Easter occurring 

April 24. 

16 (p. 183).— The " cow " referred to in the text was doubtless the 
moose (vol. ii., note 34), which, like the buflfalo, was often called 
"wild cow" by the early explorers (vol. ix., note 33). , ., , 

17 (p. 189).— For sketch of Du Peron, see vol. xiv., note 17. 

18 (p. 195).— For sketch of Le Moyne, see vol. xiv., note 16. 

■^19 (p. 199).— Barthelemy Vimont, born Jan. 17, 1594. became a 
Jesuit novice in November, 161 3. His studies were pursued at La 
Fleche (1615-18) and Clermont (1622-26). the intervening time be- 
ing spent at Rennes and Eu as an instructor. . At the; latter .college 
he acted as procurer during 1626-29; then set out for Canada (June, 
1629) with Captain Charles Daniel (vol. iv., note 46), and spent a 
year at the latter's post of Ste. Anne, in Cape Breton Island, as 
chaplain of the garrison, also laboring with the savages of that 
vicinity, as opportunity afforded. In this work he was soon joined 
by Vieuxpont (vol. iv., note 45) ; but both were recalled to France in 
1630. Vimont then spent eight years at the college in Vannes, in 
various capacities, and one year as superior of the Jesuit residence 
at Dieppe. Assigned to the Canadian mission, as its superior, he 
arrived at Quebec, Aug. i, 1639. Replaced in this office by Jerome 
Lalemant (Sept., 1645), Vimont continued to officiate at Quebec, 
Beauport, and other St. Lawrence settlements, also taking a promi- 
nent part in the administration of the mission's affairs. In October, 
1647, he went to France, "to attend to the affairs of the Ursulines, 
the Hospital Nuns, and the Iroquois ; and to settle the validity of 


260 LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES 

the marriage sacraments, which some deny to us, according to let- 
ters received this year from France" {Journ. des JSsuites, p. 93). 
This mission performed, he came back to Quebec in August, 1648 ; 
and, having completed a score of years in the Canadian field, finally 
returned to France in October, 1659. -^s superior, Vimont wrote 
the Relations of the years 1640-45. 

20 (p. 199). — Antoine (Antoine Joseph, according to Sommer- 
vogel) Poncet de la Riviere was born at Paris, May 10, 1637; at the 
age of nineteen he entered, in that city, the Jesuit novitiate, having 
already made a brilliant record as a student in rhetoric and philoso- 
phy. He was an instructor at the college of Orleans in 1631-34, and 
carried on his theological studies successively at Clermont (1634-35), 
Rome (1635-38), and Rouen (1638-39). In 1638, Poncet met Madame 
de la Peltrie (vol. xi., note 4), who through his agency became 
acquainted with Marie of the Incarnation, and chose the latter as 
head of the Ursuline convent at Quebec; and he accompanied the 
nuns on their voyage to Canada, in the summer of 1639. Poncet 
went immediately to the Huron mission, but remained there only 
one year, when he returned to Quebec. In the early part of 1642, 
he was at Three Rivers, as assistant to Buteux ; in July following, 
he was at Montreal, and baptized the first Indian converted there. 
He remained in charge of the Montreal parish till the spring of 1643, 
and apparently spent the remainder of his Canadian term of service 
at Quebec and other St. Lawrence posts. In August, 1653, he was 
captured by a marauding band of Iroquois, who took him to their 
villages and cruelly tormented him. They decided, however, to 
spare his life, — whereupon, he so eflEectually labored with them that 
they agreed to conclude a peace with the French, and in the follow- 
ing October carried Poncet back to Three Rivers. After his return, 
he ofiSciated at Quebec until September, 1657, when, becoming per- 
sonally involved in the controversy between the Jesuits and the Sul- 
pitian Abbe de Queylus, he was sent back to France. The Jesuit 
explanation of this affair is given by Rochemonteix {/esuztes, vol. 
ii., pp. 216-220); the Sulpitian, by Faillon {Col. Fran., vol. ii., pp. 
282, 290-292). After Poncet 's return to France, he was at first a 
preacher, then penitentiary at Lorette. In 1665, he went to Mar- 
tinique, where he died, June 18, 1675. 

21 (p. 219). — For explanation of this phrase, see vol. xiv., note 15. 

22 (p. 221).— See description of similar festivities at Quebec, on St. 
Joseph's day, in vol. xi.. pp. 67-71. 

23 (p. 227). — For sketch of Madame de la Peltrie, see vol. xi., 
note 4. Regarding the Ursuline nuns, see vol. viii. , note 64. 





mMam'?mu'j>^' 


IB^B'"^ 


.#*^>4 



