Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 11: Hurons and Quebec, 1636-1637
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1898 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits11jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits11jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits11jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 11 of 73.

---






THE JESUIT RELATIONS 

AND 

ALLIED DOCUMENTS 


VOL. XI 



The edition consists of sev- 
en hundred and fifty sets 
all numbered 


No. 


21L 



int f'KOKtKTY Of 

/.y^i'Z) "^HE LAW SOCIET\ 

The Jesuit Relations and Allied Document^ 


Travels and Explorations 

OF THE Jesuit Missionaries 

IN New France 

1610-1791 

THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES ; ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 

EDITED BY 

REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 


Vol. XI 

HURONS AND QUEBEC: 1636-1637 


CLEVELAND: Zbc asuttows J3rotber0 
Company, publishers, mdcccxcviii 


Copyright, 1898 

BY 

The Burrows Brothers Co 


ALL. RIGHTS RESERVED 


The Imperial Press, Cleveland 


EDITORIAL STAFF 


Editor 


Translators 


Assistant Editor 


Reuben Gold Thwaites 
FiNLON Alexander 
Percy Favor Bicknell 
William Frederic Giese 
Crawford Lindsay 
William Price 
[ Hiram Allen Sober 
Emma Helen Blair 


Bibliographical Adviser Victor Hugo Paltsits 


CONTENTS OF VOL XI 


Preface to Volume XI . . . 

Documents: — 

XXVII. Epistola ad R. P. Mutium Vitelleschi, 
Prsepositum Generalem Societatis 
Jesu, Romae. Joannes de BrSeuf; 
Ihonatiria [1636, ca.'\ 

XXVIII. Epistola ad R. P. Mutium Vitelleschi, 
Praepositum Generalem Societatis 
Jesu, Romae. Joannes de Brdbeuf; 
Ihonatiria, May 20, 1637 
XXIX. Relation de ce qui s'est passe en la 
Novvelle France, en I'annee 1637. 
[First installment, consisting of 
Chaps, i.-ix. of Part I.] Paul le 
Jeune; Cap Rouge, August 31, 1637 23 

Bibliographical Data : Volume XI . . 271 

Notes . . . . . 275 


12 



ILLUSTRATIONS TO VOL. XI 


I. Photographic facsimile of title-page, Le 

Jeune's Relation of 1637 . . .26 

II. Photographic facsimile of fireworks illustra- 
tion, from Le Jeune's Relation of 1637 

Facing 66 


PREFACE TO VOL. XI 


Following is a synopsis of the documents contained 
in the present volume : 

XXVII. Br^beuf, the superior of the Huron mis- 
sion, writes a brief letter from Ihonatiria, in the Hu- 
ron country, to his general at Rome, Vitelleschi, 
outlining the progress of the Huron mission thus 
far, and asking for more laborers in this great field ; 
the prime qualifications for effective service are, un- 
varying gentleness, and unshaken patience. The 
letter is without date, but bears internal evidence of 
having been written in 1636. 

XXVIII. This second letter of Br^beuf to the 
general, dated at Ihonatiria, May 20, 1637, is a sim- 
ilar special report upon the condition of the Huron 
missions. The more detailed Huron Relation of 
the year, by Le Mercier, was closed at Ihonatiria a 
month later (June 21), and forwarded to the Quebec 
superior, Le Jeune. In his letter, Br^beuf mentions 
two hindrances experienced in their work during the 
past year, — the ravages of a pestilence (apparently 
the smallpox) to which many Indians had suc- 
cumbed, but from which the whites had fortunately 
recovered ; and the reports, spread by their enemies, 
that the disease had been introduced by the French, 
which at first were easily believed by the credulous 
tribesmen. However, upon the mitigation of the 


PREFACE TO VOL. XI 


scourge, the missionaries had regained their influ- 
ence, and many conversions now occur. Over two 
hundred have been baptized, and many of the na- 
tives are under regular instruction. A new mission 
station, that of the Immaculate Conception, has been 
erected at Ossossand (La Rochelle) ; and Huron boys 
are being sent to the seminary at Quebec. He names 
his five co-workers, who are studying the native lan- 
guage, and especially praises the aptitude of Gamier 
therein. 

XXIX. The Relation of 1637 is, as usual, a com- 
posite; see, for particulars. Bibliographical Data for 
the present volume. Le Jeune's Relation proper, as 
superior of the Jesuit missions in New France (Part 
I. of the document), was closed on board the ship 
" Ste. Marie," at Cap Rouge; in the present volume, 
we give chaps, i.-ix. thereof, reserving the rest of 
Part I. for Vol. XII., and Part II. (the annual Huron 
Relation) ioT Vols. XIII., XIV. The following syn- 
opsis covers the portion published in this volume : 

The superior opens his Relation by describing the 
sympathy and assistance bestowed upon the Cana- 
dian mission by its friends in Europe. The Pope 
has sent them plenary indulgences for certain feast 
days, and asks the general of the order for a Rela- 
tion of the progress made by the mission. Mont- 
magny, the new governor of Canada, appointed as 
successor to Champlain, is one of the Knights of 
Malta, who have consented to defend New France. 
Several persons are thanked with heartfelt gratitude, 
who have given financial aid to the mission. The 
superior reports that prayers innumerable are being 
uttered in France, for the success of the cause. Nuns 
are planning to come hither, — the Ursulines to teach 


PREFACE TO VOL. XI 


the Indian girls, the Hospital nuns to nurse the sick. 
The writer then praises the good conduct of the 
French colonists, and their lively interest in the re- 
ligious services held by the missionaries. A vivid 
and ingenuous description is given of the fireworks 
with which was celebrated the feast of ' ' the glorious 
Patriarch, Saint Joseph," — whereat the simple sav- 
ages were filled with astonishment and delight. The 
new governor avails himself of this opportunity to 
warn the natives that " the French are more power- 
ful than the demons, and command the fire." The 
peace and good order prevailing in the colony are 
largely ascribed to the piety and ability of the gov- 
ernor, who is a firm friend of the missionaries, and 
treats the Indians with the utmost kindness. 

Le Jeune then enters upon his customary recital of 
the conversions and baptisms that have occurred dur- 
ing the year, — the latter numbering over three hun- 
dred, counting those in the Huron country. Again, 
too, he urges strongly the importance — not only for 
their conversion, but for the civilization and develop- 
ment of the country — of rendering the nomadic 
tribes stationary. He devotes much space to an ac- 
count of the debates upon religious doctrines, held 
between the missionaries and the Indians, and the 
instruction which the latter thus receive. Promi- 
nent among the natives is a chief named Makheabich- 
tichiou, who shows many signs of conversion, and 
whom the missionaries hope soon to receive into the 
fold of the church. The other savages have at least 
become more friendly and attentive, though but few 
are willing to give up their old superstitions and 
customs. The Fathers find, however, great consola- 
tion and encouragement in the Indian children who 


PREFACE TO VOL. XI 


attend the mission school ; ' ' neither snow, nor wind, 
nor cold prevents them from coming, ' ' and they are 
apt and interested pupils. Much to his surprise, the 
superior finds that " it is incomparably easier to tame 
and instruct the little girls than the boys." With 
both, but especially with the girls, a strong incentive 
to progress is found in the example of the French 
children, who are taught in the same school, and of 
whom the Indian youth are fond. 

The missionaries have to meet many difficulties, — 
the sale of liquor to the Indians, slyly practiced by 
certain Frenchmen ; the slanders and misrepresenta- 
tions of disaffected savages ; the jealousy of the medi- 
cine men, with whom they are in frequent and hostile 
collision; and the constant rage and opposition of 
the devil, whose kingdom they have so resolutely 
invaded. But they have great faith that, in the 
strength of God, they will eventually overcome all 
these enemies, and cause New France to become a 
province of his kingdom. 


R. G. T. 


Madison, Wis., November, 1897. 


XXVII -XXVIII 

Two Letters by Jean de Brebeuf, to the 
General of the Order 

XXVII.— Ihonatiria [1636, ca.] 
XXVIII. — Ihonatiria, May 20, 1637 


Source : We follow Father Martin's apographs (now in 
the Archives of St. Mary's College, Montreal) of the original 
Latin ex MSS. Soc. Jes. 


LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vou 11 


Epistola p. Joannis de Brebeuf ad R. P. Mutium 

Vitelleschi, Praepositum Generalem 

Societatis Jesu, Romse. 

r\. PC. 

Plane ut intelligeret V^ P. ea quae sunt hujus 
sedis quam hie fiximus apud Hurones Novse Franciae 
feu Canadiae populos, hujus et praecedentis anni rela- 
tiones ad earn mittendse fuissent ; verum quia existimo 
[a] R. P. N. P^' curatum iri ut mittantur, dicam tan- 
turn non eniguam [sc. exiguam] esse spem magnae 
aliquando frugis animarum in hac missione percipi- 
enda[e]. oppidatim vivunt Hurones et non palantes 
more ferarum aut etiam plurimorum aliorum barba- 
rorum habent omnino viginti oppida quorum aliqua 
funt fortissimis moenibus ligneis septa. Mutant ali- 
quando sedes nempe cum ligna ad focum non amplius 
suppetunt aut cum terra jamdudum culta, aegre suos 
fructus suos [.yr. suis] praestat. Colunt enim agros, 
ex quibus colligunt triticum Indicum, fabas quas ali- 
qui vocant Turricas {sc. Turcicas], cucurbitas, casque 
plurimas et optimas ac praeterea tabacum. Universa 
regio aut venatione aut piscatione abundat, atque 
adeo habent Hurones apud se unde vitam si non 
laute, ut [.f^. at] sufficienter et salubriter sustineant; 


1636-37] BRJ&BEUF TO THE GENERAL 


Letter of Father Jean de Brebeuf to the Very 

Reverend Father Mutius Vitelleschi, General 

of the Society of Jesus, at Rome. 

VERY Reverend Father, 
The peace of Christ. 
In order that Your Paternity might have full 
knowledge of matters pertaining to this house which 
we have established among the Huron peoples of 
New France or Canada, relations of this and the 
preceding years should have been sent to you ; but, 
because I think that Our Reverend Father Provincial 
will see that these are sent, I will merely say that 
we have good hope of some day reaping a large 
harvest of souls at this mission. The Hurons live 
in towns, not wandering about after the manner of 
wild animals, or even like many other savages. 
They have in all twenty towns, some of which are 
enclosed by very strong wooden walls. They change 
their abode sometimes — certainly when there is no 
longer sufficient wood for their fires, or when the 
land, long tilled, produces scanty crops. For they 
cultivate the fields, from which they gather Indian 
com, — the grain which some call Turkish,^ — abun- 
dance of excellent pumpkins, and also tobacco. All 
this region abounds in game and fish; and so the 
Hurons have at hand the means of supplying a liv- 
ing, if not luxurious, yet adequate and healthful; 
and they sell to others. They are not so uncivilized 
as not to be endowed with excellent sense and judg- 


8 LES RELATIONS DBS j£SUITES [Vol.11 

aliisq. divendant. Non sunt adeo barbari quin Opti- 
mo sensu et judicio natural! pr[a]editi sint, atque 
adeo fere omnes. Quod spectat ad nostrae fidei mys- 
teria quanquam illis sint auditu plane nova tamen, 
ea [sc. eis] non contradicunt, non irrident, [ea] non 
spernunt, imo potius mirantur, laudant, approbant 
ut \sc. at] non longe sibi anteponant. Una tantum- 
modo omnium responsio est. talem non habemus con- 
suetudinem, vester orbis alius est a nostro, qui Deus 
vestrum produxit, non nostrum, inquiunt, produxit. 
Denique pravse eorum consuetudines laqueis Satanse 
irretitos adhuc eos detinent. Multi sane lubentes 
Deum colunt quem annuntiamus, verum cum anti- 
quarum superstitionum occasio sese denuo offert, 
aegre abstinent. Inter caetera quibus moventur cru- 
ciatu inf erni perterientur [sc. perterrentur] et deliciis 
illecti paradisi oculos veritatis luci aperiunt. Ab- 
hinc 2 annis quibus hue removimus 90 et amplius 
baptismo abluimus. Ex his aliqui tum adulti turn 
pueri coelum jam, ut credimus vel speramus, adie- 
runt. horum precibus et exemplis plures alios per- 
trahendos arbitramur; aiunt enim parentes adhuc 
superstites nolle se pueros deserere et quo inier inie- 
ruirt [sc. illi inierint] se etiam post mortem ituros. 
Tres omnino patres ex Societate nostra anno prsece- 
dente hie morati sumus. hoc vero anno quinque. 
Magna omnium pace uti [sc. usi] sumus, sanitate vero 
tam Integra ut pene barbaris miraculo sit, persuade- 
atque Deum quem colimus esse optimum qui suorum 


1636-37] BR^BEUF TO THE GENERAL 9 

ment; and this is true of almost all of them. As for 
the mysteries of our faith, although these are entirely 
new to their ears, they yet do not gainsay them, 
or mock or scorn them; nay, rather they wonder, 
praise, and approve, though without keeping them 
long before their minds. They all have but one 
answer — ' ' Such is not our custom ; your world is dif- 
ferent from ours; the God who created yours," they 
say, " did not create ours." In short, caught in Sa- 
tan's snares, their evil habits still hold them back. 
Many, it is true, gladly worship the God whom we 
preach ; but when opportunity for their old supersti- 
tions again arises, they scarcely abstain therefrom. 
Among other things that move them, they are fright- 
ened by the torment of hell ; and, enticed by the joys 
of paradise, they open their eyes to the light of 
truth. Since we came here, 2 years ago, we have 
baptized more than 90. Of this number, some, 
both adults and children, have already gone to heav- 
en, as we believe, or at least hope. We believe that 
many others must be allured by the prayers and ex- 
amples of these. For parents yet surviving say that 
they do not wish to be separated from their children, 
and that where these have gone, they too will go 
after death. Only three fathers of our Society were 
here last year, but this year there are five. We have 
enjoyed great peace with all men, and health so com- 
plete that it is almost a miracle to the savages, and 
convinces them that the God whom we worship, and 
who exercises so great care over his own, is the 
best — especially since hardly one of the savages 
escaped last year the infection of a certain plague, by 
which very many were destroyed. Two of the Fa- 
thers who are here, Father Antoine Daniel and 


10 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES Vol.11 

tantam ctiram gerat, maxime cum anno superiori ne- 
mo pene barbarorum nescio cujus contagionis affla- 
tum effugerit, plurimique ab ea extincti sint. Duo 
ex Patribus qui hie sunt, Kebecum, ut puto, sunt 
repetituri, Pater scilicet Ant. Doeneil \sc. Daniel] et 
P. Ambr. Davost. selectos aliquot adolescentes Hu- 
rones eo deducunt ad seminarii jacienda initia. 2 aut 
3 alios in eorum locum expectamus petimusq. etiam 
alios in annum subsequentem. Operariis enim non 
paucis nunc opus est non quidem ad metendum, Sed 
ad serendum, vel potius ad linguam ediscendam ut 
verbum Dei [serere] possint; linguam enim si non 
collerent {sc. callent] non sererent tantum abest at 
mitere \sc. ut metere] posseri[n]t. Calleo ego istam 
linguam suffic[i]enter. caeteri vero qui hie sunt, val- 
de in ea proficiunt. Inter caetera ornamenta quibus 
fulgere debet hujus missionis operarius, mansuetudo 
et patientia primas partes tenere debe[n]t. et nun- 
quam hie ager feret fructus nisi in suavitate et pati- 
entia. Neque enim violenter aut imperio unquam 
cogi posse sperandum est. . . . Omnes sane 
quotquot hie sunt enixe ad perfectionem contendunt, 
ego unus ut mihi videor magno meo praejudicio lan- 
guor {sc. langueo]. 

La \sc. Ex] residentia S. Josephi apud Hurones 
Canadise populos in vico Ihonatiria. 

V. P. servus humill. filiusq. 
obedientiss. in X*^**. 

J. DE Brebeuf. 


1636-37] BR^BEUF TO THE GENERAL 11 

Father Ambroise Davost, are to go back to Kebec, I 
believe, and take with them some picked young men 
of the Hurons, to make the beginning of a seminary. 
We expect 2 or 3 other Fathers in their place, and 
request still others for the following year. For now 
there is need of laborers not a few — not indeed to 
reap, but to sow, or rather to learn the language, 
that the word of God may be sown. For, if they are 
not versed in the language, they cannot sow, much 
less reap. I have tolerable skill in that language, 
but the others who are here are very proficient there- 
in. Among the other jewels with which the laborer 
in this mission ought to shine, gentleness and pa- 
tience must hold the first rank ; and never will this 
field produce fruit except through mildness and pa- 
tience ; for one should never expect to force it by 
violent and arbitrary action. All, surely, who are 
here are zealously striving towards perfection ; I 
alone, as it seems to me, am feeble, to my own great 
disadvantage. 

From the residence of St. Joseph, among the Hu- 
rons, Canadian peoples, at the village of Ihonatiria. 
Your Paternity's most humble serv- 
ant, and obedient son in Christ, 

J. DE Brebeuf. 


12 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.11 


Epistola p. Joannis de Brebeuf ad A. R. P. Mutium 

Vitelleschi, Pr^epositum Generalem 

Societatis Jesu, Romse. 

RA. IN XT. 
P.C. 

Scrips! anno superiore ad P. V. de statu Hu- 
ronum apud quos agimus, de eorum moribus et de 
spe inde aliquando colligendi alien jus fructus anima- 
rum. Praeterea existimo ad earn missas fuisse binas 
relationes annorum superiorum ex quibus potuit 
plane cognoscere ea oia quae ad nos spectant sicut 
etiam ex ilia quam nunc mittimus. Dicam igitur P: 
V* duo hoc anno accidisse quae aliquando \sc. aliquan- 
tum] cursum evangelii retardarunt. Primum fuit lues 
et contagio nescio qua[e] quae abhinc octo mensibus 
pervasit aliquot pagos et ex qua plurimi interierunt. 
Ita etiam egit nobiscum divina providentia ut hu- 
jus calamitatis non immunes essemus, Imo pene a 
nobis incoepit aut saltern eodem tempore nos afflixit 
quo barbaros afflixi[t]. Ex sex sacerdotibus qui hie 
agimus et quatuor domesticis qui tunc erant nobis- 
cum, septem uno eodemq. tempore vidimus lectulo 
afiixos et morti proximos. Eadem divina bonitas 
pristinam omnibus sanitatem viresque restituit in 
quibus etiam nunc perseverant. At nostri Hurones 


1636-37] BR^BEUF TO THE GENERAL IS 


Letter of Father Jean de Brebeuf to the Very- 
Reverend Father Mutius Vitelleschi, General 
of the Society of Jesus, at Rome. 

VERY Reverend Father in Christ, 
The peace of Christ. 
I wrote last year to Your Paternity regarding- 
the condition of the Hurons, among whom we labor — 
of their customs, and of the prospect of reaping 
there, in the future, a harvest of some souls. Besides 
this, I think there were sent you two relations of 
the preceding years, from which, as from the one we 
now send, you can gain a clear understanding of all 
our affairs. I will say, therefore, to Your Paternity, 
that two things occurred this year, which somewhat 
checked the progress of the gospel. The first was a 
pestilence, of unknown origin, which eight months 
ago spread through several villages, and caused the 
death of many. The divine providence even so dealt 
with us that we should not be exempt from the ca- 
lamity. In fact, it almost began with us, or at least 
attacked both us and the savages at the same time. 
Of us who labor here, — six priests, and the four lay 
brothers then with us, — we saw seven confined to 
their beds at the same time, and near unto death. The 
same divine goodness has restored us all to our former 
health and strength, in which we still continue. But 
our Hurons — either, still ignorant of life eternal, or 
still unbelievers — sought remedies for their diseases. 


14 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.11 

et [sc. aut] adhuc ignari vitae aeternae aut adhuc infi- 
deles tarn sollicite et tarn anxie morbonim suorum 
remedia huic vitae idonea quaesierunt ut a[e]gre nobis 
praeberent aures de aeterna vita monentibus. Nemo 
respuisset si sanitatetn polliciti fuissemus, Verum 
nimio hujus vitae desiderio plurimi utramq. et misere 
et magno nostro mserore amiserunt. Alterum impe- 
dimentum fuit quia daemonis asserta \_sc. asseclae] 
sparserunt in valgus Gallos nostros et nos nominatim 
causam esse illius contagionis nosque eo omnino con- 
silio in eorum terras commigrasse ut eos neci dedere- 
mus, plurimaque alia ejusmodi non minus falsa de 
nobis disseminarunt. Ea autem omnia non solum 
aliquot pagos a nobis ad tempus alienarunt. sed 
nonnullis etiam eam mentem excitarunt ut nos de 
medio tollerent tanquam reipublicae perniciosos, Ve- 
rum is qui solus mortificat et vivificat, ad inferos de- 
ducere et reducere potest, ex iis periculis nos eripuit 
atque etiam fecit ut barbari suppliciter veniam pos- 
tularent. Jam jam subsederunt omnes falsi isti ru- 
mores. Libenter audimur, ducentos et amplius hoc 
anno baptismo abluimus et non est pene ullus pagus 
qui nos ad se non invitet. Adde quod hac lue et 
hisce rumoribus perfectum est ut [huic] nationi me- 
lius innotesceremus, tandemque cognitum est ex 
nostris actionibus et rebus nos in hoc devenisse non 
ad emendos pelles aut mercaturam aliquam exercen- 
dam sed eo tantum fine et ut eos doceremus et Chris- 
to conciliaremus, sanitatemque mentis et deinde vitam 


1636-37] BRJ&BEUF TO THE GENERAL 15 

sufficient for this present life, with so distressful 
anxiety that they scarcely lent ear to us who admon- 
ished them concerning the life eternal. No one 
would have refused, if we had promised health. But 
very many, on account of their ardent desire for this 
life, wretchedly lost both, to our great sorrow. The 
second obstacle arose from the tales spread among 
the people by followers of the devil, — that our 
Frenchmen, and we in particular, were the cause of 
this pestilence, and that our sole purpose in coming 
to their country was to compass their destruction ; 
and much else of the same sort, and equally false, did 
they scatter broadcast. All this, moreover, not only 
estranged several villages from us for a time, but also 
caused a determination on the part of some to remove 
us from their midst, as being dangerous to the com- 
mon weal. But he who alone ' ' mortificat et vivificat, 
ad inferos deducere et reducere potest," snatched 
us from these dangers, and even made the savages 
sue for pardon in suppliant wise. Now those false 
reports have all finally ceased. We are gladly heard, 
we have baptized more than two hundred this year, 
and there is hardly a village that has not invited us 
to go to it. Besides, the result of this pestilence and 
of these reports has been to make us better known to 
this people; and at last it is understood, from our 
actions and from our truths [of religion], that we 
have not come hither to buy skins or carry on any 
traffic, but solely to teach them and win them to 
Christ, and to procure for them their souls' health, 
and finally everlasting and immortal life. Further- 
more, since some families, although not yet baptized, 
rested all their hope in the Lord, and therefore al- 


16 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.11 

aeternam atque immortalem eis procuraremus. Prse- 
terea cum aliquot fainilia[e] quanquam nondum bap- 
tisatae totam suam fiduciam in Domino constituerent 
et proinde salvse atque incolumes pene solse reman- 
serint, factum inde est ut coedant \sc. credant] et 
ardenter baptismum exposcant, quo ut speramus, po- 
tientur cum satis probatae fuerint. Vidimus etiam 
non obscura gratise prsesentis indicia in pluribus quos 
baptismo lustra vimus et jam plures ut credimus tum 
adulti tum parvuli jam in ccelum beati avolarunt 
pro suis apud Deum intercessores. Denique in spem 
venimus fore ut hsec lues \sc. hac lue] quae adhuc saevit 
sedata tempestate at {sc. et] ad earn tranquillitatem 
[reductis?] animis quae veritatibus fidei audiendis et 
percipiendis necessaria est, plurimi convertantur. 

Novam sedem nunc extruimus in eo pago qui a 
nobis Rupella a barbaris Ossossane nominatur, ubi 
plurimi sunt incolae, ubi imprimis lues desaeviit et 
ubi semper benigne accepti, auditi et expetiti fui- 
mus. Ea sedes Residentia Conceptionis Immaculatae 
vocabitur. Praeterea cogitamus vel hoc anno duos e 
nostris mittere ad eam Huronum nationem quae At- 
tignenonghac appellatur, tum ad eos tum ad sedem 
ibi collocandum, fi fructus alien jus spes eflfulgeat. 
Jam referunt credo de seminario Huronum Quebeci 
inchoato in quo quinque adolescentes hyemarunt. 
novos jam eo submittemus speramusq. non parum 
inde accessimis \sc. accessionis] ad Huronum gen- 
tem, nobis Christoq. devinciendum. Demum fides 


1636-37] BR&BEUF TO THE GENERAL 17 


most alone remained safe and unharmed, it has re- 
sulted that they believe, and eagerly ask for baptism, 
which, as we hope, they will receive, when they 
shall have been sufficiently proved. We have seen, 
too, no uncertain signs of present grace in many 
whom we have purified through baptism ; and already 
many, both old and young, have, as we believe, 
soared away to heaven, blessed intercessors before 
God for their friends. Finally, we have come to 
hope that — this pestilence, which still rages, once 
abated in due season, and the minds of men restored 
to that tranquillity necessary to the hearing and un- 
derstanding of the truths of the faith — very many 
will be converted. 

We are now building a new house in this village, 
which we call Rupella [La Rochelle], the savages 
Ossossane, — a populous town, where the pestilence 
was especially severe, where we have always been 
kindly welcomed and heard, and where they long 
for us. This house will be called the Residence of 
the Immaculate Conception. We plan, too, even 
this year, to send two of our number to that Huron 
nation that is called Attignenonghac,^ to establish 
there at first these men, and later a residence, if a 
prospect of some success shall appear. I believe those 
at Quebec report about the seminary of the Hurons 
begun there, in which five young men have spent the 
past winter. We shall now send others there, and 
look for no little aid from that quarter in binding 
the Huron people closely to us and to Christ. Thus, 
indeed, the faith gathers its harvest, but in toil, 
vigils, sorrows, and patience. Long must be the 
time of clearing, long the time of sowing; and 


18 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 11 


sic agit fructus suos sed in labore, vigiliis, aerumnis 
et patientia. Evellendum diu, serendum diu et post- 
ea metetur: Licet nunc initio flentes et gementes 
mittamus vSemina tandem aliquando venientes venie- 
mus cum exultatione portantes manipulos nostros. 

Patres cum quibus versor sunt P. Fr. Mercier, P. 
Pet. Pijart, P. Pet. Chastellain, P. Car. Gamier et 
P. Isaac Jogues. hi sunt omnino insignes operarii 
qui cum zelo ardente animarum orationem, et unio- 
nera cum Deo egregie conjungunt. Unoque aut 
altero demum anno tantos progressus f ecerunt in lin- 
gua licet adhuc inculta et nondum bene ad artem re- 
ducta ut sane mirum sit, adeo pertinax est oium 
eorum studium, quanquam in eo genere primus mihi 
fore videatur P. Car. Gamier. Quae cum ita sint quid 
non bene de Domini bonitate sentientes speremus et 
expectemus amplam animarum messem 

P. V. servus humill. et filius obedientiss. in Chr. 

JOA. DE Brebeuf. J. 

Ex residentia S. Josephi apud Hurones in pago 
Ihonatiria 20 mai 1637. 

Ab eo tempore quo haec scripta sunt nova ilia resi- 
dentia, quam dixi Conceptionis plane extructa est, 
nosque ibi coepimus habitare eo die qui Sanctis mar- 
tyribus Primo et Feliciano sacer est nempe 9 Juni. 
[mirum?] est quanta cum pagi totius benevolentia et 
applausu excepti fuimus. Praeterea die sacro sanctae 
Trinitati sacro baptismo abluimus idque solemni ritu 


1636-37] BRABEUF TO THE GENERAL 19 

afterwards comes the reaping. Although now, in 
the beginning, we sow the seed with tears and sighs, 
yet some day ' ' venientes veniemus cum exultatione 
portantes manipulos nostros. 

The Fathers with whom I am associated are Fa- 
ther Frangois Mercier, Father Pierre Pijart, Father 
Pierre Chastellain, Father Charles Garnier, and Fa- 
ther Isaac Jogues. These are in every way extraor- 
dinary workers, who in an unusual manner combine 
eloquence and union with God with a burning zeal 
for souls. So persistent and studious are they all, 
that in only one or two years they have gained a 
truly wonderful proficiency in a language still rude 
and not reduced to grammatical rules; however, in 
this regard Father Charles Garnier ranks first, I 
think. Since matters stand thus, why should we 
not, assured of the goodness of God, look forward 
with hope to a bounteous harvest of souls ? 

Your Paternity's most humble servant and obedi- 
ent son in Christ, 

Jean de Brebeuf. J. 

From the residence of St. Joseph, among the Hu- 
rons, in the village of Ihonatiria. May 20, 1637. 

Since the time of writing the above, the new resi- 
dence of the Conception, which I mentioned, has 
been finished ; and we began to live there on the day 
sacred to the holy martyrs Primus and Felicianus — 
that. is, June 9th. It is [wonderful] with what good 
will and applause of the whole village we were re- 
ceived. Later, on the day sacred to the holy Trinity, 
we purified by holy baptism, and that with solemn 
ceremony, a man aged fifty years, from whom we en- 


20 


LES RELA TIONS DES jlSUITES [Vol. 11 


hominem quinquaginta jam annos nattim ex quo veni- 
mus in spem ampliorem [sc. amplioris] in posterum 
frugem [5^. frugis]. nam et bene omnino instructus 
est et diu probatus. famam magnamque auctorita- 
tem et existimationem [habet] et primus est qui sa- 
nus et adultus baptizatus fuerit. atque adeo ejus ex- 
emplo jam aliqui nos convenerunt instanter rogantes 
ut eos baptizaremus. 

Ibidem ad R. S. Josephi 16 junii. 


1636-37] BR£BEUF TO THE GENERAL 21 


tertain hopes of great results in the future ; for he is 
in all respects well instructed and long proved. He 
is of great repute, influence, and esteem — the first 
adult man baptized in health ; and, indeed, through 
his example some have already come and urgently 
entreated that we should baptize them. 

Also at the Residence of St. Joseph, June i6. 


XXIX 

Le Jeune's Relation. 16^7 

ROUEN: JEAN LE BOULLENGER, 1638 


Source : We reprint from the original of the first issue 
(H. 67), in Lenox Library. 

The document consists of two parts : Part L, by Le Jeune, 
as superior, consisting of the Relation proper, and a Der- 
niere Lettre; Part IL, the annual Huron Relation, made to 
Le Jeune by Le Mercier. In the present volume, we give 
chaps, i.-ix. of Part 1.; the remainder of Part I. will occupy 
Vol. XII. In Vol. XIII., will appear the greater portion of 
Part 11., the document being completed in Vol. XIV. 


K ELATION 

DE CE QVI SXST PASSE 

E N L A 

NOVVELLE FRANCE 

EN UAHNEE i<^37. 

Enuoyec au 
R. PE RE PROVINCIAL 
dc la Compagnic de I e s v s 
en la Prouincc dc.Francc. 

Far le P. Viiul le leune de la mefme Com^agnk^ 
Stferiet4r deU Mefdencede KebcCt, 



Chez Iban IB BovLtiNpER, pr^s I^ 
College des PP. lefuites. 

M. DC. >CXXVHL 

Wr^c pitiviLEGn j^v nor. 



RELATION 

OF WHAT OCCURRED 
IN 

NEW FRANCE 

IN THE YEAR 1637. 

Sent to the 

REVEREND FATHER PROVINCIAL 

of the Society of Jesus 

in the Province of France. 

By Father Paul le Jeune of the same Society, 
Superior of the Residence of Kebec. 


ROUEN, 

Jean le Boullenger, near the 
College of the Jesuit Fathers. 

M. DC. XXXVIII. 
BY ROYAL LICENSE. 


28 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.11 


Extraict du Priuilege du Roy. 

PAR Grace & Priuilege du Roy il eft permis ^ 
lean le Boullenger, Marchand Libraire, & Im- 
primeur a Roiien, d'imprimer ou faire impri- 
mer & expofer en vente, vn Liure intitule, Relation 
de ce qui s' ejl paj^i en la Nouuelle France en V anne'e mil 
fix cens trente-fept. Enuoy^e au R. P. Prouincial de la 
Compagnie </^ /E S V S en la Prouince de France. Par le 
Pere Paul le leune de la me/me Compagnie, Superieur de 
la Refidence de Yiebec: & ce, pendant le temps & efpace 
de fept annees confecutiues. Auec defenfes a tous 
Libraires & Imprimeurs d'imprimer, ou faire impri- 
mer ledit Liure, fous pretexte de defguifement, ou 
changement qu'ils y pourroient faire, a peine de con- 
fifcation, des exemplaires qui feront trouuez, & de 
fept cens liures d'amende, ainfi qu'il eft porte par 
le Priuilege. Donne k Paris, le 5. de Feurier 1638. 
Par le Roy en fon Confeil, 

Petit. 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib37 29 


Extract from the Royal License. 

BY the Grace and Prerogative of the King, per- 
mission is granted to Jean le Boullenger, Book- 
seller and Printer at Rouen, to print or to 
have printed and exposed for sale, a Book entitled. 
Relation de ce qui s' est passe en la Nouvelle France en 
r anne'e mil six cens trente-sept. Envoy^e au R. P. Pro- 
vincial de la Compagnie de J E S U S en la Province de 
France. Par le Pere Paul Ic Jcune de la mesine Compa- 
gnie, Superieur de la Residence de Kebec: and this during 
the time and space of seven consecutive years. Pro- 
hibiting all Booksellers and Printers to print or to 
have printed the said Book, under pretext of disguise 
or change they may make therein, on penalty of 
confiscation of the copies that shall be found, and of 
seven hundred livres fine, as provided by the Li- 
cense. Given at Paris the 5th day of February, 1638. 
By the King in Council, 

Petit. 


30 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 


Approbation. 

IE ESTIENNE BiNET Prouincial de la Compagnie 
de Iesvs en la Prouince de France. Suiuant 
le Priuilege qui nous a efte octroye par les Roys 
Tres-Chreftiens Henry III. le lo. May 1583. Henry 
IV. le ID. Decembre 1605. & Louys XIII. k prefent 
regnant, le 14. Feurier 1612. par lequel il eft defendu 
a tous Libraires de n'imprimer aucun Liure de ceux 
qui font compofez par quelqu'vn de noftre dite Com- 
pagnie, fans permiffion des Superieurs d'icelle. Per- 
mets a lean le Boullenger Marchand Libraire & Im- 
primeur en la ville de Roiien, de pouuoir imprimer 
pour dix ans le Relation de ce qui s'eji paj^^ en la nou- 
uelle Frace, en V afinec 1637. qui m'a efle enuoyee par 
le Pere P. le leune de noftre mefme Compagnie, Su- 
perieur de la Refidence de Kebec. En foy dequoy 
i'ay fign6 la prefente a Paris ce 22. lanuier 1638. 

Sign6, 

E. BiNET. 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 31 


Approbation. 

IEsTiENNE BiNET, Provincial of the Society of 
J E s u s in the Province of France, in accordance 
with the License which has been granted us by 
the Most Christian Kings, Henry III. May loth 1583, 
Henry IV. December loth 1605, and Louys XIII. 
now reigning, February 14th 16 12, by which all 
Booksellers are prohibited from printing any Book 
of those composed by one of our said Society, with- 
out permission of the Superiors thereof; I permit 
Jean le Boullenger, Bookseller and Printer in the 
city of Rouen, to print for ten years the Relation de 
ce qui i est pass^ en la noiivelle France, en V ann^e 1637, 
which has been sent me by Father Paul le Jeune of 
our same Society, Superior of the Residence of Ke- 
bec. In testimony whereof, I have signed the pres- 
ent at Paris this 22nd of January, 1638. 

Signed, 

E. BiNET. 


32 


LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. U 


Table des Chapitres de la Relation de Canadas. 

CHAP. I. Des fecours que V ancicnne France 
donne a la nouuelle. • • P^S^- ^ 

Chap. II. Des bons deport ements de nos Fran- 
cois. . . • pag- ^l [i-e., H] 
Chap. III. Des Sauuages qui ont requ le baptefme. 

• P^g- 26 
Chap. IIII. De Finjlruction d'vn Capitaine Sau- 

uage P^'S- 72 

Chap. V. De quelques bons fentimens que Dieu 

donnoit h ce Capitaine. . . • P^g- ^5 

Chap. VI. Ce qiion h fait pour Vinjiruction des 

autres Sauuages. • • • P^g- 97 

Chap. VII. De rinjiructid des petits Sauuages. p. 121 
Chap. VIII. De quelques prifes ou contrarietez que 

nous auons eu auec les Sauuages. . pag. 132 

Chap. IX. Quelques entretiens auec le /order ftif- 

dit P^'S' 149 

Chap. X. Des Sorciers, & sils ont communica- 
tion auec le diable. . • • P^g- ^ 54 
Chap. XI. De leurs coujimnes, & de leur croiance. 

168 [i.e., 167] 
Cha.^. yiil. Du Seminaire des Hurons. . pag. i77 

Chap. XIII. De V Ordre qu on garde au Seminaire 

&■ de quelques particularitez des Semin. pag. 191 
Chap. XIV. De V ejiat du Seminaire ^ la venue des 

Hurons leurs compatriot es pag. 210 [i.e., 206] 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 33 


Table of Chapters of the Relation of Canadas. 

CHAP. I. Of the assistance which old France 
gives to the new. . . . page i 

Chap. II. 0/ the good conduct of our French. 

page 13 [i.e., 14] 
Chap. III. Of the Savages who have received bap- 
tism. .... page 26 
Chap. II II. Of the instruction of a Savage Cap- 
tain. .... page 72 
Chap. V. Of some good sentiments that God gave 

this Captain. . . . pag^ 85 

Chap. VI. What has been done for the instruction 

of other Savages. . . . page 97 

Chap. VII. Of the instruction of the little Sav- 
ages. .... page 121 
Chap. VIII. Of some disputes or difficulties %ve have 

had with the Savages. . . page 132 

Chap. IX. Some interviews with the aforesaid sor- 
cerer. .... page 149 
Chap. X. Of the Sorcerers, and whether they have 

communication with the devil. . pctge 1 54 

Chap. XI. Of their customs and their belief. 

168 [i.e., 167] 
Chap. XII. Of the Seminary of the Hurons. page \yy 
Chap. XIII. Of the Order observedin the Seminary, 
and some particulars relating to the Seminarists. 

page 191 
Chap. XIV. Of the condition of the Seminary at 
the coming of the Hurons, their countrymen. 

. page 210 [i.e., 206] 



34 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.11 

Injiruction pour les Peres de no ft re Conipagnie qui 

feront enuoiez aux Hurons pag. 237 [i.e., 228] 

Chap. XV. Journal contenant diuerfes cho/es, qui 
nont peu ejlre ntifes fous les chap, prece- 
dens. . . . .237 [i.e., 233] 

Dernier e lettre du R. P. P. Ic leune, au R. P. 

Prou. . . . . 319 [i.e., 310] 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 35 

Instructions for the Fathers of our Society who shall 

be sent to the Hurons. . page 237 [i.e., 228] 

Chap. XV. A Journal containing divers tilings 
which could not be placed in the preceding chap- 
ters. .... 237 [i.e., 233] 

Last letter of the Reverend Father Paul le Jeune 

to the Reverend Father Provincial. 319 [i.e., 310] 


36 


LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 11 


Table des Chapitres de la Relation des Hurons. 

CHAP. I. Recit des chofes plus memorables qui 
font payees depuis le mois de luillet iufques 
au mois de Septembre, drejf^ en forme de 
Journal. . . • P^^- 2 [i.e., i] 

Chap. II. Les excej^iues cruautez des hommes, & 
les grandes mifericordes de Dieu fur la per- 
fonne d'vn prifonnier de guerre Iroquois de 
Nation. . • • • .22 

Chap. III. Suite du Journal ok principalement efl 
declaree la maladie dont h efl^ afflig^e nofire pe- 
tite maifon, & du bon fuccez quelle b, eu. pag. 56 

Chap. nil. Le fecours que nous auons rendu aux 

malades de nofire bourgade, &c. . pag. 76 

Chap. V. Offoffan^ afflig^ de contagion; diuerfes 
courfes que tious y auons fait au temps le plus 
fafcheux de VJJyuer, &c. . . pag. 97 

Chap. VI. De la Refidence de la Conception de no- 
fire Dame aux bourg\a\de d' OffoffanL pag. 2 1 8 

Chap. VII. La Conuerfion de Tfiouendaentaha pre- 
mier Sauuage adulte baptif^. . . pag. 232 


1636 - 37] LE JE UNE' S RELA TION, 1637 37 


Table of Chapters of the Relation of the Hurons. 

CHAP. I. A recital of the more memorable 
events which occurred from, the month of 
July to the month of September, arranged 
in the form of a Journal. page 2 [i.e., i] 

Chap. II. The excessive cruelty of men, and the 
great fnercy of God, upon the person of a pris- 
oner of war from the Iroquois Nation. . 22 

Chap. III. Continuation of the Jour7ial, wherein is 
chiefly related the malady with which our little 
household has been afflicted; and the fortunate 
outcome thereof. . . . page 56 

Chap. IIII. The help we have given to the sick of 

our village, etc. . . . page y6 

Chap. V. Ossossane afflicted with a contagious dis- 
ease; various journeys that we made there in the 
most disagreeable Winter weather, etc. page 97 

Chap. VI. Of the Residence of the Conception of 

nostre Dame, at the hamlet of Ossossand. page 2 1 8 

Chap. VII. The Conversion of Tsiouendaentaha, the 

first adult Savage baptized. . . page 232 


38 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.11 


MON R. PERE, 
Prenant la plume en main pour donner 
commancement a la Relation de ce qui s'efl 
paffe cette ann6e en quelques endroits, oii noftre 
Copagnie fait fa demeure en la nouuelle France, mon 
efprit s'efl quafi trouue fans penfees, fmon bien con- 
fufes. le me fuis veu faifi d'vn eftonnement, qui ne 
lailloit a mon ame qu'autant de forces qu'il en falloit 
pour letter les yeux fur la grandeur de Dieu, & pour 
adorer fa conduitte. Puis reuenant a moy-mefme, ie 
ruminois les differetes nouuelles qu'on m'efcriuoit 
de voftre Europe, & de quelques endroits de noftre 
Amerique. i'apprenois par les yeux, & par les oreil- 
les, comme la France efloit en feu pour nous, & les 
pais plus hauts des Sauuages n'eftoient que glaces. 
Ie lifois d'vne part que les grands de la terre nous 
donnoient leur coeur pour le Ciel, & que les petits du 
monde (c'eft ainfi que i'appelle ceux qui ne co- 
gnoiHent pas Dieu) nous auoient en horreur. 

I'entendois mille applaudiffemens du cofte de 
noftre Orient, & des cotrees que nous auons quafi a 
r Occident, il ne venoit que des iniures; fi bien que 
nous eftions a mefme temps couuerts de gloire & 
d'opprobres. On m'efcriuoit de voftre France que 
nous priffions courage, que Dieu eftoit pour nous, 
puis qu'il nous donnoit les affections de fes amis, 
qu'vne infinite d'ames fainctes beniffoient nos petits 
trauaux, & Ton me mandoit du fond de noftre Bar- 
barie, qu'il n'arriuoit la aucun malbeur, ny pluie, ny 
cotagio, ny fechereffe, que ces infideles n'imputafset 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 89 


MY REVEREND FATHER, 
When I took my pen in hand to begin the 
Relation of what occurred this year in some 
places in new France where our Society makes its 
dwelling, my mind was almost void of ideas, if not 
quite bewildered. I found myself overcome by a 
feeling of wonder which left my soul only the strength 
necessary to cast my eyes upon the greatness of God, 
and to adore his guidance. Then, recovering my- 
self, I reflected upon the various tidings written to 
me from your Europe, and from some parts of our 
America. I learned through my eyes and my ears 
how France was on fire for us, and how the upper 
countries of the Savages were nothing but ice. I 
read on one side that the great of the earth were giv- 
ing us their hearts for Heaven, and that the small of 
the world (thus I call those who know not God) held 
us in abhorrence. 

I heard a thousand plaudits from our lands to the 
East, and from the countries that we possess almost 
to the West came only insults ; so that we were at 
the same time covered with glory and with oppro- 
brium. They wrote me from your France that we 
should take courage, that God was for us, since he 
granted us the affections of his friends ; that an in- 
finite number of saintly souls were blessing our in- 
significant labors; and the intelligence came to me 
from the remoter parts of this, our Land of Barba- 
rism, that no misfortunes, neither rain, nor pestilence, 
nor drought, happened there, that those unbelievers 
did not impute to all the French, and to us most 


40 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 

k tous nos Frangois, & a nous tres-particulierement. 
On me crioit de loin ces paroles; Que craignez vous? 
vous auez le coeur trop ferr6, la main de Dieu eft 
elle racourcie? demandez des Peres, & des hommes 
pour ietter le feu par tout, & d'autres me difoient 
comme a I'oreille, vous marcliez a grand pas, vous 
eftes defia cliargez de monde par deffus vos forces, 
ne demandez pas felon les befoins de ces contrees, 
mais felon voftre puifCance. Vous entrez dans vn 
excez qui fera fouffrir d'excellens hommes, fl on fe 
lalfe de vous fecourir. Le pais n'eft pas encor en 
eftat de nourrir, & Frangois & Sauuages tout en- 
femble, fi les vaiifeaux vous manquent, il faudra de- 
meurer dans la confufion. le cognoiffois par vn grand 
nombre de lettres, que des perfonnes de condition 
tres-releuee & d'vne vertu tres-infigne, combattoient 
pour nous au ciel & en la terre, & Ton me faifoit 
voir fur vn bout d'efcource ou de papier, que les De- 
mons eftoiet defchaifnez, s'oppofans puiffamment a 
nos deffeins. Bref nous nous voios dans la vie & 
dans la mort. L'ancienne France nous fouhaittoit 
des fiecles, & vne partie de la Nouuelle ne nous pou- 
uoit quafi fupporter vn moment. En vn mot on 
nous prenoit pour des Anges, & pour des Diables 
tout enfemble. Voila les nouuelles que i'ay appris 
a la veue des vaiffeaux venus de France, & des ca- 
nots d'efcorce arriuez des Algonquins & des Hurons. 
Roulant tout cela dans mes penfees, ie me fuis trou- 
ue (comme i'ay defia dit) dans vn eftonnement de 
la grandeur de Dieu. Car ie puis dire auec verite, 
que ces nouuelles plaines d'horreur, apportees d'vn 
pais Barbare, ne m'ont pas moins refiouy que les 
douces faueurs dont nous a benit le ciel de la France. 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 41 

especially. From afar I heard this cry : " What do 
you fear ? Your heart is too much oppressed ; is the 
arm of God shortened? Ask for Fathers and for men 
to scatter the fire everywhere." And others said to 
me, confidentially, as it were, "You are making 
great strides, you are already burdened with people 
beyond your strength ; do not ask according to the 
needs of these countries, but according to your own 
ability. You are going into extravagances which 
will make excellent men suffer, if succor should fail 
you ; the country is not yet in a condition to sustain 
both French and Savages at the same time, and if 
the ships should not come, you must needs be em- 
barrassed." I learned through a great many letters 
that people of high rank and most signal virtue were 
contending for us in heaven and upon the earth ; and 
it was made evident to me, on a bit of bark or paper, 
that the Demons were let loose and were powerfully 
opposing our plans. In short, we find ourselves in 
life and in death. Old France desired us for centu- 
ries, and part of the New could scarcely endure us 
for a moment. In a word, we were at the same time 
taken for Angels and for Devils. Such were the 
news I received on the arrival of the ships from 
France, and the bark canoes from the Algonquins 
and Hurons. Turning it all over in my mind, I 
found myself (as I have already said) amazed at the 
greatness of God. For I can say with truth that this 
shocking news brought from a Barbarous land has 
not pleased me less than the gentle favors with which 
the skies of France have blessed us. It is a sign 
that the Demons have been powerfully attacked, 
since they put themselves vigorously on the defen- 
sive. The enemy who does not give battle is dan- 


42 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 

C'eft vne marque que les Demons font puiffamment 
attaquez, puis qu'ils fe mettent puiffamment en 
deffence. L'ennemi qui ne rend point de combat 
eft dangereux ; car il ne perd point f es forces ; plus 
la bataille eft fanglante, plus noble en eft la victoire, 
& plus glorieux le triomphe. Plus cette Eglife 
naiffante a de rapport auec la primitiue, plus nous 
donne elle d'efperance de luy voir porter des fleurs 
& des fruicts dignes du Paradis. Mais reiettons ce 
difcours au cbapitre quatorliefme, & k la Relatio, que 
Ton m'enuoie des Hurons. Parlous de noftre Colo- 
nic Fran§oife, & des Sauuages errans, lef quels fe- 
ront d'autant plus tardifs a embraffer noftre foy, que 
moins ils nous font de refiftance. Mais en fin les 
vns & les autres font ^ Dieu ; fa bonte leur deflllera 
les yeux quand il luy plaira. Cette taie qui leur 
couure la veue femble deuenir plus min- 
ce ; nous la verrons tomber quel- 
que iour auec ioie & be- 
nediction. Ainfi 
foit-il. 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 48 

gerous, for he does not weaken his strength ; the 
bloodier a battle is, the nobler the victory and the 
more glorious the triumph. The more this infant 
Church has in common with the primitive one, the 
greater hope it gives us of seeing it produce flowers 
and fruits worthy of Paradise. But let us defer this 
discussion to the fourteenth chapter, and to the Rela- 
tion which has been sent me from the Hurons. Let 
us speak of our French Colony, and of the wander- 
ing Savages, who will be all the slower to embrace 
our faith the less resistance they make to us. But 
after all, both the former and the latter belong to 
God; when it shall please him, his goodness will 
unseal their eyes. This film which covers 
their sight seems to be growing thin- 
ner ; some day we shall see it 
fall, with joy and with 
benediction. So 
be it. 


44 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 


[i] Relation de ce qvi s'est passe en la nouuelle 

France, en I'annee mil fix cens 

trente fept. 

CHAPITRE I. 

DES SECOURS QUE L'ANCIENNE FRANCE DONNE A LA 
NOUUELLE. 

IE croyois auoir parle fi amplement Tann^e palI6e, 
des fentimens d' affection qu'ont plulietirs per- 
fonnes de merite, pour la nouuelle France, que 
ie ne pourrois plus rien efcrire fur ce fujet, fans vfer 
de redites: mais 1' amour qu'on porte au falut de nos 
pauures Sauuages fe va dilatant auec des accroiffe- 
mens fi notables, que nous ferions condamnez d' in- 
gratitude deuant Dieu & les hommes, fi. nous n'en 
beniffions [2] le ciel, & n'en rendions quelque tefmoi- 
gnage a la terre. Ie ne veux pas reiterer ce que i'ay 
dit des affections de nollre grand Roy, des foins de 
Monfeigneur le Cardinal, des grandes defpenfes de 
Meffieurs les Affociez & Directeurs, lefquels me tef- 
moignent n'auoir receu aucune lettre particuliere de 
ma part au retour de la flotte, ce qui ne les a pas em- 
pefche de m'honorer d'vn grand tefmoignage de leur 
affection: mais ie les fupplie tres-humblement de 
croire que ie leur auois rendu ce deuoir, comme aufll 
a quantit6 de perfonnes tres-honorables, qui n'ont 
receu aucune de mes nouuelles, ie ne fgay par quel 
fort mes lettres ne leur ont efte rendues. Au refte 


1G36-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 46 


[i] Relation of what occurred in new France in 

the year one thousand six hundred 

and thirty-seven. 

CHAPTER I. 

OF THE ASSISTANCE WHICH OLD FRANCE GIVES TO 
THE NEW. 

1 THOUGHT I was speaking so fully last year on 
the sentiments of affection for new France, enter- 
tained by many persons of merit, that I could 
write nothing more upon this subject without repeti- 
tion. But the interest that is felt in the salvation of 
our poor Savages continues to extend, with so re- 
markable a growth that we would be condemned for 
ingratitude before God and men if we did not bless 
[2] heaven therefor, and bear witness thereof to the 
earth. I will not repeat what I have said of the kind 
interest of our great King, of the attentions of Mon- 
seigneur the Cardinal, of the great outlays of Mes- 
sieurs the Associates and Directors, who assure me 
that they did not receive any special letter from me 
on the return of the fleet, which has not prevented 
them from honoring me with strong evidence of their 
affection ; but I beg them very humbly to believe 
that I did perform this duty towards them, as well 
as towards a number of very honorable personages 
who have received no news from me ; I do not know 
by what fate my letters were not delivered to them. 


46 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.11 

ces Meffieurs me parlent en des termes, dignes d'eftre 
mis au iour, apres m'auoir declare le defir qu'ils ont 
d'amplifier le Royaume de lefus-Chrift. Voicy 
comme ils pourfuiuent : 

Nous aiions appris, & tenons pour regie certaine, que 
pour former le corps d'vne bonne Colonie, il faut com- 
mencer par la Religion^ elle ejl en V cjiat comme le coeur en 
la compofition de Vhoniuie, la premiere & viuifiante partie, 
c ejl fur elle que les fondateurs des grandes Republiques 
ont iett^ le plan de leurs edifices', qui ne dureroient pas 
s' ils auoient vn autre fondement : ainfi nous protefions [3] 
qii" elle f era toufiours precieufement traitt^e, & quen toutes 
rencontres nous la fcrons prefder en la nouuelle Frafice. 
Mon coeur tient vn long difcours, lifant ces paroles, 
aufqnelles ma bouche ne donnera pour refponfe que 
ces deux mots. Fiat, fiat, in nomine Domini. Dauid 
voulant baftir la maifon de Dieu, eftablit puiffam- 
ment la lienne. 

L'affection qu'on porte k noflre Colonie, & "k nos 
pauures Sauuages, n'eft point bornee par les Alpes. 
Sa Sainctete nous voulant combler de fes benedi- 
ctions, nous a fait expedier cette annee des Indul- 
gences plenieres pour les iours de la Conception de 
la faincte Vierge, & de noftre glorieux patron, & 
protecteur fainct lofeph. De plus il a defir6 de 
noflre R. Pere General vne briefue Relation de tout 
ce qui fe fait icy pour la gloire de noflre Seigneur, 
pour nous accorder les graces & les faueurs ne- 
ceifaires pour le bien de cette Eglife naiffante. 

Le grand Maillre de Malte, homme plein de cou- 
rage, de fageffe & de vertu, fe plaifl, a ce qu'on me 
fait entendre, dans les difcours qu'on luy fait de la 
nouuelle France. Sa Majefle tres-Chreflienne, [4] 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, idjr 47 

Moreover, these Gentlemen speak to me in terms 
which should be made public, after having declared 
the desire they had of extending the Kingdom of 
Jesus Christ. Here is the way they continue : 

We have learned, and hold it to be a safe rule, that, in 
order to form, the body of a good Colony, it is necessary to 
begin with Religion. It is to the state what the heart is 
to the organism of a ma7i, the chief and vitalizi^ig part. 
It is upon this that the founders of great Republics have 
based the plans of their edifices, ivhich would not endure if 
they had other foundations. Therefore, we declare [3] 
that it shall always be treated as something precious, and 
that on all occasions we will give it precedence in new 
France. My heart utters a long discourse in reading 
these words, to which my mouth will give no other 
answer than these two words, Fiat, fiat, in nonmie 
Domini! David, wishing to build the house of God, 
effectively established his own. 

The interest felt in our Colony and in our poor 
Savages, is not bounded by the Alps. His Holiness, 
wishing to crown us with his blessings, has had sent 
to us this year plenary Indulgences for the days of 
the Conception of the blessed Virgin, and of our 
glorious patron and protector, saint Joseph. Further- 
more, he has requested from our Reverend Father 
General a brief Relation of all that is done here for 
the glory of our Lord, in order to grant us the graces 
and favors necessary for the welfare of this infant 
Church. 

The grand Master of Malta, a man full of courage, 
of wisdom, and of virtue, is pleased, as I have been 
informed, with the reports made to him concerning 
new France. His most Christian Majesty, [4] Mon- 
seigneur the Cardinal, and Messieurs the Directors 


48 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.11 

Monfeigneur le Cardinal, & Meffieurs les Directeurs 
& Allociez, nous ont donne pour Gounerneiir I'vn de 
fes Cheualiers, que ie nommerois volontiers, auec le 
refpect que ie dois a tous ces braues foldats de lefus- 
Chrift, I'honneur de Malte, & le bonheur de noftre 
Colonic. Monfieur fon Lieu[te]nant qui porte cette 
mefme croix honorable, marche fi parfaictement fur 
fes brifees, que nous auons tous fuiet de recognoiflre 
les grandes obligations que nous auons a cette faincte 
milice, inceffamment arm^e pour la gloire du nom 
Chreftien. 

Si i'ofois violer le fecret, ie mettrois icy les noms 
de quatit^ de perfonnes, tres releu^es en honeur, en 
vertus, en merites, dot le coeur & les mains combat- 
tent auec nous au ciel, & en la terre. L'vn d'eux 
voyant qu'on difpofoit vn Hofpital, pour les pauures 
Sauuages, iette les fondemens d'vn Seminaire de pe- 
tites filles. Ie ne fcay ou vont mes penfees quand 
i'efcry cecy. Ie veux parler, & on me condamne au 
filence; ie veux rendre des actions de graces en fa- 
ueur de ces pauures petites creatures, & on me com- 
mande d'eftre ingrat. 

D'autres fe vont difpofans de ietter les fondemens 
d'vn Seminaire de Montagnets [5] d'Algonquins & 
de Hurons. Vn grand coeur bien cogneu de Dieu, 
& fort peu des hommes, a defia iett6 quelques pieces 
de ce noble edifice. Voila, dit vn autre, pour nour- 
rir trois Peres, ou trois enfans Hurons, & auec ces 
trois paroles, fait vne action de fa droicte, que fa 
gauche ignore. Tout cela & plufieurs autres chofes 
me font dites k I'oreille, auec defence d'obeyr a ces 
paroles du fils de Dieu. Quod in aure auditis prcedi- 
cate fuper tecta : Prefchez publiquement ce que vous 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 49 

and Associates, have given us as Governor one of his 
Chevaliers, whom I would willingly call, with due 
respect to all those brave soldiers of Jesus Christ, the 
honor of Malta and the good fortune of our Colony. 
Monsieur his Lieutenant, who wears this same hon- 
orable cross, walks so strictly in his footsteps, that 
we all have reason to acknowledge our great obliga- 
tions to this holy soldiery, constantly armed for the 
glory of the Christian name.^ 

If I dared to violate the secret, I would place here 
the names of a number of persons, very high in hon- 
or, in virtue, in merit, whose hearts and hands con- 
tend along with us, in heaven and upon earth. One 
of them, seeing that a Hospital was being provided 
for the poor Savages, lays the foundations of a Semi- 
nary for little girls.* I know not whither my thoughts 
carry me when I write this. I desire to speak and 
am condemned to silence; I wish to render some 
acts of thanksgiving in behalf of these poor little crea- 
tures, and I am commanded to be ungrateful. 

Others manifest a disposition to lay the foundations 
of a Seminary for Montagnets, [5] Algonquins, and 
Hurons.^ One great heart, well known to God, but 
very little to men, has already laid a few stones of 
this noble edifice, "This," says another, "is to 
maintain three Fathers, or three Huron children," 
and with these three words he doeth an act with his 
right hand which his left hand knoweth not. All 
this and many other things are whispered in my ears 
with an injunction against obeying these words of 
the son of God, Quod in aure auditis prcedicate super 
tecta, preach in public what you shall have heard in 
secret. The secrets of Kings should be held as se- 
crets ; but to hide from men the knowledge of the 


50 LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 11 

aurez entendu en fecret. Les fecrets des Rois doi- 
uent eftre des fecrets, mais defrober aux hommes la 
cognoiffance des bontez de Dieu dans le coeur des 
hommes, c'eft vne efpece d'iniuftice, dans laquelle 
on me fait tomber. II eft vray que fi on met des 
fceaux fur nos bouches, qu'on n'en fgauroit pofer 
deffus nos coeurs ; fi Ton nous rends muets deuant les 
hommes, on ne f9auroit nous defrober la parole de- 
uant Dieu : nous le benirons done dans les temps, & 
dans I'eternite, & nous procurerons qu'il foit beny ^ 
iamais au ciel & en la terre, en action de grace de 
toutes les faueurs que fes amis departent, foit k 
noflre Colonie, foit a nos Sauuages, foit ^ nous 
autres. Le temps viendra, [6] il n'eft pas loing, car 
la vie efl courte, que toutes chofes fe verront en leur 
iour, & que les ames iadis barbares, maintenant la- 
uees dans le fang de I'agneau, donneront mille bene- 
dictions a ceux qui les ont tire de I'abyfme, foit par 
leurs prieres, foit par leurs liberalitez, foit par leurs 
trauaux. O que I'eternite eft longue! quand on 
n'auroit mis qu'vne feule ame dans le ciel, qu'elles 
actions de graces ne rendra point cette efpoufe de 
lefus-Chrift, dans Teftendue de tous les fiecles, k 
ceux qui auront coopere a fon falut? elle verra le 
bon-heur dont elle iouyra, & le mal-heur qu'elle a 
euite; elle conuerfera au delk des temps, dans vne 
priuaute, & dans vne amitie tres-parfaicte, auec ceux 
qui auront diuerti fon mal-heur, & procure fon bon- 
heur. Dieu ! qui pent conceuoir les fentimens qu'elle 
aura pour eux ? mon coeur efl liquefie quand ie penfe 
aux ames que ie voy partir de ce monde, encores 
toutes rouges du fang de lefus-Chrift. Helas! quels 
doux regards elles iettent fur la Diuinite! quelles 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 51 

goodness of God in the hearts of men, is a species of 
injustice into which I am pushed. To be sure, if 
seals are placed upon our lips they cannot be placed 
upon our hearts; if we are rendered mute before 
men, we cannot be forbidden to speak in the pres- 
ence of God. We will bless him, then, in time and 
in eternity ; and we will procure for him blessings 
forever, in heaven and upon earth, in thanksgiving 
for all the favors his friends bestow either upon our 
Colony, or our Savages, or ourselves. The time will 
come, — [6] it is not far distant, for life is short, — 
when all things will be seen in their true light, and 
when souls once barbarous, now washed in the blood 
of the lamb, will bestow a thousand benedictions 
upon those who have drawn them from the abyss, 
either through their prayers, or their liberality, or 
their works. Oh how long is eternity ! If only one 
single soul were placed in heaven, what acts of 
thanksgiving will not this spouse of Jesus Christ in 
the lapse of endless ages, render to those who shall 
have been instrumental in her salvation ! She will see 
the felicity she will enjoy and the unhappiness she has 
escaped ; she will commune on the other side of time 
in a familiar and perfect friendship, with those who 
shall have averted her unhappiness and procured her 
blessedness. God! who can conceive the sentiments 
she will feel for them ! My heart melts when I think 
of the souls I see leaving this world, still red with 
the blood of Jesus Christ. Ah! what gentle looks 
they cast upon the Divinity! What thoughts and 
what love have they for those, who, near or far, have 
extended to them a hand to place them in the bosom 
of glory. 

[7] But I could not omit, without some sort of crime. 


52 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.11 

penfees, & quel amour ont elles pour ceux qui de 
pres, ou de loing, leur ont prefte la main, pour les 
loger dans le fein de la gloire. 

[7] Mais ie ne fgaurois obmettre fans quelque efpece 
de crime, que la Reine auffi hautement releuee par 
fes vertus, que par les degrez de fon throfne, n'efl 
point tellement efblouye par les brillans de fa cou- 
ronne, qu'elle ne iette par fois quelque regards vers 
fa nouuelle France. Ie I'ay appris par les lettres de 
la mere Magdalene de fainct lofeph Carmelite, du 
grand Conuent des faux-bourgs fainct lacques. Cette 
bonne ame me tefmoigne auffi que Madame la Prin- 
ceffe a de I'affection pour nos deffeins, auffi bien que 
Monfeigneur le Due d'Anguien fon fils. Voicy fes 
paroles. 

lufques icy il y a vtie grande benediction fur ces pauurcs 
petit es (elle parle des petites filles Sauuages , que nous 
auons enuoye en France,) & la main de Dieu fe voit 
manifejlement dans V affection que tout le monde leur porte, 
&• me fine Madame la Prince Jfe qui dit qu elle prendra celle 
qui nous refie, quand elle aura quatorze ou quinze ans. 
C'efl vn grand bien, car vne bonne & vertueufe Prin- 
ce ffe comme elle efl, pent bcaucoup faire. Oferoy-ie bien 
dire vn petit mot en faueur de cette nouuelle Chre- 
ftienne. Si on luy vouloit donner fon mariage, quand 
elle fera dans I'aage nubile, & puis la faire repaffer 
en ces [8] contrees, ie croy qu'on feroit beaucoup 
pour la gloire de noftre Seigneur: pource qu'vne 
petite fille Sauuage eflant icy a fon aife mariee h. 
quelque Fran9ois, ou Sauuage Chreflien, feroit vne 
puiffante chaifne pour arrefter quelques vnes de fes 
compatriotes errantes, c'efl ou il faut vifer, fi on veut 
puifTamment fecourir cette nation. Ie me promets 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6j7 63 

that the Queen, elevated as high by her virtues as by 
the steps of her throne, is not so dazzled by the splen- 
dors of her crown, that she does not sometimes cast 
her regards upon her new France. I have learned 
this through the letters of mother Magdalene of saint 
Joseph Carmelite, of the great Convent of the fau- 
bourg saint Jacques. This good soul also testifies to 
me that Madame the Princess is interested in our 
plans as well as Monseigneur the Duke d'Anguien, 
her son. ^ Here are her words : 

Thus far great blessings have beett showered upon these 
poor little ones (she is speaking of the little Savage 
girls, whom we have sent to France) and the hand of 
God is plainly manifested in the affection that every one 
shows for tJiein; and even Madame the Princess says she 
will take the one who remains to ns, zuhen she is fourteen 
or fifteefi years old. This is a great blessing, for a good 
and virtuous Princess, as she is, can do much. Dare I 
say one little word in favor of this new Christian? 
If some one would give her a dowry, when she is of 
marriageable age, and then send her back to these 
[8] countries, I believe that much would be accom- 
plished for the glory of our Lord. For a little Sav- 
age girl comfortably settled here, and married to 
some Frenchman or Christian Savage, would be a 
powerful check upon some of her wandering country- 
men. This is the point to be aimed at, if this nation 
is to be effectually succored. I depend greatly upon 
the goodness of our Lord, that he will open the hands 
of some of his friends to bring about the marriage of 
another one, whom we have here in the home of one 
of our Frenchmen, who is now rearing and support- 
ing her. Seeing her grow taller every day, not long 
ago I asked our Fathers who are here what help we 


54 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 11 


bien de la bonte de noftre Seigneur, qu'il fera ouurir 
les mains de qiielques vns de fes amis pour en ma- 
rier vne autre que nous auons icy, en la maifon de 
I'vn de nos Fran9ois, qui la nourrit & entretient main- 
tenant. Comme ie la voy grandir tous les iours, ie 
demanday n'a pas long-temps a nos Peres qui font 
icy, quel fecours nous luy pourrions donner en cas 
qu'elle fe mariaft. Ie propofois de luy faire baftir vne 
petite maifon, & luy faire def richer quelques terres, 
& la nourrir iufques ^ ce qu'elle euft dequoy fuffifam- 
ment, cela fut trouue grand dans nos grandes difficul- 
tez : car en verite les premiers commancemens font 
remplis de tres-grandes defpences, neantmoins apres 
auoir recommande I'affaire h. Dieu, voicy ce que m'en 
refcriuit Ie R. Pere Charles I'Allemant Superieur de 
la refidence de noftre Dame des Anges. Fay penfe 
h ce que [9] vojire Reuerence nous dit V autre tour du nia- 
riage d' Amiskoueian, c ejl Ie ?iom de cette fille, qui n eji 
pas encore baptif^e, ft celuy qui la veut efpoufer ejl vn 
homme craignant Dieu, faifons vn effort, que f^auons 
nous ft Dieu ne veut point entrer par cette port e ? ie m en 
remets 7ieantmoins a vojire Reuerence. Dieu fera tout 
en fon temps, il fgaura fi bien mefnager cet effort, 
qu'il ne difloquera point nos bras, lef quels n'ont point 
d'autre appuy, qu'en fa puiffance. 

Encor que ie fois defia bien auant dans la longueur, 
fi faut-il que ie rende mille & mille actions de graces 
k Madame de Comballet. Ie ferois pluftoft vn cha- 
pitre a part, que de m'oublier d'vn coeur qui n'a 
point d'autre excez que dans 1' amour de fon Dieu, 
ou on ne pent trouuer d'excez. Cette Dame elt 
doiiee d'vn grand efprit, elle regarde dans I'eternite 
les biens qu'elle fait dans les temps, mais fi fes yeux 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION. i637 56 

could give her in case she should marry. I proposed 
to have a little house built and some land cleared 
for her, and to support her until she should have 
enough for herself. This was thought a great un- 
dertaking in our straitened circumstances; for in 
truth first beginnings are fraught with great outlays. 
Nevertheless, after having recommended the matter 
to God, here is what the Reverend Father Charles 
r Allemant, Superior of the residence of nostre Dame 
des Anges, wrote me in regard to it : / have thought 
over what [9] your Reverence said to us the other day about 
the marriage of A^niskoueian (this is the natne of the 
girl who is not yet baptized); if he who wishes to 
marry her is a God-fearing man, let us make an effort; 
how do we know that God will not enter by this door? I 
leave the matter, however, to your Reverence. God will 
do all in his time ; he will know so well how to di- 
rect this effort that it will not dislocate our arms, 
which have no other support than in his strength. 

Although I have already become very tedious, yet 
I must render a thousand thanks to Madame de Com- 
ballet. I would sooner add another chapter than 
be forgetful of a heart which is guilty of no other 
excess than love of its God, in which there can be no 
excess. This Lady is endowed with a great mind; 
she sees in eternity the good which she does in time ; 
but if her eyes, moistened by the waters of a single 
baptism, saw that the salvation of these tribes de- 
pends upon the powerful aid she gives them through 
the establishment and foundation of a Hospital, her 
heart would make use of a language which only speaks 
in silence, the language in which she often communes 
with God, blessing him for having chosen her for so 
great a work. 


56 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 

moiiillez par les eaux d'vn feul baptefme, voyoi[en]t 
que le falut de ces peuples depend du puiflant fecours 
qu'elle leur donne par reftablilTement & la fondation 
d'vn Hofpital, fon coeur tiendroit vn langage qui ne 
fe parle que dans le filence, c'eft le langage qu'elle 
tient fouuent h. Dieu, le benilTant de I'auoir choifie 
pour vn fi grand ouurage. 

[lo] Au refte on fait tant de prieres, tant de voeux, 
on offre tant de Sacrifices pour faire reiifiir fon hon- 
neur, & procurer fa gloire en ces contrees, que cela 
paffe noftre eftonnement. le diray icy pour la der- 
niere fois ce que i'ay fouuent reitere dans les prece- 
dentes Relations, qu'vne infinite de Religieux tres- 
faincts en la maison de Dieu, refpandent leur ame 
deuant fa bonte, pour luy faire refpandre fes miferi- 
cordes, fur vn peuple extremenaent barbare. 

On me mande que les Congregations de la faincte 
Vierge, eflablies en nos maifos, que les efcholiers de 
nos Colleges, ont prefent^ mille & mille fois noftre 
Sauueur a fon Pere pour arracher I'infidelite de I'ame 
des Sauuages. 

La mere Prieure des Carmelites d' Aix en Prouence, 
m'apprend que Madame la Premiere Prefidente de 
cette ville, fondatrice de leur maifon, a pareillement 
eflably vn hermitage dans leur enclos, oii toutes les 
prieres & oraifons, qui s'y feront iamais, feront 
drelTees a Dieu pour le falut de la nouuelle France. 
Tout ce fainct Ordre prend les armes pour nous, auec 
tel ardeur, que i'en fuis tout confus. le n'aurois ia- 
mais fait fi ie voulois produire les fentimens de leur 
coeur [i i] que ie voy deuant mes yeux, couchez dedas 
leurs lettres, c'eft "k qui s'abbaiffera d'auantage de- 
uant Dieu, pour efleuer iufques au ciel des ames, qui 
ne craignent point I'enfer. 


1636 - 37] LE JE UNE S RELA TJON, 1637 hi 

[10] Moreover, so many prayers, so many vows are 
made, and so many Sacrifices are offered to advance 
his honor and secure his glory in these comitries, that 
all this surpasses wonder. I will say here, for the 
last time, what I have often reiterated in the preced- 
ing- Relations, that a vast number of most holy Re- 
ligious in the house of God are throwing open their 
souls before his goodness, to cause him to bestow his 
mercies upon a people barbarous in the extreme. 

Word is sent me that the Congregations of the holy 
Virgin, established in our houses, and the pupils in 
our Colleges, have thousands of times presented our 
Savior to his Father, in order to wrench infidelity 
from the souls of these Savages. 

The Prioress of the Carmelites of Aix in Provence 
informs me that likewise Madame the wife of the 
First President of that city, foundress of their house, 
has established a hermitage in their enclosure, where 
all prayers and orisons which shall ever be offered 
there, will be addressed to God for the salvation of 
new France. All this holy Order takes arms for us 
with so much ardor that I am overwhelmed there- 
with. I should never finish if I tried to exhibit the 
sentiments of their hearts [11] which I see before my 
eyes, contained in their letters. There is a struggle 
among them as to who shall humble herself the most 
before God, to raise to heaven souls which do not 
fear hell. 

There has fallen into my hands a vow signed by 
the Nuns of the Annonciade, lately established at 
Paris, by which they offer all their mortifications, 
their fastings, their prayers, in a word, all their acts 
of holiness, to be united and presented to God with 
our little labors, that it may please him to open the 


58 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.11 

II eft tombe entre mes mains vn voeu fign6 par les 
Religieufes de TAnnonciade, nouuellement eflablies 
a Paris, par lequel elles offrent toutes leurs mortifica- 
tios, leurs ieufnes, leurs prieres, en vn mot, toutes 
leurs fainctes actions, pour eftre vnies & prefentees a 
Dieu auec nos petits trauaux, a ce qu'il luy plaife 
d'ouurir les yeux d'vn peuple aueugle depuis tant de 
fiecles. le ne diray rien des meres Vrfulines, elles 
m'efcriuent auec vn tel feu, & en fi grand nombre, 
& de tant de diuers endroits, que fi on ouuroit la 
porte k leurs defirs, on compoferoit vne ville de Reli- 
gieufes, & il fe trouueroit dix maiftreffes pour vne 
efcholiere. Le fexe, I'aage, les maladies, les coliques 
tres-fenfibles n'empefchet point le facrifice qu' elles 
font "k Dieu de leurs perfonnes, fi elles pouuoient ap- 
porter des villes toutes faites, & des terres toutes 
defrichees, ie ferois d'auis qu'on freflafl des vaifTeaux 
tout expres pour les paffer, autrement non, Dieu les 
entend auffi bien en I'ancienne France, qu'en la nou- 
uelle. Le teps [12] viendra que quelques vnes d' entre 
elles obtiendront ce que demande vne armee, noftre 
Seigneur en fera le choix. 

S'il me falloit rapporter toutes les deuotions des 
Dames de Montmartre, des Religieufes de I'Aue Ma- 
ria ^ Paris, des filles de faincte Marie, de noftre 
Dame, en vn mot d'vne infinite de fainctes maifons, 
ie ferois vne Relation de ce qui fe paffe dans voftre 
France, pour le bien de la noftre. 

Mettons en dernier lieu les Hofpitalieres, puis 
qu' elles doiuent paffer les premieres, ie leur auois 
mande qu' elles m'enuoyaffent les noms de celles qui 
fouhaittoient venir en ces contrees, pour commencer 
cet eftabliff ement : elles me refcriuent vne lettre 


1636 - 37] LE JE UNE 'S RELA TION, 1637 


eyes of a people blind for so many centuries. I will 
say nothing of the Ursuline mothers \' they write me 
with such ardor, and in so great numbers, and from 
so many different places, that if the door were open 
for their desires, a city of Nuns would be formed, 
and there would be found ten teachers to one pupil. 
Sex, age, disease, severe attacks of seasickness, do 
not prevent them from making a sacrifice of their 
persons to God. If they could transport ready-made 
cities and cleared lands, I would advise that ships be 
chartered expressly to bring them over; otherwise, 
not, — God hears them as well in old France as in the 
new. The time [12] will come when some of them 
will obtain what an army of them is demanding ; our 
Lord will make his choice from among them. 

If I had to report all the acts of devotion of the 
Sisters of Montmartre, of the Nuns of Ave Maria at 
Paris, of the daughters of sainte Marie, of nostre 
Dame, — in a word, of a multitude of holy institu- 
tions, I should make a Relation of what is being done 
in your France for the welfare of ours. 

Let us put in the last place the Hospital Nuns,^ 
since they are the first to cross over. I had written 
to them to send me the names of those who wished 
to come to these countries to begin that institution ; 
they wrote me a letter full of edification, concluding 
that it would be necessary to set down the names of 
all in the house. This zeal is praiseworthy ; but let 
them be persuaded, if they please, that those who 
might be too much grieved at not being the first to 
come over, are not the proper persons to come last. 
The spirit of God is not in a violent and troublous 
wind, Sed in aura tenui, f actus est in pace locus ejus, it 
is in the gentleness of peace. Finally, as a conclusion 


60 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 

plaine d' edification, puis elles concluent qu'il fau- 
droit marquer les noms de toute la maifon, cette ar- 
deur elt loiiable, mais qu'elles fe perfuadent, s'il leur 
plaiil, que celles qui s'attrifteroient par trop de ne 
point pafTer les premieres, ne font pas propres de 
paffer les dernieres, I'efprit de Dieu n'eft point dans 
vn fouffle violent, & plein de trouble, Sed in aura te- 
nuis f actus eji in pace locus eius, il eft dans la douceur 
de paix. En fin pour conclufion de ce chapitre, ie 
diray que noflre Seigneur embrafant tant de coeurs, 
animant [13] tant de perfonnes grandes en vertu, & 
en honneur, voulant eftre prie de tant d'endroits, par 
des ames tres-efpurees, nous donne fuiet de croire 
qu'il veut eftre cogneu de ces peuples, & que noflre 
balTelTe ne retardera point la grandeur de fa bonte, 
folicitee par les prieres & les voeux, & par les fecours 
de tant d'ames, qui n'ont point d'autre intereft que 
fa gloire, noftre efpoir eft renferme en ces quatre 
paroles : In patientia vejlra poj^idebitis animas vejiras, 
c'eft dans la feule patience qu'on recueille le fruict 
des ames. II me femble que ie voy deux extremitez 
bien differentes en quelques perfonnes ; les vns atten- 
dent trop toft, les autres reiettent trop loing la con- 
uerfion des Sauuages, la patience fe loge au milieu, 
elle emportera ce que les vns penfent defia tenir, & 
qu'ils n'auront pas fi toft. Elle iouyra en fon temps 
de ce que les autres defefperent. O que ie ferois 
heureux d'eitre vn petit grain de fable, iette dans les 
plus creux fondemens de cette Eglife, fi 1' edifice n'eft 
pas fi toft efleue, il en fera plus ferme, & mieux fon- 
d^. Ainfi foit-il. 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 61 

to this chapter, I will say that our Lord, kindling so 
many hearts, animating [13] so many persons great 
in virtue and in honor, wishing to be prayed to from 
so many places by the most purified souls, gives us 
reason to believe that he intends to be known to these 
peoples, and that our littleness will not hinder the ex- 
cellence of his goodness, solicited by the prayers and 
vows, and by the help of so many souls, who have 
no other interests than his glory. Our hope is con- 
tained in these four words : In patientia vestra posside- 
bitis animus vestras, in patience alone is gathered the 
harvest of souls. It seems to me I see two quite op- 
posite extremes in various persons ; some expect too 
soon, the others postpone too far, the conversion of 
the Savages. Patience abides on middle ground, — it 
will accomplish what some think they already hold, 
and what they will not have so soon ; it will enjoy 
in its own time what others despair of. O that I 
might be blessed in being a little grain of sand cast 
into the depths of the foundation of this Church ! If 
the edifice is not so soon erected, it will be firmer 
and more solid. So be it. 


62 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 


[13 i.e., 14] CHAPITRE II. 

DES BONS DEPORTEMENS DE NOS FRANgOIS. 

IL y a des terres fi bonnes & fi fertiles, qu'elles ren- 
dent le grain meilleur que la femence, qu'on leur 
a donne. II y en ade li malignes, quelles chan- 
gent le bon grain en matitiais, metamorphofant le 
froment en feigle, & faifant degenerer I'orge en 
auoine: mais ie ne crois pas qu'il s'en trouue aucune 
dans le fein de la nature qui produife des efpics de 
froment, pour n'auoir receu que de la graine de char- 
dons. Ce miracle neantmoins fe fait alTez fouuent 
en la nouuelle France. Tous les ans les vaiffeaux 
nous apportent quantity de perfonnes qui viennent 
groffir noftre Colonic, ce nombre eft mefle comme la 
monnoye d'or & de faux aloy, il eft compofe d'ames 
d' elites & bien choifies, & d'autres bien baffes & bien 
rauallees. Or il me femble que ie puis dire auec 
verite, que le Sol de la nouuelle France eft arroufe 
[15] de tant de benedictions celeftes, que les ames 
nourries ^ la vertu y trouuent leur vray element, & 
partant s'y portent mieux qu'ailleurs; pour celles 
que leurs vices ont rendu malades, non feulement 
elles n'empirent point; mais bien fouuent venant ^ 
refpirer vn air falubre, & bien efloigne des occaflons 
du peclie, changeant de climat, elles changent de 
vie, & benillent cent mille fois la douce prouidence 
de Dieu, qui leur a fait trouuer la porte de la felicite, 
ou les autres n'apprehendent que des miferes. II eft 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 63 


[13 i.e., 14] CHAPTER II. 

OF THE GOOD CONDUCT OF OUR FRENCH. 

THERE are lands so good and fertile that they 
produce better grain than the seeds sown in 
them. There are some so malignant that they 
change the good grain into bad, transforming wheat 
into rye, and causing barley to degenerate into oats. 
But I do not believe there is to be found in the 
bosom of nature any land which produces heads of 
wheat after having received only thistle seeds. Yet 
this miracle happens quite often in new France. 
Every year the ships bring us many people who come 
to increase our Colony ; this number, like coin, is of 
mingled gold and base alloy ; it is composed of choice 
and well-selected souls, and of others indeed base 
and degraded. Now it seems to me that I can say 
with truth that the Soil of new France is watered 
[15] by so many heavenly blessings, that souls 
nourished in virtue find here their true element, 
and are consequently healthier than elsewhere. As 
for those whose vices have rendered them diseased, 
they not only do not grow worse, but very often, 
coming to breathe a salubrious air, and far removed 
from opportunities for sin, changing climate they 
change their lives, and a thousand times bless the 
sweet providence of God, which has made them find 
the door to felicity where others fear only misery. 
To be sure, we take pains everywhere to instruct 
our French ; everywhere the word of God is preached ; 


64 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 11 

vray qu'on prend peine par tout d'inftruire nos Fran- 
§ois; par tout on prefche la parole de Dieu. II n'y 
a lieu ou on n'explique la doctrine de lefus Chrift, 
nos Eglifes ou nos Chappelles font par tout trop 
petites, c'eft vne confolation bien fenfible, de les voir 
ordinairement remplies, vfqiie ad cornu altaris. Le P. 
Adam qui a quitte la plus grande partie de fa para- 
lyse, dans les grands froids de I'Hyuer, oil les autres 
la prennent ordinairement, auoit pris pour fa part 
I'inflruction de ceux, qui demeurent a noftre Dame 
des Anges: mais il a efte efcoute de quantite d' autres 
perfonnes, & a trouue tant de facilite das quelques 
vns de fes auditeurs, qu'il faifoit rendre compte ^ 
quelques ieunes [i6] hommes des poincts de la do- 
ctrine, qu'il leur auoit enfeigne, d'oii s'enfuiuoit vne 
emulation pleine d'edification, & de profit. Les en- 
fans & les ieunes gens de la doctrine Chreftienne de 
noftre Dame de Recouurance a Kebec ont tellement 
agree, qu'encor qu'il y eufl eu predication le matin, 
& qu'a I'ordinaire des Feftes & des Dimanches, on 
euft chante vne haute MelTe ; on ne lailToit point It 
I'ifTue des Vefpres, d' entendre la doctrine Chre- 
ftienne ; en forte que la Chapelle eftoit auffi plaine k 
la fin qu'au commencement. Et ia9oit que le Pere 
de Quen ait long-temps continue ce fainct exercice, 
non feulement on ne s'en eft point ennuie, ains on 
a pris plaifir a le voir inftruire auec induftrie les 
petits & les grands. En vn mot Dieu a efte ferui 
dans fes maifons, les predications bien ouyes, tant a 
Kebec, qu'aux trois Riuieres, oil le Pere Buteux in- 
ftruifoit ordinairement nos Frangois, chacun des no- 
ftres a efte occupe a entendre plufieurs confeffions, & 
particulieres & generales, il s'eft paffe fort peu de 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib37 65 

there is no place where the doctrine of Jesus Christ 
is not explained. Our Churches or Chapels are by 
far too small; it is a very real consolation to see 
them usually filled, usque ad cornu altaris. Father 
Adam,^ who has almost recovered from his paralysis 
in the great severity of the Winter, when the others 
usually contract it, had assumed as his share the 
instruction of those who lived at nostre Dame des 
Anges ; but he was listened to by many other people, 
and found so much readiness to learn in some of his 
auditors, that he had a few of the young [i6] men re- 
cite some of the doctrinal points that he had taught 
them; whence there ensued a spirit of emulation 
full of edification and profit. The children and 
young people of nostre Dame de Recouvrance at 
Kebec were so pleased with the Christian doctrine, 
that, although there had been preaching in the 
morning, and although high Mass was usually sung 
on Holydays and Sundays, yet at the close of Ves- 
pers they did not fail to stay and hear the Christian 
doctrine ; so that the Chapel was as full at the end as 
at the beginning. And although Father de Quen 
continued this holy exercise for a long time, not 
only the people did not grow weary of it, but they 
took pleasure in seeing his skillful instruction of both 
children and adults. In a word, God has been wor- 
shiped in his houses, preaching has been well re- 
ceived both at Kebec and at the three Rivers, where 
Father Buteux usually instructed our French peo- 
ple ; each of our brethren has been occupied in hear- 
ing many confessions, both ordinary and general; 
very few Holydays and Sundays during the Winter 
have passed in which we have not seen and received 
persons at the table of our Lord. And certain ones 


66 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 11 

Feftes, & de Dimanches, pendant I'Hyuer, que nous 
n'ayons veu, & receu des perfonnes ^ la table de 
noftre Seigneur. Et tel qui de trois, de quatre, & 
de cinq ans ne s'efloient confeffez en [17] I'ancienne 
France, s'approchent maintenant en la nouuelle, plus 
fouuent que tous les mois, de ce Sacrement fi falu- 
taire, les prieres fe font a genoux & publiquement, 
non feulement au fort, mais auffi chez les families, & 
efcoiiades, efparces 9a & la. Comme nous auons pris 
pour patrone de I'Eglife de Kebec, la faincte Vierge, 
fous le tiltre de fa Conception, que nous croyons im- 
maculee, auffi en auons nous fait la Fefte auec folem- 
nite, & reiouyffance. Aux premieres Vefpres on 
planta le Drapeau fur vn baftion du fort au bruit du 
canon, & des le matin au poinct du iour Tartillerie 
refueilla noftre joye. Les habitans mefme tefmoi- 
gnans leur deuotion enuers la faincte Vierge, & la 
creance qu'ils ont de fa purete des le moment de fa 
Conception, firent vne faluade de moufquets ou d'har- 
quebufes, & plufieurs s'approcherent de la faincte 
table en fon honneur. 

La Felle du glorieux Patriarche fainct lofeph, Pere, 
Patron, & Protecteur de la nouuelle France, eft I'vne 
des grandes folemnitez de ce pays ; la veille de ce iour, 
qui nous eft fi cher, on arbora le Drapeau, & fit-on 
ioiier le canon, comme i'ay dit cy deffus. Monfieur 
le Gouuerneur fit faire des feux de [18] reiouyffance, 
auffi pleins d' artifices, que i'en aie gueres veu en 
France, d'vn cofte on auoit dreffe vn pau, fur lequel 
paroiffoit le nom de fainct lofeph en lumieres, au 
deffus de ce nom facre brilloient quatite de chan- 
delles h. feu, d'oii partirent dixhuict ou vingt petits 
f erpenteaux, qui firent merueille : on auoit mis der- 


Voicy la figure dc cct edifice. 



Cettt iiguce ce met cu la page i$, dt UReUtioa de Canada}. 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 67 

who for three, four, and five years had not confessed 
in [17] old France, now, in the new, approach this 
so salutary Sacrament of tener than once a month ; 
prayers are offered kneeling and in public, not only 
at the fort, but also in families and little companies 
scattered here and there. As we have taken for pa- 
troness of the Church of Kebec the holy Virgin under 
the title of her Conception, which we believe to be 
immaculate, so we have celebrated this Festival with 
solemnity and rejoicing. At the first Vespers a Flag 
was raised on the bastion of the fort to the sound of 
cannon; and in the morning, at dawn, the artillery 
renewed our joy. Even the inhabitants, in testimony 
of their devotion to the blessed Virgin, and their be- 
lief in her purity from the moment of her Conception, 
fired a salute of muskets or arquebuses, and many 
approached the holy table in her honor. 

The Festival of the glorious Patriarch saint Joseph, 
Father, Patron, and Protector of new France, is one 
of the great solemnities of this country. On the eve 
of this day, which is so dear to us, the Flag was 
hoisted, and the cannon fired, as I have said above. 
Monsieur the Governor had an exhibition of fireworks, 
[18] as artistically devised as almost any I have seen 
in France; on one side a skin was stretched, upon 
which appeared, in illuminated letters, the name of 
saint Joseph ; above this sacred name burned a num- 
ber of lighted candles from which sprang eighteen 
or twenty little serpents, which performed wonders. 
Behind this first contrivance had been placed fourteen 
large rockets, which were sent up, one after the 
other, to the astonishment of the French and still 
more of the Savages, who had never before seen any- 
thing of the kind. They wondered at the rain of 


68 


LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol. 11 


riere cette premiere inuention quatorze groHes fufees, 
qu'on fit enleuer les vnes apres les autres, auec 
I'eftonnement des Frangois, & bien plus des Sau- 
tiages, qui n'auoient iamais rien veu de femblable, ils 
adtniroient la pluie d'or, ou de feu, & les efloiles qui 
retomboient de fort haut. Le feu des fufees fe por- 
tant tantofl tout droit, maintenant comme en arcade, 
& toufiours bien haut dedans I'air. 

Alfez proche de la, on auoit dreffe vn petit cha- 
fleau, fort bien proportionne, & enrichi de diuerfes 
couleurs, il efloit fianqu6 de quatre tourelles, rem- 
plies de chandelles a feu, qui faifoient voir par leur 
clarte toute cette petite batterie k defcouuert. II 
y auoit a I'entour de cette machine feize groffes lances 
k feu, reueftues de fauffiffons. Au quatre coins 
d'icelle on voioit quatre roiies mouuantes, & vne autre 
plus grade au deffus du chafteau qui tournoit a I'en- 
tour d'vne croix a feu, efclairee [19] de quantite de 
chandelles ardentes, qui la faifoient paroiflre comme 
toute couuerte de diamas. De plus on auoit mis ^ 
I'entour de cette fortereffe, en egale diflance quatre 
groffes trompes, d'ou Ton vit fauter treize douzaines 
de ferpenteaux, fortans fix k fix auec vne iufte di- 
flance, & quatre douzaines de fufees, qui fe deuoient 
enleuer douze a la fois. Voicy la figure de cet edifice. 
Le fieur Bourdon auoit dreffe cette machine, & le 
fieur de Beaulieu auoit compofe les feux d'artifice. 
Sur le foir Monfieur le Gouuerneur, & Monfieur de 
I'Ifle, & tons nos Meffieurs fortirent du fort, & s'en 
vindrent aupres de I'Eglife, au lieu deftine pour ces 
feux de joye. Tons les habitas de la nouuelle France, 
voifins de Kebec, fe trouuerent k cette rejouiffance ; 
les tenebres de la nuict ay at couuert le ciel, & la 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1637 


69 


gold, or of fire, and at the stars which descended 
from far above,— the fire of the rockets shooting 
straight upward, then curving around, and all the 
time very high in the air. 

Near by they had erected a little castle, very well 
proportioned, and adorned with divers colors ; it was 
flanked by four small towers filled with lighted can- 
dles, which showed all this little battery in full view. 
Around this piece of mechanism there were sixteen 
large rods enveloped in saucissons.^o At its four 
comers were seen four spinning wheels, and another 
larger one above the castle, which revolved around 
a cross of fire, lighted [19] by a number of burning 
candles, which made it look as if covered with dia- 
monds. Besides this, there had been placed around 
this fortress, at equal distances, four large cylinders, 
whence could be seen springing forth thirteen dozen 
serpents, darting out six at a time, and at regular 
intervals; and four dozen rockets, which were to as- 
cend twelve at a time. Here is the shape of this 
edifice. 

Sieur Bourdon " had constructed this contrivance, 
and sieur de Beaulieu ^^ had manufactured the fire- 
works. Towards evening Monsieur the Governor 
and Monsieur de I'lsle, and all our Gentlemen emerged 
from the fort and came near the Church, to the 
place selected for these fireworks. All the inhabi- 
tants of new France, in the vicinity of Kebec, were 
present at this rejoicing. The shades of night had 
covered the sky and the earth, when sieur de Beau- 
lieu presented a lighted brand to Monsieur the Gov- 
ernor, who set on fire the device,— having it ex- 
plained to the Savages, especially to the Hurons, 


70 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.11 

terre, le fieur de Beaulieu prefenta vn boutefeux k 
Monfieur le Gouuerneur, qui alluma cette machine, 
& fit dire aux Sauuages, notamment aux Hurons, 
que les Fran9ois eftoient plus puiffans que les De- 
mons, qu'ils commandoiet au feu, & que s'ils vou- 
loient brufler les bourgades de leurs ennemis, qu'ils 
auroient bien toft fait. 

Le iour de la Fefte noftre Eglife fut remplie de 
monde, & de deuotion, quafi comme [20] en vn iour 
de Pafques, chacun beniffant Dieu de nous auoir don- 
n6 pour protecteur, le protecteur & I'Ange Gardien 
(pour ainfi dire) de lefus-Chrift fon Fils. C'efl a mon 
aduis par fa faueur, & par fes merites, que les habi- 
tans de la nouuelle France demeurans fur les riues 
du grand ileuue fainct Laurens, ont refolu de rece- 
uoir toutes les bonnes couftumes de I'ancienne, & de 
refufer I'entree aux mauuaifes. 

Voicy vne loy faincte, publiee & receue auec amour 
& honneur dans le fein de nos temples, c'eft qu'en 
ces lieux facrez, oti on va adorer le crucifix, charge 
de mefpris, on n'a point d'egard du tout k la prefe- 
ance; mal heur a celuy, qui par fon orgueil attentera 
de violer cette faincte couftume. Helas s'il falloit 
prendre garde a qui c'eft k paffer deuant, quand il 
faut aller adorer lefus-Chrift attache en croix, nous fe- 
rions vne Babylone, aulieu d'vne faincte Sion, & nous 
irions chercher I'humilite auec orgueil. le benis 
Dieu de ce que les efprits, qui auroient plus d'in- 
terefts felon le monde dans ces prefeances, ou meffe- 
ances pour les nommer ainfi, font les premiers k foul- 
ler aux pieds ces puerilitez indignes d'vn efprit fort. 
Et a dire vrai, tant que nous aurons vn Gouuerneur 
[21] ami de la vertu, & que nous aurons la parole 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 71 

that the French were more powerful than Demons, 
that they commanded the fire; and that, if they 
wished to burn the villages of their enemies, they 
could soon do it. 

On this Holyday our Church was full of people and 
of devotion, almost as [20] it is on an Easter day, — 
all blessing God for having given us as a protector 
the foster father and Guardian Angel (so to speak) of 
Jesus Christ, his Son. It is, in my opinion, through 
his favor and through his merits, that the inhabi- 
tants of new France who live upon the banks of the 
great river saint Lawrence, have resolved to receive 
all the good customs of the old and to refuse admis- 
sion to the bad ones. 

Here is a holy law published and received with 
love and honor in the bosom of our churches, — that 
in these sacred places, where people go to adore the 
crucifix, so charged with ignominy, no attention 
whatever is paid to precedence; woe to him who, 
through pride, shall attempt to violate this holy 
custom. Alas, if we had to consider whose right it 
is to pass first when it is a question of adoring Jesus 
Christ bound to the cross, we should create a Babylon 
instead of a holy Sion, and we would go in pride to 
seek humility. I bless God that those persons who, 
according to the world, would be most concerned in 
these precedences, or in these indecorous actions, to 
call them thus, are the first to trample under foot 
these puerilities unworthy of a strong character. 
And to tell the truth, so long as we have a Governor 
[21] who is a friend of virtue and so long as we have 
free speech in the Church of God, the monster of am- 
bition will have no Altar there. I almost forgot to 


72 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 

libredansTEglife de Dieu, le monftre d'ambition n'y 
aura point d'Autel. I'oubliois quafi de dire que nous 
auons parle de Dieu en fa maifon, en langue Latine, 
Fran9oife, Montagnefe, & Huronne ; mais cela fe de- 
duira plus particulierement es chapitres fuiuans. 

Les vaiffeaux nous auoient laiffe deux perfonnes 
de la Religion pretendue, elles fe font rangees h. la 
verite de I'Eglife Catholique, & ont protefle publi- 
quement qu'ils defiroient viure & mourir en cette 
faincte creance. 

I'aurois icy vne priere a faire a tons ceux qui veu- 
lent porter iugement de I'eflat de noflre peuplade ; 
c'efl de fermer les yeux pendant que les nauires font 
h. I'ancre, k nos ports, & de les ouurir h. leur depart, 
ou quelque temps apres, dans la douce veue de nos 
compatriotes, on fe veut refiouir, & on tornbe dans 
I'excez; les bonnes couftumes s'affoupiffent, le vice 
commance a vouloir leuer la tefte, on fait plus de 
degafl de boiffons, & de rafraichiffemens pendant ce 
temps-la, qu'en tout le refle de I'annee. Ceux qui 
arriuent de nouueau, & qui ont leu dans la Relation, 
que tout procedoit [22] icy dans vn bon ordre, voyans 
quelques dilTolutions nous condamnent aifement, & 
pent eflre couchent encor dans les lettres qu'ils en- 
uoient en France I'arrefl de nollre condamnation ; 
ayans en effect quelque fuiet d'improuuer vn mal, au- 
quel il eft affez difficile de remedier, mais quand la 
flotte eft partie, que les vifites ceffent, que I'Hyuer 
commance a nous rallier, qu'on prefle I'oreille a la 
parole de Dieu, & que ceux qui fe font emancipez, 
recognoiffent leurs fautes; alors ceux qui ont creu 
que le defordre regnoit en noflre Colonic, en louent 
auec ioye la piete & la deuotion, pourueu qu'ils ne 


1636-37] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 73 

say that we have spoken of God in his house in the 
Latin, French, Montagn^s, and Huron tongues. But 
that will be taken up more in detail in the following 
chapters. 

The ships had left us two persons of the pretended 
Religion. They have come over to the truth of the 
Catholic Church, and have publicly protested that 
they desired to live and die in this holy belief. 

I have here a request to make, of all those who 
wish to express an opinion of the condition of our 
colony, — to close their eyes while the ships are at 
anchor in our ports, and to open them at their depar- 
ture, or shortly afterwards, to the agreeable sight of 
our countrymen. They wish to make merry, and 
they fall into excesses; their good habits grow 
drowsy, and vice begins to try to raise its head; 
there is a greater indulgence in drink and feasting 
during that time than in all the rest of the year. 
Those who have just arrived and who have read in 
the Relations that everything is done [22] here in an 
orderly way, seeing some dissoluteness, readily con- 
demn us, and perhaps insert in the letters they write 
to France the sentence of our condemnation, having 
in fact some reason to disapprove an evil which it is 
difficult enough to remedy. But when the fleet has 
departed, when visits come to an end, when the Win- 
ter begins to rally us, how they lend ear to the word 
of God, and how those who have taken too much lib- 
erty recognize their shortcomings ! Then those who 
thought that lawlessness reigned in our Colony, joy- 
fully praise the piety and devotion thereof, provided 
they are not terrified and do not cry out that all is 
lost when they see, now and then, the misdeeds of a 


74 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.11 

s'effarent pas, & qu'ils ne crient point, que tout eft 
perdu, pour voir les deffauts de temps en temps de 
quelques particuliers : car encor bien que ie loue, & 
que i'honore grandement nos Frangois de la nouuelle 
France, ie ne nie pas, que nous n'aions des infirmes 
& des malades. Ie f9ais qu'il y a des ames fales, 
qui par leurs paroles brutales f9andalifent les Sau- 
uages; ces Barbares me difent affez fouuent, tu dis 
qu'il ne faut point defrober, & tes Frangois nous ont 
pris telles chofes; tu dis que les yurongnes iront en 
enfer dans les feux, vn tel fera done damn6, car il eft 
toufiours yure. II eft certain, [23] qu'il vaudroit 
mieux eftre attache a vne meule de moulin, & eftre 
iette dans la mer, que de fgandalifer ces pauures infi- 
deles ; & quiconque Ie fait rendra compte du fang de 
lefus-Chriit, qu'il empefche d'eftre applique a ces 
pauures ames : mais ces deffauts font de peu de per- 
fonnes, & de gens de neant. Tous ceux qui tiennent 
icy quelque rang d'honneur, ne tombent point dans ces 
excez qui f e voilent, & f e cachent dans la nuict : car ils 
n'oferoient paroiftre "k defcouuert. La vertu par la 
grace de noftre Seigneur marche icy la tefte leu6e, 
elle eft dans I'honneur & dans la gloire, Ie peche dans 
I'obfcurite, & dans la confufion. Tous les principaux 
de noflre Colonic honorent la Religion, ie Ie dis auec 
ioye, & benediction de Dieu, ceux que fa bonte nous 
a donne pour commander, & ceux encor qui fe vont 
eftabliffant en ces contrees, gouftent, cheriffent, & 
veulent fuiure les maximes les plus fmceres du vrai 
Chriftianifme. N'eft-ce pas vne chofe bien loiiable 
d'accorder des foldats auec des artifans, des Francois 
ramaffez de diuers endroits auec des Sauuages, tenir 
tout en bride & dans vne profonde paix, gaigner 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 75 

few individuals. For although I praise and greatly 
honor our French people of new France, I do not 
deny that we have some who are weak and diseased. 
I know there are loose fellows who scandalize the 
Savages through their brutal language. These Bar- 
barians say to me quite often, " Thou sayest one 
must not steal, and yet thy French have taken from 
us such and such things ; thou sayest drunkards will 
go into the fires of hell, then such and such a one 
will be damned, for he is always drunk," Surely 
[23] it would be far better to be tied to a millstone 
and thrown into the sea, than to scandalize these 
poor infidels; and whoever does it shall render an 
account for the blood of Jesus Christ which he pre- 
vents from being applied to these poor souls. But 
these are the faults of very few persons, and of 
those of no consequence. All those who hold an 
honorable position here do not fall into these ex- 
cesses, which are covered and hidden by the night, 
for they would not dare to show themselves openly. 
Virtue, by the grace of our Lord, walks here with 
its head erect, in honor and in glory; sin, in ob- 
scurity and in confusion. All the principal person- 
ages of our Colony honor Religion ; I say with joy 
and God's blessing, that those whom his goodness has 
given to command over us, and those also who are 
coming to establish themselves in these countries, 
enjoy, cherish, and wish to follow the most sincere 
maxims of true Christianity. Is it not a very praise- 
worthy thing to harmonize soldiers, and artisans, and 
Frenchmen, gathered from different regions, with 
Savages ; to hold all in check and in profound peace, 
and to gain the affection of all? It is the skill, [24] 


76 LES RELATIONS DES j6SUITES [Vol.11 

I'affection des vns & des autres. C'eft rinduftrie [24] 
la prudence, & la fageffe de Monfieur le Cheualier de 
Montmagny noftre Gouuerneur, qui fait cette efpece 
de miracle, ie crois que ie parle auec le fentiment de 
tous ceux qui font fous fa conduitte. Nous auons de 
tres-particulieres obligations a noftre grand Roy, k 
Monfeigneur le Cardinal, & a Meffieurs de la Compa- 
gnie, & nous leur rendons de tres-humbles actions 
de graces, de nous auoir donne vn homme fi vaillant, 
fi. bien verfe dans toutes fortes de cognoiffances ; fi 
propre a commander, & ce que ie mets deuant toutes 
ces grandes perfections fi peu intereffe pour la terra, 
& grandement intereffe pour Dieu. II eft le premier 
dans les actions de piete, fe trouue aux exercices des 
plus petits, & par ce moyen les rend honorables aux 
plus grands ; le premier mobile emporte & rauit dans 
fon mouuement tous les autres cieux, & cet homme 
de Dieu, aime de Dieu & des hommes, marchant 
dans les voies de Dieu, y tire apres foy les hommes. 
Ie demandoisn'a pas long-temps, a vn bon vieillard, 
s'il ne mariroit point fa filleule, ayant appris que 
plufieurs la recherchoient : fon pere, & fa mere, ny 
moy (refpondit-il) ne fommes point preffez de I'efloi- 
gner de nous, tant que Monfieur noftre [25] Gouuer- 
neur fera icy, & que vous autres, mes Peres, aurez 
toute liberte & authorite de reprendre nos vices, & 
nous monftrer le chemin du ciel, rien ne nous obli- 
gera de la marier. La iuftice regne icy, I'infolence 
en eft bannie, 1' impudence n'oferoit leuer latefte; 
mais quand Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur s'en ira, 
nous ferons en peine de la mettre en lieu d'alleu- 
rance: car nous ne fgauons pas qui viendra apres 
luy. Dieu nous le conferue pour vn long temps. II 


1636-37] LEJEUNE'S RELATION, i637 77 

prudence, and wisdom of Monsieur the Chevalier de 
Montmagny, our Governor, which works this kind of 
miracle. I believe I am uttering the sentiments of all 
those who are under his rule. We are under very sin- 
gular obligations to our great King, to Monseigneur 
the Cardinal, and to the Gentlemen of the Company, 
and we render to them very humble thanks, for having 
given us a man so valiant and so well versed in all 
kinds of knowledge; so fit to command, and, what I 
place before all these great qualities, so little inter- 
ested in the world, and so greatly concerned for God. 
He is the first in pious acts, is present at the least 
important services, and in this way makes them hon- 
orable in the eyes of the greatest personages. The 
primum mobile takes up and carries away in its move- 
ment all the other heavenly spheres; and this man 
of God, loved by God and by men, walking in the 
footsteps of God, draws men along with him. I 
asked a good old man not long ago if he would not 
give his goddaughter in marriage, having learned 
that many were seeking her, " Neither her father, 
nor her mother, nor I " (he answered), " are in haste 
to send her away from us, as long as Monsieur our 
[25] Governor shall be here; and as long as you, my 
Fathers, shall have full liberty and authority to cor- 
rect our vices and to show us the way to heaven, 
nothing shall oblige us to marry her. Justice reigns 
here, insolence is banished, and shamelessness would 
not dare to raise its head. But when Monsieur our 
Governor shall go away, we shall have trouble in 
putting her in a place of safety ; for we do not know 
who will come after him." May God preserve him 
to us for a long time. It is very important to intro- 
duce good laws and pious customs in these early be- 


78 LES RELA TIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol. 11 

eft extremement important d'introduire de bonnes 

loix, & de fainctes couflnmes, en ces premiers com- 

mancemens : car ceux qui viendront apres nous, mar- 

cheront fur nos brif^es, & fuiuront aif^ment la pante 

[sc. parte] que nous leur aurons don- 

n6, foit k la vertu, foit 

au vice. 


1636 - 37] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 79 

ginnings, for those who shall come after us will walk 
in our footsteps, and will readily conform to the ex- 
ample given them by us, whether 
tending to virtue or 
to vice. 


80 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.11 


[26] CHAPITRE III. 

DES SAUUAGES QUI ONT RECEU LE BAPTESME. 

NOS Sauuages font toufiours fauuages, ils reffem- 
blent aux oyfeaux de paffage de leur pays, 
parfois il fe trouue en certaine faifon, des 
tourterelles en fi grande abondace, qu'on ne voit 
point les extremitez de leur armee quand elles volent 
en gros ; d'autref ois en la mefme faifon, elles ne pa- 
roiffent qu'en bien plus petites trouppes. II en eft 
de mefme de quantite d'autres oifeaux, de poiffons, 
& d'animaux terreftres, ils varient felon les annees, 
& nos Sauuages les imitent en cette inconftance. 
Ephrahaim ficut auis auolauit. Tantofl ils viennent 
en gros, puis en detail, quoy qu'il en foit, voicy les 
fruicts qu'on a recueilli de ceux qui ont demeure pro- 
che de nos habitations. 

L'an paffe nous baptifafmes enuiron cent Sau- 
uages, cette annee nous en auons baptife plus de trois 
cens en tout, tant aux Hurons qu'k Kebec, & aux 
trois Riuieres. Le premier qui a receu cette faueur 
a Kebec, fe nommoit Tifiko en fa lague, c'eft Tvn des 
Seminariftes [27] Hurons, dont ie parlerai en fon 
lieu. Le P. Charles I'Allemant le baptifa eftant 
prefque a I'agonie, & luy donna le nom de Fran9ois. 

Le 19. de Septembre vn autre Seminarifte nomme 
Satouta, fut fait Chreftien & nomme Robert en fon 
baptefme, nous en parlerons auffi au chapitre du Se- 
minaire des Hurons. 


1636-37] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i637 81 


[26] CHAPTER III. 

OF THE SAVAGES WHO HAVE RECEIVED BAPTISM. 

OUR Savages are always savage, they resemble 
the migratory birds of their own country. In 
one season turtledoves are sometimes found 
in such abundance that the end of their army cannot 
be seen when they are flying in a body; at other 
times in the same season they appear only in small 
flocks. It is the same with many other birds, with 
fish, and with terrestrial animals, — they vary accord- 
ing to the year. Our Savages are like them in this 
inconstancy. Ephrahaim sicut avis avolavit. Some- 
times they come in a body, sometimes singly. Be 
that as it may, here are the fruits that have been 
gathered from those who have lived near our settle- 
ments. 

Last year we baptized about one hundred Sav- 
ages; this year, we have baptized more than three 
hundred in all, including those among the Hurons, 
at Kebec, and at the three Rivers. The first to re- 
ceive this grace at Kebec was called Tisiko in his own 
language; he is one of the Seminarists [27] from the 
Hurons, of whom I shall speak in the proper place. 
Father Charles I'Allemant baptized him when he was 
almost in the last agony, and gave him the name of 
Francois. 

On the 19th of September another Seminarist, 
named Satouta, was made a Christian, and named 


82 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 


La troifiefme qui a eu entree en I'Eglife de Dieu, 
a efte vne petite fille, qui me fut apportee, comme 
i'eftois h. la Riuiere des prairies, auec Monfieur noftre 
Gouuerneur; fa mere la voyant malade, & me ren- 
contrant la par cas fortuit, me dit, nous venons de 
bien haut fur le grand fieuue, ie me fuis depefch^e 
de venir deuant les autres, qui viennent apres moy, 
pour vous prefenter ma fille malade, afin que vous 
la baptifiez, comme vous auez fait mes autres en- 
fans. Ie la voulois mener a Kebec, mais puis que 
ie te rencontre icy, tiens, la voila prie pour elle ; or 
voiant que I'enfant fe portoit affez bien, ie luy dis 
qu'elle defcedift iufques aux trois Riuieres, qu'elle y 
trouueroit mon frere le P. Buteux, qui luy accorde- 
roit fa demande, elle entre done dans fon canot, & 
ne manque pas d'aller trouuer le Pere, qu'elle aborda 
la larme a I'ceil, luy parlant en ces termes. 

Voicy le quatriefme de mes enfans, que ie [28] 
vous prefente, i'efpere que le baptefme luy fera plus 
fauorable pour le corps, qu'il n'a efl6 aux trois au- 
tres ; mais quand elle ne deuroit pas guerir, ne lailTe 
pas de luy faire felon voflre couftume : car ce que 
vous faites, ne pent eftre manuals, puis que vous 
nous cheriffez tons. Le P. la baptifa le 26. de Sep- 
tembre, Monfieur de Chafteau-fort fut fon parrain, 
& luy donna nom Marie, bien toft apres elle s'enuola 
au ciel, auec fes freres & foeurs, fi bien que cette pau- 
ure femme barbare, a quatre enfans en Paradis, Dieu 
luy vueille donner le bien qu'elle procure a fes enfans. 

Le 5. de Nouembre le P. de Quen baptifa vn ieune 
gargon, aage d'enuiron quatorze ans; nous I'auions 
inftruit auparauat, le fieur Oliuier fut fon parrain, & 
luy dona no Martin, fes parens firent voir qu'ils 


1636 - 37] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 


Robert in his baptism ; we shall speak of him also in 
the chapter on the Seminary for Hurons. 

The third who has entered the Church of God was 
a little g-irl who was brought to me when I was at 
the River des prairies with Monsieur our Governor. 
When her mother found she was sick, meeting- me 
by chance, she said to me, " We come from far up on 
the great river; I have hastened on ahead of the 
others, who are coming after me, to present to you 
my sick child, that you may baptize her as you have 
my other children. I intended to take her to Kebec ; 
but, as I have met thee here, see, here she is, pray 
for her." Now seeing that the child was tolerably 
well, I told her to go down to the three Rivers ; that 
she would find my brother. Father Buteux, there, 
and he would grant her request. She went in her 
canoe, and did not fail to find the Father, whom she 
addressed, with tears in her eyes, in these words : 

" Look, here is the fourth of my children whom I 
[28] present to you ; I hope that baptism will be more 
favorable to her body than it has been to those of the 
other three ; but even if she shall not get well, do not 
fail to do with her according to your custom; for 
what you do cannot be bad, since you all love us." 
The Father baptized her on the 26th of September; 
Monsieur de Chasteau-fort was her sponsor, and gave 
her the name Marie ; soon afterwards she flew away 
to heaven, to be with her brothers and sisters, so 
that this poor barbarian woman has four children in 
Paradise. May God grant her the blessing she has 
procured for her children. 

On the 5th of November Father de Quen baptized 
a boy about fourteen years old, whom he had previ- 
ously instructed. Sieur Olivier was his sponsor, and 


84 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 11 


efloient fort contens, qu'on enfeignaft leur fils. le 
fuis eftonne que ces barbares, voyans leurs enfans 
defefperez pour la fante du corps, font tres-aifes, du 
moins plufieurs d'entr'eux, qu'on leur procure le 
ciel. Et quand ils fe portent bien, ils ne fe foucient 
que de la terre. Mais helas! ce malheur n'efl pas fi 
particulier aux Pay ens, que ceux mefme qui ont la 
foy, & qui portent le nom de Chreftien [29] n'y par- 
ticipent. Combien voit on de perfonnes dans 1' Eu- 
rope, dont I'ame eft fi attach^e a la terre, qu'elle ne 
la quitte, que lors qu'on met leur corps en terre. le 
remarquay en I'inftruction de c^t enfant, la bonte 
d'vn Sauuage; lequel voyant ce pauure malade tom- 
ber en quelque deff alliance, accourt vers noftre mai- 
fon, & me rencontrant en chemin, me dit tout hors 
d'haleine, ce pauure gar§on s'en va rendre I'ame, ie 
t'allois appeller, cours tant que tu pourras, cette fer- 
ueur monfkre quelque creance en nos myfteres, Dieu 
vueille donner accroiffement ^ ces petits commance- 
mens d'vne foy, qui n'efl pas encor affez forte, pour 
les induire a quitter leurs mefchantes habitudes. 

Le mefme iour nous baptifafmes auffi vn grand 
Sauuage, aage d'enuiron quarante cinq ans, il fe 
nommoit Chibanagouch en fa langue, le fieur Oliuier 
f ut encor fon parrain, & luy donna le nom de Paul ; 
celuy-cy eftoit aime de ceux de fa nation, tant pource 
qu'il eftoit I'vn des principaux d'entre eux; que pour 
autant qu'il eftoit bon guerrier, & homme hardi : il 
tomba malade retournant de I'Acadie, & comme ie 
le voiois d^choir tons les iours, ie I'abordai plufieurs 
[30] fois pour luy parler de Dieu, mais en vain, fon 
coeur rempli d'orgueil, ne pouuoit donner lieu k la 
verite, il haiffoit fes ennemis auec rage & fureur: 


1636 - 37] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 85 

named him Martin; his parents showed that they 
were very glad that their son had been taught. I 
am surprised that these barbarians, when they see 
their children's bodily health hopeless, are pleased, 
at least some of them, to have a place in heaven pro- 
cured for them ; and, when they are well, they care 
only for the world. But alas ! this misfortune is not 
so peculiar to the Pagans, that those who have the 
faith and who bear the name of Christians [29] do 
not participate therein. How many persons do we 
see in Europe whose souls are so attached to the 
earth that they do not leave it until their bodies are 
placed in it. I observed, during the instruction of 
this child, the kindness of a Savage. He, seeing this 
poor sick child fall into a kind of swoon, ran towards 
our house and, meeting me on the way, told me, all 
out of breath, that this poor boy was about to render 
up his soul, " I came to call thee, run as fast as thou 
canst." This zeal shows some belief in our myster- 
ies. May God grant an increase to these small be- 
ginnings of a faith which is not yet strong enough to 
induce them to give up their bad habits. 

On the same day we also baptized an adult Savage, 
about forty-five years old, named in his own language 
Chibanagonch. Sieur Olivier was his godfather also, 
and gave him the name Paul. He was loved by 
those of his nation, not only because he was one of 
the principal persons among them, but because he 
was a good warrior and a bold man. He fell sick 
while on his return from Acadia ; and, as I saw him 
wasting away every day, I approached him several 
[30] times to speak to him about God, but in vain; 
his heart, filled with pride, could not make room for 
the truth ; he hated his enemies with rage and fury. 


86 


LES RELA TJONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 11 


comme on eut amene vn Hiroquois ^ KobQC, le voy- 
ant entrer dans fa cabane, il fe leue tout malade qu'il 
eftoit, fe iette fur^ce pauure homme, comme vn chien 
enrage fur quelque autre animal, & k belle dents luy 
arrache I'oreille, s'animant d'vne paffion fi brutale, 
qu'elle caufoit de I'liorreur en ceux qui le voioient, 
cette manie eft bien efloignee de la douceur de lefus 
Chrift, mais Dieu a plus de bonte que le coeur de 
I'homme n'a de malice. Ce miferable voiant en fin 
qu'il luy falloit partir de cette vie, ouure les yeux, & 
fe vient cabaner proche de iTebec pour eftre inflruit. 
I'eftois alle en ce temps-la a Beaupre qu'on nomme 
ordinairement le Cap de Tourmente; Monfieur le 
Gouuerneur, & Monfieur Gand defirans voir ces belles 
prairies, m'y menerent pour fecourir fpirituellement 
vne famille de Francois, qui refide en ce lieu-la. 
Comme nous retournions, le fieur Hebert nous ren- 
contrant me dit, que Chibanagouch s'eftoit venu loger 
proche de nos Fran9ois, & qu'il y auoit long temps 
qu'il m'attendoit, pour entendre la doctrine de lefus- 
Chrift, & receuoir [31] le S. Baptefme; ie le trouuai 
en effet das cette bonne difpofition. Nikanis me dit, 
il y a long temps que ie t'attends, inflruis moy, car 
ie ne veux pas aller dans les feux. D'oii vient (luy 
dis-ie) que tu m'as refifte fi long temps, quand ie 
t'ayparl6de ton falut. Ie n'auois point d'efprit, me 
repart-il, mais maintenant que ie me meurs, ie penfe 
a ce que tu m'as enf eigne: mais en effect elt-ce tout 
de bon que tu veux croire en Dieu? tu le verras en 
m'inftruifant: car ie perfeuererai aupres de toy iuf- 
ques k la mort; nous I'allions done voir ordinaire- 
ment le P. de Quen & moy : comme ie luy portois 
quelques images, luy ayant explique ce qu'elles re- 


1636 -37 J LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6j7 87 

Having seen an Hiroquois, who had been brought 
to Kebec, enter his cabin, he raised himself, sick as 
he was, threw himself upon this poor man as a mad 
dog falls upon some other animal, and savagely bit 
off his ear, working himself into so brutal a fury as 
to cause horror in those who saw him. This madness 
is far removed from the gentleness of Jesus Christ ; 
but God has more goodness than the heart of man 
has malice. This wretch, finally seeing that he 
would have to depart this life, opens his eyes, and 
comes to live near Kebec to be instructed. At that 
time I had gone to Beaupr6, which is usually called 
Cap de Tourmente ; ^^ Monsieur the Governor and 
Monsieur Gand, wishing to see those fine prairies, 
took me there to give spiritual assistance to a French 
family that resides in that place. On our return 
sieur Hebert, meeting us, told me that Chibanagouch 
had come to stay near our French people, and that 
he had been expecting me for a long time, in order 
to hear the doctrine of Jesus Christ and to receive 
[31] Holy Baptism. I found him, in fact, thus well 
disposed. '' Nikanis,'' he said to me, " I have been 
waiting for thee a long time; instruct me, for I do 
not wish to go into the fires." " How does it hap- 
pen," (said I to him) " that thou hast resisted me so 
long when I have spoken to thee of thy salvation ? ' ' 
" I had no sense," he replied; " but now, that I am 
going to die, I am thinking upon what thou hast 
taught me." "But art thou really in earnest in 
wishing to believe in God? " " Thou wilt see that I 
am in instructing me, for I will remain close to thee 
until my death." So we continued our visits to 
him, usually Father de Quen and I; as I brought 
him a few pictures, having explained to him what 


LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 11 


prefentoient, il I'enfeignoit aux autres: tenez difoit- 
il, voila la figure de ceux qui n'ont pas voulucroire, 
voyez comme ils font liez de fers, comme ils font 
dans les feux, comme ils font enragez : ces autres Ik 
qui vont la haut, ce font ceux qui ont creu, & obei a 
celuy qui a tout fait. Les heretiques font grande- 
ment blafmables, de condamner & de brifer les 
images, qui ont de fi bons effets. Ces fainctes figures 
font la moitie de I'inftruction qu'on pent doner aux 
Sauuages. I'auois defire quelques portraits de I'en- 
fer & de I'ame damn6e on nous en a enuoy6 quelques 
vns en papier [32] mais cela eft trop confus. Les 
diables font tellement meflez auec les hommes, qu'on 
n'y pent rien recognoiltre, qu'auec vne particuliere 
attention, qui depeindroit trois ou quatre, ou cinq de- 
mons, tourmentans vne ame de diuers fupplices, I'vn 
luy appliquans des feux, I'autre des ferpens, I'autre 
la tenaillant, I'autre la tenant liee auec des chaifnes, 
cela auroit vn bon effet, notamment fi tout eftoit bien 
diftingue, & que la rage, & la trifteile paruffent bien 
en la face de cette ame defefperee, la crainte eft I'a- 
uancouriere de la foy, dans ces efprits barbares : mais 
pour conclure ce poinct, ce pauure Neophite ayant 
efte baptife le 5. de Nouembre, vefcut iufques a I'on- 
ziefme du mois f uiuant ; exer9ant des actes de foy & 
d'efperance, & donnant affez k cognoiftre qu'il auoit 
receu ce diuin Sacrement pour le falut de fon ame, 
& non pour efperer quelque fecours pour fon corps : 
car encor qu'il fut dans vne grande difette fi eft-ce 
neantmoins qu'il ne nous demandoit rien, contre la 
couftume de fa nation qui eft I'importunite mefme 
enuers les eftrangers, eftant mort Monfieur le Gou- 
uerneur, & Monfieur le Cheualier de I'lfle fon Lieu- 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 89 

they represented, he taught this to the others. 
' * Look, ' ' said he, ' * here is the picture of those who 
would not believe ; see how they are bound in irons, 
how they are in the flames, how mad with pain they 
are; those others who go to heaven, are the ones 
who have believed and obeyed him who has made all 
things. ' ' Heretics are very much in the wrong to 
condemn and to destroy representations, which have 
so good an effect. These sacred pictures are half 
the instruction that one is able to give the Savages. 
I had desired some portrayals of hell and of lost 
souls; they sent us some on paper, [32] but that is 
too confused. The devils are so mingled with the 
men that nothing can be identified therein, unless it 
is studied closely. If some one would depict three, 
four, or five demons tormenting one soul with differ- 
ent kinds of tortures, — one applying to it the torch, 
another serpents, another pinching it with red-hot 
tongs, another holding it bound with chains, — it 
would have a good effect, especially if everything 
were very distinct, and if rage and sadness appeared 
plainly in the face of the lost soul. Fear is the fore- 
runner of faith in these barbarous minds. But 
to conclude this story, this poor Neophyte having 
been baptized on the 5th of November, lived until 
the eleventh of the following month, performing 
acts of faith and hope, and making it plainly under- 
stood that he had received this divine Sacrament for 
the salvation of his soul, and not in the hope of any 
benefit to his body. For although he was in great 
want, yet he asked us for nothing, contrary to the 
custom of his nation, which is importunity itself to- 
ward foreigners. When he died. Monsieur the Gov- 
ernor and Monsieur the Chevalier de I'Isle, his Lieu- 


90 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.11 

tenant, honorerent [33] fes funerailles, comme aufli 
plufienrs autres de nos Fran9ois. 

L'onziefme iour de Nouembre le P. de Qiien bap- 
tifa vn petit Sauuage malade, il fe nommoit Penoiitet, 
vn de nos Frangois luy changea ce nom, & I'appella 
lean Baptifte: fa mere permit volontiers qu'on I'in- 
ftruifift, 8c qu'on le fifl Chreftien. 

A mefme iour nous en baptifafme encor vn autre, 
qui fut nomme Louys, fes parens furent bien aifes, 
qu'on luy conferaft ce grand bien deuant qu'ils en- 
traffent dans les terres. 

Les iugemens de Dieu font eftranges, fon efprit fe 
refpand fur ceux qu'il luy plaift. Le chemin eftoit 
fort fafcheux, pour aller aux cabanes des Sauuages, 
il falloit defcendre vne montagne fort roide, ou y 
aller par eau, ce que nous ne pouuions faire ; nous 
eftions fort occupez en ces temps-1^: cependant vn 
defir nous aiant pris d'aller voir ces Barbares, nous 
quittafmes toute autre affaire, & arriuafmes li a pro- 
pos, que fi nous euffions encor retarde fort peu de 
temps, ces deux pauures petits fuffent partis, & d'au- 
pres de Kebec, & de cette vie, fans eftre lauez dans 
le fang de I'agneau. Car leurs parens les alloient 
traifner dans les bois auec [34] eux, oti ils moururent 
bien toft apres leur baptefme, comme nous auons 
appris. 

Le 14, du mefme mois nous baptifafmes en noflre 
Chappelle de Kebec, auec les fainctes ceremonies de 
I'Eglife, vn petit enfant, aage de quelques mois, fes 
parens le nommoient Oiiajibiskoune/out , & Monlleur 
Gand I'appella Frangois, ce pauure petit eftoit fort 
malade, Dieu luy rendit bien toft apres la fante, fon 
pere fe nomme Mantoueabeouichit , & fa mere, Ontcki- 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 91 


tenant, honored [33] his obsequies, as well as many 
others of our Frenchmen. 

On the eleventh day of November, Father de Quen 
baptized a little sick Savage called Penoutet. One of 
our Frenchmen changed this name for him into Jean 
Baptiste ; his mother very cheerfully permitted him 
to be instructed and made a Christian. 

On the same day, we baptized still another one, 
whose name was Louys; his parents were very glad 
to have this great blessing conferred upon him before 
they went farther inland. 

The judgments of God are strange ; he bestows his 
spirit upon such as he pleases. The road to the 
Savages' cabins was very bad ; it was necessary to as- 
cend a very steep mountain, or to go by water, which 
we could not do; we were very busy just at that 
time ; yet, having been seized by a desire to go and 
see these Barbarians, we gave up everything else and 
arrived there so opportunely that, had we been even 
a little time delayed, these two poor little ones 
would have departed both from the neighborhood of 
Kebec and from this life, without being washed in 
the blood of the lamb. For their parents were go- 
ing to drag them into the woods with [34] them, 
where, as we have learned, they died soon after their 
baptism. 

On the 14th of the same month, we baptized in our 
Chapel at Kebec, with the holy ceremonies of the 
Church, a little child a few months old; its parents 
had named it Ouasibiskounesout , and Monsieur Gand 
called it Frangois. This poor little one was very 
sick, but God soon afterwards restored it to health. 
It's father's name was Mantoueabeouichit , and its 
mother's, Outchibahabanoukoueou. They have given 


92 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol. 11 

bahabanoukoueou. lis ont donne vne petite fille de 
leurs enfans au fieur Olitiier, qui la cherit tendre- 
ment, il Tentretient, & la fait efleuer ^ la Frangoife; 
fi c6t enfant s'en retourne par fois es Cabanes des 
Sauuages, fon pere extremement aife de voir fa fille 
bien co-unerte, & en fort bon point, ne luy laiffe pas 
demeurer long-temps la renuoiant en la maifon, oil 
elle demeure ; mais pour reuenir "k nofkre petit Fran- 
9ois, fes parens retournans de dedans les bois, au 
commencement du Printemps, Monfieur Gand, qui 
eft charitable au pofQble enuers ces pauures barbares, 
recognut fon petit filleul, I'appellant par fon nom, 
ce pauure petit luy refpondit en begaiant, mais d'vne 
fa9on fi gentille, aufli efl-il fort bel enfant, qu'auffi 
toft Monfieur Gand luy fit faire vn [35] petit habit "k 
la Fran9oife, fi toft qu'il fera en eflat d'eftre inftruit, 
i'efpere que nous I'aurons pour I'inftruire, fon pere 
& fa mere I'ont ainfi promis en fon baptefme. 

Le 12. de Decembre nos Peres qui demeurent a la 
Conception aux trois Riuieres, baptiferent vne petite 
fille, que Madame Godefroy nomma Marie. Les fe- 
crets de Dieu nous font incognus, les Sauuages s'e- 
ftans retirez dans les bois, auoient emporte cette 
pauure enfant agee feulement de deux ou trois ans. 
Les Peres la voiant malade ne 1' auoient ofe baptifer, 
fur r incertitude de fa fante. En fin ces Barbares la 
rapporterent vn peu deuant fa mort, contre ce propos 
qu'ils auoient fait de tarder bien plus long- temps, & 
Dieu la recent en fa grace, puis en fa gloire. Qui 
habitat in adiiitorio altij^imi in protectione Dei coeli com- 
morabitiir. 

Le 5. de lanuier deux petites filles Sauuages, furent 
folennellement baptifees en I'Eglife du grand Con- 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j637 93 

one of their children, a little girl, to sieur Olivier, 
who cherishes her tenderly; he provides for her, 
and is having her brought up in the French ^3.y. 
If this child occasionally goes back to the Cabins of 
the Savages, her father, very happy to see his daugh- 
ter well clothed and in very good condition, does not 
allow her to remain there long, sending her back to 
the house where she belongs. But to return to our 
little Francois. When his parents came back from 
the woods in the early Spring, Monsieur Gand, who 
is as charitable as possible to these poor barbarians, 
recognized his little godson ; calling him by name, 
this poor little fellow answered him falteringly, but 
in so pretty a way, — he is indeed a very beautiful 
child, — that Monsieur Gand straightway had a [35] 
little dress made for him in the French fashion. As 
soon as he shall be in a condition to be taught, I 
hope we shall get him for instruction ; his father and 
mother promised this when he was baptized. 

On the 1 2th of December, our Fathers who live at 
the Conception, at the three Rivers, baptized a little 
girl whom Madame Godefroy named Marie. It is not 
for us to know the secrets of God. The Savages, 
having withdrawn into the woods, took with them 
this poor little child, only two or three years old. 
The Fathers, seeing her sick, did not dare to baptize 
her, on account of the uncertainty of her health. 
Finally, a short time before her death, these Barba- 
rians came back with her, although they had intended 
staying away a much longer time, and God received 
her into his grace, then into his glory. Qui habitat 
in adjiitorio altissimi in protectione Dei coeli commorabitur. 

On the 5th of January, two little Savage girls were 
solemnly baptized in the Church of the great Con- 


94 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.11 

uent des Carmelites de Paris. La flotte retournant 
Tan paffe de nos havres, emporta cinq Sauuages de 
ce pais cy, vne ieune femme Hiroquoife, vn petit 
gar9on, & trois petites filles Montagnaifes, cette ieune 
Hiroquoife demeure en la [36] maison de Madame de 
Combalet, qui prend la peine de I'inftruire quelque- 
fois elle mefme en la foy de lefus-Chrift, & en la 
crainte de Dieu, comme ie I'ay appris; fi la vertu 
s'emparoit tellement de fon coeur, qu'elle fuft propre 
pour retourner auec les Religieufes, qui viendront 
en fon temps, elle leur feruiroit grandement : car elle 
inftruiroit les petites filles Sauuages, qui feront auec 
elles, ^ planter du bled d'Inde, mais il feroit fou- 
haitable qu'elle fuft auec le temps en lieu, oil elle 
peuft s'addonner au iardinage, autrement aiant trop 
goufte la douceur du repos, & I'abondance d'vne 
grande maifon, elle refuiroit par apres le trauail, c'eft 
^ quoy i'apprends que Ton fonge. Pour le petit gar- 
gon, on m'alTeure qu'il eft en bon lieu, i'efpere 
qu'eftant bien efleu^, on le renuoiera quelque iour 
pour fecourir fes compatriotes. 

Quand aux trois petites filles, IVne d'icelles efloit 
defia Chreftienne, nous I'auons addreffee ^ I'hofpital 
de Dieppe, la Superieure de cette maifon fort bien 
regime, m'en efcrit en ces termes. Nojlre petite Louife 
fait tres-bien, elle eji extremement douce, fouple, obeijfante 
& denote, quand il y a quelque petite deuotion a /aire dans 
la clajfe des petites Seminarijies, c' eJi la premiere a la de- 
mander, elle ejl tellement niodejie & [37] attentiue durant 
le fainct feruice de V Eglife, qu elle fait honte a 7ios petites 
Fran^oifes, pour inoy elle me donne de la deuotion. Ie 
m entretiens fouuent auec elle des chofes qui concernent 
no fire fainct e Religion, elle y fait paroiflre tant de con- 


1636 - 37] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 95 


vent of the Carmelites of Paris. The fleet which re- 
turned last year from our ports took five Savages 
from this country, — a young Hiroquois woman, a 
little boy, and three little Montagnais girls. This 
young Hiroquois woman lives in the [36] house of 
Madame de Combalet, who, as I have learned, some- 
times takes the trouble herself to instruct her in the 
faith of Jesus Christ and in the fear of God ; if vir- 
tue should so take possession of her heart that she 
should be fitted to return with the Nuns, who will 
come at the proper time, she would be of great serv- 
ice to them ; for she would teach the little Savage 
girls, who will be with them, to plant Indian corn. 
But it would be desirable for her, in the course of 
time, to be put in a place where she can devote her- 
self to gardening, otherwise, having too long tasted 
the sweetness of repose and the abundance of a great 
house, she would afterwards shun labor. I am told 
that they intend to do thus. As to the little boy, I 
am assured that he is in a good place ; I hope that, 
after he has been well brought up, he will some day 
be sent to succor his countrymen. 

In regard to the three little girls, one of them was 
already a Christian, and we sent her to the hospital 
at Dieppe. The Superior of this excellently regu- 
lated house writes me in these terms. Our little 
Louise is doing very well. She is very sweet, compliant^ 
obedient, and devoted. When there is some small act of 
devotion to be performed in the class of little Seminary 
girls, she is the first to ask to do it; she is so modest 
and [37] attentive during the holy services of the 
Church that she puts our little French girls to shame; for 
my part, she inspires me with devotion. I often converse 
with her about the things which concern our holy Religion; 


96 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.11 

tentement, que ie crois qii elle /era capable de /aire vn 
grand bien e7i fon pays, fi nojire Seigneur luy donne vne 
longue vie. Nous efperons qu elle Communiera ti Pa/gues, 
eu e/gard a fa deuotion. II y a des millions de Chrejiiens, 
qui ont receu nojire Seigneur, qui n en fgauent pas tant 
qu elle. Ie vous enuoie vne pale de calice, dont elle a fait 
la dent elle de point couppd, f elle n eufi point efle malade, 
nous I euj^ions r endue ou r entente plus fgauante, elle 
dit qu elle veut efire Religieufe, & qu'elle ne veut point 
retourner en Canadas, quauec nos fceurs. Ce font les 
paroles de la mere Superieure, qui deuoit renuoier 
I'annee prochaine cette pauure petite; mais Ie fieur 
Hebout, qui luy a ferui de pere, la voiat fi cotente, la 
laiffe volontiers, iufques a la venue des Religieufes. 
Cette pauure enfant m'a efcrit trois mots, que ie cou- 
cherai volontiers icy. Mon R. P. La Paix de nofire Sei- 
gneur. Ie fuisfort cotente d'ejire en France, pour les faueurs 
que t y ay receu, & que ie preteds y receuoir, me voiat a la 
veille de ma premiere Communion, ce qui me donne vne telle 
allegreffe, que ie n ay point de paroles pour V expliquer, ie 
prend V affeurance de supplier en toute humility [38] V. R. 
d' en remercier la Diuine Majefi^, ie vous enuoie Ie premier 
ouurage que i ay fait, i ay efperance d' efire plus f^auante, 
& de repaffer quand& nos Meres en Canada, pour rendre Ie 
deuoir d' hofpitalite a celles de ma nation, fi Dieu m' en fait 
la grace. Et plus bas elle s'excufe, fi elle efcrit fort 
mal, ne pouuant pas encor former fes lettres, Dieu 
veille refpandre fa faincte benediction fur ces pau- 
ures enfans. Mais parlous des deux autres ; Ie les 
auois prefentees a Madame de Combalet, comme a 
celle dont la grandeur ne dedaigne point la baffeffe 
de ces pauures creatures. Cette Dame aiant pris re- 
folution de les faire baptifer, les fit conduire en I'E- 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 97 

she shows so much satisfaction therein that I believe she 
will be capable of doing great good in her own country, if 
our Lord gives her a long life. We hope she will take 
Communion at Easter, considering how devoted she is. 
There are millions of Christians who have received our 
Lord, who do not know as much as she does. I send you 
a chalice pall, the point lace edging of which was made by 
her. If she had not been sick, we would have returned 
her or brought her back better taught; she says she desires 
to be a Nun, and that she does not wish to return to Cana- 
das except with our sisters. These are the words of 
the mother Superior, who was to send back this poor 
little child next year ; but sieur Hebout, who has been 
as a father to her, seeing her so contented, is will- 
ing to leave her until the coming of the Nuns. This 
poor child has written me a few words, which I shall 
be glad to set down here. My Reverend Father, the 
Peace of our Lord. I am very glad to be in France, for 
the favors I have received here and expect to receive, see- 
ing fnyself on the eve of my first Communion; this gives 
me so much Joy that I have no words to express it. I take 
the liberty to beg, in all humility, [38] that Your Rever- 
ence will thank the Divine Majesty for it. I send you the 
first work I have done. I hope to have more learning and 
to cross over to Canada when our Mothers do, to render 
the debt of hospitality to the women of my nation, if God 
grants me the grace to do so. And farther down she 
excuses herself if she writes very badly, not yet be- 
ing able to form the letters. May God bestow his 
holy blessing upon these poor children. But let us 
speak of the other two. I had presented them to 
Madame de Combalet, as to one whose greatness does 
not disdain the littleness of these poor creatures. 
This Lady, having decided to have them bapti2ed, 


98 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 11 


glife des Carmelites, ou elles quitterent le nom de 
Barbares, pour entrer dans la liberie des enfans de 
Dieu. La mere Magdelene de fainct lofeph me def- 
crit leur baptefme en pen de mots. Votis apprendrez 
(dit-elle) la benediction que Dieu a don7i^ au baptefme des 
deux petites Sauuages, tant pour la celcbritc dc r action, 
que pour la grande deuotion quvn grand pcuple, qui fe 
trouua dans nojire Eglife, y tefmoigna. La plus grande 
fut tenue fur les fonds, par Madame la Prince ffe de Con- 
d^, qui la nomma Marguerite Tkere/e, le parrain fut 
Monjieur le Chancelier. La feconde fut tenue par Ma- 
dame de Combalet [39] & nomni^e Marie Magdelene, le 
parrain a efle Monjieur des Noiers, Secretaire d'Efiat, 
nous eufmes en nofire Eglife pour Predicateur Monfteur 
V Euefque de fainct Papoul, vn des plus eflimez Predica- 
teurs de nofire temps, & tres-fainct homme, lequel aiant ce 
beau fuiet de la vocation des Gentils, parce que c efioit le 
iour des Rois, il noublia pas de recommander r action de 
nos deux petites Canadoifes, & de louer la charity de ceux 
qui trauaillent a acquerir ces ames au fils de Dieu. Et 
plus bas elle adioulle : Ic vous diray encor, que Mar- 
guerite Therefe, qui nous efl re flee des deux petites Sau- 
uages, r autre eflant trefpaffec, efl la plus iolie quilefi 
poj^ible, elle paroifl fort bonne enfant, & auoir bien de 
Vefprit, elle fait de petites queflions, comme efl de fgauoir, 
fi nous rejfufciterons, fi nous verrons Dieu, fi nos corps 
feront gloricux, fur le fainct Sacrement; ft c' efl Dieu 
qui y efl cach^ fous les efpeces facramenteles : & ainft plu- 
fieurs autres chofes, qu elle demande fur cela. Pefpere 
que Dieu la benira, & en aura foin. 

Ah ! que ie dirois volontiers a cette enfant : helas 
ma fille qui vous a tire de la baffeffe pour vous loger 
dans I'affection des grands, qu'auez vous donne h 


1636 - 37] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 99 

had them taken to the Church of the Carmelites, 
where they gave up the names of Barbarians, to en- 
ter into the freedom of the children of God. Mother 
Magdelene of saint Joseph describes their baptism to 
me in a few words: You zvill hear (she says) about 
the blessing God has granted us in the baptism of two 
little Savages, not only on account of the celebrity of the 
act, but for the great devotion shown by the distinguished 
people who were in our Church. The taller one tvas held 
over the font by Madame the Princess de Cond^, who 
named her Marguerite Therese; the godfather was Mon- 
sieur the Cha7icellor. The second was held by Madame de 
Combalet, [39] and named Marie Magdelene; the godfather 
was Monsieur des Noiers, Secretary of State. We had in 
our Church, as Preacher, Monsieur the Bishop of saint 
Papoul, one of the most estimable Preachers of our time, 
and a very holy man; he having taken that beautiful top- 
ic, the vocation of the Gentiles, because it was Epiph- 
any, did not forget to commend the act of our two little 
Canadians, and to praise the charity of those who are striv- 
ing to obtain these souls for the son of God. And, fur- 
ther on, she adds: / will tell you also that Marguerite 
Therese, the one remaining to us of the two little Savages, 
the other having died, is as pretty as she can be. She 
seems to be a very good child, and to have much intelli- 
gence. She asks little questions, such as whether we shall 
be resurrected, if we shall see God, if our bodies will be 
glorified, in regard to the holy Sacrament, if God is con- 
cealed there under the sacramental elements; and likewise 
many other things which she asks, regarding such matters^ 
I hope God will bless her and take her under his care. 

Ah! would that I could say to this child, '' Alas, 
my daughter, who has drawn you from your lowly 
estate to place you in the affection of nobles? What 


100 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 11 


Dieu pour fortir de voflre efclauage, & pour eftre 
enroolee au nombre de fes enfans, vous [40] fou- 
uient-il des refiflances, que vous me faifiez, quand 
voflre pere vous aiant mis entre mes mains, vous en 
vouliez efchapper a toute force, pour courir apres 
voflre malheur ! vous ne croiez pas ce que vos com- 
patriotes ne fgauroient encor fe perfuader, que nous 
deflrions vous procurer le plus grand de tons les 
biens, priez pour eux maintenant, & vous difpofez 
de les venir fecourir. le vois tons les iours vos com- 
pagnes mal veftues, logees fous des efcorces, quafi 
toufiours affamees, & vous efles en I'abondance, be- 
niffez celuy qui vous a fait ces biens, & le coniurez 
d'auoir compafTion de voflre pauure & miferable na- 
tion. Pour tons ces grands perfonnages que ie viens 
de nommer, lef quels ont coopere k voflre baptef me, ie 
ne leur puis dire autre cbofe fmon, Benedicti vos a 
Domino, qu'ils font les benis de Dieu. Ce n'efl pas 
ma fille pour la nobleffe de voflre extraction, qu'ils 
vous ont tenus fur les fonds, qu'ils prennent la peine 
de vous inflruire, qu'ils vous honorent de leur affe- 
ction, mais ces ames font des ames d'eflite, qui f9auent 
la grandeur & le prix du fang de lefus-Chrifl, qu'ils 
vous veulent appliquer, pour 1' amour qu'ils luy por- 
tent : recognoiff ez ces faueurs, abbaiffez vous deuant 
eux, & bien d'auantage [41] deuant Dieu, prenant 
ces belles paroles pour voflre deuife, Mifericordias 
Domini in cEternum cantabo, Ie chanterai a tout iamais 
les mifericordes de mon Dieu. C'efl affez fur ce 
point, i'ay creu que ces deux enfans nez en noflre 
nouuelle France, deuoient auoir place entre ceux, 
que Dieu a pris pour fes enfans en leur pays. 

Le 20. de lanuier nous baptifames le petit fils d'vn 


1636-37] LE JEUNES RELATION, i637 101 

have you rendered to God for your deliverance from 
slavery, and for your enrollment among the number 
of his children? Do you [40] remember the resist- 
ance you made when your father placed you in my 
hands? You wished to escape by force, to run after 
your misery! You would not believe what your 
countrymen could not yet be convinced of, that we 
desired to secure for you the greatest of all blessings. 
Pray for them now, and prepare yourself to succor 
them. Every day I see your compatriots poorly 
clothed, lodged under bark, and almost always fam- 
ished, while you are living in abundance. Bless him 
who has given you these comforts, and implore him 
to have pity on your poor and wretched nation. As 
for all those great personages whom I have just men- 
tioned, who have cooperated in your baptism, all I 
can say to them is, Benedicti vos a Domino, that they 
are the anointed of God. It is not, my daughter, 
for the nobleness of your extraction that they have 
held you over the font, that they take the trouble to 
teach you, that they honor you with their affection ; 
but these souls are the souls of the elect, who know 
the greatness and the value of the blood of Jesus 
Christ, which they wish to apply to you for the love 
they bear him. Acknowledge these favors, abase 
yourself before them, and still more [41] before God, 
taking these beautiful words as your motto, Miseri- 
cordias Dominiin (Eternum cantabo, " I will sing forever 
the mercies of my God." Enough upon this point; 
I have felt that these two children, born in our new 
France, ought to be placed among those whom God 
has taken as his children in their own country. 

On the 20th of January, we baptized the little son 
of a Savage called Itaouigabaoiiiou. As we had ob- 


102 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 

Sauuage nomme Itaouigabaoiiiou comme nous anions 
remarque que fon enfant efloit malade, nous luy re- 
commandions fort de nous aduertir quand il le ver- 
roit en danger de mort, afin de luy procurer 1' entree 
du ciel; il n'y manqua pas, car voiant qu'il ne pou- 
uoit plus manger, il nous vint dire que c' efloit fait 
de fon fils, & que nous luy fiffions ce que nous auions 
defhine, nous luy demandafmes s'il le pourroit appor- 
ter a la Chappelle, car ils eftoient cabanez affez pro- 
che de ^ebec, & s'il ne cognoiffoit point quelque 
Frangois, pour le prier d'eftre parrain de fon enfant, 
il repart qu'il feroit apporter le malade, & qu'il prie- 
roit Monfieur de fainct Sauueur de luy donner nom, 
cela fut fait, 1' enfant fut confacre a lefus-Chrifl, & 
nomme Nicolas. Trois iours apres, ce pauure petit 
Chreftien tirant [42] aux abois, fon pere nous enuoia 
querir pour le voir mourir, toute la Cabane efloit 
remplie de Sauuages, inuitez a vn feflin, qu'on fai- 
foit pour la mort de 1' enfant: nous entrafmes apres 
que le feflin fut acheue : le pere tenoit fon pauure 
petit enfant, qui enduroit & fouffroit de grandes con- 
uulfions, fa mere fe lamentoit fort, tons les Sauuages 
efloient dans vn triflre & morne filence, eflans en- 
trez nous gardafmes le filece quelque temps auffi bien 
que les autres, afin de leur tefmoigner que nous par- 
ticipions k leur deuil, veritablement nous admirions 
la conflance du pere de ce petit innocent : car quoy 
que fes yeux villent les douleurs bien fenfibles de 
fon fils vnique, & que fes oreilles entendiffent les 
trifles fanglots, & lamentations de fa femme, il ne 
donna iamais aucun figne, ny aucune marque d'vn 
cceur foible, mais auec vne grande egalite d'efprit, 
qui paroiffoit fur fon vifage, il foulageoit fon fils auec 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 103 

served that his child was sick, we recommended him 
strongly to let us know if he saw it in danger of 
death, that we might secure for it an entrance to 
heaven. He did not fail to do so, for, seeing that it 
could no longer eat, he came to tell us that it was all 
over with his son, and that we should do to him what 
we had intended. We asked him if it could be 
brought to the Chapel, for they were encamped quite 
near Kebec ; and if he was not acquainted with some 
Frenchman, whom he could ask to be godfather for 
his child. He replied that he would have the sick 
one brought there, and would ask Monsieur de sainct 
Sauveur to give it a name. This was done; the child 
was consecrated to Jesus Christ, and named Nicolas. 
Three days afterwards, as this poor little Christian 
was nearing [42] his end, his father sent for us to 
come and see him die. The Cabin was filled with 
Savages, who were there as guests at a feast that had 
been prepared in anticipation of the death of the 
child. We entered after the feast was over ; the fa- 
ther was holding his poor little infant, which, in 
agony, was experiencing violent convulsions; its 
mother was uttering loud laments, all the Savages 
were in a sad and mournful silence ; having entered, 
we, like the others, maintained silence for some time, 
in order to show them that we were participating in 
their mourning. Truly, we admired the firmness of 
the father of this little innocent; for although his 
eyes saw the very evident sufferings of his only son, 
and although his ears heard the mournful sobs and 
lamentations of his wife, he gave no sign nor indica- 
tion of a weak heart, but with great equanimity of 
mind, which appeared upon his face, he soothed his 
son with the love of a mother, preserving, however, 


104 LES RELATIONS DES /£SUITES [Vol.11 

vn amour de mere, gardant neantmoins la conftance 
d'vn pere ; apres auoir imite quelque temps leur 
filence, ie commen9ai a vouloir confoler la mere, non 
pas tant pour efperance de luy ofter fa triftelTe, que 
pour entrer dans vn meilleur difcours. Nous fom- 
mes [43] en Europe dans vn erreur quand quelqu'vn 
eft trifte, nous I'accablons de raifons pour arracher 
fon mal, & c'eft cela mefme qui luy augmente fa 
douleur. La meilleure fagon de confoler vne ame 
affligee, c'eft de fuiure le confeil de fainct Paul, Flere 
cum flentibus, pleurer auec ceux qui pleurent, afin de 
leur faire letter par les yeux, notamment aux fem- 
mes, I'amertume qui noie leur coeur, cela fait, il ne 
faut plus parler de I'obiet qui caufe la triftelle. Les 
Sauuages gardent cecy parfaitement, car ils ne veu- 
lent point qu'on face mention des trefpaffez dans 
leurs difcours familiers, mais feulement quand on 
veut (comme ils difent) releuer ou faire reuiure le 
deffunt, faifant porter fon nom k quelque autre. Mais 
reprenons noftre difcours, ie pris done la parole & 
m'addreffant ^ la mere, ie luy dis, ie garderai parmi 
vous la couftume des Frangois, quand quelque enfant 
meurt en France, & que la mere s'en afifiige, on luy 
dit qu'en effet elle a raifon de s'attrifter de la perte 
d'vn fi gentil enfant, mais neantmoins qu'elle doit 
bien toft effuier fa douleur, fi fon enfant meurt Chre- 
ftien: car le ciel luy eft ouuert, oii il s'en va en vn 
lieu plein de delices, oil la maladie, la [44] faim, la 
pauurete, les douleurs, & la mort n'entre point. En 
vn mot, ie tafchai en mon patois Sauuage, de leur 
faire voir vn petit efchantillon des grands biens, dont 
ce petit enfant de Dieu alloit iouir. lis efcouterent 
cela dans vn grand filence, & monftrerent y prendre 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 105 

the firmness of a father. After having shared their 
silence for some time, I began to try to console the 
mother, not so much in the hope of dispelling her 
sadness, as for the sake of introducing a more cheer- 
ing topic. We [43] Europeans make a mistake in 
overwhelming one who is in sorrow with arguments 
serving to remove his trouble, for it is just that which 
augments his grief. The best way to comfort an 
afflicted soul is to follow the advice of saint Paul, 
Flere cum flentibus, " Weep with those who weep," 
that they, especially women, may shed through the 
eyes the bitterness that inundates the heart; after 
this is done, the thing that causes their grief need no 
more be mentioned. The Savages follow this rule 
to perfection, for they do not allow any one to men- 
tion the dead in their ordinary conversation, but only 
when it is desired (as they say) to take up or to re- 
store the deceased to life by having another assume 
his name. But let us resume our discourse. Then 
I began to speak, and, addressing myself to the 
mother, said to her, " I will observe among you the 
French custom ; when a child dies in France and the 
mother mourns for it, they say to her that she has 
indeed reason to grieve for the loss of so sweet a 
child, but that, nevertheless, she ought soon to as- 
suage her grief if her child has died a Christian ; for 
the sky is opened to it, whither it will go to a place 
full of delights, where sickness, [44] hunger, poverty, 
grief, and death do not enter. In a word, I tried, in 
my Savage patois, to make her see a little specimen 
of the great blessings which this little child of God 
is going to enjoy. They listened to this in profound 
silence, and showed that they took great pleasure 
therein ; in conclusion, this little Angel, having held 


106 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 

plailir; pour conclufion ce petit Ange, aiant encor 
relifle quelque temps s'eniiola au ciel, & fon corps 
fut enterre folennellement, auec vn autre Chreftien, 
dont ie vay parler. 

Le 25. du mefme mois, le fils d'vn Sauuage, que 
les Fran9ois furnomment Le Cadet, receut le fainct 
Baptefme. Le P. de Quen le fit Chreftien, & Mon- 
fieur Gand le nomma Paul, il eftoit aage de dixfept 
ans ou enuiron, ce pauure gar9on nous ferma fort 
long temps I'oreille, ne voulant point en aucune fa- 
9on ouir parler de Dieu; ie ne f9ay s'il ne fe figuroit 
point qu'il eftoit mal pris h. vn fien frere d'auoir re- 
ceu la foy, s'imaginant que le Sacrement de vie luy 
auroit caufe la mort; quoy que e'en foit, quand ie 
I'abordois pour I'inflruire, eftant fort malade, il s'en- 
ueloppoit dans fa robbe, & ne me vouloit point efcou- 
ter en aucune fa9on, c'eft pourquoy ie tafchai de I'ef- 
pouuanter, par I'apprelienfLon de I'enfer, fi bien que 
ie le fis [45] pleurer, dequoy m'eftant apperceu, ie 
redoublai mon difcours, & rehauflai ma voix, tu ne 
crains pas la mort eternelle, & tu crains la mort de 
ton corps, foit que tu croie, ou que tu ne croie pas, 
tu es mort, tu n'en peux plus, & non content de 
fouffrir la langueur de ta maladie, tu veux fouffrir 
les tourmens horribles de I'enfer, fi ie te haiffois, ie 
te laiffois aller dans le feu, mais i'ay pitie de ton 
ame, efcoute & prend garde fi ce qu'on t'enf eigne eft 
manuals ; fon pere voiant que ie le preffois, luy dit : 
mon fils tu deurois obei'r au pere, ce qu'il t'enfeigne 
eft bon. En fin Dieu luy toucha le cceur, il me pro- 
mit qu'il m'efcouteroit, ce qu'il fit, I'aiant iuge affez 
inftruit, nous le baptifafmes, cinq iours apres fon 
baptefme il mourut, la mefme nuict que le petit Ni- 


1 636 - 37] LE JE UNE' S RELA TION, 1637 107 

out for some time, flew away to heaven, and his body 
was solemnly buried, with that of another Christian 
of whom I am about to speak. 

On the 25th of the same month, the son of a Sav- 
age, whom the French surnamed Le Cadet, received 
holy Baptism. Father de Quen made him a Chris- 
tian, and Monsieur Gand named him Paul; he was 
about seventeen years old. For a long time this 
poor boy closed his ears against us, not willing to 
hear God spoken of in any way; I do not know 
whether he fancied that misfortune had come upon 
one of his brothers for having received the faith, 
imagining that the Sacrament of life had been the 
cause of death to him; be that as it may, when I ap- 
proached to give him instruction, as he was very 
sick, he wrapped himself up in his robe, and would 
not listen to me at all. I tried, therefore, to frighten 
him with the fear of hell, — so that, indeed, I made 
him [45] weep; as soon as I became aware of this, I 
redoubled my efforts, and with greater earnestness 
said, " Thou dost not fear eternal death, and thou 
f earest the death of thy body ; whether thou believ- 
est or dost not believe, thou art dead, thou canst do 
no more ; and, not content to suffer the long pain of 
thy disease, thou wishest to suffer the horrible tor- 
ments of hell; if I hated thee, I would let thee go 
into the flames, but I have compassion for thy soul ; 
listen, and see if what thou art taught is bad." His 
father, seeing that I was urging him, said, " My son, 
thou must obey the father ; what he teaches thee is 
good." Finally God touched his heart, so that he 
promised to listen to me, which he did. Having 
judged him sufficiently instructed, we baptized him ; 
five days after his baptism, he died, on the same 


108 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 

colas, c'efl pourquoy on les enterra tous deux en- 
femble. Or comme on eut beaucoup de peine k faire 
la foffe, la terre eftant fort gelee, les Sauuages qui ve- 
noient au conuoi, fe retirerent en noftre maifon, at- 
tendant qu'elle fuft faite, ie me mis done en ma 
chambrette, I'vn d'eux me voiant parti, prit la pa- 
role, & commence k dire a f es compatriotes : I'admire 
ce que difent ces gens icy, ils prennent beaucoup de 
peine pour nous, ils nous difent que les [46] morts 
qui ont creu, s'en vont deuant nous iouir d'vn grand 
bon-heur, & que nous irons apres eux, fi nous vou- 
lons croire, qu'il y a des peines ordonnees pour les 
mef chants, ie penfe qu'ils difent vray, nous ne f9au- 
rions dire Ie contraire : car comme ce qu'ils difent 
nous eft nouueau, & que pas vn de nous n'en a co- 
gnoillance, fi nous n'en voions la verite, de moins n'o- 
ferions-nous les accuf er de menfonge ; fi nos anceftres 
euffent fceu efcrire, ils nous auroient lailI6 de gros 
liures de fables & de f aufl!etez ; pour moy ie trouue 
que la doctrine des Fran9ois efl bonne. I'efcoutois 
ce difcours de ma chambre, que les autres ^ la verity 
n'improuuoient pas, mais auffi ne donnoient ils pas 
affez de tefmoignages qu'ils I'approuuaffent fort. 

Le 14. de Feburier vne femme paralitique fut mife 
au nombre des Chreftiens. Voicy comme en parle 
le P. Buteux, cette pauure creature n'auoit plus que 
les levres, & la parole de libre, elle eftoit couchee 
fur vn bout de peau de cerf , large & long enuiro de 
deux pieds, couuerte de la moitie d'vne demie cou- 
uerture tres-fimple, & toute vfee, elle efloit dans vne 
cabane perc^e h. iour de tous coftez. Comme elle ne 
pouuoit s'approcher du feu, ny en faire quad il s'e- 
fleignoit la nuict [47] elle eftoit par fois toute roide 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 10» 

night as little Nicolas, and this is the reason why 
they were buried together. But as there was consid- 
erable trouble in digging the grave, for the ground 
was frozen hard, the Savages who came to take part 
in the funeral procession withdrew to our house, to 
wait until it was made. Now I retired into my little 
room, and one of them, seeing me leave, took the 
floor and began to say to his compatriots, " I admire 
what these people say ; they take a great deal of 
trouble for us; they tell us that the [46] dead who 
have believed go away before us, to enjoy great hap- 
piness, and that we shall go after them if we will be- 
lieve ; that punishments are ordained for the wicked. 
I believe they are telling the truth ; we could not 
gainsay them ; for since what they say is new to us, 
and as not one of us has any knowledge of it, if we 
do not see the truth thereof, at least we dare not ac- 
cuse them of lying. If our ancestors had known how 
to write, they would have left us great books filled 
with fables and falsehoods ; for my part, I find that 
the doctrines of the French are good." I listened 
from my chamber to this discourse, which the others 
did not, in truth, disapprove, but neither did they 
show much evidence that they greatly approved it. 

On the 14th of February a paralytic woman was 
placed among the number of Christians. See how 
Father Buteux speaks of her : ' ' This poor woman 
had nothing left her but her lips and power of speech ; 
she was lying on a piece of deerskin about two feet 
square, and was covered with a quarter of a very 
meager and worn-out blanket ; she was in a cabin 
open to the daylight on all sides. As she could not 
get near the fire, nor kindle one when it went out at 
night, [47] she was sometimes all stiff and frozen 


110 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.11 

& glacee de froid, les Sauuages qui n'ont point de 
foy, & par confequent de charity, luy laiffoient de- 
mander ^ boire plus de quatre fois deuat que de luy 
en donner vne feule fois, ie la faifois manger moy- 
mefme, dit le P. & I'appatois comme vn enfant ; quand 
i'allois aux cabanes, ces barbares me difoiet, qu'elle 
auoit les reins tout efcorchez, & cependant iamais 
dans tout le temps que nous I'auons vifitee, nous n'a- 
uons veu aucun acte d'impatience, ny entendu au- 
cune plainte de ceux de fa cabane, feulement come 
elle vit qu'ils parloiet de decabaner, helas! dit elle, 
ils me tueront, ou m'abandonnerot en quelque en- 
droit : cela mef me arriua le ledemain de fon baptef me : 
car le P. du March^ eftant alle aux cabanes luy por- 
ter a manger, ils I'arrefterent, & luy dirent, attend 
tu entreras bien tofl, ils enfeueliffoient cette pauure 
creature, laquelle fe portoit alTez bien deux heures 
deuant, aiant fait le figne de la croix, & prononce le 
doux nom de lefus & de Marie. II eft affez probable 
qu'ils la mirent a mort. L'hofpital remediera a ces 
grands defordres, 

Le 1 8. du mef me mois, vne feme Sauuage recent 
le baptefme, mais il vaudroit bie mieux pour elle, 
que iamais elle ne I'eufl receu: car elle eft morte 
dans I'apoftafie. Comme le P. [48] de Quen & moy 
la vifitions fort fouuent durant fa maladie, fi nous 
ouurions la bouche pour luy parler de noftre creance, 
guerilTez moy, difoit elle, & ie croirai, autrement 
non, ie veux viure, fi vous me voulez rendre la fan- 
t6, i'obeirai a vos paroles. I'auois beau luy dire que 
cela n'eftoit pas en noitre pouuoir. Comme vn Sau- 
uage nomme MakheabicJuicJiiou, s'efloit trouue mal, 
& que nous 1 'anions affifle en fa maladie, le faifant 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 HI 

with the cold. The Savages, who have no faith and 
therefore no charity, let her ask for a drink more 
than four times before giving it to her once ; I my- 
self gave her food," says the Father, " feeding her 
like a child. When I went to the cabins, these bar- 
barians told me that her loins were quite raw ; and 
yet, during all the time we visited her, we never saw 
an act of impatience, nor heard a complaint against 
those of her cabin, except when she saw they were 
going to break camp; " Alas!" said she, " they will 
kill me, or abandon me somewhere." That very 
thing happened the day after her baptism ; for Fa- 
ther du Marche having gone to the cabins to take 
her something to eat, they stopped him and said to 
him, ' Wait, thou shalt go in soon.' They were pre- 
paring to bury this poor creature, who two hours be- 
fore was feeling well enough, as she had made the 
sign of the cross and pronounced the sweet names of 
Jesus and Mary. It is quite probable that they put 
her to death. The hospital will remedy these great 
wrongs." 

On the 1 8th of the same month a Savage woman 
received baptism ; but it would have been much bet- 
ter for her if she had never received it, for she died 
in apostasy. As Father [48] de Quen and I visited 
her very often during her sickness, if we opened our 
mouths to say anything to her about our belief, ' ' Cure 
me," she would say, " and I will believe, otherwise 
not ; I wish to live ; if you will restore me my health, 
I will obey your words." In vain did I tell her that 
this was not in our power. As a Savage named 
Makheabichtichiou was feeling ill, and as we had 
ministered to him in his sickness, occasionally having 
him sleep in our house, this woman, seeing that he 


112 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.11 


par fois coucher en noltre maifon ; cette femme vol- 
ant qu'il fe portoit bien, attribuoit le recouurement 
de fa fante k noftre pouuoir, & a la cognoiffance que 
nous anions auec le Manitou, c'eft a dire, auec celuy 
qui ofte ou rend la vie, fi bien qu'elle nous deman- 
doit touliours la vie du corps, ne f e f ouciant pas beau- 
coup decelle deTame; ie me fers de toute la douceur 
poffible pour gagner fon efprit, ie palTe de la dou- 
ceur aux menaces, mais ny I'huile, ny le vinaigre, 
n'eftoientpasaffez puiffans, pour guerirvnefi grande 
maladie comme eft I'opiniaftrete, qui aime trop cette 
vie, eft en danger de perdre I'autre, comme il eft ar- 
riu6 k cette pauure miferable, felon qu'on en pent 
probablement iuger, aiant done quafi defefpere de 
fon falut, i'en aduertis le fieur Oliuier, qui co- 
gnoiffoit & cheriffoit fes parens [49] de longue main, 
& qui affiftoit fort charitablement cette pauure lan- 
guilTante, il la va voir, luy demande fi elle fe veut per- 
dre, d'ou venoit qu'elle ne me vouloit point efcouter? 
il ne fait que me tancer, & me parler de la mort, 
m'eftourdillant en ma maladie, refpondit elle. En 
effet ne pouuant faire entrer la foi dans fon efprit, 
par I'efperance du ciel, i'auois tafch6 de luy donner 
entree par la terreur de I'enfer. Or foit qu'elle fei- 
gnift, ou qu'en verity elle euft quelque bonne volon- 
te, elle promit au fieur Oliuier de croire en Dieu, & 
d'obeir k ce que ie luy dirois. Nous la vifitafmes 
plufieurs fois, elle nous efcouta auec paix & repos, 
monftrant prendre gouft en noftre doctrine ; la voiant 
fufififamment inftruite, nous luy accordons le bap- 
tefme qu'elle fouhaittoit, du moins en apparence. 
Le fieur Oliuier luy donna nom Marie, ie confeffe que 
mon ame reffentoit ie ne fgai quel degouft, qu'elle 


1636 - 37] LE JE UNE ' 5 RELA TION, 1637 118 

became well, attributed the restoration of bis health 
to our power, and to our acquaintance with the Mani- 
tou, that is, with the one who takes away or restores 
life ; hence she always asked us for the life of the 
body, not troubling herself much about that of the 
soul. I used all the mildness I could to gain her at- 
tention, I passed from gentleness to threats; but 
neither oil nor vinegar was powerful enough to cure 
so great a disease as obstinacy. He who loves this 
life too much is in danger of losing the other ; thus 
it was with this poor creature, as far as we can with 
probability judge. Now as her salvation seemed al- 
most hopeless, I informed sieur Olivier, who knew 
and cared for her parents [49] efficiently, and who 
was very kind and charitable to this poor invalid. 
He went to see her and asked her if she were willing 
to be lost, and why she would not listen to me. " He 
does nothing but chide me, and speak to me of death, 
crazing me in my sickness," she replied. Indeed, as 
I could not make the faith enter her mind through 
the hope of heaven, I had tried to gain admission for 
it through the dread of hell. Now either because 
she was playing a part, or because she had in truth 
some good intentions, she promised sieur Olivier to 
believe in God and to be obedient to what I should 
tell her. We visited her several times, she listened 
to us quietly and peacefully, showing that she en- 
joyed our doctrine. Seeing her sufficiently instructed, 
we granted her the baptism that she wished, at least 
in appearance. Sieur Olivier named her Marie; I 
confess that my soul felt a sort of repugnance that it 
is not wont to feel during the baptism of others. I 
could not refrain from testifying to sieur Olivier that 
my heart was not satisfied. Father de Quen had the 


114 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.11 

n'a pas de couflume de rellentir au baptefme des 
autres. le ne me pen tenir, que ie ne tefmoignajGCe 
au fieur Oliuier, que mon coeurn'eftoit point fatisf ait. 
Le P. de Quen auoit les mefmes fentimens; mais 
qu'euffions nous fait, il n'y a point d'apparence de 
refufer ce Sacrement a vne perfonne, qui fait pa- 
roiftre [50] qu'elle a defir de s'en bien feruir; aiant 
receu ces eaux facrees, nous tafchions bien d'en 
conceuoir quelque ioie, mais mon ame n'en pouuoit 
receuoir, quoy que ie I'y contraigniffe &, force de rai- 
fons, quelques iours s'efcoulerent, fans qu'elle fit pa- 
roiflre aucune alienation de la foy, mais rentrant dans 
les penf^es de la vie prefente, elle nous prit en 
horreur, en forte qu'elle ne nous vouloit plus parler, 
ny refpondre ^ nos demandes, on a beau I'amadoiier 
pour la flechir, fes oreilles font boufchees &, nos pa- 
roles, & fon coeur ferme aux infpirations de Dieu. 
Voiant doc qu'elle s'alloit perdre ie I'entrepris cer- 
tain iour, formant les plaintes que feroit fon ame 
dans le defefpoir, & dans les feux, pent eftre auant 
que trois iours fe paffaffent. Ie luy racomptai quel- 
que chofe de la rage & de la fureur des diables, elle 
ne peut fupporter ces menaces, elle fe met ^ pleurer 
& a grincer les dents, & fans me rien dire, elle fort 
de la cabane ^ quatre pattes, comme on dit, car elle 
ne fe pouuoit plus tenir fur fes pieds, & fe couche 
fur la neige. Ie penfois qu'elle fut fortie pour quel- 
que neceffit6: mais le P. de Quen me dit, non i'ai 
bien cogneu k fon gefte qu'elle eft fortie de defpit & 
de rage. Voiant qu'elle ne retournoit point, ie 
m'imaginois [51] qu'elle eftoit entree dans quelque 
autre cabane voifine : c'eft pourquoy aiant tarde en- 
cor enuiron vne demie heure "k inftruire ceux auec 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1637 115 

same sentiments. But what should we do? There 
is no excuse for refusing- this Sacrament to a person 
who shows [50] a desire to avail himself of it. After 
she received these sacred waters, we tried hard to 
feel some joy therein, but my soul could not enter- 
tain that feeling, although I tried to constrain it 
thereto by force of argument. A few days slipped 
away, and she did not show any alienation from the 
faith ; but, when she returned to the thoughts of the 
present life, she conceived a horror for us, so that 
she would no longer speak to us nor respond to our 
inquiries. In vain do we try to bend her by coaxing ; 
her ears are deaf to our words, and her heart closed 
to the inspirations of God. Now seeing that she was 
going to be lost, I took her in hand one day, repre- 
senting to her the complaints her soul would make in 
its despair and in the flames, perhaps before three 
days would pass away. I related to her something of 
the rage and fury of the devils. She could not en- 
dure these threats ; she began to weep, and to grind 
her teeth; and, without saying anything to me, she 
went out of the cabin on all fours, as they say, for 
she could not stand on her feet, and lay down on the 
snow. I thought she had gone out to attend to some 
necessity; but Father de Quen said to me, " No, I 
knew very well from her actions that she had gone 
out from vexation and rage." Seeing that she did 
not return, I imagined [5 i] that she had entered some 
neighboring cabin. Hence, having stayed about half 
an hour longer to instruct those with whom we were, 
we went out, intending to return home ; but we were 
astonished to see this poor abandoned woman lying 
upon the snow, exposed to the air, and having no 
covering but a miserable piece of fur. I offered to 


116 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.11 

lesquels nous eftions, nous fortifmes pour nous en 
retourner ; nous f uf mes eflonnez que nous trouuaf mes 
cette pauure abandonnee expofee k I'air, & fur la 
neige, n'aiant fur foi qu'vn mef chant bout de peau, 
dont elle f e couuroit ; ie me pref ente pour la recon- 
duire en fa cabane, luy parlant affablement, & auec 
compaffion, elle me rebuta opiniaftrement ; fon mary 
qui eftoit bon Sauuage en elloit bien trifle, mais il 
n'y pouuoit apporter aucun remede. 

Peu de iours apres vne femme Sauuage me vint 
trouuer, & me dit que cette miferable apoftate s'eftoit 
voulu tuer, qu'on auoit efloign^ d'elle tous les cou- 
fteaux, qu'on 1* auoit veue enleuee en I'air plus d'vne 
coudee, qu'elle s'eftoit defrob^e de fes gens s'enfuiant 
la nuict pour difparoiflre, & eftre emport^e du diable, 
que fes gens I'auoient rattrappee, que fi elle euft dif- 
paru, elle auroit cofomme & fait mourir les Sauuages. 
Tout cecy m'eftonna. Ie m'enqueflai fi par fois quel- 
que Sauuage difparoiffoit fans eftre reueu, on me dit 
que cela arriuoit. Mais ie [52] parlerai de cecy en 
vn autre endroit ; defirant done f gauoir fi cette femme 
nous auoit racont^ de vraies, ou de fauces nouuelles, 
nous priafmes Monlieur Oliuier d'aller vifiter cette 
defefperee, pour voir fl elle vouloit perfeuerer dans 
fon malheur, & pour s'enquerir de ce qui luy eftoit 
arriue, il I'a fut voir; elle ne voulut point refpondre 
"k fes demandes, ny luy parler en aucune fagon. II 
interrogea fa mere fur ce qui s'eftoit paffe, elle donna 
aflez k cognoiflre qu'en effect elle s'eftoit voulu tuer, 
qu'elle leur eftoit efchappee la nuict, fans f9auoir 
comment ; mais qu'ils I'auoient attrappee, & ramenee 
en fa cabane; comment s'enfuioit elle, demanda-il, 
veu qu'elle ne fe peutremuer? qu'en f9au6s nousref- 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 117 

take her back to her cabin, speaking to her kindly 
and pityingly; she obstinately repulsed me. Her 
husband, a good-natured Savage, was very sorry 
about this, but he could furnish no remedy for it. 

A few days later, a Savage woman came to see me, 
and told me that this miserable apostate had tried to 
kill herself; that all the knives had been put out of 
her reach ; that she had been seen raised in the air 
more than a cubit; that she had escaped from her 
people, fleeing in the night so as to vanish and be 
carried away by the devil ; that her people had cap- 
tured her; that, if she had disappeared, she would 
have wasted away, and would have caused the death 
of the Savages. All this astonished me. I inquired 
if occasionally some Savage disappeared, never to be 
seen again, and I was answered that this did happen. 
But I [52] will speak of this in another place. Now 
wishing to know whether this woman had related 
true or false news to us, we begged Monsieur Olivier 
to go and visit this desperate creature, to learn 
whether she intended to persevere in her unhappy 
course, and find out what had happened to her. He 
went and saw her ; she would not answer his inquiries, 
nor speak to him at all. He questioned her mother as 
to what had taken place; she said enough to con- 
vince him that she had really tried to kill herself, 
that she had escaped from them in the night without 
their knowing how ; but that they had captured her, 
and brought her back to her cabin. " How could 
she escape," he asked, " seeing that she is unable to 
move?" " How do we know?" they replied. ''Per- 
haps," said the mother, " her soul tried to go away, 
and she ran after it so as not to let it escape." That 
is the story sieur Olivier brought back to us. Final- 


118 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.11 

pondent-ils, c'eft peut-eftre, dit fa mere, que fon ame 
s'en veut aller, & elle coiiroit apres pour ne la point 
laiffer efchapper. Voila ce que le fieur Oliuier nous 
en rapporta. En fin la pauure miferable aiant la 
mort entre les dents, fut portee de I'autre cofle du 
grand fleuue, ou les Sauuages alloient chercher de 
rOrignac, & mourut bien toft apres fon depart, ainfi 
qu'il nous fut rapporte. 

Le 28. du mefme mois de Feburier Monfieur Gand 
fut parrain d'vne feme Sauuage, [53] & la nomma 
Anne en fon baptefme. Le defefpoir de la fante du 
corps luy fit penfer a la fante de I'ame, tant qu'elle 
eut quelque efperance de la vie temporelle, elle ne 
fe mit point en peine de I'eternelle : mais voiat que 
le temps luy alloit efchapper, elle fe voulut letter 
dans I'eternite : comme ie m'eftonnois de la longue 
refiflance, qu'elle nous auoit fait, vn ieune Sauuage 
me dit, que ie ne m'en eftonnafl^e pas, & que plu- 
fieurs de leur nation ont cette penfee, que le baptefme 
nuit "k la vie, mais qu'il eft bon pour fe def endre du feu 
dont nous les mena9ons ; voila pourquoy quelques vns 
ne veulent point eftre baptifez, qu'ils n'aient perdu 
toute efperace de pouuoir recouurer leur fante ; c'eft 
vn erreur que le diable leur iette das I'efprit, femblable 
^ celuy de nos heretiques, qui donnent des paffeports 
aux enfans pour aller au ciel fans baptefme, mais les 
vns & les autres font trompez. Cette pauure femme 
eftant Chreftienne, furuefcut quelques iours, comme 
nous I'allions fouuent confoler, pour I'aider a fe for- 
tifier en la foy qu'elle auoit receue, ie luy demandai 
fi elle n'auoit point ouy parler de Marie, qu'elle co- 
gnoiffoit fort bien (c'eft cette Apoftate dont ie viens 
de parler) & fi elle ne vouloit point fe perdre aufll bie 


1636-37] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 119 

ly, when the poor wretch had death upon her face, 
she was carried to the other side of the great river, 
where the Savages were going to hunt the Moose, 
and died soon after her departure, as we have been 
told. 

On the 28th of the same month of February, Mon- 
sieur Gand was sponsor to a Savage woman [53] and 
named her Anne in baptism. The hopeless condi- 
tion of her bodily health made her think of the health 
of the soul ; as long as she had any hope of temporal 
life, she gave herself no anxiety for the eternal; but, 
when she saw she was losing her hold on time, she 
sought to grasp eternity. As I expressed some sur- 
prise at the long resistance she had made to us, a 
young Savage told me that I need not be astonished 
at it, — that many of their nation had this idea, that 
baptism is injurious to life, but that it is a good thing 
with which to protect oneself from the fires with 
which we threaten them. So this is why some do 
not consent to be baptized until they have lost all 
hope of being able to recover their health. It is an 
error that the devil puts in their minds, like that of 
our heretics who give passports to unbaptized chil- 
dren to go to heaven ; but both are deluded. This 
poor woman, after she became a Christian, survived 
a few days. As we often went to console her, and 
to help her strengthen herself in the faith she had 
accepted, I asked her if she had not heard about 
Marie, whom she knew very well (she is that Apos- 
tate of whom I have just spoken), and if she would 
not be lost as she had been. [54] " Ah, indeed I do 
not," she replied; " I wish to believe until death; I 
do not wish to go down under the earth, into those 
furnaces you have told us about." Having perse- 


120 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.11 

qu'elle. [54] Helas! nenny, me fit elle; ie veux 
croire iufques k la mort, ie ne veux point defcendre 
fous la terre, dans ces brafiers dont vous m'auez 
parle. Aiant perfeuere dans cette faincte refolution, 
en fin elle alia iouir des biens, qu'elle auoit efpere. 
Le 7. iour de Mars nous enterrafmes fon corps k la 
fagon des Chreftiens, Or il arriua que fes parens 
aians enueloppe ie ne fgay quel petit paquet d'efcorce 
auec fon corps, la vouloient deterrer le lendemain, ie 
m'y oppofai & prefl!ai fort le Sauuage qui me portoit 
cette parole de me dire ce que c'eftoit, en fin il me 
dit que c'eftoit vn peu de fes cheueux, qu'ils auoient 
couppe & enueloppe das de I'efcorce, & que ce petit 
paquet auoit eft6 mis auec le corps par m^garde, qu'il 
le falloit retirer pour le doner au plus proche parent 
de la deffuncte. Ie m'e moquai de leurs fuperfti- 
tions, & come il me dit que c6t home fe pourroit 
fafcher, ie luy dis en riant, qu'il couppafl vn petit 
des cheueux de fa tefle, ou qu'il prift vn peu de poil 
d'Orignac, pour doner k fon parent; que cela luy fe- 
roit bien aufli vtil, que ce qu'il demandoit, il fe mit 
"k rire, & s'en alia. 

Le 13. de May ne {sc. nous] fifmes Chreftien, m'ef- 
criret nos PP. des trois Riuieres, vn petit gargon age 
de quatre ^ cinq ans, fils d'vn Sauuage nomme Aoue- 
femenisk. II n'eftoit pas fi voifin [55] de la mort, mais 
come fon pere I'emmenoit dans les terres pour vn an, 
promettat de nous le donner, s'il recouuroit fa fant^, 
nous iugeafmes "k propos de luy faire vn bien, dot il 
ne cognoiftra la grandeur, que dans le ciel. Le Chi- 
rurgien du fort le nomma Aime, 

Le 14. iour du mefme mois, le P. Adam cofera le 
S. baptefme a vn petit gar§6 age d'euiron 9. ^ 10. 


1636-37] LE JEUNES RELATION, i637 121 


vered in this pious resolution, she finally went to en- 
joy the blessings she had hoped for. On the 7th day 
of March, we buried her body in the Christian way. 
Now it happened that her parents, having wrapped 
up some little package of bark with her body, wanted 
to exhume her the next day. I opposed this, and 
strongly urged the Savage who brought me this mes- 
sage to tell me what it was. Finally he told me it 
was a little of her hair, that they had cut and wrapped 
in some bark ; and that this little package had been 
placed with the body by mistake, — that it must be 
taken out, to be given to the nearest relative of the 
dead girl. I ridiculed their superstitions ; and, when 
he told me that this man would get angry, I told 
him laughingly to cut a little hair from his own head, 
or to take a little Moose hair, to give to this rela- 
tive, — that it would be just as useful as what he 
asked ; he began to laugh, and went away. 

" On the 13th of May we made a Christian," write 
our Fathers from the three Rivers, " of a little boy 
about four or five years old, son of a Savage named 
Aouesemenisk. He was not so very near [55] death; 
but, since his father would take him farther inland 
for a year, promising to give him to us if he recov- 
ered his health, we judged it proper to confer upon 
him a blessing, the importance of which he will not 
recognize until he gets to heaven. The Surgeon of 
the fort named him Aime." 

On the 14th day of the same month, Father Adam 
conferred Holy baptism upon a little boy about 9 or 
10 years old. One of our men, called Christofle, 
gave him the name Ignace. We had withdrawn. 
Father de Quen and I, to the house of nostre Dame 
des Anges, to enjoy for a little while the repose of a 


122 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 

ans. Vn de nos homes nomm6 Chriftofle, luy dona 
nom Ignace. Nous nous eftions retirez le P. de Quen 
& moy, en la maiso de noftre Dame des Anges, pour 
iouir par quelque temps du repos d'vne douce foli- 
tude auec Dieu, fuiuant la couftume de noftre Copa- 
gnie. Le pere de ce petit Chreflien f9acliat que nous 
eflios Ik, nous vint trouuer, & nous amena deux de 
fes enfans, qu'il nous auoit defia prefente k i^ebec, 
nous en receufmes vn au baptefme, & luy promifmes 
de predre I'autre pour le Seminaire. II vit coferer 
ce Sacrement a fon fils, auec les fainctes ceremonies 
de I'Eglife, & s'en alia fort fatisfait. 

Le 25. du mefme mois, le P. de Quen baptifa vn 
grand ieune homme languifCant, qui nous confola fort 
en I'inftruifant. Le fieur de la Porte fut fon parrain, 
& le nomma Pierre. Comme nous eftions en fa ca- 
bane, pour luy expliquer les poincts de [56] noftre 
creance, fa mere qui reuenoit d'vne autre cabane, 
nous entendant, luy cria tout haut deuat que d'en- 
trer, mon fils crois ce que te difent les PP. fi i'eftois 
malade, ie les croirois, car ils difent vrai, fi tu ne 
peux parler, penfe en ton coeur k celuy qui a tout 
fait, & luy dis qu'il aie pitie de toy ; ie viens de voir 
vne femme malade, laquelle m'a dit que quand les 
PP. I'inftruifent, elle dit en fon coeur ce qu'ils difent 
de bouche, celuy qui a tout fait voit ce que tu penfe: 
ce pauure gar9on entendant cela, fe rendoit fort at- 
tentif. II mourut bien toft apres fon baptefme; 
comme fa mere refufoit de donner fon corps pour 
I'enterrer en noftre cimetiere, le P. I'Allemant, qui 
eftoit pour lors a ATebec, m'efcriuit qu'il feroit k pro- 
pos que ie m'y tranfportaffe, pour tirer ces fainctes 
defpoiiilles des mains de cette femme. Ie priai le 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 123 

sweet solitude with God, according to the custom of 
our Society. The father of this little Christian, 
knowing we were there, came to see us, and brought 
us two of his children whom he had already pre- 
sented to us at Kebec. We accepted one of them for 
baptism, and promised to take the other for the 
Seminary. He saw this Sacrament conferred upon 
his son, with the holy ceremonies of the Church, and 
went away well satisfied. 

On the 25th of the same month. Father de Quen 
baptized a tall young man, lying ill, who consoled us 
greatly while we were instructing him. Sieur de la 
Porte ^^ was his godfather, and named him Pierre. 
As we were in his cabin to explain to him the points 
of [56] our belief, his mother, who was returning 
from another cabin, hearing us, cried to him in a 
loud voice, before entering, " My son, believe what 
the Fathers tell thee. If I were sick, I would be- 
lieve them, for they tell the truth; if thou canst not 
speak, think in thy heart upon him who has made all 
things, and tell him to have pity upon thee. I 
have just come from a sick woman, who told me 
that, when the Fathers instructed her, she said in 
her heart what they said with their lips ; he who has 
made all sees what thou thinkest." Upon hearing 
this, the poor young man became very attentive. He 
died soon after his baptism; as his mother refused 
to give his body to be buried in our cemetery, Fa- 
ther I'AUemant, who was then at Kebec, wrote me 
that it would be proper for me to go there, to get 
these holy remains from the hands of this woman. 
I begged Father de Quen to go, since I was pre- 
vented. He tried to find out why this woman was 
loath to give up the body of her son. She gave 


124 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 11 

P. de Quen d'y aller, pource que i'auois quelque em- 
pefchemet. II tafche de f9auoir pourquoy cette 
femme faifoit difficulte de donner le corps de fon 
fils ; elle en donna trois raif ons : la premiere, que le 
cimetiere de Kebec efloit fort humide: la feconde, 
que nous ne voulios pas permettre qu'ils miffent des 
efcources das leur folTe: & la troifiefme, qui eftoit la 
plus forte en fa penfee, c'eft que nous auions baptife 
fon fils auec de I'eau de la riuiere, & [57] que nous 
baptifions les autres auec de I'eau que nous appor- 
tions de noftre maifon, que I'eau de la riuiere n'au- 
roit aucun effet, & que fon fils n'iroit point au lieu 
que ie luy auois dit; elle s'opiniaftra 1^ dellus, & re- 
tint ce pauure corps trois iours fans I'enterrer, enfin 
aiant encor plus de confiance en nous qu'en ceux de 
fa nation, elle nous I'apporta k noftre Dame des 
Anges, s'affurant que nous ne defroberions rien du 
bagage qu'elle luy donneroit pour aller en 1' autre 
monde. La neceffite nous auoit contraint de baptifer 
ce pauure gargon fans ceremonie, mais nous I'enter- 
rafmes auec le chant de I'Eglife, ce qui confola fort 
les barbares, qui affifteret k fes funerailles. Comme 
ie leur difois que I'ame n' auoit que faire de tout ce 
bagage, qu'ils iettoient dans la foffe, ils me repar- 
tirent, nous le croions ainfi, mais nous efloignos de 
nos yeux ce qui nous cauferoit de la douleur, nous 
faifant relTouuenir du trefpaffe. 

Le mefme iour vn homme age d'enuiron 50. ans, 
de la nation des Attikamegues, fut enroolle au nombre 
des Chreftiens, aux trois Riuieres. Le P. Buteux 
me mande que le voiant malade, il luy demanda, oti 
il penfoit aller apres fa mort; au ciel repartit-il. Ie 
pris de Ik occafion de luy enfeigner, dit le P. [58] ce 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 125 

three reasons for it : first, that the cemetery at Kebec 
was very damp; second, that we would not permit 
them to put bark in the grave ; and the third reason, 
which was the most important, according to her idea, 
was that we had baptized her son with water from 
the river, and [57] that we baptized the others with 
water we had brought from our house; that the 
river water would have no effect, and that her son 
would not go to the place I had said he would. She 
was obstinate about it, and retained this poor bod}^ 
three days without burying it. Finally, having still 
more confidence in us than she had in the people of 
her own nation, she brought it to us at nostre Dame 
des Anges, being assured that we would not take 
away any of the bundles that she gave it to take into 
the other world. Necessity had compelled us to bap- 
tize this poor boy without ceremony, but we buried 
him with the chant of the Church, which was a great 
consolation to the barbarians who were present at the 
funeral. When I told them that the soul had no use 
for all this baggage which they were throwing into 
the grave, they replied. "We believe so, too; but 
we remove from our sight what would cause our grief, 
recalling to us the dead." 

On the same day, a man about 50 years old, of the 
nation of the Attikamegues,^^ was enrolled among the 
number of Christians, at the three Rivers. Father 
Buteux informed me that, on seeing him sick he 
asked him where he expected to go after death. 
" To heaven," he replied. "Thereupon I took oc- 
casion to teach him," said the Father, [58] "what 
he must do to obtain this great blessing. I found 
him very well disposed and partly instructed, as he 
had heard me speak of our faith in their cabins; 


126 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 

qu'il falloit faire pour obtenir ce grand bien. le le 
trouuai fort bien difpof^, & a demi inftruit, m'aiant 
ouy parler de noftre foy dans leurs cabanes, c'eft 
pourquoy nous le fifmes Chreftien. L'vn des inter- 
pretes fut fon parrain, & I'appella Frangois; comme 
ie luy faifois prononcer fon nom, ie fuis bien aife, 
dit-il, qu'on me nomme ainfi dorefnauant, & non plus 
Memegouechiou comme on faifoit. 

Le 5 . iour de luin le fieur Oliuier baptifa vne ieune 
fille aagee d'enuiron douze ans, nous anions comman- 
ce de I'inftruire, mais comme nous n'en n'eftions pas 
encor fatisfaits, nous ne luy anions point confer^ ce 
Sacrement. Le fieur Oliuier fe rencontrant das les 
cabanes, la trouua agonifant, c'eft pourquoy n'efpe- 
rant pas que nous en peulTions eftre aduertis affez 
tofl, la baptifa fans ceremonies, elle fut enterr6e le 
mefme iour. 

Le 8. de luillet vn ieune enfant Algonquin, recent 
la fant6 du corps & de I'ame par le moie des eaux fa- 
crees du baptefme. Or vn Montagnez voiant qu'il 
s'en alloit mourant, en vint donner aduis au P. Bu- 
teux, luy difant que le pere de I'enfant ne feroit pas 
marri qu'il I'allaft voir, aiant tout donne ce qu'il auoit 
aux f orders, iufques k fa propre robbe, pour fe faire 
chanter, & fouffler "k leur fa9on, [59] & tout cela fans 
aucun effect, Le P. s'y transporte, tefmoigne k ce 
barbare qu'il n'entroit point en fa cabane pour auoir, 
ains au contraire pour donner fecours au corps & a 
I'ame de fon fils, que s'il vouloit qu'on le baptifaft 
que pent eftre noftre Seigneur luy rendroit la fant6. 
Ce pauure homme en fut tres-content, Monfieur de 
Chafteau-fort qui commande aux trois Riuieres vou- 
lut eftre fon parrain & le nomma lean; ce pauure 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 127 

hence we made him a Christian. One of the inter- 
preters was his godfather, and called him Fran9ois ; 
as I had him pronounce his name, ' I am very glad,' 
said he, ' that I shall henceforth be called this and 
no longer Memegou'echiou as formerly. 

On the 5th of June, sieur Olivier baptized a young 
girl about twelve years old. We had begun to in- 
struct her, but as we were not yet satisfied, we had 
not conferred upon her this Sacrament. Sieur Oli- 
vier, happening to be among the cabins, found her 
in the death throes; hence, having no hope that we 
could be informed in time, he baptized her without 
ceremony ; she was buried the same day. 

On the 8th of July, a young Algonquin child re- 
ceived health for the body and for the soul by means 
of the sacred waters of baptism. Now a Montagues, 
seeing it was going to die, came to inform Father 
Buteux, telling him that the father of the child would 
not be sorry if he would go and see it, as he had 
given all he had to the sorcerers, even to his own 
robe, to have it sung to and blown upon in their fash- 
ion, [59] and all this had been without effect. The 
Father betook himself thither. He assures this bar- 
barian that he has not entered his cabin to get, but 
on the contrary to give, help, both to the body and 
to the soul of his son ; that, if he wished to have him 
baptized, perhaps our Lord would restore him his 
health. This poor man was very well satisfied ; Mon- 
sieur de Chasteau-fort, who commands at the three 
Rivers, consented to be his godfather, and named 
him Jean; this poor little one, having become a child 
of God, fully recovered in the two days following, to 
the great astonishment of its parents. 

On the 1 8th of the same month. Father Daniel 


128 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 

petit eftant fait enfant de Dieu, guerit plainement 
dans les deux iours fuiuans, auec I'eftonnement de 
fes parens. 

Le 1 8. du mefme mois le P. Daniel baptifa vn Hu- 
ron, de ceux qui eftoient arriuez pour la traitte, & 
qui eftoit defcendu iufques k la refidence de la Con- 
ception aux trois Riuieres. Comme il ne le trouuoit 
point capable d'inftruction, tant il eftoit oppreffe de 
fa maladie, il s'auifa de faire mettre "k genoux fes Se- 
minariftes Hurons qui Taccompagnoient, les faifant 
prier Dieu auec foy, pour le falut de leur compatriote ; 
a mefme temps qu'ils recitoient leurs prieres, le ma- 
lade ouure les yeux, les iette fur le P. qui luy de- 
mande auffi toft, s'il I'entendoit bien; aiat refpondu 
qu'il I'entendoit, luy reprefente que les remedes hu- 
mains, & tout le fecours [60] que luy auoit donne le 
fieur de la Perle, Chirurgien de 1' habitation, ne pou- 
uans remettre fon corps en fant6, qu'il falloit penfer 
^ fon ame, laquelle n'iroit point en leur Eskendende, 
c'eft le pais ou vont leurs ames, mais qu'elle feroit 
portee au ciel, ou bien dans les enfers, que toutes les 
ames alloient en fin dans I'vne de ces deux extremi- 
tez, les bonnes dans le plaifir, les mefchantes & infi- 
deles dans le malheur. Ce pau[u]re homme carelloit 
le Pere, TembralTant & luy tefmoignant qu'il prenoit 
plaifir k fon difcours. II continue done de I'inftruire, 
fur le myftere de la faincte Trinite & de 1' Incarna- 
tion, luy fait entendre que s'il croit ces veritez il pent 
eftre baptife, & que dans le baptefme fes pechez luy 
feroient pardonnez, & fon ame purifiee & toute difpo- 
fee pour le ciel, qu'il falloit feulement qu'il fuft mar- 
ri d'auoir offence celuy qui a tout fait. A ces paroles 
ce bon homme, tout moribond, commance "k frap- 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, r637 129 

baptized a Huron, one of those who had come to 
trade, who had descended as far as the residence 
of the Conception at the three Rivers. As he was 
not capable of receiving instruction, being so op- 
pressed by his sickness, he decided to have the Huron 
Seminarists who accompanied him kneel, and pray to 
God, with him, for the salvation of their country- 
man. While they were repeating their prayers the 
sick man opened his eyes and cast them upon the 
Father, who immediately asked him if he understood 
well. Having answered that he did, he represented 
to him that human remedies, and all the help [60] 
that sieur de la Perle, Surgeon of the settlement, 
had given him, could not avail to restore health to 
his body ; that he must think upon his soul, which 
would not go into their Eskendend^, the country where 
their souls go, but that it would be taken to heaven 
or to hell ; that all souls went at last into one of these 
two extremes, the good into joy, the wicked and un- 
believing into misery. This poor man caressed the 
Father, embracing him, and showing that he took 
pleasure in his conversation. So he continued to in- 
struct him upon the mystery of the holy Trinity and 
of the Incarnation. He gave him to understand 
that, if he believed these truths, he could be bap- 
tized, and that in baptism his sins would be par- 
doned, and his soul purified and prepared for heav- 
en ; that it only required that he should be sorry for 
having offended him who has made all things. At 
these words, this simple man, already dying, began 
to clasp his hands as a sign of rejoicing, but with so 
much strength that, if one had not already seen his 
eyes drowned in the sleep of death, he would have 
taken him for a man in good health. ** How good 


130 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.11 

per des mains, en figne de refiotiiffance, mais fi forte- 
ment, que li on n'eufl defia veu fes yeux noiez dans 
le fommeil de la mort, on I'eufl pris pour vn homme 
plein de fante; voila qui va bien difoit il, voila qui 
va bien. II fut done baptife, & nomme Robert, a 
peine fut-il fait enfant de Dieu, qu'il rendit I'efprit 
[6i] ^ fon pere, mourant plus heureufement, qu'il 
n'auoit vefcu. Ses compagnons vindret auffi toft 
donner la nouuelle de fa mort au P. qui fe tranfporta 
en leur cabane, & leur demanda ce qu'ils vouloient 
faire de fon corps, ils ont couftume de brufler la chair 
des corps qui meurent hors de leur pais, & d'en tirer 
les OS, puis les emporter auec eux : mais voians que 
le P. leur difoit qu'eftant mort Chreftien, il feroit k 
propos qu'il fuft enterre en Chreftie, ils luy dirent 
qu'il eftoit le maiftre, qu'il en fit ce qu'il iugeroit a 
propos. Le P. auffi toft en donne aduis ^ Monfieur 
de Chafteau-fort, lequel fit faire vn beau conuoi k ce 
Neophite. Cela pleut tant aux Huros, que les prin- 
cipaux d'entre eux fe tenas "k la porte du fort, au re- 
tour des funerailles remercierent courtoifemet nos 
Frangois, du foin qu'ils auoiet eu du malade, & de 
rhoneur qu'ils luy auoient rendu apres fa mort. 

Le iour de la fefte de noftre P. S. Ignace, le P. 
Claude Pijart, nouuellement arriu6 en la nouuelle 
France, ref pandit les eaux qui donnent la vie de 
I'ame, fur le corps d'vne petite fille Algonquine, 
comme on eut parl6 k fon pere de le baptifer, luy 
qui n'auoit point encor ouy parler du baptefme, fe 
voulut informer des autres Sauuages, s'ils fgauoient 
bien [62] ce que c'eftoit. De bonne fortune il s'ad- 
drella k I'oncle du petit lean, dont ie viens de parler; 
lequel luy dit, que le baptefme ne faifoit aucun mal, 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 131 


that is," said he, " how good that is." So he was 
baptized, and named Robert; scarcely was he made 
a child of God than he rendered up his soul [6i] to 
his father, dying more happily than he had lived. 
His companions came immediately to bring the news 
of his death to the Father, who went to his cabin and 
asked them what they intended to do with his body. 
They are accustomed to burn the flesh of a person 
who dies outside of their own country, and, extract- 
ing the bones, to take these with them. But when 
the Father told them that as he had died a Christian 
it would be fitting that he should be buried as a 
Christian, they told him that he was the master, that 
he might do with the body what he deemed proper. 
The Father immediately informed Monsieur de Chas- 
teau-fort, who arranged a fine funeral procession for 
this Neophyte. This so greatly pleased the Hurons 
that the principal men among them, lingering at the 
gates of the fort, on the return of the procession, 
courteously thanked our French people for the care 
they had given the sick man, and for the honor they 
had rendered him after his death. 

On the day of the feast of our Father, St. Ignace, 
Father Claude Pi j art, lately arrived in new France, 
bestowed the waters which give spiritual life upon 
the body of a little Algonquin girl. When they 
spoke to her father about baptizing her, he, having 
never heard of baptism, wished to get information 
from the other Savages, asking if they really knew 
[62] what it was. Fortunately, he addressed him- 
self to the uncle of little Jean, of whom I have just 

spoken, who told him that baptism did no harm, 

that, on the contrary, it had restored health to his 
little nephew. Upon hearing that, this simple man 


132 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.11 

qu'au contraire il auoit rendu la fante a fon petit 
nepueu. Ce bon home entendant cela, permit qu'on 
donaft le nom de Marguerite a fa fille, la faifant 
Chreftiene. 

Le 4. d'Aouft le P. Buteux voiant vne petite fille 
malade dans les cabanes, demanda k fon pere s'il ne 
feroit pas bien aife qu'on enrichift fon ame, il refpon- 
dit qu'il en feroit tres content, & qu'il fgauoit bien 
que nous ne faifions point de mal aux enf ans ; fi tu 
veux (luy dit-il) qu'elle foit baptifee, fais la porter en 
noftre Chappelle, cet homme fans retarder d'auan- 
tage, vint chez nous auec fa femme qui apportoit fon 
enfant. le fus bien confole de voir cette prompti- 
tude, ie I'interroge s'il ne nous doneroit pas fa fille 
pour I'inftruire, au cas qu'elle retournaft en fante; 
affeurement, dit-il, ie te la donnerai. Ie fais eftat de 
fa parole, non feulement pour ce qu'il eft Capitaine, 
mais aulTi parce qu'il eft tenu de fes gens pour homme 
paifible & veritable. Comme ie le preffois ce Prin- 
temps de fe faire Chreftien, luy demandant fi ce qu'on 
luy enfeignoit eftoit manuals, il dit que non, pour- 
quoy done ne me promets tu pas de le croire. Si ie 
te I'auois promis, repart-il, [63] ie ferois oblige de le 
faire. En effet vn Sauuage me dit certain iour, que 
ie le preffaffe d'embraffer noftre foy, car s'il te pro- 
met, difoit-il, de le faire, il tiendra fa parole, pour 
les autres ne t'y fie pas aifement. Nous auons done 
fuiet de croire, que fi fon enfant guerit qu'il le don- 
nera en fon temps pour eftre efleue en la foy qu'il a 
receu au S. baptefme. Cette paurre petite fe nom- 
moit Ouemichtigouchiou iskoueou, c'eft ^ dire femme 
d' European: deux ieunes foldats qui ont efte au 
feruice de Madame de Combalet, fe trouuans a fon 
baptefme I'vn d'eux la nomma Marie Magdelene. 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 133 

permitted the name Marguerite to be given to his 
little daughter, making her a Christian. 

On the 4th of August, Father Buteux, seeing a 
little girl sick in one of the cabins, asked her father 
if he would not like to have her soul enriched ; he 
answered that it would please him indeed, and that 
he knew very well we did no harm to children. " If 
thou desire" (he said to him) "to have her bap- 
tized, have her brought into our Chapel." This 
man, without further delay, came to our house with 
his wife, who was carrying her child. I was greatly 
consoled at seeing this promptness; I asked him if 
he would not give us his daughter for instruction in 
case she recovered her health. "Certainly," said 
he, " I will give her to thee." I count upon his 
word, not only because he is a Captain, but also be- 
cause he is regarded by his people as a peaceable and 
truthful man. When I was urging him this Spring 
to become a Christian, asking him if what was being 
taught him was bad, he said, " No." " Why, then, 
dost thou not promise me to believe it? " " If I had 
promised thee, " he replied, [63] " I would be obliged 
to do it." In fact, a Savage said to me one day that 
I should urge him to embrace our faith, " for, if he 
promise thee to do it," said he, " he will keep his 
word. As to the others, do not put so much trust in 
them." So we have reason to believe that, if his 
child recovers, he will give it to us at the proper 
time, to be reared in the faith it has received in Holy 
baptism. This poor little one was called Ouemichti- 
gouchiou iskoueou, meaning, "wife of a European." 
Two young soldiers, who have been in the service of 
Madame de Combalet, being present at her baptism, 
one of them named her Marie Magdelene. 


134 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.11 

Le 6. le P. Pierre Pijart baptifa celuy qui I'auoit 
amene des Hurons. C'efloit le Capitaine de leur 
bourgade. Ce bon home fe nomoit Anion, eftat tom- 
be malade en chemin il fut fait Chreftien, & mourut 
aux trois Ritiieres. Deuant fa mort il recommanda 
fort ^ fes gens, qti'on ne fift aucun mal aux Franfois 
en fon pais: il efloit affez inftruit, mais la chair & 
le fang le retenoient dans fa vie barbare. II approu- 
uoit les commandemens de Dieu, mais il ne croioit 
pas les pouuoir garder. Se voiant done proche de la 
mort, & hors des dangers de pouuoir plus offencer 
Dieu, il recent volontiers le Sacremet de vie [64] 
pour euiter le malheur d'vne mort eternelle. 

Le 8. le P. Daniel fit Chreftien vn autre Huro ma- 
lade, nomme Tfondak^, on le nomma lean en fon bap- 
tefme, il efloit des plus continens entre les Hurons, 
c'efl pour cette raifon (pent eftre) que Dieu luy a fait 
mifericorde. 

Le 9. il en baptifa encor vn autre nomm6 Arachio- 
kouan, il fut appelle Noel, ce ieune homme ne fgauoit 
quelle carelTe faire "k celuy qui luy procuroit le ciel, 
il le prenoit par les mains, & luy difoit, tu ne me dis 
pas chofes petites, de me parler d'aller au ciel, i'y 
veux aller, i'ay yeu quelques vns de mes copatriotes 
baptifez, qui m'inuitoient d'aller auec eux. Le P. 
luy demanda s'il fe fouuie droit de luy, quad il feroit 
en ce lieu de delice: ouy dea, faifoit-il, ie m'en fou- 
uiendrai, & ie dirai k celuy qui a tout fait, qu'il 
t'aime bien. 

Le mefme iour le P. Buteux, recent au nobre des 
Chreftiens vn Sauuage Montagnez, auquel on chan- 
gea le nom de Nenaskoumat, au nom de Pierre. Le 
Fere le voulant difpofer au baptefme, luy demandoit 


1636 - 37] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 135 

On the 6th, Father Pijart baptized the one who 
had brought him from the Hurons. It was the Cap- 
tain of their village. This good man, named Aenon, 
having fallen sick on the way, was made a Christian, 
and died at the three Rivers. Before his death, he 
earnestly recommended his people not to do any 
harm to the French in his country ; he was sufficient- 
ly instructed, but flesh and blood caused him to cling 
to his barbarous life. He approved of the command- 
ments of God, but he did not believe he could keep 
them. Now seeing himself near death, and no longer 
threatened by the possibility of offending God, he 
willingly received the Sacrament of life [64] in order 
to escape the woe of an eternal death. 

On the 8th Father Daniel made a Christian of an- 
other sick Huron, called Tsondake, naming him Jean 
at his baptism. He was one of the most continent 
men among the Hurons, and it was for this reason 
(perhaps) that God was merciful to him. 

On the 9th, he also baptized another one, called 
Arachiokouan, naming him Noel. This young man 
did not know how to show his gratitude to him who 
had procured heaven for him ; he took him by the 
hand and said to him, " Thou dost not utter trifles 
to me, in speaking about going to heaven ; I wish to 
go there ; I have seen some of my baptized country- 
men, who have invited me to go with them." The 
Father asked him if he would surely remember him, 
when he was in that happy land. "Oh yes," he 
said, " I will remember thee, and I will tell him who 
has made all things to love thee well." 

On the same day. Father Buteux received among 
the number of Christians a Montagnez Savage, whose 
name, Nenaskoumat, was changed to that of Pierre. 


136 LES RELATIONS DES Jj&SUITES [Vol.11 

fouuent s'il ne vouloit pas croire, ouy, dit-il, ie veux 
croire, fi ie n'en auois pas enuie, ie te dirois tout 
maintenat vas-t'e, ie ne te veux pas efcouter, pour 
marque de fa croiace vn peu deuat que [65] de tom- 
ber en I'agonie il faifoit Ie figne de la Croix auec 
grande edification de nos frangois qui Ie regardoient. 
Eftant mort fon frere vint prier Ie Pere de I'inhumer 
^ noftre fa9on. 

Le 16. du mefme mois les Hurons eftant fur leur 
depart des trois Riuieres. Le Pere Raymbaut en 
baptifa vn, que le P. Pierre Pijart auoit inftruit, il 
fut appelle Robert par vn ieune gargon, qui demeure 
auec nous a peine fut il Chreftien que fes gens le iet- 
tent dans vn Canot pour remmener auec eux, pent 
eftre qu'^ deux lieues de 1^, ils aurot iette fon corps 
dans vne foffe pendant que fon efprit s'en ira ioiiir 
du Paradis. 

Le 24. du mefme mois le Pere Buteux baptifa vne 
petite fille agee d'enuiron fept ans, I'vn des foldats 
enuoyez icy par Madame de Combalet, luy donna nom 
Marie le Pere eftant entre dans la cabane ou eftoit 
cefte enfant demanda h. fon pere s'il ne feroit pas con- 
tent qu'on la baptifaft, luy tout melancolique de voir 
trois enfans, qu'il ^ tous malades, luy dit fais ce que 
tu voudras mes amis & moy auons, fait tout noftre 
polTible pour la guerir, nous n'y auons rien gaigne ; 
voy fi tu reiilTiras mieux; comme le Pere I'enfeignoit 
r enfant ne pouuant retenir fa mere apprenoit [66] I'in- 
•flruction pour I'inculquer h. fa fille, en vn mot eftant 
baptifee, elle fe porte mieux, on luy fit boire de I'eau 
benifte, cela la foulageoit en forte que fes parens s'en 
reiouyffoient fort, & les autres malades nous deman- 
doient la mefme medecine. 


1636-37] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i637 137 


The Father, wishing to prepare him for baptism, 
asked him often if he did not wish to believe. ' ' Yes, 
said he, "I wish to believe; if I did not, I would say- 
to thee at this very moment, * Go away, I do not wish 
to listen to thee.' " As a proof of his belief, a little 
while before [65] falling into the agony of death, he 
made the sign of the Cross, to the great edification 
of our french who were looking at him. When he 
died, his brother came to beg the Father to bury him 
in our way. 

On the 1 6th of the same month, as the Hurons 
were about to depart from the three Rivers, Father 
Raymbaut^^ baptized one of them, whom Father 
Pierre Pijart had instructed; he was named Robert, 
by a young boy who lives with us. He had hardly 
been made a Christian when his people cast him into 
a Canoe, to take him away with them. Perhaps when 
two leagues away they may have thrown his body 
into a grave, while his soul will go on to enjoy Para- 
dise. 

On the 24th of the same month. Father Buteux 
baptized a little girl about seven years old. One of 
the soldiers sent here by Madame de Combalet gave 
her the name Marie. The Father, having entered 
the cabin where this child was, asked her father if 
he would not like to have her baptized; he, quite 
melancholy at seeing his three children all sick, said 
to him, "Do what thou wilt. My friends and I have 
done all we could to cure her, and we have accom- 
plished nothing; see if thou wilt succeed better." 
The Father began to teach her, but as she was not 
able to retain anything, her mother learned [66] the 
instruction, to impart it to her daughter. In a word, 
after being baptized she became better ; she was 


138 LES RELA TIONS DES JASUITES [Vol. 11 

Voila tous ceux qui ont efte baptifez parmy nos 
Sauuages errans & vagabonds. Le refte k receu ce 
Sacrement aux pays des Hurons, comme il fe verra 
dans la Relation de ces contrees, que i'enuoye a 
voflre R. 

le fgay bien que plufieurs Sauuages m'ont deman- 
de le fainct baptefme, mais nous n'auons garde de le 
conferer a aucun adulte en fante, linon apres vne 
longue efpreuue, il eft certain qu'on ne le peut refu- 
fer "k un pauure homme quafi agonifant, lequel donne 
des preuues qu'il a la foy, & qui rend compte d'vne 
inftruction fuffifante, ce feroit vne eflrange cruaute de 
voir defcendre vne ame toute viuante dans les enfers, 
par le refus d'vn bien que lefus Chrifl luy a acquis au 
prix de fon fang. Ouy mais fi cet homme retourne 
en fante, & qu'il vine dans fa Barbaric ordinaire, vous 
profanez ce Sacrement dira quelque vn? le refpond 
que le Sacremet eft fait pour I'homme & non pas 
rhomme [67] pour le Sacrement, & par confequent 
il vaut mieux hazarder le Sacrement que le falut de 
rhomme, adiouftez que ce qui fe fait auec raifon & 
charit6, fe fait fans offence & fans profanation de nos 
merites, fi quelques Sauuages en abufent par apres, 
cela ne rend pas coupables ceux qui luy ont confere, 
non plus que le Sacrilege que fait vne perfonne au 
Sacrement de penitence, n'endomage pas la confcience 
du Confeffeur.qui s'eft prudemment comporte. 

I'aduoue bien qu'il faut foigneufement prendre 
garde de ne point baptifer ceux qui font en fante, 
fans les auoir efprouuez & tenus au rang des Gate- 
chumenes, comme il fe faifoit en la primitiue Eglife, 
mais d'affigner 4. ou 5. ans, c'eft vn terme que fainct 
Pierre ne garda pas en f es premieres predications ; la 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 139 

given holy water to drink, which soothed her so much 
that her parents rejoiced greatly, and the other sick 
ones asked us for the same medicine. 

These are all who have been baptized among our 
wandering and unsettled Savages. The rest received 
this Sacrament in the country of the Hurons, as will 
be seen in the Relation of these countries, which I 
send your Reverence. 

I am well aware that many Savages have asked me 
for holy baptism; but we have been careful about 
conferring it upon any adult in health, except after 
a long probation. To be sure, one cannot refuse it 
to a poor man almost in the agony of death, who 
gives proof that he has the faith, and who shows 
sufficient instruction. It would be a strange act of 
cruelty to see a living soul descend into hell, through 
the refusal of a blessing which Jesus Christ has 
earned for it by the price of his blood. " Yes, but 
if this man regains his health, and if he continues to 
live in Barbarism, you profane this Sacrament," will 
some one say? I answer that the Sacrament is made 
for man, and not man [67] for the Sacrament ; and 
consequently it is better to endanger the Sacrament 
than the salvation of a man. Besides, what is done 
with reason and charity is done without offense, and 
without any profanation of which we are the cause ; 
if a few Savages abuse it afterwards, that does not 
make those guilty who have conferred it upon them, 
any more than the Sacrilege which a person com- 
mits against the Sacrament of penance injures the 
conscience of the Confessor who has behaved with 
discretion. 

I freely admit that great care must be taken not 
to baptize those who are in health, without having 


140 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.11 

prudence Chreftienne doit limiter ce temps il y ^ des 
fruicts meurs des le commecemet de I'Efle, les autres 
au milieu, qiielques-vns a I'Autone. II y en a qui ne 
font bons qu'e hyuer. II y a des Sauuages auf quels 
ie ne voudrois pas confier nos myfteres apres fix ans 
d'inftruction, il y en a d'autres notammet es pays fe- 
dentaires qui meuriront pluftofl, aufquels on ne fgau- 
roit fans iniuftice denier [68] ce qui leur appartient 
autant qu'a nous, c'eft I'eftat du poftulant ou du 
Neophyte, qui doit determiner du temps de fon bap- 
tefme ou de la reception de noftre Sacrement ado- 
rable de I'autel, & non pas vne regie generalle & 
commune k tous. 

Au refte fi nos Peres qui font aux Hurons auoient 
autant d'afcendant fur les fauuages de ces contr6es 
que nous en auons fur nos Sauuages de Kebec & des 
enuirons ; & fi nos barbares errans & vagabons efloient 
rallemblez aupres de nos habitations, & fe rendoient 
fedentaires comme les Hurons, nous n'attendrions 
pas tant d'annees pour les baptifer. Car nos fran9ois 
ayans les biens-faits & la force en la main, feront 
bien ranger a leur deuoir ceux, qui fe feroient volon- 
tairement foubmis au doux joug de I'Euangile. Mais 
les Hurons font fi forts & fl peuplez, & les frangois 
qui demeurent en leur pays en fi petit nombre, qu'ils 
ne fgauroient gagner ces peuples par de grands biens- 
faits, ny bannir d'eux la Barbaric par la crainte. Et 
nos montagnez font fi accouftumez k leurs courfes, 
leur camp eft fi leger & fi volant, que s'ils voyo[i]ent 
qu'on les voulut letter dans quelque contrainte quoy 
que raifonnable, ils auroient pluftoft iette leurs tentes 
& leurs pauillons [69] hors la portee de nos canons, 
qu'on ne les auroit pointes & amorce z, fi bien qu'il 


1636-37] LEJEUNE'S RELATION, i637 141 

tried them and kept them for some time in the rank 
of Catechumens, as was done in the primitive Church ; 
but as for assigning 4 or 5 years, it is a term which 
saint Peter did not enjoin in his first sermons. Chris- 
tian discretion ought to limit tiie term ; some fruits 
are ripe at the beginning of Summer, others in mid- 
summer, some in the Autumn, and there are some 
which are not good until winter. There are Savages 
to whom I would not confide our mysteries after six 
years of instruction ; there are others, especially 
among the sedentary ones, who will mature sooner, 
and to whom one cannot, without injustice, deny [68] 
what belongs to them as much as to us. It is the 
condition of the postulant or Neophyte which ought 
to determine the time of his baptism, or of the recep- 
tion of our adorable Sacrament at the altar, and not 
a rule which is general and common to all. 

Furthermore, if our Fathers who are among the 
Hurons had as much influence over the savages of 
these countries as we have over our Savages of Kebec 
and its vicinity, and if our wandering and unsettled 
barbarians were gathered around our settlements, and 
would become sedentary like the Hurons, we should 
not wait so many years to baptize them. For our 
french people, having the advantage and the power 
in their hands, will keep strictly to their duty those 
who will voluntarily submit themselves to the mild 
yoke of the Gospel. But the Hurons are so strong 
and so populous, and the french who live in their 
country so few in number, that they could not gain 
these tribes through great acts of kindness, nor ban- 
ish Barbarism from them through fear. And our 
montagnez are so accustomed to their wanderings, 
their camp is so light and temporary, that, if they 


142 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 11 

ne nous refte que les biens faits pour les arrefter tous 
les ans fur le prin-temps ils parlent fort de le faire, 
mais comme ils voyent la difficulte qu'il y a de de- 
fricher la terre, d'abbatre tant d'arbres, d'enleuer 
tant de fouches, d'arracher tant de racines, ils per- 
dent coeur, aimans mieux viure dans le repos, & dans 
la faineantife des beftes, que de iouir du fruict de 
leurs trauaux, cefle annee ie me fuis trouue en quel- 
ques confeils, qu'ils ont tenu, ils me preffoient de les 
fecourir d'hommes, ils en ont demande h. Monfieur 
noftre Gouuerneur difans que leur pais s'alloit d6- 
peupler d' Elans & d'autres animaux, & par confe- 
quent que li la terre ne les nourrilToit, il s'alloient 
perdre de fond en comble, on leur refpond h. cela que 
le pays n'efl pas encor en tel eftat, qu'on puiffe di- 
uertir pour eux nos fran9ois, puis que nous n'auons 
pas de terres fuffifamment defrich6es pour vn fi grknd 
nombre, comme nous fommes, cela eft tres-veritables, 
on fait d'ailleurs tout ce qu'on peut pour les aider 
Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur ma dit plufieurs fois. 
Mon Pere n'efpargnez rien ny de mes biens en par- 
ticulier, ny du pouuoir & de I'authorit^, que Dieu, 
[70] le Roy, Monfeigneur le Cardinal & Meffieurs les 
Affociez, m'ont mis entre les mains pour le bien & 
falut de nos Fran§ois & des Sauuages: car ie f9ay 
que Dieu veut cela de moy, & que telle eft la volonte 
de ces Meffieurs. Monfieur le Cheualier de I'lfle fon 
Lieutenant, qui eft homme de bonne conduitte & de 
refolution, a les mefmes fentimens. Monfieur Gad 
n'a rien a foy quand il faut exercer quelque acte 
de cliarit6, il penfe quelquefois de fa propre main 
les Sauuages malades. Les Sieurs Oliuier & Ni- 
colet, en vn mot tous nos Franjois except^ quel- 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 143 

saw one trying to place them under any restraint, 
however reasonable it might be, they would quickly 
pitch their tents and pavilions [69] out of the reach 
of our cannons, before they could be primed and 
aimed at them. So the only way we can make them 
stationary is by kind offices. Every year, towards 
spring, they talk much of settling down ; but when 
they see the difficulties attendant upon clearing the 
land, — cutting down so many trees, removing so 
many logs, and pulling up so many roots, — they lose 
heart, preferring to live in repose and in the idleness 
of animals, to enjoying the fruits of labor. This 
year I have been present in some of their councils; 
they urged me to aid them with men ; they also asked 
Monsieur our Governor to do this, saying their coun- 
try was being stripped of Elk and other animals, and 
that consequently, if the land could not furnish them 
a living, they would be utterly lost. In reply to this, 
they were told that the country was not yet in such 
condition that we could take away our frenchmen 
for them, since we had not, as yet, enough cleared 
land for so many as we are here, which is very true ; 
in other respects, we are doing all we can to aid 
them. Monsieur our Governor often says to me, 
" Father, spare nothing, either of my personal prop- 
erty, or of the power and authority which God, [70] 
the King, Monseigneur the Cardinal, and Messieurs 
the Associates have placed in my hands for the wel- 
fare of our French and of the Savages ; for I know 
that God wishes this from me, and that such is the 
will of these Gentlemen. Monsieur the Chevalier de 
risle, his Lieutenant, who is a man of wise conduct 
and of resolution, is of the same mind. Monsieur 
Gand has nothing for himself, when it is necessary 


144 LES RELATIONS DES JhlSUITES [Vol.11 

ques perfonnes de nulle conlideration font fort portez 
au falut de ces pauures barbares, & les fecourent qui 
d'vne fa§on, qui d'vne autre, mais rationabile debet 
ejfe obfequium nojlrum, nous deuons proceder auec 
raifon le petit nombre de defricheurs, & le grand 
nombre de Frangois qui font icy, empefche qu'on ne 
puiffe donner ce fecours aux Sauuages, a la verite 
cela eft pitoyable que le deffaut du temporel, retarde 
fi puiffamment le spirituel, on fait tant de vaines 
penfees en France. II y a tant de fuperfluitez en 
habits, en feftins, en baftimens, tant de pertes au 
ieu, ces excez qui feront rigoureufement bruflez, fer- 
uiroient bien icy [71] k procurer la benediction du 
Ciel fur I'vne & I'autre France. Pleut k Dieu que 
ces Dames que noflre Seigneur va touchant d'vn 
cofl6, & que la vanite retient encor a fa cadene, 
villent pour vn moment vne efcoiiade de petits gar- 
90ns, & de petites filles Sauuages affifter au Cathe- 
chifme veftus a la fainct lean Baptifte auiourd'huy 
prier Dieu, & demain s'enuoler dans les bois, faute 
que leurs parens ne font pas arreftez. le m'affeure 
que leur coeur s'attendriroit, & comme leur fexe efl 
plein de compaffion & de tendreffe, elles feroient fer- 
uir a lefus Chrift, ce qui ne fert qu'a Belial, & rap- 
porteroient ^ vne tres-haute vertu, ce qui ne s' em- 
ploye que pour les vices. 

Pour conclufion ie feray vn homme de Dieu, qui 
marche dans les voyes de Dieu, dot le nom eft efcrit 
dans les liures de Dieu, c'eft celuy-1^ qui commenga 
le miracle, qu'il fait faire pour arrefter quelque fa- 
mille de Sauuages : fon coeur parlera a Dieu pour eux, 
& fes mains les enchaifneront par fes bien-faits & 
par le fecours d'hommes qu'il a defia enuoye & qu'il 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib37 145 

to perform some act of charity ; he sometimes attends 
to the sick Savages with his own hands. Sieurs Oli- 
vier and Nicolet, in a word, all our French except a 
few persons of no importance, are greatly interested 
in the salvation of these poor barbarians, and help 
them, some in one way, some in another; but ratio- 
nabile debet esse obsequiunt nostrum, we must proceed 
with discretion. The small number of laborers, and 
the large number of Frenchmen who are here, pre- 
vent us from giving this help to the Savages. In 
truth, it is pitiful how the lack of the temporal 
so effectually retards the spiritual. They have so 
many vain thoughts in France, — there is so great a 
superfluity of clothes, of banquets, of buildings, so 
many losses in gambling; the amount which these 
excesses will consume, would be of good service 
here, [71] to procure the blessing of Heaven both 
upon this France and the other. Would to God that 
those Ladies whom our Lord is to some extent touch- 
ing, and whom vanity still holds in its chains, might 
for one moment see a crowd of little Savage boys and 
girls present at the Catechism, clothed like John the 
Baptist, to-day praying to God, and to-morrow flying 
off into the woods, on account of the wandering hab- 
its of their parents. I am sure their hearts would 
soften ; and, as their sex is full of compassion and 
tenderness, they would place at the service of Jesus 
Christ what is now only devoted to Belial, and would 
dedicate to the highest virtue what is now only used 
for vice. 

In conclusion, I will report a Godly man, walking 
in the footsteps of God, whose name is written in 
the books of God. It is he who began that miracle, 
which is now being performed, of making a family 


146 LES RELATIONS DBS jASUITES [Vol.11 

leur donnera, & nous autres qui fommes icy, nous 
prefferons ces barbares de fe feruir des benedictions 
que le Ciel leur enuoye par vn [72] homme celefte, 
li vne fois on les pent arrefter, ils font h. nous, ie me 
trompe, ie voulois dire qu'ils font ^ lefus Chrift, au- 
quel foit honneur & gloire dans les temps, & dans 
I'eternite mais voyons ce que nous auons fait c6t hy- 
uer auec vne petite ef couade qui f e vint cabaner proche 
de Kebec. 


1636 - 37] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 147 

of Savages stationary. His heart will speak to God 
for them, and his hands will bind them through his 
good deeds, and through the help of men he has al- 
ready sent and will send to them ; and we who are 
here will urge these barbarians to make use of the 
blessings that Heaven sends them through a [72] man 
of heavenly mind. If once they can be made to 
settle down, they are ours. I am mistaken, I meant 
to say they are Jesus Christ's, to whom be the honor 
and glory in time and in eternity. But let us see 
what we have accomplished, this winter, with a little 
squad of them who came to encamp near Kebec. 


148 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.11 


CHAPITRE IV. 

DE L' INSTRUCTION D'VN CAPITAINE SAUUAGE. 

CE fauuage dont ie pretends parler fe nomme en 
fa langue MaKheabichticliiou, il eft homme 
fort & hardy, bon guerrier, & a la langue afles 
bien pendue. C'eft ponrquoy encor bien qu'en effet 
il ne foit pas le Capitaine de fa Nation, fi eft-ce com- 
me il fe feparent les vns des autres par efcouades 
on le prend ordinairement pour le chef de fa bande. 
De la vient qu'on luy donne le nom de Capitaine puis 
qu'il en fait I'office affez fouuent. C'eft luy qui don- 
na I'an pafse cefte ieune femme Hiroquoife, que Mon- 
fieur le General k men6[e] en France. S'eftant done 
venu Cabaner proche de Kebec, il s'efforga d'entrer 
6s bonnes graces de [73] Monfieur noftre Gouuer- 
neur, & par ce moyen de tous nos frangois. Comme 
il cognoilfoit affez particulierement le Pere Buteux, 
il luy auoit demand^ vn mot de lettre pour me I'ap- 
porter afin d'auoir libre acces en noftre maifon. Or 
comme Monfieur de Montmagny noftre Gouuerneur 
eft riche en piet6, en courtoife & en magnanimite, & 
qu'il fe f9ait feruir de ces armesauec induftrie, il re- 
cent ce fauuage auec vn grand accueil, mais en forte 
qu'il luy fit cognoiftre qu'il ne departoit fon amitie 
particuliere, qu'a ceux qui fe faifoient inftruire en 
noftre creance. C'eft ainfi qu'il faut faire feruir fon 
credit & fon authorite k la gloire du Roy fouuerain, 
& non k noftre vanite, ce fauuage eut la puce a I'o- 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 149 


CHAPTER IV. 

OF THE INSTRUCTION OF A SAVAGE CAPTAIN. 

THIS savage of whom I propose to speak is called 
in his own language Makheabichtichiou ; he is 
strong and hardy, a good warrior, and has a 
very ready tongue. It is for this reason that, al- 
though he is not really the Captain of his Tribe, yet, 
as it divides into squads he is generally taken as the 
chief of his band. From this he derives his title of 
" Captain," since he often performs the office of one. 
It was he who last year gave the young Hiroquois 
woman whom Monsieur the General took to France. 
Now having come to Encamp near Kebec, he endeav- 
ored to get into the good graces of [73] Monsieur our 
Governor, and thus into those of all our french peo- 
ple. As he was particularly well acquainted with 
Father Buteux, he had asked him for a written mes- 
sage to bring to me, that he might gain free access 
to our house. Now as Monsieur de Montmagny, our 
Governor, is rich in piety, courtesy, and magnanim- 
ity, and as he knows how to use these weapons with 
skill, he gave this savage a warm welcome, but did 
so in such a way as to show him that he only granted 
his more intimate friendship to those who were in- 
structed in our belief. It is thus that all should use 
what influence and authority they have, for the glory 
of the sovereign King, and not for their own vanity. 
This savage now had a flea in his ear. As they hon- 
or the great Captain of the french, he desired to in- 


150 


LES RELA TJONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 11 


reille, comme ils honorent le grand Capitaine des 
franyois, il voulut entrer bien auant dans ces bonnes 
graces. II tefmoigne done qu'il vent entendre nos my- 
fteres, en certains temps qu'il n'eftoit point h. la chaffe, 
il eftoit quafi auffi fouuent en noftre maifon, qu'en 
fa cabane. II monftre tant d'ardeur que nous voy- 
ant bien fouuent empefches auec nos frangois il me 
dit Nicanis, ie ne voy que monde dans la maifon, 
pendant le iour les Frangois ne font que te diuertir, 
donne leur le iour & k moy la nuict, [74] fais moy 
venir couch er chez toy, & pendant le filence de la 
nuict nous confereros plus k noflre aife, nous luy ac- 
cordafmes ce qu'il defiroit; le foir doc apres auoir 
fait nos prieres, au lieu de dormir nous nous entrete- 
nios des articles de noflre creance, ce que nous fai- 
fions auffi pendant le iour quand le temps nous le per- 
mettoit. Ie luy expliquay la creation du Ciel & de la 
terre, la cheute des Anges rebelles, comme noftre 
premier Pere auoit efte cree, les contentemens dont 
il euft ioiiy dans le Paradis terreftre, s'il euft obey ^ 
fon Dieu, comme la mort, les maladies, la difette 
prouenoiet de fon peche, que les animaux auroiet 
obey k I'home, fi I'homme euft obey k Dieu, que la 
mort n'auroit point exerce fon Empire fur le genre 
humain, que la terre auroit comme volontairement & 
fans trauail des hommes donne des bleds & des f ruicts 
aux hommes. En effet, me dit-il, fur ce point, ie 
croy que comme elle produit de foy mefme tant 
d'arbres & tant de forte[s] d'herbes, qu'elle auroit 
auffi peu produire des bleds fans culture, ie luy fis 
entendre, que Dieu voyant la defobeyffance de 
I'homme, le voulut letter dans les feux, mais que fon 
fils fe prefenta pour payer & fatisfaire pour les hom- 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 151 

sinuate himself thoroughly into his good graces. 
Therefore he evinced a disposition to learn our faith ; 
at certain times, when he was not hunting, he was 
almost as often in our house as in his own cabin. He 
showed so much zeal that, seeing us frequently oc- 
cupied with our french people, he said to me, " Ni- 
canis, I always find people in thy house ; during the 
day, the French are always demanding thy attention ; 
give them the day, and me the night; [74] let me 
come and sleep in thy house, and during the silence 
of the night we will confer more at our ease." We 
granted his wish, and in the evening, after having 
said our prayers, instead of sleeping we talked over 
the articles of our faith, doing the same during the 
day when we had time. I explained to him the cre- 
ation of Heaven and earth, the fall of the rebellious 
Angels, how our first Father had been created ; the 
contentment he might have enjoyed in the terrestrial 
Paradise if he had obeyed his God ; how death, dis- 
ease, poverty, came from his sin ; how the animals 
would have been obedient to man if man had been 
obedient to God ; how death would not have held its 
Empire over the human race ; how the earth would 
almost spontaneously, and without human labor, have 
given its grains and fruits to men. " Indeed," he 
said to me, " as to that, I believe that, as it produces 
of itself so many trees and so many kinds of herbs, 
it could also have produced grain without cultiva- 
tion." I explained to him how God, seeing the dis- 
obedience of man, wished to cast him into the flames, 
but that his son presented himself as a pledge and 
atonement for men. However, [75] since he delayed 
to make himself man, that he might instruct and save 
men, corruption, casting itself into the world, ruined 


152 LES RELATIONS DBS j£SUITES [Vol.11 

mes, cependant [75] comme il retardoit de fe faire 
homme, pour inftruire & fauuer les hommes, les cor- 
ruption fe iettant dans le monde gafta tout, Dieu s'en 
offenfa fi fort qu'il fit pleuuoir40. iours & 40. nuicts 
fur la terre, comme fi. on euft verse I'eau, fi bien que 
tous les hommes & les animaux f urent noyes excepte 
vne feule famille compofee de huit perf onnes, laquelle 
drefla vn grand vaiffeau, dans lequel fe ietterent deux 
animaux de chaque efpece, en fin les eaux fe retire- 
rent & deffeicherent. Dieu appaifa fa colere, & de 
cette famille & de ces animaux font prouenus, tous 
les hommes & les animaux de la terre, lef quels petit 
h. petit ont repeupl6 le mode, que leur nation eft pro- 
uenue de cefte famille, que les premiers qui font ve- 
nus en leur pais, ne f9auoient ny lire ny efcrire, 
voila pourquoy leurs enfans auoient demeure dans la 
mefme ignorance, qu'ils auoient bien conferue la 
memoire de ce deluge, mais par vne longue fuitte 
d'anees ils auoiet enuelo[p]p6 cefte verite dans mille 
fables, que nous ne pouuions eflre trompez en ce 
point, ayant la mefme creance que nos anceftres, 
puifque nous voyons leurs liures. II me demanda, fi 
dans cefte longue fucceffion de temps, on ne parloit 
point du fils de Dieu, ie refpodi que les gens de bie 
en auoient cognoifsace, & que depuis le deluge [76] 
iufques a fa venue, Dieu enuoya des hommes que 
nous appellons Prophetes, pour ce qu'ils apprennent 
des veritez de Dieu, & les enfeignent aux hommes, 
pour annoncer la venue de f on fils : iufques la mefmes 
que ces Prophetes declareret plufieurs annees deuat 
fa naiflance, ou deuoit naiftre ce Prince, comme il 
deuoit mourir & relTufciter, que fa Mere deuoit eftre 
Vierge, que les pechez des hommes luy donnoient 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 153 

all. God was so deeply offended thereat that he sent 
rain upon the earth for 40 days and 40 nights, like 
tinto the pouring out of the waters, — so that all men 
and animals were drowned, except one family com- 
posed of eight persons, who made a great ship in 
which two animals of each kind took refuge. Final- 
ly, the waters receded and dried off. God's wrath 
was appeased, and from that family and from those 
animals have sprung all the people and beasts of the 
earth, who have, little by little, repeopled the world. 
I told him that their nation had sprung from this 
family ; that the first ones who came to their coun- 
try did not know how to read or write, and that was 
the reason their children had remained in ignor- 
ance ; that they had indeed preserved the account of 
this deluge, but through a long succession of years 
they had enveloped this truth in a thousand fables; 
that we could not be mistaken about this event, hav- 
ing the same belief as our ancestors, since we see 
their books. He asked me if, during this long lapse 
of time, there was no mention of the son of God. I an- 
swered that good men had had knowledge of him, and 
that, from the deluge [^6] to the time of his coming, 
God sent men whom we call Prophets, because they 
learn the truths of God and teach them to men, to an- 
nounce the coming of his son. Until then these Proph- 
ets likewise declared, many years before his birth, 
where this Prince would be born ; how he would die, 
and be resurrected ; that his Mother would be a Vir- 
gin ; that the sins of men caused him to delay his com- 
ing, so that he might make known to men how much 
they ought to desire him, since without his aid they 
knew nothing except as fables. In short, having 
come, he taught the people, healed the sick, resusci- 


154 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.11 

fuiet de retarder fa venue, qu'il vouloit faire co- 
gnoiftre aux homines, combien ils deuoient le defirer 
puis que fans fon fecours ils ne f9auoient que des 
fables, bref eftant venu il a enfeign6 les peuples, 
guery les malades, reffufcit^ les morts, & comme il 
reprenoit les mefchans ils le lierent & le clouerent 
en vne Croix, luy oftant la vie dans ces tourmens, 
que s'il les eut voulut abyfmer tons il I'auroit peu 
faire aifement par vne feule parole, mais au cotraire 
comme il eftoit bon il difoit a fon Pere, mon Pere les 
homes meritent la mort, ils vous ont offenf^, ils me- 
ritet le feu, mais voicy que ie paye pour eux, ie vous 
fupplie de faire mifericorde a tons ceux qui croirot 
en moy & qui ferot fafchez de vous auoir offense ou- 
bliez leiirs pechez, ne les iettez point dedans les feux, 
voila qui eft {yjA^ bien difoit ce pauure Barbare, mais 
i'ay bien peur qu'il ne me rebute, car ie ne fcay pas 
ce qu'il faut faire ny comme il le faut prier. Ie te 
I'enfeigneray (luy dy ie) ne t'ennuye done pas (me 
fit il) & fi le fommeil ne te preffe point paffe la nuict 
en m'inftruifant. c'eft comme nous faifons quand 
nous traictons de quelque grand affaire: car nous 
nous affemblons pendant la nuict pour n'eftre point 
diuertis, ie luy declarois les miracles, qui arriuerent 
a la mort de noftre Seigneur, comme il parut plein 
de gloire trois iours apres qu'on eut mis fon corps au 
fepulchre comme il enuoya douze hommes par le 
mode pour enfeigner fes Veritas, & que ceux qui croi- 
roient leur doctrine iroient au Ciel ou il eft monte. 
que les infidelles feroient iettes dans les enfers, que 
nous appellons ces hommes Apoflres, lefquels en ont 
inftruits d'autres par leurs efcrits, & que ceux-cy vont 
par tout annoncer ces bonnes nouuelles, que c'eft 


1636-37] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 155 

tated the dead; and, as he rebuked the wicked, they 
bound and nailed him to a Cross, taking away his 
life through these tortures ; that, if he had wished to 
overwhelm them all, he could have done it easily by 
a single word; but on the contrary, being good, he 
said to his Father, " My Father, men deserve death, 
they have offended you, they merit the flames, but 
here I am to atone for them ; I implore you to have 
mercy on all those who shall believe in me and who 
shall be sorry to have offended you; forget their 
sins, do not cast them into the flames." " Now this 
is [yy'] good, indeed," said this poor Barbarian; " but 
I am afraid he will reject me, for I do not know what 
I must do, nor how I ought to pray." " I will teach 
thee," (said I). " Do not weary thyself," (he replied) 
" but if thou art not sleepy, spend the night in in- 
structing me. It is thus we do when we are discuss- 
ing some great matter; we meet in the nighttime, 
so as not to be diverted." I related to him the mir- 
acles that followed the death of our Lord, — how he 
appeared, full of glory, three days after his body had 
been placed in the sepulchre; how he sent twelve 
men throughout the world to teach his truths, and 
how those who should believe their teachings would 
go to Heaven, whither he had ascended ; how un- 
believers would be cast into hell ; how we call those 
men Apostles, and how they had instructed others 
through their writings ; how those others went every- 
where, announcing these good tidings, and that it 
was for this we had come to their country ; how they 
saw plainly that we did not engage in traffic, that we 
did not ask any recompense ; and how I had brothers 
all over the world. " The son of God did not love 
our country," (said he) "for he did not come here, 


156 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.. 11 

pour cela que nous eflions venus en leur pays, qu'ils 
voyoient bien que nous ne traficquions point; que 
nous ne demandions aucune recompenfe, que i'auois 
des freres par tout le monde, le fils de Dieu n'a pas 
aym6 noflre pays (difoit il) car il n'y eft point venu, & 
ne nous a rien dit [78] & \sc. de] tout cela, ie repars 
qu'il n'eftoit ne qu'en vn feul pais, qu'il n'eftoit pas 
auffi venu au noftre, qu'au commencement nous ne 
croions point, maisqu'ayant prefle I'oreille a fes en- 
feignemens, nous les auons recognus tres-bons, & les 
auons embraff6s, veu tant de miracles qu'il auoit fait, 
& comme ieluy demandoisce qu'il luy fembloit de ce 
que ie luy auois declare de noftre creance ie ne fgau- 
rois, me refpond il, te dementir, car ie n'ay point de 
cognoiffance du contraire, tu me dis des chofes nou- 
uelles, que ie n'ay iamais entendues, fi i'auois efle fur 
les lieux oil cela s'eftpafse ie parlerois, mais mainte- 
nant ie n'ay rien k dire, fmon que tu f9ais beaucoup 
de chofes, i'admire ton difcours, mais recommence 
vn petit, & me fais paffer depuis la creation du monde 
iufques a nous, ie luy obei, declarant en peu de mots 
ce qui s'eftoit paffe dans tous les fiecles, touchant 
noftre faincte creance. II prenoit vn craion & mar- 
quoit fur la terre les diuers temps de fuitte, voila celuy 
qui k tout fait, me difoit-il, il commence en cet en- 
droit de creer les Anges, & le monde, la il crea le pre- 
mier homme, & la premiere femme, voila comme le 
monde croilfant, fe fepare & [79] offence Dieu, voicy 
le deluge, icy font les Prophetes, bref il vint iufques 
k noftre temps, puis fe releuant il fe mit k rire, ie ne 
m'eftonne pas, fit-il, fi nous fommes las, car nous 
auons fait vn grand chemin, en verite nos Peres n'ont 
efhe que des ignorans, car ils n'ont eu aucune co- 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j637 157 

and did not say anything to us [78] about all that." 
I replied that he was only born in one country, that 
also he had not come to ours; that at first we did not 
believe, but that, having opened our ears to his 
teachings, we had recognized them as very good and 
accepted them, seeing how many miracles he had 
wrought. When I asked him what he thought of 
our belief as I had explained it to him, " I cannot 
contradict thee," he replied, " for I have no knowl- 
edge to the contrary; thou tellest me new things, 
that I have never heard before; if I had been in the 
places where these things have taken place, I would 
speak, but now I have nothing to say, save that thou 
knowest many things; I admire thy discourse, but 
begin over again and review for me from the crea- 
tion of the world to the present time." I obeyed 
him, relating in a few words what had taken place in 
all the ages touching our holy faith. He took a pen- 
cil and marked upon the ground the different periods 
in their order, " Here is he who made all," said he; 
' ' he begins in this place to create the Angels and 
the world; there he created the first man and the 
first woman ; see how the race of men, increasing, 
divides, and [79] oifends God; here is the deluge, 
here are the Prophets," — in short, he came up to our 
own time ; then rising, he began to laugh ; " I am 
not surprised at our being tired," said he, " for we 
have made a long journey. In truth, our Fathers 
were but ignorant men, for they had no knowledge 
of all these things, except the great waters of the 
deluge, and that they do not describe as you do. I 
have nothing to say against all this, for I have not 
been taught anything to the contrary." 

Now I understood perfectly that, although this 


158 LES RELATIONS DESjASUITES [Vol.11 


gnoilTance de toutes ces chofes, finon des grandes eaux 
du deluge, encor n'en parlent ils pas comme vous. 
le n'ay rien k dire contre tout cela, car on ne m'a 
rien enfeign^ de contraire. 

Or ie recognu bien qu' encor que ce proced6 fut 
bon, ce n'eft pas neantmoins par Ik qu'il faut com- 
mencer a inftruire vn infidele, car comme toutes ces 
chofes font hifloriques I'efprit qui n'a pas co- 
gnoiffance de celuy qui nous a reuele ces veritez, de- 
meure libre de croire, ou de ne pas croire. II luy 
faut apporter des veritez naturelles pour le conuaincre 
& quand on la rendu foupple aux veritez de la na- 
ture, qui font conformes k noftre foy, alors il em- 
braffe les veritez furnaturelles par la foy, ie vy done 
bien qu'il falloit changer de batterie. 

Et par confequent es autres conferences ie me mis 
a luy prouuer qu'il y auoit vn Dieu, vn efprit fu- 
blime, qui auoit bafty la grande maifon du monde, 
& qui la gouuernoit, [80] qui faifoit rouler les aflres 
& marcher les eaux contre leur cours par les flux de 
r Ocean, qui formoit les enfans dans le ventre de 
leurs meres, en vn mot qui conduifoit toute la nature, 
les hommes, luy difois-je, ne font rien de toutes ces 
chofes & neantmoins elles paroiilent tous les iours k 
nos yeux. II faut done qu'il y ait vn autre principe 
plus puiflant, ie luy apportay plufieurs autres raifons 
pour luy faire recognoiftre grand Prince, ie luy fis 
entendre qu'il eftoit iufte, qu'il recompenfoit vn cha- 
cun felon fes oeuures, vous aimez vous autres les ges 
de bien, vous haiffez les mefchans, vous faites du 
bien k vos amis, vous bruflez vos ennemis. Dieu 
en fait de mefme, notamment apres la mort, pour- 
rois tu bien croire que deux homes mourans, I'vn 


1636 - 37] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 


159 


way of proceeding was good, yet it is not thus that 
one should begin to instruct an unbeliever ; for, since 
all these things are historical, the mind which has 
no knowledge of him who has revealed to us these 
truths remains free to believe or not to believe. To 
convince him, he must be confronted with natural 
truths ; and when he has been rendered pliant to the 
truths of nature, which are in harmony with our be- 
lief, then he embraces the supernatural truths through 
faith. So I saw quite plainly that it would be neces- 
sary to change my battery. 

Consequently, in our other conferences I applied 
myself to proving to him that there was a God, a 
sublime spirit, who had built the great mansion of 
the world and who governed it ; [80] who caused the 
stars to roll, and the waters to flow against their 
course by the tides of the Ocean ; who formed chil- 
dren in the wombs of their mothers — in a word, who 
governs all nature. " Men," said I to him, " cause 
none of all these things, and yet they appear every 
day before our eyes. There must, then, be another 
and more powerful cause. ' ' I brought forth many 
other arguments to make him recognize the great 
Prince ; I explained that he was just, that he rewarded 
each one according to his works. " You yourselves 
love good people, you hate the wicked ; you do good 
to your friends, you punish your enemies. God does 
the same, especially after death. Can you imagine 
that two men, dying, the one very good, the other 
very abominable, can be equally happy in the other 
life ? Here below no reward has been given to the 
good one, no punishment meted out to the wicked 
one, — indeed, the upright man has even been de- 
spised and the wicked one honored ; would it be pes- 


160 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.11 

tres bon, I'autre tres abominable foient egalement 
contens en I'autre vie; ga bas on n'a donne aucune 
recompenfe ^ celuy qui eft bon, on n'a point puny le 
mefchant, voire mefme on a mefpris^ rhomme de 
bien, & honore le mefchant, feroit-il bien poffible 
que cela paffaft fans iuftice, fans que rien s'en enfui- 
uit? fi ce defordre eftoit en I'vniuers, il vaudroit 
mieux eftre mefchant que bon, & tu vois bien le con- 
traire, vois done que celuy qui ^ tout fait mefure 
auffi les [8i] actions des hommes, & qu'il les traictera 
felon leurs oeuures. Vous dites que vous allez tons 
en mefme endroit. II y a parmy vous des hommes 
tres-deteftables, veux-tu aller auec eux ? Vous vous 
battrez done, & querellerez en I'autre vie, comme 
vous faictes icy. Cela n'eft point croyable. Les 
bons vont tons enfemble au Ciel, les mefchans tons 
enfemble dans les feux. Dieu nous a mis entre le 
Ciel, & I'Enfer, pour nous apprendre que nous pou- 
uions aller en I'vne de ces deux extremitez. Et 
comme noftre ame eft immortelle elle fera "k iamais 
bien-heureufe ou malheureufe. Cefte vie eft courte, 
I'autre eft bien longue, ne fais pas comme les chiens 
qui ne penfent qu'^ leur corps. Ces raifons & autres 
femblables firent quelque impreffion fur fon efprit. 
II me fit plufieurs queftions dont ie pourray parler cy 
apres. II me difoit parfois noftre croyance eft bien 
fotte, nous n'auons point d'efprit, nous fuiuons feule- 
ment ce que croyent nos yeux. Nous ne refonnons 
point, d'autrefois il me difoit, Nikanis ie n'ay point 
dormy toute la nuict i'ay fuiuy dans mon efprit tout 
ce que tu m'as enfeign6, comme vn homme qui fui- 
uroit vn chemin, parfois la crainte entrant dedans 
fon ame il apprehendoit [82] la longueur de I'autre 


1636-37] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i637 161 

sible for that to pass without justice being done, 
without something resulting from it? If this confu- 
sion existed in the universe, it were better to be bad 
than good, and yet thou seest the contrary. Under- 
stand then that he who has made all things also 
measures the [8i] actions of men, and that he will 
deal with them according to their works. You say 
that you all go to the same place ; there are among 
you most detestable men ; dost thou wish to go with 
them? Then you will be fighting and quarreling 
in the other world, as you do in this. That is not 
credible. The good all go to Heaven, the bad all 
into the flames. God has placed us between Heaven 
and Hell, to teach us that we can go to one of these 
two extremes. And, as our soul is immortal, it will 
be forever happy or miserable. This life is short, 
the other is very long ; do not be like dogs, which 
think only of the body." These arguments and 
others like them made some impression upon his 
mind. He asked me many questions, of which I 
may speak hereafter. He said to me sometimes, 
" Our belief is very silly; we have no sense, we fol- 
low only what our eyes believe, we do not reason." 
At other times he said to me, " Nikanis, I have 
not slept all night ; I have been going over in my 
mind all thou hast taught me, like a man following a 
path." Sometimes, fear entering into his soul, he 
dreaded [82] the long duration of the other life. 
" This life," said he, "is very short, the other very 
long, since it has no end ; to be sad without consola- 
tion, to be hungry and to eat only serpents and toads, 
to be thirsty and drink nothing but flames, to wish 
to die and not be able to kill oneself, and to live for- 
ever, for an eternity, in these afiiictions — it is upon 


162 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 

vie. cefte vie, faifoit-il, eft bien courte, I'autre eft 
bien longue, puis qu'elle n'a point de bout: eftre 
trifte fans confolation, auoir faim & ne manger que 
des Terpens & des crapaux, auoir foif & ne boire que 
des flammes, vouloir mourir & ne fe pouuoir tuer & 
demeurer vn iamais, vne eternite dans ces peines. 
C'eft k cela que ie penfe quelquesfois, tu me ferois 
bien plaifir de me baptifer bien toft. 

Pendant que ie I'inftruifois il eut vne forte tenta- 
tion, c'eft qu'en quittant fes fagons de faire pour en 
prendre de nouuelles il mourroit bien toft. Le Di- 
able fe feruoit de quelques-vns pour luy mettre cefte 
penfee bien auant dans I'efprit, luy difant que la plus 
grande partie de ceux qu'on baptifoit, paffoient bien 
toft en I'autre vie. Ie luy reprefente que nous eftions 
tons baptifez : Toutes les nations, difoit-il, ont quel- 
que chofe de particulier. Le Baptefme vous eft bon 
^ vous autres, & non pas a nous. Si le Baptefme luy 
repliquay-je vous caufoit la mort pas vn de ceux qui 
font baptifez n'en efclia[p]peroit, & tu vois bien qu'il 
n'y a que les malades & tres-malades qui meurent 
apres leur baptefme, voire mefme quelques-vns [83] 
guerilTent foudainement, que crains-tu? Dieu a 
defifendu de tuer, penfe-tu que ie te voudrois faire 
mourir, tu es bafty de chair & d'os comme nous. 
Dieu eft ton Pere auffi bien que le noftre. II te veut 
aymer plus que nous, fi tu crois en luy plus forte- 
ment. En fin Dieu luy fit la grace de furmonter 
cefte tentation. II n'importe, dit-il, que ie meure, 
ie ne veux point aller dedans les feux. Nous mou- 
rons tons les iours dans noftre infidelite, i'ayme au- 
tant mourir en croyant, que reftant infidelle. Nous 
I'alleurafmes le plus qu'il nous fut poffible, ^ peine 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 163 

that that I think sometimes ; thou wouldst do me a 
great favor to baptize me soon." 

While I was instructing him he had a great temp- 
tation, arising from the fear that, in giving up his 
ways of action to take up new ones, he would soon 
die. The Devil made use of certain persons to 
strengthen this idea in his mind, saying to him that 
the majority of those who had been baptized soon 
passed into the other life. I represented to him that 
we all were baptized. ' ' All nations, ' ' said he, " have 
something peculiar to them. Baptism is good for 
you others, and not for us." " If Baptism," I re- 
plied to him, " causes death to you, not one of those 
who have been baptized would escape it ; and thou 
seest clearly that it is only the sick and the very sick 
that die after their baptism ; yes, some of them even 
[83] suddenly recover. What dost thou fear? God 
has forbidden to kill ; thinkest thou I would make 
thee die? Thou art made of flesh and bone as we 
are, God is thy Father as well as ours ; he will love 
thee more than he does us, if thou hast a stronger 
belief in him." In fine, God gave him the grace to 
overcome this temptation. "It does not matter," 
said he, " whether I die, but I do not want to go into 
the fires. We die every day in our unbelief; I would, 
as soon die believing as to continue in unbelief. ' * 
We inspired him with as much faith as we could.. 
Scarcely had he become free from this temptation 
when he fell sick. 

Now the majority of the Savages looked upon him 
as dead. I kept him for some time in our house and 
we cared for him tenderly, addressing ourselves to 
God and to the Physicians. He was bled, and nursed 
as well as possible; he seemed to be very firm, and 


164 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.11 

eftoit-il libre de cefte tentation qu'il tomba malade. 
C'eft icy que la plufpart des Sauuages le tenoient 
pour mort, ie le fis demeurer quelque temps en 
noftre maifon. Nous auions foin de luy auec amour, 
nous nous addreffions a Dieu & aux Medicins. On 
le fait feigner, on le traicte le mieux qu'on pent. II 
fe monflra conftant & nous confola. Nikanis, s'efcria- 
il vn iour, ne doute point de mon coeur, ie croiray 
iufques k la mort. Ie ne me feray point fouffler par 
nos Sorciers. Ses copatriotes nous attriftoient daua- 
tage, car alias aux Cabanes ils nous demadoient come 
il fe portoit, & s'il mourroit bien toft, nous [84] re- 
partifmes que ne croyons pas qu'il deut mourir. II 
en mourra dirent quelques-vns n'en doute point. 
Leur prophetic fe trouua fauffe par la grace de N, 
S. au bout de quelques iours il fe trouua fain & gail- 
lard. Ce qui nous apporta de la ioye & de 1' admira- 
tion k quelques Sauuages qui croyoient que noftre 
cognoilfance enuers Dieu I'auoit guery. C'eft pour- 
quoy cefte pauure Apoftate dont i'ay parle cy delTus, 
nous fouftenoit toufiours qu'il ne tenoit qu'k nous de 
la remettre en fante. Pendant fa maladie qui ne fut 
pas fi grande que nous craignons, comme ie luy difois 
que i'auois demande 'k Dieu de mourir en fa place, fi 
tant eft que noftre Seigneur le vouluft appeller : non 
pas cela Nikanis me fit-il, tu ne fais pas bien, il faut 
que tu vine pour inftruire noftre nation, pour moy il 
importe pen que ie meure. Ie trouuay cefte affe- 
ction bien eftrange, car ces peuples ayment extreme- 
ment la vie, ils fe cheriffent demefurement. Mais 
fermons ce chapitre, il eft defik trop long; difons 
deux mots de fes bons fentimens. 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 165 

gave US consolation. " Nikanis," he exclaimed one 
day, * * do not doubt my heart ; I will believe until 
death. I will not have myself blown upon by our 
Sorcerers. ' ' His countrymen saddened us more than 
he did, for when we went to the Cabins they would 
ask us how he was, and if he would die soon. We 
[84] answered that we did not think he was going to 
die. "He will die," said some of them, "do not 
doubt it." Their prophecy turned out to be false. 
By the grace of Our Lord, at the end of a few days 
he found himself well and happy. This gave us joy, 
and caused wonder among some of the Savages, who 
believed that our knowledge of God had cured him. 
It was for this reason that the poor Apostate men- 
tioned above always declared to us that it depended 
upon us alone to restore her to health. During his 
sickness, which was not so serious as we feared, 
when I said to him that I had asked God to let me 
die in his place, if it should be that our Lord wished 
to call him, "Not so, Nikanis," he replied, "thou 
dost not do well ; thou must live to instruct our na- 
tion; as for me, it matters little if I die." I found 
this affection quite wonderful, for these people have 
a great fondness for life, cherishing it immoderately. 
But let us close this chapter, it is already too long ; 
let us say a few words about his good sentiments. 


166 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.11 


[85] CHAP. V. 

DE QUELQUES BONS SENTIMENS QUE DIEU DONNOIT 
A CE CAPITAINE. 

COMME il couchoit parfois en noftre petite mai- 
fon, ainfi que i'ay remarque cy defftis, il nous 
difoit qu'il n'auoit iamais creu bien fortement 
la plufpart de leurs refueries. A la mort de mes en- 
fans (faifoit-il) ie n'ay pas mis grande chofe dans leur 
foffe, ie ne m'attendois guere que nos forciers les 
peuffent guerir en leurs maladies. Ie voyois bien 
que nos feftins nous deftruifoient, ie faifois neant- 
moins comme les autres pour fuiure la coui?tume du 
pays. Mais ie m'en vay letter par terre toutes ces 
vieilles fagons de faire. Tu me deffends les feftins 
k tout manger, ie n'en feray plus. Tu me deffends 
de croire k mes fonges, ie ny croiray plus. Tu me 
deffends de fuer pour faire bonne chaffe ou bonne 
pefche, ie ne fueray plus pour ces fujets la, mais 
feulement pour ma fante. II nous difoit quantite 
d'autres chofes femblables, deuant que de s'endor- 
mir. II faifoit fes prieres comme nous luy auions 
recommande, mais il crioit k plaine tefte, comme ils 
ont couflume de faire quand ils addreffent [86] leurs 
fouhaits kceluy qui a faict Ie iour, ou k quelque autre 
qu'ils nomment leur grand Pere. Celuy qui as tout 
fait, difoit-il, ayde moy, ie veux croire en toy, en- 
feigne moy tesfa§ons de faire, car ie les veux fuiure. 
Le mefchant Manitou me veut tromper, deffends 


1636-37] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 167 


[85] CHAP. V. 

OF SOME GOOD SENTIMENTS THAT GOD GAVE THIS 

CAPTAIN. 

WHEN he slept sometimes in our little house, 
as I have remarked above, he told us that 
he had never had a very strong belief in 
most of their fancies. "At the death of my chil- 
dren," (said he) " I did not put much in their graves, 
and I hardly expected that our sorcerers could cure 
them in their sicknesses. I saw very clearly that 
our feasts were ruining us, but I did as the others 
did, that I might follow the customs of the country. 
But I am going to cast away all these old observ- 
ances. Thou forbiddest me the eat-all feast ; I will 
take part in it no more. Thou forbiddest me to be- 
lieve in dreams; I will believe in them no more. 
Thou forbiddest me to sweat, to secure good hunting 
and fishing ; I will sweat no more for those purposes, 
but only for my health." He made a great many 
other similar remarks to us, before going to sleep. 
He said his prayers as we recommended him to do, 
but he shouted them in a loud voice, as they are ac- 
customed to do when they address [86] their desires 
to him who has made the light, or to some one else 
that they call their great Father, " He who has 
made all," said he, " help me; I wish to believe in 
thee ; teach me thy ways of doing, for I wish to fol- 
low them. The wicked Manitou tries to deceive me, 
defend me from his snares." In the morning, when 


168 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 

moy de fes embufches. Le matin eftant efueill6 il 
en faifoit de mefme criant toufiours fort haut, en 
forte qii'on I'entendoit de bien loin. Comme il auan- 
goit en la cognoiffance de nos myfleres, aiijDTi angmen- 
toit-il les prieres qu'il faifoit de luy-mefme s'efcriant 
"k fa fagon. Toy qui as tout faict, ie veux croire en 
toy, ayde moy, enfeigne moy tes fagons de faire, ie 
veux faire comme toy, ie te veux imiter. Toy Mani- 
tou qui es mefchant ie n'ay plus de croyance en toy, 
tu es vn trompeur ie croy en celuy qui a tout faict & 
qui mefure tout. Toy qui es la penfee de Dieu, qui 
t'es faict homme pour nous, ie t'ayme fecoure moy, 
garde moy, deffends moy contre le Manitou. II ap- 
pelle noftre Seigneur la penfee de Dieu, pource que 
ie luy auois faict entendre, que Dieu n'eftoit point 
marie, quoy qu'il eut vn fils, & que fa cognoiffance 
ou fon Verbe eftoit fon fils. C'eft pourquoy de luy- 
mefme [87] il I'appelloit la penfee de Dieu. 

Voicy ce qu'il difoit vne autrefois. Celuy qui as 
tout faict, efcoute moy, ie ne te parleray pas Fran- 
cois, car ie ne fgay pas cefle langue, ie te parleray k 
ma fagon, ie te diray pen de chof e, car ie f§ay peu, fi 
i'en fgauois dauantage, ie t'en dirois dauantage. Tu 
es bon enfeigne moy comme tu fais, car ie veux faire 
tout de mefme. Ie ne feray plus ce qu'on m'a deffen- 
du. Ie veux croire en toy, ayde moy. II adioufla 
plufieurs autres chofes que ie n'entendy pas, car il 
faifoit fes prieres quand nous eftions retirez en nos 
chambres. Et comme il voyoit que nous ne crions 
pas comme luy faifant les nofhres, il commengoit ^ 
parler plus bas: Or tout cecy efhoit aux premiers 
commencemens ; car quand il eut appris le Pater, 
V Aue & le Credo, en fa langue, il le difoit a deux ge- 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 169 

he awoke, he did the same thing, always crying out 
in a loud voice, so that he could be heard from afar. 
As he advanced in the knowledge of our mysteries, he 
also increased the prayers that he made himself, ex- 
claiming, in his own way, " Thou who hast made all, I 
wish to believe in thee ; help me, teach me thy ways, 
I wish to do as thou dost, I wish to imitate thee. 
Thou Manitou who art wicked, I have no more be- 
lief in thee, thou art a deceiver; I believe in him 
who has made all, and who measures all. Thou who 
art the thought of God, who made thyself man for us, 
I love thee; help me, keep me, defend me against 
the Manitou. ' ' He calls our Lord ' ' the thought of 
God, ' ' because I had explained to him that God was 
not married, although he had a son, and that his 
knowledge or his Word was his son. Hence, of his 
own accord, [87] he called him " the thought of 
God." 

Here is what he said another time : ' ' Thou who 
hast made all, hear me, I will not speak French to 
thee, for I do not know that language ; I will speak 
to thee in my own way ; I will say a few things to 
thee, for I only know a few; if I knew more, I 
would say more. Thou art good; teach me how 
thou doest, for I wish to do likewise. I will do no 
more what has been forbidden me, I wish to be- 
lieve in thee, help me." He added several other 
things that I did not hear ; for he offered his prayers 
after we had retired to our rooms, and when he saw 
that we did not speak so loudly in saying ours, he 
began to speak lower. Now all this was done at 
first; for when he had learned the Pater , the Ave, and 
the Credo in his own tongue, he said them on his 
knees and in a low voice, imitating our way of pray- 


170 


LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol. 11 


noux, & d'vne voix affez baffe imitans noftre fa9on 
de prier. II me demanda neantmoins fi c'eftoit mal 
fait de crier tout haut comnie il faif oit : le refpondy 
que non, mais que Dieu cognoiffant toutes nos pen- 
f6es nous n'auions que faire de parler bien haut pour 
nous faire entendre. Depuis ce temps Ik il parloit 
plus bas, & difoit les oraifons qu'on luy faifoit dire. 
[88] II me demandoit vn iour fi les Diables n'e- 
floient point damnez faute d'efperer en Dieu. Car 
fi Dieu (difoit il) ea fi bon, il efl croyable qu'il au- 
roit piti6 des Demons s'ils efperoient en luy. le 
luy reparty que pendant qu'on efl en la voye de fe 
fauuer qu'on peut efperer en Dieu, mais que dans 
les Enfers il n'y a plus qu'vn etemel defefpoir. 

Comme il m'eut dit qu'il cognoiftroit en ce poinct 
fi nous I'aymions, fgauoir eft, fi nous le baptifions bien 
toft, ie luy reparty que nous efprouuerions fa coftance 
deuant que de le faire, ie luy reprefentay auffi les 
obligations qu'il encouroit par le Baptefme: Cela va 
bien, dit-il, c'eft la raifon que vous m'efprouuiez, 
donnez moy vn Francois qui demeure auec moy 
quand ie me retireray dedans les bois pour chaffer, il 
m'enfeignera a prier Dieu foir & matin, il epiera 
toutes mes actions, & vous rapportera fi ie fay des 
feftins h. tout manger. Si i'ay encor croyance a mes 
fonges, fi i'obey a nos Sorciers, bref vous fgaurez par 
fon moyen fi i'ay contreuenu aux deffences que vous 
m'auez faictes. 

Ie groffirois trop ce chapitre fi ie voulois rapporter 
tout I'entretien que nous auons [89] eu auec luy. 
Refte maintenant a dire le fuccez de cefte inftru- 
ction, car c'eft iuftement ce qu'on attend. 

Sur la fin de I'hyuer le Diable luy fit faire deux 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 171 

ing. However, he asked me if it was wrong to speak 
as loud as lie did. I replied that it was not; but 
that, as God knew all our thoughts, we need not 
speak so loud to make ourselves heard. After that, 
he spoke in a lower voice, and said the prayers that 
he was told to say. 

[88] He asked me one day if the Devils were not 
damned because they did not trust in God. " For 
if God," (said he) "is so good, it is to be supposed 
he would have pity on the Demons if they trusted in 
him." I said, in reply, that while a man is on the 
way to saving himself he can hope in God ; but that 
in Hell there is nothing but everlasting despair. 

When he told me that he would know whether or 
not we loved him from one thing, namely, if we bap- 
tized him before long, I replied to him that we would 
prove his steadfastness before doing so, representing 
to him also the obligations he would assume in Bap- 
tism. " Very well," said he, "it is right that you 
should put me on trial. Give me a Frenchman who 
will stay with me when I withdraw into the woods 
to hunt ; he will teach me how to pray to God morn- 
ing and evening ; he will spy upon all my actions, 
and will report to you if I take part in the eat-all 
feasts, if I still believe in dreams, if I obey our Sor- 
cerers ; in short you will know through him if I have 
violated the prohibitions you have made. ' ' 

This chapter would become too long if I tried to 
report all the conversations we had [89] with him. 
It now remains to tell the success of this instruction, 
for that is exactly what you are waiting for. 

Towards the end of the winter, the Devil made him 
commit two acts of insolence, one against us and the 
other against sieur Olivier. Having asked us for 


172 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.11 

rodomontades, I'vne en noftre endroit, I'autre enuers 
le fieur Oliuier, nous ayant demande ie ne f9ay quoy, 
que nous ne pouuions pas luy donner. II fe depita, 
& fur ce depit le diable le foUicitant il nous rendit le 
Chappelet & 1' Agnus Dei, que nous luy anions don- 
ne, & s'en alia; nous ne fifmes autre chofe fmon de 
le recommander "k Dieu. Cefte affaire eftant plus de 
fon reffort que du noftre, k peine ce pauure mife- 
rable fuft-il en fa cabane qu'il fe trouua accueilly de 
crainte & de trifteffe. II n'ofa par apres nous venir 
voir; mais la confcience le remordant il s'addreffa 
au fieur Oliuier, luy declare fa peine, & la faute qu'il 
auoit faite, I'affeurant que la colere I'auoit tranfport6, 
qu'il n'eftoit point enfant, qu'il tiendroit la parole 
qu'il nous auoit donnee de croire en Dieu. Le fieur 
Oliuier nous le ramena: ce pauure homme ne nous 
ofoit regarder, tant il eftoit confus. II me redemanda 
par apres fon chappelet, mais ie [ne] luy voulus pas 
rendre, il nous demanda fl nous anions donn6 aduis k 
Monfieur le Gouuerneur de fa fante \sc. faute], nous 
[90] difmes que tout prefentement nous venions de 
Ten informer, voyant qu'il auoit tard6 vn iour fans 
fe recognoiftre. Allons (dit-il) menez moy vers luy, 
ie luy veux parler, nous y allafmes done enfemble, 
k peine eftoit il entre dans fa chambre, qu'il s'efcria. 
Ah! Nikanis que i'ay fait vne chofe mefchante, i'en 
fuis bien marry; ie n'ay point d'efprit, la colere m'a 
penfe perdre. Non ie ne fuis point enfant, ie feray 
ferme dans la parole que ie vous ay donn6. Nous 
auons paffe I'hyuer dans vne fl grande paix: II ne 
faut pas f aire le f ol fur la fin ; ma faute eft grande 
mais ie n'ay battu ny frappe perfonne, ie hay ce que 
i'ay fait. Monfieur le Gouuerneur luy fit dire qu'il 


1636-37] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 ' 173 

something or other that we could not give him, he 
became angry; and in his anger, the devil inciting 
him, he returned to us the Chaplet and the Agnus 
Dei which we had given him, and went away; 
we could do nothing but recommend him to God, 
the affair being more in his province than ours. 
Scarcely was this poor wretch in his cabin than he 
found himself overcome by fear and sadness. He 
did not dare afterwards to come and see us ; but, as 
his conscience pricked him, he addressed himself to 
sieur Olivier, and explained to him his trouble, and 
the fault he had committed, — assuring him that an- 
ger had carried him away, that he was not a child, 
that he would keep the promise he had given us to 
believe in God. Sieur Olivier brought him back to 
us; the poor man did not dare look at us, so great 
was his confusion. He afterwards asked me to give 
him back his chaplet, but I would not restore it to 
him. He asked us if we had informed Monsieur the 
Governor about his fault ; we [90] said that we had 
just informed him thereof, seeing he had delayed 
one day in acknowledging his misdeed. " Let us 
go," (said he) " take me to him; I wish to speak to 
him." So we went there together, and hardly had 
we entered his room before he cried out, " Ah, 
Nikanis, what a bad thing I have done ! I am very 
sorry for it; I have no sense, anger has come near 
to ruining me. No, I am not a child, I will remain 
firm in the promise I have given you. We have 
passed the winter so peaceably, I ought not to act the 
fool at the end; my fault is great, but I have 
neither beaten nor struck anybody; I hate what I 
have done." Monsieur the Governor had him told 
that he had indeed doubted whether the Devil would 


174 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.11 

fe doutoit bien que le Diable n'auroit pas fi grand 
pouuoir que de Tempefcher de fe recognoiftre, que 
s'il perfeueroit dans la bonne volenti de croire en 
Dieu, que cefte faute ne pouuoit effacer I'amour qu'il 
luy portoit. 

Depuis ce temps 1^ il fe remit en fon deuoir, de 
forte que faifant feflin quelques iours apres il dit 
tout haut deuant fes compatriotes s'addreffant a moy : 
Pere le leune ce que ie t'ay promis au commence- 
ment de I'hyuer ie te le promets a la fin, ce que ie 
dis maintenant ie le diray I'Eft^: Ie ne fuis pas [91] 
enfant pour mentir, ie f9ay que ie feray moqu6, mais 
les rifees ne me tueront pas, & quand i'en deurois 
mourir, ie perfeuereray iufques k la fin, auffi bien 
faut-il que ie meure quelque iour. Ces bonnes refo- 
lutions n'empefcherent pas qu'il ne fe laiffaft vne 
autrefois emporter k fa colere contre le fieur Oliuier, 
pour ie ne f9ay quelle mauuaife entente. II ne f9a- 
uoit comment rentrer en grace auec luy, en fin le 
iour du vendredy Sainct il le va aborder & luy parle 
en cefte forte. Refpons moy ie te prie, fgay-tu bien 
I'oraifon que le fils de Dieu a faite, & qu'on m'a en- 
feigne : Ie la fgay bien en effet dit le fieur Oliuier, 
ne la dis tu pas quelquesfois? Ie la dis tons les 
iours, ces mots ne font-ils pas dans cefte oraifon: 
Pardonne 71011s tios offences^ comme nous pardonnons ti 
ceux qui nous ont offencd. Le fieur Oliuier voyant bien 
ce qu'il vouloit dire I'embraffe, & luy dit que de bon 
coeur il luy pardonnoit la faute qu'il auoit commife 
en fon endroit. Au fortir de Ik il me vint trouuer 
tout remply de ioye de s'eftre reconcilie, donnant 
mille loiianges a celuy qui luy auoit accorde fon 
pardon. 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 175 

not have so much power over him as to prevent him 
from acknowledging his fault ; that if he persevered 
in his good intention of believing in God, this fault 
could not efface the love he bore him. 

After that he resumed his good behavior, so that, 
having made a feast several days afterwards, he ad- 
dressed me before his countrymen, and said in a loud 
voice, " Father le Jeune, what I promised thee at the 
beginning of the winter, I promise thee at the end ; 
and what I say now, I will say in the Summer. I 
am not [91] a child, that I should lie; I know I shall 
be ridiculed, but laughter will not kill me ; and, if I 
should die for it, I will persevere to the end, as in- 
deed I must die some day. ' ' These good resolutions 
did not prevent him, on another occasion, from giv- 
ing way to his anger against sieur Olivier, because 
of I know not what misunderstanding. He did not 
know how to get back into favor with him; but 
finally, on Good friday, he approached him and ad- 
dressed him in this fashion: " Tell me, I pray thee, 
knowest thou well the prayer the son of God made, 
the one they have taught me ? " " I do indeed know 
it well," said sieur Olivier, "dost thou not say it 
sometimes?" " I say it every day; are not these 
words in this prayer, Forgive us our offenses, as we 
forgive those who have offended us? " Sieur Olivier, 
seeing clearly what he was trying to say, embraced 
him, and said that he heartily pardoned the fault he 
had committed against him. After departing thence, 
he came to see me, full of joy at being reconciled, 
and giving a thousand praises to him who had 
granted his pardon. 

Now although we all may fail, and ought not to reject 
a man when he acknowledge his sins, yet we must 


176 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.11 


Or ia9oit que nous foyons tous fautifs, & qu'il ne 
faille pas rebuter vn homme quand il recognoifh fes 
pechez, fi faut-il prendre [92] garde en ces premiers 
commencemens de quel efprit font portez ceux qui f e 
veulent ranger au Chriftianifme. Get homme eflant 
bien louche feroit puilTant parmy les fiens, mais 
comme il eft colere & fuperbe nous ne le prelTons pas 
tant, veu mefme qu'il a plufieurs femmes qu'il promet 
de quitter & qu'il ne quitte point. II pretend quelques 
excufes la dedans. le me fouuiens qu' eflant certain 
iour deuant Monfieur le Gouuerneur, il luy dit : Ni- 
kanis, ie defire k la verite d'embraffer voftre creance, 
mais vous me faites deux comandemens qui fe cho- 
quent I'vn I'autre, vous me deffendez d'vn cofle 
de tuer, de I'autre vous me deffendez d'auoir plu- 
fieurs femmes, cela ne s'accorde pas, de trois femmes 
que i'ay efpoufees, ie n'en ayme qu'vne, que ie veux 
retenir auec moy, ie congedie les deux autres, mais 
elles retournent malgre que i'en aye, {i bien qu'il 
faut que ie les fouffre ou que ie les tue; i'efpere 
neantmoins que dans quelque temps, ie les feray 
retourner en leur pays. Ie croyrois aifement qu'il 
n'en tient qu'vne pour fa femme qu'il ayme fort, 
hayffant les deux autres, mais il faut euiter le fcan- 
dale, & donner cefte impreffion ^ ces barbares que les 
Chreftiens ne peuuent tenir qu'vne feule [93] femme. 
Neantmoins comme cefte couftume fera difficile a ex- 
terminer, nous tolerons & attendons doucement que 
la foy fe fortifie dans I'ame de ce pauure homme, 
pour luy faire faire vn effort bien difficile a vne ame 
quaff de chair : Mais encor il me f emble que f on corps 
n'eft pas le plus grand obftacle a la foy, ains pluftoft 
fon efprit remply d'orgueil. Si Dieu le rebute, ie 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 111 

be [92] careful in these early stages to find out what 
spirit actuates those who wish to range themselves 
on the side of Christianity. This man, if he were 
deeply touched, would be a power among his own 
people ; but, as he is so choleric and haughty, we do 
not urge him much, especially as he has several 
wives whom he has promised to give up, but whom 
he does not give up. He alleges certain excuses for 
this. I remember that, being one day in the pres- 
ence of Monsieur the Governor, he said to him: 
" Nikanis, I do really wish to embrace your belief, 
but you give me two commandments which conflict 
with each other; on the one hand you forbid me to 
kill, and on the other you prohibit me from having 
several wives ; these commandments do not agree. Of 
the three wives I have married I love only one, 
whom I wish to keep with me ; I send the other two 
away, but they return in spite of me, so that I must 
either endure them or kill them ; I hope, however, 
that in a little while they will return to their own 
country." I can readily believe that he keeps only 
one of them as his wife, and that he loves her very 
much, hating the other two; but we must avoid scan- 
dal, and give these barbarians the impression that 
Christians can have only one [93] wife. Neverthe- 
less, as it is their custom, it will be difficult to do 
away with it. We tolerate it, and wait patiently un- 
til the faith becomes stronger in the soul of this poor 
man, in order to get him to make an effort which 
would be quite difficult to a soul almost of flesh. 
And yet it does not seem to me that his body is the 
greatest obstacle to the faith, but rather his proud 
spirit. If God rejects him, I imagine that it will 
be in punishment for his pride rather than for his 


178 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.11 

me figure qu'il le fera en punition de fa fuperbe plu- 
ftoft que de fa luxure, quoy qu'il foil profondement 
abyfme dans ces deux gouffres. 

Au refte il dit merueille de noftre Saincte doctrine, 
il I'a prefche publi quern ent. Le P. Buteux m'efcrit 
des trois Riuieres, qu'il dit tout haut qu'il croit en 
Dieu, qu'il garde tous fes commandemens, except^ 
celuy de n'auoir qu'vne femme. le I'ay veu k Kebec 
parler fort hardiment en faueur de noflre faincte Foy, 
dire en la prefence de fes compatriotes qu'il alloit 
ietter bas fes fa9ons de faire, qu'il ne feroit iamais 
des feflins a tout manger, qu'il n'appelleroit point 
les Sorciers pour le penfer en fes maladies, qu'il ne 
croyoit plus aux fonges, & qu'il vouloit eftre baptife, 
& croire ce que croyent les Frangois, apres tout cela 
il rampe encor [94] fur terre, fon entendement co- 
gnoift ce que la volont6 accouftumee au mal ne pent 
ou ne veut pas encor embraffer fortement. le fup- 
plie de tout mon coeur ceux ^ qui Dieu a donne la 
foy, diray-je quail par heritage, d'auoir piti6 de ce 
pauure homme, de fupplier noftre Seigneur qu'il luy 
donne I'humilite. Ah! qu'on faict peu d'eftat du 
don de la Foy dans 1' Europe: II femble que ce foit 
vne chofe connaturelle de croire en Dieu, O quel 
prefent! grand Dieu quelle faueur! c'eft icy qu'on 
voit quel threfor c'eft que de croire en Iesvs- 
Ch rist, c'eft icy qu'on cognoit la difficulte qu'il 
y a de faire entrer cefte creance dans I'efprit d'vn 
Barbare infidelle, c'eft icy que les obligations d'ai- 
mer celuy, qui nous a preuenu d'vn fi grand bien 
faict, paroilfent a decouuert. II eft vray que I'opi- 
niaftrete des heretiques eft vn vray pourtrait de la 
durete de nos Sauuages. Paflons outre. 


1 636 - 37] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 179 

lust, although he may be sunk deep in both these 
abysses. 

But to continue, he says wonders of our Holy doc- 
trine, preaching it publicly. Father Buteux writes 
me from the three Rivers that he declared openly 
his belief in God, and that he was keeping all the 
commandments, except that one about having only 
one wife. I have seen him at Kebec speak quite 
boldly in favor of our holy Faith, saying in the pres- 
ence of his compatriots that he was going to cast off 
his old customs — that he would never give eat-all 
feasts, that he would not summon the Sorcerers to 
treat him in his sicknesses, that he would no longer 
believe in dreams, and that he desired to be baptized 
and to believe what the French believe. After all 
that he still crawls [94] upon the ground ; his under- 
standing acknowledges what his will, accustomed to 
evil, cannot or will not wholly embrace. I implore 
with all my heart those to whom God has given the 
faith almost as an inheritance, I may say, to have 
pity on this poor man and to supplicate our Lord to 
give him humility. Ah, how little we value the gift 
of the Faith in Europe ! It seems as if belief in God 
were a part of our nature. Oh what a gift ! Great 
God, what a favor ! It is here that one sees what a 
privilege it is to believe in Jesus Christ; it is here 
one realizes the difficulty there is in making this be- 
lief enter the mind of an infidel Barbarian ; it is here 
that the obligations to love him, who has acquainted 
us with so great a blessing, appear fully revealed. 
Indeed, the obstinacy of heretics is a true illustration 
of the callousness of our Savages. Let us pass on. 

I am well aware that some of our French people, 
on seeing this Savage intractable, after so many 


180 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.11 

le f9ay bien que quelques-vns de nos Frangois voy- 
ant ce Sauuage retif apres tant de promeffes faictes 
en particulier, & en public, ont voulu dire que tout 
ce qu'auoit faict cet homme, n'efloit que pour fe don- 
ner du credit aupres des Frangois, afin [95] d'efpou- 
fer vne ieune femme, qu'il n'auroit peu auoir autre- 
ment. C'eft vn erreur, car ie f9ay nettement le fond 
de cefte affaire, & y ay contribue fans y penfer: mon 
deffein eftoit qu'il en retint vne des deux plus agees 
qu'il auoit, mais comme cefte ieune femme I'aymoit, 
& cependant ne I'ofoit efpoufer pour la crainte qu'elle 
auoit qu'vn Sorcier qui la vouloit prendre pour fe- 
conde femme, ne la fit mourir par fes forts. II arri- 
ua que noflre Sauuage en quelque autre occafion 
m'ayant tefmoigne qu'il redoutoit I'art de cet homme, 
ie luy fis entendre qu'il ne deuoit point craindre, s'il 
croyoit en Dieu, que fa foy luy feruiroit de bouclier 
contre les charmes, & pour le confirmer en cefte ve- 
rity ie prouoquay moy-mefme le Sorcier, ie I'atta- 
quay fi viuement que foit qu'il craignit les chafti- 
mens de Dieu, ou qu'il me creut plus grand forcier 
que luy ; il fit la paix auec ce Capitaine dans noftre 
propre maifon. S'imaginant peut-eftre que ie le tue- 
rois par des charmes plus puiffans que les fiens, s'il 
perf eueroit dans la mauuaif e volont6 qu'il auoit contre 
vn homme que i'aymois. Si toft qu'ils furent recon- 
ciliez cefle ieune femme deliuree de fa crainte I'ef- 
poufa cotre [96] mon fentiment, car veritablement fi 
i'euffe penfe que cefte reconciliation eut deu faire ce 
mariage ie ne I'aurois pas procuree comme ie fis. 
Au refte tout ainfi qu'en voftre France, fi toft qu'vne 
perfonne s'adonne ^ fuiure la deuotion les hommes 
imparfaits ne la fgauroient plus fupporter, fi elle 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 181 

promises made in private and in public, were ready 
to say that all this man had done was only to gain 
credit with the French, in order [95] to marry a 
young woman whom he could not have had other- 
wise. That is a mistake, for I thoroughly understand 
the whole affair, and unwittingly helped to bring it 
about. I intended to have him retain one of the two 
older ones that he had ; but this young woman loved 
him, yet did not dare to marry him through fear that 
a Sorcerer, who wished to make her his second wife, 
would kill her by his charms. It happened that our 
Savage on some other occasion had declared to me 
that he feared the artifices of this man, and I gave 
him to understand that he. should not fear, — that, if 
he believed in God, his faith would serve as a shield 
against all charms. To demonstrate the truth of 
this, I myself provoked the Sorcerer, attacking him 
so severely that he either feared the punishments of 
God, or else thought I was a greater sorcerer than 
he was; he made peace with this Chief in our house, 
imagining, perhaps, that I would kill him with 
charms more potent than his own, if he persevered 
in his ill-will toward a man that I loved. As soon as 
they were reconciled, this young woman, freed from 
her fears, married him against [96] my wishes, — for, 
truly, if I had thought that this reconciliation would 
have caused this marriage, I would not have pro- 
cured it as I did. However, just as in your France, 
as soon as a man betakes himself to following piety, 
imperfect men cannot tolerate him if he falls into 
some error, as if he could become a Saint in a mo- 
ment; so in ours you will find some, — but very few 
and of slight importance in these affairs, in which 
they have not the least perception, — who would have 


182 LES RELATIONS DBS J£SUITES [Vol.11 

tombe dans quelques fautes, comme fi en vn moment 
elle pouuoit deuenir Saincte, de mefme en la noftre 
vous en trouuerez mais bien pen, & bien pen confi- 
derables en ces affaires oil ils ne voyent goutte, qui 
voudroient qu'vn Sauuage fut tres-feruent Chreftien 
& fe defpouillaft tout h. coup de fa vieille peau, fi toft 
qu'il h. fait paroiftre quel que bonne inclination pour 
noflre creance, autrement tout ce qu'il fait n'efl que 
feintife. Si leur conclufion efloit bonne, ie les con- 
uainqurois de grande tromperie & pent eftre des fa- 
crileges, car apres auoir promis h. Dieu tant de fois 
de s'amender de leurs fautes, ils ne s'acquittent pas 
de la promeffe qu'ils en ont faite en fa prefence, 
done ils procedent par feintife. La conclufion n'eft 
pas bonne ny pour eux ny pour nos Sauuages. Fi- 
niflons auec fes paroles, eadem quippe menfurd qua 
menji fueritis remetietur vobis. 


1636 - 37] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 


183 


a Savage become a very fervent Christian and shed 
his old skin all at once, and as soon as he has shown 
any favorable inclination to onr belief, otherwise all 
he does is only hypocrisy. If their conclusion were 
just, I would convince them of great deceit and per- 
haps of sacrilege ; for, after having promised God so 
many times to correct their own faults, they do not 
acquit themselves of the promises they have made in 
his presence, therefore they act the part of hypo- 
crites. The conclusion is not just, either for them 
or for our Savages. Let us finish with these words, 
eadeni quippe mensurd qua mensi fueritis remetietur vobis. 


184 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.11 


[97] CHAPITRE VI. 

CE QU'ON A FAIT POUR L'INSTRUCTION DES AUTRES 
SAUUAGES. 

IE ne f§aurois aff6s benir Dieu de nous auoir donn6 
pour Gouuerneur vn homme felon fon coeur, il 
eft tout plein d' amour pour nos Fran9ois, & ne 
manque pas d' affection pour nos Sauuages, il "k vne 
dexterite admirable ^ rapporter au bien de la Reli- 
gion, tons les prefens, tons les feftins, en vn mot 
tons les fecours, & toutes les gracieufetes qu'on doit 
faire ^ ces barbares pour s'entretenir en paix auec 
eux, en forte que ce qu'on fait ordinairement par vne 
police non blafmable, il le fait par vne prudence 
vraiement Chreftienne, & vraiement lotiable, faifant 
comme on dit d'vne pierre deux coups, car par les 
mefmes faueurs & par les mefmes bien-faits dont il 
fe fert pour les attacher aux Frangois, il les attire 
encor a la foy, qui eft le bien & la vraie fin pour la- 
quelle Dieu fait voguer les vaiffeaux, d' Europe en ce 
nouueau monde, fuiuant done ces [98] maximes, les 
Sauuages au commencement de I'Hyuer s'eftans reti- 
res qui de9k qui dela dans leurs grandes forefts pour 
aller chercher .leur vie, vne petite trouppe d'Algon- 
quins, comme i'ay dit eftans reft6s aupres du fort, 
apres y auoir paff6 quelques iours il les fit affembler 
le 15. de Decembre pour leur faire feftin, ils s'y trou- 
uerent tons hommes, femmes & enfans, n'aians laifs6 
que peu de perfonnes pour garder leurs cabanes, 


1636 - 37] LE JE UNE' S RELA TION, 1637 185 


[97] CHAPTER VI. 

WHAT HAS BEEN DONE FOR THE INSTRUCTION OF 
OTHER SAVAGES. 

I CANNOT sufficiently bless God for having given 
us as Governor a man after his own heart. He 
is full of love for our French, and is not lacking 
in affection for our Savages. He is wonderfully 
adroit in using for the benefit of Religion all the 
presents, all the feasts,— in a word, all the help and 
all the benevolent acts which have to be done for 
these barbarians, to get along in peace with them. 
So that what is usually secured through unobjec- 
tionable policy is done by him with truly Christian 
and truly praiseworthy prudence, — giving, as the 
saying is, two blows with one stone ; for by means of 
the same favors and the same kind acts which he 
uses to attach them to the French, he also attracts 
them to the faith, which is the blessing and the true 
end for which God sends floating over the waves the 
ships from Europe to this new world. Therefore, 
pursuant to this [98] policy, the Savages at the be- 
ginning of Winter having withdrawn, some here, 
some there, into their great forests to seek their liv- 
ing, a little band of Algonquins who, as I have said, 
had remained near the fort, were, after having been 
there a few days, called together by him on the 1 5th 
of December, that a feast might be made for them. 
They were all there, men, women, and children, leav- 
ing only a few of their number to guard their cabins. 


186 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 11 


chafcun aiant pris place. Monfieur le Gotiuerneur 
accompagne de plufieurs Frangois leur fit dire par le 
Sieur Oliuier truchement, qu'il eftoit bien-aife de ce 
qu'ils fe comportoient fort paifiblement, & qu'il les 
aimeroit & protegeroit toufiours, tant qu'ils perfe- 
uereroient en cette bonne intelligence, qu'aiant de- 
lire de les auoir, il les auoit inuites an feftin pour fe 
conjouyr auec eux de I'amour qu'ils s'entreportoient, 
les Fra9ois & les Sauuages. A cela ils repartirent 
auec leur exclamation, ho, ho, ho, mais auec vn ton 
qui donnoit h cognoiflre la fatisfaction qu'ils auoient 
de ce temoignage d'affection, apres cela le Sieur Oli- 
uier, fuiuant la volonte de Monfieur, fit faire I'ou- 
uerture du banquet par vn Capitaine qui garda leurs 
ceremonies, [99] declarant qui eftoit celuy qui les 
inuitoit, & dequoy eftoit compofe le feflin, & a cha- 
que diuerfite de mets, quoy que meHes tous enfemble 
ils temoignent leur contentement par leur ho, ho, 
ho, tire du profond de I'eftomach, aians bien mang6 
on fit la conclufion du banquet, & on renuoia toutes 
les femmes & les enfans, les hommes ages firent 
quelque harangue en recognoiffance de I'amour que 
Monfieur le Gouuerneur leur portoit, lequel prenant 
de la occafion de leur parler, leur dit qu'en effet il 
les aimoit, mais qu'il s'eftonnoit comme eftant vis h. 
vis des Fran9ois, depuis vn fi long-temps ils n'auoient 
pas encor regeu leur creance, les alTeurant que le 
Dieu qui les conferue, les conferueroit s'ils I'embraf- 
foient, il leur demanda, fi ce qu'on leur enfeignoit 
eftoit mauuais, il les preffa fort fur ce point, ils ref- 
pondirent que veritablement ce qu'ils auoient ouy 
dire, eftoit bon, mais qu'il falloit accufer la duret6 
de leur efprit, & le defaut de perfonnes qui enten- 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 187 

All having taken their places, Monsieur the Govern- 
or, accompanied by several Frenchmen, said to them 
through the interpreter, Sieur Olivier, how very glad 
he was that they were conducting themselves so 
peaceably, and that he would always love and pro- 
tect them as long as they should persevere in this 
good understanding; that, having desired to see 
them, he had invited them to the feast to rejoice 
with them in the mutual love that the Frenchmen 
and the Savages bore to each other. This they an- 
swered with their exclamation, ho, ho, ho, but in a 
tone which showed their satisfaction in this evidence 
of affection. After this Sieur Olivier, in accordance 
with the wish of Monsieur, had the banquet opened 
by a Captain, who observed their ceremonies, [99] 
explaining who it was that had invited them, and of 
what the feast was composed; at every different 
dish, although they were all mixed together, they 
showed their satisfaction by their ho, ho, ho, drawn 
from the depths of their stomachs. After they had 
eaten heartily, the banquet was closed, and all the 
women and children were sent away. The old men 
made a few speeches in acknowledgment of the love 
Monsieur the Governor bore them, — who thereupon 
taking occasion to speak, told them that he did, in 
fact, love them, but that he was surprised that, living 
as they did face to face with the French for so long 
a time, they had not yet accepted their belief, assur- 
ing them that the God who preserves the French 
would preserve the Savages also if they believed in 
him. He asked them if what was taught them was 
bad, pressing them strongly on this point. They re- 
plied that certainly what they had heard was good, 
but that he must blame the dullness of their minds. 


188 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.11 

diffent bien leur langue pour les inftruire, i'auois 
prie le Sieur Oliuier de haranguer, nous [lOo] auions 
difpofees quelques raifons pour les prelTer, mais ils 
f9auent alTes bien fe deffaire & deftourner le propos 
qui ne leur aggr6e pas ; dequoy m'apperceuant & re- 
hauilant ma voix, ie comnien9ay en la prefence de 
nos Frangois, & des Sauuages a parler publiquement 
pour la premiere fois en leur langue, ie m'ei?tois re- 
tenu iufques alors non pas tant crainte de confufion, 
pour moy, que pour n'auilir nos myfteres les expof ans 
a leurs rifees, par mes begaiemens, ie leur dis done 
qu'a la verite on ne leur auoit point prefche la foy, iuf- 
ques alors, dans leur affemblees publiques, qu'on les 
auoit feulement inuites k faire comme nous, mais fans 
leur pouuoir declarer la beaute de noftre creance, 
qu'on le pourroit faire d'orefnauant, puifque nous nous 
auancerions en la cognoifTance de leur langue, & que 
s'ils vouloient correfpondre k Tamour que leur portoit 
noftre grand Capitaine, ils s'affembleroient parfois en 
noftre maifon, pendant I'hyuer, pour entendre parler 
de Dieu, & conferer de fa doctrine, que le fieur Oliuier 
li trouueroit pour m'expliquer ce qu'ils diroient, & que 
ie refpondrois par ma propre bouche, puis qu'ils m'en- 
tendoient bien, que Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur les 
inuitoit k cela, que Dieu mefme ne les [loi] pouuoit 
aimer voiant qu'ils ne le vouloient pas cognoiftre, & 
m'addreffant ^ vn Capitaine ie luy dis, fi ton fils ne 
t'aimoit point, s'il fe mocquoit de toy, n'en ferois tu 
pas f af che ? or fgache que tu es plus enfant de Dieu, 
que ton fils n'eft ton fils, ce n'eft pas toy qui as com- 
paff6 le corps de ton fils, tu n'as point enchaffe fes 
yeux dans fa tefte, tu n'as point emboiiet6 fes os dans 
leur iointures, attache & lie fes bras aux efpaules, fi 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 189 

and the lack of persons who understood their lan- 
guage well, to give them instruction. I had re- 
quested Sieur Olivier to make a speech, and we [lOo] 
had prepared some arguments to urge upon them; 
but they know very well how to ward off and edge 
away from suggestions which are not agreeable to 
them. Perceiving this, and raising my voice, I be- 
gan in the presence of our French and of the Sav- 
ages to speak publicly in their language for the first 
time. I had refrained from doing so until then, not 
so much through fear of embarrassment to myself, as 
of degrading our mysteries in exposing them to their 
laughter through my stammerings. I said to them 
that in truth we had not, up to that time, preached 
the faith to them in their public assemblies, but had 
only invited them to do as we did, not having the pow- 
er to declare to them the beauties of our belief ; that 
from now on we could do this, since we had made 
progress in the knowledge of their language ; and 
that if they wished to respond to our great Captain's 
love for them, they would sometimes assemble in our 
house during the winter to hear about God and to 
talk over his doctrine; that sieur Olivier would be 
there to explain to me what they should say, and 
that I would answer with my own lips, as they un- 
derstood me very well ; that Monsieur our Governor 
invited them to do this. I told them that God him- 
self could not love them [loi] when he saw that they 
did not wish to acknowledge him ; and addressing 
myself to a Captain, I said to him, " If thy son did 
not love thee, if he ridiculed thee, wouldst thou not 
be angry ? Now know that thou art more a child of 
God than thy son is thy son ; it is not thou who hast 
shaped the body of thy son, — thou hast not inserted 


190 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.11 

tu as conduit cet ouurage, que ne luy as tu d.onn6 
quatre bras, que ne luy as tu enclaue des yeux der- 
riere la tefte, c'eft Dieu qui a drefle ce baftiment, 
c'efl luy qui en eft I'autheur, il s'eft feruy de toy 
pour le mettre au iour & le conferuer. Or regarde 
maintenant qu'elle ingratitude de ne vouloir pas 
croire, & obeir a nofhre vray pere? vous me dires que 
vous ne le cognoiffes pas, venes nous voir, & nous 
vous I'enfeignerons. le leurs dis plufieurs autres 
chofes, leur demandant de temps en temps, s'ils 
m'entendoient? ouy, refpondoient ils, nous t'enten- 
dons bien, ce que ie dis eft-il mauuais? non, voulez 
vous eftre inftruits fur cette doctrine? nous le vou- 
lons bien, affembles vous done parfois en noftre mai- 
fon pour en conferer, nous le ferons, refpondent ils, 
feres vous marris que i'affemble vos [102] enfans, 
pour leur enfeigner les mefmes chofes? nous en fe- 
rons tres-contens, & tu feras plus de profit auec eux, 
qu'auec nous, car nous manquons de memoire, eftans 
defia agez, recommandez leur done qu'ils viennent 
quand on les ira appeller, nous ny manquerons pas. 
Monfieur le Gouuerneur & nos Fran9ois tefmoigne- 
rent bien du contentement de ces bonnes refolutions, 
lef quelles ont eu quelque bon effet : car & les peres 
& les meres, & les enfans ont receu quelque inftru- 
ction, & encor bien qu'ils n'aient pas embraffe noftre 
creance, ils ne laiffent pas pour la plus part de la 
refpecter, cette diuine femence operera en fon temps. 
Ie dis bien d'auantage, que s'ils eftoiet renfermez 
dans vne bourgade, & qu'on les euft veu vne couple 
d'annees fedentaires, ie ne ferois point de difficulte 
de baptifer vne partie des grads, & tous les enfans, 
qui f eroient inftruits : car aians receu la Loy de lef us- 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 191 

the eyes in his head, thou hast not fitted the bones 
into their sockets, attached and fastened the arms to 
the shoulders ; if thou hast managed this work, why- 
hast thou not given him four arms, why hast thou 
not enclosed the eyes in the back of the head? It is 
God who has formed this structure, it is he who is 
the author of it, he has used you to bring it to the 
light and to take care of it. Now think what in- 
gratitude it is not to be willing to believe, and to 
obey our real father. You tell me that you do not 
know him ; come and see us and we will teach you 
about him." I said many other things to them, ask- 
ing from time to time if they understood me, "■ Yes," 
they would answer, "we understand thee well." 
" Is what I say bad?" "No." " Do you wish to be 
instructed in this doctrine?" " We do, indeed." 
* ' Gather at our house sometimes then to talk about 
it." " We will, " they reply. " Shall you be sorry 
to have me bring your [102] children together, to 
teach them the same things?" " We shall be very 
glad of it ; and thou wilt gain more with them than 
with us, for our memories are poor, seeing we are al- 
ready old." " Urge them, then, to come when they 
are called." "We will not fail to do so." Mon- 
sieur the Governor and our Frenchmen showed a 
great deal of satisfaction at these good resolutions, 
which have had some good effect; for the fathers, 
the mothers, and the children have all received some 
instruction, and, although they have not yet em- 
braced our belief, they do not fail for the most part 
to respect it; this divine seed will germinate in its 
own time. I say still more; that if they were en- 
closed in a village and were to settle down for a cou- 
ple of years, I would not scruple to baptize some of 


192 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.11 

Chrift, on leur en feroit bien faire I'exercice, & ainfi 
petit k petit, ils s'habitueroient au chemin de la ve- 
rity, & dans pen d'annees ce feroit vn peuple de bene- 
diction, tout gill k ietter la ietinelTe das de bonnes 
couftumes, ce qu'on ne pent faire aifement, qu'en les 
arreftant ou aians des Seminaires bien fondez, c'efl 
cela qui manque, comme i'ay defia dit: car les def- 
penfes en vn [103] pais nouueau, & tout neuf, font 
fort grandes. Mais venons aux conferences que 
nous auos eu auec eux. lis me vindrent done voir 
plufieurs fois, & quand il n'y auoit que des Algon- 
quins, ie fuppliois le fieur Oliuier de s'y trouuer: car 
comme i'ay dit fouuent, ie ne les entend quafi pas, 
quoy qu'ils m'entendent fort bien, tout de mefme 
que ie n'entenderois pas vn vray Gafcon, ou Prouen- 
9al, quoy qu'il m'entendit bien, parlant Frangois. 
Les premiers qui vindrent apres ce feftin, efloiet les 
plus apparens d'entr'eux, ils nous propoferent trois 
ou quatre queftions, deuant que d'entrer en difcours 
de noftre Religion. 

Premierement ils demanderent pourquoy ils mou- 
roient fi fouuent? difans que depuis la venue des 
Fran9ois, leur nation fe perdoit entierement, qu'au- 
parauant qu'ils euffent veu des Europeans, que les 
feuls vieillards mouroient, mais qu'a prefent il en 
meurt plus de ieunes que de vieux. 

Secondement, I'vn d'eux dit qu'ils auoient ouy 
dire a fon grand pere, que plus il y auroit icy de 
Frangois, moins il y auroit de Sauuages, & que lors 
particulierement qu'on ameneroit des femmes, qu'ils 
mourroiet en grad nombre. II difoit encor qu'il y 
viendroit des robbes noires pour les inftruire, & que 
cela [104] , mefme les feroit mourir, comme en effet 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, r6s7 193 

the adults and all the children who should be in- 
structed; for, having received the Law of Jesus 
Christ, they would be called upon to put it into prac- 
tice, and thus, little by little, they would become ac- 
customed to the path of truth, and in a few years this 
would be a consecrated people. It all lies in getting 
the young people into the right habits, which cannot 
be easily done except by making them sedentary, or 
by having well-endowed Seminaries. It is that 
which is lacking, as I have already said ; for the ex- 
penses in a [103] new and altogether primitive coun- 
try are very great. But let us come to the confer- 
ences we have had with them. They came, then, to 
see me several times ; when there were only Algon- 
quins, I requested sieur Olivier to be present ; for, as 
I have often said, I hardly understand them, al- 
though they understand me very well, — just as I do 
not understand a genuine Gascon or a Provencal, 
although he might understand my French quite well. 
The first ones who came after this feast were the 
most prominent among them; they proposed three 
or four questions before entering upon a discussion 
of our Religion. 

First, they asked why so many of them died, say- 
ing that since the coming of the French their nation 
was going to destruction, — that before they had seen 
Europeans only the old people died, but that now 
more young than old died. 

Secondly, one of them said that they had heard his 
grandfather say that the more French there should 
be here, the fewer would be the Savages; and that, 
especially when they should bring over women, the 
Savages would die in great numbers. He said also 
that black robes would come over to instruct them. 


194 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.11 

dif oit-il, la plus part de ceux qui ont eft6 baptifes font 
morts. 

En troifiefme lieu il racomptoit qu'vn certain Baf- 
que au commencement venant en ce pais cy, ne fe 
lailToit point approcher des Sauuages, il les repouffoit 
& crachoit en terre, difant qu'on les efloignalt, qu'ils 
sentoient mal, cependant i[l] defcriuoit nos noms di- 
foit-il, fur vn papier, & pent eftre par ce moyen nous 
a-il enforcele & fait mourir. 

En quatriefme lieu vn autre dit que le Manitou luy 
auoit reuele en fonge que ceux 1^ feulement receue- 
roient noftre doctrine, qui deuiendroient fedentaires, 
que les autres s'en moqueroient, voila ce qu'ils nous 
obiectent & ce qu'ils reiterent alTes fouuent. 

I'aduoue que les fauuages errans ne f9auroient pas 
fe peupler beaucoup, i'en pourrois donner beaucoup 
de raifons fuffit de dire qu'ils meinent vne vie fi mi- 
ferable, qu'il ny ^ que les plus robufles qui puiflent 
refifter k leurs trauaux, mais i'aurois bien de la peine 
de rendre vne raifon naturelle, pourquoy ils men- 
nent \sc. meurent] bien plus fouuet qu'ils ne faifoient 
par le palle, on attribue cela aux boiffons d'eau de vie, 
& de vin qu'ils aiment auec vne paffion entierement 
deregl^e, non pour le [105] gouft qu'ils trouuent en 
les beuuant, mais pour le cotentement qu'ils ont 
d'estre yures, ils s'imaginent dans leur yurelTe qu'ils 
font bien efcoutes, qu'ils fjauent bien difcourir, 
qu'ils font vaillans & redoutes, qu'on les admire 
comme des Capitaines, c'eft pourquoy cette folic leur 
agreant, il n'y a quafi petit ny grand Sauuage, iuf- 
ques aux filles & aux femmes qui n'aiment c6t etour- 
dilTement, & ne prennent ces boiffons quand ils en 
peuuent auoir purement & fimplement pour s'eny- 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 195 

and that [104] likewise would make them die, "As, in 
fact," said he, " the greater part of those who have 
been baptized have died." 

In the third place, he related how a certain Basque, 
coming in the early days to this country, was unwill- 
ing to come near the Savages; he repulsed them, and 
spat upon the ground, telling them to be gone, that 
they had a bad smell ; ' ' Yet he wrote our names upon 
apiece of paper," said he, "and perhaps by this 
means he has bewitched us and caused us to die." 

In the fourth place, another one said that the Mani- 
tou had revealed to him in a dream that those alone 
would receive our doctrine who should become sed- 
entary; that the others would ridicule it. Now 
these are their objections to us, which they very 
often repeat. 

I admit that the wandering savages cannot multi- 
ply rapidly, and I might give many reasons for it. 
Suffice it to say that they lead such a wretched life 
that only the most robust can endure their hardships. 
But I would have considerable trouble to assign a 
natural cause for their dying so much more frequent- 
ly than they did in the past. It is attributed to the 
beverages of brandy and wine, which they love with 
an utterly unrestrained passion, not for the [105] 
relish they experience in drinking them, but for the 
pleasure they find in becoming drunk. They im- 
agine in their drunkenness that they are listened to 
with attention, that they are great orators, that they 
are valiant and formidable, that they are looked up 
to as Chiefs, hence this folly suits them; there is 
scarcely a Savage, small or great, even among the 
girls and women, who does not enjoy this intoxica- 
tion, and who does not take these beverages when 


196 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.11 

urer. Or comme ils les prennent fans manger, & 
auec vn tres-grand exces, ie croirois aifement que les 
maladies qui les vont exterminant tons les iours, 
pourroient en partie prouenir de la, on tafche d'y re- 
medier, mais on k bien de la peine d'empefcher nos 
Fran9ois de cooperer a ce defordre, lequel en fin pour- 
roit efteindre, s'il efloit libre toute la nation des Mon- 
tagues, qui fe retire ordinairement aupres de nos ha- 
bitations Frangoifes, ils ont tire cette couftume des 
Anglois k ce que quelques vns d'entre ceux m'ont 
dit. Or comme le diable preuoit pent eftre leur 
mine, il leur en donne des fentimens, reiettant la 
caufe de leur mort, non fur leurs exces, ains fur la 
loy de Dieu, & fur la multitude des Fran9ois, afin 
d'efloigner tant qu'il [io6] pourra ces pauures bar- 
bares de leur falut. Voions ce qu'on refpondit aux 
points qu'ils nous propoferent. Au premier le fieur 
Oliuier leur repartit qu'auant mefme que les Fran9ois 
vinffent icy, ils tomboient dans certaines grandes ma- 
ladies qui en emportoient plufieurs, & qu'ainfi ne foit, 
eflant fort ieune, difoit-il, i'appris que les premiers 
qui aborderent vos contrees y trouuerent peu de 
monde, & qu'on leur dit, que I'hiuer precedet en 
auoit tue vne tres-grande quantite. Ie leur dis aufli 
qu'ils confiderafTent tous les peuples errans & qu'ils 
les trouueroiet en petit nombre en comparaifon des 
f edentaires : que nous anions oiiy dire que les natios 
du Nort, ou les Nipifiriniens vont en marchandifes, 
eftoient quafi toutes efteintes par la famine de I'hi- 
uer pafse, vous ne pounds leur difoy-ie attribuer cette 
mort aux Francois, puifque les Frangois ne commu- 
niquent point ces peuples, ils repliquerent que les Ni- 
pifirinies leur portoient diuerfes denr^es de France, & 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 197 

they can be had, purely and simply for the sake of 
being drunk. Now as they drink without eating, 
and in great excess, I can easily believe that the 
maladies which are daily tending to exterminate 
them, may in part arise from that. Efforts are being 
made to remedy this, but it is very difficult to prevent 
our Frenchmen from cooperating in this dissolute 
conduct, which may finally extinguish, if it remains 
unchecked, the whole nation of the Montagues, who 
usually take refuge in the neighborhood of our 
French settlements. According to what some of 
them have told me, they have derived this habit 
from the English. ^^ Now as the devil perhaps fore- 
sees their ruin, he gives them these notions, attribut- 
ing the cause of their mortality, not to their excesses, 
but to the law of God and to the multitude of 
French, so as to estrange [io6] these poor barbarians 
as much as possible from their salvation. Let us see 
how the objections they proposed were answered. 
To the first, sieur Olivier replied that, even before 
the French came there, they had been attacked by 
certain epidemics which carried off many of their 
people, and that it was not as they said. " When I 
was very young," he continued, " I learned that the 
first who landed in your country found few people 
there, and that they were informed that the previous 
winter had killed an enormous number of them." I 
told them also that if they would consider all wan- 
dering peoples, they would find them in small num- 
bers in comparison with those who were sedentary ; 
and that we had heard that the nations of the North, 
where the Nipisiriniens went to barter, were almost 
entirely exterminated by the famine of the past win- 
ter. " You cannot, " I said, " attribute their death to 


198 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 

que leur mort pouuoit prouenir de la, le refpondis 
que certains peuples demeurans fort auant dans les 
terres, au deffous de Tadouffac n'auoient aucun com- 
merce auec r Europe, ne fe feruans que de haches de 
pierre h. ce qu'vne femme de ce pais la m'auoit racop- 
t€, & que cependant ils mourroient auffi fouuet [107] 
que les autres nations errantes, enfin la meilleure ref- 
ponce fut que nous craignios Dieu, que nous croions 
en luy, & partant qu'il nous conferuoit, d'oii proue- 
noit que nous efhions fort peuples, qu'au refte ce grad 
& fouuerain Seigneur nous deffendoit de tiier, fmon 
en guerre, & par confequent que nous n' anions garde 
de les faire mourir, eftans nos allies & nos amis, vous 
autres adioufta le fieur Oliuier fi toft que vous eftes 
en nombre, vous eftes orgueilleux & infupportables, 
vous prenes guerre k vos voifms fans fujet, vous vous 
affommes les vns les autres, celuy qui mefure & pefe 
tout, voiant cela ne permet pas que vous multiplies, 
ils cofefferet que cela eftoit vray, on leur reprefenta 
leur intemperance 6s boiffons, mais come ils ne f9au- 
roient fe commander, ils repartirent qu'il faudroit 
que noflre grand Roy defendit de palfer icy des 
boiffons, qui enyurent, on repliqua qu'il ne falloit 
pas letter les coufteau & les baches dans la riuiere, 
encor que les enfans & les eftourdis s'en bleffaffent 
par fois. 

Au fecond point on leur fit entendre que tant s'en 
faut que le grand nombre de Frangois les fit mourir, 
qu'au contraire plus il y en aura, plus il y aura de 
viures fur le pais, & par confequent plus ils feront 
fecourus, qu'ils voioient bien que les Francois n'a- 
uoient [108] encor tir6 [sc. tu6] aucun Sauuage, & que 
Dieu leur deffend, pour nous autres, ie leur dis que 


1636-37] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 199 

the French, since the French do not have intercourse 
with those tribes." They replied that the Nipisi- 
riniens carried them divers wares from France, and 
their death might arise from that. I replied that 
certain tribes living far inland, below Tadoussac, had 
no commerce with the Europeans, using only stone 
hatchets, according to what a woman of that country 
had related to me; and that, notwithstanding, they 
died in as great numbers [107] as the other wander- 
ing nations. After all the best answer was that we 
feared God, that we believed in him, and therefore he 
preserved us, whence it arose that we were a numer- 
ous people; that furthermore this great and sover- 
eign Lord forbade us to kill, except in war, and 
hence we had no intention of killing them, who were 
our allies and our friends. "As for you people," 
added sieur Olivier, '' as soon as you are numerous, 
you become haughty and unbearable ; you make war 
upon your neighbors without cause, you murder one 
another; he who measures and weighs all things, 
seeing that, does not allow you to multiply." They 
confessed that this was true. Their intemperance in 
drink was represented to them ; but, as they cannot 
restrain themselves, they answered that our great 
King ought to prohibit the importation hither of 
intoxicating drinks. They were answered that it is 
not necessary to throw knives and hatchets into the 
river, although children and stupid people sometimes 
hurt themselves with them. 

On the second point, they were given to under- 
stand that, far from the increase of the French mak- 
ing them die, the more of them there were, on the 
contrary, the more provisions there would be in the 
country, and consequently the more help they would 


200 LES RELATIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol.11 

s'ils ouurroient les yeux qu'ils verroiet bien que nous 
tafchions de leur fauuer la vie du corps & de Tame, 
que nous demandions leurs enfans pour les nourrir 
& entretenir, & pour les apprendre k cognoiftre Dieu, 
afin que fi les grands veulent mourir par leurs exc6s, 
& pour ne vouloir point croire en celuy qui h. tout 
fait, leur nation pujfTe fublifter & fe reflablir par ces 
ieunes plantes que Dieu conferuera comme il nous 
conferue. Que li vne partie de ceux qui font bapti- 
ses font morts, il ne s'en falloit pas eftonner, car ils 
n'ont receu ce Sacrement qu'a I'extremite, pour met- 
tre leur ame en affeurance, qu'ils fuffent morts, encor 
qu'ils ne I'eulTent point receu qu'ils voioiet bie que 
pas vn de ceux qui sot baptises en fante, n'eft mort 
foudainemet, ains au contraire quelques malades ont 
mefme recouuert la fante dans ce bain facre, ils fe 
rendent a ces raifons, mais comme le diable ne les 
veut pas laifler efchaper de fes mains, il les fait bien 
toft apres retomber dans leurs premiers doutes. 

Au troifiefme point nous tefmoignames que nous 
n'auions point oiiy parler de ce Capitaine Bafque, 
qu'il eft probable que n'eftant [109] pas accouftum^ 
h. voir les Sauuages, il auoit de la peine a en fuppor- 
ter I'odeur, que pour efcrire, on n'enforcele pas ceux 
dont on fait mention en efcriuant, autrement toutes 
les nations de la terre feroient enforcelees, car nous 
en parlous dans nos liures, qu'il ne falloit pas qu'ils 
nous mefuralTent a leur aulne, parmy eux on ne 
chaftie point les forciers, mais que nous les faifons 
mourir en noftre pais, & par confequent fi ce Bafque 
eut efte forcier que fes gens I'auroient tu6. 

Au quatriefme point nous tafchafmes de leur faire 
entendre que les fonges n'efloient que des fonges. 


1636 - 37] LE JE UNE 'S RELA TION, 1637 201 

receive ; that they were well aware that the French 
had not [108] yet slain a single Savage, and that God 
prohibited them from it. As for ourselves, I told them 
that, if they would open their eyes, they would see 
clearly that we were trying to save the lives both of 
their bodies and of their souls; that we asked for 
their children to care for and maintain them, and to 
teach them to know God, — so that, if the older ones 
chose to die through their excesses, and because 
they were unwilling to believe in him who has made 
all, their nation might survive and reestablish itself 
through these young plants, that God will preserve 
as he preserves us. I said that, if some of those who 
had been baptized had died, it was not surprising, 
for they had only received this Sacrament at the last 
moment of life, so as to assure the salvation of their 
souls; that they would have died, even if they had 
not received it; that they could see very well that 
not one of those who had been baptized while in 
health had died suddenly, — but, on the contrary, 
some sick people had even recovered their health in 
this sacred bath. They yielded to these arguments; 
but, as the devil is not willing to let them escape his 
hands, he soon caused them to fall again into their 
first doubts. 

On the third point, we testified that we had never 
heard of this Basque Captain; that probably, not 
being [109] accustomed to seeing Savages, he could 
hardly endure the odor from them ; that, as for writ- 
ing, those people are not bewitched who are men- 
tioned in writing, for in that case all the nations of 
the earth would be bewitched, for we speak of them 
in our books ; that they need not judge us by their 
standard, for among them sorcerers are not punished. 


202 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.11 

c'efl a dire des tromperies & des faucetes, \sc. fauffe- 
tes] car ^i tu fonge que perfonne ne fe conuertira, 
nous fong-erons que vous vous conuertires tous, qui 
dira vray des deux ? ils f e mirent a rire. 

Or pendant quelques mois de I'hyuer lors qu'ils 
eftoient de loifir, ils nous venoient voir alTes fouuent 
(comme i'ay desja faict mentio) me disat que ie les 
inftruififfe, d' autrefois nous les allions inuiter, imi- 
tans leurs fa9ons de faire, nous palTions le P. de Quen 
& moy aupres de leurs cabannes & ie m'efcriois, 6 
hommes venez en noflre maifon nous parlerons de 
celuy qui a tout faict, ie vous enfeigneray fa do- 
ctrine, ils refpondoient, [no] ho, ho, ho, & ne man- 
quoient pas de venir, parfois ils me demandoient fi ie 
ferois feflin, repondans que non, il n'importe, nous 
ne laifferons pas de t'aller entendre difoient-ils, or 
remarques qu'apres auoir repeu leurs ames, nous 
donnions pour 1' ordinaire ^ manger k leurs corps afin 
de les gagner, quelques vns en effet venoient pour 
manger, d'autres par curiofite, & pour la nouueaut6 
& les autres aians quelque bonne volonte. Comme 
ces conferences durerent quelques temps, ie leur ex- 
pliqueay k diuerfes fois diuers points de noflre cre- 
ance, quelques vns me refifterent, mais i'en parleray 
au chapitre des prifes que nous auons eu auec eux, 
d'autres m'expliquoient leur doctrine comme pour 
I'oppofer a la noftre, i'en toucheray quelque chofe 
en fon lieu, d'autres fe gaufCoient, quelques vns ap- 
prouuoient; vniuerfellement parlant ils paroifToient 
alI6s fatisfaits, foit que noflre Seigneur commen9aft 
d'operer en leurs ames, foit qu'ils diffimulaffent, car 
ils font affes condefcendans & complaifans, ordinaire- 
ment ie m'efforgois de leur prouuer qu'il efloit rai- 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 203 

but in our country we kill them ; and consequently, 
if this Basque had been a sorcerer, his people would 
have killed him. 

In the fourth place, we tried to show them that 
dreams were only dreams, — that is, deceit and false- 
hood, — " For, if thou dreamest that no one will be 
converted, we will dream that you all will be con- 
verted ; which of the two will tell the truth ? ' ' They 
began to laugh. 

Now during some of the winter months, when they 
were at leisure, they came to see us quite often (as I 
have already mentioned), telling me to instruct them. 
At other times we went and invited them, imitating 
their way of doing it ; we passed. Father de Quen and 
I, near their cabins and I cried out, " O men, come 
to our house ; we will speak of him who has made all ; 
I will teach you his doctrine." They replied, [no] 
** ho, ho, ho," and did not fail to come. Sometimes 
they asked me if I would make a feast ; and, if I told 
them no, "Never mind," they said, " we will not 
fail to go and hear thee." Now note that, after hav- 
ing nourished their souls, we usually gave them food 
for their bodies, in order to win them. In fact, some 
came in order to eat, others through curiosity and 
for the novelty, and others came through good will. 
As these conferences were carried on for some time, 
I explained to them on different occasions the various 
points of our belief. Some opposed me, but I shall 
speak of this in the chapter on the disputes we had 
with them; others explained to me their doctrine, 
as if to oppose it to ours, of which I shall also make 
some mention in its proper place ; others ridiculed, 
some approved. Generally speaking, they seemed 
well satisfied, either because our Lord had begun to 


204 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol, 11 

fonnable que celuy qui k tout fait prift cognoilTance de 
nos actions, qu'il nous recompenfaft ou nous punit 
felon nos oeuures, ie leur difois que ce [m] grand 
Capitaine nous comble de biens, c'eft luy qui nous 
efclaire auec le Soleil, qui nous conferue les poilTons 
auec les eaux, les animaux auec la terre, c'eft luy 
qui forme nos corps dans le ventre de nos meres, qui 
cree nos ames auec fa parole, que fi nous ne pouuons 
fupporter 1' ingratitude d'vn homme lequel nous tour- 
neroit le dos quand nous luy aurions fait beaucoup 
de prefens, penfons nous que ce grand Capitaine fup- 
portera ceux qui ne le veulent pas recognoiftre, i'en 
prenois quelqu'vns en particulier, & luy difois le So- 
leil ne t'a-il, pas fait plaifir quelquefois ne te reioiiif- 
fant par la veue de quelque beau iour, pourquoy 
done ne dis tu point k celuy qui k tout fait, ie te re- 
mercie de ce que tu me reioiiis, de ce que tu me fais 
plaifir en m'efclairant, & m'efchauffant par le Soleil 
que tu as fait, tu me remercie de ce que ie te donne 
k manger, & tu ne remercie pas Dieu de ce qu'il te 
conferue la vie, ie ne le cognois pas me difoit-il, fi 
ie le voiois ie le remercirois, il n'efl pas necelTaire 
que tu le voie, fuffit-il qu'il te confidere incelTam- 
ment, fi tu faifois du bien ^ vn aueugle, ou fi tu en- 
uoiois quelque prefent k vn amy abfent, il ne laiffe- 
roit pas de t'en aimer, quoy [112] qu'il ne te vit 
point, tu as raifon refpondoit quelque autre, auffi 
auons nous de couftume de remercier celuy qui nous 
faict du bien, nous luy crions tout hault, noftre grand 
Pere nous fommes bien aifes d'eftre en fante, nous 
voudrions bien eflre en affurance, nous voudrions 
bien auoir vne belle ioum^e, qui eft celuy la (leur 
demandois-ie) que vous appelles voflre grand Pere ? 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 205 

act upon their souls, or because they were dissimulat- 
ing, for they are rather condescending and complai- 
sant. I usually endeavored to prove to them that it 
was reasonable that he who made all things should 
take cognizance of our actions, that he should reward 
or punish us according to our works. I told them 
that this [hi] great Captain overwhelms us with 
blessings, — it is he who gives us light with the Sun, 
who maintains for us the fish with the waters, and 
the animals with the land ; it is he who forms our 
bodies in our mothers' wombs, who creates our souls 
by his word. How, if we cannot tolerate the ingrati- 
tude of a man who would turn his back upon us when 
we had made him many presents, do we think that 
this great Captain will tolerate those who are not 
willing to acknowledge him? I singled out one in 
particular and said to him, " Has not the Sun some- 
times given thee pleasure, filling thee with joy at 
the sight of a beautiful day ? Why then dost thou 
not say to him who has made all, 'I thank thee for 
the joy and pleasure thou givest me in granting me 
light, and for warming me by the Sun thou hast 
made ? ' Thou thankest me for giving thee something 
to eat, and thou dost not thank God for preserving 
thy life." " I do not know him," he replied, '' if I 
could see him, I would thank him." " It is not nec- 
essary that thou shouldst see him, — it is enough that 
he is always looking upon thee ; if thou doest good to 
a blind man, or if thou sendest a present to an absent 
friend, he would surely love thee for it, although 
[112] he does not see thee. " Thou art right," an- 
swered another. ' ' We also are wont to thank him 
who has done us good; we cry to him in a loud 
voice, ' Our great Father, we are very glad to be 


206 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 

qu'en fcauons nous, c'eft peut eftre, repartoient ils, 
celuy qui a faict le iour. Or fcachez que c'eft celuy 
qui a tout faict, lequel auec fa parolle a cree le pre- 
mier homme & la premiere femme, & le Soleil & 
tous les aftres, ie f erois ennuieux fi ie voulois defcrire 
ce qui ce \_sc. f e] paff oit en ces affemblees, ie trancheray 
court. 

II me fouuient que leur aiant parle bien amplement 
de I'Enfer & du Paradis, du chaftiment & de la re- 
compence, I'vn d'eux me dit, la moiti6 de ton difcours 
eft bon, I'autre ne vault rien, ne nous parle point de 
ces feux, car cela nous degoufte, parle nous des biens 
du Ciel, de viure long-temps 9a bas, de paffer noftre 
vie h. noftre aife ; d' eftre dans les plaifirs apres noftre 
mort, c'eft par la que les hommes fe gaignent, quand 
tu nous parle de ces biens nous penfons dans nos 
coeurs que cela eft bon & que [113] nous en voudrions 
bien ioiiir, fi tu parle ainfi, tous les Sauuages t'ef- 
couteront bien aisement, mais ces paroles de me- 
naces, dont tu te fers ne valent rien k cela, ie raparty 
que fi ie les croiois en danger de tomber dans quel- 
que grand malheur que ie ferois mefchant fi ie ne 
leur en donnois point d'auis, cette raifon les contenta, 

Vn autre me demanda comme il fe pouuoit faire 
que Dieu fut bon, puis qu'il iettoit les hommes dans 
des feux eternels, ie repliquay qu'il eftoit bon, mais 
auffi qu'il eftoit iufte payant vn chacun felon fes 
oeuures, ii tu offenfois vn ieune homme, tu ne ferois 
pas fi puny, que fi tu auois offenfe vn fage vieillard, 
& fi tu faifois du mal ^ vn fimple homme on ne te 
chaftieroit pas tant, que fi tu auois offense vn Capi- 
taine. Or f9ache que Dieu eft vn tres-grand Ca- 
pitaine. II punit comme vn Dieu, & recompenfe 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 207 

well ; we greatly desire to feel secure ; we would like 
to have a fine day.'" "Who is that," (I asked 
them) ' ' whom you call your great Father ? " " How 
do we know? it is perhaps," they answered, "he 
who made the light." "Now know that it is he 
who has made all, who with his word created the 
first man and the first woman, the Sun and all the 
stars." I would be tedious, if I were to describe all 
that takes place in these assemblies; I will cut it 
short. 

I remember that, having spoken to them very fully 
of Hell and of Paradise, of punishment and of re- 
ward, one of them said to me, ' ' Half of thy discourse 
is good, the rest is worth nothing. Do not speak to 
us of those fires, for that disgusts us ; speak to us of 
the blessings of Heaven, — of living a long time here 
below, of living at our ease, of the pleasure we will 
experience after our death, — for it is thus men are 
won ; when thou speakest to us of those blessings, 
we think in our hearts that that is good, and that 
[113] we surely desire to enjoy it; if thou speakest 
thus, all the Savages will listen to thee very readily ; 
but those threatening words thou usest do not serve 
at all to that end." I replied that, if I believed them 
in danger of falling into some great misfortune, I 
would be wicked if I did not warn them against it ; 
this argument satisfied them. 

Another one asked me how God could be good, 
when he cast men into eternal fires. I replied that 
he was good, but that he was also just, rewarding 
each one according to his works. " If thou shouldst 
injure a young man, thou wouldst not be punished so 
severely as if thou hadst hurt a wise old man ; and if 
thou shouldst do evil to a common person, thou 


208 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.11 

comme vn Dieu, & comme il nous fait de grands 
biens, auffi nous punit il auec rigueur, s'il nous voit 
mefchans & fuperbes, nous qui ne fommes que des 
vermiffeaux de terre; i'adiouftay plufieurs chofes 
qu'il n'eft pas befoin de rapporter. 

D'autres me firent quelques queftions, f^auoir fi 
apres la refurrectio nos corps feroient [114] fembla- 
bles a ceux que nous auons maintenant fi on f e marie- 
ra, fi on aura des enfans fi on aura des maifons comme 
les noftres, ^i on aura des robes 'k noftre fagon, fi les 
hommes auront de la barbe, fi les animaux reuiue- 
ront, & quelques autres chofes femblables dont il ne 
me fouuient pas. 

A tout cela nous refpondifmes felon la verite de 
noftre creance, ie me trouuay feulement empefche "k 
fatisfaire a la demande fi les hommes auroient de la 
barbe : car ils prennent cela pour vne grande deff or- 
mite. I'exquiuay comme ie pen difant que les hom- 
mes quoy qu'ils aient ou n'aient point de barbe, ne 
laifTent pas d'eflre hommes, & que Dieu nousaffuroit 
que tons ceux qui luy auroient obei feroient tres-beaux 
& plus luifans que Ie Soleil. 

Comme ie leur difois que nous anions vn liure qui 
contenoit la parole & les enfeignemens de Dieu, ils 
eftoient bien en peine comme nous pouuions auoir eu 
ce liure, quelques vns d'entre eux croioiet qu'il eftoit 
defcendu du Ciel, pendu a vne corde, & que nous 
I'auions ainfi trouue fufpendu en I'air, cette fimpli- 
cit^ me fit rire, ie m'efforjay de les contenter fur cette 
penfee. 

Fut-il ainfi que ces barbares fuflent curieuK [115] 
de f9auoir, ce feroit vne entree S. la vraie fcience, 
mais ils font froids comme marbres & font tellement 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 209 


wouldst not be so severely punished as if thou hadst 
wronged a Captain. Now know that God is a very- 
great Captain. He punishes as a God and rewards 
as a God ; and, as he bestows upon us great blessings, 
so he punishes us with severity, if he sees us wicked 
and proud, — us, who are only worms of the earth." 
I added many things that it is not necessary to report. 

Others proposed certain questions, — namely, "if 
after the resurrection our bodies would be [114] like 
those we have now ? if people will marry ? if they will 
have children? if they will have houses like ours? if 
they will dress as we do ? if men will have beards ? if 
animals will live again ? ' ' and some other matters of 
the same kind, which I do not remember. 

To all this we answered according to the principles 
of our belief. The only question I found myself un- 
able to answer satisfactorily was the one as to whether 
or not men would have beards, for they consider that 
a great deformity. I got out of it the best I could, — 
saying that men, whether they have or have not 
beards, would not cease to be men ; and that God as- 
sured us that all those who obeyed him would be very 
beautiful, and more shining than the Sun. 

When I told them that we had a book which con- 
tained the words and teachings of God, they were 
very anxious to know how we could have gotten this 
book, — some of them believing that it had been let 
down from the Sky at the end of a rope, and that we 
had found it thus suspended in the air. This sim- 
plicity made me laugh ; I tried to satisfy them on this 
point. 

If these barbarians would only display some curi- 
osity [115] to know about things, this would be the 
gate to true knowledge. But they are as cold as 


210 LES RELATIONS DES jlSUITES [Vol.11 

nourris la dedans que vous diries qu'ils n'admirent 
rien, cela leur pourroit feruir s'ils eftoient Chreftiens, 
car leur efprit feroit moins fubjet aux erreurs, pour 
le prefent ie voudrois bien qu'ils euffent vn petit 
plus d'actiuite & vn peu plus de feu, 6 Dieu qu'elle 
difference il y a d'vn Frangois a vn Sauuage, li vn 
Frangois reuient de la chaffe, il n'eft pas dans la mai- 
fon qu'on f9ait des-ja, s'il a pris quelque chofe, ou 
s'il n'a rien pris il n'a pas la patience que la table 
foit dreffee pour manger, eflant affame comme vn 
chaff eur, s'il retourne de quelque voyage quoy qu'il 
foit bien laffe, on n'attend pas qu'il foit en repos pour 
luy faire racompter tout ce qu'il fgait de nouuelles, 
nos Sauuages font bien efloignez de cette ardeur. 
Voicy ce que i'ay veu fort fouuent parmy eux, Vn 
Sauuage retournant de la chaffe iettera parfois hors 
de la cabane ce qu'il rapporte eftant entr6 il ne dit 
pas vn mot, auffi ne luy dit on rien, il s'affeoit proche 
du feu, fe deshabille, fa femme prend fes bas de 
chauffes & fes foulliers, les tord s'ils font moiiillez 
& les fait feicher, luy prend vne robe fur fon d'os & 
fe chauffe, [ii6] & tout cela fe paffe en filence, 11 fa 
femme luy a garde quelque chofe ^ manger, elle luy 
prefente dans vn plat d'ecorce fans mot dire, il le 
prend & le mange en filence, a-il mange il petune, 
aiant petune il commence a parler, fi on n'a point re- 
garde dehors, pour voir ce qu'il ^ rapporte, il auertit 
qu'il y ^ quelques Caftors ou quelques Pores-Epics, 
cette froideur m'etonnoit au commencement mais ils 
me difoient fort bien qu'il ne falloit pas eftourdir vn 
homme qui "k plus befoin de repos, que de parolles. 
Si quelqu'vn arriue de quelque autre quartier eflant 
entre dans la cabane il fe met a fon aife en la fa9on 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1637 211 

marble, and are so imbued with this indifference that 
you would say they are surprised at nothing. This 
quality would be of use if they were Christians, for 
their minds would be less subject to errors ; but at 
present I would rather have them show a little more 
activity and a little more fire. Oh, God! what a 
difference there is between a Frenchman and a Sav- 
age ! If a Frenchman returns from the chase, he is 
hardly in the house before it is already known whether 
or not he has captured anything, — even if he has not, 
he cannot wait until the table is set for the meal, 
having the appetite of a hunter ; if he returns from 
some journey, although he may be quite tired out, 
they do not wait till he has rest before having him 
tell all the news he knows. Our Savages are far re- 
moved from this animation. Here is what I have 
very often seen among them. A Savage, returning 
from the chase, will sometimes throw outside the 
cabin what he has brought back with him ; having 
entered he does not say a word, neither does any one 
address him. He sits down near the fire and un- 
dresses ; his wife takes his leggings and shoes, wrings 
them out if they are wet, and puts them to dry; he 
throws a robe over his shoulders and warms himself, 
[116] this all taking place in silence; if his wife has 
saved him anything to eat, she presents it to him on 
a bark plate without saying a word ; he takes it and 
eats in silence. After having eaten, he smokes ; and, 
when he has finished smoking, he begins to talk. If 
no one has looked outside to see what he has brought 
back, he informs them that there are some Beavers or 
some Porcupines. This indifference astonished me, 
at first ; but they told me rightly that one ought not 
to weary a man who has more need of rest than of 


212 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 

que ie viens de dire, comme on cognoit qu'il apporte 
des nouuelles on le vient voir, on s'afleoit pres de 
luy, & cependant perfonne ne luy dit mot, car ve- 
nant pour parler, c'efl k luy a comancer, aiant pris 
quelque repos, il parle fans qu'on I'interroge ny 
fans qu'on Tinterrompe en aucune fa§on, apres qu'il 
h. racompte fes nouuelles les vieillards I'interrogent 
& s'entretiennent auec luy. Fay veu arriuer deux 
Sauuages en noflre maifon qui venoient du quartier 
ou vn ieune Sauuage qui eftoit chez nous auoit fes 
parens, ils furent long-temps de loillr & iamais ce 
ieune [117] homme ne leur demanda comme on fe por- 
toit, ny ce qu'on faifoit au lieu d'oii ils venoient, ie 
luy demanday la caufe d'vn fi grad filence, c' eftoit ^ 
eux me difoit-il ^ parler, car comme ils font ages ie 
n'ay pas oz6 les interroger, 6 que ces ames font peu 
curieufes, i'attribuerois cela a flupidit6, n'eftoit que 
quand il venoit quelque ieune gar9on de fa forte il 
s'entretenoit fort bien auec luy. Or comme quel- 
ques-vns de nos Fran9ois remarquent cette froidure 
ils s'imaginent quafi que tons ces t^moignages que 
ces pauures gens donnent de vouloir receuoir noftre 
creance ne font que feintes, puis qu'ils font fans feu, 
& fans ardeur, mais fi en chofes qui leur font fi na- 
turelles, ils paroiffent de glaces, ie ne m'eftonne pas 
s'ils gardent les mefmes fa§ons de faire en des fujets 
fi efloignez de leurs fens. Mais difons maintenant 
quel bien ont apport6 ces conferences, & puis nous 
pafferons a vn autre chapitre. 

Ie dis en premier lieu que ces difcours leur ont 
donne vne grande opinion de noftre creance, cette 
graine de la parole de Dieu fructifiera en fon temps, 
ce n'eft pas tout d'enfemencer les terres, il faut que 


1636 - 37] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 213 

words. If any one comes from some other quarter, 
having entered the cabin he makes himself comfort- 
able in the way I have just described. Knowing- that 
he brings news, people come to see him and sit down 
near him; yet no one says a word to him, — for, as 
he came for the purpose of talking, it is for him to 
begin. After resting a while, he speaks without being 
questioned, or interrupted in any way. After he has 
related his news, the old men question him, and en- 
gage in conversation with him, I have seen two Sav- 
ages arrive at our house, who came from the quarter 
where a young Savage who was with us had rela- 
tives ; they were at leisure for a long time, and yet 
this young [117] man never asked them how they 
were, nor what was going on in the place whence 
they came. I asked him the cause of this so great 
silence: " It was for them to speak," he said to me, 
"for, as they are old, I did not not dare question 
them." Oh, how little curiosity have these souls! I 
should have attributed this conduct to stupidity, were 
it not that when a young fellow like himself came 
along he talked very well with him. Now when 
some of our French notice this indifference, they al- 
most imagine that all the evidences these poor people 
give of wishing to receive our faith are only feigned, 
since they are without fire and without enthusiasm ; 
but if they appear cold in things that are so natural 
to them, I am not surprised that they observe the 
same custom in regard to things so far removed from 
their comprehension. But let us tell now what bene- 
fit has resulted from these conferences, and then we 
shall pass to another chapter. 

I say, in the first place, that these discourses have 
given them a high opinion of our faith ; this seed of 


214 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 

le Ciel opere, & quand le bled eft en verdure il n'eft 
pas encore en efpics, quand il eft en efpics, il [ii8] 
faut du temps pour le meurir, fi vne partie de ceux 
qui nous ont entendu tomboient malades, ie m'afleure 
qu'ils demaderoient le baptefme, la grace follicitant 
ces coeurs fera germer en fon temps ce que nous y 
auons fem6, c'eft dequoy nous deuons prier la bont6 
de noftre Seigneur. 

Ie dis en fecond lieu que ie ne trouue plus ces Bar- 
bares fi reuefches, la crainte des fupplices commence 
k prendre vn tel afcendat fur leur efprit, qu'encor 
qu'ils ne fe rangent pas 11 toft, fi eft ce qu'ils demor- 
dent petit S. petit de leurs mefchantes couftumes, en 
voicy vn exeple. Quelques Sauuages eftoiet arriuez 
de TadoulTac pour aller h. la guerre, le P. de Quen & 
moy les fufmes voir en leur cabane, apres plufieurs 
difcours ils nous dirent que nous allaffions voir I'ap- 
pareil d'vn grand feftin qui fe faifoit en vn endroit 
qu'ils nous nommerent, mais il nous donnerent aduis 
de ny pas tarder longtemps, pource difoient-ils qu'e- 
ftant vn feftin de guerre, les femmes y feruiroient 
toutes nues, nous allames done h. la cabane qu'ils nous 
auoient enf eigne, & difcourans auec le maiftre du 
feftin nous luy demandafmes s'il garderoit cette mef- 
chante ceremonie, au commencement il fembla vou- 
loir tefmoigner qu'il la [119] garderoit mais luy 
remettant en memoire ce que nous luy auons dit I'hy- 
uer fur ces badineries en luy repref entant la colere & 
la luftice de celuy qui k tout fait. II nous dit alles 
ie vous promets que cela ne fe fera point. En effet 
ny en leurs feftins ny en leur depart ils ne garderent 
point cette fale couftume. 

En troifiefme lieu quand nous entrions ce printeps 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 215 

the word of God will bear fruit in its own time ; it is 
not all to cast the seed into the ground, — Heaven 
must operate also ; and when the corn is green it is 
not yet in ear; when it is in ear, it [ii8] must have 
time to ripen. If some of those who have heard us 
should fall sick, I am sure they would ask for bap- 
tism. Grace, entreating these hearts, will cause to 
germinate in its time what we have sown therein. It 
is for this we should implore the goodness of our 
Lord. 

I say in the second place that I no longer find these 
Barbarians so intractable. The dread of punishment 
is beginning to gain such an ascendancy over their 
minds that, although they do not so soon amend, yet 
they are, little by little, giving up their evil customs. 
Here is an example of this. Some Savages had ar- 
rived from Tadoussac on their way to war; Father 
de Quen and I visited them in their cabin, and, after 
some conversation, they told us that we should go to 
see the preparations for a great feast which were be- 
ing made in a place that they named to us. But they 
advised us not to remain there long, " Because," said 
they, "as it is a war feast, the women will serve 
there entirely naked. ' ' Then we went to the cabin 
they had indicated to us, and, in conversation with 
the master of the feast, we asked him if he should 
observe this wicked ceremony. At first, he seemed 
disposed to insist upon [119] observing it. But, re- 
calling to his memory what we had told him during 
the winter about such nonsense, and representing to 
him the anger and Justice of him who has made all, 
he said, "Go away; I promise you it shall not be 
done." In fact, neither in their feasts, nor at their 
departure, did they observe this filthy custom. 


216 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.11 

dans leurs cabanes ils nous prioient de les enfeigner, 
ce que nous faifions d'autant plus volontiers, qu'ils fe 
monftroient fort attentifs, celuy la mefme k qui nous 
perfuadafmes de quitter cette fa9on de faire ^i bru- 
tale me dit, parle nous de noftre guerre, & prie Dieu 
qu'il nous affifte, enfeigne nous comme il nous faut 
comporter, nous leurs difmes qu'il falloit qu'ils fiflent 
cette oraifon. Toy qui as tout fait, aide nous, tu 
nous commande de nous entr'aimer nous voulons 
bien aimer les hiroquois nos ennemis, mais ils font 
mefchans, fais en forte qu'ils deuiennent bons, ou 
bien nous aide h. les tuer, nous n'auons pas deffein 
de les tuer fino qu'k caufe qu'ils font mefchans & 
qu'ils ont viole la paix que nous anions faite auec 
eux, fecoure nous & nous fais retourner fains & fau- 
ues en noftre pais, nous voulons croire en toy, car tu 
es veritable; & t'obei'r, [120] car tu es bon, aide nous 
afin que nous croios, & que nous obeyffions. lis 
trouuerent cette oraifon fi bonne qu'vn Sauuage me 
tefmoigna qu'ils s'en alloient auec efperance d'eftre 
fecourus de Dieu, & qu'ils gouftoient particuliere- 
ment ces mots, nous n'auons pas deffein de tuer les 
hiroquois, finon a caufe qu'ils font mefchans, & qu'ils 
ont viol6 la paix, voila difoient-ils, ce que celuy qui 
k tout fait trouuera bon, ie leur auois encor dit qu'ils 
fillent quelques prieres deuant que de partir, ils ne 
le firent pas h Kebec, mais le Pere Buteux m'efcrit 
des trois Riuieres, qu'auant que de paffer plus auant, 
quelques vns d'eux demanderent d'entrer a la Chap- 
pelle pour y demander fecours k Dieu. Ie crois bien 
que ce qu'ils en font n'eft fonde que fur la crainte 
qu'ils ont qu'il ne leur arriue quelque mal, mais ini- 
tium fapienticB ejl timor Domini. Au refte i'ay appris 


1636-37] LEJEUNE'S RELATION, i637 217 

In the third place, when we went into their cabins, 
this spring, they begged us to teach them, which we 
did all the more willingly as they showed themselves 
very attentive. The very man whom we had per- 
suaded to give up that so brutal custom, said to me, 
' * Tell us of our war, and pray God to assist us ; teach 
us how we must behave." We told them that they 
must offer this prayer: " Thou who hast made all, 
help us ; thou commandest us to love one another, we 
would love the hiroquois, our enemies, but they are 
wicked ; so act that they may become good, or else aid 
us to kill them. We have no intention to kill them 
except for this reason, that they are wicked, and that 
they have violated the peace we had made with them ; 
help us, and make us return safe and sound to our 
own country; we desire to believe in thee, for thou 
art true, and to obey thee, [120] for thou art good; 
help us that we may believe and that we may obey." 
They thought this prayer so good, that one of the 
Savages assured me that they were going away with 
the hope of being aided by God ; and that they par- 
ticularly enjoyed these words, " we have no intention 
to kill the hiroquois, except for this reason, that they 
are bad, and have violated the peace." " This," 
said they, " is what he who has made all will ap- 
prove." I had also told them to offer some prayers 
before departing ; they did not do this at Kebec, but 
Father Buteux writes me from the three Rivers that, 
before proceeding further, some of them asked to en- 
ter the Chapel, there to request help from God. I 
know well that what they did was only based upon 
their fears that some misfortune might befall them, 
but initium sapientice est timor Domini. Moreover, I 
have learned that when they were nearing the ene- 


218 


LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 


qu'approchans des terres de leurs ennemis ils entre- 
rent dans vn orgueil infupportable, faifans mille in- 
folences, fe promettans merueille. Dieu les humilia 
bien, car leurs Capitaines & quelques autres furent 
mis ^ mort, i'en pourray parler dans le iournal. 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 219 

my's country, they assumed an intolerable arrogance, 
indulging in a thousand boasts, and promising them- 
selves wonders. God greatly humiliated them, for 
their Captains and some others were put to death. I 
may speak of this in my journal. 


220 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.11 


[12 1] CHAPITRE VII. 
DE l'instruction des petits sauuages. 

Nous partagions noftre temps pendant c6t hyuer 
en forte que nous donnions quelques iours aux 
petits Sauuages, auffi bien qu'aux grands, 
voire mefme comme nous attendons plus de fruit de 
ces ieunes plantes, que de ces vieux arbres quafi tout 
pourris nous en prenions vn foing plus particulier, 
nous ne les inuitafmes qu'vne feule fois de nous ve- 
nir voir. lis y vinrent fi fouuent que nous fufmes 
contrains de leur dire, que nous les irions querir nous 
mefmes, ou que nous y enuoirions quelqu'vn. Les 
filles compofoiet vne bande, & les gar9ons 1' autre, il 
ny auoit neige, ny vent ny froid qui les empefcliaft 
devenir quelquefois d'vn quart de lieue, quoy qu'ils 
ne foient pas trop chaudement veflus, mais leurs pa- 
rens prenans plaifir a les voir inftruire, nos Fran9ois 
les applaudiffans, les petis prefens que nous leur 
faillons, & le petit defir qu'ils auoient de f9auoir 
chof es nouuelles, les attiroit eftant arriuez en la Chap- 
pelle, ie faifois mettre les gar9ons d'vn cofl6, [122] 
& les filles de 1' autre aupres des petits gar9ons Sau- 
uages ie faifois afr[e]oir quelques petits gar9ons Fran- 
9ois, & de petites Fran9oifes aupres des ieunes fil- 
les Sauuages, afin que ces pauures enfans barbares 
qui n'ont aucune inflruction appriffent a ioindre les 
mains h. fe mettre h. genoux, k faire le figne de la 
Croix, k fe tenir debout pof^ment quad on les inter- 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j637 221 


[121] CHAPTER VII. 

OF THE INSTRUCTION OF THE LITTLE SAVAGES. 

WE divided our time during this winter, so that 
we gave some days to the little Savages as 
well as to the adults. Yea, even as we 
expect more fruit from these young plants than from 
the old trees, almost entirely rotten, we have taken 
more especial care of them. We only invited them 
once to come and see us. They came so often that 
we were obliged to tell them that we ourselves would 
go after them, or send some one. The girls made 
up one band and the boys another ; there was neither 
snow, nor wind, nor cold that prevented them from 
coming, sometimes from a quarter of a league, al- 
though they were not too warmly clad. But the 
pleasure their parents took in seeing them instructed, 
the applause our French gave them, the little pres- 
ents we made them, and the slight desire they had 
to learn something new, attracted them. When they 
entered the Chapel, I had the boys placed on one 
side, [122] and the girls on the other. Near the 
little Savage boys I seated some little French boys, 
and some little French girls near the young Savage 
girls, — in order that these poor barbarous children, 
who have no education whatever, should learn to 
join hands, kneel down, make the sign of the Cross, 
stand up properly when they are questioned, answer 
modestly, and make an obeisance, when they see our 
little French boys and girls do so. I had imagined 


222 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.11 

roge, k refpondre modeftement, k faire la reuerence 
en voiant faire ces actios k nos petits Frangois & Fran- 
9oifes, ie m'eftois figur6 qu'il feroit difficile d'appri- 
uoifer & d'inftruire les petites filles, il eft fans compa- 
raifon plus facile de les retenir que les petits gar9ons 
elles aiment grandemet nos petites Fran9oifes & fe 
piquant entre elles de les imiter, Dieu les beniffe tons 
par fa bont6. 

Deuant que de commancer leur inftruction ie les 
faifois mettre k genoux auec moy, nous commangions 
par Ie figne de la Croix, prononfans ces paroles au 
nom du Pere, & du Fils, & du S. Efprit, premiere- 
ment en Latin, puis en Sauuage ie recitois vne petite 
oraifon en leur langue pour implorer Ie fecours du S. 
Efprit & la grace de croire en Dieu. lis la difoiet 
tons auec moy, cela fait chacu prenoit fa place, bien 
fouuent il fe trouuoit de grands Sauuages auec les 
petits, ils faifoient [123] tons pour I'ordinaire, comme 
ils me voioient faire, chacun eftant aliQs ie prononyois 
doucement Ie Pater, ou Ie Credo, que i'ay drefse 
quafi comme en vers pour Ie pouuoir faire chanter il 
me fuiuoient mot k mot, I'apprenat fort gentiment 
par cceur, en ayant appris quelque couplet ou ftrophe, 
nous la chantions, enquoy ils prenoient vn grand 
plaifir, les plus ages mefmes chantoient auec eux, 
apres auoir chante ie leur faifois dire apres moy quel- 
ques interrogations & reponces de noftre creance, 
qu'ils retenoient fort bien, & m'en rendoient bon 
compte refpondans puis apres fans broncher a mes 
demandes, quoy que ie les varialTe par fois, puis ie 
leur faifois vn petit difcours, ou fur quelque article 
du Credo, ou fur les chofes dernieres, ou bien refu- 
tant ou me mocquat de leur fotte creance. Pour con- 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 223 


that it would be difficult to tame and instruct the 
little girls ; it is incomparably easier to retain them 
than the little boys, for they are very fond of our 
little French girls and take pride in imitating them. 
May God bless them all, according to his goodness ! 
Before commencing their instruction, I had them 
get on their knees with me. We began with the sign 
of the Cross, pronouncing these words, " In the name 
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy 
Ghost," first in Latin, then in the Savage tongue. I 
repeated a little prayer in their language to implore 
the help of the Holy Ghost, and grace to believe 
in God. They all said this with me, and, when it 
was finished, each one took his place, — grown Sav- 
ages often being present with the little ones. They 
all did, [123] usually, what they saw me do. Every 
one being seated, I slowly pronounced the Pater or 
the Credo, which I have arranged almost in rhyme 
so I can have them chant it ; they followed me word 
for word, learning it very nicely by heart. Having 
learned a couplet or strophe, we sang it. They took 
great pleasure in this, the older ones also singing 
with them. After this, I made them say after me 
some questions and answers relative to our faith, 
which they retained very well, and conveyed to me 
satisfactorily, answering without stumbling, the ques- 
tions I proposed afterwards, although I occasionally 
varied them. Then I gave them a little talk, either 
upon some article of the Credo, or upon the finalities, 
or else I refuted or ridiculed their foolish belief. 
In conclusion, they all knelt to ask our Lord for 
grace to retain what had been taught them ; for his 
light, to believe in him ; the strength to obey him ; 
and his protection against the malice of the devil. 


224 LES RELATIONS DBS j£SUITES [Vol.11 

clufion ils fe mettoient tons ^ genoux pour demander 
k noftre Seigneur la grace de retenir ce qu'on leur 
auoit enfeigne fa lumiere pour c[r]oire en luy, la 
force de luy obeir, & fa protection contre la malice 
du diable. Voil^ come fe paffoit I'explicatio de 
noftre catechifme, ^ Tiffue duquel nous les faifios 
chauffer, & bien fouuet nous leur dreffios quelque pe- 
tit feftin deuat lequel & apres ils prioient Dieu a la 
fa9on des Chrefliens. 

[124] Cecy fe faifoit les iours de trauail en particu- 
lier, pour les iours des feftes, nous le faifions quel- 
que fois en public, le P. de Quen k couftume de faire 
le catechifme k nos Fran9ois apres vefpres les petits 
& les grands y affiflent. Or pour encourager nos 
petis Sauuages nous les auons fait venir quelque- 
fois & le Pere me cedant la place ie leur parlois en 
Satiuage en la prefence de tons nos Fran9ois, lefquels 
prenoient grand plaifir de voir ces pauures petits bar- 
bares refpondre aulTi hardiment aux interrogations, 
que ie leurs faifois, comme s'ils euffent eft6 inflruits 
des la mamelle, le mal eft que noflre Chappelle eft 
trop petite pour les Fran9ois, & pour les Sauuages 
enfemble, c'eft pourquoy nous ne pouuons pas faire 
fouuent cet exercice en public. 

Defirant certain iour que quelques vns de leurs pa- 
rens les vifTent refpondre en public deuant nos Fran- 
9ois, ie priay MaKheabichtichiou d'en amener quatre 
des principaux qui affifteroient h. vefpres, & apres 
vefpres entendroient refpondre leurs enfans, au lieu 
de quatre il y en vint dix ou douze, les petis Sau- 
uages efkoient tons fur des petits bancs, les grands 
fe mirent qui de9a, qui delk, come ils peurent pen- 
dant le feruice ils fe comporterent [125] tous fort 


1636-37] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i637 226 

In this way the explanation of our catechism was 
conducted, at the end of which we had them warm 
themselves, and quite often we prepared a little feast 
for them, at the beginning and end of which they 
prayed to God in the way Christians do. 

[124] This was especially done on workdays. 
Sometimes on holidays we conducted these exercises 
in public. Father de Quen is accustomed to teach 
the catechism to our French after vespers, children 
and adults taking part therein. Now in order to en- 
courage our little Savages, we had them come some- 
times and the Father yielded his place to me ; I spoke 
to them in the Savage tongue, in the presence of all 
our French people, who took great pleasure in seeing 
these poor little barbarians answer the questions 
which I put to them, as readily as if they had been 
instructed since they were at the breast. The trouble 
is, that our Chapel is too small for both French and 
Savages together, hence we cannot often have this 
exercise in public. 

Desiring one day to have some of their parents see 
them answer in public before our French, I requested 
Makheabichtichiou to bring four of the principal 
ones to attend vespers, and after vespers to hear their 
children answer; instead of four, ten or twelve of 
them came. All the little Savages sat on the small 
benches, while the older ones disposed themselves 
here and there, wherever they could find places. 
During the service, they all behaved [125] very mod- 
estly. After vespers I had our little catechists pray 
to God ; I had them sing, and questioned them con- 
cerning our faith. They answered me boldly, in the 
presence of Monsieur our Governor and of all our 
French people, and of their Savage relatives, — a 


226 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUJTES [Vol.11 

modeftement, apres les vefpres ie fis prier Dieu nos 
petis cathechifles, ie les fis chanter, ie les inter- 
rogay fur noftre creance, ils me refpondoient hardi- 
ment en la prefence de Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur 
& de tons nos Fran9ois & de leurs parens Sauuages 
qui remplifloient toute I'Eglife auec grande prelle, 
i'expliquois de fois \ autre en Fran9ois leurs refponfes 
afin qu'on cognut comme ils fatisfaifoient bien aux 
interrogations qu'on leur faifoit, au lieu de petits 
agnus & d 'images qu'on donne aux Franjois, ie leur 
faifois prefent de petis coufteaux, de fers de flefches, 
& bagues, d'alefnes, & d'aiguilles qu'ils regoiuent 
fort gentiment baifant la main, & faifant la reuerence 
"k la Fran9oife. II ne faut pas doubter que nos Fran- 
9ois ne priffent vn grand plaifir en c6t exercice, mais 
bien plus les Sauuages voyans I'honeur qu'6 faifoit k 
leurs enfans. II y en auoit vn entr'autres qui k trois 
filles lefquelles refpondirent tres-bien, & eurent 
toutes trois quelque prix, ie remarquay en la face de 
leur pere que la ioye s'eftoit refpandue dans fon 
cceur, encor bien que ces barbares fcachent affez bien 
couurir & diffimuler leurs fentimens. Ce bon hom- 
me difoit par apres k fes enfans, comme ils me I'ont 
rapports, mes enfans 6coutez Ie [126] Pere, ce qu'il 
dit eft vray, vous eftes ieunes, vous pounds mieux 
retenir cela que nous autres qui fommes ages. Nos 
Fran9ois eftoient tellement fatisfaits de ces premiers 
comancemens qu'ils les venoient voir quelquefois les 
iours mefme qu'ils ne s'affembloiet qu'en particulier 
Monfieur de Repentigny, Mofieur de la poterie & 
quantity d'autres fi font trouu6 quelquefois, Monfieur 
Gand fort fouuent ce qui encourageoit ces petits ^ 
bien faire, Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur prenoit tat de 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 227 

great throng, who filled the entire Church. Now 
and then I explained their answers, in French, to the 
others, so that they might know how satisfactorily 
they replied to the questions put to them. In place 
of the little agnus Dei and other images, that one 
gives to the French, I made them presents of knives, 
iron arrow-points, rings, awls, and needles, which 
they received very politely, kissing their hands and 
making an obeisance in the French fashion. It is 
not to be doubted that our French took great pleas- 
ure in these exercises, but much more did the Sav- 
ages, when they saw the honor that was shown to 
their children. There was one, among the others, 
who had three girls, who answered very well and 
who all three received some prize ; I noticed the fa- 
ther's face beaming with the joy that filled his heart, 
although these barbarians can passably well cover 
and disguise their feelings. This good man said 
afterwards to his children, as they have told me, '* My 
children, listen to the [126] Father, what he says is 
true; you are young, you can remember it better 
than we who are old." Our French people were so 
pleased with these primary instructions that they 
came sometimes to see them, on days when the chil- 
dren were by themselves. Monsieur de Repentigny, 
Monsieur de la poterie, and a number of others came 
occasionally, and Monsieur Gand quite often, which 
greatly encouraged these little ones to do well ; Mon- 
sieur our Governor took so much satisfaction in, and 
so thoroughly approved this instruction, that, after 
having abundantly provided me with the little pres- 
ents I gave them, he told me several times that he 
would be displeased if he knew that I had dispensed 
with anything which was in his power to furnish, in 


228 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 11 

cotetemet, & approuuoit fi fort cette inftruction que 
m'aiant bien fait munir des petits prefens que ie leur 
donois, il me dit plufieurs fois qu'il feroit mef content 
s'il f9auoit que i'efpargnaffe aucune chofe qui fut en 
fon pouuoir pour continuer vn fi faint exercice. 
Monfieur Gand m'en difoit tout de mefme, quantite 
d'autres beniffoient Dieu entendant chater fes loii- 
anges en langue eftrangere. 

Or afin qu'on voye quelque petit 6chantillon de 
leurs refponfes, i'en couch eray icy quelques vnes ie 
leur demande, comme s'appelle celuy qui k tout fait, 
lis refpondent fort bien qu'il fe nomme Dieu. Com- 
bien y a-il de Dieux? il n'y en a qu'vn difent-ils, 
combien y a-il de perfonnes en Dieu? trois qui fe 
nomment Ie Pere, Ie Fils & Ie fainct Efprit & ces 
[127] trois perfonnes ne font qu'vn Dieu. 

Laquelle de ces trois perfonnes s'eft elle fait hom- 
me? Ie Fils lequel eft ne d'vne Vierge nommee Ma- 
rie, pourquoy s'eft-il fait homme? pour mourir pour 
nous & en mourant fatisfaire pour nos pechez, pour- 
quoy falloit il qu'il fatisfit? noftre premier pere aiant 
defobey ^ Dieu deuoit eftre, iette dans Ie feu & fes 
enfans, c'eft a dire tons les hommes ne deuoient point 
aller au Ciel, mais Ie fils de Dieu k dit k fon pere. 
Mon Pere ayez pitie des hommes, & ie me feray 
homme & endureray pour eux, voila pourquoy il 
s'eft fait homme & eft mort pour nous. Eft-il point 
refufcite apres fa mort? oiiy, il eft refufcite en effet, 
& k inftruit douze hommes qu'on appelle Apoftres, 
leur difant qu'ils enfeignaffent les peuples, & que 
ceux qui croiroient, iroient au Ciel, ceux qui ne vou- 
droient point croire, feroient condamnez au feu. 

Comment f e nomme Ie Fils de Dieu ? il f e nomme 
lefus. 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 229 

order to keep up this so pious work. Monsieur Gand 
told me the same thing, and many others blessed God 
in hearing his praises celebrated in a foreign tongue. 
Now, that a little specimen of their answers may 
be seen, I will record a few of them here. I ask 
them, " What is the name of him who has made all?" 
They answer very correctly that his name is God. 
* ' How many Gods are there ? " " There is only 
one," they say. "How many persons are there in 
God? " " Three, who are called the Father, the Son, 
and the holy Ghost; and these [127] three persons 
are only one God. ' ' 

Which of these three persons made himself man ? " 
" The Son, who was born of a Virgin named Mary." 
' ' Why did he make himself man ? " "To die for us, 
and in dying to atone for our sins." " Why was it 
necessary for him to atone ? " " Our first father, 
having disobeyed God, had to be thrown into the 
fire, and his children, that is, all men, might not en- 
ter Heaven ; but the son of God said to his father, 
' My Father, have pity upon men, and I will make 
myself man, and will suffer for them,' — and this is 
why he made himself man, and died for us." " Did 
he not rise after his death ? " " Yes, he indeed arose, 
and he instructed twelve men who are called Apostles, 
telling them they should teach the nations, and that 
those who believed would go to Heaven, those who 
did not believe would be condemned to the fires." 

" What is the name of the Son of God?" " His 
name is Jesus." 

' ' Where is he ? " "He ascended into Heaven, and 
thence he shall come one day to reward all men ac- 
cording to their works. ' ' 

" How many things are necessary to go to Heav- 


230 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 11 


Ou ell-il? il efl monte au Ciel & de la il viendra 
vn iour pour payer tons les hommes felon leurs 
oeuures. 

Cobien de chofes font neceffaires pour aller au 
Ciel? trois croire, eflre baptise, & obeir, que [128] 
faut-il croire? ce que nous chantons en ces parolles 
Nitapouetaouau outanimau Dieu & ce qui s'enfuit, 
c'eft le fimbole des Apoftres, pourquoy baptife on 
les perfonnes? pour purifier leurs ames & en arra- 
cher les pechez. A qui faut il obeir pour aller au 
Ciel? k Dieu lequel nous commande de 1' aimer, nous 
deffend de tuer, de defrober, de paillarder, de s'eny- 
urer, &c. 

Voila iufques ou nous fommes paruenus, mais il 
y auoit vn ieune garyon entre les autres lequel rete- 
nant ce que ie difois en expliquant nos myfteres, me 
refpondoit merueilleufement bien, dequoy m'eflant 
apperceu ie I'interrogay fans ordre, tantoft fur vn 
point, tantoft fur 1' autre, luy demandant ou eftoit 
Dieu, il eft icy, il eft au Ciel, il eft par tout. Nous 
voit il bien? il voit tout ce qui fe fait au Ciel, en 
terre, & dans les enfers. Les Sauuages iront ils en 
Paradis? oliy bien s'ils croient en Dieu, s'ils font 
baptifez & s'ils obeyffent, les Fran9ois iront-ils? non 
pas tons, car il y en a de mefchans parmy eux, ceux 
qui obeirot k Dieu, iront. Tu dis qu'il faut croire 
pour aller au Ciel, crois tu? oiiy ie crois, ie m'efforce 
de croire, que crois-tu? ie crois au Pere, au Fils & 
au fainct Efprit, ie croy que le fils s'eft fait homme 
au ventre d'vne [129] Vierge nomm^e Marie, que 
nous mourrons tons, que nous refufciterons, que le- 
fus viendra & nous payera felon nos oeuures. La 
Vierge eft elle Dieu? il fongea vn pen, puis refpon- 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 231 

en?" "Three, to believe, to be baptized, and to 
obey." "What [128] must we believe?" "What 
we sing in these words, ' Nitapouetaouau outanimau 
Dieu, ' and what follows; it is the Apostles' creed." 
' ' Why do we baptize persons ? " " To purify their 
souls, and to remove sin therefrom." " Whom must 
we obey, in order to go to Heaven?" " God, who 
commands us to love him, and forbids us to kill, to 
rob, to practice lewdness, to get drunk, etc." 

This is as far as we have gone. But there was 
one boy among the rest, who, remembering what I 
told him in explaining our mysteries, answered me 
remarkably well. Having perceived this, I ques- 
tioned him without regard to order, — now upon one 
point, now upon another, — asking him where God 
was? " He is here, he is in Heaven, he is every- 
where.' ' ' ' Does he really see us ? " " He sees every- 
thing that goes on in Heaven, on earth, and in hell." 
" Will the Savages go to Paradise? " " Yes, certain- 
ly, if they believe in God, if they are baptized, and 
if they obey." " Will the French go ? " " Not all, 
for there are wicked ones among them; those who 
obey God will go." " Thou sayest that it is neces- 
sary to believe, to go to Heaven ; dost thou believe? " 
"Yes, I believe, I try to believe." "What dost 
thou believe ? " "I believe in the Father, in the 
Son, and in the holy Ghost ; I believe that the son 
was made man in the womb of a [129] Virgin named 
Mary ; that we shall all die, that we shall be raised 
from the dead; that Jesus will come, and will reward 
us according to our works." " The Virgin, is she 
God?" He studied a little while, then answered, 
"No, she is not God, for thou sayest there is only 
one God." I confess to you that I was surprised at 


232 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 

dit, non elle n'eft pas Dieu, car tu dis qu'il n'y a 
qu'vn Dieu. le vous confeffe que ie m'ettonnay en- 
tendant ces refponfes donees auec plus de prompti- 
tude que ie ne I'interrogeois, car ie n'auois pas dit 
par ordre & de fuitte ce que ie luy propofois, tnais en 
difcourant tantofl d'vn fujet, tantofl d'vn autre. Ce 
pauure ieune gargon m'a demande le baptefme plus 
de trois fois, vne fois entre autres s'en allant dans les 
bois il me dit, tu ne me veux pas baptifer, & ie m'en 
vais bien loing d'icy, li ie tombe malade, & li ie 
meurs, que deuiendray-ie? or nous n'auons pas encor 
oz6 luy conferer ce Sacrement, pource qu'eflant ieune, 
& n'aiant pas d'authorite parmy les fiens, il retom- 
bera aifement s'il eft attaque par les autres infideles, 
ce qui n'arriuera que trop. II faut ou voir de grands 
indices de I'efprit de Dieu das leurs ames, ou atten- 
dre qu'ils foiet protegez par I'authorite de quelque 
perfonne qui foit de credit parmy eux. S'ils eftoiet 
arreftez parmy les Fran9ois, ie ne ferois nulle diffi- 
culte de le baptifer, non feulement luy, mais tous les 
autres que nous auons inftruits [130] apres les auoir 
eprouuez quelque temps, car I'exercice de la Religion 
les fortifieroit, & la puiffance des Frangois les retien- 
droit aisement, & doucement dans cet exercice. 

Or neantmoins cette explication de noftre doctrine 
leur profitera, car ils fe mocquent de leurs niaiferies 
& fe forment & accouftument I'efprit k receuoir nos 
veritez, lefquelles en effet font puilTantes. Ie n'ay 
iufques icy trouue aucun barbare qui n'ait aduoiie & 
confelfe que ce que nous enfeignons eft tres-bon. 

Ie preuois qu'on me demandera fi nous ne conti- 
nuous pas dans vn fi fainct employ. Ie dis que non. 
Le prin-temps venu nos oiiailles fe font efparfes qk 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib37 233 

hearing these answers, given more readily than I 
put the questions, for I had not uttered in regular 
order, and consecutively, what I asked him, but had 
mentioned these things in talking, now upon one 
subject, now upon another. This poor young lad 
asked me for baptism more than three times. Once, 
upon going into the woods, he said to me, " Thou 
dost not wish to baptize me, and I am going far away 
from here ; if I fall sick and if I die, what will be- 
come of me?" Now we have not yet dared to con- 
fer this Sacrament upon him, for as he is young and 
has no influence among his own people, he will easily 
succumb if attacked by the other unbelievers, which 
will happen only too often. It is necessary either to 
see great indications of the spirit of God in their 
souls, or to wait until they are protected by the au- 
thority of some person who has influence among 
them. If they were settled among the French, I 
would not scruple to baptize him, — and not only 
him, but all the others whom we have instructed, 
[130] after having put them on trial for some time; 
for the practice of Religion would strengthen them, 
and the authority of the French would keep them 
easily and peaceably in this course. 

Nevertheless they will profit by this explanation 
of our doctrine, for they now laugh at their own ab- 
surd notions, and are adapting themselves and accus- 
toming their minds to receive our truths, which are 
indeed powerful. I have not up to the present time 
found a single barbarian who has not freely admitted 
that what we teach is very good. 

I foresee that some one will ask me if we are not 
continuing in this so holy work. I say " no. " When 
the spring came, our flock scattered here and there, 


234 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.11 

& la. Vne bonne partie s'eft retiree proche de la 
Refidence de la conception aux trois Riuieres. Voi- 
cy ce que m'en efcrit le Pere Buteux. Vojlre Reue- 
rence ne fqauroit croire comme les Catechifmes qu'elle a 
fait a Kebec font icy d" ^clat & de fruit. On ne fe r it plus 
entendant parler de Dieu. On me demande tons les iours 
quand ie feray le catechifme. Mes efcoliers me preffent 
plus que ie ne les preffe. Mais le deffaut du lieu & mon 
incapacity en la langue me font retarder, vne bone vefue 
entre autres ne me park d' autre chofe. Elle me vint hier 
trouuer pour me prier, difoit-elle, defcrire au Pere le leune 
que fa fille qu'il a inflruite fe \\^\\ portoit bien, qu' elle 
deuoit fa fantd a ce bon Pere, lequel luy auoit appris h 
prier Dieu. Ie V allay vifiter en fa cabane. Ie la trou- 
uay en bonne fant^, & en bonne volontd de continuer fes 
prteres. Vofire Reuerence ne fqauroit fe perfuader quelle 
confolation. In domino loquor, Ie receus voiant ces petits 
germes du Paradis. Ce font les propres mots du Pere 
qui m'en efcrit. Cette bonne veufue dont il parle 
voyant cet Hiuer fa fille malade me la voulut don- 
ner, ie ne fjauois oti la mettre, car nous ne tenons 
point de filles en noftre maifon, d'ailleurs nous eltions 
fort courts de viures. Ie la confolay le mieux que 
ie peu & luy dis que fi fa fille apprenoit a feruir 
Dieu, qu'il la gueriroit. Cette pauure enfant ne 
laifloit pas de venir au catechifme toute malade quelle 
eftoit. Dieu en a eu foin luy rendant la fant6. 

Dans vne autre lettre le mefme Pere me mande 
qu'il feroit neceffaire que ie me tranfportaffe la haut 
pour le bien des Sauuages, notamment pour conti- 
nuer ce fainct exercice. Ce feroit bien mon fouhait. 
Mais ie n'ay peu quitter fi toft Kebec, la venue des 
vaifleaux donne trop d' occupations. Ie luy ay enuoye 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1637 235 

many of them withdrawing to a place near the Resi- 
dence of the conception at the three Rivers. Here 
is what Father Buteux writes me about them. Your 
Reverence cannot imagine the surprising results here, 
of the instruction in the Catechism that was given at 
Kebec. They no longer laugh when God is mentioned. 
They ask me every day when I shall teach the catechism, 
my pupils urging me more than I urge them. But the lack 
of room, and my own weakness in the language, make tne 
delay. A good zvidow, among others, talks to me about 
nothing else; she came to see me yesterday, to request me, 
she said, to write to Father le feune that her daughter, 
whom he instructed, [131] was xvell, — saying that she owed 
her health to this good Father, who had taught her to pray 
to God. I went to visit her in her cabin. I found her 
in good health, and well disposed to continue her prayers. 
Your Reverejice cannot realize how much consolation. In 
domino loquor, I have experienced in seeing these little 
germs of Paradise. These are the very words of the 
Father who wrote me. This good widow of whom 
he speaks, seeing her daughter sick this Winter, de- 
sired to give her to me ; I did not know where to put 
her, for we do not keep girls in our house, and, be- 
sides, we were very short of provisions. I consoled 
her as well as I could, and told her that, if her 
daughter learned to serve God, he would make her 
well. This poor child did not fail to come to cate- 
chism, sick as she was. God has taken care of her, 
restoring her to health. 

In another letter the same Father sends me word 
that I ought to go up there for the good of the Sav- 
ages, and especially to continue these holy exercises. 
This would indeed be my wish ; but I was not able 
to leave Kebec so promptly, the coming of the ships 


236 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.11 

ce que i'ay efcrit en Sauuage fur le catechifme, comme 
il parle oil begaie quafi come moy il tafchera d' aider 
ces petites ames. [132] Auec le temps les Sauuages 
s'arrefleront, & quand ils ne s'arrefteroiet pas, leur 
principal & plus grand fejour fera aupres de nos 
Frangois, tantoft en vne habitation, tantoft h. I'autre, 
fi bien que s'ils rencontrent des Peres qui f9aclient la 
langue, il feront par tout vn peu inftruits. Noflre 
Seigneur par fa faincte bonte leur vueille ouurir les 
yeux. 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 237 

giving me too much to do. I have sent him what I 
wrote in the Savage tongue, on the catechism ; as he 
speaks or stammers about as I do, he will try to help 
these little souls. [132] In the course of time, the 
Savages will become stationary ; and, if they do not, 
their principal and longer sojourns will be near our 
French, now in one settlement, now in another, — so 
that, if they find Fathers who know the language, 
they will everywhere receive a little instruction. 
May our Lord in his holy goodness open their eyes. 


238 


LES RELA TIONS DES J£SUITES [Vol. 11 


CHAPITRE VIII. 

DE QUELQUES PRISES OU CONTRARIET^S QUE NOUS 
AUONS EU AUEC LES SAUUAGES. 

LE grand Pre fire n'entroit point jadis au Sancta 
fanctorum qu'aupres I'effufion du fang de 
qnelque victime. Fay bien de la peine ^ me 
perfuader que ces peuples (notamment es pais oil ils 
font en nombre) entrent en I'Eglife fans facrifice. le 
veux dire fans que quelqu'vns de ceux qui les inflrui- 
ront foit mis a mort. A peine h. on commanc6 h. leur 
defcouurir quelques veritez de I'Euangile qu'on k 
reffenty des oppofitions, fi on dit qu'elles ont efl6 
petites, aufTi ne les k on pas encor fortement prefchez. 
Le diable ne laifTera pas deftruire fon Empire fans 
rendre [133] combat, il a commence d'aiguifer, quel- 
ques langues contre nous, mais h fa confufion. 

Si toft que nous eufmes ouuert la parole en pu- 
blic, & que Makheabichtichiou eufl tefmoigne de I'aff e- 
ction pour noftre creance, vn Capitaine Montagnez 
jaloux de I'amour qu'on luy portoit, fe mit h. d'efcrier 
fous main noftre faincte f oy, & ceux qui la publioient. 
II difoit que noftre creance leur eftoit fatale, que 
mourir & croire n'eftoit qu'vne mefme chofe pour eux, 
il tefmoignoit en particulier k fes gens, qu'il feroit 
marry s'ils fe faifoient inftruire. II affuroit que fon 
ayeul luy auoit dit qu'il y viendroit des robes noires 
qui feroient caufe de leur mort. Comme on reco- 
gneut fa malice, & que d'ailleurs il n'eft pas homme 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 28& 


CHAPTER VIII. 

OF SOME DISPUTES OR DIFFICULTIES WE HAVE HAD 
WITH THE SAVAGES. 

IN olden times the high Priest would not enter the 
Sancta sanctorum until after the shedding of the 
blood of some victim. I can hardly persuade 
myself that these tribes (especially in the countries 
where they are numerous) will enter the Church 
without a sacrifice, — I mean without putting to death 
some of those who shall instruct them. Scarcely 
has one begun to reveal to them some of the truths 
of the Gospel than he has experienced opposition; 
if it be said that this has been very slight, it may 
also be said that there has been as yet but little 
preaching. The devil will not allow his Empire to 
be overthrown without giving [133] battle; he has 
begun to whet some tongues against us, but to his 
own confusion. 

As soon as we had commenced speaking in public, 
and Makheabichtichiou had shown a partiality for our 
belief, a Montagnez Captain, jealous of our love for 
him, began secretly to deride our holy faith and those 
who proclaimed it. He said that our belief was fatal 
to them, — that believing and dying were one and the 
same thing for them ; and privately assured his own 
people that he would be sorry if they let themselves 
be instructed. He asserted that his grandfather had 
told him that black robes would come there, who 
would be the cause of their death. As his malice 


240 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.11 

— — — - _— _ _^_ 

d'authorit6, tout cela ne faifoit pas grande impreffion 
fur I'efprit des Sauuages ; f e voyant foible de ce cofte 
Ik, il change de batterie, 

II fait courir vn bruit, que i'auois dit que les gens 
de Makheabichtichiou & les fiens, les vouloient tuer 
tous deux. Qu'on m'auoit dit qu'il me vouloit tuer, 
pource qu'il auoit fonge qu'il me tueroit, & que ie 
ne I'aimois pas k caufe de cela. Eftant informe de fes 
menses, ie pris I'occafion & le temps de luy parler 
m'eftant venu voir en [134] compagnie de plufieurs 
Sauuages. Ie luy fis entendre qu'il fe faifoit tort de 
femer ces mauuais difcours & que les Fran9ois & les 
Sauuages, f9aclians que ie les aimois, il n'auoit ga- 
gne autre chofe par fes menteries, fmon qu'on le te- 
noit pour vn mef chant homme. Tu fais mal luy 
dis-je de croire que ie te haiffe, mon coeur eft affes 
grand pour vous loger tant que vous eftes. Quel- 
ques Sauuages te voulans tuer I'an pafT^ pource qu'ai- 
ant efte au pais des Hiroquois on te foup§onnoit de 
trahifon, tu f9ais que toy m'en aiant donne aduis. Ie 
fuppliay Monfieur le General de te prendre en fa pro- 
tection, & de te fauuer la vie. Ce qu'il fit pacifiant 
les differens qui efloient entre vous autres. Tu luy 
dis mefme qu'il ny auoit que luy & moy qui t'ai- 
maffions, comme tu m'en as affure de ta propre 
bouche, & pour recognoilTance de cet amour, tu fais 
femer de faux bruits qui font paroiftre ton infidelite. 
Tu te plains que les Francois te quittent & que Mon- 
fieur le Gouuerneur ne t'aime pas. Tu te trompe 
en ce point, il vous aime, & vous protege tous. Mais 
tu es jaloux de I'affection qu'il porte k vn autre, n'eft- 
il pas vray que tu cheris d'auantage ceux de ta nation, 
que les Algonquins qui [135] font vos alliez. Mon- 


1636 - 37] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 241 

was recognized, and as, besides, he is not a man of 
influence, all this did not make much impression 
upon the minds of the Savages. Seeing himself 
weak in this direction, he changed his tactics. 

He spread a report that I had said that Makhea- 
bichtichioii s people and his intended to kill them 
both ; that some one had told me that he wished to 
kill me, because he had dreamed that he would kill 
me; and that I did not like him on that account. 
Being informed of his underhand dealings, I took 
occasion and time to speak to him when he came to 
see me in [134] company with several Savages. I 
gave him to understand that he injured himself by 
circulating these bad reports ; and that, as the French 
and the Savages knew that I loved them, he had 
gained nothing by his lies, unless it was the reputa- 
tion of being a wicked man. " Thou art wrong," I 
said to him, " to believe that I hate thee; my heart 
is large enough to hold you all, as many as you are. 
Last year, when some Savages desired to kill thee, 
because, when in the Hiroquois country, they sus- 
pected thee of treason, thou knowest that, when 
thou didst inform me of it, I requested Monsieur 
the Commandant to take thee under his protection, 
and to save thy life ; which he did, reconciling the 
dissensions among you. Thou didst tell him also 
that there were none but he and I who loved thee, 
assuring me of this with thine own lips ; and in ac- 
knowledgment of this love, thou art scattering false 
reports which show thy faithlessness. Thou com- 
plainest that the French forsake thee, and that Mon- 
sieur the Governor does not love thee. Thou art 
mistaken about this, — he loves and protects you all. 
But thou art jealous of the affection that he has for 


242 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.11 


fieur le Gouuerneur en fait de mefme. Tous ceux 
qui croient en Dieu font de fa nation, il les tient pour 
tels & les aime comme tels, pour les autres, il ne les 
halt pas, il ne leur fait aucun mal; mais rempefche- 
ras tu de vouloir du bien a ceux qui veulent em- 
braffer noftre creance. Ne te fouuiens tu pas que 
defcendant auec toy I'an paffe des trois Riuieres, ie 
te donnay de bons aduis pour conferuer voflre nation 
qui fe va perdre, & que toy mefme tu dis tout haut 
qu'en effet ie vous aimois, & que fi on fuiuoit mon 
confeil, on s'en trouueroit bien, mais que tu ne croi- 
ois pas que les ieunes gens s'y voululTent refoudre. 
Ne t'ay-je pas dit ce qui nous amene en ce pais cy. 
As tu recognu que i'aimaffe vos Caftors? vous ay-je 
iamais rien demande? Tu vois au contraire que ie 
vous donne felon mon petit pouuoir. Nous auons 
quitte nos parens & nos amis, nous nous fommes 
efloignez de noftre patrie plus douce & plus agreable 
que la voftre, ie me fuis mis tant de fois en danger 
de mort pour apprendre voflre langue afin de vous 
inftruire, ie t'ay protege dans tes difficultez & apres 
tout cela feroit-il polTible que ie ne vous aimaffe 
point? ie [136] vous cheris tous, mais i'ay vn foin 
particulier de ceux qui preftent I'oreille ^ noftre do- 
ctrine, & qui veulent recognoiflre noflre commun Sei- 
gneur, celuy qui k tout fait. A tout cela il refpondit 
qu'en effet il voyoit bien que nous aimions leur na- 
tion; qu'au refte il auoit dit a Monfieur le Gouuer- 
neur que quad fes gens feroient raffemblez, il leur 
propoferoit noftre creance, & que s'ils la vouloient 
receuoir, il I'embrafferoit auec eux, que s'il faifoit 
autrement, il feroit mocque. Mak\}i\eabichtichiou qui 
efloit prefent repartit, pour moy ie me doubte bien 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 243 

another man. Is it not true that thou cherishest 
those of thy own nation more than the Algonquins 
who [135] are your allies? Monsieur the Governor 
does the same. All those who believe in God are of 
his nation, he holds and loves them as such. As for 
the others, he does not hate them, he does them no 
harm ; but wilt thou prevent him from being kindly 
disposed to those who wish to embrace our faith ? 
Dost thou not remember how, when I was coming 
down with thee last year from the three Rivers, I 
gave thee some good advice about preserving your 
nation, which is going to destruction ; and how thou 
thyself saidst aloud that I did indeed, love you all, 
and that, if my advice were followed, all would be 
well, but that thou didst not believe the young peo- 
ple would agree to it? Have I not told thee what 
brings us to this country ? Hast thou discovered 
that I liked your Beavers? Have I ever asked any- 
thing from you? Thou seest, on the contrary, that 
I give you according to my limited capacity. We 
have left our kindred and friends; we have gone 
away from our country, milder and more agreeable 
than yours; I have many times risked my life to 
learn your language, in order to instruct you; I have 
protected thee in thy difficulties ; and, after all that, 
could it be possible that I do not love you? I [136] 
cherish you all ; but I have a particular interest in 
those who lend ear to our doctrine, and who are 
willing to acknowledge our common Lord, he who 
has made all." To all this he answered that, in 
truth, he was well aware that we loved their nation; 
furthermore, that he had said to Monsieur the Gov- 
ernor that, when his people came together again, he 
would propose to them our belief: and, if they 


244 


LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. U 


que ceux de ma nation fe riront de ce que ie veux 
croire en Dieu, mais ie ne doibs point eftre honteux 
de faire vne bonne action, fi i'ay des perfonnes con- 
traires, i'en trouueray pent eftre quelques autres qui 
fuiuront mon party. 

Ie m'oubliois de dire que ce mefme barbare voy- 
ant comme la ieuneffe nous venoit voir auec grande 
affection, pour eftre inftruite, I'auoit pense diuertir 
par vne tres mefchante calomnie. II faifoit entendre 
qu'il m'auoit rapporte que les Sauuages me vouloient 
empoifonner, & que i'auois refpondu que ie les pre- 
uiendrois. Le mefme iour que ce bruit courut par 
les cabanes, le Pere de Quen & moy qui ne fgauions 
rien de cela, y [137] allafmes pour faire venir les en- 
fans. Nous fufmes eftonn^s qu'il n'y en eut que 
trois qui nous fuiuiffent, nous attribuions cela k leur 
ieu, aufquels nous les voyons fort attentifs. Apres 
auoir inftruit & renuoye ces trois petits Makheabich- 
tichiou nous vint voir & me dit Nikanis fgay tu bien 
ce qu'on dit par nos cabanes? non luy refpondis-je. 
Es tu venu en noftre quartier auiourd'huy? oiiy nous 
y fommes alles mon frere & moy, auez vous amen6 
les enfans? nenny, trois feulement nous ont fuiuy. 
En f§auez vous bien la raifon? non pas: la voicy, on 
dit fourdement que quelqu'vn t'a donne aduis que 
les Sauuages te vouloient empoifonner, & que tu as 
reparty que tu les preuiendrois, Ik deffus les parens 
ont deffendu a leurs enfans de vous venir trouuer. 
Ie me mis k rire entendant cette impofture & luy dis. 
Nikanis perfonne ne m'a dit que vous me vouluffiez 
faire mourir & quand on me I'auroit dit ie ne le croi- 
rois pas, & li ie le croyois ie ne voudrois pas m'en 
vanger, tu fgais que nous ne portons point d'armes, 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 245 

wished to accept it, he would embrace it with them, — 
that, if he did otherwise, he would be jeered at. 
Mak\li\eabichtichiou, who was present, replied, "As for 
me, I am inclined to think that those of my nation 
will laugh at me for wishing to believe in God, but 
I ought not to be ashamed of doing right ; if there 
are some persons who are against me, I shall per- 
haps find others who will be on my side." 

I forgot to say that this same barbarian, seeing 
how much the children loved to come to us to be in- 
structed, had tried to divert them from it by a very 
wicked slander. He gave out that he had told me 
that the Savages were trying to poison me, and I an- 
swered that I would forestall them. On the same 
day that this rumor was spread among the cabins, 
Father de Quen and I, knowing nothing of it, [137] 
went to get the children. We were surprised to find 
that only three of them followed us, but attributed 
that to their play, in which we saw them much en- 
grossed. After having instructed and sent away 
these three little ones, Makheabichtichiou came to us 
and said to me, " Nikanis, dost thou know what they 
are saying among our cabins?" "No," I replied. 
" Didst thou come to our quarters to-day?" " Yes, 
we went there, my brother and I." " Did you take 
away the children with you?" "No indeed, only 
three followed us." "Do you know the reason?" 

No. " " Here it is : it is whispered about that some 
one warned thee that the Savages intend to poison 
thee, and that thou saidst thou wouldst anticipate 
them, — whereupon the parents have forbidden their 
children to come to you." I began to laugh when I 
heard this misrepresentation, and said to him, " Ni- 
kanis, no one has told me that you wanted to kill me. 


246 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 

que nous appaifons les differens qui s'efleuent, & par- 
my les Fran9ois & parmy les Sauuages, ne te fou- 
uiens tu pas des confeils que ie t'ay donn6 de prier 
Dieu pour ton ennemy, qui te vouloit mettre k mort, 
t'affeurant [138] que celuy qui a tout fait prenoit la 
deffence de 1' innocent. Ne f9ay tu pas que ie t'ay 
dit cent fois que Dieu defendoit non feulement de 
tuer mais de vouloir tuer & qu'il voioit aufli bien les 
penfees qu'il entendoit les paroles. Sgache que ce- 
luy qui a feme cette graine de difcorde eft fafche de 
ce que ie t'aime & tous tes gens. 

Tout ce que tu dis eft veritable me refpondit-il, ie 
n'ay rien creu de toutes ces impoftures, ie te prie Ni- 
Kanis ne penfe point, me difoit-il, que les Sauuages 
qui font auec moy te veulent du mal. Tu verras 
maintenant comme ils fe fient en vous autres. Veux 
tu que ie face venir les petits ou les grands tout 
maintenant? Non pas luy repliquay-ie, il eft trop 
tard, demain nous continuerons I'inftruction de la 
ieuneffe. Ils ne manqueront pas dit il, de te venir 
voir: mais comme tu vois qu'il y a des mefchans par- 
my nous, ie te prie ne crois point aisement aux faux 
bruits. On te rapportera plufieurs chofes de moy- 
mefme, fi tu y adioufte foy tu me hairas & ne m'in- 
ftruiras plus. Ie dis bien dauantage comme vous 
commancez a entendre noftre langue, ne rapportez a 
voftre Capitaine & aux Fran9ois ce que vous pourrez 
entendre de fafcheux dans nos cabanes, cela engen- 
dreroit [139] du difcord entre les deux nations. Vous 
auez de I'efprit vous autres pour f9auoir ce qu'il faut 
dire, & ce qu'il faut taire. Ce pauure homme tout 
Sauuage qu'il eft h. vn bon fens, pleut a Dieu qu'il 
fut vn peu plus humble qu'il n'eft, la foy ne tarderoit 


1636 - 37 J LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 247 

and if they should I would not believe it ; and if I 
did believe it, I would not avenge myself for it. 
Thou knowest that we do not carry arms, that we 
try to settle any differences which may arise, both 
among the French and the Savages. Dost thou not 
remember the advice I gave thee to pray to God for 
thine enemy who wished to put thee to death, as- 
suring thee [138] that he who has made all took upon 
himself the defense of the innocent? Dost thou not 
know that I have told thee a hundred times that God 
forbade us not only to kill, but even not to wish to 
kill, and that he saw the thoughts as well as heard 
the words ? Know that he who has sown this seed 
of discord is angry because I love thee and all thy 
people." 

"All that thou sayest is true," he answered, " I 
have not believed these false reports in the least ; I 
pray thee, Nikanis," he said to me, " do not think 
the Savages who are with me wish thee any harm. 
Thou wilt see now how much confidence they have 
in all of you. Dost thou wish me to have the little 
ones or the grown people come immediately?" 
" No," I replied to him, "it is too late, to-morrow 
we will continue the instruction of the children." 
" They will not fail," said he, " to come to thee; but, 
as thou seest there are bad ones among us, I beg 
thee not to readily believe in false reports. They 
will report many bad things to thee about me; if 
thou give them credit, thou wilt hate me and no 
longer teach me. I say still more ; as you are be- 
ginning to understand our language, do not report 
to your Captain and to the French what annoying 
remarks you may hear in our cabins, for that would 
produce [139] discord between the two nations. You 


248 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.11 

pas k prendre racine dans fon ame car il eft alTez in- 
ftruit. 

Nous aiant quitt6 il s'en alia faire vn cry public par 
leurs cabanes, fuiuant leur couftume quand ils veu- 
lent donner quelque aduertiffement general, il crioit 
^ pleine tefte fe pourmenant h. I'entour de leurs loges. 
Ecoutez 6 hommes, ne croiez point les faux bruits 
qu'on a fait courir parmy nous, ne craignez point 
que le Pere nous face du mal, n'eft-ce pas luy qui 
nous enf eigne qu'il ne faut point tuer, & que celuy 
qui a tout fait, prend vengeance des meurtriers, il 
eft homme come nous, il craint auffi bien que nous 
celuy qui mefure & qui regie tout. Et vous ieuneffe 
ne manquez pas de Taller demain voir pour vous 
faire inftruire, ce qu'il vous dit eft bon efcoutez-le. 
Ces pauures enfans vindret le lendemain en bon 
nombre k I'ordinaire. Mais nous nous eftonafmes 
aiant appris cette nouuelle come ces trois enf as dejk 
affez grads n'auoiet pas lailTe de nous fuiure [140] le 
iour precedent ; nonobftant la deffence de leurs parens 
& la menace qu'on les feroit mourir. Pour ce grand 
femeur de calomnies il a fi peu de credit, qu'il ne 
nous epouuante guere, fon propre fils mefme en fait 
fort peu d'eftat, k ce que m'a dit le fieur Oliuier, iuf- 
ques Yk qu'il luy dit vn iour, ie ne fgaurois demeurer 
auec toy, pource que n'ayant point d'efprit tu veux 
neantmoins faire du Capitaine: c'eft pourquoy on fe 
mocque de toy, & i'en re9ois de la confufion. Si tu 
veux que ie demeure auec toy, quitte cette vanity 
d'eftre Capitaine, puis que tu n'as ny difcours, ny 
conduitte. En effet i'ay entendu plufieurs de fa 
bande fe mocquer de luy. 

Nous auons eu vne autre prife auec vn forcier nom- 


1636-37] LE JE UNE' S RELA TION, 1637 249 

have intelligence enough, you Frenchmen, to know 
what ought to be said, and what ought to be left un- 
said." This poor man, all Savage as he is, has very 
good sense. Would to God that he were a little 
more humble than he is ; the faith would not be long 
in taking root in his soul, for he is sufficiently in- 
structed. 

When he left us, he went to cry aloud among their 
cabins, according to their custom when they wish to 
make some public announcement ; he cried in a loud 
voice, walking around their houses: "Listen, O 
men ! Do not believe the false reports that have been 
spread among us, do not fear that the Father will do 
us harm ; is it not he who teaches us that we must 
not kill, and that he who has made all takes ven- 
geance on murderers ? He is a man as we are ; he 
fears, like us, him who measures and rules all things. 
And you, children, do not fail to visit him to-mor- 
row, that you may be instructed; what he says is 
good, listen to him. ' ' These poor children came the 
next day in goodly numbers, as usual. But we 
were quite astonished, after learning this news, that 
those three children, already nearly grown, had not 
failed to follow us [140] the day before, notwithstand- 
ing the prohibition of their parents, and the threat 
that they would be killed. As for this great sower 
of calumnies, he has so little influence that he does 
not frighten us much. Even his own son does not 
have much respect for him, according to what sieur 
Olivier told me, he even went so far as to say to him 
one day, " I cannot live with thee, for, although thou 
hast no sense, thou wishest to act the Captain ; this 
is why they make fun of thee, and I am humiliated 
by it. If thou wish me to live with thee, give up 
this vain idea of being a Captain, since thou hast 


250 


LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol. 11 


me Pigarouich, celuy-cy eftoit an quartier de Ma- 
k\Ji\eabichtichiou & comme il le haiffoit k mort, voyant 
qu'il entroit en credit aupres des Francois, il en eftoit 
jaloux, auffi bien qne c6t autre pretendu Capitaine, 
& h mon aduis, ce qui I'anima encor fut qu'il apprit 
que nous nous mocquions de fes fortileges, & que 
nous alTurions Mak[/i]eadk/au/nou, que fon ennemy 
ne luy pourroit rien faire s'il fe confioit en Dieu. 
Eftant done certain iour venu auec les hommes pour 
conferer des points de noftre creance, & de [141] la 
vanite de la leur, Mak\}{\eabichtichiou dit tout haut 
parlant le premier, que ce que i'auois dit eftoit bon, & 
qu'il vouloit quitter leur fa§ons de faire pour pren- 
dre les noftres, le forcier Ik deffus prend la parole, 
& s'addreffant a moy me dit. Pere le leune ie parle- 
ray a mon tour, f9ache done que quoy qu'il en foit 
de voftre creance, qu'il y a cinq chofes que ie ne 
veux point quitter, 1' amour enuers les femmes, la 
creance a nos fonges, les feftins a tout manger, le 
defir de tuer des Hiroquois, croire aux forciers, & 
leur faire feftin iufques au creuer. Voila dit-il, ce 
que nous ne quitterons iamais. Le fieur Oliuier 
m'expliqua tout cela, car ce Sauuage a la parolle & 
r accent tout "k fait Algonquin; ayant oiiy ce difcours 
de cheual & de mulct, ie luy refpondis en cette forte. 
Pour les femmes il t'eft permis d'en tenir vne au- 
pres de toy, n'ayant qu'vn corps tu n'as befoing que 
d'vne femme, & comme tu ne voudrois pas qu'on 
desbaucbaft la tienne, auffi ne t'eft-il pas permis de 
toucher a celles des autres. II repliqua qu'il ne laifTe- 
roit pas de le faire s'il pouuoit : ie repliquay que fi ce 
defordre eftoit parmy eux, qu'ils n'eftoient pas affeu- 
res de leurs enfans, tu penfe quelquefois carreffer 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION. i637 261 


neither the ability to make speeches nor to be a 
leader." In fact, I have heard several of his band 
make fun of him. 

We had another dispute with a sorcerer named 
Pigarouich. He was in the same district as Maklh^ea- 
bichtichiou, and, as he had a deadly hatred for him, 
when he saw that he was on good terms with the 
French, he was jealous of him, as the other so-called 
Captain had been ; and, in my opinion, what aroused 
him still more was that he heard that we ridiculed 
his sorceries, and that we assured Mak\}i\eabichtichiou 
that his enemy could not harm him if he trusted in 
God. Now having come one day with the men, to 
confer about the points of our belief, and [141] the 
vanity of theirs, Mak\h\eabichtichiou, speaking first, 
said boldly that what I had told them was good, and 
that he intended to give up their customs and adopt 
ours. The sorcerer, thereupon beginning to speak 
and addressing me, said, " Father le Jeune, I will 
speak in my turn. Know, then, that whatever there 
may be in your belief, there are five things that I 
will not give up, — the love for women, the belief in 
our dreams, the eat-all feasts, the desire to kill the 
Hiroquois, the belief in sorcerers, and making feasts 
for them even to bursting. Those are the things," 
said he, " that we will never abandon." Sieur Oli- 
vier explained all this to me, for the language and 
the accent of this Savage are altogether Algonquin. 
Having heard this horse-and-mule speech, I answered 
it in this way : 

"As to women, thou art permitted to keep one 
with thee ; having only one body, thou hast need of 
only one woman; and as thou wouldst not like to 
have other men debauch thine, so it is not permitted 
thee to touch theirs." He replied that he would not 


252 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.11 

ton fils, mais tu te [142] te trompe, tu carreffe le fils 
d'vn autre. Car fi tu es mefchant comme tu dis, les 
autres te paient en mef me monoye & ainfi il ne a 
qu'vne confufion de chiens parmy vous, II demeura 
tout confus, & les autres fe mocquerent de luy. 

Pour les fonges ie luy demanday s'il tlieroit fon 
Pere au cas qu'il euft fonge qu'il le deut faire? le 
diable fe mefle la nuit dans vos imaginations, & fi 
vous luy obeyffez il vous fera les plus mefchans du 
monde. I'adjouftai plufieurs autres chofes. 

Quant, aux feftins a tout manger ie luy dis, que 
les demons eftoient bien aifes de les faire creuer pour 
les faire mourir au pluftoft; que Dieu, au contraire 
defirant qu'ils vef culTent long-temps, def endoit ces ex- 
cez qui ruinoient leur fante, les autres trouuerent 
cette refponfe tres-bonne. Pour ce qui concerne les 
Hiroquois puis que vous auez guerre auec eux tiie 
les tons fi tu peux. Quant aux f orders puis que vous 
voyez tons les iours qu'ils ne f9auroiet guerir aucun 
malade auec leurs tambours, & autres badineries, fi 
vous auez de I'efprit, vous quitteres tout cela. Ie 
m'eftendis dauatage, mais ie ferois trop long fi ie 
voulois tout rapporter. Pour conclufion ie leur de- 
clarai qu'il y auoit deux vies, I'vne bien courte, & 
r autre bien longue, & que la [143] longue feroit tres- 
heureufe oti tres-malheureufe, Qu'il pouuoit main- 
tenant choifir celle qui luy agreoit dauantage. il re- 
pliqua qu'il aimoit feulemet la vie qu'il auoit en ce 
monde. Le fieur Oliuier luy dit, & moy i'ayme 
I'autre. Si on te prefentoit luy dit-il deux robes vne 
mefchate qui ne deut plus durer que trois iour, & vne 
belle toute neufue qui pent durer plufieurs annees, 
laquelle prendrois tu des deux ? fans doute tu pren- 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 263 

fail to do it if he could. I rejoined that, if this licen- 
tiousness existed among them, they could not be sure 
of their own children, — " Thou thinkest sometimes 
that thou art caressing thy son, but thou [142] art 
mistaken, thou caressest the son of another. For if 
thou be as bad as thou sayest, the others pay thee in 
the same coin, and thus there is the same confusion 
among you that there is among dogs." He was very 
much embarrassed, and the others laughed at him. 

As for dreams, I asked him if he would kill his 
Father, in case he dreamed that he was to do it. 
' ' The devil meddles with your imaginations in the 
night; and, if you obey him, he will make you the 
most wicked people in the world." I added several 
other things. 

In regard to the eat-all feasts, I told him that the 
demons were glad to have them burst, so as to kill 
them all the sooner; that God, on the contrary, 
wishing them to live a long time, prohibited these 
excesses which ruined their health. The others con- 
sidered this a very good answer. "As for the Hiro- 
quois, since you are at war with them, kill them all, 
if thou can. As regards the sorcerers, since you 
will see every day that they cannot cure any sickness 
with their drums and other nonsense, if you have 
any sense you will give up all that." I expatiated 
still more upon this subject, but it would take too 
long for me to report it all. In conclusion, I de- 
clared to them that there were two lives, one very 
short, and the other very long, and that the [143] 
long one would be very happy or very miserable, — 
that he could now choose the one which pleased him 
more. He replied that the only life he cared for was 
the life of this world. Sieur Olivier said to him, 
" And as for me, I care for the other. If some one 


254 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.11 

drois celle qui feroit de duree, & cependant tu aime 
dis tu vne vie qui t'efchappe tous les iours & que tu 
perdras peut-eflre dans peu de temps, & tu mefprife 
la vie future qui doit durer a iamais. 

Vn autre Sauuage de la compagnie parlant apres 
dit, qu'ils n'eftoient point de I'aduis de cet home, mais 
qu'ils trouuoient bo ce qu'on leur auoit enf eigne, 
Et quelques iours apres deux ou trois nous venans 
voir en particulier nous dirent que nous tinffions bon 
centre ce forcier, qu'on le craignoit dans les cabanes, 
& qu'il nous vouloit tenir tefte. Nous ne manquafmes 
pas de I'attaquer. Nous eftant venu voir vne autre- 
fois, & nous aiant dit que dans peu de iours il deuoit 
confulter Ka-Khichigou KJietiKJd ceux qui font le iour. 
Dans mes relations i'ay appell6 ceux qu'ils inuoquent 
dans leurs tabernacles Khichikouekhi, que i'interpre- 
tois genies [144] du iour. II me femble que ie les 
entendois nommer ainfi, mais ce forcier & fes gens 
les nomment du mot que ie viens de dire, ou d'vn 
autre approchant, qui fignifie ceux qui font le iour ; 
m'ayant done dit qu'il vouloit confulter ces demons, 
ie luy repliquay qu'il trompoit fes gens, leur faifant 
croire que ces beaux faifeurs du iour, mouuoient fon 
tabernacle, & cependant que c'eftoit luy, il me de- 
manda fi ie voulois gager contre luy, que fon taber- 
nacle trembleroit encor que luy ny autres ne le tou- 
chalTent point. Ie me mettray difoit-il, tout couche 
au fond de mon tabernacle, ie feray fortir dehors mes 
bras & mes jambes, & neantmoins tu le verras trem- 
bler auec fureur. I'accepte la gageure, & mets au 
triple de ce qu'il difoit. Les Sauuages fe rejoiiifloient 
fort de cette difpute, les vns me difoient tu perdras, 
les autres difoient non, il gagnera, car il eft plus 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1637 265 

presented thee two robes," — said he to him, "an 
old one which could not last more than three days, 
and a fine new one which might last several years, — 
which of the two wouldst thou take ? Doubtless thou 
wouldst take that one which would last; and yet 
thou sayest that thou lovest a life which is slipping 
away from thee every day, and that thou wilt lose, 
perhaps, in a short time, and thou despisest the fu- 
ture life which is to endure forever. ' ' 

Another Savage of the company, speaking after- 
wards, said that they were not of the opinion of this 
man, but that they approved of what had been taught 
them. And, a few days later, two or three of them, 
coming to see us privately, told us that we should 
hold out firmly against this sorcerer, that he was 
feared in the cabins, and that he would oppose us. 
We did not fail to attack him. Another time, when 
he came to see us, he informed us that in a few days 
he should consult Ka-Khichigou Khetikhi, those who 
make the light. In my relations I have called those 
whom they invoke in their little tents Khichikouekhi, 
which I interpreted "genii [144] of light," for it 
seemed to me I had heard them called so ; but this 
sorcerer and his people call them by the name I have 
just mentioned, or by another one almost like it, 
which signifies " those who make the light." Now 
having told me that he intended to consult these de- 
mons, I replied to him that he was deceiving his 
people in making them think that these fine ' ' makers 
of the light " were moving his tent, when it was he. 
He asked me if I would bet with him that his tent 
would move, although neither he nor any one else 
should touch it. "I will lie down flat upon the floor 
of my tent," said he, " I will stretch my arms and 
my legs outside, and yet thou wilt see it shake vio- 


256 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.11 

grand forcier que Pigarouich. le leur dis que ie ne 
voulois tirer aucun gain de cette gageure, que ie leur 
donnois ce que le forcier auroit perdu, cela les ani- 
moit fort, ils fe mettoient tous d'vn cofl6. M'ad- 
drelTant done au forcier ie luy dis prends garde "k ce 
que tu fais, car fi c'eft toy qui meut to tabernacle, ie 
couperay en vn momet tous les lies qui le tienet en 
eftat & ie te ferai paroiftre [145] impofteur: fi c'eft 
quelque efprit ou quelque vent comme tu dis, f9ache 
que c'eft le diable. Or le Diable nous craint, fi c'eft 
luy ie luy parleray fortement, ie le tanceray & le con- 
traindray de confelTer fon impuilTance contre ceux 
qui croyent en Dieu, & luy feray auoiier qu'il vous 
trompe. Or fe voyant gauff6 s'il entre en fureur, & 
s'il te tue, qu'on ne s'en prenne pas ^ nous autres: 
s'il fort & s'il bat ceux qui I'auront appell6, n'en re- 
jettez pas la caufe fur nous, car vous verrez que nous 
le deffieros de nous aborder, & qu'il ne pourra pas 
pource que Dieu nous protege. En effect i'auois 
deffein de me feruir d'vne efpee deformais, & ie crai- 
gnois que Dieu ne permift au Demon de faire mal ^ 
ces infideles & mefcreans, & qu'ils ne creuffent que 
cela fe fift a noftre follicitation. Quand ce pauure 
homme entendit cela il eut peur, il fit neantmoins 
bonne mine: mais changeant de difcours il me dit, 
veux-tu gager que ie te mettray vn bafton de Porcelaine 
dans la main, tu le verras, tu le toucheras, tu I'enfer- 
meras dans ta main, puis venant a I'ouurir tu ne le 
trouueras plus. S'en eft fait, luy di-je, j'accepte la 
gageure, car fi c'eft toy qui doiue retirer ce bafton tu 
feras bien fubtil fi tu me trompe: fi c'eft le Diable, il 
a peur de ceux qui fe confient en Dieu. II ne [146] 
me touchera point, mais peut-eftre t'efpouftera t'il 


1 636 - 37] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 267 

lently." I accepted the wager, and put up three 
times as much as he suggested. The Savages en- 
joyed this dispute very much, some saying to me, 
"Thou wilt lose," the others declaring, "No, he 
will win, for he is a greater sorcerer than Pigarouich." 
I told them that I did not wish to derive any gain 
from this wager, that I gave them the share 
the sorcerer would lose; this excited them very 
much, and they placed themselves all on one side. 
Then addressing myself to the sorcerer, I said to 
him, " Be careful what thou doest; for, if it is thou 
who movest thy tent, I will instantly cut all the 
cords which hold it in place and I will show thee 
[145] to be an impostor. If it be some spirit or the 
wind, as thou sayest, know that it is the devil. Now 
the Devil fears us, and, if it is he, I shall speak to 
him severely, — I shall chide him, and shall force 
him to confess his impotence against those who be- 
lieve in God ; and I shall make him confess that he 
is deceiving you. Now when he sees himself ridi- 
culed, if he gets into a fury, and if he kills thee, do 
not lay the blame upon us ; if he goes out and strikes 
those who shall have called him, do not reproach us 
for it, for you will see that we will defy him to ap- 
proach us, and that he will not be able to do it, be- 
cause God protects us." In fact I had intended to 
hold this over them as a sword hereafter, ^^ and I 
feared that God would permit the Demon to do harm 
to these infidels and skeptics, and they would be- 
lieve nothing else than that it had been done at our 
instigation. When the poor man heard this, he was 
afraid, though he preserved a bold front ; but chang- 
ing the subject, he said to me, " Wilt thou bet that 
I cannot put a stick of Porcelain in thy hand, which 
thou wilt see and touch and close in thy hand, — 


258 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.11 

bien ferr6 : Mon pauure forcier ferrant les efpaules 
eufb bien voulu retirer fon efpingle du jeu, comme 
on dit, mais ie le preffois fort, & m'addreffant h. fes 
gens, vous voyez comme il vous abufe, il n'oferoit 
gager, preffez-le vous autres, afin que vous reco- 
gnoiffiez fes f ourbes & fes tromperies : luy voyant cela 
me donna beure au lendemain. Ten donne inconti- 
nent aduis au fieur Oliuier, & le priant de fe trouuer 
auec le P. de Quen & moy, & quelques Fran9ois que 
nous aurions pris pour eftre tefmoins du fait. Le 
lendemain i'attendois qu'on nous vint appeller felon 
que nous anions conuenu, mais au contraire on nous 
vint dire que le forcier s'en eftoit alle des le poinct 
du iour a la chaff e au lievre, qui n'eft icy la chafTe que 
des ieunes gar9ons. Ses gens difoient entr'eux qu'il 
auoit eu peur, qu'il n'auoit point de courage, les vns 
s'en eftonnoient admirans noftre creancer les autres 
difoient que les Fran9ois eftoient plus grands f orders 
qu'eux. II eft vray qu'ils nomment ces gens-lk Ma- 
n[i]touifioueKhi, c'eft a dire qui ont cognoiiTance auec 
le Manitou, auec celuy qui eft fuperieur aux hommes, 
appliquans le nom de Manitou tantoft a Dieu, tan- 
toft au diable. 

[147] Quelques iours s'eftans efcoulez, ce forcier 
tafcha de me venir trouuer en particulier: ie ferois 
trop long de rapporter icy comme il s'effor9a douce- 
ment de me gagner, ie lailferay vne partie de ces 
chofes pour le Journal. Comme il eftoit auec nous, 
plufieurs Sauuages entrerent, ie voulu les remettre 
fur ce qui s'eftoit palle : il me tira par la robbe, & 
me pria f ecrettement de quitter ce difcours, ie luy obey 
en ce poinct: mais ie I'eftourdy & fes compagnons, 
par ce que ie vay dire ; ie pris vne fueille de papier, & 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j6s7 259 


then, upon opening it, thou wilt no longer find it 
there?" " Done," said I, " I will accept the bet, for 
it is thou who must take away this stick, and thou 
wilt be sly indeed if thou deceivest me ; if it be the 
Devil, he is afraid of those who believe in God. He 
[146] will not touch me, but perhaps he will give 
thee a close dusting." My poor sorcerer, shrugging 
his shoulders, would have been very glad to with- 
draw his pin from the game, as the saying is, but I 
urged him strongly, and, addressing myself to his 
people, said, "You see how he deludes you; he 
would not dare to take up the bet; do you urge him, 
so that you may discover his frauds and his deceits." 
When he perceived this, he appointed an hour for 
the next day. I immediately informed sieur Olivier 
of it, and requested him to be there with Father de 
Quen and me, and some Frenchmen, whom we 
would take along as witnesses of the aifair. The 
next day, I waited for them to come and summon us, 
as we had arranged ; but, on the contrary, they came 
to tell us that the sorcerer had gone off at daybreak 
to hunt hares, which is here the sport only of young 
boys. His people said among themselves that he 
was afraid, that he had no courage ; some of them 
were astonished, and wondered at our belief; others 
said the French were greater sorcerers than they 
were. In truth they name such people Man[i]touisi- 
ouekhi, meaning, "those who are acquainted with 
the Manitou, with him who is superior to men," ap- 
plying the name Manitou now to God and now to the 
devil. 

[147] Some days having elapsed, this sorcerer tried 
to come and see me privately ; it would take me too 
long to relate here how he tried to win me by gentle 
means, — I will leave a part of these things for the 


260 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.11 

ie leur fis tenir par les quatre coins, puis ayant mis 
par deffus quelques aiguilles, ie palTois doucement ma 
main par delTous, tenant entre mes doigts vne petite 
pierre d'aymant: Ces aiguilles attirees par cefle 
pierre, alloient & venoient, auangoient ou reculoient 
felon Ie mouuemet de ma main : cela les eflona voyas 
courir & tourner ces aiguilles fans qu'on les touchaft. 
Les voyant dans I'eftonnemet ie dy au forcier qu'il 
en fifl autant ; il refpondit par les yeux me regardant 
fans dire mot: ie leur declaray que cela fe faifoit na- 
turellement, que ie ne me feruois point du diable 
pour Ie faire, & que c'eftoit vne chofe mefchante de 
s'en feruir: Qu'en France on mettoit a mort tous 
les Sorciers & Magiciens, quand [148] on les pouuoit 
def couurir ; que Ie malin ef prit ne faifoit iamais plai- 
fir a perfonne, qu'il s'efforgoit au commencement de 
couurir fa malice, mais qu'en fin il trompoit ceux qui 
auoyent recours a luy. Pour toy Pigarouich, di-ie 
au Sorcier, fi tu veux croire mon confeil tu ne con- 
fulteras iamais les Demons, ce font des menteurs. 
lis te difent que fe font eux qui font Ie iour, c'eft vne 
impofture : c'eft Dieu qui a fait Ie iour creant Ie So- 
leil: apres que ces Demons t'auront bien fait faire 
du mal aux autres, ils te tueront & t'entraifneront 
dans les flammes. Penfe a ce que ie te dis: II me 
refpondit qu'il nous viendroit voir. II y eft venu en 
effect, & nous a propof6 quelques queftions que ie 
vay defduire. 


1636-37] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 261 


Journal. While he was with us, several Savages en- 
tered, and I wished to remind them of what had 
occurred ; he pulled my gown, and begged me in a 
whisper to drop that subject. I obeyed him on this 
particular, but I dumbfounded him and his compan- 
ions by what I am going to relate. I took a sheet of 
paper, and made them hold it by the four corners ; 
then, having placed upon it some needles, I slowly 
passed my hand over it, holding between my fingers 
a little lodestone. The needles, attracted by this 
stone, went and came, advanced and retreated, ac- 
cording to the movement of my hand. They were 
astonished at seeing these needles run and turn 
about, without any one touching them. Seeing their 
amazement, I told the sorcerer that he should do 
the same; he answered by staring at me, without 
saying a word. I explained to them that this was a 
natural phenomenon, that I did not avail myself of 
the devil, in order to do it, and that it was a wicked 
thing to use his help ; that in France they put Sor- 
cerers and Magicians to death, when [148] they could 
be discovered ; that the evil spirit never did any one 
any good ; that in the beginning he tried to cover up 
his malice, but in the end he deceived those who had 
recourse to him. " As for thee, Pigarouich," said I 
to the Sorcerer, ' ' if thou wilt take my advice, thou 
wilt never consult the Demons, they are liars. They 
tell thee it is they who make the light ; this is an im- 
position, for it is God who makes the light by creat- 
ing the Sun. After these Demons shall have caused 
thee to do much harm to others, they will kill thee 
and drag thee into the flames. Think on what I 
tell thee. ' ' He answered that he would come and 
see us. He did indeed come, and proposed to us 
some questions which I am going to explain. 


262 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.11 


[149] CHAPITRE IX. 

QVELQVES ENTRETIENS AUEC LE SORCIER SUSDIT. 

CET homme ayant veu que nous luy faifions 
tefte, que fouuent nous le deffions d'exercer 
f es charmes contre nous : que nous nous moc- 
quions mefme du Manitou qu'ils redoutent comme 
la mort : Que nous dilions hautement que les Sor- 
ciers n'auoyent aucun pouuoir que celuy que le Dieu 
des Chrefliens leur permet, & que tons ceux qui 
croyent en luy ne les deuoyent pas craindre, com- 
men§a comme ie m 'imagine, k nous tenir plus grands 
Sorciers que luy. II me vint voir en fecret, & me 
propofa diuerfes queflions grandement ridicules. 

Eflant done feul en noftre maifon, il me dit, ie te 
veux racompter ce que ie fay: fi tu I'improuue ie le 
quitteray, car ie veux croire en celuy qui a tout fait. 
Ie fay des feflins auf quels il faut tout manger. Ie 
chante fort pendant ces feftins. Ie croy k mes fonges, 
ie les [150] interprete, comme auffi les fonges des 
autres : Ie chante & ie bats mon Tambour pour eflre 
heureux k la chafle & pour guerir les malades : Ie 
confulte ceux qui ont fait le lour. Ie tue les hommes 
auec mes forts, & auec mes inuentions ie prend des 
robbes, & d'autres prefens pour la guerifon des ma- 
lades: i'ordonne qu'on en donne aulTi aux malades, 
dy moy ce que tu trouue de manuals en tout cela. 
Ie luy refutay tons ces articles par bonnes raifons le 
mieux qu'il me fut poflible. 


1636 - 37] LE JE UNE 'S RELA TION, 1637 263 


[149] CHAPTER IX. 

SOME INTERVIEWS WITH THE AFORESAID SORCERER. 

THIS man, — having seen that we are holding our 
own against him, that we often defied him to 
exercise his charms upon us; that we even 
ridiculed the Manitou, whom they fear as they do 
death ; that we were saying boldly that the Sorcer- 
ers had no power outside of that which the God of 
the Christians grants them, and that all those who 
believe in him ought not to fear, — began, I imagine, 
to consider us greater Sorcerers than himself. He 
came to see me secretly, and proposed to me divers 
questions ridiculous in the extreme. 

Being, then, alone with me in our house, he said, 
" I am going to tell thee what I do ; if thou dost not 
approve of it I will give it up, for I wish to believe 
in him who has made all. I give feasts at which all 
must be eaten, I sing loudly during these feasts; I 
believe in my dreams, — I [150] interpret them, and 
also the dreams of others ; I sing and beat my Drum, 
in order to be lucky in the chase and to cure sick- 
ness; I consult those who have made the Light; I 
kill men by my sorceries and with my contrivances ; 
I take robes and other gifts for curing the sick ; I 
order that these should also be given to the sick 
themselves. Tell me, what dost thou find bad in all 
that?" I refuted all these points by good argu- 
ments, the best I could conjure up. 

Another time, he told me that during their epi- 


264 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 11 

Vne autre fois il me dit que durant leur mortality, 
il y a trois ou quatre ans, qu'eftant prefque k I'ago- 
nie comme les autres, il auoit veu en fonge vne Mai- 
fon faite comme la noflre, dans laquelle il y auoit des 
Images comme celles qu'il voyoit chez nous : & qu'a- 
pres ce fonge il guerit, & depuis autant de fois qu'il 
s'eft trouue malade, s'il a peu auoir le mefme fonge, 
qu'il n'a point retard^ k recouurer la fant6 : h.€ bien, 
me fit-il, cela n'eft-il pas bon? le prins peine de luy 
defcouurir la vanite de leurs refueries. 

II me dit vn autre iour, que pour deuenir forcier, 
c'eft h. dire pour auoir communication auec le Mani- 
tou, & eftre heureux [151] aux fonges. II auoit jeuf- 
n€ cinq iours & cinq nuicts, fans boire ny manger, 
retire dans vne petite cabanne au milieu des bois. 

Comme ie I'auois repris de fes lubricitez, il me pro- 
pofa quelques casde Confcience: tu dis, me faifoit-il, 
que Dieu deffend la pluralite des femmes : he bien, 
pour le contenter ie n'en auray qu'vne a mes coftez: 
Mais y aura il du mal d'en aller chercher d' autres que 
ie ne tiendray point pour femmes? Ie luy reparty, 
voudrois-tu bien que quelqu'vn vint defbaucher ta 
femme ou ta fille ? Non pas, refpond-il : Tu vois done 
bien que c'eft mal fait de folliciter &. mal les femmes 
ou filles d'autruy. 

Cela eft vray, me fit-il : mais fi les femmes me re- 
clierchent, feray-ie mal de condefcendre a leur defir? 
Si ta femme ou ta fille recherchoyent quelque homme 
pour fe proftituer, feroyent elles bien? Non ce n'eft 
pas bien fait: done les femmes qui te recherchent 
font mal? II eft vray, elles n'ont point d'efprit, ref- 
pond-il : fi elles font mal de te demander vne chofe 
illicite, aufsi fais tu mal de leur accorder, tu as raifon, 
repart-il, ie cognois bien ce que tu dis. 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 265 

demic three or four years ago, he, being almost in 
the agony of death, like the others, had seen in a 
dream a House made like ours, in which were some 
Images like those he saw in our house; and that 
after this dream he recovered; and, since then, 
whenever he has been sick, if he could have the 
same dream, he quickly recovered his health. " Now 
then," he said to me, "is that not a good thing?" 
I took pains to show him the vanity of their dreams. 

He told me another day that, in order to become 
a sorcerer, — that is, to have communication with the 
Manitou, and to be lucky [151] in dreams, — he had 
fasted five days and five nights, without drinking or 
eating, isolated in a little cabin in the midst of the 
woods. 

As I had reprimanded him for his lusts, he pro- 
posed certain questions of Conscience to me. " Thou 
sayest," he said, "that God prohibits a plurality of 
wives; well, then, to satisfy him I will only have 
one with me ; but will there be any harm in going 
to seek others, whom I shall not take as wives?" I 
answered him, " Dost thou wish some one to come 
and debauch thy wife or thy daughter?" "No," 
said he. " Well, then, thou seest plainly it is an evil 
deed to solicit the wives and daughters of others." 

" That is true," said he, " but, if the women seek 
me, shall I do wrong to yield to their desire? " " If 
thy wife or thy daughter were to seek some man with 
whom to prostitute herself, would she be doing 
right?" "No, that is not doing right." "Then 
the women who seek thee, are they doing wrong?" 
"Certainly, they have no sense," he replied. "If 
they do wrong to ask thee for an unlawful thing, 
thou also doest wrong to grant it to them." " Thou 
art right," said he, " I grant what thou sayest." 


266 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.11 

II me demanda fi en effect Makheabichtichiou [152] 
vouloit croire en Dieu: ie luy dy qu'il le difoit ainfi: 
au refte luy adjonftay-ie, on m'a dit que tu le voulois 
tuer par tes forts, donne t'en de garde, car mainte- 
nant qu'il vent croyre en celuy qui a tout fait, il eft 
en fa protection : & le Diable ne luy pouuant faire 
aucun mal defchargeroit peut-eftre fa colere fur toy. 
Pour Makheabichticliiou ie luy ay confeille, non pas 
de te vouloir du mal, mais de prier Dieu qu'il te face 
f age & te face quitter tes f ortileges : car noftre Dieu 
nous deffend de hayr perfonne, il prend luy-mefme 
la vengeance pour nous contre nos ennemis. Ce bon 
homme efpouuante fit incontinent la paix auec Ma- 
kheabichticliiou, fe promettans I'vn 1' autre en ma pre- 
fence de s'entraymer & de fe tenir comme freres. 
Depuis ce temps-la ce Sorcier fe rendit plus curieux 
de f9auoir quelle eftoit noftre doctrine. II me fit di- 
uerfes interrogations touchant la vie eternelle, tou- 
chant I'enfer, touchant la refurrection des corps, & fe 
monftroit fi attentif que i'en eftois eflonn6. II me 
promit qu'il prieroit Dieu en fecret, il me faifoit dire 
quelque Oraifon pour I'apprendre. II m'alTeura qu'il 
ne confulteroit plus les Demons & qu'il s'abftiendroit 
des autres chofes que ie luy auois deffendu. II a 
[153] garde cela tandis qu'il a eft6 noftre voifm: 
mais comme il eft peu inftruit, & que s'il a la foy 
c'eft vne foy de crainte & tres-feruile, il oublie aife- 
ment fes promeffes. Eftant certain iour k la chaffe, 
comme ils fe trouuerent preffez de faim n'ayans 
rien pris : MaKheabichtichiou dit aux Sauuages, vous 
fgauez que le P. nous a dit que nous euffions recours 
a Dieu en nos neceffitez, prions-le maintenant qu'il 
nous affifte: tons les autres fe mirent ^ rire: ex- 


1636-37] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib37 267 

He asked me if Makheabichtichiou did really [152] 
wish to believe in God. I told him that he said he 
did. " Moreover," I added, " I have been told that 
thou wishest to kill him by thy charms; be careful, 
for now that he is trying to believe in him who has 
made all, he is under his protection; and the Devil, 
not being able to do him any harm, may discharge his 
wrath upon thee. As to Makheabichtichiou, I have 
advised him not to wish thee any harm, but to pray 
God to make thee wise and to make thee give up thy 
sorceries ; for our God forbids us to hate any one, he 
himself taking revenge for us upon our enemies." 
this simple man, greatly frightened, immediately 
made peace with Makheabichtichiou, each promising 
the other in my presence to love and treat the other 
as a brother. After that time this Sorcerer became 
more curious to know about our doctrine. He asked 
me various questions regarding the future life, hell, 
the resurrection of the body, and showed himself so 
attentive that I was astonished. He promised me he 
would pray to God in secret, and had me repeat a 
Prayer for him to learn. He assured me that he 
would no longer consult the Demons, and that he 
would refrain from other things I had prohibited. 
He [153] kept this up as long as he was our neigh- 
bor ; but, as he is only slightly instructed, and as his 
faith, if he have any at all, is the faith of fear and ser- 
vility, he easily forgets his promises. One day, in 
the hunt, when they were pressed by hunger, hav- 
ing captured nothing, Makheabichtichiou said to the 
Savages, ' ' You know that the Father has told us to 
have recourse to God in our distress ; let us pray him 
now to assist us." All the other Savages began to 
laugh except the Sorcerer, who did not oppose the 


268 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.11 

cept6 le Sorcier qui ne contraria point la propofition 
faite de prier Dieu. Or pour le prefent ie ne fgay oil 
eft ce pauure homme : c'efl le malheur de cefte Na- 
tion, ie croy qu'ils font defcendus de Cayn, ou de 
quelque autre errant comme luy. 


1636-37] LEJEUNE'S RELATION, i637 269 

proposition made to pray to God. Now for the pres- 
ent I do not know where this poor man is ; this is the 
misfortune of this Nation, which I verily believe has 
descended from Cain, or from some other wanderer 
like him. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA : VOL XI 

XXVII -XXVIII 

Brebeuf's two letters to the general of the order, 
here given, were both sent from Ihonatiria, — one 
without date, but bearing internal evidence of having 
been written in 1636, and the other dated May 20, 
1637. The original manuscripts are in Latin, and 
preserved in the MSS. Soc. Jes. In 1858, Father 
Martin made copies thereof, and his apographs are 
now in the Archives of St. Mary's College, at Mont- 
real; we follow the text of the Latin apographs, in 
the present issue, and our English translation is made 
therefrom. This is, so far as we are aware, the first 
publication of the letters in the language in which 
they were written. 

Martin's French translations of his apographs are 
given in Carayon's Premiere Mission, pp. 163-166, 
and 157-162 respectively. Through a clerical error, 
Carayon gives 1638 (instead of 1636) as the date of 
our Doc. XXVII., thus throwing them out of true 
chronological sequence; we restore them to their 
proper places. 

XXIX 

The Relation of 1637 (Rouen, 1638) is, for conven- 
ience, styled Le Jeune's; but like many others of the 
series, it is a composite. The book contains three 
sections: the first (pp. 1-313) consisting of 309 pp., 
is Le Jeune's own Relation, as superior, dated on 


272 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 

board the ship Saint e Marie at Cap Rouge, August 
31, 1637, and addressed to the provincial of the 
Jesuits, for the province of France; following this 
(pp. 314-336), is a letter of 23 pp., from Le Jeune to 
the provincial, dated Sept. 1 1 , evidently sent in the 
same ship with the Relation, as a postscript ; the third 
section, of 256 pp., separate pagination, is the annual 
Huron Relation, rendered to Le Jeune, — this time, 
signed by Fran§ois Joseph le Mercier, and dated at 
Ihonattiria, June 21, 1637. Owing to the fact that 
Le Jeune's two contributions are continuously paged, 
they are classed by bibliographers as together consti- 
tuting Part L of the Relation of 1637; and the sepa- 
rately-paged Huron report as Part H. thereof. 

For the text of this document, we have had re- 
course to the original printed Relation (first issue), 
in Lenox Library, which is usually designated as 
"H. 67," because described in Harrisse'siVi?/^^, no. 67. 

Collation (H. G'j): Title, with verso blank, i leaf; 
' ' Extraict du Priuilege du Roy ' ' (dated Paris, Feb. 
5, 1638), p. (i); "Approbation" by the provincial 
(dated Paris, Jan. 22, 1638), p. (i); "Table des 
Chapitres," pp. (2); introductory letter, Le Jeune 
to the provincial, pp. (4); text by Le Jeune (15 
chaps.), pp. I- 3 13; " Derniere lettre dv P. Paul le 
leune," pp. 314-336; text by Le Mercier (Huron 
Relation, 7 chaps.), pp. 1-256 (separate pagination). — 
A folding wood-engraving, representing fireworks, 
appears between pp. 18 and 19 of Part L 

Peculiarities: The pagination is, in places, erratic: 
In Part L, p. 14 is mispaged 13; p. 182, mispaged 
128; there are no pp. 193- 196 in this part, signature 
" M " ending with p . 1 92 , and signature " N " beginning 
with p. 197. The copy in Harvard College has p. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DA TA : VOL. XI 273 

167 mispaged as 168, though in both issues in the 
Lenox Library the pagination, in this respect, is 
correct. In Part IL (the Huron Relation), p. 170 
is mispaged 172, There are several errors in page 
references, in the Table des Chapitres, which will be 
found corrected within brackets, in the present issue. 
Signature "A" begins with p. i of the text — the pre- 
liminary matter is made up of the title, plus sig. "a" 
in four. Although Parts I. and IL are separately 
paged, the signatures of the volume form a continu- 
ous series. Part II. beginning with "Aa." 

Harrisse's Notes (no. 68), and the Lenox Catalogue 
(p. 5) describe what is called a second issue. The 
title-page of the example in the Lenox Library is 
an entire reset; it reads line-for-line like H. 6^ , down 
to the ornament ; in the place of the one reproduced 
in our facsimile, H. 68 presents " the monogram of 
Christ, surrounded by rays of light." The remain- 
der of the title of the second issue is as follows : 

A ROVEN, I Chez Iean le Bovlenger. | Et fe 
-Uendent h Paris, \ Chez PlERRE DE Bresche, rue S. 
Eftienne | des Grecs k 1' Image Sainc5t lofeph. | 
M. DC. XXXVIII. I A VEC PRIVILEGE DV ROY. \ 

Harrisse declares that the differences in title-page, 
between H. (i'j and H. 68, are the only ones dis- 
coverable. The errors in pagination, both in Table 
and text, are identical ; but we have discovered 
two typographical differences, in Part I., which are 
slight, but interesting : On p. 300, line 2 1 , the word 
tra cts, in H. 67, appears with the " i " dropped out, 
while in H. 68 the defect is remedied to read traicts; 
on p. 304, last line, the longt-emps of H. d'j becomes 
long-temps in H. 68. Possibly other changes might 
be found, upon a line-for-line comparison. Harrisse 


274 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES 

(no. 67) has omitted to indicate the parallel line- 
divisions between the seventh and eighth lines, after 
the word " Provincial." In no. 68 he has made a 
similar omission in the imprint, between the second 
and third lines, after " Bovlenger." 

Apparently, the Rouen printer and dealer worked 
off a special edition for sale in Paris, with a fresh 
title-page giving the name of the dealer in the latter 
city — the home edition being H. 67, and the Paris 
edition H. 68. That the Rouen edition was the first, 
is evident from the typographical corrections above 
noted. Further, in the Rouen example in Lenox, 
there are numerous ' ' bites ' ' of the frisket, in print- 
ing; in the Paris example, in the same library, the 
impressions are all clear, showing that the frisket 
had by that time been adjusted. 

A note in Lenox Catalogue, after the description 
of H. 68, says: " In the Bib. du Roi at Paris there 
was a copy having folio i of first part double. The 
title to Chap. i. was mil six cens trente sept — in the 
other trente six — the latter no doubt a mistake and 
intended to be cancelled." 

Copies of this Relation are to be found in the 
Brown (H. 67), Lenox (both issues), Laval University 
at Quebec (both issues), and Harvard College (H. 6^) 
libraries, and (H. 67) in the British Museum. Copies 
of the first issue (Rouen) have been sold or priced as 
follows: O'Callaghan (1882), no. 12 16, brought $20, 
and had cost him $33.75 in gold ; Harrassowitz(i882), 
no. 24, priced at 150 marks; Barlow (1889), no. 1277, 
sold for $22.50; Dufosse (1892), priced at 300 francs. 
Copies of the second issue (Rouen et Paris) have been 
priced as follows : Leclerc (1878), no. 779, 200 francs ; 
Dufosse (189 1 and 1893), 225 and 300 francs. 


NOTES TO VOL XI 


(Figures in parentheses, following number of note, refer to pages 
of English text.) 

I (p. 7). — The grain that some call Turkish: Indian com, or 
maize {Zea mays, Linn.), — also known at that time as "Turkey 
wheat" or "Turkey corn" (from a vague notion that it originated 
in Turkey), and " Indian wheat " (bid d' Inde). The word "maize " 
is a form of the original Haytian name, niahis or mahiz. The early 
explorers found this grain under cultivation by the American abo- 
rigines, from Canada to Chile; and the Spaniards, soon after the 
discovery of America, introduced maize into Europe, whence it 
rapidly spread over the civilized world. There was long a contro- 
versy among scientific men over the question whether maize was of 
American or of Oriental origin: the former theory was advocated 
notably by Humboldt and De CandoUe, and appears most probable. 

Cartier describes the culture and use of this com by the natives 
of Hochelaga, in his Brief Ricit (Tross ed., 1863), fol. 23, 24. 
Champlain saw it everywhere along the North Atlantic coast; he 
is ' ' the first who has left a record of its cultivation in New England, 
and of its preservation through the winter." He also noticed that 
the Indians made successive plantings thereof. — See his Voyages 
(Prince Soc), vol. ii., pp. 64-66, 82, 121, 122. Cf. Smith's Generall 
Historie of Virginia (London, 1629; reprint, Richmond, Va., 1891), 
vol. i., p. 126. 

On the preparation and use of maize as food, see vol. v. of this 
series, note 28; Champlain (ut supra), vol. ii., p. 123, and vol. iii.» 
pp. 162-164; Smith's Virginia (ut supra), vol. i., p. 127; and 
Charlevoix's Journ. Hist., pp. 331-333. It is estimated that a 
larger part of the human race is nourished by this grain than by 
any other except rice. 

Columbus and Oviedo mention that the aborigines of the New 
World made from maize an intoxicating liquor, called chicha, which 
was also observed by Pickering in use in Peru (Chron. Hist, of 
Plants, pp. 610, 859). For further information regarding maize, 
see Salisbury's History and Chetnical Investigation of Maize 
(Albany, 1849) ; Lundy's " Zea Maize," in Phila. Nutnis. and Antiq , 
Soc. Proc, 25th anniv. (Phila., 1883), pp. 15-22; Carr's Food of 
Amer. Inds., and Mounds of Miss. Valley. 


276 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 

2 (p. 17). — Attignenonghac : see vol. viii., note 23. 

3 (p. 49). — The Knights Hospitallers of St. John (also called 
Knights of Rhodes, and Knights of Malta), a religious and military 
order, had its origin in the hospitals founded at Jerusalem (1048), 
by certain Italians, for the benefit of pilgrims thither ; these hospi- 
tals were served by a confraternity, under one Gerard. After the 
capture of Jerusalem by the Crusaders, the Hospital brothers were 
joined by several Knights, one of whom, Raymond du Puy, became 
the head of the order upon Gerard's death (11 18.) To their former 
duties of hospitality and the care of the sick was now added that of 
knighthood, in opposition to infidels — which latter soon predomi- 
nated in the work of the order. Its constitutions, based on the 
Augustinian rule, were approved by Pope Calixtus II. (1120). Dur- 
ing four centuries, this order won great renown and power from its 
brilliant achievements in the long and bloody struggle between the 
Christians and Saracens. The island of Rhodes was the headquar- 
ters of the Hospitallers, from 1310 until 1522, when they were 
defeated, after a long siege, and driven from the island. The em- 
peror Charles V. having given them the island of Malta, they estab- 
lished themselves here, rendering Malta one of the strongest forti- 
fied places in the world. They held this island until 1798, when it 
was captured by Bonaparte; since then, the order has had but a 
nominal existence, its seat having been at Rome since 1834. — See 
McClintock and Strong's Cyclop, of Bibl. Lit., vol. ix., pp. 246, 247. 

4 (p. 49). — This seminary for Indian girls was founded by 
Madame de la Peltrie. Born at Alengon (1603), of a noble Norman 
family, Marie Madeleine de Chauvigny married a gentleman named 
De la Peltrie, but was left a childless widow at the age of twenty- 
two. Deeply religious and enthusiastic in temperament, she had, in 
early girlhood, desired to enter a convent ; but the opposition of her 
family prevented such action. After the death of her husband, she 
engaged in works of piety and benevolence. Upon reading, in Le 
Jeune's Relation of 1635, his appeal for help in educating Indian 
girls, she determined to devote herself and her fortune to this 
cause, — making, during a severe illness, a vow to that effect. Com- 
manded by her father to marry again, under pain of disinheritance, 
she contracted a nominal marriage with M. de Bernieres-Louvigny, 
royal treasurer at Caen — a gentleman of wealth and great piety. 
Her father dying soon afterwards, she fulfilled her vow by sailing 
to Canada (May, 1639) with three Ursuline nuns, with whom she 
founded a convent of that order in Quebec. There they maintained 
a school for girls, in which they received both French and Indian 
children. Mother Marie of the Incarnation was superior of the con- 
vent, from its foundation until her death in 1672. Lands were as- 


NOTES TO VOL. XI 277 

signed to the Ursulines, in the Jesuit seigniory of Notre Dame des 
Anges; but these were exchanged in 1646 for estates at Longue 
Pointe and on the Isle of Orleans. 

Madame de la Peltrie remained at the Ursuline convent until 1642, 
when she joined the Montreal colony established in that year. Four 
years later, she was again in Quebec ; the Journ. des Jisuites in- 
forms us that, on Nov. 21, 1646, she became a novice in the Ursuline 
order there. In their convent she died, Nov. 18, 1671 ; and her biog- 
raphy has been written by a nun of the order (Quebec, 1864, caJ). 

5 (p. 49). — Le Jeune here refers to the school founded by Rene 
Rohault and his father (vol. vi., note 9; vol. viii., p. 227; vol. ix., 
note 32). 

6 (p. 53)- — Madame the Princess : Charlotte, princess of Conde 
(vol. ii., note 24). The piety of her son (vol. viii., note 13) is eulo- 
gized in the Relation of 1636 (vol. viii., p. 225). 

7 (P- 59)- — Concerning the Ursulines, see vol. v., note 3. 

8 (p. 59). — Regarding the Hospital nuns, see vol. viii., note 64. 

9 (p. 65). — For sketch of Nicolas Adam, see vol. viii., note 55. 

10 (p. 69). — Saucisson (Eng. "sausage"): a bag filled with pow- 
der, attached to a rocket to increase the noise of its explosion. 

11 (p. 69). — Jean Bourdon, a native of Normandy, a surveyor 
and engineer by occupation, came to Canada in 1634. He was a 
prominent and public-spirited citizen of his adopted land, — actively 
participating in its civil affairs, and in its defense against the hostile 
Iroquois. In Oct.- Nov., 1645, he was commandant at Three Rivers, 
between Champflour's departure for France and the arrival of the 
latter's successor. In July, 1647, he was elected procuror-syndic by 
the colonists; and in September, 1663, was appointed by the Sover- 
eign Council " procuror-general for His Majesty." Later, he was a 
member of the Council. In 1650, 1660, and 1664 he made voyages 
to France, — apparently in the interests of the Quebec colony as 
well as his own. He was one of the commercial company of Ta- 
doussac (vol. ix., note 4). Dying Jan. 12, 1668, he left a widow and 
six children. Of his four daughters, two became Ursuline and two 
Hospital nuns ; Marguerite was one of the founders of the General 
Hospital of Quebec (1693), and Anne was a superior of the Ursu- 
lines. Mother Marie of the Incarnation writes (1668) in the highest 
praise of Bourdon's integrity and goodness, and of the piety and 
charity of his widow; both were warm friends of Mother Marie. 

In 1646, Bourdon went with Isaac Jog^es (vol. ix., note 41) on an 
embassy to the Iroquois. May 2, 1657, he undertook an expedition 
from Quebec, endeavoring to reach Hudson Bay by sea; but at 
55° N. lat. he encountered so many icebergs that he could go no 
farther. His Huron guides were murdered by the Eskimos ; and in 
August of that year he was compelled to return to Quebec. As 


278 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 


early as 1641, he sketched the first map of French Canada (vol. iv., 
note 38). 

Bourdon early became a landed proprietor. In May, 1637, he was 
granted 50 arpents of woodland — a part of the tract known later as 
"the plains of Abraham;" this is the first Canadian concession 
which mentions the Coutume de Paris. Ten years later, he secured 
another estate, extending a half-league along the St. Lawrence; 
this and the above grant together constituted the fief Dautray. In 
March, 1646, the fief St. Francis was also granted to him jointly 
with Jean Le Sueur de St. Sauveur, a priest, who had come with 
Bourdon to Canada; this last was augmented (1653) by a part of the 
common lands formerly granted to the colony of Quebec, "in con- 
sideration of the expenditures made by the sieurs Bourdon and St. 
Sauveur upon their concessions for the protection of Quebec against 
the inroads of the Iroquois. " In 1653, Bourdon obtained still another 
grant, that of Pointe aux Trembles. 

12 (p. 69). — Jacques Gourdeau (born in 1614, says Suite; but 1624, 
according to Tanguay), a native of Poitou, France, was in Quebec 
in March, 1637. In 1652, he there married Eleonore de Grandmaison, 
widow of sieur de Chavigny, who possessed several estates. Gour- 
deau and his wife lived in her house on the Isle of Orleans ; and 
there he was assassinated (June 2, 1663) by a servant, who set fire 
to the house to conceal his crime. Gourdeau left to his widow four 
children. 

13 (p. 87). — Beaupre and Cap de Tourmente are described in vol. 
ix., note 37. The seigniory of Beaupre was one of those assigned 
to Laval, first bishop of Canada. 

14 (p. 123). — Pierre de la Porte, a native of Paris, was at Quebec in 
May, 1637 — being mentioned, in the document describing Bourdon's 
first concession, as the possessor of lands between Quebec and Cap 
Rouge. He seems to have returned to Paris within a few years, 
for a daughter was there born to him who married, at Quebec (1665), 
Frangois Genaple. 

15 (p. 125). — For sketch of the Attikamegues, see vol. ix., 7iote 20. 

16 (p. 137). — Charles Raymbault, born Apr. 6, 1602, became a 
Jesuit novice at Rouen, Aug. 24, 1621. His studies were pursued 
there and at La Fleche and Bourges ; and he gave instruction suc- 
cessively in the colleges of Rennes, Blois, and Amiens. From 1633 
to 1637, he acted as procuror for the college of Rouen ; in the latter 
year, being appointed agent for the Canada mission, he soon after 
departed for Quebec. In 1640, he was laboring with Buteux at 
Three Rivers ; and in the autumn of that year was sent to the Huron 
country with Claude Pijart, that they might establish missions 
among the Algonkin tribes north of the Hurons. They began their 


NOTES TO VOL. XI 279 

work, in November of that year, with the Nipissiriniens (vol. v., 
note 51), who, as Lalemant tells us (Huron Relation of 1641, chap, 
vii.), were accustomed to migrate southward on the approach of 
winter, to spend that season in the Huron territory. Having in- 
structed these Algonkins during the winter at their encampment 
near Ste. Marie, the missionaries decided to follow them to their 
summer residence at Lake Nipissing, where they carried on the mis- 
sion (named the Holy Ghost) to this tribe. Two years later, Pijart 
founded a second mission (St. Elizabeth), not far from Lake Simcoe, 
for the Algonkins of that region. 

In September, 1641, — at a "feast of the dead," celebrated by the 
Nipissings, to which they invited their allies, and at which the 
Jesuits were also present, — the missionaries encountered certain 
savages of the Pauoitigoueienhac tribe (known to the French as 
"Sauteurs," from their residence near the rapids of St. Mary's 
River, and in modern times as Ojibwas or Chippewas), who urged 
the ' ' black gowns ' ' to visit them at their homes. In accordance 
with this invitation, Raymbault and Jogues, with a small Huron 
escort, left Ste. Marie a few weeks later, and, after a voyage of 17 
days through Lake Huron, reached the rapids where dwelt their 
Sauteur friends — the location of the modern Sault Ste. Marie. Here 
they were cordially welcomed, and urged to remain and instruct the 
people ; but this invitation they were obliged to decline, returning 
soon afterwards to the Huron mission. Immediately thereafter, 
Raymbault set out in a canoe, with Rene Menard, to rejoin his Nipis- 
sing disciples ; but stormy and freezing weather compelled them to 
give up their voyage and return to Ste. Marie. The hardships of 
these expeditions enfeebled Raymbault's constitution, and he was 
obliged to descend to Quebec for proper care and food. There he 
remained, in an invalid condition, until his death, Oct. 22, 1642 — the 
first Jesuit who died at Quebec. He had not a brilliant intellect, but 
was a man of practical judgment and good sense, and of intense, 
though calm, devotion to his missionary duties. 

17 (p. 197). — Concerning intemperance among the Indians, see vol. 
vi., note 19. 

18 (p. 257). — This sentence was erroneously printed in the original 
issue of this Relation; and Le Jeune himself thus corrects it at the 
close of his Relation of 1638: " The Relation of last year is full of 
errors. ... In Chapter 8, at page 145 — where some quarrel 
that I had with a sorcerer is in question — the Printer makes me, in 
place of employing exorcisms against the devil, use a sword. This 
is what I wrote in the original : ' In fact, I intended to employ a 
sort of exorcism ; ' the Printer made it : 'In fact, 1 intended to use a 
sword hereafter.' " 





l^?\^ 


