Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 35: Hurons, Lower Canada, Algonkins, 1650
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1899 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits35jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits35jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits35jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 35 of 73. Volume 35 reaches 1650, the end of the world's window.

---

ScShS) Sun avec as 
bead hel i a) 
seu o™ SAB?) S18 OS aitianeae & & 
Bsa S56 SR Rese @ 2B yes 

SoG o Ss tutive asus 
Sue 
meet LIT ot tt Sr bt ty 
va ee tg%"- 808 aed ged 
itd et fit} @ Geum 


wise skeen 


@.5 
ee 
2, S.8-e8 
S98 646-4 ¢ 
$656 Geiss 
Pf 


Ps 
S 8s R tek © 8 
$088.4 . 


€ LOGE 1} 


ue) 
| 
ATM ayn sd d 


_ Bo | 


6.3 )8) 8 8/8)/8),0. 9 


818° 8)8 S58) 8:8 a ae e 
ss £84 2.2 


~~ Wey 7h7 een 


y ae Pe 
\" 
} 1% -# vats! ry 
ae * yf : ; 
6% . 4 & Ge ‘, 
} 2 | 6" > — a | 
~- 


THE JESUIT RELATIONS 


AND 


ALLIED DOCUMENTS 


The edition consists of sev- 
en hundred and fifty sets 
all numbered 


No. PAL 


Le Brceenreheuser 


Prectolermos qrommnlan Patram b SoctePlefitrnomtanctalP Annas Dénoie Campanis Caritativo Aetiacerevcons frie crerthir 2 Feb 16 
uw 5.P. Anton Ha ncel Defpenfis grem Jue vitam Jeruare votlens enterfretur 4. lul1b 4.3 07 Ploa-deBrebeuy dro Batocenfet PGabrel Lallemant pee 
if Mhic 7 snarl. bye RCard Garnier partfinus Paftoris officio fungens, felopts tnpetitur. 7 Decemb 1649 OP Natal chahanel diac Mimaten f-ab api 


“an 


TORTURE OF 


[Reduced facsimile of plate in Historia Canadensis, by Franciscus Creuxius, S.J., published t 
and place. Modern portraits of several of the 


_—. 


—— a 
“Warloguer Anrilanus Chri shurn ad Hircqueos portans Damorizm atuliffe credits fecuri perentitur, 19 O cto.1647 3: 4-.Duo ynuenes gall etus comiles Crucidan 
’ ammi:candentibusqueigni fecurcbus ad collum apperfis:cauftr aquaebultenti,in Baptifmi contemplum a be fr hago deuor alifque Carnibus intercunt 
dem tempus, inprofluenterm deyectus eft 10 lofeph Onuhare ) wuenis Algonquinus ¢ chrifti laudibusceffarenolens,tr diebus totidemag, nod cructatur ann 1650 verno 


: 
: 
JESUIT MARTYRS. 


| Cramoisys at Paris, 1664. The artist has grouped, in his picture, incidents far separated in time 
yrs, are apparently based upon those given therein.) 


726! 


The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 


TRAVELS AND EXPLORATIONS 
OF THE JESUIT MISSIONARIES 
IN NEW FRANCE 


1610-1791 


THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES; ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 


EDITED BY 
REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 


Vol. XXXV 
HURONS, LOWER CANADA, ALGONKINS: 1650 


CLEVELAND: The Burrows Brotbers 
Company, PUBLISHERS, M DCCC XCIX 


petites aft faith i 


» / mnt < | 


CopyRIGHT, 1899 ; 
BY . 
Tur Burrows BrotHers Co 3 


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 


EDITORIAL STAFF 


Editor : , REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
{ FINLOW ALEXANDER 
PEeRcY FAVOR BICKNELL 
Translators . ; 4 CRAWFORD LINDSAY 


WILLIAM PRICE 


| HIRAM ALLEN SOBER 
Assistant Editor. EMMA HELEN BLAIR 


Bibliographical Adviser VicTOR HuGo PALTSITS 


CONTENTS OF VOL. XXXV 


PREFACE TO VOLUME XXXV 
DOCUMENTS :— 


LXXII. Epistola ad R. P. Vincentium Caraf- 
fam, Prepositum Generalem Socie- 
tatis Jesu, Rome. Paulus Rague- 
neau,; Sanctz Marie in Insula Sancti 
Josephi apud Hurones, March 13, 
1650 . ; ‘ ; ‘ 

LXXIII. Journal des PP. Jésuites. Hzerosme 
Lalemant, and FPaul Ragueneau; 
Quebek, January—December, 1650 
LXXIV. Relation de ce qvis’est passéen .... 
la Nouuelle France, depuis l’Efté de 
l'année 1649. jufques a l’Efté de 
l’année 1650. [Chaps. i.—xii., first 
installment of the document.] Paul 
Ragueneau; Kebec, September 1, 
1650 F : : 
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOLUME XXXV 
NOTES 


. 285 
. 289 


18 


30 


65 


RE. 


ITI. 


IV. 


ILLUSTRATIONS TO VOL. XXXV 


Torture of the Jesuit Martyrs; reduced fac- 
simile of plate in Historia Canadensis, by 
Franciscus Creuxius, S.J. . Frontispiece 

Facsimile of handwriting of Charles Al1- 
banel, S.J.; selected from entry in parish 
register of Notre Dame, Montreal, dated 


January 9, 1650 . ; . Facing 54 
Photographic facsimile of title-page, Re/a- 
tion of 1649-50 . ; ‘ a. 


Facsimile of handwriting of Barthélemy 
Vimont, S.J.; selected from his account 
of the chapel of Sillery . . Facing 218 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXXV 


Following is a synopsis of the documents contained 
in the present volume: 


LXXII. This isa letter from Ragueneau to the 
father general, dated in the Huron country, March 
13,1650. Init is depicted in vivid colors the distress 
and misery into which the Huron nation has been 
plunged. Since the last Relation, two more Jesuits 
have fallen at their posts,—Charles Garnier and 
Noél Chabanel. The little Huron church is scattered 
in every direction, the country being devastated by 
war, famine, and pestilence. So great is the famine 
that cannibalism prevails, and corpses are dug from 
the graves for food. In the midst of their afflictions, 
the people seek instruction and baptism from the 
missionaries, as never before. The latter—‘‘as 
good shepherds, following their flock ’’ — have aban- 
doned their house of Ste. Marie, and established a 
new residence on St. Joseph (now Christian) Island, 
that they may minister to the Hurons who have fled 
thither. Here they make a fresh clearing in the 
forest, and build homes; and, besides, construct 
fortifications for defense, should the Iroquois attack 
them. Hardest of all is to clear the ground from 
stumps, and plant it with seed. They have brought 
supplies of food and live stock from Ste. Marie, and 
have aided their disciples with their reserves of 
Indian corn. Notwithstanding their hardships, all 


10 PREFACE TO VOL. XXXV 


connected with the mission are ready to lay down 
their lives for its sake; and they rejoice in their 
sufferings, regarding these as tokens of God’s favor. 


LXXIII. The Journal des /Jésuites continues its 
record, through the year 1650. But few events of 
importance occur, until the coming of summer. In 
january, a cabin for the savages is erected at the 
hospital, by the French carpenters; but, ‘‘ upon 
occupying it, the cabin proved to be useless, on 
account of the smoke.’’ The moose-hunt of this 
winter is unusually good. 

‘On St. Joseph’s eve, there was a very cold bon- 
fire — that is to say, very simple, without fireworks or 


rockets.” In consequence of the governor’s illness, 
Lalemant starts the fire, ‘‘ but with great repug- 
nance.’’ Late in April, the Jesuits decide to assign 


lands at Beauport to the fugitive Hurons; also, to 
erect, at their own expense, a new building for their 
mission at Three Rivers. May 11, the Iroquois make 
a raid upon a farm close to Quebec, and kill two 
men. At this time, the Jesuits exchange their land 
at Three Rivers—nearly 500 arpents—for another 
tract of like size, that the former may be turned into 
common lands; this is done under constraint from 
the local authorities. Bressani sets out for the Huron 
country, on June 7, accompanying a large trading- 
fleet of canoes. A week later, a Huron from Three 
Rivers comes to Quebec, claiming that the Iroquois 
have sent him to negotiate a peace with the French. 
This story proving false, his own countrymen con- 
demn him to death; ‘‘he was accordingly baptized 
on the 20th, and named Louys, without as yet 
knowing whether he were to live or to die.” On the 
following day, he is put to death by the Hurons; and 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXXV 1l 


charitable French women bury his corpse. About 
this time, the Jesuit superior makes the visitation at 
the hospital; but he ‘‘did not go in, or see the 
Accounts, having noticed that they had not much 
inclination for this.’’ 

This year, Lalemant excuses himself from the St. 
John’s bonfire,— ‘‘not judging it proper to encourage 
this custom, which had not been practiced in the time 
of M. de Montmagny” (this last statement being 
apparently a lapsus memoria, to judge by the record 
of the Journal itself). The French fleet comes earlier 
than last year; the letters it brings are conveyed 
from Tadoussac to Quebec bya Jesuit and a habitant, 
arriving at the latter place July 5; the first ship 
reaches Quebec on the 1oth. On the 28th, Ragueneau 
also arrives, with all his company. In August occur 
more Iroquois raids, several Frenchmen being cap- 
tured or killed by them. Among the latter is Robert 
le Coq, a Jesuit donné. 

On the returning vessels, this autumn, eight 
Fathers, with numerous brethren and donnés, are 
sent back to France. Among these are Jerome 
Lalemant, the superior, who is succeeded at Quebec 
by Ragueneau; the latter, therefore, continues the 
Journal after October 22. The new superior seldom 
mentions in its pages a church service or proces- 
sion,— unlike Lalemant, who filled most of the Journal 
with minutiz of all ecclesiastical affairs; Ragueneau 
notes, as arule, only matters of general interest in 
the annals of the colony. 

Several prominent habitants go down to Tadoussac, 
November 10, to engage in the seal-fishery, for which 
they have secured important concessions. The 
Jesuits’ new church is consecrated December 24, and 


12 PREFACE TO VOL. XXXV 


the first mass is said therein, although the building 
is not completed. The Ursuline convent is burned 
to the ground on the night of December 30, and the 
nuns with difficulty save their own lives, losing all 
their furniture and clothing; the loss is estimated at 
40,000 frances. ‘The Ursulines are aided, as much as 
possible, by the Hospital nuns and the Jesuits; the 
latter (including even the brethren) decide to deny 
themselves their desserts, ‘‘in order to aid there- 
with these good mothers, who have more need than 
we of these delicacies.”’ 


LXXIV. The Relation of 1649-50 is entirely 
written by the new superior, Ragueneau, being dated 
at Quebec, September 1, 1650; it is supplemented by 
two letters,—one, penned by Jerome Lalemant, 
apparently soon after his arrival in France, in 
December following, and addressed to the provincial 
at Paris; the other by the mother superior of the 
Hospital nuns, addressed to ‘‘ Monsieur N., a citizen 
of Paris,’’ and dated at Quebec, September 29. 

In the Relation proper (of which we here give the 
first twelve chapters), a short prefatory note to the 
provincial announces the removal of the Huron 
Christians from their ruined country to the more 
sheltered vicinity of the French settlements. The 
Relation proper begins with the removal of the 
mission from Ste. Marie to St. Joseph Island. The 
wretched Hurons having fled in all directions,— into 
the forests or the rocky islands of the lake, or toa 
refuge among the Tobacco and Neutral tribes,— the 
Jesuits see that they can no longer remain at their 
posts, but must follow their flocks. Accordingly, 
they accede to the request made by their disciples, 
that they will accompany the latter to St. Joseph,— 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXXV 13 


some of the Fathers, however, being sent on itinerant 
missions to remote bands of savages. The departure 
from their old home, and its destruction by their 
own hands, lest the enemy should find it a vantage- 
spot, are eloquently and pathetically related. At 
the new Ste. Marie, built upon the island, the 
Jesuits are obliged to fortify both their house and 
the neighboring village. This village had over a 
hundred cabins, containing more than six thousand 
souls; but famine and pestilence have swept away 
many of these. During the entire winter, the peo- 
ple not only suffer these horrors, but are in constant 
dread of a threatened attack by the Iroquois. This 
accumulation of misfortunes, however, renders the 
poor Hurons so tractable to the Faith that the mis- 
sionaries accomplish among them ‘‘ bya single word, 
more than ever before, in entire years.’’ Another 
potent influence upon them is the charity of the 
Jesuits, who aid the starving and sick people to the 
utmost of their power; ‘‘ many have remained alive 
only through the assistance which we rendered 
them.’’ It is interesting to note the method em- 
ployed by these Fathers in aiding the poor — that of 
personal investigation, the essential element of the 
best modern almsgiving; and the foresight which 
secured, before winter, all available supplies of food 
within their reach. The writer describes the occu- 
pations of the missionaries during the winter, 
relieving the poor, visiting the sick, and instructing 
all in religion. 

Ragueneau describes, at length, the capture and 
devastation of the mission villages in the Tobacco 
tribe, and the martyr deaths of Garnier and Chaba- 
nel,—the former, on December 7, 1648; the latter, 


14 PREFACE TO VOL. XXXV 


about two days later. Then follow biographical 
sketches of these two Fathers, with eulogies upon 
their apostolic labors and saintly characters. Chaba- 
nel’s missionary life presents an especially pathetic 
aspect, since — though full of zeal and spiritual aspi- 
ration—he could not learn the Indian language; 
and, moreover, was filled with disgust and aversion 
at the natives, their customs, and mode of life, and 
at the hardships imposed by his duties to them. 
Yet he would not relinquish these, and even bound 
himself by a vow, to ‘‘remain there until death, 
that he might die upon the Cross.”’ 

Certain infidels in the mission of St. Mathias, 
where Chabanel was stationed, had during his 
absence formed a conspiracy against the mission- 
aries, and had profaned and plundered one of the 
Jesuit chapels. There is good evidence that Chaba- 
nel was murdered by an apostate Huron,— probably 
as a result of that conspiracy. 

Some of the Huron fugitives have made a new 
settlement, on the shore of Lake Huron, and a mis- 
sionary is sent to spend the winter with them; this 
constitutes the mission of St. Charles. Some wel- 
come the Father gladly; others accuse the Faith 
of bringing ruin upon them. These last ‘‘ must be 
humiliated, before they can be saved;’’ this is 
accomplished by famine, the fishery being this year 
a failure. Thereupon, ‘‘they flocked to him like 
sheep, and entreated for Holy Baptism.” At the 
end of winter, many of these sufferers betake them- 
selves to the new Jesuit post on St. Joseph Island. 
Another mission is carried on, among the Algonkin 
tribes along Lake Huron,—the Fathers sharing the 
wretched nomadic life of those people. 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXXV 15 


Ragueneau describes the renewed incursions of 
the Iroquois in the spring of this year (1650), which 
complete the ruin of the wretched Hurons. Their 
country is thoroughly devastated; the scattered 
bands who still remain are ruthlessly butchered by 
an enemy ‘‘ more cruel than cruelty itself;’’ and 
despair reigns in the hearts of the few survivors. 
Many of those who had taken refuge on St. Joseph 
Island are driven by hunger to the mainland, to 
search for food, and are destroyed by the Iroquois. 
The Christian Indians who remain on the island see 
but one hope for their lives; they entreat the Jesuits 
to convey them to the French settlements on the St. 
Lawrence, and there form a Huron colony under 
French protection. This proposal is accepted, and 
the remnant of the tribe, some three hundred in 
number, make their way to Quebec,—always in 
danger, while on this fifty days’ journey, from 
ferocious Iroquois rangers. Ragueneau graphically 
portrays the devastation which these enemies have 
wrought, not only in Huronia, but along Lake Nipis- 
sing and the Ottawa River,—reducing a populous 
region, full of promise, to a wilderness. 

At last (July 28) this sad company arrive at Que- 
bec. All possible aid is furnished to them there, 
but this new charge is too great for the means of the 
little colony, and much suffering occurs among the 
fugitives; several hundred more of these are ex- 
pected before long, from the upper country. The 
Iroquois are now constantly harassing the French 
settlers, wherever they can find them away from the 
protection of the forts; and it is desirable that 
measures be at once taken to break their power. 

Some Christian Indians from Sillery, and some of 


16 PREFACE TO VOL. XXXV 


the Hurons, go in the spring to attack the Iroquois; 
but, through the treachery of one of their own num- 
ber, suffer a severe defeat. Some of their warriors 
are burned to death by the Iroquois, but they suffer 
as Christians, even to the latest breath. The Sillery 
church has thus suffered greatly, having lost many 
of its chief native Christians, and numerous instances 
of their faith are recorded. 

This year, it has been impossible to send a mis- 
sionary to the Attikamégues, although they desire 
one; but their goodness and innocence being great, 
they do not need so much spiritual support as do 
most other tribes. 

Then follows an account of the Holy Cross mission 
at Tadoussac. The most conspicuous feature in this 
work is ‘‘ the burning zeal manifested by the Chris- 
tian Savages and their Captains for the extension 
of Christ’s Kingdom, and the banishment of vice 
from their Churches.’’ Various instances of this are 
related, especially in their attempts to restrain 
drunkenness. The Tadoussac Christians invite the 
people of neighboring tribes (of whom they had 
formerly been jealous) to come and dwell near them, 
that they also may receive Christian instruction; 
and they even invite the missionaries to go with 
them upon their trading expeditions inland,— upon 
which they had hitherto refused to take any French- 
men. Accordingly, Druillettes goes to a distant tribe 
(probably one which De Quen had visited before), 
wherein are some Christians, whom he consoles and 
instructs, administering to them the sacraments. 

Lae © Fd 


Manpison, Wis., November, 1898. 


LXXII—LXXIII 


MISCELLANEOUS DOCUMENTS, 1650 


LXXII.— Epistola P. Pauli Ragueneau ad R. P. Vincentium 
Caraffam, Prapositum Generalem Societatis 
Jesu; ex Domo Sancte Mariz in Insula Sancti 
Josephi apud Hurones, 13° Martii 1650 

LXXIII.— Journal des PP. Jésuites, en l’année 1650 


SOURCES: Doc. LXXII. is from Rochemonteix’s /¢suztes 
et la Nouvelle-France, t. ii., pp. 466-469. Doc. LXXIII. 
we obtain from the original MS. in the library of Laval 
University, Quebec. 


18 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


Epistola P. Pauli Ragueneau ad R. P. Generalem 
Vincentium Caraffam. 


OSTER ADMODUM REVERENDE IN CHRISTO PATER, 
N Pax Christi. 

Superiore anno, nihil literarum accepimus ex 
Europa; imo ne Quebeco quidem responsum ad nos 
ullum est allatum, ad eas literas, quas scripseram, fu- 
sas satis, de rerum nostrarum statu. Utante czperat, 
ita nunc etiam pergit manus Domini nos tangere. 
Nec querimur tamen, nec dicimus: miseremini met, 
saltem vos amict mei; quia potius letamur, et gaude- 
mus semper, quia et nostro, omnium quotquot hic 
sumus, et ecclesia nostre bono, eveniunt mala, 
quibus permittit Deus nos probari, et quibus sane nos 
coronet potius, quam affligat. 

Intellexit Paternitas vestra, posterioribus meis 
literis de pretiosa morte, aut potius martyrio Patrum 
nostrorum; Patris Antonii Daniel, Patris Joannis 
de Brebeuf, et Patris Gabrielis Lallement; quos 
barbari Iroquei, Ecclesiz huic nascenti eripuerant 
crudeliter, cum grege christiano pastorem etiam 
mactantes, unumquemque omnibus suis invigi- 
lantem. 

Sub finem exeuntis ejusdem anni 1649, duo alii 
Patres simili morte perfuncti sunt, in statione sua: 
Pater Carolus Garnier, vir apostolicus, vereque natus 


1650] RAGUENEAU TO FATHER GENERAL 19 


Letter of Father Paul Ragueneau to the Very Rev- 
erend Father General, Vincent Caraffa. 


Pax Christi. 

Last year, we received no letters from 
Europe; not even from Quebec did any reply come 
to those letters which I wrote, fully describing the 
condition of our affairs. As before, the hand of God 
has continually stricken “is. Yet we complain not, 
nor do we cry: Miseremini mei, saltem vos amict met; 
because we rather are glad, and always rejoice, for 
these evils by which God permits us to be tried 
result in blessing to all of us who are here, and to 
our church; and by them he certainly crowns us, 
rather than casts us down. 

Your Paternity has learned from my last letter of 
the precious death, or rather martyrdom, of our 
Fathers,— Father Antoine Daniel, Father Jean de 
Brebeuf, and Father Gabriel Lallement,— whom the 
savage Iroquois cruelly snatched from this growing 
Church, slaying each of these pastors with his 
Christian flock, as he watched over his own. 

Toward the close of this same past year, 1649, two 
other Fathers suffered a like death, at their posts,— 
Father Charles Garnier, an apostolic man, who cer- 
tainly was born for the salvation of those peoples, 
and to whose complete holiness nothing was lacking; 
and his companion, Father Noél Chabanel, who had 


las VERY REVEREND FATHER IN CHRIST, 


20 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 35 


in salutem istarum gentium, cuique nihil omnino 
deerat ad perfectam sanctitatem; et Pater Natalis 
Chabanel ejus socius, qui ex Provincia Tolosana ad 
nos venerat. Alter die septima Decembris occisus 
est, hostili manu, medio in oppido; quod victores 
Iroquei irruptione facta, ferro atque igne vastarunt. 
Alter, postridie solum extinctus est, Immaculate 
Virginis Conceptioni sacro: incertum qua manu; an 
hostili an potius perfidi apostate, qui per sylvas invias 
errabundo Patri, ac profugo, necem sit molitus, ut 
ejus suppellectili, quantumvis paupere, veste nimirum 
et calceis, potiretur, pileoque jam lacero. 

Sed de his fusius perscribam alibi. Neque vero 
bello solum afflicti sunt Hurones nostri; sed funesta 
fame, et contagiosa lue, simul omnes misere pereunt. 
Effossa passim e sepulchris cadavera, nec fratribus 
modo fratres, sed ipsis etiam matribus filii, jam 
evecti fame, pretiosa nuper pignora, filiisque parentes 
sui, pabulum non semel dedere: inhumanum quidem, 
nostrisque barbaris haud insuetum minus quam 
Europzis, qui suorum carnibus vesci abhorrent. Sed 
nimirum nihil in cibo discernunt dentes fameilci; 
neque eum agnoscunt, in cadavere mortuo, quem 
parentem, quem filium, quem fratrem nuper vocarent, 
dum expiraret; imo neque humano, belluinoque 
stercori parcitum. Felices quibus amara glande et 
porcorum siliquis uti licuit, innocuo cibo, neque vero 
ingrato, cui fames condimentum daret; cuique hoc 
anno raritas pretium longe majus fecit, quam antea 
frumento Indico solitum esset dari. 


1650] RAGUENEAU TO FATHER GENERAL 21 


come to us from the Province of Toulouse.’ One of 
these was murdered by the hand of an enemy, on the 
seventh day of December, in the middle of the 
village, which the victorious Iroquois had raided and 
laid waste with fire and arms. The other was slain 
only the next day, a day sacred to the Immaculate 
Conception of the Virgin. It is uncertain by whose 
hand he fell, whether that of an enemy, or, more 
probably, that of a treacherous apostate,— who may 
have murdered the Father as he wandered, a fugi- 
tive, through the trackless forest, that he might rob 
the priest, poor as he was, of even his clothes, shoes, 
and torn hat. 

But of these matters I will write more fully at 
another time. For, in truth, our Hurons are dis- 
tressed not only by war, but by a deadly famine and 
a contagious plague; all are miserably perishing 
together. Everywhere, corpses have been dug out 
of the graves; and, now carried away by hunger, 
the people have repeatedly offered, as food, those 
who were lately the dear pledges of love,—not only 
brothers to brothers, but even children to their 
mothers, and the parents to their own children. It 
is true, this is inhuman; but it is no less unusual 
among our savages than among the Europeans, who 
abhor eating flesh of their own kind. Doubtless the 
teeth of the starving man make no distinction in 
food, and do not recognize in the dead body him 
who a little before was called, until he died, father, 
son, or brother. Nay, more, even the dung of man 
or beast is not spared. Fortunate are they who can 
eat the food of swine,— bitter acorns, and husks,— 
innocent food, and indeed not without relish, to 
which hunger adds a sauce; to these, the scarcity of 


22 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 35 


Hec publica calamitas, inimica corporibus, animis 
salutaris fuit: neque enim hactenus laborum nos- 
trorum fructus major extitit, nunquam altius descendit 
fides in pectora, neque hic usquam christianum nomen 
fuit illustrius, quam inter ruinas afflicte gentis. 
Numeramus hoc posteriore anno, baptizatos barbaros, 
supra tria millia: verissime ut nobis dictum appareat 
effatum illud Apostoli, flagellat Deus omnem filium 
quem recipit. Superstites adhuc sumus in hac missi- 
one, Patres tredecim, coadjutores quatuor, domes- 
tici perpetui viginti duo, undecim alii famuli non per- 
petui (quibus solis stipendia solvuntur satis modica) ; 
sex milites, quatuor pueri, sexaginta omnino anime; 
quibus ccelestia sic sapiunt, ut terrena desipiant: 
certé enim affirmare possum Paternitati vestre, nemi- 
nem unum esse qui in spiritu et veritate Deum non 
adoret; vere ut hzc dici possit esse Domus Dei, et 
Porta cceli. 

Paternam erga nos Dei manum experimur; ita 
enim hec nos mala cingunt, ut tamen nusquam attin- 
gant; nihil ut animis, nihil ut corporibus defuerit; 
non earum quidem rerum, que ad delicias, sed quibus 
natura satis sustentet se parvo contenta. Neque 
vero nobis solum hic viximus; sed insuper nobis 
dedit divina munificentia, unde possemus christiano- 
rum paupertati ac miseriis, misericorditer subvenire, 
vix ut ullus restet in vivis, qui auxilio nostro non 
vivat; vix ut ullus sit mortuus, qui non agnoverit 
plus charitati nostre debere se, quam ulli omnino 


1650] RAGUENEAU TO FATHER GENERAL 23 


this year has given a value far higher than, for- 
merly, was usually placed upon Indian corn. 

This calamity of our people was, though destruc- 
tive to their bodies, salutary to their souls,— for, up 
to this time, our labors have not yielded greater 
fruits; never before has faith gone more deeply into 
hearts, or the name of Christian been more glorious, 
than in the midst of the disasters to a stricken peo- 
ple. We count more than three thousand savages 
baptized this last year; so that verily that saying of 
the Apostle seems to be spoken unto us: Flagellat 
Deus omnem filium quem recipit. At present, there 
remain in this mission thirteen Fathers, four coadju- 
tors, twenty-two donnés, eleven other domestics (to 
whom alone are paid very modest wages), six sol- 
diers, and four boys,— sixty souls in all; to these, 
heavenly things have so sweet a savor that they 
render those of earth insipid. Truly, I can declare 
to your Paternity that there is not one who does not 
worship God in spirit and in truth,—so that this 
may verily be called Domus Dei, et Porta celi. 

We experience the fatherly guidance of God; for, 
although evils environ us, they yet do not touch us, 
so that nothing is lacking to either soul or body,— 
not indeed of those things which minister to pleas- 
ure, but in those which sufficiently sustain a nature 
content with little. Yet we do not live here merely 
for ourselves; but the divine bounty has given us, 
in addition, means with which to relieve, in compas- 
sion, the poverty and wretchedness of the Chris- 
tians,—so that there is hardly one among the living 
who does not live by our aid; hardly one of those 
that died who did not acknowledge that he owed more 
to our charity than to that of any other human being. 


24 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35: 


mortalium omnium. Sic adeo ut parentes Patrice 
publice jam vocemur, et omnino simus: magnum 
sane adjumentum ad christianam fidem. 

De futuro Dominus providebit, sufficit enim diei 
malitia sua. Sed tamen duz res sunt, unde multum 
timemus huic missioni, ne ruinam trahat. Alterum, 
ab hostibus Iroquzis; alterum a defectu annone: 
neque enim satis apparet, unde huic malo obviam iri 
possit. Coacti sunt Hurones nostri, superiori anno, 
non modo suas domos, suaque oppida, sed agros etiam 
deserere: vexati nimis bello, ac perpetuis afflicti cladi- 
bus; fugientem gregem, secuti sumus Pastores; nos- 
trasque etiam sedes, delicias dicam nostras, Sanctz 
Mariz domum reliquimus, excultaque a nobis jugera, 
quz spem divitem messis darent: imo, operi manuum 
nostrarum, nos ipsi ignem subjecimus; ne hostibus 
implis, tectum przberet Domus sancta: atque adeo 
una die, ac fere momento, absumi vidimus labores 
nostros, decem propemodum annorum: unde spes 
erat nobis, potuisse nos colligere, que necessaria 
nobis ad victum forent; adeoque perstare nos potu- 
isse, in his regionibus, sine auxilio Galliz. Sed Deo 
aliter visum est: desolata nunc domus, desolatique 
Penates; aliomigrandum fuit, et in terra exilii nostri, 
novum exilium quzrendum. 

In conspectu continentis, viginti circiter milliaribus 
ab hac prima sede Sanctz Marie, Insula est, vastis- 
simo cincta lacu (quod mare melius vocetur): illic 
stetere Hurones profugi, pars saltem maxima; illic 


1650} RAGUENEAU TO FATHER GENERAL 25 


Indeed, we are publicly hailed as the fathers of this 
Country, and so we are,— wherein there is certainly 
strong support to the Christian faith. 

For the future, the Lord will provide; sufficit enim 
diet malitia sua. Nevertheless, there are two sources 
of possible destruction to this mission, which we 
greatly dread,—first, the hostile Iroquois; second, 
the failure of provisions; and it is not clear how 
these dangers may be encountered. Our Hurons, 
last year, were forced not only to leave their homes 
and their fortified villages, but even to forsake their 
fields, because they were harassed by warfare, and 
crushed by unceasing disaster. We, the Shepherds, 
followed our fleeing flock, and we too have left our 
dwelling-place,—I might call it our delight,— the 
residence of Sainte Marie, and the fields we had 
tilled, which promised a rich harvest. Nay, more, we 
even applied the torch to the work of our own hands, 
lest the sacred House should furnish shelter to our 
impious enemy: and thus in a single day, and almost 
ina moment, we saw consumed our work of nearly 
ten years, which had given us the hope that we could 
produce the necessities of life, and thus maintain 
ourselves in this country without aid from France. 
But God has willed otherwise; our home is now 
laid waste, and our Penates forsaken; we have been 
compelled to journey elsewhere, and, in the land of 
our exile, to seek a new place of banishment. 

Within sight of the mainland, about twenty miles 
from that first site of Sainte Marie, is an Island sur- 
rounded by a vast lake (which might better be called 
asea). There the fugitive Hurons checked their 
flight,—at least most of them; there also we must 
abide; there, where lately were the dens of wild 


26 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 35 


etiam standum nobis fuit: illic struendz nove sedes, 
ubi nuper ferarum tecta fuerant; illic exscindendz 
silve, nunquam ab orbe condito securim passe; illic 
demum exstruenda preesidia, bellicus labor, non nobis 
solum, sed etiam barbaris. He fuerunt artes nostre, 
hic conatus noster continuus; non estate modo, sed 
tota hyeme; ut jam satis tuti nobis videamur, ab hac 
parte, atque excipiendo communi hosti haud imparati: 
neque enim ligneo tantum vallo cincti sumus, ut moris 
hactenus fuerat; sed lapide, spissoque muro, quam 
difficili ad ascensum, tam facili ad defensionem; qui- 
que inimicum ignem non metuat, non arietem, 
tormentave ulla bellica quibus uti possint Iroquzi. 
Sed operosior longe restat labor, evellendis arbo- 
ribus, tellurique ad cultum agrorum parande, unde 
arcendz fami, partim frumenta, partim radices, atque 
herbe sufficiant; Tali enim cibo hic vescimur; nullo 
utimur potu, nisi aque frigide: vix ullo vestitu, nisi 
ferarum pellibus, quas natura sine arte prebet. 
Gallinas decem, par unum porcorum reservavimus, 
boves duos, totidemque vaccas quantum scilicet 
servande prolis sit satis; annonz frumenti Indici, in 
annum unum, absumpta reliqua, ut charitati christi- 
anz non deessemus: servatum tamen exiguum illud, 
quod dixi; quia charitas non agit perperam; nec 
debuit tam esse prodiga, curandis utique corporibus, 
nihil ut nobis reliqui faceret, quo possemus nos 
utcumque sustentare, qui fidei excolende, salutique 
animorum procurande incumbamus. Ut tamen 


1650] RAGUENEAU TO FATHER GENERAL 27 


beasts, we were obliged to build new homes; there 
the forest, never touched by the axe since the crea- 
tion, had to be cleared away; there, finally, not only 
we, but the savages, had to construct fortifications, a 
task pertaining to war. This was our occupation, 
this our unceasing effort,—winter and summer 
alike,—that we might at last render ourselves safe, 
in this respect, and quite prepared to receive the 
common enemy. We surrounded our position, not 
merely with a wooden palisade, as hitherto had been 
the custom, but with a closely-built stone’ wall, as 
difficult to scale as it is easy of defense,— which 
defies the enemy’s torch, or a battering-ram, or any 
engine of war which the Iroquois can employ. 

But a far more laborious task remains, in pulling 
out trees and preparing the ground for cultivation, 
that its yield of grain, roots, and vegetables may be 
sufficient to prevent famine—for on such food we 
live here; we have no other beverage than cold 
water. We have almost no covering, save the skins 
of beasts, which nature furnishes without labor on 
our part. We saved ten fowls, a pair of swine, two 
bulls, and the same number of cows,— enough doubt- 
less to preserve their kind. We have one year’s 
supply of Indian corn; the rest has been used for 
Christian charity. However, the small amount 
which I have mentioned has been saved, because 
charity does not act blindly, and ought not to be so 
lavish, especially in saving bodies, as to leave noth- 
ing for our sustenance who must devote ourselves to 
the cultivation of the faith, and to securing the salva- 
tion of souls. But, though everything should fail, 
never, God helping us, shall courage, hope, and 
patience fail; for love can do all things, and endure 


28 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


omnia desint, Deo adjuvante, nusquam deerunt ani- 
mi, nusquam spes deerit, nusquam patientia: charitas 
enim omnia potest, omnia sustinet. Hoc polliceri 
sancte possum, de omnibus quotquot hic degunt, 
Patribus. Paratum habent pectus ad omnia: non 
crtuces, non pericula, non cruciatus ullos exhorrent, 
quorum in conspectu vivunt, in quibus mori, habent 
in votis, ed feliciorem zxstimantes missionis hujus 
statum, suzque vocationis dignitatem, quo propius 
positam ante oculos jam vident, crucem quisque 
suam, seque omnino in cruce positos; unde eos 
eripere, nullus mortalium possit; unde eosdem 
detrahere, sola jubentis Dei voluntas queat, qui per 
obedientiz vocem eis loquatur. Amet nos, vestra 
Paternitas, filios suos et benedicat nobis, in ccelesti- 
bus, in christo; quia filii Crucis sumus, utinam in ea 
moriamur. Hzc summa est votorum nostrorum, 
hec spes nostra, hoc nostrum gaudium quod nemo 
tollet a nobis. 
R* admodum P*tis Ve 
Humillimus et obsequentissimus filius 
PAULUS RAGUENEAU. 

Ex Domo Sanctz Marie in 
Insula Sancti Josephi apud Hurones 
In Nova Francia 13° Martii 1650 

Admodum Reverendo in Christo 

Patri nostro Vincentio Caraffz 

Preposito Generali Societatis Jesu, Romam. 


1650] RAGUENEAU TO FATHER GENERAL 29 


allthings. This solemn assertion I can make as 
regards all the Fathers living here. Their hearts 
are ready for allthings. They dread neither crosses, 
nor dangers, nor torture; in the sight of these they 
live, and in these they pray to die,—counting the 
state of this mission the more blessed, and the dig- 
nity of their own vocation the nobler, the nearer they 
see each his own cross before him, and himself upon 
it, whence no mortal could rescue them; whence 
only the will and command of God, who speaks to 
them through the voice of obedience, can withdraw 
them. We beg the love and blessing of your Pater- 
nity for us, your sons, in the heavenly places in 
Christ; for we are sons of the Cross,—oh, that we 
may die upon it! This is the burden of our 
prayers, this our hope, this our joy, which no one 
shall take from us. 
Your most Reverend Paternity’s 
Most humble and obedient son, 
PAUL RAGUENEAU. 
From the Residence of Sainte Marie, 
in the Island of Saint Joseph, among the Hurons 
In New France, March 13, 1650. 
To our Very Reverend Father in Christ, 
Vincent Caraffa, 
General of the Society of Jesus, at Rome. 


Estreines. 


Mr. Vignar. 


Maile. Manse. 


saluts rer. dim. du 
moys. 


30 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


Journal des Péres Jésuites, en l’année 
1650. 


IANUIER. 1650. 


LES Hospitalieres lettre le matin par 

| . M.deS*. Sauueur a qui ie donné vn pain 

de bougie vn Crucifix, & Vn gerson 

cde principal officier de nde paroisse les Hos- 
pit. enuoyerent 2. Chapons le matin. 

les Vrsul*. nvf enuoyerent saliier par M*. 
Vignar, & n’entioyerent rien autre chose: Ie 
donné a M*. Vignar vn pain de bougie; & vne 
bible que m’auoit donné Madem. Manse. 

A St. Martin vn pain de bougie, & vne main 
de papier & deux liurets spirituels. 

Mons". le gouu. enuoya vne esc8ade de sol- 
dats au bout du pont nvf saluer auec decharge 
de leur arquebuse, & de plvf 6. flacons de vin 
dont deux estoient de vin d’Espagne. 

I’enuoye les Estreines a tout les domesti- 
ques de la maison, scauioir vn petit reliquaire 
de deux sols, & vn liure de plvf a gloria, &a 
beaufour officier du lutrin. on leur donna 
souliers sauu. ou mitraines. 

on commenga le Dimanche 1* dimanche du 
moys & le 2°. de l’année a aller au salut 
aux Hospitalieres auec resolution d’aller 
alternis primis Dominicis Mensiii aux maisons 


1650] | JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 31 


Journal of the Jesuit Fathers, in the year 
1650. 


JANUARY, 1650. 


ST. The Hospital nuns sent a letter in the 
morning by Monsieur de St. Sauveur, to 
whom I gave a cake of candle-wax, a Cru- 

cifix, and A gerson,—as being the principal 
officer of our parish. The Hospital nuns sent 
2 Capons in the morning. 

The Ursulines sent greeting to us by Mon- 
sieur Vignar, and sent nothing else. I gave 
Monsieur Vignar a cake of candle-wax, and a 
bible which Mademoyselle Manse had given me.” 

To St. Martin a cake of candle-wax, a quire 
of paper, and two spiritual books. 

Monsieur the governor sent a squad of sol- 
diers to the end of the bridge, to salute us with 
a discharge of their arquebuses ; and further, 
6 flagons of wine, two of which were Spanish. 

I sent New-year’s gifts to all the domestics 
of the house,—to wit, a little reliquary of two 
sols: and, in addition, a book to gloria, and 
one to beaufour, an officer in the choir. We 
gave them savage shoes or mittens. 

We began on Sunday,—the Ist sunday of 
the month and the 2nd day of the year,—to 
go to benediction at the Hospital nuns’, with 
the resolution to go alternis primis Dominicis 
Mensium to the religious houses, and pray to 


New-year’s gifts. 
Monsieur Vignar. 


Mademoyselle 
Manse. 


Benediction on the 
ist sunday of 
the month. 


Mission tous les 
Dimanches a beau- 
port. 
guantité de ptres. 


Cabane de sauuages 
a l hopital, 


prise @ orignaux. 


Exercices a made. de 
MONCEAUX. 


Entrée de Made. la 
fouuern. a Sillery. 


Tours gras. 


32 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 35 


religieuses prier Dieu p*. toutes les necessites 
du pays par le salut du St. Sacremt. & les orai- 
sons Conuenables a la fin. 

on Commenga a aller a beauport tvf les 
dimanches, & festes dire la Messe, le chemin 
estant fort beau, & y ayant icy guantité de 
prestres: Et on y fit mission apres Noel & aux 
Moys suiuans; le p. richar auoit ce soin. 

Vne Cabane fut dressée a la Cour de 1’hos- 
pital p*. les sauuages; le magazin fournit les 
planches, & cde ie croy tout le reste, scauoir 
le Clou & les cheurons il parut toutesfois au 
commencem'. que c’estoient les Hospitalieres, 
qui fournirent les Iournées de quelques 
hommes; nvf donnasmes vn Charpentier deux 
Iours & le fort deux soldats Charpentiers; 
dans l’vsage elle parut Inutile a cause de la 
fumée. 


FEBURIER. 1650. 


Sur la nouuelle de pistes d’yroquois, il y 
eut rumeur a Quebek & Conseil p*. les precau- 
tions de ce mal-heur. 

Il y eut quantité d’orignacs pris cette année 
du costé du nort & du Sud, tant par les 
fran¢gois que par les sauuages. 

le p lyonne a Sillery donne les Exercices a 
Madame de Monceaux. 

Differend p*. l’entrée de Mademoys. la gou- 
uernante a Sillery reiglé par vne lettre enuoyée 
a cet effect a Sillery. 

Aux lours gras cde les années passées 


1650] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 33 


God for all the needs of the country, through 
the benediction of the Blessed Sacrament, and 
Suitable prayers at the close. 

We Began to go to beauport, every sunday 
and feast-day, to say Mass,—the road being 
very good, and there being many priests here, 
And we held a mission there after Christmas, 
and in the following Months. Father richar 
had this charge. 

A Cabin was erected in the Court of the 
hospital, for the savages; the warehouse fur- 
nished the boards, and, I believe, all the 
rest,—namely, the Nails and the rafters. It 
appeared at the start, however, that the Time 
of certain men was furnished by the Hospital 
nuns. We gave a Carpenter for two Days, 
and the fort two soldiers who were Carpen- 
ters. Upon occupying it, the cabin proved 
to be Useless, on account of the smoke. 


FEBRUARY, 1650. 


Upon the news of yroquois tracks, there 
was some excitement at Quebek, and a Coun- 
cil for precautions against this misfortune. 

There were many moose taken this year 
both north and South of us—by the french 
as well as the savages. 

Father lyonne, at Sillery, holds a Retreat 
for Madame de Monceaux.? 

Dispute concerning the entry of Mademoy- 
selle the governor’s wife at Sillery; regulated 
by a letter sent for this purpose to Sillery. 

At Shrovetide, as in the former years, bene- 
diction at the parish church, at the End of 


Mission every Sun- 
day at beauport. 


Many priests. 


Cabin for savages at 
the hospital. 


Capture of moose. 


Retreat for madame 
de monceaux. 


Entrance of Made- 
moyselle the gov- 
ernor’s wife at 
Sillery. 


Shrovetide. 


. 


Mercredy des cen- 
adres. 


Predications du 
Quaresme 


Entrée aux Hospit. 
de Mad. de Moceaux. 


St Loseph. 


34 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


salut a la paroisse a 1’Issue de Vespres le Di- 
manche. le lundi a l’hospital sur les 3. h. 
& le mardy aux Vrsul®. a mesme heure, 
ceux de Sillery s’en peuuent retourner le 
faisant a 3. h. p’. salut Vtrobiq., le miserere, 
Tanti ergo, & vn motet par elles au lieu du 
laudate &c 

le Mercredy des cendres cée l’an passé mais 
on sonna trop tost, il suffit de sonner le 1*. a 
7. h. a 7%. 1a petite Messe, & Incontinent 
apres la benediction des Cendres, & la grande 
messe. 


MARS 


le Iour des Cendres estoit le 2. le p. bres- 
sany prescha le mercredy & Vendredy outre 
les Dim. & festes cde 1l’an passé id est le Mer- 
credy aux Vrsul®. a commencer le 2. mercredy; 
& le Vendredy aux Hospital. a commencer le 
1*, Vendredy. 

Madame de monceaux, m’ayant demandé 
permission de faire vne retraite les Iours gras 
aux Hospitalieres, ie le luy accordé, apres 
auoir regeu par escrit le sentimt. de la Sup. & 
de toute la Communauté qui le desiroit. 

La veuille de St. Ioseph il y eut vn feu fort 
froid c’est a dire tout simple sans artifice ny 
fusée Mons". le gouuern'. me fit prier par 
sa femme d’y mettre le feu, luy estant Indis- 
posé, ie le fis, mais auec grande repugnance; 
on n’y chanta point parce qu’on doit suppo- 
ser que le salut qui a precedé Immediatemt., 


1650] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 35 


Vespers on Sunday; at the hospital on mon- 
day, about 3 o'clock; and on tuesday at the 
Ursulines’, at the same hour. Those from 
Sillery can return, when this occurs at 3 
o’clock. For benediction Utrobique, the mise- 
rere, Tantum ergo, and a motet by the nuns, 
instead of the /audate, etc. 

Ash Wednesday, as last year; but we rang 
too soon. It is sufficient to ring the Ist bell 
at 7 o’clock; at 7%, low Mass; and, Immedi- 
ately after, the blessing of the Ashes, and 
high mass. 


MARCH. 


Ash Wednesday was on the 2nd. Father 
bressany preached on wednesday and Friday, 
besides Sundays and feast-days, as last year, — 
7d est, on Wednesday at the Ursulines’, begin- 
ning with the 2nd wednesday; and on Friday 
at the Hospital nuns’, beginning with the Ist 
Friday. 

Madame de monceaux, having asked me 
permission to make a retreat at Shrovetide at 
the Hospital nuns’, I granted it her, after 
having received in writing the opinion of the 
Superioress and of the whole Community, 
who desired it. 

On St. Joseph’s eve, there was a very cold 
bonfire,— that is to say, very simple, without 
fireworks or rockets. Monsieur the governor 
requested me, through his wife, to start the 
fire,—he being Indisposed. I did so, but 
with great repugnance. There was no sing- 
ing, because it is to be supposed that the 


Ash Wednesday. 


Lenten Preaching. 


Madame de Mon- 
ceauxs entrance 
among the Hos- 
pital nuns. 


St. Joseph. 


Messagers. 


Sepmaine Ste. 


36 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


c’est a dire enuiron vne heure deuant, supplée 
a cela. 
Il y eut cette année force messagers des 3. 
riu. icy, & d’icy aux 3. riu. 
1650. AURIL 


Le Dimanche des rameaux estoit le dix, on 
y fit tout cde l’an passé. le Ieudy St. tout cde 
l’an passé, le lauemt. des pieds a I’hospital: 
il y eut toutesfois cette année vn manquemt. 
aussy bien que toutes les années precedentes 
scauoir qu’on ne donna pas vn ordre suffisant 
p™.ne point laisser le St. Sacrement seul a la 
paroisse tout le long de l'’apresdisnée; les 
Peres pouroient prendre vne heure pour y aller 
dire leurs heures, au moins depuis quatre 
heures iusques a 7. 

le Vendredy le sermon de la passion com- 
menga a 7. h. & demie c’est vne bonne heure; 
le reste cde l’an passé 

le Samedy on commenga le seruice a 7.4 & 
c'est vne fort bonne heure pour plusieurs 
raisons: 1". p'. Iouir de M. de St. Sauueur qui 
doit se trouuer au seruice de l’hospital & la 
paroisse doit sonner La premiere: 24. affin 
que nos Peres qui desirent dire la messe la 
puisse dire plvf regulieremt. car le seruice 
finissant en suite sur les 9. h. % on peut dire 
ensuite fort naturellemt. & regulieremt. plu- 
sieurs Messes cde a n. D. de Paris: tout le reste 
coe l’an passé: 

Ie fis plusieurs fautes a la benediction des 


1650] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 37 


benediction which has Immediately pre- 
ceded —that is, about an hour before — com- 
pensates for that. 

There were many messengers this year 
from 3 rivers hither, and from here to 3 rivers. 


1650, APRIL. 


Palm Sunday was on thetenth; all the serv- 
ices were held the same as last year. On 
Holy Thursday, exactly as last year, occurred 
the washing of feet at the hospital; there was, 
however, an omission this year, as well as in 
all the preceding years,—to wit, that no suffi- 
cient order was given that the Blessed Sacra- 
ment might not be left alone at the parish 
church throughout the afternoon. The Fa- 
thers might take an hour to go there and say 
their canonical hours,—at least, from four 
o’clock till 7. 

On Friday the passion sermon began at half 
past 7,—a good hour; the rest, the same as 
last year. 

On Saturday, we began the service at a 
Yy past 7; and this is a very good hour, for 
several reasons: Ist, for having the Bene- 
fit of Monsieur de St. Sauveur, who must be 
present at the hospital service, and the parish 
bell must ring first; 2nd, so that our Fathers 
who desire to say mass, may say it more regu- 
larly,—for, the service thus ending about % 
past 9, one may then very naturally and regu- 
larly say several Masses, as at nostre Dame in 
Paris. All other services occurred as last year. 

I made several mistakes at the blessing of 


Messengers. 


Holy Week. 


Saluts les festes de 
pasgue a l’ordinaire 
aux Matsons relig. 


2consultes. 


Consulte pr. la 
Colonie Huronne. 


38 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 35 


fonds pour n’auoir pas relu auparauant le 
missel me fiant a ce que les années precedentes 
i’en auois pratiqué, mais c’est a quoy il ne se 
faut iamais fier. 

Le Dimanche de pasque, il y eut du monde 
des quatre heures qui occupa au moins 4. 
Confesseurs iusques a 9g. heures; le p. bres- 
sany fit l’entretien cde les deux années 
precedentes cela me parut plvfa propos que 
Iamais cela tenant place de sermon: il y eut 
quatre messes, mais pour bien faire il en 
faudroit 5. ce Iour la deux deuant la grande 
messe, & deux apres: on n’alla point ce Iour 
la a beauport & a Sillery on ne donna point 
la Communion; le salut a 7. heures on adulice 
le souper d’vn quart d’heure. - PIEive 

En ce temps Ie fis deux Consultes oohsitiee 
tables ou estoient le p. Vimont p. bressany p. 
de la place, & le p. richar: 

La 1°. s'il falloit donc loger & donner place 
aux Hurons sur nos terres de beauport, & il 
fut dit qu’ouy, mais qu’il falloit que ce fussent 
familles les plvf choisies, & qu’il falloit se 
resoudre de faire la depence de cinq cents 
escv{ par an pour ce suiet . 

La 2°. si ayant receu six mille liures de 
la Communauté p™. le bastiment de née 
maison de Quebek, laquelle somme paroissoit 
grosse a ceux qui estoient maintenant dans 
les affaires: si pour adoucir cet article, il 
seroit conuenable de ne rien demander, a la 


1650] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 39 


the fonts, for not having previously read the 
missal again,— relying on what I had practiced 
in the preceding years; but one should never 
trust to that. 

On easter Sunday, there were people as 
early as four o’clock, who occupied at least 4 
Confessors until 9g o’clock. Father bressany 
discoursed, as in the two preceding years; that 
appeared to me more appropriate than Ever, 
as taking the placeofa sermon. There were 
four masses; but there should properly be 5. 
On that Day, there were two before high mass, 
and two afterward. We did not go on that 
Day to beauport; and at Sillery we did not give 
the Communion. Benediction at 7 o’clock; 
supper was eaten a quarter of an hour earlier. 

At this time I held two important Consulta- 
tions, at which were present father Vimont, 
father bressany, father de la place, and father 
richar. 

The ist, as to whether it was incumbent 
upon us to lodge and assign a location to the 
Hurons upon our lands at beauport. It was 
decided that we should do so, but that these 
must be families most carefully selected; and 
that we must resolve to incur an expense of 
five hundred écus a year for this purpose. 

At the 2nd, it was debated whether, hav- 
ing received six thousand livres from the 
Cummunity for the building of our house at 
Quebek,— which sum appeared heavy to those 
who were now in office,—in order to abate 
this item, it would be proper to ask nothing 
from the Community for the duclding at three 


Benedictions on the 
easter festivals, 
as usual, at the 
religious Houses. 


2 consultations. 


Consultation about 
the Huron Colony, 


& pr. le bastiment 
des 3. riu. 


200077. 


retour du Pere 
Druilletes. 


St. Marc. 


nouuelles de Mont- 
real 


depart de robert 


depart du p. lyonne 
pr. Tadousac. 


noe f. ratel arriue. 


Voyage aux 3. riu. 


40 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 35 


Communauté p*. le dastiment des trots riuteres que 
nuf destrions pareillem'. bastir sur nos terres, quoy 
que l’an passé on eut arresté au Conseil de 
nvf donner pour cela deux mille liures mais 
qui n’auoient point esté touchées; & il fut dit 
qu’il seroit mieux de faire ce bastiment de nvf 
mesme p*. le subiect susdit, & qu’il ne falloit 
point presser l’execution du payement des 
susdits 2. mille liures. 

le 18. lendemain de Pasque retour du p. 
Druilletes en bonne santé. 

le 25. Iour de St. Mare on ne fit point de 
procession mais on se contenta des litanies 
apres Vespres: enuiron ce Iour fut debouchée 
la petite riuiere de St. Charles. 

le 27. arriua fontarabie de montreal; i’estois 
a Sillery ofi ie faisois la visite, & y fis la 6°. 
& derniere exhortaon. 

le 30. partit robert le Coq pour les 3. 
riu. auec la Chaloupe de Martin grouuel & 
quelques Canots. 


MAY 


le 3. partit le p. lyonne auec sauuages pour 
la mission de Tadoussac, & de gaspé. 

le 9. au soir arriua des 3. riu. nde f. Iaques 
ratel; Ils apporterent les nouuelles de la prise 
d’vn yroquois, qui disoit force nouuelles. 

le 11. nous partismes p*. les 3. riu; apres 
auoir entendu les premiers massacres de deux 
hommes & pillage des yroquois en ces quar- 
tiers fait le mesme Iour sur les 4. h. du matin 


1650] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 41 


rivers which we likewise desired to erect upon our 
lands,— although last year they had decreed 
in the Council to give us two thousand livres 
therefor, which, however, had not been re- 
ceived. It wasdecided that it would be better 
to erect this building at our own expense, for 
the aforesaid reason; and that we should not 
press the actual payment of the aforesaid 2 
thousand livres. 

On the 18th, the day after Easter, the re- 
turn of father Druilletes, in good health. 

On the 25th, St. Mark’s Day, we made no 
procession, but we were satisfied with the 
litany after Vespers. About this Day, the 
little river St. Charles became open. 

On the 27th, fontarabie* arrived from 
montreal; I was at Sillery, where I was 
making a visitation, and I gave the 6th and 
last exhortation there. 

On the 30th, robert le Coq left for 3 rivers, 
with Martin grouvel’s® Shallop and some 
Canoes. 


MAY. 


On the 3rd, father lyonne left with the sav- 
ages for the mission of Tadoussac and gaspé. 

On the oth, at evening, our brother Jaques 
ratel arrived from 3 rivers. They brought 
word of the capture of an yroquois, who was 
telling much news. 

On the 11th, we left for 3 rivers, after 
having heard of the first massacres—of two 
men—and plunder by the yroquois in these 
districts, committed on that very Day, about 


and about the build- 
ing at 3 rivers. 


2000 livres. 


Return of Father 
Druitletes. 


St. Mark. 


News from Mont- 
real, 


Departure of robert. 


Departure of father 
lyonne for Tadousac. 


Our brother ratel 
arrives. 


Journey to 3 rivers. 


Diuers accidens 
& 
Premiers massacres 
aux guartiers de 
Quebek 


atuers malheurs. 


Eschange de terre 
aux 3. riuteres. 


500. arpens en Com- 
mune... force. 


42 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 35 


a l’habitaon de Iaques Maheu; nvf reuinsmes 
a Quebek le lendemain 12. a cause du mauuais 
temps, & en repartismes le 14. & arriuasmes 
aux 3. riu. le 19. apres auoir seiourné 4. Iours 
au Cap a l’arbre. Nvf estions 3. le p. bres- 
sany & le p. André richar & moy; le p. richar 
partist le lendemain de née arriuée ou deux 
Iours apres, & arriua a montreal le mesme 
Iour; d’ofi le lendemain partit le p. dequen 
qui reuint auec moy des 3. riu. p*. aller a 
Tadousac. 

Pendant nostre seiour aux 3. riu. arriua 1™, 
le massacre de l’homme de Petit sur nos 
terres de beauport & l’enterrem'.de son fils 
Ioseph. cela arriua le 13. & vn peu auparauant 
furent tués vers la riuiere de Champlain 
deux sauuages & deux autres blesses: Et 
Enfin vint la nouuelle de la deffaite des guer- 
riers Algonquains; & la perte par naufrage 
du bon Charles & de 12. autres reuenans de 
Tadousac. 

Aux 3. riu. se traita l’affaire de l’eschange 
de nostre Concession proche de cing cents Arpens 
p*. en fatre Vne Commune ou prairie; en autant 
de terre au dessvf; si nvf [ne] l’eussions fait, 
on nvf y eut contraint, & y en auoit eu de 
grosses menaces de la part du gouuern’. la 
chose fut Conclue ainsy qu’elle se voira dans 
l’Acte, cela fut accordé, cde il € apres plu- 
sieurs Consultes ofi estoient les pp. buteux, 
bressany, dequen, P. Piiart, bailloquet. 


1650] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 43 


4 o'clock in the morning, at the settlement of 
Jaques Maheu. Wecame back to Quebek the 
next day, the 12th, on account of the bad 
weather; we left again on the 14th, and ar- 
tived at 3 rivers on the igth, after having 
sojourned 4 Days at Capa l’arbre. We were 
3,—-father bressany, father André richar, and 
I. Father richar left on the day after our 
arrival, or two Days later, and arrived at 
montreal on the same Day,— whence, on the 
next day, father dequen started, who came 
back with me from 3 rivers, to go to Tadousac. 

During our sojourn at 3 rivers, there hap- 
pened, ist, the murder of Petit’s man on 
our lands at beauport, and the burial of his 
son Joseph. That occurred on the 13th; and, 
a little before, two savages were killed toward 
the river of Champlain, and two others 
wounded. Finally, came the news of the 
defeat of the Algonquain warriors, and the 
loss, by shipwreck, of the good Charles® and 
of 12 others, coming back from Tadousac. 

At 3 rivers, the business was transacted 
concerning the exchange of our Grant,— 
nearly five hundred Arpents, in order to make A 
Common or meadow of it,—for as much land 
above. If we had not done so, they would 
have constrained us to; and there had been 
loud threats of this on the part of the govern- 
or. The matter was Settled as it appears in 
the Deed. That was granted as it now 
stands, after several Consultations,— at which 
were present fathers buteux, bressany, de- 
quen, Pierre Pijart, and bailloquet. 


Various accidents, 
and 
First massacres 
in the region of 
Quebek. 


Sundry misfortunes. 


Exchange of land at 
3 rivers. 


500 arpents as Com- 
mon land; 
compulsion. 


depart du pere 
bressamy ... 


node retour. 


Jeste Dieu 


44 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 35 


le 18. partit le p Druilletes auec M. bourdon 
de Quebek. 


IUIN. 1650. 


Et le p. bressany, nde f. feuuille, robert le 
Coq, auec deux domestiques Iean boyer, & 
Charles Amyot; & 25. ou 30. francois mar- 
chans & autant de sauuages en 22. ou 23. 
Canots partirent des 3. riu. escortés de deux 
Chaloupes le mardy de la Pentecoste 7. de 
Iuin: nvf en repartismes le 10. & fusmes a 
Quebek le 12. le p. partit de Montreal le 15. 

L’ordre de la procession du St. Sacrement 
fut celuy-cy. Les Clochetes, la baniere, la 
Croix, & deux Enfans auec chandel. d’argent 
& surplis a costé (il les faut aduertir de bonne 
heure p*. se potrruoir de coronnes de fleurs) 
Les sauuages le rang des Enfans & des 
femmes fermé par Mad. de Monceaux & Ma- 
demoys. de repentigny qui les conduisoient, 
Suiuoient les hommes qui estoient conduits 
par le p. duperon en surplis & estolle (les 
Sauuages vinrent trop tard ce qui apporta 
vn peu de Confusion, on ne laissa pas de 
commencer) 

les Torches, puis les chantres laiques, M. 
de St. Sauueur en chape auec Cierge a la main; 
puis M". Vignar aussy seul en Chasuble, en 
suite le p. la place & le p. Vimon; puis deux 
Anges auec chandeliers a la main, & vn petit 
sauuage qu’ils tenoient de l’autre, lesquels 
sauuages portoient vn petit cierge: Puis le 


- — 


1650] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 45 


On the 18th, father Druilletes set out, with 
Monsieur bourdon, from Quebek. 


JUNE, 1650. 


Father bressany, our brother feuville, robert 
le Coq,— with two domestics, Jean boyer and 
Charles Amyot,—and 25 or 30 french traders, 
and as many savages in 22 or 23 Canoes, left 
3 rivers, escorted by two Shallops, on tues- 
day in Whitsun-week, the 7th of June. We 
departed thence on the roth, and were at 
Quebek on the 12th. The father started from 
Montreal on the 15th. 

The order of the procession of the Blessed 
Sacrament was as follows: The Bells, the 
banner, the Cross, and two Boys beside it, 
with silver candlesticks and surplices (they 
must be notified early, so as to provide them- 
selves with wreaths of flowers). Then came 
the savages, and the line of Boys and women, 
closed by Madame de Monceaux and Made- 
moyselle de repentigny, who led them; the 
men followed, who were led by father dupe- 
ron, insurplice and stole. (The savages came 
too late, which occasioned a little Confusion; 
we nevertheless proceeded.) 

Then came the Torches, then the lay choris- 
ters; Monsieur de St. Sauveur with cope,—a 
Taper in his hand;—then Monsieur Vignar, 
also alone, with Chasuble; next father la 
place and father Vimon; then two Angels, 
each with a candlestick in one hand, anda 
little savage whom he led with the other,— 
each savage bearing a smalltaper. Then the 


Departure of father 
bressany. 


Our return. 


Corpus Christz. 


Jutte de francots 


46 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


Diacre seul en dalmatiq. portant La bourse en 
suite deux de nos ff. auec Encensoirs fumans; 
puis le dajz porté par M. de Tilly, M. gode- 
froy des 3. riu. M. de Maure; & Iean baptiste 
qui estoit fort mal habillé, scauoir, auec vne 
vieille Couuerture; aux deux costés du prestre 
qui portoit le St. Sacrement deux de nos ff en 
surplis & aux cierges. 

Cet ordre é fort bon mais il ne fut pas bien 
gardé quoad modi, car ils se marchoient sur 
les talons les Vns des autres, le mal venoit 
1™*. des deux ff. qui portoient les encensoirs 
fumans qui alloient trop viste & ne prenoient 
pas garde a se tenir vis a vis 1’vn de l'autre, 
& sic de aliis. 

Au 1. reposoir le dixit dominvf en faux 
bourdon, & d** saluti fac regé; aux Hospital. 
g. articles du nom de Iesvf{f & o salutaris 
hostia; aux Vrsul*’. autant 

on distribua les sauuages en plusieurs 
endroits. 

En ce mesme temps quatre Domestiques de 
M. du Herisson des 3. riu. s’estant eschapés 
de sa maison arriuerent vis a vis du Cap rouge, 
en deux Canots dans lesquels ils auoient 
Couuerture fusils &c. ils firent semblans de 
venir p*™. quelque affaire, mais La nuit s’estant 
euadés ne furent plvf veus. 

le 15. au soir arriua vn Huron des 3. riu. 
nommé Skandahietsi qui disoit estre enuoyé 
des yroquois auec des coliers p*. faire la paix 


ag 


1650] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 47 


Deacon alone, in dalmatic, bearing The purse; 
next, two of our brethren with smoking 
Censers; then the canopy, borne by Monsieur 
de Tilly, Monsieur godefroy of 3 rivers, 
Monsieur de Maure, and Jean baptiste, who was 
very poorly clad,—to wit, in an old Blanket. 
On each side of the priest who bore the 
Blessed Sacrament, walked two of our breth- 
ren, in surplices and with tapers. 

This order is very good, but it was certainly 
not observed guoad modum, for they marched 
on One another’s heels. The trouble came 
ist from the two brethren who bore the smok- 
ing censers; these went too fast, and did not 
take care to keep abreast of each other, e¢ sic 
de alits. 

At the Ist temporary altar, we sang the 
dixit dominus in faux-bourdon, and domine 
saluum fac regem; at the Hospital nuns’, 9 
articles of the litany of the name of Jesus, 
and o salutaris hostia; the same at the Ursu- 
lines’. 

We distributed the savages at several places. 

At this same time, four Domestics of 
Monsieur du Herisson’s,® at 3 rivers, having 
escaped from his house, arrived opposite Cap 
rouge in two Canoes, in which they had Blan- 
kets, guns,etc. They pretended to come on 
some business; but, having slipped away in 
The night, they were not seen again. 

On the 15th, at evening, arrived a Huron 
from 3 rivers, named Skandahietsi, who said 
that he was sent by the yroquois with [porce- 
lain] collars to make peace with the french, 


Flight of some 
Trench. 


Lustice de louys 
Skandahietst huron 


Me. La gouuernante 
Et La D. de 
MONCEAUX 
Enseuelissent vn 
huron supplicié — 


Visite de l’ hospital 


depart du p. de gquen 
&» des barques des 
Haébitans. 


48 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 35 


auec les francois; & que les coliers estoient 
cachés a la petite riuiere proche des 3. riu. 
qu'il les auoit caché la crainte que les Algon- 
quains ne s’en aperceussent, il se coupa en 
plusieurs choses estant interrogé, ce qui fit 
qu’on le mit en prison; & qu’on enuoya querir 
les Algonq. & Hurons p*. scauoir ce qu’il y 
auoit a faire en tel cas; 2/ fut lugé digne de 
mort, i fut donc baptisé le 20; & nommé louys 
sans qu'il sceut encores s’il deuoit viure ou 
mourir: le lendemain 21. il fut conduit au 
Carqan par le boureau & le sergent, & laissé a 
la dispdon des Hurons & Algonquains vn 
Huron nommé henheonsa, luy donna deux 
coups de Hache sur la teste & le tua sur le 
champ, il fut enseueli par Mad. la gouuer- 
nante, & Madame de Monceaux: & vn autre 
Huron nommé starahon fit vne longue harague 
p’. Iustifier l’affaire, & se rendre caution que 
sa nation approuueroit grandemt. le tout: 

Ce mesme 21. Ie fis la Visite a l’hospital y 
allant dire la messe, & parlant en particulier 
a toutes les religieuses; ie n’y entré pas ny 
ne vis les Comptes ayant veu qu’on n’y pas 
beaucoup d’Inclinaon. 

Ce mesme 21. partit le p. dequé p*. allera 
Tadousac dans la barque de Martin grauel; & 
le lendemain partit la barque de M. godefroy; 
toutes deux p’. faire fortune par la voye de 
la nauigation, & du Commerce; i’escriuis au 
p. Charles par cette voye. 


1650] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 49 


and that the collars were hidden at the little 
river near 3 rivers,—adding that he had hid- 
den them for fear that the Algonquains should 
perceive them. He contradicted himself in 
several points, when questioned; in conse- 
quence, he was put in prison, and we sent for 
the Algonquains and Hurons, in order to 
know what was to be done in such a case. 
He was Judged worthy of death; he was accord- 
ingly baptized on the 20th, and named louys, 
without as yet knowing whether he were to 
live or to die. The next day, the 21st, he was 
led to the Carcan® by the executioner and the 
sergeant, and left to the will of the Hurons 
and Algonquains. A Huron, named henhe- 
onsa, gave him two blows with a Hatchet on 
his head, and killed him on the spot. He 
was buried by Madame the governor’s wife 
and Madame de Monceaux; and another Hu- 
ron, named Outarahon, made a long harangue 
to Justify the affair, and to guarantee that his 
nation would thoroughly approve all that was 
done. 

On this same 21st, I made the Visitation at 
the hospital,— going thither to say mass, and 
talking in private with allthe nuns. I did not 
go in, or see the Accounts,— having noticed 
that they had not much Inclination for this. 

On this same 21st, father dequen started to 
go to Tadousac, in Martin gravel’s bark; and, 
the next day, Monsieur godefroy’s bark 
sailed,— both to make fortunes in the way of 
navigation and Trade. I wrote to father 
Charles by this medium. 


Justice upon louys 
Skandahietst, 
a huron. 


Madame The govern- 
or’s wife, And The 
Lady de monceaux 
Bury an executed 
huron. 


Visttation at the 
hospital. 


Departure of father 
de guen and of the 
Habitans’ barks. 


reres nouu. de 
Jrance. 


Jeu de la St. Tean. 


Nouuelles de france 


coffre aux Lettres. 


La Chapelle 


Yroguois 
Massacre de fran. 


50 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 85 


le 22. premieres nouuelles de france par vn 
matelot du bord du Cap Iammes qui estoit 
dans le St. Sauueur perdu 1’an passé, dont 32. 
personnes se sauuerent en trois chaloupes 
dont l’vne arriua a l’Isbonne. 

le 23. le feu de la St. Iean duquel ie m’ex- 
cusé preuoyant qu’on m’y fairoit mettre le 
feu a l’ordinaire, & ne iugeant pas a propos 
de laisser courir cette coustume qui n’auoit 
point esté pratiquée du temps de WM”. de 
Montmagny,; ce fut M. le gouuern'. qui y mit 
le feu; le P. la place y assista en surplis 
& Estolle auec S'. Martin p‘. y chanter le 
Te Ded. 


1650, IUILLET. 


Le 5. sur les 9. h. du soir arriua buissot & 
le p. Lyonne qui apporterent le Coffre des 
lettres de france, & la nouuelle de l’approche 
du 1°. nauire enuoyé par M. rozée & Guenet 
lequel arriua le ro. 

Le 11. on commenga a trauailler aux fonde- 
mens de la Chapelle. 

Le 14. arriua le petit vaisseau de M. giffar. 

Et le 28. le P. Supert. des Hurons auec 
toute sa bande l'histoire se trouuera dans la 
relaon & dans les Archiues. 


AOUST 


le 10. arriua la nouuelle de la prise ou 
massacre de g. francois aux 3. riu. par les 
Yroquois 


1650] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 51 


On the 22nd, the first news from france 
came by a sailor from the vessel of Captain 
Jammes, who was in the St. Sauveur, which 
was lost last year,—wherefrom 32 persons 
escaped in three shallops, one of which arrived 
at l’Isbonne {Lisbon].” 

On the 23rd, they lit St. John’s bonfire, — 
from which I excused myself, foreseeing that 
they would have me start the fire as usual, 
and not judging it proper to encourage this 
custom — which had not been practiced in the 
time of Monsieur de Montmagny. Monsieur the 
governor was the one who started the fire; 
Father la place was present in surplice and 
Stole, with St. Martin to sing the Ze Deum. 


1650, JULY. 


On the 5th, about 9 o’clock in the evening, 
arrived buissot™ and father Lyonne; they 
brought the Chest of letters from france, and 
news of the approach of the Ist ship,—sent 
by Monsieur rozée and Guenet,’”’— which 
arrived on the roth. 

On the 11th, work was begun on the foun- 
dations of the Chapel. 

On the 14th arrived the small vessel of 
Monsieur giffar ; 

And, on the 28th, the Father Superior of the 
Hurons, with all his company; the narrative 
will be found in the relation and the Archives. 


AUGUST. 


On the roth arrived the news of the capture 
or massacre of g frenchmen, at 3 rivers, by 
the Yroquois. 


rst news from 
france. 


St. John’s bonfire. 


News from france. 


Letter-box. 


The Chapel. 


Yroquots. 
Massacre of 
Srenchmen. 


retour du p. Druil- 
letes de Tadousac. 


Lour de l’ Assopiion. 


Mort de robert le 
Cog. 


Suffrages. 


depart du vaisseau 
de la rochelle 


arriuée de nre f. 
liegeots. 


oraison de go. heures. 
ala St. Augustin. 


52 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 35 


le 12. on partit de Quebek pour le secours 

le 11. fut le retour du p. Druilletes de 
Tadssak. 

le 15. se fit vne procession solemnelle dont 
lV’ordre est icy inseré dans vn papier a part le 
reste alla cde Les annees precedentes. 

le 22. arriua la nouuelle de la mort de robert 
le cog & de la blessure de plusieurs autres 
par les yroquois proche des 3. riu. 1’on 
Intima au refectoire les suffrages de robert 
en ces termes, Tous les PP. diront 6. 
messes. & les ff. six Chapelets pour feu 
robert le Coq decedé en ce pays au seruice 
perpetuel de la Compi*. & le lendemain se 
dit la messe pour luy. ce fut le 20. qu’il 
fut tiié. 

Le 23. partirent par le petit vaisseau de la 
rochelle, le p. pierre piiart, le p. greslon, & 
le p. fr. duperon, le Sieur gendron, Ioseph 
boursier, dit desforges, Louys le boéme,, & 
louys Pinar, & Michel. PT carer 

le dernier d’Aoust arriua née f. Liepeois, 
qui nvf apporta les nouuelles du dernier vais- 
seat qui estoit proche. Ce vaisseau mouilla 
lancre le 8. de Sept. deuant Quebek. ~~ “8** ““ 

Ala St. Augustin les Vrsulines firent les 
40. h. 4 Iours deuant, & les hospital. 3. Iours 
apres la feste & le Dimache qui estoit le 
Iour de St. Augustin se fit vne procession a 
l’ordinaire aux 2. maisons religieuses. 


1650]' JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 53 


On the 12th, men started from Quebek to 
give assistance. 

On the 11th, father Druilletes returned 
from Tadousak. 

On the 15th, asolemn procession was made, 
the order of which is inserted here on a sepa- 
rate paper: the rest occurred as in The for- 
mer years. 

On the 22nd arrived the news of the death 
of robert le coq, and of the wounding of 
several others by the yroquois near 3 rivers. 
We Announced at the refectory the suffrages 
for robert, in these terms: ‘‘ All the Fathers 
will say 6 masses, and the brethren six Rosa- 
ries, for the late robert le Coq, deceased in 
this country in the perpetual service.of the 
Society;’’ and, the next day, the mass for 
him was said. He was killed on the 20th.” 

On the 23rd there sailed, by the small 
vessel of la rochelle, father pierre pijart, father 
greslon, and father frangois duperon; Sieur 
gendron, Joseph boursier, alias desforges, 
Louys le boéme, and louys Pinar and Michel.” 

On the last day of August arrived our 
brother liegeois, who brought us news of the 
last vessel, which was near. This vessel 
anchored before Quebek on the 8th of Septem- 
ber. 

At the feast of St. Augustine, the Ursulines 
observed the 40 hours, 4 Days before, and the 
hospital nuns 3 Days after, the feast; and on 
Sunday, which was the Day of St. Augustine, 
a procession was made, as usual, to the 2 
religious houses. 


Father Druilletes’s 
return from 
Tadousac. 

Day of the 
Assumption. 


Death of robert le 
Cog. 


Suffrages. 


Departure of the 
vessel of la rochelle. 


Arrival of our 
brother liegeots. 


go hours’ devotion on 
St. Augustine's day. 


Depart de plus. des 
nares pour france 


54 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 35 


SEPTEMB. 1650. 


le premier partit le p™. Druilletes auec Iean 
guerin p’. les Abnaquiois; Noel estoit le 
Conducteur. 

le 8. arriua le dernier vaisseau ofi estoit M. 
d’ailleboust le Ieune, Madem. Manse &c. 

le I9. au soir fut noyé Laual Commis au 
vaisseau du Capit. Terrier. 

le 21. partit de Quebek le vaisseau du Cap. 
Terrier ofi estoit le pere Lyonne, le p. bonin, 
le p. Daran, nos ff Claude Ioyer & Nicolas 
Noircler, Madame de Monceaux, & deux de 
nos Domest. donnés bernar & rolan. 

le 25. partit la barque de Montreal, ofi estoit 
Mademoyselle Manse, & le dernier de Sept. 
la fregate oft estoit M. de la poterie. 


OCTOBRE 


le 15. partirent les Hurons pour la guerre. 

le 18. Noel retourna du voyage des Abna- 
quiois & nvf apporta nouuelles & lettres 
du p. Druilletes, qui se trouueront dans les 
Archiues. 

le mesme lour retourna la fregate des 3. riu. 
dans laquelle estoit le p. bailloquet. 

le 22. partit le p. Charles Albanel p*. son 
voyage ou hyuernement auec les sauuages & 
retourna le 22 d’Auril. 


NOUEMBRI. . . (P. RAGUENEAU.) 


Le iour des morts partit le dernier Nauire, 
dit le Chasseur dans lequel estoient le R. P. 


« ee 


£-¥ % bse di 9 lente Pr (arolie, 
 Lbost Societe Ce ees eed i 


FACSIMILE OF HANDWRITING OF CHARLES ALBANEL, S.J. 


r (Liber Baptizatorum, p. 22) of Parish of Notre Dame, 
Montreal, 1642 - 1668.] 


[Dated January 9, etc., 1650; being an entry in the first r egister 


1650] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 55 


SEPTEMBER, 1650. 


On the first, father Druilletes left, with 
Jean guerin,’ for the Abnaquiois; Noel was 
the Guide. 

On the 8th arrived the last vessel, in which 
were the Young Monsieur d’ailleboust,” 
Mademoyselle Manse, etc. 

On the igth, at evening, was drowned La- 
val,’® Agent on the vessel of Captain Terrier. 

On the 21st, Captain Terrier’s vessel sailed 
from Quebek,—in which were father Lyonne, 
father bonin, and father Daran; our brethren 
Claude Joyer and Nicolas Noircler; Madame 
de Monceaux; and two of our pledged 
Domestics — bernar and rolan. 

On the 25th, the Montreal bark sailed, in 
which was Mademoyselle Manse; and, the 
last day of September, the frigate, in which 
was Monsieur de la poterie. 


OCTOBER. 


On the 15th the Hurons departed for the war. 

On the 18th, Noel returned from the jour- 
ney to the Abnaquiois, and brought us news 
and letters from father Druilletes, which will 
be found in the Archives. 

On the same Day, the frigate returned from 
3 rivers, in which was father bailloquet. 

On the 22nd, father Charles Albanel set out 
for his journey, or wintering, with the sav- 
ages; and he returned on the 22nd of April. 


NOVEMBER. . . (PAUL RAGUENEAU.) 


On all souls’ day, the last Ship sailed, called 
the Chasseur,—in which were the Reverend 


Departure of several 
of ours for france. 


*. 


Le P. loseph du 
Perron— 


Le Pere Poncet 


Pesche du Loup 
marin. 


56 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


Hierosme Lallemant superieur. le P. Ioseph 
Bressany, & n. f. Liegeois. Ioseph Molere 
& Christophle Renant, domestici perpetui, 
cum spe ingrediendi in societatem. M* de 
Tilly & M. Godefroy estoient de la partie, & 
M’* Bourdon. 

Le P. Paul Ragueneau fut laissé Vice 
superieur. 

Le mesme iour partit la barque pour Mont- 
real, qui mena le P. Ioseph Du Peron pour 
les Trois Riuieres. 

Le 7*™¢ i’allay faire la visite au Cap tour- 
mente, a Beaupré a Beauport, au Cap rouge, 
& repassant par Sillery, i’allay a la coste de 
S*. Geneuieue. & ne retournay a Quebec, 
que le quinziesme. i’entendy enuiron go 
Confessions generales &c. le P. Poncet 
m’accompagnoit, & Iean Caron. 

le 108™¢, Simon Guyon, Couruille & Lespiné 
partent par canot pour la Chasse de Loups 
Marins, vers Tadoussac. selon le conuenu 
par vn contract d’association auec M* de Tilly, 
Mr’ Buissot, & M* Godefroy; lequel a en ordre 
allant en france, d’obtenir le droit de cette 
Pesche ou chasse de Loups Marins a [d/ank 
space) de Messieurs de la Compagnie. & d’y 
associer pour vn huitiesme M* Rozee. ; 
Outre ce dessein de la pesche du Loup marin, 
ils pretendent attirer 14 les Sauuages, & y 
faire bonne traite de Castors. & pour cet 
effet les susdits Couruille, Lespine & Simon 


1650] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 57 


Father Hierosme Lallemant, superior; Father 
Joseph Bressany and our brother Liegeois; 
Joseph Molere and Christophle Renant,” do- 
mestict perpetut, cum spe ingrediendi in soctetatem. 
Monsieur de Tilly and Monsieur Godefroy 
were of the party, also Monsieur Bourdon. 

Father Paul Ragueneau was left as Vice- 
superior. 

On the same day, the bark for Montreal 
sailed, which conveyed Father Joseph Du 
Peron to Three Rivers. 

On the 7th, I went to make the visitations 
at Cap tourmente, Beaupré, Beauport, and 
Cap rouge; and, again passing by Sillery, I 
went to the hill of Ste. Genevieve, and did not 
return to Quebec until the fifteenth. I heard 
about 90 general Confessions, etc. Father 
Poncet accompanied me, and Jean Caron. 

On the toth, Simon Guyon, Courville, and 
Lespiné start by canoe for the Seal-Hunt 
toward Tadoussac, according to the agreement 
by a contract of association with Monsieur de 
Tilly, Monsieur Buissot, and Monsieur Gode- 
froy. This last has received orders to 
go to france, to obtain the right of this 
Fishery or hunt for Seals at [d/ank space] from 
Messieurs of the Company; and to associate 
therein, as an eighth member, Monsieur 
Rozee. . . . Besides this scheme for the 
Seal-fishery, they intend to attract the Savages 
thither and thus carry on a good trade in 
Beavers; and to this end the aforesaid Cour- 
ville, Lespine, and Simon Guyon had made a 
voyage into the Sagné, in order to make 


Father Joseph du 
Perron. 


Father Poncet. 


Fishery of the Seal. 


7. Hurons pris par 
Les [roqguots. 


La Sr st Diique. 


58 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 35 


Guyon auoient fait vn voyage dans le Sagné, 
pour lier la partie auec les sauuages, & ietter 
le hamegon de cette traite. Ledit voyage se 
fit Dans le moys d’octobre, & ils en rappor- 
terent enuiron 300 [d/ank space] Castors. 

Le 22. La barque qui auoit esté enuoyée a 
Montréal, pour y porter l’anguille &c. n’ayant 
pfi monter plus loin que les trois Riuieres, 
retourna icy a Quebec. le lac St. Pierre 
commengoit ase glacer, & le vent n’estoit pas 
fauorable pour ce voyage. Cette barque ap- 
porta la nouuelle de la prise de 7. Hurons de 
la bande de Honda‘kont, par les Annie‘ron- 
nons, qti n’auoient que trois canots, et 
n’estoient que 17 ou 18 en nombre. ces 
Hurons pris furent Atieronhonk, Otra%ahe, 
Etio‘ton, Otrihore, Sa,os’endoiak, Tehonan- 
de‘ton & [d/ank space]. ils furent prisala veue 
de Montreal. & de dix canots Hurons, qui 
prirent la fuite. ; 

Le 22°™ j’allay faire vne seconde visite au 
cap rouge, &c. et en retournay le 24°™*. auec 
le P. Poncet. 


DECEMBRI. 


Le 6s™*, Armand & Tichiongamie partent 
pour les Trois Riuieres chargez des ordres 
de Mr’. le Gouuerneur pour la fortification de 
la place, & pour la deffense contre les Iroquois. 

Le 8s™°¢, La sceur de St. Dominique fit sa 
Profession aux Vrsulines, celebrante Patre 
De Quen, concionante Patre Chastelain. Mr* 


1650] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 59 


arrangements with the savages, and cast the 
hook for this trade. The said voyage took 
place In the month of october; and they 
brought back about 300 [d/ank space] Beavers. 

On the 22nd, The bark which had been sent 
to Montréal to carry thither the eels, etc., not 
having been able to ascend above three Riv- 
ers, returned here to Quebec; lake St. Pierre 
was beginning to freeze, and the wind was 
not favorable for this voyage. This bark 
brought news of the capture of 7 Hurons of 
the band of Honda‘kont, by the Annie‘ron- 
nons, who had only three canoes, and were 
only 17 or 18 in number. These captured 
Hurons were Atieronhonk, Otrawahe, Etio‘ton, 
Otrihore, Sa,owendoiak, Tehonande‘ton, and 
[lank space}. They were captured in sight of 
Montreal, and of ten Huron canoes, which 
took flight. 

On the 22nd, I went to make a second visita- 
tion at cap rouge, etc., and returned on the 
24th, with Father Poncet. 


DECEMBER. 


On the 6th, Armand and Tichionwamie start 
for Three Rivers, charged with Monsieur 
the Governor’s orders for the fortification 
of the place, and for its defense against the 
Iroquois. 

On the 8th, sister St. Dominique* made 
her Profession at the Ursulines’, celebrante 
Patre De Quen, conctonante Patre Chastelain. 
Monsieur the Governor, Monsieur Menoil, 
Monsieur de St. Sauveur, and Monsieur Vignal 


7 Hurons taken by 
The Iroquots. 


Sister st. Dominique. 


La Sr de La passion. 


zre, messe a Lieglise 
nouuelle 
Et La benit. 


Le P. L. garreau., 


Incendte des Vrsul 
par Leur boulan- 
Lert. 


60 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 35 


le Gouuerneur, Mt Menoil M'. de St Sauueur 
& M’. Vignal. vinrent disner en nostre refec- 
toire. M* Le Gouuerneur nous traitant. 

Le 27. Lasceurde La Passion fit sa profes- 
sion aux Hospitalieres, celebrante P. Chau- 
monot, me concionante & admittente vota. 
Mr’. de St. Sauueur & M* Vignal vinrent disner 
en nostre refectoire, les Meres hospitalieres 
no? ayant enuoya de quoy. 

Le 24°. le P. Poncet dit La premiere messe 
a l’eglise nouuelle, & eam benedixit. 

Le P. Poncet dit la messe de mynuit a la 
nouuelle eglise le P. Mercier céans, le P. La 
Place a1 hospital, le P. Garreau chez Martin 
Grouuel, & moy chez M*. Giffard a Beauport 
Mr’. de St. Sauueur a la coste de S** Geneuieue. 

La 308™¢ Dec. enuiron sur les vne ou deux 

heures apres mynuit le feu ayant pris dans la 
boulangerie des Meres Vrsulines, toute leur 
maison en fut bruslée, & a peine se peurent 
elles sauuer quasi nués. on ne peut rien sau- 
uer des meubles, sinon de la sacristie. 
La perte fut iugée estre de guarante mille 
francs. Les Meres Hospitalieres les receu- 
rent charitablement. & nous taschasmes de 
les assister de tout nostre pouuoir. Le me- 
moire en sera fait, & inseré cy-apres. Ce fut 
de l’aduis vniuersel de tous nos Peres, qu’on 
iugea que la charité nous obligeoit de donner 
ce secours a ces bonnes meres. 

Le 28™°, iour de Ianuier la Conclusion fut 


1650] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 61. 


came to dine in our refectory,— Monsieur 
The Governor treating us. 

On the 27th, sister de La Passion made her 
profession at the Hospital nuns’, celebrante 
Patre Chaumonot, me conctonante et admittente 
vota. Monsieur de St. Sauveur and Mon- 
sieur Vignal came to dine in our refectory, 
the hospital Mothers having sent us the where- 
withal. 

On the 24th, Father Poncet said The first 
‘mass at the new church, e¢ eam benedixit. 

Father Poncet said the midnight mass at 
the new church, Father Mercier here,” Fa- 
ther La Place at the hospital, Father Garreau 
at Martin Grouvel’s, and I at Monsieur Gif- 
fard’s at Beauport; Monsieur de St. Sauveur 
at the hill of Ste. Genevieve. 

On the 30th of December, about one or two 
hours after midnight, fire caught in the bak- 
ery of the Ursuline Mothers, and their whole 
house was burned; and with difficulty could 
they escape, almost naked. Nothing of the 
furniture could be saved, except that of the 
sacristy. . . The loss was estimated at 
Sorty thousand francs. The Hospital Mothers 
received them charitably, and we tried to assist 
them to the utmost of our power. The state- 
ment of this aid will be made and inserted 
hereinafter. It was by the general opinion of 
all our Fathers, that we decided that charity 
obliged us to give this assistance to these good 
mothers. 

On the 2nd day of January, the Decision 
‘was made, unxanimi omnium Patrum consensu, 


Sister de La passion. 


rst mass at The new 
church, And The 
consecration. 


Father Leonard 
garreau. 


Fire at the 
Ursulines’, from 
Their bakery. 


prise, vnanimi omnium ‘oannel Weber. imo 
& fratrum, de nous priuer de nos desserts, 
afin d’en secourir ces bonnes meres, qui ont 

plus de necessité de ces douceurs, que nous. 


1650] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 63 


imo et fratrum, to deny ourselves our desserts, 
in order to aid therewith these good mothers, 
who have more need than we of these delica- 
cies. 


a 


LXXIV 


RELATION OF 1649-50 


PARIS: SEBASTIEN ET GABRIEL CRAMOISY, 1651 


SOURCE: Inthe body of the Re/atzon, we follow Lenox 
Library’s copy of the first issue (H. 95); the letter of the 
Mother Superior, we obtain from the Lenox copy of the 
second issue (H. 96). 

We give herewith chaps. i.-xii.; the remainder of the 
document will be published in Volume XXXVI. 


fe “ 
os) it 124 i’ 
AT 


| thee 


iy 


enw — M 


SAAN RAE CRE PME IY LS Ha SRNR I 
: a is | 


TARR TS 


DERE EEL EE ee 
‘ 


RELATION 


DE.CE 


QVI SEST PASSE’ 


eS 
we Mien 
‘ 
ee 
i. Cee 
a 


_enlaMiflion desPeres de laCom. . 
pagnie de [ks vs,auxHuros,& aux: a 


pais plus bas dela Nowuelle Fran- 
ce, depuis lEfte de année 1649, 
“jufques al Efte de l'année 1650. 


~Enuoyeée | 


AV R..P. CLAVDE DE LINGENDES 


Prouincial de la Compagniede LES VS — 
en la Prouince de France. 


perieur des Miffions de laCompagni¢ * 
de Izsysenla Nouuelle Brance,. 


A -PARIS=3 


SERASTIEN CRAMOISY,  -u 7, 
~ Imprimeur ordinaire du Roy, ; rué fain& 


pony” { Iacques 
Chez & dela hs Regente. Mes Clea: ; 


GapRiet CRamMorsy, ~ SAS 


M.D C -LAd. 


AVEC PRIVILEGE DY ROY. 


rie 


Parle R. P. Pavt RAGVENEAY, Sus « 


Sah 


i 
+) 
1) 


Ree Are Oy 


WHAT OCCURRED 


in the Mission of the Fathers of the 
Society of JESUS, among the Hurons, 
and in the lower countries of New 
France, from the Summer of the year 
1649, to the Summer of the year 1650. 


Sent to 
REV. FATHER CLAUDE DE LINGENDES, 
Provincial of the Soctety of JESUS 
in the Province of France. 


By the Rev. Father PauL RAGUENEAU, 
Superior of the Missions of the So- 
ciety of Jesus in New France. 


PA RIS, 


SespastTien Cramossy, enh 
Print- Printer in ordinary to the King }) Ue Saint 
as red and the Queen Regent, 


AND 
Gasriet Cramoisy, 


Me IC. Bt. 
BY ROYAL LICENSE. 


Jacques, at 
the Sign of 
the Storks. 


70 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 35 


Table des Chapitres contenvs en cette Relation. 


ELATION de ce qui s’eft pafsé en la Mision 
R des Peres de la Compagnie de IESVS, aux 
Hurons, pays de la Nouuelle France, depuis 
LEfté de lannée 1649. wmfqu'a VEfé de 


lannée 1650. . pag. 1. 
CuaP. I. Du tran/fport de la Maison de Sainte 

Marie dans  Ifte de fainé Iofeph. : ode | 
II. De la Mifsion de fainé Tofeph. : 9 


III. De la prife & defolation de la Miffion de s. 
Iean, par les Iroquois, & de la mort du P. 


Charles Garnier, qui y eftoit en mtfSion. i, ee 
IV. De la mort du P. Noél Chabanel. , a 8S 
V. De la mifsion de faint Matthias. ‘ 1 
VI. De la mifsion de fainé& Charles. ; » | ae 
VII. Dela Mifsion du fain E/fprit. ; Pe 
VIII. De la defolation du pays des Hurons, au 
Printemps de l année 1650. ; 80 
IX. De leftabliffement de la Colonie priced: a 
Kebec. ; PA J 
X. Del Eglife de s. lileok a Sillery. 5 . 105 
XI. Des Sauuages des Trois riuieres, & des Attica- 
megues. : . 120 


XII. Dela Mifion de Sainte Croix a Tadouffac. 142 
XIII. De la venué d'un Hiroquois en France, & de 


Ja mort. ; k ; : . 154 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 71 


Table of the Chapters contained in this Relation. 


ELATION of what occurred in the Mission of 
R the Fathers of the Soctety of JESUS among the 
Hurons, inhabitants of a country of New 
France, from the Summer of the year 1649 to 


the Summer of the year 1650. +) ee 
CuHap. I. Of the removal of the House of sainte 

Marie to the Island of saint Joseph. . with) 
II. Of the Mission of saint Joseph. 9 
Ill. Of the capture and devastation of the Mission 

of St. Jean, by the Iroquois; and of the death 

of Father Charles Garnier, who was missionary 

there. of RES 
IV. OF the dash of Father Noil Chahanes ree 
V. Of the mission of saint Matthias. : 4 OG 
VI. Of the mission of saint Charles. : oy ae 
VII. Of the Mission of the holy Ghost. . 78 
VIII. Of the devastation of the country of the 

Hurons, in the Spring of the year 1650. eee 
IX. Of the establishment of the Huron Colony at 

Kebec. ‘ ) OF 
X. Of the Church of St. ideals. at Siliory: . 105 
XI. Of the Savages at Three rivers, and the Attt- 

camegues. ’ <i. 480 
XII. Of the Mission of the holy his at Eon 

Sac. ; . 142 


XIII. Of the jeiad of a Hibiasieds in France, and 
of his death. . P ; ; . 154 


pra) dhe P. Pbeirind Lalionane aR. P. Claude moh 


de Lingendes, Prouincial de la Compagnie de 
IESvsS en la Prouince de France. : ee 
Lettre de la R, M. Superieure de L’Hofpital de la eT ; 
Mifericorde de Kebec en la Nouuelle France, a 
Monfeur N. Bourgeots de Paris. ; . 178 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 73 


Letter of Father Hierosme Lallemant to Reverend 
Father Claude de Lingendes, Provincial of the 
Society of JESUS in the Province of France. 172 

Letter of the Reverend Mother Superior of the Hos- 
pital of Mercy at Kebec, in New France, to 
Monsieur N., a Citizen of Paris. . 178 


74 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 35 


[1] Relation de ce qvi s’eft paffé en la Miffion 
des Peres de la Compagnie de IESVS, aux 
Hurons, pais de la Nouuelle France, 
depuis l’Ef{té de l’année 1649. iuf- 
qu’a l’Efté de l’année 1650. 


Au R. P. CLavpE pE LincEnvEs, Prouincial de la Compagnie de 
lesvs en la Prouince de France. 


ON R. PERE, 
M PAX CHRISTI. 


Ce n'eft plus du pais des Hurons, que 7 addreffe 
a vofire Reuerence la Relation de ce quis’y eft pafsé. 
Cette pauure Eglife naiffante [2] qui parut il y a vn an, 
toute couuerte de fon fang, opprimée fous la cruauté des 
Iroquois, ennemis du nom de Dieu & de la Foy; a du 
deputs continué plus que tamais dans Ses fouffrances: La 
plus grande part de nos bons Neophytes, & quelques-vns de 
leurs Pafteurs ont fuiuy le chemin des premiers, au milieu 
des feux & des flammes, & maintenant font dans le Ciel 
de compagnie. Vue famine e/pouuentable qui a regné 
partout, y a mts la defolation. Nous comptons plus de 
trois mille baptizez cette derniere année: mats le nombre 
des morts eft plus grand que de ceux qut ont furuefcu a la 
ruine de leur Patrie. Les chofes eftant reduttes a Ll’ extre- 
mité, nous nous fommes veus obligez de quitter enfin une 
place qui n'eftoit plus tenable, pour en fauuer au moins les 
reftes. Ce fut le dixie/me tour du mots de Iuin dernier, 
gue nous fortif/mes de ces terres de Promifsion, qui eftotent 
noftre Paradis, & ot la mort nous euft efté mille fois plus 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 75 


[1] Relation of what occurred in the Mission of the 
Fathers of the Society of JESUS among the 
Hurons, inhabitants of a country of New 
France, from the Summer of the year 1649 
to the Summer of the year 1650. 


To Reverend Father CiaupE DE LincENDEs, Provincial of the 
Society of Jesus in the Province of France. 


Y REVEREND FATHER, 

M PAX CHRISTI. 

It 1s no longer from the country of the Hurons that 
I send to your Reverence the Relation of what has happened 
therein. The poor infant Church—([2]| which was seen, 
a year ago, bathed in its own blood, trodden down by the 
cruelty of the Iroquots, the enemies of God’s name and of 
the Faith —has since then undergone yet greater sufferings. 
The larger number of our good Neophytes, with some of 
their Pastors, have followed through fire and flame the 
steps of thetr predecessors, and now bear them company in 
Heaven. A terrible famine, prevalent everywhere, has 
wrought desolation. We count over three thousand bap- 
tized during the last year; but the dead outnumber those 
who survive the ruin of their native Land. Reduced thus 
to extremity, we found ourselves at last compelled to 
relinguish a position that was no longer tenable, that we 
might, at least, save these who remained. It was on the 
tenth day of last June that we took our departure from 
this land of Promise, which was tous a Paradise, and in 
which death would have been to us a thousand times more 


76 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


douce, que ne fera la vie en quelque lieu que nous putfsions 
eftre. Mais i faut future Dieu, & uw faut aimer Ses 
conduttes, quelques oppofées qu elles parotffent a nos defirs, 
a nos plus faintes esperances, & aux plus tendres amours 
de noftre ceur. En vn mot, nous Jfommes defcendus a 
Kebec, auec [3] quelques familles Chrefitennes de ces 
pauures Sauuages, qui ont fuiuy noftre retraite; auec 
lefquels nous tafcherons de former, al’ abry du fort de nos 
Francois, une Colonie Huronne, s'il platfi a Noftre 
Seigneur de benir leurs deffeins & les noftres. Voftre 
Reuerence verra le tout en detatl, dans cette Relation, que 
te luy addreffe, la fuppliant de nous procurer les prieres de 
tous ceux gut ont quelque amour pour ces peuples. Nous 
en auons vn plus grand befoin que tamais. 
Mon Reuerend Pere, 
De Kebec, ce premier 
de Septembre 1650. 
Voftre tres-humble & obeiffant 
Seruiteur & fujet en N.S. 
PAVL RAGVENEAV. 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 77 


sweet than life will be in any place where we could dwell. 
But we must follow God, and must love his leadings, how- 
ever opposed they may seem to our wishes, our holiest hopes, 
or the tenderest longings of our hearts. Ina word, we 
have come down to Kebec, together with [3] some Christian 
Samiltes of the poor Savages who have followed us in our 
retreat,—and with whom, tf it please Our Lord to bless 
their purposes and ours, we shall endeavor, under cover of 
our French fort, to form a Huron Colony. Your Rever- 
ence will find all the details in this Relation that I send 
you, beseeching you to obtain for us the prayers of all who 
have any love for these peoples. We stand in greater need 
of them than ever. 
My Reverend Father, 
From Kebec, this first 
day of September, 1650. 
Your very humble and obedient 
Servant and subject in Our Lord, 
PAUL RAGUENEAU. 


78 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 35 


[4] CHAPITRE I. 


DU TRANSPORT DE LA MAISON DE SAINCTE MARIE 
DANS L’ISLE DE S. IOSEPH. 


N fuite des victoires fanglantes, que rempor- 
FE terent les Iroquois fur nos Hurons, au commé€ce- 
ment du Printemps de l’an paffé 1649. & en 

{uite des barbaries plus qu’inhumaines qu’ils exer- 
cerent A l’endroit de leurs captifs de guerre, & des 
cruels tourmens qu’ils firent fouffrir impitoyablement 
au Pere Iean de Brebeuf, & au Pere Gabriel Lalle- 
mant, Pafteurs de cette Eglife vrayement fouffrante; 
la terreur s’eftant iettée fur les bourgades voifines, 
qui redoutoient vn femblable malheur; tout le pais 
fe diffipa: Ces pauures peuples defolez ayans quitté 
leurs terres, leurs maifons, & leurs bourgades, & tout 
ce qu’ils auoient de plus cher en ce monde, pour fuyr 
la cruauté d’vn ennemy qu’ils craignoient plus que 
mille morts, & que tout ce qui reftoit deuant leurs 
yeux, capable d’efpouuanter des perfonnes defia 
miferables. Plufieurs [5] n’efperans plus d’humanité 
parmy les hommes, fe ietterent dans 1’efpaiffeur des 
bois, pour y trouuer la paix, quoy qu’auec les beftes 
feroces. Les autres fe retirerent fur des rochers 
affreux, au milieu d’vn grand Lac, qui a prez de 
quatre cent lieués de circuit; aymans mieux mourir 
dans les eaux, & dans les precipices, que dans le feu 
des Iroquois. Vn bon nombre, ayans pris party 
parmy les peuples de la Nation-Neutre, & dans le 
fommet des Montagnes que nous nommons la Nation 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 79 


[4] CHAPTER I. 


OF THE REMOVAL OF THE HOUSE OF SAINTE MARIE TO 
THE ISLAND OF ST. JOSEPH. 


N consequence of the bloody victories obtained by 

| the Iroquois over our Hurons at the commence- 
ment of the Spring of last year, 1649, and of the 
more than inhuman acts of barbarity practiced toward 
their prisoners of war, and the cruel torments piti- 
lessly inflicted on Father Jean de Brebeuf and Father 
Gabriel Lallemant, Pastors of this truly suffering 
Church,—terror having fallen upon the neighboring 
villages, which were dreading a similar misfortune,— 
all the inhabitants dispersed. These poor, distressed 
people forsook their lands, houses, and villages, and 
all that in the worid was dearest to them, in order to 
escape the cruelty of an enemy whom they feared 
more than a thousand deaths, and more than all that 
remained before their eyes,—calculated as that was 
to strike terror into hearts already wretched. Many, 
[5] no longer expecting humanity from man, flung 
themselves into the deepest recesses of the forest, 
where, though it were with the wild beasts, they 
might find peace. Others took refuge upon some 
frightful rocks that lay in the midst of a great Lake 
nearly four hundred leagues in circumference,— 
choosing rather to find death in the waters, or from 
the cliffs, than by the fires of the Iroquois. A goodly 
number having cast in their lot with the people of 
the Neutral Nation, and with those living on the 


80 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 35 


du Petun,; ceux qui reftoient les plus confiderables 
nous inuiterent a nous ioindre auec eux, & de ne pas 
fuyr fi loin; efperans que Dieu prendroit leur caufe 
en main, lors qu’elle feroit deuenué la noftre, & qu’il 
auroit foin de leur deffenfe s’ils auoient foin de le 
feruir: Nous promettans pour cét effet, de fe faire 
tous Chreftiens, & d’eftre fideles A la foy iufqu’a la 
mort, qu’ils voyoient armée de tous coftez pour les 
exterminer. 

C’eftoit iuftement ce que Dieu demAadoit de nous, 
en des temps de defolation, de fuyr auec les fuyans, 
de les fuiure par tout ot leur foy les fuiuoit, & de [6] 
ne pas negliger aucun de ces Chreftiens: quoy qu’il 
fuft conuenable d’arrefter le gros de nos forces, ot 
le gros de ces fugitifs prendroient deffein de s’ar- 
refter. C’eft la conclufion que nous prifmes ayans 
recommandeé l’affaire 4 Dieu. 

Nous détachafmes quelques-vns de nos Peres, pour 
faire quelques Miffions volantes; les vns dans vn petit 
canot d’efcorce, pour voguer fur les coftes, & vifiter 
les ifles les plus efloignées de ce grand Lac; a4 foixante, 
quatre vingts, & cent lieués de nous. Les autres 
prirent leur chemin par terre, trauerfans la profondeur 
des bois, & grauiffans la cime des montagnes. En 
quelque endroit que nous marchions, Dieu eftant 
noftre conducteur, noftre deffenfe, nos efperances, 
& noftre tout; quia t’il a craindre pour nous? 

Mais il fallut, A tous tant que nous eftions, quitter 
cette ancienne demeure de faincte Marie; ces edifices, 
qui quoy que pauures, paroiffoient des chef-d’ceuures 
de l’art, aux yeux de nos pauures Sauuages; ces 
terres cultiuées qui nous promettoient vne riche 
moiffon. I1 nous fallut abandonner ce lieu, que ie 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 81 


Mountain heights, whom we call the Tobacco 
Nation,™ the most prominent of those who remained 
invited us to join them, rather than to flee so far 
away,—trusting that God would espouse their cause 
when it should have become our own, and would be 
mindful of their protection, provided they took care 
to serve him. With this in view, they promised us 
that they would all become Christians, and be true 
to the faith till the death came which they saw 
prepared on every side for their destruction. 

This was exactly what God was requiring of us,— 
that, in times of dire distress, we should flee with 
the fleeing, accompanying them everywhere, whither- 
soever their faith should follow them; and that [6] 
we should lose sight of none of these Christians, 
although it might be expedient to detain the bulk of 
our forces wherever the main body of fugitives might 
decide to settle down. This was the conclusion we 
came to, after having commended the matter to God. 

We told off certain of our Fathers, to make some 
itinerant Missions,—some, in a small bark canoe, 
for voyaging along the coasts, and visiting the more 
distant islands of the great Lake, at sixty, eighty, 
and a hundred leagues from us; others to journey by 
land, making their way through forest-depths, and 
scaling the summits of mountains. Go which way 
we might, since God was our guide, our defense, our 
hope, and our all, what was there to fear for us? 

But on each of us lay the necessity of bidding fare- 
well to that old home of sainte Marie,—to its struc- 
tures, which, though plain, seemed, to the eyes of our 
poor Savages, master-works of art; and to its culti- 
vated lands, which were promising us an abundant 
harvest. That spot must be forsaken, which I may 


82 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


puis [7] appeller noftre feconde Patrie, & nos delices 
innocentes; puis qu’il auoit efté le berceau de ce 
Chriftianifme, qu’il eftoit le temple de Dieu, & la 
maifon des feruiteurs de Iefus-Chrift, & crainte que 
nos ennemis trop impies, ne profanaffent ce lieu de 
faincteté, & n’en priffent leur auantage; nous y 
mifmes le feu nous mefmes, & nous vifmes brufler 
& nos yeux, en moins d’vne heure, nos trauaux de 
neuf & de dix ans. 

C’eftoit fur les cing a fix heures du foir, le qua- 
torziefme iour du mois de Iuin, qu’vne partie de 
nous monta fur vn petit vaiffeau que nous auions 
bafty: Ie me iettay auec la plus grande part des 
autres, {ur des arbres de cinquante 4 foixante pieds de 
longueur, que nous auions abatus dans les bois, & que 
nous traifnafmes dans l’eau, les lians tous enfemble, 
pour nous faire vn plancher flottant fur cet element 
infidelle, comme autrefois nous auions veu qu’en 
France on conduifoit le bois flotté deffus les eaux. 
Nous voguafmes toute la nuict fur noftre grand Lac, a 
force de bras & de rames; & le temps nous eftant 
fauorable, nous abordafmes heureufement au bout [8] 
de quelques iours, dans vne ifle ot les Hurons nous 
attendoient, & qui eftoit le lieu ot nous auions pris 
le deffein de nous reiinir tous enfemble, pour en 
faire vne ifle Chreftienne. 

Dieu fans doute nous conduifoit en ce voyage: car 
lors mefme que nous coftoyons ces terres abandon- 
nées, l’ennemy eftoit en campagne, & fit fon coup le 
lendemain, fur quelques familles Chreftiennes, qu’il 
furprift durant leur fommeil, fur le chemin que nous 
auions tenu, maffacrant les vns fur la place; les 
autres furent emmenez captifs. 


— 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 83 


[7] call our second Fatherland, our home of innocent 
delights, since it had been the cradle of this Christian 
church; since it was the temple of God, and the 
home of the servants of Jesus Christ. Moreover, for 
fear that our enemies, only too wicked, should pro- 
fane the sacred place, and derive from it an advantage, 
we ourselves set fire to it, and beheld burn before 
our eyes, in less than one hour, our work of nine or 
ten years. 

It was between five and six o’clock, on the evening 
of the fourteenth of June, that a part of our number 
embarked in a small vessel we had built. I, in com- 
pany with most of the others, trusted myself to some 
logs, fifty or sixty feet in length, which we had felled 
in the woods, and dragged into the water, binding 
all together, in order to fashion for ourselves a sort 
of raft that should float on that faithless element,— 
just as, in former days, we had seen in France float- 
ing timbers transported down the streams. We 
voyaged all night upon our great Lake, by dint of 
arms and oars; and, the weather being favorable, we 
landed without mishap, after [8] a few days, upon an 
island, where the Hurons were awaiting us, and 
which was the spot we had fixed upon for a general 
reunion, that we might make of it a Christian island. 

God, doubtless, led us on this journey; for, even 
while we coasted along those deserted lands, the 
enemy was in the field, and on the following day 
delivered his blow upon some Christian families 
whom he surprised, during their sleep, along the 
road which we had followed; some were massacred 
upon the spot, others led away captive. 

The Hurons who were awaiting us on that Island, 
called the Island of Saint Joseph, had sown there their 


84 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 35 


Les Hurons qui nous attendoient d&s cette Ifle, 
appellée l’Ifle de Saint lIofeph, y auoient femé leur 
bled d’Inde: mais les fechereffes de 1’ E{té eftoient 
fi exceffiues, qu’ils perdoient l’efperance de leur 
moiffon, fi le Ciel ne leur donnoit quelque pluye 
fauorable. Ils nous prierent a noftre abord d’ob- 
tenir cette faueur pour eux. Nos prieres furent 
exaucées le mefme iour, quoy qu'il n’y euft aupara- 
uant aucune apparence de pluye. 

Ces grans bois, qui depuis la Creation du monde, 
n’auoient point efté abbatus de la main d’aucun 
homme, nous [9] receurent pour hoftes; & la terre 
nous fournit, fans la creufer, la pierre & le ciment 
qu'il nous falloit, pour nous fortifier contre nos enne- 
mis. En forte que Dieu mercy nous nous vifmes en 
e{tat de tres-bonne deffenfe, ayant bafty vn petit 
fort, fi regulierement qu’il fe deffendoit facilement 
foy-mefme, & qui ne craignoit point, ny le feu, ny la 
fappe, ny l’efcalade des Iroquois. 

De plus, nous mifmes la main pour fortifier le 
bourg des Hurons, qui ioignoit 4 noftre habitation: 
nous leur dreffames des baftions, qui en deffendoient 
les approches,; eftans dans le deffein de prefter & 
les forces, & les armes, & le courage de nos Fran- 
cois, qui euffent exposé tres-volontiers leur vie, pour 
vne deffenfe fi raifonnable, & fi Chreftienne: ce bourg. 
eftant vrayement Chreftien, & le fondement du 
Chriftianifme refpandu en toutes ces contrées. 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 85 


Indian corn; but the Summer drouths had been so 
excessive that they lost hope of their harvest, unless 
Heaven should afford them some favoring showers. 
On our arrival, they besought us to obtain this favor 
for them; and our prayers were granted that very 
day, although previously there had been no appear- 
ance of rain. 

These grand forests, which, since the Creation of 
the world, had not been felled by the hand of any 
man, [9] received us as guests; while the ground 
furnished to us, without digging, the stone and 
cement we needed for fortifying ourselves against 
our enemies.* In consequence, thank God, we found 
ourselves very well protected, having built a small 
fort according to military rules, which, therefore, 
could be easily defended, and would fear neither 
the fire, the undermining, nor the escalade of the 
Iroquois. 

Moreover, we set to work to fortify the village of 
the Hurons, which was adjacent to our place of 
abode. We erected for them bastions, which de- 
fended its approaches,—intending to put at their 
disposal the strength, the arms, and the courage of 
our Frenchmen. These would most willingly have 
hazarded their lives in a defense so reasonable and 
so Christian,—the village being truly Christian, and 
the foundation of the Christian church that is 
dispersed throughout these regions. 


86 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [{Vou. 35 


CHAPITRE II. 
DE LA MISSION DE SAINCT IOSEPH. 


ETTE Ifle dans laquelle nous auions tranfporté 

© la maifon de Sainte Marie, [10] ayant le nom 
de Saint lofeph Patron de ces Pais; les Sau- 

uages qui s’y eftoient retirez, compofoient la Miffion 
qui portoit le mefme nom. Le bourg Huron auoit 
plus de cent cabanes, dont vne feule contenoit les 
huit & dix familles, qui font foixante & quatre vingt 
perfonnes. Outre cela, il y auoit ca & 1a dans la 
Campagne, quelques cabanes plus efloignées; qui 
toutes ont donné de l’employ aux Peres qui ont eu 
le foin de cette Miffion: fur laquelle Dieu a versé fes 
benedictions, 4 proportion des Croix qu'il y a enuoyé. 
La famine y a efté extreme. Non pas que les 
terres qu’on y auoit enfemencées, n’euffent rendu 
auec l’vfure que l’on defiroit, & bien au dela du cen- 
tuple, ce qu’on leur auoit confié: mais 4 caufe que de 
dix familles, A peine y en auoit il vne feule qui euft 
pti vacquer aux trauaux, qui font neceffaires, pour 
fe faire vn champ de bled d’Inde, en vn lieu, qui 
lors que l’on y aborda n’eftoit qu’vne efpaiffe foretft, 
qui n’auoit rien de difposé pourle labour. La pluf- 
part de ces pauures exilez dans leur propres pais, 
auoient paffé tout 1’Efte, & vne partie de [11] 1’Au- 
tomne, a viure dans les bois, de racines & de fruits 
fauuages; & A pefcher ca & 1a, fur les Lacs & fur les 
Riuieres, quelques petits poiffons, qui feruoient plus 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 87 


CHAPTER II. 
OF THE MISSION OF SAINT JOSEPH. 


HIS Island, to which we had transferred the 
house of Sainte Marie, [10] being called by the 
name of Saint Joseph, Patron of these Regions, 

the Savages who had removed there constituted the 
Mission bearing the same name. The Huron village 
comprised over a hundred cabins, one of which might 
contain eight or ten families,— making, say, sixty or 
eighty persons. Besides this village, in the Coun- 
try, here and there, were a few more distant cabins, 
all of which have provided work for the Fathers who 
have had charge of this Mission, on which God has 
poured out his blessings in proportion to the Crosses 
which he has sent it. 

The famine here has been very severe. Not that 
the lands which had been sown would not have 
returned with interest what we desired —indeed, 
more than a hundredfold—that which had been 
entrusted to them; but for the reason that there was 
hardly one family in ten which had been able to 
apply itself to the labor needed to cultivate a field of 
Indian corn in a place which, when they came to it, 
was but a thick forest, unprepared in any way for 
tillage. The greater number of these poor people, 
exiles in their own country, had passed the whole 
Summer, a part also of [11] the Autumn, living in 
the woods on roots and wild fruits; or taking, here 
and there, in the Lakes or Rivers, a few small fish, 


88 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 35 


pour reculer vn peu leur mort, que pour contenter 
leur vie. L’hyuer eftat venu, qui a couuert la terre 
de trois & quatre pieds de neige, & qui a glacé tous 
les Lacs & toutes les Riuieres; tout ce ramas de 
monde s’eftant rangé proche de nous, fe vit inconti- 
nent dans la neceffité, & dans 1’extremité de la mifere; 
n’ayans fait, ny pf faire aucune prouifion. 

Ce fut alors que nous fufmes contrains de voir des 
fqueletes mourantes, qui fouftenoient vne vie mife- 
rable, mangeant iufqu’aux ordures, & les rebuts de 
la nature. Le gland eftoit 4 la plus-part, ce que 
feroient en Frace les mets les plus exquis. Les 
charognes mefme deterrées, les reftes des Renards 
& des Chiens, ne faifoient point dhorreur, & fe 
mangeoient, quoy qu’en cachete: Car quoy que les 
Hurons, auant que la foy leur euft donné plus de 
lumiere, qu’ils n’en auoient dans 1l’infidelité, ne 
creuffent pas commettre aucun peché de mager leurs 
ennemis, auffi peu qu’il yen a de les tuer: [12] 
Toutefois ie puis dire auec verité, qu’ils n’ont pas 
moins d’horreur de manger de leurs compatriotes, 
qu’on peut auoir en France de manger de la chair 
humaine. Mais la neceffité n’a plus de loy, & des 
dents fameliques ne difcernent plus ce qu’elles man- 
gent. Les meres fe font repeués de leurs enfans, 
des freres de leurs freres, & des enfans ne recon- 
noiffoient plus en vn cadavre mort, celuy lequel lors 
qu’il viuoit, ils appelloient leur Pere. 

Nous auons tafché de foulager vne partie de ces 
miferes: mais quoy qu’en ces aumofnes, nous ayons 
ef{té peut eftre au dela de ce que la Prudence euft 
demandé de nous, toutefois le mal eftant fi public, 
& tout le monde ne pouuant pas eftre fecouru 


_— 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 89 


which aided rather in postponing for a little time 
their death, than in satisfying the needs of life. 
Winter having set in, covering the ground with three 
or four feet of snow, and freezing all the Lakes and 
Rivers, that entire multitude of people who had 
crowded near us found themselves in immediate 
need, and in the extremity of misery, not having 
laid in, nor being able to store, any provisions. 

Then it was that we were compelled to behold 
dying skeletons eking out a miserable life, feeding 
even on the excrements and refuse of nature. The 
acorn was to them, for the most part, what the 
choicest viands are in France. Even carrion dug 
up, the remains of Foxes and Dogs, excited no hor- 
ror; and they even devoured one another, but this 
in secret; for although the Hurons, ere the faith had 
given them more light than they possessed in infi- 
delity, would not have considered that they com- 
mitted any sin in eating their enemies, any more 
than in killing them, [12] yet I can truly say that 
they regard with no less horror the eating of their 
fellow-countrymen than would be felt in France at 
eating human flesh. But necessity had no longer 
law; and famished teeth ceased to discern the nature 
of that they ate. Mothers fed upon their children; 
brothers on their brothers; while children recognized 
no longer, in a corpse, him whom, while he lived, 
they had called their Father. 

We endeavored to relieve these miseries, in part; 
but, although our alms exceeded, perhaps, what Pru- 
dence asked of us, still—the calamity being so wide- 
spread, and it being impossible for us to assist all 
equally — we were compelled to be witnesses of some 
of these horrifying spectacles. 


90 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


efgalement de nous; nous auons efté contraints de 
voir de nos yeux vne partie de ces fpectacles, qui 
nous faifoient horreur. 

Ceux qui auoient dequoy parer aucunement A la 
famine, fe virent attaquez d’vne maladie contagieufe, 
qui en emporta vn grand nombre; mais particuliere- 
ment des enfans. 

La Guerre auoit defia fait fes rauages: non feule- 
ment dans la defolation arriuée [13] 1’ Hyuer prece- 
dent; mais en quantité de maffacres, qui eftoient 
furuenus tout le long de 1’Efte, en terre ferme, aux 
enuirons de cefte Ifle; ot la pauureté contraignoit 
quantité de familles d’aller chercher auffi toft la 
mort, que la vie, dans des campagnes abandonnées 4 
la fureur des ennemis. Mais afin que rien ne man- 
qua{t aux miferes d’vn peuple afflige; tous les iours, 
& toutes les nuits de 1’Hyuer, ce n’eftoient que des 
nuits d horreur, das les craintes & dans les attétes 
ott ils eftoiét fans ceffe d’vne armée ennemie d’Iro-. 
quois, dont ils auoient eu aduis; qui (difoit-on,) 
deuoit venir nous enleuer cette Ifle, & exterminer 
auec nous les ref{tes d’vn pais tirant 4 fa fin. Voila 
vne face d’affaire bien deplorable: mais ce fut au 
milieu de ces defolations, que Dieu prit plaifir de 
tirer le bien de ces peuples, de leur plus grand mal- 
heur. Leur coeur fe trouuoit fi docile 4 la foy, que 
nous faifions dans leurs efprits plus en vne parole, 
que iamais nous n’auions pti faire en des années 
toutes entieres. Ces pauures gens mourans de faim 
venoient eux-mefmes nous trouuer, & nous deman- 
der le Baptefme; fe [14] cdfolans des efperances du 
Paradis, qu’ils voyoiét auffi proche d’eux, qu’eftoit 
la mort, qu’ils portoient dans leur fein. 


1650) RELATION OF 1649-50 91 


Those who were totally without means to guard 
against the famine were attacked by a contagious 
malady, which carried off a great number of them, 
especially of the children. 

The War had already made its ravages, not only 
in the devastation which occurred [13] in the preced- 
ing Winter, but in the number of massacres which 
happened all through the Summer, on the mainland 
in the vicinity of this Island; poverty compelled 
numbers of families to go thither, to seek death as 
much as life, in the open country given over to the fury 
of the enemy. But, that nothing might be lacking 
in the miseries of an afflicted people, all the days and 
nights of Winter were but nights of horror, passed 
in constant fear and expectation of a hostile party of 
Iroquois, of whom tidings had been received; these 
(it was said) were to come to us to sweep this Island, 
and to exterminate, with us, the remnants of a nation 
drawing to its end. Here is an aspect of the matter 
calamitous indeed; but it was in the midst of these 
desolations that God was pleased to bring forth, from 
their deepest misfortunes, the well-being of this 
people. Their hearts had become so tractable to the 
faith that we effected in them, by a single word, 
more than we had ever been able to accomplish in 
entire years. These poor people, dying of hunger, 
came of their own accord to see us, and besought of 
us Baptism,—[14] consoling themselves with hopes 
of Paradise, which they beheld as near to them as 
was the death itself which they carried in their 
bosoms. 

One mother was visited, who had but her two 
breasts, and these dry and without milk,— which, 
nevertheless, were the sole offering she had been 


92 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 35 


Vne mere s’eft veué, n’ayant que deux mammelles, 
mais fans fuc & fans laict, qui toutefois eftoit l’vnique 
chofe qu'elle eut peu prefenter A trois ou quatre 
enfans, qui pleuroient y eftans attachez: Elle les 
voyoit mourir entre fes bras, les vns apres les autres, 
& n’auoit pas mefme les forces de les pouffer dans le 
tombeau. Elle mouroit fous cette charge, & en 
mourant elle difoit, Ouy, Mon Dieu, vous eftes le 
maiftre de nos vies: nous mourrons puifque vous le 
voulez; voila qui eft bien que nous mourrions Chre- 
{tiens. I’eftois damnée, & mes enfans auec moy, fi 
nous ne fuffions morts miferables, ils ont receu le 
fainct Baptefme, & ie croy fermement que mourans 
tous de compagnie, nous refufciterons tous enfemble. 

Vne autre mere fe voyant mourir la premiere, auec 
autant de paix que fi elle efit entré dans vn doux 
fommeil, laiffoit deffus fon fein deux pauures orphe- 
lins, qui continuoient de la fuccer apres fa mort, & 
qui mouroient deffus leur mere, [15] auffi paifible- 
ment, qu’ils s’y eftoient autrefois endormis, lors 
qu’ils en tiroiét & le laict, & la vie. 

Plufieurs en expirant recommandoient leur ame 
a Dieu, d’autres difoient 4 leurs enfans, qu’ils ne 
fongeaffent rien qu’a luy, puifque luy feul feroit leur 
Pere dedans l’eternité. Quelques-vns ayant vendu 
pour vn repas de gland boiiilly dans l’eau, l’vnique 
chofe qui leur ref{toit de tous leurs biens, & laquelle 
ils s’e{toient referuée, pour ne pas mourir auffi nuds, 
qu’ils eftoient fortis du ventre de leur mere; fe 
voyans ainfi defpoiiillez dans les attentes de la mort, 
qui eftoit prochaine, difoient 4 Dieu; Oiiy mon 
Dieu, ie n’ay plus rien en terre, & mon cceur 
n’y peut eftre attaché: i’attens auec joye la mort, 


—_—— 


i ————— a 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 93 


able to make to three or four infants, who wept as 
they were pressed to her bosom. She beheld them 
die in her arms, one after another, and had not even 
the strength to cast them into the grave. She 
expired under this burden; but with her dying 
breath she said: ‘‘ Yes, My God, you are the lord 
of our lives; we shall die, since you will it; but 
how good it is, that we should die Christians. I 
would have been damned, and my children with me, 
had we not died in affliction. They have received 
holy Baptism; and I firmly believe that, being com- 
panions in death, we shall rise all together.”’ 

Another mother, perceiving that she would be the 
first to die, left with the same peace as if she were 
falling into a sweet slumber—upon her bosom two 
poor orphans, who continued to suck from her after 
her death, and who died upon their mother [15] as 
quietly as formerly they had slept there, when they 
drew from her both milk and life. 

Many, when dying, commended their souls to God; 
others bade their children think only of him, since 
he, and no other, would be their Father through 
eternity. Some, having sold for a meal of acorns, 
boiled in water, the single possession which remained 
to them of all their goods,—and which they had 
reserved in order that they might not die in as naked 
a condition as they had issued from the wombs of 
their mothers,— finding themselves thus despoiled, 
said to God, while awaiting the death that was at 
hand: ‘‘ Yes, my God, I have nothing more on earth, 
and my heart cannot be attached to it. I await with 
joy the death which formerly Iso much dreaded; but 
it is in the hope which your faith affords me, that I 


94 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 35 


qu’autrefois i’ay tant redoutée: mais c’eft dans l’efpe- 
trance que voftre foy me donne que ie feray d’autant 
plus heureux dans le Ciel, que ie meurs main tenant 
miferable. 

Ces pauures moribonds nous beniffoient en mef{me 
temps qu’ils enuifageoient leurs miferes, n’y en 
ayant aucun qui n’ait trouué en nous, & plus d’amour, 
& vne charité plus fecourante, [16] qu’ils n’en efprou- 
uoient mefme de leurs plus proches. Auffi ne nous 
regardoient-ils, qu’auec des yeux d’amour, comme 
leurs Peres, & receuans nos charitez durant leur vie, 
ils fgauoient bien qu’elles continueroient fur eux, 
mefme iufqu’apres la mort, quelques-vns de nos 
Peres, & des Francois qui eftoient auec nous, s’eftans 
chargez du foin, qu’aucun autre ne vouloit prendre, 
non pas mefme les plus proches parens des defunts, 
d’enfeuelir & d’enterrer ces pauures abandonnez des 
hommes: mais que nous pouuons appeller les cheris 
de Dieu, puis qu’ils font maintenant fes enfans, quel- 
ques barbares & miferables qu’ils ayent efté. Ecce 
guomodo computati Sunt inter filios Det, & inter Sanétos 
JSors tlorum eft. ; 

Il s’eft trouué de ces pauures Chreftiens, qui fe 
voyans mourir dans ces miferes, nous enuoyoient 
querir. Hé! ie te prie, mon frere, nous difoient-ils, 
enterre moy dés maintenant; car c’e{t fait de ma vie, 
& tu vois bien que tu me dois compter entre les 
morts. Ce que ie crains, fi ie mourois auant que 
d’eftre enterrée, c’eft que de pauures gens auffi mife- 
rables que moy, ne me defpoiiillent [17] de ce haillon, 
dont ma nudité eft couuerte, pour fe couurir eux- 
mefmes. Ce me fera vne confolation, entrant dans 
le tombeau, de fgauoir que mon corps n’aura pas cette 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 95 


shall be all the happier in Heaven because I now die 
in misery.’’ 

These poor dying people blessed us, even while 
confronting their miseries; for there was not one of 
them who had not received from us more love, and 
more helpful charity, [16] than they had experienced 
from even their nearest relatives. For this reason 
they looked on us only with eyes of love, as upon 
their Fathers; and, being made recipients of our 
charities during life, they were well assured that 
these would be extended to them even after death. 
For some of our Fathers, and of the Frenchmen who 
were with us, had charged themselves with the care 
which no one else — not even the nearest relatives of 
the dead — would undertake, of laying out, and bury- 
ing these poor people,—forsaken indeed by their 
fellow-men, but whom we could call the beloved of 
God, since they are now his children, however bar- 
barous and wretched they may have been. Ecce 
guomodo computati sunt inter filios Det, et inter sanctos 
sors tllorum est. 

There were some of these poor Christians who, 
perceiving that a wretched death was near, sent for 
us in their miseries. ‘‘ Ah!’’ they said to us, ‘‘I 
entreat thee, my brother, bury me now, at once; for 
my life is over, and thou seest plainly that I am num- 
bered among the dead. Now, what I fear is this, 
that, if I should die before being buried, other poor 
people, as destitute as I am, may rob me [17] of these 
tags that cover my nakedness, to put upon them- 
selves. It will be a consolation to me, on going 
down to the grave, to know that, after death, my 
body will not suffer that humiliation, of which I have 


96 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 85 


confufion apres la. mort, dont i’ay eu horreur toute 
ma vie. Ces fpectacles nous tiroient les larmes. 

Il faut confeffer que fans nous cette mortalité efit 
eft€é encore bien plus grande: car plufieurs n’ont 
vefcu que de 1’affiftance que nous leur auons donné. 
La main de Dieu ayant efté vrayement paternelle fur 
nous, voulant nous conferuer, pour mettre dans le 
Ciel les reftes de ce peuple mourant. Car c’eft cette 
diuine Prouidence, qui par des voyes toutes pleines 
d’amour, (ie les pourrois appeller miraculeufes,) nous 
fourniffoit les moyens, non feulement de fubfifter 
nous mefmes, dans cette mifere publique: mais nous 
dénoit encor les moyens de faire du bien A tout le 
monde, de nous rendre les maiftres des cceurs, & de 
gagner leur affection, pour les gagner tous tant 
qu’ils font 4 Iefus-Chrift. C’eft ce qu’ils admiroient 
eux-mefmes; adorans en mefme temps la toute 
puiffance de Dieu, & fon amour fur nous, & en fuite 
[18] fur eux, voyans bien que nous ne viuions que 
pour eux. 

Tout 1l’Hyuer, ayans employé la iournée, les vns 
pour le falut des ames, les autres dans les ceuures de 
charité; La nuit donnoit quelque treue A noftre tra- 
uail: autant qu’il en falloit pour ne pas fuccomber 
aux fatigues de la iournée; mais non pas tant que la 
nature en euft pris d’elle-mefme, auec vn plaifir 
innocent. Car a vray dire, nous ne dormions que 
d’vn demy fommeil. Quelques froids, quelques 
neiges, quelques vents qui foufflaffent; toute la nuit 
il y auoit des fentinelles expofées aux rigueurs du 
temps, & des rondes continuelles qui faifoient leur 
deuoir: Les autres, qui durant ce temps 14, prenoient 
vne partie de leur repos, eftoient toufiours deffous 
les armes, & comme attendans le combat. 


ee 


= 


Ce ae ee 


— 
= 


es 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 97 


had a horror all my life.’’ Scenes like these drew 
tears from our eyes. 

I must confess that but for us, this mortality would 
have been very much greater ; for many have remained 
alive only through the assistance which we rendered 
them; the hand of God, truly that of a father over us, 
chose to preserve us that we might lead to Heaven the 
remnant of this dying people. For it was this divine 
Providence which, by methods full of love (I may 
call them miraculous), not only supplied to us, dur- 
ing this time of general misery, the means for our 
own subsistence, but gave to us the ability to bene- 
fit all, to render ourselves masters of men’s hearts, 
and to gain their affections, that we might win them, 
one and all, to Jesus Christ. It was this which they 
themselves extolled,—adoring, at the same time, 
the almighty power of God and his love toward us, 
and, therefore, [18] toward themselves, perceiving 
clearly that we lived but for them alone. 

All Winter, having employed the day, some of us 
in the care of souls, others in works of charity, the 
night afforded some respite to our labors,—as much, 
at least, as was needed to prevent our succumbing to 
the fatigues of the day; but not as much as nature 
herself would have taken with a guileless pleasure. 
For, to say the truth, our sleep was but a half-sleep: 
whatever the cold, whatever the snow, whatever 
winds might blow, sentinels kept watch all night 
long, exposed to every severity of weather in the 
never-ending rounds which formed their duty; the 
others, who during this time were taking their allot- 
ment of repose, were the while under arms, as if 
awaiting battle. 

Our assiduous care for them captivated the hearts 


98 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 35 


Ce grand foin rauiffoit le coeur de ces pauures Sau- 
uages, qui tous les iours, matin & foir rempliffoient 
nof{tre Eglife pour y rendre A Dieu leurs hommages. 
Les Sacremés y eftoient frequétez auec deuotion Les 
Feftes & les Dimanches eftoient fanctifiez par la 
Pieté du peuple, [19] & par les predications publiques. 
Les enfans y auoient leur iour fur la femaine, & les 
filles le leur feparé, pour apprendre le Catechifme. 

Mais le plus fort de noftre trauail, eftoit de vifiter 
les cabanes, pour y confoler les affligez, y fecourir 
les pauures, pour y affifter les malades, pour y dif- 
pofer 41a mort, ceux qui en eftoient les plus proches, 
pour y confirmer dans l’efprit de la foy les Chre- 
{tiens & les catechumenes, & pour y gaigner les 
infidelles 4 Iefus-Chritft. 

Nos Peres, en faifant ces vifites, auoient 1’ceil A la 
pauureté d’vn chacun; & felon qu’ils iugeoient plus 
a propos de fubuenir aux necefflitez plus preffantes, 
ils fe feruoient d’vne efpece de monoye, qu’ils 
alloient diftribuant aces pauures. C’eftoit vn petit 
morceau de cuiure, marqué pour cét effet. Tous 
ceux qui en auloient receu par aumofne, fe trouuoient 
a noftre porte fur le Midy, & prefentoient leur petite 
monoye. On donnoit aux vns vne certaine mefure 
de gland, qu’ils faifoient boiiillir dans vne laixiue de 
cendres, pour vn premier boiiillon, afin d’en ofter la 
plus grande [20] amertume. On diftribuoit aux 
autres quelque morceau de poiffon enfumé, qu ils 
cuifoient en l’eau, dont par apres ils fouftenoient 
leur vie. Ceux qui eftoient les mieux partagez, 
receuoient vn peu de farine de bled d’Inde, boiiillie 
dans l'eau. 

Nous auions achepté auant que les neiges euffent 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 99 


of these poor Savages, who every day, morning and 
night, filled our Church that they might there render 
homage to God. There the Sacraments were resorted 
to with great devoutness; the Feast-days and Sun- 
days were sanctified by the Piety of the people, [19] 
and by public preachings. The boys had their day 
in the week, and the girls their separate day, for 
learning the Catechism. 

But the heaviest part of our work lay in visiting 
the cabins for the purpose of consoling the afflicted, 
assisting the poor, aiding the sick, preparing for 
death those who were nearest to it, strengthening 
in the faith the Christians and catechumens, and 
winning unbelievers to Jesus Christ. 

Our Fathers, in making these visits, considered 
the poverty of each person; and, according as they 
deemed it advisable to aid the most pressing necessi- 
ties, they made use of a kind of coin which they went 
about distributing among these poor people; it was 
a little piece of copper, stamped for this purpose. 
All who had received it as an alms stood at our door, 
about Midday, and presented their small coin. To 
some was given a certain quantity of acorns, which 
they cooked,— first boiling them in a lye made from 
ashes, in order to take from them their excessive 
[20] bitterness. We distributed to others a small por- 
tion of smoked fish, which they cooked in water, and 
on it kept themselvesalive. The more favored among 
them received a little Indian meal, boiled in water. 

Before the snow had covered the ground, we had 
bought five or six hundred bushels of acorns, and 
had despatched several canoes to procure among the 
Algonquin Nations, sixty, eighty, or a hundred 
leagues away, this supply of fish. The little corn 


100 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vou. 35 


couuert la terre, cing ou fix cents boiffeaux de gland. 
Nous auids enuoié quelques canots, pour aller cher- 
cher parmy les Nations Algonquines, cette prouifion 
de poiffon, 4 foixante, quatre-vingt, & cent lieués de 
1a. Ce peu que nous auids de bled, venoit du trauail 
des Hurons, au temps de l’abondance. Vude exeunt 
flumina reuertuntur. C’eftoit pour eux, auffi bien que 
pour nous, que Dieu nous auoit fourny en fon temps 
cette manne du Ciel: car c’eft ainfi que i’appelle les 
plus grandes richeffes que nous euffions, lefquelles 
eftant en France, i’euffe appellé de grandes pauure- 
tez, & de grandes miferes. La nature fe contente de 
peu, & d’ot on bannit les delices, on bannit de grands 
foins, & on s’exempte de beaucoup d’empreffemens, 
peu neceffaires 4 vne vie, qui apres tout [21] ne peut 
e{tre immortelle. 

Quantité de perfonnes m’ont prié de leur faire fga- 
uoir l’ordre que nous tenions, pour 1’in{truction de 
nos Sauuages, & la fuite de nos employs le long de 
la iournée. Ces employs n’eftans pas dans l1’efclat, 
& n’ayans point de fpectateurs, finon ceux qu’on 
appelle les balieures de la terre, & le rebut du monde; 
ce que ie puis refpondre a cette demande, ne peut 
auoir rien d’efclattant Ceux toutefois qui ne trou- 
uent rien de petit, dans les chofes qui concernent le 
falut des ames, puis qu’ils defirent que ie defcende 
dans ces particularitez, & que c’eft pour eux & pour 
femblables perfonnes que i’efcris cecy, ils fgaurdt 
qu’ayans pris pour nous-mefmes, deux ou trois heures 
de la nuit, pour agir auec Dieu, auant que d’agir 
auec le prochain; Le iour eftant venu, les Chreftiens 
venoiét a1’ Eglife, ott nous referuions quelques Meffes 
pour eux. Les prieres s’y faifoient publiques, a 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 101 


we had was the produce of Huron industry in times. 
of prosperity. Unde exeunt flumina revertuntur. It 
was for them, as for ourselves, that God had pro- 
vided, in due season, this manna from Heaven,— for 
so I term what was the greatest wealth we possessed, 
which, in France, I would have called great poverty 
and misery. Nature contents herself with little; 
and, whencesoever gratifications are excluded, great 
cares also are banished, and men are relieved from 
many strong desires,—little in keeping with a life 
which, after all, [21] cannot be immortal. 

Many persons have begged us to acquaint them 
with the order that is followed in the instruction of 
our Savages, and the course of our occupations dur- 
ing the day. As these employments make no display, 
and have no spectators, save those whom people are 
wont to term the offscourings of the earth, or the 
refuse of the world, the reply that I make to this 
inquiry can containinit nothing remarkable. ‘Those, 
however, who do not regard as trifles things that 
concern the salvation of souls, since they wish me 
to go into particulars,—and since it is for them, and 
persons like them, that I am writing,—let them 
know that, having reserved to ourselves two or three 
hours of the night for intercourse with God, before 
occupying ourselves with our fellow-creatures, at 
daylight the Christians were wont to assemble in the 
Church, where we reserved for them a few Masses. 
The prayers were said aloud, for the reason that, 
otherwise, many who were newly converted to the 
faith would not be able to learn them so readily. 
One of our Fathers presided at this devotion, and all 
the Savages followed him,—repeating, without [22] 
haste, the same words. The prayer ended, we gave 


102 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


caufe que plufieurs nouuellement conuertys A la foy, 
ne peuuent pas fi toft les apprendre. Vn de nos 
Peres prefidoit 4 cette deuotion, & tous les Sauuages 
le fuiuoient, repetans fans [22] empreffement les 
mefmes mots. La priere acheuée on donnoit quel- 
que inftruction a toute l’affemblée; quelquefois leur 
expliquant quelqu’vn de nos myfteres, d’autresfois, 
pour les confirmer dans la foy, on leur en deduifoit 
quelques motifs, qui nous fembloiét dauantage dans la 
portée de leur efprit: fouuent on les exhortoit A quel- 
que chofe de pratique, afin qu’ils paffaffent faintement 
la iournée,: foit qu’on les pouffaft A offrir A Dieu 
leurs trauaux, leurs peines, leurs fouffrances; foit 
qu’on leur donnat quelque Oraifon iaculatoire, qui 
fait leur entretien, & l’ame de tout leur trauail, foit 
qu'on leur enfeignaft les moyens de refifter aux ten- 
tations; & comment y ayant fuccombé par mal-heur, 
il faut auoir recours A Dieu, & luy en demander 
pardon, foit enfin qu’on les incitaft A fon amour, & 
aux defirs de la vie eternelle. 

Cette inftruction eftant finie, & la plus courte qu’il 
fe pouuoit; les premiers venus fortoient, & les autres 
demeuroient pour receuoir auffi l’inftruction, ayans 
fait les prieres publiques comme les precedens. La 
Chapelle fe rempliffoit en [23] cette facon, dix & 
douze fois vne matinée. Cependant d’autres Peres 
entendoient les confeffions, & felon les neceffitez plus 
particulieres d’vn chacun, ils leur donnoient diuers 
aduis. Souuent en vn matin, vn feul Pere difoit vn 
bon mot, a cinquant & foixante perfonnes. Les plus 
longs entretiens, ne font pas toufiours ceux qui 
penetrent plus auant dans le coeur. 

Sur les neuf heures on fermoit la porte de 1’Eglife: 


: 
1 
: 
f 
L 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 103 


a short instruction to the whole assembly,— some- 
‘times explaining to them some one of our mysteries; 
at other times, that we might strengthen them in the 
faith, deducing from it such motives of action as 
seemed to us more within the grasp of their minds. 
Oftentimes, we exhorted them to something prac- 
tical, with a view to their passing holily the day,— 
whether it were by urging them to offer to God their 
labors, their pains, and their sufferings; or by giving 
them some ejaculatory Prayer that should be their 
support, and the life of all their work; or by teaching 
them the means of resisting temptation, and how, if 
through misfortune they had yielded to it, they 
should betake themselves to God, and ask his pardon; 
or, in fine, by inciting them to love of him, and to 
desires of eternal life. 

This instruction ended, and made as short as pos- 
sible, the first comers withdrew; others remained, in 
order to receive instruction also, having first joined 
in the public prayers, like those who had preceded 
them. The Chapel was filled, [23] thus, ten or a 
dozen times a morning. Meanwhile, others of the 
Fathers heard confessions, and, in accordance with 
the special needs of each one, gave them various 
advice. Often, in the course of a morning, a single 
Father would say an appropriate word to fifty or 
sixty persons. The longest discourses are not always 
those that sink most deeply into the heart. 

At nine o’clock, the door of the Church was shut, 
and it was then that our Fathers went to the cabins 
to make their visitations, continuing these till about 
two hours before night. For then, following the 
example of the morning, we rang the bell to recall 
the Christians to public prayer, the Church being 


104 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


& c’eftoit alors que nos Peres alloiét dans les cabanes, 
y faire leurs vifites, iufqu’enuiron deux heures auant 
la nuit. Car alors on fonnoit pour rappeller les Chre- 
{tiens aux prieres publiques, en la mefme facgon qu’on 
les auoit fait le matin, 1’Eglife fe rempliffant & fe 
vuidant dix ou douze fois pour le moins, & c’eft pour 
lors que plufieurs de ces bons Neophytes rédoient 
conte de leur iournée, felon que ceux qui auoient le 
foin d’vn chacun, les arreftoiét 4 la porte pour cét effet, 
tantoft l’vn tantoft l’autre; pour fgauoir en vn mot, 
cObien de fois ils auoient pensé 4 Dieu le long duiour: 
en quoy ils luy auoient efté plus fideles: s’ils luy 
auoient offert leur trauail, leur [24] faim, & leur mifere: 
s’ils n’auoient point commis quelque faute. Cela fe 
fait auec vne candeur qui n’a rien de barbare, & auec 
vne fimplicité d’enfant; qui eft vne marque infaillible 
de l’efprit de Dieu. Toufiours la nuit nous furpre- 
noit pluftoft que nous ne defirions: mais neantmoins 
nous la receuions auec amour, elle feule nous 
donnant le loifir de retourner auec Dieu; fi toutefois 
on peut fortir de luy, lors qu’on ne parle que de 
luy, qu’on n’agit que pour luy, qu’on vit en luy, dans 
l’attente de ne mourir iamais pour autre que pour 
luy. 

C’eftoient 14 nos employs, au milieu de cette bar- 
barie deuenué Chreftienne: c’eftoit ainfi que Dieu 
alloit difpofant ces peuples pour le Ciel, les voyant 
proches de leur ruine. Nous 1’allons voir dans les 
‘Chapitres fuiuans. 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 : 105 


filled and emptied at least ten or twelve times. It 
was then, too, that many of these good Neophytes 
gave in their account of the day, as those who had 
charge of each one detained them at the door for that 
purpose,—sometimes one, sometimes another, to 
learn, in a word, how often, throughout the day, 
they had thought upon God; in what they had been 
the most true to him; if they had offered to him 
their labor, their [24] hunger, their misery; if they 
had not committed some fault. Such questions were 
answered with a frankness that showed nothing of 
the barbarous, and — which is an infallible indication 
of the spirit of God—with the simplicity of a child. 
The night always came upon us sooner than we 
desired; nevertheless, it was welcomed by us with 
pleasure, for it alone afforded us the leisure for going 
back to God,— if, indeed, they can depart from him, 
who never speak but of him or act but for him, and 
who live in him, in the earnest expectation of never 
dying but for his sake. 

Such were our employments in the midst of that 
barbarism become Christian. It was thus that God 
proceeded to prepare this people for Heaven, perceiv- 
ing them to be near to their destruction. This we 
shall see in the Chapters which follow. 


106 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


[25] CHAPITRE III. 


DE LA PRISE & DESOLATION DE LA MISSION DE 
SAINCT IEAN, PAR LES IROQUOIS, & DE LA 
MORT DU P. CHARLES GARNIER, QUI 
Y ESTOIT EN MISSION. 


ANS les Montagnes, que nous nommons la 
Nation du Petun, nous y auions depuis quel- 

ques années deux Miffions: en chacune il y 

auoit deux de nos Peres. La plus frontiere a l’enne- 
my, eftoit celle qui portoit le nom de Saint Iean; 
dont le bourg principal, qui s’appelloit du mefme 
nom, eftoit d’enuiron cing a fix cent familles. 
C’eftoit vn champ arrousé des fueurs d’vn des plus 
excellens Miffionaires, qui ayt ef{té en ces pais, le Pere 
Charles Garnier; qui le deuoit auffi arroufer de fon 
fang, puis qu’il y eft mort auec fon troupeau, qu’ila 
conduit luy-mefme iufque dans le Paradis; le iour 
approchant auquel Dieu vouloit faire vne Eglife 
triomphante, de celle qui iufqu’alors [26] auoit 
toufiours e{té dans les combats, & qui pouuoit porter 
le nom d’vne Eglife vrayement fouffrante, nous en 
eufmes nouuelles fur la fin du mois de Nouembre, 
par deux Chreftiens Hurons efchappez d’vne bande 
d’enuiron trois cents Iroquois, qui nous dirent que 
l’ennemy eftoit encore irrefolu, quelle demarche il 
prendroit, ou vers la Nation du Petun, ou contre I’'Ifle 
ot nous eftions. La deffus nous nous tenons en 
e{tat de deffenfe, & arreftames nos Hurons, qui 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 107 


[25] CHAPTER III. 


OF THE CAPTURE AND DEVASTATION OF THE MISSION 
OF SAINT JEAN, BY THE IROQUOIS; AND OF THE 
DEATH OF FATHER CHARLES GARNIER, 

WHO WAS MISSIONARY THERE. 


N the Mountains, the people of which we name 
| the Tobacco Nation, we have had, for some years 
past, two Missions; in each were two of our 
Fathers. The one nearest to the enemy was that 
which bore the name of Saint Jean; its principal 
village, called by the same name, contained about 
five or six hundred families.* It was a field watered 
by the sweat of one of the most excellent Mission- 
aries who had dwelt in these regions, Father Charles 
Garnier,— who was also to water it with his blood, 
since there both he and his flock have met death, he 
himself leading them even unto Paradise. The day 
approaching in which God would make a Church tri- 
umphant of that which, up to that time, [26] had 
always been in warfare, and which could bear the 
name of a Church truly suffering, we received intel- 
ligence of it, toward the close of the month of 
November, from two Christian Hurons, escaped from 
a band of about three hundred Iroquois, who told us 
that the enemy was still irresolute as to what meas- 
ures he would take,— whether against the Tobacco 
Nation, or against the Island on which we were. 
Thereupon, we kept ourselves in a state of defense, 
and detained our Hurons, who had purposed taking 


108 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 35 


prenoient deffein de fortir en campagne, pour aller au 
deuat de cét ennemy. En mefme téps nous fifmes 
porter promptement cette nouuelle 4 ceux de la 
Nation du Petun, qui la receurent auec ioye, enui- 
fageans cette trouppe ennemie, cdme defia vaincué, 
& cOme vne matiere de leur triomphe. Ils 1’atten- 
dent quelques iours de pied ferme; puis s’ennuyans 
que la victoire fut fi tardiue a les venir trouuer, ils 
voulurent luy aller au rencontre; au moins les habi- 
tans du bourg de Saint Iean, hommes de main & de 
courage. Ils haftent leur fortie, craignans que 1’Iro- 
quois ne leur efchappe, le voulans [27] furprendre, 
lors qu’il eft encore en chemin. Ils partent le 
cinquiefme iour du mois de Decembre, & prennent 
leur route, vers le lieu d’ot ils attendent l’ennemy: 
mais l’ennemy ayant pris vn detour, ne fut pas ren- 
contré, & par vn furcroift de malheur pour nous, 
comme il faifoit fes approches du bourg, il fit prife 
d’vn home & d’vne femme qui venoient d’en fortir. 
Il apprend de ces deux captifs l’eftat de la place, & 
{cait qu’elle eft dépourueué de la meilleure partie de 
fon monde, fans delay, il hafte le pas, pour y mettre 
tout A feu & A fang, l’occafion luy en eftant fi fauo- 
rable. 

Ce fut le feptiefme iour du mois de Decembre 
dernier de l’année 1649. fur les trois heures apres 
midy, que cette troupe d’Iroquois parut aux portes 
de ce bourg, l’efpouuante & la terreur fe iette incon- 
tinent dans tout ce pauure peuple dépoiiillé de fes 
forces, qui fe trouue vaincu, lors qu’il penfoit eftre 
vainqueur. Les vns prennent la fuite; les autres 
font tiiez fur la place; le feu en donna a plufieurs les 
premieres nouuelles, qui confommoit defia vne partie 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 109 


the field to meet that enemy. At the same time, we 
caused the tidings to be speedily conveyed to the 
people of the Tobacco Nation, who received it with 
joy, regarding that hostile band as already con- 
quered, and as occasion for their triumph. They 
resolutely awaited them for some days; then, weary- 
ing because victory was so slowly coming to them, 
they desired to go to meet it,—at least, the inhabitants 
of the village of Saint Jean, men of enterprise and 
valor. They hastened their attack, fearing lest the 
Iroquois should escape them, and desiring [27] to 
surprise the latter while they were still on the road. 
They set out on the fifth day of the month of Decem- 
ber, directing their route toward the place where the 
enemy was expected. But the latter, having taken 
a roundabout way, was not met; and, to crown our 
misfortunes, the enemy, as they approached the 
village, seized upon a man and woman who had just 
come out of it. They learned from these two cap- 
tives the condition of the place, and ascertained that 
it was destitute of the better part of its people. 
Losing no time, they quickened their pace that they 
might lay waste everything, opportunity so greatly 
favoring them. 

It was on the seventh day of the month of last 
December, in the year 1649, toward three o’clock in 
the afternoon, that this band of Iroquois appeared at 
the gates of the village, spreading immediate dismay, 
and striking terror into all those poor people,— bereft 
of their strength, and finding themselves vanquished, 
when they thought to be themselves the conquerors. 
Some took to flight; others were slain on the spot. 
To many, the flames, which were already consuming 
some of their cabins, gave the first intelligence of 


110 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 35 


de leurs cabanes: Quantité furent pris captifs: mais 
[28] l’ennemy victorieux, craignant le retour des 
guerriers, qui luy eftoient allez, au rencontre haftoit 
fi precipitemment fa retraite, qu’il fit main baffe fur 
tous les vieillars & enfans, & fur tous ceux qu’il ne 
iugeoit pas pouuoir le fuiure affez promptement en 
fa fuite. 

Ce furent des cruautez inconceuables. On arra- 
choit 4 vne Mere fes enfans pour les ietter au feu: 
d’autres enfans voyoiét leur Mere affommée 4a leurs 
pieds, ou gemiffante dans les flammes, fans qu’il leur 
fuft permis, ny aux vns, ny aux autres, d’en tefmoi- 
gner aucune compaffion. C’eftoit vn crime de 
re{pandre vne larme; ces barbares voulans qu’on 
marchait dans la captiuité, comme ils marchoient 
dans leur triomphe. WVne pauure Mere Chreftienne, 
qui pleuroit la mort de fon enfant, fut tuée fur la 
place, a caufe qu’elle auoit encor de l’amour, & 
qu’elle ne pouuoit eftouffer affez toft les fentimens 
de la Nature. / 

Le Pere Charles Garnier reftoit alors feul de nos 
Peres, en cette Miffion, lors que les ennemis paru- 
rent, il eftoit actuellemét occupé a inftruire ce peuple 
das leurs cabanes qu’il vifitoit. Il fort au bruit de 
[29] cette alarme. II va droit 4 l’Eglife, ot il trouua 
quelques Chreftiés. Nous s6mes morts, mes freres, 
leur dit-il, Priez Dieu, & prenez la fuyte, par ott vous 
pourrés efchaper. Portés voftre foy auec vous le 
re{te de vos vies, & que la mort vous trouue fongeans 
& Dieu, il leur donne fa benediction, & reffort 
promptement, pour aller au fecours des ames. Pas 
vn ne fonge A la deffenfe, tout eftant dans le defef- 
poir. Plufieurs trouuent vne iffué fauorable pour 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 111 


the disaster. Many were taken prisoners; but [28] 
the victorious enemy, fearing the return of the 
warriors who had gone to meet them, hastened their 
retreat so precipitately, that they put to death all 
the old men and children, and all whom they deemed 
unable to keep up with them in their flight. 

It was a scene of incredible cruelty. The enemy 
snatched from a Mother her infants, that they might 
be thrown into the fire; other children beheld their 
Mothers beaten to death at their feet, or groaning 
in the flames,— permission, in either case, being 
denied them to show the least compassion. It wasa 
crime to shed a tear, these barbarians demanding 
that their prisoners should go into captivity as if 
they were marching to their triumph. A poor Chris- 
tian Mother, who wept for the death of her infant, 
was killed on the spot, because she still loved, and 
could not stifle soon enough her Natural feelings. 

Father Charles Garnier was, at that time, the only 
one of our Fathers in that Mission. When the enemy 
appeared, he was just then occupied with instructing 
the people in the cabins which he was visiting. At 
the noise of the alarm, he went out, [29] going 
straight to the Church, where he found some Chris- 
tians. ‘‘ We are dead men, my brothers,” he said 
tothem. ‘‘Pray to God, and flee by whatever way 
you may be able to escape. Bear about with you 
your faith through what of life remains; and may 
death find you with God in mind.’’ He gave them 
his blessing, then left hurriedly, to go to the help 
of souls. A prey to despair, not one dreamed of 
defense. Several found a favorable exit for their 
flight; they implored the Father to flee with them, 
but the bonds of Charity restrained him. All 


112 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 85 


leur fuyte. Ils inuitent le Pere de fuyr auec eux: 
mais il eft retenu par les liés de la Charité, il 
s’oublie de foi-mefme, & il ne penfe qu’au falut du 
prochain. Son zele le portoit, & le faifoit courir par 
tout: foit pour donner 1’abfolution aux Chreftiens, 
qu’il auoit au rencontre; foit pour chercher dans les 
cabanes toutes en feu, des enfans, des malades, & 
des catechumenes, fur lefquels il refpandoit les eaux 
du Saint Baptefme, au milieu de ces flammes. Son 
coeur ne brufloit d’autre feu, que de l’amour de Dieu. 

Ce fut dans ces employs de Saincteté, qu’il fe vit 
accueilly de la mort, qu’il enuifageoit fans la craindre 
n'y fans reculer [30] d’vn feul pas. Vn coup de fufil 
le perga d’vne balle, vn peu au deffous de la poitrine: 
vne autre balle, du mefme coup, luy déchira le petit 
ventre, & luy donna dans vne cuiffe, dont il fut ter- 
rafsé. Mais fon courage n’en fut pas abbatu. Le 
barbare qui auoit fait ce coup, le defpoiiilla de fa 
fotane, & le laiffa nageant dedans fon fang, afin de 
fuiure les autres fugitifs. 

Ce bon Pere, fort peu de temps apres, fut veu 
ioindre les mains, faifant quelque priere. Puis tour- 
nant la tefte ca & 1a, il apperceut 4 dix ou douze pas 
de foy, vn pauure Moribond, qui venoit auffi bien 
que luy, de receuoir le coup de la mort, mais qui 
auoit encore quelques reftes de vie. L’amour de 
Dieu & le zele des Ames, eft encore plus fort que la 
mort. Il fe met a genoux; puis ayant fait quelque 
priere, il fe leue auec peine, & fe porte le mieux 
qu’il peut vers cét agonizant, pour l’affifter a bien 
mourir. Iln’auoit pas fait trois ou quatre demarches, 
qu’il retombe encor affez rudement. Il fe leue 
pour la feconde fois, & fe met encore 4 genoux, & 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 y 1138 


unmindful of himself, he thought only of the salva- 
tion of his neighbor. Borne on by his zeal, he 
hastened everywhere,—either to give absolution to 
the Christians whom he met, or to seek, in the burn- 
ing cabins, the children, the sick, or the catechu- 
mens, over whom, in the midst of the flames, he 
poured the waters of Holy Baptism, his own heart 
burning with no other fire than the love of God. 

It was while thus engaged in Holy work that he 
was encountered by the death which he had looked 
in the face without fearing it, or receding from it 
[30] a single step. A bullet from a musket struck 
him, penetrating a little below the breast; another, 
from the same volley, tore open his stomach, lodging 
in the thigh, and bringing him tothe ground. His 
courage, however, was unabated. The barbarian 
who had fired the shot stripped him of his cassock, 
and left him, weltering in his blood, to pursue the 
other fugitives. 

This good Father, a very short time after, was 
seen to clasp his hands, offering some prayer; then, 
looking about him, he perceived, at a distance of ten 
or twelve paces, a poor dying Man,— who, like him- 
self, had received the stroke of death, but had still 
some remains of life. Love of God, and zeal for 
Souls, were even stronger than death. Murmuring a 
few words of prayer, he struggled to his knees, and, 
rising with difficulty, dragged himself as best he 
might toward the sufferer, in order to assist him in 
dying well. He had made but three or four steps, 
when he fell again, somewhat heavily. Raising 
himself for the second time, he got, once more, upon 
his knees and strove to continue on his way; but his 
body, drained [31] of its blood, which was flowing in 


114 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


pourfuit fon mefme chemin: mais fon corps efpuisé 
[31] de fon fang, qui fort en abondance de fes playes, 
n’e{t pas fi fort que fon courage; il retombe pour la 
troifiefme fois, n’ayat fait que quatre ou cinq pas. 
Nous n’auons pfi fcauoir ce qu’il fit du depuis: vne 
bonne Chreftienne, qui nous a fait fidelement tout ce 
rapport, n’en ayant pas vefi dauantage, acaufe qu’vn 
Iroquois la furprit elle mefme, & luy déchargea fur 
la tefte vn coup de hache-d’armes, qui la terraffa fur 
le lieu, quoy que depuis elle en foit réchapée. Le 
Pere receut quelque temps apres, deux coups de 
hache, fur les deux tempes, de part & d’autre, qui 
enfoncoient dans la ceruelle, c’eftoit la recompenfe 
la plus riche qu’il efperaft de la bonté de Dieu, pour 
tous les feruices paffez Son corps fut defpoiiillé, & 
laiffé tout nud fur la place. 

Deux de nos Peres, qui eftoient dans la Miffion la 
plus voifine, receurent quelques reftes de ces pauures 
Chreftiens fugitifs, qui y arriuoient hors d’haleine; 
plufieurs tous couuerts de leur fang. Toute la nuict, 
ce ne furent qu’alarmes, dans la crainte ot tout le 
monde eftoit d’vn femblable malheur. Sur le com- 
mencement [32] du iour, on apprit par quelques 
efpions que l’ennemy s’eftoit retiré. Ces deux Peres 
partent dés le mefme moment, afin de voir eux- 
mefmes de leurs yeux, vn {pectacle bien trifte: mais 
toutefois digne de Dieu. [ls ne trouuent que des 
cadaures, les vns deffus les autres; & de pauures 
Chreftiens: les vns qui acheuoient de fe confommer 
das les reliques deplorables de ce bourg tout en feu; 
les autres, noyez dans leurs fang; & d’aucuns qui 
auoient quelques reftes de vie, mais tous couuers de 
playes, qui n’attendoient rien que la mort, beniffans 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 115 


abundance from his wounds, had not the strength of 
his courage. For the third time he fell, having 
proceeded but five or six steps. Further than this, we 
have not been able to ascertain what he accom- 
plished,—the good Christian woman who faithfully 
related all this to us having seen no more of him, 
being herself overtaken by an Iroquois, who struck 
her on the head with a war-hatchet, felling her upon 
the spot, though she afterward escaped. The Father, 
shortly after, received from a hatchet two blows upon 
the temples, one on either side, which penetrated to 
the brain. To him it was the recompense for all 
past services, the richest he had hoped for from 
God’s goodness. His body was stripped, and left, 
entirely naked, where it lay. 

Two of our Fathers, who were in the nearest neigh- 
boring Mission, received a remnant of these poor 
fugitive Christians, who arrived all out of breath, 
many of them all covered with their own blood. 
The night was one of continual alarm, owing to the 
fear, which had seized all, of a similar misfortune. 
Toward the break [32] of day, it was ascertained 
from certain spies that the enemy had retired. The 
two Fathers at once set out, that they might them- 
selves look upon a spectacle most sad indeed, but 
nevertheless acceptable to God. They found only 
dead bodies heaped together, and the remains of 
poor Christians,—some who were almost consumed 
in the pitiable remains of the still burning village ; 
others deluged with their own blood; and a few who 
yet showed some signs of life, but were all covered 
with wounds,— looking only for death, and blessing 
God in their wretchedness. At length, in the midst 
of that desolated village, they descried the body they 


116 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


Dieu dans leur malheur. Enfin, au milieu de ce 
bourg defolé ils y apperceurent le corps, quils y 
e{toient venus chercher: mais fi peu connoiffable, 
e{tant tout couuert de fon fang, & des cendres de cét 
incendie, qu’ils paffoient outre; mais quelques 
Sauuages Chreftiens, reconnurent leur Pere, qui eftoit 
mort pour leur amour. [ls l’enterrent au mefme 
lieu, ot auoit efté leur Eglife; quoy qu'il n’en reftaft 
plus aucune marque, le feu ayant tout consdmé. 

La pauureté de cét enterrement fut grande; mais. 
fa faincteté n’en fut pas [33] moindre. Ces deux bons 
Peres fe defpoiiillerent d’vne partie de leurs habits, 
pour en couurir le mort; & ne purent faire dauan- 
tage, 4 moins que de s’en retourner tout nuds. 

Ce fut vn bien riche dépoft, pour vn lieu fi aban- 
donné, que le corps d’vn fi grand feruiteur de Dieu: 
mais ce grand Dieu trouuerra bien les moyens de 
nous reiinir tous dans le Ciel, puifque ce n’eft qu’v- 
niquement pour fon amour, que nous fommes ainfi 
difperfez, & durant noftre vie, & apres noftre mort. 

La crainte que l’ennemy ayant fait quelque feinte, 
ne retournait fur fes brisées, obligea tout ce conuoy 
de charité de repartir le mefme iour, & fans delay, 
& retourner en hafte, d’ot ils eftoient partis, fans 
boire & fans manger, par des chemins fafcheux, & 
en vne faifon bien penible, la neige ayant defia 
couuert la terre. 

Deux iours apres la prife & l’incendie de ce bourg, 
les habitans retournerent, qui ayans trouué la dé- 
marche qu’auoit pris l’ennemy par vn autre chemin, 
s’eftoient doutez du malheur arriué. Mais ils le 
virent de leurs yeux, & A la veué des [34] cendres, & 
des corps morts de leurs parens, de leurs femmes, & 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 : 117 


had come to seek; but so little cognizable was it, 
being completely covered with its blood, and the 
ashes of the fire, that they passed it by. Some 
Christian Savages, however, recognized their Father, 
who had died for love of them. They buried him 
in the same spot on which their Church had stood, 
although there remained no longer any vestige of it, 
.the fire having consumed all. 

The poverty of that burial was sublime, and its 
sanctity no [33] less so. The two good Fathers 
divested themselves of part of their apparel, to cover 
therewith the dead; they could do no more, unless 
it were to return entirely unclothed. 

It was truly a rich treasure to deposit in so deso- 
late a spot, the body of so noble a servant of God; 
but that great God will surely find a way to reunite 
us all in Heaven, since it is for his sake alone that we 
are thus scattered, both during life and after death. 

Dread lest the enemy, having made but a show of 
departure, might retrace his steps, constrained all 
that escort of love to set out again that same day, 
and, without losing time, to return, as speedily as 
possible, to the place whence they had departed,— 
without food or drink; by roads difficult of passage; 
and at a most fatiguing season, as the snow had 
already covered the ground. 

Two days after the taking and burning of the 
village, its inhabitants returned,— who, having dis- 
covered the change of plan which had led the enemy 
to take another route, had had their suspicions of the 
misfortune that had happened. But now they beheld 
it with their own eyes; and at the sight of the [34] 
ashes, and the dead bodies of their relatives, their 
wives, and their children, they maintained for half 


118 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 35 


de leurs enfans, ils furent vne demy-iournée dans 
vn profond filence; affis & terre, a la fauuage, & fans 
leuer les yeux, ny pouffer mefme aucun foufpir, 
comme des {ftatués de marbre, fans parole, fans 
regars, & fans mouuement. Car c’eft 1a le dueil des 
Sauuages; au moins des hommes & des guerriers: les 
larmes, les plaintes & les crys eftant, difent-ils, pour 
les femmes. 

La perte & du Pafteur & du troupeau nous ont efté 
fenfibles; mais il faut qu’en l’vn & en l’autre nous 
adorions & nous aimions les conduites de Dieu fur 
nous, & fur nos Eglifes, & que nous foyons difpofez 
d’agreer iufqu’a la fin tout ce qu’il voudra, 

Le Pere Charles Garnier nafquit 4 Paris l’année 
1605. il entra en noftre Compagnie l’année 1624. & 
ainfi il n’auoit guere plus de 44. ans, le 7. Decembre 
1649. iour auquel il mourut dans l’employ vrayement 
Apoftolique, dans lequel il auoit vefcu, depuis l’an 
1636. qu'il quitta la France, & monta dans le pais des 
Hurons. 

[35] Dés fon enfance il auoit eu des fentimens de 
pieté tres-tendres, & principalement vn amour filial 
a l’endroit de la tres-faincte Vierge, qu’il appelloit 
fa Mere. C’eft elle, difoit-il, qui m’a porté deffus 
fes bras, dans toute ma ieuneffe, & qui m’a mis dans 
la Compagnie de fon Fils. Il auoit fait vn voeu de 
fouftenir iufqu’aé la mort, fon Immaculée Conception. 
Il eft mort 4 la veille de cette augufte Fefte, pour 
aller la folemnifer plus auguftement dans le Ciel. 

Dés fon Nouitiat, il paroiffoit vn Ange: fa modeftie 
eftant fi rare, qu’on le propofoit 4 tous les autres, 
comme vn miroir de faincteté. Il] auoit eu de tres- 
grandes difficultez 4 obtenir permiffion de fon pere, 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 119 


the day a profound silence,—seated, after the man- 
ner of savages, upon the ground, without lifting 
their eyes, or uttering even a sigh,—like marble 
statues, without speech, without sight, and without 
motion. For it is thus that the Savages mourn,—at 
least, the men and the warriors,—tears, cries, and 
lamentations befitting, so they say, the women. 

The loss of the Pastor and of his flock has been to 
us a heavy blow; but in both it becomes us to love 
and adore the Divine hand that guides us and is over 
our Churches, and to dispose ourselves to accept all 
that he wills, until the end. 

Father Charles Garnier was born in Paris, in the 
year 1605,and entered our Society in 1624; he was 
thus but little over 44 years of age on the 7th of 
December, 1649,—the day on which he died in 
labors which were truly Apostolic, and in which he 
had lived since the year 1636, when he left France 
and went up to the country of the Hurons. 

[35] From his infancy, he entertained the most 
tender sentiments of piety, and, in particular, a filial 
love toward the most holy Virgin, whom he called 
his Mother. ‘‘ It it she,’’ he would say, ‘‘ who has 
carried me in her arms through all my youth, and 
has placed me in the Society of her Son.” He had 
made a vow to uphold, until death, her Immaculate 
Conception. He died on the eve of that august 
Festival, that he might go to solemnize it yet more 
gloriously in Heaven. | 

From the time of his Novitiate, he seemed an 
Angel, his humility being so uncommon that he was 
held before all others as a mirror of sanctity. He 
had experienced the greatest difficulties in obtaining 
permission from his father to enter our Society; but. 


120 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 35 


pour entrer en noftre Compagnie: mais elles furent 
bien plus grandes, lors que dix ans aprés cette pre- 
miere feparation, il fallut luy en faire agreer vne 
feconde plus fenfible, qui eftoit fon départ de la 
France, pour venir en ces Miffions du bout du monde: 
Nos Superieurs ayans defiré que fon Pere y donnaft 
fon confentement, 4 caufe des obligations particu- 
lieres, que luy auoit noftre Compagnie. Son voyage 
en fut retardé [36] vne année toute entiere: mais ce 
ne fut que pour enflammer fes defirs. [our & nuidct, 
il ne fongeoit qu’a la conuerfion des Sauuages, & a 
y confommer fa vie, iufqu’au dernier foufpir [1 pltt 
& Dieu déslors de luy donner des preffentimens de 
la mort qui luy eft arriuée; mais fi puiffans, fi doux, 
& fi aimables, que ie puis dire que déslors il eftoit 
mort vrayement au monde, & que le monde luy eftoit 
comme vn cadavre mort, pour lequel on n’a plus que 
de l’horreur & du dégouft. Il fut donc vn an tout 
entier pour combattre tous les efforts de la nature, 
en fon bon pere, qui ne pouuoit entendre a vne fi 
dure feparation. Il y employa, & amis, & larmes, & 
prieres, & des mortifications continuelles. Enfin il 
obtint ce grand coup du Ciel, auec tant de ioye de 
fon coeur, qu'il eftimoit cette iournée la plus heureufe 
qu’il euft eué toute fa vie. 

Paffant la mer, il fit dans le nauire des conuerfions 
notables. Entr’autres il fut aduerty, qu’il y auoit 
parmy les matelots, vn homme fans confcience, fans 
Religion, & fans Dieu, qui fuyoit tout le monde, & 
que tout le monde fuyoit. [37] Il y auoit plus de 
dix ans qu’il ne s’eftoit confefsé. Le Pere porté de 
fon zele ordinaire, entreprit cette humeur noire, & 


cét homme defefperé, & apres mille tefmoignages de © 


a 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 121 


these were very much enhanced when, ten years 
after that first separation, it became necessary to 
reconcile the father to a second, of a still more pain- 
ful kind. This was his departure from France, to 
go into these Missions at the end of the world,—our 
Superiors having expressed their wish that his 
Father should yield consent to this, on account of 
peculiar obligations which our Society was under to 
him. His voyage was thus delayed, [36] an entire 
year; but this only served to fan the flame of his 
desires. Day and night he thought only of the con- 
version of the Savages, and of devoting to them his 
life, to its latest breath. It pleased God, from that 
time, to visit him with presentiments of the death 
which has befallen him,— but presentiments so inspir- 
ing, so peaceful, so delightful, that I can say that 
thenceforward he was dead to the world, and the 
world was to him as some lifeless carcass, for which 
one feels only horror and disgust. It required, then, 
a whole year to contend with all the struggles of 
nature in the mind of his good father, who could not 
hear of so cruel a separation. He employed therein 
friends, tears, prayers, and continual mortifications. 
At length, he succeeded in obtaining this great boon 
from Heaven, and with so much joy in his heart, 
that he looked upon that day as the happiest of his 
entire life. 

While crossing the sea, he made some remarkable 
conversions on shipboard. Among others, he was 
informed that belonging to the crew was a man with- 
out conscience, without Religion, and without God. 
This man avoided every one, and all avoided him; 
[37] it was over ten years since he had confessed. 
The Father, carried away by his usual zeal, took in 


122 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


charité, qu’il luy rendit, par toute forte de foins, 
d’inftructions, & de bons offices, enfin il le gagna, & 
luy fit faire vne confeffion generale, & il le mit dans 
vne fi grande paix, & ioye de confcience, que tout le 
monde en fut eftonné & touché. 

Dés qu’il fut arriué aux Hurons, on efit en fa per- 
fonne vn ouurier infatigable, remply de tous les dons 
de la Nature & de la Grace, qui peuuent rendre vn 
Miffionaire accomply. I1 poffeda la langue des Sau- 
uages en vn degré fi eminent, qu’ils l’admiroient 
eux-mefmes. I] entroit fi auant dans les cceurs, & 
auec vne eloquence fi puiffante, qu’il les rauiffoit 
tous a foy: fon vifage, fes yeux, fon ris mefme, & 
tous les geftes de fon corps ne prefchoient que la 
faincteté. Mais fon cceur parloit plus haut que fes 
paroles, & fe faifoit entendre mefme dans fon filence: 
I’en fgay plufieurs qui fe font conuertis A Dieu, aux 
feuls regars de fon vifage, qui eftoient vrayement 
[38] Angeliques, & qui donnoient de la deuotion, & 
des impreffions de Chafteté 4 ceux qui l’abordoient, 
foit qu’il fut en prieres, foit qu’il parfit rentrer en 
foy, fe recueillant de l’action d’auec le prochain; foit 
qu’il parlaft de Dieu, foit mefme lors que la Charité 
lengageoit dans d’autres entretiés, qui dénoient 
quelque relafche 4 fon efprit. L’amour de Dieu qui 
regnoit en fon coeur, animoit tous fes mouuemens, & 
les rendoit diuins. 

Ses vertus eftoient heroiques, & il ne luy en man- 
quoit pas vne de celles qui font les plus grads Saints. 
Vne Obeifsace accomplie capable de tout faire, & 
prefte 4 ne rien faire, fi fon Superieur ne vouloit. 
Vne Humilité fi profonde, que quoy que tout fut 
eminent en luy, non feulement il s’eftimoit le plus 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 123 


hand that gloomy temper and that hopeless man; 
and, after a thousand evidences of love,— exhibited 
in all manner of attentions, instructions, and good 
offices, succeeded at last in winning him. He 
induced this man to make a general confession, and 
brought him into so great a peace, and joy of con- 
science, that all wondered, and were touched by it. 

As soon as he came among the Hurons, we had in 
him an indefatigable worker, replete with every gift 
of Nature and of Grace that could make an accom- 
plished Missionary. He had mastered the language 
of the Savages so thoroughly that they themselves 
were astonished at him. He worked his way so far 
into their hearts, and with such a power of eloquence, 
as to carry them away with him. His face, his 
eyes,—even his laugh, and every movement of his 
body,— preached sanctity. His heart spoke yet 
louder than his words and made itself heard, even in 
his silence. I know of several who were converted 
to God by the mere aspect of his countenance, which 
was truly [38] Angelic, and which imparted a spirit 
of devotion, and Chaste impressions, to those ap- 
proaching him,—whether he were at prayer, or 
seemed to be communing with himself, collecting his 
thoughts, after some activity in behalf of his neigh- 
bor; or whether he spoke of God; or it might be, 
even, when Charity had engaged him in discourse of 
a different character, which afforded some relaxation 
to his mind. The love of God which reigned in his 
heart gave life to all his movements, and made them 
heavenly. 

His virtues were heroic, nor was there lacking in 
him one of those which go to make up the greatest 
Saints. A perfect Obedience, capable of doing every- 


124 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 35 


indigne de cette Miffion, mais il croyoit que Dieu le 
puniffoit terriblement de fes infidelitez, lors qu’il 
voyoit quelqu’vn auoir quelque opinion de luy. Ce 
luy ef{toit vn des tourmens des plus fenfibles qui pfit 
luy arriuer. Et ie fcay que fouuent en ces rencon- 
tres, pour donner A ces mefmes perfonnes de bas 
fentimens de foy-mefme, il leur defcouuroit fes 
défauts, & ce [39] qui luy donnoit plus d horreur de 
foy-mefme, croyant qu’en fuite on le deuft auoir en 
horreur. 

Son oraifon eftoit fi refpectueufe en la prefence de 
Dieu, & fi paifible dans le filence de toutes fes puif- 
fances, qu’a peine fouffroit-il la moindre diftraction, 
quoy qu’au milieu des employs les plus diffipans. 
Ce n’eftoient que colloques, qu’affections & qu’amour, 
dés le commencement de 1’Oraifon; & ce feu s’alloit 
allumant toufiours iufqu’a la fin. 

Sa mortification eftoit égale 4 fon amour: il la 
cherchoit & nuict & iour, toufiours couché deffus la 
dure, & portant toufiours fur fon corps quelque partie 
de la Croix, qu'il cheriffoit durant fa vie, & fur 
laquelle il defiroit mourir. Chaque fois qu’il retour- 
noit de fes Miffions, il ne manquoit iamais de faire 
racerer les pointes de fer, d’vne ceinture toute herif- 
sée de moletes d’efperon, qu’il portoit fur la chair 
nué: & outre cela, tres-fouuent il vfoit d’vne difci- 
pline de fer, armée auffi de pointes tres-aigués. Son 
viure n’eftoit autre que celuy des Sauuages, c’eft a 
dire, le moindre qu’vn miferable gueux peut efperer 
en France. [40] Cette derniere année de famine, le 
gland & les racines ameres luy eftoient des delices: 
non pas qu'il n’en fentit les amertumes, mais il les 
fauouroit auec amour: quoy que toufiours il euft efté 


| 
. 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 125 


thing, and prepared to do nothing, if so his Superior 
willed it. A Humility so profound that, although 
eminent in every respect, not only did he regard him- 
self as the most unworthy in this Mission, but it was 
his conviction that God was terribly punishing his 
unfaithfulness, when he perceived that any one 
thought highly of him. That, to him, was one of 
the keenest sufferings that could befall him; and I 
know that oftentimes, on such occasions, that he might 
give to these same persons a low opinion of him, he 
made known to them his failings, and [39] whatever 
would produce in him a greater loathing of him- 
self,— believing that, in consequence, he would be 
held in abhorrence. 

His prayers were so full of reverence for the pres- 
ence of God, and so peaceful in the hush of all his 
own powers, that he scarcely seemed to suffer the 
least distraction, though engaged in occupations 
most apt to dissipate his thoughts. His Prayers, 
from the outset, were but a series of colloquies, de- 
vout emotions, and acts of love; and this ardor grew 
even more intense until the close. 

His mortification was equal to hislove. He sought 
it night and day: always lay on the bare ground, 
and bore constantly upon his body some portion of 
that Cross which during life he held most dear, and 
on which it was his desire to die. Every time that 
he returned from his Mission rounds, he never failed 
to sharpen freshly the iron points of a girdle all 
covered with spur-rowels, which he wore next to his 
skin. In addition to this, he would very often use 
a discipline of wire, armed, besides, with sharpened 
points. His daily fare differed in no way from that 
of the Savages,— that is to say, it was the scantiest 


126 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


vn enfant chery & d’vne maifon riche & noble, & 
tous les amours de fon Pere; efleué dés le berceau en 
d’autres nourritures qu’en celles des Pourceaux. Mais 
tant s’en faut qu’il s’eftima{t miferable dans ce grand 
abandon de toutes chofes, ot il eftoit; & qu’il euft 
voulu dire, ce que difoit l’enfant Prodigue, Quanti 
mercenarty in domo Patris met abundant panibus; ego 
autem hic fame pereo; qu’au contraire il s’eftimoit 
heureux de tout fouffrir pour Dieu. 

Dans les dernieres lettres, qu’il m’efcriuit trois 
iours auant fa mort; pour refponfe A vne demande 
que ie luy faifois touchant l’eftat de fa fanté, & s’il 
n’eftoit point & propos qu’il quittaft pour quelque 
temps fa Miffion, afin de venir nous reuoir, & reparer 
vn peu fes forces: Ilme refpondit tres au long quan- 
tité de raifons, qui l’obligeoient de demeurer en fa 
Miffion; mais raifons qui ne prenoient leur force que 
de l’efprit de charité, & du [41] zele vrayement 
Apottolique dont il eftoit remply. Il eft vray, m’ad- 
iouftoit-il, que ie fouffre quelque chofe du cofté de 
la faim: mais ce n’eft pas iufqu’A la mort; & Dieu 
mercy, mon corps & mon efprit, fe fouftiennent dans 
leur vigueur. Ce n’eft pas de ce cofté 1A que ie 
crains; mais ce que ie craindrois dauantage, feroit 
qu’en quittant mon troupeau en ces temps de miferes, 
& dans ces frayeurs de la guerre, qu’il a befoin de 
moy, plus que iamais; ie ne manquaffe aux occafions 
que Dieu me donne, de me perdre pour luy; & qu’en 
fuite, ie ne me rendiffe indigne de fes faueurs. Ie 
n’ay que trop de foin de moy-mefme, adiouftoit-il; & 
fi ie voyois que les forces fuffent pour me manquer, 
puifque voftre Reuerence me le commande, ie ne 
manquerois pas de partir: car ie fuis tousjours preft 


oe 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 "497 


that a miserable beggar would expect in France. 
[40] During that last year of famine, acorns and 
bitter roots were, to him, delicacies,—not that he was 
insensible to their bitterness, but that love gavea 
relish to them. And yet he had ever been the cher- 
ished child of a rich and noble house, and the object 
of alla Father’s endearments,— brought up, from the 
cradle, on other foods than those of Swine. But so 
far was he from regarding himself as wretched in 
this great surrender of everything, where he was; 
or from wishing to say, in the words of the Prodigal 
son, Quanti mercenarit in domo Patris met abundant 
pantbus, ego autem hic fame pereo, that, on the contrary, 
he esteemed himself happy in suffering all things 
for God. 

In his latest letters, addressed to me three days 
before his death, in response to a request which I 
made to him touching the state of his health,—ask- 
ing if it would not be right that he should quit for a 
time his Mission, in order to come once more to see 
us, and recruit a little his strength,—he answered 
me by urging, at great length, many reasons which 
disposed him to remain in his Mission, but reasons 
which gathered their force only from the spirit of 
charity and [41] truly Apostolic zeal with which he 
was filled. ‘‘It is true,’’ he added, ‘‘ that I suffer 
something in regard to hunger, but that is not to 
death; and, thank God, my body and my spirit keep 
up in all their vigor. I am not alarmed on that side; 
but what I should fear more would be that, in leav- 
ing my flock in the time of their calamities, and in 
the terrors of war,—in a time when they need me 
more than ever,—I would fail to use the opportuni- 
ties which God gives me of losing myself for him, 


128 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 35 


de tout quitter, pour mourir dans l’obeiffance, ot 
Dieu me veut: fans cela, ie ne defcendray iamais de 
la Croix ot fa bonté m’a mis. 

Ces grands defirs de faincteté auoient creu auec 
luy dés fon bas Age. Pour moy, l’ayant connu depuis 
plus de douze ans, qu’il refpandoit deuant moy tout 
[42] fon coeur, comme il faifoit deuant Dieu mefme; 
ie puis dire auec verité, qu’en toutes ces années, ie 
ne croy pas que hors le fommeil, il ayt efté vne feule 
heure, fans ces defirs ardens & vehemés de s’auancer 
de plus en plus, dedans les voyes de Dieu, & d’y 
auancer fon prochain. Hors de cela, rien au monde 
ne le touchoit; ny parens, ny amis, ny repos, ny 
confolation ny peines, ny fatigues. Son tout eftoit 
en Dieu, & hors de luy, tout ne luy eftoit rien. 

Il prenoit des malades, & les portoit fur fes efpau- 
les, vne & deux lieués, pour leur gagner le coeur, & 
pour auoir occafion de les baptizer. II faifoit les dix 
& les vingt lieu#s, durant les chaleurs de 1’ E{fté les 
plus exceffiues, & par des chemins dangereux, ot 
fans ceffe les ennemis faifoient quelques maffacres. 
Il couroit hors d’halene apres vn feul Sauuage, qui 
luy feruoit de guide, pour aller baptizer, ou quelque 
moribond, ou quelque captif de guerre, qu’on deuoit 


brufler le iour mefme. Ila pafsé des nuicts entieres - 


dans des efgaremens & des chemins perdus, au milieu 
des neges profondes, & des plus grands froids de 
[43] l’Hyuer, fans que fon zele fuft arrefté d’aucune 
faifon de l’année. 

Durant les maladies contagieufes, qu’on nous 
fermoit par tout les portes des cabanes, & qu’on ne 
parloit d’autre chofe que de nous maffacrer, non 
feulement il marchoit tefte baifsée, ot il fpauoit qu’il 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 : 129 


and so render myself unworthy of his favors. I take 
only too much care of myself,’’ added he; “‘ and if I 
saw that my powers were failing me, I should not 
fail, since your Reverence bids me, to come to you; 
for Iam at all times ready to leave everything, to 
die, in the spirit of obedience, where God wills; but 
otherwise, I will never come down from the Cross 
on which his goodness has placed me.” 

These great aspirations after sanctity had grown 
with him from his infancy. For myself, having 
known him for more than twelve years,—in which 
he opened to me all [42] his heart, as he did to God 
himself,—I can truly say that, in all those years, I 
do not think that, save in sleep, he has spent a single 
hour without these burning and vehement desires of 
progressing more and more in the ways of God, and 
of helping forward in them his fellow-creatures. 
Outside of these considerations, nothing in the world 
affected him,—neither relatives, nor friends, nor 
rest, nor consolation, nor hardships, nor fatigues. 
God was his all; and, apart from him, all else was to 
him as nothing. 

He took some sick people, and carried them on his 
shoulders for one or two leagues, in order to gain 
their hearts, and to secure the opportunity to baptize 
them. He accomplished some ten or twenty leagues 
during the most excessive heat of Summer, along 
dangerous roads, where the enemy was continually 
perpetrating massacres. All breathless, he would 
hurry after a single Savage, who served him as guide, 
that he might baptize some dying man, or a captive 
of war who was to be burnt that same day. He has 
passed whole nights in groping after a lost path, 
amid the deep snows and the most biting cold of [43] 


130 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


y euft vne feule ame 4 gagner pour le Paradis; mais 
par vn excez de ce zele, & vne induftrie de Charité, 
il trouuoit les moyens de s’ouurir tous les chemins 
qu’on luy fermoit, de rompre tous les obftacles; 
quelquesfois auec violence. Mais ce qui eftoit de 
plus diuin, en tout ce procedé, qui n’auoit rien de la 
prudence humaine; c’eft que dés fon entrée, il 
gagnoit les efprits farouches, d’vne feule parole, & 
qu’il venoit & bout de fon deffein. Rien ne le rebu- 
toit, & toufiours il efperoit en bien, des ames les plus 
defefperées. 

Il auoit vn recours particulier aux Anges, & en 
reffentoit des fecours tres-puiffans. Des Sauuages, 
qu’il alloit affifter A l’heure de la mort, l’ont vet 
accompagné d’vn ieune homme, difoient-ils, d’vne 
rare beauté, & d’vn efclat maieftueux, qui fe tenoit a 
fon cofté, & qui [44] les animoit 4 obeir aux in{ftru- 
ctions du Pere. Ces bonnes gens n’en pouuoient 
dire dauantage, & demandoient quel eftoit ce com- 
pagnon, quirauiffoit ainfileurcceur. Ils ne fgauoient 
pas que les Anges font plus que nous dans la conuer- 
fion des Pecheurs, quoy que pour l’ordinaire leur 
operation ne foit pas fi vifible. 

Son inclination la plus grande, eftoit 4 affifter les 
plus abandonnez: & quelque humeur rebutante que 
put auoir quelqu’vn, fi chetif & impertinent qu’il pfit 
ef{tre; il fentoit efgalement pour tous des entrailles 
de Mere; n’obmettant mefme aucun acte de Miferi- 
corde corporelle, qu’il pfit pratiquer, pour le falut 
des ames On1’a vetfi panfer des viceres fi puants, & 
qui rendoient vne telle infection, que les Sauuages, & 
mef{me les parens plus proches des malades, ne les 
pouuoient fouffrir. Luy feul y mettoit la main tous 


' 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 131 


Winter,— his zeal knowing no obstacle at any season 
of the year. 

During the prevalence of contagious diseases,— 
when they shut on us everywhere the doors of the 
cabins, and talked of nothing but of massacring us,— 
not only did he go unswervingly where he felt there 
was a soul to gain for Paradise; but, by an excess of 
zeal, and an ingenuity born of Charity, he found 
means of opening all the ways that had been closed 
against him, and of breaking down, sometimes forci- 
bly, all that opposed his progress. But that which 
imparted a more heavenly aspect to every such proce- 
dure, and did not result from human sagacity, was 
this, that, from the moment of his entry, he won 
over fierce spirits by a single word, and accomplished 
all that he had set himself to do. Nothing repelled 
him; and he always looked for good, even from souls 
the most hopeless. 

He had a way of recourse to the Angels, all his 
own, and experienced their most powerful assistance. 
The Savages, to whose aid he went at the hour of 
death, have seen him accompanied, as they said, by 
a young man of rare beauty and majestic glory, who 
remained at his side, and [44] urged them to obey 
the instructions of the Father. These good people 
could tell no more, and inquired who was this com- 
panion who had so stolen away their hearts. They 
knew not that the Angels do more than we in the 
conversion of Sinners, although ordinarily, their 
operation is not so evident. 

His strongest inclination was to aid the most 
depraved, however repulsive the disposition that any 
one might possess, however vile and insolent he 
might be. He felt for all alike, with the bowels of a 


132 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


les iours, en effuyoit le pus, & nettoyoit la playe, 
deux & trois mois de fuite, auec vn ceil & vn vifage 
qui ne refpiroit que charité: quoy que fouuent il 
vift tres-bien que ces playes eftoient incurables. 
Mais, difoit-il, plus elles [45] font mortelles, plus 
i’ay de pente 4 en prendre le foin; afin de conduire 
ces paulures gens iufqu’a la porte du Paradis, & afin 
d’empefcher leur cheute dans le peché, en vn temps, 
qui eft pour eux, le plus perilleux de la vie. 

Il n’y auoit dans tout le pais des Hurons, aucune 
Miffion ot il n’euft efté, & il en auoit commencé plu- 
fieurs, nommement celle ot il eft mort. Il agiffoit 
auec les Sauuages, dans vne grande Prudence, & auec 
vne douceur de Charité, qui fcauoit tout excufer, & 
tout fupporter, quoy qu’elle n’euft rien de lafche. 

I] n’auoit aucune attache A fon trauail; ny aux 
perfonnes, ny aux lieux, ny aux employs. Mais 
enuifageant la volonté de Dieu efgalement en toutes 
chofes; en quelque lieu qu’il fuft quelque occupation 
que l’obeiffance luy ordonnaf{t; dés ce mefme mo- 
ment, il s’y portoit auec courage, auec conftance, & 
comme vn homme qui n’auoit plus d’autres penfées 
au monde, finon de trouuer Dieu, ot on vouloit 
qualors il le cherchaft. Souuent on luy a fait quit- 
ter le foin des Miffions, ou eftoit tout fon cceur; pour 
labourer la terre, pour feruir d’vn homme de [46] 
voiture, & traifner fur les neiges, comme vn cheual 
ala charué; pour prendre le foin des malades, pour 
auoir foin de la cuifine, pour aller chercher cA & 1A 
dans les bois, quelques raifins fauuages; & faire les 
dix & douze lieués pour en trouuer fa charge, & pour 
en retirer apres de longs trauaux, A peine ce qu'il 
faut de vin, pour celebrer quelques Meffes le refte 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 133 


Mother,—not omitting any act of corporal Mercy 
which he could perform for the salvation of souls. 
He has been seen to dress ulcers so loathsome, and 
which emitted a stench so offensive, that the Sav- 
ages, and even the nearest relatives of the sick man, 
were unable to endure them. He alone would 
handle these, wiping off the pus and cleansing the 
wound, every day, for two and three months together, 
with an eye and a countenance that betokened only 
charity,—though he often saw very clearly that the 
wounds were incurable. ‘‘ But,’’ said he, ‘‘ the more 
[45] deadly they are, the stronger inclination have I 
to undertake the care of them,—that I may lead 
these poor people even to the gate of Paradise, and 
keep them from falling into sin at a time which is 
for them the most perilous in life.’’ 

Not one Mission was there in the whole territory 
of the Hurons in which he had not been; and several 
of them he had himself originated,— that, in particu- 
lar, in which he died. ‘Toward the Savages he 
conducted himself with a remarkable Prudence, and 
with a sweetness of Charity that could excuse all, 
and bear with all, though having in it nothing that 
was mean-spirited. 

He tied himself neither to his work nor to persons, 
to places nor employments; but, regarding equally 
in everything the will of God,’ wherever he might 
be; whatever occupation obedience might appoint to 
him, from that very moment he betook himself to it 
with courage and constancy, and as a man who had 
no other thought in the world save that of finding 
God where, at the time, it was willed that he should 
seek him. Often was he called upon to leave the 
care of Missions, where his whole heart lay, to till 


134 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


de l’année. Par tout il eftoit égal 4 foy-mefme, & a 
le voir, on euft iugé qu’il n’auoit point d’inclination, 
finon pour ce qu’on luy voyoit faire, & que c’eftoit 14 
le vray employ, ot il fut appellé de Dieu. On ne 
fera rien, difoit-il, pour le falut des ames, fi Dieu ne 
fe met de la partie auec nous: quand c’eft luy qui 
nous y applique, par la conduite de 1’obeiffance, il 
eft obligé de nous y affifter, & auec luy nous y ferons 
ce qu'il attend de nous. Mais quand c’eft que nous 
cheriffons vn employ, fut-il le plus fainct de la terre, 
Dieu n’eft pas obligé d’eftre de la partie: il nous 
laiffe 4 nous-mefmes, & de nous-mefmes que pou- 
uons-nous finon vn rien, ott le peché qui nous met 
au deffous du rien? 

Il n’eftoit pas tellement attaché 4a la [47] conuer- 
fion des Hurons, que fon coeur ne le tranfportaft aux 
Nations les plus efloignées; n’y euft-il que les enfans 
a baptizer, qui, difoit-il, font vn gain certain pour le 
Ciel. Il nous difoit fouuent qu’il euft efté bien aife 
de tomber entre les mains des Iroquois, & d’eftre 
leur captif: que s’ils l’euffent bruflé tout vif, il euft 
efi pour le moins ce loifir 14, de les inftruire, autant 
de temps, qu’ils prolongeroient fes tourmens: Que 
s’ils luy euffent donné la vie, c’euft efté vn riche 
moyen de procurer leur conuerfion, qui nous eft 
impoffible, le chemin nous en eftant fermé, tandis 
qu’ils font nos ennemis. 

Ie finiray ce Chapitre, par quelques points d’vne 
lettre, que m’efcriuit celuy de nos Peres, qui l’en- 
terra, & qui auoit pafsé en Miffion auec luy, les 
dernieres années de fa vie, voicy comme il m’en 
efcrit. 

Puifque voftre Reuerence defire que ie luy efcriue, 


ee ee —— 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 135 


the ground; to harness himself to some [46] convey- 
ance and drag it over the snows, like a horse at the 
plough; to care for the sick; to take charge of the 
cooking; or to go up and down in the forest in quest 
of some wild grapes, achieving ten or twelve leagues 
in finding his load,—to procure from it, after pro- 
tracted labors, scarcely as much wine as would be 
needed for the celebration of a few Masses during 
the remainder of the year. In everything, he was 
indifferent to himself; and, to look at him, one would 
think that he had no inclination save for that which 
one saw him doing, and that that was the real occu- 
pation to which God had called him. ‘‘ We shall do 
nothing,” he used to say, ‘< for the salvation of souls, 
if God do not take sides with us. When it is he who 
sets us apart to this, by the direction of obedience, 
he binds himself to aid us in it; and, with him assist- 
ing us, we shall accomplish that which he expects of 
us. But, when it happens that we set our hearts on 
any particular employment, be it the holiest on 
earth, God does not bind himself to second our 
efforts, but leaves us to ourselves; and, of ourselves, 
what can we accomplish save a nothing, or the sin 
which lowers us beneath a nothing?’’ 

He was not so wedded to the [47] conversion of 
the Hurons that his heart did not go out to Nations 
the most distant,— were it only to baptize the infants, 
‘‘. who,” he remarked, ‘‘ are a certain gain for Heav- 
en.’’ He often said to us that it would have pleased 
him to fall into the hands of the Iroquois, and be 
their captive; for, had they burned him alive, he 
would at least have had a chance of instructing them 
for as long a time as they prolonged his torments; 
and, if they had spared his life, that would have 


136 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


ce que ie fcay des vertus du Pere Charles Garnier, ie 
coucheray icy ce que i’en ay remarqué. Ie puis dire 
en general, que ie ne connoiffois point de vertu, qui 
luy manquaft, & qu’il les [48] auoit toutes dans vn 
haut degré. Ie puis auffi affeurer, qu’en quatre ans 
que i’ay efté fon compagnon, ie ne l’ay iamais veu 
faire vne faute, qui fut directement contre quelque 
vertu I] cherchoit vrayment Dieu dans fon employ, 
& non pas foy-mefme; & ie n’ay iamais pfi remarquer 
que la nature agit en luy, particulierement dans les 
fonctions de nos Miffions. Il fe portoit ardemment 
a quoy que ce fuft; auec autant de zele pour les 
affaires d’autruy, & pour l’auancement des autres 
Eglifes, comme de la fienne. Ie l’ay toufiours veu 
dans vne grande efgalité, parmy la diuerfité des 
fuccez, fon coeur, ny fon vifage, ne paroiffoit iamais 
troublé de quoy que ce fuft. I] iouiffoit d’vne grande 
paix d’efprit, qui prouenoit d’vne grande conformité 
qu’il auoit aux volontez de Dieu, 4 laquelle vertu, 
depuis quelque temps, ils’eftudioit particulierement. 
Tout le monde fgait le zele qu’il auoit pour la 
conuerfion des Sauuages, comme il aymoit d’eftre en 
Miffion, la peine qu'il auoit a la quitter, & combien 
il preffoit, lors qu’il eftoit 4 la maifon, pour retour- 
ner en Miffion. Il me fouuient que dans [49} ma 
maladie, lors qu’on me croyoit tout proche de la mort, 
vn foir en me veillant, il me demanda, que lors que 
ie ferois en Paradis, ie priafle pour la Miffion de 
Saint Iofeph, dont alors il auoit le foin, il me demanda 
cela vniquement, & d’vne fagon que ie ne puis expli- 
quer, & qui me fit conceuoir qu’il ne fongeoit a rien, 
qu’au bien de fa Miffion. Tadmirois fouuent en luy 
qu’il ne parloit iamais en mauuaife part, d’aucun 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 . 137 


been a precious means of obtaining their conver- 
sion,—a thing impossible, as it is, the way being 
closed against us as long as they remain our enemies. 

I will conclude this Chapter with a few extracts 
from aletter which one of our Fathers, he who buried 
him, wrote to me,—one who had shared with him 
the work of the Mission during the last years of his 
life. He writes to me thus: 

‘‘ Since your Reverence desires that I should relate 
to you what I know of the virtues of Father Charles 
Garnier, I will set down here such as have come 
under my observation. I can affirm, in a general 
way, that I knew of no virtue that he lacked, and 
that he [48] possessed all virtues in a high degree. 
I can also assert that, in the four years during which 
I have been his companion, I have never known him 
to commit a fault directly opposed to any virtue. 
In his work, he truly sought God, and not himself. 
I never observed any action in him prompted by 
nature, especially in our Missionary duties. He 
ardently offered himself for these, whatever they 
might be; and with as much zeal for the concerns of 
others, and for the advancement of other Churches, 
as for his own. I have always remarked in hima 
wonderful equanimity amid the inequalities of 
success; neither his heart nor his countenance ever 
appeared troubled by anything. He enjoyed a great 
peace of mind, the effect of the perfect conformity of 
his will with that of God,—in the attainment of 
which virtue he had been, for some time, particu- 
larly studious. Every one knows how zealous he 
was for the conversion of the Savages; how he loved 
to be on Mission duty; the pain he felt in leaving it; 
and how he hasted, when at the house, to return to 


138 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 85 


Sauuage, quelque impertinent qu’il fuft: & moy fou- 
uent luy parlant de quelque faute qui m’euft dépleu 
en eux: il efcoutoit paifiblement, & l’excufoit; ou 
bien ne difoit mot: & iamais ie n’ay pti remarquer 
ny en fes paroles, ny en fes actions, fi peu que ce foit 
de paffion 4 l’endroit d’aucun Sauuage. II n’auoit 
point d’autres penfées, que des chofes de fa Miffion: 
il eftoit ignorant de la France, comme vn homme qui 
iamais n’en euft efté; & les nouuelles qu’il en enten- 
doit vne fois chaque année, faifoient fi peu d’im- 
preffion dans fon efprit, qu’il les oublioit incontinét. 
Ce n’eftoit qu’auec violence qu'il fe captiuoit a 
Ventretien de quelques letres, dont il ne fe pouuoit 
[50] difpenfer. Il fembloit n’eftre nay que pour la 
conuerfion des Sauuages: fa ferueur en cét endroit 
croiffoit tous les iours. Il auoit vn fenfible regret, 
quand quelque petit enfant luy efchappoit, mourant 
fans Baptefme: cette nouuelle le furprenoit, & 1l’affli- 
geoit, comme vn autre feroit affligé de la mort d’vn 
de fes plus proches parens. Son zele eftoit infati- 
gable: il quittoit fouuent le manger & le repos pour 
fes Chreftiens. Ie l’ay veu partir fouuent d’vn tres- 
matiuais temps, & marcher auec de grandes incom- 
moditez, allant d’vn bourg a l’autre; tomber dans 
les Riuieres; Rien n’eftoit capable de 1’arrefter, 
quand il eftoit queftion de trauailler pour les Sau- 
uages. Il s’accommodoit bien auec fon compagnon, 
quel qu’il fuft, iamais il ne m’a dit parole, qui fuft 
le moins du monde contre la Charité. Il prenoit 
toufiours le pire pour foy, & m’accommodoit en tout; 
& il tafchoit de couurir fa charité du pretexte de fa 
propre commodité; comme fi ce qui eftoit le pire, 
luy euft efté le plus commode. Son obeiffance eftoit 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 139 


the Mission. I remember that in [49] my sickness, 
when they believed me to be near death, one even- 
ing, watching with me, he begged that, when I 
should be in Paradise, I would pray for the Mission 
of Saint Joseph, of which he then had the care. He 
entreated for that above everything else, and in a 
way that I cannot describe, but which gave me to 
understand that he thought of nothing but the wel- 
fare of his Mission. It was often a source of admi- 
ration to me that he never spoke ill of any Savage, 
however insolent he might have been. Often, too, 
when I spoke to him of some fault in them that had 
displeased me, he would listen quietly, and either 
excuse it or say nothing; nor have I ever seen him 
manifest, by word or action, even the least passion- 
ate feeling toward any Savage. He thought only of 
the concerns of his Mission. He was ignorant of 
France, as if he were a man who had never belonged 
to it; and news of it, which reached him once in 
every year, made so little impression on him, that it 
was immediately forgotten. It was only by great 
effort that he brought himself to make a reply, from 
which he could not spare himself, to certain letters. 
[so] He seemed to have been born only for the con- 
version of the Savages, his fervor in that respect 
increasing every day. It was a matter of keen regret 
to him when some little child escaped his vigilance, 
and died without Baptism; the intelligence surpris- 
ing and afflicting him as another would be afflicted 
by the death of one of his nearest relatives. His 
zeal was unwearying: he would often leave his meals 
or sleep, for the sake of his Christians. I have seen 
him, many times, set out in fearful weather, to walk 
with great difficulty from one village to another, even 


140 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


rare, & pleine de foufmiffion, & de fimplicité, quoy 
qu'il fat quelquefois [51] particulier en fes penfées: 
dez le moment qu'il connoiffoit vn fentiment con- 
traire 4 celuy du Superieur, il agiffoit auec autant 
d’ardeur dans l’efprit d’autruy, qu’il euft fait dans le 
fien. I1 eftoit tres-exact dans 1’obferuation de nos 
Regles; & quelque occupation qu’il euft, pour la con- 
uerfion des Sauuages, iamais il n’euft perdu aucun 
temps de fes Oraifons, de fes lectures f{pirituelles, ny 
de fon examen. I] retranchoit de fon fommeil ce 
qui luy euft manqué pour cét effet, dans la brieueté 
du iour. Sa Chafteté eftoit fi pure, qu’elle me 
paroiffoit Angelique: dans vne Modeftie auffi rare, 
que i’en aye point veu en France. Mais fur tout, 
i’admirois fon Humilité, il auoit vn tres-bas fenti- 
ment de foy-mefme, & quoy qu'il euft des talens 
eminens pour ces Miffions, neantmoins il fe poftpo- 
foit 4 tous les autres. Les loiianges des hommes ne 
le touchoient aucunement. Ie ne l’ay iamais ouy 
parler, ny 4 fon auantage, ny auec mefpris d’autruy. 
Iufques icy font les termes du Pere qui m’efcrit. 

I’ay crefi que dans la naifueté de cette lettre, ceux 
qui fgauent ce que c’eft de la [52] vertu folide, & 
qui ont l’ceil ouuert aux chofes qui vrayement rédent 
vne ame grande aux yeux de Dieu, y defcouuriront 
vn threfor, que poffedoit ce feruiteur de Dieu. 
T’adioufteray icy feulement, que tous ceux qui l’ont 
pratiqué, l’ont eftimé vn Saint, & qu’il auoit l’appro- 
bation de tout le monde, fans en excepter aucun. 
Les Hurons le nommoient Oracha. 

Voicy encore vn petit mot qu’il efcriuit de 1’Ifle de 
fainct Iofeph a fes deux freres, fgauoir eft le R. P. 
Henry de S. lofeph de 1’Ordre des Carmes, & le R. 


A > 


ied on 


=) 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 141 


falling into Rivers. Nothing stopped him when it 
was a question of work for the Savages. To a 
companion, whoever he might be, he accommodated 
himself in all respects; and to me never uttered a 
syllable that in the least degree infringed Charity. 
He always took the worst of everything for himself, 
and consulted my convenience in everything. He 
strove also to hide his charity under pretense of his 
own comfort,—making it appear that, to him, the 
worst had been the most agreeable. His obedience 
was exceptional,— most simple and unquestioning. 
Although he was sometimes [51] punctilious in his 
ideas, he would, from the moment that he became 
conscious of a sentiment opposed to that of the 
Superior, act as readily upon the judgment of another 
as, before, he would have done upon hisown. He 
was very exact in his observance of our Rules; and, 
however occupied he might be in the conversion of 
the Savages, he never missed any of his times of 
Prayer, of spiritual reading, or of self-examination. 
What time was wanting to him for this purpose, 
owing to the shortness of the day, he took from his 
sleep. His Chastity was so unsullied that it appeared 
to me Angelic, and was manifested in a Modesty so 
tare that, in France, I have seen nothing comparable 
to it. But, above all, I admired his Humility. He 
held himself in the very humblest estimation; and 
although he had eminent talents for these Missions, 
he assigned to himself a place behind all the others. 
The praises of men had no effect upon him. I have 
never heard him speak either in commendation of 
himself, or slightingly of others.’’ Thus far, the 
words of the Father who writes to me. 

I have thought that, in the ingenuousness of this 


142 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


P. Iofeph de Paris Capucin. Cette lettre fait voir la 
trempe de fon cceur, & le preffentiment qu’il auoit 
de fa mort. Ce petit mot, dit il, eft pour nous 
encourager tous trois 4 nous hafter d’aimer noftre 
bon Maiftre; car ie croy qu'il eft difficile que quel- 
qu’vn de nous trois ne foit bien proche du terme de 
fa carriere. Redoublons donc nos ferueurs, haftons 
le pas, redoublons nos prieres les vns pour les autres, 
& faifons vne nouuelle proteftation, que celuy que 
no{tre Seigneur appellera le premier A foy de nous 
trois, fera l’aduocat des [53] deux qui refteront, pour 
leur obtenir de Noftre Seigneur fon faint amour, & 
vne parfaicte vnion auec luy, & vne perfeuerance 
finale. Ie fais done le premier cette proteftation, & 
prie Noftre Seigneur de tout mon cceur, de poffeder 
nos trois coeurs, & de n’en faire qu’vn auec le fien 
dés a prefent & dans l’eternité. Voila le {tile d’vn 
Sainct qui aimoit fes freres en Saint & comme 
des Saints: auffi auons-nous appris qu’il auoit des 
marques de faincteté dés fa tendre ieuneffe. 

Deffunct Monfieur Garnier fon pere, auoit cou- 
{tume de donner tous les mois quelque piece d'argent 
a fes enfans pour leurs petits diuertiflemens dans 
leurs ef{tudes, le P. Charles Garnier eftant penfionaire 
en noftre College de Paris, & fortant les iours de 
congé pour s’aller vn petit recreer en ville, au lieu 
de porter fon argent en vn ieu de paulme, l’alloit 
ietter dans la boétte des prifonniers du petit Chafte- 
let; L’vn de fes bons freres qui luy a veu donner 
pour vne feule aumofne toute la recreation d’vn mois, 
adioufte, que paffant vn iour fur le Pont-neuf, & 
voyant vn liure fale & impie, [54] qu’on difoit auoir 
e{té composé par Theophile, il l’achepta, & le mit 


iG 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 143 


letter, they who know what [52] solid virtue is, and 
whose eyes are open to the things that really make a 
soul great in the sight of God, will discover the 
treasure which this his servant possessed. I will 
merely add here that all who associated with him 
regarded him as a Saint, and that every one, with- 
out exception, spoke well of him. The Hurons 
named him Oracha. 

There yet remains a little word addressed by him, 
from the Island of saint Joseph, to his two broth- 
ers,—that is, the Reverend Father Henry de St. 
Joseph, of the Order of the Carmelites, and the Rev- 
erend Father Joseph, of Paris, a Capuchin. That 
letter discloses to us the temper of his heart, and the 
presentiment he had of his death. ‘‘ This little 
word,’’ he wrote, ‘‘is to encourage us, all three, to 
hasten on in the love of our holy Master; for I can 
hardly think that some one of us three may not be very 
near the close of his career. Let us redouble then 
our zeal, hasten our steps, redouble our prayers, each 
for the others, and make a new protestation that he 
whom our Lord shall first of us three call to himself 
shall intercede for the [53] two who remain,—to 
obtain for them, from Our Lord, his holy love, a per- 
fect union with him, and the grace of final persever- 
ance. I make then, the first, this protestation; and 
I fervently beseech Our Lord that he will possess our 
three hearts, and make them one with his own, both 
now and in eternity.’’ This was the manner of 
speech of a Saint, who loved his brothers as a Saint, 
and as Saints. We have been informed also that he 
possessed these tokens of saintly character from his 
earliest youth. 

The late Monsieur Garnier, his father, was in the 


144 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


en eftat de n’eftre iamais leu de perfonne, peut 
eftre, difoit-il, que quelqu’vn le lifant offenferoit 
Dieu, il vaut mieux l’achepter & le perdre. Vne 
autre fois fes camarades eftans entrés dans vn caba- 
ret pour y faire bone chere, comme il eftoit de la 
Congregation de Noftre Dame, qui deffend aux 
ieunes gens d’entrer dans de femblables lieux, il les 
attendit a la porte comme vn laquais attendroit fon 
mai{tre, ces preludes marquant vne grande faincteté 
future. Ie ne m’eftonne pas fi Monfieur fon pere 
voyant que fon fils vouloit eftre Iefuifte, dit a 1’vn 
de nos Peres, Si ie n’aimois vniquement vof{tre Com- 
pagnie, ie ne vous donnerois pas vn enfant qui depuis 
fa naiffance iufques A maintenant n’a iamais commis 
la moindre defobeiffance, & ne m’a iamais causé le 
moindre déplaifir. La gloire de fa mort a couronné 
l’innocence de fa vie. 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 145 


habit of giving to his children, every month, during 
their term of study, a small sum of money toward 
their little amusements. While Father Charles Gar- 
nier was a boarder in our College at Paris, setting 
out at holiday-times for a little recreation in the city, 
instead of spending his money on a game at tennis, 
he threw it into the prisoners’ box of the petit Chas- 
telet.% One of his good brothers, who saw him give 
at a single alms a whole month’s allowance, adds 
that, passing one day over the Pont-neuf and notic- 
ing an indecent and impious book,—[54] written, 
it was said, by Theophile,”—he bought it, and so 
defaced it that no one could readit. ‘‘ Perhaps,’’ 
said he, ‘‘ some one in reading it might offend God; 
it is better to buy and destroy it.’’ At another time, 
his companions having gone into a tavern to make 
merry, he waited —as he belonged to the Congrega- 
tion of Our Lady, which prohibits young men from 
going into places of the kind —for them at the door, 
as a servant would wait for his master. Such begin- 
nings spoke of a distinguished sanctity in times to 
come. Iam not surprised that Monsieur his father, 
when he saw that it was his son’s wish to become a 
Jesuit, said to one of our Fathers: ‘‘ If I did not love 
your Society above all others, I would not give to 
you a child who, from the time of his birth to the 
present, has never been guilty of one act of disobedi- 
ence, or caused me the least displeasure.’’ The 
glory of his death has crowned the innocence of his 
life. 


146 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


[55] CHAPITRE IV. 
DE LA MORT DU PERE NOEL CHABANEL. 


OICY la fixiefme victime que Dieu a pris A foy, 

V de ceux de noftre Compagnie, qu'il auoit 

appellé en cette Miffion des Hurons; n’y 

ayant efi encore aucun de nous qui y foit mort, fans 

y refpandre fon fang, & confommer le facrifice tout 
entier. 

Le Pere Noél Chabanel eftoit compagnon de Miffion 
du Pere Charles Garnier, & lors que le bourg de 
fainct Iean fut pris par les Iroquois, il n’y auoit que 
deux iours qu’ils s’eftoient feparez, felon les ordres 
qu’ils en auoient receu: Nos Peres & moy ayansiugéa 
propos de ne pas tenir deux Miffiénaires expofez dans 
le danger, outre que la famine y eftoit fi extreme, 
qu’ils ne pouuoient trouuer vne nourriture fuffifante 
pour deux perfonnes. Mais Dieu ne voulut pas 
qu’ayans vefcu enfemble fous le ioug d’vne mefme 
Miffion, ils fuffent feparez 4 la mort. 

[56] Ce bon Pere, reuenant donc ot 1l’obeiffance le 
rappelloit, auoit pafsé par la Miffion de fainct Mathias, 
ott eftoient deux autres de nos Peres, & les auoit quitté 
le matin du feptiefme iourde Decembre. Ayant fait 
fix grandes lieués d’vn chemin tres difficile; il fut 
furpris de la nuict, au milieu des bois, eftant en 
compagnie de fept ou huict Chreftiens Hurons. Son 
monde eftoit couché & endormy; luy feul veilloit, & 
eftoit en priere. Sur la minuit il entend du bruit, 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 147 


[55] CHAPTER IV. 
OF THE DEATH OF FATHER NOEL CHABANEL. 


ERE is the sixth victim whom God has taken to 

H himself from those of our Society whom he 

had called to this Mission of the Hurons,— 

there having been, as yet, not one of us who has died 

there without shedding his blood, and consummating 
the sacrifice in its entirety. 

Father Noél Chabanel was the Missionary compan- 
ion of Father Charles Garnier; and when the village 
of saint Jean was taken by the Iroquois, there were 
but two days in which they were separated, in 
accordance with the orders which they had received,— 
our Fathers and I having thought it wiser not to 
keep two Missionaries exposed to danger; consider- 
ing, besides, that the famine in that quarter was so 
severe that sufficient food for both could not be 
obtained. Butit was not God’s will that, having lived 
and been yoked together in the same Mission, they 
should be separated in death. 

[56] This good Father,-then, returning whither 
obedience recalled him, had passed through the Mis- 
sion of saint Mathias, where were two other of our 
Fathers, and had left them on the morning of the 
seventh day of December. Having traveled six long 
leagues over a most difficult road, he found himself 
overtaken by night in the thick of the forest, being 
in the company of seven or eight Christian Hurons. 
His men were resting, and asleep; he only was 


148 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 35 


& des cris: partie de l’armée ennemie victorieufe, 
qui tenoit ce chemin; partie auffi des captifs, pris ce 
iour 14 mefme dans le bourg de fainct Iean, qui 
chantoient leur chanfon de guerre felon leur cou- 
{tume. Le Pere a ce bruit refueille fes gens, qui 
fans delay prennent la fuite par dans les bois, & 
enfin fe fauuerent, s’eftans difperfez ca & 1A, & ayans 
pris leur route vers le lieu mefme d’ot venoit 
l’ennemy, quoy qu’vn peu A l’efcart. 

Ces Chreftiens efchappez du peril, arriuerent 2 la 
Nation du Petun, & firent leur rapport, que le Pere 
auoit fait quelque chemin, voulant les fuiure: mais 
[57] que n’en pouuant plus, il s’eftoit mis A genoux, 
& qu'il leur auoit dit, N’importe que ie meure; cette 
vie eft bien peu de chofe, c’ef{t le bon-heur du Para- 
dis, que les Iroquois ne me pourront rauir. 

Sur l’aube du iour, le Pere ayant changé de route, 
voulant venir nous trouuer en 1’Ifle ot nous e{tions, 
fe vit arrefté au bord d’vne riuiere, qui luy trauerfoit 
fon chemin. Vn Huron ena fait le rapport; adiou- 
{tant qu’il le paffa dans fon canot, au deca de la 
riuiere; & que pour fuir plus leftement, il s’eftoit 
defchargé de fon chapeau, & d’vn fac ot eftoient fes 
efcrits, & d’vne couverture, qui fert A nos Miffion- 
naires de robe & de manteau, de paillaffe & de 
matelats, de lictt, & de tout autre meuble, & mefme 
de maifon, lors qu’ils font en campagne, n’ayans 
point pour lors, d’autre abry. Du depuis nous 
n’auons pfi apprendre aucune autre nouuelle du Pere. 

Nous ne fommes pas affeurez, comment il fera 
mort, & s’il ne fera point tombé entre les mains des 
ennemis, quien effect tuerent fur le mefme chemin, 
vne trentaine de perfonnes. Ou pluftoft que s’eftant 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 149 


watching, and in prayer. Toward midnight, he 
heard a noise, accompanied with cries,— partly of a 
victorious hostile force who occupied that road; 
partly, also, of captives, taken that very day in the 
village of saint Jean, who were singing, as was their 
custom, their war-song. On hearing the noise, the 
Father awoke his men, who fled at once into the 
forest, and eventually saved themselves,— scattering, 
some here, some there; and taking their route toward 
the very place from which the enemy had come out, 
though a little at one side of it. 

These Christians, escaped from the peril, arrived 
at the Tobacco Nation, and reported that the Father 
had gone some little way with them, intending to 
follow them; but [57] that, becoming exhausted, 
he had fallen on his knees, saying to them, ‘‘ It mat- 
ters not that I die; this life is a very small considera- 
tion; of the blessedness of Paradise, the Iroquois 
can never rob me.”’ 

At daybreak, the Father, having altered his route, 
desirous of coming to the Island where we were, 
found himself checked at the bank of a river, which 
crossed his path. A Huron reported the circum- 
stance, adding that he had passed him, in his canoe, 
on this side of the stream; and that, to render his 
flight more easy, the Father had disburdened him- 
self of his hat, and of a bag that contained his writ- 
ings; also of a blanket, which our Missionaries use 
as robe and cloak, as mattress and cushion, fora bed, 
and for every other convenience,—even for a dwell- 
ing-place, when in the open country, and when they 
have, for the time, no other shelter. Since then, 
we have been unable to learn any other news of the 
Father. 


150 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 35 


efgaré dans les bois, il y [58] foit mort, partie de 
faim, partie de froid, au pied de quelque arbre, ot 
la foibleffe l’ayt obligé de s’arrefter. Mais apres 
tout, ce qui nous femble plus probable, c’eft qu’il 
aura e{té tué par ce Huron, le dernier qui l’ayt veu, 
autrefois Chreftien, & depuis Apoftat; lequel pour 
iotiyr des defpoiiilles du Pere, l’aura aflommé, & aura 
ietté fon corps dans la Riuiere Sinouseuffions voulu 
pourfuiure cette affaire, ie croy que nous euffions trou- 
ué des pretuuues conuainquantes contre ce meurtrier: 
Mais dans ces miferes publiques, nous iugeafmes plus 
a propos d’eftouffer les foup¢ons qu’on pouuoit en 
auoir; & nous-mefmes fermafmes les yeux 4 ce que 
nous eftions bien aifes qu’on ne vit pas. Ce nous 
eft affez que Dieu foit feruy. 

Le Pere Noél Chabanel nous eftoit venu de la 
Prouince de Tolofe, l’année 1643. ayant efté receu en 
nof{tre Compagnie dés l’année 1630. alors aagé feule- 
ment de dix-fept ans. Dieu luy auoit donné vne forte 
vocation en ces pais, mais elle ne fut pas fans combat 
e{tant icy, mefme apres les trois, les quatre, & les 
cing ans d’eftude, pour apprendre la [59] langue des 
Sauuages, il s’y voyoit fi peu auancé, qu’a peine 
pouuoit-il fe faire entendre dans les chofes les plus 
communes. Cette mortification n’eft pas petite 4 vn 
homme qui brufle du defir de la conuerfion des Sau- 
uages, & qui d’ailleurs n’auoit iamais manqué ny de 
memoire, ny d’efprit, qu’il auoit fait affez paroiftre, 
ayant enfeigné quelques années, auec fatisfaction, la 
Rhetorique en France. Son humeur, en fuite de 
cela, eftoit fi efloignée des fagons d’agir des Sauuages, 
qu’il ne pouuoit quafi rien agreér en eux, leur veué 
luy eftoit onereufe, leur entretien, & tout ce qui 


o—_— 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 151 


Of the manner of his death we are uncertain,— 
whether he may have fallen into the hands of the 
enemies, who actually slew on the same road some 
thirty persons; or that, having missed his way in the 
forest, he [58] may have died there, partly from hun- 
ger, partly from cold, at the foot of some tree at 
which weakness had obliged him to halt. But, after 
all, it seems to us most probable that he was mur- 
dered by that Huron,—once a Christian, but since 
an Apostate,—the last to see him, and who, to enjoy 
the possessions of the Father, would have killed him, 
and thrown his body into the River. Had we been 
inclined to pursue this matter further, I feel sure 
that we would have discovered proofs sufficient to 
convict this murderer; but, in such general misery, 
we judged it wiser to smother our suspicions; and 
we closed our own eyes to what we were well pleased 
was not evident. It is enough for us that God’s 
purposes should have been served. 

Father Noél Chabanel had come to us from the 
Province of Toulouse, in the year 1643, having been 
received into our Society as early as the year 1630, 
when he was only seventeen years of age. God had 
given him a strong vocation for these countries; but, 
once here, he had much to contend with; for, even 
after three, four, and five years of effort to learn the 
[59] language of the Savages, he found his progress 
so slight, that hardly could he make himself under- 
stood even in the most ordinary matters. This was 
no little mortification to a man who burned with 
desire for the conversion of the Savages, who in other 
ways was deficient neither in memory nor mind, and 
who had made this manifest enough by having for 
some years successfully taught Rhetoric in France. 


152 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


venoit de ce cofté 1a: Il ne pouuoit fe faire aux 
viures du Pais, & la demeure des Miffions eftoit fi 
violente 4 toute fa nature, qu’il y auoit des peines 
extraordinaires, fans aucune confolation, au moins 
de celles qu’on appelle fenfibles, toufiours coucher 4 
plate terre, viure depuis le matin iufqu’au foir dans 
vn petit enfer de fumée, & dans vn lieu ot fouuent 
le matin on fe trouue couuert de neiges, qui entrent 
de tous coftez dans les cabanes des Sauuages; ot on 
e{t remply de vermine; ot tous les fens ont chacun 
{[60] leur tourment, & de nuict, & de iour, n’auoir 
iamais que de l’eau toute pure pour efteindre fa foif, 
& les meilleurs metz qu’on y mange pour l’ordinaire, 
n’eftant que de la cole, faite de farine de bled d’Inde 
boiiillie dans l’eau: y trauailler fans ceffe, eftant tou- 
fiours fi mal nourry, & n’auoir pas vn feul moment 
de la iournée, auquel on puiffe fe retirer en vn lieu, 
qui ne foit public: n’auoir point d’autre chambre, 
d’autre fale, ny d’autre cabinet, pour faire fes eftudes; 
non pas mefme aucune autre lumiere, que celle d’vn 
feu enfumé, entourré en mefme temps de dix & de 
quinze perfonnes, & d’enfans de tous aages, qui crient, 
qui pleurent, qui y difputent, qui s’entretiennent de 
leur mefnage; qui y font leur cuifine, leur repas, 
leur trauail,en vn mot tout ce qui fe fait dans la 
maifon. Quand Dieu auec cela retire fes graces 
fenfibles, & fe cache 4 vne perfonne, qui ne refpire 
qu’apres luy; quand il la laiffe en proye 4 la trifteffe, 
& aux dégoufts, & aux auerfions de la Nature: ce ne 
font pas 1a des efpreuues qui foiét 4 la portée d’vne 
vertu commune; & il faut que l’amour de Dieu foit 
alors puiffant [61] dans vn cceur, pour n’y eftre pas 
eftouffé. Ioignez les veués continuelles des perils, 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 153 


In consequence of this, the temper of his mind was 
so opposed to the ways and manners of the Savages, 
that he saw in them scarce anything that pleased 
him; the sight of them, their talk, and all that 
concerned them, he found irksome. He could not 
accustom himself to the food of the Country; and 
residence in the Missions did such violence to his 
entire nature that he encountered therein extraordi- 
nary hardships, without any consolation,— at least, of 
the character that we call sensible. There, one must 
always sleep on the bare ground, and live from morn- 
ing to night in a little hell of smoke; in a place 
where often, of a morning, one finds himself covered 
with the snows that drift on all sides into the cabins 
of the Savages; where vermin abound; where the 
senses, each and all, are [60] tormented both night 
and day. One never has anything but water to 
quench his thirst; while the best food usually eaten 
there is only a paste made with meal of Indian corn 
boiled in water. One must work there incessantly, 
though always so poorly nourished; never have one 
moment in the day in which to retire to any spot 
that is not public; have no other room, no other 
apartment, no other closet, in which to prosecute his 
studies. One has not even any other light than that 
of a smoky fire,—surrounded, at the same time, by 
ten or fifteen persons, and children of all ages, who 
scream, weep, and wrangle; who are busied about 
their cooking, their meals, their work, about every- 
thing, in a word, that is done in a house. When 
God, besides all this, withdraws his sensible graces, 
and hides himself from a person who longs only for 
him, — when he leaves him a prey to sorrow, to dis- 
gusts, and repugnances of Nature,—these are trials 


154 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 35: 


dans lefquels on fe trouue 4 chaque moment, d’eftre 
attaqué d’vn Ennemy barbare, qui fouuent vous fera 
fouffrir mille morts, auant que d’en mourir d’vne 
feule; qui n’a que des feux & des flammes, & des 
cruautez inouyes. Sans doute qu’il faut vn courage 
digne des enfans de Dieu, pour ne pas perdre coeur 
au milieu de cét abandon. 

C’a efté dans cét abandon que Dieu a voulu efprou- 
uer les cing & fix années, la fidelité de ce bon Pere. 
Mais tant s’en faut que le Diable ayt iamais rien 
gaigné fur luy, de ce cofte 14; quoy qu'il luy repre- 
fentaft chaque iour, Que retournant en France, il y 
trouuerroit & la ioye, & le repos, & les confolations 
qu'il y auoit receués, tout le temps paffé de fa vie: 
qu'il n’y manqueroit pas d’employ plus fortable a fon 
naturel, & dans lequel tant d’ames Saintes pratiquent 
hautement la vertu de Charité, dans le zele des Ames, 
& confomment leur vie pour le falut de leur prochain. 
Iamais pour tout cela, il n’a voulu fe détacher de la 
Croix ot Dieu l’auoit mis; iamais [62] il n’a demandé 
d’en fortir. Mais au contraire, pour s’y attacher plus 
inuiolablement, il s’obligea par voeu d’y demeurer 
iufques 4 la mort, afin de mourir en la Croix. Voicy 
la teneur du voeu qu'il en conceit, & ces propres 
termes. 

Domine Tefu Chrifte, qui me Apoftolorum Sanctorum 
huius vinee Huronice adiutorem, licet indigni/simum, 
admirabili dispofitione tue paterne Prouidentie voluifit. 
Ego, Natalis Chabanel, impulfus defiderio /erutendt 
Spiritui tuo fancto, in promouenddé barbarorum Huronie, 
ad tuam fidem conuerfione: Voueo, coram fSanéit/simo 
Sacramento pretiofi Corporis & Sanguinis tut, Tabernaculo 
Dei cum hominibus, perpetuam ftabilitatem in hac 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 155 


that are not within the compass of ordinary virtue; 
and the love of God must be strong [61] in a heart, 
if itis not to be stifled by them. Join to these the 
continual sight of dangers, in which one finds him- 
self at every moment, of attack by a savage Enemy 
who often will subject you to the sufferings of a 
thousand deaths, ere death itself ensues; who uses 
only fire, and flames, and unheard-of cruelties. 
Doubtless a courage is needed worthy of the children 
of God, if one is not to lose heart in the midst of 
such abandonment. 

It has been in this abandonment that God has 
willed to put to the test, for five or six years, the 
fidelity of this good Father; but assuredly the Devil 
never having got the better of him upon that 
account, although he represented to him every day 
that, by returning to France, he would find there the 
joy, repose, and comfort which during all his past 
life he had received; that there he would not lack 
employment better suited to his disposition, employ- 
ment in which so many Saintly souls nobly practice 
the virtue of Charity in a zeal for Souls, and expend 
their lives for the salvation of their fellow-men. 
Never, for all that, would he break away from the 
Cross on which God had placed him; never [62] did 
he ask that he might come down from it. On the 
contrary, in order to bind himself to it more invio- 
lably, he obliged himself, by a vow, to remain there 
till death, so that he might die upon the Cross. 
These are the terms of the vow, as he conceived it, 
and its very words: 

Domine Jesu Christe, qui me Apostolorum Sanctorum 
hujus vinee Huronice adjutorem, licet indignissimum, 
admirabili dispositione tue paterne Providentie voluisti: 


156 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 85 


Mifstone Huronicé: omnia intelligendo tuxta Societatis, 
& Supertorum etus interpretationem, & difpofitionem. 
Obfecro te igitur, /ufcipe me in feruum huius Mtfsionis 
perpetuum, & dignum effice tam excelfo minifterio, Amen. 
Vigefimdé die Iunt7 1647. 

Iefus-Chrift mon Sauueur, qui par vne difpofition 
admirable de voftre Paternelle Prouidence, auez voulu — 
que ie fuffe Coadjuteur des Saincts Apoftres de cette 
vigne des Hurons, quoy que i’en fois tout A fait 
indigne: Me fentant [65 i.e., 63] poufsé du defir, de 
feruir aux intentions qu’a fur moy voftre fainct 
Efprit, pour auancer la conuerfion 4 la foy, des bar- 
bares de ce pais des Hurons; Moy, Noel Chabanel, 
e{tant en la prefence du tres-fainct Sacrement, de 
voftre Corps & de voftre Sang precieux, qui eft le 
tabernacle de Dieu auec les hommes: Ie fais voeu de 
perpetuelle ftabilité en cette Miffion des Hurons; 
entendant le tout, felon l’interpretation des Supe- 
rieurs de la Compagnie, & felon qu’ils voudront 
difpofer de moy. Ie vous coniure donc, mon Sau- 
ueur, qu’il vous plaife me receuoir pour feruiteur 
perpetuel de cette Miffion, & que vous me rendiez 
digne d’vn miniftere fi fublime. Amen. 

Il fit ce voeu le iour du tres-Saint Sacrement, de 
l’année 1647. & quoy que du depuis ces reuoltes de la 
Nature ayent toufiours donné de l’exercice a fa vertu; 
la grace a toufiours efté la maiftreffe, & Dieu luy a 
donné cette perfeuerance, qu’il defiroit fi ardemment. 

La derniere fois qu'il fe fepara d’auec nous, pour 
aller en la Miffion ot il eft mort; embraffant, & difant 
le dernier [64] adieu, 4 celuy de nos Peres, qui auoit 
le foin de la conduite de fon ame; Mon cher Pere, 
luy dit-il, que ce foit tout de bon cette fois, que ie 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 157 


Ego, Natalis Chabanel, impulsus desiderto serviendt 
Spiritui tuo sancto, in promovendd barbarorum Huronia, 
ad tuam fidem conversione; Voveo, coram sanctissimo Sa- 
cramento pretiosi Corporis et Sanguinis tui, Tabernaculo 
Dei cum hominibus, perpetuam stabilitatem in hac Missione 
Huronicé: omnia intelligendo juxta Societatis, et Supert- 
orum ejus interpretationem, et dispositionem. Obsecro te 
igitur, suscipe me in servum hujus Missionis perpetuum, et 
dignum effice tam excelso ministerio, Amen. Vigesimd 
die Juntt, 1647. 

‘‘ Jesus Christ, my Savior, who by a wonderful 
dispensation of your Paternal Providence have willed 
that I, though altogether unworthy, should be a 
Coadjutor of the Holy Apostles in this vineyard of 
the Hurons; impelled [65 i.e., 63] by the desire of 
ministering to the purpose which your holy Spirit 
hath respecting me, that I should help forward the 
conversion to the faith of the barbarians of this 
Huron country: I, Noel Chabanel,— being in the pres- 
ence of the most holy Sacrament of your Body and 
your precious Blood, which is the tabernacle of God 
among men,— make a vow of perpetual stability in 
this Mission of the Hurons; understanding all things 
as the Superiors of the Society expound them, and 
as they choose to dispose of me. I conjure you, 
therefore, O my Savior, to be pleased to receive 
me as a perpetual servant of this Mission, and to 
make me worthy of so lofty a ministry. Amen.’’ 

He made this vow on the feast of Corpus Christi, 
in the year 1647; and although, since that time, 
these rebellions of Nature have constantly tasked his 
virtue, grace has always been the mistress; and God 
has granted him the perseverance he so ardently 
desired. 


158 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 35 


me donne 4 Dieu, & que ie luy appartienne. Mais 
il profera ces paroles d’vn fi bon accent, & d’vn vifage 
firefolu a la vraye fainteté, qu’il toucha viuement 
celuy de nos Peres auquel il parloit; lequel ayant 
trouué a l’heure mefme, vn de fes amys, ne pit 
s’empefcher de luy dire; Vrayement ie viens d’eftre 
touché! Ce bon Pere vient de me parler auec 1’ ceil 
& la voix d’vne victime qui s’immole: Ie ne feay pas 
ce que Dieu veut faire, mais ie voy qu’il fait vn grand 
Saint. 

En effet, Dieu le difpofoit au facrifice; & il luy 
donnoit 4 luy-mefme, quelque forte de prefentiment. 
Il auoit dit a vn de fes amys; Ie ne feay ce qu'il ya 
en moy, & ce que Dieu veut difpofer de moy: mais 
ie me fens tout changé en vn point. Ie fuis fort 
apprehenfif de mon naturel; toutefois maintenant 
que ie vay au plus grand danger, & qu’il me femble 
que la mort n’eft pas efloignée, ie ne fens plus de 
crainte. Cette difpofition ne vient pas de moy. 

[65] Lors qu’il partit de la Miffion de fainé Mathias, 
le iour mefme de fa mort, parlant au Pere qui l’em- 
braffoit. Ie vay, dit-il, ot l’obeiffance me rappelle: 
mais ou ie ne pourray [obtenir], ou i’obtiendray du 
Superieur, qu’il me renuoye dans la Miffion qui eftoit 
mon partage, il faut feruir Dieu iufqu’A la mort. 

On verra dans la lettre fuiuante, qu’il a efcrit au 
R. P Pierre Chabanel fon frere Religieux de noftre 
Compagnie, les fentimens qu’il auoit des fouffrances. 
Peu s’en eft fallu, dit-il, dans les apparences humaines, 
que V. R. n’ait eu vn frere Martyr: mais helas! il 
faut deuant Dieu, vne vertu d’vne autre trempe que 
la mienne pour meriter l’honneur du Martyre: Le 
R. P. Gabriel Lallemant 1’vn des trois que noftre 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 159 


The last time that he parted from us, to go to the 
Mission where he died,— embracing and bidding the 
last [64] farewell to that one of our Fathers who was 
charged with the direction of his soul,—he said to 
him: ‘‘ My dear Father, may it be for good and all, 
this time, that I give myself to God; and may I 
belong to him.’’ But he uttered these words with so 
strong an emphasis, and a countenance so bent upon 
true sanctity, as sensibly to affect the Father to whom 
he was speaking, and who, chancing at that very 
hour to meet one of his friends, could not refrain 
from saying to him: ‘‘ Verily, I have just been deep- 
ly moved! That good Father has but now spoken to 
me with the look and voice of a victim who immo- 
lates himself. I know not what God wills, but I see 
that he is fashioning a great Saint.’’ 

In truth, God was preparing him for the sacrifice, 
and affording him some kind of presentiment of it. 
He had said to one of his friends: “‘ I do not know 
what is working within me, or what God wills to do 
with me; but, in one respect, I feel entirely changed. 
I am naturally very timorous; but, now that I am 
going to a most dangerous post, and, as it seems to 
me, death is not very far away, I no longer feel any 
fear. This frame of mind springs not from myself.’’ 

[65] When he set out from the Mission of saint 
Mathias, on the very day of his death, he said, speak- 
ing to the Father, who was embracing him: ‘‘ I am 
going whither obedience calls me; but whether I 
shall succeed or not in obtaining from the Superior 
that he send me back to the Mission that was allotted 
to me, God must be served until death.’’ 

We shall see in the following letter,— which he 
wrote to the Reverend Father Pierre Chabanel, his 


160 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 35 


Relation dit auoir fouffert pour Iefus-Chrift, auoit pris 
ma place au bourg de fain& Louys depuis vn mois 
deuant fa mort, que ie fus enuoié comme plus robufte 
de corps en vne Miffion plus eloignée & plus labo- 
tieufe: mais non pas fi fertile en Palmes & en 
Couronnes que celles [sc. celle] dont ma lacheté 
m’auoit rendu indigne deuant Dieu. Ce fera quand 
il plaira A la [66] diuine Bonté pourueu que de mon 
cofté ie tache de faire, Martyrem in umbré & Martyrium 
fine fanguine. Les rauages des Iroquois fur ce pais 
feront peut eftre vn iour le refte par les merites de 
tant de Saincts, auec lefquels i’ay la confolation de 
viure fi doucement parmy tant de tracas & de dangers 
continuels de la vie. La Relation me difpenfera 
d’adioufter autre chofe a la prefente, auffi bien n’ay-ie 
ny papier ny loifir qu’autant qu’il en faut pour 
fupplier V. R. & tous nos Peres de fa Prouince de fe 
fouuenir de moy au fainct Autel, comme d’vne 
victime deftinée peut-eftre au feu des Iroquois, V# 
merear tot Sanctorum patrocinio victoriam in tam fortt 
certamine: Ce font fes paroles dignes d’vn homme 
qui n’attendoit que le moment du facrifice. 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 ; 161 


brother Religious of our Society,— his appreciation 
of suffering. ‘‘ Judging from human appearances,”’ 
said he, ‘‘ Your Reverence has been very near to pos- 
sessing a brother a Martyr; but alas! in the mind of 
God, to merit the honor of Martyrdom, a virtue of 
another stamp than mine is needed. The Reverend 
Father Gabriel Lallemant, one of the three whom 
our Relation mentions as having suffered for Jesus 
Christ, had taken, for a month before his death, my 
place in the village of saint Louys,— while I, as being 
more robust of body, was sent upon a Mission more 
remote and more laborious, but not so fruitful in 
Palms and Crowns as that of which my cowardice 
has, in the sight of God, rendered me unworthy. It 
will be when it shall please the [66] divine Good- 
ness, provided that I strive to realize, in my person, 
Martyrem in umbré et Martyrium sine sanguine. 'The 
ravages of the Iroquois throughout this country will 
perhaps, some day, supply what is wanting, through 
the merits of those many Saints with whom I have 
the consolation of leading so peaceful an existence 
in the midst of such turmoil, and continual danger 
to life. The Relation will dispense me from adding 
anything else at present, as I have neither paper nor 
leisure, save so much as are needed to entreat Your 
Reverence, and all our Fathers of your Province, to 
remember me at the holy Altar as a victim doomed, 
it may be, to the fires of the Iroquois. Ut merear tot 
Sanctorum patrocinio victoriam in tam forti certamine.”’ 
These are his words, worthy of a man who was only 
awaiting the moment of the sacrifice. 


162 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES _ [Vou. 85 


CHAPITRE V. 


DE LA MISSION DE SAINCT MATTHIAS. 


auions dans la Nation du Petun. Depuis la 
mort les deux PP. dont [67] nous auons parlé; 
la neceffité d’ouuriers nous obligea de ne faire plus 
qu’'vne Miffion, dans toutes ces Montagnes, furchar- 
geant les deux autres Peres, qui y reftoient, du foin 
de ces pauures Eglifes defolées, qui venoient de per- 
dre leurs Pafteurs: & mefme, quelque temps apres, 
nous nous vifmes contrains de ne laiffer qu'vn feul 
des deux Peres, pour tout le Chriftianifme, vne 
maladie furuenué A 1’vn d’eux, nous ayant obligé de 
le rappeller en vn lieu, ot il pift receuoir vn peu 
plus d’affiftance. 
Dans les grandes fatigues de ces Miffions, exposées 
a tous les malheurs dont la Nature peut auoir plus 
d’horreur, ce n’eft pas vne des Croix des moins 
pefantes, de fe voir feul, dans vne Eglife diffipée, 
qui ne faifoit que naiftre: de fe voir accablé dés le 
matin iufqu’au foir, d’vn monde de Catechumenes & 
de Chreftiens, dont il faut baptizer les vns, entendre 
les autres en Confeffion, apprendre 2 la plus-part les 
Prieres & le Catechifme, & les Mytteres de noftre 
Foy, folliciter les infideles A ce qui eft de leur falut, 
aller chercher & les vns & les autres, dans des cabanes 
abandénées, ot la [68] pauureté mefme habite, mais 
ou l’efprit de la Foy, n’y eft pas moins diuin, que 


ey %ESTOIT icy la feconde des Miffions, que nous 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 163 


CHAPTER V. 
OF THE MISSION OF SAINT MATTHIAS. 


ERE lay the second Mission that we possessed 
in the Tobacco Nation. Since the death of 
the two Fathers of whom [67] we have spok- 

en, a scarcity of workers obliged us to maintain only 
one Mission throughout those Mountains,— thereby 
overburdening the two other Fathers who remained 
there with the care of the poor desolated Churches 
that had so recently lost their Pastors. After a 
time, we were even constrained to leave one only of 
those two Fathers to carry on the entire Christian 
work,— one of them having been seized with a mala- 
dy which obliged us to recall him to quarters where 
he could receive a little more assistance. 

Among the great hardships of these Missions, 
exposed to every evil of which Nature has the most 
horror, it is not one of the least heavy of the Crosses 
to find oneself alone in a Church which is dispersed, 
and was born but yesterday; to find oneself over- 
whelmed from morning to night by a crowd of Cate- 
chumens and Christians,—some needing baptism, 
others Confession, and, most of them, instruction in 
the Prayers and Catechism, and the Mysteries of our 
Faith; unbelievers requiring to be awakened to the 
concerns of their salvation,—all to be sought out in 
the deserted cabins, where [68] poverty itself resides, 
but where the spirit of the Faith is not less divine than 
in the Louvres and most superb Palaces of Europe. 


164 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


dans les Louures & dans les Palais les plus fuperbes 
de 1’Europe. 

Quelques Capitaines infideles, animez contre les 
progrez de la Foy, & croyans qu’elle feule eftoit la 
ruine des pais qui fe font Chreftiens, firent courir 
vne calomnie contre nous, afin d’irriter tout le peu- 
ple, & l’animer 4 la vengeance. On affemble pour 
cette effet les plus confiderables d’vn bourg, depen- 
dant de cette Miffion, (c’eftoit le bourg de fain 
Mathieu, dont nos Peres eftoient alors abfens:) On 
publie hautement dans ce confeil de fedition, qu’vn 
certain Huron efchapé depuis peu de iours, des mains 
des Iroquois plus voifins de Kebec, y auoit veu de 
grands coliers de Porceleine, enuoyez de la part 
d’Onnontio, (c’eft le nom que donnent les Hurons 4 
Monfieur nof{tre Gouuerneur.) Que cét Onnontio vou- 
lant diuertir les armes des Iroquois, crainte qu’ils ne 
fe iettaffent fur les Francois de Montreal, des Trois 
Riuieres, & de Kebec; auoit enuoyé ces prefens, & 
ces coliers de Porcelene, dis le pais ennemi, afin de 
les inuiter de céduire [69] vne armée dans le pais des 
Hurons; & qu’il leur auoit promis, que les Francois 
qui y eftoient, trahiroient les Hurons & les Algon- 
quins; faifans mine de fe porter auec courage, A leur 
deffenfe: mais qu’en effet lors qu’on feroit dans le 
combat, ils ne tueroient perfonne; ayans receu des 
ordres fecrets de fa part, de ne charger leurs armes 
a feu, finon de poudre feule, fans bale & fans plomb. 

En fuite de cette calomnie, on nous fait plus noirs 
que nos robes, on crie aux traiftres & A la trahifon, 
on ne parle que de nous maffacrer, & les boutefeux 
de cette fedition, difent hautement, qu’il faut affom- 
mer le premier des Frangois qu’on auroit au rencontre. 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 165: 


Some infidel Captains, exasperated at the progress 
the Faith was making, and believing that it alone 
caused the ruin of the countries that are becoming 
Christianized, circulated a calumny against us in the 
hope of stirring up the natives and inciting them to 
take revenge. For this purpose, the most eminent 
among them assembled in a village belonging to this 
Mission (it was the village of saint Mathieu, from 
which our Fathers were then absent); and in this 
seditious council it was boldly announced that a 
certain Huron, lately escaped from the hands of the 
Iroquois nearest to Kebec, had seen there some large 
Porcelain collars, sent by Onnontio (the name which 
the Hurons give to Monsieur our Governor). It was 
stated that this Onnontio,— wishing to turn aside the 
weapons of the Iroquois, fearing lest they should 
make a dash upon the French at Montreal, Three 
Rivers, and Kebec,—had sent these presents and 
these Porcelain collars into the enemy’s country, in 
order to induce them to transport [69] an armed 
force into the Huron territory; and that he had 
promised them that the French who were there 
should betray the Hurons and the Algonquins, by pre- 
tending to go bravely in their defense,— but that, in 
fact, when the fighting took place they were to kill no 
one, having received from him secret orders to load 
their firearms with powder only, without bullet or shot. 

In the train of this calumny they painted us blacker 
than our robes, raised a cry of ‘‘ Traitors, and treach- 
ery!’’ and talked only of massacring us; while the 
firebrands of the sedition noisily declared that they 
must kill the first Frenchman they should meet. 

Indeed, descrying from a distance our two Mis- 
sionaries,— who were shaping their course, a very 


166 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


En effet, nos deux Miffionaires, faifans leur courfe, 
fort peu de iours apres, A ce bourg de leur departe- 
ment, ot. ce confeil s’eftoit tenu: de loin qu’on les 
etit apperceu, on crie, Au meurtre & au maffacre: on 
court aux portes par ott ils doiuent entrer: on les 
recoit auec des crys & des hiiées, femblables 2 celles, 
dont on accueille les prifonniers de guerre, qui font 
deftinez pour le feu. Nos Peres entrent A leur ordi- 
naire, auec vn vifage [70] affeuré. Qui craint Dieu, 
ne craint pas les creatures, & ceux qui ne fouhaittent 
que de mourir en fon feruice, ne paliffent pas en ces 
rencontres Les feditieux s’entre-parlent, pour voir 
celuy qui leueroit la hache, fur ces deux victimes 
innocentes. Ils ne iettent fur eux, que des yeux de 
fureur, & leur coeur ne refpire rien que le fang. Mais 
Dieu leur lia les mains pour ce coup. Ces deux bons 
Peres paffent 4 trauers cette foule d’impies, fans 
receuoir aucun dommage. Plufieurs qui n’eftoient 
pas de la coniuration, mais qui n’en pouuoient igno- 
rer les conclufions, qu’on auoit publiées, fe difoient 
les vns aux autres: Ne font-ce pas ceux-cy que l’on 
deuoit maffacrer? comment donc ont-ils trauersé au 
milieu de leurs ennemis, preparez pour le meurtre? 
on eft forty a la foule, pour les tuér, & pas vn toutes- 
fois n'a fait le coup, que tant de monde auoit promis 
de faire. 

Dieu ne fe contente pas de proteger nos Peres en 
ce rencontre: mais pour recompenfer les fatigues & 
les dangers de leur voyage, en la monnoye dont il 
paye les iournées de fes feruiteurs: en vn feul iour 
ils baptizerent dix-fept perfonnes dans [71] ce bourg, 
ot ils deuoient trouuer la mort; & ils y confefferent 
quantité de Chreftiens. 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 ‘ 167 


few days after, to this village in their district where 
the council was held,—there were shouts of ‘‘ Murder 
them!” ‘‘ Killthem!’’ Then, rushing to the gates 
by which they would enter, they greeted them with 
cries and hootings, similar to those with which they 
receive prisoners of war who are doomed to the flames. 
Our Fathers went in as usual, with calm faces; 
[70] for they who fear God have no fear of his crea- 
tures, and they who have no other desire than to 
die in his service do not quail in such emergencies. 
The rioters conferred together, to decide which of 
them should raise the hatchet against those two 
innocent victims. They cast upon them nothing but 
furious looks, and their hearts thirsted only for 
blood. But God stayed their hands, for that time; 
and the two good Fathers passed through the crowd 
of impious wretches, without receiving any hurt. 
Many who were not in the conspiracy, but who could 
not have been ignorant of what had been publicly 
determined, said one to another, ‘‘ Are not these 
they who were to be massacred? How, then, have 
they passed through the midst of enemies ready for 
murder? These have risen up from the throng to 
kill them; and yet not one has dealt the blow which 
so many had pledged themselves to strike.”’ 

God did not content himself with protecting our 
Fathers in this danger; but,—to repay them, for the 
hardships and dangers of their journey, in the coin 
with which he pays the day’s wages of his servants,— 
in a single day they baptized seventeen persons in 
[71] the very village where they were to meet their 
death, besides confessing a number of Christians. 

The village of St. Jean had not as yet been taken 
and laid waste by the Iroquois when that sedition 


168 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


Le bourg de S. Iean n’auoit pas encore efté pris, 
ny defolé par les Iroquois, lors que cette fedition 
arriua: mais ce fut fort peu de iours apres: & nous 
auons fujet de croire, que la mort du Pere Noél Cha- 
banel, n’a efté qu’vn effect de cette coniuration. Veu 
nommément que le Huron, fur lequel tomba le fou- 
pgon de l’affaffiant, cémis en la perfonne de ce Pere, 
eftoit du bourg de S Mathieu; & qu’vne perfonne de 
confiance nous a dit, auoir entendu de fa bouche; 
qu’il s’ef{toit vanté d’eftre le meurtrier, & d’auoir 
défait le monde de cette voirie de Francois, & d’auoir 
ietté dans la riuiere fon cadavre, l’ayant affommé a 
fes pieds Quoy qu’il en foit, ce n’eft pas vn petit 
bon-heur pour ceux qui viuent en ces contrées, de 
fcauoir & de voir, que leur vie eft entre les mains de 
tout le monde; & quwils doiuent attendre la mort, 
autant de la part de ceux mefmes qu’ils recdnoiffent 
pour amis, que d’vn Iroquois ennemy. 

En vn autre bourg, dependant de cette mefme 
Miffion, nos Peres y auoient erigé [72] vne petite 
Chapelle, & ils y auoient efleué vn clocher, pour y 
appeller les Chreftiens, & mettre dans ce nouueau 
Chriftianifme, les exercices de deuotion, qui eftoient 
defia eftablis dans les Eglifes plus anciennes. Les 
infideles entrent en fureur a la veué de ces obiets de 
pieté; ils contrefont les poffedez du Diable, s’ils ne 
le sot en verité; ils rompét tout, & ils profanét ce 
lieu de faincteté; ils dérobent & ils pillent les petits 
meubles de cette pauure Eglife, & tout ce qu’auoiét 
les Peres, qui alors en eftoiét abfens ayans e(fté faire 
leurs vifites en des bourgades plus efloignées. On 
porte cOme en triomphe ces dépoiiilles de la maifon 
de Dieu; on vomit des imprecations contre ceux qui 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 169 


occurred, but this event took place a very few days 
afterward; and we have reason for believing that 
the death of Father Noél Chabanel was simply an 
outcome of the conspiracy. Notice particularly, that 
the Huron upon whom fell the suspicion of murder 
committed on the person of that Father was of the 
village of St. Mathieu; and that a trustworthy per- 
son told us that he had heard, from the man’s own 
lips, his boast that he was the murderer; that he had 
rid the world of that common carrion of a French- 
man, and had thrown his body into the river, after 
braining him at his feet. Be that as it may, it is not 
a small advantage, to those who live in these parts, 
to know and see that their lives are at the mercy of 
every one; and that they may expect death as much 
at the hands of those very persons whom they recog- 
nize as friends, as from an Iroquois enemy. 

In another village, dependent on this same Mis- 
sion, our Fathers had built [72] a small Chapel, and 
had erected a belfry, to summon Christians thither, 
and to introduce into this new Christian field the exer- 
cises of devotion already established in the older 
Churches. The infidels became enraged at the sight 
of these objects of piety. They acted as those who 
are possessed of the Devil, if they were not so in 
truth. They broke everything in pieces; profaned 


the holy place; plundered and stole the little fur- 


nishings of that poor Church, and all the possessions 


of the Fathers, who were at that time absent on their 


visitation rounds in some of the more remote villages. 
These spoils of the house of God were carried about 
as ifin triumph; imprecations were spit forth against 
those who preached his word; and it was loudly 
proclaimed that they merited death, 


170 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


prefchent fa parole, & on publie hautement qu’ils 
meritent la mort. 

Ces infolences font arriuées plus d’vne fois: mais 
qui a Dieu pour protecteur, experimente mille fois 
en vn feul Hyuer, que le Diable peut bien entrer en 
rage contre nous, & qu’il a fujet de le faire, voyant 
qu’on luy enleue fa proye; mais qu’apres tout, Dieu 
eft le maiftre, qu’vn feul cheueu ne peut tomber de 
la tefte de fes feruiteurs, fans fa diuine volonté; & 
[73] que la foy ne porte iamais plus de fruits, que 
lors qu’elle eft dauantage perfecutée. [1 falloit que 
le nombre des Eflus de Dieu fut accomply en toutes 
ces contrées, auant que leur defolation arriuaft qui 
eftoit fi prochaine. 

Vn pauure, mais excellent Chreftien de cette 
Miffion, eftoit tombé entre les mains des ennemis, & 
n’attendoit rien que le feu pour fon fupplice. II efit 
recours A Dieu dans faneceffité. Mon Dieu, dit-il, ie 
croy de tout mon cceur, que vous feul eftes le maiftre 
de nos vies: fi vous voulez, i’efprouueray dés auiour- 
d’huy, que ma foy m’aura déliuré de la mort, qui 
fans voftre fecours m’eft tout a fait inéuitable. 
Chofe eftrange! ce pauure homme fut déliuré a 
lheure mefme de fa captiuité, l’Iroquois qui venoit 
de le prendre captif, l’ayant renuoyé, fans fgauoir 
pourquoy. Ce Chreftien fe nomme Pierre Outouré. 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 ; 171 


These insults have happened more than once; but 
he who has God for protector learns, a thousand 
times over in a single Winter, that the Devil may 
well become enraged against us, and that he has 
reason to do so, seeing that his prey is taken from 
him; but that, after all, God is the master; that a 
single hair cannot fall from the head of his servants 
without the divine will; and [73] that faith never 
bears more fruit than when it is most persecuted. 
It was necessary that the number of God’s Elect 
should be completed in these parts, before the 
desolation should come upon them that was so near 
at hand. 

A poor but excellent Christian of this Mission had 
fallen into the hands of enemies, and expected noth- 
ing less than the fire for his torture. In his necessity 
he had recourse to God. ‘*‘ My God,” he said, ‘‘I 
believe with all my heart that you alone are master 
of our lives; if you choose, I shall be able to prove 
from to-day that my faith will have delivered me 
from the death which, without your succor, I can 
in no way escape.’’ Strange circumstance! That 
poor man, at that very hour, was delivered from his 
captivity,—the Iroquois who had just taken him 
prisoner having suffered him, without knowing why, 
to go at large. This Christian was called Pierre 
Outouré. 


172 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


CHAPITRE VI. 


DE LA MISSION DE SAINCT CHARLES. 


gnans le feu des Iroquois, [74] auoient quitté 

leur pais, & s’efloignoient de nous, pour fuir 
encore plus loin, ce cruel ennemy: eftans arriuez en 
vn lieu qu’ils iugerent affez propre pour s’y habituer, 
s’y arre{terent & y baftirent leurs cabanes, a deffein 
de s’y fortifier, & d’y faire vn nouueau pais. Deux 
de nos Miffionaires, l’vn de langue Algonquine, & 
l’autre qui parle Huron, ayans parcouru tout 1 Eité, 
les coftes de noftre mer douce, pour le fecours fpiri- 
tuel, tant des Hurons, qui alors y eftoient difperfez, 
que des peuples Algonquins, nous reprefenterét A 
leur retour, qu’il feroit 4 la gloire de Dieu, que quel- 
qu’vn de nous hyuernaft en ce lieu, ot plus de monde 
deuoit fe raffembler. Nous y deftinafmes donc vn 
de nos Peres, de la langue HurGne, qui nous quitta 
au mois d’Octobre. 

Lors qu’il fut arriué en cette nouuelle habitation, 
quelques Chreftiens le receurent chez eux, auec vne 
charité qui n’efit rien de fauuage. La premiere chofe 
qu’ils firent, fut de dreffer de quelques écorces 
d’arbres, vne Chapelle, riche dans fa pauureté, ot 
depuis le matin iufqu’au foir, Dieu ne laiffoit pas 
d’eftre adoré, au milieu de ces vaftes forefts, ot 
iamais il n’auoit receu cét hommage. 

[75] Plufieurs qui n’eftoient pas Chreftiens, fe 


Q) rae ie Hurons, de ceux qui l’an pafsé, crai- 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 173 


CHAPTER VI. 
OF THE MISSION OF SAINT CHARLES. 


ERTAIN Hurons,—among those who, last 
» year, fearing the fires of the Iroquois, [74] 
had left their country and gone away far 
from us, that they might withdraw still farther from 
the cruel enemy,—having come to a place which 
they deemed sufficiently adapted to residence, set- 
tled down there and built their cabins, purposing to 
fortify themselves, and to make of it a new country. 
Two of our Missionaries,—one of whom spoke the 
Algonquin language, the other the Huron,— having 
coasted all Summer along the shores of our fresh- 
water sea to minister to the spiritual needs of both 
the Hurons who at that time were scattered there, 
and the Algonquin peoples, represented to us on their 
return that it would be to God’s glory if some of us 
were to winter in that locality, where a yet larger num- 
ber of people were to draw together. We accordingly 
assigned to them one of our Fathers, proficient in the 
Huron language, who left usin the month of October. 
Arriving at the new settlement, some Christians 
received him into their homes with a charity not 
natural to the savage. The first thing they did was 
to build, with the bark of trees, a Chapel, opulent 
in its very poverty, in which, from morning to even- 
ing, God ceased not to be adored, in the midst of 
those vast forests, where never before had he received 
such homage. 


174 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 35 


rendirent auffi-toft aux inftructions qu’on leur donna. 
Quelques autres accufoient la Foy, d’eftre vne chofe 
mauuaife, & ne vouloient pas y entédre: difans que 
iamais leur pais n’auoit efté fi affligé, que lors qu’on 
auoit c6mencé tout de bon, A quitter leurs anciénes 
fuper{titids, & 4 receuoir le Baptefme. Ces gés-la 
e{toiét les plus riches, & les plus A leur aife, il falloit 
que Dieu les humilia{t, pour les fauuer. 

En effect, cdme ils n’auoiét quafi aucune prouifion 
de bled, & que le plus fort de leur efperdce eftoit 
fur la péche, qui toutes les années eft tres-abondante 
en ce lieu 14, pendant 1’Hyuer; iamais elle ne s’y eft 
veué fi malheureufe que celle-cy. Ils font des trous 
dans la glace, efpaiffe de deux & de trois pieds: au 
deffous de laquelle ayans trouué l’eau viue, ils iettent 
leurs rets, ot d’ordinaire on puife quantité de poiffon, 
qui accourt 4 ces ouuertures. Mais cét Hyuer ils ne 
trouuoient das leurs filets aucun poiffon, dix ou douze 
petits haracs, qui quelquefois s’y rencontroient, eftoit 
vne manne du Ciel, 4 ces pauures gens, qui mouroient 
de faim. IIs fe virét bien-toft au bout de leurs petites 
[76] prouifions; fans bled, fans gland, & fans legu- 
mes. D’aucuns alloient peler les arbres, & faifoient 
boiiillir les efcorces, pour les rendre mangeables: 
d’autres viuoient d’vne certaine mouffe, qui f’attache 
aux rochers, & d’vne efpece de tondre, qui pourry 
dedans l’eau, s’humecte, & fe renfle comme vne 
éponge. Vne fois chaque iour, on faifoit cuire das 
vne grade chaudiere, vn petit morceau de poiffon 
enfumé, qui rendoit vn boiiill6 amer, dont vn chacun 
beuuoit abondamment, afin de fe remplir, & d’eftouf- 
fer fa faim par ces lauaces d’eau. 

Ce bon Pere, fe vit enfin reduit a cette vie, l’efpace 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 rit ae 


[75] Many, who were not Christians, attended the 
instructions as soon as they were given. Some 
others charged the Faith with being an evil thing, 
and would not listen to it,—affirming that their 
country had never been so afflicted as when they had 
commenced in earnest to abandon their old supersti- 
tions, and to receive Baptism. ‘These people were 
among the wealthiest and most comfortably circum- 
stanced. It needed, then, that God, if he would 
save them, should bring down their pride. 

Indeed, while their provision of corn was very 
scanty, and although their greatest hope lay in the 
fishing,— which, every year during Winter, is wont 
to afford a very plentiful supply in that locality,— 
never had the latter turned out so unproductive as 
in the present season. Their custom is to make 
holes in ice two or three feet thick; under these, 
having come upon water, they cast their nets, in 
which are usually taken large quantities of fish, 
which flock to these openings. But this Winter there 
were no fish to be found in the meshes,—ten or 
twelve little herrings, which were occasionally en- 
countered, being as manna from Heaven to these poor 
people, who were perishing from hunger. Quickly 
they found themselves at the end of their scanty 
[76] provisions,— without corn, without acorns, and 
without vegetables. Some proceeded to strip the 
trees, boiling the bark to render it eatable. Others 
lived on a certain moss which attaches itself to 
tocks,* and on a sort of punk which, being first 
rotted in water, becomes absorbent, and swells out 
like a sponge. Once a day, they cooked, in a large 
kettle, a small morsel of smoked fish, which yielded 
a bitter soup,—of which each person drank freely, 


176 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 35 


de cinquante iours: qui apres tout luy eftoient des 
iours bien-heureux, qui le faifoient benir Dieu, voy- 
ant que cette mifere publique, abbatoit la fuperbe de 
ceux qui du commencement n’auoient pas voulu 
V’efcouter. Ils venoient comme des moutons, & 
demandoient le faint Baptefme; non pas dans 1’at- 
tente d’aucun fecours, qu’ils pfiffent e{perer, d’vn 
homme qu’ils voyoient dans la famine auffi bien 
qu’eux: mais 4 caufe qu’ils admiroient que fon cou- 
tage n’en fuft pas abbatu; qu’il eftoit leur confola- 
tion, [77] dans la veué qu’il leur donnoit alors, d’vn 
bon-heur eternel, exempt de toutes ces miferes. Il 
faut bien, difoient-ils, que ce qu'il nous prefche foit 
vray, puis qu’il ne craint pas de mourir auec nous, 
& de faim, & de froid; & qu’il nous enfeigne le 
mefme dans noftre Pauureté, qu’il faifoit lors qu’il 
eftoit plus 4 fon aife. 

Sur la fin de 1’Hyuer, ces pauures fameliques, fe 
voyans mourir tous vifs dans ces miferes, fe diffi- 
perent cA & 14. Vne partie vinrent nous trouuer en 
I’Ifle ot nous eftions, y efperans plusdefecours. Le 
Pere les y accompagna; & apres fix grandes iournées 
d’vn chemin tres-penible, fur les glaces, de cette mer 
alors glacée, il arriua heureufement en cette maifon. 

Vn autre de nos Peres, qui auoit hyuerné en la 
Miffion de Saint Pierre, encore plus efloignée, n’efit 
pas moins 4 fouffrir, dans les mefmes miferes, qui 
partout ont confommé ces peuples, & dont partout 
Dieu a tiré fa gloire, difpofant toutes ces ames pour 
le Ciel, par des voyes adorables. 


1650) RELATION OF 1649-50 ; 177 


that he might fill himself, and stifle his hunger with 
these watery draughts. 

The good Father found himself at last reduced to 
this way of living for the space of fifty days, which, 
after all, were, to him, very happy days,—days 
which caused him to bless God, perceiving that the 
common misery was bringing down the arrogance of 
those who, at first, refused to listen to him. Now 
they flocked to him like sheep, and entreated for 
holy Baptism,—not in the expectation of any relief 
they could hope for from a man who, as they saw, 
was famished like themselves, but because they 
admired him, seeing that his courage was not abated 
by it; and because he was their consolation, [77] in 
the prospect that he then gave them of an eternal 
happiness, free from all these miseries. ‘‘ It must 
indeed be,’’ they said, ‘‘ that what he preaches to us 
is true; since he fears not to die with us of hunger 
and cold, and because he teaches us, in our Poverty, 
as he taught us when he had more comfort.’’ 

Toward the close of the Winter, these famishing 
people, undergoing a living death in these miseries, 
dispersed in various directions; a part of them set 
out to come to us in the Island where we were liv- 
ing, expecting to find there more relief. The Father 
accompanied them; and, after a very distressing 
journey of six long days on the ice of the lake, which 
was then frozen, they arrived safely at this house. 

Another of our Fathers, who had wintered in the 
still more distant Mission of Saint Pierre, had not 
less to suffer while sharing the same miseries, which 
everywhere have consumed this people, and from 
which God has everywhere derived his glory by pre- 
paring, in ways adorable, all these souls for Heaven. 


178 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 35 


[78] CHAPITRE VII. 
DE LA MISSION DU SAINT ESPRIT. 


ETTE Miffion eftoit pour les Nations de la 
Cy langue Algonquine, qui n’ont point de demeure 
affeurée, auffi peu que les poiffons, de la 
pefche defquels ils viuent, fur les coftes du grand 
Lac, qu’ils habitent, tantof{t en vn lieu, & tantoft en 
vn autre, felon les diuerfes faifons de l’année; ou 
felon que les craintes des Iroquois les obligent de 
s’efloigner plus loin, du peril qui les menace chaque 
iour. C’eft 4 dire que nos Peres qui ont eu le foin de 
cette miffion, y ont mené vne vie errante, auec ces 
peuples errans, & ont efté quafi toufiours deffus les 
eaux, ou fur quelques rochers affreux, battus des 
flots & des tempeftes. Mais partout, Dieu s’y eft 
fait connoiftre,; n’eftant pas moins le Dieu des Mers, 
que le Dieu de la terre. Quantité de ces nations 
errantes, ont pris feu depuis vn an aux paroles de 
l’Euangile: quantité fe font faits Chreftiens, & ont 
receu le faint Baptefme: mefme leurs Capitaines, 
qui iamais n’auoient voulu fe faire inftruire. Voicy 
ce que [79] m’en efcriuoit le Pere qui cét Hyuer auoit 
le foin de cette Miffion. Ie benis Dieu, dit il, de 
Vaffiduité de ces bonnes gens A venir prier Dieu: 
i’admire leur innocence, & le defintereffement du 
temporel,; eux ne me demandans rien; & moy n’ay- 
ant rien dequoy leur donner. 
Les barbares ne font pas fi barbares qu’on les 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 179 


[78] CHAPTER VII. 
OF THE MISSION OF THE HOLY GHOST. 


HIS Mission was established for the Nations 
oF speaking the Algonquin tongue, who have — 
as little as the fish, by taking which they sub- 
sist—no certain abode along the coasts of the great 
Lake, where they dwell sometimes in one place, 
sometimes in another, conformably to the different 
seasons of the year; or according as fears of the Iro- 
quois compel them to move farther away from the 
peril which every day threatens them. This means 
that our Fathers who have had the care of that mis- 
sion have led a wandering life among this wandering 
people, and have lived almost always on the water, 
or on desolate rocks beaten by the waves and storms. 
But everywhere God has made himself known to 
them, being no less the God of the Seas than the 
God of the land. Many of these wandering nations 
took fire, a year ago, at the words of the Gospel; 
many have become Christians and received holy 
Baptism,—even their Captains, who had never been 
willing to receive instruction. The following [79] 
was written to me by the Father who had the care 
of that Mission last Winter. ‘‘I bless God,’’ he 
says, ‘‘ for the diligence with which these good people 
come to pray to him. I admire their innocence, and 
disregard of temporal interests; they ask nothing 
from me, and I have not wherewith to give them.”’ 
The barbarians are not so barbarous as, in France, 


180 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35. 


croit en France, ou pour mieux dire, il faut aduoiier 
que la foy dompte la barbarie, & qu’elle donne vn 
coeur Chreftien, A des gens qui n’auoient que des 
coeurs de befte. 

Il eftoit temps que Dieu leur donnaft cét efprit de 
foy: car le Printemps eftant venu, les Iroquois partys 
de deux cents lieués de 1A, furprirent vne partie de 
ces bons Neophytes, dans le lieu qu’ils eftimoient le 
plus affeuré pour leur vie. Ils entraifnerent dans la 
Captiuité, hommes, femmes, & enfans; fans pardon- 
ner a cét aage innocent, qu’ils brufloient au milieu 
des flammes, auec des cruautes inconceuables. Les 
voyes de Dieu font adorables: il laiffe profperer les 
ennemis de fon faint Nom; en mefme téps qu'il 
abandonne & toutes les miferes, ceux qui commencent 
al’adorer. Qu’il en foit beny a iamais. 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 181 


they believe them to be; or, to put it better, it must 
be admitted that the faith subdues barbarity, and 
gives Christian hearts to people who naturally 
possess only the hearts of beasts. 

It was time that God should give to them the spirit 
of faith; for, when Springtime came, bands of 
Iroquois, coming from a distance of two hundred 
leagues, surprised a party of these good Neophytes 
in a place where they deemed their lives perfectly 
secure; dragged them into Captivity, men, women, 
and children,—not sparing even the young, but 
committing them to the flames with a cruelty beyond 
conception. The ways of God are adorable. He 
suffers the enemies of his holy Name to prosper, at 
the same time that he abandons to every kind of 
misery those who are but just learning to worship 
him. May he be forever blessed. 


182 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


[80] CHAPITRE VIII. 


DE LA DESOLATION DU PAIS DES HURONS, AU PRIN- 
TEMPS DE L’ANNEE 1650. 


OUS auions paffé tout l’Hyuer, dans les extremi- 
N tez d’vne famine qui a regné par toutes ces 
cotrées, & qui partout a enleué vn tres-grand 
nombre de Chref{tiens, continuant toufiours fes raua- 
ges, & iettant le defefpoir partout. La faim eft vn 
tyran inexorable, qui iamais ne dit c’eft affez, qui 
iamais ne donne de treue; qui deuore tout ce qu’on 
luy donne; & fi on manque 8 le payer, il fe repaift 
du fang humain, il vous déchire les entrailles, fans 
qu’on puiffe euiter fa rage, ny fe fouftraire de fa 
veué, tout aueugle qu’il eft. Mais le Printéps eftant 
venu, les Iroquois nous furent encore plus cruels; & 
ce font eux qui vrayement ont ruiné toutes nos 
e{perances, & qui ont fait vn lieu d’horreur, vne terre 
de fang & de carnage, vn theatre de cruauté, & vn 
fepulchre de carcaffes décharnées par les langueurs 
d’vne longue famine, d’vn pais de benediction, d’vne 
terre de Sainteté, & d’vn lieu qui n’auoit plus rien de 
barbare, depuis que le fang [81] refpandu pour fon 
amour auoit rendu tout fon peuple Chreftien. 

Nos pauures Hurons affamez furent contraints de 
fe feparer d’auec nous, au commencement du mois 
de Mars, pour aller chercher quelque gland au fom- 
met des montagnes qui fe découuroient de leurs neges; 
ou pour aller 4 quelques pefches, en des lieux plus 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 . 


[80] CHAPTER VIII. 


OF THE DEVASTATION OF THE COUNTRY OF THE 
HURONS, IN THE SPRING OF THE YEAR 1650. 


E had passed all the Winter in the extremities 
/ \V of a famine which prevailed over all these 
regions, and everywhere carried off large 
numbers of Christians, never ceasing to extend its 
ravages, and casting despair on every side. Hun- 
ger is an inexorable tyrant,—one who never says, 
‘‘It is enough;’’ who never grants a truce; who 
devours all that is given him; and, should we fail to 
pay him, repays himself in human blood, and rends 
our bowels,— ourselves without the power to escape 
his rage, or to flee from his sight, all blind though 
he be. But, when the Spring came, the Iroquois 
were still more cruel to us, and it is they who have 
indeed blasted all our hopes. It is they who have 
transformed into an abode of horror—into a land of 
blood and carnage, into a theater of cruelty, and into 
a sepulchre of bodies stripped of their flesh by the 
exhaustions of a long famine—a country of plenty, 
a land of Holiness, a place no longer barbarous, since 
the blood [81] shed for love of it had made all its 
people Christians. 

Our poor famished Hurons were compelled to part 
from usat the commencement of the month of March, 
to go in search of acorns on the summits of the 
mountains, which were divesting themselves of their 


184 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


expofez au Soleil du Midy, ou les glaces fe fondét 
pluftoft. Ils efperoient en ces lieux efcartez, de 
trouuer quelque petit foulagement a la famine, qui 
les faifoit mourir tout vifs, comme vn ennemy trop 
domeftique renfermé dans leurs propres maifons, & 
qui s’eftoit rendu le maiftre dela place. Mais ils 
craignoient en mefme temps, de trouuer vne mort 
plus cruelle, & de tomber dans les feux & les flammes 
des Iroquois, allans ainfi chercher leur vie. Ils fe 
cofeffent auat que de partir, ils redoublét leurs deuo- 
tions d’autant plus que leurs miferes s’augmentét: 
plufieurs fe cOmunient pour fe difpofer A la mort; 
iamais leur foy ne fut plus viue, & l’efperance du 
Paradis ne leur parut iamais plus douce, que dans ce 
defefpoir & cét abandon de leur vie. Ils diuifent 
leurs troupes; afin [82] que fi les vns tomboient entre 
les mains de l’ennemy les autres piiffent efchaper. 

Le grand Lac, qui entouroit noftre Ifle de Saint 
Iofeph, n’eftoit alors rien qu’vne croufte de glaces, 
efpaiffes de deux & de trois pieds. A peine ces bons 
Chreftiens nous quittoient ils de veué, que ces glaces 
fondent fous leurs pieds: d’aucuns fe noyent dans 
ces abyfmes, & y trouuerét leur tombeau; les autres 
s’en retirét plus heureufement quoy que tranfis d’vn 
froid mortel. Ce fut vne mort bien cruelle, a de pau- 
ures vieillars, Ades femmes & 4 des enfans, de rendre 
l’ame fur ces neges, fans aide & fans fecours: mais 
non pas fans la confolation de celuy, qu’ils adoroient 
dedans leur coeur, & qui iamais n’y pfit mourir. 

Vne vieille Chreftienne, aagée de foixante ans, 
ayant paffé toute la nuit couchée au milieu de ces 
glaces, y fut trouuée pleine de vie le lendemain 
matin. On luy demande, qui l’auoit conferuée. Ie 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 185 


snow; or to repair to certain fishing-grounds in places 
more open to the Southern Sun, where the ice melted 
sooner. They hoped to find, in those remote places, 
some little alleviation from the famine, which was 
rendering their existence a living death,—as it were, 
an enemy domiciliated, shut up in their own houses, 
who had made himself master of the situation,— and 
all this, while in dread of a death still more cruel, 
and of falling into the fire and flame of the Iroquois, 
who were continually seeking their lives. Before 
going away, they confessed, redoubling their devo- 
tions in proportion as their miseries increased. Many 
received holy communion as preparation for death. 
Never was their faith more lively, and never did the 
hope of Paradise appear to them more sweet than in 
this despair, this surrender of their lives. They split 
up into bands, so [82] that, if some fell into the 
hands of the enemy, others might escape. 

The great Lake which surrounded our Island of 
Saint Joseph was, at that time, nothing but a bed of 
ice two or three feet in thickness. Hardly had these 
good Christians left our sight than the ice melted 
under their feet; some were drowned in the depths, 
and found there their grave; others, more fortunate, 
extricated themselves, though benumbed with a 
deadly cold. It was a most cruel death to the poor old 
men, women, and children, to give up their souls on 

‘these snows, without help or succor,— not, however, 
without consolation from him whom they adored in 
their hearts, and who could never die therein. 

An old Christian woman, aged sixty years, who 
had passed the whole night lying on the ice, was 
found on the following morning, full of life. She 
was asked who had preserved her. ‘‘I called out,’’ 


186 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 35 


m’efcriois de fois 4 autres, refpddit elle, /¢/ous taitenr, 
Iefus ayez pitié de moy: en mefme temps ie me fen- 
tois toute efchauffée le froid me faififfant A quelque 
temps de 14, ie recommengois ma priere, [83] & mon 
corps reprennoit fa chaleur, i’ay paffé toute la nuit 
en cette forte, & i’attendois la mort auec plaifir. 
Cette pauure femme, ne fcauoit rien que ces deux 
mots de toutes fes prieres, elle en réchapa pour lors: 
mais du depuis elle eft tombée entre les mains des 
ennemis, & y trouua la fin de fes miferes. 

Nos pauures fameliques cémengoient A iouir des 
douceurs de leur pefche, qu’ils trouuerent affez abon- 
dante: mais leur ioye deuoit eftre plus pour le Ciel, 
que pour laterre. Le iour de 1’Annonciation, vingt- 
cinquiefme de Mars, vne armée d’Iroquois ayans 
marché prez de deux-cents lieués de pais, a trauers 
les glaces & les neges, trauerfans les montagnes & 
les fore{ts pleines d’horreur, furprirent au commen- 
cement de la nuit, le camp de nos Chreftiens, & en 
firent vne cruelle boucherie. Il fembloit que le Ciel 
conduifit toutes leurs demarches, & qu’ils euffent vn 
Ange pour guide: car ils diuiferent leurs troupes 
auec tant de bon-heur, qu’ils trouuerent en moins de 
deux iours, toutes les bandes de nos Chreftiens, qui 
ef{toient difperfées ¢& & 14; efloignées les vnes des 
autres, de fix, [84] fept, & huit lieués. Cent per- 
fonnes en vn lieu; en vn autre cinquante: & mefme 
il y auoit quelques familles folitaires, qui s’eftoient 
efcartées en des lieux moins connus, & hors de tout 
chemin. Chofe eftrange! de tout ce monde diffipé, 
vn feul homme s’efchapa, qui vint nous en apporter 
les nouuelles: comme il arriua autrefois A ce prodige 
de Patience, auquel il ne reftoit dedans fes pertes, 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 187 


she replied, ‘‘from time to time, /esous taitenr,— 
‘Jesus, have pity on me.’ At the same moment, I 
felt myself quite warm. The cold again seizing on 
me, some time after, I renewed my prayer, [83] 
and my body again recovered its warmth. I passed 
the whole night in that way, and cheerfully awaited 
my death.’’ This poor woman could recall but those 
two words out of all her prayers. She recovered, 
for that time; but since then has fallen into the 
hands of the enemies, and hasthus met the termina- 
tion of her miseries. 

Our poor starvelings were just beginning to enjoy 
the benefit of their fishery, which they found abun- 
dant enough; but their joy was to savor more of 
Heaven than of earth. On the day of the Annuncia- 
tion, the twenty-fifth of March, a war-party of 
Iroquois—who had marched over nearly two hun- 
dred leagues of country, across ice and snow, crossing 
mountains and forests full of terrors—surprised, one 
nightfall, our Christians’ camp, and perpetrated in it 
acruel butchery. It seemed as if Heaven directed 
their every step, and as if they had an Angel for 
guide; for they divided their forces so successfully 
as to discover, in less than two days, every party of 
our Christians, who had scattered hither and thither. 
These were separated by six, [84] seven, or eight 
leagues,— one hundred in one place, fifty in another; 
there were even some solitary families who had 
strayed into less well-known places, and away from 
all beaten track. Strange circumstance! of all that 
scattered people, but a single man escaped, who 
came to bring to us the news,—even as, in days of 
old, it happened to that prodigy of Patience for whom 
there survived, in his losses, but one sad messenger, 


188 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


finon vn trifte meflager, qui venoit hors d’halene, 
luy en donner aduis, & luy rendre fon mal-heur plus 
fenfible. 

Ma plume n’a plus d’ancre, pour exprimer la rage 
des Iroquois, en ces rencontres, elle A horreur de 
reprefenter fi fouuent des fpectacles de cruauté, auf- 
quels nos yeux ne peuuent pas s’appriuoifer, auffi 
peu. que nos fens; qui iamais ne font infenfibles A 
l’excez de tous ces tourmens de fureur. Noftre 
vnique confolation, c’eft que ces fupplices d’horreur, 
trouuent la fin auec nos vies, & que Dieu les couron- 
nera d’vn bon-heur qui n’a point de fin. 

Du depuis, les malheurs nous ont accueilly a la 
foule, & peine les Chreftiens, qui reftoient dans le 
bourg Saint Iofeph, [85] auoient refpiré quelques 
iours; pour releuer leurs e{perances, apres vn coup fi 
rude, qui les auoit tous abbatu. Ils tremblent dans 
la crainte des flammes, & de la cruauté des Iroquois: 
mais vn mal quwiils n’enuifagent que de loin, leur 
paroift moins terrible, que la douleur prefente, d’vne 
famine infupportable, qui les portoit iufques aux 
rebuts de la nature, & les faifoit deuorer des car- 
caffes pourries; la Mere n’auoit point d’horreur 
d’affouuir fa faim enragée du corps de fon enfant; & 
les enfans ne pardonnoient pas au corps de leur Pere. 

La faim, dit-on, fait fortir les loups hors du bois. 
Nos Hurons fameliques, font auffi contrains de fortir 
hors d’vn bourg, qui n’eftoit remply que d’horreur. 
C’eftoit fur la fin de Carefme. Helas! que ces pau- 
ures Chreftiés euffent efté trop heureux, s’ils euffent 
efi dequoy le ieufner, au gland &al’eau_ Le iour de 
Pafque, nous leur fifmes faire vne communion gene- 
rale: le lendemain, ils fe feparerent d’auec nous: 


= ee ee eee 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 "189 


who hastened breathlessly to apprise him of his 
calamity, and thus render it more poignant. 

My pen can no longer express the fury of the 
Iroquois in these encounters; it shrinks from the 
repeated portrayal of such scenes of cruelty,—to 
which our eyes cannot become familiarized any more 
than our feelings, which are never dulled to the 
violence of all these torments which rage suggests. 
Our sole consolation is this, that these horrible inflic- 
tions end with our lives; and that God will crown 
them with a happiness that has no end. 

Since then, misfortunes have crowded upon us. 
Hardly had the Christians who remained in the 
village of Saint Joseph [85] enjoyed a few days’ 
respite, to raise their hopes after so terrible a blow as 
that which had stricken them down, than their fear 
of the flames, and of the cruelty of the Iroquois, 
revived. But an evil which they regarded only as 
remote seemed less terrible than the immediate pangs 
of an insupportable famine, which was already inclin- 
ing them to the very rejections of nature, and causing 
them to devour rotting carrion. The Mother felt 
no horror in satiating her raging hunger on the body 
of her own child; nor did the children spare the 
body of their Father. 

Hunger, it is said, drives the wolves from the 
woods; our starving Hurons were likewise compelled 
to leave a village where only horror abounded. This 
was toward the end of Lent. Alas! these poor 
Christians would have been only too happy had they 
had anything from which to fast, as even acorns and 
water. On Easter day, we had a general com- 
munion forthem. The next day, they parted from 
us, leaving in our care all their little property,—the 


190 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 36 


nous laiffans tous leurs petits meubles: dont la pluf- 
part declarerent publiquement qu’ils nous faifoient 
leurs heritiers; voyans bien que leur [86] mort 
n’eftoit pas efloignée, & qu’ils la portoient dans leur 
fein. 

En effect, peu de iours s’efcoulent, que nous 
apprenons les nouuelles du malheur que nous auids 
preueu Ce pauure troupeau diffipé tombe dans les 
embufches de nos ennemis Iroquois: les vns font 
tuez fur la place; on traifne les autres captifs; on 
brufle les femmes & les enfans, quelques vns s’écha- 
perent du milieu de ces flammes, qui apportent 
l’effroy & la terreur par tout. 

Huit iours apres, vn femblable mal-heur accueille 
encore vne autre bande. Ce ne font que maffacres 
en quelque lieu qu’ils aillent. Par tout la famine les 
fuit; ot ils rencontrent vn ennemy, plus cruel que la 
cruauté mefme: & pour comble d’vne mifere fans 
reffource, ils apprénent que deux puiffantes armées 
font en chemin, pour les venir exterminer: que la 
premiere vient 4 deffein de faire le dégaft dans leurs 
champs, d’arracher leurs bleds d’Inde, & de defoler 
la campagne; que la feconde armée doit moiffonner 
tout ce qui auroit efchapé la fureur des premiers. 
Ce n’eft que defefpoir par tout. 

Dans le plus fort de toutes ces alarmes, [87] deux 
anciens Capitaines viennent me trouuer en fecret, & 
me firent cette harangue. Mon frere, me dirét-ils, 
tes yeux te trompent lors que tu nous regarde: tu 
croy voir des hommes viuans; & nous ne fommes 
que des fpectres, & des ames de trefpaffez. Cette 
terre que tu foule aux pieds va s’entr’ouurir, pour 
nous abifmer auec toy, afin que nous foyons au lieu 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 "Se aaett 


greater number publicly declaring that they made 
us their heirs, perceiving clearly that their [86] 
death was not far away, and that they carried it 
within. 

Indeed, but a few days had slipped by when news 
reached us of the misfortune we had anticipated. 
That poor scattered band fell into the snares of our 
enemies, the Iroquois. Some were slain on the spot; 
others dragged away captive; women and children 
were burned; some few escaped from the midst of 
the flames, which struck dismay and terror into 
every heart. 

Eight days afterward, a similar misfortune assailed 
yet another band. Whithersoever they go, mas- 
sacres await them. Famine follows them every- 
where, in which they meet an enemy more cruel 
than cruelty itself; and to fill up the measure of 
misery without hope, they learned that two power- 
ful war-parties were on the way, who were coming 
to exterminate them; that the first designed to make 
havoc of their fields, to pluck up their Indian corn, 
and to lay waste the country: while the second party 
was to cut down everything that might have escaped 
the fury of the first. Despair reigns everywhere. 

At the height of these alarms, [87] two old Cap- 
tains came to see me privately, and addressed me 
thus: ‘‘ My brother,’’ they said to me, “‘ thine eyes 
deceive thee when thou lookest on us; thou believest 
that thou seest living men, while we are but specters, 
the souls of the departed. The ground thou treadest 
on is about to open under us, to swallow us up, 
together with thyself, that we may be in the place 
where we ought to be, among the dead. It is need- 
ful that thou shouldst know, my brother, that this 


192 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 35 


qui nous e{t deu parmy les morts. I] faut que tu 
{cache, mon frere, que cette nuit dans vn confeil, on 
a pris la refolution d’abandonner cette Ifle. La 
plufpart ont deffein de fe retirer dans les bois, afin 
de viure folitaires, & qu’homme du monde ne fga- 
chant ott ils font, l’ennemy n’en puiffe auoir la 
connoiffance: Quelques-vns font eftat de reculer a 
fix grandes iournées d’icy: les autres prennent leur 
route vers les peuples d’Andaftoé, alliez de la nou- 
uelle Suede: d’autres difent tout haut, qu’ils vont 
mener leurs femmes & leurs enfans, pour fe ietter 
entre les bras de l’ennemy, ot ils ont vn grand 
nombre de leurs parens, qui les defirent, & qui leur 
donnent aduis, qu’ils ayent 4 fe fauuer au pluftoft, 
d’vn pais defolé, s’ils ne veulent perir deffous fes. 
ruines: Mon [88] frere, adiouftoient-ils, que feras-tu 
folitaire en cette Ifle, lors que tout le monde t’aura 
quitté? es-tu venu icy pour cultiuer la terre? veux tu 
enfeigner 4 des arbres? ces Lacs, & ces Riuieres, 
ont elles des oreilles pour efcouter tes inftructions? 


pourrois tu fuiure tout ce monde, qui fe va diffiper? 


la plufpart trouueront la mort, ot ils efperent trou- 
uer la vie: quand tu aurois cent corps, pour te 
diuifer en cent lieux, tu ne pourrois pas y fuffire, tu 
leur ferois 4 charge, & tu leur ferois en horreur: La 
famine les fuiura partout, & la guerre les trouuerra. 

Mon frere, prend courage, m’adioufterent ces Capi- 
taines. Toy feul, nous peux doner la vie, fi tu veux 
faire vn coup hardy. Choifis vn lieu, ot tu puiffe 
nous raffembler, & empefche cette diffipatid, iette 
les yeux du cofté de Quebec, pour y tranfporter les. 
re{tes de ce pais perdu, n’attés pas que la famine, & 
que la guerre, ayét maffacré iufques au dernier, tu 


1650] ‘RELATION OF 1649-50 7 193 


night, in council, we have resolved upon leaving 
this Island. The greater number intend to take 
refuge within the forest, and live alone; and as no 
one in the world will know where they are, the 
enemy cannot have knowledge of them. Some 
reckon on withdrawing six long days’ journey hence; 
others take their route toward the people of Andas- 
toé, allies of new Sweden; others speak boldly of 
taking their wives and children, and throwing them- 
selves into the arms of the enemy,— among whom 
they have a great number of relatives who wish for 
them, and counsel them to make their escape as soon 
as possible from a desolated country, if they do not 
wish to perish beneath its ruins. My [88] broth- 
er,’’ they added, ‘‘ what wilt thou do alone in this 
Island, when all will have forsaken thee? Hast thou 
come here to cultivate the land? Wilt thou instruct 
the trees? These Lakes, and these Rivers, have 
they ears to listen to thy teaching? Couldst thou fol- 
low all this multitude which is about to disperse? 
The greater number will meet their death where 
they hope to find life. Even couldst thou have a 
hundred bodies, to be present in a hundred places, 
it would not suffice; and thou wouldst be a burden 
to them, and they would hold thee in abhorrence. 
Famine will track their every step, and war will 
hunt them down. 

*“My brother, take courage,’’ added these Cap- 
tains. ‘‘ Thou alone canst bestow upon us life, if 
thou wilt strike a daring blow. Choose a place 
where thou mayst be able to reassemble us, and 
prevent this dispersion. Cast thine eyes toward 
Quebec, and transport thither the remnants of this 
ruined nation. Do not wait until famine and war 


194 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 35 


nous porte dedas tes mains, & dans ton cceeur. La 
mort t’en a rauy plus de dix mille. Si tu differe 
dauantage il n’en reftera plus vn feul: & alors tu 
aurois le regret de n’auoir [89] pas fauué ceux que 
tu aurois pti retirer du danger, & qui t’en ouurent 
les moyens. Si tu efcoute nos defirs, nous ferons 
vne Eglife 4 l’abry du fort de Kebec: noftre foy n’y 
fera pas efteinte: les exemples des Algonquins & 
des Francois nous tiendront en noftre deuoir: leur 
charité foulagera vne partie de nos miferes; & au 
moins y trouuerons-nous quelquefois quelque mor- 
ceau de pain pour nos petits enfans, qui depuis fi 
long temps, n’ont que du gland, & des racines 
ameres, pour fouftenir leur vie. Apres tout, deuf- 
fions-nous mourir auec eux, la mort nous y fera plus 
douce, qu’au milieu des forefts, o1 perfonne ne nous 
affifteroit A bien mourir, & ot nous craignons que 
noftre foy ne s’affoibliffe auec le temps, quelque 
refolution que nous ayons de la cherir plus que nos 
vies. 

Ayant entendu le difcours de ces Capitaines, i’en 
fis le rapport a4 nos Peres. L’affaire eftoit trop im- 
portante, pour la conclure en peu de iours. Nous 
redoublons nos deuotions; nous confultons enfemble; 
mais plus encore auec Dieu; nous faifons des prieres 
de quarantes heures, pour reconnoiftre fes fainctes 
volontez. [90] Nous examinons cette affaire, quinze, 
feize & vingt fois. Il nous femble de plus en plus 
que Dieu auoit parlé par la bouche de ces Capitaines. 
Car nous voyons qu’il eftoit vray, que tout le pais des 
Hurons, n’eftoit plus qu’vne terre d’horreur, & vn 
lieu de maffacre. En quelque endroit que nous 
iettaffions noitre veué, nous eftions conuaincus, que 


ee 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 195 


have slain the last of us. Thou bearest us in thy 
hands and thy heart. More than ten thousand have 
been snatched away by death. If thou delay longer, 
not one will remain, and then thou wouldst know 
the regret of not having [89] saved those whom thou 
couldst have withdrawn from danger, and who dis- 
closed to thee the means. If thou listen to our 
wishes, we will build a Church under shelter of the 
fort at Kebec. There, our faith will not die out; 
and the examples of the Algonquins and of the French 
will hold us to our duty. Their charity will alle- 
viate, in part, our miseries; and, at the least, we 
shall sometimes find there a morsel of bread for our 
little ones, who, to sustain life, have for so long 
lived on acorns, and bitter roots. After all, if we 
must die with them, death there would be to us far 
easier than in the midst of forests, where no one 
would assist us to die well; and where, we fear, our 
faith would in time become enfeebled, whatever 
resolution we had to prize it more than our lives.”’ 
Having listened to the discourse of these Captains, 
I made a report of it to our Fathers. The matter 
was too important to settle in a few days. We 
redoubled our devotions; we consulted together, but 
still more with God. We offered prayers during 
forty hours, that we might discover his holy will. 
{90] We discussed this matter fifteen, sixteen, even 
twenty times. It seemed to us more and more clear 
that God had spoken to us by the lips of these Cap- 
tains; for the truth was apparent to us that the entire 
Huron country was but a land of horror and a region of 
massacres. Wherever we cast our eyes, we saw con- 
vincing proof that famine on the one hand, and War 
on the other, were completing the extermination 


196 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


la famine d’vn cofté, & la Guerre d’vn autre, acheue- 
roient d’exterminer ce peu qui reftoit de Chreftiens. 
Mais fi nous les pouuions mener a l’abry du fort de 
nos Francois, de Montreal, des trois Riuieres, ou de 
Quebec; nous iugions qu’en effet ce feroit 14 1’vnique 
lieu de leur refuge que les fecours que nous pour- 
rions leur rendre, y feroient plus puiffans, & que 
leur foy y feroit plus en affeurance: en vn mot, que 
Dieu y feroit plus glorifié. 

Ce fut vn fentiment fi general de tous nos Peres, 
que ie ne pti y refifter, eftant d’ailleurs bien affeuré 
que leur coeur eftoit tellement attaché aux croix & 
aux fouffrances, qu’ils cheriffoient dans cette heu- 
reufe Miffion; que chofe au monde ne les euft pf 
détacher finon l’vnique [91] veué de la plus grande 
gloire de Dieu. 

L’ennemy cependant continué tousjours fes maffa- 
cres; la famine va nous depeuplant, fi nous ne 
haftons noftre retraidte nous fauuerons moins de 
Chreftiens. Le deffein en ayant efté pris 4 loifir, 
l’execution en deuoit eftre prompte; crainte que 
l’Iroquois n’entendant ces nouuelles, n’allaft nous 
tendre des embufches, pour nous arrefter au paflage. 

Ce ne fut pas fans larmes que nous quittafmes ce 
pais, qui poffedoit nos cceurs, qui arreftoit nos efpe- 
tances, & qui eftant defia rougy du fang glorieux de 
nos freres, nous promettoit vn femblable bon-heur, 
nous ouuroit le chemin du Ciel, & la porte du Para- 
dis. Mais quoy! il faut s’oublier de foy-mefme, & 
quitter Dieu, pour Dieu, ie veux dire, qu’il merite 
luy feul d’eftre feruy, fans la veué de nos interefts, 
fuffent-ils les plus Saints que nous puiffions auoir au 
monde. 


i 
P 
) 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 " OT 


of the few Christians who remained: but if we 
could conduct them to the shelter of a French fort at 
Montreal, three Rivers, or Quebec, it would be, we 
thought, their only place of refuge; that there, the 
assistance which we could render them would be 
more effectual, and their faith would be more 
assured; and, in fine, that there God would be more 
glorified. 

So generally was this the opinion of our Fathers, 
that I could not withstand it,— being moreover well 
assured that their hearts were so entirely wedded to 
the crosses and sufferings which they cherished in 
this blessed Mission, that nothing in the world would 
induce them to tear themselves from these, save the 
one [91] motive of the greater glory of God. 

Meanwhile, the enemy continued their massacres 
without pause; the famine went on depopulating us: 
unless we hurried our retreat, we would save few 
Christians. The resolve being deliberately taken, 
its execution must be speedy, for fear that the 
Iroquois, hearing the news of it, might lay a snare 
for us, to bar our way. 

It was not without tears that we left a country 
which possessed our hearts and engaged our hopes; 
and which, even now reddened with the glorious 
blood of our brethren, promised us a like happiness, 
and opened to us the way to Heaven, and the gate of 
Paradise. But yet! self must be forgotten, and God 
left for God’s sake,—I mean, that he is worthy of 
being served for himself alone, without regard to 
our interests, were they the most Holy that we could 
have in the world. 

Amid these regrets, the thought was consoling 
that we were to take away with us poor Christian 


198 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 35 


Dans ces regrets, ce nous fut vne confolation, 
d’emmener auec nous de pauures familles Chreftien- 
nes; enuiron trois cents ames: triftes reliques d’vne 
nation autrefois fi peuplée; que les miferes [92] ont 
accueilly, au temps qu’elle a efté la plus fidele a 
Dieu. Le Ciel y auoit fes efluz; il s’eft peuplé de 
nos defpoiiilles, en depeuplant la terre: & ce nous 
eft affez, pour nous contenter dans nos pertes, de 
voir que ceux qui font reftez auec nous; ayans perdu 
leurs biens, leurs parens, leur patrie, n’ayent pas 
perdu leur foy. Plus de trois mille auoient depuis 
vn an receu le Saint Baptefme, qu’euffions-nous pti 
plus faintement leur fouhaitter, finon qu’ils empor- 
taffent dans le Ciel leur innocence baptifmale? Dieu 
leur a fait cette grace, pluftoft qu’ils ne s’y atten- 
doient, pourrions-nous bien nous plaindre, qu’il leur 
ayt haité fes faueurs? puifque nous-mefmes nous 
nous fuffions eftimez trop heureux, de mourir en leur 
compagnie pour iouir du mefme bon-heur. 

Par les chemins, qui font d’enuiron trois cents 
lieues, nous auons marché fur nos gardes, comme 
dans vne terre ennemie: n’y ayant aucun lieu ot 
l’Iroquois ne foit a craindre, & ot nous n’ayons veu 
des reftes de fa cruauté, ou des marques de fa perfidie. 
D’yn cofté nous enuifagions des campagnes, ou il 
[93] n’y a pas dix années, que i’y comptois les huit & 
dix milles hommes: de tout cela, il n’en reftoit pas 
mefme vn feul. Paffant plus outre, nous coftoyions 
des terres, nouuellement rougies du fang de nos 
Chreftiens. D’vne autre part vous euffiez veu des 
piftes encores toutes fraifches, de ceux qu’on auoit 
emmenez captifs. Wn peu plus loin; il n’y auoit 
que des carcaffes de cabanes, abandonnées 4 la fureur 


a= 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 * 199: 


families numbering about three hundred souls,— 
sad remains of a nation formerly so numerous, 
which calamities [92] have assailed at a time when 
they were most faithful to God. Heaven had there 
its elect,—in depopulating the earth, it has peopled 
itself with our spoils; and it suffices to content us in 
our losses to see that those who remain with us, 
although they have lost their goods, their relatives, 
their country, have not lost their faith. A year ago, 
more than three thousand persons had received Holy 
Baptism: what more holy wish could we have formed 
for them, than that they should take with them into 
Heaven their baptismal innocence? God granted 
them that grace sooner than they expected: could 
we rightly complain that he had hurried his favors 
upon them ?— considering that we would have deemed 
ourselves only too blest, had we died in their com- 
pany, so as to enjoy the same happiness. 

By roads which covered a distance of about three 
hundred leagues we marched, upon our guard as in 
an enemy’s country,—there not being any spot 
where the Iroquois is not to be feared, and where we 
did not see traces of his cruelty, or signs of his 
treachery. On one side we surveyed districts which, 
[93] not ten years ago, I reckoned to contain eight 
or ten thousand men. For all that, there remains 
not one of them. Going on beyond, we coasted 
along shores but lately reddened with the blood of 
our Christians. On another side you might have seen 
the trail, quite recent, of those who had been taken 
captive. A little farther on, were but the shells of 
cabins abandoned to the fury of the enemy,— those 
who had dwelt in them having fled into the forest, 
and condemned themselves toa life which is but 


200 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 35 


de l’ennemy, ceux qui les habitoient ayans pris la 
fuite dans les bois, & s’eftans condamnez 4 n’auoir 
plus d’autre demeure qu’vn perpetuel banniffement. 
Les Nipiffiriniens peuples de la langue Algonquine, 
auoiét efté tout nouuellement maffacrez dans leur 
lac, de quarante lieués de contour: lequel autrefois 
i’auois veu habité quafi tout le long de fes coftes, & 
lequel maintenat n’eft plus rien qu’vne folitude. 
Vne iournée plus en dega nous trouuafmes vne forte- 
reffe, ott les Iroquois auoient pafsé 1’Hyuer venans a 
la chaffe des hommes. A quelques lieués de 1a, 
nous en trouuafmes encore vne autre. Par tout, 
nous marchions fur les mefmes démarches de nos 
plus cruels ennemis. 

[94] Au milieu du chemin, nous eufmes vne alarme 
affez viue, vne troupe d’enuiron quarate Francois, & 
de quelques Hurds, qui auoient hyuerné a Kebec, & 
qui m6toient cette grande riuiere, apperceurent quel- 
ques piftes de nos découureurs, & creurét que c’eftoit 
lennemy: En mefme temps noftre auant-garde efit 
auffi connoiffance des piftes de ceux qui venoiét de 
nous découurir. Les vns & les autres eftans retour- 
nez fur leurs pas, chacun fe prepare au combat: mais 
eftans venus aux approches, nos alarmes furent bien- 
to{ft changées en ioye. 

Ces Francois que nous eufmes au rencontre, 
auoient fait prife depuis fort peu de iours, de quel- 
ques Iroquois, qui auoient voulu les furprendre, 
& qui euffent fait vn coup auffi heureux qu'il eftoit 
remply de courage, s’ils fe fuffent affez promptement 
retirez apres leur premiere defcharge. [Ils n’eftoient 
que dix Iroquois, qui auoient hyuerné enuiron foi- 
xante lieués au deffus des Trois Riuieres, ot ils ne 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 ~ 201 


perpetual banishment. The Nipissirinien people, who 
speak the Algonquin tongue, had quite lately been 
massacred at their lake,—forty leagues in circum- 
ference, which formerly I had seen inhabited in 
almost the entire length of its coast; but which, now, 
is nothing but a solitude. One day’s journey this 
side of the lake, we found a fortress, in which the 
Iroquois had passed the Winter, coming to hunt men; 
a few leagues thence, we met with still another. All 
along, we marched over the very steps of our most 
cruel enemies. 

[94] Midway in our journey, we had an alarm that 
was thrilling enough. A band of about forty French- 
men, and a few Hurons, who had wintered at Kebec, 
and who were ascending this great river, noticed the 
tracks of some of our scouts, which they took to be 
those of the enemy. At the same time, our van- 
guard had also noticed the footprints of those who 
had just discovered us. Both having retraced their 
steps, each side prepared itself for battle; but on 
drawing near, our fears were soon changed into joy. 

These Frenchmen whom we met had effected, but 
a very few days ago, the capture of some Iroquois, 
who had intended to surprise them, and who would 
have dealt a blow as successful as daring, had they 
withdrawn quickly enough after their first volley. 
They were but ten Iroquois, who had wintered about 
sixty leagues above Three Rivers,—where they 
were living by hunting, and awaiting, in the Spring, 
some band, of either Frenchmen or Hurons, who 
might pass that way. These enemies, having de- 
scried toward evening [95] the smoke from the fires 
of our Frenchmen, who had camped about a league’s 
distance from their place of ambush, came by night 


202 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35. 


viuloient que de chaffe; attendas au Prin-téps quelque 
bande, ou de Francois, ou de Hurons qui pafferoient 
par 14. Ces ennemis ayans apperceu fur le foir, [95] 
la fumée du feu de nos Francois, qui s’eftoiét cabanez 
enuiron vne lieué proche de leurs embufches, 
viennent de nuict les reconnoiftre, & ils eurent bien 
laffeurance, dix qu’ils eftoient, d’en attaquer 
foixante. Il eft vray qu’ils fe glifferent A la faueur 
d’vne nuict obfcure, & qu’ils prirent leur route auec 
tant de bon-heur, qu’ils ne furent pas apperceus des 
fentinelles, finon lors qu’ils eftoient defia dedans le 
camp, & qu’ils déchargerent les coups de mort fur les 
premiers qu’ils rencontrerent en leur chemin, tout le 
monde eftant endormy. 

Il femble que la mort ne cherchoit que les bons 
Chreftiens, & les colomnes de noftre Eglife Huronne, 
ils en tuerent fept auant qu’on fe fuft reconnu, 
entr’autres vn Capitaine nommé Iean Baptifte Atiron- 
ta, dont fouuent nous auons parlé dans nos Relations 
precedentes, lequel ayant hyuerné a Kebec cette 
derniere année, y auoit edifié tout le monde, par 
l’innocence de fa vie, & par l’exemple de fes vertus. 

Le Pere Breffany qui nous ramenoit cette troupe, 
auec laquelle il eftoit defcendu des Hurons fur la fin 
de l’E{té [96] precedent, fe refueille au bruit de ces 
meurtres, il voit a fes coftez fes compagnons, qui 
defia auoient receu le coup de la mort, il crie aux 
armes, & en mefme temps il recoit trois coups de 
fléche dans la tefte, qui le couurent tout de fon fang. 
On accourt au fecours, fix Iroquois furent tuez fur la 
place, deux furent pris captifs; les deux derniers 
n’en pouuant plus lafchent le pied, & fe fauuent a la 
fuite. Voila quels font nos ennemis, ils font fur 


" 
t 
: 


1650) RELATION OF 1649-50 208 


to reconnoiter them. Indeed, they were bold 
enough, ten though they were, to attack sixty. Itis 
true that they crept in under favor of a dark night, 
and were so lucky in the choice of their route, that 
the sentinels failed to perceive them until they were 
already within the camp, and had discharged their 
death-blows on the first persons they encountered in 
their path, every one being asleep. 

It seems as if death sought only good Christians, 
and the pillars of our Huron Church. They killed 
seven of these before meeting opposition,— among 
others, a Captain named Jean Baptiste Atironta,— 
of whom we have often spoken in our preceding 
Relations,— who, having wintered in Kebec that last 
season, had edified all by the purity of his life, and 
his virtuous example. 

Father Bressany, who was bringing back to us 
this band,— with which he had gone down from the 
Huron country, toward the end of the preceding 
Summer,—([96] awaking at the noise made by these 
murderers, saw, stretched near him, his companions 
who had already received the death-blow. He cried, 
‘*To arms!’’ —and at the same time received three 
arrow-wounds in the head, which covered him with 
blood. Our men rushed to the rescue. Six Iroquois 
were slain on the spot; two were taken prisoners; the 
last two, powerless to do more, took to their heels, 
and saved themselves by flight. Such are our ene- 
mies; they are upon you when you believe them to 
be two hundred leagues away, and at the same 
moment vanish from your sight, if, having dealt 
their blow, they purpose a retreat. 

The company which had met us, having been ap- 
prised of the overthrow of the whole Huron nation, 


204 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 35 


vous, lors qu’on les croit 4 deux cents lieues de 1a, 
& au mef{fme moment ils f’efuanouiffent de vos yeux, fi 
ayans fait leur coup ils veulent fonger & la retraicte. 

Cette troupe, qui nous efit au rencontre: ayant 
appris la defroute de tout le pais des Hurons, prend 
deffein de retourner deffusfes pas Nous fuiuons donc 
noftre chemin. Helas que ces malheureux Iroquois 
ont caufé de defolation en toutes ces contrées! Lorf- 
que ie montois cette grande Riuiere, il n’y a que 
treze ans: ie l’auois vefi bordée de quantité de peu- 
ple dela langue Algonquine, qui ne connoiffoient pas 
vn Dieu: & lefquels au milieu de 1’infidelité s’efti- 
moient les [97] Dieux de la terre: voyans que rien ne 
leur manquoit, dans l’abondance de leurs pefches, de 
leurs chaffes, & du commerce qu’ils auoient auec 
leurs nations alliées: & auec cela, ils eftoient la ter- 
reur de leurs ennemis. Depuis que la foy eft entrée 
dans leur coeur, & qu’ils ont adoré la Croix de lefus- 
Chrift; il leur a donné pour partage vne partie de 
cette Croix vrayement pefante: les ayat mis en proye 
aux miferes, aux tourmens, & A des morts cruelles, 
en vn mot, c’eft vn peuple effacé de deffus la terre. 
Noftre vnique confolation, c’ef{t qu’eftans morts Chre- 
{tiens, ils font entrez dans le partage des veritables 
enfans de Dieu. Flagellat Deus omnem filium quem 
reciptt. 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 205 


determined to retrace their steps; so we pursued 
our way. Alas, that those wretched Iroquois should 
have caused such desolation in all these regions! 
When I ascended the great River, only thirteen years 
ago, I had seen it bordered with large numbers of 
people of the Algonquin tongue, who knew no God. 
These, in the midst of their unbelief, looked upon 
themselves as the [97] Gods of the earth, for the 
reason that nothing was lacking to them in the rich- 
ness of their fisheries, their hunting-grounds, and 
the traffic which they carried on with allied nations; 
add to which, they were the terror of their enemies. 
Since they have embraced the faith, and adored the 
Cross of Jesus Christ, he has given them, as their 
lot, a portion of that Cross,—verily a heavy one, 
having made them a prey to miseries, torments, and 
cruel deaths; in a word, they are a people wiped off 
from the face of the earth. Our sole consolation is 
that, having died Christians, they have entered on 
the heritage of true children of God. Flagellat Deus 
omnem filium quem recipit. 


206 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 35 


CHAPITRE IX. 


DE L’ESTABLISSEMENT DE LA COLONIE HURONNE, A 
KEBEC. 


PRES enuiron cinquante iournées, d’vn chemin 

A tres penible; dans lequel nous fifmes quantité 

de naufrages; plufieurs de nous eftans tombez 

dans [98] des precipices affreux, & dans le milieu des 

abifmes, d’ot Dieu nous retiroit d’vne main amou- 

reufe, contre nous efperances: enfin nous arriuafmes 
A Kebec, le vint-huitiefme de Iuillet. 

Nous auions feiourné deux iours a Montreal, ot 
nous y fufmes receus auec vn coeur de Charité vraye- 
ment Chreftienne. C’eft vn lieu auantageux pour 
l’habitation des Sauuages. Mais cette place eftant 
frontiere 4 l’Iroquois, que nos Hurons fuyent plus 
que la mort mefme: ils ne pfirent pas fe refoudre d’y 
commencer leur Colonie. Si.1’Iroquois pouuoit eftre 
arre{té: cette Ifle feroit bien-toft toute peuplée: & 
mefme ie ne fuis pas hors d’e{perance, qu’auant l’ Hy- 
uer quelques familles de ces bons Chreftiens fugitifs, 
n’y aillent faire leur demeure. 

C’eft la couftume de ces Peuples, mefme des Infi- 
deles, lors qu’vne nation fe refugie dans quelque pais 
ef{tranger,; que ceux qui les recoiuent les diftribuent 
incontinent dans diuerfes maifons, ot non feulement 
on leur donne le gifte, mais auffi les neceffitez de la 
vie, auec vne Charité qui n’a rien de barbare: & [99] 
quivn iour fera honte a quantité de peuples, qui 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 207 


CHAPTER IX. 


OF THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE HURON COLONY AT 
KEBEC. 


FTER about fifty days of a most distressing 
A journey in which many wrecks befell us,— 
several of us having fallen over [98] frightful 
precipices, and into yawning gulfs, from which God, 
contrary to our expectations, withdrew us with a 
hand of love,—at length we arrived at Kebec, on 
the twenty-eighth day of July. 

We had remained two days at Montreal, where we 
were received with a heart of Charity truly Chris- 
tian. It isa locality possessing advantages as a set- 
tlement for Savages. But as it is an advanced post 
toward the Iroquois, from whom the Hurons flee more 
than from death itself, they could not bring them- 
selves to establish there their Colony. Ifthe Iroquois 
could be checked, that Island would be soon peo- 
pled; and I am even not without the hope that, 
before Winter, some families of these good Christian 
fugitives will go there, and make it their abode. 

It is customary with these Peoples, even with the 
Unbelievers, that, when a nation seek refuge in 
any foreign country, those who receive them imme- 
- diately distribute them over different households. 
Therein, they not only give them lodging, but the 
necessities of life as well, with a Charity savoring 
in nothing of the savage, [99] which will one day 
put to shame many peoples who have been born to 


208 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 35 


font nez dans le Chriftianifme. I’ay veu dans les 
Hurons pratiquer tres-fouuent cette hofpitalité: autant 
de fois que nous y auons vefi des nations defolées, 
des bourgs ruinez, & quelque peuple fugitif, fept & 
huit cent perfonnes trouuoient dés leur abord, des 
hoftes charitables, qui leur tendoient les bras, qui 
les fecouroient auec ioye, & qui mefme leur diftri- 
buoient vne partie des terres defia enfemencées, afin 
quils pfiffent viure, quoy qu’en vn pais eftranger, 
comme dans leur Patrie. 

Nos Hurons fe promettoient au moins, vne partie 
de cét accueil, e{tansarriuez&a Kebec Les Religieufes 
Hofpitalieres ouurirent incontinent & leur cceur, & 
leurs mains, & le fein de leur Charité: non feulement 
pour les malades: mais auffi pour quelques vnes de 
ces pauures familles, que la famine pourfuiuoit. Les 
Vrfulines pareillement, auec leur bonne fondatrice, 
Madame de la Peltrie, ont entrepris en ce rencontre, 
au deffus de leurs forces: mais non pas au deffus de 
leur confiance qu’elles ont en Dieu, elles fe charge- 
rent [100] incontinent d’vne famille tres-nombreufe: 
la premiere qui dans le pais des Hurons ayt embraffé 
la foy. Leur feminaire fut ouuert a de petites filles, 
qui accreurent leur nombre, & le zele de ces bonnes 
Meres, ne trouuant point quafi de bornes, leurs claffes 
s’ouurirent auffi a quantité d’externes; qu’elles 
in{truifent du Catechifme, en langue Huronne: & 
aufquelles elles donnent 4 manger: eftendant ainfi 
leurs Charités en mefme temps & fur les corps, & fur 
les ames. Trois ou quatre perfonnes des plus confi- 
derables, fe font chargez auffi, chacun du foin d’vne 
famille. Mais apres tout, il eft refté plus de deux 
cents de ces pauures Chreftiens, qui n’ont peu trouuer 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 "209 


Christianity. I have very often seen this hospitality 
practiced among the Hurons,—as many times as we 
have seen nations devastated, or villages destroyed, 
or when some fugitive people, seven or eight hundred 
persons, would find, from the time of their arrival, 
benevolent hosts, who stretched out to them their 
arms, and assisted them with joy: who would even 
divide among them a share in lands already sown, in 
order that they might be able to live, although ina 
foreign country, as in their own. 

Our Hurons promised themselves a part at least in 
this welcome. On their arrival at Kebec, the Hos- 
pital Nuns opened to them immediately their hearts, 
their hands, and the bosom of their Charity,— not 
only on behalf of the sick, but also for some of the 
indigent families, whom famine still pursued. The 
Ursulines likewise, together with their good found- 
ress, Madame de la Peltrie, undertook for them, in 
this emergency, beyond their powers, but not in 
advance of the trust they reposed in God. They 
took immediate charge [100] of a very numerous 
family,—the first who, in the Huron country, had 
embraced the faith. They threw open their semi- 
nary to some little girls, which swelled their number, 
and the zeal of these good Mothers knew almost no 
bounds. Their classes were opened to a number of 
day-scholars, whom they instructed in the Catechism, 
and the Huron tongue, and to whom they gave 
food,— extending thus their Charities at the same 
time to both their bodies and souls. Three or four 
of the more prominent citizens charged themselves 
each with the care of afamily. But after all, there 
remained more than two hundred of these poor Chris- 
tians who were unable to find any help in the famine 


210 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [{Vou. 35 


aucun fecours, dans la famine qui les preffe, & qui 
les fuit par tout. 

Ie prie Noftre Seigneur de donner les veritables 
fentimés d’vne charité vrayement Chreftienne, & tous 
ceux qui ont vne fi riche occafion de la pratiquer. 
En attendant qu’on puiffe faire dauantage: & quoy 
qu'il coufte, nous tafcherons comme leurs Peres, de 
fubuenir & leurs neceffitez. Par les chemins, nous 
les auons nourris, dans leur propre pais, [101] Dieu 
nous fourniffoit les moyens de foulager vne partie de 
leurs miferes. Nous auons refpandu pour eux noftre 
fang & nos vies, pourrions nous apres cela leur refu- 
fer ce qui eft hors de nous, qui puiffe eftre en noftre 
pouuoir? Ils viennent tous les iours querir chez 
nous, la portion qu’on leur diftribué, ils fe font 
baftys eux-mefmes leurs cabanes, ils tafcheront par 
leur trauail de chercher quelque partie de leur 
nourriture. Si apres nous eftre e{puiffez, nous nous 
voyons dans l’impuiffance de continuer nos charitez, 
& qu’ils meurent icy de famine, proche de nos Fran- 
¢ois; au moins aurons-nous cette confolation, qu’ils 
y mourront Chreftiens. 

Mais la famine n’eft pas le mal qui foit le plus a 
craindre. C’ef{t la terreur des Iroquois, qui mena- 
cent toutes ces contrées, qui font fentir par tout leur 
barbarie, & qui de plus en plus vont continuans leur 
tage, non feulement contre les reftes des Algonquins 
& des Hurons: mais tournent maintenant le poids de 
leur fureur contre nos habitations Frangoifes. 

Il n’y a que fort peu de iours, qu’vne [102] autre 
bande de vingt-cing a trente Iroquois, eurent bien 
l’affeurance d’attaquer en plein iour, proche des 
Trois Riuieres, plus de foixante de nos gens, qui les 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 211 


that pressed hard upon them, and followed them 
everywhere. 

I pray Our Lord to grant genuine feelings of a 
truly Christian charity to all those who have so rich 
an opportunity for putting itin practice. Until more 
can be done, we, as their Fathers, shall endeavor, at 
whatever cost, to provide for their necessities. On 
their journey down, we had fed them; in their own 
country, [101] God had given us the means of allevi- 
ating, in part, their miseries. For them we shed our 
blood, and spent our lives; could we after that, 
refuse to them, so far as might be in our power, that 
which was extraneous to us? They come every day 
to our house for the allowance that is served out to 
them; they themselves have built their cabins, and 
they will try by their labor to provide for themselves 
a part of their support. If, after having exhausted 
our resources, we find ourselves powerless to con- 
tinue our charities, and behold them dying here of 
famine, close to our Frenchmen, there remains to us 
at least this consolation, that they will die Christians. 

But the famine is not the evil which is most to be 
feared. There is the terror of the Iroquois, who are 
threatening all these regions; who everywhere make 
their barbarity felt; who are venting their rage, more 
and more fiercely, not only against the remnants of 
the Algonquins and Hurons, but are directing now 
the weight of their fury against our French settle- 
ments. 

Only a very few days ago, [102] another band of 
some twenty-five or thirty Iroquois had the extreme 
audacity to attack, in open day, near Three Rivers, 
more than sixty of our people, who had gone in quest 
of them. These miscreants lay, waist-deep, in the 


212 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35. 


alloient chercher Ces mal-heureux font a demy- 
corps dans la boué, dans des marets, & cachez dans 
des iones, d’ott ils font leur décharge, & ot on ne 
peut pas les aborder. Se voyans trop preffez, ils 
prennent la fuyte, & s’embarquent dans leurs canots. 
Nos gens ne peuuent pas toufiours marcher de com- 
pagnie; plufieurs demeurent en arriere. Les Iroquois 
les voyans defunys, tournent vifage, & combattent 
contre ceux qui font auancez des premiers: quand ils 
voyent qu’on fe reiinit, ils reprennent la fuyte auec 
ordre; & apres quelque temps, ils reprennent auffi 
le combat: en vn mot, ce font des Protées qui 
changent de face A tout moment; & on ne doit pas 
croire qu’ils foient & fans conduite, & fans courage. 

Nous perdifmes en ce rencontre quelques-vns de 
nos meilleurs Soldats: d’autres furent grieuement 
bleffez. Les Iroquois fe voyans trop viuement 
preffez, firent vne retraite, auec vn ordre, qui [103] 
n’efit rien de barbare. Auffi, leur conducteur, & le 
chef de ces ennemis de la foy, eftoit vn Hollandois; 
ou pluftoft l’abomination d’vyn peché, & vn monftre 
produit, d’vn Pere Hollandois Heretique, & d’vne 
Payenne. 

Iufques 4 quand Dieu permettra-il qu’on face vne 
terre d’horreur, d’vn pais qui fans ces Barbares ne 
feroit que benediction. Car n’euft efté leur cruauté, 
le nom de Dieu auroit penetré bien audt dans vn 
grand nombre de peuples infideles, qui reftent encore 
a conuertir; La Croix de Iefus-Chrift fe feroit iour, 
au milieu des tenebres du Paganifme qui y regne, & 
le Paradis s’ouuriroit A vn million de pauures Ames, 
qui n’ont que l’enfer pour partage. 

Nous attendons auant 1’ Hyuer trois cent Chreftiens 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 ~ 2s 


mud and marshes, and hidden by the rushes, whence 
they discharged their firearms, and where they 
could not be approached. Finding themselves too 
much pressed, they took to flight, and embarked in 
their canoes. Our people cannot always march to- 
gether; many remainin therear. The Iroquois, see- 
ing them disunited, turned face, and fought against 
those who were the most advanced. Perceiving the 
forces reunited, they again took to flight in good 
order, and, after a while, returned again to the com- 
bat. In a word, they are Proteuses, who change 
their appearance every moment; and it should not 
be supposed that they lack either generalship or 
courage. 

We lost, in this encounter, some of our best Sol- 
diers; others were grievously wounded. The Iro- 
quois, finding themselves too hotly pressed, effected 
a retreat, with an order which [103] indicated 
nothing of the savage; moreover, their commander, 
the most prominent among these enemies of the 
faith, was a Hollander,—or, rather, an execrable issue 
of sin, the monstrous offspring of a Dutch Heretic 
Father and a Pagan woman.” 

How long will God allow to be transformed into a 
land of horror a country which, without these Bar- 
barians, would be a blessed land? For, had it not 
been for their cruelty, the name of God would have 
penetrated far among a great number of unbelieving 
peoples who still remain to be converted. The Cross 
of Jesus Christ would have brought the light of day 
into the darkness of the Paganism that now reigns 
among them, and Paradise would have opened its 
gate to a million of poor Souls, who now have only 
hell for their portion. 


214 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 35 


Hurons, qui viendront accroiftre noftre Colonie com- 
mencée: fix cents hommes de la Nation Neutre, 
nous ont fait porter la parole, qu’ils viendroient 
VEfté prochain, nous demander des armes & du 
fecours, ayans maintenant guerre ouuerte auec les 
Iroquois, en mefme temps, il faudroit fondre fur cét 
ennemy de la foy, & [104] trouuer les moyens de 
leur porter la guerre dans leur propre pais. En vne 
année de bon fuccez; & apres vn effort, digne du 
zele que tant de faintes Ames ont pour la conuerfion 
des Sauuages, on auroit exterminé cette poignée de 
gens, qui ne viuent que pour renuerfer les ouurages 
de Dieu. 

Apres cela, nos efperances refloriroient, & la gloire 
de nos Eglifes, feroit encore plus grande, que n’a 
e{té l’innocence & la fainteté de celles, dont nous 
deplorons maintenant les ruines. 

Mais puis que nous parlons de 1’eftabliffement 
d’vne Colonie Huronne 3 Kebec, mettons en fuitte 
quelques Chapitres des Sauuages circonuoifins, affoi- 
blis, en terre par les mefmes ennemis, & par les 
mefmes perfecutions, & fortifiés pour le Ciel par vne 
mefme creance, 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 » B16 


We expect, before Winter, three hundred Chris- 
tian Hurons, who are to come to swell our new 
Colony. Six hundred of the Neutral Nation have 
sent us word that they are coming, next Summer, to 
solicit from us arms and help, being now in open 
war with the Iroquois. Meanwhile, measures must 
be taken to strike at that enemy of the faith, and 
[104] to find means of carrying the war into their 
own country. One successful year would be enough; 
and, after an effort worthy of the zeal that so many 
saintly Souls possess for the conversion of the Sav- 
ages, this handful of people, who only live to destroy 
the works of God, would be exterminated. 

After that, our hopes would bloom again, and the 
glory of our Churches would be even greater than the 
spotless lives and sanctity of those whose ruin we 
now deplore. 

But, since we are speaking of the establishment of 
a Huron Colony at Kebec, let us devote a few Chap- 
ters to the Savages who are round about us,—en- 
feebled on earth by the same enemies and the same 
persecutions, but strengthened by Heaven with the 
same belief. 


216 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


[105] CHAPITRE X. 
DE L’EGLISE DE SAINCT IOSEPH A SILLERY. 


ETTE Eglife n’a pas efté exempte des calami- 
{7 tez, quicomme vn torrent ont inondé le pauure 
pais des Hurons. On nous efcrit d’Europe, 
que les malheurs font fi vniuerfels, qu’on diroit quafi, 
que les columnes de 1’ Vniuers font esbranlées. Nous 
auons cette confolation dans nos miferes, que noftre 
crearice, eft bien fouuent noftre grand crime, & que 
la guerre d’vn Eftat tout barbare, eft quafi changée 
en vne guerre Saincte. Car la plus part de nos 
Chreftiens, ne prennent les armes depuis quelque 
temps, que pour conferuer le Chriftianifme dans leurs 
nouuelles Eglifes. Or comme les Croix font le fonde- 
ment de la Religion, & que Dieu n’a point détruit 
fon Eglife par les perfecutions, nous efperons que 
les guerres, les famines, [106] & les martyres, qui 
peuplent 1’ Eglife triomphante de nos bons Chreftiens, 
n’abifmeront pas ces pauures Eglifes militantes & 
fouffrantes. Les fleuues qui fe cachent fous terre, 
ne font pas perdus; ils en fortent auec l’e{tonnement 
de ceux qui en ignorent la fource & l’origine: mais 
entrons en difcours. 

Vne troupe de Chreftiens de fainct Iofeph, s’eftants 
ioints ce Prin-temps auec quelques Sauuages des 
Trois Riuieres, & auec quelques Hurons, a deffein, 
comme ils difent d’aller coupper les pieds 4 quelques- 
vns de leurs ennemis, afin d’empefcher qu’ils ne les 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 .- 217 


[105] CHAPTER X. 
OF THE CHURCH OF SAINT JOSEPH AT SILLERY. 


HIS Church has not been exempted from the 
calamities which, like a torrent, have over- 
whelmed the poor country of the Hurons. 

They wrote to us from Europe that misfortunes are 
so universal that they could almost say that the pillars 
of the Universe are being shaken. We have this 
consolation, in our own miseries, that our belief is 
very often our great crime; and that war, undertaken 
against a barbarous Nation is almost changed into a 
Holy war. For the greater number of our Chris- 
tians have not taken up arms for some time, except 
for the preservation of Christianity in our new 
Churches. Now, as Crosses form the foundation of 
Religion, and as God has never destroyed his Church 
by persecutions, we hope that wars, famines, [106] 
and martyrdoms, which are peopling the Church 
triumphant of our good Christians, will not swallow 
up these poor Churches which are militant and suffer- 
ing. Streams that hide themselves under the earth 
are not lost; they burst out from it, to the astonish- 
ment of those who are ignorant of their source and 
origin. But let us begin with our subject. 

A band of Christians from saint Joseph having 
joined, this Spring, some Savages of Three Rivers, 
and a few Hurons,— with the design, as they say, 
of cutting off the feet of some of their enemies, so as 
to prevent these from coming to disturb them at their 


218 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 35 


vinffent troubler dans leurs prieres, rencontrerent vn 
Iroquois en leur chemin, dont ils fe faifirent. Quel- 
ques-vns fe voulant contenter de cette proye, leur 
Capitaine nommé Jean stagsain8s, homme grand & 
puiffant, tres bon Chreftien & fort vaillant, repartit 
qu'il falloit approcher des bourgades Hiroquoifes, & 
tacher d’en furprendre quelqu’vne: Ils auancent donc 
ala fourdine, enuoyant deuant eux vn Algonquin & 
vn Huron, pour reconnoiftre fi l’ennemy n’eft point 
€n campagne. Le Huron fit rencontre d’vne trouppe 
[107] d’Iroquois, fe voyant {urpris, il fait bonne 
mine, & pour fauuer fa vie, il cémit vne lafcheté & 
vne trahifon tres-horrible. Voil& qui va bien, que 
ie vous aye rencontré, dit-il, aux Iroquois, il y a 
long-temps, mes freres, que ie vous cherchois, ils luy 
demandent ot il alloit, ie m’en vay, dit-il, en mon 
pais, chercher mes parens & mes amis: le pais des 
Hurons n’eft plus ot il eftoit, vous l’auez tran{porté 
dans le voftre, c’eft 12 ot ie m’en allois pour me 
ioindre 4 mes parens & A mes compatriotes, qui 
ne font plus qu’vn peuple auec vous. Ie me fuis 
efchappé des ombres qui reftent encore d’vn peuple 
quin’eft plus. T’és tu mis en chemin tout feul, luy 
demadent-ils? Non pas, refpond-il, i’ay pris 1’occa- 
fion d’vne bande d’ Algonquins, qui vous viennent 
chercher; ie me fuis écarté d’eux de téps en temps, 
pour rencontrer quelques-vns du pais ot ie me vay 
rendre, afin de les liurer entre leurs mains. Les 
Iroquois treffaillans d’aife A cette nouuelle, fe raffem- 
blent & s’en vont fous la conduite de ce Iudas, 
furprédre nos pauures Algdquins, qui fe fians trop 
{ur leurs efpions, ou fur leurs Découureurs, comme 
ils les nomment, [108] n’attendoient pas vne falue 


[Araq1IS Jo jadeyo ay} JO yunoooe STY Wtory pepeTas) 


C'S ‘LINOWIA AWATEHLAVG AO ONILIMMAGNVH JO ATIWISOVA 


‘2 f°: lh > > 


:¢ mige Hany eon = c 


. 


ae 


ied Af nef 


ee 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 . 219 


prayers,— encountered an Iroquois on the way, whom 
they made prisoner. Some of them being willing to 
content themselves with that prey, their Chief, named 
Jean Outagwainou,—a tall and powerful man, a very 
good Christian, and exceedingly valiant,—replied 
that they ought to push on to the Hiroquois villages, 
and endeavor to surprise some one of them. They 
pressed forward, therefore, stealthily, sending out an 
Algonquin and a Huron, to ascertain if the enemy 
were in the field. The Huron encountered a band 
[107] of Iroquois, and, finding that he was perceived, 
assumed a friendly guise, and, to save his own life, 
was guilty of most horrible cowardice and treachery. 
‘* How lucky that I have met you!”’ said he to the 
Iroquois; ‘‘ fora long time, my brothers, I have been 
seeking you.” They asked him where he was going, 
and he replied, ‘‘l am going to my country, to seek 
out my relatives and friends. The country of the 
Hurons is no longer where it was,— you have trans- 
ported it into your own: it is there that I was going, 
to join my relatives and compatriots, who are now 
but one people with yourselves: I have escaped from 
the phantoms of a people who are no more.’’ ‘‘ Art 
thou journeying by this way, all alone?’’ they asked 
him. ‘‘ No,’’ replied he; ‘‘I took the opportunity 
‘of coming with a band of Algonquins, who are now 
seeking you. I have wandered away from them, 
from time to time, in order to meet some people of 
the country to which I am going, that I may deliver 
myself into their hands.” The Iroquois, trembling 
with joy at this news, gathered themselves together; 
and, proceeding under the guidance of that Judas, 
surprised our poor Algonquins, who—trusting too 
much to their spies, or their Uncoverers, as they call 


220 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


d’arquebufes qui les mit en déroute, plufieurs y per- 
dirent la vie, quelques-vns fe fauuerét A la faueur 
des bois, vn bon ndébre fut mis dans les liens pour 
eftre la curée de ces matins, noftre Capitaine 
Chreftien fe battit auec vne generofité qui donna 
de l’eftonnement 4 l’ennemy mefme: Les iugemens 
de Dieu font pleins d abyfmes. 

Le traiftre ayant demeuré quelque téps auec les 
Iroquois, eut bien la hardieffe de retourner vers les 
Francois & vers les Algonquins, pour tramer, a ce 
qu'on croit vne autre trahifon, fa premiere ayant fi 
bien reiiffi fans eftre découuerte; mais Dieu qui eft 
iufte, ne permit pas qu’vne actid fi noire fut bien 
long-tempscachée. Les Algonquins qui retournerent 
de cette défaite plus morts que vifs, ayans declaré a 
leurs amis les foupcons qu’ils auoient de ce Huron, 
on l’interrogea fur ce fait, il parut chanceler, on le 
preffe de dire la verité, enfin il auoué fon crime, 
confeffant ingenuément que l’amour de la vie, & 
la crainte de la mort, l’auoit ietté dans cette mal- 
heureufe déloiauté. 

Monfieur le Gouuerneur le fit apprehender, [109] 
& apres auoir e{té conuaincu d’vne trahifon fi noire, 
il fut condamné a mort, & liuré entre les mains de 
fes gens mefme, pour en faire l’executid. On penfa 
premierement au falut de fon ame, & puis on I’atta- 
cha au pilory planté deuant le fort des Frangois, ou 
parut vn Huron armé d’vne hache, qui luy dit, tu 
merite la mort pour auoir trahy nos amis & nos 
alliez,; il eft vray, refpond le coulpable, tuez-moy, 
le Huron luy décharge vn coup de hache {ur la tefte, 
qui ne 1’affomma pas, il redouble iufques a trois fois, 
& le met A mort. Voila le payement de fa trahifon: 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 221 


them—([108] were not expecting a salute of arque- 
buses, which put them to rout. Many lost their 
lives; some saved themselves, under cover of the 
forest; a large number were bound, to become the 
quarry of those curs. Our Christian Captain fought 
with a heroism that astonished the very enemy. 
The judgments of God are unfathomable. 

The traitor, having dwelt some time with the 
Iroquois, had actually the hardihood toreturn to the 
French and Algonquins, in order to plot, as it was 
believed, another treason, the former having suc- 
ceeded so well without being discovered. But God, 
who is just, will not permit that an action so black 
should be long hidden. The Algonquins, who 
returned from that defeat more dead than alive, 
having made known to their friends their suspicions of 
the Huron, he was questioned on the circumstance. 
He seemed to waver; they pressed him to tell the 
truth. At length, he avowed his crime,—frankly 
confessing that love of life and fear of death had 
impelled him to that wretched act of perfidy. 

Monsieur the Governor caused him to be appre- 
hended; [109] and, after having been convicted of 
so foul a treachery, he was condemned to death, and 
delivered into the hands of his own people for execu- 
tion. They bethought themselves first of the salva- 
tion of his soul: then they fastened him to the pillory 
erected in front of the French fort, where a Huron 
_drew near, armed with a hatchet, who said to him: 
“Thou deservest death, for having betrayed our 
friends and our allies.’’ ‘‘It is true,’’ replied the 
culprit; ‘‘ kill me.’’ The Huron then dealt upon his 
head a blow with the hatchet, which did not finish 
him; repeating it three or four times, he was put to 


222 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 36 


mais difons deux mots de nos pauures Chreftiens 
conduits au pais des feux & des flammes, nous n’en 
{cauons encor que peu de chofe, mais ce peu eft bien 
remarquable. 

Deux Hurds captifs, échappés des mains des Iro- 
quois, ayas veu les horribles tourmens qu’on a fait 
fouffrir 4 ces pauures victimes, nous ont comblé de 
douleur & de ioye. IIs difent, que ces bons Neo- 
phytes chantoient les loitianges de Dieu, au milieu 
des fammes; qu’il fembloit que le Ciel, fur lequel 
ils iettoient incefsiment les yeux, leur dénoit plus 
de cotentemét [110] & de plaifir, que les feux ne leur 
caufoiét de douleurs & de tourmés, mais ils exaltent 
fur tout vn nommé Iofeph Onaharé, quelques-vns ont 
dit qu'il meritoit la palme du martyre, car en effet, 
il a fouffert pour Iefus-Chrift, & voicy cément. 

Ce Ieune homme depuis quelque-temps, ne regar- 
doit plus les Iroquois que comme les ennemys de la 
foy, & comme les deftructeurs de la Religion Chre- 
{tienne, il ne portoit les armes contre eux qu’en veué 
de conferuer l’Eglife, ot il auoit pris naiffance en 
Iefus-Chrift, il s’eftoit refolu de fouffrir & de mourir 
conftamment pour fa querelle, c’eft pourquoy fe 
voiant pris & garotté, il luy rendit mille loiianges, le 
remercia de luy auoir donné la foy & le Baptefme, 
pria tout haut en face de tous fes ennemis, donna 
courage a fes camarades, les exhortant de fouffrir les 
tourmens, qui leurs eftoient preparés, comme des 
enfans de Dieu, a qui le Ciel eftoit ouuert. Les 
Iroquois luy deffendét de prier Dieu, & d’animer fes 
gens. Il les regarde d’vn vifage affuré, il les voit 
armés de fer, de feux, de flames, de coufteaux, de 
haches toutes rouges, il fe moque d’eux & de [111] 


b 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 P 223 


death. Such was the reward of treachery.” But 
let us say a few words respecting our poor Christians 
who were led away to the country of fire and flames. 
We know as yet but little of the matter; but that 
little is very remarkable. 

Two Huron captives, escaped from the hands of 
the Iroquois, having been witnesses of the horrible 
torments which they made these poor victims suffer, 
have filled us with both grief and joy. They tell us 
that these good Neophytes chanted the praises of 
God in the midst of the flames; that it seemed as if 
Heaven, toward which they cast unceasingly their 
eyes, had afforded them more satisfaction [110] and 
delight than the fire had caused them pain and 
anguish. But they extol, above all, one named 
Joseph Onaharé; some of them say that he deserved 
the martyr’s palm, for indeed he suffered for Jesus 
Christ; and let us see how. 

That Young man had, for some time past, looked 
upon the Iroquois as nothing more than enemies of 
the faith and destroyers of the Christian Religion. 
He carried arms against them with the object only of 
preserving the Church in which he had been born in 
Jesus Christ; he had made the resolution to suffer 
and die with constancy for his cause. For this 
reason, finding himself a prisoner, and bound, he 
rendered Christ a thousand praises; thanked him for 
having bestowed on him the faith and Baptism; 
prayed loudly, in the face of all his enemies; and 
imparted courage to his comrades, exhorting them 
to suffer the torments which had been prepared for 
them as children of God, to whom Heaven was open. 
The Iroquois forbade him to pray to God, or to 
encourage his people. He looked upon them with 


224 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35. 


leurs tourmens, il continué fa priere, ce qui iette ces 
barbares dans vne telle rage qu’ils refolurent de le 
tourmenter d’vne facd nouuelle, s'il ne ceffoit d’inuo- 
quer fon Dieu, ils le martyriferent trois iours, & trois 
nuits durant, & iamais ne purent l’empefcher de 
chanter les loiianges de fon Seigneur, & de fon 
maif{tre: ils luy difoient, en fe moquant, ce que les 
Iuifs obiectoient au Fils de Dieu, demande fecours 4 
celuy que tu inuoque; dis luy qu'il te vienne déli- 
urer: mais ce Ieune homme, méprifant leur fureur, 
remercioit Dieu de la grace qu’il luy faifoit d’endu- 
rer comme vn Chreftien, & non céme vn fimple 
Sauuage. Enfin il l’honora iufques au dernier fouf- 
pir, & ceux qui ont affifté aces grades fouffrances, 
difent qu’ils ne fgauent lequel des deux a paru plus 
eftonnant 4 leurs yeux, ou la rage, & la grandeur des. 
tourmens, ou la conftance & la generofité du Patient. 
Comme on eftoit fur l’impreffion de ce Chapitre, on 
areceu vne lettre, apportée par le dernier vaiffeau 
venu de ces contrées, qui parle en ces termes a vn 
Pere qui en eft retourné depuis peu. 

Voicy des nouuelles de voftre pauure Iofeph. Vn 
Ieune Huron fon grand amy, [112] aiant efté pris 
auec luy, & receu la vie des Iroquois, qui luy auoient 
donné toute liberté dans leurs Bourgades, s’eft fauué, 
& nous a rapporté ce qui fuit. N’eftant point fuf- 
pect aux Iroquois qui m’auoiét donné la vie, ie trou- 
uay moien de monter fur 1’echaffaut, ot on tourmentoit 
Iofeph Onaharé, & de luy parler vn peu de temps, il 
me dit ces paroles. Si iamais m6 cher amy tu 
retourne au pais des Algdéquins, affure les que les 
Iroquois auec tous leurs tourmens, n’ont peu m’ar- 
racher la priere de la bouche, ny la foy de mon coeur; 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 225 


a steadfast countenance; he saw them armed with 
iron, fire, flame, knives, and red-hot hatchets. But 
he laughed at them and [111] their tortures; he con- 
tinued in prayer, which so enraged the barbarians 
that they determined to torture him in some new 
way, if he did not cease to invoke his God. They 
put him to martyrdom for three days and three nights, 
and were never able to make him cease from singing 
the praises of his Lord and master. They uttered to 
him, in mockery, the reproach of the Jews against 
the Son of God: ‘‘ Ask help from him whom thou 
invokest; tell him to come and deliver thee.’’ But 
this Young man, despising their fury, thanked God 
for the grace he had given him to suffer as a Chris- 
tian, and not asa common Savage. In short, he paid 
him honor to the last breath; and those who looked 
on at these great sufferings, said that they did not 
know which of the two appeared to them the more 
astonishing,—the violence and intensity of the tor- 
ments, or the constancy and magnanimity of the 
Sufferer. While this last Chapter was on the press 
a letter was brought, by the latest vessel that had 
come from those countries, to a Father who had 
lately returned thence, couched in these terms: 
“Here is news concerning your poor Joseph. A 
Young Huron, his great friend, [112] having been 
made a prisoner with him,—but whose life was 
spared by the Iroquois, who had given him full 
liberty within their Villages,— made his escape, and 
reported to us what follows. ‘ Unsuspected by the 
Iroquois, who had granted me life, I found means to 
mount the scaffold on which they were torturing 
Joseph Onaharé, and talked with him a little while. 
He said these words to me: ‘‘ If ever, my dear friend, 


226 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


Dis leur que ie fuis mort auec plaifir dans 1’efperance 
d’aller bien toft au Ciel. En effect adioutoit ce Ieune 
Huron, il ne ceffa de prier & de loiier Dieu dans fes 
tourmens qui durerét trois iours entiers, & comme 
cette grande trouppe de Bourreaux le tourmentoient 
dauantage pource qu’il prioit, luy au lieu d’arrefter 
fes prieres pour arrefter fes tourmens, les redoubloit 
dauantage, leuant fouuent les yeux vers le Ciel. Ce 
{pectacle me comblant de douleur & me tirant les 
larmes des yeux. Il me demanda fi i’eftois mefcon- 
tent de fon bon-heur; ne m’attendris point [113] par 
tes larmes, me difoit-il, car ie t’affeure, qu’encor que 
ie fouffre beaucoup en mon corps, mon ame n’eft 
point trifte, ce feroit bien pour vn neant que ie m’at- 
trifterois, puis que ie fuis fi proche de la maifon de 
celuy quia tout fait. Voila, dit le Pere, dont nous 
auons receu la lettre, ce qu’on nous a raconté de 
nouueau de ce ieune homme qui vous a efté fi cher. 

Sortant de Saint Iofeph il fit de foy-mefme, & fans 
qu’aucun l’in{truifit, vne Confeffion generale depuis 
fon Baptefme, & paffant aux Trois riuieres il fe 
confeffa & fe communia encor auec fes camarades. 
Dieu le difpofoit 4 vne fi fainte & fi glorieufe mort. 

Ce genereux Athlete eftoit natif d’vne petit nation 
Algonquine affez peu efloignée du pays des Hurons. 
Ayant ouy parler de noftre creance, & voyant que 
fes compatriotes ne la gouttoient pas; il defcendit aux 
Trois riuieres, & de 14 il vint iufques A Saint Iofeph 
a Sillery, ott ayant veu la pieté des Chreftiens, il fut 
touché, fe fit inftruire, & en fuite demanda & obtint 
le Baptefme. Nous l’auions tenu vn an dans noftre 
maifon, & comme il fe faifoit grand il choifit vn tres- 
bon Chreftien nommé [114] Charles Kariskatifitch 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 T eee 


thou returnest to the country of the Algonquins, 
assure them that the Iroquois, with all their tortures, 
have not succeeded in stifling the prayer on my lips, 
nor the faith in my heart. Tell them that I died 
gladly, in the hope of going very soon to Heaven.’’ 
Indeed,’ added the Young Huron, ‘ he did not cease 
to pray, and to praise God, amid tortures that lasted 
three whole days; and, as this great troop of Butchers 
tormented him the more, because he prayed, he, 
instead of desisting from his prayers, redoubled 
them, often lifting his eyes to Heaven,—the spec- 
tacle filling me with grief, and drawing tears from 
my eyes. He asked meif I felt sad at his happiness. 
** Do not unnerve me [113] by thy tears,’’ he said to 
me; ‘‘for I assure thee that although I suffer much 
in my body, my soul is not at all sad; it would cer- 
tainly be for a mere nothing if I were afflicted,—I, 
who am so near the house of him who made all 
things.’’’ See,’’ says the Father from whom we 
received the letter, ‘‘ what has been recently told us 
concerning that young man who was so dear to you.’’ 

When he left Saint Joseph, he made—of his own 
accord, and without any one instructing him to do 
so—a general Confession, dating from the time of 
his Baptism; and going on to Three rivers, he again 
confessed and received communion with his com- 
trades. God was preparing him for so holy and 
glorious a death. 

This noble Champion was a native of a petty Al- 
gonquin nation, not far distant from the country of 
the Hurons. Having heard of our belief, and seeing 
that his fellow-countrymen had no relish for it, he 
went down to Three rivers, and from that place came 
as far as the mission of Saint Joseph at Sillery,— 


228 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 365. 


pour fon Pere, qui le receut & l’adopta comme fon 
fils, & le maria A vne ieune fille Chreftienne; il eftoit 
d’vn naturel prompt, vif & hardy, & fila Foy n’eut 
efté fortement enracinée dans fon ame, il y a long- 
temps qu’il auroit quitté la demeure & la compagnie 
des Chreftiens, veu mefmement que fes parens firent 
tous leurs efforts pour le faire retourner en fon pays, 
iufques a luy deleguer vn fien coufin que noftre 
Neophite méprifa, voyant le peu d’amour qu’il auoit 
pour la Religion Chreftienne. 

Vne année deuant fa mort, eftant allé en guerre 
auec vne troupe d’Algonquins dot le chef n’eftoit pas 
baptifé, cOme ils approchoient du pays de leurs 
ennemis, leur Capitaine voulut confulter le Demon 
pour fgauoir de luy quelle route ils prendroient, afin 
de faire rencontre 4 leur auantage: Noftre lofeph 
s’y oppofa, difant que la Loy de Iefus-Chrift ne 
permettoit aucune communication auec les mauuais 
efprits; mais comme il n’eftoit pas le plus fort, on 
dreffe le Tabernacle, le Sorcier, ou pluftoft le Ion- 
gleur, y entre, il l’ébranle, & le fait trembler d’vne 
fagon eftrange, il fait fes inuocations, en forte [115] 
que le Demon, ou pluftoft le charlatan mefme chan- 
geant de voix, & s’adreffant au Chreftien, luy dit 
d’vn ton plein de menaces: D’ot vient que tu ne 
veux pas qu’on me confulte? Tu fais du hardy, & 
tu n’es qu’vn fuperbe. Tout le monde tremble a 
cette voix. Le Chreftien repart fans s’eftonner: Tu 
veux jetter la peur dedans mon ame, ie ne crains ny 
toy, ny tes menaces, ny les Iroquois; ie crains & 
i’honore celuy qui a tout fait, c’eft mon Maiftre & le 
tien; tu n’as de pouuoir qu’autant qu’il t’en accorde. 
C’eft moi, dit le Demon, qui ay tout fait. Tues vn 


E—— OO ——<<<— rl ee 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 * 229: 


where, having witnessed the piety of the Christians, 
he was impressed, placed himself under instruction, 
and, in due course, solicited and obtained Baptism. 
We retained him for a year, in our house; and as he 
was reaching manhood, he selected a very good Chris- 
tian, named [114] Charles Kariskatisitch, for his 
Father, who received and adopted him as his son, 
and married him to a young Christian girl. He was 
naturally quick, vivacious, and daring; and, if the 
Faith had not been firmly rooted in his soul, he 
would long ago have left the abode and companion- 
ship of Christians,—especially since his relatives 
exerted all their efforts to induce him to return to 
his own country, even to sending to him, as ambas- 
sador, his own cousin, whom our Neophyte scorned 
when he saw how little love the latter felt toward 
the Christian Religion. 

A year before his death,—having gone on the 
war-path with a band of Algonquins, the chief of 
which was not baptized,—as they drew near to the 
country of their enemies, their Captain wished to 
consult the Demon, to ascertain from him what route 
they should take in order to meet with success in 
their venture. Our Joseph opposed this, saying that 
the Law of Jesus Christ did not allow of any com- 
munication with wicked spirits; but as he was not the 
most influential, the Tabernacle was erected; the Sor- 
cerer —or rather, the Juggler—entered it, shook it, 
and made it tremble after a strange fashion. His 
invocations he performed in such a manner, [115] 
that the Demon,— or rather, the charlatan himself,— 
changing his voice, and addressing the Christian, 
said to him in a threatening tone: ‘‘ Whence comes. 
it that thou art not willing that I should be 


230 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 85 


impofteur, replique noftre Iofeph, monftre tes forces, 
ie te deffie, tu voudrois m’ébranler, mais tu n'y per- 
dras que tes peines. Le Demon demeura confus, & 
no{tre Chreftien ne laiffa pas de reffentir comme vn 
coup qui luy fut donné au cofté, qui l’empefcha trois 
iours durant de refpirer, ne fe mouuant qu’auec 
peine, cela le furprit, mais ne l’abattit pas, il difoit 
en fon coeur; I] n’importe quand ie deurois mourir, 
ie ne cederay iamais au Manits. Enfin s’eftant forte- 
mét recommandé a Dieu, le mal le quitta en vn 
in{tant comme il l’auoit pris en vn moment. 

[116] Quelqu’vn de fes camarades voyant qu’il ne 
plioit point nonob{tat fa douleur, luy fit ce reproche; 
Ie fuis marry d’auoir entrepris ce voyage auec toy, 
ie voudrois que nous fuffions encor dans les cabanes 
d’ott nous fommes partis, ie n’en fortirois iamais en 
ta compagnie, puis que tu ne fais pas comme les 
autres, & que tu n’obeys point A noftre Capitaine. 
Hé quoy donc, fit noftre Chreftien, nous fommes- 
nous mis en campagne pour confulter le Demon? nos 
parens & nos alliez nous ont-ils dit a noftre depart; 
Allez dreffer des Tabernacles, & faites reuiure les 
anciennes fuperftitions que nous auons quittées? ne 
nous ont-ils pas recommandé de couper les bras & les 
jambes a4 nos ennemis, afin que nous puiffions prier 
Dieu, & que nous puiffions eftre inftruits en repos? 
Nous cherchons des hommes, & non des Demons, 
c’eft en ce point que j’obeiray, & non pas en vos 
jongleries. 

Comme ils eftoient dans cette contrafte, ils apper- 
ceurent deux Iroquois, ils quittent le combat de la 
langue, ils partent comme des levriers d’attache; 
nof{tre Iofeph éleue fon coeur a Dieu, & courant 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 » 23k 


consulted? ‘Thou actest the part of the bold, and 
thou art but an arrogant man.’’ All trembled at that. 
voice. The Christian, quite undismayed, replied: 
‘““Thou wishest to put fear into my soul; I fear 
neither thee, nor thy threats, nor the Iroquois; I 
fear and honor him who made all things. He is my 
Master, and thine; thou hast only as much power as. 
he grants thee.’”’ ‘‘It is I,’’ said the Demon, ‘‘ who 
created all things.’’ ‘Thou art an impostor,’’ 
replied our Joseph; ‘‘show me thy power; I defy 
thee. Thou wouldst unsettle me; but thou wilt only 
waste thy trouble.’’ The Demon, abashed, remained 
silent; our Christian, however, received what seemed 
like a blow upon his side, which for three days im- 
peded his breathing, every movement causing suffer- 
ing. This surprised, but did not deject him; for he 
said in his heart, ‘‘ It matters not; though I were to 
die, I will never yield to the Manitou.’’ At length, 
being earnestly commended to God, the trouble left 
him, as it had seized him, in an instant. 

[116] One of his comrades—perceiving that he 
did not give way, in spite of his sufferings—re- 
proached him after this manner: ‘‘ I repent of having 
undertaken this journey with thee; I would we were 
again in the cabins whence we came; I would never 
have left them in thy company, since thou actest not 
as others, and obeyest not our Captain.’’ ‘‘ Hal 
what then?’’ asked our Christian; ‘‘ have we taken 
the field in order to consult the Demon? Did our 
relatives and allies tell us at our departure, ‘ Go, and 
set up the Tabernacles, and revive the old supersti- 
tions that we have abandoned?’ Did they not. 
charge us to cut off the arms and legs of our enemies, 
that we may be able to pray to God and be instructed 


232 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 35 


comme la foudre, paffa bien-toft fes camarades: [117] 
les Iroquois fe fentans pourfuiuis jettét leurs robes 
par terre, & fuiét la mort plus vifte que la tempefte; 
mais noftre foldat Chreftien attrappe bien-toft celuy 
des deux qui auoit moins d’haleine, il luy donna vn 
grand coup d’efpée dans le flanc, & fans s’arrefter 
pourfuiuit fon compagnon: mais comme il auoit trop 
dauantage, il ne le pfit attrapper; Retournans fur fes 
pas, il rencontre le forcier, & luy dit, hé bien ton 
demon t’auoit-il dit que tu te trouuerois des derniers 
a la courfe? fi j’euffe efté femme, il m’auroit fait 
peur, mais ie ne crains ny toy nyluy, ny tous vos 
fortileges. Paffons outre. 

Le mal-heur arriué par la trahifon dont nous 
venons de parler, ne fut pas feul, Charles Kariskati- 
fitch, qui auoit adopté pour fils noftre Iofeph, retour- 
nant de Tadouffac 4 Kebec dans vne chalouppe 
chargée de Chreftiens, fut accueilly d’vne fi grande 
tempeite, qu’il fit naufrage dans le grand fleuue, & 
pas vn n’en réchappa, ces deux coups de foudres 
lancez fur la pauure Eglife de S. lofeph ont caufé 
vne grandiffime defolation. I1 faut confeffer que la 
Foy eft vn grand appuy, fi elle n’euft regné dans les 
[118] coeurs des femmes veufues, & des filles orphe- 
lines, & des enfans abandonnez, on n’auroit entendu 
que des cris, & des hurlemens de barbares, & des 
lamentations de gens defefperez, & on ne vit que des 
benedictions, & des loiianges; ces pauures creatures 
Ala verité bien abattués, mais remplies d’vne fainte 
refignation aux volontez de Dieu, fe vindrent ietter 
aux pieds de nos Autels, les meres prians pour leurs 
enfans, les femmes pour leurs maris, & les enfans 
pour leurs peres. Toutes fe confefferent & fe 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 233 


in peace? We are seeking men, and not Demons; 
in this I shall be obedient, and not in your jug- 
gleries.’’ 

While thus contesting, they perceived two Iro- 
quois; the battle of tongues was abandoned, and 
they started out like greyhounds from the leash. 
Our Joseph lifted his heart to God; and running, 
fast as lightning, soon outstripped his comrades. 
[117] The Iroquois, seeing that they were pursued, 
threw their clothing on the ground, and fled from 
death more quickly than from the storm. But our 
Christian soldier, soon outrunning that one of the two 
who had the least breath, struck him sharply in the 
side with a javelin, and without stopping, continued 
to pursue this man’s companion; but, as the latter 
had too great a start, he failed to take him. Retrac- 
ing his steps, he met the sorcerer, and said to him: 
** Well, did thy demon tell thee that thou wouldst be 
found among the last in the race? Had I beena 
woman, I might have been afraid of him; but I fear 
neither thee, nor him, nor all thy spells.’’ Let us 
proceed. 

The unfortunate event brought about by the trea- 
son of which we have just spoken did not stand 
alone. Charles Kariskatisitch, who had adopted our 
Joseph as a son, while returning from Tadoussac to 
Kebec in a shallop laden with Christians, was met 
by so heavy a storm as to be wrecked in the great 
river, not one escaping.® These two bolts, striking 
the poor Church of St. Joseph, threw us into the deep- 
est affliction. It must be admitted that the Faith is 
a great support. Had it not reigned in the [118] 
hearts of widowed women and orphaned girls, naught 
would have been heard but cries, howls of barba- 


234 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35. 


communierent pour le foulagement de leurs ames. 
Cum occideret eos querebant cum. Plus Dieu les afflige, 
& plus ils le cherchent, qu’il foit beny A iamais dans 
les temps & dans 1’eternité. 

Nous pourrids rapporter quantité de bds fentimés 
& de bdnes actions des enfans de ces nouuelles 
Eglifes, mais le peu que nous auons dit, fuffira pour 
exciter ceux qui entendront parler de noftre defola- 
tion, de nous fecourir au Ciel & en la terre. Ces 
Eglifes font nées dedans les Croix, elles ont engendré 
leurs enfans dans les fouffrances, dans les perfecu- 
tions, dans les epidimies, dans les famines; dedans les 
guerres, elles ne fe nourriffent que de larmes [119] 
& que d’angoiffes, elles ne font quafi plus compofées 
que de veufues, & que d’orphelins, & fi ie parlois en 
Sauuage, ie dirois qu’il ne refte plus que des ombres, 
que les viuans font allez au Ciel. Ie ne puis apres 
tout defefperer, la primitiue Eglife eftoit remplie de 
bannis, de gens faits efclaues, de condamnez aux 
feux, aux roués, aux mines, aux efcuries publiques, 
& Dieu a tiré de ces baffeffes les Tiares & les Mitres, 
les Sceptres & les Couronnes, qui ne trouueront leur 
affermiffement folide que dans 1’eftabliffement du 
Royaume de IESVS-CHRIST, Dieu vueille donner 
la penfée & le zele aux Princes Chreftiens de 
l’eftablir en ce nouueau monde. 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 * 235 


rians, and lamentations of a despairing people; but 
we witnessed nothing but thanksgivings and praises. 
These poor creatures—of a truth, laid low indeed, 
but filled with holy resignation to the will of God— 
came to throw themselves at the foot of our Altars, 
mothers praying for their children, wives for their 
husbands, and children for their fathers. All 
confessed and received communion, for the comfort 
of their souls. Cwm occideret eos, querebant eum. ‘The 
more God afflicted them, the more they clung to 
him. May he be blessed forever, through time and 
eternity. 

We could recount a multitude of holy sentiments 
and good actions of the children of these new 
Churches; but the little we have said will suffice to 
arouse those who shall hear the story of our affliction 
to assist usin Heaven andonearth. These Churches 
were born amid Crosses: they have begotten their 
children amid sufferings, persecutions, epidemics, 
famines, and wars; they have fed on tears [119] and 
anguish. They have almost no other members than 
widows and orphans; and, if I were to speak as a 
Savage, I would say that there remains naught else 
than phantoms, the living having gone to Heaven. I 
cannot, after all, despair. The primitive Church 
was filled with exiles, and with people reduced to 
slavery, or condemned to the flames, to the wheel, to 
the mines, to the public stables; and God has drawn 
from such abasement Tiaras and Miters, Scepters and 
Crowns, which will only find their lasting solidity in 
the establishment of the Kingdom of JESUS 
CHRIST. May God be pleased to give to Christian 
Princes the purpose and the zeal to establish it in 
this new world. 


236 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


[120] CHAPITRE XI. 


DES SAUUAGES DES TROIS RIUIERES & DES ATTI- 
CAMEGUES. 


PRES le départ des vaiffeaux fur la fin de 
A l’année 1648. plufieurs Sauuages de diuerfes 
nations s’ef{tans raffemblés aux Trois riuieres, 
tindrent vn confeil entr’eux, dans lequel ils conclu- 
rent que les articles fuiuans feroient foigneufement 
obferuez. 

1. Qu’on choifiroit l’vn des plus feruens Chre- 
{tiens de cette nouuelle Eglife, pour fonder les 
volontez de tous les Sauuages qui fe voudroient habi- 
tuer en cét endroit, touchant leur bonne ou mauuaife 
inclination pour la Foy & pour la Priere comme ils 
parlent. 

2. Que tous ceux qui voudroient faire profeffion 
du Chriftianifme fe fofiimettroient aux peines qui 
leurs feroient impofées s’ils contreuenoient aux Loix 
de Iefus-Chrift & de fon Eglife. 

3. Que l’yurognerie feroit bannie & [121] exilée 
de leurs cabanes, & que fi quelqu’vn tomboit dans 
ce crime on le mettroit en prifon pour le faire jefiner 
quelques jours, non pas au pain & al’eau, mais a 
l’eau toute pure, fans autre aliment. 

4. Que les Apoftats, s’il s’en trounoit aux trois 
riuieres, ou les infidelles endurcis, & rebelles a la 
Foy ne feroient point protegez dans le fort des 
Francois. 


= 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 237 


[120] CHAPTER XI. 


OF THE SAVAGES AT THREE RIVERS, AND THE ATTI- 
CAMEGUES. 


FTER the departure of the ships, toward the 

A end of the year 1648, many Savages of differ- 

ent nations, being assembled at Three rivers, 

held a council among themselves, at which it was 

resolved that the following articles should be care- 
fully observed. 

1. There shall be selected from this new Church 
one of the most fervent Christians, for the purpose 
of sounding the wills of all Savages who might desire 
to settle in this place, to ascertain whether or not 
they are favorably inclined toward the Faith, and, 
as they say, ‘‘ toward the Prayer.”’ 

2. That all those who wish to make profession of 
Christianity, shall submit themselves to the penalties 
which would be imposed should they transgress the 
Laws of Jesus Christ and of his Church. 

3. That drunkenness shall be banished, and [121] 
driven out of their cabins; and that, should any one 
fall into this crime, he shall be placed in prison, and 
made to fast for several days,—not on bread and 
water, but on water only, without other nourishment. 

4. That Apostates, should there be any in three 
rivers, or hardened infidels, and rebels against the 
Faith, shall not find shelter within the French fort. 

As a consequence of these conclusions, all the infi- 
del Savages were sounded. They replied that they 


238 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


En fuitte de ces conclufions on fonda tous les Sau- 
uages infideles. Ils répondirent qu’ils honnoroient 
la priere, & qu’ils vouloient prefter l’oreille a la 
doctrine de Iefus-Chrift; il n’y en eut qu’vn feul qui 
rebuta{t la propofition qu’on luy fit de fe conuertir: il 
y auoit long-temps qu’il frequentoit les Chreftiens, 
mais le demon luy auoit mis fi auant dans la tefte qu’il 
mouroit bien-toft s’il fe faifoit baptifer, que la crainte 
d’vne mort temporelle 1’a-jetté dans vn mal-heur 
eternel; car en fuyant les Hiroquois il eft tombé 
entre leurs mains, & fi Dieu ne luy a fait vne grace 
miraculeufe il a paffé d’vn feu elementaire dans le 
feu des enfers: on remarqua auec eftonnement que 
tous ceux qui l’accompagnoient fe fauuerent, & que 
luy feul & fa famille furent la proye [122] de ces 
Anthropophages. 

Pour les Chreftiens, leur ferueur fut fi grande, que 
fi quelqu’vn auoit contreuenu aux ordres fufdits, il 
fe venoit prefenter luy-mefme pour eftre emprifonné 
ou pour receuoir en public la correction ou le chafti- 
ment de fa faute; Dieu veiiille que cette ardeur dure 
long-temps. 

Le courage & la force d’vn Chreftien en la Foy, 
nous donnera fujet de parler de la fin affez mal- 
heureufe de deux fauuages: vne efcoiiade de 25. ou 
30. hommes eftoient allez en marchandifes vers la 
nation des s8taskot¥’emisek, ce font peuples qui ne 
defcendent quafi jamais vers les Francois, leur langue 
eft meflée de 1’Algonquine & de la Montagnefe, ces 
marchans eftans munis d’armes, partie pour fe 
deffendre, partie pour en vendre 4 ces peuples, l’vn 
d’eux voyant que fa poudre eftoit humide, l’expofe 
aux rayons du Soleil pour la faire fecher, l’autre 


$i 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 * 239 


honored the prayer, and that they would lend ear to 
the doctrine of Jesus Christ. There was only one 
who refused the proposal that he should become 
converted. He had, for a long time past, associated 
with the Christians there, but the demon had so 
deeply planted in his mind the idea that he would 
die soon if he were baptized, that the fear of a tem- 
poral death entailed an eternal misfortune; for, in 
fleeing from the Hiroquois, he fell into their hands, 
and, unless God worked on him a miracle of grace, 
he passed from an earthly fire into the fire of hell. 
It was observed with awe that all who accompanied 
him were saved, and that he alone, and his family 
were the prey [122] of those Anthropophagi. 

In regard to the Christians, their fervor was so 
great, that, if any one transgressed the above-men- 
tioned orders, he would come, and deliver himself 
tp to be imprisoned, or to receive in public the repri- 
mand or chastisement of his fault. God grant that 
this fervor be lasting. 

The courage and strength of a Christian in the 
Faith will afford us reason to speak of the very 
sad end of two savages. A squad of 25 or 30 men 
had gone, for trade, to the people of the Outaouko- 
twemiwek; these are tribes who scarcely ever go 
down to the French settlements; their language is 
a mixture of Algonquin and Montagnais. These 
traders being provided with arms,— partly for self- 
defense, partly for sale to this people,— one of them, 
observing that his powder was damp, exposed it to the 
trays of the Sun in order to dry it. Another, wish- 
ing to apprise the Savages of the country of their 
arrival, fired a shot from an arquebus, at a few steps 
from the barrel containing the powder; this caught 


240 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


voulant donner aduis de leur venué aux Sauuages du 
pays, tira vn coup d’arquebufe 4 quelques pas du 
baril ott eftoit cette poudre, qui prit feu en vn mo- 
ment, & brufla trois Sauuages en forte qu’on eut dit 
qu’ils auoient paffé au trauers d’vn grand [123] incen- 
die, tant ils eftoient noirs & défigurez. On les porte 
auffi-tof{t dans les cabanes des infidelles, les charlatans 
ou les jongleurs, comme les plus experts medecins 
du pays, fe prefentent pour conjurer leur mal, par 
des cris, & par des chanfons & par des tambours plus 
capables de tuer vn malade que de le guerir: deux 
condefcendirent 4 leur fuper{tition, mais le troifiéme, 
nommé Barthelemy Chigs’nabik, ne voulut jamais 
qu’on le foufflaft, ny qu’on remplit fes oreilles de 
leurs hurlemens. On luy dit que c’eft fait de fa vie, 
fices medecins ne le penfent 4 leur mode: I] n’im- 
porte, répond-il, la vie de l’ame eft preferable 4 la 
vie du corps; les infideles le prient d’auoir compaffion 
de foy-mefme, ils font approcher les Iongleurs: il les 
rebute, proteftant qu’il n’aura jamais recours au 
demon. Ceux qui faifoient profeffion de l’aimer le 
conjurent de vouloir éprouuer leurs anciens remedes, 
pour éuiter la mort. Ie mourray fans peine, repart- 
il, & ie ne puis fans peché obeyr 4 vos Iongleurs, ne 
m’en parlez plus, ie fuis Chreftien; j’ay toutes ces 
{uperftitions en horreur. En fin ce bon Neophyte 
eft rechapé auec la joye & le contentement [124] des 
Chreftiens, & les deux autres moururent incontinent 
apres le tintamarre des tambours & des hurlemens de 
ces jongleurs, ce qui donna bien de 1’eftonnement, 
& de la confufion aux infideles. 

Si-toft que ce braue Neophyte fut de retour aux 
Trois riuieres, il fe tranfporta 4 la chappelle pour 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 241 


fire in an instant, and burned three Savages so 
severely that you would have thought they had passed 
through a great [123] fire, so blackened and dis- 
figured were they. They were taken at once into 
the cabins of the infidels. The charlatans or jug- 
glers, as being the most expert physicians of the 
country, offered to charm away their hurts by cries, 
songs, and drums, more suited to kill than to cure a 
sick man. Two submitted to their superstitions. 
The third, named Barthelemy Chigounabik, would 
never consent to be blown upon, or that he should 
be deafened with their howls. They said that it was 
all over with him if these medicine-men did not treat 
him after their fashion. ‘‘It matters not,’’ he 
replied; ‘‘the life of the soul is to be preferred 
to that of the body.’’ The infidels besought him 
to have compassion on himself. They called the 
Jugglers; he repelled them, protesting that he would 
never have recourse to the demon. Those who pro- 
fessed to love him conjured him to consent to a trial 
of their old-time remedies, in order to escape death. 
“‘T shall die willingly,’’ he replied; ‘‘ and I cannot, 
without sin, obey your Jugglers. Speak to me no 
more of it. I ama Christian; I hold all these super- 
stitions in abhorrence.’’ In the end, this good Neo- 
phyte recovered, to the joy and gratification [124] of 
the Christians, while the other two died immediately 
after all the din of the drums, and the howls of the 
jugglers, which caused much astonishment and 
discomfiture among the infidels. 

As soon as this brave Neophyte returned to Three 
rivers, he repaired to the chapel to thank God for 
having preserved him in so great a danger. His 
fervency in upholding the Faith made him respected; 


242 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 35 


remercier Dieu de l’auoir conferué dans vn fi grand 
danger, fa ferueur 4 maintenir la Foy le rend recom- 
mandable, & noftre Seigneur prend plaifir de le 
confoler dans les troubles de cette miferable vie. 

Vn Sauuage difant vn iour en la prefence de quel- 
que Pere de noftre Compagnie, qu’il fentoit depuis 
quelque temps le poids d’vne trifteffe qui luy eftoit 
onereufe: il faut, dit Barthelemy, que tu ne croye 
pas fi fortement en Dieu, que doit croire vn homme 
qui eft baptifé; car fi ta Foy eftoit viue, rien ne te 
pourroit attrifter: jamais ie n’eftois content, deuant 
que ie fuffe Chreftien, j’auois toufiours quelque ennuy 
ou quelque trifteffe, mais maintenant que ie puis 
aller au Ciel, & que les peines de cette vie nous font 
profitables, rien ne m’attrifte, [125] vne feule chofe 
me donne du mécontentement, c’eft de voir quel- 
ques-vns de mes compatriotes peu affectionnez A la 
Foy & a la Priere. 

Voicy vn raifonnement de Sauuage que ie pourrois 
appeller Theologique, pource qu'il eft fondé fur les 
principes de la Foy. Ce braue Neophyte ayant 
appris les fouffrances & la mort du Pere Iean de Bre- 
beuf & de nos autres Peres maffacrez par les Hiro- 
quois, en tiroit ces belles conclufions, il me femble 
qu’il ne faut point s’attrifter de la mort de ces bons 
Peres, leurs tourmens font paffez, & leur joye ne 
finira jamais, s’ils nous aymoient en terre ils nous 
ayment encore au Ciel; car la bonté ne fe perd pas 
en ce pays-la; s’ils procuroient le falut des Sauuages 
en ce monde, ils ne font pas pour le negliger en 1’au- 
tre, ou la charité ne diminué jamais: fi plus on eft 
grand & plus on fait de bien nous n’auons rien perdu 
par leur abfence. Pour moy ie les veux imiter, 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 _ 


and our Lord was pleased to comfort him in the 
troubles of this miserable life. 

A Savage saying, one day, in the presence ofa 
Father of our Society, that he had felt, for some time 
past, the pressure of a sorrow, which was burden- 
some, Barthelemy said: ‘‘It must be that thou 
believest not so firmly in God as a man ought who is 
baptized; for if thy Faith be living, nothing can 
cause thee sadness. I was never happy before I 
became a Christian,—I had always some burden or 
some sorrow; but now that I can go to Heaven, and 
that the troubles of this life are profitable to us, noth- 
ing saddens me. [125] One thing only causes me 
displeasure,—it is to see any of my fellow-country- 
men caring little for the Faith and the Prayer.”’ 

Here is a course of reasoning from a Savage, which 
I could call Theological, for it is founded on the prin- 
ciples of the Faith. This brave Neophyte, having 
been informed of the sufferings and death of Father 
Jean de Brebeuf, and of our other Fathers, murdered 
by the Hiroquois, drew from them these admirable 
conclusions: ‘‘It seems to me that we should not 
mourn over the death of these good Fathers; their 
torments are over, and their joy will never end. If 
they loved us on earth, they will still love us in 
Heaven, for goodness does not go to ruin in that 
country. If inthis world they labored for the salva- 
tion of the Savages, they are not going to slight 
them in that other, where charity never grows less. 
If one is the greater, the more good he does, we 
have lost nothing by their absence. For myself, I 
desire toimitate them. I find myself in danger from 
our enemies, like them. They could have escaped, 
and I can do so, by shunning the paths along which 


244 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 35 


ie me trouue dans le danger de nos ennemis aufii 
bien qu’eux, ils fe pouuoient fauuer, ie le pourrois 
faire en m’écartant des endroits ott les ennemis font 
leur courfes, ils font demeurez dans le [126] peril 
pour ayder ceux qui ne pouuoient pas fuyr, ils ont 
mieux aymé mourir inftruifant les Sauuages, que de 
fe mettre 4 couuert en les abandonnant; j’en feray 
de mefme, ie mourray pluftoft que de manquer 4 mes 
compatriotes, le feul defir de les fecourir pour leurs 
ames & l’amour que j’ay pour la Foy & pour la 
Priere, me retiendra auprés de ceux qui donnent 
leur vie pour nous. 

Ce bon homme aymoit fi tendrement ceux qui 
expofent leur vie pour noftre Seigneur, qu’il voulut 
qu’vn petit fils que Dieu luy a donné portaft le nom 
d’Ifaac en l’honneur du Pere Ifaac Iogues maffacré 
au pays des Hyroquois. Cét enfant eftant tombé 
malade bien-to{t apres fon Baptefme, il n’en accufa 
point ce Sacrement de vie comme font les infideles, 
il le prend entre fes bras, le porte 4 l’Eglife, luy fait 
le figne de la Croix fur le front auec de1l’eau benitfte, 
le prefente 4 Dieu auec ces paroles; Il eft A toy, 
prends-le, ou me le rends, tu me 1’as donné fais ce 
que tu voudras, tu le peux guerir, ie croy en toy, aye 
pitié de moy; il ne fallut point d’autre medecine 
pour guerir cét enfant, il le remporta plein de vie en 
fa cabane; [127] fa mere s’eftant trouuée fort mal fe 
feruit du mefme remede & s’en trouua tres-bien. 

Le Pere tomba malade incontinent apres, vn Fran- 
gois qui entend la langue des Sauuages l’allant vifiter 
luy demanda quelle penfée il auoit dans fa maladie, 
& file demon ne tachoit point de luy perfuader que 
ce mal prouenoit de fa creance; I] ne l’a pas encore 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 245: 


our enemies proceed. They remained in [126] perils 
that they might assist those who were unable to flee. 
They preferred to die while instructing the Savages, 
rather than to seek shelter by abandoning them. I 
will do the same; I will die rather than fail my fel- 
low-countrymen. ‘This one desire, to aid them for 
the sake of their souls, and the love which I have 
for the Faith and for Prayer, will keep me near 
those who give their lives for us.’’ 

This good man loved so tenderly those who hazard 
their lives for our Lord, that he resolved that a little 
son whom God had given him should take the name 
of Isaac, in honor of Father Isaac Jogues, murdered 
in the country of the Hyroquois. This child had 
fallen sick soon after his Baptism; but he did not 
throw the blame on that Sacrament of life, as the 
infidels do. Hetook him into his arms, brought him 
to the Church, made on his forehead the sign of the 
Cross with holy water, and presented him to God 
with these words: ‘‘ He is thine; take him, or give 
him back to me. Thou didst give him to me; do 
what thou wilt. Thou canst heal him; I believe in 
thee; have mercy on me.’’ No other medicine was 
needed for the healing of that child: he brought him 
back, full of life, into his cabin. [127] His mother, 
being very ill, made use of the same remedy, and 
was quite restored. 

The Father fell ill, immediately afterward. <A 
Frenchman, who understood the language of the 
Savages, asked, while visiting him, what he thought 
of in his sickness, and whether the Demon was not 
trying to persuade him that this sickness proceeded 
from his belief. ‘‘ He has not done so yet,’’ he 
replied; ‘‘ and, when he does, he will gain nothing. 


246 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 35 


fait, répondit-il, & quand il le feroit il n’y gagneroit 
rien; j’ay toufiours deuant les yeux vn certain dif- 
cours que j’ay entendu de la bouche de Noel Nega- 
bamat, qu’on appelle 4 prefent Tekserimat: I’ay 
perdu, me difoit-il, la plus part de mes enfans depuis 
que ie fuis baptifé: ceux qui me reftent font tous 
malades, j’attends leur mort 4 tous momens, il n’y a 
‘iour qu’il ne nous arriue quelque perte, ou quelque 
mal-heur, perdons tout, mais ne perdons point la Foy. 
Ces parolles me font demeurées profondement dans 
l’efprit, Ie dis fouuent a celuy qui a tout fait, ie ne 
veux que la penfée que tu prends de moy, fais tout 
ce que tu voudras, & ie l’agreeray; j’ay deffein, 
ajouftoit-il, de me confeffer & de me communier 
Dimanche prochain, & puis [128] ie ne penferay plus 
a moy: ille fit & guerit; Dieu n’a pas moins d’amour 
pour les fimples que pour les fgauans. 

Ie coucheray en ce lieu vne hiftoire affez remar- 
quable. Vne jeune Algonquine ayant efté prife en 
fon pays, & menée dans le pays des Hyroquois, 
comme elle eftoit affez bien faite, & d’vn bon naturel, 
elle fit rencontre d’vn bon mary, apres huict ou neuf 
ans de captiuité, elle tomba malade, en forte qu’elle 
croyoit que c’eftoit faitde favie. Vne autre captiue, 
nommée Monique l’alla vifiter: Remarquez s’il vous 
plaift en paffant, vn trait de l’adorable prouidence 
du bon Dieu fur fes éleus. Cette Monique eftoit 
aueugle quand elle fut prife, & c’eft vn miracle que 
les Hyroquois qui m’affacrent toutes les vieilles 
femmes & toutes les infirmes qui ne leur peuuent 
rendre aucun feruice pardonnerent 4 vn aueugle: 
mais Dieu la vouloit conferuer pour le falut de plu- 
fieurs ames; elle a efté fort bien inftruite en 1’ Hof- 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 247 


I have always in remembrance a certain discourse 
which I heard from the lips of Noel Negabamat, 
whom they now call Tekwerimat. ‘I have lost,’ he 
said to me, ‘ the greater number of my children since 
I was baptized; those who are left to me are all ill: 
I expect their death at every moment. ‘There is not 
a day when some loss or misfortune does not befall 
us; let us lose all, but let us not lose the Faith.’ 
These words have dwelt deeply in my mind. I say 
often to him who made all things: ‘I desire only 
what thou choosest for me; do whatever thou wilt, 
and I will accept it.’ I intend,’’ added he, ‘“‘to 
confess and receive communion next Sunday; and, 
after that, [128] I will think no more about myself.’’ 
This he did, and recovered. God has not less love 
for the simple than for the wise. 

I will set down here a very remarkable story. A 
young Algonquin woman, seized in her own country, 
and taken to the country of the Hyroquois,— a some- 
what comely person, and of good disposition,— met 
with a good husband. After eight or nine years of 
captivity, she was taken so ill that her life was in 
danger. Another captive, named Monique, went to 
visit her. Observe, if you please, in passing, a fea- 
ture of the adorable providence of the good God over 
his elect. This Monique was blind when she was 
taken prisoner; and it was marvelous that the Hyro- 
quois, who put to death all the old women and the 
infirm, who can be of no use to them, should spare 
one who was blind. But God chose to preserve her 
for the salvation of many souls. She had been very 
well instructed in the Hospital at Kebek; she under- 
stood the doctrine of Jesus Christ, and conversed on 
it with much intelligence and good feeling. God 


248 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


pital de Kebek, elle fcait la doctrine de Iefus-Chrift, 
& en parle tres-bien, & auec beaucoup de bons fenti- 
mens; Dieu luy a rendu, non pas la veué toute 
entiere, mais autant qu’il en faut [129] pour fe con- 
duire, & pour aller confoler les femmes & les filles 
Chreftiennes qui gemiffent comme elle, fous le poids 
d’vne rude captiuité: elle fait de petites affemblées, 
elle inftruit, elle catechife, elle encourage, elle 
enfeigne & fait faire les prieres 4 fes compagnes; en 
vn mot Dieu luy fait faire en ce pays d’horreur & de 
tenebres le meftier d’vn dogique ou d’vn predica- 
teur. Ayant donc appris que la femme dont nous 
voulons parler eftoit malade elle fe tranfporte en fa 
cabane, & luy remet en memoire ce qu’elle auoit 
autresfois entendu de noftre creance: voyant que la 
malade prenoit plaifir en ces difcours, elle pourfuit fa 
pointe, paffe la nuict auprés d’elle, luy fait demander 
pardon de fes fautes, l’exhorte 4 fouhaiter le faint 
Baptefme pour éuiter les peines, & pour jouyr des 
recompenfes qu’elle luy met deuant les yeux. Cette 
pauure creature animée d’vn efprit plus fort que le 
fien, promit 4 Dieu qu’elle chercheroit toutes les voyes 
d’eftre baptifée, fi fa bonté la tiroit de la mort qu’elle 
attendoit. Sa priere fut exaucée, elle guerit & fe 
voulant en fuitte retirer en fon pays pour accomplir 
fa promeffe, fon coeur fut [130] combatu de diuerfes 
penfées. Elle auoit vn petit fils 4gé enuiron de 7. 
ou 8. ans qu’elle aymoit vniquement, fon efpoux la 
cheriffoit fort, elle eftoit en pleine liberté dans les 
bourgades Hyroquoife, & les parens de fon mary la 
voyoient de bon ceil, elle fe jettoit dans le hazard 
d’eftre bruflée & rotie toute viue en cas de furprife 
dans fa fuitte, elle pretendoit aller dans vn} pays 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 249 


restored to her, not full power of vision, but as much 
as was necessary [129] for finding her way, and for 
going about to comfort the Christian women and 
girls, who, like herself, were groaning under the 
weight of a harsh captivity. She formed little 
gatherings; instructed, catechized, encouraged, and 
taught them, and induced her companions to pray. 
In a word, God enabled her to perform, in that land 
of horror and darkness, the office of a dogique ora 
preacher. Having learned, then, that the woman 
we are speaking of was ill, she betook herself to her 
cabin and reminded her of what she had formerly 
learned concerning our belief. Seeing that the sick 
woman took pleasure in these discourses, she pursued 
her point,— she passed the night by her side, induced 
her to ask pardon for her faults, and exhorted her to 
desire holy Baptism that she might escape the pun- 
ishments and enjoy the rewards which she set before 
her. This poor creature, animated by a spirit strong- 
er than her own, promised God that she would seek 
every means of being baptized, if his goodness would 
deliver her from the death she was expecting. Her 
prayer was granted, and she recovered; and desiring, 
in consequence, to go back to her own country, in 
order to fulfill her promise, her heart [130] struggled 
with conflicting thoughts. She hada little son, aged 
about 7 or 8 years, for whom she entertained a 
singular love; her husband loved her dearly; she 
enjoyed full liberty in the Hyroquois villages, and 
her husband’s relations looked kindly on her. She 
hazarded the chance of being burned, or roasted 
alive, in the event of being overtaken in her flight. 
She purposed going toa country that had been laid 
waste,— where, perchance, not one of her relations 


250 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 85 


defolé, ou peut-eftre aucun de fes parens ne reftoit 
fur la terre pour la receuoir; il n’importe, elle eft 
refolué de tenir la parolle qu’elle a donnée a Dieu, 
elle cherche les moyens d’éuader: vne fienne amie 
captiue promet de luy tenir compagnie, la conclufion 
eft prife, elles preparent leur petit bagage qui ne 
pouuoit pas eftre bien grand, puis qu’il ne les deuoit 
pas empécher, ny de marcher, ny de courir dans 
les rencontres. La nuit deftinée pour leur départ 
commengant de reueftir la terre & les forefts de fes 
tenebres, cette pauure femme voulut prendre congé 
de fon petit fils, les Sauuages ont trop de tendreffe 
pour leurs enfans, ils croyent fouuent leur perfuader 
par la raifon, ce qu’on ne peut obtenir d’vn fi bas 
age que par la crainte; elle [131] luy tint ce difcours; 
Mon enfant ie ne fuis pas de ce pays-cy, ayant efté 
prife captiue dans le pays des Algonquins & amenée 
dans cette bourgade, ton pere m’a époufée; mais 
mon cher fils ie ferois bien ayfe de voir encore vne 
fois mon pays, c’eft pourquoy j’ay refolu de te quit- 
ter; ne t’en fache point, car ie t’ayme beaucoup; 
l’enfant fe mit a pleurer, & luy dit; ma mere ie veux 
aller auec vous, ne m’abandonnez pas. Mon fils, 
repart la mere, tu ne me fcaurois fuiure, tu ferois 
caufe de ma mort; quand ie feray partie addreffe-toy 
a telles femmes qui font de mon pays, elles t’enfei- 
gneront ce que tu dois fcauoir, rends leur obeyffance, 
& lors que tu feras affez grand pour me venir trou- 
uer: fouuiens-toy que tu as vne mere au pays des 
Algonquins qui t'a aymé de tout fon coeur; mais ne 
me découure point; car tu ferois caufe que ie ferois 
bruflée. Ayant fait fon Adieu, non fans larmes 
& fans fotipirs de part & d’autre, il furuint vn 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 251 


might yet remain on earth to receive her. It mat- 
tered not; she had resolved on keeping her word 
that she had pledged to God. She sought means of 
escape; and a friend of hers, a captive, promised to 
accompany her. The resolution was taken; they 
made ready their little baggage, which could not be 
very extensive, since it must not impede them in 
difficult places, either in walking or running. The 
night determined on for their departure had begun 
to invest in darkness the land and the forests, when 
this poor woman attempted to take farewell of her 
little son. The Savages are too fond of their chil- 
dren,—they often trust to convince them by reason, 
of what, at so tender an age, they can only acquire 
by fear; she [131] spoke to him in these terms: ‘‘ My 
child, I am not of this country, having been taken 
captive in the country of the Algonquins, and brought 
to this village. Thy father married me: but, my 
dear son, it would delight me to see once more my 
own country. For that reason, I have resolved to 
leave thee; do not sorrow, for I love thee much.”’’ 
The child began to weep, and said to her: ‘‘ My 
mother, I will go with you; do not abandon me.’’ 
‘‘My child,’’ the mother replied, “‘ thou canst not 
follow me; thou wouldst be the cause of my death. 
When I shall have gone away, address thyself to 
such women as are of my country: they will teach 
thee what thou oughtst to know: render to them 
obedience. And, when thou shalt be old enough to 
come to me, remember that thou hast a mother in 
the land of the Algonquins, who loved thee with all 
her heart; but on no account betray me, for thou 
wouldst be the cause of my being burned.’’ Having 
made her Adieu, not without mutual tears and sighs, 


252 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


empéchement qui retarda leur fuitte fept ou huict 
iours, & pendant tout ce temps-la ce pauure petit 
innocent ne découurit jamais le deffein de fa mere, 
ce filéce eft rare en vn Age fi tendre. 

[132] Enfin ces deux fugitiues prenant 1’occafion 
au poil, fe jettent dans ces vaftes forefts, ne portant 
que la moitié de leur vie, & encore eftoit-elle parta- 
gée entre la crainte & l’efperance: tout eft chemin 
dans ces grands bois, il faut tenir fa route a la veué 
des Aiftres fans compas, & fans bouffole; ayant defia 
fait quelques journées de chemin, elles appercoiuent 
des Hiroquois qui retournoient de la guerre ou de la 
chaffe, la peur leur ofte l’efprit & vne partie de leurs 
forces; celle qui s’eftoit rendué compagne de noftre 
captiue, portant auec foy vn petit enfant qu’elle auoit 
mis au monde fort peu de iours deuant fa fuitte, 
voyant que fon lait s’eftoit perdu & tary, tant par la 
peur & par l’apprehenfion de fes ennemys, que par 
les grands trauaux qu’elles fouffroient en vn voyage 
fi épouuantable, & craignant d’ailleurs que les cris 
& les gemiffemens de ce pauure petit ne fiffent perdre 
& la mere & l'enfant, elle luy ofta la vie, mais la 
pauure mal-heureufe ne conferua pas la fienne par 
cette mort, elle fut reconnué & prife par ces Hyro- 
quois qui la garotterent pour eftre la pafture des 
flammes dans leur bourgade: [133] mais redoutant 
les feux de la terre & ne connoiffant pas ceux de 
l’enfer, elle s’y precipita par vne mort volontaire & 
comme enragée. 

Pendant que les ennemis pourfuiuoient celle-cy, 
l’autre fe cacha fi dextrement qu’elle éuita leur prife, 
& pourfuiuant fon chemin toute feule; enfin elle 
arriua au pays des Chreftiens, ou elle raconta toutes 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 253 


there occurred, unexpectedly, a hindrance which 
delayed their flight for seven or eight days; and, 
during the whole of that time, this poor little inno- 
cent never made known his mother’s design. Such 
silence is rare at so tender an age. 

[132] At length these two fugitives, seizing oppor- 
tunity by the beard, dashed into the vast forests, 
taking with them but half of their lives, and even 
that was shared between fear and hope. In these 
great forests, the road is everywhere. They must 
shape their course by observing the Stars, without 
compass or needle. Having been already some days 
on the way, they espied some Hiroquois, who were 
returning from war, or from the hunt. Fear de- 
prived them of their senses, and, in part, of their 
strength. She who had become our captive’s com- 
panion bore with her a little infant, whom she had 
brought into the world a very few days before her 
flight; seeing that her milk was gone and dried up,— 
as much through fear and dread of her enemies, as 
by the great toil she had undergone in a journey so 
appalling,—and fearing, moreover, that the cries 
and wailings of the little one would be the ruin of 
both mother and child, she took its life. But the 
poor unfortunate woman did not save her own life 
by that death, for she was recognized, seized, and 
bound by these Hyroquois, that she might be food 
for the flames in their village; [133] but, dreading 
the fires of earth, and having no knowledge of those 
of hell, she, like one maddened, plunged headlong 
into these by a self-inflicted death. 

While the enemy were in pursuit of this woman, 
the other so cleverly hid herself as to elude capture, 
and proceeded on her way all alone. At length, she 


ae = 


254 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


fes auantures; & apres auoir efté foigneufement 
inftruite en la Foy de Iefus-Chrift, elle fut baptifée 
en fon nom, bien joyeufe d’auoir trouué la veritable 
liberté des enfans de Dieu par des dangers capables 
d’épouuanter des Geans. 

On baptifa 4 mefme temps vne femme dont la 
conuerfion ne femble pas moins miraculeufe, quoy 
qu’elle foit moins eftrange en apparence. C’eftoit 
vn efprit altier, vne humeur dédaigneufe & arro- 
gante, la fuperbe eftoit le caractere qui la diftin- 
guoit des autres femmes, & vous euffiez dit que ce 
mal eftoit hereditaire en fa famille, tant ceux qui 
la touchoient en eftoient empeftez. Sa Sceur aifnée 
e{tant prife des Hyroquois ayma mieux fe tuer foy- 
mefme, & vn enfant qu’elle portoit auec elle, que 
d’eftre leur feruante [134] ou leur efclaue. II arriua 
certain iour, qu’vn Pere de noftre compagnie luy 
parlant, déplora auec des paroles tendres, mais effi- 
caces, le mal-heur & la punition de fa foeur, qui auoit 
fi fouuent méprifé le Baptefme: la crainte de tomber 
dans le mefme chaftiment s’empara fi fortement de 
cette ame, qu’elle fe fit inftruire, & pourfui[ui]t fon — 
Baptefme fi ardamment, qu’elle l’obtint auec vne fi © 
grande benediction, qu’il n’y a rien de plus fouple, 
de plus obeyffant & de plus humble que cette femme, — 
les épreuues l’ont rendué plus conftante en la Foy, © 
elle a perdu fon mary, braue Capitaine & bon chaffeur, — 
elle n’a plus qu’vn fils pour tout fupport, & ce fils eft 
toufiours malade: ce delaiffement des creatures — 
l’attache plus fortement au Createur. 

Ie ne fgay fi ie dois marcher plus auant dans les” 
bons fentimens des Sauuages, le rapport qu’ils ont — 
les vns auec les autres peuuent donner du dégouft a 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 255 


reached the country of the Christians, where she 
related all her adventures; and after having been 
carefully instructed in the Faith of Jesus Christ, 
was baptized in his name,— overjoyed to have found 
the true liberty of the children of God by dangers 
sufficient to terrify Giants. 

There was baptized at the same time a woman 
whose conversion seems not less wonderful,—though, 
in appearance, not quite so unusual. She possessed 
a haughty spirit, a disdainful and arrogant disposi- 
tion. Pride it was that distinguished her from other 
women: and you would have said that this vice was 
hereditary in her family, so much were all her kin- 
dred infected with it. Her elder Sister, being made 
prisoner by the Hyroquois, preferred destroying her- 
self, together with a babe she carried with her, rather 
than be their servant [134] or their slave. It hap- 
pened on acertain day that a Father of our society, 
talking with her, lamented in gentle, though forcible 
words, the misfortune and punishment of her sister, 
who had so often scorned Baptism. The fear of 
falling under a similar chastisement seized so strong- 
ly upon her mind, that she received instruction, and 
sought her Baptism so ardently as to obtain it, with 
a blessing so great, that nothing could have been 
more compliant, obedient, and humble than this 
woman. Trials rendered her more steadfast in the 
Faith. She lost her husband, a brave Captain and a 
good hunter. She has now but one son for her 
entire support, and he is always ailing. This isola- 
tion from creatures attaches her more strongly to 
the Creator. 

I do not know whether I ought to expatiate further 
on the edifying feelings of the Savages. The resem- 


256 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 35 


vn entendement qui fuit de cent lieués tout ce qui 
paroift approcher des redites, mais auffi faut-il auouér 
que plufieurs perfonnes nous conjurent de ne point 
obmettre ce qui peut enflammer la volonté. 

[135] Quand ie penfe a la vie que j’ay menée 
deuant que d’eftre baptifé, difoit vn bon Neophyte, 
ie fuis fi confus que ie voudrois me pouuoir dérober 
des yeux de Dieu & des hommes & de moy-mefme; 
& fi pour expier mes offenfes on me difoit qu’il fe 
faut jetter dans les mains des Hyroquois, il me 
femble que j’obeyrois promptement. 

Vn autre s’eftonnoit, que Dieu eut tant de bonté, 
d’auoir amené des predicateurs d’vn pays fi efloigné 
pour le conuertir. Si moy qui ne fuis qu’vn pauure 
homme, difoit-il, reffens tant de douleur de voir les. 
defordres de quelques-vns de mes gens qui ne font 
pas encore Chreftiens, en forte que j’ay de la peine 
de les fouffrir; comment eft-ce que Dieu m’a fouffert 
tant d’années? mais qui l’a porté, nonobftant nos. 
maladies, 4 me faire fon enfant? il faut bien que le 
coeur de Dieu foit vn coeur de Pere. 

Vn autre inftruit du S. Efprit; car les hommes ne 
luy auoient point appris cette lecon, difoit, qu’il ne 
falloit pas benir Dieu & le remercier feulement pour 
les graces qu'il nous a fait, il le faut benir auffi pour 
ceux qui ne le louént pas; il luy faut rendre [136] des 
actions de graces pour les biens qu’il fait 4 ceux qui 
ne le connoiffent pas, il le faut adorer pour les enfans. 
qui n’ont point encore d’efprit ny de jugement. Si 
quelque homme fait vn prefent 4 mes enfans, ie le 
remercie pour eux; & pourquoy donc ne benirois-je 
pas celuy qui leur a donné la vie, & qui leur conferue 
auec tant de bonté; ie le remercie mefme pour les. 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 * 2957 


blance which they bear one to another may be 
distasteful to a mind which flees a hundred leagues 
from what seems to approach repetition; but, on the 
other hand, it must be said that many persons entreat 
us to omit nothing whatever that can kindle the will. 

[135] ‘‘ When I reflect on the life which I led be- 
fore being baptized,’’ said a good Neophyte, “‘ I am 
so confounded, that I would hide from the eyes of 
God and man, and from myself; and if, to expiate 
my offenses, I were told that I must cast myself into 
the hands of the Hyroquois, it seems to me that I 
would promptly obey.”’ 

Another wondered that God had so much goodness 
as to have brought preachers into so distant a coun- 
try, to convertit. ‘‘If I,’’ said he, ‘‘ who am buta 
poor man, feel such distress at seeing the licentious- 
ness of some of my people, who are not yet Chris- 
tians, that it gives me pain to endure them, how is 
it that God has borne with me for so many years? 
But who has moved him, notwithstanding our evil 
ways, to make me his child? It must indeed be that 
the heart of God is that of a Father.’’ 

Another —instructed by the Holy Ghost, for men 
had never taught him this lesson—observed that 
we ought not to bless and thank God solely for the 
favors he has bestowed upon ourselves,—we should 
bless him also on behalf of those who do not praise 
him; we should render to him [136] thanksgivings 
for the benefits which he confers on those who do 
not know him. We should adore him on behalf of 
children who have, as yet, neither sense nor judg- 
ment. ‘‘If some man makes a present to my 
children, I thank him on their behalf; and why, then, 
should I not bless him who gave them life, and has 


258 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 35 


autres enfans, afin qui fi leurs parens s’en oublioient, 
Dieu recoiue honneur & loiiange des biens qu’il depart 
a fes creatures. 

Vn Capitaine, homme de confideration, demandoit 
d’eftre inftruit & d’eftre baptifé, le Pere a qui il 
s’adreffa le voulant éprouuer, l’écouta affez froide- 
ment, & luy dit, viens-moy trouuer tous les iours, & fi 
ie ne fuis pas 4 la maifon, retourne vne autrefois; il 
venoit en certain temps jufques a cinq ou fix fois 
pour vn iour, il n’y arien qui éloigne tant de Dieu, 
& qui foit plus oppofé a4 la verité qui le faft, & que 
l’orgueil, l’humiliation eft la pierre de touche de la 
Foy & des vertus folides; le Pere inftruifoit ce 
Capitaine, comme s’il eut inftruit vn enfant. Enfin 
cét homme connut bien qu’on vouloit découurir [137] 
s'il auoit vne bonne & forte volonté d’embraffer vne 
Loy qui fait profeffion de la Croix, de la pauureté & 
de l’humilité. Il apporte aux pieds du Pere fes 
richeffes qui confiftoient en quelques coliers de porce- 
laine, & luy dit; mon pere donne tout cela aux 
pauures, & f¢ache que j’ayme la Foy plus que tous 
les biens de la terre; & en fuitte découurant fes 
épaules, fais-moy fuftiger bien ferré pour mes offen- 
fes, & tu fgauras que ie ne crains point les fouffran- 
ces, ny la confufion: fa conftance & vn danger de 
mort ott il fe rencontra, luy firent donner le Baptefme. 
Si-toft qu’il fut Chreftien il s’écria deuant fes gens, 
fcachez que c’eft du fond de mon cceur que j’ay 
embraffé la pierre [sc. priere]; Si vous me voyez 
jamais reculer, ie vous donne toute liberté de vous 
rire & de vous mocquer de mon incon{tance. 

Vn chaffeur ayant eu quelque inftruction, fe mit a 
genoux pour remercier Dieu apres auoir tué vn grand 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 - 259 


preserved them with somuch goodness? I thank him 
myself on behalf of other children, that, should their 
relatives forget them, God may receive honor and 
praise for the benefits which he dispenses to his 
creatures.’’ 

A Captain, a prominent man, asked to be instructed 
and baptized. The Father to whom he addressed 
himself, wishing to prove him, listened to him some- 
what coldly, and said to him, ‘‘ Come to me every 
day; and, if I am not at home, come back another 
time.’”’ He came at stated hours, as many as five or 
six timesaday. There is nothing which so removes 
us from God as display and pride; humiliations are 
the touchstone of Faith, and of solid virtue. The 
Father instructed this Captain as if he had been 
instructing a child. At length, that man well under- 
stood that we wished to discover [137] whether he 
possessed a good and strong intention to embrace a 
Law which made profession of the Cross, of poverty, 
and of humility. He brought to the feet of the 
Father his riches, which consisted of some porcelain 
collars, and said to him: ‘‘ My father, give all that 
to the poor, and know that I love the Faith more 
than all the riches of earth;’’ and then, baring his 
shoulders, ‘‘ Cause me to be scourged right well for 
my offenses, and thou shalt know that I fear neither 
sufferings norshame.” His steadfastness, and a dan- 
ger of death which befell him, caused Baptism to be 
granted him. As soon as he became a Christian, he 
exclaimed before his people: ‘‘ Know that it has 
been from the depths of my heart that I have 
embraced the prayer; if you see that I ever go back, 
I give you full liberty to jeer and to mock at my 
inconstancy.’’ 


260 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


Cerf, fon camarade fe mit a rire; j’ay, fit il, appris 
cela des Chreftiens, l’autre s’en gauffe & le pouffe 
du pied pour le faire leuer, difant, qu'il auoit bien 
vefcu jufques alors fans ces badineries, & que fon 
bon-heur [138] ne dépendoit pas de nos ceremonies: 
A quelque temps de 1a, ce fanfaron s’eftant embarqué 
dans vn canot, fit naufrage, & s’en reuint tout dela- 
bré & a demy mort; noftre chaffeur luy dit, fi tu 
euffe, prié le Dieu des Chreftiens, peut-eftre t’auroit- 
il preferué de ce mal-heur. Ce miferable s’en gauffa 
derechef, mais s’eftant mis fur l’eau vne autre fois, 
fon petit bafteau décorce renuerfa dedans par vn beau 
temps; on eut peine de retirer fon corps des portes 
de la mort, Dieu veuille que fon ame en recoiue la 
vie: quoy qu’il en foit, noftre chaffeur touché de ce 
chaftiment, nous vint trouuer & nous dit; qu’vn 
nommé Atcheens, Capitaine de la nation d’ Yroquet 
l’auoit enchargé de fe faire baptifer. Ne fais pas 
comme moy, luy difoit-il, jay negligé le Baptefme 
pendant la vie, ie le fouhaite 4 la mort, & ie ne le 
puis auoir: ah! que j’ay de regret de mourir dans vn 
lieu éloigné des Francois: mon coeur eft trifte, ie 
fuis priué de l’vnique bien qui me pourroit confoler; 
fois fage, mon cher amy, n’attends pas a la mort A te 
conuertir; pour conclufion, ce bon chaffeur fut mis 
au nombre des Catecumenes. 

[139] Difons deux mots des Atticamegues, & 
finiffons ce Chapitre. Ces peuples deleguerent vn 
vray Ifraélite d’entr’eux, pour nous venir voir, & 
pour emmener en leur pays le Pere qui a vn foin 
particulier de cette Miffion. Ce pauure Pere n’y pit 
aller, pource qu’il n’y auoit pour lors que deux de 
nos Peres aux Trois riuieres pour le fecours des 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 261 


A hunter, who had received some instruction, fell 
on his knees to thank God, after having killed a large 
Stag; his comrade began to jeer. ‘‘I have,’’ said 
he, ‘‘ learned this from the Christians. The other 
made game of him, and pushed him with his foot, 
to make him rise, saying that he had always lived 
well, up to that time, without such follies; and that 
his good fortune [138] depended not on our ceremo- 
nies. Some time afterward, this braggart, having 
set out in his canoe, was wrecked, and came back 
quite woebegone, and half dead. Our hunter said to 
him: ‘‘ If thou hadst prayed to the God of the Chris- 
tians, perhaps he would have preserved thee from 
this misfortune.’’ The miserable man again mocked 
at him; but, venturing once more on the water, in 
fair weather, his frail bark canoe again upset. It 
was with difficulty that his body was rescued from 
the gates of death; God grant that his soul may 
receive life. However, our hunter, affected by this 
chastisement, came and told us that aman named 
Atcheens, Captain of the Yroquet nation, had charged 
him to become baptized. ‘‘ DonotasIdid,’’ he said 
to him. ‘‘I made light of Baptism during life; I 
wish for it in the hour of death, and cannot have it. 
Ah! how I regret having to die in a spot far distant 
from the French; my heart is sad; I am deprived of 
the one blessing that could comfort me. Be wise, 
my dear friend; wait not thy conversion till death.”’ 
To conclude; this good hunter was received into the 
number of the Catechumens. 

[139] Let us say a word or two about the Attica- 
megues, and finish this Chapter. These people 
delegated a true Israelite among them to come and 
see us, and to take back to their own country the 


262 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 35 


Francois & des Sauuages. Iene fcay lequel des deux 
fut plus trifte, ou ce bon Ifraélite nommé Antoine, 
aagé d’enuiron 55. ans, ou le Pere, A qui les larmes 
venoient aux yeux, entendant les amoureux reproches 
que luy faifoit ce fidele Meffager. Que diront ceux 
qui te fouhaitent auec impatience, & qui ont vn fi 
grad defir de fe confeffer? que ferdt mes enfans qui 
n’dt pas encor receu le Baptefme? ma femme qui n’a 
pti defcendre iufques icy ne me verra pas de bon ceil, 
fi ie retourne fans t’embarquer? faut-il done que 
nous foyons feparez apres noftre mort? que les vns 
foient bien-heureux, & les autres mal-heureux, fi 
j’euffe pfi apporter toute ma famille fur mes efpaules 
ie l’aurois fait, mais les chemins font efpouuantables. 
Si les autres qui ne peuuent furmonter ces difficultez, 
viennent 4 [140] mourir fans Baptefme, 4 qui en fera 
la faute? pour conclufion le Pere ordonna que 1’vn 
des plus fages d’entr’eux confereroit le faint Baptefme 
a ceux qu’on verroit en danger de mort, & qu’on 
porteroit les autres 4 former fouuent des actes d’vn 
pur amour, & d’vne contrition parfaite, pour fuppléer 
au defaut du Sacrement de Penitence. I1 eft vray 
que ces bonnes gens menent vne vie fi innocente que 
le Pere fe confoloit dans l’impuiffance de les aller 
fecourir. 

Il a fgeu depuis, que la femme d’vn Capitaine eftoit 
morte fans Confeffion; iamais, dit-il, on n’a veu 
femme plus zelée pour la Foy, elle a conuerty fon 
mary, fon gendre, & toute fa famille, & quantité d’au- 
tres perfonnes. Elle demandoit tous les iours 4 Dieu 
la grace de ne point mourir qu’apres auoir receu tous 
fes Sacremens. II ne luy a pas accordé cette faueur, 
mais il luy auoit donné vne fi grande innocence, 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 ' 263. 


Father who has special charge of that Mission. This 
poor Father could not go, there being, at that time, 
only two of our Fathers at Three rivers, to minister 
to the French and the Savages. I donot know which 
of the two was the more sad,—the good Israelite, 
who was named Antoine, and aged about 55 years; 
or the Father, whose tears came to his eyes on listen- 
ing to the loving expostulations made by this faithful 
Messenger. ‘‘ What will they say who impatiently 
long for thee, and so greatly desire confession? What 
will my children do, who have not yet received 
Baptism? or my wife, who could not come down here, 
and will not look upon me with a kindly eye if I 
return without thee on board? Must we, then, be 
separated after our deaths? Must some be blest, and 
others wretched? If I could have brought all my 
family upon my shoulders, I would have done it; 
but the roads are frightful. If others, who cannot 
surmount these difficulties, come to [140] death unbap- 
tized, with whom will lie the blame?’’ In the end, 
the Father decided that one of the most intelligent 
among them should bestow holy Baptism on those 
who should be in manifest danger of death; and that 
others should be induced to offer frequent acts of 
pure love and perfect contrition, to supply the lack 
of the Sacrament of Penance. In truth, these good 
people led so innocent a life, that the Father consoled 
himself for his inability to go to their aid. 

He has learned, since then, that the wife of a 
Captain had died without Confession. ‘‘ Never,’’ said 
he, ‘‘has a woman been seen more zealous for the 
Faith. She converted her husband, her son-in-law, 
and her whole family, and many other persons. She 
entreated from God, every day, the favor that she 


264 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vo. 35 


& vne telle crainte & horreur du peché, qu’elle ne 
manquoit iamais de s’éueiller tous les Samedis fur 
la minuit; & alors fe mettant & genoux elle exami- 
noit fa confcience, puis s’adreffant 4 noftre Seigneur, 
elle luy confeffoit tous fes [141] pechez comme elle 
auroit fait deuant vn Preftre, recitant en fuite quel- 
ques prieres, comme fi ce veritable Pontife luy eut 
donné pour penitence. Dieu eft bon, & fa bonté fe 
répand iufques dans le fonds de la Barbarie. 

Le Pere adjoufte que quelques Sauuages inftruits 
dedans ces vaftes forefts, fans iamais auoir veu aucuns 
Europeans, font venus demander le Baptefme, reci- 
tans brauement les prieres qu’ils auoient apprifes de 
la bouche des Chreftiens qui habitent ces grands 
bois. Ilme femble que nous pouuons dire des graces 
de Dieu ce qu’on dit du Soleil; Mec eff qui fe abfcon- 
dat a calore eius, il n’y a perfonne qui ne reffente 
quelques effets de cette chaleur diuine. 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 265 


might not die till she had received all the Sacra- 
ments. He did not accord her that favor, but gave 
her an innocence so exalted, and such a fear and hor- 
ror of sin, that she never failed to waken, on every 
Saturday, about midnight; then, kneeling down, she 
examined her conscience. Next, addressing herself 
to our Lord, she confessed to him all her [141] sins, 
as she would have done to a Priest,— reciting after- 
ward some prayers, as if he, the real Pontiff, had 
given them to her fora penance.” God is good, and 
his goodness is diffused even in the depths of 
Barbarism. 

The Father adds that some Savages, instructed 
within these vast forests, who had never seen any 
Europeans, have come to solicit Baptism, readily 
reciting the prayers they had learned from the lips 
of Christians who inhabit these great woods. It 
seems to me that we can say of the graces of God 
what is said of the Sun, Mec est gui se abscondat & calore 
ejus,—‘‘ There is no person who feels not some 
effects of this divine warmth.”’ 


266 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 35 


[142] CHAPITRE XII. 
DE LA MISSION DE SAINTE CROIX A TADOUSSAC. 


E Pere qui cultiua l’an paffé cette Miffion, dit 
dans fes Memoires, que ce qu’il en a remarqué 
de plus confiderable, fe rapporte au zele ardant 

que les Sauuages Chreftiens & leurs Capitaines ont 
fait paroiftre pour l’amplification du Royaume de 
Iefus-Chrift, & pour écarter le vice de leur nouuelle 
Eglife. 

En voicy quelques exemples. Ce bon Pere les 
e{tans venus vifiter apres Pafques, ils le prierent de 
leur faire adorer la fainte Croix, comme les Chre- 
{tiens de S. Iofeph l’auoient adoré la Semaine fainte. 
Il ne faut pas, difoient-ils, que pour auoir efté priuez 
de Preftres en ce faint Temps, nous foyons encore 
priuez du fouuenir de la mort de noftre Redempteur. 
Ils fe difpoferent 4 cette grace, huict iours durant, fe 
confeffans deux fois felon leur couftume: quand ils 
paffent quelques [143] mois fans pouuoir approcher 
de ce Sacrement: ils firent vn jeufne public & vni- 
uerfel, & vn iour de Vendredy ils rendirent leurs 
deuoirs A Iefus-Chrift mourant, auec tant de fenti- 
mens de pieté & de deuotion, que les Frangois qui 
affifterent A cette fainte ceremonie, ne pouuoient affez 
admirer la ferueur de ces bons Neophytes. 

Quelques-vns touchez de regret d’auoir offenfé 
Dieu, pour s’eftre laiffé autresfois furprendre des. 


| 


——e 


1650} RELATION OF 1649-50 ‘ 267 


[142] CHAPTER XII. 
OF THE MISSION OF THE HOLY CROSS AT TADOUSSAC. 


HE Father who last year had the direction of 

Ai this Mission says in his Memoirs that what he 

has observed in it as most noteworthy relates 

to the burning zeal which the Christian Savages and 

their Captains have manifested for the extension of 

the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the banishing of 
vice from their new Church. 

Here are some examples. This good Father hav- 
ing come to visit them after Easter, they asked to be 
allowed to venerate the holy Cross as the Christians 
of St. Joseph had venerated it during holy Week. 
*‘Tt ought not to be,’’ they said, “‘ that, because we 
have been deprived of Priests throughout this holy 
Season, we should be debarred, besides, from this 
memorial of the death of our Redeemer.” During 
eight days, they prepared themselves for this favor,— 
going to confession twice, as is their usage when 
they pass some [143] months without being able to 
approach that Sacrament. They held a public and 
universal fast; andona Friday they offered reverence 
to Jesus Christ dying, with such emotions of piety 
and devotion, that the French, who assisted at the 
holy ceremony, could not sufficiently admire the fervor 
of these good Neophytes. 

Some —touched with regret at having offended 
God by having allowed themselves, on former occa- 
sions, to be beguiled by the intoxicants which the 


268 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


boiffons, que les Francois leur portent; prote{terent 
tout haut, & tout publiquement, qu’ils eftoiét indignes 
de s’approcher de l’image de Iefus-Chrift, demandant 
qu’il leur ffiit feulement permis de baifer le paué de 
l’Eglife. 

Quelques petits enfans s’eftans apperceus qu’on 
emportoit la fainte Croix deuant que leurs parens 
leur euffent fait baifer, demanderent par leurs larmes 
& par leurs cris, & par leurs begayemens, qu’on la 
remit, afin qu’ils la pfiffent adorer auffi bien que les 
autres. 

Il femble, dit le Pere, que noftre Seigneur laiffa 
découler quelque petite goute de fon Sang dans les 
coeurs de ces bonnes [144] gens; car au fortir de la 
les Capitaines & les principaux Chreftiens, enflam- 
mez contre la vice qui regne dauantage 4 Tadouffac 
4 la venué des vaiffeaux, caufé par le vin, & par l’eau 
de vie qu’on leur vend, protefterent hautement, que 
ceux qui auoient approché leur bouche des playes de 
Iefus-Chrift en fon image, feroient rudement chaftiez 
fi d’orefnauant ils la profanoient par 1’ yurognerie. 

En fuite de cette publication, ceux qui auoient des 
barils pleins de ces boiffons, cachez dedans la terre, 
les apportoient au Pere, luy difans que tandis qu’il 
tiendroit leur Demon familier en prifon, il ne leur 
pourroit nuire. 

Ils ordonnerent encore, que perfonne ne traitat ou 
n’achetat de ces boiffons que par l’ordre du Pere 
donné par efcrit, & que fi quelqu’vn y contreuenoit, 
qu’il feroit cenfé pour yurogne, & puny comme tel. 

En troifiéme lieu, ils fupplierent tres-humblement 
Monfieur le Gouverneur qu’il fit dreffer vne prifon 4 


ai 
1 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 269 


French bring them — protested loudly and publicly 
that they were unworthy to draw near to the image 
of Jesus Christ; and requested that they should be 
permitted only to kiss the pavement of the Church. 

Some little children, noticing that the holy Cross 
had been removed before their parents had made 
them kiss it, besought with tears and cries, in their 
childish accents, that it should be put back again, 
that they might venerate it, as well as the others. 

‘* It seems,’’ said the Father, ‘‘ that our Lord per- 
mits some tiny rill of his Blood to flow down into 
the hearts of these good [144] people; for, on leav- 
ing, the Captains and the leading Christians, incensed 
against the vice which is more than ordinarily 
prevalent at Tadoussac on the arrival of the vessels, in 
consequence of the wine and brandy that is sold to 
them, protested loudly that they whose lips had 
touched the wounds of Jesus Christ on his image 
should be severely chastised if, in future, they pro- 
faned their lips by drunkenness.’’ 

In consequence of this notification, those who had 
barrels filled with these liquors, hidden underground, 
brought them to the Father,—telling him that, as 
long as he kept their familiar Demon in prison, he 
could not injure them. 

They enacted, moreover, that no one should trade 
or purchase these liquors except by order of the Fa- 
ther, given in writing; and that any one transgress- 
ing this rule should be regarded as a drunkard, and 
punished as such. 

In the third place, they humbly entreated Mon- 
sieur the Governor that he would cause a prison to 
be erected at Tadoussac, and any who were stained 
with this crime to be punished and chastised. 


270 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor 35 


Tadouffac, & qu’il fit punir & chaftier ceux qui 
feroient entachez de ce crime. 

En quatriéme lieu, vn Capitaine affez [145] fujet a 
cette maladie protefta par vn cry public, que fi iamais 
on le voyoit eftourdy de boiffon, il vouloit le premier 
fubir toute la rigueur des loix, & que pour la 
mauuaife edification qu’il auoit autresfois donné, il fe 
feroit punir & fuftiger publiquement fi quelqu’vn de 
fes gens tomboit dans cette faute, voulant vanger en 
fa propre perfonne les PEFROF de ceux qui eftoient 
fous fa charge. 

Quelque temps apres vn ieune homme parut a 
demy yure, ce Capitaine voulut tenir fa parole. I1 
fe trouue dans vne affemblée ot eftoient 1a plufpart 
de fes gens, & leur tint ce difeours. Si vous auez de 
l'amour pour moy, faites-le maintenant paroiftre, 
tirez vengeance de mon corps pour le peché d’vn tel; 
fi quelqu’vn de vous m’efpargne, ie le tiendray pour 
vn lafche & pour vn poltron, & pour vne perfonne 
peu affectionnée a la Foy, & & la priere: 14 deffus il 
defcouure fes efpaules, commandant aux petits & 
aux grands de le fuftiger; la plufpart prenans fes 
paroles au pied de la lettre, obeyrent fortement de 
la main auffi bien que du coeur. Les Francois qui fe 
trouuerent a ce {pectacle, voyans qu’on le frappoit 
tout de bon, furent [146] attendris, & quelques-vns 
iufques aux larmes, admirans la conftance & la joye 
qu'il faifoit paroiftre dans le facrifice qu’il offroit 4 
Dieu pour le peché de fon peuple. 

Celuy qui auoit cémis l’offenfe voyant ce beau jeu, 
fut bien eftonné, il s’auance & parle en ces termes a 
fon Capitaine qui eftoit fon parent. Mon coufin 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 ; 271 


In the fourth place, a Captain who was somewhat 
[145] given to this weakness affirmed, by a public 
declaration, that, if ever he were seen light-headed 
from drink, he would be the first to undergo all the 
rigor of the laws; and that, because of the bad 
example he had formerly given, he would punish 
himself by being publicly scourged, if any one of 
his people should commit that fault,— wishing to 
avenge upon his own person the sins of those who 
were under his charge. 

Some time after, when a young man made his 
appearance half drunk, this Captain wished to make 
good his word. He happened to be at a meeting 
where were gathered together the greater number 
of his people, and he spoke to them as follows: “‘ If 
you have any love for me, display it now; take 
vengeance upon my body for the sin of this one. If 
any one spare me, I shall regard him as a coward and 
a dastard, and as one who cares little for the Faith 
and prayer.”” Upon that, he bared his shoulders, 
ordering both great and small to scourge him; the 
greater number, taking what he said literally, obeyed 
lustily, both with heart and hand. The French who 
were present, seeing they were striking him in 
earnest, were [146] moved, some even to tears, admir- 
ing his constancy, and the joy which he manifested 
in the sacrifice he was offering to God for the sin of 
his people. 

He who had committed the offense, seeing this 
admirable spectacle, was astounded; he came forward, 
and addressed his Captain, who was a relative of his, 
in these terms: ‘‘ My cousin, we have but one body, 
since we have the same blood in our veins. Thou 
hast borne half of the punishment due to my offense; 


272 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 35 


nous n’auons qu’vn mefme corps, eftans paitris d’vn 
mefme fang; tu as porté la moitié du chaftiment 
deub 4 mon offenfe, il faut que le facrifice s’acheue 
fur mon corps, l’innocent a fouffert, venons au cou- 
pable; & 14 deffus il fe prefente A ceux qui eftoient 
defia tous difpofez de luy faire la charité qu’il atten- 
doit de leurs mains, aymant mieux fouffrir en cette 
vie que de porter fon crime en l’autre monde. 

L’vn des deux Capitaines de cette Reduction, 
apprenant que fon frere eftoit fur le point de faire 
diuorce auec fa femme, l’aborde auec ces paroles; Ie 
ne fcay fiie te dois appeller mon frere, fi tu quitte 
ta femme tu quitteras la Foy, & en fuite tu cefferas 
d’eftre mon parent & mon allié, ou pluftoft tu te 
declareras mon ennemy, auife 4 ce que tu feras, fi 
tu fors de [147] l’Eglife il faut fortir de Tadouffac, 
& iamais n’y paroiftre, autrement ie te feray dégra- 
der, ou abandonner dans quelque Ifle deferte, d’ot 
iamais tu ne pourras fortir. Ce pauure homme 
eftonné d’vn tel difcours, confeffa ingenuément, que 
fon coeur vouloit eftre méchant, il conjure les Chre- 
{tiens de prier Dieu qu’il luy pardonne fon offenfe, 
il demande qu’on le puniffe rigoureufement, & que 
c’e{t l’vnique mifericorde qu’il attend de ceux qui 
croyent en Dieu, auec lefquels il n’ofoit fe trouuer 
dans leurs faintes affemblées s’en iugeant tres- 
indigne. 

Les Chreftiens auec leurs Chefs, jadis fi ialoux de 
leur pais, & leur port de Tadouffac, qu’ils en refu- 
foient la cognoiffance aux autres Nations, voyans que 
les Peres ne pouuoient pas les aller trouuer dans le 
fonds de leurs grands bois, les ont inuitées de venir 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 273 


the atonement must be completed upon my body. 
The innocent has suffered; let us come to the 
guilty.’’ Thereupon,—preferring to suffer in this 
life rather than to carry his crime into the other 
world,— he offered himself to those who were already 
quite prepared to accord him the charity he was 
awaiting at their hands. 

One of the two Captains of this Reduction, learn- 
ing that his brother was on the point of being 
divorced from his wife, accosted him in these words: 
‘‘T do not know whether I ought to call thee my 
brother; if thou leave thy wife, thou leavest the 
Faith, and, in consequence, thou ceasest to be my 
relative and ally,—or, rather, thou declarest thyself 
my enemy. Consider what thou wilt do; if thou go 
forth from [147] the Church, thou must get thee out 
of Tadoussac, never to make thy appearance here 
again. Otherwise, I will cause thee to be disgraced, 
or abandoned on some desert Island, whence thou 
canst never escape.’’ ‘The poor man, astounded at 
such words, frankly confessed that his heart had 
consented to wickedness, and entreated the Christians 
to ask God to pardon his offense. He begged that 
he might be punished with severity, saying that this 
was the one mercy he hoped for at the hands of those 
who believed in God, among whom he dared not 
present himself in their holy assemblies, deeming 
himself most unworthy. 

The Christians, with their Chiefs,—formerly so 
jealous of their country, and their port of Tadous- 
sac, that they denied it intercourse with other Na- 
tions,— seeing that the Fathers could not go to them 
in the depths of their vast forests, invited them to 
come and dwell near them, that they might be taught 


274 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


demeurer aupres d’eux pour apprendre le chemin du 
Ciel, apportant pour raifon, qu’eftans amis en cette 
vie, il ne falloit pas eftre diuifez en lautre. Les 
8papinachisek ont defia receu la Foy. Les Smamisek 
qui habitét les terres voifines de 1’Ifle d’Anticofti ont 
commencé cette année de paroiftre 4 Tadouffac, & 
[148] de prefter l’oreille 4 la doctrine de Iefus-Chrift. 
Ces bons Capitaines leur ont fait des prefens pour les 
attirer aupres d’eux, afin de leur donner enuie 
d’embraffer leur creance. 

Ce n’eft pas tout. Ces peuples qui cachoient iadis 
aux Francois les chemins des Nations ot ils vont tra- 
fiquer, ne voulans pas mefme que nous en abordafiions, 
nous preffent maintenant qu’ils font Chreftiens, de 
les fuiure dans ces vaftes forefts, pour baptifer & 
pour confeffer les Nations qui ne peuuent approcher 
de leur pays. Ils ont mené le Pere Gabriel Druil- 
lettes dans ces contrées par vn chemin nouueau, mais 
tres-affreux, afin qu’il vifitat & qu’il confolat ceux 
qui ne le pouuoient venir trouuer 4 Tadouffac. Ie 
vy, dit le Pere, tant de ferueur dans ces bons Neo- 
phytes 4 mon premier abord, que les fatigues d’vn 
voyage efpouuantable, & qui fait peur aux Sauuages 
mefmes, me femblerent bien douces. 

Si toft que noftre Canot parut a leurs yeux, ils 
accoururent vers les riues d’vn grand lac fur lequel 
nous voguions, & m’ayant reconnu, la joye fe refpan- 
dit fur leur vifage; ils fe jettent 4 genoux, les petits 
[149] enfans m’enuironnent & me careffent de tous 
coftez, les malades s’écrient qu’ils ne craignent plus 
la mort, puis qu’ils ont moyen de fe confeffer, les 
principaux deleguent quelques Canots pour aduertir 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 . 275 


the Heavenly way,— giving as a reason that, being 
friends in this life, they ought not to be separated in 
the next. The Oupapinachiwek have already re- 
ceived the Faith. The Oumamiwek, who inhabit 
lands in the neighborhood of the Island of Anticosti, 
have begun, this year, to appear at Tadoussac, and 
[148] to give ear to the doctrine of Jesus Christ. These 
good Captains have presented gifts to them, to attract 
them near to themselves, that they may give these 
people a desire to embrace their own belief. 

This is not all. These peoples—who formerly 
concealed from the French the highways to the Na- 
tions to whom they went for traffic, not being willing 
that even we should approach them —press us, now 
that they are Christians, to follow them into these 
vast forests, in order to baptize and confess the 
Nations who cannot reach their country. They took 
Father Gabriel Druillettes into those regions by a 
new but most frightful road, that he might visit and 
comfort those who could not come to him at Tadous- 
sac. ‘‘I saw,’’ the Father said, ‘‘so much pious 
ardor in these good Neophytes, on my first arrival, 
that the fatigues of a terrible journey, which fright- 
ened even the Savages, seemed to me most sweet. 

‘* As soon as they caught sight of our Canoe, they 
ran to the shores of a large lake upon which we were 
paddling; and, having recognized me, joy spread 
itself over their faces. They fall upon their knees; 
the little [149] children surround me, and caress me 
onall sides; the sick exclaim that they no longer fear 
death, since they can now go to confession. The 
chiefs send some Canoes, to inform the neighboring 
Savages of my coming; moreover, they erect for me 
a small Chapel, which is quickly built. 


276 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vot. 35 


les Sauuages voifins de ma venué. On me dreffe 
cependant vne petite Chapelle, qui fut bien-toft 
baftie. 

Le Dogique, c’eft a dire celuy qui fait les prieres. 
publiques parmy ces bonnes gens, & qui les inftruit 
en l’abfence des Peres, fit rendre des actions de graces 
a noftre Seigneur pour noftre arriuée, il fit entonner 
des Cantiques aux petits & aux grands, mais auec 
tant de pieté, & de deuotion, que ie ne pfis iamais 
parler que par les yeux, tant mon coeur eftoit remply 
de confolation. 

Ce bon Dogique ne manquoit pas tous les iours de 
vifiter les malades, de prier pour eux, en forte que 
quelques Payens touchez de cét exemple, demandoient 
le Baptefme, & quelques-vns difoient tout haut, que 
fes prieres les auoient guaris de leurs maladies. 

Il rendit vn compte tres-exact au Pere de tout ce 
qui s’eftoit paffé pendant 1’Hyuer touchant le Chri- 
{tianifme, il demandoit [150] des confeils pour foy & 
pour cette petite Eglife, auec autant d’humilité, de 
foumiffion, & de prudence, qu’on en fgauroit fouhai- 
ter au milieu de noftre Europe. 

Vn vieillard aagé d’enuiron quatre-vingts ans fort 
ahurté a fes fuperftitions, voyant la bonne vie des 
Chreftiens, & preftant l’oreille aux paroles du Pere, 
le pria de l’inftruire, proteftant qu’il abandonneroit 
fes anciennes couf{tumes pour embraffer les noftres. 
Il venoit deux fois le iour en la Chapelle pour appren- 
dre, comme vn enfant, les elemens de noftre doctrine, 
& comme fa memoire eftoit fort deffeichée on le 
voyoit fouuent fe pourmener en des lieux écartez, repe- 
tant les prieres qu’on luy auoit enfeignées, pour les 
inculquer plus auant dans le fonds de fon coeur. 


1650} RELATION OF 1649-50 ; 277 


‘‘ The Dogique—that is td say, he who offers the 
public prayers among these good people, and who 
instructs them in the absence of the Fathers — offered 
thanksgivings to our Lord for our arrival; he sang 
the Canticles to old and young, and with so much 
piety and devotion that I could not speak, save by 
my eyes, so full was my heart of consolation. 

‘“ This good Dogique failed not, each day, to visit 
the sick, and to pray for them; so that some Pagans, 
touched by his example, begged for Baptism, and 
some of them publicly declared that his prayers had 
cured them of their diseases.’’ 

He rendered to the Father a very exact account of 
all that had occurred during the Winter, in regard to 
Religious affairs. He solicited [150] advice, for both 
himself and this little Church with as much humility, 
submission, and discretion as could be wished for in 
the heart of our Europe. 

An old man, aged about eighty years, firmly 
wedded to his superstitions, observing the good life 
which the Christians led, and giving his attention to 
the words of the Father, begged of him instruction, — 
protesting that he abandoned the ancient customs to 
embrace ours. He came twice a day to the Chapel 
in order to learn, as a child, the elements of our doc- 
trine; and as his memory had become much enfeebled, 
he was often seen to betake himself to out-of-the- 
way places, repeating the prayers which had been 
taught him, that he might impress them more deep- 
ly upon his heart. 

All the Catechumens most earnestly sought their 
Baptism. Among others, one, already aged, seeing 
that the Father refused him this grace,— delaying it 
until the Spring of the following year, that he might 


278 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vou. 35 


Tous les Catechumenes pourfuiuirent ardamment 
leur Baptefme, vn entr’autres defia aagé, voyant que 
le Pere luy refufoit cette grace, le remettant pour 
l’efprouuer iufques au Printemps de l’année fuiuante 
entra dedans l’Eglife, harangua fortement en la 
prefence de tous les Chreftiens, proteftant que s’il 
mouroit deuant ce temps-la, il accuferoit le Pere 
deuant la Iuftice de [151] Dieu de fa perte & de fa 
damnation. 

Le Demon enragé de voir qu’on luy arrache des 
mains vne proye dont il joiiit depuis tant de fiecles, 
a tafché de troubler ces bons Neophytes par l’impo- 
{ture d’vn ieune homme, que fes parens proteftent 
auoir enfeuely & enterré, & le iour fuiuant de fes 
funerailles il parut, difent-ils, fur le foir tout plein 
de vie, affeurant qu’vn certain qu’il ne cognoiffoit 
pas l’auoit tiré du fepulchre, & luy auoit enfeigné la 
fagon d’honorer Dieu; il condamne les prieres & les 
deuotions des Chreftiens, auec tant d’attache 4 fon 
jugement, qu’encore qu’il auoiie que le Demon foit 
mauuais, & qu'il faille croire en IESVS-CHRIST, 
il le veut neantmoins feruir A fa mode, traifnant deux 
& trois femmes apres foy. II a fait folliciter quel- 
ques ieunes Chreftiens par fa foeur, 4 qui il a fait croire 
quelle pouuoit fans crime leur accorder ce qu’ils 
fouhaiteroient d’elle, pourueu qu’ils renongaffent a 
la Foy & aux prieres qu’on leur a enfeignées dans 
Tadouffac, mais les Anges font plus puiffans que les 
Demons, ces bons Neophytes ont conferué la pureté 
de leurs corps, par la pureté de leur creance. 

[152] Enfin le Pere eftant fur fon depart, vn bon 
Sauuage l’inuita au feftin, luy rendant mille graces, 


- 
— 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 . 279 


prove him,—entered the Church and vigorously 
harangued in the presence of all the Christians, pro- 
testing that, if he died before that time, he would 
charge the Father, before the Justice of [151] God, 
with his ruin and damnation. 

The Demon, enraged at seeing snatched from him 
a prey he had possessed for so many ages, has 
endeavored to disturb those good Neophytes by the 
following imposture. A young man who, his rela- 
tives affirmed, was shrouded and buried, appeared, 
they said, in the evening of the day after his funeral, 
full of life,—asserting that a certain person, whom 
he did not know, had taken him from the tomb, and 
had instructed him in the way he should honor God. 
He condemned the prayers and devotions of Chris- 
tians with such obstinate adhesion to his own way 
of thinking, that—although he acknowledged the 
wickedness of the Demon, and the necessity of 
believing in JESUS CHRIST—he would neverthe- 
less serve him after his own fashion, keeping with 
him two or three wives. He induced his sister to 
solicit some young Christians, by making her believe 
that she might without wrong grant them what they 
might desire of her, provided they would abandon 
the Faith, and the prayers which had been taught 
them in Tadoussac. But the Angels have more 
power than the Demons; these good Neophytes have 
preserved the purity of their bodies by the purity of 
their belief. 

[152] At length, when the Father’s departure was 
near, a good Savage invited him to a feast,—return- 
ing him a thousand thanks, and bestowing on him a 
thousand benedictions for the trouble he had taken in 
coming to visit them with so much pains; assuring 


280 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 35 


& luy donnant mille benedictions, de la peine qu’il 
auoit prife de les venir vifiter auec tant de trauaux, 
Vaffeurant qu’auffi-toft que l’Hyuer feroit paffé, il 
meneroit la plufpart de fes gens 4 Tadouffac, pour y 
eftre inftruits plus a4 loifir, le priant de nommer en 
chaque cabane quelque bon Neophyte des plus fages, 
& des mieux inftruits, pour tenir fa place en fon 
abfence, & pour luy rendre compte en fon temps des 
actions & des déportemens de ces nouueaux enfans 
de Dieu, qui en verité compofent vne petite Eglife 
fort innocente. 

Vn braue & genereux Catechumene voulut accom- 
pagner le Pere, mais il le fit paffer par fon pais, ot 
ayant fait aflembler fes compatriotes il demanda le 
Baptef{me d’vne facon bien agreable, & pleine de fer- 
ueur. Mon Pere, luy dit-il, i’ay autresfois manié nos 
tambours, & ie me fuis meflé de fouffler & de chanter 
nos malades, ie renonce en la prefence de mes gens 
A toutes ces fuperiftitions, ie defire d’eftre baptifé 
deuant [153] eux, afin qu’eftans tefmoins de la Foy 
que ie profeffe, ils foient mes accufateurs fi ie n’obey 
A tout ce que la Loy de IESVS-CHRIST me com- 
mande, ie les inuite, & les conjure de me reprocher 
en ta prefence tout ce que ie commettray contre la 
profeffion du Chriftianifme. Ie defire qu’ils me 
veillent, & qu’ils examinent mes actions pour t’en 
faire vn fidelle rapport, me foumettant au chaftiment 
que tu me voudras impofer, fi ie contreuiens aux loix 
de mon Baptefme; ne fais donc point de difficulté de 
m’accorder cette grace, qui doit non feulement pro- 
fiter A mon ame, mais qui doit encore donner lumiere 
Ala nation des 8taksamitek, qui font diftans de ce 
lieu de dix iournées. Mon frere iadis Capitaine de 


1650] RELATION OF 1649-50 281 


him that, as soon as Winter was over, he would 
bring the greater number of his people to Tadoussac, 
to be there instructed more at leisure; and beseech- 
ing him to name, in each cabin, some good Neo- 
phyte,—one of the most discreet, and most fully 
instructed,—to take his place in his absence, and to 
render him an account, in due season, of the actions 
and behavior of these new children of God, who, in 
truth, form a small but a very innocent Church. 

A worthy and generous Catechumen determined 
to accompany the Father, but brought him through 
his own country,— where, when he had assembled 
his fellow-countrymen, he solicited Baptism in a 
manner most acceptable and full of fervor. ‘‘ My 
Father,” he said, ‘‘in former times I handled our 
drums, and took part in blowing upon and singing 
over our sick people; I renounce, in the presence of 
my people, all these superstitions. I desire to be 
baptized before [153] them, that, being witnesses to 
the Faith which I profess, they may be my accusers 
if I obey not all the commands of the Law of JESUS 
CHRIST; and I invite and conjure them to reproach 
me before thee with whatever I may commit contrary 
to the profession of Christianity. I desire that they 
watch me, and examine my actions, that they may 
make to thee a faithful report of these, submitting 
myself to the chastisement which thou shalt impose 
upon me, should I transgress the rules of my Bap- 
tism. Do not then make any difficulty of according 
me this favor, which must not only benefit my soul, 
but enlighten also the nation of the Outakwamiwek, 
ten days’ journey hence. My brother, at one time a 
Captain at Tadoussac, having instructed me in the 
truths of which thou hast told us, I have given an 


282 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 35 


Tadouffac m’ayant in{truit des veritez, dont tu nous 
a parlé, i’en ay fait le recit A ces peuples qui font 
mes alliez. Ie les ay efpouuantez par les peines 
d’Enfer, ie les ay confolés par les delices dont iouyffent 
les Chreftiens au Ciel, ie les ay fait prier Dieu, ils 
m’ont tefmoigné vn grand defir d’eftre inftruits; 
baptife-moy donc, mon Pere, nous les irons voir 
l’E{té prochain tous [154] deux enfemble. [II] ne 
falloit pas éconduire vn fi bon coeur. 


1650) RELATION OF 1649-50 . 283 


account of them to these people, who are my allies. 
I have frightened them by the pains of Hell; I have 
comforted them with the delights which Christians 
enjoy in Heaven. I have made them pray to God; 
they have declared to me their strong desire to be 
instructed. Baptize me then, O my Father; we will 
go to see them next Summer, [154] both together.”’ 
There was no need of declining to accept so good a 
heart. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XXXV 


LXXII 


This is a Latin letter written by Paul Ragueneau 
to the father general (Caraffa), dated in the Huron 
country, March 13, 1650. The original rests in the 
domestic archives of the Society. Here, it was copied 
(probably in 1858) by Father Felix Martin; his apo- 
graph is in the archives of St. Mary’s College, Mont-. 
real. His French translation appeared six years 
later in Carayon’s Premitre Mission, pp. 247-253. 
The Latin text appears for the first time in Roche- 
monteix’s /ésuztes et la Nouvelle-France, t. ii., pp. 466— 
469; this we follow, in our reprint. 


LXXIII 


For bibliographical particulars of the Journal des 
Jésuites, see Vol. XXVII. 


LXXIV 


In reprinting the Relation of 1649-50 (Paris, 1651), 
we follow the text of the first edition, but add the 
letter of Marie de St. Bonaventure, mother superior, 
from pp. 178 and 179 of the second edition—the 
edition in which it first appeared. The ‘‘ Privilege ”’ 
is dated at ‘‘ Paris le 19. Decembre 1650,’’ and the 
‘** Permission ’’ was ‘‘ Fait 4 Blois ce huictiéme De- 
cembre 1650.’’ ‘The first and second editions of this 
Relation are generally referred to as ‘‘ H. 95”’ and 


286 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES 


‘“H. 96,” respectively, because they are described 
in Harrisse’s Votes, nos. 95 and 96. 

Collation of first edition (H. 95): Title, with verso 
blank, 1 leaf; ‘‘ Table des Chapitres,’’ pp. (2); prefa- 
tory epistle from Paul Ragueneau to the provincial, 
Claude de Lingendes, pp. 1-3; Ragueneau’s Rela- 
tion (13 chaps.), pp. 4-171; ‘‘ Lettre dv P. Hierosme 
Lallemant, au R. P. Claude de Lingendes,” pp. 172- 
178; ‘‘ Priuilege,” with ‘‘ Permifsion’’ on the verso, 
1 leaf. Page 63 ismisnumbered 65, and p. 178 is by 
transposition misprinted 187. Signatures: 4 in two, 
A-Lin eights, and M in four, the last two leaves being 
blank. 

The second edition is an entire reset. It varies 
not only in typographical arrangement, but has also 
head-ornaments which differ from those of the first 
edition. The tail-piece of a basket with fruit, which 
appears on p. 171 of the first, is lacking in the second 
edition. 

The title and collation of the second edition 
(H. 96) are as follows: 

Relation | de ce | qvi s’est passé | en la Miffion des 
Peres de la Com- | pagnie de Iesvs, aux Hurons, & 
aux | pais plus bas de la Nouuelle Fran- | ce, depuis 
l’E{té de l’année 1649. | jufques a 1’ Efté de l’année 
1650. | Enuoyée av R. P. Clavde de Lingendes | Pro- 
uincial de la Compagnie de Iesvs, | en la Prouince de 
France. | Par le R. P. Pavl Ragveneav, Superieur | 
des Miffions de la Compagnie de Iesvs | en la Nou- 
uelle France. | [Printer’s ornament] | 

A Paris, | Chez | Sebastien Cramoisy, | Imprimeur 
ordinaire du Roy, | & de la Reyne Regente. | Et | 
Gabriel Cramoisy, | rué fainct | Iacques, | aux Ci- 
co- | gnes. | M. DC. LI. | Avec Privilege dv Roy. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XXXV 287 


Collation: Title, with verso blank, 1 leaf; ‘‘ Table 
des Chapitres,’’ pp. (2); Ragueneau’s prefatory 
letter, pp. 1-3; Ragueneau’s Relation (13 chaps.), 
pp. 4-171; Jerome Lalemant’s letter, pp. 172-177; 
‘« Lettre de la R. M. | Superieure de 1’ Hofpital de la 
Mifericorde | de Kebec en la Nouuelle France, a 
Mon- | fieur N. Bourgeois de Paris.’’ on pp. 178 
and 179, with the ‘‘ Priuilege’’ and ‘‘ Permifsion ”’ 
on the verso of the latter page. There is no mispag- 
ing. Signatures: Two preliminary leaves without 
signature mark, A—L in eights, and M in four, the 
last two leaves being blank. Sheet two of sig. K is 
incorrectly designated as ljj. 

Copies of the first edition have been sold or priced 
as follows: Squier sale (1876), no. 1964, sold for 
$10.75; Harrassowitz (1882), priced at 250 marks; 
Barlow (1890), no. 1299, sold for $5; Dufossé (1891, 
1892, and 1896), priced at 225, 175, and 300 francs, 
respectively. 

The second edition is more uncommon. The 
Brinley copy, sold in 1879, no. 139, for $55. Copies 
of one or both editions are in the following libraries: 
Lenox (both); Harvard (first); Brown (first); Ayer 
(first); Library of Parliament, Ottawa (first); Public 
Library of Toronto (first); Laval University, Quebec 
(both); British Museum (first); and Bibliotheque 
Nationale, Paris (both). 


NOTES TO VOL. XXXV 


(Figures in parentheses, following number of note, refer to pages 
of English text.) 


1 (p. 21).— For sketch of Garnier, see vol. viii., mote 52; of 
Chabanel, vol. xxiii., zofe 14. Cf. accounts of these Fathers given 
in Relation of 1650, chaps. iii.—iv., in present volume. 

2 (p. 31).— Guillaume Vignar (Vignal), arrived in Canada in Sep- 
tember, 1648, as chaplain of the Ursuline convent. In 1658, he 
went to Montreal, where he died, Oct. 27, 1661, as a prisoner in the 
hands of the Iroquois. 

For sketch of Jeanne Mance, see vol. xxii., mo¢e 7. 


3 (p. 33).— This was Anne Gagnier (Gasnier), widow of Jean du 
Clement du Vault, seigneur de Monceaux; she was born in 1614. 
She obtained from the Hundred Associates (Mar. 29, 1649) a conces- 
sion, the seigniory of Riviére Jacques Cartier. The year from 
September, 1650, to September, 1651, she spent in a visit to France, 
and on August 21, 1655, married Jean Bourdon (vol. xi., zo¢e 11), then 
a widower; he died in January, 1668, and she in June, 1698. 


4 (p. 41).— Fontaradze: the nickname of a soldier, Pierre Legros; 
he was killed by the Iroquois, May to, 1652, with Father Jacques 
Buteux (vol. vi., zoZe 5). 


5 (p. 41).— Martin Grouvel (Gravel), married, at Quebec (Nov. 20, 
1635), Marguerite Auber (Aubert); he was captain of a _ vessel 
engaged in the Tadoussac trade. The date of his death is not 
known, but it must have been previous to September, 1661, since 
at that time the second marriage of his widow is recorded. 


6 (p. 43).— Champlain river, in the county of the same name, falls 
into the St. Lawrence at the village of Champlain. 

‘*The good Charles’’ was a Christian Indian of Sillery, Charles 
Kariskatisitch, mentioned in Relation of 1649-50, chap. x. (pp. 229, 
233 of this volume). 


7 (p. 47).— For sketch of Charles le Gardeur de Tilly, see vol. 
xxvii., mote 5. In 1648-49, he is mentioned as governor of Three 
Rivers; and he was twice sent to Paris as one of the deputies of the 
habitants to secure concessions from the home government. 


290 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES 


8 (p. 47).— This was Michel le Neuf du Hérisson, elder brother 
of Jacques le Neuf de la Poterie (vol. viii., mote 58); he came to 
Canada in 1636, becoming one of the leading citizens of Three 
Rivers, and in 1649 obtained an estate in the suburbs of that town. 
The date of his death is not recorded. 


9 (Pp. 49).— Carcan: ‘‘an iron collar, fixed upon a post, by which 
the person sentenced was fastened thereto. The punishment of the 
carcan was abolished in 1832’’ (Littré). 


Io (p. 51).— An account of this shipwreck is given at the close of 
Relation of 1649 (vol. xxxiv., pp. 229-235). 

Ir (p. 51).—Frangois Buissot (Bissot), sieur de la Riviére,—a 
native of Normandy, born in 1613,—is first mentioned in Canadian 
records in 1647. He married (Oct. 25, 1648) Marie Couillard, by 
whom he had twelve children, one of whom became the wife of the 
explorer Louis Joliet. Atthe time of his marriage, Buissot obtained 
a grant of 200 arpents in the seigniory of Lauson; Feb. 25, 1661, he 
became proprietor of Isle aux CZufs, near Tadoussac (in which 
region he was, during several years, engaged in the fur trade),— ‘‘ the 
last concession granted by the Hundred Associates,’’ according to 
Sulte (Canad.-Frangais, t. iv., p. 15); and, in 1672, obtained from 
Talon the fief of Vincennes, county of Bellechasse. He died in 
July, 1678. 

12 (p. 51).—Jean Rozée, a merchant of Rouen, was an active 
member of the Hundred Associates, and for a considerable time one 
of the directors of that company. With Antoine Cheffault and 
others, he obtained (early in 1636) a grant of Orleans Island (vol. v., 
note 49); this association was for many years influential in Canadian 
affairs. 

Jean Guenet, also a Rouen merchant, was another of the Hundred 
Associates; his name appears in connection with Rozée’s as late as 
1652. 

13 (p. 53).— ‘‘ This paper is no longer in existence ’’ (Queb. ed. of 
Journal, p. 142, note). 

14 (p. 53).—Concerning Robert le Coq, see vol. xix., mote 5, and 
Pp. 95-115. See his ‘‘act of donation’’ to the Jesuit order, vol. 
XXi., Pp. 305. 

15 (p. 53).— Guillaume Gendron, surnamed La Rolandiére, was 
born in 1630, near Nantes, France. <A reference to him made in the 
Journal, Aug. 15, 1653, shows that he came to Canada at least as 
early as 1642. In 1664, he married Anne Loiseau, by whom he had 
two daughters; he appears to have been a resident of Montreal at 
this time, and figures in the militia company of that town. He 
died in September, 1687. 


NOTES TO VOL. XXXV ° 291 


16 (p. 55).— For sketch of Jean Guérin, see vol. xxi., zo¢e 24. His 
virtues are eulogized in Relation of 1663, chap. viii. 

17 (p. 55).— This was Charles Joseph d’Ailleboust, sieur de Mus- 
seaux, nephew of the governor; he was born at Paris, in 1624, and 
was induced by his uncle to settle in Canada (1648). He was in 
command of the ‘‘flying camp” organized in 1649 against the 
Iroquois. In 1651, he succeeded Maisonneuve as governor of Mont- 
real. Ennobled in 1667, he held many important positions in that 
town; he was a judge, in both civil and criminal cases; and was, 
in 1666, one of the commanders of militia. He died in November, 
1700. His wife was Catherine le Gardeur; they had fourteen chil- 
dren, two of whom became nuns. 

18 (p. 55).—‘‘ Girard Laval of Rouen, about twenty-five years old, 
a clerk upon Captain Terrien’s vessel’’ (Register of Notre-Dame, 
Quebec). 

19 (p. 55).— Here Ragueneau’s handwriting replaces that of Lale- 
mant; the Journal is continued by the former until Aug. 15, 1653. 
His autograph signature is written at the beginning of the para- 
graph following this. 

20 (p. 57).—This is the only mention of Regnaut (Renant) in 
either Journal or Relations. See his Recit veritable, in vol. xxxiv. 
(doc. lxix.). 

21 (p. 59).— This was Philippine Gertrude de Boulogne (vol. xxxii., 
note 18). 

22 (p. 61).— ‘‘ By this word ceans must be understood that house 
loaned by the Company of the Hundred Associates, in which mass 
was celebrated after the fire of 1640; for the Jesuit chapel was not 
yet finished *’ (Quebec ed. of Journal, p. 146, ote 3). 

23 (p. 81).— Regarding the Tobacco tribe, see vol. v., zofe 18; the 
Neutrals, vol. viii., notes 34, 41, and vol. xviii., zo¢e Ig. 

24 (p. 85).—See Harris’s description of the cement made by the 
Jesuits (vol. xix. of this series, 7o/e 8). 

25 (p. 107).—See Hunter’s note on location of missions in the 
Tobacco tribe (vol. xx., z0¢e 6). He says, in a recent letter to the 
Editor: ‘‘The most southerly or frontier site that I know of, at 
which European relics have been found in any quantity, is on lot 3 
of the fourth concession, in Nottawasaga township. This might 
have been either St. Jean, or St. Pierre and St. Paul,—the balance 
of evidence being in favor of the latter.”’ 

26 (p. 145).—See notice of the Petit Chatelet in vol. xv., 20fé 9g. 

The Pont Neuf was built across the Seine to connect the {le de la 
Cité with the two islets, La Gourdaine and Aux Treilles; it was 


292 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES 


begun by Henri IIL, in 1578, and finished by Henri IV., in 1604. 
A statue of the latter was erected on the bridge in:.1613, which 
remained until the Reyolution; in 1818 it was replaced by another. 
“In the 16th century, the Pont Neuf was so much the resort of 
news-venders and jugglers that any popular witticism was described 
as ‘a Pont Neuf.’”’—See Hist. of Parts (Whittaker), vol. iii., pp. 
156-162; and Hare’s Walks in Paris, PP. 252-256. 

27 (P. 145).— Théophile: the popular appellation of Théophile de 
Viau, a French poet (1590-1626),—noted for his brilliant wit and 
biting satire, but equally for the profane and licentious tone of his 
verse. So far did this go that in 1623: he was condemned to be 
burned at the stake; finally (1625), this sentence was commuted to 
one of perpetual exile; but his patron, the duke de Montmorency, 
afterward. obtained permission for him to remain in Paris. ‘Théo- 
phile died Sept. 25, 1626. 


28 (p. 175).— This was probably the tripe de roche (Umbilicaria 
Dillenit, Tuck.), one of the edible species of lichen, growing upon 
rocks in Canada. It is often mentioned by early explorers. Perrot 
(Tailhan’s ed., p. 52) describes it as “‘a sort of gray moss, dry, which 
has no flavor of its own, tasting only of the soil, and of the soup in 
which it is cooked; without it, most of the families would die with 
hunger.”” Father André (Re/ation of 1671, chap. ii.) says of it: ‘It 
is necessary to close one’s eyes when one begins to eat it.” Char- 
levoix (Journ. Hist., p. 332) mentions it in similar terms. 


29 (p. 213).— Reference'is here made to ‘‘ the Flemish Bastard,”’ so 
called,— the son of a Dutchman and a Mohawk woman; his mother’s | 
tribe chose him as one of its chiefs. He was long a prominent figure - 
in the hostilities waged by the Iroquois against the French and 
Algonkins. In 1666, he came to Quebec to negotiate for peace; 
this was accomplished, for the time, but was soon broken; and Tracy 
and Courcelles led an expedition against the Mohawks, which laid 
their country waste. Overwhelmed by this blow, they sent the 
Flemish Bastard to Quebec to sue for peace, which was then estab- 
lished. The Bastard, with many of his tribesmen, even removed 
their families and abodes to Canada, and settled near Montreal.— 
See Perrot (Tailhan’s ed.), pp. 111-114, 228. 

30 (Pp. 223).— Cf. the description of this incident given in Journ. 
des Jésuites (p. 49 of this volume). ptr 


oF PO Su 8e eS 
Sue om 2 ™ 9.8 6.65846 Ged Gul, 800.8. O.8,8 
8.408. 8.8 Qu 828) 86 ReG 818. 858.8. 8.8 2 


oe 
2.58 
eee gee . 

mumeees on fees 
Ramis Let tet ter 
eas 

2.0.8.8 


ueuaen 


peueraen 


mt 
+4 


