Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 14: Hurons and Quebec, 1637-1638
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1898 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits14jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits14jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits14jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 14 of 73.

---



f6 
3)1 

SMR 



THE JESUIT RELATIONS 

AND 

ALLIED DOCUMENTS 


VOL. XIV. 



The edition consists of sev- 
en hundred and fifty sets 
all numbered 


No. 







'^ 




14 ft it nu 


^ ^ 

^ 




N^ 


^ is 
^ t)^ i.-^ ^"^ - "^ 


S 

a 
z 

< 


a 


U 
< 


C 


I! 


THE I'HOPERTY 

6qi<1 the law society 

The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 


Travels and Explorations 
OF THE Jesuit Missionaries 

IN New France 

1610-1791 

THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES ; ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 

EDITED BY 

REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 


Vol. XIV 
HuRONS AND Quebec : 1637 -1638 


CLEVELAND; XTbc 3Burrow6 IBtotbcw 
Company, publishers, mdcccxcviii 


Copyright, 1898 

BY 

The Burrows Brothers Co 


ALL rights reserved 


The Imperial Press, Cleveland 


EDITORIAL STAFF 


Editor 


Translators 


Assistant Editor 


Reuben Gold Thwaites 
FiNLOw Alexander 
Percy Favor Bicknell 
William Frederic Giese 
Crawford Lindsay 
William Price 
Hiram Allen Sober 
Emma Helen Blair 


Bibliographical Adviser Victor Hugo Paltsits 


CONTENTS OF VOL. XIV 

Preface to Volume XIV . • • ^ 

Documents: — 

XXIX. Relation de ce qvi s'est passe en la 
Novvelle France, en I'annee 1637. 
[Second installment of Part II., com- 
pleting the document. I Francois 
Joseph le Mercier; Ihonatiria, June 21, 
1637 . . . • -5 

XXX. Relation de ce qvi s'est passe en la 
Novvelle France, en I'annee 1638. 
[First installment, being Part I. of 
the document.] Paullejeune; Thre^ 
Rivers, August 25, 1638 . .113 

Bibliographical Data: Volume XIV . 281 

Notes ....•• 285 



ILLUSTRATIONS TO VOL XIV 


I. 


II. 


Photographic facsimile of Du Quen's hand- 
writing, selected from his copy of Chev- 
alier de Sillery's donation to the Jesuits, 
dated Paris, Feb. 22, 1639 ■ Frontispiece 

Photographic facsimile of title-page, Le 
Jeune's Relation of 1638 . . .116 


PREFACE TO VOL. XIV 


The greater part of Le Mercier's (Huron) contribu- 
tion to the Relation of 1637 (Document XXIX.) was 
presented in our Vol. XIII. We now give the re- 
mainder of the Huron report, which thus closes the 
entire document. 

Le Mercier continues his record of missionary la- 
bors among the plague-stricken Hurons, — nursing 
the sick, consoling the afflicted, and baptizing dying 
children and those adults who at the point of death 
turned to this rite as a protection from the fires of 
hell. In the intervals of these labors, the Fathers 
learn what they can of the native language, " all the 
secret of which," says the author, "consists in the 
conjugations of verbs." In this they are greatly 
aided by " some catechisms prepared for them last 
year by Louis de Sainte-Foy, upon the mysteries of 
the life, death, and passion of Our Lord." 

In March, the missionaries submit to some of the 
clans certain questions — whether they are ready to 
believe in and accept the faith ; whether they are 
willing that some of the Frenchmen should become 
allied to them by marriage ; and if there is any prob- 
ability of the reunion of the natives hereabout to 
those of the Bear clan, from whom they had become 
estranged. The second of these queries is readily 
answered in the affirmative ; but they hesitate as to 
the others. 


PREFACE TO VOL. XIV 


In April, Gamier and some of the domestics spend 
a fortnight in a trip to the neighboring Tobacco Na- 
tion, during which they baptize fifteen sick persons. 

May 3, a fire occurs not far from the mission 
house, in a cabin occupied by some orphans, whose 
relatives had been carried off by the pestilence ; not 
only the villagers, but the missionaries, contribute 
to a fund for the relief of these children, who thus 
find themselves in better circumstances than before. 
In this month of May, a new mission house is estab- 
lished at Ossossane, under the charge of Pierre 
Pijart, and here Gamier soon joins him. 

In the final chapter of this report to Le Jeune, Le 
Mercier relates at length ' ' the happy conversion of 
Tsiouendaentaha, the first adult savage baptized in 
good health in the Huron country," which event fills 
the souls of the Fathers with gladness. 

XXX. The Relation for 1638 consists of two parts : 
Part I., on the missions of New France in general, 
by the superior, Le Jeune, and closed at Three Riv- 
ers, August 25, 1638: Part II., the annual report to 
Le Jeune, from the Huron missions, by Le Mercier, 
dated at Ossossane, June 9, 1638. In the present 
volume, we publish Part I., reserving Part II. for 
Vol. XV. 

Le Jeime begins his Relation by naming ' ' the four 
batteries that shall destroy the empire of Satan," 
which the missionaries are now ranging against as 
many defenses of that empire — superstition, error, 
barbarism, sin. These engines of war are: the study 
of the native languages, the establishment of a hos- 
pital, seminaries for Indian children, and the substi- 
tution among the savages of a sedentary for a nomad- 
ic mode of life. 


PREFACE TO VOL. XIV 


The writer then recounts minutely the conversions 
and baptisms of the past year. Notable among these 
are : an Algonkin who, lying for months at the point 
of death, is restored to health through the prayers of 
the Fathers — not only is he baptized, and made a 
catechumen, but his wife, sister, and three children ; 
two young men, pupils in the Huron seminary; the 
wife and children of Pigarouich, the " sorcerer" with 
whom the missionaries had so many encounters the 
previous year, Pigarouich burned all the utensils 
of his art, and since then has steadily refused to prac- 
tice it, though many times tempted by valuable gifts 
to do so. The religious experiences of a young Al- 
gonkin catechumen, and the proofs of sincerity shown 
by him, are also rehearsed. 

A notable event now occurs, — the establishment of 
the residence of St. Joseph de Sillery, four miles 
above Quebec, through the munificence of Noel de 
Sillery, a Knight of Malta, who, having become a 
priest, dedicated his fortune to pious works. At this 
residence are established two Algonkin families, com- 
prising about twenty persons, who consent to settle 
there and till the soil for their living, — the begin- 
ning of an Indian village, where the native converts 
can be withdrawn from their savage associations, and 
kept under French and Christian influences. Sillery 
has by this time become a center for gathering the 
vagrant savages of that region, and giving them 
religious instruction. 

Progress is also reported from the station at Three 
Rivers ; the savages eagerly bring their children for 
baptism ; ' ' these sacred waters, having many times 
saved the lives of entire families, are now in great 
esteem among them." The medicine men are losing 


PREFACE TO VOL. XIV 


their influence ; the ' ' eat-all ' ' feasts and consultation 
of demons are no longer practiced. 

After its early trials, the seminary for the Hurons 
is now prospering. One of its pupils, converted to 
the faith, returns to the Huron country with one of 
the Fathers, to allay the excitement and discontent 
of the people, who have been threatening the mission- 
aries sent there — accusing them as sorcerers, who 
have brought thither the pestilence for the ruin and 
death of the natives. Besides the seminary for the 
Hurons, others have been begun near Quebec, for the 
Algonkins and Montagnais ; the mission has now in 
charge fifteen of these Indian children, who must be 
supported and educated. 

Jerome Lalemant, Simon le Moyne, and Fran9ois 
du Peron arrive in the spring of 1638, and are forth- 
with sent to the Huron country ; on the way thither, 
they meet with various annoyances and losses. 

In addition to gentlemen already named, the fol- 
lowing have recently rendered material assistance to 
the editor: Pere Colombier, S.J., librarian of I'Ecole 
de Sainte-Genevieve, and M. Girard de Rialle, direc- 
tor of the Archives au Ministere des Affaires etran- 
geres, Paris; Dr. Herbert Friedenwald, superintend- 
ent of MS. department. Library of Congress, Wash- 
ington; Rev. W. O. Raymond, president of New 
Brunswick Historical Society, St. John, N. B. ; Rev. 
Oswald Mueller, S. J., of the College of the Sacred 
Heart, Prairie du Chien, Wis. ; Dr. G. Devron, New 
Orleans; Dr. J. N. B. Hewitt, of the Bureau of Eth- 
nology, Washington; and Dr. John G. Henderson, 
Chicago. 

R. G. T. 

Madison, Wis., January, 1898. 


XXIX (concluded) 

Le Jeune's Relation. 16^7 

ROUEN: JEAN LE BOULLENGER, 1638 


Part 1. (Le Jeune's Relation proper, and his Dernt^re 
Lettre) appeared in Volumes XL, XiL Part IL (Le Mer- 
cier's Huron Relation^ was commenced in Volume XIIL, 
and is completed in the present volume. 


6 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.14 

[183] Pedat noftre feiour d' OJfofane le P S. & le P. 
C. G. firet vn petit voiage qui n'eft pas a obmettre. 
Le 5. de ce mois ils baptiferet 2, malades "k Anon- 
natea & le ledemain 6. aux Biffirinies (qui hiuernoiet 
k I. quart de lietie) i petit enfat tout fraifchemet nay. 
Par vne prouidece de Dieu bie particuliere, ils auoient 
efl6 iufques 1^ d^s le iour precedent, & auoient vilit6 
toutes les cabanes : mais nayant rien trouu6 qui fuft 
capable de les y arrefter plus [184] long-temps, ils en 
efloient partis ^ deffein de retourner d^s le foir a la 
maifon, k vn quart de lieue de la ils s'eftoient apper- 
ceus qu'vn chien qui les auoit fuiuis ne paroiffoit, vn 
chien n'efl pas peu de chofe en ce pays, & cettuy-cy 
fait beaucoup en ce rencontre, neantmoins ils ne s'en 
efloient pas mis autrement en peine, fgachant bien 
que ce n'eftoit pas la premiere fois qu'il efloit retourne 
tout feul ; eftant aupres d' Aneatea [Anonatea] la neige 
commenca a tomber fi efpaiffe qu'ils auoient affez de 
peine k fe conduire, de forte qu'il leur fallut contre 
leur delTein pafTer la nuict en cette bourgade. Le 
lendemain matin par vne prouidence particuliere de 
Dieu, le chien ne fe trouuant point ils fe ref olurent de 
Taller chercher iufques aux Biffiriniens, ils ne furent 
pas pluftofl au village qu'on les auertit qu'vne femme 
eftoit accouchee la nuict, mais que fon enfant efloit 
mort, c'efloit aflez dire pour ne s'en remuer pas da- 
uantage, neantmoins Dieu qui auoit deffein de fauuer 
cette petite ame, les infpira d'aller voir la mere, ils 
trouueret cette femme bien malade, & I'enfant encor 
auec vn peu de vie, le P. Garnier le baptifa fans que 
fes parents s'en apperceuffent, il auoit "k ce defTein 
par preuoyance trempe fon mouchoir dans I'eau [185] 
auant que d'entrer dans la cabane, peut eflre fi on 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 7 

[183] During our sojourn at Ossosane, the Father 
Superior and Father Charles Gamier made a little 
trip which is not to be overlooked. On the 5th of 
this month, they baptized 2 sick persons at Anonna- 
tea; and the next day, the 6th, with the Bissiriniens 
(who were wintering a quarter of a league from there), ^ 
a little newborn child. By a very special providence 
of God, they had gone as far as this place the day be- 
fore, and had visited all the cabins, but, finding 
nothing sufficient to detain them there [184] longer, 
they had departed, intending to return in the even- 
ing to their home. At a quarter of a league from 
there, they perceived that a dog which was following 
them had disappeared. A dog is no small thing in 
this country, and this one performed an important 
part in this case. However, they did not trouble 
themselves any further about it, knowing well that 
this was not the first time that it had returned all 
alone. Being near Aneatea [Anonatea], the snow be- 
gan to fall so thickly that they had considerable diffi- 
culty in finding their way, so that, contrary to their 
intention, they were obliged to pass the night in that 
village. The next morning, through a special provi- 
dence of God, the dog not being found, they resolved 
to go in quest of it as far as the Bissiriniens. They 
were hardly in the village before they were informed 
that a woman had been delivered of a child during 
the night, but that her child was dead. This was 
enough to cause them to give no more heed to the 
matter; but God, who intended ta save this little 
soul, inspired them to go and see the mother. They 
found this woman very sick, and the child still bare- 
ly alive. Father Garnier baptized it without the 
knowledge of its parents, — having, for this purpose, 


8 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.14 

euft confult6 la deffus la mere elle n'en eufl pas eft6 
d'auis, les Algonquins ne font encor gueres capables 
du fainct baptefme, peu de temps apres ce petit Ange 
s'enuola au Ciel. 

Le 20. nous apprifmes d'Anons [Aenons] vne nou- 
uelle opinion touchant la maladie qu'il couroit vn bruit 
quelle efloit venue des Agniehenon qui I'auoient ap- 
portde des Andastoerhonon qui eft vne nation vers la 
Virginie. Ces peuples dit on en auoient efte infectez 
par Ataentsic, qu'ils tiennent eftre la mere de celuy 
qui a fait la terre, qu'elle auoit pafse par toutes les 
cabanes de deux bourgs, & qu'au fecond on luy auoit 
demande, mais en fin pourquoy eft-ce que tu nous 
fais mourir, & qu'elle auoit fait cette refponfe, d'au- 
tant que mon petit fils louskeha eft fafche contre les 
hommes, ils ne font que fe faire la guerre & s'entre- 
tuer les vns les autres, il eft maintenant refolu en 
punition de cette inhumanite, de les faire tons mou- 
rir. Voftre R. me permettra s'il luy plaift de re tren- 
cher d'orefnauant femblables contes auffi bien on me 
prelle de tons coftez, & on me menace tons les iours 
qu'on va mettre incontinant les canots a I'eau i'iray 
iufques ou ie pourray, & efcriray [186] iufques au iour 
de I'ebarquement, fi ie n'arriue au terme, quelque 
autre s'il luy plaift, luy mandera le refte I'annee pro- 
chaine. 

Depuis enuiron le 20. de Feuvrier iufques a la fe- 
maine de la Paffio noftre principal employ fut I'eftude 
de la langue. Le P. S. nous auoit deja copose quel- 
que difcours qui nous auoient grademet fayone dans 
I'inftructio des Sauuages; & pedant le Carefme il 
nous a explique quelques Catechifmes que Louys de 
ste. Foy nous auoit tourn^ I'an paffe fur les miftere 


1 637 - 38] LE JE UNE 'S RELA TIO N, 1637 9 

had the foresight to dip his handkerchief in water 
[185] before entering the cabin. Perhaps if the mother 
had been consulted thereupon, she would not have 
been favorable to it ; the Algonquins are as yet hard- 
ly fit for holy baptism. Shortly afterwards, this 
little Angel flew away to Heaven. 

On the 20th, we learned from Anons [Aenons] a 
new opinion concerning the malady, — that a report 
was current that it had come from the Agniehenon, 
who had brought it from the Andastoerhonon, a nation 
in the direction of Virginia,^ These tribes, it is said, 
had been infected therewith by Ataentsic, whom 
they hold to be the mother of him who made the 
earth ; that she had passed through all the cabins of 
two villages, and that at the second they had asked 
her, " Now, after all, why is it that thou makest us 
die? " and that she had made this answer, " Because 
my grandson, louskeha, is angry at men, — they do 
nothing but make war and kill one another; he has 
now resolved, as a punishment for this inhumanity, 
to make them all die. ' ' Your Reverence will permit 
me, if you please, to shorten, from now on, stories 
of this kind, — especially as they crowd me upon all 
sides, and warn me every day that they are going to 
launch the canoes immediately. I shall go as far as 
I can, and shall write [186] up to the day of the em- 
barkation. If I do not reach the end, some one else, 
if you please, will acquaint you with the rest next 
year. 

From about the 20th of February up to Passion 
week, our chief occupation was the study of the lan- 
guage. The Father Superior had already composed 
some discourses for us, which had accustomed us, in 
great measure, to the" instruction of the Savages; 


10 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.14 

de la vie, mort & paffion de N. S. qui nous ont encor 
grandemet ayd6 nomement en ce point. Nous auios 
deflein de trauailler cette ann^e au Dictionnaire. mais 
Dieu nous k mis dans la neceffit6 de nous conteter de 
ce que nous auios; on na pas laiff6 par fa ste. grace 
de faire vn grand progrez en la langue, de forteq; 
maintenat s'il eft queftio de faire quelques petites 
courfes pour vifiter & inftruire quelque Sauuage, le 
P. S. trouue des persones toutes difposees a partir, & 
ny en a pas vn de nous autres qui ne fe tienne heureux 
d'al[l]er cooperer au falut de quelque ame Nous 
auos bien fuiet de remercier cette infinie bonte qui 
nous donne vne fi grande affectio pour cette lague 
barbare, apres nos exercices de deuotion nous n'a- 
uos point de [187] plus grande confolatio que de 
vaquer h. cette eftude, ce font nos entreties les plus 
ordinaires, & nous recueillos tous les mots de la bou- 
che des Sauuages come autat de pierres precieufes 
pour nous en feruir par apres a faire eclatter ^ leurs 
yeux la beaute de nos s. myfteres. Depuis peu le P. 
S. a trouue de belles ouuertures pour diftinguer les 
coiugaifons des verbes, en quoy confifte tout le fecret 
de la langue, car la plus part des mots se coniuguent, 
tat plus on ira en auat, on ira touiours decouurant 
nouueau pays. 

Le 2. iour de Mars vne vieille feme mourut en 
noftre bourgade, le P. S. lauoit baptis6e quelques 
iours auparauant. Le lendemain il baptifa h. Anno- 
natea vn ieune enfant de 9. k 10 ans, la maladie y con- 
tinuoit toiiiours & n'en eft pas encore partie. 

Le 7. on trouua vn ieune li5me roide mort etedu 
fur la neige h. vne port^e de moufquet de noftre ca- 
banne, le P. S. «& F. Petitpre allat du matin k Ouerio 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 11 

and during Lent he explained to us some Catechisms 
that Louys de ste. Foy had translated for us last 
year upon the mystery of the life, death, and passion 
of Our Lord, which also greatly aided us, especially 
in this respect. We had intended to work this year 
upon the Dictionary, but God has placed us under 
the necessity of contenting ourselves with what we 
had. We have not failed, through his holy grace, to 
make great progress in the language, — so that now, 
if there is a question of making little trips to visit 
and instruct some Savage, the Father Superior finds 
persons all ready to go ; and there is not one of us 
who does not consider himself happy to go and co- 
operate in the salvation of some soul. We have 
good reason to thank this infinite goodness which 
gives us so great a liking for this barbarous language. 
After our devotional exercises, we have no [187] 
greater consolation than to devote ourselves to this 
study ; it is our most common subject of conversation, 
and we gather up all the words from the mouths of 
the Savages as so many precious stones, that we may 
use them afterwards to display before their eyes the 
beauty of our holy mysteries. Within a short time, 
the Father Superior has discovered excellent meth- 
ods of distinguishing the conjugations of the verbs, 
in which the whole secret of the language lies ; for 
the greater part of the words are conjugated. How- 
ever far we advance, we shall still continue to dis- 
cover new lands. 

On the 2nd day of March, an old woman died in 
our village, whom the Father Superior had baptized 
a few days before. The next day, he baptized at 
Annonatea a young child between 9 and 10 years 
old. The disease still continued there, and has not 
yet departed thence. 


12 


LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol. 14 


auoient ouy fa voix come d'vne perfonne qui fe mou- 
roit, & eftas en refolution de Taller chercher s'il eut 
cri6 encor vne fois, mais les forces luy ayans manque, 
& quelques Sauuages difans, les vns que c'eftoit vne 
ame qui fe plaignoit, les autres vn chien : ils auoient 
continue leur chemin fans fe mettre dauantage en 
peine, [i88] Nos Sauuages difcoururent fort fur la 
mort de ce pauure ieune homme, entre autres chofes 
plufieurs attribuerent la caufe de fa mort a vn larcin 
qu'il auoit fait aux Algonquins dont on le trouua 
faifi, ce qui les faifoit parler de la forte n'eftoit pas 
la cognoiffance qu'ils ont que Dieu defifend & punit 
le larcin, c'eft k quoy ils ne penfoient gueres, mais 
ils fondoient leur opinion fur la parole du forcier 
Tsondacouane qui auoit dit quelque temps auparauant 
que quiconque deroberoit les lignes des Algonquins 
oti les amorces de leurs amegons, il ne manqueroit 
point d'eftre incontinent faifi de la maladie. 

Le 9. Le Pere Superieur & le Pere Charles Camier 
allerent vifiter quelques malades au bourg d'Onnen- 
tifati oil ils baptiferent vn petit enfant. 

Le 12. Le Pere Gamier & moy nous baptifames 
vne femme a vne petite bourgade que nous appellons 
Arendaonatia ; ce f ut auec vne confolation toute par- 
ticuliere ; de fait Dieu luy ayant depuis rendu la fan- 
t6 il luy efl demeure vn grand eflime du fainct 
baptefme, nous a tefmoigne beaucoup de bonne vo- 
lonte pour garder les commandemens de Dieu & k 
feruy mefme ^ inftruire quelques autres Sauuages. 

[189] Le 15. i'accompagnay le Pere Superieur ^ 
Anonatea, oil il baptifa vne femme fort malade, de la 
nous allafmes vifiter les Algonquins ou nous anions 
apris qu'il y auoit auffi quantite de malades; nous 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 13 

On the 7th, a young man was found quite dead, 
stretched out upon the snow, within musket-range 
of our cabin. The Father Superior and Frangois 
Petitpre, going that morning to Ouenrio, had heard 
his voice, as of a dying person, and resolved to go 
and seek him if he had called once more ; but as his 
strength failed him, and as some of the Savages said 
it was a soul complaining, and others that it was a 
dog, they had continued on their way without giv- 
ing themselves any further concern about it. [188] 
Our Savages dwelt at length upon the death of this 
poor young man, several attributing the cause of his 
death, among other things, to a theft he had com- 
mitted among the Algonquins, in which they hap- 
pened to catch him. What made them talk in this 
way was not the knowledge they possess that God 
forbids and punishes theft, — that was something for 
which they cared little ; but they based their opinion 
upon the word of the sorcerer Tsondacouane, who had 
said some time before that whoever stole the Algon- 
quins' lines, or the baits from their hooks, would, 
without fail, be immediately attacked by the disease. 

On the 9th, the Father Superior and Father Charles 
Gamier went to visit some sick people in the town of 
Onnentisati, where they baptized a little child. 

On the 1 2th, Father Gamier and I baptized a wom- 
an in a little village that we call Arendaonatia,^ 
doing so with a very special feeling of consolation. 
In fact, God having since restored her health, she 
has conceived a very high opinion of holy baptism, 
and has evinced much good will in keeping the com- 
mandments of God and even in aiding to instruct 
some of the other Savages. 

[189] On the 15th, I accompanied the Father Su- 


14 LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 14 

vifmes entre autres vn nomin6 Oraoxaandindo, qui 
mourut deux ou trois iours apres, nous auions vne 
particuliere obligation h. ce Sauuage. Le P. 3upe- 
rieur fit tout fon poffible pour le rendre capable de 
nos myfteres & du baptefme, de fait il fembloit du 
commencement y vouloir prefter I'oreille, par apres 
neantmoins fe voyant prefs6 de refpondre diftincte- 
ment il prit pour pretexte qu'il n'entendoit pas bien, 
on fait venir vn Sauuage de fa nation qui en effet en- 
tend & parle excellemment bien Huron qui luy repe- 
toit fort fidelement en fa langue tout ce que difoit le 
pere. Apres tout cela nous ne pumes tirer autre 
chofe de luy, finon qu'il ne fentoit aucune inclination 
d'aller au Ciel veu qu'il n'auoit Ik aucune cognoif- 
fance, & pour tout ce que le pere luy pent dire, iamais 
il ne fit autre ref ponce. Nous eufmes toufiours cette 
confolation que le Capitaine, & plufieurs qui eftoient 
Ik furent k cette occafion pleinement inf ormez de ce 
que nous pretendons en ce pays, & qui nous fommes, 
car ils nous aduouerent [190] ingenuement que iuf- 
ques alors ils ne nous auoient pas pris pour des hom- 
mes engendrez h. I'ordinaire des autres, mais pour de 
vrays demons incarnez, & nous dirent que ceux de 
rifle les auoient mis dans cette creance. A entendre 
les vns & les autres ie veux dire les Hurons & les 
Algonquins, ces meflieurs la nous preftent fouuent 
de femblables charitez. 

Le 17. i'accompagne encor le P. S. k lahenhouton 
ou demeure le chef du confeil de cette pointe, le fuiet 
de ce voyage eftoit pour leur faire 3. propofitions. 
La I. s'ils n'eftoiet pas enfin en refolutio de croire ce 
que nous enfeignons, & d'embrafl!er la foy, la 2. s'ils 
auroient pour agreable que quelques vns de nos Fran- 


1637-38] LE J JUNE'S RELATION, ib37 15 

perior to Anonatea, where he baptized a very sick 
woman; thence we went to visit the Algonquins, 
where, we had learned, there were also a number of 
sick people. We saw among others one Oraouandindo, 
who died two or three days afterwards. We were 
under a special obligation to this Savage. The 
Father Superior did all in his power to fit him for 
our mysteries and for baptism ; in fact, he seemed at 
first willing to lend an ear ; but afterwards, seeing him- 
self pressed to answer definitely, he made a pretext 
that he did not fully understand. They summoned a 
Savage of his own nation who, in fact, understands 
and speaks Huron extremely well, and who very 
faithfully repeated to him, in his own tongue, all 
that the father said. After all that, we could draw 
nothing else from him except that he did not feel 
any inclination to go to Heaven, seeing that he had 
no acquaintances there ; and to all the father could 
say to him, he never made any other answer. We 
always had this solace, that the Captain, and several 
who were there, were upon this occasion fully in- 
formed of what we are aiming at in this country, 
and who we are; for they confessed to us [190] in- 
genuously that until then they had taken us not for 
men engendered in the fashion common to others, 
but for real incarnate demons, — telling us that the 
people of the island had led them into this opinion. 
According to them, — I mean the Hurons and the 
Algonquins, — those gentlemen often render us sim- 
ilar kindnesses. 

On the 17th, I again accompanied the Father Su- 
perior to lahenhouton, where resides the chief of the 
council of this place. The object of this journey was 
to make them 3 propositions: ist, whether they had 


16 LES RELATIONS BES /^SUITES [Vol.14 

9ois fe marialTet au pluftoft dans leurs pays, la 3, s'il 
y auoit quelque apparence de reiinion entre eux & 
ceux d" OJfofan^ & de quelques bourgs circonuoifms. 
Voftre R. fcait le fuiet de leur diuiQon, nous luy en 
efcriuifmes amplement I'an palTe a roccafion de la 
fefte des Mors. Pour ce qui eft de la premiere pro- 
politio nous n'eufmes pas toute la fatisf action pos- 
fible, ce Capitaine n'eft pas des plus grands efprits 
du monde, au moins hors du tracas de leurs affaires, 
pour [191] la feconde & la troifiefme ils la goufterent 
fort, & tefmoignerent nous auoir beaucoup d' obliga- 
tion de cette fi etroitte alliance que nous voulions 
faire auec eux, & de ce q; nous nous intereffions fi 
fort pour le bien du pays. A cette occafion ils nous 
aduouerent les manuals deffeins qu'ils auoient eu cet 
hyuer fur nos vies, aians appris k ce qu'ils penfoient 
de bonne part, que I'oncle de feu Eftienne Brufle, 
en vengeance de la mort de fon nepueu, d'ont on n'a- 
uoit tire aucune fatisf action, auoit etrepris la mine 
de tout le pays, & auoit caufe cette maladie conta- 
gieufe. Et fur ce que le Pere temoigna qu'il fou- 
haitteroit bien fort que ces articles fuffent propofes 
en vne affembl6e generalle, il refpondit que la chofe 
n'eftoit pas impoffible, qu'ils en confereroient entre 
eux, & nous en diroient par apres leur fentiment, 
neatmoins que pour ce qui eftoit des manages qu'il 
n'eftoit pas neceffaire de faire tant de ceremonies que 
ceux des Frangois qui eftoient en refolution de fe 
marier, auoient la liberte de prendre des femmes ou 
bon leur fembleroit, que ceux qui f eftoient mariez 
par le paffe n' auoient point demande vn cofeil gene- 
ral pour cela [192] mais qu'ils en auoient pris par ou 
ils en auoient voulu. Le Pere refpondit a cela qu'il 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 17 


not at last resolved to believe what we taught, and 
to embrace the faith ; 2nd, whether it would be ac- 
ceptable to them that some of our Frenchmen should 
marry in their country as soon as possible; 3rd, 
whether there was any probability of a reunion be- 
tween them and the people of Ossosan^ and some of 
the surrounding villages. Your Reverence knows 
the cause of their division ; we wrote to you about it 
fully last year, on the occasion of their feast of 
the Dead."* As regards the first proposition, we did 
not gain all the satisfaction possible ; this Captain is 
not one of the most intelligent men in the world, at 
least outside the little perplexities of their affairs; 
as for [191] the second and third, they approved of 
them heartily, and assured us that they were under 
a great obligation to us for this so close alliance that 
we wished to make with them, and for our great 
interest in the welfare of the country. Upon this oc- 
casion they confessed to us the evil designs they had 
had this winter upon our lives, — having learned 
from a reliable source, as they thought, that the 
uncle of the late Estienne Brusl6, in revenge for the 
death of his nephew, for which no satisfaction had 
been obtained, had undertaken the ruin of the whole 
country, and had caused this contagious disease. 
And thereupon, as the Father declared that he 
greatly desired to have these matters proposed in a 
general assembly, he replied that the thing was not 
impossible, that they would confer about it among 
themselves and give us their opinion afterward; 
however, concerning the marriages, it was not neces- 
sary to go through so many ceremonies, — that those 
Frenchmen who had resolved to marry were free to 
take wives where it seemed good to them ; that those 


18 


LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.14 


efloit bien vray que les Frangois qui s'eftoiet autre- 
fois mariez dans le pays n'auoient point fait tant de 
bruit, mais auffi que leur pretenfions eftoient bien 
efloign^es des noflres, que leur deffein auoit efte de 
fe faire barbares & fe rendre tout h. fait femblables k 
eux, & que nous au contraire nous pretendions par 
cette alliance les rendre femblables k nous, leur don- 
ner la cognoiffance du vray Dieu & leur apprendre "k 
garder fes faints commandemens, & que les mariages 
dont nous parlions f eroient ftables & perpetuels ; & 
leur propofa tons les autres auantages qu'ils en tire- 
roient, ces efprits brutaux ne s'arrefterent gueres aux 
spirituels ; les temporels furent plus a leur gouts, ils 
n'en eulTent fouhaitte que des affeurances bien cer- 
taines. Quelques iours apres ce Capitaine nous vint 
trouuer en I'abfence, du Pere Superieur nous tefmoi- 
gnant qu'ils auoient confere entre eux touchant les 
trois propofitions qui auoient efte faites, que les an- 
ciens les auoient fort agrees, & qu'il eftoit venu pour 
s'efclaircir fur quelques doutes qu'ils auoient fur le 
mariage, & premierement il nous dit qu'ils feroient 
bien aife de f9auoir ce qu'vn mary [193] doneroit k 
fa feme, que parmy les Hurons la couftume eftoit de 
doner beaucoup, au refte c'eft a dire vne robe de 
caftor, & pent eftre quel que collier de pourcelaine, 
2. fi la femme auroit tout en fa difpoGtion, 3. s'il pre- 
noit enuie au mary de retourner en France, s'il em- 
meneroit fa femme auec foy, & au cas qu'elle demeu- 
raft, queft-ce qu'il luy lailleroit k fon depart, 4. fi la 
femme venoit a manquer, & que fon mary la chalTaft ; 
ce qu'elle emporteroit, tout de mefme, fi de fon plain 
gre la fantaifie luy prenoit de retourner chez fes pa- 
rens. Toutes ces queftions monftrent qu'ils y auoiet 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 19 

who had married in the past had not demanded a 
general council for that purpose, [192] but that they 
had taken them in whatever way they had desired. 
The Father replied to this that it was very true that 
the Frenchmen who had hitherto married in the 
country had not made such a stir about it, but also 
that their intentions were far removed from ours, — 
that their purpose had been to become barbarians, 
and to render themselves exactly like them. He 
said that we, on the contrary, aimed by this alliance 
to make them like us, to give them the knowledge 
of the true God, and to teach them to keep his holy 
commandments, and that the marriages of which we 
were speaking were to be stable and perpetual ; and 
he laid before them all the other advantages they 
would derive therefrom. These brutal minds gave 
but little heed to the spiritual considerations; the 
temporal were more to their taste, and of these they 
wished to have very definite assurances. Some days 
later, this Captain came to see us in the absence of the 
Father Superior, aSvSuring us that they had conferred 
among themselves touching the three propositions 
that had been made; that the old men were very 
favorable to them, and that he had come in order to 
be enlightened concerning certain doubts they had 
about marriage. And first, he told us, they would 
be very glad to know what a husband [193] would 
give to his wife ; that among the Hurons the custom 
was to give a great deal besides, — that is to say, a 
beaver robe, and perhaps a porcelain collar. 2nd, 
whether the wife would have everything at her dis- 
posal. 3rd, if the husband should desire to return to 
France, whether he would take his wife with him ; 
and, in case she remained, what he would leave her 


20 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.14 

pens6. Nous fifmes ce que nous peufmes pour les 
contenter. La deffus, luy tefmoignant au refle que 
quad il en auroit cofer^ auec le P. Sup. qui I'expli- 
queroit en bons termes, ils auroient tout fuiet de de- 
meurer plainement fatisfaits de noftre precede en ce 
point. Voyla oil nous en fommes de ces mariages; 
quelque vns de nos Frangois auoient bien eu la penfee 
de paffer plus outre, & d'en venir k I'execution, &la 
chofe femble eftre bien auantageufe pour le Chriftia- 
nifme : mais quelques empef chemens fe font iettez k 
la trauerfe. La chofe merite bien vne meure deli- 
beration, il y ^ bien des confiderations a faire auant 
que de [194] s' engager dans le mariage, fur tout par- 
my des peuples barbares comme ceux-cy. 

Pour ce qui regarde la reiinion de toute cette 
nation des Ours, c'eft vne affaire encor indecife ; le P. 
Superieur a fait k ce deffein plufieurs voyages, foubs 
I'efperance qu'on nous auoit donne d'vn confeil gene- 
ral, il leur auoit mefme donne parole, que s'il n'eftoit 
queflio que de quelque prefent, nous eflions refolus 
de ne rien ef pargner en cefte occafion : & tout fraif che- 
ment eflant a Offoffant, ou quelques anciens tenoient 
la chofe comme faite, il nous auoit made que nous 
luy enuoiaffions douze cens grains de pourcelleine, 
pour pref enter aux deux parties qui deuoient s'affem- 
bler k AfidiataL De fait la plufpart des Capitaines 
des bourgades de cette pointe, s'efloient mis en che- 
min, mais celuy qui a efte I'autheur & le chef de la 
diuifion, aiant refuf6 de s'y trouuer, 1 'affaire efl 
demeuree pendue au croc, neantmoins on ne la tient 
pas encor defefperee. 

Le 2 1 . nous allaf mes k Ouenrio le P. Gamier & 
moy oil nous baptifames la femmes du Capitaine, fort 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 21 

on his departure. 4th, if the wife failed in her duty 
and the husband drove her away, what she could 
take away with her — and the same if, of her own 
free will, the fancy seized her to return to her rela- 
tives. All these questions show that they had 
thought over the matter. We did what we could to 
satisfy them thereupon, — assuring him besides that 
when he should confer with the Father Superior, 
who would explain it clearly, they would all have 
good reason to be fully satisfied with our proceed- 
ings in the matter. This is the situation in regard 
to these marriages. Some of our Frenchmen had 
thought seriously of going farther, and of carrying 
out this plan, and the thing seems indeed to be ad- 
vantageous to Christianity ; but some obstacles were 
thrown in the way. The matter certainly deserves 
mature deliberation ; many things are to be consid- 
ered before [194] engaging themselves in marriage, 
— above all, among barbarous peoples like these. 

As regards the reunion of this whole nation of the 
Bear, it is a matter still undecided. The Father Su- 
perior has made several journeys with this in view, 
in the hope they had given us of a general council ; 
he had even given them his word that, if it were only 
a question of a present, we were resolved to spare 
nothing to this end. And very recently, being at 
Ossossanc, where some of the old men regarded the 
matter as already accomplished, he had sent word to 
us to send him twelve hundred porcelain beads to 
present to the two parties which were to assemble at 
Andiatae. In fact, the majority of the Captains of 
the villages in that quarter started to go thither ; but 
the one who was the author and chief of this division 
having refused to be present, the matter has remained 


22 


LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUJTES [Vol. 14 


aagee: fon mary tefmoigna en eflre affez content, 
neantmoins craignant que le baptefme ne la fit mou- 
rir: [195] il me dift, me monflrant trois de fes doigts. 
Mon neueu, regarde, trois ionrs font d 'importance, 
me donnant a entendre qu'il efloit important qu'elle 
ne mourut dans le troifiefme iour, autrement qu'ils 
croiroient que nous ferions caufe de fa mort, & me 
preffa de luy dire fi elle gueriroit. le lui refpondis 
qu'il n'y auoit que Dieu qui le peufl dire affeure- 
ment, qui feul eftoit le maiftre de nos vies, & en dif- 
pofoit h. fa volonte, mais que ie I'alTeurois bien d'vne 
chofe, que le baptefme ne luy auanceroit point fes 
iours, au contraire que Dieu, qui a vn foin particu- 
lier de tons ceux qui font baptifez, luy pourroit bien 
auffi rendre la fante. De fait au bout de quelques 
iours elle fut parfaitement guerie, & depuis nous h. 
beaucoup ayde pour en baptifer quelques autres. Le 
26. le P. Pijart & le P. Gamier baptiferent deux 
petits enfans a Onnentifatj. 

Le vingt-neufiefme nous affemblafmes les princi- 
paux de noflre bourgade, pour f9auoir premierement, 
s'ils efloient en refolution de paffer encor icy I'Hy- 
uer: fecondement fi le deffein qu'ils auoient eu de fe 
reiinir auec ceux d' Ouenrio [196] efloit tout a fait 
rompu, autrefois ce n'eftoit qu'vn bourg; troifiefme- 
ment, fi enfin ils ne vouloiet pas prefler I'oreille aux 
propofitios qu'on leur auoit faites fi fouuent touf chant 
leur falut. A ce dernier article ils refpondirent que 
quelques vns d'entre eux croyoient ce que nous en- 
feignions, que pour les autres ils n'en pouuoient pas 
refpondre: au refte qu'ils n'eftoient pas encor en dif- 
pofition pour cet annee de changer le lieu de leur 
demeure; & que 1 'annee prochaine il ne tiendroit pas 


1 637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' 5 RELA TION, 1637 23 

hanging on the hook. Nevertheless, it is not yet 
regarded as hopeless. 

On the 2ist, we went to Ouenrio, Father Garnier 
and I, where we baptized the very aged wife of the 
Captain. Her husband seemed to be rather pleased 
at this; nevertheless, fearing that baptism might 
cause her death, [195] he said to me, showing me 
three of his fingers, " My nephew, look; three days 
are of importanoe," — giving me to understand that 
it was important that she should not die on the third 
day, otherwise that they would believe we were the 
cause of her death ; he urged me to tell him if she 
would recover. I answered that no one but God 
could tell that with certainty, — that he alone was 
the master of our lives, and disposed of them at will ; 
but that I would certainly assure him of one thing, 
that baptism would not shorten her days, — on the 
contrary, that God, who has a special care over all 
those who are baptized, might indeed even restore 
her to health. In fact, at the end of a few days she 
had entirely recovered, and since then has helped 
us a great deal in baptizing some others. On the 
26th, Father Pijart and Father Garnier baptized two 
little children at Onnentisati. 

On the twenty-ninth, we assembled the chief men of 
our village, to know, first, if they had determined to 
pass the Winter here again ; secondly, if the inten- 
tion they had had of reuniting with the people of 
Ouenrio [196] was altogether relinquished; formerly 
this was all one village. Thirdly, if they would 
not at last lend ear to the propositions that had so 
often been made to them touching their salvation. 
To this last point they answered that some among 
them believed what we taught; as for the others, 


24 


LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol. 14 


^ eux, qu'ils ne s'affemblairent en vn mefme bourg 
auec ceux d'Ouenrio, quoy que s'en foitnous fommes 
refolus pour nous, d'eftablir ailleurs d'autres' refi- 
dences. 

Ce mefme 29. Le P. Sup partifl pour aller k Tea- 
naojlaiad auec le P. Garnier, afin qu'il peuft temoi- 
gner fur les lieux aux parens de Louys de Ste. Foy 
le reffentimet que nous auios de I'affliction de leur 
famille, & efTuier par quelques petis prefes le refte 
de leurs larmes. Ce voyage ne fut pas inutile pour 
plufieurs, dont les vns receurent le S. baptefme, & les 
autres eurent le bien d'eflre informez de nos faincts 
myfleres, que nous aurons d'orefnauent plus de 
commodite de leur prefcher, maintenant que nous 
fommes [197] habituez ^ Offoffati^, qui eft comme le 
cceur du pays. Au bourg de Scajionacnrat le P. Sup. 
aiant iette quelque propos de noftre croyance a noftre 
hofle, quelques autres de la cabane s'approcherent, 
& efcouterent fort attentiuement fans deflourner le 
difcours aillieurs felon la couftume des Sauuages, mais 
luy faifans plufieurs quefhions fort a propos. Entre 
autres comment nous fgauions qu'il faifoit fi bon au 
Ciel? ce qu'il falloit faire pour y aller? commet s'en- 
tendoiet les commendemens de Dieu, que le Pere leur 
propofoit? ils les gouftoient & approuuoient grande- 
ment. 

Le 30. ils arriuerent a Teanaojlaiac oil ils recontre- 
rent vne bonne partie des parens de Louys de Ste. 
Foy, & k cette premiere entreueiie, fe renouueleret 
les reffentimens de la perte qu'ils auoient faite ; le 
Pere leur temoigna d'abord que' des le mois d'Octobre 
il auoit eu deilein de les aller confoler ^ la premiere 
commodite, mais que la maladie de noftre maifon, les 


1 637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 25 

they could not answer for them. Moreover, they 
were not yet inclined for this year to change the 
place of their residence ; and that next year it would 
not be their fault if they did not meet in the same 
village with the people of Ouenrio. Be that as it 
may, we are resolved for our part to establish other 
residences elsewhere. 

On this same 29th, the Father Superior set out to 
go to Teatiaostaiad with Father Gamier, in order that 
he might upon the spot testify to the relatives of 
Louys de Ste. Foy the sympathy we felt for the 
affliction of their family, and by means of some little 
presents wipe away the rest of their tears. This 
journey was not unprofitable for several persons, of 
whom some received Holy baptism, and others had 
the blessing to be informed of our holy mysteries. 
How much greater will henceforth be our facilities 
for preaching to them, now that we are [197] settled 
at Ossossand, which is, as it were, the heart of the 
country. At the village of Scanonaenrat, the Father 
Superior having made some remarks about our belief 
to our host, some other inmates of the cabin ap- 
proached and listened very attentively, without di- 
verting the conversation to other subjects according 
to the custom of the Savages, but asking him several 
very pertinent questions. Among others, " how we 
knew that it was so pleasant in Heaven ? " " What 
must be done, in order to go there?" " How were 
the commandments of God that the Father proposed 
to them to be understood?" They enjoyed and 
approved them greatly. 

On the 30th, they arrived at Teanaostaiad, where 
they met a great many of the relatives of Louys de 
Ste. Foy; and at this first interview- they renewed 


26 


LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 14 

occupations de tout I'hyuer, & les mauuais bruits qui 
auoient couru par le pays, I'auoiet faict differer, ce 
voyage iufques en vn temps auquel la maladie eftat 
diminu6e de beau coup, ils auroiet moins de fuiet d'a- 
uoir ombrage de nous & de craindre [198] que ne leur 
portaffions le mal : puis il les cofola, & comme felon 
la couftume du pais, vne perfonne qui efl dans I'affli- 
ction ne s'eftime gueres confolee, {i vous ne luy don- 
nez que des paroles, le Pere leur fit vn prefent de 
400. grains de pourcellene, & de 2. petites baches. 
Vn des oncles de Louys de fainte Foy, nous auoit 
voulu faire croire que Louys n'eftoit pas mort, il y 
auoit plus de deux mois qu'il nous auoit dit en fe- 
cret, qu'il auoit apris de bonne part qu'il elloit encor 
plein de vie, neantmoins la mere leur dit en cefte 
occafion, qu'elle n'en croioit rien : elle a depuis change 
d'auis comme ie diray en fon lieu. 

Le 31. au retour de Teanaojiaia^, les Peres couche- 
rent h. Ekhiondaltfaan, qui ell vn bourg affez beau & 
affez peuple ; noflre hofle fit vne queftion au P. Su- 
perieur, que iamais aucun de nos Sauuages ne nous 
auoit faite, il luy demanda pour quel vfage il y auoit a 
I'entree de noftre Chapelle de kebec, vn vafe plein 
d'eau. Le P. leur dit qu'entre-autres vfages cet eau 
feruoit a chaffer les diables, ils demanderent fi cette 
eau leur pourroit feruir 'k mefme fin. Le P. Supe- 
rieur leur refpondit qu'ouy, moyennant qu'ils creuf- 
fent [199] en Dieu, & prift de 1^ occafion de les in- 
flruire fur la croiance d'vn Dieu. & fur la fin de 
I'homme. lis firent retirer toute la ieuneffe, qui 
s'eftoit amaffee ^ la foule pour voir les Peres, & 
affemblerent les chefs du bourg pour conferer en- 
femble fur ce fuiet. Tons conclurent qu'il falloit 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6j7 27 

their expressions of sympathy for the loss they had 
sustained. The Father assured them, at the outset, 
that since the month of October he had intended to 
go and console them at the earliest opportunity ; but 
that the sickness of our household, the occupations 
of the whole winter, and the evil reports that were 
current through the country, had caused him to defer 
this voyage until a time when, the sickness having 
greatly abated, they would have less reason to take 
umbrage at us, and to fear [198] that we might bring 
them the disease. Then he consoled them, and as, 
according to the custom of the country, a person 
who is in affliction hardly considers himself com- 
forted if you give him nothing but words, the Father 
made them a present of 400 porcelain beads and 2 
little hatchets. One of the uncles of Louys de sainte 
Foy had tried to make us believe that Louys was not 
dead ; more than two months before he had told us, 
secretly, that he had learned on good authority that 
he was still alive and well. Nevertheless, his mother 
told them on this occasion that she did not believe 
this at all; she has changed her mind since then, as 
I shall relate in the proper place. 

On the 31st, on their way back from Teanaostaiaf, 
the Fathers slept at Ekhiondaltsaan, a tolerably fine 
and populous village.^ Our host asked the Father 
Superior a question that none of our Savages had 
ever proposed to us ; he asked him what was the use 
of a vase full of water at the entrance to our Chapel 
at kebec. The Father told him that, among other 
uses, this water served to drive away the devils;, 
they asked if this water would serve the same pur- 
pose for them. The Father Superior said "yes," 
provided they would believe [199] in God; and he 


LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 14 


auoir de I'eau benifte, neantmoins trouuans quelque 
difficulte a ce que le Pere leur difoit, que Dieu nous 
deffendoit de nous feruir de Arendioouane, ou forciers, 
en nos maladies, ils propofoient de s'affembler encor 
le lendemain matin auant noflre depart. Mais le 
Pere leur aiant fait entendre que Dieu ne defendoit 
pas I'vfage des remedes naturels que prefcriroient les 
Arendioouan^, ils fe tindrent pleinement fatisfaits, & 
conclurent qu'il n'efloit point befoin de s'affembler le 
lendemain, mais feulement de venir au pluftoft querir 
de I'eau benifle. Nous les attendons encore ; il y a 
bien de I'apparence qu'ils ne s'en mettent plus gueres 
en peine, maintenant qu'ils ne font plus dans I'ap- 
prehenfion de la maladie, leur bourg en ayant efte 
preferue iufques k prefent. 

Le I. iour d'Auril eflant arriuez ^ Andiatae ils vi- 
fiterent quelques malades, entre autres [200] vn ieune 
enfant de 1 3. ans Voftre Reuerence aura de la confo- 
lation d'entendre quelques particularitez de fon bap- 
tefme, que nous auons tout fujet d'attribuer aux me- 
rites de S. lofeph. Les Peres le trouueret en tel 
eftat que fes parents n'attendoient plus que I'heure 
qu'il expiraft, tout ce qu'ils peuret faire pour lors, 
fut de luy faire aualler vn peu d'eau fucree, & de de- 
mander a Dieu fon ame, ils firent vn voeu k Dieu de 
quelques Meffes en I'honneur de S. lofeph. II y 
auoit encor quelques autres malades dans le bourg; 
le P. Superieur les alia voir, & laiffa le Pere Gamier 
aupres de cet enfant, afin que s'il reuenoit a foy il 
peufl en eftre auerty incontinent, cependant le Pere 
Gamier ne laiffa pas de dire quelque bon mot aux 
parents, & leur parler du Paradis & de I'Enfer. Ils 
fembloient du commencement auoir quelque inclina- 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 


29 


took occasion therefrom to instruct them upon the 
belief in one God, and upon the end of man. They 
ordered the withdrawal of all the youth, who had 
collected in a crowd to see the Fathers, and as- 
sembled the chief men of the village to confer to- 
gether upon this subject. All decided that they 
must have some holy water ; but, finding some ob- 
stacles in what the Father said, that God forbids us 
to resort to Arendioouan^, or sorcerers, in our sick- 
nesses, they proposed to assemble again the next 
morning, before our departure. But the Father, 
having made them understand that God did not for- 
bid the use of natural remedies which the Arendioou- 
an^ might prescribe, they were entirely satisfied, and 
concluded it was not necessary to assemble the next 
day, but only to come and get some holy water as 
soon as possible. We are waiting for them yet; it 
is quite probable that they do not concern them- 
selves much further about it, now that they are no 
longer in apprehension of the disease, their village 
having been preserved up to the present. 

On the I St day of April, having arrived at Andiata^, 
they visited some sick people, among others [200] a 
child of 13 years. Your Reverence will have the 
consolation of hearing some particulars of his bap- 
tism, which we have every reason to attribute to the 
merits of St. Joseph. The Fathers found him in 
such a condition that his relatives were only waiting 
for the hour of his death ; all they could do then 
was to make him swallow a little sweetened water, 
and to ask his soul of God ; they made a vow to God 
of some Masses in honor of St. Joseph. There were 
still some other sick people in the village; the 
Father Superior went to see them and left Father 


30 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 14 


tion, que cet enfant allafl apres la mort oh efloiet fes 
parents deffunts, neantmoins, le P. Superieur eftant 
retourn^ fur le foir, & leur ayant demand^ leur'auis, 
ils dirent qu'ils defiroient que leur fils allafl ou il 
faifoit le meilleur, & leur aiant refpondu que c'eftoit 
au ciel oti il faifoit le meilleur, ils dirent qu'ils defi- 
roient done qu'il y allaft. Or de peur de perdre 
I'occafion [201] de mettre au Ciel I'ame de ce pauure 
malade le P. Superieur laifCa coucher aupres de luy 
le P. Gamier. II s'entretint vne partie de la nuict 
auec les parents, & fur tout auec vn fameux forcier, 
fur la verity d'vn Dieu, & quelques autres bos dif- 
cours, le malade palTa la nuict affez doucemet, & la 
nature mefme fit quelques efforts, de forte que le 
lugement luy reuint, au grand contentement du pere 
& de la mere, qui a cette occafion difoient meruelle 
d vn peu de fucre qu'on luy auoit done; le P. Gamier 
ne perdit point de temps, mais fi tofl qu'il le vift tant 
foit peu ^ foy, il fe mift ^ I'inftruire, pour le bapti- 
fer, il nacheua pas neantmoins, voyant qu'il y auoit 
bien de I'apparence, qu'allant auertir le Pere Supe- 
rieur ils le trouueroit encor en bo iugement. Le 
Pere vient, I'inflruit, & en vn mot le fait baptifer par 
le P. Gamier. II fut nomme lofeph en recognoif- 
fance de la faueur qu'ils auoient receu de ce S. Patri- 
arche; qui nous tefmoigne toufiours que c'efl k bonne 
raifon que nous I'auons pris pour noftre patron & 
noftre Pere. 

Le 2. iour d'Auril ils trouuerent auffi ^ Off off an^, 
vne ieune femme a I'extremite, elle auoit encor afl:ez 
de lugement; mais il ne leur fut pas poffible de luy 
perfuader le baptefme, [202] nonobftant toutes les 
confideratios qu'on luy peuR reprefenter du Paradis 


1637-38] LEJEUNE'S RELATION, i637 31 


Garnier beside this child, in order that, if he recov- 
ered consciousness, he might be immediately ad- 
vised thereof. Meanwhile Father Garnier did not 
fail to say a few good words to the relatives, and to 
tell them of Paradise and of Hell. They seemed at 
first somewhat inclined to have this child go after 
death to the place where his dead relatives were; 
nevertheless, the Father Superior having returned 
towards evening, and having asked them their opin- 
ion, they said they desired their son to go where it 
would be best for him; and, having answered them 
that it would be best for him in heaven, they said 
that they wished him then to go there. Now for fear 
of losing the opportunity [201] of placing the soul 
of this poor sick boy in Heaven, the Father Superior 
left Father Garnier to sleep beside him. He con- 
versed during a part of the night with the relatives, 
and especially with a famous sorcerer, upon the truth 
of the one God, and some other good subjects. The 
patient passed the night very quietly, and nature it- 
self made some efforts, so that consciousness returned 
to him, to the great satisfaction of his father and 
mother, who, when this happened, told wonders of 
a little sugar that had been given him. Father Gar- 
nier lost no time, but as soon as he saw him even 
slightly revived, he began to instruct him, in order 
to baptize him; yet he did not finish, seeing that 
there was every probability that, if he went to notify 
the Father Superior, they would find the boy still 
entirely conscious. The Father comes, instructs 
him, and, in short, has him baptized by Father 
Garnier. He was named Joseph in acknowledge- 
ment of the favor they had received from this Holy 
Patriarch, who is always showing us that it is with 


32 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.14 

& de I'enfer, elle mourut miferablement quelques 
iours apres. 

Le 5, vn Capitaine d' Off off and enuoia inuiter le P. 
Superieur a vn confeil general qui s'y deuoit tenir, 
il partir le 6. ie luy fis compagnie. En paffant par 
Ouenrio, il fit alTembler les ancies pour traitter de 
leur reunion auec ceux de noflre bourgade ; mais ils 
ne refolurent rien, feulement ils promirent d'en con- 
ferer entr'eux encor plus particulierement. Eftans 
arriuez ^ Offoffand, nous attendifmes deux iours apres 
le confeil, & apres cela il nous en fallut reuenir 
comme nous eftions allez, Tabfence du Capitaine du 
bourg, Angouteus en fut la caufe. Cependant le 
Capitaine d' Off off and loiia fort le deffein que nous 
anions de les rallier tous enfemble, que ce feroit vn 
nouueau fuiet de nous faire aimer, & nous rendre 
confiderables dans le pais, que fi la chofe reiiffilToit, 
il en feroit parl6 a iamais en toutes les affembl^es 
folemnelles, & aux Fefles des morts. Tandis que 
nous eftions "k attendre ce confeil ; vn des gendres de 
noftre hofte retourna de la chaff e de I'Ours, mais k 
I'entendre, ce qu'ils [203] auoient pris ne recompen- 
foit pas la perte qu'ils auoient faite; nous eufmes du 
plaifir "k ce narre, il raconta la mort d'vn chien, qu'ils 
croioient auoir efle deuore d'vn Ours, fi pathetique- 
ment, que vous eufliez prefque creu qu'il parlafl de 
la mort d'vn des braues Capitaines du pais; il loiia 
fon courage k pourfuiure I'Ours, & a luy faire tefle, 
il adioufla que I'aiant perdu de veue, & I'aiant fuiui 
long temps k la pifle, iufques k vne petite riuiere ; il 
s'efioit en fin arrefte, & auoit dit, en fichant fa hacbe 
en terre: Quoy done, Oiiatit (c'eftoit le nom du chien) 
es-tu mort ? voila ma hache que ie rifque auec toy. 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 33 

good reason we have taken him for our patron and 
our Father. 

On the 2nd day of April, they also found at Ossos- 
san^ a young woman on the verge of death ; she had 
still enough understanding, but it was not possible 
to persuade her to accept baptism, [202] notwith- 
standing all the arguments that could be presented 
to her about Paradise and hell. She died miserably, 
several days later. 

On the 5th, a Captain of Ossossane sent to invite 
the Father Superior to a general council to be held 
there; he departed on the 6th, I accompanying him. 
In passing through Oiienrio, he had the old men as- 
semble to treat of their reunion with the people of 
our village; but they came to no conclusion, only 
promising to confer again about it, more in detail, 
among themselves. Having arrived at Ossossantf, we 
waited two days for the council, and after that we were 
obliged to return as we had come, the absence of the 
Captain of the village Angouteus,^ being the cause 
of this. However, the Captain of Ossossan^ greatly 
praised our plan of bringing them all together, say- 
ing that this would be a new occasion for endearing 
ourselves, and rendering ourselves influential in the 
country; that, if this affair were successful, it would 
be mentioned forever in all the solemn assemblies, 
and at the Feasts of the dead. While we were 
awaiting this council, a son-in-law of our host re- 
turned from Bear hunting; but, according to his 
story, what they [203] had captured did not recom- 
pense them for the loss they had sustained. We 
enjoyed this narrative ; he described the death of a 
dog, which he believed had been devoured by a 
Bear, so pathetically, that you would almost have 



34 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.14 

Celuy ^ qui efloit le chien efcoutoit ce difcours, auec 
vn coeur fi faifi qu'il euft trope ceux qui euffent igno- 
re le fuiet de fa douleur. Ah ! il eft vray (difoit-il) 
que i'aimois bien fort Ouatit, i'auois refolu de le gar- 
der auec tnoy toute fa vie, il n'y auoit point de fonge 
qui fuft capable de me porter a en faire feftin, pour 
rien du monde ie ne I'euffe donne ; & encor me feroit- 
ce maintenant quelque confolation, fi on m'auoit ap- 
porte vn petit Ours qui peuft prendre fa place, & por- 
ter fon nom. Mais voicy vn fuiet plus ferieux, & 
tout k fait plein de confolation. 

[204] Le 13. a I'occafion de quelques vns de nos 
domeftiques, qui alloient faire vn voyage a la nation 
du Petun, qui efl a deux iournees de nous. Le P. 
Gamier demanda au P. Superieur de leur faire com- 
pagnie, fimplement pour y vifiter les malades, qui 
eftoient (^ ce qu'on nous auoit dit) en affez bon nom- 
bre. Ce voiage fut de 14. iours, le pere baptifa 15. 
perfonnes malades, vn enfant k Arente, deux autres a 
OJJoJfan^, qui moururent pen de iours apres, le refte 
^ la nation du Petun, f9auoir efl deux femmes fort 
aagees, & dix petits enfans, dont deux moururent le 
mefme iour de leur baptefme. Ce fut vne prouidence 
de Dieu bien particuliere, nommement pour vn petit 
gargon de dix ans, il y auoit trois ans qu'il languilToit, 
& n'attendoit ce femble, que le baptefme pour mourir. 

Le 15. nous aprifmes qu'vn ieune homme s'efloit 
empoifonne a Offojfand, & a cette occafion quelques 
Sauuages nous dirent, qu'vne des principales caufes 
pourquoy ils vfoiet d'vne fi grande indulgence enuers 
leurs enfans, c'eftoit d'autant que lors que les enfans 
fe voioient traittez de leur parens auec quelque ri- 
gueur, ils en venoient d'ordinaire aces extremitez & 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 36 

believed that he was relating the death of one of the 
brave Captains of the country. He praised his cour- 
age in pursuing the Bear, and in opposing him ; he 
added that, having lost sight of him, and having a 
long time followed his tracks as far as a little river, 
he had at last stopped, and had said, sticking his 
hatchet into the ground, "How now, OiiatW (this 
was the name of the dog) " art thou dead? There is 
my hatchet that I risk with thee." The owner of 
the dog listened to this speech with so heavy a heart 
that he would have deceived those who might not 
know the cause of his grief. "Ah! it is true " (said 
he) ' * that I dearly loved Ouatit; I had resolved to 
keep him with me all his life ; there was no dream 
that could have influenced me to make a feast of 
him, — I would not have given him for anything in 
the world ; and yet it would be some consolation to 
me now if they had brought me a little Bear, which 
could take his place and carry his name." But here 
is a more serious subject, and one in every way full 
of consolation. 

[204] On the 13th, when some of our domestics 
were going on a visit to the Tobacco nation, which 
is a two days' journey from us, Father Gamier asked 
the Father Superior's permission to accompany 
them, simply to visit the sick there, who were (ac- 
cording to what we had been told) quite numerous. 
This journey lasted 14 days, and the father baptized 
15 sick persons, — one child at Arente; two others at 
Ossossand, who died a few days afterward; the rest 
in the Tobacco nation, namely, two very old women 
and ten little children, two of whom died the day of 
their baptism. This was a very special providence of 
God, especially for a little boy of ten years ; he had 


36 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.14 

fe pendoient, ou mangeoient [205] d'vne certaine ra- 
cine, qu'ils appellent Andachienrra, qui eft vn poifon 
fort prefent. 

Le 19. les BiJ^iriniens voians les glaces rompues, 
& le lac ouuert, s'embarquerent pour retourner en 
leur pais, & emporterent dans fept canots foixante & 
dix corps, de ceux qui efloient morts pendant leur 
hyuernement parmi les Hurons. Nous nous fer- 
uifmes de cette occafion pour faire fgauoir de nos 
nouuelles ^ voftre R. veu mefme qu'vn Sauuage nom- 
me Ontaete auoit deffein de tirer droit a Kebec. 

Le 20. on fit mourir k OJfoJfane vne femme en qua- 
lite de forciere; parmi ces barbares moins que demi 
preuue en cette matiere, fuffit pour vous faire fendre 
la tefle. Voicy comme la chofe arriua: Celuy qui fe 
croioit auoir efte enforcel6 d'elle, I'enuoia querir fous 
pretexte de I'inuiter ^ vn feftin, elle n'eft pas li tofl 
arriu^e, qu'on luy prononce fa fentence, fans autre 
forme de procez. Cette pauure miferable voiant 
qu'il n'y auoit point d'appel, nomma celuy qui luy 
donneroit le coup de hache, en mefme temps on la 
traifne hors la cabane, on luy brufle la face, & vne 
partie du corps auec des efcorces [206] ardantes, & en 
fin celuy qu'elle auoit pris pour parrain, luy fendit la 
tefte; le lendemain fon corps fut brufle «fe mis en 
cendre au milieu du bourg. Quelques vns difent 
qu'elle aduoiia le fait, & mefme qu'elle nomma quel- 
ques vns de fes coplices, d'autres difent qu'elle parla 
feulement en general, difant qu'ils s'eftoient tons 
accordez de ne fe point defcouurir I'vn I'autre, au cas 
que quelqu'vn fuft pris fur le fait. Aoiidaenchrid, vn 
des Capitaines voiant qu'elle eftoit prife, fut d'auis 
qu'on I'expediaft promptement, difant que les anciens 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j6s7 37 

been lingering for three years, and was waiting only 
for baptism, it seems, to die. 

On the 15th, we learned that a young man had 
poisoned himself at Ossossan^; and in reference to 
this some Savages told us that one of the principal 
reasons why they showed so much indulgence to- 
wards their children, was that when the children 
saw themselves treated by their parents with some 
severity, they usually resorted to extreme measures 
and hanged themselves, or ate [205] of a certain root 
that they call Andachienrra, which is a very quick 
poison. 

On the 19th, the Bissiriniens, seeing the ice broken 
and the lake open, embarked to return to their own 
country, and carried away in seven canoes seventy 
bodies of those who had died while they wintered 
among the Hurons. We availed ourselves of this 
opportunity to send news of ourselves to your Rev- 
erence, especially as a Savage named Outaetd in- 
tended going direct to Kebec. 

On the 20th, a woman was put to death as a 
sorceress at OssossanL Among these barbarians less 
than half proof in this matter suffices to have one's 
head split. The affair occurred thus : The one who 
thought he had been bewitched by her sent for her 
under the pretext of inviting her to a feast ; she had 
no sooner arrived than her sentence was pronounced, 
without other form of trial. This poor wretch, see- 
ing there was no appeal, named him who was to give 
her the hatchet stroke ; at the same time she was 
dragged outside the cabin, her face and part of her 
body were burned with pieces of lighted bark, [206] 
and finally the one she had taken for godfather split 
her head. The next day her body was burned and 


38 


LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol. 14 


eftoient trop lafches, & que fi on la gardoit iufques 
au lendemain, elle feroit pour auoir la vie fauue. 

Le 2 1. on nous rapporta qu'vn Sauuage venu fiai- 
fchement de So7iontouan, auoit aduerti que nos Hurons 
fe tinffent hardiment fur leurs gardes, & que les en- 
nemis leuoiet vne armee, foit pour venir fondre dans 
le pais, tandis qu'ils feront allez en traitte, foit pour 
les attendre au paffage quand ils defcendront a Ke- 
bec. Toutes les annees en cette faifon on ne manque 
pas de faire courir femblables bruits, qui font d'au- 
tant moins croiables qu'ils font ordinaires, & d'au- 
tant plus k craindre que nos Sauuages s'en mettent 
[207] peu en peine. On dit que les anciens & les plus 
confiderables du pais font fouuent les autheurs de ces 
fauces alarmes, pour retenir toufiours dans les bourgs 
vne bonne partie des ieunes gens, & de ceux qui font 
capables de porter les armes, & empefcher qu'ils ne 
s'efcartent tous enfemble en mefme temps pour leur 
traitte. 

Le 23. le P. Superieur nous enuoia le Pere Ifaac 
logues & moy, vifiter les malades de deux ou trois 
petites bourgades, nous baptifames quatre petits 
enfans, deux moururent des le lendemain, & le troi- 
fiefme peu de iours apres, quelle faueur du del pour 
ces petits Anges ! & quelle confolation pour nous de 
voir que cette diuine bonte daigne fe feruir de nous 
pour tirer des mains du diable tant d'ames cr^es ^ fon 
image, & leur appliquer les merites du fang de fon 
fils ! Que nous auons bien fuiet de dire en ces fi heu- 
reufes occafions, Qtiis fum ego & quce eji domus patris 
met, quia me deduxijli vfque hue ! 

Le I . iour de May le P. Superieur partit auec le 
P. Charles Gamier, pour aller a Offoffane\ le fuiet de 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 39 

reduced to ashes, in the middle of the village. Some 
say that she confessed the deed, and even that she 
named some of her accomplices; others affirm that 
she spoke only in a general way, saying that they 
had all agreed not to expose one another, in case 
any one were taken in the act. Aondacnchrio, one of 
the Captains, seeing that she was captured, was of the 
opinion that she should be promptly despatched, — 
saying that the old men were too lenient, and that, if 
she were kept until morning, her life would probably 
be spared. 

On the 2ist, it was reported to us that a Savage, 
lately come from Sonoutouan,' had warned our Hurons 
to remain boldly upon the watch, — that the enemy 
was raising an army, either to pounce upon the 
country while they were away trading, or to await 
them at the passage when they were going down to 
Kebec. Every year at this season similar rumors 
are sure to circulate, which are so much the less 
credible that they are so common, and all the more 
to be feared since our Savages give themselves [207] 
little concern thereat. It is said that the old men 
and those most influential in the country are often 
the authors of these false alarms, in order to keep 
always in the villages a good part of the young men 
and of those capable of bearing arms, and to prevent 
them from going away, all at the same time, to do 
their trading. 

On the 23rd, the Father Superior sent us. Father 
Isaac Jogues and me, to visit the sick of two or three 
little villages. We baptized four little children; 
two died the next day, and the third a few days after- 
ward. What a favor from heaven for these little 
Angels! And what a consolation for us to see that 


40 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 14 


ce voiage eftoit quelque efperance qu'on nous auoit 
donnee d'vne affemblee generale qui fe deuoit tenir 
[208] au bourg d'Andiatad, mais le ciel auoit d'autres 
deffeings, ce confeil fut remis, & les Peres eurent le 
bien de baptifer en diuers endroits quatre malades, 
vne femme qui mourut incontinent apres, fon mari 
eftoit a Textremite, mais il refufa opiniaftrement le 
baptefme. 

Le 3. le P. Pierre Pijart baptifa ^ Anonatea vn petit 
enfant de deux mois, en danger manifefle de mort, 
fans que fes parens s'en apperceuffent, n'aiant peu 
obtenir leur confentement, voicy I'inuention dont il 
fe feruit. Noftre fuite \sc. fucre] fait icy des mer- 
ueilles, il fait femblant de luy vouloir faire boire vn 
peu d'eau fucree, & par mefme moien trempe le doigt 
dans I'eau, & voiant que le pere entroit en quelque 
defiance, & luy recommandoit fort de ne le pas bap- 
tifer, il met la cueillier entre les mains d'vne femme 
qui eftoit la aupres, & luy dit, faits luy prendre toy- 
mefme;elle s'approche & trouua que I'enfant dor- 
moit, & en mefme temps le Pere fous pretexte de 
voir fi en eifet il dormoit, luy appliqua fon doigt 
mouille fur le vifage & le baptifa, au bout de deux 
fois ving quatre heures il alia au ciel. Quelques 
iours auparauat il s' eftoit ferui [209] a peu pres de la 
mefme induflrie pour baptifer vn petit gar9on de fix 
^ fept ans. Son pere efloit fort malade, & auoit re- 
fufe plufieurs fois le baptefme: le Pere lui demanda 
s'il ne feroit pas bien content que fon fils fuft bap- 
tife, a quoi ayant refpondu que non. Au moins dit 
le Pere tu ne trouueras pas mauuais que ie lui donne du 
fucre ; oui dea, mais ne le baptif e pas : le Pere lui en 
fait doc prendre vne fois, deux fois, & a la troifiefme 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6j7 41 

this divine goodness deigns to use us to wrest from 
the hands of the devil so many souls created in his 
image, and to apply to them the merits of the blood 
of his son ! How much reason have we to say upon 
these so happy occasions, Quis sum ego et qiics est do- 
nius patris nici, quia me deduxisti usque hue! 

On the I St day of May, the Father Superior departed 
with Father Charles Garnier, to go to Ossossan^. 
The reason of this journey was the hope that had 
been given us of a general assembly that would be 
held [208] at the village of AndiataL But heaven 
had other designs. This council was postponed, and 
the Fathers had the good fortune to baptize in vari- 
ous places four sick persons, — one, a woman who 
died immediately afterward; her husband was on 
the verge of death, but he obstinately refused bap- 
tism. 

On the 3rd, Father Pierre Pijart hsiiptized at Anona- 
tea an infant two months old, in manifest danger of 
death, without its parents being aware that he did 
so ; not having succeeded in obtaining their permis- 
sion, he employed the following device : Our sugar 
does wonders here ; he made a feint of wishing to 
give it a little sugared water to drink, and at the 
same time dipped his finger in the water ; and seeing 
that its father showed some distrust, and urgently 
requested him not to baptize the child, he put the 
spoon into the hands of a woman who was standing 
by, and said to her, " Give it to him thyself." She 
drew near and found that the child was asleep ; and 
at the same time the Father, under pretext of seeing 
if it really slept, applied his wet finger to its face 
and baptized it ; at the end of forty-eight hours, it 
went to heaven. A few days before, he had prac- 


42 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 14 

cueilleree auant que d'y mettre le fucre, laiffa tom- 
ber de I'eau fur 1' enfant en pronon§ant les paroles 
Sacramentales. En mefme temps vne petite • fille 
qui le regardoit faire, fe prit ^ crier, mon pere il le 
baptife ; ce pere fe met en peine, mais le P. Pijart 
lui dit, n'as tu pas bien veu que ie lui ai donne du 
fucre. Get enfant ne la fit pas longue, pour fon pere 
Dieu lui a fait vne belle grace car il eft encor plein 
de fante. 

Ce mefme iour 3. de Mai fur les onze heures du 
foir, le feu prit en noftre bourgade ^ vne cabane qui 
n'eftoit efloignee de la noftre qu'enuiron de la por- 
tee d vn moufquet. II n'y auoit dedans que quatre 
ou cinq pauures enfans, fept ou huict de leurs parens 
eftoient morts de contagion pendant I'hyuer, ils for- 
tirent tons nuds : encore eurent-ils [2 10] affez de peine 
h fe fauuer, le feu courut £i promptement qu'en moins 
de rien la cabane fut toute embrafee, nous courufmes 
pour les fecourir, mais ce ne fut que pour regarder 
& tefmoigner que nous leur portions compaffion ; le 
vent qui eftoit Norotieft, fe trouua graces h. Dieu 
grandement fauorable tant pour le refte des cabanes 
des Sauuages que pour la noftre ; autrement vn bourg 
entier eft bien toft expedi6 & reduit en cendres, des 
efcorces de cedre dont la plufpart des cabanes font 
couuertes, prenant quafi auffi aif^ment feu que du 
falpetre. 

Le 4. les anciens s'affemblerent pour conuenir en- 
femble de quelque contribution pour affifter ces pau- 
ures orfelins: chaque cabane s'obligea h fournir trois 
facs de bl6, car on n'en auoit peu fauuer vn feul 
grain: en vn mot chacun les aida de ce qu'il put, qui 
leur donoit vn plat, qui vne quaiffe, quelques vns 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib37 43 


ticed [209] very nearly the same ingenuity, in order 
to baptize a little boy six or seven years old. His 
father was very sick, and had several times refused 
baptism; the Father asked him if he would not be 
glad to have his son baptized, and he having an- 
swered "no," to this, "At least," said the. Father, 
' ' thou wilt not disapprove of my giving him some 
sugar." " Certainly not, but do not baptize him." 
Accordingly, the Father had him take it once and 
again ; and at the third spoonful, before putting the 
sugar in it, he let some water fall upon the child 
while pronouncing the Sacramental words. At the 
same time a little girl who was looking at him began 
to cry out, " My father, he is baptizing him." The 
father was troubled, but Father Pijart said to him, 
" Hast thou not seen plainly that I have given him 
sugar ? ' ' The child did not survive long. As for 
his father, God did him a great favor, for he is still 
in excellent health. 

On this same 3rd of May, towards eleven o'clock in 
the evening, a cabin of our village, only about a 
musket-shot distant from ours, took fire. There 
were within only four or five poor children, seven or 
eight of their relatives having died from the conta- 
gion during the winter. They ran out entirely naked, 
and even then had [210] considerable trouble to save 
themselves. The fire spread so rapidly that in less 
than no time the cabin was all in flames. We ran 
to help them, but it was only to look on and show 
that we had compassion for them. The wind, a 
Northwester, proved, thanks to God, very favorable 
both to the rest of the cabins of the Savages, and to 
ours; otherwise an entire village is soon despatched 
and reduced to ashes, — the cedar bark, with which 


44 LES RELATIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol. 14 

mefme quelques robes de Caflor; nous les affiftames 
auffi fort liberalement, il n'y eut gueres de nos do- 
meftiques qui ne leur fift auffi quelque gracieufete. 
De forte que ces pauures enfans fe trouuerent plus 
riches au moins en robes & en habits qu'ils n'eaoient 
auparauant. 

Le 5. le P. Chaflellain eftoit alle auec le [211] P. 
Pijart vifiter quelques malades a Anendaonactia il bap- 
tifa vn ieune homme qui efloit k I'extremite. 

Le 10. Le P. Pijart partit pour aller chercher de 
ieunes enfans pour mener ^ Quebec: fi tons ceux 
dont il a quelque parole, fe refoluent d'y demeurer, 
le feminaire ne fera pas mal fourni pour vn commen- 
cement : fi nous croyons les bruits qui courent ici des 
I'hiuer, il y en a deux de morts de ceux de I'an paffe. 
Mais pent eflre que ce ne font que des bruits : pluft 
a Dieu que ceux qu'on a fait courir de la mort de 
Louys de faincte Foy, ne fuffent pas plus affeurez, & 
qu'au contraire, ce qui s'en dit maintenant, fuft auffi 
veritable que nous eRimons les autres mal fondez. 
Sa mere qui ne pouuoit auparauant efcouter ce qui 
s'en difoit, penfe maintenant auoir des alleurances 
mfaillibles qu'il efl parmi les Agnietironons, on lui a 
mefme nomme celui qui I'a adopte pour f on fils : fi 
cela efl, nous auons quelque efperance que Dieu nous 
le rendra par quelque voie que ce foit. le f9ais bien 
que s'il demeure en ceae captiuite, ce ne fera pas 
faute d'auoir ici, & en France des perfonnes qui im- 
portunent le Ciel de voeux & de feruentes prieres 
pour fa deliurance. 

[212] Le 12. Le P. Charles Gamier & le P. Ifaac 
logues baptiferent a Anonatea 3. perfonnes bien ma- 
lades; entre autres vne pauure femme qui mourut 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TJON, 1637 


45 


the greater number of the cabins are covered, taking 
fire almost as easily as saltpeter. 

On the 4th, the old men assembled, in order to 
agree together upon some contribution to assist these 
poor orphans. Each cabin bound itself to furnish 
three sacks of corn, for they had not been able to 
save a single grain. In a word, every one aided 
them with whatever he could,— one giving them a 
plate, another a chest, some even giving them Beaver 
robes. We also assisted them very liberally, and 
there was hardly any of our domestics who did not 
also show them some act of kindness; so that these 
poor children found themselves richer, at least in 
robes and clothing, than they had been before. 

On the 5 th, Father Chastellain went with [211] 
Father Pijart to visit some sick people at Anendaonac- 
tia; he baptized a young man who was at the point 
of death. 

On the loth. Father Pijart departed to go in 
search of some young children to take to Quebec. 
If all those from whom he has some promise resolve 
to remain there, the seminary will not be badly sup- 
plied for a beginning. If we may believe the re- 
ports that have been current here since winter, two 
of those of last year are dead ; but perhaps these are 
only rumors. Would to God that those which have 
been circulated about the death of Louys de sainte 
Foy had as little certainty ; and that, on the contrary, 
what is now being said of him were as true as we 
consider the other ones without foundation. His 
mother, who could not listen to these rumors before, 
now thinks she has infallible proofs that he is 
among the Agnietironons-^ she has even been told 
the name of the one who has adopted him for his 


46 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.14 

d^s le lendemain. Et parce qu'vn de ceux-la auoit 
efle baptife fous condition, ^ raifon du peu de iuge- 
ment que il faifoit paroiftre, le P. Chaftellain/y re- 
tourna vn peu apres, & I'aiant trouue vn peu plus k 
foi I'inftruifit derechef, & le baptifa auec les condi- 
tions requifes. 

Le 19. nous eufmes tout a fait vne iournee d'hiuer, 
il tomba pres d'vn demi pied de neige & gela bieii 
fort la nuit fuiuante. Sondacoimtie perdit vn peu de 
fon credit, en cefte occafio. Deux ou 3. iours aupa- 
rauant, on s'eftoit tue de croffer en toutes les bour- 
gades d'ici autour; ce forcier aiant affeure que le 
temps ne dependoit que d'vn ieu de crolTe; auffi nos 
Sauuages difoient a pleine bouche que ce n'efloit 
qu'vn charlatan, & vn impofteur, cependant c'eft 
grand cas que ces experiences ne les rendent gueres 
plus fages. 

Le 28. Le P. Charles Gamier, & le P. logues alle- 
rent viliter vn vieillard fort malade a Arontaefi. On 
nous auoit fait entendre que ceux de cette bourgade 
auoient quelque auerfion du baptefme ; neantmoins 
ce [213] bon homme a la premiere ouuerture qu'on lui 
en fit tefmoigna des fentiments tons contraires, & 
apres auoir efle fuffifamment inaruit, & receu le 
famct Baptefme il en remercia nos peres auec beau- 
coup d'affection. 

Le premier iour de luin le P. Charles Gamier & 
le Pere Chaftellain furent enuoiez ^ Ouenrio k I'occa- 
fion d'vne femme qu'on nous auoit fait bien malade. 
Quelle prouidence de Dieu ! cette femme f e trouua 
hors de danger, & fut en partie caufe que 3. autres 
malades, qui moururent peu apres, receurent le bap- 
.tefme, dont ]e dernier mourut hier quatriefme de ce 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 47 

son. If this be true, we have some hope that God 
will restore him to us in some way, whatever it may- 
be. I know very well that if he remain in this 
captivity, it will not be for lack of having here and 
in France persons who importune Heaven with vows 
and fervent prayers for his deliverance. 

[212] On the 1 2th, Father Charles Garnier and 
Father Isaac Jogues baptized at Anonatca 3 very sick 
persons, — among others, a poor woman who died 
the next day. And because one of these had been 
baptized conditionally, for the reason that he ap- 
peared hardly in his right mind. Father Chastellain 
returned to him a little while afterwards, and, hav- 
ing found him somewhat more rational, instructed 
him again, and baptized him with the requisite con- 
ditions. 

On the 19th, we had a real winter day; nearly 
half a foot of snow fell and the following night it 
froze very hard. Sondacouane lost a little of his 
repute on this occasion. Two or 3 days before, they 
had tired themselves to death playing crosse in all 
the villages around here, because this sorcerer had 
affirmed that the weather depended only upon a 
game of crosse; and now our Savages openly de- 
clared that he is only a charlatan and an impostor. 
It is worthy of note, however, that these experiences 
render them but little wiser. 

On the 28th, Father Charles Garnier and Father 
Jogues went to visit a very sick old man at Arontaen. 
We had been given to understand that the people of 
that village had some aversion to baptism ; neverthe- 
less, this [213] good man, at the first proposal that 
was made to him, expressed quite opposite senti- 
ments; and after having been sufficiently instructed, 


48 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 14 


mois. Void comme la chofe arriua. Les Peres 
eftant a Oiienrio apprirent qu'vn petit enfant efloit k 
Textremite ; ils coururent & le baptiferent, il mourut 
auant hier; de la ils allerent iufques a Onnentifatj 
pour vifiter vn nomme Onendich vn des premiers fup- 
pofts du Sorcier Sondacouan^\ qui leur parla comme 
vn homme qui eftoit en eftat de fe guerir, & qui 
n'auoit pas auec cela beaucoup de difpofition ^ rece- 
uoir des auis touchant fon falut. Mais fans doute 
quelque Ange du ciel conduifoit leur pas, on leur 
donna auis de fe tranfporter k vne petite cabane 
drelTee a I'efcart dans les [2 14] champs, & qu'il y auoit 
vne femme malade qui feroit bien aife de les voir: 
11 fe prefenta mefme vn ieune homme plein de bonne 
volont6 qui les y conduifit: mais le malade qu'ils 
alloient voir eftoit defia fur pieds. lis eftoient fur le 
poinct de s'en retourner, lors qu'ils entendirent vne 
voix plaintiue qui leur fit demander s'il y auoit quel- 
que autre malade; on refpondit que oui, qu'il y auoit 
dehors vne femme qui tiroit k la fin. De fait ils la 
trouuerent couchee fur quelques fueillages, & expo- 
fee aux ardeurs du foleil : cefte pauure femme venoit 
d'accoucher deuant terme d'vn enfant mort, il fem- 
bloit qu'elle n'attendift plus que le baptefme, d6s le 
lendemain elle mourut. Au retour ils pafferent par 
Anonatea felon qu'ils auoient ordre du P. Superieur 
pour vifiter encor vne femme malade, mais elle eftoit 
morte des le iour de la Pentecofte. lis fe trouuerent 
Ik tout a propos pour inftruire & baptifer vn pauure 
vieillard que nous ne fgauions pas eftre malade, nous 
lui anions penf6 trois ou quatre mois durat quelques 
vlceres qu'il auoit aux pieds, dont il commen9oit k 
fe mieux porter : il a efte emporte en peu de iours : 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE 'S RELA TION, 1637 49 

and having received holy Baptism, he thanked our 
fathers therefor with much affection. 

On the first day of June, Father Charles Gamier 
and Father Chastellain were sent to Ouenrio, on ac- 
count of a woman who had been represented to us 
as very sick. What a providence of God I this wom- 
an was found to be out of danger, and was partly 
the cause of 3 other sick people, who died shortly 
afterwards, receiving baptism ; the last of these died 
yesterday, the fourth of this month. See how this 
came to pass. The Fathers, being at Ouenrio, learned 
that a little child was dying ; they hastened and bap- 
tized it, and it died the day before yesterday. Thence 
they went to Onnentisati to visit one Onendich, one of 
the chief tools of the Sorcerer Sondacouan^. He 
spoke to them like a man who was convalescent, and 
who, besides, was not greatly disposed to receive 
advice touching his salvation. But doubtless some 
Angel from heaven guided their footsteps ; they were 
instructed to repair to a little cabin standing by itself 
in the [214] field, and that there was a sick woman 
there who would be very glad to see them ; a young 
man even presented himself, very willingly, and 
conducted them thither. But the sick woman they 
had gone to see was already on her feet. They 
were upon the point of returning, when they heard 
a plaintive voice, which made them ask if there was 
any other sick person; they were answered "yes," 
— that there was a woman outside whose end was 
drawing near; in fact, they found her lying upon 
some leaves and exposed to the heat of the sun. 
This poor woman had just been delivered, prema- 
turely, of a dead child; it seemed as if she was only 
waiting for baptism, as she died the next day. On 


50 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.14 

les Peres le baptiferent auec bien de la confolatio. 
Come [215] les Peres lui demandoient s'il ne feroit 
pas bien aife d'aller au ciel; helas! dit il, il y a bien 
loing & j'ai de bien matiiiaifes iambes, comment 
pourroi-ie y aller ! nous receufmes hier les nouuelles 
de fa mort. Voftre R. voit que nos pauures Sau- 
uages ne font pas encor hors de maladie, fi Dieu par 
la mifericorde n'y met bien toft la main, les grandes 
chaleurs qui regnent icy en cette faifon ne font pas 
pour dilTiper ce mauuais air. II y a deux bourgades 
qui en font particulierement affligees, Andiatae & 
Onnentifatj ou demeurent les deux plus grands for- 
ciers du pais, fgauoir eft Sondacouane & Tehorenhae- 
gnon. Pendant I'hyuer ils auoient defia perdu vne 
grande partie de leur credit aupres des malades des 
autres bourgades, & maintenant ils font plus que 
iamais dans la confufion, voians que leur fueries, 
feftins, breuuages & leurs ordonnances ne feruent de 
rien k leur compatriotes. Depuis peu Sacondoiiane \sc. 
SondacoilaiKf^ s'eft auife de defendre aux malades la 
neige de France, c'eft ainfi qu'ils appellent le fucre, & 
a perfuade a quelques vns que c'eftoit comme vn 
efpece de poifon, il eft aife de iuger qu'il eft le princi- 
pal autheur de cefte defence. Le diable fgait alTez 
bien combien ces petites douceurs nous ont defia [216] 
ferui, pour luy tirer des mains tant d'ames qu'il 
tenoit captiues. II a fait tous fes efforts cet hyuer 
pour nous fermer la bouche, & nous empefcher de 
prefcher a ces peuples barbares les grandeurs & les 
infinies mifericordies du maiftre que nous feruons: 
mais fes deffeins n'aians pas reiilTi (car Dieu nous a 
fait la grace de baptifer deux cens trente k quarante 
perfonnes) il a depuis peu fufcite contre nous de nou- 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 51 

their return they passed through Anonatea, according 
to an order they had received from the Father Su- 
perior to visit another sick woman, but she had died 
on the day of Pentecost. They found themselves 
there very opportunely to instruct and baptize a 
poor old man, that we did not know was sick; we 
had cared for him three or four months while he 
had some ulcers upon his feet, from which he was 
beginning to recover. He was taken off in a few 
days, the Fathers baptizing him with much consola- 
tion. When [2 1 5] the Fathers asked him if he would 
not be very glad to go to heaven, " Alas! " said he, 
"it is very far away, and I have very bad legs; how 
shall I be able to go there?" We received the news 
of his death yesterday. Your Reverence sees that 
our poor Savages are not yet free from sickness ; if 
God does not mercifully interpose his hand, the 
great heat which prevails here at this season is not 
likely to dissipate this malaria. There are two vil- 
lages which are especially afflicted, Andiatae and 
Onnentisati, where reside the two greatest sorcerers 
of the country, namely, Sondacouani and Tehorenhae- 
gnon. During the winter they had already lost a 
great deal of their credit with the sick of other vil- 
lages ; and now they are more than ever discomfited, 
seeing that their sweats, feasts, potions, and ordi- 
nances are of no avail with their countrymen. Within 
a short time Sacofidouane [sc. Sondacouatt^~\ has taken 
it into his head to forbid to the sick the " French 
snow," — thus they call sugar, — and has persuaded 
some that it is a species of poison. It is easy to see that 
he is the chief author of this prohibition. The devil 
knows well enough how much these little sweets 
have already [2 16] aided us in wresting from his hands 


62 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.14 

uelles tempeftes. On dit encor prefque autant que 
iamais que nous s5mes la caufe de la maladie ; ces 
bruits font en partie fondez fur ce qu'elle eft en 
cefte faifon beau coup plus mortelle qu'elle n'eftoit 
pendant les froidures de I'hyuer, &par confequent la 
plus part de ceux que nous baptifons meurent. Auec 
cela tout fraifchement vn certain capitaine Algonquin 
a fait entendre k nos Hurons, qu'ils fe trompoient de 
penfer que les diables les fiffent mourir, qu'ils ne de- 
uoient s'en prendre qu'aux Fran§ois, & qu'il auoit veu 
comme vne femme Fran9oife qui empelloit de fon 
f ouffle & de fon haleine tout le pays ; nos Sauuages 
s'imaginent que c'eft la foeur de feu Eftienne Brufl6 
qui fe venge de la mort de fon frere. Ce Sorcier 
adioufte que nous nous meflons auffi nous mefme 
d'enforceler, [2 1 7] que nous nous feruions ^ ce deffein 
des images de nos faincts, qu'en les montrant il en 
fort de certaines influences empeftees qui fe coulent 
iufques dans la poictrine de ceux qui les regardent, 
& ainll qu'il ne faut pas s'eftonner s'ils fe trouuent 
par apres accueillis du mal; Les principaux & les 
chefs du pays nous font affez paroiftre qu'ils ne font 
pas dans cette creance, mais neantmoins qu'ils crai- 
gnent que quelque eftourdi ne falTe quelque mauuais 
coup qui leur donne fujet de rougir. Nous fommes 
entre les mains de Dieu ; & tons ces dangers ne nous 
font pas perdre vn moment de noflre joye, ce nous 
feroit vn trop grand honneur de perdre la vie en 
nous emploiant h. fauuer quelque pauure ame ; pour 
tous ces bruis & toutes ces menaces, nous fommes 
refolus dans la prudence & la difcretion, de ne rien 
demordre de nos' fonctions & exercices ordinaires. 
Si nous en faifions autrement, nous croirions faire 


1637-38] LEJEUNE'S RELATION, i637 53 

SO many souls that he held captive. He has made 
every effort this winter to close our mouths, and to 
prevent us from preaching to these barbarous people 
the grandeur and infinite mercy of the master whom 
we serve ; but his designs not having succeeded (for 
God has granted us the favor of baptizing two hun- 
dred and thirty or forty persons), he has recently 
stirred up new tempests against us. They are still 
saying, almost as much as ever, that we are the 
cause of the malady. These reports are partly 
founded upon the fact that it is in this season much 
more fatal than it was during the severe cold of the 
winter, and consequently the greater part of those 
we baptize, die. Besides this, very recently a cer- 
tain Algonquin captain has given our Hurons to un- 
derstand that they were mistaken in thinking that 
the devils caused them to die, — that they should 
blame only the French for this; and that he had 
seen, as it were, a French woman who was infecting 
the whole country with her breath and her exhala- 
tions. Our Savages imagine that it is the sister of 
the late Estienne Brusl6, who is avenging her broth- 
er's death. This Sorcerer added that we, even we 
ourselves, meddle with sorcery; [217] that for this 
purpose we employ the images of our saints, — that, 
when we show them, certain tainted influences issue 
therefrom which steal down into the chests of those 
who look at them, and therefore they need not be 
astonished if they afterwards find themselves as- 
sailed by the disease. The prominent and chief men 
of the country show us quite plainly that they do 
not share this belief, but nevertheless intimate that 
they fear some heedless fellow will commit some 
foul deed that will cause them to blush. We are in 


54 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 14 


tort a la grace que Dieu nous a faite, degenerer de 
noflre condition ; & fe feroit fans doute ignorer que 
les Apoftres n'ont iamais plante la croix du fils de 
Dieu que parmi les perfecutions, & en fin aux de- 
pends de leur vie. 

Le 4. de ce mois i'ai receu vne lettre du P. [218] 
Pierre Pijart, qui eft maintenant au bourg d' Offofan^ 
ou il a I'oeil fur ceux qui trauaillent ^ dreffer noftre 
cabane; puifque Tembarquement de nos Sauuages 
eft encor differe pour quelques iours, ie me garderai 
bien de trencher en deux mots ce qui ne pent qu'a- 
porter beaucoup de confolation a V. R. 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 


55 


God's hands, and all these dangers do not make us 
forfeit a moment of our joy. It would be too great 
an honor for us to lose our lives while employed in 
saving some poor soul; as for all these reports and 
all these threats, we have resolved, in prudence and 
discretion, not to abate a whit from our usual func- 
tions and occupations. If we did otherwise, we 
would think we were doing wrong to the grace that 
God has shown us, and falling below our estate ; and 
this would be, without doubt, to ignore the fact that 
the Apostles never planted the cross of the son of 
God save in the midst of persecutions, and finally at 
the expense of their lives. 

On the 4th of this month, I received a letter from 
Father [218] Pierre Pijart, who is now at the village 
of Ossosane, where he has oversight of those who are 
building our cabin. Since the embarkation of our 
Savages is again deferred for several days, I shall 
certainly refrain from cutting off with a few words 
what can only afford Your Reverence great consola- 
tion. 


56 


LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 14 


CHAPITRE VI. 

DE LA RESIDENCE DE LA CONCEPTION DE NOSTRE 
DAME AU BOURG D'OSSOSANE. 

EN fin voicy nos defirs accomplis, ie ne donnerai 
plus maintenant de fimples efperances h. V. R. 
on trauaille h bon efcient a nous dreffer noftre 
cabane k Off of and, & nous attendons qu'elle nous 
enuoie, s'il lui plaift, des ouuriers pour y baflir vne 
chapelle en I'honneur de L'immaculee Conception 
de noflre Dame. 

[219] Le 17. de Mai le P. Super, fit ouuerture de 
noflre refolution au Capitaine, 'k deffein de faire 
mettre la main a I'oeuure au pluftoft. Le Capitaine 
fit affembler le Confeil ; ou la propofition fut receue 
auec beaucoup de contentement ; ils s'obligerent de 
nous faire vne Cabane d'enuiron douze braffes, nous 
priant s'ils ne la faifoient plus grande de confiderer 
que la maladie auoit emporte vne partie des jeunes 
gens, & que le refle efloient prefque tous allez en 
traitte, ou a la pefche, & nous donnant parole de nous 
la faire fi longue & fi ample que nous voudrions I'an- 
nee prochaine. Le Confeil fini chacun prift fa hache, 
& s'en allerent tous en troupe difpofer la place. 

Le 21. le P. Pierre Pijart partit pour mettre en be- 
fongne les ouuriers auec deux de nos domefliques, 
1^ il eut de I'exercice en toutes famous, les malades lui 
ont donne dequoi exercer la charite, & ceux qui tra- 
uailloient a noftre cabane vn beau fujet de pratiquer 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, idjr 57 


CHAPTER VI. 

OF THE RESIDENCE OF THE CONCEPTION OF NOSTRE 
DAME, AT THE HAMLET OF OSSOSANE. 

AT last, behold our desires accomplished ! I shall 
now express no longer mere hopes to Your 
Reverence, for they are working in earnest to 
erect for us our cabin at Ossosan^; and we expect that 
you will send us, if you please, some workmen to 
build there a chapel in honor of the Immaculate 
Conception of our Lady. 

[219] On the 17th of May, the Father Superior 
broached the subject of our decision to the Captain, 
in order to have the work begun as soon as possible. 
The Captain summoned the Council to assemble, 
where the proposition was received with much satis- 
faction. They bound themselves to make us a Cabin 
of about twelve brasses, — begging us, if they did not 
make it larger, to consider that the malady had car- 
ried off a part of the young men, and that the rest 
were nearly all gone trading or fishing; and giving 
us their word to make it as long and as wide as we 
should wish, the following year. The Council over, 
each one took his hatchet, and they all went away 
in a crowd to prepare the site. 

On the 2ist, Father Pierre Pi j art departed with 
two of our domestics, to set the laborers to work. 
There he had exercise of all kinds; the sick gave 
him occasion to exercise charity, and those who were 
working upon our cabin an excellent opportunity to 


58 LES RELATIONS DES jiiSUITES [Vol.14 

la patience. Voici ce qu'il m'en efcrit du quatriefme 
de luin. 

le me trouue ici dans vn tracas bien extraordiilaire ; 
i'ai d'vn cofl6 ^ faire trauailler a noflre cabane, & de 
I'autre des malades a [220] vifiter: ceux-la ne font 
qu'vne partie de ce qu'ils venlent, & aupres de ceux- 
ci ie rencontre plus de f orders & ^' Arendioouane Q;}i<t 
d'occalions de leur parler de Dieu, & des affaires de 
leur falut. Ie remercie mon Sauueur de la patience 
qu'il me donne, & de ce que parmi tant de fujets de 
diflractions, il ne me laiffe point fans confolation 
interieure ; autrement ce me feroit vn petit enfer de 
me voir en cet eftat, & d'eftre priu6 come ie fuis de 
I'vfage des Sacremens. Ie me cofole dans la pefee 
que i'ai que nous ne bafliffons pas ici vne fimple 
cabane, mais vne maifon de noftre Dame, ou pluftoft 
plufieurs belles chappelles aux principales bourgades 
du pais, puis que c'eft icy ou nous efperons auec 
I'affiftance du Ciel jetter les femences d'vne belle & 
plantureufe moiffon des ames. Depuis que ie fuis 
ici Dieu m'a fait la grace de baptifer trois malades, 
vn petit enfant, noftre hofte, & fa fille ; pour ce qui 
efl de ceux-ci s'ils ne guerilfent, ce ne fera pas pour 
auoir efpargne les remedes du pays. Ce bo homme 
a toufiours efte difpofe pour danfer, chanter & faire 
V Aoutaerohj pour les autres, en cette occafion ci on 
n'a pas manque de lui rendre la pareille; on nous a 
fouuentesfois raconte des chofes prefque incroiables 
[221] de ces feftins qu'ils appellent di Aoutaerohj; 
Voici ce que i'en ai veu de mes yeux. 

Le 24. de May on fit vn de ces feftins pour fa fante 
& celle de fa fille ; ils danferent & heurlerent comme 
des demons vne grande partie de la nuict ; mais ce 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 59- 

practice patience. He wrote me thus about it, on 
the fourth of June : 

' ' I find myself here in the midst of extraordinary 
confusion, — on one hand, I have to keep them at 
work upon our cabin; and, on the other, I have 
the sick to [220] visit; the former only do a part of 
what they attempt, and I encounter near the latter 
more sorcerers and Arendioonane than occasions to 
speak to them of God and of the matter of their sal- 
vation. I thank my Savior for the patience he gives 
me, and that, among so many causes for distraction, 
he does not leave me without internal consolation ; 
otherwise it would be for me a little hell to find my- 
self in this condition, and to be deprived, as I am, 
of the use of the Sacraments. I console myself 
with the thought I have that we are not building 
here a simple cabin, but a house for our Lady, — or 
rather many beautiful chapels in the principal vil- 
lages of the country, since it is here that we hope, 
with the aid of Heaven, to cast the seeds for a beau- 
tiful and plenteous harvest of souls. Since I have 
been here God has granted me the favor to baptize 
three sick persons, — a little child, our host, and his 
daughter. As regards the latter, if they do not re- 
cover, it will not be from having spared the native 
remedies. This good man has always been ready 
to dance, sing, and perform the Aoutaerohi for the 
others ; and on this occasion they have not failed to 
render him like service. They have oftentimes re- 
lated things to us that were almost incredible, [221] 
concerning these feasts that they call Aoutaerohi. 
Here is what I have seen of them with my own eyes r 

"On the 24th of May, one of these feasts was- 
made for his health and that of his daughter. They 


«0 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 14 


qui nous eftonna le plus fut qu'vn certain nomme 
Ofcouta prit de fa bouche vn gros charbon de feu tout 
rouge, & le porta iufques aux malades qui eltoient 
affez loing de lui, faifant force grimaces & grondant 
comme vn ours a leurs oreilles : neantmoins la chof e 
ne reiiffit pas a fon gre. Ce charbon n'efloit pas 
affez dur. & s'efloit rompu dedans fa bouche, ce qui 
empefcha I'operation de ce remede : c'efl pourquoi il 
fut ordonne qu'on recommenceroit le lendemain, & 
qu'on fe feruiroit de cailloux ardants au lieu de char- 
bons. Cependant i'eftois en peine pour le malade 
qui alloit en empirant, & ie fus prefque fur le point 
de lui faire ouuerture du Baptefme : neantmoins aiant 
recommande la chofe k Dieu, ie penfai qu'il valloit 
mieux attendre qu'il fuft au bout de toutes fes 
fantafies, efperant qu'apres auoir recognu par ex- 
perience le peu de foulagement qui fe tire en ces 
extremitez de ces remedes, [222] imaginaires, ie le 
trouuerois plus difpofe 'k m'efcouter & ^ ne mettre fa 
confiance qu'en Dieu ; Doncques le lendemain on fe 
difpofe pour vn fecond feftin d'Aoutaerohj, on apporte 
force cailloux, pour les faire rougir on fait vn feu h. 
brufler la cabane. Tauois eu quelque penfee de m'al- 
ler retirer ailleurs pour cette nuict que f e deuoit faire 
ce fabat, toutesfois ie iugai h propos de m'i trouuer 
pour voir fi en effet tout ce que i'en auois oui" dire 
efloit veritable. 24. perfonnes furent defignees pour 
chanter & faire toutes les ceremonies : mais quel chant 
& quels tons de voix, pour moi ie croi que fi les de- 
mons & les damnez chantoient dans I'enfer, ce feroit 
a peu pres de cette forte, ie n'oui iamais rien de plus 
lugubre & de plus effroiable. Fattendois toufiours 
ce qu'ils feroient de ces cailloux qu'ils faifoient 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 61 


danced and howled like demons a good part of the 
night, but what astonished us the most was that a 
certain man named Oscouta took in his mouth a great 
red-hot coal, and carried it to the patients, who were 
at some distance from him, making many grimaces, 
and growling in their ears like a bear ; nevertheless, 
the performance did not result as he desired. The 
coal was not hard enough, and broke within his 
mouth, which prevented the operation of the remedy. 
Hence it was ordained that they should begin again 
the next day, and that they should use red-hot stones 
instead of coals. Meanwhile, I was troubled about 
the sick man, who was growing worse, and I was al- 
most upon the point of proposing Baptism to him ; 
nevertheless, having recommended the matter to 
God, I thought it better to wait until he reached the 
end of all his fancies, — hoping that, after he had 
recognized by experience the little relief to be ob- 
tained in such extremities from these imaginary 
remedies, [222] I would find him more disposed to 
listen to me, and to put his confidence only in God. 
Accordingly, the next day they prepared for a second 
Aoutaerohi feast. A number of stones were brought ; 
and, to make them red-hot, a fire was prepared hot 
enough to bum down the cabin. I had had some in- 
tention of retiring elsewhere for the night when this 
witches' sabbath was to take place ; but I judged it 
wise to be present there to see if all I had heard 
about it were really true. 24 persons were chosen to 
sing and to perform all the ceremonies; but what 
songs, and what tones of voice ! For my part, I be- 
lieve that if the demons and the damned were to sing 
in hell, it would be about after this fashion ; I never 
heard anything more lugubrious and more frightful. 


^2 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.14 

chauffer & rougir auec tant de foin. Vous me croi- 
rez puifque ie parle d'vne chofe que i'ai veu de mes 
yeux, ils efcarterent les tifons, les tirerent du milieu 
du feu, & aiant les mains derriere le dos les prirent a 
belles dents, les porterent iufques aux malades, & 
demeurerent affez long temps fans lafcher prife, 
f oufflans fur eux & grondans k leurs oreilles ; ie garde 
vn de ces cailloux expreffement [223] pour vous le 
monftrer; vous vous eflonnerez comme vn homme 
peut auoir la bouche fi bien fendue, il eft enuiron de la 
groffeur d'vn oeuf d'oie. Cependant i'ai veu vn fau- 
uage le mettre dans fa bouche en telle fa9on qu'il y 
en auoit plus dedans que dehors, il le porta affez 
loing, & apres cela il eiioit encor {\. chaud que I'ayaiit 
iette contre terre il en fortit des eftincelles de feu. 
Ie m'oubliois de vous dire qu'apres ce premier feftin 
d: Aoutaerohj vn de nos Francois eut la curiofit6 de 
voir li en effet tout cela fe faifoit fans que perfonne 
fe bruflaft, il s'adreffa k cet Ofcouta qui auoit empli 
fa bouche de charbons allumez, il lui fit ouurir & la 
trouua fj faine & entiere fans aucune apparence de 
bruflure : & non feulement ceux-ci ne f e brufloient 
point, mais les malades mefme. lis fe laifferent f rot- 
ter par le corps de cendres toutes rouges fans tefmoi- 
gner aucun fentiment de douleur, & fans que leur 
peau en parufl tant foit peu intereffee. Ce feftin 
acheue ils ne fe trouuerent pas au bout de leurs dou- 
leurs, au contraire il y auoit plus d'apparence de dan- 
ger: auffi fit on venir deux autres forciers, qui firent 
mille cingeries autour de ces pauures malades : mais 
tout cela n'eft rien au pres de [224] ce que ie vous 
viens de dire, voici vne chofe affez remarquable. 
Le 26. fur le foir on difpofa vne fuerie qui fut fuiuie 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE' S RELA TION, 1637 63 

I was waiting all the time to see what they would do 
with those stones that they were heating and making 
red-hot with so much care. You may believe me, 
since I speak of a thing that I saw with my own 
eyes, — they separated the brands, drew them from 
the midst of the fire, and, holding their hands be- 
hind their backs, took these between their teeth, car- 
ried them to the patients and remained some time 
without loosing their hold, blowing upon them and 
growling in their ears. I am keeping one of the 
stones expressly [223] to show you. You will be 
astonished that a man can have so wide a mouth ; the 
stone is about the size of a goose Qgg. Yet I saw a 
savage put it in his mouth so that there was more of 
it inside than out; he carried it some distance, and, 
after that, it was still so hot, that when he threw it 
to the ground sparks of fire issued from it. I for- 
got to tell you that, after the first Aoutaerohi feast, 
one of our Frenchmen had the curiosity to see if, in 
reality, all this was done without any one being 
burned. He spoke to this Oscouta who had filled his 
mouth with live coals ; he had him open his mouth 
and found it unhurt and whole, without any appear- 
ance of having been burned ; and not only those per- 
sons, but even the sick people were not burned. 
They let their bodies be rubbed with glowing cin- 
ders, without showing any evidences of pain, and 
without their skin appearing in the least affected. 
This feast ended, they did not reach the end of their 
sufferings; on the contrary, there was more appear- 
ance of danger. Therefore two other sorcerers were 
summoned, who played a thousand apish tricks 
around these poor patients. But all these were 
nothing in comparison with [224] what I have just 


64 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.14 

d'vn feftin. le ne vis de ma vie chofe pareille, il y 
entrerent 20. hommes & s'entafferent prefque les vns 
fur les autres, le malade mefme s'i traina quoi qu'a- 
uec beaucoup de peine, & fut de la troupe, il ciianta 
auffi affez long temps, & au milieu des ardeurs de 
cette fuerie il demanda de I'eau pour fe rafraifchir, il 
en but vne partie & ietta le refte fur fon corps. Voi- 
1^ vn excellent remede pour vn malade a I'extremite; 
auffi le lendemain ie le trouuai. en bel eftat. De 
fait ce fut vn bel eftat pour lui, puifque Dieu lui fit 
pour lors la grace de conceuoir 1' importance des af- 
faires de fon falut, & a moy de me mettre en la bou- 
che des paroles pour lui expliquer les principaux de 
nos myflere. Comme ie lui difois que le Baptefme 
n'eftoit pas vn remede pour la fante du corps, nous 
le f§auons bien me dit-il, lui, & vn des anciens qui 
fe trouua lors que ie I'inflruifois, nous le fgauons 
afles: c'eft vn grand auantage pour nous que dans ce 
bourg ils font pleinement inf ormez de ce que nous pre- 
tendons par le Baptefme. La fille fuiuit bien toft 
I'exemple de fon pere, qui I'exhorta lui mefme k de- 
mander le Baptefme, [225] ^ I'occafion de la mort de 
leurs enfans qui auoient efte baptifez. Le pere mou- 
rut le iour de la Pentecofte, pour fa fille il femble 
qu'elle fe porte vn peu mieux : i'auois bien de I'obliga- 
tion k ce bon vieillard, de m'auoir amene en ce pais, 
& ie me refloiiis maintenant de ce qu'il a pleu h. Dieu 
fe feruir de moi pour le conduire dans le ciel. Ce 
Sauuage auoit des qualitez qui le rendoient tout a fait 
aimable : ie ne me f us iamais imaging pouuoir trou- 
uer en vn barbare tant de douceur & de debonnairet6, 
pendant mon voyage il me traittoit comme fon propre 
fils. 


1 637 - 38 J LE JE UNE S RELA TION, 1637 66 

told you. Here is something quite remarkable: 
Towards evening of the 26th, they prepared a sweat, 
which was followed by a feast. I never saw any- 
thing like it in my life ; 20 men entered, and almost 
piled themselves upon one another. Even the sick 
man dragged himself thither, though with consid- 
erable difficulty, and was one of the troop; he also 
sang for quite a long time, and in the midst of the 
heat of this sweat he asked for water with which to 
refresh himself, — a part of which he drank, and the 
rest he threw over his body. An excellent remedy, 
forsooth, for a sick man on the verge of death ! So 
the next day I found him in a fine condition ; indeed 
it was a fine condition for him, since God then gave 
to him the grace to conceive the importance of the 
concerns of his salvation, and to me to put into my 
mouth the words to explain to him our principal 
mysteries. When I told him that Baptism was not 
a remedy for the health of the body, ' We know that 
well,' replied to me both he, and an old man who 
was present when I was instructing him, ' we know 
that well enough.' It is a great advantage to us that 
in this town they are fully informed of what we 
mean by Baptism. The daughter soon followed the 
example of her father, who himself exhorted her to 
ask for Baptism, [225] at the time of the death of 
their children, who had been baptized. The father 
died on the day of Pentecost; as for the daughter, 
she seems to be a little better. I was under great 
obligation to this good old man for having brought 
me into this country; and I rejoice now that it has 
pleased God to employ me to lead him to heaven. 
This Savage had some qualities which rendered him 
very lovable ; I had never imagined that I could find 


66 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.14 

Le mefme iour que ie receu la prefente le P. Supe- 
rieiir & le P. Chaftellain retournerent d'OJjfo/an^, oh 
lis eftoient allez le iour precedent pour confoler par 
quelque pref ent les parents de noftre hofle : le bien 
que nous anions receu d'eux pendant tout I'hiuer, de- 
mandoit de nous ce tefmoignage du reffentimet que 
nous auios de leur afflictio. lis prirent auffi cefte 
occalion pour s'affeurer des bruits qui couroient en 
ces quartiers, qu'a raifon de la mort de ce Sauuage, 
on auoit tout a fait abandonn^ I'entreprife de noflre, 
cabane pour n'y plus remettre la [226] main. Mais 
en y allant ils paflerent par Arente ou ils trouuerent 
les efprits vn peu aigris & rebutez du Baptefme, "k 
caufe de la mort d'vn ieune enfant baptife dans I'ex- 
tr^mite depuis deux iours : fi qu'eftas entrez das vne 
cabane pour voir vne petite fille de cinq ans qui eftoit 
en pareil danger, & qui auoit tefmoigne auparauant 
par fes larmes & fes pleurs I'auerfion qu'elle auoit 
du Baptefme, k la premiere ouuerture qu'ils firent 
de ce Sacrement on les pria de n'en parler pas dauan- 
tage: neantmoins I'eflat de cette petite malade leur 
fit iuger qu'il falloit paller par deffus le refus des 
parents qui eftoient Ik en grand nombre. C'efl pour- 
quoi le P. Pierre Chaftellain pria le P. Superieur de 
parler vn peu de la fieure & de la maladie, "k fin qu'il 
euft occafion de faire le medecin, & tafter le poulx k 
r enfant, cependant il moiiilla vn mouchoir le plus 
fecrettement qu'il put dans vn feau qui eftoit la, & 
fit mine de s'en frotter le vifage: puis s'approchant 
d'vne main il lui tafta le poulx & de 1' autre fous pre- 
texte de voir fi elle auoit la tefte extraordinairement 
efchauffee, il la baptifa fans qu'aucun des alfiflans 


1637-38] LE /FMNE'S RELATION, i6s7 67 

in a barbarian so much gentleness and amiability; 
during my journey he treated me like his own son." 
On the same day that I received this letter, the 
Father Superior and Father Chastellain returned 
from Ossosan^, whither they had gone the day before 
to console the relatives of our host with a present. 
The kindness we had received from them during the 
whole winter demanded from us this evidence of the 
sympathy we felt for their affliction. They also took 
this occasion to assure themselves of the reports 
which were current in these quarters, that, on ac- 
count of the death of this Savage, the work of build- 
ing our cabin had been altogether abandoned, to be 
no more resumed. [226] But, in going thither, they 
passed through Arente, where they found the peo- 
ple's minds somewhat embittered and prejudiced 
against Baptism, on account of the death of a young 
child, baptized in its last moments two days before ; 
so that when they entered a cabin to see a little girl 
five years old who was in similar danger, — and who 
had before shown, by her tears and sobs, the aver- 
sion she had for Baptism, at the first overtures they 
made of this Sacrament, — they were begged to speak 
of it no more. Nevertheless, the condition of this 
little patient made them decide that it was better to 
disregard the refusal of the relatives, who were pres- 
ent there in great numbers. Hence Father Pierre 
Chastellain requested the Father Superior to t^lk a 
little about the fever and the disease, in order that 
he might have an opportunity to act the physician, 
and to feel the child's pulse; meanwhile, he wet a 
handkerchief as secretly as he could in a pail of wa- 
ter which stood there, and made a feint to wipe her 
face; then approaching, with one hand he felt the 


68 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.14 

s'en aperceuft, quoi qu'ils euffent tous les yeux ou- 
uerts fur ce [227] qu'il alloit faire. 

Eftans arriuez a Offofan^ ils apprirent que les bruits 
qui auoient couru eftoient faux, & que la feule abfence 
du Capitaine eftoit caufe de I'interruption de I'ou- 
urage ; les Peres eurent moien de f9auoir de la bouche 
mefme du Capitaine ce qui en eftoit, qui leur tefmoi- 
gna des fentimens tout contraires, & mefme leur fit 
entendre que les chefs & les principaux des dernieres 
bourgades du pais, auec lefquels ils venoient de tenir 
Confeil, lui auoient fait paroiftre beaucoup de con- 
tentement de ce que nous nous approchions deux, 
veu qu'ils auroient d'orefnauant plus de commodite 
de nous venir vifiter, adiouftans qu'ils euffent a nous 
donner toute forte de fatisf action, & nous baflir vne 
belle cabane. Le P. Superieur fit fes prefens aux 
parens de noftre hofte deffunt, les remerciments s'en 
firent fur I'heure & par apres en plein feftin. 

Au retour ils eftoient defia au de-1^ du bourg d'An- 
gouteus par lequel ils eftoient pafTez, lors qu'ils ren- 
contrerent vne femme qui s'en alloit en fon champ, 
& qui entre autres difcours leur parla d'vne fienne 
petite fille qu'elle faifoit fort malade, priant le [228] 
Pere de Taller baptifer, ce qui les obligea k retour- 
ner fur leur pas. Comme ils eftoient fur le point de 
baptifer cet enfant, la grandmere voiant que la ieu- 
nefle entroit k la f oule pour les voir ; & comment, leur 
dit elle, n'auez vous iamais veu des Frangois, ne fga- 
uez vous pas que quand nos forciers viennent vifiter 
les malades ils ne veulent point qu'on les voie, & 
qu'on les interrompe, il n'en fallut pas dire dauan- 
tage. Sur ces entrefaites on vint aduertir le Pere 
qu'vne femme eftoit extremement malade, de fait il 


1637-38] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 69 


pulse, and with the other, under pretext of seeing if 
her head were unusually hot, he baptized her without 
any of those present perceiving it, although they all 
had kept their eyes open to [227] what he was doing. 

Having arrived at Ossosan^, they learned that the 
reports that had been circulated were false, and that 
only the absence of the Captain had caused the in- 
terruption of the work. The Fathers had an oppor- 
tunity of learning from the lips of the Captain him- 
self what there was in it. He assured them of quite 
opposite sentiments, and even gave them to under- 
stand that the chiefs and head men of the frontier 
villages of the country, with whom they had just 
held a Council, had evinced to him great satisfaction 
because we were coming nearer to them, seeing that 
they would hereafter find it easier to come and visit 
us, and adding that they would have to give us all 
manner of satisfaction and build us a fine cabin. 
The Father Superior gave his presents to the rela- 
tives of our deceased host, thanks being returned to 
him therefor at the time, and afterwards in open 
feast. 

On their return, they had already gotten beyond 
the village of Angouteus, through which they had 
passed, when they encountered a woman who was 
going to her field, and who, among other things, 
mentioned to them one of her little girls, whom she 
represented as very sick, begging the [228] Father 
to go and baptize her, which obliged them to retrace 
their steps. As they were upon the point of baptiz- 
ing this child, the grandmother, seeing that the 
children were crowding in to see them, said, " How 
now, have you never seen Frenchmen? Do you not 
know that when our sorcerers come to visit the sick 


70 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.14 

I'a trouua en tel eftat qu'il iugea k propos de Tin- 
flruire, elle efloit bien contente d'eflre baptifee, mais 
quand on lui dit qu'il efloit neceffaire de faire vne 
ferme refolution de changer de vie, & de ne plus pe- 
cher; elle s'efcria, eft-il poffible que ie ne peche 
plus; il n'eft pas poffible, & en mefme temps fe cou- 
urit le vifage de fa robe, donnant k attendre que cela 
eftant, elle n'auoit que faire d'eftre baptifee. Le 
Pere lui reprefenta qu'elle ne deuoit pas fe rebuter 
pour cela, qu'il eftoit bien vrai que nous eflions tous 
fujets au peche, auffi qu'il ne lui demandoit pas abfo- 
lument [229] qu'elle ne pechaft plus, feulement 
qu'elle prift vne bonne refolution de ne plus retourner 
k fa vie paffee. Au refte que s'il arriuoit apres le 
baptefme qu'elle pechaft, qu'elle ne penfaft pas pour 
cela que tout f uft perdu ; qu'il lui enfeigneroit encor 
vn autre moien par le lequel les pechez s'effagoient. 
Vne fienne parente prit \k deffus la parole ; courage, 
lui dit-elle, puis que les pechez s'effacent, & ne 
perds point vne li belle occafion d'eftre baptifee ; tu 
as maintenant la commodite des Fran9ois, regarde 
qu'ils s'en vont & que peut eftre nous ne les reuerrons 
de long temps. Elle la prefcha fi bien qu'elle fran- 
chit ce pas, & promit de faire fon poffible pour ne plus 
pecher, & ainfi le Pere la baptifa. 

Le feptiefme ie receu vne feconde lettre du Pere 
Pierre Pijart, il m'efcriuit en ces termes. Depuis ma 
derniere ie continuerai "k vous mander I'eftat de noflre 
nouuelle Refidence. Le cinquiefme de ce mois ie dis 
la premiere Meffe en noftre maifon de la Conception 
de noftre Dame, off rant ce tres fainct Sacrifice par vne 
Melfe votiue de la tres-faincte Trinity "k ces [230] 
mefmes diuines perfonnes pour la difpofition des 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 71 

they do not wish any one to see them and interrupt 
them?" It was not necessary to say any more. 
While this was going on, some one came to inform 
the Father that a woman was extremely ill. In fact, 
he found her in such a condition that he deemed it 
advisable to instruct her; she was very glad to be 
baptized, but when she was told that it was neces- 
sary to make a firm resolve to change her manner of 
life, and to sin no more, she exclaimed, " Is it possi- 
ble for me to sin no more ? It is not possible ; ' ' and 
at the same time she covered her face with her robe, 
giving us to understand that, this being so, she 
would have nothing to do with baptism. The Father 
represented to her that she ought not to refuse it on 
that account ; that it was very true we were all liable 
to sin, and therefore he did not demand absolutely 
[229] that she should sin no more, — only that she 
should make a good resolution not to return to her 
past life. Besides, if, after baptism, she should hap- 
pen to sin, she need not think all was lost on that ac- 
count; that he would teach her still another means 
by which sins were blotted out. One of her rela- 
tives thereupon began to speak: "Take courage, 
since sins are blotted out, ' ' she said to her, ' ' and 
do not lose so fine an opportunity to be baptized; 
thou hast now the advantage of having the French- 
men here; consider that they are going away, and 
that perhaps we shall not see them again for a long 
time." She preached to her so well that she re- 
solved to take this step, promising to do her best not 
to sin any more ; and therefore the Father baptized 
her. 

On the seventh, I received a second letter from 
Father Pierre Pijart, who wrote me in these terms: 


72 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.14 

coeurs de ces pauures Sauuages, & pour I'heureux 
fuccez des labeurs de ceux qui y feront emploiez. Le 
ledemain ie dis la MelTe de rimmaculee Conception, 
I'inuoquant comme patronne particuliere de cette 
nouuelle habitation : vous pouuez penfer auec qu'elle 
confolation de mon ame, & ie fus tellement foulag6 
des petits trauaux & importunitez des Sauuages que 
i'auois endure les iours precedents, que ie m'imagi- 
nois eftre en vne autre vie. Ie me trouuai fi plein 
de courage qu'il me fembloit que le palle auoit efte 
fort peu de chof e en comparaifon de ce que ie fouhai- 
tois endurer, ie me les reprefentois defia deuant les 
yeux, & quoi que ie m'y fois toullours confacre, ne- 
antmoins ie m'y voiie maintenant par vne affection 
plus particuliere de fuiure celui qui a tant endure pour 
nous. 

Le quatriefme de ce mois ie baptifai vn petit en- 
fant par vne particuliere prouidence de Dieu, le iour 
precedent i'auois eft6 en la mefme cabane, & ne I'a- 
uois point veu, de fait il n'y eftoit pas pour lors. 
Vn de nos Fran9ois y eftant all6 par apres, pour y 
voir vn petit fan [231] qu'on vouloit vendre, le trou- 
ua concha fur le dos, abandonne de fa mere qui n'at- 
tendoit que I'heure qu'il expirafl, il me vint querir 
promptement, ie le baptifai. Ie viens d'apprendre 
qu'il y a des malades "k Angoutenc, cependant ie ne 
f9aurois quitter ce bourg, i'ai baptif^e ce matin vne 
femme ^ I'extremite, ie I'auois inflruire des hier au 
foir: Dieu lui face mifericorde, qu'il foit k iamais 
beni. Maintenant que i'efcris la prefente il ne refte 
que dix efcorces pour acheuer la cabane, on les eft 
all6 querir, le foir s'en fera fait. Priez Dieu qu'il 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 73 

" I will send you further information of the state of 
our new Residence since my last letter. On the fifth 
of this month, I said the first Mass in our house of 
la Conception de nostre Dame, offering this most 
holy Sacrifice, through a votive Mass of the most 
holy Trinity, to these [230] same divine persons for 
the preparation of the hearts of these poor Savages, 
and for auspicious results to the labors of those who 
shall be employed here. The next day, I said the 
Mass of the Immaculate Conception, invoking it as a 
special patron of this new settlement. You can im- 
agine with what consolation of soul I did this; and 
it was such a relief from the petty cares, and the 
importunities of the Savages, that I had endured 
through the preceding days, that I imagined I was 
in another life. I found myself so full of cour- 
age that it seemed to me the past had been a very 
trifling thing in comparison with the trials I desired 
to endure, — I already pictured them before my eyes ; 
and, although I have always consecrated myself to 
this work, I nevertheless dedicate myself to it now 
from a more peculiar and affectionate desire to follow 
him who has endured so much for us. 

" On the fourth of this month, I baptized a little 
child, by a special providence of God. The day be- 
fore, I had been in the same cabin and had not seen 
it, — indeed, it was not there at the time. One of 
our Frenchmen having gone thither afterwards, to 
see a little fawn [231] which they wished to sell him, 
found the child lying upon its back, abandoned by 
its mother, who was only awaiting the hour of its 
death ; he came promptly for me, and I baptized it. 
I have just learned that there are some sick people at 
Angoutenc, but I cannot leave this village. I bap- 


74 LES RELA TIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol. 14 

m'attire tout "k foy & eftant parfaictement conuerti k 
lui, croiez que vous n'aurez iamais trouue perfonne 
qui foit dauantage voftre tout en lefus. De la Refi- 
dence de la Conception de Noflre Dame ce feptiefme 
de luin. 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 75 

tized this morning a woman who was at the point of 
death ; I had instructed her last evening ; may God 
have mercy on her and may he be forever blessed! 
At the time I am writing this, there remain only ten 
pieces of bark to finish the cabin ; they have gone to 
get them, and this evening it will be completed. 
Pray God that he may make me all his own ; and, be- 
ing perfectly converted to him, believe that you will 
never find any one who is more entirely yours in 
Jesus. From the Residence of la Conception de 
Nostre Dame, this seventh of June." 


76 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.14 


[232] CHAPITRE VII. 

l'hevrevse conversion du tsiouendaentaha 

premier sauuage adulte baptise en 

estat de sante dans le 

pays des hurons. 

EN mefme temps que le Diable femble auoir le 
deffus, que le fainct Baptefme eft d'6crie en 
deux ou trois bourgades d'ici autour h. raifon de 
la mort de quelques baptifez, que les Sorciers, (dont 
les paroles font receues pour des oracles) defendent 
aux malades I'vfage de quelques douceurs qui nous 
donnoient entree aupres d'eux ; que quelques anciens 
qui font eftat d'eftre de nos amis tafchent de nous 
perfuader de nous en retourner en France, & qu'on 
crie de tous coftez que c'eft trop endurer de nous, & 
[233] qu'il faut nous fendre la tefte. Vn Sauuage 
aag^ d'enuiron cinquante ans, homme d'efprit, des 
plus iudicieux & des plus confiderables du pais, apres 
y auoir penf6 meurement depuis trois ans qu'il a 
aflift^ k r explication de la doctrine Chreftienne, & 
aiant eft^ inftruit fort particulierement : depuis quel- 
ques mois a demand^ inftamment le baptefme, & le 
iour de la tres faincte Trinite a eft6 baptife publique- 
ment & auec les ceremonies de L'Eglife en prefence 
des principaux de cette bourgade, dont les vns ont 
regard^ cette action auec eftonnement, & les autres 
auec vn defir de I'imiter. 

La France h. eu Thonneur & la gloire d'ouurir la 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 77 


[232] CHAPTER VII. 

THE HAPPY CONVERSION OF TSIOUENDAENTAHA, THE 

FIRST ADULT SAVAGE BAPTIZED, WHILE 

IN HEALTH, IN THE COUNTRY 

OF THE HURONS. 

AT the very time when the Devil seems to have 
the upper hand,— when holy Baptism is de- 
cried in two or three villages around here on 
account of the death of some of those baptized, when 
the Sorcerers (whose words are received as oracles) 
are prohibiting the sick from using a few sweetmeats 
which give us access to them, when some old men 
who pride themselves on being our friends are trying 
to persuade us to return to France, and when the cry 
is raised on all sides that our presence is unendura- 
ble, and [233] that our heads must be split,— a Sav- 
age about fifty years old, a man of intelligence and 
one of the most discreet and influential persons in 
the country, after having given the subject mature 
consideration for three years, while he has been at- 
tending the explanations of the Christian doctrine, 
and having been very carefully instructed, earnestly 
requested baptism a few months ago; and, on the 
day of the most holy Trinity, he was baptized pub- 
licly, and with the ceremonies of the Church, in the 
presence of the chief persons of this village, some of 
whom regarded this act with astonishment, and 
others with a desire to imitate it. 

France has had the honor and the glory to open 


78 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.14 


porte de L'Eglife au premier de ces peuples barbares, 
& s'attendoit qu'il deuft eftre vn des Apoftres du 
pays. Mais Dieu ayant permis par les fecrets re'ffors 
de fa dinine prouidence qu'il foit tombe entre les 
mains des ennemis, oti il eft mort ou captif : il a plu 
k cette infinie bonte nous en rendre auiourd'huy vn 
autre, ce qui nous donne fuiet defperer qu'il fera fui- 
ui de plulieurs. II eft vray que ce ieune homme auoit 
des qualitez qui le rendoient recommandable, [234] 
comme il eftoit d'vn naturel fort docile, auoit I'efprit 
affez bon, & vne fuffifante cognoiffance de noftre 
langue, il pouuoit fans doute rendre de bons feruices 
^ Dieu, & nous aider grandement en la predication 
du S. Euangile ; mais ie trouue en cettui-ci quelque 
chofe dauantage, au moins de plus ferme & de plus 
f olide ; Ce fut vne chofe pleine de confolation de voir 
vn Sauuage tir6 de fon pays en la fleur de fa ieu- 
neffe, baptife & reueftu de la robe d'innocence en vne 
ville & vne afTemblee des plus celebres de toute la 
France: toutesfois i'eftime que plufieurs feront en 
quelque fa9on plus confolez d'entendre qu'vn homme 
fait, de bonne famille, qui eft en la reputation d'vn 
home d'efprit & de iugement, en vn pays barbare 
parmi fes parens encor infideles, en vn temps auquel 
le Baptefme eft mefprife, & les Predicateurs de I'E- 
uangile regard^s comme forciers & empoifonneurs, 
ait produit auiourd'huy vne ferme refolution de viure 
en Chreftien le refte de fa vie, & renonc6 publique- 
ment & pour iamais ^ toutes fes fuperftitions. II y 
auoit deHa long temps qu'il nous auoit tefmoign^ 
quelque defir d'en venir ^ ce poinct, neantmoins le 
[235] peu d'effets que nous voions de fes belles pa- 
roles, & la cognoiffance que nous auons que cette na- 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' 5 RELA TION, 1637 79 

the door of the Church to the first man of these bar- 
barous peoples, and was expecting that he would be- 
come one of the Apostles of the country. But God 
having, through the secret workings of his divine 
providence, permitted him to fall into the hands of 
the enemy, where he is either dead or a captive, it 
has pleased this infinite goodness to restore us to-day 
another one in his place, which gives us reason to 
hope that he will be followed by many more. That 
young man certainly had some qualities which ren- 
dered him commendable; [234] as he was of a very 
docile disposition, and had a tolerably good mind and 
a sufficient knowledge of our language, he was able, 
no doubt, to render good service to God, and to aid us 
greatly in preaching the Holy Gospel. But I find in 
this man something more, at least something firmer 
and more substantial. It was an event full of con- 
solation to see a Savage taken from his country in 
the flower of his youth, baptized, and clothed in the 
robe of innocence, in one of the most celebrated cities 
and assemblies of all France. Yet I judge that many 
will be, in some respects, more consoled to hear that 
a full-grown man, of good family, having the repu- 
tation of a man of intelligence and judgment, — in a 
barbarous country, among his still infidel kindred, 
at a time when Baptism is despised, and the Preach- 
ers of the Gospel regarded as sorcerers and poison- 
ers, — has evinced to-day a firm resolution to live as 
a Christian for the rest of his life, and has renounced 
publicly and forever all his superstitions. For a long 
time he had been showing us some disposition to take 
this step, but the [235] meager effects we saw of his 
fine words, and the knowledge we have that this na- 
tion is perhaps one of the most deceitful upon the 


80 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.14 

tion eft pent eftre vne des plus diffimulees qui foit 
fur la terre, faifoit que nous ne nous preffions pas 
bien fort de I'engager dans le Baptefme. 11 "nous 
auoit fait quelques traicts qui nous faifoient entrer 
en deffiance & craindre qu'il n'y eufl bien du propre 
intereft en fon fait ; entre autres I'an paffe, ie ne f9ai 
fi nous I'auons mande a voftre R. mais Taction eft 
affez gentille. Apres auoir aflift^ a quelques Cate- 
chifmes, ou le P. Superieur auoit parle amplement 
contre leurs Superftitions, & oil lui mefme auoit ap- 
plaudi a tout ce qui s'eftoit dit: il toba malade, quoi 
qu'allez legerement, deux ou trois iours confecutifs 
on ioiia au plat dans fa cabane, comme il eft croiable, 
de I'ordonnance du medecin, ou en fuite de quelque 
fonge, ce jeu eft vn des excellents remedes qu'ils 
aient ; au bout de f ept ou huict iours qu'il euft tout 
^ fait recouure fa fante, il fembloit qu'il euft quel- 
que honte de fe monftrer. Neatmoins aiant rencon- 
tre le P. Superieur, il lui dit qu'il auoit quelque 
chofe k lui communiquer, & qu'il trouuafl bon qu'il 
vint paffer la nuict chez nous. II ne [236] fut pas fi 
toft entre qu'il nous dit qu'il auoit peche; nous voila 
bien aife de le voir au moins dans quelque reco- 
gnoiffance de fa faute, nous penfions defia qu'il s'al- 
laft accufer d'auoir contreuenu a ce que le Pere leur 
auoit enf eigne: mais quant il vint "k s'expliquer, il fe 
trouua que ce peche eftoit qu'on lui auoit defrobe 
fon bonnet ; il eft fort probable que le motif de cette 
confelTion eftoit I'efperance qu'il auoit que pour peni- 
tence on luy en rendroit vn autre. Le Pere prift la 
parole & lui dit, que le larron auoit peche & non pas 
lui, & que pour lui s'il auoit peche c'eftoit en ce 
qu'il auoit fait iouer au plat pour fa fante; k cela 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 81 

earth, caused us not to be in great haste about invit- 
ing him to Baptism. He had shown us some traits 
that had caused us to distrust him, and to fear that 
there was considerable self-interest in his conduct. 
I do not know whether we informed your Reverence 
of it last year, among other things, but one of his acts 
was quite ridiculous. After having attended some 
of the Catechisms, where the Father Superior had 
spoken at length against their Superstitions, and 
where he himself had applauded all that was said, 
he fell sick, though not seriously; and for two or 
three consecutive days the game of dish ^ was played 
in his cabin, — probably by order of the doctor, or in 
consequence of some dream. This is one of the ex- 
cellent remedies they have. At the end of seven or 
eight days, when he had entirely recovered his 
health, it seemed that he was rather ashamed to show 
himself. Nevertheless, having encountered the Fa- 
ther Superior, he told him he had something to com- 
municate to him, and that he would like to come and 
pass the night with us. He [236] had no sooner 
entered than he told us that he had sinned. Behold 
us very glad to see him at least recognize his fault ; 
and at once we supposed that he was about to accuse 
himself of having violated what the Father had taught 
them. But when he came to explain himself, it was 
found that this sin was that some one had stolen his 
cap ; it is very probable that the motive of this con- 
fession was his hope that, for a penance, he would 
be given another one. The Father addressed him, 
saying that the thief had sinned, and not he; and 
that, as for him, if he had sinned, it was in having 
the dish game played for his recovery. To this he 
did not lack an answer, — asserting that what he had 


82 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.14 

il ne manqua point de repartie, tefmoignant que ce 
qu'il en auoit faict n'auoit pas efte qu'il creuft que 
cela lui deuft rendre la fante, mais fimplement pour 
fe diuertir. 

Cette annee il a tefmoign^ plus de fmcerit6 en fes 
paroles, & Dieu lui a fans doute touch^ le coeur. Get 
hyuer que nos Sauuages s'affemblerent en noftre ca- 
bane, pour faire quelque priere publique k I'occafion 
de la maladie, ce fut lui qui fit paroiftre le plus de 
foi & de confiance en Dieu; auffi [237] efl il encor lui 
& toute fa famille Jl reffentir des effects de cette con- 
tagion qui n'a quafi efpargne perfonne. 

Le mercredy des Cendres il vint trouuer le P. Sup. 
& lui demanda inllamment le Baptefme, le Pere lui 
refpondit qu'il efloit bien aife de le voir dans cette 
bonne volonte, mais neantmoins que la chofe eftoit 
de telle importance qu'elle meritoit bien qu'il y pen- 
faft encor ferieufement quelques mois, pendant lef- 
quels il prendoit vn foin plus particulier qu'aupara- 
uant de I'inflruire de tout ce qui eft de nos faincts 
myfteres. Vne grande partie du Carefme il venoit 
nous voir tous les iours de grand matin, & le Pere 
I'inflruifoit & lui racontoit les Euangiles de chaque 
iour, il y prenoit vn grand plaifir ; & ces cognoiffances 
lui firent des lors conceuoir vn grand eftime de noftre 
Seigneur. Vn iour que le Pere lui demandoit s'il 
croioit fermement tout ce qu'il lui auoit enfeign^; 
oiii dea, dift-il, ie le crois, il m'eft refte feulement 
quelque petit doute fur la propofition que tu me fis vn 
iour que le Ciel tournoit autour de la terre, veu [238] 
que i'ay remarqu6 que I'Eftoille Theandihar ne change 
point de place ; (il parloit de celle que nous appellons 
Polaire) le Pere le contenta lui monltrant que la fta- 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 83 

done was not done because lie believed that it would 
restore his health, but merely to divert himself. 

This year he has shown more sincerity in his words, 
and God has doubtless touched his heart. This win- 
ter, when our Savages assembled in our cabin to offer 
a public prayer on account of the malady, it was he 
who showed the most faith and confidence in God; 
therefore [237] it is yet for him and all his family to 
feel the effects of this epidemic, which has spared 
hardly any one. 

On Ash Wednesday, he came to see the Father Su- 
perior, and urgently asked him for Baptism ; the Fa- 
ther answered him that he was very glad to see him 
so well disposed, but that, nevertheless, the matter 
was so important that it well merited his giving it 
serious thought for a few months more ; during that 
time, he took care to instruct him more minutely 
than before in all that concerns our holy mysteries. 
During the greater part of Lent, he came to see us 
early every morning, and the Father instructed him 
and narrated the Gospels for each day ; he took great 
pleasure therein, and the knowledge of these things 
made him then conceive a high opinion of our Lord. 
One day when the Father asked him if he firmly be- 
lieved all that had been taught him, " Yes indeed! " 
said he, " I believe it; I still have only some little 
doubt about the information thou gavest me one day 
that the Sky turns around the earth, — seeing [238] 
that I have noticed that the Star Thcandihar does not 
change its place " (he was speaking of the one we call 
"the Polar"); the Father satisfied him by showing 
him that the apparent fixedness of this star was not 
contrary to the movements of the Heavens. 

But of all our mysteries, the one which has always 


84 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.14 

bilit6 apparente de cette efloille n'eftoit pas contraire 
aux mouuements des Cieux. 

Or de tons nos myfteres celui qui lui a toufioiirs le 
plus agre6 & qui a fait le plus d'impreffion fur fon 
efprit, 9'a efte le myllere de la glorieufe Refurre- 
ction de noftre Seigneur, car difoit-il fouuent, & quel- 
quefois mefme aux Sauuages; ie ne trouue point de 
marques plus infallibles de la diuinite de celui qu'on 
nous preche que fa refurrection, comment euft-il pu 
refufciter s'il n'euft efl6 Dieu. Mais ce qui nous 
agree le plus en ce Sauuage c'elt la liberte qu'il prend 
de parler ouuertement de nos faincts myfteres deuant 
les autres, & de la refolution qu'il a prife de viure 
d'orefnauant en Chreflien. Au commencement du 
Printemps la maladie eflant tout a fait ceffee en noftre 
bourgade, le P. Sup. aflembla les principaux de ceux 
qui eftoient efchappez, pour leur declarer qu'il [239] 
n'efloient point obligez, felon la promeffe qu'ils en 
auoient faite k Dieu de lui baftir vne petite chapelle, 
puifque s'eflants adreflez aux forciers & mefme aux 
demons, & aians mis toute leur confiance en leurs 
fuperftitions ordinaires, Dieu les auoit iugez indignes 
de reffentir les effects de fa mifericorde. Et comme 
il les exhortoit k recognoiflre Dieu pour leur maiftre, 
^ n'auoir recours qu'k lui, & fe plaignoit de ce qu'il 
y en auoit fi peu qui creufTent ce que nous enfei- 
gnions, pour moi dit TJiouendaentaha, ie croi tout ce 
que vous croiez vous autres, & me trouue volontiers 
en voflre cabane quand vous priez Dieu. Au refle 
Echon tu ne dois pas t'eflonner, fi quelques vns ne 
croient point, & fe mocquent mefme de ce que tu en- 
f eigne; tu fgais bien que tous les hommes n'ont pas 
creu au fils de Dieu pendant qu'il viuoit fur terre. 


l«37-38] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1637 85 

pleased him most, and whicli has made the most im- 
pression on his mind, was the mystery of the glorious 
Resurrection of our Lord. " For I do not find more 
infallible tokens of the divinity of him whom they 
preach to us," he often said, and sometimes even to 
the Savages, "than his resurrection; how could he 
have been resurrected if he were not God?" But 
what pleases us most in this Savage is the free- 
dom with which he speaks, before the others, of our 
holy mysteries, and of the resolve he has made to live 
hereafter as a Christian. At the beginning of Spring, 
the malady having altogether ceased in our village, 
the Father Superior assembled the principal ones of 
those who had escaped, to make known to them that 
they [239] were not obliged to fulfill the promise they 
had made to God to build him a little chapel, — be- 
cause, having addressed themselves to sorcerers and 
even to demons, and having put all their confidence 
in their usual superstitions, God had judged them 
unworthy of experiencing the effects of his mercy. 
And, when he was exhorting them to acknowledge 
God as their master, and to have recourse to him 
alone, and was complaining because there were so 
few of them who believed what we taught, *' As for 
me," said Tsiouendaentaha, " I believe all that you 
people believe, and am glad to be present in your 
cabin when you pray to God. But, Echon, thou 
shouldst not be astonished if some do not believe, 
and even ridicule what thou teachest; thou knowest 
well that all men did not believe in the son of God 
while he lived upon the earth, — that many despised 
his doctrine, persecuted him, and put him to death." 
Meanwhile, a certain man named Ihongouaha having 
risen from his place to go out, he continued, " Now 


86 


LES RELA TIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol. 14 


que plufieurs ont mefprife fa doctrine, I'ont perfecut^ 
& mis a mort. Sur ces entrefaites vn certain nom- 
m6, Ihongouaha s'eftant leue de fa place pour fortir, 
& bien dit-il Echon, ne t'auois ie pas bien dit que 
Ihongouaha ne croioit point, & ne prenoit point plaifir 
^ tes difcours, fi tofl que [240] tu as ouuert la bouche 
pour parler de Dieu, s'ea leue. Puis s'adreffant ^ 
lui mefme, Ihongouaha parle, & dis franchement ton 
fentiment, fi tu n'agree pas ces difcours ne t'y trouue 
point. Le P. Gamier le rencontra en fon voiage de 
la nation du Petun, & ayant pris le temps pour dire 
fon chapelet auec lui, le lendemain il le vint prier de 
le lui faire dire, & le Pere I'aiant entretenu de quel- 
ques bons difcours, nommement fur la PalTion [sc. 
r Apparition] de noftre Seigneur aux Pelerins d'E- 
maus; il en fit le recit lui mefme par apres a d'autres 
Sauuages. Parmi toutes ces belles difpofitions nous 
nous eflonnions vn peu de ce qu'il ne prelloit pas 
fon baptefme auec plus d'inftance; neantmoins la 
conflance qu'il apportoit k nous venir voir tons les 
iours pour eftre inflruit, nous donnoit occafion de 
croire qu'il procedoit en ce point auec beaucoup de 
fimplicite. De fait le P. Super, lui aiant demand^ 
ce qu'il en penfoit, & s'il ne feroit pas bien content 
d'eftre baptife, oiii dea, dit-il, mon nepueu, mais 
attends encor vn peu ie te prie; fa raifon efloit, qu'il 
n'en fjauoit pas encor allez. Comme le pere lui ra- 
contoit fouuent quelques hiftoires tant du vieil que 
du nouueau [241] teftament, il s'imaginoit qu'il fal- 
loit tout f^auoir auant que d'eflre baptife, & fe plai- 
gnoit fouuet de fa memoire. Ie penfe, difoit-il, auoir 
affez d'efprit, & cependant ie ne f9aurois bien rete- 
nir, & fi ie n'en f^ay d'auatage comment pourray-ie 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 87 

then, Echon, have I not told thee that Ihongouaha did 
not believe, and took no pleasure in thy discourses? 
as soon as [240] thou hast opened thy mouth to speak of 
God, he has risen. ' ' Then, addressing the man him- 
self, he said: ''Ihongouaha, speak, and express thy 
sentiments frankly ; if thou dost not like these dis- 
courses, do not come here." Father Gamier, on his 
journey from the Tobacco nation, met this man, and 
having taken time to say his rosary with him, the man 
came next day to ask that he would exercise him in 
saying it ; and the Father having conversed with him 
about some good topics, especially the Apparition of 
our Lord to the Pilgrims of Emmaus, he afterwards 
told the story himself to some other Savages. With 
all this good disposition, we were somewhat aston- 
ished that he did not urge his baptism with more in- 
sistence; however, the constancy he manifested, in 
coming to see us every day for instruction, gave us 
reason to believe that he was acting in this regard 
with much sincerity. In fact, the Father Superior 
having asked him what he thought of it, and if he 
would not be very glad to be baptized, " Yes, indeed, 
my nephew," said he; " but wait a little longer, I 
pray thee." His reason was that he did not yet 
know enough. As the father often related stories to 
him from both the old and the new [241] testaments, 
he imagined that he must know all before being bap- 
tized, and often complained of his memory. " I 
think I have sense enough," said he, " and yet I can- 
not remember well ; and, if I do not know any more, 
how shall I be able to talk with myself all alone, as 
the rest of you do?" He was generally present at 
our house when we were offering our prayers. But 
the Father having finally made him understand that 


88 LES RELATIONS DBS JASUITES [Vol.14 

m'entretenir tout feul come vous faites vous autres, 
il fe trouiioit d' ordinaire chez nous lors que nous fai- 
lions nos oraifons. Mais enfin le P. luy ayant fait 
entendre, que c'efloit alTez de bien f§auoir les articles 
de noflre croyance, & que le principal eftoit d'auoir 
vne ferme refolution de garder les commandemens 
de Dieu, il prift pour terme de fon baptefme le iour 
de la tres-fainte Trinite, 15. iours auparauant le Pere 
I'inftruifit fur les principaux myfteres de noftre foy, 
& les ceremonies & obligations du baptefme : pendant 
ce temps 1^ le P. Garnier k tafch6 de luy apprendre 
le Pater & I'Aue, & quelques petites prieres. le dis 
tafche: car il n'en h peu encor venir h bout; ce n'a 
pas eft6 faute de diligence de part & d' autre. C'efloit 
vn plaifir de luy voir quelque fois eftudier fa le9on, 
il vous repetoit trois ou quatre fois vne mefme chof e, 
tenant fa tefle k deux mains, & fe bouchant les yeux. 
Au reite il eftoit toufiours difpofe k prior Dieu, fou- 
uent il preuenoit le Pere, & le venoit chercher pour 
cet effect, quelquefois [242] il faifoit fes prieres a 
deux genoux deuant le faint Sacrement, quelque fois 
dans les champs, & (ce qui nous k pleu d'auantage) 
en prefence des Sauuages ; demandans luy mefme de 
fon propre mouuement h prier Dieu. Vn iour le 
Pere Garnier luy monftrant vn Crucifix, il le prit 
entre fes mains, & fe mit a prefcher en prefence de 
ceux de fa cabane, fur le myftere de noftre redemp- 
tion, & en vn autre occafion que le Pere luy fit voir 
vne image de noftre Seigneur fort bien faite, il com- 
men9a h. I'apoftropher en ces termes, ha ! done nous ta 
benedictio, garde nous, aye pitie de nous, tu es le 
maiftre de nos vies, tu nous as rachete. le luy ay veu 
faire tout le meme de fon propre mouuemet en vne 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, r6s7 89 

it was enough to know well the articles of our belief, 
and that the principal thing was to have a firm deter- 
mination to keep the commandments of God, he 
chose for the time of his baptism the day of the most 
holy Trinity. 1 5 days before, the Father instructed 
him upon the principal mysteries of our faith, and 
the ceremonies and obligations of baptism. During 
that time, Father Gamier tried to teach him the Pater 
and the Ave, and some little prayers. I say " tried," 
for he has not yet succeeded ; this has not been for 
lack of diligence on the part of both. It was a pleas- 
ure to see him, sometimes, studying his lesson; he 
would repeat the same thing three or four times, 
holding his head between his hands and closing his 
eyes. Moreover he was always ready to pray to 
God; often he anticipated the Father, and came to 
seek him for this purpose. Sometimes [242] he 
offered his prayers on his knees before the holy Sac- 
rament, sometimes in the fields, and (what pleased 
us more) in the presence of the Savages, — he himself 
asking, of his own accord, to pray to God. One day, 
when Father Gamier showed him a Crucifix, he took 
it in his own hands, and began to preach in the pres- 
ence of those of his cabin, upon the mystery of our 
redemption; and another time, when the Father 
showed him a very finely wrought image of our Lord, 
he began to apostrophize it in these terms: "Ah, 
give us thy benediction ; keep us, have pity on us ; 
thou art the master of our lives, thou hast redeemed 
us ! " I saw him do exactly the same thing, of his 
own accord, on a similar occasion. All this pleased 
us greatly, yet we could not neglect to sound him 
upon his willingness to renounce all his superstitions 
and to live like a Christian, the rest of his life; in 


90 LES RELATIONS DES JASUJTES [Vol.14 

femblable rencontre. Tout cela nous contentoit 
grandement, neantmoins nous ne pouuions nous 
lafTer de le fonder fur la difpofition de fa volo'nt^, 
pour renoncer a toutes fes fuperftitions & viure Chre- 
ftiennement le refte de fa vie, enquoy il nous a tou- 
fiours monflre beaucoup de courage, difant que pour 
ce qui efloit des fuperflitions il n'auoit point de regret 
de les quitter, puifque ce n'efloit que pech^, & que 
pour ce qui eftoit des femmes, fon temps eftoit paff^, 
que ce ne feroit pas ce qui luy donneroit de la peine, 
& le P. Superieur luy aiant expliqu6 ^ cette occafion, 
comme [243] nous pouuons offencer Dieu par penf^e. 
Pour nioy, dit-il, ie ne f9ay ce que c'efl que d'auoir 
de mauuaifes penfees, nos penfees ordinaires font, 
voyl^ ou ie feray, & maintenant que nous fommes 
pour aller en traitte, ie penfe quelquefois que I'on me 
feroit bien plaifir quand ie defcendray ^ Kebec de 
me donner vne belle & grande chaudiere pour vne 
robe que i'ay. Dieu luy fera la grace quelque iour, 
s'il luy plaift, de voir plus clair dans fon interieur. 
Le terme de fon baptefme s'approchant, nous fouhait- 
tios pour fon plus grand bien, & pour fa confolation 
& la noftre, qu'il fifl publiquement ouuerture de fon 
deffein, afin que par apres il euft plus de liberte de 
changer de vie, & faire comme nous : il s'y accorda 
tres volontiers, & fe propofa de faire vn feflin, pour 
aflembler plus commodement tons ceux de noflre 
bourgade, nous y affiflafmes, le Pere Superieur & 
moy auec vn de nos d'omeltiques : la il ne fit point la 
petite bouche, & declara nettement la refolution qu'il 
auoit prife, la plufpart fe coniotiirent auec luy, mais 
pas vn ne parla encor pour f oy ; pendant le feftin il 
entretint la copagnie fur nos faints myfteres, il leur 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib37 91 

this matter he always showed a great deal of cour- 
age, — saying that, as far as the superstitions were 
concerned, he did not regret giving them up, since 
they were only sins ; and that, as for women, his day 
had passed, and that would not give him trouble. 
When the Father Superior explained to him on this 
occasion, how [243] we could offend God in our 
thoughts, he said: " As for me, I do not know what 
it is to have bad thoughts; our usual thoughts are, 
' That is where I shall go, ' and * Now that we are go- 
ing to trade, I sometimes think that they would do 
me a great favor when I go down to Kebec, by giv- 
ing me a fine large kettle for a robe that I have.' " 
God will grant him the grace some day, if it please 
him, to see more clearly into his own heart. The 
time of his baptism approaching, we wished, for his 
greater benefit, and for his and our consolation, that 
he should publicly make a declaration of his purpose,, 
in order that he might afterwards have more liberty 
to change his life and to do as we do. He agreed to 
this very willingly, and proposed to make a feast, in 
order to bring together more conveniently all those 
of our village. We were present, the Father Supe- 
rior and I, with one of our domestics. Here, he did 
not close his mouth, but frankly announced the reso- 
lution he had taken ; the majority rejoiced with him, 
but not one spoke as yet for himself. During the 
feast he entertained the company upon our holy mys- 
teries, explaining to them that of the Annunciation 
of our Lady, some of the miracles of Our Lord, his 
death, and Passion. Finally the Father Superior 
invited the [244] company to his baptism the next 
morning, the day of the most holy Trinity. This 
was perhaps one of the most beautiful days we have 


92 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.14 

expliqua celuy de I'Annonciation de noftre Dame, 
quelques miracles de N. S. fa mort & Paffion. En 
fin le P. Super, inuita la [244] compagnie k fon bap- 
tefme pour le lendemain matin iour de la tres-faincte 
Trinite, cette iournee nous a efl6 peut-eftre vne des 
plus belles que nous ayons iamais eu en ce pais. Du 
grand matin le P. Superieur baptifa vn vieillard fort 
malade, qui mourut deux ou trois iours apres : de Ik 
nous allafmes pour voir noftre catecumene, mais il 
eftoit chez nous ; Le Pere I'inftruifit encor auant la 
ceremonie, nommement fur la communion. Noftre 
Chapelle eftoit extraordinairement bien ornee, elle 
occupoit la moiti6 de noftre cabane, auffi n'y fifmes 
nous point de feu ce iour Ik: nous anions drefle vn 
portique entortille de fetiillage, mefle d'oripeau, en 
vn mot nous anions eftall6 tout, ce que voftre R. 
nous a enuoie de beau, iamais on n'auoit rien veu de 
fi magnifique en ce pays. Toutefois la piece la plus 
rare eftoit noftre prof elite, auffi toute I'affiftance auoit 
les yeux arreftez fur luy: on auoit bien veu baptifer 
quantity de petits enfans en noftre cabane, mais qu'vn 
homme de fon aage, & en eftat de fante fe prefentaft 
pour receuoir le baptefme, c'eft ce qui ne s'efloit 
point encor veu. Au commencement de la ceremo- 
nie il parut vn peu honteux, & trembloit de tout le 
corps ; & comme le P. Superieur I'interrogeoit il fe 
perdit, & luy dift tout bas Echon ie [245] n'entends 
rien h. refpondre; neantmoins quand il n'eftoit 
queftion que d'vn oiiy ou d'vn non, il parloit fi haut 
& 11 diftinctemet, qu'il vous oftoit tout fujet de dou- 
ter de la fincerite de fon coeur, & mefme cette pudeur 
qui paroiffoit fur fon front, nous faifoit voir comme 
k decouuert, la droiture de fes intentions en vne 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 93 

ever had in this country. Early in the morning, the 
Father Superior baptized an old man, very ill, who 
died two or three days afterward. Thence we went 
to see our catechumen, but he was at our house. The 
Father instructed him again before the ceremony, 
especially upon the communion. Our Chapel was 
remarkably well decorated ; it occupied half of our 
cabin, so we did not make any fire there that day. 
We had arranged a portico, entwined with leaves 
mingled with tinsel ; in fact we had displayed every- 
thing beautiful that your Reverence has sent us. 
Nothing so magnificent had ever been seen in this 
country. But the rarest piece was our proselyte, so 
the eyes of all those present were fixed upon him. 
True, they had seen many little children baptized in 
our cabin ; but that a man of his age, and in good 
health, should present himself to receive baptism, — 
this was something they had not seen before. At 
the beginning of the ceremony, he appeared rather 
bashful, and trembled all over; and when the Father 
Superior questioned him, he was confused, and said 
to him in a low tone, '' Echon, I [245] do not know 
what to answer." However, when it was only a 
question of " yes" or " no," he spoke so loudly and 
so distinctly as to remove all one's reasons to doubt 
the sincerity of his heart; and even this modesty 
which appeared upon his brow showed us unveiled, 
as it were, the integrity of his intentions in an affair 
of so much importance. Meanwhile, there was an 
old man named Tendoutsakorin^ who could not refrain 
from talking, and from saying aloud that it was much 
better to be baptized like that than in sickness, which 
often deprives us of judgment and understanding; 
and he exhorted the whole assembly to imitate Tsi- 


M LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 


14 


affaire de telle importance. Cependant 11 y euft vn 
vieillard nomme Tendoutfahorind, qui ne fe peut tenir 
de parler, & de dire tout haut, que cela eftoit bien 
mieux d'eftre ainfi baptife, qu'en eftat de maladie, 
•qui nous ofle fouuent le iugement & I'efprit; & 
exhorta toute I'airemblee ^ imiter, Tfiouendaentaha, & 
fe faire baptifer comme luy au pluftoft. Du refte 
nous eufmes affez de filence: vn peu d'apareil extra- 
ordinaire y faifoit beaucoup. Simon Baron fut fon 
parrain, & le nomma Pierre. Nous efperos qu'il fera 
comme la pierre fondametale du Chriftianifme en ce 
pays, que Dieu fe feruira de luy pour la conuerfion 
de plufieurs, & que ce S. Apoitre, dont il porte le 
nom, prendra ces peuples en fa protection, & leur 
ouurira la porte du ciel. Apres fon Baptefme le P. 
Superieur dift la MefTe, qu'il entendit auec affez de 
deuotion pour vn Sauuage, de temps en temps ie luy 
difois quelque petit mot, tantoa ie luy faifois faire 
vn acte de foy, tantoft [246] demander k Dieu pardon 
de fes pechez, tantoft ie luy difois qu'il s'entretint 
interieurement fur les grandes obligations que nous 
auions k noare Seigneur, ^ la fin de la Meffe il com- 
munia auec beaucoup de modeftie, & le P. Superieur 
luy aida par apres ^ faire fon action de graces, vne 
heure ou deux apres nous fifmes vn feftin a tous ceux 
de noflre bourgade pour nous conioiiir par enfemble 
de la grace que Dieu venoit de faire a noftre Chre- 
ftien, on fgait affez que tous les feftins ordinaires 
confiflent en deux ou trois poiffons boucanez, & cuits 
dans le ble du pais ; il fe tint plufieurs bons difcours 
touchant le baptefme & nos faints myfteres, nous 
laiffafmes noftre Chapelle en mefme eftat tout le 
long du iour: ce qui donna aux Sauuages dequoy ad- 


1637-38] LEJEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 95 

ouendaentaha, and to be baptized like him, as soon as 
possible. Apart from this, we had reasonable quiet, 
the little extra decoration serving materially to this 
end. Simon Baron was his godfather, and named 
him Pierre. We hope that he will serve as a foun- 
dation stone to Christianity in this country, that God 
will emplo)' him for the conversion of many; and 
that this Holy Apostle, whose name he bears, will 
take these peoples under his protection, and will 
open to them the gate of heaven. After his Baptism 
the Father Superior said Mass, to which he listened 
with considerable devotion for a Savage. From 
time to time I said a few words to him, having him 
now perform an act of faith, now [246] ask God's 
pardon for his sins; again, I told him to reflect in- 
wardly upon the great obligations that we are under 
to our Lord. At the close of the Mass, he received 
communion very modestly, and the Father Superior 
helped him afterwards to offer his thanksgiving. An 
hour or two later, we made a feast for all the people 
of our village, that we might rejoice together at the 
grace that God had just shown to our Christian. It 
is well known that all the ordinary feasts consist of 
two or three smoked fish, cooked with the native 
com. Several profitable discourses were given, re- 
garding baptism and our holy mysteries. We left 
our Chapel in the same condition during the whole 
day, — thus giving the Savages something to admire, 
and ourselves a good subject upon which to instruct 
them. An old man, looking at our Crucifix, asked 
me who that was who was fastened to it. Having 
told him, he began to speak to our Lord in these 
words, Etsagon ihouaten etsagon taouacaratat, " Cour- 
age, nephew, courage, take care of us!" It is thus 


96 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.14 

mirer, & k nous vn beau fujet de les inftruire : vn 
vieillard regardant noflre Crucifix me demanda qui 
eftoit celuy qui y eftoit attache ; & luy ayant expli- 
qu^, il fe mit k parler k noflre Seigneur en ces termes 
Etfagon ihoiiaten etfagon taoiiacaratat, courage, mon 
neueu, courage, garde nous: c'efl ainfi que les vieil- 
lards appellent les ieunes gens; ie luy fis entendre 
qu'il eftoit noflre pere k tons, & que c'efloit de luy 
que nous tenos I'eflre & la vie; fa fimplicite le ren- 
doit excufable. Nos images & nos tableaux font 
grandement defirez en quelques endroits, fur tout k 
[247] ArentL II arriua iuflement qu'vne femme de 
cette bourgade nous vint vifiter ce iour Ik : elle f ut mer- 
ueilleufement furprife k I'entree de noflre cabane; 
elle s'arrefla quelques temps, n'ofant s'auancer & 
pafler outre, ce fut vn plaifir de la voir dans ce com- 
bat : car d'vn cofl6 elle f e f entoit puifTamment attiree 
par la nouueaut^ de cet obiet, d'vn autre cofle la 
crainte qu'elle auoit qu'aprochant de plus pres nos 
tableaux, elle ne fut incontinent faifie du mal, la fai- 
foit reculer en arriere. Neantmoins apres auoir bien 
difpute, la curiofLt6 I'emporta 9a (dit elle) il n'y a 
remede I ar if con, il faut que ie m'hazarde, il faut que 
ie voye, quand il m'en d'euroit coufler la vie. Cette 
action en toucha plufieurs, & i'efpere (moyennant la 
continuation des feruantes prieres de tant de fainctes 
ames, qui s'emploient fl conflamet aupres de Dieu, 
pour le bien de ces peuples) que nous luy en mande- 
rons I'ann^e prochaine de bos effets. Cet exemple 
donna bien k f onger "k Enditfaconc Capitaine d" Onneti- 
fati, c'efl vn fort bon efprit & curieux k merueille 
d'entendre nos fagons de faire de France; k I'occafion 
d'vne image du iugement que nous anions expof^e, 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j637 97 

the old men address the young men. I made him 
understand that he was the father of us all, and that 
from him we obtain being and life; his simplicity 
rendered him excusable. Our images and our pic- 
tures are in great demand in some places, especially 
in [247] ArentL It so happened that a woman of 
that village came to visit us that day. She was 
wonderfully surprised at the entrance of our cabin ; 
she remained there for some time, without daring to 
advance and cross the threshold. It was amusing to 
see her in this struggle, for, on the one hand, she felt 
herself powerfully attracted by the novelty of this 
object; and, on the other, her fear, lest, in approach- 
ing nearer our pictures, she would be immediately at- 
tacked by the disease, made her draw back. Never- 
theless, after a hard struggle, curiosity got the better 
of her. " There is no help for it, lariscon " (she said) ; 
" I must venture, I must see, even though it cost me 
my life." This act affected many of them, and I 
hope (by means of the continuation of the fervent 
prayers of so many saintly souls, who exert them- 
selves so continually in God's presence for the good of 
these tribes) that we shall next year inform you of 
some good results therefrom. This example gave 
Enditsaconc, Captain of Omientisati, much to reflect 
upon. He is a man of great intelligence, and is 
wonderfully curious to hear about our ways of doing 
things in France. Once, when we showed him a 
representation of the judgment, he inquired very 
particularly of the Father Superior, who those were 
who were going into hell, and what must be done to 
go to heaven. The Father instructed him fully. 
[248] Two days later, another family of our village 
came to ask baptism from us, with great earnestness ; 


98 LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 14 

il s'enquit fort particulierement du P. Superieur, qui 
eftoient ceux qui alloiet aux enfers, & de ce qu'ii fal- 
loit faire pour aller au ciel, le Pere rinftruifit ample- 
ment. [248] Deux iours apres vne autre famille de 
noftre bourgade s'en vint nous demader le baptefme, 
auec beaucoup d'inftance ; le P. Superieur eft mainte- 
nant apres h. les inflruire. C'eft vn grand aduantage 
que quelqu'vn ait commence; & encore vne perfonne 
de confideration comme eft Pierre TJiouendaentaha; il 
ne manque point de venir prier Dieu tous les iours, 
& d'entendre la MelTe les Feftes & les Dimanches, 
nous efperons que toute fa famille fuiura bien toft 
fon exemple. Dieu foit infiniment benit: c'eft vne 
grande confolation pour nous, d'auoir vn tel Chreftien 
que celuy-lk, qui faffe profeffion publique de noftre 
faincte foy, en vn temps auquel fes myfteres les plus 
adorables, font tenus pour fufpects, & ceux qui les 
prefchent, regardez plus que jamais, comme autant 
d'empoifonneurs & de forciers. 

Ce n'eft pas feulement dans ce pais que nous 
fommes en cette reputation, ces faux bruits out couru 
iufques aux nations eftrangeres, qui nous prennent 
comme les maiftres, & les arbitres de la vie & de la 
mort. II n'y k pas long temps qu'vne nation Algon- 
quine que nous nommons des Cheueux releuez, nous 
enuoia vne ambaffade expres, auec des prefens pour 
nous fupplier de les efpargner dans ce commun de- 
faftre, & d'auoir efgard [249] k I'affection qu'ils nous 
portoient. Nous leur fifmes entendre que nous ne 
pouuions receuoir ces offrandes, que ce n'eftoit pas h. 
nous qu'ils fe deuoient adreffer, «& qu'il n'y auoit 
qu'vn fouuerain Seigneur de la vie & de la mort, & 
quec'eftoitk luy ^qui ils deuoient auoir recours; que 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 99 

the Father Superior is now engaged in instructing 
them. It is a great advantage that some one has 
made a beginning, and that, too, a person of influ- 
ence, as is Pierre Tsiouendaentaha ; he does not fail 
to come every day to pray to God, and to hear Mass 
on Feast days and Sundays. We hope that all his 
family will soon follow his example. God be infi- 
nitely blessed! It is a great consolation for us to 
have such a Christian as he is, to make a public pro- 
fession of our holy faith at a time when its most 
adorable mysteries are looked upon with suspicion, 
and those who preach them are regarded, more than 
ever, as so many poisoners and sorcerers. 

It is not only in this country that we have this 
reputation, for these false reports have been carried 
even to strange nations, who consider us as the mas- 
ters and arbiters of life and death. Not long ago, an 
Algonquin tribe that we call ' ' men of the raised 
Hair "^ sent a special embassy to us with presents, 
to beg us to spare them in this general calamity, and 
to regard [249] the affection that they bore us. We 
explained to them that we could not receive these 
offerings, that it was not to us they should address 
themselves ; that there was only one sovereign Lord 
of life and of death, and that it was to him they 
should have recourse ; that this was the only remedy 
we had used in our sickness, and we had found it 
very efficacious. They returned very well satisfied, 
with the determination to follow our advice. Never- 
theless, the providence of God has, since then, per- 
mitted them to be afflicted like the others, so that in 
their village they count as many as seventy dead, 
which gives them much to reflect upon. However, 
after having investigated everything that they im- 


100 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 14 


c'eftoit IVnique remede dont nous nous eftions ferui 
dans nos maladies, & dont nous nous eftions tl-es- 
bien trouuez. lis s'en retournerent bien s'atis- 
faits, auec refolution de fuiure noftre confeil. Ne- 
antmoins la prouidence de Dieu h. permis qu'ils ayent 
efte depuis afifligez comme les autres, fi qu'en leur 
bourg ils comptet iufques a foixante & dix morts, ce 
qui leur donne bien a penf er ; toutes-f ois apres auoir 
recherche tout ce qu'ils s'imaginoient pouuoir eftre 
la caufe de ce mal'heur, ils s'arrefterent enfin ^ vne 
chofe, que la feule lumiere, que I'autheur de la na- 
ture k imprime fur le front de tous les hommes, leur 
pouuoit decouurir. Quelques-vns fe fouuindrent 
qu'ils auoiet autre fois defrobe vn collier de 2400. 
grains de pourcelleine k feu Eftienne Brufle, ils fe 
defereret eux-mefmes aux anciens, qui a ces nou- 
uelles s'affemblerent incontinent, «& apres auoir tout 
bien confidere, iugerent qu'ils auoient trouue la 
fource de leur maladie, & ainfi que I'vnique moyen 
d'y remedier [250] eftoit d'en faire au plultoft la 
reftitution ; & afin que la chofe reiilTit mieux, ils fe 
refolurent de venir en perfonne trouuer les Fragois, 
& fatisfaire au tort qu'on leur auoit fait. La refolu- 
tion ne fuft pas fi toft prife qu'ils fe mirent en che- 
min. le laiHe k penfer a voftre R. fi nous fufmes 
eftonnez du fuiet de cette feconde ambaffade, que 
ces vieillards declarerent, auec des termes dignes de 
compaffion; ils eftallerent fur vne natte les deux 
mille quatre cens grains de porcellenne, qu'ils auoient 
amafle par vne contribution qu'auoient faite ceux qui 
reftoient dans leur bourg; ils nous coniurerent tres- 
inftamment, & k diuerfes reprifes, de receuoir ce 
collier en fatisf action du larcin fait k vn Francois, d'a- 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i637 101 

agined might be the cause of their misfortune, they 
at last fixed upon something which only the light 
that the author of nature has impressed upon the 
brow of all men, could reveal to them. Some re- 
membered that they had once robbed the deceased 
Estienne Brusle of a collar of 2400 porcelain beads. 
They accused themselves before the old men, who at 
this news immediately assembled ; and, having well 
considered the whole matter, they decided that they 
had found the source of their malady, and thus the 
only means of remedying it [250] was to make resti- 
tution therefor as soon as possible ; and for the bet- 
ter success of the affair they resolved to come in 
person to see the French, and to satisfy them for the 
wrong done to them. This decision was no sooner 
made than they started on the journey. I leave your 
Reverence to imagine how much we were astonished 
at the cause of this second embassy, which these old 
men made known in terms worthy of compassion. 
They spread out upon a mat the two thousand four 
hundred porcelain beads, which they had collected 
by a contribution made by the survivors in their vil- 
lage. They conjured us very earnestly, and at dif- 
ferent times, to receive this collar in satisfaction for 
the theft committed against a Frenchman, to have 
pity on them, and to preserve the few whom the dis- 
ease had spared up to that time. The Father Supe- 
rior rejoined that it was very well-advised on their 
part to wish to make this restitution, — that it was 
an act of justice, and very right not to keep the 
property of others ; that, nevertheless, we could not 
accept this collar, since it had not been stolen from 
us, and he from whom it had been taken was dead, 
and there was no one in the country who could re- 


102 LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 14 

iioir piti€ d'eux, & de conferuer ce pen que la mala- 
die auoit iufques h. prefent efpargne. Le P. Sape- 
rieur refpondit que c'eftoit tres-bien aduif6 k eux, 
de vouloir faire cette reftitution, que c'eftoit vne 
action de iuftice, & tres-raifonnable de ne point retenir 
le bien d'autrui; neantmoins que nous ne pouuions 
pas accepter ce collier, puis qu'il ne nous auoit pas 
eft6 defrob6, & que celuy h. qui il auoit eft6 pris eftoit 
mort, & n'y auoit perfonne dans le pays qui le peuft 
receuoir en fon nom. D'auantage [251] que c'eftoit 
vne chofe trop dangereufe pour nous, nommement en 
ce temps ; de receuoir des prefens de nations eftran- 
geres ; que ceux de ce pais, qui auroient bien toft le 
vent de cette affaire, ne prendroient pas cecy pour 
vne fimple reftitution: mais pluftoft pour quelque 
fecrette intelligence ^ leur defauantage; enfin qu'ils 
deuoient fe contenter de s'eftre mis en deuoir de 
rendre ce qu'ils iugeoient ne leur appartenir pas, 
qu'ils fatisfaifoient en cela fuffifamment h. leur obli- 
gation, & que 1 'acceptation que nous en ferions, fe- 
roit tout h. fait inutile pour eux, & nous pourroit eftre 
extremement dommageable, s'ils venoient h. guerir 
deformais; que fi au contraire le mal continuoit, ils 
ne manqueroient pas de nous eftimer des trompeurs, 
comme n'aians pas refpondu k leur attente. lis fe 
contenterent de ces raifons, & s'en retournerent auec 
leur porcellenne, & mefme auec quelque petit pre- 
fent. Mais ce n'eft iamais fait, ceux-cy ne font pas 
fi toft partis qu'en voici d'autres qui nous donnent 
fuiet de chercher de nouueaux expediens pour fatis- 
faire k leur imagination. Le iour du baptefme de 
Pierre TJiouendaentaha nous anions expof6 vne fort 
belle image du iugement, [252] ou les damnez font 


1637-38] LE JKUNE'S RELATION, ib37 108 

ceive it in his name. More than this, [251] he said 
that it was too dangerous a thing for us, especially 
at this time, to receive presents from strange na- 
tions; that the people of this country, who would 
soon get wind of this affair, would not consider it as 
a simple restitution, but rather as some secret un- 
derstanding to their disadvantage; in fine, that they 
should content themselves with having undertaken 
to restore what they considered did not belong to 
them, — that in doing so they had sufficiently dis- 
charged their obligations, and that our acceptance of 
it would be altogether useless to them, and might be 
extremely injurious to us, if from that time they be- 
gan to recover; that if, on the contrary, the sickness 
continued, they would be certain to regard us as im- 
postors for not having fulfilled their expectations. 
They were satisfied with these arguments, and re- 
turned with their porcelain and even with a little 
present. But this thing is never ended; they had 
no sooner departed than others came, who caused 
us to search for new expedients to satisfy their im- 
agination. On the day of the baptism of Pierre 
Tsiouendaentaha, we had exhibited an excellent repre- 
sentation of the judgment, [252] where the damned 
are depicted, — some with serpents and dragons tear- 
ing out their entrails, and the greater part with some 
kind of instrument of their punishment. Many ob- 
tained some benefit from this spectacle; but some 
persuaded themselves that this multitude of men, 
desperate, and heaped one upon the other, were all 
those we had caused to die during this Winter; that 
these flames represented the heats of this pestilential 
fever, and these dragons and serpents, the venomous 
beasts that we made use of in order to poison them. 


104 


LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.14 


depeints, les vns auec des couleuures & des dragons, 
qui leur defchiret les entrailles, & la plufpart -auec 
quelque efpece d'inftmmens de leurs fupplices. Plu- 
fieurs tirerent quelque profit de cette veue, neant- 
moins quelques vns fe font perfuadez que cette mul- 
titude d'hommes defefperez, & entaffez les vns fur 
les autres, efloit tons ceux que nous anions fait mourir 
c6t Hyuer ; que ces flammes repref entoient les ardeurs 
de cette fieure peftilentielle, & ces dragons & ces 
Terpens, les befles venimeufes, dont nous nous eflions 
feruis pour les empoifonner. Cela fut dit en plein 
feflin h. Ouenrio au rapport du Capitaine Enditfacon. 
Vn autre depuis nous demanda fi en effect il eftoit 
vrai que nous nouriffions chez nous la maladie comme 
vn animal domeflique, difant que c'eftoit vne opinion 
affez commune dans le pais. Et tout fraifchement 
que ie retournois d' Offoffafttf, vne femme qui venoit 
de fon champ, prit vne fauterelle & me I'apporta, me 
priant inftamment de luy enfeigner quelque inuen- 
tion pour faire mourir ces beftioles, qui mangent les 
bleds, adiouflant qu on luy auoit dit, que nous eftions 
paffez maiftres en ce meflier. 

Le 9. noftre cabane d' OJjfojfjTane eUsmt tout k fait 
acheu^e, quarante h cinquante Sauuages, [253] tant 
hommes que femmes, vindrent icy a Ihojiattiria que- 
rir vne partie de noftre bled, & quelques petits meu- 
bles, les Capitaines eftoient de la troupe. Ce font 
des feruices qu'ils vous rendent gratuitement en ces 
occafions. 

Le 16. tomba malade de la contagion, vne ieune 
fiUe, des parentes & de la cabane de noftre nouueau 
Chreftien. La fage prouidence de Dieu a des deffeins 
que nous ne voions pas; tout 1' Hyuer ils n'auoient 


1637-38] LE [EUNE'S RELATION, i637 105 

This was said in open feast at Ouenrioy according to 
the report of Captain Enditsacon. Another one after- 
ward asked us if it were really true that we were 
raising the malady in our house as if it were a do- 
mestic animal, saying that this was quite a common 
opinion in the country. And very recently, when 
I was returning from Ossossane, a woman who was 
coming from her field caught a grasshopper and 
brought it to me, begging me earnestly to teach her 
some contrivance for killing these little creatures 
that eat the com, adding that she had been told that 
we were past masters in this art. 

On the 9th, our cabin at Ossossan^ being entirely 
finished, forty or fifty Savages, [253] both men and 
women, came here to Ihonattiria to get part of our 
corn and a few little articles of furniture, the Cap- 
tains being in the crowd. These are services that 
they render you gratuitously on these occasions. 

On the 1 6th, a young girl, related to our new Chris- 
tian and belonging to his cabin, fell sick of the con- 
tagion. The wise providence of God has designs 
that we do not see. All the Winter they had been 
occupied solely in comforting the others; and now 
they are the only ones in our village who are afflict- 
ed. This shock is indeed rather violent for a new 
plant, and for us a reason for adoring submissively 
the secret judgments of God. She is now in the fifth 
day of her fever, with very manifest signs of danger. 
Therefore we have already prepared her for Holy 
Baptism, to which she and her relatives have given 
us their consent, with evidences of great faith and 
resignation to the will of God. It is also a consola- 
tion to us to see nothing in the cabin, up to the pres- 
ent, contrary to the first promises and resolutions of 


106 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 14 


efl;6 occupez qu'a confoler les autres, & maintenant 
les voila feuls de noftre bourgade dans I'afSictio. 
C'eft vne fecouffe vn peu bie forte pour vne nouuelle 
plante, & pour nous vn fuiet d'adorer auec foubmiflio 
les fecrets iugemens de Dieu; la voila maintenat 
dans le cinqui^me iour de fa fiebure, auec des fignes 
affez manifeftes de danger; auffi I'auos nous defia 
difpof^e au S. Baptefme, pour lequel elle & fes pa- 
rens nous ont donne leur confentement, auec des tef- 
moignages d'vne grande foy & refignation k la volote 
de Dieu. Ce nous eft encor vne confolation de ne 
rien voir dans la cabane iufques h. prefent, de con- 
traire aux premieres promeffes & refolutios du bap- 
tefme. Pour luy il continue conftamment depuis 
fon baptefme, dans les deuoirs de Chreftien ; il a chan- 
ge de maiftre, le Pere [254] Gamier eft ^ OjifoJJan^\ 
maintenant le P. Chaftellain prend le foin de le faire 
prier Dieu foir & matin. II ne manque pas defia de 
perfonnes qui le perfecutent, il fe comporte neant- 
moins courageufemet, Dieu luy donne le don de per- 
feuerance, & continue k toute fa famille 1' inclination 
qu'elle a k receuoir la foy. Dieu foit benit, nous ve- 
nous tout maintenant de nous feruir de la bonne dif- 
pofition que nous anions trouu6 dans cette cabane. 
Le P. Chaftelain vient de baptifer cette pauure ma- 
lade, nous auons encor exhorts fes parens ^ fe con- 
former au bon plaifir de Dieu. Cette fille fait le 50. 
par deffus les deux cens que nous auons baptifez cette 
annde en ce pais. Vne partie refte encor en vie, & 
bien nous en prend qu'ils ne font pas tons das le ciel, 
il y auroit "k craindre qu'ils ne fermaffent la porte ^ 
beaucoup d'autres; quelques vns n'ont defia que trop 
d'auerfion du S. Baptefme. Neantmoins ce nous eft 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1637 107 

baptism. As for him, he continues steadfast since his 
baptism in the duties of a Christian ; he has changed 
his teacher, as Father [254] Garnier is at Ossossan^; 
now, Father Chastellain is careful to have him pray 
to God evening and morning. There are not lack- 
ing persons already who persecute him, but he com- 
ports himself with courage. May God grant him the 
gift of perseverance, and keep his whole family in 
the inclination they now have to receive the faith I 
Blessed be God ; we have just now availed ourselves 
of the good disposition we had found in that cabin, 
for Father Chastelain has just baptized this poor sick 
girl, and we have again exhorted her relatives to 
conform to the good pleasure of God. This girl was 
the 50th over and above the two hundred whom we 
have baptized this year in this region. Some of 
them are still alive, and it is well for us that they 
are not all in heaven, for this would cause us to fear 
that they might close the doors to many others ; some 
have already only too much aversion to Holy Bap- 
tism. Nevertheless, it is a very sensible consolation 
to us to have seen in this barbarism so many Savages 
die with so evident signs of predestination. And if 
we only had assurance of the eternal happiness of 
thirty or 40 little children, who have been carried off 
by this contagious malady after having received bap- 
tism, we would consider that we had already received 
[255] the reward for a thousand times more hardships 
than we could suffer in seeking so many poor wan- 
dering sheep, and in the conquest of this new world. 
It is a part of the heritage of Jesus Christ, which has 
been righteously acquired by him. Postula a me et 
daho tibi gentes k<sreditatem tuam. These are so many 


108 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 14 


vne confolation bien fenfible, d'auoir veu mourir en 
cette barbaric vn {i grand nombre de Sauuageg, auec 
de grades marques de predeftination. Et quand 
nous n'aurions que I'affeurance du bon-heur eternel 
de trente ^ 40. petits enfans, qui ont efte emportez 
par cette maladie contagieufe, apres auoir receu le 
baptefme, nous eflimerios auoir defia receu [255] la 
recompenfe de mille fois plus de trauaux que nous 
n'en pouuons fouffrir k la recherche de tant de pau- 
ures brebis efgarees, & ^ la conquefle de ce nouueau 
monde. C'eft vne partie de I'heritage de lefus 
Chrift qui luy eft bien acquiefe. Pojiula a me & dabo 
tibi gentes hcereditatem tuam; ce font autant d'auocats 
pour nous, pour tout le pais, & pour tons ceux qui 
s'intereffent pour le falut de ces peuples ; & vn motif 
bien puilTant pour moienner la conuerfion des pa- 
rents, qui n'ont rien tant k coeur que de fuiure leurs 
enfans apres la mort. 

Maintenant ie puis finir la prefente quand ie vou- 
drai, puis que ie ne fgaurois laiffer voftre R. dans vn 
fuiet de confolation qui luy puiffe agr^er d'auantage, 
auffi bien I'embarquement preffe, il y a deux iours 
qu'vn de nos domeftiques eft parti; ie m'en vai ^ 
noftre nouuelle Refidence, pour prendre la place du 
P. Pijart, qui vient icy pour fe preparer au voyage. 
Le P. Superieur I'enuoie k A'ebec, pour pouuoir con- 
ferer de bouche auec voftre R. de tout ce qui re- 
garde le bien de cette miffion ; le grand zele que nous 
fgauons qu'elle a pour le falut de ces pauures ames, 
nous feroit fouhaitter la voir icy en perfonne; au 
moins il nous replit d'efperance [256] qu'elle nous 
enuoiera toufiours de braues ouuriers, & qu'elle nous 
aidera de ces bons confeils, pour commencer heureu- 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s7 109 

advocates for us, for the whole country, and for all 
those who interest themselves in the salvation of 
these peoples, — and a most powerful motive to oper- 
ate in the conversion of the parents, who have noth- 
ing so much at heart as to follow their children after 
death. 

Now I can finish the present letter when I please, 
since I cannot leave your Reverence with a reason 
for consolation which can be more acceptable to 
you; moreover, the embarkation is urgent; one of 
our domestics departed two days ago. I am going 
to our new Residence to take the place of Father Pi- 
jart, who is coming here to prepare for the voyage. 
The Father Superior sends him to Kebec that he may 
confer with your Reverence, by word of mouth, on 
all that concerns the welfare of this mission. The 
great zeal that we know you have for the salvation 
of these poor souls makes us wish to see you here in 
person; at least, it fills us with hope [256] that you 
will always send us valiant workers, and that you will 
aid us with good counsel to begin this new Church 
auspiciously, after the establishment of which we are 
going to work with more courage than ever. So 
many adults escaped from death after baptism con- 
strain us to do this ; the war that the powers of dark- 
ness have openly declared against us does not permit 
us to remain without our weapons at hand ; and so 
many good sentiments that God inspires in us, and 
in thousands and thousands of persons in France, 
would accuse us of unfaithfulness if we should be- 
have slothfully in the midst of so many excellent op- 
portunities; and above all, the assurances we have of 
aid from the holy prayers and holy sacrifices of your 


110 


LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.14 


fement cette nouuelle Eglife, apres reftabliffement 
de laquelle nous allons trauailler plus courageufemet 
que iamais. Tant d'adultes efchapez de la mort a- 
pres le baptefme nous y obligent, la guerre que nous 
ont declare ouuertement les puiffances des tenebres, 
ne permettent pas que nous foions fans auoir les 
armes au point, & tant de bons fentimens que Dieu 
nous donne, & k mille & mille perfonnes qui font en 
France, nous accuferoient d'infidelit6 fi nous nous 
comportions lafchement parmi tant de fi belles occa- 
fios ; & fur tout les affeurances que nous auons fur le 
fecours des fainctes prieres & faincts facrifices de 
voftre R. aufquels nous nous confios tons, & moy par- 
ticulierement qui fuis : 

Mon R. Pere, 

De la Refidence de S. lofeph ^ Ihonattiria 
aux pays des Hurons, ce 21. luin, iour du 
bien heureux Gonzague 1637. 

Voftre tres humble & tres-obeiffant 
feruiteur en N. S. lefus Chrift. 
Francois Joseph le Mercier. 


1687-38] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i637 HI 

Reverence, in which we all put our trust, and par- 
ticularly I, who am, 

My Reverend Father, 

From the Residence of St. Joseph at Ihonattiria, 
in the country of the Hurons, this 21st of 
June, day of the blessed Gonzague, 1637. 

Your very humble and very obedient 
servant in Our Lord Jesus Christ. 
FRANgois Joseph le Mercier.^® 


XXX 

Le Jeune's Relation, i6j8 

Paris: SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, 1638 


Source : We reprint from the original of the first issue 
(H. 69), in Lenox Library. 

The document consists of two parts: Part L, by Le 
Jeune, as superior, is given in the present volume ; Part 
II., by Le Mercier, touching on the Huron missions, will 
appear in Volume XV. 




JL-< L/ £\ A J- \J^ 


\T)B CE QVI SEST FASSE* 

EN La 

NOVVELLE FRANCE 
EN LAN NE'E i6^d. 

Enuoycc au 

II. PERE PROVINCIAL 

dc ! :i Com pagni c dc I e s v s cii 
la Prouincc dc France, 

T.if !c P . P A V L F. L E I E V N E f/c U mrf^.t " Comi.',iB-mri 
SipcruKr fie ialljff deuce (icKel'^r, 



A PARIS/ 

rncz S E B A s T I E N Ckauoi s'^ * ImprH-^ieat 

ordinaire du Roy , rue fain d lacquers , 

aux Cicognes. 

"^M. DC. xxxvTiir" 


RELATION 

OF WHAT OCCURRED 
IN 

NEW F RANGE 

IN THE YEAR 1638. 

Sent to the 

REVEREND FATHER PROVINCIAL 

of the Society of Jesus in 
the Province of France. 

By Father Paule le Jeune of the same So- 
ciety, Superior of the Residence of K^bec. 


PARIS , 

S E B A s T I E N C R A M o I s Y, Printer in ordinary 

to the King, rue sainct Jacques, 

at the Sign of the Storks. 

M. DC. XXXVIII. 
BY ROYAL LICENSE. 


118 


LES RELA TIONS DES J£SUITES [Vol. 14 


Table des Chapitres contenus en ce Liure. 

RELATION de ce gut s'eji paff^ en la Nouuelle 
France en V annce 1638. . page i. 

Chapitre I. Des moyens que nous tenons pour 
publier & amplifier la foy parmy les 
Sauuages. . ... 2 

Chap. II. Du Baptefme d'vn Sauuage, & de quel- 

ques-vns de fa famille. . . ,5 

Chap. III. De quelques autres Sauuages baptifez. 15 
Chapitre IV. D' autres perfonnes adultes baptiz^es 

folemjiellement. . . . .20 

Chap. V. De la Conuerjion & du Baptefme d'vn 

leune homme, & de quelques autres Sauuages. 25 
Chap. VI. Des grandes difpofitions d'vne Catechu- 

m,ene Algonquin. . . . -35 

Chap. VII. De quelques Sauuages errans deuenus 

fede7itaires. . . . . .41 

Chap. VIII. De I'efiat prefent des Sauuages 

touchant la Foy. . , . .40 

Chap. IX. Du Seminaire des Hurons. . -55 

Chap. X. Continuation du Seminaire. . . 60 

Chap. XI. Ramas de diuerfes chofes . . 69 


1637-38] LEJEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 119 


Table of Chapters contained in this Book. 

RELATION of what occurred in New France, 
in the year i6i?>. • • P^g^ ^' 

Chapter I . Of the means we employ to publish 

and spread the faith among the Savages. 2 

Chap. II. Of the Baptism of a Savage, and of some 

of his family. . . • • 5 

Chap. III. Of some other baptized Savages. . 15 

Chapter IV. Of other adult persons who have been 

solemnly baptized. . • • .20 

Chap. V. Of the Conversion and Baptism of a 

young man, and of some other Savages. . 25 

Chap. VI. Of the excellent inclinations of an Al- 
gonquin Catechumen. . • '35 

Chap. VII. Of some wandering Savages who have 

become sedentary. . . ■ • 4^ 

Chap. VIII. Of the present condition of the Sav- 
ages, touching the Faith. . • -49 

Chap. IX. Of the Seminary for the Hurons. . 55 

Chap. X. Continuation of the Seminary. . 60 

Chap. XI. A collection of various matters. . 69 


120 LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 14 


RELATION de ce qui s'eft paffe dans le 
Pays des Hurons en I'annee 1637. & 1638. i 

Chap. I. Des perfecutions que nous auons 

fouffert en V ann^e 1637. • • 3 

Chap. II. AJJembUe generate de tout le pays oh on 

de liber e de nojlre mort. , . .14 

Chap. III. Af^ijlance particuliere de Dieu fur 

nous dans nostre perfecution. . .23 

Chap. IV. Des Hurons baptifes cette annde 1638. 31 
Chap. V. La Conuerfion de lofeph Chii^atenhi^a, 

natif de ce bourg d' Offofane. . -35 

Chap. VI. Laconduite de Dieu fur nojire nouueau 

Chreflien. . . . . .40 

Chap. VII. lour de fainct lofeph folemnel dans 

les Hurons pour quelques circonfiances. . 47 

Chap. VIII. Noftre employ pendant tout V hyuer 

quand ces peuples font plus fedentaires. . 5 2 

Chap. IX. La refidence de fainct lofeph a Ihona- 

tiria. , . . . .60 

Chap. X. Bref Journal des chofes qui nont peu 

entrer dans les Chapitres precedents. . 63 


1687-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ibjS 121 


RELATION of what occurred in the Country 
of the Hurons, in the year 1637 and 1638. i 

Chap. I. Of the persecutions that we suf- 
fered in the year 1637. . • 3 
Chap. II. General Assembly of the whole country, 

where our death is under deliberation. . 14 

Chap. III. Special assistance of God to us in our 

persecution. . . • -23 

Chap. IV. The Hurons baptized this year, 1638. 31 
Chap. V. The Conversion of Joseph Chiwatenhwa, 

a native of this village of Ossosane. . 3 5 

Chap. VI. The guidance of God respecting our new 

Christian. . . . • -40 

Chap. VII. Day of saint Joseph a solemn one 

among the Hurons, on account of certain cir- 
cumstances. . . • -47 
Chap. VIII. Our occupations during the entire 

winter, when these tribes are more sedentary. 52 
Chap. IX. The residence of saint Joseph at Ihona- 

tiria. . . . • .60 

Chap. X. Brief Journal of the things which could 

not be entered in the preceding Chapters. . 63 


122 


LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 14 


[I] Relation de ce qvi s'eft paffe en la Novvelle 
France en I'annee 1638. 

MON REVEREND PERE, 
Puis que nous ne pouuons auoir de treue 
pour la Relation de ce qui fe paffe en ce nou- 
ueau monde, & qu'il en faut encor payer le tribut 
cette annee, ie me comporteray enuers ceux qui la 
fouhaittent, comme on fait en[uers] des eftomacs 
defla raffafi6s, aufquels on ne prefente que peu de 
chofes, & encor bien delicates, de peur de les d^bau- 
cher. On eft defia i^i remply des fagons de faire de 
nos Sauuages, & de nos petits trauaux en leur en- 
droit, que i'apprehende le degouft; c'eft pourquoy 
ie diray peu de beaucoup, omettant des chapitres 
entiers, de peur d'eftre accuse de longueur. 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 1 23 


[i] Relation of what occurred in New France, in 
the year 1638. 

MY REVEREND FATHER, 
Since we can have no truce in the Relation 
of what takes place in this new world, and as 
the tribute must be paid again this year, I shall be- 
have toward those who desire it as one does toward 
stomachs already sated, to which one offers only a 
few things, but very delicate ones, for fear of ruining 
them. People are already so full of the customs of 
our Savages, and of our little labors for them, that I 
fear disgust ; hence I shall say little of many things — 
omitting whole chapters, lest I be accused of tedious- 
ness. 


124 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.14 


[2] CHAPITRE I. 

DES MOYENS QUE NOUS TENONS POUR PUBLIER & 
AMPLIFIER LA FOY PARMY LES SAUUAGES. 

LA fuperftition, I'erreur, la barbaric, & en fuitte le 
peche, font icy comme dans leur empire, nous 
nous feruons de quatre grandes machines pour 
les renuerfer ; Premierement nous f aif ons des courf es 
pour aller attaquer I'ennemy fur fes terres par fes 
propres armes, c'efl a dire, par la cognoiffance des 
langues Montagnefe, Algonquine, & Hurone. Quand 
les portes nous feront ouuertes dans d'autres nations 
encor plus efloignees, nous y entrerons £i Dieu nous 
prefte fecours. Or ie diray en palTant fur ce poinct, 
que plufleurs n'attendoient rien des vieilles fouches 
Sauuages. Toute I'efperance n'eftoit que dans la 
ieuneCCe; mais I'experience nous apprend qu'il n'y a 
bois fl fee que Dieu ne faffe reuerdir, quand il luy 
plaifl. Nous commen9ons "k voir dans les Hurons 
[& p]army nos Montagnets & Algonquins, qu[elque]s 
families profeller publiquement la Foy, & frequen- 
ter les Sacremens auec vne deuotion & modeftie qui 
n'a rien de Sauuage que 1' habit. Cette balle eftime 
qu'on auoit de nos pauures Sauuages errans, le doit 
changer en des actions de grace & de benediction, 
comme nous verrons cy apres. 

Secondement comme ces peuples font attaques [3] 
de grandes maladies, nous procurons qu'on leur 
drelTe vn hofpital. On y trauaille maintenant fort 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 125 


[2] CHAPTER I. 

OF THE MEANS WE EMPLOY TO PUBLISH AND SPREAD 
THE FAITH AMONG THE SAVAGES. 

SUPERSTITION, error, barbarism, and conse- 
quently, sin, are as if in their empire here. 
We employ four great contrivances to over- 
throw them. First, we make expeditions to go and 
attack the enemy upon their own ground, with their 
own weapons, — that is to say, by a knowledge of the 
Montagnais, Algonquin, and Huron tongues. When 
the doors shall be opened to us in nations still more 
remote, we will enter there if God lend us his help. 
Now I will say upon this point, in passing, that 
many did not expect anything from the old Savage 
stocks, all hope being placed only in the young ; but 
experience teaches us that there is no wood so dry 
that God cannot make it become green again, when 
it pleases him. We begin to see in the Huron coun- 
try, and among the Montagnais and Algonquins, a 
few families publicly professing the Faith and fre- 
quenting the Sacraments, with a devotion and modesty 
which have nothing of the Savage except the dress. 
This low opinion that people had of our poor wan- 
dering Savages must be changed into thanksgivings 
and blessings, as we shall see hereafter. 

Secondly, as these peoples are attacked [3] by seri- 
ous diseases, we are obtaining for them the erection 
of a hospital. The men are now hard at work there- 
on, so far as the conditions of the country allow. 


126 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.14 

& ferme, felon que le pais le pent permettre, Madame 
la Ducheffe d'Aiguillon qui a jette les fondemens de 
ce grand ouurage, pent d6s cette annee goufter les 
fniicts de fes liberalites. Car les hommes qui tra- 
uaillent icy pour fon deffein, rendent c^t hyuer quel- 
que affiftance a de pauures Sauuages delaiffes, Dieu 
les toucha tellement, qu'en verite ie fouhaitterois 
vne femblable mort ^ celle qu'il a donnee k deux de 
ces Barbares, deuenus enfans de Dieu dans le fang 
de lefus-Chrift. 

En troifiefme lieu, nous nous effor9ons de com- 
mencer des Seminaires de Hurons, d'Algonquins, & 
de Montagnets. Nous en auons maintenant de ces 
trois fortes a Kebec, i'en diray deux mots cy apres. 

En quatriefme lieu, nous tachons d'arrefter les 
Sauuages errans. Ie confeffe qu'il faut des chaines 
d'or pour ce deffein, mais leurs ames font plus pre- 
cieufes que I'or & que les perles, c'efl bien gagner 
au chage que de les prendre h. cet appas. Vne per- 
fonne de grande vertu a commence de leur tendre ce 
piege. Ayant gage quelques hommes pour ayder 
ces pauures Barbares a fe baflir, & a cultiuer la terre. 
II a pris du premier coup h. cette diuine attrappe 
deux families, compofees d'enuiron vingt perfonnes; 
ie me trompe, il en a pris dauantage: car bien qu'on 
n'ait encor loge que ces deux families, il y en a beau- 
coup d'autres gagnees par ce miracle de charity. 
C'eft vne benediction de voir ces pauures Sauuages 
deuenus enfas de Dieu, les vns en effet par le fainct 
Bapteme, [4] les autres par defir & par bonne volon- 
te, nous en parlerons plus amplement en fon lieu. 

Voyla les quatre batteries qui d6truiront I'empire 
de Sathan, & qui arboreront le drapeau de lefus- 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 127 

Madame the Duchesse d'Aiguillon,^^ who laid the 
foundations of this great work, can after this year 
enjoy the fruits of her liberality. For the men who 
are working here to carry out her plan, having given 
assistance this winter to some poor forlorn Savages, 
God so touched them that in truth I would desire a 
death similar to that which he has granted to two of 
these Barbarians, who became children of God in 
the blood of Jesus Christ. 

In the third place, we are endeavoring to begin 
Huron, Algonquin, and Montagnais Seminaries. We 
have them now at Kebec, of these three kinds; I 
will say a few words about them, hereafter. 

In the fourth place, we are trying to fix the wan- 
dering Savages. I confess that golden chains are 
needed for this purpose; but their souls are more 
precious than gold and pearls, and it is an advanta- 
geous exchange to win them by this allurement. A 
person of great virtue has begun to lay this snare for 
them, having hired some men to aid these poor Bar- 
barians to build for themselves, and to cultivate the 
land.^^ At the first setting of this divine trap, he 
caught two families, composed of about twenty per- 
sons. I am mistaken, — he caught more ; for although 
only these two families have yet been lodged, there 
are many others that have been gained by this mir- 
acle of charity. It is a blessing to see these poor 
Savages become children of God, — some, indeed, by 
means of holy Baptism, [4] the others through desire 
and good will ; we will speak of these more fully, in 
the proper place. 

Behold the four batteries which shall destroy the 
empire of Satan, and shall unfurl the banner of Jesus 
Christ in these regions. It is the hands and the 


128 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.14 

Chrifl en ces quartiers. Ce font les mains & les 
coeurs de quelques perfonnes cheries de Dien qui 
font ioiier ces machines par leurs bien-faits & par 
leurs prieres. Les Chapitres fuiuans leur vont don- 
ner fujet de croire que leurs oraifons font agreables 
k Dieu, puis qu'il fe plaifl a les exaucer & par confe- 
quent ie les coniure de nous cotinuer ce grand fe- 
cours. Ie confeffe ingenuement ma pufillanimite, ie 
ne m'attendois pas Ie refle de mes iours de voir de fi 
puiffans effets de la grace en des ames fi barbares. 
lufques icy quelque Sauuages approuuoient Ie Ba- 
ptefme en leurs enfans, & en leurs malades: mainte- 
nant ceux qui font en fant6, & qui demeurent vne 
partie de I'annee proche de nos habitations, I'hono- 
rent 8c Ie pourchaffent auec affection pour eux-mef- 
mes. Ce changement a efte fi foudain & fi fenllble, 
que ceux qui n'efperoient quafi rien de ces peuples 
errans, on efte contrains de confeffer que Ie Dieu du 
Ciel efloit aulii bien Ie Dieu des Barbares, que Ie 
Dieu des Fran9ois. Ie ne parle point des Sauuages 
de Tadouffac; ce font les moins difpofez de tons, 
mais de ceux qui fe retirent ordinairemet k Kebec, 
ou aux trois Riuieres. Nous en auons baptife plus 
de cet-cinquate cette annee, fans compter ceux qui 
ont elle faits Chreftiens aux Hurons. Ie ne rappor- 
teray pas tout ce qui s'eft palle de remarquable en 
ces Baptefmes; i'en diray peu, & ce peu r'alTemble, 
approchera peut-eftre plus pres de la logueur que ie 
ne defirerois. Entrons en difcours. 


1637 - 38J LE JE UNE" S RELA TION, 1638 129 


hearts of a few persons, cherished by God, that put 
these engines in motion by their benefactions and 
their prayers. The following Chapters will give 
them reason to believe that their prayers are accept- 
able to God, since he is pleased to hearken to them ; 
and hence I conjure them to continue to us this great 
help. I frankly confess my f aint-heartedness ; I did 
not expect during the remainder of my days to see 
so powerful effects of grace in these so barbarous 
souls. Until now, some of the Savages approved 
Baptism in their children and in their sick people ; 
now those who are in health, and who remain a part 
of the year near our settlements, honor it, and eager- 
ly and gladly seek it for themselves. This change 
has been so sudden and so evident, that those who 
expected almost nothing from these wandering tribes 
have been obliged to confess that the God of Heaven 
was as truly the God of the Barbarians as the God of 
the French. I am not speaking of the Savages of 
Tadoussac, — they show the least inclination of all, — 
but of those who usually withdraw to Kebec or to 
the three Rivers. We have baptized more than a 
hundred and fifty of these, this year, without count- 
ing those who have become Christians among the 
Hurons. I will not report all the remarkable inci- 
dents of these Baptisms, — I will say little of them ; 
and this little, all together, will approach nearer to 
tediousness, perhaps, than I would desire. Let us 
begin the relation. 


130 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. li 


[5] CHAPITRE 11. 

DU BAPTESME D'VN SAUUAGE, & DE QUELQUES-VNS 
DE SA FAMILLE, 

I9ESCRIUY I'an paffe les entretiens que nous 
auions eu auec vne efcoiiade de Montagnets & 
d'Algonquins qui s'eftoient campes proche de 
nous pendant I'liyuer, pource que la graine de I'E- 
uangile ne germa pas fi toft que quelques vns atten- 
doient, cela leur fit dire que c'eftoit peine perdue de 
prefcher des Sauuages, veu mefme que celuy qui 
tranchoit du Capitaine parmy eux, nomme MaKhea- 
bichtichiou, n'auoit pas correfpondu k I'efperance 
qu'on auoit eu de luy: C'eft chofe eftrange, qu'on 
voudroit en vn moment introduire le Chriftianifme 
dans I'infidelite, la polite ffe dans la Barbarie, & il a 
fallu des Hecles pour etablir noftre creance dans 1' Eu- 
rope parmy des nations fedentaires & policees ! Or 
ie puis dire que cette graine facree qu'on ietta cet 
hyuer dans leurs coeurs, a rapporte au centuple. 

Premieremet ce Capitaine Makheabichticliiou n'eft 
point dans le defefpoir de fon falut, ie croy qu'il a 
la foy, quoy qu'il en foit, de la charite, il y a bien 
de la difference entre croire, & obeir k Dieu. Nous 
eftant venu voir ce Printemps, il n'ofoit entrer dans 
noftre maifon, ie le tancay vertement, il m'efcouta 
patiemment, puis il me repliqua: Si tu f9auois le re- 
gret qui me roge le cceur, tu me porterois compaffion 
au lieu de me tancer, ie penfois que tu m'interroge- 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6sS 131 


[5] CHAPTER 11. 

OF THE BAPTISM OF A SAVAGE, AND OF SOME OF HIS 

FAMILY. 

I WROTE last year about the conversations we 
had with a band of Montagnais and Algonquins 
who had encamped near us during the winter. 
Because the seed of the Gospel did not germinate as 
soon as some expected, this made them say that it 
was labor lost to preach to the Savages, seeing that 
even the one who played the Captain among them, 
named Makheabichtichiou, had not corresponded to 
the hopes that had been entertained of him. How 
strange it is that some should require, in a moment, 
the introduction of Christianity into infidelity, refine- 
ment into Barbarism, — when centuries have been 
needed to establish our belief in Europe, among sed- 
entary and civilized nations! Now I can say that 
this sacred seed that was cast that winter into their 
hearts, has yielded a hundredfold. 

First, this Captain Makheabichtichiou's salvation 
is not hopeless. I believe that he has faith ; be that 
as it may, in charity, there is a great deal of differ- 
ence between believing and obeying God. Having 
come to see us this Spring, he did not dare to enter 
our house ; I chided him vigorously ; he listened to 
me patiently, and then replied: "If thou knewest 
the regret that gnaws my heart, thou wouldst have 
compassion, instead of chiding me. I thought thou 
wouldst question me upon the belief thou hast [6] 


132 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.14 

rois fur la creance que tu m'as [6] enfeignee, ie t'en 
euffe rendu bonne raifon, car i'ay prie Dieu tout cet 
hyuer, & au lieu de me monftrer bon vifage, tu me 
re9ois auec des reproches? Tu me dis que i'ay tou- 
fiours plufieurs femmes? penfe-tu qu'on fe defa[u]ire 
fi aif6ment de fes vieilles habitudes? peut-eflre que 
vous autres aues eu autant de peine que nous de quit- 
ter vos anciennes couflumes, quand on a commenc6 
de vous annoncer la Foy ? Pref cris moy laquelle tu 
defire que ie retienne de mes femmes, & ie chalTeray 
les autres. En vn mot, il eft dans vne bonne difpo- 
fition, ie n'en parleray neantmoins qu'en paffant, 
iufques k ce que ie Ie voie Chreftien, fi Dieu luy en 
fait la grace. 

En fecond lieu, Ie forcier nomm6 Pigarouich, auec 
lequel nous anions eu quelques prifes, comme ie I'ay 
efcry en la Relation precedente, a brufle toutes les 
vtenfilles de fon art, & iamais plus ne s'en eft voulu 
mefler depuis, quoy qu'on Ten ait follicite plufieurs 
fois en cachette, & par de grands pref ens, s'eftant 
fait plainement inftruire, il a fait des merueilles pour 
la Foy, mais pource qu'il a terny ce luftre par quel- 
ques actios de proptitudes, que nous ne pouuons f up- 
port er en vn Catechumene, ie n'en diray pas dauan- 
tage, encor bien qu'il nous foit venu depuis pen 
tefmoigner fes regrets iufques aux larmes; s'il conti- 
nue fortemet h. frapper, on lui ouurira les portes de 
I'Eglife. 

En troifiefme lieu, la maladie s'eftant iettee fur 
ces pauures peuples, tons ceux qui auoient affifte aux 
inftructions que nous leur donafmes, fe trouuans faifis 
de cette epidimie, fe font fait catechifer plus ample- 
ment, & pas vn d'eux n'eft mort [7] fans Baptefme, 
s'il a pen auoir acces k quelqu'vn de nos Peres. 


1637-38] LE JFMNE'S RELATION, 1638 133 

taught me. I could have given thee a good account 
of it, for I have prayed to God all this winter; and 
instead of showing me a pleasant face, thou receivest 
me with reproaches. Thou tellest me that I con- 
tinue to keep several wives ; dost thou think that a 
person can so readily give up his old habits? Per- 
haps you people had as much trouble as we to quit 
your old customs when the Faith was first announced 
to you. Tell me which one of my wives thou desir- 
est me to retain, and I will drive away the others." 
In a word, his inclinations are good ; I will speak no 
more of him, however, except incidentally, until I 
see him a Christian, if God grant him that grace. 

In the second place, the sorcerer named Pigarouich, 
with whom we had some disputes, as I wrote in the 
preceding Relation, has burned all the utensils of his 
art, and has never again consented to tamper with it 
since then, — although he has been often secretly so- 
licited to do so, and with valuable presents. Having 
been fully instructed, he has done wonders for the 
Faith ; but because he has tarnished this bright rec- 
ord by some hasty actions, that we could not suffer 
in a Catechumen, I will say no more about him, even 
although he came to us a little while ago, and ex- 
pressed his regret to us, even to tears. If he con- 
tinue to knock loudly, the doors of the Church will 
open to him. 

In the third place, the malady having attacked 
these poor peoples, all those who had been present 
at the instructions we gave them, being seized by 
this epidemic, have had themselves more fully cate- 
chized ; and not one of them died [7] without Bap- 
tism, if he could have access to one of our Fathers. 

But, finally, the one of whom I am about to speak 


134 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.14 

Mais en fin, celuy dot ie vay parler eftoit de cette 
efcoliade, il fnt touch6 viuement d6s lors, quoy qu'il 
n'en ait rien fait paroiftre que cette annee, ce feu 
qui brufloit fon ame ne luy donnant aucun repos, il 
nous vint trouuer, & nous dit que des les premieres 
inftructions que nous donnafmes aux Sauuages, so 
coeur auoit creu tout ce que nous difions de la gran- 
deur de Dieu, & que pour cela il enuoioit fes enfans 
au Catechifme, leur recommadant d'efcouter attetiue- 
met ce qu'on leur enfeignoit : Ie n'ofois pas, faifoit- 
il, vous aborder, ny ne fgauois comment vous decla- 
rer les penfees de mon ame, ie fouhaittois que vous 
m'appellaffies. En fin Negabamat (c'eft Ie no d'vn 
Sauuage, fon amy) me parlant du deflein que vous 
auies de nous aider ^ deuenir fedentaires, ie luy dis 
que ie defirois eflre de la partie, non tant pour Ie fe- 
cours temporel que vous prometti^s, que pour vous 
entedre parler du falut de noftreame: II me femble, 
difoit-il, que i'ay eu des ma ieunelfe quelque petite 
cognoiffance des chofes que vous enfeignes, ie pen- 
fois ainll k part moy, il y en a vn qui a tout fait, de 
qui nous dependons, qui nous a donne la vie, & nous 
fait trouuer dequoy la fouftenir, & celuy-1^ hait les 
mefchans. I'auois defir de Ie cognoiflre, c'eft pour- 
quoy ie me fuis beaucoup refioiiy quad ie vous en ay 
ouy parler. En fin il nous promit de venir paller 
I'hiuer aupres de nous pour eftre plus particulieremet 
inflruit. A peine eftoit-il Catechumene, que Dieu 
Ie mit dans de fortes efpreuues : il auoit vne belle & 
grolle famille, la [8] maladie fe iette Ik dedas, & en 
liure vne bone partie k la mort : vne f emme agee fa 
parente, qui gouuernoit fon mefnage, efl enleu6e en 
peu de iours : fa propre f emme & deux de fes enfans 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 135 

was of this company. He was deeply touched from 
that time on, although he gave no evidence thereof 
until this year. This fire that burned his soul giv- 
ing him no rest, he came to see us, and told us that 
at the first instructions we gave to the Savages his 
heart had believed all that we said of the greatness 
of God, and that therefore he sent his children to the 
Catechism, recommending them to listen attentively 
to what was taught them, " I did not dare address 
you," said he, " nor did I know how to declare to you 
the thoughts of my soul; I was wishing that you 
would summon me. At last, when Negabamat" 
(the name of a Savage, his friend) " spoke to me of 
your intention to help us to become sedentary, I told 
him that I would like to take part in this, — not so 
much for the temporal aid you promised, as to hear 
you talk about the salvation of our souls. It seems to 
me," he said, " that I have had from my youth some 
little knowledge of the things you teach ; I was wont 
to think thus when I was alone, ' There is one who 
has made all, upon whom we depend, who gave us 
our life, and causes us to find something with which 
to sustain it; and that one hates evil-doers.' I had a 
desire to know him, hence I was greatly rejoiced 
when I heard you speak of him." Finally, he prom- 
ised to come and spend the winter near us, that he 
might be more thoroughly instructed. Scarcely had 
he become a Catechumen, when God put him to a 
severe test. He had an interesting and large family ; 
the [8] disease invaded it, and delivered a good part 
of it over to death. An old woman, a relative, who 
managed his household, was taken off in a few days ; 
his own wife and two of his children died before his 
eyes; some of his kindred and relations who were 


136 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.14 

meurent deuant fes yeux, quelques-vns de fes parens 
& alliez demeurans auec luy, font emportez en mefme 
temps, il fe cofoloit fur leurs Baptefmes, car il n'y 
en eut pas vn qui ne prit k fa mort vne nouuelle 
naiflance en I. C. Apres les auoir quafi tons enfeue- 
lis de fes propres mains, luy-mefme eft terraff^, le 
voila dans la mefme contagion que les autres : & pour 
furcroift d 'affliction, fon fils aifne le croiat mort, fe 
marie contre fa volonte ; c'eftoit pour accabler I'efprit 
d'vn Geat, & pour refueiller les pefees que plufieurs 
Sauuages auoient eu; que vouloir eftre Chreftien, 
c'eftoit vouloir partir de ce monde. Mais Dieu qui 
tient le fond de I'Ocean en repos durat la furie des 
vents, calma fon coeur das ces tempefles. Ce pauure 
home fe iette entre nos bras, qui ne luy eftoient que 
trop ouuerts. Mr le Cheualier de Montmagny, noftre 
Gouuerneur, voiant la bonte de ce Sauuage, n'efpar- 
gne rien de tout ce qui luy pouuoit donner quelque 
foulagement: il luy enuoye & perdrix & volailles, & 
autres oifeaux qu'on gardoit pour fa table, ou plutot 
pour les malades ; il n'efpargne ny les cofitures, ny 
le trauail, ny la boutique de fon Medecin & Chirurgie 
tout enfemble. Veritablemet ce grad cceur eft loii- 
able de n'auoir rien pour foy, que les coeurs & I'a- 
mour de tous ceux qui font fous fon gouuernement, il 
n'y a famille Francoife qui ne fe reffente de fes bon- 
tez dans fon affliction. Au bout du cote, noftre Ca- 
tech. alloit tou jours s'affoiblilTant, [9] en forte que fe 
voyant ^ deux doigts de la mort, il fit venir le refte 
de fes enfans, & leur dit: Mes enfans, croyez en 
Dieu, imitez en ce poinct voftre Pere. le croy en luy 
auec autant d'affeurance que fi ie le voyois de mes 
yeux, ne I'offencez point, & il vous aidera. Ie fuis 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 137 

living with him were carried off at the same time. 
He consoled himself with their Baptism, for there 
was not one of them who did not experience at his 
death a new birth in Jesus Christ. After having 
buried nearly all these with his own hands, he him- 
self was stricken, — behold him seized with the same 
contagion as the others; and, to increase his afflic- 
tions, his eldest son, believing him dead, married 
against his will. It was enough to crush the spirit 
of a Giant, and to revive the ideas that many of the 
Savages had entertained, that to intend to become a 
Christian was to consent to depart from this world. 
But God, who maintains peace at the bottom of the 
Ocean during the fury of the winds, calmed his heart 
in the midst of these tempests. This poor man threw 
himself into our arms, which were only too wide 
open for him. Monsieur the Chevalier de Montma- 
gny, our Governor, seeing the goodness of this Sav- 
age, spared nothing of whatever might give him 
some relief. He sent him both partridges and poul- 
try, and other birds that were kept for his table, or 
rather for the sick ; he spared neither the sweetmeats, 
nor the services, nor the store of his Physician and 
Surgeon together. Truly, this great heart is worthy 
of praise for having nothing of his own, except the 
hearts and the love of all those who are under his 
government ; there is not a French family which does 
not experience his kindness in time of affliction. To 
finish this story, our Catechumen grew continually 
weaker, [9] so that, beholding himself within two 
finger-lengths of death, he summoned the rest of his 
children and said to them, " My children, believe in 
God ; imitate your Father in this respect. I believe 
in him with as much certainty as if I saw him with 


138 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.14 

defia mort, quand mon corps fera en terre, demeurez 
aupres des Peres, & leur obeiffez. le ferois trop 
long de rapporter tout ce qu'il leur dit. II tira les 
larmes des yeux de ceux qui I'entendoient. Les ay- 
ant fait retirer, il nous preffa de luy accorder le S. 
Baptefme. Haftez-vous, nous difoit-il, ie me meurs, 
ie fuis preffe d'aller au Ciel. Quelquefois penfant 
eftre feul, nous I'efcoutions d'vn lieu voifm, faifant 
fes prieres a Dieu auec vne tendreffe & vne deuotion 
toute plaine de confiance. En fin le iour de la fefle 
du glorieux Saint Frangois Xauier, Mr le Gouuer- 
neur, Mr le Cheualier de I'lfle, & M. Gand eftans 
prefens, nous le fifmes Chreflien. M. de I'lfle le 
nomma Frangois Xavier. II tefmoigna tant de coeur 
& tat de fatisfaction de cette faueur, que ces Meffieurs 
s'en retournerent tous confolez. A huict iours de 
1^, M. le Gouuerneur & M. de I'lfle m'eftans venus 
prendre pour Taller vifiter dans vne petite Cabane 
oil il s'eftoit retire pour mourir en paix & fans bruit, 
il nous declara auec vne fimplicite toute naifue vne 
grande communication qu'il auoit eu auec Dieu. 
Hier fur le foir, me difoit-il, penfant en Dieu, ie me 
fuis veu entoure d'vne grande lumiere, i'ay veu les 
beautez du Ciel, dont tu nous paries; i'ay veu la mai- 
fon de ce grand Capitaine qui a tout fait. I'eftois 
dans vn plaifir qui [lo] ne fe pent exprimer. Cecy 
difparoiffant tout a coup, ie rabaiffe mes yeux vers 
la terre, & vis vn gouflfre epouuentable qui m'a tranfi 
de peur. II me femble qu'on me dit, ne va pas 1^, ie 
n'auois garde de m'en approcher; car ie tremblois 
comme la feiiille fur I'arbre pouffee du vent. Get 
horreur s'euanoiiiflant auffi bien que la beaute & la 
lumiere qui m'auoit enuironne, ie fuis demeure tout 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 139 

my eyes; do not offend him, and he will help you. 
I am already dead; when my body is in the earth, 
remain near the Fathers, and obey them." It would 
take too long to report all he said to them ; he drew 
tears from the eyes of those who heard him. Hav- 
ing directed them to withdraw, he urged us to grant 
him Holy Baptism. "Hasten," he said to us; "I 
am dying, I am in haste to go to Heaven." Some- 
times thinking himself alone, we heard him from a 
place near by offering his prayers to God, with a ten- 
derness and devotion showing the utmost confidence. 
Finally, on the feast day of our glorious Saint Fran- 
9ois Xavier, Monsieur the Governor, Monsieur the 
Chevalier de I'lsle, and Monsieur Gand being pres- 
ent, we made him a Christian. Monsieur de I'lsle 
named him Frangois Xavier. He displayed so much 
feeling, and so much satisfaction for this favor, that 
those Gentlemen returned greatly comforted. A 
week afterwards, Monsieur the Governor and Mon- 
sieur de risle having come to take me to visit him, 
in a little Cabin where he had retired to die in peace 
and quietness, he declared to us, with altogether 
naive simplicity, a great communication he had had 
with God. "Yesterday, towards evening," he said 
tome, "while thinking of God, I saw myself sur- 
rounded by a great light; I saw the beauties of 
Heaven, of which thou tellest us; I saw the house of 
that great Captain who has made all. I was in a 
state of delight which [10] cannot be expressed. This 
suddenly disappearing, I lowered my eyes toward 
the earth, and saw a frightful gulf which paralyzed 
me with fear. It seemed to me some one was say- 
ing to me, ' Do not go there ! ' I had no wish to ap- 
proach it, for I was trembling like the leaf upon the 


140 LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 14 

efperdu, auec vn defir de croire & d'obeyr ^ Dieu 
toute ma vie, afleure noftre Capitaine que voila, que 
ie croy du profod du coeur. Or ie puis affeurer V. 
R. que nous auons fait noftre poffible pour defcouurir 
^i ce n'eftoit point vne fourbe on vn fonge. Nous 
I'auons fonde plufieurs fois & en diuers temps ; iuf- 
ques la que Ie croiant auoir I'ame fur les leures, nous 
Ie fifmes fouuenir de cette vifion, Ie mena9ant d'vn 
rigoureux chaftiment s'il mentoit en chofe de telle 
importance. Ce pauure homme efpouuente, s'effor- 
9a de fe leuer en fon feant, & nous dit d'vn oeil con- 
ftant ; ie vous affeure en toute verite que la chofe eft 
comme ie vous I'ay defcrite. Ie ne vous ay pas men- 
ty h. la vie, ie ne vous mentiray pas a la mort. A 
cela que peut-on dire autre chofe fmon que Ie Dieu 
du Paradis refpand fes benedictions auffi bien fur les 
Barbares, que fur les Grecs. M. Ie Gouuerneur & 
M. de rifle Ie retournans encore voir vne autre fois 
auec Ie lieur Marfolet, qui entend fort bien la langue 
des Sauuages, furent fi fatisfaits, que Ie fieur Marfo- 
let m'affeura puis apres qu'il luy auoit penfe tirer 
les larmes des yeux, luy demandant s'il n 'auoit point 
befoin d'aucune chofe qui fuft en fon pouuoir. [11] 
Non, repart-il, fmon que tu prie Dieu pour moy tous 
les iours & tous les matins: Combien de fois s'a- 
dreffant a Dieu, luy a-il dit, vous eftes mon Seigneur 
& mon maiftre, ordonnez de ma vie & de ma mort, 
ie fouhaitte la mort pour vous voir, & ie voudrois 
viure pour Ie bien de mes enfans. Sa famille I'affli- 
geant, il difoit. Que tout Ie monde me quitte, ie ne 
vous quitteray pas. Eftre ne Barbare & parler en 
ces termes, c'eft publier les bontez du Dieu des Scy- 
thes, & des Chreftiens. 


1637 - 38] LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1638 141 


tree shaken by the wind. This feeling of horror 
vanished, as well as the beauty and light which had 
surrounded me. I was left quite distracted with a 
desire to believe and to obey God all my life ; assure 
our Captain of this, that I believe from the bottom 
of my heart." Now I can assure Your Reverence that 
we did all we could to discover whether this were an 
imposture or a dream. We had sounded him sev- 
eral times and on different occasions, until, believing 
that he had his soul upon his lips, we reminded him 
of this vision, threatening him with severe punish- 
ment if he lied in a matter of so much importance. 
This poor frightened man, trying to raise himself to 
a sitting posture, said to us with a steadfast eye, " I 
assure you in all truth that the thing is as I have 
described it to you. I have not lied to you in life ; I 
will not lie to you at my death." Regarding this, 
what can one say except that the God of Paradise 
bestows his blessings upon the Barbarians as well as 
upon the Greeks. Monsieur the Governor and Mon- 
sieur de risle again returning to see him with sieur 
Marsolet, who understands the language of the Sav- 
ages very well, were so pleased, that sieur Marsolet 
assured me afterwards that he had almost drawn 
tears from their eyes; when he asked him if he 
needed anything that might be in his power to give, 
[11] "No," he replied, "unless thou pray God for 
me every day and every morning." How many 
times, addressing God, did he say to him, " You are 
my Lord and my master ; order my life and my death ; 
I wish for death, that I may see you, and I would 
gladly live for the good of my children." His family 
mourning for him, he said, " Though all the world 
forsake me, I will not forsake you." To be born a 


142 


LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 14 


Sa maladie tirant en longueur. Car il fut plus de 
trois mois, tantoft dans vn peu de vie, maintenant 
quafi dans la mort, il appelloit ceux qui refloient de 
fa famille, & leur donnoit des confeils admirables. 
En fin on fit tant de prieres pour luy, nos Peres s'a- 
dreffans a Dieu par quelques voeux & par quelques 
mortifications, qu'au mefme temps qu'on I'auoit aban- 
donn^, & qu'on luy donnoit comme ^ vn mort tout ce 
qu'il defiroit, Dieu luy renuoye fa fante, le voila for- 
ty du tombeau auec I'eflonnement des Frangois & 
des Sauuages. II s'en va chercher fa prouifion de 
chair d'Eflans dans les bois, il part en Mars apres 
tous les Sauuages, & reuient en Auril, & cependant 
il en rapporte plus que fix autres enfemble. Au re- 
tour il eft accueilly d'vne tempefle dans les glaces, 
il a recours "k Dieu, fait prier fa famille, il fort du 
peril qui I'alloit engloutir, & qui abyfma I'vn de fes 
canots charge de viande. Comme il vit que quelques- 
vns de fes gens ne prioient pas de bon cceur, il leur 
dit, voicy que nous abordons la maifon des Frangois, 
oil on a promis de me [2 i.e., 12] loger. le ne veux 
perfonne auec moy qui ne croye en Dieu. Si quel- 
qu'[v]n de vous autres n'a le cceur ferme, qu'il prenne 
fa part de noftre prouifion, & qu'il fe retire ailleurs. 
II auoit deux femmes auant fon baptefme, la plus 
f orte & la plus ieune mourut Chreftienne: L'autre 
qui n'a guiere d'efprit fe monftroit froide en la foy. 
C'eft k celle-lk qu'il parloit tacitement & a fa foeur; 
celle cy refpondit tout haut, qu'elle croioit defia dans 
fon coeur; En effet elle fut baptizee peu de iours 
apres. Pour fa femme, voyant qu'elle fe renge vn 
petit, il ne I'a pas voulu repudier, quoy qu'elle ne le 
foulage quafi point en fon mefnage. Noflre nouueau 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, tb38 143 

Barbarian, and to speak in these terms, is to publish 
the goodness of the God of the Scythians and of the 
Christians. 

His sickness was long and tedious, for he was ill 
more than three months, — sometimes showing a 
little life, and again almost in the grave. He called 
those of his family who survived, and gave them 
admirable advice. Finally, so many prayers were 
offered for him, our Fathers addressing themselves 
to God through vows and mortifications, that at the 
very time when he had been abandoned, and all that 
he desired had been given him, as to a dead man, 
God sent him back his health. Behold him emerged 
from the tomb, to the astonishment of the French 
and of the Savages. He went into the woods, in 
quest of his provision of Elk meat ; he departed in 
March after all the other Savages, and returned in 
April, and yet he brought back more of it than six 
others together. On his return, he was assailed 
amidst the ice by a tempest ; he had recourse to God, 
made his family pray, and emerged from the peril 
that was about to engulf him, and which sunk one 
of his canoes loaded with meat. When he saw that 
some of his people were not praying from their hearts, 
he said to them, " See, we are drawing near the 
house of the French, where they have promised to 
[2 i.e., 12] lodge me. I do not wish any one with 
me who does not believe in God. If any one of you 
has not a steadfast heart, let him take his share of 
our provisions, and let him retire elsewhere." He 
had two wives before his baptism : the strongest and 
youngest of them died a Christian. The other one, 
who had but little intelligence, showed herself cold 
towards the faith. It was to this one and to her sis- 


144 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.14 

Chreflien profeffant hautement la foy, & publiant par 
tout que Dieu luy auoit rendu la fant6 du corps '& de 
Tame, defira de s'approcher de la Sainte Table, il s'y 
prepara auec vne grand purete, il fit vne bonne Con- 
feffion depuis fon Baptefme. ieufna la veille du Saint 
Sacrement, iour deftine pour fa premiere commu- 
nion. Monfieur noflre Gouuerneur nous parla de 
luy donner I'vn des baftons du Poele, foubs lequel on 
portoit le Saint Sacrement, en prenant vn luy-mefme 
par vne humilite vraymet genereufe. C'eftoit vn 
fpectacle agreable au Ciel & k la terre, de voir ce 
Neophite couuert d'vne modeflie vrayment Chrefti- 
enne fous vne belle robbe de Sauuage, porter le dais 
^ la procefTion auec la premiere perfonne du pays. 
Les Moufquetades & les canons venant k bruire & a 
tonner, les Autels & repofoirs eftant bien parez, 
donnoient ie ne fcay quelle deuotion que noflre nou- 
ueau foldat goufloit auec vne douceur incroyable. 
[13] En fin il recent celuy qui le venoit d'honorer 
publiquement, ne fe pouuant faouler de le benir. II 
dit par apres a I'vn de nos Peres, le ne me foucie 
plus des chofes de la terre ; II importe peu que ie 
fois pauure ou riche, fain ou malade, puifque le Ciel 
m'efl ouuert, & que mon vray Capitaine m'eft venu 
vifiter. Quand vous me chafl*eriez, quand voftre 
Gouuerneur me rebuteroit, quand vous fortiriez tons 
de noflre pais, ie ne quitterois iamais Dieu. Quel 
changement ! cet homme qui a mange plufieurs fois 
la chair de fes ennemis, re9oit maintenant I e s v s - 
Christ, auec vn coeur plein de deuotion ! le con- 
feffe auec vne candeur toute naifue ! bref , il efl dans 
I'exercice de la Religion, fe comportant en vray 
Chreflien. Dieu luy face la grace de perfeuerer iuf- 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 145 

ter that lie was speaking indirectly. The latter an- 
swered aloud that she already believed in her heart ; 
in fact, she was baptized a few days afterward. As 
for his wife, seeing that she gave way a little, he did 
not wish to repudiate her, although she gives him 
little comfort in his household. Our new Christian, 
openly professing the faith, and proclaiming every- 
where that God had restored to him health of body 
and of soul, desired to approach the Holy Table. 
He prepared himself for this with great purity, made 
a good Confession after his Baptism, and fasted on 
the eve of the Holy Sacrament, the day appointed 
for his first communion. Monsieur our Governor 
suggested to us that we give him one of the poles of 
the Canopy under which the Holy Sacrament was 
borne,— he himself taking one, through a truly noble 
humility. It was a spectacle agreeable both to Heav- 
en and to earth, to see this Neophyte — clad, under a 
beautiful Savage robe, Avith truly Christian modes- 
ty — bearing the canopy in the procession, with the 
chief person in the land. The Muskets and cannons 
beginning to roar and thunder, and the beautiful 
decorations of the Altars and resting places, caused 
an indescribable spirit of devotion, which our new 
soldier enjoyed with an incredible delight. [13] 
Finally, he received him who came to honor him 
publicly, and could not bless him profusely enough. 
He said afterwards to one of our Fathers, " I do not 
care any more for the things of earth ; it matters 
little whether I am poor or rich, well or sick, since 
Heaven is opened to me, and my true Captain has 
come to visit me. If you were to drive me away, 
if your Governor were to reject me, if you were all 
to leave our country, I would never give up God." 


146 


LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 14 


ques \ fa mort. Difons deux mots de fes enfans, il 
auoit trois gar9ons & trois filles; Dieu prit I'Vti de 
fes gar9ons dans la contagion, & I'vne de fes filles 
doiiee d'vne grace non commune aux Sauuages. 
Pour marque que la foy eftoit dedans fon coeur, voy- 
ant vn Pere de noflre Compagnie qui la vifitoit k la 
mort, elle s'efcria en refuant, car elle auoit vne vio- 
lente fieure. Ah mon Pere ! ie m'en vay dans les 
feux, ie fuis damnee. Cela fit voir que la crainte 
efloit dans fon ame, Ie Pere luy parlant de Dieu elle 
reuint a foy, fe r'afl:eura, & mourut dans I'innocence 
de fon Baptefme. 

Sa foeur iumelle nee k mefme iour, & quafi dans 
les mefmes perfections naturelles, fe prefentant aux 
fainctes Ceremonies du Baptefme, Monfieur noftre 
Gouuerneur la voyant fi gentille, voulut eflre fon par- 
rain: & ayant appris que noflre [14] grande Reine 
iettoit par fois quelques regards vers Ie Ciel pour Ie 
falut de nos pauures Barbares, qu'elle auoit mefme 
fouhaitte qu'on efleuaft quelque ieune fille Sauuage 
en la Foy en fa confideration, il luy fit porter fon 
nom, I'appellant Anne. Cette nouuelle plante croift 
tous les iours en la foy, frequentant les Sacremens k 
r imitation de fon pere: II arriua certain iour que 
celuy qui la deuoit entendre de confeffion, I'inflruifant 
auparauant, & luy recommandant la candeur, elle Ie 
regarda comme eftonn^e, & luy dit ; Ne m'auez-vous 
pas enf eigne que c'efl k Dieu a qui on declare fes 
pechez en la prefence du Preftre ! Ie moyen done de 
luy mentir, & de luy cacher quelque chofe, puis qu'il 
f 9ait tout ? 

Entre ces trois enfans baptifez, I'vn des Peres que 
V. R. nous a enuoyes cette annee, mettant pied k 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 147 

What a change! This man, who has many times 
eaten the flesh of his enemies, now receives Jesus 
Christ with a heart full of devotion, and confesses 
him with a candor altogether naive ! In short, he is 
practicing Religion, conducting himself as a true 
Christian. May God give him the grace to persevere 
until his death. Let us say a few words of his chil- 
dren. He had three boys and three girls; God took 
one of his boys during the contagion, and one of his 
girls, who was endowed with a grace not common to 
the Savages. As an evidence of the faith that was 
within her heart, seeing one of the Fathers of our 
Society who was visiting her in her dying moments, 
she exclaimed in her delirium, for she was in a vio- 
lent fever, ' ' Ah, my Father ! I am going into the 
fires ; I am damned ! ' ' That showed that fear was 
in her soul. Upon the Father speaking to her of 
God, she recovered her senses, reassured herself, and 
died in the innocence of her Baptism. 

Her twin sister, born on the same day, and with 
almost the same natural perfections, presented her- 
self for the holy Ceremonies of Baptism. When 
Monsieur our Governor saw how amiable she was, 
he wished to be her godfather ; and having learned 
that our [14] great Queen sometimes raised her eyes 
toward Heaven for the salvation of our poor Barba- 
rians, and that she had even wished some young Sav- 
age girl to be brought up in the Faith on her account, 
he had her take her name, calling her Anne. This 
new plant grows daily in the faith, frequenting the 
Sacraments in imitation of her father. It happened 
one day that when the one who was to hear her con- 
fession was instructing her beforehand, and recom- 
mending sincerity to her, she looked at him as if in 


148 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.14 

terre, a receu h. mefme temps en I'Eglife de Dieu le 
plus petit fils de noftre Neophyte : refte encore a ba- 
ptizer fon fils aifne, & vne autre fille plus ieune, que 
Dieu benira s'il luy plaifl en fon temps. 

Cette femme qui gouuernoit fa famille fe difpofant 
au Baptefme, vit entrer la nuict en fa petite Cabane 
vn animal gros come vn Ours. Croyat que ce fuft vn 
demon, elle eufl recours k Dieu, & cette befle ou fan- 
tofme difparut, le lendemain elle fut receue dans 
I'Eglife militante, & peu de temps apres dans la 
triomphante. 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s8 149 

astonishment, and said: " Have you not taught me 
that it is God to whom one declares one's sins in the 
presence of the Priest? How then can I lie to him, 
and conceal anything from him, since he knows all?" 

Of these three baptized children, one of the Fa- 
thers whom Your Reverence has sent us this year, at 
the very time of his landing, received into the Church 
of God the youngest son of our Neophyte. There 
still remains to be baptized his eldest son and an- 
other younger daughter, whom God will bless, if it 
please him, in his own time. 

The woman who takes care of his family, while 
preparing herself for Baptism, saw an animal as large 
as a Bear enter her little Cabin, during the night. 
Believing this to be a demon, she had recourse to 
God, and the beast or phantom disappeared. The next 
day she was received into the Church militant, and 
a little while afterward into the Church triumphant. 


160 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.14 


[15] CHAPITRE III. 
DE QUELQUES AUTRES SAUUAGES BAPTISES. 

VN ieune Sauuage fe voyant malade, demande le 
Baptefme auec inftance, mais comme on le 
tenoit dans les epreuues ; Ne voyes-vous-pas, 
nous fit-il, qn'on me va mener a la mort? car mes pa- 
rens me trainans apres enx dans les bois, ne manque- 
ront iamais pour fe deliurer de la peine que ie leur 
donneray de m'affommer, ou de m'abandonner feul 
dans ces grandes forefts. Oiiy, mais fi tu gueris, luy 
dit on, perfeueras-tu dans la foy que tu profeffe main- 
tenant? comme il eft d'vn naturel violent & affez 
orgueilleux, nous craignons en luy I'Apoftafie; Ne 
me paries pas de guerifon, refpond-il, ie vous de- 
mande le Baptefme comme vn homme qui s'en va k 
la mort. Lk delTus il f e leue en fon feant, prie qu'on 
le face Chreftien ; fa demande accomplie, on le vou- 
lut faire recoucher, car il eftoit debile, attendes, dit- 
il, que i'aye vn petit remercie Dieu du grand prefent 
que ie viens de receuoir. Apres fon Baptefme il fuft 
traifne en mille endroits, on ne I'affomma pas, mais 
on le fit bien f ouffrir ; il fut quelquefois delaiiI6 tout 
feul au coin d'vn bois auec vn peu de viures qu'on 
mettoit aupres de luy. Iamais ie ne vy homme tant 
endurer, ie ne croy pas que lob fufl plus pauure ; car 
il n'auoit plus [16] que la peau colee fur fes os, & 
vne mefchante efcorce d'arbre qui luy feruoit de lict, 
de robe, & de maifon, il s'efcrioit par fois, ie hay 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 151 


[15] CHAPTER III. 

OF SOME OTHER BAPTIZED SAVAGES. 

A YOUNG Savage, finding himself sick, urgently- 
asked for Baptism ; but, when he was kept on 
probation, he said to us, " Do you not see that 
they are taking me to my death? For my relations 
dragging me after them into the woods will be sure 
to free themselves from the trouble I shall give 
them, by killing me, or abandoning me in these great 
forests." "Yes, but if thou recover," was said 
to him, " wilt thou persevere in the faith 'that thou 
dost now profess ? ' ' As he is of a violent and rather 
haughty disposition, we feared Apostasy for him. 
" Do not speak to me of recovery," he replied; " I 
ask you for Baptism as a man who is going to his 
death." Thereupon he raised himself to a sitting 
posture and begged to be made a Christian. His re- 
quest fulfilled, they wished him to lie down again, 
for he was very weak. " Wait," said he, " until I 
have thanked God a little for the great gift I have 
just received." After his Baptism he was dragged to 
a thousand places ; he was not killed, but was made 
to endure great suffering. He was sometimes left 
all alone in a corner of the woods, with a little food 
placed near him. I have never seen a man endure 
so much, — I do not think that Job was any more 
wretched; for this man had nothing more [16] than 
the skin adhering to his bones, and a wretched piece 
of bark which served him as bed, blanket, and house. 


152 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.14 

mon corps, ie ne crains point la mort, puis en pin- 
9ant fa peau toute noire & affreufe k voir, ce' n'efk 
pas cette ponrriture que i'aime, c'eft le Ciel ou mon 
ame doit aller. Les Sauuages s'en voulans deffaire 
firent courre vn bruit qu'il eftoit deuenu loup garou, 
& qu'il vouloit manger tous ceux qui rapprochoient; 
comme nous eufmes appris toutes ces belles nou- 
uelles, nous le lifmes apporter, & le fecourufmes fi 
bien, que cette carcaffe reprit corps, ce mort refufci- 
ta; & ce pauure muet delia fi bien fa langue, que 
c'eft vn plaifir de 1' entendre maintenant benir Dieu; 
il prefche fes gens, leur reproche leurs vices & leur 
ingratitude auec vne liberte qui nous confole, & le 
bon eft qu'il s'accufe le premier tout publiquement, 
d'auoir autrefois commis les pechez qu'il reprend en 
eux : il con9oit fl bien nos myfteres, que ie ne croy 
pas que beaucoup de vieux Chreftiens procedent plus 
fmcerement & plus nettement au Sacrement de Peni- 
tence que ce Neophyte. 

Vn autre plus ieune que luy fut aufli delaiff6 dans 
fa maladie, le Sauuage qui I'abandonna vint trouuer 
vn de nos Peres, & luy dit, Vas-t'en trouuer vn ieune 
gar9on que i'ay laiff6 en tel endroit, pource que ie 
m'en vay a la challe dans les bois, & ie ne le f9aurois 
traifner apres moy; Cela dit, mon homme s'en va 
fans autre ceremonie. Nous prifmes ce pauure en- 
fant defia fait Chreftien par le Baptefme, nous luy 
rendons toute I'alTiftance poffible I'efpace de plus de 
trois mois qu'il fuft en [17] noflre petite maifon; 
Dieu le voulut appeller a foy, il fe confelTa & recent 
le Sacrement de 1' Extreme Onction. Vn pen deuant 
fa mort, il nous demanda qui eftoient ceux qu'il auoit 
ouy chanter fort melodieufement toute la nuict, ce 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 153 

He sometimes cried out, " I hate my body, I do not 
fear death;" then, pinching his skin, all black and 
frightful to look upon, " It is not this rottenness that 
I love; it is Heaven, whither my soul is going." 
The Savages, wishing to get rid of him, spread a 
report that he had become a man wolf, and that he 
would eat all those who came near him. When we 
had learned all this fine news, we had him brought 
to us, and succored him so effectually that this carcass 
again became a body, this corpse was resuscitated ; 
and this poor mute tongue was so loosened that it is 
a pleasure now to hear him bless God. He preaches 
to his own people, reproaching them for their vices 
and their ingratitude with a freedom that consoles 
us ; and the best of it is that he first accuses himself, 
publicly, of having formerly committed the sins that 
he reproves in them. He has so good a conception 
of our mysteries that I do not think many old Chris- 
tians proceed to the Sacrament of Penance more sin- 
cerely and more frankly than this Neophyte. 

Another one, younger than he, was also deserted 
in his sickness. The Savage who abandoned him 
came to one of our Fathers, and said to him, " Go 
and find a young boy that I have left in such and 
such a place, because I am going to the woods to 
hunt, and I cannot drag him after me." So saying, 
my man went away without further ceremony. We 
took this poor child, who had been already made a 
Christian by Baptism. We rendered him all the as- 
sistance possible, during the space of more than three 
months that he was in [17] our little house. God 
wished to call him to himself ; he confessed, and re- 
ceived the Sacrament of Extreme Unction. Shortly 
before his death, he asked us who those were whom 


154 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.14 

qui I'auoit recre^ au poflible, il penfoit que nous les 
auions entendu, comme il difoit cela; il fe monftra 
eflonne, & nous dit, Ne voyez-vous pas ces gens W 
fort 6pouuentables qui me regardent d'vn mauuais 
oeil? on le r'affeura auffi-toft. Le foir dont il mourut 
la nuict, il appella fort vn de nos Peres, qui accourut 
incontinent; mais on ne piit f9auoir ce qu'il vouloit 
dire, il s'efcrioit feulement. Le Pere le fgaura, le 
Pere le f 9aura ; quelque temps apres il rendit fon ame 
bien heureufe a noftre Seigneur. 

Tay parle dans les Relations precedentes d'vn cer- 
tain furnomme des Frangois, le grand Oliuier, lequel 
fit baptifer il y a deux ans fa fille, & puis apres fa 
femme, fe promettant bien de mourir Chreftien aufli 
bien que les autres: Ce bo-heur luy eft arriue non 
fans vne faueur particuliere de Dieu, car il efloit fort 
fuperflitieux, & ne manquoit pas d'efprit pour deffen- 
dre ces niaiferies ; II fe meloit de deuiner. Or foit 
que le diable fe communiquaft a luy par leur fre- 
milTement de mammelle, foit qu'il le rencontraft 
quelquefois par hazard, ie I'ay veu affeurer qu'vne 
certaine nouuelle qu'on attendoit arriueroit le lende- 
main matin, & cela fut trouue veritable. Eftant 
tombe malade, il nous fit appeller, nous y allafmes 
trois de compagnie ; Ce bon homme defia conuaincu 
fur f es fuperftitions, nous dit : Ah mes chers amis ! 
[i8] vous me faites plaifir, ie n'ay plus de parolles 
qu'autant qu'il en faut pour vous tefmoigner que ie 
croy en Dieu ; que ie renonce k nos badineries pour 
embraffer la Foy que vous m'auez enfeignee. La 
deffus il fe voulut mettre ^ genoux, mais il n'eut pas 
alfez de force, on luy confera le prenijer Sacrement 
de grace, & tout fur I'heure il paffa dans la gloire. 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, r6s8 156 

he had heard singing all night, very melodiously, 
affording him the utmost delight ; he thought that 
we had heard them. As he told this, he assumed a 
startled look, and said to us, " Do you not see those 
frightful people there, looking at me with evil eyes? " 
We immediately reassured him. On the evening of 
the night he died, he called loudly for one of our Fa- 
thers, who immediately ran to him ; but he could not 
understand what the boy intended to say, as he only 
exclaimed, " The Father will know it, the Father 
will know it." Some time afterward, he rendered 
up his blessed soul to our Lord. 

I have spoken in preceding Relations of a certain 
man surnamed by the French, "big Olivier," who 
two years ago had his daughter baptized, and after- 
wards his wife, fully resolving that he would die a 
Christian, as well as the others. This good fortune 
did not happen to him without a special favor of 
God ; for he was very superstitious, and did not lack 
the ability to justify those foolish notions; he took 
part in divination. Now either because the devil 
communicated with him by means of their throb- 
bings of the breast, or because he chanced to meet 
him sometimes, I have known him to assert that cer- 
tain news which was expected would arrive the next 
morning, which proved to be true. Having fallen 
sick, he had us summoned; three of us went to him. 
This good man, already convinced of his supersti- 
tions, said to us, '' Ah! my dear friends, [i8] you are 
doing me a favor. I have no longer the power to 
speak, except what is necessary to testify to you that 
I believe in God, that I renounce our absurdities to 
embrace the Faith that you have taught me. " There- 
upon he tried to get on his knees, but he had not 


166 LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUJTES [Vol. 14 

Nous verrons quelques exemples bien plus notable 
que celuy que ie vay deduire, comme il ne faut point 
defefperer de la bonte de Dieu ; nonobftant la barba- 
ric des Sauuages. Vn de nos Peres abordant vne 
ieune fille malade pour la difpofer au Baptefme, cette 
pauure creature I'apperceuant, luy dit; fors d'icy, ie 
ne te veux pas voir. Lc Pere faifant femblant de ne 
la pas entendre, luy dit, ma fille, ie voudrois bien 
f9auoir ou eft ta plus grande doulcur, pour y appor- 
ter quelque remede. La malade incitee par I'cfprit 
malin, fe tourne de I'autre coft6 toute en colere, ce 
que fa foeur qui la gardoit ayant apperceu, dit au 
Pere ; n'entends-tu pas qu'cllc te dit que tu t'en aille, 
& que tu luy romps la teflc. Les deux Peres qui 
eftoient 1^ recognoiffant la tentation du diable, ont 
recours h. Dieu, & Ie demon s'enfuit. Ma fille, dit 
I'vn de fes Peres, nous te voudrions donner vn bon 
confcil, & tu Ie mefprife; quoy done, fortirons-nous 
fans que tu nous parle ? a ces parolles die f e tourne 
la face, & s'efcrie: Ah mon Pere, ie me meurs! ie 
n'en puis plus, c'eft fait de ma vie! Non ma fille, 
vous ne mourez pas tout k fait, luy dit Ie Pere, fi 
vous croiez en Dieu; car voftre ame ioiiira d'vn plai- 
fir eternel. Ie croy refpond-elle, [19] ie croy, ie fuis 
marrie de I'auoir offenfe. On I'interroge fur les prin- 
cipaux articles de noltre creance, comme elle auoit 
afllft6 au Cathechifme, elle repondit, fort bien : On luy 
demanda fi elle voudroit bien receuoir Ie S. Baptefme, 
elle repondit, non de paroles, mais par effect; car en- 
core qu'elle fuft aux abois de la mort, elle fe fouleue 
doucement, met vn plat d'ecorce fous fa tefte, faifant 
figne qu'on verfaft deffus ces eaues fanctifiantes pour 
guerir les playes de fon ame, on luy obeyt, on la fait 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, tdjS ISfT 

enough strength. The first Sacrament of grace was 
conferred upon him, and almost at the same time he 
passed into glory. 

We shall see examples even more remarkable than 
this I am about to describe, showing that the good- 
ness of God must not be despaired of, notwithstand- 
ing the barbarism of the Savages. One of our Fa- 
thers approaching a young sick girl to persuade her 
to Baptism, this poor creature perceiving him, said, 
"Go away from here; I do not wish to see thee." 
The Father, pretending not to hear her, said, " My 
daughter, I would like very much to know where 
thy greatest pain is, to bring thee some remedy for 
it." The patient, incited by the evil spirit, turned 
angrily to the other side ; her sister, who was taking 
care of her, seeing this, said to the Father, " Dost 
thou not hear her tell thee to go away, — that thou 
art turning her brain ? ' ' The two Fathers who were 
there, recognizing the temptation of the devil, had re- 
course to God, and the demon fled. ' ' My daughter, 
said one of these Fathers, ' ' we wish to give thee good 
counsel, and thou despisest it; how now, shall we go 
away without thy speaking to us ? " At these words 
she turned her face and exclaimed, " Ah, my Father, 
I am dying ! I can do no more, it is a question of my 
life ! " " No, my daughter, you will not entirely per- 
ish," the Father said to her, " if you believe in God. 
for your soul will enjoy eternal pleasure." " I be- 
lieve," replied she, [19] "I believe, I am sorry to 
have offended him." She was questioned upon the 
principal articles of our belief; as she had attended 
the Catechism, she answered very well. She was 
asked if she truly desired to receive Holy Baptism ; 
she answered not by words, but by actions; for, al- 


158 


LES RELATIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol.14 


Chreftienne, & a mefme temps citoyenne du Paradis; 
Car en rabbaiflant fon corps vers la terre, fon'ame 
s'enuola dans les Cieux. C'efl vne faincte penfee de 
mediter par fois quels font les eftonnemens & les 
fainctes epouuentes, pour ainli dire, qu'a Tame d'vn 
Sauuage, paffant en vn moment de 1' extremity de la 
barbarie, & de la baffeffe dans le fein de la gloire. 
Quelle action de grace ne fait-elle point k ceux qui 
luy ont procure cette grandeur, quelle benediction 
du Ciel ne demande-elle point h. Dieu pour ceux qui 
n'ont point epargn^ les biens de la terre, afin qu'on 
luy appliquaft le fang de Iesvs-Christ. Paf- 
fons outre; i'ay peur d'eftre long. 


1637-38] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1638 15^ 

though she was on the verge of death, she gently- 
raised herself and put a bark plate under her head, 
making a sign that these sanctifying waters should be 
poured over her to cure the wounds of her soul ; she 
was obeyed ; she was made a Christian, and at the same 
time a citizen of Paradise, — for, in lowering her body 
towards the ground, her soul flew away to Heaven. 
It is a holy exercise of the mind to meditate at times 
upon the wonder and holy terror, so to speak, that 
the soul of a Savage experiences in passing, in one 
moment, from the extreme of barbarism and degrada- 
tion into the bosom of glory. What thanksgivings 
does it not offer for those who have procured it this 
greatness ; what Heavenly blessings does it not ask 
from God for those who have not spared their earth- 
ly goods that they might apply to it the blood of 
Jesus Christ? Let us pass on ; I fear this will 
be too long. 


160 


LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.14 


[20] CHAPITRE IV. 

d'autres personnes adultes baptiz^es solem- 
nellement. 

LE feminaire des Hurons nous a donne cette annee 
deux ieunes homines, auffi conflans en la Foy, 
que leur nation eft variable & changeante. le 
n'ay pas connoiffance du futur, mais ie f9ay bien que 
le fejour qu'ils ont fait parmy nous, les a fait iuger 
tres-difpofez pour receuoir le caractere du Chreftien. 
Mr le Cheualier de Montmagny en nomma vn Ar- 
mand lean, du nom de Monfeigneur le Cardinal, iu- 
geant qu'il efloit k propos qu'vn Prince de I'Eglife 
qui fauorife cette Eglife naiffante, en recueillit les 
premiers fruits. Son compagnon eft celuy qui fe 
fauua I'an paffe des mains des Hiroquois par vne 
efpece de miracle. Monfieur Gand & Madamoifelle 
de Repentigny, fes parain & maraine, I'appellerent 
lofeph, au nom de Meffieurs de la Nouuelle France. 
Le Chapitre du Seminaire des Hurons nous fera voir 
les bonnes difpofitions & les vertus de ces deux ieunes 
hommes vrayment touchez de Dieu. Fay parle dans 
les Relations precedentes d'vne ieune fille donnee a 
vne famille Fran9oife pour deux ans, 'k condition que 
ce temps expire, elle fe pourroit retirer aupres de fes 
parens, fi elle en auoit la volonte ; Le terme appro- 
chant, fon pere la preffa fort de le fuiure: [21] elle 
fit la fourde oreille. II enuoye vn ieune homme pour 
luy parler de mariage : Et afin de gagner plus forte- 


1637-38] LEJEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 161 


[20] CHAPTER IV. 

OF OTHER ADULT PERSONS WHO HAVE BEEN SOL- 
EMNLY BAPTIZED. 

THE seminary for the Hurons has given us this 
year two young men, as steadfast in the Faith 
as their nation is unsteady and changeable. I 
have no knowledge of the future, but I know well 
that the sojourn they made among us has caused them 
to be considered very well prepared to receive the 
stamp of Christian. Monsieur the Chevalier de Mont- 
magny named one of them Armand Jean, the name 
of Monseigneur the Cardinal, deeming it appropriate 
that a Prince of the Church, who favors this rising 
Church, should gather the first fruits thereof. His 
companion is the one who escaped last year from the 
hands of the Hiroquois by a sort of miracle. Mon- 
sieur Gand and Madamoiselle de Repentigny, his god- 
father and godmother, called him Joseph, in the 
name of the Gentlemen of New France. The Chap- 
ter on the Seminary for the Hurons will show us the 
good inclinations and virtues of these two young 
men, truly touched by God. I have spoken in the 
preceding Relations of a young girl given to a French 
family for two years, on condition that when this 
time expired she should be allowed to go back to her 
parents, if she wished to do so. As the time drew 
near, her father strongly urged her to follow him ; 
[21] she turned a deaf ear. He sent a young man to 
speak to her about marriage, who, in order to more 


162 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.14 

ment fon amiti6, & la diuertir des Francois, il luy 
fait prefent de braffelets & de pendans d'oreille, & 
d'vn colier de pourcelaine, ce font les perles & les 
diamans du pays. Cette bonne Cathecumene ag6e 
de 12 ^ 14 ans, repondit en fuyant, laiffa Ik fes pre- 
fens, & celuy qui les offroit fans luy dire vn feul 
mot. Ayans done reconnu fa conftance, nous la dif- 
pofafmes au Baptefme. Le diable s'y voulut oppo- 
fer, car elle fut faifie d'vne efpece d'obfeffion {\ vio- 
lente, qu'en vn moment elle tournoit la tefte auec 
vne deformite fort horrible, fon eftomac s'efleuoit 
demefurement : On la voyoit toute epouuentee fans 
pouuoir dire autre parole, fmon; i'ay peur, i'ay peur. 
Cecy luy arriua par trois fois, & toufiours en des 
temps que pas vn de nous ne pouuoit eftre appell6 
pour la voir en cet eflat. On preffa fort de luy faire 
prendre quelque medecine, pour luy purger le cer- 
ueau, difoit-on. Nous en anions la volonte, mais 
I'oubly nous faififfoit incontinent. Le Baptefme la 
deuoit guerir ; car depuis que les eaux facrees I'eurent 
faite enfant de Dieu, iamais plus le diable ne luy 
donna cette epouuente ; Elle fut appellee Magdelaine 
de S. lofeph. Fefpere qu'vne ame cherie de Dieu 
luy trouuera fon mariage. 

Le forcier Pigarouch, auec lequel nous eufmes tant 
de prifes I'an paffe, comme i'ay defia dit, a inftruit 
& fait baptizer fa femme, & trois de fes enfans k la 
mort. Vn fien frere fe rendant opiniaflre, & fe moc- 
quant des feux d'Enfer, il le preffa [22] fi fortement 
qu'il le fl^chit. Comment, luy faifoit-il, tu crois que 
ton ame n'aura aucune connoiffance apres ta mort? 
Eft-ce toy qui I'a cree pour en parler auec cette opi- 
niaftrete? Tu mets toute fon affeurance en tes ap- 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 163 

effectually gain her friendship and estrange her from 
the French, made her a present of bracelets and ear- 
rings, and a necklace of porcelain, — these are the 
pearls and diamonds of the country. This good 
Catechumen, between 12 and 14 years old, answered 
by jEleeing, leaving there his presents, and him who 
offered them, without saying to him a single word. 
Having now recognized her constancy, we prepared 
her for Baptism. The devil tried to oppose this, for 
she was seized by a sort of obsession, so violent that 
she instantly turned her head around, with horrible 
distortion, and her stomach grew enormously swollen. 
We saw that she was utterly terrified, and unable to 
utter a word, except, " I am afraid, I am afraid." 
This happened to her three times, and always at a 
time when none of us could be called to see her in 
this condition. There were urgent requests to have 
her take some medicine, to clear her brain, they said. 
We were willing to do this, but negligence suddenly 
seized us. Baptism was destined to cure her; for, 
since the sacred waters have made her a child of 
God, the devil has never caused her this fright. She 
was called Magdelaine of St. Joseph. I hope that 
some soul dear to God will find in her a wife. 

The sorcerer Pigarouch, with whom we had so 
many disputes last year, as I have already said, in- 
structed and had his wife and three of his children 
baptized at death. One of his brothers becoming ob- 
stinate, and ridiculing the fires of Hell, he urged 
him [22] so strongly that he convinced him. ' ' What ! " 
said he to him, " dost thou think thy soul will have 
no consciousness after death? Is it thou who hast 
created it, that thou shouldst speak of it with this 
obstinacy? Thou placest all thy dependence upon 


164 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.14 

prehenfions remplies d'erreur, & moy qui croy en 
Dieu, ie m'appuye fur fa parolle; c'eft luy qui a tire 
les ames du neant, & par confequent qui en pent par- 
ler auec toute verit6. La raifon t'apprend que celuy 
qui t'a donn^ I'eftre en demande quelque reconnoif- 
fance fur peine de chafliment. II fit fi bien, que ce 
bon homme fe rendit, & fut nomme Chryfoftome. 

Ayans baptise vne bonne f emme dans vne groffe ma- 
ladie, en forte qu'elle repondoit auec vne entiere con- 
noiffance S. toutes les demandes qu'on luy fit, fans que 
iamais elle parut extrauaguee, arriue qu'elle retourne 
en fante, nous luy demandafmes fi elle fe fouuenoit 
bien du nom qu'on luy auoit donne. Non, dit-elle, 
ie ne f9ay pas feulement fi on m'a baptifee. Mais 
ne te fouuiens-tu pas, luy difmes nous, des reponfes 
que tu nous a faites touchant noftre creance. Non, 
refpondit-elle, ie ne fcay ce que vous m'auez deman- 
de, ny ce que ie vous ay r^pondu, mais ie me fouuiens 
bien qu'il me fembloit quand vous me parliez que Ie 
Diable me vouloit tuer, & que ie dif ois en mon coeur ; 
c'eft bien k luy "k m'offencer, puisque ie crois en 
Dieu, il n'en fgauroit venir ^ bout. Ie me fenty par 
apres deliuree de ce danger, ce fut fans doute par ce 
Baptefme. Cette pauure femme fe comporte bien 
maintenant, fort ioyeufe d'auoir efte malade, pour 
auoir [2 3 J receu vne faueur qu'on ne luy eut pas fi toft 
accord6e. Ie ne f9aurois me lafTer de dire que ceux 
qui defefperent de la conuerfion des Sauuages, font 
vne iniure a la bonte de Dieu ; Nous auons fecouru 
cet hyuer vn ieune homme auec vne grande patience, 
car fa maladie a dur6 plus de cinq mois : Apres toute 
la charit^ qu'on luy eut fait, & I'inftruction qu'on 
luy eut donnee, Ie diable luy renuerfa quafi la cer- 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 165 

thy apprehensions, full of errors as they are; and I 
who believe in God, I lean upon his word ; it is he 
who has drawn souls from nothing, and consequently 
can speak of them with all truth. Reason teaches 
thee that he who has given thee being demands some 
acknowledgment thereof, on pain of punishment." 
He argued so well that this good man yielded, and 
was named Chrysostome. 

Having baptized a good woman in a serious illness, 
so that she responded with perfect intelligence to all 
the questions put to her, without once appearing to 
wander, it happened that she returned to health, and 
we asked her if she remembered clearly the name 
that had been given to her. " No," said she, " I do 
not even know whether I have been baptized." 
' ' But dost thou not remember, ' ' we said to her, * ' the 
answers that thou didst make to us concerning our be- 
lief ?" " No," she answered, " I do not know what 
you asked me, nor what I answered you ; but I re- 
member very well that it seemed to me, when you 
addressed me, that the Devil tried to kill me, and 
that I said in my heart, ' It is no wonder that he at- 
tacks me, since I believe in God ; but he cannot suc- 
ceed.' I afterwards felt myself delivered from this 
danger ; it was no doubt through this Baptism. ' ' This 
poor woman behaves well now, and is very glad that 
she was sick, that she might [23] receive a favor that 
would not have been granted to her so soon. I can- 
not refrain from saying that those who despair of the 
conversion of the Savages, offer an insult to the good- 
ness of God. We have this winter succored a young 
man, with great patience, for his sickness lasted 
more than five months. After all the kindness that 
had been shown him, and the instruction that had 


166 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.14 

Tielle. Ce pauure miferable entre en fureur, blaf- 
pheme centre Dieu, protefte qu'il ne croit plus "en luy. 
Tout I'hyuer faifoit-il, ie I'ay prie, & ie m'attendois 
qu'il me gueriroit, & me voila plus mal que iamais, 
qu'il me damne s'il veut, ie ne m'en foucie pas. 
Ceux qui entendent ces blafphemes creurent inconti- 
nent que les Sauuages ne croyent que par intereft. 
C'efl chofe eftrange que Ie mal eft mieux receu que 
Ie bien. Tout Ie monde croit au premier recit toutes 
les fimplicites que nous efcriuons de ces peuples, mais 
fl on remarque quelque traict d'efprit, de bon fens, 
en vn mot, quelque faueur de la nature, ou de la 
grace, cela elt comme reuoque en doute. Qui euft 
iamais cru que noftre blafphemateur deuft chanter les 
loiiages de Dieu. Nous Ie fifmes porter dans la Ca- 
bane de quelques Sauuages fes parens ; & au mefme 
temps que nous ne luy donnions plus aucun fecours, 
fmon de luy remonftrer doucement fon pecli6, il fut 
fi contrit, qu'il nous tira les larmes des yeux. II 
demanda Ie Baptefme, protefta qu'il eftoit marry d'a- 
uoir offence fon Seigneur, luy donne fa vie fans Ie prier 
de la prolonger d'vn moment. Dit tout haut qu'il 
croit & qu'il veut [24] croire a iamais en celuy qui 
luy a touche Ie coeur: on Ie baptize dans cette fer- 
ueur .• Ie Diable furuient k la trauerf e ; vn fien frere 
fonge que fi on mettoit vn bafton aupres de luy qui 
reffemblaft k vne couleuure, qu'il gueriroit: On en 
fait vn auffi-toft, on Ie place aupres de fa tefte. Ay- 
ant eu aduis de cette fuperftition, nous I'allafmes 
vifiter; comme nous luy demandions fi ce balton n'a- 
uoit point fait fon corps, puis qu'on Ie mettoit aupres 
de luy pour Ie refaire, il Ie prit, & nous Ie donna. 
Emportez-le, fit-il, afin qu'il n'en foit plus de nou- 


1637-38] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s8 167 

been given him, the devil almost turned his head. 
This poor wretch, being in a fury, blasphemed God, 
and protested that he no longer believed in him. 
" All the winter," said he, "I have prayed to him, 
and was expecting that he would cure me ; and here 
I am, worse than ever I Let him damn me if he will, 
I do not care!" Those who hear these blasphemies 
immediately conclude that the Savages believe only 
through self-interest. Strange, how evil is better 
received than good! Every one believes, at the first 
recital, all the simplicities that we write about these 
peoples ; but if we note some trait of intellect or good 
sense, — in a word, some boon of nature or of grace, — 
this is, as it were, called in question. Who would 
ever have believed that our blasphemer was to sing 
the praises of God? We had him carried into the 
Cabin of some of his Savage relatives; and at the 
very time that we were giving him no more assis- 
tance, except to remonstrate gently with him about 
his sin, he was so contrite that he drew tears from 
our eyes. He asked for Baptism, protesting that he 
was sorry to have offended his Lord ; and offered him 
his life, without praying him to prolong it for a mo- 
ment. He said aloud that he believed, and that he 
would [24] forever believe in him who had touched 
his heart. He is baptized while in this fervor. The 
Devil unexpectedly comes across his path; one of 
his brothers dreams that if a stick resembling a ser- 
pent be put near him, he will recover. One is im- 
mediately made, and placed near his head. Having 
been notified of this superstitious act, we went to 
visit him ; when we asked him whether this stick had 
made his body, since it was placed near him in order 
to restore him, he took it and gave it to us. " Take 


168 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.14 

uelle, ils I'ont mis aupres de moy fans que i'y aye 
aucune creance. le I'enuoye a V. R. encore qu'il 
n'ait autre rarete fmon qu'il fera vn long voyage. 
Ayant furuefcu quelque temps apres fon baptefme, il 
fe confeffa, & receut I'extreme-Onction auec vn tel 
fentiment de deuotion, que fa face en eftoit toute epa- 
noiiie. Nous luy demandafmes, s'il ne craignoit 
point la mort. Non, ie ne la crains plus depuis mon 
baptefme, au contraire, ie defire fort d'aller voir mon 
Pere & mon Dieu. Nous luy remifmes en memoire 
quelques offences qu'il pourroit auoir faites depuis 
qu'il eftoit Chreflien, afin d'en demander pardon k 
Dieu : II penfa vn petit ^ part foy, puis il nous dit. 
Non, ie ne fuis pas tomb6 dans ces pechez. Car me 
prefentant au Baptefme, ie fis mon compte qu'eftans 
enfant de Dieu ie ne le deuois plus offencer ; & puis 
il me femble que ceux qui font baptizes ne tombent 
point dans ces offences. Sa mort eftonna ceux qui 
auoient defefpere de fa conuerfion. 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE S RELA TION, 1638 169 


it away," lie said, " in order that I may hear no more 
about it ; they placed it near me without my having 
any belief in it." I send it to Your Reverence, al- 
though it is rare in no other respect except that it 
will make a long journey. Having survived some 
time after his baptism, he confessed and received ex- 
treme Unction, with such sentiments of devotion that 
his face was all aglow. We asked him if he did not 
fear death. "No; I no longer fear it since my bap- 
tism ; on the contrary, I greatly desire to go and see 
my Father and my God." We recalled to his mem- 
ory some offenses that he might have committed since 
he had become a Christian, so that he might ask 
God's pardon for them. He thought within himself 
a little; then he said to us, " No, I have not fallen 
into those sins, for, when I presented myself for Bap- 
tism, I considered that, being a child of God, I ought 
no more to offend him ; and then it seems to me that 
those who are baptized do not fall into those offenses. " 
His death astonished those who had despaired of his 
conversion. 


170 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.14 


[25] CHAPITRE V. 

DE LA CONUERSION & DU BAPTESME D'VN IEUNE 
HOMME, & DE QUELQUES AUTRES SAUUAGES. 

NONeJl abbreuiata manus Domini vt faluare nequeat: 
neque aggranata ejl auris eius vt non exaudiat. 
Dieu n'a pas les mains plus foibles, ny les au- 
reilles plus fermees qu'il auoit il y a mille ans. Ces 
paroles nous feruiront de garend contre ceux qui 
prendroient les faueurs que fa bonte commece k faire 
aux Sauuages pour des exagerations. Nous verrons 
en ce ieune homme vn triophe de la prouidence & de 
la mifericorde du grad Dieu, II y a tantofk deux ans 
que Mr Gand, homme fort charitable enuers les pau- 
ures Sauuages, recueillit ce miferable ^ demy mort 
de faim, de froid, & de maladie, quoy qu'il fuft 
tres-bie apparete parmy les fies, il I'habille, le loge, 
luy procure des viures, & nous le met entre les mains 
pour rinftruire: on le prelTe par diuerfes raifons; on 
le fait prier Dieu foir & matin, il f9ait la plufpart 
de nos myfteres, mais il ne les croit qu'en apparence: 
en vn mot, il cherchoit la vie du corps, & no de 
Tame. L'hyuer pafT^, le froid cotinue das fon coeur, 
dequoy nous apperceuas, nous le chalTafmes come 
vne persone qui nous fuiuoit k la fago des chies, pour 
auoir du pain, il paffe I'Efte auec fes compatriotes, 
parlant toufiours honorablement de nous; fur I'Au- 
tomne il luy arriue vne difgrace, faifant vne fuerie, 
il tomba [26] fur les pierres ardentes qui efchauffoient 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 171 


[25] CHAPTER V. 

OF THE CONVERSION AND BAPTISM OF A YOUNG MAN, 
AND OF SOME OTHER SAVAGES. 

NON est abbreviata manus Domini ut salvare nequeat: 
neque aggravata est auris ejus ut non exaudiat. 
God's hands are no weaker, nor his ears more 
shut, than they were a thousand years ago. These 
words will serve us as a guarantee against those who 
would regard as exaggerations the favors that his 
goodness is beginning to bestow upon the Savages. 
We shall see in this young man a triumph of the prov- 
idence and mercy of the great God. It is almost 
two years since Monsieur Gand, a man who is very 
charitable to the poor Savages, rescued this poor 
wretch, half dead from hunger, cold, and sickness, 
although he was very well connected among his own 
people; he clothed him, lodged him, procured him 
food, and put him in our hands to be instructed. 
Different arguments were urged upon him ; he was 
made to pray to God morning and evening, he knew 
the greater part of our mysteries ; but he believed 
only in appearance. In a word, he sought the life 
of the body, and not that of the soul. The winter 
past, the cold continued in his heart, — perceiving 
which, we drove him away as a person who followed 
us, as a dog would, to get some bread. He passed 
the Summer with his countrymen, always speaking 
of us with respect. Toward Autumn, a misfortune 
happened to him ; when he was taking a sweat, he 


172 LES RELATIONS DES jlSUITES [Vol.14 

ces eftuues, il fe grilla & brufla vne grande partie du 
corps; c'eftoit chofe affreufe de le voir. Le voila 
done auffi pres de la mort que de I'hyuer, car il con- 
noit bien qu'il ne le paffera iamais, s'il n'eft forte- 
ment fecouru: ce qu'il n'attendoit point de fes gens, 
qui ne fgauent non plus que c'efl de charite que de 
chirurgie .• il nous iette plufieurs oeillades, nous parle 
de retourner auec nous.- mais nous n'auions plus 
d'oreilles pour luy, croians qu'il n'en auoit point pour 
Dieu. En ce mefme temps nous re9eufmes lettres de 
nos Peres des Trois riuieres, lefquels nous deman- 
doient quelque ieune Sauuage pour paffer I'hyuer 
auec eux, afin qu'en I'inftruifans ils fe formaffent 
toufiours en la cognoiffance de leur langue. Nous 
ne penlions guere k ce pauure corps tout rofty : mais 
en fin apres en auoir trouue d'autres qui nous man- 
querent de parole, nous fufmes contraints de leur 
enuoier ce pauure miferable, qui n' auoit plus que la 
moiti6 de fon corps. O mon Dieu, quelle prouidence ! 
ils le font penfer, ils le traittent auec toute forte d'a- 
mour & de coeur ; eftant giiery, c6t homme de pierre 
demeura toufiours froid come vne glace. En fin nos 
Peres ne pouuans foufifrir cette langueur, ont recours 
k Dieu, luy font quelques voeux par I'intercefiion du 
glorieux Apoftre S. Paul, prefentent le fainct Sacri- 
fice de la MefTe le iour de fa conuerfion pour la con- 
uerfion de cette flatue infenfible. Chofe eftrange ! le 
voila change en vn moment, fon coeur eft plain de 
regrets d' auoir fi log temps refifl6 k Dieu, il preffe 
qu'on le baptize pour eftre def charge du fardeau de 
fes pechez, il ieufne de [27] foy-mefme, faifant fem- 
blant de manger, «& remettant dextrement a I'ecart 
ce qu'on luy donnoit pour fon viure: il paffe dans la 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TJON, 1638 173 

fell [26] Upon the burning stones which heat these 
baths, and scorched and burned a great part of his 
body; it was something frightful to see. Behold 
him, then, as near death as in the winter; for he 
knew very well that he would never survive it if he 
were not vigorously assisted ; this he did not expect 
from his own people, who no more know what chari- 
ty is than they understand surgery. He cast many 
glances at us, and spoke to us about returning to us; 
but we had no longer ears for him, believing that he 
had none for God. At this very time we received 
letters from our Fathers at the Three rivers, who 
asked us for some young Savage to pass the winter 
with them, so that in giving him instruction they 
might continue to improve their knowledge of their 
language. We hardly gave a thought to this poor 
badly roasted body ; but finally, after having found 
others, who failed to keep their word with us, we were 
constrained to send them this poor wretch, who had 
no more than half of his body. Oh my God, what a 
providence ! They had him cared for, they treated 
him with every evidence of love and affection ; hav- 
ing recovered, this man of stone still remained cold 
as ice. Finally our Fathers, unable to endure this 
apathy, had recourse to God, made vows to him 
through the intercession of the glorious Apostle St. 
Paul, and offered the holy Sacrifice of the Mass 
on the day of his conversion, for the conversion of 
this insensible statue. Strange to say ! behold him 
changed in a moment ; his heart is full of regret for 
having so long resisted God ; he urges them to bap- 
tize him, that he may be relieved from the burden 
of his sins; he fasts of [27] his own accord, — pre- 
tending to eat, but dexterously putting to one side the 


174 LES RELA TJONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 14 

rigueur de I'hyuer les heures entieres dans la Chap- 
pelle, attire par vne vertu fecrette qu'il adore fans la 
connoitre. Son efprit qui iufques alors auoit pani 
maffif, & pefant comme du plomb, fe fubtilife en 
forte qu'il congoit fans peine tout ce qu'on luy en- 
feigne de nos myfteres. Nos Peres s'en etonnans, il 
repondit : C'efl vne faueur de mon bon Ange, auquel 
ie demande fecours autant de fois que vous m'appel- 
lez pour eftre inftruit. Comme on luy vint ^ parler 
de la prefence de lefus-Chrift au Sainct Sacrement, 
il fit vn gefte comme d'vn homme plein de ioye. Ie 
ne m'etonne plus, fit-il, fi ie prenois tant de plaillr 
d'approcher de lAutel quand ie faifois mes prieres 
en la Chappelle.- plus i'en eflois proche, plus ie reffen- 
tois de contentement dans mon ame, fans pouuoir 
comprendre d'ou cela procedoit. 

Ses parens ayant rapporte force chair frefche de 
leur chaffe pendant Ie Carefme, on luy dit qu'il en 
pouuoit manger, puis qu'il n'^toit pas encore baptist. 
II repartit, vous vous en abftenez pour vn bien, ie 
defire me procurer ce bien h. moy-mefme. Pour Ie 
fonder, on luy fit entendre que Ie Baptefme luy fe- 
roit peut-eflre occafion de mort. Dieu puniffant la 
feintife de fon cceur par ce fupplice. II repondit en 
ces termes. Si Ie Baptefme ne me doit faire mourir 
qu'en cas de feintife, ie ne la dois pas craindre: mais 
quand il tueroit abfolument mon corps, ie Ie deman- 
derois pour faire reuiure ma pauure ame. Dieu efl 
admirable dans [28] fes procedures: a mefme temps 
qu'on promet Ie Sacrement de lumiere a ce pauure 
Catechumene, il luy ofte les yeux du corps, vne de- 
fluxion luy tombe en vn moment fur la veue, & Ie 
rend aueugle, ou peu s'en faut: car il ne voit pas 


1637-38] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, idjS 176 

food that was given to him ; he passes whole hours 
in the Chapel, in the rigor of winter, attracted thither 
by a secret virtue which he adores without recogniz- 
ing it. His mind, which until then had seemed dull, 
and heavy as lead, becomes so alert that he conceives 
without any difficulty all that is taught him of our 
mysteries. Our Fathers showing surprise at this, he 
said, " It is a favor from my good Angel, of whom I 
ask help every time you summon me to be instruct- 
ed." When they came to tell him of the presence 
of Jesus Christ in the Holy Sacrament, he made a 
gesture as of a man full of joy. " I am no longer 
astonished," said he, " that I took so much pleasure 
in approaching the Altar when I offered my prayers 
in the Chapel; the nearer I approached, the more 
contentment I felt in my soul, without being able to 
comprehend whence it proceeded." 

His relatives having brought back an abundance 
of fresh meat from their hunting during Lent, he 
was told that he might eat of it, since he was not yet 
baptized. He rejoined, ''You abstain from it for 
some good, I desire to obtain this good for myself." 
To try him, he was made to understand that Baptism 
would perhaps be the occasion of his death, God 
punishing the hypocrisy of his heart through this 
affliction. He answered in these words: "If Bap- 
tism is only going to cause my death on account of 
hypocrisy, I need not fear it ; but if it should abso- 
lutely kill my body, I would ask it that I might cause 
my poor soul to live again. God is admirable in [28] 
his methods. At the same time that the Sacrament 
of light is promised to this poor Catechumen, he takes 
away from him the eyes of his body ; an inflamma- 
tion suddenly attacks his eyesight, and he becomes 


176 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.14 

affez pour fe conduire. Ce coup ne I'eftonna point, 
il tint ferme dans fa refolution, le diable n'euft pas 
la force de reueiller dans fon ame I'erreur des Sau- 
uages, qui s'imaginoient il n'y a pas long temps qu'ils 
ne pouuoient procurer la vie de leur ame qu'en pen- 
dant celle du corps. Comme on le veit conftant dans 
cette tentatio, & dans cette epreuue que Dieu luy 
donna, on le mit au nombre des enfans de Dieu, il 
fut nomme Paul, fuiuant la promefTe qu'on en auoit 
fait a ce grand Apoftre. 

Quelque temps apres fon Baptefme, nos Peres des 
Trois Riuieres nous I'enuoyerent a Kebec auec vn 
mot de lettre, dont voicy la teneur. Le peu de viures 
que nous auons, & le grand nombre de Sauuages qui 
ont befoin de notre fecours, nous ont fait refoudre 
de vous enuoyer ce nouueau foldat de lefus-Chrift, 
peut-eftre encore luy pourra-on trouuer \k bas quel- 
que remede k fes yeux. Au refle, il eft vrayement 
touchy, il a vne humilite vraiment Chreftiene, vne 
grande refignation k la vol6t6 de Dieu. Nous luy 
auons fouuent demande s'il ne s'affligeoit point d'a- 
uoir perdu les yeux: il a toufiours refpondu que 
n'eftant pas maiftre de foy-meme, il falloit lailTer 
agir Dieu, lequel eftant noftre Pere, cognoiffoit bien 
ce qui nous eftoit le meilleur. Tout de mefme, 
difoit-il, que fi mon corps n'euft eft6 brufle cet Au- 
tomne, mon ame fuft tombee c6t hyuer dans les feux ; 
car i'eufle [29] fuiuy les Sauuages, & perdu la vie auec 
eux dans la foiblefTe en laquelle ie me trouuois : de 
mefme, peut-eftre que ie perdrois la veue du Ciel, fi 
Dieu ne m'oftoit la veue de la terre. La Foy luy a 
fait perdre la honte de parler de Dieu deuant fes 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 177 

blind, or nearly so, for he does not see well enough 
to guide himself. This stroke did not appal him, he 
continued steadfast in his resolution ; the devil had 
not power to reawaken in his soul the error of the 
Savages, who not long ago imagined that they could 
only procure the life of their souls in destroying that 
of their bodies. As he was seen to be firm in this 
temptation, and in this trial which God made of him, 
he was placed among the number of the children of 
God; he was named Paul, in accordance with the 
promise made to this great Apostle. 

Some time after his Baptism, our Fathers of the 
Three Rivers sent him to us at Kebec, with a brief 
letter, of which this is the tenor : * ' The small amount 
of food that we have, and the great number of Sav- 
ages who need our help, have made us decide to send 
you this new soldier of Jesus Christ; perhaps, also, 
may be found down there some remedy for his eyes. 
It may be added that he is really touched ; he has a 
truly Christian humility, and great resignation to 
the will of God. We have often asked him if the 
loss of his eyes did not afilict him ; he has always re- 
plied that, not being master of himself, he must leave 
it to God to act, who, being our Father, knew well 
what was best for us. ' Just as, ' said he, ' if my body 
had not been burned this Autumn, my soul might 
have fallen this winter into the fires, — for I might 
have [29] followed the Savages, and lost my life with 
them in the state of weakness in which I was ; so, 
perhaps, I would have lost the sight of Heaven, if 
God had not taken away the sight of earth.' Faith 
has caused him to lose the shame he felt in speaking 
of God before his countrymen. I trust that he will 
give you consolation." 


178 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 14 

compatriotes, i'efpere qu'il vous donnera de la con- 
folation. 

Auffi-toft qu'il fut arriue, il fe confeffa & commu- 
nia, & le iour mefme il tomba malade, mais fi bruf- 
quement & fi fortement, qu'on me vint vide appeller 
pour le voir mourir. Eflans aupres de luy, nous luy 
demadafmes en la prefence des Sauuages s'il crai- 
gnoit la mort, il foufrit doucement, quoy qu'il fut ex- 
tremement abatu. le fuis baptife, repliqua-il, ie ne 
crains plus ny la mort, ny le diable : Si ie ne croiois 
pas en Dieu, i'aurois peur: mais Dieu eltant auec 
moy, ie ne crains plus rien linon de I'offencer. N'eftes 
vous point trifle de mourir fi tot, luy fifmes nous, 
demandez moy plutoft, fi ie ne fuis pas bien ioyeux 
d'aller au Ciel, que ceux-la s'attriftent de la mort, 
qui n'ont point d'efperance en Dieu, pour moy ie 
croy en fa parole, i'efpere en fa bonte, c'eft pour- 
quoy ie ne fuis point trifle, ces paroles nous touche- 
rent d'autant plus, qu'elles furent profitables ^ fes 
gens qui admiroient ce grad changement en vn ieune 
homme de leur nation. lis furent encor plus efton- 
nez, quand k peu de iours de la ils le virent en fante 
contre leur efperance: il frequente maintenant les 
Sacremens, voire mefme il goufte Dieu dans I'Orai- 
fon, voila ou la grace pent porter vn Sauuage, Dieu 
luy donne la perfeuerance, car fi les efloilles tombent 
du Ciel, perfonne ne vit en affeurance. 

[30] Nous adiouterons k ce ieune homme la conuer- 
fion d'vne famille plus heureufe pour le Ciel, que 
fortunee fur la terre. Vn grand homme bien fait & 
bien renomme parmy les Sauuages, apres nous auoir 
vn affes log temps prefle I'oreille, nous aborda, pour 
nous temoigner les fentimens de fon cceur: il nous 


1 637 - 38] LE JE UNE" S RELA TION, 1638 179 

As soon as he arrived, he confessed and took com- 
munion ; and that very day he fell sick, but so unex- 
pectedly and seriously, that I was summoned in haste 
to see him die. Being with him, we asked him in 
the presence of the Savages if he feared death. He 
smiled gently, although he was extremely low. " I 
am baptized," he replied: " I no longer fear death, 
or the devil. If I did not believe in God I would be 
afraid, but God being with me, I no longer fear any- 
thing except offending him." "Are you not sad to 
die so soon?" we asked him. " Ask me, rather, if I 
am not very glad to go to Heaven ; let those who 
have no hope in God be sad at the thought of death ; 
as for me, I believe in his word, I hope in his good- 
ness; this is why I am not sad." These words af- 
fected us all the more as they were profitable to his 
own people, who wondered at this great change in a 
young man of their nation. They were still more 
astonished when a few days afterwards they saw him 
in good health, contrary to their expectations. He 
now frequents the Sacraments; yea, more, he even 
enjoys God in Prayer. Behold how far grace can 
bear a Savage ! May God give him perseverance ; 
for, if the stars fall from Heaven, no one lives in cer- 
tainty, 

[30] We will add to the conversion of this young 
man, that of a family, happier as to Heaven than it 
was fortunate upon earth. A tall, well-built man, 
and of excellent repute among the Savages, after hav- 
ing listened to us for some time, approached us, to 
make known the sentiments of his heart. He said to 
us, on his return from burying one of his children, 
" My soul is filled with sadness, not for the death of 
my son, but because he died without baptism." Now 


180 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 14 

dit, venant d'inhutner I'vn de fes enfans, i'ay Tame 
remplie de trifteffe, non de la mort de mon fils,-mais 
de ce qu'il eft mort fans baptefme. Or comme il eut 
appris que fon enfant eflant mort en bas age ne 
reffentoit point la peine du feu, pour n'auoir commis 
aucun peche actuel, il nous remercia fort de luy auoir 
enfeigne vne doctrine fi fauorable, difoit-il. Puis il 
adioufta, il court vn bruit 1^ haut que vous auez ecrit 
a vn grand Capitaine de France pour nous ayder a 
loger ^ la Fra9oife, & a def richer la terre, cela eft-il 
vray? Luy ayant repondu que cela efloit veritable. 
Souuenez-vous, dit-il, que ie fuis des premiers qui 
me veux ranger fous vos drapeaux, ie ne feray pas 
feul, ie vous en ameneray plufieurs auec moy : mais 
vn poinct, faifoit-il, me tiet en haleine, fi ce Capi- 
taine auquel vous auez r^crit vous enuoye vn me- 
diant papier, defiflerez-vous de nous enfeigner. A 
Dieu ne plaife, luy difmes nous, iamais nous ne vous 
abandonnerons. Voila, repart-il, Ie meilleur de vos 
difcours, car ie ne veux m'arrefter aupres de vous 
que pour Ie falut de mon ame. Sur ces entrefaites, 
fe preparant pour faire vn voyage k Tadoulfac, il 
nous dit plufieurs f ois ; Vifitez fouuet ma famille, fi 
quelqu'vn meurt fans baptefme, vous en repondrez, 
car nous voulons tons croire en Dieu. Vn autre mien 
fils eft [31] malade, faites-le Chreftien au plufloft, de 
peur de furprife. Les iugements de Dieu font des 
abyfmes, ce bon homme lequel nous refioiiilfoit iuf- 
ques au fond du coeur, non pour fa feule conuerfion, 
mais pour I'efperance que nous anions que plufieurs 
imiteroient fon exemple, tomba malade Ie iour qu'il 
fe deuoit embarquer, & dans quatre iours apres, il eft 
baptife & mis au tombeau. Trois iours apres fa fem- 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, idjS 181 

when he had learned that his child, having died in 
infancy, did not feel the pains of hell, not having 
committed any actual sin, he thanked us heartily for 
having taught him a doctrine so favorable, he said. 
Then he added, " A report prevails up yonder that 
you have written to a great Captain of France that 
he should aid us to settle in the French way, and to 
clear the land; is that true?" Having told him that 
it was, " Remember," said he, " that I am one of the 
first who wishes to place himself under your flags ; 
I shall not be alone, I shall bring several with me. 
But one point," said he. " makes me hesitate. If this 
Captain to whom you have written sends you a bad 
paper, will you stop teaching us?" "God forbid," 
we replied ; * ' we shall never forsake you. " ' ' There, ' ' 
said he, " that is the best of your speeches; for I do 
not wish to stay near you for anything except the sal- 
vation of my soul." Meanwhile, as he was prepar- 
ing to make a journey to Tadoussac, he said to us 
several times, ' ' Visit my family often ; if any of them 
die without baptism, you will answer for it, for we 
all wish to believe in God. Another of my sons is 
[31] sick; make him a Christian as soon as possible, 
for fear of being taken unawares." The judgments 
of God are unfathomable. This good man, — who 
caused us to rejoice from the bottom of our hearts, 
not only for his own conversion, but for the hope we 
had that many would imitate his example, — fell sick, 
the day on which he was to embark ; and within four 
days afterward, he was baptized and borne to the 
grave. Three days later, his wife was seized by the 
same malady; feeling that she was stricken with 
death, she summoned us and said: " The love that 
you bear me makes me believe that I cannot do bet- 


182 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.14 

me eft faifie de mefme mal, fe fentant frappee k mort, 
elle nous appelle, & nous dit.- L'amour que vous.nous 
portez ma fait croire que ie ne peux mieux laiffer 
mes deux petits fils qu'entre vos mains, puifque vous 
avez chery le pere, cheriilez les enfans: le vous les 
donne, efleuez-les en voftre creance, & me baptifez, 
car ie fuis morte. Comme on les tranfportoit, cette 
pauure mere les regardant, leur dit d'vne voix dolete. 
Adieu mes enfans, c'eft pour la derniere fois que 
ie vous verray 9a bas en terre. Cela dit, on la fait 
Chreftienne, & du Baptefme on la porte au tombeau, 
fes deux enfans font deux petits germes du Semi- 
naire. Sur ces entrefaites, fa foeur arriue toute 
malade, c'eftoit I'vne des mefchantes femmes du pais, 
elle fe mefloit de leur forcellerie, en quoy elle re- 
iiffilfoit mieux que les homes. L'affliction ouure les 
yeux de I'entendement, cette miferable demande le 
Baptefme, crie mercy k Dieu, protefte qu'elle croit, 
elle nous eftonne par vn changement fubit, nous luy 
accordons ce qu'on ne luy pouuoit refufer fans impi- 
ety. A peine eft-elle purgee de fes offences qu'on la 
met en terre, fon mary fe voiant charg^ de fon en- 
fant encor fort ieune, nous le donne pour ellre mis 
auec fes coufms. [32] La mort de ces deux pauures 
creatures n'empefche pas que leur troifiefme foeur 
ne fe face maintenant inftruire pour viure "k lefus- 
Chrift. En mefme temps vn ieu[n]e homme bien in- 
ftruit, frappe de la mefme contagion, recherchant le 
falut de fon ame dans les eaux du Baptefme, y trouua 
encor celuy du corps : car il guerit k mefme temps 
qu'il fut Chreftien. Cette guerifon bien foudaine 
nous eftonna, d'autant qu'il eftoit aux abois quand 
on le baptifa. Reuenu k foy, il nous donna fon 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 183 

ter than to leave my two little sons in your hands ; 
since you have cherished the father, cherish the chil- 
dren. I give them to you, rear them in your belief; 
and baptize me, for I am dead." As they were being 
carried away, this poor mother, looking at them, said 
in a mournful voice, " Farewell, my children; this is 
the last time I shall see you here below on earth." 
This said, she was made a Christian, and from Bap- 
tism was carried to the grave. Her two children are 
two little germs of a Seminary. Meanwhile her sis- 
ter arrived, very sick; she was one of the wicked 
women of the country, taking part in their sorcery, 
in which she succeeded better than the men. Afflic- 
tion opens the eyes of the understanding ; this wretch- 
ed creature demands Baptism, cries to God for mercy, 
protests that she believes ; she astonishes us by a sud- 
den change ; we grant her what could not be refused 
to her without impiety. Scarcely is she purged from 
her transgressions than she is put in the ground. 
Her husband, finding himself burdened with her still 
very young child, gives him to us, to be placed with 
his cousins. [32] The death of these two poor crea- 
tures does not prevent their third sister from now 
having herself instructed, that she may live in Jesus 
Christ. At the same time, a young man, well in- 
structed, stricken by the same contagion, seeking the 
salvation of his soul in the waters of Baptism, found 
therein also that of his body ; for he recovered at the 
same time that he became a Christian. This very 
sudden recovery surprised us, inasmuch as he was 
almost dead when baptized. Upon his recovery, he 
gave us his little brother to be cast into the port of 
safety, both for the body and for the soul. A Father 
passing near a cabin without entering, a Savage 


184 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.14 

petit frere pour le letter au pour [^6-. port] de falut, 
tant pour le corps que pour Tame. Vn Pere paffant 
aupres d'vne cabane fans entrer dedans, vne femme 
Sauuage luy dit en fe plaignant. le croy que tu ne 
nous aime plus, puis que tu palTe fans nous vifiter : 
le Pere foufrit a cette plainte, entre dans la cabane, 
y trouue vne pauure femme fort malade, qui luy dit, 
fied toy vn petit aupres de moy, car ie me meurs, 
puis en luy monflrant fon petit fils, elle luy demande 
la larme k I'ceil, s'il ne voudroit pas bien feruir 
de pere au pauure petit enfant qu'elle alloit laiffer, 
le Pere la confola bien-toft, il fit emporter ce petit 
innocent pour eftre efleue auec les autres, puis com- 
me cette femme eftoit baptifee, il Tenquift ^i elle ne 
feroit pas bien aife de fe confelTer des peches qu'elle 
auroit commis depuis fon baptefme, elle le fit auec 
tant de preparation, & tant de candeur, que le Pere de- 
meura quelques iours comme eftonne, voiant comme 
la Foy iettoit de profondes racines dans les ames de 
ces pauures Barbares. 

Quelque temps apres, vn Capitaine eftant tombe 
malade, & ayant receu le fainct Baptefme, nous [33] 
donna fa propre fille agee d'enuiron trois ou quatre 
ans, nous la faifons efleuer ches vne famille Fran- 
9oife, la mere de cet enfant ne la pouuoit quitter 
qu'auec peine, mais ce bon Neophyte la prefTa tant 
qu'elle nous I'apporta elle mefme, cognoiflant bien 
qu'elle feroit mieux dans nos maifons Fran9oifes, que 
fous I'vne de leurs cabanes. I'obmets vn grand nom- 
bre de baptefmes, pour ne paffer les limites que ie me 
fuis propofe, encor qu'on y peut remarquer quelque 
chofe de notable, quand ce ne feroit qu'vne proui- 
dece de Dieu tres-particuliere. Par exemple, quel- 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 163S 185 

woman said to him complainingly, " I believe that 
thou dost not love us any more, since thou passest 
without visiting us. " The Father smiled at this com- 
plaint, entered the cabin, and found there a poor 
woman very sick, who said to him, " Sit thou near 
me a little while, for I am dying." Then showing 
him her little son, she asked, with tears in her eyes, 
if he would not act as father to the poor little child 
she was about to leave. The Father soon consoled 
her; he had this little innocent taken away, to be 
brought up with the others; then, as this woman had 
been baptized, he asked if she would not like to con- 
fess the sins that she might have committed since 
her baptism. She did this with so much prepara- 
tion, and so much candor, that the Father remained 
bewildered, as it were, for several days, seeing how 
deeply the Faith was becoming rooted in the souls 
of these poor Barbarians. 

Some time afterward, a Captain having fallen sick, 
and having received holy Baptism, [33] gave us his 
own daughter, about three or four years old. We 
are having her reared in a French family. The 
mother of this child could hardly give her up ; but 
this good Neophyte urged her so strongly that she 
herself brought her to us, knowing very well that 
she would be better off in our French houses than in 
one of their cabins. I omit a great many baptisms, 
in order not to go beyond the limits I have set for 
myself, although one can observe something remark- 
able in them, if it be only a very special providence 
of God. For example, one of us enters a cabin by 
mere chance, sees a slight movement under an Elk 
skin, finds a dying child, baptizes it, and sends it to 
Heaven at the same time. 


186 


LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.14 


qu'vn de nous entre par cas fortuit dans vne cabane, 
voit vn petit mouuement fous vne peau d'Eflan, 
trouue vn enfant mourant, le baptize, & I'enuoye au 
Ciel "k mefme temps. 

Vn vSauuage vient qnerir vn de nos Peres pour aller 
baptizer vn malade dans fa cabane, le Pere le fuit, 
tons deux pafTent fur le fleuue glace : k peine font- 
ils k I'autre bord que la glace fe creue, & s'en va k 
vaux I'eau, s'ils euffent encor vn pen attendu, ils 
eftoiet morts. Entres qu'ils font en la cabane, le P. 
rencotre vn enfat qui n'a plus que ce qu'il faut de vie 
pour receuoir le S. Baptefme: eftant fait enfant de 
Dieu, il s'enuole au Ciel, & le P. retournat fur fes 
pas, trouue le pont fur lequel il auoit paffe mis en 
pieces .• il refloit encor vne groffe glace efchoiiee fur 
les bords du grand fleuue, il mote deifus, appelle 
tant qu'il pent, afin qu'on le vienne querir auec vn 
canot: on rapper9oit, on y court, il s'embarque, & 
la glace qui le portoit flotte aufli-tofl qu'il I'a quittee, 
& s'en va dans le courant de la riuiere, vous euffies 
dit qu'elle n'attendoit fmon [34] que le P. fut en 
lieu de fauuete. Toutes ces rencotres font vn pro- 
dige de la prouidence de Dieu. 

Vn Pere defcendant a Kebec, arriue en mefme 
teps que ceux qui alloient vifiter les Sauuages qui 
eftoient malades : il s'en va done luy-mefme en leurs 
cabanes, en baptize trois ou quatre a 1' article de la 
mort, s'en retourne d'oii il eftoit venu, fans qu'on 
ait quafi peu cognoiftre ce qui I'auroit peu appeller 
au lieu ou Dieu le conduifoit pour le falut de ces 
ames. Quant fa majefle veut fauuer vne ame, tons 
les demons ne la f§auroient perdre. Vne autre fois 
les Sauuages vindrent encor querir vn de nous pour 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, jdjS 187 


A Savage comes to seek one of our Fathers to go 
and baptize a sick person in his cabin ; the Father fol- 
lows him ; both cross over the frozen river. Scarcely 
have they reached the other bank, when the ice cracks 
and floats away with the current ; if they had waited 
a little longer they would have been killed. Enter- 
ing the cabin, the Father finds a little child who has 
only enough life left to receive Holy Baptism. Hav- 
ing been made a child of God, it flies away to Heav- 
en ; and the Father, retracing his footsteps, finds the 
bridge upon which he had crossed broken to pieces. 
There still remained an immense cake of ice, stranded 
upon the shores of the great river; he climbs upon 
this, calls as loudly as he can, so that they may come 
after him in a canoe. He is perceived, they hasten 
thither, embark him, and the ice which bore him 
floats away as soon as he has left it, and goes off in 
the current of the river. You might have said that 
it was waiting for nothing else but [34] for the Fa- 
ther to be in a place of safety. All these occurrences 
are marvels of the providence of God. 

A Father, going down to Kebec, arrives at the 
same time as those who were going to visit the Sav- 
ages who were sick. Now he himself goes into their 
cabins, baptizes three or four of them at the point of 
death, returns to the place whence he had come, — 
almost without any one being able to recognize what 
might have called him to the place where God led 
him for the salvation of these souls. When his maj- 
esty wishes to save a soul, all the demons cannot 
cause it to be lost. Another time, the Savages again 
came to request one of us to go and visit their sick, 
at several leagues from our dwellings. The Father 
embarks with them; the devil, foreseeing the good 


188 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.14 

aller vifiter leurs malades a quelques lieux de nos 
demeures, le P. s'embarque auec eux, le diable preuo- 
iant le bien qu'il deuoit faire, ramaffe tant de glaces 
k I'entotir de leur canot, qu'ils furent contraints 
de fe defembarquer fur vne ifle noiee, & couuerte 
d'vne feule glace. Les Sauuages trouuerent I'intien- 
tion de faire du feu fur ce foyer fans le fondre, ils 
coupent vn grand arbre de bois blanc, lequel ne 
brufle guere au feu, ils en font leur atre, allument 
du feu deffus, & pour maifon & lict tout enfemble, 
prennent des morceaux de bois fur lef quels ils fe cou- 
chent auec le P. & y paffent la nuict. Le matin ils 
fe r'embarquent : les glaces les enuironent derechef , 
ils criet au fecours : les Sauuages du lieu ou ils al- 
loient les entendans, accourent, leur tendent de logues 
perches, & les tirent des portes de la mort. Le P. 
ayat remerci^ Dieu de cette faueur, inftruit les fains 
& les malades, en baptize quelques- vns, entre autres 
vn enfant qui perdit la vie auffi-toft : cela fait, il s'en 
retourne auec facilite, admirant dans fon ame les 
voyes que Dieu tient pour fauuer fes efleus. 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 189 

he is about to do, masses so much ice around their 
canoe, that they are obliged to disembark upon an 
island, overflowed, and covered only with ice. The 
Savages found a contrivance for making a fire upon 
this hearth without melting it. They cut a large 
tree of green wood, which hardly burns in the fire ; 
they make a hearth of it, and light a fire thereon ; 
and, for house and bed all together, take pieces of 
wood upon which they and the Father lie down, and 
thus pass the night. In the morning, they reembark ; 
the ice again encompasses them, they call for help. 
The Savages of the place whither they were going, 
hearing them, hasten thither, hold out to them long 
poles, and draw them from the gates of death. The 
Father, having thanked God for this favor, instructs 
the well and the sick, and baptizes some of them, — 
among others, a child who immediately gave up its 
life. This done, he returns with ease, admiring in 
his soul the ways that God takes to save his elect. 


190 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.14 


[35] CHAPITRE VI. 

DES GRANDES DISPOSITIONS D'VN CATECHUMENE AL- 
GONQUIN. 

IE ne fcay pas bon gre a ceux qui ont cm qu'on ne 
remarquoit dans I'efprit des Sauuages aucun pe- 
tit rayon de lumiere, ny de connoilTance touchant 
la Diuinite. I' ay autrefois efcrit contre c6t erreur. 
Voicy deux exemples qui combatant. Vne femme, 
nous difoit-il, n'y a pas long-temps qu'eftant bien 
malade, elle eut vne penfee qu'il falloit qu'il y eufl 
quelqu'vn qui la peuft guerir, elle I'inuoque, recou- 
ure fa fante : k quelque temps de la, difoit-elle, ie 
defcendis vers Kebec, ie vous entendis parler de Dieu 
& de fa Toute-puiffance, aufll-toft ie commen9ay k 
dire en mon coeur, voyla celuy que i'ay prie, & qui 
m'a guery, ie ne f9auois pas fon nom, ie ne Ie co- 
gnoilTois pas, il faut que i'efcoute ce qu'on en dit 
pour croire en luy. 

Ce ieune homme dont ie vay parler eftant deliure 
d'une maladie qui en auoit enleue plufieurs autres, 
philofophoit en cette forte : II faut bien qu'il y ait 
dans rVniuers quelque puiffant genie qui m'ait con- 
ferue: car ie n'ay rien apporte k ma guerifon, non 
plus que les autres, & fi mon corps n'eft point d'vne 
autre temps, ie voudrois bien cognoiftre ce bien- 
faicteur. 

Vne autre fois eftant feul, & contemplant fa main, 
il difoit: Ce n'eft pas moy qui ay compofe cette 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 191 


[35] CHAPTER VI. 

OF THE EXCELLENT INCLINATIONS OF AN ALGONQUIN 
CATECHUMEN. 

I AM not pleased with those who have believed 
that in the mind of the Savages one did not ob- 
serve any little ray of light or knowledge touch- 
ing the Divinity. I have previously written against 
this error ; behold two examples which oppose it. A 
woman told us not long ago that, being sick, the 
thought occurred to her that there must be some one 
who could cure her; she invokes him, she recovers 
her health. " Some time after that," said she, " I 
went down to Kebec ; I heard you speak of God and 
of his Omnipotence ; I immediately began to say in 
my heart, ' This is he to whom I have prayed, and 
who has cured me.' I did not know his name, I did 
not understand him ; I must listen to what is said of 
him, in order to believe in him." 

This young man of whom I am about to speak, 
having been delivered from a sickness that had taken 
off many others, philosophized in this way : * ' There 
must certainly be in the Universe some powerful 
spirit which has preserved me ; for I have done noth- 
ing for my recovery more than the others, and yet 
my body is not made of a different material. I would 
gladly know this benefactor." 

Another time, being alone and contemplating his 
hand, he said: "It is not I who have formed this 
hand, or who stretched out these fingers; nor can 


192 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.14 

main, ny eftedu ces doigts, cela ne peut eftre [36] 
non plus attribu6 a mon pere ny k ma mere ; car 
outre qu'ils n'auoient point de cognoiffance quad ma 
main fe formoit, ils ne f9auroient donner aucun mou- 
uement ^ leur ouurage: ils ne ffauroient faire ny 
auiron, ny canot, ny autre manufacture qui s'ouure 
& fe ferme par vn mouuement fecret comme font 
mes doigts : fans doute il y a quelque grand ouurier 
qui fait ces merueilles: fuft-il ainfi que quelqu'vn 
m'en donnaft la cognoiflance. le prie V. R. de croire 
que ie n'adioufte rien aux penfees de ce Sauuage. 
Nous fommes dignes de reproche d'en auoir perdu 
plufieurs femblables, pour ne les auoir marquees fur 
le papier. 

Ce bon ieune homme eftant dans cette difpofition, 
defcedit par cas fortuit vers nos demeures : car il eft 
de rifle, nation fort efloignee des Francois. Nous 
ayant entendu parler du grand Architecte de I'Vni- 
uers, fon cceur prend feu, il nous vient aulTi-toft trou- 
uer en particulier; le voila touche, plus on luy parle 
de Dieu, & plus il en veut oliir parler, il goufte ^ 
longs traicts cette eau facree qui altere en raffafiant, 
il deuient importun, mais d'vne importunite qui nous 
eftoit fort agreable, on I'enfeigne tons les iours deux 
fois, & apres vne groffe beure d'inftruction, il de- 
mandoit permilTion d'aller k la Chappelle, pour de- 
mander a Dieu la grace de retenir ce qu'on luy auoit 
enf eigne ; au fortir de la, il fe retiroit pour 1' ordinaire 
^ I'efcart dans le bois pour ruminer a part foy ce 
qu'il auoit appris: retournant en fa cabane, il en fai- 
foit part aux fiens auec vne ardente affection, accom- 
pagn6e d'vne ancienne modell;ie. 

Quand il fe fentit fortifie dans la Foy, il fit vn [37J 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 193 

this be [36] also attributed to my father or mother, — 
for, besides that they did not know when my hand 
was formed, they cannot give any motion to their 
work ; they cannot make a paddle, or a canoe, or any 
other piece of work which opens and closes itself by 
a secret impulse, as my fingers do. Without doubt 
there is some great workman who performs these 
wonders ; if it be so, would that some one would give 
me a knowledge of him ! " I beg Your Reverence 
to believe that I add nothing to the ideas of this Sav- 
age. We deserve to be reproached for having lost 
many others like these, because we did not note them 
down on paper. 

This good young man, being in this state of mind, 
came down, by mere chance, to our dwellings; for 
he belongs to the Island Savages, a nation far distant 
from the French. Having heard us speak of the 
great Architect of the Universe, his heart takes fire, 
he comes to see us immediately in private ; lo, he is 
touched. The more we talk to him of God, the more 
he wishes to hear about him ; he drinks in long 
draughts this sacred water, which produces thirst in 
quenching it ; he becomes importunate, but with an 
importunity that was very agreeable to us. Twice a 
day, he was taught ; and after a long hour of instruc- 
tion he asked permission to go to the Chapel, to ask 
God for the grace to retain what had been taught 
him. On leaving there, he usually retired to a lonely 
place in the woods, in order to meditate by himself 
upon what he had learned ; returning to his cabin, 
he communicated it to his people with glowing en- 
thusiasm, accompanied by a quaint modesty. 

When he felt himself fortified in the Faith, he 
made a [37] feast to all the Savages who were in the 


194 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.14 

feftin k tous les Sauuages qui eftoiet dans les cabanes 
voifmes, pour leur decharger f on coeur : efkan-t af se- 
bles, il leur dit: Mes chers copatriotes, ie vous ay 
fait venir pour vous declarer publiquemet que d6s ce 
moment ie quitte toutes les fottes couftumes de noflre 
nation, & pour preuue de mon dire, ie ne chanteray 
point, ie ne feray point les cris & les bruits que nous 
faifons a nos banquets, mais ie prieray Dieu & Ie be- 
niray de ce qu'il nous a done ce que ie vous presete 
a mager de bo coeur; Voies fi vous Ie voules prier 
auec moy. A ces paroles les voila bien eftones, ils 
bailTent les yeux, Ie fuiuent mot 'k mot dans les pri- 
eres qu'il prefenta a Dieu. 

Voici vne autre preuue de fa foy ; come nous luy 
faifions quelque prefent pour gagner plus fortement 
fon amitie, il Ie refufa, difant, qu'il ne croioit point 
pour tirer aucune vtilite des Frangois ; tous vos biens 
ne fauueront pas mon ame; c'eft la Foy feule que 
i'attends de vous; fl ie prenois quelque autre chofe, 
ceux de ma nation s'imagineroiet que ie ne croirois 
pas en Dieu, mais en vous autres. Ie fouhaitterois 
vne feule faueur, c'eft qu'on m'aidaft k deuenir fe- 
dentaire, afin d'eftre aupres de vous pour entendre 
la parole de Dieu. On parle icy qu'on a defia baty 
vne maiso pres de Kebec pour ce fujet. Mades, s'il 
vous plaift, au Pere qui en a la conduitte, qu'il me 
fera plailir de m'accorder la mefme courtoifie qu'il 
pretend faire aux autres: mais faites luy bien en- 
tedre, qu' encore qu'il m'efconduife, ie ne laifferay 
pas de croire en Dieu. Ce n'efl; pas luy qui a fait 
mon ame, & qui luy doit pardonner mes peches : quad 
il n'y auroit plus aucun de vous autres fur Ie pais, ie 
ne pourrois pas [38] quitter Dieu. II nous a dit iuf- 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 195 

neighboring cabins, that he might unburden his heart 
to them. Being assembled, he said to them: " My 
dear countrymen, I have summoned you to declare 
to you publicly that from this moment I give up all 
the foolish customs of our nation ; and, as a proof of 
what I say, I will sing no more, I will engage no more 
in those cries and noises that we make at our ban- 
quets, but I will pray to God and will bless him because 
he has given us what I freely present to you to eat ; 
see if you wish to pray to him with me. ' ' At these 
words, behold them indeed astonished ! They lower 
their eyes, and follow him word for word in the pray- 
ers he offered to God. 

Here is another proof of his faith : Once when we 
gave him a present, to more completely gain his 
friendship, he refused it, saying that he did not be- 
lieve in order to derive some benefit from the French. 
"All your possessions will not save my soul ; it is the 
Faith alone that I expect from you; if I took any- 
thing else, the people of my nation would imagine 
that I did not believe in God, but in you people. I 
could desire only one favor ; and that is that I might 
be aided to become sedentary, that I might dwell 
near you to hear the word of God. They are saying 
here that a house has already been built near Kebec 
for this purpose. Send word, if you please, to the 
Father who has charge of it, to do me the favor to 
grant me the same courtesy that he intends to show 
the others ; but make him understand clearly that, 
although he refuse me, I will not cease to believe in 
God. It is not he who created my soul, and who 
must pardon my sins ; if there were no longer any of 
you people in the country, I could not [38] abandon 
God." He even went so far as to say to us, " If all 


196 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol.14 

ques la, quand tons les Fran9ois me traitteroient 
auec rigueur, iufques a me frapper, & me mettre en 
pieces, ie n'abandonerois point la Foy, car ce n'eft 
pas en eux que ie croy, mais en Dieu. Cette foy eft 
accompagnee d'vn grand zele qu'il a du faint de fes 
compatriotes, il les preff e incelTamment par vines rai- 
fons, il nous les amene pour entendre la doctrine de 
I.e. Quelques-vns faisat la fourde oreille, il dit vn 
iour an P. qui les enfeignoit. Allons, mon Pere, 
quittos ces opiniaftres; allons parler de Dieu aux 
nations plus eloignees, ie m'alfeure que fi elles enten- 
doiet ce que vous nous enfeignes 9a has, qu'elle 
receuroient la Foy k bras ouuerts, & nous faifons les 
retifs, Sa cofiance en Dieu eft d'autant plus digne 
d'admiration, qu'elle a commence lors qu'il n'eftoit 
encore que Catechumene. Eftat bie efloigne dans 
les bois ou il eftoit alle a la chaffe, vne feme de fon 
ef couade tomba malade : cela les incomodoit fort de- 
dans leurs courfes d'abandonner cette pauure crea- 
ture, c'eft ce qu'il ne pouuoit plus goufter, il s'a- 
dreffe ^ fon mary, & luy dit; Tu as appris ce qu'on 
nous enfeigne de la bonte & de la puiffance de Dieu, 
il eft maiftre de noftre vie, il nous I'a donnee, il 
nous la pent rendre quand nous I'aurons perdue: 
prios-le qu'il gueriffe ta femme, mais prions-le de 
bon cceur, & nous confions en luy. Ce bon homme 
& toute la cabane y eftant accord^e, il fait mettre 
tout Ie monde k genoux, il inuoque la bonte de Dieu, 
& tons les autres prient mot pour mot apres luy. Ce 
n'eft pas tout, defirant d'eftre exauc6, il pafTa luy feul 
vne partie de la nuit en prieres. Noftre Seigneur 
foit beny a iamais. [39] Deuant que Ie iour fuiuant 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 197 

the French were to treat me harshly, even striking 
me and tearing me to pieces, I would not give up the 
Faith; for it is not in them I believe, but in God." 
This faith is accompanied by great zeal for the salva- 
tion of his countrymen ; he is continually urging them 
by keen arguments, and brings them to us to hear 
the doctrine of Jesus Christ. As some of them paid 
no attention, he said one day to the Father who was 
teaching them, " Come, my Father, let us leave these 
obstinate people ; let us go and speak of God to more 
distant nations. I am sure if they heard what you 
teach us down here, they would receive the Faith 
with open arms, while we vshow ourselves stubborn." 
His confidence in God is so much the more worthy of 
admiration as it began when he was still only a Cate- 
chumen. Having gone far into the woods on a hunt- 
ing trip, a woman of his party fell sick; this incom- 
moded them greatly in their hunting, but to abandon 
this poor creature was something which he could no 
longer approve. He addresses himself to her hus- 
band, and says to him, ' ' Thou hast learned what they 
teach us of the goodness and power of God; he is 
master of our life, — he gave it to us, he can restore 
it to us when we might have lost it ; let us pray him 
to restore thy wife to health, but let us do it heartily, 
and let us trust in him." This good man and all the 
cabin having agreed to this, he makes all kneel down ; 
he invokes the goodness of God, and all the others 
pray after him, word for word. This is not all ; de- 
siring to be listened to favorably, he passes a part of 
the night alone in prayer. Our Lord be forever 
blessed ! [39] Before the following day was over, this 
woman was working as cheerfully and was in as good 
health as any of the others. 


198 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.14 

fut paff6, cette femme trauailloit auffi gaiement, & 
auec autant de fante que toutes les autres. 

II experimeta le fecours de Dieu dans fa chaffe, 
tous les matins & tons les foirs il faifoit prier Dieu k 
tous fes gens, & luy-mefme luy adreffoit ces paroles. 
C'eft vous, 6 mo Dieu, qui m'auez fait, & par confe- 
quent ie fuis a vous, vous pouuez difpofer de moy 
come ie difpofe des petits meubles que i'ay fait. 
Regardez-moy doc come vne chofe qui vous appar- 
tient: come I'vfage d'vn auiron que i'ay fait eft k 
moy, auffi faut-il que I'vfage de mon corps & de mon 
ame, & de toutes mes puiffances que vous auez ba- 
fties, foit "k vous. Ie vous offre tout, & le corps & 
I'ame, & toutes mes actions, ie me repofe fur vous de 
ma challe, me fouuenat que vous efles mon Pere, II 
s'en alloit auec cette cofiance, & faifoit merueille, 
iamais il ne difoit, i'ay pris, i'ay tue, mais Dieu m'a 
donn6 telle chofe. Retournant certain iour de la 
chaffe, il sogeoit k part foy aux prieres qu'on luy 
auoit enfeign^e. Sur ces entrefaites, il appergoit vn 
Ours, le pourfuit & le tue, eftant mort, il s'arrefte 
tout court, c6t animal n'eft pas "k moy, faifoit-il, car 
Dieu me I'a fait tuer, non par mes merites, mais en 
vertu des prieres que font les Frangois. C'eft done 
^ eux qu'il appartient, & non k moy: il I'apporte, 
nous le prefente pour le diflribuer, difoit-il, k ceux 
qui faifoiet bie leurs prieres. 

Ie ne f9ay pas s'il a la charite, mais ie fgay bien 
qu'il en donne de grands indices. Entedat vn iour 
vn de nos Peres parler de Dieu, il le deuoroit des 
yeux; & pour conclufion luy dit. Que ne fuis-ie 
etemellement auec toy: c'eft la verity que ce Cate- 
chumene [40] ne fe laffe iamais de femblables dif- 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s8 199 

He experienced the help of God in his hunting. 
Every morning and evening he had all his people 
pray to God ; and he himself addressed to him these 
words: " It is you, O God, who have made me, and 
consequently I am yours; you can dispose of me as 
I dispose of the little utensils I have made. Look 
upon me, then, as a thing that belongs to you ; as the 
use of a paddle that I have made belongs to me, so 
must the use of my body and my soul, and of all my 
powers that you have created, belong to you. I offer 
you all, — both body and soul, and all my actions; I 
depend upon you in my hunting, remembering that 
you are my Father. ' ' He went away in this confi- 
dence, and accomplished wonders ; never did he say, 
"I have captured, I have killed," but, "God has 
given me such a thing." Returning one day from 
hunting, he was meditating apart upon the prayers 
that had been taught him. Meanwhile, he perceives 
a Bear, pursues and kills it ; it being dead, he stops 
short; "This animal does not belong to me," he 
says, "for God made me kill it, not through my own 
merits, but in virtue of the prayers made by the 
French; so it is to them it belongs, and not to me." 
He brings it, and presents it to us to distribute, he 
says, to those who faithfully offer their prayers. 

I do not know whether he has charity, but I do 
know that he shows strong indications of it. Hear- 
ing one of our Fathers speak of God, one day, he de- 
voured him with his eyes, and at the conclusion said 
to him, * ' Why am I not always with thee ? " In- 
deed, this Catechumen [40] never grows weary of 
such discourses. Having passed three whole hours 
there once, when he was sent away lest he become 
tired of it, you would have said that the morsel was 


200 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.14 

cours, y ayant paffe les trois heures entieres, come 
on le reuoioit de peur qu'il ne s'ennuiafl, vous .eufliez 
dit qu'on ofloit le morceau de la bouche h. vn affame. 
Ne craignez pas, difoit-il, de me laffer, i'ay prou de 
regret d'auoir paffe ma vie fans cognoiftre Dieu. Le 
plus grand plaifir que i'aye au monde, c'eft d'en ouir 
parler. II alia bien iufques dans cet exc^s, qu'ayant 
confomme toutes fes prouifions, il s'abftenoit d'aller 
h. la pefche, ou k la chaff e, de peur d'eflre priue de 
nous venir voir, pour parler de Dieu & de noftre cre- 
ance, paffant quelquefois quafi les deux iours fans 
manger. Nous en eftans apper^eu, nous le reprifmes 
de cette ardeur deregl^e, le fecourant felon noflre 
pouuoir. le f9ay bien qu'a peine me croira-on, mais 
ie ne f9aurois cacher les merueilles de Dieu. 

II n'y a pas long temps que regardant vn Huron 
fort age, il nous dit : Helas, que Dieu eft bon ! qu'il 
eft bon ! il y a peut-eftre foixante & dix ans qu'il 
nourrit & qu'il coferue ce vieillard, & ie m'affeure 
qu'il ne luy a iamais rendu vne parole d'action de 
grace! Si i'auois donne dix fois a manger a vn 
homme fans qu'il en fit aucune recognoiffance, ie ne 
le voudrois plus voir dependons de Dieu en toutes 
nos actions, & nous pefons fi peu a luy. 

II n'entrepred iamais aucun voiage qu'il ne viene 
demander fecours ^ N. Seig. dans la Chapelle, & fe 
recommander a nos prieres. Que vous eftes heu- 
reux, dit-il par fois, d'auoir cogneu Dieu des votre 
ieuneffe, & de le fgauoir prier. Pour moy depuis 
que i'en ay la cognoiffance, ie pefe inceffamment en 
luy. C'eft vne chofe bien remarquable, [41] que les 
Sauuages fortement touches, font ordinairement de- 
uots a leurs bons Anges. Relifant les memoires de 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 201 

being taken from the mouth of a famished person. 
"Do not fear to weary me," said he, ''I feel great 
regret at having passed my life without knowing 
God. The greatest pleasure I have in the world is 
to hear about him." Indeed, he went so far in this 
excess that, having consumed all his provisions, he 
refrained from going fishing or hunting, lest he might 
be deprived of coming to see us that he might talk 
about God and our belief, — sometimes passing almost 
two days without eating. Becoming aware of this, 
we reproved him for this immoderate ardor, succor- 
ing him as well as we could. I know very well that 
I shall hardly be believed, but I cannot conceal the 
wonders of God. 

Not long ago, looking at a very aged Huron, he 
said to us: " Ah, how good God is, how good he is! 
For perhaps seventy years he has nourished and pre- 
served this old man, and I am sure he has never ren- 
dered him a word of thanksgiving ! If I had given 
a man food ten times without his making any ac- 
knowledgment, I would not wish to see him again. 
We depend upon God in all our acts, and we think 
so little about him! " 

He never undertook a journey without coming to 
ask help of Our Lord in the Chapel, and commend 
himself to our prayers. " How fortunate you are," 
he sometimes said, " to have known God from your 
youth, and to know how to pray to him. As for 
me, since I have a knowledge of him, I think of 
him continually." It is a very wonderful thing [41] 
that the Savages, when strongly moved, are usually 
devoted to their good Angels. In reading over again 
the memoirs of our Fathers, scattered in different 
regions, I have been astonished in seeing how the 


202 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.14 

nos Peres, difperf6s en diuers endroits, i'ay efte efton- 
n6, conliderant comme le fainct Efprit va donnant les 
mefmes fentimens a ces Neophites. Car fans fe rien 
commiiniqiier les vns aux antres, ils demandent lu- 
miere h. leur bon Ange quand ils viennent pour eflre 
inflruicts: ils ont les mefmes eftonnemens de la 
grandeur & de la bonte de Dieu, quoy qu'ils les 
expliquent diuerfement. Noftre Cathecumene en a 
des fentimens fort doux ; Ouy, mais dira quelqu'vn, 
pourquoy retient-on encore au nombre des Catechu- 
menes vn homme fi bien difpofe? le refponds qu'il 
ne fe faut pas trop hafter dans les affaires d' impor- 
tance. L'emprelfement qu'apportent les vailfeaux, 
nous a fait differer fon baptefme iufques apres leur 
depart, deuant qu'ils ayent iette I'Anclire dans vos 
haures, ce bon Catechumene fera Chreftien. 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, jdjS 203 

holy Ghost gives always the same sentiments to these 
Neophytes. For, without having any communica- 
tion with one another, they ask light from their good 
Angel when they come to be instructed ; they feel 
the same astonishment at the greatness and goodness 
of God, although they express it differently; our 
Catechumen has some very tender sentiments on this 
subject. " Yes," some one will say, " but why still 
retain among the number of Catechumens a man so 
well disposed? " I answer that there must not be too 
much haste in matters of importance. The activity 
occasioned by the ships makes us defer his baptism 
until after their departure; before they have cast 
Anchor in your harbors, this good Catechumen will 
be a Christian. 


204 LES RELATIONS DBS JASUJTES [Vol.14 


CHAPITRE VII. 

DE QUELQUES SAUUAGES ERRAS DEUENUS SEDE- 
TAIRES. 

CE Chapitre donnera de la confolation &, V. R. & 
^ toutes les perfonnes qui prennent plailir de 
voir regner Iesvs-Christ dans nos grands 
bois ; car il nous met dans vne grande efperance de 
la conuerfion des Sauuages, fi tant efl qu'on les puiffe 
fecourir h. la fa9on que ie le vay deduire. 

L'vn des plus puiffans moyens que nous puiflions 
auoir pour les amener ^ Iesvs-Christ, [42] c'eft 
de les reduire dans vne efpece de Bourgade, en vn 
mot de les aider h. def richer & cultiuer la terre, & a 
fe baftir. Comme nous cherchions toufiours quelque 
fecours pour faire cette entreprife, arriue qu'vne per- 
fonne de vertu de voftre France bien cognue au Ciel 
& en la terre, & dont le nom ne pent fortir de ma 
plume fans luy deplaire, me donna aduis d'vn delTein 
qu'il auoitde feruir Noftre Seigneur en ces contrees. 
II gage a cet effet quelques artifans & quelques hom- 
mes de trauail pour commencer vn baftiment, & pour 
def richer quelques terres, m'affeurant dans fes lettres 
qu'il n'auoit point d' autre but en ce trauail que la 
plus grande gloire de Dieu : Nous mifmes fes ouuri- 
ers dans vn bel endroit nomme a prefent la Refidence 
de S. lofeph, vne bonne lieue au dellus de Kebec 
fur le grand fieuue. Monfieur Gand auoit pris ce 
lieu pour foy, mais il le confacra volontiers a vn fi 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ,638 205 


CHAPTER VII. 

OF SOME WANDERING SAVAGES WHO HAVE BECOME 
SEDENTARY. 

THIS Chapter will give consolation to Your Rev- 
erence and to all persons who take pleasure in 
seeing Jesus Christ reign in our great 
forests, for it inspires us with great hope for the con- 
version of the Savages, so greatly can they be aided 
in the way I am about to describe. 

One of the most efficient means we can use to bring 
them to Jesus Christ [42] is to organize them into 
a sort of Village, — in a word, to help them clear and 
cultivate the land, and to build homes for themselves. 
When we were continually seeking some help to ac- 
complish this enterprise, it happened that a virtuous 
person of your France, well known in Heaven and 
upon earth, and whose name cannot go forth from my 
pen without displeasing him, informed me of a plan 
he had for serving Our Lord in these countries. He 
hired for this purpose some artisans and laborers, to 
begin a building and to clear some lands, — assuring 
me in his letters that he had no other object in this 
work than the greater glory of God. We located his 
workmen in a beautiful place, at present called the 
Residence of St. Joseph, a good league above Kebec, 
upon the great river. ^~ Monsieur Gand had taken 
this place for himself, but he willingly consecrated 
it to so good an object. Affairs being in this condi- 
tion, we sent word to this good Seignior that he 


206 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 14 


bon deffein. Les affaires eftant en cette difpofition, 
nous mandafmes ^ ce bon Seigneur, qu'il feroi-t vn 
grand facrifice a Dieu s'il vouloit appliquer le tra- 
uail de fes hommes k fecourir les Sauuages. II fal- 
loit attendre vne annee pour auoir refponfe. Ce- 
pendant il arriue que demandans a vn Sauuage fes 
enfans pour les mettre au Seminaire, il nous refpon- 
dit ; c'eft trop peu de vous donner mes enfans, prenez 
le pere & la mere, & toute la famille, & logez nous 
aupres de voflre demeure, afin que nous puiffions 
entendre voflre doctrine, & croire en celuy qui a 
tout fait. Nous luy demandafmes s'il parloit fans 
feintife. le vous parle nettement, refpond-il, felon 
les penfees de [43] mon coeur. Cecy nous fit refou- 
dre de luy offrir tout fur I'heure la maifon qu'on 
baftiffoit en la refidence de S. lofeph, a condition 
neantmoins que celuy a qui nous en anions refcrit 
n'en eftoit pas content, qu'il en fortiroit. Ce bon 
Sauuage nomme des fiens Negabamat, nous dit qu'il 
nous viendront voir pour parler de cette affaire, & 
qu'il prendroit auec foy vn fien amy de mefme vo- 
lonte. II s'allia d'vn nomme NenasKoumat, C'eft 
noftre Fran9ois Xavier dont i'ay parle cy-deffus. lis 
nous vindrent trouuer tons deux en vn foir, & nous 
dirent que les bonnes affaires fe faifoient bien mieux 
dans le filence de la nuict, que dans le bruit du iour ; 
Et par confequent que nous leur donnaflions le con- 
vert pour traitter auec nous de ce que nous leur anions 
parl6. 

Le Soleil eftant couche, & tout le monde en repos, 
Negabamat me fit cette harangue Pere le leune, tu 
es defia aage, & partant il ne t'eft plus permis de 
mentir ; Sus done, prends courage, dis hardiment la 


1637-38] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s8 207 

would make a great sacrifice to God if he would apply 
the work of his men to succoring the Savages. We 
must wait a year for an answer. Meanwhile, it hap- 
pened that, upon asking a Savage for his children to 
place them in the Seminary, he answered us: " It is 
too little to give you my children ; take the father 
and mother, and the whole family, and lodge us near 
your dwelling, that we may hear your doctrine and 
believe in him who has made all." We asked him if 
he was speaking sincerely. * ' I am speaking to you 
frankly," said he, " according to the thoughts of [43] 
my heart." This made us resolve to offer him at 
once the house that was being erected at the resi- 
dence of St. Joseph, — on condition, however, that 
if he to whom we had written were not satisfied 
with this, he should go out of it. This good Sav- 
age, named by his own people Negabamat, told us 
that he would come to see us to talk over this mat- 
ter, and that he would bring with him one of his 
friends, of the same mind. He associated with him- 
self a certain Nenaskoumat, our Fran9ois Xavier of 
whom I have spoken above. They both came to see 
us one evening, and said to us that important affairs 
would far better be transacted in the silence of the 
night than in the noise of the day ; and, consequent- 
ly, that we should give them shelter, that they might 
treat with us regarding the matter which we had 
mentioned to them. 

The Sun having set, and every one having gone 
to rest, Negabamat made me the following speech : 
" Father le Jeune, thou art already old, and there- 
fore it is no longer permitted to thee to lie. Come 
now, take courage, and boldly speak the truth. Is 
it not true that thou hast promised me to lodge us in 


■208 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.14 

verity. Eft-il pas vray que tu m'as promis de nous 
loger en cette maifon qu'on baftit, & de nous ayder ^ 
defricher, moy & vn autre famille ? Voicy Nenaf Kou- 
mat auec lequel ie me fuis alTocie, C'eft vn homme 
paifible, tu le cognois bien. Nous venons voir li tu 
perfifte en tes parolles, tons les Sauuages ^ qui nous 
auons parle de ce deffein Tadmirent, mais ils ne 
croient pas que tu le mettes iamais en execution; 
prends garde a ce que tu feras. Si tu veux mentir, 
ments de bonne-heure, deuant que de nous engager 
dans vne maifon pour nous en faire fortir. Nous 
fommes en quelque credit parmy [44] ceux de noflre 
nation, s'ils nous voyoient degeus par vous autres, ils 
fe moqueroient de nous, ce qui nous facheroit. Cette 
harangue fi naifue nous fit foufrire. Ie leur reparty 
que cette maifon n'eftoit point a nous, que les hom- 
mes qui la baftilloient n'eftoient point 'k nos gages, 
mais que i'auois refcrit en France a celuy qui auoit 
entrepris ce deffein de I'appliquer pour le bien de 
leur nation, & qu'eux fe prefentans les premiers pour 
eflre fecourus, on les aideroit aulTi les premiers, fi 
nous anions de fauorables refpoces, qu'au refte ie me 
promettois tant de la bont6 de cet homme de Dieu, 
qu'il leur accorderoit aif^ment cette grande & fmgu- 
liere faueur. 

lis nous firent la deffus mille queflions. Ce grand 
homme k qui tu as refcrit, n' eft-il pas bien auffi bon 
que vous autres? Bien meilleur, luy difmes-nous. 
Voila qui va bien, repliquent-ils ; car puifque vous 
nous voulez du bien, & que vous nous en faites, fi ce 
Capitaine eft meilleur que vous, il nous en fera 
encore dauantage. Mais eft-il bien ag6, II I'eft en 
effet, leur fifmes-nous. Ne mourra-il point bien tofl ? 


1637-38] LE /RUNE'S RELATION, 1638 209 

this house tliey are building, and to help us, me and 
another family, to clear the land? Here is Nenas- 
koumat, with whom I am associated ; he is a peace- 
able man, — thou knowest him well. We come to 
see if thou art firm in thy promises ; all the Savages 
to whom we have spoken of this plan admire it, but 
they do not believe thou wilt ever put it into execu- 
tion ; take care what thou doest. If thou art going 
to lie, lie soon, before getting us into a house only 
to make us leave it. We have some influence among 
[44] those of our nation ; if they saw us deceived by 
you people, they would ridicule us, and this would 
anger us." This harangue, so ingenuous, made us 
smile. I replied to them that this house did not be- 
long to us, and that the men who were building it 
were not hired by us ; but that I had written to France 
to him who had undertaken this enterprise, to use it 
for the good of their nation, and that, as they were 
the first to present themselves to be helped, they 
would also be the first to receive assistance if we had 
a favorable answer; that, moreover, I was promising 
myself thus much from the goodness of this man of 
God, that he would readily grant them this great and 
especial favor. 

Thereupon they asked us a thousand questions. 
" This great man to whom thou hast written, is he 
not as good as the rest of you?" " Much better," we 
replied. " That is very well," they rejoined, "for 
since you wish to benefit us, and as you have already 
done so, if this Captain is better than you, he will do 
still more for us. But is he very old?" " He is, in- 
deed," we answered them. " Will he not die very 
soon?" "We know nothing about that." "Does 
he often pray to God?" "Very often." "It is 


210 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.14 

nous n'en fgauons rien. Prie il bien Dleu? grande- 
ment bien. S'en eft fait, dirent-ils, nous ferons fe- 
courus; car s'il prie bien Dieu, Dieu I'aimera, fi Dieu 
Taime, il le conferuera, & s'il vit longtemps, il nous 
aidera, puis qu'il efl bon. Vous pouuez penfer fi ce 
raifonnement fi naif nous confoloit. Voicy, firent- 
ils pourfuiuant leur difcours, encore vn autre poinct 
d' importance: comme nous tirons defia fur I'aage, 
11 nous venons a mourir, ne chalTerez vous point nos 
enfans de cette maifon, [45] ne leur refuferez-vous 
point le fecours que vous nous aurez donne. Leur 
ayant expliqu6 comme parmy nous les biens des pa- 
rens appartenoient aux enfans apres leur mort, ils 
s'efcrierent. Ho, Ho, que tu dis de bonnes chofes, li 
tu ne ments point, mais pourquoy mentirois-tu, n'e- 
flant plus enfant. 

Voila done mes gens les plus contens du monde .• 
ils vont voir la maifon qu'on bafliffoit, ils ne fe fgau- 
roient faouler de la regarder, ils demandent d'y loger 
au Printemps, fi toft qu'elle fera acheuee & meublee ; 
cependant, difoit Negabamat, nous irons faire noftre 
chalfe durant I'liyuer. Nenaf Koumat qui penfoit au- 
tant aux biens du Ciel, qu'au fecours de la terre, notjs 
dit tous bas, pour moy ie viendray paffer I'hyuer 
aupres de vous pour eftre inftruit. 

Les voila done feparez, I'vn trauerfe le grand fleuue 
pour aller cherclier des Caftors, I'autre fe vient ca- 
baner tout pres de Kebec. Les affaires de Dieu ne 
s'eftabliffent que dans les difficultes, ils tombent tous 
deux fort malades ^ mefme temps. Qui n'euft penf6 
que tout ce deffein efloit renuerfe ? Nenaskoumat 
trouua la vie de Tame dans la maladie du corps; il 
fut fait Chreftien, & nomme Fran9ois Xauier, comme 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 211 

done," said they, " we shall be aided; for if he prays 
frequently to God, God will love him ; if God loves 
him, he will preserve him ; and, if he lives a long 
time, he will help us, since he is good." You can 
imagine how much this so artless method of reason- 
ing consoled us. "There is still another point of 
importance," said they, continuing their talk; "as 
we are already getting old, if we happen to die, will 
you not drive our children from this house, — [45] 
will you not refuse them the help that you will have 
given us?" Having explained to them how, among 
us, the property of the parents belongs to the chil- 
dren after their death, they cried out, " Ho, Ho, what 
good things thou tellest us, if thou art not lying ; but 
why shouldst thou lie, being no longer a child?" 

Behold, then, my men, the happiest in the world. 
They go to see the house that is being built, they 
cannot look at it enough ; they ask to lodge there in 
the Spring as soon as it shall be completed and fur- 
nished. "Meanwhile," said Negabamat, "we will 
go and do our hunting during the winter. ' ' Nenas- 
koumat, who was thinking as much of the blessings 
of Heaven as of worldly assistance, said to us in an 
undertone, " For my part, I will come and pass the 
winter near you, to be instructed." 

So they are separated, — the one crossing the great 
river to go in search of Beavers, the other coming to 
encamp very near Kebec. The affairs of God are 
established only in the midst of difficulties. They 
both fall very sick at the same time. Who would 
not have thought that all this project would be over- 
thrown? Nenaskoumat found the life of the soul in 
the sickness of the body ; he was made a Christian, 
and named Fran9ois Xavier, as I have already re- 


212 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.14 

i'ay defia remarque. Pour Negabamat, nous ne luy 
pouuions donner aucun fecours, eftant trop efloigne 
de nous. 

La bonte de Dieu qui a commence c6t ouurage, & 
qui le mettra en fon dernier poinct, comme nous ef- 
perons, nous rendit nos deux profelytes en bonne 
fante, non fans crainte, & fans beaucoup [46] de 
voeux & de mortifications qu'on luy prefenta. Le 
Printemps venu, mes gens fe prefentent a la maifon 
qui les attendoient, on les re9oit k bras ouuerts. 
Leurs coeur eft tout plein de ioye, les autres Sauuages 
d'etonnement, & nous de cofolation, voyant les pre- 
miers fondemens iettes d'vne bourgade, & en fuite 
d'vne Eglife qui produit defia des fleurs & des fruicts 
tres-agreables aux yeux des Anges & des hommes. 
Ces deux families font compofees d'enuiron vingt 
perfonnes, dont la plufpart font defia baptif6s, le refte 
le fera bien-tofl s'il plaift k Dieu. De I'heure que 
i'efcris cecy, il y a defia plufieurs mois qu'ils font 
enfemble dans vne chambre aifez petite, & cepen- 
dant ie puis dire auec verite que ie fuis encore a 
remarquer la moindre querelle ou la moindre difpute 
qu'ils ayent eu par entr'eux. 

Les autres Sauuages circonuoifms fe vinrent Caba- 
ner k I'entour de cette maifon, demandans la mefme 
faueur, mais ils voyent bien qu'on ne les pent pas fl 
toft fecourir, nos maifons ne fe dreflent pas en deux 
heures commes leurs Cabanes. 

Le bruit de cette affiftance qu'on vouloit donner 
aux Sauuages fe refpandit incontinent dans toutes 
les nations circonuoifmes : cela les a tellement tou- 
chees, que fi nous anions les forces de leur donner 
les mefmes fecours, on les reduiroit toutes en fort 
peu de temps. Et rema[r]qu6s s'il vous plaifl vne 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s8 213 

marked. As for Negabamat, we could not give him 
any help, as he was too far away from us. 

The goodness of God, which began this work, and 
which will bring it to completion, as we hope, re- 
stored to us our two proselytes in good health, — not 
without fear, and many [46] vows and mortifications 
being offered to him. When Spring came, my peo- 
ple presented themselves at the house which was 
awaiting them ; they were received with open arms. 
Their hearts were filled with joy, the other Savages 
with astonishment, and we with consolation, at see- 
ing the first foundations of a village laid, and after 
that of a Church which is already producing flowers 
and fruits most acceptable in the sight of Angels and 
of men. These two families are composed of about 
twenty persons, the greater part of whom are already 
baptized, and the rest will be soon, if it please God. 
At the time I am writing this, they have already been 
several months together in one rather small room ; 
and still I can say with truth that I have yet to no- 
tice the least quarrel or the least dispute among them. 

The other Savages of the neighborhood came to 
Encamp around this house, asking the same favor, 
but they see clearly that they cannot be assisted so 
soon ; our houses are not built in two hours, as their 
Cabins are. 

The report of this assistance that we intended to 
give the Savages spread immediately in all the sur- 
rounding nations ; it has touched them so deeply that, 
if we had the power to give them the same help, 
they would all be subdued in a very short time. And 
notice, if you please, a great blessing in this matter; 
not one of them hopes to be lodged and assisted who 
does not resolve to be an honest man, and to become 


214 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vui.. 14 

grande benediction en cette affaire, pas vn n'efpere 
eftre loge ny fecouru qui ne fe refolue d'eftre ho.mme 
de bien, & de fe faire Chreftien, fi bien que c'efl vne 
mefme chofe en [47] vn Sauuage de vouloir eflre 
fedentaire, & de vouloir croire en Dieu. 

Dans ces ioyes communes & publiques, vn poinct 
tenoit nos- deux profelytes en haleine. Le doute 
qu'ils auoient touliours que cet homme de bien qui 
faifoit baflir cette maifon ^ fes defpens, ne nous en- 
uoiaft point de bon papier comme ils parloient, c'eft 
^ dire, ne refpondit pas fauorablement k leur deffein ; 
ils fouhaittoient auec paffion la venue des vaiffeaux. 
.En fin en ayant eu nouuelles, ils nous vindrent trou- 
uer, & nous demanderent fi le papier venu de France 
efloit bon. lis auoient belle peur qu'vn mot de lettre 
ne les fit fortir de leur demeure, qu'ils cheriffent ex- 
tremement; Nous leur refpondifmes que les Peres 
qui apportoient ce papier eftoient en chemin, de Ta- 
doulTac a Kebec dans vne barque qui les amenoit, 
Comme ils virent que le vent les pouuoit retarder, 
ils me demandent vn mot de lettre pour les aller que- 
rir dans leur canot; ie leur donne aufTi-toft, & s'em- 
barquent encore plus vifte : ils vont comme le vent, 
abbordent la barque, enleuent les deux Peres, & nous 
les amenent: Noftre ioye fut double, & de voir nos 
Peres en bonne fante, & d'apprendre les fainctes vo- 
lont^s de c^t homme vrayment de Dieu, lequel accor- 
doit ce fecours aux pauures Sauuages auec vn cceur 
fi denue & plein d'amour que nous en reftions tons 
eflonnes. Si toft que i'en eus ouuert la bouche k nos 
deux fedentaires, ils triomphent de ioye, font mille 
actions de grace ^ leur mode, & me difent cent fois, 
que ie n'eftois point menteur, que ce braue homme 
efloit vrayment Capitaine, [48] qu'ils connoiffent bien 


1 637 - 38] L E JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 215 

a Christian, — so mtich so that it is the same thing in 
[47] a Savage to wish to become sedentary, and to 
wish to believe in God. 

In these common and public rejoicings, one point 
kept our two proselytes in suspense, — their continual 
uncertainty whether that kind man who had this 
house built at his expense, would send us good 
paper, as they termed it, — that is to say, would look 
favorably upon their plan ; they ardently longed for 
the coming of the ships. Having at last had news 
of them, they came to see us, and asked us if the 
paper that had come from France was good. They 
had great fear that a written word would cause them 
to leave their home, to which they were greatly at- 
tached. We answered them that the Fathers who 
were bringing this paper were on the way, between 
Tadoussac and Kebec, in a bark which was convey- 
ing them hither. As they saw that the wind might 
delay them, they asked me for a written message, 
that they might go and bring them in their canoe ; I 
gave it to them at once, and they embarked still more 
quickly. They went like the wind, came alongside 
the bark, took the two Fathers out of it, and brought 
them to us. Our joy was twofold, — that we saw our 
Fathers in good health, and that we learned the holy 
wishes of this man, truly a man of God, who granted 
this help to the poor Savages with a heart so disin- 
terested and full of love that we stood amazed at it. 
As soon as I opened my lips to mention it to our two 
settlers, they exulted with joy ; they performed a 
thousand acts of thanksgiving, after their fashion, 
and told me a hundred times that I was not a liar, 
that this kind man was truly a Captain; [48] that 
they fully recognized that I was now of their nation, 


216 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUJTES [Vol.14 

que i'eftois maintenant de leiir nation, qu'ils alloient 
dire par tout qu'ils eftoient aulTi de la noftre, & que 
ie ne manqualTe point d'efcrire vn bon papier en 
France pour affeurer ce bon Capitaine qu'ils ne 
mentiroient iamais en ce qu'ils nous auoient promis 
de feruir Iesvs-Christ toute leur vie. Negaba- 
mat tenoit ce difcours. Pour Frangois defia Chre- 
ftien, il me dit que fa grande ioye eftoit de fe voir 
aupres de nous pour pouuoir apprendre k mieux 
prier Dieu. 

Au fortir de Ih. ils publient par tout que nous eflions 
veritables, que nous eftions leurs peres, que nous vou- 
lions refufciter leur nation qui s'en alloit mourant. 
C'eft merueille, combien la charit6 de c6t homme de 
bien a de puilTans effets fur ces Barbares; Ils nous 
preflent maintenant, & nous ne pouuons fubuenir k 
tous. La difficulte de baftir en ce pays-cy, pour la 
longueur de I'Hyuer, & pour les frais qu'il faut faire, 
eftant extreme. S'ils voient iamais vn hofpital dreffe, 
& leurs malades bien logez & bien fecourus, c'efl vn 
autre eftonnement qui les rauira tous. La pauuret6 
du pays foulage peu ou point les grandes defpenfes 
qu'il faut faire pour ces entreprifes vrayment hero- 
iques ; mais pleuft k Dieu que ceux qui peuuent f auo- 
rifer ces entreprifes viffent du moins vne feule fois 
les exercices de deuotion qui fe font tous les iours en 
la maifon de ces nouueaux fedentaires. Si ie n'auois 
peur d'ennuyer, ie raconterois icy les grands defirs 
qu'ils ont de bien cognoiftre Dieu, leur naiuet6, leur 
bonte naturelle, leurs queftions gentilles, Ie contente- 
ment [49] qu'ils ont de fe voir logez non feulement 
h 1^ Frangoife, mais encore inftruits en la Foy. 
Noftre Seigneur les veilles tenir fous fa faincte pro- 
tection. Ainfi foit-il. 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, tbsS 217 

and that they were going to tell everywhere that 
they were also of ours; and that I should not fail to 
write a good paper to France to tell this good Cap- 
tain that they would never belie their promises to 
serve Jesus Christ all their lives. Negabamat 
made this speech. As for Fran9ois, already a Chris- 
tian, he told me that his great joy was to be near us, 
so that he could better learn to pray to God. 

In going thence, they published everywhere that 
we were truthful; that we were their fathers, — that 
we wished to revive their nation, which was rapidly 
dying out. It is wonderful what potent effects the 
charity of this good man has upon these Barbarians. 
They are crowding around us now, but we cannot 
supply the wants of all, — the difficulty of building 
in this country, on account of the length of the Win- 
ter and the expenses that must be incurred, being 
extreme. If they ever see a hospital erected, and 
their sick well lodged and cared for, that will be an- 
other wonder which will delight them all. The pov- 
erty of the country relieves but little, or not at all, 
the great expenses that must be incurred for these 
truly heroic enterprises. But would to God that 
those who are able to favor these enterprises might 
see, at least once, the devotional exercises that are 
daily practiced in the house of these new settlers. 
Were I not afraid of being tedious, I would relate 
here the great desire they have to know God, their 
ingenuousness, their natural goodness, their pleas- 
ing questions, and the satisfaction [49] they experi- 
ence in finding themselves not only lodged in the 
French way, but also instructed in the Faith. May 
it please our Lord to keep them under his holy pro- 
tection. Amen. 


218 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.14 


CHAPITRE VIII. 

DE L'ESTAT present DES SAUUAGES TOUCHANT 
LA FOY. 

POUR faire conceuoir k V. R. la difpofition dans 
laquelle Dieu a mis nos Sauuages, ie luy diray 
ce qui fe pafTa au def embarquement des quatre 
Peres qu'elle nous a enuoies de renfort, lef quels font 
tous arriuez en bonne fant^ par la grace de Noftre 
Seigneur. Mettant pied &, terre, ils baptizerent tous 
quelques Sauuages. Mais ce qui les toucha plus vi- 
uement ; fut que les ayant menez "k diuerfes reprif es 
en la refidence de S. lofeph, ou demeurent ces deux 
familes dont ie viens de parler, oii s'eftoit encore re- 
tire quelque nombre de nos Sauuages, nous les fifmes 
aflifler aux prieres & k I'inftruction que nous don- 
nons ^ ces pauures brebis egarees, qui ne demandent 
flnon qu'on leur ouure la porte du bercail; Le fignal 
donne pour les affembler, ils viennent tous, hommes, 
femmes & enfans, excepte fort peu, dont la plufpart 
font malades, ou gardent les Cabanes. lis quittent 
fouuent leur fouper, on leur jeu, ou quelque autre 
action que ce foit pour venir aux prieres. Entrant 
en la Chapelle, [50] ils faluent I'Autel, puis fe vont 
retirer aupres des bancs qu'on leur a prepare k cet 
effet. Eflans allembl^s, le Pere qui les inftruit fe 
met k genoux, fait les prieres propre du matin & du 
foir, car ils s'alTemblent deux fois le iour, ils fuiuent 
tous le Pere mot apres mot, print auec luy les ge- 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 219 


CHAPTER VIII. 

OF THE PRESENT CONDITION OF THE SAVAGES, TOUCH- 
ING THE FAITH. 

TO give Your Reverence some idea of the state of 
mind in which God has placed our Savages, I 
will tell you what occurred at the disembark- 
ing of the four Fathers whom you sent us as rein- 
forcements, all of whom, by the grace of Our Lord, 
arrived in good health. Upon stepping ashore, they 
all baptized some Savages. But they were more 
deeply moved when we took them at various times 
to the residence of St. Joseph, where reside those two 
families of whom I have just spoken, and where also 
a considerable number of our Savages have with- 
drawn. We had them assist at the prayers and 
instruction we give to these poor wandering sheep, 
who ask for nothing but that the door of the fold be 
opened to them; the signal given for them to as- 
semble, they all come, men, women, and children, — 
except a very few, who are mostly ill, or guarding 
their Cabins. They often leave their supper, their 
games, or other occupations, whatever they may be, 
to come to prayers. Entering the Chapel, [50] they 
salute the Altar, then withdraw to the benches which 
have been placed there for them. When they have 
assembled, the Father who instructs them kneels 
down, offers the prayers suitable to the morning or 
the evening, — for they meet twice a day; all follow 
the Father word for word, kneeling on the ground 


220 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.14 

noux en terre, & les mains jointes: apres les prieres 
ils s'affeoient, & le Pere leur explique quelque poinct 
de la doctrine de Iesvs-Christ, oh refute quel- 
qu'vnes de leurs fuperflitions, eux demeurans fort 
attentifs, & faifans par fois quelques interrogations 
pour eftre mieux 6claircis. Apres ce difcours, ils 
chantent tous, ou le Symbole des Apoftres, ou I'Orai- 
fon Dominicale, ou les Commandemens de Dieu, ou 
quelque autre hymne en leur langage, auec vn accord 
bien agreable: En fuite, ils fe remettent a genoux, 
demandent k Dieu la grace de retenir ce qu'on leur a 
enfeign^, font la reuerence 'k I'Autel, & s'en retour- 
nent en leurs Cabanes. Les Peres nouuellement 
arriues eftans das la Chapelle, & voyans cet agreable 
fpectacle, parlerent du coeur, des yeux, & de la bou- 
che, & nous dirent ; On ne croit pas en Frace ce que 
nous voions. Quoy que vous nous en ayez refcrit 
quad nous eftions encore "k Tadouffac, il falloit fe fer- 
uir de nos yeux pour voir vne fi grande benediction. 
Nous voions bien maintenant que les miracles ne- 
ceffaires pour conuertir ces pauures peuples, c'eft de 
les aider k demeurer & viure par enfemble, & qu'en 
leur faifant tirer leur nourriture de la terre, vous 
leur ferez ioiiir des biens du Ciel. 

Or ce n'eft pas feulement en la refidence de S. lo- 
feph qu'on fait prier les Sauuages, & qu'on les [51] 
inllruit, le mefme fe fait aux trois Riuieres ou ils fe 
monftrent egallement affectionn^s a noflre creance : 
H(EC eji mutatio dextem excelji, c'efl vn changement de 
Dieu bien foudain: Car I'annee paff^e ils n'eftoient 
point en c6t eftat. Voicy vn exemple qui fait voir 
le refpect qu'ils portent a nos prieres. Vne femme 
eflanttombee en phrenefie par la violence de la fieure, 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ibjS 221 

with him, and clasping their hands ; after the pray- 
ers, they sit down, and the Father explains to them 
some point of the doctrine of Jesus Christ, or 
refutes some of their superstitions, they showing 
close attention and occasionally asking some question 
for better enlightenment. After this discourse, they 
all sing, either the Apostles' Creed, the Lord's 
Prayer, the Commandments of God, or some other 
hymn in their language, in very agreeable harmony ; 
then they kneel down again, ask God for the g^ace 
to retain what has been taught them, make a rever- 
ence to the Altar, and return to their Cabins. The 
newly-arrived Fathers, being in the Chapel, and wit- 
nessing this agreeable spectacle, spoke with their 
hearts, their eyes, and their lips, and said to us: "In 
France, they do not believe what we see here. Al- 
though you wrote about it to us when we were still 
at Tadoussac, we had to use our own eyes in order 
to see so great a blessing. We now see clearly that 
the miracle necessary to convert these poor peoples 
is to aid them to settle down and live together ; and 
that, in making them draw their sustenance from the 
earth, you will make them enjoy the good things of 
Heaven." 

Now it is not only at the residence of St. Joseph 
that the Savages are made to pray, and are [51] in- 
structed ; the same thing is done at the three Rivers, 
where they show themselves equally interested in 
our belief. Hcec est mutatio dexter(2 excelsi; it is a 
very sudden change, and of God, for last year they 
were not thus disposed. Here is an example which 
illustrates the respect they have for our prayers. A 
woman, being attacked by delirium in the violence of 
a fever, upset everything in the Cabin ; a Father com- 


222 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.14 

renuerfoit tout dans fa Cabane ; vn Pere y arriuant 
pour les faire prier Dieu, cette pauure incefee fe mit 
^ genoux aupres du Pere, fans donner aucune marque 
de fa folie ; & autant de fois qu'on alloit faire les pri- 
eres, autant de fois paroifToit-elle en fon bon fens, 
hers de Ik elle eftoit phrenetique. le ne cognois plus 
aucun Sauuage qui ait demeure quelque teps aupres 
de nos habitations, qui ofe publiquement refifter "k 
noftre Foy. le ne dis pas que tous la fuiuent ou en 
ayent enuie, mais Iesvs-Christ eft maintenant 
fi cogneu parmy eux, que pas vn n'en oferoit parler 
mal k propos deuant nous. II n'y a plus que ceux 
qui ne nous ont point encore entendu qui faHent dififi- 
culte de nous pref enter leurs enfans & leurs malades 
au Baptefme. Ces eaux faeries aiat fauue la vie par 
fois "k quelques families entieres, font maintenant en 
grand credit parmy eux. 

Si plufieurs ne demandent pas le Baptefme, c'eft 
qu'ils s'en iugent indignes; d'autres ne voulat pas 
quitter leur vices, approuuent noftre creace, mais ils 
la croyent facheufe & difficile. C'eft vne marque 
que le S. Efprit eft I'Efprit de I'Eglife, puifque pas 
vn Sauuage n'a pas pluftoft la volonte d'y entrer, que 
d'eftre homme de bien. lis s'imaginent que ceux 
qui font baptifez doiuent quitter leurs [52] pechez & 
leurs vices, pour mener vne vie nouuelle, ce qui eft 
veritable. 

Les Sorciers & les longleurs ont tellement perdu 
leur credit, qu'ils ne foufflent plus aucun malade, & 
ne font plus ioiier leur tambour, finon peut-eftre la 
nuict, ou en des lieux ecartez ; mais iamais plus en 
noftre prefence. On ne voit plus de feftins k tout 
manger, plus de confultes de demons : Tout cela eft 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 223 

ing there to have them pray to God, this poor fren- 
zied creature kneeled beside the Father without 
showing any indications of madness ; as often as they 
went there to offer prayers, so often did she appear 
to be in her senses ; but at other times she was in- 
sane. I do not know any Savage now who has lived 
for some time near our settlements who dares pub- 
licly to resist our Faith. I do not say that all of 
them follow it, or are inclined to do so ; but Jesus 
Christ is now so recognized among them that not 
one would dare speak ill of him before us. There 
are no longer any, save those who have not yet heard 
us, who object to offering us their children and their 
sick for Baptism. These sacred waters, having some- 
times saved the lives of whole families, are now in 
great repute among them. 

If some do not ask for Baptism, it is because they 
deem themselves unworthy; others, not willing to 
give up their vices, approve our belief, but consider 
it inconvenient and difficult. It is a sign that the 
Holy Spirit is the Spirit of the Church; since no 
sooner has a Savage a desire to enter it than he 
wishes to become a virtuous man. They imagine 
that those who have been baptized must give up 
their [52] sins and their vices, that they may lead a 
new life, which is true. 

The Sorcerers and Jugglers have lost so much of 
their credit that they no longer blow upon any sick 
person, nor beat their drums, except perhaps at 
night, or in isolated places, — but no longer in our 
presence. No more eat-all feasts are seen, no more 
consultations of demons : all these things are banished 
from our sight. The other superstitions will be sup- 
pressed, little by little. When any one of them does 


224 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 14 

banny de deuant nos yeux, les autres fuperftitions 
s'efloufferont petit h. petit. Quad quelqu'vn d'eux 
s'en fert, il fait ce qu'il peut, afin que nous n'en foy- 
ons point aduertis, de peur d'eftre tagez. Si tous les 
Sauuages efloient arreftes come ces deux families 
fedentaires dont i'ay parle cy-deffus, nous ne ferions 
point difficulte de les baptifer bien-toft. Car vous les 
entendriez demader k Dieu la grace de croire en luy, 
de luy obeyr, & de iamais plus ne I'offencer. En vn 
mot, c'eft tout de bon que plufieurs de ces pauures 
Sauuages pefent a leur falut. II n'eft pas iufques 
aux enfas meme qui ne prenet plaifir d'eftre inftruits. 
Vn Pere leur faifant vn iour le Catechifme k I'air, la 
pluye, furuenant, cinq ou fix petits gargons prirent 
vne grande efcorce, qu'ils tafchoient d'efleuer fur la 
tefte du Pere pour le mettre h. couuert. Cette actio 
pleine d'innocence, monftre que noftre Seigneur prend 
encore plaifir qu'on luy amene des enfans. Quelques 
Sauuages des Attikamegues, de la natio des Pores- 
epics, & de rifle, ont demande le mefme fecours qu'on 
donnoit aux autres, notamment pour eftre inftruicts. 
Helas, fi le pays eftoit plus facile k faire reuflir, ou fi 
plufieurs mains s'ouuroiet k ces pauures Barbares, 
qu'6 feroit vne belle [53] Eglife! Ce que fait ce 
grand homme dont i'ay parle cy-deffus, en la refidence 
de S. lofeph, proche de Kebec, il le faudroit faire en- 
core aux trois Riuieres, h. la riuiere des prairies, & 
aux nations plus hautes ; Ce feroit le moien d'ame- 
ner des ames h. lefus-Chrift, peut-eftre que nous 
enuoierons h. ce Printemps vn de nos Peres h. I'lfle, oh. 
on dit que la petite nation des Algonquins s'eft reti- 
ree. Voila en general I'eftat de cette Eglife naiffante. 
Les chaftimens arriues k quelque mecreans, & les 


1637-38] LEJEUNE'S RELATION, i6j8 225 

practice these, he does all that he can to prevent our 
being informed of it, for fear of being reproved. If 
all the Savages were settled, like those two seden- 
tary families of whom I have spoken above, we would 
not hesitate to baptize them quickly; for you will 
hear them asking God's grace to believe in him, to 
obey him, and never more to offend him. In a word, 
it is entirely in earnest that many of these poor Sav- 
ages are thinking of their salvation. There are none 
of them, even to the very children, who do not take 
pleasure in being instructed. One day, when one of 
the Fathers was teaching the Catechism in the open 
air, it began to rain ; and five or six little boys took 
hold of a large piece of bark, which they tried to raise 
over the Father's head to shelter him. This act, so 
full of innocence, shows that our Lord still takes 
pleasure in having children brought to him. Some 
Savages of the Attikamegues, of the Porcupine na- 
tion, ^^ and of the Island, have asked for the same 
help that was given to the others, and especially for 
instruction. Ah, if the country were such as more 
easily to ensure success, or if many hands would 
open to these poor Barbarians, what a glorious [53] 
Church could be formed ! What that great man of 
whom I have spoken above is doing at the residence 
of St. Joseph, near Kebec, ought to be done also at 
the three Rivers, at the river des prairies, and in the 
nations higher up ; this would be the means of lead- 
ing souls to Jesus Christ. Perhaps we shall send 
one of our Fathers, this Spring, to the Island, whith- 
er it is said the petite nation ^^ of the Algonquins has 
retired. Such is, in general, the condition of this 
infant Church. The chastisements that have over- 
taken some unbelievers, and the favors granted to 


226 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.14 

faueurs accord^es k ceux qui ont eu recours a Dieu, 
n'ont pas peu feruir pour en reduire quelqu'vns 'k leur 
deuoir. Vn miferable Sauuage fe gauffant fort de 
noftre creance, deuint phrenetique au milieu de fes 
gaulTeries. Comme il efkoit fale & impudent dans 
fes folies, les Sauuages pour s'en d^faire luy attache- 
rent vne corde au col & au pied, qu'ils ramenent 
centre fa cuiffe, afin que venant k s'eftendre & a ban- 
der cette corde, il s'eftranglaft foy-mefme. \A delTus 
ils font fa foffe, & difent qu'il efl mort: Nos Peres 
furuenans, le voyent remuer fous vn bout de couuer- 
ture, I'ayant defcouuert, couppent vifle la corde qu'il 
auoit au col, mais trop tard, il eftoit d6ja eftouffe : il 
mourut incontinent apres. Vn autre refiitant pu- 
bliquement a la Foy, donna vn coup de pied k vn de 
nos Peres qui baptif oit vn enfant dans fa cabane ; k 
quelque temps de la il efl emport6 par vne maladie 
auffi facheufe come elle eftoit eftrange. Les Sau- 
uages ont mefme recognu en quelques vns que Dieu 
leur denioit le baptefme a la mort, dont ils s'eltoient 
mocqu^s pendant leur vie. LailTons ces trifles dif- 
cours, [54] voicy quelque chofe de meilleur. 

Deux ieunes Sauuages s'eflansembarques c6t hyuer 
dans vn canot pour porter des viures k quelqu'vns 
de leurs gens au dela du grand fieuue, furent telle- 
ment aflaillis des glaces, qu'en vn moment leur canot 
& tout ce qui eftoit dedans fut froiff6 & mis en pieces. 
Eux fe iettent fur vne grade glace port^e auec im- 
petuofit6 par le courat de la maree. lis s'attendoient 
k tons coups que cette glace venant k fe brifer, ou k 
fe culbuter contre les autres, ils couleroient a fond. 
De fecours, ils n'en pouuoiet efperer; car outre qu'il 
efloit nuict, la riuiere efloit fi chargee de glaces, 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE S RELA TION, 1638 227 

those who have had recourse to God, have not suc- 
ceeded in bringing some back to their duty. One 
wretched Savage, while mocking at our belief, be- 
came insane in the midst of his jeers. As he was 
foul and shameless in his madness, the Savages, in 
order to get rid of him, fastened a rope to his neck 
and his foot, which they drew up against his thigh, — 
so that, when he came to stretch himself and to 
tighten the cord, he strangled himself. There- 
upon, they made his grave, and said that he was 
dead. Our Fathers, coming just then, saw him move 
under one end of the covering; and, having uncov- 
ered him, they quickly cut the cord he had around 
his neck, — but too late, he was already strangled; 
he died immediately afterwards. Another one, pub- 
licly opposing the Faith, gave a kick to one of our 
Fathers who was baptizing a child in his cabin ; some 
time after that, he was carried off by a disease as 
grievous as it was strange. The Savages have even 
recognized that, in the case of some, God denied 
them at death the baptism they had ridiculed during 
life. Let us end this sad account; [54] here is some- 
thing better. 

Two young Savages having embarked this winter 
in a canoe, to carry provisions to some of their people 
beyond the great river, were so assailed by the ice 
that in one moment their canoe and all within it was 
crushed and broken to pieces. They leaped upon a 
great cake of ice, that was swept impetuously along 
by the current of the tide. They were expecting 
every moment that this ice would break up, or over- 
turn in striking against the other pieces, and they 
would go to the bottom. As to succor, they could 
not hope for it ; for, besides that it was night, the 
river was so charged with ice that no human being 


228 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.14 

qu'homme du monde n'en euft ofe aborder. Se voy- 
ant done pourmenez plus d'vne grande lieue loin, plus 
pr6s de la mort que de la vie, I'vn des deux dit k fon 
compagnon qui fe mefloit de leurs forcelleries, ou de 
leurs iongleries, fers toy maintenant de ton art pour 
nous fauuer la vie. L'autre refpondit, il n'efl pas 
temps de penfer k cela, mais bien k ce que les Peres 
nous enfeignent. lis difent que nous auons vn Pere 
au Ciel qui pent tout, & qui voit tout, que t'en fem- 
ble, fi nous le prions, feroit-ce pas bien fait / Son 
camarade s'y accordant, celuy-cy fit la priere tout 
haut, & a mefme inftant la glace qui les portoit au 
milieu du grand fleuue, tire &. bord au trauers de quan- 
tity d'autres, ils quittent d'vn plein faut ce pont flot- 
tant ; a peine eftoient-ils a bord, que cette glace qui 
les auoit amen6 au port de falut, s'alla brifer entre 
mille autres en vne pointe qui leur eufk feruy de fe- 
pulchre. Ces pauures gens bien eftonnes, publierent 
par apres come ils auoiet eft6 fauu6s: L'vn d'eux eft 
defia baptif6, & fa femme & fon enfant ; le forcier a 
quitte [55] toutes fes badineries, & nous a promis de 
fe faire inftruire. 

Dans la grande contagion qui a maffacr^ quafi tous 
ces peuples, fans s'attacher, aux Fran9ois, quelques- 
vns ayans eu recours ^ Dieu tout de bon, font rechap- 
pez des portes de la mort. Le Baptefme a fauue la 
vie kplufieurs: Car en verity il n'y auoit ailleurs au- 
cune efperance de guerifon pour eux felon toutes les 
raif ons humaines ; Tout cela joint au fecours qu'on 
donne a ces pauures Sauuages, a faict breche das 
leurs cceurs. I'obmets vne infinite de bons fentimens 
que Dieu leurs donne pour trouuer la fin de ce 
Chapitre. 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 229 

would have dared to venture upon it. Now seeing 
themselves carried more than a good league away, 
nearer to death than to life, one of the two said to 
his companion, who participated in their sorceries or 
their juggleries, " Use now thy art to save our lives." 
The other one answered, * * This is no time to think 
of that, but of what the Fathers teach us. They say 
that we have a Father in Heaven who can do all and 
who sees all ; what dost thou think, would it not be 
a good thing for us to pray to him ? ' ' His comrade 
assenting to this, he offered a prayer in a loud voice ; 
and at the same instant the ice, which was bearing 
them to the middle of the great river, floated towards 
the shore through many other pieces, and with one 
great leap they left this floating bridge. They were 
hardly on shore ere this ice, which had brought them 
to a port of safety, drifted away and was broken 
among a thousand other pieces, at a place which 
might have served them as a sepulchre. These poor 
creatures, greatly astonished, afterwards proclaimed 
how they had been saved. One of them is already 
baptized, as well as his wife and child. The sorcerer 
has given up [55] all his tricks, and has promised us 
that he will be instructed. 

In the great epidemic which has slain nearly all 
these peoples, without getting any hold upon the 
French, some who had recourse to God in earnest 
were recovered from the gates of death. Baptism 
saved the lives of many, for in truth there was no 
hope of recovery for them in anything else, accord- 
ing to all human considerations. All this, added to 
the assistance given to these poor Savages, has made 
a breach in their hearts. I omit an infinite number 
of good sentiments that God is giving them, in order 
to get to the end of this Chapter. 


230 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.14 


CHAPITRE IX. 

DU SEMINAIRE DES HURONS. 

ON a toufiours bien iuge que les puiffances d'En- 
fer banderoient toutes leurs forces centre le 
deflein de ce Seminaire, & de leur femblables : 
& que s'il auoit "k reiiffir comme on a beaucoup de 
fujet de I'efperer, ce ne feroit qu'apres auoir foufte- 
nu plufieurs batailles, & eflay \sc. effuye] tout plein 
de dif graces, Nous vifmes I'an paffe comme il penfa 
eftre eftouffe dans fon bergeau: Voicy la fuitte des 
efforts de ces malheureux efprits, qui veillent conti- 
nuellement k la ruine des hommes. 

Les ieunes Sauuages Hurons qui auoient paffe Tan- 
nic d'auparauant auec nous au Seminaire de Noftre- 
Dame des Anges, en auoient dit tant de bien "k leurs 
compatriotes, defcendus I'annee d'apres pour la re- 
traite, qu'ils firent venir I'enuie a plufieurs de fe pre- 
f enter pour y eftre receus ; mais il ne fut pas pofQble 
de donner fatisf action "k tons [56] on fe contenta du 
nombre de fix, I'vn def quels fut bien-toft apres def- 
bauch^ par vn de fes parens qui le ramena au pays, 
de forte qu'il n'en refta que cinq, les deux qui nous 
efloient demeurez de Tan paffe, & trois nouueaux. 
Mais comme les deux anciens faifoient iugement du 
bon heur de leur demeure en ce lieu, plus par le fuc- 
ces & par le profit de I'efprit, que par I'agreemet de 
la nature corrompue; Les nouueaux venus au con- 
traire, n'y pretendans que la fatisf action de leurs plai> 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 231 


CHAPTER IX. 

OF THE SEMINARY FOR THE HURONS. 

IT has always been rightly thought that the powers 
of Hell would unite all their forces against the 
project of this Seminary, and of similar ones; 
and that if it were to succeed, as we have good rea- 
son to hope it will, it would only be after having 
sustained many battles and undergone abundant mis- 
fortunes. We saw last year how it was nearly smoth- 
ered in its cradle. Behold the continuation of the 
efforts of those unhappy spirits who are constantly 
watching for the ruin of men. 

The young Huron Savages who had before passed 
a year with us, at the Seminary of Nostre-Dame des 
Anges, had said so many favorable things about it to 
their countrymen, who had come down the following 
year to trade, that they inspired many with a desire 
to present themselves for admission thereto. But it 
was impossible to satisfy all; [56] we contented our- 
selves with six, one of whom was soon enticed away 
by one of his relatives, who took him back to their 
country; so only five were left, — the two from the 
year before, and three new ones. But, — as the two 
seniors measured the happiness of their life in this 
place more by their spiritual success and profit, than 
by the charms it had for corrupt nature ; and these 
newcomers, on the contrary, aimed at nothing but 
the enjoyment of their pleasures and the gratification 
of their senses, — the results in the two cases were 


232 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.14 

lirs & fenfualities, TilTue des vns & des autres a eft6 
bien differente. Car ces nouueaux hoftes s'empolrtans 
felon leur couflume au larcin, k la gourmandife, au 
ieu, ^ la faineatife, aux menfonges, & a femblables 
defordres, ne purent fouffrir les aduertilTemens pater- 
nels qui leur furent donnes de commencer k chager 
de vie, & fur tout les reproches tacites des exemples 
de leurs compagnons, qui efloiet autant dans la rete- 
nue, que ceux-cy eftoient das le defordre & dans le 
d^reglemet. Ce fut lors que le malin efprit prit fon 
temps, & leur fit enfin predre la refolution de s'efuir; 
Pour cela il falloit vn canot des viures, & dequoy en 
auoir par les chemins: ils font fi bien par leurs lar- 
cins, par leurs feintes, & par leurs diflimulations, 
qu'ils fe trouuent fort bien equip^s, & vn beau matin 
ils s'en vont a la derobee, enleuat tout ce qu'ils peu- 
rent fans qu'on en ait eu depuis aucune nouuelle. 

Voila done derechef le Seminaire reduit au petit 
pied ; & au nombre de deux : ce qui n'efl pas arriue 
fans vne fpeciale prouidence de Dieu : Car d'vn cofl6 
les Sauuages du pais ayant efte malades extraordi- 
nairement, on a eu le moien d'en affifler dauantage 
qu'on n'euft fait, & de [57] fauuer les corps & les 
ames de plufieurs, reduits k I'extreme neceffit^: De 
I'autre les anciens Seminariftes demeurans feuls, 
n'ont receu aucune alteration dans leur bonne difpo- 
Ution, par le manuals exemple & par les manuals dif- 
cours des autres ; ce qui eftoit quafi neceff aire pour 
les eftablir dans I'eflat auquel en fin par la grace de 
Dieu, on les a veu apres leur Baptefme auec edifica- 
tion, & fatisf action d'vn chacun .• tout le monde 
aduoiiant qu'on ne pouuoir defirer plus de piet6, plus 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6j8 233 

altogether different. For these new guests, giving 
themselves up, according to their custom, to thiev- 
iiig^j gormandizing, gaming, idleness, lying, and sim- 
ilar irregularities, could not endure the paternal 
admonitions given them to change their mode of life, 
and above all the tacit reproofs conveyed by the 
example of their companions, who showed as much 
restraint as they did lawlessness and immoderation. 
It was then that the evil spirit seized his opportunity, 
and finally caused them to decide to run away. For 
this they needed a canoe-load of provisions, and the 
means of obtaining them on the way. They ac- 
complished so much through their thefts, their de- 
ceits, and their dissimulations that they found them- 
selves very well equipped; and one fine morning 
they stole away, taking with them everything they 
could, and nothing has been heard of them since. 

Behold our Seminary again reduced to a small 
scale, and to two inmates, which happened not with- 
out a special providence of God. For on the one 
hand, as the Savages of the country were suffering 
unusually from sickness, we had the means to assist 
them more than we would have had, and of [57] sav- 
ing the bodies and souls of many who were reduced 
to extreme necessity. On the other hand, the old 
Seminarists, being alone, experienced no change in 
their good dispositions through the bad example and 
evil talk of the others. This was almost necessary 
to establish them in the state of mind which, finally, 
by the grace of God, they made evident after their 
Baptism, to the edification and satisfaction of all, 
every one acknowledging that no greater piety, gen- 
tleness, and reserve could be desired in those who 


234 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.14 

de douceur, & plus de retenue dans des Chrefliens de 
naiffance: voicy ce qu'e efcrit leur inftructeur . 

Armand-Iean qui a efte baptif^ le premier, a I'ef- 
prit bon & le iugement affes ferme .• ie ne I'ay point 
veu chanceler depuis qu'il a conceu ce qui eft de 
noftre creance, il eft porte a fe vaincre dans fon natu- 
rel vn peu brufque, enquoy il n'a pas peu profiler . 

Parlant vn iour auec fon compagnon de I'indilTolu- 
bilite du mariage, comme il voioit de grandes difficul- 
tes parmy ceux de fa nation touchant ce poinct, il 
monftra d'eftre fort en peine. Car ou nous nous 
marierons, ounon, difoit-il, fi nous prenons femme, la 
premiere quinte qui la prendra, elle nous quittera la, 
& partant nous voila reduit a vne vie miferable, 
attendu que ce font les femmes en noftre pais qui 
fement, qui plantent, & qui cultiuent la terre, & qui 
nourriflent leurs maris. De refuir le mariage parmy 
les Hurons, c'eft ce qui demande vne chaftete que 
noftre pais n'a iamais cogneu. Que ferons-nous 
done? Pour moy, dit ce braue ieune homme, ie ne 
prendray iamais de Huronne, fi ie n'y voy vne con- 
ftance extraordinaire, [58] ie rechercheray vne Fran- 
9oife, fi ie fuis 6c6duit, ie fuis en refolution de viure 
& mourir chafte. Remarques qu'il n'eftoit pas encore 
baptife. Pendant I'hyuer il a bien le courage de fe 
faire quelquefois violence, par le motif d'vne patiece 
vraiement Chreftienne, foit ^ tenir fes mains dans 
I'eau glacee, foit a y entrer par fois iufqu'k la cein- 
ture, fous pretexte de quelque neceflit6 qui s'en pre- 
fente, foit trauaillant tefte nue quand il pleut, lors 
mefme que tons les autres fe mettent "k couuert. Ce 
n'eft pas Ik I'humeur des Sauuages qui ne cognoillent 
pas lefus-Chrift. 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 235 

were Christians by birth. Observe what their in- 
structor writes about them : 

" Armand Jean, who was baptized first, has a good 
mind and vigorous judgment. I have not seen him 
waver since he has conceived the true idea of our 
belief ; he is inclined to conquer his somewhat hasty- 
disposition, but has not been able to succeed. 

" One day, in speaking with his companion upon 
the indissolubility of marriage, when he observed the 
great difficulties in regard to this among the people of 
his nation, he showed himself much concerned thereat. 
' For we shall either marry, or we shall not,' said he. 
' If we take a wife, at the first whim that seizes her, 
she will at once leave us ; and then we are reduced 
to a wretched life, seeing that it is the women in our 
country who sow, plant, and cultivate the land, and 
prepare food for their husbands. To forego mar- 
riage among the Hurons is something which requires 
a chastity our country has never known. What shall 
we do then? As for me,' said this worthy young 
man, ' I will never take a Huron woman, if I do not 
see in her extraordinary constancy; [58] I will try to 
find a French woman. If I am refused, I am re- 
solved to live and die in chastity.' Observe that he 
was not yet baptized. During the winter he really 
had the courage to inflict suffering upon himself, im- 
pelled thereto by a truly Christian fortitude, — either 
holding his hands in ice-cold water, or going into it 
sometimes up to his waist, under pretext of some 
necessity which presented itself, or working bare- 
headed in the rain, even when all the others had 
placed themselves under shelter. This is not the 
mood of the Savages who do not know Jesus Christ. 

" He sets an excellent example to our workmen, 


236 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 14 

II eft de fi bon exemple parmy les ouiiriers, que 
iamais il ne mettra la main h. I'oeuure, qu'auparauant 
il n'ait leu6 le coeur & les mains a Dieu pour luy de- 
dier fon action. Au refte, il s'applique fi bien k tout 
ce qu'on luy commande, qu'il n'y a trauail auquel il 
ne reiifliffe paffablement. 

Depuis fon baptefme il fe confeffe & fe communie 
tous les huict iours auec vne deuotion & vne modeftie 
qui nous fait recognoiftre en luy la prefence de la 
grace. Sur tout il a vne auerfion grande du pecli6, 
nommement de I'impurete. II ne faut que fe figurer 
les debordemens d'un Sauuage lubrique pour admi- 
rer ce que ie vay dire : Se fentant attaqu6 la nuict 
en fonge de quelque penfee mefleante, il fe leue en 
furfaut, fe met a genoux pour prier Dieu iufqu'au 
fon de quatre heures pour le leuer: Alors il me 
vient trouuer auec tant de confufion & d'humilite. 
qu'il me fut aife de cognoiftre que le Prince des 
fuperbes auoit quitte la place. II s'accufoit comme 
coulpable d'vn grad acte de vertu qu'il auoit exerc^. 
II defiroit fort ieufner [59] les Vedredis & les Same- 
dis de I'annee, pour la deuotion fenfible que Dieu luy 
communique a la paflion du Fils, & aux douleurs de 
la Mere ; mais nous le contentafmes fur ce que noftre 
Seigneur auroit efgard a fa bonne volont^ dans fon 
trauail, voicy vn trait de fa grande refignation. II 
auoit vne iambe gelee, fon compagnon voulat aller k 
la chafle, & ne f9achant rien de fon incommodit6, le 
preffe de luy tenir compagnie, luy de peur de luy 
deplaire, fe leue de grand matin, & fe difpofe comme 
s'il euft deu partir quant & luy, durant la Meffe il 
prie Dieu k ce qu'il infpire fon inftructeur ce qui fe- 
roit de fa volonte, eftant tout preft de partir, fi on le 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 237 

for he will never put his hand to the work before he 
has raised his heart and his hands to God to dedicate 
to him his action. Moreover, he applies himself so 
thoroughly to all that he is commanded to do, that 
there is no work in which he does not succeed pass- 
ably well. 

"Since his baptism, he confesses and communes 
every week with a devotion and modesty which makes 
us recognize in him the presence of grace. Above 
all, he has a great aversion to sin, especially to im- 
purity. It is only necessary to imagine the lewdness 
of a dissolute Savage, to admire what I am about to 
say. One night, feeling himself assailed in a dream 
by some unseemly thought, he started up out of his 
sleep, knelt down, and prayed to God until the clock 
struck four for the rising hour. Then he came to 
see me with so much confusion and humility that it 
was easy for me to perceive that the Prince of the 
haughty had given up his post. He accused him- 
self, as if guilty, of a great act of virtue he had per- 
formed. He was very desirous of fasting [59] on the 
Fridays and Saturdays of the year, impelled by the 
evident devotion that God communicates to him at 
the passion of the Son and the sorrows of the Mother ; 
but we satisfied him by assurances that our Lord 
would have regard to his good will in his work. 
Here is an example of his noble resignation : One of 
his legs was frozen, and his companion, wishing to 
go hunting, and not knowing that he was disabled, 
urges him to go with him : he, for fear of displeasing 
him, rises early in the morning, and makes prepara- 
tions as if he were to depart with him. During Mass 
he prays God to inspire his instructor according to his 
will, being all ready to depart if it were considered 


238 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 14 

iugeoit k propos, Dieu y pourueut, car de bone ren- 
contre, ie I'arreftay, aiant veu la mauuaife difpofition 
de fa iambe. 

Son compagnon femble vn peu plus morne, c'efl ce 
pauure fugitif que Sainct Ignace nous ramena I'an 
paff6, apres vn voeu que nous luy fifmes pour fon re- 
tour: le changement & la conftance d'Armand luy a 
beaucoup feruy. Depuis qu'il le vit Chreflien, il fe 
rangea de foy-mefme aux ieufnes de I'Eglife: il 
a monftr6 vn defir extraordinaire du Baptefme, il 
entend volontiers quand on I'aduertit de fes manque- 
mens, il eft d'vne humeur affez affable & complai- 
fante, N'eftant encore que Cathecumene, il s'ab- 
ftint de manger d'vn Eflan qu'il auoit pris k la chaffe, 
pendant le Carefme, nonobftant les fatigues de fes 
courfes. 

II fe prepara au fainct Baptefme i . par vn ieufne 
extraordinaire, 2. par le retranchement des plaifirs 
de la chaffe, ou il eft fort enclin, 3. par vn recueille- 
ment interieur, s'entretenant quelques fepmaines [60] 
fur les Commandemens de Dieu. 

Depuis qu'il a efte fait enfant de I'Eglife, on a re- 
marqu6 en luy toute vne autre docilite, vne modeftie, 
& vne honeftete exterieure, qui part d'vne purete in- 
terieure de I'ame, auec vne foubmiffion de fa volont6 
k la conduite du fainct Efprit, & k la direction de fes 
maiftres. 

Ie ferme ce Chapitre, difant vn mot de I'vnion & 
de la Concorde qui fe retreuue entre ces deux ieunes 
Sauuages, fi qu'on ne les a iamais veu fe quereler 
I'vn I'autre: Ie fgay bien qu'il y a de la nature, & 
qu'vne mefme langue, & les mefmes exercices leur 
lient naturellement les coeurs, mais aulTi s'appercoit- 


1637-38] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s8 239 

proper. God arranged the matter, for by a happy 
chance I stopped him, having noticed the bad condi- 
tion of his leg. 

" His companion seems a little duller. He is the 
poor fugitive whom Saint Ignace brought back to us 
last year, after a vow that we had offered for his re- 
turn. Armand's alteration and steadfastness are of 
great service to him. Since he sees him a Christian, 
he participates of his own accord in the fasts of the 
Church; he has shown an extraordinary desire for 
Baptism, and listens willingly when he is admonished 
of his shortcomings ; he is of an affable and compli- 
ant disposition. As yet only a Catechumen, he ab- 
stained from eating Elk meat that he had taken in 
the chase, during Lent, notwithstanding the fatigues 
of his expeditions. 

" He prepared himself for holy Baptism, ist, by an 
extraordinary fast; 2nd, by diminishing the pleas- 
ures of the chase, to which he is strongly inclined; 
3rd, by inward reflection, meditating for several 
weeks [60] upon the Commandments of God. 

" Since he has been made a child of the Church, 
there has been observed in him quite a new docility, 
a modesty, and outward refinement which emanate 
from internal purity of soul, together with a submis- 
sion of his will to the guidance of the holy Ghost, 
and to the direction of his superiors." 

I close this Chapter with a few words on the union 
and harmony that exists between these two young 
Savages ; so perfect is it, that they have never been 
seen to quarrel with each other. I know very well 
that nature, the same language, and the same occu- 
pations naturally unite their hearts ; but also grace 
can be clearly perceived working within them, so 


240 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.14 

on bien de la grace qui agit 1^ dedans, en forte qu'ils 
fe preuiennent I'vn I'autre auec des motifs d'yne ve- 
ritable charite. Le Chapitre fuiuant fera voir comme 
ils ont bien reiiffy en leur pays. 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 241 


that they are prepossessed toward each other from 
motives of true charity. The following Chapter will 
show how well they have succeeded in their own 
country. 


242 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.14 


CHAPITRE X. 

CONTINUATION DU SEMINAIRE. 

APRES le depart de la flotte de I'annee paff^e, les 
nouuelles que nous receuios des Hurons al- 
loient toufiours de mal en pis, fi bien que nous 
n'attendions qu'vn maflacre general de nos Peres & 
de nos Frangois en ce pais-1^, ou quelque effect 
extraordinaire de la douce prouidence du grand Dieu 
en leur endroit. Nous auons paffe I'hyuer dans ces 
craintes & dans ces efperances, follicitans le Ciel de 
refpandre fes benedictions fur ceux [6i] qui nous 
chargeoient de mille maledictions. En fin le prin- 
temps venu, Mr le Cheualier de Montmagny noftre 
Gouuerneur, homme vraiement fage & prudent, vou- 
lant conferuer la Religion en ces contrees, & le com- 
merce de ces peuples auec nos Fra9ois, fe delibere 
d'y enuoyer quelques-vns de fes hommes, pour f9a- 
uoir en quel eftat eftoient les affaires : mais comme 
on auoit peur qu'vn petit nombre de Fran5ois ne 
fuffent maffacr^s des Hurons au cas qu'ils nous euffent 
declare la guerre, nos Seminariftes fe prefenterent 
pour rendre ce feruice a Dieu, a Mr noftre Gouuer- 
neur, & "k tous ces MelTieurs de la Nouuelle France. 
On les fit promptement equipper auec vn ieune Fran- 
5ois bien courageux: & pour conferuer ces deux 
ieunes Neophytes, nous enuoiames auec eux le P. 
qui les auoit inftruit au Seminaire, afin de nous les 
ramener, au cas que tous nos Peres & nos Fran9ois 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 243 


CHAPTER X. 

CONTINUATION OF THE SEMINARY. 

AFTER the departure of the fleet last year, the 
news we received from the Hurons continued 
going from bad to worse ; so that we expected 
nothing but a general massacre of our Fathers and 
our French people in that country, or some extraor- 
dinary effect of the gentle providence of the great 
God in their behalf. We have passed the winter in 
these fears and hopes, soliciting Heaven to bestow 
its blessings upon those [61] who were loading us 
with a thousand maledictions. Finally, when spring 
came. Monsieur the Chevalier de Montmagny, our 
Governor, a truly wise and prudent man, wishing to 
preserve Religion in these countries, and the com- 
merce of these peoples with our French, decided to 
send thither some of his men to ascertain the condi- 
tion of affairs. But as they feared that a small num- 
ber of Frenchmen might be massacred by the Hu- 
rons, in case they had declared war against us, our 
Seminarists presented themselves to render this ser- 
vice to God, to Monsieur our Governor, and to all 
those Gentlemen of New France. They were prompt- 
ly equipped, together with a very courageous young 
Frenchman ; and, in order to preserve these two 
young Neophytes, we sent with them the Father who 
had instructed them at the Seminary, to bring them 
back to us, in case all our Fathers and our French- 
men should be put to death in a general conspiracy 


244 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.14 

fuffent mis a tnort par vne confpiration generale de 
tout le pais. Que fi ce meurtre prouenoit feulement 
de quelques particuliers, ils auoient ordre d'affeurer 
les innocens de ramitie des Frangois. Les voila 
done embarqu6s auec des Algonquins qui vont comme 
le vent malgre le courant des eaux merueilleufement 
grolles & rapides au Printemps, ^ raifon d'vne infi- 
nit6 de neiges fondues qui fe viennent ietter dans les 
grands fleuues. le ferois trop long fi ie voulois rap- 
porter toutes les particularites de ce voiage, ie me 
contenteray d'en toucher quelques- vnes en paffant. 

Comme nous auons fait publiquement prier Dieu 
nos Sauuages, foit a Kebec, foit aux trois Riuieres, 
f oit en la Riuiere des prairies ; le bruit de [62] cette 
bonne action s'eftant refpandu par tout, les Algon- 
quins voulurent eftre de la partie, ils prierent le Pere 
de les inftruire : mais come il ne f^auoit pas la langue, 
il prit quelques Litanies que nous auos dreilees des 
attributs de Dieu, & leur fit chanter tons les foirs, & 
tons les matins, faifant le mefme dans les nations 
qu'ils rencontroient. Ces peuples publians volon- 
tiers en leur lague les gradeurs du maiftre qu'ils ne 
cognoiffent pas encor. lis n'eitoient pas trop auan- 
ces dans leurs voiages, qu'vne dif grace arriua a I'vn 
de nos deux Seminariftes nomm6 Armand : doublant 
vne pointe, les bouillons d'eau comme d'vne grofle 
maree, venant a choquer fon canot, le renuerferent, 
& tout ce qui eftoit dedans, en forte qu'on croioit que 
tout fufl perdu. Le ieune Algonquin qui n'auoit 
rien que fon corps dans le canot, ne penfa qu'a fe 
f auuer ; il f ut bien-tofl ^ bord hors du danger : mais 
Armand voulant fauuer vne Chapelle que le Pere 
portoit pour dire la faincte Meffe, & quantity de 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 245 

of the whole country. But, if this murder were only 
the work of individuals, they had orders to assure the 
innocent ones of the friendship of the French, Be- 
hold them, then, embarked with some Algonquins, 
who went like the wind in spite of the current of the 
river, which is enormously swollen and rapid in the 
Spring, on account of the vast quantity of melted 
snow that is precipitated into the great rivers. It 
would take too long if I tried to report all the details 
of this voyage ; I will content myself with touching 
upon some of them in passing. 

As we had had our Savages at Kebec, at the three 
Rivers, and at the River des prairies offer public 
prayers to God, the report of [62] this good action 
having been spread abroad, the Algonquins wished to 
participate in it ; they begged the Father to instruct 
them. But, as he did not know the language, he 
took some Litanies that we had arranged, on the at- 
tributes of God, and had them sing these every morn- 
ing and evening, repeating this in all the nations 
they encountered, — these peoples willingly publish-. 
ing, in their own language, the greatness of the mas- 
ter whom they did not yet know. They had not ad- 
vanced far in their voyage, when the one of our two 
Seminarists named Armand suffered a misfortune. 
In doubling a point, the surging of the water, as of 
a heavy tide, dashed against his canoe, and over- 
turned it with all that was in it, so that they thought 
that all was lost. The young Algonquin, who had 
nothing but his own body in the canoe, thought only 
of saving himself; he was soon on shore, out of dan- 
ger. But Armand, wishing to save a Chapel that the 
Father was carrying in order to say the holy Mass, 
and a quantity of porcelain and other baggage, en- 


246 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUJTES [Vol.14 

pourcelaine, & autre bagage renferm6 das vne caiffe, 
s'engagea li auant qu'on le perdit de veue .- voila la 
caiffe & le calice, & I'aube, & la chafuble, & tout fon 
equipage abyfme d'vn cofte, & luy de 1' autre. Le 
P. ne le voiant plus en terre ny fur les eaux, le cher- 
che au Ciel, fe iettant ^ genoux au coing d'vn bois. 
Ce pauure ieune Chreftien aiant combattu centre la 
mort iufques ^ auoir les mains toutes ecorchees, & le 
corps tout brife, fe trouue affis au fond de I'eau fur 
vne roche : il en fait vne Chapelle plus fauorable que 
celle qu'il venoit de perdre: ie veux dire qu'il s'a- 
dreffe k Dieu du fond des abyfmes, non de la bouche 
qu'il [63] tenoit bien fermee, mais du coeur, qu'il ref- 
pandit deuant fa bonte. Vous eftes le Maiftre de la 
vie, luy difoit-il, la mienne n'eft plus k moy, car ie 
ne la fcaurois conferuer, vous pouues tout, laiffez- 
moy mourir, faites-moy reuiure, vous eftes men Dieu. 
A peine fon ame auoit elle pouffe ces affectios, que 
so corps fe vit efleue fur I'eau, ou il recontre des 
broffailles qu'il attrappe en telle forte, qu'il trouua 
toufiours dequoy f e retirer iufques au bord du torrent 
malgre f a rapidite : fes copagnons 1 ' aiant veu difpa- 
roiflre, regardoient fi les ondes ne ietteroiet point vn 
corps mort ; quand ils en virent vn viuant, ils s'ef- 
crierent de ioye, le P. accourt pour voir fon pauure 
nourriffon reffufcite. La perte que ce ieune homme 
venoit de faire des ornemens Ecclefiaftiques, le ren- 
doit confus, & le iettoit dans des excufes, quand le 
P. I'embraffant, luy dit; C'eft affes, mon fils, c'eft 
aff^s que vous foi^s viuant, ne parlous point de noflre 
perte, mais beniffons Dieu de ce qu'il vous a retire 
de la mort. 

A peine ce ieune homme eftoit-il retire de ce dan- 


1637-38] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1638 247 

closed in a chest, went down so far that he was lost 
to sight. Behold the chest, the chalice, the alb, and 
the chasuble, and all his outfit engulfed on the one 
hand, and he on the other. The Father, seeing him 
no more on land or on water, sought him in Heaven, 
kneeling down in the corner of a wood. This poor 
young Christian, having struggled with death until 
his hands were all skinned and his body all bruised, 
found himself at the bottom of the river, upon a rock ; 
he made of it a more favorable Chapel than the one 
he had just lost. I mean to say that he addressed 
himself to God from the bottom of the abyss, — not 
from his mouth, which he [63] kept tightly closed, 
but from his heart, which he opened to his goodness. 
' ' You are the Master of life, ' ' he said to him ; ' ' mine 
no longer belongs to me, for I do not know how to 
preserve it ; you can do all ; let me die, or cause me 
to live, you are my God." Hardly had his soul 
uttered these affectionate sentiments, when his body 
felt itself lifted to the surface of the water, where he 
encountered some bushes, which he grasped in such 
a way that he found at least something with which 
to draw himself to the edge of the current, in spite 
of its rapidity. His companions having seen him 
disappear, looked to see if the waves would not cast 
up a dead body. When they saw a living one, they 
cried out with joy, and the Father ran to meet his 
poor resuscitated foster child. This young man's loss 
of the Ecclesiastical ornaments embarrassed him, and 
caused him to begin making excuses ; when the Fa- 
ther, embracing him, said, " It is enough, my son, it 
is enough that you are living ; do not let us speak of 
our loss, but let us bless God for rescuing you from 
death." 


248 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol.14 

ger, que le P. tombe dans vne autre. Les canots 
s'efbans fepar^s, celuy qui menoit le P. dem.eura le 
dernier : comme ils arriuerent a vne iournee de I'ifle, 
11 fallut aller ^ pied, le pauure P. penfa mourir en ce 
chemin; voicy comme il m'en refcrit. Nous par- 
tifmes d6s le grand matin fans boire ny manger, nous 
cheminions a grand pas par vn tres-mauuais chemin, 
& dans de grandes chaleurs; i'eftois charge de mo 
petit bagage, ie croiois que mes gens s'arrefteroient 
fur le Midy pour manger : mais ils me laillerent der- 
riere, gagnant toufiours pais: ma foibleffe croifTant 
auec [64] la chaleur du iour, ie demeure Ik comme 
tout euanoiiy, ie me iette k terre n'en pouuant plus; 
puis aiant pris vn peu de repos, ie trouue trois ou 
quatre grofeilles qui ne me foulagerent pas beaucoup, 
car voulant reprendre mon chemin, ie fus contraint 
de me coucher vne autre-fois, tant i'auois de mal "k la 
tefte, & de foiblelTe par tout le corps. Ie me fouue- 
nois affez de la pauure Agar, & du Prophete Elie, 
que Dieu auoit fecourus dans leurs necelTit^s, mais 
mes pech6s me defendoient d'efperer cette faueur 
temporelle : mon ame neatmoins f e conf oloit f e vol- 
ant partir de ce monde par obeiffance, au cas qu'on 
ne me vint point fecourir, ie demeuray vne heure ou 
deux en cet 6tat, quand mes gens s'eftans appergeu 
que ie tardois trop, me vindrent chercher, ie leur 
demanday vn peu "k manger, mais ils me refpondirent 
qu'ils n'auoient rien: ils prennent mon petit bagage, 
& m'excitent a prendre cceur: nous trouuafmes vn 
ruiHeau qui me rafraifchit, & qui me donna quelques 
forces pour arriuer fur le foir k I'ifle, ou ie trouuay 
mes Seminariftes, & noftre Fran9ois bie en peine; 
car ils m'attendoient depuis deux iours .• Ie fis ren- 


1637-38] LE JEUNRS RELATION, ibsS 249 

Hardly had this young man been extricated from 
this danger than the Father fell into another. The 
canoes being separated, the one which carried the 
Father was the last ; when they had gone to within 
one day's journey of the island, they had to walk, 
and the poor Father almost died on the way; thus 
he wrote me about it : " We departed early in the 
morning, without eating or drinking ; we journeyed 
with long strides over a very bad road, and in ex- 
treme heat ; I was burdened with my little baggage ; 
I supposed my people would stop about Noon to eat 
something, but they left me behind, continuing to 
advance. My weakness increasing with [64] the heat 
of the day, I stopped there, almost fainting, and 
threw myself upon the ground, able to do no more. 
Then having taken a little rest, I found three or four 
gooseberries, which did not help me much, — for, at- 
tempting to resume my way, I was compelled to lie 
down again, as my head ached severely and 1 felt a 
great weakness throughout my body. I well remem- 
bered poor Hagar and the Prophet Elias, whom God 
had helped in their necessity, but my sins forbade 
me to hope for this temporal favor ; nevertheless, my 
soul was comforted in seeing itself depart from this 
world through obedience, in case they should not 
come to succor me. I remained an hour or two in 
this condition, when my people, having noticed that 
I delayed too long, came to look for me. I asked 
them for a little food, but they answered that they 
had nothing; they took my little baggage, and urged 
me to take heart ; we found a brook that refreshed 
me, and gave me strength enough to get to the is- 
land towards evening, where I found my Seminarists 
and our Frenchman in great anxiety, for they had 


250 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.14 

centre de quelques Hurons, parens de noftre Armand, 
auec lef quels ie me retiray. Les Algonquins m'en- 
uoierent querir fur le foir pour les faire prier Dieu, 
& pour chanter les Litanies en leur langue dans leurs 
cabanes. Ma debilite ne me put empefcher de leur 
donner ce contentement, qui m'eftoit plus doux qu'k 
eux mefme. En fin nous apprifmes icy que nos Peres 
& nos Fran9ois fe portoient bien aux Hurons, & 
qu'ils nous raconteroient a noftre arriuee les dangers 
qu'ils [65] auoient encourus pendant Thyuer. Apres 
nous eftre rafraichis quelque temps das cette ifle, 
nous nous embarquames auec les Hurons, quittans 
les Algonquins en leur pais : ^ deux iours de Ik nous 
trouuafmes les amis & les allies de lofeph The^athi- 
ron qui defcendoient vers les Fran9ois: ie fus d'ad- 
uis qu'il fe mit en leur copagnie, pour paller encor 
vn hyuer k Kebec, afin de s'y fortifier dauantage en 
la Foy. Bref, continuant noftre route, nous arri- 
uafmes aux Hurons le 9. de luillet, eftat partis de la 
Riuiere aux [sc. des] prairies le 11. luin, fefte de S. 
Bamab6. Voila vne partie des chofes que le Pere 
m'efcriuoit. Dieu f9ait quel contentement receurent 
nos Peres k cette entreueue, ils fe confoloient tous 
comme des gens retires du tobeau, quoy qu'en di- 
uerf es fa9ons ; ie ne racoteray point les perf ecutions 
qu'ils auoient fouffertes pendat tout I'-hyuer. La Re- 
latio qu'ils m'ont enuoy6e, & que i'adrelTe k V. R. rap- 
porte tout cela ; ie diray feulement qu'ils furent bien 
eftonnez de voir les deportemens de noftre Semina- 
rifte : ce ieune home s'eftant retire dans fa bourgade, 
deuient Predicateur, il loiie noftre foy, dit mille biens 
de la liberality des Frangois, crie partout que nous 
fommes les Peres de tous ces peuples, que nous leur 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 251 

been expecting me for two days. I met some Hu- 
rons, relatives of our Armand, with whom I retired 
to rest. In the evening, the Algonquins sent for me 
to exercise them in prayer to God, and to sing the 
Litanies in their own language, in their cabins. My 
weakness could not prevent me from giving them 
this satisfaction, which was more agreeable to me 
than to them. At last we learned here that our 
Fathers and our Frenchmen were prospering among 
the Hurons, and that they would recount to us on 
our arrival the dangers that they [65] had incurred 
during the winter. After having refreshed ourselves 
for some time at this island, we embarked with the 
Hurons, leaving the Algonquins in their own coun- 
try. Two days after this, we found the friends and 
allies of Joseph Thewathiron, who were going down 
to the French. I deemed it advisable for him to join 
them, to pass one more winter at K6bec, that he 
might further strengthen himself in the Faith. In 
short, continuing our journey, we arrived at the Hu- 
ron country on the 9th of July, having departed from 
the River des prairies on the nth of June, the feast 
of St. Barnabas." These are some of the things that 
the Father wrote me. God knows what satisfaction 
our Fathers experienced at this meeting; they all 
solaced themselves as people who had been rescued 
from the grave, although in different ways. I will 
not recount the persecutions they had suffered dur- 
ing the whole winter ; the Relation they have sent 
me, and which I forward to Your Reverence, reports 
all that. I will only say that they were greatly as- 
tonished to see the behavior of our Seminarist. This 
young man, having withdrawn to his own village, 
becomes a Preacher. He praises our faith, says a 


252 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.14 

venons annoncer des paroles de vie, il ne pent fouffrir 
qu'on nous fonp96ne d'anoir cauf6 lenrs maladies: la 
honte natnrelle anx ieunes Saunages denant les vieil- 
lards, eft banie de fon coenr, la foy le rend hardy 
comme vn lion, fes gens I'efcoutent, admirent fes dif- 
cours, quittent petit a petit les penfees noires qu'ils 
auoient pris de nous. La vertu «& la chaftete de ce 
nouueau Predicateur les \^(>\ rauit; voicy ce qu'en 
mande vn de nos Peres. Priez Dieu pour noftre pau- 
ure Armand, il fait merueille, mais il eft an milieu 
des perils ; il couche dans les cabanes des Hurons fes 
parens, oil les filles fot gloire de rechercher les ieunes 
hommes, il a rendu de grands cobats & remporte de 
fignalees victoires, il tefmoigne hautement qu'il eft 
Chreftien, & qu'il fe veut comporter comme tel en 
toutes fes actions ; il f e vient confeff er & communier 
tons les Dimanches en la bourgade oil nous fommes, 
efloignee d'vne bonne lieue de la fienne : nous eftions 
fl decries dans cette bourgade, que plufieurs perfonnes 
font mortes c6t hyuer fans Baptefme, pource que nous 
n'en ofions approcher, les enfans mefmes nous regar- 
doient come des forciers, & comme des empoifon- 
neurs, fi bien qu'vn Pere fe trouuant auec ce Neo- 
phyte, vn petit enfant voyant qu'on luy faifoit bon 
vifage, demanda a fes parens fi les Francois ne fai- 
foient plus mourir les Hurons. Que le Ciel donne a 
iamais des benedictions k ceux qui ont fouftenu & qui 
fouftiennent les Seminaires des Sauuages. Dites 
moy, ie vous prie, toutes les grandes defpefes qu'on 
a faites iufques k prefent pour eftablir & pour confer- 
uer ce Seminaire, & les autres, peuuent-elles eftre 
mifes en parangon auec le fruict que ce ieune homme 
a commence de faire? En verite nous fommes dans 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 263 

thousand good things of the liberality of the French, 
and proclaims everywhere that we are the Fathers of 
all these peoples, that we come to announce to them 
the words of life; he cannot endure to have them 
suspect us of having caused their sickness. The 
timidity natural to the young Savages, before the old 
men, is banished from his heart, — the faith makes 
him as bold as a lion ; his people listen to him, ad- 
mire his speeches, and give up, little by little, the 
black thoughts they had conceived of us. The vir- 
tue and chastity of this new Preacher [66] delight 
them. One of our Fathers thus writes us about him : 
' ' Pray God for our poor Armand ; he is doing won- 
derfully well, but he is in the midst of perils. He 
sleeps in the cabins of his Huron relatives, where the 
girls boast of seeking the young men. He has fought 
some great battles, and has won some signal victo- 
ries. He openly proclaims that he is a Christian, and 
that he wishes to conduct himself as such in all his 
actions. Every Sunday he comes to the village 
where we are, a good league distant from his own, 
to confess and take communion. We were so de- 
cried in that village that several persons died this 
winter without Baptism, because we did not dare ap- 
proach them ; even the children regarded us as sor- 
cerers and poisoners, — so much so that, a Father 
happening to be with this Neophyte, a little child, 
seeing that the Father was well treated, asked its 
parents if the French no longer made the Hurons 
die. Oh that Heaven may forever give its blessings 
to those who have sustained and who are sustaining 
the Seminaries for the Savages!" Tell me, I pray 
you, can all the great expenses that have been in- 
curred up to the present to establish and to preserve 


254 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.14 

reftonnement & dans les benedictions de Dieu, voy- 
ans ce que nous n'ofions attedre d'vne plantenee au 
milieu de la Barbarie, & fi nouuellement ent[r]ee en 
I'Eglife de Dieu. 

Nos Peres des Hurons voyans le fruict que faifoit 
[67] ce ieune homme, & come des c6t hyuer prochain, 
peut-eflre deux de nos Peres iront demeurer auec luy 
en fa bourgade, nous refcriuent que nous leur ren- 
uoyaffios au pluftoft lofeph The^athiron, pour auoir 
vn autre Predicateur en fa ville ou bourgade bien 
belle, & bie peupl6e, nous coniurans de faire nos 
efforts, d'arrefter autant que nous pourrions de ieunes 
Hurons qui voudroient refter au Seminaire, qu'ils 
n'auoient oi€ en demader fur le pais dans la difficult^ 
du teps, & pour les dangers qui font fur la riuiere 
qui les doit apporter: nous y ferons nos efforts, on 
nous en a defia donne quelques-vns ; mais comme ce 
peuple defcend cette annee ^ la debandade, ie ne f9ay 
pas le nombre que nous pourrons auoir. II s'en pre- 
fente affez de grands, & de fort aagez, mais nous 
craignos qu'ils n'enleuent les plus ieunes. Entre 
ceux que nous auons rebutez, il s'eft trouue vn homme 
aage de plus de 40. ans, lequel a voulu demeurer h. 
toute force: voiant que nous luy fermions I'oreille, 
il efl all^ prier nos Fragois de le receuoir auec eux, 
s'adreffant tantoft ^ I'vn, tantoft a I'autre Si on craint 
que ie ne derobe, difoit il, tenez voyla mon bagage 
que ie ne renuoye point au pais, ie ne fgaurois com- 
mettre larcin qui vaille cela, The^athiron que i'ay 
rencontre en chemin (c'eft noftre Seminarifte lofeph) 
m'a tant dit de bien des Fragois & de leur creance, 
que ie veux croire en Dieu, & demeurer auec eux 
pour eftre inftruit. II tira vn Chapelet en noftre 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, idjS 255 

this Seminary, and the others, be compared with the 
fruit that this young man has begun to produce ? In 
truth, we are in the midst of wonders and of the 
blessings of God, seeing what we did not dare ex- 
pect from a plant sprouted in the midst of Barba- 
rism, and so lately grafted upon the Church of God. 
Our Huron Fathers, seeing the results of \6y'] this 
young man's work, — and as, this coming winter, per- 
haps two of our Fathers will go and live with him 
in his village, — wrote to us that we should send them 
Joseph Thewathiron as soon as possible, to have an- 
other Preacher in his very flourishing and populous 
town, or village, conjuring us to put forth all our 
efforts to stop as many young Hurons as we could, 
who would like to remain at the Seminary, since 
they had not dared to ask for them through the coun- 
try in those troublous times, and because of the dan- 
gers hpon the river which was to bear them. We 
will strive to do so. Some have already been given 
us ; but as, these peoples are descending this year in 
straggling parties, I do not know how many we shall 
be able to get. Enough adults present themselves, 
and very old men, but we are afraid they will take 
the younger ones. Among those whom we have re- 
jected is a man more than 40 years old, who insisted 
upon remaining with us. Seeing that we closed our 
ears to him, he went and begged our French people 
to receive him among them, applying now to one, 
now to another. " If you fear that I will steal," he 
said, " here, take my baggage, which I will not send 
back home ; I cannot commit any theft that will be 
equal to this in value. Thewathiron, whom I met 
on the way" (this is our Seminarist, Jo.seph), "told 
me so much that was good about the French and 


256 LES RELATIONS DBS j£SUITES [Vol.14 

prefence que ce ieune Seminarifle luy atioit d6n6 
pour tefmoignage qu'il vouloit eftre Chreflien, ne- 
antmoins comme ces peuples font affez [68] diffimu- 
lez, nous I'auons laiff^ aux trois Riuieres pour I'ef- 
prouuer dauantage. Ce pauure homme nous faifoit 
companion, car il prelToit la larme k I'oeiL Si ces 
compatriotes qui doiuent encor defcendre ne I'ef bran- 
lent point, nous le receurons: nous n'auons que trop 
de coeur pour luy, mais comme il eft aag6, & par 
confequent plus attache k fes volontez que les ieunes 
gens, nous auons peur qu'il ne fe iette dans quelque 
d^bauche. 

Au refte, ie voy bien que fi Dieu nous en donne 
beaucoup, nous ferons accablez ; car au lieu d'vn Se- 
minaire, en voy la trois fur pied dans peu de temps, 
I'vn d'Algonquins, I'autre de Montagnets, & le troi- 
fiefme des Hurons. On m'a donne fept petits en- 
fans, tant Montagnets qu'Algonquins, il les faut pour- 
uoir: on m'en prefente encor 4. ou 5. autres pour 
mettre au Seminaire, & on m'a promis d'en amener 
encor au Printemps : ie ne fcay comment f atisfaire k 
tout cela, ie me trompe, la main de Dieu eft grande, 
fon coeur eft plus grand que le noftre, tous les ans il 
me femble que nous allons manquer de forces, & tous 
les ans ie voy croiftre k proportion que les occalions 
d'exercer la charite fe prefentent. Confide in Domi- 
no^ & dabit tibi petitiones cordis tui Nous luy deman- 
dons le falut de ces pauures Sauuages, dont nous en 
auons quinze fur les bras, qu'il faut nourrir & fecou- 
rir plus particulierement que les autres, aufquels il 
faut faire I'aumofne de temps en temps, iufques k ce 
qu'ils foient en eltat de tirer leur vie de la terre. 
Outre ceux-cy, on auoit donn6 deux enfans "k Mon- 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s8 257 

their belief, that I wish to believe in God, and to re- 
main with them to be instructed." He drew out a 
Rosary, in our presence, that this young Seminarist 
had given him, as a sign that he wished to be a 
Christian. Nevertheless, as these peoples are rather 
[68] deceitful, we have left him at the three Rivers 
for further trial. This poor man aroused our com- 
passion, for tears came to his eyes. If his country- 
men, who are yet to come down, do not unsettle him, 
we will receive him. We have only too much feel- 
ing for him ; but, as he is old, and consequently more 
attached to his desires than young men are, we are 
afraid that he may engage in some debauch. 

Besides, I see plainly that if God gives us many 
of them, we shall be overwhelmed; for, instead of 
one Seminary, behold three of them started in a 
short time, — one for the Algonquins, another for the 
Montagnais, and the third for the Hurons. Seven 
little children, both Montagnais and Algonquins, have 
been given to me, and they must be provided for; 4 
or 5 others have been presented to me to put in the 
Seminary, and they have promised to bring me more 
in the Spring. I do not know how to meet all this; 
I am mistaken, the hand of God is strong, his heart 
is greater than ours ; every year it seems to me that 
we shall lack means, and every year I see them in- 
crease in proportion as the opportunities for exercis- 
ing charity present themselves. Confide in Domino, 
et dabit tibi petitiones cordis tui. We ask him for the 
salvation of these poor Savages, of whom we have 
fifteen on our hands, who must be more carefully fed 
and assisted than the others, and to whom we must 
give alms from time to time, until they shall be in a 
condition to draw their sustenance from the earth. 


258 LES RELA TJONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 14 


fieur Gand, I'vn def quels eft monte au Ciel apres fon 
Baptefme, il [69] fait efleuer 1' autre auec vn grand 
amour, il rend bien d'autres fecours k ces pauures 
peuples. Le fieur Oliuier a auffi deux petites filles 
Sauuages, & vn petit gar9on, comme il eft icy Com- 
mis au Magazin de Meffieurs de la Nouuelle France, 
ie ne doute point que ces Meffieurs ne feruent de bras 
droit ^ la charit6 qu'ils exercent enuers ces ieunes 
plantes de I'Eglife de Dieu. 


1637-38] LE/EUNE'S RELATION, i6s8 269 

Besides these, two children have been given to Mon- 
sieur Gand, one of whom ascended to Heaven after 
his Baptism ; the [69] other one he is having brought 
up with great and loving care. He gives a great 
deal of other help to these poor peoples. Sieur Oli- 
vier also has two little Savage girls, and a little boy. 
As he is a Clerk here in the Store of the Gentlemen 
of New France, I do not doubt that these Gentlemen 
use his right hand in the charities they practice 
toward these young plants of the Church of God. 


260 


LES RELA TIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol. 14 


CHAPITRE XI. 

RAMAS DE DIUERSES CHOSES. 

LE iour de S. Barnabe nous auons eu vn tremble- 
terre en quelques endroits, il fe fit fi bien fen- 
tir, que les Sauuages eftoient bien eftonnez de 
voir leurs plats d'efcorces fe choquer les vns les 
autres, & I'eau fortir de leurs chaudieres. Cela leur 
fit ietter vn grand cry plein d'eftonnement. 

Voicy vne fa9on gentille de terminer vn proems. 
Vn Sauuage s'eflant efloigne du pais pour ie ne fcay 
quel fujet, fa femme fe voyat rechercli6e dans fon 
abfence, en efpoufe vn autre : quelques mois apres 
ce fecondes nopces, le premier mary retourne & veut 
rauoir fa femme : I'autre ne la voulant pas rendre, 
les voyla en proces, le pere de cette femme iugea ce 
differet en dernier relTort: il pred vn bafton, le porte 
vn peu loin, le fiche en terre, puis s'adrefsat aux 
plaideurs, leur dit. Celuy qui rapportera le premier 
ce baflon aura ma fille, eux de courre. La femme 
fut adiugee ^ celuy qui auoit meilleures jambes, & 
le proces fut tellemet [70] efteint, qu'il n'en fut plus 
parl6 que pour rire. Ce traict efl auffi gaillard que 
I'inconftace dans leurs mariages nous caufera de 
trifleflie. Le lien fi ferr6 qui tient I'homme & la 
femme fous vn mefme joug, aura bien de la peine 
d'y arrefler les Sauuages. Meffieurs de la Nouuelle 
France me femblet auoir apporte quelque comence- 
ment de remede k ce malheur : veritablemet ils font 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1638 


261 


CHAPTER XI. 

A COLLECTION OF VARIOUS MATTERS. 

ON St. Barnabas "s day, we had an earthquake in 
some places ; and it was so perceptible that 
the Savages were greatly surprised to see their 
bark plates collide with each other, and the water 
spill out of their kettles. This drew from them a 
loud cry of astonishment. 

This is a fine way to end a lawsuit. A Savage 
having absented himself from home, for I know not 
what reason, his wife, being wooed in his absence, 
married another. A few months after these second 
nuptials, the first husband returned and wished to 
have her back again ; the other one not consenting 
to give her up, a lawsuit results; the father of the 
woman decides the contention without appeal. He 
takes a stick, carries it a short distance away, and 
sticks it in the ground ; then, addressing the litigants 
he says, " He who shall first bring back that stick 
shall have my daughter, ' ' and tells them to run. The 
woman was assigned to him who had the better legs, 
and the suit was so entirely [70] settled, that it was 
never more spoken of except as a joke. This perform- 
ance is as amusing as their inconstancy in marriage 
IS cause for sadness. The bond, so strong, which 
holds man and wife under the same yoke, will be 
very hard to fasten upon the Savages. The Gentle- 
men of New France seem to me to have made some 
begmnmg towards correcting this evil ; they are truly 


262 LES RELATIONS DES JRSUITES [Vol.14 

loiiables pour 1' affection qu'ils portent an falut de ces 
pauures peuples. I'apprend qu'ils ont donn.6 cette 
annee quatre arpens de terre defrichee ^ deux ieunes 
filles Sauuages qui fe marieroient "k quelques Chre- 
ftiens, fans preiudice du fecours qu'ils pourront doner 
aux autres k I'aduenir. le les remercie de tout mo 
coeur de cette charite au no de deux Neophytes a qui 
cette aumofne eft defia deftinee. Ce font deux ieu- 
nes filles baptifees, dont les bons Anges ne feront 
pas ingrats enuers ces Meffieurs. Vne honnefte Dame 
dont on ne m'a point efcrit le nom, a fait prefent 
d'vne bonne piece d'argent pour marier aulTi quelque 
fille Sauuage baptifee. Tout cela eft defia appliqu^. 
Dieu qui pouruoit aux petits oifeaux du Ciel, benira 
ces ames d'eflite, puis qu'elles prennent les interefts 
de lefus Chrift fon Fils en la perfonne de ces nou- 
ueaux enfans. Voila iuftement les moiens de rendre 
les mariages des Sauuages ftables & indiffolubles. 
Car vn mary ne quittera pas fi aif ement vne femme 
qui lui apporte vn honefte dot, & vne femme ayant 
fes biens aupres de nos habitations Fran^oifes, ne 
s'en efloignera pas facilement non plus que de fon 
mary. Adiouflez que s'eftas donnez parole prez de 
nos Autels, la crainte des loix [71] les retiendra dans 
le deuoir. Les biens qu'on fait & qu'on procure ^ 
ces pauures Neophytes, donne vn puiffant empire 
fur eux k ceux qui les gouuernent, & vne grande 
authorite ^ la foy Chreftienne pour fe faire rendre 
obeifTance : En voicy vn exemple. 

Quatre cabanes afflig^es de maladies, fe voyant vn 
peu fecourues par noftre entremife, fe font affem- 
bl6es en cofeil, ou ceux qui sot encor en fant6, ont 
coclud qu'il falloit croire en Dieu, & auoir recours k 


1637 -38 J LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 263 

praiseworthy for the interest they take in the salva- 
tion of these poor peoples. I learn that they have 
this year given four arpents of cleared land to two 
young Savage girls who would marry Christians, 
without detriment to the help they may give to oth- 
ers in the future. I thank them with all my heart 
for this charity, in the name of the two Neophytes 
to whom this alms is already assigned. They are 
two young baptized girls, whose good Angels will 
not be ungrateful to these Gentlemen. A worthy 
Lady, of whose name I have not been informed, has 
made a present of a goodly sum of money, also to 
provide for the marriage of some baptized Savage 
girl. All this has already been thus employed. God, 
who provides for the little birds of Heaven, will 
bless these chosen souls, since they take up the inter- 
ests of Jesus Christ, his Son, in the persons of these 
new children. This is the very best means to render 
the marriages of the Savages permanent and indis- 
soluble. For a husband will not so readily leave a 
wife who brings him a respectable dowry; and a 
woman, having her possessions near our French set- 
tlements, will not readily leave them, any more than 
her husband. Add to this that having given their 
word at our Altar, the fear of the law [71] will hold 
them to their duty. The good that is being done 
and procured for these poor Neophytes gives a pow- 
erful influence over them to those who govern them, 
and strong authority to the Christian faith in making 
them render obedience to its laws. Here is an ex- 
ample of this : 

Four cabins afflicted with sickness, finding them- 
selves somewhat relieved through our agency, as- 
sembled in council, where those who were still in 


264 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 14 


fa bont6. Voila la premiere affembl^e qu'ils ont faite 
entre eux purement pour la Foy, d'autat plus remar- 
quable, qu'en meme temps Mr noflre Gouuerneur 
nous parloit de les fecourir fortement, & pour la foy 
& pour leur maladie; fi bien qu'eux & nous fans 
f9auoir rien I'vn de 1' autre, eftions affembles pour le 
mefme fujet. Depuis ce temps-la ils n'ont point ma- 
que, tant qu'ils ont efl6 proches de nos demeures, de 
venir tons les iours foir & matin k la Chapelle pour 
prier Dieu, & pour eftre inftruits en fa doctrine. I'ap- 
prend que MakheabichtichiH parla le premier en ce 
confeil, & dit; Mes compatriottes, i'ay prefle I'oreille 
vn log temps aux Peres, ce qu'ils m'ont enf eigne eft 
tres-bon: ie leur auois promis de croire en Dieu, i'ay 
manqu6 de parole, i'en fuis marry: c'eft h. ce coup 
qu'ils feront preuue de ma conftace. Sus, rangeons 
nous tons fous la protection de celuy qui a tout fait ; 
ne perdos point courage, fi quelqu'vn de vous luy 
promet de croire en luy, qu'il tienne fa parole, & 
n'imite pas mon inconflance. En fuite de ces bones 
refolutions, les Sauuages de ces quatre cabanes fe 
trouuerent tons en [72] noftre maifon le iour de la 
glorieufe AlTomption de la Vierge, afin d'affifter k la 
proceffio que nous fifmes pour recognoiflre cette 
grande Princefle comme Superieure & protectrice de 
I'vn «& 1' autre France, felon les fainctes affections de 
noftre bon Roy, & encor pour benir Dieu de ce qu'il 
a pleu k fa bont6 de luy doner vn enfant de miracle 
& de benedictio. Mr noftre Gouuerneur n'oublia 
rien de toute la magnificece poffible pour honorer 
cette proceffio. II faifoit beau voir vne efcoiiade de 
Sauuages marcher apres les Fran9ois auec leurs robes 
peintes, & figurees, tous deux a deux, & fort modefte- 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ibjS 265 

health concluded that they must believe in God and 
have recourse to his goodness. This was the first 
assembly they have held among themselves purely for 
the Faith, and all the more remarkable as at the same 
time Monsieur our Governor was talking with us 
about aiding them vigorously, as regarded both the 
faith and their sickness; so that they and we, with- 
out knowing anything about each other's movements, 
had assembled for the same purpose. Since that time 
they have not failed, whenever they have been near 
our dwellings, to come to the Chapel every evening 
and morning, in order to pray to God and to be in- 
structed in his doctrine. I learn that Makheabichti- 
chiou was the first to speak in this council, saying, 
" My countrymen, I have been listening for a long 
time to the Fathers; what they have taught me is 
very good. I promised them to believe in God; I 
have failed to keep my word, but I am sorry for it ; 
it is at this time that they shall prove my constancy. 
Come, let us range ourselves under the protection of 
him who has made all ; let us not lose courage ; if 
any of you promise to believe in him, keep your 
word, and do not imitate my inconstancy." In con- 
sequence of these good resolutions, the Savages of 
these four cabins were all present in [72] our house 
on the day of the glorious Assumption of the Vir- 
gin, — in order to take part in the procession that we 
made, to acknowledge this great Princess as Superior 
and protectress of both old and new France, accord- 
ing to the holy desires of our good King; and, be- 
sides, to bless God that it has pleased his goodness 
to give her a child of miracle and of blessing. ^^ Mon- 
sieur our Governor overlooked nothing of all the 
magnificence that could be displayed, to do honor to 


266 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vou 14 

ment. Les hayes de foldats en diners endroits les 
faluent de moufquetades, les canons qui eftoiet fur 
la terre & fur I'eau, ioiians vn bel ordre, caufoient ie ne 
fgay qu'elle reliouillance, accompagnee d'vne faincte 
deuotio que tons offroient k Dieu pour raccomplille- 
ment des deffeins de noflre grand Roy, & pour le fa- 
lut de ces peuples. En ce mefme teps trois iongleurs 
ou forciers, nous apporterent cinq tambours, dont ils 
s' eftoiet feruis dans leurs Sabbats, proteftans par cette 
action qu'ils abandonnoient le party de Belial pour 
fuiure lefus Chrift. Comme ce Chapitre n'eft qu'vn 
ramas de diuerfes chofes qui n'ont point de liaifon, il 
contiendra quelques articles bien differens les vns 
des autres: voicy vne nouuelle affez fafcheufe. 

Le Pere Hierofme Lalemant nous ayant quitte 
pour aller aux Hurons, fit rencotre en chemin de 
quatre cabanes d'Algonquins de I'lfle, les Hurons 
qui les menoient mettans pied a terre, entrerent dans 
I'vne de ces cabanes, & le Pere fe [73] retira k part 
pour prier Dieu; mais on le fit bien- toft appeller, & 
on luy fit figne qu'il fe mit aupres d'vn certain Sau- 
uage de mauuaife fa9on. Celuy-cy voyant le Pere, 
entrer en cholere, & fe plaint de ce qu'vn Fragois 
palfe par la depuis pen de iours, auoit faigne I'vn de 
fes malades, dont la mort s'en eftoit enfuiuie: Lk 
deffus fe mettant en humeur & en furie, il me monftre 
vn licol, & vne hache (dit le P. qui m'a refcrit toute 
cette tragi-comoedie) me faifant figne qu'il failloit 
mourir ! En f uitte il difpof e ce cordeau par vn noeud 
courant, & auec vn action de furieux & d' enrage, il 
me prend la tefte auec les deux mains pour me la 
faire paffer dans ce licol; ie I'arrefte auec la main, 
luv faifant entendre mon innocece le mieux qu'il 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1638 267 


this procession. It was a beautiful sight to see a 
company of Savages marching behind the French, in 
their painted and figured robes, two by two, and very 
modestly. The lines of soldiers in different places 
saluting them with musket-shots, and the cannons 
which were upon land and water being fired in excel- 
lent order, caused an indescribable rejoicing, accom- 
panied by a holy devotion, which all offered to God 
for the accomplishment of the designs of our great 
King, and for the salvation of these peoples. At the 
same time three jugglers or sorcerers brought us five 
drums, which they had used in their Orgies, protest- 
ing by this act that they abandoned the party of 
Belial to follow Jesus Christ. As this Chapter is only 
a collection of various matters that have no relation, 
it will contain articles on very different subjects. 
Here is a rather unpleasant piece of news : 

Father Hierosme Lalemant, having left us to go to 
the Hurons, encountered on the way four cabins of 
the Algonquins of the Island. The Hurons who were 
conveying them, having gone ashore, entered one 
of these cabins, and the Father [73] withdrew to one 
side to pray to God. But they soon called him, and 
motioned him to take his place near a certain evil- 
looking Savage. This man, perceiving the Father, 
fell into a rage, and complained that a Frenchman 
who had passed that way a few days before had bled 
one of his sick people, and death had followed. 
"Thereupon, becoming angry and enraged, he 
showed me a halter and a hatchet " (says the Father, 
who wrote to me all about this tragic comedy), 

making me a sign that I must die ! Finally, he 
arranged this cord with a running knot ; and with a 
furious and violent gesture he seized my head with 


268 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.14 

m'eftoit poffible. Luy fe mocquant de tout cela, de- 
uenoit touliours plus furieux, & leuant la hach-e, me 
donne k entendre que fi ie ne finiffois par I'vn, ie finie- 
rois par I'autre. Voyant que Ie colet de ma fotanne 
rempefchoit de m'eftrangler, il s'efforga de la de- 
graffer. Dans cette contrafle nos Hurons petunoiet 
fans dire vn feul mot; deux de nos Frangois qui 
efloient hors la cabane coururent aux armes, mais ie 
les arreftay de peur de plus grand mal-heur, les aduer- 
tilTant qu'ils agiffent pluftofl auec les Hurons qui 
nous auoient pris en leur protection & fauuegarde. 
Enfin ce barbare fit fortir nos Hurons de fa cabane, 
& me tirant par vn pied, me retint prifonnier pour 
m'expedier. Les Hurons venoient par fois regarder 
dans la cabane ce qu'on y faifoit, difans qu'ils de- 
meureroiet Ik toute la nuict, pour auifer k ce qu'ils 
auoient k faire, fe portans pour refpondant de ma 
[74] perfonne, au cas qu'on me voulut deliurer; ce 
qui fit que ce barbare me lafcha. Ie m'en retournay 
dire mon breuiaire, & nos Hurons s'en vont au con- 
feil, dans lequel ils arreflet de faire des pre fens a cet 
homme forcene; ils Ie font venir en leur cabane, 
pour luy donner des baches & vne lame d'efpee : Le 
plus age de nos Hurons leuant ces baches I'vne apres 
I'autre, s'efcrioit 'k chacune ; Voila pour deliurer les 
Francois qui font auec nous. Ce barbare ay ant re- 
garde toutes ces haches, dit ; La penfee de tuer les 
Fran9ois commence a fortir de mon efprit ; mais a 
ce que ie fois content, & qu'elle forte toute k fait, il 
me faut encore vne chaudiere : ne s'en trouuant point, 
il demande en la place vne chemife ; on la luy donne, 
alors il tefmoigna d'eftre parfaitement content; & fe 
faifant apporter vn plat d'^corce plain d'eau, il en 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, r6s8 269- 


both his hands to compel me to pass it into this noose. 
I stopped him with my hand, explaining to him mv 
innocence as best I could. He ridiculed all this, 
became still more enraged, and raising his hatchet, 
gave me to understand that if I did not perish by the 
one I would by the other. Seeing that the collar 
of my gown prevented him from strangling me, he 
tried to unhook it. During this struggle, our Hurons 
smoked without uttering a word; two of our French- 
men who were outside the cabin hastened to arm 
themselves, but I stopped them for fear of a greater 
misfortune, — advising them rather to negotiate with 
the Hurons, who had taken us under their protection 
and safe guidance. Finally, this barbarian made our 
Hurons leave his cabin ; and, holding me by one foot, 
kept me a prisoner, with the intention of despatching 
me. From time to time, the Hurons came and 
looked into the cabin to see what was going on, say- 
ing that they would remain there all night to consid- 
er what was to be done, holding themselves respon- 
sible for my [74] person, in case he consented to 
release me; this caused the barbarian to let me go. 
I returned to say my breviary ; and our Hurons went 
into council, where they decided to make presents to 
this madman, — sending for him to come into their 
cabin, to give him hatchets and a javelin-blade. The 
oldest of our Hurons, raising these hatchets one after 
the other, said with each one, ' This is to free the 
Frenchmen who are with us.' This barbarian, hav- 
ing looked at all these hatchets, said, ' The idea of 
killing the Frenchmen is beginning to go out of my 
mind; but that I may be satisfied, and that it may 
go out altogether, I must have a kettle besides.' 
There being none forthcoming, he asked for a shirt 


270 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.14 

lane fa face & fes yeux, puis aualant le refle; voila; 

dit il, pour efluyer mes larmes & chager mon vifage ; 

voila pour aualer toute ramertume & le fiel de ma 

cholere; ie ne fuis plus fafche. La delTus s'en va 

emportant les prefens. Eflant de retour en fa ca- 

bane, il enuoya la chair d'vn Caftor k nos gens pour 

tefmoignage de reconciliation. Nos Hurons m'ont 

fort prelTe defcrire cette hiftoire k Monfieur le Gou- 

uerneur; Le defplaifir qu'ils ont de ce qui s'eft paff6 

en a tellement irrite I'vn d'eux, qu'il penfa tuer ce 

barbare d'vn coup de hache le lendemain matin. II 

ne m'eft pas poffible d'efcrire dauantage, les Marin- 

guoins ou coufms me mallacrent h. milliaffe, ne me 

donnant pas la permilTion d'efcrire vne feule fyllable 

fans douleur. C'efl bien k ce coup qu'il me faut par- 

donner [75] fi i'efcris mal, & m'excufer aupres de 

Mofieur le Gouuerneur, dont ie ne vous puis dire la 

charite pendant que i'ay eu I'honeur d'eftre auec luy. 

C'efl I'inuariable, & toufiours luy-mefme, & toufiours 

r incomparable. Dieu le benifle a iamais. Tout 

cecy eft tire des lettres du Pere. Ie me promets bien 

que Monfieur le Cheualier de Montmagny ne man- 

quera pas d'arrefter I'orgueil de cet Infulaire. 

Le Pere Le Moine que nous enuoyons aufQ aux Hu- 
rons a couru vne autre fortune no moins dangereufe. 
Ses gens ay at gafpille les viures qu'6 leur auoit don- 
n6, voir mefme en ayant vedu vne partie aux Algon- 
quins, defembarquerent le Pere & deux Francois qui 
eftoient auec luy. D'autres Fran9ois defcendans des 
Hurons f e trouuerent k ce beau rencontre ; & comme 
ils tagoient ces barbares de n'auoir pas conferue leurs 
viures, ils repartirent qu'ils eftoiet courageux, & 
.qu'ils pafferoient bien huict iours fans manger. Ces 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s8 271 

instead ; one was given to him, and he declared that 
he was perfectly satisfied ; then, causing a bark dish 
full of water to be brought to him, he washed his 
face and eyes, and, swallowing the rest, ' This,' said 
he, ' is to wash away my tears and to change my 
countenance ; this is to swallow all the bitterness and 
gall of my anger; I am no longer angry.' There- 
upon he went away, taking with him his presents. 
Having returned to his cabin, he sent the flesh of a 
Beaver to our people as an evidence of reconciliation. 
Our Hurons urged me strongly to relate this story 
to Monsieur the Governor. The anger they felt at 
what had taken place so irritated one of them that 
he almost killed this barbarian, the next morning, 
with a blow of his hatchet. It is impossible to 
write any more, as the Mosquitoes or gnats are at- 
tacking me by the thousands, not allowing me to 
write a single syllable without pain. So for this time 
you must pardon me [75] if I write badly, and excuse 
me to Monsieur our Governor, whose charity, while 
I have had the honor of being with him, I cannot 
describe to you. He is invariable, — always him- 
self, and always incomparable. May God bless him 
forever. " All this is taken from the Father's letters. 
I promise myself that Monsieur the Chevalier de 
Montmagny will not fail to curb the pride of this 
Islander. 

Father Le Moine,^^ whom we are also sending to 
the Hurons, met with another adventure, not less 
dangerous. His people having wasted the food that 
had been given them, and having even sold some of 
it to the Algonquins, put on shore the Father, and 
two Frenchmen who were with him. Other French- 
men, who were going down from the Hurons, hap- 


272 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.14 

Fran§ois fierent donner au Pere vn pen de bled & de 
farine d'Inde pour viure dans le grand defert on il 
eftoit abandonne, en attedant que I'vn des canots qui 
defcendoiet le prit en repaffant. Le pauure Pere 
m'efcriuit fon def afire en pen de mots. 

le ne f9ay fi mes pechez me ferment la porte au 
pays que i'ay tant defire; mais quoy que s'en foit, 
me voila degrade & delaiffe a vne pointe de fable au 
del^ de la petite nation des Algonquins, n'ayat point 
d' autre maifon que le grand monde : II n'y a que trois 
iours que I'vn des canots qui portoit noftre petit ba- 
gage tourna dans I'eau; Nos paquets furent empor- 
tees par le courat, nous en repechafme \;]6\ vn auec 
grande peine, I'autre fut perdu; Dieu foit beny de 
tout. 

I'ay defia dit come le Pere qui remenoit les Semi- 
narifles. Huros, auoit auffi perdu so equipage dans le 
mefme chemin. Si les Sauuages fe riet dedas leurs 
pertes, nous ne de deuos pas pleurer dedas les noftres, 
puif q ; Dieu les f9aura bie reparer. 

Le Pere du Perron qui monte auffi Ik haut aura 
peut-eflre vn plus heureux fucces que ces trois pre- 
miers, fa gayet6 k fon depart, & I'honneur que luy fit 
Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur auffi-bien qu'aux autres, 
ietta les Sauuages das vne allegreffe qui nous promet 
quelque chofe de bon ; celuy qui le mene nous dit 
en s'embarquant: le fuis Capitaine, il ne pent arri- 
uer aucun mal au Pere en ma prefence, ils nous pro- 
mirent de prendre en paffant le Pere le Moine, & les 
Frangois qui eftoient auec luy. 

Voicy vn bout de lettre du Pere que i'ay laiffe k 
la reGdence de S. lofeph, ou les Sauuages fe rendent 
fedentaires. Apprenant qu'vne barque motoit aux 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNK S RELA TION, 1638 273 

pened to be present on this fortunate occasion ; and 
when they chided these barbarians for not having 
kept their provisions, the latter replied that they 
were courageous, that they could easily pass a week 
without eating. These Frenchmen made them give 
the Father a little corn and Indian meal to live upon, 
in the great desert where he had been abandoned, 
while waiting until one of the canoes that was going 
down should take him on its way back. The poor 
Father wrote me about his misfortune in a few words : 

" I do not know whether it is my sins that close to 
me the gate of the country I have so greatly desired ; 
but at all events here I am, stripped and forsaken, on 
a point of sand beyond the petite nation of the Algon- 
quins, with no other house than the great world. 
Only three days ago, the canoe that carried our little 
baggage upset in the water, and our packages were 
carried away by the current ; we fished up [76] one 
of them with a great deal of trouble, but the other 
was lost. God be blessed for all." 

I have already told how the Father who was tak- 
ing back the Huron Seminarists also lost his baggage, 
traveling over the same route. If the Savages laugh 
at their own losses, we should not weep over ours, 
since God can fully retrieve them. 

Father du Perron, ^^ who is also going up there, will 
perhaps be more successful than his three predeces- 
sors. His cheerfulness at his departure, and the 
honor shown by Monsieur our Governor to him as 
well as to the others, put the Savages into so good a 
humor that it promised us good results. The one 
who took him said to us, in embarking, " I am Cap- 
tain ; no harm can happen to the Father in my pres- 
ence." They promised us that they would take up. 


274 


LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 14 


trois Riuieres ; ie dy aux Sauuages, que voulez-vous 
que i'efcriue au Pere le leune par la barque qui doit 
monter la haut .- Tu luy manderas, me refpondirent- 
ils vniuerfellement, que nous defirons tous croire en 
Dieu, que nous voulons tous eftre baptifez, & que 
nous le prions qu'il retourne au pluftoft 9a bas pour 
nous donner le Baptefme. Ayant receu cette ref- 
ponfe, ie me retiray plein de confolation; n'en auois- 
je pas bien fuiet? Ce font les propres mots du Pere. 
Si tofl que ie fuis defcendu k Kebec, ces bon Sau- 
uages me vindrent voir, les Chreftiens fe confefferent 
{yy^Sc comunierent ceux qui ne font pas encore ba- 
ptifez me prefferent de leur doner le Baptefme ; Le 
mefme Pere m'efcriuit vne autrefois en ces termes 
MaKheabicliticliiou, Pigarouich, OuchefKouetou, & 
plufieurs autres Sauuages font arriues k S. lofeph: 
mettant pied ^ terre, ils font venus droit en ma cham- 
bre pour les conduire en la Chapelle, afin de remercier 
Dieu de ce qu'il les auoit conferuez dans leur voy- 
ages; ne m'ayant point trouue, ils ont efle prier vn 
autre de nos Peres qui eftoit icy, lequel s'excufant 
fur le peu de connoiflance qu'il a de la langue, ils ont 
pris Paul le bon aueugle, I'ont mene a la Chapelle, 
& l'on[t] fait prier Dieu. Ce bon Neophyte leur a 
fait faire les prieres qu'il recite foir & matin. Que 
pouuez-vous efperer dauantage des Sauuages? On 
croyoit que ces pauures errans feroient les derniers 
^ fe ranger, & ils fe prefentent des premiers, aidez- 
les k cultiuer la terre, & a f e loger, & vous les aurez 

tous. 

Le Pere Charles Lalemant qui paffe en France pour 
nos petites affaires au lieu du Pere Quentin, qui a 


1637 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 275 

on the way, Father le Moine and the Frenchmen 
who were with him. 

Here is part of a letter from the Father whom I 
left at the residence of St. Joseph, where the Sav- 
ages are forming a settlement : ' ' Learning that a 
bark was going up to the three Rivers, I said to the 
Savages, ' What do you wish me to write to Father 
le Jeune, to send by the bark that is going up there? ' 
' Thou wilt send him word, ' they all answered, ' that 
we all desire to believe in God, that we all wish to 
be baptized, and that we pray him to come down here 
again as soon as possible, to give us Baptism.' Hav- 
ing received this response, I withdrew, greatly com- 
forted ; had I not good reason to be ? " These are the 
very words of the Father. As soon as I went down 
to K^bec, these good Savages came to see me ; the 
Christians confessed \J^'\ and took communion, and 
those who were not yet baptized urged me to give 
them Baptism. The same Father wrote me another 
time in these words: " Makheabichtichiou, Piga- 
rouich, Oucheskouetou, and several other Savages 
have arrived at St. Joseph. As soon as they stepped 
on shore, they came directly to my room for me, to 
take them to the Chapel, in order to thank God that 
he had preserved them in their voyages ; not finding 
me, they entreated another of our Fathers who was 
here; but, as he excused himself upon the plea of 
knowing so little about the language, they took Paul, 
the good blind boy, led him to the Chapel, and made 
him pray to God. This good Neophyte had them 
offer the prayers that he says evening and morning. 
What more can you expect from Savages? It was 
thought that these poor wanderers would be the last 
to fall in line, and they present themselves first. 


276 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 14 


efte enuoye a MifKou, dira de bouche ce que ie ne 
puis coucher fur le papier fans logueur. 

II eft temps de tirer ^ la fin; Ie croy que ie n'ay 
point contreuenu a la refolution que i'auois prife 
d'eflre court, puifque i'obmets quantite de chofes de 
peur d'eflre long. I'auray cette confolation cette 
annee que difant peu, il fe gliffera peu de fautes fous 
le rouleau de la preffe. 

La Relation de 1' annee paffee en eft remplie .• il 
faut que i'e conte vne pour inuiter I'lmprimeur h. 
prendre quelque jaloufie de fon ouurage. Au [78] 
Chapitre 8. page 145 • o^ il s'agift de quelque prife 
que i'eus auec vn forcier; au lieu de me feruir d'ex- 
orcifmes contre le diable, I'lmprimeur me fait feruir 
d'vne efpee. Voicy ce que i'auois couche dans I'ori- 
ginal. En effet i'auois deffein de me feruir d'vne 
efpece d'exorcifmes, I'lmprimeur a mis; En effect 
i'auois deffein de me feruir d'vne efpee deformais. 
Ie vous confeffe que ce beau rencontre m'a fait rire. 
Quand on parle de fi loing, on ne fait pas fi bien en- 
tendre fes penfees, I'efcriture eft vne parole muette, 
qui fe change auffi facilement, qu'il eft aife de pren- 
dre vn Caractere pour vn autre: on fait dire a vn 
enfant ce qu'on veut quand fon pere eft abfent. C'eft 
affez pour ce coup. 

Cependant nous demanderons a Dieu fa grande be- 
nediction pour ces ames d'edite, qui par leurs mains 
& par leurs voeux attirent nos pauures Sauuages ^ 
lefus-Chrift. Nous coniurons tons V. R. & tons nos 
Peres & nos Freres de fa Prouince, de ioindre vos 
prieres auec les noftres, afin que noftre recognoiffance 
aupres de Dieu attire les graces & les faueurs du Ciel, 
& fur noftre Colonie, & fur nos Neophytes, & fur ces 


1637-38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1638 277 

Help them cultivate the land, and give them a place 
to lodge, and you will have them all." 

Father Charles Lalemant, who is going to France 
to look after our little affairs instead of Father Quen- 
tin, who has been sent to Miskou, will relate verbally 
what I cannot record upon paper without tediousness. 

It is time to draw to a close. I do not think I 
have infringed upon the resolution I made to be brief, 
since I omit many things lest I be tedious. I shall 
have this consolation this year, that, in saying little, 
few faults will slip under the roller of the press. 

The Relation of last year is full of them ; I must 
mention one of them, in order to induce the Printer 
to take some pride in his work. In [78] Chapter 8, 
on page 145, — where some quarrel I had with a sor- 
cerer is in question, — the Printer makes me, in place 
of employing exorcisms against the devil, use a sword. 
This is what I wrote in the original: " In fact I 
intended to employ a sort of exorcism;" the Printer 
made it : " In fact, I intended to use a sword here- 
after." I must confess that this pretty witticism 
made me laugh. When one speaks from so great a 
distance, his thoughts are not so well understood. 
Writing is a mute language, which is so easily changed 
that it is easy to take one Character for another; a 
child is made to say whatever one wishes, when its 
father is absent. This is enough for this time. 

Meanwhile, we shall ask God for his great blessing 
upon those elect souls, who with their hands and 
their vows draw our poor Savages to Jesus Christ. 
We all conjure Your Reverence, and all our Fathers 
and Brethren of your Province, to join your prayers 
with ours, — that our acknowledgments to God may 
draw down mercies and favors from Heaven, upon 


278 


LES RE LA TIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol. 14 


pauures peuples, & fur fes enfans, lefquels fe pro- 
f client tons en general, & moy en particulier; ce que 
ie fuis de tout mon coeur. 
De V. R, 

Tres-humble & tres-oblige feruiteur 

felon Dieu Pavl le Ievne. 

Aux trois Riuieres en la Refidence de 
la Conception, ce 25. d'AouJi i6j8. 


1637-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib38 279 


our Colony, upon our Neophytes, upon these poor 
tribes, and upon your children, who all profess them- 
selves in general, and I in particular, what I am with 
all my heart, 

Your Reverence's 

Most humble and greatly obliged servant 
in God, Paul le Jeune. 
From the three Rivers, at the Residence of 
la Conception, this 25th of August, 1638. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL XIV 

XXIX 

For particulars of this document, see VoL XI. 
XXX 

The Relation of 1638 (Paris, 1638), is a composite, 
although for convenience classed by bibliogi-aphers 
as Le Jeune's. His Relation proper, as superior of 
the Jesuit missions in New France, occupies Part I. 
of the document. It is addressed to the provincial 
at Paris, and signed at Three Rivers, August 25, 
1638. Part II. consists of the usual Huron Relation, 
rendered by Le Mercier to Le Jeune, and is dated at 
Ossossane, June 9, 1638. 

For the text of this document we have had re- 
course to the original printed Relation (first edition), 
at Lenox Library, which is there designated as " H. 
69," because described in Harrisse's Notes, no. 69. 

Collation (H. 69). Part I. : Title, with verso blank, 
il. ; ''Table des Chapitres," pp. (2); text of Le 
Jeune (11 chaps.), pp. 1-78. Part II. (separately 
paged): Half-title, with verso blank, i 1. ; text of 
Le Mercier (Huron Relation, 10 chaps.), pp. 1-67 
(misnumbered ^G); " Extraict du Priuilege du Roy " 
(dated Paris, Dec. 14, 1638), and " Permifsion du P. 
Prouincial " (dated Paris, March 26, 1638), on verso 
of p. 67. Page 12 of Le Jeune is mispaged 2. Har- 
risse's line-title of this edition is incorrect. 

There is a second edition of this Relation, known 
as " H. 70," and it collates as follows: 


282 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 

Relation | de ce qvi s'est passe | en la | Novvelle 
France | en I'annee 1638. | Ennoyee an | R.. Pere 
Provincial | de la Compagnie de lesvs | en la Prouince 
de France. | Par le P. Pavl le levne de la mefme 
Compagnie, | Superieur de la Refidence de K6bec. ] 
{Cut, with storks] \ A Paris, | Chez Sebastien Cra- 
moisy Imprimeur ordinaire du Roy, rue fainct 
lacques, | anx Cicognes. | M. DC. XXXVIII. | Avec 
privilege dv roy. | Title, with verso blank, i 1. ; 
"Table des Chapitres," pp. (2); text of Le Jeune, 
pp. 1-78; half-title, with verso blank, i 1.; text of 
Huron Relation, by Le Mercier, pp. 1-67, with 
Privilege and Permission on the verso of p. 67. In 
Le Jeune's Relation, pp. 23 and 35 are misnumbered 
2 and 3, respectively. 

That the second edition is an entire reset, is evi- 
denced by variations on every page, in the head-lines, 
line-endings, spelling, contractions, and typograph- 
ical arrangement. The following particulars will be 
sufficient to enable collectors to distinguish between 
the two editions. In the first edition, the fifth line 
of the title-page is in larger type than in the second 
edition, and while in the former the eighth line ends 
with " en," in the latter it ends with " lESVS." Le 
Jeune's baptismal name is spelled " Pavle " in the 
first edition, but " Pavl " in the second. Other dif- 
ferences, mainly of punctuation, may upon compari- 
son be noticed in the title-pages. The head orna- 
ment to the "Table des Chapitres" consists of 
seventeen parts in the first edition, and of eighteen 
parts, equally divided, in the second edition. The 
initial R is much larger in the first edition than in the 
other. In the Permission (which bears an earlier 
date than either of the Relations), the signature. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XIV 283 

misprinted " Bstienne Einet " in the first edition, 
is corrected to " EsTiENNE Binet " in the second 
edition. We have noticed many more differences or 
corrections, as, e.g., " de cefle perfecutions " changed 
to " de cefle perfecution," and " touf jour " to " touf- 
jours. ' ' 

Harrisse's Notes, p. 62, mentions a Latin version 
" dans le recueil du P. Trigant " (Cologne, 1653). He 
doubtless here refers to the following Latin work, in 
i2mo, 60 pp. : 

Progressvs Fidei | Catholicae | inNovoOrbe. | L | 
Jn Canada, Sive | Noua Francia. | IL | Jn Cochin 
China. | IIL | In magno Chinensi | Regno: | De quo 
R. P. Nicolaus Trigautius | Societ. lesv libris V. 
copiose & accurate | fcripfit. | . , . | Coloniae 
Agrippinae, | Apud Joannem Kinchium fub | Mono- 
cerote veteri. | Anno M.DC.LIIL | PermifTu Supe- 
rior. & Priuil. S. C. M. general. | 

As the name of Trigaut appears so prominently 
upon the title, the authorship of the entire work has, 
in several catalogues, been attributed to him. A 
close examination of the phraseology, however (note 
the colon in the eleventh line), reveals that he is ac- 
tually accredited only with Part IIL The book is 
merely a compilation : Part Lisa rather free transla- 
tion into Latin, in condensed form, of the New France 
Relation of 1648-49, by Ragueneau, which had orig- 
inally been published in Paris, in 1650. On p. 3 of 
the work it is called " Excerpta ex Relatione." 
Doubtless both Parts II. and III. are by Trigaut, who 
was a Jesuit missionary to China, and in his later 
years an author of several publications relating to 
that field; he died in 1628, twenty-five years before 
this Cologne compilation. In making the above ref- 


284 


LES RELA TIONS DES jtSUITES 


erence, Harrisse appears, curiously, to have confound- 
ed the Relation of 1638 with that of 1648-49;. it is 
evident, also, from the style of his citation on p. 96 
of the Notes, that he had not examined the Progressus 
Fidei, but had taken his title at second-hand. It is a 
very rare book, the only copy known to us being in 
the Brown Library. 

Copies of the Relation of 1638 are in Brown (first 
edition). Harvard College (second edition), Lenox 
(both editions), and New York State libraries; in 
Laval University, Quebec (second edition), and in the 
British Museum (first edition). 

For further references, see Harrisse, nos. 69, 70, 99, 
and p. 62; Sabin, vol. x., nos. 39954, 39955, and vol. 
xvi., p. 538. Also, the following sales catalogues: 
Dufosse's Librairc Am&icaine, n.s., xxi^ ann^e, no. 
2898, copy offered for 300 fr. (he has also ofPered 
copies of late years at 170 to 225 fr.); Dodd, Mead 
& Co., April, 1896, no. 42, copy of second edition (a 
Lenox duplicate) offered for $50; O'Callaghan, no. 
1217, second edition, but called there '' first issue," 
sold for $45; Harrassowitz (1882), no. 25, priced at 
125 marks. 


NOTES TO VOL. XIV 


( Figures in parentheses, following number of note, refer to pages 
of English text.) 

1 (p. 7). — Concerning the Bissiriniens (Nipissings), see vol. v., 
note 19 (but for " winter" read " summer "). 

2 (p. g). — For sketches of the Agniers (Mohawks) and the Andas- 
tes, see vol. viii., note 34, pp. 300, 301. 

3 (p. 13). — The small village of Arendaonatia, although in Tiny 
township, was at some distance from the main trail connecting the 
mission towns north and south. — A. F. Hunter. 

4 (p. 17). — Regardmg the separation here referred to, see vol. x., 
pp. 279, 281, 307. 

5 (p. 27). — Ekhiondaltsaan: see vol. xii., note 7. 

6 (p. 33). — Angouteus is probably a misprint for Angoutenc (vol. 
xiii., note 15). 

7 (p. 39). — Sonontouan was the chief town of the Seneca tribe (vol. 
viii., notes 21, 35). 

8 (p. 81). — This game of the dish is described by Brebeuf in vol. 
X., pp. 187, 189. 

9 (p. 99). — Cheveux relevez : a sedentary tribe living west of the 
Petun or Tobacco Nation, according to Champlain's map of 1632. 
The latter visited (1615) this people, — to whom he gave the above 
name, on account of their peculiar mode of dressing the hair, — and 
describes them at some length ( Voyages, Laverdiere's ed., pp. 512, 
513, 546-548), praising their enterprise, industry, and uncommon 
domestic neatness. They were then at war with the Fire Nation 
(Mascoutins), in which they were assisted by the Neutrals. Sagard 
(Canada, p. 199) mentions the same tribe, under their Huron 
appellation, Andatahouats; this name is derived from ondata 
("wood" or "forest"), thus signifying "the people of the forest." 
Sagard also met (p. 197) some Indians " of the gens du bois, a dis- 
tant tribe, far towards the Southern sea, dependent on the Cheveux 
relevez, and, as it were, the same people." Laverdiere {Cham- 
plain, p. 512), says: " From the word Ondatahouat is formed 
Outaouat, or Ottawa — the name by which all the Upper Algonquins 
were afterward designated. . . . Champlain, in his large map 
of 1632, places them west of the Petun nation, which leads to the be- 


286 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES 

lief that they occupied the long point that juts into Lake Huron, to- 
ward the Manitoualin islands. On the other hand, the Relation of 
1640 locates on those very islands the Outaouan, ' people who came 
from the tribe of Cjieveux-Releves. ' This agrees with the Relation 
of 1671, where it is said (chap, ii., art iii.) that the island of Ekaen- 
toutan (Manitoualin) was formerly the land of the Outaouais; and 
with Nicolas Perrot, who calls that island ' the island of the Outa- 
ouaks ' {Mhnoire, Tailhan's ed., p. 126)." Du Creux's map also 
locates the Cheveux-Relev^s on Manitoulin. 

All these citations would indicate that a Southern group of Algon- 
kin clans — tillers of the soil, and marked by habits and customs 
somewhat different from those of the Northern — were, at a very 
early date, dwelling in the region between Lake Huron and the 
western end of Lake Ontario ; but that during the first half of the 
seventeenth century — driven northward by the frequent attacks of 
the fierce Iroquois — they retreated to the southern shore of Georgian 
Bay, thence to the long peninsula N. W. of Owen Sound, and finally 
to the Manitoulin Islands and to the mainland north of Georgian 
Bay. 

A. F. Hunter supplies the f oUowmg information : * ' The Ottawas 
of Manitoulin Island still form the greater part of the mixed Ind- 
ian population there. They appear to have received more fugi- 
tive Hurons, after the dispersion of that people, than did any other 
Algonkin nation. The unusually large stature of many individuals 
among the modern Ottawas, compared with that of other Eastern 
Algonkins, would seem to support this view." A history of this 
tribe has been published, by an Ottawa chief, A. J. Blackbird, — His- 
tory of the Ottawa and Chippewa Indians of Michigan (Ypsilanti, 
Mich., 1887). 

10 (p. III). — For sketch of Le Mercier, see vol. viii., note 11. 

11 (p. 127). — For sketch of the Duchess d'Aiguillon, see vol. viii., 
note 62. 

12 (p. 127). — Noel Brulard (or Brulart), chevalier de Sillery, de- 
scended from an old and noble Burgundian family, was born at 
Paris, Dec. 25, 1577. At the age of eighteen, he was sent to Malta, 
where he served twelve years, gaining much renown as a military 
officer, and high rank among the Knights of St. John (vol. xi., 
note 3). Returning to France, he received the commandery of 
Troyes, with an annual income of 40,000 livres. He was sent as 
ambassador to Madrid (1614) and to Rome (1622), and held impor- 
tant State offices ; his rank, wealth, and military renown rendered 
him for many years a personage of distinction at the French court. 
In the midst of this brilliant career (1625), he renounced the world 
and embraced the religious life, — probably led thereto by the influ- 


NOTES ro VOL. XIV 287 

ence of his friend, Vincent de Paul, — and was ordained a priest at 
the age of 57 (1634). By a special dispensation from Rome, he was, 
however, allowed to retain possession of his stili great fortiine, that 
he might personally expend it in pious and charitable works. He 
was especially interested in Le Jeune's project for rendering seden- 
tary the wandering Indian tribes; and in 1637 he gave to the Jesuit 
missions in Canada the funds for establishing at SiUery (named for 
its benefactor) their colony of Indian neophytes — the first in New 
France of those "reductions" which had already rendered the 
missions in Paraguay so flourishing (vol. xii., note 28). Garneau 
says {Canada, vol. i., p. 132) that the commander de Sillery 
was interested in Canada, and induced to join the Hundred As- 
sociates, by another member of his order, Isaac de Razilly(vol. viii., 
note 2). Brulard gave liberal aid also to other mission enterprises 
in New France ; and he lavished his wealth on the charitable under- 
takings of Vincent de Paul. His death occurred Sept. 26, 1640. 

Other members of the Brulard family were notable both in civil 
and religious affairs. The father, Pierre, was a magistrate, highly 
esteemed by Henry IV. Noel's eldest brother, Nicolas, marquis de 
Sillery, was appointed by that monarch (1607) chancellor of France 
and Navarre, and was interested in Canadian affairs. The second 
son, Frangois, caused a Jesuit college to be built at Rheims, and was 
an archdeacon in the Church. A third brother, Jean Baptiste, was 
a Capuchin pnest, and became commissary general of the houses of 
his order in France. A sister, Catherine, was for many years abbess 
of Longchamp, near Paris ; and another sister founded a religious 
order (the Hospital Nuns of St. Augustin) at Paris. — See Suite's 
Can.-Frangais, vol. ii., pp. 63, 64, where he gives a sketch con- 
densed from the Abbe Bois's Le Chevalier de Sillery (Quebec, 1871). 
Cf. Rochemonteix'sy(?J«//^j^, vol. i., pp. 246-248. 

13 (p. 225). — Porc-iptc (Porcupine): the French translation of 
Kakotichac. the name (m their own dialect, and referring to the 
great abundance, in that region, of porcupines — Erethtzon dorsatus) 
of a tribe dwelling on the banks of Lake St. John. In July, 1647, 
the Jesuit De Quen (vol. viii., note 15) made a journey up the Sague- 
nay from Tadoussac, to visit this tribe, whom he found receptive 
to the faith, and most hospitable to himself ; in his letter describing 
this voyage {Relation of 1647, chap, xii.), he states that he "was 
the first Frenchman who had set foot on their soil." In September, 
1 67 1, Charles Albanel halted a few days among this people, on his 
way to Hudson's Bay; he says of them (Relation of 1672, chap, 
vi.): " The Inhabitants have been greatly diminished in numbers 
by the late wars they have carried on with the Iroquois, and by the 
smallpox, which is the pest of the Savages : now they are beginning 


288 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 


to rehabilitate themselves through people from outside tribes, who, 
since the peace, resort there from many quarters. ' ' 

14 (p. 225). — Regarding the Petite Nation, see vol. v., note 56. 

15 (p. 265). — A child of miracle and blessing: the birth of the 
Dauphin was considered miraculous. Anne of Austria had de- 
spaired of giving the king a son and heir ; she therefore made a vow 
to her patroness, Ste. Anne. After the birth of the Dauphin, Anne, 
in fulfillment of her vow, sent ex veto gifts to the shrines of Ste. 
Anne d'Auray, in Brittany; Ste. Anne d'Apt, in Provence; and Ste. 
Anne de Beaupre, near Quebec. To the last-named, she sent a 
chasuble worked by her own hands, which is still to be seen in that 
shrine. — Crawford Lindsay. 

16 (p. 271). — Simon le Moyne, at the age of eighteen, entered the 
Jesuit novitiate at Rouen, Dec. 10, 1622; his studies were pursued 
here, and at Clermont and La Fleche, and he was an instructor at 
the Rouen college during 1627-32 and 1636-37. While a student at 
Clermont, he was an active member of the " league of prayer for 
the Canadian mission," to which belonged Le Jeune, the Lalemants, 
and many others. Assigned to the mission in Canada, he went 
thither in the spring of 1638, and at once departed to the Huron 
country ; by that people he was surnamed Wane. In the following 
year, he began (with Daniel) a mission among the Arendarhonons 
(vol. viii., note 24), that of St. Jean Baptiste; and for several years 
was in charge of this mission and of that at Teanaustaye (St. 
Joseph). After the dispersion of the Hurons, he probably served at 
Quebec and other posts on the St. Lawrence, until 1653, when he 
was sent as an ambassador to the Iroquois, and likewise opened a 
mission among the Onondagas. Much of his time during the next 
five years was spent among the Iroquois tribes, by whom he was 
known as Ondessonk — the appellation they had formerly bestowed 
upon Jogues (vol. ix., note 41), and after the martyrdom of the latter 
had conferred upon Le Moyne, in accordance with their custom. 
While in the Iroquois country, Le Moyne visited New Amsterdam 
(New York), and formed a strong friendship with the Dutch minis- 
ter there, Jan Megapolensis, who had formerly aided Jogues in his 
captivity. Le Moyne made a fifth journey to the Iroquois country 
in 1661, and spent the following winter there; and again in 1663, 
according to the Jour, des Jd suites, went to Sonontouan. He died 
Nov. 24, 1665, from a fever, at Cap de Magdeleine. 

17 (p. 273). — Francois du Peron was born at Lyons, Jan. 26, 1610; 
he became a Jesuit novice at Avignon, Feb. 23, 1627. He was, in 
turn, both student and instructor at Dole and Lyons ; and while at 
the latter college, was also superintendent of the Trinity boarding- 
school. He was sent to Canada in 1638, and labored among the 


NOTES TO VOL. XIV 289 

Hurons (who named him Anonchiard) from that time until their dis- 
persion by the Iroquois. In August, 1650, he made a voyage to 
France; his name does not again appear until 1657, when he went 
with Ragueneau to the Onondaga mission, escaping in the following 
March from the hostile savages of that tribe (vol. ix. , note 40). The 
Journ. des Ji suite s vsx&a.'don?, his arrival from France, June, 1665; 
and, in the following November, his death at Fort St. Louis (Cham- 
bly), where he was chaplain. 



