Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 18
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1898 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits18jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits18jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits18jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 18 of 73.

---






THE JESUIT RELATIONS 

AND 

ALLIED DOCUMENTS 


VOL. XVllI 


LIBn-,:^Y 


o: 


I 


The edition consists of sev- 
en hundred and fifty sets 
all numbered 


No.. 


j^L^-i^ 



The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 


Travels and Explorations 
OF THE Jesuit Missionaries 

IN New France 

1610-1791 

THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES ; ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 

EDITED BY 

REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 


Vol. XVIIl 

HURONS AND QUEBEC: 1640 


CLEVELAND: ttbc JBurtows JStotbew 
Company, publishers, mdcccxcviii 


Copyright, 1898 

BY 

The Burrows Brothers Co 


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 


The Imperial Press, Cleveland 


EDITORIAL STAFF 


Editor 


Translators . 


Assistant Editor 


Reuben Gold Thwaites 
FiNLOw Alexander 
Percy Favor Bicknell 
William Frederic Giese 
Crawford Lindsay 
William Price 
Hiram Allen Sober 
Emma Helen Blair 


Bibliographical Adviser Victor Hugo Paltsits 


CONTENTS OF VOL XVIII 


Preface to Volume XVIII 

Documents: — 

XXXVIII. Lettre au T. R. P. Mutio Vitelleschi, 
General de la Compagnie de Jesus, 
k Rome, Joseph-Marie CJiaumonot; 
Pays des Hurons, May 24, 1640 
XXXIX. Lettre au R. P. Philippe Nappi, 
Superieur de la Maison Professe, 
k Rome. Joseph-Marie Chaumonot; 
Pays des Hurons, May 26, 1640 
XL. Lettre au R. P. Philippe Nappi, 
Superieur de la Maison Professe, 
k Rome. Joseph-Marie Chaumofiot; 
Sainte-Marie aux Hurons, August 
3, 1640 . . . . 

XLI, Relation de ce qvi s'est passe en la 
Novvelle France, en I'annee 1640. 
[Chaps, i.-x. of Part I.] Paul le 
Jeune; Kebec, September 10, 1640 

Bibliographical Data: Volume XVIII 

Notes ...... 


10 


14 


36 


47 
251 

255 



ILLUSTRATION TO VOL. XVIII 


I. Photographic facsimile of title-page, Relation 

of 1640 . . . . .50 


PREFACE TO VOL. XVIll 

Following is a synopsis of the documents contained 
in the present volume : 

XXXVIII. Joseph Marie Chaumonot writes to 
the Father General (May 24, 1640) a brief letter, 
sketching the state of the Huron mission. It has 
thirteen priests, with several donnes; it comprises 
thirty-two villages, ' ' in which not a single cabin re- 
mains where the Gospel has not been proclaimed." 
The missionaries have been frequently persecuted, 
but none have yet perished. 

XXXIX. Two days later (May 26), Chaumonot 
writes to Father Nappi, of Rome, a more detailed 
account of the mission, — the manner in which the 
Fathers live, their methods of work, the characteris- 
tics of the savages, the persecution experienced from 
them, and the ravages of the epidemic. He then nar- 
rates the miraculous cure of two blind persons by 
one of the missionaries, and the details of several 
baptisms. The death of an Iroquois prisoner, by 
torture, is described; and allusion is made to the 
possibility that some of the missionaries may meet 
similar treatment from the Iroquois. Chaumonot 
sends greetings to many of his friends by name, and 
closes by asking for some masses and communions, 
of which the missionaries are often deprived. 


PREFACE TO VOL. XV III 


XL. This is another letter by Chaumonot to Nap- 
pi, dated August 3 of the same year. The writer 
describes a missionary journey made by him with 
Brebeuf to a tribe where the Gospel has not before 
been preached. Here they are met with distrust and 
aversion, arising from the same calumnies that had 
so endangered them among the Hurons. Their 
books are considered as repositories of magic spells ; 
and the missionaries are suspected of concocting 
these spells even when they kneel in prayer. They 
are repeatedly threatened with death ; but God pro- 
tects them from their enemies. This mission has 
little effect, except that they succeed in baptizing 
many sick children, without the knowledge of their 
relatives; many of these are now in heaven. Chau- 
monot does not give the name of this tribe ; but, 
from the Huron Relation of 1641 (chap, vi.) we learn 
that it was the Attiwandaronk or Neutral Nation. 
The letter closes by relating several acts of heroism, 
among the Hurons, remarkable in " poor infidels 
without morality." 

XLI. The Relation of 1640 is a composite. In 
1639, Barthelemy Vimont succeeded Le Jeune as 
superior of the order in New France, and his name 
appears on the title-page of the annual volume. He 
seems, however, to have only edited the Relation^ or 
perhaps only forwarded the matter to Paris for pub- 
lication by the provincial; for Part I., the Quebec 
portion, is still from the pen of Le Jeune (dated Sep- 
tember 10); and Part IL, the Huron report, is by 
Jerome Lalemant (dated May 27, with a postscript 
written August 3). In our present volume, we pub- 
lish the first ten chapters of Part I., by Le Jeune. 

The report opens with a synopsis of Father M6- 


PREFACE TO VOL. XVIII 


nard's account of the voyage made by the French 
fleet this year, which also brought over Joseph du 
Peron and some lay brethren, and additional nuns 
for both convents at Quebec ; all these were heartily 
welcomed there. The writer warns the nuns who 
desire to come to Canada that the country is not 
ready for them, and that they must await its devel- 
opment. The great object of the missionaries now 
is, to render the savages sedentary ; four families of 
them are at present living in the cabins built for 
them by the French. 

Le Jeune praises the virtue and piety of the colo- 
nists. He relates that a plague of grasshoppers and 
other insects was immediately driven away by some 
prayers and processions. The people enjoy good 
health; the soil is prolific; peace and content pre- 
vail. By way of diversion for the people, and honor 
to the infant Dauphin of France, Montmagny has a 
miracle play or ** tragi-comedy " performed, under 
the charge of Martial Piraube. For the benefit of 
the savages, there is introduced therein " the soul 
of an unbeliever, pursued by two demons, who finally 
hurl it into a hell which vomits forth flames. The 
struggles, cries, and shrieks of this soul and of these 
demons, who speak in the Algonquin tongue, so deep- 
ly penetrates the hearts of some," that a savage, two 
days later, tells of hideous dreams, inspired by the 
spectacle. 

Now that the epidemic of smallpox (described in 
the Relation of 1639) is over, the savages reassemble 
at St. Joseph (Sillery), and resume their effort to 
become sedentary. Those who are converted decide 
among themselves to drive away from this settlement 
all who do not believe as they do. Acting on the 


PREFACE TO VOL. XVIII 


advice of the Fathers and a suggestion from Montma- 
gny, the governor, they elect, by secret ballot, some 
chiefs to rule over them, — the head of these being 
Etinechkavat, a Christian. They not only make all 
necessary arrangements for the conduct of their 
affairs, but summon the women to a council and 
admonish them to be forthwith baptized — the disin- 
clination of the latter to that rite having been ' ' the 
cause of all their misfortunes." The women are 
warned that hereafter they must obey their hus- 
bands ; one of them, having run away, is caught, and 
the chiefs ask the Fathers if she would not better 
be chained by one foot, and whether four days and 
nights of fasting would be sufficient penance for her 
fault. 

The Indians have now begun to cultivate the land. 
Father Vimont, the new superior, is residing at Sil- 
lery, in order to aid them ; and the French colonists 
have also done much in this direction. Some Algon- 
kins also are settling at Three Rivers. At both set- 
tlements, the converts desire to interest their tribes- 
men in their undertaking, and to gather them into 
the colonies, to be aided by the French, and to have 
but one God. Several instances are given of the 
faith, obedience, and virtue displayed by these neo- 
phytes. The chief difficulty anticipated by the Fa- 
thers is, in the enforcement of single marriage, to 
which the savages are unaccustomed. In this, as in 
all other matters, Montmagny aids the missionaries 
to the utmost, — causing three marriages of Sillery 
Indians to take place at Quebec, with a magnificent 
feast and rich gifts for the bridal party. Many of 
the young Indians come to the Fathers " in private, 
and ask us to find them wives, or to speak for them 


PREFACE TO VOL. XVIII 


to those whom they desire to marry ; some widows, 
and even some young girls, ask us secretly to find 
them husbands, confiding in us more than in those 
of their own nation." All the converts show great 
solicitude to avoid the sins they have abandoned, 
especially the licentious acts and speech so prevalent 
among their countrymen ; and the girls drive away 
their pagan suitors with firebrands. 

Madame de la Peltrie comes to Sillery at Christ- 
mas, to attend the midnight mass with the savages; 
the latter go to escort her thither, and ' ' vie in caress- 
ing her." She often visits them, at other seasons, 
and takes with her some Indian girls from the Ursu- 
line seminary, who have learned to sing very sweet- 
ly, both in their own language and in French, The 
converts show great zeal, — they refuse to eat on 
fast days, even when in great need; they thank 
God when successful in hunting ; they are very con- 
trite for their faults, and even for their evil dreams. 
The children are ready to fight one another for their 
belief. A young man is severely punished by the 
Sillery converts, for having married an unbaptized 
girl ; and ' ' two boys, who came late to prayers in the 
morning, were punished by having a handful of hot 
cinders thrown upon their heads, with threats of 
greater chastisement in case the offense were repeat- 
ed," Another man gives up tobacco, when reproved 
by a priest, Pigarouich, erstwhile a medicine man, 
is immediately cured of an illness, by prayer; and 
the same agency enables him to make a canoe (the 
first he had ever built), " as well as the most expert 
person could have done." Even the unbelieving 
Indians show the utmost respect for the Christian 
mysteries and belief, and imitate the actions of those 


PREFACE TO VOL. XVIII 


who have been converted ; some even have visions 
of heaven. A young Christian, having lost at gam- 
bling, confesses to the priest with great contrition ; 
and " with charming simplicity" adds, " I will stake 
nothing hereafter, except some article of small value. " 

Buteux sends to his superior similar accounts from 
the residence at Three Rivers. Many widows and 
orphans, made such by the fatal epidemic of last 
year, have come hither, to seek aid from the French. 
The missionaries aid these, as far as their own 
poverty will allow, and, in the spring, set them to 
raising corn for their supplies. 

Le Jeune relates a terrible tragedy occurring 
among a household of savages who had been attacked 
by smallpox in the forests. Most of them died ; the 
head of the family, — who had recently married in 
the savage fashion, without waiting for the Church's 
benediction, and whom, in consequence, " God was 
sharply pursuing with his judgments, ' ' — ill and help- 
less, was murdered by his sister, to avoid further 
care for him, and to flee with her own son. She at 
first abandoned her brother's children, but afterward 
compelled the elder of these to strangle his own little 
sister. " But God, in whose sight all this fatal trag- 
edy was played, willed that this Proserpina should 
play one act of it. He struck her with the contagion 
from which she was fleeing ; and, before reaching the 
place where she wished to bring her son, she died 
like a beast. Finally, her son was brought to the 
hospital, where he died in an intolerable stench, but 
with strong indications of salvation." 

Le Jeune proceeds to enumerate the Indian tribes 
of whom the French have knowledge, from Labra- 
dor to Hudson Bay, and from the Mississippi to 


PREFACE TO VOL. XVIII 


Virginia. This survey reveals a boundless field for 
missionary labor, and he asks the aid of Christians 
in France to help spread the Gospel therein. 

In this connection he states an interesting oc- 
currence — the arrival on the St. Lawrence of an 
Englishman, brought hither by Abenaki Indians, who 
is " searching for a route through these countries to 
the sea of the North," in which quest he has " for 
two years ranged the whole Southern coast, from 
Virginia to Quinebiqui." Montmagny sends him to 
Tadoussac, that he may return to England by way 
of France. 

R. G. T. 

Madison, Wis., March, 1898. 


XXXVIII— XL 
Three Letters by Joseph Marie Chaumonot 

XXXVIII.— Au T. R. P. General de la Compagnie de Jesus ; 
Pays des Hurons, 24 Mai, 1640 

XXXIX.— Au R. P. Philippe Nappi, Superieur de la Maison 
Professe, a Rome ; Pays des Hurons, 26 Mai, 
1640 

XL. — Au meme; Sainte-Marie aux Hurons, 3 Aout, 
1640 


Source : The originals were in Italian, and deposited in 
the archives of the Society in Rome. Father Martin copied 
them there in 1858, and translated them into French ; these 
translations being published in Carayon's Premiere Mission 
des J ^suites ati Canada, pp. 195-215. We follow Carayon 
for the French text, and our English translations are there- 
from. 


10 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.18 


[195] Lettre du P. Joseph-Marie Chaumonot, au 
T. R. P. Mutio Vitelleschi, General 
de la Compagnie de Je- 
sus, a Rome. 

(Traduite de I'ttalien sur I' original conservd d Rome.) 

Du pays des Hurons, 24 mai 1640. 

MON Tres-Reverend Pere, 
Pax Christi. 
Le 10 de septembre 1639, j 'arrival dans le 
pays des Hurons en la Nouvelle- France, apres une 
navigation de trois mois tres-penible et tres-dange- 
reuse, qui fut suivie d'un voyage d'un autre mois sur 
les rivieres, les lacs et k travers les forets. 

Nous sommes ici treize Peres, tons frangais, avec 
quelques jeunes gens qui se donnent a nous pour le 
soin du temporel, et qui nous tiennent lieu de freres 
coadjuteurs. Notre maniere de vivre paraitra en 
Europe tres-etrange et tres-p^nible, mais nous la trou- 
vons fort douce et fort agreable. Nous n'avons ni 
sel, ni huile, ni fruits, ni pain, ni vin, excepts celui 
que nous gardons pour la messe. Toute notre nour- 
riture se compose d'un grand [196] plat de bois rem- 
pli d'une esp^ce de soupe faite de bl^ d'Inde, ecras^ 
entre deux pierres ou pile dans un mortier, et assai- 
sonnee avec quelques poissons fum^s. Notre lit est 
la terre, couverte d'une ecorce d'arbre ou tout au 
plus d'une natte. 

L'etendue de notre mission comprend cette ann^e 


1640] CHAUMONOT TO THE GENERAL 11 


[195] Letter from Father Joseph Marie Chaumonot 

to the Very Reverend Father Mutio Vi- 

telleschi, General of the Society 

of Jesus, at Rome. 

( Translated from, the Italian original preserved at Rome.) 

From the Huron country, May 24, 1640. 

MY Very Reverend Father, 
Pax Christi. 
I arrived in the Huron country, in New 
France, on the loth of September, 1639, S'fter a very 
painful and dangerous voyage of three months, which 
was followed by a journey of another month upon 
rivers and lakes, and through forests. 

There are thirteen Fathers of us here, all French, 
with some young men who are given to us for the 
care of temporal matters, and who with us take the 
place of lay brethren. Our manner of living will 
seem in Europe very strange and full of hardship, 
but we find it quite easy and agreeable. We have 
neither salt, oil, fruits, bread, nor wine, except what 
we keep for the mass. Our entire nourishment con- 
sists of [196] a sort of soup made of Indian corn, 
crushed between two stones, or pounded in a mor- 
tar, and seasoned with smoked fish, — this served in 
a large wooden dish. Our bed is the ground, cov- 
ered with a piece of bark, or, at the most, with a mat. 

The extent of our mission comprises this year 
thirty-two hamlets or villages, in which not a single 


12 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 

trente-deux bourgs ou villages, dans lesquels il ne 
Teste pas ime seule cabane ou I'Evangile n'ait 6t6 
annonce. Beaucoup de sauvages ont re9u le bapteme. 
La plupart, victimes d'tine epidemie qui a ravag6 
tout le pays, sont au ciel, nous I'esperons. Cette ma- 
ladie a 6te 1' occasion de bien des calomnies et de per- 
s6cutions excitees contre nous sous le pretexte que 
nous 6tions les auteurs du fieau. Toutefois aucun 
de nous n'a peri dans cette tempete, bien que quel- 
ques-uns aient ete batonnes et que d'autres aient vu 
la hache levee sur eux, et bien pres de leur tete. 

Nous avons tous besoin du secours de vos priferes ; 
c'est pourquoi nous nous recommandons humblement 
k vos saints Sacrifices. 

Je suis, 

de Votre Paternity, 
Le tres-indigne serviteur et fils en 

Notre-Seigneur. 
Joseph-Marie CHAUMONOT. 
Du pays des Hurons, le 24 mai 1640. 


1640] CHAUMONOT TO THE GENERAL 13 

cabin remains where the Gospel has not been pro- 
claimed. Many savages have received baptism ; most 
of these, the victims of an epidemic which has 
ravaged the whole country, are in heaven, we hope. 
This malady has been the occasion for many calum- 
nies and persecutions, excited against us under the 
pretext that we were the authors of the scourge. 
None of us, however, have perished in this tem- 
pest, although some have been beaten, and others 
have seen the hatchet raised over them, and very near 
to their heads. 

We all have need of the help of your prayers, 
hence we commend ourselves humbly to your holy 
Sacrifices. 

I am 

Your Paternity's 
Very unworthy servant and son in 

Our Lord, 
Joseph Marie CHAUMONOT.^ 

From the country of the Hurons, May 24, 1640. 


14 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.18 


{197] Lettre du P. Joseph-Marie Chaumonot au 

R. P. Philippe Nappi, Superieur de la 

Maison Professe a Rome. 

(Traduite de I'italten sur V original conserve h Rome.) 

Du pays des Hurons, 26 mai 1640. 

MON Rev]erend Pere, 
Pax Christi. 
Je ne pourrai jamais remercier assez la di- 
vine bonte de la faveur qn'elle m'a faite, en me 
conduisant k travers tant de dangers, dans le lieu le 
plus favorable qui soit au monde, pour perfectionner 
un religieux. Je dois en faire part a Votre Reverence, 
afin qu'elle veuille bien m'aider k en remercier le 
bon Dieu. L'annee derniere, j'ai ecrit que, aprfes trois 
mois d'une navigation tres-p^nible, je suis arriv6 
dans la Nouvelle-France, mais qu'il me fallait encore 
m'avancer trois cents lieues plus loin dans le desert. 
Voici le r^cit de ce voyage. 

La veille de saint Laurent, je m'embarquai dans 
un canot de sauvages Hurons (ainsi s'appelle ce peu- 
ple) sur la grande riviere, qui porte le nom de [198] 
ce glorieux martyr ; dans quelques endroits, elle est 
large de dix, treize, vingt lieues. Pendant cent 
lieues de son cours, ses eaux sont salees, et le flux et 
reflux s'y font sentir: aussi est-elle sujette, vu sa 
largeur, k des tempetes, comme I'Oc^an. 

Le P. Poncet s'embarqua en meme temps que moi ; 
mais quatre jours apres le depart, nous fumes obli- 


1640] CHAUMONOT TO NAPPI 15 


[197] Letter of Father Joseph Marie Chaumonot 
to the Reverend Father Philippe Nappi, Supe- 
rior of the Professed House at Rome. 

(Translated fro7n the Italian original preserved at Rome.) 

From the country of the Hurons, May 26, 1640. 

MY Reverend Father, 
Pax Christi. 
I shall never be able sufficiently to thank the 
divine goodness for the favor that it has done me, 
by leading me through so many dangers into the 
most favorable place in the world for perfecting a 
religious. I am obliged to acquaint Your Reverence 
therewith, to the end that you may kindly consent to 
aid me in thanking the good God for it. Last year, 
I wrote that after three months of very difficult navi- 
gation I arrived in New France, but that I still had 
to proceed three hundred leagues further into the 
wilderness. Here follows the account of this journey. 

On the eve of saint Lawrence, I embarked in a 
canoe of Huron savages (thus this people is called), 
on the great river which bears the name of [198] that 
glorious martyr; in some places it is ten, thirteen, 
twenty leagues wide. For a hundred leagues of its 
course its waters are salt, and the flow and ebb of 
tides is there perceptible : it is also subject, by reason 
of its width, to storms, like the Ocean. 

Father Poncet embarked at the same time with 
me ; but four days after the departure we were obliged 


16 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.18 

g€s de nous s6parer, laissant notre premier canot 
pour monter s6par6ment dans deux autres. Nous 
devions cependant aller de compagnie, de telle sorte 
que presque chaque soir, nous nous trouvions en- 
semble pour souper et passer la nuit, avec les conduc- 
teurs de nos canots d'ecorce, et souvent meme nous 
avions la grande consolation de dire la sainte messe, 
le matin, avant de partir ; mais ce fut la seule pen- 
dant tout le voyage, qui fut de trente jours pour moi 
et de trente-deux pour le P. Poncet: voyage on ne 

peut plus laborieux 

Arrive au but de ce voyage, je trouvai onze de nos 
Peres, distribu^s dans trois Residences pour etre plus 
prfes des bourgs importants, qu'ils veulent instruire 
et civiliser. Nos habitations sont d'ecorce, comme 
celle des sauvages, sans divisions int^rieures, excepts 
pour la chapelle. Faute de table et d'ustensiles de 
manage, nous mangeons par terre et nous buvons 
dans des 6corces d'arbres. Tout I'appareil de notre 
cuisine et de notre refectoire [199] consiste dans un 
grand plat de bois, plein de sagamit^, a laquelle je ne 
vols rien de plus semblable que la colle qui sert k 
tapisser les murs. La soif ne nous gene guere, soit 
parce que nous ne nous servons jamais de sel, soit 
parce que notre nourriture est toujours tr^s-liquide. 
Pour moi, depuis que je suis ici, je n'ai pas bu en tout 
un verre d'eau, quoiqu'il y ait d6j^ huit mois que je 
sois arrive. Notre lit est form6 d'une ecorce d'arbre, 
sur laquelle nous mettons une couverture, 6paisse k 
peu pres comme une piastre de Florence. Pour les 
draps, on n'en parle pas, meme pour les malades. 
Mais la plus grande incommodite, c'est la fum6e qui, 
faute de cheminee, remplit toute la cabane et gate 


1640] CHAUMONOT TO NAPPI 17 

to separate, leaving our first canoe in order to get 
into two others, singly. We were, however, to go in 
company, so that almost every evening we found 
ourselves together to sup and pass the night with the 
guides of our bark canoes ; and often we even had 
the great consolation of saying the holy mass in the 
morning before starting ; but this was the only con- 
solation during the whole voyage, which was thirty 
days for me and thirty-two for Father Poncet, — the 

most laborious journey possible 

Having arrived at the end of this voyage, I found 
eleven of our Fathers, distributed in three Residences 
in order to be nearer to important villages, which 
they desire to instruct and civilize. Our habitations 
are of bark, like those of the savages, and without 
interior partitions, except for the chapel. For want 
of a table and household utensils, we eat on the 
ground, and drink from the bark of trees. The 
whole apparatus of our kitchen and of our refectory 
[199] consists of a great wooden dish, full of saga- 
mit^, whereto I see nothing more similar than the 
paste which is used in covering walls. Thirst hard- 
ly annoys us, — either because we never use salt, or 
because our food is always very liquid. As for me, 
since I have been here, I have not drunk in all a glass 
of water, although it is now eight months since I 
arrived. Our bed is made with a piece of bark, upon 
which we put a blanket nearly the thickness of a 
Florentine piastre. Respecting sheets, there is no 
mention of them, even for the sick. But the great- 
est inconvenience is the smoke, which, for want of a 
chimney, fills the whole cabin and spoils everything 
that one would keep. When certain winds blow, it 
is no longer possible to stay therein, because of the 


18 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.18 

tout ce qu'on voudrait garder. Quand certains vents 
souffient, il n'est plus possible d'y tenir, k cause de 
la douleur que ressentent les yeux. En hiver nous 
n'avons pas la nuit d' autre lumiere que celle du feu 
de la cabane, qui nous sert pour reciter notre br6- 
viaire, pour ^tudier la langue et pour toute chose. 
Le jour, nous nous servons de I'ouverture laiss6e au 
haut de la cabane, et qui est k la fois cheminee et 
fenetre. Voilk la maniere de vivre dans notre resi- 
dence ; pour celle que nous gardons quand nous allons 
en mission, Votre Reverence doit savoir d'abord que, 
quoique ces sauvages observent entre eux certaines 
regies d'hospitalite, avec nous ils ne [200] les obser- 
vent pas. Nous sommes done obliges de porter avec 
nous quelques petits couteaux, des aleines, des 
bagues, des aiguilles, des pendants d'oreille et choses 
semblables, pour payer nos hotes. Nous portons en 
outre une couverture en guise de manteau, qui sert 
h. nous envelopper la nuit. 

La maniere d'annoncer la parole de Dieu aux sau- 
vages n'est pas de monter en chaire et de precher 
sur une place publique ; il nous faut visiter chaque 
cabane en particulier, et aupres du feu, exposer k 
ceux qui veulent nous ecouter les mysteres de notre 
sainte foi. lis n'ont en effet aucun autre lieu de 
reunion pour traiter leurs affaires, que la cabane de 
quelqu'un de leurs capitaines. 

Je ne me serais jamais imagine une duret6 comme 
celle d'un coeur sauvage eleve dans I'infidelite. Quand 
ils sont convaincus de la folic de leurs superstitions 
et de leurs fables, et qu'on leur a prouve la verite et 
la sagesse de la foi, il faudrait, pour achever de les 
gagner, leur promettre que le bapteme leur donnera 


1640] CHAUMONOT TO NAPPI 19 

pain felt by the eyes. In winter, we have no other 
light by night than that of the cabin fire, which serves 
tis for reciting our breviary, for studying the lan- 
guage, and for everything. By day we use the open- 
ing left at the top of the cabin, — which is at once 
chimney and window. Such is the manner of living 
in our residence ; as for the one that we observe when 
we go on a mission. Your Reverence must know, to 
begin with, that although these savages practice 
among themselves certain rules of hospitality, with 
us they [200] apply them not. We are, therefore, 
obliged to carry with us a few little knives, awls, 
rings, needles, earrings, and such like things, to 
pay our hosts. We carry furthermore a blanket in 
the guise of a cloak, which serves to wrap us in at 
night. 

The way of announcing the word of God to the 
savages is not to mount a pulpit and preach in a pub- 
lic square ; we must visit each cabin in private, and 
beside the fire expound, to those who are willing to 
listen to us, the mysteries of our holy faith. They 
have, in fact, no other place of meeting, for transact- 
ing their affairs, than the cabin of some one of their 
captains. 

I should never have imagined a hardness like that 
of a savage heart, brought up in infidelity. When 
they are convinced of the folly of their superstitions 
and of their fables, and when one has proved to 
them the truth and the wisdom of the faith, it would 
be necessary, in order to finish winning them, to 
promise them that baptism will give them prosperity 
and long life, — these poor peoples being susceptible 
only to temporal goods. That does not result from 


20 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 18 

prosp6rit6 et longue vie, ces pauvres gens n'etant sen- 
sibles qu'aux biens temporels : cela ne vient pas de 
stupidite; ils sont meme plus intelligents que nos 
campagnards, et il y a certains capitaines, dont nous 
admirons I'^loquence, acquise sans beaucoup de pr6- 
ceptes de rhetorique. [201] Leur obstination dans 
I'infidelit^ est produite par la difficulte qu'ils croient 
trouver dans 1' observation des commandements et 
surtout du sixieme. 

Le petit nombre de fideles, que Notre-Seigneur 
s'est choisi, est une preuve de ce que pent la grace 
dans les coeurs les plus barbares de la terre. J 'en 
connais un qui, cette ann^e, au moment ou les hosti- 
lit6s contre la religion etaient plus vives, n'a pas 
craint de parcourir en apotre presque tons les vil- 
lages. II allait dans les assemblees et les conseils 
des capitaines, lorsqu'ils traitaient quelque affaire, 
et blamait hardiment leurs folies. II exaltait la soli- 
dity de la doctrine, que les robes noires (c'est ainsi 
qu'ils nous appellent) etaient venus leur enseigner, 
protestant qu'il 6tait pret k donner sa vie pour la 
d^fendre. Ses auditeurs applaudissaient alors k ses 
discours; mais ils n'embrassaient pas pour cela la 
v^rit^, qu'ils reconnaissaient. Ce meme Sauvage de- 
manda k faire les exercices, et il en profita si bien, 
que le Pere, qui lui donnait les meditations, en ^tait 
6trangement emerveille. Si on 6crit dans la Rela- 
tion frangaise ses reflexions spirituelles, elles pour- 
ront servir de le9on, meme aux religieux les plus 
pieux et les plus fervents. II avait dans sa famille 
une nifece, attaquee de je ne sais quelle maladie, qui, 
la nuit, lui faisait pousser des cris effrayants, comme 
si elle avait vu quelque spectre. [202] Pour la d61i- 


1640] CHAUMONOT TO NAPPI 21 

stupidity ; they are even more intelligent than our 
rustics, and there are certain captains whose eloquence 
we admire, — acquired without many precepts of 
rhetoric. [201] Their obstinacy in infidelity is pro- 
duced by the difficulty which they think to find in 
the observance of the commandments, and especially 
of the sixth. 

The small number of faithful ones whom Our Lord 
has chosen for himself, is a proof of what grace can 
do in the most barbarous hearts on the earth. I know 
one who this year, at the moment when the hostili- 
ties against religion were most keen, did not fear to 
make the round, as an apostle, of nearly all the vil- 
lages. He went into the assemblies and the councils 
of the captains, when they were transacting some 
business, and boldly censured their follies. He ex- 
alted the solidity of the doctrine which the " black 
gowns ' ' (thus they call us) had come to teach them ; 
protesting that he was ready to give his life to de- 
fend it. His hearers then applauded his remarks ; but 
they did not therefore embrace the truth which they 
acknowledged. This same Savage requested to make 
a retreat, and he profited by this so well that the 
Father, who gave him the meditations, was strangely 
amazed thereat. If his spiritual reflections be writ- 
ten in the French Relation, they may serve as a les- 
son even to the most pious and to the most fervent 
religious. He had in his family a niece, attacked by 
some sickness or other, which at night caused her to 
utter frightful cries, as if she had seen some spectre. 
[202] To relieve her, he put his chaplet about her 
neck, saying to her: " Remember that thou art a 
Christian, and that thou belongest no more to the de- 
mon; and make the sign of the cross." She did so, 


22 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.18 

vrer, il lui mit au cou son chapelet, en lui disant: 
« Rappelle-toi que tu es chretienne, et que tu n'ap- 
« partiens plus au demon, et fais le signe de la croix. » 
Elle le fit, et k partir de ce moment, elle n*a plus 6t6 
tourmentee de semblable mal. 

II serait trop long de raconter tous les exemples 
h^roiques de Constance que ce Sauvage et quelques 
autres de nos convertis, bien qu'en petit nombre, 
nous ont donnes. Mais e'en est assez pour montrer 
a Votre Reverence que Dieu ne refuse pas sa grace, 
meme aux plus sauvages des hommes, et que ces 
peuples sont capables de recevoir la doctrine de 
I'Evangile, malgre la tres-grande difficulte qu'il y a k 
I'expliquer, k cause de la pauvret6 de la langue; car 
ils n'ont ni vignes, ni troupeaux, ni tours, ni villes, 
ni sel, ni lampes, ni temples, ni maitres d'aucune 
science ou art. lis ne savent ni lire ni ecrire, et nous 
avons beaucoup de peine ^ leur faire comprendre les 
paraboles qui sont sur ces matieres dans le saint 
Evangile. II est vrai que ce defaut et cette pauvrete 
de leur langue n'a jamais ete cause du retard de leur 
conversion; car les Peres qui savent leur langue, 
leur font assez bien connaitre ce qui est necessaire 
pour le salut, sans ce servir de ces comparaisons. 

L'hiver dernier, il n'y a pas eu une seule cabane 
[203] dans nos trente-deux bourgs, ou la parole de 
Dieu n'ait ete portee; mais les fruits ont ete plus 
grands pour I'Eglise triomphante que pour I'Eglise 
militante. Comme il regnait une maladie conta- 
gieuse qui n'epargnait ni age ni sexe, tout notre soin 
6tait de catechiser les malades, pour leur donner ^ 
la fin de leur vie un passe-port pour le ciel. Le plus 
grand nombre de ceux que cette maladie a enleves, 
apres le saint bapteme, ^taient les petits enfants 


1640] CHAUMONOT TO NAPPI 23 

and from that moment forward, she was not again tor- 
mented by the like trouble. 

It wonld be too tedious to relate all the heroic 
examples of constancy which this Savage and some 
others of our converts, though in small number, have 
given us. But this is enough to show Your Rever- 
ence that God does not refuse his grace, even to the 
most savage of men, and that these peoples are cap- 
able of receiving the doctrine of the Gospel, notwith- 
standing the very great difficulty of explaining it, 
on account of the poverty of the language ; for they 
have neither vineyards nor flocks, nor towers nor 
cities, nor salt, nor lamps, nor temples, nor masters 
of any science or art. They can neither read nor 
write, and we have much difficulty in making them 
understand the parables which are related to these 
matters in the holy Gospel. It is true that this de- 
fect and this poverty of their language has never been 
a cause of the delay in their conversion ; for the 
Fathers who know their language enable them to 
understand well enough that which is necessary for 
salvation, without using these comparisons. 

Last winter, there was not a single cabin [203] in 
our thirty-two villages into which the word of God 
was not carried ; but the results have been greater 
for the Church triumphant than for the Church mili- 
tant. As there prevailed a contagious disease which 
spared neither age nor sex, all our care was to cate- 
chize the sick, in order to give them at the end of 
their life a passport for heaven. The greatest num- 
ber of those whom this malady carried off, after holy 
baptism, were the little children 

The Savages have held several very crowded as- 
semblies, to consider means for compelling us to 


24 


LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol. 18 


Les Sauvages ont tenu plusieurs assemblees tres- 
nombreuses pour aviser aux moyens de nous forcer ^ 
quitter le pays. Beaucoup de capitaines ont vot6 
notremort; mais pas un n'a os6 s'en faire I'ex^cu- 
teur, et jusqu'^ present Dieu nous a pr6serv6 de leurs 
coups. Pendant tout I'hiver nous nous attendions 
chaque jour ^ apprendre la mort de quelqu'un de 
nos missionnaires, et chaque jour en disant la sainte 
messe, nous faisions la communion, comme devant 
nous servir de viatique. Tout s'est born6 k quelques 
coups de baton, et au chagrin de voir renverser les 
croix que nous avions dressees, et reduire en cendres 
une de nos cabanes. Un seul des notres a vu couler 
son sang, sed non usque ad mortem 

Quand nous visitons ces pauvres gens, s'ils n'ar- 
rivent pas k temps pour nous fermer la porte [204] 
au nez, ils se bouchent les oreilles et se couvrent la 
figure de peur d'etre ensorceles. Tout cela nous 
donne beaucoup d'esperance qu'un jour la foi ileurira 
dans cette malheureuse terre, puisque les persecu- 
tions dont Dieu se sert pour I'etablir et la cultiver ne 
nous font pas defaut. 

La moisson promet beaucoup, non pas seulement k 
cause du nombre de nos Sauvages, mais parce qu'il 
y a bien d'autres nations repandues dans ces im- 
menses solitudes. Nous connaissons dej^ les noms de 
plus de vingt, qui sont dans la direction de la mer du 
Nord, toutefois peu considerables : on nous fait espe- 
rer qu'au-dela, nous trouverons des contrees plus 
peuplees. Pour y arriver il faudra souffrir encore 
plus que nous ne I'avons fait pour venir ici. 

Avant de finir, je veux raconter k Votre Reverence 
quelques faits extraordinaires arrives cette annee. 


1640] CHAUMONOT TO NAPPI 25 

leave the country. Many captains have voted our 
death ; but not one has dared to become the execu- 
tioner therein, and hitherto God has preserved us 
from their attacks. During the whole winter we 
were expecting every day to learn the death of some 
one of our missionaries ; and each day, while saying 
the holy mass, we received the communion, as if it 
were to serve as viaticum. Everything ended in a 
few blows from a club, and in the vexation of see- 
ing the crosses overturned which we had set up, and 
one of our cabins reduced to ashes. A single one of 
ours has seen his blood flow, sed non usque ad mor- 
tem 

When we visit these poor people, if they do not 
arrive in time to close the door [204] to our noses, 
they stop their ears and cover their faces, for fear of 
being bewitched. All that gives us much hope that 
one day the faith will flourish in this unhappy land, 
since the persecutions which God uses to establish 
and cultivate it are not wanting for us. 

The harvest promises much, not only on account 
of the number of our Savages, but because there are 
many other nations spread abroad in these immense 
solitudes. We already know the names of more than 
twenty, which are in the direction of the Northern 
sea, — not at all considerable, however; we are led to 
hope that, beyond, we shall find more populous re- 
gions. To arrive there, it will be necessary to suffer 
still more than we have done in order to come here. 

Before finishing, I wish to relate to Your Rever- 
ence some extraordinary incidents which happened 
this year. A poor man, baptized in his sickness, 
having recovered health, was attacked with an in- 
flammation which deprived him of sight. One of our 


26 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.18 

Un pauvre homme, baptis6 dans sa maladie, ayant 
recouvre la sante, fut attaque d'une fluxion qui le 
priva de la vue. Un de nos Pferes, le f61icitant un 
jour d'avoir 6cliapp6 k la mort, eut pour reponse que 
maintenant la vie 6tait pour lui un fardeau, puisqu'il 
6tait aveugle. Le Pere lui lava les yeux avec de 
I'eau benite, en disant: «Que le Pere, le Fils, et le 
Saint-Esprit, en qui tu crois, te guerissent», et au 
meme moment la fluxion cessa, [205] et le lendemain 
la vue lui fut rendue compl^tement. — Une femme 
n' ayant pas voulu se soumettre ^ certaines supersti- 
tions, fut f rappee de c6cite par le demon, pour la 
punir. Le meme Pere I'engagea k mettre sa con- 
fiance en Dieu, et k se laver avec de I'eau benite, et 
elle recouvra parfaitement la vue. — Un jeune hom- 
me, ayant ete k la peche avec son jeune frere, et 
quelques autres, fut attaqu^ par les ennemis de leur 
nation. Comme il craignait plus la mort de son jeune 
frfere que la sienne, il le couvrit de son corps, le pro- 
tegeant ainsi contre les coups qu'il re§ut lui-meme. 
On le ramena demi-mort k son village. Un de nos 
Peres s'y trouvait. Voyant qu'il etait sans mouve- 
ment et sans parole, il ne pouvait pas I'aider k bien 
mourir. Malgre cela, il ne perdit pas courage, et fit 
voeu de quelques messes en I'honneur de saint Fran- 
§ois-Xavier, pour le soulagement de ce pauvre infi- 
dele. Au meme moment la langue du moribond se 
d61ie, ses yeux s'ouvrent et regardant le ciel, il s'^- 
crie ((Aondechichiai Taitene. Toi qui as fait la terre, 
aie piti^ de moi.» Aussitot le Pere I'instruit, le bap- 
tise, et il mourut peu apres. — Un autre jeune homme 
avait, je ne sais par quel depit, mange une racine 
v6n6neuse pour se donner la mort, et il etait d6jk 


1640] CHAUMONOT TO NAPPI 27 

Fathers, congratulating him one day for having es- 
caped death, received the answer that now life was a 
burden for him, since he was blind. The Father 
washed his eyes with holy water, saying : ' ' May the 
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, in whom thou 
believest, heal thee ; ' ' and at the same moment the 
inflammation ceased, [205] and the next day his sight 
was completely restored. A woman having been 
unwilling to submit to certain superstitions, was 
struck with blindness by the demon, to punish her. 
The same Father persuaded her to put her confidence 
in God, and to bathe herself with holy water, and 
she perfectly recovered sight. A young man, hav- 
ing been fishing with his young brother and certain 
others, was attacked by the enemies of their nation. 
As he feared more for his young brother's death than 
his own, he covered him with his own body, thus pro- 
tecting him against the blows that he himself re- 
ceived. He was led back half dead to his village. One 
of our Fathers happened to be there. Seeing that he 
was without motion and without speech, he could not 
aid him to die well. Notwithstanding that, he did 
not lose courage, and vowed some masses in honor 
of saint Fran9ois Xavier, for the relief of this poor 
infidel. At the same moment the dying man's 
tongue is loosed, his eyes open, and looking at heav- 
en, he exclaims: Aondechichiai Taitene, " Thou who 
hast made the earth, have pity on me." Immediate- 
ly the Father instructs and baptizes him ; and he died 
soon afterward. Another young man had, from I 
know not what chagrin, eaten a poisonous root, in 
order to commit suicide; and he was already tor- 
mented by the violence of the poison when he came 
to our cabin. Having there succumbed, he flings 


28 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.18 

totinnent6 par la violence du poison quand il vint k 
notre cabane. Rendu \\ il se jette k terre, en [206] 
^cumant, avec tons les signes d'une mort prochaine. 
Interroge sur la cause de son mal, pour toute r6- 
ponse, il presente le reste de la racine qu'il avait 
mangee, en disant de la montrer k ses parents apres 
sa mort. Nos Peres, avertis par quelques Sauvages 
que ce poison 6tait mortel, s'empressent d'instruire 
an plus vite ce malheureux, et le baptisent, apres 
avoir pris toutes les precautions necessaires, quand il 
s'agit du bapteme des adultes. Environ une demi- 
heure apres, il mourut en chemin, pendant que ses 
parents le reportaient k sa cabane. — Un homme, 
attaque par la contagion et voyant I'inefficacite des 
remedes des medecins du pays, c'est-k-dire des sor- 
ciers (vrais ou faux), se donna plusieurs coups de 
couteau dans la poitrine. Un des Notres entre alors 
par hasard dans sa cabane, et aussitot celui-ci I'ap- 
pelle et lui demande le bapteme. Le Pere le cate- 
chise et le baptise sans tarder. Le nouveau chretien 
lui dit: «Ne crois pas que j'aie demande le bapteme 
dans I'esperance de prolonger ma vie, puisque je suis 
presque dejk mort; regarde mes blessures, et vois s'il 
est possible d'echapper; ce n'est que I'esperance du 
ciel qui m'a pousse k me faire baptiser. » Le Pere 
I'engagea ^ faire un acte de regret de s'etre donne la 
mort. Peu de temps apres, il mourut. 

Nos Sauvages prirent, il n'y a pas un mois, un [207] 
de leurs ennemis ; mais avant d'etre mis k mort, il 
fut baptise par un des Notres, qui venait par hasard 
d'arriver dans le village. Pendant que les Sauvages 
tourmentaient ce captif, il chantait qu'il devait aller 
au ciel. Je voudrais pouvoir decrire les supplices 


1640] CHAUMONOT TO NAPPI 29 

himself to the ground, [206] foaming, with all the 
signs of an approaching death. Being questioned 
about the cause of his trouble, his only answer was 
to present the remainder of the root that he had eat- 
en, — bidding to show it to his parents after his death. 
Our Fathers, warned by some Savages that this poi- 
son was deadly, make haste to instruct this wretch 
as quickly as possible, and baptize him, after having 
taken all the precautions necessary when it is a 
question of the baptism of adults. About half an 
hour later, he died by the wayside, while his parents 
were carrying him back to his cabin. A man, at- 
tacked by the contagion, and seeing the inefficiency 
of the remedies of the physicians of the country — 
that is to say, wizards (true or false) — stabbed him- 
self several times in the breast. One of Ours then 
enters by chance into his cabin, and straightway this 
man calls him and asks him for baptism. The Fa- 
ther catechizes him, and baptizes him without delay. 
The new Christian says to him : ' ' Do not believe 
that I have asked for baptism in the hope of prolong- 
ing my life, since I am already almost dead, — look 
at my wounds, and see if it is possible to escape it ; 
it is only the hope of heaven which has impelled me 
to become baptized." The Father induced him to 
offer an act of regret for having caused his own 
death. Soon afterward, he died. 

Our Savages captured, less than a month ago, one 
[207] of their enemies; but, before being put to 
death, he was baptized by one of Ours, who by 
chance had just arrived in the village. While the 
Savages were tormenting this captive, he sang that 
he was to go to heaven. I would I could describe 
the tortures which they inflict upon those of the ene- 


80 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 

qu'ils font souffrir ^ ceux des ennemis qui tombent 
entre leurs mains; mais il n'est pas possible de voir 
«n ce monde quelque chose qui represente mieux la 
manifere dont les demons tourmentent les damn6s. 
Des qu'ils ont fait un prisonnier, ils lui coupent les 
doigts des mains, ils lui d^chirent avec un couteau 
les 6paules et le dos, ils le garrottent avec des liens 
trfes-serr^s, et le conduisent en chantant et en se mo- 
quant de lui, avec tout le mepris imaginable. Arri- 
ves h. leur village, ils le font adopter par quelqu'un 
de ceux qui ont perdu leur fils h. la guerre. Ce 
parent simule est charge de caresser le prisonnier. 
Vous le verrez venir avec un collier en fer chaud, et 
lui dire: «Tiens, mon fils, tu aimes, je crois, k etre 
bien om6, k paraitre beau.w En le raillant ainsi, il 
commence ^ le tourmenter depuis la plante des pieds, 
jusqu'au sommet de la tete, avec des tisons ardents, 
avec la cendre chaude, en per9ant ses pieds et ses 
mains avec des roseaux ou des pointes de fer. Quand 
la faiblesse ne permet plus au captif de se tenir de- 
bout, on lui donne h. manger, et puis [208] on le fait 
marcher sur les charbons de plusieurs brasiers places 
en rang. S'il est ^puise, ils le prennent par les mains 
et les pieds, et le portent sur ces brasiers. Enfin ils 
le conduisent hors du village, et le font monter sur 
une estrade pour que tons les Sauvages, le voyant 
dans ce pitoyable 6tat, puissent satisfaire la rage de 
leur coeur. Au milieu de tous ces supplices, ils I'in- 
vitent k chanter, et le patient chante afin de ne pas 
passer pour lache. Tres-rarement ils se plaignent de 
la cruaut^ qu'on exerce sur eux. Pour couronner 
toute cette rage infernale, ils enlevent la peau de la 
tete h. ces infortunes. Apres leur mort, ils mettent 


1640] CHAUMONOT TO NAPPI 31 

mies who fall into their hands ; but it is not possible 
to see in this world anything that better represents 
the way in which the demons torment the damned. 
As soon as they have taken a prisoner, they cut off 
his fingers; they tear his shoulders and his back 
with a knife ; they bind him with very tight bonds, 
and lead him, — singing, and mocking at him with 
all the contempt imaginable. Having arrived at 
their village, they have him adopted by some one of 
those who have lost their son in the war. This 
feigned parent is charged with caressing the prisoner. 
You will see him come with a necklace in the form 
of hot iron, and say to him: " See here, my son; 
you love, I am sure, to be adorned, to appear beauti- 
ful." While thus deriding him, he begins to tor- 
ment him from the sole of the feet even to the crown 
of the head, with firebrands, with hot cinders, — pierc- 
ing his feet and his hands with reeds or with sharp 
irons. When weakness no longer permits the cap- 
tive to stand upright, they give him to eat, and then 
[208] they make him walk over the coals of several 
fires placed in a row. If he is exhausted, they 
take him by the hands and the feet, and carry him 
over these fires. Finally, they conduct him outside 
the village, and make him ascend a platform, so that 
all the Savages, seeing him in this lamentable plight, 
may satisfy their heart's rage. In the midst of all 
these tortures, they invite him to sing, and the suf- 
ferer sings in order not to pass for a coward. Very 
rarely do they complain of the cruelty which is prac- 
ticed upon them. To crown all this infernal rage, 
they remove the scalp from these unfortunates. 
After their death, they cut their bodies to pieces, 
and give to the principal captains the heart, the 


32 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.18 

leurs corps en pieces, et ils donnent aux principaux 
capitaines, le cceur, la tete, etc. Ceux-ci en font pre- 
sent ^ d'autres pour assaisonner leur soupe, et pour 
s'en nourrir, comme si c'6tait la viande de quelque 
cerf ou autre animal sauvage. 

Nous courons maintenant le danger d'etre pris et 
trait6s de la meme maniere que les Hurons, avec qui 
nous vivons ; car nous passons chaque ann^e, soit en 
descendant k Quebec, soit en remontant, par les lieux 
memes, ou les ennemis de nos Sauvages sont k I'affut 
pour les saisir dans leur voyage; et il n'y a [presque] 
pas d'annee oil plusieurs Hurons ne soient pris ou 
tu6s, comme je viens de dire. 

V. R. voit par Ik que nous avons besoin de secours 
[209] spirituels pour etre k I'abri de tant d* ennemis 
domestiques et Strangers, visibles et invisibles que 
nous rencontrons au milieu de ces peuples feroces. 

Je devrais 6crire h. beaucoup de Peres qui sont dans 
votre Province ; mais le papier et le temps me man- 
quent. C'est pourquoi je conjure V. R. de supplier 
h. ce silence, en montrant la pr6sente k ceux qui de- 
manderont de mes nouvelles, mais surtout h. N. T. R. 
P. G^n^ral et au P. Assistant de France, h. qui j'a- 
dresse cette lettre ; mais faites-moi la charity de la 
corriger auparavant, et ensuite de la faire copier 
par quelqu'un, car elle est trop mal 6crite pour etre 
presentee h. sa Paternity. 

V. R. voudra bien me rappeler au souvenir du R. 
P. Pensa, Provincial, du P. Oliva, des PP. Zucchi, 
Caravita, Gottefroid, Lampugnano, Fieramonti, Ara- 
iia, Oddone, Conti, Giustino, Ricci et autres, outre 
les PP. de Magistris et Finetti. 

Mon Reverend Pere, demandez pour moi quelques 


1640] CHAUMONOT TO NAPPI 33 

head, etc. The latter make presents of the same to 
others, to season their soup, and to feed themselves 
therewith, as if it were the meat of some stag or 
other wild animal. 

We now run the risk of being captured and treated 
in the same manner as the Hurons, with whom we 
live; for we pass, each year, — either while going 
down to Quebec, or in coming up, — by the very 
places where the enemies of our Savages are on the 
watch to seize them in their journey ; and there is 
hardly a year when several Hurons are not captured 
or killed as I have just described. 

Your Reverence thereby sees that we have need of 
spiritual aid, [209] in order to be sheltered from so 
many enemies, domestic and foreign, visible and 
invisible, whom we encounter in the midst of these 
ferocious tribes. 

I ought to write to many Fathers who are in your 
Province; but the paper and the time fail me. 
Wherefore I beseech Your Reverence to make good 
this silence, by showing this to those who shall ask 
about me : but especially to Our Very Reverend Fa- 
ther General, and to the Father Assistant for France, 
to whom I address this letter ; but do me the kindness 
of correcting it beforehand, and of then having it 
copied by some one, — for it is too badly written to 
be presented to his Paternity. 

Your Reverence will be kind enough to remember 
me to the Reverend Father Pensa, Provincial; to 
Father Oliva, Fathers Zucchi, Caravita, Gottefroid, 
Lampugnano, Fieramonti, Araiia, Oddone, Conti, 
Giustino, Ricci, and others; besides the Fathers de 
Magistris and Finetti. 

My Reverend Father, ask for me some masses and 



34 LES RELA TIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol. 18 

messes et quelques communions, pour I'amour de 
Dieu ; car, dans cette Mission, nous sommes expo- 
ses ^ en etre souvent prives, 

Je suis, de Votre Reverence, 
Le tres-indigne serviteur en Jesus-Christ, 
Joseph-Marie CALVONOTTI (Chaumonot). 

Au Pays des Hurons, dans la Nouvelle- France, le 
26 mai 1640. 


1640] CHAUMONOT TO NAPPI 35 

some communions, for the love of God ; for, in this 
Mission, we are liable to be often deprived of them. 

I am Your Reverence's 
Very unworthy servant in Jesus Christ, 
Joseph Marie CALVONOTTP (Chaumonot). 

In the Country of the Hurons, in New France, the 
26th of May, 1640. 


36 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 


[210] Lettre du P. Joseph -Marie Chaumonot, au 

R. P. Philippe Nappi, Superieur de la 

Maison Professe de Rome. 

(Traduite de Vitalien sur I'orzgmal conserve a Rome.) 

De Sainte- Marie aux Hurons, 3 aout 1640. 

MON R^V^REND PeRE, 
Pax Christi. 
J'ai reju en meme temps, I'annee derniere, 
deux lettres de Votre R6v^rence, I'tine de I'ann^e 
1638, Taiitre de I'annee 1639. La premiere m'appre- 
nait trois choses: d'abord qu'elle se souvenait de moi 
\ ratitel et qu'elle a c61ebre la sainte Messe pour moi 
sur le tombeau du B. Louis de Gonzague, comme je 
Ten avals priee. En second lieu, que Son Eminence 
le cardinal Pallotto continue sans relache k propager 
la devotion ^ la sainte maison de Lorette ou mieux "k 
la sainte Famille qui I'a sanctifiee. Enfin que le P. 
Ange de Magistris est parti pour le Paraguay, aussi- 
tot apres son ordination et sa premiere messe, c616- 
br6e dans I'eglise de Lorette dite de Ripetta 

[211] Pour reconnaitre en quelque fa9on la charity 
que vous avez de me donner des nouvelles de Rome, 
je vous tiendrai au courant des choses capables 
d'interesser votre curiosite, et de plus je presserai le 
P. Bressani de traduire en italien la Relation entiere 
que chaque ann6e nous envoyons ^ notre Pere Assis- 
tant. 

L'ann6e derniere, j'accompagnai I'un des Notres 


1640] CHAUMONOT TO NAPPI 37 


[210] Letter of Father Joseph Marie Chaumonot 
to the Reverend Father Philippe Nappi, Supe- 
rior of the Professed House at Rome. 

(Translated from the Italian original preserved at Rome.) 

From Sainte Marie of the Hurons, August 3, 1640. 

MY Reverend Father, 
Pax Christi. 
I received at the same time, last year, two 
letters from Your Reverence: one of the year 1638; 
the other, of the year 1639. The first apprised me of 
three things: to begin with, that you remembered 
me at the altar and that you celebrated holy Mass for 
me on the tomb of the Blessed Louis de Gonzague,^ 
as I had begged you to. In the second place, that 
His Eminence the cardinal Pallotto continues, with- 
out relaxation, to propagate the devotion to the holy 
house of Lorette; or better, to the holy Family 
which sanctified it.^ Finally, that Father Ange de 
Magistris started for Paraguay directly after his or- 
dination and his first mass — celebrated in the church 
of Lorette called de Ripetta 

[211] To acknowledge in some fashion your char- 
ity in giving me news of Rome, I will keep you in- 
formed of the matters likely to interest your curiosi- 
ty; and, moreover, I will urge Father Bressani to 
translate into Italian the whole Relation which we 
send each year to our Father Assistant. 

Last year, I accompanied one of Ours (Father de 


38 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.18 

(le P. de Br^beuf) dans un pays oil I'Evangile n'avait 
pas encore ^t6 annonc6. Partant de notre Residence 
an pays des Hurons, nous fimes six jours de route, 
toujours dans les bois, et sans trouver aucun endroit 
pour nous reposer ou refugier. Nous ^tions obliges 
de porter ^ dos tout ce qui nous 6tait n^cessaire pour 
notre nourriture. Les sentiers de ces forets sont 
tres-difficiles, 6tant fort pen battus, remplis de brous- 
sailles et de branches, coupes de marais, de ruisseaux, 
de riviferes sans autres ponts que quelques arbres, 
brisks par I'age ou par le vent. L'hiver est la meil- 
leure saison pour voyager, parce que la neige rend 
les sentiers plus unis. Mais il faut qu'elle soit dur- 
cie, comme nous I'avons trouvee k notre retour, "k 
I'exception de deux journees: sans cela, on enfonce 
k chaque pas. II y a encore un avantage k voyager 
en hiver: c'est que les cours d'eau sont glaces, et 
que nous avons pu, pendant soixante milles, trainer 
nos bagages. [212] II est vrai qu'on ne trouve aucun 
abri contre les vents qui sont tres-violents et tr^s- 
froids. Mais, grace k Celui h qui la mer et les vents obi- 
issent, nous avons march^ courageusement et joyeuse- 
ment, nialgr6 le froid, la fatigue et des chutes sans 
nombre sur la glace ; ce dont mes genoux ont conser- 
ve bon souvenir. Mais qu'est-ce que cela en compa- 
raison de ce que Notre- Seigneur a souffert pour moi? 
Je m'estimerais heureux de me briser bras et jambes 
k son service. 

Les petits enfants en danger de mort ont recuelli 
les premiers fruits de notre apostolat. Nous en 
avons baptist un grand nombre a I'insu de leurs pa- 
rents, qui s'y seraient opposes certainement. Beau- 
coup de ces enfants sont d6jk partis pour le ciel. 


1640] CHAUMONOT TO NAPPI 39 

Br6beuf) to a country where the Gospel had not yet 
been announced. Starting from our Residence in 
the land of the Hurons, we made six days' route, 
continually in the woods, and without finding any 
place in which to rest ourselves or to take refuge. 
We were obliged to carry on our backs whatever was 
necessary to us in the way of our food. The paths 
in these forests are very difficult, being very little 
worn, — filled with brushwood and branches; cut up 
with swamps, brooks, and rivers, without other bridges 
than a few trees, broken off by age or by the wind. 
The winter is the best season for traveling, because 
the snow renders the paths more even. But it must 
needs be hardened, as we found it on our return, 
with the exception of two days : otherwise, one sinks 
in at every step. There is still another advantage in 
traveling in winter, — namely, because the water- 
courses are frozen, and we were able to drag our bag- 
gage for sixty miles. [212] It is true that one finds 
no shelter from the winds, which are very violent 
and very cold. But thanks to Him whom the sea and 
the winds obey, we proceeded bravely and joyfully, 
despite the cold, the fatigue, and countless falls on 
the ice, whereof my knees have retained a goo d re- 
minder. But what is that in comparison with what 
Our Lord has suffered for me ? I should esteem my- 
self happy to break my arms and legs in his service. 
The little children in danger of death have reaped 
the first fruits of our apostolate. We have baptized 
a great number of them without the knowledge of 
their parents, who would certainly have opposed it. 
Many of these children have already departed for 
heaven. As for the adults, not only have they not 
been willing to listen to the good news, but they even 


40 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 18 


Quant aux adultes, non-seulement ils n'ont pas vou- 
lu 6couter la bonne nouvelle, mais ils nous empe- 
chaient d'entrer dans leurs bourgades, nous mena- 
§ant de nous tuer et de nous manger, comme ils font 
h. leurs plus cruels ennemis. La cause de cette 
grande aversion venait des calomnies propagees par 
quelques mauvais habitants du pays d'oii nous ve- 
nions. Par suite de ces calomnies, ils etaient con- 
vaincus que nous etions des sorciers, des imposteurs 
venus pour s'emparer de leur pays, apres les avoir 
fait perir par nos sortileges, lesquels etaient enfer- 
m^s dans nos ecritoires, dans nos livres, etc.; de 
[213] sorte que nous n'osions pas, sans nous caclier, 
ouvrir un livre ou ecrire quelque chose. Non-seule- 
ment nos livres et nos papiers etaient suspects de 
magie, mais encore nos moindres gestes et mouve- 
ments. Je voulus une fois me mettre ^ genoux dans 
une cabane, ou nous nous etions retires pour prier 
avec plus de recueillement. Aussitot le bruit se 
repandit que Oronhiaguehre, c'est-k-dire, porte-ciel 
comme ils m'appellent, avait passe une partie de la 
nuit ^ faire ses sortileges et qu'en consequence tous 
devaient se mettre en garde et se defier de lui. 
Mais, en depit du diable et de ses suppots, nous 
avons pu employer tout notre hiver 'k parcourir les 
bourgades des sauvages, les menajant de I'enfer, 
s'ils ne se convertissaient, sans que personne ait ose 
toucher un seul de nos cheveux. Chacun d'eux 
cependant desirait notre mort et excitait les autres k 
nous tuer, mais aucun n'avait le courage de le faire, 
quoique cela fut la chose la plus facile du monde : 
nous n'etions que deux hommes faibles, sans armes, 
loin de tout secours humain; Dieu seul etait pour 


1640] CHAUMONOT TO NAPPI 41 

prevented us from entering their villages, threatening 
to kill and eat us, as they do with their most cruel 
enemies. The reason of this great aversion arose 
from the calumnies disseminated by some evil inhab- 
itants of the country from which we came. In con- 
sequence of these calumnies, they were convinced 
that we were sorcerers, impostors come to take pos- 
session of their country, after having made them per- 
ish by our spells, which were shut up in our ink- 
stands, in our books, etc., — [213] insomuch that we 
dared not, without hiding ourselves, open a book or 
write anything. Not only were our books and our 
papers suspected of magic, but even our slightest 
gestures and motions. I once attempted to kneel down 
in a cabin, where we had withdrawn in order more 
collectedly to pray. Straightway the noise spread 
that Oronhiaguehre — that is to say, heaven-bearer, 
as they call me — had spent a part of the night in 
devising his spells, and that in consequence all were 
bound to put themselves on guard and distrust him. 
But, in spite of the devil and of his imps, we have 
been able to spend our whole winter in making the 
round of the savages' villages, — threatening them 
with hell if they would not be converted, — and 
nobody has dared to touch a single one of our hairs. 
Each one of them, however, was desiring our death 
and exciting the others to kill us; but none had the 
courage to do so, although that was the easiest thing 
in the world, — we were only two weak men, without 
weapons, far from all human assistance. God alone 
was for us, and he paralyzed the ill-will of so many 
enemies. May Your Reverence help me to thank the 
Lord for having preserved me from so many trials 
and dangers. 


42 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 

nous, et il a paralyse le mauvais vouloir de tant 
d'ennemis. Que Votre Reverence m'aide ^ remer- 
cier le Seigneur de m'avoir preserve de tant d'e- 
preuves et de dangers. 

L'automne prochain, j'espere passer un second 
hiver au milieu de ces pauvres sauvages: aussi [214] 
je compte obtenir le secours de vos prieres 

Pour finir cette lettre j'ajouterai trois faits assez 
remarquables arrives cette ann^e, vusurtoutqu'il s'a- 
git de pauvres infideles, sans morality. Le premier 
fait est celui d'un jeune homme qui, voyageant par 
un grand froid avec sa soeur et la voyant prfes de suc- 
comber, se depouilla d'une grande peau qui le cou- 
vrait pour Ten revetir; puis I'encourageant ^ hater le 
pas afin d'eviter la mort qui la mena^ait, il resta avec 
le mauvais vetement de sa soeur. La jeune fille le 
laissant, se mit k courir jusqu'k son village, et pen- 
dant ce temps-Ik son pauvre frere mourait de froid, 
victime de son h^roisme fraternel. Soixante autres 
environ, durant cet hiver, perirent dans les neiges. 

Le second fait est celui d'un petit enfant de huit k 
neuf ans qui, jouant sur la glace, tomba dans I'eau. 
Un de ses freres, k peu pres du meme age, se jeta 
dans la rivifere par le trou oil son frere avait disparu, 
le saisit, et nageant sous la glace, eut I'adresse de 
remonter avec son fardeau par une autre ouverture 
assez eloign^e de la premiere et lui sauva ainsi la 
vie. Ce fait arriva dans un village ou nous nous 
trouvions. 

Le troisieme est un fait de guerre. Nos sauvages, 
etant alle combattre, furent surpris par I'ennemi 
dans une embuscade. Voyant I'impossibilite de se 
[215] d^fendre, les anciens dirent aux plus jeunes : 


1640] CHAUMONOT TO NAPPI 43 

Next autumn I hope to spend a second winter in 
the midst of these poor savages; accordingly, [214] 
I count on obtaining the help of your prayers 

To conclude this letter, I will add three quite 
remarkable occurrences which happened this year, — 
especially since they concern poor infidels without 
morality. The first is that of a young man who, 
traveling during intense cold with his sister, and see- 
ing her almost succumb, stripped himself of a great 
skin which covered him, in order to clothe her with 
it; then, encouraging her to quicken her pace in 
order to avoid the death which was threatening her, 
he stayed behind, with his sister's thin garment. 
The young girl, leaving him, began to run even to 
her village, and during that time her poor brother 
was dying of cold, the victim of his fraternal hero- 
ism. About sixty others, during this winter, per- 
ished in the snows. 

The second instance is that of a little child of eight 
or nine years who, playing on the ice, fell into the 
water. One of his brothers, of almost the same age, 
jumped into the river through the hole where his 
brother had disappeared, seized him, and swimming 
beneath the ice, had the skill to come up again with 
his burden, through another opening quite distant 
from the first, and thus saved his life. This deed 
happened in a village where we chanced to be. 

The third is an incident of war. Our savages, hav- 
iiig gone to fight, were surprised by the enemy in an 
ambush. Seeing the impossibility of [215] defend- 
ing themselves, the elders said to the younger men : 
" Since you can render services to our nation, take 
flight, while we shall check the enemy." This is 
what happened: those old savages were taken, led 


44 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vou 18 

«Puisque vous pouvez rendre des services "k notre 
nation, prenez la fuite, pendant que nous arreterons 
I'ennemi.)) C'est ce qui arriva: ces vieux sauvages 
furent pris, emmenes captifs, cruellement tourmen- 
t6s, briil^s, rotis et devores, selon la coutume de cette 
contree, habitee par des anthropophages, comme je 
vous I'ai dejk 6crit. 

N'ayant rien autre chose ^ raconter k Votre Reve- 
rence, je finis, en la priant, si elle trouve quelque 
chose dans ma lettre qui puisse interesser notre T. 
R. P. General, de vouloir bien le lui communiquer, 
mais de bouche seulement, ma lettre 6tant ecrite trop 
miserablement pour la mettre sous les yeux de Sa 
Paternite. Que Votre Reverence veuille bien I'assu- 
rer que je ne dis jamais la sainte messe sans la recom- 
mander k Notre Seigneur. 

Je suis, de Votre Reverence, 

le tres-humble serviteur en Notre-Seigneur. 

Joseph-Marie CHAUMONOT. 

De la residence de Ste-Marie aux Hurons, le 3 
aout 1640. 


1640] CHAUMONOT TO NAPPI 45 

away captive, cruelly tormented, burned, roasted, 
and devoured, — according to the custom of this coun- 
try, inhabited by cannibals, as I have already writ- 
ten to you. 

Having nothing else to relate to Your Reverence, 
I close ; requesting you, if you find anything in my 
letter which can interest our Very Reverend Father 
General, to be so kind as to make it known to him : 
but orally alone, — my letter being written too 
wretchedly to put it beneath His Paternity's eyes. 
Will Your Reverence kindly assure him that I never 
say holy mass without commending him to Our Lord ? 

I am Your Reverence's 

very humble servant in Our Lord. 

Joseph Marie CHAUMONOT. 

From the residence of Ste. Marie among the 
Hurons, the 3rd of August, 1640. 


XLI 

Relation of 1640 

Paris: SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, 1641 


SOURCE:"' We reprint from the original edition (H. 76), in 
Lenox Library. 

Tiie document consists of two parts : Part L, by Le Jeune, 
dated at Quebec, September 10, 1640; Part IL, by Jerome 
Lalemant, dated in the Huron country, May 27, 1640, with 
a postscript dated August 3. In the present volume, we give 
chaps, i.-x. of Part L; this part will be concluded in our 
Volume XIX., and Part II. commenced ; Volume XX. will see 
the conclusion of the entire document. 


RELATION 

DECEQVI S'EST PASSE' 

^-^ E N L A . 

NOVVELLE FRANCE 

EN UANNEE M. DC. XL. 

Enuoy^c au R. P. Prouincial de la Com- 

pagnie dc I e svi dc I.i Prduince 

de France. 

Par le P. Bartbelemy Vmontyde U 

f>iefme Compugnie, Superieur de U 

Rcfidence de Kiehec, 



A PARIS, 

Chez Sebastien Cramoisy 

Imprimeur ordinaire du Roy , rue 

S. Iacques,aux Cicognes 

"~ M, DC. XL I. 

^H(C Friuilive dn Roy, 




RELATION 

OF WHAT TOOK PLACE 
IN 

NEW F RANGE 

IN THE YEAR M. DC. XL. 

Sent to the Reverend Father Provincial 

of the Society of J esus of the 

Province of France. 

By Father Bartbelemy Vimont, of the 

same Society, Superior of the 

Residence of K6bec. 


PARIS, 

Sebastien Cramoisy, Printer in 
ordinary to the King, rue St. Jac- 
ques, at the Sign of the Storks. 

M. DC. XLI. 
By Royal License. 


52 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.18 


Extraid du Priuilege du Roy. 

PAR grace & Priuileg-e du Roy, il eft permis k 
Sebastien Cramoisy, Marchand Libraire lure, 
Imprimeur ordinaire du Roy, Bourgeois de 
Paris, d'imprimer ou faire imprimer vn liure intitule, 
Relation de ce qui s' eji pajf^ en la nouuelle France en 
V ann^e 1640. enuoy^e au Reuerend Pere Prouincial de la 
Compagnie de Iesvs en la Prouince de France, par le Pere 
Barthelemy Vimont de la me/me Compagnie, Superieur 
de la Rejidence h K^bec : & ce pendant le temps & ef pace 
de quinze annees confecutiues : Auec defences k tous 
Libraires & Imprimeurs d'imprimer ou faire impri- 
mer ladite Relation fous pretexte de d^guifement ou 
changement qu'ils y pourroient faire, k peine de con- 
fifcation, & de I'amande port^e par ledit Priuilege. 
Donne k Paris, ce 20. Septembre 1640. Par le Roy 
en fon Confeil, Sign6, 

Ceberet. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 53 


Extract from the Royal License. 

BY the grace and License of the King, permis- 
sion is granted to Sebastien Cramoisy, Book- 
seller under Oath, Printer in ordinary to the 
King, Citizen of Paris, to print or to have printed a 
book entitled Relation de ce qui s' est pass^ en la nouvelle 
France en V ann^e 1640. envoy ^e au Reverend Pere Pro- 
vincial de la Compagnie de jESUS en la Province de France, 
par le Pere Barthelemy Vimont de la mesme Compagnie, 
Superieur de la Residence h K^bec; and this during the 
time and space of fifteen consecutive years. Pro- 
hibiting all Booksellers and Printers from printing 
or having printed the said Relation under pretext of 
disguise or change that may be made therein, on 
penalty of confiscation, and of the fine provided by 
the said License. Given at Paris, this 20th of Sep- 
tember, 1640. By the King in Council. Signed, 

Ceberet. 


54 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 18 


Permiffion du P. Prouincial. 

NOVS Iacqves Dinet Prouincial de la Compagnie 
de Iesvs en la Prouince de France: Auons 
accord6 pour I'aduenir au Sieur Sebastien 
Cramoisy Marchand Libraire, Imprimeur ordinaire 
du Roy, rimpreffion des Relations de la Nouuelle 
France. Fait k Paris, le 12. Decembre 1640. 

Iacqves Dinet. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 55 


Permission of the Father Provincial. 

WE, Jacques Dinet, Provincial of the Society 
of Jesus in the Province of France, have 
for the future granted to Sieur Sebastien 
Cramoisy, Bookseller, Printer in ordinary to the 
King, the printing of the Relations of New France. 
Done at Paris, this 12th of December, 1640. 

Jacques Dinet. 


56 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 


Table des Chapitres contenus en cette Relation. 

RELA TION de ce qui s'eji paj}^ en la nouuelle 
France en r ann^e 1640. . . Pa-g- i- 

Chapitre I. Du voyage & de V arriu^e de la 
flotte en la nouuelle France. . • 3- 

Chap. II. De V ejlat general de la Colonie Frangoi/e, 

& de la conuerjion des Sauuages. . .16 

Chap. III. Les Sauuages fe r ajfemblent h S. lo/eph 

apres la maladie, ejlifent quelques Capitaines ^ 

& font par oijlre leur Zele pour la Foy. . 22 

Chap. IV. Des Sauuages bapti/ez, & des bonnes 

anions de cette nouuelle Eglife. . . 44 

Chap. V. Continuation du me fine difcours. . 58 

Chap. VI. Continuation du niefme fujet. . . 72 

Chap. VII. Continuation des anions de nos nouueaux 

Chretiens. . . . . -9^ 

Chap. VIII. De la bonne difpofition de quelques 

Sauuages non encore baptifez. . . 105 

Chap. IX. De la prouidence de Dieu au choix de 

quelques-vns, & au rebut de quelques autres. . Wj 
Chap. X. De I esperance qu on a de la conuerfion de 

plufieurs Sauuages. . . . .128 

Chap. XI. De V hospital. . . . .146 

Chap. XII. Du fommaire [sc. feminaire'] des Meres 

Vrfulines. . . . . .168 

Chap. XIII. Diuerfes chofes qui nont pit e^re 

rapport^es aux Chapitres precedens. . .187 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 57 


Table of the Chapters contained in this Relation. 

RELA TION of what occurred in new France 
in the year 1640. . . . page i. 

Chapter I. Of the voyage of the fleet, and its 
arrival in new France. . . • 3- 

Chap. II. Of the general condition of the French 

Colony, and the conversion of the Savages. . 16 
Chap. III. The Savages reassemble at St. foseph 

after the epidemic, elect several Captains, and 

show their Zeal for the Faith. . .22 

Chap. IV. Of the Savages baptized, and the good 

deeds in this new Church. . . -44 

Chap. V. Continuation of the same subject. . 58 

Chap. VI. Continuation of the same subject. . 72 

Chap. VII. Continuation of the actions of our new 

Christians. . . • • • 9^ 

Chap. VIII. Of the good disposition of some Savages 

not yet baptized. . . • .105 

Chap. IX. Of the providence of God in the choice of 

some, and the rejection of others. . • 1^7 

Chap. X. Of the hope we have for the conversion of 

many Savages. . . • .128 

Chap. XI. Of the hospital. . . .146 

Chap. XII. Of the seminary of the Ursuline Mothers. 168 
Chap. XIII. Various things which could not be re- 
ported in the preceding Chapters. . .187 


68 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUJTES [Vol.18 


Table des Chapitres contenus en la Relation de 

ce qui s'eft paffe dans le pays des 

Huron en I'annee 1640. 

CHAPITRE I. De V ejlat du pays. pag. 4 

Chapitre II. Des perfecutions excit^es contre 
nous. . . . . .11 

Chap. III. De V ejlat general du Chri^ianifme en 

ces contr^es. . . . . -33 

Chap. IV. De la Re Jidence fixe de fain6ie Marie. . 42 
Chap. V. De la mif^ion de fain^e Marie aux Ata- 

ronchronons. . . . . .68 

Chap. VI. De la re fide nee & mifiion de S. Jofieph 

aux Attingneenongnahac. . . -79 

Chap. VII. De la mifiion de la Conception aux Atti- 

gnaouentan. . . . . -99 

Chap. VIII. Des Chrefiiens de cette mefime mifiion 

de la Conception. . . . .118. 

Chap. IX. De la mifiion de fainil lean Baptifie aux 

Arendaronons. . . . .145. 

Chap. X. De la mifiioti fiurnomm^e des Apofires aux 

Khionontateronons. .... 164. 
Lettre efcritte au P. Vimont depuis la Relation. . 192 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 59 


Table of the Chapters contained in the Relation 

of what took place in the country of 

the Hurons, in the year 1640. 

CHAPTER I. Of the condition of the coun- 
try. .... page 4. 

Chapter II. Of the persecutions excited aga inst 

us. . . . . .11. 

Chap. III. Of the general condition of Christianity 

in these countries. . . . • 33- 

Chap. IV. Of the permanent Residence of sainte 

Marie. . . . . .42. 

Chap. V. Of the mission of sainte Marie to the Ata- 

ronchrotions. . . . . .68. 

Chap. VI. Of the residence and mission of St. Joseph 

to the Attingneenongnahac . . . • 79- 

CJiap. VII. Of the mission of la Conception to the 

Attignaouentan. . . . -99 

Chap. VIII. Of the Christians of this same mission 

of la Conception. . . . .118. 

Chap. IX. Of the mission of saint Jean Baptiste to 

the Arendaronons. . . . .145. 

Chap. X. Of the mission surnamed ' ' of the Apos- 
tles^'' to the Khionontateronons. . . 164. 
Letter written to Father Vimont after the Relation 

was finished. . . . . .192 


60 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 


[i] Relation de ce qvi s'eft paffe en la Nouuelle 
France, en I'Annee 1640. 

MON R. Pere, 
le croyois qu'eftant def charge du fardeau 
de la Superiority, ie ferois en fuite deliur6 des 
foins de la Relation que V. R. exige de nous, & 
qu'vne grande partie de la France attend auec quel- 
que paffion: mais noftre R. P. Superieur ma fait 
veoir que cefte confequence n'eftoit point neceffaire, 
fi bien que nonobflant qu'il la put drefler auec auan- 
tage ayant defia vne grande cognoiffance du pays & 
des Sauuages, il s'eft encor repof6 fur moy pour [2] 
cefte ann^e dans rempreflement de fes affaires du 
tribut dont les affedtions de V. R. & d'vne infinit6 
de perfonnes de merite & de condition nous rendent 
redeuables. Ie doute fort fi nous aurons vn affez 
grand fond pour faire cefle rente annuelle, fi ce n'eft 
qu'on ayme les redites car les fubiets fe trouuans fort 
femblables, les difcours ne fgauroient pas auoir vne 
grande diuerfite quand les fauuages fe feront tous 
reduits comme il arriuera quelque iour fi on les 
fecoure fortement ie ne fgay plus ce qu'on pourroit 
remarquer finon leurs bonnes adtios qui pour auoir 
beaucoup de reffemblances pourroient caufer du 
degouft. Pleut k Dieu que nous fuffions dans cefte 
peine, & que tous ces pauures Barbares fuffent au 
point que nous les fouhaittons, a peine de ne pro- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 61 


[I] Relation of what occurred in New France, 
in the Year 1640. 

MY Reverend Father, 
I thought that, when I was relieved from 
the burdens of a Superior, I would conse- 
quently be freed from the responsibility of the Rela- 
tion which Your Reverence exacts from us, and 
which a large part of France awaits with some eager- 
ness. But our Reverend Father Superior has shown 
me that this is not a necessary consequence ; and so, 
although he could have done it advantageously, as 
he has already an extensive knowledge of the coun- 
try and of the Savages, there again devolves upon 
me [2] this year, in the pressure of his business, the 
tribute which Your Reverence's affection and that of 
an infinite number of persons of merit and rank make 
it incumbent upon us to render. I doubt very much 
whether we shall have enough material to make up 
this annual rent, unless our readers like repetitions. 
For as the subjects are very similar, the narratives 
cannot have a great variety when the savages shall 
all be converted, — as will happen some day, if they 
are energetically aided. I do not know what one can 
record then, unless it be their good actions, which, 
from their great similarity, may cause some feeling 
of surfeit. Would to God that we might have this 
difficulty, and that all these poor Barbarians were at 
the point where we wish them to be, reluctant to make 
known their actions except to the sight of Heaven, 


62 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.18 

duire leurs adtions qu'k la veue du Ciel, & de n'en 
parler qu'^ celuy auquel on ne les peut cacher, mais 
entrons en difcours. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 63 

and to Speak of them except to him from whom they 
cannot be concealed. But let us begin our nar- 
rative. 


M LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.18 


[3] CHAPITRE PREMIER. 

DU VOYAGE & DE L'ARRIUEE DE LA FLOTTE EN LA 
NOUUELLE FRANCE. 

LE Pere Rene Menart eflant arriu6 h. Kebec nous 
a racont6 quelques particularitez du Voyage 
de la Flotte de cefte ann6e, lefquelles m'ont 
femble tres-dignes de compofer ce premier chapitre. 
Nos vaiffeaux, difoit-il, fe mirent en Rade le vingt- 
lixiefme de Mars. Madame la Duchelle d'Aiguillon 
ayant augment^ la fondation de fon Hofpital en la 
Nouuelle France, & defirant en fuite que deux Reli- 
gieufes de la maifon de la Mifericorde eftablie k 
Dieppe vinffent donner du fecours k leurs bonnes 
foeurs, Monfeigneur I'Archeuefque de Roiien leur 
accorda leur cong^ auec autant d'amour & d'affedtion 
qu'il defire raccroilTement de la gloire de noftre Sei- 
gneur en la conuerlion des pauures Sauuages : [4] la 
Mere de faindte Marie & la foeur de faindl Nicolas 
toutes deux profeffes de ce Monaftere furent choifies 
auec vne tres-fenfible confolation de leur bon-heur, 
& auec les regrets de quantity d'autres qui foufpi- 
roient apres cefte croix qu'ils enuifageoient comme 
vn Paradis. Madame de la Pelletrie fondatrice d'vn 
Seminaire de petites filles fauuages & des Religieufes 
Vrfulines qu'elle ^ fait pafCer en ces contr^es, defi- 
rant qu'on leur amenaft vne ProfeUe du Conuent de 
Paris, Monfeigneur I'Archeuefque s'interelfant dans 
la caufe de Dieu, & voulant auoir part k I'inftrudtion 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 65 


[3] CHAPTER FIRST. 

OF THE VOYAGE OF THE FLEET, AND ITS ARRIVAL 
IN NEW FRANCE. 

FATHER Rene Menart,^ having arrived at Kebec, 
related to us some details of the Voyage of 
the Fleet this year, which seem to me very 
worthy to compose this first chapter. " Our ships," 
said he, ' ' set out from their Anchorage on the twen- 
ty-sixth of March, Madame the Duchess d'Aiguil- 
lon having increased the endowment of her Hospital 
in New France, and desiring, consequently, that two 
Nuns of the house of Mercy established at Dieppe 
should come and give some help to their good sis- 
ters, Monseigneur the Archbishop of Rouen granted 
them their dismissal, with a love and affection pro- 
portionate to his desire for the increase of the glory 
of our Lord in the conversion of the poor Savages. 
[4] Mother de sainte Marie and sister de saint Nicho- 
las, both professed nuns of this Monastery, were 
chosen, with very keen appreciation of their good 
fortune, and with regrets for the many others who 
were sighing for this cross, which they regarded as 
a Paradise. As Madame de la Pelletrie, foundress 
of a Seminary for little savage girls and for the Ur- 
suline Nuns whom she has had cross over into these 
countries, desired that there should be brought to 
them a Professed Nun of the Convent of Paris, ^ and 
as Monseigneur the Archbishop, who interests him- 
self in the cause of God, and wishes to participate in 


66 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.18 

& au falut des ames que ces bonnes filles cultiueront, 
ne iugeant pas &, propos qu'vne feule fortit de fon 
Conuent en enuoya deux, f9auoir efl la Mere Anne 
de faindte Claire, & la Mere Marguerite de faindte 
Athanafe qui enleuerent auec elles tous les coeurs de 
cefte grande Maifon. Voyla done quatre Religieufes 
embarquees dans le vaifleau nomme I'Efperance, 
conduit par Monfieur de Courpon fort honefle Gentil- 
homme, lequel k oblig6 ces [5] bonnes ames au der- 
nier point: ie ne f9ay fi les demons preuoyoient 
quelque grand bien de ce paffage, mais il femble 
qu'il nous ayent voulu abyfmer des la rade, ils 
foufleuerent tout I'Ocean, defchainerent les vents, 
exciterent des tempeftes fi horribles & fi continues 
qu' elles nous penferent perdre k la veue de Dieppe: 
nous fufmes dans ces dangers racontoit le Pere, 
depuis le vingt-fixiefme de Mars iufques au vingt- 
huidtiefme d'Auril battus de pluye & de neige aufli 
pres de la mort que nous I'eftions des coftes de France, 
vn vaiffeau de faindt Valery qui eftoit en rade auec 
nous fe detachant de fes ancres s'alla brifer k nos yeux, 
tout ce qui eftoit dedans fe perdit, les hommes furent 
engloutis dans les ondes & de vingt ou enuiron qu'ils 
eftoient dans ce Nauire il ne s'en fauua que trois, la 
mort qui moiff onnoit ces corps f embloit nous attendre k 
tous moments pour nous deuorer, i'entendois plufieurs 
perfonnes detefter I'heure & le moment que lapenf^e 
leur eftoit venue en I'efprit [6] de monter fur mer, & 
de confier leur vie k la mercy d'vn cable, la vertu 
anime puilTamment vn coeur, ces bonnes filles qui en 
autre temps auroient tremble dans vn bafteau dellus 
la Seine, fe mocquoient de la mort, & de fes appro- 
ches, en effet il importe peu qu'on meure fur la terre 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 67 

the instruction and salvation of the souls that these 
good sisters will cultivate, did not judge it proper for 
one alone to leave her Convent, he sent two, namely, 
Mother Anne de sainte Claire and Mother Marguerite 
de sainte Athanase, and all the hearts of this great 
House went with them. Accordingly, there were 
four Nuns who embarked in the vessel called the 
" Esperance," under the command of Monsieur de 
Courpon, a very honest Gentleman, who favored 
these [5] good souls to the utmost. I do not know 
whether the demons foresaw some great blessing 
from this passage, but it seems as if they desired to 
engulf us from the time we left the roadstead. They 
raised up the whole Ocean, unchained the winds, 
and excited such horrible and continuous tempests 
that they almost made us perish in sight of Dieppe. 
We were in the midst of these dangers, ' ' related the 
Father, " from the twenty-sixth of March until the 
twenty-eighth of April, beaten upon by rain and 
snow, as near to death as we were to the coasts of 
France. A ship of saint Valery, which was in the 
roadstead with us, detaching itself from its anchors, 
went to pieces before our eyes, everything that was 
within being carried away. The men were engulfed 
in the waves ; and, of twenty or thereabout who were 
in this Ship, only three were saved. The death that 
reaped these bodies, seemed at every moment wait- 
ing to devour us. I heard many persons cursing the 
hour and the moment when the thought entered 
their minds [6] to go upon the sea, and to entrust their 
lives to the mercy of a cable. Virtue animates a 
heart powerfully. These good sisters, who, at other 
times, would have trembled in a boat upon the Seine, 
mocked at death and its approaches. In fact, it mat- 


68 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 

ou dans les eaux, pourueu qu'on meure auec Dieu. 
Cefte tempefte eftant pallee il s'en efleua vne autre 
auffi furieufe que la premiere comme on la vit naiftre 
dans I'air, nos mariniers ietterent le fecond ancre qui 
nous fauua la vie, car le cable du premier qui nous 
auoit tenu iufques alors fe rompit en vn moment, «& 
noftrc vailTeau fe fuft perdu fans refource, li le 
fecond ancre ne I'eufl arrefte. Si nous euitions vn 
peril nous tobions dans 1' autre, le cable manquant k 
noflre Vice- Admiral vn coup de mer le ietta fur nous 
auec vne telle fureur que les plus coftans penfoiet 
eftre perdus, iamais ie n'ay enuifag6 la mort de fi 
pres, i'eu recours au grand faindt lofeph, patron des 
contrees ou nous voulions aller, fi ce vaifleau fe fuft 
auanc6 de vingt pas nous nous fuffions brifes, & I'O- 
cean [7] nous auroit enfeuelis dedans fes ondes. Au 
point que ie prefentois mes voeux ^ Dieu par I'entre- 
mife de ce grand Saindt, on nous vint dire que le 
vent auoit efcart6 ce vaiffeau, Dieu confenia les trois 
de noflre Flotte qui eftoient en rade fans autre perte 
que d'vn cable & d'vn bafteau que la tempefte nous 
enleua, quelques vns auoient fait courre le bruit qu'vne 
des Religieufes eftoit morte, & que I'autre eftoit h. 
r extremity. Ie defcendy en terre, difoit le Pere, 
pour afleurer du contraire ; il eft vray qu'elles eurent 
de I'exercice vn grand mois durant pendant ces tem- 
pefles, que Dieu efprouua leur conftance, mais pas 
vne ne recula en arriere. Ah ! qu'il fait bon fe letter 
entre les bras de fa douce prouidence, & receuoir 
auec amour les coups que fa main nous donne, les 
Anges conferuoient noflre Flotte par les mefmes 
tempefles que les demons excitoient pour la perdre, 
ie ne f9ay fl depuis cent ans on a veu des vaiffeaux fi 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 69 

ters little whether one die upon the land or upon the 
sea, provided one die with God. This tempest hav- 
ing passed over, another arose as furious as the first. 
As they saw it arising in the air, our sailors cast the 
second anchor, which saved our lives ; for the cable 
of the first, which, until then, had secured us, broke 
in a moment, and our ship would have been hope- 
lessly lost if the second anchor had not held us fast. 
If we avoided one danger, we fell into another. Our 
Vice Admiral missing the cable, a wave dashed it 
upon us with such fury that the most steadfast 
thought they were lost. Never have I confronted 
death so near. I had recourse to the great saint 
Joseph, patron of the countries where we wished to 
go. If this ship had advanced twenty paces, we 
would have been dashed to pieces, and the Ocean [7] 
would have swallowed us in its waves. At the 
moment when I was offering my vows to God through 
the medium of this great Saint, they came to tell me 
that the wind had passed by this vessel. God pre- 
served the three of our Fleet which were in the road- 
stead, without other loss than that of a cable, and of 
a boat that the tempest carried away from us. Some 
had circulated the report that one of the Nuns was 
dead, and that another was dying. I landed," said 
the Father, " to assure them of the contrary. It is 
true they were in some anxiety during the long 
month of these tempests when God was proving 
their constancy, but not one of them drew back. 
Ah ! how good it is to cast oneself into the arms of 
his sweet providence, and to receive with love the 
strokes that his hands give us! The Angels pre- 
served our Fleet through the same tempests that the 
demons excited to destroy it. I do not know that 


Vo LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.18 

long temps en rade ny batus de vents fi fortement 
contraires, cefle furie nous enchaifnat pres du port 
nous deffendoit [8] contra des fregates ennemyes 
equipees en guerre qui nous attendoient au paffage, 
fi bien que fi nous eufiions leu6 I'ancre vn iour deuant 
noflre defpart, nous fuffions infailliblement tombez 
entre les mains de I'ennemy. Madame la Ducheffe 
d'Aiguillon ayant eu aduis de cet embufcade fit en 
forte que Monfeigneur le Cardinal de Richelieu com- 
manda aux vaiffeaux du Havre de nous donner 
efcorte, comme nous nous mettions en deuoir de les 
aller ioindre, nous rencontrafmes cinq fregates Dun- 
querquoifes, aufli toft on met la main aux armes, on 
iette les canons hors des fabors, chacun fe difpofe au 
combat, Monfieur de Courpon noflre Admiral s'a- 
uance, mais ces fregates eflant embarafTees de deux 
vaiffeaux Hollandois qui nous auoient quittez la nuidt 
precedente, & qui venoient d'eftre pris vn peu auant 
que nous paruffions s'efcarterent de nous voyans ^ 
noflre contenance que nous eflions pour leur difpu- 
ter fortement la vidloire, nous arriuafmes au Havre 
incontinent apres, ou nous trouuafmes cinquante Na- 
uires "k I'ancre [9] qui nous attendoient, le vent nous 
fauorifant Monfieur de Beaulieu qui commandoit la 
flotte Roiale, nous fit entourer de quarante vaiffeaux. 
le ne penfois pas eflre en mer, difoit le Pere, me 
voyat enuironn6 de tant de bois, comme nous vogui- 
ons dans cette affeurance, les vaiffeaux du Roy def- 
couurirent liuic5l fregates ennemies aufquelles ils don- 
nerent la chaffe ; mais elles euaderent k la faueur du 
vent, I'efcorte Royale nous voyans hors de la manche 
& hors du danger nous quitta. Voila comme les 
tempefles nous voulant perdre au port nous prote- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 71 

for a hundred years vessels have been seen so long 
anchored, or assailed by winds so very contrary. 
This fury, chaining us near the port, defended us [8] 
against hostile frigates equipped for war, which were 
awaiting us at the passage, — so that, if we had 
weighed anchor one day before our departure, we 
would infallibly have fallen into the hands of the 
enemy. Madame the Duchess d'Aiguillon, having 
been advised of this ambuscade, so arranged that 
Monseigneur the Cardinal de Richelieu ordered the 
ships of Havre to convoy us. As we were about 
to go and join them, we encountered five Dunkirk 
frigates. Immediately the weapons are grasped, the 
cannons are thrust out of the portholes, — every one 
is ready for the combat. Monsieur de Courpon, our 
Admiral, advances. But these frigates — being em- 
barrassed by two Dutch ships that had left us the 
previous night, and which had just been captured a 
little while before we appeared — turned away from 
us, seeing in our faces that we were ready stubbornly 
to dispute the victory with them. We reached Havre 
directly afterwards, where we found fifty Ships at 
anchor [9] which were awaiting us. The wind fa- 
voring us. Monsieur de Beaulieu, who commanded 
the Royal fleet, had us surrounded by forty ships. I 
did not think that I was upon the sea," said the Fa- 
ther, ' ' seeing myself encompassed by so much wood. 
As we floated along in this security, the ships of the 
King discovered eight hostile frigates, to which they 
gave chase. But they escaped, owing to a favorable 
wind. The Royal escort, seeing us out of the chan- 
nel and out of danger, left us. Thus the tempests, 
ready to destroy us in the port, protected us against 
our enemies. As soon as we were upon the high 


72 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUJTES [Vol, 18 

geoient centre les ennemis, fi-toft que nous fufmes 
en haute mer les vents nous fauoriferent pour la 
plufpart du temps, nous eufmes quelques petites bou- 
rafques; mais de peu de duree. le n'ay point veu 
plus de deuotion fur la terre que fur la mer, les prin- 
cipaux de noftre flotte, les pafTagers & les matelots 
alliftoient au diuin feruice que nous chantions fort 
fouuent, ils frequentoient les Sacremens, fe trou- 
uoient aux prieres & aux ledtures publiques qu'on 
faifoit en fon temps, mais la deuotion fut tres-fen- 
fible & tres-remarquable [lo] le iour du faindt Sacre- 
met, on prepara vn autel magnifique dans la chambre 
de noftre Admiral, tout 1' equipage drella vn repofoir 
fur I'auant du vaiffeau, noftre Seigneur voulant eftre 
adore fur cet element fi mobile, nous donna vn calme 
fi doux que nous penlions voguer fur vn eftang, nous 
fifmes vne proceffion vrayement folemnelle, puis que 
tout le monde y affifta & que la piete & la deuotion 
la faifoient marcher en bel ordre toute k I'entour du 
vailleau, noftre frere Dominique Scot reueftu d'vn 
furplis portoit la croix, aux deux coftes de laquelle 
marchoient deux enfans portans vn flambeau ardent 
en la main, fuiuoient les Religieufes auec leurs 
cierges blancs & vne modeftie Angelique, apres le 
Preftre qui portoit le faindt Sacrement marchoit 
I'Admiral de la flotte, & en fuitte tout I'equipage, les 
canons firent retentir I'air & les ondes de leur ton- 
nerre, & les Anges prenoient plaifir d'entendre les 
loiianges que nos coeurs & nos bouches donnoiet k 
leur Prince 8c k noftre fouuerain Roy. II n'y eut 
que fept perfonnes qui n'approchallent [ii] de la 
faindte table, & encor s'eftoient ils repus vn peu 
auparauant de cette viande facree ; enfin apres auoir 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 73 

sea, the wind favored us during most of the time ; 
we had some slight squalls, but they were of short 
duration. I have not seen more devotion upon the 
land than there was upon the sea; the chief person- 
ages of our fleet, the passengers, and the sailors 
attended divine service, which we celebrated very 
often. They frequented the Sacraments, and were 
present at prayers and the public readings that were 
given at suitable times. But the devotion was most 
profound and most conspicuous [10] on the day of 
the blessed Sacrament. A magnificent altar was pre- 
pared in the chamber of our Admiral; the whole 
crew erected an altar at the prow of the ship ; our 
Lord, desiring to be adored upon this so unstable 
element, gave us a calm so peaceful that we could 
imagine ourselves floating upon a pond. We formed 
a procession truly solemn, since every one took part 
in it, and their piety and devotion caused them to 
march in fine order all around the ship. Our broth- 
er Dominique Scot, wearing a surplice, bore the 
cross, on either side of which marched two children, 
each bearing a lighted torch in his hands ; the Nuns 
followed with their white wax tapers, in Angelic 
modesty; after the Priest, who carried the blessed 
Sacrament, walked the Admiral of the fleet, and 
then the whole crew. The cannons made the air 
and the waves resound with their thunder, and the 
Angels took pleasure in hearing the praises that our 
hearts and our lips gave to their Prince and to our 
sovereign King. There were only seven persons 
who did not approach [11] the holy table, and yet 
they had feasted upon this sacred food a little while 
before." Finally, after having enjoyed very fair 
weather after this act so imbued with piety, the Ad- 


74 LES RELA TIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol. 18 

iouy d'affez beau-temps depuis cette adtion, toute 
plaine de piete, rAdmiral arriua k Tadoullac le der- 
nier de luin, oil le faindt lacques eftoit entre deux 
iours auparauant, le Pere Menard s'embarquant dans 
vne chalouppe auec noftre frere Dominique Scot, 
laiffa le Pere lofeph Duperron & noftre frere laques 
Ratel auec les Religieufes, pour nous venir donner 
promptement nouuelles de I'arriuee de la flotte, bref le 
Dimanche au matin le fainct lacques commande par 
le Capitaine Ancelot, vint moiiiller I'ancre deuant 
Kebec, Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur defcendit fur le 
port auec noftre R. P. Superieur, pour receuoir nos 
Peres & pour conduire ces filles vrayement genereufes 
en leurs maifons, au fortir du vaiHeau elles fe iettent 
k genoux, baife la terre tant defiree, chantent vn 
Laudate Dominum ojnnes Gerties, & Madame de la Pel- 
letrie accompagnee de fes petites Seminariftes genti- 
ment veftues, embrafle ces bonnes Religieufes, [12] 
les conduit premierement en la Chappelle des Vrfu- 
lines, comme eftant la plus proche du Quay, noftre 
Eglife & noftre maifon ayant efte brufl^es, on les 
mena en cette Chappelle pour adorer noftre Seigneur, 
& pour le remercier des faueurs qu'elles auoient 
receues de fa bonte, del^ elle vont faluer Monfieur 
noftre Gouuerneur en fon fort, puis on les mena cha- 
qu'vnes dans leurs maifons, oil la ioye & la charit6 
leur donna entree, elles fortirent du vaifTeau plus 
faines qu'elles n'y eftoient entrees, la pauuret6 & les 
incommoditez des maifons bafties fur la terre, femble 
des palais & des richeffes k ceux qui fortent d'vne 
maifon de bois flottante au gre des vents & des vagues, 
le landemain on les conduifit ^ S. lofeph, pour leur 
faire veoir les Sauuages, qui les ont attirees en ce 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 75 

miral arrived at Tadoussac on the last of June, where 
the ' ' saint Jacques ' ' had entered two days before. 
Father Menard, embarking in a shallop with our 
brother, Dominique Scot, left Father Joseph Duper- 
ron and our brother Jacques Ratel with the Nuns, 
that he might promptly come to give us news of the 
fleet's arrival. In brief, on Sunday morning the 
" saint Jacques," commanded by Captain Ancelot, 
came and cast anchor opposite Kebec; Monsieur our 
Governor went down to the wharf with our Rever- 
end Father Superior, to receive our Fathers, and to 
escort these truly generous sisters to their houses. 
Upon leaving the ship they fell upon their knees, 
kissed the ground so long desired, and sang the Lau- 
date Dominum otnnes Gentes; and Madame de la Pelle- 
trie, accompanied by her little Seminarists, neatly 
dressed, embraced these good Nuns, [12] whom she 
conducted first to the Chapel of the Ursulines, this 
being the nearest to the Quay, as our Church and 
house had been burned. They were taken to this 
Chapel to adore our Lord, and to thank him for the 
favors they had received from his goodness. Thence 
they went to salute Monsieur our Governor in his 
fort; then they were taken to their own houses, 
where joy and love welcomed them. They left the 
ship in better health than when they had entered it. 
Poverty and discomfort, in houses that are built upon 
the land seem palaces and riches to those who come 
forth from a house of wood floating at the will of the 
winds and the waves. The next day, we took them 
to St. Joseph, to show them the Savages who have 
attracted them to this new world. They were pres- 
ent at prayers, and at the instruction that was being 


76 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.18 

nouueau monde, elles affiflerent aux prieres & ^ Tin- 
ftmdtion qu'on leur fit. La ioye deroboit leurs cceurs 
& leurs yeux, ce patiure peuple admiroit la genereufe 
conftance de ces ietines Amazones, qui malgre I'O- 
cean viennent chercher le [13] falut de ces barbares 
en ces derniers confins du monde, bref ayant vifit6 
les pauures demeures de ce peuple ; elles f e retire- 
rent en leur cloflure, pour la garder fuiuant leurs 
Reigles & leurs Inftituts. Quelques iours apres leur 
arriuee, la Mere de faindte Marie Hofpitaliere eft 
tomb^e malade, c'eft vn petit agneau tout difpofe 
pour entrer dans le bercail du vray Berger, il femble 
neantmoins que Dieu luy veille rendre la fant6. 

Pour conclufion de ce Cbapitre, ie diray ces deux 
mots k vne infinite de Religieufes, qui bruflent d'vn 
defir de fuiure celles qui font palTees. Ce n'eft pas 
tout d'eftre enuoy^es de la France, il faut eftre 
appellee de la nouuelle, pour faire icy plus de fruidt 
que de bruit. Les filles ne f9auroient penetrer dans 
les Nations plus eloign^es & plus peupl6es ; il en eft 
venu tres-fuffifamment pour les occupations qu'elles 
peuuent auoir dans vn pais qui ne fait que de naiflre. 
Celles k qui I'humilite, I'obeyfCance & I'appel leurs 
ont [14] donn6 des patentes, ont efte receues k bras 
ouuerts des Anges gardiens de ces contr6es, elles co- 
operent fainctement auec ces bien-heureux efprits au 
falut de ces peuples, en effet & les Hofpitalieres & les 
Vrfulines font dans la ioye, elles ont palTe I'ann^e 
das vne profonde paix, cberies des Fran9ois & des 
Sauuages, tres-zel6es pour les fondtions de leur infti- 
tut. Ce bon-heur n'en doit point attirer dauantage, 
puis qu'vn plus grand nombre n'eft pas de faifon, le 
pais fe faifant tous les iours ouurira en fon temps la 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 77 

given. Joy stole away their hearts and their eyes. 
These poor peoples admired the noble constancy of 
these young Amazons, who, in spite of the Ocean, 
came to seek the [13] salvation of these barbarians in 
these farthest confines of the earth. In brief, having 
visited the poor dwellings of these people, they 
retired to their own seclusion, to observe it according 
to their Rules and their Institutes. Some days after 
their arrival. Mother de sainte Marie, a Hospital 
Nun, fell sick. Here was a dear lamb all ready to 
enter the fold of the true Shepherd. It seems, how- 
ever, that God willed her to be restored to health. 

As a conclusion to this Chapter, I will say these 
few words to a vast number of Nuns, who burn with 
a desire to follow those who have crossed over. It 
is not everything to be sent from France ; one must 
be called by new [France], in order to produce more 
fruit here than noise. The sisters cannot penetrate 
into the more distant and more populous Nations; 
those who have come are amply sufficient for the 
occupations they can have in a country which has 
accomplished only its birth. Those to whom humil- 
ity, obedience, and vocation have [14] given diplo- 
mas, have been received with open arms by the 
guardian Angels of these countries. They cooperate 
piously with those blessed spirits in the salvation of 
these peoples. In fact, both the Hospital Nuns and 
the Ursulines are full of joy. They have passed the 
year in profound peace, cherished by the French and 
Savages, very zealous in the functions of their order. 
This happiness ought not to attract more of them, 
since a greater number would be unseasonable ; as 
the country grows every day, it will, at the proper 


78 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.18 

porte aux autres. II faut pour le prefent bander tous 
nos nerfs pour arrefter les Sauuages, au commence- 
ment que nous vinfmes en ces contrees, comme nous 
n'efperions quafi rien des vieux arbres, nous emploi- 
ons toutes nos forces "k cultiuer les ieunes plates, 
mais noflre Seigneur nous donnant les adultes nous 
couertilTons les grades defpeces, que nous failios 
pour les enfas, au fecours de leurs peres & de leurs 
meres, les aydant \ cultiuer la terre & k fe loger 
dans vne maifon fixe & permanente, nous retenons 
neantmoins encor auec nous quelques [15] petits or- 
phelins delailTes. Mais noftre plus grand effort doit 
tendre ^ rallier ces pauures brebis egarees, fans cela 
il n'y a point d'occupation en ces contrees pour des 
Religieufes, notamment pour les Vrfulines, il n'en 
eft pas de mefme de nous autres ; car nous penetrons 
^s nations fedentaires, ou les filles n'ont aucun acces, 
tant pour I'eloignement de nos Fran9ois qui les 
conferuent, que pour I'horreur des chemins, & 
pour les grands trauaux & dangers qui furpaffent 
leur fexe, les filles & les femmes ne f9auroient 
monter plus haut que I'lfle de Montreal, oii le 
fault faindt Louys : or eft il que depuis 1' embouchure 
du fleuue S. Laurens iufques \ cette Ifle, tous les 
Sauuages font errans, il les faut done reduire k vne 
vie fedetaire, fi on veut auoir leurs enfans, ceux qui 
prenoient plaifir de fecourir noftre feminaire feront 
confol6s, voyant que les depenfes qu'on faifoit pour 
des enfans, eftant employees ^ faire vne petite mai- 
fon, arreftent & gaignent k lefus-Chrift le pere, la 
mere & les enfans. Nous auons fait quatre petits 
logemens cette ann6e, voila pour quatre [16] families, 
ces bonnes gens font rauis voyant cette charity, le 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 79 

time, open the door to the others. At present, we 
must strain every nerve to arrest the Savages. When 
we first came into these countries, as we hoped for 
scarcely anything from the old trees, we employed 
all our forces in cultivating the young plants ; but, 
as our Lord gave us the adults, we are turning the 
great outlay we made for the children to the succor 
of their fathers and mothers, — helping them to cul- 
tivate the land, and to locate in a fixed and perma- 
nent home ; we still retain with us, however, some 
[15] little abandoned orphans. But our strongest 
efforts ought to tend towards rallying these poor lost 
sheep. Without this, there is no occupation in these 
countries for Nuns, especially for the Ursulines. It is 
not the same with us ; for we penetrate into the sed- 
entary nations, where the sisters have no access, — 
not only on account of the remoteness of our French 
who have charge of them, but of the horrors of the 
roads, and the great hardships and dangers, which 
are beyond their sex. The girls and women cannot 
go up farther than the Island of Montreal, or the 
sault saint Louys. Now it happens that from the 
mouth of the river St. Lawrence up to this Island, 
all the Savages are wanderers ; hence they must be 
brought to a sedentary life, if we wish to have their 
children. Those who took pleasure in assisting our 
seminary will be consoled by seeing that the outlays 
made for the children, being employed in erecting a 
little house, arrest and win for Jesus Christ the 
father, the mother, and the children. We have built 
four little lodgings this year, and in these there are 
four [16] families. These good people are delighted 
at seeing this charity. The whole may amount to 


80 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 

tout peut reuenir ^ quatre ou cinq cens efctis, helas ! 
ce n'eft qu'vn coup de dez en France, ou vne fimple 
collation, & dans nos grands bois c'eft le falut de 
quatre pauures families, qui peut eftre ne verroient 
iamais Dieu li on ne leur prefboit ce fecours. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 81 


four or five hundred 6cus. Alas ! it is only one throw 
of the dice in France, or one simple collation ; and 
in our great woods it is the salvation of four poor 
families, who perhaps would never see God if this 
aid were not lent them. 


'82 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.18 


CHAPITRE II. 

DE L'ESTAT general DE LA COLONIE FRANgOISE, & 
DE LA CONUERSION DES SAUUAGES. 

LA paix, Tamour & la bonne intelligence regne 
parmy nos Frangois. La foy s'eftend & iette 
de profondes racines parmy les Satitiages, ces 
quatre paroles fuffiroient pour monftrer que nous 
viuons icy dans vn flecle d'or. 

Ceux qui nous ont parl6 des fiecles dor6s, ne les 
embelifloient pas des mines du Perou, mais d'vne in- 
nocence preferable aux richeffes de I'vn & de I'autre 
hemifphere. [17] Si bien que nous pouuons quali 
dire que I'vfage de fer, rend les fiecles d'or, & I'v- 
fage de Tor fait les fiecles de fer. II eft vray qu'on 
vit en ces contrees dans vne grande innocence, la 
vertu y regne comme dans fon empire, le vice qui la 
pourfuit inceflamment, n'y paroit qu'en cachette & ^ 
la derobee, ne fe produifant iamais fans confufion. 
Les principaux habitas de ce nouueau monde, defi- 
reux de conferuer cette benedidtion du Ciel, fe font 
ranges fous les drapeaux de la fainc5le Vierge, k 
rhonneur de laquelle ils entendent tous les Samedis 
la fainc5te MefTe, frequentent fouuet les Sacremens 
de vie, prefle I'oreille aux difcours qu'on leur fait 
des grandeurs de cette PrincefTe, & du bon-heur de 
la paix & de I'vnion qui les allie 9a bas en terre, 
pour les rendre vne mefme chofe auec Dieu dedans 
les Cieux, cette deuotion a banny les inimiti^s & les 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 83 


CHAPTER II. 

OF THE GENERAL CONDITION OF THE FRENCH COLO- 
NY, AND THE CONVERSION OF THE SAVAGES. 

PEACE, love, and good understanding reign 
among our French people. The faith is 
extending, and taking deep root among the 
Savages. These few words might suffice to show 
that we are living here in a golden age. 

Those who have told us about golden ages did not 
embellish them with Peruvian mines, but with an 
innocence preferable to the riches of either hemi- 
sphere; [17] so that we can almost say that the use 
of iron renders the ages golden, and the use of gold 
makes the ages iron. Verily, one lives in these 
countries in great innocency, — virtue reigns here as 
if in its empire ; vice, which pursues it incessantly, 
only appears secretly and by stealth, never introduc- 
ing itself without humiliation. The principal inhab- 
itants of this new world, desiring to preserve this 
blessing of Heaven, have ranged themselves under 
the banner of the blessed Virgin, in whose honor they 
hear the holy Mass every Saturday, often frequent 
the Sacraments of life, and lend ear to the discourses 
that are given them on the dignities of this Princess, 
and on the blessedness of the peace and union that 
bind them here below on earth, to render them one 
with God in Heaven. This devotion has banished 
enmities and coldness; it has introduced pure dis- 
course in the place of too licentious language ; it has 


84 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.18 

froideurs, elle a introduit de bons difcours, au lieu 
des paroles trop libertines, elle a fait reuiure la cou- 
flume de prier Dieu publiquemet foir & matin dans 
les families, elle a donne des affedlions de la puret6 
k quelques [i8] perfonnes dans le mariage, iufqiies k 
pre f enter leurs voeux par mutuel accord, k I'integrite 
de la faindle Vierge, & les renouueller de temp en 
temps, pour receuoir plus faindtement fon fils bien 
aym6 dedans leurs coeurs. L'annee palTe les che- 
nilles, les fauterelles & les autres vermines, man- 
geant tout ce qui fortoit de la terre, on fit quelques 
proceffions & quelques prieres publiques pour cet 
effet, chofe eflrange, le iour fuiuant ces beftioles 
moururent & difparurent en telle forte, que telle per- 
fonne a recueilly plus de trente poinHons de froment, 
n'en efperant pas dix boifl!eaux, 

Au refte nous viuons icy fort contens & fort fatis- 
faits, les Frangois font en bonne fant^, I'air du pays 
leur eft bon, auffi eft-il pur & fain, la terre commence 
^ leur donner des grains abondamment, les guerres, 
les procez, les debats & les querelles ne I'empeftent 
point, en vn mot, le chemin du Ciel femble plus court 
& plus affeure de nos grands bois, que de vos grandes 
villes, il eft vray que nous ne penfons point eftre 
feuls dans vn pays eftranger, auffi n'y fommes nous 
[19] pas, puis que nous n'auons tous qu'vn mefme 
Prince & qu'vn mefme Roy, que nous aymons & que 
nous honorons vniquement, nous fifmes I'an paffe des 
f eux de refiouyllance pour la naiff ance de Monf eigneur 
le Dauphin, nous priafmes Dieu par vne procelTion 
folemnelle, de rendre cet enfant femblable k fon 
pere, noftre ioye & noftre affedtion, ne s'eft pas con- 
tenues dans les limites d'vne annee, Monfieur le Che- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 85 

revived the custom in families of publicly praying to 
God, evening and morning; it has given desires for 
purity to some [18] persons in marriage, even to 
offering their vows by mutual accord to the chastity 
of the blessed Virgin, and to renewing these, from 
time to time, that they may more holily receive her 
well-beloved son in their hearts. Last year, the 
caterpillars, grasshoppers, and other insects eating 
all that came out of the earth, some processions and 
public prayers were made on this account ; strange 
to say, the following day these little animals died, 
and disappeared so entirely, that a certain person 
reaped more than thirty puncheons of grain, though 
not expecting over ten bushels. 

Moreover, we live here in great contentment and 
satisfaction. The French are in good health; the 
air of the country agrees with them, as it is pure and 
salubrious; the soil is beginning to yield them 
grain in abundance; wars, lawsuits, disputes, and 
quarrels do not infect them. In a word, the road to 
Heaven seems shorter and surer from our great for- 
ests than from your large cities. True, we do not 
think of ourselves as being alone in a strange coun- 
try; nor are we so, [19] since we all have only one 
and the same Prince and the same King, whom alone 
we love and honor. Last year, we made bonfires for 
the birth of Monseigneur, the Dauphin ; we entreated 
God, by a solemn procession to make this child like 
his father. Our joy and our affection were not kept 
within the bounds of one year ; Monsieur the Cheva- 
lier de Montmagny, our Governor, wishing to prolong 
it, has had a Tragi-comedy represented this year, in 
honor of this newborn Prince. I would not have be- 
lieved that so handsome apparel and so good actors 


86 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.18 

ualier de Montmagny noflre Gouuerneur la voulant 
prolonger, k fait reprefenter cette annee vne Tragi- 
comedie en I'honneur de ce Prince nouueau n6, ie 
n'aurois pas creu qu'on eut pen trouuer vn fi gentil 
appareil, & de fi bons acteurs k Kebec, le fieur 
Martial Piraub6 qui conduifoit cette a(5tion & qui en 
repref entoit le premier perf onnage, reuffit auec excel- 
lence ; mais afin que nous Sauuages en peuffent reti- 
rer quelque vtilit6, Monfieur le Gouuerneur doii6 
d'vn zele & d'vne prudence non commune, nous in- 
uita d'y mefler quelque chofe qui leur put donner dans 
la veue & frapper leurs oreilles, nous fifmes pour- 
fuiure I'ame d'vn infidelle par [20] deux demons, 
qui enfin la precipiterent dans vn enfer, qui vomiffoit 
des flames, les refiftances, les cris & les hurlemens 
de cette ame & de ces demons, qui parloient en 
langue Algonquine, donnerent s'y auant dans le coeur 
de quelques vns, qu'vn Sauuage nous dit ^ deux iours 
de Ik, qu'il auoit eft6 fort efpouuant6 la nuidt par vn 
fonge tres-affreux, ie voyois difoit-il, vn gouffre hor- 
rible, d'ou fortoient des flames & des demons, il me 
fembloit qu'ils me vouloient perdre, ce qui me donna 
bien de la terreur, bref ce pauure peuple fe vient 
rendre k lefus-Chrift de iour en iour, le fecours 
qu'on leur donne pour def richer & pour cultiuer la 
terre les encourage fi fort, que c'eft vne benedidtion 
de les voir prier & trauailler [en] fon temps. 
% Les bons exemples des principaux de cette colonic 
les gagnent puiflamment, Monfieur noftre Gouuer- 
neur approche par fois de la faindte table auec eux, 
il les honore de fa prefence, les venant vifiter k S. 
lofeph, ayant appris que ces bons Neophites deuoient 
communier le iour de fefte de noftre Fere & Patri- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 87 

could be found in Kebec. Sieur Martial Piraub6,^ 
who had charge of this performance, and who repre- 
sented the chief personage, succeeded excellently; 
but in order that our Savages might derive some 
benefit from it. Monsieur the Governor, endowed 
with uncommon zeal and prudence, invited us to put 
something into it which might strike their eyes and 
their ears. We had the soul of an unbeliever pur- 
sued by [20] two demons, who finally hurled it into 
SI hell that vomited forth flames ; the struggles, cries, 
and shrieks of this soul and of these demons, who 
spoke in the Algonquin tongue, penetrated so deeply 
into the hearts of some of them, that a Savage told 
us, two days afterward, that he had been greatly 
frightened that night by a very horrible dream. " I 
saw," said he, " a hideous gulf whence issued flames 
and demons. It seemed to me that they tried to 
destroy me, and this filled me with great terror." In 
brief, these poor peoples are giving themselves up to 
Jesus Christ from day to day ; the help that is given 
them in clearing and cultivating the land encourages 
them so greatly, that it is a blessing to see them 
praying and working, each in due time. 

The good examples of the chief men of this colony 
strongly influence them; Monsieur our Governor 
sometimes approaches the holy table with them ; he 
honors them by his presence, coming to visit them 
at St. Joseph. Having learned that these good Neo- 
phytes were to receive communion on the day of the 
feast of our Father and Patriarch, St. [21] Ignace, 
he came to perform his devotions with them in our 
Chapel of St. Joseph. Madame de la Peltrie was 
there at the same time, to be godmother to some chil- 
dren that were to be baptized. Was it not beautiful 


88 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 18 

arche S. [21] Ignace, il vint faire fes deuotions aiiec 
eux en noftre Chapelle de S. lofeph, Madame de la 
Peltrie s'y troiiua en mefme temps, pour eftre mar- 
raine de quelques enfans qu'on deuoit baptifer, ne 
faifoit-il pas beau voir ces perfonnes de merite & de 
qualit6, meflees parmy des Sauuages approclier tous 
enfemble de lefus-Chrift, cette innocence nous fait 
vn liecle d'or. 

II y a quelque temps que nous difions aux Sauuages, 
que des perfonnes de condition auoient defire d' eftre 
recommand^s ^ leurs prieres quand ils communie- 
roient, que la Royne mefme auoit fouhaitt^ qu'ils 
priaffent Dieu pour fon Dauphin, comme ie I'ay ap- 
pris de bonne part, cela les eftonne & les confole, «& 
donne vne apprehenlion de la grandeur de Dieu, & 
vne eftime des prieres, voyas que des perfonnes li 
releu^es en font tant d'eftat, leur difant que cette 
bonne Princelle auoit fait quelque aumofne pour les 
fecourir, que d'autres Dames ou femmes de Capitaines 
faifoient le mefme, qu'on prioit Dieu pour eux par 
toute la France, ils admiroient la bont6 [22] & la no- 
blefle du chriftianifme, qui abbaiffe les chofes grandes 
& releue les plus baffes. Quelques vns d'eux me 
dirent que tous les iours ils ne manquoient pas de 
prier pour les perfonnes qui les affiftoient, me nom- 
mant fort bien ceux qui ont eftably quelque fecours 
folide, pour les tirer de leurs grandes miferes. Les 
Chapitres fuyuans donneront de la confolation h. ceux 
qui ont coopere au fang de lefus-Chrift, dont la vertu 
paroit auec eftonnement en ces pauures barbares. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 89 

to see these worthy and titled persons, mingling with 
the Savages, — and all together approaching Jesus 
Christ? This simplicity creates for us a golden age. 
Some time ago, we told the Savages that persons 
of rank had desired to be recommended to their pray- 
ers when they received communion, — that even the 
Queen had wished them to pray to God for her Dau- 
phin, as I have learned on good authority. This 
surprises and consoles them, and gives them an idea 
of the greatness of God, and an esteem for prayer, 
seeing that personages so eminent value it so high- 
ly. Upon telling them that this good Princess had 
given some alms to succor them, that other Ladies 
or wives of Captains had done the same, that pray- 
ers for them were offered to God throughout all 
France, — they admired the goodness [22] and lofty 
character of Christianity, which abases great things 
and exalts the most humble. Some of them told me 
that they would not fail to pray daily for the persons 
who helped them, naming to me very well those who 
have given substantial help to draw them out of their 
great miseries. The following Chapters will afford 
some consolation to those who have cooperated with 
the blood of Jesus Christ, the virtue of which appears 
wonderfully in these poor barbarians. 


90 


LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol.18 


CHAPITRE III. 

LES SAUUAGES SE RASSEMBLENT A SAINCT JOSEPH APRES 

LA MALADIE, ELISENT QUELQUES CAPITAINES, & 

FONT PAROISTRE LEUR ZELE POUR LA FOY. 

I? AY veu quelquefois des pigeons effarez battus 
d'vn faucon, ces pauures oyfeaux voloient qui 
degk qui del^ k [23] lentour de leur colombier 
fans y entrer, puis leur ennemy venant ^ difparoiftre 
ils venoient fondre tout ^ coup dans leur petite mai- 
fon, voila iuftement I'idee du pitoyable eftat auquel 
fe trouuoient I'an paffe nos Sauuages, la maladie les 
pourfuiuoit comme ^ tire d'aifles, ils tournoient ^ I'en- 
tour de la maifon S. lofeph, palToient & repalToient 
dans leurs petites gondoles & canots, & voyant encor 
r ombre du Vautour qui les chaffoit, ils s'enfuyoient 
derechef, mais enfin ce fleau venant ^ ceffer, ils fe 
font venus rejetter dans la demeure qu'ils ont choifis, 
Et Deus fecit cum tent at tone prouentuin, Dieu leur a 
donn6 plus de courage qu'auparauant. Au temps 
qu'ils fe raffembloient le R. P. Vimont noftre Supe- 
rieur, montant aux trois Riuieres en rencontra quel- 
ques vns en chemin, def quels il m'efcriuit en ces 
termes, Nous arriuafmes hier fur le midy chez Mon- 
fleur de la Poterie, nous n'en pourrons partir que ce 
iourd'huy prefque k mefme heure, pource que nos 
mattelots ont laiffe efchouer noftre chalouppe trop 
haut, ie n'ay peu trouuer de canot pour gaigner le 
deuant, [24] car il n'y en a icy que deux; dont I'vn 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 91 


CHAPTER III. 

THE SAVAGES REASSEMBLE AT SAINT JOSEPH AFTER 

THE EPIDEMIC, ELECT SEVERAL CAPTAINS, AND 

SHOW THEIR ZEAL FOR THE FAITH. 

1HAVE sometimes seen frightened pigeons at- 
tacked by a hawk. These poor birds would fly 
here and there [23] around their dovecote, with- 
out entering it ; then, their enemy happening to dis- 
appear, they would suddenly dart into their little 
home. This is precisely the image of the pitiable 
condition in which our Savages were last year. The 
malady pursued them with flapping wings, as it 
were ; they hovered around the house of St. Joseph, 
passed and repassed in their little gondolas and 
canoes, and, still seeing the shadow of the Vulture 
that pursued them, they again took flight; but final- 
ly, as this scourge began to abate, they came and 
took refuge in the dwelling they have chosen, Et 
Deus fecit cum tentatione proventum, God has given 
them more courage than before. At the time they 
were reassembling, the Reverend Father Vimont, 
our Superior, going up to the three Rivers, encoun- 
tered some of them on the way, of whom he wrote 
me in these terms: " We reached Monsieur de la 
Poterie's^ house yesterday about noon; we shall not 
be able to leave until to-day at about the same hour, 
because our sailors have let our shallop run aground 
too far up. I could not find a canoe, to go on ahead 
of it, [24] for there are only two here, — one of which 


92 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 

s'en va &. S. lofeph, I'autre doit feruir k trente Sau- 
uages ou enuiron, que ie rencontray icy hier au foir, 
ie les fis prier Dieu & les enfeignay le mieux que ie 
peu, ils me forcerent de chanter Irinitik, (c'efl vn 
Cantique compof6 en leur langue) Dieu fgait comme 
ie m'en acquit^, ie paffay pourtant iufques au bout 
auec les Litanies, ie leur expofay comme voftre Re- 
uerence & moy, leur anions procure la Gribane, pour 
mener leur petit bagage h. S. lofeph, & que Monfieur 
le Gouuerneur leur accordoit cette faueur pour les 
obliger k defricher la terre, ils s'y tefmoignerent fort 
portez, apres que i'eu parle, ils me dirent d'eux 
mefmes qu'ils eftoient parens du Capitaine de I'lfle; 
mais cependant qu'ils ne I'aymoiet pas, pource qu'ils 
fgauoient bien qu'il ne fe montroit affectionne a la 
culture de la terre & h. I'inftrudtion qu'en apparence, 
prenant conge d'eux ie les alTeuray que ie prefferois 
mon voyage, pour les venir prendre au retour & me 
faire leur Capitaine iufques h. S. lofeph, i'ay veu 
quelques vieilles femmes infirmes «fe [25] quelques en- 
fans, qui pourront augmenter 1' occupation des meres 
Hofpitalieres & des meres Vrfulines, ie defire auec 
paffion de retourner bien vifte, & de contribuer quel- 
que chofe k I'arreft de ces pauures Sauuages, i'oubliois 
vn mot qui me confola bien fort, ils adioufterent k 
leur harangue, qu'ils n'auoient point d'efprit pour 
retenir ce qu'on leur enfeignoit, pource qu'ils n'e- 
ftoient point baptifez, & qu'ils fgauoient bien que le 
baptefme ayde a bien comprendre & k bien retenir, & 
que s'ils eftoient baptifez ils auroient plus de force & 
plus d'efprit, pour apprendre les chofes de la foy, 
& pour faire comme les Frangois, ie vous prie faluer 
de ma part V. Ces bonnes gens & plufieurs autres de 


1640] RELA TJON OF 1640 9a 

goes to St. Joseph, the other must serve about thirty 
Savages whom I encountered here last evening. I 
had them pray to God, and taught them as well 
as I could. They made me sing the Irinitik (a Song 
composed in their language). God knows how I 
acquitted myself of this; however, I proceeded to 
the end with the Litanies. I explained to them how 
your Reverence and I had procured for them the 
Gribane,^ to take their little baggage to St. Joseph, 
and that Monsieur the Governor was granting them 
this favor, in order to induce them to clear the land. 
They declared themselves very favorably inclined to 
this. After I had spoken, they told me that, as for 
themselves, they were relatives of the Captain of the 
Island; but that, however, they did not like him, 
because they knew very well that he showed himself 
interested in the cultivation of the land and in the 
instruction, only in appearance. Upon taking leave 
of them, I assured them that I would hasten my 
journey, in order to come and take them on my 
return, and make myself their Captain as far as St. 
Joseph. I saw some infirm old women and [25] some 
children, who may give the Hospital mothers and the 
Ursuline mothers more occupation. I desire ear- 
nestly to return very soon and contribute something 
towards the permanent settlement of these poor Sav- 
ages. I forgot one thought which consoled me very 
much. They added, in their address, that they had 
not the sense to retain what was taught them, be- 
cause they were not baptized, — that they were well 
aware that baptism aids in comprehending clearly and 
in remembering well ; and that, if they were baptized, 
they would have more strength and more intelligence 
to learn the things pertaining to the faith, and to do 


94 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 

diners endroits fe font enfin ralTemblez k S. lofeph, 
ou ils ont fait ce que ie vay dire, tons les Chreftiens 
qui font les principaux d'entre eux, firent vn corn- 
plot, fans nous en rien dire, d'affembler les Sauuages 
pour les induire fortement k croire que fi quelqu'vn 
fe monftroit formellement ennemy de la foy, ils pri- 
rent refolution de la chaffer de la bourgade qu'ils 
[26] commencent. Nous ayant donn6 aduis de leur 
deflein, nous iugeafmes qu'il les falloit lailfer faire, 
& que cette adtion fl extraordinaire aux Sauuages, 
qui ne fe contredifent quafi. iamais, s'eftimas tons 
auffi grands feigneurs les vns que les autres, pouuoit 
prouenir de I'efprit de Dieu. L'affemblee faite trois 
Chreftiens haranguerent, le premier fut Eftienne Pi- 
garouik, iadis fameux forcier parmy eux, il aigrit vn 
petit les efpris de quelques payens par fa ferueur, 
car apres auoir tefmoign^ qu'il ne craignoit point la 
mort, qu'il tiendroit h. faueur qu'on le maffacraft pour 
la foy, il dit qu'il falloit bannir le diable de leur nou- 
uelle refidence, & que les mefcreans le retenoient 
auec eux, notamment ceux qui vouloiet auoir deux 
femmes, & par confequent qu'il falloit ou croire ou 
fe feparer, & que ceux qui auoient du courage de- 
uoient dire franchement leurs penfees fur ce fujet. 

Apres celuy-cy Noel Negabamat parla; mais plus 
moderement. L'experience fit il, nous apprend que 
Monfieur le Gouuerneur, que les Peres & tons les [27] 
Frangois nous ayment, vous voyez qu'ils ne fecourent 
pas feulement ceux qui font baptifez, ils nous aydent 
tons k cultiuer la terre & a nous loger, ils nous foula- 
gent en nos maladies, ils fubuiennent k nos difettes 
fans nous rien demander, ny fans attendre de nous 
aucune recompenfe, vous approuuez tons ces bonnes 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 95 

as the French do. I beg you, salute for me Yours." 
These good people, and many others from various 
places, finally gathered at St. Joseph, where they 
did what I am about to tell. All the Christians 
who are prominent among them mutually agreed, 
without telling us anything about it, to get the Sav- 
ages together and offer them strong inducements to 
believe ; if any one showed himself an open enemy 
to the faith, they resolved to drive him away from 
the village that they [26] are beginning. Having 
informed us of their intention, we judged that it was 
best to let them proceed, and that this action, so 
extraordinary among the Savages, who hardly ever 
contradict one another, each considering himself as 
great a lord as the other, might proceed from the 
spirit of God. The people being assembled, three 
Christians addressed them. The first was Estienne 
Pigarouik, formerly a famous sorcerer among them. 
He somewhat irritated the minds of some of the 
pagans by his fervor ; for — after having testified that 
he did not fear death, that he would consider it a 
favor if they should murder him for the faith — he 
said that they must banish the devil from their new 
residence, and that the unbelievers retained him 
with them, especially those who wished to have two 
wives ; and, consequently, that it was necessary either 
to believe or to separate, and that those who had 
courage ought frankly to express their opinions upon 
this subject. 

After this one, Noel Negabamat spoke, but more 
moderately. " Experience," he began, " teaches us 
that Monsieur the Governor, that the Fathers, and 
all the [27] French love us. You see that they suc- 
cor not only those who are baptized, they aid us all 


«6 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 

adtions, vous dites tous, cela eft bien, ces gens Ik nous 
ayment; mais f5achez que li ce qu'ils font eft bon, ce 
qu'ils enfeignent eft encore meilleur, ils ne difent 
pas qu'ils iront tous feuls au Ciel, ils difent que nous 
fommes tous freres, que nous n'auons qu'vn mefme 
Pere, que les plailirs de I'autre vie font aufli-bien 
pour nous que pour eux, vous fgauez ce qu'ils enfei- 
gnent, vous les efcoutez tous les iours, il me femble 
que nous deurions nous vnir tous d'vne mefme 
creance, puis que nous voulons nous ralfembler dans 
vne mefme bourgade. 

lean Baptifte Etinechkadat qui eft Capitaine d'ex- 
tradtion, parla le dernier. Vous f^auez (dit-il) que ie 
ne fuis pas grand difcoureur, que ma langue tient 
[28] mon palais, & qu'k peine ma bouche eft elle 
percee, ie fuis defia age, ie commance k penfer plus 
qu'k parler : or ie vous alfeure que i'ay bien confidere 
la Foy deuant que de I'embraffer, ie ne me fuis pas 
rendu k la premiere femonce, mais i'en fuis mainte- 
nant fi fatisfait que plus ie la confidere, & plus ie 
I'ayme, & par confequent fi vous auez quelque cre- 
ance en moy ne craignez point de I'embraffer, ie 
croy que I'vnique moy en de reffufciter voftre nation 
qui fe va perdre c'eft de vous r'affembler tous, & de 
croire en Dieu, non par feintife, mais du fond du 
coeur; & comme il eft bon, & qu'il pent tout, il nous 
fera reuiure, & nous conferuera. Voyla ce que dirent 
nos Chreftiens en cefte premiere affemblee qui fe fit 
la nuidt en laquelle nous ne nous trouuafme point 
non plus qu'aux autre fuiuantes, nos Neophytes ou 
pluftoft noftre Seigneur conduifoit tout cet affaire. 

Vn Payen feul, homme arrogant, mais qui la autre- 
fois efte dauantage, prit la parole apres ces trois 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 97 

to cultivate the land, and to furnish ourselves with 
lodgings ; they relieve us in our sicknesses, they pro- 
vide for us in our want, without asking us for any- 
thing, nor expecting any recompense from us. You 
all approve of these good actions ; you all say * That 
is good, those people love us.' But know that if 
what they do is good, what they teach is still better. 
They do not say that they all will go alone to Heav- 
en ; they say that we all are brothers, that we have 
only one and the same Father, that the pleasures of 
the other life are for us as well as for them. You 
know what they teach, — you listen to them every 
day. It seems to me we all ought to unite in one 
and the same belief, since we wish to assemble in 
one and the same village." 

Jean Baptiste Etinechkavat, who is a Captain by 
descent, spoke last. "You know" (said he) "that 
I am not a great talker, — that my tongue clings 
[28] to my palate, and that it is hard to open my 
lips. I am already old, I am beginning to think 
more than to speak. Now I assure you that I con- 
sidered the Faith well before embracing it, I did not 
yield to the first invitation ; but I am now so satisfied 
that, the more I consider it, the more I love it; and 
consequently, if you have any faith in me, do not 
fear to embrace it. I believe that the only means of 
restoring your nation, which is going to destruction, 
is for you all to assemble and to believe in God, — 
not hypocritically, but from the depths of your hearts ; 
and as he is good, and as he can do all, he will re- 
store and preserve us." That was what our Chris- 
tians said in this first assembly, which took place at 
night ; we were not present there, nor were we at the 
following ones. Our Neophytes, or rather our Lord, 
conducted this whole affair. 


98 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.18 

harangues. le voy bien, dit-il, qu'on nous veut 
chajQfer, il eft vray qu'on ne s'attaqua pas fi diredte- 
ment [29] ^ moy qu'^ vn tel, qui eft mon parent, 
mais il faut qu'on f9ache qu'on ne le peut heurter 
fans me choquer, on crie qu'il ayme deux femmes, 
n'auons nous pas cefte liberty depuis vn long temps 
d'en prendre tant que nous voudrons? Si on penfe 
nous faire fortir de force, il faut ioiier k qui I'empor- 
tera, celuy qui perdra la partie cedera : Nous ef cou- 
tons tous les iours les Peres, nous n'improuuos pas 
ce qu'ils difent, mais nous ne croyos pas pouuoir re- 
tenir ce qu'ils enfeignent, ny garder ce qu'ils recom- 
mandent, il ne fe faut pas hafter les forces viennet 
auec I'age : I'ay eu de grands degoufts de ce qu'ils 
prefchent, ie me fuis autrefois mocqu6 d'eux, ie les 
ay querellez & menace, ie n'auois que la bouche en 
ce temps-Ik, maintenant ie commence k auoir des 
oreilles, fi elles ne font pas encore fl bien percees que 
les voftres, ce qu'on dit ne lailfe pas d'y entrer: 
Pour moy fi i'eftois parent des Francois comme vous 
qui auez receu leur creance, ie ne voudrois pas pour- 
tant offencer mes compatriotes, la conclufion fut 
qu'on penferoit k cet affaire. Nos Chreftiens [30] ne 
quitterent pas leur poindte, ils nous vindrent prier 
d'agir fecrettement auec Monfieur le Gouuerneur, 
afin qu'il les portaft k cr6er quelques Chefs pour les 
conduire dans leurs petites affaires, iugeas bien que 
le petit nombre des Chefs eftant gagne tout le refte 
fuiuroit aifement apres. Monfieur le Gouuerneur 
qui ne laiffe efcouler aucune occafion d'amplifier la 
Foy & le Royaume de lefus-Chrift, fit appeller les 
principaux, & apres les auoir loiiez, les vns d'auoir 
receu le faindt Baptefme, les autres de fe difpofer k 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 99 

One Pagan alone — an arrogant man, but who had 
formerly been more so — began to speak after these 
three harangues. "I see clearly," said he, "that 
they wish to drive us away. True, they do not 
attack me so directly [29] as they do such a one, who 
is my relative. But it must be known that one can- 
not strike him without hurting me. They cry out 
that he loves two women ; have we not had the priv- 
ilege for a long time to take as many of them as we 
wish ? If they think to make us go out by force, we 
shall have to play at ' who shall fetch ? ' and the one 
who loses the game shall give up. We listen every 
day to the Fathers, — we do not disapprove what they 
say ; but we do not think that we can remember what 
they teach, or observe what they recommend; we 
must not be in haste, strength comes with age. I 
did feel great distaste for what they preach, — I used 
to make sport of them, I have quarreled with and 
threatened them ; I had nothing but a mouth at that 
time, but now I am beginning to have ears ; if they 
are not yet so sensitive as yours, nevertheless, what 
is said goes into them. As for me, if I were related 
to the French as you are who have received their 
belief, I would not be willing, however, to offend my 
countrymen." The conclusion was that they would 
think the matter over. Our Christians [30] did not 
give up their point. They came to beg us to treat 
secretly with Monsieur the Governor, that he might 
prompt them to appoint some Captains to lead them 
in their little affairs, — judging rightly that, the few 
Captains being gained over, all the rest would readily 
follow. Monsieur the Governor, who does not let 
slip any occasion for extending the Faith and the 
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, had the principal ones 


100 LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 18 

le receuoir, apres les auoir exhortez k tenir ferme 
dans la refolution qu'ils ont prife, & qu'ils ont delia 
mis en pradtique de cultiuer la terre & de s'arrefter. 
Apres auoir recommande aux Chreftiens la conftance 
en leurs manages, il leur fit entendre qu'il feroit "k 
propos qu'ils efleuffent quelques chefs pour les gou- 
uerner, & que fi les femmes & la ieunefle viuoient 
dans I'independance, que ce n'eftoit pas le moyen de 
fe conferuer, ils promirent tous de s'alTembler k S. 
lofeph fur ce fubjet. 

A trois iours delk ils nous vindrent [31] trouuer en 
noflre maifon, & nous demaderent comme ils proce- 
deroient en cefle affaire, leur ayant explique comme 
cela fe pourtoit faire par bul[le]tins fecrets, ils con- 
clurent tout fur I'lieure qu'il falloit qu'ils entraffent 
I'vn apres I'autre en la chambre de I'vn de nous pour 
nommer au Pere qui feroit Ik trois des principaux 
qu'ils iugeroient plus propres pour commander; cela 
fe fifl fur rheure, le Pere efcriuit leur voix fecrete- 
ment, puis il leur declara tout haut combien chacun 
d'eux auoit de fuffrages, fans nommer ceux qui les 
auoient donnez, les Chreftiens I'emporterent par 
deflus les Payes, lea Baptifhe Etinechkadat n'entra 
point dans I'efledtion; car eftant Capitaine d'ex- 
tradtion chacun luy dona le premier rang, vn feul 
Payen approcha du nombre des voix qu'eurent les 
Chreftiens. 

L'elec5tion faite ils fe regardoient I'vn I'autre bien 
eftonnez, n'ayans iamais proced^ en cefte fa^on, pas 
vn ne prenoit la parole, en fin vn Chreftien eftro- 
piat d'vne iambe qui s'eftoit trouue auec les autres 
s'efcria, A quoy penfons nous? pourquoy perfonne 
ne parle-il? voyla voftre [32] ouurage, c'eft nous qui 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 101 

called together; and — having praised them, some 
for having received holy Baptism, others for prepar- 
ing themselves to receive it; having exhorted them 
to hold fast to the resolution they have taken, and 
which they have already put into practice, to culti- 
vate the land and to settle down ; and having recom- 
mended to the Christians constancy in their mar- 
riages — he gave them to understand that it would 
be well if they should elect some chiefs to govern 
them; and that, if the women and the youth lived 
independently, this was not the way to preserve them- 
selves. They all promised to assemble at St. Joseph 
to consider this matter. 

Three days afterward they came [31] to our house 
to see us, and asked us how they should proceed in 
this affair. Having explained to them how it could 
be done through secret votes, they immediately con- 
cluded that they must enter, one after the other, the 
chamber of one of us, to name, to the Father who 
should be there, three of the principal men whom 
they might consider best qualified to command. This 
was done without delay; the Father wrote their 
votes secretly, then he declared to them aloud how 
many ballots each of them had, without naming those 
who had given them. The Christians prevailed over 
the Pagans. Jean Baptiste Etinechkavat did not 
compete in the election, for, being a Captain by 
descent, every one gave him the first rank. One 
Pagan alone approached the number of votes that 
the Christians had. 

The election over, they looked at one another in 
great astonishment, never having proceeded in this 
manner. No one broke the silence. Finally a Chris- 
tian, crippled in one leg, who happened to be present 


102 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.18 

venons de conclure qu'il faut que tels & tels comman- 
dent, oti pluftoft c'eft Dieu qui la ainfi ordonn6, il 
a conduit nos voix & nos fuffrages, il ne refte plus 
qu'^ obeyr, puis fe tournant vers nous, ie voy bien 
chacun regarde fon compagnon "k qui commencera de 
parler, mes Peres, nous dit-il, permettez nous de nous 
retirer en quelque endroit hors de vofkre maifon ; afin 
que nous puifllons nous confulter les vns & les autres, 
fur ce que nous venons de faire, & qu'vn chacun dife 
librement ce qu'il en penfe, on les congedia fur le 
champ, eux s'eftans alTemblez en I'vne de leur 
cabanes k part, ce boiteux pouff^ comme ie croy, de 
I'efprit de Dieu, parla d'vne fi grande ferueur des 
grandeurs de la Foy, & fur tout des biens de I'obe- 
iffance, qu'il les eftonna tous, ils parlementerent 
entr'eux & conclurent. Premierement que ce 
pauure boiteux, qui parloit fi bien de Dieu, feroit 
Capitaine des prieres, qu'il feroit efcoute, qu'il 
apprendroit de nous tout ce qu'il pourroit des veri- 
tez de noftre creance pour leur expliquer, [33] & que 
chacun fe difpoferoit ^ la receuoir. 

Secondement ils en deftinerent deux, qui tien- 
droient la ieunefle dans leur deuoir, I'vn eftoit Chre- 
ftien & r autre encore Pay en. 

En troifiefme lieu ils conclurent, que les trois qui 
auoient eu plus de voix determineroient de leurs 
affaires, auec lean Baptifte def-ja Capitaine, & que 
ces nouueaux Magiftrats ne feroient qu'vn an en 
charge, leur terme expir6 qu'on procederoit ^ vne 
nouuelle efledtion. 

En quatriefme lieu, ils confirmerent la refolution 
qu'ils auoient prife de cultiuer la terre, cela faidt ils 
allerent trouuer Monfieur le Gouuerneur pour luy ren- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 103 

with the others, exclaimed, " What are we thinking 
about? Why does no one speak? This is your own 
[32] work. It is we who have just concluded that 
such and such persons should command, or rather it 
is God who has so ordered it, — he has guided our 
opinions and our ballots ; nothing more remains but 
to obey." Then, turning toward us, " I see plainly 
that each one is looking at his companion to see who 
will begin to speak. My Fathers," he said to us, 
* ' permit us to withdraw to some place outside of your 
house, that we may consult among ourselves upon 
what we have just done, and that each one may say 
freely what he thinks of it. ' ' They were immedi- 
ately dismissed, and, having assembled apart in one of 
their cabins, this lame man, urged on, as I believe, by 
the spirit of God, spoke with so great fervor of the 
grandeurs of the Faith, and above all of the blessings 
of obedience, that he astonished them all. They 
parleyed among themselves, and concluded: First, 
that this poor cripple, who spoke so well of God, 
should be Captain of prayers ; that he should be lis- 
tened to ; that he should learn from us what he could 
of the truths of our belief, to explain these to them ; 
[33] and that each one should dispose himself to 
receive it. 

Secondly, they appointed two of them, who should 
keep the young men to their duty ; one was a Chris- 
tian, and the other still a Pagan. 

In the third place, they concluded that the three 
who had received the most votes should decide their 
affairs, with Jean Baptiste, already a Captain, and 
that these new Magistrates should be in charge only 
one year ; that, when their term expired, they should 
proceed to a new election. 


104 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 

dre raifon de leur proced6, & pour le fupplier d'au- 
thorifer ceux qu'ils auoient efleus, il leur promit de les 
maintenir, & comme il fait rendre obeyffance a chaque 
pere de famille dans fa maifon, qu'il tiendra la main 
s'ils Ten requierent, que leurs compatriottes obeyfTent 
k ce qu'ils ont conclud par entr'eux. Quand tout fut 
arrefl^, la ieuneffe paffant I'arquebufe [34] fur I'ef- 
paule k I'entour de la cabane, ou les Capitaines auoient 
efl^ elleus, fit vne gentile falue pour les honnorer. 

Le lendemain I'vn de nous interrogeant vn Payen 
affez efloign^ de la foy s'il ne penfoit point a fe faire 
inftruire. N'auez vous pas, dit-il, ouy ces coups 
d'arquebufes qu'on tira hier au foir, ce bruit vous 
affeuroit de la volont6 que i'ay de croire en Dieu; 
car nous conclumes tons qu'il falloit vous efcouter, 
& embralTer vos fagons de faire. 

Comme tout cecy s'eftoit palf6 feulement entre 
les hommes, ils refolurent d'alTembler les femmes 
pour les prelTer de fe faire inftruire, & de receuoir 
le faindt Baptefme, on les fit done venir, & les ieunes 
gens auffi, le bon fut qu'on les prefcha fi bien, que 
le iour fuiuant vne partie de ces pauures femmes ren- 
contrant le Pere de Quen luy dirent, oil efl vn tel 
Pere, nous le venons prier de nous baptifer, bier les 
hommes nous appellerent en Confeil, c'eft la pre- 
miere fois que iamais les femmes y font entries ; mais 
ils nous traic5terent fi rudement, [35] que nous en 
eflions toutes eftonnees, c'eft vous autres nous di- 
foient-ils, qui eftes caufes de tous nos malheurs, c'eft 
vous qui retenez les demos parmy nous, vous ne 
prelTez point pour eftre baptifees, il ne fe faut pas 
contenter de demander vne feule fois cette faueur 
aux Peres, il les faut importuner, vous eftes paref- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 105 

In the fourth place, they confirmed the resolution 
they had made to cultivate the land. This done, 
they went to see Monsieur the Governor to give him 
an account of their proceedings, and to entreat him 
to authorize those whom they had elected. He prom- 
ised them that he would support these; and, as he 
has obedience rendered to every head of a family in 
his own house, that he would lend a helping hand if 
they required it of him, to the end that their coun- 
trymen should obey what they have mutually con- 
cluded. When all was resolved upon, the young 
men, passing, with arquebuses [34] upon their shoul- 
ders, around the cabin where the Captains had been 
elected, fired a neat salute in their honor. 

The next day, when one of us asked a Pagan, who 
was somewhat averse to the faith, if he were not 
thinking of being instructed, " Did you not hear the 
arquebus shots last evening?" said he. "That 
noise assured you of my willingness to believe in 
God; for we all concluded that we must listen to 
you, and embrace your customs." 

As all this took place only among the men, they 
resolved to call together the women, to urge them 
to be instructed and to receive holy Baptism. Ac- 
cordingly, they were brought together, and the young 
people also. The best of it was that they preached 
to them so well that the following day some of these 
poor women, encountering Father de Quen, said to 
him, ' ' Where is such a Father ? we have come to beg 
him to baptize us. Yesterday the men summoned 
us to a Council, the first time that women have ever 
entered one; but they treated us so rudely [35] that 
we were greatly astonished. ' It is you women,' 
they said to us, * who are the cause of all our misfor- 


106 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.18 

feufes d'aller aux prieres, quant vous paffez deuant 
la croix, vous ne la falues point, vous voulez eftre 
independantes, or fgachez que vous obeirez k vos 
maris, & vous ieuneffe vous obei'rez a vos parens & 
k nos Capitaines, & fi quelqu'vn y manque nous auons 
conclud qu'on ne luy doneroit point k manger. Voila 
vne partie du fermon de ces nouueaux Predicateurs, 
lefquels k mon aduis font d'autant plus eftonnans 
qu'ils font nouueaux, & tres-efloignez des fa9ons d'a- 
gir des Sauuages. le croy bien qu'ils n'entreront pas 
tout d'vn coup dans cette grande foufmiffion qu'ils fe 
promettent ; mais il en fera de cet article comme des 
autres, ils I'embralTeront petit "k petit. Vne ieune 
femme vn peu apres ces efledtions, s'en eftant fuye 
dans [36] le bois ne voulant pas obeyr k fon mary, 
les Capitaines la firent chercher, & nous vindrent 
demander fi 1' ay ant trouuee il ne feroit pas bon de 
I'enchainer par vn pied, & fi ce feroit affez de la faire 
ieufner quatre iours & quatre nuidts fans manger, 
pour penitence de fa faute. 

II arriua au mefme temps vn trai(5t d'edification, 
deux femmes aueugles, ayans ouy dire qu'il falloit 
honorer la croix qui eftoit entre leurs cabanes & la 
Chappelle, la cherchoient auec leurs baftons quant 
elles venoient k la Meffe, & comme elle eft plantee 
dans vne pallifCade de pieux, ils pafloient leurs bas- 
tons fur ces pieux, fe doutat bien que cette croix eftant 
plus haute, elles la rencontreroient, quelques vns de 
nos Fran§ois les voyans li attentiues k chercher, s'ar- 
reflerent pourveoir ce qu'elles vouloient faire, apres 
auoir bien fuyui la palliflade, enfin elles rencontrerent 
la croix, «& toutes deux luy firent vne grande reue- 
rence, cela fit rire nos Francois, qui ne laifferent 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 107 

tunes, — it is you who keep the demons among us. 
You do not urge to be baptized ; you must not be sat- 
isfied to ask this favor only once from the Fathers, 
you must importune them. You are lazy about go- 
ing to prayers ; when you pass before the cross, you 
never salute it ; you wish to be independent. Now 
know that you will obey your husbands; and you 
young people, you will obey your parents and our 
Captains ; and, if any fail to do so, we have concluded 
to give them nothing to eat. ' ' ' This is a part of the 
sermon of these new Preachers, who, in my opinion, 
are so much the more wonderful as they are new and 
very far removed from the Savage methods of action. 
I believe, indeed, that they will not all at once enter 
into this great submissiveness that they promise 
themselves ; but it will be in this point as in others, 
they will embrace it little by little. A young woman 
having fled, shortly after these elections, into [36] 
the woods, not wishing to obey her husband, the 
Captains had her searched for, and came to ask us, 
if, having found her, it would not be well to chain 
her by one foot ; and if it would be enough to make 
her pass four days and four nights without eating, 
as penance for her fault. 

There occurred at the same time an edifying inci- 
dent. Two blind women having heard that they 
must honor the cross which was between their cabins 
and the Chapel, felt for it with their staffs when they 
came to Mass ; and, as it is planted within a palisade 
of stakes, they passed their staffs over these stakes, 
wondering if, this cross being higher, they could 
touch it. Some of our Frenchmen, seeing them so 
earnestly searching, stopped to see what they in- 
tended to do. After having carefully followed the 


108 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.18 

pas d'eftre bien ediffiez de la {implicit^ de ces bonnes 
gens. 

En fuite de toutes ces conclufions, ils [37] fe mi- 
rent ^ trauailler k leurs deferts, de verity ie croy que 
leurs Anges fe reliouyfloient bien fort, les voyant £i 
feruens dans vne occupation £i innocente & fi vtile, 
pour le bien de leurs corps & de leurs ames, noflre 
Reuerend Pere Superieur qui auoit pafle I'Hyuer "k 
Kebec, voulut iouyr de cette confolation, il s'en vint 
demeurer k S. lofeph, & fit merueille pour les fecou- 
rir. Nous somes extremement obligez ^ V. R. de 
nous auoir enuoye vn homme fi prudent, fi charitable 
& fi zele pour le falut des pauures Sauuages. Non- 
obftant les diuertiffemens de fa charge, il a tellement 
aduanc6 en la cognoilTance de la langue qu'il fe faict 
defia entendre, expliquant le catechifme auec fruidt, 
il s'en alloit luy-mefme auec nos hommes fecourir 
ces bons Neophites, leur donnant par fois a manger 
k la fin de leur trauail, leur procurant du bled d'Inde 
pour femer, ie vous lailTe k penfer fi ces pauures 
Sauuages eftoient confolez, voyans ces grands ac5tes 
de charity. 

Quelques Fran9ois voulans participer k ce bon 
ceuure, donnerent auffi [38] quelques iourn^es de 
leurs homes pour aduancer cet ouurage, & ayder ces 
pauures gens k femer leurs bleds, la graine de chari- 
te, produit des fruidts de gloire. 

A mefme temps qu'on trauailloit 9a bas auec fer- 
ueur, quelques Algonquins de I'lfle faifoient le 
mefme aux trois riuieres, le defert qu'ils ont fait, efl 
I'vne des plus fortes chaifnes qui les puifTent arre- 
fter, ils auoient donn^ parole k N. R. P. Superieur 
qui les alia vifiter, de fe faire inflruire, & de cultiuer 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 10» 

palisade, they finally encountered the cross, and both 
made a deep reverence to it. This made our French- 
men laugh, yet they were greatly edified at the sim- 
plicity of these good people. 

In consequence of all these conclusions, they [37] 
set to work at their meadows. In truth, I believe that 
their Angels rejoiced greatly, seeing them so fervent 
in an occupation so innocent, and so useful to the wel- 
fare of their bodies and their souls. Our Reverend 
Father Superior, who had passed the Winter at Kebec^ 
wishing to enjoy this consolation, came to live at St. 
Joseph, where he did wonders in aiding them. We 
are extremely obliged to Your Reverence for having 
sent us a man so prudent, so charitable, and so zeal- 
ous for the salvation of the poor Savages. Notwith- 
standing the distractions of his office, he has so 
advanced in the knowledge of the language that he 
already makes himself understood, explaining the 
catechism profitably. He went himself with our 
men to succor these good Neophytes, sometimes giv- 
ing them food at the end of their work, and procur- 
ing Indian corn for them to plant. I leave you ta 
imagine whether these poor Savages were comforted, 
at seeing these great acts of charity. 

Some Frenchmen, wishing to participate in this 
good work, also gave [38] a few days' labor of their 
men to advance it, and to help these poor people 
plant their corn. The seed of charity produces fruits 
of glory. 

At the same time that they were working down 
here with fervor, some Algonquins of the Island 
were doing the same thing at the three rivers. The 
clearing they have made is one of the strongest chains 
that can hold them there. They had given their 


no LES RELATIONS DBS j£SUITES [Vol.18 

la terre, ie croy qu'ils la garderont, fi la crainte de 
leurs ennemis ne les faidt quitter prife. Le Pere 
lacques Buteux & le Pere Charles Raimbault qui 
trauaillent en cette refidence, les gaignent fortement 
h. noftre Seigneur. 

Quand nos Sauuages eurent enfemence leur champs, 
ils nous diret qu'ils auoient deffein de defcendre h. 
Tadouffac, en partie pour aller en marchandife aux 
peuples du Saguene ; mais principalement pour inui- 
ter le Capitaine de TadoulTac & fes gens, d'em- 
bralTer la foy & de venir demeurer aupres d'eux, & 
pource [39] qu'en telles occafions les prefens parlent 
plus que la bouche, ils amalTerent quantite de porce- 
laine, pour prefenter h. ce Capitaine, nous y cotribu- 
afmes quelque chofe de noftre part, ils nous dirent 
encore que £i. ceux de TadoulTac fe rangeoient auec 
eux, qu'ils iroient inuiter les autres nations plus 
efloignees h. f aire le mef me ; afin adiouftoient ils que 
nous n'ayons tous qu'vn Dieu, & qu'vne fagS de faire, 
nos paroles difoient les Chrefliens, ne feront point 
nouuelles ; car le bruit de noftre creance f e refpend 
defia par tout, ha! qu'il eft vray que, Deus nojler ignis 
confumens ejl, que Dieu eft vn feu conf ommant, & que 
Nemo ejl qui fe abfcondat h calore eius, qu'il n'y a mar- 
bre qu'il n'echauffe. Euffay-ie iamais creu, que des 
Barbares nes dans la cruaute, nourris de chair hu- 
maine, fuffent deuenus Predicateurs de lefus-Chrift, 
ie puis affeurer que ie ne fgache perfonne qui leur ayt 
donn6 ces penfees, d'aller inuiter les autres nations 
de croire en Dieu, c'eft vn pur ouurage du faindt 
Efprit, & afin qu'on voye que c'eft I'efprit. Qui 
contmet omnia &• replet orbem terrarum fcientiam [40] 
habens vocis. Voyci ce qu'il a fait dire aux Sauuages 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 HI 

word to Our Reverend Father Superior, who went to 
visit them, that they would receive instruction, and 
would cultivate the land; I believe that they will 
keep it, if the fear of their enemies does not cause 
them to let go the prize. Father Jacques Buteux 
and Father Charles Raimbault, who labor in this resi- 
dence, exert a strong influence upon them for our 
Lord. 

When our Savages had planted their fields, they 
told us that they intended to go down to Tadoussac, 
partly to trade with the peoples of the Saguene, but 
principally to invite the Captain of Tadoussac and 
his people to embrace the faith and to come to live 
near them ; and since [39] on such occasions presents 
speak louder than words, they collected a quantity 
of porcelain to present to this Captain. We con- 
tributed something thereto, on our part. They told 
us, besides, that if the people of Tadoussac ranged 
themselves on their side, they would go and invite 
the other more distant nations to do the same, " In 
order," they added, " that we may all have only one 
God, and one way of doing things." " Our words," 
said the Christians, ' ' will not be new, for the report 
of our belief is already spread everywhere." Ah, 
how true it is that Deus nosier ignis consumens est, that 
God is a consuming fire; and that Nemo est qui se 
abscondat h calore ejus, that there is no marble that it 
does not heat. Would I ever have believed that 
Barbarians born in cruelty, and fed upon human 
flesh, would become Preachers of Jesus Christ? I 
can assure you that I do not know any one who has 
given them these ideas of going to invite other 
nations to believe in God, — it is purely the work of 
the holy Spirit; and, in order that it may be seen 


112 LES RELATIONS DES jiSUITES [Vol.18 

des trois Riuieres. Quelques canots d'Attikamegues 
(ce font peuples qui habitent ordinairement au delTus 
du fleuue des trois Riuieres) eftas defcendus vers nos 
Francois, les Algonquins les inuiterent de venir de- 
meurer auec eux pour auoir la cognoillance de Dieu, 
leur difant mille biens du fecours que nous leur ren- 
dons felon noflre petit pouuoir, ces nouueaux hofles 
ne repartirent rien ^ cela; mais s'en allans trouuer le 
Pere Buteux, ils luy tefmoignerent qu'ils auoient vn 
grand defir d'eftre inflruidls, & de cultiuer la terre, 
non pas auec les Algonquins, ^ raifon qu'ils efloient 
differens d'humeur & de langue, le Pere leur deman- 
da s'ils ne voudroient pas bien choifir vne place, vne 
iournee de chemin ou enuiron, dans le fleuue Meta- 
ber8tin, que nous appellos les trois Riuieres, & que 
Ik deux Peres de noftre Copagnie les iroient inftruire, 
helas! firent ils, c'eft bien ce que nous fouhaitte- 
rions. Voicy les propres termes de la lettre du Pere 
Buteux, qui nous refcriuit ces bonnes nouuelles, 
alleure toy, me [41] dit le Capitaine de cette nation, 
que ie f eray ce que ie pourray enuers mes gens ; afin 
que cela fe fafle, tu en fgauras des nouuelles deuant 
I'Automne, afin qu'on fe puiffe difpofer pour defer- 
ter au Printemps, prends courage, moy & mon oncle 
que voila parlerons fortement de cet affaire, cet oncle 
dont il parloit & qui eftoit Ik prefent, efl vn bon 
vieillard que ie baptifay Tan paff^, & que le fieur 
Marfolet nomma Nicolas, ie luy auois dit qu'il taf- 
chaft de fe venir confeffer au Printemps, il n'y a pas 
manque, il a rompu expres le deffein qu'il auoit d'al- 
ler plus haut, cet homme efl fort affectionne k la 
fainc5te Foy, ce qui luy donne vne grande confiance 
en Dieu, dont en voicy vn effecft qu'il me raconta lors 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 113 

that it is the spirit, Qui continet omnia et replet orbem 
terrarum. scientiam [40] habens vocis, behold what it 
has caused the Savages of the three Rivers to say. 
Some canoes of Attikamegues (these are tribes that 
live ordinarily above the river of the three Riv- 
ers) having come down towards our French, the 
Algonquins invited them to come and live with them, 
in order to obtain a knowledge of God, — telling them 
a thousand good things about the help that we ren- 
der them according to our limited power. These 
new guests answered nothing to this ; but, going to 
see Father Buteux, they testified to him that they 
had a great desire to be instructed and to cultivate 
the land, — but not with the Algonquins, because 
they were of different natures and language. The 
Father asked them if they would not like to choose 
a place, distant one day's journey or thereabout, on 
the river Metaberoutin, which we call the three 
Rivers, and that there two Fathers of our Society 
would go to instruct them. " Ah," they replied, 
*' that is just what we would like." Here are the 
exact words of the letter of Father Buteux, who 
wrote us this good news : " ' Rest thee assured, ' [41] 
the Captain of this nation said to me, ' that I shall 
do what I can with my people, in order that this may 
be accomplished ; thou shalt hear news of it before 
Autumn, so that arrangements maybe made to clear 
the land in the Spring. Take courage ! I and my 
uncle, whom you see, will speak urgently of this 
matter.' This uncle of whom he spoke and who was 
present there, is a good old man whom I baptized 
last year, and whom sieur Marsolet named Nicholas. 
I had told him that he should try to come and con- 
fess in the Spring. He did not fail to do so, purposely 


114 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.18 

que ie le voulois congedier, apres s'eftre confeffe, 
attend encor vn petit me dit-il, ie te veux dire ce 
que m'a fait noflre Pere, c'eft ainfi qu'il appelloit 
Dieu, les neiges n'ont pas efb6 bonnes cette ann^e, ce 
qui a efte caufe qu'a la fin de I'Hyuer ie me fuis 
trouu6 vne fois bien en peine, ie n'auois rien ^ man- 
ger, & ie n'efperois pas d'en trouuer auec mes iambes 
delia vieilles, [42] veu que de meilleurs chaffeurs que 
moy perdoient courage, ie m'addrelTay pour lors, 
comme ie fay en toutes mes necelTites ^ noftre Pere, 
& luy dis i'efpere en toy, tu es le maiftre de tout, 
ayde nous, fais ce qu'il te plaira, quelque teps apres 
ma priere, ie rencontray inopinement deux Orignaux, 
dont i'en tuay vn fur le champ, & donnay charge ^ 
de ieunes gens d'aller tuer I'autre, ce qu'ils firent, 
ainfi i'efpere que celuy qui eft bon me logera au ciel 
auec luy. Ie puis dire en verity que le P. R[a]im- 
bault & moy voyans comme ce bon homme s'eftoit fl 
bien conferue dans les forefls & parmy des Barbares, 
n'ayant eu que fort peu d'inflruc5tion, n'admirafmes 
la b6t6 de Dieu ; le faindt Efprit eft vn grand maiftre. 
Nos Algonquins font allez en traic5le vers vne na- 
tion qui fe nomme les Vtakd'amivek \sc. i^takH'ami- 
8ek], ceux-cy traidtent auec d'autres qui viennent du 
Nord, & qui s'appellent Papiraga8'ek, ils ont vn ren- 
dez-vous, oil ils s'aflemblet au mois d'Aouft, il fait 
s'y froid au pays de ceux-cy que les arbres ne vien- 
nent pas "k iufte grandeur, pour donner de I'efcorce 
fuffifante pour [43] leur faire des canots, qu'ils achep- 
tent des autres peuples, i'efpere que la Foy fera por- 
t6e dans ces nations, qu'on pourra attirer & arrefter 
9a-bas auec le temps. Ce font les paroles du Pere, 
Dieu le veille exaucer. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 116 

breaking off his plan of going farther up. This man 
takes a deep interest in the holy Faith, and this 
gives him great confidence in God, of which here is 
one result that he related to me when I would have 
dismissed him. After having confessed, he said to 
me, ' Wait a little longer; I wish to tell thee what 
our Father has done for me' — it is thus he called God — 
'The snows have not been favorable this year, which 
caused me once at the end of the Winter to be in 
great distress ; I had nothing to eat, and I did not 
expect to find any game with my legs already old, 
[42] seeing that better hunters than I had lost cour- 
age. I addressed myself then, as I do in all my ne- 
cessities, to our Father, and said to him, "My hope 
is in thee, thou art the master of all ; help us ; do 
what shall please thee. ' ' Some time after my pray- 
er, I encountered unexpectedly two Moose, — one of 
which I killed immediately, and charged some young 
men to go and kill the other one, which they did. 
So I hope that he who is good will lodge me in 
heaven with him.' I can say truly that Father 
R[a]imbault and I, seeing how this good man had 
been preserved in the forests and among Barbarians, 
though he had had but very little instruction, admired 
the goodness of God. The holy Ghost is a great 
master. 

"Our Algonquins have gone to trade in the vicin- 
ity of a nation called the Outakw'amiwek.'" The 
latter trade with others who come from the North, 
and who are called Papiragaw'ek.^^ They have a 
rendezvous where they assemble in the month of 
August. It is so cold in the country of the latter 
that the trees do not attain the proper size to furnish 
them bark enough for [43] making their canoes, 


116 LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 18 

I'ay defia dit, qu'vne piece de cent efcus eft capable 
d'arrefter & de conuertir toute vne famille, par vne 
petite maifonnette qu'on luy dreffe, partie k la Fran- 
9oife, partie k la fa^on des Sauuages, pleuft k Dieu 
que la fuperfluite des baftimens de France, fut 
conuertie en ces petits edifices, & que la deuotion 
d'arrefter & fixer ces pauures peuples, entraft dans 
le cceur des puiffans du monde. Qui reduit vne 
famille conuertit tous fes defcendans, & fait vn petit 
peuple Chreftien. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 117 

which they buy from other tribes. I hope the Faith 
will be carried into these nations, that we may be 
able to attract and locate them down here in the 
course of time. " These are the words of the Father; 
may God hearken to them. 

I have already said that the sum of a hundred 6cus 
is sufficient to hold and convert an entire family, by 
means of a little house that is built for it, partly 
in the French way, partly in the fashion of the 
Savages. Would to God that the superfluity of 
buildings in France were converted into these little 
edifices; and that zeal to render these poor peoples 
permanently settled would enter the hearts of the 
mighty ones of the earth. He who civilizes one family 
converts all its descendants, and makes a miniature 
Christian people. 


118 LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol. 18 


[44] CHAPITRE IV. 

DES SAUUAGES BAPTISES, & DES BONNES ACTIONS DE 
CETTE NOUUELLE EGLISE. 

NOUS auons baptife cette annee enuiron douze 
cens Sauuages, tant aux Hurons qti'icy bas, 
ceux qui ont receu ce Sacrement es refidences 
de Kebec, de S. lofeph, & des trois Riuieres, font la 
plufpart perfonnes adultes, qui ont embralTe la Foy 
de lefus-Chrift, dans vne bonne fante, apres vne fuffi- 
fante inflrudtion qu'on leur a donnee, ils viuent 
maintenant dans vne ioye & dans vne innocence tres- 
aymable. le ne m'arrefteray pas k d'efcrire les par- 
ticularites de leurs baptefmes, ie me contenteray de 
coucher quelques vnes de leurs bonnes adtions, & 
des bons fentimens que Dieu leur donne. C'eft main- 
tenant qu'on pent dire que, Samaria recipit Verbum 
[45] Dei, qu'il n'y a point de barbaric ^ I'efpreuue 
des bont6s de Dieu, les ames faindtes qui ont arrouf^ 
ces nouuelles plantes de leurs larmes, & qui les ont 
fait germer & pouller par leurs fainctes prieres, & 
par leurs fecours charitables : goufterot auec plaifir 
ces fruidls du fang de lefus-Chrift, que ie leur pre- 
fente de tout mon coeur. 

Nous auons done en la refidence de faindt lofeph, 
vne nouuelle Eglife de Sauuages, qui fe raffemblent 
petit k petit en ce lieu 1^, tant pour eftre inflruidts, 
que pour cultiuer la terre. Nous en auos vn autre 
aux trois Riuieres, qui pour eftre plus ieune n'a pas 


1640] RELATION OF 1640 119 


[44] CHAPTER IV. 

OF THE SAVAGES BAPTIZED, AND THE GOOD DEEDS 
IN THIS NEW CHURCH. 

WE have baptized this year about twelve hun- 
dred Savages, including those among the 
Hurons as well as those down here. Those 
who have received this Sacrament at the residences 
of Kebec, St. Joseph, and the three Rivers, are for 
the most part adults, who have embraced the Faith 
of Jesus Christ in good health, after they have been 
given sufficient instruction. They are living now in 
most delightful happiness and innocence. I will not 
stop to describe the particulars of their baptisms, 
but will content myself with mentioning some of 
their good actions and some of the good sentiments 
that God gives them. It is now that we can say, 
Samaria recipit Verbum [45] Dei, there is no barbarian 
condition that is proof against God's goodness. The 
pious souls who have watered these new plants with 
their tears, and who have made them germinate and 
grow by their holy prayers and by their kindly assist- 
ance, will taste with pleasure these fruits of the 
blood of Jesus Christ, which I present to them with 
all my heart. 

We have, then, at the residence of saint Joseph, a 
new Church of Savages, who are gradually collecting 
in that place, both to be instructed and to cultivate 
the land. We have another at the three Rivers, 
which, being younger, is not as yet so strong. The 


120 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.18 

encor tant de force. Les principaux Satiuages d'icy- 
bas font defla Chrefliens, les autres afpirent h. cette 
faueur, c'efl vne confolation bien douce de veoir la 
candeur de ces nouueaux enfans de Dieu. 

Premierement il n'y a nulle difficulte de porter ces 
bons Neophites, h. frequeter les Sacremens les iours 
qu'on defire qu'ils s'en approchent, vn [des] Peres s'en 
va la veille par les cabanes, ou bien leur dit aux pri- 
eres, & h. rinftrudlion qu'on leur [46] fait tons les 
foirs en la Chappelle, oil ils s'allemblent, demain ne 
manqu^s pas de vous venir confefTer, & ceux k qui 
on accordera la faindte Communion la receuront auec 
reuerence, ko ! refpondent-ils, cela fait tenez vous 
prefts fi vous voulez des quatre beures du matin ; car 
vous ne manquerez pas de voir des Sauuages h. voflre 
porte, tons prefts de fe confefTer, cette obeylTance eft 
elle pas bien aymable? 

Comme on leur recommande de ne laiffer croupir 
dans leur coeur aucune offence qu'ils iugent tant foit 
peu griefue; i'en ay veu s'en venir d^s le point du 
iour en noftre maifon, & dire a I'vn de nous, mon 
Pere, mon coeur eft mechant, i'ay fach6 Dieu, i'ay 
fait telle offence, difant tout haut leur peche, par 
exemple, i'ay fait vn feftin ^ tout manger, le Diable 
ma trompe, ie me viens confefTer, ie n'auray point 
de repos que ie n'aye vomy la malice de mon ame ; 
s'eftans confefTez ils s'en vont foulagez, fe croyans 
purifiez dans le fang de lefus-Chrift qui leur eft 
applique par ce Sacrement, dont ils con9oiuent fort 
bien la vertu. 

[47] II y en a qui ne manquent point de fe con- 
fefTer tous les huidt iours, & de fe communier autant 
de fois qu'on leur permet, car ils ne le font point 
fans cong6. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 121 

principal Savages down here are already Christians, 
and the others aspire to this grace. It is a very 
sweet consolation to see the candor of these new chil- 
dren of God. 

First, there is no difficulty in inducing these good 
Neophytes to frequent the Sacraments on the days 
when they are desired to approach them. One of 
the Fathers goes through the cabins, the evening 
before, or says to them at prayers, and at the in- 
struction that is [46] given them every evening, in 
the Chapel where they assemble, " Do not fail to 
come to-morrow to confess ; and those to whom the 
holy Communion shall be granted, shall receive it 
with reverence." Ho! they respond. This done, 
hold yourselves in readiness, if you please, at four 
o'clock in the morning, for you will be sure to see 
Savages at your door, all ready to confess. Is not 
this obedience very pleasing? 

When they were urged to allow no offense, how- 
ever insignificant they might consider it, to stagnate 
in their hearts, I have seen them come to our house 
at the break of day, and say to one of us, * ' My Father, 
my heart is wicked; I have offended God; I have 
committed such an offense, " naming their sin aloud, — 
for example, " I have made an eat-all feast; the 
Devil has deluded me. I am going to confess; I 
shall have no rest until I have vomited forth the 
malice of my soul." Having confessed, they go 
away relieved, believing themselves purified in the 
blood of Jesus Christ, which is applied to them 
through this Sacrament, the virtue of which they 
very well comprehend. 

[47] There are some who do not fail to confess 
every week, and to receive communion as many 


122 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.18 

I 'ay delia remarqu^ aux Relations precedentes, 
que plufleurs quittent leur ieu, ou leur difner, ou leur 
fouper, c'eft &. dire leur manger, quand on les appelle 
aux prieres oti ^ I'inftrucftion qui fe fait tous les iours 
vne fois ou deux k I'Eglife, quand ils ne font point 
k la chafTe. 

Vn de nos Frangois eflant venu certain iour de 
grand matin k Sillery, & ayat iett6 les yeux par les 
cabanes, vit encor les Sauuages tous endormis, Ik 
delTus on fonne la premiere Mefle, laquelle alTez 
fouuent fe dit deuant que le Soleil fe leue. En vn 
moment il vit la plufpart des Chreflies debouts, & en 
vn tour de main s'eftans enueloppez de leurs cou- 
uertes qui leur feruetde robbes & de lidts, ils s'e vin- 
dret droit k la Chappelle en cet equipage fans mot 
dire, ce bon homme qui les regardoit refta tout eflon- 
n6 les ayant plufloft veu en la Maifon de Dieu qu'vn 
Frangois ne fe feroit habille, la plufpart [48] des 
Chreftiens font ialoux d' entendre tous les iours la 
MelTe, cet auatage qu'ils ont par dellus les Payens de 
pouuoir affifter "k ces myfteres facrez les confole 
fort. 

Nous auons eft^ long-temps en doute li nous bap- 
tizerions les ieunes gens prefls de fe marier deuant 
qu'ils ayent pris party. L'experience nous fait veoir 
que la grace du Baptefme opere puillamment dans 
vn coeur, la loy qui deffend au Chreftien de s'allier 
d'vne infidelle eft li bien receue parmy ces bonnes 
gens, que fi vn ieune homme Payen recherche vne 
fille Chreftienne, pour I'ordinaire il s'addrelTera k 
nous pour eflre inftruit, & pour receuoir le Baptefme 
deuant que parler k la fille, car il f9ait bien qu'elle 
le mefprifera comme vn infidele, oil fi elle a quelque 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 123 

times as they are permitted, for they do not do so 
•without leave. 

I have already remarked in the preceding Rela- 
tions that many quit their games, or their dinner or 
supper, — that is to say, their food, — when they are 
called to prayers, or to the instruction that is given 
once or twice every day in the Church, when they 
are not away hunting. 

One of our Frenchmen having come to Sillery one 
day, early in the morning, and having glanced 
through the cabins, saw all the Savages still sleep- 
ing. At that moment the bell was rung for the first 
Mass, which is often said before the Sun rises. In 
a moment, he saw the greater part of the Christians 
upon their feet; and in the turn of one's hand they 
had wrapped themselves in their blankets, which 
serve as garments and as beds ; they came straight to 
the Chapel, in this costume, in complete silence. 
The good man who was looking at them was greatly 
astonished at seeing them in the House of God 
before a Frenchman would have been dressed. The 
majority [48] of the Christians are anxious to hear 
Mass every day. The advantage they have over the 
Pagans, of being able to attend these sacred mys- 
teries, consoles them greatly. 

We have been long in doubt whether we should 
baptize young people of marriageable age before 
they have made their choice. Experience has shown 
us that the grace of Baptism operates powerfully in 
a heart. The law which forbids the Christian to 
ally himself with an unbeliever is so well received 
among these simple people that, if a young Pagan is 
seeking a Christian girl, he will usually apply to us 
to be instructed and to receive Baptism before speak- 


124 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.18 

bonne inclination pour luy elle ne manquera pas de 
luy dire qu'elle ne fe pent pas marier fans le confen- 
tement du Pere qui I'aura baptif^e ou inftruidte. 

Nous viuons maintenant dans vne profonde paix, 
la Foy eft refpect^e des Payens mefme, les nouueaux 
Chreftiens font dans la ferueur, il eft vray que Dieu 
[49] a efprouue ces pauures peuples par de grandes 
calamitez, mais comme la nuidt retourne apres le 
iour, & I'Hyuer apres I'Eft^, ie m'attend bien qu'il 
s'efleuera quelque tempefte apres cefte bonace. Ie 
me perfuade quafi que ces bourrafques prouiendront 
des manages faits a la fagon des Chreftiens, les Sau- 
uages font depuis plufieurs fiecles dans la polTeffion 
d'vne pleine liberty brutale changeans de femmes 
quand il leur plaift, n'enprenantqu'vne ou plufieurs, 
felon leur paffion, maintenant qu'ils fe font Chreftiens, 
il faut qu'ils baillent le col fous le ioug d'vn mariage, 
qui pent eftre leur feblera vn iour bien rude, il eft 
vray qu'il ne s'eft iamais trouu6 au monde d'alliances 
plus faindtes & plus parfaictes, & plus propre pour 
conferuer I'amitie, que celles des Chreftiens; mais 
cela n'empefche pas que les mari^s tribulationem carnis 
habeant, ne foient alTez fouuent troubles dans leurs 
mefnages, & que ce ne foit vne efpece de martyr, 
d' eftre lie infeparablement auec vn homme ou vne 
femme, qui aura plus d'apret6 qu'vn [50] chardon, 
& moins de douceur qu'vne epine. 

Or ce n'eft pas que iufques ^ prefent nous ayons 
grand sublet de nous plaindre de nos Neophites en 
ce point, au contraire, ie dirois volotiers que I'amour 
que fe portent ceux que nous auons maries en face 
de I'Eglife, apres la publication des bancs [sc. bans], 
& le defir qu'ils ont de perfeuerer iufques ^ leur 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 125 

ing to the girl ; for he knows very well that she will 
scorn him as an unbeliever, or, if she be well inclined 
toward him, she will not hesitate to tell him that she 
cannot marry him without the consent of the Father 
who may have baptized or instructed her. 

We are living now in profound peace ; the Faith 
is respected even by the Pagans, and the new Chris- 
tians are fervent. True, God [49] has tried these 
poor people by great calamities ; and, as night returns 
after day, and Winter after Summer, I am expecting 
with certainty that he will raise up some storm 
after this calm. I am almost persuaded that these 
tempests will arise from the marriages made in the 
Christian way. The Savages have been for many 
ages in possession of a complete brutal liberty, chang- 
ing wives when they pleased, — taking only one or 
several, according to their inclinations. Now that 
they have become Christians, they must bend their 
heads under the yoke of single marriage, which per- 
haps will, some day, seem to them very hard. It is 
true that no alliances have ever been found in the 
world more holy and more perfect, and better adapted 
for preserving affection, than those of Christians. 
But that does not prevent that those who are married 
tribulationem carnis habeant, and be often annoyed in 
their households, and that it should be a sort of 
martyrdom, to be inseparably bound to a man or a 
woman who may have more sharpness than a [50] 
thistle, and less softness than a thorn bush. 

Now it is not that, hitherto, we have great reason 
to complain of our Neophytes in this matter. On 
the contrary, I can readily say that the love which 
inspires those who have married with the rites of 
the Church, after the publication of the banns, and 


126 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.18 

mort dans cette amiti6, eft vn miracle de la Religion 
Chreflienne, il eft bien vray que deuant que de les 
baptifer, & par apres deuant que de les marier, nous 
leur faifons fortement apprehender les loix du ma- 
nage, leur faifant voir 1' importance qu'il y a d'obeir 
aux ordonnances de Dieu & de fon Eglife, & la dif- 
grace qu'ils encourreroient de choquer 1' authority de 
Monfieur le Cheualier de Montmagny noftre Gouuer- 
neur, lequel ne manqueroit pas de faire punir feuere- 
ment ceux qui rebuteroient leurs femmes pour en 
prendre d'autres. 

Veritablement Dieu nous a fauorife d'vn homme 
felon fon coeur, tres zel6 [51] pour fa gloire & pour 
fon feruice, comme il voit 1' importance qu'il y a 
d'authorifer ce Sacrement, & de le redre venerable 
parmy ces peuples, il defira que la ceremonie de trois 
mariages que nous auons publies ^ Sillery, fe palfat 
"k Kebec, & voulut luy mefme faire vn magnifique 
feftin k tous les conuies aux nopces, Madame de la 
Pelletrie & quelques autres Dames Fran9oif es prirent 
charge d'accommoder les epouf^es, & pour les hom- 
mes on les fit richement veftir, portans les dons pre- 
cieux, que fa Maiefte fit I'an palfe k quelques vns de 
nos Sauuages, les principaux de nos Fran9ois les con- 
duirent auec honneur iufques a 1' Eglife, ayant receu 
le Sacrement de mariage, ils les menerent en vne 
fale, oil ils furent tres-bien traictes. Les Sauuages 
voyant cet appareil efloient rauis, nos Fran9ois bien 
edifies, & les cieux prenoient plaifir k vne adtion qui 
fe faifoit pour la gloire de celuy qui les a baftis. 
Quelques Montagnets & Algonquins, non conuies 
aux nopces, regardoient ces ceremonies auec eftonne- 
ment, & leurs femmes voyant les ieunes fiUes & [52] 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 127 

their desire to persevere until death in this affection- 
ate relation, is a miracle of the Christian Religion. 
It is indeed true that before baptizing them, and 
afterwards before marrying them, we clearly ex- 
plain to them the laws of marriage, showing them 
the importance of obeying the ordinances of God 
and of the Church, and the disgrace they incur by 
clashing with the authority of Monsieur the Cheva- 
lier de Montmagny, our Governor, who would not 
hesitate to have those severely punished who should 
discard their wives in order to take others. 

Truly, God has favored us with a man after his 
own heart, very zealous [51] for his glory and for 
his service. As he saw the importance of authoriz- 
ing this Sacrament, and of making it reverenced 
among these peoples, he desired that the ceremony 
for three marriages that we had published at Sillery 
should take place at Kebec, and wished himself to 
make a magnificent feast for all those invited to the 
nuptials. Madame de la Pelletrie and some other 
French Ladies took charge of dressing the brides ; 
and as for the men, we had them richly clothed, 
wearing the precious gifts which his Majesty made 
last year to some of our Savages. Our leading 
Frenchmen conducted them with honor to the Church, 
and, after they had received the Sacrament of mar- 
riage, took them into a hall, where they were hand- 
somely entertained. The Savages, when they saw 
this ceremoniousness, were enraptured, and our 
French people greatly edified ; and the heavens took 
delight in an act which was done for the glory of 
him who built them. Some Montagnais and Algon- 
quins, not invited to the wedding, regarded these 
ceremonies with astonishment ; and their wives, see- 


128 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 18 

femmes qti'on alloit marier reueftues des petites 
richeffes du pays, dont ils font grande eftime, fe di- 
foient I'vne h. I'autre, on cognoifl bien que ces ^pou- 
f6es ne font point orphelines, que leurs peres ne font 
pas morts, elles ne feroient pas fi braues li elle 
n'auoient de bons parens, loiiant par cette admiration 
le foin qu'on a de ces nouuelles plantes du iardin de 
I'Eglife. I'entendy de mes oreillesces paroles fortir 
de la bouche de quelques vns de nos Fran9ois, nous 
n'attendions pas cette benedidtion de nos iours, en 
verit6 c'eft vne confolation bien fenfible, de voir vn 
Barbare efleu6 dans la liberty qu'ont les ames [sc. anes] 
fauuages, fe captiuer doucement fous le ioug de 
lefus-Chrift noftre Sauueur. 

L'vn de ces mari^s eftoit Vincent Xauier, fils de 
deffundt Fran9ois Xauier Nenaskvmato, ieune homme 
ag6 d'enuiron vingt deux ans, fe voyant priu^ de fon 
pere & de fa belle mere, emport^s de 1' epidemic com- 
mune, nous vint dire qu'il auoit befoin du fecours 
d'vne femme, qui luy fes raquettes & fes robes, bref 
qui prit garde "k fon mefnage, i'ay de [53] I'affedtion, 
difoit-il, pour vne ieune fille, ie vous prie d'aflembler 
mes parens, & de considerer fi elle m'eft propre, fi 
vous iug^s que ce foit mon bien ie I'efpouferay, 
finon ie fuiuray voftre conf eil : fes parens & fes amis 
conclurent que ce party luy eftoit fortable. Or 
comme I'Aduent approchoit, nous luy difmes qu'k la 
verit6 il fe pouuoit bien marier en ce fainc5t temps, 
mais que les plus fages Chreftiens ne le faifoit pas, 
ouy, mais difoit-il, le temps me preffe d'aller k la 
cballe, vous me remettez ^ quarante iours d'icy, qui 
me fera mes raquettes, priez en voftre promife, luy 
difmes nous, il fe mit k rire, ie me feray refpondit- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 129 

ing the young girls and [52] women who were about 
to be married arrayed in the small treasures of the 
country, which they greatly value, said to one an- 
other, " One could easily tell that these brides are 
not orphans, that their fathers are not dead; that 
they would not be so fine if they did not have good 
parents, ' * praising by this admiration the care that 
is taken of these new plants in the garden of the 
Church. I heard with my own ears these words 
come from the lips of some of our French people, — 
' ' We did not expect this blessing in our time ; in 
truth, it is a very touching consolation to see a Bar- 
barian, reared in the freedom of the wild asses, bring 
himself meekly under the yoke of Jesus Christ, our 
Savior. ' ' 

One of these bridegrooms was Vincent Xavier, son 
of the deceased Frangois Xavier Nenaskumato, a 
young man about twenty-two years old. Finding 
himself deprived of his father and stepmother, who 
were carried off in the general epidemic, he came to 
tell us that he needed the help of a woman to make 
his snowshoes and clothes, — in brief, to take care of 
his household. " I am [53] in love with a young 
girl," said he; "I beg you to call my relatives to- 
gether, and to consider whether she is suitable for 
me. If you decide that it is for my good, I will 
marry her; if not, I will follow your advice." His 
relatives and friends decided that this choice would 
be a suitable one for him. Now as Advent was draw- 
ing near, we told him that, in truth, he could very 
properly marry at this holy season, but that the most 
prudent Christians did not do it. " Yes," said he, 
" but I am in a hurry to go hunting. If you put me 
off until forty days hence, who will make my snow- 


180 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. Ig 

il, gauffer de moy : car ce n'eft pas la couftume de 
noftre nation d'emploier les filles deuant leur ma- 
nage, mais il n'importe fit il, quoy que le terme que 
vous me donnez foit bien long, il vaut mieux attendre 
& fe mettre en danger d'eflre moqu6 que de ne pas 
vous obeir, ce bon ieune homme attendit, & fe com- 
porta auec vne innocence vrayement Chreftienne pen- 
dant tout ce teps-la, fe confeffant fort fouuent, pour 
fe [54] fortifier contre les embufches de fathan, qui 
ne dort pas en telles occafions. 

le ne f9ay fi ce que ie vay dire, ne fera point trou- 
u6 ridicule en voftre France ; mais il eft icy & dans 
I'innocence & dans la bien-feance. Les Sauuages 
qui vont "k I'entour de nos habitations, s'addreffent "k 
nous pour tons leurs petits negoces, comme feroient 
des enfans k leurs peres, ils viennent par fois deman- 
der s'ils iront chaffer en tel endroit, s'ils prendront 
medecine, s'ils feront fuerie, s'ils danceront. s'ils fe 
marieront, les ieunes gens nous viennent trouuer en 
particulier & nous prient de leurs trouuer femme, ou 
de parler pour eux "k celles qu'ils defirent epoufer, 
quelques femmes veufues, & mefme encor quelques 
filles nous prient en fecret de leurs trouuer mary, fe 
confians plus en nous qu'a ceux de leur nation, & nous 
difent fort bien que nous agiffions comme de noftre 
part, fans faire femblant qu'ils nous ont parle, le tout 
gift k fe comporter en forte dans ces offices de cha- 
rite, qu'eux mefmes fe lient & qu'ils concluent leurs 
affaires fans nous engager, finon a les [55] conduire 
dans les voyes des enfans de Dieu. Les Payens 
mefme qui ont quelque inclination a la Foy, fe com- 
portent ainfi enuers nous. 

II y a quelque temps qu'vn ieune Sauuage non 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 131 

shoes?" " Ask your promised bride to do it," we 
said to him. He began to laugh, and replied, " I 
shall make myself a laughingstock, for it is not the 
custom in our country to employ girls before their 
marriage; but it does not matter," he continued; 
" although the term you set me is a very long one, 
it is better to wait, and to risk being made sport of, 
than not to obey you." This good young man wait- 
ed, and behaved with a truly Christian innocence 
during all that time, — confessing very often, in order 
[54] to fortify himself against the snares of satan, 
who does not sleep at such times. 

I do not know if what I am going to say will not 
be considered absurd in your France, but it is looked 
upon here as both innocent and proper. The Sav- 
ages who come about our settlements apply to us in 
all their little affairs, as children would to their fa- 
thers. They come sometimes to ask if they shall go 
hunting in such a place, if they shall take medicine, 
if they shall have a sweat, if they shall dance, if they 
shall marry. The young men come to see us in 
private and ask us to find them wives, or to speak for 
them to those whom they desire to marry; some 
widows, and even some young girls, ask us secretly 
to find them husbands, confiding in us more than in 
those of their own nation, and tell us emphatically 
that we are to act as if on our own account, without 
making it appear that they had spoken to us. The 
whole point lies in so behaving in these offices of 
charity that they themselves become intimate and 
conclude the affair without involving us, except in 
[55] leading them in the paths of the children of 
God. Even the Pagans who are well disposed towards 
the Faith behave thus toward us. 


132 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.18 

encor baptif6, nous fit demander par quelques vns de 
fes parens Chreftiens, li nous trouuerions bon qu'il 
fe mariat k vne fille qu'il nommoit. Or comme ny 
I'vn ny I'autre n'eftoient pas Chreftiens, nous ref- 
pondifmes que nous n'entrions point dans ces co- 
gnoiffances, & que nous ne nous meflions point des 
manages, linon pour prendre garde qu'ils fe traidtent 
^ la fa9on des Chreftiens quand on eft baptife, ce 
ieune homme ne palla pas outre. L'ayant rencontr^ 
k quelques iours de delk, ie luy demanday s'il n'e- 
ftoit point niari6, ie n'ay garde fit-il, de me marier 
fans voftre confentement, vous eftes mon pere, c'eft 
k vous non feulement de me dire fi vous trouues bons 
que ie me marie, mais encor de m'affigner Ie iour 
que ie Ie dois faire, ouy, mais luy dy-ie, vous n'eftes 
pas Chreflien ? ie ne Ie f uis pas encor repartit-il, mais 
i'ay grande enuie de I'eflre, & [56] celle que ie 
recherche h. la mefme volonte, c'eft pourquoy ie vous 
fupplie de nous baptifer tous deux deuant noftre ma- 
nage, nous attendrons tant qu'il vous plaira, fi nous 
ne fommes pas encor affez inflruidls. Les ames 
fainc5tes, qui prient pour la conuerfion de ces peuples 
& qui fe voient exauc^es, pourront elles oui'r parler 
de cette candeur fans que leurs cceurs s'amolliffent 
ou fe fonde das Ie coeur de Dieu. Comme nous voy- 
ons que noftre Seigneur va beniflant les manages de 
ces bons Neophites, nous baptifafmes ces deux ieunes 
gens, bien inftruidts, & puis les mariafmes en face 
de I'Eglife, nous auons fait plufieurs autres mariages, 
ils font tous par la grace de noftre Seigneur dans vne 
bonne refolution de ne fe point quitter iufques ^ la 
mort, except^ vn ou deux, qui commencent a tous 
donner de la peine. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 133 

Some time ago a young Savage, not yet baptized, 
had us asked by some of his Christian relatives if we 
would approve of his marrying a girl whom he named. 
Now as neither the one nor the other was a Chris- 
tian, we replied that we would not take part in such 
connections, and that we did not meddle with mar- 
riages, except to see that they live in a Christian 
manner when they have been baptized. This young 
man did not press the matter farther. Having met 
him some days later, I asked him if he were not mar- 
ried. " I have no inclination," he replied, " to mar- 
ry without your consent. You are my father ; it is 
for you not only to tell me whether you approve 
my marrying, but also to appoint the day when I 
shall do so." "Yes," I said to him, "but you are 
not a Christian." " I am not one yet," he replied, 
" but I am very desirous of becoming one, and [56] 
the girl whom I am seeking has the same desire; 
this is why I beg you to baptize us both before our 
marriage. We will wait as long as you please, if 
we are not yet sufficiently instructed." Can the 
holy souls who pray for the conversion of these peo- 
ples, and who feel that they are heard, hear of this 
candor without their hearts softening or melting in 
the heart of God? As we see that our Lord keeps 
blessing the marriages of these good Neophytes, we 
baptized these two young people, well instructed, 
and then married them with the rites of the Church. 
We have arranged several other marriages. All 
these pairs are, by the grace of our Lord, firmly re- 
solved not to forsake each other until death, — except 
one or two, who are beginning to cause us some 
trouble. 


134 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 

Quand il arriue quelque different entr'eux, il nous 
viennent trotiuer, ou nous en font donner aduis, vne 
femme Chreftienne apprenant qu'on faifoit ie ne f9ay 
quels ieux ou recreations publiques dans vne cabane, 
s'y voulut trouuer, fon [57] mary tefmoigna qu'il ne 
I'aggreoit pas, elle ne laiffa pas d'y aller contre fa 
volont6, eftant de retour fon mary luy dit, li ie n'e- 
ftois pas Chreftien, ie vous dirois que fi vous n'auez 
point d'affe(5tion pour moy, que vous cherchalTiez vn 
autre mary ^ qui vous rendiffiez plus d'obei'ffance; 
mais ayant promis k Dieu de ne vous point quitter 
iufques k la mort, ie ne f9aurois vous tenir ce langage 
quoy que vous m'offencies, cette pauure femme luy 
demanda pardon tout fur I'heure, & des Ie matin du 
iour fuiuant, elle s'en vint trouuer Ie Pere qui la bap- 
tif^e, & luy dit mon Pere, i'ay facli6 Dieu, ie n'ay 
pas obey k mon mary, i'en ay Ie coeur tout trifle, ie 
voudrois bien m'en confelTer, cette candeur eft rauif- 
fante. C'eft affez pour ce Chapitre, paffons h. quel- 
ques autres adtions de ces bons Neophites. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 186 

When some difference occurs among them, they 
come to see us, or have us give them some advice. 
A Christian woman, learning that I know not what 
games or public recreations were in progress in a 
cabin, wished to be present there; her [57] husband 
declared that he did not approve this; she went, 
however, against his wish. Having returned, her 
husband said to her, " If I were not a Christian, I 
would tell you that, if you did not care for me, you 
should seek another husband to whom you would 
render more obedience; but, having promised God 
not to leave you until death, I cannot speak to you 
thus, although you have offended me." This poor 
woman asked his forgiveness, without delay, and on 
the following morning came to see the Father who 
had baptized her, and said to him, " My Father, I 
have offended God, I have not obeyed my husband ; 
my heart is very sad ; I greatly desire to make my 
confession of this." Such frankness is delightful. 
Enough for this Chapter; let us pass on to some 
other acts of these good Neophytes. 


136 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.18 


[58] CHAPITRE V. 

CONTINUATION DU MESME DISCOURS. 

VN ieune Sauuage malade, ayant efl6 abandonn6 
de fes gens enuiron dix lieues au dellus de la 
relidence S. lofeph, le Pere de Quen, qui a 
grandement trauaille toute cette ann^e en cette reli- 
dence, prit vn Fran9ois auec foy & s'en alia chercher 
ce panure malade, I'ayant trouu6 auec bien de la 
peine, le fit amener ^ I'Hofpital, oii ce panure gar9on 
fut fi bien affifl6, qu'il en guerit, la charite fait des 
miracles, elle change les Sauuages en enfans de Dieu, 
ce ienne Sauuage voyant vn fi grand amour en fon 
endroit, fe fait inftruire, prelTe qu'on le baptife, on 
en fait quelque difficult^, pource qu'eftant prefl k fe 
marier, on craignoit qu'il ne s'alliaft de quelque infi- 
dele, s'il ne pouuoit trouuer de fille Chreftienne ; il 
promet de garder toutes les loix de Dieu & de fon 
Eglife, [59] tant qu'il luy fera poffible, mais il le pro- 
met de fi bonne grace, «& d'vn fi bon coeur, qu'on le 
baptife, la grace a de puiHans effedts, depuis ce 
temps-Ik ce ieune homme ne s'eft iamais dementi de 
fa parole, il n'a pas la feule penfee d'epoufer vne 
infidele, il eft fi ennemy des diffolutions de la ieu- 
neffe, qu'vn certain iour quelques Sauuages eftans 
arriu^s du pays des Algonquins, il nous vint dire en 
fecret, & fur le foir, ie vous fupplie de me donner le 
couuert cette nuit & les autres fuiuantes, tant que ces 
ieunes gens ferot parmy nous, pource que ie ferois 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 137 


[58] CHAPTER V. 

CONTINUATION OF THE SAME SUBJECT. 

AS a sick young Savage had been abandoned by 
his people about ten leagues above the resi- 
dence of St. Joseph, Father de Quen, who has 
labored diligently all this year in this residence, took 
a Frenchman with him and went in search of this 
poor sufferer. They found him after a great deal of 
trouble, and had him brought to the Hospital, where 
the poor boy was so well cared for that he recovered. 
Charity works miracles ; it changes Savages into chil- 
dren of God. This young Savage, seeing so great 
love toward him, received instruction, and urged us 
to baptize him. There were some objections to this, 
because, being of a marriageable age, it was feared 
that he might ally himself with some unbeliever if 
he could not find a Christian girl. He promised to 
obey all the laws of God and of his Church, [59] in 
so far as it should be possible to him ; and he prom- 
ised it with such good grace and so good a heart, 
that he was baptized. Grace has powerful effects. 
Since that time this young man has never belied his 
promise, — he has no thought of marrying an unbe- 
liever, and is such an enemy of the dissoluteness of 
the young men that one day, when some Savages 
arrived from the Algonquin country, he came toward 
evening, and said to us, secretly, " I entreat you to 
give me shelter this night and the following ones, 
as long as these young men shall be among us ; for 


138 LES RELATIONS DESJ^SUITES [Vol.18 

oblige par bien-feance de les accompagner, & comme 
ils ne font pas baptifez, ils pourront faire quelque 
chofe que Dieu hayt, & moy ie ne f9aiiroit plus 
I'offencer, car c'eft tout de bon que ie croy, & que ie 
luy ay dit que ie luy obeyrois. 

Vn autre ieune homme nous difoit que fon bap- 
tefme luy auoit bouch6 les oreilles, ie n'entends plus 
faifoit-il, les paroles diflolues que quelques eftourdis 
proferent par fois en noftre cabane, mon coeur eft li 
content de fe voir libre de fes offences, qu'il ne fe 
pent comprendre, [60] ie f9ay de bonne part ce que 
ie vay dire, vn ieune homme ag6 d'enuiron vingt- 
cinq k trente ans, paffant chemin coucha dans vne 
cabane de Sauuages; la nuit vne femme I'aborda, 
luy voyant fon deffein, courut au deuant de la tenta- 
tio, retires vous luy dit-il, car ie fuis Chreftien, ceux 
qui prient Dieu ne commettent point ces pechez-lk. 

Fay defia dit ailleurs, que les ieunes Sauuages qui 
cherchent femme, vont voir la nuit leur maiftreffes, 
nous crions fortement contre cette couflume tres- 
pernicieufe, car encor que pour I'ordinaire tout fe 
paffe dans vne grande honeftete, neantmoins Ie dan- 
ger d'offencer Dieu y eft trop grand. 

Or tout aufli-toft qu'il arriue quelques ieunes Sau- 
uages de dehors, nos Chreftiens nous en donnent 
aduis, afin que nous tenions la main que tous fe con- 
tiennent dans leur deuoir, eux mefmes crient contre 
la ieunefCe qui s'emancipe, leurs reprochans qu'ils 
appellent les demons dans leurs cabanes, & qu'ils 
attirent la maledidtion de Dieu deffus leurs teftes. 
II eft arriu6 vne chofe bien [61] remarquable en cet 
endroit, vn ieune homme non encor baptife recher- 
chant vne fille Chreftienne I'alla voir la nuit ; cette 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 189 

I shall be obliged by courtesy to accompany them, 
and, as they are not baptized, they will be likely to 
do something that God hates; and, for my part, I 
can no more offend him, for it is in earnest that I 
believe, and that I told him I would obey him." 

Another young man told us that his baptism had 
stopped his ears. " I no longer hear," said he, " the 
licentious words that heedless youths sometimes utter 
in our cabin. It is impossible to understand how 
glad my heart is to see itself free from its sins." [60] 
I learned from good authority what I am about to 
relate. A young man between twenty-five and thir- 
ty years old, while pursuing his way, lay down to 
sleep in a cabin of Savages. In the night, a woman 
approached him. He, perceiving her purpose, antici- 
pated temptation by saying to her, " Go away, for 
I am a Christian; those who pray to God do not 
commit such sins." 

I have said elsewhere that the young Savages who 
are seeking a wife go to visit their mistresses at 
night. We forcibly denounce this most pernicious 
custom; for although, in general, all is done with 
great decency, yet the risk of offending God is too 
great. 

Now, when any young Savages arrive from out- 
side, our Christians immediately inform us of it, that 
we may watch and see that all keep within the 
bounds of duty. They themselves rebuke the young 
men who take too much liberty, reproaching them 
with calling the demons into their cabins, and with 
drawing down the curse of God upon their heads. 
There happened a very [61] remarkable thing in re- 
gard to this. A young man not yet baptized, who 
was wooing a Christian girl, went to see her at night. 


140 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.18 

fille ne le rebuta point de prime abord, elle I'efcouta 
difcourir, ce qui fcandalifa tellement les Chrefliens, 
que nous en fufmes incontinens aduertis, nous la 
fifmes venir & la tan^afmes vertement, luy repro- 
chant qu'elle fe comportoit comme vne perfonne aban- 
donn^e, qui ne croyoit point en Dieu, & que les 
feules carelles de ce ieune homme en tel temps, 
eftoient coulpables. Cette pauure fille bien eftonnee 
repartit au Pere qui la tan9oit ; mon Pere il eft vray 
que i'ay efcout^ ce ieune homme, mais il ne m'a 
point carelTee, ie ne fuis point Frangoife, i'ay veu des 
Frangois badiner auec des filles, & les carelTer & bai- 
foter: ce n'ell; point noftre couftume, ceux qui nous 
recherchent, nous parlent feulement & puis s'en 
vont, croy^s moy difoit elle, quand ce ieune homme 
me parloit ie me fouuenois fort bien que i'eftois 
Chreftienne, & que ie ne voulois pas offencer Dieu, 
ie luy ay dit feulement qu'il s'addrelfat ^ vous pour 
cet affaire, le [62] bruit eft cependant luy dit le Pere, 
que vous ne vous eftes pas bien comport^e, ceux qui 
prient Dieu refpondit elle, ne diront pas cela; car ie 
vous affeure que ie n'ay fait autre mal que de I'efcou- 
ter, me comportant felon noftre ancienne fa9o de 
faire. L^ deffus, vn certain qui voulut rire, & tout 
enfemble s'affeurer de 1' innocence de la fille en fa 
fimplicit6, ie fgauray bien luy dit-il, fi ce ieune 
homme vous a tromp^e, car ie vous feray prendre 
vn breuage qui vous fera vomir tout fur le champ 
s'il vous a touchee, ne vomiray-ie point, dit-elle, au 
cas qu'il ne m'ait point touchee? point du tout: 5a 
done donnez le moy tout maintenant, & vous verrez 
mon innocence, le compagnon luy donne vne ceuil- 
ler^e de firop fort noir, elle le prend d'vn vifage tout 


1640] RELA TJON OF 1640 141 

At first this girl did not rebuff him, but listened to 
his conversation, which so scandalized the Christians 
that we were immediately informed of it. We sum- 
moned her and reprimanded her sharply, reproach- 
ing her with behaving like a profligate who did not 
believe in God, and telling her that even the caresses 
of this young man at such a time were sinful. This 
poor girl, greatly surprised, replied to the Father 
who chided her, " My Father, it is true that I have 
listened to this young man, but he did not caress me. 
I am not French; I have seen Frenchmen trifling 
with girls, caressing and kissing them, but this is not 
our custom, — those who seek us only talk to us, and 
then go away. Believe me," said she, " when this 
young man was speaking to me I remembered very 
well that I was a Christian, and that I was unwilling 
to offend God. I merely told him that he should 
address himself to you in this matter." " The [62] 
report is, however, ' ' said the Father, ' ' that you did 
not behave properly." " Those who pray to God," 
she replied, " will not say that. For I assure you 
that I have done nothing wrong, beyond listening 
to him, conducting myself according to our ancient 
customs." Thereupon, a certain person, for the 
sake of a joke and also to assure himself of the gen- 
uineness of the girl's simplicity, said to her, " I shall 
know truly whether this young man has deceived 
you, for I will have you take a potion that will make 
you vomit immediately if he has touched you." 
' ' Shall I not vomit, ' ' said she, ' ' unless he has touched 
me?" " Not at all." " Well, then, give it to me 
now and you will see my innocence." His compan- 
ion gave her a spoonful of very black syrup, which 
she took with a very cheerful face, and swallowed 


142 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 

guay, I'auale auec affeurance, 11 ie ne dois point vo- 
mir s'efcrie elle, qu'au cas que i'aye commis quelque 
mal ie ne crains rien. Elle fut loiiee de fa conflance, 
marque de fa purete ; mais on luy fit li bien entendre 
Ie mal que c'eftoit de fcandalifer fon prochain, & de 
fe mettre en danger d'eftre trompee [63] du diable, 
qu'elle & fes compagnes en profiterent. Et h. quel- 
ques fepmaines del^, d'autres ieunes gens les eftans 
venus rechercher la nuit, elles leur dirent auffi-toft 
qu'ils fe retiraffent, & qu'elles eftoient Chreftiennes, 
qu'ils s'addrellallent aux Peres qui les auoient bap- 
tif6es, pour parler de mariage s'ils en vouloiet 6pou- 
fer quelques vnes, ces ieunes gens ne s'en allans 
point, elles prirent des tifons de feu & les menacerent 
de leur porter k la face s'ils ne fe retiroient, eflre ne 
dans la barbarie & faire ces actions, c'eft prefcher 
bautement lefus-Chrift. 

Vne femme Chreftienne croyant qu'vn Fran9ois luy 
donnoit vn coufleau afCez gentil, qu'il luy preftoit 
feulement, Ie retint, Ie Frangois s'en oublia pour lors, 
fi bien qu'il creut I'auoir perdu, mais I'ayant reco- 
gnu entre les mains de cette femme, il luy voulu 
ofler, elle refifle, proteflant qu'il luy a donne, la 
diuerfite de langage fait aflez fouuent de fauffes 
ententes, enfin cette femme entre fi bien en colere, 
qu'elle fit coniec5turer au Pere de Quen, qui eftoit Yk 
prefent, que la Foy n'eftoit pas profondement enra- 
cinee [64] dans fon ame, c'eft pourquoy il luy demanda 
fi elle auoit voulu tromper Dieu en fon baptefme, h. 
ces paroles elle entre en foy mefme & luy dit, mon 
Pere c'eft la colere qui m'a tranfportee, i'ay fache 
Dieu, ie m'iray confeffer, ce n'eft pas I'amour que ie 
porte au coufteau, mais la peur que i'ay eu que vous 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 143 

confidently. "If I do not vomit," she exclaimed, 
" except in case I have done wrong, I fear nothing." 
She was praised for her firmness, a sign of her puri- 
ty. But she was made to understand so clearly the 
harm there was in scandalizing her neighbor, and 
placing herself in danger of being deluded [63] by 
the devil, that she and her companions profited by 
it. And a few weeks afterwards, when other young 
men came to visit them at night, they straightway 
told them that they should go away, — that they were 
Christians, and that, if the men wished to marry any 
of them, they should address themselves on that sub- 
ject to the Fathers who had baptized the girls. But, 
as these young men did not go away, the girls took 
firebrands and threatened to thrust them in their 
faces if they did not leave. To be born in barbar- 
ism and act in this manner, is to preach Jesus Christ 
boldly. 

A Christian woman, believing that a Frenchman 
gave her a very pretty knife, that he had only loaned 
her, kept it. The Frenchman forgot it for the time, 
so that he thought he had lost it. But having recog- 
nized it in the hands of this woman, he tried to take 
it away. She resisted, protesting that he had given 
it to her. A difference in language often results in 
misunderstandings. Finally, this woman became so 
angry that she made Father de Quen, who was pres- 
ent, imagine that the Faith was not deeply rooted 
[64] in her soul. Hence he asked her if she had 
wished to deceive God in her baptism. At these 
words, she recovered herself and said to him, " My 
Father, I have been carried away by my anger. I 
have displeased God, I will go and confess. It was 
not my love for the knife, but the fear I had that 


144 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 

ne me tinfies pour vne larronneffe, ie vous allure que 
i'ay precede de coeur deuant Dieu en mon baptefme, 
& c'eft ce qui m'afflige, qu'on croie que ie commette 
les pech^s que ceux qui font baptifes ne commettent 
point, Ik-deffus elle fe mit ^ prefcher les ieunes filles 
qui efloient 1^, leurs declarant ce qu'elles deuoient 
quitter, au cas qu'elles voululTent eftre Chreftiennes. 

Quelques Sauuages nous ont propof6 ces cas de 
confcience bien aifes 'k refoudre, par exemple, fi c'e- 
floit vn grand peche de fonger la nuit quelque mal, 
quoy qu'en dormant mefme on y refiflafl. Quand Ie 
diable nous porte k croire nos fonges, fi nous les re- 
jettons, difoient-ils, la penfee que nous auons eue de 
les croire, efl-elle vn grand mal? I'ay eu peine [65] 
quelque fois de demand er certains pech^s k quelques 
Sauuages, de peur de leur faire entendre que des 
perfonnes baptif^es les pouuoient commettre. 

On baptifa certain iour cinq vieilles femmes en- 
femble, dont la plus ieune auoit plus de foixante ans, 
apres Ie baptefme I'vne de ces bonnes Neophites prit 
Ie Pere qui les auoit baptifees par la main, & luy dit 
mon fils tu nous as fait reuiure, noftre coeur eft tout 
refiouy, il nous dit que tes paroles font veritables, & 
que nous irons au ciel, I'autres s'efcrioit 6 que ie prie- 
ray Dieu maintenant de bon coeur! en effet fi-toft 
qu'on parloit de Dieu dans leurs cabanes, elles fe 
mettoient k genoux & ioignoient les mains, la plus 
ag6e difoit ^ fes gens, il me femble que nos An- 
ceflres croyoient quelque chofe de ce qu'enfeignent 
les Peres, car il me fouuient, qu'efkant bien ieune, 
mon pere fort ag6 nous racomptoit que celuy qui a 
tout fait, & qui donne ^ manger, fe fafchoit quand 


1640] RELA TJON OF 1640 146 

you might look upon me as a thief. I assure you 
that I acted sincerely before God in my baptism ; and 
what afflicts me is that it should be thought that I 
commit sins that those who are baptized do not com- 
mit. ' ' Thereupon, she began to preach to the young 
girls who were present, declaring to them what they 
would have to give up if they wished to be Chris- 
tians. 

Some of the Savages have proposed to us these 
cases of conscience, which are very easy to solve, — 
for example, if it be a great sin to dream some- 
thing wrong at night, although even in dreaming 
one should resist it ? "If the devil incline us to be- 
lieve our dreams, if we reject them," they ask, '' is 
the thought we had, of believing them, a great sin? " 
I have been troubled [65] sometimes in asking Sav- 
ages about certain sins, lest I might cause them to 
infer that baptized persons could commit these. 

One day five old women were baptized together, 
the youngest of whom was more than sixty years old. 
After baptism, one of these good Neophytes took the 
Father who had baptized them by the hand, and said 
to him, " My son, thou hast made us live again; our 
hearts are full of joy, — they tell us that thy words 
are true, and that we shall go to heaven." The 
others cried out, " Oh, how fervently I will now pray 
to God! " In fact, as soon as one spoke of God in 
their cabins, they fell upon their knees, and clasped 
their hands. The most aged one said to her people, 
" It seems to me that our Ancestors believed some- 
thing of what the Fathers teach ; for I remember 
that when I was quite young, my father, who was 
very old, related to us that he who has made all, and 
who provides our food, was displeased when any 


146 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.18 

on faifoit quelque mal, & qu'il haifloit les mefchans, 
& qu'il les punilloit apres leur mort. 

Apres le baptefme de ces bonnes [66] vieilles, 
comme nous renuoions vn grad homme bien fait, 
rejettans fon baptefme en autre temps pour ne nous 
fembler alTez inflruic5t, il parut fort trifle, ie fuis 
afflig6 nous difoit-il, vous me dites que ie ne fuis pas 
encor alfez inftruidt, n'en f9ay ie pas autant que ces 
bonnes vieilles que vous auez baptifees? permettez 
moy que ie reuienne demain matin, & vous m'exa- 
miner6s encor vne fois, nous luy permifmes & ce bon 
homme, iadis fort orgueilleux, mais maintenant fort 
bon Chreftien, fe faifoit inflruire par vn enfant, des 
principaux articles du Catechifme, enfin il nous preffa 
li bien, alleguat qu'il s'en alloit faire vn voiage, & 
qu'il n'ofoit partir fans eftre defcharge de fes peches, 
que nous le baptifafmes auec quelques autres qu'on 
fit Chreftiens k mefme temps, vn peu de cognoiffance 
Chreftienne auec vne bonne volont^, vaut plus que 
toute la Philofophie d'Ariftote. 

Le feiziefme de lanuier, ayant appris qu'vne pau- 
ure vieille femme eftant partie de la refldence de S. 
lofeph, pour aller aux trois Riuieres, eftoit demeur^e 
malade \6y'] en chemin auec deux enfans, incapables 
de la fecourir, nous enuoiafmes deux Sauuages pour 
I'amener h. I'Hofpital, comme ils n'auoient point de 
traifnes ils amenerent les deux enfans, & lailTerent 
la malade toute feule au milieu des bois, nous tangaf- 
mes fort ces deux melTagers, & leur difmes qu'il falloit 
retourner querir cette pauure creature, I'vn d'eux qui 
n'eftoit pas encor Chreftien, entendant parler de re- 
tourner, efquiue au pluftoft, celuy qui efloit baptif^, 
rebrouff e chemin auec vn de nos Peres & noftre frere 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 147 

one did wrong, and that he hated the wicked and 
punished them after their death." 

After the baptism of these good [66] old women, 
as we were sending away a tall, well-formed man, — 
postponing his baptism until another time, because 
he did not seem well enough instructed, — he ap- 
peared very sad, " I am grieved," he said to us. 
' * You tell me that I am not yet sufficiently instructed ; 
do I not know as much as these simple old women 
whom you have baptized? Permit me to return to- 
morrow morning, and examine me once more." We 
allowed him to do so, and this good man, once very 
proud, but now a very good Christian, reconciled 
himself to be instructed by a child in the principal 
articles of the Catechism. Finally, he urged us so 
strongly — alleging that he was going away on a 
journey, and that he dared not depart without being 
freed from his sins — that we baptized him, with a 
few others who were made Christians at the same 
time. A little Christian knowledge, together with 
good will, avails more than all the Philosophy of 
Aristotle. 

On the sixteenth of January, having learned that a 
poor old woman, who had left the residence of St. 
Joseph to go to the three Rivers, was lying ill [67] 
by the wayside, with two children who were incapable 
of helping her, we sent two Savages to bring her to 
the Hospital. As they had no sleds, they brought 
the two children, and left the sick woman all alone 
in the depths of the woods. We chided these two 
messengers severely, and told them that they must 
return and get this poor creature. One of them who 
was not yet a Christian, hearing us say " return," 
stole away as quickly as possible. The one who was 


148 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 

lean Ligeois, arriu6es qu'ils furent oil eftoit la malade, 
ils la trouuerent en vn trou fait dans la neige, couchee 
fur quel que branche de pin, fans autre abry que le 
Ciel, elle n'auoit point d'ecorces pour fe deffendre de 
I'iniure de I'air, il fallut coucher en cette mefme 
hoflellerie, ou on ne trouue rien a foupper que ce 
qu'on y porte, Dieu donna vn nouuel abry k ces nou- 
ueaux hofles, il neiga tant toute la nuit, qu'ils eftoient 
couuerts & enfeuelis dans la neige de tous cofles. Ces 
trauaux qui paroiffent grands en France, [68] palTent 
icy pour legers, en effet on les fouffre fans peine, le 
iour venu la malade fe confeffe, on la lie fur vne petite 
traifne, noftre frere Ligeois & ce bon ieune Sauuage 
la tirent & la poulfent tant qu'ils peuuent, mais comme 
le temps eftoit fafcbeux & qu'elle auoit beaucoup 
endur6, elle mourut deuant que d'arriuer h. I'Hofpital, 
li ces a(5tions touchent les Sauuages, elles touchent 
aufli le Ciel, qui dat niuem Jicut lanam, qui fait trouuer 
vn manteau de neige auffi chaud qu'vn manteau de 
laine. 

C'efl vne chofe afCez ordinaire aux Chreftiens de 
fe mettre a genoux fi-toft qu'ils ont tu6 quelque ani- 
mal, & d'en remercier Dieu fur le champ, vne bonne 
vieille femme fgachant cette couftume la prattiqua h. 
fa mode s'en allant chercher des racines pour man- 
ger, en ayant trouue elle fe mit k genoux fur la neige, 
tenant ce difcours k noftre Seigneur, grand Capitaine 
c'efl vous qui auez fait le ciel & la terre, & ces 
racines, vous les auez faidtes pour noftre nourriture, 
vous me les auez enfeignes afin que i'en mangealTe, 
ie vous en remercie, fi vous m'en [69] voul6s encor 
donner ie les prendray, finon ie ne lailTeray pas de 
croire en vous, voila fa priere. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 149 

baptized retraced his steps, with one of our Fathers 
and our brother Jean Ligeois. When they reached 
the place where the sick woman was, they found her 
in a hole made in the snow, lying upon a few branches 
of pine, with no shelter but Heaven, and with no 
bark to protect herself from the wind. They had to 
sleep in this same hostelry, where nothing was to be 
found for supper except what they brought with 
them. God gave a new shelter to these new guests ; 
it snowed so hard, all night, that they were covered 
and shrouded in snow on all sides. These hardships, 
which seem great in France, [68] are considered here 
as light, — in fact, they are easily borne. When 
morning came, the sick woman confessed; they 
bound her to a little sled, and our brother Ligeois, 
and this good young Savage hauled and pushed her 
as well as they could. But, as the weather was very 
severe, and as she had suffered a great deal, she died 
before reaching the Hospital. If these actions touch 
the Savages, they also touch Heaven, qui dat nivent 
sicut lanam, who causes a mantle of snow to be found 
as warm as a mantle of wool. 

It is a very common practice with the Christians 
to fall upon their knees as soon as they have killed 
some animal, and to thank God for it upon the spot. 
A good old woman, knowing this custom, practiced it 
in her own way. Going in search of some roots to eat, 
and finding some, she knelt upon the snow and ad- 
dressed these words to our Lord: " Great Captain, it 
is you who have made heaven and earth, and these 
roots. You have made them for our nourishment, 
you have shown them to me that I might eat them. 
I thank you for them ; if you [69] are willing to give 
me more, I will take them ; if not, I will not give up 
believing in you." This was her prayer. 


160 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.18 

Vn Sauuage paffant fur le bord du grand fleuue, 
comme les vents fouffloiet auec violence vne allez 
belle tortue poulTee par la tempefte, fortit du fond 
de I'eau & fut iett6e k fes pieds comme vne pierre, 
luy la voyant fe met k genoux, & leuant les yeux au 
Ciel dit ces paroles; Mon Pere ie vous remercie, c'eft 
vous qui m'auez donne cet animal, vous I'auez fait 
pour me nourrir, & maintenant vous me le prefent6s, 
ie vous en remercie. 

De verite ces bonnes gens ont vne candeur bien 
aymable, ce feroit vne chofe bien nouuelle en France, 
li quelqu'vn des auditeurs alTembles pour entendre 
la predication, arreftoit le predicateur au milieu de 
fon difcours, ou pour luy parler, ou pour luy deman- 
der I'explication de quelque point de fa dodlrine, 
cela fe fait tous les iours icy fans mefeance. Quel- 
qu'vn de nous pref chant de la confeffion, & declarant 
I'importance qu'il y a de purifier fon cceur dans ce 
Sacremet, [70] & de ne rien cacher "k Dieu, vn Capi- 
taine s'efcria tout haut, mon Pere on ne fait que iouer 
dans nos cabanes, efcoutes ieuneffe, entendez-vous 
bien ce que nous dit le Pere, vous ne faicftes pas bien, 
amandez-vous, vous ioiiez trop, venez-vous confeffer, 
& gardez-vous bien de celer aucun de vos pechez, 
cette parenthefe fermee, le Predicateur continue fon 
difcours. 

Vne autrefois le Pere parlant de la Communion, & 
difant que le Fils de Dieu fe cachoit fous la blan- 
cheur du pain pour efprouuer noftre foy, vne bonne 
vieille leuant fa voix, dit aux autres femmes qui 
eftoient la, nous auons beau nous deguifer, il vient 
expr^s en noftre coeur pour voir tout ce qui s'y palle, 
il cognoift bien fi nous croyons par feintife ou non, 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 151 

As a Savage was passing along the bank of the 
great river while the wind was blowing violently, a 
very fine turtle, stirred up by the tempest, came forth 
from the depths of the water, and was thrown at his 
feet like a stone. When he saw it, he fell upon his 
knees and, raising his eyes to Heaven, uttered these 
words, " My Father, I thank you. It is you who 
have given me this animal. You have made it to 
nourish me, and now you present it to me. I thank 
you for it." 

Verily, these good people possess a truly engaging 
candor. It would be a very novel thing in France if 
one of the audience assembled to hear a sermon were 
to stop the preacher in the middle of the discourse, — 
either to talk with him, or to ask him for the ex- 
planation of some point of his doctrine. This hap- 
pens here every day without any impropriety. One 
of us preaching on confession, and declaring the im- 
portance of purifying one's heart in this Sacrament, 
[70] and of concealing nothing from God, a Captain 
exclaimed aloud, " My Father, they do nothing but 
gamble in our cabins. Listen, young men, do you 
understand clearly what the Father is telling us? 
You are not doing right; mend your ways! You 
gamble too much ; come and confess, and be careful 
not to hide any of your sins. ' ' This parenthetical 
speech finished, the Preacher continued his sermon. 

At another time, — when the Father was speaking 
of the Communion, and saying that the Son of God 
concealed himself under the whiteness of the bread 
to try our faith, — a good old woman, raising her 
voice, said to the other women who were there, " It 
is in vain for us to hide anything ; he comes into our 
hearts purposely to see all that is going on there. 


152 LES RELATIONS DBS j£SUITES [Vol. 18 

c'efl pour cela qu'il fe cache, afin de defcouurir fi nous 
auons de la malice en I'ame. 

Quand on dit quelque chofe qu'ils approuuent fort, 
ils le tefmoignent par fois tout au milieu de la predi- 
cation ho-ho, difent-ils, ou bien, mi hi, voila qui va 
[71] bien : ou bien encor, mi ke tiang, nous ferons cela. 

Vous en verrez qui diront au Predicateur, mon 
Pere n'allez pas ii vifle, parlez plus doucement, 11 le 
Pere ne fe fert pas bien k propos de quelque mot en 
leur langue, ils luy fuggerent le vray mot qu'il faut 
dire, & perfonne ne trouue cela eflrange. Pay autre- 
fois remarque, que les Sauuages pour fe faire beaux, 
fe rougillent ou fe noircillent la face, ou fe la pei- 
gnent d'vne autre couleur, or comme quelqu'vn de 
nous cryoit certain iour contre cette mauuaife cou- 
flume. L'vn de fes auditeurs indign^ contre ceux qui 
la retenoient, s'efcria, mon Pere il n'y a que les 
difformes & les malotrus qui fe peignent, nous autres 
qui fommes beaux naturellement, nous auons quitt6 
cette vieille mode, voila leur franchife. Mais remar- 
quez s'il vous plaift, qu'il n'y a que les principaux de 
I'auditoire qui fe donnent I'autorit^ de parler, c'efl 
affes pour ce Chapitre. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 153 

He knows very well whether we are only pretending 
to believe, — it is for this purpose that he conceals 
himself, to discover whether we have any malice in 
our souls. ' ' 

When one says something which they greatly ap- 
prove, they show it sometimes in the very midst of 
the preaching. Ho-ho, they say, or mi hi, " that is 
[71] good ; " or, again, mi ke Hang, ' ' we will do that. 

There are some who will say to the Preacher, ' ' My 
Father, do not go so fast; speak more slowly." If 
the Father does not correctly use some word of their 
language, they will suggest to him the right word 
that he should use, and no one finds this strange. I 
have previously remarked that the Savages, to adorn 
themselves, redden or blacken their faces, or paint 
them in some other color. Now as one of us rebuked 
this mischievous custom on a certain day, one of his 
auditors, indignant at those who retained it, ex- 
claimed, " My Father, it is only the deformed and 
the uncouth who paint themselves. The rest of us, 
who are naturally handsome, have given up this old 
custom." See how frank they are. But observe, if 
you please, that it is only the chief persons of the 
audience who assume authority in speaking. This 
is enough for this Chapter. 


154 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 18 


[72] CHAPITRE VI. 

CONTINUATION DU MESME SUJET. 

VN ieune homme Chreflien s'eftant mis en colere 
battit fa femme, qui I'auoit infolemment pro- 
•uoqii6, il n'eftoit pas encor hors de fougue, que 
fe repentant de fon peche, il fe glille en noftre chap- 
pelle pour en crier mercy a Dieu, il y rencontra le 
Pere de Quen auquel il dit, ie fuis trifle, ie viens de 
fafcher Dieu, priez-le pour moy, or comme cela s'e- 
ftoit fait deuant plufieurs perfonnes, il s'efleue vne 
grande rumeur dans les cabanes, plufieurs Chrefliens 
& plufieurs Payens tous enfemble, s'en viennent 
chez nous fe plaindre de ce fcandale, ces gens 1^ ne 
refpedtent pas leur baptefme, difoient les Chrefliens, 
ils viuent comme s'ils ne croyoient pas en Dieu. Les 
infideles nous reprochoient que nous ne les baptifions 
pas, & qu'ils faifoient mieux que plufieurs qui I'efloiet, 
[73] on leur enfeigne du bien, difoient-ils, & ils ne 
le font pas : ils prient Dieu & cependant ils f e met- 
tent en colere, ils font baptif6s & neantmoins ils ne 
laiflent pas de fe battre, comme nous leurs eufmes dit 
que nous les aduertirions de leur deuoir, ils les allerent 
querir tout fur I'heure, fans attendre dauantage, ils 
furent vefperiz6s comme il faut, notamment la fem- 
me, qui efloit plus coulpable que fon mary, cette con- 
fufion leur feruit, & ne fit point de mal aux autres ; 
les infideles ne f9auroient fupporter les deffauts des 
Chrefliens, ils croyent qu'ayant embrafle vne Loy fi 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 155 


[72] CHAPTER VI. 

CONTINUATION OF THE SAME SUBJECT. 

A YOUNG Christian, getting into a passion, beat 
his wife, who had insolently provoked him. 
He had not yet recovered from his rage, when, 
repenting of his sin, he slipped into onr chapel to 
cry to God for mercy ; encountering Father de Quen 
there, he said to him, " I am sad, I have just offended 
God, pray to him for me." Now as that had hap- 
pened in the presence of several persons, a great 
clamor arose in the cabins, — many Christians and 
Pagans coming together to us, to complain of this 
scandal. "Those people do not respect their bap- 
tism," said the Christians; " they live as if they did 
not believe in God." The unbelievers reproached 
us with not having baptized them, when they be- 
haved better than many who were baptized. [73] 
" They are taught what is right," said these, " and 
they do not do it. They pray to God, and yet they 
get angry. They are baptized, and yet they do not 
hesitate to beat one another. ' * When we had told 
them that we would admonish those persons con- 
cerning their duty, they went and brought them 
without delay, waiting for nothing more. They 
were properly reprimanded, especially the woman, 
who was more guilty than her husband. This humil- 
iation was useful to them, and did no harm to the 
others. The unbelievers cannot tolerate the faults 
of the Christians ; they believe that, having embraced 


156 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.18 

faindte, ils doiuent eflre exempts de toute fragilite, 
il eft vray que la grace du baptefme fait d'eftranges 
metamorphofes, quand on y correfpond. 

Vn Sauuage Chreftien, voulant entrer en quelque 
maifon, vn Fran9ois le repoulTa auec violence, ils fe 
parloient tons deux fans s'entendre, le Sauuage fe 
voyant mal traidte, difoit, fi ie n'eflois baptif6 ie t'ac- 
commoderois bien, ie fuis plus grand & plus fort que 
toy, ie t'aurois bien-tofl renuerf6 par terre, mais le 
[74] Pere qui m'a baptife m'a dit que la colere ne 
valoit rien, & qu'il ne falloit point faire de mal, 
mefme h. ceux qui nous en faifoient, c'eft pourquoy 
ie me retireray. 

Vn ieune Neophite ayant fait rencontre d'vn cari- 
bou, le tua d'vn coup d'arquebufe, auffi-toft il fe mit 
h. genoux pour en remercier Dieu, couftume qu'il 
gardoit mefme deuant que d'eftre baptife, mais ce 
qu'il fit en fuitte eft fort remarquable ; premierement 
il enuoya aux pauures malades de I'Hofpital, vne 
partie de fa chaffe, off rant ces premices h. noftre Sei- 
gneur, fecondement comme il auoit tu6 cet animal le 
leudy au foir, & qu'il en deuoit faire feftin le iour 
fuiuant felon la couftume du pays, il voulut attendre 
iufques au Dimanche, de peur que les Chreftiens ne 
mangealfent de la chair les iours deffendus, il voyoit 
bien que la neceflite en laquelle ils eftoient les difpen- 
foient allez, on luy difoit aulTi que les hommes de- 
uoient partir le Samedy pour aller ^ la chaffe, & 
qu'ils ne goufteroient point de fon feftin s'il ne fe 
haftoit de le faire, nonobftant tout cela, [75] il tint 
ferme, aymant mieux plaire k Dieu qu'aux hommes. 
La veille de Noel quelques Sauuages non encor bap- 
tifez, eftans arriues k S. lofeph firent feftin de grefle 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 157 

a Law so holy, the latter ought to be exempt from all 
frailties. It is true that the grace of baptism causes 
strange transformations, when one acts in accord 
with it. 

A Christian Savage, who wished to enter a certain 
house, was violently repulsed by a Frenchman. They 
both talked, but neither understood the other. The 
Savage, finding himself badly treated, said, " If I 
were not baptized, I would thrash thee well. I am 
larger and stronger than thou art, — I would soon 
have thrown thee to the ground ; but the [74] Father 
who baptized me told me that anger avails nothing, 
and that one must not do evil even to those who have 
done it to us; hence I will go away." 

A young Neophyte, having encountered a caribou, 
killed it with a shot from his arquebus. He imme- 
diately fell upon his knees and thanked God for it, — 
a custom which he observed even before his bap- 
tism; but what he did afterward is very remarkable. 
First, he sent to the poor sick persons at the Hospi- 
tal a portion of his game, offering these first fruits to 
our Lord. Secondly, as he had killed this animal 
Tuesday evening, and as he ought to make a feast of 
it the following day, according to the custom of the 
country, he wished to wait until Sunday, lest the 
Christians would not eat meat on the forbidden days. 
He saw, indeed, that the necessity in which they 
found themselves sufficiently dispensed them; and 
he was also told that the men were to leave on Sat- 
urday, to go hunting, and that they would not taste 
his feast if he did not hasten to give it. Notwith- 
standing all this, [75] he held firm, preferring to 
please God rather than man. On Christmas eve, 
some Savages, not yet baptized, having arrived at St, 


158 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 

d'oTirs, ce font leurs grandes delices, comme on y 
inuitoit quelques vns de nos Chreftiens, I'vn deux 
refpondit, encor que veritablement nous foyons dans 
la neceffite, neantmoins nous ne mangerons point de 
chair auiourd'huy, nous ieufnons tous, c'eft pourquoy 
nous n'irons point au feflin, nous aprifmes cette 
re f ponce quelques iours apres par cas fortuit, cela 
nous ediffia & confola dautant plus que ces pauures 
gens foufroient de la difette. 

Madame de la Pelterie fondatrice des Vrfulines, 
tres-zelee pour les Sauuages, voulut venir k fainct 
lofeph h. la fefte de Noel, pour fe trouuer h. la Meffe 
de minuidt auec eux, elle a vne ioye & vne confola- 
tion nompareille quand elle peut communier auec 
ces bons Neophites, elle fe trouua certain iour entou- 
r^e de plus de quarante Sauuages, qui approchoient 
tous de la fainc5te table auec elle, cela ne fe palla pas 
fans larmes de [76] ioye, aufTi faut-il auoiier que le 
changement fi fubit de ces pauures barbares, donne 
bien du contentement au coeur qui ayme lefus-Chrifl. 

Quand les Sauuages Chreftiens euret aduis qu'elle 
leur vouloit faire cet honneur de les venir vifiter k 
cette bonne fefte, ils I'allerent querir hommes, fem- 
mes & filles, auec vne telle ardeur que nous en eftions 
eftonnes, c'eftoit a qui la carefferoit dauantage, fi par 
fois elle les vient vifiter par eau, ces bonnes gens luy 
font vne petite falue d'arquebuzades lors qu'elle fe 
defembarque, Taccompagnant iufques k leurs mai- 
fons ou cabanes, auec beaucoup d'affedtion, elle amene 
toufiours auec foy quelques petites filles Sauuages 
feminariftes bien gentiment couuertes, ce qui agr^e 
fort aux Sauuages, or comme ces enfans entendent 
tous les iours la faincite Meffe auec fes Religieufes, & 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 1» 

Joseph, made a feast of bear's fat, which is their 
great delicacy. When some of our Christians were 
invited to this, one of them replied, " Although we 
are truly in need, nevertheless we will not eat meat 
to-day. We are all fasting, and for that reason we 
shall not go to the feast." We learned of this an- 
swer a few days later by mere chance, and it edified 
and consoled us all the more, because these poor 
people were suffering from want. 

Madame de la Pelterie, foundress of the Ursulines, 
very zealous in behalf of the Savages, wished to 
come to saint Joseph at the Christmas feast, in 
order to be present with them at the midnight Mass. 
She experiences a matchless joy and consolation 
when she can receive communion with these good 
Neophytes. She found herself one day surrounded 
by more than forty Savages, who all approached the 
holy table with her, and this did not take place with- 
out tears of [^76] joy. Indeed, it must be confessed 
that the so sudden change in these poor barbarians 
gives great satisfaction to the heart that loves Jesus 
Christ. 

When the Christian Savages learned that she 
wished to do them the honor of visiting them at this 
blessed feast, they went to bring her, — men, women, 
and girls, — with an ardor that greatly surprised us. 
They vied with each other in caressing her. When 
sometimes she comes by water to visit them, these 
good people fire a little arquebus salute for her when 
she disembarks, — accompanying her as far as their 
houses or cabins, and showing her great affection. 
She always brings with her some little Savage semi- 
nary girls, very prettily dressed, which greatly 
pleases the Savages. Now as these children hear the 


160 LES RELATIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol.18 

qu'elles les entendent chanter pendant I'eletiation du 
faindt Sacrement, elles ont 11 bien retenu vn de leurs 
motets, qu'elle le chanterent brauement ^ S. lofeph 
deuat tons leurs parens Chrefliens, lors qu'on [yyl 
letioit la faindte Hoftie h. la Meffe de minuidt, elles 
chanterent aulii deuant la faindte Mefle vn Cantique 
fpirituel compofe en leur langue, fur la Naiffance du 
Fils de Dieu, tons les Sauuages reprenoient genti- 
ment le ftrophes, chantans les vns apres les autres 
auec vn bon accord, Dieu f^ait 11 ces bons Neophites 
eftoient contens auffi-bien que leurs enfans, & £i Ma- 
dame de la Pelterie qui en eft plus ialoufe que leurs 
pauures meres, eftoit confol^e. Deux chofes aug- 
menterent fa ioye, La premiere fut, qu'entrant fur le 
foir en la maifon de Noel Negabamat, oil elle fe reti- 
roit, elle le trouua k genoux auec toute fa famille, fai- 
fant leurs prieres, elle fut bien eftonn^e & les Peres 
aulii qui I'accompagnoient, d' entendre les longues 
oraifons qu'ils faifoient, nonobflant qu'ils eulfent 
ainfl6 aux prieres communes, qu'on fait faire ordi- 
nairement aux Sauuages en la Chappelle. 

En fecond lieu, voulant faire feftin aux Sauuages 
qui I'auoient tant ediffi^e, elle fit pref enter k Noel 
Negabamat ce qu'elle leur donnoit, mais Noel dit au 
[78] Pere qui luy parloit, mon Pere il y a icy quel- 
ques Sauuages qui s'en vot aux trois Riuieres, i'ap- 
prends que ceux qui font 1^ font efbranl^s & qu'ils 
ont enuie de croire, il feroit bon que Madame de la 
Peltrie fit ce prefent h. ces Sauuages qui font fur leur 
depart, pour les gagner, afin qu'ils parlent bien de 
la Foy, & qu'ils portent leurs compatriotes k I'em- 
bralTer. le n'aurois pas attendu cette refponce ny ce 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 161 

holy Mass every day with the Nuns, and as they hear 
them sing every day during the elevation of the 
blessed Sacrament, they have remembered one of 
their motets so well that they sang it finely at St. 
Joseph, in the presence of their Christian relatives, 
when \J7'\ the sacred Host was elevated at the mid- 
night Mass. They sang also before the holy Mass 
a spiritual Song, composed in their own language, 
upon the Birth of the Son of God. All the Savages 
took up the strophes finely, and sang them one after 
another in good time. God knows how happy these 
good Neophytes were, and their children too, and 
what consolation Madame de la Pelterie experienced, 
who is more solicitous about them than are their 
poor mothers. Two circumstances added to her joy. 
The first was that, entering toward evening the 
house of Noel Negabamat, where she was staying, she 
found him upon his knees with all his family, say- 
ing their prayers. She was greatly astonished, and 
the Fathers also who accompanied her, to hear the 
long prayers they were offering, notwithstanding the 
fact that they had assisted at the general prayers 
that we usually have the Savages offer in the Chapel. 
In the second place, wishing to make a feast for 
the Savages who had so greatly edified her, she had 
what she was going to give them offered to Noel 
Negabamat ; but Noel said to the [78] Father who 
spoke to him, " My Father, there are some Savages 
here who are going to the three Rivers. I learn that 
those who are there are moved, and are inclined to 
believe. It would be well for Madame de la Peltrie 
to make this present to these Savages who are about 
to leave, in order to win them to speak well of the 
Faith, and to influence their compatriots to embrace 


162 LES RELA TIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol. 18 

zele d'vn homme, qui ne fait que de naifire en lefus- 
Chrift. 

II n'efl pas iufques aux enfans, qui n'ayent quel- 
que affection pour leur creance, fi vn d'entr'eux voit 
faire quelque mal a fon compagnon, il luy dit qu'il 
faut qu'il fe confeffe, & qu'il a mal fait, il y a quel- 
ques iours que deux ieunes gargons, I'vn Chreftien & 
r autre Pay en, fe penferent gourmer a bon efcient 
pour leur creance, le Chreftien parlant h. celuy-cy 
nouuellement arriue, I'inuitoit de prier Dieu, il luy dit 
comment veux tu que ie le prie ne le voyant pas, 
r autre le menace d'aller en enfer s'il ne le prioit, 
penfe-tu dit I'infidele, que ce que dif ent les Peres foit 
vray ? nous irons [79] nous autres apres noftre mort oh. 
le Soleil fe couche, nous n 'irons point dans la terre, 
les Peres font des menteurs, non, fit le Chreftien, ils 
ne mentent pas, ceux qui croyent & qui obeyffent k 
Dieu irot au Ciel, les autres iront au feu, cela n'efl 
pas vray repart fon compagnon, le Chreftien refifte, 
I'autre luy tient tefle, bref ils s'animent fi bien, que 
fi on ne fut venu pour les feparer. ils s'alloient battre 
bien ferre, ie trouue ce zele d'autant plus admirable 
que les Sauuages font froids comme glace, & ennemis 
des difputes & des querelles, ce n'eft pas qu'ils n'ay- 
ent de la colere, mais ils la cachent mieux que nous, 
aufli leur fait elle plus de mal, en voicy vn exemple. 

Vne ieune femme, fe voyant prefl!6e d'efpoufer vn 
homme qu'elle n'aymoit point, entre en telle fureur 
fans le faire paroiftre au dehors, qu'elle fe voulut 
6trangler, on court incontinent, on la trouue demie 
morte, on coupe le licol, on la reporte toute pafm^e 
en fa cabane, aufii-toft vn Chreftien nous en vient 
donner aduis, nous y courufmes, I'vn de nous la voy- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 168 

it." I would not have expected this answer or this 
zeal from a man who had only just been born in 
Jesus Christ. 

There are none, even among the children, who 
have not some affection for their belief ; if one of them 
sees any fault in a companion, he tells him that he 
must confess, for he has done wrong. A few days 
ago, two boys, one a Christian and the other a Pagan, 
were about to fight in earnest, on account of their 
beliefs. The Christian, speaking to the other, who 
had just arrived, invited him to pray to God. The 
latter said to him, " Why dost thou ask me to pray 
to God, when I do not see him ? ' ' The other threat- 
eningly replied that he would go to hell, if he did 
not pray. " Dost thou think," said the unbeliever, 
' ' that what the Fathers say is true ? We shall go 
[79] after our death to the place where the Sun sets, — 
we shall not go into the ground ; the Fathers are 
liars. " " No, ' ' returned the Christian, ' ' they do not 
lie; those who believe and obey God will go to 
Heaven, the others will go into the fire." " That 
is not true," retorted his companion. The Christian 
insisted, the other was obstinate ; in short, they be- 
came so excited that if some one had not come and 
separated them, they would have fought very fierce- 
ly. I found this zeal all the more admirable, because 
the Savages are as cold as ice, and opposed to dis- 
putes and quarrels. Not that they do not experience 
anger, but they conceal it better than we do, and it 
also does them more harm. Here is an example of 
this. 

A young woman, finding herself urged to marry a 
man whom she did not love, became so enraged, 
without showing any outward indications of it, that 


164 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 

ant en cet efhat deplorable, [80] fit fecrettement vn 
voeu ^ la plus fainc5te & plus adorable famille qui fut 
iamais, de lefus, de Marie & de S. lofeph, priant le 
chef de cette augufte maifon, d'empefcher que cette 
ame ne fe perdit, elle reuint ^ foy, & nous donna 
tout le contentement que nous euffions peu efperer 
d'vne ame qui fortoit des portes de I'enfer, nous luy 
demandafmes fi elle ne craignoit point d'eflre d'am- 
nee, ie ne penfois point k cela, difoit-elle, mais feule- 
ment k me deliurer de I'ennuy de cet homme. 

Vn ieune Chreftien ayant ioue, & perdu quelque 
chofe notable de fon petit meuble, fe douta bien que 
nous en ferios mefcontens, il s'en vint trouuer I'vn 
de nous & luy dit, mon Pere, ie vous prie ne foy6s 
point mef content de ce que i'ay fait, ie ne le feray 
plus, i'ay perdu beaucoup au ieu, i'ay mal fait, ie ne 
fuis pas trifle de ma perte, mais de vous auoir mef- 
contente ; car ie f9ay bien que cela vous deplaift, & 
que Dieu ne I'aggree pas, ie ne ioiieray plus que 
chofe de petite valeur, cette fimplicite eft aimable. 

[81] Vne femme Chreftienne ayant fong6 qu'elle 
voyoit le diable, nous vint trouuer des le matin, i'ay 
penf6 venir d6s cette nuit, difoit-elle, le mefchant 
manitou m'eft venu voir, il m'a voulu donner k man- 
ger, ie I'ay refufe, i'eftois fi epouuantee me fouue- 
nant de ce que vous nous auez enfeigne, que ce mef- 
chant nous vouloit perdre, que m'eftant eueill6e en 
furfault, ie voulois courir en voftre maifon de peur 
qu'il ne me trompaft: on I'alfeura que fi elle eftoit 
forte en la Foy, qu'il ne luy pourroit faire aucun 
mal, notamment fi elle ne croyoit plus en fes fonges, 
ie les hais mefme en dormant, difoit cette pauure 
creature. Voicy vn point d'edification, les neiges 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 165 

she tried to hang herself. People ran to her at once ; 
they found her half dead ; they cut the noose, and 
carried her, entirely unconscious, to her cabin. 
A Christian came straightway and informed us of 
this ; we ran thither, and one of us, seeing her in 
this deplorable state, [80] secretly made a vow to the 
most holy and adorable family that ever existed, — 
that of Jesus, Mary, and St. Joseph, — praying the 
head of that august house to prevent this soul from 
being lost. She came to herself, and gave us all the 
satisfaction that could have been expected from a 
soul which was coming forth from the gates of hell. 
We asked her if she was not afraid of being damned. 
" I was not thinking of that," said she, " but only of 
freeing myself from the annoyance of that man." 
' A young Christian gambled, and lost something 
valuable from his little property. Wondering, right- 
ly, if we would not be displeased with him, he came 
to see one of us and said, " My Father, I pray you 
not to be displeased with what I have done ; I will 
not do so any more. I have lost much in play; I 
have done wrong. I am not sad about my loss, but 
because I have displeased you ; for I know very well 
that you are dissatisfied, and that God is not pleased. 
I will stake nothing hereafter, except something of 
small value." This simplicity is charming. 

[81] A Christian woman having dreamed that she 
saw the devil, came to see us the next morning. " I 
almost came in the night," said she; "the wicked 
manitou came to see me, and wished to give me some- 
thing to eat, but I refused him. I was so frightened 
when I recalled what you have taught me, — that this 
evil one desired to ruin us, — that, waking with a 
start, I wished to run to your house, lest he should 


166 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.18 

eflant vn pen hautes, nos Sauuages s'en allerent dans 
les bois pour faire leurs prouilions de chairs d'Elan; 
comme ils deuoient eftre long-temps nous donafmes 
aux Chreftiens vn calandrier pour recognoiftre les 
Dimaches, afin de faire leurs prieres vn petit plus 
longues ces iours-lk ; or comme ils ne fgauent ny lire, 
ny efcrire, on auoit diflingue les iours & les Lunes, & 
les Fefles par diuerfes marques, [82] leur donnans 
ce papier comme k I'auenture, pour voir s'ils s'en 
pourroient feruir, ie vous affeure que nous fufmes 
bien eftonnes k leur retour, car nous eftans venus 
voir, apres auoir remercie Dieu en la Chappelle, ils 
nous apporterent leur papier, & nous dirent, voyez fl 
nous ne nous fommes point mefcont^s, voila le iour 
ou nous penfons eftre, firent ils, ils ne s'eftoient pas 
mefpris d'vn feul iour, voila adiouftoient-ils les iours 
de Dimanches, nous les auons gardez tous, except^ 
celuy-lk, qu'ils monftroient, nous I'auons marqu6 ex- 
pres pour vous le monftrer, nous difmes qu'il falloit 
vous en aduertir, le degel nous contraignit de trauail- 
ler ce iour-lk, nous en eftions bien marris, mais nous 
eftions en danger de perdre nos prouifions: les iours 
de Fefles nous nous affemblions & prions Dieu dans 
vne cabane, & nous chantions ce que nous f9auons, 
les autres iours chacun prioit Dieu chez foy. 

Le quinziefme de lanuier, quelques Sauuages nous 
vindrent trouuer de plus d'vne lieue loin pour fe con- 
felTer, deuant [83] que de s'engager plus auant dans 
les terres, entre autres vne femme nous toucha, ie 
n'ay point encor communis, difoit-elle, ie ne fgay fl 
ie vous reuerray iamais, accordez moy la Communion 
deuant mon defpart, onl'interrogea&l'ayant trouu^e 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 167 


beguile me." She was assured that, if she were 
strong in the Faith, he could do her no harm, espe- 
cially if she no longer believed in her dreams. " I 
hate them even in my sleep," said this poor creature. 
In the following, there is matter for edification. The 
snow being rather deep, our Savages went into the 
woods to provide themselves with Elk meat ; as they 
were to be gone a long time, we gave the Christians 
a calendar, that they might know the Sundays, so 
that they could make their prayers somewhat longer 
on those days. Now as they can neither read nor 
write, we had distinguished the days and the Months 
and the Feasts by different marks. [82] Giving them 
this paper at random, as it were, to see if they could 
use it, I assure you that we were greatly astonished 
upon their return ; for when they came to see us, 
after having thanked God in the Chapel, they brought 
us their paper, and said, " See if we have counted 
wrongly; there is the day where we think we are," 
they continued. They were not mistaken by a single 
day. " There," they added, " are the Sundays; we 
have kept them all except that one," which they 
indicated ; ' ' we have marked it purposely to show it 
to you, for we said that we must tell you about it. 
The thaw obliged us to work that day; we were 
sorry about it, but we were in danger of losing our 
provisions. On the Feast days, we assembled and 
prayed to God in one cabin, and sang what we knew. 
On the other days, each prayed to God by himself." 
On the fifteenth of January, some Savages came 
to us from more than a league away, to make con- 
fession, before [83] getting still farther into the inte- 
rior. Among others, a woman touched our hearts. 
'* I have not yet received communion," said she; '* I 


168 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.18 

affez inflruicfte, on luy donna raccomplilTement de 
fon defir. 

Voicy quelques parolles tir^s des lettres que la 
Mere Superieure de THofpital m'efcriuoit, renuoy- 
ant les malades ^ S. lofeph. Cette fille qui retourne 
^ S. lofeph, & que nous auons penfee en noftre Hof- 
pital, eft I'vne des plus modeftes que i'aye veu, non 
feulement parmy les Sauuages, mais aufli parmy les 
Fran9oifes, elle s'eft comport^e auec vne tres-grande 
retenue parmy tant de perfonnes qui font en I'Hofpi- 
tal, dans vne autre lettre. Plufieurs Sauuages vin- 
drent hier en noftre maifon, comme il eftoit tard, ils 
ont coucli6 k I'Hofpital, ils m'ont extremement edi- 
fice, au premier mot des prieres qu'on fait le foir, ils 
fe mirent k genoux, & les firent auec vne deuotion 
qui me touchoit, ie crains que mes offences [84] ne 
me rendent indigne d'ayder ce pauure peuple. 

Vne autrefois elle efcriuoit en ces termes, les ma- 
lades que vous nous enuoyez font extremement pa-^ 
tiens, ilsm'eftonnent, ils prient Dieu fort volontiers, 
nous les faifons entrer en noftre Chappelle pour prier, 
ils le font auec grande affec5tion. 

I'ay dit cy-deffus, que les Sauuages auoient cre6 
vn certain ioune Chreftien fort feruent, Capitaine des 
prieres, c'eft k dire qu'il auroit foing de faire faire les 
prieres en noftre abfence, & de fe faire inftruire foy- 
mefme, pour rapporter S. fes gens ce qu'on luy auroit 
enf eigne, or il arriua que les Sauuages s'en eftant 
allez k quelques lieues de faindt lofeph, pour faire 
des canots, ce Capitaine les fuiuit, & quelques iours 
apres il nous vint retrouuer, & nous tint ce difcours, 
nos Capitaines m'ont enuoye vers vous, pour eftre 
inftruidl, felon que nous auios conuenu par enfemble, 


1640] RELA riON OF 1640 169 

do not know wh ether I shall ever see you again ; 
grant me the Communion before my departure." 
She was questioned, and, being found sufficiently 
instructed, she was granted the fulfillment of her 
desire. 

Here are some sentences taken from the letters 
that the Mother Superior of the Hospital wrote me 
when she sent the patients back to St. Joseph: 
" This girl who is returning to St. Joseph, and whom 
we have cared for in our Hospital, is one of the most 
modest girls I have ever seen, not only among the 
Savages, but also among the French. She has con- 
ducted herself with very great reserve among the 
many persons who are in the Hospital. ' ' In another 
letter, ' ' Several Savages came to our house yester- 
day ; as it was late, they slept in the Hospital. They 
edified me greatly. At the first word of the prayers 
that were offered in the evening, they knelt down 
and said them with a devotion that touched my heart. 
I fear that my own transgressions [84] render me 
unworthy of aiding these poor people." 

At another time, she wrote in these terms: " The 
sick whom you have sent are extremely patient ; they 
astonish me. They pray to God with great willing- 
ness ; we had them enter our Chapel to pray, which 
they did very gladly." 

1 have said above, that the Savages had created a 
certain young and very fervent Christian, " Captain 
of prayers," — that is to say, he was to see that the 
prayers were said in our absence, and was to be him- 
self instructed, that he might report to his people 
what had been taught him. Now it happened that, 
the Savages having gone some leagues away from 
saint Joseph to make canoes, this Captain followed 


170 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.18 

ie leur ay enfeigne tout ce que ie f9auois, ie m'en 
viens ^ I'efcole pour apprendre quelque autre chofe 
de noftre creance, afin de leur enfeigner, [85] ils 
font tous extremement contens de la Foy qu'ils ont 
embraffee, c'efttoutde bon qu'ils croyent en Dieu, on 
ne fait maintenant non plus d'eftat de nos vieilles 
couftumes, & de nos vieilles fuperftitions anciennes, 
dans les cabanes de ceux qui font baptifes, que de 
cette pierre. Quelques Sauuages de TadoulTac nous 
font venus voir pour eftre inftruidts, & pour demeu- 
rer auec nous, & pour cultiuer la terre, ils nous ont 
eftonnes, tant ils tefmoignent de defir d'eftre Chre- 
ftiens, ils nous ont dit iufques k ces paroles, fi vous 
nous voyez clianceler dans la refolution que nous 
auons prife de nous faire baptifer, nous vous permet- 
tons de nous frapper, & de nous chaffer d'auec vous. 
Voicy vn mot de lettre du P. de Quen, touchant 
ces bons Neophites, lean Baptifte Etinechkavat & 
Eflienne Pigarvich, me vindrent voir hier tout expres 
pour fgauoir quand il feroit Dimanche ils me dirent 
qu'ils eftoient trifles de n'auoir pas ouy la Meffe 
depuis qu'ils eftoient partis de S. lofeph, ie leur ay 
donne vn papier, ou i'ay marque les [86] iours, afin 
qu'ils peuffent f9auoir quand il fera Dimanche, ils 
m'ont promis qu'ils ne manqueroient pas de venir k 
la Meffe ce iour-lk, quoy qu'ils foient efloignes d'icy 
enuiron trois lieues, en effecft, ils n'y ont pas man- 
qu6, ils m'ont affeur6 qu'on prioit Dieu dans vne 
cabane, oil tous les Sauuages Chreftiens s'affem- 
bloient, & qu'ils allumoient vne ecorce deuant I'i- 
mage de noftre Seigneur, mais pource que 1* Ecorce 
fe confomme trop toft, ils m'ont prie de leur donner 
vn cierge, ils font tous dans vn contentement incroy- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 171 

them; and some days afterward, coming to see us, 
lie discoursed in this manner : ' ' Our Captains have 
sent me to you to be instructed, according to what 
we have agreed upon together. I have taught them 
all I knew. I am coming to school to learn some- 
thing else about our belief, in order to teach them. 
[85] They are all entirely satisfied with the Faith that 
they have embraced. It is in earnest that they be- 
lieve in God. Our old customs and ancient supersti- 
tions are now no more valued, in the cabins of those 
who are baptized, than this stone. Some Savages of 
Tadoussac have come to us to be instructed, and to 
remain with us and cultivate the land. They have 
astonished us, so great a desire do they show to be 
Christians. They have even said these words to us, 
' If you see us waver in the resolution we have made, 
to be baptized, we will let you beat us, and drive us 
away from you.' " 

Here is part of a letter from Father de Quen, 
touching these good Neophytes. " Jean Baptiste 
Etinechkavat and Estienne Pigaruich came to me 
yesterday, expressly to know when it would be Sun- 
day. They told me they were sad at not having 
heard Mass since they had left St. Joseph. I gave 
them a paper whereon I marked the [86] days, that 
they might know when Sunday came. They prom- 
ised me that they would be sure to come to Mass that 
day, although they are about three leagues distant 
from here; and, in fact, they did not fail to come. 
They assured me that prayers were offered to God 
in a cabin where all the Christian Savages gathered, 
and that they lighted a piece of bark before the im- 
age of our Lord ; but, as the bark burned out so soon, 
they begged me to give them a taper. They are all 


172 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.18 

able d'auoir embraffe la Foy, nous chaflions difoient- 
ils, les defobeilTans : vne ieune fille n'ayant pas voulu 
aller a la rets, ou fon pere I'entioyoit, fut deux iours 
fans manger en punition de fa def obei'ff ance : deux 
ieunes gar9ons eftans venus trop tard aux prieres du 
matin, furent punis par vne poignee de cendres 
chaudes qu'on leur ietta fur la tefle, auec menace de 
plus grand chaftiment en cas de recidiue, le Sauuage 
qui me racomptoit cette hiftoire me fit rire, eftant 
difoit-il, aux prieres auec les autres, la face tournee 
vers r image de noftre [87] Seigneur, iauois grande 
enuie de voir fi ces deux ieunes gens que ie venois 
d'eueiller eftoient venus aux prieres; mais me fou- 
uenant que vous recomandiez la modeftie, & I'atten- 
tion quand on parle "k Dieu, ie n'ofois me mouuoir, 
enfin voulant recognoiftre fi tout le monde eftoit en 
fon deuoir, ie me laiflay aller, ie tournay la tefle ; 
mais tant foit pen & bien fagement, ie croy, faifoit- 
il, qu'il n'y a point de mal en cela, cette candeur me 
fit rire. 

Voicy vne adtion qui m'a grandement touchy : vn 
ieune homme Chreftien, age d'enuiron vingt-deux 
ans, n'ayant peu trouuer femme ^ S. lofeph, s'en 
alia en marchandife vers vne autre nation, dans les 
terres d'ou il ramena vne ieune fille, auec le f can- 
dale des nouueaux Chreftiens, qui ne veulent pas 
qu'vn ieune homme baptife 6poufe vne Payenne, il 
demeuroit auec elle comme eftant marie k la fa9on 
des Sauuages, fi-toft qu'il parut aux trois Riuieres, on 
la luy fit quitter, I'ayant quitt^ il s'en reuint a S. 
lofeph tout plain de confufion. Nous affemblafmes 
les principaux Chreftiens [88] pour fgauoir comme 
on fe comporteroit en cet affaire, ils concluoient 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 173 

in an incredible state of satisfaction at having em- 
braced the Faith. * We punish the disobedient,' said 
they. A young girl who would not go to the nets, 
where her father sent her, was two days without food 
as a punishment for her disobedience. Two boys, 
who came late to prayers in the morning, were pun- 
ished by having a handful of hot cinders thrown 
upon their heads, with threats of greater chastise- 
ment in case the offense were repeated. The Sav- 
age who related this next story to me made me 
laugh. ' Being at prayers with the others,' said he, 
' having my face turned towards the image of our [87] 
Lord, I had a great desire to see if these two young 
men whom I had just awakened had come to pray- 
ers ; but remembering that you recommended mod- 
esty and attention when one is speaking to God, I 
did not dare move. Finally, wishing to find out if 
every one was doing his duty, I yielded. I turned 
my head, but ever so little, and very discreetly ; I 
believe,' he added, ' that there was no harm in that.' 
This candor made me laugh." 

Here is an act which has greatly touched me. A 
young Christian, about twenty-two years old, not 
having been able to find a wife at St. Joseph, went 
to trade with another nation in the interior, whence 
he brought back a young girl, to the scandal of the 
new Christians, who do not allow a baptized man to 
marry a Pagan. He lived with her as if married, in 
the fashion of the Savages. As soon as he appeared 
at the three Rivers, they made him leave her; and, 
after having given her up, he returned to St. Jo- 
seph, greatly humiliated. We assembled the prin- 
cipal Christians, [88] to ascertain what action would 
be taken in this matter. They summarily decided 


174 LES RELATIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol.18 

nettement qu'il le falloit chaffer & luy deffendre de 
iamais plus demeurer auec les Chreftiens pour auoir 
fait vne fi mauuaife ac5lion, nous repartifmes que 
cette rigueur feroit bonne en cas qu'il voulut perfe- 
uerer dans fa malice, mais que Dieu eflant plein de 
mifericorde, il le falloit receuoir k pardon s'il reco- 
gnoiffoit fon offenfe, auffi-tofl fut ordonne qu'il crie- 
roit mercy k Dieu publiquement de fon pecli6, voicy 
comme la chofe fe paffa, vn Dimanclie matin la pluf- 
part des Chreftiens eftans affembles en I'Eglife pour 
ouyr la faindte Meffe, ce pauure ieune homme fe tint 
^ I'entr^e de la porte, & parlant tout haut dit au 
Pere qui fe difpofoit pour celebrer; mon Pere me 
voulez vous permettre I'entree de I'Eglife, le Pere 
luy reprocha qu'il auoit commis vn grand f can dale, 
& que s'il en vouloit demander pardon k Dieu qu'il 
entraft, il entre done, fe met ^ genoux deuant I'Au- 
tel, & de foy-mefme parlant tout haut il s'efcrie, mon 
Dieu faidtes moy mifericorde, ie vous ay offence, 
ie vous en demande [89] pardon, ayes piti6 de moy, 
i'ay commis vn grand peche, mais vous eftes bon, 
faites moy mifericorde, ie ne commettray plus iamais 
cette offence, ie me confefferay, ayes piti6 de moy, 
& vous autres qui eftes icy affembles, pries pour 
moy, afin que Dieu me faffe mifericorde, ie fuis 
bien marry de 1' auoir fach6, cela dit, il fe profterna 
baifant la terre, & vn Capitaine Chreftien s'^cria, 
prions pour luy afin que Dieu luy face mifericorde, 
tout le monde fe mit auffi-toft k genoux priant tout 
haut noftre Seigneur d' auoir piti^ de ce pauure peni- 
tent, ie confeffe ingenuement que cette adtion me 
perga le coeur, ce n'eft pas tout, ce ieune homme 
m'eftant venu voir fur les trois heures apres midy, 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 175 

that he should be driven away and forbidden ever to 
live again with the Christians, for having been guilty 
of so bad an action. We replied that this severity 
would be proper in case he intended to persevere 
in his evil course ; but that, as God was full of mer- 
cy, he should be received and pardoned if he ac- 
knowledged his offense. It was immediately decreed 
that he should publicly entreat God for mercy upon 
his sin. The affair occurred thus: One Sunday 
morning, the greater part of the Christians having 
assembled in the Church to hear the holy Mass, this 
poor young man, remaining near the open door, and 
speaking loudly, said to the Father who was prepar- 
ing to officiate, " My Father, will you permit me 
to enter the Church? " The Father reproached him, 
saying that he had caused a great scandal, and that, 
if he would ask God's pardon for it, he might enter. 
He came in, then, knelt down before the Altar, and 
of his own accord, speaking in a loud voice, cried, 
"My God, have mercy upon me; I have offended 
you, I ask you [89] for pardon; have pity upon me; 
I have committed a great sin, but you are good, — 
have mercy upon me. I will never be guilty of this 
offense again; I will confess; have pity upon me. 
And you who are here assembled, pray for me, that 
God may show me mercy ; I am very sorry to have 
offended him." This said, he prostrated himself, 
and kissed the ground; and a Christian Captain 
exclaimed, " Let us pray for him, that God may show 
him mercy. " All immediately fell upon their knees, 
praying aloud to our Lord to have compassion on this 
poor penitent. I confess frankly that this act pierced 
me to the heart. This is not all. This young man 
coming to see me, about three o'clock in the after- 


176 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.18 

me toucha plus qu'il n'auoit fait le matin, mon 
Pere, me difoit-il, i'ay eu vn li grand regret de ma 
faute que ie n'ay ofe aborder aucun Chreftien depuis 
mon retour, ie n'oferois feulement les regarder, on 
m'auoit bien dit que vous me tanceriez fi ie reuenois 
^ fainc5l lofeph, ie n'ay pas laiffe de vous venir trou- 
uer, ie vous affeure que depuis que i'ay quitt6 cette 
femme, i'ay ieufn6 tous [90] les iours, ne mangeant 
qu'vne fois le iour & encore pas, tant i'ay de douleur 
d'auoir fafcli6 Dieu, ie n'ay ofe me retirer aux ca- 
banes des Chreftiens, ie paffe deuant eux la tefte 
baiffee fans mot dire, ie les iray voir quand ie feray 
confeUe, voyla comme la chofe paffa, mais voicy ce 
qui me ietta dans vn profond eflonnement, quand ce 
bon Neophite eut fatisfait pour ce fcandale, ie luy 
demanday comme il eftoit laifle aller ^ vn fi grad 
pech6, ie ne luy auois point voulu parler deuant fa 
penitence, i'examinay diligemment fon procede, ie 
le trouuay fi peu coulpable deuat Dieu, que ie fremis 
quelque temps en moy-mefme d'vne faindte horreur, 
il eft vray qu'il auoit amen6 cette ieune fille, ayant 
delia donne parole k vne autre, il eft vray qu'il de- 
meuroit auec elle comme s'il eufl efte marie, & voyla 
le fcandale, mais il eft vray auffi que la crainte qu'il 
auoit d'offencer Dieu & le refpedt qu'il portoit ^ fon 
baptefme, I'auoient empefche de la toucher, quoy 
qu'il en fut fortement follicite, defirant qu'elle fut 
Chreftienne deuant que de luy tefmoigner fon [91] 
amiti6, voyla &. mon aduis ce qui paffe 1' eflonnement, 
eftre dans le feu & ne pas brufler, faire vne adlion 
prefque innocente deuant Dieu, & en porter la peni- 
tence auec amour deuant les hommes. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 177 

noon, affected me more than he had done in the 
morning. " My Father," said he, " I have so deeply- 
regretted my fault that I have not dared to approach 
any Christian since my return ; I would not dare even 
to look at them. I was told, indeed, that you would 
chide me if I returned to saint Joseph ; but I have 
come, nevertheless, to see you. I assure you that, 
since I left this woman, I have fasted every [90] 
day, — eating only once a day and not more, — so 
much have I grieved for having offended God. I 
have not dared to take shelter in the cabins of the 
Christians; I pass before them in silence, with bowed 
head; I shall go and see them when I have con- 
fessed." Thus the incident passed over, but now 
see what caused me profound astonishment; when 
this good Neophyte had atoned for this offense, I 
asked how he had come to yield to so great a sin ; I 
had been unwilling to speak to him before his pen- 
ance. I carefully examined his behavior; I found 
him so little guilty before God that I shuddered with- 
in myself for some time with a holy horror. It is 
true that he had taken this young girl, having al- 
ready given his word to another ; it is true that he 
lived with her as if they were married, and that was 
the offense. But it is true also that his fear of offend- 
ing God and his respect for his baptism had pre- 
vented him from touching her, although he .was 
urgently solicited to do so, — desiring that she should 
become a Christian before showing her the evidences 
of his [91] affection. This, in my opinion, is what 
passes wonder, — to be in the fire, and not be burned ; 
to do an act almost innocent before God, and patient- 
ly to bear the penance for it before men. 


178 LES RELATIONS DBS jtSUITES [Vol.18 


CHAPITRE VII. 

CONTINUATION DES ACTIONS DE NOS NOUUEAUX 
CHRESTIENS. 

CONCEPTUM fermonem tenere quis poterit. Puis 
que ie fuis en train de parler des adtions de 
nos Chreftiens, il faut que ie couche en ce 
Chapitre Ie refle des petites remarques que i'en ay 
faidtes, ou qu'on m'en a donnees. 

Vn Sauuage de I'lfle eflant defcendu &, S. lofeph 
pour trouuer femme k fon fils, & recherchant la fille 
de deffundt Frangois Xauier Nenaskvmat, Noel Ne- 
gabamat k qui cette fille a efte fort recommand^e, 
parla en ces termes au pere du ieune homme ; nous 
ne fommes [92] plus ce que nous auons eft6, nous 
auons quitt6 nos anciennes fa$ons de faire pour en 
prendre de meilleures, celles que nous auons prifes 
nous aggreent, nous les aymons & nous les voulons 
garder iufques a la mort, c'eft pourquoy nous ne pou- 
uons donner cette fille, qui croit en Dieu, & qui eft 
baptifee, qu'k vne perfonne de mefme creance, autre- 
ment Dieu fe fafcheroit, & nous ne voulons pas 
I'offencer, Ie barbare ne repartit rien k ce difcours, il 
diuertit Ie propos, & s'entretint pour lors de toute 
autre chofe; mais Ie landemain matin il retourna 
auec vn grand colier de pourcelaine, qu'il prefenta ^ 
Noel Negabamat, & luy dit, voyla qui parle pour 
moy, & qui vous affeure que ie veux croire en Dieu, 
& que ie veux embraffer les fagons de faire que vous 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 179 


CHAPTER VII. 

CONTINUATION OF THE ACTIONS OF OUR NEW CHRIS- 
TIANS. 

CONCEPTUM sermonem tenere quis poterit? Since 
I am speaking of the actions of our new Chris- 
tians, I must set down in this Chapter the 
remainder of the little observations that I have made 
of them, or that have been communicated to me. 

A Savage of the Island, who went down to St. 
Joseph to find a wife for his son, asked for the daughter 
of the deceased Fran§ois Xavier Nenaskumat. Noel 
Negabamat, to whom this girl had been carefully- 
entrusted, spoke in these terms to the father of the 
young man : ' ' We are no [92] longer what we once 
were, — we have given up our old customs, to accept 
better ones. Those that we have adopted please us ; 
we love them, and wish to observe them until death. 
Hence we cannot give this girl, who believes in God 
and is baptized, except to a person of the same belief. 
Otherwise, God would be angry, and we do not wish 
to offend him." The barbarian answered nothing to 
this speech ; he changed the subject, and conversed 
for the time about some other matter. But, the 
next morning, he returned with a large porcelain 
collar, which he presented to Noel Negabamat, say- 
ing to him, " This will speak for me, and will assure 
you that I wish to believe in God, and that I wish 
to embrace the customs that you so cherish. There- 
fore, do not raise any difficulties about granting this 


180 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 


cheriffez tant, & par confequent ne faites nulle diffi- 
culte d'accorder cette fille ^ mon fils; car il fe fera 
baptifer, & moy auffi, Noel Negabamat bien eftonne 
de cette ac5tion repartit, nous ne voulons rien con- 
clure touchant ce mariage fans Tadnis de noftre 
Pere, il eft alle faire vn tour h. Kebec [93] nous I'at- 
tendons ce soir, fi-toft qu'il fera de retour ie luy por- 
teray ce colier, qui luy fera entendre vos intentions, 
il n'y manqua pas, k peine le Pere eftoit il entre dans 
fa chambre, que Noel luy prefente cette pourcelaine 
& luy expofe toute 1' affaire, ie fgay de bonne part 
que ce ieune Sauuage preffa fort la fille pour fgauoir 
fi elle I'aggreoit, mais encor qu'elle eut de I'affedtion 
pour luy, neantmoins elle ne refpondit autre chofe 
finon, qu'il ne falloit pas s'addreffer k elle pour cet 
affaire, mais au Pere qui I'a inftruicfte & ^ fes parens. 
Or ce Sauuage fe voyant econduit de ce cofte-lk, 
pour des iuftes raifons, rechercha vne ieune femme 
Payenne qui venoit de quitter fon mary, & comme 
celle-cy eftoit parente de lean Baptifte Etinechkavat 
il s'addreffe k luy, le tire k I'ecart, luy fait fes prefens 
& fa demande, lean Baptifte luy repondit en cette 
forte, ie tiens cette ieune femme comme ma fille, mais 
ie ne te celeray point que les eaux du baptefme 
n'ayant pas encor palI6 fur fa tefte, elle a peu d'efprit, 
i'ay pri6 fouuent vn tel Pere de la baptifer, [94] 
comme il recognoiffoit qu'elle n'aymoit pas fon mary, 
& qu'elle le pourroit quitter, comme elle a fait, il ne 
I'a pas voulu faire, fi elle eftoit baptifte ie ne la don- 
nerois iamais qu'k vn Chreflien, puis qu'elle ne I'eft 
pas, ie te I'accorde, fi elle en eft contente. Au refte 
encor que le Pere qui f9ait la valeur des eaux qu'il 
verfe fur nous, ne I'ait point voulu baptifer, il ne la 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 181 

girl to my son; for he will be baptized, and I also." 
Noel Negabamat, greatly surprised at this act, re- 
plied, " We will conclude nothing about this mar- 
riage without the advice of our Father. He has gone 
on a journey to Kebec; [93] we expect him this 
evening. As soon as he returns I will carry him 
this collar, which will make him understand your 
intentions." He did not fail to do so; and the 
Father had scarcely entered his chamber before Noel 
presented him this porcelain, and explained the 
whole matter to him. I know upon good authority 
that this young Savage importuned the girl exceed- 
ingly, to find out if she would accept him; but, 
although she felt some affection for him, she would 
nevertheless give him no other answer than that he 
must not apply to her in this matter, but to the 
Father who had instructed her, and to her relatives. 
Now this Savage, seeing himself put off in this 
quarter for good reasons, sought a young Pagan 
woman who had just left her husband ; and as she 
was a relative of Jean Baptiste Etinechkavat, he 
addressed the latter ; taking him aside, he proffered 
him his presents and his request. Jean Baptiste an- 
swered him thus: " I look upon this young woman 
as my daughter; but I will not conceal from thee 
that, as the waters of baptism have not passed over 
her head, she has little sense. I have often begged 
such a Father to baptize her ; [94] as he saw that she 
did not love her husband, and that she probably 
would leave him, as she has done, he was not will- 
ing to do so. If she were baptized, I would never 
give her to any one but a Christian ; as she is not, 
I will give her to thee, if she is willing. Moreover, 
although the Father, who knows the value of the 


182 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 18 

pas entierement econduite, mais il nous ^ dit feule- 
ment, qu'il falloit attendre qu'elle fut mieux difpo- 
f6e, c'eft pourquoy ie te fupplie de la faire inftruire 
1^ haut par les Peres qui font aux trois Riuieres, & 
de luy procurer le baptefme, & k ton fils auffi, ce font 
les paroles de ce bon Neophite. 

I'ay parl6 cy-delTus d'vn Chreftien eftropiat d'vne 
iambe, ie puis dire que la grace fait vn miracle en 
ce ieune homme ; ie penf e auoir def crit f on baptefme 
aux relations precedentes, mais cela n'empefchera 
pas que ie ne touche icy vne ou deux de fes adtions 
en paffant, il eft d'vn naturel prompt & altier, mais 
fi le fang amolit les diamants, la grace dompte les 
coeurs, il nous racomptoit [95] vn iour, qu'eftant all6 
a la guerre, il fe vit pourfuiuy par trois grands Hiro- 
quois, comme lors il auoit de bonnes iambes il les 
deuangoit auec aduantage, enfin s'eftant apperceu 
qu'ils n'eftoient pas tous trois enfemble, il tourne 
vifage, attaque le premier & I'arrefle d'vn coup de 
fleche ; cela fait, il fait f emblant de fuir, les autres 
le pourfuiuans, il fe retourne vne autrefois, tranf- 
perce le plus proche, puis ay ant iette fon arc & fon 
carquois, il court apres le troifiefme I'efp^e k la main, 
mais comme il craignoit d'en rencontrer quelques 
autres, il fe retira bien ioyeux, d'auoir euite vn tel 
danger. 

II auoit pour lors vn corps de fer, pour ainfi parler, 
& vne ame de feu, mais les grandes maladies qui 
I'attaquerent par apres luy firent bien voir qu'il eftoit 
bafty de fange & de boue, comme le refte des hom- 
mes; il attribue toutes fes dif graces k fon orgueil, il 
dit hautement deuant fes compatriotes qu'k mefme 
temps qu'il s'eft veu plonge dans quelque eftime de 


1640J RELA TION OF 1640 188 

waters that lie pours upon us, was not willing to bap- 
tize her, he did not entirely refuse her, but merely 
told us that it was necessary to wait until she were bet- 
ter disposed. Hence, I beg thee to have her instructed 
up there by the Fathers who are at the three Rivers, 
and to procure baptism for her and for thy son also. ' ' 
Such were the words of this good Neophyte. 

I have spoken above of a Christian who was lame in 
one leg. I can say that grace effected a miracle in 
this young man. I think I have described his bap- 
tism in preceding relations, but that will not prevent 
me from incidentally mentioning here one or two of 
his actions. He is of a hasty and proud disposition ; 
but, if blood softens diamonds, grace subdues hearts. 
He related to us [95] one day that, having gone to 
war, he saw himself pursued by three stout Hiro- 
quois. As he then had good legs, he considerably 
outran them. At last, perceiving that they were 
not all three together, he turned around, attacked the 
first one and stopped him by an arrow shot. This 
done, he pretended to flee, and the others pursued 
him ; he turned again, and pierced the nearest one 
through; then, having thrown down his bow and 
quiver, he ran after the third, javelin in hand ; but 
as he was afraid of encountering others, he withdrew, 
greatly rejoiced at having escaped such danger. 

He had then a body of iron, so to speak, and a 
soul of fire. But the severe illnesses that afterward 
attacked him made him see plainly that he was built 
of clay and mud, like the rest of humanity. He 
attributes all his misfortunes to his own pride. He 
says boldly before his countrymen that whenever he 
has found himself plunged in self-admiration, at that 
very time some misfortune has overtaken him. We 


184 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.18 

foy-mefme, "k mefme teps quel que malheur I'a ac- 
cueilly, nous I'auons [96] fecouru quelques ann^es 
dans fes miferes, enfin la maifon de cliarit6 & de mi- 
fericorde eftant eftablie on I'y fit porter, comme il eft 
vrayement toucli6 de Dieu, il profitoit grandement 
aux autres malades. Ayant appris cet Hyuer que 
les Peres de la refidence de S. lofeph fe retiroient, 
ou comme parlent maintenant les Sauuages qui nous 
cognoiffent, fe cachoient pour parler "k Dieu dans 
leurs exercices fpirituels, il pria inftamment qu'on I'y 
fit porter, n' ayant plus d' autre incommodit6 que fa 
iambe, dont il ne fe pent feruir, la mere Superieure 
de I'Hofpital m'en efcriuit ces mots, Pierre Trigatin 
(c'eft ainfi qu'il fe nomme) me voyant donner ma 
lettre k vn Sauuage, ma obligee de mander k V. R. 
qu'il defire auec paffion d'aller k S. lofeph, pour 
eftre enfeigne a prier Dieu, & faire quelque retraidte, 
il fut hier vne heure & demie en noftre Chappelle 
en oraifon, & toutes les fois qu'il en fort, on voit 
bien qu'il eft tout remply de Dieu, nous tefmoignant 
vn mefpris de tout, mefme du boire & du manger, 
il eft foufmis k tout, on diroit [97] d'vn predicateur 
le voyant enfeigner les autres, 1' affection luy faifant 
faire tons les geftes qu'il faut pour leur imprimer ce 
qu'il dit, ie croy que les ames qui ayment Dieu fer- 
uemment ont des confolations nompareilles voyans 
ces bons Neophites, ce font les paroles de la Mere. 

Enfin noftre R, P. Superieur le fit apporter ou 
plufhoft traifner k la fa9on du pais, il conceuoit fort 
bien les chofes de Dieu, gardoit le filence, fe retiroit 
en vn petit coing pour faire fes oraifons & fes medi- 
tations, il s'eftonnoit de I'ignorance des hommes, & 
deploroit la mifere de fes compatriotes, nous ne 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 185 

have [96] aided him for several years in his suffer- 
ings ; the house of charity and mercy being finally 
established, we had him carried there, and, as he is 
really touched by God, the other patients profited 
greatly by his presence. Having learned this Win- 
ter that the Fathers of the residence of St. Joseph 
went into retreat, — or, as the Savages who know us 
now say, hid themselves to speak to God in their 
spiritual exercises, — he begged earnestly that he 
should be carried there, his only impediment being 
his leg, which he could not use. The mother 
Superior of the Hospital wrote me thus about him : 
' * Pierre Trigatin ' ' (this is his name), ' ' seeing me 
give my letter to a Savage, has constrained me to 
send this message to Your Reverence, that he pas- 
sionately desires to go to St. Joseph to be taught to 
pray to God, and to go into retreat. Yesterday he 
was an hour and a half in prayer, in our Chapel ; and, 
every time he issues therefrom, it is very evident 
that he is filled with God, testifying to us a con- 
tempt for all things, even for food and for drink ; he 
is submissive to all; one would call him [97] a 
preacher, seeing him teach the others, — his enthu- 
siasm causing him to make all the gestures necessary 
to impress upon them what he is saying. I believe 
that the souls who fervently love God experience 
incomparable consolation in seeing these good Neo- 
phytes." These are the Mother's words. 

Finally, our Reverend Father Superior had him 
brought, or rather dragged, in the fashion of the 
country. He very well understood the things of God, 
kept silent, and withdrew to a little corner to offer 
his prayers and meditations. He expressed astonish- 
ment at the ignorance of men, and deplored the 


186 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 18 

fommes difoit-il, que des chiens, nous ne penfons 
qu'^ cette vie, quand on me parle de Dieu mon ame 
eft repeue, il me femble qu'elle eft comme vn 
homme qui a grand appetit, auquel on donne bien k 
difner. 

Le Pere qui le conduifoit le voyant petuner, luy 
demanda pourquoy il petunoit, il demeura court fans 
refpondre, fi Dieu vous difoit pourfuit le Pere, ren- 
dez compte de vos adlions, pourquoy [98] auez vous 
pris du tabac? que diriez-vous? ie ferois bien en 
peine ; car ie n'en ay iamais pris que pour le plaifir 
que i'y fentois, mais pourquoy adioutoit-il, ne m'a- 
uez vous pas auerty pluftoft de cette action deregl^e ? 
ie n'en prendray iamais plus; en effet il s'en palla 
fort long-teps, iufques k ce qu'vne perfone luy dit 
qu'il feroit k propos qu'il en prit vn peu pour fa fan- 
t^, ceux qui f9auent de quelle manie les Sauuages & 
quelques Franjois font portes h. prendre la fumee du 
tabac, admireront cette abftinence en vn Canadois, 
les grands yurongnes n'ayment pas tant le vin que 
les Sauuages ayment le petun. 

Ayant fait vn tour ce Printemps aux trois Riuieres, 
le Pere Buteux refcriuit de luy ces paroles au Pere 
Claude Pijart, Pierre Trigatin eft 9a haut de fort 
bonne edificatio, il ne lailfe pas d'auoir enuie de cou- 
rir tout boiteux qu'il eft, il y a quelque iours qu'vn 
Fran9ois nous vint donner I'alarme des Hiroquois, 
Pierre auffi-toft fe prefente pour aller decouurir I'en- 
nemy, & quoy que ie luy peuffe alleguer, il deflra 
s'embarquer dans vn canot [99J de quatre perfonnes, 
qu'il gouuernoit au commancement auec I'vne des 
potences dont il fe fert pour marcher, & puis auec vn 
auiron, ils s'en allerent done dans le lac S. Paul, oti 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 187 

misery of his countrymen. " We are only dogs," 
said he; "we think of nothing but this life. When 
one speaks of God, my soul is fed ; it seems to me it 
is like a man who has a great appetite, to whom is 
given a good dinner." 

The Father who had charge of him, seeing him 
smoking, asked him why he smoked. He stopped 
short, and did not answer. " If God said to you," 
pursued the Father, " ' Render an account of your 
actions ; why [98] did you take tobacco ? ' what would 
you say? " " Indeed I would be at a loss; for I have 
never taken it except for the pleasure I felt from it. 
But why," he added, "have you not informed me 
sooner of this disorderly action ? I will never again 
take it. ' ' In fact he dispensed with it for a long time, 
until some one told him that it would be proper for 
him to take a little of it for his health. Those who 
know what a mania the Savages and some Frenchmen 
have for smoking tobacco, will admire this abstinence 
in a Canadian. Intemperate drinkers are not so fond 
of wine as the Savages are of tobacco. 

As he made a trip to the three Rivers this Spring, 
Father Buteux wrote these words about him to 
Father Claude Pi j art: " Pierre Trigatin affords very 
great edification up here; he even wishes to run, 
lame as he is. A few days ago, a Frenchman came 
to give us the alarm about the Hiroquois. Pierre 
immediately presented himself to go and discover the 
enemy; and, however much I might argue with 
him, he desired to embark in a canoe [99] with four 
persons, which he guided at first with one of the 
staffs which served him in walking, and then with 
a paddle. They went, then, to lake St. Paul, where 
a noise had been heard. As night drew on, they per- 


188 LES RELATIONS DBS jASUITES [Vol. 18 

on auoit entendu du bruit, comme la nuit approchoit 
ils apperceurent comme vn canot, auffi-toft croyans 
que c'efloit I'ennemy, Pierre fit defembarquer les 
Sauuages & vn Francois qui eftoient auec eux les fait 
mettre a genoux, pour prier Dieu, & leur priere 
eftant faite ils fe rembarquent, s'en vont donner fur 
ce canot pour le combattre, mais en I'approcliant ils 
trouuerent que c'efloit vn arbre qui fiottoit fur I'eau, 
s'il ne combattit point ce ne fut pas faute de courage, 
mais d'occafion, il s'efl icy confefle & communie & 
Louis Nichvtenfis auffi, les deux Dimanches qu'ils y 
ont eft^. II a bonne enuie de reuenir encor enfeigner 
fes gens, en verite ie n'euffe pas creu qu'il euft eu 
la hardieffe qu'il a monftre k I'endroit de ceux qu'il 
enfeignoit, principalement en ce qu'il leur difoit, 
qu'il cherifToit tons les hommes ; & mefme les Hiro- 
quois en Dieu, & que s'il auoit vn prifonnier il [lOo] 
auroit plus de foin de luy brufler le coeur de 1' amour 
de Dieu, que de tourmenter fon corps, ^ mon aduis il 
n'y a que la grace qui puifle faire dire cela, notam- 
ment k vn homme de fon humeur, voila ce que porte 
la lettre du Pere. 

I 'ay parl6 bien amplement aux annees precedentes 
d'vn certain forcier tres-fameux parmy les Sauuages, 
maintenant bon Chreftien, il fut baptif6 des I'ann^e 
paff6e, i'en diray deux mots pour le prefent, il fe 
nomme Eftienne Pigarovich, il arriua a S. lofeph le 
vingt-troifiefme d'Auril retournant de fa chafle de 
I'Efla, voicy ce qu'il nous raconta a diuerfes ren- 
contres. Voyant que la petite verole attaquoit ceux 
auec lef quels il s'eftoit ioint premierement, il reprit 
les incredules de n'auoir pas prelim I'oreille aux dif- 
cours de la foy que nous leur anions faic5ts, en apres 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 189 

ceived something like a canoe, — and, at once sup- 
posing that it was the enemy, Pierre had the Savages 
and a Frenchman who was with them disembark, 
and made them kneel and pray to God. Their pray- 
er finished, they reembarked and proceeded to attack 
this canoe ; but, upon approaching it, they perceived 
that it was a tree floating upon the water. If he 
did not fight it was not for lack of courage, but of 
opportunity. He confessed and received communion 
here, and Louis Nichutensis also, the two Sundays 
they were here. He has a great desire to return 
again, to teach his people. In truth, I would not 
have believed that he possessed the fearlessness he 
has shown toward those whom he was teaching, — 
principally in saying to them that he cherished all 
men, even the Hiroquois, in God; and that, if he 
had a prisoner, he [100] would care more to burn his 
heart with love for God, than to torture his body. 
In my opinion, nothing but grace can inspire such 
words, especially in a man of his nature." Such are 
the contents of the Father's letter. 

I have spoken very fully in former years of a cer- 
tain sorcerer very famous among the Savages, now 
a good Christian. He was baptized during the past 
year. I will say a few words concerning him at this 
time. His name is Estienne Pigarouich. He ar- 
rived at St. Joseph on the twenty-third of April, on 
his return from Elk-hunting. Here is what he related 
to us at various times : Seeing that the smallpox was 
attacking those whom he had first joined, he re- 
proved the unbelieving for not having lent ear to the 
discourses that we had given them on the faith ; then 
he exclaimed, " If any one wishes to pray to God, let 
him join me; I hope that he will help us! " Some 


190 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.18 

il s'efcria fi quelqu'vn veut prier Dieu qu'il fe ioigne 
^ moy, i'efpere qu'il nous fecourera, quelques infi- 
deles fe ietterent de fon party, tous les foirs & tous 
les matins ils faifoient leurs prieres h. genoux, ils 
les pronongoit tout haut & les autres le fuiuoient 
[loi] mot apres mot, chofe eftrange pas vn deux ne 
fut attaqu6 de cette maladie peftilente, qui emporta 
tous ceux que I'infidelite ou le refpedt humain em- 
pefcherent d'auoir recours a Dieu. 

II nous racomptoit que le Capitaine de Tadouffac, 
nomme Etovait, auec lequel il s'eftoit retir^, difoit 
par fois deuant fes gens, ie hay la foy & les prieres, 
ny moy ny mes enfans ne croirons iamais ce que di- 
fent les Frangois de I'autre vie, ie m'eftonnois faifoit 
ce bon Neophite, de cette malice, Dieu ne la pas 
laill^ long-temps impunie, car luy, fa femme & tous 
fes enfans & ceux qui eftoient auec luy furent pris 
du mal commun & enleues en vn inftant, 6 que i'e- 
flois trifte difoit-il, de voir mourir ces pauures mife- 
rables fans baptefme. Apres que nous fufmes deli- 
ur6s de ce fleau commun ie tombay malade bien 
auant dans I'Hyuer, & dans les bois, en forte que ie 
n'en pouuois plus, tous ceux qui eftoient auec moy 
me tenoient pour mort, dans cette afiiicftion ie me fou- 
uins que i'eflois baptife & que Dieu eftoit mo Pere, 
ie luy dis pour lors en mon coeur, tu peux tout [102] tu 
fgais bien que ie n'en puis plus, & que i'ay la tefte 
fi foible que ie vay perdre I'efprit, fi tu veux tu me 
peux guerir, determine neantmoints & faidts ce que 
tu voudras, mais ie croy que tu es tout puiHant, & que 
fi tu voulois tout maintenant tu me giierirois, comma 
ie priois en mon coeur, faifoit-il, ie me fenty guery 
en vn inftant kaiafikat, kaiafikat, tout k coup, tout k 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 191 

unbelievers went over to his side, and every evening 
and morning they said their prayers on their knees, — 
some pronouncing them aloud, and the others fol- 
lowing them, [loi] word for word. Strange to say, 
not one of them was attacked by this pestilential 
malady, which carried off all those whom infidelity 
or fear of public opinion prevented from having 
recourse to God. 

He related to us that the Captain of Tadoussac, 
named Etouait, with whom he had taken shelter, 
said sometimes before his people, " I hate the faith 
and prayers; neither I nor my children will ever 
believe what the French say of the other life." " I 
was surprised at this malice," said this good Neo- 
phyte. God did not leave him long unpunished ; for 
he, his wife, and all his children, and those who 
were with him, were seized by the common malady 
and carried off in a moment. " Oh! how sorry I 
was," said he, " to see these poor wretches die with- 
out baptism. After we were delivered from this 
common scourge, I fell sick late in the Winter, and 
far in the woods, — so that I was utterly helpless, and 
all those who were with me regarded me as a dead 
man. In this affliction I remembered that I was 
baptized and that God was my Father. I said to 
him then in my heart, ' Thou canst do all, [102] thou 
knowest well that I can do no more, and that my 
head is so weak that I am about to lose my mind ; if 
thou wilt, thou canst heal me. Decide, however, 
and do what thou wilt ; but I believe that thou art 
all-powerful, and that, if thou wilt, thou canst at this 
moment heal me.' While I was praying in my 
heart," he continued, " I felt myself cured in an 
instant, kaiasikat, kaiasikat, suddenly, suddenly; I 


192 LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 18 

coup, ie me leuay tout fur Theure & mangeay auec 
reftonnement de ces gens que tu vols, monftrant ceux 
qui raccompagnoient pour lors, non ejl perfonarum 
acceptatio apud Deum, Dieu ne regarde point fi on eft 
Grec ou Barbare, qui a plus de confiance & plus 
d'amour eft le mieux venu aupres de fa Majeft6. 

Voicy vn autre traidt de fa prouidence, ayant fait 
ma prouifion de chair d'Elan, difoit ce bon Neophite, 
ie me trouuay bien en peine comme ie la porterois k 
faindt lofeph, car nous n 'anions pas affez de canots 
pour nous & pour noftre bagage; ie penfois dans 
mon efprit fi ie ne pourrois pas bien faire vn caieux 
de bois, fur lequel ie mettrois [103] mon equipage, 
mais les marees font fi fortes, les vents fi dangereux, 
& les caieux fi pefans, que toute ma prouifion s'en 
fut allee k vaux I'eau, ne f9acliant quel confeil pren- 
dre, ie dy k ma femme, prions Dieu, nous fommes 
baptif6s, il nous infpirera ce qu'il faut faire, apres 
noftre priere, ie me fenty port6 k faire vn canot, ie 
n'en auois iamais fait, & ie defefperois deuant ma 
priere d'en pouuoir faire, mais ayant dit k Dieu que 
tout ce qu'il nous auoit donne k manger feroit perdu 
s'il ne nous aydoit, ie creu que i'en viendrois "k bout, 
en eff et nous en fifmes auffi bien que les plus experts. 

Ce bon homme eft fi zel6, que quand il f9ait quel- 
que defordre parmy fes gens, il nous en vient don- 
ner aduis pour y remedier ; luy mefme va voir ceux 
qu'il croit faire mal & leur donne bon confeil, il 
prend vn tres-grand plaifir d'oiiir parler de Dieu, & 
de grandes recompenfes & des grands chaftimens de 
I'autre vie, il a fi peu de refpedt humain qu'il ne 
craint ny petit ny grand, & par fois il nous tefmoi- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 19S 

arose without delay, and ate something, to the aston- 
ishment of these people that thou seest ' ' — pointing 
to those who then accompanied him. Non est perso- 
narum accept atio apud Deum, God cares not whether 
one is a Greek or a Barbarian ; he who has the most 
confidence and love is the most welcome to his 
Majesty. 

Behold another example of his providence. " Hav- 
ing obtained my supply of Elk meat," said this good 
Neophyte, " I was quite at a loss how I should carry 
it to saint Joseph, for we did not have enough canoes 
for ourselves and our baggage. I wondered if I could 
not easily make a wooden raft, upon which I could 
put [103] my goods; but the tides are so strong, the 
winds so dangerous, and the rafts so heavy, that all 
my supplies might go to the bottom of the river. 
Not knowing what course to take, I said to my wife, 
* Let us pray to God; we are baptized, — he will in- 
spire in us what must be done. ' After our prayer, 
I felt myself prompted to make a canoe ; I had never 
made one, and I despaired, before my prayer, of 
being able to do so ; but having told God that all he 
had given us to eat would be lost, if he did not help 
us, I believed that I could accomplish it. In fact, 
we made one as well as the most expert persons could 
have done." 

This good man is so zealous that, when he knows 
of some irregularity among his people, he comes to 
inform us of it that it may be remedied. He himself 
goes to see those whom he believes to have done 
wrong, and gives them good advice. He takes a 
very great pleasure in hearing conversation about 
God, and about the great rewards and severe punish- 
ments of the other life. He has so little regard for 


194 LES RELATIONS DES j£:SUJTES [Vol.18 

gne [104] qu'il voudroit bien fouifrir la mort pour fa 
creance. 

C'efl vne confolation bien fenfible d'entendre auec 
quelle innocence ces bonnes gens rendent compte de 
leurs confciences quand ils retournent des bois apres 
cinq ou fix mois d'abfence, ils fe conferuent pour la 
plufpart auec vne purete rauiffante, encor qu'ils 
foient auec des barbares, & qu'ils n'ayent autre fe- 
cours que du Ciel, comme ils ne font pas polis ^ I'ex- 
terieur, il n'y a que ceux qui entendent leur langue 
& qui les conuerfent qui ayent cognoiffance de ces 
vrais biens incognus aux yeux des hommes; mais 
bien cognus de Dieu. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 196 

worldly considerations that he fears neither small 
nor great ; and he sometimes declares to ns [104] that 
he would willingly suffer death for his belief. 

It is a very touching consolation to hear with what 
innocence these good people render an account of 
their consciences when they return from the woods, 
after five or six months of absence. They maintain 
themselves, in most cases, in a delightful purity, al- 
though they are with barbarians, and have no other 
aid than that of Heaven. As they are not outwardly 
polished, it is only those who understand their lan- 
guage and converse with them who have a knowl- 
edge of these truly good persons, — unknown to the 
eyes of men, but well known to God. 


196 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 


[105] CHAPITRE VIII. 

DE LA BONNE DISPOSITION DE QUELQUES SAUUAGES 
NON ENCOR BAPTISES. 

DANS les grandes reliftences que les Sauuages 
nous faifoient au commencement que nous 
leur parlions de la foy, ie fuppliois fouuent 
noftre Seigneur de me faire cefbe grace qu'auat ma 
mort ie peuffe voir deux families lauees dedas fon 
fang, profelfer publiquement & coflamment la Reli- 
gion Ciireftienne, fa bont6 ayant donn6 cefte confo- 
lation "k mes yeux, ie fouhaittois quafi de chanter Ie 
Cantique de S. Simeon, tant cefte faueur me fem- 
bloit grande, mais Dieu qui ne mefure pas fes dons 
k la petiteffe de noftre coeur, a voulu que ie vilTe en- 
trer en fon Eglife, non feulement ces deux premieres 
families, mais plufieurs autres, & que i'euffe ce con- 
tentement bien doux de les voir profefTer courageuf e- 
ment la foy de lefus-Chrift ; ce n'eft pas [106] tout, 
ce Dieu des mifericordes a tellement difpofe les Sau- 
uages non encor baptifez, qu'il femble que fa Ma- 
jefte veut changer ce pauure peuple, & faire reluire 
fes lumieres dans les tenebres. Difons deux mots 
des fentiments qu'il donne k quelques vns de ces 
Infideles. 

Plufieurs fe viennent recommander h. nos prieres 
quand ils entreprenent quelque voyage; cet hyuer 
dernier, voulans trauerfer la grande riuiere toute 
heriff^e de glaces, ils nous venoient trouuer, & I'vn 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 197 


[105] CHAPTER VIII. 

OF THE GOOD DISPOSITION OF SOME SAVAGES NOT 
YET BAPTIZED. 

IN the great resistance the Savages made to us, 
when we first spoke to them of the faith, I often 
supplicated our Lord to grant me this favor, — 
that before my death I might see two families washed 
in his blood, publicly and steadfastly profess the 
Christian Religion. His goodness having granted 
this consolation to my eyes, I almost desired to sing 
the Canticle of St. Simeon, so great did this favor seem 
to me. But God, who does not measure his grace by 
the littleness of our hearts, has willed that I should 
see enter his Church not only these first two fami- 
lies, but several others ; and that I should have the 
satisfaction, truly sweet, of seeing them boldly pro- 
fess the faith of Jesus Christ. This is not [106] all; 
this God of mercy has so disposed the Savages not 
yet baptized, that it would seem that his Majesty 
wishes to transform this poor people, and to make 
his light shine in the darkness. Let us say a few 
words about the sentiments he has given to some of 
these Unbelievers. 

Many come to commend themselves to our pray- 
ers, when they are undertaking a journey. This last 
winter, wishing to cross the great river all blocked 
with ice, they came to see us; and one of them, ad- 
dressing the Father that he knew, said to him, " My 
Father, when you see us embark, look at us; raise 


198 LES RELA TIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol. 18 

deux s'addrelTant au Pere qu'il cognoilToit, luy difoit, 
Mon Pere, quand vous nous verrez embarquez regar- 
dez nous, leuez les yeux au Ciel, dites k Dieu ces 
paroles, gardez-les, ouurez leur paffage, efcartez les 
glaces, deliurez les du peril ou plufieurs perdent la 
vie, ne nous perdez point de veue tandis que nous 
ferons fur la riuiere, difoient ces bonnes gens, & 
quand nous ferions efloign^s de vous dedans les bois, 
penfez h. nous quand vous prierez Dieu. 

Vn autre Sauuage dont la mere & la fille eftoient 
baptifees, & fe nommoient Magdelaine «& Dorothee, 
faifoit cefte [107] priere k Dieu quand il alloit k la 
chalTe, vous qui auez tout fait regardez Magdelaine 
& Dorothee vos enfans, elles veulent manger, don- 
nez leur dequoy, i'en vay chercher pour elles, vous 
les aymez, car elles font baptifees. Ce bon homme 
empruntoit les noms de fa mere & de fa fille pour 
induire noftre Seigneur k luy donner bonne chaffe, 
faifant voir par cefte action I'eftime qu'il faifoit du 
baptefme, qu'il receura bien-toft s'il plaift ^ Dieu. 

Vn Sauuage nous difoit que d6s fa ieunelle il regar- 
doit le Ciel & la terre auec eftonnement, mais qui 
pourroitbien auoir fait tout cela, difoit-il? cela n'a 
pas efl6 fait en vain & fans deffein. 

Vn autre nous racontoit qu'efbant malade cet Au- 
tomne, il auoit veu dans le Ciel vn ieune Franjois 
de fa cognoilfance trefpaffe depuis peu, ie la vy, di- 
foit-il, dans vne beaute & dans vn lieu le plus rauif- 
fant du monde, ie voulu m'auancer pour aller en ce 
lieu de delices, mais il me demanda fi i'eftois baptif6, 
ayant refpondu que non, il me dit, retire toy, tu ne 
f9aurois voir le grand Capitaine du Ciel, [108] ny 
venir auec moy, fi tu n'es lau6 dans les eaux du bap- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 199 

your eyes to Heaven, and say to God these words: 
* Preserve them ; open the way for them, and part 
the ice ; deliver them from a danger wherein many 
lose their lives. ' Do not lose us from sight while 
we shall be upon the river, ' ' said these good people ; 
^' and, when we shall be far away from you in the 
woods, think of us when you pray to God." 

Another Savage, whose mother and daughter were 
baptized and were named Magdelaine and Doroth^e, 
offered this [107] prayer to God when he went hunt- 
ing: "You who have made all, look down upon 
Magdelaine and Doroth^e, your children. They 
wish to eat, give them food. I am going away to 
seek something for them; you love them, for they 
are baptized." This good man borrowed the names 
of his mother and daughter, to induce our Lord to 
give him successful hunting, — showing by this act 
the esteem in which he held baptism, which he will 
receive soon, if it please God. 

A Savage told us that, ever since his youth, he 
had looked upon the Sky and the earth with wonder. 
"" Now, who can have made all that?" said he, " it 
has not been made in vain, and without a purpose." 

Another related to us that, being sick this Au- 
tumn, he had seen in Heaven a young Frenchman of 
his acquaintance who had died a little while before. 
*'' I saw him," said he, " in most ravishing beauty 
and in the most delightful place imaginable. I 
wished to go forward and enter this place of delight, 
but he asked me if I were baptized. When I told 
him I was not, he said to me, ' Retire, thou canst 
not see the great Captain of Heaven, [108] or come 
with me, if thou art not washed in the waters of bap- 
tism.' This amazed me greatly, and, at the same 
time, what I saw disappeared." 


200 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.18 

tefme, cela m'eflonna fort, & k mefme temps ce que 
ie voyois difparut. 

Quoy qu'il en foit de cefte vifion, ce Sauuage a 
fouftenu publiquement deuant ceux de fa nation que 
les ames pouuoient aller au Ciel, & qu'il y feroit def- 
ja s'il euft efte baptife. Vn certain Algonquin racon- 
toit cet hyuer qu'vn Sauuage de ces pays plus haut 
eftoit refufcite ; on I'auoit enfeuely, difoit-il, on eftoit 
tout preft de le mettre en terre quand il commenga k 
fe remuer, on fe met ^ decoudre viftement les robes 
dans lefquelles on I'auoit enueloppe, ce bon homme 
fe leue k fon feant, racontent qu'il vient du pays des 
ames, lequel eft fitue ou le Soleil fe couche, alleure 
qu'il n'a veu 1^ aucun Fran§ois, ce lieu eftant deftin6 
feulement pour les Sauuages, il eft en ma puiffance^ 
difoit-il, de viure encore en terre, mais i'ayme mieux 
m'en aller au pays des ames que refter parmy les 
hommes, cela dit, il fe couche, meurt derechef, on 
le renueloppe & le met-on en terre. Le Sauuage qui 
a eu la vifion dont [109] ie viens de parler, enten- 
dant cefte fable, dit tout hault qu'il n'en croyoit rien, 
& que ce qu'il auoit veu eftoit fi admirable qu'il ne le 
pouuoit ofter de fon efprit, afCeurant toufiours que 
les ames pouuoient aller au Ciel. 

Mais remarquez s'il vous plaill que le Diable degoit 
ce pauure homme, donnant vne faulfe interpretation 
aux parolles qu'il a entendues, car comme ce Fra9ois 
qu'il affeure auoir veu dans vne grande gloire, luy 
dit qu'il n'entreroit point au Ciel qu'il ne fut bap- 
tife, il a coclud delk qu'auffi toft qu'il fera baptife il 
mourra pour y aller, fi bien qu'il retarde de iour en 
iour ne pouuant fe refoudre k quitter fi toft la terre, 
i'efpere qu'on luy oftera bien toft cet erreur. II a 
fait defia baptifer fa femme & fes enfans. 


1640] RELA TION 01^ 1640 201 

Whatever there may be in this vision, this Savage 
has publicly maintained before those of his nation that 
souls can go to Heaven, and that he would already 
be there if he had been baptized. A certain Algon- 
quin related this winter that a Savage of those coun- 
tries farther up had been resuscitated. * * They had 
shrouded him," said he, " and were all ready to put 
him in the ground when he began to move. They 
quickly set to work to undo the robes in which they 
had bound him. This good man, sitting up, related 
that he had come from the country of souls, which 
is situated where the Sun sets, and that he had not 
seen any Frenchman there, — this place being des- 
tined only for Savages. "It is in my power," said 
he, ' ' to live again upon earth ; but I prefer to go 
away to the country of souls, rather than to remain 
among men ; " so saying, he lay down and died again. 
He was a second time enveloped, and placed in the 
ground. The Savage who had the vision of which 
[109] I have just spoken, hearing this tale, said boldly 
that he did not believe it at all, and that what he had 
seen was so wonderful that he could not get it out of 
his mind, — continuing to assert that souls could go 
to Heaven. 

But observe, if you please, that the Devil deludes 
this poor man, giving a false interpretation to the 
words that he heard. For, since this Frenchman 
whom he declares to have seen in great glory said to 
him that he could not enter Heaven if he were not 
baptized, he has concluded therefrom that, as soon as 
he shall be baptized, he will die in order to go there ; 
so that he delays from day to day, not being able to 
resolve upon leaving the earth so soon. I hope he 
will speedily be freed from this error. He has 
already had his wife and children baptized. 


202 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.18 

II y a des Sauuages non encor baptifez qui nous 
viennent donner aduis des fuperftitions qui fe com- 
mettent en fecret dans les cabanes, difans que ceux 
qui croyent encor k ces refueries, retiennent les de- 
mons parmy eux, il eft vray que les Infideles n'ofe- 
roient quafi plus diuulguer ces vieilles fottifes qui fe 
vont tous [no] les iours aboliffant ^ S. lofeph. 

Vn Sauuag-e, encor payen, auoit procure le bap- 
tefme "k vne fienne petite fille, cet enfant venant "k 
mourir nous I'enterrafme honorablement en noftre 
Cimetierre, ce qui le toucha fort, mais come nous 
luy eufmes parl6 de la gloire dont iouyffoit fon 
enfant, il en fut fi aife qu'il s'efcria, mon coeur efloit 
eftouffe, & vous luy auez donn6 de I'air, puis que ma 
fille eft fi heureufe, ie veux aller auec elle, & puis 
que vous auez loge fon corps aupres de voftre maifon, 
logez moy aulii aupres de vous, car d'orefnauant ie 
tiendray ce lieu-cy pour mon pays, & ie m'arrefteray 
auec les autres qui veulent compofer vne bourgade, 
inftruifez moy tous les iours & ma femme auffi, elle 
a volont6 d'eftre baptifee auffi bien que moy, comme 
on les inftruifoit s'il arriuoit que le pere qui en auoit 
pris charge s'abfentaft quelquefois, ils luy difoient 
au retour, voftre abfence nous attrifte & noflre coeur 
eft rellouy quand vous eftes de retour, car vous eftes 
noflre pere. 

Vne femme Sauuage ayant racommod^ quelque 
chofe pour noftre maifon; [in] quelque canot ou 
chofe femblable, nous luy demadafmes ce qu'elles vou- 
loit pour fa peine, helas! dit-elle, ie ne demade rien 
fmon que vous vous fouueniez que ie ne fuis pas bap- 
tifee, ie craignois cet hyuer de mourir dans les bois 
fans baptefme, au moindre mal mon coeur trembloit, 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 203 

There are Savages not yet baptized who come to 
inform us of superstitious rites which are performed 
secretly in the cabins, — saying that those who still 
believe in these delusions retain the demons among 
them. In truth, the Unbelievers would hardly dare 
divulge these ancient follies any more, which are 
[no] daily being abolished at St. Joseph. 

A Savage, still pagan, had procured baptism for 
one of his little girls. This child happening to die, 
we buried her with honor in our Cemetery, which 
deeply touched him. But, when we spoke to him of 
the glory his child was enjoying, he was so pleased 
that he exclaimed, " My heart was suffocating, and 
you have given it air. Since my child is so happy, 
I wish to go with her ; and since you have placed her 
body near your house, lodge me also near you, — for 
henceforward I shall look upon this place as my 
country, and shall settle with the others who wish 
to form a village. Instruct me every day, and my 
wife also. She wishes to be baptized, as well as I." 
While they were being instructed, if it happened 
that the father who had taken charge of them occa- 
sionally absented himself, they would say to him on 
his return, "Your absence saddens us, and our 
hearts are rejoiced when you have returned, for you 
are our father." 

A Savage woman, having mended some article for 
our house, — [m] a canoe, or something of the 
kind, — we asked her what she desired for her trouble. 
" Ah," said she, " I ask nothing, except that you 
remember that I am not baptized. I was afraid of 
dying in the woods this winter without baptism ; my 
heart trembled at the least sickness. Do not let me 
go away from you any more burdened with my sins." 


204 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.18 

ne me laiffez plus efloigner de vous chargee de mes 
offenfes. 

Deux autres femmes s'eftant efgar^es du chemin 
fur la nuit, eftoient en danger de mourir de froid fur 
les neiges, car elles n'auoient point de raquettes ny 
de hache ny de fufil, & ne fe portoient pas trop bien, 
fe voyans dans cefle angoiffe elles ont recours k 
Dieu, I'vne efloit Chreftienne & I'autre non; ayant 
fait leur priere elles orient a I'auenture pour voir li 
elles ne feroient point entendues de quelqu'vn; k 
mefme temps vn canot conduit par deux Chrefliens 
paffoit fur le grand fleuue k I'endroit ou eftoient ces 
femmes, ils refpondent ^ leurs cris, les appellent, les 
font defcendre au bord de I'eau, & les embarquent, 
ces bonnes femmes admiroient ce rencontre, & di- 
foient auec eftonnement, Dieu nous a [112] prompte- 
ment fecourues. 

Vn forcier de TadoufTac fort eftourdy eftant venu 
h. S. lofeph nous le traidtafmes rudement de paroles, 
il nous difoit nettement que fon art luy auoit fauu6 
la vie, & que s'il croyoit en Dieu qu'il ne pafTeroit 
pas rEfl6, nous recommandafmes k Noel Negabamat 
de luy parler en fecret, il ny manqua pas, il paffoit 
quafi les nuidts h. luy parler de noftre creance. En 
fin cet homme quoy que mechant fut toucli6 des dif- 
cours de ce bon Neophyte, & des bons exemples des 
nouueaux Chreftiens, en forte qu'il nous vint prier 
de baptifer fon fils, & nous affeura qu'il fe feroit in- 
fbruire, ie voy bien, dit-il, que ie ne fay pas bien, ie 
veux quitter le Diable, & croire en Dieu, ie m'en vais 
faire vn tour h. Tadouffac, bien toft vous me verrez 
de retour. Ie ne fgay pas ce qui en fera tous ceux 
que Dieu appelle ne refpondent pas ^ fa voix, cet 
homme k bien des liens k rompre. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 205 

Two other women, who lost their way towards 
nightfall, were in danger of dying from cold upon 
the snow, for they had no snowshoes, hatchets, or 
tinder box, and besides, were not very well. See- 
ing themselves in this extremity, they had recourse 
to God. One was a Christian, and the other not. 
When they had offered their prayers they shouted, 
to see if, perchance, they would not be heard by 
some one ; and at the same time a canoe, paddled by 
two Christians, made its way over the great river 
towards the place where these women were. They 
answered their cries, called to them, had them come 
down to the edge of the water, and took them on 
board. These good women wondered at this encoun- 
ter, and said with astonishment, "God has [112] 
promptly aided us." 

A sorcerer of Tadoussac, a very reckless fellow, 
having come to St. Joseph, we took him sharply to- 
task. He told us bluntly that his art had preserved 
his life, and that if he should believe in God he 
would not survive the Summer. We requested Noel 
Negabamat to speak to him privately. He did not 
fail to do so ; he almost spent nights in talking to 
him of our belief. Finally this man, although 
wicked, was touched by the discourse of this good 
Neophyte, and by the good example of the new 
Christians, so that he came and pleaded with us to 
baptize his son, and assured us that he would be in- 
structed. " I see clearly," said he, " that I am not 
doing right; I will quit the Devil, and believe in 
God. I am about to make a trip to Tadoussac, but 
you will soon see me back again." I do not know 
how it will turn out ; not all those whom God calls, 
respond to his voice. This man has many ties to 
sunder. 


206 LES RELATIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol.18 

I 'ay delia remarqu6 qu'il y a des Sauuages non 
encor baptifez qui ne fe veulent pas marier fans 
noflre aduis, d'autres ne manquent point de fe met- 
tre k genoux [113] fi-toft [ils] onttu6 quelque animal 
& d'en remercier Dieu, cela fe vamettre en couftume 
parmy eux, d'ou naiftra vn grand bien, car s'ils ont 
recours k Dieu fa bonte ne les abandonnera pas. 

Vn Payen allant voir la nuit vne femme veufue 
pour I'epoufer, celle-cy luy dit ne fgais tu pas que 
les Peres orient centre cette couftume, de plus tu as 
def-ja vne femme, en voudrois tu auoir deux toy qui 
fais eflat d'approuuer les prieres? li vn tel Pere (di- 
foit-elle) te trouuoit icy que dirois-tu? cet importun 
continuant de la molefter les autres nuits, elle luy dit 
tu me contraindras de m'en aller ailleurs, & de de- 
couurir ta malice aux Peres, ne crains tu point I'en- 
fer? fgaclie que ie veux eftre Cbreftienne, & que ie ne 
veux 6poufer qu'vn Chreftien, ne me parle plus, tu 
perds tes peines, ie veux obei'r k Dieu. 

II n'y a coeur fi dur que la parole de Dieu n'amo- 
lilTe k la longue, vn efprit rude & fuperbe, me difoit 
il y a quelque temps, ie me fuis moqu6 cent fois des 
difcours du Pere de Quen, i'ay refifte au Pere Bu- 
teux Ie voulant empefcher de [114] nous inftruire, 
pour toy ie ne te pouuois fupporter, ie prenois plaifir 
de te quereller, & quand ie I'auois fait ie I'allois ra- 
compter par les cabanes comme vne grande proiieffe, 
mais maintenant vos paroles me femblent bonnes, 
elles defcendent petit k petit dans mon coeur, ie croy 
que mes oreilles fe feront k les 6couter. 

Voicy quelques remarques du Pere Buteux en- 
uoyees des trois Riuieres, ces pauures gens font dans 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 207 

I have already remarked that there are Savages not 
yet baptized who will not marry without our advice. 
Others always fall upon their knees [113] as soon as 
they have killed some animal, and thank God for it. 
This is getting to be a custom among them, whence 
will arise great good, — for, if they have recourse to 
God, his goodness will not abandon them. 

A Pagan went to see a widow one night, to marry 
her, when she said to him, " Dost thou not know 
that the Fathers rebuke this custom? and besides, 
thou hast already a wife ; wouldst thou have two, — 
thou, who pretendest to approve prayers? If such a 
Father" (said she) " found thee here, what wouldst 
thou say?" This troublesome fellow continuing to 
annoy her on other nights, she said to him, " Thou 
wilt compel me to go somewhere else, and to expose 
thy malice to the Fathers. Dost thou not fear hell? 
Know that I intend to be a Christian, and that I will 
not marry any one but a Christian. Do not speak 
to me any more ; thou hast thy trouble for nothing ; 
I wish to obey God." 

There is no heart so hard that the word of God 
does not soften it in time. A rude and haughty fel- 
low said to me some time ago, " I have a hundred 
times made sport of the speeches of Father de Quen ; 
I have opposed Father Buteux, trying to prevent 
him from [114] instructing us; as for thee, I could 
not endure thee, — I took pleasure in quarreling with 
thee, and, when I had done so, I went through the 
cabins and spoke of it as a great feat. But now your 
words seem good to me ; they are going down little 
by little into my heart ; I believe my ears will get 
accustomed to hear them." 

Here are some observations of Father Buteux, sent 


208 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.18 

la creance que la maladie les doit accueillir cet Efl6, 
ils ne laillent pas de fe difpofer pour le baptefme, 
ils font fort port^s k prier Dieu, quad nous entrons 
dans leurs cabanes, ils demandent li c'eft pour faire 
les prieres, fe mettans "k genoux fi-toft qu'on les 
commance. 

L'vn de nous allant faire prier Dieu dans les 
cabanes, vn peu efloignees de noftre habitation, ren- 
contra vn vieillard qui s'en alloit faire des traifnes il 
demanda au Pere ou il alloit, ie vay faire prier tes 
gens, luy dit le Pere, ie n'y pourray affifter, dit ce 
bon Sauuage, mais prions icy, 1^ deffus il fe met k 
genoux fur la neige, [115] par vn temps tres-rigou- 
reux, le Pere le fit prier Dieu, cela fait ce bon homme 
s'en alia tout content a fon trauail. 

Vne femme me difoit qu'eftant dans la neceffit^ au 
milieu des bois, fon mary fit mettre ceux de fa cabane 
^ genoux, & leur dit, or fus addrelTons nous ^ celuy 
qui nous peut nourrir, il eft bon, alleurement il nous 
fecourera fi nous le prions de bon coeur, ce qu'ils 
firent & incontinent apres ils firent fort bonne chalTe 
d'ours. 

Voicy ce qui eft arriue depuis peu, dit le Pere, vn 
Sauuage de confideration parmy les fiens, me vint 
dire qu'il auoitveu le manitou, & qu'ilme prioitd'al- 
ler chez luy faire les prieres inftituees pour le chaf- 
fer, il y fallut aller quoy qu'il fut nuit, ie portay 
auec moy vn crucifix, que chacun adora, apres les 
auoir affurez ie laillay le crucifix dans leur cabane, 
quelque temps apres ce Sauuage qui m'eftoit venu 
querir fe trouua opprefl!^ d'vn mal de coft^, caufe du 
trop grand trauail qu'il auoit pris ^ fon champ, ce 
pauure homme ne f5achant k qui auoir recours, s'ad- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 209 

from the three Rivers : ' ' These poor people still be- 
lieve that the malady is to attack them this Summer. 
They do not cease to prepare themselves for bap- 
tism; they are strongly inclined to pray to God; 
when we enter their cabins they ask if it is to offer 
prayers, falling upon their knees as soon as these 
are begun. 

" One of us, going into the cabins at a little dis- 
tance from our settlement to offer prayers, met an 
old man who was going away to make sleds. He 
asked the Father where he was going. ' I am going 
to get thy people to pray, ' replied the Father. ' I 
cannot be present,' said this good Savage, * but let us 
pray here.' Thereupon he knelt down upon the 
snow, [115] in the severe cold; the Father had him 
pray to God, and, this done, the good man went off 
to his work, very happy. 

" A woman told me that, being in want while in 
the depths of the woods, her husband had those of 
his cabin kneel down, and said to them, ' Come, let 
us address ourselves to him who can feed us ; he is 
good, — he will certainly help us, if we pray to him 
sincerely.' This they did, and directly afterwards 
were successful in bear- hunting. 

' ' Here is something that happened a little while 
ago," says the Father. " A Savage, of high stand- 
ing among his own people, came and told me that 
he had seen the manitou, and pleaded with me to go 
home with him to offer the prayers appointed to drive 
him away. I was obliged to go, although it was 
night, taking with me a crucifix, which every one 
adored. After having reassured them, I left the 
crucifix in their cabin. Some time afterward, this 
Savage who had come to get me, finding himself 


210 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 

dreffa ^ celuy qu'il croyoit auffi puiflant [ii6] pour 
chaffer la maladie que les diables, il luy demanda la 
guerifon, qu'il receut plainement & foudainement. 

Vn ieune homme nous a fort edifi6 demandant 
le baptefme, ie confeffe, difoit-il, que ie fuis vn 
coureur, que ie n'ay point d'arreft, mais depuis que 
vous m'auez parle de 1' autre vie, ie porte touf jours 
vos paroles dans mon coeur, i'ay beau aller 5a & Ik, 
ce que vous m'auez ditme fuit par tout, il me femble 
qu'on I'a efcrit dans mon coeur, ie difois I'autre iour 
au lieur Oliuier, que ie croyois tout de bon, & que 
i'auois pris refolution de m'arrefter, ce n'efl pas luy 
difoy-ie, que i'efpere qu'on me fera meilleur marcli6 
au magazin fi ie fuis baptif6, non ie ne penfe point k 
vos marchandifes, ie penfe k quelque chofe de meil- 
leur, voila, luy monft[r]ant le Ciel, ce que ie penfe, 
c'eft cela qui eft efcrit dedans mon coeur, & qui me 
fait craindre de mourir auparauant que mes pechez 
foient emport^s par les eaux du baptefme, Dieu luy 
donne la perfeuerance. 

II y a trois iours qu'vne femme non encor baptif^e 
demeuroit k la porte de [117] I'Eglife pendant la 
Meffe, mais comme fon petit fils eftoit Chreflien, & 
qu'il n'eft permis qu'aux Chreftiens d'entendre la 
Meffe, elle plantoit ce petit enfant tout debout atta- 
che k fon berceau k 1' entree de la Chappelle, atten- 
dant dehors que la Meffe fut ditte pour le prendre 
faifant voir par cette adtion I'eflime qu'elle faifoit du 
bon-heur de fon fils, qu'on luy accorderoit k elle 
mefme n' eftoit la crainte qu'on a qu'elle 6poufe vn 
Payen, fon mary I'ayant laiff^e fort ieune. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 211 

oppressed by a pain in his side, caused by too hard 
work he had done in his field, — the poor man, not 
knowing to whom he should apply, addressed himself 
to him whom he believed to be as powerful [116] to 
drive away sickness as devils. He asked him for his 
recovery, which he received completely and suddenly. 

" A young man greatly edified us in his request 
for baptism. ' I confess,' said he, ' that I am a rover, 
that I have no abiding-place ; but, since you have 
spoken to me of the other life, I always bear your 
words in my heart : it is vain for me to go here and 
there, — what you have said to me follows me every- 
where ; it seems as if it had been written in my heart. 
I said the other day to sieur Olivier that I believed 
sincerely, and that I had resolved to settle down, — 
" not," I said to him, " because I hope they will give 
me things cheaper at the store if I am baptized ; I 
am not thinking of your merchandise, I am thinking 
of something better ; that ' — indicating the Sky — * is 
what I think of, it is that which is written in my heart, 
and which makes me afraid to die before my sins are 
carried away by the waters of baptism.' " May God 
give him perseverance. 

" Three days ago a woman, not yet baptized, re- 
mained at the door of [117] the Church during Mass. 
As her little son was a Christian, and as none but 
Christians are allowed to hear Mass, she set this little 
child, — standing upright, bound to his cradle, — at 
the entrance to the Chapel, waiting outside until 
Mass was over, to take him ; showing by this act the 
value she attached to her son's good fortune, which 
would be granted to her also were it not for the fear 
that she will marry a Pagan, her husband having 
left her very young." 


212 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.18 


CHAPITRE IX. 

DE LA PROUIDENCE DE DIEU AU CHOIX DE QUELQUES 
VNS, & AU REBUT DE QUELQUES AUTRES. 

QVELQUES Sauuages fe conuertilTent quelque- 
fois li foudainement, & par des occafions fi 
peu premedit^es, qu'il femble qu'vn hazard 
les mene an [ii8] Ciel, & cependant ils n'y entrent 
que par vne fage conduite, & par vne affur^e proui- 
dence du grand Dieu. 

Vn Capitaine Sauuage s'eftoit cabane au delTus de 
S. lofeph en pleine fante, le voila tout k coup d'vne 
grande maladie, arriue qu'vne femme paflant deuant 
noftre maifon dans fon canot, nous dit deux mots fans 
fe defembarquer, comme elle pourfuiuoit fon che- 
min, I'vn de nous luy crie, n'y a-il point de malades 
en voftre cabane, helas! fit elle, ie m'oubliois de 
vous dire qu'vn tel Capitaine eft tombe ce matin 
dans de grandes conuulfions, auffi-tolt le Pere de 
Quen entendant cela court, prend fa couuerture & 
vn morceau de pain pour tous viure «&: s'embarque, 
il arriue fur la nuit, trouue cet homme en vn pitoy- 
able eflat, I'inftruit, le confole, il demande le bap- 
tefme, crie mercy "k Dieu de fes pechez, le Pere ne 
le croyant pas fi mal, fe retire en la cabane voifme 
pour faire fes prieres & prendre vn peu de repos, 
mais Dieu qui vouloit auoir cette ame I'empefclia fi 
bien de dormir, qu'il fut come cotraint de fe leuer & 
d'aller voir so malade, [119] chofe eftrage, il le trouue 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 213 


CHAPTER IX. 

OF THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD IN THE CHOICE OF 
SOME, AND THE REJECTION OF OTHERS. 

CERTAIN Savages are sometimes converted so 
suddenly, and by means so little premedi- 
tated, that it seems as if chance takes them 
to [118] Heaven; and yet they do not enter it with- 
out a wise leading and a definite providence of the 
great God. 

A Savage Captain had encamped above St. Joseph, 
in good health, when all at once he was attacked by 
a serious illness. It happened that a woman passing 
before our house in her canoe said a few words to 
us without disembarking; as she continued on her 
way, one of us called to her, " Are there not some 
sick people in your cabin?" " Oh," said she, " I 
forgot to tell you that such a Captain fell sick this 
morning, with violent convulsions." Upon hearing 
this, Father de Quen immediately ran, seized his 
blanket, and a piece of bread for his only food, and 
embarked. He arrived toward nightfall, and found 
this man in a pitiable condition ; he instructed and 
consoled him ; the latter asked for baptism, and cried 
to God for mercy for his sins. The Father, not sup- 
posing him so ill, withdrew to a neighboring cabin, 
to offer his prayers and take a little rest. But God, 
who intended to have this soul, so kept him from 
sleeping that he was constrained, as it were, to arise 
and go to see his patient. [119] Strange to say, he 


214 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.18 

aux abois, n'ayant plus de vie qu'autant qti'il en 
falloit pour demander & pour receuoir le faindt Bap- 
tefme, le Pere bien eftonne luy donne, & I'enuoie 
tout fur rheure en Paradis: vous diriez que cet 
homme s'eft fauue par hazard, & que d'autres fe 
damnent par accident, mais il ny a ny hazard ny acci- 
dent deuant Dieu, fa bonte & fa iuflice s'accordent 
bien auec fa prouidence. 

Ce n'eft pas tout, quelques enfans efloient malades 
dans ces mefmes cabanes, le Pere les veut baptifer, 
les parens s'y oppofent, vne femme plus inftruite 
que les autres fe trouuant Ik plaide pour le baptefme 
de ces pauures enfans, & Dieu gagna fa caufe, car 
ils furent faidls fes enfans, qu'il foit beny k iamais, 
laudent eum cceli & terra & omnia guce in eis funt. L'vn 
de nous, eflant alle dire la faindte Meffe k I'Hofpi- 
tal, trouue vne femme nouuellement apportee bien 
malade, il luy vint vne forte penfee de la difpofer 
tout fur I'heure au baptefme, mais comme il eftoit 
preffe & qu'il auoit quelque indifpofition pour lors, 
il voulut differer, [120] fe promettant bien de la 
reuenir voir das peu de temps, comme il la quittoit, il 
fentit ce reproche en fon coeur, fi cette femme meurt 
fans baptefme h qui en f era la f ante ? il retourne vers 
la malade, luy touche le poux, & le trouuant affez 
bon k fon aduis, la quitte encor vne fois, il n'eftoit 
pas forty qu'vn remords luy fait prendre refolution 
de ne point quitter cette pauure creature, qu'il ne la 
vit en eftat de receuoir ce Sacrement de falut, il 
s'arrefte, I'inltruit, la laiffe dans vn grand defir d'eftre 
Chreftienne, & dans des regrets d'auoir offenf6 fon 
Dieu & fon Pere, il ne fut pas loing qu'on luy vint 
crier que cette pauure femme expiroit, il retourne, 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 215 

found him in a desperate condition, having no more 
life than was necessary for him to ask and receive 
holy Baptism. The Father, greatly surprised, gave 
it to him, and sent him straightway to Paradise. 
You might say that this man had escaped by chance, 
and that others damn themselves by accident. But 
there is neither chance nor accident with God ; his 
goodness and justice harmonize with his providence. 
This is not all. Some children were sick in these 
same cabins. The Father wished to baptize them, 
the parents opposed him ; a woman, better instructed 
than the others, being present, pleaded for the 
baptism of these poor children, and God gained his 
cause, for they were made his children. May he be 
forever blessed, laudent eum coeli et terra et omnia quce 
in eis sunt. One of us having gone to say holy Mass 
at the Hospital, found a woman who had been just 
brought there very sick. A strong impulse prompted 
him to dispose her immediately to baptism, but as he 
was in haste, and felt some indisposition at the time, 
he wished to defer it, [120] promising himself that 
he would certainly return and see her in a little 
while. As he left her, he was conscious of this 
reproach in his heart, " If this woman dies without 
baptism, whose fault will it be?" He returned to 
the sick woman, felt her pulse, and finding her well 
enough, in his opinion, left her again. He had not 
gone out before remorse made him resolve not to 
leave this poor creature, until he saw her in a condi- 
tion to receive this Sacrament of salvation. He 
stopped, instructed her, and left her with a great 
desire to be a Christian, and with regret at having 
offended her God and Father. It was not long 
before they came to him, exclaiming that this poor 


216 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.18 

la baptife, elle meurt donnant des indices tres-grands 
de fa predeftination, le Pere fe fouuenant de ce qui 
s'eftoit pafr6 en fon cceur, refta tout 6pouuante. voy- 
ant qu'il ne s'en efloit quafi rien fallu qu'elle ne fut 
morte fans baptefme, il eft vray qu'k fon regard le 
falut de cette ame paroiffoit n'auoir eft^ attach^ qu'au 
petit filet fort aife k rompre, mais Dieu le tenoit 
auec vne chaifne bien forte. 

[i2i] Voicy quelques remarques tirees des me- 
moires du P. Buteux, vne troupe d'Algonquins traif- 
nans quant & eux beaucoup de pauures veufues & 
orphelins, fe font venus ietter entre les bras de noftre 
charity, qui n'eftoientque trop ouuerts pour les rece- 
uoir, il faut que ie confelle que voyant I'extreme 
difette de ces pauures barbares, foit pour leurs viures, 
foit pour leurs habits, iamais ie n'eus plus d'enuie 
d'eftre riche, la premiere cabane oii i'entray, fut de 
deux pauures veufues bien agees lefquelles auoient 
recueilly enuiron dix ou douze enfans, & pour toute 
prouifion n'auoiet pas la valeur d'vn fac de bled 
d'Inde, c'eft pour lors que ie regrettay les viures 
qu'on nous enuoyoit, lef quels ont efte perdus dans la 
barque qui nous venoit voir, i'entrois dans quelque 
deffiance voyant tant de pauures creatures fur nos 
bras auec fi peu de viures qui fe rencontroient en 
noftre maifon, mais celuy qui nourrit les oyfeaux du 
Ciel, n'abandonne pas ceux pour lefquels il a cree 
les oyfeau, & les poillons & tous les animaux. Ie 
ne f9ay par quel miracle de fa prouidence [122] cela 
s'eft fait, mais ie f§ay bien que ces pauures gens ont 
tous paffe I'Hyuer fains & gaillards, & fa bonte nous 
a fait trouuer dequoy les fecourir, nous en auons bap- 
tife quelques vns qui nous confolent, entre autres vne 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 217 

woman was expiring; he returned, and baptized her; 
and she died, giving very marked indications of her 
predestination. The Father, recalling what had 
passed in his own heart, was filled with consternation, 
considering how near she was to dying without bap- 
tism. True, in his eyes, the salvation of this soul 
seemed only attached by a fine thread, very easy to 
break ; but God held it with a very strong chain. 

[121] Here are some observations taken from the 
memoirs of Father Buteux : " A band of Algonquins, 
dragging with them many poor widows and orphans, 
came to throw themselves into the arms of our char- 
ity, which were only too wide open to receive them. 
I must confess that, when I saw the extreme poverty 
of these poor barbarians, both as to their food and 
their clothes, I never had a greater desire to be rich. 
The first cabin I entered was that of two poor wid- 
ows, well advanced in age, who had gathered togeth- 
er about ten or twelve children, and for their sole 
provision had not the value of a bag of Indian com. 
It was then I regretted the supplies that were sent 
us, which had been lost in the bark that was coming 
to see us. I had some misgivings when I saw so 
many poor creatures upon our hands, with so little 
food to be found in our house ; but he who feeds the 
birds of the Air, does not abandon those for whom 
he has created the birds, the fish, and all the animals. 
I do not know by what miracle of his providence 
[122] this was done; but I do know well that these 
poor people all passed the Winter well and happy, 
and his goodness enabled us to find something with 
which to assist them. We have baptized some of 
them who are a comfort to us, — among others, a 
good widow, who seems to have been reserved for 


218 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol.18 

bonne veufue, qui femble auoir eft6 referu6e pour le 
Ciel par vne particuliere prouidence de noftre Sei- 
gneur: les Hiroquois venat faire la guerre en fon 
pays I'enleuerent en fa petite ieunelTe auec quelques 
autres prifonniers, elle fut efleu^e parmy eux & repu- 
t6e par apres comme vne f emme de leur nation ; 
eftant delia grande les Algonquins allans en guerre 
auec deffunt Monlieur de Champlain, & fe iettans fur 
vne bourgade d' Hiroquois oh. efloit cette femme, 
maffacroient tous ceux qu'ils auoient k la rencontre, 
cette pauure creature fe trouuant dans la m61ee, vou- 
lut faire entendre aux Algonquins qu'elle efloit de 
leur nation, mais elle auoit oublie fa langue, excep- 
ts ce mot feul, qu'elle reiteroit de toutes fes forces, 
nir, nir, nir, moy, moy, moy, ce mot luy fauua la vie, 
vn Algonquin I'ayant tiree k part, elle luy fit enten- 
dre comme [123] elle put, qu'elle auoit efte prife en 
fa ieuneffe par I'ennemy, on la remene en fon pays, 
ou s'ellant mariee elle a veu mourir fon mary, fes 
enfans, grand nombre de fes parens & Dieu I'a con- 
feru^e dans la grande mortalite qui a fort afflig6 fa 
nation, la referuant pour luy donner entree en fon 
Eglife, & pour exciter fes compatriotes a deferter la 
terre, car elle feule, auec cinq petits enfans qu'elle 
a conferuez dans la calamite publique, n'ayant de 
viure que ce que noftre pauurete luy fournit, a defia 
fait vn beau grand champ de bled d'Inde, elle me fit 
grande pitie 1' autre iour, entrant fur le foir en fa 
cabane, ie la trouuay toute abbatue & toute 6plor^e, 
luy en demandat la raifon elle me dit, ie ne puis 
tenir mes larmes, iettant les yeux fur ces pauures 
orphelins, pour moy il y a long-temps que ie fuis 
accouflumee a palfer les iournees entieres fans man- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 219 

Heaven by a special providence of our Lord. The 
Hiroquois, coming to make war against her country, 
carried her off in her childhood with some other 
prisoners. She was reared among them, and after- 
ward reputed as a woman of their nation. Once, 
after she had grown up, the Algonquins went to war 
in company with the deceased Monsieur de Cham- 
plain,^^ and throwing themselves upon a Hiroquois 
village where this woman was, massacred all those 
whom they encountered. This poor creature, find- 
ing herself in the conflict, tried to make the Algon- 
quins understand that she was of their nation ; but 
she had forgotten her own language, except this one 
word, which she reiterated with all her might, nir, 
nir, nir, ' me, me, me.' This word saved her life. 
An Algonquin drawing her aside, she made him un- 
derstand, as well as [123] she could, that she had been 
captured in her youth by the enemy. She was sent 
back to her own country, where, having married, she 
saw her husband, her children, and a great many of 
her relatives die. But God preserved her in the 
midst of the great mortality which has heavily 
afflicted her nation, — reserving her, in order to give 
her admission to his Church, and to stimulate her 
compatriots to clear the land; for she alone, with five 
little children that she has saved in the public calam- 
ity, and having nothing to live upon except what 
our poverty furnishes her, has already prepared a 
fine, large field of Indian corn. She aroused my deep 
compassion, the other day. Entering her cabin to- 
wards evening, I found her quite despondent and in 
tears. Upon asking the reason of this, she said to 
me, ' I cannot restrain my tears when I cast my eyes 
upon these poor orphans. As for me, I have for a 


220 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.18 

ger, comme i'ay fait tout auiourd'htiy trauaillant k 
mon champ fans rien prendre, mais ie ne puis enten- 
dre ces enfans crier ^ la faim fans eflre touch^e, 
voila difoit-elle, le fubiedt de mes larmes, de vous 
importuner ie [124] n'oferois, car depuis I'Automne 
iufques k maintenant vous nous auez toufiours fecou- 
riies confommant les viures qui vous font grand 
befoin. Si eft-ce luy dif-je que i'ay donn6 ce matin 
dequoy vovs faire vne fois "k manger auiourd'huy, ie 
n'en ay rien veu, repart elle, enfin le Pere trouua 
que le Sauuage k qui il auoit donne cette commiffion 
ayant de quoy difner ce iour-lk, auoit referue cette 
aumofne pour le lendemain; la bont6 & la iuflice 
font les deux bras de la grande prouidence de Dieu, 
nous auons veu des effedls de fa mifericorde, voyons 
vn coup de fa iuftice. 

Vn Sauuage ayant efte baptife en danger de mort 
auec de grands fentimens de I'autre vie, reuint en 
fant6. II efloit d'vn affez bon naturel, mais 1' amour 
d'vne femme le perdit, il I'aymoit paflionnement, & 
n' ayant pas le loifir qu'elle fut inflruite & baptifee, 
il r^poufa a la fago des Sauuages, fans attendre la 
benedicftion de I'Eglife, nous le menajafmes des 
chaflimens de Dieu, qui le fuiuirent de bien pr6s, ce 
miferable s'en eftant alle ^ la chaff e du caftor auec 
fa famille [125] allez nombreufe, vit mourir fa femme, 
& les enfans qu'elle auoit d'vn autre lit fans bap- 
tefme, fes parens faifis du mefme mal furent bien 
toft emportez, en fin il tombe malade auec vn fien 
fils ag6 d'enuiron vingt ans, & vne fienne fille Chre- 
ftienne agee de douze, fa foeur qui efloit veufue 
depuis quelques annees & qui auoit pour fils vn grad 
ieune homme excellent chaffeur, foignoit tous ces 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 221 

long time been accustomed to pass whole days with- 
out eating, — as I have done during this day, working 
in my field and taking nothing, — but I cannot hear 
these children cry with hunger, without being 
touched. This, ' said she, ' is the cause of my tears. 
To importune you I [124] would not dare; for, since 
Autumn until now, you have always helped us, using 
up your supplies, and thus leaving yourselves in 
great want. ' ' Yet I gave you food,' said I, ' in order 
that you might eat once to-day. ' ' I have seen none 
of it,' she replied." Finally, the Father found that 
the Savage to whom he had given this commission, 
having something to dine upon to-day, had reserved 
this gift for the morrow. Goodness and justice are 
the two arms of the glorious providence of God. We 
have seen some effects of his mercy; let us see a 
stroke of his justice. 

A Savage who had been baptized while in danger 
of death, with admirable sentiments regarding the 
other life, was restored to health. He had a good 
enough disposition, but love for a woman ruined 
him. He loved her passionately; and, not having 
the time to wait until she was instructed and bap- 
tized, he married her in the Savage fashion, without 
waiting for the benediction of the Church. We 
threatened him with the punishments of God, which 
followed very closely upon him. This unhappy man, 
having gone to hunt the beaver with his numerous 
family, [125] saw his wife, and her children by a 
previous marriage, die without baptism. Her par- 
ents, seized by the same malady, were soon carried 
away. Finally, he fell sick, together with one of his 
sons, about twenty years of age, and one of his daugh- 
ters, a Christian, twelve years old. His sister — who 


222 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.18 

malades dans les bois, mais comme elle vit fon fils 
faifi de cefte contagion, elle prit vn eftrange confeil 
pour luy fauuer la vie, le voulant amener vers les 
demeures de nos Frangois pour trouuer quelque re- 
mede "k fon mal, & ne pouuant embarqu[e]r fon frere, 
qui eftoit ce miferable apoflat que Dieu pourfuiuoit 
viuement, elle raffomme k grands coups de baftons 
en la prefence de fes deux enfans de fon nepueu, & 
de fa niepce, qui n'ofoient branler de peur que cefle 
megere ne leur en fit autant, cela fait elle embarque 
fon fils malade & laifTe "k 1' abandon fon nepueu & fa 
niepce qui fortoient de maladie leur crians qu'ils 
prifTent vn canot qu'elle leur monftroit [126] s'ils fe 
vouloient fauuer, ces pauures enfans ne pouuans pas 
mettre k I'eau ce canot ny le gouuerner dans leur foi- 
bleffe, quittant leur pere qu'on venoit d'alTommer, 
fuiuent vn iour entier leur tante fur le bord de I'eau 
fans manger, cefle proferpine les regardoit fans com- 
pafTion, en fin eflant lafI6 de ramer elle defcendit en 
terre pour fe repofer, fon nepueu la prie d'auoir piti6 
de luy & de fa pauure foeur, cefte cruelle repart, fi 
tu veux que ie te fauue la vie tue ta foeur, car ie ne 
vous fgaurois pas embarquer tous deux : de plus pro- 
mets moy que tu ne parleras iamais de ce que i'ay 
fait a ton pere, ah ! Dieu que fera ce pauure ieune 
homme, de tuer fa foeur c'eft cruaut6, de refter auec 
elle, c'eft choifir la mort fans luy pouuoir donner la 
vie, c'eft deux pauures enfans fe regardoiet I'vn I'au- 
tre parlans des yeux, car leurs coeurs n'auoient pas 
affez de forces pour donner du mouuement k leurs 
langues : en fin cefte tigrefle preffa ce pauure ieune 
homme d'eftre le bourreau de fa propre foeur. Ma 
plume ne peut fans horreur trencher le mot, il prend 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 223 

had been a widow for some years, and who had a son 
who was a tall young man and an excellent hunter — 
took care of all these patients in the woods. But 
when she saw her son assailed by this contagion, she 
took a strange course in order to save his life. De- 
siring to bring him to the dwellings of our French to 
find some remedy for his disease, and not being able 
to take on board her brother, — the miserable apostate 
whom God was sharply pursuing, — she beat the 
latter to death with heavy blows from a club, in the 
presence of his two children, her nephew and her 
niece, who did not dare stir lest this Megera would 
do as much to them. This done, she embarked her 
sick son, and deserted her nephew and niece who were 
recovering from the illness, — calling to them to take 
a canoe that she showed them, [126] if they wished 
to save themselves. These poor children, — not be- 
ing able to launch this canoe, or to guide it in their 
weakness, — leaving their father who had just been 
beaten to death, followed their aunt a whole day 
along the edge of the water, without eating. This 
Proserpina looked at them pitilessly. At last, being 
weary of paddling, she came ashore to rest. Her 
nephew begged her to have pity upon him and his 
poor sister. This cruel woman replied, " If thou 
wishest me to save thy life, kill thy sister, for I can- 
not embark you both. Promise me, besides, that 
thou wilt never speak of what I have done to thy 
father." O God, what will this poor young man 
do ? To kill his sister is cruel ; to remain with her is 
to choose death, without being able to give her life. 
These two poor children look at each other, speaking 
with their eyes, for their hearts have not enough 
strength to give motion to their tongues. Finally, 


224 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.18 

vne corde, la paffe au col [127] de fa foeur, iette cefte 
pauure innocente par terre, met vn pied fur le bout 
de ce licol & tire I'autre bout tant qu'il petit des deux 
mains immolant k la cruaut6 de cefle louue cefte 
pauure vidtime innocete. Quand ce miferable frere 
fut de retour ie luy demandois fi fa foeur ne I'auoit 
point fupplie de luy lailTer la vie, no fit-il, elle ne 
m'en parla point, ny ne s'enfuit de moy, elle me 
regarda d'vn oeil pitoyable, & me laiffa exercer vne 
cruaute qui me deuoit fauuer la vie, ce meurtre com- 
mis, ce ieune homme s'embarque auec cefle megere, 
mais Dieu "k la veue duquel fe ioiioit toute cefte 
funefte tragedie, voulut que cefte proferpine en fit 
vn adte, il la frappa de la cotagion qu'elle fuyoit, & 
auant que d'arriuer oil elle vouloit mener fon fils, elle 
mourut comme vne befte. En fin fon fils fut appor- 
t6 k I'hofpital oh il eft mort dans vne puanteur into- 
lerable, mais auec de grands indices de fon falut, 
nous en parlerons en fon lieu. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 225 

this tigress urged the poor young man to be the ex- 
ecutioner of his own sister. My pen cannot set down 
the word without horror. He takes a cord, passes it 
around [127] his sister's neck, throws this poor inno- 
cent to the ground, puts one foot upon the end of 
this noose, and draws the other as tightly as he can 
with both hands, — sacrificing to the cruelty of this 
she- wolf this poor innocent victim. When this 
wretched brother had returned I asked him if his sis- 
ter had not entreated him to spare her life. " No," 
he replied, " she did not speak to me, nor flee from 
me ; she looked at me pitifully, and left me to exer- 
cise a cruelty which was to save my life." This 
murder committed, the young man embarked with 
this Megera, but God, in whose sight all this fatal 
tragedy was played, willed that this Proserpina should 
play one act of it. He struck her with the contagion 
from which she was fleeing; and, before reaching 
the place where she wished to bring her son, she 
died like a beast. Finally, her son was brought to 
the hospital, where he died in an intolerable stench, 
but with strong indications of salvation. We shall 
speak of him in the proper place. 


226 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.18 


[128] CHAP. X 

DE L'ESPERANCE QU'ON A DE LA CONUERSION DE 
PLUSIEURS SAUUAGES. 

I^AURAY de la peine a declarer mes penfees dans 
ce Chapitre, mon efprit croit plus qu'il n'en 
fcauroit dire, faifons le denombrement de quel- 
ques nations en partie voifmes des riues du grand 
fleuue, & puis ie tafcheray de m'enoncer. 

A I'entr^e du grand golfe de S. Laurent du cofl6 
du Nord on trouue les Efquimaux peuples bien bar- 
bares & grads ennemis des Europeans "k ce qu'on dit 
fuiuant la mefme cofte du Nord en motant on ren- 
contre les peuples de Chifedech & les Berfiamites, ce 
font petites nations dont on a peu de cognoiffance, 
lefquelles ont commerce auec d'autres qui font de- 
dans les terres. En fuite on trouue les Sauuages de 
TadoulTac, qui ont cognoiffance auec la nation du 
Pore Epic, & par I'entremife de :ceux-cy auec [129] 
d'autres Sauuages encore plus retirez dedans les 
terres. Montant toufiours on arriue k Kebec, & puis 
aux trois Riuieres. Les Sauuages qui frequentent 
ces deux habitations vont en marchandife aux At- 
tikamegues, & ceux-cy "k trois ou quatre petites 
nations qui font au Nord de leur pays. 

Quand on arriue au premier faut qui fe rencontre 
dans le grand fleuue S. Laurent, que nous appellons 
le fault faindt Louis, on trouue vn autre fleuue nom- 
me la Riuiere des Prairies. Ce fleuue fe nomme 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 227 


[128] CHAP. X. 

OF THE HOPE WE HAVE FOR THE CONVERSION OF 

MANY SAVAGES. 

1 SHALL be at a loss to make known my thoughts 
in this Chapter, for my mind thinks more than 
it can express. Let us enumerate some of the 
nations partly adjacent to the banks of the great river, 
and then I will try to express my thoughts. 

At the entrance to the great gulf of St. Lawrence, 
on the Northern shore, we find the Esquimaux 
tribes, — very barbarous, and hostile to the Europeans, 
it is said; following the same Northern shore up- 
wards we find the Chisedech and Bersiamite peo- 
ples; these are insignificant nations, of whom we 
know little, who have dealings with other inland 
tribes. Then we find the Savages of Tadoussac, who 
have intercourse with the Porcupine nation, and 
through them with [129] other Savages farther in- 
land. Continuing up the river we reach Kebec, and 
then the three Rivers. The Savages who frequent 
these two settlements go to trade with the Attika- 
megues, and these with three or four other small 
nations which are North of their country. ^^ 

When we reach the first rapid found in the great 
river St. Lawrence, which we call " sault saint 
Louis," we come to another stream called the " River 
des Prairies. " This river is thus named because when 
a certain Frenchman named des Prairies, charged with 
piloting a bark to the sault St. Louis, came to this junc- 


228 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 

ainli, pource qu'vn certain Frangois nomm6 des Prai- 
ries ayant charge de coduire vne barque an fault S. 
Louis, quad il vint k cet affour ou rencontre de ces 
deux fleuues au lieu de tirer du cofte du Sud, ou eft 
le fault faindt Louis il tira au Nord vers cet autre 
fleuue qui n'auoit point encore de nom Frangois, & 
qui depuis ce temps 1^ fut appelle la Riuiere des 
Prairies. Montat done fur cete riuiere on rencontre 
les Ouaouechkairini, que nous appellons la petite 
nation des Algonquins. Montant toufiours plus haut 
■on trouue les Kichefipirini, les Sauuages [130] de 
rifle qui ont h. coft6 dans les terres au Nord les Kota- 
koutouemi. Au Sud de I'lfle font les Kinounchepi- 
rini, les Mataouchkarini, les Ountchatarounounga, 
les Sagahiganirini, les Sagnitaouigama, & puis les 
Hurons qui font ^ I'entree de la mer douce. Ces fix 
nations derniere font entre le fleuue de fainct Lau- 
rens & la Riuiere des Prairies. Quittant la Riuiere 
des Prairies quand elle tire droit au Nord pour aller 
au Surouefe on va trouuer le Lac Nipifm ou font les 
Nipifiriniens : Ceux-cy ont au Nord les Timifcimi, 
les Outimagami, les Ouachegami, les Mitchitamou, 
les Outurbi, les Kiriflinon qui habitent fur les riues 
de la mer du Nord ou les Nipifiriniens vont en mar- 
chandife. Reuenons maintenant "k la mer douce. 
Cefte mer n'eft autre chofe qu'vn grand Lac lequel 
fe venant k eftreffir h. rOiieft, ou I'Oiieft Nord-oiieft 
fait vn autre plus petit Lac, qui puis apres fe va elar- 
gilTant en vn autre grand Lac ou feconde mer douce. 
Voicy les nations qui bordent ces grands Lacs ou ces 
mers du coft6 du Nord. 

I'ay dit qu'^ I'entree du premier de [131] ces Lacs 
fe rencontrent les Hurons, les quittans pour voguer 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 229 

tion or meeting of these two rivers, instead of coast- 
ing along the Southern shore, where the sault saint 
Louis is, he turned to the North, towards the other 
river which as yet had no French name, and which, 
since that time, has been called the " River des 
Prairies." Going up this river, then, we find the 
Ouaouechkairini, which we call the " petite nation " 
of the Algonquins. Going still farther up the river 
we find the Kichesipirini, the Savages [130] of the 
Island, who have adjacent to them, in the territory 
to the North, the Kotakoutouemi. To the South of 
the Island are the Kinounchepirini, the Mataouchka- 
rini, the Ountchatarounounga, the Sagahiganirini, 
the Sagnitaouigama, and then the Hurons, who are 
at the entrance to the fresh- water sea.^^ These last 
six nations are between the river saint Lawrence and 
the River des Prairies. Leaving the River des Prai- 
ries when it turns directly to the North, that we may 
go to the Southwest, we come to Lake Nipisin, where 
the Nipisiriniens are found. These have upon their 
North the Timiscimi, the Outimagami, the Ouache- 
gami, the Mitchitamou, the Outurbi, the Kiristinon, 
who live on the shores of the North sea whither 
the Nipisiriniens go to trade. ^^ Let us return now 
to the fresh-water sea. This sea is nothing but a 
large Lake which, becoming narrower in the West, 
or the West Northwest, forms another smaller Lake, 
which then begins to enlarge into another great Lake 
or second fresh-water sea. Such are the nations that 
border these great Lakes or seas of the North. 

I have said that at the entrance to the first of [131] 
these Lakes we find the Hurons. Leaving them, to 
sail farther up in the lake, we find on the North the 
Ouasouarini ; farther up are the Outchougai, and still 


280 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.18 

plus haut dans le lac, on trouue an Nord les Ouafoua- 
rini, plus haut font les Outchougai, plus haut encore 
k I'embouchure du fleuue qui vient du Lac Nipilln 
font les Atchiligoiian. Au delk fur les mefmes riues 
de cefte mer douce font les Amikoiiai, ou la nation 
du Caftor. Au Sud defquels eft vne Ifle dans cefte 
mer douce longue d'enuiron trente lieues habitue des 
Outaouan, ce font peuples venus de la nation des 
cheueux releuez. Apres les Amikouai fur les mefmes 
riues du grand lac font les Oumifagai, qu'on paffe 
pour venir k Baouichtigouian, c'eft k dire, k la nation 
des gens du Sault, pource qu'en effedt il y a vn Sault 
qui fe iette en cet endroit dans la mer douce. Au 
delk de ce fault on trouue le petit lac, fur les bords 
duquel du coft6 du Nord font les Roquai. Au Nord 
de ceux-cy font les Mantoue, ces peuples ne nauigent 
guiere, viuans des fruidts de la terre, palfant ce plus 
petit lac on entre dans la feconde mer douce, fur les 
riues de laquelle font les Maroumine, plus auant en- 
core fur les [i 32] mefmes riues habitent les Ouinipigou 
peuples fedentaires qui font en grand nombre, quel- 
ques Fran9ois les appellet la Nation des Puans, k 
caufe que le mot Algonquin ouinipeg fignifie eau 
puante. Or ils nomment ainfi I'eau de la mer fal6e, 
li bien que ces peuples fe nommet Ouinipigou, pource 
qu'ils viennent des bords d'vne mer dot nous n'auons 
point de cognoiflance, & par confequent il ne faut 
pas les appeller la nation .des Puans, mais la nation 
de la mer, 6s enuirons de cette nation font les Na- 
dveliv, les Affinipour, les Eriniouaj, les Rafaouakoue- 
ton, & les Pouutouatami. Voila les noms d'vne 
partie des nations qui font au delk des riues du grand 
fleuue faindl Laurent, & des grands lacs des Hurons 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 231 

farther up, at the mouth of the river which comes 
from Lake Nipisin, are the Atchiligouan. Beyond, 
upon the same shores of this fresh-water sea, are the 
Amikouai, or the nation of the Beaver. To the 
South of these is an Island in this fresh-water sea 
about thirty leagues long, inhabited by the Outaouan ; 
these are people who have come from the nation of 
the raised hair. After the Amikouai, upon the same 
shores of the great lake, are the Oumisagai, whom 
we pass while proceeding to Baouichtigouian, — that 
is to say, to the nation of the people of the Sault, 
for, in fact, there is a Rapid, which rushes at this 
point into the fresh-water sea. Beyond this rapid 
we find the little lake, upon the shores of which, to 
the North, are the Roquai. To the North of these 
are the Mantoue, people who navigate very little, 
living upon the fruits of the earth. ^^ Passing this 
smaller lake, we enter the second fresh-water sea, 
upon the shores of which are the Maroumine ; and 
still farther, upon the [132] same banks, dwell the 
Ouinipigou, a sedentary people, who are very numer- 
ous; some of the French call them the " Nation of 
Stinkards," because the Algonquin word "ouinipeg " 
signifies ' ' bad-smelling water, ' ' and they apply this 
name to the water of the salt sea, — so that these peo- 
ples are called Ouinipigou because they come from 
the shores of a sea about which we have no knowl- 
edge; and hence they ought not to be called the 
nation of Stinkards, but the nation of the sea. In the 
neighborhood of this nation are the Naduesiu, the 
Assinipour, the Eriniouai, the Rasaouakoueton, and 
the Pouutouatami.^^ These are the names of a part 
of the nations which are beyond the shores of the 
great river saint Lawrence and of the great lakes of 


232 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. Ig 

du coft6 du Nord. le vifiteray tout maintenant le 
coft6 du Sud, ie diray en palTant que le fieur Nicolet 
interprete en langue Algonquine & Huronne, pour 
Meffieurs de la nouuelle Frace, m'a donne les noms 
de ces nations qu'il a vifite luy mefme pour la 
plufpart dans leur pays, tons ces peuples entendent 
r Algonquin, except^ les Hurons, qui ont [133] vne 
langue k part, comme aulfi les Ouinipigou ou gens de 
mer. On nous a dit cette annee qu'vn Algonquin 
voyageat au delk de ces peuples, a rencontre des 
nations extremement peuplees, ie les voyois difoit-il 
aflembles comme dans vne foire, achepter & vendre, 
en fi grand nombre qu'on ne les pouuoit compter, il 
donnoit vne idee des villes d' Europe, ie ne f9ay pas 
ce que s'en eft. Vifitons maintenant le cofl6 du Sud 
du grand. fleuue S. Laurent. 

Depuis fon embouchure iufques au fault S. Louis, 
on trouue les Sauuages du Cap Breton, les Souricois 
font plus auat dans les terres, on rencontre les Sau- 
uages de Mifcou & de Gafpe, entre les riues de la 
mer de I'Acadie, & le grand fleuue font les Eteche- 
mins, les Pentagouetch, les Abnaquiois, les Nahiga- 
niouetch, & quelques autres nations, mais elles font 
toutes bien petites. 

Depuis le fault S. Louis montant toufiours fur ce 
grand fleuue, on trouue de belles nations au Sud, & 
toutes fedentaires, & fort nombreufes, comme les 
Agneehrono, les Oneiochronon, le [134] Onontaeh- 
ronon, les Konkhandeenhronon, les Oniouenhronon, 
les Andaftoehronon, les Sonontouehronon, les Ando- 
ouanchronon, les Kontareahronon, les Ouendat, les 
Khionontatehronon, les Oherokouaehronon, les Aon- 
dironon, les Ongmarahronon, les Akhrakvaeronon, 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 233 

the Hurons on the North. I will now visit the 
Southern shores. I will say, by the way, that 
sieur Nicolet, interpreter of the Algonquin and 
Huron languages for the Gentlemen of new France, 
has given me the names of these nations, which 
he himself has visited, for the most part in their 
own country. All these peoples understand Algon- 
quin, except the Hurons, who have [133] a lan- 
guage of their own, as also have the Ouinipigou, or 
people of the sea. We have been told this year that 
an Algonquin, journeying beyond these peoples, en- 
countered nations extremely populous. " I saw them 
assembled," said he, " as if at a fair, buying and sell- 
ing, in numbers so great that they could not be 
counted ; " it conveyed an idea of the cities of Eu- 
rope. I do not know what there is in this. Let us 
now visit the Southern coast of the great river St. 
Lawrence. 

From its mouth up to the sault St. Louis are to be 
found the Savages of Cape Breton. The Souricois 
are farther inland ; we also meet the Savages of Mis- 
cou and Gaspe ; between the shores of the Acadian 
sea and the great river are the Etechemins, the Pen- 
tagouetch, the Abnaquiois, the Nahiganiouetch, and 
a few other nations, but they are all very small. ^^ 

Continuing to ascend this great river from the 
sault St. Louis, we find to the South very flourishing 
nations, all sedentary and very numerous, — such as the 
Agneehrono, the Oneiochronon, the [134] Onontaeh- 
ronon, the Konkhandeenhronon, the Oniouenhronon, 
the Andastoehronon, the Sonontouehronon, the An- 
doouanchronon, the Kontareahronon, the Ouendat, 
the Khionontatehronon, the Oherokouaehronon, the 
Aondironon, the Ongmarahronon, the Akhrakuaero- 


234 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 

les Oneronon, les Ehreflaronon, les Attiouendaronk, 
les Eriehronon, les Totontaratonhronon, les Ahriot- 
taehronon, les Ofcotiarahronon, les Hvattoehronon, 
les Skenchiohronon, les Attiflaehronon, les Ontarah- 
ronon, les Aoueatfiouaenhronon, les Attocliingoch- 
ronon, les Attiouendarankhronon. Toutes ces na- 
tions font fedentaires, comme i'ay defia dit, elles 
cultiuent la terre, & par confequent font remplies 
de peuples, i'ay tire leurs noms d'vne carte Huronne, 
que le Pere Paul Ragueneau m'a communique, il n'y 
a point de doute que ces peuples ne foient au Nord 
de la Virginie, de la Floride, & pent eftre encore de 
la nouuelle Mexique, voila vn beau champ pour les 
ouuriers Euangeliques & bien parfem6 de Croix, la 
plus [135] part de ces peuples entendent la langue 
Huronne. 

Le vingt-quatriefme iour de luin efl arriu6 icy vn 
Anglois auec vn fien feruiteur, conduits dans des ca- 
nots par vingt Sauuages Abnaquiois, il efl party du 
lac ou fleuue Quinibequi en Lacadie, ou les Anglois 
ont vne habitation, pour venir chercher quelque paf- 
fage par ces contr^es vers la mer du Nord, Monfieur 
le Gouuemeur en ayant ouy nouuelle, ne luy permit 
pas de venir "k Kebec, il I'enuoya garder par quelques 
foldats, luy enioignant de prefler fon retour, il s'en 
mit en deuoir, mais quelques vns des principaux Sau- 
uages qui I'auoient amenez eflans tombez malades, 
8c les riuieres ou ruilTeaux par ou il auoit pafTe eftat 
afleichees, il fe vint letter entre les mains des Fran- 
§ois, pour euiter la mort qu'il ne pouuoit quafi pas 
euiter au retour, tant ces chemins font horribles & 
epouuantables, Monfieur de Montmagny le fit con- 
duire a TadoufTac, pour aller rechercher I'Angleterre 
par la France. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 235 

non, the Oneronon, the Ehressaronon, the Attiouen- 
daronk, the Eriehronon, the Totontaratonhronon, the 
Ahriottaehronon, the Oscouarahronon, the Huattoeh- 
ronon, the Skenchiohronon, the Attistaehronon, the 
Ontarahronon, the Aoueatsiouaenhronon, the Atto- 
chingochronon, the Attiouendarankhronon. All 
these nations are sedentary, as I have already said.^^ 
They cultivate the land, and consequently are very 
populous. I have taken their names from a Huron 
map that Father Paul Ragueneau sent me. There 
is no doubt that these peoples are at the North of Vir- 
ginia, Florida, and perhaps even new Mexico. Here 
is a glorious field for Gospel laborers, and well strewn 
with Crosses. The greater [135] part of these tribes 
understand the Huron language. 

On the twenty-fourth day of June, an Englishman 
arrived here with one of his servants, brought in 
canoes by twenty Abnaquiois Savages. He departed 
from the lake or river Quinibequi in Lacadie, where 
the English have a settlement, to search for some 
route through these countries to the sea of the North. 
Monsieur the Governor, having learned of this, did 
not permit him to come to Kebec ; he sent him away, 
gfuarded by some soldiers, enjoining him to hasten 
his return. He set about doing so, but some of the 
principal Savages who had brought him having fallen 
sick, and the streams or brooks by which he had 
journeyed having dried up, he came and threw him- 
self into the hands of the French to avoid the death 
that he could scarcely escape on his return, so 
horrible and frightful are the roads. Monsieur de 
Montmagny had him taken to Tadoussac, that he 
might return to England by way of France. 

This good man related some wonderful things to 


236 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 

Ce bon homme nous racontoit des merueilles de la 
nouuelle Mexique, i'ay [136] apris difoit-il qu'on 
pent nauiger en ce pays la par les mers qui luy font 
au Nord, il y a deux ans que i'ay rod6 toute la cofte 
du Sud, depuis la Virginie iufques ^ Quinebiqui, 
pour clierclier fi ie ne trouuerois point quelque grande 
riuiere, ou quelque grand lac qui me conduiiit ^ des 
peuples qui eullent cognoiffance de cette mer qui eft 
au Nord du Mexique, n'en ayant point trouue ie fuis 
venu en ces pays cy, pour entrer dans Ie Saguen^, & 
pour penetrer fi ie pouuois auec les Sauuages du 
pays iufques k la mer du Nord ; ce pauure homme 
euft perdu cinquante vies s'il en euft eu autant, 
deuant que d'arriuer en cette mer du Nord, par Ie 
chemin qu'il fe figuroit, & quand il auroit trouu6 
cette mer, il n' auroit rien decouuert de nouueau, ny 
rencontre aucune ouuerture au nouueau Mexique, il 
ne faut pas eftre grand Geographe pour recognoiftre 
cette verity. 

Mais ie diray en paflant que nous auons de grandes 
probabilites, qu'on pent defcendre par Ie fecond 
grand lac des Hurons, & par les peuples que nous 
[137] auons nom^s dans cette mer qu'il clierchoit, Ie 
fieur Nicolet qui a Ie plus auant penetr6 dedans ces 
pays fi efloign6s, m'a affeur^ que s'il euft vogu6 trois 
iours plus auant fur vn grand fleuue qui fort de ce 
lac, qu'il auroit trouue la mer, or i'ay de fortes con- 
iedtures que c'eft. la mer qui refpond au Nord de la 
nouuelle Mexique, & que de cette mer, on auroit en- 
tree vers Ie lapon & vers la Chine, neantmoins comme 
on ne ffait pas ou tire ce grand lac, ou cette mer 
douce, ce feroit vne entreprife genereufe d'aller def- 
couurir ces contr6es. Nos Peres qui font aux 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 237 

US about new Mexico. " I have [136] learned," said 
he, " that one can sail to that country through seas 
that are North of it. For two years I have ranged 
the whole Southern coast, from Virginia to Quinebi- 
qui, seeking to find some great river or great lake 
that might lead me to peoples who had some knowl- 
edge of this sea which is to the North of Mexico. 
Not having found any, I came to this country to en- 
ter the Saguene, and penetrate, if I could, with the 
Savages of the country, to the North sea." This 
poor man would have lost fifty lives, if he had had so 
many, before reaching this North sea by the way he 
described; and, if he had found this sea, he would 
have discovered nothing new, nor found any passage 
to new Mexico. One need not be a great Geographer 
to recognize this fact. 

But I will say, in passing, that it is highly prob- 
able one can descend through the second great lake 
of the Hurons, and through the tribes that we [137] 
have named, into this sea that he was seeking. Sieur 
Nicolet, who has advanced farthest into these so dis- 
tant countries, has assured me that, if he had sailed 
three days' journey farther upon a great river 
which issues from this lake, he would have found the 
sea. Now I have strong suspicions that this is the 
sea which answers to that North of new Mexico, and 
that from this sea there would be an outlet towards 
Japan and China. Nevertheless, as we do not know 
whither this great lake tends, or this fresh-water sea, 
it would be a bold undertaking to go and explore 
those countries. Our Fathers who are among the 
Hurons, invited by some Algonquins, are about to 
extend their labors to the people of the other sea, of 
which I have spoken above. ^ Perhaps this voyage 


238 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.18 

Hurons inuites par quelques Algonquins, font fur le 
point de donner iufques k ces gens de 1' autre mer, 
dont i'ay parl6 cy-dellus, pent eftre que ce voyage fe 
referuera pour I'vn de nous qui auons quelque petite 
cognoillance de la langue Algonquine. 

On voit par ce que ie viens de dire, la grande eflen- 
due de pays, & le grand nombre de peuples qui n'ont 
point ouy parler de lefus-Chrifl. 

Et me femble que le temps viendra & qu'il eft 
della venu, auquel Dieu fe veut [138] faire cognoiftre 
^ vne partie de ces nations, on ne pent reuoquer en 
doute que le Pere Eternel ne veille mettre fon Fils 
en polTeffion de 1' heritage qu'il luy a promis, dabo tibi 
gentes hcereditatem tuam, doniinabitur h mari eofque \sc. 
ufque\ ad mare, il commandera depuis la mer du 
Nord, iufques k la mer du Sud, & h flumine eofque {sc. 
ufque'] ad terminos orbis terrarum, & depuis le grand 
fleuue de S. Laurens, qui eft le premier de tous les 
fleuues, iufques aux derniers confins de la terre, iuf- 
ques au dernieres limites de I'Amerique, & iufques 
aux Ifles du lapon, & vltra, & au delk, omnes gentes 
feruient ei, toutes les nations luy rendront hommage, 
animas pauperum faluas faciei, il fauuera les ames des 
pauures Sauuages, omnes gentes magnificabunt eum, 
tous les peuples le magnifieront, &■ replebitur Male fiat e 
eius omnis terra, fa Majefte remplira toute la terre, 
fiat, fiat. Et il y a de I'apparence, que nous en 
fommes 1^, veu le changement des coeurs, que Dieu 
fait en ces qua[r]tiers, en eftant follicite par vne infi- 
nite de fain(5tes ames, qui iour & nuidt employent 
leurs voeux & leurs prieres, aupres de fa diuine Ma- 
jefte pour [139] ce fubiet. Le zele auffi & la ferueur 
de ceux qui y contribuent, & s' off rent k y contribuer 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 289 

will be reserved for one of us who has some little 
knowledge of the Algonquin tongue. 

One sees, from what I have just said, the great 
extent of the country and the great number of peo- 
ples who have never heard of Jesus Christ. 

And it seems to me that the time will come, and 
that it has already come, when God will [138] make 
himself known to a part of these nations. We cannot 
call in question the truth that the Eternal Father 
wishes to put his Son into possession of the heritage 
that he has provided him; dabo tibi gentes hceredi- 
tat em. tuam, dominabitur d. mari usque ad mare, he shall 
rule from the North sea to the South sea, et a flumine 
usque ad terminos or bis terrarmn, and from the great 
river St. Lawrence, which is the chief of all rivers, 
to the remotest confines of the earth, even to the 
farthest boundaries of America and to the Islands of 
Japan, et ultra, and beyond ; omnes gentes servient ei, 
all the nations shall render him homage ; animas 
pauperum salvas faciet, he shall save the souls of the 
poor Savages; omnes gentes magnificabuyit eum, all 
peoples shall magnify him, et replebitur Majestate ejus 
omnis terra, his Majesty shall fill all the earth ; Jiat, 
fiat. And it seems that we are attaining this, con- 
sidering the change of hearts that God is effecting in 
these quarters, being solicited thereto by an infinite 
number of saintly souls, who day and night employ 
their vows and their prayers before his divine Majes- 
ty, for [139] this purpose. Moreover, the zeal and 
the fervor of those who contribute to this, and offer 
to contribute more and more, also give us strong 
assurance of this. It is not without design that God 
inspires so many good souls to assist with their means 
this infant Church, which cannot ascend towards 


240 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.18 

de plus en plus, nous en done auffi de grandes alTeu- 
rances. Ce n'eft pas fans deflein, que Dieu infpire 
tant de bonnes ames, ^ affifter de leurs moyes cette 
Eglife naiffante, qui ne peut s'efleuer vers le ciel, fi 
elle n'ell; fouftenue fur terre, ie veux dire, fi les biens 
temporels n'y font employes, & ne feruet d'attrait aux 
Sauuages, pour les retirer du milieu des bois, & leur 
donner quelque efperance de mieux en des demeures 
arreftees, oil ils puiffent eftre inflruidls. Ie n'ofe 
icy fpecifier ce que plufieurs y font, parce qu'ils m'ont 
fait entendre, qu'ils ne veulent auoir que Dieu pour 
tefmoin. Ceux qui auront deuotion de les imiter, 
ont par delk le P. Charles Lalemant Procureur de 
toutes nos miffios, qui fgaura bien leur dire ce qui 
fera le plus expedient, lors qu'il fera aduerty de leurs 
"bonnes intentions. Mais fi nous nous promettons le 
fecours des Princes & liberalitez des viuants, nous 
n'auons pas moins de fujet d'efperer que ceux qui 
nous ont honorez de leurs affedtions [140] & offerts 
leurs voeux k Dieu pour nous, durant le cours de 
cette vie, continuerot cet exercice dans le ciel; & ce 
d'autant plus volontiers, qu'ils en cognoitront mieux 
la neceflit^. C eft-icy que ie fens mon coeur atten- 
dry, & fe renouuellent tons les fentimens dont il fut 
faify ^ la nouuelle du deces de Monfleur Foucquet 
d'heureufe memoire, duquel il n'y a que Dieu, qui 
comprit les tedrelfes pour nos pauures Sauuages, 
I'eftime qu'il faifoit de cefte entreprife, le zele & les 
liberalitez auec lefquelles il en procuroit 1' execution, 
ie ne doute point que la perte d'vn homme, fi vtile ^ 
I'Eftat, & dont les adtions ont merit6 vne approba- 
tion fi vniuerfelle, n'ayt efte extraordinairement fen- 
fible h. I'ancienne France, mais elle me permettra de 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 241 

heaven if it is not sustained upon earth, — I mean, if 
temporal benefits are not employed to serve as an 
attraction to the Savages, to draw them out of the 
woods, and give them some hope of better things in 
established dwelling places, where they can be in- 
structed. I dare not specify what several are doing 
in this matter, because they have given me to under- 
stand that they wish God to be their only witness. 
Those who have the devout wish to imitate these 
have over yonder Father Charles Lalemant, Procuror 
of all our missions, who can very well tell them what 
will be most advisable, when he is informed of their 
good intentions. But if we promise ourselves the 
aid of Princes and the liberality of the living, we 
have no less reason to hope that those who have 
honored us with their kind interest [140] and offered 
their vows to God for us, during this life, will con- 
tinue this exercise in heaven, and all the more will- 
ingly as they will then better know the need for it. 
Here I feel my heart softened, and all those tender 
feelings are renewed with which it was filled at the 
tidings of the death of Monsieur Foucquet,^^ of happy 
memory, whose tenderness for our poor Savages, the 
value he placed upon this enterprise, the zeal and 
liberality with which he procured its execution, are 
comprehended by no one but God. I do not doubt 
that the loss of a man so useful to the State, and 
whose actions have merited so universal approbation, 
has been deeply felt by old France, but she will per- 
mit me to say that it has not been less felt by the new. 
The consolation of both is that uno avulso, non deficit 
alter; he has left a heritage not only of his reputation 
and offices, but also of his virtues, and especially of 
his zeal for the service of God in these countries. 


242 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.18 

dire qu'elle ne I'a pas moins eft6 ^ la notnielle, la 
confolation de I'vne & de I'autre eft que, vno auulfo, 
non deficit alter, il a laifl^ vn heritier non feulement 
de fa reputation & de fes charges, mais auffi de fes 
vertus, & particulierement de fon zele pour le feruice 
de Dieu, dans ces contrees. La crainte que i'ay de 
faire fouffrit la modeftie des [141] viuans, & de violer 
le fecret dent 1' obligation dure mefme apres la mort, 
ne me permettra dans d'en dire dauantage. 

Quant "k Meffieurs de la Nouuelle France, qui font 
de grand frais tous les ans, pour faire pafler en ces 
contr6es fi efloign6es de 1' Europe, les chofes necef- 
faires pour y fubfifter; ils nous obligent toufiours 
infiniment en cela; comme auffi en ce qu'ils ont ac- 
cord6 mefme faueurs aux Sauuages Chreftiens, qui 
fe rendront fedentaires qu'aux Franjois, ie les en re- 
mercie de tout mon coeur, & les coniure de perfeuerer 
das leurs faueurs. Et fur ce propos, ils me permet- 
tront s'il leur plaift, de leur dire icy quatre petites 
paroles, la plus faine partie de leurs corps s'eft iett^e 
dans leur alTociation, non tant pour retirer les biens 
periffables de ce nouueau monde, que pour cooperer 
puiflamment au falut de ces peuples, or puifque 
Dieu fauorife leur premier delfein, appellant ces 
pauures barbares k foy par leur entremife, il me fem- 
ble qu'ils ont fubiet de fe rellouir, & de benir celuy 
qui leur accorde la fin plus noble qu'ils pretendoient, 
les choififfant pour [142] procurer vn fi grand ou- 
urage. Que fi les fruidts de ces grandes terres que 
le Roy leur a donn^e ne correfpondent pas k leurs 
defpenfes exceffiues, ie ne croy pas que le Dieu du 
ciel, duquel ils ont procure & procureront encor la 
gloire, s'oublie d'eux. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 243 

My fear of offending the modesty of the [141] living, 
and of violating the secret which continues binding 
even after death, will not permit me to say more. 

As for the Gentlemen of New France, who every 
year are at great expense in bringing over to these 
countries so remote from Europe, the supplies neces- 
sary for subsistence here, they always infinitely 
oblige us in this matter, as also in their having ac- 
corded the same favors to the Christian Savages who 
shall make themselves sedentary, as to the French. 
I thank them for this with all my heart, and adjure 
them to persevere in their favors. And in regard to 
this they will permit me, if they please, to say here 
a few modest words. Their best energies are lav- 
ished upon their association, — not so much for the 
sake of deriving perishable goods from this new 
world, as to cooperate efficiently in the salvation of 
these peoples. Now since God favors their chief 
purpose, calling these poor barbarians to himself 
through their agency, it seems to me that they have 
reason to rejoice and to bless him who grants them 
the most noble object for which they are striving, 
choosing them to [142] accomplish so great a work. 
And if the fruits of these broad lands that the King 
has given them do not correspond to their excessive 
outlay, I do not think that the God of heaven, whose 
glory they have procured and will procure, will for- 
get them. 

How the spirit of God is working ! I was wishing 
that some one would do at the three Rivers what we 
were doing at St. Joseph near Kebec. Several Algon- 
quins presented themselves to form a settlement, and 
we lacked the means for this. The God of heaven, 
who saw our weakness, inclined toward us the arms 


244 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.18 

Que I'efprit de Dieu eft agiffant, ie fouhaittois que 
quelqu'vn fit aux trois Riuieres, ce que nous faifons 
k S. lofeph proche de Kebec, plufieurs Algonquins 
fe prefentoient pour s'arrefter, & nous manquions de 
forces, le Dieu du ciel qui voyoit nos foibleffes, nous 
difpofoit des bras d'amour & de charite, vne perfonne 
de merite & de condition, a faidt paffer cette ann^e 
quatre hommes, k ce deffein, pour def richer & pour 
baftir. 

Reftoit encor ^ pouruoir k la Riuiere des prairies 
on croit icy que fi on dreffe la quelque habitation, 
plufieurs Sauuages y aborderont de diners endroits. 
Nous apprenons par la flotte de cette ann6e, que 
des perfonnes de vertu & de courage, font en refolu- 
tion d'y enuoier nombre d' hommes I'an prochain, ils 
ont defia fait paflier des viures pour ce deffein, [143] 
n'eft-il pas done vray que Dieu fraie le chemin aux 
pauures Sauuages, pour les attirer dans les filets de 
I'Euangile. Ouy, mais dira quelqu'vn cette entre- 
prife eft plaine de depences & de difficultez, ces 
Meffieurs trouueront des montagnes oil ils pefent 
trouuer des vallees, i'ay defia dit cent fois, que tons 
ceux qui trauaillent fous I'eftendart de lefus-Chrift, 
pour luy amener des ames, feminant in lacrimis, ie 
ne diray pas a ces Meffieurs qu'ils trouueront des 
chemins parfem^s de rofes, la croix, les peines & les 
grands frais, font les pierres fondamentales de la mai- 
fon de Dieu. An refte fi iamais les Fran9ois s'efta- 
bliffent en cet endroit, i'efpere que les Sauuages qui 
ont autrefois habite cette contr^e, & qui font montes 
plus haut pour la crainte de leurs ennemis, retourne- 
ront dans leur ancien pays, ou ils trouueront la vie 
de I'ame, n'y cherchans que la vie du corps. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 245 

of love and charity ; a personage of merit and rank 
has caused four men to be brought over this year for 
the purpose of clearing and building. 

It remains now to provide for the River des prai- 
ries. It is thought here that if a habitation is erected 
there, many Savages will come to it from different 
places. 

We learn, through this year's fleet, that some brave 
and virtuous persons have resolved to send hither a 
number of men next year, having already sent over 
supplies for this purpose. [143] Is it not true that 
God opens the way to the poor Savages, to attract 
them into the Gospel nets? " Yes," some one will 
say, * ' but this enterprise is full of expenses and diffi- 
culties ; these Gentlemen will find mountains where 
they expect to find valleys." I have already said a 
hundred times that all those who work under the 
standard of Jesus Christ, to lead souls to him, semi- 
nant in lacrimis. I will not tell these Gentlemen that 
they will find the way strewn with roses; the cross, 
hardships, and great expenses are the foundation 
stones of the house of God. Moreover, if ever the 
French establish themselves in this place, I hope that 
the Savages who formerly inhabited this region, and 
who have gone farther up the river, for fear of their 
enemies, will return to their old country, where they 
will find the life of the soul, while seeking only the 
life of the body. 

This is not all. If ever we are at peace with the 
tribes of the South, — which will be very easily 
effected if some Hollanders cede what they have 
usurped [144] in Acadia upon the territory of his 
Majesty, for this coast belongs to new France, — the 
settlement which will be found at the River des prai- 


246 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 18 

Ce n'eft pas tout, fi iamais nous fommes en paix 
auec les peuples du Midy, ce qui fe fera bien ayfe- 
ment, fi quelques Hollandois cedent ce qu'ils ont 
vfurpe [144] en I'Acadie fur les terres de fa Majefl6, 
car cette cofte eft de la nouuelle France, 1' habitation 
qui fe fera en la Riuiere des prairies, donnera vn 
facile accez a tons ces peuples qui font en nombre & 
fedentaires. Madame la Ducheffe d'Aiguillon m'en 
efcrit de fa grace, & me promet de s'y emploier, 
comme elle a defia commance; d'ou reuffira vn bien 
nompareil pour ces pauures contrees ; & il n'y aura 
que Dieu feul qui foit capable de recompenfer cette 
faindte & forte entreprife. 

C'eft ce qui faidt que nous nous portons k de nou- 
uelles decouuertures, nos Peres qui font au pays des 
Hurons, combattans tous les iours contre la mort, & 
contre les demons, ne fcauroient s'arrefter, ils par- 
lent d'aller h. la nation du petun, k la nation neutre, 
k la nation des gens de mer, ceux qui trauaillent 
pour les Algonquins veulent eftre de la partie, Dieu 
leur prefente des Sauuages qui fauorifent leurs def- 
feins, il remue leurs coeurs, & anime leur courage. 

II me femble que quand ie mis le pied en ces con- 
trees, il y auoit moins d'apparence [145] que les Sau- 
uages qui ont receu lefus-Chrift, fe deufCent arrefter 
& fe foufmettre k fes loix que ie n'en voy, pour vne 
partie des nations dont i'ay fait mention cy-delTus. 
Pourquoy done les defefperons-nous? ouy, mais tout 
le monde n'eft pas dans ces fentimens Ik, ie refpond 
excepte ceux qui ne voyent les Sauuages qu'en 
paflant, & au lieu ou ils ne font pas encor inltruidts, 
excepte quelques efprits mefcontens, & malfaits qui 
blafphemant, qucecumgue ignorant, qui condamnent ce 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 247 

ries will give an easy access to all these tribes, which 
are numerous and sedentary. Madame the Duchess 
d'Aiguillon has graciously written to me, and prom- 
ised to interest herself therein, as she has already be- 
gun to do, — whence will arise a matchless good for 
these poor countries. There is no one save God 
alone who is capable of rewarding this holy and brave 
enterprise. 

It is this that impels us to new discoveries. Our 
Fathers who are in the Huron country, combating 
daily against death, and against the demons, cannot 
rest. They talk of going to the tobacco nation, to 
the neutral nation, to the nation of the people of the 
sea. Those who work among the Algonquins wish 
to participate in this work. God presents them Sav- 
ages who favor their designs ; he stirs their hearts, 
and animates their courage. 

It seems to me that when I set foot in these coun- 
tries there was less probability [145] that the Sav- 
ages who have received Jesus Christ would settle 
down and submit to his laws, than I see in regard to 
a part of the nations I have mentioned above. Why, 
then, shall we despair of them? Yes, but not every 
one entertains such sentiments. I answer that, — ex- 
cept those who see the Savages only for a short time, 
and in places where they are not yet instructed, and 
except some discontented and perverse minds, who 
blaspheme qucscui7tque ignorant, who condemn what 
they do not see, and what they think they see, — 
there is no one here who does not admire and bless 
God in the conversion of the Savages. Do you wish 
me to speak plainly? When I regard, with my own 
eyes of flesh, the innumerable expenses that must be 
incurred in order to succeed in this enterprise, the 


248 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.18 

qu'ils ne voyent pas, & qu'ils penfent voir, il n'y a 
perfonne icy qui n'admire & ne beniffe Dieu dans la 
conuerfion des Sauuages. Voulez-vous que ie vous 
parle nettement, quand ie regarde auec mes yeux de 
chair, les frais innombrables qu'il faut faire pour ve- 
nir a bout de cette entreprife, les peines, les trauaux, 
les fouffrances, les croix, les dangers, les morts, les 
calomnies qui fe rencontrent, & qui fe rencontreront 
de plus en plus, & de toutes parts, en ce chemin oti 
nous nous iettons, quand ie contemple auec ces mef- 
mes yeux la legerete, I'inconftance, & la barbaric 
[146] des Sauuages, ie tremble, ie fuis foible comme 
vn rofeau, ie n'ay plus de coeur, tout me femble bafty 
fur Ie fable mouuant, mais quand ie releue ma pen- 
f6e & que ie la iette en lefus-Chrift, & que ie I'enui- 
fage auec les yeux de la foy, & de la confiance, quand 
ie confidere ce qu'il a fait, «& ce qu'il fait tons les iours 
pour fauuer ces pauures ames, ie fuis tout puiffant, 
ces difficultez m'animent, & tout cet ouurage me 
femble fonde fur la pierre vine, petra autem erat Chri- 
Jitis, ie parle dans les fentimens de tous ceux que 
Dieu a appell6 k cette vigne, dont ie fuis Ie moindre. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 249 

pain, the labors, the sufferings, the crosses, the dan- 
gers, the deaths, the slanders that must be encoun- 
tered, — and that will have to be encountered more 
and more, and from all sides, in this road where we 
have cast ourselves, — when I contemplate with these 
same eyes the frivolity, the inconstancy, and the 
barbarity [146] of the Savages, I tremble, — I am as 
weak as a reed, I have no more heart ; all seems to 
me to be built upon the shifting sand. But when I 
lift up my thoughts, and cast them upon Jesus Christ, 
and when I look at him with the eyes of faith and 
confidence, when I consider what he has done, and 
what he is doing every day to save these poor souls, — 
I am all-powerful, — these difficulties animate me; 
and all this work seems to me to be founded upon 
the living rock, petra autem erat Christus. I express 
the sentiments of all those whom God has called to 
this vineyard, of whom I am the least. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL XVIII 

XXXVIII -XL 

These three documents are letters in Italian, sent 
to Rome, from the Huron country, by Father Joseph 
Marie Chaumonot, — the first (May 24, 1640) to the 
Father General, the other two (May 26 and August 
3, 1640) to Father Philippe Nappi, superior of the 
professed house at Rome. In 1858, Father Felix 
Martin found them in the Society archives, then pre- 
served in Rome, and made copies of them ; but these 
apographs cannot now be found with the other Martin 
papers in the archives of St. Mary's College, Mont- 
real. We follow the French translation, made by 
Martin, and published in Carayon's Premiere Mission 
des Jesuit es au Canada, where they are numbered xiv., 
XV., and xvi. respectively; our English translation is 
from the French. 

XLI 

The Relation of 1640 (Paris, 1641), although having 
only Vimont's name on the title-page, is in reality 
a composite. His share in the publication seems to 
have been solely that of editor. He succeeded Le 
Jeune as superior in 1639, ^^^ became responsible 
for the Relations Mn'i-A 1645, when he was in turn suc- 
ceeded by Jerome Lalemant. Part I. was prepared 
by Le Jeune, and is signed " A Kebec, en la nou- 
uelle France, ce 10 de Septembre 1640." Part. II. 
is the report on the Huron mission by Jerome Lale- 


252 LES RELA TIONS DES JASUITES 

mant, which is dated " Des Hurons, ce 27 de May 
1640," and contains a postscript that is dated " Des 
Hurons, ce 3. d'Aoufl 1640," 

For the text of this annual, we have had recourse 
to a copy of the original Cramoisy edition in the 
Lenox Library. The Relation is usually designated 
as " H. 'j^,'" because described in Harrisse's Notes, 
no. ^6. 

Collation: Title with verso blank, i leaf; " Priui- 
lege " (signed 20th September, Le Jeune's letter of 
loth September having, of course, not yet arrived in 
Paris), with " Permiffion " on the verso, i leaf; 
" Table" to Part L, pp. (2); " Table" to Part IL, 
pp. (2) ; Le Jeune's Relation, pp. i - 197, with the verso 
of p. 197 blank, — followed by Lalemant's Huron 
Relation, which consists of: half-title, with verso 
blank, i leaf; text, pp. 1-196, as numbered; one 
blank leaf. The signatures are: a in four, A-M in 
eights, N in four, aa-mm in eights, nn in four, the 
last leaf being a blank. There is no mispaging in 
Le Jeune's section; but in Lalemant's, pp. 9, 80, and 
193-198 are misnumbered 10, 74, and 191 - 196. We 
have examined several copies which agree even with 
regard to turned letters, e.g.. Part L, p. 113, 1. 17 — 
"I'enfej." But we have discovered the following 
peculiarity in Le Jeune's Relation — p. 154, 1. 26, 
reads in one copy : ' ' Itavichpich nous a grandement, ' ' 
and in the other: " Itaovichpich nous a gradement." 

Copies of this Relation may be found in the follow- 
ing libraries : Lenox (both variations). Harvard, Brown 
(private), Laval University (Quebec), and British Mu- 
seum. Copies have been sold or priced as follows: 
Harrassowitz (1882), no. 27, priced at 125 marks; 
O'Callaghan (1882), no. 1219, sold for $15 — it had 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XVIII 253 

cost him $26; Quaritch, General Catalogue, vol. v., no. 
30005, priced at £\^\ Dufosse (1891), priced at 150 
francs; Chadenat, of Paris, priced (1892 and 1897) at 
160 and 150 francs, respectively. 


NOTES TO VOL XVIII 


( Figures in parentheses, following number of note, refer to pages 
of English text.) 

I (p. 13). — Pierre Joseph Marie Chaumonot was bom Mar. 9, 1611, 
in a village of Burgundy, France. While a lad, he wandered into 
Italy, and finally, at the age of twenty-one, resolved to enter the 
Jesuit order, in which he became a novice May 18, 1632, at Rome. 
In that city his priestly studies were pursued, interrupted by two 
years (1635-37) spent as an instructor at Fermo. In 1639, he was 
assigned to the Canadian mission, and immediately went to the Hu- 
ron country. In November, 1640, he undertook, with Brebeuf, a 
mission to the Neutral Nation, where they remained five months, 
until — suffering the utmost hardships, and threatened on every side 
with death — they were obliged to return to Ste. Marie. Chaumo- 
not then labored at the missions, successively, of St. Jean Baptiste, 
St. Michel, and La Conception ; of the last-named, he had charge 
when the Hurons were dispersed by the Iroquois (1649), whereupon 
he followed his disciples in their flight to Isle St. Joseph (now 
Charity Island), in Lake Huron. Finding this retreat no longer 
safe from their enemies, the Hurons, in the summer of 1650, took 
refuge at Quebec ; and, in March following, they were established 
on the isle of Orleans by the Jesuits, on an estate purchased by 
them from Eleonore de Grandmaison (vol. xi., note 12). This 
colony was under Chaumonot' s care; it numbered at first about 400, 
but was soon increased, by other refugees, to about 600 souls. In 
September, 1655, Chaumonot went with Dablon to the Onondaga 
mission, and labored among the Iroquois tribes during the next 
three years. Returning to Quebec, he again took charge of his 
Huron colony — remaining in this post thirty-five years longer, ex- 
cept one year in Quebec (1663-64), and two years (1664-66) at Fort 
Richelieu as chaplain of its garrison. In the autumn of 1692, he 
was compelled to give up his charge and retire to Quebec, by a 
lingering illness which finally ended his life, Feb. 21, 1693. 

By the command of his superior, Chaumonot wrote his autobiog- 
raphy (1688), which will be given in this series. He is best known 
by his works on the Huron language, in which he was unusually 
proficient. An English translation (by Wilke) of his Huron gram- 


256 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 

mar (written in Latin) was published in Quebec Lit. and Hist. Soc. 
Trans., vol. ii. (1831), pp. 94-198. 

2 (p. 35). — This name — Calmonotti, as misprinted by Carayon — 
was simply an Italianized form of Chaumonot's name, the root of 
which means "bald" (Lat. calvus). — A. E. Jones, S.J. 

3 (P- 37)- — Luigi de Gonzaga was born at Castiglione, Italy, in 
156S, and became a Jesuit at the age of eighteen. He did not live, 
however, to complete his training for the priesthood; for in 1591, an 
epidemic appearing in Rome, he so devoted himself to the care of 
the sick and dying that he fell a victim to the pestilence. He was 
canonized in 1626, under the name of St. Aloysius. 

4 (P- 37)- — The holy house of Lorette : the Santa Casa, — accord- 
ing to tradition, the house of the Virgin Mary at Nazareth, which 
was discovered by Empress Helena, about 308 A. D. ; upon the ruin 
and subjugation of Palestine by the Turks, this house was miracu- 
lously transported (May, 1 291) to Tersate, in Dalmatia, and again 
(1294) in like manner to Loreto, its present location. This is a city 
of about 8,000 population, in the Marches of Italy, 13 miles N. E. of 
Macerata, and three miles from the Adriatic. The Santa Casa 
stands within a magnificent church, and its original rough bricks 
are entirely encased in white marble, exquisitely sculptured. Rich 
and costly gifts have been lavished upon it, and ' ' its treasury of 
offerings is one of the richest in the Western world." Among these 
are certain gifts presented in 1684 by the Christian Hurons of Cana- 
da. In this house is a statue of the Virgin, in cedar wood, said to 
have been made in the time of the Apostles. About 40,000 pilgrims 
visit it annually. This shrine and its devotions were especially 
favored by the Jesuits. — See McClintock & Strong's Bibl. Cyclop., 
art. "Loretto;" and " Maison de Lorette," in L'Abeille, vol. viii. 
(i860), nos. 27-29. 

5 (p. 65). — Ren6 Menard was born at Paris, Sept. 7, 1605, and 
became a Jesuit novice Nov. 7, 1624. He was a student at Paris, 
La Fleche, Bourges, and Rouen, successively ; and an instructor at 
Orleans (1629-32) and Moulins (1636-39). In 1640, he came to Cana- 
da ; and, after spending a year in the study of Algonkin, accom- 
panied Ragueneau to the Huron country. Upon Raymbault's 
return from Sault Ste. Marie (vol. xi., note 16), Menard started with 
him to the country of the Nipissings, but they were driven back by 
storms. In April, 1642, however, M6nard and Pijart succeeded in 
reaching that tribe, with whom they remained till Sept., 1643. Me- 
nard was connected with the Huron mission until its destruction in 
1649, 3.fter which he was stationed at Three Rivers, becoming supe- 
rior of that residence in June, 1651. From May, 1656, to March, 1658, 
he was a laborer in the Iroquois mission, — at the latter date, being 


NOTES TO VOL. XVIII 257 

compelled, with the other missionaries, to flee for their lives to Quebec. 
In August, 1660, Menard was sent with a party of Ottawa Indians 
who were returning from Montreal to their home on Lake Superior. 
He spent the winter with them, probably in the neighborhood of the 
present L'Anse, Mich., suffering great hardships and privations, — 
harshly treated by most of the Indians, though converting a few of 
them and baptizing some at the point of death. Hearing, in the 
following spring, that some Hurons who had fled from their Iroquois 
foes had encamped about the headwaters of the Black River in 
Wisconsin, Menard set out to visit them. Near the end of the jour- 
ney, he became separated from his French companion, and was 
seen no more, — doubtless perishing of hunger in the unknown forest 
(August, 1661). — See Campbell's excellent monograph on Menard, 
Parkman Club Pubs. (Milw.), no. 11. 

6 (p. 65). — Concerning the relations between the Ursulines of 
Paris and of Tours, cf. vol. xvi., pp. 15-17; also Chapot's Marie de 
V Incarnation, t. i., pp. 318-320, 354, 355. 

7 (p. 87). — Piraube was royal notary at Quebec, during the years 
1639-43; other information about him is not available. 

8 (p. 91). — For sketch of De la Poterie, see vol. viii., note 58. 

9 (p. 93). — Gribane : "a bark with mast and sails, of 50 or 60 
tons, in use along the coasts of Normandy and Picardy, and in the 
navigation of the lower Seine, from Rouen to Havre " (Littre). 

10 (p. 115). — Outakw' ainiwek (Outagoumois): a tribe living in 
the vicinity of Lake Outakouami, N. E. of L. Mistassini, as indicated 
on various maps of that time. Some of these make it the source of 
the Peribonca River ; in which case, it would be the modern Lake 
Ouichtagani (Bouchette's map, 1846). 

11 (p. 115). — Papiragaw'ek: the Papinachois, a Montagnais 
tribe located far to the N. E. of Lake St. John, mainly about the 
headwaters of the Betsiamites River. They were at various times 
visited by Jesuit missionaries from the Tadoussac mission; and 
Nouvel spent several years among them (1664-67). 

12 (p. 219). — Concerning Champlain's attacks on the Iroquois, see 
vol. v., note 50. 

13 (p. 227). — Concerning Eskimos, see vol. ii., note 10; Brinton's 
American Race (N. Y., 1891), pp. 59-64; and Bur. of Ethnol. 
Rep., 1884-85, 1887-88. 

Bersiamites : a Montagnais tribe, dwelling on the northern trib- 
utaries of the St. Lawrence, below Tadoussac. Le Jeune mentions 
some of them (vol, viii., p. 41) as having been perfidiously slain 
(1635) by the savages of Tadoussac. A missionary (probably Jacques 
de la Place) wrote in the Relation of 1646 that "a mortal hatred 
existed between the Bersiamites and the savages of Acadia and 


258 LES RELA TIONS DES jtS UITES 

Gaspe; " he was present, in that year, at a conference held between 
these tribes, at which a treaty of peace was concluded. The mis- 
sionaries found the Bersiamites gentle and docile ; Bailloquet visited 
them in 1661-62, and probably, in subsequent years, other priests 
from the Tadoussac mission. The tribe was also known as Ouma- 
miwek. 

Peupies de Chisedech : dwelling near the Bersiamites. and allied 
to them. 

Regarding the Pore-Epics, see vol. xiv., no^e 13. 

14 (p. 229). — Concerning the Petite Nation, the Island tribe, and 
the Iroquets (here named Ountchatarounounga), see vol. v., noies 
52, 56, 57- 

" Ouaouechkairini : these were the Algonkins proper, and prob- 
ably were called ' Petite Nation ' on account of their low stature. 
The Petite Nation River in Ottawa county, Que., and the Little 
Nation River in Prescott county, Ont., — tributaries of the Ottawa 
from opposite sides, — preserve the name of this tribe, and show 
their original location. " — A. F. Hunter. 

Kotakoutouemi: Laverdiere conjectures this to be the Outaou- 
kotwemiwek mentioned in Relation of 1650, chap, v., "whose lan- 
guage is a medley of Algonquin and Montagnais. " Apropos of this 
linguistic feature, Perland says {Cours d'Htstoire, vol. i., p. 91): 
' ' There existed, among the Algonqums and Montagnais, a sort of 
patois, by means of which they held communication among them- 
selves without the Europeans being able to understand them." 

Mataouchkarini : the Relation of 1672 mentions this tribe as then 
living near Hudson Bay, apparently having fled thither for refuge 
from their enemies. Their earlier habitat, as indicated by their 
name, was the Madawaska River of Ontario. 

" Sagahiganirini : their location may have been near the Rideau 
range of lakes, where numerous remains exist. Dr. T. W. Beeman 
of Perth, Ont., who has examined these remains, says: 'Every 
small lake shows one or more village sites. ' One of considerable 
size existed at Rideau Lake itself, where the Tay River empties 
into it. Here have been found evidences of an extended occupa- 
tion, lasting down to the arrival of white traders, as a few traces 
of European intercourse are found there. See Beeman's accounts 
in Ont. Arch. Mus. Ann. Rep. (Fifth, Seventh, and Eighth). 

" Kinounchepirini: the situation of these was probably in Ren- 
frew county, Ontario, where the valleys of tributaries of the Ottawa 
River contain remains of former Indian towns. A number of relics 
from that district are in the Ontario Archaeological Museum at 
Toronto." — A. F. Hunter. 

15 (p. 229). — These Algonkin tribes extended from Lake Temis- 


NOTES TO VOL. XVIII 259 

earning westward to Hudson Bay. The largest and most important 
was the Kiristinon or Cristinaux, a name afterward shortened to 
that now given them, Cri or Cree. Druillettes and Dablon estab- 
lished a mission among them in 1661, and Allouez was there in 1667. 
Brinton says {Amer. Race, p. 74) that this tribe "retained the lan- 
guage of the stock in its purest form." 

"Timiscimi: a name derived from that of Lake Temiscaming {fetm's 
garni, ' deep lake"). Remains of early Indian occupation are found 
near the Old Fort, at the northern end of this lake ; but the above 
name has not been continuously retained by any distinct tribe. " — 
A. F. Hunter. 

16 (p. 231). — The Atchiligouan, at the mouth of French River, 
were visited by Garreau and Claude Pi j art in 1646. 

The Oumisagai (now Mississaguas) were in 1670-73 a part of the 
Sault Ste. Marie mission; and Nouvel and Andre were then laboring 
among them. A. F. Hunter says: "This is the earliest reference 
to the Mississaguas. They are now settled in Eastern Ontario, at 
New Credit, Alnwick, and other points, and number in all about 
800." — See Chamberlain's account of this tribe, in Journ. Amer. 
Folk-Lore, vol. 1., pp. 150-160. 

Baouichtigoiiian : called by the French Gens du Saut, or Sau- 
teurs, because of their residence about the Sault de Ste. Marie; 
now known as Ojibwas, or Chippewas. The Relation of 1670 says 
that, becoming reduced to the number of 150, they formed a union 
with three other neighboring tribes, the Nouquet, Outchibous, and 
Marameg. A. F. Hunter says: "A band of Algonkins, now at 
Sault Ste. Marie, Ont., is known as the Batchewaung tribe, — this 
being still the native name of that town (written also Pow-e-ting). 
It is not probable, however, that these Indians are the descendants 
of those mentioned in the text, — few tribes, owing to wars, migra- 
tions, and other causes, retaining their original locations. It is 
thought by some writers that the Sauteux of Lake Superior, and 
westward, are the descendants of the original Nation du Sault; see, 
for instance, Maclean's Canadian Savage Folk (Toronto, 1896), 
p. 171." 

Concerning the Amikouai (Beavers), see vol. x., Jtote 6; the Otta- 
was, vol. xiv., 7iote 9. 

17 (p. 231). — Ouinipigou= Winnebagoes (vol. xv., note 7): Nadue- 
siu = Sioux; Assinipour = Assiniboines. All these are branches of 
the Dakota stock. 

Maroumine = Menomonees; Eriniouai:= Illinois; Pouutouatami = 
Pottawatomies, — all Algonkin tribes. Rasouakoueton is probably 
equivalent to Mascoutins, R being a misprint for M. 

18 (p. 233). — Concerning the tribes of Gaspe, Acadia, and Maine, 


260 LES RELA TIONS DES J£SUITES 

see vols, i.-iii. of this series. Souricois = Micmacs; Pentagouetch = 
Penobscots; Etechemins = Tarratines. On the Abenakis, see vol. 
xii., note 22. 

Nahiganiouetch : the Mahicans or Mohicans, occupying the ter- 
ritory between the Connecticut and Hudson Rivers, and allied with 
the Pequots ; of Algonkin stock. 

19 (p. 235). — For sketches of the Huron-Iroquois tribes, see vol. 
viii., jto/e 34. 

Kontareahronon : apparently the inhabitants of the Huron village 
of Contarea (vol. x., 7iote 8). Ouendat (Wyandot): the general 
appellation of the Huron clans (vol. ii., note 58 and vol. v., note 17). 
" Aondiro7ion : that part of the Neutrals who lived nearest to the 
Hurons; destroyed by the Senecas in 1648 (^Relation of 1648). 
C«^wara^r<7«£'« [apparently a misprint for Onguiarahronon] : the 
Niagara portion of the Neutrals. Oneronon : probably the Wen- 
rohronons, part of whom took refuge with the Hurons in 1639." — 
A. F. Hunter. 

Attiouendaronk : the Neutrals (vol. viii., note 41). Sanson's 
map (1656) gives two locations for this tribe, — one, west of the Nia- 
gara ; the other, far south of Lake Erie, and west of the Alleghany 
Mountains. This, and the similar duplication of names in the pres- 
ent text, suggest the possibility that a part of this nation had fled 
southward, to escape the Iroquois. 

Totontaratotihronon : Laverdiere conjectures that this may be 
the Atontrataronnons, an Algonkin tribe who, a little later, fled 
from the St. Lawrence to the Huron country. Among them, Me- 
nard established the mission of Ste. Elizabeth (Huron Relation of 
1644, chap. viii.). 

In any attempt to identify the names of Indian tribes, as recorded 
at so remote a time, there are many difficulties, which must not be 
forgotten by the modern reader of an enumeration like that here 
given by Le Jeune. No Indian tongue was written, at the time of 
the missionaries' arrival ; and they, in their attempts to learn and 
write a language utterly different from any they had hitherto 
known, were met by almost insuperable obstacles, — as we are told 
by Biard (vol. ii., pp. 9-13; iii., pp. 193-197), and by Le Jeune in 
earlier Relations {yo\. v., pp. 111-115; vii., pp. 21-33). Many of 
the tribes enumerated in the text were known to the French only 
through the reports of wandering Indians, fur traders, or coureurs 
de bois, — most of them ignorant men; and these names could be 
only phonetically noted, — with great liability to misunderstand- 
ing, on the part of both Frenchman and Indian. At the same time, 
as may be seen in the text, these names were often transmitted 
through other tribes, especially the Huron ; and when we add to all 


NOTES TO VOL. XVIII 261 

these complexities the frequent shifting of residence, on the part of 
the tribesmen, it will be seen that great caution is necessary in 
attempting to identify either tribes or locations through their names 
alone. 

20 (p. 237).— This refers to the voyage of Jogues and Raymbault 
to Sault Ste. Marie (vol. xi., note 16). 

21 (p. 241). — This was Francois Fouquet, viscount de Vaux, who 
was born in 1587, and died Apr. 22, 1640. He was a member of the 
royal council, and also of parliament; and, for his integrity and 
ability, was held in high esteem by Louis XIII. and Richelieu, who 
employed him in many State affairs of importance. He was father 
of Nicolas Fouquet, the noted minister of finance under Louis XIV. 








^'ipsi^-^^ 



