Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 1: Acadia, 1610-1613
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1896 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits01jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits01jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits01jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 1 of 73.

---

w 
CJ= 

 
 ..... 
c5 
 0 
U (J) 

 = 
 Õ 

 = C\I 
u=..... 

 - (O 
"': =-- 0 
fJI- 
LL.=..... 
o (0 

 ...... 

 ..... 

 M 
z
 
=> 


I:
 


'1 



 
t 
$ i 


, l 


. I 
,: , 
t J 
. .f) 
 of 
. .
 \ .., 


j 
. 



'7."ti,
 

. :tl

t: 
t ..... 
, 


'II 


IJU 
If 
n I 
Itm( III If 
ih u 
I H, J {. 


.', 
.\\ 
t. :t" 
. 


". 


t. 
ot 


, f Ii 


j II 
I 


u 


JlI 




F:: 

 I ï 
· J uïJ: 
\ g 
 
 
v. I 
S f/1 ft 



VOL. I 


THE JESUIT RELATIONS 


AND 


ALLIED DOCUMENTS 



The editi01l C01lsists of sev- 
en Illwdred and fifty sets 
all 1l1111lbered 


No. &-3....... 



t 66 t+3 


The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 


TRAVELS AND EXPLORATIONS 
OF THE JESUIT l\1ISSIONARIES 
IN NE\V FRANCE 


1610- 1 79 1 


THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES; ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 


EDITED BY 


REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 


Vol. I 
ACADIA: 1610- 1613 


CLEVELAND: ttbe ]3UftOWa :l3rotbere 
Compan
, PUBLISHERS. M DCCC XCVI 



COPYRIGHT, 1896 
BY 
THE BURROWS BROTHERS Co 


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 


The IlIlþerial Press, CÜvelalzd 



EDITORIAL STAFF 


Editor REUBEN GOLD THW AITES 


Translator from the 
French J OH!\'" CUTLER COVERT 
Assistant Translator from 
the French 11:ARV SIFTON PEPPER 


Translators from the 
Latin 
Translator from the 
Italian 
Assistant Editor 


j vVn LIAM FREDERIC GIESE 
1 JOHN DORSEY \VOLCOTT 


l\L\RY SIFTON PEPPER 


E)I"\lA HELE
 BLAIR 



GENERAL PREFACE 


The story of New France is also, in part, the 
story of much of New England, and of States whose 
shores are washed by the Great Lakes and the Mis- 
sissippi River. It may truly be said that the history 
of everyone of our northern tier of commonwealths, 
from Ivlaine to 
1innesota, has its roots in the French 
régime. It is not true, as Bancroft avers, that the 
Jesuit was ever the pioneer of New France; we now 
know that in this land, as elsewhere in all ages, the 
trader nearly always preceded the priest. But the 
trader was not often a letter-writer or a diarist; 
hence, we owe our intimate knowledge of New 
France, particularly in the seventeenth century, 
chiefly to the wandering missionaries of the Society 
of Jesus. Coming early to the shores of Nova 
Scotia (I6II), nearly a decade before the landing of 
the Plymouth Pilgrims, and eventually spreading 
throughout the broad expanse of New France, ever 
close upon the track of the adventurous coureur de 
bois, they met the American savage before contact 
with civilization had seriously affected him. vVith 
heroic fortitude, often with marvellous enterprise, 
they pierced our wilderness while still there were 
but Indian trails to connect far-distant villages of 
semi-naked aborigines. They saw North America 
and the North Americans practically in the primitive 



viii 


GENERAL PREFACE 


stage. Cultivated men, for the most part,- trained 
to see as well as to think. and carefully to make 
record of their experiences,- they left the most lux- 
urious country in Europe to seek shelter in the foul 
and unwelcome huts of one of the most wretched 
races of man. To win these crude beings to the 
Christian Faith, it was necessary to know them inti- 
matel y. in their daily walks. No coureur de bois was 
more expert in forest lore than were the Jesuit 
Fathers: and the records made by these soldiers of the 
Cross,-explicit and detailed, while familiar in tone,- 
are of the highest scientific value, often of consider- 
able literary interest. The body of contemporary, 
documentary material which, in their Relations and 
Letters, the Jesuits of New France have bequeathed 
to the historian, the geographer, and the ethnologist, 
entitles them to the enduring gratitude of American 
scholars. For forty years, these documents have, in 
part, been more or less familiar to Americanists as a 
rkh storehouse of material. But, hitherto, they have 
existed only in rare and costly forms, when in print 
at all,- as original products of ancient French, 
Italian, and German presses, or as reprints issued in 
sparse num ber for slnall circles of bibliophiles; 
while many important papers, capable of throwing 
lig-ht upon certain portions of Canadian history hith- 
erto in shade, have as yet remained in manuscript. 
"\Ve cannot promise for this series the entire body 
of existing Jesuit documents, either printed or in 
manuscript, which illustrate the history of New 
France in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. 
This would carry us, even were they all obtainable, 
far beyond the necessary limits of this series; for the 
fathers were profuse writers, and their papers are in 



GENERAL PREFACE 


ix 


many archives. It is of necessity a matter of selec- 
tion. 'Ve shall, however, reissue all of the docu- 
ments usually designated as Rdatiolls,- the Cramoi- 
sys, the Quebec reissue, the Shea and O'Callaghan 
reprints; and to these will be added a very consider- 
able collection of miscellaneous papers of importance, 
from printed sources and from manuscripts, in order 
to fill the chronological gaps and round out and com- 
plete the story. It is the purpose of the Editor 
to present this mass of selected material in chrono- 
logical order, so far as proves practicable, and to 
furnish such scholarly helps as will tend to render it 
more available than hitherto for daily use by students 
of American history. To this end will be given an 
English translation, side by side with the original 
text. \Vhile translations of many of the briefest 
documents, and of portions of others, have already 
appeared in one form or other, this is the first at- 
tempt to translate the entire body of the Relations. 
In many cases, where corruptions in text have crept 
in, we shall be enabled, by recourse to original 
manuscripts, to restore correct renderings; this care 
has been taken, wherever practicable, even to the ex- 
amination of manuscripts in European archives; but 
occasionally we shall be obliged to follow our prede- 
cessors blindly in this regard, either from inability 
to discover the whereabouts of the original. or to 
obtain access to it, when found. In the case of each 
document, we shall invariably state the source 
whence we obtained our copy, and shall give addi- 
tional bibliographical data as to other editions known 
to us. All maps and other illustrations appearing 
in previous editions will be reproduced in this; and 
these will be supplemented by other important con- 



x 


GENERAL PREFACE 


temporary aids of like character. At the end of each 
volume will appear such Notes as seem necessary to 
the elucidation of the text. The closing volume of 
the series will contain - and probably will be wholly 
devoted to-an exhaustive analytical Index, a feat- 
ure without which the work would lose much of 
its value. In short, no pains have been, or will be, 
spared to render all possible service to scholars, in 
the present work. But the field is wide, the diffi- 
culties are many, and the Editor makes no claims to 
perfection. He will be grateful to any who, in the 
course of publication,- promising to extend through 
several years yet to come,- will offer helpful sugges- 
tions in any department of the undertaking. 
While seeking to reproduce the old texts as closely 
as practicable, with their legitimate typographic and 
orthographic peculiarities, it has been found advis- 
able here and there to nlake a few minor changes. 
The original printer was sometimes careless,- Cra- 
moisy especially so,- and his proof-reader negligent. 
The result was that certain typographical errors 
crept into the original prints,- errors not of the 
author's making, and therefore not illustrative of 
his methods. These consist in the main, of: (I) 
turned letters; (2) transposed letters; (3) slipped let- 
ters; and (4) mis-spacings. To these obvious errors 
may be added such as, e. g., mistaking the verb gra!- 
ter for grauer, evidently through a failure on the part 
of the writer to cross his t's,- the context plainly 
showing what was written; the printing, e. g., of 
beau/oup for beflllCOlip J. or the repetition on the next 
line of a syllable in a divided word, resulting in such 
a redundancy as, Poupollllall! for pOl/llan!. Palpable 
blemishes like these, we have deemed it advisable to 



CJ..Ï\YERAL PREFACE 


Xl 


correct without specific mention; in some instances, 
however, the original error has been retained, and 
in juxtaposition the correct rendering given within 
brackets. 
Another and more annoying class of errors is, the 
wrong numbering of chapters and pages in the old 
issues, chiefly the fruit of carelessness in make-up. 
\Ve indicate, throughout, the original pagination, by 
inclosing within brackets the number of each page 
at its beginning, e. g. [148J; in case of misnumbering, 
the correct figure is also given, e. g. [150,1. e. 149J. 
A similar device is adopted as to chapter misnumber- 
ing, e. g. Chapitre XXX. [i. e. XXIX.]. 
A difference in the typographic style of the docu- 
ments presented in the present series, will occasion- 
ally be noticed. In following originals of the seyen- 
teenth and eighteenth centuries, we have of course 
reproduced their peculiarities, such as the long" s," 
and character diphthongs; but where our sale copy 
has been a modern reprint, in a modern typographic 
dress, we have followed its style, deeming it inad- 
visable, for mere sake of uniformity, to masquerade 
the document in olden guise. 
In the progress of the work, which has now been 
under way for some sixteen months, many persons 
beside the present staff have tendered helping 
hands. To them, the Editor returns, for the Pub- 
lishers and for himself, grateful acknowledgment. 
It is impracticable to natne them all in this place; 
but of a few from whom special favors have been 
received, it is only just to speak: The Reverend 
Arthur E. Jones, S. J., archivist of 81. 1Iary's Col- 
lege, :Montreal, from the first opened his heart to 
this enterprise, and has not only given us carte 



xii 


GE1VERAL PREFACE 


bfa/zelle to ransack his priceless stores, but has con- 
tributed invaluable suggestions and data, almost 
without number. To Wilberforce Eames, librarian 
of Lenox Library, and his assistant, Victor H. 
Paltsits, we owe much; for in their institution the 
greater part of the transcription is being done, and 
their daily courtesies and kindnesses materially 
lighten the task. Superintendent Robbins Little, 
and Librarian Frederick Saunders, of Astor Library, 
hm;e also been of much assistance in the conduct of 
the work. To John Nicholas Brown, of Providence, 
R. 1., and to his librarian, George Parker Winship, 
we are indebted for numerous courtesies and sug- 
gestions during the copying and photographing of 
documents in the John Carter Brown Library of 
Americana. Similar aid is being rendered by Dr. 
Justin 'V"insor, of Harvard College Library, and his 
assistants, W. H. Tillinghast and T. J. Kiernan; by 
the librarians of St. Francis Xavier College, New 
York, and the Jesuit Colleges at Georgetown, D. C., 
and Woodstock, 
Id.; by L. P. Sylvani, assistant libra- 
rian of the Library of Parliament, Ottawa; and by C. 
H. Gould, librarian of :McGill University Library, 

lontreal, and his assistant. Henry lvlott. Donald 
Guthrie McNab, of <Montreal, has kindly permitted us 
to photograph and reproduce his excel1ent oil portraits 
of the early fathers; and, in this connection, we feel 
under especial obligations to :Messrs. N otman & Son, 
of :Montrea1, for their intelligent advice and patience 
in photographing paintings and manuscripts for the 
series. Marked privileges have been granted by the 
officials of the Bibliothèque N ationale and the Bibli- 
othèque de l' Arsenal, of Paris. Numerous antiqua- 
rians have rendered generous aid, notably Peter A. 



GENERAL PREFACE 


xiii 


Porter, of Niagara Falls, N. Y.; v,r. 1\1. Beauchamp, 
of Baldwinsville, N. Y.; l'Abbé H. A. B. Verreau, 
of Montreal; Mgr. T. E. Hamel, of Quebec; and A. 
F. Hunter, of Barrie, Ontario. Further acknowledg- 
ment of assistance will be rendered in the several 
volumes, as they appear. 


R. G. T. 


MADISON, WIS., August, 1896. 



CONTENTS OF YOLo I 


GE
ERAL PREFACE 
HISTORICAL IXTRODUCTIO
. TIle Editor 
PREFACE TO VOLU:\[E I 
DOCUl\[E
TS :- 
1. La Conversion des Savvages qui ant esté 
baptizés en la N ovvelle France, cette 
ann ee 16 10. .ill arc Le sea rbot 49 
II. Lettre :Missive, tovchant la Conversion et 
baptefme du grand Sagamos de la nou- 
uelle Frãce. ]11. Bertrand J. Port Roy- 
al, June 28, 1610 115 
III. Lettre au T .-R. P. Claude Aquaviva, 
Général de la Compagnie de J ésus, à 
Rome. Pierre Biard.. Dieppe, January 
21,1611 1 2 5 


Vll 


45 


IV. Lettre au R. P. Christophe Baltazar, Pro- 
vincial de France, à Paris. Pierre 
Biard J" Port Royal, June 10, 1611 13 8 
V. Lettre au R. P. Provincial, à Paris. E1l/ze- 
11l01ld Massi J' Port Royal, June 10, 1611 18 4 
VI. Lettre au T.-R. P. Claude Aquaviva. 
Pierre Biard J" Port Royal, June 1 1, 161 1 188 
VII. Canadicæ :NIiffionis Relatio ab anno 161 I 
ufque ad annum 1613, cum fiatu ejuf- 
dem Miffionis, annis 1703 & 17 10 . 
Josepll JOll'iY1U)' . 193 
VIII. De Regione et I\Ioribus Canadenfium feu 
Barbarorum N ovæ Franciæ. Joseplt JOll- 


'j'cncy 


. 239 
. 299 
3 0 5 


BIHLIOGRAPHICAL D.\TA: Volulne I 
NOTES 



. 
.;. 


ILLUSTRATIONS TO YOLo I 


I. Photographic facsimile of title-page. 
carbot's La COIl7.'l'rsion des Sa7)1Jagcs 
II. Photographic facsimile of title-page, 
trand's Lcttrc lIIissitH! 
III. 1vlap of Port Royal (1609), from Lescarbot's 
Hz"stoire {it' la N01l7}clle France (Paris, 1612) 
Facing- 124 
IV. Map of "La Terre Nevve, Grand Riviere 
de Canada, et côtes de l'Ocean en la Nov- 
velIe France," from Ibid . Facing 19 2 
V. Historical map of New France, showing 
missions, forts, portage-routes, tribes, etc 
At t'nd of volume 


Les- 
52 
Ber- 
liS 



INTRODUCTION 


BY REUBEN GOLD THW AITES 


Doubtless Norse vikings, venturing far southward 
from outlying colonies in Iceland and Greenland, 
first coasted New France, and beached their sturdy 
ships on the shores of New England. But five cent- 
uries passed without result, and we cannot properly 
call them pioneers of American civilization. Colum- 
bus it was, who unlocked the eastern door of the 
New World. Five years later, John Cabot, in be- 
half of England, was sighting the gloomy headlands 
of Cape Breton. Cortereal appeared in the neigh- 
borhood, in 1501, seeking lands for the Portuguese 
crown. About this time, at intervals, there came to 
Newfoundland certain Norman, Breton, and Basque 
fishers, who, erecting little huts and drying-scaffolds 
along the rocky shore, sowed the first seed of that 
polyglot settlement of French, Portuguese, Spanish, 
and English which has come down to our day al- 
most uninterruptedly. By 151 I, these fishermen 
appear to have known the mainland to the west; 
for on the map of Sylvanus, in his edition of Ptole- 
my, that year, we find a delineation of the "Square 
Gulf," which answers to the Gulf of S1. Lawrence. 
In 1520, Fagundus visited these waters for the Por- 



2 


INTRODUCTION 


tuguese, and four years later Verrazano was making 
for the French an exploration of the coast between 
North Carolina and Newfoundland. Whether or not 
Cartier (1535) was the first to sail up the S1. Lawrence 
" until land could be seen on either side, " no man can 
now tell; apparently, he was the first to leave a record 
of doing so. Progress up the river was checked by 
Lachine Rapids, and he spent the winter on Mont- 
real Island. 
France and Spain were just then engaged in one 
of their periodical quarrels, and adventurers were 
needed to fight battles at home, so that it was six 
years before any attempts were made to colonize the 
river-lands to which Cartier had led the way. In 
1541, a Picard seigneur named Roberval, enjoying 
the friendship of Francis 1., was commissioned as 
viceroy of the new country beyond the Atlantic, with 
Cartier as his chief pilot and captain-general, and a 
choice selection of jail-birds for colonists. Cartier 
started off before his chief, built a fort at Quebec, 
and, after a long and miserable winter, picked up a 
quantity of glittering stones which he took to be 
gold and diamonds, and gladly set sail for home. 
Tradition has it that Roberval met him near the 
mouth of the river, but was unable to induce him to 
return to his cheerless task of founding a state in an 
inhospitable wilderness, with convicts for citizens. 
Roberval, however, proceeded to Quebec with his 
consignment of prison dregs, and throughout another 
protracted winter the flag of France floated from the 
little intrenched camp which Cartier had planted on 
the summit of the cliff. Roberval's principal occu- 
pation appears to have been the disciplining of his 
unruly followers, a work in which the gibbet and 



INTRODUcTIO.N 


3 


the lash were freely employed. He also essayed ex- 
plorations up the river; but the rude task was not to 
his liking, and, with what remained of his battered 
band, he followed Cartier to France. 
It is commonly said that Canada was abandoned by 
the French between the going of Roberval and the 
coming of Champlain. But, though little was done 
toward colonizing on the S1. Lawrence, Newfound- 
land was by no means neglected. Its fishing in- 
dustry grew apace. The rules of the Church, pre- 
scribing a fish diet on certain holy days, led to a large 
use of salted fish throughout Catholic Europe; and, 
by 1578, full a hundred and fifty French vessels 
alone, chiefly Breton, were employed in the New- 
foundland fisheries, while a good trade with the main- 
land Indians, as far south as the Potomac, had now 
sprung up. The island colony proved valuable as a 
supply and repair station for traders and explorers, 
and thus served as a nucleus of both French and 
English settlement in America. 
It is difficult for us of to-day to realize that, at any 
time in the world's history, enlightened folk should 
have thought good colonists could be made out of 
the sweepings of the jails and gutters of the Old 
\VorId. But in the sixteenth and seventeenth centu- 
ries that delusion was quite generally entertained by 
would- be founders of states across sea; it required 
the lessons of more than a hundred years of disas- 
trous experiments to teach discerning men that only 
the best of the middle class and the masses, can suc- 
cessfully plant a new community in the wilderness. 
The experiences of Cartier and Roberval on the St. 
Lawrence, and of Laudonnière in Florida (1564), 
were of no avail in influencing governmental policy 



4 


INTRODUCTION 


at Paris. In 1590, the 
1arquis de la Roche was sent 
out with the usual dissolute crew to succeed Rober- 
val as the king's agent on the banks of the S1. Law- 
rence. Leaving part of his ill-favored gang on the 
desert Sable Isle, off Nova Scotia (where early in the 
century Baron de Léry had vainly attempted to 
plant a colony), La Roche set forth to explore the 
mainland for a site. A wild storm blew his vessels 
to France, and the wretched skin-clad survivors of 
the band which he had left behind were not rescued 
until thirteen years had elapsed. Their tale of horror 
long rang in the ears of France. 
In 1600-1603, Chauvin and Pontgravé made suc- 
cessful trading voyages to the S1. Lawrence. Samuel 
de Champlain was one of the party which, in the 
latter year, followed in Cartier's track to :Montreal. 
The same season, a Calvinist, named De Monts, was 
given the vice-royalty and fur-trade monopoly of 
Acadia, and in 1604 he landed a strangely-assorted 
company of vagabonds and gentlemen on S1. Croix 
Island, near the present boundary between 
Iaine 
and New Brunswick; but in the spring following 
they settled at Port Royal, near where is now Annap- 
olis, Nova Scotia, thus planting the first French 
agricultural settlement in America. Five years later. 
Champlain reared a permanent post on the rock of 
Quebec, and New France was at last, after a century 
of experiments, fairly under way. 
Various motives influenced the men who sought 
to establish French colonization in America. The 
ill-fated agricultural colony of the Huguenots in 
Florida (1562-68), was avowedly an attempt of Ad- 
miral Coligny to found an enduring asylum for 
French Protestants. The enterprise of New France, 



INTRODUCTION 


5 


on the other hand, was the outgrowth of interests 
more or less conflicting. Doubtless the court had 
deepest at heart the kingly passion for territorial ag- 
grandizement; next uppermost. was the pious wish 
to convert heathen nations to the Catholic faith, ex- 
plorers like Cartier being authorized to discover new 
lands" in order the better to do what is pleasing to 
God, our Creator and Redeemer, and what may be 
for the increase of his holy and sacred name, and of 
our holy mother, the Church;" the desire for pelf, 
through the agency of the fur trade, and the possi- 
bility of the discovery of precious metals, gave com- 
mercial zest to the undertaking, and to many was 
the raisoll d' étre of the colony; and lastly, was the al- 
nlost universal yearning for adventure, among a peo- 
ple who in the seventeenth century were still im- 
bued with that chivalric temper which among Eng- 
lishmen is assigned to the :ß.Iiddle Ages. The inner 
life of 
 ew France. throughout its century and a 
half of existence, was largely a warring between 
these several interests. 

lissionaries came early upon the scene. 'Vith 
the Calvinist De Monts were Huguenot ministers for 
the benefit of the settlers, and Catholic priests to 
open a mission among th e savages, for the court had 
stipulated with him that the latter were to be in- 

tructed only in the faith of Rome. But no mission- 
ary work was done, for the colony was through 
several years on the verge of dissolution, and the 
priests became victims of scurvy. Poutrincourt, who 
held under De :Monts the patent for Port Royal, did 
nothing to further the purposes of the court in this 
regard, until 1610, when, admonished for his neg- 
lect, he brought out with him a secular priest, Messire 



6 


INTRODUcTIO.N 


Jessé Fléché, of Langres, who on June 24, " appar- 
ently in some haste," baptized twenty-one Abenakis, 
including the district sagamore, or chief. The ac- 
count of this affair, which Poutrincourt sent in tri- 
umph to France, is the initial document in the pres- 
ent series. 
On the twelfth of June, 161 I, there arrived at Port 
Royal, at the instance of King Henry IV., two Jesuit 
fathers, Pierre Biard and Ennemond .Massé. They 
were, however, not favorably received by Poutrin- 
court and his followers; they found great practical 
difficulties in acquiring the Indian languages, and 
made slight progress in the herculean task to which 
they had been set. To them came, the following 
year, a lay brother, Gilbert du Thet, who was soon 
dispatched to the head of the order, in France, with 
an account of the situation. In the spring of 1613, 
he returned, in company with Father Quentin. The 
little band of missionaries had no sooner established 
themselves at the new French colony on Mt. Desert 
Island, than the latter was attacked and dispersed by 
the Virginian Argall. Du Thet was killed in the 
fight, Massé was, with other colonists, set adrift in a 
boat, and Biard and Quentin were taken to Virginia. 
to be eventually shipped to England, and thence 
allowed to return into France. Several of the earlier 
documents of our series have to do with this first 
and apparently unfruitful mission of the Jesuits to 
Acadia. 
In 1615, Champlain thought the time ripe for the 
institution of Indian missions upon the St. Law- 
rence, a spiritual field hitherto neglected, and intro- 
duced to Quebec four members of the fraternity of 
Récollets, the most austere of the three orders of 



hVTROD UCTION 


7 


Franciscans; these were Fathers Denis Jamay, Jean 
d'Olbeau, and Joseph Ie Caron, and a lay brother, 
Pacifique du Plessis. To D'Olbeau was assigned 
the conversion of the :Montagnais of the Lower St. 
Lawrence; Le Caron went to the Hurons, or Wyan- 
dots, in the vast stretch of forested wilderness west 
of the Ottawa River, and before the coming of au- 
tumn had established a bark chapel in their midst; 
Jamayand Du Plessis remained in the neighborhood 
of Quebec, ministering to the colonists and the 
wandering savages who came to the little settlement 
for purposes of trade or sociability, or through fear 
of scalp-hunting Iroquois. For ten years did these 
gray friars practice the rites of the church in the 
Canadian woods, all the way from the fishing and 
trading outpost of Tadoussac to the western Lake of 
the Nipissings. Barefooted, save for heavy wooden 
sandals, coarsely clad in gown and hood, enduring 
in a rigorous climate, to which they were unused, all 
manner of hardships by flood and field, they were 
earnestly devoted to their laborious calling in a time 
when elsewhere the air of New France was noisy 
with the strife of self-seeking traders and politicians. 
Yet somehow their mission seemed without impor- 
tant result. Even less successful was the enterprise 
of some fellow Récollets, who, in 1619, began inde- 
pendent work among the French fishermen and 11ic- 
macs of Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and Gaspé, 
but were forced in 1624, after many disasters, to aban- 
don their task, three of them joining the party at 
Quebec. 
Th
 little band on the S1. Lawrence, although thus 
reinforced, felt impelled, in 1625, to invite the power- 
ful aid of the Jesuits, who in the face of great odds 



8 


INTRODUCTION 


were just then holding most successful missions in 
Asia, Africa, and South America. In response to 
the call, three fathers of the black gown came to 
Quebec this year,-Massé, who had been of the old 
Acadian mission, Charles Lalemant, and that giant 
among them, in both stature and deeds, Jean de 
Brébeuf. Immediately the work began to broaden, 
but the records of the dual mission do not give 
evidence of many converts,- a few Huron youth 
taken to France, and there instructed and baptized, 
being the chief gains. The wandering habits of 
the Indians were not favorable to persistent instruc- 
tion of the young, and adults were unwilling to 
COl11mit themselves to the new doctrine, even when 
not openly opposed to its promulgation. The sum- 
mer months were usually spent by the missiona- 
ries at Tadoussac, Quebec, and Three Rivers, where 
trading parties from the tribes were wont to assem- 
ble; and, when the latter scattered for their winter 
hunts, the missionaries accompanied them, sharing 
the toils, dangers, and discomforts of the movable 
camps, and often suffering much from positive abuse 
at the hands of their not over-willing hosts. 
The settlements of Port Royal and Quebec were at 
this time wretched little hamlets of a few dozen huts 
each, surrounded by a palisade, and these fell an easy 
prey to small English naval forces (1628-29)' With 
their fall, ended the slender mission of the Récollets 
and Jesuits, who were in triumph carried off to Eng- 
land. For a few months, France did not hold one foot 
of ground in North America. But as peace had been 
declared between France and England before this con- 
quest, the former received back all of its possessions, 
and the inevitable struggle for the mastery of the 



INTRODUCTION 


9 


continent was postponed for four generations longer. 
With the release of Canada to France, in 1632, the 
Jesuits were by the home authorities placed in sale 
charge of the spiritual interests of both settlers and 
Indians, and the history of their greatest missions be- 
gins at this time. On the fifth of July, there landed 
at Quebec, Fathers Paul Ie J eune and Anne de N ouë, 
and a lay brother named Gilbert. Le Jeune was the 
superior, and at once devoted himself to learning the 
language and customs of the savages, and so study- 
ing the enormous field before him as intelligently to 
dispose of his meagre forces. 


THE INDIANS. 
The existence of rival tribes among the Red 
Indians of North America, was, perhaps, the most 
formidable obstacle in the path of the missionaries. 
It has always been impossible to make any hard-and- 
fast classification; yet the Indians presented a consid- 
erable variety of types, ranging from the Southern 
Indians, some of whose tribes were in a relatively 
high stage of material advancement and mental 
calibre, down to the savage root-eaters of the Rocky 
Mountain region. The migrations of some of the 
Indian tribes were frequent, and they occupied over- 
lapping territories, so that it is impossible to fix the 
tribal boundaries with any degree of exactness. 
Again, the tribes were so merged by intermarriage, 
by affiliation, by consolidation, by the fact that there 
were numerous polyglot villages of renegades, by 
similarities in manner, habits, and appearance, that 
it is difficult even to separate the savages into 
families. It is only on philological grounds that 
these divisions can be made at all. In a general way 



10 


INTRODCcTIO.l.V 


we may say that between the Atlantic and the Rock- 
ies, Hudson Bay and the Gulf of :Mexico, there were 
four Indian languages in vogue, with great varieties 
of local dialect: 
1. The Algonkins were the most numerous, hold- 
ing the greater portion of the country from the un- 
occupied "debatable land" of Kentucky northward 
to Hudson Bay, and from the Atlantic westward to 
the :Mississippi. Among their tribes were the Mic- 
macs of Acadia, the Penobscots of J\Iaine, the Mon- 
tagnais of the S1. Lawrence, the ill-defined tribes of 
the country round about Lake St. John, and the 
Ottawas, Chippewas, Mascoutens, Sacs, Foxes, Pot- 
tawattomies, and Illinois of the Upper Lakes. These 
savages were rude in life and manners, were in- 
tensely warlike, depended for subsistence chiefly on 
hunting and fishing. lived in rude wigwams covered 
with bark, skins, or matted reeds, practised agri- 
culture in a crude fashion, and were less stable in 
their habitations than the Southern Indians. They 
have made a larger figure in our history than any 
other family, because through their lands came the 
heaviest and most aggressive movement of white 
population, French or English. Estimates of early 
Indian populations necessarily differ, in the absence 
of accurate knowledge; but it is now believed that the 
number was never so great as was at first estimated 
by the Jesuit fathers and the earliest English colo- 
nists. A careful nlodern estimate is, that the Algon- 
kins at no time numbered over 90,000 souls, and 
possibly not over 50,000. 
II. In the heart of this Algonkin land was planted 
the ethnic group called the Iroquois, with its several 
distinct branches, often at war with each other. The 



I1VTROD UcTION 


11 


craftiest, most daring, and most intelligent of North 
American Indians, yet still in the savage hunter state, 
the Iroquois were the terror of every native band 
east of the 11ississippi, before the coming of the 
whites, who in turn learned to dread their ferocious 
power. The five principal tribes of this family- 
:Mohawks, Oneidas, Onondagas, Cayugas, and Sene- 
cas, all stationed in palisaded villages south and east 
of lakes Erie and Ontario-formed a loose confeder- 
acy styled by themselves and the French" The Long 
House," and by the English "The Five Nations," 
which firmly held the waterways connecting the 
Hudson and Ohio rivers and the Great Lakes. The 
population of the entire group was not over 17,000- 
a remarkably small number, considering the active 
part they played in American history, and the control 
which they exercised through wide tracts of wilder- 
ness. Related to, but generally at war with them, 
were the Hurons of Canada, among whom the 
Jesuits planted their earliest missions. Champlain, 
in an endeavor to cultivate the friendship of his 
Huron and Algonkin neighbors, early made war on 
the Iroquois, and thus secured for New France a 
heritage of savage enmity which contributed more 
than any other one cause to cripple its energies and 
render it at last an easy prey to the rival power of 
the English colonies. 
III. The Southern Indians occupied the country 
between the Tennessee River and the Gulf, the Ap- 
palachian Ranges and the :Mississippi. Of a milder 
disposition than their Northern cousins, the Chero- 
kees, Chickasaws. Choctaws, Creeks, and Seminoles 
were rather in a barbarous than in a savage state; 
by the time of the Revolution, they were not far be- 



]2 


INTRODUcTI01Il 


hind the white proprietors in industrial or domestic 
methods, and numbered not above 50,000 persons. 
With them, this story of the Jesuit missions has little 
to do; the Louisiana mission, an offshoot of that of 
New France, did faithful work here, but the docu- 
mentary result was neither as interesting nor as pro- 
lific, and necessarily occupies but small space in the 
present series. 
IV. The Dakotah, or Sioux, family occupied for 
the most part the country beyond the Mississippi. 
They were and are a fierce, high-strung people, genu- 
ine nomads, and war appears to have been their chief 
occupation. The Jesuits worked among them but in 
slight measure, on the waters of the Upper Missis- 
sippi; they met this family chiefly in the persons 
of the \Vinnebagoes, one of their outlying bands, 
which at the time of the French occupation was resi- 
dent on and about Green Bay of Lake :Michigan, at 
peace and in confederacy with the ..l\.lgonkins who 
hedged them about. 
The mission of the French Jesuits to these widely- 
scattered hordes of savages forms one of the most 
thrilling chapters in human history. It is impos- 
sible, in this brief Introduction, to attempt anything 
nlore than the barest outline of the theme; Roche- 
monteix, Shea, and Parkman have told the story in 
detail, from differing points of view, and with these 
authorities the student of the following documents in 
the case is presumed to be familiar. A rapid sum- 
mary of results will, however, be useful; and this we 
may best obtain, at the expense of occasional repeti- 
tion of narrative, by following the fortunes of the 
pioneers of the Cross through the several district 
missions into which their work was naturally divided. 



I.IVTRODUcTION 


13 


1. THE ABENAKI :MISSION. 


This mission was chiefly in Maine and Acadia, and 
on Cape Breton Island. The Abenakis (or Abnakis) 
were a strong but mild-mannered Algonkin tribe, 
settled in villages or cantonments; but, like others of 
their race, in the habit of taking long semi-annual 
journeys,-each winter to hunt, and each summer to 
fish. We have seen that the French Jesuits, Biard 
and 1vlassé, were in the field as early as 1611, soon 
after the establishment of Port Royal; their prede- 
cessor being the secular French priest, Fléché, who 
had been introduced to the country by Poutrincourt, 
the patentee. Biard and Massé met with many dis- 
couragements, chiefly the opposition of Poutrincourt's 
son, Biencourt (sometimes called Baron 81. Just), 
who had been left in charge of the colony. Never- 
theless the missionaries learned the native language, 
and made many long journeys of exploration, one of 
Biard's trips extending as far as the mouth of the 
Kennebec. They were later joined by a lay brother, 
Du Thet, and by Fathers Quentin and Laleman1. 
Joining the new French colony on !vIt. Desert Island, 
in the spring of 1613, the establishment was almost 
immediately destroyed by the Virginian Argall. In 
the skirmish, Du Thet was killed. 
In 1619, a party of Récollets, from Aquitaine, 
began a mission on 81. John River, in Acadia, but 
five years later, as we have seen above, abandoned 
the task, the survivors joining the Quebec mission of 
their order. Other Récollets were in Acadia, how- 
ever, between 1630 and 1633, and later we have 
evidence of a sr.1all band of Capuchins ministering 
to French settlers on the Penobscot and Kennebec; 



14 


Il\7TROD UCTION 


but it is probable that they made no attempt to con- 
vert the natives. 
A Jesuit mission was founded on Cape Breton in 
16 34, by Father Julian Perrault; and a few years 
later, Father Charles Turgis was at Miscou. Other 
missionaries soon Calne to minister to the 11icmacs, 
but for many years their efforts were without result; 
and sickness, resulting from the hardships of the 
situation, caused most of the early black gowns to 
retreat from the attempt. Finally, an enduring 
mission was established among these people, and, 
until about 1670, was conducted with some measure 
of success by Fathers Andrew Richard, Martin de 
Lyonne, and James Fremin. About 1673, the Récol- 
lets took up the now abandoned work, occasionally 
aided by secular priests from the Seminary of Que- 
bec, and Jesuits, until at last the lvIicmacs from Gaspé 
to Nova Scotia were declared to be entirely converted 
to the Catholic faith. 
Father Gabriel Druillettes, of the Jesuit mission at 
Sillery, near Quebec, went to the Kennebec country 
in 1646, invited thither by converted Abenakis who 
had been at Sillery, and during visits, extending 
through a period of eleven years, was Inore than 
ordinarily successful in the task of gaining Indian 
converts to Christianity. In 1650, he made a notable 
visit to the Puritans of Eastern :Massachusetts, during 
which was discussed the proposed union between 
New France and New England, against the Iroquois. 
U pan the final departure of Druillettes in 1657, the 
Abenakis were but spasmodically served with mis- 
sionaries; occasionally a Jesuit appeared among 
them, but the field could not be persistently worked, 
owing to the demands upon the order from other 



INTRODUCTION 


15 


quarters. The fathers now sought to draw Abenaki 
converts to Sillery, and later to St. Francis de Sales, 
at the falls of the Chaudière, which soon became al- 
most exclusively an Abenaki mission. 
In 1688, Father Bigot, of this mission, again en- 
tered the field of the Kennebec, at the same time that 
Rev. Peter Thury, a priest of the Quebec Seminary, 
opened a Inission on the Penobscot, and the Récol- 
let F. Simon gathered a flock at 11edoktek, near the 
mouth of the St. John. They were in time aided 
and succeeded by others: the Jesuits being Julian 
Binneteau, Joseph Aubery, Peter de la Chasse, 
Stephen Lauverjeat, Loyard, and Sebastian Rale; 
the death of Rale, the greatest of them all, at the 
hands of New England partisans in the border strife 
of 1724, is a familiar incident in American history. 
Jesuits succeeded to the Penobscot mission in 17 0 3, 
and with great zeal, but amid continual hardships 
and discouragements, carried on the principal work 
among the Abenakis until the downfall of New 
France in 1763. The majority of the Kennebec con- 
verts, however, emigrated to the mission of St. Fran- 
cis de Sales, and from there frequently went forth 
upon avenging expeditions against the New England 
borderers. 


II. THE MONTAGNAIS MISSION. 
This was centered at Tadoussac, and ministered to 
the Montagnais, Bersialnites, Porcupines, Oumaniwek, 
Papinachois, and other tribes of the Lower S1. Law- 
rence and the Saguenay. Tadoussac had, from the 
earliest historic times, been a favorite harbor and 
trading-station for the French; for, being at the 
junction of two great rivers, it was convenient as a 



16 


INTRODUCTION 


place of assembly for the natives of the lower coun- 
try. The first priests in the district had said mass 
there; but it was not until 1640 that a Jesuit mission 
was formed by Father Jean du Quen, its sphere of 
influence soon reaching to the upper waters of the 
Saguenay, Lake 81. John, Hudson Bay, and the coast 
of Labrador. Du Quen was acti vel y assisted by 
Charles Meiachkwat, a Montagnais convert, who 
erected the first chapel, became a catechist, and made 
extended tours through the neighboring tribes. In 
time, there were associated with Du Quen, Fathers 
Buteux and Druillettes. Protracted missionary tours 
were made by them, with results which were con- 
sidered satisfactory as compared with other missions; 
although they had serious difficulties to contend with, 
in the prevalent intemperance which the fur trade in- 
troduced among the natives, the belief in dreams, 
the laxity of morals, and the wiles of medicine-men, 
or sorcerers, as they were called by the Jesuits. 
For the first few years, the missionaries spent 
their winters in Quebec, ministering to the colonists, 
and each spring went down to Tadoussac to meet the 
summer trading parties; but greater persistency of 
effort was deemed desirable, and thereafter, instead 
of returning home in the autumn, they followed the 
Indians upon their winter hunts, and in the course of 
these wanderings endured the usual privations and 
hardships of traveling camps. Bailloquet, Nouvel, 
Beaulieu, Albanel, De Crépieul, Dalmas, Boucher, 
Peter Michael Laure, and Jean Baptiste Labrosse, 
are other names of Jesuit fathers who at different 
periods were engaged upon this toilsome mission. 
In 1670, Tadoussac was almost deserted, owing to 
Iroquois raids and the ravages of smallpox; the Mon- 



hVTRODUcTION 


17 


tagnais and kindred tribes were in hiding, through 
the vast country between Lake St. John and Hudson 
Bay. They were still followed by their devoted 
shepherds, whom no hardship could discourage. The 
following year, Crépieul began a mission on Hud- 
son Bay, and here in 1694 his auxiliary Dalmas was 
killed. Laure (1720-37) left us a monument of his 
labors in a :Montagnais grammar and dictionary. La- 
brosse, the last of his order at Tadoussac, instructed 
many of his flock to read and write, and left a legacy 
of native education, which has lasted unto the pres- 
ent day; he lived and taught long after his order 
had been suppressed in New France, and died at Ta- 
doussac in 1782. 


III. THE QUEBEC AKD ßI0KTREAL :1IISSIOXS. 
These included the several missions at Quebec, 
:Uontreal, Three Rivers, Sillery, Bécancourt, and St. 
Francis de Sales, which were designed for the wan- 
dering 
lontagnais of the district, those Algonkins of 
the \Vest who could be induced to come and settle on 
the lower .waters, and in later years such Abenakis of 
Acadia and ßlaine as sought an asylum upon dis- 
tinctively French soil. 
vVe have seen that Récollets were first at Quebec, 
ministering both to colonists and Indians, and that, in 
162 5, they invited the Jesuits to aid them. In 162 9, 
the joint mission came to a close through the sur- 
render of Quebec to the English. \Vhen the mission 
was reopened in 1632, Jesuits alone were in charge, 
their operations being at first confined to the neigh- 
boring :Montagnais, although they soon spread 
throughout the entire Canadian field. In 16 5 8 , 
Bishop Laval founded the Seminary of Quebec, 



18 


INTRODUCTION 


whereupon the Jesuits resigned their parishes among 
the colonists, and thereafter confined themselves to 
their college and the Indian missions. In addition to 
their parish work, the priests of the seminary con- 
ducted missions in Acadia, Illinois, and on the lower 
:Mississippi. 
The year following the return of the Jesuits to 
Canada, Father Buteux, of that order, began his 
labors at Three Rivers, which was a convenient gath- 
ering-place for the fur trade. The village was fre- 
quently raided by Iroquois, but remained until the 
fall of New France one of the prominent centers of 
missionary influence. The efforts of Buteux, which 
lasted until his death at the hands of Iroquois in 
1652, met with considerable success. His custom, 
like that of the other Inissionaries, was to be present 
at the French posts during the annual trading 
" meets, " and when the savages returned to the wil- 
derness, to accompany some selected band. In thus 
following the nomadic tribes, he made some of the 
longest and most toilsome journeys recorded in the 
annals of the Society of Jesus, and shared with his 
flock all the horrors of famine, pestilence, and inter- 
tri bal war. 
It was soon realized by the missionaries that but 
meagre results could be obtained until the Indians 
were induced to lead a sedentary life. Their wander- 
ing habit nullified all attempts at permanent instruc- 
tion to the young; it engendered improvidence and 
laziness, bred famine and disease; and the constant 
struggle to kill fur-bearing animals for their pelts 
rapidly depleted the gmne, while the fur trade 
wrought contamination in many forms. :Uissionary 
efforts were at first conducive to the interests of the 



INTRODUCTION 


19 


fur trade, by bringing far-distant tribes within the 
sphere of French influence; but so soon as the Jesuit 
sought to change the habits of the natives, to cause 
them to become agriculturists instead of hunters, 
and to oppose the rum traffic among them, then the 
grasping commercial monopoly which controlled the 
fortunes of New France, and was merely "working" 
the colony for financial gains, saw in the Jesuit an 
enemy, and often placed serious obstacles in his path. 
In pursuance of the sedentary policy, and also to 
protect the wretched :Montagnais from Iroquois war- 
parties, the Jesuits, in 1637, established for them a 
palisaded mission four miles above Quebec, at first 
giving it the name 81. Joseph, but later that of 8il- 
lery, in honor of Commander N oël Brulart de 8illery, 
of France, who had given ample funds for the found- 
ing of this enterprise. Here were at first gathered 
twenty of the Indians, who began cultivation of the 
soil, varied by occasional hunting and fishing trips, 
which the missionaries could not prevent. The little 
town slowly grew in importance, both Algonkins and 
Montagnais being represented in its population. 
Three years later, nuns opened a hospital at Sillery, 
for the reception of both French and Indian pa- 
tients, and thus greatly added to the popularity of 
the mission. But in 1646 the nuns removed their 
hospital to Quebec; a few years later, the church and 
mission house were destroyed by fire; disease made 
sad havoc in the settlement; the thin soil became ex- 
hausted through careless tillage; Iroquois preyed 
upon the converts, until at last the Algonkins almost 
entirely disappeared; and although their place was 
taken by Abenakis from :Maine and Acadia, until the 
attendance became almost solely Abenaki, the el1ter- 



20 


INTRODUCTION 


prise waned. In 1685, it was abandoned in favor of St. 
Francis de Sales, a new mission established at the 
falls of the Chaudière River, not far from the St. Law- 
rence. Beyond a monument of later days, to the mem- 
ory of Fathers 1Iassé and De N ouë, whose names are 
prominently connected with this work, nothing now 
remains to mark the site of the old Sillery mission. 
From St. Francis, the mission work began to spread 
into I\laine. Of its character and extent there, men- 
tion has already been made. St. Francis achieved a 
certain measure of prosperity, as Indian mission
 go. 
It became in time a source of serious trouble to the 
New England borderers, for many a French and In- 
dian war-party was here fitted out against the latter, 
during the series of bloody conflicts which marked 
the three-quarters of a century previous to the fall 
of New France. Finally, in September, 1759, 11aj. 
Robert Rogers descended upon the village with his 
famous rangers, and in retaliation pillaged and 
burned the houses, and killed "at least two hundred 
Indians. ,. New France soon after fell into the hands 
of the English, and, the Jesuits being suppressed. we 
hear little more of St. Francis de Sales. 
In 1641, the missionary settlement of :Montreal was 
founded by 11aisonneuve. The Jesuit
 were the 
first resident clergy, and soon began mission work 
among the neighboring Indians and those who re- 
sorted thither from the valleys of the Lower St. Law- 
rence and the Ottawa. Soon, however, the SuI pi- 
tians, established in Paris by the Abbé Olier, one of 
the Society of 1Iontreal, took charge of the mission 
on 110ntreal Island, which in after years was moved 
to the Sault au Récollet, and thence to the Lake of 
the Two :Mountains, where there was gathered a poly- 



INTRODUCTION 


21 


glot village composed of Iroquois, Algonkins, and 
Nipissings. U pan the opening of the English 
régime, the Jesuit and Récollet missions were sup- 
pressed, but those of the Sulpitians were undisturbed, 
so that this mission at the lake is the oldest now ex- 
tant in Canada. 
Among the Algonkins of the Ottawa River (or 
Grande Rivière), no permanent missions were attempt- 
ed by any of the orders. Long the chief highway to 
the "\tVest, the river was familiar to travelling mission- 
aries, who frequently ministered to the tribesmen 
along its banks, either at the native villages or dur- 
ing the annual trading councils at the French posts of 
1Vlontreal, Three Rivers, and Quebec. 


IV. THE HURON MISSION. 
At the time of the advent of the French, the 
Hurons (or vVyandots), allied in origin and language 
to the Iroquois, numbered about 16,000 souls, and 
d '
lel t in several large villages in a narrow district 
on the high ground between Lake Simcoe and Geor- 
gian Bay of Lake Huron. Their dwellings were 
bark cabins, clustered within stoutly-palisaded walls, 
and near each fortified town were fields of corn, 
beans, pumpkins, and tobacco. Agricultural in habit, 
keen traders, and in the rnain sedentary, these semi- 
naked savages made short hunting and fishing expedi- 
tions, and laid up stores for the winter. They were 
better fighters than the Algonkins around them, yet 
were obliged gradually to withdraw north"ward and 
westward from Iroquois persecution, and during the 
period of the Jesuit missions were almost annihilated 
by the latter. To the southwest, across a wide stretch 
of unpopulated forest, were the allies and kindred of 



22 


INTRODUCTION 


the Hurons, the Tionontates, called also Petuns, or 
Tobacco Nation, a term having its origin in their 
custom of cultivating large fields of tobacco, which 
commodity they used in a wide-spread barter with 
other tribes. To the southeast of the Petuns, west 
of Lake Ontario and on both sides of the gorge of 
Niagara, were the peaceful Atiwandaronks, who, be
 
ing friends alike of Iroquois, Algonkins, and Hurons, 
were known as the Neutral Nation. To the east- 
ward of the Neutrals, strongly intrenched in the in- 
terlocking basins of the Genesee and the :Mohawk, 
lay the dread confederacy of the Iroquois, who in 
time were to spread like a pestilence over the lands 
of all their neighbors. 
The intelligence and mobility of the Hurons ren- 
dered the early prospects for missionary effort among 
them more promising than with the rude and no- 
madic Algonkins. But while at first the missionaries 
of New France were well received, the innate savage- 
ry of these people in time asserted itself. Their 
medicine-men, as bitterly fanatical as the howling 
dervishes of the Orient, plotted the destruction of 
the messengers of the new faith; the introduction 
of European diseases was attributed to the "black 
gowns;" the ravages of the Iroquois were thought to 
be brought on by the presence of the strangers; the 
rites of the church were looked upon as infernal in- 
cantations, and the lurid pictures of the Judgment, 
which were displayed in the little forest chapels, 
aroused unspeakable terror among this simple people; 
finally, an irresistible wave of superstitious frenzy 
led to the blotting out of the mission, accompanied 
by some of the most heart-rending scenes in the 
history of Christian evangelization. 



INTRODUCTION 


23 


It will be remembered that in 161 5 the Récollet 
friar, Joseph Ie Caron, made his way into the far-away 
country of the Hurons, but returned in the following 
year, having learned much of their language and cus- 
toms. Five years later, another of his order, \Villiam 
Poulin, took up the weary task, being joined in 162 3 by 
Fathers Le Caron and Nicholas Viel, and the historian 
of the Récollet missions, Brother Gabriel Sagard. All 
of them soon left the field, however, save Viel, who 
alone, amid almost incredible hardships, attained some 
measure of success; but in 1625, when descending the 
Ottawa to meet and arrange for co-operation with the 
Jesuit Brébeuf, at Three Rivers, he was willfully 
drowned by his Indian guide in the last rapid of Des 
Prairies River, just back of :Montreal. Such is the 
origin of the name of the dread Sault au Récollet. 
In 1626, the Jesuits Brébeuf and Anne de Nouë, 
having received some linguistic instruction from Ré- 
collets who had been in the Huron field, proceeded 
thither, with a Récollet friar, Joseph de la Roche 
Daillon, to resume the work which the Récollets had 
abandoned. Dai11en attempted a mission to neigh- 
boring Neutrals, but, being roughly handled by 
theln, rejoined his Jesuit friends among the Hurons. 
Two years later, he returned to Quebec, having been 
preceded by De Nouë, who found it impossible to 
master the difficult language of their dusky flock. 
Brébeuf, now left alone, labored gallantly among 
these people, and, winning the hearts of many by 
his easy adoption of their manners, gathered about 
him a little colony of those favorably inclined to his 
views. He was recalled to Quebec in 1629, arriving 
there j l1st in time to fall into the hands of Louis 
Kirk, and be transported to Engb.nc1. 



24 


L.VTRODUcTION 


When Canada was restored to France, by the 
treaty of St. Germain, the Jesuits were given sale 
charge of the Indian missions, but it was 1634 before 
the Huron mission could be reopened. In Septem- 
ber, Brébeuf, Antoine Daniel, and Davost returned 
to Brébeuf's old field, and commenced, in the large 
town of Ihonatiria, the greatest Jesuit mission in the 
history of New France. Others soon joined them. 
Additional missions were opened in neighboring 
towns, some of the strongest of these being each 
served by four fathers, who were assisted by laymen 
donnés, or given men); while in the cultivation of 
the soil, and the fashioning of implements and utensils 
both for the fathers and for the Indians, numerous 
hired laborers, from the French colonies on the St. 
Lawrence, were employed in and about the missions. 
Charles Garnier and Isaac J ogues, with their attend- 
ants, made a tour of the Petun villages; other Jesuits 
were sent among the Neutrals; and even the Algon- 
kins as far northwestward as Sault Ste. l\larie were 
visited ( 16 4 1 ) by Raymbault and Jogues, and looked 
and listened with awe at the celebration of the mass. 
In 16 39, there was built, on the River \Vye, the forti- 
fied mission house of St. l\lary's, to serve as a center 
for the wide-spread ""york, as a place for ecclesiastical 
retreat for the fathers, and a refuge when enemies 
pressed too closely upon them. 
The story of the hardships and sufferings of the 
devoted missionaries, as told us by Rochemonteix, 
Shea, and Parklnan, and with rare modesty recorded 
in the documents to be contained in this series, is 
one of the most thrilling in the annals of humanity. 
Space forbids us here to dwell upon the theme. No 
men haye, in the zealous exercise of their faith, 



INTRODUcTIO.N 


25 


performed hardier deeds than these Jesuits of the 
Huron mission; yet, after three years of unremitting 
toil, they could (1640) count but a hundred converts 
out of a population of 16,000, and these were for the 
most part sick infants or aged persons, who had died 
soon after baptism. The rugged braves scorned the 
approaches of the fathers, and unmercifully tormented 
their converts; the medicine-men waged continual 
warfare on their work; smallpox and the Iroquois 
were decimating the people. 
J ogues was (1642) sent down to the c
onies for 
supplies for the missions, but with his :H!ron com- 
panions was captured by an Ir
uois war-party, who 
led them to the :Moha"\vk towns. There most of the 
Hurons were killed, and J ogues and his donné, René 
Goupil, were tortured and mutilated, and made to 
serve as slaves to thcir savage jailers. Finally Gou- 
. 
pil, a promising young physician, was killed, and 
J ogues, being rescued by the Dutch allies of the 
Mohawks, was sent to Europe. Supplies thus fail- 
ing them, the Huron missionaries were in a sad 
plight until finally (1644) relieved by an expedition 
to
he lower country undertaken at great hazards by 
Brébeuf, Garreau, and Noël Chabatlel. The same 
season, Francis Joseph B1;essani, attempting to reach 
the Huron missions, had been captured and tortured 
by Mohawks; like J ogues, he was rescued through 
Dutch intercession and sent back to Europe, but both 
of these zealots were soon back again facing the cruel 
dangers of their chosen task. 
A temporary peace followed, in 1645, and the hope 
of the Jesuits was rekindled, for they now had five 
missions in as many Huron towns, and another 
established for Algonkins who were resident in the 



26 


hVTRODUcTION 


Huron district. But in July, 1648, the Iroquois at- 
tacked Teanaustayé, the chief Huron village, and 
while encouraging the frenzied defense Father Daniel 
lost his life at the hands of the enemy. He "vas 
thus the first Jesuit martyr in the Huron mission, 
and the second in New France,-for Jogues had been 
tortured to death in the Iroquois towns, two years 
before. The spirit of the Hurons was crushed in 
this bloody foray: large bands, deserting their 
towns, fled in terror to seek protection of the Petuns, 
while ot1!.ers made their way to the Manitoulin 
Islands 0' Lake Huron, and even as far west as the 
islands of Green Ba
 and the matted pine forests of 
Northern \Visconsin. Here and there a town was 
left, however, and one of the largest of these, called 
S1. Ignatius by the Jesuits, was stormed by a thou- 
sand Iroquois, :March 16, 1649. The three survivors 
fled through. the woods to neighboring St. Louis, 
where were Brébeuf, now grown old in his service 
of toil, and young Gabriel Laleman1. Bravely did 
they aid in defending St. Louis, and administering 
to wounded and dying; but at last were captured, and 
being taken to the ruined town of St. Ignatius w
re 
most cruelly tortured until relieved by death. Early 
in November, Fathers Garnier and Chabanel met 
their death in the Petun country, the former at the 
hands of Iroquois, the latter being killed by a Huron 
who imagined that the presence of the Jesuits had 
brought curses upon his tribe. 
The missions in the Huron country were now en- 
tirely abandoned. A few of the surviving Jesuits 
followed their flocks to the islands in Lake Huron; 
but in June, 1650, the enterprise was forsaken, and 
the missionaries, with a number of their converts, 



INTRODUCTION 


27 


retired to a village, founded for them, on the Island 
of Orleans, near Quebec. This settlement being in 
time ravaged by the Iroquois, a final stand was made 
at Lorette, also in the outskirts of Quebec, which 
mission exists to this day. 
The great Huron mission, which had been con- 
ducted for thirty-five years, had employed twenty- 
nine missionaries, of whom seven had lost their lives 
in the work. This important field forsaken, many 
of the missionaries had returned to Europe disheart- 
ened, and apparently the future for Jesuit missions 
in New France looked gloomy enough. The 
Iroquois had now practically destroyed the :ß10ntag- 
nais between Quebec and the Saguenay, the Algon- 
kins of the Ottawa, and the Hurons, Petuns, and 
Neutrals. The French colonies of Quebec, Three 
Rivers, and 110ntreal, had suffered from repeated 
raids of the N ew York confederates, and their forest 
trade was now almost wholly destroyed. In this hour 
of darkness, light suddenly broke upon New France. 
The politic Iroquois, attacked on either side by the 
Eries and the Susquehannas, and fearing that while 
thus engaged their northern victims might revive 
for combined vengeance, sent overtures of peace to 
Quebec, and cordially invited to their cantonments 
the once detested black gowns. 


V. THE IROQUOIS 
IISSION. 
Champlain had early made enemies of the Iroquois, 
by attacking them as the allies of his Algonkin neigh- 
bors. This enmity extended to all New France, 
and lasted, with brief intervals of peace, for over 
half a century. We have seen that Jogues was the 
first of his order (1642) to enter the Iroquois country, 



28 


INTRODUCTION 


as a prisoner of the Mohawks, the easternmost of the 
five tribes of the confederacy. Two years later,Bres- 
sani, while on his way to the Huron missions, was also 
captured by the Mohawks, passed through a similar 
experience of torture, was sold to the Dutch, and 
transported back to France, and again like J ogues 
resumed his hazardous task of attempting to tame the 
American savage. During the first peace (1\Iay, 
16 4 6 ), Jogues, now in civilian costume, paid a brief 
visit to his former tormentors on the :Mohawk, this 
time conveying only expressions of good-will from 
the governor of New France. His political errand 
accomplished, he returned to Quebec; but in August 
was back again, with a young French attendant 
named Lalande, intent on opening a mission among 
the Iroquois. Meanwhile, there had been a revul- 
sion of sentiment on their part, and the two French- 
men had no sooner reached the lVlohawk than they 
were tortured and killed. 
During an Iroquois attack upon Quebec, seven 
years later (1653), Father Joseph Anthony Poncet 
was taken prisoner by the marauders and carried to 
the Mohawk, where he suffered in the same manner 
as his predecessors; but his captors being now desir- 
ous of a renewal of peace with the French, spared 
his life, and sent him back to Quebec with overtures 
for a renewal of negotiations. Early in July, 16 54, 
Father Simon Ie Mayne was sent forth upon a tour 
of inspection, and returned to Quebec in September, 
with glowing reports of the fervor of his reception 
by both Mohawks and Onondagas. It was deter- 
mined to rear a mission among the latter, and thither 
( I6 55),-a four weeks' voyage,-proceeded Claude 
Dablon and Peter Mary Joseph Chaumonot; while, 



INTRODUcTIO.V 


29 


to appease the jealous 1Iohawks, Le :l\Ioyne at the 
same time reopened a brief but unprosperous mis- 
sion among that tribe. 
At first, Dablon and Chaumonot had high hopes of 
their Onondaga enterprise; but mistrust soon arose 
in the minds of the natives, and Dablon found it 
necessary to proceed to Que bec and a btain fresh 
evidences of the friendship of the French. He re- 
turned in the early summer of 1656, accompanied by 
Fathers Francis Le :Mercier, superior of the Canadian 
mission, and René 1Iénard, two lay brothers, and a 
party of French colonists under a militia captain, 
who designed founding a settlement in the land of 
the Iroquois. By the close of the year, the work 
was in a promising stage; a number of Christianized 
Hurons, who had been adopted into the confederacy, 
formed a nucleus for proselyting, several Iroquois 
converts had been made, and all five of the tribes 
had been visited by the missionaries. 
Fathers Paul Ragueneau and Joseph Imbert 
Dupéron, who had been sent out from Quebec in 
July, 1657, to assist the Onondaga mission, reached it 
only after many perils en route; for meanwhile, 
there had been a fresh Iroquois uprising against the 
Hurons and Ottawas, in which Father Leonard Gar- 
reau lost his life near :Montreal, and the entire confed- 
eracy was soon in an uproar against the white allies 
of its ancient enemies. The intrepid Le :\Ioyne 
joined the party in November, and in the following 
l\Iarch (1658), on learning that all of the French had 
been condemned to death, the entire colony stole 
away in the night, and reached !vlontreal only after a 
long and hazardous voyage. The great Iroquois mis- 
sion, which had promised so happily and cost so 



30 


IiVTRODUcTION 


much in blood and treasure, was now thought to be 
a thing of the past. 
There was, however, still another chapter to the 
story. In the summer of 1660, after two years of 
bloody forays against New France, a Cayuga sachem, 
who had been converted at Onondaga, came to :Mont- 
real as a peace messenger, asking for another black 
gown to minister to the native converts and a number 
of French captives in the Iroquois towns. Once 
more, Le :Moyne cheerfully set out upon what seemed 
a path to death; but he passed the winter without 
molestation, and in the spring following was allowed 
to return to Canada with the French prisoners. 
It was five years later (1665), before the govern- 
ment of New France felt itself sufficiently strong to 
threaten chastisement of the raiding Iroquois, who 
had long been making life a torment in the colonies 
on the St. Lawrence. The Oneidas, Onondagas, 
Cayugas, and Senecas sued for peace; but the 1\10- 
hawks were obstinate, and their villages were wasted 
by fire until they too asked for mercy and the minis- 
trations of the Jesuits. Fathers James Fremin, 
James Bruyas, and John Pierron were sent out in 
166 7; later, they were assisted by Julian Garnier, 
Stephen de Carheil, Peter 1filet, and Boniface, so 
that by the close of 1668 a mission was in progress in 
each of the five cantonments. A few notable con- 
verts were made, among them Catharine Tegakouita, 
known as the" Iroquois saint;" Catharine Ganneak- 
tena, an Erie captive who afterwards founded a 
native mission village on the banks of the St. Law- 
rence; the head-men Assendasé, Kryn, and Soenrese. 
But a great success was never possible; here as else- 
where, the vices and superstitions of the tribesmen 



INTRODUcTIOJ\T 


31 


were deep-rooted, and they had not yet reached a 
stage of culture where the spiritual doctrines of 
Christianity appealed strongly, save to a fewemotion- 
al natures. The converts were subjected to so many 
annoyances and dangers, that isolation was thought 
essential, and there was established for them opposite 
:Montreal the palisaded mission of St. Francis Xavier; 
this settlement, fostered by the French as a buffer 
against Iroquois attack all the colonists, was subse- 
quently removed to Sault St. Louis, and is known in 
our day as Caughnawaga. This mission, and that 
of the Sulpitians on :Montreal 1Iountain -later re- 
moved to the neighboring Lake of the Two 1Iount- 
ains,-and at Quinté Bay, were frequently recruited 
by Iroquois Christians, who were carefully instructed 
by the missionaries in the arts of agriculture and the 
rites of the church. 
This depletion of the Iroquois population alarmed 
the sachems of the confederacy. To please them, 
Governor Dongan of New York, himself a Catholic, 
introduced to the Five Nations three English Jesuits, 
who sought in vain to counteract the movement. 
The French did not abandon the Iroquois mission- 
field until 1687, when the rising power of the English 
obliged them to 'withdraw from the country. \Ve have, 
however, glimpses of occasional attempts thereafter to 
revive the work, Bruyas being on the ground in 17 01 , 
joined the following year by James de Lamberville, 
Garnier, and Le Valliant, and later by James d'Hue 
and Peter de 
larieu1. The entire party were again 
driven from the cantonments in 1708, De 11arieul be- 
ing the last of his order to remain on duty. 
Thereafter, the Jesuits were chiefly devoted to 
their mission at Caughnawaga, whither many Iro- 



32 


INTROD UcTION 


quais retreated before the inroads of Dutch and Eng- 
lish settlers who were now crowding upon their 
lands. When the black gowns were at last expelled 
from New France, secular priests continued their 
work among the remnants of those New York Indians 
who had sought protection by settling among the 
French colonists on the St. Lawrence. 


VI. THE OTTAWA 11IsSION. 
This embraced the tribes beyond Lake Huron,- the 
Chippewas at Sault Ste. :Marie, the Beavers, the Crees, 
the Ottawas and refugee Hurons on Lake Superior, 
the 11enomonees, Pottawattomies, Sacs, Faxes, Win- 
ne bagoes, 
Iiamis, Illinois, and those of the Sioux who 
lived on or near the banks of the Mississippi. The 
Ottawas were the first Indians from the upper lakes 
to trade with the French, hence that vast district be- 
came early known as the country of the Ottawas. 
The Huron mission was the door to the Ottawa 
mlSSlon. Jogues and Raimbault were with the Chip- 
pewas at Sault Ste. 11arie in 1641; but it was nine- 
teen years after that (1660), before they were followed 
by another Jesuit, the veteran Father 11énard, who 
accompanied an Ottawa fleet up the great river of 
that name, through Lake Huron and the Sault, and 
on to Keweenaw Bay, where he said the first mass 
heard on the shores of the northern sea. After a 
wretched winter on that inhospitable coast, spent in 
a shanty of fir boughs, with savage neighbors who 
reviled his presence, he proceeded inland intent on 
ministering to some H urons who had fled from Iro- 
quois persecution to the gloomy pine forest about the 
upper waters of Black River, in what is now Wiscon- 
sin. In August, 1661, he lost his life at a portage, 



IJ.VTRODUcTION 


33 


thus being the first martyr upon the Ottawa mission. 
Four years later, Claude Alloüez set out for Lake 
Superior, and reaching Chequamegon Bay in October 
( 166 5), built a little chapel of bark upon the south- 
west shore of that rock-bound estuary ,- the famous 
mission of La Pointe. His flock was a medley, 
Hurons and Algonkins here clustering in two vil- 
lages, where they lived on fish, safe at last from 
the raging Iroquois, although much pestered by the 
wild Sioux of the \Vest. For thirty years did Al- 
loüez travel from tribe to tribe, through the forests 
and over the prairies of the vast wilderness which a 
century later came to be organized into the North- 
west Territory, and established missions at Green 
Bay, Sault Ste. :Marie, on the :Miami, and, with :Mar- 
quette, among the Illinois at Kaskaskia. 
Later, there arrived on the scene Fathers Louis 
Nicholas, James :Marquette, Dablon, Louis André, 
Druillettes, Albanel, and others. The field of the 
Northwest seemed at first, as did the Huron mission, 
highly promising. The missionaries were every- 
where greeted by large audiences, and much curiosity 
was displayed concerning the rites of the church; 
but, as usual, the nomadic habits of the Indians ren- 
dered instruction difficult. The fathers, with great 
toil and misery, and subject to daily danger and in- 
sult, followed their people about upon long hunting 
and fishing expeditions; and even when the bands 
had returned to the squalid villages, life there was 
almost as comfortless as upon the trail. Among the 
donnés and the Jesuit coadjutor brothers were skillful 
workers in metal, who repaired the guns and utensils 
of the natives, and taught them how best to obtain 
and reduce the are from lead and copper deposits. 



34 


INTRODUcTIO.l.Y 


We have evidence that the copper region of Lake 
Superior was at times resorted to by the lay followers 
and their Indian attendants, to obtain material for 
crucifixes and for the medals which the missionaries 
gave to converts; and in the lead nÜnes centering 
about where are now Dubuque, Iowa, and Galena, Ill., 
the missionary attendants and Indians obtained lead 
for barter with French fur-traders, who, like the sol- 
diers of the Cross, ,vere by this time wandering all 
over the Northwest. 
Marquette had succeeded Alloüez at La Pointe, in 
166 9; but it was not long before the Hurons and 
Ottawas of Chequamegon Bay foolishly incurred the 
fresh hostility of the Sioux, and the following year 
were driven eastward like autumn leaves before a 
blast. 1Iarquette established them in a new mission, 
a t Point S1. Ignace, opposite Mackinaw; and it was 
from here that, in 1673, he joined the party of Louis 
Joliet, en route to the Mississippi River. The St. 
Ignace mission became the largest and most success- 
ful in the N orthvvest, there being encamped there, 
during :Marquette's time, about 500 Hurons and 1,300 
Ottawas. The interesting story of Marquette, a fa- 
miliar chapter in American history, will be fully devel- 
oped in the documents of this series; and we shall be 
able to present for the first time a facsimile of the 
original :MS. Journal of his final and fatal voyage 
(1674), which is preserved among the many treasures 
of the Jesuit College of S1. :Mary's, in :Montreal. 
After the suspension of the publication of the 
Relatiolls, in 1673, we obtain few glimpses of the Ot- 
tawa mission, save in the occasional references of 
travelers. The several local missions in the district 
were, in the main, probably more successful than those 



INTRODUCTION 


35 


in any of the other fields of endeavor. La Pointe, 
Green Bay, S1. Ignace (later :Mackinac), Sault Ste. 
Marie, St. Joseph's, and Kaskaskia became the most 
important of them all; and at some of these points 
Catholic missions are still maintained by Franciscan 
friars and secular priests, for resident French Creoles 
and Indians. The uprising of the Faxes against 
French power, which lasted spasmodically from 
about 1700 to 1755, greatly hampered the work of the 
Jesuits; they did not, during this period, entirely ab- 
sent themselves from the broad country of the Otta- 
was, but conversions were few and the records slight. 
There was, for a time, governmental attempt to 
supplant the Western Jesuits with Récollets. Sev- 
eral friars were with La Salle, who had a great antip- 
athy to the disciples of Loyola,- Father Hennepin's 
adventures belong to this period of Récollet effort, 
his colleagues at Fort Crèvecæur being Brothers 
Ribourde and :Membré; but their mission closed with 
the Iroquois repulse of the French from Crèvecæur, 
and the consequent death of Ribourde. When La 
Salle retired from the region, Alloüez resumed the 
Illinois mission of the Jesuits; and soon after there 
arrived upon the ground Fathers Gravier, Marest, 
Mermet, and Pinet, who, because of the more docile 
character of the tribes collectively known as the 
Illinois,-Kaskaskias, Cahokias, Peorias, and Tama- 
roas,- found here a relatively fruitful field. In 
time, French settlements grew up around the 
palisaded missions, intermarriages occurred, and the 
work flourished for many years. Black gowns visited 
the prosperous Illinois towns as late as 1781, when 
the death of Father 11eurin closed the work of his 
order in the Northwest. 



36 INTRODUcTIO
V 


VII. THE LOUISIANA MISSION. 


The Jesuit Marquette was in Louisiana in 1673, 
but established no mission. Nine years later, 11em- 
bré, of the Récollets, accompanied La Salle into the 
region, and instructed natives as far down the 11issis- 
sippi as the mouth; and with La Salle at his death 
were Anastasius Douay, of the Récollets, and the 
Sulpitian Cavalier. In 1698, Francis Jolliet de :Mon- 
tigny and Anthony Davion, priests of the Seminary 
of Quebec, established missions on the Yazoo, alTIOng 
the Natchez, and elsewhere in the neighborhood; to 
their aid, soon came others of their house,-St. Côme, 
Gaulin, Fonçault, and Erborie, who labored until 
about 1710, when, S1. Côme and Fonçault being 
killed by roving Indians, the survivors retired to the 
North. The Jesuit Du Rue accompanied Iberville 
into the country in 1699-1700, followed by De 
Limoges and Dongé, of his order, their work con- 
tinuing until about 1704. 
In 172 I, Father Charlevoix reported that but two 
priests were then in Louisiana, one at Yazoo and 
another in New Orleans; at the latter post, a chaplain 
of some sort was established throughout the French 
régime. Capuchins and Jesuits were both admitted to 
Louisiana, in 1722, the former to serve as priests to 
the French of the country, chiefly at New Orleans 
and Natchez, while the Jesuits were restricted to the 
Indian missions, although permitted to maintain a 
house in the outskirts of New Orleans. It was not 
long before the Illinois mission became attached to 
Louisiana, and missionaries for that field usually en- 
tered upon their work by way of the New Orleans 
house. Missions were maintained in the villages of 



IJ\
TROD UcTION 


37 


the Arkansas, Yazoo, Choctaws, and Alibamons; but 
the uprising of the Indians in the Natchez district, 
in 1727, led to the fall of these several missions, to- 
gether with that of French colonies above New Or- 
leans. Father Du Poisson was killed by savages at 
Natchez, where he was temporarily supplying the 
French settlers in the absence of their Capuchin friar; 
Souel fell a victim to the Yazoos, at whose hands 
Doutreleau narrowly escaped destruction. However, 
the Jesuits did not despair, but soon returned to the 
Lower :Mississippi, where they continued their labors 
until about 1770, although the order had in 1762 been 
suppressed in France. 
The Louisiana mission of the Jesuits, while pro- 
ducing several martyrs, and rich in striking examples 
of missionary zeal, has yielded but meagre document- 
ary results; few of the papers in the present series 
touch upon its work, and indeed detailed knowledge 
thereof is not easily obtainable. Severed from Can- 
ada by a long stretch of wilderness, communication 
with the 81. Lawrence basin was difficult and spas- 
modic, and in the case of the Jesuits generally unnec- 
essary; for, having their own superior at New Or- 
leans, his allegiance was to the general of the order 
in France, not to his fellow-superiors in Quebec and 
:Montreal. The several missions of New France played 
a large part in American history; that of Louisiana, 
although interesting, is of much less importance. 


THE RELATIONS. 
A few explorers like Champlain, Radisson, and Per- 
rot have left valuable narratives behind them, which 
are of prime importance in the study of the begin- 
nings of French settlement in America; but it is to 



38 


INTRODUcTIO.J.V 


the Jesuits that we owe the great body of our informa- 
tion concerning the frontiers of New France in the 
seventeenth century. It was their duty annually to 
transmit to their superior in Quebec, or :Montreal, a 
written journal of their doings; it was also their duty 
to pay occasional visits to their superior, and to go 
into retreat at the central house of the Canadian 
mISSIon. Annually, between 1632 and 1673, the 
superior made up a narrative, or Relatio1l, of the most 
important events which had occurred in the several 
missionary districts under his charge, sometimes 
using the exact words of the missionaries, and some- 
times with considerable editorial skill summarizing 
the individuaì journals in a general account, based in 
part upon the oral reports of visiting fathers. This 
annual Relation, which in bibliographies occasionally 
bears the name of the superior, and at other times of 
the missionary chiefly contributing to it, was for- 
warded to the provincial of the order in France, and, 
after careful scrutiny and re-editing, published by 
him in a series of duodecimo volumes, known collect- 
ively as The Jesuit Relations. 
The authors of the journals which formed the basis 
of the Relations were for the most part men of trained 
intellect, acute observers, and practised in the art of 
keeping records of their experiences. They had left 
the most highly civilized country of their times, to 
plunge at once into the heart of the American wilder- 
ness, and attempt to win to the Christian faith the 
fiercest sa vages known to history. To gain these 
savages, it was first necessary to know them intimate- 
ly,- their speech, their habits, their manner of 
thought, their strong points and their "\-'leak. These 
first students of the North American Indian were 



INTRODUCTIO.N 


39 


not only amply fitted for their undertaking, but none 
have since had better opportunity for its prosecution. 
They were explorers, as well as priests. Bancroft 
was inexact when he said, in oft-quoted phrase, 
"N at a cape was turned, not a river entered, but a 
Jesuit led the way." The actual pioneers of New 
France were almost always coureurs de bois, in the 
prosecution of the fur trade; but coureurs de bois, for 
obvious reasons, seldom kept records, even when 
capable of doing so, and as a rule we learn of their 
previous appearance on the scene only through 
chance allusions in the Relations. The Jesuits per- 
formed a great service to mankind in publishing 
their annals, which are, for historian, geographer, 
and ethnologist, among our first and best authorities. 
1Iany of the Relations were written in Indian 
camps, amid a chaos of distractions. Insects innu- 
merable tormented the journalists, they were im- 
mersed in scenes of squalor and degradation, over- 
come by fatigue and lack of proper sustenance, often 
suffering from wounds and disease, maltreated in a 
hundred ways by hosts who, at times, might more 
properly be called jailers: and not seldom had savage 
superstition risen to such a height, that to be seen 
making a memorandum was certain to arouse the 
ferocious enmity of the band. I t is not surprising 
that the composition of these journals of the Jesuits 
is sometimes crude; the wonder is, that they could 
be written at all. Nearly always the style is simple 
and direct. Never does the narrator descend to self- 
glorification, or dwell unnecessarily upon the details 
of his continual martyrdom; he never cOlnplains of 
his lot; but sets forth his experience in phrases the 
most matter-of-fact. His meaning is seldom obscure. 



40 


INTRODUCTION 


We gain from his pages a vivid picture of life in the 
primeval forest, as he lived it; we seem to see him 
upon his long canoe journeys, squatted amidst his 
dusky fellows, working his passage at the paddles, 
and carrying cargoes upon the portage trail; we see 
him the butt and scorn of the savage camp, some- 
times deserted in the heart of the wilderness, and 
obliged to wait for another flotilla, or to make his 
way alone as best he can. Arrived at last, at his 
journey's end, we often find him vainly seeking for 
shelter in the squalid huts of the natives, with every 
man's hand against him, but his own heart open to 
them al
. We find him, even when at last domiciled 
in some far-away village, working against hope to 
save the unbaptized from eternal damnation; we 
seem to see the rising storm of opposition, invoked 
by native medicine-men,- who to his seventeenth- 
century imagination seem devils indeed,-and at last 
the bursting climax of superstitious frenzy which 
sweeps him and his before it. N at only do these 
devoted missionaries,- never, in any field, has been 
witnessed greater personal heroism than theirs,- 
live and breathe before us in the RelatioJls / but we 
have in them our first competent account of the Red 
Indian, at a time when relatively uncontaminated by 
contact with Europeans. We seem, in the Relations, 
to know this crafty savage, to measure him intellec- 
tually as well as physically, his inmost thoughts as 
well as open speech. The fathers did not under- 
stand him from an ethnological point of view, as 
well as he is to-day understood; their minds were 
tinctured with the scientific fallacies of their time. 
But, with what is known to-day, the photographic re- 
ports in the Relations help the student to an accurate 



IiVTRODUcTION 


41 


picture of the untamed aborigine, and much that mys- 
tified the fathers, is now, by aid of their carefulj our- 
nals, easily susceptible of explanation. Few periods 
of history are so well illuminated as the French 
régime in North America. This .owe owe in large 
measure to the existence of the Jesuit RelatioJls. 
"\Vhat are generally known as the Relations proper, 
addressed to the superior and published in Paris, 
under direction of the provincial, commence with Le 
Jeune's Bricl/e Relation dll Voyage de la NOll'i'elle-France 
( 16 3 2 ); and thereafter a duodecimo volume, neatly 
printed and bound in vellum, was issued annually 
from the press of Sebastien Cramoisy, in Paris, until 
16 73, when the series was discontinued, probably 
through the influence of Frontenac, to whom the 
Jesuits were distasteful. The Relations at once be- 
came popular in the court circles of France; their 
regular appearance was always awaited with the 
keenest interest, and assisted greatly in creating and 
fostering the enthusiasm of pious philanthropists, 
who for many years substantially maintained the mis- 
sions of New France. In addition to these forty 
volumes, which to collectors are technically known as 
"Cramoisys," many similar publications found their 
way into the hands of the public, the greater part of 
them bearing date after the suppression of the Cra- 
moisy series. Some were printed in Paris and Lyons 
by independent publishers; others appeared in Latin 
and Italian texts, at Rome and other cities in Italy; 
while in such journals as ..lJ,ferCllre François and A1lIlUæ 
Litteræ Societatis Jesll, occasionally were published let- 
ters from the missionaries, of the same nature as the 
Relations, but briefer and more intimate in tone. 
It does not appear, however, that popular interest 



42 


I.lVTROD UcTION 


in these publications materially affected the secular 
literature of the period; they were largely used in 
Jesuit histories of New France, but by others were 
practically ignored. General literary interest in the 
Relations was only created about a half century ago, 
when Dr. E. B. o 'Callaghan, editor of the Docu- 
mentary History of New York, called attention to their 
great value as storehouses of contemporary informa- 
tion. Dr. John G. Shea, author of History of the 
Catholic Missions among tIle Indian Tribes of the United 
States, and Father Felix JYlartin, S. J., of Montreal, 
soon came forward, with fresh studies of the Rela- 
tions. Collectors at once commenced searching for 
Cramoisys, which were found to be exceedingly 
scarce,- most of the originals having been literally 
worn out in the hands of their devout seventeenth- 
century readers; finally, the greatest collector of 
them all, James Lenox, of New York, outstripped 
his competitors and laid the foundation, in the Lenox 
Library, of what is to-day probably the only complete 
collection in America. In 1858, the Canadian gov- 
ernment reprinted the Cramoisys, with a few addi- 
tions, in three stout octavo volumes, carefully edited 
by Abbés Làverdière, Plante, and Ferland. These, 
too, are now rare, copies seldom being offered for sale. 
The Quebec reprint was followed by two admirable 
series brought out by Shea and O'Callaghan respect- 
ively. Shea's Cramoisy Series ( 1857-1866), numbers 
twenty-five little volumes, the edition of each of 
which was limited to a hundred copies, now diffi- 
cult to obtain; it contains for the most part entirely 
new matter, chiefly Relations prepared for publication 
by the superiors, after 1672, and miscellaneously 
printed; among the volumes, however, are a few 



INTRODUCTION 


43 


reprints of particularly rare issues of the original 
Cramoisy press. The O'Callaghan series, seven in 
number (the edition limited to twenty-five copies), 
contains different material from Shea's, but of the 
same character. A further addition to the mass of 
material was made by Father 11artin, in Relations 
lnédites de la Nouvelle-France, 1672-79 (2 vols., Paris, 
1861); and by Father Carayon in Prelllière ivlission des 
J ésuites au Canada (Paris, 1864). In 1871, there was 
published at Quebec, under the editorship of Abbés 
Laverdière and Casgrain, Le Journal desJésuites, from 
the original manuscript in the archives of the Semi- 
nary of Quebec (now Laval University). The memo- 
randa contained in this volume,-a rarity, for the 
greater part of the edition was accidentally destroyed 
by fire,-were not intended for publication, being of 
the character of private records, covering the opera- 
tions of the Jesuits in New France between 1645 and 
1668. The Journal is, however, an indispensable com- 
plement of the Relatio1ls. It was reprinted by a 
:Montreal publisher (J. 11. Valois) in 1892, but even 
this later edition is already exhausted. :ßlany inter- 
esting epistles are found in Let/res Édzjìantes ct Curieuses, 
écrites des Jrlissions Étrangères, which cover the Jesuit 
missions in many lands, between the years 1702 and 
177 6 ; only a small portion of this publication (there 
are several editions, ranging from 1702-1776 to 18 75- 
77) is devoted to the North American missions. 
American historians, from Shea and Parkman down, 
have already made liberal use of the Relations, and 
here and there antiquarians and historical societies 
have published fragmentary translations. The great 
body of the Relations and their allied documents, how- 
ever, has never been Englished. The text is difficult, 



44 


INTROD UcTIO]\/ 


for their French is not the French of the modern 
schools; hence these interesting papers have been 
doubly inaccessible to the majority of our historical 
students. The present edition, while faithfully re- 
producing the old French text, even in most of 
its errors, offers to the public, for the first time, an 
English rendering side by side with the origiNal. 
In breadth of scope, also, this edition will, through 
the generous enterprise of the publishers, readily be 
first in the field. Not only will it embrace all of the 
original Cramoisy series, the Shea and O'Callaghan 
series, those collected by Fathers 1vIartin and Carayon, 
the Journal des Jésuites, and such of the Lettn's Édi- 
fiaJltes as touch upon the North American missions, 
but many other valuable documents which have 
not previously been reprinted; it will contain, also, 
considerable hitherto-unpublished material from the 
manuscripts in the archives of St. :Mary's College, 
Montreal, and other depositories. These seyeral 
documents will be illustrated by faithful reproduc- 
tions of all the maps and other engravings appearing 
in the old editions, besides much new material 
obtained especially for this edition, a prominent 
feature of which will be authentic portraits of many 
of the early fathers, and photographic facsimiles of 
pages from their manuscript letters. 
In the Preface to each volume will be given such 
Bibliographical Data concerning its contents, as seem 
necessary to the scholar. The appended Notes con- 
sist of historical, biographical, archæological, and mis- 
cellaneous comment, "\vhich it is hoped may tend to 
the elucidation of the text. An exhaustive General 
Index to the English text will appear in the final 
volume of the series. 



PREFACE 'TO YOLo I 


There is a dramatic unity in the Jesuit Relations 
and Allied Documents, as they will be presented in 
this series. Commencing with a report of the first 
conversion of savages in New France, in 1610, by a 
secular priest, and soon drifting into the records of 
Jesuit missionary effort, they touch upon practically 
every important enterprise of the Jesuits, in Canada 
and Louisiana, from the coming of Fathers Biard 
and 1Iassé, in 1611, to the death, in the closing 
decade of the eighteenth century, of Father Well, 
" the last Jesuit of l\tlontreal." 
I. The series fitly opens with Lescarbot's La 
Con'iJcrsioJZ des Sa'i}'l}ages. 1Iarc Lescarbot, a Paris 
lawyer, a Huguenot poet as well as historian, and in 
man y respects a picturesque character in the early 
scenes of our drama, adroitly seeks in this document 
to convince the Catholic Queen of France that his 
Huguenot patrons, De :Monts and Poutrincourt, are 
so wisely ordering affairs in their New World domain 
that not only will the glory of France be enhanced, 
but the natives be won to Christ through the medium 
of the Church; for it was part of the agreement 
entered into with the Crown, by these adventurers, 
that while their colonists should be permitted to have 
Huguenot ministers, the aborigines must be con- 
verted only by Catholic priests. To this end, Lescar- 



46 


PREFACE TO VOL. I 


bot describes with unction the sudden conversion by 
a secular priest, Messire J essé Fléché, of old Chief 
Membertou and twenty other Micmacs, and their 
formal baptism on the beach at Port Royal. The 
object is, of course, to ward off the threatened inva- 
sion of New France by the Jesuits, by showing how 
thoroughly the work of proselyting is being carried 
forward without their aid. 
II. By the same ship which, in the hands of Pou- 
trincourt's son, Biencourt, carries to France this ingen- 
ious document, one Bertrand, a Huguenot layman, 
sends a message to his friend, the Sieur de la 
Tronchaie. In his Lettre Missive, 11. Bertrand de- 
scribes the conversion of Membertou and his fellow 
savages, and speaks with enthusiasm of the new 
country: as well he may, for in Volume II. we shall 
find Lescarbot testifying that in Paris the worthy 
Bertrand was " daily tormented by the gout," while 
at Port Royal he was "entirely free" from it. 
III. Lescarbot's fervid description of Father 
Fléché's conversions did not succeed in keeping the 
Jesuits from New France. The present document is 
a letter written at Dieppe, by Father Pierre Biard, of 
the Society of Jesus, to his general at Rome, telling 
of the adventures which had befallen Father Enne- 
mond Massé and himself, since they, the pioneers of 
their order in the New "\tV arId, had been ordered from 
France to Port Royal. Certain Huguenot merchants 
of Dieppe conspired to prevent the passage of the 
Jesuits to America; but finally the queen and other 
court ladies, favoring the missionaries, purchased con- 
trolof the Huguenots' ship and cargo, and the exult- 
ant fathers are now on the eve of sailing. 



PREFACE TO VOL. I 


47 


IV. In this letter, written by Biard to his provin- 
cial, a few weeks after the arrival at Port Royal, the 
missionary gives the details of his voyage, describes 
the spiritual and material condition of Poutrincourt' s 
colony, and outlines plans for work among the 
Indians- only Huguenot ministers being, as yet, 
allowed under the charter to serve the spiritual needs 
of the colonists themselves. 
V. In this letter, Biard notifies his general of the 
safe arrival of 11assé and himself. 
VI. A like duty is here performed by Massé. 
VII. Father Jouvency, one of the eighteenth-cen- 
tury historians of the Society of Jesus, herein gives 
an historical account of the Canadian missions of 
his order, in 1611-13; and, by way of comparison, 
tells of the condition of the same missions in 17 0 3, 
ending with a list of the Jesuit missions in North 
America in the year 1710, the date of original pub- 
lication. 
.VIII. Herein, J ouvency gives a detailed account of 
the Indian tribes of Canada,- their customs, charac- 
teristics, superstitions, etc. Although not in strict 
chronological order, these chapters are given here as 
being from the same work as the foregoing. 
In the preparation of several of the Notes to 
V olume I., the Editor has had some assistance from 

Irs. Jane Marsh Parker, of Rochester, N. Y. 
R. G. T. 


MADISON, WIS., August, 1896. 




LESCARBOT'S LA CONVERSION DES SA VV AGES 


PARIS: JEAN MILLOT, 1610 


SOURCE: Title-page and text, reprinted from original in 
Lenox Library, New York; the. Register of Baptisms from 
original in the John Carter Brown Library, Providence, R. I. 


PECULIARITIES IN ORIGINAL PAGINATION: P. 7, misnum- 
be red I; p. 16, misnumbered 6; pp. 23, 24, are repeated, 
except the last sentence on p. 24; p. 49 numbered "t6." 




---------------

 _ 1 ' . 
! LA . 
! CONVERSION . 
IDE S S A V V AGES 
(LVI ONT: ESTE' BA- 
I 
FTIZE S EN LA NOVV"ELLE 
France, ce
te annee 1619.. 


eAVEC VW BRE.F 1(ECIT 
till rvoJage .du SiU4r D E .J 
 I 
POVTRINCOVRT. 
I 
1 


A PARIS, 


Chez I f A!It ?vI ILL 0 T, tenant f.1 boutiqae fur 
lcs dcgrcz de la grand> Salle dll Palais. 


. \l-.... 
\ 
L______________ - - - 


..d.)!t:C PrjuiÙz
e dt
Roy. 


l. 



THE 
CONVERSION 
OF r[HE SAVAGES 
\VHO WERE BAP- 
TIZED IN NEW FRANCE 
during this year, 16 I o. 


WITH JI 737\IEF O(A7\7\ATIVE 
of tbe vo)'age of Sieur DE 
POUTRINCOURT. 


PARIS, 


JEAN MILLOT, keeping shop upon the steps of 
the great Hall of the Palace. 


By Royal License. 



54 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[V OL. 1 


[iii] A la Royne. 


MADAME, 
Die'll m' aYaJlt fait naitre amateur de ma 
nation & zelateur de .fa gloire, ie 1le puis 1Jloins que de IllY 
faire part de ce qui la touche, & quifaJls doute l'éPOÙlÇOll- 
nera qllaJzd dIe ellteJldra que Ie 110m de Iefus-Chrift eft 
a1lJlollcé és terres d' outre mcr qui porte1lt Ie nom dl' France. 
llIais particulierement cela regarde 'lIôtre Majeflé, laquelle 
fur as nouvelles a rendll 'l'n temoignage du grand con- 
tentemCJlt [iv] qu' elle ell a'lloit. La Chrétiolté doit aci au 
courage & à la pidé du Sieur de PoutriJlcourt, qui ne 
pellt 'l'Ùlre oiflf parmi la trãquillité en laquelle nous v'ivo1ls 
par Ie bellejicedu fCll Roy vôtre Epoux. l1Iais (MADA
WE) 
fi vous dejirez bien-tot voir cet æuvre a'l'ancé, 1"1 faut que 
vous y lIlettiez la main. DOJlJlez luy des ailes pour ,(.loler 
fur les eaux, & pOlctrer ji aZJant da1ls /es terres de delà, 
que jufques a l' extremité olÌ l' OccideJlt fe joint à l' Orient, 
tout lieu rctE'1ltijfe du 110m de la France. Ie fçay qu' Ü ne 
manque de volonté & jidelité all fervice du Roy & de 'lJôtre 
Majejlé, pour fazore (apres ce qui efl de Die'll) que 'ZlOUS 
.foyés obeis par tout Ie 1Jlollde. Et pour 17101Z regard ell tout 
ce que i' ay 'iamais travaillé, ie me fuis efforcé de bÙm 
meriter du Roy & du public, au.fqllels i' ay dedié mes 
labeurs . [v] S'it m' en arri'lle que/que fruit, ie Ie dediera)J 
vololltiers, & tout ce que Diell m' a domzé d' Ùlduflrie, à 
l' accroi./Jement de cette eJltreprife, & à a qui regardera Ie 
bien de 'llótre fenn"ce. Cepe ndaJlt aye z ( flf ADA lifE) 
agreable ce petit difcollrs evangelique (c' eft à dire portallt 
b01lJles 11Ouz J ellcs) que publie à la Frana fouz vôtrc bOil 
plazjir, MADA1JfE, de vôtre Majeflé Ie tres-humblc, tres- 
obeï./Jant, & tres-jide/e .fen1itellr & .fujet, 


flfARC LEScARBOT. 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


55 


[iiiJ To the Queen.! 


MADAME, 
God havÙzg crcated mc a lover of 11l)1 country 
and zcalous for its glory, I cannot do less thal1 'impart to 
z"t whatever affects its intercsts,. and so doubtless -it "itlill 
be grcatly encouragcd b)' thc tidÙlgs that the name of 
Jesus Clzrist lzas bcen proclaimed ill thc lands beyond the 
sca, which bear the name of France. But th-is 1lC"iUS z"s of 
especial 'interest to your lI-fajesty, who, UPOll hearing it, 
gavc ev'idozce of your grcat satisfaction [ivJ thereiJl. 
The ChristiaJl 
Vorld O"ií'es th-is C"i'ent to the courage and 
p'ietyof Sieur de PoutrÙzcourt,2 who caJlnot lead a lifc of 
zOdlencss amid the pcaceful prosper-ity in wkich we live 
througll tile favor of the deccased King, your Husband. 
But (lIfADAME), if )'OU W-isll to see immcdiate advance- 
ment in this work, YOll must le1ld a Ile!pÙlg hand. G'ive 
it wings to fly O"iler the scas, and to pClletrate so far itltO 
the lands bcyond that, e"i'Cll to tile uttcnnost parts whcrc tlte 

Vest 'Zl1l'itcs with the East, C7/cry place may resound with 
thc name of France. I know that there is no lack of good- 
will and loyalty in tile service of the King and of your 
Majest)" to tile end that (after what is due to God) YOll 
ma)1 bc obeyed by allmallkiJld. And as for mc, Ùz all that 
I havc ever donc, I ha'i/e eJldea"i1orcd to merit thc estccm of 
thc King and of the public, to whom I have dcdicated my 
labors. [v] If I gather any fruit thcrcfrom,. I shall l1n"ll- 
ingly consecrate it, and all thc eJlcrgy God lzas gÙ}en me, to 
tlze enlargemcnt of th-is cnterprise and to wlzatC7.'er may 
concenz thc welfare of )'Ollr ser7!ice. lIIcaJ'Z"iuhile, be plcased 
(hI ADA 111 E) to accept this little gospclnarrative (gospel, 
because bringing good tidings), whicll -is published in France 
under your good pleasure, lIIADAME, b), your Afajest)/s 
vcry humble, vcr)1 obcdicJlt and "i1ery faithful scr7Jant and 
subject , 


.i.1fARc LEScARBOT. 3 



56 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


[vi] Extraict du Priuilege du Roy. 


P AR grace & priuilege du Roy, il efi permis à lean 
Minot Marchant Libraire en la vine de Paris, 
d'imprimer, au faire imprimer, vendre & difiri- 
buer par tout nofire Royaume tant de fois qu'illuy 
plaira, en telle forme au caraétere que bon Iuy fem- 
blera, vn liure intitulé LA CONVERSION DES SA VV AGES 
compofé par MARC LESCARBOT Advocat en la Cour de 
Parlement. Et ce jufques au temps & terme de fix 
ans finis & accomplis, à compter du jour que Iedit livre 
fera achevé d'imprimer. Pendant lequel temps de- 
fences font faiétes à taus lmprimeurs, Libraires, & 
autres de queIque efiat, qualité, au condition qu'ils 
foient, de non imprimer, vendre, contrefaire, au alte- 
rer ledit liure, au aucune partie d'iceluy, fur peine de 
confifcation des exeplaires, & de quinze cens livres 
d'amende appliquable moitié à nous, & moitié aux 
pauvres de L'hofiel Dieu de cette vine de Paris, & 
defpens dommages, & interefis dudit expofant: Non- 
obfiant toute c1ameur de Haro, Chartre Normande, 
Privileges, lettres ou autres appellations & oppofi- 
tions formees à ce contraires faiétes au a faire. Donné 
à Paris Ie neufiefme iour de Septem bre I' an de grace 
16 10. Et de nofire regne Ie premier. 
Par Ie Roy en fan Confeil. 
Signé, BRIGARD. 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


57 


[vi] Extract from the Royal License. 


B y the grace and prerogative of the King, per- 
mission is granted to Jean 11illot, Bookseller in 
the city of Paris, to print or to have printed, to 
sell and distribute throughout all our Kingdom, as 
often as he may desire, in such form or character as he 
may see fit, a book, entitled: THE CONVERSION OF THE 
SAVAGES, composed by l\1:ARC LESCARBOT, Counsellor 
in the Court of Parliament. And this to remain 
valid until the expiration of six complete years, 
counting from the day on which the printing of said 
book shall be finished. During said period of time 
all Printers, Booksellers, and other persons of whatso- 
ever rank, quality, or condition are prohibited from 
publishing, selling, imitating, or changing said book 
or any part thereof, under penalty of confiscation of 
the copies, and of fifteen hundred livres fine, one- 
half of which is to be paid to us, and one-half to the 
poor of the town hospital in this city of Paris, to- 
gether with the costs, damages, and interests of the 
aforesaid petitioner: notwithstanding all cries of 
Haro, Norman Charter, 4 Licenses, letters, or other 
appeals and counter-claims, opposed to this now or 
in future. Given at Paris on the ninth day of Sep- 
tember, in the year of grace, 1610, and in the first of 
our reign. 


By the King in Council. 
Signed, BRIGARD. 



Mallh. 
24. ver.f. 
14. 


58 


LES RELA TIOlvTS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


[7J La Converfion des Sauvages qui ont efié 
baptifez en la Nouuelle-France, 
cette annee 1610. 


L A parole immuable de nôtre Sauveur Iefus-Chrifi 
nous temoigne par I' organe de fainét Matthieu 
que l' Euallgile du royal/me des cieux fera allJLOllCé 
par tout Ie monde, pour eflre en tcmoignage à toutes na- 
tions, avant que la conf011l11lation vicWle. N ous f ca vans 
par les hiftoires que la voix des Apôtres a ec1até par 
tout Ie monde de deça dés il y a plufieurs fiec1es 
paffez, quay qu'aujourd'hui les royaumes Chrétiens 
en foient la moindre partie. Mais quant au nouveau 
monde decouvert depuis environ fix-vingts ans, nous 
n'auons aucun veftige que la parole de Dieu yait 
onques [8J efté annoncée avant ces derniers temps, fi ce 
n'efi que nous voulions adjouter quelque fay à ce que 
Iehan de Leri rapporte, que comme il racontoit vn 
jour aux Brefiliens les grandes merveilles de Dieu en 
la creation du monde, & myfteres de nôtre redemp- 
tion, vn vieillart lui dit qu'il auoit oui dire à fon grand 
pere qu'autrefois vn homme barbu (or les Brefiliens 
ne Ie font point) eftoit venu vers eux, & leur avoit 
dit chafes femblables: mais qu'on ne Ie voulut point 
écouter, & depuis f'eftoiët entre-tuez & mangez les vns 
les autres. Quant aux autres nations de dela quel- 
ques vns ant bien quelque fourde nouvelle du deluge, 
& de l'immortalité des ames, enfemble dela beati- 
tude des biëvivans apres cette vie, mais ils peuvent 
avoir retenu cette obfcure doétrine de main en main 
par tradition depuis Ie catac1ifme vniverfel qui avint 



1610-13] 


THE ./ESUIT RELA TIONS 


[7] The Conversion of the Savages who have 
been baptized in New France dur- 
ing this year, 1610. 


T HE unchangeable word of our Savior Jesus Christ 
bears witness to us through the lips of saint 
:Matthew that This Gospel of the kingdom, shall 
be preacllcd ill the "iV/tole world, for a testimony to all 
llati01ls, and thcn shall the consummation comc. History 
shows that the voice of the Apostles has resounded for 
several centuries past throughout all the old world, 
although to-day the Christian kingdoms form the 
smallest part of it. But as to the new world, dis- 
covered some hundred and twenty years ago, we 
have no proof that the word of God has ever [8] 
been proclaimed there prior to these later times; 
unless we are to believe the story of Jean de Lery, 5 
who says that one day as he was telling the Bra- 
zilians about the great miracles of God in the crea- 
tion of the world, and the mysteries of our redemp- 
tion, an old man told him that he had heard his 
grandfather say that, many years before, a bearded 
man (Brazilians have no beards) had come among 
them and had related something similar; but that 
they would not listen to him, and since then had 
been killing and eating each other. As to the other 
countries beyond the sea, some of them have indeed 
a certain vague knowledge of the deluge, and of the 
immortality of the soul, together with the future re- 
ward of those who live aright; but they might have 
handed this obscure doctrine down, from generation 
to generation, since the universal deluge which hap- 


59 


l
fatth. 24, 
ver.'ìe I4. 



60 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


au temps de Noé. Refte donc à deplorer la mife- 
rable condition de ces peuples qui occupent vne terre 
fi grande, que Ie monde de deça ne vient en compa- 
raifon avec elle, fi nous comprenons la terre qui eft 
outre Ie detroit de Magellan dite, [9] Terra del flJgo, 
tant en fan etenduë vcrs la Chine, & Ie lapan, que vers 
la Nouvelle Guinée: comme auffi celIe qui eft outre 
la gran de riviere de Canada, qui s'eftend vers l'Orient 
& eft baignée de Ia gran de mer Occidentale. Toutes 
lefquelles contrees font en vne miferable ignorance, 
& n'ya point d'apparence qu'elles aient onques eu Ie 
vêt de l'EvangiIe, finon qu'en ce dernier fiec1e l'Hef- 
pagnol parmi la cruauté & I'avarice y a apporté 
quelque Iumiere de la religion Chrétienne. :l\Iais 
cela eft fi peu de chafe, qu'on n'en peut pas faire fi 
grand eftat qu'il pourroit fembler, d'autant que par 
la confeffion méme de ceux qui en ant écrit les 
hiftoires ils ant preque tué taus les naturels du païs, 
& en fait nombre vn certain hiftorien, de plus de 
vingt millions, dés i1 y a foixante dix ans. L' An- 
glois depuis vingt-cinq ans a pris pié en vne terre qui 
git entre la Floride, & Ie païs des Armouchiquois, 
laquelle terre a efté appellée Virginie en l'honneur 
de la defunéte Rayne d' Angleterre. :Mais cette 
nation fait fes affaires fi fecretement, que peu de gens 
en fçauent de [10] nouvelles certaines. Peu apres 
que i'eu publié man Hiftoire de la Nouvelle France 
on fit vn embarquemêt de huit cens hommes pour y 
envoyer. 11 n'eft point mention qu'ils fe foient lavé 
les mains au fang de ces peuples. En quay ils ne 
font ni à loüer, ni à blamer: car il n'y a aucune lay, 
ni aucun pretexte, qui permette de tuer qui que ce 
fait, & méme ceux des biens defqueIz nous-nous em- 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIOi\7S 


61 


pened in the time of Noah. It remains now to 
deplore the wretched condition of these people who 
occupy a country so large that the old world bears no 
comparison with it, if we include the land which lies 
beyond the straits of Magellan, called [9] Terra del 
fugo, extending as far toward China and Japan as 
toward New Guinea; and also the country beyond 
the great river of Canada,6 which stretches out to the 
East and is washed by the great Western ocean. 
Dense ignorance prevails in all these countries, where 
there is no evidence that they have ever felt the 
breath of the Gospel, except in this last century when 
the Spaniard carried thither some light of the Chris- 
tian religion, together with his cruelty and avarice. 7 
But this was so little that it should not receive much 
consideration, since by the very confession of those 
who have written their histories, they have killed 
almost all the natives of the country, who, only sev- 
enty years ago, according to a certain historian, 8 num- 
bered more than twenty millions. For more than 
twenty-five years, the English have retained a foot- 
hold in a country called, in honor of the deceased 
Queen of England, Virginia, which lies between 
Florida and the land of the Armouchiquois. 9 But that 
country carries on its affairs with so much secrecy, 
that very few persons know [10] anything definite 
about it. Soon after I published my History of New 
France,lO there was an embarkation of eight hundred 
men to be sent there. It is not reported that they 
bathed their hands in the blood of those people, for 
which they are neither to be praised nor blamed: for 
there is no law nor pretext which permits us to kill 
anyone, whosoever he may be, and especially the per- 
sons whose property we have seized. But they are 



62 


LES RELATIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


parons. Mais ils font à prifer s'ils montrent à ces 
pauvres ignorans Ie chemin de falut par Ia vraye & 
non fardeé doétrine Evangelique. Quant à noz Fran- 
çois ie me fuis affez plaint en madite Hifioire de la 
poltronnerie du temps d'aujourd'huy, & du peu de 
zele que nous avons fait à redreffer ces pauvres 
errans, fait à faire que Ie nom de Dieu fait coneu ex- 
alté & glorifié en ces terres d'outre mer, où jamais il 
ne Ie fut. Et toutefois nous voulons que cela porte 
Ie nom de France, nom tant augufie & venerable, que 
nous ne pouvons fans honte noUs glorifier d'vne 
France qui n'eft point Chrétienne. Ie fçay qu'il ne 
manque pas de gens de bõne volonté pour y aller. 
Mais pourquoy [I I] l'Eglife, qui poffede tant de biens; 
mais pourquoy les Grands, qui font tant de depenfes 
fuperflues, ne financent-ilz quelque chafe pour I'exe- 
cution d'vn fi fainét æuvre? Deux Gentils-hommes 
pleins de courage en ces derniers teps fe font trouvez 
zelés à ceci, les Sieurs de Monts, & de Poutrincourt, 
lefquels à leurs dépens fe font enervés, & ant fait 
plus que leurs forces ne pouvoient porter. L'vn & 
l'autre ant continué jufques à prefent leurs voyages. 
Mais l'vn a efié deceu par deux fois, & efi tombé en 
grand interefi pour s'efire rendu trap credule aux 
paroles de quelques vns. Or c1'autant que les der- 
nieres nouvelles que nous avons de nôtre Nouvelle- 
France yiennent de la part du Sieur de Poutrincourt, 
nons dirons ici ce qui efi de fan fait: & avons iufie 
fujet d'exalter fan courage, entant que ne pouvant 
viure panni la tourbe des hommes oififs, dont nous 
n' abandons que trap; & voyant nôtre France comme 
languir au repos d'vn calme ennuieux aux hõmes de 
travail: apres avoir en mille occafions fait preuve de 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


63 


to be commended if they show to these poor ignorant 
people the way of salvation by the true and unvar- 
nished doctrine of the Gospel. As to our French 
people, I have complained enough in my History of 
the cowardice of these later times, and of our lack of 
zeal either in reclaiming these poor erring ones, or in 
making known, exalted, and glorified, the name of 
God in the lands beyond the seas, where it never has 
been proclaimed. And yet we wish that country to 
bear the name of France, a name so august and 
venerable that we cannot, without a feeling of shame, 
glory in an un-Christianized France. I know that 
there are any number of people who are willing to go 
there. But why is it that [I I] the Church, which has 
so much wealth; why is it that the Nobility, who ex- 
pend so much needlessly, do not establish some fund 
for the execution of so holy a work? Two courage- 
ous Gentlemen, Sieurs de 1Ylonts and de Poutrincourt, 
haye in these later times shown such great zeal in this 
work, that they have weakened their resources by 
their outlays, and have done more than their strength 
justified them in doing. Both have continued their 
voyages up to the present time. But one of them 
has been frustrated twice, and has had heavy losses 
through too great confidence in the words of certain 
persons. Now, inasmuch as the latest news of our 
New France comes from Sieur de Poutrincourt, we 
shall speak here of what he has accomplished, and 
we have good reason to praise his courage; for (not 
being able to live among the crowd of idle men, of 
whom we have only too many, and seeing our France 
seeming to languish in a monotonous calm that was 
wearisome to men of action), after having given a 
thousand proofs of his valor during the last twenty- 



64 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


fa valeur depuis vingt quatre ans ença; il a voulu 
coroner [12] fes labeurs vrayement Herculeens par la 
caufe de Dieu, pour laquelle il employe fes moyens 
& fes forces, & va hazardant fa vie, pour accroitre Ie 
nombre des citoyens des cieux, & amener à la ber- 
gerie de Iefus-Chrift nôtre fouverain Pafteur, les 
brebis egarées, lefquelles il feroit bien-feant aux 
Prelats de l'Eglife d'aller recuillir (du mains contri- 
buer à cet effeét) puis qu'ils en ant Ie moyen. Mais 
avec combien de travaux s'eft-il employé jufques ici à 
cela? Voici la troifieme fois qu'il paffe Ie grand 
Ocean pour parvenir à ce but. La premiere année fe 
paffa avec Ie fieur de Monts à chercher vne demeure 
propre & vn port affeuré pour la retraite des vaiffeaux 
& des hommes. Ce qui ne fucceda pas bien. La 
feconde année fut employée à la mefme chafe, & lors 
il eftoit en France. En la troifieme nous fimes 
epreuve de la terre, laquelle nous rendit abondam- 
ment Ie fruiét de nôtre culture: Cette annee icy 
voyant par vne mauvaife experience que les hommes 
font trompeurs, il ne s'eft plus voulu attendre à autre 
qu'à luy-méme, & [s']eft mis en mer Ie 26. Fevrier. 
ayant eu [13] temps fort contraire en fa navigation, 
laquelle a efté la plus longue dont i'aye jamais oui 
parler. Certes la nôtre nous fut fort ennuieufe il y a 
trois ans, ayans efté vagabons l'efpace de deux 
mois & demi fur la mer avant qu'arriver au Port 
Royal. Mais en cette-ci ils ant efté trois mois 
entiers. De forte qu'vn indifcret fe feroit mutiné 
jufques à faire de mauvaifes confpirations: toutesfois 
la benignité dudit Sieur de Poutrincourt & Ie refpeét 
du lieu où il demeuroit à Paris, lui ant ferui de bou- 
clier pour luy garentir la vie. La premiere côte où 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELATIONS 


65 


four years, he sought to crown [12] his truly Herculean 
labors in the cause of God, for which he employs his 
means and strength, and endangers his life, by in- 
creasing the number of celestial citizens, and leading 
to the fold of Jesus Christ, our sovereign Shepherd, 
the wandering sheep, whom it would be becoming to 
the Prelates of the Church to go out and gather in (at 
least to contribute to this end) since they have the 
means of doing so. But with what difficulty has he 
labored in this cause up to the present time? Thrice 
has he crossed the great Ocean to carryon his enter- 
prises. The first year was passed with sieur de 
:Monts in seeking a suitable dwelling and a safe port 
for the withdrawal of the ships and their crews. 
In this, they did not meet with much success. The 
second year passed in the same way, and then he re- 
turned to France. During the third year, we experi- 
mented with the soil, which yielded abundantly to 
our cultivation. This present year, discovering 
through an unfortunate experience that men are not 
always to be trusted, he made up his mind to depend 
upon no one but himself, and put to sea on the twenty- 
sixth of February; the [13] weather being very un- 
favorable, he made the longest voyage of which I 
have ever heard; certainly our own, three years ago, 
was tedious enough, when we drifted about upon the 
sea for the space of two months and a half before 
reaching Port Royal. But this one lasted three whole 
months, so that one reckless man was about to 
mutiny, going so far as to form wicked conspiracies; 
but Sieur de Poutrincourt's kindness, and respect for 
the place where he lived in Paris, served as a shield 
to protect his life. The first coast which Sieur de 
Poutrincourt discovered was port 1fouton; there, 



Terrir, 
c' eft å 
dire dt'- 
cou'lwir 
la terre. 


Hijl. dtC 
I a IVOt/- 
'ilelle- 
France 
Ii'll. 2. 
chaþ. 37. 
þ.5 2 7. 


66 


LES RE"LA TI01VS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


territ iceluy Sieur de Poutrincourt fut au port au 
Mouton. De là parmi les brouïllas qui font fort fre- 
quens Ie long de l'Eté en cette mer, il fe trouva en 
quelques perils, principalement vers Ie Cap de Sable, 
où fan vaiffeau penfa toucher fur les brifans. Depuis 
voulant gaigner Ie Port Royal, il fut porté par la 
violence des vents quarante lieuës par-dela, c'eft à 
fçavoir à la riviere de Norombega tant celebrée & 
fabuleufement décrite par les Geographes & Hifto- 
riens, ainfi que i'ay monftré en madite Hiftoire, là où 
fe pourra voir cette navigation par la Table geogra- 
phique [14] que i'y ay mife. De-là il vint à la riviere 
fainét Iehan qui eft vis à vis du Port Royal pardela 
la Baye Françoife, où il trouva vn navire de S. Malo, 
qui troquoit avec les Sauvages du païs. Et là il eut 
plainte d'vn Capitaine Sauvage qu'vn dudit navire 
lui auoit ravi fa femme, & en abufoit: dont ledit 
Sieur fit informer, & print celui là prifonnier, & Ie 
navire auffi. Mais il laiffa aller ledit navire & les 
matelots fe contentant de garder Ie malfaiteur: lequel 
neantmoins s'evada dans vne chaloupe & fe retira 
avec les Sauvages, les detournant de l'amitié des 
François, comme nous dirons ci-apres. En fin ar- 
riués audit Port Royal il ne fe peut dire avec combien 
de ioye ces pauvres peuples receurent ledit Sieur & 
fa compagnie. Et de verité Ie fujet de cette ioye 
eftoit d'autant plus grand qu'ils n'avoient plus d'ef- 
perance de voir les François habiter aupres d'eux, 
defquels ils auoient reffenti les courtoifies lors que 
nous y eftions, dont fe voyans priués, auffi pleuroient 
ils à chaudes larmes quand nous partimes de là il y 
a trois ans. En ce Port Royal eft la demeure [15] 
dudiét fieur de Poutrincourt, Ie plus beau fejour que 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


among the fogs which are very common in this sea 
during the Summer, he encountered serious dangers, 
principally in the neighborhood of Cape Sable, where 
his ship came near foundering. Thence, in trying 
to reach Port Royal, he was carried by violent winds 
forty leagues beyond, namely to the Norombega 
river,l1 so celebrated and so fabulously described by 
Geographers and Historians, as I have shown in my 
said History, where this voyage may be seen in the 
geographical Chart [14] which I have inserted therein. 
Thence he came to the riyer saint John, which is 
opposite Port Royal beyond French Bay,12 where he 
found a ship from S1. Malo trading with the Savages 
of the country. Here complaint was made to him by 
a Captain of the Savages, that one of the crew of 
the said ship had stolen away his wife and was abusing 
her: the Sieur informed himself about the matter and 
then made a prisoner of the malefactor and seized 
the ship.13 But he released the ship and the sailors, 
contenting himself by retaining the guilty one, who 
escaped, however, in a shallop, and went off with the 
Savages, prejudicing them against the French, as we 
shall relate hereafter. Arrived at last at Port Royal, 
it is impossible to describe the joy with which these 
poor people received the Sieur and his company. 
And, in truth, there was still greater reason for this 
joy, since they had lost all hope of ever again seeing 
the French live among them. They had had some 
experience of our kind treatment while we were 
there, and, seeing thenìselves deprived of it, they 
wept bitterly when we left them three years ago. 
This Port Royal. the home [15] of sieur de Poutrin- 
court, is the most beautiful earthly habitation that God 
has ever made. It is fortified upon the North by a 


67 


Terrir, 
1Ilcanitzg to 
discover 
tIle land. 


Jlistoryof 
New 
France, 
book 2, 
chaþ. 37, 
þ.5 2 7. 



68 


LES RELATIONS DES ./ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


Dieu ait formé fur la terre, relnparé d'un rang de 12 
au IS. lieuës de montagnes du côté du N art, fur lef- 
queUes bat Ie Soleil tout Ie iour: & de cotaux au côte 
du Su, au Midi: lequel au refte peut contenir vingt 
mi11es vaiffeaux en affeurance, ayant vingt braffes de 
profond à fan entrée, vne lieuë & demie de large, & 
quatre de long jufques à vne ile qui a vne lieuë Fran- 
çoife de circuit: dans lequel i'ay veu quelquefois à 
l'aife noüer vne moyenue Baleine, qui venoit auec Ie 
flat à huiét heures au matin par chacun jour. Au 
refte dans ce port fe peche en la faifon gran de quan- 
tité de harens, d'eplans, (au eperlans) fardines, bars, 
moruës, loups-marins, & autre poiffons: & quant aux 
coquiUages, on y recueille force houmars, crappes, 
palourdes, coques, moules, efcargots, & chatagines de 
mer. Mais qui voudra aller au deffus du flat de Ia 
mer il pechera en la riviere force eturgeons & fau- 
mons, à la deffaiéte defquels il y a vn fingulier 
plaifir. Or pour reprendre nôftre fil, Ie Sieur de Pou- 
trincourt arrivé [6 i.e. 16] là a trouvé fes batimens 
tout entiers fans que les Sauvages (ainfi a-on appellé 
ces peuples là iufques à maintenant) y euffent touché 
en aucune façon, ny méme aux meubles qu'on yavoit 
Iaiffé. Et foucieux de leurs vieux amis ils deman- 
doient comme vn chacun d'eux fe portoit, les nommant 
particulierement par .leurs noms comlnuns, & deman- 
dans pourquoy tels & tels n'y eftoient retournez. Ceci 
demontre vne grãde debõnaireté en ce peuple, lequel 
auffi ayant en nous reconu toute humanité, ne nous 
fuit point; comme il fait l'Hefpagnol en tout ce 
grand maude nouveau. Et confequemment par vne 
douceur & courtoifie, qui leur eft auffi falniliere qu'à 
nous, il eft aifé de Ies faire plier à tout ce que l' on 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


69 


range of 12 or 15 leagues of mountains, upon which 
the Sun beats all day, and by hills on the Southern 
or Meridian shore, which forms a port that can se- 
curely harbor twenty thousand ships, being twenty 
fathoms deep at its entrance, a league and a half in 
width, and four leagues long, extending to an island 
which is a French league in circumference: here I 
have sometimes seen swimming at ease a medium- 
sized Whale, which came in with the tide at eight 
o'clock every morning. Furthermore, there can be 
caught in this port, in their season, great quantities 
of herring, smelt, sardines, barbels, codfish, seals and 
other fish; and as to shell-fish, there is an abundance 
of lobsters, crabs, palourdes,14 cockles, mussels, snails, 
and porpoises. But whoever is disposed to go beyond 
the tides of the sea will find in the river quanti- 
ties of sturgeon and salmon, and will have plenty of 
sport in landing them. Now, to return to our story; 
\Vhen Sieur de Poutrincourt arrived [6 i.e. 16] there, 
he found his buildings entire, the Savages (as these 
people have been called up to the present) not hav- 
ing touched them in any way, even the furniture re- 
maining as we had left it. Anxious about their old 
friends, they asked how they were all getting along, 
calling each individual by his name, and asking why 
such and such a one had not come back. This shows 
the great amiability of these people, who, having 
seen in us only the most humane qualities, never flee 
from us, as they do from the Spaniard in this whole 
new world. And consequently by a certain gentle- 
ness and courtesy, which are as well known to them 
as to us, it is easy to make them pliant to all our 
wishes, and especially so in regard to Religion, of 
which we left them some good impressions when we 



Aux 
Hebr. II. 
ver.f. 6. 


70 


LES RELA TJONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


voudra, & particulierement pour ce qui touche Ie 
point de la Religion, de Iaquelle nous leur avions 
baillé de bonnes impreffiõs lors que nous eftions au pres 
d'eux, & ne defiroient pas mieux que de fe ranger fouz 
la banniere de Iesus-Chrift: à quay ils euffent efté 
receuz dés lars, fi nous euffiotls eu vn pié ferme en la 
terre. Mais comme nous penfions continuer, [I7J 
avint que Ie fieur de 1Ionts ne pouvant plus fournir à 
la depenfe, & Ie Roy ne l' affiftant point, il fut contraint 
de revoquer taus ceux qui eftoient pardelà, lefquels 
n'avoient porté les chafes neceffaires à vne plus longue 
demeure. Ainfi c' euft efté temerité & folie de con- 
ferer Ie baptéme à ceux qu'il euft fallu par apres 
abandonner, & leur donner fujet de retourner à leur 
vomiffement. 11ais maintenant que c'eft à bon 
efcient, & que ledit fieur de Poutrincourt fait pardelà 
fa demeure aétuelle, il eft loifible de leur imprimer 
Ie charaétere Chrétien fur Ie front & en l'ame, apres 
les avoir inftruit és principaux articles de nôtre Fay. 
Ce qu'a eu fain de faire ledit Sieur, fachant ce que dit 
l' Apôtre, que cduy qui s' approclte de Diezl doibt cro'ire que 
D'Íell eft: & apres cette croyance, peu à peu on vient 
aux chafes qui font plus eloignées du fens commun, 
comme de cröire que d'vn rien Dieu ait fait toutes 
chafes, qu'il fe fait fait hommô, qu'il fait nay d'vne' 
Vierge, qu'il ait voulu nlourir pour l'homme, &c. Et 
d' autant que les hommes Ecclefiaftics qui ant efté 
portés pardelà ne font encore [r8] inftruits en la langue 
de ces peuples, ledit Sieur a pris la peine de les in- 
ftruire & les faire inftruire par l'organe de fan fils ainé 
jeune Gentilhomme qui entend & parle fort bien Iadite 
langue, & qui sëble eftre né pour leur ouvrir Ie che- 
min des cieux. Les hommes qui font au Port Royal, 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


were there; and they seemed to wish for nothing bet- 
ter than to enroll themselves under the banner of 
Jesus Christ, where they would have been received 
at once if we had had a firm foothold in the country. 
But just as we were hoping to continue [17 J the work, 
it happened that sieur de 110nts. being unable longer 
to meet the expenses, and not receiving any help 
from the King, was obliged to recall all those who 
were over there, who had not taken with them the 
means necessary to a longer sojourn. So it would 
have been rash and unwise to administer baptism to 
people whom it was necessary afterwards to abandon, 
and give them an opportunity to return to their cor- 
ruption. But now that the work is being carried on 
in earnest, and as sieur de Poutrincourt has actually 
settled there, it is lawful to impress upon their minds 
and souls the stamp of Christianity, after having 
instructed them in the principal articles of our Faith. 
Sieur de Poutrincourt is careful to do this, remem- 
bering what the Apostle said, He that cometh to God, 
must believe that he is J" and after believing this, one 
comes gradually to ideas which are farther removed 
from mere sensual apprehension, such as the belief 
that out of nothing God created all things, that he 
made himself man, that he was born of a Virgin, 
that he consented to die for man, etc. And inas- 
much as the Ecclesiastics who have been taken over 
there are not [I 8J familiar with the language of these 
people, the Sieur has taken the trouble to teach them 
and to have them taught by his eldest son, a young 
Gentleman who understands and speaks the native 
language very well, and who seems to have been 
destined to open up to the Savages the way to 
heaven. The people who are at Port Royal, and in 


71 


Hebrews II, 
vcrs. 6. 



Ammzall 
it! arcellm. 


E/at: 4I. 
ver;: 25 
Icrem. 5I. 
ver;: 23. 
Sanies 
Pagnin, 9. 


72 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[V OL. 1 


& terres adjacentes tirant vers la Terre-neuve, s'ap- 
pellent Souriquois, & ont leur langue propre. :1tlais 
paffée la Baye Françoife, qui a environ 40. lieuës de 
profond dans les terres, & 10. ou 12. lieuës de large, 
les hommes de l'autre part s'appellent Etechemins, 
& plus loin font les Armouchiquois peuple diftingué 
de langage de ceux-ci, & lequel eft heureux en quã- 
tité de belles vignes & gros railins, s'il fçavoit 
conoitre l'vtilité de ce fruit, lequel (ainli que nos 
vieux Gaullois) il penfe eftre poifon. II a aufli de la 
chãve excellente que la nature lui donne, laquelle en 
beauté and bõté paffe de beau coup la nôtre: & outre 
ce Ie Saffafras, force chenes, noyers, pruniers, cha- 
taigniers, & autres fruits qui ne font venus à nôtre 
conoiffance. Quant au Port Royal ie veux confeffer 
qu'il n'y a pas [19J tant de fruits: & neantmoins la 
terre y eft plantureufe pour y efperer tout ce que la 
France Gaulloife nous produit. Tous ces peuples fe 
gouvernent par Capitaines qu'ils appellent Sagamos, 
mot qui eft pris és Indes Orientales en méme lignifica- 
tion, ainfi que i'ay leu en l'hiftoire de 1Iaffeus, & 
lequel i'eftime venir du mot Hebrieu SagaJl, qui lignifie 
Grand Prince, felon Rabbi David, & quelquefois celui 
qui tient Ie fecond lieu apres Ie fouverain Pontife. 
En la verllon ordinaire de la Bible il eft pris pour Ie 
Magiftrat: & neantmoins là méme les interpretes He- 
brieux Ie tournèt Prince. Et de fait nous lifons dans 
Berofe que Noé fut appellé Saga tant pour ce qu'il 
eftoit grand Prince, que pour ce qu'il avoit enfeigné la 
Theologie, & les ceremonies du fervice divin, avec 
beaucoup de fecrets des chofes natureles, aux Scytes 
Armeniens, que les anciens Cofmographes appellerent 
Sages du nom de Noé. Et paraventure pour cette 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TI01VS 


the adjacent countries extending toward Newfound- 
land, are called Souriquois 15 and have a language of 
their own. But beyond French Bay, which extends 
into the land about forty leagues, and is ten or twelve 
leagues wide, the people on the other side are called 
Etechemins; and still farther away are the Armouchi- 
quois, whose language is different from that of the 
Etechemins, and who are fortunate in having an 
abundance of vines and large grapes, if they only 
knew how to make use of this fruit, which they be- 
lieve (as did our ancient Gauls) to be poisonous. 
They also have excellent hemp, which gro,vs wild, 
and in quality and appearance is much superior to 
ours. Besides this they have Sassafras, and a great 
abundance of oak, walnut, plum and chestnut trees, 
and other fruits which are unknown to us. As to 
Port Royal, I must confess that there is not [I9J much 
fruit there; and yet the land is productive enough to 
make us hope from it all that Gallic France yields to 
us. All these tribes are governed by Captains called 
Sagamores, a word used with the same signification 
in the East Indies, as I have read in the History by 
1Iaffeus,1ü and which I believe comes from the He- 
brew ,vord Sagan, which, according to Rabbi David, 
means Great Prince, and sometimes means the one 
who holds the second place after the sovereign Pon- 
tiff. In the usual version of the Bible it is defined 
" :Magistrate," and yet even there the Hebrew inter- 
preters translate it by the word "Prince." And in 
fact we read in Berosus 17 that Noah was called Saga, 
as much because he was a great Prince as because he 
had taught Theology and the ceremonies of divine 
service, and also many of the secrets of nature, to 
the Armenian Scythians, whom the ancient Cosmog- 


73 


A 1Jl1Jliallus 
iJl arce/- 
hilus. 


Isaiah 4I, 
verso 25, 
Jerem.5I, 
vers.23, 
Santes 
PagnÙl,9. 



74 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


méme confideration ont efté appellés nos Teétofages, 
qui font les Tolofains. Car ce bon pere reftaurateur 
du monde vint en Italie, & envoya [20J repeupler les 
Gaulles apres Ie Deluge, donnant fan nom de Gaul- 
lois (car Xenophon dit qu'il fut auffi appellé de ce 
nom) à ceux qu'il y envoya, par ce qu'il avoit efté 
echappé des eaux. Et n'eft pas inconvenient que 
lui-méme n'ait impofé Ie nom aux Teétofages. Re- 
venons à nôtre mot de Sagamos lequel eft Ie tiltre 
d'honneur des Capitaines en ces Terres neuves dont 
nous parlons. Au Port Royal Ie Capitaine, au Saga- 
mos dudit lieu s'appelle en fan nom Membertou. II 
eft âgé de cent ans pour Ie mains, & peut naturelle- 
ment vivre encore plus de cinquante. 11 a fous fay 
plufieurs familles, aufquelles il commande, non point 
avec tant d'authorité que fait nôtre Roy fur fes 
fujets, mais pour haranguer, donner confeil, marcher 
à la guerre, faire raifon à celui qui reçoit quelque 
injure, & chafes fèblables. II ne met point d'impoft 
fur Ie peuple. Mais s'il y a de la chaffe il en a fa 
part fans qu'il foit tenu d'y aller. Vray eft qu'on lui 
fait quelquefois des pre fens de peaux de Caftors, au 
autre chafe, quand il eft employé pour la guerifon de 
quelque malade, au pour interroger [2 I J fon dæmon 
(qu'il appelle A021tem) afin d'auoir nouvelle de quel- 
que chafe future, au abfente: car chaque village, au 
compagnie de Sauvages, ayant vn AoutllloÙZ, c' eft à 
dire Devin, qui fait cet office, :Membertou eft celui 
qui de grande ancienneté à prattiqué cela entre ceux 
parmi lefquels il a converfé. Si bien qu'il eft en 
credit pardeffus taus les autres Sagamos du païs, aiãt 
dés fa jeuneffe efté grand Capitaine, & parmi cela 
cxcrcé l'office de Devin & de Medecin, qui font les 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


75 


rap hers called "Sages," after Noah. And perhaps for 
this very same reason our Tectosages, who are the 
Tolosains,18 are so called. For this good father, who 
restored the world, came into Italy and sent [20J a 
new population into Gaul after the Deluge. giving his 
name, Gauls (for Xenophon says that he was also called 
by this name), to those whom he sent there, because 
he had escaped from the waters. And it is not im- 
probable that he himself imposed this name upon the 
Tectosages. Let us return to our word Sagamore, 
which is the title of honor given to the Captains in 
these new Lands, of which we are speaking. At Port 
Royal, the name of the Captain or Sagamore of the 
place is 11embertou. 19 He is at least a hundred years 
old, and may in the course of nature live more than 
fifty years longer. He has under him a number of 
families whom he rules, not with so much authority 
as does our King over his subjects, but with sufficient 
power to harangue, advise, and lead them to war, to 
render justice to one who has a grievance, and like 
matters. He does not impose taxes upon the people, 
but if there are any profits from the chase he has a 
share of them, without being obliged to take part in 
it. It is true that they sometimes make him presents of 
Beaver skins and other things, when he is occupied in 
curing the sick, or in questioning [2 IJ his demon (whom 
he calls AOlltem) to have news of some future event or 
of the absent: for, as each village, or company of 
Savages, has an AOlltmoÙz, or Prophet, who perfonns 
this office, 1\lem bertou is the one who, from time 
immemorial, has practiced this art among his follow- 
ers. He has done it so well that his reputation is far 
above that of all the other Sagamores of the country, 
he having been since his youth a great Captain, and 



76 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


(VOL. 1 


trois chafes plus efficaces à obliger les hommes, & à 
fe rendre neceffaire en cefte vie humaine. Or ce 
11embertou aujourd'huy par la grace de Dieu eft 
Chrétien avec toute fa falnille, aiant efté baptizé, & 
vingt autres apres lui, Ie jour fainét Iehan dernier 24. 
Iuin. I'en ay lettres dudit Sieur de Poutrincourt en 
datte du vnzieme jour de I uillet enfuivant. Ledit 

Iembertou a efté nommé du nom de nôtre feu bon 
Roy HENRV 1111. & fan fils ainé du nom de 1Ion- 
feigneur Ie Dauphin aujourd'huy nôtre Roy LOVIS 
XIII. que Dieu benie. Et ainfi confequemment la 
femme de 1lembertou a [22J efié nommée 1IARIE du 
nom de la Rayne Regente, & à fa fille a efté impofé 
Ie nom de la Roine MARGVERITE. Le fecond fils de 

Icm bertou dit Aétaudin fut nommé P A VL du nom de 
nôtre fainét Pere Ie Pape de Rome. La fille du fufdit 
Louis eut nom CHRISTIKE en 1 'honneur de 11adame 
la fæur ainee du Roy. Et confequemlnent à chacun 
fut impofé Ie nom de quelque illufire, au notable per- 
fonnage de deça. Plufieurs autres Sauvages efioicnt 
lors allez cabanner ailleurs (comme c' e11leur coutume 
de fe difperser par bendes quand l'efté eft venu) lors 
de ces folennitez de regeneration Chrétienne, lef- 
quels nous efiimons efire aujourd'huy enrollés en la 
famille de Dieu par Ie méme lavcmet du fainét bap- 
teme. )lais Ie diable, qui iamais ne dart, en cefte 
occurrence ici a témoigné la jaloufie qu'il avoit du 
falut annoncé à ce peuple, & de voir que Ie nom de 
Dieu fufi glorifié en cette terre: ayant fufcité vn 
mauvais François, non François, mais Turc: non 
Turc, nlais Athée, pour detourner du fentier de falut 
plufieurs Sauvages qui eftoient Chréticns en leur ame 
& de [2 3J volonté dés it y a trois ans: & entre autres vn 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


77 


also having exercised the offices of Soothsayer and 
:Uedicine-man, which are the three things most effica- 
cious to the well-being of man, and necessary to this 
human life. Now this :11embertou to-day, by the grace 
of God, is a Christian, together with all his family, 
having been baptized, and twenty others with him, on 
last saint John's day, the 24th of June. I have 
letters from Sieur de Poutrincourt about it, dated the 
eleventh day of July following. He said l\lembertou 
was named after our late good King HENRI IV., and 
his eldest son after 
lonseigneur the Dauphin, to-day 
our King LOUIS XIII., whom may God bless. And so, 
as a natural consequence, the wife of 1Iembertou [22] 
was named :11ARIE after the Queen Regent, and her 
daughter received the name of the Queen, 1IARGUE- 
RITE. The second son of 11embertou, called Actaudin, 
was named PAUL after our holy Father, the Pope of 
Rome. The daughter of the aforesaid Louis was 
named CHRISTI
E in honor of :11adame, the eldest 
sister of the King. And thus to each one was given 
the name of some illustrious or notable personage 
here in France. A number of other Savages were 
about to camp elsewhere (as it is their custom to 
scatter in bands when summer comes) at the time of 
these ceremonies of Christian regeneration, whom we 
believe to be to-day enrolled in the family of God by 
the same cleansing water of holy baptism. 20 But the 
devil, who never sleeps, has shown the jealousy 
which he felt at the salvation of these people, and at 
seeing that the name of God was glorified in this 
land, by inciting a .wicked Frenchman, not a French- 
man but a Turk, not a Turk but an Atheist, to divert 
from the path of righteousness several Savages who 
had been Christians in their hearts and [23J souls for 



78 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


Sagamos nommé ChKoudun homme de grand credit, 
duque] i'ay fait honorable metion en man Hiftoire de 
la Nouvelle-Frãce, par ce que je l'ay veu fur taus 
autres aymer les François, & qu'il admiroit nos inven- 
tions au pris de leur ignorance: mémes que s'eftant 
quelquefois trouvé aux remontrances Chrétiennes qui 
fe faifoient par-de là à noz Frãçois par chacun 
Dimanche, i1 s'y rendoit attentif, encores qu'il n'y 
entedift rien: & davantage avoit pendu devant fa 
poitrine Ie figne de la Croix, lequel il faifoit auffi 
porter à fes dåmeftics & avoit à nôtre imitation plan- 
té vne grande Croix en la place de fan village dit 
Oigoudi, fur Ie port de la riuiere fainét lehan, à dix 
lieuës du port Royal. Or cet homme avec les 
autres, a efié détourné d'eftre Chrétien par l'avarice 
maudite de ce mauvais François que i'ay touché ci- 
deffus, lequel ie ne veux nõmer pour cette heure pour 
l'amour & reverence que ie porte à fan pere, mais 
avec protefiation de l'eternifer s'il ne s'amende. 
Celui-Ià, di-ie, pour attraper quelques Caftors de ce Sa- 
gamos [24] ChKoudun, l'alla en Iuin dernier fuborner, 
apres s'eftre euadé des mains dudit Sieur de Poutrin- 
court, disãt que tout ce qu'icelui Poutrincourt leur 
difoit de Dieu n'efioit rien qui vaille, qu'il ne Ie fal- 
loit point croire, & que c'eftoit vn abufeur, & qu'il 
les feroit mourir pour avoir leurs Cafiors. Ie laiffe 
beaucoup de mechans difcours qu'il peut avoir adjouté 
à cela. S'il eftoit de la Religion de ceux qui fe 
difent Reformez ie l'excuferois aucunement: mais 
il mõtre bien qu'il n'efi ni de l'vne, ny de l'autre. 
Si diray-ie toutefois qu'il a fujet de remercier Dieu 
du dãger OÙ il s'efi veu en nôtre voiage. Ce Saga- 
mas pouvoit efiant Chrétien en redre bon nombre 



1610-13J 


THE JESUIT RELATIOIYS 


79 


three years; and among others a Sagamore named 
Chkoudun, a man of great influence, of whom I have 
made honorable mention in my History of New 
France, because I saw that he, more than all the 
others, loved the French, and that he admired our 
civilization more than their ignorance: to such an ex- 
tent, that being present sometimes at the Christian 
admonitions, which were given every Sunday to our 
French people, he listened attentively, although he 
did not understand a word; and moreover wore the 
sign of the Cross upon his bosom, which he also had 
his servants wear; and he had in imitation of us, a 
great Cross erected in the public place of his village, 
called Oigoudi, at the port of the river saint John, 
ten leagues from Port Royal. N ow this man, with 
others, was turned away from Christianity, by the 
cursed avarice of this wicked Frenchman to whom I 
have referred above, and whom I do not wish to 
name now on account of the love and reverence I 
bear his father, but I protest that I will immortalize 
him if he does not mend his ways. He, I say, in 
order to defraud this Sagamore [24J, Chkoudun, of a 
few Beavers, went last June to bribe him, after having 
escaped from the hands of Sieur de Poutrincourt, say- 
ing that all this Poutrincourt told them about God 
was nonsense, that they need not believe it, that he 
was an impostor, that he would kill them and get 
their Beavers. I omit a great many wicked stories 
that he may have added to this. If he were of the 
religious belief of those who call themselves Re- 
formed, I might somewhat excuse him. But he 
plainly shows that he is neither of the one nor the 
other. But I will say, however, that he has reason to 
thank God for his escape from imminent peril on our 



80 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[V OL. 1 


femblables à lui, à fan imitation. :Mais ie veux 
efperer, au pluftot croire pour certain qu'il ne de- 
meurera plus gueres long tèps en cet erreur, & que 
ledit Sieur aura trouvé moyen de l'attirer (avec beau- 
coup d'autres) pres de fay, pour luy imprimer dere- 
chef les vives perfuafions dont il luy avoit autrefois 
touché l'ame en ma prefence. Car l'efprit de Dieu 
eft puiffant pour faire tõber fur ce champ vne nou- 
velle roufee, qui fera regermer ce que la grele a 
deffeché & abbatu. Dieu vueille par fa grace con- 
duire Ie tout en forte que la chafe reüffiffe à fa gloire 
& à l'edification de ce peuple, pour lequel taus Chré- 
tiens doivent faire continuelles prieres à fa divine 
bonté, à ce qu'il lui plaife con firmer & avancer 
l'æuvre qu'il lui a pleu fufciter en ce temps pour 
l'exaltation de fan nom, & Ie falut de fes creatures. 


FIN. 
[25] II Y a pardela des hommes d'Eglife de bon fça- 
voir que Ie feul zele de la Religion ya porté, lefquels 
ne manqueront de faire tout ce que la pieté requerra 
en ce regard. Or quant à prefent il n'eft pas befoin 
de ces Doéteurs fublimes qui peuvent eftre plus vtiles 
pardeça à combattre les vices & les herefies. Ioint 
qu'il y a certaine forte de gens defquels on ne fe peut 
pas bien affeurer faifans métier de cenfurer tout ce 
qui ne vient à leurs maxÎ1nes, & voulans commander 
par tout. II fuffit d'eftre veillé au dehors fans avoir 
de ces epilogueurs qui confiderent taus les mouve- 
mens de vôtre corps & de vôtre cæur pour en faire 
regitres, defquels les plus grands Rois mémes ne fe 
peuvèt defendre. Et puis, que ferviroièt pardela tãt 
de gens de cette forte, quãt à prefent, fi ce n'efi qu'ils 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


81 


yoyage. This Sagamore, being a Christian, by his 
good example might have caused a great number of 
others to become Christians. But I am willing to 
hope, or rather firmly believe, that he will not remain 
much longer in this error, and that the Sieur will 
have found some means of attracting him with many 
others to himself, to impress upon him the vital 
truths with which he had formerly, in my presence, 
touched his soul. For the spirit of God has power to 
drop upon this field fresh dew, .which will bring forth 
a new germination where all has been laid waste and 
beaten down by the hail. May God, by his grace, 
guide all in such a way that it will redound to his 
glory and to the edification of this people, for whom 
all Christians ought to make continual supplication 
to his divine goodness, to the end that he may con- 
sent to confirm and advance the work, which he has 
been pleased to begin at this time for the exaltation 
of his name and for the salvation of his creatures. 21 


END. 
[25] There are in that country some men of the 
Church, of good scholarship, whom nothing but their 
religious zeal has taken there, and who will not fail to 
do all that piety requires in this respect. Now, for the 
present, there is no need of any learned Doctors who 
may be more useful in combating vices and heresies 
at home. Besides, there is a certain class of men in 
whom we cannot have complete confidence, who are 
in the habit of censuring everything that is not in 
harmony with their maxims, and wish to rule wher- 
ever they are. It is enough to be watched from 
abroad without having these fault-finders, from whom 
even the greatest Kings cannot defend thetTIselves, 



Façon de 
vivre 
des Sou- 
riquois 
&0 Ethe- 
chemins. 


82 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


vouluffent s'addonner à la culture de la terre? Car 
ce n'efi pas tout que d'aller là. II faut confiderer ce 
que l' on y fera y efiant arrivé. Pour ce qui efi de 
la demeure du Sieur de Poutrincourt il s'efi fourni au 
depart de ce qui lui efioit neceffaire. Mais s'il prenoit 
envie à quelques gens de bien d'y [26] avancer l'Evan- 
gile, ie feroy d'avis qu'ils fiffent cinq au fix bandes, 
avec chacun vn navire bien equippé, & qu'ils allaffent 
planter des colonies en diverfes places de ces quartiers 
là, comme à Tadou[fac, Gachepé, Campfeau, la Héve, 
Oigoudi, Sainéte Croix, Pemptegoet, KinibeKi, & 
autres endroits où font les affemblées de Sauvages, 
lefquels il faut que le temps ameine à la Religion 
Chrétienne: fi ce n'efi qu'vn grand Pere de famille 
tel que Ie Roy en vueille avoir la gloire totale, & face 
habiter ces lieux. Car d'y penfer vivre à leur mode 
i' efiime cela efire hors de nôtre pouvoir. Et pour Ie 
montrer, leur façon de vivre eft telle, que depuis la 
premiere terre ( qui eft la Terre-neuve) infques aux 
Armouchiquois, qui font pres de trois cens lieuës, les 
hommes vivent vagabons, fans labourage, n'eftans 
iamais plus de cinq au fix femaines en vn lieu. 
Pline à fait mention de certains peuples dits Ichthyo- 
phages, c'efi à dire Mangeurs de poiffons, viuans de 
cela. Ceux ci font tout de méme les trois parts de l'an- 
née. Car venant Ie Printeps ils fe divifent par troupes 
fur les rives de mer infques à [27] l'Hiver, lequel 
venãt, par ce que Ie poiffõ fe retire au fond des gran des 
eaux falées, ilz cherchent les lacs & ombres des bois, 
où ilz pechent les Cafiors, dont ilz vivet, & d'autres 
chaffes, comme Ellans, Caribous, Cerfs, & autres ani- 
maux moindres que ceux-lá. Et neantmoins quelque- 
fois en Eté méme ilz ne laiffent point de chaffer: & 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT R.E.'LA TIO.l\TS 


come near enough to record every movement of our 
hearts and souls. And then what would be the use 
of so many such men over there at present, unless 
they wanted to devote themselves to the cultivation 
of the soil? For going there is not all. \Vhat they 
will do, when they get there, must be taken into con- 
sideration. As to Sieur de Poutrincourt's residence, 
he provided himself at his departure with everything 
that was necessary. But if a few honest people were 
seized with a desire to [26J advance the cause of the 
Gospel there, I would advise them to make up five or 
six parties, each one having a well-equipped ship, and 
to go and establish colonies in different parts of New 
France, as at Tadoussac, Gachepé, Campseau, la Héve, 
Oigoudi, Ste. Croix, Pemptegoet, Kinibeki, and in 
other places, .where there are assemblages of Savages, 
whom time must lead to the Christian Religion: un- 
less the head of some great family, like the King, 
wishes to have the sale glory of peopling these lands. 
For to think of living as the Savages do seems to me 
out of all reason. And to prove this, the following 
is an example of their way of living: From the first 
land (which is Newfoundland) to the country of the 
Armouchiquois, a distance of nearly three hundred 
leagues, the people are nomads, without agriculture, 
never stopping longer than five or six weeks in a 
place. Pliny mentions a certain people called 
Ichthyophagi, i. e., Fish-eaters, living in the same 
way. These Savages get their living in this manner 
during three seasons of the year. For, when Spring 
comes, they divide into bands upon the shores of the 
sea, until [27] \Vinter; and then as the fish withdraw 
to the bottom of the great salt waters, they seek the 
lakes and the shades of the forests, where they catch 


83 


.LvI anner of 
living of 
the 
Souriquois 
and Et he- 
chemins. 



Ie coucher. 


A rm01/- 
chiquoz:,'. 


Plin. liv. 
18. chaþ. 
2. & 10. 


Iroquois. 


84 


LES RELATIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


d'ailleurs ant infinie quantité d'oyfeaux en certaines 
iles és mois de :May. Iuin, Iuillet, & Aouft. Quant 
à leur coucher, vne peau etendue fur la terre leur 
fert de matelas. Et en cela n'avons dequoy nous 
mocquer d'eux, par ce que noz vieux peres Gaullois 
en faifoient de méme, & dinoiêt auffi fur des peaux de 
chiens & de loups, fi Diodore & Strabon difent vray. 
:L\Iais quant au pais des Armouchiquois & Iroquois, il 
y a plus grande moiffon à faire pour ceux qui font 
pouffez d'Yn zele religieux, par ce que Ie peuple y eft 
beau coup plus frequent, & cultive la terre, de laquelle 
il retire vn grand foulagement de vie. Vray eft qu'il 
n'entent pas bien la façõ de faire Ie pain, n'ayant les 
inventiõs des moulins, ni du levain, ni des fours; ains 
broye fan blé en certaine façon de [28] mortiers, & 
l'empâte au mieux qu'il peut pour Ie fa ire cuire entre 
deux pierres echauffées au feu: au bien rotit ledit 
blé en epic fur la braife, ainfi que faifoient les vieux 
Romains. au dire de Pline. Depuis on trouva Ie 
moyen de faire des gateaux fouz la cendre: & depuis 
encore les boulengers trouverent la façon des fours. 
Or ces peuples cultivans la terre font arretés, ce que 
les autres ne font point, n'ayans rien de propre, tels 
qu'eftoient les Allemans au temps de Tacite, lequel a 
décrit leurs anciennes façons de vivre. Plus avant 
dans les terres au deffus des Armouchiquois font les 
Iroquois peuples auffi arretés, par-ce qu'ilz cultivent 
la terre, d'où ils recueillent du blé mahis (au Sarazin) 
dés féves, des bõnes racines, & bref tout ce que nous 
avons dit du pays defdits Armouchiquois, voire encore 
plus, car par neceffité ilz vivent de la terre, eftans 
loin de la mer. Neantmoins ils ant vn grand lac 
d' étendue merveilleufe, comme d' environ 60. liel1ës, 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


Beavers, upon which they live, and other game, as 
Elk, Caribou, Deer, and still smaller aninlals. And 
yet, sometimes even in Summer, they do not give up 
hunting: besides, there are an infinite number of 
birds on certain islands in the months of J\1ay, June, 
July and August. As to their beds, a skin spread 
out upon the ground serves as mattress. And in this 
we have nothing to jest about, for our old Gallic an- 
cestors did the same thing, and even dined from the 
skins of dogs and wolves. if Diodorus and Strabo tell 
the truth. But as to the Armouchiquois and Iroquois 
countries, there is a greater harvest to be gathered 
there by those who are inspired by religious zeal, be- 
cause they are not so sparsely populated, and the 
people cultivate the soil, from which they derive 
some of the comforts of life. It is true that they do 
not understand very well how to make bread, not 
having mills, yeast, or ovens; so they pound their 
corn in a kind of [28] mortar, and make a paste of it as 
best they can, and bake it between two stones heated 
at the fire; or they roast this corn on the ear upon 
the live coals, as did the old Romans, according to 
Pliny. Afterwards people learned to bake cakes un- 
der the embers; and still later bakers began to make 
use of ovens. Now these people who cultivate the 
soil are stationary, not like the others who have noth- 
ing of their own, just as the Germans in the time of 
Tacitus, who has described their ancient way of 
living. Farther inland, and beyond the Armouchi- 
quais, are the Iroquois tribes, also stationary, because 
they till the soil, whence they gather maize wheat 
(or Buckwheat), beans, edible roots, and in short all 
that we have mentioned in describing the Armouchi- 
quois, even more, for from necessity they draw their 


85 


Their beds. 


A rmouchi- 
quois. 


Pliny, 
book I8, 
chaþ.2 
and IO. 


Iroqzeois. 



Nouveau 
jJfexique. 


Gralld 
lac outre 
Calzada. 


conquete 
de la Pa- 
lcfline 
c01llþaree 
à celle de 
I a Nù u- 
velle- 
France. 


86 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


à lentour duquel ils font cabãnés. Dans ledit lac 
il y a des iles belles & grandes, habitées defdits Iro- 
quois, qui font vn grand peuple, & plus on va [29] 
avant dans les terres plus on les trouve habitées: íì 
bien que (s'il en faut croire les Hefpagnols) au pays 
dit Ie Nouveau :Mexique bien loin pardela lefdits Iro- 
quois, en tirant au Suroüeft, il y a des villes baties, 
& des maifons à trois & quatre etages: méme du 
beftial privé: d' où ils ant appellé vne certaine riviere 
Rio de las Vaccas, La riviere des Vaches, pour y en 
avoir veu en grand nombre paturer Ie lõg de la 
riviere. Et eft:ce pays direétement au Nort à plus de 
cinq cens lieuës du vieill\lexique, avoifinant, comme 
ie croy, l'extremité du grand lac de la riviere de 
Canada, lequel (felon Ie rapport des Sauvages) a trente 
journées de long. Ie croiroy que des hommes ro- 
buftes & bien compofés pourroient vivre parmi ces 
peuples là, & faire grand fruit à l'avancement de la 
Religion Chrétienne. Mais quant aux Souriquois, & 
Etechemins, qui font vagabons & divifés, il les faut 
affembler par la culture de la terre, & obliger par 
ce moyen à demeurer en vn lieu. Car quiconque a 
pris la peine de cultiver vne terre il ne la quitte 
point aifement. II cõbat pour la conferver de tout 
fan courage. [30] Mais ie trouve ce deffein de longue 
execution fi nous n'y allons d'autre zele, & fi vn Roy 
ou riche Prince ne prent cette caufe en main, laquelle 
certes eft digne d'vn royaume tres-Chrétien. On a 
jadis fait tant de depenfes & pertes d'hommes à la re- 
conquefte de la Paleftine, à quay on a peu proufité: & 
aujourd'hui à peu de frais on pourroit faire des mer- 
veilles, & acquerir infinis peuples à Dieu fans coup 
ferir: & nous fommes touchés d'vne ie ne fçay quelle 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIOl\
S 


sustenance from the earth, as they are far from the sea. 
However, they have a great lake in their country, of 
wonderful extent, perhaps about sixty leagues, around 
which they encamp. In this lake there are large and 
beautiful islands inhabited by the Iroquois, who are 
a great people; the farther [29J we penetrate into the 
country. the more we find it inhabited: so much so 
that (if we can believe the Spaniards) in the country 
called New J\.Iexico. a long distance to the Southwest 
of these Iroquois, there are regularly built cities and 
houses of three and four stories, and even domesti- 
cated cattle, whence they have named a certain river 
Rio de las Vaccas, or Cow river, because they saw a 
large number of them grazing on its banks. And 
this country is more than five hundred leagues direct- 
ly to the north of old :Mexico, being near, I believe, 
the end of the great lake of the river of Canada 
which (according to the Savages) is a thirty days' 
journey in length. I believe that robust and hardy 
men could live among these people, and do great 
work for the advancement of the Christian Religion. 
But as to the Souriquois and Etechemins, who are 
nomadic and divided, they must be made sedentary 
by the cultivation of the land, thus obliging them to 
remain in one place. For anyone who has taken the 
trouble to cultivate a piece of land does not readily 
abandon it, but struggles valiantly to keep it. [30] But, 
I think, the execution of this plan will be very slow 
unless we take hold of it with more zeal, and unless a 
King, or some rich Prince, take this cause in hand, 
which is certainly worthy a most Christian kingdom. 
Great expense and loss of life were once incurred in 
the re-conquest of Palestine, from which there was lit- 
tle profit; and to-day at slight expense wonders could 


87 


lVC'Zl' 
JJIexico. 


A great 
lake beyond 
Canada. 


Conquest of 
Palestine 
comþared 
with that of 
New 
France. 



Au Roy 

 à la 
Royne. 


88 


LES RELA TI01YS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


lethargie en ce qui eft du zele religieux qui bruloit noz 
peres anciennement. Si on n'efperoitaucun fruit tem- 
porel en ceci ie pardonnerois à l'imbecillité humaine. 

lais il ya de fi certaines efperances d'vne bõne vfure, 
qu'elles ferment la bouche à taus les ennemis de ce 
pays là, lefquels Ie decrient afin de ne perdre la traite 
des Caftors & autres pelleteries dont ils vi vent, & fans 
cela mourroyent de faim, au ne fçauroient à quay 
s'employer. Que s'il plaifoit au Roy, & à la Royne 
Regente fa mere, en laquelle Dieu a allume vn brafier 
de pieté, prendre gouft à ceci (cõme certes elle a fai6t 
au rapport de la ConverÍÌõ des Sauvages baptizés par Ie 
[3 I] foin du Sieur de Poutrincourt) & laiffer quelque 
memoire d'elle, au plufiot s'affeurer de la beatitude 
des deux par cette aétion qui eft toute de Dieu, on 
ne peut dire quelle gloire à l'avenir ce lui feroit 
d'efire la premiere qui auroit planté l'Evangile en de 
fi grandes terres, qui (par maniere de dire) n' ant 
point de bornes. Si Helene mere de l' Em pereur 
Cõfiantin eufi trouvé tant de fujet de bien-faire, elle 
euft beaucoup mieux aimé edifier à Dieu des temples 
vivans que tant d'edifices de marbre dont elle a rem- 
pli la terre fainéte. Et au bout l'efperance de la re- 
muneration temporelle n'en eft pan vaine. Car 
d'une part Ie Sieur de Poutrincourt demeure toujours 
ferviteur du Roy en la terre que fa 1Iaiefté luy a 
oétroyée: en laquelle il feroit Ie rendezvous & fup- 
port de tant de vaiffeaux qui vont taus les ans aux 
Terres neuves, où ilz reçoivent mille incommodités, 
& en perit grand nombre, comme no us avons veu & 
oui dire. Dailleurs penetrant dans les terres, nous 
pourrions nous rendre familier Ie chemin de la Chine 
& des :Molucques par vn c1imat & parallele tèperé, en 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELATIONS 


be accomplished, and an infinite number of people 
won over to God, without striking a blow: and yet 
we are touched by an inexplicable apathy in religious 
matters, which is quite different from the fervid zeal 
which of old burned in the bosoms of our fathers. If 
we did not expect any temporal fruit from these 
labors, I would pardon this human weakness. But 
there are such well-founded hopes of good usury, 
that they close the mouths of all the enemies of that 
country, who decry it in order not to lose the traffic 
in Beaver and other furs from which they gain a 
livelihood, and without which they would die of 
starvation or would not know what to do. But if the 
King and the Queen Regent, his mother, in whom God 
has kindled a fire of piety, should be pleased to take an 
interest in this (as she has certainly done in the report 
of the Conversion of the Savages, baptized through 
the [3 I] instrumentality of Sieur de Poutrincourt) 
and would leave some memorial of herself, or rather 
would secure for herself the blessedness of heaven by 
this most godly act, no one can tell how great would 
be her future glory in being the first to establish the 
Gospel in such vast territories, which (so to speak) 
have no bounds. If Helena, the mother of the Em- 
peror Constantine, had found such a field for good 
work, she would have greatly preferred to glorify 
God with living temples, instead of building so many 
marble edifices, with which she has filled the holy 
land. And, after all, the hope of temporal profit is 
not vain. For on one hand Sieur de Poutrincourt 
will continue to be the servant of the King in the 
country which his Majesty has granted him; where 
he would afford a rendezvous and give assistance to 
all the vessels which go every year to the new 


89 


A þþeal to 
the King 
and the 
Queen 
Regt'nt. 



Moyens 
þour aller 
aux 140- 
lucques 
þar Ie Po- 
nan! & 
Ie Nort. 


Vtilités. 


Chiqua- 
nerie. 


A mmiã 
Al arcellin. 



o 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


(VOL. 1 


faifant quelques fiatiõs au [32] demeures au Saut de la 
grande riviere de Canada, puis aux lacs qui font plus 
outre, Ie dernier defquels n'efi pas loin de la grande 
mer Occidentale, par laquelle les Hefpagnols vont 
aujourd'hui en l'Orient: Ou bien on pouroit faire la 
méme entreprife par la riviere de Saguenay, outre 
laquelle les Sauvages rapportent qu'il y a vne mer 
dont ilz n'ont veu Ie bout, qui efi fans doute ce 
paffage par Ie N art, lequel en vain I' on a tant re- 
cherché. De forte que nous aurions des epices, & 
autres drogues fans les mendier defdits Hespagnols, & 
demeureroit és mains du Roy Ie proufit qu'il tire de 
nous fur ces denrées: Laiffant à part l'vtilité des 
cuirs, paturages, pecheries, & autres biens. J\ilais il 
faut femer avant que recuillir. Par ces exercices on 
occuperoit beaucoup de ieuneffe Françoife, dont vne 
partie languit au de pauvreté, au d'oiíìveté: ou 
vont aux provinces etrangeres enfeigner les metiers 
qui nous efioient iadis propres & particuliers, au 
moyen dequoy la France efioit remplie de biens, au 
lieu qu'aujourd'hui vne longue paix ne l'a encore peu 
remet
re en fan premier lufire, tant [33] pour la raifon 
que deffus, que pour Ie nombre de gens oiíìfs, & men- 
dians valides & volontaires que Ie public nourrit. 
Entre lefquelles incon1modités on pourroit mettre 
encore Ie mal de la chiquanerie qui mange nofire na- 
tion, dõt elle a efié blamée de tout temps. A quay 
feroit aucunement obvié par les frequètes navigations: 
eftant ainíì qu'une partie de ceux qui plaident au- 
roient plufiot fait de conquefier nouvelle terre, de- 
meurans en l'obeiffance du Roy, que de pourfuivre ce 
qu'ilz debattent avec tant de ruines, longueurs, folici- 
tudes, & travaux. Et en ce ie repute heureux to us 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


World, where they encounter a thousand hardships 
and, as we have seen and heard, great numbers of 
them are lost. On the other hand, penetrating into 
the country, we might become familiar with the route 
to China and the :Moluccas, through a mild climate 
and latitude, establishing a few stations, or [32] settle- 
ments, at the Falls of the great Canadian river, then 
at the lakes which are beyond, the last of which is 
not far from the great "\Vestern sea, through which 
the Spaniards to-day reach the Orient. Or, indeed, 
the same enterprise could be carried on through the 
Saguenay river, beyond which the Savages say there 
is a sea of which they have never seen the end, which 
is without doubt that Northern passage that has been 
so long sought in vain. So that we could have spices 
and other drugs without begging them from the 
Spaniards, and the profits derived from us upon these 
commodities would remain in the hands of the King, 
not counting the advantages of having hides, pastur- 
age, fisheries, and other sources of wealth. But we 
must sow before we can reap. In this work we could 
give employment to many of the youth of France, a 
part of whom languish in poverty or in idleness: 
while others go to foreign countries to teach the 
trades which in former times belonged strictly and 
peculiarly to us, and by means of which France was 
filled with prosperity; whereas, to-day, a long period 
of peace has not yet been able to restore to her her 
former glory, as much [33] for the reasons just given, 
as for the number of idle men, and of able-bodied and 
voluntary mendicants, whom the public supports. 
Among these obstacles we may place also the evil of 
chicanery, which preys upon our nation, and which 
has always been a reproach to it. This "\yould be 


91 


.J.Jfeans of 
reachÙtg 
the 
lJIoluccas 
through the 
iVorthern 
route. 


A dvant- 
ages. 


cltÛ:a1zery 



Felic:zïé 
des Sau- 
vages. 


Pour ceux 
qui vont 
en la N. 
Fra1zce. 


A la Roy- 
ne. 



2 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


ces pauvres peuples que ie deplore ici. Car la blafar- 
de Envie ne les amaigrit poìt ilz ne reffentent point 
les inhunlanités d'vn qui fert Dieu en torticoli, pour 
fouz cette couleur tourmenter les hommes; ilz ne 
font point fujets au ca1cul de ceux qui manquans de 
vertu & de bonté s'affublent d'vn faux pretexte de 
pieté pour nourrir leur ambition. S'ilz ne conoiffent 
point Dieu, au mains ne Ie blafphement ilz point, 
comme font la plufpart des Chretiens. IIz ne fçavent 
que c'eft d'empoifonner, ni de corrompre la [34] 
chafteté par artifice diabolique. II n' y a point de 
pauvres, ny de mendians entre eux. Taus font 
riches, entant que taus travaillent & vivent. 11ais 
entre nous il va bien autrement. Car il y en a plus 
de la moitié qui vit du labeur d'autrui, ne faifant aucun 
metier qui fait neceffaire à la vie humaine. Que fi ce 
païs là eftoit etabli, tel yaqui n'ofe faire ici ce qu'il 
feroit là. II n'ofe point ici eftre bucheron, laboureur, 
vigneron, &c. par ce que fõ pere eft chiquaneur, 
barbier, apothicaire &c. Et là il oublieroit toutes ces 
aprehenfions de reproche, & prendroit plaifir à cul- 
tiver fa terre, ayant beaucoup de compagnons d'auffi 
bonne maifon que lui. Et cultiver la terre c'eft Ie 
metier Ie plus innocent, & plus certain, exercice de 
ceux de qui nous fommes taus defcendus, & de ces 
braves Capitaines Romains qui fçavoient domter & ne 
point eftre domtés. :Mais depuis que la pompe & la 
malice fe font introduits parmi les hommes, ce qui 
eftoit vertu a tourné en reproche, & les faineans font 
venus en eftime. Or laiffons ces gens là, & revenons 
au Sieur de Poutrincourt, ains pluftot a vous, Ô Rayne 
Tref -Chretienne, [35] la pI us grande, & pI us cherie 
des cieux que l'æil du monde voye en la rõde qu'il fait 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELATIOiVS 


somewhat obviated by frequent voyages; for a part 
of these pettifoggers would sooner conquer some new 
land, remaining under the dominion of the King, than 
follow up their cause here with so much loss, delay, 
anxiety, and labor. And, in this respect, I consider 
all these poor savages, whom we commiserate, to be 
very happy; for pale Envy doth not emaciate them, 
neither do they feel the inhumanity of those who 
serve God hypocritically, harassing their fellow-creat- 
ures under this mask: nor are they subject to the 
artifices of those who, lacking virtue and goodness 
wrap themselves up in a mantle of false piety to 
nourish their ambition. If they do not know God, 
at least they do not blaspheme him, as the greater 
number of Christians do. Nor do they understand 
the art of poisoning, or of corrupting [34] chastity by 
devilish artifice. There are no poor nor beggars 
among them. All are rich, because all labor and 
live. But among us it is very different, for more 
than half of us live from the labors of the others, 
having no trades which serve to the support of human 
life. If that country were settled, there are men who 
would do there what they have not courage to do 
here. Here they would not dare to be wood-cutters, 
husbandmen, vinedressers, etc., because their fathers 
were pettifoggers, barber-surgeons, and apothecaries. 
But over yonder they would forget their fear of being 
ridiculed, and would take pleasure in cultivating 
their land, having a great many companions of as 
good families as theirs. Cultivating the soil is the 
most innocent of occupations and the most sure; it 
was the occupation of those from "\vhom we have all 
descended, and of those brave Roman Captains who 
knew how to subjugate, but not how to be subjugated. 


fr3 


A JJl1JlÙZ1lUS 
.J.II arce/- 
lillus. 


!-laþþÙzess 
of the 
Savages. 


Oþþor/uni- 
ties for 
cmigrmzts 
to New 
Fra1zce. 



94 


LES RELA TIONS DES .I É SUITES 


[VOL. 1 


chaque iour alentour de cet vnivers. .V.ous qui avés 
Ie maniement du plus noble Empire dici bas, Quay 
fouffrirez YOUS de voir vn Gentil-hõme de fi bonne 
volonté fans l'employer & fans Ie fecourir? Voulez 
vous qu'il emporte la prel11iere gloire du monde par 
deffus vous, & que Ie triomphe de cet affaire luy de- 
meure fans que vous y participiés? Non, non, Ma- 
dame, it faut que Ie tout vous en fait rapporté, & que 
cõme les etoilles empruntent leur lumiere du foleil, 
auffi que du Roy & de vous qui nous l'avés dõné 
toutes les belles actiõs des François depëdent. II 
faut donc prevenir cette gloire, & ne la ceder à autre, 
tandis que vous avés vn Poutrincourt bon François, 
& qui a fervi Ie feu Roy de regretable memoire vôtre 
Epoux (que Dieu abfolye) en des affaires d'Eftat dont 
les hiftoires ne font mention.: En haine dequoy fa 
maifon & fes biens ant paffé par l'examen du feu 
II ne paffe point l'Ocean pour voir Ie pais, com me 
ant fait préque taus les autres qui ant entrepris de 
femblables navigations [36) aux dépens de noz Rays. 
11ais il mõtre par effeét queUe eft fan intentiõ, fi bien 
qu'on n'en peut point douter, & ne hazarderez rien 
maintenant quand vôtre :'Majefté l'employera à bon 
efcient à l'amplificatiõ de la religion Chrétienne és 
terres Occidentales d'outre mer. Vous reconoiffez 
fan zele, Ie vôtre eft incomparable, mais il faut avifer 
où fe pourra mieux faire vôtre emploite. Ie louë les 
Princeffes & Dames qui depuis quinze ans ant dõné 
de leurs biens pour Ie repos de ceux au celles qui fe 
veulent fequeftrer du monde. 1Iais i 'eftime (fauf 
correétion) que leur pieté feroit plus illuftre fi elle fe 
illontroit envers ces pauvres peuples Occidentaux qui 
gemiffent, & dont le defaut d'inftruétion crie ven- 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


But now, since pomp and malice have been introduced 
among men, what was virtue has been turned into 
reproach, and idlers have risen into favor. However, 
let us leave these people, and return to Sieur de Pou- 
trincourt, or rather to you, 0 most Christian Queen, 
[35J the greatest and most cherished of heaven, 
whom the eye of the world looks down upon in its 
daily round about this universe. You who have the 
control of the most noble Empire here below, how 
can you see a Gentleman so full of good will, without 
employing and helping him? Will you let him carry 
off the greatest honor in the world when it might 
have been yours, and will you let the triumph of this 
affair remain with him and not share in it yourself? 
No, no, 11adalne, all must proceed from you, and as 
the stars borrow their light from the sun, so upon 
the King, and upon you who have given him to us, all 
the great deeds of the French depend. We must then 
anticipate this glory, and not yield it to another, 
while you have a Poutrincourt, a loyal Frenchman who 
served the late lamented King, your Husband (may 
God give him absolution), in affairs of State which 
are not recorded in history. In revenge for which 
his house and property passed through the ordeal of 
fire. He is not crossing the Ocean to see the country, 
as have nearly all the others who have undertaken 
similar voyages [36J at the expense of our Kings. 
But he shows so plainly what his intentions are, that 
we cannot doubt them, and your :ßtlajesty will risk 
nothing by employing him in earnest for the propa- 
gation of the Christian religion in the vVestern lands 
beyond the sea. You recognize his zeal, your own 
is incomparable; but you must take thought as to 
how you may best employ it. I commend the Prin- 


95 


To the 
Queell. 



Lzv. I. ch. 
24. 
 tz: 
2. ch. 4I. 

42. 


Que c' eft 
ce Bane 
Voy la di'- 
Ie Hijloi- 
re lzv. 2. 
chaþ. 24. 



6 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


geance à Dieu contre ceux qui les peuvent ayder à 
efire Chrétiens, & ne Ie font pas. Vne Rayne de 
Cafiille a efié caufe que la religion Chrétienne a efié 
portée és terres que tient l'Hefpagnol en Occident: 
faites Ô lumiere des Raynes du monde, que par vous 
bien tot on aye ec1ater Ie nom de Dieu par tout ce 
monde nouveau où il n'efi point encore coneu. Or 
reprenant Ie fil de mõ [37J Hifioire, puifque nous avons 
parlé du voyage dudit Sieur de Poutrincourt, it ne 
fera point hors de propos fi apres avoir touché les in- 
commodités & longueurs de fa navigation, qui I' ant 
reculé d'vn an, nous difons vn mot du retour de fan 
vaiffeau. Ce qui fera bref, d'autant qu'ordinairement 
font bréves les navigations qui fe font des terres Oc- 
cidentales en deça hors Ie Tropique du Cancre. I'ay 
rendu la raifon de cela en man Hifioire de la N ou- 
yelle-France, où ie renvoye Ie Leéteur: comme auffi 
pour fçavoir la raifon pourquoy en Eté la mer y efi 
remplie de brumes en telle forte que pour vn jour 
ferein il y en a deux de broüillas: & deux fois m'y 
fuis trouvé panni des brumes de huiét jours entiers. 
Ceci e efié caufe que ledit Sieur de Poutrincourt ren- 
voyant fan fils en France pour faire nouvelle charge, 
il a demeuré auffi long temps à gaigner Ie grand Banc 
aux 110ruës depuis Ie Port Royal, comme à gaigner 
la France depuis ledit Banc: & toutefois depuis icelui 
Banc jufques à la terre de France il y a huit cens 
bonnes lieuës: & de là méme jufques audit Port Royal 
il n'y en a gueres [38] plus de trois cens. C'efi fur 
ledit Banc qu'on trouve ordinairement tout l'Eté force 
navires qui font la Pecherie des :Moruës qu'on apporte 
pardeça, lefquelles on appelle 110ruës de Terre- 
neuve. Ainfi Ie fils dudit Sieur de Poutrincourt (dit 



lô10-13] 


THE .JESUIT RELA TIOl\TS 


cesses and Ladies who for fifteen years have given of 
their means for the repose of those men or women 
who wished to sequester themselves from the world. 
But I believe (under correction) that their piety would 
shine with greater luster if it were shown in behalf 
of these poor "\Vestern nations, who are in a lament- 
able condition, and whose lack of instruction cries to 
God for vengeance against those who might help 
them to become Christians, and will not. A Queen 
of Castille caused the Christian religion to be intro- 
duced into the lands of the "\Yest which belong to 
Spain; so act, 0 light of the Queens of the world, 
that through your instrumentality, the name of God 
may soon be proclaimed throughout all this new 
world, where it is not yet known. N ow resuming the 
thread of our [37] History, as we have spoken of the 
voyage of Sieur de Poutrincourt, it will not be out 
of place, if, after having touched upon the hardships 
and tediousness of his journey, .which retarded him 
one year, we say a word about the return of his ship, 
which will be brief, inasmuch as the voyages from 
the 'Vestern world, this side of the Tropic of Cancer J 
are usually so. I have given the reason for this in 
my History of New France, to which I refer the 
Reader, where he .will also learn why it is that in 
Summer the sea there is overhung with fogs to such 
an extent that for one clear day there are two foggy 
ones; and twice we were in fogs which lasted eight 
entire days. This is why Sieur de Poutrincourt's 
son, when he was sent back to France for fresh sup- 
plies, was as long in reaching the great Codfish 
Banks from Port Royal, as in getting to France from 
the said Banks; and yet from these Banks to the coast 
of France there are eight hundred good leagues; and 


97 


Book I, 
ch.24, 
and book 2, 
C/:.4 I alzd 42. 


For these 
Banks, see 
the said 
History, 
book 2, 
i-h. 24. 



La ma- 
niere de 
cette þe- 
cherie, 
voy au 
lie It j"u.l- 
dzï. 


E,z IS. 
jours dlt 
BaIze en 
France. 


Kebec 
Fort du 
Sieur de 
.i1follts. 


fiR 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


Ie Baron de Sainét Iuft) arrivãt audit Banc fit pro vi- 
fion de viande freche, & pecherie de poiffon. En 
quay faifant il eut en rencontre vn navire Rochelois 
& vn autre du Havre de Grace, d'où il eut nouvelles 
de la mort lamentable de nôtre defun
l bon Roy, fans 
fçavoir par qui, ni conlment. l\lais apres eut en ren- 
contre vn autre navire Anglois, d'où il entendit la 
méme chafe, accufans du parricide des gens que ie ne 
veux ici nõmer: car ils Ie difoient par haine & envie, 
n'ayans plus grans adverfaires qu'eux. En quinze 
jours donc ledit Sieur de Sainét Iuft fut rendu dudit 
Banc en France, ayant toujours en vent en poupe: 
navigation certes beaucoup plus agreable que celIe du 
vingtfixieme de Février mentionnée ci-deffus. Les 
gens du Sieur de Monts partirent du Havre de Grace 
neuf au dix jours apres ledit jour 26. Février pour aller 
à Kebec, 4 0 . lieuës pardela [39] la riviere de Sague- 
nay, où icelui Sieur de :Thlonts s'eft fortifié. 11ais ilz 
furent contraints de relacher pour les mauvais vents. 
Et làdeffus courut vn bruit que le Sieurde Poutrincourt 
eftoit peri en mer, & tout fan equipage. A quay ie 
n'adjoutay onques fay, croyant pour certain que Dieu 
l'aidera, & Ie fera paffer par-deffus toutes difficultez. 
Nous n'avons encore nouvelles dudit Kebec, & en 
attendons bien-tot. :Thlais ie puis dire pour la verité 
que fi jamais quelque chafe de bon reüffit de la N ou- 
velIe-France la pofterité en aura de l'obligatiõ audit 
Sieur de 1'lonts autheur de ces chafes, auquel fi on 
n 'euft point oté Ie privilege qui lui avoit efté baillé 
pour la traite de Caftors & autres pelleteries, aujour- 
d'hui nous aurions force befiiaux, arbres frui
iers, 
peuples, & batimes en ladite province. Car il a 
defiré ardamment de voir pardela les affaires etablies à 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


thence to Port Royal there are hardly [38J more than 
three hundred. It is upon these Banks that a great 
many ships are usually found all the Summer, fishing 
for Cod, which are brought to France and are called 
Newfoundland Codfish. So Sieur de Poutrincourt's 
son (who is called Baron de Sainct Just), on arriving 
at these Banks, laid in a supply of fresh meat and 
fish. While doing this he met a ship from Rochelle 
and 
nother from Havre de Grace, whence he heard 
the news of the lamentable death of our late good 
King, without knowing by whom or how he was 
killed. But afterwards he met an English ship from 
which he heard the same thing, certain persons being 
accused of this parricide whom I will not here name; 
for they brought this accusation through hatred and 
envy, being great enemies of those whom theyac- 
cused. So in fifteen days Baron de Sainct Just made 
the distance between the Banks and France, always 
sailing before the wind; a voyage certainly much 
more agreeable than that of the twenty-sixth day of 
February mentioned above. Sieur de :rvlonts' s crew left 
Havre de Grace nine or ten days after this twenty-sixth 
of February to go to Kebec, forty leagues beyond [39J 
the Saguenay river, where Sieur de 
10nts has forti- 
fied himself. But contrary winds compelled them to 
put into port. And thereupon a report was circu- 
lated that Sieur de Poutrincourt was lost in the sea 
with all his crew. I did not believe this for an in- 
stant, trusting that God would help him and would 
enable him to surmount all difficulties. We have as 
yet no news from Kebec. but expect to hear from 
there soon. I can say truly that if ever any good 
comes out of New France, posterity will be indebted 
for it to Sieur de :\Ionts, author of these enterprises: 


99 


For their 
manner of 
fishing, sa 
the above- 
mentioned 
þlace. 


In I5 days 
from the 
Banks to 
France. 


Á
ebec, 
SÙ:ur de 
Jronts's 
fort. 



Femme s 
combie1z 
nece//ai- 
res. 


100 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


l'honneur de Dieu & de la France. Et jaçoit qu'on 
lui ait oté Ie fujet de continuer, fi ne s'eft il point 
decouragé jufques à prefent de faire ce qu'il a peu, 
ayant fait batir vn Fort audit Kebec, avec des loge- 
mens fort beaux & commodes. En ce lieu de Kebec 
cette [40] grande & itnmenfe riviere de Canada eft re- 
duite à l'étroit, & n'a que la portée d'vn fauconneau 
de large, abõdante en poiffons autant que riviere du 
monde. Pour Ie pays il eft beau à merveilles, & 
abondant en chaffe. 
Iais eftant en pays plus froid 
que Ie port Royal, affavoir quatre vingtz lieuës plus 
au N art, auffi la pelleterie y eft elle beaucoup plus 
belle. Car (entre autres) les Renal's y font nail's, & 
d'vn pail fi beau, qu'il femble faire honte à la I\Iartre. 
Les Sauvages du Port Royal y peuvent aller en dix 
au douze jours par Ie moyen des rivieres fur lef- 
quelles ils navigent préque jufques à la fource, & de 
là portans leurs petits canots d'écorce par quelque 
efpace dans les bois, ils gaignent vne autre riviere qui 
va tomber dans ledit fieuve de Canada, & ainfi expe- 
dient bien-tot de lõgs voyages: ce que de nous-mémes 
ne fçaurions faire en l'etat qu'eft Ie païs. Et par mer 
audit Kebec il y a dudit Port Royal plus de quatre 
cens lieuës en allant par Ie Cap Breton. Ledit Sieur 
de :Monts y auoit envoyé des vaches dés it ya deux 
ans & demi, mais faute de quelque femme de village 
qui entendift Ie [41] gouvernement d'icelles, on en a 
laiffé mourir la plufpart en fe dechargeant de leurs 
veaux. En quay fe reconoit com.bien vne femme eft 
neceffaire en vne maifon, laquelle ie ne fçay pour- 
quay tant de gens rejettent, & ne s'en peuvent paffer. 
Quant à may ie feray toujours d'auis qu'en quelque 
habitation que ce fait on ne fera jamais fruit fans la 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELATI01\fS 


101 


and if they had not taken away the license which 
was granted him to trade in Beaver and other skins, 
to-day we should have had a vast number of cattle, 
fruit-trees, people, and buildings in the said province. 
For he earnestly desired to see everything estab- 
lished there to the honor of God and of France. And, 
although he has been deprived of the motive for con- 
tinuing, yet up to the present he does not seem dis- 
couraged in doing what he can; for he has had built 
at Kebec a Fort and some very good and convenient 
dwellings. Here at Kebec this [40] great and mighty 
river of Canada narrows down and is only a falcon- 
shot wide; it has as great a supply of fish as any 
river in the world. As to the country, it is wonder- 
fully beautiful, and abounds in game. But being in a 
colder region than port Royal, since it is eighty 
leagues farther North, the fur there is all the finer. 
For (among other animals) the Faxes are black and of 
such beautiful fur that they seem to put the Martens 
to shame. The Savages of Port Royal can go to 
Kebec in ten or twelve days by means of the rivers, 
which they navigate almost up to their sources; and 
thence, carrying their little bark canoes for some 
distance through the woods, they reach another 
stream which flows into the river of Canada, and thus 
greatly expedite their long voyages, which we our- 
selves could not do in the present state of the country. 
And from Port Royal to Kebec by sea it is more 
than four hundred leagues. going by way of Cape 
Breton. Sieur de 110nts sent some cows there two 
years and a half ago, but for want of some village 
housewife who understood [41] taking care of them, The need of 
they let the greater part die in giving birth to their women. 
calves. 'Yhich shows how necessary a woman is in 



Eccleji. 
4 verj: 
10. 


ConJþira- 
tÙm c ha- 
Nee. 


Voyage 
aux Iro- 
quois . 


Peuþles 
ell1zemis. 


102 


LES RELATIONS DES./ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


compagnie des femmes. Sans elles la vie eft trifte, 
les maladies viennent, & meurt on fans fecours. 
C'est pourquoy ie me mocque de ces myfogames qui 
leur ant voulu tant de mal, & particulierement i'en 
veux à ce fol qu'on a mis au nombre des fept Sages, 
lequel difoit que la femme eft vn mal neceffaire, veu 
qu'il n'y a bien au Inonde comparable à eUe. Auffi 
Dieu la il bailIée pour compagnc à !' homme, afin de I aider 
& conjolcr: & Ie Sage dit que Jlfaillcureux cft!' Ilòme 
qui eft jc II I, car iln'aperjomlcqui I eclwllffe, & s'il tombe 
ClZ la foJJc il n' a perjo/l1zc pour Ic relever. Que s'il y a 
des femmes folIes, il faut eftÜner que les hommes ne 
font point sãs faute. De ce defaut de vaches plu- 
fieurs fe font reffentis, car eftant tombés malades ilz 
n'ont pas eu toutes les douceurs [42] qu'autrement ils 
euffent euës, & s'en font allez promener aux champs 
Elifées. Vn autre qui auoit efté de nôtre voyage, 
n'eut point la patience d'attendre cela, & voulut 
gaigner Ie ciel par efcalade dés Ie COlnmencement de 
fan arrivée, par vne confpiration contre Ie sieur 
Champlein fan Capitaine. Les complices furent con- 
demnés aux galeres, & ramenés en France. L'Eté 
venu affavoir il y a vn an, ledit Champlein defireux 
de voir Ie païs des Iroquois, afin qu'en fan abfence 
les Sauvages ne fe faififfent point de fan Fort, il leur 
perfuada d'aller là faire la guerre, & partirent avec 
lui & deux autres François, en nõbre de quatre-vingts 
au cent, iufques au lac defdits Iroquois, à deux ces 
lieües loin dudit Kebec. De tout temps il y a eu 
guerre entre ces deux nations, comme entre les Souri- 
quais & Armouchiquois: & fe font quelquefois elevés 
les Iroquois jufques au nõbre de huit mille hommes, 
pour guerroyer & exterminer taus ceux qui habitoient 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TJONS 


a house, and I cannot understand why so many 
people slight them, although they cannot do without 
them. For my part, I shall always believe that, in 
any settlement whatsoever, nothing will be accom- 
plished without the presence of women. \Vithout 
them life is sad, sickness comes, and we die un cared- 
for. Therefore I despise those woman-haters who 
have wished them all sorts of evil, which I hope 
will overtake that lunatic in particular, who has been 
placed among the number of the seven Sages, who 
said that woman is a necessary evil, since there is no 
blessing in the world to be compared to her. There- 
fore God gave her as a compallion to mall, to aid and 
comfort Ilim: and the Wise :Ylan says: -IVoe to Iiilll 
tltat is alonc, for whcn hc fallcth, Iic ltatll none to lift 
Ilim up. And if two lie togctllcr, tlicy shall warm one 
another. If there are some worthless women, we 
must remember that men are not faultless. Several 
suffered because of this lack of cows, for when they 
fell ill they did not have all the comforts [42] that 
they would have had otherwise, and so they have 
departed to the Elysian fields. Another, who had 
been with us on the voyage, did not have the pa- 
tience to wait for death, but must needs go to 
heaven by scaling the walls, as soon as he arrived 
there, by a conspiracy against sieur de Champlein, 
his Captain. His accomplices were condemned to 
the galleys and sent back to France. \Vhen Sum- 
mer came, that is a year ago, Champlein wishing 
to see the country of the Iroquois, to prevent the 
Savages from seizing his Fort in his absence, per- 
suaded them to go and make war against them; so 
they departed with him and two other Frenchmen, 
to the number of eighty or a hundred, to the lake of 


103 


Ecclesiastes 
4, verse IO. 


A consþir- 
acy þun- 
is he d. 


Journey to 
the la1zd 
of the 
Iroquois. 



104 


LES RELA TIO.l.VS DES ./ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


la grande riviere de Canada: comme it eft à croire 
qu'ils ant fait, d'autant que là n'eft plus aujourd'hui Ie 
1angage qui s'y parloit au [43] temps de Iacques Quar- 
tier, qui y fut il y a quatre-vingts ans. Ledit Cham- 
plein avec fes troupes arrivé là, ilz ne fe peurent fi 
bien cacher qu'ilz ne fuffent apperceuz de ces peuples, 
Guerrc. qui ant toujours des fentinelles fur 1es avenües de 
leurs ennemis: & s'efians les vns & les autres bien 
remparés, il fut convenu entre eux de ne point com- 
battre pour ce jour là, mais de remettre l' affaire au 
lendemain. Le temps lors efioit ferein: fi bien que 
l' Aurore n'eut point plutot chaffé les ombres de la 
uuit, que 1a rumeur s'emeût par tout Ie camp. Quel- 
que enfant perdu des Iroquois ayant voulu fortir de 
fes rem pars, fut tranfpercé non d'un trait d'Apollon, 
au de l' Archerot aux yeux bendés, mais d'un vray 
trait materiel & bien poignant qui Ie mit à la ren- 
verfe. Là deffus, la co1ere monte au front des offen- 
fés & chacun fe met en ordre pour attaquer & fe 
defendre. Comme la troupe des Iroquois s'avançoit, 
Champlein qui avoit chargé fan moufquet à deux 
balles, voyant deux Iroquois marcher devant avec des 
panaches fur la tête, fe douta que c'efioient deux Capi- 
taines, & voulut s'avancer [44J pour les mirer. },tlais 
les Sauvages de Kebec l'empecherent, difans: II 
n'efi pas bon qu'ilz te voyent, car incontinent, n'ay- 
ans point accoutumé de voir telles gens, i1z s' en 
fuiront. Mais retire toy derriere Ie premier rang des 
nôtres, & puis quand nous ferons prets, tu devanceras. 
Ce qu'il fit: & par ce moyen furent 1es deux Capi- 
taines tout enfemble emportés d'vn coup de mouf- 
Victorie. quet. Lars vidoire gaignée. Car chacun fe debende, 
& ne refioit qu'à pourfuivre. Ce qui fut fait avec 



1610-13J 


THE .JESUIT RELA TI01VS 


the Iroquois, two hundred leagues distant from 
Kebec. There has always been war betw.een these 
two nations, as there has been between the Souri- 
quais and Armouchiquois: and sometimes the Iro- 
quois have raised as many as eight thousand men 
to war against and exterminate all those who live 
near the great river of Canada: and it seems that 
they did this, as to-day the language which was spoken 
in the [43] time of Jacques Quartier, who was there 
eighty years ago, is no longer heard in that region. 22 
\Vhen Champlein arrived there with his troops, they 
could not conceal themselves so well but that they 
were perceived by the Iroquois, who always have 
sentinels upon the routes of their enemies: and each 
side being well fortified, it was agreed among them 
not to fight that day, but to postpone the affair until 
the morrow. The weather then was very clear; so 
clear that scarcely had Aurora chased away the shad- 
ows of the night, than a din was heard throughout 
the camp. An Iroquois skirmisher having tried to 
issue from the fortifications, was pierced through, 
not by one of the arrows of Apollo, nor of the little 
Archer with the blindfolded eyes, but by a genuine 
and very painful arrow, which stretched him out 
upon his back. Thereupon the eyes of the offended 
were full of ire, and each one takes his place in the 
line of attack and defense. As the band of Iroquois 
advances, Champlein, who had charged his musket 
with two balls, seeing two Iroquois, their heads 
adorned with feathers, marching on in front, sup- 
posed they were two Captains, and wanted to advance 
[44] and aim at them. But the Kebec Savages 
prevented him, saying :-" It is not well that they 
should see thee, for, never having been accustomed 


105 


Hostile 
lzatÙJ11s. 


IVar. 



Tab agie , 
c'ejl j"cjll. 


106 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


peu de refiftance, & emporterent environ cinquante 
têtes de leurs ennemis, dont au retour Ïlz firent de 
merveilleufes fêtes en Tabagies, danfes, & chanfons 
continuelles, felon leur coutume. 



1610-13] 


THE.lESUIT RELATIONS 


to see such people as thou art, they would imme- 
diately run away. But withdraw behind our first 
rank, and when we are ready, thou shalt advance." 
He did so, and in this way the two Captains were both 
slain by one musket shot. Victory ensued at once. 
For they all disbanded, and it only remained to pur- 
sue them. This was done with little opposition, and 
they carried off some fifty of their enemies' heads, a 
triumph ,vhich, upon their return, they celebrated 
with great festivities, consisting of continual Taba- 
gies,2a dances, and chants, according to their custom. 24 


107 


Victory. 


Tabagie is 
celebrated. 



108 


LES RELA TIG.KS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


[4,J Extrait dv Regitre de Bapteme de l'Eglise dv 
Port Royal en la Nouvelle France. Le iovr 
Sainct lehan Baptifte 24. de luin. 


M EMBERTOV grand Sagamos âgé de plus de 
cent ans a efté baptizé par 1leffire Ieffé Fleche 
Pretre, & nommé HENRY par 110nfieur de Pou- 
trincourt au nom du Roy. 
2. MEMBERTOVCOICHIS (dit Iudas) fils ainé de 
11embertov âgé de plus de 60. ans, auffi baptizé, & 
nommé LOVIS par 
lonfieur de Biencour au nom de 
Monfieur Ie Dauphin. 
3. Le fils ainé de 11embertoucoichis dit à prefent 
Louïs Membertou, âgé de cinq ans, baptizé & tenu 
par 110nfieur de Poutrincourt, qui l' a nomme IEHAN 
de fan nom. 
4. La fine ainée dudit Louïs âgée de treze ans auffi 
baptizée, & nommée CHRISTINE par ledit Sieur de 
Poutrincourt au nom de :Uadame la fille ainée de 
France. 
5. La feconde fine dudit Louïs âgée d'onze ans 
auffi baptizée, & nommée ELIZABETH par ledit fieur de 
Poutrincourt au nom de }Iadame la fine puifnée de 
France. 
6. La troifieme fine dudit Louïs tenuë par ledit 
Sieur de Poutrincourt au nom de 
ladame fa femme 
auffi baptizée, nommée CLAVDE. 
7. La 4. fille dudit Louïs tenuë par Monfieur de 
Coullogne pour l\Iadamoifene fa mere, a eu nom 
CA THERIKE. 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


109 


[4,J Extract from the Register of Baptism in the 
Church of Port Royal, New France. The day 
of Saint John the Baptist, June 24. 


M E11BERTOU, a great Sagamore, over one hun- 
dred years old, has been baptized by l\Iessire 
Jessé Fleche,25 a priest; and named HE
RY, 
by Monsieur de Poutrincourt, after the late king. 
2. 1vIEMBERTOUCOICHIS (called Judas), eldest son 
of J\lembertou, over sixty years old, also baptized; 
and naIned LOUIS, by J\10nsieur de Biencour, after 
J\10nsieur the Dauphin. 
3. The eldest son of Mem bertoucoichis, now called 
Louis 1vlembertou, aged five years, baptized; J\lon- 
sieur de Poutrincourt godfather, and named JOHN, 
after himself. 
4. The eldest daughter of said Louis, aged thir- 
teen years, also baptized; and named CHRISTINE by 
Sieur de Poutrincourt, after :Madame the eldest 
daughter of France. 
S. The second daughter of the said Louis, eleven 
years old, also baptized; and named ELIZABETH by 
sieur de Poutrincourt, after 11adame, the youngest 
daughter of France. 
6. The third daughter of said Louis, Sieur de 
Poutrincourt godfather, also baptized, and named 
CLAUDE, in honor of his wife. 
7. The fourth daughter of said Louis, J\10nsieur 
de Coullogne godfather, was named CATHERINE, af- 
ter his mother. 



110 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


8. La 5. fille dudit Louïs a eu nom IEHANNE ainfi 
nõmée par ledit fieur de poutrincourt au nõ d'une de 
fes filles. [\76] 
9. La 6. fille dudit Louïs tenuë par René Maheu 
a efté nommée CHARLOTTE du nom de fa mere. 
10. ACTAVDINECH, troifieme fils dudit Henri Mem- 
bertou a efté nommé PAVL par ledit fieur de Poutrin- 
court au nom du Pape Paul. 
1 I. La femme dndit Paul a efié nommée RENEE 
du nom de :Madame d' Ardanville. 
12. La femme dudit Henri a efié tenuë par ledit 
fieur de Poutrincourt au nom de la Rayne, & nommée 
MARIE de fan nom. 
13. La fille dudit Henri tenuë par ledit fieur de 
Poutrincourt, & nommée MARGVERITE au nom de la 
Rayne },tlarguerite. 
14. L'vne des femmes dudit Louïs tenuë par 110n- 
fieur de Iouï pour 11adame de Sigogne, nommée de 
fan nom. 
15. L'autre femme dudit Louïs tenuë par ledit 
fieur de Poutrincourt au nom de Madame de Dam- 
pIerre. 
16. ARNEST coufin dudit Henri a efté tenu par 
ledit fieur de Poutrincourt au nom de 110nfieur Ie 
Nonce, & nommé ROBERT de fan nom. 
17. AGOYDEGOVEN auffi coufin dudit Henri a efié 
nommé NICOLAS par ledit fieur de Poutrincourt au 
nom de Monfieur des N oyers Advocat au Parlement 
de Paris. 
18. La femme dudit Nicolas tenuë par ledit fieur 
de Poutrincourt au nom de Monfieur fan neveu, a eu 
nom PHILIPPE. 
19. La fille ainée d'icelui Nicolas tenuë par Ie dit 
Sieur pour 11adame de Belloy fa niepce, & nommée 
LOVISE de fan nom. 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELATIOIVS 


111 


8. The fifth daughter of said Louis was named 
JEANNE, thus named by sieur de Poutrincourt, after 
one of his daughters. [46J 
9. The sixth daughter of said Louis, René Maheu 
godfather, was named CHARLOTTE, after his mother. 
10. ACTAVDINECH, the third son of Henry JYlember- 
tau, was named PAUL by sieur de Poutrincourt, after 
Pope Paul. 
I I. The wife of said Paul was named RENÉE, after 
1vladame d' Ardanville. 
12. The wife of said Henry, sieur de Poutrincourt 
sponsor in the name of the Queen, was named :MARIE, 
after her. 
13. The daughter of Henry, sieur de Poutrincourt 
godfather, was named MARGUERITE, after Queen 
Marguerite. 
14. One of the wives of Louis, Monsieur de Jouï 
sponsor in the name of Mme. de Sigogne, was named 
after her. 
IS. The other wife of Louis, sieur de Poutrincourt 
sponsor in the name of 
1adame de Dam pierre. 
16. ARNEST, cousin of Henry, sieur de Poutrin- 
cou.rt godfather in the name of ]\IIonsieur the Nuncio, 
was after him named ROBERT. 
17. AGOVDEGOVEN, also cousin of Henry, was by 
sieur de Poutrincourt named NICHOLAS, after Mon- 
sieur de N ayers, a Lawyer of the Parliament of Paris. 
18. The wife of said Nicholas, sieur de Poutrin- 
court godfather in the name of his nephew, was 
named PHILIPPE. 
19. The eldest daughter of Nicholas, the said Sieur 
sponsor in the name of 
1:adame de Belloy, his niece, 
was after her named LOUISE. 
20. The younger daughter of Nicholas, the said 



112 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


20. La puif-née dudit Nicolas tenuë par ledit fieur 
pour lacques de Salazar fan fils, a efié nommée IAc- 
QVELINE. 
2 I. V ne niepce d udi t Henri tenuë par Monfieur de 
Coullongne au nom de Madamoifelle de Grandmare, 
& nommée AI\NE de fan nom. 
LOVE' SalT DIEV. 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIOIVS 


113 


sieur being godfather for Jacques de Salazar, his son, 
was named JACQUELINE. 
2 I. A niece of Henry, Monsieur de Coullongne 
sponsor in the name of Mademoiselle de Grandmare, 
was after her named ANNE. 


PRAISED BE GOD. 



II 


BERTRAND'S LETTRE MISSIVE 


Touchant la Conversion et Baptesme du grand 
Sagamos 


PARIS: JEAN REGNOUL, 1610 


SOURCE: Title-page and text reprinted from original in 
Lenox Library. 




LE 1 RE MISSI- 
VE, TO VCHANT 1 A 
CON V E R S ION E T 
 
 p- 
tefin
 du grand Sagamos de 
lanouucUe Frãce,qui en efioit 
aupàrauant r arriuéc des Fr2-n: 
çois le chef & fOllucrain. 


Conrendnt få promij'fe â aNt'l1et fts fubiffj 
ala mefmr Conurrfion;/Ju Irs canty.",.;.. 
d
't' pdr la fOi"U ' S 41mes. 
Énuoyée du Port R()y
l de !a flCltUeUe 
France au Sit de la Troncñai
,d tté
 
duo 1.8. iuin 1610. ...tI 




 

 


"or 


A PAR I Sf 


Chct I E AN R E eN OV L, luëdu FüiJI
 
1/ 
pres [ainlk Y UfS. 


.4-.,. 


1 6 I O. 

UfC ptrmSftj
 



A LETTER MISSI- 
VE IN REGARD TO THE 
CONVERSION AND BAPTISM 
of the grand Sagamore of New 
France, who was, before the ar- 
rival of the French, its chief 
and sovereign. 


Containing h-is þr011l-ise to secure the con- 
version of kis subjects also, e'l'ell by 
stre1lgth of arms. 


Sent from Port Royal, in New France, to 
Sieur de la Tronchaie, dated 
June 28, 1610. 


PARIS, 


JEAN REGNOUL, Rue du Foin, 
near Saint Ives. 


16 I o. 
IVilh þcrmissioll. 



Les 11OU- 
uelles de la 
mort du 
Roy 
11,' efloiêt 
e1zcores en 
ce þays là. 


120 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


[3J Lettre Miffive, Tovchant la Converíìon et 
Baptefme du Grand Sagamos de la nouuelle 
France, qui en eftoit auparauant l'arriuée 
des Francois chef & f ouuerain. 
:> 


M ONSIEVR & Frere, Ie n'ay voulu laiffer partir 
Ie nauire fans vous faire fçauoir des nouuelles 
de ce païs que ie croyaurez agreables, d'au- 
tant que ie fçay, qu'eftes bon Catholique, C'eft que Ie 
Grand Sagamos, qui fe dit en noftre langue Grand 
Capitaine des Sauuages, & Ie premier de taus, s'eft 
fait baptifer Ie iour de la faind lean Baptifte derniere, 
[4J auec fa femme, fes enfans, & enfans de fes enfans, 
iufques au nombre de vingt: auec aut ant de ferueur, 
ardeur & zele à la Religion que pourroit faire vn qui 
y auroit efté inftruid depuis trois au quatre ans: II 
promet faire baptizer les autres, autrement qu'il leur 
fera la guerre: Monfieur de Poutrincourt & 
10nfieur 
fan fils les ant tenus au nom du Roy, & de Mon- 
feigneur Ie Dauphin. C'eft defia vn beau commence- 
ment, ie croy que cy apres ce fera encores mieux : 
Quant au pays, iamais ie n'ay veu rien de fi beau, 
meilleur ny plus fertile, & vous dis auec verité, & 
fans mentir, que fi i'auois trois au quatre Laboureurs 
maintenant auec may, & [5J pour les nourrir vne année, 
& du bled pour enfemencer Ie labourage qu'ils pour- 
roient faire de leurs bras feulement, du furplus qui 
me reuiendroit apres leur nourriture, i'efpererois 
faire trafiq taus les ans de fept au huid mille liures 
en Caftors & Pelleterie: Ie fuis bien marryauant que 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIOIVS 


[3] A Letter Missive in regard to the Conversion 
and Baptism of the Grand Sagamore of new 
France, who was, before the arrival of 
the French, its chief and sovereign. 


S IR and Brother, I did not wish the ship to de- 
part without giving you some news of this 
country which I believe will be acceptable, 
as I know that you are a good Catholic. The Grand 
Sagamore, whom we call in our language Grand Ca )- 
tain of the Savages, and chief of all, was baptized 
on last saint John the Baptist's day, [4] with his wife, 
children, and children's children, to the number 
of twenty; with as much enthusiasm, fervor, and zeal 
for Religion as would have been evinced by a per- 
son who had been instructed in it for three or four 
years. He promises to have the others baptized, 
or else make war upon them. Monsieur de Pou- 
trincourt and his son acted as sponsors for them in 
the name of the King, and of Monseigneur the 
Dauphin. \Ve have already made this good begin- 
ning, which I believe will become still better here- 
after. As to the country, I have never seen anything 
so beautiful, better, or more fertile; and I can say 
to you, truly and honestly, that if I had three or four 
Laborers "\Yith me now, and [5] the means of support- 
ing them for one year, and some wheat to sow in the 
ground tilled by their labor alone, I should expect to 
have a yearly trade in Beaver and other Skins amount- 
ing to seven or eight thousand livres, with the sur- 


121 


The news of 
the King's 
death had 
110t then 
reached 
Canada. 



122 


LES RELATIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


partir que ie ne fçauois ce que ie fçay, i'euffe em- 
ployé Ie verd & Ie fec au i'en euffe amené deux au 
trois, & deux muids de bled qui eft peu de ...chofe: 
V ous affeurant qu'il fait beau trafiquer par deçà & 
faire vn beau gain: Si vous voulez y entendre, man- 
dez may voftre volonté par ce porteur qui defire re- 
tourner & faire trafiq, fuiuant ce qu'il a veu. Ie ne 
vous [6J en diray dauantage, finon que ie prieray Dieu 
Monfieur & frere vous donner en parfaiéte fanté 
tref-Iongue vie. De la nouuelle France, du Port 
Royal ce xxviij. Iuin, 1610. 
Voflre trc.f-affeéli01l1lé Frere & .fcrlliteur 
BERTRAND. 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


123 


plus which would remain to me after their support. 
I am very sorry that I did not know before my de- 
parture what I know now; if I had, I should have 
left no stone unturned to bring with me two or three 
farmers, and two hogsheads of wheat, which is a mere 
trifle. I assure you it is delightful to engage in trade 
over here and to make such handsome profits. If you 
wish to take a hand in it, let me know your intentions 
by the bearer, who desires to return and traffic here 
in pursuance of what he has seen. I [6J shall say no 
more, except to pray God to give you, Sir and 
Brother, a long life and perfect health. From Port 
Royal, New France, this 28th of June, 1610. 
Your vcry affectionate Brother and servant, 
BERTRAND. 



'-

 
..11.' :,I. 
.'1"; Þ, J I .
 ,
, 
. . Ij ,.}. . j j --...:-" 
, 
.. j). 
.' 'w}}} }. ;:. LA/{ØC],; ",Ud 
. Ii} -
*") (J :. ll { 
 

 
 t$
 i_
>(,'s' i' '
(r tti{} 
 
',f . j)..I.JII i J . · 
I - . . . jl i \)ílt J ', 
 ,. 
\., .;"': .r:-- 0 
. . _ .jír
M 
,
 ]
i(ìPf; . - 1 
 . 6 \ ., 
1 D E ..
,_ 
{
 "IJ 
1.jtl (: !. ) 
.. I'" III J' j J i y 
 r.. 
 1 _ } 
" . (j1 f }.fi\' 
?i '''Hi. // . 
...
- ._" ft 
//
"=.f;JYf ,.t,) I.. 
 } I 
i\:il- u. - ' 
 .. HI' f ; :. H . C F'-; _ J '.Ç (. '1 ' . 
 :. 
ø'-- ;
 1J
.t!
Jl 14IlJI4fI
J
 f -- \\ · 
 
.--? R- .. ,
, 'J fl. 
 
/ .. If 
}}.1(.\);-... (? 
 ' .J.I1J.,n.'..fL 
 :f .,J 
'1 .,e. ' 
 F -f 1 i"{ \'.' '\,.. p
 r ' 
y...... "- 
 .,. III' I 
 ... 

 
i.l;'/i.# I jl
 .I 
 
,'ta. Å '
\cr'
, 

 
, 
 


 


. 
In f",,;,rV"1' L JNtlb
 rKrud.i -:..: 
 
--.--C... ____ ---- . --____ 



i 
-..i. 


' a .j
 T '



'7
 ::': 
. , , 
\ 
..
 '" 
. . ....,. 


'.;.-/
 

 ." 
- 
 - ( 
.. 
.... Z' 
-)tJ 6 tj 
1" ... i 


IGVRE DV 


NO 


1/- 
;j' 
, J -l ". ..' 
" . !).'-!!: 
p,}.'f(. 
 
") . -""']I i - ".. 
" .t-
 
 - .. ï t .ñ. 
.I.. 
 ""If 
eJ,. .. ,t' . 
, ø :JÇ .." . 
./ 
*
 -.=- 


, 


"'jIÞ 


-F 


..c. 


FRO"\ LESCARBOT'S HISTOIRE DE LA NC 


[Slightly reduced from 



/ . 


J

 

 


Par fir tM"C' L
.rerJø
. ".(;D.<)- -=1 
I.... . 
.J' 1 . 
'
 . 'Jl
 (
 
 

M"J.." 
.
.
, ."'.
- 
:() 
a

' 
 
(l 
It;'f:i. 

. 


:ì) 


L J.JF, F RA NCE . 

 .f) 

 
;
 

-I" 
I). 


-- 

Mf 
"'i,R;i 
... 
. .,,
.'hPí. 
twt,.. - 
c",rr 0 


'" 


- 
- 
- - :.-:
 

 !;. 
 - "" . " . 
- 
 


)?

.
 


,,'
"':',' :. 
, .
.'.:'.' 
-
 \1r; 'f
:; 


..
,.;
 


r4( . 
.......... -':.. 


4:> 
, 

I 
 
"- .
 
 
 4 
1 
 
-t .; 
,) 
'. 
,. .. 
. . 
 . 
-- ;r . 


'-4 
t 

 . : 
k-
. .r].Il.:
q, Jk Rty 

 
 L. ,
 IÍ --
 


LLE FRANCE; PARIS, 1612. 


oa\.] 




III-VI 


Lettre du P. Pierre Biard, au T. R.- P. Claude 
Aquaviva 
Dieppe, Janvier 21, 1611 


Lettre du P. Biard, au R.- P. Christophe Baltazar 
Port Royal, Juin 10, 1611 


Lettre du P. Ennemond Massé, au T. R. - P. 
Aquaviva 
Port Royal, Juin 10, 161 I 


Lettre du P. Biard, au T. R.- P. Aquaviva 
Port Royal, Juin II, 1611 


SOURCE: Reprinted from Pn:}}Úère fifissz.oll des J ésuÜes 
au Canada, by Auguste Carayon, S. J. Paris: L'Écureux, 
1864. 



126 


LES RELA TIONS DES J.É'SUITES 


[VOL. 1 


[I] PREMIÈRE MISSION DES JÉSUITES 


AU CANADA.. 


Lettre du P. Pierre Biard, au T. R. P. Claude A- 
quaviva, Général de la Compagnie 
de Jésus, à Rome. 


(Traduite sur l'origÙzallatin, conservé dans les 
Archives du Jésus, à Rome). 


DIEPPE, 2 I janvier 161 I. 
M ON TRÈS-RÉvÉREND PÈRE, 
Pax Christi. 
Que je voudrais pouvoir vous raconter com- 
bien grandes et nombreuses ant été, dans notre pe- 
tite affaire, les miséricordes de Dieu et les fruits de 
sa bénédiction et des prières; c'est-à-dire comment 


* Nous ajouterons aux lettres de nos premIers missionnaires au 
Canada un fragment d'un mémoire intitulé: Jl.fonumenta Novæ 
Era/leiæ, ab anno 1607, ad a1l1wm I737.-IJlsulæ ..Jfartinicæ ab 
anno r678.-lnsulæ cayennensis ab all1lO 1668. 
La traduction du chapitre II de ce manuscrit, conservé dans nos 
archives de Rome, donnera un ensemble de faits sur la Nouvelle- 
[2] France, qui ne se trouve pas dans les lettres que nous publions. 
Parmi les gentilshommes qui s'offrirent à Henri-Ie-Grand, d'heu- 
reuse mémoire, pour entreprendre la colonisation de Ia Nouvelle- 
France, était Ie sieur de Potrincourt. Le roi lui accorda tout ce 
qu'il demandait, mais en 1m signifiant qu'il aurait à emmener avec 
lui des religieux pris dans notre Compagnie pour les employer, 
seion ses ordres, à procurer Ie salut des sa
vages; que du reste la 
dépense de cette mission ne serait nullement à sa charge, mais que 
Ie Trésor royal y pourvoirait. 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELATIONS 


127 


[I] FIRST MISSION OF THE JESUITS 
IN CANADA.- 26 


Letter from Father Pierre Biard,27 to the Very Rev- 
erend Father Claude Aquaviva,28 General 
of the Society of Jesus, Rome. 


(Translated from the Latin origÙzal, preserved zit the 
A rchives of Jesus, at Rome.) 


ÐIEPPE, January 2 I st, 161 I . 2
 
M v VERY REVEREND FATHER, 
The peace of Christ be with you. 
Would that I could recount how great and 
numerous have been the mercies of God, the fruits of 
his blessing and of our prayers in this our little enter- 
prise; that is to say, how [2J we have emerged from 


* 'Ve shall add to the letters of our first missionaries to Canada a 
fragment of a memoir entitled: Records of JVTew France,from the 
year I607 to the year I737.-0f the Island of jJfartÙtiquefrom 
the year IÓ78.-Of the Island of Cayemzefr01ll the year I668. 
The translation of chapter II. of this manuscript, preserved in 
our archlVes at Rome, will give a collection of facts about New 
[2] France, which are not found in the letters we publish. 
Among the gentlemen who offered themselves to Henry the Great, 
of happy memory, to undertake the colonization of New France, 
was sieur de Potrincourt. The king granted him all that he 
asked, but at the same time gave him to understand that he must 
take with him some religious persons from our Society for the pur- 
pose of securing, according to his orders, the salvation of the 
savages; furthermore, that the expense of this mission would In 
no respect devolve upon him, but would be provided for from the 
royal Treasury. 



128 


LE:S RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


[2J nous sommes sortis de difficultés graves et multi- 
pliées, et comment, délivrés de toute entrave, nous 
partons pour la Nouvelle-France, lieu de notre [3J des- 


Le R. P. Pierre Coton, alors confesseur et prédicateur du roi, et 
qui était fort estimé de Sa Majesté, comme on sait, fut chargé par 
lut de choisir, dans sa Compagnie, des hommes capables, pour 
mener à bien cette périlleuse et sainte entreprise. 
Beaucoup de nos religieux s'offrirent pour cette mission lointame. 
Parmi eux on remarquait Ie P. Pierre Biard, homme dont la vertu 
égalait Ie talent, et qui occupait alors la chaire de théologie à Lyon. 
Le choix des supérieurs tomba sur lui et sur Ie P. Ennemond Masse, 
dont nous aurons à parler plus loin. 
11s partirent tous les deux en 1608 pour Bordeaux, où ils devaient 
s'embarquer, mais il fallut attendre trois ans. Car Ie gentilhomme, 
dont nous avons déjà par1é, retarda son départ; puis ensuite i1 pré- 
texta la nécessité de faire un voyage d'essai, afin. disait-il, de pré- 
parer une habitation convenable pour les Pères. 11 fit en effet ce 
voyage accompagné d'un prêtre séculier, lequel, se laissant aller à 
un zèle peu réfléchi, baptisa une centaine de sauvages, sans les 
avoir suffisamment instruits et éprouvés. Plus tard, on s'aperçut 
que ces pauvres gens n'avaient pas même compris ce qu'ils avaient 
reçu. 
Trois ans après, de retour de son voyage, Ie sieur de Potrincourt, 
pressé par la reine-mère, se chargea de conduire nos Pères au [3] Ca- 
nada. Mais ce ne fut pas sans gran des difficultés et beaucoup de souf- 
frances que nos Pères arrivèrent au Port-Royal, sur les côtes de 
l' Acadie. 
L'année qui suivit leur arrivée, deux autres des Nôtres allèrent les 
rejoilldre: ce furent Ie P. Quentin et Ie Frère coadjuteur Gilbert du 
Thet. Deux ans de séjour à Port-Royal démontrèrent à nos Pères 
l'impossibilité de fixer là Ie centre de leur mission, soit à cause de 
la difficulté d'y attirer un grand concours de sauvages, soit à cause 
des tracasseries de ceux qui commandaient. I1s transportèrent Ie 
siége de leur mission sur un autre point de la même côte, au 4S e 
degré 30 minutes de latitude, et cela sur un décret du roL Cette 
fondation prit Ie nom de Saint-Sauveur. lIs y étaient établis depuis 
peu de temps, lorsque les anglais, survenant à l'improviste, s'em- 
parèrent du valsseau français, saisirent les lettres-patentes du com- 
mandant, et, par une insigne fourberie, Ie traitèrent de pirate. Au 
moment de l'attaque, plusieurs français furent tués, et parmi eux Ie 
frère Gilbert du Thet, homme remarquable par son courage et sa 
piété. 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELATIONS 


129 


grave and multiplied difficulties, and how, delivered 
from every obstacle, we depart for New France, the 
place to which we [3J are bound, as Your Reverence 


The Reverend Father Pierre Coton, then confessor and preacher 
to the king, and who was very highly esteemed by His Majesty, as 
we know, was commissioned by him to select, from his Society, 
some men capable of conducting to a successful issue this perilous 
and holy enterprise. 
Many of our religious offered themselves for this distant mission. 
Among them was noticed Father Pierre Biard, a man whose integri- 
ty equaled his talent, and who then occupied the chair of theology 
at Lyons. The choice of the superiors fell upon him and upon 
Father Ennemond Masse, of whom we shall speak hereafter. 
They both departed in 1608 for Bordeaux, where they intended to 
embark, but they were obliged to wait three years. For the gentle- 
man, of whom we have already spoken, postponed his departure; 
then he offered as an excuse the necessity of making a trial voyage, 
in order, said he, to prepare a suitable dwelling for the Fathers. In 
fact he did make this journey, accompanied by a secular priest, 
who, yielding to a thoughtless zeal, baptized a hundred savages 
without having sufficiently instructed and tested them. Later, it 
was discovered that these poor people had not even understood what 
they had received. 
Three years afterwards, on returning from his voyage, sicur de 
Potrincourt, urged by the queen-mother, undertook to convey our 
Fathers to [3] Canada. But it was not without great difficulty and 
much suffering that they reached Port Royal, upon the coast of 
Acadia. 
The year following their arrival, two others of our Society went 
to join them, namely, Father Quentin and Gilbert du Thet, a 
Brother-coadjutor. 30 A two years' sojourn in Port Royal demon- 
strated to them the impossibility of making that the center of their 
mission, either on account of the difficulty of attractmg there a 
great assemblage of savages, or because of the bickerings of those 
in command. They transferred the seat of their mission to another 
point upon the same coast, in latitude 45 0 30"", according to a decree 
of the king. This settlement received the name of Saint Savior. 
They had been established there but a short time, when the English, 
coming upon them suddenly, took possesslOn of the French ship, 
seized the letters-patent of the commander, and. by a piece of 
outrageous rascality, treated him as a pirate. At the moment of 
attack several Frenchmen were killed, and among them brother 
Gilbert du Thet, a man remarkable for his courage and piety. 



130 


LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


tination, comme V otre Paternité Ie sait! Elle peut 
certainement s' en réjouir avec une grande consola- 
tion dans Ie Seigneur. 
[4J :Mais voicï déjà minuit sonné, et à la première 
lueur du jour, nous mettons à la voile. Je vous don- 
nerai seulement un précis des événements. 
Quand les marchands hérétiques nous virent à 
Dieppe, au jour fixé pour Ie départ, Ie 27 octobre de 


Les anglais victorieux, après avoir pil1é tout à leur aise, abandon- 
nèrellt dans une mauvaise barque une partie de français, et em- 
menèrent avec eux, en Virginie, les PP. Biard et Quentin. Nos deux 
prisonniers s'attendaient à être condamnés à mort, surtout lorsque, 
reconduits à Port-Royal, ils refusèrent de faire connaître la retraite 
des français qui se tenaient cachés dans les environs. Dirigés une 
seconde fois sur la Virginie, ils y auraient probablement trouvé la 
mort, si la divine Providence n'ei'1t rendu inutiles tous les efforts des 
marins anglais pour y aborder. La violence de la tempête les rejeta 
sur les iles Açores appartenant aux portugais, et OÙ, malgré eux, ils 
furent obligés de prendre terre. 
Les anglais eux-mêmes furent forcés d'admirer la loyauté et la 
[4] charité de nos Pères qui, en se montrant aux portugais, pou- 
vaient amener la saisie du navire et faire condamner les anglais, 
comme pirates, au dernier supplice. Avant d'entrer dans Ie port, 
ils avaient exigé de leurs prisonniers la promesse de ne pas les 
dénoncer et de se tenir cachés durant tout leur séjour aux Açores. 
Pendant la visite du vaisseau faite par les portugais, les Pères 
restèrent à fond de cale, où ils échappèrent à tous les regards. Cetté 
générosité et cette fidélité à garder la parole donnée surprirent 
tellement les anglais, qu'ils changèrent immédiatement de procédés 
envers leurs captifs et les emmenèrent directement en Angleterre, 
où ils firent publiquement leur éloge. 
L'ambassadeur de France, à la nouvelle de leur arrivée, se hâta de 
les réc1amer et les fit reconduire honorablement,dans leur patrie, au 
mois de mai 1614. 
Ce premier voyage de nos missionnaires, si stérile en apparence, 
eut cependant d'heureux résultats. Outre l'expérience acquise et 
dont on profita, Ie zèle des catholiques français, ranimé par les 
paroles des Pères, créa de nouvelles ressources, et dès que la colonie 
française fut délivrée des anglais, les J éSUltes reprirent la route du 
Canada, où ils fondèrent enfin une des plus belles missions de la 
Compagnie. 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELATIONS 


131 


knows. For this you may rejoice with great consola- 
tion in the name of the Lord. 
[4J But it has already struck midnight, and we are to 
sail at break of day, so I shall give you only a sum- 
mary of the events which have taken place. 
When the heretic merchants saw us at Dieppe, 
upon the day fixed for our departure, the 27th of 
October of last year, 1610 (we had, in fact, agreed to 


The victorious English, after having pillaged as much as they 
liked, abandoned part of the French in a miserable bark, and took 
with them to Virginia Fathers Biard and Quentin. Our two prisoners 
expected to be condemned to death, especially when, being taken 
back to Port Royal, they refused to make known the hiding-place of 
the French who were concealed in the neighborhood. Turning 
their course a second time toward Virginia, they would probably 
have met death there, had not divine Providence frustrated all the 
efforts of the English sailors to land. A violent storm cast them 
upon the Azores islands, which belong to Portugal; and there, in 
spite of all theIr efforts, they were obliged to disembark. 
Even the English were forced to admire the loyalty and charity 
[
] of our Fathers, who, by showing themselves to the Portuguese, 
might have caused the seizure of the ship, and had the English con- 
demned and executed as pirates. Before entering port they exacted 
from their prisoners the promise not to denounce them, and to keep 
themselves concealed during their entire sojourn at the Azores. 
.While the Portuguese were visiting the ship, the Fathers remained 
in the bottom of the hold, where they escaped observation. This 
generosity and loyalty in keeping their word so surprised the English 
that they immediately changed their treatment of their captives, 
and took them directly to England, where they publicly eulogized 
them. 
The French ambassador, on hearing- of their arrival, hastened to 
reclaim them, and had them taken back honorably into their own 
country, in the month of May, I6I
. 
This first voyage of our missionaries, apparently so futile, had, 
however, fortunate results. Beside the experience acquired, of 
which good use was made, the zeal of French catholics, revived by 
the stories of the Fathers, created new resources; and as soon as 
the French colony was delivered from the English, the Jesuits 
resumed their voyages to Canada, where they finally founded one 
of the finest missions of the Society.- [Carayon.] 



132 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


l'année dernière, 1610 (nous étions en effet convenus 
qu'on partirait de Dieppe), ils imaginèrent un moyen 
qu'ils crurent favorable pour nous nuire. Deux 
d'entre eux avaient fait un contrat avec 
L de Potrin- 
court pour charger et équiper son navire, [sJ sur le- 
quel nous devions voyager. Ils déclarèrent aussitõt 
qu'ils ne voulaient plus s'occuper du vaisseau, s'il 
devait porter des Jésuites. C'était une insigne ma- 
lice, et elle était facile à prouver, surtout quand les 
catholiques leur ajoutaient que Ie devoir ne leur per- 
mettait pas de refuser les Jésuites, puisque c'était 
l' ordre formel de la Reine. 
On ne put cependant rien gagner sur eux. Il fal- 
lut avoir encore recours à la Reine. Sa Majesté 
écrit au gouverneur de la ville, catholique plein de 
zèle et de piété, et lui enjoint de signifier aux héré- 
tiques que c'est sa volonté que les Jésuites soient 
reçus dans Ie vaisseau qui va partir pour la N ouvelle- 
France, et qu'on n'y mette aucun obstacle. 
A la réception de ces lettres, Ie gouverneur as- 
semble ce qu'on appelle Ie consistoire, c'est-à-dire 
taus les fidèles disciples de Calvin. Il donne lecture 
des lettres de la Reine, et les invite à l'obéissance.- 
Quelques-uns, c'est-à-dire ceux qui étaient bans, 
disent hautement qu'ils sont eux aussi du même avis, 
et ils engagent les marchands à se soumettre; mais 
ils déclarent que pour eux ils ne sont maîtres de rien. 
Tel était leur langage en public; mais en particulier, 
un des marchands qui était chargé d'équiper Ie na- 
vire, protesta qu'il n'y mettrait rien; que la Reine, 
si elle Ie voulait, pouvait lui [6J õter son droit, mais 
que pour lui, il ne Ie cèderait pas autrement. 
Que faire? Certainement tout était arrêté; car 
cette société n'avait pas de contrat écrit, et ces sortes 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELATIOJYs 


133 


sail from Dieppe), they contrived a plan which they 
considered capable of injuring us. Two of them: u 
had made a contract with 
Ionsieur de Potrincourt to 
load and equip his ship, [sJ in which we were to make 
the voyage. They straightway declared that they 
would have nothing more to do with the vessel. if it 
were going to carry any Jesuits. It was a remark- 
able exhibition of malice, as was easy to prove, 
especially when the catholics informed them that 
they were in duty bound not to reject the Jesuits, 
since it was the formal order of the Queen. 32 
However, nothing could be gained from them, and 
the Catholics were again obliged to have recourse to 
the Queen. Her :Majesty writes to the governor of 
the city, a zealous and pious catholic, and charges 
him to inform the heretics that it is her will that the 
Jesuits be received in the ship which is about to de- 
part for New France, and that no obstacle be put in 
their way. 
"\Vhen these letters are received, the governor as- 
sembles what is called the consistory, namely, all 
faithful disciples of Calvin. He reads the Queen's 
letters and urges them to be obedient. Some of them, 
namel y, those who were well disposed toward us, 
boldl y declare that they also are of the same opinion; 
and they try to induce the merchants to yield. But 
they declare that for their part they are not the mas- 
ters. At least they say this in public; but in private 
one of the merchants who was charged with fitting 
out the vessel, protested that he would put nothing 
into it; that the Queen, if she wished, could deprive 
him [6J of his right, but that he certainly would not 
yield it otherwise. 
What was to be done? In truth, all proceedings 



]34 


LES RELA TIO
\TS DES ./ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


d'engagetnents entre gens nobles ne se Inettent pas 
ordinairement sur papier. On ne pou vait donc pas 
agir contre ces hérétiques. 
On s'adresse de nouveau à la Reine. A la vue 
d 'une pareille effronterie. elle dit en manière de 
proverbe: ,. II ne faut s'abaisser à prier des vilains" ; 
et elle ajouta que les Pères partiraient une autre fois. 
Les catholiques consternés déc1arent alors aux hé- 
rétiques que les ]ésuites ne monteront pas dans ce 
vaisseau, qu'ils peuvent en conséquence Ie fréter, et 
que, dans taus les cas, si les ] ésuites y prenaient 
place, ils payeraient auparavant eux-mêmes Ie prix 
de la cargaison. 
Cette assurance une fois donnée, on vit à nu toute 
la malice des calvinistes; car ils chargèrent aussitôt 
Ie navire. complétement et de marchandises et de 
toute espèce d'objets, ne pouvant s'itnaginer que les 
catholiques pussent jamais trouver de quai payer Ie 
prix de tan t de chases. 
A cette nouvelle, 
Iadame la marquise de Guerche- 
ville. première dame d'honneur de la Reine, [7] s'in- 
digna de voir les efforts de l' enfer prévaloir et la 
malice des homInes pervers détruire ces grandes 
espérances que l'on avait de procurer la gloire de 
Dieu. C'est pourquoi, afin que Satan ne demeurât 
pas le maître et ne renversât pas l'espoir que l'on 
avait de fonder une église au Canada, eUe sollicita 
elle-même les aumônes des Grands, des Princes et de 
toute la Caul' pour soustraire les ]ésuites à la mé- 
cbanceté des hérétiques. 
Qu'arriva-t-il? Le navire déjà chargé était prêt à 
prendre la mer, quand cette dame envoya aux catho- 
liques 4,000 livres avec d'autres secours. Alors, 
pour ne pas agir par surprise, ils yont dire adroite- 



1610-]3] 


THE JESUIT RELA TI01VS 


13.") 


were at a standstill; for this society had no written 
contract, since agreements of this kind among noble- 
men are not usually put upon paper. Therefore they 
could not prosecute these heretics. 
They address themselves anew to the Queen. In 
the presence of such effrontery she quoted the word
 
of the proverb: "Never stoop to entreat a churl,"- 
and added that the Fathers should go another time. 
The dismayed catholics then declare to the heretics 
that the Jesuits will not embark upon their vessel, 
and that consequently they may go on freighting it; 
and that, in any event, if the Jesuits did occupy a place 
therein, they themselves would first pay the price of 
the cargo. 
This assurance once given, the malice of these 
calvinists was exposed in all its nakedness; for they 
immediately loaded every part of the ship not only 
'with merchandise, but with all kinds of goods, never 
dreaming that the catholics would be able to find the 
Ineans of paying for all these things. 
At this news, the marchioness de Guercheville, first 
lady of honor to the Queen, [7J was indignant at seeing 
the forces of hell prevail, and the malice of wicked 
men destroy one's strong hopes of securing the glory 
of God.8.:! Therefore, in order to prevent the triumph 
of Satan and the overthrow of their hopes of founding 
a church in Canada, she herself solicited alms from 

 obles, Princes, and from a11 the Court, to rescue the 
Jesuits from the malevolence of the heretics. 
\Vhat happened? The ship, already loaded. was 
about to sail, when this lady sent to the catholics 
4,000 livres, with other means of assistance. Then. 
not to be underhand, they go directly to the heretic
 
.:tnd say that they want the Jesuits to go with them, 



136 


LES RELATIOiVS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


ment aux hérétiques qu'ils yeulent avoir avec eux les 
J ésuites, que telle est la yolonté de Ia Reine, et que, 
par conséquent, i1 faut qu'ils les laissent monter dans 
Ie vaisseau, au bien que les marchands acceptent Ie 
prix de la cargaison et qu'ils se retirent. Ceux-ci 
déc1arent qu'ils veulent Ie prix de leurs marchandises 
(Je crois qu'ils ne pensaient pas que les catholiques 
eussent assez d'argent, au qu'ils espéraient trouver 
queIque autre moyen de déjouer leurs projets). On 
leur donne Ie prix demandé, et ce à quai personne ne 
se serait attendu, nous sommes si pleinement substi- 
tués à leur place, que la moitié du bâtiment nous ap- 
partient, et que nous avons déjà ce qu'il faut pour 
commencer [8J cette fondation que Ie Seigneur dai- 
gnera bénir dans sa générosité et dans sa bonté. 
Ainsi donc, man Très-Révérend et bon Père, Votre 
Paternité voit combien la malice du démon et de ses 
suppôts a tourné à notre avantage. N ous ne demall- 
dions d'abord qu'un petit coin dans ce vaisseau, et à 
prix d'argent; main tenant nous y sommes lesmaîtres. 
N ous allions dans une région déserte, sans gran de 
espérance d'un secours de longue durée, et nous re- 
cevons déjà Ie commencement de la fondation. N 011S 
étions forcés d'enrichir les hérétiques d'une partie de 
nos aumônes, et maintenant ils renoncent d'eux- 
mêmes à profiter d'une occasion qui Ies devait en- 
richir. 
Mais je crois que Ie grand sujet de leur douleur, 
c'est précisément Ie triomphe du Seigneur Jésus; et 
fasse Ie ciel qu'il triomphe toujours! Ainsi soit-il! 
Dieppe, Ie 2 I janvier r6II. 
De V otre Paternité 
Le fils en Jésus-Christ et Ie serviteur indigne, 
PIERRE BIARD S. J. 



161O-13J 


THE JESUIT RELA TIO..l\/S 


13ï 


that such is the will of the Queen; and so conse- 
quently they must allow them to embark, or else the 
merchants must accept the price of the cargo and 
withdraw. The latter declare that they want the 
value of their merchandise. (1 believe they did not 
think the catholics would have enough money, or 
else they hoped to baffle them by some other means.) 
They give them the price they asked; and, what no 
one could have expected, we so conlpletely take their 
place, that half the ship belongs to us, and we have 
already lTIeanS enough to begin [8] laying the founda- 
tion, ,vhich the Lord, in his generosity and goodness, 
.will condescend to bless. 
So now, my Very Reverend and good Father, you 
,ee how entirely the malice of the evil one and of his 
tools has been turned to our advantage. At first we 
only asked a little corner in this vessel at their price. 
N ow we are masters of it. \Ve were going into a 
dreary wilderness, without much hope of permanent 
help; and we have already received enough to begin 
laying the foundation. We were to enrich the here- 
tics by a portion of our alms; and now they, of their 
own accord, refuse to profit by an occasion which was 
to benefit them. 
But I believe that the great source of their grief, 
is nothing else than the triumph of the Lord Jesus; 
and may heaven grant that he always triumph! 
Alnen ! 
Dieppe, January 2 I, 161 I. 
Of Your Reverence, 
The son and unworthy servant in Jesus Christ, 
PIERRE BIARD S. J. 



13
 


LE"'5 RELA TIù_"S DES JÉSCITES 


[VOL 1 


[9] Lettre du P. Biard, au R. P. Christophe 
Baltazar, Provincial de France 
a Paris. 


(coþzëe Slt1. I' attlOKraþht? cOlzser'lIé (lUX A rchives tilt 
Jé.ws å Rome.) 


M ON REVEREND PERE, 
Pax Christi. 
Enfin, par la grace et faveur de Dieu, nous 
voicy arrivez à Port-Royal, lieu tant désiré, et après 
avoir paty et surmonté, pendant l' espace de sept mois, 
force contradictions et traverses, que nous susciterent 
à Dieppe quelques-uns de la pretendue religion, et 
sur mer, les fatigues, orages et tourmentes de l'hy- 
ver, des vents et des tempestes. Par la misericorde 
de Dieu et par les prieres de V ostre Reverence et de 
nos bons Peres et Freres, nous voicy au bout de nostre 
course, et au lieu tant souhaité V.oicy aussi la premiere 
commodité qui se presente pour escrire à Vostre 
Reverence, et lui faire sçavoir de nos nouvelles et de 
l'estat auquel nous nous retrouvons. Je suis marry 
que Ie peu de temps de nostre arrivée en ce pays ne 
me permette pas d'en discourir, et comme je désir- 
erois [I oJ plus amplement, et de l'estat de cette 
pauvre nation; neantmoins je m'efforceray de vous 
descrire non-seulement ce qui s'est passé en nostre 
voyage, mais aussy tout ce qu'avons peu apprendre 
de ce peuple depuis que nous y sommes, selon que, 
je penfe, taus nos bons seigneurs et amis avec V ostre 
Reverence (doivellt) l'attendre et Ie desirer. 



1()lO-1

] 


THE JF....;UfT RI:'L
-l TIONS 


1:j9 


. 


[9J Letter fronl Father Biard, to Reverend Father 
Christopher Baltazar, Provincial 
of France, at Paris. 


(Coþiedfrom the autog-raþh þreserved Ùl the An-hh/o. 
of Jesus, at Rome). 


M y REVERE!'!> FA TIlER, 
The peace of Christ be with you. 
At last by the grace and favor of God, here we 
are at Port Royal, the place so greatly desired, after 
having suffered and overconle, during the space of 
seven months, a multitude of trials and difficulties 
raised up against us at Dieppe by those belonging to 
the pretended religion; and after having survived at 
sea the fatigues, stonl1s, and discomforts of winter, 
winds. and tempests. By the mercy of God, and 
through the prayers of Your Reverence and of our good 
Fathers and Brothers. here we are at the end of our 
journey and in the long-wished-for place. And I am 
now taking the first opportunity which presents itself 
to write to Your Reverence, and to communicate to you 
news of ourselves and of our present situation. I anI 
sorry that the short time we have been in this coun- 
try does not permit me to write about it at length. as I 
was desirous [10] of doing, and about the condition of 
these poor people; however. I will try to describe to 
you not only what happened in our voyage, but also 
all that we have been able to learn of these peoples 
since our arrival, as I believe all our good noblemen 
and friends, as well as Your Reverence, expect and 
desire nìC to do. 



14u 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITE
 


[VOL. 1 


Et, pour commencer par Ie préparatif de nostre 
voyage, Vostre Reverence aura sceu l'effort que firent 
deux marchants de Dieppe de la religion pretendue, 
qui avoient charge de fretter Ie navire, pour empes- 
cher que n 'y fussions reçus. II y avoit jà quelques 
années que ceux qui avoient commencé et continué Ie 
voyage de Canada, avoient desiré quelques uns de 
nostre COlnpagnie pour s'employer à Ia conversion 
de ce peuple là; et Ie feu Roy d 'heureuse memoire 
Henry Ie Grand avoit assigné cinq cents escus pour 
Ie voyage des premiers qui y seroient envoyés, quand 
Ie R. P. Enmond Masse et may, deputés pour ce voy- 
age, après avoir salué la Reyne Regente, entendu de 
sa propre bouche Ie saint zele qu'elle avoit de la con- 
version de ces peuples barbares, reçu les susdicts cinq 
cents escus pour nostre viatique, aydés aussi de la 
pieuse libéralité de Mesdames les Marquises de Guer- 
cheville, Verneuil et de Sourdis, partis de Paris, 
arrivasmes à Dieppe au jour que nous avait assigné 
[II] }'Ionsieur de Biancourt, fils de 1vlonsieur de Po- 
trincourt, pour nous y prendre, sçavoir Ie 27 d'Oc- 
tobre 1610. 
Les deux susdicts march ants, aussitost qu'ils 
ouïrent que deux Iesuites debvoient aller au Canada, 
s'adresserent à Monsieur de Biancourt 1 et luy denon- 
cerent que si lesdicts Iesuites entroient au navire, ils 
n'y vouloient rien avoir. On leur respondit que Ia 
venuë des Iesuites ne leur nuyroit en rien; que, Dietl 
mercy et la Reyne, ils avoient moyen de payer leur 
pension sans greyer aucunement leur fret. Ils per- 


I Charles de Biencourt, écuyer, sieur de Saint
Just et fils de M. de 
Poutrincourt. II était alors âgé de dix-neuf ou vingt ans. (Les[tlr- 
bot et C halllþlaÙz. ) 



lôlO-13J 


THE JESUIT RELATIO.J.VS 


141 


So, to begin with the preparations for our voyage, 
Your Reverence must know about the effort put forth 
by two Dieppe lTIerchants of the pretended religion, 
who were charged with freighting the ship, to pre- 
vent our being received upon it. For a number of 
years past, those who began and continued to make 
voyages to Canada have wished some of our Society 
to be employed for the conversion of the people of 
that country; and Henry the Great, the late King, of 
happy memory, had set aside five hundred écus 34 for 
the voyage of the first ones who should be sent 
there: at this time Reverend Father Enmond Jvlasse 
and I, chosen for this mission, after having saluted 
the Queen Regent and learned from her own utter- 
ances the holy zeal which she felt for the conversion 
of this barbarous people. and having received the 
above-mentioned five hundred écus for our viati- 
cum,35 aided also by the pious liberality of the 

farchionesses de Guercheville, Verneuil, and de 
Sourdis,36 left Paris and arrived at Dieppe upon the 
day which [I I] :Monsieur de Biancourt, son of Mon- 
sieur de Potrincourt, had designated for our de- 
parture, the 27th of October, 1610. 
The two above-mentioned merchants, as soon as 
they heard that two Jesuits 'were going to Canada, ad- 
dressed themselves to :Monsieur de Biancourt * and 
warned him that, if the said Jesuits intended to em- 
bark upon the ship, they would have nothing to do 
with it: they were told that the presence of the 
Jesuits would in no wise interfere 'with them; that, 
thanks to God and the Queen, they had the money 


"* Charles ùe Biencourt, esquire, sieur de Saint-Just and son of 
:\Ionsieur de Poutrincourt. He was then nineteen or twenty years 
old. (L('scarbol and ChamþlaÙz.)-[Carayon.] 



142 


LES RELA TIOIVS Dl:'S JÉSUITES 


[Y 01.. 1 


sistent toute fois en leur negative; et quoyque Mon- 
sieur de Sicoine, gouverneur de la ville, fort zelé 
catholique, s'en entremeslast de bonne affection, si 
nc pût-il rien obtenir d'eux. A cette cause, 110nsieur 
Robbin 2 , Ie fils, autrement de Coloigne, associé avec 
:Monsieur de Biancourt pour Ie voyage, se delibera 
d' aller en Cour et déclarer à la Reyne cet accroche- 
ment; ce qu'il fit. La Reyne sur cela donna lettres 
addressantes à 110nsieur de Sicoigne, à ce qu'il eust 
à declarer la volonté du Roy à present regnant, êtrc 
telle, et avoir pareillement [I2J esté telle celIe du 
feu Roy d'eternelle memoire, que lesdicts Iesuites 
aIlent en Canada; et par ainsyentendissent les con- 
trariants sur ce fait, qu' ils se trouveroient en opposi- 
tion contre Ie bon plaisir de leur Prince. Les lettres 
estoient fort affectueuses; et plût à Monsieur de Si- 
coigne de mander à soy tout Ie consistoire, et leur en 
faire lecture. Si est-ce que pour tout cela, les mar- 
chants sus mentionnés ne voulurent en rien délnordre: 
seulement fut accordé que, laissant à part la question 
des Iésuites, on chargeroit promptemcnt Ie vaisseau, 
de peur que cet embarras et dispute n'apportast du 
retardement au secours qui promptement debvoit 
estre donné à l\Ionsieur de Potrincourt. 
Lars je pensois bien quasi toutes nos attentes estre 
mises au rouët, et ne sçavois quel1e clef noUS en 
pourroit assez c1esgager. ::\Iais 1Ionsieur de Coloigne 
ne desespera point; ains, se montrant de sa grâce 
toujours plus ardent à poursuivre pour nous, fit en- 
tendre en Cour, par un second voyage qu'il fit, y 
avoir bien moyen de debouter les susdits marchants. 


, Thomas Robin, écuyer, sieur de Cologne, demeurant en la ville 
de Paris. (Lcscarbot.) 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TI01VS 


14:{ 


to pay their passage without in the least disturbing 
their cargo. They still persisted, howeyer, in their 
refusal; and although :Monsieur de Sicoine, governor 
of the city, a very zealous catholic, kindly interposed, 
he could gain nothing from them. For this reason. 
Monsieur Robbin, t his son, otherwise called de Co- 
10igne. 87 a partner of 
Ionsieur de Biancourt in this 
voyage, thought he would go to Court and make 
known this difficulty to the Queen; he did so. The 
Queen, thereupon, sent letters addressed to lVlonsieur 
de Sicoigne, telling him to announce that the will of 
the present King, as well as [12] that of the late King 
of eternal memory, was that these Jesuits should go 
to Canada; and that those who were opposing their 
departure were doing so against the will of their 
Prince. The letters were very kind: and 
lonsieur 
de Sicoigne was pleased to assemble the consistory, 
and read them to that body. Notwithstanding all 
this, the merchants would not yield in the least; it 
was merely granted that, leaving the Jesuits out of 
the question, they should promptly load their ship, 
lest these perplexities and disputes should cause 
some delay in bringing the succor to :Monsieur de 
Potrincourt, which must be given promptly. Then 
I almost made up my tnind that all our hopes were 
doomed to disappointment, for I did not see how we 
were to be extricated from these difficulties. )lon- 
sieur de Coloigne did not despair; but, showing him- 
self in his kindness always more eager to pursue the 
case for us, by a second journey he convinced the 
Court of an excellent plan for thwarting the mer- 
chants; namely, by paying them for their cargo, and 


t Thomas Robin. esquire, sieur de Cologne, living in the city of 
Pari
. (Ll'scarbot.)-[Carayon.] 



14-1 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[Yo I.. 1 


sçavoir est, en leur payant leur marchandise, et ainsi 
les dédommageant. Madame de la Guercheville, 
dame de grande vertu, recognoissant cet expédient, 
et jugeant n'estre convenable à la piété de Ia cour que 
pour si peu un æuvre de Dieu fust arresté, et satan 
en eust ainsi Ie [I 3J dessus, se c1élibera de faire un 
queste pour mettre ensemble la somme de deniers 
requise, et Ie fist avec telle diligence et si heureuse- 
ment, par Ia pieuse liberalité de plusieurs des Sei- 
gneurs et Dames de la cour, qu'elle assembla bientost 
quatre millivres, et les envoya à Dieppe. Ainsy les- 
dits marchants furent exc1us de tout Ie droict qu'ils 
eussent pû avoir sur Ie vaisseau, sans rien perdre, et 
nous y fusmes introduits. 
Cet affaire et plusieurs autres qui survinrent dans 
l'aprest de nostre voyage, furent cause que ne pusmes 
partir de Dieppe avant Ie 26 janvier 161 I. 1'Ionsieur 
de Biancourt, jeunc seigneur fort accomply et expert 
en la maryne, estoit nostre conc1ucteur, et chef du 
vaisseau. Nous estions 36 pcrsonnes dans un navire 
appelé la Grace de Dint, d'environ soixante tonneaux. 
Nous n'eusmes que deux jours de bon vent; au troi- 
siesme, nous nous vismes subitement, par un vent et 
marées contraires, emportés jusques à cent au deux 
cents pas des esquillons l'isle d'vVytht, en Angle- 
terre; et bien nous en print que nous y rencontrasmes 
bon ancrage; sans cela resoluement c'estoit faict de 
nous. 
Eschappés de là, nous relaschasmes à Hyrmice et 
depuis à Niéport; en quay nous consumasmes 18 
jours. Le 16 de février, premier jour de caresme, 
[I4J un bon norouest s'elevant, nous donna moyen de 
partir, et nous accompagna jusques hors de la Manche. 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIO.NS 


14.) 


thus indemnifying them. 11adame de la Guerche- 
ville, a lady of great virtue, recognizing the expedi- 
ency of this plan, and deeming it inconsistent with 
real piety to allow a godly work to be checked for such 
a trifle, and thus [13] that satan should be permitted 
to triumph, determined to try and raise the sum of 
money required: and she did so with such diligence 
and success, through the pious generosity of several 
Noblemen and Ladies of the court, that she soon col- 
lected four thousand livres and sent them to Dieppe. 
Thus the merchants were deprived of all the rights 
which they might have had in the vessel, without 
losing anything, and we were admitted into it. 
This, and other incidents interfering with the 
preparations for our voyage, were the reasons why 
we could not leave Dieppe before the 26th of January, 
161 I. Monsieur de Biancourt, a very accomplished 
young gentleman, and well versed in matters pertain- 
ing to the sea, was our leader and commander. There 
were thirty-six of us in the ship, which was called 
fa Grace dc Dicll, of about sixty tons burden. \Ve 
had only two days of favorable winds; on the third 
day we suddenly found ourselves carried, by contrary 
winds and tides, to within a hundred or two hundred 
paces of the breakers of the isle of \Vight, in Eng- 
land; and it was fortunate for us that we found good 
anchorage there, for otherwise we certainly should 
have been lost. 
Leaving this place we put into port at H yrmice, 
and then at Newport; by which we lost eighteen 
days. The 16th of February, first day of lent, [14] 
a good northwester arising allowed us to depart, and 
accompanied us out of the English Channel. Now 
mariners, in coming to Port Royal, arc not accus- 



14ß 


LES RELA TI01\TS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


Ors ant accoustumé les mariniers, venant à Port- 
Rayal, de ne point prendre la droite route des isles 
Ouessants jusqu'au Cap de Sable, ce qui abregeroit 
beaucoup Ie chemin; car en cette façon, de Dieppe à 
Port-Royal, n'y auroit qu'environ mil lieues ; ains 
leur coustume est de deseendre vel'S Ie Sud jusqu'aux 
Açores, et de là tirer au grand bane, pour du grand 
banc, selon que les vents se présentent, viser au Cap 
de Sable. ou bien à Catnpseaux, ou bien autre part. 
lIs m 'ont dict que pOllr trois raisons ils descendent 
ainsi aux Açores: la premiere pour esviter la mer du 
nort, qui est fort haute, disent-ils; la seconde, pour 
s'ayder des vents du sud, qui volontiers reignent Ie 
plus; la troisiesme, pour assurer leur estime: autre- 
Inent il est difficile qu'ils se recognoissent et dressent 
leur yoyage sans erreur. lVlais nulle de ces causes a 
eu effet quant à nallS, qui neantmoins avons suivy 
cette coustnnle: non la premiere, parce que nous 
avons experimenté tant de tempestes et la mer si rude, 
que je ne pense pas y avoir beaucoup de gain, nort 
au sud, sud ou nort; non la seconde, parce que sou- 
vent, quand nons voutions Ie Sud, Ie Nort souffioit, 
et à retours; non enfin la troisiesme, d'autant que 
nous ne pusmes point voir ces Açores, quoyque nous 
fussions [15] descendus jusqu'à 39 degrés et demy. 
Ainsi toute l'estime de nos conducteurs s'embrouilla, 
et nous n'cstions pas encore aux Açores du grand 
banc, quand quelques-uns opinoient que nons l'eus- 
sions desjà passé. 
Le grand banc aux molües n'est pas, comme j'es- 
timois en France, quelque banc de sablan ou terre 
qui apparoisse hors de la mer, ains est une grande 
lisiere de terre soubs l' eau à 3 S, 40 et 4S brasses, 
large en quelques endroits de 2 S lieuës. On I' appellc 
banc, parce que c'est là premierement où venant des 



1610-13] 


TJIEJESUIT RELATIONS 


147 


tomed to take the direct route from the Ouessant 
islands to Cape Sable, which would lessen the dis- 
tance, for in this way, from Dieppe to Port Royal, 
there would only be about one thousand leagues; but 
they are in the habit of going South as far as the 
Azores, and from there to the great bank, thence, 
acconling to the winds, to strike for Cape Sable, or 
Campseaux, or elsewhere. They have told me that 
they go by way of the Azores for three reasons: first, 
in order to avoid the north sea, which is very 
stormy, they say; second, to make use of the south 
winds, which usually prevail there; third, to b.e sure 
of their reckonings; for otherwise it is difficult to 
take their bearings and arrange their route without 
error. But none of these causes affected us, although 
we followed this custom. N at the first, for we were 
so tossed about by telnpests and high seas, that I do 
not think we gained much by going north or south, 
south or north; nor the second, because often when 
we wanted the South, the North wind blew, and vice 
versa; and certainly not the third, inasmuch as we 
could not even see the Azores, although we went 
[ I sJ down as far as 39 0 30'. Thus all the calculations 
of our leaders were confounded, and we had not yet 
reached the Azores of the great bank when son1e of 
them thought we had passed it.: t '! 
The great codfish bank is not, as I thought in 
France, a kind of sand or mud-bank, appearing above 
the surface of the sea; but is a great sub-marine pla- 
teau 3S, 40 and 4S fathoms deep, and in some places 
twenty-five leagues in extent. They call it bank, 
because, in coming from the deep sea, it is the first 
place where bottom is found with the sounding lead. 
Now upon the border of this great bank, for the 
space of three or four leagues, the waves are generally 



148 


LES RELA TI01\lS DES ./ÉSUITES 


[YOLo 1 


abismes de l'ocean, l'on trouve terre avec la sonde. 
Or, sur Ie bard de ce grand banc, les vagues sont 
d'ordinaire fort furieuses trois au quatre lieues du- 
rant, et ces trois au quatre lieues on appelle les 
Açores. 
Nous estions environ ces Açores Ie mardy de 
Pasques, quand nous voicyen prouë notre ennemy 
conjuré, l'Ouest, avec telle furie et opiniastreté, que 
peu s'en fallut que nOllS ne perissions. De huict 
jours entiers, il ne nous donna relasche, adjoustant 
l 
sa malice Ie froid et souvent la pluie au la neige. 
Naviger en ce traject de la Nouvelle-France, si 
dangereux et si aspre, principalement en petits vais- 
seanx et mal munitionnez, est lln sommaire de toutes 
les miseres de la vie N ous n' avions repos ni [16] jour 
ni nuict. Si nous pensions prendre nostre refection. 
nostre plat subitement eschappoit contre la tête de 
quelqu'un; un autre tomboit sour nous, et nous 
contre quelque coffre, et tourneboulions avec d'autres 
pareillement renversez; nostre tasse se yersoit sur 
nostre lict, et Ie bidon dans nostre seing. au bien un 
coup de mer mandoit nostre plat. 
Monsieur de Biancourt m'honoroit de tant, que je 
couchois dans sa chambre. Une belle nuict ainsy 
qu'estant au lict nous pensions prendre quelque re- 
pas, voicy qu'un gentil et hardy coup de mer qui 
faussa les fermetures de la fenestre, la rompt et nous 
vient couvrir bien hautement; autant en eusmes nous 
une autre fois de jour. En outre, Ie froid estoit si 
violent, et l'a esté plus de six semaines durant, qu'à 
peine nous sentions nous d'engourdissement et de gel. 
Le bon Père Masse a pati beaucoup. 11 a demeuré 
quelques quarante jours malade sans manger que bien 
peu, et quasi sans bouger du lict; encore vouloit-il 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELATIONS 


149 


very high, and these three or four leagues are called 
the Azores. 
We were near these Azores on Tuesday of Easter 
week, when suddenly we became a prey to our 
sworn foe, the West wind, which was so violent and 
obstinate that we very nearly perished. For eight 
entire days it gave us no quarter, its vindictiveness 
being augmented by cold and sometimes rain or snow. 
In taking this route to New France, so rough and 
dangerous, especially in small and badly-equipped 
boats, one experiences the sum total of all the miseries 
of life. vVe could rest neither [16] day nor night. 
When we wished to eat, a dish suddenly slipped from 
us and struck somebody's head. 'Ve fell over each 
other and against the baggage, and thus found our- 
selves mixed up with others who had been upset in 
the same way; cups were spilled over our beds, and 
bowls in our laps, or a big wave demanded our 
plates. 
I was so highly honored by Monsieur de Biancourt 
as to share his cabin. One fine night, as we were 
lying in bed, trying to get a little rest, a neat and im- 
pudent wave bent our window fastenings, broke the 
window, and covered us over completely; we had the 
same experience again, during the day. Further- 
more, the cold was so severe, and continued to be for 
more than six weeks, that we lost nearly all sensa- 
tion from numbness and exposure. Good Father 
Masse suffered a great dea1. 39 He was ill about forty 
days, eating very little and seldom leaving his bed; 
yet, notwithstanding all that, he wanted to fast. 
After Easter he continued to improve, thank God, 
more and more. As for me, I was gay and happy, 
and, by the grace of God, was never ill enough to 



150 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


jeusner avec tout cela. Après Pasque, il meliora 
tousjours, Dieu mercy de plus en plus. Pour may, 
j'estois gaillard, quand mesme plusieurs des matelots 
se rendoient, et la Dieu grâce, je n'ay jamais tenu Ie 
lict pour mal que j'eusse. 
Eschappés des tourmentes, nous entrasmes dans les 
glaces sur les Açores du banc, degrez du nort 4 6 . 
Aucunes des glaces sembloient des isles, autres [17] 
des petits bourgs, autres des grandes églises au dômes 
bien hau1ts, au superbes chasteaux: toutes flottoient. 
Pour les esviter, nous prismes au sud; mais ce fut 
tomber, comme l'on dict, de Charybdis en Sylla, car 
de ces hau1ts rochers, nous tombasmes en un pavé de 
basse glace, la mer en estant toute couverte aut ant 
que la vue pouvoit porter. N ous ne savions en pas- 
ser; et n'eust esté la hardiesse de M. de Biancourt, 
nos mariniers demeuroient sans expedient; mais it 
fit passer outre, non obstant Ie murmure de plusieurs, 
par où la glace estoit plus rare, et Dieu, par sa bonté, 
nous assista. 
Le 5 de may, nous descendismes à Campceau, et 
eusmes Ie moyen d'y celebrer la sainte messe après 
tant de temps, et nous sustenter de ce pain qui nourit 
sans deffaut, et console sans fin. Depuis, nous costoy- 
ames terre jusqu'à Port-Royal, et y sommes arrivés à 
bans et heureux auspices Ie saint jour de Pencoste de 
bon matin, sçavoir est Ie 22 de may!, jour auquelle 
soleil entre dans les Iumeaux. Nostre voyage avoit 
duré quatre mois. 
Il n'est possible d'exprimer l'ayse que reçurent de 
nostre arrivée Monsieur de Potrincourt et les siens, 
lesquels, durant tout cet hyver, se trouvèrent [18] en 


) Champlain et Charlevoix, qui l'a copié, mettent à tort Ie 12 de 
juin. 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELATIONS 


151 


stay in bed even when several of the sailors had to 
give up. 
After escaping from these trials, we entered the ice 
at the Azores of the bank, 46 degrees north latitude. 
Some of these masses of ice seemed like islands, 
others [I7J little villages, others grand churches or 
lofty domes, or magnificent castles: all were float- 
ing. To avoid them we steered towards the south; 
but this was falling, as they say, from Charybdis 
into Scylla, for from these high rocks we fell into a 
level field of low ice, with which the sea was entirely 
covered, as far as the eye could reach. We did not 
know how to steer through it; and had it not been 
for the fearlessness of 1'Ionsieur de Biancourt, our 
sailors would have been helpless; but he guided us 
out, notwithstanding the protests of many of them, 
through a place where the ice was more scattered, 
and God, in his goodness, assisted us. 
On the 5th of May, we disembarked at Campceau,40 
and there had the opportunity of celebrating holy 
mass after so long a time, and of strengthening our- 
selves with that bread which never fails to nourish 
and console. Then we coasted along until we 
reached Port Royal, where we arrived under good 
and happy auspices early in the morning 41 of the 
holy day of Pentecost, the 22nd of May, * the day 
upon which the sun enters the constellation Gemini. 
Our voyage had lasted four months. 
The joy of :Monsieur de Potrincourt and his fol- 
lowers, at our arrival, is indescribable. They had 
been, during the entire winter, reduced [I8J to sore 
straits, as I am going to explain to you. 


* Champlain and Charlevoix, who copied this, were wrong in 
saying the 12th of }une.-[Carayon.] 



152 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


de très-grandes necessités, comme je vous vais de- 
clarer. 
:Monsieur de Potrincourt avoit accompagné son fils 
revenant en France sur la fin de juillet 1610, et y 
estoit venu jusques au port Saint lean 1 , autrement 
dict Chachippé, distant du Port-Royal 70 lieuës est 
et sud. Revenant et ayant redoublé Ie Cap de Sable, 
se trouvant en la baye courante, accablé de fatigues, 
il fut contraint de ceder Ie gouvernail pour un peu 
dormir, donnant mandement à celuy qui succedoit de 
suivre toujours terre, jusqu'au plus profond de la 
Baye. Ce successeur, ne sçay pourquoy, ne suyvit 
pas Ie commandement, ains peu de temps après chan- 
gea, et abandonna terre. 
Le Sauvage 1\iembertou, qui suyvoit dans sa cha- 
loupe, fut estonné de cette route; néanmoins, n'en 
sçachant pas la cause, n'en imita pas l'exemple, et si 
n'en dit rien. Aussi arriva-t-il bientost à Port- 
Rayal, là où 
1. de Potrincour erra par six semaines 
en danger de se perdre; car Ie bon seigneur, s'estant 
esveillé, fut bien esbahy de se veoir en pleine mer, à 
perte de terre, dans une chaloupe. II avait beau 
regarder son cadran, car ne sçachant [19J queUe route 
son gentil gouverneur avoit tenué, il ne pouvoit devi- 
ner ni où it estoit, ni où il convenoit addresser. Un 
autre mal, sa chaloupe ne pouvoit aller à la boline 2 , 
ayant esté, ne scay comment, brisée par les flancs. 
Ainsi, voulust-il au non, i1 estoit necessité à prendre 
toujours vent derriere. 
Un tiers inconvenient et grief: ils n'avoient de 


1 Lescarbot dit: (( Son père Ie conduisit jusque au port de la Hève, 
à cent lieues loin, au environ du Port-Royal.>> Ce qui donnerait à 
entendre que Chachippè, Port Saint-Jean et la Hève sont une 
même chose. 
2 Aller à la bouline, c'est-à-dire tenir Ie plus près du vent. 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TI01VS 


153 


:Monsieur de Potrincourt had accompanied his son 
a part of the way upon the latter's return to France 
the last of July, 1610, and had gone as far as port 
Saint John, * otherwise called Chachippé,42 70 leagues 
east and south of Port Royal. \Yhen he was return- 
ing, as he veered around Cape Sable, he found him- 
self in a strong current; weakened by hardships, he 
was obliged to yield the helm, in order to take a little 
rest, commanding his successor to always keep near 
the shore, even in the deepest part of the Bay. This 
pilot, I know not why, did not follow his orders, but 
soon afterward changed his course and left the shore. 
The Savage, 1vI, embertou who was following in his 
boat, was astonished that Poutrincourt should take 
this route; but, not knowing why he did so, neither 
followed him nor said anything about it. So he 
soon arrived at Port Royal, while :Monsieur de Potrin- 
COUf drifted about for six weeks, in danger of being 
hopelessly lost; for this worthy gentleman, when he 
awoke, was very much surprised at seeing himself 
in a small boat in the open sea, out of sight of 
land. He looked at his dial in vain, for not know- 
ing [19J what route his amiable pilot had taken, he 
could not guess where he was, nor in what direction 
to turn. Another misfortune was that his boat would 
not sail on a bowline, ** having been somehow dam- 
aged in the sides. So, whether he wished to do so or 
not, he was always obliged to sail before the wind. 
A third inconvenience and misfortune was a lack 
of food. Ho-wever, he is a man who does not easily 
* Lescarbot says: .. His father accompanied him as far as port de 
la Hève, a hundred leagues, more or less, from Port Royal." This 
makes it appear that Chachippè, Port Saint John, and la Hève are 
one and the same place.- [Carayon.] 
** To sail on a bowline means to sail close to the wind.- [Carayon.] 



154 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


vivres. Néantmoins, c'est une homme qui ne se rend 
pas facilement, et bonheur l'accompagne. Donc, en 
cette perplexité de route, il se determina heureuse- 
ment de prendre au nord, et Dieu lui envoya ce qu'il 
souhaitoit, un favorable Sud. Contre Ie mal de la 
faim, sa prudence luy servit; car il avoit chassé et 
gardé certain nombre de cormorans. 2 J\lais quel 
moyen de les rôtir en une chaloupe, pour les manger 
et garder? De bonne fortune, il se trouva avoir quel- 
que planche, sur laquelle il dressa un foyer, et ainsi 
rotit son gibier, à l'ayde duquel il arriva à Pente- 
gouët, anciennement Ia Norembegue, et de là aux 
Etechemins, puis à l'embouscheure du Port-Royal, 
où, par desastre, il pensa faire naufrage. 
II faisoit obscur quand il se trouva en cette entrée, 
et ses gens commencerent à lui, contredire, [20J niant 
assurément que ce fust l'embouscheure du Port- 
Rayal. Luy ouït volontiers les opinions de ses gens, 
et malheur qu' encore les suyvit-il, et aynsi prenant 
en bas de la Baye Françoise, il s'en alIa roder bien 
loing à la mercy des vents et des marées. Cependant 
ses gens estoient bien en peine au Port-Royal, et jà 
quasi tenoient-ils pour tout assuré qu'il fust peri; à 
cela aydoit Ie sauvage l\Iembertou, qui affirmoit Iuy 
avoir veu prendre vers la mer à perte de vuë; d' où 
l'on inferoit, comme l'on croit autant facilement ce 
que l'on craint comme ce que l'on ayme, que puis- 
que tels au tels vents avoient régné, il estoit impos- 
sible qu'avec une chaloupe, il eust peu eschapper. 
Et jà traitoit-on du retour en France. Or bien esba- 
his, et ensemble bien joyeux furent-ils, quand ils 
virent leur Thésée, revenu de l'autre monde; ce fut 


2 Le cor11lorall est un oiseau de mer, qui a Ie cou fort long, les 
pattes très-hautes, et qui vit de poisson. 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELATIONS 


1,:>5 


give up, and good luck follows him. Now in this 
perplexity about the route, he fortunately decided to 
turn to the north, and God sent him what he desired, 
a favorable South wind. His thrift served him against 
the misfortune of hunger, for he had hunted and kept 
a certain number of cormorants. t But how could 
they be roasted in a small boat, so as to be eaten and 
kept? Fortunately he found he had a few planks, 
upon which he built a fixe-place, and thus roasted the 
game; by the aid of which he arrived at Pentegouët, 
formerly N orembegue, and from there to the Eteche- 
mins, thence to the harbor of Port Royal, where by 
a piece of ill luck, he was nearly shipwrecked. 
It was dark when he entered this harbor, and his 
crew began to oppose him, stoutly denying [20] that 
they were in the harbor of Port Royal. He was willing 
to listen to their objections, and unfortunately even 
yielded to them; and so turning to the lower part of 
French Bay, he went wandering away off at the mercy 
of the winds and waves. :Meanwhile the colonists of 
Port Royal "\vere in great anxiety, and had already 
nearly made up their minds that he was lost; the sav- 
age, :Mem bertou. strengthened this fear by asserting 
that he had seen him sail out of sight upon the sea; 
whence it was inferred, since people believe as easily 
what they fear as what they favor, that as such and 
such a wind had prevailed, it was impossible for them 
to escape in such a boat. And they were already 
planning their return to France. Now they were 
greatly astonished, and at the same time exceeding]y 
happy when they saw their Theseus return from an- 
other world; this was six weeks after his departure, 
t The cormorant is a long-necked, high-stepping sea- bird, which 
lives upon fish.- [Carayon.] 



156 


LES RELA TIOl\TS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


six semaines après son depart, au même temps que 
M. de Biancourt arrivoit en France, Ie retour duquel 
estoit attendu à Port-Royal pour tout Novembre de 
la même annèe 1610. 
Iais on fut bien estonné, 
quand non seulement on ne Ie vit pas à Noël, mais 
aussi on perdit espérance, à cause de l'hiver, de Ie re- 
voir avant la fin d'apvril ensuivant. 
Cette fut raison pour quay on se retrancha de 
vivres; mais ce retranchement profitoit peu, d'autant 
que Ie Sieur de Potrincourt ne rabattoit rien [2 I] de 
ses libéralités vers les Sauvages, craingnant les 
aliener de la fay chrestienne. C'est un seigneur vray- 
ment liberal et magnanime, mesprisant toute recom- 
pense des biens qu'il leur fait; de maniere que les 
Sauvages, quand par fois on leur demande pourquoy 
ils ne lui redonnent quelque chose pour tant de biens 
qu'illeur faict, ont de coustumes de respondre mali- 
tieusemen t : Elldries IlÙtall lIlctaij Sagamo: c' est-à- 
dire, :Monsieur ne se soucie point de nos peaux de 
castor. Néantmoins ils envoyoient par fois quelques 
pieces d'orignac, qui aydoyent à toujours gagner Ie 
temps. Or, bon moyen pour espargner, voicy que, 
l'hyver venu, leur moulin se glace, et n'y avoit 
moyen de faire farine. Bon pour eux, qu'ils trou- 
verent provision de pais et febves; cette fut leur 
manne et ambroisie sept semaines durant. 
Là estoit venu Apvril, mais non pas Ie navire, et 
lors Ie moulin eut beau se glacer, car aussi bien n 'y 
avoit-il rien pour la tremye. Que fera-on? la faim 
est un meschant mal. On se met à pescher sur eau, 
et fouiller soubs terre: sur eau, on eut des esplans et 
du harang; soubs terre, on trouva de fort bonnes ra- 
cines, qu'on appelle c1tiqllCH, et abondent fort en de 
certains endroits. 



1610-13] 


THE .fESUIT RELA TI01\lS 


157 


just when Monsieur de Biancourt arrived in France, 
whose return was expected at Port Royal during the 
whole month of November of the same year, 1610. 
But they were very much surprised when they did 
not see him at Christmas; then they lost all hope, on 
account of the winter weather, of seeing him again 
before the end of the following April. 
For this reason they cut down their rations; but 
such economy was of little avail, since Sieur de Po- 
trincourt did not lessen [21] his liberality toward the 
Savages, fearing to alienate them from the christian 
faith. He is truly a liberal and magnanimous gen- 
tleman, refusing all recompense for the good he does 
them; so when they are occasionally asked why they 
do not give him something in return for so many 
favors, they are accustomed to answer, cunningly: 
Elldries llÙzaJllllclaij Sagalllo, that is to say, " Monsieur 
does not care for our beaver skins." Nevertheless, 
they have now and then sent him some pieces of elk- 
meat, which have helped him to gain time [i.e., to 
save his own provisions]. But they, the French, had 
a good chance of economizing when winter came, for 
their mill froze up, and they had no way of making 
flour. Happily for them they found a store of peas 
and beans, which proved to be their manna and am- 
brosia for seven weeks. 
Then April came, but not the ship; now it was just 
as well that the mill was frozen up, for they had 
nothing to put in the hopper. \Vhat were they to do? 
Hunger is a bad complaint. Some began to fish, 
others to dig. From their fishing they obtained some 
smelts and herrings; fronl their digging some very 
good roots, called cltiqucli, which are very abundant 
in certain places. 



158 


LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


Ainsi contentoit-on aucunement cet importun cre- 
diteur; je dis aucunement parce que, Ie pain leur 
[22J manquant, toute autre chose leur estoit peu, et 
jà faisoit-on estat que, si Ie navire ne venoit pour 
tout Ie mois de may, que l'on se mettroit par la coste 
en recherche de quelques navires, pour repasser au 
doux pays de froment et vignoble. C'estoyent les 
gens de 
10nsieur de Potrincourt qui parloient ainsi; 
car pour luy, il avoit Ie courage, et si sçavoit bien 
les moyens de faire attendre jusques à la saint lean. 
II n'en fut pas de besoing, Dieu mercy, car comme 
dict est, nous arrivasmes Ie 22 de may. Or si, à 
cette venue, l'allegresse de 
lonsieur de Potrincourt et 
de ceux de l'habitation fut grande, ceux là Ie pour- 
rant conjecturer, qui sçavent ce que c'est de la faim, 
du desespoir, de la crainte, de patir, d' estre pere, 
et veoir ses entreprises et travaux à valleau. 
Nous pleurasmes taus au rencontre, et nous esti- 
mions quasi songer; puis, quand nous fusmes un peu 
revenus et entrez en propos, cette question fut mise 
en avant, sçavoir: man (de vrai) qui estoit Ie plus 
ayse des deux, au 
I. de Potrincourt et les siens, au 
M. de Biancourt et nous. De vray, nous avions bien 
taus Ie cæur bien esiargy, et Dieu, par sa misericorde, 
donna signe d'y prendre plaisir; car, après la messe 
et Ie disner, comme ce ne fusse qu'allée et venue du 
navire à I'habitation et de l'habitation au [23J navire, 
chacun voulant caresser, et estre caressé de ses amis, 
comme après l'hyver on se resjouït du beau temps, 
et après Ie siége de la liberté, il arriva qne deux de 
l'habitation prindrent un canot des sauvages pour 
aller au navire. Ces canots sont tellement faits que, 
si on ne s'y tient pas bien juste et à plomb, aussitost 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


159 


Thus this importunate creditor was somewhat satis- 
fied; I say somewhat, because, when there was no 
bread, [22J everything else was of little account; and 
they had already made up their minds that, if the ship 
did not come during the month of }lay, they would re- 
sort to the coast, in search of ships to take them back 
to the sweet land of wheat and vines. It was 
Ionsieur 
de Potrincourt's followers who talked this way; as 
for him, he was full of courage and knew well how 
he could manage to hold out until saint John's day 
[midsummer J. Thank God, there was no need of 
this, for, as has been said, we arrived the 22nd of 
lay. 
Those who know what hunger, despair, fear and 
suffering are, what it is to be a leader and see all 
one's enterprises and hard work come to nought, can 
imagine what must have been the joy of 1vlonsieur de 
Potrincourt and his colony upon seeing us arrive. 
"\Ve all wept at this meeting, which seemed almost 
like a dream; then when we had recovered ourselves 
a little and had begun to talk, this question (mine, in 
fact) was proposed, to wit: 'Vhich was the happier of 
the two, 110nsieur de Potrincourt and his people, or 
:Monsieur de Biancourt and his? Truly, our hearts 
swelled within us, and God, in his mercy, showed that 
he took pleasure in our joy; for, after mass and din- 
ner, there was nothing but going and coming from 
the ship to the settlement, and from the settlement to 
the [23J ship, each one wanting to embrace and be 
embraced by his friends, just as, after the winter, we 
rejoice in the beautiful spring, and after a siege, in 
our freedom. It happened that two persons from the 
settlement took one of the canoes of the savages to 
go to the ship. These canoes are so made that, if 
you do not sit very straight and steady, they imme- 



160 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


on vire; arriva donc que, voulant retourner dans Ie 
mesme canot du navire à 1 'habitation ne sçay com- 
ment ne charrierent pas droict, et eux dans l'eau. 
Le bonheur porta que pour lors je me promenois 
avec .Iv1. de Potrincourt à la rive. Nous voyons l'ac- 
cident, et, à nostre pouvoir faisions signe avec nos 
chapeaux à ceux du navire, de courir au secours; 
car de crier, rien n'eust proffité, tant Ie navire estoit 
esloigné, et Ie vent faisoit du bruit. Personne n'y 
prenoit garde du commencement; de maniere que 
nostre recours fut à l' oraison, et de nous mettre à 
genou, n'y voyant autre remede; et Dieu eut pitié 
de nous. L'un des deux se saisit du canot renversé, 
et se jette dessus; l'autre, à la parfin, fut secouru 
d'une chaloupe, et tous deux ainsi retirez et sauvez 
nous comblerent de liesse, voyant comme la bonté 
divine, par sa toute parternelle douceur, n'avoit point 
voulu permettre que Ie malin esprit nous enviast et 
funestast un si bon jour. A elle soit gloire à tout ja- 
mays. Ainsy soit-il. 
[24] Or maintenant il est temps qu'arrivés par la 
grâce de Dieu en santé nous jettions les yeux sur Ie 
pays, et y considerions un peu l'estat de la chres- 
tienté que nous y trouvons. Tout son fondement 
consiste après Dieu en cette petite habitation d'une 
famille d'environ vingt personnes. Messire Iessé 
Flesche, vulgairement dict Ie Patriarche, en a eu la 
charge, et, dans un an qu'il y a demeuré, a baptizé 
quelque cent au tant des Sauvages. Le mal a esté 
qu'il ne les a pu instruire comme il eust bien désiré, 
faute de sçavoir la langue, et avoir de quay les en- 
tretenir; car celui qui leur nourrit l'âme faut quand 
et quand qu'il se delibere de sustenter leur corps. 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELATIONS 


161 


diately tip over; now it chanced that, wishing to 
come back in the same canoe from the ship to the set- 
tlement, somehow they did not properly balance it, 
and both fell into the water. 
Fortunately, it occurred at a time when I happened 
to be walking upon the shore with Monsieur de Po- 
trincourt. Seeing the accident, we made signs with 
our hats as best we could to those upon the ship to 
come to their aid; for it would have been useless to 
call out, so far away was the ship, and so loud the 
noise of the wind. At first no one paid any attention 
to us, so we had recourse to prayer, and fell upon 
our knees, this being our only alternative; and God 
had pity upon us. One of the two caught hold of the 
canoe, which was turned upside down, and threw 
himself upon it: the other was finally saved by a 
boat, and thus both were rescued; so our cup of joy 
was full in seeing how God in his all paternal love 
and gentleness, would not permit the evil one to 
trouble us and to destroy our happiness upon this 
good day. To him be the glory forever. Amen! 
[24] But now that we have arrived in good health, 
by the grace of God, it is time we were casting our eyes 
over the country, and were giving some consideration 
to the condition in which we find christianity here. 
Its whole foundation consists, after God, in this little 
settlement of a family of about twenty persons. 
Messire J essé Flesche, commonly called the Patriarch, 
has had charge of it; and, in the year that he has 
lived here, has baptized about one hundred Savages. 
The trouble is, he has not been able to instruct them 
as he would have wished, because he did not know 
the language, and had nothing with which to support 
them; for he who would minister to their souls, must 



162 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


Ce bon personnage nous a fait beaucoup d'amitié, et 
a remercié Dieu de nostre venue; car il avoit jà de 
longtemps resolu de repasser en France à la pre- 
miere commodité ; ce qu'il est bien ayse de faire 
maintenant, sans Ie regret d'abandonner une vigne 
qu'il aura it plantée. 
On n'a pû jusques à maintenant traduire au lan- 
gage du pays la croyance commune au symbole, 
l'oraison de nostre Seigneur, les commandemens de 
Dieu, les Sacremens et autres chefs totalement neces- 
saires à faire un chrestien. 
Estant dernièrement au port Saint-lean, je fus 
adverty qu'entre les autres Sauvages, il y en avoit 
cinq jà chrestiens. Ie prends de là occasion de leur 
[25] donner des images, et planter une croix devant 
leur cabane, chantant un Salve Reg'z"na. Ie leur fis 
faire Ie signe de la croix; mais je me trouvois bien 
esbahy, car autant quasi y entendoient les non-bap- 
tizés, que les chrestiens. Ie demandois à un chacun 
son nom de baptesme; quelques-uns ne Ie sçavoient 
pas, et ceux-là s'appeloient Patriarches / et la cause 
est parce que c'est Ie Patriarche qui leur impose Ie 
nom; car ils conc1uënt ainsy, il faut qu'ils s'appellent 
Patn:arclles, quand ils ant oublié leur vray nom. 
I1 y eut aussi pour rire, car lorsque je leur deman- 
dais s'ils estoient chrestiens, ils ne m'entendoient 
pas; quand je leur demandois s'ils estoient baptizés, 
ils me respondoient: Hetm:oJl enderquir Vortu'la1zdz'a 
Patriarch!
' c'est à-dire: "Oui, Ie Patriarche nous a 
fait semblables aux Normans." Or, appellent-ils 
Normans taus les Françoys hormis les Malouins, 
qu'ils appellent Samaricois, et les Basques qu'ils 
disent Bascua. 
Le sagamo, c'est-à-dire Ie seigneur du port Saint- 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


163 


at the same time resolve to nourish their bodies. 
This worthy man has shown great friendliness toward 
us, and thanked God for our coming; for he had made 
up his mind some tinle ago to return to France at the 
first opportunity, which he is now quite free to do with- 
out regret at leaving a vine which he has planted. 
They have not yet succeeded in translating into 
the native language the common creed or symbol, 
the Lord's prayer, the commandments of God, the 
Sacraments, and other principles quite necessary to 
the making of a christian. 
Recently, when I was at port Saint John, I was in- 
formed that among the other Savages there were five 
who were already christians. Thereupon I took oc- 
casion to give them [25] some pictures, and to erect a 
cross before their wigwams, singing a Sahl{' Regina. 
I had them make the sign of the cross; but I was 
very much astonished, for the unbaptized understood 
almost as much about it as the christians. I asked 
each one his baptismal name; some did not know 
theirs, so they called themselves Patrz:a , rchs because 
it is the Patriarch who gives them their names, and 
thus they conclude that, when they have forgotten 
their own names, they ought to be called Patriarchs. 
It was also rather amusing that, when I asked 
them if they were christians, they did not know what 
I meant; when I asked them if they had been bap- 
tized, they answered: Hdm:oll elldcrquir Vort1Jla1zdz"a 
Patriarché, that is to say, " Yes, the Patriarch has 
made us like the Normans." N ow they call all the 
French' 'N ormans, " except the 
lalouins, 43 whom they 
call Samaricois, and the Basques, Bascua. 
The name of the sagamore, that is, the lord of port 
Saint John, is Cacagous, a man who is shrewd and cun- 



164 


LES RELATIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


lean, est un appelé Cacagous, fin et matois s'il n'y en 
a point en la coste; c'est tout ce qu'il a rapporté de 
France (car il a esté en France), et me disoit qu'il 
avoit esté baptizé à Bajonne, me racontant cela 
comme qui raconteroit d'avoir esté par amitié conduit 
à un bal. Sur quay, voyant Ie mal, et [26J voulant 
esprouver si je luy esmouverois point la conscience, 
je luy demandois combien il avoit de femmes. 11 me 
respondit qu'il en avoit huict; et de fait, il m'en 
compta sept, qu'il avoit là presentes, nle les dési- 
gnant avec autant de gloire, tant s'en faut qu'avec 
honte, comme si je luy eusse demandé combien i1 
avoit de fils legitimes. 
Un autre, qui cherchoit plusieurs femmes, comme 
je luy dissuadasse, luy alleguant qu'il estoit chres- 
tien, nle paya de cette response: RerOllre quz"ro Nort- 
malldz"a: c' est à-dire Cela est bon pour vous autres, 
Normans. Aussi ne voit-on gueres de changement 
en eux après Ie bapteslne La mesme sauvagine et les 
mesmes mæurs denleurent, au peu s'en faut, mesmes 
coustumes, cerenlonies, us, façons et vices, au mains 
à ce qu'on en peut sçavoir, sans point observer au- 
cune distinction de temps, jours, offices, exercices, 
prieres, debvoirs, vertus au remedes spirituels. 
Membertou, comnle celuy qui hante Ie plus 11. de 
Potrincourt dés long temps, est aussi Ie plus zelé, et 
montre Ie plus de foy; mais encore il se plaint de ne 
nous pas assez entendre, et desireroit d'estre pres- 
cheur, dit-il, s'il estoit bien instruict. Ce fut luy 
qui me fit l'autre jour une plaisante repartie; car, 
comme je luy enseignois son Pater, selon la traduc- 
tion que m'en a fait 
1. de Biancourt, sur ce [27J que 
je lui faisois dire: Nui ell caraco 1lae z"qllCJJl eSJJloi ciscou / 
c'est-à-dire, donne-nous aujourd'huy nostre pain quo- 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


165 


ning as are no others upon the coast; that is all that he 
brought back from France (for he has been in France); 
he told me he had been baptized in Bayonne, relating 
his story to me as one tells about going to a ball out 
of friendship. Whereupon, seeing how wicked he 
was, and [26] wishing to try and arouse his con- 
science, I asked hinl how many wives he had. He 
answered that he had eight; and in fact he counted 
off seven to me who were there present, pointing 
them out with as much pride, instead of an equal 
degree of shame, as if I had asked him the number of 
his legitimate children. 
Another, who was looking out for a number of 
wives, made the following answer to my objections 
on the ground that he was a christian: Reroure quiro 
Nortma/ldia: which means, " That is all well enough 
for you Normans." So there is scarcely any change 
in them after their baptism. The same savagery and 
the same manners, or but little different, the sa1ne 
customs, cerenlonies, usages, fashions, and vices re- 
main, at least as far as can be learned; no attention 
being paid to any distinction of time, days, offices, ex- 
ercises, prayers, duties, virtues, or spiritual remedies. 
1Iembertou, as the one who has most associated 
with Monsieur de Potrincourt for a long time, is 
also the most zealous and shows the greatest faith, 
but even he complains of not understanding us well 
enough; he would like to become a preacher, he says, 
if he were properly taught. He gave me a witty an- 
swer the other day, as I was teaching him his Pater, 
according to the translation made of it by !vI. de Bian- 
court, when [27J I had him say: Nui ell caraco lzae 
ique11l eSlIloi cÙC01l/ that is, " Give us this day our daily 
bread." "But," said he, "if I did not ask him for 



166 


LES RELA TIOiVS DES /ÉSUITES 


(VOL. 1 


tidien. "Mais, dit-il, si je ne luy demandois que du 
pain, je demeurerois sans orignac au poisson." 
Le bon vieillard nous contoit avec grande affection 
comnle Dieu l'assiste depuis qu'il est chrestien, et 
nous disoit que ce printemps, luy arriva de patir 
grande faim luy et les siens; que sur ce illuy sou- 
vint qu'il estoit chrestien, et par ce il pria Dieu. 
Après sa prière, allant veoir à la riviere, il trouva 
des esplans à suffisance. Et puifque je suis sur ce 
vieux sagamo, premices de cette gentilité, je vous 
.diray encore ce qui luy est arrivé cet hyver. 
I1 a esté malade, et ce qui est plus, jugé à mort par 
les aoutmoÙzs au sorciers du pays. Or est la coustume 
que dès aussitost que les Aoutmoins ant sentencié la 
maladie au plaie estre martelle, dès lors Ie patient 
ne mange plus; aussy ne luy donne-t-on rien. Ains, 
prenant sa belle robe, i1 entonne luy-mesme Ie chant 
de sa mort; après lequel cantique, s'il tarde trop à 
mourir, on luy jette force seaux d'eau dessus, pour 
l'advancer, et quelquefois l'enterre-t-on à demy vif. 
Or les enfants de :Membertou, quay que chrestien, 
se preparoient à user de ce beau devoir de pieté en- 
vers leur père; jà ils ne luy donnoient plus à manger, 
et luy ayant prins sa [28] belle robe de 10utre, avoit, 
comme un cygne, chanté et conc1u sa N ænie au 
chant funerail. Dne chose I'affligeoit e:1core, c'est 
qu'il ne sçavoit pas comment il debyoit bien mourir 
en chrestien, et qu'il ne disoit point adieu à :M. de 
Potrincourt. Ces chases entendues, 11. de Potrin- 
court vint à Iuy, luy remonstre et l'asseure qu'en 
despit de taus les Aoutmoins et Pilotois, i1 vivroit et 
recouvreroit santé, s'il vouloit manger; ce qu'il estoit 
tenu de faire, estant chrestien. Le bon homme crut, 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELATIONS 


167 


anything but bread, I would be without moose-meat 
or fish. " 
The good old man told us, with a great deal of 
feeling, how God is helping him since he has beconle 
a christian, saying that this spring it happened that 
he and his family were suffering much from hunger; 
then he remenlbered that he was a christian, and 
therefore prayed to God. After his prayer, he went 
to the river and found all the smelts he wanted. 
And while I am speaking of this old sagamore, the 
first fruit of this heathen nation, I will tell you also 
what happened this winter. 
He was sick, and what is more, had been given up 
to die by the native aOlitmoills, or sorcerers. Now it 
is the custom, when the Aoutmoins have pronounced 
the malady or wound to be mortal, for the sick man 
to cease eating from that time on, nor do they give 
him anything nlore. But, donning his beautiful 
robe, he begins chanting his own death-song; after 
this, if he lingers too long, a great many pails of 
water are thrown over him to hasten his death, and 
sometimes he is buried half alive. Now the children 
of :Membertou, though christians, were prepared to 
exercise this noble and pious duty toward their 
father; already they had ceased giving him anything 
to eat and had taken away his [28J beautiful otter 
robe, and he had, like the swan, finished his N ænie, 
or funeral chant. One thing still troubled him, that he 
did not know how to die like a christian, and he had 
not taken farewell of :Monsieur de Potrincourt. 
When 11. de Potrincourt heard these things, he 
went to see hÏ1n, remonstrated with him, and assured 
him that, in spite of all the Aoutmoins and Pilotois, 
he would Ih'e and recover his health if he would eat 



]68 


LES RELATIOlvTS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


et fut sauyé; aujourd'huy il raconte cecy avec grand 
contentement, et rememore bien à propos comme 
Dieu a misericordieusement en cela fait entendre la 
malice et mensonge de leurs aoutmoins. 
Je raconteray icy un autre faict du mesme Sieur 
de Potrincourt, et qui a beaucoup proffité à toute 
cette gentilité. Un sauvage chrestien estoit mort, et 
(marque de sa constance) il avoit mandé icy à l'habi- 
tation, pendant sa maladie, qu'il se recommandoit 
aux prieres. Aprés sa mort, les autres Sauvages se 
preparoient de l'enterrer à leur mode: leur mode est 
qu'ils prennent tout ce qui appartient au defunct, 
peaux, arcs, utensiles, cabannes, etc. bruslent tout 
cela, hurlants, brayants avec certains c1ameurs, sor- 
celeries et invocations du malin esprit. M. de Po- 
trincourt delibera de vertueusemen t resister à ces ce- 
remonies. II met donc en armes toutes ses gens, et 
[29] s'en va aux Sauvages en main forte, obtient par ce 
moyen ce qu'il demandoit, sçavoir est que Ie corps 
fust donné à M. Ie Patriarche, et ainsi l' enterrement 
fut faict à Ia chrestienne. Cet acte, d'autant qu'il 
n'a pû estre contrarié par les Sauvages, a esté loué 
par eux, et l' est encores. 
La chappelle qu' on a eue jusque à maintenant, est 
fort petite, pirement accomodée, et en toutes façons 
incommode à taus exercices de religion. Pour re- 
mede, M. de Potrincourt nous a donné tout un quar- 
tier de son habitation, si nous pouvons Ie couvrir et 
accomoder. Sel1lement j'adjousteray encore un mot, 
que plusieurs seront bien ayses et édifiés d'ouïr. 
Après man arrivée icy à Port-Royal, fay esté avec 
M. de Potrincourt jusque aux Etechemins. Là, Dieu 
voulut que je rencontrasse Ie jeune dl1 Pont de Sainct 



1610-13] 


fHE JESUIT RELA TIOiVS 


169 


something, which he was bound to do, being a chris- 
tian. The good man believed and was saved; to-day 
he tells this story with great satisfaction, and very 
aptly points out how God has thereby mercifully ex- 
posed the malice and deceit of their aoutmoins. 
I shall here relate another act of the same Sieur de 
Potrincourt. which has been of great benefit to all 
these heathen. A christian savage had died, and (as 
a mark of his constancy) he had sent word here to the 
settlement during his sickness, that he desired our 
prayers. After his death the other Savages prepared 
to bury him in their way; they are accustomed to take 
everything that belongs to the deceased, skins, bows, 
utensils, wigwams, etc., and burn them all, howling 
and shouting certain cries, sorceries, and invocations 
to the evil spirit. M. de Potrincourt firmly resolved 
to oppose these ceremonies. So he armed all his 
men, and [29] going to the Savages in force, by this 
means obtained what he asked, namely, that the body 
should be given to the Patriarch, and so the burial 
took place according to christian customs. This act. 
inasmuch as it could not be prevented by the Savages, 
was and still is, greatly praised by them. 
The chapel they have been using until now is very 
snlall, badly arranged, and in every way unsuited for 
religious services. To remedy this. 
L de Poutrin- 
court has given us an entire quarter of his habitation, 
if we can roof it over and adapt it to our needs. But 
I shall add one more word which will be pleasant and 
edifying news to nlany. 
After my arrival here at Port Royal, I went with 
)1. de Potrincourt as far as the Etechemins. There 
God willed that I should meet young du Pont, of 
Sainct :ßlalo,4-l who, having been for some reason 



lïO 


LES RELATIO.lVS DES.lESUITES 


[VOL. 1 


:Malo, lequel ne sçays comment effarouché 1, avoit 
passé toute l'année avec les Sauvages, vivant de 
mesme qu'eux. C'est un jeune homme d'une gran de 
force d'esprit et de corps, n'y ayant sauvage qui 
courre, agisse au patisse au parle mieux que luy. II 
estoit en grandes apprehensions de 11. de [30] Potrin- 
court; mais Dieu me donna tant de croyance envers 
luy, que sur ma parole il vint avec may dans nostre na- 
vire, et, après quelques submissions et debvoir rendu 
par luy, la paix fut faite au grand contentement de 
taus. Au départir, comme les canonades bruyèrent, 
il me pria de luy assigner heure pour sa confession. 
Au Iendemain matin, luy mesme prevint l'heure, 
tant il estoit en ferveur, et se confessa en l'orée de 
la mer, en la présence de taus les Sauvages, qui s'é- 
merveilloient d'ainsy Ie voir à genoux devant may si 
long temps. Depuis, il communia avec grand ex- 
empie, et puis dire que les larmes m'en vinrent aux 
yeux, et ne fus pas seul. Le diable fut confus de cet 
acte: aussy pensa-il subitement tout troubler l'aprés 
disnée suivante; mais Dieu mercy, par l'équité et 
bonté de :1\1. de Potrincourt, Ie tout a esté remis en 
son entier. 
Voilà, man Révérend Pere, Ie discours de nostre 
voyage et des chases survenues tant en yceluy que 
devant celuy, et depuis nostre arrivée à cette habita- 
tion. Reste maintenant à vous dire que la conver- 
sion de ce pays à l'Evangile, et de ce peuple à la 
civilité, n'est pas petite, ni sans beaucoup de difficul- 
tez; car en premier lieu, si nous considerons Ie pays, 


) (( L'année prochainement passée, il avoit été fait prisonnier par 
Ie Sieur de Potrincourt, d'où s'estant esvadé subtilement, il ayoit 
esté contraint courrir les bois en grande misere.)) (Relation im- 
þrimée. ) 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


1ïl 


frightened away [from the settlement], * had passed the 
entire year with the Savages, living just as they did. 
He is a young man of great physical and mental 
strength, excelled by none of the savages in the 
chase, :in alertness and endurance, and in his ability 
to speak their language. He was very much afraid 
of 1'1. de [30] Potrincourt: but God inspired me with 
so much faith in him that, relying upon my word, Du 
Pont came with me to our ship; and after making 
some apologies and promises, peace was declared, to 
the great satisfaction of all. 'Vhen he departed, as 
the cannon were sounding, he begged me to appoint 
an hour to receive his confession. The next morn- 
ing, in his great eagerness, he anticipated the hour, 
and made his confession upon the shores of the sea in 
the presence of all the Savages, who were greatly 
astonished at thus seeing him upon his knees so long 
before me. Then he took communion in a most ex- 
emplary manner, at which I can say tears came into 
my eyes, and not into mine alone. The devil was 
confounded at this act; so he straightway planned 
trouble for us that very afternoon; but thank God, 
through the justice and goodness of 1:1. de Potrin- 
court, harmony was everywhere restored. 
And now you have had, my Reverend Father, an 
account of our voyage, of what happened in it, and 
before it, and since our arrival at this settlement. It 
now remains to tell you that the conversion of this 
country, to the Gospel, and of these people to ciyiliza- 
tion, is not a small undertaking nor free from great 
difficulties; for, in the first p1ace, if we consider the 
* .. The year before he had been made a prisoner by Sieur de Po- 
trincourt; and having slyly escaped from him, he had been obliged 
to wander about in the woods in great misery."-(PrÙz!t:d Rda- 
iioll.) - [Carayon.] 



] -oJ 
i.. 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


ce n'est qu'une forest, sans autre commodité pour la 
vie que celles qu'on apportera de France, et avec Ie 
tern ps on pourroi t retirer d u terroir. a près qu' on [3 I] 
l'aura cultivé. La nation est sauvage, vagabonde, 
mal habituée, rare et d'assez peu de gens. Elle est, 
dis-je, sauvage, courant les bois, sans lettres, sans 
police, sans bonnes mæurs; elle est vagabonde, sans 
aucun arrest, ni des maisons ni de parenté, ni des pos- 
sessions ni de patrie; elle est mal habituée, gens ex- 
tremement paresseux, gourmans, irreligieux, traitres, 
cruels en vengeance, et adonnés à toute luxure, 
hommes et femmes, les hommes ayant plusieurs 
femmes et les abandonnant à autruy, et les femmes 
ne leur servant que d'esc1aves qu'ils battent et as- 
somment de coups, sans qu'elles osent se plaindre; et 
après avoir esté demy meurtries, s'il plaist au meur- 
trier, il faut qu'elles rient et Iuy fassent caresses. 
Avec taus ces maux, ils sont extrêmement glorieux: 
ils s'estiment plus vaillans, que nous, meilleurs que 
nous, plus ingenieux que nous, et, chose difficile à 
croire, plus riches que nous. Ils s'estiment, dis-je, 
plus vaillants que nous, se vantant qu'ils ont tué des 
Basques et 
1alouins, et fait beau coup de mal aux 
navires, sans que jamays on en ait tiré vengeance, 
voulant dire que ce a esté fa ute de cæur. Ils s'es- 
timent meilleurs: .. Car, disent-ils, vous ne cessez de 
vous en tre ba Ure et q uerell er l' un l' autre; n oUS vi vans 
en paix. 'Tous estes envieux les uns des autres, et 
detractez les uns des autres ordinairement; [32J vous 
estes larrons et trompeurs; vous estes convoiteux, 
sans 1iberalité et misericorde: quant à nous, si nons 
avons un lllorceau du pain, nous Ie partissons entre 
nOllS. 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


173 


country, it is only a forest, without other conven- 
iences of life than those which will be brought from 
France, and what in time may be obtained from the 
soil after [3 I] it has been cultivated. The nation is 
savage, wandering and full of bad habits; the people 
few and isolated. They are, I say, savage, haunting 
the woods, ignorant, lawless and rude: they are wan- 
derers, with nothing to attach them to a place, neither 
homes nor relationship, neither posses::;ions nor love 
of country; as a people they have bad habits. are ex- 
tremely lazy, gluttonous, profane, treacherous. cruel 
in their revenge, and given up to all kinds of lewd- 
ness, men and women alike, the men having several 
wives and abandoning them to others, and the women 
only serving them as slaves, whom they strike and 
beat unmercifully, and who dare not complain; and 
after being half killed, if it so please the murderer, 
they must laugh and caress him. 
\Vith all these vices, they are exceedingly vainglo- 
rious: they think they are better, more valiant and 
more ingenious than the French; and, what is diffi- 
cult to believe, richer than we are. They consider 
themselves, I say, braver than we are, boasting that 
they have killed Basques and :ßlalouins, and that 
they do a great deal of harm to the ships, and that no 
one has ever resented it, insinuating that it was from 
a lack of courage. They consider themselves better 
than the French; " For," they say, " you are always 
fighting and quarreling among yourselves; we live 
peaceably. Y au are envious and are all the time 
slandering each other; [32] you are thieves and de- 
ceivers; you are covetous, and are neither generous 
nor kind; as for us, if we have a morsel of bread we 
share it with our neighbor. " 



174 


LES RELA TIONS DES J1!.
UITES 


(VOL. 1 


Telles et semblables chases disent-ils commune- 
ment, voyant les susdictes imperfections en quel- 
ques-uns de nos gens; et, se flattent de ce que quel- 
ques-uns d'entre eux ne les ant si éminentes, ne 
considerant (pas) qu'ils ant taus des vices beaucoup 
plus énormes, et que la meilleure part des nostres 
n'ont pas mesmes les vices susdicts, concluent uni- 
versellement qu'ils vallent mieux que taus les chres- 
tiens. C'est l'amour propre qui les aveugle, et Ie 
malin esprit qui les seduit, ne plus ne mains que 
vous voyez en nostre France les desvoyés de la fay 
s'estimer et se vanter estre meilleurs que les catho- 
liques, d'autant qu'en quelques-uns its voyent beau- 
coup de vices, ne regardants ni les vertus des autres 
catholiques, ni leurs vices beaucoup plus grands; ne 
voulant, comme Cyclopes, avoir qu'un seul æil, et 
celuy fiché sur aucuns vices de quelques catholiques, 
et jamays sur les vertus des autres, ni sur eux, sinon 
pour se tram per. 
lIs s'estiment aussi plus ingenieux, d'autant qu'ils 
nous voyent admirer aucunes de leurs manufactures, 
comme æuvres de personnes si rudes et grossieres, 
[33] et admirent peu ce que nous leur monstrans, 
quay que beaucoup plus digne d'estre admiré, faute 
d'esprit. De là vient qu'ils s'estiment beaucoup plus 
riches que nous, quay qu'ils soyent extremement 
pauvres et souffreteux. 
Cacagous, duquel fai cy-devant parlé, a bonne 
grace, quand il a un peu haussé Ie ton; car pour 
monstrer sa bonne affection envers les Françoys, il 
f;e vante de vouloir aller veoir Ie Roy, et Iuy porter 
un present de cent castors, et fait estat, ce faisant, de 
Ie faire Ie plus riche de taus ses predecesseurs. La 



1610-13j 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


175 


They are saying these and like things continually, 
seeing the above-mentioned imperfections in some of 
us, and flattering themselves that S01ne of their own 
people do not have them so conspicuously. not realiz- 
ing that they all have much greater vices, and that 
the better part of our people do not have even these 
defects, they conclude generally that they are supe- 
rior to all christians. It is self-love that blinds them, 
and the evil one who leads them on, no more nor 
less than in our France, we see those who have de- 
viated from the faith holding thelnselves higher and 
boasting of being better than the catholics, because 
in some of them they see many faults; considering 
neither the virtues of the other catholics, nor their 
own still greater imperfections; wishing to have, like 
Cyclops, only a single eye, and to fix that one upon 
the vices of a few catholics, never upon the virtues 
of the others, nor upon themselves, unless it be for 
the purpose of self-deception. 
Also they [the savages] consider themselyes more 
ingenious, inasmuch as they see us admire some of 
their productions as the work of people so rude and 
ignorant; [33] lacking intelligence, they bestow very 
little admiration upon what we show them, although 
much more worthy of being admired. Hence they 
regard themselves as much richer than v,'e are, al- 
though they are poor and w:retched in the extreme. 
Cacagous, of whom I have already spoken, is quite 
gracious when he is a little elated about something; 
to show his kindly feelings toward the French he 
boasts of his willingness to go and see the King, and 
to take him a present of a hundred beaver skins, 
proudly suggesting that in so doing he will make 
him richer than all his predecessors. They get this 



lï6 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


cause aussy de ce jugement leur vient de l'extreme 
et bruslante convoitise de leurs castors qu'ils voyent 
regner en quelques-uns des nostres. . 

on mains plaisant est Ie discours d'un certain 
Sagamo, qui ayant ouy raconter de M. de Potrincourt, 
que Ie Roy estoit jeune et à marier: "Peut-estre, dit- 
iI, luy pourray-je donner ma fille pour femme; mais, 
selon les us et coustunles du pays, il faudroit que Ie 
Roy lui fist de grands presens: sçavoir, quatre au 
cinq barriques de pain, trois de pais au de febves, un 
de petun, quatre au cinq chapots de cent sols pièce, 
avec quelques arcs, flesches, harpons, et semblables 
denrées. . , 
Voylà les marques de l'esprit de cette nation, qui 
est fort peu peuplée, principalement les Soriquois et 
Etechemins qui avoysinent la mer, combien que [34] 

l em bertou assure q u ' en sa j eunesse il a veu chimo- 
1111tz, c' est-à-dire des Sauvages aussi dru semés que 
les cheveux de la teste. On tient qu'ils sont ainsi 
diminués depuis que les François ant commencé à y 
hanter: car, depuis.ce temps-là, ils ne font tout l'esté 
que manger; d'où vient que, prenant une tout autre 
habitude, et amassant de humeurs, l'automne et l'hy- 
ver ils payent leurs intemperies par pleurésies, esqui- 
nances, flux de sang, qui les font mourir. Seulement 
cette année, soixante en sont marts au Cap de la 
Hève, qui est la plus grande partie de ce qu'its y 
estoient; et neantmoins personne du petit peuple de 
1\1. de Potrincourt n'a esté seulement malade, nonob- 
stant toute l'indigence qu'ils ant paty; ce qui a faict 
apprehender les Sauvages que Dieu nous deffend et 
protége comme son peuple particulier et bien-aymé. 
Ce que je dis de cette rareté d 'habitants de cette 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


li'ï 


idea from the extreme covetousness and eagerness 
which our people display to obtain their beaver skins. 
Not less amusing is the remark of a certain Saga- 
more, who, having heard "1L de Potrinc01ut say that 
the King was young and unmarried: " Perhaps," said 
he, " I may let him marry my daughter: but accord- 
ing to the usages and customs of the country, the King 
must make me some handsome presents; namely, 
four or five barrels of bread, three of peas or beans. 
one of tobacco, four or five cloaks worth one hundred 
sous apiece, bows, arrows, harpoons, and other similar 
articles. ' , 
Such are the marks of intelligence in the people of 
these countries, which are very sparsely populated, 
especially those of the Soriquois and Etechemins, 
which are near the sea; although [34] Membertou as- 
sures us that in his youth he has seen chimollllt
, that is 
to say, Savages, as thickly planted there as the hairs 
upon his head. It is maintained that they have thus 
diminished since the French have begun to frequent 
their country; for, since then they do nothing all 
summer but eat; and the result is that, adopting an 
entirely different custom and thus breeding new 
diseases, they pay for their indulgence during the 
autumn and winter by pleurisy, quinsy and dysen- 
tery, which kill them off. During this year alone 
sixty have died at Cape de la Hève. which is the 
greater part of those who lived there; yet not one of 
all M. de Potrincourt's little colony has even been 
sick, notwithstanding all the privations they ha'"e 
suffered; which has caused the Savages to apprehend 
that God protects and defends us as his favorite and 
well-beloved people. 
What I say about the sparseness of the population 



178 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


contrée, se doict entendre de ceux qui paroissent en 
la coste de la mer; car, dans les terres, principale- 
ment des Etechemins, il y a force peuple, à ce qu'on 
dit. Toutes ces chases conjoinctes avec la difficulté 
du langage, Ie temps qu'il y faudra consommer, les 
despends qu'it y faudra faire, les grandes incommo- 
ditez et labeurs et disettes qu'il faudra endurer, de- 
clarent assez la grandeur de cette entreprise, et les 
difficu1tés qui la pourront traverser. Toutes [35] fois 
plusieurs chases m'encouragent à la poursuite d'icelle. 
Premierement l' esperance que j' ay en la bonté et 
providence de Dieu. Esaïe nous assure que Ie roy- 
aume de nostre Redempteur doict estre recognu par 
to ute la terre, et qu'il ne doict avoir ni antres de dra- 
gons, ni cavernes de basilisques, ni rochers inacces- 
sibles, ni abysmes tant profonds que son humanité 
n'adoucisse, son salut ne guerisse, son abondance ne 
fertilise, son humilité ne surhausse, et enfin que sa 
croix ne triomphe victorieusement. Et pour quay 
n 'esperay-je que Ie temps est venu auquel cette pro- 
phetie doict estre accomplie en ces quartiers? Que 
si cela est, qu'y a-t-il de tant difficile que nostre Dieu 
ne puisse faciliter ? 
En second lieu, je mets la consideration du Roy 
nostre Sire. C'est un Roy qui nous promet rien de 
moindre que Ie feu Roy son pere l'incomparable 
Henri Ie Grand. Cet æuvre a commencé avec son 
reigne, et peut on dire que depuis cent années la 
France s'est approprié ce pays, au en a si veritable- 
ment pris possession, ny tant faict, que depuis son 
reigne, que Dieu remplisse de toutes benedictions. 
Il ne voudra permettre que son nom et ses armes 
paroissent en ces regions avec Ie paganisme, son au- 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


179 


of these countries must be understood as referring to 
the people who live upon the coast; for farther in- 
land, principally among the Etechemins, there are, 
it is said, a great many people. All these things, 
added to the difficulty of acquiring the language, the 
time that must be consumed, the expenses that must 
be incurred, the great distress, toil and poverty that 
must be endured, fully proclaim the greatness of this 
enterprise and the difficulties which beset it. Yet 
[35J many things encourage me to continue in it. 
First, my trust in the goodness and providence of 
God. Isaiah assures us that the kingdom of our 
Redeemer shall be recognized throughout the earth; 
and that there shall be neither caves of dragons 
nor dens of cockatrices, nor inaccessible rocks, nor 
abysses so deep, that his grace will not soften and his 
salvation cure, his abundance fertilize, his humility 
raise up, and over which his cross will not at last 
victoriously triumph. And why shall I not hope 
that the time has come when this prophecy is to be 
fulfilled in these lands? If that be so, what can there 
be so difficult that our Lord cannot make it easy? 
In the second place, I rely upon the King, our Sire. 
He is a Sovereign who promises us nothing less than 
the late King, his father, the incomparable Henry 
the Great. This work began in the latter's reign, 
and it may be said that in the century since France 
has appropriated this country, or has so completely 
taken possession of it, there has not been so much ac- 
complished at any time as since our present king be- 
came sovereign; may God fill his reign with all 
blessings. He will not permit his name and arms to 
stand in these regions side by side with paganism, 
his authority with barbarism, his renown with sav- 



180 


LES RELA TIONS DES ./ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


thoritf avec la barbarie, sa renommée avec la sauva- 
gine, son pouvoir avec l'indigence, [36] sa fay avec 
manquelnent, ses subjects sans ayde ni secours. Sa 
mère aussy, une autre Reyne Blanche, visant à la 
gloire de Dieu, contemplera ces deserts et nouveliers 
siens, où, au commencement de sa Regence, Ie coutre 
de l'Evangile a par son moyen ouvert quelque espe- 
rance de moisson, et se souviendra de ce que Ie feu 
Roy, grand de sagesse aussi bien que de valeur, pro- 
nonça au Sieur de Potrincourt venant en ce pays: 
"Allez, dit-il, je trace l'édifice; man fils Ie bastira." 
Ce que nous supplions vostre Reverence de luy re- 
presenter, et ensemble Ie bon æuvre que leurs Ma- 
jestés peuvent faire en ces quartiers, si c'estoit leur 
bon playsir de fonder et donner quelque honneste 
revenu à cette residence, de laquelle se pourroit 
s'epandre par toute cette contrée ceux qui y seroyent 
eslevés et entretenus. 
V oylà Ie second fondement de nostre esperance, 
auquel j'adjousteray la pieté et largesse que nous 
avons experimenté sur nostre depart ès-seigneurs et 
dames de cette tres-noble et tres-chrestienne cour, 
me promettant qu'ils ne voudront manquer de favo- 
riser de leurs moyens cette entreprise, pour ne perdre 
ce que desjà ils y ant employé, ce qui leur sert d'ares 
de gloire et de felicité immortelle devant Dieu. 
:M. de Potrincourt, Seigneur doux et équitable, 
[37] vaillant, amé et experimenté en ces quartiers, et 
:M. de Biancourt son fils, imitateur des vertus et 
belles qualitez de son pere, taus deux zelés au service 
de Dieu, qui nous honorent et cherissent plus que 
nous ne meritons, nous donnent aussi grand courage 
de nous employer en ceste ouvrage de tout nostre 
pouvoir. 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


181 


agery, his power with poverty, [36] his faith with lack 
of works, nor leave his subjects without aid or succor. 
His mother also, another Queen Blanche,45 looking 
to the glory of God, will contemplate these lately- 
acquired wildernesses, where in the beginning of 
her Regency the Gospel plough has, through her in- 
strumentality, created some hope of a harvest; and 
will recall what the late King, great in wisdom as 
well as in courage, said to Sieur de Potrincourt when 
he came to this country: "Go," said he. "I plan 
the edifice; my son will build it.' , We beg your 
Reverence to lay this matter before him, together 
with the work which might be done by their Majesties 
in these lands, if it were their good pleasure to en- 
dow and to give a fair revenue to this mission, from 
which all those who would be educated and main- 
tained here might go forth through the whole country. 
That is the second resource upon which our hopes 
are founded; to which I will add the piety and lib- 
erality which we experienced upon our departure 
from the lords and ladies of this most noble and most 
christian court, who promised me that they would 
not fail to assist this enterprise with their means, in 
order not to lose what they have already invested in 
it, which serves them as monuments of glory and of 
eternal happiness before God. 
M. de Potrincourt, a mild and upright Gentleman, 
[37] brave, beloved and well-known in these parts, and 
M. de Biancourt, his son, who reflects the virtues and 
good qualities of his father, both zealous in serving 
God, and who honor and cherish us more than we 
deserve, also encourage us in devoting all our energy 
to this work. 
Finally, we are encouraged by the situation and 



182 


LES RELA TIONS DES ./ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


Finalement, l'assiete et condition de ce lieu, qui 
promet beaucoup pour l'usage de la vie humaine, s'il 
est cultivé, et sa beauté, qui me fait esmerveiller de 
ce qn'il a esté si peu recherché jusques à maintenant, 
où est ce port où nons sommes, fort propre ponr d'icy 
nous estendre aux Armouchiquois, Iroquois et :Mon- 
tagnes, nos voisins, qui sont grands peuples, et labou- 
rent les terres comme nons; ce lieu, dis-je, nous fait 
esperer quelque chose à l'advenir. Que si nos 80n- 
riquois sont peu, ils se peuvent peupler; s'ils sont 
sauvages, c'est pour les domestiquer et civiliser qu'on 
vient icy; s'ils sont rudes, nous ne devons point estre 
pour cela paresseux; s'ils ant jusqu'ici peu profité, 
ce n'est merveille, ce seroit rigueur d'exiger si tost 
fruict d'un gref, et demander sens et barbe d'un 
enfant. 
Pour conclusion, nons esperons avec Ie temps les 
renùre susceptible de la doctrine de la fay et religion 
chrestienne et catholique, et après, passer [38] plus 
avant aux regions de deçà plus habitées et cultivées, 
comme dict est; esperance que nous appuyons sur 
la bonté et misericorde de Dieu, sur Ie zele et fer- 
vente charité de taus les gens de bien qui affectueuse- 
ment desirent Ie royaume de Dieu, particulierement 
sur les sainctes prieres de V ostre Reverence et de 
nos RR. PP. et très-chers FF. auxquels très-affectu- 
eusement nous nous recommandons. 
Du Port-Royal en la Nouvelle-France, ce dixiesme 
juin mil six cents onze. 


PIERRE BIARD. 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


183 


condition of this place, which, if it is cultivated, 
promises to furnish a great deal for the needs of 
human life; and its beauty causes me to wonder that 
it has been so little sought up to the present time. 
From this port where we now are, it is very conven- 
ient for us to spread out to the Armouchiquois, Iro- 
quois, and :Montagnais, our neighbors, which are 
populous nations and till the soil as we do; this situ- 
ation, I say, makes us hope something for the future. 
For, if our Souriquois are few, they may become 
numerous; if they are savages, it is to domesticate 
and civilize them that we have come here; if they 
are rude, that is no reason that we should be idle; if 
they have until now profited little, it is no wonder, 
for it would be too much to expect fruit from this 
grafting, and to demand reason and maturity from a 
child. 
In conclusion, we hope in time to make them sus- 
ceptible of receiving the doctrines of the faith and of 
the christian and catholic religion, and later, to pen- 
etrate [38] farther into the regions beyond, which they 
say are more populous and better cultivated. 'Ve 
base this hope upon Divine goodness and mercy, 
upon the zeal and fervent charity of all good people 
who earnestly desire the kingdom of God, particular- 
ly upon the holy prayers of Your Reverence and of 
our Reverend Fathers and very dear Brothers, to 
whom we most affectionately commend ourselves. 
From Port Royal, New France, this tenth day of 
June, one thousand six hundred and eleven. 
PIERRE BIARD. 



184 LES RELA TIOfl.lS DES JÉSUITES [VOL. 1 


[39] Lettre du Père Ennemond Masse au R. P. 
Claude Aquaviva, Général de la 
Compagnie de Jésus. 


(Traduite sur I' origillallatill.) 


PORT-RoVAL, 10 juin 161 I. 
M ON TRÈS-RÉvÉREND PÈRE, 
Pax Christi. 
Si V otre Paternité a vu avec plaisir ma lettre 
du 13 octobre, fen ai éprouvé bien davantage à rece- - 
voir la sienne du 7 décembre; d'autant plus que je 
suis Ie premier de la Compagnie qui ait reçu la pre- 
mière lettre que Votre Paternité ait jamais envoyée 
au Canada. J e prends ce fait comme un heureux au- 
gure, et je l'accepte comme venant du ciel, pour 
m'exciter à courir a'l1CC fcrveur dans la carrÙ\re, afin de 
mériter et de recevoir Ie prix de cette 'llocatioll céleste, et 
en fin de me sacrifier moi-même plus promptement et 
plus complétement pour Ie salut de ces peuples. 
Je vous l'avoue; j'ai dit alors franchement à Dieu: 
.life void: Sz" VOltS choisissez ce qu'il y a de faz"ble et de 
méPrisable dans ce monde, þour ren'l/erser [40] et détrllire 
ce qui est fort, vous trouverez tout cela dans Enne- 
mond. .life void: ellvoyez-moz., et rendez ma langue et 
ma parole Ùztcllz"gible, afill que je lze soÙ pas barbare pour 
ceUX' qui m' entelldr01lt. 
Vas prières, j' en ai la confiance, ne seront pas sans 
succès, comme semble Ie présager notre arrivée ici, 
Ie très-saint jour de la Pentecôte. NOllS sommcs faz"bles 
elZ YéSlls-CllrÙt, maÙ, je l'espère, llOUS 7./ÍíJro1ls avec luz" 



1610-13] 


THE .IE
UIT RELATI01VS 


lS5 


[39] Letter from Father Ennemond Masse to Rev- 
erend Father Claude Aquaviva, General 
of the Society of Jesus. 


(Translated from the Latin original.) 


PORT ROYAL, June 10, 161 I. 
M y VERY REVEREND FATHER. 
The peace of Christ be with you. 
If Your Reverence read with pleasure my 
letter of October 13th, I felt a great deal more in 
receiving yours of December 7th, especially as I am 
the first of the Society to receive from Your Reverence 
the first letter which you have ever sent to Canada. 
I take this event as a happy omen, and accept it as 
coming from heaven, to incite me to run witlt ardor 
in tile race, in order to merit and receive the reward 
of this hl'avenly vocation, and to sacrifice myself more 
promptly and more completely for the salvation of 
these people. 
I admit to you that I saz"d then freely to God: Here 
I am; 'If you clwose what is weak and despicable in this 
world to overtlzrow [40J and destroy tllat which zS strong, 
you will find all this in Ennemond. Here I am
' send 
me, and make my tongue and my words intelligible, so tllat 
I may not be a barbarian to tllose wlw willltear me. 
Your prayers, I am sure, will not be in vain, as our 
arrival here upon the most holy day of Pentecost 
seems to presage. rVe are weak in Jesus Christ, but, I 
hope, we shall li'lle with him by tIle power. of God. It is 



186 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


par la force de DÙu. Que Votre Paternité, je l'en con- 
jure, obtienne par ses saintes prières et ses saints 
sacrifices, que Ie Seigneur accompli sse toutes ces 
chases en nous. 
Le fils indigne en Jésus-Christ de la Compagnie de 
J ésus. 
ENNEMOND :MASSE. 
Port-Royal, dans la Nouvelle-France, Ie 10 juin 
16I1. 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIOl"/S 


187 


my earnest entreaty that Your Reverence, by your 
prayers and holy sacrifices, may prevail upon the Lord 
to accomplish all these things in us. 
The unworthy son in Jesus Christ, of the Society 
of Jesus, 
ENKEMOND :MASSE. 
Port Royal, New France, June 10, 161 I. 



188 


LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


[4 1 ] Lettre du P. Pierre Biard, au T.-R. P. Claude 
Aquaviva, Général de la Compa- 
gnie de Jésus. 


(Traduite sur l'originalla/in.) 


PORT-ROYAL, I I juin 161 I. 
M ON TRÈs-RÉvÉREND PÈRE, 
Pax Christi. 
Après quatre mois d'une navigation vraiment 
trèspénible et très-périlleuse, nous sommes enfin ar- 
rivés, grâce à la protection de Dieu et aux prières de 
V otre Paternité, à Port-Royal, dans cette N ouvelle- 
France, terme de notre voyage. 
Nous avons en effet quitté Dieppe Ie 26 janvier de 
cette année 161 I, et nous sommes arrivés cette même 
année Ie 22 maio Je donne en français au R. P. Pro- 
vincial la relation de toute notre entreprise et de 
l'état où nous avons trouvé les chases ici. C'est ce 
qui me paraissait plus urgent et plus utile, puisque 
j'étais dans l'impossibilité de Ie faire en même temps 
en latin. J e ne me suis pas encore arrêté huit jours 
à Port-Royal, et tout Ie temps est [42] absorbé par des 
interruptions continuelles et par les nécessités de la 
vie. Au reste, Ie P. :Masse et moi, nous nous por- 
tons assez bien, grâce à Dieu: mais il nous a fallu 
prendre un serviteur pour les travaux matériels. 
Nous ne pouvions nous en passer sans un grand détri- 
ment pour l'esprit et pour Ie cæur. 
M. de Potrincourt, qui commande ici au nom du Roi, 
nous aime et nous estime en proportion de sa piété. 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


189 


[41] Letter from Father Pierre Biard, to the Very 
Reverend Father Claude Aquaviva, Gen- 
eral of the Society of Jesus. 


(Translated from the Latin original.) 


PORT ROVAL, June II, I6II. 
M v VERY REVEREND FATHER, 
The peace of Christ be with you. 
After four months of very painful and perilous 
navigation, we have at last arrived, thanks to the 
protection of God and to the prayers of Your Rever- 
ence, at Port Royal, in New France, the end of our 
journey. 
In truth we left Dieppe the 26th of January this 
year, 161 I, and arrived :May 22nd of this same year. 
I am giving to the Reverend Father Provincial the 
narrative in French of our whole undertaking, and 
of the condition in which we found things here. 
This seemed fit> me the more necessary and useful, as 
it was impossible for me to write it at the same time 
in Latin. I have not yet been settled a week in Port 
Royal, and all the time has [42] been taken up by con- 
tinual interruptions and in providing the necessities 
of life. As to ourselves, Father Masse and I, we are 
feeling very well, thank God; but we have been 
obliged to take a servant to do the drudgery. We 
could not dispense with one without a great deal of 
anxiety and trouble. 
M. de Potrincourt, who commands here in the 
name of the King, loves and esteems us in propor- 
tion to his piety. 



190 


LES RELATIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


A la première occasion nous nous empresserons, 
avec Ia grâce de Dieu, de dire queUes sont nos espé- 
rances de succès. 
Le vaisseau s'est déjà éloigné. Je vais être obligé 
d'aller Ie rejoindre en canot, pour qu'il ne parte sans 
mes lettres. 
Je conjure Votre Paternité, par les mérites de Jé- 
sus-Christ, de se souvenir de nous et de ces contrées 
très-solitaires, et de venir à notre secours, autant 
qu' el1e Ie pourra, non-seulement par Ie moyen des 
prières très-ferventes de notre Compagnie, mais aussi 
par la bénédiction et les faveurs de notre Saint-Père 
Ie Pape (comme je les ai déjà demandées). 
Assurément nous semans dans une grande pau- 
vreté et dans les larmes; daigne Ie Seigneur nous ac- 
corder de moissonner un jour dans la joie. C'est ce 
qui arrivera, comme je l'espère et comme je l'ai [43] 
dit, grâce aux prières et aux bénédictions de V otre 
Paternité, que je sollicite humblement, 
de V otre Paternité, 
Le fils et serviteur indigne, 
PIERRE BIARD, S. J. 
A Port-Royal, dans la NouveUe-France, au Cana- 
da, Ie I I de juin 161 I. 



1610-13] 


THE .fESUIT RELA TIONS 


191 


We shall take the first opportunity to impart to you 
what may be, by the grace of God, our prospects of 
success in this country. 
The ship has already gone. I shall be obliged to 
overtake it in a canoe, that it may not leave without 
my letters. 
I conjure Your Reverence, through the merits of 
Jesus Christ, to remember us and these solitary 
lands, and to come to our aid in so far as you are 
able, not only by the fervent prayers of our Society, 
but also by the blessing and favor of our Holy Father 
the Pope (which I have already invoked). Surely we 
sow in great poverty and in tears; may the Lord 
grant that we some day reap in joy. Which will 
come to pass, as I hope and have said, [43J through 
the prayers and blessings of Your Reverence, which 
are humbly solicited by your 
Unworthy son and servant, 
PIERRE BIARD, S.J. 
Port Royal, New France, or Canada, June I I, 
1611. 



S1' 


tê _ 
I' 
 



f) 
. . . 


14ft, fOld. M fe c,' 


I\f \-RCVS 


. 


FROM LESCARBOT'S HISTOIRE DE LA Now 


[Reduced to % the dimensions 0 



NOVV[LL E 


FRANCE 


" ' 


1, 


( 


; (. '\ 
lL ___1-1- -
 - 
1 Ndl.t nr. ."J" 'f '-F- CVS L r.SC^I<'ßO I , "'Ie' "1111(;111 cÚ/",h14rt ,,!:frC4!4,. J
 r( 


BOT'S HISTOIRE DE LA NOWELLE FRANCE; PARIS, 1612. 
[Reducerl t, . the ,limen!Jion!J of origtnal.l 



VII 


JOUVENCY'S CANADICÆ MISSIONIS RELATIO 
ROME: GIORGIO PLACKO, 1710 


SOURCE: We follow the general style of O'Callaghan's 
Reprint No.4. The Title-page, Eulogy of Biard, and 
Table of Contents, are the work of that Editor. The 
Text, and List of Missions in 1710, he reprinted from 
Jouvency's Historia Societatis Jeslt (Rome, 1710), part 
v., pp. 321-325, <)61, 962; the proof of these we have 
read from a copy of that work, found in the library of 
the College of St. Francis Xavier, New York. The 
bracketed pagination in Arabic figures is that of Jou- 
veney; that in Roman, of O'Callaghan. 



CANADICÆ 


MISSIONIS 


RELA TIO 


A b a1lno 161 I ufque ad annum 1613, cum flatu 
cjzifdc11l1l1"zjJionis, a1lnis 1703 & 1710, 


Auctore J 05EPHO J UVENCIO, Societatis 
J efu, Sacerdote. 


.
 


" 
L 
",
I' '
 " 
'''' f) ''''' '- B ' 
,.. -, 
. 
 

 .. 
, .... 
...:fI 
'


 i 1 J l( 
.....
 Þ-, 

 
, 
-"-.",,,Y -_. 

-




 
. 
,;> -.....
\;; 


Ex Hiftoriæ Soc. Jefu. Lib. xv. Part. v, imprefIa 


ROMÆ 
Ex Typographia Georgii Plachi 
M. D. CC. X. 



AN ACCOUNT OF THE 


CANADIAN 



I I S S ION 


From tIle )'car 16 I I until the )'car 16 13, 7J.JÙlz the 
conditioll of thc same l1IÙsioll Ùz tIle 
)'cars 1703 and 1710, 


By JOSEPH JOUVENCV, a Priest of the 
Society of Jesus. 


Printed from the History of the Society of Jesus, 
Book xv., Part v. 


ROME 


From the Press of Giorgio Placko 
IjIO. 



196 


LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


[iJ P. Petri Biardi Eulogium ac Vita. 


D E Patre Petro Biardo qui tantam in Miffione 
Canadica inchoanda part em geffit hæc fcribit 
Pater ]ofephus Juvencius In fua Hil10riâ fub anno 
1622. 
"Ex omnibus qui hoc anno vivere In provincia 
Lugdunenfi defierunt, luétu maxima elatus el1 Aveni- 
one P. PETRUS BIARDUS Gratianopolitanus. Religi- 
onis propagandæ ftudio navigaverat ad barbaros 
Canadenfes, fueratque inter primos ejus terræ culto- 
res, ut in quinta parte narratum el1. Jnde pulfus ab 
hæreticis Anglis, & redire in Galliam coaétus, totum 
fe impendit [ii] juvandis popularibus fuis, quorum 
ut faluti confuleret, nihil fibi reliqui ad laborem 
diligentiamque faciebat. Ejus tamen indul1riam ex- 
perti maxime funt Parodienfes in præfectura Caroli- 
tana, quam civitatem per ufitata ordinis minil1eria 
diu coluit. Noviffime regionis præfeétus Marchio 
Ragnius, juffus a rege capias in Campaniam ducere 
contra Erneftum Manffeldium Galliæ finibus immi- 
nentem, Biardum fibi adfciverat comitem expedi- 
tionis, & facrorum minil1rum. Per earn occafionem 
nefcias, utrum fpeétata magis fit apoftolici viri chari- 
tas, an patienta. Magna erat in caftris inopia com- 
meatuum. Diaria militibus præbebantur adeo ma- 
ligne, ut nonnulli fame perirent. Biardus cibario, & 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELATIONS 


19ï 


[i] Eulogy and Life of Father Peter Biard. 


C ONCERNING Father Peter Biard, who per- 
formed so great a part in the establishment of 
the Canadian :Mission, Father Joseph J uvency46 
writes these things in his History, under the year 
1622: 
" Of all who during the present year have departed 
this life in the province of Lyons, the most regretted 
was F ATHER PETER BIARD, of Grenoble, who was 
taken away at Avignon. 'Vith the desire of propagat- 
ing religion, he had journeyed to the barbarous 
Canadians, and had been among the first settlers of 
that country, as has been narrated in the fifth part (of 
this volume). Upon being driven thence by the heret- 
ical English, and compelled to return to France, he en- 
tirely devoted himself [ii] to the service of his coun- 
trymen; and, that he might provide for their salva- 
tion, in no respect showed himself deficient either in 
labor or diligence. His industry, however. was espe- 
cially enjoyed by the Paray Ie Monial, in the prefec- 
ture of Charolles, which community he long served 
with the customary ministrations of the order. Fi- 
nally, the prefect of the district, Marchio Ragne, upon 
being ordered by the king to lead troops into Cam- 
pania against Ernest van :Mansfeld,4í' who was threaten- 
ing the frontiers of France, had selected Biard as his 
companion during the expedition, and as a minister 
of sacred rites. U pan that occasion one would doubt 
whether the charity of the apostolic man, or his pa- 
tience, were the more remarkable. There was in the 
camp a great scarcity of provisions. Rations were so 



198 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


demenfum fuum, ac fiquid præterea pecuniolæ a diti- 
oribus emendicando corrogaffet, inter egentiffimos 
militum partiebatur, fe ipfum fraudans diurno viétu, 
ut aliis benigne faceret. A venionem concefferat 
[ iii] denique, ut attritas tot laboribus vires paucorum 
dierum otio reficeret. Verum quafi divinans, inftare 
fibi omnium laborum & vitæ finem, totum illud 
tempus impendit excolendo piis commentationibus 
anÏ1no inter tirones, feque ad primam tirocinii formam 
fen ex emeritus ita compofuit, ut nullam omitteret 
earum exercitationum, quibus ad fui mundique con- 
temptum erudiri folent novitii. His intentuln, ni- 
hilque jam præter cæleftia cogitantem mars oppreffit, 
xv. Cal. Decem bris. ' , 
Adhæc non inutile forfan videbitur adjicere quæ ab 
auétore antiquiore Philippa fcilicet Alegambe fcripta 
funt in Catalogo Scriptorum Societatis Jefu. fub 
verba Biard: 
"PETRUS BIARDUS natione Gallus, patriâ Gratiano- 
politanus. operarius magni zeli, atque adeò lTIultarum 
palmarum, quas [iv] in horridis et inuiis Canadenfium 
Septentrionalis Americæ populorum filuis primus 
legit. Extrema ibi omnia paffus, nihil tamen inhu- 
manum magis, quàm Hæreticos, expertus eft. Feri- 
tatis oblita gens barbara integerrimi hominis inno- 
centimTI venerari difcebat; cùm ecce tibi fanétitatis 
inimica, Deumque nefciens Hærifis, cum Anglis 
Canadæ oras irrupit; difficillimæ expeditionis ingens 
pretium fuit, exofum inde abdl1cere Jefuitam. Ha- 



1610-13] 


THE JES U IT RELA TIOJ\?S 


199 


poorly furnished to the soldiers that some perished 
with hunger. Biard divided among the most needy 
of them, both his own allowance and whatever small 
sums of money he had collected by begging from the 
more w
a1thy, depriving himself of daily sustenance, 
that he might do a kindness to others. He had re- 
tired to A vignon, [iii] at last, that he might with a few 
days' leisure refresh his energies. which had been 
worn out by so many toils. But divining, as it were, 
that the end of aU labors and of life was at hand, he 
spent all that period in disciplining his spirit by pious 
meditations among the novices; and, although an 
aged man who had served his time, so adapted him- 
self to the earliest form of the novitiate, that he 
omitted none of those exercises by which beginners 
are educated to a contempt of themselves and of the 
world. vVhile intent upon these, and already think- 
ing of nothing but heavenly things. death seized him 
on the 17th day of November." 
To these things it will perhaps not seem useless to 
add what has been written by an earlier author, 
namely, Philip Alegambe,48 in the Bibliography of the 
Authors of the Society of Jesus, under the word 
Biard: 
" PETER BL\RD, a French citizen, born in Grenoble, 
a laborer of great zeal, and of very many laurels 
which [iv] he first gathered in the dreadful and pathless 
forests of the Canadian tribes of North America. Al- 
though suffering there every extremity, he still ex- 
perienced nothing more brutal than the Heretics. 
The barbarous race, forgetting its savageness, was 
learning to venerate the character of this most right- 
eous man; when, behold, Heresy, hostile to holiness 
and ignorant of God, burst. together with the Eng- 
lish, upon the shores of Canada. The reward of a 



200 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


bitus eft in vinculis aliquamdiu; & vix tandem in 
Galliam nudus ab omni remiffus. Intereà verò dum 
integrum illi effet ad noualia Canadæ redire, dam- 
num ab Hæreticis illatum íanc1è vltus eft: reliquo 
vitæ tempore quæfiuit intentiffimis fiudiis ad vitam 
illos, à quibus ad necem adduétus fuerat. Docuerat 
olim Theologiam Lugduni, non fine laude. Reuer- 
fus è 
1iffione Cafirenfi, cùm Auenionem diuertiffit, & 
opportunitate temp oris vfus íeceffiffet in N ouitiatum t 
in ipfis [v] penè fpiritualium Exercitiorum initiis, ad 
paradifi contemplationem, vt credimus, euocatus eft, 
die XIX. N ouembris, Anno MDCXXIJ. 
Præter Epiflolam ad R. P. Præpojit1l11l Ge71eralem è 
Portzt Rega/i, et Relati011ClIl Expeditio71is A ng/oru11Z in 
Callada/ll, P. Biardus ícripfit Libr2l1n pro allcloritate 
Pontificis, contra l\lartinettum :à1inifirum. Gallicè 
etiam edidit íeorfim Re/atio71clIl }\To'iJæ Frallciæ & iti- 
lleris Patru1Jl Societatis :JeJÚ ad i//a1Jl. Lugduni apud 
L. IVl uguet, MDCXVI. in 12. 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


201 


very laborious expedition was great,-to drive thence 
the hated Jesuit. For some time he was kept in 
bonds; and at last, stripped of everything, he was 
with difficulty restored to France. But meanwhile, 
until it was safe to return to the wilds of Canada, he 
took vengeance in a holy manner for the injury in- 
flicted by the Heretics; during the rest of his life he 
sought with the greatest enthusiasm to win to life 
those by whom he had been devoted to death. He 
had formerly taught Theology at Lyons, not without 
commendation. On his return from the Military 
ßiIission, when he had turned aside to A vignon, and, 
making use of his opportunity, had retired into 
the Novitiate, in [v] almost the very beginning of his 
spiritual Exercises, he was called away to the con- 
templation of paradise, as we believe, on the 19th 
day of November, in the year 1622. 
Besides a Letter to R. P. General Commander from 
Port Royal, and All Accouut of the Expedit'ion of the 
Englislz against Canada, Father Biard wrote A Book Ad- 
'lJocatillg tlte autllOrity of the Pontiff against ßilartinet, a 
minister. In French, also, he published separately 
All Accollnt of New Frallcc alld of tlte jourlley tltitlzer of 
tIle Fatllers of tlte SocietJI of Jesus. Lyons, by L. ßilu- 
guet, 1616, in 12mo. "-[O'CALLAGHAN.] 



202 


LES RELA TI01\lS DES JÉSú?TES 


[VOL. 1 


[vii] Tabvla Rervrn. 


Pag. 


S OC/ETAS Jcfll, Ùz Cmzadam, fell No'ualll 
Frallâam illdlléta . . . 5 


II /1litiU1Jl Canadicæ ftf(/ji01l1s, & primi fruc- 
tus 


7 


III Domiâ/z"a Soâetatis & lIh/jiollcS l1Z Nova 
Fra1lcia 


18 


IV M'ljJio Calladclljis ah Allglis proturbata 25 
V Ul'lUS è Societate Ùlll.rficitllr,o alii Canada 


ejÙ:Ùaztllr 


27 


VI iJItjJiolles Societatis Jcfu 'Ill A mcrica fcPtcll- 
triollali, A 1l11O 17 10 37 



1610-13J 


THE JESUIT RELA TIOIVS 


203 


[vii] Table of Contents. 


[Th
 þag
 nunzl1
rs r
f
r to O'Ca//ag/zan's R
þri"t.] 


Page. 
T HE Society of Jesus Ùztroduced illto Canada 
or Nt'w FranC{' . . . . 5 


II BegÙl1lÙzg and first frzdts of thl' Canadz'a1l 
i1fÚsz"01l 7 
III Settlements and ftfissi01ZS of the Society ill Ne'lV 
Francc 18 
IV Tile Canadian lVlissz"01Z driven out by tile Eng- 
lish 2S 
V Ollt' of tilt' members of tlze Society zs killed J' 
the others are expelled from Canada 27 
VI l'rfissions of the Society of Jesus Z1l North 
Amcrica, in tile year 1710 37 



204 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


Missionis Canadicæ Relatio. 


[3 2 1 S. II.] SOCIETAS JESU, IN CANADAM, SEU NOVAM 
FRANCIAM INDUCT A. 


A )IERICAM feptentrionalem tres præcipuè natio- 
nes obtinent, Hifpani, Galli, & Angli. :11exi- 
cum, Floridæ pars & Californiæ, funt Hifpanæ 
ditionis. Littora orienti foli oppofita & ad Aufirum 
devexa occuparunt variis temporibus Angli, Sueci, 
& Hollandi. Quod inter illos & Mexicanos verfus 
feptentriones & occafum campi jacet, Galli tenent, ac 
N ovam Franciam, five Canadam, vulgo vacant. Ni- 
hil tetrius immaniufve barbaris Canadenfibus fingi 
poterat, prius quam induéta religione mitefcerent, ut 
patebit ex iis quæ Paragraph a decimo referentur. 
Nunc barbaries, & fæda fcelerum cohors, rationi ac 
*ijaz: c. 35. virtuti locum dedit, videturque huic oraculo* veteri 
conftare fides: Lætabitur dc.fcrta & z'nvz'a, & exultabit 
.folit1tdo, & florebit quaji lilium. 



1610-13] 


THE.fESUIT RELATIO.NS 


205 


An Account of the Canadian Mission. 


[32 I 
 II.] THE SOCIETY OF JESUS INTRODUCED 
INTO CANADA. OR NEW FRANCE. 


N ORTH AMERICA is occupied principally by 
three nations- the Spanish, the French, and 
the English. Mexico, a part of Florida and of 
California, belongs to the Spanish dominions. The 
shores opposite to the rising sun, and stretching South- 
ward, have been occupied at various times by the Eng- 
lish, the Swedes, and the Dutch. The French possess 
the territory which lies between these and the }.tlexi- 
cans, towards the north and west, commonly called 
New France or Canada. Nothing fouler and more 
hideous than the savage Canadians could have been 
imagined, before they began to soften under the in- 
fluence of religion, as will appear from matters to be 
presented in the tenth Paragraph. N ow, barbarism 
and the vile array of sins have given place to reason 
and virtue, which seems to confirm our faith in this 
ancient prophecy: -x- TIlt: land tltat was desolate and '* Isaiah, c. 
impassable sltall be glad, and tIle wilderness shall rejoice, 35. 
and sltall flourislz like tIll: lily. 




06 


LES R.E.LA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


(VOL. 1 


INITIUM CANADICÆ MISSIONIS, & PRIl\II FRUCTUS. 


A :11ERICÆ 1ittora, Franciæ obverfa, Galli jam 
inde ab anno MDXXIV. identidem lufirave- 
runt: fed obiter, & quafi prætereuntes. De. 
mum fuperiori feculo ineunte, region em interiorem 
fubiit Samuel Calnplenius, qui Canadenfis coloniæ 
parens merito dici potefi. Jamque negotiatio bel- 
1iffimè procedebat, cum Henricus IV. de religione 
Inagis. quàm de commercia folicitus, in hanc Orbis 
novi partem inferre Chrifiiana facra decrevit, anno 
1'IDCVIII. ac Societatis homines ad hanc Apofioli- 
cam expedition em pofiulavit. Certior de confilio 
Regis factus P. Petrus Cotonus, regiæ confcientiæ 
moderator, juffufque firenuos quamprimum defignare 
facerdotes, qui folida tanti operis jacerent fundamen- 
ta, Societatis Præpofitum admonuit. Ex omni, non 
juvenuln modo, fed etiam fenum, numero, laborio- 
fam Miffionem flagitantium, deleéti funt P. Petrus 
Biardus. Gratianopolitanus, theologiæ profeffor in col- 
legia Lugdunenfi; & P. Enemundus :ðlaffæus, Lug- 
dunenfis. :Moram confiliis felicibus attulit Regis im- 
provifa mors; & Societatis alnicorunl fiudia. qui 
navem & reliqua itineri neceffaria comparabant, debi- 
litavit. Sed inviéta rebus adverfis Cotoni pietas. 
Reginæ auétoritatem illterpofuit, ut difficultates ob. 
jeétas profligaret. Ergo indicitur profeclio: Patres 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT Rl!-L
l TIO.XS 


207 


BEGC\'XI:\'G .\-XD FIR
T FRUITS OF THE CANADIAN 
\TlSSION. 


T HE French had, since the year 15 2 4, often visited 
the coasts of America opposite to France, but 
cursorily, and, as it were, while passing by. 
Finally, at the beginning of the last century, Samuel 
Champlain, who well deserves to be called the parent 
of the Canadian colony, entered the region of the in- 
terior. Already was the undertaking progressing very 
favorably, when Henry IV., more solicitous for relig- 
ion than for commerce, resolved, in the year 1608, to 
introduce Christian rites into this part of the new 
World, and asked members of the Society to under- 
take this Apostolic enterprise. Upon being informed 
of the plan of the King, and ordered to choose as 
soon as possible energetic priests who would lay 
solidly the foundations of so great a work, Father 
Caton, the confessor of the king, informed the Com- 
mander of the Society. From the whole number, 
not only of youths but also of old men, who sought 
this laborious Duty, there were chosen Father Peter 
Biard, of Grenoble, a professor of theology in the 
college of Lyons, and Father Enemond 11assé, of 
Lyons. The unforeseen death of the King delayed 
this auspicious enterprise, and diminished the enthu- 
siasm of the friends of the Society, who were provid- 
ing a ship and other necessaries for the voyage. But 
the pious Caton, unconquered by adversity, brought 
in the authority of the Queen, in order that he might 
overcome the difficulties in his way. As a result, the 
time was set for their departure, and the Fathers has- 



:!os 


LES RELA l'IONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


Deppam advolant, inde vela Novam in Franciam 
faéturi Ecce autem repentè inexpeétatus obex. Ea 
navis erat Potrincurtii, nobilis Galli: duobus tamen 
mercatoribus Calvinianis obnoxia, utpote qui fumptus 
non leves aù ill am armamentis inftruendam fecerant. 
Ifti fimul atque imponendos in hanc hOlnines Societa- 
tis audierunt, negant enimvero fe paffuros ut è portu 
folvat. Opponitur imperium Reginæ, mandata inge- 
minantur. Refpondent per fe non ftare quin facer- 
dotes alii quilibet admittantur; at fibi cum noftris 
hominibus nihil effe rei velIe. Ubi vidit Cotonus 
in1proborun1 pertinaciam frangi non poffe, alia rem 
aggreffus eft via. Erat matrona non pietate minus 
quàm genere nobilis, Antonia Guerchevillæa. Hæc 
negotium )Iiffionis haud fecus procurabat, ac fuum: 
utque non vulgarem apud multos gratiam, virtutis 
opinione collegerat, magnam fubito pecuniæ vim 
corrogavit, qua mercatoribus hæreticis fumma repen- 
-deretur, ab iis in adornandam navim contributa. Sic 
illis rejeétis & invitis, Patres admiffi fuerunt. At, 
quia interin1 extraétum tempus fuerat, non ante VII. 
Kalend. Februarias, cum hyemaret afperum æquor, 
vela funt faéta. Hinc menfium quatuor curfus fuit, 
qui vulgo duorum eft; ae morbis intus, tempefiatibus 
faris, infeitus. Ingreffi demum oítia Laurentiani flu- 
vii XI. Kal. J nnias, ipfo facro Pentccoftes die, veíti- 
gia Chrifiianæ religionis aliqua invenere, leviter ab iic; 
quos è Gallia profeétos in hane plagalTI diximus, inl- 
preffa. Cum enim illis ignotus [322] gentis fermo, 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELATIO.A"....,. 


209 


tened to Dieppe, in order that they might sail thence 
for New France. But. 10 ! suddenly an unexpected 
obstacle. Their ship belonged to Poutrincourt, a 
French nobleman; it was. however, subject to the 
control of two Calvinistic merchants, since they had 
incurred no light expense toward providing her with 
equipments. As soon as they heard that Inembers of 
the Society were to be embarked upon her. they re- 
fused to allow her to leave the port. The authority 
of the Queen was invoked; her commands were reiter- 
ated. ,They answered that they would not refuse ad- 
mission to any other sort of priests, but that they 
were unwilling to have anything to do with our men. 
When Coton saw that the stubbornness of the rascals 
could not be overcome, he approached the matter by 
another way. There was a lad y distinguished not 
less for piety than for birth, Antoinette de Guerche- 
ville. This woman was as solicitous for the interests 
of the Mission as for her own; and since she had 
acquired an uncommon influence among many, be- 
cause of her reputation for integrity, she quickly col- 
lected a large sum of money, by means of which the 
heretical merchants were repaid the amount 'which 
they had spent in equipping the ship. So, although 
the merchants were disappointed and unwilling, the 
Fathers were admitted. But, because of the interven- 
ing delay, they did not sail until the 26th of January. 
when the storms of winter caused a raging sea. On 
this account the voyage was of four months' duration, 
although ordinarily of two, and was terrible because 
of disease within and tempests without. Having en- 
tered at last the mouth of the St. Lawrence river on 
the 22nd day of 1vIay, on the holy day of Pentecost. 
they came upon some traces of the Christian religion, 
which had been superficially impressed by those 



210 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


nec certum confianíque in hum a barbara domicilium 
effet, facultas non fuppetebat erudiendi quos obiter 
baptizabant : qui que prifiinos in mores revoluti, 
Chrifiianum vix retinebant nomen, illudque popu- 
laribus vitiis confpurcabant. Prima Patribus cura 
fuit ut íacellun1 confiruerent, perdifcerent linguam 
yernaculam, excolerent Gallas, qui è veteri Francia 
in novam navigaverant. Infiituta efi folennis fup- 
p1icatio; Chrifius íanétiilimi Sacramenti yelo teétus, 
& quanta fieri potuit maxima apparatu circumveétus, 
in terræ felicis, tot íanclis pofiea frequentandæ ve- 
luti poffeilionem aufpicatò venit. Proxi111a infantibus 
íacro lavandis fonte cura eft data, quorum nonnulli, 
pofi fuíceptum íalutis íacralnentum, ad terram vi- 
ventium poffidendam, quafi gentis totius nomine, de- 
migrarunt. Puel1am ann as natam novem, oppreffaln 
gravi morbo, parentes abjecerant. Cum enim artis 
Inedicæ prorfus ignara natio fit, ægrotos facile defpe- 
rat, neque cibo, aut curatione ulla, juvat. Depofitam 
Patres à parentibus pofiularunt, ut expiarent lympha 
falutari. Ultra illis permiffa eft, quippe quæ inftar 
nlortui canis haberetur. Abduétam in mapale fe- 
paratum curavere íedulo: edoétam, quantuln erat 
neceffe; baptizatam, ac nona pofi luce mortuam, cælo 
intulerunt. Eadem Sociorum caritas lætiorem exi- 
turn in juvene íortita eft. Ejus pater 1\1embertous, 
prin1us omnium, uti narrant, barbarorum, cum è Gal- 
lia navigatu111 illuc fuit, in Chrifiianorum numerum 
venerat; homo firenuus, & on1nium popularium teí- 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


211 


whom we have mentioned as having journeyed from 
France into this region. For, since the speech of the 
people was unknown [322] to them, and they had no 
certain and fixed residence in this savage land, there 
was no opportunity for educating those whom they 
chanced to baptize, and who, plunging again into 
their former habits, scarcely retained the Christian 
name, while defiling it with their native vices. The 
first concern of the Fathers was to build a chapel, to 
learn the language of the country, and to instruct the 
Frenchmen who had emigrated from old to new 
France. A solemn Thanksgiving was enjoined; the 
figure of Christ, covered with a canopy, was carried 
about with the greatest possible ceremony; and he 
came auspiciously into the possession, so to speak, of 
the happy land afterwards to be frequented by so many 
holy men. Next, attention was given to laving the 
infants in the sacred font, of whom some, after receiv- 
ing the sacrament of salvation, departed to their 
homes in the land of the immortals, in the nan1e, as 
it were, of the whole race. A girl aged nine years, 
afflicted with a grievous disease, had been abandoned 
by her parents. For, since the race is altogether 
ignorant of the art of medicine, they readily despair 
of the sick, and neither provide them with food nor 
care for them in any way. The Fathers asked her 
parents to give them the forsaken child, in order that 
they might sanctify her with the water of salvation. 
She was readily handed over to them; and naturally, 
inasmuch as she was considered no better than a dead 
dog. Taking her apart to their hut they gave her as- 
siduous care; she was baptized, and, dying on the 
ninth day afterward. they introduced her into Heaven. 
The same charity of the Associates resulted more for- 
tunately in the case of a young boy. His father was 



2]2 


LES RELA TIOJl/S DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


timonio, ceteris longè præfians animi robare, belli 
fcientia, c1ientelarum multitudine, & gloriofi c1aritu- 
dine cognOlninis; quippe Magni Imperatoris titulum 
publico fuffragio confecutus. Hunc obtinebat locum 
Membertous inter Souriquios, qui Acadialn, circa 
ofiia Laurentiani amnis, incolunt. Ejus filium diffi- 
cili ægritudine confliétatum P. Biardus invifit. Mira- 
tur nihil trifie in tugurio; non planétum, non flebiles 
nænias: imo epulum, choream, & duos trefve canes 
alligatos. Quærit quid hæc fibi velint. Refpondent 
juvenem brevi effe moriturum, arnicas vocatos: iBis 
epulum parari: funebrem choream pofiea ducendam: 
canes, quos videbat, interficiendos, placandis mortui 
Manibus. Exc1amavit Pater nequaquam ifia Chrif- 
tianis hon1inibus convenire, & impias confuetudines 
graviter increpuit. Senior, adolefcentis parens, ig- 
norantiam excufavit; ceterum fe ac filium in ipfius 
effe potefiate; doceret, juberet, imperata faéturos. 
Sacerdos vetuit ne canes interficerentur: faltatores 
importunos an1andavit: epuli partem, quæ fuperfii- 
tionis habere nihil videbatur, pern1ifit: in primis 
autem, ne deponeretur penitus ægroti cura prohibuit; 
imo fuafit ut ad Gallorum domicilia, quamvis 10ngè 
difjunéta, deportaretur; fperare fe, favente Deo, 
futurum ut convalefceret. Benignè auditus efi 3 
1lembertoo: delatus æger ad nos fuit, ridentibus, ac 
bolum tantum tam fubito è faucibus ereptum fibi do- 
lentibus veneficis, & circulatoribus, quorum fententiâ 
conc1amatus ac10lefcens vivere poffe negabatur. Ac 



1610-13] 


THE .JESUIT RELA TIONS 


213 


lViembertou, who, they say, in the early days of navi- 
gation thither from France, first of all the savages 
became a Christian; he was an energetic t:nan, and, 
according to the testimony of all his countrymen, far 
excelled others in vigor of n1ind, in know ledge of 
war, in nun1ber of dependents, and the distinction of 
a glorious name, for by public vote he had acquired 
the title of "Great Chief." This position 1vlember- 
tau held among the Souriquois, who inhabit Acadia 
about the mouth of the 81. Lawrence river. Father 
Biard visited 11elnbertou's son, who was suffering 
from a dangerous illness. He was surprised that 
there was no grief in the wigwam; no lamentations, 
no tearful dirges; instead, a feast, a dance, and two 
or three dogs fastened together. He asked what 
these things meant. They answered that the youth 
would die in a short time; that the friends had been 
invited, and for them the banquet was being pre- 
pared; that afterwards a funeral dance was to be con- 
ducted; and that the dogs which he saw were to be 
killed to appease the Spirit of the dead boy. The 
Father exc1aitned that these things were quite unfit- 
ting for Christian men, and severely censured the 
impious custom. The parent of the youth excused 
his ignorance; he said that henceforth he and his son 
should be under the Father's direction; he begged 
him to instruct and command them, and said that 
they would execute his orders. The Priest forbade 
the killing of the dogs; he dismissed the rude dancers; 
a part of the repast he allowed, as not devoted to su- 
perstitious rites. He insisted that the patient should 
no longer be neglected; still more, he persuaded them 
that the boy should be taken to the dwellings of the 
French, although these were far distant, saying that 
he hoped, by the fayor of God, for his recovery. The 



214 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


fane agebat animanl, cùm triduo poít ad Gallorum 
domicilia pervenit, fraétus itinere ac morbo. PatrUlTI 
tanlen arte ac ítudio, & fcilicet Dei benignitate, re- 
creatus eít; nec ipfe tantunl in fide catho1ica can fir- 
matus, fed ejus capeffendæ defiderio conlplures in- 
flammati. 
lncidit aliquanto poít in morbum pater adolefcen- 
tis, & ad nos fimiliter deferri voluit, ubi noítrUlTI in 
tuguriUlTI, atque adeo in un ius è Patribus leétum 
acceptus, piè vitanl claufit; quodque barbaris novum 
accidit ac lTIole, ítum illatus eít in ComlTIUne Chriíti- 
anæ plebi fepulcrunl: nam ipfi a sepulcris majorum 
ægerrime divelluntur. Curatunl funus illuítri, ut 
rerum ferebant anguítiæ, pompa. N ec honore iíto 
qualicumque indigna barbari virtus erat, qui etiam 
ante qUàlTI Chriítunl noffet, non potuerat adduci ut 
plures una duceret uxores: id naturæ ac rationi ma- 
gis confentaneum arbitratus. Poít fufceptam vera 
Chriíti Fidenl ita vixerat, ut barbaris admirationi 
effet, Chriítianis exemplo. 
Hæc domi geíta. Egreffi deinde quafi pomerio 
præcones Evangelici magnanl regionis partenl 1 uítra- 
vere. Divina res, ubicunlque licuit, faéta: impofitæ 
manus ægrotis, conciliati munufculis parentes ac 
liberi; data Gal1is, novas condentibus fedes, opera; 
necnon claffiariis atque veétoribus. Non defuit pa- 
tientiæ læta feges, ac tanta interdulTI exítitit annonæ 
penuria, ut fingulis hebdonladis certum [323] unicui- 
1ue demenfum daretur, quod vix fufficiebat in unum 



]610-13] 


THE .JESUIT RELA TIONS 


215 


priest was favorably heard by :ß1embertou; the patient 
was brought to us, although the sorcerers and medi- 
cine-men, who declared that the unhappy youth could 
not live, ridiculed this decision, and grieved that such 
a morsel should be snatched suddenly fronl their jaws. 
And indeed he was at the point of death, when, three 
days afterward, exhausted by the journey and by 
sickness, he arrived at the French settlement. N ev- 
ertheless, by the skill and devotion of the Fathers, 
and by the kindness of God, he was restored; nor was 
he alone established in the Catholic faith, but many 
of his countrynlen were inflamed with the desire of 
adopting it. 
Some titne afterward, the father of the young man 
fell sick, and wished to be also brought to us, where, 
after being received into our hut and even into the 
bed of one of the Fathers, he piously departed this 
life; and, what was novel and displeasing to the sav- 
ages, he was buried among Christian people; for they 
themselves are very reluctant to be separated from 
the tombs of their ancestors. His funeral was ob- 
served, as far as the limitations of the case permitted, 
with marked ceremony. Nor was this savage's virtue 
unworthy in any respect of that honor; for, even be- 
fore he had learned of Christ, he could not be induced 
to marry more than one wife, considering this more 
in harnlony with nature and reason. But, after his 
acceptance of the Faith of Christ, he so lived that he 
was to the savages an object of adnliration, to the 
Christians an example. 
These things were accomplished at home. Then 
going forth, as it were, from the city walls, the 
heralds of the Gaspe] traversed a great part of the 
country. A godly act was perfornled wherever op- 
portunity allowed; hands were laid upon the sick; 



216 


LES RELA TIOiVS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


diem, videlicet panis unciæ decem, íelibra carnis íale 
maceratæ, & piíorum, fabarumve aliquantulum. Ad- 
hæc, erat fibi quiíque faber, íarcinator, pifior, coquus, 
lignator, & aquator. Occurrebant interdum Patri- 
bus, in his ærumnis, voces ill arum , qui bus 11:oíes 
*Num. c. provinciam explorandæ Chananitidis dederat, * Terra 
13- 14. Ilæc de7.'orat habitatorcs fuos,. ibi'vidimus '11lolljlra quædam 
filioru11l Enac, dc genere Giganteo, quibus cOlllParati, 
quafi locujlæ 'lJideba11lur. At fimul veniebat in men- 
tern oratio J oíue, & Calebi, plena divinæ fiduciæ: 
Terra 'Z1alde bona ejl. Si prop it ius fuerit Dominus, Ùz- 
duat 1lOS Ùz ea11l. Neq21c timcatis populu11l tcrræ Im.fus, 
Dominus 1l0blfcu1Jl_ ejl. 



1610-13] 


THE .JESUIT RELA TIONS 


217 


parents and children were conciliated by means of 
Ii ttle gifts; services were rendered to the French who 
were establishing new homes; nor were the seamen 
and ships' passengers neglected. There was not 
lacking a glad harvest for their patience. :Mean- 
while, so great a scarcity of provisions existed, that for 
each week [323] a ration was allotted, so scanty that it 
was hardly sufficient for one day; namely, ten ounces 
of bread, half a pound of salted meat, and a handful 
of peas or beans. In addition to this, each man was 
his own mechanic, mender, miller, cook, hewer of 
wood, and drawer of water. There occurred some- 
times to the Fathers, in the midst of the miseries, the 
words of those to whom :Moses had given the task of 
reconnoitering Canaan: * This land . devouretlt *J\/ztm. c. 
its Ùzhabitants J ' . . there we saw certain monsters of I3, I4. 
tIle SOIZS of Enac of tIle Giant-kind: in comparison of whom, 
'lue seemed lz"ke locusts. But at the same time there came 
into mind the speech of Joshua and of Caleb, full of 
di vine trust: The land wkich we llave gone round is very 
good. If the Lord be favorable, Ill' will brÙzg us z"nto it. 
. Fear ye not the people of tllis land" tIle Lord 
is with llS. 



218 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


DOMICILIA SOCIETATIS & ::\IISSIONES IN NOVA 
FRANCIA. 


E T effe cum fervis fuis, ac militibus Domil1um, 
exitus comprobavit. Nam hoc anno :r-.IDCCIII. 
ineunte, cum hæc fcribimus, præter Quebecenfe 
collegium, numerantur in hac terra dcferta prius & 
illvia triginta & amplius florentiffimæ cultiffimæque 
Miffiones nofiræ Societatis. Prima in confpeétu Que- 
beci, decimo ab urbe lapide, Lauretana dicitur. Al- 
tera in pago Taduffaco fedet: ad ripam fluvii Lauren- 
tiani, leucis infra Quebecum LX. verfus ortum. Tres 
aliæ fupra Quebecum ipfum, longe procurrunt in Bo- 
ream, circa lacum S. Joannis: una in eo loco, qui à 
feptem infulis nomen habet; altera, in pago Chigouti- 
mino; tertia, fecus amnem Saguenæum. Excoluntur 
ibi :r-.10ntagnæi, Papinachii, M:ifiaffini, & aliæ paffim 
gentes errabundæ. Jam, fi verfus obeuntis folis 
partes & fluminis Laurentiani fontem tendas, occurret 
in ejus ripâ feptentrionali pagus Trium fluminum 
diétus, quia ibi tria quædam flumina confluunt: abefi 
Quebeco feptem oétove dierum iter. Florebat illic 
AlgonKinorum l\Iiffio longe pulcherrima, fed hanc 
vinum igne vaporatum & fiillatum, à mercatoribus 
Europæis, facilem inde quæfium male captantibus 
inveétum, vehementer labefaétavit induéta ebrietate. 
Penfat hæc damna virtus ac pietas AbnaKiforum. 



1610-13J 


THE .JESUIT RELA TIONS 


219 


SETTLE:\IENTS AND MISSIONS OF THE SOCIETY IX 
KEW FRAKCE. 


A ND that the Lord is with his servants and soldiers, 
the outcome has proved. For, in the beginning 
of this year 1703, while we are writing these 
things, there are numbered in this formerly solitar)! and 
ullcxplorcd cOlllltr)' more than thirty very prosperous 
and wel1-equipped :Missions of our Society, besides 
the col1ege of Quebec. The first of these, in sight of 
Quebec, at the tenth mile-stone from the city, is cal1ed 
Lorette. Another is situated in the district of 
Tadoussac, on the shore of the river St. Lawrence, 
sixty leagues below Quebec toward the east. Three 
others, above Quebec itself, extend far into the Korth 
about lake St. John; one in that place which takes its 
name from the seven islands; 4!J another in the dis- 
trict of Chigoutimini; 50 the third on the Saguenay 
river. There they minister to the :Montagnais, the 
Papinachois, the 
1istassins, and other wandering 
tribes. Now, if you journey towards the regions of 
the setting sun, and the source of the St. Lawrence 
river, you wil1 find upon its northern bank a district 
cal1ed Three rivers, because there three rivers flow 
together: it is distant from Quebec seven or eight 
days' journey. Here, there formerly flourished the 
most successful 
Iission of the Algonquins; but it has 
been much weakened through the drunkenness in- 
duced by brandy, brought in by European merchantf 
who thus wickedly derive an easy profit. But these 
losses are compensated by the virtue and piety of the 
Abenakis. Among them a mission of three stations 



220 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


Triplex apud illos ftatio collocata una Quebeco non 
procul, in XL VI. gradu latitudinis, nomine S. Fran- 
cifci Salefii & patrocinio infignita: aliæ duæ funt re- 
motiores; loco nomen eft NipifiKouit. Trans amnem 
Laurentianum ad Meridiem funduntur Iroquæorum 
quinque nationes. Septem fUnt apud ill as præconum 
Evangelii domicilia, per centum quinquaginta leucas 
fparfa. Ex iis fex profligata fuerant bello Gallas 
inter & Iroquæos conflato circa annum 1\IDCLXXXII. 
Revocata cum religione pax anno 1\IDCCII. omnia 
priorem in ftatum reftituit. In iis Iroquæorum J\;Iiffi- 
onibus ea præcipuè floret, quæ à S. Francifco Xaverio 
nomen habet, ad 1Iontem-Regalem. 
Supra Iroquæos, verfus occafum & Aquilonem, 
intra quadragefimum gradum & XLV. cernere eft 
majores duos lacus angufto freta junétos: alter, ifque 
amplior, Ilinæorum; alter Huronum dicitur. Has 
ingens terræ lingua dividit, cujus in apice fedet NIiffio 
S. Ignatii, five 1IiffilimaKinacana. Supra duos iftos 
lacus tertius eft, ambobus major, quem fuperiorem 
lacum appellant. Hujus in aditu conftituta eft 1\1:iffio 
S. Mariæ à Saltu. Interjeétum inter hunc, & bin as 
inferiores lacus fpatium occupant OutaouaKi, apud 
quos plurima ftativa Societas habet. Ejufmodi arces 
religionis (fic enim appellare l\1iffiones licet) un de 
fuos profert milites, & facra explicat vexilla, tres 
circa lacum Ilinæorum pofitæ funt, prima inter Pute- 
atamifos: J\;Iiffio Sandi J ofephi nuncupatur: altera 
inter KiKaroufos, J\;IafKoutenfos, & Outagamifos; S. 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIO..'\TS 


221 


has been established; one located among them, not 
far from Quebec, on the forty-sixth parallel of lati- 
tude, distinguished by the name and patronage of St. 
Francis de Sales: the other two are more remote, at a 
place named Nipisikouit. Across the St. Lawrence 
river, to the South, extend the five nations of the Iro- 
quois. There are among them seven stations of the 
Evangelists, scattered through a hundred and fifty 
leagues. Of these, six were destroyed in the war 
which arose between the French and Iroquois, about 
the year 1682. Peace, together with the recall of 
the missionaries, in the year 1702 restored all things 
to their previous condition. 51 Among these :Missions 
of the Iroquois, that one is especially flourishing 
which is named for St. Francis Xavier, at !vlontreal. 52 
Above the Iroquois, toward the west and North, 
between the fortieth and forty-fifth parallels, one may 
see two great lakes joined by a narrow strait; the 
larger one is called the lake of the Ilinois,5.3 the other 
the lake of the Hurons. 54 These are separated by 
a large peninsula, at the point of which is situated the 
:Mission of S1. Ignatius, or 1Iissilimakinac. 55 Above 
these two lakes there is a third, greater than either, 
called lake superior. A t the en trance of this lake 
has been established the :Mission of Ste. :Marie at the 
Sault. 56 The space between this and two smaller 
lakes is occupied by the Outaouaki, among whom 
the Society has many stations. Three such citadels 
of religion (for thus it is proper to call the :Missions), 
whence she leads forth her soldiers and unfurls her 
sacred standards, have been located about the lake 
of the Ilinois: the first, among the Puteatamis, and 
called the Mission of St. Joseph; another, among the 
Kikarous, :Maskoutens, and Outagamies, and possess- 
ing the name of St. Francis _ Xavier: 5i the third, 



222 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


Franciíci Xaverii nomen obtinet: tertia inter Oumi- 
amiíos, Angeli Cufiodis. Infra memoratos lacus, 
íupra ipíam Floridaln, vafiiffilnos pererrant campos 
Ilinæi. Ibi ampliffima fiatio, cui nomen ab immacu- 
lata Virginis 
Iatris conceptione impofitum, tres in 
1Iiffiones íecatur, & ad fluvium uíque Miffifipum 
procurrit. Infidet ejuídem fluminis ripis miffio Baio- 
guIana, in trigefimo primo gradu latitudinis: demum 
ultima protenditur íecundum eundem amnem verfus 
:Nlexicanum finum. Hæc viíum efi enuc1eare paulo 
difiindius, & quafi fub uno fiatim aípedu ponere, ut 
intelligatur quò fingula referenda fint, quæ pofiea de 
N ova Francia narra bun tur. 
Refiat ignota Europæis adhuc pars Canadæ im- 
menfa, ultra 1Iiffifipum fluvium, c1ementiori fubjeéta 
cælo, frequens incolis, armentis frugibufque læta; 
vitæ veræ ac íalutis expers. Hæc generofos Chrifii 
milites vocat. N ec non altera [324J longe ifii diffi- 
milis, quæ rigidis circa Hudfonium finuln, à gradu 
LV. ad LX. aut LXX. íubjeda íeptentrionibus, nivi- 
bus ac pruinis demería, tanto æquiùs implorat opem, 
quanta gravioribus incommodis confliétatur. Hic 
Societas ante annos paucos prima cæpit figere vefii- 
gia. Illucefcet ilIa, fpero, dies, CUln obvallatum 
periculis ac laboribus iter eadem perrumpet. N on fine 
magna molimine c1aufira Tartari, oppreffas injufia 
íervitute animas retinentis, perfringuntur; neque ilIa 
ipfa, tot florens modo coloniis, :\Iiffio Canadica fiatim 
fuam efi maturitatem adepta. Ægrè per fexdecim 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 



23 


among the Oumiamis,58 has the name of the Guardian 
Angel. Below the lakes which have been mentioned, 
above Florida, the Ilinois roam through most exten- 
sive territories. There, a very large station, named 
from the immaculate conception of the Virgin :Moth-. 
er, is divided into three l\1:issions, and extends as far 
as the river Mississippi. Upon the banks of the 
same river is situated the mission of Baiogula, at the 
thirty-first parallel of latitude; 59 and it extends down 
that stream towards the gulf of l\Iexico. I t has 
seemed best to explain these matters somewhat fully, 
because the individual facts here specified will be re- 
ferred to in what is to be hereafter narrated concern- 
ing New France. 
There remains unknown to Europeans, up to the 
present time, an immense portion of Canada, beyond 
the :Mississippi river, situated beneath a milder sky, 
well-inhabited, and abounding in animal and vege- 
table life; the whole, deprived of true life and of sal- 
vation. This region calls to the generous soldiers of 
Christ. So is it, likewise, [324] with another region 
far dissimilar to that, around the frozen Hudson bay, 
from the fifty-fifth parallel to the sixtieth or seven- 
tieth; lying at the north, plunged in snows and 
frosts, it even more justly implores aid, as it is 
afflicted by more weighty ills. Here the Society, a 
few years ago, first began to plant its footsteps. 
That day will dawn, I hope, when it shall break 
through the barriers of dangers and toils. Not 
without great exertion are the gates of Tartarus, 
which hold burdened souls in unmerited bondage, 
broken down; nor did the Canadian l\Iission itself, 
now flourishing with so many settlements, all at once 
attain its full development. Grievously, through 
sixteen years did it, so to speak, stick in a rough 



224 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


annos tanquam in íalebris hæfit, nec íuam quandam 
naéta formam eft, nifi anno íeculi íuperioris quinto 
& vigemo, cùm íe aliquando ex iBis anguftiis expli- 
cuit, P. Petri Cotoni, cui íua debebat primordia, bene- 
ficia, ut íexta Pars Hiftoriæ fufius exponet. 
Nunc ærumnarum ac periculorum plenos natales 
referimus laborioíæ I\1iffionis, quæ vix nata, in ipfis 
cunis per Anglos propemodùm extinéta eft. 



16]0-]3] 


THE.lESUIT RELATIONS 


225 


road; indeed, it did not take shape until 1625, when 
it was extricated from its perplexities by the aid of 
Father Peter Caton, to whom it owed its origin, as 
the sixth Part of this History will more fully ex- 
plain. 
Now we return to the natal days, full of hardships 
and dangers, of the toilsome :Mission, which, scarcely 
born, was almost exterminated in its cradle by the 
English. 



226 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


1\11SS10 CANADE"NSIS AB ANGL1S PROTURBATA. 


S OCIIS illic degentibus venerant auxilio Idibus 
Maii anni J\IDCXIII. Pater Quintinus, & Frater 
Gilbertus Thetus, regia diplomate infiruéti, quo 
facultas ipfis dabatur novi domicilii cornmodo loco 
ædificandi. Gallas reperiunt incumbentes in con- 
dendam urbem, & periculi, quod infiabat, ignaros. 
Angli paucis ante annis occupaverant Virginiam. 
Hæc Americæ feptentrionalis ad ortum portio mari- 
tima, inter Floridam Novamque Franciam fita, tricefi- 
mo fexto, feptimo, & oétavo gradibus fubfiernitur. 
Eò cum tenderent Angli æfiivis anni MDCXIII. 
menfibus, & infcii locorum errarent, ob exortam cali- 
ginem, quæ huic mari denfiffima folet per eos menfes 
incubare, paulatim delapfi funt ad littus, ubi Galli 
confederant, haud procul portu Sanéti Salvatoris. 
Pofiquam cognoverunt Gallicas naves ibi confifiere, 
arma expediunt, & in portum invehuntur. Interea 
Galli ancipiti opinione fufpenfi, arnicas an hofies cen- 
ferent, quos reéta in fuam fiationern ventus infere- 
bat, eventum trepidi opperiebantur. Brevi, quinam 
efIent patuit. Angli faéto impetu in Gallicum navi- 
gium, paucis infiruétum propugnatoribus, ceteris ad 
condenda domicilia digreffis, id nullo negotio expug- 
nan t. 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


227 


THE CANADL-\!\'" :MISSIOX DRIVEX OUT BV THE EKGLISH. 


T o OUR C01IRADES residing in that place there 
had come as a reinforcement, on the 15th day of 

Iay, 1613, Father Quentin and Brother Gilbert 
du Thet, provided with a royal commission, by which 
they were empowered to establish a new settlement in 
a suitable location. 60 They found the French intent 
upon founding a city, and unaware of the danger 
which threatened. The English, a few years before, 
had occupied \Tirginia. This eastern coast-region of 
North America, situated between Florida and New 
France, is comprised between the thirty-sixth and 
thirty-eighth parallels. \Vhile the English were 
sailing thither in the summer months of the year 
1613, and, having lost their bearings and strayed 
from their course, on account of the fogs, which 
usually are very heavy upon this sea in the summer, 
they were gradually borne to the shore where the 
French had settled,61 not far from the port of St. 
Sauveur. When they learned that a French ship 
was stationed there, they made ready their weapons 
and entered the harbor. :Meanwhile the French, 
uncertain whether they should consider as friends 
or foes those whom the wind was bearing directly 
towards their position, tremblingly awaited the out- 
come. \Vho they were was soon apparent. The 
English attacked the French ship,G2 wherein few 
were drawn up in defense - for the others had de- 
parted to work on the buildings - and with no 
trouble captured her. 



228 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


UNUS È SOCIETATE INTERFICITUR; ALII CANADA 
EJICIUNTUR. 


P RIMO in confiiétu Gilbertus Thetus, domefticæ 
rei adiutor è Societate, confofIus lethali plaga, 
poftridie religiofa morte occubuit. Ceteri Pa- 
tres qui ftabant in littore, in poteftatem Argalli, 
prætoris Angli, venerunt. Ille, dum Gallicæ navis 
prædam & fupelleétilem recenfet, subduxit clam è 
SaufIæii, navis Gallicæ gubernatoris, qui huic expe- 
ditioni præerat, fcrinio regium diploma, cujus fide tota 
novæ coloniæ ratio nitebatur. Max ipfulTI SaufIæium 
è littore fubeuntem adortus, quærit ex eo quo jure, 
cujus auétoritate, novas tam prope Virginiam fedes 
moliatur. Laudavit SaufIæius regium diploma, quod 
fe in capfis rite confcriptum habere dixit. Ad eas 
ubi ventum eft, vidit integras, & obferatas, fuifque 
omnia digefta locis agnovit, diploma nullum appa- 
ruit. Tum Argallus, vultu & voce ad feveritatem 
compofitis, fugitivos & prædones conclamat, ac necem 
commeruifIe pronunciat, fimulque navim fuis diripi- 
endam tradit. IlIum interea Patres obfecrant ut 
viétis benignè confulat, quibus objici nihil noxæ poffit 
aliud, quàm quod in pacato folo fuerint nimium fe- 
curi: auétoritatem Regis Galliæ non dubiam ac vo- 
luntatem teftantur. Prætor probè fibi confcius vera 
narrari, comiter eos audivit, & omnibus poteftatem 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


22
 


aXE OF THE l\JL\IBERS OF THE SOCIETY IS KILLED; THE 
OTHERS ARE EXPELLED FRO:'.! CANADA. 


I N THE FIRST onset, Gilbert du Thet, a household 
assistant of the Society, was stricken with a mortal 
wound, and on the following day piously departed 
this life. The rest of the Fathers, "\vho were stand- 
ing on the shore, were captured by Argall, the Eng- 
lish commander. Ita This man, while he was taking 
an inventory of the plunder and equipment of the 
French ship, surreptitiously removed fron1 the 
trunk of Saussaye, the captain of the French vessel, 
and commander of the expedition. the royal com- 
mission upon whose authority all the proceedings of 
the new colony were based. Soon meeting Saussaye 
hitnself, returning from the shore, Argall asked him 
by what right, by whose authority, he was founding 
a new colony so near Virginia. Saussaye cited the 
royal commission, which he asserted that he had, 
duly drawn up, in one of his trunks. \\Then they 
came to these, he saw them untouched and locked, 
and all things disposed in their proper places; but 
no commission appeared. Thereupon Argall, chang- 
ing his countenance and voice to severity, pro- 
nounced them runaways and pirates, and declared 
that they deserved death; while at the same time 
he delivered over the ship to his men to be plun- 
dered. :Meanwhile the Fathers besought him to 
adopt mild measures toward the vanquished, against 
whom no other fault could be charged than that, in 
a peaceful situation, they had been too careless; 
they testified that the authority and favor of the 



230 


LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


in Galliam redeundi fecit. Duas in naviculas infe- 
lix turba imponitur, quaruln una curfum in Galliam 
rec1à dirigeret; altera cum aliquot Anglis folveret in 
Virginiam, inde Franciam petitura. Hanc PP. Biar- 
dus & Quintinus, illam P. ::\Iaffæus, & Sauffæius con- 
fcenderunt. Utriufque fors longè difpar fuit. Quæ 
Sauffæium & P. l\Iaffæum yehebat dum oram Inariti- 
mam legit, annonâ, nautis, armamentis defiituta, in- 
cidit in gelninas naves reditum in Galliam adornantes. 
]ungit fe illis læta, cumque fuis veétoribus Macloyi- 
un1, Britanniæ Aremoricæ oppidum, paucis diebus 
tenuit. 
Interim Argallus, clafus Anglicæ præfeétus, Pa- 
tres Biardum & Quintinuln deduéturus in Virginiam, 
ut confiitutum fuerat, paululum iis præivit cum fua 
navi prætoria. Virginiam obtinebat Anglus ferox, 
n01nini Gallico, ac Societati nofiræ [325] perinfenfus. 
Ubi adventare ] efuitas audivit, vociferatur perdendos 
homines improbiffimos, bufia pietatis ac religionis. 
Argallus contra nitebatur, feque vivo nihil molefiiæ 
damnive Patribus inferendum affirmabat: hanc enim 
ipfis dederat fidem; & regium diploma, cujus auétori- 
tate colonia Gallica in Novam Franciam deducebatur, 
protulit. Hoc diplomate inflammatus homo furiofus, 
exturbandos è Nova Francia Gallas clamat. In hanc 
fententiam Angli proceres ivernnt. jubetur Argallus 
viam remetiri; Gallas, quicumque fupereffent, ejicere, 
domicilia evertere, & æquare folo. Rediit: arces in 
ora Canadenu extruétas incendit, omnia delevit, ac 



1610-]3] 


TlfJ
'JE
'ìUfT RELA TfOA-S 


231 


King of France had certainly been given to the 
colony. The captain, w.ho was thoroughly conscious 
of the truth of their statements, listened to them 
kindly, and gave to all the opportunity of returning 
to France. The unhappy crowd was placed upon 
two small ships, one of which directed its course 
straight towards France; the other, with some of the 
English, sailed for Virginia, thence to depart for 
France. Fathers Biard and Quentin embarked upon 
the latter; Father ßlassé and Saussaye upon the 
former. The fortunes of these ships were widely 
diverse. \Vhile that which carried Saussaye and 
Father 
Iassé was coasting along the shore, destitute 
of provisions, of seamen, and of equipment, she fell 
upon two ships preparing to return to France. She 
gladly joined herself to these, and, with her passen- 
gers, arrived in a few days at St. :Malo, a town of 
Bri ttan y . 

Iean.while Argall, the commander of the English 
fleet, in order that he might conduct Fathers Biard 
and Quentin to Yïrginia, as had been resolved upon, 
preceded them a little with his flag-ship. Virginia 
was then ruled by a ferocious Englishman,64 who was 
extremel y hostile to the French name and to our 
Society. [325] \'
hen he heard that Jesuits had ar- 
riyed, he exclaimed that such extremely wicked men, 
the sepulchers of piety and religion, ought to be de- 
stroyed. Argall strove against him, and declared 
that, while he lived, no annoyance or injury should 
be offered to the Fathers, for he had given them 
this assurance; and he produced the royal commis- 
sion, by authority of which the French colony was 
brought to New France. Incensed by this commis- 
sion, the man declared in a rage that the French 
must be driven from New France. In this decision 



232 


LES RELA TIONS DES jÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


naves duas in Regia Portu deprehenfas, invaiìt. 
Dutil hæc in Canada geruntur, naves Anglicæ, 
præeuntem Argallum fecutæ, aliæ procul à Virginia 
ventorum vi abreptæ; aliæ undis hauftæ funt. Una, 
cui Turnellus Anglus præerat, & qua Patres Quinti- 
nus ac Biardus vehebantur, continentibus fexdecim 
dierum procellis vexata, in Azores, Lufitanorum ad 
Africæ littus infulas, celerrimè defertur. Hic vero 
novum exoritur periculul11. Turnellus pænam me- 
tuens, quòd Societatis facerdotes per fummam imma- 
nitatem domicilio avulfos fpoliatofque fecum traheret, 
indignifque habuiffet modis, de ill arum nece agitarc 
confilia cæpit. Satius denique illi vifum ad eorunl 
clementiam & humanitatem, quam in graviffimis 
injuriis perfpexerat, confugere. Operam tamen de- 
dit, ne intraret portum; fed ftante in ancoris navigio. 
neceffariam annonam immifsâ fcaphâ pararet. Con- 
tra quàm fperaverat accidit. Secunda enim vento 
impulfus, portUtll quamlibet invitus reluétanfque 
fubiit. Noftri de ilIa, quamvis non ita merito, nc 
verbum quidem ulIum, quo accufaretur, interpofuere: 
læti quod hoftem ita fervaffent. Agnovit beneficitun 
gubernator Anglus; ac deinceps fæpenumero cum 
fumma Patrum laude prædicavit. Id vera multo fe- 
cit impenfiùs, cùm tempeftate ad Angliæ urbem Pen- 
brochium projeétus, ejus oppidi magiftratibus movit 
fufpicionem maritimi latronis, quòd & Francicâ yc- 
heretur navi, neque fcriptam auétoritatem proferret. 
qua fuam navigationem tueretur. Affeveranti fe à 



ItnO-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


233 


the English councilors agreed. Argall was ordered 
to retrace his path; to expel those of the French 
who remained; to destroy their buildings, and level 
them with the ground. He returned, burned the 
forts built upon the Canadian coast, destroyed every- 
thing, and seized two ships which he found at Port 
Royal. 65 
While these things were taking place in Canada, 
of the English ships which were following the lead 
of Argal1 some were driven far from Virginia by the 
violence of the wind; others were swamped by the 
waves. One, which the Englishman Turnell 66 com- 
manded, and in which Fathers Quentin and Biard 
were being conveyed, after being driven continu- 
ously for sixteen days by tempests, was quickly 
borne to the Azores, islands on the coast of Africa 
belonging to the Portuguese. But here a new 
danger arose. Turnell, fearing punishment because 
he .was carrying with him and was holding under 
unjust conditions priests of the Society, who had 
been torn from their homes and robbed with the 
greatest brutality, began to consider plans for mak- 
ing way with them. Finally it seemed better to him 
to take refuge in their clemency and mildness, which 
he had observed amid the most grievous injuries. 
Nevertheless, he took measures that they should 
not enter the port, thinking that while the ship stood 
at anchor he might procure the necessary provision:; 
by sending in a small boat. The contrary to what 
he had expected happened. For, impelled by an in- 
shore .breeze, he entered the harbor, although un- 
willingly and reluctantly. Our friends, contrary to 
his deserts, interposed not even a word by which he 
might be accused. rejoicing because they had, in this 
nlanner, saved an _enemy. -
 The English captain rec- 



:!
l-! 


LES REL.-l TIOXS DE5ì .I
;."ìUITES 


[YOLo 1 


prætore fuo Argallo tempe1tate divulfun1. fides non 
habebatur. In tanto difcrin1Ìne facerdotes duos So- 
cietatis teftes citavit, quos haberet in navi, & quo- 
run1 incorrupta fides nemini venire pofIet in dubium. 
CUln Patres interrogati rem ita fe habere confirmaf- 
fent, periculo liberatus eft. Reddidit qualn debebat 
illorum humanitati vicen1; utque ipfis non folunl 
efIet in1pune, fed etialn ut à magiftratu honor habe- 
retur, curavit. Certior interÍ1TI fa<5tus Regis Chrifti- 
aniffimi oTator de Pat rum navigatione difficili, & in 
Anglimn adventu, egit cum Angliæ Rege de remit- 
tendis illis in Galliam. Quo annuente, Ambianun1 
decima, quàn1 fuerant capti, n1enfe ad Socios læti 
fofpitefque pervenerunt. 



HilO-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 



ð
 


ognized their kindness, and afterwards often spoke 
"\vith great praise of the Fathers. But this he did 
much more unreservedly when, borne by a storm to 
Pembroke, a city of England, he was suspected by 
the officials of that town of piracy on the high seas, 
because he was sailing in a French ship and produced 
no written authority by which he migh-t justify his 
voyage. \Vhen he asserted that he had been sepa- 
rated by a storm from his commander, Argall, no cre- 
dence was given to hhn. In this crisis he tnentioned 
as witnesses the two priests of the Society whom he 
had in the ship, and whose uncorrupted integrity 
could be doubted by no one. When the Fathers, 
on being questioned, had given assurance that the 
affair was thus, he was released from danger. He 
made the requital which was due to their kindness. 
and took care that they should not only suffer no 
harm, but eyen that they should be shown honor by 
the officials. :J\Ieantime the an1bassador of the Most 
Christian King, upon being informed of the toilsome 
voyage of the Fathers, carried on negotiations with 
the King of England concerning their restoration to 
France. With his consent, they arrived, in the tenth 
month after their capture, joyfully and safely among 
their Brethren at Amiens. 



236 


LES RELA TIOl\'S DES /ÉSUITES' 


[VOl. 1 


APPENDIX. 


Miffiones Societatis Iefv in America Septentrio- 
nali Anno M.DCC.X. [9 61 ] 


A PUD Abnaquæos Iniffioncs. Aux Abllaqllis. 
S. Angeli Cuftodis miffio. Dc rAnge Gardinl. 
Baiogulana miff. Baiogula. 
Chigutiminiana miff. ChigoutÙ/lÙlÌ. 
S. Francifci Saleúi miff. Dc S. François de SaIcJ'. 
S. Francifci Xaverii miff. De S. Frallçois ./(a'i,ier. 
Huronica ref. Aux HuroJls. 
S. Ignatii miff. Dc S. Igllace. 
Immaculatæ Conception is Iniff. Dc I'IlJllllaelllee 
COllception. 
A_d feptem Infulas miff. Alix Sept Isles. 
S. ]ofephi miff. Dc S. Jofepll. 
Apud Ilinæos miffiones. Aux IIÙzozS. 
Apud Iroquæos miffiones. AllX Iroquois. 
Lauretana miffio. Dc Lordtc. 
Ad ripas, & oftium fiuvii :Miffiffipi miffiones. All 
 
bonis, & a [embouchure till l1Iiffiffipi. 
[962] :11 on tis-regal is ref. JWoll[t]-l'cal. 

ipiúkouitana miffio. Nipifiko'i1it. 
Apuc1 Outakouacos miffiones. Aux OutaÁ'o'i!acs. 
Sagucnæa miffio. Du Sagllellai. 
Saltenús mifÜo. Dll Sault de Sailltc JJfarzl". 
In úlvis miffiones. Dalls /cs fore.fis. 
Taduffacenús Iniff. Dc Tadoll./Jak. 
Trifiuviana miff. AllX trois Rh'ÙTCS. 
Nlll/11'ralltllr Socii 42. 



1610-13] 


TNJ:: JESUIT Rlé.'LA TIOlvTS 


237 


APPENDIX. 


Missions of the Society of Jesus in North 
America in the Year 1710. [96IJ 


M ISSIONS among the Abenakis. 
:Mission of the Holy Guardian Angel. 
Baiogula mission. 
Chigoutimini mission. 
Mission of St. Francis de Sales. 
:Mission of St. Francis Xavier. 
Huron residence. 
:Mission of St. Ignatius. 
yIission of the Immaculate Conception. 
Mission at the seven Islands. 
Mission of 81. Joseph. 
Missions among the Ilinois. 
:Xlissions among the Iroquois. 
Mission of Lorette. 
Missions on the banks and at the mouth of the 

Iississi ppi ri vcr. 
r 9 62 ] Residence of 
Ion treal. 

ipisikouit mission. 

Iissions among the Outakouacs. 
Saguenay mission. 

Iission of Sault de Sainte :Marie. 
Forest missions. 
Tadoussac mission. 
)Iission at Three Rivers. 
..\-ulllbcr of brethrell 42 



VIII 


JOUVENCY'S 


De Regione ac Moribus Canadensium 
ROME: GIORGIO PLACKO, 1710 


SOURCE: We follow the general style of O'Caliaghan's Re- 
print NO.5. The Title-page, Tabula Rerum, and Re- 
rum Insigniorum Indiculus, are the work of that Edi- 
tor. The Text, he reprinted from Jouvency's HlS- 
toria Socidatis JCSZl (Rome, 1710), part V., pp. 344- 
347; we have read the proof thereof, from a copy of 
that work found in the library of the College of St. 
Francis Xavier, New York. The bracketed pagination 
is that of Jouvency; except in the Tabula Rerum and 
Rerum Insigniorum Indiculus, which is that of O'C.tl- 
laghan. 



DE 


REGIONE ET 1\10RIBUS 


CANADENSIUM 


SEU BARBARORUM 


l\OVÆ FRANCIÆ 


Auctore J OSEPHO J UVENCIO, Societatis 
J efu, Sacerdote. 


,
 ... .
#Jf
 ..... (
 

 I . JV' . " " 
-, .:. . t .,; ,,
'.. "It-- 
, 
 ,- ?I. ( .: 

 
';
 
, ;llt
,., T 
'
,. 6.\.,,,ì
...._, 


Ex Hiítoriæ Soc. Jefu. Lib. x\". Parte v, impreITa 


R 0 !VI 
E 


Ex 'fypographia Georgii Plachi 
1\'1. D. CC. X. 



CONCERNIXG THE 


COUNTRY A-\
D l\IANNERS 


OF THE CANADIANS, 


OR THE SAVAGES OF 


N E \V 


FRANCE 


By JOSEPH J OUVENCY, a Priest of the 
Society of J estis. 


Printed from the History of the Society of Jesus, Book 

.\"., Part v. 


RO.ME: 


Printin
 House of Giorgio Placko 


IjIO. 



24
 


LES RELA TIO.NS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


[3J Tabula Rerum 


Pag. 


I 


F LUJlffNA Nwæ FrallcÙ/!.. foli natura; 
feræ, þzfces, G'i'CS, &c. 


5 


II Ca1ladl'lzjill1Jl d01JlllS & res fGlIliliaris,. morbi,. 
ægrorll1Jl Cllra & 1Il0rtllorlllll 


10 


III Belli gert Ildi ratio J. an/lG" crude/itas uz 
captivos 


27 


IV I1ldoles amJJu: corporis ell/tus.. cibi, COJl- 
'i.,h,ia .. fllPdlex J. relig io, & .fut er jlitioJl{,
'. 33 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIOJ\'S 


243 


[3] Table of Contents. 


[Tile þage numbers refer to O'Ca//aghall's Reþrint.] 


I 


Page. 
R ITrERS of JVC'i.(1 France; Ilatlfre of tlte 
soil JO 'wild beasts, fish, birds, ete. . 5 


II 


Homcs alld hVlIsdlold aOJlomy of thl Canadi- 
ans JO diseases JO treatment of the sick aud of 
the dead 


16 


III l1Iode of 'i.tmrfare J. weapons.. crlfdty to pris- 


OJlers 


,,- 

I 


IV Jlelltal characteristics; care of tile body; food; 


feasts J. household utensils; religion aJld Slf- 
perstitiolls . 


33 



244 


LES RELA TIO
VS DES /ÉSUITES 


[V oJ.. 1 


[344 
. À.] De regione ac rnoribus Canadenfi- 
urn, feu barbarorurn Novæ Franciæ. 


FLUMINA NOV Æ FkANCIÆ; SOLI XA TURA; FERÆ, 
PISCES, AYES, &C. 


D uo funt in Nova Francia majores fiuvii. Unus 
ab indigenis Canada nominatus, & à quo tota 
regia nomen traxit, nunc fiuvius Sanéti Lau- 
rentii dicitur, & ab occafu in ortum ampliffimo fiuit 
alveo. Alter, cui nomen :Miffifipus, per vafia, & igno- 
ta magnam adhuc partem, terrarum fpatia fertur 
à Septentrione in :Meridieln. Habent hoc fingulare 
hujus regionis fiuvii, quòd certis in locis ex editiore 
folo præcipitant in humiliorem planitiem ingenti 
cum ftrepitu. Ea loca faltus vocant Franci. Cata- 
dupa reéte dixeris, qualia in Nilo celebrantur. Aqua 
tota fiuminis, in morem arcuati fornicis, ita fæpe ca- 
dit, ut infra fufpenfunl altè amnem ficco veftigio tran- 
fire liceat. Barbari, cum huc ventum eft, fuas navi- 
culas, è levi compaétas cortice, imponunt humeris, 
& in placidam fiuminis, alveo depreffiore fiuentis. 
partem eas deportant, cum farcinulis. Urbs novæ 
Franciæ primaria Kebecum nuncupatur, S. Laurentii 
fiuvio impofita. Cælo falubri tota regia utitur; at hy- 
erne frigida, & diuturna vexatur. Hanc efficit partim 
fiuminum & lacuum crebritas; partim opacitas & am- 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELATIONS 


245 


[344 
 x.] Concerning the country and manners 
of the Savages of New France. 


RIVERS OF NEW FRANCE ; NATURE OF THE SOIL; 
WILD BEASTS, FISH, BIRDS, ETC. 


T HERE are two great rivers in New France. One, 
called by the natives Canada, a name thence ex- 
tended to the whole country, is now called the 
river S1. Lawrence, and flows in a very broad channel 
from west to east. The other, named :Mississippi, 
flows from North to South, through vast regions, for 
the most part still unknown. The rivers of this land 
are remarkable because in certain places they are 
precipitated with a great uproar from the higher to 
the lower levels. The French call those places wa- 
ter-falls. You might justly call them cataracts, such 
as are famous in the case of the Nile. The water of 
an entire river often falls in the form of an arch, in 
such fashion that it is possible to walk dry-shod be- 
neath the stream which rushes overhead. The sav- 
ages, when they come to such a spot, shoulder their 
boats, which are constructed of light bark, and carry 
them, together with the baggage, to the calm por- 
tion of the river flowing below. The chief city of 
new France is called Kebec, and is situated on the 
St. Lawrence river. The whole country possesses 
a healthful climate, but is harassed by a cold and 
long winter. This is caused partly by the frequency 
of the rivers and lakes; partly by the thickness and 
great extent of the forests, which diminish the force 
of the sun's heat; finally, by the abundance of snow 



246 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


plitudo nemorum, quæ vim folis calidam infringunt; 
denique nivium copia, quibus terra tres quatuorve 
menfes, in iis locis quæ ab Boream propius accedunt, 
& eidem ac vetus Gallia parallelo fubjacent, conti- 
nenter inhorrefcit. Humus omnium arborum plan- 
tarumque feraciffima, præfertim ubi excifæ filvæ 
locum culturæ majorem præbuerunt. Quadrupedes 
eædem, quæ in Europa: nonnullæ regionis propriæ 
funt, ut alces. :Magnam belluam indigenæ appellant. 
Id nominis invenit à mole corporis: bOVelTI enim 
æquat magnitudine. Mulum capite refert; cervum 
cornibus, pedibus, & cauda. Earn canibus immiffis 
barbari agitant; defatigatam conficiunt jaculis & 
n1Ïffilibus. Si defunt venatici canes, ipfi vicem illo- 
rum obeunt. Per medias quippe nives incredibili 
celeritate gradiuntur, ac ne corporis pondus veftigia 
pedum altius in niVelTI deprimat, fubfternunt plantis, 
inferuntque pedibus, lata reticula, illis fimillima, 
quibus pilam lufores vulgò pulfant. Hæc reticula, 
fpatium nivis ac foli fatis magnum amplexa, curren- 
tes facile f uftinen t. Alces vera crura exilia defigens 
alte in nivem, ægrè fe expedit. I1lius carnibus vef- 
cuntur, teguntur pelle, ungula pofterioris finiftri 
pedis fanantur. Huic ungulæ mira quædam & mul- 
tiplex virtus ineft, medicorum celeberrimorum tefti- 
mania commendata. Valet in primis adverfus mor- 
::>um comitialem, five admoveatur pedori, qua parte 

or micat; five indatur palæ annuli, quem digitus 
1 :evæ minima proximus geftet; five demum teneatur 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


247 


with which the land J in its most Northern regions, 
which lie upon the same parallel as old France, is 
continually desolated for three or four months. The 
soil is extremely productive of all sorts of trees and 
plants, especially where the clearing of the forest has 
furnished additional space for cultivation. The same 
quadrupeds are found as in Europe; some, as the 
moose, are peculiar to the country. The natives call 
it the" great beast." This name it receives because 
of the huge size of its body, for it is as large as an 
ox. Its head resembles that of a mule; its horns, 
hoofs J and tail, those of a stag. The savages hunt this 
animal with the aid of dogs; when it is worn out they 
dispatch it with spears and missiles. If hunting- 
dogs are lacking, they themselves go in place of 
them. Indeed J they proceed through the midst of 
the snow with incredible swiftness; and, in order that 
the weight of the body may not sink their feet too 
deeply into the snow, they place beneath their soles, 
and fasten to their feet, broad pieces of net-work, very 
similar to those with which players commonly strike 
the ball. These pieces of net-work, which cover a 
sufficientl y large portion of the surface of the snow, 
readily support them while running. But the moose, 
planting their slender legs deeply into the snow, 
with difficulty extricate themselves. The savages 
eat its flesh, are clothed with its skin, and are cured 
by the hoof of its left hind leg. In this hoof there 
is a certain marvelous and manifold virtue, as is 
affirmed by the testimony of the most famous physi- 
cians. It avails especially against the epilepsy, 
whether it be applied to the breast J where the heart 
is throbbing, or whether it be placed in the bezel of a 
ring, which is worn upon the finger next to the little 
finger of the left hand; or, finally, if it be also held 



248 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


in ejufdem finiftræ vola, in pugnum contrada. Nec 
minorem vim habet ad fanandam pleuritidem, capitis 
vertigines, & fexcentos alios, fi credimus expertis, 
morbos. 
Alterum animantis genus illic notiffimum & fre- 
quentiffimum eft fiber, cujus pelle, cum Europæis 
mercibus mutanda, commercii Canadenus ratio fere 
tota conftat. Color caftaneæ colorem imitatur; mo- 
dus cor[po]ris idem, qui exigui vervecis: curti pedes 
& ad natandum compouti, nam in aquis perinde ac in 
terra degit; cauda glabra, craffa & plana, quæ natanti 
pro gubernacula fit: dentes duo, majores ceteris, ex 
are utrimque prominent: iis tanquam gladio & ferra 
utuntur fibri ad arbores exfcindendas, cum domos 
extruunt; in iis enim fabricandis mira pollent in- 
duftria. Eas ponunt ad lacuum fiuviorumve ripas: 
muros è fiipitibus componunt, interjedo cefpite uligi- 
nofo ac tenaci, ca1cis inftar; vix ut multa vi effringi 
opus & convelli poffit. Tota cafæ fabrica variis con- 
tigna tionibus diftingui tur: infilna è tranf verfis lignis 
craffioribus conftat, inftratis defuper ramis, ac re- 
lido foramine & oftiolo, per quod in fiuvium fubire, 
cum videtur, poffint: Hæc modice fupra fiuminis 
aquam exftat, aliæ affurgunt altius, in eafque, u fiu- 
vius intumefcens imum tabulatum vicerit, fe recep- 
tant. In una è fuperioribus contignationibus cubant; 
præbet molle ftratum alga uccior, & arborum mufcus, 
quo fe tutantur a frigore; in altera penum habent, & 
provifa in hyemem cibaria. Ædificium fornicato 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


249 


in the hollow of the left hand, clenched in the fist. 
Nor does it have less power in the cure of pleurisy, 
dizziness, and, if we may believe those familiar with 
it, six hundred other diseases. 
Another well-known and common sort of animal 
there, is the beaver; its skins, which are exchanged 
for European merchandise, being the basis of almost 
the entire system of Canadian commerce. Its color 
resembles that of the chestnut; the shape of its body 
is like that of a small wether; its legs are short and 
formed for swimming; its tail, which it uses as a 
rudder while swimming, is smooth, thick and flat; 
two teeth, larger than the others, project from its 
mouth on each side; these, the beavers use like a 
sword and a saw in cutting down trees when they 
build their houses, for in the construction of these 
they exhibit wonderful industry. They locate them 
on the banks of lakes or rivers; they build walls of 
logs, placing between them wet and sticky sods in 
the place of mortar, so that the work can, even with 
great violence, scarcely be torn apart and destroyed. 
The entire house is divided into several stories; the 
lowest is composed of thicker cross-beams, with 
branches strewn upon them, and provided with a 
hole or small door through which they can pass into 
the river whenever they wish; this story extends 
somewhat above the water of the river, while the 
others rise higher, into which they retire if the 
swelling stream submerges the lowest floor. They 
sleep in one of the upper stories; a soft bed is fur- 
nished by dry seaweed and tree moss, with which 
they protect themselves from the cold; on another 
floor they have their store-room, and food provided 
for winter. The building is covered with a dome- 
shaped roof. Thus they pass the winter, for in sum- 



250 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. ] 


teéto c1auditur. Sic hyetnem exigunt: naln æftate, 
opacum in ripis frigus captant, aut undis immerfi ca- 
lares æftivos fugiunt. In una fæpe domo ingens, 
& multorum capitum familia ftabulatur. Quod fi loci 
premuntur anguftiis, difcedunt juniores ultra, & fua 
fibi domicilia moliuntur. In earn curam incumbunt 
fub prima autumni frigora, & mutuas fibi InVlcem 
operas commodant, turn ad fecanda ligna, tum ad 
comportanda, ita ut plures uni eidemque fuccedant 
oneri, & ingentia ramalia, nemorifque ftragem, deve- 
hant. Si quem fiuvium nancifcuntur ad fuos accom- 
modatum ufus, non tamen fatis alto gurgite, ftruunt 
aggerem coercendis aquis, donec ad idoneam altitu- 
dinem affurgant. Ac primo quidem arbores grandio- 
res arrodendo dejiciunt: deinde tranfverfas ab una ripa 
ducunt ad alteram. Dupliccm verfum & ordinem ar- 
borum faciunt; reliéto inter illas obliquè fic pofitas 
fpatio fex fere pedum, quod referciunt cæmentis, ar- 
gilla, ramis, tam folerter, nihil ut perfeétius à fummo 
architeéto expeétes. Operis longitudo major minorve 
eft, pro fiuvii, quem coercere volunt, modo. Duce- 
nûm aliquando paffuum ejufmodi aggeres reperti. At, 
fi amnis plus jufto intumefcit, diffringunt aliquam 
molis partem, ac tantum emittunt aquæ, quantum fa- 
tis videtur. 
Vt feris filvæ, fic pifcibus abundant fiumina. Vnus 
eft in Iroquæorum lacu, de quo nihil à prifcis le- 
gitur proditum fcriptoribus. Caufarus ab indigenis 
vacatur: oéto pedes longus, aliquando decem. Craffi- 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


251 


mer they enjoy the shady coolness upon the shores, 
or escape the SUllllller heat by plunging into the wa- 
ter. Often a great colony of many members is lodged 
in one house. But, if they be incommoded by the 
narrowness of the place, the younger ones depart of 
their own accord and construct homes for them- 
selves. U pan the advent of cool weather in autumn, 
they devote themselves to this task, and lend mutual 
services in turn, both in cutting and carrying logs, so 
that many assist at one and the same burden, and thus 
carry down great branches and logs of forest trees. 
If they find any river suitable for their purposes, 
except in having sufficient depth, they build a dam 
to keep back the water until it rises to the required 
height. And first, by gnawing them, they fell trees 
of large size; then they lay them across from one 
shore to the other. They construct a double barrier 
and rampart of logs, obliquely placed, leaving between 
them a space of about six feet, which they so ingen- 
iously fill in with stones, clay, and branches that one 
would expect nothing better from the most skillful 
architect. The length of the structure is greater 
or less, according to the size of the stream which 
they wish to restrain. Dams of this kind a fifth 
of a mile long are sometimes found. But, if the 
river swell more than is safe, they break open some 
part of the structure, and let through as llluch water 
as seems sufficient. 
As the forests abound in wild beasts, so the rivers 
teem with fish. There is one in the lake of the Iro- 
quois,67 which is not mentioned by early authors. It 
is called by the natives" Causar," and is eight feet 
long, sometimes ten. It is as thick as the human 
thigh; it is dun-colored, approaching white; it 
bristles all over with scales, so hard and so finnly set 



252 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


tudo, humani femoris; color leucophæus, candido 
tamen propior; fquamis totus horret tam duris, tam- 
que validè confertis, ut aciem pugionis, & hafiilium, 
exc1udant. Caput amplum, & crania præduro, tan- 
quam caffide, munitum. Hinc pifcis armati nomen 
illi à Gallis inditum. Et vera perpetua cum aliis 
pifcibus bella gerit, quorum exitio pafcitur. Pro 
tela rofirum imn1ane gerit, humani brachii longitu- 
dine, gemino dentium ordine infirudum. Hoc vena- 
bulo non folum reliquos madat pifces, verum etiam 
avibus, cum mutare dapes cupit, infidiatur & illudit. 
Earn ob rem occultat fe inter careda: rofirum ex- 
ertat aquis, ac paulifper diducit. Sic perfiat immo- 
tus donee accedant volucres, & incautæ rofiro infi- 
deant, arundinem aut virgultum ratæ: continuo per- 
fidus infidiator, mifellarum pedes contrado rofiro 
firingit, & in gurgitem demerfas vorat. 
N on minor volucrum efi copia, quàm pifcium. 
Certis menfibus palumbes è filvis prorumpunt in 
agros tanto numero, ut arborum ramos prægravent; 
quibus pofiquam infederunt nodu, facile capiuntur, 
& barbaras menfas regali ferculo cumulant. Præte- 
rea in vafiiffimo finu, in quem evolvit fe flumen fandi 
Laurentii, cernitur exigua infula, feu potius biceps 
fcopulus: infulam volucrum dicunt. Tot enim eò 
convolant è finitimo pelago, ut in ire numerum ne- 
queas. Indigenæ fufiibus prædam non difficilem com- 
minuunt, aut pedibus conculcant; cymbafque lautis 
dapibus, & inemptis [345] plenas referunt. Ludunt 



1610--13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


253 


together that they turn the edge of a knife or the 
point of a spear. The head is large, and protected 
by an exceedingly hard skull, like a helmet. Hence 
the name of "armored fish" has been given it by 
the French. It carries on perpetual war with, and 
feeds upon, other fishes. For a weapon it carries an 
immense beak, of the length of a man's arm and fur- 
nished with a double row of teeth. vVith this hunt- 
ing-spear it not only devours other fishes, but also, 
whenever it wishes to vary its diet, deceives and en- 
snares birds. For this latter purpose it hides itself 
among the sedge; it projects its beak from the water 
and opens it slightly. It thus remains motionless 
until the birds approach and thoughtlessly perch 
upon the beak, deeming it a reed or a bush; then 
the treacherous en snarer seizes the feet of the unfor- 
tunate birds by closing its beak, and, dragging them 
into the water, devours theIn. 68 
The birds are fully as abundant as the fishes. 
During certain months of the year the pigeons sally 
forth from the woods into the open country in such 
great numbers that they overload the branches of 
the trees. When they have settled upon the trees at 
night they are easily captured, and the savages heap 
their tables with royal abundance. Besides this, in 
the huge gulf into which the river saint Lawrence 
flows may be seen a small island, or rather a double 
rock; they call it the isle of birds. 69 For so many 
congregate there from the neighboring ocean that it 
is impossible to count their numbers. The natives 
make an easy prey of them with clubs, or by tramp- 
ling them under foot, and bring back their canoes 
filled with sumptuous food acquired without price. 
[345] Everywhere may be seen, sporting in the water, 
geese, ducks, herons, cranes, swans, coots and other 



254 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


in aquis paffim anferes, anates, ardeæ, grues, olores, 
fulicæ; & aves a1iæ, viétum ex undis petere folitæ. 
Peculiare quiddam habet una, gallinæ fimilis, fi mo- 
lem fpedes; pennis in tergo nigricantibus, fub alvo 
candidis. Pedum alter unguibus aduncis armatur; 
alter digitos levi & continua pelle junétos habet, 
qualis eft anatum; hoc natat, ilIa pifces trahit & 
evifcerat. 



1610--13J 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


255 


birds whose habit it is to seek their living from the 
waves. A certain peculiarity attaches to one, which 
is about the size of a cock; its wings are black on the 
outside and white beneath. One of its feet is anned 
with hooked claws, the other has webbed toes, like 
those of a duck; with the latter it swims, with the 
fanner it seizes and disembowels fishes. 



256 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


CANADENSIUM DOMUS & RES FAMILIARIS; MORBI; 
ÆGRORUM CURA & MORTUORUM. 


J A:rvl, fi mores & indolem gentis requiras, partim 
vagi degunt, in filvis per hyemem, quò venatio- 
nis uberioris vocat fpes; æftate, ad amnium 
ripas, ubi præbet facilem annonam pifcatus: aliqui 
pagos incolunt. Cafas fabricantur infixis humi per- 
ticis: latera corticibus intexunt; pellibus, mufco, 
ramis operiunt faftigia. In media cafa focus: in 
fummo teéto foramen, emiffarium fumi. Is ægre 
eluétatus totam, ut plurimum, cafam fic opplet, ut 
coaétis habitare in hoc fumo advenis fæpe oculorum 
acies obtundatur, & hebefcat: barbari, durum genus 
& his affuetum incommodis, rident. Domefticæ rei 
cura, & quidquid in familia laboris eft, imponitur 
feminis. Illæ domos figunt, ac refigunt; aquam, & 
ligna devehunt, cibos apparant: vicem & locum man- 
cipiorum, opificum, & jumentorum, implent. Vena- 
tionis & belli cura, virorum eft. Hinc gentis foli- 
tudo, & paucitas. Mulieres enim, ceteroquin haud 
infecundæ, his diftriétæ laboribus, neque maturos 
edere queunt fetus, neque alere jam editos: itaque 
aut abortum patiuntur, aut partus recentes deftituunt, 
aquationi, lignationi, ceterifque operibus intentæ; 
vix ut trigefimus quifque infans adolefcat. Accedit 
rei medicæ infcitia, cujus ignoratio facit ut è morbis 
paulo gravioribus raro emergant. 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


257 


HOMES A:KD HOUSEHOLD ECONOMV OF THE CANA- 
DIANS; DISEASES ; TREATMENT OF THE 
SICK AND OF THE DEAD. 


N O\V, if you inquire concerning the customs and 
character of this people, I will reply that a 
part of them are nomads, wandering during 
the winter in the woods, whither the hope of better 
hunting calls them - in the summer, on the shores of 
the rivers, where they easily obtain their food by fish- 
ing; while others inhabit villages. They construct 
their huts by fixing poles in the ground; they cover 
the sides with bark, the roofs with hides, moss and 
branches. In the middle of the hut is the hearth, 
from which the smoke escapes through an opening at 
the peak of the roof. As the smoke passes out with 
difficulty, it usually fills the whole hut, so that 
strangers compelled to live in these cabins suffer in- 
jury and weakening of the eyes; the savages, a coarse 
race, and accustomed to these discomforts, ridicule 
this. The care of household affairs, and whatever 
work there may be in the family, are placed upon the 
women. They build and repair the wigwams, carry 
water and wood, and prepare the food; their duties 
and position are those of slaves, laborers and beasts 
of burden. The pursuits of hunting and war belong 
to the men. Thence arise the isolation and numeri- 
cal weakness of the race. For the women, although 
naturally prolific, cannot, on account of their occupa- 
tion in these labors, either bring forth fully-devel- 
oped offspring, or properly nourish them after they 
have been brought forth; therefore they either suffer 



258 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


Duos maximè fontes morborum fiatuunt: unum 
ex ipfa ægrotantis mente ortum, quæ defideret quid- 
piam, ac tandiu corpus ægrum vexet, dum re de- 
fiderata potiatur. Putant enim ineffe in hominum 
unoquoque innata quædam defideria, fæpe ipfis igno- 
ta, quibus fingulorum felicitas contineatur. Ad ejuf- 
modi defideria & innatas appetitiones cognofcendas 
adhibent hariolos, quibus hanc divinitus conceffam 
facultatem arbitrantur, ut animorum intimas receffus 
pervideant. I1li, quodcumque primum occurrit, aut 
ex quo fieri quæfium aliquem poffe fufpicantur, ab 
ægro defiderari pronunciant. Nec dubitant paren- 
tes, amici, & confanguinei ægrotantis, quidquid illud 
fit, quantivis pretii, comparare ac largiri ægro, nun- 
quam pofiea repofcendum. I1le dona fruitur, & 
lucri partem hariolis afpergit; ac fæpe pofiridie vita 
cedit. Vulgo tamen relevantur ægroti, quippe levi- 
bus tentati morbis: nam in gravioribus timidiores 
funt ifii præfiigiatores, negantque inveniri poffe quid 
ægrotus defideret: tunc eum depofitum conc1amant, 
auétorefque funt confanguineis ut hominem tollant è 
media. Ita longiore morbo vexatos necant, aut fenio 
feffos; eamque caritatem fummam interpretantur, 
quia mars ærumnis languentium finem ponit. Ean- 
dem benevolentiam adhibent erga pueros parentibus 
orbatos, quos null as effe malunt, quam miferos. AI- 
terU1TI fontem morborum effe cenfent veneficorum oc- 
cultas artes, & præfiigias, quas ridiculis cærimoniis 
conantur averruncare. Sæpe noxios humores ejiciunt 



]610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


259 


abortion, or forsake their new-born children, while 
engaged in carrying water, procuring wood and other 
tasks, so that scarcely one infant in thirty survives 
until youth. To this there is added their ignorance 
of medicine. because of which they seldom recover 
from illnesses which are at all severe. 
They believe that there are two main sources of 
disease: one of these is in the mind of the patient 
himself, which desires something, and will vex the 
body of the sick man until it possesses the thing re- 
quired. For they think that there are in every man 
certain inborn desires, often unknown to themselves, 
upon which the happiness of individuals depends. 
For the purpose of ascertaining desires and innate 
appetites of this character, they summon soothsay- 
ers, who, as they think, have a divinely-imparted 
power to look into the inmost recesses of the mind. 
These men declare that whatever first occurs to 
them, or something from which they suspect some 
gain can be derived, is desired by the sick person. 
Thereupon the parents, friends, and relatives of the 
patient do not hesitate to procure and lavish upon him 
whatever it may be, however expensive, a return of 
which is never thereafter to be sought. The patient 
enjoys the gift, divides a portion of it among the 
soothsayers, and often on the next day departs from 
life. Commonly, however, the sick recover, plainly 
because their illnesses are slight; for, in the case of 
more severe complaints. these soothsayers are more 
cautious, and deny the possibility of ascertaining 
what the patient desires; then they bewail him whom 
they have given up, and cause the relatives to put 
him out of the way. Thus they kill those afflicted 
with protracted illness, or exhausted by old age, and 
consider this the greatest kindness, because death 



260 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


fudando. Certum cafæ locum corticibus inc1udunt, 
ac tegunt pellibus, ne qua poffit aer afpirare. Intra 
congerunt lapides deufios & igne multo faturos. Sub- 
eunt nudi & brachia cantitantes jaétan1. Sed, quod 
mireris, ab his thermis egreffi & fudore diffluentes, 
hyeme perfrigida, in lacum aut amnem fe conjiciunt, 
de pleuritide fecuri. 
lVlortuorum cadavera nunquam efferunt per cafæ 
januam, fed per earn partem, in quam converfus eger 
exf pira vi 1. Animam pu tan t evolare per camini f pira- 
culum; ac ne moras trahat, cafæ prifiinæ defiderio, 
neu puerulorum aliquem difcedens afflet, hoc afflatu 
videlicet moriturum, ut putant; crebro fufie tundunt 
parietes tugurii, ut earn citius exire compellant. Im- 
mortalem effe arbitrantur. N e porro emoriatur fame, 
magnam vim ciborum infodiunt cum corpore; vefies, 
item, alIas, variamque fupelleétilem, magna fumptu, 
& multo rum annorum lab are conquifitam, ut iis uta- 
tur, inquiunt, ac decentius verfetur in regno mortuo- 
rum. Sepulcra nobilium exfiant paulum ab hum a : 
iis perticas in morem pyramidis compaétas imponunt: 
arcum addunt, fagittas, c1ypeum, & alia militiæ de- 
cora: feminarum vera tumulis, torques & monilia. 
Infantium corpora fepeliunt propter viam, ut eorum 
anima, quam ab ipforum corporibus abire longius 
non putant, illabatur in prætereuntis alicujus feminæ 
finum, & adhuc informem animare fetum poffi1. In 
1uétu vult urn inficiunt fuligine. :Moniti de fun ere 
affines, vicini, & amici concurrunt in funefium tu- 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT R.l!.'LA TIONS 


261 


puts an end to the sufferings of the sick. They dis- 
play the same benevolence towards children deprived 
of their parents, whom they prefer to see dead rather 
than to see them miserable. They believe that an- 
other source of disease is the hidden arts and the 
charms of sorcerers, which they seek to avert by 
means of absurd ceremonies. Often they expel nox- 
ious humors by sweating. They inclose a certain 
portion of the hut with pieces of bark and cover it 
with hides, in order that no air may enter. "\Vithin 
they pile stones heated to a high temperature. They 
enter naked and toss their arms while singing. But, 
strange to say, they will leave this heat, dripping- 
with perspiration, and in the very coldest part of 
winter cast themselves into a lake or river, careless 
of pleurisy. 
They never bear out the corpses of the dead 
through the door of the lodge, but through that 
part toward which the sick person turned when he 
expired. They think that the soul flies out through 
the smoke-hole; and, in order that it may not linger 
through longing for its old home, nor while depart- 
ing breathe upon any of the children, who by such 
an act would be, as they think, doomed to death, 
they beat the walls of the wigwam \vith frequent 
blows of a club, in order that they may compel the 
soul to depart more quickly. They believe it to be 
immortal. That it may not thereafter perish with 
hunger, they bury with the body a large quantity of 
provisions; also, garments, pots, and various utensils 
of great expense, and acquired by many years' labor, 
in order, they say, that he may use them and pass 
his time more suitably in the kingdom of the dead. 
The tombs of the chiefs are raised a little from the 
ground; upon them they place poles joined in the 



:26
 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


gurium. U nus aliquis, fi mortui conditio ferat, ver- 
ba facit, neque rationelTI ullam ex iis prætermittit, 
quæ ad leniendam ægritudinem à dicendi magiftris 
afferri folent. Excurrit in demortui laudes: homi- 
nem eUIn natum fuiffe admonet, atque adeo nlorti 
obnoxiu111: qui cafus emendari nequeant, fieri patien- 
tia leviores: alia id genus in eandem fententiam edif- 
ferit. Tertia die funus ducitur. Epulum funebre 
apponitur toti pago, fingulis fUaITI fynlbolam, nec 
malignè, conferentibus. Hujus epuli caufas afferunt 
maximè tres: primaITI, ut communem mærorem leni- 
ant: alteram, ut qui alnici peregrè ad funus veniunt, 
accipiantur honeftius: tertiam, ut gratificentur ex- 
tinéti 
Ianibus, quem ea liberalitate deleétari exifti- 
mant, & appofitis etiam dapibus pafci. Peraéto 
convivio præfeétus funeris, quem in fingulis familiis 
c1arioribus, certum atque infignem habent, adeffe 
tempus exequiarum proclamat. Omnes continuo 
lamentari, & ululare. Effertur cadaver propinquo- 
rum' humeris, inteétum fibrinis pellibus, & in feretro, 
è conicibus juncifve confeéto compofitum, colleétis in 
glomum artubus, ut eo modo terræ nlandetur, inqui- 
unt, quo in alvo materna olim jacuit. Deponitur 
feretrUll1 in conftituto loco, munera quæ quifque 
offert mortua, præfiguntur perticis: & appellantur 
ill arum auétores à funeris præfeéto: inftauratur 
planétus; denique juvenes ludicro certan1Ïne inter fe 
dimicant. 
!\Iajori fepeliuntur apparatu & luétu, qui aquis 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELATI01VS 


26:
 


form of a pyramid; they add a bow, arrows, shield 
and other insignia of war; but upon the tombs of the 
women they place necklaces and collars. They bury 
the bodies of infants beside paths, in order that 
their souls, which they think do not depart very far 
from the body, may slip into the bosoms of women 
passing by, and animate the yet undeveloped fetus. 
In mourning, they stain the face with soot. When 
informed of a death, the relatives, neighbors, and 
friends assemble at the lodge where the corpse lies. 
If the condition of the dead permit, one of them 
makes a speech, in which he employs all those argu- 
Inents that the nlost eloquent speakers are wont to 
use for the solace of grief. He rehearses the praises 
of the dead; he reminds them that the latter was born 
a man, and therefore liable to death; that those mis- 
fortunes which cannot be repaired are made lighter 
by patience; he sets forth other things of that sort to 
the same effect. On the third day the funeral is 
held. A funeral feast is provided for the whole vil- 
lage, each individual liberally furnishing his share. 
For this feast they ad vance three main reasons: first. 
that they may assuage the general grief; secondly, 
that those friends who come from a distance to the 
funeral may be more fittingly entertained; thirdly, 
that they may please the spirit of the dead, which, 
they believe, is delighted by this exhibition of liber- 
ality. and also partakes of the repast placed for him. 
When the feast is completed the master of the 
funeral, who, in each distinguished family, perma- 
nently holds this office and is greatly honored, pro- 
claims that the time for the burial has come. All 
give utterance to continuous lamentations and wail- 
ings. The corpse, wrapped in beaver skins. and 
placed upon a bier made of bark and rushes, with his 



264 


LES R
LATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


obruti perierunt. Nam eorum cadavera laniantur: 
carnium pars cum vifceribus in ignem projicitur. Id 
facrificii quoddam genus eft, quo placare cælum con- 
tendunt. Iratum enim effe genti non dubitant, cum 
in undis quifpiam extinguitur: ac fi quid rite atque 
ordine peraétum in iftis funeribus non fuerit, huic 
piaculo calamitates omnes, quibus poftea confliétan- 
tur, acceptas ferunt. Indulgent luétui per annum 
integrum. Primis diebus decem jacent humi, diu 
noétuque in ventrem proni: nefas tunc vocem ullam, 
nifi quæ dolorem fignificet, mittere; aut accedere ad 
ignem, aut conviviis intereffe. Anno reliquo luétus 
continuatur, at levius. Omittuntur omnia urbanitatis 
officia, colloquia cum vicinis, congreffus amicorum; 
ac fi conjugem amiferint; cælibes, donec annus 
fluxerit, perftant. Poft oétavum aut decimum quem- 
que annum Hurones, quæ natio latè patet, omnia 
cadavera certum in locum ex omnibus pagis depor- 
tant, & in foveam prægrandem conjiciunt. Eum 
diem 
Iortuorum vacant. Is ubi de procerum fenten- 
tia conftitutus eft, eruunt corpora fepulcris; alia jam 
confumpta, & offibus vix hærentia; alia putri carne 
leviter amiéta: alia fcatentia fædis vermibus, & gra- 
viter olentia. Offa diffoluta in faccos abdunt: cada- 
vera nondum diffuta componunt in farcophagis, & 
fupplicantium ritu deferunt in deftinatum locum, 
alto filentio, & compofito gradu procedentes, non 
fine fufpiriis, & lamentabili eiulatu. N e vera me- 
moria nobilium, & arte præfertim bellica infignium, 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELATI01Vs 


265 


limbs bent and pressed tightly against his body in 
order that, as they say, he may be committed to the 
earth in the same position in which he once lay in 
his mother's womb, is borne out on the shoulders of 
the relatives. The bier is set down at the appointed 
place, the gifts which each one offers to the dead are 
fastened to poles, and the donors are named by the 
master of the funeral. The mourning is renewed; 
finally, boys vie with each other in a mock contest. 
Those who have been drowned are buried with 
greater ceremony and lamentation. For their bodies 
are cut open, and a portion of the flesh, together with 
the viscera, thrown into the fire. This is a sort of 
sacrifice, by means of which they seek to appease 
heaven. For they are sure that heaven is enraged 
against the race whenever anyone loses his life by 
drowning. If any part of these funeral rites has not 
been duly and regularly performed, they believe that 
all the calamities from which they afterwards may 
suffer are a punishment for this neglect. They in- 
dulge their grief throughout an entire year. For 
the first ten days they lie upon the ground day and 
night, flat upon their bellies; it is impious then to 
utter any sound unless significant of grief, or to ap- 
proach the fire, or to take part in feasts. During 
the remainder of the year the mourning continues, 
but less vigorously. All the duties of politeness, 
conversation with neighbors, and association with 
friends, are neglected; and, if a man has lost a wife 
he remains unmarried until the year has expired. 
Every eight or ten years the Hurons, which nation is 
widel y extended, convey all their corpses from all 
the villages to a designated place and cast them into 
an immense pit. They call it the day of the Dead. 
"\\?hen this has been decreed by resolution of the 




Gö 


LES RELA TIO
V.). DES IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


qui prole carent, intercidat, eligunt aliquem ætate 
ac robore florentenl, cui denlortui nomen imponunt. 
HIe n1ilitum fiatinl delec
ulll habet, ac bellum ca- 
pefsit, ut præclaro quopiam edito facinore, probet 
fe non tantum nominis, fed etiam virtutis ejus, cui 
fubfiituitur, heredem effe. Inferioris notæ nomina 
æterno filentio damnant. Itaque filllUI ac in pago 
quifpianl è vita ceffit, ejus nonlen alta voce pronunci- 
atur per omnes cafas. ne quis illud temere ufurpet. 
Quod fi mortuum tamen appellare neceffe fuerit, utun- 
tur verborum circuitione, & præfantur quidpiam, quo 
lllortis ominofa [346] lllenloria leniatur. Idque fi 
Olnittatur, accipiunt In gravem contumeliam: neque 
atrociori malediéto vulnerari filium aut parentem 
poffe putant, quam fi huic filius, illi parens, mortuus 
exprobretur. 



1610-13J 


THE JESUIT RELATIONS 


2157 


elders, they drag out the corp
es from their graves, 
some already decomposed, with flesh scarcely cling- 
ing to the bones, others thinly covered with putrid 
flesh, others teeming with vile worms and smelling 
fearfully. The loose bones they place in sacks. the 
bodies not yet disintegrated they place in coffins, and 
bear them, in the manner of suppliants, to the ap- 
pointed place, proceeding amid deep silence and with 
regular step, uttering sighs and mournful cries. But, 
in order that the memory of chiefs and of those 
especially famous in the art of war, who lack off- 
spring, may not fail, they choose some person in the 
flower of his age and strength, to whom they gi,'e the 
name of the dead man. The nan1esake in1mediately 
makes a levy of wa:-riors and starts for battle. in 
order that by the achievement of son1e glorious deed 
he may prove himself the heir not only of the name 
but also of the valor of him whose place he has 
taken. Names of lesser note are condemned to ever- 
lasting silence. Therefore, as soon as anyone in the 
village has departed this life his name is proclaimed 
in a loud \yoice throughout all the lodges. in order 
that no one may rashly use it. But if, nevertheless, 
it be necessary to name the deaù n1an, they use a 
circumlocution and preface something by which the 
unpleasant [346J recollection of his deat'.l may be 
softened. If that be (mitted they c: nsider it a 
deadly insult; nor do tl1 
y think tha, son or parent 
can be wounded by m01 
 savage abuse than when 
their dead relatives are defamed before them. 



26f; 


LES RELA TJONS DES ./ÉSUITES 


[VOL 1 


BELLI GEREl\IH RATIO; .\.R
'IA; CRUDELITAS IN 
CAPTIYOS. 


B ELLA temere ac ferociter fufcipiunt, nulla fæpe, 
aut perlevi de caufa. Duces communi fuffra- 
gio legunt, eofque vel familiarum præcipuarum 
natu maximos, vel quoruln virtus bellica, aut etiam 
eloquentia perfpeéta fit. Civili bello nunqumn inter 
f e concurrun t; arma in fini timos tan turn movent; 
neque imperii ac ditionis proferendæ caufa, fed ferè ut 
illatam fibi, vel fæderatis, injuriam ulcifcantnr. Gla- 
dios, & gravidas nitrato pulvere fiftulas, à Batavis & 
Ang1is accepere, quibus armis freti, certiùs & auda- 
cius in hoftium, atque adeò Europæorum perniciem 
confpirant. Interdum bella fingulari certamine fini- 
unto Agmina duu, hinc J\Iontanorunl, quos vacant, 
inde Iroquæorum conftiterant ante aliquot annas, 
velut in procinctu. Duces antegreffi jam defigna- 
bant locum ad aciem explicandam, cum unus alte- 
rt1nl fic allocutus fertur: Parcamus noftrorum fan- 
guini, inlo noftro: manibus nudis rem agamus. Uter 
alterum dejecerit, is vincat. Placuit conditio. Ma- 
nus ambo conferunt. J\Iontanus Iroquæum ita delaffa- 
vit, dol urn artemque virtuti mifcens, ut hun1Í denique 
proftratum 1igaverit, impofitumque humeris ad fuum 
agmen viétor detulerit. Clypeos conficiunt è ligno 
dolata, plcrumque cedrino; paulunl ad oras incurvos: 



1610-13] 


THE .fESUIT RELA TIONS 


269 


METHODS OF WARFARE; WEAPONS; CRUELTY TO 
PRISO
ERS. 


T HEY engage In \var rashly and savagely, often 
with no cause, or upon a very slight pretext. 
They choose as leaders, by general vote, either 
the eldest members of illustrious families or those 
whose warlike valor, or even eloquence, has been ap- 
proved. In civil war they never engage; they carry 
arms only against their neighbors, and not for the 
sake of extending their dominion and sway, but usu- 
ally, in order that they may avenge an injury inflicted 
upon themselves or their allies. They have obtained 
swords and guns from the Dutch and English. and, 
relying upon these weapons, they plan with greater 
determination and boldness the destrÜction of their 
enemies, and even of the Europeans. Sometimes 
they decide their wars by single combat. Two 
bands, one of the so-called 1Iontagnais,70 the other 
of Iroquois, had met a few years ago in readiness 
for battle. The leaders had advanced and were al- 
ready designating the positions for the formation of 
the lines of attack, when it is said that one thus ad- 
dressed the other: " Let us spare the blood of our 
followers; nay, rather let us spare our own. Let us 
settle the matter with our bare hands, and he who 
overcomes the other shall be the victor." The pro- 
position was accepted, and the two joined battle. 
The Montagnais, by means of a combination of strat- 
egy and skill with courage, so wearied the Iroquois 
that he finally hurled the latter to the ground, bound 
him, and triumphantly carried hÏ1n off upon his 



:!ïU 


LES RELA TIOAS DES JÉ."iUITr.:S 


[VOL. 1 


leves, prælongos & peranlplos, ita ut totum corpus 
protegant. Jam, ne jaculis aut fecuribus perrum- 
pantur omnino ac diffiliant, eos intus confuunt refti- 
bus ex anÏlnalium corio contextis, quæ totam clypei 
molem continent conneétuntque. 
on geftant è bra- 
chia fufpenfos, fed funem ex quo pendent, rejiciunt in 
humerum dextrum: adeo ut latus corporis finiftrUlTI 
c1ypeo protegatur; nlOX ubi jaculum emiferunt, aut 
ferream difploferunt fiftulam. pallIum retrahunt dex- 
trum latus, ac finiftrum clypeo teétum obvertunt hofti. 
In prælio id maximè itudent, vivos ut hoftes capi- 
ant. Captis & in fuos abduc1is pagos prinlum veftes 
detrahunt; deinde ungues crudis dentibus fingillatÜTI 
avellunt: turn palo alligatos verberant ad fatietatenl. 

Iox vinculis folutos cogunt ire, ac redire, geminum 
inter ordinem armatorum fpinis, fuftibus, & ferra- 
mentis. Denique, accenfo circum foco, lentis igni- 
bus miferos torrent. Interim torofas carnes fodicant 
candentibus laminis, & verubus, aut recifas ac femi- 
uftulatas, fanie fiuentes & fanguine, vorant. :N unc 
tædis ardentibus totum corpus. ac præfertim hiatus 
vulnerum, pertentant: nunc detraéta capitis cute in- 
fpergunt nudæ calvæ favillam, & fervidos cineres: 
nunc brachiorum nervos ac pedum vellunt, lancinant, 
aut hebeti fecant lente ferro, derepta parumper cute, 
in pedis malleolo, & manus carpo. Sæpe cogunt cap- 
tivum infelicem ingredi per fubjeétos ignes: aut 
frufta fuæ carnis mandere, ac vivo fepulcro condere. 
H ujufmodi carnificinam non pauci è Patribus 80- 



161 (}'-13] 


TFIE JESUIT RE'LA TIOiVS 


2ïl 


shoulders to his own band. They make their shields 
of hewn wood, principally cedar, with slightly-curv- 
ing edges, light, very long and very large, so that 
they cover the entire body. N ext, in order that 
they may not be penetrated and split by spears or 
tomahawks, they overlace thenl on the inner side 
with thongs made from the skins of animals, which 
hold together and connect the whole mass of the 
shield. They do not carry the shield suspended frOll1 
the arm, but cast by a cord over the right shoulder, 
so that it protects the left side of the body; when 
they have cast their spears or fired their guns they 
slightly retire the right side and turn toward the en- 
emy the left side, which is protected by the shield. 
In battle they strive especially to capture their 
enemies alive. Those who have been captured and 
led off to their villages are first stripped of their 
clothing; then they savagely tear off their nails one 
by one with their teeth; then they bind them to 
stakes and beat them as long as they please. Next 
they release them from their bonds, and compel thenl 
to pass back and forth between a double row of men 
armed with thorns, clubs and instrulnents of iron. 
Finally, they kindle a fire about them, and roast the 
miserable creatures "\vith slow heat. Sometimes 
they pierce the flesh of the muscles with red-hot 
plates and with spits, or cut it off and deyour it, half. 
burned and dripping with gore and blood. 
 ext, 
they plant blazing torches all over the body, and 
especially in the gaping wounds; then, after scalp- 
ing him they scatter ashes and live coals upon his 
naked head; then they tear the tendons of the arms 
and legs, lacerate them, or, after removing a little of 
the skin, leisurely cut them with a knife at the ankle 
and wrist. Often they compel the unhappy prisoner 



27
 


LES R.ELA TJOJ\,TS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


cietatis pertulere. Hanc porro extrahunt in multos 
dies; utque navis cruciatibus trifiis viétima fuppetat, 
intermittunt eofdem aliquandiu, donec ad extremum 
fatifcant corpora, & concidant. Tunc è peétore cor 
avellunt, torrent fubjeétis prunis; & cruore condîtum 
juvenibus avidè comedendum objiciunt, fi captivus 
fuppliciorum acerbitatem generosè fuerit perpeffus: 
ut viri fortis, inqniunt, mafculum robur juventus bel- 
latrix combibat. Laudatur qui rogum, cultros, vul- 
nera, irretorto vultu afpexerit, & exceperit: qui non 
ingemuerit, qui rifu cantu que tortoribus illuferit: 
nam canere tot inter mortes, amplum ac magnificUlTI 
effe putant. Itaque cantilenas ipfi multo ante com- 
ponunt, quas capti, fi fors ferat, recitent. Reliqua 
multitudo cadaver abfumit in ferali convivio. Dux 
refervat fibi verticis pellem cum coma, monumentum 
viétoriæ, trophæum crudelitatis. 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT Rr.'LA TIOll/S 



73 


to walk through fire, or to eat, and thus entomb in a 
1iving sepulchre, pieces of his own flesh. Torture 
of this sort has been borne by not a few of the 
Fathers of the Society. "Moreover, they prolong 
this torment throughout many days, and, in order 
that the poor victim may undergo fresh trials, inter- 
mit it for some time, until his vitality is entirely ex- 
hausted and he perishes. Then they tear the heart 
from the breast, roast it upon the coals, and, if the 
prisoner has bravely borne the bitterness of the 
torture, give it, seasoned with blood, to the boys, to 
be greedily eaten, in order, as they say, that the 
warlike youth may imbibe the heroic strength of 
the valiant man. The prisoner who has beheld and 
endured stake, knives and wounds with an unchang- 
ing countenance, who has not groaned, who with 
laughter and song has ridiculed his tormentors, is 
praised; for they think that to sing amid so many 
deaths is great and noble. So they themselves com- 
pose songs long beforehand, in order that they may 
repeat them if they should by chance be captured. 
The rest of the crowd consume the corpse in a brutal 
feast. The chief reserves for himself the scalp as a 
sign of victory, a trophy of cruelty. 



274 


LES RELA TIONS DES ./ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


I"DOLES A1\L\II: CORPORIS CULTUS: CIBI, CONVIVIA; 
SUI'ELLEX: RELIGIO, & SUPER- 
STITIOXES. 


S IC hoftes accipiunt: at domi colunt pacem, rixaf- 
que diligenter cavent, nifi quas ebrietatis impo- 
tentia excitavit. Fortunati, fi nunquam illis 
hanc peftem Europa importaffet! Irafci ne norunt 
quidem, ac vehementer initio mirabantur, cum inve- 
herentur Patres in vitia pro concione, eofque furere 
exiftitnabant, qui pacatos inter auditores, & arnicas, 
tanta contentione fe jaétarent. Liberalitatis & muni- 
ficentiæ fan1am aucupantur: fua largiuntur ultra; 
ablata vix repetunt: nec fures aliter, quam rifu & 
fannis ulcifcuntur. Si quem, oborta fimultate nefarie 
aliquid moliri fufpicantur, non minis deterrent homi- 
nem, fed donis. Ex eadem concordiæ ftudio fit ut 
affentiantur ultra, quidquid doceas; nihilo tamen 
fecius tenent mordicus infitam opinionem aut fuper- 
ftitionem: eoque difficilius erudiuntur. Quid enim 
agas cum annuentibus verba & concedentibus omnia; 
re nihil præftantibus? :Miferorum egeftatem benignè 
fublevant; viduarum ac fenum fuftentant orbitatem, 
nifi cunl fenio ætas vieta marcet, vel morbus gravior 
incidit: tunc enim abrumpere infelicem vitam fatius 
arbitrantur, quàm alere ac producere. Quæcumque 
calamitas ingruat, nunquam fe dimoveri de animi 
tranquillitate patiuntur, qua felicitatem potiffimUlTI 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIO/'/S 


2ï!) 


:\IEKTAL CHAR.\CTERISTICS; CARE OF TIIF nODY; 
FOOD; FEASTS; HOUSEHOLD UTEKSI LS ; 
REI.IGI()
 .\:\"D SUPERSTITIO
S. 


T HUS they treat their enemies; but at home they 
cu1tÏ\
ate peace and carefully avoid quarrels, 
except those \vhich the fury of drunkenness 
has aroused. Fortunate would they be if Europe had 
never introduced this scourge among them! They 
know nothing of anger, and at first were greatly sur- 
prised when the Fathers censured their faults before 
the assembly; they thought that the Fathers were 
madmen, because among peaceful hearers and friends 
they displayed such yehemence. These people seek 
a reputation for liberality and generosity; they give 
away their property freely and very seldom ask any 
return; nor do they punish thieves otherwise than 
with ridicule and derision. If they suspect that any 
one seeks to accomplish an evil deed by means of 
false pretences, they do not restrain him with threats, 
but with gifts. From the same desire for harmony 
comes their ready assent to whatever one teaches 
them; nevertheless they hold tenaciously to their 
native belief or superstition, and on that account are 
the more difficult to instruct. For what can one do 
with those who in word give agreement and assent 
to everything, but in reality give none? They 
kindly relieve the poverty of the unfortunate; they 
provide sustenance for widows and old men in their 
bereavement, except when. with old age, vitality is 
withering away, or some grievous disease arises; for 
then they think it better to cut short an unhappy eÀ.- 
istence than to support and prolong it. "\Vhatever 



276 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


definiunt. Inediam multorum dierum, morbos. & 
ærumnas leniffime & confiantiffimè perferunt. Ipfos 
partus dolores, licet acerbiffimos, ita diffimulant femi- 
næ vel fuperant, ut ne ingemifcant quidem: ac fi cui 
lacryma vel gemitus excideret, æterna fiagraret igno- 
minia, neque virum, à quo duceretur, præterea in ve- 
niret, Nihil unquam amicus cum amico, uxor cum 
viro, cum uxore vir, queritur & expofiulat. Liberos 
mira caritate compleétuntur: fed modum non tenent; 
in eos enim neque animadvertunt ipfi, neque ab aliis 
animadverti finunt. Hinc petulantia puerorum & 
ferocitas, quæ, pofiquàm fe corroboravit ætate, in 
omne fcelus erumpit. Quam autem erga liberos & 
familiares comitatem præ fe ferunt, eandem cum 
ceteris civibus fuis, ac popularibus, ufurpant. Si 
quis amariore joco quempiam momordit, (nam dica- 
ces vulgo funt, & in jocos effufi) belle diffimulant, 
aut vicem reponunt, & abfentes remordent; nam præ- 
fentes cavillari, aut coram diétis inceffere, religio efi. 
Non aliud libentiùs convicium regerunt laceffiti, quàm 
fi hominem ingenio carere dican t. Scilicet ingenii 
laudem vindicant fibi; nec temere. Nemo inter illos 
hebes, ac tardus; quod nativa illorum in deliberando 
prudentia, & in dicendo facundia, dec1arat. Auditi 
quidem fæpe funt tam appofitè ad perfuadenduln pe- 
rorare, idque ex tempore, ut admiration em exercita- 
tiffimis in dicendi palæfira moverent. 
Refpondet ingenio corpus, aptum membris, pro- 



1610-13] 


THE .JESUIT RELA TIONS 


277 


misfortune may befall them, they never allow them- 
selves to lose their calm composure of mind, in which 
they think that happiness especially consists. They 
endure many days' fasting. also diseases and trials, 
with the greatest cheerfulness and patience. Even 
the pangs of childbirth, although most bitter, are so 
concealed or conquered by the women that they do 
not even groan; and if a tear or a groan should es- 
cape anyone of them. she would be stigmatized by 
everlasting disgrace, nor could she find a man there- 
after who would marry her. Friends never indulge 
in complaint or expostulation to friends, wives to 
their husbands, or husbands to their wives. They 
treat their children with wonderful affection, but 
they preserve no discipline, for they neither them- 
selves correct them nor allow others to do so. Hence 
the impudence and savageness of the boys. which, 
after they have reached a vigorous age, breaks forth 
in all sorts of wickedness. Moreover, they exercise 
the same mildness which they exhibit toward their 
children and relatives, toward the remainder of their 
tribe and their countrymen. If any person has in- 
jured another by means of a rude jest (for they are 
commonly very talkative, and are ready jesters), the 
latter carefully conceals it, or lays it up, and in retal- 
iation injures his detractor behind his back; for to 
jest in the victim's presence, or to make a verbal 
attack, face to face, is characteristic of religion. 
There is nothing which they are more prone to use 
as a counter-allegation, when provoked, than to 
charge a man with a lack of intelligence. For they 
claim praise because of their intelligence, and not 
without good reason. No one among them is stupid 
or sluggish, a fact which is evident in their inborn 
foresight in deliberation and their fluency in speak- 



278 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


ceritate formofum, rob are validum. Idem, qui Gal- 
lis, color; tametfi corrumpunt ilIum unguine, & oleo 
putri, quo fe perungunt; necnon pigmentis variis, 
quibus fibi pulcri, nobis ridiculi, videntur. Alios 
cernas nafo cæruleo, genis vera & fuperciliis atratis: 
alii frontem, nafum, & genas, lineis verficoloribus 
difcriminant: totidem larvas intueri te putes. Ejuf- 
modi coloribus credunt fe hofiibus effe terribiles; 
fuum pariter in acie metum, quafi vela, tegi: demum 
pellem ipfam corporis indurari, ad vim hiberni frigo- 
ris facilius tolerandam. Præter ifios colores induci 
pro cujufque libidine ac deleri folitos, non pauci fia- 
biles ac perpetuas avium aut animalium, putà ferpen- 
tis, aquilæ, bufonis, imagines imprimunt cuti, hunc 
in modum. Subulis, cufpidibus, aut fpinis collum, 
peétus, genafve ita pungunt, ut rudia rerum ifiarum 
lineamenta effingant: mox in punétam & cruentam 
cutem immittunt atrum è carbone comminuto pulve- 
rem, qui cum fanguine concretus impreffas effigies ita 
inurit vivæ carni, ut eas nulla temporis diuturnitas 
expungat. Totæ quædam nationes, ea præfertim 
quæ a Tabaco nomen habet, itemque alia quæ Neutra 
dicitur, id confianti more ac lege ufurpat, nec fine 
periculo interdum; maxime fi efi tempefias frigidior, 
aut debilior [347] corporis confiitutio. Tunc enim 
dolore vic
i, licet eum ne gemitu quidem fignificent, 
linquuntur animo, & exanimes aliquando concidunt. 
Laudant oculos exiles, labra repanda & prominen- 



1610-13] 


THE .JESUIT RELA TIONS 


279 


ing. Indeed, they have often been heard to make a 
peroration so well calculated for persuasion, and that 
off-hand, that they would excite the admiration of 
the most experienced in the arena of eloquence. 
Their bodies, well proportioned, handsome because 
of their height, vigorous in strength, correspond to 
their minds. They have the same complexion as the 
French, although they disfigure it with fat and rancid 
oil, with which they grease themselves; nor do they 
neglect paints of various colors, by means of which 
they appear beautiful to themselves, but to us ridic- 
ulous. Some may be seen with blue noses, but with 
cheeks and eyebrows black; others mark forehead, 
nose and cheeks with lines of various colors; one 
would think he beheld so many hobgoblins. They 
believe that in colors of this description they are 
dreadful to their enemies, and that likewise their 
own fear in line of battle will be concealed as by a 
veil; finally, that it hardens the skin of the body, so 
that the cold of winter is more easily borne. Besides 
these colors, which are usually applied or removed 
according to the pleasure of each person, many im- 
press upon the skin fixed and permanent representa- 
tions of birds or animals, such as a snake, an eagle, or 
a toad, in the following manner: With awls, spear- 
points, or thorns they so puncture the neck, breast or 
cheeks as to trace rude outlines of those objects; 
next, they insert into the pierced and bleeding skin 
a black powder made from pulverized charcoal, 
which unites with the blood and so fixes upon the 
living flesh the pictures which have been drawn that 
no length of time can efface them. Some entire 
tribes-that especially which is called the Tobacco 
nation, and also another, which is called the Neutral 
nation - practice it as a continuous custom and 



280 


LES RELA TIOIVS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


tia: pars radunt comam, pars alunt: his nudum finci- 
put, illis occiput: aliis coma tota furrigitur in vertice, 
aliis parcè ad tempora utrimque propendet. Bar- 
barn, inftar monftri, execrantur; ac fi quis in men- 
ta fuccrefcat pilus, ftatim vellunt. Viri æque ac 
feminæ imas auriculas pertundunt: & iis inaures è 
vitro, teftifve pifcium, inferunt. Quo foramen am- 
plius eft, eo cenfent formofius. Nunquam ungues 
refecant. Europæos rident, qui defluentem è naribus 
humorem candidis fudariis excipiant, &, Quo, inqui- 
unt, rem adeo fordidam refervant ifti? Saltantes 
curvant arcuatim corpus prono capite, & brachia fic 
agitant, ut qui farinam manibus fubigunt, raucùm 
identidem grunnientes. Alvum infimam fuccingunt 
lata cortice, vel animantis pelle, aut verucolore panno, 
cetera nudi. Feminæ pelles ex humeris & colla pro- 
mittunt ad genua. Zonas atque armillas, è concha ve- 
neria, quan1 vulgo porcellanam appellamus, aut feta 
hyftricis non infcite contextas, geftant: torques hunc 
in modum confeétos magna habent in pretia. Sto- 
reas è marifco (junci marini genus eft) fatis ele- 
ganter elaborant: iis pavimentum fternunt, in iifdem 
carpunt fomnos, aut in vitulorum Inarinorum, fibro- 
rumve mollibus exuviis. Dormiunt circa focum in 
mapali media femper ardentem, fi frigus eft: fub dio, 
fi æfias. 
Menfam, aut cathedram, in cafa tota videas nullam; 
in dunes fubfidunt, fimiarum inftar: is vefcentium, 



1610-13J 


THE .JESUIT RELA TIONS 


281 


usage; sometimes it is not without danger, especially 
if the season be somewhat cold or the physical con- 
stitution rather weak. [347] For then, overcome by 
suffering, although they do not betray it by even a 
groan, they swoon a"way and sometimes drop dead. 
They praise small eyes and turned-up and projecting 
lips. Some shave their hair, others cultivate it; 
some have half the head bare, others the back of the 
head; the hair of some is raised upon their heads, 
that of others hangs down scantily upon each temple. 
They detest a beard as a monstrosity, and straight- 
way pull out whatever hair grows upon their chins. 
The men as well as the women pierce the lobes of 
their ears, and place in them earrings made of glass 
or shells. The larger the hole, the more beautiful 
they consider it. They never cut their nails. They 
ridicule the Europeans, because the latter wipe off 
the mucus flowing from the nose with white handker- 
chiefs, and say: "For what purpose do they pre- 
serve such a vile thing?" In dancing, they bend 
the body, with the head lowered, in the form of a 
bow, and move their arms like those who knead 
dough, at the same time emitting hoarse grunts. 
They gird the lower portion of the belly with a broad 
piece of bark or hide or a parti-colored cloth, and 
leave the rest of the body naked. The women wear 
skins hanging from the shoulders and neck to the 
knees. They wear belts and bracelets ingeniously 
manufactured from Venus shells,71 which we com- 
monly call porcelain, or from porcupine quills; and 
necklaces made in this fashion they value highly. 
They make very neat mats from marisco (a variety of 
marine rush); with these they cover their floors, and 
also take their rest upon them, or upon the soft furs 
of the seal or the beaver. In winter they sleep 



282 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


is deliberantium, & confabulantium habitus eft. 
Adeuntes arnicas falutant inepto rifu; fæpius ho, 
hho, hhho, conc1amantes. Cum vefcuntur, potum 
dapibus non intermifcent, neque identidem bibunt; 
fed femel tantùm, fumpto cibo. Qui arnicas convivio 
accipit, cum iis neque accumbit, nec ciborum partem 
ullam attingit, fed epulantibus dividit: aut, fi quem 
adhibet ftruétorem, fedet feorfum jejunus, & fpeétat. 
Inter edendum filent: falem averfantur. & condi- 
menta: offa canibus projicere piaculum arbitrantur: 
igni cremant, vel terræ infodiunt. Si enim, inquiunt, 
urfi, fibri, & aliæ, q uas venando captamus, feræ, offa 
fua permitti canibus, & comminui, refcirent; non tam 
facile capi fe paterentur. Adipem è pinguibus col- 
leétum cibis, abftergunt coma; genis interdum bra- 
chiifve allinunt, elegantiæ, ut aiunt, caufa, & valetu- 
dinis: nam adipe non folum nitere cutem, fed corro- 
borari membra exiftimant. Non alia cibo vefcuntur 
libentius quàm Sagamita. Pulmentum eft è farina, 
præfertim Indici tritici, confeétum: admifto, quod 
illis condimentum præcipuè fapit, oleo. Itaque in 
conviviis pars dapum prima oleum, aut adeps, in 
quem concretum & fpiffum ita dentes infigunt, ut nos 
in panem aut pomun1. Antequam illis lebetes, cor- 
tinæ, aliaque id genus vafa ærea deferrentur è Gallia, 
utebantur cacabis è cortice compaétis; verùm quia 
imp ani flammis non poterant impunè, hanc ad coquen- 
das carnes artem excogitaverant. Silices plurimos 



1610-13] 


THE .JESUIT RELATIOIVS 


283 


about a fire constantly burning in the middle of the 
lodge, in summer under the open sky. 
Neither table nor chair can be seen in the hut. 
They squat upon their haunches like monkeys; this 
is their custom while eating, deliberating or convers- 
ing. They greet approaching friends with silly 
laughter, more often exclaiming, ho, hho, hhho. 
When they eat they do not take beverages with their 
food, nor do they drink often, but only once after eat- 
ing. \Vhoever entertains his friends at a feast 
neither sits with them nor touches any part of the 
food, but divides it among the feasters; or, if he has 
some one act as carver, sits apart fasting and looks 
on. \Yhile eating they keep silence; they reject salt 
and condiments; they consider it a sin to throw the 
bones to the dogs; they either burn them in the fire 
or bury them in the ground. For, they say, if the 
bears, beaver, and other wild animals which we cap- 
ture in hunting should know that their bones were 
given to dogs and broken to pieces, they would not 
suffer themselves to be taken so easily. They wipe 
off upon their hair the grease which is collected from 
fatty foods; sometimes they smear their cheeks or 
arms for the sake, as they say, of elegance and 
health; for they think that not only is the skin made 
resplendent with grease, but that the limbs are thus 
strengthened. For no other food do they have such 
fondness as for Sagamita. It is a relish made from 
flour, especially that of Indian corn, mixed with oil, 
which as a flavor is held in especial esteem among 
them. Therefore, in feasts the first course consists 
of oil or fat, in hard and compact lumps, into which 
they bite as we do into a piece of bread or an apple. 
Before pots, kettles and other vessels of the sort were 
brought to them from France, they used receptacles 



284 


LES RELATIONS DES.lÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


conjiciebant in focum, donec penitus ignem com- 
bibiffent. Candentes in all am frigida plenam & car- 
nibus alios atque alios fubinde immiUebant. Ad 
hunc modum aqua calefaéta carnes citius opinione 
faciliufque percoquit. Ad tergendas manus utuntur 
pilofo canuln tergo, cui illas affricant; item fcobe 
ligni putris. Hæc matribus vice panniculorum eft, 
ad purgandas infantium fordes; hæc inftar culcitæ 
languidis corporibus fubfternitur. Vafa coquinaria 
non extergunt. Quo funt craffo pingui magis oblita, 
eo melius, ill arum judicio, nitent. Turpe ducunt & 
fuperbum inambulare inter colloquendum. Odorem 
mofci graviter ferunt, & meram effe mephitim pu- 
tant, præ carnis rancidæ, aut adipis mucidi frufto. 
Sexcenta funt ejus generis, in quibus longiffimè re- 
cedunt ab Europæorum inftitutis: fed ab ill arum 
vitiis propius abfunt, eaque vel æquant, vel fupe- 
rant. Gulæ irritamenta, & inimicas bonæ ac fanæ 
mcnti potiones, ab Europæis mercatoribus accepe- 
runt, qui bus lucri bonus eft odor, etiam ex :fìagitio, 
& fcelerata nundinatione. Tandiu effe pergunt, dum 
adeft quod edant: nihil in cr:aftinum, aut hyemem, 
reponunt: nec famem valde reformidant, quia fe fer- 
re diuturnam poffe confidunt. Conviviis ea lex pofita 
confenfu moribufque gentis eft, ut omnia fercula 
con[umantur. Si quis edit parciùs, & excufat valetu- 
dinem, pleétitur, aut ejicitur, ut infulfus, quafi qui vi- 
vendi artem nefciat. Primaria fupelleétilis domei1icæ 



1610-13] 


THE .JESUIT RELA TIONS 


28.3 


of closely joined bark; but, because they could not 
place them with safety over the flames, they devised 
the following way of cooking meat: They cast a 
large number of flint stones into the fire until they 
had become red-hot. Then they would drop these 
hot stones one after another into a vessel full of cold 
water and meat. In this manner the water was 
heated and the meat cooked more quickly and more 
easily than one would suppose. For wiping their 
hands they use the shaggy back of a dog, also pow- 
der of rotten ,vood. The last-named is used by 
mothers, in the place of wash-cloths, to clean the 
dirt from their infants; it is also used as a mattress 
to support the weary body. They do not cleanse 
their cooking utensils. The more they are covered 
with thick grease, so much the better are they, in 
their judgment. They consider it disgraceful and 
arrogant to walk while conversing. They dislike 
the odor of musk, and consider it a downright pest 
in comparison with a piece of rancid meat or moldy 
fat. 
There are six hundred matters of this sort in which 
their customs differ very widely from those of Euro- 
peans; but they are less removed from the faults of 
the latter, and either equal or excel them. They 
have received stimulants of the appetite, and drinks 
hostile to a good and sound mind, from European 
traders, who think much of profit, even when tainted 
with the disgrace of a "\vicked traffic. They continue 
to exist so long as they have anything to eat; they 
store up nothing for to-morrow, or for the winter; 
nor do they greatly dread famine, because they are 
confident of their ability to bear it for a long time. 
In feasts it is the rule, by general consent and cus- 
tom of the race, that all the food shall be consumed. 



286 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


pars, olla eft, five ahenum, in quo carnes coquuntur. 
Opes lebetum numero metiuntur: nec regem Galliæ 
aliam ob caufam initio magni æftimabant; quàm 
quòd plures habere all as dicebatur. Quanta fit apud 
exleges, & omni frena folutos, intemperantiæ impu- 
nitas & licentia, præfertim in adolefcentibus, promp- 
turn eft intelligere: nam grandiores natu libidinem 
certis finibus circumfcribunt, cùm æftus cupiditatum 
deferbuit: nec impune eft peccanti feminæ. 
Religionis apud illos neque lex ulla, neque cura. 
Nullo ftato & certo cultu Numen profequuntur. 
Effe tamen aliquod, velut in fubluftri node, vident. 
Quod quifque puer afpicit in fomnis, cum lucefcere 
ratio incipit, hoc illi deinceps numen eft, canis, urfus, 
avis. Vivendi normam & agendi plerumque ducunt 
è fomniis; ut fi quem interficiendum, exempli caufa, 
fomniaverint, non conquiefcant donec hominem in- 
fidiis exceptum necaverint. Piget fabulas referre, 
quas de mundi opificio comminifcuntur. His implent 
otiofas & avidas plebis aures harioli, & circulatores 
nequiffimi, impietate quæftuofa. :Malorum audorem 
genium nefcio quem vacant 
Ianitoù, ac vehementif- 
fime perhorrefcunt. Hoftem procul dubio generis 
humani, qui à nonnullis divinos honores & facrificia 
quædam extorquet. Circa naturam animarum non 
levius delirant. Simulacra fingunt corporea, cibi & 
potionis egentia. Deftinatum animabus verfus occi- 
dentem folem, pagum credunt, in quem obita morte 



1610-13] 


THE .JESUIT RELA TIONS 


287 


If anyone eats sparingly and urges his poor health 
as an excuse, he is beaten or ejected as ill-bred, just 
as if he were ignorant of the art of living. The prin- 
cipal article of their household utensils is the pot or 
kettle in which the meat is cooked. They measure 
property by the number of kettles, and in the be- 
ginning conceived a high opinion of the king of 
France, for no other reason than because he was said 
to possess a good many kettles. How great is the 
impunity and wantonness of licentiousness among 
men uncivilized and free from all restraint, especial- 
lyamong the youth, may be readily observed; for 
the elder men confine their lust within fixed limits, 
after the violence of their passions has subsided, and 
an erring woman does not go unpunished. 
There is among them no system of religion, or care 
for it. They honor a Deity who has no definite char- 
acter or regular code of worship. They perceive, 
however, through the twilight, as it were, that some 
deity does exist. What each boy sees in his dreams, 
when his reason begins to develop, is to him there- 
after a deity, whether it be a dog. a bear, or a bird. 
They often derive their principles of life and action 
from dreams; as, for example, if they dream that 
any person ought to be killed, they do not rest until 
they have caught the man by stealth and slain him. 
It is wearisome to recount the tales which they in- 
vent concerning the creation of the world. Sooth- 
sayers and worthless quacks fill with these the idle 
and greedy ears of the people in order that they may 
acquire an impious gain. They call some divinity, 
who is the author of evil, " :Manitou," and fear him 
exceedingly. Beyond doubt it is the enemy of the 
human race, who extorts from some people divine 
honors and sacrifices. Concerning the nature of 



288 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


fe recipiant: & ubi epulis, venationi, & choreis indul- 
geant. Hæc enim apud illos fumma. 
Cum primtun de fempiternis ignibus, & incendiis 
fceleri defiinatis audierunt, immane quantum obfiu- 
puere: fidem tamen pertinaciter abrogabant, quòd 
dicerent ibi efIe ignem non pofIe, ubi nihil ligni fit: 
turn, quænam filvæ alere tot ignes, tam diuturnos, pof- 
f ent ? Hæc ratio ineptiffimat antam vim apud barbaras 
mentes habebat, ut iis perfuaderi veritas evangelica 
non pofIet. Quippe in homine carnali, ut ait è SS. 
PP. nonnemo, tota ratio intelligendi eft confuetudo 
cernendi. Expugnavit nihilominus pertinaciam fa- 
cerdos acer & ingeniofus. Fidenter affirmavit infe- 
rorum terram vices obire ligni, & ipfam ardere per 
íeíe. Rifu barbaræ multitudinis exceptus eft. Imo, 
inquit, hujus A vernalis terræ fruftuln proferam vobis, 
ut, quoniam verbis divinis non creditis, veftris ipfi 
oculis credatis. Accendit curiofitatem promiffi novi- 
tas & fiducia. Convenerunt è tota regione ad diem 
confiitutum, & in ingenti planitie, colli bus infiar am- 
phitheatri cinda, confederunt. Primores gentis duo- 
decim ledi fuere, viri graves & cordati, qui facer- 
dotem obfervarent, numquid fraudis ac præfiigiar- 
urn lateret. Ille fulphuris glebam depromit, dat iftis 
arbitris & cognitoribus tradandam: hanc ocuEs, nafo, 
manu fcrutati, haud dubie terram efIe confeffi funt. 
Aderat alIa cum prunis candentibus. Tunc facerdos 
populo pro cuI fpedante; inhiantibus, demiffo in pru- 



1610-13] 


THE .JESUIT RELA TIONS 


289 


spirits, they go none the less astray. They make 
them corporeal images which require food and drink. 
They believe that the appointed place for souls, to 
which after death they are to retire, is in the direc- 
tion of the setting sun, and there they are to enjoy 
feasting, hunting, and dancing; for these pleasures 
are held in the highest repute among them. 
When they first heard of the eternal fire and the 
burning decreed as a punishment for sin, they were 
marvelously impressed; still, they obstinately with- 
held their belief because, as they said, there could 
be no fire where there was no wood; then, what for- 
ests could sustain so many fires through such a long 
space of time? This absurd reasoning had so much 
influence over the minds of the savages, that they 
could not be persuaded of the truth of the gospel. 
For, plainly, in the physical man, as some one from 
Sts. Peter and Paul says, the entire system of knowl- 
edge is based on vision. Nevertheless, a clever and 
ingenious priest overcame their obstinacy. He con- 
fidently declared that the lower world possessed no 
wood, and that it burned by itself. He was greeted 
by the laughter of the crowd of savages. "But, ., 
said he, " I will exhibit to you a piece of this land 
of Avernus, in order that, since you do not believe 
the words of God, you may trust the evidence of your 
own eyes." The novelty and boldness of the 
promise aroused their curiosity. Upon the appointed 
day they assembled from the whole neighborhood, 
and sat do"\vn together in an immense plain, sur- 
rounded by hills like an amphitheater. Twelve lead- 
ing men of the tribe, persons of dignity and sagaci- 
ty, were chosen to watch the priest, in order that 
neither fraud nor sorcery might be concealed. He 
produced a lump of sulphur and gave it to the judges 



290 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 1 


nas nafo, judicibus, excuffit in carbones è fulphurea 
gleba particulas aliquot, quæ fubito conceperunt ig- 
nem & adore fetido nares curiofas impleverunt. Hoc 
iterum, ac tertiò cum effet faétum, affurrexit multi- 
tudo attonita, manum planam imponens ori, quo gefiu 
fummam admirationem tefiantur; & inferos effe di- 
centi Deo credidit. 



1610-13] 


THE .JESUIT RELA TIONS 


291 


and inspectors to be handled; after examining it with 
eyes, nose, and hand, they admitted that it was cer- 
tainlyearth. There stood near by a kettle contain- 
ing live coals. Then the priest, under the eyes of 
the people at a distance, while the judges were gap- 
ing with their noses thrust down toward the coals, 
shook some grains from the lump of sulphur upon 
the coals, which suddenly took fire and filled the 
curious noses with a stifling odor. When this had 
been done a second and a third time, the crowd arose 
in astonishment, placing their hands flat over their 
1nouths, by which gesture they signify great sur- 
prise; and believed in the word of God that there is 
a lower world. 



292 


LES RELA TI0.1\7S DES .IÉSUITES 


[V OL. 1 


[5 I] Rerum Insigniorum Indiculus. 


A L CE 5 conjidcratio. . 
virtus .mira unglllæ ejus . 
A 1lgli barbaris gladios et graz'idas 
þulvere fifllllas fuþþedita1lt 
AnÙnar1ll1l de natura de/irant Canadellfes . 
Aves Novæ Frallâæ 
A vis þrædatrix 
Batavz. barbaris arma vcndzmt 
Canada fluvius 
Ca1tadelljiu1JZ donuts 
11lulieru1JZ laborcs 
morbi et ægrorU11l cura 
funcra 
bell a . 


arma . 
crudelitas m caþtivos . 
Ùzdo/es 
corþoris cztltus 
cibi 


COllVZVza 
[52] Canadclljium fllþcllex. 
religio et fUþerflitiones 
Caþtivorum crude/is fors . 
Cafæ Calladenjiu1Jl 
cadavera þerjanuam 1tZmf}uam efferzmtur 
Cafæ fibroru1JZ 
Caufarus feu Pifcis armatus 
Clyþei barbarorulll 


7 
8 


llitrato 


27 
20, 46 
14 
15 
27 
5 
16 
17 
18 
20 
27 
28 
29 
33 
37 
4 2 
44 
44 
45 
29 
16 
20 
10 
12 
28 



1610-13J 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


293 


[5 I] Index of Prominent Topics. 


[Tht' pagt' numbt'rs "t'fer to O'Ca/laghan's Reþrint.] 


E LK: deserzptioll . . 
wonder ful efficacy of z'ts hoof 
The EllgÜsh suþply s'iÆ'ords, guns and a1tl1nU- 
1litioll to the savages 
Absurd ideas of Canadia1ls conccrlÛng tIle soul 
Birds of New France 
A bird of prey 
The Dutc/z sell arms to the savages. 
The rz"'i)er Canada . 
Homes of the Calladz.ans 
tasks of the women 
diseases and treatment of the sick 
funerals 


7 
8 


27 
20, 46 
14- 
15 
27 
S 
16 
17 
18 


20 


wars . 27 
weapons 28 
cruelty to prisoners 29 
character 33 
care of the body 37 
food 4 2 
feasts. 44 
[52] Implements of the Canadians . 44 
reÜgioll and superstitions 45 
Cruel fate of prisoners 29 
Houses of the Canadz.a1zs 16 
corpses are never carried out through the door. 20 
Houses of the beavers 10 
The Causar or armored Fish 12 
Shields of the sa'i.!ages 28 



294 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. ] 


Coqllt:ndi ratio in cacabis è corticc confeétis . 42 
Ebridas ab Euroþæis difcitllr 44 
Exequiar1l1ll ritus . 20 
Fcminis impollitllr quidqllid laboris eft 17 
Fibri cOlljideratio 9 
FIzI'i.'ii quid habellt jillglllaYl' 6 
FraJ1eiæ NO'l'æ deferiptio, jlumilla . 5 
eællllll 6 
foli 1latura 7 
ft
 7 
Galliæ rex cur maglli æflilllabatur 45 
Hurolles diem Jlfortllorulll celebrant 25 
Infantium mira 1Il0rtalitas I ï 
[ur eorpora proþter 'iJiam fepelizmt 2 I 
I/lfi'rllalcs ig1les tile þrobat facerdos 4 8 
[S 3] Iroquæi bellum c1Im lvlontauis fÙlgulari certa- 
mine fillizl1lt 28 
Jroquæoru1fl laclls . 12 
J{(bt'Cum, 'llrbs þrimaria NO'iJæ Frallciæ 6 
Jlaglla Be/Ilia, quid 7 
Jllt111it01Ì, golÍus malOrll1Jl . 4 6 
J1lzlfijiplls jlll'l'ÙIS 6 
Jlolltanz. bellum fil/gulari certa1lline fillÙmt 28 
...llorborulll fOlltes duo 18 
Jllortuorulll fefla cc/cbritas apud Hurones 25 
.Jlos Calladcnfis 1ll0rtuos fufcitmzdi 25 
iYa'i.'iculæ barbarorulll 6 
...Velltra Natio 3 8 
...Vumen 1lullo certo cultu profequll1ltllr 44 
Pal1f1llbcs ab.fqllc 1111lllCrO 14 
PI/cis ar11latus 13 
Patres 11011 þaltci SocÙtatis Jefli dire torqllclltllr 3 I 
Religio Calladenfiu11l 45 
Retieula þcdibus fllbftrata ut fuper Ui1/CS de anzbulcut 8 



1610-13] 


THEJESUIT RELATIONS 


295 


.J.vlaJlIler Of eooking in 'i'esse/s made from bark 4 2 
Drll1zkc1lness -is learned from the Euroþt'a1zS 44 
Rites of sepulture . 20 
IVhatc'i.'er 'iC'ork there is, -is placed UpOll the 'Zf)omell. 17 
Description of the bea'i.'l'r 9 
Peculiarities of the ri'iJers . 6 
Deseription of New Frallce, ri'vers. 5 
climate 6 
llature of the soil 7 
wild animals . 7 
Tl?lY tile king of Frallce 'iL'aS greatly respected 45 
The Hurons ec/ebrate tlte da)' of tIle Dead . 25 
Remarkable 1ll0rtaNty among infants 17 
Wll)' tltey bury tlte bodies near the road 2 I 
41 priest pro'i'es that theYl' -is hdl fire 48 
[53] Till' Iroquois conclude a war with the llfo/ltagJlais 
by single combat 28 
Lake of the Iroquois 12 
Kebee, the ehief city of New France 6 
The Great Beast, what it -is 7 
.JIallitoll, the spirit of e'i,z.l. 46 
J/ississippi riz'er 6 
The lIIontaignais eondude a war by sÙlgle combat. 28 
T'i.tJo sources of disease 18 
Festival of the Dead among the Hurons 25 
Canadian lIla1ll1er of honoring tlte dead 25 
Boats of tile sa'iJagcs 6 
The Neutral Nation 38 
Thl')' re'i'ere a dcit), witll lto fixed form of worship. 44 
Illllllllll'rable pigeons [4 
The armored fish 13 
Fathers of the Society of Jesus art' erudly tortured. 3 I 
Religion of the Canadians . 45 
Network bound ullder the feet, to walk O'i.'er the Slto'if.' 8 



296 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


S. Laurodzï .flll'i'ius 
:-'àgalllita quid, 
[54] Sa/Ius fCll catadllpæ ill fll/'i'ìis 
Sinlls Sanéti Lallrclltù" 
SOJlwio'r ll1Jl 'ila Ilitas 
Slida Ildo IlOxios flU mort's ljicill11t 
TabacltJlZ, Ilatio ljUS ILOlIlÙÚS 
Trophælls . 
[(}Iucrum illfllia 


[Y 0 I.. 1 


S.6 
4 2 
6 
[4 
4 6 
19 
3 8 
3 2 


14 



1610-13] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


297 


St. La'i.l'rt'llCC ri'i'l'r 

àgalJlita, '"iL'hat it is 
[54] 1 Vater-falls, or cataracts, Ùz the rÙ'ers 
GlIlf of St. La'i.ore/lce 
Ig/lorant belief ill dreams . 
Thl')l expel1loxiolts humors by s'i.J..1l'atillg 
Tobacco, the /lation of that Ilal1U' 
TIle tropli}' 
l.'ì/c of Birds 


5, 6 
4 2 
6 
14 
4 6 
19 
3 8 
3 2 
14 



BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. I 


I 


Our text of Lescarbot's La COllZ'ers-lOIl follows, to 
the close of p. 44 (original pagination), the copy at 
Lenox Library; pp. 45, 46, the " Regitre de Bap- 
teme, " follow the copy at John Carter Brown Library, 
Providence, R. I., as the Lenox copy does not have 
these two pages. 
It is a rare book; the two copies above cited are 
the only ones known to us, in America. Leclerc, in 
Bz"bliot/zcca A 11leriCfllla (Paris, 1867), p. 206, says: 
"Cette pièce est plus rare que I'Histoire de la 
Nouvelle France," referring to Lescarbot's better- 
known work. Sabin speaks of it (vol. X., no. 40167), 
as "probably the rarest of Lescarbot's works." 
See further references in the John Carter Brown 
Catalogue (Bartlett's Bibliotheca A mericallfl, Provi- 
dence, 1882), vol. ii., no. 99: Graesse's Trlsor de Li'i'res 
Rares et PrÙÙux (Dresden, 1863), vol. iv., p. 175; 
Harrisse's Notes sur la N01l7xlle Francc (Paris. 1872), 
no. 21; Ternaux's Bibliot/u'qlle AmlricaÌ1ze(Paris, 1837), 
no. 330; \Vinsor's NarratÌ7.'c alld Critical Hist01J1 of 
A merica, vol. i v., p. 299; and Lenox Catalogue of 
JesuÙ Relatiolls (N. Y., 18 79), p. 3.* 


* In order to save needless repetition of long titles, bibliographical 
works, when once cited in full, will thereafter be referred to by the 
usual cut-shorts: e. g., the John Carter Brown Catalogue will be 
hereafter known in our Bibliographical Data as .. Brown Cata- 
logue;" the list of Jesuitica in \Vinsor's 1.Yarralive llnd critÙ-al 
His t01:V , vol. iv., as .. \\ïnsor;" the Lenox Catalogue of þ-.f1llt 



300 BIBLIOGRAPHIcAL DA TA: VOL. I 


Title-page. This is given in photographic facsimile, 
in this reissue. The Lenox and Brown copies are 
alike, in this. It will be noticed that there is no date 
of publication, this being established from the Privi- 
lege. 
Collatz"on. Title, I p.; blank at back of title, I p.; 
dedication" A LA ROVNE," 3 pp., signed" MARC LES- 
CARBOT;" privilege, I p., dated "Paris, 9 Sep., 
1610," and signed" Brigard;" text, pp. 7-44. Page 
7 is misnum bered I. (The Brown Catalogue says: 
"Page I is misnumbered 7." This is a misprint in 
the Catalogue.) "FIN," at end of p. 24; then pp. 23 
and 24 are reprinted, all except the last sentence on 
p. 24: "Dieu vueille par fa I grace conduire Ie tout 
en forte que la chafe I reüffiffe à fa gloire & à l'édifi- 
cation de ce peu- I pIe, pour lequel taus Chrétiens 
doivent faire I continuelles prieres à fa divine bonté, 
à ce qu'ililui plaife confirmer & avancer l'æuvre 
qu'ilI lui a pleu fufciter en ce temps pour l'ex- 
altation I de fan nom, & Ie falut de fes creatures. 
I FIN." 
It is evident that the intention was to have the first 
leaf (pp. 23, 24) cut out. This duplication of pp. 23, 
24 is in both the Brown and Lenox copies. 
The "Extrait du Regitre de Bapteme" in the 
Brown copy (it is not in the Lenox copy) forms 2 
pages at the end of text. The first page of this 
" Regitre" is not numbered; the second is num- 
bered "t6" (intended for 46), and this ends the 


Relations, as .. Lenox Catalogue;" Harrisse's Notes sur la 
Nouvelle France, as .. Harrisse's Notes, "or simply as .. Harrisse; " 
etc., etc. The student who is familiar, in a general way, with these 
bibliographical sources,- and it is presumed that those are, for 
whom this series of repnnts is designed,-will not be confused by 
the customary method of brief citation. 



BIBLIOGRAPHIcAL DA TA: r,'OL. I 301 


book. The same " Regitre "appears in somewhat 
different order in Lescarbot's Nouvelle Francc, (1612 
ed.), pp. 638-640, chap. 5, book v.; also, according 
to Harrisse's ..L1Votcs, in chap. 3, book v.. of the 1611 ed. 


II 


In Bertrand's Lcttrc fifissz"'i'e, we follow the original 
Paris edition, in Lenox. It is a rare publication, the 
Lenox copy being apparently the only one in the 
United States; Brown has a manuscript copy, made 
from that at Lenox. Sabin (vol. x., no. 40682), says: 
" It is a piece of unusual rarity." Sabin has a pre- 
vious reference in vol. ii., no. 5025, under caption 
"Bertrand," wherein a misprint makes him cite the 
date of the letter as " 28 June, 1618" ( eight years 
later than the actual date); a further misprint causes 
Sabin to record the pamphlet as having" 48 pages or 
less," the actual number being 8. In his Notes, 
Harrisse omits a line-ending after the second " nou- 
uelle "in his description of the title-page. See, for 
further references: Ternaux, no. 329; Winsor, p. 299; 
Lenox Catalogue, p. 3; Brown Catalogue, vol. ii., 
no. 103. 
Title-page. Giyen 111 photographic facsimile, in 
present volume. 
CollatÙJJl. Title, 1 p.; blank at back of title, I p. ; 
text. pp. 3-6; dated on p. 6, " Port Royal xxviij. Iuin, 
1610," and signed " Bertrand." Blank leaf at end, 
completing 4 leaves=8 pp. 


111- .VI 


In these four letters, by Biard and Massé, we fol- 
low Carayon's Premièrc iJ;'lissioll des JéSllitCS all Canada 
(Paris, 1864). It is a scarce book, and brought $8 at 



:->U:! 11IBLIOGRAPHIcAL DrlTrl: VOL. 1 


the Barlow Sale, in N ew York, 1890. See references 
in Harrisse, p. 285; Sabin, no. 10792; vVinsor, pp. 
15 I, 29 2 , 300; and Lenox Catalogue, p. 15. The ori- 
gin of the letters in the volume is found at the top 
of the first page of each letter; and these data, with 
accompanying notes by Carayon, are reproduced in 
the present series, which will, in strict chronological 
order, contain all of the papers given by that editor 
 
although in many cases we shall follow the original 
issues of the letters, whenever found. Documents 
III., V., and \TI. were written in Latin; and Docu- 
ment IV. in French. 
Collatiol/. Blank, 2 pp.; bastard title, I p.; blank, 
I p.; title proper, I p.; blank, I p. Preface begins 
on p. vii. (not numbered), and ends on p. xvi. Pref- 
ace acknowledges indebtedness to F. Felix :\Iartin, 
S. J., for copying and translating into French (from 
the Latin) most of the letters in the volume. Text, 
pp. 1-302; Table at end, 2 pp.; the last of these is 
numbered 304. 


VII 
We follow the style and make-up of Dr. E. B. 
O'Callaghan's Reprint (Albany, N. Y., 187 I) of the 
Canadicæ ilIissiollis, in Jouvency's Hist. Soc. Jt'SII, part 
v., comlnencing p. 32 I. In the Lenox Catalogue. 
it is designated" O'Callaghan's Reprint, :NO.4." 
This nl1nlbering of O'Callaghan's reprints, is merely 
a device peculiar to the Lenox Catalogue, for sake of 
easy reference, and has been followed by \Vinsor; 
the reprints thenlselves bear no numbers. 
The text of this docunlent, however, we have 
conlpared with the original folio edition of Jouvency's 
work, in the library of 81. Francis Xavier College, 

 ew York, and the pagination thereof is indicated 



BIBLIOGRA PHIcAL DA TA: VOL. I 303 


instead of that of the O'Callaghan Reprint. The 
list, "1\1issiones Societatis J esu in America Sep- 
tentrionali Anno .M. DCC. X.," which O'Callaghan 
reprints as if a part of the original Calladicæ lVIissionis, 
is on pp. 961,962 of the same volume of Jouvency in 
which the latter appears (part v.). 
Title-page. The O'Callaghan Reprint is closely 
imitated. 
Collation of 0' Callag/wll Reprint. Title, 1 p.; re- 
verse of title, with inscription: ., Editio viginti 
quinque exemplaria. O'C.," 1 p.; Biardi Eulbgium ac 
Vita, pp. i-\
.; blank, I p.; Tabula, I p.; blank, I p. : 
text, pp. 5-33; colophon: "Albaniae Excvdebat Joel 
:Ñlunsellius I 
lense Aprilis Anno I CIJ. IJCCC. 
LXXI.," I p.; half-title, "Appendix," I p.; blank, I 
p. ;" :Missiones Societatis Iesu I in America Septentrio- 
nali I Anno 
I.DCC.X.," 2 pp., the last of which is 
numbered 38. 


VIII 
We follow the style and make-up of O'Callaghan's 
Reprint (Albany, 187 I), which is numbered 5 in the 
Lenox Catalogue. The text and pagination follow 
the original, in Jouvency's His!. Soc. Jesll, part v., 
commencing p. 344. 
Title-page. The ü'Callaghan Reprint is closely 
imitated. 
Collatioll of 0' Callaghall Reprint. Title, I p.; re- 
verse of title, with inscription: "Editio viginti 
quinque exemplaria. O'C.," I p.; Tabula Rerum, I p. ; 
blank, I p.; text, pp. 5-49; blank, I p.; Rerum 
Insigniorum Indiculus, 4 pp.; colophon: "Albaniae 
Excvdebat Joel :Munsellius I 11ense Qvintilis Anno I 
CIJ. IJCCC. LXXI.," I p. 



NOTES TO VOL. I 


(Figures ziz þarentheses,followi1zg number of note, refer to þages 
. _._., of English text.) 


I. (p. 55)-Marie de Médicis, queen regent, widow of Henry of 
Navarre; appomted regent by the king, the day before his assas- 
sination, May q, 1610. She was accused of having been privy to 
his murder.: 
2. (p. 55) - The reports of Champlain, and the maps and charts 
with which, upon returning from his voyage of 1603, he enter- 
tained Henry IV., so interested the latter that he vowed to encour- 
age the colonization of New France. To carry on this work he 
commissioned, as his lieutenant-general in Acadia, Pierre du Gua, 
Sieur de Monts, governor of Pons, a Huguenot resident at court, 
and, according to Champlain, "a gentleman of great respectability, 
zeal, and honesty." De Monts' commission is given at length in 
Baird's HuguellOt Emigration to America, vol. i., p. 341; his char- 
ter of "La Cadie" embraced the country between the 40th and 46th 
degrees of latitude, and he held therein a monopoly of the fur trade. 
J. G. Bourinot, in calwdian 1lIonthly, vol. vii., pp. 291,292, says the 
name Acadia (also written Acadie, and La Cadie) "comes from 
àkãde, which is an affix used by the Souriquois or Mic Macs . 
to signify a place where there is an abundance of some particular 
thing. "- See, also, Laverdière's CEuvres de cha11lþlai1z (Quebec, 
1870), p. lIS. In 1604, De Monts sailed from France with a colony 
composed of Catholics and Huguenots, served by "a priest and a 
minister." Champlain and Poutrincourt were with the expedition, 
and Pontgravé commanded one of the two ships. The cancelling 
of his monopoly (1607), deprived De :\Ionts of the means to carry 
on his colonization schemes. The title to Port Royal he had already 
ceded to Poutrincourt. The king renewed De Monts' monopoly for 
one year, upon his undertaking to found a colony in the interior. 
Thereupon De Monts sent Champlain to the St. Lawrence (1608), 
as his lieutenant. Upon the death of Henry IV. (1610), De Monts, 
now financially ruined, surrendered his commission, selling his pro- 
prietary rights to the Jesuits. 
"Jean de Biencourt, Baron de Poutrincourt, a gentleman of Pic- 
ardy, a
 brave chevalier, had carried=arms against Henry IV. in the 



306 


lV-OTES TO VOL. I 


ranks of the Catholics, during the wars of the League. Lescarbot 
tells how' The king, holding him besieged in his castle of Beaumont, 
wished to give him the dukedom of this place in order to attach him 
to his service.' Poutrincourt refused. But, when the king had ab- 
jured his faith, he served this prince loyally and followed him to 
battle, where he accumulated more honor than fortune. In 1603. he 
lived in retirement with his wife, Jeanne de Salazar, and his chil- 
dren, in his barony of Saint-Just, in Champagne,struggling painfully 
against the difficulties of an embarrassed situation, and striving to 
improve the tillage and crops of his little domain. It was here that 
De Monts, his former companion in arms, found him. He knew his 
courage, his intelligence, and his activity, and did not doubt that a 
voyage to Canada and an agricultural colony in these distant lands. 
so fertile and primeval, would appeal to his ardent soul. Poutrin- 
court, in fact, received with enthusiasm the plan of his old friend; 
however, before binding himself definitely, he wished to find out, on 
his own account, something about the state of the country, and for 
this purpose to make a trial voyage."- Rochemonteix's Les Jésmïes 
d la .l.You7Hlle France (Paris, 1896), vol. i., p. II. 
Pleased with Annapolis harbor, Poutrincourt decided to settle 
there with his family, and De Monts gave him a grant of the place. 
In 1606, Poutrincourt made a second voyage to Port Royal, explor- 
ing the coast with Champlain and Lescarbot. After the abandon- 
ment of the colony (1607), he went to France, returning to Acadia 
in 1610, inspired with zeal to convert the savages, but without 
the aid of the Jesuits. See Parkman's Pioneers of Fra1tce zit the 
.l.Yt"W H/orld (ed. 1885, which will hereafter be cited, unless other- 
wise noted), pp. 2-t-t-322; also Shea's ed. of Charlevoix's Histor)' of 
lYew rl'ance, vol. i., p. 260. By the destruction of Port Royal in 
1613, he was the heaviest loser-the total loss to the French, accord- 
ing to Charlevoix, being a hundred thousand crowns. In Ióq, 
Poutrincourt visited the ruins of Port Royal for the last time, thence 
returning to France to engage in the service of the king. He 'was 
fatally wounded by a treacherous shot after the taking of Méry 
(1615). Baird (Hug. ElIlig., vol. i., p. 94), says: .. This nobleman, 
if nominally a Roman Catholic, appears to have been in full sympa- 
thy with his Huguenot associates, De Monts and Lescarbot. His 
hatred of the Jesuits was undisguised." Lescarbot's account of 
Poutrincourt's dispute with them differs essentially from that given 
by Biard, þost. 
3. (p. 55)-Marc Lescarbot (or L'Escarbot), parliamentaryad. 
vocate, was born at Vervins, France, between 1570 and 1580. He 
'was more given to literature than to law, and appears to have been a 
man of judgment, tact, and intelligence. He spent the winter of 



KO TES TO VOL. I 


307 


1606-0j at Port Royal, which Slafter (Prince Soc. ed. of Voyagt':!' 
0./ Samuel ChamþlaÙz, yol. ii., p. 22, note 56) locates .. on the 
north side of the bay [Annapolis Basin] in the present town of 
Lower Granville; not, as often alleged, at Annapolis." See Bouri- 
not's" Some Old Forts by the Sea," in Trans. Ro)'al Society of 
Canada, sec. ii., pp. 72-j-t, for description of Port Royal, which he 
places on the site of the present Annapolis. In the spring of 160j, 
Lescarbot explored the coast between the harbor of St. John. N. B., 
and the River St. Croix. On the abandonment of De Monts' colony, 
the same year, he returned to France. where he wrote much on 
Acadia and in praise of Poutrincourt. Larousse gives the date of 
his death as 1630. Parkman's PÙmeers, PP.258 et seq., gives a 
lively account of Lescarbot's winter at the colony. Abbé Failloll, 
in Histoire tit? la Colonic Frallçaise en Canada (Montreal, 1865), 
vol. i., p. 91. says he has given us the best accounts extant (m the 
present document, his Histoire de la J\ T ozt7Ielle .France, 1609, and 
his Les 
'l-fuses de la J\ T Olt71elle France, 1618) of the enterprises of 
De :Monts and Poutril1court; and that while a Catholic in name, 
he was a Huguenot at heart. 
-to (p. 5j)- Clamellr dt: Haro, Chartre Normand, an expres- 
sion used in all the privileges or licenses granted by the king to 
booksellers. The latter phrase refers to a deed containing numer- 
ous privileges or concessions, accorded to the inhabitants of N 01'- 
mandy by Louis X., Mar. 19, 1313. and repeatedly confirmed after- 
ward. Haro is supposed to be derived from, Ha Rou! or Ha Rollo! 
Hence an appeal to Rollo. the first Duke of Normandy. 
5. (p. 59)- The first attempt of the Huguenots to establish a 

olony in America was at Rio Janeiro, under Villegagnon (1555). 
A reinforcement was sent thither in I55j, and among its Calvinist 
preachers was Jean de Léri, the historian of the disastrous under- 
taking. See his Historia NavigatÙmis in Brasiliam (1586), quoted 
in Parkman's Pioneers, p. 28. 
6. (p. 6I)-The St. Lawrence; so named by Cartier (1535), but 
frequently called .. The Great River," .. The River of the Great 
Bay," etc., by early annalists. In the account of his second voy- 
age, Cartier styles It Ie grand jleuve de Hochelaga. See Win- 
.sor's lVarrative and Crzïical History 0./ America, vol. iv., p. 163; 
also his Cartier to r'ro,zte,laC, p. 28. 
j. (p. 6I)-Concerning early European acquaintance with Ameri- 
can Indians: 
.. In the yeere IIS3 . it is written, that there came to Lubec, 
a citie of Germanie, one Canoa with certaine Indians, like vnto a 
long barge: which seemed to haue come from the coast of Baccalaos, 
which standeth in the same latitude that Germanie doth." (Antoine 



308 


il/OTES TO VOL. I 


Galvano, in Goldsmid's ed. of Hakluyl's Voyages, vol. xvi., p. 293.) 
Harrisse (Bibliotheca AmerzCalla Vetustissima, no. jI) cites the 
Chr01llcon of Eusebius (Paris, 1512) as having, "under the date 15 0 9, 
a notice saying that there had been brought to Rouen seven Sav- 
ages from North America." 
The Indians of Newfoundland, when first discO\'ered by the 
French, called codfish bacalos, which Lescarbot and other early 
French writers say is identical with the Basque word for codfish. 
Many evidences led Cartier, upon his first voyage (1534-). to believe 
that the natives had had previous intercourse with Europeans. 
8. (p. 6I)-Probably André Thevet. A translation of his descrip- 
tion of the Isles of Demons (now known as Belle Isle and Quir- 
pon), is given in Parkman's Pioneers, p. I9I. Thevet's (osllZog- 
raþhie U1llverselle (Paris, 1558), and SÙzgularitez de la France 
antarctique (Paris, 1558), must have been familiar to Lescarbot. 
De Costa gives a translation of so much of the Cosmograþhie as 
relates to New England, in .J.JlagazÙle of AmerzCll1z Histmy, vol. 
viii., p. 130: .. The production of the mendacious monk, André 
Thevet. " It seems clear that Thevet never sa-w the American 
coast, that his imagination amplified the accounts of navigators who 
had visited the region, particularly those of Cartier. Priceless as 
are first editions of Thevet, he has a poor reputation for veracity. 
9. (p. 61)-The Armouchiquois (or Almouchiquois of Champlain) 
were, according to Parkman (Jesuits of N. A merica, p. xxi.), the 
Algonkin tribes of New England,- Mohicans, Pequots, Massachu- 
setts, Narragansetts, and others,-" in a chronic state of war with 
the tribes of New Brunswick and K ova Scotia." 'Villiamson, 
in Histor)' of the State of 
J1aÙze (Hallowell, 1832), vol. i., p. 4-ïï), 
says they were an Etchemin tribe, the Marechites of the St. John 
River; but Champlain, who had, like Biard, visited the Armouchi- 
quois country, says that it lies beyond Choüacoet (Saco), and that the 
language is different from those of the Souriquois and Etchemins. 
Laverdière affirms that "the French called Almouchiquois several 
peoples or tribes that the English included under the term Massa- 
chusetts;" and he conjectures that these two names are etymolog- 
ically allied.-See his Chamþlain, pp. 200, 205, 206. 
10. (p. 6I)-Lescarbot here refers to his Histoire de la Nouvelle 
.Frallce. The first edition (Paris, 1609) is a rare prize to collect- 
ors,-a London catalogue of 1878 pricing it at 1,"45. The edition of 
1612 IS followed in the Tross reprint (Paris, 1866); that of 1618 
contains Lescarbot's assault upon the Jesuits. The fourth and 
sixth books, only, were" translated out of the French into English" 
by P. Erondelle, 1609. A German version of a brief summary of 
the work appeared in lól3. 



IVO TES TO VOL. I 


309 


II. (p. 67)-The term Norembega, variously spelled, was applied 
indifferently to the entire range of Acadian and New England 
coast; but apparently the Penobscot is here meant. See Winsor's 
N. a1zd C. Hist., vol. iv., index; Documelztary History of State of 
Alaine, vol. ii., pp. lii., liii.; Prince Society's ed. of Chamþlain, 
memoir and index. The claim is made for Bangor, Me., that it is 
on the site of an ancient town called Norumbega. Much informa- 
tion on this point is given in Maine Hist. Soc. Colis., vols. ii., iv., 
V., vii., viii., and ix. Sewall claims that the true form of Norum- 
begua is Arâmbec, and that it was the name of a city of the savages, 
situated near the head-waters of the Damariscotta, above Pema- 
quid.-A1ZCÙ'ltt Dominions of -,7Iaine, pp. 30-46. Horsford, in 
Discovery of the AncÙ'nt City of Norembega and Defences of 
Norembega (Boston, 1890 and 1891), claims, on slender evidence, 
that Watertown, Mass., occupies the site of an old town of that 
name founded by N" orse vikings in 1000 A. D. 
12. (p. 67) - Bay of Fundy; first shown on map of Diego Homem 
(1558); named by De Monts Grande Baye Française (shown on Les- 
carbot's chart of Port Royal); appears as Argal's Bay, on Alexan- 
der's map (I62.t-); Golfo di S. Luize, on Dudley's (1647); Fundi 
Bay, on Moll's (lïI2); and Bay of Fundy, or Argal, on that of the 
English and French Commissioners (1755). Bourinot (Calzad. -,Wo., 
vol. vii., p. 292) says that Fundy is a corruption of F01Zd de la Baie, 
as the lower part of the bay was called; he follows here Ferland's 
suggestion, in COltrs d' Histoire du Calzada (Quebec, 1861), vol. 
i., p. 65. 
13. (p. 6ï)-The son of Pontgravé, who, according to Parkman 
(Pioneers, p. 290) had exasperated the Indians by an outrage on 
one of their women, and had fled to the woods. 
q. (p. 69)-Palourdes is Breton for a kind of shellfish. 
IS. (p. 73)-The Souriquois, or Micmacs, of Nova Scotia. Cham- 
plain's map of 1632 places them east of Port Royal. 
16. (p. 73) - Raphael Maffei, Maffeus Volaterranus, or Raffaello 
Volterrano, savant and historian; born in Volterra Q5I, died 1521 
or 1522. Harrisse (Bib. Amer. Vet., p. 88) gives a catalogue of 
his works, and says. "The Commentary of Maffei has a peculiar 
interest from the fact that it preceded the publication of Peter 
Martyr's Decades" (1511-
6). 
Laverdière (ChalllþlaÙl, p. 70, note) says that sagamo is a :\Ion- 
tagnais word; and he cites Laflèche as deriving it from Ichi and 
okÙllau, meaning" great chief." 
17. (p. 73) - Berosus (325-255 B. C., circa), a Chaldean priest, 
astrologer, and historian. His best known work is the Babylonica, 
a history of Babylonia; its remaining fragments have been repro- 



310 


j'o/O TES TO VOL. I 


duced by several European writers, especially in Richter's Berosi 
Chald. Historiæ quae suþerslmt (Leipsic, 1825). 
18. (p. 75)-The Tolosains were a tribe of the Volcæ of Gaul. 
Another tribe of the V olcæ were the Tectosages - so called from 
their sagu1Jl (frock or cloak). 
19. (p. 75)-Membertou was chief of all the Micmac groups from 
Gaspé to Cape Sable. Champlain writes. that he was" a friendly 
savage, although he had the name of being the worst and most 
traitorous man of his tribe." Lescarbot called him .. the chef 
d' æuvre of Christian piety," and Biard had strong faith in him. 
He claimed to remember the first visit of Cartier (1534). 
20. (p. 77) - Biard, six years later, complains bitterly of this 
overhaste in baptizing, declaring that these savages, when he went 
among them in 16II, did not know the first principles of the Faith, 
and had even forgotten their Christian names. 
21. (p. 81)-ln the original edition, pp. 25 and 26, apparently 
through an error in make-up, are verbal repetitions of the two pre- 
ceding pages. This duplication has been omitted in the present 
edition. 
22. (p. I05) - Marked changes occurred in the population of the 
51. Lawrence valley, between the visits of Cartier (1535) and Cham- 
plain (1603). Morgan, in League of the Iroquois (Rochester, 1851), 
p. 5, maintains the correctness of a tradition that the aborigines 
whom Cartier found at Hochelaga were Iroquois, and that they then 
were subject to the Algonkins, whom Champlain found in posses- 
sion of the valley. Cf. Parkman's Pioneers, p. 208, and School- 
craft's His!. of Illdiall Trzöes of the U. 5., vol. vi., pp. 33, 188. For 
further treatment of the migrations of the Iroquois, see Introduction 
to Hale's Iroquois Book of Rites (Phila., 1883), and Faillon's Col. 
Er., vol. i., pp. 524. et seq. 
23. (p. 107) - T abagie. A feast described fully in one of the later 
Relations. 
24. (p. IOj)-This easy victory of the French and Algonkins over 
the Iroquois (July 29, 1609), on the western shores of Lake Cham- 
plain, cost New France dearly, as it secured for the struggling 
colony the deadly enmity of the most warlike savages on the conti- 
nent, for nearly a century and a half. It was impossible for New 
France to make permanent headway when sapped by such an 
enemy. Slafter's exhaustive notes to ChalllþlaÍ11's Voyages 
(Prince Soc.), vol. i.. p. 91, and vol. ii., p. 223. make it clear that the 
site of this momentous skirmish was Ticonderoga. 
25. (p. 109)- Jessé Fléché, a secular priest from the diocese of 
Langres, was invited by Poutrincourt to accompany the first colony 
to Acadia. The papal nuncio gave him authority to absolve in all 



NOTES TO VOL. I 


311 


cases, except those reserved to the pope.-Faillon's Col. Fr., vol. 
i., p. 99. Poutrincourt evidently meant to Christianize Acadia with- 
out the aid of the Jesuits. The wholesale baptism of savages by 
Fléché, before the arrival of Biard and l\Iassé, was, according to 
Faillon (Ibid., vol. i., p. 1(0), condemned as a profanation by good 
Catholics, .. tous les théologiens, and notamment la Sorbonne." -Cf. 
also note 19, ante, and Sagard's Histoire du Canada, p. 97. He 
had been at Port Royal nearly a year before the arrival of the 
Jesuits. The name is variously spelled: Fleche, Fléche, Flèche, 
Fléché, Flesche, Fleuchy, and Fleuche; see Suite's PoutrÙzcourt en 
Acadie, p. 38. See Bourinot's picturesque description of the bap- 
tismal scene, in Cml. Royal Soc. Trmls., sec. ii., p. 73. Fléché was 
much esteemed by the :Micmacs; his nickname. II Le Patriarch," is 
still current among them corrupted into II Patliasse," as the name 
for a priest.-See Ferland's Cours d' Histoire (Quebec, 1861), vol. 
i., p. 80. 
26. (p. I27)-The four letters here given (Biard, Jan. 21, June 10, 
and June II, 16II; and Massé, June II, 16II) are from Carayon's 
Premzëre JIissÙJ1l dcs Jésulïes au Cmzada: LeI/res eI Documents 
hzédlÏs (Paris, 1864). All of the documents in Carayon's collection 
will be published in this series, in chronological order, with that 
Editor's valuable footnotes. 
Auguste Carayon, S. J., a leading authority upon the history of 
his order in New France, was born in Saumur, France, 1813, and 
died in Poitiers, 18j..t. His principal works were: Bibliograþhie 
historique de la Comþagnie de Jésus.. Catalogue des ouvrages 
relatifs à I' histoire des Jésulïes deþuis leur origine jusqu' à 
nos jours (Paris, 1864): Docume1zts inédzïs C01lCeY1Zmzt la Com- 
þagme de Jésus (Poitiers, 1863-1875, 18 vols.); Prellllëre 1I1is- 
sion des Jésulïes au Lanada (Paris, 1864); Ba1l1zisse1lle1zt des 
JésulÏes de la Louisimze (Paris, 1865); Établissemellt de la Com- 
þagme de Jésus à Brest, þar Louis XIV. (1865); Pris01zs du 
ltIarquis de Pombal, mÙlistre du Portugal, journal de T759 à 
I777 ( 186 5); Noles historiques sur les þarlements et les Jésuzïes 
au dix-hulÏzëme slëcle (1867). Caray<?n also edited numerous im- 
pOl"tant historical works, between 1864 and I87I. 
2j. (p. I27)-Pierre Biard, S. J., writer of several of the early 
Acadian Rela!i{J1ls, was born at Grenoble, France, 1657, and died at 
Avignon, November 17, 1622. In 1608, he was called from a chair 
of scholastic theology and Hebrew, in Lyons, by Father Coton, 
the King's confessor and preacher, to take charge of the Jesuit 
mission in Acadia. His several accounts of the colony, with the 
part taken by himself in notable episodes, do not always agree 
with the version of Lescarbot. See Parkman's Pioneers, part ii., 



312 


NOTES TO VOL. I 


chaps. v.-viii.; also, R. P. Felix Martin's Life of R. P. Pierre 
Biard, S. ]. (Montreal, 1890). 
28. (p. 12j)-Claude Aquaviva, S. ]., born 154-4; elected general 
of the Society of Jesus, 1581; died, 1615; a Neapolitan nobleman; 
chamberlain of the Court of Rome; fifth general of the order, and 
ranked by some historians as its ablest legislator and second 
founder. See Nicolini's History of the Jesuzïs, pp. 210, 25j. 
29. (p. 127)-Fathers Biard and Massé sailed January 26. 
3 0 . (p. 129)-Brother-coadjutor. The six classes of the order 
of Jesuits were: (1) novices, (2) lay-brothers, (3) scholars, (4) coad- 
jutors, (5) Jesuits of the Third Order, and (6) Jesuits of the Fourth 
Order. See Thomas D'Arcy :McGee's Lecture on the Jesuits. 
31. (p. 133)- Biencourt and Robin de Coulogne, not having means 
to equip and provision the vessel which was to convey Biard and 
Massé to Port Royal, made an arrangement with Dujardin and 
Duquesne, two merchants of Dieppe, by which the latter undertook 
to furnish the equipment and supplies in consideration of being ad- 
mitted as partners in Poutrincourt's fur-trading and cod-fishing 
enterprise. Concerning this Contract d' A ssociatÙm des Jésuites 
au Trafique du Caltada, made January 20, IbII, see Parkman's 
Pioneers, p. 288, 'Jlote. Cf. also, Rochemonteix's Jésuites, vol. i., 
p. 3 2 . These partners, being Huguenots, objected to the shipment 
of the Jesuits, but finally sold their mterests for 2,800 livres to 
Madame de Guercheville, whose part in this expedition is related in 
note 33, þost. See Biard's succeeding letter, for fuller details of 
this adventure. 
32. (p. 133) - Formal ordt:r of the Queen. October 7, 1610, the 
young King, Louis XIII., wrote from Monceaux to Baron de Pou- 
trincourt: "Monsieur de Poutrincourt, as Father Pierre Biard and 
Father Ennemond Massé, religious of the Society of Jesus, are being 
sent over to New France to celebrate the divine services of the 
church and to preach the Gospel to the people of that country, I 
wish to hereby recommend them to you, that you may, upon all oc- 
casions, assist and protect them in the exercise of their noble and 
holy calling, assuring you that I shall consider it a great service." 
The Queen Mother also wrote: "Monsieur de Poutrincourt, now 
that the good Jesuit Fathers are about to try, under the authority 
of the King, my son, to establish our faith over there, I hereby 
request you to give them, for the success of this good work, all the 
courtesy and assistance in your power, as a service very near our 
heart, and very acceptable to us, praying God, Monsieur de Pou- 
trincourt, to keep you under his holy and watchful care." - David 
Asseline's Antiquities alzd Chro11icles of the City of Dieþþe 



NO TES TO VOL. I 


313 


(Dieppe, 1874; 2 '\"ols.) The letters are reproduced in Faillon's Col. 
Fr., vol. i., p. 102. 
33. (p. 135) -Antoinette de Pons, :\Iarquise de Guercheville, pat- 
roness of Jesuit missions in New France, was lady of honor to Marie 
de 1\Iédicis, and accounted one of the most beautiful and zealously 
religious women of her time. Taking up the defence of the Jesuits 
against Poutrincourt, she not only bought the ship in which to trans- 
port them to America, but the cargo and the royal patent of De 
Monts, thus succeeding the latter as proprietor of all Acadia, except- 
ing Port Royal, which still remained in Poutrincourt's possession. 
Concerning her rupture with De :\Ionts, see Shea's Charlevoix, 
vol. i., p. 27-l. She resolved to plant a strictly Catholic colony at 
Pentagoet (site of Bangor, Me.). and sent out, under La Saussaye, 
some fifty settlers and three Jesuit missionaries (1613). Upon 
reaching Port Royal, they were joined by Biard and Massé, and 
thence proceeded to the eastern side of Mount Desert Island. For 
the location of their mission, St. Sauveur, see Parkman's PÙmeers, 
p. 30-l, 1lote. The descent of the English under Argall (1613), 
was the end of "Madame de Guercheville's mission. See N. Y. 
Colonial Documents, vol. iii., pp. I, 2, concerning reparation al- 
lowed her by the government of Great Britain for the loss of her 
vessel. Cf. Faillon's Col. Fr., vol. i., pp. no-lq; and Baird's Hug. 
Emig., vol. i., p. 103. Upon the queen regent's high regard for the 
Jesuits, see Col. Fr., vol. i., pp. IOI, I02. 
34. (p. 141) - Several of the old French coins were called écus. 
They date from the period of Charles VII.,-écus à la couromze, 
or crowns of gold, from the crOWl1 which formed the type of the 
reverse.-Prime's Coins, Jledals, mzd Seals, p. ISO. The écu of 
Louis XIV. is first given in Dye's Coin Ellcycloþedia, p. 621; value 
in United States currency, $I.I08. The early écu was equal to three 
francs; later, to about five. 
35. (p. 14 1 )- l'iaticum. In Père de Ravignan's O,Z the Exist- 
nlce and hlstzïulÙms of the Jesuits (Paris, 1862), p. 190, 1lote ii., 
mention is made of a custom in connection with the viaticum of mis- 
sionaries, which was frequently observed at this time. The found- 
ers or benefactors of missions, in order to obtain with greater cer- 
tainty and abundance the money which they intended for mission- 
ary work in distant lands, charged the merchants, who acted as 
agents, to sell the merchandise which they consigned to them, and 
to remit the price of it to the missionaries for their support. Thus 
l\Iadame de Guercheville furnished considerable money to Bien- 
court to invest in the fish and fur trade, which he was about to un- 
dertake, with the sole condition that, for her share, he should sup- 



314 


NOTES TO VOL. I 


port the missionaries. See Rochemonteix's Jésuites, vol. i., pp. 
35-36, note. 
36. (p. 141) -The Marchioness de Verneuil furnished their chapel, 
Madame de Sourdis their vestments and linen, and Madame de 
Guerchevilleprovided other necessaries.-A1lnuæ Litteræ S. J., an. 
1612, p. 570. 
Madame de Verneuil founded a convent of Annunciades, and gave 
her declining years to religion. She died at Paris, T633, aged 54. 
37. (p. 143) - In his Relation of 1616, chap. xi., Biard says: 
.. Thomas Robin de Coulogne enjoyed a modest fortune; he had 
often heard about New France from the Dieppe merchants, and had 
wished to mingle in this colonization movement. What Baron de 
Poutrincourt told him about the attempts made at Port Royal 
pleased him greatly, and he promised to assist him." 
The names of Monsieur de Coullogne (Coulogne) and of Madame 
de Sigogne (Sicoine) appear in Fléché's list of baptisms. alzte. Other 
contemporary spellings of Coulogne are: Cologne, Coloigne, and 
Coloine. 
38. (p. 147) -This is an interesting, and we believe a unique state- 
ment of Biard, that the islands off the Gulf of St. Lawrence were 
once called the .. Azores of the Great Bank." The maps of many 
early cartographers and navigators represent Newfoundland as a 
group of islands, or a large island with a circlet of smaller ones, or 
.. almost a single island."-See Winsor's N. mzd C. His!., vol. i., 
pp. 74, 77, 79, 93, 379. As Newfoundland was the first land sighted 
by voyagers in New France, and as their last sight of land had been 
the Azores, the naming of the islands of the Great Bank the Azores 
is in keeping with their custom in this regard. 
39. (p. I49)-EnnemondMassé,S.].,bornatLyons, 1574; died at 
Sillery, Canada, 1646; admitted to the Society of Jesus at the age of 
twenty, and assigned to a chair of theology in Lyons; in 1608, 
chosen by Father Coton to accompany Biard to Acadia. He was 
again sent to Canada in 1625. with Charles Lalemant. Jean de 
Brébeuf. and two lay brothers. During the English occupation of 
Canada (1629-32), he was in France. but returned with Brébeuf in 
16 33. Rochemonteix (Jésuites. vol. i.. p. 24) says of him: .. Of 
an impetuous and violent nature, he had all he could do to restrain 
it. But. by vigilance and perseverance. he conquered it so well 
that he no longer seemed to have any strong impulses or passions. 
Industrious. unwearying. of robust health. he was prepared for the 
hardships of a distant mission by a life of penitence and denial. 
frequently fasting. sleeping upon hard boards. accustoming his taste 
to everything, and his body to extreme cold and heat. Although 
innocent as a child. he led the life of a penitential anchorite; in 



NOTES TO VOL. I 


315 


1608, they made him an Associate to Father Coton, then confessor 
and preacher to the king. But this austere apostle preferred a life 
of privation and sacrifice to that of the court. He chose Canada." 
Bressani's Relatione, to be given post, describes the death of Massé, 
who was one of the most notable of the missionaries of New 
France. A monument to his memory has been erected at Sillery. 
There is a difference of usage in the matter of accenting his name: 
Charlevoix, Winsor, and Parkman do not use the accent; but Champ- 
lain, Biard, and Cretineau- J oly do, and Faillon (Lòl. Fr., vol. i., p. 
101) gives authorities for this usage, which we have preferred to 
adopt. 
40. (p. 151) - Bourinot (Cmzad. J.JIo., vol. vii., p. 292) says 
Call so is a Souriquois word meaning "facing the frowning cliff;" 
also, that" the strait was long called after the Sieur de Fronsac, 
one of the early gentlemen adventurers who held large estates in 
Acadia." It is shown as de/roit de rronsac on Chabert's map 
(1750); it is Camceau on Champlain's map of 1632; it sometimes 
appears as Campceau on old French documents; and is spelled both 
Canceaux and Canso in the official correspondence between France 
and England in the eighteenth century. In 1779, the fisheries of 
Canso were worth 1,"50,000 a year to England. See :\1urdoch's 
History of Nova !)èotia (Halifax, 1865-67), vol. ii., p. 597. 
41. (p. 151) - Lescarbot states that they arrived at night, three 
hours after sunset.- RelatÙm denllëre (Paris, 1612), to be given 
þost. 
42. (p. 153)-Cap de la Hève, now known as Cape La Have, is the 
southern point of La Have Island, off New Dublin Bay, one of 
many indentations of the coast of the township of New Dublin, 
Lunenburg County, Nova Scotia. The cape is a picturesque cliff or 
bluff rising 107 feet above tide level, and visible a long distance out 
to sea. When De Monts and Champlain left Havre de Grâce, France, 
in March, 1604-, Cap de la Hève, in the suburb of St. Adresse, 
must have been the last land seen by them; as this cliff off New 
Dublin was probably the first sighted by them in La Cadie, it was 
natural that they should name it after the famous French landmark. 
There are evidences on La Have Island of an early French settle- 
ment, of which there appear to be no records; although it is known 
that Saussaye planted a cross there, May 16, 1613. De Laet, in de- 
scribing Cadie (1633) says: "Near Cap de la Hève lies a port of 
the same name,4-t o 5' north latitude, with safe anchorage."-See 
Des Brisay's Hist. of Co. of Llt1le1zburg, N. S. (2d ed., Toronto, 
1895), pp. 166 et seq. The Editor is also indebted to F. Blake 
Crofton, secretary of the Nova Scotia Historical Society, for informa- 
tion under this head. 



316 


NO TES TO VOL. I 


43. (p. 16 3) - People from St. Malo, France. Spelled also by 
Biard, þost, Malouines. 
4..J.. (p. 169)- Robert, the son of Pontgravé, who had escaped from 
custody, and had been in hiding in the forest. See Parkman's 
Pioneers, pp. 265, 290; also, Lescarbot's reference to him, ante. 
45. (p. 181) - Referring to Queen Blanche of Castile (n87-1252), 
regent after the death of her husband, Louis VIII., during the 
absence of her son, Louis IX. (Saint Louis), in the Holy Land. 
46. (p. 197) - Joseph Jouvency (also written Juvency, Jouvenci, 
and Jouvancy), Jesuit historian, an eminent litterateur of his time. 
Born in Paris, September q, 16..\.3; died at Rome, May 29, 1719. In 
1659, he was admitted to the Society of Jesus, for many years filling 
the position of professor of rhetoric at La Flèche, and devoting 
much time to historical and classical research. After taking his vows 
in 1677, he was sent to Rome, as one of the staff of writers upon 
Historia Societatis Jes1t. 
47. (p. 19i)-Count Ernest von Mansfeld, soldier of fortune, con- 
spicuous in the Thirty Years War. Born, 1585; died, 1626, soon 
after his defeat by Wallenstein at the bridge of Dessau. His great 
army of mercenaries was, according to Motley (Johl1of Barne- 
veld, vol. ii., p. 32), .. the earliest type, perhaps, of the horrible mili- 
tary vermin destined to feed so many years on the unfortunate 
dismembered carcass of Germany." Cf. Kohlrausch's History of 
German)' (Haas trans.), pp. 320, 326. Concerning the campaign 
of Louis XIII., against the Huguenots (1622), and Count von Mans- 
feld's part therein, see Kitchin's History of France, pp. 497, 49 8 . 
48. (p. 199)-Philip Alegambe, a Jesuit scholar (Flemish). Died 
in 1652, while superior of the house of his order at Rome. He was 
the leading writer upon Bibliotheca Scriþtortt11z 
òdetatis JéS1t 
( 16 43). 
49. (p. 219) - Seven Islands. A group at the mouth of the St. 
Lawrence Rh'er, near the northerly shore of the gulf. 
50. (p. 219)-Chicoutimi River, rismg in numerous small lakes 
near Lake St. John, pursues a picturesque course, frequently inter- 
rupted by rapids, eastward and northeastward into the Saguenay. 
At the junction, seventy-five miles above the mouth of the latter, is 
now the important lumber-shipping port of Chicoutimi, at whose 
wharves ocean-going vessels are laden. The old missionary district 
of that name included the rugged country lying south and south- 
west of Lake St. John. 
51. (p. 22I)-The French Jesuits definitely abandoned the Iro- 
quois field in 1687, owing to the rising power of the English. In 
17 01 , Bruyas was again on the ground, being joined the year follow- 
ing by De Lamberville, Garnier, and Le Valliant, and later by 



NO TES TO VOL. I 


317 


D'Hue and De Marieul. The entire party was driven out in 1708, 
and many of their Iroquois converts retired with them to the mis- 
sion of Caughnawaga, near Montreal. 
52. (p. 22 I) - The Iroquois Mission of St. Francis Xavier was 
founded in 1669 by Iroquois Christians, - emigrants from the 
"castles" of the Five Nations. The mission was finally removed 
to Sault St. Louis, on the St. Lawrence, and called Caughnawaga, 
from the Indian village of that name on the Mohawk, where had also 
been a Jesuit mission. 
53. (p. 22I)-Lake Michigan. Called Lac des Puants on Cham- 
plain's map of 1632, in reference to the Winnebago tribe (Puants) on 
Green Bay; in several of the Relations, and on Marquette's map 
(1674), it is styled Lac des Illinois, from the Illinois Indians upon its 
southern coast; Allouez .calls it (1675) Lac St, Joseph, because of 
Fort and River St. Josephs on the southeast coast; Coronelli's map 
(1688) honors the Dauphin by calling the lake after him; Hennepin 
comes the nearest to modern usage, in his name, Michigonong. 
54. (p. 221)-Lake Huron, which has figured under many titles, 
in the old maps and chronicles, This name has reference to the 
Indian family upon its eastern shores. Champlain first named it 
La Mer Douce (" The Fresh Sea OJ), and later Lac des Attigouantan, 
after the chief tribe of the Hurons; Sanson's map (1657) names it 
Karegnondi; Coronelli's map (1688) christens it Lac d'Orleans. 
Colden in one place gives it as Quatoghe, and in another as Cania- 
tare. Lac des Hurons first appears in the map accompanying the 
Relation for 1670-7I. 
55. (p. 221)-The mission of St. Ignace was founded by Mar- 
quette, in 1670, on Point St. Ignace, on the mainland north of and 
opposite the Island of Michillimackinac (now shortened to Macki- 
nawor Mackinac, as fancy dictates). The term Michillimackinac, 
variously spelled, was applied by the earliest French not only to the 
island and straits of that name, but in general to the great peninsula 
lying north of the straits. 
56. (p. 22I)-The mission of Sault Ste. Marie, at the outlet of 
Lake Superior, was founded by Raimbault and Jogues in 1640. 
The place was always an important rallying-point for the natives, 
and naturally became the center of a ,"vide-spreading fur trade, 
which lasted, under French, English, and American dominations in 
turn, until about 1840. 
57. (p. 221)-The Western mission of St. Francis Xavier was 
founded by Allouez in 1669, at the first rapids in the Fox River (of 
Green Bay), on the east side of the river, in what is now the city of 
Depere, Wis. An important Indian village had from the earliest 
historic times been located there. 



318 


NOTES TO VOL. I 


58. (p. 223) - Outaouakl = Ottawas; Puteatamis = Pottawatto- 
mies; Kikarous= Kickapoos; Outagamies=Foxes; Oumiamis=Mi- 
am is. 
59. (p. 223) - Bayagoulas, one of the Louisiana missions, of which 
Father Paul du Ru, S. ]., was in charge in 1700. Rhea's Cath- 
olic Missions, p. 443. 
60. (p. 227 )-An anonymous writer in The Catholic World, 
(vol xii., p. 629) makes the statement that Quentin and Du Thet 
were sent out to replace Biard and Massé "if they had perished; 
otherwise to return to France." Contemporary writers, however, 
speak of their coming as a reinforcement. 
61. (p. 227) - On what came to be known as Frenchman's Bay, on 
the east side of the island of Mount Desert. Parkman says (Pio- 
neers, ed. 1865, p. 276, note): "Probably all of Frenchman's Bay 
was included under the name of the Harbor of St. Sauveur. The 
landing-place so called seems to have been near the entrance of the 
bay, certainly south of Bar Harbor. The Indian name of the Island 
of Mount Desert was Penetic. Its present name was given by 
Champlain. " 
62. (p. 227) - The" Jonas," conspicuous in the annals of Acadia 
from the time in which Poutrincourt and Lescarbot sailed in her for 
Port Royal, in 1606, to her capture by Argall in 1613. Parkman 
aptly calls her "the 'Mayflower' of the Jesuits." 
63. (p. 229) - Samuel Argall, born in Bristol, England, 1572; died, 
1639. See Cooke's Virginia (Amer. Commonwealths ser.), pp. 
111-113, for a fair estimate of this tempestuous character. Folsom's 
" Expedition of Captain Samuel Argal," in N. Y. Hist. Colis. (new 
ser.), vol. i., pp. 333-342, goes over that ground quite completely. 
64. (p. 231 )-Sir Thomas Dale, the predecessor of Argall as gov- 
ernor of Virginia; he was in the service of the Low Countries, 
1588--<)5, and 1606-10; in 16II, he entered the service of the VIrginia 
Company, where he remained five years as governor of the colony; 
and in 1619 he died at Masulipatam, while in command of an expe- 
dition to the East Indies. 
65. (p. 233) - The charge was freely made at the time, that Biard 
and Massé, incensed at Biencourt, who had been unkind to them, 
piloted Argall to Port Royal. Poutrincourtand Lescarbot, dislik- 
ing the Jesuits, naturally believed it, and the former addressed the 
French admiralty court on the subject, under the date of July 18, 
16q.-See Lescarbot's .l'lo'ltv. France, book v., chap. q. Cham- 
plain discredited the charge, saying that Argall compelled an Indian 
to serve as pilot. Cf. Parkman's Pioneers, pp. 313 et seq., and 
Biard's own statements, þost (Letter to T.-R. Général, May 6, 
1614; and Relation of 1616). 



NOTES TO VOL. I 


319 


66. (p. 233 )-Argall's lieutenant, in command of the captured 
.. Jonas." According to Parkman (Pioneers, p. 318), he was" an 
officer of merit, a scholar, and linguist," treating his prisoners with 
kindness. 
67. (p. 25I)-Reference is here made to Lake Champlain, the Mer 
des Iroquois and Lacus Irocoisiensis of the early French cartogra- 
phers. Richelieu River was at first styled Rivière des Iroquois. 
In a letter of John Winthrop to Lord Arlington, dated Boston, Oct. 
25, 1666, Lake Champlain is referred to as Lake Hiracoies.- N. Y. 
ColO1z. Docs., iii., p. 138. See also. Palmer's History of Lake 
Cha11lþlaÙt (Albany, 1866), pp. 12, 13; and Blaeu's maps of 1662 and 
1685, in \Vinsor's N. alzd C. Hist., vol. iv., p. 391. 
68. (p. 253)-The gar-pike (Leþidosteus osseus). A picture of 
this" armored fish" is given in Creuxius's Historia Canadensis 
(Paris, 1664), p. 50. 
69. (p. 253)- Jouvency plainly refers to what is still known as 
Bird Island, or Bird Rocks, in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, N. W. of 
Cabot Strait. Authorities disagree in locating the Bird Island of 
Cartier's first voyage. See Hakluyt's Voyages (Goldsmid ed.), 
vol. xiii., pt. I, p. 78; Shea's Charlevoix, vol. i., p. II2, note,. both 
indicating that what is now called Funk Island, off the eastern coast 
of Newfoundland, was the Bird Island of Cartier. Kingsford, in 
History of Canada (Toronto, 1887), vol. i., p. 3, identifies it, how- 
ever, with the present Bird Island of the Gulf. Champlain's map 
of 1613 has a Bird Island near the mouth of the Bay of Fundy. 
Anspach, in History of Newfoundland (London, 181 9), p. 317, says: 
.. Fogo Island [N. W. of Cape Freels] is described in the old maps 
by the name of Aves, or Birds' Island." 
70. (p. 269) - The Montagnais, a wretched tribe of nomads, were, 
at this time, chiefly centered upon the banks of the Saguenay River. 
71. (p. 281)- Venus lllercenaria, the round clam, or quahaug. 



... 



-, 


36" eo "'- 
- 
 
l 
C) 

 
 


"" 


'K 
, ' "1'''1 

'\ 



 
, 



 
I)' ,III Jj \ 
.. p 
- ""'" .

 
bl \ , 
 _ '1 
t'1 1 4! 

V 
...' 
 
[} 


\ 


/\..- 
III 


r; ì\ 

 


",r,.. 

 

_ G 
\. 


rr CI1
1(A8<1"
 'i 
".bo , 
0.,",, ; , ,:":::. -:.. / 
I , 
/! 
I 


t\ 


1 " V 
 
: I 
: . 
T f1 s ! ............ \ 

. : C"þo 
I 
. . 
. I 
. I 
:;, I 


I 
\ 
\ \ "'\ 
':. 
. 


1 


tlú. 


'-^ 


----- 



80" 


16 0 Loa.1tad. 


GneJlwlc" TO 


6& 


-= 


'0" ..a._p.'_ c 



.: : 
J A lJ-I E S oB.A 1
 


Å- 



 


----------- 


LA. }VB 1 



- 

. , 
r
 

 

"r^"Yt 

 
;/ -- 
[Ø;t: 
rJJ:. Fort 
I 
l 
....., 
"""'-C:)L-. 
() 
,.. 
i 
l 

 
rA \ A X 

 
\onil 
- (''o
 
ç} 
V; \. 
o \. 
\1 


( 


ò 


), 


MAP OF 


NI 'Y FRANCE 


(PARTS' F UNITED STATES AND CANADA.) 
1610-1701. 



 
)t 


To IUustrate 


THE JESUIT RELATIOKS 
AND A-LLIED DOl'{)]IEXTS. 



 


Xodenl, Ji 
 ,lAnu are S1'*'1& lor &Jør
e. 
Beale of Mileø. 

 .. 100 



 


JI...r.oltß La'" 


.p.- 
t:0; 


Scale of Vll-. 


{ 
tI 
..
 


'"-Q 


70> 


70 


G
 


TUE BLRItOWS BROTUEItS OOJIPANY. 1'lrnl.ISIIEUS. 



11>0 


60 

 I.ilio It 

,$/--g---, 
-- - ----- ----- -,,,,' ---- "-,,, 


c.z; 


.1;- 


)lIT 


I 
úCl ' 
II I 
" I 
I 


,o'D 18le1 



 

- 


' OF 
ro!':"O"I!"G U LF 
ST. LA."W..RE]{
E 
I!:.o<<d tlon 

 0 1&1&D4I 


it' 
 


uisbotlrg 


l'\ 
} \ 
ctltln<1 II 
i.r L>1Vf(ltJ , 
'
_J 111 

I 
I 
I 


'./Ir 
\
 
;r 


-------- 
\ 


Co}>O ;; 


-f,on 3 \ \ , \ 
1f sa':c:. \,)9-- I'
 
i/.. 


;.\f 


c 


\ 


..0 0 


M OF 

'V I R.ANCE 
IF rr.ITE \TES AND CANADA.) 
16 701. 


To 


rESUT RELATIONS 
LLIEI DOCUJIEXTS. 


n4a
,L "e &\own lor lkJertmce. 
&- Mileø. 


t 


;:? 
D 
" 
 
'_

Ca 

 .. 
. S .. 

. 


a.:i 


} 
 
'b 
I ). 
 ) -'- 
-'or' Y. 
 
11\'''' 
 n. 

 'V 
80 
- 

 





J 


t 



