Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 4: Acadia and Quebec, 1616-1629
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1897 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits04jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits04jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits04jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 4 of 73.

---








511 



THE JESUIT RELATIONS 

AND 

ALLIED DOCUMENTS 


VOL. IV 



The edition consists of sev- 
en hundred and fifty sets 
all numbered 


No. 





Jean de Brebeuf, SJ. 


S. ^. ^ THE PRCi'ERTY OF 

l^J^ THE LAW SOCIETY 

The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 


Travels and Explorations 

OF THE Jesuit Missionaries 

IN New France 

1610-1791 

THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES ; ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 

EDITED BY 

REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 


Vol. IV 
ACADIA AND Quebec: 1616-1629 


CLEVELAND: tTbe JSutrows JBtOtbCtfl 
Company, publishers, mdcccxcvii 


Copyright, iSgy 

BY 

The Burrows Brothers Co 


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 


The Imperial Press, Cleveland 


EDITORIAL STAFF 


Editor . . Reuben Gold Thwaites 

Translator from the 
French . . John Cutler Covert 

Assistant Translator from 
the French . Mary Sifton Pepper 

Translator from the 

Latin . . William Frederic Giese 

Translator from the 

Italian . . Mary Sifton Pepper 

Assistant Editor . Emma Helen Blair 


CONTENTS OF VOL IV 


Preface to Volume IV . . . i 

Documents: — 

XIV. Relation de la Novvelle France, de fes 
Terres, Natvrel dv Pais, & de fes Ha- 
bitans. [Chapters xxvi.-xxxvii. and 
Index, completing the document.] 
Pierre Biard ; Lyons, 1616 , . 7 

XV. Lettre au Sievr de Champlain. Charles 

Lalemant ; Kebec, July 28, 1625 .170 

XVI. Lettre au R. P. Prouincial des RR. 
Pferes Recolledts. Charles Lalemant ; 
Kebec, July 28, 1625 . . .172 

XVII. Epistola ad R. P. Mutium Vitelleschi, 
Praepositum Generalem Societatis 
Jesu, Romse. Carolus Lalemant ; Nova 
Francia, August i, [1626] . .176 

XVIII. Lettre au Pere Hierofme I'AUemant. 
Charles Lalemant ; Kebec, August i , 
1626 . . . . .185 

XIX. Lettre au R. P. Sup^rieur du College 
des I6fuites k Paris. Charles Lale- 
mant ; Bordeaux, November 22, 1629 229 

Bibliographical Data : Volume IV . . 247 

Notes ...... 253 


ILLUSTRATIONS TO VOL. IV 


I. Portrait of Jean cle Brebeuf, S.J. ; photo- 
engraving from oil portrait by Donald 
Guthrie McNab . . Frontispiece 

n. Photographic facsimile of title-page, Charles 

Lalemant to Jerome . . i88 


PREFACE TO VOL IV 


Following is a synopsis of the documents contained 
in the present volume : 

XIV. In the concluding portion (Chapters 
xxvi.-xxxvii.) of the Relation of 1616, Biard re- 
lates how he and Father Quentin were taken to 
Virginia, where they narrowly escaped death ; they 
then were sent to England, and finally to France, ar- 
riving there after a captivity of over nine months, and 
being subjected to many perils by sea and land. The 
annalist records what progress the Christian religion 
has made in New France. The missionaries have 
now learned the nature of the country, and the char- 
acter and needs of the people ; and the colonists have 
established friendly relations with the savages. The 
latter have some general knowledge of religion, and 
are anxious to be baptized. Several miracles are re- 
counted, in the cure of persons given up as dying. 
Biard then discusses at length the respective terri- 
torial claims of the French and English in the New 
World, and contends that New France should extend 
southward at least to 39°. He concludes by urging 
that more attention should be given in France to both 
the temporal and religious interests of Canada, espe- 
cially to the conversion of the savages. 

Between the dates of Documents XIV. and XV. in 
our series, there is a break of nine years. The Jesuit 


PREFACE TO VOL. IV 


mission in Acadia had abruptly closed with the attack 
by Argall, so fully described in the writings of Biard, 
who, in his Relation of 1616, appears for the last time 
upon our stage. Meantime, the Recollet friars were 
conducting their missions upon and beyond the St. 
Lawrence; but, — as related in the Introduction (Vol- 
ume I. of this series) and in Notes to this Volume, 
post, — finding themselves unequal to the great task, 
they invited the Jesuits to return to New France and 
aid them in the conversion of the savages. The first 
of the "black gowns" to arrive (April, 1625) were 
Charles Lalemant, Masse, and Brebeuf. 

XV. Lalemant, as superior of the mission, writes 
(July 28, 1625) to the governor, Champlain, announc- 
ing the arrival of the Jesuits at Quebec, the hospital- 
ity of the Recollets to them, and the death of Nicholas 
Viel, of the latter order. 

XVL On the same date, Lalemant writes to the 
provincial of the Recollets, thanking him for the 
kindness and hospitality shown the Jesuits by himself 
and others of his order in Canada. 

XVIL Lalemant writes (Aug. i, no year men- 
tioned, but without doubt 1626) to his general, at 
Rome. He tells what the Jesuit missionaries have 
accomplished during the past year : they have spent 
most of the time studying the language of the natives, 
for which purpose Brebeuf spent the winter among 
the savages ; they had learned all they could of the 
people and the country; and had preached to and 
confessed the French colonists. They had established 
one residence among the Indians. He announces 
that he sends Noyrot back to France, to look after the 
interests of their mission. 


PREFACE TO VOL. IV 


XVIII. On the same date as the foregoing, Lale- 
mant writes to his brother Jerome, in France, who is 
also a Jesuit. The missionary gives a short descrip- 
tion of the country and the climate; then of the 
people, their customs, religious belief, clothing, etc. ; 
describes the extent of the Canadian trade with 
France ; and tells of the establishment of a residence 
for the Jesuits, near that of the Recollets. The diffi- 
culties encountered by the missionaries in acquiring 
the native languages, are mentioned, together with 
their relations with a certain interpreter, and the 
help received from him. The writer tells of Brebeuf 
passing the entire winter among the savages of the 
vicinity ; Lalemant went on a similar trip, and had 
to return in eleven days, as his improvident hosts had 
no food. He announces his probable departure for a 
longer stay among the natives. He sends Noyrot 
back to France, in the interests of the mission, and 
Br6beuf and De None to the Huron country. The na- 
tives are ready to be taught, the writer says, and he 
sends a little Huron boy to be instructed in France. 
Champlain and Gaumont have, he says, chosen him 
as their confessor. He wishes to name their first 
church, "Our Lady of the Angels," and asks his 
brother to send him therefor "A fine picture sur- 
rounded by angels. •• The busy superior mentions 
this as the sixty-eighth letter he has just written to 
France,— chiefly to benefactors of the mission, and 
" those who have written to me." 

Lalemant (see note 20, post, for details) had gone to 
France for supplies for the colony, in November, 
1627; and upon his return in May, 1628, was with 
others captured by the English Admiral Kirk, to 
whom, a year later, Quebec capitulated. The Jesuits 


PREFACE TO VOL. IV 


were sent to England, and thence allowed to return 
to France. Lalemant, with a party of missionaries, 
again attempted to return to Canada (June, 1629), but 
they were shipwrecked on the Canso rocks. Two of 
the adventurous Jesuits were drowned, another re- 
mained in the country, but Lalemant returned to 
France. 

XIX. Lalemant writes (Nov. 22, 1629), from Bor- 
deaux to the superior of the Jesuit college at Paris, 
describing the shipwreck he had recently experi- 
enced, in which Father Noyrot and Brother Louis 
Malot were drowned; and announcing his own safe 
arrival at Bordeaux. 

July 5, 1632, Emery de Caen, the French fur-trade 
monopolist, arrived at Quebec, commissioned to re- 
claim that stronghold from Kirk. With him were 
the Jesuits Le Jeune and De Noue, who had been 
sent hither to reopen the mission of their order in 
New France. 

The Editor gratefully acknowledges the receipt of 
information from the following gentlemen, relative 
to annotations in this volume : Dr. John G. Bourinot, 
Dr. Douglas Brymner, Capt. E. Deville, and Mr. L. 
P. Sylvain, of Ottawa; Mr. William McLennan, Mr. 
C. H. Gould, and Rev. Arthur E. Jones, of Montreal; 
and Mgr. T. E. Hamel, Dr. N. E. Dionne, and Mr. E. 
E. Tache, of Quebec. To the list of persons named 
in the General Preface to this series, as having fur- 
nished valuable suggestions in the prosecution of the 
work, the Editor takes pleasure in adding the follow- 
ing: Rev. Joseph Le Halle, S. J., president of St. 
Ignatius College, Cleveland; Rt. Rev. Ignatius F. 
Horstmann, R. C. bishop of Cleveland; Rev. E. A. 


PREFACE TO VOL. IV 


Higgins, S. J., of St. Mary's College, St. Mary's, 
Kans. ; Rev. A. A. Hartmann, S. J., of Canisius Col- 
lege, Buffalo, N. Y. ; and Mr. James H. Coyne, of St. 
Thomas, Ont. 

R. G. T. 

Madison, Wis., January, 1S97. 


XIV (concluded) 

Biard's Relation de la Nouvelle France 

LYONS: LOUIS MUGUET, 1616 


Chaps, xxvi.-xxxvii., and Index, completing the docu- 
ment; Chaps, i.-xxv. appeared in Volume 111. 


LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol. 4 


CHAPITRE XXVIII. [i.e., xxvi.] 

LE PILLAGE DE NOSTRE NAUIRE, & DE NOS GENTS, 

LES ANGOISSES OU NOUS ESTIONS. 

L7ANGLOIS vidtorieux s'en vint a terre, oil 
eftoyent nos tentes, & alogetnents commen- 
ces, & fit rechercher noflre Capitaine de tous 
tons coft^s, difant, qu'il vouloit voir nos commiffios; 
que cefte terre leur appartenoit, & que pour cela ils 
s'eftoyet rues fur nous nous y trouuats, neantmoins 
que fi nous faifions apparoiftre de noftre bonne foy, 
& que nous fuffions la venus fous I'autorit^ de [238] 
noftre Prince, qu'ils y auroyent efgard, ne voulants 
en rien contreuenir a la bonne confederation de nos 
deux Rois. Le malheur fut qu'on ne trouua point 
la Sauflaye, ^ I'occafion de quoy 1' Anglois fin, & fub- 
til fe faifit de fes coffres, les crocheta induftrieufe- 
ment, & y ayant trouuee nos commiflios, & lettres roy- 
aux, les faifit ; puis remettant toutes les bef ongnes en 
fa place, chafque chofe tout ainfi qu'il I'auoit trouuee, 
referma lefdits coffres gentiment. Le lendemain la 
Sauffaye eftant venu, le Capitaine Anglois, qui f§auoit 
fort bien fa leyon, I'accueillit humainement, & luy 
fit les premiers interrogats auec belles ceremonies: 
Puis vint au point : luy demandant fes commiflions, 
k celle fin qu'il n'y euft aucune doute, quand reelle- 
ment on verroit, & confidereroit les paroles, & auto- 
rite [239] du Roy noftre Sire. La Sauffaye refpon- 
dit que fes lettres eftoyent dans fes coffres. On 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELA TION, 1616 


CHAPTER XXVIII. [i.e., xxvi.] 

THE PLUNDERING OF OUR SHIP, AND OF OUR PEOPLE, 
AND THE DISTRESSES WE ENDURED. 

THE victorious Englishman came on shore, where 
we had our tents and our houses just begun, 
and had our Captain searched for in all direc- 
tions, saying that they wished to see our commis- 
sions; that this land belonged to them, and hence 
they had fallen upon us when they found us there ; 
nevertheless, if we could show our good faith in the 
matter, and that we had come there under the au- 
thority of [238] our Prince, that they would show 
some regard for it, wishing in no wise to violate the 
alliance between our two Kings. But the trouble 
was, la Saussaye could not be found, and on this ac- 
count the shrewd and cunning Englishman seized his 
trunks, skillfully picked the locks, and, having found 
therein our commissions and royal patents, took pos- 
session of them ; then, putting everything back in its 
place, each article just as he had found it, nicely 
fastened the trunks again. The next day, la Saus- 
saye having returned, the English Captain, who knew 
his lesson remarkably well, received him kindly and 
made his first inquiries with a fine show of courtesy ; 
then he came to the point and demanded his commis- 
sion, so there might be no doubt when the words and 
authority [239] of the King, our Sire, were actually 
seen and considered. La Saussaye answered that the 
letters were in his trunks. These were brought, and 


10 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.4 


luy apporta fes coffres, & auant qu'il les ouurifl auec 
fes clefs, on I'aduifa qu'il regardaft bien fi perfonne 
y auroit touche; car quant a eux ils y alloyent fort 
fimplement. La Sauffaye recognoilToit tout eftre 
en fort bon ordre, mais malheur! il n'y retrouuoit 
pas, fes lettres. Icy le Capitaine Anglois cbagea 
de mine, & de ton, & fe refroignant comm'il falloit, 
quoy done (dit-il) vous nous impof ez icy ? Vous don- 
nes k entendre qu'auez commiffion de voftre Roy, 
& n'en pouuez produire aucun tef moignage ? Vous 
efles des Forbas & Pirates treftous; vous merites la 
mort. Et des lors, il fit la part du butin aux foldats : 
En quoy il confuma toute I'apres-difnee. Nous de 
la terre confiderions le guafpillement [240] de tons 
nos biens: car les Anglois nous laiffoyent a terre, 
eux fe tenants en mer, & ayats ioints par enfemble 
nos vaiffeaux au leur, car nous en anions deux, f9a- 
uoir eft noftre nauire, & vne barque conftruidle fur 
le lieu, & equippee de neuf . Nous eftions reduits en 
piteux eftat: mais ce n'efloit pas la fin. Le iour fui- 
uant on vint a terre, & on nous pilla encores ce qu'y 
anions : non pas tout du commencement, ains a paf- 
fades, & k chafque fois qu'on defcedoit k terre, touf- 
iours quelque detroufl^e de nos manteaux, habits, & 
autres chofes. Vne fois on fit quelques violences, & 
atrocitez de traic5tement fur la perfonne de deux de 
nos gents, ce qui efpouuanta tellemet vne partie des 
autres, qu'ils s'enfuirent par les bois comme pauures 
beftes efgarees, demy nuds, & fans [241] aucuns 
viures, ne f9achants ce qu'ils pourroyent deuenir. 

Venons aux lefuites. le vous ay dit, que Gilbert 
du Thet fut outre d'vne mofquetade durant le com- 
bat. Les Anglois entrants dans le nauire le mirent 


1616-29J BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 U 


before he unlocked them he was advised to look close- 
ly to see if they had been tampered with, for, as to 
them, they were acting with all sincerity. La Saus- 
saye found that all was in good order, but alas! he 
could not find the letters. Hereupon the English 
Captain changed his mien and his voice, and, frown- 
ing in the most proper manner, ' ' How now (said he), 
are you imposing on us? You give us to understand 
that you have a commission from your King, and you 
cannot produce any evidence of it. You are Outlaws 
and Pirates, every one of you, and merit death." 
Then he set his soldiers to plundering, and in this 
the whole afternoon was consumed. From the shore 
we looked on at the pillage [240] of our property: 
for the English had left us on shore while they re- 
mained on the water, where they joined our vessels 
to theirs, for we had two, our ship and a barque con- 
structed at this place and newly equipped. We were 
reduced to a pitiful state, but this was not the end. 
The next day they came on shore, and robbed us also 
of what we had there. Not all at one time, but at 
intervals, and whenever they came on shore, always 
appropriating some of our mantles, clothes, and other 
things. Once they maltreated and abused two of 
our men, which so frightened part of the others that 
they fled to the woods like poor hunted beasts, half- 
naked and without [241] food, not knowing what 
would become of them. 

Let us speak of the Jesuits. I have told you that 
Gilbert du Thet was struck down by a musket ball 
during the fight. When the English boarded our 
ship, they put him, together with all the other 
wounded men, into the hands of their Surgeon. This 
Surgeon was a Catholic, and known as such. He 


12 LES RELATIONS DBS jtSUITES [Vol.4 

entre les mains de leur Chirurgien & luy, & tous les 
autres bleffes. Ce Chirurgien eftoit Catholique, & 
recognu pour tel ; & perfonne fort charitable, & qui 
nous a faid: mille bons offices. Or le P. Biard ayant 
fceu la bleffure de Gilbert du Thet fit demander au 
Capitaine, que les bleffes fuffent portes a terre, ce qui 
fut accorde, & par ainfi ledit Gilbert euft le moyen 
de fe confeffer, & de benir & louer Dieu iufte, & 
mifericordieux en la Compagnie de fes Freres, mou- 
rat entre leurs mains. Ce qu'il fit auec grande con- 
ftance, refignation, & deuotion, [242] vingt & quatre 
heures apres fa bleffure, il euft fon fouhait, car au 
defpart de Honfleur, en prefence de tout 1' equipage 
il auoit hauffe les mains, & les yeux vers le Ciel pri- 
ant Dieu, qu'il ne reuint iamais plus en France, ains 
qu'il mouruft trauaillat a la conquefte des ames, & 
au falut des Sauuages. II fut enterre le mefme iour 
au pied d'vne grande Croix que nous anions dreffee 
du commencement. 

Les lefuites n'eftoyent iufques alors recognus des 
Anglois, flnon que pour Preftres. Or le P. Biard & 
le P. Enemond Maffe s'en alleret au nauire parler au 
Capitaine Anglois, & luy expliqueret ouuertement 
comm'ils eftoyet lefuites, venus en ces quartiers-1^ 
pour la couerfio des Sauuages, puis le fupplierent par 
le fang de celuy, qu'il recognoiffoit pour Sauueur, & 
[243] par les mif ericordes qu'il en attendoit, qu'il luy 
pleuft auoir pitie de ces pauures Frangois, fur lef- 
quels Dieu luy auoit done puiffance, & qu'en leur 
mifere il recognufl combien les affaires de ce monde 
varient: qu'il luy pleuft leur donner & leur moyen- 
ner retour en leur pays de France. Le Capitaine les 
ouyt fort paifiblement, & leur refpondit auec pareil 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, tbi6 13 

was very charitable, and did us a thousand kind serv- 
ices. Now as soon as Father Biard learned about 
Gilbert du Thet's wound, he sent a request to the 
Captain to have all the wounded carried on shore; 
this was granted, and so the said Gilbert had an op- 
portunity to confess, and to bless and praise a just 
God, full of mercy to the Society of his Brothers ; 
and he died in their arms. He passed away with 
great steadfastness, resignation, and devotion, [242] 
twenty-four hours after he was wounded. He had 
his wish ; for when leaving Honfleur, in the presence 
of the whole crew, he had raised his hands and eyes 
to Heaven, praying God that he might never again 
return to France, but that he might die working for 
the conquest of souls and for the salvation of the Sav- 
ages. He was buried the same day at the foot of a 
large Cross which we had erected when we first went 
there. 

Up to this time the Jesuits had not been recognized 
by the English, except as Priests. Now Father Biard 
and Father Enemond Mass6 went to the ship to speak 
with the English Captain, and explained to him open- 
ly that they were Jesuits, who had come to these 
regions to convert the Savages ; then they implored 
him, by the blood of him whom he acknowledged as 
his Savior, and [243] by the mercy which he expected 
from him, that he might be pleased to have pity upon 
these poor French, over whom God had given him 
power ; and that in their wretched condition he might 
see how changeable are the affairs of this world, allow 
them to return to France, their native country, and 
furnish them means therefor. The Captain listened 
to them very kindly, and answered them with like 
courtesy: "But," (said he) dissembling, "I am very 


14 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.4 

honneur: mais (dit-il) dilTiiiiiilant, ie m'eftonne fort 
comme vous aiitres lefuites, lefquels on tient com- 
mtinement pour gens de confcience, & de Religion, 
vous vous retrouuiez icy, neantmoins en la compagnie 
des forbans, «& picoreurs, gens fans adueu & fans loy, 
ny honneur. Le P. Biard refpondit & preuua auec 
tant d'arguments, que toute leur troupe eftoit de 
gens de bien, & recommandes par fa Majefte [244] 
tres-Chreftienne : & refuta fi peremptoirement toutes 
objedtions contraires, que le Capitaine Anglois fut 
contraindt de faire femblant, qu'il s'y accordoit, vain- 
cu par fes raifons. Certes (adioufta-il) il y a bien eu 
de la faute, a ce que ie voy, d'ainfi perdre vos lettres. 
Neantmoins ie traidteray de voftre retour auec voflre 
Capitaine, & des lors iufques au depart, il fit touf- 
iours manger k fa table lefdits deux Peres, leur mo- 
ftrant beaucoup de refpedt & honeftete. Or il auoit 
vn'efpine au pied, qui le tourmentoit; c'eftoit le Pi- 
lote, & les Matelots, qui eftoyent euades, & defquels 
il ne pouuoit fgauoir nouuelles. Ce Pilote appelle le 
Bailleur, de la ville de Roiien, s'en eftant all^ pour 
recognoiftre (ainfi que vous a efle dit) ne pent point 
retourner ^ temps au nauire pour le defedre, [245] & 
partant il retira fa chaloupe k I'efcart, & la nuit ve- 
nue print encores auec foy les autres Matelots, & fe 
mit en fauuete hors la veue, & le pouuoir des An- 
glois. De nuidt il nous venoit trouuer pour auifer 
auecques nous ce qui feroit de faire. II fit en parti- 
culier ce bon office aux lefuites : car il vint trouuer le 
P. Biard, & le prenant par la main le coniura de ne 
fe point meffier de luy, pource qu'il eftoit de la Pre- 
tendue, I'affeurant qu'il ne manqueroit ny k luy, ny 
a aucun des Peres: & qu'il fupplioit Dieu, que tout 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELA TION, 1616 15 

much astonished at you Jesuits, who are generally re- 
garded as conscientious and Religious men, being here, 
nevertheless, in the company of pirates, marauders, 
and idle wanderers, who are men without calling, with- 
out law, and without honor. ' ' Father Biard answered, 
and proved by many arguments, that their whole com- 
pany were honest people and were recommended by 
his most Christian [244] Majesty, and so summarily re- 
futed all opposing arguments, that the English Cap- 
tain had to seem to agree with him, conquered by his 
logic. "Certainly (he added) there has been indeed 
some fault, as far as I can see, in thus losing your let- 
ters. Nevertheless, I shall consider the matter of 
your return with your Captain. ' * And from that time 
until our departure, he always had the two Fathers 
eat at his table, showing them great respect and 
courtesy. Now he had a thorn in his side, which 
caused him much uneasiness; it was the Pilot and 
Sailors who had escaped, and of whom he could get 
no news. This pilot, ^ called " le Bailleur," from the 
city of Roiien, had gone out to reconnoitre (as has 
been stated), and could not return to the ship in 
time to defend it; [245] therefore he turned his boat 
aside, and when night came took in with him the 
other Sailors, and withdrew to a place of safety, out of 
sight of the English and beyond their power. At 
night he came to see us and to talk over with us what 
was to be done. He performed this kind act espe- 
cially for the Jesuits; for he came to Father Biard 
and taking him by the hand implored him not to 
mistrust him because he was of the Pretended ~ 
Religion, assuring him that he would not fail him, 
nor any of the Fathers, and that he should pray God 
not to forsake him also, as he was speaking from 


16 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.4 

ainfi il ne I'abandonnaft point, comm'il le difoit de 
coeur fyncere. Le P. Biard le remercia de bonne 
affedtion, & luy promit de fe fouuenir de cefte fi 
bonne volont6: il luy dit neantmoins qu'il ne vouloit 
encores penfer a foy, iufques a ce qu'il vit totis les 
autres en beau [246] chemin. Que lors il deuiendroit 
ce qu'k Dieu plairoit, admonneftant ledit Pilote de fe 
garder de tomber es mains des Anglois : parce que le 
Capitaine buttoit fort a le pouuoir attraper, Ledit 
Pilote fit fagement fon profit de ceft aduertiffement, 
& de celuy des autres. Car de la a deux ou trois 
iours, il paffa a la barbe des Anglois, comme fe fau- 
uant, & s'en allant chercher nauire, & leur difant 
que ce n'eftoit pas pour cefte fois la, qu'il le falloit 
attedre. Mais il fe retira feulement derriere quel- 
ques Ifles non loin de la pour y efhre aux efcoutes & 
confiderer quelle fortune nous arriueroit. Cela fit k 
mon aduis, que le Capitaine Anglois fe refolut pluf- 
toft a ne nous pas faire pis, toutesfois il en auoit 
quelque volote, ce que ie ne fgay. De vray par les 
coniedtures de ce que nous auons experimete [247] 
defpuis, il eftoit bien Capitaine fort fage & rufe, mais 
neatmoins gentil-homme ayat le courage noble : fes 
gents auffi n'eftoyet point inhumains, ny cruels contre 
perfonne de nous. 

Or ne f9auroit-on croire les angoiffes aufquelles 
nous eftions en ce temps, car nous ne f9auions oh 
donner de la tefte. Du cofte des Anglois, nous n'at- 
tendions que la mort, ou du moins la feruitude : aulTi 
d'arrefter fur le pays, & viure parmi les Sauuages 
a leur fagon tout vn an entier, & tant de gens, nous 
fembloit eftre vne mort bien longue & miferable. 
Ces bons Sauuages ayants ouy noftre def afire s'en 


161G-29] BIARD'S RELA TION, 1616 17 

a sincere heart. Father Biard thanked him very 
affectionately, and on his part promised to remem- 
ber his good will; he told him, however, that he 
did not wish to think of himself, until he saw all 
the others on a safe [246] road, and then, let happen 
to him what God willed. He admonished the Pilot to 
be careful not to fall into the hands of the Enorlish, 
for the Captain was trying very hard to catch him. 
The Pilot wisely profited by this advice, and by that 
of the others. For, during the next two or three 
days, he went about in defiance of the English, as if 
making his escape and going for a ship, seeming to 
say to them that they need not count upon him this 
time. But he only withdrew behind some Islands 
not far off, to be on the lookout and to see what fortune 
might befall us. I believe this made the English 
Captain decide not to subject us to any worse treat- 
ment, however much he might have wished to do so, 
in regard to which I know nothing. Certainly, judg- 
ing from what we experienced [247J afterwards, he 
was indeed a very shrewd and cunning Captain, but 
nevertheless a gentleman of truly noble courage ; nor 
were his men inhuman or cruel to any of us. 

Now it is impossible to imagine the anxiety we en- 
dured at that time, for we knew not which way to 
turn. From the English, we expected only death or 
at least slavery ; but to remain in this country, and 
for so many men to live among the Savages in their 
way for a whole year, looked to us like a long and 
miserable death. These good Savages, having heard 
about our misfortune, came and offered to do their 
best for us, promising to feed us during the Winter, 
and showing a great deal of sympathy for us. But 
we could hope for nothing better [248] than they had ; 


18 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.4 

vindrent h. nous, & nous offroyent leur poffible, pro- 
mettants de nous alimenter durant I'Hyuer, & mon- 
ftrants vne grande copaffion. Mais nous ne pou- 
uions pas efperer mieux, [248] qu'ils n'ont. Auffi. 
de trouuer autres expedients en vn tel defert: nous 
n'en voyons point, Voicy en fin comme Dieu nous 
pourueut. 


1616-29] niARD'S RELATION, i6i6 19 

also we could see no prospect of finding any other 
expedients in such a desert. Now see how God pro- 
vided for us. 


20 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.4 


CHAPITRE XXIX. [i.e., xxvii.] 

LES EXPEDIENTS TROUUEZ POUR REUENIR EN FRANCE, 

& COMME TRENTE DE NOS GENS Y ARRIUERENT 

APRES PLUSIEURS TRAUAUX. 

LE Capitaine Anglois appelle vSamuel Argal, & fon 
Lieutenant, dit Guillaume Turnel, commen- 
cerent a trailer de noflre retour felon leur pro- 
meffe auec noftre Capitaine la Sauffaye. Les Anglois 
offroyent des conditions bien iniques, mais pour le 
faire court, la concltifion fut qu'vne [249] chaloupe 
nous reflant de deux, q nous en anions, ils nous en 
I'aifferoyent vne, & qu'auec icelle nous allaffions oti 
Dieu nous conduiroit. Le Capitaine Anglois, caute- 
leux qu'il eft; voulut auoir vn efcrit, figne de la main 
de la Sauffaye, par lequel il tefmoignalt, que o'eltoit 
de fon choix, que ce parti auoit efte prins. 

Cede conclufion ouye, le P. Biard s'en alia trouuer 
ledit Capitaine, & luy reprefenta, qu'ils reltoyent 
trente perfonnes, & qu'il eltoit impoffible que tant de 
gens peulTent eftre entaffez dans vn fi petit vaiiTeau, 
tant s'en faut qu'ils peuffent dans iceluy faire cent 
cinquante lieiies, & trauerfer des bayes de dix & 
douze lieues, comme il leur conuenoit faire, auant que 
trouuer aucu nauire Frangois, auquel ils fe peuffent re- 
fugier: que cela eftoit manifeftement [250] nous ietter 
a la mort, & au defefpoir. L'Anglois refpondit, q la 
Sauffaye ne le croyoit pas ainfi : mais que fi on vou- 
loit def charger ladidte chaloupe, qu'il en ouuriroit 
bien vn moyen: qu'il conduiroit a la Virginie les ar- 


16H>-29J BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 21 


CHAPTER XXIX. [i.e., xxvii.] 

TIIK MEANS WHICH WERE FOUND TO RETURN TO 
FRANCE, AND HOW THIRTY OF OUR PEOPLE AR- 
RIVED THERE AFTER MANY TRIALS. 

THE English Captain, whose name was Samuel 
Argal, and his Lieutenant, William Turnel,* 
began, as they had promised, to treat with our 
Captain la Saussaye about our return. The English 
offered some very unfair conditions, but to make the 
story short, the conclusion was that as one [249] boat 
remained to us of the two we had had, they would 
leave it for us, and with it we could go where God 
directed us. The English Captain, crafty as he was, 
wished to have a written acknowledgement signed 
by la Saussaye, in which he should testify that it was 
by his own choice that this course had been taken. 

When this decision was heard, Father Biard went 
to see the Captain, and represented to him that there 
remained thirty persons, and that it was not possible 
for so many people to crowd into so small a vessel, 
and still less possible that they could therein make 
one hundred and fifty leagues, and cross bays of ten 
and twelve leagues, which would be necessary before 
they found any French ship in which they could take 
refuge: that such a thing was plainly [250] throwing 
ourselves into the jaws of death and of despair. The 
Englishman answered that la Saussaye did not think 
so, but if they wished to lighten the said boat he 
would find a means of doing so ; that he would take 


22 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.4 

tifants qui voudroyent y venir fous promelTe, qu'on 
ne les forceroit point en letir Religion, & que, apres 
vn an de feruice, on les feroit repalTer en France. 
Trois accepterent cefte off re. 

Pareillement le fieur de la Mote des le commence- 
ment auoit confenti de s'en aller a la Virginie auec 
ledit Capitaine Anglois, qui I'honnoroit beaucoup, 
parce qu'il 1' auoit trouue I'efpee au poing, & voyoit 
en luy plufieurs autres bones qualitez, ce qui profitoit 
de beaucoup a toute noftre troupe. On luy auoit auffi 
permis de mener auec foy aucuns, qui de mefme 
[251] feroyent affeurez fous fa faueur. Le Capitaine 
Flory fe refolut pareillement de tenter la mefme for- 
tune, parce qu'on luy donnoit efperance qu'il y pour- 
roit recouurer fon nauire. Le P. Biard pria, que 
quatre qu'ils eftoyent, f9auoir eft deux lefuites, & 
deux autres fuffent portez au Ifles de Pencoit, & que 
Ik on les recommandaft aiix pefcheurs Anglois, qui y 
font d'ordinaire, a celle fin que par leur moyen ils 
peuffent repafler en France, ce que le Capitaine An- 
glois luy o(5troya fort volontiers. 

En cefle fa§on la chaloupe fe trouua conpetemment 
defchargee, & toute noftre troupe fut diuisee en trois 
egales bandes: Car quinze eftoyent auec la Pilote: 
quinze reftoyent auec les Anglois ; & quinze entroyent 
dans la chaloupe accordee. De ces quinze [252] le 
P. Enemond Mafse en eftoit I'vn, car le choix ayant 
efte bailie a la troupe de ceux, qui deuoyent entrer 
dans la chaloupe a ce qu'ils peuffent eflire de tous 
les trois lefuites celuy qu'ils aimeroient mieux pour 
leur faire compagnie; ce fut luy, qu'ils agreerent 
le plus. 

Cefle chaloupe done fut deliuree entre les mains 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 23 

to Virg-inia the workmen who wished to go there, 
under promise that they would not force them in the 
matter of Religion, and that, after one year of serv- 
ice, they would send them back to France. Three 
accepted this offer. 

Sieur de la Mote likewise had from the first con- 
sented to go to Virginia with the English Captain, 
who honored him greatly, because he had found him 
sword in hand, and saw in him many other good qual- 
ities, which proved a great advantage to all our com- 
pany. He was, moreover, permitted to take with him 
some who were [251] to enjoy the same favor as he 
did. Captain Flory also decided to try the same for- 
tune, because he was encouraged to hope that he might 
thus recover his ship. Father Biard begged that four 
of them, namely two Jesuits and two others, might 
be taken to the Pencoit Islands and recommended to 
the English fishermen, who are usually there, that 
they might, with their help, return to France. This 
the English Captain granted very willingly. 

Thus the boat was sufficiently lightened, and our 
whole company was arranged in three equal divi- 
sions ; for fifteen were with the Pilot, fifteen with the 
English, and fifteen had embarked in the boat left to 
them. Of this fifteen, [252] Father Enemond Mass6 
was one, for, it having been granted to the company 
who were to go in that boat to choose the one of the 
three Jesuits whom they preferred to accompany 
them, it was he whom they favored the most. 

This boat was then given in charge of la Saussaye, 
and of Father Enemond Mass6, Jesuit, whom the 
English Captain highly honored. He delivered it 
over to them with a small supply of food, and other 
provisions. But our poor men were in great trouble 


24 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 4 


de la Sauffaye, & dudit P. Enemond Mafse, lefuite, 
que le Capitaine Anglois honora beaucoiip. II la 
liura quelque peu amonitionnee de viures, & autres 
pronilions. Mais nos paiiures gens furent bien en 
peine, quand il la falltit conduire: car ils n'efloyent 
pour tout, que deux, ou trois mariniers, & iceux 
n'auoyent ny carte, ny cognoiffance des lieux. En 
cefte deftrelTe Dieu les fecourut fort a poindt : car le 
Pilote, qui auoit mis fes gens en [253] feurte, defi- 
reux de f9auoir en quel eftat efloit le refte de la 
troupe, fe defguifa en Sauuage & s'en vint efpier fur 
les lieux. L'Ange de Dieu le conduifit par le bon 
endroit ; car il rencontra tout a propos cefte chaloupe, 
qui s'en alloit, & ne f9auoit comment cefte bonne 
fortune parut de fi bon augure aux rencontres, qu'ils 
s'alTeurerent des lors, que Dieu leur vouloit faire mi- 
fericorde, mefmes que pour furcroit de grace, ils 
firent vne fort belle pefclie de gros Aumars ou Can- 
chres de mer, & les Sauuagcs leur donnerent libe- 
ral ement force oyfeaux, & poilTons, & de tout ce 
qu'ils auoyent auec grande fignification de compaf- 
fion. 

En ceite fa96 ils fe vindret ioindre a la chaloupe 
des Matelots, & de compagnie gagnerent I'lfle de 
Menano. C'eft'Ifle eft a I'emboucheure [254] de la 
Baye Fran9oife, & d'icelle iufques a I'lfle Longue, oii 
f alloit qu'ils trauerfaffent dix lieiies de pleine mer fort 
fafcheufes a caufe des grandes marees, qui y courent, 
&bouillent: & de mal'lieur, manuals temps les re- 
tint icy huidt, ou neuf iours. Leurs maux & appre- 
henfions les firent recourir a Dieu par voeus, & pri- 
eres, qui furent exaucees, comme il parut par le beau 
temps qui vint felon leur f ouhait : &. la faueur duquel 


1616-29J BIARirS RELATIOX, ibib 25 


when they had to sail their vessel; for in all, there 
were only two or three sailors, and these had neither 
map nor knowledge of the country. In this distress 
God sent them relief in the very nick of time ; for the 
Pilot, who had placed his men in (253] security, anx- 
ious to know how the rest of the company were far- 
ing, disguised himself as a Savage and went spying 
about the place. The Angel of God guided him 
through the right path, for he very opportunely en- 
countered this boat, which was sailing off with no 
knowledge of navigation. This good luck seemed 
such a favorable omen to those in the boat, that they 
were sure from that time on that God would be merci- 
ful to them ; and, as a superabundance of grace, they 
had great success in catching large Lobsters or Sea 
crabs, and the Savages generously gave them quan- 
tities of birds and fish and all other things they had, 
with great exhibitions of sympathy. 

Thus they fell in with the boat containing the Sail- 
ors, and in their company reached the Island of Menano. 
This Island is at the entrance [254] to French Bay, 
and thence they went as far as Long Island ; in this pas- 
sage they had to cross ten leagues of a very angry 
sea caused by the strong and violent currents which 
flow between, and unfortunately, bad weather kept 
them there eight or nine days. Their sorrows and 
apprehensions made them have recourse to God with 
vows and prayers, which were heard, as was evident 
from the beautiful weather which followed, according 
to their wish, and by means of which they reached 
Long Island. Here, in order to keep their promise, 
they planted a Cross, celebrated Holy Mass, and 
marched in procession. Here also God had prepared 
a storehouse ; for they found in this place a good pile 


26 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.4 

ils paruindrent a I'lfle Longne, on pour tenir leur pro- 
meffe ils planterent vne Croix, celebrerent la Saindte 
MelTe, & firent vne proceffKJ. La auffi Dieti leur 
auoit prepare vn magafm: car ils y trouuerent vn 
bon monceau de fel, que le fieur de Biencourt y auoit 
autrefois delaifse, & pour I'employer ils firent vne 
fort bonne, & heureufe pefclie. Ainfi prouifionnez 
[255] ils pafferet au Cap Forchu, auquel lieu ils trou- 
uerent le Sagamo Louys Membertou, qui fit grand 
accueil au P. Enemond Mafse, & le vouloit retenir 
a toute force. Mais ledit Pere s'excufa fur la necef- 
fite de ne point delaiffer fa compagnie. Le Sauuage 
leur fit k treftous Tabagie d'vn Orignac, ce qui leur 
fit grand bien, & en doublerent plus ioyeufement 
defpuis le Cap de Sable. Eftants ja proches du Port 
au Mouton, ils eurent au deuant d'eux quatre cha- 
loupes de Sauuages, qui reuenoyent de la trocque. 
C'effcoit Roland, & autres Sagamos, qui aufii toft re- 
cogneurent ledit P. Enemond, & luy firent leurs 
liberalitez bien grandes certes : demie Galette de 
pain a chacun des copagnons, & vne entiere a luy. 
C'eftoit le monde renuerse, les Sauuages fournilloyent 
du pain, atix [256] Francois gratuitement. Ce pain 
fembloit de la Manne a nos tribulez : car de trois fep- 
maines ils n'en auoyent mange. Et pour le comble 
de fouhait, les Sauuages leur dirent, que non guieres 
loin de la y auoit deux nauires Fra9ois, I'vn a Se- 
zambre, & I'autre a Paffepec. Ce qui fit diligenter 
nos Pelerins k ce qu'ils ne les perdiffent. 

Ces deux nauires eftoyent Maloiiins, I'vn apparte- 
nant au leune Dupont, duquel nous auons fouuent 
parle cy deuant, d'enuiron cinquante tonneaux feule- 
ment : le Capitaine Vible BuUot commandoit a I'autre, 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, ibi6 27 

of salt, which sieur de Biencourt had previously left 
there, and to find tise for it they caught a fine lot of 
fish. Thus provisioned, [255] they passed on to 
Cape Forchu, where they found the Sagamore, 
Louys Membertou, who gave Father Enemond Masse 
a hearty welcome and tried by all means to keep him 
there. But the Father excused himself, giving as 
his reason the necessity of remaining with his com- 
pany. The Savage made Tabagie for them all with 
Moose Meat, which was a great blessing to them, and 
then they doubled Cape Sable more cheerfully. When 
they were in the neighborhood of Port au Mouton, 
they saw before them four boats filled with Savages, 
who were returning from the trading station. It 
was Roland and other Sagamores, who immediately 
recognized Father Enemond, and showed him a gen- 
erosity truly wonderful ; namely, by giving half a 
Sea Biscuit to each of his companions, and a whole 
one to him. Behold the world turned upside down, 
the Savages freely furnishing bread to the [256] 
French. This bread seemed like Manna to our af- 
flicted (Frenchmen), for they had tasted none for three 
weeks. And to complete the fulfillment of their 
wish, the Savages told them that not far from there 
were two French ships, one at Sezambre and the other 
at Passepec. This caused our Pilgrims to hasten, 
that they might not fail to see them. 

These two ships were from Saint Malo, one belong- 
ing to Dupont the Younger, whom we have frequently 
mentioned before, this ship being only about fifty tons 
burthen ; Captain Vible BuUot commanded the other, 
of a hundred tons, and (a good augury) called the 
" Sauveur." Each of these two took its half of the 
whole band, but those in the smaller vessel suffered 


28 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.. 4 

qui eftoit de cent tonneaux, & (de bon augure) s'a- 
pelloit le Sauueur. Chacun de ces deux print fa 
moiti6 de toute la troupe, mais ceux du petit vaiiTeau 
patirent beaucoup: car tout leur defailloit : place, 
viures, eau: & furent horriblement agitez de [257] 
tempeftes & contrariete de vents : noftre mefchef ne- 
antmoins arriua profperemet pour ce vailTeau, parce 
qu'il auoit perdu beaucoup de fes gens, & a peine 
s'en fut-ils peu reuenir fans ce rencontre, & nouueau 
renfort de nos desbandez. 

Au grand vaiffeau, appelle Ic Sauueur, on fut 
mieux, mefmes que les Matelots furent fi charitables, 
que de leur propre gre ils retrancherent leur ordi- 
naire, & quitterent plufieurs bonnes places pour ac- 
commoder leurs hoftes. Le P. Enemond Mafse fut 
retire en ceftuy-cy, & le Pilote Alain Yeon luy fit 
beaucoup de charitez. lis furent accueillis pareille- 
ment de tempeftes, & experimenterent eftre vray, ce 
qu'on dit du feu S. Elme, oil Freres confolants, que 
quand ils apparoiffent deux a la fois, c'eft bon figne. 
Car deux apparuret [258J vn quart d'heure fur leurs 
Antemnes, & bien tofl apres les bourrafques & furies 
de mer s'accoiferent. 

Tons les deux nauires arriuerent en fauuete h. S. 
Malo, quafi en mefme temps quoy que le Sauueur 
fuft parti douze iours plus tard. La ioye, qu'ils re- 
ceurent vous la pouuez eftimer, repalTant par la me- 
moire les dangers dont ils fe voyoyent efchappez. 
Le P. Enemond Mafse, & toute la troupe fe loiient 
beaucoup de Thiimanite & bon accueil. qu'ils re- 
ceurent en ladidte ville de Saincil Malo, de mon Sei- 
gneur I'Euefque, de Monfievir le Gouuerneur, de MM. 
les Magiftrats, Marchands, & generalement de tous. 


1616-2i>] BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 


a great deal, being in need of everything, room, food, 
and water, and being horribly shaken up by [257] 
tempests and adverse winds; our disaster, however, 
happened very opportunely for this vessel, because 
it had lost many of its crew, and could scarcely have 
returned without this chance meeting and fresh rein- 
forcement afforded by our wanderers. 

In the larger vessel, called the Saiivcur, they fared 
better, as the Sailors were so kind-hearted that, of their 
own free will, they stinted themselves of their rations, 
and left several good places for the accommodation of 
their guests. Father Enemond Masse had taken ref- 
uge in this one; and the Pilot, Alain Yeon, showed 
him great kindness. They were likewise assailed by 
tempests, and experienced the truth of the saying 
about St. Elmo's fire, or the consoling Brothers, — 
that when two appear at once, it is a good omen. For 
two appeared [258] for a quarter of an hour upon the 
Lateen Sailyard, and soon after, the fury of the tem- 
pest and the sea abated. 

Both ships arrived safe at St. Malo almost at the same 
time, although the " Sauveur " had departed twelve 
days later. You may imagine their joy in recalling 
to memory the dangers from which they had escaped. 
Father Enemond Masse and the whole company 
greatly praised the kindness and welcome they re- 
ceived in the city of Saint Malo, from my Lord the 
Bishop, from the Governor, the Magistrates, Mer- 
chants, and all the citizens in general. 


30 LES RELATIONS DES /ASUITES [Vol.4 


CHAPITRE XXX. [i.e., xxviii.] 

[259] LE VOYAGE DE LA VIRGINIE; & LE RETOUR EN 
LA NOUUELLE FRANCE. 

DIEV foit beny. Voyla ja les deux tiers de noflre 
troupe reconduits en France fains & fauues 
parmi leurs parents, & amis, qui les oyent 
center leurs grandes auantures. Ores confequem- 
ment vous defirez fgauoir que deuiendra 1' autre tiers, 
qui eft encores demeure entre les Anglois. Certes 
bien plus longue, & plus variable fortune les attend, 
& tons n'en fortiront pas bagues fauues. 

Les Anglois auoyent trois vaiffeaux, f9auoir eft le 
leur, auec lequel ils nous auoyent prins, de cent 
trente tonneaux. Le noftre, qu'ils auoyent faifi de 
cent tonneaux, [260] & vne barque de douze tonneaux, 
laquelle pareillement ils tenoyet de nous, & ne la nous 
auoyent point voulu quitter, pour fournir a noftre 
retour. lis remplirent ces trois vaiffeaux de leurs 
gens, & nous partagerent entre eux. Le fieur de la 
Mote, le Capitaine Flory, & le refte d'vne moitie fai- 
fant en tout huic5l perfonnes, furent logez en la Capi- 
taneffe, & les autres en nombre de fept, demeurerent 
dans le nauire captif, duquel le Lieutenant Turnel 
eftoit faidt Capitaine. 

Or pour commencement de mal-heur, on ne con- 
duifit point les lefuites aux Ifles de Peucoit, felon la 
promeffe, ains on les mena droit h. la Virginie auec 
le refte de la troupe, laquelle on confoloit par belles 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 31 


CHAPTER XXX. [i.e., xxviii.] 

[259] THE VOYAGE TO VIRGINIA; AND THE RETURN 
TO NEW FRANCE. 

GOD be praised. Here were now two-thirds of 
our company conducted back to France, safe 
and sound, among their friends and kindred, 
who listen to them as they relate the stories of their 
wonderful adventures. Consequently you will wish to 
know what became of the other third, who remained 
behind in the hands of the English. In truth, a 
longer and more varied fate awaits them, and all will 
not emerge therefrom unharmed. 

The English had three vessels; namely, their own, 
with which they had captured us, of a hundred and 
thirty tons; ours, which they had seized, of a hun- 
dred tons; [260] and a barque of twelve tons, which 
they had likcAvise taken from us, and would not give 
back to be used for our return. They filled these 
three vessels with their people, and distributed us 
among them. Sieur de la Mote, Captain Flory, and 
half of the rest, making in all eight persons, were 
placed in the "Capitanesse,*" and the others, seven 
in number, remained in the captured ship, of which 
Lieutenant Turnel was made Captain. 

Now as the beginning of their ill luck, the Jesuits 
were not taken to the Peucoit Islands, according to 
promise, but were taken straight to Virginia with 
the rest of the crowd, who were consoled with bright 
hopes, inasmuch as (said they) the Marshal of Vir- 


32 


LES RELA riONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 4 


efperances d'autant que (difoit-on) le Marefchal de 
la Virginie, qui a toute charge, [261] & autorite de 
iurifdidlion, eltoit grand amy des Fran9ois, come 
ayant obtenu tous les principaux honneurs par la re- 
commandation de feu Henry le Grand, & ayant efte 
fon foldat, & fon penfionnaire. Cela nous prefchoit 
on fouuent. 

Mais nos prefcheurs ne prenoyent pas leur texte 
de I'Euangile. Car ce beau Marefchal, qui a leur 
dire auoit le fil, & la trempe fi Frangoife, ayant ouy 
nouuelles de nous, ne parloit que de harts & gibets, 
& de nous faire pendre treitous. L'efpouuante nous 
en fut donn^e, & aucuns en perdirent le repos, ne 
s' attendants plus qu'a monter ignominieufement par 
vne efchelle, & deualer miferablement par vne corde. 
Mais le Capitaine Argal fe moftra genereux a nous 
defendre: car il refilla audit Marefchal, oppofant la 
[262] foy par luy donnee. Et comm'il fe vid trop 
foible en cefte oppofitio ; il publia nos commiffions, 
& lettres Royaux, dont ie vous ay parle cy deuant, 
qu'il auoit fubtilement enleue des coffres de la Sauf- 
faye. Et c'eft par ce moyen que nous auons fceu 
qu'il auoit vfe de telle rufe, car autremet nous n'en 
euffions peu rien defcouurir. Le Marefchal voyant 
ces autoritez de fa Majefte tres-Chreftienne, & la re- 
folution du Capitaine, n'ofa pafler plus outre, ainfi 
apres quelques iours & quelques autres apprehen- 
fions, on nous fit fgauoir, que parole nous feroit 
gardee. 

Or comment on nous la garderoit, & quel moyen 
on nous trouueroit de nous renuoyer en France, c'ef- 
toit vne grande queflion. Le General, le Marefchal 
& tous les Principaux chefs de la Virginie s'affem- 


1616-29J BIARD'S RELA TION, 1616 33 


ginia,'' who has full power [261] and authority of 
jurisdiction, was a great friend of the French, as he 
had secured all his more important honors through 
the recommendation of the late Henry the Great, 
having been his soldier and pensioner. This was 
preached to us frequently. 

But our preachers did not take their text from the 
Gospels. For this charming Marshal, who had the 
fibre and character of a Frenchman, as they said, 
when he heard an account of us, talked about nothing 
but ropes and gallows, and of having every one of us 
hanged. We were badly frightened, and some lost 
their peace of mind, expecting nothing less than to 
ignominiously walk up a ladder to be let down dis- 
gracefully by a rope. But Captain Argal showed 
great magnanimity in defending us: for he opposed 
the Marshal, urging the [262] promise given by him. 
And as he found himself too weak in this opposition, 
he published our commissions and Royal patents, of 
which I have spoken before, which he had surrepti- 
tiously removed from la Saussaye's trunks. And it 
was in this way we learned that he had made use of 
such a trick, for otherwise we should never have 
found it out. The Marshal, seeing these warrants of 
his most Christian Majesty, and the determination of 
the Captain, did not dare go any farther; so, after 
several days spent in great apprehension, we were 
informed that their promise would be kept. 

Now how they were going to keep it, and what 
means would be found to send us back to France, 
was the great question. The General, ^ the Mar- 
shal, and all the other Important personages of Vir- 
ginia assembled in Council. [263] The result and 
conclusion of their consultation was to act still worse 



34 


LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol. 4 


blerent en Confeil. [263] Sur icelle le refultat & con- 
clufion des opinions fut de pis faire que iamais, puis 
qu'il leur fembloit d'en auoir le moyen. Car il fut 
ordonn6 que le Capitaine Argal auec fes trois vaif- 
feaux retourneroit en la nouuelle France, pilleroit, & 
raferoit toutes les fortereffes, & habitations des Fran- 
cois qu'il trouueroit en toute la cofte jufques a Cap 
Breton: c'eft a dire iufques au 46 degre, & demy: 
(parce qu'ils pretendent a tout tat de pays: qu'il 
feroit pendre la Sauffaye, & tons ceux de fes gens, 
lefquels il trouueroit eftre demeurez dans ces con- 
fins; pilleroit de mefme tons les vaiffeaux, qu'il ren- 
contreroit, trouuant toutesfois moyen aux perfonnes 
de fe pouuoir retirer en France: en cas qu'ils ne 
fiffent point de refiftance; & qu'on nous mettroit 
nous autres vieux prifonniers en compagnie [264] de 
ceux k qui en cefte fagon Ion feroit grace de la vie. 
Telle fut la deliberation. Mais Dieu efloit par deffus, 
& come vous orres, il en difpofa autrement, quant a 
plufieurs articles. 

Selon cefte conclufion, Argal reprint vn'autrefois 
la route de la nouuelle France, plus fort que deuat, 
car il auoit trois vaiffeaux, & auec meilleure efpe- 
rance: parce que le butin, qu'il auoit faidt fur nous 
luy accroiffoit, & la cupidite, & I'efpoir. II ne print 
cependant auec foy la moitie de nos gens, ie ne fcay 
pourquoy. Dans fon vaiffeau eftoit le Capitaine 
Flory, & quatre autres; dans celuy du Lieutenant 
Turnel (qui eftoit le noftre captif) les deux lefuites, 
& un gargon. 

Le premier lieu ou ils tirerent fut S. Sauueur. Car 
ils s'attendoyet d'y trouuer la Sauffaye: & vn nauire 
[263 i.e., 265] nouuellement venu. lis furet trompez, 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 35 


than ever, since it seemed to them they had the 
power to do so. For it was decreed that Captain 
Argal, with his three vessels, should return to new 
France, plunder and demolish all the fortifications 
and settlements of the French which he should find 
along the entire coast as far as Cape Breton : namely, 
to 46 and one half degrees north latitude, (for they 
lay claim to all this territory : that he was to have la 
Saussaye hanged, with all those of his men whom he 
found remaining within these limits ; that he should 
likewise plunder the ships, which he encountered, 
finding means, however, to allow their people to re- 
turn to France, in case they showed no resistance; 
and that we old prisoners should be placed in com- 
pany [264] with those whose lives had thus been 
spared. Such was the decision. But God was on 
high, and, as you will hear, he decreed otherwise in 
regard to a number of things. 

In accordance with this decision, Argal again 
started for new France, stronger than before, for he 
had three vessels, and higher expectations ; because 
the booty he had taken from us strengthened both 
his cupidity and his hopes. However, he did not 
take with him the half of our people, I know not 
why. In his vessel were Captain Flory and four 
others; in that of Lieutenant Turnel, (which was the 
one captured from us) the two Jesuits and a boy. 

They directed their course first to St. Sauveur, for 
they expected to find la Saussaye and a newly arrived 
[263 i.e., 265] ship there. They were mistaken, inas- 
much as la Saussaye was in France, as has been said. 
They burned our fortifications and tore down our 
Crosses, raising another to show they had taken pos- 
session of the country, and were the Masters thereof. 


36 


LES RELA TJONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 4 


d'autant que la Sauffaye efloit en France, ainfi qu'a 
efte dit : ils bruderent nos fortifications, & abbatirent 
nos Croix, en dreffants vne pour marque, qu'ils fe 
faififfoyet du pays, comme Seigneurs. 

Cefte Croix portoit le nom graue du Roy de la 
grande Bretaigne. lis pendirent auffi vn de leurs 
hommes, pour caufe d'vne confpiration au mefme 
endroidt, oil huidt iours au parauant ils auoyent ab- 
batu la premiere de nos Croix. 

De faindt Sauueur ils addrefferent a S. Croix, an- 
cienne habitation du fieur de Monts, & parce qu'ils 
auoyent fceu, que le P. Biard y auoit efte, Argal 
vouloit qu'il les y conduifit, mais ledit Pere ne le 
voulut point, ce qui le mit entierement en la difgrace 
dudit [2641.6., 266] Argal, & en grand danger de 
fa vie. Ce neantmoins Argal roda tant en haut 
qu'en bas, & rechercha tant tons leurs endroits, les 
confrontans auec les cartes, qu'il nous auoit prinfes, 
qu'en fin il la trouua de foy-mefme; il en enleua vn 
bon monceau de fel, qu'il y trouua, brufia I'habita- 
tion, & deftruifit toutes les marques du no & droidl 
de France, ainfi qu'il auoit eu commandement. 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELA TION, 1616 37 


This Cross had carved upon it the name of the King 
of great Britain. Also, on account of a conspiracy, 
they hanged one of their men in the very place where, 
eight days before, they had torn down the first of our 
Crosses. 

From saint Sauveur they sailed for Ste. Croix, 
sieur de Monts's old settlement; and, as they knew 
that Father Biard had been there, Argal wished him 
to conduct them thither; but the Father would not 
consent to do so. This caused him to be in complete 
disgrace with [264 i.e., 266] Argal, and in great danger 
of his life. Notwithstanding this, Argal wandered 
about, up and down, and, by dint of searching all places 
thoroughly and comparing them with the maps which 
he had taken from us, he at last found the place him- 
self. He took away a good pile of salt, which he 
found there, burned the settlement, and destroyed all 
traces of the name and claims of France, as he had 
been commanded to do. 


LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 4 


CHAPITRE XXXII. [i.e., xxix.] 

LA PRINSE, & INCENDIE DE PORT ROYAL, DEUX 
GRANDS DANGERS DU P. BIARD. 

LE Capitaine Argal ayant mine faindte Croix ; ne 
fgauoit comment addrelTer, & faire voile k Port 
Royal felon la commiffion qu'il en auoit, d'au- 
tant qu'il [265 i.e., 267] doutoit de s'aller engouffrer 
en fi dangereufe plage fans condndleur bien cognoif- 
fant des lieux, & par I'exemple frais, qu'il auoit du 
P. Biard, il n'ofoit attendre qu'aucun Fran9ois I'y 
vouluft coduire, ou I'y confeiller fmcerement. A 
cefte caufe il fe mit en quefte de quelque Sauuage, 
& fit tant par fes courfes, embufches, enqueftes, & 
induftries, qu'il furprint le Sagamo, homme tres-ex- 
periment6, & entendant au faidt du pays; a la con- 
duidte d'iceluy il vint a Port Royal. Or il y euft eu 1^ 
fans doute du mal-heur pour le regard des Fran9ois, 
parce que I'Anglois entrant k la Lune, dans le Port 
comm'il fit, & venat anchrer k la veue de 1' habitation 
a plus de deux lieues loin, fi les Fragois euffent veil- 
16, ils auoyet beau moyen ou de fe preparer au com- 
bat, ou de fe defbagager: car ^ [266 i. e., 268] caufe 
de la maree, I'Anglois ne fut deuant 1' habitation qu'k 
dix, ou onze heures du iour fuiuant. le ne f9ay ce 
qu'on fit. Tant y a que I'Anglois mettant pied k 
terre ne trouua perfonne dans le fort, & vit des fou- 
liers & des hardes efparfes. Par ainfi il euft double 
ioye en cefte prinfe: I'vne qu'il ne trouua aucune re- 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 39 


CHAPTER XXXII. [i.e., xxix.] 

THE TAKING AND BURNING OF PORT ROYAL; FATHER 
BIARD TWICE IN GREAT DANGER. 

CAPTAIN Argal, having destroyed sainte Croix, 
did not know in what direction to sail to reach 
Port Royal, according to his commission, 
and hesitated all the more as he [265 i.e., 267] was 
afraid of being stranded upon such a dangerous coast 
without a guide who was very familiar with the 
locality ; and, judging from the recent example of 
Father Biard, he did not dare expect that any 
Frenchman would consent to guide him, or give him 
sincere advice in the matter. For this reason, he be- 
gan to look for a Savage, and by dint of much run- 
ning about, lying in ambush, inquiring, and skillful 
maneuvering, he caught the Sagamore, a very experi- 
enced man, and well acquainted with the country; 
under his guidance, he reached Port Royal, Now 
there was certainly bad luck for the French, as 
the English entered the Port by Moonlight, and 
dropped anchor in sight of the settlement, at a dis- 
tance of more than two leagues; so, if the French 
had been on their guard, they would have had an 
excellent opportunity to prepare for a fight, or to run 
away, for on [266 i.e., 268] account of the tide, the 
English were not in front of the settlement until ten 
or eleven o'clock the next day. I do not know what 
they were doing. At all events, when the English 
landed, they found no one in the fort^ and saw shoes 


40 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.4 

fiftance, ce que iamais il n'euft penfe; Tautre qu'il 
rencontra vn affez bon butin, ^ quoy il ne s'attendoit 
pas. 

Ce rencontre de butin non attendu, penfa coufter 
la vie au P. Biard: voicy comment. Les Anglois 
ayant ja perdu beaucoup de temps k chercher faindte 
Croix: & defpuis a attraper vn Sauuage, qui fuft 
leur condudteur, le Lieutenat Turnel eftoit d'aduis de 
lailTer le voyage de Port Royal, & s'en retourner au 
pluflofl a la Virginie, alleguant pour raifons, que le 
lieu [267 i.e., 269] eftoit tres-dangereux, & la faifon 
par trop auancee (car c' eftoit la fin d'Odtobre,) & 
qu'au bout de tant de peines, ils n'y auroit point de 
profit, parce qu'on n'y trouueroit rien, fmon mifere, & 
la haine des Fran9ois, qu'ils s'acquerroyent bien me- 
ritoirement par le bruflement qu'ils y alloy ent faire, 
fans recompenfe d'aucun emolument. Le Lieutenat 
Turnel auoit ouy ces raifons du P. Biard, auec le- 
quel il prenoit fouuet plaifir de deuifer, & les eftimoit 
fort valides. Or le Capitaine Argal ayant eu le bo- 
heur d'vne facile entree, & defpuis dans Port Royal 
(ainfi qu'a efte dit) vn affez bon butin, en viures, 
hardes, & vtenfiles dans 1' habitation; il reprochoit &. 
fon dit Lieutenant, fon confeil, & la croyance qu'il 
auoit eu au lefuite: & mefmes pour cefte caufe luy 
faifoit moindre part de la proye. [268 i.e., 270] Le 
Lieutenant en eftoit en grande cholere, & d'autant 
plus qu'on I'auoit toufiours en reputation d'homme 
d'efprit, & de bon confeil, de quoy il fe voyoit degeu 
a I'occafion comm'il penfoit, du lefuite. 

Or il y auoit vn Puritain Anglois, maiftre du grand 
nauire plus malin que tous les autres, diffimule ne- 
antmoins, car ils faifoit les plus beaux femblants du 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6j6 41 

and clothing all scattered about ; so they were doubly- 
pleased by this capture, first, because contrary to all 
their expectations, they met no resistance ; and sec- 
ond, because they found a fair supply of booty, which 
they were not anticipating. 

This unlooked-for capture of booty nearly cost 
Father Biard his life, in this way. As the English 
had already lost a gpreat deal of time looking for 
sainte Croix, and afterward in finding a Savage who 
might act as their guide. Lieutenant Turnel was 
of the opinion that it would be better to abandon the 
voyage to Port Royal, and return as soon as possible 
to Virginia; giving as his reasons that the place [267 
i.e., 269] was very dangerous and the season too far 
advanced (for it was the end of October) ; that, after so 
much trouble, there would be no profit in the end, 
because they would find nothing there but misery 
and French hatred, which they would very deserved- 
ly draw down upon them by the conflagration they 
were going to kindle there, without being requited 
for it by any reward. Lieutenant Turnel had heard 
these arguments from Father Biard, with whom he 
often took pleasure in conversing, and considered 
them very good. Now when Captain Argal had 
such an easy entry, and afterwards at the settlement 
of Port Royal (as we have said) found such a quantity 
of booty in food, clothes and utensils, he reproached 
his Lieutenant for his advice, and for his confidence 
in the Jesuits : and on that account gave him a small- 
er part of the plunder. [268 i.e., 270] The Lieutenant 
was very angry, and so much the more so, as he had 
always had the reputation of being a man of intelli- 
gence and good judgment, which he had now for- 
feited, as he thought, on account of the Jesuit. 


42 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.4 

monde : mais les autres Anglois nous aduertiffoiet de 
ne no9 point fier en luy, d'autant qu'il eftoit maligne- 
ment enuenime contre nous. Cefluy-cy done voyant 
fon eoup, perfuadoit au Capitaine, & au Lieutenant, 
lef quels il voyoit efmeus, d'abandonner a terre le 
lefuite, difant, qu'il eftoit eftoit indigne que les An- 
glois, luy donnalTent des viures, puis qu'il les auoit 
voulu empefcher d'e auoir, [269 i.e., 271] & mille 
autres raifons qu'il alleguoit. le ne fgay qui fecou- 
ruft tant a propos le lefuite en ce danger, que fa fim- 
plicite. Car tout de mefme, que s'il euft efte bien 
fauorife, & qu'il euft peu beaucoup enuers ledit An- 
glois, il fe mit a genoux deuat le Capitaine par deux 
diuerfes fois, & a deux diuerfes occafions, "k celle fin 
de le flechir a mifericorde enuers les Fran§ois dudit 
Port Royal efgares par les bois, & pour luy perfuader 
de leur lailTer quelques viures, leur chaloupe, & quel- 
qu' autre moyen de pafCer 1' Hyuer. Et voyez combien 
differentes petitions on faifoit audit Capitaine : car au 
mefme temps, que le P. Biard le fupplioit ainfi pour 
les Fran9ois, vn Fran9ois crioit de loin auec outrages, 
& iniures tres indignes k haute voix, qu'il le falloit 
maffacrer. Or Argal (qui eft d'vn cceur [270 i.e., 272] 
noble,) voyant cefte tant fyncere affedtion du lefuite, 
& de r autre cofte cefte tant beftiale & enragee inhu- 
manite de ce Fran9ois, laquelle ne recognoiffoit ny fa 
propre nation, ny biens-faidts, ny Religion, ny eftoit 
domtee par raffli(5tion^& ^verges de Dieu, eftima que 
ce luy feroit toufiours reproche, & impropere, fi fans 
iugement, & fans auoir ouy parties, il venoit a de- 
laiffer pour vne accufation fubtile, celuy a qui il auoit 
donne fa parole. Et par ainfi reietta tout enfemble, 
& la luafion de 1' Anglois, & la forcenerie du Fran- 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELA TION, i6ib 43 

Now there was an English Puritan, master of the 
larger vessel, more malicious than all the others, yet 
hypocritical, for he made the finest pretensions in 
the world : but the other Englishmen advised us not 
to trust him, as he was wickedly prejudiced against 
us. So this man, seeing his opportunity, persuaded 
the Captain and Lieutenant, who he saw were aroused, 
to leave the Jesuit on shore, saying he did not de- 
serve that the English should give him food since he 
had tried to prevent them from obtaining it, [269 i.e., 
271] and offering a thousand other arguments. I know 
not what rescued the Jesuit so opportunely from this 
danger, unless it were his simplicity. For just as if 
he had been highly favored, and had great influence 
with these English, he dropped upon his knees before 
the Captain, two different times and upon two differ- 
ent occasions, to move him to pity towards the French 
of Port Royal who were wandering about through 
the woods, and to persuade him to leave them some 
food, their boat, and other means of passing the 
Winter. And see now what different requests were 
being made to this Captain : for at the same time that 
Father Biard was thus petitioning him in behalf of 
the French, a Frenchman was shouting out from 
afar, with most scandalous insults and abuse, that he 
ought to be slain. Now Argal (who has a noble [270 
i.e., 272] heart), seeing the so sincere affection of the 
Jesuit, and, on the other hand, the so brutal and infu- 
riated inhumanity of this Frenchman, who remem- 
bered neither his own country, nor kindnesses, nor 
Religion, nor was crushed by God's afflicting rod, 
considered that it would always be a reproach and 
disgrace to him, if, without trial and hearing from 
both sides, he should cast off, on account of a sly and 


44 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.4 

9ois, d'autant plus appaif6 enuers le lefuifte, que 
plus il le voyoit attaqu6 fans qu'il remarquafl en luy 
changement, ou alteration. 

Or ledit Capitaine ayant enleue de Port Royal tout 
ce qui luy fembla commode, iufques aux [271 i.e., 
273] ais, verroils, ferrures, & cloux; il y mit le feu. 
Chofe certes bien pitoyable, car dans vn'heure ou 
deux on vit reduit en cendres le trauail & defpenfe 
de plufieurs annees & perfonnes de merite. Et 
plaife ^ noftre Seigneur que ce mefme feu aye telle - 
ment deftruit tons les pech^s, qui peuuent auoir efl6 
commis en cefte place, que iamais ils ne refufcitent 
plus en aucune part, ny ne prouoquent la iufte & re- 
doutable vengeance de noftre Dieu. L'Anglois 
(comme i'ay dit autre part) effa9oit par tout, tons mo- 
numents, & indices de la puiffance Fran9oife : ce 
qu'il n'oublia pas icy iufques a faire vfer du pic, & 
cifeau fur vne groffe & maffiue pierre, en laquelle 
eftoyent entailles les nos du fieur de Monts, & autres 
Capitaines auec les fleurs de lys. Ce faidt, il leua 
I'anclire pour s'en aller; mais [272 i.e., 274] il fut 
retenu par le manuals temps k I'embouclieure du Port 
trois, ou quatre iours. 

Tandis qu'il feiournoit icy a I'Anclire, vn Fran9ois 
de ceux dudit Port demanda de parlementer: ce qui 
luy fut accorde. Or entre les bos affaires, que ce 
beau parlementateur vint traidter, fut de dire au Ca- 
pitaine Anglois, qu'il s'efmerueilloit bien fort, com- 
ment il n'auoit pie9a deliure le monde du pernicieux 
lefuite, qui elloit en fes nauires. Si ce n'eftoit, peut- 
eftre que le mal-heur I'y conferuaft pour reuancher 
les Fran9ois par quelque trahifon mefchante, que 
ledit lefuite ioiieroit k fon coup, & occafion. Car 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 46 

cunning accusation, him to whom he had given his 
word. And so he rejected both the persuasions of 
the Englishman, and the rage of the Frenchman, 
looking upon the Jesuit all the more favorably as he 
saw that, however much he was attacked, there was 
no change or deterioration in his conduct. 

Now this Captain, having taken away from Port 
Royal everything that seemed convenient to him, even 
to the [271 i.e., 273] boards, bolts, locks, and nails, set 
the place on fire. A truly pitiable thing, for in an 
hour or two the work of several worthy people, during 
a number of years, was reduced to ashes. And may 
our Lord grant that this same fire has so completely 
destroyed all sins, which may have been committed 
in this place, that they may never again arise in any 
other place, nor ever provoke the just and dreadful 
vengeance of our God. The English (as I have 
stated elsewhere) destroyed, everywhere, all monu- 
ments and evidences of the dominion of the French ; 
and this they did not forget to do here, even to mak- 
ing use of pick and chisel upon a large and massive 
stone, on which were cut the names of sieur de Monts 
and other Captains, with the fleurs-de-lys. This 
done, they weighed anchor to sail away, but [272 i.e., 
274] bad weather detained them three or four days 
at the mouth of the Harbor. 

While they remained anchored here, a Frenchman 
from among those at the Port asked to confer with 
them ; his request was granted. Now among the nice 
things which this fine parliamentarian did, was to say 
to the English Captain that he was very much sur- 
prised indeed that he had not already rid the world 
of the pernicious Jesuit, who was in one of his ships. 
If he were not despatched, perhaps some ill luck might 


46 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.4 

c'efloit (difoit-il) vn vray, & naturel Efpagnol, qui 
ayant commis plufieurs forfaidts en France, ^ caufe 
defquels il en eftoit fuitif, leur auoit encores donne 
beaucoup [273 i.e., 275] de f can dales a Port Royal, 
& qu'il ne falloit aucunement douter, qu' encores ne 
fit-il pis anx Anglois. Argal oyant dire, que le P. 
Biard eftoit naturel Efpagnol, ne le pouuoit croire; 
mais on luy donna ceft'accufation par efcrit, & foub- 
ligne de cinq ou fix: & le prelToit-on fort a ce qu'il 
iettaft en terre a I'abandon ledit P. Biard. Mais tant 
plus qu'on Ten preffoit, tant moins I'Anglois y con- 
fentoit, parce que y confentant il ne pouuoit fuir le 
deshonneur d'auoir manque de foy, & de iuftice; 1^ 
ou le gardant pour la Virginie, il s'attendoit de I'y 
faire mourir en acquerant loiiange de fidelity a fon 
office, & de patience a fupporter. Car en communi- 
quant au Marefchal cefte depofition des Frangois, & 
adiouftant par deffus comme ledit Pere n' auoit voulu 
monftrer I'lfle S. [274 i.e., 276] Croix, & auoit taf- 
ch6 de diuertir les Anglois d'aller a Port Royal; il 
n' auoit garde defchapper des mains du Marefchal, 
defquelles a peine I'auoit-on peu arracher, lors mef- 
me, qu'on n' auoit aucune prinfe fur luy, Ainfi Dieu 
le voulut fauuer pour lors, & encores pP merueil- 
leufement defpuis, comme vous orrez. Cependant 
vous remarquerez fagement iufques a quelle rage 
le malin efprit agite ceux, qui fe vendent a luy, & 
combien il faut eflre referue a croire les delations 
& detradtios, puis que le P. Biard auoit vefcu dans 
Port Royal, & auoit toufiours efte notoirement re- 
cogneu pour ce qu'il eft, c'eft a dire bon Fran9ois 
naturel, & qui iamais ne fut en Efpagne ny luy, ny 
fon pere, ou mere, ou aucun de fes parens. Or que 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 47 

keep him there to take revenge for the French upon 
the English by some wicked treason, which the Jesuit 
would be guilty of, in his way and at his opportunity. 
For he was (said he) a true and native Spaniard, who, 
having committed several crimes in France, on ac- 
count of which he was a fugitive from justice, had also 
been the cause of a great deal [273 i.e. , 275] of scandal 
at Port Royal, and there could not be the slightest 
doubt that he would do something still worse to the 
English. Argal, when he heard it said that Father 
Biard was a native Spaniard, could not believe it; 
but this charge, made in writing and signed by five 
or six persons, was handed to him ; and they urged 
him strongly to put on shore and desert Father Bi- 
ard. But the more they urged him, the less the Eng- 
lishman would yield to them, because in giving his 
consent, he could not escape the dishonor of having 
broken faith and failed in doing justice ; whereas, if 
he kept him until he got to Virginia, he could count 
upon having him executed there, at the same time 
receiving praise for his fidelity to his word, and for 
his patience in bearing with him. For when he would 
communicate to the Marshal this statement of the 
French, and add to it that the Father would not con- 
sent to guide them to the Island of Ste. [274 i.e., 276] 
Croix, and had tried to keep the English from going 
to Port Royal, there would be no danger of his escap- 
ing from the hands of the Marshal, from which they 
had hardly rescued him before, although then they 
had no claim upon him. Thus God willed that he 
should be saved that time, and still more wonderful- 
ly since then, as you will hear. Meanwhile, you will 
wisely observe to what madness the evil spirit in- 
cites those who sell themselves to him, and how 


48 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 4 

ce neantmoins vn Fran§ois fe foit trouu6 fi poffed6 
par I'efprit [275 i.e., 277] fanguinaire, que pour le 
faire mourir il foit venu h. impofturer 11 furieufe- 
ment, & receuant le chaftiment de Dieu n'en aye 
faidl autre profit, que de fe proflituer fi defefpere- 
ment h. Sathan, & a calomnie, cela furpafl!e toute ap- 
prehenfion commune de malice, & a peine peut-on 
conceuoir, qu'vn homme puiffe deuenir fi vendu, & 
fi defefperement afferui a peche. 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 


49 


necessary it is to be cautious in believing slanders 
and detractions; for Father Biard had lived in Port 
Royal, and had always been universally recognized 
for what he is; namely, a good, native-bom French- 
man, who had never even been in Spain, neither he, 
nor his father, nor his mother, nor any of his kin- 
dred. Now notwithstanding all this, a Frenchman 
was found so possessed with the spirit of [275 i.e., 
277] bloodshed, that to have him killed he was led to 
commit such a monstrous act of imposition, and while 
under the chastisement of God, derived no other ad- 
vantage therefrom than to sell himself so hopelessly 
to Satan and to calumny. This exceeds all ordinary 
conceptions of wickedness, and it is difficult to con- 
ceive how a man can be so desperately given up to 
and enslaved by sin. 


50 


LES RELATIONS PES /^SUITES [Vol. 4 


CHAPITRE XXXI. [i.e., xxx.] 

LE DEPART DE PORT ROYAL, LES DIUERSES AUEN- 

TURES DES NAUIRES; & COMME NOUS FUSMES 

CONTRAINTS DE RELASCHER AUX AgORES. 

LE neufuiefme de Nouembre de cede ann6e 1613. 
les Anglois departiret de Port Royal en inten- 
tion de s'aller rendre a [276 i.e., 278] leur Vir- 
ginie, & y iouir du butin I'hyuer fuiuant. Or des ce 
temps le Lieutenant Turnel, ne regardoit plus le P. 
Biard, que comme vn pendard abominable: il le de- 
teftoit encores d'auantage, quand il repenfoit an paf- 
s€ : car par le pafse, il auoit faidt eflat de le prifer, 
& I'aymer pour fa naifue fimplicite, & ouuerte can- 
deur. Mais ayant veu le tefmoignage par efcrit de 
tant de Fran9ois, qui I'affeuroyent eftre naturel Efpa- 
gnol, & mefchant homme, il aimoit mieux croire, 
que le lefuite full menteur, que non pas tant d'autres, 
qui I'accufoyent. Par ainfi il haiffoit d'autant plus 
irreconciliablement cefte fi profonde & impenetrable 
diffimulation (comme il penfoit) d'vn Efpagnol, con- 
trefaifant le Fran9ois, laquelle luy, homme repute 
pour accort, & bien aduis6, n'auoit fceu defcouurir 
[277 i.e., 279] en tant de temps; ains a laquelle il 
s'efloit laifse furprendre iufques a vne familiarity, & 
amiti6 grande. Telle elloit la cholere du Capitaine 
Turnel, lequel d'ores en auant i'appelleray abfolue- 
ment Capitaine & non plus Lieutenant, parce que 
nous allons nous feparer: efcoutez comment. 

Le fecond iour apres noflre depart, veille de S. 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 51 


CHAPTER XXXI. [i. e., xxx.] 

THE DEPARTURE FROM PORT ROYAL; VARIOUS AD- 
VENTURES OF THE SHIPS; AND HOW WE WERE 
COMPELLED TO STOP AT THE AgORES. 

ON the ninth of November of this year, 1613, the 
English left Port Royal, intending to go back 
to [276 i.e., 278] Virginia, and there to enjoy 
their booty during the following winter. Now from 
this time on, Lieutenant Turnel only looked upon 
Father Biard as an abominable rascal : he hated him 
still more when he thought of the past, for then he 
had openly shown his esteem and love for him on ac- 
count of his naive simplicity and open candor. But 
having seen the testimony in writing of so many 
Frenchmen, who assured him that he was a native 
Spaniard, and a wicked man, he preferred to believe 
that the Jesuit was a liar, rather than to disbelieve so 
many others who accused him. Therefore his hatred 
was all the more irreconcilable against the deep and im- 
penetrable hypocrisy (as he thought) of a Spaniard, 
pretending to be a Frenchman, which he, reputed to be 
a man of sagacity and wisdom, had not been able to 
discover [277 i.e., 279] in so long a time, but had al- 
lowed himself to be drawn by it into great familiarity 
and friendship. Such was the wrath of Captain Tur- 
nel, whom I shall hereafter call simply Captain and 
no longer Lieutenant, because we are going to be 
separated [from the other ships] ; hear in what way. 
On the second day after our departure, on the eve 


52 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.4 

Martin, vn fi grand orage s'efleua, qu'il efcarta nos 
trois vaiffeaux en telle fa§on, que defpuis ils ne fe 
font point reueus enfemble; ains ont tire trelious 
bien diuerfes routes. 

La barque n'a point comparu defpuis, & nouuelles 
aucunes n'en ayant efte ouyes aucuns fe doutent 
qu'elle foit perie, auec les fix Anglois, qui eftoyent 
dedans. 

La Nau Capitaneffe, ou commendoit Argal, non- 
obftat le contrafte, vint a port heureufement [278 
i.e., 280] a la Virginie das trois fepmaines, ou enui- 
ron. Le Marefchal (duquel nous vous auons parle cy 
deuant) ouyt fort volontiers du Capitaine Argal, tout 
ce qui s'eftoit pafse, & attendoit en bonne deuotion 
le P. Biard pour luy toft accourcir les voyages, luy 
faifant trouuer au milieu d'vne efchelle le bout du 
monde ; mais Dieu, maiftre de la vie, & des puiffances 
difpofe a fon bon plaifir de fes creatures, & non a la 
fantafie du bras humain; prenant plaifir au tiltre, 
que luy donne fon Pfalmifte, d'eftre le Seigneur, qui 
deliure le pmiure des mains des plus forts, & le dejlitu^, 
de la puiffance de ceux, qui le pillent, comme ie m'en 
vais vous monftrer, qu'il a faidt. 

Les deux lefuites, & vn gar9on Frangois ef coyent 
dans le nauire captif, fur lequel auoit efte commis le 
Capitaine Turnel; ce nauire [279 i.e., 281] fepare 
d'auec Argal par la tepefte en fut tant inceffamment 
pourfuiuy feize iours durant, que le Capitaine per- 
dant efperace de pouuoir aborder la Virginie, appella 
tons fes gents, & mit en deliberation, qu'eft-ce qu'il 
faudroit faire pour fauuer leurs vies. Car de com- 
battre les orages plus long temps pour ne fe pas 
efloigner de ladidte Virginie, il n'y auoit point d'ap- 


161t>-29] BIARD'S RELA TION, 1616 


53 


of St. Martin, so terrible a storm arose that our three 
vessels were scattered so efTectually that they never 
came together afterwards, but all sailed away in 
different directions. 

The barque was never seen again, and, no news of 
it having been heard, no one doubts that it was lost 
with the six Englishmen who were on board. 

The Ship "Capitanesse," which Argal commanded, 
notwithstanding its hindrances, safely reached port 
[278 i.e., 280] in Virginia, after three weeks or there- 
about. The Marshal (of whom we have spoken above) 
listened very willingly to Captain Argal as he related 
all that had taken place, and in a proper spirit of de- 
votion awaited Father Biard, to shorten for him his 
voyages and to make him find the end of the world 
from the middle of a ladder; but God, master of life 
and all-powerful, disposes of his creatures according 
to his own good pleasure, and not according to the 
whims of human authority ; taking pleasure in the 
title given him by the Psalmist, of being the Lord, 
Who delivers the poor from the hajids of the strofig, and 
the destitute frotn the power of those who strip him, as I 
am going on to show you he did. 

The two Jesuits and a French boy were in the cap- 
tured ship which had been committed to the care of 
Captain Turnel; this ship, [279 i.e., 281] separated 
from Argal by the tempest, was so incessantly fol- 
lowed by it for sixteen days, that the Captain, losing 
hope of being able to reach Virginia, called together all 
his people, and took counsel with them upon the best 
way to save their lives. For there seemed to be no 
probability that they would longer be able to combat 
the storms so as to keep near Virginia, because they 
had in the ships the horses taken from Port Royal, 


54 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.4 

parence, parce que on auoit dans le nauire des che- 
uaux prins a Port Royal, qui les ruinoyent d'eau tant 
ils en beuuoyent, les tourbillons rompoyet tant de 
voiles, aufuents, & cordages, qu'il n'y auoit plus de 
quoy les refaire, & les viures eftoyent bien bas, hors 
la moulue feulement, de laquelle y auoit alTez ; mais 
de pain on n'en auoit eu, par I'efpace de trois mois, 
que deux onces chafque iour pour tefte, [280 i.e., 
282] bien rarement trois: & fi il en reftoit fort peu. 
En cefle deliberation les mariniers furet d'aduis qu'il 
falloit fouftenir encores quelques iours pour leur 
honeur. Et (approbation de leur confeil) le bon 
temps leur arriua au iour fuiuant, & les conduifit fi 
auant qu'ils ne s'eftimoyent pas eftre a plus de vingt 
& cinq lieues de leur port. 

Pour en confeffer la franche verite, les lefuites ne 
prioyent point pour ce bon temps, car ils f9auoyent 
affez oti c'efl qu'il les conuoyoit. Or Dieu, croy-ie, 
ay at pitie d'eux, fufcita vn gaillard, & fougueux 
furoiieft, qui vint donner droidt en face a nos An- 
glois, & les contraignift de mettre le nauire en cappe 
(comme Ton dit) de plier toutes les voiles, & de pen- 
fer a leur confcience. 

Le Capitaine voyant cefle rage [281 i.e., 283] de 
vents, & de vagues ne voulut plus s'opiniaftrer, ains 
conclud, qu'il falloit relafcher aux A9ores a 7. cents 
lieues de la, pour s'y pouruoir de leurs necefTitez, & 
attendre le bon temps. II fit tourner le cap pour 
adrefler la, & auffi toft apres on tua les cheuaux qui 
nous auoyent gafte & confume noftr'eau, de maniere 
qu'elle eiloit toute infedte, & puante, & encores la 
donnoit on en bien petite mefure. Mais la chair de 
cheual elloit fort bonne, au gouft des lefuites. 

Or durant ces furieufes, & liorrib[l]es tempefles, 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 55 

and these spoiled as much of the water as they 
drank ; the winds had so torn their sails and broken 
their gunwales and ropes, that they had nothing 
left with which to repair them; the stock of food 
was low, except the codfish, of which they had 
enough ; but as to bread, they had had, during three 
months, only two ounces a day to each person, [280 
i.e., 282] very rarely three; and so there remained 
but little of it. In this consultation, the sailors 
were of the opinion that their honor demanded them 
to hold out some days longer. And (in approval of 
their decision) fair weather came the next day, and 
bore them so far ahead that they judged they were 
no more than twenty-five leagues from their port. 

To tell the honest truth, the Jesuits did not pray 
for this fair weather, knowing very well to what fate 
it was carrying them. Now God, taking pity on them, 
as I believe, aroused a lively and vigorous south- 
wester, which blew right in the Englishmen's teeth, 
and forced them to lie to (as the vSaying is), to reef the 
sails, and to examine their consciences. 

The Captain, seeing this fury [281 i.e., 283] of the 
winds and waves, thought it well not to persist in his 
course, but decided to make for the A9ores, 7 hundred 
leagues from there, to provide for their necessities 
and to wait for good weather. He turned the prow 
in that direction, and immediately thereafter they 
killed the horses which had been spoiling and drink- 
ing the water, so that it was all infected and had a 
bad smell ; and even this was measured out to us in 
small quantities. But the horseflesh was very good, 
according to the taste of the Jesuits. 

Now during these furious and horrible tempests, 
when all had good reason to look into their con- 


56 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.4 

comme tous auoyent bien occafion de penfer ^ leur 
confcience, Dieu particulierement difpofoit le Capi- 
taine. De maniere, qti'vne fois bien repentant, il 
appella le P. Biard, & luy tint ces difcours, que ie 
vais inferer quafi de mot a mot: car ce [282 i.e., 284] 
Capitaine parloit bon Fran9ois, & beaacoup d'autres 
lagues vulgaires, outre le Latin & le Grec, qu'il en- 
tendoit bien, homme de grand efprit, & qui a bien 
eftudie : P. Biard, (difoit-il) Dieu eft courrouce centre 
nous, ie le voy bie; il eft courrouce contre nous, 
di-je, mais non pas contre vous ; contre nous, parce 
que nous vous somes alles faire la guerre, fans la 
vous premierement denocer, ce qu'eft contre le droict 
des gens. Mais ie protefte, que 9'a efte contre mon 
aduis, & mon gre. Ie n'euffe fceu qu'y faire, il me 
falloit fuiure, i'eftois feruiteur. Ainfi ie vous dy, 
que ie voy bie que Dieu eft courrouce contre nous, 
mais non pas contre vous, ains a I'occafion de vous: 
car vous ne faidles que patir. Le Capitaine s'arreftat 
icy, voS" pouues eftimer fi le lefuite manqua de ref- 
podre a propos. Le Capitaine, [283 i.e., 285] le prit 
d'vn autre endroit, mais, P. Biard (dit-il) c'eft chofe 
eftrange, que vos Fran9ois de Port Royal vous ac- 
cufent ainfi. Le Pere refpondit, Mais mofieur, m'a- 
ues-vous iamais ouy mefdire d'eux? Nenny, dit-il; 
ains i'ay fort bien remarque que quand on mefdifoit 
d'eux, & deuant le Capitaine Argal, & deuant moy, 
toufiours vous les aues defendus, i'en fuis bon tef- 
moin. Monfieur (dit le Pere) prenez argument de la, 
& iuges, qui a Dieu, & la verite de fon cofte ; ou les 
mefdifants, ou bien les charitables. Ie I'entends bien, 
dit le Capitaine : mais, Pere Biard, la charite ne vous 
a elle point fait mentir, quad vous me difiez, que 


1616-29] B/ARD'S RELATION, i6i6 57 


sciences, God especially inclined the Captain to do so, 
in such a manner, that once, when he was feeling very 
repentant, he called Father Biard and held with him 
the following conversation, which I here insert almost 
word for word: for this [282 i.e., 284] Captain spoke 
good French, and many other common languages, 
besides Latin and Greek, which he understood very 
well ; he was a man of great intelligence and a thor- 
ough student. "Father Biard" (said he) "God is 
angry at us, I see it clearly ; he is angry at us, I say, 
but not at you ; angry at us, because we went to make 
war upon you without first giving you notice, which 
is contrary to the rights of nations. But I protest 
that it was contrary to my advice, and my inclination. 
I did not know what to do, I had to follow, I was 
merely a servant. But I tell you I see very clearly 
that God's wrath is kindled against us, but not against 
you, although on your account: for you do nothing 
but suffer." The Captain pausing here, you may 
judge whether or not the Jesuit failed to make a suit- 
able answer. The Captain [283 i.e., 285] took up an- 
other phase of the question. "But, Father Biard" 
(says he) "it is strange that your countrymen from 
Port Royal should accuse you thus." The Father 
answers, "But, Sir, have you ever heard me slander 
them?" "By no means," he says, "but I have clear- 
ly observed that when evil things are said of them, 
both before Captain Argal and before me, you have 
always defended them, of which I am a good wit- 
ness. " "Sir" (the Father says) ' * draw your own con- 
clusions from that, and judge which have God and 
truth on their side, whether the slanderers, or the 
charitable. " "I know that very well, ' ' says the Cap- 
tain, "but. Father Biard, did not charity make you 


58 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol.4 

nous ne trouuerions que mifere a Port Royal? Le 
Pere repartit, Pardonnez moy, monfieur, vous priant 
de vous fouuenir, que ie ne vous ay dit [284 i.e., 
286] fmon que moy eftant la, ie n'y auois veu, & 
trouue que mifere. Cela feroit bon, dit le Capitaine, 
fi vous n'efties Efpagnol, comme Ton dit que vous 
eftes, car I'eftat, ce que vous defires tant de bien aux 
Fra§ois n'eft pas pour amour que vous leur portes, 
ains pour haine des Anglois. a cecy le Pere Biard 
ref pondit fort au long : mais il ne luy pent iamais de- 
fraciner ceft'opinion, difant, qu'il n'eftoit point croy- 
able, que cinq, ou fix Fran9ois conftitues en aiflidtion 
euffent voulu figner vne fauffe accufation contre vn 
leur concitoyen Preftre: n'y ayants autre profit que 
de le faire perdre, & par ce moy en fatis-faire a leur 
maudite palTion. 

Ie vous ay faidt ce recit k fin que la fuaue difpofi- 
tion de la diuine prouidence foit recogneue, & que 
vous entendiez, come Dieu [285 i.e., 287] alloit pre- 
parant peu k peu le coeur du Capitaine. Car il fe 
trouua bie perplex, & luy & fes gens, quand ils fe 
virent pres des Agores. La caufe en eftoit, parce 
que ces Ifles font habitees des Portugais Catlioliques ; 
par ainfi les Anglois confideroyent, que venants k y 
anchrer, il faudroit fouffrir la vifite du nauire. Que 
fi en la vifite on defcouuroit les lefuites que c'ellioit 
faicft d'eux, parce qu'on deliureroit lefdits lefuites, 
comme Catholiques : & qu'eux feroyent pendus, ou 
pour le moins mis a la cadene comme voleurs de 
Preftres. 

Le remede a ce mal eftoit facile, faifant faire auf- 
dits lefuites vn faut dans la mer. Neantmoins 
comme ie vous ay monflre, la crainte de Dieu s'ef- 


161&-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 59 

lie, when you told me we should find nothing but 
misery at Port Royal?" " Pardon me," answers the 
Father, ' ' I beg you to remember that I told you only 
[284 i.e., 286] that when I was there, I saw and found 
nothing but misery." "That would be all right," 
says the Captain, " if you were not a Spaniard, as 
they say you are ; for, being one, the great good 
which you desire for the French is not on account of 
the love you bear them, but on account of your 
hatred of the English." Upon this Father Biard 
entered into a long explanation ; but he could never 
eradicate this opinion from the Captain's mind, who 
said it was not credible that five or six Frenchmen, 
surrounded by afflictions, would have consented to 
sign a false accusation against a Priest, one of their own 
fellow-citizens, deriving no other profit therefrom 
than to destroy him, and in this way to satisfy their 
evil passions. 

I have narrated this to you that the kindly disposi- 
tions of providence may be recognized, and that you 
may understand how God [285 i.e., 287] proceeded, lit- 
tle by little, to prepare the heart of the Captain. For 
both he and his crew were greatly perplexed, when 
they found themselves near the Agores. The reason 
for this was, that these Islands are inhabited by Catho- 
lic Portuguese, so the English judged that, in anchor- 
ing there, they would have to allow the ship to be 
visited; and if in this visit the priests were discov- 
ered, it would be all over with them, for the Jesuits, 
as Catholics, would be liberated, and they [the Eng- 
lish] would be hanged, or at least condemned to the 
chain and ball, as robbers of Priests. 

The remedy for this evil was an easy one; namely, 
to make the Jesuits take a leap into the sea. Never- 


m LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.4 

toit refueillee, qui combattoit pour eux. Nollre 
Seigneur en fin, qui les [286 i.e., 288] protegeoit 
aux prieres de fa glorieufe Mere, fit que le Capitaine 
fe refolut de les cacher au fonds du nauire, efperant 
que cela fuffiroit pour feurte: comme il fuffit auffi, 
mais la bone foy des lefuites y aydant, ainfi que vous 
entendres tout a ceft'heure. 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, ibi6 61 

theless, as I have shown you, the fear of God was 
awakened, and this contended for them. Our Lord in- 
deed who [286 i.e., 288] protected them through the 
prayers of his glorious Mother, caused the Captain to 
decide to conceal them in the hold of the ship, hoping 
this would suffice for their security, as it did ; but the 
good faith of the Jesuits assisted therein, as you will 
soon hear. 


•62 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.4 


CHAPITRE XXXII. [i.e., xxxi.] 

COMME LE NAUIRE FUT VISITE AUX AgORES, & LA 

BONNE FOY, QUE LES lESUITES GAR- 

DERENT AUX ANGLOIS. 

LA main de Dieu eftoit euidemment fur les le- 
fuites pour les proteger, ainli que vous auez 
peu apperceuoir par cy deuant : Et f ut manif efte 
en vn autre danger, qu'ils palTerent; que nous ne ra- 
contons pas icy, pour n'eflre longs, auquel neant- 
moins [287 i.e., 289] ils confefTent d'auoir eu plus 
de peur, qu'en beaucoup d'autres, & non fans caufe. 
Cefle protedtion diuine fe monftra encores clairement 
en ce quell 'ofta I'apprelienfion du peril au Capitaine. 
Car s'il euft preueu les grands dangers qu'il courut 
puis apres, ie ne fcay s'il euft efte affez confcien- 
tieux, ou fes gens pour ne fe point refoudre au 
meurtre, auant que de tomber aux perplexites, auf- 
quelles ils furent reduits, en cefte fa9on. 

Ils arriuerent k I'lfle de Faeal, qui eft vne des 
A9ores, & ne fe penfoyent "k leur arriuee, que d'an- 
chrer aupres de la ville, d'enuoyer leur batteau pour 
fe charger d'eau, de laquelle ils auoyent principale- 
ment befoin, & achepter quelque peu de bifcuit, & 
autres neceffitez plus preffantes. En cefte fa9on il 
eftoit fort facile [288 i.e., 290] de cacher les lefuites, 
parce qu'on ne vifite gueres, que fort legerement 
ceux qui font loin de terre, & puis la vifite palTee: 
tout le peril eft pafCe. Cefte confideration fit re- 
foudre tant facilemet le Capitaine k ne pas vfer de 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, ibib 63 


CHAPTER XXXII. [i.e., xxxi.] 

HOW THE SHIP WAS VISITED AT THE AZORES, AND 

HOW THE JESUITS KEPT THEIR PROMISE 

TO THE ENGLISH. 

GOD'S hand was evidently stretched over the Jes- 
uits for their protection, as you have been able 
to see heretofore. It was also manifest in 
another danger through which they passed, and which 
we do not relate here, lest we be tedious, in which, 
nevertheless, [287 i.e., 289] they confess to have felt 
more fear than in many others, and not without 
cause. This divine protection was even more evi- 
dent in removing all apprehensions of danger from 
the Captain. For if he had foreseen the great risks 
which he ran afterwards, I am not sure that he or his 
crew would have been so conscientious as not to have 
resolved upon murder, before falling into the perplex- 
ities to which they were in this way reduced. 

They came to the Island of Faeal, one of the A9- 
ores, where, upon their arrival, they intended only to 
anchor near the town, to send their boat for a supply 
of water, which they needed most, and to buy a few 
biscuit and other very necessary articles. In this way 
it was quite easy [288 i.e., 290] to conceal the Jesuits; 
for those vessels which are some distance from the 
land are only slightly visited, and, this visit over, all 
danger is past. This was the reason why the Cap- 
tain so readily resolved not to use cruelty. But fate 
found other ways and means, which he had not con- 


64 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.4 

cruaute. Mais la fortune trouua bien autres tours, 
& deftours qu'il ne pefoit: car il luy falluft entrer 
dans le haure, & fe tenir a la veue de la ville, & des 
autres nauires. La de fmiftre accident, noftre nauire 
s'alla heurter contre vne carauelle Efpagnolle, char- 
gee de fuccre, & luy rompit fon beau-pre; I'Efpagnol 
penfa que ce fut vn guet a pens, a celle fin de fur- 
prendre fon vaiffeau, & le voler: tout ainfi qu'auoit 
faidl vn Frangois dans le mefme port, cinq femaines 
au parauat, & partant fe print a crier au courfaire, 
faifant armer fes gens, & peu s'en fallut que Ion 
[289 i.e., 291] ne vinft aux mains. Grand bruit & 
grande efmeute dans la ville, & par tons les nauires 
qui efloyent la, grand alarme. II fallufl que le Capi- 
taine allafl a terre, & y demeurafl pour gages, & 
affeurance: encores ne pouuoit-on croire, qu'il fut 
autre que Pirate, on vint vifiter & reuifiter le na- 
uire, & les lefuites ioiioyent comme Ton dit a ef con- 
failles, de trou en cachot, & de cachot en fonds, touf- 
iours en quelque nouuelle muffe. Or fur le vif, & 
le chaud des foup9ons, & grabuge, les Efpagnols 
venants vifiter les pauures Peres & le garcon Francois 
eftoyent derriere vne chaloupe fe tenant coys & fans 
fouffler, car fi feulement ils euffent fouffle vn peu 
gros, ou remue la main ou le pied, ils euffent eft6 
defcouuerts. La chofe elloit fi hazardeufe, que nos 
Anglois en tranfiffoyent de [290 i.e., 292] male-peur. 
Mais les lefuites leur voulurent conflamment garder 
la foy pour plufieurs raisos, & entre autres, pour faire 
voir par effedt aux calomniateurs de I'Eglife Catho- 
lique, qu'a tort, & contre verite ils luy impofent d'en- 
feigner, qu'il ne faut point garder la foy aux here- 
tiques. Ce qu'eft totalement faux, & contre fa doc- 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELA TION, 1616 65 


sidered ; for he was obliged to enter the harbor and 
remain in full view of the town, and of other ships. 
There, by an unlucky accident, our ship ran foul of 
a Spanish caravel, loaded with sugar, and broke its 
bowsprit ; the Spaniards thought this was a ruse by 
means of which to surprise their vessel and rob it, 
just as a French ship had done in the same port five 
weeks before; and so they began to cry "pirates!" 
at the same time arming their crew; just a [289 i.e., 
291] little more and they would have come to blows. 
There was great commotion and noise in the town, 
and considerable alarm throughout all the ships in 
the harbor. The Captain had to go on shore, and re- 
main there as a hostage and security ; and even then, 
no one could believe that he was other than a Pirate. 
They came to visit and revisit the ship, and the Jes- 
uits played, as the saying is, at hide and seek, from 
top to bottom, from dungeon to hold, always finding 
some new hiding place. Now during the liveliest and 
fiercest suspicions, and disputes, the Spaniards came 
to visit the ship, and the poor Fathers and the French 
boy were huddled behind a boat, still and breathless ; 
for if they had even breathed a little loud, or moved 
hand or foot, they would have been discovered. The 
thing was so dangerous that our English were seized 
with a [290 i.e., 292] panic. But the Jesuits wished to 
continue to keep faith with them for several reasons, 
and among others to make the slanderers of the Catho- 
lic Church really see that they ascribed to it wrong- 
fully and untruthfully the doctrine that it is not 
necessary to keep faith with heretics ; which is totally 
false and contrary to its belief. But let us return 
to the Spaniards. They never discovered the said 
fathers in their visit, and went away with a very high 


66 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUJTES [Vol.4 

trine. Mais reuenons aux Efpagnols, ils n'apper- 
ceurent iamais lefdits peres en leur vifite, & s'en 
allerent en fort bonne opinion des Anglois, qui les 
voyants dehors, & reuenants a foy de la grande ap- 
prehenfion en laquelle ils auoyent efte, fe prindrent 
^ faire tant de carelles aux Peres, & tant de fefte en 
recognoiffance de leur fmcerit6, qu'en pourroyet faire 
vne troupe de bons parents & amys s'entre rencon- 
trants en paix apres vne abfence, & feparation [291 
i.e., 293] de bien long temps. Les mefmes Anglois 
ont fouuent depuis loiiang6 lefdidts Peres en la pre- 
fence de leurs Miniftres en Angleterre de cefte leur 
fidelity, & les Miniftres en demonftroiet grands 
fignes d'eftonnement & admiration. 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 67 


opinion of the English. The latter, when they saw 
them outside, recovering from the panic into which 
they had been thrown, began to embrace the Fathers 
as effusively, and to make as great a celebration in 
acknowledgment of their sincerity, as a company of 
kind kindred and friends would make at a peaceful re- 
union after a very long [291 i.e., 293] absence and sep- 
aration. These same English have often since then 
praised the Fathers for this their fidelity, in the 
presence of their Ministers in England; and the 
Ministers have thereupon made great demonstrations 
of astonishment and admiration. 


68 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.4 


CHAPITRE XXXII. 

LA VENUE EN ANGLETERRE : & LA DELIURANCE DES 
lESUITES. 

LES Anglois demeurerent trois fepmaines entieres 
engagez en cefle Ifle, que noUvS difons de Faeal, 
pendant lequel teps les pauures lefuites ne 
peurent point voir le Soleil. Or parce que lefdicfts 
Anglois auoyent faute d'argent, ils ne peuret guieres 
s'y remplumer, ce qui les fit du tout [292 i.e., 294] 
refoudre ^ ne plus retenter la Virginie, ains s'en re- 
uenir en Angleterre, attendu mefmemet que ja ils 
fe voyoient dans la prefente annee 16 14, qui eftoit le 
terme de leur feruice. 

Or eflants en la courfe & voye d' Angleterre, la 
tempefle nous ietta hors la marche (qu'on appelle) 
c'eft a dire, hors le Canal qui eft entre France & An- 
gleterre, & nous fallut refugier au Port de Milfier, en 
la Prouince de Galles. La vne autre fois toutes pro- 
uifios nous defaillirent, ce qui contraignit noftre Capi- 
taine d'aller a Pembroch, ville principale de ceft 
endroit, & Viceadmiraute, mais a Pembroch il fut 
arrefte prifonnier, fur le foupcon qu'on auoit qu'il ne 
fuft Pirate. Le foup9on nailToit de ce que luy, & fes 
gens eftoient Anglois, & leur nauire toutesfois efloit 
faidt a la [293 i.e., 295] Fra9oife, ce qui faifoit pre- 
fumer, qu'il venoit du Port de Gryp aux Ifles de 
I'Arcin, parde9a le Cap Efcumant. Le Capitaine fe 
iuftifia du mieux qu'il peufl, difant la verite : mais on 


1616-29] B/ARD'S RELATION, i6i6 69 


CHAPTER XXXII. 

THE ARRIVAL IN ENGLAND; AND THE DELIVERANCE 
OF THE JESUITS. 

THE English were occupied three entire weeks at 
this Island, which we call Fseal, and during 
this time the poor Jesuits were not able to see 
the Sun. Now as these English were in need of 
money, they could not fit themselves out there, and 
this made them firmly [292 i.e., 294] decide to make no 
further attempt to return to Virginia, but to go back 
to England, especially as they now found themselves 
in the present year, 16 14, which was the term of 
their service. 

Now on our way to England the tempest cast us 
out of la ma[n]che ^ (as it is called) ; that is, out of 
the Channel between France and England, and we 
were obliged to take refuge in the Harbor of Milfier 
[Milford], in the Province of Wales. There again 
all provisions failed us, which compelled our Captain 
to go to Pembroch [Pembroke], the principal city of 
this place, and a Vice-admiralty. But at Pembroke 
he was taken prisoner, as they suspected him of be- 
ing a Pirate. The suspicion arose from the fact that 
he and his crew were English, yet their ship was made 
after French [293 i.e., 295] models, which made them 
think he came from Port de Gryp on the Arcin 
Islands, this side of Cape Escumant. The Captain 
justified himself as well as he could, by telling the 
truth; but they did not believe him, inasmuch as 


70 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.4 

ne luy croyoit pas, d'autant qu'il n'auoit point de 
Commiffions : & n'en pouuoit auoir, parce que n'eftant 
que Lieutenant, il fuiuoit fon Capitaine, & ne s'eftoit 
fepar6 d'auec luy que par accident de tempefte, ainli 
qu'auez ouy. A cefte caufe il fut contraindt de pro- 
duire pour tefmoins de fa preud'homie les deux 
lefuites, qu'il auoit dans fon nauire, gens irrepro- 
chables, ce difoit-il, & difoit vray. 

AulTi toft par commandement du Magiftrat lefdits 
lefuites furet appelles a terre ; & interroges en luf- 
tice, auec grand refpedt. Eux conterent la verite du 
faidt, & a leur depofition le Capitaine fut [294 i.e., 
296] tenu gentil-homme d'honneur, & de bien ; fauf 
k demefler nos differents touchant la nouuelle Frace 
par deuat le Roy. Neantmoins il fallut feiourner vn 
grand long temps audit Pembroch attendat refponfe 
de Londres, car il fut neceifaire d'y enuoyer tant pour 
auoir de 1' argent, que pour aduertir de ceft affaire le 
grand Admiral, & la compagnie des Marchands, qui 
ont charge de la Virginie. 

Et cefl icy, ou I'admiration arrefte, 8c mon haleine, 
& mon pas; pour m'ef crier auec le Sage, Que les dif- 
pojitions de la Diuine prouidence font veritablement dref- 
f^es au compas, articuUes au nombre, & mefur^es au 
poids, & trebuchet, iufques a vn demy grain. Car ceft 
appel des lefuites fut fans doute, vne induftrie de 
cefte paternelle prouidece, qui les alTiftoit par tout: 
d'autant que [295 i.e., 297] s'ils fuffent demeures 
dans le nauire, comm'ils y eftoyent, deftitues de tout, 
au coeur de I'hyuer (car c'eftoit en Feurier) & ce, 
quatre fepmaines durant, il eft vrayfemblable qu'ils 
fuffent morts de froid, & de mif ere : mais au moyen 
de ceft appel, ils furent cogneus par le luge, lequel 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, ibi6 71 

he had no Commission, and could not have had, be- 
cause being nothing but a Lieutenant he followed 
his Captain, from whom he was accidentally sepa- 
rated by the storm, as you have heard. For this rea- 
son he was obliged to produce, as witnesses of his 
honesty, the two Jesuits whom he had in his ship, 
irreproachable men, as he said, and said truly. 

Immediately, by command of the Magistrate, the 
Jesuits were summoned to come on shore, where they 
were very respectfully interrogated in a Court of 
Justice. They stated the real facts of the case, and 
upon their testimony the Captain was [294 i.e., 296] 
acknowledged to be a gentleman of honor and of 
worth ; as to the disentanglement of our difficulties 
about new France, these were to be reserved for the 
King. Nevertheless, we had to make a very long 
sojourn at Pembroke, awaiting an answer from Lon- 
don, for it was necessary to send there, partly to ob- 
tain money, partly to make known the affair to the 
high Admiral, and the company of Merchants who 
have charge of Virginia. 

And here admiration makes me pause and hold my 
breath, to cry out with the Wise Man, That the dispen- 
sations of Divine providence are truly arranged by com- 
pass, joined harmoniously , and measured by weight and 
balance even to the lialf of a grain. For this call of the 
Jesuits was without doubt a contrivance of this pater- 
nal providence, which everywhere assisted them ; in- 
asmuch as, [295 i.e., 297] if they had remained in the 
ship, as they were doing, in want of everything, in the 
depths of winter (for it was February), and had con- 
tinued to do this during four weeks, it is probable 
that they would have died of cold and starvation; 
but, by means of this summons, they became known 


72 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.4 

fort honefte & graue perfonnage qii'il eft, ayant en- 
tendu combien ils eftoyent mal dans le nauire, les fit 
loger chez le Maire de la ville, & paya pour eux, di- 
fant, que s'ils auoyent dequoy, ils le luy rendroyent: 
finon que cela f eroit donne pour Dieu : car autrement 
ce nous feroit trop de honte, (difoit-il) fi gens tant 
honneftes, & fgauants ne trouuoyet de la courtoilie 
parmy nous. Ce bon Seigneur s'appelle Nicolas 
Adams, Vice-admiral dudit Pembroch. 

Or pendant ce fejour toute [296 i.e., 298] forte de 
gens les alloient voir, & de bien loin, par curiofite de 
voir des lefuites en leur habit, ainfi qu'ils eftoient, & 
ont toufiours efte iufques a leur retour en Frace. 
Miniftres, lufticiers, Gentilshommes, & autres ve- 
noyent conferer auec eux; Vn Milord mefmes du 
grad Confeil voulut auoir le plaifir de les accarer en 
difpute rangee auec quatre Miniftres. le dy Miniftres 
pour m'accommoder a 1' intelligence Frangoife: car 
en Angleterre ils les appellent Preftres: Et le Chef 
de la difpute eftoit vn Archidiacre, parce que les An- 
glois retiennent encores beaucoup de I'Eglife Catho- 
lique, comme I'Ordre de la Hierarchic Ecclefiaftique, 
Archeuefques, Euefques, Preftres, Archipreftres, 
Archidiacres, Curez, Chanoines, &c. L'impofition 
Epifcopale des mains en la creation des Preftres, [297 
i.e., 299] & moindres Ordres, & en la confirmatio 
des enfans, Le Crefme, & les ceremonies, le figne de 
la Croix, & I'lmage d'icelle, & d'autres: La Pfalmo- 
die, & culte ordinaire, les feftes ordonnees des Saindts, 
& Saindtes, les Vigiles, les leufnes, le Carefme, 
I'Abftinence des viandes au Vendredy, & Samedy, 
les habits Sacerdotaux, & vaiffeaux facrez: Et ceux 
qui condamnent toutes ces chofes, comme font les 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 73 

to the Judge, honorable and grave personage as he 
is, and he, having heard how badly off they were in 
the ship, had them lodged in the house of the Mayor 
of the city, and paid for them himself, saying they 
might pay it back if they had the means, otherwise 
it would be given to God. "For" (said he), "it 
would be a great disgrace to us if such honorable 
and learned men were not received among us with 
courtesy." This kind Gentleman's name is Nico- 
las Adams, Vice admiral of Pembroke. 

Now during this sojourn [296 i.e., 298] all kinds of 
people went to see them, and some from a great dis- 
tance, through curiosity to see Jesuits dressed in their 
robes, as they were then and always have been until 
their return to France. Ministers, Justices, Gentle- 
men, and others came to confer with them; even a 
Lord of the great Council wished to have the pleas- 
ure of pitting four Ministers against them in debate. 
I say Ministers, to make myself intelligible to the 
French, for in England they call them Priests. And 
the Chief one in the debate was an Archdeacon, for 
the English still have a great many things in com- 
mon with the Catholic Church, as the Order of 
the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, Archbishops, Bishops, 
Priests, Archpriests, Archdeacons, Curates, Canons, 
etc. ; the Episcopal laying on of hands in the ordination 
of Priests, [297 i.e., 299] and lesser Orders, and in the 
confirmation of children ; the Chrism and its cere- 
monies, the sign of the Cross, the Image of this and 
of other things; the Psalmody and usual form of 
worship, the prescribed Saints' days, the Vigils, 
Fasts, Lent, Abstinence from meat on Friday and 
Saturday ; Priestly robes, and consecrated vessels. 
And those who condemn all these things, as the Cal- 


74 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.4 

Caluiniftes de France & d'Efcoffe, & les appellent 
fuperftitions damnables, & inuentions de 1' Antechrift, 
font nommez des Anglois, Puritains, & les detellent 
comme peftes execrables. 

Or en fin, refponfe venant de Londres, on fceut, 
que Monfieur 1' Ambaffadeur de France auoit efl6 ad- 
nerty de I'arrmee de ce nauire, & en pourfuinoit la 
reddition, [298 i.e., 300] & particulierement des le- 
fuites, ayant en commandement de ce faire de fa 
Majeft6 tres-Chreflienne. Ce fut vn autre effedl de 
la Pronidence diuine, lors qu'elle moyenna ce noftre 
arrefl, en la Prouince de Galles, k celle fin qu'il fufl 
cogneu de tons : car nous auons de grands indices : & 
vous en verrez tantoft aucuns, que fi les Marchands, 
qui ont furintendance de la Virginie, en pouuoient 
faire k leur gre, pas vn eftranger, qui auroit efte en 
ladic5te Virginie, ne reuiendroit iamais en fon pays. 

Pour tofl finir noflre difcours, notez que les lefuites 
furent conduits par vn long circuit au Port de San- 
duidts ; & de la ramenez a Douure par le commande- 
ment du Roy, & de Douure a Calais, oil ils rendirent 
graces "k Dieu pour tant de iignalez benefices, [299 
i.e., 301] & prouidence fienne, & en auoyent bien 
occafion, ayants demeur^ neuf mois & demy entre 
les mains des Anglois. Le fieur d'Arquien, Gouuer- 
neur dudit Calais, & Monfieur la Baulaye, Doyen, 
leur firent de leur grace fort bon accueil, & leur au- 
mofnerent affez pour fe conduire iufques ^ leur Col- 
lege d' Amiens. 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 76 

vinists of France and of Scotland do, and call them 
damnable superstitions, and inventions of the Anti- 
christ, are by the English called Puritans, and are 
detested by them as abominable plagues. 

When at last an answer came from London, it was 
learned that the Ambassador of France^ had heard 
about the arrival of this ship, and was negotiating its 
surrender, [2981.6., 300] especially the surrender of 
the Jesuits, having had orders to do so from his most 
Christian Majesty. This was another effect of divine 
Providence, since it caused this our arrest in the 
Province of Wales to the end that it might be known 
to all ; for we have strong proofs, and you will soon see 
some of them, that if the Merchants in whose hands 
lay the administration of Virginia, had been able to 
have their own way, not one foreigner who was to be 
found in Virginia, would ever have returned to his 
own country. 

To finish our story as quickly as possible, note that 
the Jesuits were taken by a long roundabout way to 
the Harbor of Sanduicts [Sandwich], and from there 
sent to Dover by order of the King, and from Dover 
to Calais, where they rendered thanks to God for such 
signal blessings [299 i.e., 301] and providences, for 
which they had good cause, having been nine months 
and a half in the hands of the English. Sieur d'Ar- 
quien. Governor of Calais, and Monsieur la Baulaye, 
Dean, gave them a very warm reception and provided 
them with means to return to their College at Amiens. 


76 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.4 


CHAPITRE XXXIV. [i.e., xxxiii.] 

LE RETOUR DU SIEUR DE LA MOTE, DU CAPITAINE 

FLORY, & DE QUELQUES AUTRES. ET LA 

REDDITION DU NAUIRE. 

PEV apres cefte deliurance des lefuites, Dieu re- 
cueillit encores par fa mifericorde, quafi tout 
le refte du naufrage en cefte fagon. 

Le gargon qui efloit auec les lefuites, appelle Guil- 
laume Crito, [300 i.e., 302] fut conduit k Londres, & 
de la renuoye a fon Pere a Honfleur. 

Sur ce mefme temps le fieur de la Mote reuint 
auffi en Angleterre dans vn vailTeau de la Bermude, 
qui auoit palfe par la Virginie. 

Le Capitaine Argal combatit genereufement contre 
le Marefchal Thomas Deel (que vous auez ouy eftre 
fort afpre en fes humeurs) k fin d'obtenir de luy per- 
miffion du retour, pour ledit fieur de la Mote, & I'ob- 
tint en fin. 

Or ledi(5t fieur la Mote fut fort eftonne, que fubite- 
ment eftant arriue en Angleterre, perfonne ne luy 
parloit plus, perfonne ne le voyoit, il eftoit delaiffe 
de tous ; & le pis eft, que fur ce il tomba malade dans 
le nauire. II fe foupgonna incontinent du danger oil 
il efloit, & d'ou il venoit: fgauoir eft, des marchands 
de la Virginie, [301 i.e., 303] qui eufi!ent defire fe 
deffaire de luy, & ne fgauoyent comment. II tafcha 
done par fubtilite, & en trouua le moyen, de faire 
ffauoir de fes nouuelles a Monfieur de Biffeaux, digne 
Ambaffadeur de fa Majefte tres-Chreflienne, qui auffi 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 77 


CHAPTER XXXIV. [i.e., xxxiii.] 

THE RETURN OF SIEUR DE LA MOTE, OF CAPTAIN 
FLORY AND OTHERS, AND THE SUR- 
RENDER OF THE SHIP, 

SHORTLY after this liberation of the Jesuits, God 
in his mercy rescued nearly all the others who 
had been shipwrecked, and in the following 
way. 

The boy who was with the Jesuits, called Guil- 
laume Crito, [300 i.e., 302] was taken to London and 
thence sent to his Father at Honfleur. 

At the same time sieur de la Mote also returned to 
England in a vessel from the Bermudas, which had 
stopped at Virginia. 

Captain Argal generously contended with Marshal 
Thomas Deel* (of whose great asperity of temper 
you have heard us speak) to obtain from him permis- 
sion for sieur de la Mote to return, and at last it was 
granted. 

Now this sieur la Mote was very much astonished 
when suddenly, on arriving in England, no one 
spoke to him any more, nor looked at him, and he 
found himself forsaken by all ; and the worst of it 
was that he was taken sick on board the ship. He 
immediately suspected the nature of the danger which 
threatened him, and whence it came ; namely, from 
the Virginia merchants, [301 i.e., 303] who would 
have liked to get rid of him, and did not know how. 
Therefore he tried by secret means, and finally sue- 


78 LES RELA TIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol. 4 

toft luy manda deux Gentilshommes, & le fit deli- 
urer, & bien traicter, ainfi qu'il meritoit pour fon 
courage, & valeur. 

En ce mefme temps aulTi Madame la Marquife de 
Guercheuille enuoya la Sauffaye ^ Londres, a celle 
fin de folliciter la reddition du nauire, & la reparation 
des torts receus par vn vol tant inique. Le nauire a 
eft6 rendu, mais on n'a rien obtenu d'auantage 
iufques a maintenant. 

Or ainfi que noftre nauire ayat mainleu6e prenoit 
ja le vol en France, pais de fon origine : voicy, que 
le Capitaine Flory fon Maiftre [302 i.e., 304] arriua 
comme a poindt nomme, pour entrer dedans, & y 
commander. 

Le Capitaine Argal s'en reuenant en Angleterre 
I'auoit encores arracbe des mains du Marefchal, «& 
luy, & deux autres Fran§ois. Certes ledit Argal 
s'eft monftr6 tel, que nous auons occafion de luy fou- 
haitter, qu'il ferue d'ores-en-auant vne meilleure 
caufe, & ou fa nobleffe de coeur puiffe paroiftre, non 
k la perte, ains a la manutention des gens de bien. 

De tout noftre nombre, trois font morts k la Vir- 
ginie, & quatre y reftet encores, ^ la deliurance def- 
quels on trauaille autant que faire fe pent. Dieu 
par fa mifericorde leur donne patience, & tire de 
noftre affliction le bien que fa prouidence, & bonte 
aggreent. Ainfi foit-il. 


1616-2yj BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 79 


ceeded in having his story made known to Monsieur 
de Bisseaux, worthy Ambassador of his most Chris- 
tian Majesty, who immediately sent to him two Gen- 
tlemen who had him liberated and well treated, as 
he deserved to be for his courage and his valor. 

At the same time also Madame la Marquise de 
Guercheville sent la Saussaye to London, to request 
the surrender of the ship, and reparation for the 
wrongs involved in this iniquitous robbery. The 
ship has been given up, but, up to the present, noth- 
ing else has been obtained. 

And now, just as our ship, having been set free, 
was about to wing her way to France, her native land, 
behold, Captain Flory, her Master, [302 i.e., 304] as 
if by appointment, arrives upon the scene to step in 
and take command of her. 

Captain Argal, about to return to England, had 
rescued him and two other Frenchmen from the 
hands of the Marshal. Certainly this Argal has 
shown himself such a person that we have reason to 
wish for him that, from now on, he may serve a bet- 
ter cause and one in which his nobility of heart may 
appear, not in the ruin, but in the preservation of 
honest men. 

Of all our number, three died in Virginia, and 
four still remain there, for whose liberation every- 
thing possible is being done. May God in his mercy 
give them patience, and may he derive from our 
affliction whatever good is acceptable to his provi- 
dence and mercy. Amen. 


80 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.4 


CHAPITRE XXXV. [i.e., xxxiv.] 

[303 i.e., 305] QUEL PROFIT A ESTE FAICT QUANT A LA 
RELIGION CHRESTIENNE EN LA NOUUELLE FRANCE. 

MAINTENANT quelqu'vn ayant ouy tout noftre 
recit a bon droidt nous dira: Or fus, voila 
beaucoup de trauaux, que vous nous auez 
cont^, plufieurs entreprinfes loiiables, & diuers acci- 
dents bien fauuages; Mais quoy? Eft-ce la tout le 
profit quant a I'auancement du culte de Dieu? N'a- 
uez-vous couru que pour ainfi vous lalTer? defpendu 
que pour confumer, paty finon pour encores par delTus 
en eftre diffamez en France ? Car fi Canada ne rend 
point autre reuenu, nous vous dirons, qu'aucun, s'il 
n'eft fol, ne trauaille pour feulement patir; [304 i.e., 
306] & ne defpend pour feulemet s'efpuifer. Ains a 
tres-bie dit le faindt Apoftre, Que, gut laboure, c eft en 
efperance de recueillir du frui6l. Quel fruidt doncques 
nous apportez-vous de vos trauaux. 

A ce''a ie refponds que par tout, & auffi bien en 
France, qu'en Canada, il faut femer auant que moyf- 
f onner, & planter auant que recueillir, & ne point tant 
eflre ou auare, ou impatient, qu'on vueille, comme 
les vfuriers, auffi toll le profit que le prefl. Combie 
que certes au feruice de Dieu il n'y auroit que def- 
penfes, & trauaux, elles ont de foy-mefme ailez 
grand emolument, & falaire; non ja pour eflre def- 
penfes & trauaux, ains pour eflre preuues, & exer- 
cices de noflre deuoir, & pieufe volonte enuers noflre 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 


81 


CHAPTER XXXV. [i.e., xxxiv.] 

[303 i.e., 305] WHAT PROGRESS THE CHRISTIAN RE- 
LIGION HAS MADE IN NEW FRANCE. 

NOW some one, having heard all our story, with 
good reason will say: " Come now, here is a 
great deal of labor you have told us about, 
several laudable enterprises, and various rough and 
violent accidents, but is this all the profit there is in 
the advancement of the worship of God ? Have you 
run, only to thus weary yourselves? expended, only 
for the sake of consuming? endured suffering, only 
to be abused for it in France? For if Canada does 
not furnish any other revenue, we can tell you that 
no one, unless he be a fool, works simply for the 
sake of suffering, [3041.^,306] or expends only 
to exhaust himself. But very truly says the holy 
Apostle, That he who plantcth hopeth to gather fruit. 
What fruit then do you bring us from your labors ? ' ' 
To this I answer, that everywhere, in France as 
well as in Canada, it is necessary to sow before reap- 
ing, and to plant before gathering, and not to be so 
avaricious or impatient as to wish, like usurers, the 
profit at the same time as the loan. How true it is 
that, in the service of God, there should be nothing 
but expense and labor, these of themselves being a 
great enough reward and salary; not because they 
are expenses and labors, but because they are proofs 
and exercises of our duty and pious willingness to- 
wards the liberal donor of all gifts, our all-powerful 


82 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.4 

liberal donateur de toutes chofes noflre Dieu tout- 
puiffant. Car il [305 i.e., 307] ne poife pas, ny n'ef- 
time nos confeils, & deffeins a la balance & au poids 
des euenements, qui font en fa main, & ordonnance; 
ains a la folidit6 de noftre vouloir, ^ la maffmete de 
I'entreprinfe, a I'integrite de la deuotion, & delibera- 
tion. 

II difpofe les euenements comme il luy plaift, les 
rendant fouuent plus heureux, & plus frudtueux, que 
moins on les recognoit pour tels. Car celuy, qui 
plantc fiejl rien, ny cclui qui arroufe ; ains celui, qui 
donnc accroifjemcnt ; lequel accroillement fe fait pre- 
mierement foubs terre, & hors la veue des hommes. 
Quant a moy, i'eflime vn tres-grand profit en ce que 
nous auos toufiours mieux, & mieux defcouuert le 
naturel de ces terres, & pais : la dif pofition des habi- 
tans: le moyen de les pouuoir ayder: [306 i.e., 308] 
les contrarietez, qui peuuent furuenir au progrez de 
I'ceuure : & les fecours, qu'il faut oppofer a I'ennemy. 
L'architeae qui fait, & deffai(5t fes plans & modeles 
iufques a la cinq, & fixiefme fois, ne fe penfe pas pour 
cela n'auoir rien faidt en fon premier, & fecond elTay, 
lefquels il aura deffaits pour s'arrefter, au fixiefme; 
Parce que, dira-il, ce dernier n'a fa perfecftio, que de 
I'imperfectio des premiers. De mefme en eft-il de 
I'orateur, qui efface & raye deux, & trois fois ce qu'il 
auoit efcrit de premiere ardeur, parce que la beaute, 
& force des concepts, & paroles, qu'il fubflitue pour 
la quatriefme fois, luy naift de la reiedtion, & du def- 
plaifir des precedentes. Auffi de vray, ce n'eft pas 
autrement, que Dieu nous donne pour 1' ordinaire la 
prudence, & I'ameliorement des chofes; finon [307 
i.e., 309] par diuerfes experiences, & pour la plufpart 


161*>-29] B/ARD'S RELATION, i6i6 


83 


God. For he [305 i.e. , 307] does not weigh nor judge 
our counsels and designs in the balance and by the 
weight of the results, which are in his hand and or- 
dinance ; but by the firmness of our desire, the great- 
ness of the enterprise, and the honesty of our devo- 
tion and purpose. 

He arranges events as it pleases him, often render- 
ing them the more happy and the more fruitful, the 
less one recognizes them as such. For he that plant - 
£th is nothing, nor he that watereth ; but he who giveth 
the increase ; and this increase is first made under the 
ground, and out of the sight of men. 

For my part, I consider it a great advantage that we 
have learned more and more about the nature of these 
territories and lands, the character of the inhabitants, 
the means of helping them, [306 i.e., 308] the ob- 
stacles which are liable to arise against the progress of 
the work, and the help that must be given to oppose 
the enemy. The architect who makes and unmakes 
his plans and models even to the fifth and sixth time, 
does not think, for all that, that he has not accom- 
plished anything in his first and second trials, which 
he has destroyed to stop at the sixth ; for he will say 
that the perfection of the last, lies only in the imper- 
fections of the first. It is thus also with the orator, 
who erases and scratches out twice and three times 
what he has written in his first enthusiasm, because 
the beauty and force of the ideas and words, which 
he substitutes for the fourth time, come to him from 
his rejection of, and dissatisfaction with, the preced- 
ing ones. So, in truth, it is not otherwise that God 
usually gives us prudence and the better management 
of things, only [307 i.e., 309] through various experi- 
ences, and for the most part through our own faults 


84 


LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol. 4 

de nos fautes & de celles d'autruy. Nous auons done 
vne partie de nos pretenfions, nous auons experi- 
ment6: nous f9au6s ce qu'il faut, & ce qui nuit: & ou 
gift le poindt principal de 1' affaire. Les moyens, 
qu'on a employ6 n'ont point efte fi grands, ne fi pro- 
portionnez k plus haute fin, qu'il faille nous beaucoup 
mefcotenter de ce que Dieu nous done. 

Mais encores d'autre cofte c'eft vn grand fruidt, 
que la confiance & amitie que les Sauuages ont prinfe 
auecques les Frangois, par la grande familiarite, & 
hantife, qu'ils ont eu auec eux. Car toufiours faut-il 
mettre cefte bafe auant que d'efleuer le chapiteau; 
f§auoir eft, de les nous rendre ou citoyens, ou bons 
hoftes, & amis auant que de les auoir pour freres. 
Or cefte confiance, & cefte [308 i.e., 310] priuaute 
eft ja fi grande, que nous viuons entr'eux auec 
moins de crainte, que nous ne ferions dans Paris. 
Car dans Paris nous n'oferions dormir, que la porte 
bien verrouillee; mais la nous ne la fermons que 
contre le vent, & fi n'en dormons pas pour cela 
moins affeurez. Au commencement ils nous fuyoiet, 
& craignoyent : ores ils nous defiret. A noftre pre- 
miere defcente, & vifite de S. Sauueur, nous fifmes 
femblant, que la place ne nous agreoyt pas, & que 
voulions aller autrepart, ces bonnes gents du lieu en 
pleuroyent, & lamentoyent. Au contraire, le Saga- 
mo de Kadefquit, appelle Betfabes, s'en vint pour 
nous y attirer auec mille promeffes, ayant ouy que 
nous pretendios de nous y aller loger. Eft-ce peu 
que d'auoir ce fi bon fondement de luftice en nos peu- 
plades, «& ce tant [309 i.e., 311] affeure gage de bon 
fuccez ? Et ne faut point eftimer que les autres Na- 
tions ayent porte cefte amitie auffi bien que nous. 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 85 


and those of others. We have done, then, a part of 
what we intended to do ; we have experimented, we 
know what is necessary and what is harmful, and 
wherein lies the principal part of the work. The 
means which have been employed have not been 
so great, nor so proportioned to a higher purpose, 
that we should be greatly dissatisfied with what God 
gives us. 

But yet, on the other hand, it is a great result that 
the French have won the confidence and friendliness 
of the Savages, through the great familiarity and fre- 
quent intercourse which they have had with them. 
For the foundation must always be laid before raising 
the capital ; that is, we must make them citizens, or 
good hosts and friends, before making them brothers. 
Now this confidence and this [308 i.e., 310] intimacy 
is already so great that we live among them with less 
fear than we would in Paris. For in Paris we can 
not sleep without having the doors well bolted ; but 
there we close them against the wind only, and 
sleep no less securely for keeping them open. At 
first they fled from us, and feared us ; now they wish 
us with them. When we first disembarked and 
visited St. Sauveur, and pretended that we did not 
like the place, and that we thought of going else- 
where, these simple natives wept and lamented. 
On the other hand, the Sagamore of Kadesquit, 
called "Betsabes,"*^ came to persuade us, with a thou- 
sand promises, to go to his place, having heard that 
we had some intention of making a settlement 
there. Is it a small thing to have such a founda- 
tion of Justice in our colonies, and this so [309 i.e., 
311] sure pledge of great success? And we must 
not conclude that other nations have borne this 


86 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.4 

Car nous fommes tefmoiiivS oculaires, conime lefdidts 
Sauuages ayants rencontre vn atiantage (a leur adiiis) 
contre les Anglois, fe ruerent fur eux furieufement, 
penfants comme ie croy tirer quelque reuenche de 
I'iniure, qui nous auoit efte faicte: mais le bon-heur 
ne les feconda pas en leur attaque. Pareillement. 
fur la fin de I'an 1611. les Holandois voulans feule- 
ment defcendre au Cap de la Heue, pour y faire 
aiguade, nos Sauuages les alTaillirent brufquement. 
& en defirent fix, entre lef quels eftoit le Capitaine 
du nauire. II me femble, que nous ferons indignes 
de cefle bienvueillance, fi nous ne faifons, qu'elle leur 
profile a aymer celuy, de qui nous [310 i.e., 312] re- 
ceuons tous nos biens. 

Outre plus, quoy que les lefuites n'ayent pas bap- 
tife communement les adultes pour les raifons cy- 
deuant deduites: fi les ont-ils catechife tant qu'ils ont 
peu, & par les yeux, & par les oreilles. Par les yeux, 
dy-ie, leur faifant voir nos vs & ceremonies, & les y 
accouftumants. En nos Proceffions nous faifios aller 
les petits enfans au deuat de la Croix, & faire quelque 
feruice, comme de porter les luminaires, ou autres 
chofes; & tant eux que leurs peres y prenoyent du 
plaifir, comme s'ils eulTent efle vrayement Chrefliens. 
Dieu mercy cela eft ja communement gaigne, qu'ils 
ne veulent point mourir fans baptefme, fe croyans 
eftre miferables a iamais, s'ils trefpaffent fans iceluy, 
ou du moins, fans vne forte volonte d'iceluy, & fans 
douleur de leurs pechez. 

[311 i.e., 313] Le Patriarche Flefche (comme a 
efte dit) en auoit baptife peut eftre quatre vingts, les 
lefuites feulemet vne vingtaine, & iceux petits enfans, 
hormis trois, qui ont efte baptif^s en extreme neceffite 


161t>-29] lilARD'S RELATION, j6i6 87 


friendship as well as we, for we are eyewitnesses 
to the fact that these Savages, having (as they sup- 
posed,) some advantage over the English, threw them- 
selves upon them with fury, thinking, I believe, to 
get revenge for the injury that had been done us; 
but they were not successful in their attack. Like- 
wise, towards the end of the year i6i i, the Holland- 
ers merely wishing to land at Cap de la Heve to 
take in some fresh water, our Savages assailed them 
fiercely, and made away with six of them, among 
whom was the Captain of the ship. It seems to me 
that we will be unworthy of this friendliness, if we 
do not so act that it may avail them in learning to 
love him, from whom we [310 i.e., 312] receive all 
our blessings. 

Furthermore, although the Jesuits have not usual- 
ly baptized adults, for the reasons heretofore stated, 
yet they have catechized them as well as they could, 
both through the eyes and the ears. Through the 
eyes, I say, making them see our usages and cere- 
monies and accustoming them thereto. In our Pro- 
cessions we had the little children march before the 
Cross, and perform some service, such as carrying 
the lights, or other things; and both they and their 
fathers take pleasure in this, as if they were really 
Christians. Thank God this much has already been 
accomplished, that they do not wish to die without 
baptism, believing that they will be forever miser- 
able, if they pass away without it, or at least a strong 
desire for it, and without sorrow for their sins. 

[311 i.e., 313] The Patriarch Flesche (as has been 
said) baptized perhaps eighty of them, the Jesuits only 
about twenty, and these were little children, except 
three, who were baptized in the last extremity of sick- 


88 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.4 


de maladie, & font alles iouir de la vie bien-heureufe. 
apres auoir efte regeneres a icelle, comme auffi aucus 
des petits enfans. Nous anions compofe noftre Cate- 
chifme en Sauuageois, & commencions aucunement a 
pouuoir iargonner auec nos Catechumenes. Nous 
dreffions vne nouuelle peuplade fort commode: c'ef- 
toit noftre Automne, noftre temps des fruidts: & 
voila que fur ce poind: I'enuieux de tout bien, & fpe- 
cialement, du falut humain eft venu de malice k 
mettre le feu a nos trauaux, & nous emporter hors 
du champ. Le vidtorieux lefus de fa puillante main : 
& inuincible [312 i.e., 314] fapience le confonde. 
Ainfi foit-il. 


1616-29] MARD'S RELA riO.\, 1616 89 

ness, and thence have gone to enjoy a life of bliss, 
after having been born again in this life ; as have also 
some of the little children. We had composed our 
Catechism in the Savage language, and had begun 
to be able to talk some kind of a jargon with our 
Catechumens. We were founding a new and very- 
pleasant colony, it was our Autumn, our time of 
harvest. And lo, at this moment, the one who is jeal- 
ous of all good, and particularly of human salvation, 
came and, wickedly setting fire to all our work, bore 
us away from the field. May the victorious Jesus, 
with his powerful hand, and invincible [312 i.e., 314] 
wisdom, confound him. Amen. 


»0 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.4 


CHAPITRE XXXVI. [i.e., xxxv.] 

AUCUNES MERUEILLES, QUE DIEU A OPERE EN LA 
GUERISON DES SAUUAGES. 

MAIS comme Dieu appelle cefle nation de Sau- 
uages par fa mifericorde, & douceur conue- 
nablement k leur portee, & neceffites, ainfi luy 
a-il pleu fe monflrer a eux benin & fecourable. le 
vous remarqueray icy trois de ces marques bien eui- 
dentes, & certaines, faidtes en la guerifon des mala- 
dies corporelles. 

La premiere foit cefte-cy. Le P. Biard eflant alle 
a la riuiere de I'Eplan (ainfi qu'a efte dit cy-deffus,) 
on luy dit, qu'^ deux lieiies [313 i.e., 315] de Ik en 
la Baye S. Marie y auoit vne femme proche de la 
mort, laquelle defiroit fort de le voir, & luy parler. 
Le Pere pria vn certain nomme la Pierre, de I'y con- 
duire: ce qu'il fit. lis treuuerent cefte femme felon 
la coultume de leurs malades, eftendue au long du 
feu, & trauaill^e de mal defpuis trois fepmaines. Le 
Pere la Catechife du mieux qu'il peut, & 1' encourage, 
faifant quelques prieres, puis s'en reuint, luy laiffant 
vne croix pendue au col, par ce qu'il ne I'eftima point 
eftre fi bas, qu'il la fallufl baptifer, feulement il ad- 
iiertit les affiftants, que fi elle continuoit en maladie 
trois ou quatre iours, ou qu'elle empirafl, qu'6 le vint 
appeller. II n'en fut pas de befoin: car le iour fui- 
uant laditte femme fe leua faine, & gaillarde, & s'en 
alia trouuer fon mary chargee d'vn pefant fac, & fa 


1616-29] RIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 91 


CHAPTER XXXVI. [ie., xxxv.] 

SOME MIRACLES WHICH GOD PERFORMED IN THE 
CURE OF THE SAVAGES. 

BUT as God, being merciful and gentle, calls this- 
nation of Savages according to their capacity 
and needs, so he has been pleased to show 
himself kind and helpful to them. I shall call to 
your attention here three proofs of this, very evident 
and sure, which were shown in the cure of bodily ills. 
Let the first be this one. Father Biard having- 
gone to the river of Smelts" (as has been said before), 
was told, that two leagues [3 1 3 i.e., 3 1 S] from there at 
the Baye Ste. Marie, there was a woman very near 
death, who had a strong desire to see and speak with 
him. The Father begged a certain man named 
Pierre to accompany him thither, which he did. 
They found this woman, who had been afflicted by 
disease for three weeks, stretched out by the fire, 
according to the custom of their sick people. The 
Father Catechized her as well as he could, and en- 
couraged her, offering some prayers; then he re- 
turned, leaving a cross hanging around her neck, 
for he did not consider her so low that it was neces- 
sary to baptize her ; he only advised those present 
that if she continued ill three or four days, or if she 
became worse, they should summon him. There was 
no need, for the next day this woman arose healthy 
and happy, and, laden with a heavy bag, went to 
find her husband four leagues away, with her cross 


92 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.4 

croix au [314 i.e., 316] col; iufques k quatre lieiies 
de la. Celuy qui premier la vit fut vn huguenot de 
Dieppe, appelle lea Bachelard, qui en vint porter les 
nouuelles au fufdit lefuite. 

La feconde fut a Pentegoet: le Pere Biard y eftant 
en la compagnie du Sieur de Biencourt, & felon fa 
couftume vifitant les malades du lieu, & recitant fur 
eux les faindls Euangiles, on luy en monflra vn, du- 
quel on n'attendoit plus vie, malade defpuis trois 
mois. II efloit pour lors en vn fort accez, ne parlant 
qu'a grande peine, & fuant d'vne fueur froide, pre- 
fage de la mort. Le lefuite luy fit baifer par plu- 
fieurs fois vne croix, qu'il luy attacha au col, luy an- 
non9ant le mieux qu'il pouuoit les bonnes nouuelles 
du falut acquis en icelle ; il y auoit bonne compagnie 
de Sauuages, qui efcoutoyent, & ^ leur contenance 
monftroyent [315 i.e., 317] grand contentement en 
ce qui f e dif oit : le Pere les lailTa ainfi bien affedtion- 
nes, & s'en reuint a la barque. Or ce que Dieu fit 
en fon abfence apparoit, de ce que nous vifmes vn 
iour apres. Car le Sieur de Biencourt faifant la 
trocque en fa barque, ce Sauuage y vint auec les 
autres, fain, & gaillard portant fa croix en parade, & 
fit recognoifl'ance au Pere Biard deuant tous auec 
grande ioye. 

La tierce eft bien fignalee, & partant ie la deduiray 
au long. Comme nous auons raconte cy-deuant le 
Sieur de la Mote, Simon I'interprete, & le Pere Biard 
eftoyent all6s vifiter le lieu de S. Sauueur, pour re- 
cognoiflre s'il feroit bon pour leur demeure. Or re- 
uenants de cefte vifite, & retournants aux Cabannes 
des Sauuages, ils ouyrent de bien loin, deux on trois 
f ois vn grand, & [316 i.e., 318] lamentable hurlement, 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, ibi6 OS- 

hanging around her [314 i.e., 316] neck. The one 
who first saw her was a huguenot of Dieppe, called 
Jean Bachelard, who came to bring the news to the 
Jesuit. 

The second was at Pentegoet; Father Biard being 
there in company with Sieur de Biencourt, and, ac- 
cording to his custom, visiting the sick people of the 
place, and reciting over them passages from the holy 
Gospels, they showed him a certain one who was not 
expected to live, having been sick for three months. 
He was then having a violent attack, speaking only 
with great difficulty, and bathed in a cold perspira- 
tion, the forerunner of death. The Jesuit had him 
kiss a cross several times, which he attached to his 
neck, announcing as well as he could the good tidings 
of the salvation acquired thereby ; there were a num- 
ber of Savages present, who listened, and, by their 
countenances, showed [315 i.e., 317] great satisfaction 
in what was being said. The Father left them thus 
kindly disposed, and returned to the barque. Now 
what God did in his absence was apparent from what 
we saw a day later. For when Sieur de Biencourt 
was trading in his barque, this Savage, with several 
others, came there healthy and happy, parading his 
cross, and, with great demonstrations of joy, ex- 
pressed his gratitude to Father Biard before them 
all. 

The third is very remarkable, and therefore I shall 
tell it at length. As we have related above, Sieur de 
la Mote, Simon the interpreter, and Father Biard had 
gone to visit the place called St. Sauveur, to find out 
whether it would be suitable for a settlement. Now 
coming back from this visit, and returning to the 
Cabins of the Savages, they heard two or three times 


•94 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.4 

& demandans an Sauuage, qui les conduifoit, qu'ell-ce 
que cela pourroit eftre: le Sauuage leur refpondit: 
que quelqu'vn eftoit mort: & que e'en eftoit les 
plaintes, qui fut caufe, que noUvS ne nous en mifmes 
point en efmoy. Or comme nous eftions ja fort a la 
portee de la voix, voicy que ce mugiffement s'entend 
<ie nouueau ; & de fortune vn ieune gargon Sauuage 
fe rencontrant fur le chemin, la curiofite poulTa le P. 
Biard a luy demander, qui eftoit ce mort, que Ton 
lamentoit? Le gar9on refpondit, que ce n'eftoit pas 
vn mort, ains vn mourant : & adioufte de foy-mefme : 
court vifhe, ^ laduenture le pourras-tu baptifer auant 
qu'il meure tout k faidt; lors comme fi Dieu Teull; dit 
de fa bouche, nous nous mifmes a courir de tout 
noftre poflible. Arriues, nous [317 i.e., 319] trouuaf- 
mes tons les Sauuages hors de leurs Cabannes ranges 
en haye comme des foldarts en vne perte de ville, au 
milieu fe promenoit vn miferable Pere tenant fon en- 
fant, qui fe mouroit entre fes bras. Or quand I'en- 
fant venoit a letter des fanglots croyant qu'il vouloit 
rendre I'Ame, le Pere fe prenoit a hurler pitoyable- 
ment, & toute la compagnie le fuiuoit de mefme ton ; 
car telle eft leur couftume. Doncques le P. Biard 
voyant ce fpedlacle, s'adrefTa au defconforte Pere, & 
luy demanda s'il luy plairoit bien, qu'il baptifaft fon 
fils: le bon homme, qui eftoit prefque hors de foy, 
ne luy refpondit rien de parole ; mais en effedl il luy 
mit fon enfant entre les bras. Le P. cria que toft 
Ion apportaft de I'eau, ce qu'on fit, & remettant I'en- 
fant entre les mains du Sieur de la Mote (qui de grand 
[318 i.e., 320] zele defiroit d'en eftre parrain, le 
baptifa, I'appellant Nicolas, du nom dudidt Sieur. 
Les Sauuages attendants quelque grand effe(5t, fe 


1616-29] BIAKD'S RELATION. 1616 95 

cries and [316 i.e., 318] lamentations in the distance, 
and, asking the Savage who guided them what this 
might mean, he answered that some one was dead 
and this was the mourning ; hence we did not hasten 
our footsteps. Now as we were already within easy 
hearing distance of the voice, lo, this howling begins 
anew; and, by chance, a young Savage boy being 
met upon the way, curiosity impelled Father Biard 
to ask him who this dead person was that was being 
mourned. The boy answered that no one was dead, 
but that some one was dying, and added, of his own 
accord, "Run fast, perhaps you can baptize him be- 
fore he really dies;" then, as if God had said this 
with his own lips, we began to run with all our 
might. When we arrived we [317 i.e., 319] found all 
the Savages outside their Huts, drawn up in line like 
soldiers on the surrender of a city ; in front of them 
walked an unhappy Father holding his child, who 
was dying, in his arms. Now when the child hap- 
pened to sob, the Father, supposing that its Life was 
departing, began to groan pitifully ; and the whole 
company followed him in the same tone, for such is 
their custom. ^*' Accordingly, when Father Biard saw 
this spectacle, he addressed the disconsolate Father, 
and asked him if he would be glad to have his son 
baptized ; the poor simple fellow, who was almost 
beside himself, answered him not a word, but put 
the child in his arms. The Father cried that they 
should bring him some water immediately, which was 
done, and putting the child in the arms of Sieur de 
la Mote (who was very [318 i.e., 320] zealous to be 
its godfather, baptized him, calling him Nicolas, 
the name of the said Sieur. The Savages, expecting 
some great results, crowded round to see what would 


96 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.4 

prefferent pour voir ce qu'en aduiendroit. Or le P. 
Biard apres auoir recite quelques oraifons a ce qu'il 
pleuft "k Dieu d'illuminer ces pauures Payens, print 
le baptife des mains du Sieur de la Mote, & le donna 
k fa mere, qui eftoit Ik, qui comme Mere, prefenta in- 
continent le tetin "k fon fils, lequel teta de bon appetit. 
Quand les Samiages virent ainli cet enfant pendu aux 
mamelles de fa mere; fi la terre eufl fondu defTous 
leurs pieds, ie ne fgay s'ils eulTent efle plus eftonnes. 
lis demeuroyent la fixes, & immobiles, fans fonner 
mot comme des Engeles. Le Pere leur dit quelques 
paroles d' edification, puis leur fignifia de fe retirer en 
leurs Cabanes. Et f9auez [319 i.e., 321] vous s'il 
fut obey? Ces bonnes gens le regardoient lors 
comme s'il euft efte plus qu'homme, tremblants de- 
uant luy, auec demonftration d'eflre grandement tou- 
chez de Dieu. Cefl enfant eftoit encores fain & dif- 
pos vn mois apres cefte fienne guerifon, peu auant 
noflre prinfe par les Anglois: car fa mere I'apporta a 
nos tentes, & fut veu de la plufpart de nos gens. 
Voyla comme Dieu ne laiffe point fa loy fans authen- 
tique tefmoignage ; ny fa bonte fans admirables 
efifedts. 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELA TION, 1616 97 

happen. Now Father Biard, after having recited 
some prayers to the effect that God might be pleased 
to enlighten these poor Heathen, took the baptized 
child from the hands of Sieur de la Mote, and gave 
him to his mother, who was there ; she, as Mother, 
immediately offered the child the breast, and he re- 
ceived nourishment with great eagerness. When the 
Savages saw this child thus hanging upon the mother's 
breasts, if the earth had sunk beneath their feet, I 
do not think they could have been more astonished. 
They remained there, fixed and immovable, without 
saying a word, and as if Frozen. The Father uttered 
a few words of instruction to them and then motioned 
to them to return to their Cabins. Do you [319 i.e., 
321] know whether he was obeyed or not ? These good 
people looked upon him as though he were more 
than man, trembling before him, and seeming to 
have been strongly touched by God. This child was 
still healthy and active a month after this, its recov- 
ery, a little while before we were taken by the Eng- 
lish ; for the mother brought him to our tents, and 
was seen by the greater part of our people. See now 
that God does not leave his law without authentic 
testimonies, nor his goodness without admirable re- 
sults. 


98 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.4 


CHAPITRE XXXVII. [i.e., xxxvi.] 

LES RAISONS DES FRANgOIS, PAR LESQUELLES ILS 
S'APPROPRIENT a BON DRQICT LES TERRES DE 
LA NOUUELLE FRANCE, CONTRE LA PRE- 
TENSION DES ANGLOIS. 

MAINTENANT, que i'ay fatisfaidl aux deux 
premieres [320 i.e., 322] parties de ma pro- 
melTe, f§auoir eft, que i'ay faidt ma Relation 
du naturel des terres & des habitans de la nouuelle 
France: & vous ay raconte les comportemes des le- 
fuites, & les accidents, qui leur y font furuenus; 
Refle la tierce, d'expofer en quoy confifte la difpute, 
qui eft ores furuenue entre les Franfois, & Anglois, 
touchant ces contr^es, & les raifons de I'vn & de 
I'autre party. Car le curieux Ledteur, ^ mon aduis, 
fera bien aife, d' entendre en quoy gift ce poin(5t coten- 
tieux: & les raifons qu'on apporte de part & d'autre; 
mefmes que cela appartient a I'honneur des Fran9ois, 
de faire cognoiftre ^ toutes nations a combien iuftes 
tiltres, pertinentes raifons, & fyncere confcience, nos 
Roys fe font faits Maiftres, & ont poffed^ ces terres 
iufques h. ce temps. 

[321 i.e., 323] II faut doncques f9auoir tout pre- 
mierement, que les Anglois ne nous difputent point 
toute la nouuelle France; Car ils n'ofent nous denier, 
ce que tout le monde nous accorde ; ains f eulement 
ils conteftent des confins. lis nous accordent donc- 
ques vne nouuelle France, mais limitee par les bords 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 99 


CHAPTER XXXVII. [i.e., xxxvi.] 

THE REASONS WHY THE FRENCH HAVE APPROPRIATED 

BY GOOD RIGHT THE LANDS OF NEW FRANCE, 

AGAINST THE PRETENSIONS OF 

THE ENGLISH. 

NOW as I have fulfilled the first two [320 i.e., 322] 
parts of my promise, that is, I have given an 
Account of the character of the lands and the in- 
habitants of new France, and have described to you 
the conduct of the Jesuits, and the adventures that 
befell them ; there remains then the third topic : the 
explanation of the dispute that has now arisen be- 
tween the French and English in regard to these 
countries, and the arguments for and against both 
sides. For the curious Reader, I believe, will be 
glad to learn just what the point of contention is, 
and the arguments which are advanced by both par- 
ties ; it is even due to the honor of the French people, 
to make known to all nations how just are the titles, 
how suitable the reasons, and in what sincerity of 
conscience our Kings have made themselves Masters, 
and have taken possession of these lands up to the 
present. 

[321 i.e., 323] Accordingly it must be understood 
that the English do not dispute with us all of new 
France. For they dare not refuse what everybody 
grants us, but they only contest some of the bounda- 
ries. They grant us then a new France, but bound 


100 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.4 

du Golfe, & grande riuiere de fain(5l Laurens, & nous 
reflreignent dans les 47. 48. & 49. degres d'eleuatio 
polaire. Du moins ils ne nous permettent, pas de def- 
cendre plus has vers le midy, que du quarantefixiefme 
degre ; s'attribuans tout ce qui eft des la Floride, & 
le 33. degre iufques a Campfeau, & les Ides de Cap 
Breton. 

Les fondements de cefte leur pretenfion font parce 
que enuiron I'an 1694, il y a vingt deux ans, eftants 
entrez dans ce grand fein [322 i.e., 324] de la mer 
Americane, que les Anciens appelloyent de Mocofa, 
& y ayants trouue vne riuiere, & pai's, qui leur agrea : 
ils commencerent a le vouloir habiter, luy impofants 
le nom de Virginie : mais ayants efte contrariez par 
les naturels, & autres accidents leur eftoyent arriuez, 
ils furet en fin contraints de le quitter entierement, 
n'y ayants pas demeur6 plus de deux, ou trois ans. 
Neantmoins defpuis le Sereniffime Roy lacques a pre- 
fent regnant, venu 'k la couronne, ils ont prins refo- 
lution de le reconquefter, & cultiuer. A quoy ledit 
Roy fauorifant, a bailie des grands Priuileges a ceux, 
qui entreprenoyent cefte peuplade, & entre autres a 
eftendu le droidt de leur tenue des le 33. degre d'ele- 
uation iufques au 45. leur donnat puiffance de courir 
fus ^ tous eljrangers, qu'ils trouueroyet dans [323 
i.e., 325] ce deftroidt de terre, & cinquante mille 
auant dedans la mer. Ces lettres du Roy on efte ex- 
pediees I'an quatriefme de fon regne, & de grace 1607. 
le 10. d'Auril, il y a fept ans: car ie defcry cecy I'an 
1614. 

Voyla ce que i'en ay peu apprendre de toutes les 
parchartes & enfeignements, que nos contendants ap- 
portent pour f e maintenir en droidl, & cauf e ; & nous 


161&-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6ib 101 

it by the shores of the Gulf and great river saint 
Lawrence, and restrict us within the 47th, 48th, and 
49th degrees of north latitude. At least they do not 
allow us to go farther south than the forty-sixth de- 
gree, claiming all that country from Florida and the 
33rd degree up to Campseau and the Islands of Cape 
Breton. 

The reasons for these their pretensions are, that 
about the year 1694 \sic\ twenty-two years ago, hav- 
ing entered that great gulf [322 i.e., 324] of the Amer- 
ican sea which was formerly called Mocosa, and there 
having found a river and country which pleased them, 
they made attempts at settlement, giving it the name 
of Virginia; but, having been opposed by the na- 
tives, and other accidents having overtaken them, 
they were at last obliged to give it up entirely, not 
having lived there more than two or three years. 
Nevertheless since the Most Serene King James, now 
reigning, came to the throne, they resolved to re- 
conquer and cultivate it. The King, favoring this 
project, granted some important Privileges to those 
who undertook this colony, and, among other things, 
extended their right of occupation from the 33rd de- 
gree of north latitude up to the 45th, giving them 
power to attack all foreigners whom they might find 
within [323 i.e., 325] these limits, and fifty miles out 
into the sea. These patents of the King were drawn 
up during the fourth year of his reign, and in the 
year of grace 1607 on the loth of April, seven years 
ago, for I am writing this in 1614.^^ 

So that is what I have been able to learn from all 
the charters and instructions which our contestants 
bring forth to support them in their rights and 
claims ; and, while we are being confined within the 


102 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.4 

confiner dans le deftroidt de la vieille Canada, eux fe 
tenants an large, & a f ranches coudees, nous faifants 
la part k leur bon plaifir. Voicy ce que nous leur 
repartiffons legalement. 

1. En premier lieu, que par vne prouidence admi- 
rable de Dieu leurs propres lettres Royaux fur lef- 
quelles ils fe fondent, les defdifent de leur preten- 
tion: Parce qu'il eft dit expreffement dans [324 i.e., 
326] icelles auec exception fpecifique: Nous leur don- 
nons toutes les terres iufques au ^^. degrd, lefquelles ne 
font point a6luelletnent poffed^es par aucun Prince Chref- 
tien. Or eft-il, que lors de la datte de ces lettres, le 
Roy de France adtuellement & reellement polfedoit 
pour le moins iufques au 39. degre defdidtes terres. 
Tout le monde le f 9ait par les voyages de Champlain : 
car il confte par iceux, que I'an 1607. le fieur de Mots 
eftoit a port Royal, & par fes gens, & au thorite gou- 
uernoit tout iufques au 39. degre, comme Lieutenant 
de fa Majefte tres-Chreftienne. 

2. En apres, fi les Anglois veulet dire, qu'ils n'ont 
pas commence de poffeder leur Virginie des Van 
feulement 1607, ains des I'an 1594. qu'ils la trou- 
uerent (comme nous auons dit :) Nous refpondos, que 
la riuiere, laquelle ils commencerent [325 i.e., 327] 
lors a poffeder eft au 36. degre, & que cefte leur al- 
legation ^ I'auenture pourroit valoir, s'il n'efloit 
queftion, que de retenir cefte didte riuiere, & fept ou 
huidt lieiies de I'vn, & 1' autre cofte d'icelle: car au- 
tant loin fe pent porter noftre veue pour 1' ordinaire; 
mais que fubitement vn vaiffeau pour entrer dans vn 
fleuue enjambe par dominatio trente fois plus loin, 
qu'il ne pent eftendre fa veue; c'eft vouloir auoir les 
bras, ou pluftoft la conuoitife bien monftrueufe, mais 
pofons que cela fe puiffe faire. 


1616-2J)] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 103 

limits of old Canada, they are holding themselves at 
large with plenty of elbow room, giving us our share 
at their good pleasure. Now this is how we would 
answer them according to law: 

1. In the first place, as by an admirable providence 
of God, their own Royal patents, upon which they 
found their claims, contradict them in their preten- 
sions. Because it is said expressly in these, [324 i.e., 
326] with specific exception : We give them all the lands 
up to the 4.5th degree, ivhich do not actually belong to any 
Christian Prince. Now it happens that at the time of 
the date of these letters, the King of France actually 
and really possessed the said lands at least up to the 
39th degree. Every one knows this through the 
voyages of Champlain, for he relates in these that, 
in the year 1607, sieur de Monts was at port Royal, 
and, through his people and authority, ruled all the 
country to the 39th degree as Lieutenant of his most 
Christian Majesty. 

2. Again, if the English wish to say that they did 
not begin to take possession of their Virginia from 
the year 1607 only, but from the year 1 594, when they 
discovered it (as we have said), we answer that the 
river, which they began [325 i.e., 327] then to possess 
[the James river], is in latitude 36 degrees, and that 
this their claim might perchance be of some value, 
if it were only a question of retaining this said river, 
and seven or eight leagues on either side of it, for 
our eyes can generally reach as far as that ; but that 
a ship, merely because it had entered a river, should 
claim dominion thirty times farther than the eye can 
reach — this is wishing to have arms, or rather greedi- 
ness, indeed monstrous. But let us suppose it could 
be done. 


104 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.4 

II s'enfuiura done, que Ribaud & Laudoniere eflans 
allez ^ la Floride en tres-bel arroy, par authority du 
Roy Charles IX. I'an 1564. 1565. & 1566. pour culti- 
uer le pais ; & y ayant edifie la Caroline au 30. degre 
d'eleuation: ils prindrent polTeffion iufques au 38. & 
[326 i.e., 328] 39. degr6, & par ainfi voila les An- 
glois hors de leur Virginie, fuiuat leurs propres max- 
imes. 

3. Quoy que, fi pour eftre en vn lieu, Ion polTede 
auffi toft (felon la prefuppofition des Anglois) huidt 
ou neuf degrez plus auant; Pourquoy eft-ce, qu'eux 
eftants au 36. auanceront pluftoft iufques au 45. que 
nous (comme ils confelTent) eftans ja au 46. ne def- 
cendrons iufques au 37. Quel droidt y ont-ils plus 
que nous? Voila done ce que nous refpondons aux 
Anglois. 

4. Mais pour mieux declarer le fonds de noflre 
iuftice; il faut fe reffouuenir de ce que nous auons 
monftre cy-deuant; f9auoir eft, que fa Majefte tres- 
Chreftienne a prins polTeffion de ces terres, auant 
tout autre Prince Chreftie, par droidt d'inuention 
premiere. Car il eft affeure, & confelfe de [327 i.e., 
329] tous, que les Bretons & Normads trouuerent 
premierement le grad Banq, & les Terres Neufues, 
rangeants la cofte iufques au Cap de Sable, qui eft. 
au 43. degre, iufques ou le grand Banq s'eftend. 
Cefte inuention fut faidte I'an 1504. il y ja cent & 
dix ans. 

5. D'auantage tous confelTent, que par le com- 
mandement du grad Roy Fran9ois lean Verazan print 
poffeffion de cefdidtes terres au nom de la France; 
commengant des le 33. degre d'eleuation iufques au 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 106 

It will follow, then, that Ribaud and Laudoni- 
ere,'- — having gone to Florida in fine array by the 
authority of King Charles IX., in the years 1564, 
1565, and 1566, to cultivate the land, and there hav- 
ing extended Carolina to the 30th parallel of north 
latitude, — took possession as far as the 38th and [326 
i.e., 328] 39th parallels; and so behold the English 
out of their Virginia according to their own maxims. 

3. Yet if being in a place gives possession (as the 
English presuppose) of eight or nine degrees farther 
on, why is it that they, being at the 36th, can advance 
to the 45th, better than we (as they acknowledge) 
being at the 46th, can go down to the 37th? What 
greater rights have they than we? vSo thus we an- 
swer the English. 

4. But to better declare the justice of our cause, 
what we have explained above must be recalled; 
namely, that his most Christian Majesty took pos- 
session of these lands before any other Christian 
Prince, by right of first discovery. For it is true, 
and is acknowledged by [327 i.e., 329] all, that the 
Bretons and Normans first discovered the great Bank, 
and Newfoundland, sailing along the coast to Cape 
Sable, which is in the 43rd degree, up to where the 
great Bank extends. This discovery was made in the 
year 1 504, one hundred and ten years ago. 

5. Furthermore, all acknowledge that, by the com- 
mand of the great King Francis, Jean Verazan took 
possession of these countries in the name of France, 
beginning at the 33rd degree of north latitude up to 
the 47th. This was done in two voyages, the last 
of which was made in the year 1523, ninety years 
ago. 

6. In addition to this, Jacques Cartier ^^ first en- 
tered the great river in two voyages that he made, 


106 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.4 

47. Ce fut par deux voyages def quels le dernier fut 
faicft I'an 1523. il y a quatre vingts & dix ans. 

6. Outre plus, lacques Cartier entra premier dans 
la grande riuiere par deux voyages, qu'il y fut, & 
defcouurit les terres de Canada. Son dernier voyage 
fut I'an 1534. Done c'eft merueille [328 i.e., 330] 
que les Anglois nous accordent les terres de la def- 
couuerture de lacques Cartier, nous voulants ofter le 
45. degre: car il eft afleure, que cefte defcouuerture 
eft de beaucoup pofterieure aux autres cy-deuant 
didtes des parties plus meridionales. Et la grande 
riuiere eft tellement fituee, que la poffeffion de fes 
terres eft prefque inutile a qui ne tiet du moins iuf- 
ques au 40. degre. Qu'on regarde la charte. 

7. Auffi eft-ce merueille comme lefdic5ts Anglois 
difent nous accorder les Terres Neufues, & cepen- 
dant ils y font allez habiter defpuis quatre ans, enui- 
ron le 48. ou 49. degre. 

8. Or eft-ce le commun confentement de toute 
r Europe, que de depeindre la nouuelle France, I'ef- 
tendant au moins iufques au 38. ou 39. degr6, ainfi 
qu'il appert [329 i.e., 331] par les mappemondes, 
imprimees en Efpagne, Italic, Holande, Allemagne, 
& Angleterre mefme. Ce font auffi les Fran9ois, qui 
en ont faicft defcription, ont impofe les noms, ont ap- 
priuoifez les Sauuages, ont trocque, & toufiours con- 
uerfe auec eux des la premiere inuention iufques k 
ce temps, & non point autres. Et ce fut au quarante 
troifiefme degre, que le Marquis de la Roche s'alla 
loger, dreffant fa peuplade I'an 1598. Et defpuis I'an 
1603. le fieur de Mots recent en don toutes ces terres 
des le 40. degre iufques au 46. de feu d'heureufe me- 
moire Henry le Grand, lequel auffi declara par lettres 
expreffes, que rien de ce qu'on apportoit de Ik, ou 


1616-29] BJARD'S RELATION, ibi6 107 

and discovered the lands of Canada. His last voyage 
was in the year 1534. Now it is a wonder [328 i.e., 
330] that the English grant us the lands of Jacques 
Cartier's discovery, wishing as they do to deprive us 
of the 45th degree; for it is very certain that this 
discovery dates back much farther than the others 
heretofore cited of the more southern parts. And 
the great river is so situated that the possession of 
these lands is almost useless to any one who does not 
possess at least as far as the 40th degree. Look at 
the map. 

7. Also it is wonderful how these English say they 
have granted us Newfoundland, and nevertheless 
went there to live four years ago, near the 48th or 
49th degree. ^^ 

8. Now, by the common consent of all Europe, new 
France is represented as extending at least as far as 
the 38th or 39th degree, as it appears [329 i.e., 331] on 
the maps of the world printed in Spain, Italy, Hol- 
land, Germany, and England itself. ^^ Also, it is the 
French, and not others, who have made a description 
of it, have given it its names, have tamed the Sav- 
ages, have traded and always had communication 
with them from the first discovery up to the present 
time. And it was in the forty- third degree that the 
Marquis de la Roche went to settle, establishing his 
colony in the year 1598.^'^ And, since the year 1603, 
sieur de Monts received as a gift all the lands from 
the 40th degree to the 46th degree, from the late 
Henry the Great, of happy memory, who also de- 
clared by express letters, that nothing which was 
brought away from there, or taken there, was liable 
to foreign custom duty, as that country was a just part 
and legitimate outgrowth of this Kingdom, and in 
no wise a foreign one. 


108 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.4 

qu'on y emportoit ne deuoit traidte foraine, comme 
eftant ce pais vne partie iufle, & legitime accreiie h. 
ce Royaume, & nullemet eftragere. 

[330 i.e., 332] 9 Et certes, outre les raifons appor- 
t6es, requite naturelle fauorife k cefte declaration; 
parce que ces terres \k font paralleles h. noftre France, 
& non point k I'Angleterre. Elles font dy-ie tout 
d'vne tenue auecques nous: de maniere, qu'ayant 
eft6 trouuees vaquates par nous au dela de noftre 
riuage; elles accroilTent k noftre heritage, ainfi que 
la loy des Alluuions en determine, ff. acq. rer. domin. 
I. 29. inter miiltos. & I. 30. Ergo. 

10. En effedt, feu Monfieur le Comte de Soyffons 
fut pourueu du gouuernement defdites contr^es, & 
en a port6 le tiltre de fon viuant; & auiourd'huy 
Monfieur le Prince met cefte Ik au rang de fes autres 
prerogatiues, & principaux honneurs. 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 109 

[330 i.e., 332] 9. And surely, in addition to the rea- 
sons here given, common justice favors this declara- 
tion ; for those lands are parallel to our France, and not 
to England. They are, I say, contiguous with us, so 
that having been found unoccupied by us and beyond 
our shores they accrue to our inheritance, as the law 
of Alluvions determines, ff. acq. rer. domin. I. 29. inter 
multos. & I. 30. Ergo}'^ 

10. Finally the late Comte de Soyssons was in- 
vested with the government of the said countries,^''' and 
bore the title to it in his lifetime; and to-day the 
Prince places this in the rank of his other preroga- 
tives and principal honors. ^^ 


no LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.4 


CHAPITRE XXXVIII. [i.e., xxxvii.] 

[331 i.e., 333] RAISONS POUR LESQUELLES ON DEUROIT 

ENTREPRENDRE A BON ESCIENT LE CULTI- 

UAGE DE LA NOUUELLE FRANCE. 

ICY deuant que finir, ie fuis contraindl de cotter au- 
cunes raifons qui m'efmeuuent Tame, quand ie 
confidere comme nous delailTons cefte pauure 
nouuelle Frace en frifche, & quant au temporel, & 
quant au fpirituel, en barbarie, & paganifme. Ie 
ffay prou, que ie profite bie plus de les alleguer aux 
oreilles de noftre Seigneur par feruente priere; que 
de les marquer aux yeux des hommes par efcriture 
morte. Neantmoins tant plus ardamment ie m'efcrie 
deuat Dieu en les pefant, tant plus ie me fens [332 
i.e., 334] preffe a les fpecifier aux hommes, les efcri- 
uant. 

Et premierement, fi Ion confidere Ie temporel, c'eft 
vne autre France en influence, & condition du ciel, 
& des elements: en eftendue de pays dix ou douze 
fois plus grande, fi nous voulons: en qualite, aufli 
bonne, fi elle eft cultiu^e, du moins, il n'y a point 
d'apparence qu'elle doiue eftre pire; en fituation; k 
r autre bord de noftre riuage, pour nous donner la 
fcience, & la feigneurie de la mer, & nauigage ; ie dy 
mille biens, & vtilitez. En vn mot, quad ie dy vne 
autre France, & vne autre Efpagne "k cultiuer. 

2. En apres, les tentatiues, que nous auons ja faidt 
tant de fois des cent, & dix ans, nous obligent a con- 


1616-20] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 m 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. [i.e., xxxvii.] 

[331 i.e., 333] REASONS WHY THE CULTIVATION OF 

NEW FRANCE OUGHT TO BE UNDERTAKEN 

IN EARNEST. 

HERE, before finishing, I am obliged to set down 
some reasons which agitate my soul, when I 
consider how we are letting this poor new 
France lie fallow, both as to the temporal and the 
spiritual, in savagery and paganism. I know well 
that I may accomplish much more by advancing these 
reasons to the ear of our Lord in earnest prayer, 
than by presenting them to the eyes of men in cold 
letters. Nevertheless, the more ardently I cry to 
God in considering them, so much the more I feel 
myself [332 i.e., 334] urged to specify them to men in 
writing. 

And first, if the temporal is considered, this country 
is another France in the influences and conditions of 
the heavens and of the elements ; in extent of country, 
ten or twelve times larger, if you wish; in quality, 
as good if it be cultivated, at least there is no reason 
why it should be worse ; in situation, upon the shore 
opposite to ours, to give us the knowledge and mas- 
tery of the sea, and of navigation ; I say there are a 
thousand blessings and advantages. In a word, as 
it were, another France and another Spain to be cul- 
tivated. 

2. Next, the attempts which we have already made 
so many times for a hundred and ten years, oblige us 


112 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.4 


ilance; fi nous ne voulons auec la mocquerie des 
eflrangers perdre encores le fruidt de [333 i.e., 335] 
tant de temps confume, & des pertes de tant & 
d'hommes, & de biens, qu'il a conuenu faire pour ac- 
querir la cognoiffance de ces terres, Coftes, Golfes, & 
diuers endroits, laquelle (Dieu mercy) nous auons ac- 
quis auec la bienvueillance, & familiarite du peuple. 
Peuple debonnaire, qui nous tend les mains auec vn 
defir incroyable, & vne douleur bien grande de nous 
y voir maftines ; non pour autre raifon, fmon que les 
entreprinfes, qui ont efl6 faidtes iufques a mainte- 
nant, ayant elte quafi f ouftenues par des particuliers ; 
il n'eft pas de merueille s'ils ont fuccombe au faix, & 
aux frais, qu'vne telle oeuure requiert. 

3. Que fi nous nous lallons, ou languiffons, nous 
auons deuant les yeux prou d'autres, qui nous ont 
monftre d'auoir courage. Et certes en cas que nous 
n'y faifions [334 i.e., 336] noftre deuoir, il n'y a 
point de raifon d'empefcher autruy. Confiderons 
done fi cela nous eil fort aduantageux de perdre le 
profit, que rapportent de ces contrees to^ les ans plus 
de cinq ces de nos nauires, qui y vont, foit a la 
pefcbe des baleines, foit k celle des molues & autres 
poiffons, foit k la traiae, de la pelleterie des Caftors, 
Elans, Martres, Loups marins, Loutres, &c. Car il ne 
faut pas attendre d'y auoir part, fi d'autres faififfent 
le domaine, ainfi qu'a bien declare ces annees la dif- 
pute arriuee a Spitsbergen, & autrepart. 

4. Voila pour le temporel : mais pour le fpirituel, 
auquel I'indicible, grace de Dieu nous furhaufle 
iufques au furnom & gloire de tres-Chreftiens. Cal- 
culous & fupputons les benefices qui nous accom- 
paignent & obligent [335 i.e., 337] inceffamment en 


1616-29J BIARD'S RELATION, /6i6 113 


to continue, unless we wish, to the scorn of strangers, 
to yet lose the fruit of [333i-e., 335J so much time con- 
sumed, and to suffer the loss both of so many men 
and so much wealth, as has been necessary in acquir- 
ing a knowledge of these lands, Coasts, Gulfs and 
different places, which (thank God) we have obtained, 
as well as the good will and intimacy of the people, — 
a gentle people, who extend to us their hands with 
an incredible longing, and with a profound grief to 
see us defeated, — for no other reason than that the 
enterprises which have been undertaken up to the 
present, having been almost entirely sustained by 
private individuals, have sunk — and it is not to be 
wondered at — under the burden and the expenses, 
which such a work requires. 

3. If we give up or become indifferent, we have 
before our eyes many others, who have shown us 
that they have courage. And certainly, in case we 
did not do [334 i.e., 336J our duty, there is nothing to 
prevent others from doing theirs. Now let us consid- 
er whether it is very advantageous to lose the profit, 
which is brought from these countries every year by 
more than five hundred of our ships, which go there, 
either on whaling expeditions, or for cod and other 
fish, or for trade in furs of the Beaver, Elk, Marten, 
Seal, Otter, etc.*^ For we must not expect to have 
any share in this, if others seize the property, as has 
been very clearly shown during these years by the 
disputes which occurred at Spitsbergen and else- 
where. 

4. So much for the temporal ; but as to the spirit- 
ual, in which the inexpressible grace of God raises 
us to the surname and glory of "most Christian," let 
us calculate and sum up the benefits which accom- 


114 LES RELATIONS DES jlSUITES [Vol.4 

fuite de ce premier la vocation a I'Eglife Sainc5te & 
cognoillance de noftre Sauueur lefus-Christ ; & lors 
nous pourrons fommer combien grande feroit 1' ingrati- 
tude, & combie horrible chaftiment elle porteroit en- 
croupe, fi nous ne tafchions de faire prifer cefte grace, 
la communiquant a nos proches a la proportion de nos 
moyens, & redeuances. Tel chaftiment a efte fage- 
ment remarque par le venerable Bede. Car quelque 
peu auant fon aage, les Efcoffois furent illuftres de di- 
uine lumiere, a ce qu'ils fe recogneuffent eftre tombes 
en herefie par illufion, & mefgarde: la oii les Bretons, 
ou ceux de la Prouince de Galles, furent precipites 
en I'abyfme, & tenebres des faux-bourgs d'Enfer, les 
herefies, defquels deux effedts fi contraires, & fi op- 
pofes ce grand Saindt, [336 i.e., 338] & cognoiffant 
veritable des oeuures de la prouidence, & luflice Eter- 
nelle ; en rapporte les cauf es k deux difpofitions di- 
uerfes de I'vn, & 1' autre peuple. Parce, dit-il, que 
les Efcoffois auoyent aumofne aux Anglois aupara- 
uant par grande charite, & deuotion ce qu'ils auoyent 
receu de la verite Euangelique ; & partant Dieu leur 
volut faire mifericorde a mefure combie, & entaffee, 
leur ouurant les yeux, pour y fe voir deceus, & 
trompes. La ou les Bretons, foit par negligence, foit 
par autre intemperie d'ame, ne s'efloient guieres fou- 
ciez de voir lefdidls Anglois perir miferablement en 
leur infidelite ; Et partant meriterent come f eruiteurs 
ingrats de perdre le talent de la foy Catholique, lequel 
ils n'auoyent daigne mettre a profit, & d'autruy, & 
d'eux mefmes. O que [337 i.e., 339] de chofes nous 
aurions k penfer, & dire fur ce fujet. 

Mais foit affez d'auoir au deuant de nos yeux que 
ces pauures peuples, ces images de noftre Dieu comme 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 115 


pany and favor us [335 i.e., 337] continually after this 
first one, which is our calling to the Holy Church and 
knowledge of our Savior, Jesus Christ ; and then we 
shall be able to estimate how great would be our in- 
gratitude, and how horrible the chastisement it would 
bring with it, if we do not try to enhance the value 
of this grace by communicating it to our fellow-men 
in proportion to our means and opportunities. Such 
chastisement has been wisely commented upon by 
the venerable Bede. For, shortly before his age, the 
Scotch were illuminated by a divine light, so that they 
saw themselves fallen into heterodoxy by delusions 
and inadvertence ; while the Bretons, or those people 
of the Province of Wales, were cast into the abyss 
and shadows of the outskirts of Hell, the heresies; of 
these two so contrary and opposite effects this great 
and Saintly Man, [3361.^,338] so truly acquainted 
with the works of providence and Eternal Justice, at- 
tributes the causes to the two different dispositions 
of the two nations. "For," says he, "the Scotch 
had previously given to the English, through great 
charity and devotion, what they had received of 
Evangelical truth ; and therefore God wished to 
show them mercy in a full and overflowing measure, 
opening their eyes that they might see themselves 
deceived and mistaken. While the Bretons, either 
through negligence or other lack of spiritual modera- 
tion, were quite indifferent when they saw the Eng- 
lish perishing miserably in their infidelity ; therefore 
they deserved, as ungrateful servants, to lose the 
talent of the Catholic faith, which they had not 
deigned to profit by, either for others or for them- 
selves." Oh, what [337 i.e., 339] food there is for 
reflection and discourse upon this subject! 


116 


LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 4 


nous, & capables de fa iouy fiance, ces conforts de 
noftre efpece, & pre f que de mefme qualite auec nous, 
font fur le bord de 1' horrible gouffre des feux infer- 
naux, voire plufieurs centaines d'iceux precipitez 
chaque iour dans les peines eternelles, & abyfmes de 
damnation, fans efpoir de deliurance. O Dieu! nous 
nous eftonnons de ces iugements ef pouuentables ; 
comme il y a bien dequoy s'eflonner; mais nous n'a- 
uons pas le fens pour apperceuoir, ny I'entendemet 
pour recognoiftre, que le fang de cefte fi cruelle exe- 
quution efl deflus nos mains, qui ne nous euertuons 
pas de Tempefcher: deffus nos [338 i.e., 340] pieds, 
qui ne nous remuons point pour y remedier; delTus 
nos maifons, qui les baftilTons tant fuperbement, fans 
nous foucier de Teternelle demeure de nos freres; 
delTus nos bourfes, nos poffeffios, nos moyens, & 
noflre coeur qui fommes fi peu efmeus de tels fpec- 
tacles & contribuons fi peu, Ik oti le Fils de Dieu, 
noflre Sauueur, n'a point efpargn6 fa vie. Plaife 
luy nous faire mifericorde, & receuoir de nous, & de 
toute creature loiiange, & benedidtion, k tons les 
fiecles des fiecles. Ainfi foit-il. 

FIN. 


1616-29] BIAKD'S RELATION, i6i6 117 

But let it be enough to keep before our eyes the 
vision of these poor natives, these images of our God 
as we are, and as capable of enjoying him, these 
companions of our own species, and almost of the 
same quality as we, who are upon the edge of the 
horrible gulf of the fires of hell, many of them even 
precipitated every day into eternal torments, and 
profound depths of everlasting punishment, without 
hope of deliverance. O God! we are amazed at these 
frightful judgments, as there is much in them to 
cause our amazement ; but we have not the sense to 
perceive, nor the understanding to appreciate, that 
the blood of this so cruel execution is upon our 
hands, who do not exert ourselves to prevent it; 
upon our [338 i.e., 340] feet, which do not move to 
remedy it ; upon our houses, which we build so mag- 
nificently without caring for the eternal dwellings 
of our brothers ; upon our purses, our possessions, our 
wealth, and our hearts, which are so little moved by 
such spectacles and contribute so little to that for 
which the Son of God, our Savior, did not spare 
even his life. May it please him to grant us mercy, 
and to receive from us and from all his creatures, 
praises and blessings forever and ever. Amen. 

END. 


118 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.4 


Table des Choses Plvs Remarqvables. 

ABSENCE du P. Biard occafidrie les Yrani^ois 
de ne s' expofer au daftger de fe perdre. p. 178. 
Acadie, pays des Souriquois, proche de 

Canada. . . . . /. 4. 

Agores, Isles de la couronne d' Efpaigne. . p. 2S1. 

Aguigueott, AJIieou, Bctfabes Capitauies Cafiadois 

offrent aux Yranqois prins par ! Anglois, de les 

retirer & entretenir. . . . /• 35* 

Alain Yeon Pilot e de S. Mala charitable eniiers les 

Frangois de S. Sauueur. . . /. 257. 

Ambaffadeur de Y ranee en Angleterre, follicite la 

liberty des lefuites de Canada captifs. p. 296. 

Anglois auancent quatre vingts lieiies fur la nou- 

uelle Yrance. . . . p. 228. 

Anglois desfai6i par f Armouchiquois, & pourquoy. p. 179. 
Anglois habitues en la Virginie a deux cens cinquante 

lieiies des Yranqois de S. Sauueur. . p. 227. 

Anglois conduits a S. Sauueur par mef garde des 

Canadins, qui les croyoyent ejire Yrangois. p. 229. 
Anglois enuabiffent le nauire des Yran^ois de S. 

Sauueur, pillent r habitation, captiuent les 

Frangois. . . . . /. 235. 

A nglois defrobe finement aux Yrangois Icurs lettres 

Royaux, pour les priuer de iujle defenfe en leur 

captiuite. . . . . /. 238. 

Anglois pouuant letter en nier les lefuites captifs, 

pour ne fe perdre a leur occafion, fe contente 

de les cacher. . . . p. 286. 


161G-29] n/.iKirS RELAriOX, i6i6 119 


Index of the Most Important Subjects. 

ABSENCE of Father Biard causes the French 
not to expose themselves to danger of ruin. p. 178 
Acadia, country of the Souriquois, near 
Canada. . . . . p. 4. 

Azores, /s/ands of the Spanish crown. . /. 281 

Aguigueou, Asticou, Betsabes, Canadian Captains, 
offer to the French, captured by the English, 
to take them away and maintain them. p. 35 

Alain Yeon, Pilot of St. Malo, charitable towards 

the French of St. Sauveur. . . P- ^^y 

Ambassador of France in England, solicits the 

liberation of the captive Jesuits of Canada. p. 296 

Advancetnent of the English eighty leagues into 

new France. . . . />. 228 

English defeated by the Armouchiqnois, and why. p. 179 

English settled in Virginia, two hundred leagues 

from the French of St. Sauveur. . /• 227 

English guided to St. Sauveur through a misunder- 
standing of the Canadians, ^vJio supposed them 
to be French. . . . /• 229 

English invade the ship of the French of St. Sauveur, 

plunder the settlement, and capture the French. /. 235 

English cunningly rob the French of their Royal 
patents, to prevent their making an honest de- 
fense in their captivity. . . P- ^^S 

English, having power to throw the captive Jesuits 
into the sea, not to ruin themselves on their ac- 
count, content themselves with hiding them. p. 286 


120 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.4 

Anglois contraints d'aborder aux Azores, font ga- 
rentis par la charitd des lefuites leurs prifon- 
niers. . . . . p. 289. 

Anglois recognoiffans dti bon office recen des lefuites. p. 290. 

Anglois tenant captifs les lefuites, foup^onnt^ d'efire 

pirate par les fens mefmes. . p(^S' ^9 

Anglois foup^onne d'eflre pirate, fe iuflifie par le 

tefmoignage des lefuites fes prifonniers. p. 293. 

Anglois apprehendeiit d' ab order aux tcrres de V Ef- 

pagnol, auec des lefuites captifs. . /. 285 

320 

47 
31 
32 
92 

32 


Anglois nont que pretcndre en la nouuelle Y ranee, p 

Anguilles fe pefchcnt en iny-Septembre. . p 

Arbres frui^liers fort rares en Canada. 

Arbres forefiiers de Canada. 

Arcs & pauois fur la tombe des Jiommes. 

Ardoife en Canada. 

Argal Capitaine Anglois fe faifU fecrettement des 

commiffions des Frangois de S. Sauueur. p. 238. 

Argal Capitaine Anglois vent renuoyer en Y ranee 

tons les Francois dans vne chaloupe, auec eui- 

dent danger de leur pert e, . . p. 2^1. 

Argal Capitaine Anglois s'oppofe fort au Maref- 

chal de la Virginie, a ce que fes prifonniers les 

Yranqois ne foyent pendus. . . p. 262. 

Argal Capitaine Anglois equitable. . p. 270. 

Armes des Canadois, r arc & la targue. . /• 55- 

Armoiries de Madame de Guerche-ville pof<fes au 

Cap de la Heue, en figne de poffeffion. p. 216. 

Armouchiquois baillent grand foupqon aux Francois 

de les vouloir piller fous pretexte de trocque. p. 178. 
Armouchiquois afftfs difpofes au Chriflianifme . p. 180. 
Affis. Eflre affis, figne de reuerence entre les 

Canadois. . . . . p. g\. 


p- 

285 

p. 

320 

p- 

47 

p' 

31 

p- 

32 

p- 

92 

p- 

32 


1616-29] RfARD'S RELA TION, 1616 121 

English, compelled to la^td at the Aqores, are ren- 
dered safe through the charity of the Jesuits, 
their captives. . /. 289 

English acknowledge this kind service of the Jesuits, p. 290 

English, holding the Jesjiits captive, themselves sus- 
pected of being pirates by their own countrymen, pag. 29 

English, suspected of being pirates, are acquitted 

on the evidence of the Jesuits, their prisoners, p. 293 

English are afraid to land upon Spanish territory, 
with their Jesuit prisoners. 

English merely pretenders to new France. 

Eel-fishing in the middle of September. 

Fruit trees very rare in Canada. 

Forest trees of Canada. 

Bows and shields upon the men's graves. 

Slate in Canada. 

Argal, an English Captain, secretly seizes the com- 
missions of the French of St. Sauveur. /. 238 

Argal, an Etiglish Captain, wishes to sefid all the 
French to France in a small boat, with evident 
danger of their behig lost. . . /. 25 i 

Argal, an English Captain, strongly opposes the 
Marshal of Virginia, so that his French pris- 
oners should not be hanged. . . p. 262 

Argal, an English Captain, a just 7nan. . /. 270 

Arms of the Canadians, the bow and the shield. p. 55 

Armorial Bearings of Madame de Guerche-ville 
placed at Cap de la Hevc, as a sign of posses- 
sion. . . . . p. 216 

Armouchiquois strongly suspected by the French ofiyi- 

tending to plunder tJiem, under pretext of trade, p. 178 

Armouchiquois disposed favorably to Christianity, p. 180 

Seated. To be seated, a sign of reverence among 

the Canadians. . . . p. gi 


122 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.4 

AJfociation de la Marquife de Gucrcheville aiiec le 

Jieur de Potrincourt au fai^l de Canada. p. i88 

AJlicou Sagamo en la cojle d'Acadie. . p. 222 

Aumars, ou Cancres de mer, fiircnt pefch^s par les 

Yranqois de S. Sauiieur en leur grande difette. /• 253 

Auoir chien & fac, en Canada, ejl iouyr du droi6l 

de propriete. . • • P- S^ 

Autmoins /onl les Prejires dcs Canadois, . p. 54 

Autmoins, Medecins & Sorciers engeollent les Jim- 
pies Cajiadois. . . • P- 79 

Autmoins fe font donner force prefents pour la 

cure des malades. . . • P- ^7 

Autmoins inuocans Dieu par le nom du Soleil, en 

cas de neceffitL . . • /• 9^ 

B. 

Bate de Chini6lou en Canada, cjlcfidue en belles 

prairies. . . - • P- '^7- 

Bale Francoife entrc Port Royal, & la riuiere S. 

Jean. . . • • /. 165. 

Bale des mines a vingt & deux lic2i'es de Port Royal, p. 203. 
Baye de Genes, ainfi appellee par Chaplain. p. 204. 

Baye des mines large de hui6l licu'cs. . p. 205. 

Baptefme trop facile me nt confer e au Mexique, auec 

notable dommagc dcs baptifds. . p. \o6. 

Baptefme confer^ aux Canadois non injlruits an 

deuoir de Chriflianifme, & le mal qui en 

reuffit. . . . • /.HI. 

Baptefme des perfonnes aagdcs, non bicn infiruitcs, 

differ e auec grande confideration. . p. 11$. 

Baptefme defire dcs Canadins audt la mort. p. 310. 

Baptefme guer it vn enfant Canadin malade a la 

mort. . . • • /. 318. 

Baptif^s en Canada fans precedente inflruclion, 

ne f^atioyent ricn du Chrcflien, non pas mef- 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELA T/ON, i6i6 123 


Association of the Marquise de Guercheville with 

sieur de Potrincotirt in Canadian affairs. p. i88 

Asticou, a Sagamore on the coast of Acadia. p. 222 

Lobsters, or sea Crabs, zvcre caught by the French of 

St. Sauveur in their great poverty. . /• 2 5 3 

To have a dog and a bag, in Canada, is to enjoy 

the rights of property. . . P- S^ 

Autmoins are the Priests of the Canadians. p. 54 

Autmoins, Medicine men and Sorcerers dupe the 

simple Canadians. . . . P- 79 

Autmoins require many presents for the cure of 

the sick. . . . . P- ^7 

Autmoins invoke God by the name of the Sun, when 

they are in need. . . . /• 96 

B. 

Bay of Chinictou in Canada, surrounded by beauti- 
ful meadows. . . . P- 2 7 
French Bay, betzveen Port Royal and the river St. 

Jolt^i- . . . . /• 165 

Bay of mines, tiventy-two leagues from Port Royal, p. 203 
Baye de Genes, thus called by Champlain. p. 204 

Bay of mines eight leagues zvide. . . p. 205 

Baptism too easily administered in Mexico, with 

notable detriment to those baptized. . p. io6 

Baptism administered to the Canadians not yet 
instructed in the duties of Christianity, and 
the evils which result therefrom. . p. iii 

Baptism of aged persons, not well instructed, de- 
ferred with great consideration. . /-US 
Baptism desired by Canadians before dyittg. /• 310 
Baptism cures a Canadian child sick unto death. /. 318 
Those baptized in Canada zvithout previous instruc- 
tion, know nothing of Christianity, not even 


124 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 4 


mes leiir nom de Baptcfme. . . />. 109. 

Bafques o?it alienes les Excomminquois en Canada 

de nos Yranqois. . . • /• 33- 

Biencourt & Robin en fauenr des Cahiinijies, con- 
fentent que les lefiiites nentrent dans leur 
nanire. ..../• 134- 

Biencourt par le nioyen des lefuites fait voile en 
Canada, heaucoup plujiojl qiiil ne pounoit 
autrenient. . • - • P- ^l^- 

Biencourt foupconne que Madame de Guerche-ville 

le veut defpoiiiller des droi6ls de Canada. p. 197. 

Bretons ont defcouuert la Y ranee nouuelle. /. 2. 

Bretons fouuent malades en Canada. . p. 1$. 

Cabanes d" Hyuer des Canadois, d'vn clos rond de 
perches ferniies en poin£le par le haul, cou- 
ucrtes de peaux, nattes, ou efcorces. p. 40. 41- 

Cabanes des Canadois toufiotirs en bel afpe6l, & 

prds des bonnes eaux. . . P- 4^- 

Cabanes d' EJlc des Canadois, large s & longues, & 

cotmertes de nattes, ou efcorces. . p. 4.2. 

Calais. Le Gouuerneur, & Doyen de Calais accueil- 
lent, &■ fecourent char it able me nt les lefuites 
de Canada renuoye's d' Angle t err e, . /. 299. 

Caluinifies ne peuuent trouuer bon que les lefuites 
paffent en Canada, ouy bic tous autres Eccleji- 
afiiqucs. . . • • /• ^33- 

Canada nefi quvne partic de la Y ranee nouuelle, 
f^auoir efi, la coflc du long de la grande 
riuiere C ana das. . • • /*• 3- 4- 

Canada, Prouince de la Yrance nouuelle premiere- 

me?it defcouuertepar laqucs Cartier Van i 524. p. 4- 
Canada parallele a la Yrance, en mefme climat, & 

eleuation de Pole. . • • P- 9- 

Canada plus froide que nofirc Y ranee, & pourquoy. p. 10. 
Ca?iada fuje£ie au Scurbot, ou maladie de la terre. p. 14- 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 126- 


their Baptismal names. . . p. 109 

Basques have alienated the Excomminquois in 

Canada from onr French. . • P- 33 

Biencourt and Robin, out of regard for the Calvin- 
ists, agree that the fesuits must not enter their 
ship. . . /. 134 

Biencourt by means of the fesuits sails for Canada, 
much sooner than he coicld Jiave done without 
them. . . . /. 138 

Biencourt suspects that Madame de Guerche-ville 

luishes to rob him of his rights in Canada. p. 197 

Bretons discovered new France. . . p. 2 

Bretons often sick in Canada. . . /• ^5 

Winter Cabins of the Canadians ; a circle of poles 
closed at the top and covered with skins, mats, 
or pieces of bark. . . • P' 40. 4^ 

Cabins of the Canadians always in a beautiful loca- 
tion, a7id near good water. . . /. 41 

Summer Cabins of the Canadians long and wide, 

and covered with mats or bark. . /. 42 

Calais. The Governor and Deafi of Calais welcome 
and kindly assist the fesuits of Canada sent 
back from England. . . . /. 299 

Calvinists are not satisfied to have the Jesuits go to 
Canada, but are willing to take all other Ec- 
clesiastics. . . . . /• 133 

Canada is only a part of new France, namely, the 

land along the great river Canadas. . /. 3, 4 

Canada, a Province of new France, first discovered 

by Jaques Cartier, in the year 1524. . p. 4 

Canada parallel to France, in the same climate 

and Polar elevation. . . . P- 9 

Canada colder than our France, a7id why. . />, 10 

Canada subject to Scurvy or land disease. . /. 14 


126 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.4 

Canada apporte maladie aiix oifeux. . p. 16. 

Canada ger7nc aujjitoji an Priyitemps qne nojire 

Frajice. . . . . /. 18. 

Canada ^s endj'oits les plus froids rend Ics bleds 

incurs €71 f on temps. . . . p. ig. 

Canada n a point de hautes montagnes. . p. 20. 

Canada fort entrecoup^e de riuieres, & bras de mer, 

en eft rendu'e plus fr old e. . . />. 23. 

Canada a caufe des continuelles forcfls efl moins 

efchauffde du Soleil, & pource plus froide que 

les campagnes ouuertes. . . p. 24. 

Canada pour n eflre labour^e efl couuerte d'vne dure 

croufle, quafi impenetrable au Soleil, & part ant 

beaucoup plus froide. . . />, 24 

Canada produi^i la vigne fauuage en beaucoup 

d' endroits, qui nieurit en fon temps. p. 31 

Canada ^s terres cogneiies des Francois, na que 

dix mille habitans. . . . P- Th 

Canada, horfmis Port Royal, donne a Madame de 

Guercheuille . . . . /. 190 

Canada du Gouuernemetit du Prinee de Soiffons. p. 330 
Canada pourquoy doit eflre cultiue'e des Yran^ois. /. 331 
Canadois fideles au Franqois cotre V Anglois. p. 34 

Canadois charitables enuers les Yranqois captifs de 

V Anglois. . . . . A 35- 36 

Canadois ont honne memoire des chofes fenfibles. p. 36 
Canadois comprennent , & iuge^it bien les chofes 

fenfibles. . . . . /, 36 

Canadoifes ceintes deffus, & deffous le ventre. p, 37 
Canadois quafi tous fans barbe, horfmis les bien 

robufies. . . . . P- 2>7 

Canadois ne peuuent retenir la memoire d'vne fuitte 

de paroles. . . . . P- ^7 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 127 

Canada brings sickness to those who are idle. p. i6 

Canada shows vegetation as early in Spring as our 

France. . . . . /. i8 

Canada in the coldest places yields the wheat crop 

in its season. . . . p. ig 

Canada has no high mountains. . . p. 20 

Canada, very much intersected by rivers and arms 

of the sea, is thereby rendered colder. p. 23 

Canada, on account of the continuous forests, is less 
heated by the Sun, and therefore colder than 
the open countries. . . . /. 24 

Canada, not being cultivated, is covered zvith a 
hard crust, almost impcjietrable to the Sun, 
and therefore much colder. . . /. 24 

Canada produces the wild grape in many places, 

which ripens in its season. . . P- l^ 

Catiada, in the lands known to the French, has 

only ten thousand inhabitants. . p. j-^ 

Canada, with the exception of Port Royal, given to 

Madame dc Guerchcvillc. . . p. loo 

Canada under Authority of the Prince de Soissons. p. 330 

Canada, why the French should cultivate it. /• 331 

Canadians faithful to French against English. p. 34 

Canadians kind to French made prisoners by Eng- 
lish. . . ■ P-ZS, l^ 

Canadians have a good memory for visible and 

material things. . . . P- }fi 

Canadians comprehend and estimate well the things 

known throtigh the senses. . . /• 36 

Canadian luomen wear belts above and below the 

stomach. . . . . P- Z7 

Canadians nearly all beardless, except the more 

robust. . , . ^ P- \7 

Canadians have no memory for a consecutive ar- 
rangement of words. . . /• 27 


128 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.4 

Canadois mocqueurs des perfonnes contrefaites. p. 37. 

Canadois 71' out point le corps contrefaict, ny de- 

fectueux. . . . . p. 37. 

Canadois vejius de peaux conroydes anec le pail, & 

bigarrdes de couleurs. . . P- 19' 

Canadois paoureiix, & grands vanteurs. . P- SS- 

Canadois forts, & addroi^ls a la lutte, & non h 

autre combat. . . . /*• 55- 

Canadois liber aux & recognoiffans. . /. 58. 

Canadois prattiqxiet la Polygamic plus pour Ic prou- 

fity que pour V incontinence. . p. 62. 

Canadois maladifs depuis la hdtife des Yrd^ois, h 
caufe de leurs excds ti manger viandes non 
accoujlumdes. . . • /. 69. 

Canadois ne fe foucieni du lendemain, viuas du 

iour a la iournee. . . . p. 7^' 

Canadois oin6ls d' huile de loup marin fentent mal. p. 77. 

Canadois fe font Chrefiiens, feulement pour marque 

d' amitie auec les Franqois. . . p. 109. 

Canadois fe plaignent fort qu on ne les ait aduerty 
des deuoirs du Chriflianifme auat leur bap- 
tefme, auf quels ils ne fe fuffent obliges, s'ils 
les eujfent cogneus. . . . p. ill. 

Canadins baptifh a la pourfuitte du fieur de Po- 

trincourt. . . . • P- ^26. 

Canadois ne peuuet exprimer par parole que les 

chofes fort fenfibles, & materielles. . /. 1 5 1 . 

Canadins fufe6ls d'Afiicou inuitent les lefuites it 

prendre logis en leur terre. . p. 222. 

Canadins careffent les Anglois, les croyans eflre 
Yrangois, & par ignorance les menent a S. 
Sauueur, oil ils pillent & captiuent les Fran- 
cois. ...•/• 229. 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELA TION, 1616 129 


Canadians scoffers at ill-shapen people. . /• 37 

Canadians' bodies are not ill-shapen or defective, p. 37 

Canadians dressed in skins which have been curried 

and decorated in various colors. . p. 30 

Canadians cowardly and great boasters. . /• 55 

Canadians strong and skillful in wrestling, and 

not ifi any other kind of combat. . /• 5 5 

Canadians generous and grateful. . /• 58 

Canadians practice Polygamy more for profit than 

for incontinence. . . . p. 62 

Canadians sickly sitice their intercourse with the 
French, on account of their excesses in eating 
food to which they are not accustomed. p. 69 

Canadians not anxious about to-morrow, only liv- 
ing from day to day. . . P- 70 

Canadians, when they rub themselves with seal oil, 

have a bad smell. . . . P- 77 

Canadians embrace Christianity only as a sign of 

friendship with the Fre?ich. . . p. lOg 

Canadians complain greatly that they were not ad- 
vised of the duties of Christianity before their 
baptism, to which they would not have bound 
themselves if they had known them. . p. iii 

Canadians baptized through the instrumentality of 

sieur de Potrincourt. . . p. 126 

Canadians can express in words only the more vis- 
ible and material thiiigs. . . /• 151 

Canadian subjects of Asticou invite the fesuits to 

locate in their territory. . . p. 222 

Canadians embrace the English, believing them to 
be French, and throtigh ignorance guide them 
to St. Sauveur, where they plunder and cap- 
ture the French. . . . p. 229 


130 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.4 


Canadm s' attrijie fort, ayant recogneu que par 
me/garde il auoit mis les Yranqois de Saincl 
Sauucur entrc Ics mains de V Anglois. p. 231. 

Canadins portent grande compaffion aux Yranqois 
captifs de V Anglois, & leiir offrent tonte ami- 
tie. ...../• 246. 

Canadins donnent largement de leur proye aux 

Franqois de S. Sauueur neeejjiieux. p. 253. 

Cafiadijis Men recogneus peuuent ejlre cy apres 

mieux aid^s au falut de leur ame. . p. 306 

Canadins ayatis grande confiance aux Yrangois, 
peuuent eJlre mieux aidez par eux, que par 
autres en leur conuerjion. . . p. 307 

Canadins grandement fideles aux Yrangois. p. 308 

CanadiJis ennemis de V Anglois, & Holandois. p. 309 

Canadins affe£tionnez au Baptefme. . /. 3 10 

Canadine malade a la mort, guerie par le Cate- 

chifme, & vne Croix pendue au col P- 3^3 

Canadois ne portent point de hauls de chauffes. p. 39 

Canadois portent greues, & fouliers de peaux d'ef- 

lan. . . . . P' 39 

Canadois plantet nouuelles cabanes a chaque chajige- 

ment de lieu, & de re fide nee. . p. 40 

Canadois fe cabanent en bel afpe£l, & pre's des 

bonnes eaux. . . • /• 4^ 

Canadois fe couchent a V entour du foyer, fur des 

peaux de loups marins, la tc fie fur vn fac. p. 41 

Canadois a chacune des treize lunes annuelles ont 

nouuelle chaffe, ou pefche. . . /• 42 

Canadois ne viuent que de chaffe, & de pefche. p. 42 

Canadois meurent de faim quand la chaffe, & 

pefche ne rciiffit. . . ■ P- 43 

Canadois font fort incdmodds de pluye, & de nege, 

quand elle ne gele pas. . . /• 44 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELA TION, 1616 ISl 


Canadians very sorrowful when they recognized 
that through inadvertence they had delivered 
the French of Saint Sauveur into the hands of 
the English. . . . . /. 231 

Canadiayis show great sympathy for the French 
taken prisoners by the English, and offer them 
many favors. • • . p. 246 

Canadians give getterously of their game to the 

needy French of St. Sauveur. . /■ 253 

Canadians, well understood, cati afterwards be bet- 
ter assisted in the salvatio7i of their souls. p. 306 
Canadians, having great confidence in the Frejich, 
can be better aided by them, than by others, in 
their conversion. . . . P- 307 
Canadians very faithful to the French. . p. 308 
Canadians enemies of the English and Dutch. p. 309 
Canadians fond of Baptism. . . /. 310 
Canadian woman sick unto death, cured by the 

Catechisyn and a Cross hufig around her neck. /. 3 1 3 
Canadians do not wear trousers. . , P- 2)9 

Canadia?ts wear leggings and shoes of elk skin. p. 39 
Canadians erect new houses at every change of place 

and residence. . . . />. 40 

Canadians camp in pleasant localities and near good 

water. . . . . /. 41 

Canadians lie around the fire, upon seal skins, their 

heads upon bags. . . . p. \i 

Canadians have new game or fish for every one of 

their thirteen moons. . . . P- A^ 

Canadians live only upon game and fish. . p. 42 

Canadians die of starvation when hunting and fish- 
ing are not successful. . . /• 43 
Canadians are very greatly incotive^iienced by the 

ram and snow when it does not freeze. p. 44 


132 


LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.4 


Canadois portent des raqiiettes au pied fur la nege 

molle, pour chaffer. . . . P- 44- 

Canadois riches en gibier d'eau, non de terre. p. 46. 

Canadois en my-Septembre de la mer vont d. la 

pefche des riuieres. . . • P- A7- 

Canadois fte poffedent rien en propriety aiiant leur 

mariage. . . • • /• S^- 

Canadois ont des quereles fur le refus des droits 

les vns enuers les autres. , . /. 52. 

Canadin giiery par la Croix, & Catechifme. p. 315. 

Canadins hurlent horriblement aupres de leurs 

malades mourans. . . • P-l^T- 

Campfeau cojle de mer loin de fix vingts lieu'es de 

Port Royal. . . . • /• I39- 

Cap de la Heiie en la cofte de VAcadie. . pag. 216. 
Cap de fable. ..••/• 255- 

Cap Breton. . . • • /. 263. 

Cap Yorchu. . . • • /• 255- 

Caribous, moitid afne, moitid cerf, bons h manger, p. 43. 
Caflors & Eflans 07it leur feconde chaffe en Odobre, 

& Nouembre. . . • P- A7- 

Cafiors fe prennent en Yeurier & Mars, pour la 

premiere chaffe. . . • /• 43* 

Catechifme exa6leinent pra£liqu^ efl trefneceffaire 

aux Canadins cl caufe de leur faqon de viure 

vagabonde. . . • /. 102. 103, 104. 

Catechifme & Croix p endue au col d'vne Canadine 

la guerit de maladie mortelle. . P- 3^3- 

Catechifme guerit vn Canadin malade. . pag. 215. 
Cauots, efquifs des Canadois, faidls, d'efcorce de 
bouleau, fort legers, capable s de toute vne 

famille, & vtenfiles neceffaires . p- 48 

Cauot fort commode pour la pefche, & voiture. p. 48. 
Cauot fai6l quarante lieues en vn iour. . pag. 49. 
Champlain fonde V habitation de Kebec. . p. 121. 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 133 

Canadians wear snowshoes upon the feet when the 

snow is soft, for hunting. . . />. 44 

Canadians rich in marine, not in forest game. p. 46 

Canadiafis, in the middle of September, come from 

the sea to fish in the rivers. . . P- A7 

Canadians possess no property before viarriage. p. 51 
Canadians quarrel when some refuse dues to oth- 
ers. . . . . /. 52 
Canadian cured by the Cross and Catechism. /-SIS 
Canadians howl terribly around their dying friends . p. T,iy 
Campseau seacoast distant one hundred and twenty 

leagues from Port Royal. . . /• 139 

Cap de la Heve on the coast of Acadia. . pag. 2 16 
Cape sable. . . . . /• 255 

Cape Breton. . . . . /. 263 

Cape For chu. . . . . /*• 255 

Caribou, half ass, half deer, good to eat. . p. 43 

Chase, the second time for the Beaver and Elk in 

October and November. . . P- A7 

Capture of the beaver in the first hunt, in February 

and March. . , . , /. 43 

Catechism exactly attended to is very necessary to 
the Canadians, on accou?it of their wandering 
mode of life. . . • P- 102, 103, 104 

Catechism and Cross, hung from the neck of a Cana- 
dian woman, cure her of a mortal illness. /• 3 1 3 
Catechism cures a sick Canadian. . . pag. 2 1 5 
Canoes, the skiffs of the Canadians, made of birch- 
bark, very light, capable of holding an entire 
family and their necessary utensils. . p. 48 
Canoe very convenient for fishi?tg and conveyance, p. 48 
Canoe makes forty leagues in one day. . pag. 49 
Champlain establishes the settlement of Kebec, p. 121 


134 LES RELATIONS DES jiSUITES [Vol.4 

Champlain defcouure la cojle dc la riuiere S. Lau- 
rens. . . . • p. 121. 
Champlain Lieutenant du Jieur de Mont s. p. 121. 
Q,hamplain allant h Kebec paffe a trailers dcs 

glaqons de mer e7tornienie7it gros & affreiix. p. 139. 
Oharbon de terre en Canada. . . /. 32. 

Chair boucande, ou fech^e a la fuin^e, mife en 

referue. . . . . p. 70. 

Charmes, Chefnes, Hejires, & Peupliers en Ca- 

7iada. . . . . /. 32. 

Qhajfe & pefche font tout le reuenu des Canadois. p. 42. 
Q, ha Jfe premiere des Cajiors en Yeurier, & Mars. p. 43. 
Chaff e feconde des Cafiors, & Eslans en 06tobre & 

Nouembre. . . . . /. 47. 

Cheuille plant ^e en terre par V Autmoin faignant 

de chaffer le Diable. . . /. 82. 83. 84. 

Ohiens du malade manges en Tabagie. . pag. 89. 
Chini£lou efi vne Baye en Canada fort belle en 

prairies. . . . . p. 27. 

Chini^lou pays de Canada fertile & aggreable. p. 204. 
Chiquebi racine a guife de truffes, dont les lefuites 

viuoyefit en temps de famine. . /. 213. 

Chirurgien Anglois Catholique, charitable emicrs 

les Yrangois de S. Sauueur bleffez. p. 241. 

Coquilles, & poiffons de toute forte foifonnent en 

la mer de Canada durant cinq mois. . p. 4$. 

Co fie de la riuiere Sain^l lean en Canada y abon- 

dante en vigne fauuage, & iioyers. . /. 3 1 . 

Cofie de S. Sauueur fort aggreable, . p. 22$. 

Croix pendu'e au col d'vn Canadin le guerit d'vne 

longue maladie. . . . /*• 3 ^ 5 • 

Croix plant ^e au Cap de la Heue, . p. 216. 

Croix plant ^e au Port S. Sauueur. . p. 226. 

Coudriers font frequents en Canada. . /• S^* 

Counibas pays inhabitable a caufe du froid. p. 21. 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELA TION, 1616 135 

Champlain explores the shores of the river St. 

Lawrence. . . . . p. \2i 

Champlain, Lieut etiant of sictir dc Mont s. p. 121 

Champlain, going to Kebec, passes through enor- 
mous and frightful masses of ice. . p. i^g 
Coal in Canada. . . . . /. 32 
Smoked meat, or meat dried in smoke, stored away p. 70 
Elm, Oak, Beech, a?id Poplar in Canada. p. 32 
Hunting and fishing are the only resources of the 

Canadians. . . . . /. 42 

First hunt for Beavers in February and March. p. 43 
Second hunt for Beavers and Elk in October and 

November. . . . . /. 47 

Stick planted in the ground by the Autmoin, feign- 
ing to chase away the Devil. . /. 82, 83, 84 
Dogs of the sick man eaten in the Tabagie. pag. 89 
Chinictou is a Bay in Canada surrounded by beauti- 
ful meadows. . . . p. 2'j 
Chinictou a country of Canada fertile a?id pleasant . p. 204 
Chiquebi, a root something like truffles, upon which 

the Jesuits lived in time of famine. . /. 213 

English Surgeon, a Catholic, charitable towards 

the wounded Fretich of St. Sauveur. . p. 241 

Shellfish, and fish of all kinds, swarm in the 

Canadiafi sea during five months. . p. 45 

Banks of the river Saint John ifi Canada abound- 
ing in zuild grapes and nuts. . . P- Z^ 
Coast of St. Sajivetir very agreeable. . p. 22$ 
Cross hung from the neck of a Canadian cures him 

of a long illness. . . . /• 3 1 5 

Cross planted at Cap de la Heve. . p. 216 

Cross planted at the Port of St. Sauveur. p. 226 

Hazel trees very abundant in Canada. . /. 3 1 

Counibas country uyiinhabitable on account of the 

cold. . . . . . p. 21 


136 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.4 

D 

Defun6l enfeuely auec fon fac, fes peaux, fleches, 

& autres meublesjiens, & pre/ents de fes amis. p. 92 
Diahle familier h Membertou encores Payen. p. 95 

Diable trauaillant les Oanadois auant la venue des 

Yranqois. . . . . P- 9S 

Dieu entre les Q,anadois ejl nomin^ du nom du Soleil. p. 96 
Dix mille perfonnes feulement en toutes les terres 

de Oanada. . . . . P- 73 

Droi£i de propriety en Q,anada fe practique par la 

poffeJ]io7i du chien, & du fac. . P- S^ 

Dueil a la inort des parens & amis, cfl de fe broii- 

iller la face de noir. . . p. go 

Du Pont le ieune reconcilid au fieur de Potrincourt 

a la requefie du P. Biard. . . pag. 147 

Du Pont le ieune reconcili^ au fieur de Potrincourt 

fe confeffe, & fai£l fes Pafques au bord de la 

mer, auec grande edification des afjifians, p. 148 
Du Pont perd fon nauire, & le recouure a la requefie 

du P. Biard. . . . /. 148 

Du Pont le ieune employ^ pour traduire le Cate- 

chifme en langue Canadine. . . P- ^7S 

Du Pont le ieune retire en fon nauire vne partie des 

Francois de S. Sauueur. . . /. 256 


Enfans en gra?id nombre font la force des Sagamos 

Canadois. . . . . p. 62. 

Enfant Canadin malade a la mort guery par le 

Baptefme. . . . . /. 318. 

Eplan de Canada fe prend en Mars. , p. 4.$. 

Eplan, petit poiffon com^ne Sardine. . /. 213. 


1616-29] B/ARD'S RELATION, j6i6 187 

D 

Dead men buried with their bags, skins, arrows, 
and other possessions, atid presents from their 
friends. . . . . /. 92 

Devil familiar to Mernbertou while yet a Pagan, p. 95 

Devil tonnenting the Canadiatis before the coming 

of the French. . . . /• 95 

God, among the Canadians, is know7i by the same 

na7ne as the Sun. . . . /. 96 

Ten thousand people only in all the lands of 

Canada. . . . . P- 73 

Right of property in Canada evidenced by the pos- 
session of the dog and of the bag. . />. 5 i 

Dead kindred or friends mourned by smearing the 

face with black. . . . p. go 

Du Pont the younger recottciled to sieur de Potrin- 

court at the request of Father Biard. . pag- 147 

Du Pont the younger, reconciled to sieur de Potrin- 
court, confesses, and receives the Easter Sac- 
rament on the seashore, to the great edifica- 
tion of those present. . . . /, 148 

Du Pont loses his ship and recovers it at the re- 
quest of Father Biard. . . /. 148 

Du Pont the younger employed to translate the Cate- 
chism, into the Canadian language. . P- ^7S 

Du Pont the younger takes into his ship part of the 

French of St. Sauveur. . . /. 256 


Large families the strengtJi of Canadian Sagamores, p. 62 
Canadian child sick unto death cured by Baptism, p. ^iS 
Canadian smelts takeii in March. . p. 45 

Smelt, a little fish like a Sardine. . /. 2 1 3 


138 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.4 

EJlans, & Cajiors out leur feconde chaff e en 06lobre, 

& Nouembre. . . . p. /^"J 

Eslans fe prennent pour la fccondc chaff e en 06tobre 

& Nouembre. . . . /. 47 

Efpoux Canadois donne a fon beau-pere, & ne reqoit 

riendeluy. . . . • p. 61 

EJiuues fri£lio7is, fuetirs vfit(fes en Canada pour la 

/a?ite. . . . • P' 77 

EJloiirgeon fe pefcJie en Auril. . . /. 45 

Ete^ninquois, Montaguets, Souriquois alliez aux 

Francois en Canada. . . />. 34 

Excomniinquois ennentis des Franqois en Canada, 

a V occafion des Bafques. . . /• 33 

F 

FcBal Vvne des Iflcs des Aqores. . . /. 287. 

Yeinmes Canadoifes portent le fais du mefnage, & 

/o7it de pire condition, qne chambrieres. p. 62. 

Yemmes Canadoifes pudiques. . . p. 66. 

Femmes Canadoifes durement trai£l^es de leurs 

maris. . . . . /• 65. 

Yemmes Candoifes peu fecondes a caufe de leurs 

trauaux continuels. . . • P- 7"^' 

Y leurs de lis raf(fes en Canada par V Anglois. p. 271. 
Yoin de Canada haut de la longueur d'vn homnie. p. 26. 
Yrangois de S. Sauueur accufe's d'efire bannis & 

pirates, pour ne pouuoir produire leur com- 

miffion furprinfe par r Anglois. . /. 239. 

France nouuelle ejl propre des Yrangois priiiatiue- 

ment aux Anglois. . . . p- 320- 

Yranqois'^nt enfeignd Vvfage du poifon, & autre s 

mal-heurs aux Canadois. . . p. 6^. 

Yrangois doiuent entrepretidre la culture de 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6j6 189 


Second chase for Elk and Beaver in October and 

November. . . . . P- A7 

Elk are captured in the second cliase in October 

and November . . . . p. Ay 

Canadian husbatid gives to his father-in-law, in- 
stead of receiving from him. . p. 6i 

Rubbing and vapor-baths used in Canada for the 

health. . . . . P- 77 

Sturgeon are caught in April. . . P- AS 

Eteminquois, Montaguets, Souriquois, allies of the 

French in Canada. . . . /• 34 

Excomminquois, enemies of the French in Canada, 

on account of the Basques. . . P- SS 


F(zal, one of the Islands of the Aqores. . p. 2S7 

Canadian women bear the burdens of the household, 
and are in a worse condition tlian cJiamber- 
inaids. . . , , p. 62 

Canadian women modest. . . p. 66 

Canadian women badly treated by their husbands, p. 65 
Canadian women not fruitful on account of their 

continual hardships. . . . p. 12 

Fleurs-de-lis erased in Canada by the English. p- 271 
Hay in Ca?iada as high as a man. . p. 26 

French of St. Sauveur accused of being outlaws and 
pirates, because tliey could not produce their 
commission, which had been seized by the Eng- 
l^S'i- • . . . . /. 239 

New France is owned by the French exclusive of 

the English. . . , 2). 320 

French have taught the use of poison and other 

evils to the Canadians. . . /. 68 

French ought to undertake the cultivation of 


140 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.4 


Qanada. . . . • P- 33^- 

Yrangois en da?iger de fe per dre p army les Armou- 

chiquois, par vn foup^on fondd en apparence. p. 178. 

Yranqois pretendent iujlement defboutter V Anglois 

de la nouuelle Yrance. . . P- 320. 

Yrance nouuelle ejl vne forejl perpetuelle . /• 4 

France nouuelle, partie Occidentale de V Amerique . p. i . 

France nouuelle defcouuerte Van 1^04. par les Bre- 
tons. . . . . p. 2. 

Frangozs Bretons ont les premiers defcouuert la 

nouuelle Y ranee, . . • p. 2. 

France nouuelle pourquoy doit ejlre cultiu^e par les 

Yrangois. . . . • P- 33'^- 


Glaqons ejlrayigement gros, charriez cent lieux dans 

la mer par les riuieres. . • P- '^39- 

Garqons, ou 7ion encores mariez n' acquierent rien 

a eux-me/mes, ains h leur Sagamo. . /. 51. 

Gilbert du Thet le/uite tud par les Anglois h S. 

Sauueur. ...•/• 241. 

Greues, & fouliers des Canadois. . . p. 39- 

Guerres des Canadois fe prattiquent par furprifes. p. 55. 

H 

Habitans des terres de Canada dix mille en tout. p. 73. 
Habitans de S. Malo fort charitables enuers les 

Yrangois reuenans de Canada. . /. 258. 
Habits de peaux velues des Qanadois. . p. 39. 
l^arenc fe pefche en Auril. . • P- 4S^ 
'H.auts de ckauj/'es ne font en vfage en Canada, p. 29. 
Henry III I. fe fafche que le fieur de Potrincourt 

7ie fe hafle pour Canada. . . /• 125. 


1616-29] B/ARD'S RELATION, i6i6 141 

Canada. . . . . /• 33i 

French in danger of ruin among tJie Armouchi- 
quois, on account of a suspicion based upon ap- 
pearances, . . . . p. lyS 
French justly assume to overrule the claims of the 

English in new France. . . /. 320 

New France is an interminable forest. . p. 4 

New France, Western part of America. . p. i 

New France discovered in tJie year 1504, by the 

Bretons. . . . . p. 2 

French Bretons the first discoverers of new France, p. 2 
New France, why it ought to be cultivated by the 

French. . . . . /• 33i 


Masses of ice, wonderfully large, drifted a hundred 

leagues into the sea through the rivers. p. 1 39 

Boys, or those not yet married, can acquire nothing 

for themselves, but for their Sagamore. p. 51 

Gilbert du Thet, Jesuit, killed by the English at 

St. Sauveur. . . . /. 241 

Leggings and shoes of the Canadians. . p. 39 

Wars of the Canadians are carried on by strategy, p. 55 

H 

Inhabitants of the lands of Canada, ten thousand 

in all. . . . . P' 73 
Inhabitants of St. Malo very charitable towards 

the French returning from Canada. . /. 258 

Clothes of the Canadians made of hairy skins. p. 39 

Herring fishing in April. . . /• 45 

Trousers are not used in Canada. . . /. 29 
Henry IIII. is angry because sieur de Potrincourt 

does not hasten to Canada. . . /• 125 


142 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.4 

Henry IIII. Roy de Yrance, dejlme les lefuites 

en Qanada. . . . . /. 123. 

Henry Membertoii inalade 'rneurt a Port Royal, 

fort Chrejiiennenient. . . /. 162. 

Herbes potageres fort grandcs, & bon?ies en Q,a- 

nada. . . . . />. 27. 

Huguenot de Dieppe remarque vjte guerifon mer- 

ueilleufe d' vfie Canadine . . . /. 314. 

Huile de graiffe de loup inarin, faiiffe annuelle des 

Cafiadois. . . • . . />. 43. 


laques Cartier defcouure Oanada en la France 

nouuelle r an 1524. & 1534' • P- 4- 

lean Denys de Honfleur, va en la Yrance nouuelle 

Van 1506. . . . • /• 3- 

lean Verazan prend pojfefjion de la Yrance nouuelle 

au nom de Yrangois I. Roy de Y ranee. p. 3. 

lefuites captifs en Angleterre vifitez honor ablemejit 

par les habitans dii lieu. . . p. 296. 

lefuites exhortent les Canadois baptifez auant leur 
venue en Oanada, de reietter la Polygamie, & 
ce qii on leur ref pond. . . p. ill. 

lefuites ne veulent baptifer les adultes quapres 
auoir efi^ deuement inflrui^ls, dont ils fo7it 
calomniez di lord. . . p. no. ill. 112. 

lefuites tafchent h tourner en Canadois les principes 
de la F^j, mais les mots ne fe trouuent fuffi.- 
fans pour ce f aire. . . . p. 112. 

lefuites ne baptifent point les perfonnes aag^es fans 
efire deuement catechifdes, & h fort bonne 
raifon. . . . • p. 114. 

lefuites defiiriez en Canada par le Roy Henry ////. p. 123. 

lefuites exclus de V entree d'vn nauire, en faueur 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 143 

Henry II II. , Kmg of France, appoints the Jesuits 

to Canada. . . . . /. 123 

Henry Membertou, being sick, dies at Port Royal 

in a very Christian Manner. . /. 162 

Pot herbs very large and good in Canada. p. 27 

Huguenot of Dieppe notices the marvelous cure of a 

Canadian Woman. . . . /. 314 

Seal oil the Canadian sauce the year romid. p. 43 

I 

Jaques Carticr explores Canada i7i new France in 

the years 1^24 and i$^4. . . p. 4 

Jean Denys, of Honfleur, goes to new France in 

the year 1506. . . . P- I 

Jean Verazan takes possession of new France in 

the name of Fraricis I. , King of France. p. 3 

Jesuit prisoners in England receive honorable visits 

from the inhabitants of the place. . p. 296 

Jesuits exhort the Canadians, baptized before they 
came to Canada, to discard Polygamy, and 
what they answer thereto. . . p. ill 

Jesuits do not wish to baptize the adults until they 
have been properly instructed, for which they 
are unjustly slandered. . p. no, ill, 112 

Jesuits try to change hito the Canadian tongue the 
principles of the Faith, but suitable words for 
this purpose cannot be found. . . p. 112 

Jesuits do not baptize aged per so7is unless they are 

properly catechized, a?id with very good reason, p. 114 

Jesuits appointed to Canada by King Henry IIII. p. 123 

Jesuits excluded from entering a ship, out of regard 

for the Calvinists. . . . /. 134 

Jesuits sail for Canada in January, 161 1. /. 138 


144 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.4 

des Caluinijies. . . . p. 134. 

le/uites de/marent p07ir Canada en lanuier. 16 11. p. 138. 
lefuites arriuez h Port Royal en luin \6ii. /• I49- 

le/uites defendus de calomnie par le tefmoignage 

mefnie des Caluinijies. . • /• H^ 

lefuites s' ejiudient a la langue Canadine, mais les 

Canadins ne les y feruent fidelement . p. 151. 152. 
lefuites font empefchez de pr on filer en la langue Can- 
adine, par ceux mefnies, qui les deuoyent aider, p. 1 54. 
lefuites ne veulent confentir que Membertou fait 

entcrre auec fes predeceffeurs infideles. p. 161. 

lefuites bafliffent de leurs mains vne chaloupe pour 

aller a la que fie des viures en temps de famine, p. 210. 
lefuites cueillent le Chiquebi racine, & pefchent 

V Eplan, & le Harefie en temps de famine. p. 213. 
lefuites & autres Yrangois de S. Sauueur font 

menez h la Virginie. . . p- 260. 

lefuites garentiffent V Anglois qui les tenoit captifs, 

de la main de V Efpagnol. . . p- 289. 

lefuites des Ifles Agores font portez en Galles 

Prouince d'Angleterre. . . p- 292. 

lefuites mettent ds mains du fieur de Biencourt en 
fa necejfitd toutes leurs prouifions pour le fou- 
lager, & les fens. . . . p- 209. 

lefuites font retirez de Port Royal, & tranf portez 
pr^s de VI fie de Pemetiq /^z^r dreffer nouuelle 
habitation. . . . • /. 219. 

lefuites produits tefmoins en Angleterre, pour la 
iufiification du Capitaine qui les tient captifs, 
le deliurent de foupgon. . . p- 293. 

lefuites captifs defrayez en Galles par le luge du 

lieu fort charitablement . . . /• 295. 

lefuites de Canada captifs en Angleterre, renuoyez 

libres a Calais. . - • P- 298. 


1616-21)] n/ARD'S RELA TION, 1616 


146 


Jestiits arrive at Port Royal in June, 16 11. /• 149 

Jesuits acquitted of slander by the evidence of Cal- 

vinists themselves. . . . p. 142 

Jesuits study the Canadian language, but the Cana- 
dians do not serve tJiem faithfully, p. 151,152 
Jesuits are prevented from making progress hi the 

Canadian language by the very ones who 

ought to aid them. . . , /. 1 54 

Jesuits do not wish to consent that Membertou be 

buried with his infidel aficestors. . p. 161 

Jesuits build with their oiun hands a boat, to go in 

search of food in time of famine. . /. 210 

Jesuits gather the Chiquebi root, and fish for Smelts 

and Herring, in time of famine. . p- 211 

Jesuits and other French of St. Sauveur are taken 

to Virginia. . . . . p. 260 

Jesuits save the English, who hold them prisoners, 

from the hands of the Spaniards. . /. 289 

Jesuits are carried from the Acores Islands to 

Wales, a Province of England. . /. 292 

Jesuits place in the hands of sieur de Biencourt, in 

his need, all their provisions, to nourish him 

and his people. . . , p. 20Q 

Jesuits are withdraivn from Port Royal, and taken 

to the Island of Pemetiq, to establish a new 

settlement. . . , , />. 210 

Jesuits, produced as witnesses in England, for the 
justification of the Captain ivho holds them 
prisoners, deliver hitn from suspicion. p. 293 

Jesuit prisoners' expenses in Wales very kindly paid 

by the Judge of the place. . . /. 295 

Jesuits of Canada, prisoners in England, liberated 

and sent to Calais. . . . /. 298 


146 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.4 

Ingres, c ejl a dire Anglois, hays des Canadois. p. 3S- 
I fie longue a dix lieiies de Baye Yrancoife /• 254 

K 

Kadefquit, port d'Acadie dejline an nouueau logis 

desYranqois. . - • p. 221 

Yi€b&Q. habitation fondee par Champlain. p. 121 

Kinibequi, riiiiere proche des Armonchiquois, a foix- 
ante & dix lieiies de port Royal. . p- "^7^ 


La Marquife de Giierehciiille impctre en don Ca- 
nada, horf mis port Royal. . . /. 190 
Langage Canadois fort manque a exprimer vne in- 
finite de chofe fort ordinaires. . /• i 5 i 
La Marquife entre en affociation ponr le fait de 

port Royal auec le fieur dc Potrincourt . p. 188 

La Motte, Lieutenant de la Sauffaye. . P- 221 

Le fieur de Potrincourt va en Canada, & faidl bap- 

tifer auplufioft des Sauuages. . /. 126 

La Motte Gentilhomme Yranqois, captif auec les 

lefuites de Canada, mis en liberte. . /• 301 

Lang7ies differentes entre les peuples de Canada. p. 54 
Lapins, & leuraux affez rares en Canada. p. 46 

La Royne donne aiix lefuites cinq cens efcus pour 

le voyage de Canada. • • .130 

Legumes croiffent fort grands, & bons en Canada. 27 

Le fiejir de Potrincourt emprunte des prouifions de 

bouche des Yrancois fcs voifins, & leur fait 

recognoifire fon fils pour Vice-admiral. . 146 

Le fieur de Potrincourt retourne de Canada en 

France vn mois apres qu il y efioit arriud pour 

enuitailler port Royal. . • • H9 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 147 


Ingrt^s, that is English, hated by the Canadians. p. 35 
Long Island, ten leagues from French Bay. /. 254 

K 

Kadesquit, a port of Acadia, intended as a new resi- 
dence for the French. . . . p. 22\ 
Kebec settlement, founded by Champlain. p. 121 
Kinibequi, a river near the Armouchiqitois, seventy 

leagues from port Royal. . . /• 1 76 

The Marquise de Gucrchcville given the grant of 

Canada, ivith the exception of port Royal. p. 190 

Canadian Language very iveak in expressing an in- 

fifiite 7iumber of very ordinary things. /• i 5 i 

The Marquise enters into partnership in the affairs 

of port Royal tvith sieur de Potrincourt. p. 188 

La Motte, Lieutenatit of la Saussaye. . /. 223 

Sieur de Potrincourt goes to Canada and has a 
number of the Savages baptized as quickly as 
possible. . . . . p. 126 

La Motte, a French Gentleman, prisoner with the 

Jesuits of Canada, set at liberty. . /• 301 

Different languages among the tribes of Canada. p. 54 
Rabbits and hares rather scarce in Canada. p. 46 

The Queen gives to the Jesuits five hundred ^c us for 

the Canadian voyage. . . .130 

Vegetables grow very large and are good in Canada. 27 

Sieur de Potrincourt borrows some provisiotis from 
his French neighbors, and makes them recognize 
his son as Vice-admiral. . . .146 

Sietir de Potrincourt returns from Canada to 
France a month after he had come to repro- 
vision port Royal . . . . -149 


148 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.4 


Louys Memberto2i Sagamo fai£l Tabagie a quinze 
Yranqois de faincl Sauiieur retournans en 
Y ranee. . . • • -255 

Loups marins fe prennent a foifon en lanmer. . 42 

Loup mar in, poiffon fraye fur terre e's Ijles de 

Canada. . . • • -43 

Loutres ont leur chaffe principale en Yeurier, & 

Mars. . . • • -43 

Lugubres hurleinents a la niort des Canadois. . 90 

Lunes. Par Luncs Ics Canadois font affortis de 

nouuelle chaffe, on pefche. . . .42 

M 

Madame la Marquife de Guercheuille zelde en 

I' affaire de Canada. . . .127 

Madame de Gtiercheuille defraye les lefuites au 

chemin de Canada. . . . .130 

Madame de Guercheuille trouue V expedient d" ex- 
clure les Caluinifies du nauire oil ils ne vou- 
loyent admettrc les lefuites. . -135 

Madame de Guercheuille trouue le fonds d'vne rente 
perpetuelle en Canada, pour y entretenir les 
lefuites. . . • • -137 

Madame de ^ourdis fotirnit aux lefuites le linge 

pour Canada. . ■ • .130 

Madame la Marquife de Vernueil fournit aux le- 
fuites les habits d'Eglife, & autres vtenfiles 
pour Canada. . • • -130 

Magafins des Canadois, font quelques facs de pro- 

uifton pendus efi vn arbre. . . .71 

Magiciens frequents en Canada. . . -94 

Magiflrats de la Virginie prennent refolution de 
ruiner toutes les places des Yrancois en Canada, 
piller tons les nauires, & renuoyer les perfonnes 


1616-29] B/ARD'S RELATION, i6i6 149 

Louys M ember tou. Sagamore, makes Tabagie for 
fifteen Frenchmen of saint Sauveur returning 
to France. . . . . 255 

Seals are caught in abundance in January. . 42 

Seal, fish which breeds upon the Islands in Canada. 43 
Otters are hunted chiefly in February and 

March. . . . -43 

Doleful hozvls at the death of Canadians. . 90 

Moons. The Canadians arrange their hunting and 

fishing by Moons. . . . .42 

M 

Madame la Marquise de Guercheville zealous in 

the affairs of Canada. . . .127 

Madame de Guercheville defrays the expenses of the 

Jesuits on their Journey to Canada. . .130 

Madame de Guercheville devises an expedient to ex- 
clude the Calvinists from the ship in which they 
did not wish to admit the Jesuits. . • ^ 3 5 

Madame de Guercheville raises a fund for a con- 
tinual income in Canada, to maintain the 
Jesuits there. . . . • ^37 

Madame de Sourdis furnishes the Jestiits with the 

linen for Ca?iada. . . . .130 

Madame la Marquise de Vernueil furnishes the 
Jesuits with the Ecclesiastical robes and other 
utensils, for Canada. . . .130 

Magazines of the Canadians are bags of provisions 

hung to a tree. . . . -71 

Magicians very commofi in Canada. . . 94 

Magistrates of Virginia decide to ruin all the places 
of the French in Canada, to plunder their ships, 
and to send the people back to France. . 264 


150 LES RELATIONS DES JESUIT ES [Vol.4 

en Yraiice. . . . .264 

Maladcs criiellcincnt trait tea en Canada. 

Malade tarda nt a viourir ejlouffe a force d'eau 

froide qii on luy ver/e fur le ventre. . 85 

Malade ayant tejld fans rien donner, re^oit des 

prefents. . . . . .89 

Marefchal de la Virginie vent faire pefidre les 

Yranqois de faincl Sauueur. . .261 

Mariages come fe traittet entre Canadois. . 61 

Matachias, chaines, & parures des fenimes Cana- 

doifes. . . . . '37 

MatacJiias, ioyaux, cncillices fnr la foffe des fein- 

mes. . . . . .92 

Medecmes ordinaircs des Canadois ^ ejliiues & fric- 
tions. . . . . -77 

Memberton, Sagavio, & Antjnoin tout enfemble. 54 

Membertou na iamais en qiivne fenitne a la fois, 
inefmes eflant Pay en ^ iugcant la Polygamie in- 
fame & incommode. . . ,65 

Memberton, & fon fils retires des mains de V Aut- 
nioin, qui les auoit condamnez de maladie mor- 
telle. . . . . .87 

Membertou appelld le Capitaine, apres fa mort. . 93 

Membertou feu I d' entre les Canadies baptifcz auoit 

fait profit du baptef me. . . .109 

Membertou premier baptif/ des Sagamos. . 158 

Membertou log/ & ferui par les lefuites dans leur 

cabanc iufques a fa mort. . . .158 

Membertou demande d'eflre enterrtf aucc fes ma- 
jeurs, les lefuites luy remonflrent que cela re- 
pugne au Chriflianifme : il perfifie quelque 
temps, puis en fin acquiefce. . 160. 162 

Membertou defore d' efire bien infiruict, pour fe 

rendre Predicateur de V Euangile. . .163 


1616-29] 


niARirS RELATION, i6i6 


151 


Sick people cruelly treated in Canada. 

Sick people who are slow to die, sinothered by pour- 
ing a quantity of cold water upon their 
stomachs. . . . . .85 

Sick person havi)ig made his itnll iv it hout giving 

anything, himself receives gifts. . . 89 

Marshal of Virginia wishes to have the French of 

saint Sauveur hanged. . . .261 

Afarriages, how arranged among Canadians. . 61 

Matachias, chains, and adornments of Canadian 

women. . . . . -37 

Matachias, jewels, collected upon the graves of the 

women. . . . . .92 

Medicines in use among the Canadians, vapor-baths 

and rubbing. . . . -77 

Metnbertou, both Sagamore and Auttnoin. . 54 

Membertou had only one wife at a time, even when 
a Pagan, considering Polygamy both wicked and 
inconvenient . . . . .65 

Membertou and his son ivithdrawn from the hands 
of the Autmoifi, who had pronounced their ill- 
nesses fatal. . . . .87 

Membertou called ''■the Captain " after his death. 93 

Membertou, of all the Canadians who xvere bap- 
tized, profited by his baptism. . .109 

Membertou the first Sagamore to be baptized. . 158 

Membertou lodged and cared for by the Jesuits in 

tlieir cabin up to the time of his death. . 158 

Membertou asks to be buried with his fathers ; the 
Jesuits urge that this would be contrary to 
Christianity ; he insists for some time, then 
finally yields. . . . . 160, 162 

Membertou wishes to be well instructed, to make 

himself a Preacher of the Gospel. . .163 


152 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.4 

Member ton confeille an P. Enemond malade d'ef- 

crire a Biencourt qii on ne V a point tn^, 7nais 

qu'il eji wort de maladie. . . .202 

Memoir es de France efface es en Canada, par les 

Anglois. .... 265. 271 

Merueille, Capitaine natif de S. Malo, ejiant pri- 

fonnier, fait tout deuoir de bon Chrejiien. 173 

Meuano, IJle a V cnibonclieure de la Baye Yrangoife. 254 
Mine d' argent en la Baye faincle Marie, en Canada. 
Mine de fer a la riniere S. lean. . .32 

Mines de ciiyiire a port Royal, & a la Baye des 

mines. . . . . .32 

M.oco/a terre fer me, oh efi fltu^e la Virginie des 

Anglois. ..... 227 

yiois. Chaque mois de V anne'e les Canadois ont 

pefche, ou chaffe abondante, on tons les deux, 
yiontagnets, Souriqnois, Etcchemins allies aux 

Yranqois en Canada. . . .34 

Monts deferts, IJle, appelle'e Vemetic^. . .219 

Morts enterrez affis, les gcnonx contre Ic ventre, la 

tejle fur les genonx. . . .91 

Moulues foifonnent en la cofie de mer d^s le com- 

mencemejit de May infqncs a la my-Septembre. 45 

N 

Nattes de rozeaii, fort mennes, & bien tiffues, 

deffendent les cabancs de la pluye. . . 42 

Nauire arrine a propos a cenx de port Royal en leur 

grande difette. . . . .186 

Nauire captif des Yranqois de S. Sauueur com- 
■mand^par Turnel Anglois efi port ^ par le vent 
aux Aqores Ifles de la coronne d' Efpagne. 281 

Nauire de la Sauffaye arrine en Canada. . 216 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION. i6i6 153 

Membertou advises Father Enemond, who is sick, to 
lurite to Biencoiirt, that they did not kill him, 
but that he died of illness. . . .202 

Mementos of France effaced in Canada, by Eng- 
lish. .... 265.271 

Merveille, Captain, a native of St. Malo, being 
a prisoner, performs all the duties of a good 
Christian. . . . . • ^73 

Meuatio, Island at the mouth of French Bay. . 254 

Mine of silver at Bay e saijite Marie, in Canada. 

Mine of ir 071 at the river St. fohn. . . 32 

Alines of copper at port Royal and Bay of mines. 32 

Mocosa, the mainland in which the Virginia of the 

English is situated. . . .227 

Months. Every month of the year in Canada has 
an abundance of fish or game, or both. 

Montaguets, Souriquois, Etechemins, allies of the 

French in Canada. . . . .34 

Moiint desert, Island, called VQvaQ.ti(\. . .219 

Dead people buried in a sitting posture, the knees 

against the stomach, the head upon the knees. 91 

Codfish abound near the seacoast from the begin- 
ning of May until the middle of September. . 45 

N 

Mats of reeds, well woven, and very fine, protect 

the cabins from rain. . . .42 

Ship arrives very opportunely for those at port 

Royal in their great need. . . .186 

Ship captured from the French of St. Sauveur, 
commanded by Turncl, an Englishman, is car- 
ried by the wind to the Azores Islands of the 
crown of Spain. . . . .281 

Ship of la Saussaye arrives in Canada. . .216 


154 


LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES 


[Vol. 4 


295 
31 

9 
62 

26 
4 


Nicolas Adams Inge de PembrocJi en Ajigleterre, 

charitable cnners Ics lefiiites captifs. 
Noyers frequents en la cojle de la riniere faincl 

leaii. .... 

Noms change z anx trefpaffez aprcs qii ils font en- 

terrez. .... 

Nopces des Canadois anec folemnelle Tabagie, chants, 

& danfes. .... 
Norembegue, terre de Canada auffi bonne que noflre 

Yrance. .... 

Norembegne, & Acadie pais de la France nounelle. 
Normans font allez en la Yrance nouuelle, V an 

1500. deux ans apres les Bretons. 
Nouuelle Yrance fepare'e de la Guienne de ]iui6t 

ce7is, on mille liciies par mer. 
Nouuelle France, partie occidentale de V Amerique. 


O 

Oeufs d'oyfeanx de proye d' eau abondent e7i Canada. 45 

Oyes blanclies, & grifes, paffageres en Canada. . 46 
Oyfeaux de proye de mer counrent les Isles de 

Canada de Icurs oeufs. . . .45 

Oyfeaux originaircs, & paffagers rares en Canada ; 

cenx de proye font frequents. . . 46 

On6lion d' huyle de loup marin vfit^e en Canada 

contre le chaud, & le froid. . . 77 

Orignacs font de faifon eji Yenrier & M.ars. . 43 

Ours bons a manger en Canada anx mois dc Yen- 
rier & Mars. . . . .43 
Outardes, ou Canes fannages fe prennent en Auril. 45 
Outardes paffageres en Canada . . .46 

P 


PembrocJi, ville principale de Galles en Anglcterre. 292 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 155 

Nicolas Adams, Judge, of Pcvtbroch in England, 

kitid to the captive Jesuits. . . -295 

Nuts abundant upon the banks of the river saint 

John. . . . . .31 

Names of the dead changed after they are buried. 9 

Nuptials of the Canadians ivith solemn Tabagie, 

songs, and dances. . . . .62 

Norembegua, country of Canada, as good as France. 26 
Norembegua and Acadia, countries of nezv France. 4 

Normans went to new France in the year 1 500, two 

years after the Bretons. . . .3 

Neiv France separated from Guienne by eight hun- 
dred or one thousand leagues of the sea. 
New France, the western part of America. . i 

O 

Eggs of marine birds of prey abundant in Canada. 45 
White and grey geese, birds of passage in Canada. 46 

Marine birds of prey cover the Islands of Canada 

with their eggs. . . . .45 

Native birds and birds of passage rare in Canada : 

birds of prey common. . .46 

Anointing with Seal oil used in Canada against 

heat and cold. . . . -77 

The season for moose is in February and March. 43 

Bears good to eat in Canada in the months of Feb- 
ruary and March. . . . .43 
Bustards, or wild Ducks, arc taken in April. . 45 
Bustards, birds of passage in Canada. . . 46 


Pembroke, the principal city of Wales in England. 292 
Pentegoet river has a Sagamie along its banks. . 53 


166 LES RELATIONS DES JP.SUITES [Vol.4 

Pentegoet ruiiere, a vne S agamic du long de fon 

riiiage. . . . . -53 

Pencoit, Ijles a vingtcinq lieiies de famcl Sauueur. 228 

Perdrix grifes a grad queiie en Canada. . 46 

Pere E7iemond lAaff^fe loge aiiec yiembertou pour 

apprcndre la languc Canadine. . . 200 

IPere Enemond yiajf^, liiy qidnziefme renuoye par 

V Anglois en Y ranee dans vne chaloupc. . 252 

P. Biard tient auec foy vn Canadin, pour apprendre 

la langue fauuage. . . . .201 

Vere Biard, & P. Enemond M^affd dejiines pour 

Canada. . . . . .129 

Yerc Biard nc veut enfeigner aux Anglois le logis 

de fa in fie Croix, dont il court peril de fa vie. 264 

P. Biard court fortune d' eflre iette en terre deferte, 

ou en nier par les foupgons de r Anglois. . 268 

Pere Biard preuue efficacement au Capitaine Ang- 
lois, que les Francois de S. Sauueur font bien 
aduoii^s du Roy de Yrancc. . . /. 244. 

Pefche abondante depuis May, iufques a iny-Sep- 

tenibre. . . . . /. 45. 

Pefche fucceffiue de diuers poijfons dc's la my -Mars 

iufques en Oilobre. . . p. 44. 45- 46. 

Petun, & fum^e d'iceluy pra^iqude par Ics Cana- 
dois, contre le mauuais letups, la faim, &" 
autre s juaux. . . . /. 78 

Peuples dc Canada trois en tout allies des Yranqois. p. 34 

Pierre du Gas, fietir de Monts Lieutenant du Roy 

Henry IIII. en la France nouuelle. . p. 5 

Pilotois, Medecin f order. . . /. 80 

Pilote Francois Caluiiiifte offre toute aniitic aux 

lefuites captifs des Anglois. . . p. 245 

Plaflrier recognoifl le ficur de Biencourt. . 157 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 167 

Pencoit, Islands twenty-five leagues from saint 

Sauveur. . . . . .228 

Gray partridges with large tails, in Canada. . 46 

Father Enemond Mass^ goes to live zvith Member- 

tou to learn the Canadian language. . 200 

Father Enemond Mass^, one of fifteeti sent by the 

English to France in a shallop. . .252 

Father Biard keeps with him a Canadian, to learn 

from him the language of the savages. . 201 

Father Biard and Father Enemond Massd ap- 
pointed to Canada. . . . .129 

Father Biard refuses to disclose to the Etiglish the 
position of sainte Croix, for zvhich he is in 
danger of losing his life. . . .264 

Father Biard runs the risk of being cast upon a 
desert land, or into the sea, through the sus- 
picions of the English. . . .268 

Father Biard proves satisfactorily to the English 
Captain, that the French of St. Sauveur are 
under the protection of t lie King of France. p. 244 

Fish abundant from May to the middle of Septem- 
ber. . . . . ;>. 45 

Continuous fishing for different kinds of fish from 

the middle of March until October. p. 44, 45, 46 

Tobacco used amojig the Canadians as a protection 

against bad weather, famine, and other evils, p. 78 

Tribes of Canada, only three are allies of the 

French. . . . . /• 34 

Pierre du Gas, sieur de Monts, Lieutenant of King 

Henry IIII. in new France. . p. 5 

Pilotois, Medicine man and sorcerer. . p. 80 

French Pilot, a Calvinist, shoivs great friendliness 

to the Jesuit prisoners of the English. p. 245 

Plastrier acknowledges sieur de Biencourt. 1 5 7 


158 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.4 

Plaifant difcours de Louys Membcrtoii aiiec le P. 

Enemond yiaffe nialade. . . . 202 . 

Ponamo poiffofi de Canada fraye foiis la glace en 

Deccmbrc. ..../. 47. 
Port Royal & Saiyi6tc Croix, deux logis bajlis par 

le Jieur de Mouts en la Yrajicc nomielle. p. 8. 

Port Royal a forme de Pcninfiile. . p. 24. 

Piiritain procure tout le mal qu il peut aux lefui- 

tes. . . . . p. 268. 

Port Royal nial enuitailU fur P Hyuer, pour grand 

nombre de perfonnes. . . p. 144. 

Port aux Coquilles a vingt & ime lieu'cs de Port 

Royal. . . . . • 155- 

255. 
271. 


Port au yiouton. ... 

Port Royal brufl^ par V Anglois. 

Port Royal a quelles conditions cede au fieur de 

Potrincourt par le fieur de M.onts. 
Port Royal fans aucune defefe perdu pour les Yrd- 

gois, & pilU Sf brufl^ par r Anglois. 
Port de S. Sauueur nouuellement appelle de ce nom, 

& defiin^ a fiomcelle habitatio de Frangois. 
Port de S. Sauueur fort capable, & h V abry du vent. 
Prefage manuals d' vn Jigne paroijfant au del. 
Propriety de Canadois efi en la poffeffon du chien, 

& du fac. .... 
Prouifion pour Port Royal mal mefnag^e a Dieppe, 

& dans le nauire. ... 
Pyramides de perches fur les tombeaux des nobles de 

Canada. .... 


R. 


122. 

266 

220. 
225. 
167. 

51. 

194. 

92. 


Racine ChiqviQhi a guife de truffes. . .213. 

Raifons obligedtes le Yrangois a cultiuer Canada. 331. 


1616-29J BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 159 

Amusing talk of Louys Membertou ivitli Father 

Enemond Massd, when he was Hi. . .202 

Ponamo, a fish of Canada, spaiuns under the ice in 

December. . . . . P- A7 

Port Royal afid Sainte Croix, two stations estab- 
lished by sieur de Monts, in new France. p. 8 
Port Royal in the form of a Peninsiila. . /. 24 
Puritan makes all the trouble he can for the Jesuits, p. 268 
Port Royal badly provisioned for the Winter, on 

account of the great number of persons. p. 144 

Port aux Coquilles, twenty -one leagues from Port 

Royal. . . . . -155 

Port au Mouton. . . . .255 

Port Royal burned by the English. . .271 

Port Royal, on what conditions ceded to sieur de 

Potrincourt by sieur de Mo7its. . .122 

Port Royal, defenseless, is lost to the French, and 

pillaged and burned by the English. . ,266 

Port of St. Sauveur newly called by this 7iame, and 

intended as a new habitation for the French. 220 
Port of St. Sauveur very spacious, and protected 

from the ivind. . . . .225 

Presage of evil in a phenomenon appearing in the 

heavens. . . . , .167 

Property of the Canadians lies in the possession of 

a dog and a bag. . . . .51 

Provisions for Port Royal badly managed at Dieppe 

and in the ship. . . . .194 

Pyramids of poles upon the tombs of the grandees 

of Canada. . . . . .92 

R. 

Root, Chiquobi, resembles truffles. . .213 

Reasons why the French ought to cultivate Canada. 331 


160 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.4 

Religion des Canadois, pure forcelerie. . • 93- 

Riiiieres & bras de incr fort frcquens, rendent 

Canada beaucoup plus f raid. . . 24. 

Robe faerie, & pretieufc dcs Aiitmoins. . . 96. 

Roland Sagamo, & autres donnent du pain aux 

Francois de S. Sauueur. . . .255. 


Sac, flecJies, peaux, chiens, & autres meubles du 

defun^l enfeuelis auec luy. . . .92. 

Sagamie au riuage de Sain^le Croix. . . 53. 

Sagamie au bard de la riuiere S. lean. . . 53. 

Sagamochin, petit Sagamo. . . .52. 

Sagamo, ejl Ic chef, & Capitaine dc quelque 

puiffante famille. . . . .51. 

Sagamos recogneus de leurs fuje^ls en payant le 

droi6i de chaff e, & de pefche. . • 5 1 • 

S agamies diuif^es felon la port^e des Bayes & 

Qofies de riuieres. . . . • 53' 

Sagamos tiennent les Eflats en EflL . . 53- 

Sagamos & Autmoins feuls ont voix h aJfembUes 

publiques. . . . . 53- 54' 

Sagamos Armouchiquois retirent bien a propos leurs 

gens du nauire Yranqois, pour euiter querelle. 1 79 
Saincl lean, riuiere en Canada. . . .31 

Sain^l lean, riuiere fort pcrilleufe en fon embou- 

cheure. . . . . .165 

Sain6l Laurens, riuiere charrie des glaces enormes 

bien auant en haute mer. . . -139 

Sain6l Sauueur, habitation des Yranqois en Canada, 

en la terre de la Norembegue. . .19 

Sain£l Sauueur, port ainfi nommd de nouueau en la 

cofle d'Acadie, defiine a vne habitation nou- 

uelle, ..... 229 


Itn6-2i»] B/ARD'S RELATION, 1616 161 


Religion of the Canadians, pure sorcery. . . 93 

Rivers, and many arms of the sea, make Canada 

much colder. . . . .24 

Robe of the Autmoins, sacred and precious. . 96 

Rola?td, a Sagamore, and others give bread to the 

French of St. Sauveur. . . .255 

S. 

Sack, arrows, ski)is, dogs, and other property of the 

deceased buried with him. . . .92 

Sagamie on the banks of Sainte Croix. . -53 

Sagamie on the banks of the river St. John. . 53 

Sagamochin, little Sagamore. . . .52 

Sagamore is the chief and Captain of some power- 
ful family. . . . .51 
Sagamores acknowledged by their subjects by paying 

a tax of game and of fish. . . .51 

Sagamies divided according to the extent of the Bays 

and river Batiks. . . . c-i 

Sagamores hold State Councils in Summer. . 53 

Sagamores and Autmoins alone have a voice in the 

public assemblies. . , . 5^ "54 

Sagamores of the Armouchiquois very opportunely 
zvithdraw their people from the French ship to 
avoid a quarrel. 
Saint John, a river of Canada. 
Satnt John, a river which is very dangerous at its 

mouth. ... 

Satnt Lawrence, a river whose drift ice extends far 

out into the open sea. 
Saint Sauveur, a settlement of the French in Can- 
ada, in the land of Norembegua. 
Satnt Sauveur, a port so named recently, on the 
coast of Acadia, ititended for a new settlement 


179 
31 


165 

139 

'9 

229 


162 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 4 


Sain^ Sauueur, prins &■ pille par Ics Anglois, . 237 
5. Sauitcur brufl^ par Ics Anglois. . . 265 

Saincle Croix cjl au pais des Eteminqnois. . 7 

Sain6ie Croix, Ifle e?i la Francr noimelle, premiere 
demeurc du fieur de Plants, Lieutenant pour le 
Roy. . . • ■ .7 

Saincle Croix, Ijle de riuiere a fix lieties de port 

aux Coquilles. . ■ • • ^ 5^ 

Sauffaye arriue en Canada pour dreffer nouuelle 
habitation, & feparer les le/uitcs de port 
Royal. . . . . .215 

Sanjjfaye Capitainc s' amufe trop a cultiner la terre, 
& neglige le bajliment, catife de de la perte de 
S. Sauueur. .... 226. 

Sauffaye Capitaine de S. Sauueur ne pent produire 
fes lettres de Commiffion, luy ayans cfi^ 
fecrettemcnt cnleuees par V Anglois. . -239. 

Sauffaye Capitaine renuoyc^ en Yra7ice par I' Anglois, 

auec quatorze Francois. . . .252. 

Schoudon Sagamo, nomine le Fere apres fa mort. . 93. 
Scurbot, on maladie de la terre, couftumier en 

Canada. . • • • ■ M- 

Sepulcres des Canadois routes auec des baflons, & 

de la terre defjfus. . . ■ .92. 

Soiffons. Le Vrince de Soiffons Gouuerneur de 

Canada. . . . • • 330- 

Souliers, & greues des Canadois. . • • • 39- 

Souriquois, Montaguets & Etechemins allies 

des Yrangois en Canada. . . •34' 

Tabagie, banquet des Canadois. . • 46. 

Tabagie des prouifions du nialadc ayant tefie. . 89 

Teftanicnt des Canadois auant la mort. 
Thomas Aubert, Normand va en la Yrancc tiouuelle 


88, 


161d-29] 


niARD'S RELATION, 1616 


163 


Saint Sauvcur, taken and pillaged by the English 

St. Saiivciir burned by the English. 

Sainte Croix is in the country of the Eteminquois. 

Sainte Croix, an Island in new France, first resi- 
dence of sieur de Monts, Lieutenant for the 
King. .... 

Sainte Croix, an Island of the river, six leagues 
from port aux Coquilles. 

Saussaye arrives in Canada to establish a new set- 
tlement, and take the Jesuits from port Royal. 

Saussaye, Captain, in amusing himself too much 
with the cultivation of the latid, neglects the 
construction of buildings, and catises the loss 
of St. Sauveur. . . . . 

Saussaye, Captain of St. Sauveur, cannot produce 
the letters containing his Commission, these 
having been secretly appropriated by the Eng- 
lish. .... 

Saussaye, Captain, sent back to France by the Eng- 
lish with fourteen Frenchmen. 

Schoudon, Sagamore, called ''the Father " after his 
death. .... 

Scurvy, or land disease, common in Canada. 

Sepulchres of the Canadians arched over tvith 
sticks, with earth on top. 

Soissons. The Prince dc Soissons, Goirrnor of Can- 
ada. .... 

Shoes and leggings of the Canadians. 

Souriqiiois, Montaguets, and Etechemins, allies 
of the French in Canada. 

Tabagie, a Canadian banquet. 

Tabagie from the provisions of a sick man ivho has 
made his will. 

Testament of the Canadians before death. 


237 
265 

7 


7 
156 
215 

226 

239 
252 

93 
H 

92 

330 
39 

34 
46 

89 
88 


164 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.4 

Van 1508. ..... 2 

Thomas Deel, Marc/chal d'Atigletcrrc a la Virginie, 

homme fort a/pre cniicrs Ics Yranqois captifs. 261 . 300 
Thomas Robin affocie du finir dc Potrincotirt an 

negoce de Canada. . . . .127 

Tortucs abondcnt en Decembre. . . .47 

Trocquc dcs pcaux dc Cajiors, EJlants, Martres, 

loups mar ins en EJlc. . . -33 

Trois peuples allies aux Yrangois en Canada. . 34 

Tur7iel, Capitaine Anglois toiirne /on amour en 

haine contre le P. Biard, & poiirquoy. . 276 

Turnel Lieutenant Anglois foupgonne de /on Capi- 
taine pour auoir con/er^ auec le P. Biard. . 267 
Turnel Capitaine Anglois port d cot re /on grc aux 
terres d' E/pagne, /e rcconcilie aux le/uites, 
pour y auoir leur /aueur. . . . 282. 

V. 

Ve/Jies d'orignac a garder V huile du loup marin. 43 
Vible Bullot re^oit en /on tiauirc vne par tie des 

Yrancois de S. Sauueur. . . .256 

Virginie. Fort des Atiglois en la terre /erme de 

Moco/a a 250. lieues de S. Sauueur. . 227 

Vigne /amiage en plu/ieurs endroits de Canada, qui 

meurit en /a /ai/on. . . • 3'' 

F I N. 


1616-29] HIARD'S RELATION. i6i6 165 

Thomas Aubtrt, Norman, goes to ?ieiv France in 

the year 1508. .... 2 

Thomas Dee I, English Marshal in Virginia, a man 

very severe to the Frenefi eaptives. . 261, 300 

Thomas Robin associated zvith sieur de Potrincourt 

in the affairs of Canada. . . .12/ 

Turtles abundant in December. . . .47 

Trade in the skins of Beavers, Elks, Martens, 

and seals, in Summer. . . -33 

Three tribes allied loith the French in Canada. 34 

Turnel, English Captain, has his lo%'e for Father 

Biard changed into hate, and why. . .276 

Turnel, Englisli Lieutenant, suspected by his Cap- 
tain, for having conferred luith Fatlier Biard. 267 

Turnel, English Captain, carried against his will 
to the lands of Spain, becomes reconciled to the 
fesuits, in order to have their favor. . 282 

V. 

Bladders of moose skin in which to keep the seal oil. 43 
Vible Bullot receives in his ship a part of the 

French of St. Sauveur. . . .256 

Virginia. A fort of the English on the mainland 

of Mocosa, 2%o leagues from St. Sauveur. . 227 
Vine, wild, in many places in Canada, which ripens 

in its season. . . . ,31 

END. 


166 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.4 


Privilege. 

MICHEL COYSSARD, Vice-[pro]mncial de la 
Compagnie de Iesvs, en la Prouince de Lyon, 
permet, (fuiuant le Priuilege done par les 
Roys tres-Chrefliens a la mefme Compagnie) ^ Lows 
MvGVET de faire imprimer, & vendre la Relation de 
la nouuelle France en Canada, & ce pour le terme 
de quatre ans. Faict a Lyon, ce 23. lanuier 16 16. 

M. COYSSARD. 


1616-29] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 167 


License. 

MICHEL COYSSARD, Vice-provincial of the 
Society of jESUS, in the Province of Lyons, 
permits, (according to the License granted 
by the most Christian Kings to the same Society) to 
LouYS MuGUET to have printed, and to sell, the 
Relation of new France in Canada, and this for the 
term of four years. Done at Lyons, this 23rd of 
January, 16 16. 

M. COYSSARD. 


XV— XVII 
Three Letters by Charles Lalemant 

XV.— Au Sievr de Champlain ; Kebec, Juillet 28, 1625 

XVI.— Au R. P. Prouincial des RR. Peres Recollects ; Kebec, 
Juillet 28, 1625 

XVII.— Epistola ad Praepositum Generalem ; Nova Francia, 
Augustus I, [1626] 


SOURCE: Documents XV. and XVI., are reprinted from 
Sagard's Histoirc du Canada (Paris, 1636), pp. 868 - 870. In 
Document XVII., we follow Father Felix Martin's apograph 
(now in the Archives of St. Mary's College, Montreal) of 
the original Latin MS. in the Archives of the Gesu, Rome. 


170 LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 4 


Lettre du R. P. Charles Lallemant Superievr 

des Miffions en Canada au Sievr 

de Champlain. 

[868] 71 ^ ON SIEVR, 

i V Jl Nous voicy graces a Dicu dans Ic rcfort 

de vojlrc Licutenancc oil nous fommes heu- 
reufemcnt arriues, apres auoir en vne des belles trauerfes 
[869] quon aye encor experiviente. Monfieur le General 
apres nous auoir declare quil luy ejloit impofsible de nous 
loger ou dans V habitation oil dans le fort, & qu il faudroit 
ou, repajfer en France, ou nous retirer chcz les Peres Recol- 
lects, nous a contrainCt d' accepter ce dernier offre. Les Peres 
nous ont receus auec tant de charite quil nous ont obligez 
pour vn iamais. Nojlrc Seigneur /era leur rccompence. 
Vn de nos Peres ejloit alle a la trai6le en intention de paf- 
fer aux Hurons ou aux Hiroquois, auec le Pere Recollect 
qui eji venu de Frdce, felon quits aduifcroient auec le Pere 
Nicolas, qui fe deuoit treuuer a la trai6ie & conferer auec 
eux, mais il ejl arriue que le pauure Pere Nicolas au 
dernier faut s ejl noyc, ce qui a ejl^ caufe quits font 
retournez, n'ayans ny cognoijfance , ny langue, ny infor- 
mation : nous attendons done voflre venue, pour refoudre 
ce qui f era a propos de fa ire. Vous fcaurez tout ce que 
vous pourrez defirer de ce pays du P. lofcph, c efl pour- 
quoy ic me content e de vous affeurer que ie fuis, 
Monfieur, Voflre tres-affe6lionne feruitcur, 

Charles Lalemant. 
De Kcbec ce 2S. luillct 1625. 


l()16-2y] C. LALEMANT TO CHAMPLAIN 171 


Letter from the Reverend Father Charles Lalle- 
mant,'*' Superior of the Missions in Can- 
ada, to Sieur de Champiain. 


[868] Q//?, 

^^ Thanks to God, here zve are in the district 

of your Lieutenancy, zvhere we arrived after 
having one of the most successful voyages [869] ever yet ex- 
perienced. Monsieur the General, '^^ after having told us 
that it was impossible to give us lodging either in the settle- 
ment or in the fort, and that we must either return ta 
France, or withdraw to the Recollect Fathers' *^ obliged us 
to accept the latter offer. The Fathers received us ivith so 
much charity, that we feel forever under obligations to them. 
Our Lord ivill be their rczvard. One of our Fathers, to- 
gether zvith the Recollect Father who came from France ^^ 
went to the trading station''^ with the intention of going to 
the Hurons or to the Hiroquois, as they should think best af- 
ter consulting Father Nicolas, who was to be at this station 
to confer with them. But it happened that poor Father 
Nicolas was drowned in the last of the rapids,'^^ for ivhich 
reason they returned, as they knew no one there, and had 
no knoivledge of the language or of the country. We are 
therefore awaiting your arrival, to determine zuhat it will 
be zvcll to do. You will hear all you wish to knozv of this 
country from Father Joseph,'^ therefore I am content to 
assure you that I am. 
Sir, Your very affectionate servant, 

Charles Lalemant. 
Kebec, this 2%th of July, 1625. 


172 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.4 


Lettre du R. P. Charles Lallemant Superievr 

des Miffions en Canada au R. P. 

Prouincial des RR. Peres 

Recolleds. 

MON Reverend Pere, 
Pax Chrijli. 
Cc feroit ejlre par trop mcfcognoiffant de ne 
point cfcrire a vojlre Reucrc?tce, pour la remercier, tant 
des Icttres qui fur e fit dernier ement efcrites en nojtre 
fauenr aiix Peres qui font icy en [870] la noiiuelle France, 
coimnc de la charity que nous auons receues defdits Peres, 
qui tious ont obliges pour vn iamais, ic fupplie nofire bon 
Dieu qu il foit la grande recompence & des vns & des 
autres, pour )non particulier i efcris a nos Supcrieurs, que 
ten ay vn tcl reffentiment que V occafion ne fe prefentera 
point que ie ne le faffe paroifire, & les fupplie quoy que 
d\iilleurs bicn affeclionnez de tefmoigner a tout vofire 
faincl Ordrc le jnefme reffentiment. Le P. lofeph dira a 
vofire Reuerence le fuiet de fon voyage pour le bon fuccez 
duquel, nous ne cefferons d'offrir &" prieres & facrifices h 
Dieu, il faut ccfie fois aduanccr a bon efcient les affaires 
de 7ioflre Maiflre, & ne ricn obmettre de ce qu'on pourra 
s'aduifer efire neceffaire, i en ay efcrit a tous ceux que 
I ay creu y pouuoir contribuer que ie fn affeure s'y em- 
ploieront fi les affaires de France le permettent, ie ne doiite 
point que vofire Reuerence ne s'y porte auec affection, & 
ainfi virtus vnita, fera beaucoup d'effet, en attetidant le 


1616-29] C. LALEMANT TO THE PROVINCIAL 173 


Letter from the Reverend Father Charles Lalle- 

mant, Superior of the Missions of Canada, 

to the Reverend Father Provincial of 

the Reverend Recollect Fathers. 

MY Reverend Father: 
The peace of Christ be ivith you. 
It would be altogether too ungrateful not to 
ivrite to your Reverence to thank you, both for the letters 
which zvere recently written in our behalf to the Fathers 
zvho are here in [870] neiv France, and for the kindness 
which we have received from these Fathers, ivho have 
placed us under everlastifig obligations to the?n. I pray 
our good Lord that he may be an ample recompense for 
both. As to me, / ivrite to our Superiors that I am so 
grateful for this that I shall lose no opportunity to show 
my appreciation of it ; and I implore them, although they 
are already very much attached to your Fathers, to express 
the same gratitude to all your holy Order, Father Joseph 
will tell your Reverence the ptirpose of his voyage,^' for the 
success of which zee shall not cease to offer prayers and 
sacrifices to God. The affairs of our Master must be ad- 
vanced in earnest this time, and nothing must be omitted 
which may be deemed necessary. I have written to all of 
those who, I thought, could contribute to this enterprise, and 
who, I believe, will occupy themselves with it, the affairs 
of France permitting. I do not doubt that your Reverence 
will take an interest in the work, and thus virtus unita 
will achieve good results. In awaitiiig our success, I com- 


174 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 4 

fuccez ie me recommande aux fain£ls Sacrifices de vojlre 
Reference, de laqiiclle ie fuis. 
De Kebec ce 28. luillet 
1625. 

Tres-humble feruiteur 
Charles Lalemant. 

A mon Reuerend Pere Ie P. Prouincial 
des RR. Peres Recolledts. 


161&-29] C. LALEMANT TO THE PROVINCIAL 175 


mend myself to the holy Sacrifices of your Reverence, of 
whom I am, 

Kebec, this 28th of July, 
1625. 

The very humble servant, 

Charles Lalemant. 

To my Reverend Father, the Father Provincial 
of the Reverend Recollect Fathers. 


176 LES RELATIONS DESjASUITES [Vol.4 


Epistola Patris Caroli Lalemant Superioris Missio- 

nis Canadensis ad Reverendissimum Patrem 

Mutium Vitelleschi, Pr^positum Ge- 

neralem Societatis Jesu, Romae. 

(Transcripsit Pater Felix Martiniis ex codice Latino q tit in 

Archivis Jesii, Romce, cotiservatur). 

AUMODUM REVERENDE IN CHRISTO PaTER. 
Pax Christi. 
Non miretur Paternitas vestra si nullas a pos- 
tremis, hoc est ab anno litteras habuerit a nobis, adeo 
enim remoti sumus a littore maris, ut semel duntaxat 
singulis annis visitemur a Gallis et quidem ab iis tan- 
tnm quibus libera est ad nos navigatio, nam caeteris 
est interdicta ; quo fit ut si casu aliquo perirent naves 
illae onerarise vel certe a praedonibus caperentur, ab 
una Dei providentia expectanda essent alimenta qui- 
bus vitam sustentare possemus; a barbaris enim 
hominibus vix necessaria ad vitam habentibus nihil 
sperandum, sed qui hactenus providit Gallis, hie jam 
tot annis commorantibus et nihil nisi lucrum tempo- 
rale quaerentibus non deerit suis uni Dei gloriae et 
animarum saluti invigilantibus. Hoc igitur anno toti 
pene fuimus in perdiscendo barbaro idiomate, uno aut 
altero mense excepto quibus terram coluimus unde 
tenuem nobis victum comparare utcumque possemus. 
Pater Joannes Brebeuf vir et pius et prudens et cor- 


1616-29] C. LALEMANT TO THE GENERAL 177 


Letter from Father Charles Lalemant, Superior of 
the Missions of Canada, to the Very Rever- 
end Father Mutio Vitelleschi,"^ General 
of the Society of Jesus, at Rome. 

(Transcribed by Father Felix Martin from the original Latin 
MS., preserved in the Archives of the Gesii, Rome.) 

VERY Reverend Father in Christ: 
The peace of Christ be with you. 
Your Paternity need not be surprised to 
have received no letters from us during the year 
since our last; for we are so remote from the sea- 
coast that we are visited only once a year by French 
vessels, and then only by those to whom navigation 
hither is allowed, for to others it is interdicted; so 
that, if by any mischance those merchant ships should 
be wrecked, or be taken by pirates,'^ we could look to 
Divine providence alone for our daily bread. For 
from the savages, who have scarcely the necessaries 
of life for themselves, nothing is to be hoped; but 
he who has hitherto provided for the needs of the 
French, who have dwelt here so many years only 
with a view to temporal gain, will not abandon his 
faithful ones who seek only the glory of God and the 
salvation of souls. During the past year we have 
devoted ourselves almost entirely to learning the dia- 
lect of the savages, excepting a month or two spent 
in cultivating the soil, in order to obtain such slight 
means of subsistence as we could. Father Jean Bre- 
beuf,^ a pious and prudent man, and of a robust con- 


178 LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 4 

pore robustus acerbum hyemis tempus cum barbaris 
transegit, unde maximam peregrinae linguae cogniti- 
onem hausit ; nos interim ab interpretibus licet 
maxime alienis a communicando barbaro hoc idio- 
mate obtinuimus, praeter spem et expectationem om- 
nium, quod sperare poteramus. Sed haec sunt tantum 
gemini idiomatis rudimenta, multo plura supersunt. 
Ad multiplicationem quippe nationum multiplicantur 
idiomata ; ac terram banc longe lateque diffusam in- 
colunt quinquaginta ut minimum nationes, ingens 
sane campus in quo nostra excurrat industria ; messis 
multa operarii pauci qui tamen eo sunt animo, per 
Dei gratiam, ut nullis terreantur diflficultatibus, 
quamvis fructus spes magna nondum affulgeat, adeo 
rudes sunt incolae et proxime at bestias accedentes. 
Certe hoc unum solatur nos quod Deus optimus, max- 
imus, in repetenda mercede, fructus non tam sit hab- 
iturus rationem quam voluntatis nostrae et laboris im- 
pensi, modo grata sit ipsi hsec nostra qualiscumque 
voluntas, non est quod male locatam operam nostram 
existimemus: nullus ergo alius hoc anno fructus 
quam loci, personarum et idiomatis duarum nationum 
cognitio, si barbarorum ratio habeatur, nam Gallis 
nostris qui tres hie tantum supra quadraginta nume- 
rantur praesto fuimus, quorum generales totius vitae 
confessiones audivimus, habita prius exhortatione de 
ejus confessionis necessitate, singulis prseterea men- 
sibus geminam ad eos concionem habuimus; his 
majora dabit sequens annus Deo bene juvante et to- 


1616-29J C. LALEMANT TO THE GENERAL 179 


stitution, passed the sharp winter season among the 
savages, acquiring a very considerable knowledge of 
this strange tongue. We, meantime, learning from 
interpreters who were very unwilling to communi- 
cate their knowledge, made as much progress as we 
could hope, contrary to the expectation of all. But 
these are only the rudiments of two languages ; 
many more remain. For the languages are multi- 
plied with the number of the tribes; and this land, 
extending so far in every direction, is inhabited by 
at least fifty different tribes, truly an immense field 
for our zeal. The harvest is great, the laborers are 
few; but they have, by God's grace, a courage un- 
daunted by any obstacles, although the promise of 
success is not yet very great, so rude and almost 
brutish are the natives. We have, truly, this one 
consolation, that God in his goodness and power, in 
the distribution of his rewards will not so much con- 
sider our success as our good will and our efforts. 
Provided only that our desires, such as they may be, 
be pleasing in his sight, we shall have no reason for 
deeming our efforts misspent. Our labors this year 
have had no further fruit than a knowledge of the 
country, of the natives, and of the dialects of two 
tribes, if the savages alone be considered. As re- 
gards the French, whose number does not exceed 
forty-three, we have not been negligent. We have 
heard their general confessions, relating to their 
whole past life, after first holding an exhortation on 
the necessity of this confession. Each month, more- 
over, we have preached two sermons to them. To 
these efforts the following year will add still greater 
ones, if God help and promote our enterprise as he 
has done hitherto. 


180 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol. 4 

turn hoc negotium ut hactenus fecit promovente. 

Valent nostri omnes, per Dei gratiam 

Vix unus utitur linteis cum decumbit. Quod super- 
est nobis temporis a propria et proximorum salute id 
totum in excolenda terra insumitur. Longe alia fuis- 
sent virtutum incrementa, si alium Nostri non desi- 
derassent superiorem. Facile est Paternitati Vestrae 
remedium adhibere, longe melius obsequentis quam 
imperantis personam sustineo. Dabit hoc mihi ut be- 
ne spero Paternitas Vestra a qua id, qua possum ani- 
mi demissione, peto, nee hujus remedii defectu re- 
morabitur diutius alacritatem nostrorum in augen- 
dis virtutibus. E Gallia missi sunt ad nos hoc anno 
operarii primum hie domicilium Societatis erecturi 
quod omnino necessarium indicavimus propter Gallos 
nostros hie commorantes et nusquam alibi. Erigentur 
postea in aliis nationibus in quibus major speratur 
fructus. Certas enim et statas sedes habent, ad eas 
brevi missuri sumus unum e nostris vel duos potius, 
nimirum Patrem Joannem de Brebeuf et Patrem An- 
nam de Noue, quorum missio si succedat laetissimus 
aperitur Evangelio campus ; barbarorum opera eo de- 
ducendi sunt, neque enim aliis vectoribus uti possunt. 
Cum bona superiorum venia redit in Galliam Pater 
Philibertus Noyrot, hoc totum negotium ut hactenus 
fecit promoturus. Indiget Paternitatis Vestras auc- 
toritate ut libere possit agere cum iis qui res nos- 
tras curant. Facessunt ipsi aliquid negotii Lutetiae 
Patres nostri, nescio quam ob rem, nonnihil videntur 


1616-29] C. LALEMANT TO THE GENERAL 181 


We are, God be thanked, all well 

Hardly one of us uses bed-linen when he sleeps. 
All our time that is not devoted to seeking the salva- 
tion of our fellow-men and of ourselves is occupied in 
tilling the soil. Far greater would be our growth in 
virtue, if another of Our Brothers were not more de- 
sirable as superior. This it is easy for Your Pater- 
nity to remedy, as I feel myself far better fitted for 
obedience than for command. I truly hope that Your 
Paternity, from whom I ask it with all possible sub- 
mission, will grant me this, and will not longer 
hinder, for lack of this remedy, the eagerness of our 
brethren to increase their virtues. Some workmen 
have been sent to us this year from France, to construct 
the first dwelling of the Society here, which we con- 
sidered as quite indispensable on account of our 
French, who settle here and nowhere else. Others 
will be built later among other tribes from whom we 
expect greater results. To those that have fixed set- 
tlements we shall in a short time send one of our num- 
ber or rather two ; Father Jean de Brebeuf and Father 
Anne de None.'" If their mission is successful, a 
most promising field will be opened for the Gospel. 
They must be taken there by the savages, for they 
can not use any other boatmen. With consent of his 
superiors. Father Philibert Noyrot *^ returns to France 
to promote as hitherto the interests of our enterprise. 
He stands in need of the influence of Your Pater- 
nity in order to negotiate freely with those who 
have charge of our affairs. Our own Fathers at Paris, 
for some reason, put difficulties in our way, and seem 
rather unfriendly to our mission; so that, but for 
the favor of Father Cotton,*^ of blessed memory, our 
affairs would have fallen to the g-pound. . 


182 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol. 4 

alieni ab hac missione, cui nisi favisset bonae memo- 
rise Pater Cottonus omnino jacuissent res nos- 
trae, . . . Verum quia rediturus est ineunte vere 
Pater Noyrot, omnino alius e nostris erit necessarius 
Lutetiae vel Rothomagi qui in ipsius locum sufficia- 
tur et rerum nostrarum curam suscipiat, necessaria 
singulis annis mittat et litteras nostras accipiat ; si ta- 
men ita judicaverit Paternitas Vestra. Septem ergo hie 
residui erimus. Patres quatuor : P. Enemundus Masse, 
admonitor et confessarius, P. Joannes de Brebeuf , P. 
Annas de Noue et ego. Coadjutores vero tres : Gil- 
bertus Burel, Joannes Goffestre et Franciscus Charre- 
ton, parati omnes ad quosvis labores pro Dei gloria 
suscipiendos. Sanctissimis Paternitatis Vestrse Sac- 
rificiis commendant se omnes. 

P. V. filius humillimus 

Carolus Lalemant. 
E Nova Francia 

Cal. Aug. 


1616-29] C. LALEMANT TO THE GENERAL 183 


As Father Noyrot is to return at the beginning of 
spring, another of our members will be absolutely 
necessar)^ at Paris, or at Rouen, to fill his place and to 
look after our interests, sending us yearly what sup- 
plies we need, and receiving our letters, if Your Pa- 
ternity so decide. There thus remain seven of us 
here; four priests, Father Enemond Masse, "^ as ad- 
monitor and confessor, Father Jean de Brebeuf, Fa- 
ther Anne de Noue, and myself; and three lay broth- 
ers, Gilbert Burel, Jean Goffestre, and Fran9ois 
Charreton, all of us ready to undertake any labors 
wha*^^soever for the glory of God. We all commend 
ourselves to the Most Holy Sacrifices of Your Pater- 
nity. 

Your Paternity's most humble son 

Charles Lalemant. 

New France, 

August 1st. 


XVIII 

Charles Lalemants 

Lettre au Hierosme I'Allemant 
Kebec, Aoull i, 1626 

Paris: JEAN BOUCHER, 1627 


Source : Title-page and text reprinted from original in 
Lenox Library. 


Rp"* 


DV PERE 


^f^^^^mm?m 


CHARLES 

L'ALLEMANT 

SVPERIEVR DE LA MIS- 

fion de Canadas5 dc laCom- 

pagnie dc I E s V s, 

Enuoyet an Pere Hierofme tAUemant 
fonfrerCy de la mefme Compagnie 

Cu fontcontcnus les mc£urs& facons dc vi* 

lire des Sauuages habitans de ce pa'isUj 

& comme ils Ce comportcnt aucc 

les Chicfticns Francois qui y 

dcmeurenc. 

fnfembU U defcription des t'iiUs de ceftc centra ^ 



A PARIS,. 
Par Ieam B o y ch£ p., luc des Amandiers 

aiaVcfueRoyale. 16x7. 


LETTER 

FROM FATHER 

CHARLES 

UALLEMANT 

SUPERIOR OF THE Mis- 
sion of the Canadas ; of 
the Society of Jesus. 

Sent to Father Jerome I'AUemant, bis brother, 
of the same Society 

In which are contained the manners and 
customs of the Savages inhabiting that 
country ; and on what terms they 
live with the French Chris- 
tians who reside there. 

Together with the description of the tozcns of 
that country. 


PARIS, 

Jean Boucher, rue des Amandiers 
Verity Royale. 1627. 


190 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.4 


[I i.e., 3] Lettre dv Pere Charles L'Allemant Supe- 

rieur de la Miffion de Canadas, de la Com- 

pagnie de Iesvs. Au Pere Hierofme 

rAllemant (on frere. 

Pax Chrifti. 

I^ESCRIVIS ran paff^ a Voftre Reuerence (enui- 
ron la my-Iuillet) le fucc6s de noftre voyage; 
depuis ce temps ie n'ay peu vous efcrire, k 
caufe que les vaiffeaux n'abordent icy qu'vne fois 
Tan. C'eft pourquoy il ne faut attendre des nouuelles 
de nous que d'annee en annee: Et fi ces vaiffeaux ve- 
noient vne fois a manquer, ce feroit bien merueille 
fi vous en receuiez deuant deux ans; outre qu'il nous 
faudroit cefte annee attendre de I'vnique prouidence 
de Dieu les chofes neceffaires a I'entretien de cefte 
vie. Done depuis mes dernieres, voicy ce que i'ay 
peu recognoiftre de ce pais, & ce qui s'efl paffe: Ce 
pais eft d'vne grande eftendue, ayant bien mille ou 
douze cens lieues de longueur; fa largeur, enuiron 
le 40. degrez vers I'Orient; il eft borne de la mer 
Oceane, & vers I'Occident, de la mer de la Chine. 
Plufieurs Nations I'habitent: Ion m'en a nomme 38. 
ou 40. fans celles que Ion ne cognoift pas, que les 
Sauages neantmoins affeurent. Le lieu oil les Fran- 
§ois fe font habituez appelle Kebec, eft par les 46. 
degrez & demy, fur le bord d'vn des plus beaux 
fleuues du monde, appelle par les Frangois, la riui- 
ere de faindl Laurens, efloigne pres de deux cens 


1616-29] C. LALEMANT TO JEROME 191 


[I i.e., 3] Letter-^ from Father Charles L'Allemant, 

Superior of the Mission of Canadas, of 

the Society of Jesus. To Father 

Jerome i'Allemant, his brother.'^" 

The peace of Christ be with you. 

LAST year (about the middle of July) I wrote to 
Your Reverence in regard to the success of our 
voyage. I have not been able to communicate 
with you since then, because the ships touch here 
only once a year ; and therefore news can be expected 
from us only from year to year. And if these ships 
failed once, it would not be surprising if you did not 
receive news before two years; besides, during the 
intervening year we should be obliged to look en- 
tirely to the providence of God for the necessaries of 
life. Now, since my last letters, the following is 
what I have been able to learn about this country, 
and what has been done here. This country is of 
vast extent, being easily a thousand or twelve hun- 
dred leagues long, and in width extending about 
40 degrees toward the Orient. It is bounded by 
the Ocean sea, and towards the West by the sea of 
China. Many Tribes inhabit it, about 38 or 40 hav- 
ing been named to me, besides those which are un- 
known ; of the existence of which, however, the Sav- 
ages assure us. The place inhabited by the French, 
called Kebec, is in 46 and one-half degrees, upon the 
shore of one of the most beautiful rivers in the 
world, called by the French the river saint Lawrence. 


192 LES RELA TIONS DES J]^SUITES [Vol. 4 

lieues de remboucheure du dit fleuue, & cepedat le 
flot monte encore 35. ou 40, lieues au delTus de nous. 
[4] L'endroit le plus eftroit de cefte riuiere eft vis k 
vis de I'habitation, & toutesfois fa largeur y eft plus 
d'vn quart de lieue. Or quoy que le pais oil nous 
fommes foit par les 46 degrez & demy plus Sud 
que Paris de pres de deux degrez, fi eft-ce que I'Hy- 
uer, pour I'ordinaire, y eft de 5. mois & demy; les 
neiges de 3. ou 4. pieds de hauteur; mais fi obftinees 
qu'ellesne fondent point pour I'ordinaire que vers la 
my-Auril, & commencent toufiours au mois de No- 
uembre, pendant tout ce temps on ne void point la 
terre; voire mefme nos Frangois m'ont dit, qu'ils 
auoient traifn^ le may fur la nege, au premier iour 
de May: L'annee mefme que nous arriuafmes, & ce 
auec des raguettes; car c'eft la couftume en ce pais 
de marcher fur des raguettes pendat I'Hyuer, de 
peur d'enfoncer dans la neige, a I'imitation des Sau- 
uages, qui ne vont point autremet k la chafCe de 
I'orignac. Le plus doux Hyuer qu'on ait veu, efl ce- 
luy que nous y auons paffe (difent les Anciens habi- 
tans) & cependant les neiges commencerent le 16. 
Nouembre, & vers la fin de Mars commencerent k 
fondre, la longueur & continuation des neiges eft 
caufe que Ion pourroit douter fi le froment & le feigle 
reufQroit bien en ce pais ; i'en ay veu neatmoins d'aulTi 
beau qu'en voftre France, & mefme le noftre que 
nous y auons feme, ne luy cede en rien ; pour plus 
grande alleurance il faudroit y f emer du bled mefteil ; 
I'orge & I'auoine y viennent le mieux du monde, plus 
grainues beaucoup qu'en France. C'eft merueille de 
voir nos pois tant ils font beaux. Ainfi la terre n'eft 
pas ingrate (comme voftre Reuerence pent voir.) Plus 
on va montant la riuiere, & plus on f 'appercoit de la 


1616-29] C. LA LEMANT TO JEROME 193 

Kebec is about two hundred leagues from the mouth 
of this river, and yet the tide ascends 35 or 40 leagues 
above us. [4] The narrowest part of this river is oppo- 
site the settlement, and yet its width here is more than 
one-fourth of a league. Now although the country 
where we are, being in latitude about 46 and one-half 
degrees, is farther South than Paris by nearly two de- 
grees, yet the Winter generally lasts here 5 months 
and a half ; the snow is 3 or 4 feet deep, but it is so 
firm that it does not usually melt until near the mid- 
dle of April, and it always begins in the month of 
November. During all this time the earth is never 
seen; indeed our Frenchmen have even told me that 
they dragged their maypole over the snow on the first 
day of May, in the very year of our arrival, and that 
with snowshoes ; for it is the custom in this country 
to walk on snowshoes during the winter, for fear of 
sinking into the snow, in imitation of the Savages; 
who never go otherwise to hunt the moose. The 
mildest Winter that has been seen is the one that 
we have passed here (say the Old inhabitants), and 
yet the snow began to fall on the i6th of Novem- 
ber and to melt towards the end of March. The long 
duration of the snow might cause one to somewhat 
doubt whether wheat and rye would grow well in 
this country. But I have seen some as beautiful as 
that produced in your France, and even that which 
we have planted here yields to it in nothing. To bet- 
ter provide against scarcity, it would be well to plant 
some meslin ; -^ rye and oats grow here the best in 
the world, the grains being larger and more abun- 
dant than in France. Our peas are so beautiful; it is 
wonderful to see them. So the earth is not ungrate- 
ful (as your Reverence may see.) The farther up the 


194 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.4 

bonte d'icelle. Les vents qui regnent en ce pais, 
font, le Nor-d'Eft, le Nor-Ouefl, & le Sur-Ouefl. 
Le Nor-d'Eft ameine les neges en Hyuer, & les 
pluyes en autre faifon Le Nor-Oueft eft £i froid 
qu'il penetre iufques aux motielles des os; le Ciel eft 
fort ferein quand il foufifie. Depuis remboucheure 
de cefte Riuiere iufques icy, il n'y a point de terre 
defrichee, ce ne font que bois. Cefte Nation icy ne 
f'occupe point h. cultiuer la tetre [terre], il n'y a que 3. 
ou 4. families qui en ont defriche 2. ou 3. arpens ou 
ils fement du bled d'Indes ; & ce depuis peu de temps. 
On m'a dit que c'efloit les RR. PP. Recoledts qui 
leurs auoient perfuade. Ce qui a efte cultiue en ce 
lieu par les Frangois eft peu de chofe, f'il y a 18. ou 
20. arpens de terre [5] c'eft tout le bout du monde. 
A deux cens lieues d'icy en montant la Riuiere, il fe 
trouue des Nations plus ftables que celles cy, qui 
baftiffent de grands villages, lefquels ils fortifient 
contre leurs ennemis, & trauaillent k bon efcient h. 
la terre ; d'oii vient qu'elles ont quantite de bled d'ln- 
de, & ne meuret pas de faim comme celles cy, fi font- 
elles plus fauuages en leurs moeurs, commettans fans 
fe cacher, & fans honte aucune, toute fortes d' impu- 
dences. Or quoy que cefte Riuiere nous conduife k 
ces Nations Ik, fl eft-ce pourtant qu'il y a bien de la 
difficulte a y aller, k caufe des faults qui fe trouuet fur 
la Riuiere (qui font de certains precipices d'eau, qui 
empefchet tout k fait qu'on ne puiffe nauiger.) C'eft 
pourquoy lors que les Sauuages arriuent a ces faults 
Ik, il faut qu'ils portent leurs batteaux fur leurs ef- 
paules, auec tout leur bagage, & qu'ils fen aillent 
par terre quelquesfois 2. 3. 4. & 8 lieues, & ainfi que 
paffent les Fran9ois lors qu'ils y vont. Les RR. PP. 
Recoledts y font allez quelquesfois, & y ont port6 


1616-29] C. LALEMANT TO JEROME 195 

river we go, the more we see of the fertility of the 
soil. The prevailing winds in this country are the 
Northeast, Northwest, and Southwest. The North- 
east brings the snows in Winter, and the rains in 
other seasons. The Northwest is so cold that it pene- 
trates even to the marrow of the bones ; yet the Sky 
is very serene when it blows. From the mouth of 
the River to this place, none of the land is cleared, 
there being nothing but forests. This Tribe does not 
occupy itself in tilling the soil ; there are only 3 or 4 
families who have cleared 2 or 3 acres, where they sow 
Indian corn, and they have been doing this for only a 
short time. I have been told that it was the Rever- 
end Recolect Fathers who persuaded them to do it. 
That cultivated by the French in this place is of small 
area, only 18 or 20 acres [5] at the most.** Two hun- 
dred leagues from here, ascending the River, Tribes are 
found which are more sedentary than those which 
are here ; they build large villages which they fortify 
against their enemies, and cultivate the land in ear- 
nest. It thus happens that they have stores of Indian 
corn, and do not die of starvation like those here. 
Yet they are more savage in their customs, and com- 
mit all kinds of shameless acts, without disgrace or 
any attempt at concealment. Now, although this River 
takes us to these Tribes, yet truly the difficulty in get- 
ting there is very great, on account of the rapids which 
are found in the River ; (these are certain falls of water 
which entirely prevent navigation.) Therefore, when 
the Savages reach these rapids, they are compelled to 
carry their boats upon their shoulders with all their 
baggage, and to go overland, sometimes 2, 3, 4, or 8 
leagues ; and the French have to do the same when 
they go there. The Reverend Recolect Fathers made 


196 


LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 4 


tous leurs viures pour vn an, ou dequoy en acheter; 
car d'attendre que les Sauuages vous en donnet 
c'eft folic, fi ce n'eft qu'ils vous ayent pris fous leur 
protcdlion, & que vous voulicz demeurer dans leurs 
villages & cabanes ; car alors il vous nourriront pour 
rien; Mais qui f'y pourroit refoudre! les yeux reli- 
gieux ne peuuent fupporter tant d'impudicitez qui f'y 
commettent a defcouuert: c'eft pourquoy les RR. PP. 
Recolec5ts ont efte contraints de baftir des Cabanes a 
part; mais auffi falloit il qu'ils achetaffent leurs 
viures. En ces Nations il n'y a eu cefte annee aucun 
Religieux; quand nous arriuafmes icy I'an paffe il y 
auoit vn P. Recolet qui fen venoit auec les Sauuages, 
au lieu de la traitte 35. lieues au delTus de cefte habi- 
tation; mais au dernier fault qu'il palTa fon canal fe 
renuerf a & f e noya : En def cendant les Sauuages ne 
mettent pied k terre pour les fauls ; mais feulemet en 
montant. Ainfi ces faults font que ces Nations font 
de difficile abord. Or bien qu'il n'y ait point eu de 
Religieux en ces Nations, les marchands n'ont pas 
laiffe d'y enuoyer des Fran§ois pour entretenir les 
Sauuages, & les amener tous les ans a la traitte Ces 
Fran9ois par confequent n'ont oiiy la Meffe toute 
I'annee, ne fe font ny confeffez, ny communiez a 
Pafques, & viuent dans des occafions tres-grandes de 
pecher. Queer itur, f'ils peuuent en cofcience y aller 
de la forte; Voftre [6] Reuerece me fera plaifir de 
confulter quelqu'vn de nos Peres pour en fgauoir la 
refolution & me I'efcrire. 

Quant aux fa§ons de faire des Sauuages, c'eft 
affez de dire qu'elles font tout a fait fauuages. De- 
puis le matin iufques au foir, ils n'ont autre foucy 
que de remplir leur ventre lis ne viennent point 
nous voir fi ce n'eft pour demander a manger, & fi 


1616-29J C. LALEMANT TO JEROME 


197 


this journey occasionally and carried all their food 
for a year, or the means of buying it ; for to expect 
the Savages to give it to you is folly, unless they 
have taken you under their protection, and you wish 
to live in their villages and cabins ; then they would 
feed you for nothing. But who could make up his 
mind to do this? Religious eyes could not support 
the sight of so much lewdness, carried on openly. 
Therefore, the Reverend Recolect Fathers were com- 
pelled to build their cabins apart ; but they also, on 
that account, had to buy their food. There has been 
no Religious among these Tribes this year. When 
we arrived here last year, there was one Recolet Fa- 
ther who came with the Savages to the trading 
station, 35 leagues above this settlement ; but when 
coming down the last of the rapids, his canoe upset 
and he was drowned.^^ In descending the river, the 
Savages do not land on reaching the rapids, but only 
in going up. Thus the rapids make these Tribes diffi- 
cult of access. Although there have been no Reli- 
gious among these Tribes, the merchants have not 
failed to send Frenchmen there to gain the good will 
of the Savages, and to induce them to come yearly to 
the trading station. As a consequence, these French- 
men have not heard Mass during the entire year, 
have not confessed nor taken the Easter Sacrament, 
and their surroundings are such that there are fre- 
quent opportunities for sin. Quczritur: can they con- 
scientiously go thither under these circumstances? 
Your [6] Reverence will do me the favor to consult 
some one of our Fathers, to know his decision and 
to write to me about it. 

As to the customs of the Savages, it is enough to 
say that they are altogether savage. From morning 


198 


LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol. 4 


vous ne leur en donnez ils tefmoignent du mefcon- 
tentement. Ils font de vrais gueux f 'il en fut iamais, 
& neantmoins fuperbes an poffible. lis eftiment que 
les Frangois n'ont point d'efprit an prix d'eux; les 
vices de la chair font fort frequets chez eux; tel 
qui y efpoufera plufieurs femmes qu'il quittera quand 
bon luy femblera & en prendra d'autres. II y en a icy 
vn qui a efpouf e fa propre fille ; mais tous les autres 
Sauuages s'en font trouuez indignez; de nettete 
chez eux il ne s'en parle point, ils font fort fales en 
leur manger & dans leurs cabanes, ont force vermine 
qu'ils mangent quand ils I'ont prife La couflume 
de cefte Nation efl de tuer leurs peres & meres lors 
qu'ils font fi vieux qu'ils ne peuuet plus marcher, 
penfans en cela leur rendre de bons feruices; car 
autrement ils feroient contraints de mourir de faim, 
ne pouuans plus fuiure les autres lors qu'ils changent 
de lieu; & comme ie fis dire vn iour a vn qu'on luy 
en feroit autant lors qu'il feroit deuenu vieil; il me 
refpondit qu'il f'y attendoit bien La fa5on de faire 
la guerre auec leurs ennemis c'efl pour I'ordinaire 
par trahifon, les allans efpier lors qu'ils font ^ 
I'efcart; & s'ils ne font affez forts pour emmener 
prifonniers ceux ou celuy qu'ils rencontreut, ils 
tirent des fieches deffus, puis leur couppet la telle, 
qu'ils emportent pour monflrer a leurs gens, que 
s'ils les peuuent emmener prifonniers iufques en leurs 
cabanes ils leur font endurer des cruautez nompa- 
reilles, les faifant mourir \ petit feu : & chofe etrange ! 
pendant tous ces tourmens, le patient chante toufiours, 
refputans a defhonneur f 'ils crient & s'ils fe plaignent 
Apres que le patiet efl mort, ils le mangent, & n'y 
a fi petit qui n'en ait fa part, ils font des feflins auf- 
quels ils fe conuient les vns les autres, & mefme ils 


1616-29] C. LALEMANT TO JEROME 199 


until night they have no other thought than to fill 
their stomachs. They come to see us only to ask for 
something to eat ; and if you do not give it to them 
they show their dissatisfaction. They are real beg- 
gars, if there ever were any, and yet proud as they 
can be. They consider the French less intelligent 
than they. Vices of the flesh are very common among 
them. One of them will marry several women, 
and will leave them when he pleases, and take 
others. There is one here who married his own 
daughter, but all the other Savages were indignant 
at him for it. As to cleanliness among them, that 
never enters into the question ; they are very dirty 
about their eating, and in their cabins they are covered 
with vermin, which they eat when they catch them. 
It is a custom of this Tribe to kill their fathers and 
mothers when they are so old that they can walk no 
longer, thinking that they are thus doing them a good 
service; for otherwise they would be compelled to 
die of hunger, as they have become unable to follow 
the others when they change their location. When 
I had it explained to one of them one day that the 
same thing would be done for him when he be- 
came old, he answered that he certainly expected it. 
Their method of making war against their enemies 
is generally through treachery, watching to find them 
alone ; and, if they are not strong enough to make 
prisoners of those whom they encounter, they shoot 
them with their arrows, then cut off their heads, 
which they bring back to show their people. But, if 
they can take them to their cabins as prisoners, they 
subject them to unparalleled cruelties, killing them 
by inches; and, strange to say, during all of these 
tortures, the victim sings constantly, considering it a 


200 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.4 

conuient quelques Fran9ois de leur cognoiffance, & 
en ces fefti[n]s ils donnent k chacun fa part dans des 
plats ou efcuelles d'efcorce & lors que ce font feflins 
k tout manger, il ne faut rien lailTer, autremement 
vous efles obligez "k payer quelque chofe, & perdriez 
la reputation de braue [7] homme. Aux feflins qu'ils 
font pour la mort de quelqu'vn ils font la part au 
defunt auffi bien qu'aux autres, laquelle ils iettent 
dans le feu, & fe donnent bien garde que les chiens 
ne participet k ce f eftin ; & pource ramalTent tous les 

05 & les iettent dans le feu. lis enterrent les morts 

6 auec eux tout ce qu'ils auoient, comme chandeliers, 
peaux, coufteaux, &c Et comme ie demaday vn iour 
a vn vieillard pourquoy ils mettoient tout ce bagage 
dans les foffes, il me refpondit qu'ils le mettoient afin 
que le mort s'en feruift dans 1' autre monde ; & comme 
ie luy repartis que toutes les fois que Ion regardoit das 
les foff es on y trouuoit toufiours le bagage, qui eftoit 
vn temoignage que le mort ne s'en feruoit pas; il me 
refpodit, qu'k la verite le corps des chaudieres, peaux, 
coufteaux, &c. demeuroit; mais que Tame des chau- 
dieres, coufteaux, &c. s'en alloit dans I'autre monde 
auec le mort, & que \k il s'en feruoit. Ainli ils croyent, 
(comme V.R. void) I'immortalite de nos Ames; & de 
fait ils affeurent qu'apres la mort, ils vont au Ciel ou 
elles mangent des champignons, & fe communiquent 
les vnes auec les autres. lis appellent le Soleil Iesvs ; 
& Ion tient en ce pais que ce font les Bafques qui y 
ont cy-deuant habite, qui font Autheurs de cefte de- 
nomination. De la vient que quand nous faifons nos 
Prieres, il leur femble que comme eux nous addrelTons 
nos Prieres au Soleil. A ce propos du Soleil, ces 
Sauuages icy croyent que la terre eft percee de part 
en part, & que lors qu'il fe couche, il efl cache en vn 


1616-29] C. LALEMANT TO JEROME 201 

dishonor if he cries out or complains. After the vic- 
tim is dead, they eat him, and no one is so insignifi- 
cant that he does not get his share. They have feasts 
to which they invite each other, and even some of their 
French acquaintances; at these feasts they give to 
each one his part on a dish or plate of bark; and 
when they are "eat-all" feasts, nothing must be left, 
otherwise you would be compelled to pay something, 
and would lose your reputation as a brave [7] man. 
At the feasts which are given in honor of the 
death of some one, they set aside a part for the de- 
ceased as well as for the others, which they throw 
into the fire; they are very careful that the dogs 
shall not share in this feast, and to this end, they 
gather up all the bones and throw them into the fire. 
They bury the dead, and with them all their be- 
longings, such as candlesticks, furs, knives, etc. 
When I asked an old man one day why they placed all 
this baggage in the grave, he replied that they did so 
in order that the deceased might use it in the other 
world ; and when I answered him that when any one 
looked into the grave all the baggage was seen there, 
which was a proof that the deceased did not use it, 
he replied, that in truth the body of the kettles, furs, 
knives, etc., remained, but that the soul of the ket- 
tles, knives, etc., went off to the other world with 
the deceased, and that he made use of them there. 
Thus they believe (as Your Reverence sees) in the 
immortality of our Souls ; and, in fact, they assure you 
that after death they go to Heaven, where they eat 
mushrooms and hold intercourse with each other. 
They call the Sun Jesus ;-^^ and it is believed that the 
Basques,*^ who formerly frequented these places. In- 
troduced this name. It thus happens that when we 


202 LES RELATIONS DBS j£SUITES [Vol.4 

trou de la terre, & fort le lendemain par I'autre. lis 
n'ont aucun culte diuin, ny aucunes fortes de Prieres 
lis croyent neantmoins qu'il y en a Vn qui a tout fait ; 
mais pourtant ils ne luy rendent aucun honneur. 
Entr'eux ils ont quelques perfonnes qui font efhat 
de parler au Diable ; ceux la font auffi les Medecins, 
& guarillent de toute maladie. Les Sauuages crai- 
gnent grandement ces gens-la, & les carefset de 
peur qu'ils n'en re9oiuent du mal. Nous apprendrons 
peu k peu ce qui eft des autres Nations, lefquelles 
font plus ftables en leurs demeures ; Car pour celles- 
cy ou nous fommes maintenant auec les Fran9ois, 
elle eft feulement vagabonde fix mois I'annee, qui 
font les fix mois d'Hyuer, errans 5k & Yk felon la chaffe 
qu'ils trouuent, & ne fe cabanent que deux ou trois 
families enfemble en vn endroit, deux ou trois en 
I'autre, & les autres de mefme. Ez autres [8] fix 
mois de I'annee, vingt ou trente s'alTemblent fur le 
bord de la Riuiere pres de noftre habitation, autant a 
ThadoulTac, & autant a quarante lieues au dellus 
de nous, & Yk ils viuent de la chaffe qu'ils ont faidte 
I'Hyuer, c'efl k dire, de viande d'orignac, boucanee, 
& de viures qu'ils ont traite auec les Frangois. le 
croy auoir efcrit I'an paffe ce qui eft de leurs ve- 
ftemens, & comme 'ils font toufiours nud tefle, leurs 
corps font feulemet couuerts d'vne peau, ou d'ori- 
gnac, ou d'vne robbe de Caftor, qui font 5. ou 6. Ca- 
ftors coufus enfemble, & veftent ces peaux, comme 
fans comparaifon, les Ecclefiaftiques les Chappes, n'e- 
ftans attachez par deuant que d'vne courroye : quelque- 
fois ils fe ceignent d'vne ceinture, quelquefois ils n'en 
ont point du tout, & neantmoins pour lors on ne void 
rien de deshonnefte, cachans fort decemment les par- 
ties que I'honneftete veut eftre couuertes. En Hyuer 


1616-29] C. LALEMANT TO JEROME 203 

offer Prayers, it seems to them that we address our 
Prayers to the Sun, as they do. While on the sub- 
ject of the Sun, the Savages here believe that the 
earth is pierced through and through ; and that, when 
the sun sets, it hides in one hole in the earth, and 
comes out next morning through the other. They 
have no form of divine worship, nor any kind of 
Prayers. They believe, however, that there is One 
who made all, but they do not render him any homage. 
Among them there are persons who make a profes- 
sion of talking to the Devil ; these are also the Phy- 
sicians, and cure all kinds of diseases. The Savages 
have great fear of these people, and humor them lest 
they do them some injury. Little by little we shall 
learn more of the other Tribes, who are more seden- 
tary in their habits; but, as to these where we now 
are with the French, they are wanderers only during 
six months of the year, which are the six Winter 
months, — roving here and there, according as they 
may find game, only two or three families erecting 
their cabins together in one place, two or three in 
another, and so on. The other [8] six months of the 
year, twenty or thirty come together upon the shore 
of the River near our settlement, part at Thadoussac, 
and the same number forty leagues above us; and 
there they live upon the game which they have cap- 
tured during the Winter ; that is to say, on smoked 
moose meat, and food for which they have traded 
with the French. I believe I wrote something about 
their clothing last year, and how they always go bare- 
headed ; they wear no other clothes than a moose skin 
or a Beaver robe, which consists of 5 or 6 Beaver Skins 
sewed together ; and they wear these skins as, without 
making any comparison, the Ecclesiastics wear their 


204 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.4 

ils ont des chaufTes & des fouliers faits de peau d'ori- 
gnac; mais les fouliers, tant deffus que deffous font 
fouples comme vn gand. lis ont la plus part du temps 
leurs vifages peints de rouge ou de gris brun & ce en 
diuerfes fa9ons, felon la fantaifie des femmes, qui 
peignent leurs maris & leurs enfans, defquels ils 
graiffent auffi les cheueux de graiffe d'ours, ou 
d'orignac. Les hommes n'ont non plus de barbe que 
les femmes, ils fe Tarraclient afin de plaire dauan- 
tage aux femmes. le n'en ay veu que trois ou quatre 
qui ne fe la font point arrachee depuis peu de temps 
a r imitation des Fran9ois ; mais pourtant ils n'en 
font pas fournis. La couleur de leur chair tire fort 
fur le noir; on n'en void pas vn qui aye la charnure 
blanche, neantmoins il n'y a rien de fi blanc que 
leurs dents. lis vot fur les riuieres dans de petits 
canaux d'efcorce de bouleau, fort proprement faits: 
dans les moindres il y pent tenir 4 ou 5. perfonnes, 
encore y mettent-ils leurs petits bagages. Les auirons 
font proportionnez aux canaux I'vn deuant I'autre 
derriere, c'eft d'ordinaire la femme qui tient celuy de 
derriere, & par confequent qui gouuerne. Ces pauures 
femmes font de vrais mulcts de charge, portant toute 
la fatigue ; f ont-elles accouchees, deux heures apres 
elles s'en vont aux bois pour fournir au feu de la ca- 
bane. En Hyuer lors qu'ils decabanent elles trainent 
les meilleurs pacquets fur la neige ; bref les hommes 
ne f emblent auoir pour partage que la chalTe, la guerre, 
& la traitte. A propos de la [9] traitte, ie n'en ay 
encores rien dit, auffi eft-ce I'vnique chofe qui me 
refte touchant les Sauuages, Toutes leurs richeffes 
font les peaux de diuers animaux; mais principale- 
ment de Caftors. Auparauant I'affociation de ces 
Meffieurs aufquels le Roy a donne cefte traitte pour 


1616-29] C. LALEMANT TO JEROME 205 

Capes, attached in front only by a leather strap. 
Sometimes they wear a belt, sometimes none at all, 
and nevertheless nothing improper is noticed on that 
account, as they very modestly cover the parts which 
decency demands should be covered. In Winter 
they have leggings and shoes made of moose skin, 
but the shoes, the uppers as well as the soles, are 
as pliable as a glove. Their faces are usually painted 
red or grayish brown, and this is done in different 
styles, according to the fancy of the women, who 
paint their husbands and children, whose hair they 
also oil with bear or moose grease. The men are no 
more bearded than the women ; they pull their beards 
out in order to be more agreeable to the women. I 
have seen only three or four who had not done so, 
and this but recently in imitation of the French ; yet 
they did not have beards. The color of their skin is 
strongly inclined to black ; not one is seen whose 
skin is white, and yet nothing is so white as their 
teeth. They go upon the rivers in light birch-bark 
canoes, very neatly made ; the smallest of them can 
hold 4 or 5 persons and leave room for their little 
baggage. The oars are proportioned to the canoes, 
one at the bow and one at the stern ; ordinarily, the 
woman holds the one at the stern, and consequently 
steers. These poor women are real pack mules, endur- 
ing all hardships. When delivered of a child, they 
go to the woods two hours later to replenish the fire of 
the cabin. ^^ In the Winter, when they break camp, 
the women drag the heaviest loads over the snow ; 
in short, the men seem to have as their share only 
hunting, war, and trading. Apropos of [9] trading, I 
have as yet said nothing, and it is also the last thing 
which remains to be said in regard to the Savages. 


206 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 4 

certain temps, moiennant quelques conditions portees 
par les Articles, les Sauuages efloient vifitez de plu- 
lieurs perfonnes, iufques la qu'vn des Ancies m'a dit 
qn'il a veu iufques a vingt nauires dans le port de 
TadoufTac ; mais maintenant que cefte traitte a efte 
accordee ^ I'affociation qui eft auiourd'huy priuatiue- 
ment a tons autres, Ion ne void plus icy que deux 
nauires qui appartiennent a I'Affociation, & ce, vne 
fois I'an feulement, enuiron le commencement du mois 
de luin. Ces deux nauires apportent toutes les mar- 
chandifes que ces Meffieurs traic5tent auec les Sau- 
uages, c'eft k ffauoir des capaux, des couuertures, 
bonnets de nuidt, chapeaux, chemifes, draps, haches, 
fers de fleches, aleines, efpees, des tranches pour 
rompre la glace en Hyuer, des coutteaux, des chau- 
dieres, pruneaux, raifms, du bled d'Inde, des pois, du 
bif cuit, ou de la galette, & du petun ; & outre ce qui 
eft necelTaire pour le viure des Frangois, qui demeuret 
en ce pais 1^, en ef change ils emportent des peaux 
d'orignac, de loup ceruier, de regnard, de loutre, & 
quelquefois il fen rencontre de noires, de mattre, de 
blaireau, & de rat mufque; mais principalement de 
Caftor, qui eft le plus grand de leur gain : On m'a dit 
que pour vne annee ils en auoient remporte iufques a 
22000. L'ordinaire de chaque annee eft de 15000. 
ou 12000. k vne piftole la piece, ce n'eft pas mal alle ; 
il eft bien vray que les frais qu'ils font font aflez 
grands, ayant icy quarante perfonnes & plus qui font 
gagez & nourris; outre les frais de tout I'equipage de 
deux nauires, oil il fe retrouue bien 150. homes qui 
re9oiuent des gages & fe nourriffent. Ces gages ne 
font pas tons d'vne fa9on: L'ordinaire eft de 106. 
liures, il y en a qui ont cent efcus. le cognois vn 
Truchement qui a cent piftoles, & quelque nombre 


1616-29] C. LALEMANT TO JEROME 207 

All of their wealth consists in the furs of different ani- 
mals, but principally of the Beaver. Before the time 
of the association of those Gentlemen to whom the 
King gave this trade for a certain time in consideration 
of certain conditions mentioned in the Articles, '^^ the 
Savages were visited by many people, to such an extent 
that an Old Man told me he had seen as many as twenty 
ships in the port of Tadoussac. But now since this busi- 
ness has been granted to the association, which to-day 
has a monopoly over all others, we see here not more 
than two ships which belong to it, and that only once 
a year, about the beginning of the month of June. 
These two ships bring all the merchandise which 
these Gentlemen use in trading with the Savages; 
that is to say, the cloaks, blankets, nightcaps, hats, 
shirts, sheets, hatchets, iron arrowheads, bodkins, 
swords, picks to break the ice in Winter, knives, 
kettles, prunes, raisins, Indian corn, peas, crackers 
or sea biscuits, and tobacco; and what is necessary 
for the sustenance of the French in this country be- 
sides. In exchange for these they carry back hides of 
the moose, lynx, fox, otter, black ones being en- 
countered occasionally, martens, badgers, and musk- 
rats; but they deal principally in Beavers, in which 
they find their greatest profit. I was told that dur- 
ing one year they carried back as many as 22,000. 
The usual number for one year is 15,000 or 12,000, 
at one pistole each, which is not doing badly. ^^ It 
is true their expenses are very heavy, as they keep 
here forty persons and more, who are paid and 
maintained; this in addition to the expense of the 
crews of two ships, which consist of at least 150 
men, who receive their wages and food. These 
wages are not all the same. They are generally 


208 


LES RELA TIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol. 4 


de peaux qu'il luy eft permis d'emporter chaque an- 
nee. II eft vray qu'il les traidle de fa marchadife. 
Voftre Reuerence le verra cefte annee, c'efl vn de 
ceux qui nous ont grandement aide. Voftre Reue- 
rence lui fera, f'il luy plaift, bon raqueil; il eft pour 
retourner & rendre icy de grands feruices a N. Sei- 
gneur. Refte maintenant [lo] a mander a voflre Re- 
uerence ce que nous auons fait depuis noftre arriuee 
en ce pais, qui fut a la fin de luin. Le mois de luillet 
& d'Aouft fe pafferent, partie a efcrire des lettres, 
partie a nous recognoiftre vn peu dans le pais, & a 
chercher quelque lieu propre pour y eftablir noftre 
demeure : Afin de tefmoigner aux RR. PP. Recoledts, 
que nous defirios les deliurer au pluftoft de I'incomo- 
dite que nous leur apportions. Apres auoir bien con- 
fidere tons les endroits, & apres auoir pris langue des 
Fran9ois, & principalement des Reuerends Peres 
Recoledts le i. iour de Septembre nous plantafmes 
la faindte Croix, au lieu que nous anions choifi, auec 
toute la folemnite qui nous fut polTible. Les Re- 
uerends Peres Recoledts y affifterent auec les plus ap- 
parens des Fran9ois, qui apres le difner f e mirent tons k 
trauailler. Nous auons depuis toufiours continue, 
nous cinq, a defraciner ler [les] arbres, & ^ befcher 
la terre tant que le teps nous a permis. Les neiges 
venantes nous fufmes contraints de furfoir iufques 
au Prin-temps pendant le trauail nous ne laiCQons 
pas de penfer comment nous viendrions a bout du 
langage du pais ; car des Truchemens, difoit-on il ne 
faut rien attendre ; fi eft-ce neantmoins qu' apres auoir 
recommande I'affaire a Dieu, i'ay pris refolution de 
m'addreffer au Truchement de cefte Nation, quitte, 
difie en moy-mefme pour eftre refufe auffi bien que 
les autres. Done apres m' eftre efforce par des ex- 


1616-29] C. LALEMANT TO JEROME 209 

1 06 livres, but some receive a hundred 6cus. I 
know an Interpreter who receives one hundred pis- 
toles, and a certain number of hides which he is per- 
mitted to carry away each year.'^ It is true that 
he trades them off as his own merchandise. Your 
Reverence will see him this y^zx ; he is one of those 
who have very effectively assisted us. Your Reverence 
will, if you please, give him a kind greeting; for he 
is going to return, and do great service here for Our 
Lord. It remains now [10] to tell your Reverence 
what we have done since our arrival in this country, 
which was the last of June. The months of July and 
August passed by, partly in writing letters, partly in 
getting a little acquainted with the country, and in 
seeking a proper place for our settlement, that we 
might show the Reverend Recolect Fathers that we 
desired to relieve them as soon as possible of the in- 
convenience which we caused them. After haviner 
carefully considered all the places, and after having 
consulted with the French people, and especially with 
the Reverend Recolect Fathers, we planted the holy 
Cross on the ist day of September, with all possible 
solemnity, upon the place which we had chosen. 
The Reverend Recolect Fathers took part in the cere- 
mony with the most prominent of the French, and 
after dinner all of them went to work. We have 
continued this work ever since, we five, uprooting 
trees and breaking the ground whenever we had 
time. The snow intervened, and we were compelled 
to give up our work until Spring. During the work, 
the thought of acquiring a knowledge of the language 
of this country was constantly in our minds ; for it was 
said that we could expect nothing from the Interpret- 
ers. Nevertheless, after having commended the mat- 


210 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.4 

hortations que ie faifois «& par noftre conuerfation, de 
donner d'autres impreflios de noftre Compagnie, qu'on 
n'auoit en ce pais, Voftre Reuerence croiroit-elle bien 
que nous y auos trouue I'Anti-Coton, que Ion fai- 
foit courir de chambre en chambre, & qu'enfin Ion 
a brufle quatre mois apres noftre arriuee; ayant, 
difie, tafche de donner d'autres imprefQons. Ie 
m'adreffay done au Truchement de cefte Nation, & 
Ie priay de nous donner cognoiffance du langage. 
Chofe eftrage, il me promifl fur I'heure, qu'il me 
donneroit pendant I'hyuer tout Ie cotentement que 
ie pourrois defirer de luy. Or c'eft icy oii il faut ad- 
mirer vne particuliere prouidence de Dieu: car il 
faut remarquer, que Ie General eftoit charge de fes 
allociez de repaffer en France, ou bien de luy dimi- 
nuer fes gages & luy prelfoit fi fort de retourner la 
mefme annee que nous arriuafmes qu'il fallut que Ie 
General vfaft de commandement abfolu auec affeu- 
rance que fes gages ne luy feroient [ii] point dimi- 
nuees, pour Ie faire demeurer cette annee ; & de fait 
il eft demeure ^ noftre grand contentement. Secundo 
notandum; Que ce Truchement n'auoit iamais voulu 
communiquer a perfonne la cognoiffance qu'il auoit de 
ce langage, non pas mefme aux RR. PP. Recoledts, 
qui depuis dix ans n'auoient ceffe de Ten impor- 
tuner ; & cependant a la premiere priere que ie luy 
fis, me promift ce que ie vous ay dit, & f'eft acquite 
fidelement de fa promeffe pendant cet Hyuer. Or 
neantmoins parce que nous n'eftions pas affeurez 
qu'il deuft eftre fidele en fa promeffe, craignans que 
r Hyuer fe paffaft fans rien auancer en la cognoif- 
fance de la langue. Ie confultay auec nos Peres, f'il 
ne feroit point a propos que deux de nous allaffent 
paffer 1' Hyuer auec les Sauuages, bien auant dans les 


1616-29] C. LALEMANT TO JEROME 211 

ter to God, I made up my mind to speak to the Inter- 
preter of this Tribe, saying to myself that at the 
worst, I could only be refused as the others had been. 
So, after having striven by my exhortations and our 
conversation to correct the impressions concerning our 
Society that exist in this country, can Your Rever- 
ence believe that we have found here the "Anti- 
Coton,"^ which was circulated from chamber to 
chamber, and which was finally burned, about four 
months after our arrival? Having, I say, tried to 
give other impressions, I applied then to the Inter- 
preter of this Tribe and begged him to teach us the 
language. Strange to say, he at once promised 
me that, during the winter, he would give me 
all the help that I could ask of him. Now in this a 
special providence of God must be admired, because 
it must be observed that the General ^^ was ordered 
by his associates to send him back to France, or else 
to reduce his wages ; and he [the interpreter] begged 
him so earnestly to return the same year that we ar- 
rived, that the General was compelled to use impera- 
tive authority, and to tell him that his wages would 
[i i] not be reduced, to make him stay this year; and, 
in fact, he remained, to our great satisfaction. 5^- 
cundo notandum ; This Interpreter had never wanted 
to communicate his knowledge of the language to 
any one, not even to the Reverend Recolect Fathers, 
who had constantly importuned him for ten years; 
and yet he promised me what I have told you, the 
first time I urged him to do so, and he kept his 
promise faithfully during that Winter. However, as 
we did not feel certain that he would keep his 
word, and fearing the Winter would pass and we 
would make no progress in the language, I consulted 


212 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol.4 

bois, afin que leur hantife nous donnaft la cognoif- 
fance que nous cherchions; nos Peres furet d'auis 
que ce feroit allez qu'vn y allaft, & que I'autre de- 
meureroit pour fatisfaire a la deuotion des Fran§ois. 
Ainfi ce fut le P. Brebeuf qui eut ce bonheur ; il partit 
le 20. d'0(5tobre, & retourna le 27. de Mars, ayant 
touliours efte efloign6 de nous de 20. ou 25. lieux. 
Pendant fon abfence ie fommay le Truchement de 
fa promelle k laquelle il ne manqua point ; A peine 
eufie tir6 de luy ce que ie defirois, que ie me refolus 
d'aller palTer le refte de I'Hyuer auec le premier 
Sauuage qui nous viendroit voir; Ie m'y en allay 
done le 8. de lanuier; mais ie fus contraint de re- 
tourner 1 1 . iours apres ; car ne trouuans pas dequoy 
viure eux-mefme, ils furent contraints de retourner 
voir les Fran9ois. A mon retour, fans perdre temps, 
ie follicitay le Truchement d'vne autre Nation de 
me communiquer ce qu'il f9auoit; dont ie m'eflonne 
comme il le fit fi franchement, ayant efl6 par le 
palle fi referue a I'endroit des Reuerends Peres Re- 
colets. II nous donna tout ce que nous luy de- 
mandafmes ; il efl bien vray que nous ne luy deman- 
dafmes pas tout ce qu'euffions bien defire; car 
comme nous recogneufmes en luy vn efprit alTez 
groffier, ce n'eufl pas efte noftre aduantage de le 
preffer par de la fa portee, nous fufmes neantmoins 
tres contens de ce qu'il nous donna; & ce qui eft ^ 
remarquer afin de recognoiflre d'auantage la proui- 
dence de Dieu en ce fait, cedit Truchement s'en de- 
uoit retourner en France la mefme annee que nous 
ariuafmes, & ce par I'entremife des Peres Recolets, 
& de nous qui le iugios necelTaire pour [12] le bien 
de fon ame, & de fait nous I'emportafmes pardelTus 
le General de la flotte, qui a toute force le vouloit 


1616-29] C. LA LE MA NT TO JEROME 213 


with our Fathers as to the propriety of two of us go- 
ing to spend the Winter with the Savages, far into 
the depths of the forest, in order that, by constant 
association with them, we might gain the knowledge 
we sought. Our Fathers were of the opinion that it 
would be sufficient for one to go, and that the other 
ought to remain to attend to the spiritual needs of 
the French. So this good fortune fell to the lot of 
Father Brebeuf.-^ He left on the 20th of October and 
returned on the 27th of March, having been distant 
from us 20 or 25 leagues all the time. During his 
absence I reminded the Interpreter of his promise, 
which he did not fail to keep. I had hardly learned 
from him what I desired, when I determined to go 
and spend the remainder of the Winter with the first 
Savage who should come to see us. So I went off 
with one on the 8th of January, but I was compelled 
to return 1 1 days later ; for, as they could not find 
enough for themselves to eat, they were compelled 
to come back to the French. As soon as I returned, 
I lost no time in urging the Interpreter of another 
Tribe to teach me what he knew ; and I was aston- 
ished that he should do it so freely, as in the past 
he had been so reserved in regard to the Reverend 
Recolet Fathers. He gave us all that we asked for; 
it is quite true that we did not ask all that we would 
have wished ; as we noticed in him a mind somewhat 
coarse, it would not have been to our advantage 
to have urged him beyond his depth. We were, 
however, highly pleased with what he gave us ; and 
what is noteworthy, in order to better recognize the 
providence of God in this matter, this very Inter- 
preter was to return to France the same year that we 
arrived, and this was to be done through the inter- 


214 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.4 

renuoyer en la Nation de laquelle il eft Truchement, 
le voila done arriue icy ou nous fommes auec des 
Fran§ois qui reuenoient de la traitte, en refolution de 
fen retourner en France, les vailTeaux font fur le 
point de partir: la veille du depart il vint nous voir 
chez les Reuerends Peres Recolets pour nous dire 
Adieu. Ce grand Dieu fit ioiier tout k propos vn ref- 
fort de fa Prouidence, comme il eftoit chez nous voila 
vne forte pleurefie qui le prend & le voilk couch^ au 
lidt, fi bien & fi beau qu'il fallut que les vailleaux 
s'en retournaffent fans luy; & par ce moyen le voilS, 
qui nous demeure, hors des dangers neantmoins de 
fe perdre, ce qui nous auoit fait folliter fon retour. 
le vous laiffe k penfer fi pendant fa maladie nous 
oubliafmes de luy rendre tout deuoir de charite ; il 
fufifit de dire qu'auparauant qu'il fuft releue de cefte 
maladie, pour laquelle il n'attendoit que la mort; il 
nous alTeura qu'il eftoit entierement k noftre deuo- 
tion, & que s'il plaifoit k Dieu luy rendre la fante, 
I'Hyuer ne ce palTeroit iamais fans nous donner tout 
contentement, dequoy il s'eft fort bien acquitt6, 
graces a Dieu. 

le me fuis peut-eftre eftendu plus que de raifon k 
racopter cecy ; mais ie me plais tant "k racompter les 
traits de la prouidence particuliere de Dieu, qu'il me 
f e f emble que tout le mode y doit prendre plaifir ; & 
de fait s'il s'en fuft retourn6 en France cefte annee 
Ik, nous eftions pour n'auancer gueres plus que les 
Reuerends Peres Recolets en lo. ans. Dieu foit lou6 
de tout, voila done k quoy f e pafla la meilleure partie 
de I'hyuer. Outre ces occupatios ie n'ay point man- 
que k mon tour d'aller les feftes & Dimanches dire la 
Meffe aux Fran9ois, auf quels i'ay fait exhortation 
toutes les fois que i'y ay efte : le Pere Brebeuf de fon 


1616-29] C. LALEMANT TO JEROME 215 

vention of the Recolet Fathers and through our influ- 
ence, as we deemed it necessary for [12] the good of 
his soul ; and in fact we carried the day over the head 
of the General of the fleet, who was resolved in any 
event to send him back to the Tribe whose Inter- 
preter he was. So he arrived here where we are, with 
the French who were returning from the trading 
station, resolved to go back to France, the ships be- 
ing on the point of leaving. The evening before his 
intended departure, he came to see us at the Reverend 
Recolet Fathers', to bid us Farewell. The great God 
showed his Providential designs very propitiously 
then ; while he was with us he was taken with a severe 
attack of pleurisy and was put to bed, so nicely and 
comfortably, that the ships were obliged to go back 
without him, and by this means he remained with 
us, out of all danger of ruining himself; for it was 
the fear of this which had caused us to urge his re- 
turn. You will readily understand that during his 
sickness we performed every act of charity for him. 
It suffices to say that, before he recovered from this 
sickness, in which he expected to die, he assured us 
that he was entirely devoted to us; and that if it 
pleased God to restore his health, the Winter would 
never pass by without his giving us assistance, a 
promise which he kept in every respect, thank God. 
I have, perhaps, dwelt longer upon this than was 
necessary, but I am so pleased to relate the special 
acts of God's providence, as it seems to me every one 
must take pleasure in them ; and in fact, if he had 
gone back to France that year, we would have made 
hardly any more progress than the Reverend Reco- 
let Fathers did in 10 years. May God be praised for 
all ! In this way we passed the greater part of the 


216 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol. 4 

cofte en faifoit autant, & auons fi bien auanc6 par la 
grace de Dieu, que nous auons gaign^ le cceur de 
tous ceux de 1' habitation, auons fait faire des con- 
feffions generales a la plus part, & auons vefcu en tres- 
bonne intelligence auec le Chef. Enuiron le milieu 
du Carefme ie m'hazarday de prier le Capitaine de 
nous donner les Charpentiers de 1' habitation pour 
nous aider a dreffer vne petite cabane au lieu que 
nous auons commence a def richer, ce qu'il m'ac- 
corda auec beaucoup de courtoifie: les charpentiers 
ne fouhaitoient [13] rien tant que de trauailler pour 
nous ; «& de fait ils nous auoient donne le mot aupara- 
uant: auffi trauaillerent-ils auec tant d'affedtion, que 
nonobftant I'incommodite du temps & de la faifon 
(car il y auoit encore vn pied & demy de neige) ils 
eurent acheue noftre cabane le Lundy de la femaine 
Saindte, & cependant ils cierent plus de 250. aix, 
tant pour la couuerture, que pour le tour de la 
cabane; vingt cheurons, & dolerent plus de vingt- 
cinq groffes pieces necelTaires pour 1' erection de 
la cabane. Voila des commencemens affez heur- 
eux graces a Dieu, ie ne f9ay quel fera le progres 
k caufe de la continuation de mes imperfedlions. 
Au refte parmy ces Sauuages nos vies ne font pas 
affeurees. Si quelque Frangois leur a fait quelque 
deplaifir ils s'en vengent par la mort du premier 
qu'ils rencontrent, fans auoir efgard a plaifir aucun 
qu'ils ayent receu de celuy qu'ils attaquent. S'ils ont 
fong6 lanuidt qu'il faut qu'ils tuent quelque Frangois, 
gar[d]e le premier qu'ils rencontrent a I'efcart. Ils 
ajouftent grande croyance a leurs fonges. Quelques- 
vns deux vous diront deux iours auparauant la venue 
des vailTeaux I'heure &. laquelle ils arriueront, & ne 
vous diront autre chofe fmon qu'ils I'ont veu en dor- 


1616-29] C. LALEAfANT TO JEROME 217 

winter. Besides these occupations, I, in my turn, 
have not failed to go, on holydays and Sundays, to 
say Mass for the French, to whom I have made an 
exhortation every time I have been there. Father 
Brebeuf did the same on his part ; and, by the grace 
of God, we have made such progress that we have 
won the hearts of all the people of the settlement, and 
have induced most of them to make general confes- 
sions, and have lived on good terms with the Chief. 
About the middle of Lent, I ventured to ask the Cap- 
tain to give us the Carpenters of the settlement to 
help us erect a little cabin at the place we had begun 
to clear away, and he very courteously granted my 
request. The carpenters asked for [13] nothing better 
than to work for us, and in fact they had previously 
given us their promise ; so they worked with such 
good will, that, notwithstanding the unfavorableness 
of the weather and of the season (for there was still a 
foot and a half of snow), they had finished our cabin 
by Monday of Holy week; and besides, they had 
sawed over 250 planks, both for the roof and for the 
sides of the cabin, twenty rafters, and hewn over 
twenty-five large pieces necessary for the erection of 
the cabin. These are very happy beginnings, thank 
God; but, considering my imperfections still con- 
tinue, I do not know how much progress will be made. 
Further, there is no security for our lives among these 
Savages. If a Frenchman has in some way offended 
them, they take revenge by killing the first one they 
meet, without any regard for favors which they may 
have received from the one whom they attack. If 
during the night they dream they must kill a French- 
man, woe to the first one whom they meet alone. 
They attach great faith to their dreams. Some of 


218 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.4 

mant. Ceux-la font en reputation parmy eux de par- 
ler au Diable. Leur conuerfion ne nous donnera pas 
pen d' affaire. Leur vie libertine & faineante, leur 
efprit groffier, & qui ne peut guere comprendre, la 
difette des mots qu'ils ont pour expliquer nos myf- 
teres, n'ayans iamais eu aucun culte diuin, nous ex- 
ercera a bon efcient. Mais pourtant nous ne perdons 
pas courage graces a Dieu, appuyez fur cette verite, 
que Dieu n'aura pas tant efgard au fruidt que nous 
ferons, qu'a la bonne volont6 & au trauail que nous 
prendrons; & puis plus il y aura difficult^ en leur 
conuerfion, & plus y aura-t'il de defiance de nous- 
mefmes; tant y a que noftre efperance eft en Dieu. 
Si ie puis ie me tranfporteray en d'autres nations; 
fi cela eft, il ne faut plus attendre de nouuelles, car 
ie feray fi loin d'eux, qu'a grand peine pourray-ie 
leur ecrire; car au cas que cela arriue ie vous dy 
adieu & k tout Ie monde iufques k ce que nous nous 
reuoyons au Ciel. N'oubliez pas les fuff rages pour 
noftre ame, & faites les de fois a autres. A tout haz- 
ard lors que vous vous fouuiendrez de nous en vos 
faindts facrifices, dites pour vn tel vif ou mort. Le 
fecours qui nous eft venu de France eft vn bon com- 
mencement pour cette Miffion ; mais les affaires [14] ne 
font pas encore en tel eftat que Dieu puiffe y eftre 
feruy fidellement. L'heretique y a autant encore 
d'empire que iamais, c'eft pourquoy ie renuoye le 
Pere Noiroit felon la permilTio que les Superieurs 
m'en ont faite, afin qu'il paracheue ce qu'il a com- 
mence ; il eft le mieux entendu en cette affaire. Si 
nos Peres defirent I'affermiffement, & le bon fucces 
de cette Miffion, il eft du tout expedient qu'ils le 
laiffent faire. C'eft bien a fon corps defendant qu'il 
s'en retourne, veu principalement qu'il eft tant in- 


1616-29] C. LALEMANT TO JEROME 219 

them will tell you two days before the coming of a 
ship the hour of its arrival, and will give no other ex- 
planation except that they have seen it while asleep. 
These are reputed among them to have intercourse 
with the Devil. Their conversion will give us no 
little trouble. Their licentious and lazy lives, their 
rude and untutored minds, able to comprehend so 
little, the scarcity of words they have to explain our 
mysteries, never having had any form of divine wor- 
ship, will tax our wits. And yet we do not lose cour- 
age, thank God; trusting in this truth, that God will 
not have so much regard to the fruits that we pro- 
duce, as to our good will and the trouble we take; 
and besides, the greater the difficulty in their conver- 
sion, and the more distrust we have in ourselves, so 
much the greater will be our trust in God. If I can, 
I shall go among some of the other tribes ; and, in 
that event, no further news need be expected from 
me, because I shall be so far away that it will be 
very hard to communicate with you ; and if that 
should happen, I say farewell to you and to every one 
until we meet in Heaven. Do not forget the prayers 
for our souls, and make them from time to time. In 
any case when you remember us in your holy sacri- 
fices, offer them up for such and such a one, living or 
dead. The help which has reached us from France 
is a good beginning for this Mission, but things [14] 
are not yet in such a condition that God can be faith- 
fully served here. The heretic holds as complete 
dominion here as ever, and therefore I send back 
Father Noiroit, according to the permission that I 
have received from the Superiors, in order that he 
may finish what he has begun ; he is the most capable 
one for this affair. If our Fathers wish the strength- 


220 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.4 

commode deffus la mer. Feniioye fon compagnon 
auec le Pere Brebeuf a 300 lieux d'icy a vne de ces 
nations qui font ftables en leur demenre, ils y fe- 
ront bien toft s'ils trouuent des Sauuages qui les y 
vueillent conduire, autrement ils feront contraints de 
retourner vers nous; i'attends tous les iours de leurs 
nouuelles. le viens d'apprendre tout maintenant 
qu'ils font partis. Le Diable qui craint la touche a 
voulu jouer des fiennes, car nos Peres eftans defia 
embarquez, les Sauuages par deux ou trois fois les 
voulurent faire defembarquer, alleguans que leurs ca- 
naux eftoient trop chargez; mais en fin Dieu Tem- 
porta par deffus luy, on gaigna les Sauuages a force 
de prefents. S'il plaift "k Dieu faire reiiffir cette 
milTion, voila vne entree dans des nations infinies 
pour ainfi dire, qui font toufiours ftables en leur de- 
meure. I'euffe bien deflr^ eftre de la partie, mais 
nos Peres ne I'ont pas iug6 a propos, iugeans qu'il 
eftoit neceffaire que ie demeuraffe icy, tant pour 
reftabliffement de noflre petit domicille, que pour 
I'entretien des Fran9ois. Voftre R. s'eftonnera peut- 
eftre de ce que i'ay enuoye le P. Brebeuf qui auoit 
defia quelque commencement a la langue de cette 
nation, mais les talents que Dieu luy a departy m'y 
ont fait refoudre; le fruidt que Ton attend de ces 
natios la eftant bien autre que celuy que Ton efpere 
de celle cy. S'il plaift "k Dieu benir leurs trauaux 
nous aurons grand befoin d'ouuriers; les difpofitions 
du cofte des Sauuages font telles, qu'on en pent ef- 
perer quelque chofe de bon. Le truchement ayant 
demande en ma prefence a I'vn de leurs Capitaines 
s'ils feroiettous contens que quelques-vns desnoftres 
allaffent demeurer en leur pays pour leur apprendre 
a cognoiflre Dieu, il refpondit qu'il ne falloit de- 


161ft-29] C. LALEMANT TO JEROME 221 


ening and the success of this Mission, it is by all 
means proper that they should allow him to proceed.^ 
He returns very much against his inclination, prin- 
cipally on account of his sufferings upon the sea. 
I send his companion ^^ with Father Brebeuf, 300 
leagues from here, to one of those tribes which has a 
permanent location. They will soon be there if they 
find Savages to conduct them, otherwise they will be 
obliged to return here; I am expecting news from 
them daily. I have just learned that they have 
gone. The Devil, who feared their approach, tried 
to play some of his tricks on them, for, when our 
Fathers had embarked, the Savages tried two or 
three times to make them go ashore, asserting that 
their canoes were too heavily loaded ; but at last God 
triumphed over him, and the Savages were won by 
means of presents. If it please God to give success 
to this mission, it will open a way, so to speak, to an 
infinite number of tribes which have permanent set- 
tlements. I should have been very glad to be one 
of the party ; but our Fathers did not deem it expe- 
dient, considering it well that I should remain here, 
both for the establishment of our little home and for 
the welfare of the French. Your Reverence will be 
astonished, perhaps, at my having sent Father Bre- 
beuf , who already had some knowledge of the language 
of this tribe ; but the talents that God has given him 
influenced me, the fruits which are expected from 
those tribes being very different from those hoped 
for here. If it please God to bless their labors, we 
shall have great need of workers; the disposition on 
the part of the Savages is such that something good 
may be looked for. When the interpreter asked one 
of their Captains in my presence, if they would all 


222 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.4 

mander cela & qu'ils ne fouhaittoient rien tant, puis 
ayant confidere la maifon des Recollets ou nous 
eftions, il adioufta qu'a la verite ils ne pourroient 
pas nous baflir vne maifon de pierre femblable a 
celle-la, [15] mais demandes leur, dit-il au truche- 
ment, s'ils feroient contans de trouuer h. leur arriuee 
vne cabane faidte femblable aux noflres. II ne pou- 
uoit nous tefmoigner plus d'affedlion; De plus il y a 
eu de la fterilite dans leur pays cette annee, & ils 
I'attribuent ^ caufe qu'ils n'y ont point eu de Reli- 
gieux, tout cela nous fait bien efperer. Pour ceux 
de cette Nation ie les ay fait fommer de refpondre, 
s'ils ne vouloient pas fe faire inflruire; & nous 
donner leurs enfans pour le mefme fujet: ils nous 
ont tous refpondu qu'ils le defiroient. lis attendent 
que nous ayons bafty, c'efl a nous cependant de 
mefnager leur affedtion & apprendre bien leur langue. 
Au demeurant ie fupplirois volontiers ceux qui ont de 
I'affedtion pour ce pays, qu'ils ne fe d^gouftaffent 
point s'ils n'entendent promptement des nouuelles 
du fruidt que I'on efpere. La conuerfion des Sau- 
uages demande du temps. Les premieres fix ou fept 
annees fembleront fteriles a quelques vns. Et fi 
i'adiouftois iufqu'^ dix ou douze, polTible ne m'eloi- 
gneroisie pas de la verite. Mais eft ce a dire pourtat 
qu ' il faille tout quitter la ? Ne f aut-il pas des comence- 
mens par tout? Ne faut-il pas des difpofitions pour 
arriuer ou on pretend ? Quand a moy ie vous conf elTe 
que Dieu me fait cette mifericorde, qu'encor que ie 
n'efperaffe aucun profit tout le temps qu'il luy plaira 
me conferuer en vie, pourueu qu'il euft nos trauaux 
agreables, & qu'il vouluft s'en feruir comme de pre- 
paration pour ceux qui viendront apres nous, ie me 
tiendrois trop heureux d' employer & ma vie & mes 


1616-29] C LALEMANT TO JEROME 223 

be glad if some one of us should go among them to 
teach them to know God, he answered that it was not 
necessary to ask that, that they desired nothing bet- 
ter; then, having examined the house of the RecoUets 
where we were, he added that they indeed could not 
build us a stone house like that one; [15] " But ask 
them," said he to the interpreter, "if they will be sat- 
isfied upon their arrival to find a cabin made similar to 
ours. ' ' He could not manifest more affection for us 
than he did. Moreover, there was a drought in 
their country this year, and they attributed it to the 
fact that they had no Religious among them ; all this 
gives us strong hopes. As to the people of this Tribe, 
I had them called together to say whether they wanted 
to be instructed, and to give us their children for the 
same purpose. They all answered that they did. 
They are waiting for us to build ; and it is for us, in 
the meantime, to cultivate their affection and to learn 
their language. Meanwhile, I would request those 
who are interested in this country not to be disap- 
pointed if they do not promptly receive news of the 
hoped-for converts. The conversion of the Savages 
takes time. The first six or seven years will appear 
sterile to some; and, if I should say ten or twelve, I 
would possibly not be far from the truth. But is that 
any reason why all should be abandoned? Are not 
beginnings necessary everywhere ? Are not prepara- 
tions needed for the attainment of every object? 
For my part, I confess that, if God shows me mercy, 
although I expect no fruits as long as it will please him 
to preserve my life, provided that our labors are ac- 
ceptable to him, and that he may be pleased to make 
use of them as a preparation for those who will come 
after us, I shall hold myself only too happy to employ 


224 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.4 

forces, & n'epargner rien de ce qui feroit en mon pou- 
uoir, non pas mefme mon fang pour femblable fuiet. 
Neantmoins fi nos Superieurs ne font point d'aduis 
qu'on paffe outre, me voicy tout pres de me foufmet- 
tre k leur volenti, & fuiure leur iugement. Voicy vn 
petit Huron qui s'en va vous voir, il eft paffionne de 
voir la France. II nous aff edtionne grandement & fait 
paroiftre vn grand defir d eftre inftruidt ; neantmoins 
le pere & le Capitaine de la nation, le veulent reuoir 
I'an prochain, nous alTeurant que s'il eft contant il le 
nous donnera pour quelques annees. II ell fort im- 
portant de le bien contenter ; car fi vne f ois cet enfant 
eft bien inftruit, voila vne partie ouuerte pour entrer 
en beaucoup de nations oil il feruira grandement. Et 
tout k propos le truchement de cetre [cette] nation la 
eft retourn[e] en France. Truchement qu'il aime tant, 
qu'il I'appelle fon pere. le prie noftre Seigneur 
qu'il luy plaife benir le voyage. Au refte ie remer- 
cie V. R. du courage [i6] qu'elle m'a donn6. Fay leu 
fes lettres quatre ou cinq fois; mais ie n'ay peu 
gaigner fur moy que ce n'ait eft6 la larme k I'oeil^ 
pour plufieurs raifons, mais fpecialement fur la fou- 
uenance de mes imperfedtions (coram Deo loqtior) qui 
m'eloignent grandement, du merite de cette vocation, 
& me fait viuement apprehender que ie n'aille tra- 
uerfer les delTeins de la grace de Dieu, en I'etablilTe- 
ment du Chriftianifme en ce pays Apres cela ie ne 
crains rien. Ie vous fupplie en vertu de ce que vous 
aimez mieux dans le Ciel, de ne vous lalTer point de 
folliciter la diuine bonte, ou qu'il me face la grace de 
m'en defaire, ou fi mon idignite eft venue iufques la 
qu'il m'y faille encore tremper, que ce ne foit au 
preiudice de nos pauures Sauuages; que ma mifere 
n'empefche point les effedts de fa mifericorde, & le 


1616-29] C. LALEAfANT TO JEROME 225 

my life and my strength, and to spare nothing in my 
power, not even my blood, for such a purpose. How- 
ever, if our Superiors do not think we should go far- 
ther, I am ready to submit to their will and to follow 
their judgment. A little Huron is going to see you ; 
he longs to see France. He is very fond of us and 
manifests a strong desire to be instructed; neverthe- 
less, his father and the Captain of the nation wishes to 
see him next year, assuring us that, if he is satisfied, 
he will give him to us for some years. It is of im- 
portance that he should be thoroughly satisfied ; for, 
if this child is once instructed, it will open the way 
to many tribes where he will be very useful. And 
the return of the interpreter of that tribe to France 
is very opportune, — the Interpreter whom he loves 
so much, that he calls him his father. I pray our Lord 
to be pleased to bless his voyage. I also thank Your 
Reverence for the courage [i6] you have given me. 
I have read your letters four or five times, and I have 
not been able to keep the tears from my eyes for 
several reasons; but especially in reflecting upon 
my imperfections (coram Deo loquor) which are far 
from the merit necessary for this vocation, and in- 
spire me with grave fears that I am opposing the 
purposes of God's grace in the establishment of 
Christianity in this country. After that, I fear noth- 
ing. I beseech you, in the name of all you hold most 
dear in Heaven, not to become weary in appealing to 
the divine goodness, either to do me the favor of re- 
moving me from here, or, if my unworthiness is so 
great that I must yet be chastened, let it not be to 
the disadvantage of our poor Savages; let not my 
shortcomings prevent the effects of his mercy, nor 
my weak will be a hindrance to the order that his 


226 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol.4 

defordre de ma volont6 fragile, I'ordre que fa bonte 
vent etablir en ce pays. Nous continuous plus que 
iamais les bonnes intelligences auec le Pere loseph, 
qui eft icy I'vnique Preftre de fon Ordre, I'vn eftant 
alle auec nos Peres aux Hurons; &rautre s'en retour- 
nant en France ; il a deux bons freres auec luy. M*". 
Champlain eft toufiours fort affedtionne en noftre en- 
droit, m'a pris pour direc5teur de fa confcience, auffi 
bien que Gaumont, duquel i'auray vn foin particulier 
felon les recommandations de voftre R. L'aduis que 
voftre R. me donne touchant la dedicace de noftre 
premiere Eglife, eft fort conforme a ma deuotion fi les 
Superieurs m'en laiffent la liberte, elle ne fera iamais 
appellee autrement que N. Dame des Anges; c'eft 
pourquoy ie fupplie V. R de nous faire auoir quelque 
beau Tableau enuironne d' Anges. C'eft vne des 
grades Feftes des PP. Recolets, qui ont dedie leur 
Chappelle a S. Charles; & la Riuiere fur laquelle, eux 
&nous; fommes logez, f'appelle la riuiere S. Charles, 
ainfi nomee quelque temps auparauant que nous vin- 
fios. Pour les lettres ie ne penfe pas auoir obmis 
perfonne, tant de nos bien-faiteurs plus fignalez, que 
de ceux qui m'ont efcrit. Auffi vous confeffay je que 
ie fuis vn peu las; voicy la 68 & fi ce n'eft pas la 
derniere. Plaife a noftre bon Dieu que le tout foit k 
fa gloire Noftre R. P. Affiftant fe monftre fort affec- 
tione a cefte MifQon ; ie luy enuoye vne charte de ce 
pays, affeurant que ie demeureray toute ma vie, de 
Voftre Reuerence, 

Seruiteur tres-affec5tionne en N Seigneur 
Charles l'Allemant. 
A Kebec ce i. 
d'Aouft 1626. 


1616-29] C. LALEMANT TO JEROME 227 


goodness wishes to establish in this country. Our sym- 
pathetic relations with Father Joseph ^ are stronger 
than ever. He is the only Priest of his Order here, 
one having gone with our Fathers to the Hurons, and 
the other now returning to France ; he has two good 
brothers with him. M*". Champlain is always very 
kind to us, and has chosen me as his confessor. Gau- 
mont has done the same, and I shall take special care 
of him, according to the recommendations of your 
Reverence. The advice which your Reverence gives 
me in regard to the dedication of our first Church, is 
in thorough harmony with my views. If the Supe- 
riors leave it to me, it will never be otherwise named 
than " N. Dame des Anges." Therefore I beg Your 
Reverence to send us a beautiful Picture surrounded 
by Angels. It is one of the great Fete days of the 
Recolet Fathers, who have dedicated their Chapel to 
St. Charles; the River upon which they and we live 
is called the river St. Charles, so called some time 
before our arrival. As to sending letters, I think I 
have not passed over any one, either of our well- 
known benefactors or any of those who have written 
to me ; and I confess to you that I am a little tired ; 
this is the 68th, and it is not the last. May it please 
our good God that everything may be done here for 
his glory. Our Reverend Father Assistant manifests 
a great deal of affection for this Mission ; I send him 
a map of this country. With assurances that I will 
be, during my life, of Your Reverence, 

The very affectionate servant in Our Lord, 
Charles l'Allemant. 
Kebec, this ist of 
August, 1626. 


XIX 


Charles Lalemant's 

Lettre au R. P. Superieur du College des Jesuites 

a Paris 

BORDEAUX: Nouembre 22, 1629 


Source : The Title-page and Avant-Propos follow O'Cal- 
laghan's Reprint, No. 3 ; but the Text has been compared with 
the original publication in Champlain's Voya^^es (Paris, 
1632), part ii., pp. 275-279. The bracketed pagination 
in the Text is that of Champlain. 


L E T T R E 

du Reuerend 

Pere L'ALLEMAND. 

SupMeur de la Miffion des Peres I^fuites, 
en la 

NOUUELLE FRANCE 

Enuoyee de Bordeaux au R. P. Supe- 

rieur du College des lefuites 

a Paris, 

et datee du 22 Nouembre, 1629. 



Imprim6e d'apres I'exemplaire que Ton trouve 
dans les Voyages du Sieur Champlain. 

A PARIS, 
M. DC. XXXII. 


LETTER 

from the Reverend 

Father L'ALLEMAND. 

Superior of the Mission of Jesuit Fathers, 
in 

NEW FRANCE 

Sent from Bordeaux to the Reverend 

Father Superior of the Jesuit College 

at Pa R 1 s , 

and dated 22nd November, 1629. 


Reprinted from the copy to be found in the Voyages of 
Sieur Champlain. 

PARIS, 
M. DC. XXXII. 


232 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.4 


Avant-Propos. 

LE R. Pere CHARLES LaLLEMANT, qui a ^crit la 
Lett re /uiva?ite, entra a V dge de vingt ans dans la 
Compagnie de Jefus. En 1613, il avoit accompagn^ 
M. de la Saujfaye, a Pentagouct. Argal /' ^tant empard de 
cet e'tablijfemement , le P. Lallcmant f en retourna en 
France, d'oii il partit pour le Catiada en 1625. O cjloit la 
premiire fois que des P^res J^fuites entrerent dans ce Pays. 
Quelques aftndes aprds, il flit envoye avec le P. PJiilibert 
Noyrot, Procureur de la Mifjion, chercher en France du 
fecours pour la Colonic, et ayant trouve de quoi fretter un 
batiment avec des vivres, ils / ' y ctoient embarque's vers la 
fin du mois de Juillet, 1629. Le vaiffeau fit naufrage 
fur la c6te de V Acadie, et c efl de cet naufrage et d' autre s 
^v^nements qui fuivirent que traitte la prefente lettre. 
[O'Callaghan.] 


1616-29] C LALEMANT TO PARIS SUPERIOR 233 


Preface. 

THE Reverend Father CHARLES LALLEMANT, who 
wrote the follozving Letter, entered the Society of 
Jesus at the age of twenty years. In 1613, he ac- 
companied M. dc la Saussaye to Pe?ttagouet.'^ Argal took 
possession of this settlement, and Father Lallcmant returned 
to France, whence he departed for Cafiada in 1625. This 
was the first time that the Jesuit Fathers had entered that 
Country. Several years later, he was sent with Father 
Philibert Noyrot, Ageiit for the Mission, to France, to seek 
aid for the Colony ; and, having secured the means to load 
a ship with supplies, they embarked upon it toward the 
end of July, 1629. The ship ivas wrecked upon the 
Acadian coast ; and it is this shipwreck and other subse- 
quent events that the present letter describes. [O'Cal- 
laghan.] 


234 LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 4 


Lettre du Reuerend P. rAllemand, au R. P. Su- 
perieur, a Paris. 


[275] A -^ YT fejourn^ deux tours h. Dieppe ie ni ache- 
/"Y fftinay ii Rouen, ou ie iri arrejiay deux autres 
iours, & appris comme Ie vaijfeau des Reue- 
rends Peres V Allemand & Noyrot s' ejioient perdus vers les 
IJlcs de Canfeau, & me fit-on voir vne lettre dudit Reue- 
rend Per e r Allemand, Superieur de la MiJJion des Peres 
le/tiites, en la nouuelle France, enuoy^e de Bordeaux au 
R. P. Superieur du College des lefuites a Paris, & dattde 
du 22. Nouembre 162^. comme il s'enfuit. [Champlain.] 

[276] A/f ON Reverend Pere, 

i Vi Pax Chrifti. 

Cafligans caftigauit me Dominus & morti 
non tradidit me, Chajliment qui m'a ejl^ d'autant plus 
fenfible que Ie naufrage a ed^ accompagnd de la mort du R. 
P. Noyrot & de nojire frere Louys, deux homes qui de- 
uoient, ce me femble grandemet feruir a no^re Seminaire. 
Or neafitmoins puis que Dieu a difpof^ de la forte, il nous 
faut chercher nos contentements dans fes fain6tes volontez, 
hors def que lies il ny eut iamais efprit folide ny content, & 
ie niajfeure que V experience aura fait voir a vofire re- 
uerence que r amertume de nos rejjfentitnents d^tremp^e dans 
la douceur du bon plaifir de Dieu, auquelvne ame s' attache 
infepar ablemc7it , perd (ou Ie tout) ou la meilleure partie de 
fan fiel ; Si que s'il refie encore quelques foufpirs pour les 
fouff ranees, ou paffdes ou prefentes, ce nefi que pour afpi- 
rer dauantage vers Ie Ciel, & perfe6iionner auec merite 


161ft-29] C. LALEMANT TO PARIS SUPERIOR 235 


Letter from the Reverend Father rAllemand to 
the Reverend Father Superior, at Paris. 

[275] A FTER having sojourned two days at Dieppe^ I 
£^^ journeyed to Rouen, where I remained two 
more days, a?td learjied how the ship of the 
Reverend Fathers V Alleniand arid Noyrot had beeft wrecked 
upon the Ca?iseau Islands ; and I was shown a letter from 
the Reverend Father V Allemand, Superior of the Mission 
of the Jesuit Fathers in new France, sent from Bordeaux 
to the Reverend Father Superior of the Jesuit College at 
Paris, and dated November 22nd, 162^, as follows. 
[Champlain.] 


[276] A yi Y Reverend Father, 

i V 1 1"^^ peace of Christ be with you. 

Castigans castigavit me Dominus & morti 
non tradidit me, a Chastisement all the more keenly felt 
by me, as the shipwreck was accompanied by the death of 
the Reverend Father Noyrot and of our brother Louys,^ 
two men who were destined, it seems to me, to be of great 
service to our Seminary. But nevertheless, since God has 
so ordained, we must seek our consolation in his holy will, 
outside of which there ticver was a peaceful or contented 
■mind ; and I feel sure that experience will have shown your 
reverence that the bitterness of our grief, tempered with the 
sweetness of doing the will of God, to whom a soul is insep- 
arably attached, loses (either all ) or the greater part of its 
sting. And yet, if there still retnain sofne sighs for the 
sufferings either of the past or of the present, it is only to 


236 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.4 

ce^e conformity dans laquelle V ame a pris refolution de 
paffer le re^e de fes iours ; De quatre des no^res que 7ious 
ejiions dans la barque, Dieu partageant a V efgal, en a 
pris deux, & a laiffe les deux autres. Ces deux bons Reli- 
gieux tres-bien difpofez & rejignez h la mort, fcruiront de 
vi6time pour appaifer la colere de Dieu iu^lenient iettde 
contre nous pour nos deffauts, & pour nous rendre deformais 
fa bont^ fauorable au fucceds du deffein entrepris. 

Ce qui nous perdit fut vn grand coup de vent de Sues2, 
qui s'ejleua lors que nous e^ions a la riue des terres, vent 
fi impetueux que quelque foin & diligence que peu^ apporter 
no^re Pilot e auec fes Matelots, Quelques voeux & prieres 
que nous peuJ^io7is faire pour de^ourner ce coup, iamais 
nous ne peufmes faire en forte que nous n allafsions heurter 
contre les rockers : ce fut le 26. iour d'apres no^re depart, 
iour de fain6l Barthelemy , enuiron fur les neuf heures du 
foir ; De 2^. que nous eftions dans la barque, dix feulement 
efchapperent, les autres furejit eflouffez dans les eaux. Les 
deux nepueux du Pere Noyrot tindrent compagnie a leur 
ancle, leurs corps ont efie enterrez, [277] entre autres celuy 
du P. Noyrot & de noflre frere, des fept autres nous n en 
auons eu aucune nouuelles, quelque recherche que nous en 
ayons pen faire. De vous dire comment le Pere de Vieuxpont 
& moy auons ef chappy du naufrage, il me feroit bicti diffi- 
cille, & croy que Dieu feul en a cog7ioiffance, qui fuiuans 
les deffeins de fa diuine prouidece nous a preferuez, car pour 
mon regard ne iugeant pas dans les apparences humaines 
quil me fufl poj^ible d' e'uiter ce danger, i'auois pris refo- 
lution de me tenir dans la chambre du nauire auec noflre 
frere Louys, nous difpofans tous deux a receuoir le coup de 
la mort, qui ne pouuoit tarder plus de trois Miferere, lors 
que i' entendis qu on m appelloit fur le haul du nauire, ie 
croyois que c'efloit quelqiivn qui auoit affaire de mon fe- 


1616-29] C. LALEMANT TO PARIS SUPERIOR 237 

make us aspire more earnestly to Heaven, and to perfect with 
merit this harmony in which the soul is determined to pass 
the rest of its days. Of the four of us who were in the 
barque, God equally divided them, taking two and leaving 
two. These two good Religious, who were thoroughly pre- 
pared and resigned to die, will serve as victims to appease 
the wrath of God, justly provoked against us for our short- 
comings, and to cause him to grant in the future his good- 
ness, that it may be favorable to the success of the project 
undertaken. 

Our ivreck was caused by a heavy gust of tuind from the 
Southeast, ivhich arose zvhen we were near the shore, — a 
wind so strong that in spite of all the diligence of our Pilot 
and his Sailors, and the vows and prayers which we made 
to avert the disaster, we could not avoid striking upon the 
rocks. This zvas on the 26th day after our departure, 
saint Barthelemy' s day, about nine o'clock in the even- 
ing. Of the 24. who were in the barque, ten only escaped, 
the others being suffocated in the water. The two neph- 
ews of Father Noyrot kept company zvith their uncle, and 
there the bodies were buried, [277] among others that of 
Father Noyrot and our brother ; of the seven others we 
have no tidings, nottuithstajiding the search that has been 
made. It would be difficult for me to tell you how Father 
de Vieuxpont ^^ and I escaped shipwreck, and I believe it is 
known only to God, who, in harmony with the purposes of 
his divine providence, has preserved us ; for in regard to 
myself, 7iot thinking it within the bounds of human possi- 
bility that I could escape this danger, I had resolved to re- 
main in the ship's cabin with our brother Louys. We 
were preparhig ourselves to meet death, which could not be 
farther away than three Miserere's, when I heard some one 
call me on the deck of the ship. I thought it might be some 


238 ■ LES RE LA TIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 4 

cours, ie mojttay en haut, & trouuay que c' ejloit le P. 
Noyrot qui me demandoit derechef V abfolutio7i : Apres luy 
auoir donn^e, & chantd tous ejifemble le Salue Regina, ie 
fus contrai7i£t de detneurer en haut ; car de defcendre il 
ny auoit plus de fnoyen, la 7ner ejioit Ji haute, & le vent Ji 
furieux, qti en nioins de rien le co^e qui pane hoit fur le 
rocher fut mis en pieces, i'ejiois proche du P. Noirot lors 
quvn coup de tner vint fi im.petueufement donner contre le 
cojld fur lequel nous eflions qui rompit tout, & me fepara 
du P. Noyrot, de la bouche duquel t entendis ces dernieres 
paroles, In manus tuas Domine, &c. Pour moy de ce 
coup ie tne trouuay engage entre quatre pieces de bois, deux 
defquelles 'me donnerent fi rudement contre la poi£lrine, & 
les deux autres me briferent fi fort le dos que ie croyois 
vtourir auparauant que d' edre enuelopp^ des flots, ^nais 
voicy vn autre coup de mer qui me defengageant de ces bois 
menleua, & tnon bonnet & mes pantoufles, & mifi le refie 
du 7iauire tout a plat dans la mer: Ie tombay heureufement 
fur vne planche que ie n abandonnay point, de renco?itre 
elle efioit li^e auec le refie du co^e de ce nauire. Nous 
voila doncques a la tnercy des flots, qui ne nous efpargnoient 
point ; ains s' efleuaits ie ne fgay coinbie?i de could^es au 
deffus de 7ious, to7nboient par apres fur 7ios tefies. Apres 
auoir flott^ longtef7ips de la forte dans V obfcurit^ de la 
nui6t, qui e^oit defia C07n77ie7icde, regardant a V entour de 
moy ie 7n apperceus que nous efiions enfer77iez d' efpi7ies & 
fur tout e7iuiron7iez & prefi du cofiau qui fembloit vne ifle, 
puis regardant vn pen plus atte7itiuement ie contay fix per- 
fo7ines qtii n e^oient pas fort efloig7i^es de moy, deux 
def quels m' apperceua7is 7n excitere7it a fair e tous mes efforts 
pour 771 approcher , ce ne [278] fut pas fans peine, car les 
coups que i'auois receus da7is le debris du vaiffeau 7najwient 
fort affoiblis : Ie fis ta7it 7iea7itmoi7is, qu' auec 77ies pla7iches 


1616-29] C. LALEMANT TO PARIS SUPERIOR 239 

one who was planning my rescue. I luent up and found it 
was Father Noyrot, who asked me to again give him abso- 
lution. After having given it to him, and having all sung 
together the Salve Regina, / was obliged to remain above, 
for there tvas no means of descending ; the sea being so 
high and the wind so furious, that, in less than no time, 
the side which leaned toward the rocks was broken in pieces. 
I was near Father Noyrot, when a wave struck the ship so 
hard on the side ivhere we were that it broke everything, 
separating me from Father Noyrot, from whose lips I 
heard these last words : In manus tuas Domine, &c. / 
found myself after this bloiv entangled in four pieces of wood, 
tzvo of which struck me so hard on the chest and the other 
two hit me so heavily upon the back, that I thought I should 
die before being engulfed in the waves ; but then came an- 
other sea, which, freeing me from these pieces of wood, 
carried me off, and my cap and slippers, and scattered the 
rest of the ship over the sea. Fortunately, I fell upon a 
plank to which I clutig, and which happened to be attached 
to the rest of the side of the ship. We were then at the 
mercy of the waves, which did not spare us, but which 
rose, I ktiow not how many cubits above us, and then fell 
forward over our heads. After having floated about a 
long time in this manner, in the darkness of the night, 
which had already set hi, looking around me I saw that 
we were surrounded on all sides by pine trees, and every- 
where enviro7ied by, and near the shores of what seemed to 
be an island ; then examining a little more closely I counted 
six persons who were not far from me, two of whom no- 
ticed me, and motioned for me to try and come near them. 
This [278] was 7tot without difficulty, for the blows I had 
received from the debris of the ship liad weakened me. I 
did so well, however, that with the aid of my planks, I 


240 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.4 

i" arriuay au lien ok Us ejloient, & auec leur fecours ie me 
trouuay aj^is ftir le grand maji, qui tenoit encore ferme 
auec vne partie du vaiffeau, ie n'y fus pas long-temps car 
conime 7ious approchions plus pre's de cctte ijle, nos Matelots 
fe lancer ent bien-to^ a terre, & auec leur aj^ijiance tons 
ceux qui ejloient fur le cojl^ du nauire y furent bien tojl 
apres. Nous voila doncfept de compagnie , ie n auois bonnet 
ny fouliers, ma foutane & habits ejloient tons defchires, dr 
Ji moulus de coups que ie ne pouuois me Jotcjlenir, & de 
fai6lilfallut qu'on fne Jou^int pour aller iufques dans 
le bois, aiij^i auois-ie receu deux rudes coups a2ix deux 
jambes, mais Jur tout a la dextre, dont ie me reffeyis en- 
core, Ics mains f endues auec quelque contufion, la haiiche 
ejcorchde, la poitrine Jur tout fort offenc^e, nous nous re- 
tirajm.es do7ic tous Jept dans le bois, moiiillez comme ceux qui 
venoient d'etre trempez dans la mer : la premiere choje 
que 710US JiJ^nes Jut de remercier Dieu de ce quil nous auoit 
prejeruez, & puis le prier pour ceux qui pourroiet ejlre 
morts. Cela Jai6l pour nous ejchauffer nous nous couchaj- 
mes les vns proches des autres, la terre & V herbe qui auoient 
ejld moiiillez de la pluye du iour n ejloient encore propre 
pour nous Jeicker, nous pajjfajmes ainji le rejle de la nui£l, 
pendant laquelle le P. de Vieuxpont (qui graces a Dieu 
n ejloit point offenc^) dorniit Jort bien. Le V endeniain Ji 
tofl qu il fut iour nous allafmes recognoiflre le lieu oil nous 
eflions, & trouuafmes que c'efloit vne ijle de laquelle nous 
pouuions paffer a la terre fertne, fur le riuage nous trou- 
uafmes force chofes que la mery auoit iett^, i y trouuay deux 
pantoufles, vn bonnet, vn chappeau, vne foutanne , & plufoeurs 
autres chofes neceffaires. Sur tout Dieu nous y enuoya 
pour viures cinq bariques de vin, quelque s dix pieces de 
lard, de fhuile, du pain des frontages, & vne harquebufe, 
& de la pouldre tout a propos pour faire du feu. Apres 


1616-29] C. LALEMANT TO PARIS SUPERIOR 241 

reached the place where they were, and, with their assist- 
ance, I found myself sitting upon the mainmast, which 
was still firmly fastened to a part of the ship. I did not 
remain there long, for as we neared the island our Sailors 
soon leaped to the land ; and, with their assistance, all 
those who were on the side of the ship were soon brought 
to the shore. There were then seven of us together ; I had 
neither cap nor shoes, my cassock and clothes were all torn, 
and I ivas so bruised by blozvs from the wreck, that I could 
not sta?id up ; and, in fact, some one had to support me 
while I was trying to reach the woods ; for I had received 
two hard blows upon both legs, but especially upon the 
right one, luhich I still feel ; my hands were cut and 
bruised, the flesh torn from my hips ; above all I was 
badly zvomided in the chest. All seven of us withdrew in- 
to the woods, as wet as those who have Just been soaked in 
the sea. The first thing we did was to thank God for 
having preserved us, and then we prayed to him for those 
who might be dead. This done, we lay dow7i very near to 
each other to keep warm ; the ground and the grass, which 
had been wet by the rain of the previous day, were not yet 
in a condition to dry us ; thus we spent the rest of the 
night, during zvhich Father dc Vieuxpont (who, thank God, 
was unharmed) slept well. The tiext 7norning, at day- 
break, we reconnoitered the place where tve were, and dis- 
covered that it was an island, from which we could go to 
the maifiland. We found many things upon the shore that 
had been thrown up by the sea; I found there two slippers, 
a cap, a hat, a cassock, and several other necessary articles. 
Best of all, God sent us as food, five barrels of wine, about 
ten pieces of lard ; oil, bread, and cheese ; also an arquc- 
buse, powder, arid everytJmig necessary to make a fire. 
After having drawn all these upon the shore, on saint 


242 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.4 

qti 071 eut ainji tout retire, le tour de fain6t Louys tous 
s employerent a faire le poj^ible pour bajlir vne chalouppe 
du desbris du vaijfeau, auec laquelle nous irions rangeant 
la cojie chercher quelque nauire de pefcheurs : On fe mit 
doncques a trauailler auec tnefchans ferremens que V on 
trouua, elle ejioit bien aduancie le quatriefme iour, lors 
que nous eufmes cognoiffance d'vne chalouppe qui ejloit fous 
voile venant vers le lieu ok nous ejlions, ils receurent de- 
dans vn de nos matelots qui alia tout feul plus proche du 
lieu [279] oil elle deuoit pajfer, ils le ^nenerent dans leur 
vaiffeau parler au Maijire, auquel il racota no^re dif- 
grace, le maijire tout auj^i-tojl s' embarqua dans vne cha- 
louppe & nous vint trouuer, nous offrit a tous le paffage : 
Nous voila en affeurance , car le lendemain tous les homines 
coucherent dans /on vaiffeau : C ejloit vn vaiffeau Bafque 
qui faifoit pefche d vne lieu'e & deniie du rocher, oil nous 
jifnies na7ifrage, & pour autdt qii il r ejloit encores bien du 
temps pour acheuer leur pefche, nous demeurajmes auec 
eux ce qui r ejloit du mois d' Aoujl, & tout le inois de Sep- 
tembre. Le premier d' 0£lobre arriua vn Sauuage qui dijl 
au MaiJlre que s'il ne s en alloit il y auroit datiger que les 
Anglois ne le Jurpriffent. Cette nouuelle le difpoja au de- 
part : Le mejme Sauuage nous diJl que le Capitaine Dan- 
iel ejloit a vingt-cinq lieu'es de Id qui bajiiffoit vne maijon, 
& y laiffoit des Frangois auec vn de nos Peres : Cela me 
donna occafion de dire au P. de Vieuxpont qui me preffoit 
fort que ie luy accordaffe de demeurer auec ce Sauuage 
dans cejle coJle, qui ejloit bien Vvn des meilleurs Sauuage s 
qui Je puiffe rencontrer, Mon Pere voicy le moyen de con- 
tenter vojlre reuerence, le Pere Vimond Jera bien aije 
d'auoir vn compagnon. Ce Sauuage s'offre de mener vo- 
jlre Reuerence iujques au lieu oil ejl Monjieur Daniel, fi 
elle veut demeurer la elle y demeurera, ft elle veut aller 


1616-29] C. LALEMANT TO PARIS SUPERIOR 243 


Louis's day, everybody went to work in earnest to build 
a boat out of the wreck of the ship, in which zve might sail 
along the coast in search of some fishing boat. So we 
began to zvork with the poor tools at our disposal, and coti- 
siderable progress was made by the fourth day, when we 
learned of a boat under sail, coming towards the place 
where we were. They received on board one of our sailors y 
zvho went alone to the place [279] tiear ivhich it ivas to 
pass. They took him into their ship to speak zvith their 
Captain, to ivhom he related our misfortune. The cap- 
tain immediately entered a boat and came in search of us, 
offering a passage to all of us. Behold us then in safety, 
for the next night we all slept in his ship. It was a 
Basque, which was fishitig a league and a half from the 
rock where we ivere wrecked ; and, as they would tiot 
finish their fishing for some time, we stayed with them 
during the remainder of the month of August and the en- 
tire month of September. On the first of October a Sav- 
age arrived, and told the Master that if he did not leave 
he would be in danger of being surprised by the English. 
This news decided his departure. The same Savage told 
us that Captain Daniel^ was twenty-five leagues away, 
and was building a house, and that he had left the French 
with one of our Fathers there. This led me to say to 
Father de Vieuxpont , who urged me earnestly to permit 
him to remain with this Savage upon this coast, for he 
was one of the best Savages that could be found ; " My 
Father, here is the way we cati satisfy your reverence ; 
Father Vimond^"^ will be very happy to have a companion. 
This Savage offers to conduct your Reverence to the place 
where Monsieur Daniel is ; if you wish to remain there, 
you may do so ; if you wish to go to spend a few months 
with the Savages to learn their language, you may do so ; 


244 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.4 

quelqiie mois auec les Samiages, pour apprendre la langue 
elle le poiirra /aire, & ainfi le R. Pere Vimond & vojlre 
Reuerence auront leiir contentement : le bon Pcre fut ex- 
trefmement ioyeux de cejle occajion qui fe prefentoit, ainji 
it s' enibarqtie dans lachalouppe du Sauuage, ie luy laijfay 
tout ce que nous anions fauii(f, horfmis le grand Tableau 
duquel le matelot Bafque s'ejioii faiji, mais i auois bien 
pense au ret our de luy faire rendre, Ji vne autre dif grace 
ne nous fut arriu^e. Nous partif^nes done de la cojle le 
6. Ociobrc, & apres auoir endurd de Ji furieufes tempejles 
que nous 7i anions encores experimete'es, le quarantie/me 
iour de nojlre depart efitrdt das vn port proche de S. 
Sebajlie, nous fifmes de rechef vn fecond naufrage, le Na- 
uire ronipu en mille pieces, toute la molu'e perdue, ce que le 
pens faire cc fit de me fauuer dans vne chalouppe, dans 
laquelle ie me iettay auec des pantoiifles aux pieds, & vn 
bonnet de nui6t en tejie, & en ccjie efquippagc m'en alter 
trouuer nos Peres a S. Sebajiien, d" ok ie partis il y a hui£l 
iours, & fuis arriud a Bourdeuac proche de Bordeaux le 
20. de ce mois. Voila le fucceds de nojlre voyage, par 
lequel vojlre Reuerence pent iuger des obligations que i ay 
a DIEV. 


1616-29] C. LA LE MA NT TO PARIS SUPERIOR 245 


and so the Reverend Father Vimond and your Reverence 
will be satisfied. ' ' The good Father was very happy at this 
opportunity which offered itself, so he etnbarked in the 
Savage's boat. I gave him all that we had saved, except 
the large Painting, which the Basque sailor had taken 
possession of; but I had intended to make him surrender it 
upon our return, if another misfortune had not overtaken 
us. So we left the coast on the 6th of October ; and after 
having suffered the most furious tempests that zve had yet 
experienced, we entered, the fortieth day after our depar- 
ture, the port near St. Sebastien, where we were wrecked a 
second time, the Ship being broken into a thousand pieces 
and all the codfish being lost. All I could do was to escape 
in a shallop into which I threw myself, in my slippers and 
nightcap, and in this outfit I went to find our Fathers at 
St. Sebastien, whence I departed eight days later, and 
arrived at Bourdevac, near Bordeaux, the 20th of this 
month. This is the result of our voyage, from which your 
Reverence can judge of my obligations to GOD. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. IV 

XIV 

Chapters xxvi.-xxxvii., completing the document, 
are given in the present volume. The preceding 
chapters, with Bibliographical Data, are found in our 
Volume IIL 

XV -XVII 

Documents XV. and XVI. are letters from Charles 
Lalemant to Sieur de Champlain and the provincial 
of the Recollets, respectively, dated at Quebec, July 
28, 1625. They are taken from Sagard's Histoire du 
Canada (Paris, 1636), pp. 868, 869, 870; in the Tross 
reprint of Sagard (Paris, 1865), they are in vol. iii., 
pp. 789, 790.48 

Document XVII. is a letter from Lalemant to his 
general, at Rome, dated New France, August i, 
(presumably 1626). It was written in Latin, the 
original being preserved in the Archives of the Gesu 
at Rome. This is one of the letters copied for Caray- 
on, by Father Martin, in 1858, and translated by the 
latter into French, for the Premitre Mission, where it 
appears on pp. 117- 121, — see Bibliographical Data 
for Document XIII., in our Volume III. We follow 
the Martin apograph, in Latin (preserved at St. 
Mary's College, Montreal), and our translation into 
English is made therefrom."*^ 

The above three letters by Lalemant were selected 
by O'Callaghan from Sagard and Carayon, — the 
third being, of course, Martin's French translation, — 


248 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES 

and published at Albany in 1870, with a brief "Avis" 
giving the sources of the documents. This publica- 
tion, known in the Lenox Catalogue as "O'Callaghan 
Reprint No. 2," bears the following title-page: 

Copie de Trois | Lettres | efcrittes es annees 1625. 
et 1626, I Parle P. Charles Lallemant | Superieur des 
Miffions de la Compagnie | de lesvs en la | Novvelle 
France. | A Albanie | De 1' Imprimerie de J. Mun- 
sell 1 M.DCCC.LXX. 

Collation of O' Callaghan s Reprint. Title, i p.; re- 
verse of title, with inscription : " Edition tiree k 
vingt cinq exemplaires. O'C," i p.; "Avis" (by 
O'Callaghan), i p. ; text, pp. 5 - 14. 

For further references, see Brown, vol. ii., no. 316 
and p. 166; Harrisse, nos. 426, 427, 429; Sabin, vol. 
X., no. 38679; O'Callaghan, nos. 1209, 1250 ; Win- 
sor, p. 301; Lenox, p. 18. 

XVIII 

We follow the original publication (Paris, 1627), 
now in the Lenox Library, of Lalemant's letter to his 
brother, Jerome; it is described in the Lenox Cata- 
logue, p. 4, under " H. 41." 

There are extant, four different reprints of this 
document, as follows: 

I . It appears to have first been reprinted in Mer- 
cure Franqois, tome xiii., pp. 12-34; the portion of 
the journal wherein this is found, is devoted to the 
events of the year 1626, but the royal Privilege for 
the volume was " Donne au camp de la Rochelle le 
28. de Septembre, I'an de grace 1628." The original 
publication appeared without statement of Privilege ; 
it is, therefore, impossible to say when in 1627 permis- 
sion to print was granted. In the Quebec edition of 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. IV 249 

the Relations (1858), it is inadvertently stated (vol. i.) 
that this letter commences on p. i (instead of p, 12) 
of tome xiii. of Meraire, an error which Sabin, Harrisse, 
and others have repeated. As will be seen by a com- 
parison of our text with that of issues which follow 
the Mercurc, the differences between the original and 
this first reprint are slight. 

2. The next reprint appears in Danjou's Archives 
Curieuses, 2nd series, tome iii. (Paris, 1838), pp. 
405 -426). This follows the text of the original, and 
not that of the Mcrciirc. The following clause in the 
Lenox Catalogue, p. 19, — the final sentence of note 
under " 7(b)" in list of O'Callaghan's Reprints, — is 
misleading : ' ' The copy in the Astor Library of that 
work is printed from the original letter of 1627." 
The ' ' copy in the Astor ' ' is simply this reprint in 
Archives Curieuses, of which rare collection the Astor 
has a set. 

3. The third reprint, but the first in separate 
form, was issued by O'Callaghan at Albany, 1870, 
and is the one designated in the Lenox Catalogue 
(p. 19) as " 7(b)." The text of the Mercure reprint is 
followed, with a made-up title-page, as follows: 

Relation | de ce qvi s'est passe | en la | Novvelle 
France | en I'annee M.DC.XXVL | Enuoyee au 
Pere Hierosme L'AUemant ] par le P. Charles L'Al- 
lemant Superievr de | la Miflion de la Compagnie de 
lesvs I en | Canada. | D'apres la Copie dans le Mer- 
cure Fran9ois | Tome 13. | A Paris | Chez Eftienne 
Richer rue S. lean de Latran | M. DC. XXIX. 

Collation of same. Title, i p. ; reverse of title, with 
inscription : ' ' Edition tiree a vingt-cinq exemplaires, 
O'C," I p.; Tables des Matieres, 2 pp.; text, pp. 
I -51; Table, pp. 53-59- 


250 LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES 

4. A second separate reprint was issued by O'Cal- 
laghan in 1871, and is that referred to in the Lenox 
Catalogue (p. 19) as " 7(a)." This follows the orig- 
inal text, and not that of the Mercure ; it is set in 
small type in imitation of the original (Paris, 1627), 
and comes into the same number of pages. Upon 
the otherwise blank page facing the last page of the 
text, is the inscription : " Caique fur I'exemplaire 
dans la colledtion | de Mr. James Lenox, de New 
York." The title-page is apparently photo-litho- 
graphed from the original. 

For further references to this document, which has 
had a curious bibliographical history, see Harrisse, 
no. 41 ; Sabin, vol. x., no. 38680 (original), and no. 
38682 (reprint); Carayon, nos. 1254, 1255, and p. 
1 179; Ternaux, no. 496; Winsor, pp. 300, 301; His- 
torical Magazine, vol. iii., p. 19; Brown, vol. ii., p. 
166; Lenox, p. 4 (H. 41), 19; and the Barlow (no. 
1272), Murphy (no. 1480), and O'Callaghan (nos. 
1250, 1982) sale catalogues. 

Title-page. We give a photographic facsimile of 
original. 

Collation of Origi7iaL Title, i p.; text, pp. i-i6. 

XIX 

Charles Lalemant's letter of Nov. 22, 1629, to the 
superior of the Jesuit College at Paris, originally ap- 
peared without title or headlines, in Lcs voyages du 
Sieur de Champlain (Paris, 1632), 2nd part, pp. 275- 
279. O'Callaghan reprinted it in what is known in 
the Lenox list as "No. 3," of which, — as with others 
of the O'Callaghan series, — but twenty-five copies 
were published. He omitted the preliminary edi- 
torial note, on p. 275, made up a title-page of his own, 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. IV 251 

and furnished the Avant-Propos. In the present 
issue, we reproduce the O'Callaghan title-page and 
Avant-Propos, but in all other respects strictly follow 
the original publication. See further references in 
Winsor, p. 301 ; Sabin, vol. x., no. 38681 ; Lenox, p. 18. 

Title-page. We imitate O'Callaghan's Reprint. 

Collation of O" Callaghan s Reprint. Title, i p. ; re- 
verse of title, with inscription: "Tir^e k vingt cinq 
exemplaires, lefquels ne font | pas k vendre. O'C," 
I p. ; Avant-Propos (by O'Callaghan), i p. ; blank, 
I p.; text, pp. 5-15; colophon, i p.: "Acheve 
d'lmprimer k Albany, N. Y., par | J, Munfell, ge 14 
Juin, 1870." 


NOTES TO VOL IV 


(Figures in parentheses, following number of note, refer to Pages 
of English text.) 

1 (p. 15). — The pilot : see vol. ii., note 88. 

2 (p. 15). — Pretended Religion : see vol. iii., note 31. 

3 (p. 21). — On Tumell, see vol. i. note 66. 

4 (P- 33)- — The Marshal : Sir Thomas Dale (spelled Deel, by 
Biard). See vol. i., note 64. 

5 (P- 33)- — The General : this was Sir Thomas Gates, one of the 
prominent men of his time in both military and civil service. He 
was of Devonshire, and probably at this time a little over 50 years 
of age ; had been an officer in the Drake-Sidney expedition to 
America (1585-86), and published an account of it in 1589; later, 
had military commands in Spain and Holland ; was commander of 
the English expedition to Virginia in 1608, and appointed the first 
sole and absolute governor to the colony there ; returned to England 
in April, 161 4. He lived about six years longer, and took much in- 
terest in the affairs of Virginia. Both he and Dale were men of 
energy and executive ability ; to their efforts are mainly ascribed 
the establishment and continuance of the Jamestown colony. 

6 (p. 69). — The French name for the English Channel: given on 
account of its shape, resembling a sleeve (Fr. tnanche). It gives its 
name to the maritime department of France in which are situated 
Cherbourg and St. L6. 

7 (P- 75)- — The ambassador : see vol. ii., note 94. 

8 (p. 85). — On Betsabes, see vol. iii., note 16. 

9 (p. 91). — River of smelts : the Liesse River of Lescarbot (see 
vol. ii., note 37). 

10 (p. 95). — On this point, cf. Maurault {Hist. Abenakis, p. 95, 
note 4): " The Abnakis always exhibited profound grief at the death 
of a child ; the parents were inconsolable. The cause of this great 
sorrow was the belief of the savages that a child was wretched in 
the other world, because it was too young and weak to procure for 
itself the necessities of life there. ' * 

11 (p. loi). — The letters patent here referred to were those issued 
to Sir Thomas Gates and others, for the establishment of colonies in 
Virginia, and constituted the colonial charter. This document. 


254 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 

dated April lo, 1606, granted some 20,000 square miles to the two 
companies, but claimed for the crown all of North America be- 
tween 34° and 45° north latitude, presumably amounting to some 
2,000,000 square miles, as the width of the continent was then under- 
stood. The text is given, with collateral and illustrative papers, in 
Brown's Genesis, pp. 52 et seq. 

12 (p. 105). — For a graphic account of the colonial enterprises of 
Jean Ribaut and Rene de Laudonniere in Florida (1562-65), consult 
Parkman's Pioneers, pp. 33-150. Cf. Laudonniere's own narra- 
tive, and Ribaut's journal, as given in Goldsmid's Hakluyt, vol. 
xiii., pp. 407-507; also, Guerin's Navigateitrs Francais (Paris, 
1846), pp. 180-204. 

13 (p. 105). — Concerning these early discoveries by the French, 
see vol. ii., notes 49, 72; and vol. iii., notes 5, g. 

14 (p. 107). — Biard here refers to the colony established in 1610 by 
John Guy and others at Cupids Harbor (opening into Conception 
Bay), N. F. Lord Bacon was prominent in this enterprise, and it 
was his influence that secured the charter and subsidies granted to 
the Newfoundland Colonization Companj'-, as it was called. The 
company seems to have existed till at least 1628. For Guy's charter, 
and letters written by him, with an account of his enterprise and of 
other early colonies in that region, see Prowse's Hist. N.F., pp. 

92-133- 

15 (p. 107). — The map of Ortelius (1570) shows New France as ex- 
tending southward to 40°. Van der Aa's "Canada" (1619, ca.), and 
Blaeu's "Extrema Americae" (1620), give the Kennebec river as the 
dividing line between New England and New France; the latter 
region is extended by Van der Aa to the south of the Great Lakes, 
and as far as the Mississippi river. Wmsor gives {Car tier to 
Frontenac, p. 9), a sketch reduced from a tracing of the alleged map 
of Denis (1506), mentioned in vol. iii., of the present series, note 4. 

16 (p. 109). — Reference is here made to the " Pandects," or Cor- 
pus Juris Civilis, a collection of the Roman civil law, made in the 
sixth century by Emperor Justinian. The " law of Alluvions " has 
two branches, — the law of abandonment, and that of accretion 
(acquirendo). Biard's reference is to the Corpus Juris Civilis, Di- 
gest, book 41 ( " De adquirendo rerum dontinio" ), 29 and 30. The 
sign ff, used in our text, was employed by early jurisconsults to sig- 
nify the Digest, and even the Pandects as a whole ; it is supposed to 
be a corruption of the Greek character r (or perhaps of Oj- — See 
Hermann Hugo's De Prima Scribetidi Originc (Antwerp, 1617), 

p. 153- 

17 (p. 109). — Regarding the Count de Soissons, see vol. ii., note 24. 

18 (p. 109). — Cf. with these arguments of Biard, Champlain's 


NOTES TO VOL. IV 255 

" Abregi des decovvertvres de la Nouuelle France," in his Voy- 
ages (ed. 1632), part 2, pp. 290-296; and Hinsdale's " Right of Dis- 
covery." in Ohio Archaol. and Hist. Quarterly, Dec, 1888. 

iQ (p. 113). — Concerning the French fisheries in Newfoundland, 
■which, with the neighboring Banks, furnished the greater part of 
the Canadian product, see Prowse's Hist. N.F., pp. 49-50; and 
Dionne's Noiiv. France, chaps, viii., ix. For a detailed account of 
the Canadian fisheries at the present time, see Joncas's "Fisheries 
of Canada," m Canadian Economics (Montreal, 1884), pp. 41-73. 

Lalemant says (doc. no. xviii., post) that the usual exportation of 
beaver skins from New France was 12,000 to 15,000 annually; and 
that it had, in one year, been 22,000. These skins were sold in 
France at a pistole each, or ten livres. The Company of Merchants 
is said to have realized an annual dividend of 40 per cent on its in- 
vestment. Gameau cites De Caen as saying, when Quebec was 
restored to him by Kirk, in 1632: " But as for our settlement, my 
people have found it utterly consumed, along with 9,000 beaver 
skins, valued at 40,000 livres." — Histoire dii Canada (\\^ ed., Mont- 
real, 1882), vol. i., p. 127, note*. See, also, chapter on "New 
France and the Fur-trade," in H. H. Bancroft's N. W. Coast, vol. i., 
pp. 378-403; and Dionne's Nouv. France, chap. xiii. Gagnon's 
Essai de bibliographie canadienne (Quebec, 1895), p. 128, mentions 
Bruslons's Dictionnaire universe I de commerce (Savary's ed., Paris, 
1723) as "an immense compilation, containing highly valuable infor- 
mation in regard to Canadian commerce in the seventeenth century." 

20 (p. 171). — Charles Lalemant (also written L'Alemand, L'Al- 
mand, Lallemant, and Allemand) was bom at Paris Nov. 17, 1587, and 
became a novice of the Jesuits July 29, 1607, at Rouen. He studied 
philosophy at La Fleche, 1609-12; during the following three years, 
he was an instructor in the college of Nevers ; four years more he 
devoted to the study of theology at La Fleche, and one year at Paris. 
He was a professor in the college at Bourges, 1620-22 ; and, for three 
years more, principal of the boarding school of Clermont, Paris. 
In March, 1625, he was appointed superior of the mission at Quebec, 
^hither he went with his brethren Masse and Brebeuf, and the Re- 
collet missionary Joseph La Roche-Daillon, arriving in June of that 
year. Here Lalemant remained till November, 1627, when he went 
to France' to procure supplies. Returning in the following May, 
the ship was captured by Admiral Kirk, the Jesuits being sent to 
England, and later to France. In June, 1629, Lalemant, with sev- 
eral other Jesuits, made a second attempt to return to Canada ; but 
they were shipwrecked on the rocks near Canso. Noyrot and Malot 
perished in the waves, Vieuxpont joined Father Vimont at Grand 
Cibou, and Lalemant was taken back to France by a Basque fishing 


256 LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES 

vessel, arriving at St. Sebastiet: after still another shipwreck. Que- 
bec having been meanwhile captured by the English, the Canadian 
missions were interrupted until 1632, when the region was restored 
to France. Lalemant, upon his return to France, in 1629, was ap- 
pointed rector of the college at Eu; and, later, of that at Rouen. In 
April, 1634, his superiors granted his earnest request that he might 
again go to Canada. He was placed in charge, with Masse and De 
Noue, of the chapel "Notre-Dame de Recouvrance" (built by Cham- 
plain on his return to New France), and was the latter's friend and 
spiritual director, attending him at his death. Lalemant returned 
to France in 1639, ^'^^ there, during several years, acted as agent for 
the Canadian missions ; he was afterwards successively rector of the 
colleges at Rouen, La Fleche, and Paris, and at the last place supe- 
rior of the Maison Prof esse. There he died, Nov. 18, 1674. 

21 (p. 171). — The General. This was Emery de Caen, who, with 
his uncle, Guillaume de Caen, was placed by Montmorency in 
charge of commercial affairs in New France; both were Hugue- 
nots — the latter a merchant, the former a naval captain. 

It is necessary, in this connection, to outline the commercial mo- 
nopolies that successively dominated New France in its infancy. 
For an account of the first of these, granted to De Monts, see vol. i., 
note 2. His patent was finally canceled in 1609; and in January, 
161 1, he gave up his claims in America to Madame de Guercheville. 
Meanwhile, Champlain (see vol. ii., note 42) was continued as lieuten- 
ant of the King in New France, with personal command over the 
Quebec colony, which was sustained mainly through his efforts, with 
the aid of the Rouen merchants who had been associated with De 
Monts. 

Company of Associates. — The Rouen associates withdrew from the 
enterprise, toward the close of 1611; and, in the following year, 
Champlain undertook the formation of a new company, to be com- 
posed of merchants from Rouen, Havre, St. Malo, and La Rochelle. 
It was open to all who were willing to share both the profits and 
the losses, thus avoiding the jealousies that had been aroused against 
the limited membership of De Monts 's company. The Rochelle 
men finally declined to enter the company, which afterwards lost 
heavily by the illicit trade in which the former engaged with the 
savages. Champlain also accuses these merchants of selling arms 
and ammunition to the natives, and exciting their hostility against 
the Quebec colonists. — See his Voyages (1632), part 2, pp. 2, 3. The 
Count de Soissons (vol. ii. of this series, note 24) was appointed gov- 
ernor of New France, with Champlain as his lieutenant. After con- 
siderable delay, the Company of Associates was organized (1613-14) ; 
among its members were, besides De Monts and Champlain, 


NOTES TO VOL. IV 257 

Thomas Poree, Lucas Legendre, Mathieu Dusterlo, and Daniel 
Boyer. Quarrels arose among the associates, caused by commercial 
and even religious differences of opinion ; and some of them tried to 
eject Champlain from his command. Although this attempt failed, 
his work was greatly hindered and embarrassed, until the Duke of 
Montmorency, Conde's successor as viceroy, came to his aid (1620). 

Company of De Caen. — Dissensions and complaints still arising, 
the Company of Associates was summarily dissolved by Montmo- 
rency, in November, 1620, and a new company formed. At its head 
were the De Caens ; there were, also, Guillaume Robin, Jacques de 
Troyes, and Frangois Herve, merchants ; Francois de Troyes, chief 
of royal finance at Orl6ans ; Claude Le Ragois. receiver-general of 
finance at Limoges; Pierre de Verton, counselor and secretary of 
the King ; and others. The old company had resented Montmoren- 
cy's order of dissolution ; but within a year its membership and in- 
terests were consolidated with those of the new association. The 
latter received a monopoly for eleven years, to which the King 
added eleven more ; but it also was dissolved by Richelieu, early in 
1627, to make room for his "Company of New France," also known 
as the "Company of the Hundred Associates." 

Company of Neiu France. — This association was personally con- 
trolled and managed by Richelieu ; and had members in official posi- 
tions about the court, and in Paris, Rouen, and other cities of 
France. Among these were Marquis Deffiat, superintendent of 
finance; Champlain; Claude de Roquemont; the Commander de 
Razilly ; Sebastian Cramoisy, the Parisian publisher ; Jean de Lau- 
son, long the president of the company, and intendant of Canada ; 
Louis Houel, secretary of the King, and controller of the salt works 
at Brouage ; and several leading merchants of Paris, Rouen, Dieppe, 
and Bordeaux. The reasons for the formation of this company, the 
royal charter granted to it, and its articles of association, are given 
in Mercure Francois, vol. xiv. (1628), pp. 232-267. For a complete 
list of the (107) members, see Creuxius' Hist. Canad.; for a copy of 
the list, with the company's charter, and other interesting particu- 
lars, see Suite's Histoire des Canadiens-Franqais (Montreal, 1882- 
84), vol. ii., pp. 27-33. The company was granted jurisdiction over 
the territory extending from Florida to the Arctic Circle, and from 
Newfoundland to the " great fresh lake " (Huron). Only Catholics 
were permitted to join this association, or to settle in its colonies ; 
and no Huguenot or foreigner might enter Canada. The capture of 
Quebec by the English (1629) temporarily broke up this monopoly; 
but it resumed operations when that region was retroceded to France 
(vol. ii., note ^2). The charter of the company obliged it to send 
4,000 colonists thither before 1643 ; to lodge and support them dur- 


258 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 

ing three years ; and then to give them cleared lands for their main- 
tenance. The vast expense attending this undertaking was beyond 
the ability of the Associates; therefore, in 1645, they transferred to 
the inhabitants of Quebec their monopoly of the fur trade, with 
their debts and other obligations,— retaining, however, their seignio- 
rial rights. Finally (Feb. 24, 1663), the Hundred Associates aban- 
doned their charter, and New France again became the property of 
the crown. 

All these monopolies appear to have sought mainly their own 
financial interests. They sustained the Quebec settlement, but in 
penurious fashion, and only so far as it aided their trade with the 
natives ; but they did nothing to make it an agricultural community, 
or to forward Champlain's schemes for the permanent colonization 
of Canada, — neither of which objects could well be attained under 
the feudal tenure by which the colonists held land under the com- 
panies. 

For more extended accounts of these enterprises, see Parkman's 
Pioneers, pp. 364-366, 419-432; his Jesuits, pp. 155- 157. i94. i95. 
331; Ferland's Cours d'Histoire, vol. i., pp. 161, 162, 167, 185, 189, 
197-201, 215, 217, 220, 226, 338-340; Rochemonteix'sy(?.y?^z^^.y, vol. i., 
pp. 128-135, 159. 163, 164, and vol. ii., pp. 65-66; Slafter's "Memoir 
of Champlain," in Voyages (Prince Soc), vol. i., pp. no- 114, 122, 
144-158, 1B7; Faillon's Colon. Fr., vol. i., pp. 132-136, 150, 160-175, 
189-232, 268-272, 333-352; Winsor's dirtier to Frontenac, pp. 
130, 131, 167, 168; Garneau's Canada, vol. i., pp. 63-75; and Mar- 
gry's Collection de manuscrits relatifs a la Nouvelle France 
(Quebec, 1883), vol. i., pp. 62-85. 

The losses of the De Caens at the capture of Quebec (referred to 
note ante, 19) were heavy; and, as some compensation therefor, 
they were granted a monopoly of the fur trade in the Gulf of St. 
Lawrence for one year. Emery De Caen was therefore appointed 
provisional governor of Canada for that period, upon the restitution 
of the province by the English; and on July 13, 1632, he took formal 
possession of Quebec in the name of his King. Laverdiere gives 
(Champlain, close of vol. ii.) numerous " Pieces justificatives ;" see 
pp. 6-31 of these, for documents showing De Caen's losses through 
Kirk's attack, and his attempts to secure redress from the latter 
through the English government. L'Abbe H. A. B. Verreau, in 
Report on Canadian Archives (1874), p. 197, mentions that in Paris 
he found documents granting islands in the West Indies to De Caen, 
in 1633 and 1640. 

22. (p. 171). — Champlain, in thorough accord with the policy then 
dominant at the court of France, was fully as desirous of establish- 
ing the Christian religion among the savages of America as of gain- 


NOTES TO VOL. IV 259 

ing new possessions for France. He had tried, in 1612, to induce 
Madame de Guercheville to send the Jesuits to Quebec, and to aid 
De Monts in establishing a colony there; see his Voyages (1632), 
pt. i., pp. 112, 113. This proposal was rejected, on account of De 
Monts's Calvinistic faith. But when the Company of Merchants 
was formed, two years later, Champlain at once made plans for the 
establishment of missions in New France. Consulting Louis Houel, 
of Brouage, the latter advised him to apply to the RecoUets (vol. ii., 
of the present series, note 41), who had already won renown from 
their successful missions in Spanish America. 

That Order gladly responded to the appeal ; and, having secured 
the consent of the King of France and of the Pope, and assurances 
of aid from the Company of Merchants, the first Recollet mission- 
aries to Canada departed from France, April 24, 161 5. — See Introduc- 
tion, vol. i., pp. XX., xxi. Other RecoUets were sent over, from 
time to time; and, in 1620-21, they built a convent and chapel (the 
first in Canada) on St. Charles River, about half a French league 
from the fort of Quebec. This they named Notre-Dame des Anges ; 
it was situated (according to Laverdiere) on the spot where now 
stands the General Hospital. 

By 1624, five Recollet missions had been established — at Tadous- 
sac, Quebec, and Three Rivers ; at Carhagouha, in the Huron coun- 
try ; and among the Nipissings. There was another, in Acadia, on 
St. John River, founded in 1619, conducted by three RecoUets from 
Aquitaine, and supported by certain commercial companies at Bor- 
deatix. This mission was closed in July, 1624; and, immediately 
thereafter, its priests joined their brethren at Quebec. 

Just before their arrival, a conference of the Recollet missionaries 
was held at Quebec, at which they resolved to ask the cooperation 
of the Jesuits (also noted for the success of their foreign missions) 
in the Canadian field, which was far too large and arduous for their 
limited resources, hoping that the latter order would send some mis- 
sionaries at its own expense. The RecoUets, even more austere 
than the other Franciscan orders, were forbidden by their rules to 
own property ; hence their missionaries could not look to their own 
order for aid. The Company of Merchants had agreed with Cham- 
plain to support six of the RecoUets ; but, as many of its members 
were Protestants, this outlay was probably an unwelcome burden 
to them. Moreover, the religious dissensions constantly arising be- 
tween the Huguenots and the Catholics were felt to be a hindrance 
to the labors of the missionaries, who would have preferred that 
Protestants should be entirely excluded from the management of 
affairs. Sagard says (Canada, pp. 860, 861) that he complained to 
Montmorency of the disorders in Canada, for which he blamed the 


260 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 

Huguenots ; and that the RecoUet provincial at Paris, with Father 
Irenseus Piat (envoy from the Canadian missionaries, to negotiate 
with the Jesuits), made formal charges against them in the council, 
to the same effect. The viceroy (in Rochemonteix's phrase, "a man 
of the world, who loved pleasures quite as well as honors") had 
meanwhile gladly disposed of his troublesome Canadian dignities 
(January, 1625) to his nephew Henri de Levis, duke of Ventadour, 
a pious man who cared not for trade or conquest, but only for the 
conversion of the savages. De Levis's spiritual director was a 
Jesuit ; the application of the Recollets for aid from the Society of 
Jesus came at an opportune time for both orders. It is also prob- 
able that the influences of the court, at that time strongly inclined 
toward the Jesuits, helped to bring about the arrangement. There 
was, however, considerable opposition to its consummation, especial- 
ly from the Company of Merchants; but, according to Faillon, the 
new viceroy asserted his authority over them, and obliged them to 
yield. In accordance with the agreement, the Jesuit fathers Lale- 
mant. Masse, and Brebeuf, with the coadjutors Frangois Charreton, 
Jean Goffestre, and Gilbert Burel, were sent to New France in April, 

1625. There they pursued their missionary labors until the capture 
of Quebec by the English, four years later. After that event. Kirk 
sent all the missionaries back to France, by way of England. When 
the French returned (1632), they were accompanied solely by Jesuit 
priests ; for Richelieu would not allow the Recollets to resume their 
Canadian missions. 

For accounts of this transaction, from a Recollet standpoint, see 
Shea's Le Clercq, pp. 224-233; and Sagard's Canada, pp. 860-865. 
The Jesuit view is given in Rochemonteix's Je suites, vol. i., pp. 
137-153. Cf. Faillon's Colon. Fr., vol. i., pp. 206-212. 

23 (p. 171).— This was Joseph de la Roche-Daillon (written also 
d'Allion), a Recollet priest of the province of St. Denis, allied to the 
house of the counts du Lud (or Lude). He accompanied the Jesuit 
missionaries to Canada, and, after remaining at Quebec for a year, 
went to the Huron country with Brebeuf and De Noue. In October, 

1626, he visited the Neutral Nation, and spent the winter there. In 
the summer of 1628, he returned from the Huron mission to Quebec, 
remaining there until its capture ; Champlain mentions his visit to 
" Father la Roche," just before that event, to ask if the Recollets 
could supply any grain to the colony. Sagard gives (Canada, pp. 
880-892) a letter written to a friend by Daillon, describing his visit 
to the Neutrals; it is reproduced by Le Clercq (Shea's ed., vol. i., 
pp. 263-272). Harris (citing Noiseux's Liste chronologique) gives 
the date of Daillon's death as July 16, \bib.— Early Missions in 

Western Canada (Toronto, 1893), p. 56, note. 


NOTES TO VOL. IV 261 


24 (p. xnx^.— The trading station: Three Rivers (see vol. ii., 
note 52). This point was long a favorite fur-trade rendezvous for 
the Indians. The RecoUet missionaries established a residence here 
in June, 161 5, which was maintained until 1628. The fortified 
French settlement at Three Rivers was established by Champlain in 
July, 1634, to protect the Huron and Algonkin fur trade from the in- 
cursions of the Iroquois, and to serve as an outpost of defence for 
Quebec. The first colonist was Jacques Hertel, who in 1633 had ob- 
tained a grant of land there. The Jesuit missionaries were also 
among the proprietors of the new town, having obtained from the 
Company of New France (see note 21, ante), by a grant dated Feb. 
15, 1634, six arpents of land at Three Rivers; but they did not se- 
cure possession of this till Montmagny delivered it to them (1637). 
However, within two months after La Violette, Champlain's lieuten- 
ant, had erected his stockade at Three Rivers, two of the Jesuit 
fathers, — Le Jeune and Buteux, — had established a residence there, 
which was for many years an important center of missionary work. — 
See Suite's Can.-Fran^ais, vol. ii., pp. 4S-54: he gives a list, con- 
taining also much genealogical information, of the early inhabitants 
of Three Rivers ; and the document granting land there to the So- 
ciety of Jesus, copied from Titres seigneuriaux (Quebec, 1852), p. 
70. Cf. Ferland's Cours d'Hisioire, vol. i., p. 270; he states that 
the church registers of Three Rivers are continuous since February, 
1635 ; and that these records are the oldest existing in Canada. The 
first entry g^ves the exact date on which the settlement was begun — 
July 4, 1634. 

Suite has published, at Montreal, several works concerning this 
town: Hisioire de la ville des Trois-Rivieres (1870), Chrofiique 
trijluvienne (1879), and Album de V Histoire des Trois-Rivitres 
(1881). 

25 (p. 171). — Father Nicholas Viel, then stationed at Montargis, 
France, was sent to the Canadian mission of the RecoUets, with 
Brother Gabriel Sagard (see note 48, post), in 1623. Arriving at 
Quebec, June 28 of that year, they at once accompanied Father 
Joseph Le Caron to the Huron country, which they reached in Au- 
gust, and settled at the residence already established at Quieunonas- 
caran. At the end of ten months, Le Caron and Sagard returned to 
Quebec, leaving Viel in charge of the mission. In the summer of 
1625, he went with the Hurons on their annual trading voyage to 
Quebec, taking with him an Indian lad named Ahautsic, whom he 
had baptized and confirmed. A storm scattering the fleet, the three 
Hurons in his canoe viciously threw him and his disciple into the 
water, at the last rapid above Montreal, which from that time has 
borne the name of Sault au RecoUet. Sagard and Le Clercq give 


262 


LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES 


full accounts of Father Viel's missionary work, and of his tragic 
death. The latter states that Viel left a dictionary of the Huron 
language, with other memoirs, in the hands of certain Frenchmen 
then living in the Huron country, who, later, conveyed the MSS. to 
Father Le Caron, at Quebec. 

26 (p. 171). — Joseph Le Caron was one of the four Recollets who 
began the mission of that order in Canada (see note 22, ante). Ver- 
bal permission to engage in this work was given them by the papal 
nuncio at Paris, that their departure might not be delayed by wait- 
ing for the usual brief ; for some unknown reason the issue of this 
paper was delayed until March 20, 161 8. The original document is 
now in the departmental archives of France, according to Faillon 
(Col. Fr., vol. i., p. 146). It is addressed to Father Le Caron and 
other RecoUet brothers and priests: Sagard copies it in his Canada, 
pp. 12-17. 

Upon arriving at Tadoussac, May 25, 161 5, Jamay (the superior) 
went with Le Caron to Three Rivers, where they at once pro- 
ceeded to establish a sedentary mission for the Indians. Leaving 
this in the care of Jamay (whose headquarters were at Quebec), 
Le Caron departed for the Huron country, living with the savages 
at their town of Carhagouha (near Thunder Bay ; later known as 
Toanche). Here he remained until the following May, meanwhile 
visitmg with Champlain the Tobacco Nation and adjoining tribes. 
By these Indians he was cruelly treated, at the instigation of the 
medicine men (whom the French missionaries styled "sorcerers")- 
In July, 1 61 6, the Recollet missionaries held at Quebec a confer- 
ence with Champlain and other friends of their work, at which it 
was decided that they needed more missionaries, more French colo- 
nists, and a seminary for the education of Indian children. To ob- 
tain aid in these directions, Jamay and Le Caron soon afterwards 
went with Champlain to France, where at first they received but 
little help or encouragement. Jamay remained to forward the inter- 
ests of the mission ; while Le Caron, now appointed its superior, re- 
turned to Canada in the spring of 1617, accompanied by Father Paul 
Huet. A year later, desiring to work personally among the sav- 
ages, Le Caron delegated to Father d'Olbeau his authority as supe- 
rior, and spent a year at Tadoussac, with the Montagnais. During 
1619-22, he labored at Quebec, then again wintered with the Monta- 
gnais; and in July, 1623, returned to the Huron mission, accom- 
panied by Viel and Sagard (see notes 25, 4S). During his year's 
stay there, he did much to aid Champlain in securing the temporary 
treaty of peace which, in July, 1624, was concluded between the 
Iroquois, on one part, and the French and their savage allies on the 
other. 


NOTES TO VOL. IV 263 


In August, 1625, Le Caron went to France on the affairs of the 
mission, and returned the following year with Brother Gervase Mo- 
hier and a reinforcement of Jesuit missionaries. He remained at 
Quebec, as superior of his mission, until 1629, when all the priests 
were sent back to France by Kirk. As the RecoUets expected to re- 
sume work on the Canadian mission. Le Caron was appointed its 
procurator in France; but he died on March 29, 1632, — according to 
Le Clercq — through grief at the exclusion of his order from Canada. 

Upon the invasion of Canada by the English, the RecoUet mission- 
aries had been urged by their savage disciples to take refuge with 
them in their towns, where they would be safe from attack, and could 
minister to the religious wants of the natives until the French 
should return. The fathers wished to accept this proposal ; but as 
it was opposed by the council of Quebec, Le Caron felt obliged to 
decline it, for which he was afterwards blamed by some of his 
brethren in France. 

Full details of his work are given by Le Clercq and Sagard : the 
former copies a letter written by La Caron to his provincial at Paris, 
Aug. 7, 161 8; also fragments of memoirs sent by him to that officer 
in 1624. — See Shea's Le Clercq, vol. i., pp. 134-137, and 213-224. 
He is said to have prepared a dictionary of the Huron language 
(Ibid., p. 249). Other MSS. of his were burned in March, 1631, as a 
result of sanitary measures then taken against a contagfious disease 
in the convent of St. Margaret, near Gisors, Normandy, of which he 
was superior. — See " Memorial of the R6collets, 1637," in Margry's 
Dtkouvertes et dtablissements des Frangais dans V Amirique sep- 
tentrionale (Paris, 1876-86), vol. i., p. 11. 

27 (P- 173)- — The purpose of his voyage. Sagard tells us (Cana- 
da, p. 871) that this was to improve the condition of Canada, and to 
ask the King for funds to support the children and new converts in 
the seminary planned by the RecoUets. Le Clercq asserts that it 
was through Le Caron 's influence that Emery de Caen was recalled 
from Canada, and replaced by a Catholic, Raymond de la Ralde 
(who had been De Caen's lieutenant) ; also that the same influence 
had much to do with the formation of Richelieu's Company of New 
France. — See Shea's Le Clercq, vol. i., pp. 253-259. Rochemon- 
teix, however, claims (/t'suites, vol. i., p. 165) that Richelieu's deter- 
mination to replace Montmorency's company by that of the Hun- 
dred Associates was due mainly to Father Noyrot's influence, and to 
his representations of the state of affairs in Canada. 

28 (p. 177). — Mutio Vitelleschi was born at Rome, in 1565; on 
Nov. 15, 161 5, he became Aquaviva's successor as general of the 
Society of Jesus; his death occurred Feb. 9, 1645. Ranke, in His- 
tory of the Popes (Foster's tr., London, 1871), vol. ii., p. 3S8, says: 


264 LES RELA TIONS DES j£S UITES 

"Vitelleschi was by nature mild, indulgent, and conciliatory; his in- 
timates called him the angel of peace ; and he found consolation on 
his deathbed from the conviction that he had never injured any one. 
These were admirable qualities of a most amiable man, but did not 
suffice to fit him for the government of an order so widely extended, 
active, and powerful. He was unable to enforce strictness of disci- 
pline, even with regard to dress ; still less could he oppose an effec- 
tual resistance to the demands of determined ambition." Dauri- 
gnac, in History of the Society of Jesus (Clements's tr., Baltimore, 
1878), vol. i., p. 398, says that he was designated "the Angel" by 
Pope Urban VIII., on account of his docility and humility. It was 
under his generalship (Feb. 12, 1622) that Loyola, the founder of the 
Jesuit order, and Francis Xavier, were canonized by Gregory XV. ; 
that the first centenary of the society was held (Sept. 25, 1639), when 
its reports showed that it occupied 36 provinces, and had 800 houses 
and 15,000 members; and that the great controversy between the 
Jansenists and Jesuits began. Even more important, according to 
Ranke, was the change which occurred, during this administration, 
in the government and discipline of the society, by which the " pro- 
fessed " members attained supremacy, and occupied positions in 
business, administration, and other affairs of the world, which be- 
fore had belonged mainly to the coadjutors,— those of provincials, 
rectors, and superiors of colleges. The former ascetic strictness of 
discipline was relaxed; and the society became less ardent in its 
devotion to the interests of the Holy See. Vitelleschi and his im- 
mediate successors strove, but with little success, to correct these 
tendencies.— See Ranke, tit supra, pp. 387-393; he obtains most of 
his information from a MS. in the Corsini library at Rome, entitled 
Discorso sopra la religione de' padri Gesuiti, e lore modo di go- 
vernare (1681-86, circa). Cf. Daurignac's account f^w/ siipra, pp. 
324-398) of the order under Vitelleschi's administration. 

29 (p. 177). — During the seventeenth century, all navigated seas 
were infested with pirates. Lescarbot mentions (vol. ii. of the pres- 
ent series, p. 131) that Poutrincourt met, in the English Channel, a 
ship of "Forbans" or pirates; the word "forban" means, literally, 
one banished, an outlaw, and characterizes most of the European 
pirates of the time. Sagard (Canada, 115, 120, 121), relates that, on 
his journey to New France, his ship was threatened by a Dutch pi- 
rate, in the very harbor of Rochelle. Suite (Can.-Fran^ais, vol. ii., 
p. 20, note) cites the case of one of De Caen's vessels, which was 
captured (September, 1624) while en route from Gaspe to Bordeaux, 
by Turks, near the coast of Brittany ; the Frenchmen were carried 
away as slaves. 

Brown (Cape Breton, p. no), who says he obtained his informa- 


NOTES TO VOL. IV 265 

tion from original documents in the Public Record office at London, 
writes: " The fishermen of Newfoundland were cruelly harassed by 
pirates. In eight years (1612-20), the damage done by the pirates 
was estimated at 40,800/. / besides the loss of 180 pieces of ord- 
nance, and 1,080 fishermen and mechanics carried off by force. On 
August 8, 1625, the Mayor of Poole wrote to the Privy Council, say- 
ing that, unless protection were afforded to the Newfoundland fleet 
of 250 sail, 'of the Western Ports,' they would be surprised by the 
Turkish pirates; and, on the 12th of the same month, the Mayor of 
Plymouth informed the Council that twenty-seven ships and 200 men 
had been taken by pirates in ten days." Brown also cites Discourse 
and Discovery of Newfoundland (London, 1623), written by one 
Captain Whitbourne, who was sent out in 1615, to hold a court of 
admiralty for inquiry into certain abuses ; and who says that Peter 
Easton, a pirate, had ten sail of well-appointed ships, that he was 
master of the seas, and levied a regular tax on fishing vessels. 

As early as 1620, John Mason, then governor of Newfoundland, 
received a commission from the English admiralty to suppress 
pirates ; and he captured, among others, a Sallee (or Moorish) pirate 
in the Irish harbor of Crookhaven (1625). Prowse (Hist. N.F., pp. 
108, 174, 182), gives the text of this commission; he also states that 
Placentia was raided five times previous to 1685, by English buc- 
caneers, who plundered the town of all movable property. 

30 (p. 177). — Jean de Brebeuf was born March 25, 1593, at Conde- 
sur-Vire, Normandy. He belonged to a noble family, from which, 
according to the Biographic Universelle (Paris, 1843-66), the Eng- 
lish family of Arundel had its descent. Entering the Society of 
Jesus Nov. 8, 161 7, at Rouen, he was ordained five years later; and 
in 1625 was sent to Canada as one of the first Jesuit missionaries 
(note 22, ante). The fii;pt year he spent among the Montagnais; but 
in 1626 went, with De Noue, to the Huron country, where they 
settled at Toanche (known to the Recollets as Carhagouha; see note 
26, ante), in the bark cabin which Le Caron had erected eleven 
years before. Here Brebeuf remained (alone, after the first year) 
until the capture of Quebec. Returning to Canada with Charaplain 
(1633), he at once resumed work in the Huron country, where he la- 
bored until his death (excepting 1641-44, when at Quebec). During 
the winter of 1640-41. he endeavored (but without success) to estab- 
lish a mission in the Neutral Nation. He lived successively at Iho- 
natiria, a new village built not far from the deserted Toanche; 
Teanaustaye. called by the missionaries St. Joseph, in the present 
township of Medonte, Simcoe county, Ontario; and St. Ignace and 
St. Louis, about half-way between the former towns. In March, 
1649, a thousand Iroquois attacked and destroyed the two last-named 


266 LES RELA TIONS DES j£s UITES 


villages, capturing there Brebeuf and Gabriel Lalemant, both of 
whom were put to death with cruel tortures,— the former dying 
March i6, the latter on the day following. Their bodies were res- 
cued by their brethren, and their bones afterwards taken to Que- 
bec,— where, in the Hotel Dieu, Brebeuf s head is still preserved, 
inclosed in a silver bust sent from France by his family. A minute 
account of this martyrdom is given by one of the lay brothers of the 
Huron mission, Christophe Regnaut (Regnault), in a MS. written at 
Caen in 1678. A copy of this document, with an English transla- 
tion, is given by Brymner, in Canadian Archives, 18S4, pp. Ixiii.- 
Ixvii., and will in due course be reproduced in the present series. 

Harris (Miss. West. Canada., p. 212, note J states that he has 
seen in St. Martin's church (Ritualist), Brighton, England, a figured 
window in memory of Father Brebeuf. A memorial church, in 
honor of all the Jesuit martyrs in the Huron country, is now ( Jan- 
uary, 1897) approaching completion at Penetanguishene, Ontario; 
an illustration thereof will appear in vol. v. of this series. 

Brebeuf's Relations of the Huron mission will appear in succeed- 
ing volumes of our series; that for 1636 contains an elaborate ac- 
count of the social condition, manners, and customs of that nation, 
and a treatise on their language — this last being reproduced, in an 
English translation, by Albert Gallatin in Transactions of Amer. 
Antiquarian Society, vol. ii., (Cambridge, 1836), pp. 236-238. At 
the close of Champlain's Voyages (ed. 1632) may be found transla- 
tions into Montagnais of Ledesma's " Christian Doctrine," by Bre- 
beuf; and of the Lord's Prayer, Apostles' Creed, etc., by Masse. 

31 (p. 181). — Anne de None was born Aug. 7, 1587; his father was 
the seigneur of Prieres and of Villers, near Rheims, France. Anne's 
early years were spent at court, first as a page, then as an officer of 
the King's bedchamber; but at the age of twenty -five he devoted 
himself to a religious life, and entered the Jesuit novitiate (Sept. 20, 
1612). He spent ten years in the study of philosophy and theology, 
at the Jesuit colleges of Paris, La Fleche, and Nevers ; then became 
acting rector at Bourges, where he remained until sent to Canada 
(1626). Accompanying Brebeuf to the Huron country, he came 
back to Quebec in the following spring, apparently remaining there 
until the English invasion. During this time he essayed to spend a 
winter with the Montagnais, but suffered so greatly from cold and 
hunger that he was obliged to leave them. Returning to Canada 
with De Caen (1632), his first care was to repair the convent and 
other buildings destroyed by the English. Unable, after repeated 
efforts, either to learn the native languages, or to endure the hard- 
ships of life among the savages, he spent the remainder of his life in 
the French settlements on the St. Lawrence, — ministering to the 


NOTES TO VOL. IV 267 

sick and dying, instructing the colonists, supplying the temporal 
needs of his brethren, directing workmen who repaired buildings or 
cultivated the ground, — as Rochemonteix says, " he became, in the 
mission, the servant of all." His disposition was enthusiastic and 
impetuous, yet gentle, lovable, and self-sacrificing. On a journey 
to Fort Richelieu, to administer the sacraments to the garrison there. 
he was frozen to death on the St. Lawrence river, Feb. i, 1646. 

32 (p. iSi). — Philibert No>Tot was bom October, 1592, in the dio- 
cese of Autun; he entered the Jesuit order Oct. 16, 161 7, and spent 
four years in study at Paris and Bourges. Four years later, having 
been ordained as a priest, he was appointed procuror of the latter 
college, retaining this office until his death. It was by his advice, 
according to Rochemonteix, that Ventadour (whose confessor he 
was) bought the viceroyalty of Canada from Montmorency. In 1626, 
Noyrot went to Quebec, taking with him twenty workmen to build 
a residence for the Jesuit missionaries there. Lalemant immediate- 
ly sent him back to France, to report to Richelieu on the affairs of 
Canada, and to secure the removal of the Huguenots from the direc- 
tion of the mercantile company. This resulted in the formation of 
the Company of New France (see note 27, ante J. In order to relieve 
the scarcity at Quebec, Noyrot loaded a ship with a year's supply of 
provisions for the missionaries and their workmen ; but, according 
to Le Clercq, these supplies were stopped at Honfleur by De Caen 
and La Ralde, from resentment at Noyrot' s complaints about their 
conduct. In consequence of this disappointment, the workmen of 
the mission were taken back to France by Lalemant. Twice again 
did Noyrot seek to convey supplies to his brethren at Quebec; the 
first time (July, 1628), he was driven back by Admiral Kirk; the sec- 
ond (June, 1629), he perished by shipwreck near Canso (see note 20, 
antej. 

33 (p. 181). — Regarding Cotton, (Coton) see vol. ii., note 68. 

34 (p. 183). — For sketch of Masse, see vol. i., note 39. 

35 (p. 191). — Le Clercq, apparently without good reason, men- 
tions this letter as " falsely attributed to Lalemant." — See Roche- 
WLontei^'s J<!si(ttes, vol. i., p. 155, note. 

36 (p. 191). — A younger brother of Charles Lalemant; a sketch of 
his life will be given in a later volume. 

37 (P- 193)- — Mesli'n (or tnaslin ; derived from Latin miscere): 
mixed grain, especially a mixture of rye and wheat. 

38 (p. 195).— Champlain wished to make Quebec an agricultural 
colony, but his efforts were thwarted by the narrow and selfish poli- 
cy of the mercantile companies, who cared only to develop the fur 
trade. They gave the colonists no means for cultivating the soil, 
and, according to Champlain, "had not themselves cleared an arpent 


268 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES 

and a half of land in the 22 years during which they were, according 
to his Majesty's intention, to have peopled and cultivated the colony 
of Quebec." Sagard says (Canada, p. 168) that the space cleared 
was not even one arpent. The merchants even oppressed Hebert 
(vol. ii., note 80), — "the only colonist who supported his family from 
the produce of his land, making many illegal claims upon him for 
his yearly harvests, and compelling him to sell only to the com- 
pany, and that at a specified rate. " — Champlain's Voyages (1632), 
part 2, pp. 144, 183, 184. Cf. Mercure Frangois, vol. xiv. (1628), p. 
234. The RecoUet missionaries were cultivators, and, desirous of 
leading the savages from a nomadic to a seidentary life, even in- 
duced a few of the latter to imitate their example. The Jesuits also 
paid much attention to agriculture. — See Faillon's Col. Fr., vol. i., 
pp. 161-164 ; Rochemonteix's Jesuites, vol. i., pp. 154-157 ; and 
Suite's Can.-Frangais, vol. ii., p. 18. 

Champlain says (Laverdiere's ed., pp. 1144, 11 55) that the plow 
was first used in Canada, April 27, 1628 ; this was doubtless by Couil- 
lard, Hebert' s son-in-law. 

Arpent : a word of Celtic derivation, according to Columelle and 
Littre; it occurs as early as the eleventh century (e.g.. Chanson de 
Roland). An old French land measure, containing 100 square 
perches, but varying in different provinces. The linear arpent of 
Paris was 180 French feet (variously computed at from 191.83 to 
192.3 English feet), the common arpent 200, and the standard arpent 
220. The first of these was the one used in New France, under the 
Coutume de Paris, and it still remains the legal measure in all the 
seigniories of Quebec. The Quebec Department of Crown Lands, 
which we adopt as preferable authority, translates the arpent into 
191.85 English feet. 

Bourdon's map of the settlements on the St. Lawrence, from Que- 
bec to Cape Tourmente (1641 ; reproduced at end of Tanguay's 
Diet. Ghiial., vol. i.), indicates that each lot had seven arpents 
of river frontage, and a depth of a French league or more (84 ar- 
pents to the league). Giffard's concession at Beauport (the first of 
the seigniories) was i^ leagues along the river, and the same in 
depth. — Suite's Can.-Frangais, vol. ii., pp. 47-48. Duralde's sur- 
vey of the Illinois country (1770) assigned to each inhabitant a lot, 
measuring from one to four arpents wide, and forty arpents deep. — 
See H. W. Williams's chapter on " St. Louis Land Titles," in Scharf's 
History of St. Louis (Phila., 1883), vol. i., pp. 316-329. Williams, 
whom Scharf indorses as an authority, computes the arpent at 192 
feet 6 inches, English measure. 

The assignment of lands throughout New France in long, narrow 
strips, was obviously made to secure for each settler a frontage on 


NOTES TO VOL. IV 269 

the river, then the main highway ; and to bring the inhabitants of 
each settlement into close neighborhood, for social and defensive 
purposes. The same reasons, of course, governed the allotment of 
lands in Roger Williams's colony at Providence (1640), — an inter- 
esting similarity to French Canadian custom. The " home-lots " at 
Providence had an (estimated) river frontage of 105 to 120 English 
feet, all running up to a common highway along the crest of the 
back-lying ridge; each lot contained from 4^ to 5^ acres. For 
description and plats, see Charles W. Hopkins's Home Lots of the 
Early Settlers of Providence Plantations (Providence, 1886). 

39 (p. 201). — Cf. vol. iii., note 22. 

40 (p. 201). — See vol. ii., note 21. 

41 (p. 205). — Cf. vol. iii., note ig. 

42 (p. 209). — For value of 6cu, see vol. i., note 34. The livre was 
a money of account, in value somewhat less than the modern franc ; 
but in ordinary speech, both terms signified the same value; six 
livres =■ one crown. The livre of Tours was worth 20 sous ; that of 
Paris, 25 sous. The pistole was a money of account, equal to ten 
livres tournois, and worth ten francs of the present currency. 

43 (p. 211) Anti-Coton : a sarcastic pamphlet, published in Sep- 
tember, 1610; it attacked the Jesuits, and especially Father Coton, 
the confessor of Henry IV. , of whose murder the Jesuits had been 
accused by their enemies. Daurignac says (Hist. Soc. fcsus, vol. 
i., p. 295) that this pamphlet was attributed to Pierre Dumoulin, a 
Protestant minister of Charenton. This and other like attacks on 
the Jesuits had been circulated in Canada, and had prejudiced 
against them even many Catholics. 

44 (P- 233). — This mention of Lalemant being at Pentegoet in 1613, 
has been copied by some later writers ; but it is apparently an over- 
sight. Biard would certainly have included Lalemant in his account 
of the Acadian missions, if the latter had been there. 

45 (P- 237). — Alexander Vieuxpont was born Dec. 25, 1599, at 
Auxeville, Normandy. He became a Jesuit novice Sept. 13, 1620, at 
Rouen, and for seven years pursued his studies there, at Rennes, 
and at La Fleche. Thence he was sent to Alengon, and two years 
later (June, 1629), he went with Noyrot to Canada. Cast ashore 
near Canso, in the shipwreck wherein the latter perished, Vieuxpont 
went to Grand Cibou, to join Father Vimont, then laboring among 
the savages of Cape Breton. In 1630, recalled to France by his su- 
periors, he became a traveling preacher in the rural districts near 
Rouen ; he did not return to Canada. 

46 (p. 243). — After the destruction of Port Royal (1613), the Eng- 
lish took no immediate steps to secure possession of Acadia. Eight 
years later. Sir William Alexander (afterwards secretary of state for 


270 LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES 

Scotland) obtained from James I. a grant of all the lands from the 
St. Croix River to the St. Lawrence, under the title of " Nova Sco- 
tia;" thus were ignored all French rights in that region. In 1625, 
this grant was renewed by Charles I., with considerable additions. 
Alexander, not having the necessary funds, was unable to establish 
any colonies there until 1627; when (having associated with himself 
Gervase Kirk and his sons, William Berkley, John Love, and others, 
under the title of " Merchant Adventurers of Canada "), he sent his 
son, as governor of Nova Scotia, with a few Scotch emigrants, to 
form a settlement at Port Royal. David Kirk, whose vessel had 
conveyed them, returned to England for reinforcements; and, in 
the following year, he seized Miscou, and all the French fishing ves- 
sels in the Gulf; threatened Quebec; and captured De Roquemont's 
squadron, sent by the Hundred Associates with supplies and artillery 
for Champlain's succor. In 1629, he captured Quebec. Early in 
that year, Sir James Stewart, who had purchased a tract of land 
from Alexander, brought a colony to Port Baleines, Cape Breton 
(near the present Louisburg) ; he also began to seize the French ves- 
sels fishing on that coast. This excited the anger of Captain 
Charles Daniel (one of the Hundred Associates, and a brother of the 
Jesuit Antoine Daniel), who had recently come from France; he 
seized and demolished Stewart's fort, and proceeded to erect an- 
other at Grand Cibou. (This name, meaning " the great river," 
was doubtless applied by the natives to the estuary now known as 
Great Bras d'Or; but Daniel's colony was planted at St. Anne's 
Bay, — thus named by him, — just north of the Bras d'Or). Charles 
Leigh, who made a voyage to Cape Breton in 1597, mentions "the 
harborow of Cibo;" see Goldsmid's Hakluyt, vol. xiii., p. 69. Here 
he left a garrison of forty men, with the two Jesuits Vimond and 
Vieuxpont, and took the English colonists back to their own country 
(except a few, whom he carried to France as prisoners). Cham- 
plain, arriving in Dieppe Dec. 31, 1629, met Daniel there, and ob- 
tained from him his " Relation" of the above enterprise, which is 
given in Champlain's Voyages (1632), part 2, pp. 271-275. 

In the following year, Daniel returned to this fort, and settled cer- 
tain disorders that had arisen during his absence. It is not definite- 
ly known how long the garrison was kept here ; but, when De Caen 
took possession of Canada (1632), the Jesuits Davost and Antoine 
Daniel also came to Cape Breton (probably with Charles, the latter' s 
brother), and carried on the mission begun by Vimont. Denys, a 
few years later, had an important settlement at St. Anne's. 

47 (p. 243). — Vimont remained at Cape Breton but a year, and 
did not return to Canada until 1639. A sketch of his life will appear 
hereafter. 


NOTES TO VOL. IV 271 

48 (p. 247). — Gabriel Sagard Theodat, a lay brother, was one of 
the Recollet missionaries to Canada, where he arrived June 24, 1623, 
in company with Father Nicholas Viel. He states, in his Canada, 
p. II, that he desired to go on this mission in 1615, at which time 
he was in a Recollet convent in Paris ; but his superiors would not 
then consent. Sagard 's missionary labors were among the Hurons, 
with whom he remained nearly one year ; returning then to France, 
he wrote and published two books, — Grand voyage du pays des 
Hurons (Paris, 1632), and Histoire du Canada (Paris, 1636). In 
these works he minutely describes the customs, social condition, re- 
ligion, etc., of the Indian tribes; and gives a history of the mission- 
ary labors of the Recollets, up to their expulsion in 1629. To the 
Grand Voyage he appends a dictionary of the Huron language. 
He died in 1650. 

There is some confusion among historians in regard to the dates 
of Sagard's sojourn in New France, which apparently arises from 
his own inaccuracy of statement, or possibly from a typographical 
error. In his Histoire (Tross ed., 1866), p. 115, he says that he left 
France in 1623; but, in the Grand Voyage (Tross ed., 1865), p. 5, 
he gives the year as " ving^-quatre ; " while, in the former work, p. 
759, he gives in full the letter of his provincial recalling him to 
France, dated March 9, 1625. Champlain, however, says that Sa- 
gard arrived at Quebec in June, 1623, and returned from the Huron 
country in July, 1624. 

Sagard's works are rare, and command high prices. Brunet says 
(in Michaud's Biog. Univ.) that five and even eight guineas were 
paid for a copy at public sales in London ; and that, in France, one 
was valued in 1S51 at 210 francs. Chevalier says, in his edition of 
the Histoire (Paris, 1S66), p. iii., note, that 1,200 francs had in vain 
been offered for a copy of that work. Gsignon (Bib Hog. Canad.J 
states that a copy brought $38 at the Fraser sale in Quebec, i860; 
and that one had been offered by a Paris bookseller, in 1S90, for 
1,200 francs. 

49 (p. 247). — Father Felix Martin was born Oct. 4, 1804, at Auray, 
in Bretagne, France; in September, 1S23, he became a novice in the 
Jesuit order, entering the convent of Montrouge, at Paris. During 
nearly twenty years, he was employed in various colleges and mis- 
sions throughout Western Europe; and, early in 1842, was sent to 
Canada. There he labored, especially in Montreal, until August, 
1851, when he became the first rector of St. Mary's College in that 
city ; he was its founder, and the designer of its building. In this 
position he remained until 1857, when he became superior of the resi- 
dence at Quebec. Four years later, he returned to France, where 
he was, successively, rector of St. Francis Xavier's college at 


272 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 

Vannes. and superior at Poitiers and Rouen. He died at Paris, 
Nov. 25, 1892. 

Father Martin published (Montreal, 1852) a French translation of 
Bressani's Breve Relatione (1653), accompanied by explanatory 
notes and a biographical sketch of Bressani. Later, he wrote the 
lives of Jogues, Brebeuf, and other early missionaries; and, in 18S6, 
a biography of his sister. Mother St. Stanislas, a French nun. He 
was also noted as an antiquarian and collector, especially in regard 
to the Jesuit Relations and the history of Canada. Carayon's Pre- 
miere Mission des Jdsuites au Canada (Paris, 1864), described in 
Bibliographical Data for Doc. xiii., in vol. iii.. p. 285, a valuable col- 
lection of documents, all of which are embodied in our series, con- 
sists of manuscripts collected by Father Martin, chiefly in 1858, 
while on a visit to Europe. 


rJ. 


y^ 


/^-- 





:ii^fMtfir^ipT|f^^im!£i>Sfp^l^^^^ 


c 
^ 



