Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 19: Quebec and Hurons, 1640
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1898 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits19jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits19jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits19jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 19 of 73.

---


i 17 


3 



THE JESUIT RELATIONS 

AND 

ALLIED DOCUMENTS 


VOL. XIX 



The edition consists of sev- 
en hundred and fifty sets 
all numbered 


No.d^ 


x^s. 



The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 


Travels and Explorations 

OF THE Jesuit Missionaries 

IN New France 

1610-1791 

THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES ; ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS. MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 

EDITED BY 

REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 


Vol. XIX 
Quebec and Hurons : 1640 


CLEVELAND. Z\ic 3Burrow0 asrotbew 
Company, publishers, mdcccxcviii 


Copyright, 1898 

BY 

The Burrows Brothers Co 


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 


The Imperial Press, Cleveland 


EDITORIAL STAFF 


Editor 


Translators . 


Assistant Editor 


Reuben Gold Thwaites 
' FiNLOw Alexander 
Percy Favor Bicknell 
William Frederic Giese 
Crawford Lindsay 
William Price 
Hiram Allen Sober 
Emma Helen Blair 


Bibliographical Adviser Victor Hugo Paltsits 


CONTENTS OF VOL. XIX 

Preface to Volume XIX . . . i 

Document: — 

XLI. Relation de ce qvi s'est passe en la Nov- 

velle France, en I'annee 1640. [Chaps. 

xi.-xiii. of Part I., and Chaps, i.-viii. 

of Part II.] Paul le Jeune; K6bec, 

September 10, 1640. Jerome Lalemant; 

Des Hurons, May 27, 1640 . . 7 

Notes ...... 269 


ILLUSTRATION TO VOL XIX 


I. Sketch map of Ste. Marie-on-tlie-Wye, by 

A. F. Hunter . . . .270 


PREFACE TO VOL. XIX 


The entire volume is devoted to a continuation of 
the Relation of 1640 (Document XLI.), which is the 
joint product of Le Jeune and Jerome Lalemant. In 
Vol. XVIII. we presented the first ten chapters of 
Part I., which is by Le Jeune (dated at Quebec, Sep- 
tember 10); this part is concluded in the present vol- 
ume, and eight chapters are given of Part II. (by 
Lalemant, dated in the Huron country, May 27). 

Following is a synopsis of the portion of the Rela- 
tion herewith printed : 

Le Jeune continues his report from Quebec, by 
describing the noble work of the Hospital nuns. 
From August to May, they have had more than a 
hundred patients, and have, besides, given aid to over 
two hundred Indians. Nearly all the sick whom 
they have nursed had the smallpox, which caused an 
almost insupportable stench ; and the nuns, despite 
what aid could be given them, are exhausted by their 
incessant labors and the horrors of the epidemic. 
They note with surprise the patience and fortitude 
of the Indians, notwithstanding their pains, sores, 
and fever. Father Pijart gives religious instruction 
to all the inmates, many of whom show most edify- 
ing devotion ; and twenty of the sick have been bap- 
tized. Among all these sick Indians, not one dispute 
has arisen, — much to their praise, as compared with 
the patients in a hospital in France. On Holy Thurs- 


PREFACE TO VOL. XIX 


day, the feet of the poor patients are washed, accord- 
ing to French custom; in this ceremony all the 
leading French people take part, headed by Mont- 
magny and Madame de la Peltrie. Le Jeune de- 
scribes the virtuous life and pious death of a young 
Iroquois woman who had been sent (1636) to France 
and educated in a Paris convent. 

The labors of the Ursulines are then recounted. 
Now eight in number, they are lodged in two small 
rooms, where also they must teach their pupils and 
receive visitors. But they are full of enthusiasm and 
joy in their work, and find in the Indian girls won- 
derful docility, obedience, and intelligence, — not to 
mention the piety and love for religion that these 
children display. The girls delight in attending 
mass, and are much more attentive and quiet than 
children in France; " they compose their faces, and 
regulate their actions by ours, except that in their 
reverences they imitate Madame de la Pelletrie." 
They love and obey the nuns more than their own 
mothers. 

Le Jeune next recounts various events of the past 
year. On the first journey from Quebec of the new 
superior, Vimont, his vessel is wrecked, and he is 
compelled to return home. The missionaries meet 
serious losses, — two of their workmen are drowned; 
their house, the chapel, and the church at Quebec, 
are destroyed by fire, and they thus lose all their 
supplies for outlying stations and even for the Huron 
mission. The governor loans them a house, and, for 
the time, they hold religious services at the hospital. 
Le Jeune ends his report by describing some abo- 
riginal superstitions. A piece of burned leather is 
rubbed upon a sick man's head, to drive away the 


PREFACE TO VOL. XIX 


manitou. The Iroquois sometimes use the calcined 
bones of a newly bom infant, sacrificed by them, for 
charms, especially to secure success in battle. 

Part II. of the general Relation consists of Jerome 
Lalemant's report made to Vimont, his superior, 
upon the concerns of the Huron mission for this 
year. The harvest of last autumn was unusually 
abundant, says Lalemant, but the Indians, instead 
of thanking God for this, devote themselves more 
than ever to feasts. They have also had numerous 
fights with the Iroquois, but have lost therein more 
than they have gained. They depend on the medi- 
cine men to predict for them the coming of the ene- 
my, and the outcome of the contest, but in this are 
sometimes disappointed. There are two classes of 
these wizards — " magicians," who are greatly feared 
and honored; and " sorcerers," who are held in 
abomination, and who may, on suspicion alone, be 
slain with impunity, 

Lalemant describes the outbreak of smallpox 
among the Hurons, and the resulting persecutions 
against the missionaries. He recounts the sufferings 
of one of their donnas, who, attacked on the Ottawa 
River by the disease, was abandoned by the natives ; 
after lying on the rocks for four days, exposed to 
storms, he was at last rescued by a Huron to whom, 
a year before, he had shown like kindness and com- 
passion. Even his recovery does not relieve the 
missionaries from the suspicions and hatred of the 
ignorant Hurons, who tear down the crosses above 
the Fathers' cabins, threaten them, beat one of them 
with clubs, and even lie in wait to murder them. 

During the year, the missionaries, in the Huron 
country, have baptized over a thousand persons; but 


PREFACE TO VOL. XIX 


most of these were thus received at the point of 
death, the majority being children. The decision is 
made by the Fathers, to go from their residences on 
missions to the various tribes, — a more diiSicult 
method, but, as they think, more efficacious in reach- 
ing the savages. They have taken a census, not 
only of the villages, but of the families in each, and 
even of nearly all the persons in the country ; this 
shows a population, in thirty-two villages, of about 
12,000 souls. 

After giving a general outline of the hardships 
and dangers experienced in carrying on these mis- 
sions, the writer relates in more detail the progress 
and condition of each. The residence at Ste. Marie 
has now become their only fixed and permanent 
station, — those of St. Joseph and Ossossan6 having 
been removed thither. One object in building the 
house at Ste. Marie was to furnish a suitable place 
for the rest and spiritual refreshment of the mission- 
aries ; but the first to make retreat therein was ' ' the 
Christian," Joseph Chihwatenhwa. His pious senti- 
ments on this occasion are related at length. A 
speech of his, defending the missionaries, causes the 
conversion of another Indian, " who is likely to be 
one of the pillars of this rising Church." This new 
convert, named in baptism Louis, tries to persuade 
his relatives to embrace the new faith, but, despite 
his eloquence, with little success; " the words which 
issued all on fire from the lips of this Christian were 
received in hearts colder than marble." Various 
baptisms, occurring in the villages near Ste. Marie, 
are recounted. It is but a little time since a general 
council of all the clans was held, at which the mis- 
sionaries were denounced — most of those present 


PREFACE TO VOL. XIX 


demanding their death; but an old man, who is 
friendly to them, finally suggests that his countrymen 
first seek out and slay their own sorcerers, and then, 
if their afflictions still continue, they may kill the 
Frenchmen. This, for the time, quiets their minds. 

Lalemant then narrates the course of events at St. 
Joseph, — largely in extracts from the letters of Chas- 
tellain and Brebeuf , who have labored at that resi- 
dence. This village has been especially the theatre 
of persecutions against the " black robes; " yet they 
have there baptized, during the year, nearly 300 per- 
sons, many of whom are now in heaven. The de- 
tails of some notable conversions are recounted. One 
woman, baptized while dying, sees " at her side a 
company, with unknown faces of rare beauty ; these 
beings offer her very handsome cloth, with which to 
cover her. " Nevertheless, the missionaries find, in 
the course of the epidemic, that ' ' their Church mili- 
tant has been built mostly on sand, — the winds and 
storms have almost thrown everything to the ground ; " 
many converts have returned to their old supersti- 
tions, and even publicly renounced the new faith. 
Some, however, remain faithful through all persecu- 
tion, and thus greatly console their teachers. One 
of these experiences a sort of miracle, while yet a 
catechumen; not showing sufficient respect toward 
God, in his prayers, he sees one day " a picture of 
Our Lord move itself, look at him with an eye of 
anger, and stir its lips in a manner which horrified 
him. . . . Four of our Fathers, who afterward 
examined this affair, were led to believe that this 
thing was real." Another is no longer subject to 
vertigoes, after her baptism. 

Lalemant proceeds to describe the work at the mis- 


PREFACE TO VOL. XIX 


sion of La Conception (Ossossan6), up to the time of 
its cessation ; it has been in charge of Ragueneau, 
assisted by Du Peron or Chaumonot. ' ' Thence have 
come the worst reports and the most pernicious 
designs against us." Unfortunately, it is the Chris- 
tians there who have been most severely afflicted by 
the epidemic; hence the unbelievers say that the 
faith profits them nothing, and "it is now in dis- 
grace " among them. The Fathers are therefore 
threatened, driven away, and even in danger of 
death at the hands of the infuriated savages. Not- 
withstanding, they have baptized, " in spite of the 
demons and hell," over 250 persons. Various in- 
stances are enumerated, of persons who, " inspired 
by the devil," refuse baptism. In this mission also, 
many of the converts have fallen away; but some 
show most edifying zeal and devotion, even in the 
midst of afflictions. One of these is for a time, like 
many of his townsmen, beguiled by the fair prom- 
ises of a certain * ' magician * ' into permitting him to 
treat the sick; but when these patients die, the de- 
luded neophyte has his eyes opened, and returns to 
the true faith. The chapter on this mission of La 
Conception (which also closes the present volume) 
ends with many details of the piety and devotion of 
" the pearl of our Christians," Joseph Chihwatenhwa. 

R. G. T. 

Madison, Wis., March, 1898. 


XLI (continued) 

Relation of 1640 

Paris: SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, 1641 


Chaps, xi.-xiii. of Part I., and chaps, i.-viii. of Part II. 
The remainder of this document will appear in Volume XX. 


LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.19 


[146] CHAPITRE XL 

DE L'HOSPITAL. 

LES Religieufes hofpitalieres arriuerent ^ Kebec 
le premier iour du mois d'Aoufl de I'an paff6, 
k peine eftoient elles defcendiies du vailleau, 
[147] qu'elles fe virent accablees de malades, la fale 
de I'Hofpital eftant trop petite, il fallut dreffer des 
cabanes en leur iardin, k la fagon des Sauuages, n'ay- 
ans pas de meubles fnffifammet pour tant de monde, 
il leur fallut coupper en deux & en trois vne partie 
des couuertures & des draps qu'elles auoient apport^ 
pour ces pauures malades, en vn mot, au lieu de 
prendre vn peu de repos, & de fe rafraichir des 
grandes incommoditez qu'elles auoient fouffertes fur 
la mer, elles fe virent fi chargees & fi occupies, que 
nous eufmes peur de les perdre, & leur hofpital d^s 
fa premiere naiffance, les malades abordoient de tous 
coftez en tel n ombre, leur puanteur eftoit fi infu- 
portable, les chaleurs fi grandes, les rafraichifl^emens 
fi courts & fi pauures, dans vn pays fi neuf & fi nou- 
ueau, que ie ne f§ay comme ces bonnes filles, qui 
n' auoient quafi pas le loifir de prendre vn petit de 
fommeil, refifterent k tous ces trauaux. Noftre R. 
P. Superieur auoit vn foing tres-particulier de ces 
pauures Sauuages, le P. de Quen fe ioignoit k luy auec 
vne charity incomparable, fa fant6 en fut endomma- 
g6e [148] pour quelque temps, car I'air efloit fi cor- 
rompu & fi infect, qu'^ peine les poulmons pouuoient 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 


[146] CHAPTER XL 

OF THE HOSPITAL. 

THE hospital Nuns arrived at Kebec on the 
first day of the month of August of last year. 
Scarcely had they disembarked [147] before 
they found themselves overwhelmed with patients. 
The hall of the Hospital being too small, it was neces- 
sary to erect some cabins, fashioned like those of the 
Savages, in their garden. Not having enough furni- 
ture for so many people, they had to cut in two or 
three pieces part of the blankets and sheets they had 
brought for these poor sick people. In a word, instead 
of taking a little rest, and refreshing themselves after 
the great discomforts they had suffered upon the sea, 
they found themselves so burdened and occupied 
that we had fear of losing them and their hospital 
at its very birth. The sick came from all directions 
in such numbers, their stench was so insupportable, 
the heat so great, the fresh food so scarce and so 
poor, in a country so new and strange, that I do not 
know how these good sisters, who almost had not 
even leisure in which to take a little sleep, endured 
all these hardships. Our Reverend Father Superior 
took very special care of these poor Savages, and Fa- 
ther de Quen joined him in this work with an incom- 
parable charity. His health was injured by it [148] 
for some time, for the air was so impure and so 
tainted that the lungs could scarcely inhale without 
the heart being thereby affected. All the French 


10 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.19 

ils refpirer fans que le cceiir s'en reffentit, tous les 
Fran9ois nez fur le pays, furent attaquez de cette 
contagion auffi-bien que les Sauuages ; ceux qui font 
venus de voflre Frace en furent exempts, exceptez 
deux ou trois, defia naturalifez k Tair de cette con- 
tr^e. 

Bref depuis le mois d'Aoufl iufques au mois de 
May, il eft entr6 plus de cent malades k I'hofpital, 
plus de deux cens pauures Sauuages y ont eft6 fou- 
lagez, foit ert palTant, foit en y couchant vne nuit ou 
deux ou dauantage, on en a veu iufques "k dix, douze, 
vingt, trente k la fois, vingt pauures malades y ont 
receu le fain(5t Baptefme, & enuiron vingt-quatre 
fortant de cette maifon de mifericorde, font entrez 
dans le feiour de la gloire. Tout cecy eft deu k la 
charit6 & liberality de Madame la Duchelle d' Aiguil- 
lon, qui procure auec des foins & des affedtions toutes 
d'or, cet ouurage. Que ce grand courage qu'elle a 
conceu dans le fang du Fils de Dieu, prenne fes ac- 
croijGfemens [149] dans ce mefme fang adorable. 
Mais voyons en detail ce qui s'efl paff6 dans la maifon 
de cette Dame, ou pluftofl dans celle qu'elle a erig6 
"k Dieu, 

Le bel ordre qui fe garde au feruice des pauures 
malades en la maifon de mifericorde de Dieppe, fe 
faidt voir icy en la nouuelle France, auec vne grande 
ediffication de nos Frangois & des Sauuages, ie ne le 
coucheray point fur ce papier, puis que vous le pou- 
uez voir de vos yeux en voftre France. Le Pere 
Claude Pijard, lequel a eu foin tout I'hiuer de I'in- 
ftrudtion des pauures de cette maifon, m'a donne vn 
petit memoire coucli6 en ces termes: Le matin on 
f aifoit faire les prieres aux Sauuages, & quelque temps 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 11 

bom in the country were attacked by this contagion, 
as well as the Savages. Those who came from your 
France were exempt from it, except two or three, 
already naturalized to the air of this region. 

In brief, from the month of August until the 
month of May, more than one hundred patients en- 
tered the hospital, and more than two hundred poor 
Savages found relief there, either in temporary treat- 
ment or in sleeping there one or two nights, or more. 
There have been seen as many as ten, twelve, twenty, 
or thirty of them at a time. Twenty poor sick people 
have received holy Baptism there ; and about twenty- 
four, quitting this house of mercy, have entered the 
regions of glory. All this is due to the charity and 
liberality of Madame the Duchess d'Aiguillon, who 
accomplishes this work with a care and affection 
truly golden. May this great courage, that she has 
conceived in the blood of the Son of God, receive its 
increase [149] in this same adorable blood. But let 
us see in detail what has taken place in the house of 
this Lady, or rather in that which she has erected to 
God. 

The excellent order observed in the service of the 
poor patients in the house of mercy at Dieppe is 
seen here in new France, to the great edification of 
our French and the Savages. I will not set it down 
upon this paper, since you can see it with your own 
eyes in your France. Father Claude Pijard, who 
has had charge of the instruction of the poor of this 
house, during the entire winter, has given me a little 
relation, couched in these terms: " In the morning, 
we had the Savages say prayers, and, some time after, 
the holy Mass was celebrated, at which those who 
had been baptized were present ; after dinner, we had 


12 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.19 

apres fe difoit la faindte Melle, ou ceux qui eftoient 
baptifez affifloient : apres le difner on faif oit reciter le 
catechifme, & en fnite on en donnoit vne petite expli- 
cation, adioutant pour 1' ordinaire quelque hiftoire 
pieufe qu'vn des Sauuages repetoit. Le foir ils fai- 
foiet leur examen de confcience, ils fe confelToient 
& communioient tons les quinze iours, & I'auroient 
fait plus fouuent fi [150] on leur eut permis, leur 
deuotion s'eft fait voir ^ vifiter fouuent le tres-fainc5t 
Sacrement, k dire plufieurs fois le iour leur chappe- 
let, k chanter des cantiques fpirituels, qui ont fucce- 
d6 a leurs chanfons barbares, bref ^ ieufner la faindte 
quarentaine, pour ceux qui le pouuoient faire, vn pau- 
ure boiteux & deux femmes aueugles nouuellement 
baptif^es, comme on leur parla du carefme non pour 
les induire k le ieufner tout entier, mais quelques 
iours feulement, refpondirent qu'ils vouloient faire 
tout ce que faifoient les Chrefliens, en effet ils ont 
ieufne comme nous. 

Vne bonne vieille entendant parler que les per- 
fonnes de fon age eftoient exemptes de cette loy, dit 
qu'elle auoit affez de force pour la garder, & la peur 
qu'elle eut qu'on ne la fit point ieufner auec les 
autres, luy fit commancer le carefme deux iours de- 
uant le Mercredy des cendres, les Religieufes auoient 
beau luy dire qu'il n'eftoit pas encor temps de ieufner, 
fi le Pere ne Ten euft alTeure, elle ne vouloit manger 
qu'k midy, nonobftant qu'elle ne fut pas encor forti- 
fi€e [151] d'vne maladie qui I'auoit fort affoiblie. 

le diray icy en palfant que I'vne de ces deux fem- 
mes aueugles, dont ie viens de parler, auoit vne petite 
fille agee de deux ans feulement, cette enfant condui- 
foit fa mere, & raduertiffoit en fon petit iargon des 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 18 

them recite the catechism, and then gave them a 
little explanation of it, usually adding some pious 
story that one of the Savages repeated. In the even- 
ing, they made their examination of conscience ; they 
confessed and received communion every two weeks, 
and would have done so oftener if [150] we had per- 
mitted them. They showed their devotion by often 
visiting the most holy Sacrament, by saying their 
rosary several times a day, by singing spiritual can- 
ticles, which have succeeded their barbarous songs, — 
in short, by fasting throughout the sacred forty 
days, for those who could do so. A poor lame man 
and two blind women recently baptized, when we 
told them about Lent, — not to induce them to fast 
during the whole period, but only a few days, — re- 
sponded that they wished to do all that the Christians 
did; in fact, they fasted as we did. 

" A good old woman, hearing that persons of her 
age were exempt from this law, said that she had 
enough strength to keep it ; and her fear that we 
might not have her fast like the others made her be- 
gin Lent two days before Ash Wednesday. In vain 
the Nuns told her that it was not yet time to fast; 
if the Father had not assured her of it, she would 
not have eaten except at noon, although she had not 
yet regained her strength [151] from a sickness that 
had greatly weakened her. 

" I will say here, by the way, that one of these 
two blind women, whom I have just mentioned, had 
a little daughter only two years old. This child led 
her mother, and warned her in her childish jargon 
of the rough places where she might stumble." 

What I am about to tell is taken from the letters 
that the Mother Superior has written me. 


14 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.19 

endroits raboteux ou elle auroit peu faire quelque 
faux pas. 

Ce que ie vay dire eft tir6 des lettres que la Mere 
Superieure m'a efcrites. 

Tous nos malades out vn grand f oin de prier Dieu, 
ils nous prelTent fouuent de prier pour eux, ce nous 
eft vne grande confolation de les voir affidus aux pri- 
eres foir & matin, ils fe refueillent les vns les autres 
fi-toft que le temps des prieres approche, il y en a 
qui fe tiennent long-temps feuls en la chappelle 
deuant le S. Sacrement, les deux femmes aueugles 
font deuenues fort denotes depuis leur baptefme, 
Heleine me fembloit fort ftupide auant que d'eftre 
Chreftienne, ie n'euffe iamais creu la voir fi zel^e 
come elle eft, elle employe beaucoup de temps k prier 
Dieu, elle fe tient dans vn grand filence deuant la 
Melfe le iour qu'elle [152] veut communier, ie leur 
ay demand^ allez fouuent ce qu'elles penfoient les 
voyant fort attentiues & recueillies, nous penfons k 
Dieu difoient elles, & k ce que le Pere nous enf eigne. 

Pierre Trigatin continue dans les deuotions def- 
quelles ie vous ay defia refcry, paffant beaucoup de 
temps en oraifon dans noftre chappelle. 

La patience de nos malades m'eftonne, i'en ay veu 
plufieurs couuerts de la petite verolle par tout le 
corps, auec vne fieure tres-ardente, ne fe plaindre non 
plus que s'ils n'auoient point de mal, obei'r pondtu- 
ellement au medecin, fe monftrer recognoiffant des 
moindres feruices qu'on leur rendoit. 

Entre autres Lazare Petikovchkaovat, nous a laifT^ 
I'vn des plus rares exemples de patience qu'on puiffe 
voir, vous I'auez veu fouuent dans fon infirmity, il a 
eft6 fept mois entier dans noftre hofpital, afflig6 de 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 15 

" All our sick are very careful to pray to God. 
They urge us often to pray for them. It is a great 
consolation to us to see them attentive to prayers 
evening and morning. They waken one another as 
soon as the time for prayers draws near. There are 
some who remain alone a long time in the chapel, 
before the Blessed Sacrament. The two blind wom- 
en have become very devout since their baptism. 
Heleine seemed to me very stupid before she became 
a Christian ; I would never have expected to see her 
so zealous as she is. She spends a great deal of time 
praying to God ; she maintains a strict silence before 
Mass, on the day when she [152] wishes to receive 
communion. I have often asked them, when I saw 
them very intent and meditative, of what they were 
thinking. ' We are thinking of God,' they would 
say, ' and of what the Father has taught us. ' 

" Pierre Trigatin continues in the devotions of 
which I have already written you, passing ihuch 
time in prayer in our chapel. 

" The patience of our sick astonishes me. I have 
seen many whose bodies were entirely covered with 
smallpox, and in a burning fever, complaining no 
more than if they were not sick, strictly obeying the 
physician, and showing gratitude for the slightest 
service that was rendered them. 

' ' Among others, Lazare Petikouchkaouat has left 
us one of the rarest examples of patience that it is 
possible to see. You have often seen him in his in- 
firmity. He was seven whole months in our hospital, 
afflicted with very painful sores in several parts of 
his body, with a fever that continually preyed upon 
him and so parched him that he could not quench 
his thirst. He was seized by a ravenous hunger, 


16 LES RELATIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol.19 

playes tres-fenfibles en plufieurs endroits de fon 
corps, auec vne fieure qui le minoit continuellement, 
& qui le brufloit fi fort, qu'il ne pouuoit etancher fa 
foif, il fut pris d'vne faim canine, [153] en forte qu'il 
ne pouuoit fe raffafier, il mangeoit inceffamment, & 
plus il mangeoit & plus il defeichoit, il vint en tel 
eftat que les os luy percoient adluellement la peau, 
la pourriture fe mit & dans fes os & dans fa peau, on 
eut mis vne groffe noix dans quelques vns de fes os 
decouuerts & tout cauez de pourriture, fes vlceres 
eftoient grands & profonds, il fouffroit eftrangement, 
mais auec vne patience encor plus eftrange, il fe fai- 
foit leuer tons les iours vne fois, apres vn cry qu'il 
iettoit par la violence des douleurs qu'on luy faifoit 
en le touchant, il encourageoit ceux qui le portoient, 
& puis les remercioit auec beaucoup de douceur, il 
aymoit notamment ce ieune homme qui s'eft donn6 
k noftre hofpital pour fecourir les pauures malades, 
auffi faut il confefler que ce bon ieune homme I'a fe- 
couru auec vne charity qui ne fe peut allez loiier, il 
appelloit ce malade fa confolation, vous f9auez com- 
bien il eftoit puant, ie n'ay iamais fenty rien de fl 
infedt, cependant fon corps refla dans [sc. fans] au- 
cune mauuaife odeur apres fa mort, ce qui nous 
eflonna, il fe [154] confelloit & communioit affez 
fouuet, il I'a fait encor depuis que vous luy auez 
donne I'extreme-ondlion, bref il eft mort auec ces 
paroles en la bouche, lefus chaverimir, lefus ayez 
piti6 de moy, lefus ayez pitie de moy. lufqu'icy la 
Mere. 

Les fecrets de Dieu font des abyfmes, ce grand & 
puiHant Sauuage auoit efte fort fuperbe & defbau- 
che, au commancement qu'il fut en I'hofpital il eftoit 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 17 

[153] which he could not satisfy; he ate continually, 
and the more he ate the more he wasted away. He 
reached such a state that his bones actually pierced 
through his skin. Putrefaction took place, both in 
his bones and in his skin ; a large walnut could have 
been put in some of his bones, uncovered and all 
hollowed out by putrefaction ; his sores were large 
and deep ; he suffered strangely, but with a patience 
still more strange. He had himself raised once every 
day ; and, after one cry that he uttered through the 
violence of the pain caused by touching him, he 
spoke encouragingly to those who held him, and then 
thanked them with great gentleness. He particu- 
larly loved the young man who offered himself to 
our hospital to assist the poor patients ; but then it 
must be confessed that this good young man succored 
him with a charity that cannot be sufficiently praised. 
He called this patient his consolation. You know 
how offensive to smell he was — I have never known 
anything so tainted ; yet after his death no bad odor 
arose from his body, which astonished us. He [154] 
confessed and received communion frequently, doing 
so even after you gave him extreme unction. In 
short, he died with these words upon his lips : ' Jesus 
chauerimir,' ' Jesus have pity upon me; Jesus, have 
pity upon me.' " Thus far the Mother. 

The secrets of God are unfathomable. This large 
and powerful Savage had been very proud and dis- 
solute. When he first entered the hospital he was 
still full of self, — he tried to kill himself, to be freed 
from the torments that he was suffering; but Father 
Pijard related, every day of Lent, some story of the 
Passion in the hall of the poor ; this wretched man 
was touched and piously fell into the line of duty. 


18 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.19 

encor plain de foy-mefme, il fe vouloit faire mourir 
pour fe deliurer des tourmens qu'il fouffroit, mais le 
P, Pijard racontat tous les iours du carefme quelque 
hiftoire de la Paffion en la fale des pauures, ce mife- 
rable fnt touche, & fe rangea faindtement ^ fon 
deuoir, les Religieufes ont exerc6 vne charity tres- 
fignal^e enuers ce cadavre viuant, c'eft I'vn de ceux 
que Dieu a voulu fauuer, par la mifericorde qui s'ex- 
erce en leur hofpital. 

I'ay veu, pourfuit la Mere, en quelques vns vne 
grande conftance k la mort, & vne ioye fondle fur 
I'efperance qu'ils auoient d'aller au ciel, entre autres 
efperance Itavichpich nous a grandement confol^es, 
au commencement qu'elle [155] entra en noftre hofpi- 
tal, elle auoit grand defir de recouurer fa fant^, elle 
paroilToit fort ennemie de la mort, & cependant auffi- 
toft qu'on luy eut dit que fa maladie eftoit mortelle, 
que c'efloit fait de fa vie, elle ne s'en eftonna point, 
elle pria qu'on luy fit venir le Pere, s'eflant confelfee 
deux ou trois fois, en peu de temps elle paroifloit 
refolue & ferme comme vn rocher, elle voyoit deuant 
fes yeux quatre petits enfans qu'elle laiffoit fort pau- 
ures & fort ieunes, & fon mary grandement defole, 
& tout cela ne I'efbranloit point, la foy opere forte- 
ment dans ces nouueaux Chreftiens, vous diriez qu'ils 
font alTeurez qu'en fortans de cette vie, ils vont droit 
en Paradis. 

I'ay remarqu6 vne honeftet^ tres-grande dans tous 
les Sauuages que nous auons eu k 1' hofpital, notam- 
ment aux filles & femmes Chrefliennes, comme nous 
difions certain iour par recreation a nos malades, que 
nous irions au pays des Hurons pour les fecourir, ils 
nous dirent que ces peuples eftoient fort diflolus, & 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 19 

The Nuns have exercised a most signal charity 
towards this living skeleton; he is one of those 
whom God has willed to save through the mercy that 
is exercised in their hospital. 

" I have seen in some of them," continues the 
Mother, " a great steadfastness at death, and a joy 
founded upon their hope of going to heaven. Among 
others, esperance Itauichpich greatly consoled us. 
When she first [155] entered our hospital, she had an 
eager desire to recover her health. She seemed very 
averse to dying; and yet, as soon as she was told 
that her sickness was mortal, that it was all over 
with her, she was not at all shocked ; she begged that 
the Father be sent for, and, having confessed two or 
three times, in a little while she appeared as resolute 
and firm as a rock. She saw before her eyes four 
little children that she was leaving, very poor and 
very young, and her husband exceedingly disconso- 
late ; and all this did not make her waver. The faith 
operates strongly in these new Christians. You 
would say that they are sure that, in leaving this 
life, they go straight to Paradise. 

' ' I have noticed a very great chastity in all the 
Savages that we have had in the hospital, especially 
in the Christian girls and women. When we said 
one day, to divert our patients, that we were going 
to the country of the Hurons to succor them, they 
told us that those peoples were very dissolute, and 
that we, who so loved purity, could not endure them ; 
[156] in short, they prayed you Fathers to dissuade 
us from this plan, for the sake of our love of chastity. 
But when we told them that we had only said this 
in jest, they replied that we must confess, and that 
God forbade lying. This made us smile, and greatly 


20 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.19 

que nous autres qui aymions tat la purete ne les pour- 
rions fupporter, [156] bref ils prieret vos Peres de 
nous diiluader ce delTein, par I'affedtion que nous 
portios ^ I'honeflete, mais comme nous leurs eufmes 
dit que nous n'auions dit cela qu'en riant, ils nous 
repartirent qu'il falloit nous confeffer, & que Dieu 
deffendoit de mentir, cela nous fit rire & nous edifia 
fort, voyant la tendrelTe de leur confcience. 

Vn de nos malades ayant fait quelque adtion de de- 
pit, en demanda pardon de luy mefme auec beaucoup 
d'humilit6, il s'en confeffa le mefme iour, & deux ou 
trois iours apres il paroiffoit encor tout confus de fa 
faute, il tafchoit d'amadoiier la perfonne qu'il auoit 
offenc6, il prioit Dieu pour elle, & luy offroit quelque 
petite chofe qu'il auoit pour I'appaifer. 

I'ay fouuent admire, dit la Mere, comme ces per- 
fonnes fi differentes de pays, d'age, & de fexe s'ac- 
cordent fi bien. II faut qu'vne Religieufe veille tous 
les iours en France dans nos maifons, pour obuier 
aux difputes de nos pauures, ou pour les alToupir, & 
tout I'hiuer nous n'auons pas remarqu6 le moindre 
difcord [157] parmy nos Sauuages malades, il ne s'efl 
efleu6 pas vne petite querelle. 

Les remedes que nous auons apport6 d' Europe font 
fort bons pour les Sauuages, lef quels n'ont point de 
difficult^ "k prendre nos medecines, ny "k fe faire fei- 
gner, la cliarit6 des meres enuers leurs enfans eft fort 
grande, car elles prennent dans leurs bouche la me- 
decine qu'on donne k leurs enfans, & puis la font 
pafTer dans la bouche de leurs petits. Voila ce que 
m'efcriuit cette bonne Mere. 

Meffieurs de la nouuelle France, ayat defir6 que 
les Religieufes hofpitalieres fiflent celebrer le facri- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 21 

edified us, seeing the tenderness of their consciences. 

" One of our patients, having committed some 
vexatious act, asked pardon for it of his own accord 
with great humility. He confessed, the same day ; 
and, two or three days later, he appeared still very 
much embarrassed by his fault. He tried to soothe 
the person whom he had offended ; he prayed to God 
for her, and offered her some little article that he 
had, to appease her. 

' * I have often wondered, ' ' says the Mother, ' ' how 
these persons, so different in country, age, and sex, 
can agree so well. In France, a Nun has to be 
on her guard every day in our houses, to prevent 
disputes among our poor, or to quell them ; and all 
winter we have not observed the least discord [157] 
among our sick Savages, — not even a slight quarrel 
has arisen, 

" The remedies that we brought from Europe are 
very good for the Savages, who have no difficulty in 
taking our medicines, nor in having themselves bled. 
The love of the mothers toward their children is very 
great, for they take in their own mouths the medi- 
cine intended for their children, and then pass it into 
the mouths of their little ones." Thus the good 
Mother wrote to me. 

The Gentlemen of new France, having desired 
that the hospital Nuns celebrate the sacrifice of the 
holy Mass, to draw down the blessing of God upon 
their holy enterprises, this was solemnly done on 
the thirtieth day of November ; and, to honor them 
more, Monsieur Gand was godfather in their name 
to a worthy young Savage, who was baptized in the 
chapel of the hospital, and named Frangois. 

On holy Thursday, as it is the custom of well- 


22 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.19 

fice de la faindte Meffe, pour attirer la benedic5tion 
de Dieu fur leurs faindtes entreprifes, cela fe fit 
folemnellement le trentiefme iour de Nouembre, & 
pour les honorer dauentage, Monfieur Gand fut par- 
rin en leur nom d'vn braue ieune Sauuage, qui fut 
baptif^ dans la chappelle de I'hofpital, & nomm6 
Fran9ois. 

Le leudy faindt, comme c'eft la couftume des hof- 
pitaux bien regies, de lauer les pieds des pauures, 
Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur fe voulut trouuer ^ cette 
[158] faindte ceremonie; le matin on dit la Mefle 
dans la fale des malades, ou les Religieufes & les 
Sauuages malades communierent, en fuitte on rangea 
tous les hommes d'vn coft6, & les femmes & filles 
de r autre, Monfieur le Gouuerneur commanga le 
premier ^ lauer les pieds des hommes, Monfieur le 
Cbeualier de I'lfle & les principaux de nos Fra§ois 
fuiuirent apres, les Religieufes auec Madame de la 
Pelletrie, Mademoifelle de Repentigny; & plufieurs 
autres femmes lauerent les pieds des femmes Sau- 
uages auec vne grande charity & modeftie, Dieu f9ait 
fi ces pauures barbares voyans des perfonnes de tel 
merite k leur pieds, eftoient touchez, nous leurs expli- 
quafmes pourquoy nous exercions ces adtions d'hu- 
milite, ils font tres capable de cette inftrudtion, la 
conclufion leur fut bien agreable, car on leur fit apres 
vne belle collation, vn honnefte homme habitant du 
pays, ne s'eftant peu trouuer k cette faindte adtion 
aflembla le foir fes domeftiques, & fit le mefme en 
leur endroit. 

Les Sauuages qui fortent de I'hofpital [159] & qui 
nous viennent reuoir ^ S. lofeph, ou aux trois Riui- 
eres, difent mille biens de ces bonnes Religieufes, ils 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 23 

regulated hospitals to wash the feet of the poor, 
Monsieur our Governor wished to be present at this 
[158] holy ceremony. In the morning, Mass was said 
in the hall of the sick, where the Nuns and the sick 
Savages received communion. Then all the men 
were ranged on one side, and the women and girls 
on the other. Monsieur the Governor began first 
to wash the feet of the men, Monsieur the Chevalier 
de risle and the principal men of our French people 
followed; the Nuns, with Madame de la Pelletrie, 
Mademoiselle de Repentigny, and several other wom- 
en, washed the feet of the Savage women, very lov- 
ingly and modestly. God knows whether these poor 
barbarians were touched, at seeing persons of such 
merit at their feet. We explained to them why we 
performed these acts of humility; they are very 
capable of understanding this instruction. The 
conclusion was very agreeable to them, for a fine 
collation was afterward offered them. A worthy man, 
a resident of the country, not being able to be pres- 
ent at this holy act, assembled his domestics in the 
evening, and did the same thing to them. 

The Savages who leave the hospital, [159] and 
who come to see us again at St. Joseph, or at the 
three Rivers, say a thousand pleasant things about 
these good Nuns. They call them " the good," " the 
liberal," "the charitable." The Mother Superior 
having fallen sick, these poor Savages were very 
sorry, the sick blaming themselves for it. " It is we 
who have made her sick, ' ' they said ; ' * she loves us 
too much ; why does she do so much for us ? " When 
this good Mother, having recovered, entered the 
hall of the poor, they knew not how to welcome her 
enough. They have good reason to love these good 


24 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.19 

les appellent les bonnes, les liberales, les charitables, 
la Mere Superieure eftant tomb6e malade, ces pau- 
ures Sauuages en eftoient tons trifles, les malades 
s'accufoient eux mefmes, c'efl nous qui I'auons fait 
malade, difoient-ils, elle nous ayme trop pourquoy 
trauaille elle tant pour nous? Quand cette bonne 
Mere fut guerie, & qu'elle entra dans la fale des pau- 
ures, ils ne f9auoient quelle chere luy faire, ils ont 
bien raifon d'aymer ces bonnes Meres, car ie ne croy 
pas que les parens ayent des affections fi douces, fi 
fortes & fi conftantes pour leurs enfas, que ces bonnes 
filles en ont pour leurs malades, ie les ay veu fouuent 
fi accablees qu'elles n'en pouuoient plus, cependant 
ie ne les ay iamais ouy plaindre, ny du trop grand 
nombre de leurs malades, ny de leur infedtion, ny de 
la peine qu'ils leur donnoient, elles ont vn coeur fi 
amoureux & fi tendre pour fes pauures gens, que fi 
par fois on leur faifoit quelque petit prefent, on pou- 
uoit bien [i6o] s'alTeurer qu'elles n'en goutteroit pas 
quelque befoin qu'elles en euffent, tout eftoit dedie 
& confacre pour leurs malades, il a fallu moderer 
cette charite, & leur faire vn commandement de man- 
ger du moins vne partie des petits dons qu'on leur 
feroit, lors principalement qu'elles eftoient infirmes, 
ie ne m'eftonne pas fi les Sauuages qui recognoilTent 
fort bien ce grand amour, les ayment, les dierifCent 
& les honorent. 

Le P. Buteux refcriuoit il y a quelques iours au 
R. P. Superieur, qu'vne femme qui auoit demeur6 
long-temps a I'hofpital, faifoit beaucoup de fruidt 
parmy les Sauuages de fa nation, les inflruifans auec 
vne grande ferueur, cela eft ordinaire a tons ceux 
qui ont paff^ I'liiuer dans cette faindte maifon, ils 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 25 

Mothers; for I do not know that parents have so 
sweet, so strong-, and so constant an affection for 
their children as these good women have for their 
patients. I have often seen them so overwhelmed 
that they were utterly exhausted ; yet I have never 
heard them complain, either of the too great num- 
ber of their patients, or of the infection, or of the 
trouble they gave them. They have hearts so lov- 
ing and so tender towards these poor people that, if 
occasionally some little present were given them, 
one could be very [160] certain that they would not 
taste it, however greatly they might need it, every- 
thing being dedicated and consecrated to their sick. 
This charity had to be moderated, and an order was 
given them to eat at least a part of the little gifts 
that were made to them, especially when they were 
not strong. I am not surprised if the Savages, who 
recognize very clearly this great charity, love, cher- 
ish, and honor them. 

Father Buteux wrote, some days ago, to the Rev- 
erend Father Superior that a woman who had re- 
mained a long time at the hospital did a great deal 
of good among the Savages of her nation, instruct- 
ing them with much fervor. This is the common 
practice of those who have passed the winter in this 
holy house; they afterwards preach to their com- 
patriots with great zeal. 

In conclusion, I do not know which of the two 
feels more satisfaction, — Madame the Duchess d'Ai- 
guillon in having founded and built a house to our 
Lord in new France, or her nuns in finding them- 
selves in this new world. 

[161] Here are the words of a letter from Mother de 
St. Ignace, Superior i^ " My satisfaction is so great 


26 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.19 

prefchent par apres leur compatriotes auec vn grand 
zele. 

Pour conclufion ie ne f9ay qui des deux a plus de 
contentement, ou Madame la Ducheffe d'Aiguillon 
d'auoir fonde & bafty vne maifon k noftre Seigneur 
en la nouuelle France, ou fes filles de fe voir en ce 
nouueau monde. 

[i6i] Voicy les paroles d'vne lettre de la Mere de 
S. Ignace Superieure, mon contentement eft li grand 
de me voir en Canada, que ie n'ay peu m'empefcher 
defcrire h. V. R. que ie fay plus d'eftat de m'y voir 
que d'eftre Emperiere de tout Ie monde. 

Pour Madame la Ducheffe d'Aiguillon, fa ioye fe 
produit & fe fait paroiftre par des paroles & par des 
effedts tout d'amour, i'ay veu icy plufieurs lettres 
efcrites de fa main dont elle a honore diuerfes per- 
fonnes, il n'y en a pas vne qui ne m'ait toucli6 Ie coeur, 
car tons les articles portent coup, il me femble qu'ils 
vont tons donner dans Ie coeur de Dieu, n'enuifageans 
que fon pur amour dans cette grande entreprife, pour 
laquelle Dieu la choilie, & qu'elle va accompliffant 
de iour ^ autre auec fuccez & liberality, par la grace 
du mefme Dieu infpirateur des coeurs. 

Ie penfois finir ce chapitre, mais il faut que ie dife 
deux mots d'vne ieune femme Hiroquoife, qui fut 
enuoy6e en France il y a quelques annees. 

Madame la Ducheffe d'Aiguillon [162] I'ayant fait 
receuoir au nombre des enfans de Dieu par Ie fainc5t 
baptefme, la fit loger au grand Conuent des Meres 
Carmelites au fauxbourg S. laques de Paris, ces 
bonnes Meres me voulant faire goufter des fruidts 
qu'vn fauuageon de ces contr^es tranfplante en 
I'Eglife de Dieu auoit porte en voftre France, m'ot 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 27 

at seeing myself in Canada, that I cannot refrain 
from writing to Your Reverence that I think more of 
being here than of being Empress of the whole 
world." 

As for Madame the Duchess d'Aiguillon, her joy 
appears and shows itself in very loving words and 
deeds. I have seen here, written by her own hand, 
several letters with which she has honored various 
persons. There is not one of them which has not 
touched my heart, for every sentence strikes home ; 
it seems to me that they will all reach the heart of 
God, considering only her pure love in this great 
enterprise, for which God chooses her, and which she 
continues to carry on from day to day, with success 
and liberality, by the grace of the same God, the 
inspirer of hearts. 

I thought I had finished this chapter; but I must 
say a few words about a young Hiroquois woman 
who was sent to France some years ago.^ 

Madame the Duchess d'Aiguillon [162] having 
had her received into the number of the children of 
God through holy baptism, had her lodged in the 
great Convent of the Carmelite Mothers, in the faux- 
bourg St. Jacques, at Paris. Those good Mothers, 
wishing to have me taste some of the fruits that a 
wild plant of these countries, transplanted into the 
Church of God, had borne in your France, have sent 
me a paper, unsigned, which speaks of her virtues 
and her death. Mother Magdelaine de Jesus, very 
zealous for the conversion of these peoples, has also 
written me fully about her. I will give two or three 
extracts from these letters, to show that there is 
no heart so barbarous that it cannot receive Jesus 
Christ. 


28 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.19 

entioy6 vn papier, fans nom, qui parle de fes vertus 
& de fa mort, la Mere Magdelaine de lefus, tres- 
zel^e pour la conuerfion de ces peuples, m'en a aufli 
amplemet refcrit, ie tireray deux ou trois mots de 
ces lettres, pour faire voir qu'il n'y a coeur fl barbare 
qui ne foit capable de lefus-Chrifl, 

I'ay remarque, dit la Mere Magdelaine de lefus; 
qu'Anne Therefe, c'eftoit le nom de cette bonne 
Hiroquoife, auoit vn defir tout k fait extraordinaire 
d'eflre inftrui(5te, elle ne fe laffoit iamais d'entendre 
parler de Dieu, ny de le prier les Feftes & les Di- 
manches, elle demandoit par fois cong6 de s'aller 
pourmener, mais fa recreation efloit d'aller entendre 
Vefpres en vne Eglife, & Compile en vn autre, elle 
auoit vne puret^ & vne tendreffe [163] de confcience 
admirable, elle aymoit extremement la frequentation 
des Sacremens, quand elle voyoit parer 1' Eglife elle 
en demandoit la raifon, & on n'auoit point de paix 
auec elle qu'on ne luy eut explique le myfbere de la 
fefte qu'on deuoit celebrer, I'efcoutant auec vne 
grande auidit^, fon coeur fgauoit bie s'entretenir auec 
Dieu. Ayant remarqu6 certain iour qu'vne fille for- 
tant de la Communion, s'occupa incontinent en pri- 
eres vocales recitant fon chappelet, elle luy dit au 
fortir de 1' Eglife, ma foeur quand vous auez commu- 
nis il faut regarder lefus-Chrift dans voftre coeur fans 
parler, il le faut adorer en filence, & luy dire du 
fond de voftre ame, Monfeigneur ie me donne a vous, 
prenes mon coeur, poffedSs voftre pauure creature, & 
quand vous luy aurez parle quelque teps du coeur, 
alors vous pourrez remuer vos levres. 

Elle eftoit d'vn bon naturel, fort charitable & fort 
recognoiffante, eftant vne fois auec la Mere Magde- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 29 

" I noticed," said Mother Magdelaine de Jesus, 
* ' that Anne Therese ' ' — the name of this good Hiro- 
quois woman — ' ' had a most extraordinary desire to 
be instructed. She never wearied of hearing about 
God, nor of praying on Feast days and Sundays. 
She sometimes asked leave to go for a walk, but 
her recreation was to go to hear Vespers in one 
Church, and Compline in another. She had a purity 
and a tenderness [163] of conscience that were admir- 
able. She liked exceedingly to frequent the Sacra- 
ments; when she saw the Church decorated, she 
asked the reason for it, and gave us no peace until 
we explained to her the mystery of the feast that 
was about to be celebrated, to which she listened 
with great eagerness; her heart knew well how to 
commune with God. One day, having noticed that 
a sister who was going away from Communion sud- 
denly began to pray aloud while reciting her rosary, 
she said to her, as they were leaving the Church, 
' My sister, when you have received communion, 
you must look at Jesus Christ in your heart, without 
speaking ; he must be adored in silence, and you must 
say to him, from the depths of your soul, " My Lord, 
I give myself to you ; take my heart, possess your 
poor creature ; ' ' and, when you have spoken to him 
for some time in your heart, then you can move your 
lips.' 

" She had a good disposition, very charitable and 
very grateful. Once when she was with Mother Mag- 
delaine, some one came and told her that a person 
who came to teach her to read was dead. She [164] 
was touched at this, and entreated me and all the 
sisters to commend her soul to our Lord. ' ' 

If some poor person presented himself, she was 


80 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.19 

laine, on luy vint dire qu'vne perfonne qui luy venoit 
monftrer k lire eftoit morte, elle en [164] ftit touch6e, 
& me pria & toutes les foeurs de recommander fon 
ame "k noftre Seigneur. 

Quand il fe prefentoit quelque pauure, elle ne vou- 
loit pas qu'on le fit attendre, elle mefme luy donnoit 
fon difner s'il venoit en ce temps-Ik, fe palTant h. du 
pain feul; la nuit qu'elle mourut elle tefmoigna 
qu'elle auoit de grandes obligations aux Peres lefuites, 
elle en nomma trois ou quatre par leurs noms, elle fe 
tefmoigna auffi fort redeuable k la Mere Magdelaine, 
& k la Mere Prieure de I'auoir receue en leur maifon. 

Quelques perfonnes eflant en noftre tour, elle les 
fit rire par quelques paroles Fran9oifes qu'elle pro- 
nonga mal, cela I'emeut vn peu & la fit fortir brufque- 
ment, pour fuir la confufion, mais vn remords la fai- 
fiffant tout fur I'heure, elle rentra dans la chambre, 
fe mit h. genoux, baifa la terre, & demanda pardon 
de fa promptitude & de fon defaut d'liumilit6. 

Voyant vn homme s'impatienter pour s'eftre bleflfe 
elle s'efcria, efl il polfible qu'vn Chreflien fouffre 
auec impatience, [165] puis qu'on luy promet le Para- 
dis ou il fait fi beau, pour payement de fa patience, 
nous autres difoit elle, nous n'auons pas I'efperance 
ny la promefl^e de ces biens, & cependant nous ne 
nous fafcbon point dans les douleurs horribles qu'on 
nous fait fouffrir, quand nous fommes pris en guerre 
par nos ennemis. 

Elle ne s'impatienta point en fa maladie, quoy 
qu'alTez longue, elle difoit qu'elle eftoit bien ayfe 
de fouffrir, penfant bien fouuent k ce que noftre 
Seigneur lefus-Chrift auoit endur6 pour elle, fi-tofl 
qu'elle fut baptif^e elle voulut ieufner tout le Carefme 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 31 

unwilling that he should be kept waiting ; she her- 
self gave him her dinner if he came at that time, 
contenting herself with bread alone. The night on 
which she died, she testified that she was under great 
obligations to the Jesuit Fathers, mentioning three 
or four of them by their names ; she declared herself 
also greatly indebted to Mother Magdelaine, and to 
the Mother Prioress, for having received her in their 
house. 

" Some people being at our house, she made them 
laugh by incorrectly pronouncing some French words. 
This touched her a little, and caused her to go out 
abruptly, to escape embarrassment; but, being im- 
mediately seized with remorse, .she reentered the 
room, fell upon her knees, kissed the ground, and 
asked for pardon for her hastiness and lack of 
humility. 

" Seeing a man lose his temper because he had 
hurt himself, she exclaimed, 'Is it possible that a 
Christian should feel pain with impatience, [165] 
when he has the promise of Paradise, where it is so 
beautiful, as a reward for his patience? We people,' 
said she, ' have not the hope nor the promise of these 
blessings; and yet we do not become angry in the 
horrible pains that we are made to suffer when we 
are captured in war by our enemies. ' 

" She was not impatient in her sickness, although 
it was rather long. She said that she was very glad 
to suffer, thinking very often of what our Lord Jesus 
Christ had suffered for her. As soon as she was 
baptized, she wished to fast all the following Lent, 
bravely overcoming the difficulty that those of her 
nation have in abstaining from food when they are 
hungry. Having gone to some house at this holy 


32 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.19 

fuiuant, furmontant genereufement la peine qu'ont 
ceux de fa nation de s'abftenir de manger quand ils 
ont appetit. Eftant all6e pendant ce faindt temps en 
quelque maifon, on luy prefenta k manger, pent eftre 
quelques fruidts, iamais elle n'en voulut goufter. 

Elle auoit vne honeftet^ & vne puret6 admirable, 
vn homme de qualite, qu'elle honoroit & qu'elle auoit 
fouuent veu chez Madame la DuchelTe d'Aiguillon, 
[i66] venant des champs s'approcha d'elle pour la 
faluer, elle fe retira bien vifte difant, lefu, c'eft vn 
homme ie ne le puis faluer, iamais elle ne parloit ^ 
aucun feul "k feul, s'il venoit en la maifon quelque 
Religieux ou quelque feculier, elle alloit auffi-toft 
querir vne tourriere pour luy tenir compagnie. 

Comme ie luy parlois, m'efcrit la Mere Magde- 
laine, du deflein que vous auiez de la rappeller en 
la nouuelle France, pour luy faire epoufer quelque 
Sauuage Chreflien, elle me dit qu'elle ne vouloit point 
d'autre ^poux que lefu-Chrift. Luy en parlat vne 
autrefois, elle fe fafcha fi fort, qu'elles s'en alia fur 
I'heure & on ne la put faire reuenir qu'on ne luy eut 
promis que iamais plus on ne luy parleroit de mariage. 

Eftant malade elle demanda pardon k toutes les 
foeurs auec beaucoup de deuotion, elle auoit quelque 
repugnance "k mourir, mais ayant demand^ fi la Vierge 
eftoit morte, comme on luy eut dit que cette Prin- 
cefTe auoit paye cette debte commune k tous les 
hommes, elle tefmoigna [167] qu'elle eftoit fort con- 
tente de mourir, vn peu deuant que de rendre I'ef- 
prit, elle appella vne tourriere & luy dit, fi vous 
f9auiez ma foeur que ie fuis ayfe 1^ dedans, en luy mon- 
ftrant fon coeur, ie fuis fi contente que ie ne vous le 
puis dire, elle pria qu'on recitaft les Litanies de la 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 33 

time, she was offered something to eat, perhaps fruit, 
but she would not taste it. 

" She was possessed of wonderful modesty and 
purity. A man of rank, whom she respected, and 
whom she had often seen at the house of Madame 
the Duchess d'Aiguillon, [166] coming from the coun- 
try, approached to salute her. She drew back very 
quickly, saying, ' Jesus ! it is a man ; I cannot salute 
him ! ' She never spoke to any man alone ; if any 
Monk or layman came into the house, she went 
straightway in quest of an attendant to keep her 
company. 

' ' When I spoke to her, ' ' Mother Magdelaine writes 
me, " of your intention to recall her to new France, 
to have her marry some Christian Savage, she told 
me that she desired no other spouse than Jesus 
Christ. Speaking to her of this at another time, she 
became so vexed that she immediately went away ; 
and we could not have induced her to come back if 
we had not promised that we would never speak to 
her again of marriage. 

" In her sickness, she asked pardon of all the sis- 
ters, with great devoutness. She had some repug- 
nance to death ; but, having asked if the Virgin had 
died, and being told that this Princess had paid the 
debt common to all men, she declared [167] that she 
was well satisfied to die. A little while before ren- 
dering up her soul, she called an attendant, and said 
to her, ' If you knew, my sister, how glad I am in 
here ' — pointing to her heart ; ' I am happier than I 
can tell you.' She entreated that the Litanies of the 
blessed Virgin be recited; when she responded to 
them very attentively, she was told that she would 
make herself worse. But it was necessary to grant 



84 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.19 

faindle Vierge, comme elle y repondoit auec grande 
attention, on luy dit qn'elle fe feroit mal, mais il 
fallut accorder k la deuotion de fon efprit, ce qui 
potitioit vn pen nuire h. la fant6 de fon corps. 

On luy demanda fi elle efloit bien aife de mourir 
Chreftienne, ouy, dit elle, de tout mon coeur, elle 
paroilloit tres ioyeufe & tres-contente. Vne bonne 
fceur luy faifant faire vne adte de contrition, cette 
pauure Neophite luy dit, recommanc^s ma foeur, 
encor, encor, elle le fit iufques k trois fois, fouhait- 
tant qu'on luy parlafl incelTamment de Dieu. Enfin 
cette ame qui a pris naiffance au milieu de la Barba- 
rie, s'en alia voir celuy qu'elle n'a cognu que bien 
tard, mais auec beaucoup d'ardeur & d' amour. Qu'il 
foit beny [i68] k iamais dans les temps & dans 
r eternity. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 35 

to the devotion of her soul what might slightly 
injure the health of her body. 

" She was asked if she was truly glad to die a 
Christian. 'Yes,' said she, 'with all my heart.' 
She appeared very joyful and very contented. While 
a good sister was having her perform an act of con- 
trition, this poor Neophyte said to her, ' Begin again, 
my sister, — again, again.' She did it as many as 
three times, desiring to be continually told of God. 
At last this soul, which had its birth in the midst of 
Barbarism, went to see him whom it knew only very 
late, but with great ardor and love. May he be for- 
ever blessed, [168] in time and in eternity." 


36 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.19 


CHAPITRE XII. 

DU SEMINAIRES DES MERES VRSULINES. 

IE n'ay point veu de Meres fi ialoufes pour leurs 
enfans, que Madame de la Pelletrie & les Vrfu- 
lines le font pour leur petites f eminarifles : 
r amour qui prend fa naiffance en Dieu eft plus gene- 
reux, & plus conftant que les tendreffes de la nature, 
ces bonnes filles femblent n'auoir ny bras ny coeur, 
que pour cultiuer ces ieunes plantes, & les rendre 
dignes du iardin de I'Eglife, pour eftre vn iour tranf- 
plantees dans les facres parterres du Paradis. 

Le deffein de cette bonne dame eftoit de commen- 
cer vn petit feminaire de fix pauures petites orphe- 
lins Sauuages, la difficult^ de iouir de fes biens ne 
luy permettant [169] pas dauantage, fon coeur eft 
bien moins limite que fes forces, au lieu de fix, il en 
eft entre dix-huidt dans cette petite maifon, il eft 
vray qu'elles n'ont pas demeure toutes enfemble ^ 
mefme temps, mais pour I'ordinaire, elles eftoient 
fix ou fept log^es auec Madame de la Pelletrie, trois 
Religieufes, & deux filles Frangoifes, & tout cela dans 
deux petites chambres, oil de nouueau font encor 
entries deux Religieufes, fans compter les petites 
filles Fran9oifes qui vont en ce petit Monaftere pour 
eftre inftruidles, fans compter auffi les filles, & les 
femmes Sauuages, qui entrent k toutes heures en la 
chambre, oh on enf eigne leurs petites compatriotes, 
& qui aflez fouuent y pafTent la nuit, eftant furprifes 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 


CHAPTER XII. 

OF THE SEMINARY OF THE URSULINE MOTHERS. 

1HAVE never seen Mothers so solicitous for their 
children as are Madame de la Pelletrie and the 
Ursulines for their little seminarists. The love 
that finds its source in God is more generous and 
more constant than the tenderness of nature. These 
good sisters seem to have neither arms nor hearts 
except to cultivate these young plants, and to render 
them worthy of the garden of the Church, that they 
may be some day transplanted into the holy gardens 
of Paradise. 

This good lady's intention was to begin a small 
seminary of six poor little orphan Savages, the diffi- 
culty of getting possession of her property not per- 
mitting her [169] to do more. Her heart is much 
less limited than her means. Instead of six, eight- 
een have entered this little house. It is true that 
they have not dwelt there all at the same time ; but 
usually there were six or seven lodged with Madame 
de la Pelletrie, — three Nuns, and two French girls; 
and all these in two little rooms, where recently, two 
more Nuns have entered,^ — without counting the 
little French girls who go to this small Monastery to 
be instructed ; without counting, also, the Savage girls 
and women who at all hours enter the room where 
their little compatriots are being taught, and who 
often pass the night there, when overtaken by bad 
weather, or detained on some other account. I leave 


38 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 19 

de manuals temps, on retenues pour quelque autre 
fujet, ie vous laille h. penfer combien grandes font 
les incommodit6s, qui prouiennent d'vn lieu li re- 
treily : mais apres tout cela ie puis dire, que la ioye 
qu'elles regoiuent de voir Ie fruidt de leurs petits tra- 
uaux, effuye tellement leurs ennuis, & donne vn tel 
plailir k leur coeur, que fl leurs corps font logez ^ 
I'eftroit, [170] leur efprit ne reffent rien de cette pri- 
fon Efcoutons les parler de leur threfor, c'eft k dire 
de leurs enfans, li ie voulois coucher icy toutes les 
lettres de ioye qu'elles m'ont efcrites fur ce fujet, ie 
ferois quafi vn liure au lieu d'vn chapitre, ceux qui 
paffent icy de voflre France, font quafi tous trompez 
en vn point, ils ont des penf6es extremement baffes 
de nos Sauuages, ils les croyent maffifs & pefans, & 
fi-toft qu'ils les ont pratiques, ils confeffent que la 
feule education, & non I'efprit manque k ces peuples. 

La Mere Cecile de la Croix, & la Mere Marie de 
faindt lofeph, m'ont quelquefois entretenu des bonnes 
qualites de leurs enfans: voicy comme celle-cy en 
parle, il n'y a rien de fi docile que ces enfans, on les 
plie comme on veut, elles n'ont aucune replique k 
ce qu'on defire d'elles: s'il faut prier Dieu, reciter 
leur catechifme, ou faire quelque petit trauail ou quel- 
que ouurage, elles font auffi-toft prefles fans mur- 
mure & fans excufes. 

Elles ont vne particuliere inclination a prier Dieu, 
outre les heures ordonn^es [171] pour Ie faire, & 
pour les inftruire, elles nous preffent cent fois Ie iour 
de les faire prier, & de leur enfeigner comme il faut 
faire, ne fe lallant iamais de cette action vous les 
verriez ioindre leurs petites mains, & donner leur 
cceur k noftre Seigneur. Tous les iours elles affiftent 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 39 

you to imagine how great must be the discomforts 
arising from so narrow quarters. But, notwithstand- 
ing all this, I can say that the joy they experience 
in seeing the fruit of their little labors so mitigates 
their trials and gives their hearts so much pleasure, 
that even if their bodies are lodged in narrow space, 
[170] their minds are not at all sensible of this prison. 
Let us hear them speak of their treasure, — that is to 
say, of their children. If I were to copy here all the 
joyful letters they have written me upon this subject, 
I would almost make a book instead of a chapter. 
Those who cross over here from your France are 
almost all mistaken on one point, — they have a very 
low opinion of our Savages, thinking them dull and 
slow-witted; but, as soon as they have associated 
with them, they confess that only education, and not 
intelligence, is lacking in these peoples. 

Mother Cecile de la Croix and Mother Marie de 
saint Joseph have sometimes entertained me with the 
good qualities of their children. See how the latter 
speaks of them : ' ' There is nothing so docile as these 
children. One can bend them as he will ; they have 
no reply to anything one may desire from them. If 
they are to pray to God, recite their catechism, or 
perform some little piece of work or task, they are 
ready at once, without murmurs and without excuses. 

" They have a special inclination to pray to God 
outside the hours specified [171] for doing so and for 
their instruction. They urge us a hundred times a 
day to have them pray, and to teach them how it 
should be done, never wearying of this act. You will 
see them clasping their little hands, and giving their 
hearts to our Lord. They attend holy Mass every 
day, and are so attentive — not playing and talking, 


40 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.19 


^ la faindle MelTe auec telle attention que nous en 
fommes rauies, ne badinant, ny ne parlant point ^ la 
fagon des petits enfans de France, elles fe compofent 
& fe reglent fur nos adtions, excepte que pour les 
reuerences elles imitent Madame de la Pelletrie: 
elles ont fl peur de ne point affifter ^ ce diuin facri- 
fice, qu'vn iour Madame les voulant mener k I'habita- 
tion de S. lofeph, ou font leurs parens, elles deman- 
derent fi on ne leur feroit pas entendre la Meffe 
deuant que de partir. 

Elles ne manquent pas de reciter tons les iours 
leur chappelet, fi elles appergoiuent quelque Reli- 
gieufe fe retirer a part pour le reciter, elles fe pre- 
fentent pour le dire auec elle : vne Religieufe leur 
ayant certain iour accorde cette faueur, leur dit que 
c'eftoit vne bonne deuotion [172] de proferer ces 
paroles apres chaque Aue Maria, /ancle lofeph or a pro 
nobis, elles promirent qu'elles les diroient, & qu'elles 
prieroient ce grand Sainc5t, en effedt fi-toft qu'elles 
fortoient de la Meffe, elles venoient rendre compte "k 
cette bonne Mere de leur petite deuotion, elles fe 
gliffent par fois dans noftre choeur, & Ik fe pla9ant 
de part & d'autre, tenant chacune vn liure en la main, 
elles fe comportent comme nous faifons pendant 
noftre office, elles chantent V Aue Maris Jlclla & le 
Gloria Patri, faifant les mefmes inclinations qu'elles 
nous voyet faire ; & comme elles ne f gauent que cet 
Hymne par coeur, elles le chatent vingt, & trente 
fois fans le laffer, s'imaginans qu'elles font vne priere 
bien agreable k Dieu, cette innocence eft rauiffante. 

Le Vendredy Saindl, comme elles virent que les 
Religieufes quittoient leur chauffure, & faifoient de 
grandes proflernations pour adorer la faindte Croix, 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 41 

like the little children in France — that we are 
delighted. They compose their faces, and regulate 
their actions by ours, except that in their reverences 
they imitate Madame de la Pelletrie. They are so 
afraid of not being present at this divine sacrifice, 
that one day, when Madame wished to take them to 
the settlement of St. Joseph, where their relatives 
are, they asked if they would not be allowed to hear 
Mass before departing. 

" They do not fail to recite their rosary every day. 
If they notice some Nun going aside to say hers, 
they present themselves to say it with her. A Nun, 
having granted them this favor one day, told them 
that it was a suitable act of devotion [172] to offer 
these words after each Ave Maria: " Sancte Joseph, 
or a pro nobis y They promised that they would say 
them, and that they would pray to this great Saint. 
Indeed, as soon as they left the Mass they came and 
rendered this good Mother an account of their little 
devotion. They sometimes slip into our choir, and, 
placing themselves on opposite sides, each holding a 
book in her hand, they act as we do during our serv- 
ice. They sing the Ave Maris Stella and the Gloria 
Patri, making the same inclinations that they see us 
make; and as this is the only Hymn they know by 
heart, they sing it twenty and thirty times without 
tiring of it, thinking that they are offering a prayer 
very acceptable to God. This innocence is enchant- 
ing. 

" On Good Friday, when they saw that the Nuns 
took off their shoes and prostrated themselves low to 
adore the holy Cross, these poor children laid aside 
their shoes, and observed the same ceremonies which 
they had noticed in their Mothers. 


42 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.19 

ces pauures enfans poferent leurs fouliers, & garderent 
les mefmes ceremonies qu'elles auoient remarquees 
en lenrs Meres. 

[173] Affes fouuent on les trouue feules priat Dieu, 
& recitant leur chappelet, elles prennent vn grad 
plaifir de ramaffer des fleurs par les bois; & d'en 
faire de petites couronnes, qu'elles vont pre f enter k 
rimage de la faincte Vierge, qui eft dans noftre 
choeur, elles I'entourent de bouquets, & luy font 
toutes les careffes poffibles, ces petites deuotions pro- 
uiennent d'elles mefmes, ou pluftoft de I'efprit de 
Dieu: car perfonne ne les incite k les embraffer: 
fuffit qu'elle voie vne adtion loiiable pour I'imiter 
felon leur petit pouuoir. 

Elles ayment grandement les images, elles en font 
de petits oratoires, oil elles couchent, elles fe font 
expliquer ce qu'elles reprefentent, ne fe lalfant iamais 
d'ouir parler des myfteres de noftre creance. 

Leur plus grande recreation c'eft de dancer ^ la 
mode de leur pays, elles ne le font pas neantmoins 
fans conge; I'eftant venu demander vn iour de Ven- 
dredy, on leur dit que lefus eftoit mort vn Vendredy, 
& que c' eftoit vn iour de triftelfe, il n'en fallut pas 
dauantage pour les arrefter, [174] nous ne dancerons 
plus ce iour Ik, firent elles, nous ferons triftes, puif- 
que lefus eft mort k tel iour. 

Quant on eut donn^ efperance k trois des plus 
grandes, qu'elles pourroient comunier k Pafques, ie 
ne vy iamais plus de ioye, dit la Mere qui les inftruic5t, 
elles prenoient vn plaifir indicible quad on les inftrui- 
foit fur cet adorable myftere, fe rendant extraordi- 
nairement attentiues. II femble qu'elles conceuoient 
cette amoureufe verite par delTus leur age : car elles 


1640] RELA TJON OF 1640 43 

[173] " They are frequently found alone, praying 
to God and reciting their beads. They take great 
pleasure in gathering flowers in the woods, and in 
making little garlands of these, which they go and 
present to the image of the blessed Virgin which is 
in our choir. They surround her with bouquets and 
offer her all possible endearments. These little de- 
votions proceed from themselves, or rather from the 
spirit of God, for no one urges them to undertake 
these ; it is enough for them to see a praiseworthy 
action, to imitate it according to their childish ability. 

" They are very fond of the images, making little 
oratories for them, where they sleep. They have the 
meaning of these explained to them, and never weary 
of hearing about the mysteries of our belief. 

"Their favorite recreation is to dance, after the 
fashion of their country ; they do not do this, how- 
ever, without permission. Having come one Friday 
to ask this, they were told that Jesus had died on 
Friday, and that it was a day of sadness. Nothing 
more was needed to stop them. [174] ' We will dance 
no more on that day, ' they said ; * we will be sad, 
since Jesus died on such a day.' 

" When three of the larger girls had been encour- 
aged to hope that they could receive communion at 
Easter, I never saw more joy," says the Mother who 
instructs them. " They take unspeakable pleasure 
in receiving instruction upon this adorable mystery, 
becoming unusually attentive. It seems that they 
have a conception of this lovable truth beyond their 
years, for they are no more than twelve years old. 
They decided to fast upon the eve of their com- 
munion, a custom they have observed ever since, 
whenever they approach the holy table." 


44 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.19 

n'ont pas plus de douze ans, elles voulurent ieufner 
la veille de leur communion, couflume qu' elles ont 
garde depuis autant de fois, qu' elles fe font appro- 
cli6es de la faindte table. 

Comme le P. Pijard inftruifoit ces trois femina- 
riftes, vne des plus petites agee d'enuiron fix ans, fe 
prefenta demandant la faindte communion auec les 
autres, le Pere luy dit qu'elle eftoit trop petite, he 
mon Pere, difoit elle, ne me rebutes pas pour eflre 
petite, ie deuiendray grande auffi-bien que mes com- 
pagnes, on la laiffa efcouter, elle retint fi bien tout 
ce [175] qu'on expliquoit de cet adorable myftere, & 
en rendoit par apres fi bon compte, qu'elle rauilToit 
ceux qui Ten interrogeoient, on ne luy accorda pas 
neantmoins cette viande des forts. Sa mere I'eftant 
venue voir pendant ces iours-1^, cette enfant fe mit 
k I'inftruire des myfleres de noflre foy, qu'elle expli- 
quoit par des images, elle la fit prier Dieu, & puis 
luy monflroit les lettres alphabetiques dans vn liure, 
pour luy tefmoigner le defir qu'elle auoit de f5auoir 
lire: cette bonne femme eftoit fi rauie, qu'elle faifoit 
1 'enfant auec fon enfant, proferant les lettres apres 
fa petite fille, comme fi elle eut repet^ fa legon. A 
la mienne volont€ difoit elle aux Religieufes, que 
i'euffe cognu Dieu auffi-toft que vous, ie fuis extreme- 
ment contante de voir ma fille auec vous autres, 
quand nous la retirerons elle nous inftruira fon Pere, 
& moy, nous auons tons deux vn grand defir d'eftre 
baptif6s, elle nous enfeignera k prier Dieu. 

Mais voyons ce que m'efcriuit la mere Marie de 
r Incarnation touchant la [176] premiere communion; 
de ces ieunes enfans. Fay efke grandemet confol^e 
ayat apris que le R. P. Superieur auoit inclination 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 45 

When Father Pijard was instructing these three 
seminarists, one of the smallest children, about six 
years old, presented herself and asked for the holy- 
communion with the others. The Father told her 
that she was too young. "Ah, my Father," said 
she, " do not refuse me because I am little; I shall 
become large, as well as my companions." She was 
allowed to listen, and remembered so well all [175] 
that was explained of this adorable mystery, and 
afterward gave so good an account of it, that she 
delighted those who questioned her. However, she 
was not granted this food for the strong. Her 
mother coming to see her during those days, this 
child began to instruct her upon the mysteries of the 
faith, which she explained by images. She had her 
pray to God, and then showed her the letters of the 
alphabet in a book, to prove to her the desire she had 
to learn to read. This good woman was so pleased 
that she acted the child with her child, saying the 
letters after her little girl as if she were reciting her 
lesson. " My daughter wishes," said she to the 
Nuns, " that I should know God as soon as I know 
you. I am very glad to see her with you ; when we 
go away, she will instruct us, her Father and me. 
We both have a great desire to be baptized ; she will 
teach us to pray to God." 

But let us see what mother Marie de 1' Incarnation 
wrote me, concerning the [176] first communion 
of these children. " I was greatly consoled when I 
learned that the Reverend Father Superior was in- 
clined to have three of our seminarists make their 
first communion, if they were considered fitted for 
it. Father Claude Pijard instructed them with great 
care ; he is much comforted at seeing them so well 


46 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.19 

que trois de nos feminariftes fiflent leur premiere 
communion; li elles en eftoient iug6es capables, le 
P. Claude Pijard les inftruit auec vn grand foin, il 
efl tout confoM de les voir en vne 11 bonne difpofi- 
tion, il eft vray mon bon Pere, qu'elle font paroiftre 
tant de defir de poffeder vn fi grand bien, que vous 
diri^s qu'elle vont entrer au ciel, tant elles ont de 
ioye fur leur vifage: Agnes faifoit hier quelque 
traidt d'enfant, on luy dit qu'elle fafchoit Dieu, elle 
fe prit "k pleurer luy en ayant demand^ la raifon, 
elle r6pondit, on ne me fera pas communier ^ caufe 
que i'ay facli6 Dieu; on ne la peut appaifer qu'on ne 
I'euft alTeuree, que cela ne I'empefclieroit pas de 
communier, elles font fi attentiues k ce qu'on leur 
enfeigne qu'outre ce que le Pere les inftruit, fi 
ie leur voulois faire repeter ce qu'on leur dit, & 
ce qui efl couche au catechifme depuis le matin iuf- 
ques au foir, elles H afCuiettiroient volontiers; [177] 
i'en fuis rauie d'eftonnement ie n'ay point veu des 
filles en France ardentes "k fe faire inftruire ny k 
prier Dieu, comme le font nos feminariftes, ie croy 
que les benedidtion du ciel font plainement fur ces 
ames innocentes ; car elles le font vrayement. Voicy 
ce que Madame de la Peltrie m'efcriuit fur le mefme 
fujet. 

II ne m'eft pas polHble de laiffer palTer cette occaf- 
lion, fans vous racompter la ioye, que nos enfans 
font paroiftre de ce qu'on leur a accorde la faindle 
communion pour le leudy fainct: vous auriez vne 
confolation bien fenfible, li vous voy^s auec quelle 
attention elles efcoutent les inftructions, que le Pere 
Pijard leur fait tous les iours vne fois, & noftre Mere 
deux ou trois fois, pour les bien difpofer k receuoir 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 47 

inclined. Verily, my good Father, they manifest so 
much desire to possess so great a blessing that you 
would say they are about to enter heaven, so much 
joy appears on their faces. Agnes committed some 
childish fault yesterday ; she was told that she was 
offending God. She began to cry, and, when asked 
the reason, she replied, ' They will not let me re- 
ceive communion, because I have offended God.' 
She could not have been comforted, had we not 
assured her that that should not keep her from com- 
munion. They are so attentive to what is taught 
them that, besides the instruction the Father gives 
them, if I wivshed to have them repeat what has been 
told them, and what is contained in the catechism, 
from morning until night, they would willingly submit 
to this. [177] I am carried away with astonishment 
at them ; I have never seen girls in France so eager to 
be instructed, or to pray to God, as are our semina- 
rists. I believe that the blessings of heaven are fully 
bestowed upon these innocent souls, for such they 
certainly are." See what Madame de la Peltrie 
wrote me upon the same subject. 

** I cannot let this opportunity pass, without de- 
scribing to you the joy our children showed at being 
granted the holy communion on holy Thursday. 
You would experience a touching consolation if you 
could see with what attention they listen to the in- 
structions that Father Pijard gives them once every 
day, and our Mother two or three times, to prepare 
them well for the reception of such a guest. These 
are incredible fervors. When they are asked why 
they have so great a desire to receive communion, 
they reply that Jesus will come to kiss them in heart, 
and that he will make their souls beautiful. One 


48" LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUJTES [Vol.19 

vn tel hofte, ce font des ferueurs qui ne font pas 
croyables, quand on leur demande, pourquoy elles 
ont vn fi grand defir de communier, elles refpondent, 
que lefus les viendra baifer au coeur, & qu'il embel- 
lira leurs ames, fouuent on appergoit le vifage de 
ma filliole Marie Negabamat, dans vn ^panouillement 
de ioye tout extraordinaire, [178] fi vous luy en de- 
mand's le fubiet c'eft dit elle, que ie communieray 
bien-toft. Ie vous confefle mon R. P. que i'ay le 
coeur tout rauy de les voir dans de fi belles difpofi- 
tions, de forte que quand il plaira ^ la diuine proui- 
dence de me retirer de ce monde, ie fuis fatisfaidle, 
puifque fa diuine mifericorde commence ^ reluire 
fur nos petites feminarifles, & qu'il femble agreer 
nos petits trauaux. 

Le Pere Claude Pijard qui auoit le foin d'inftruire 
ces enfans pendant cet hiuer dernier, m'a confeffe, 
que les larmes luy tomboient des yeux, voyant la 
modeftie de ces ieunes enfans en leur premiere com- 
munion, 

Reuenons aux remarques que la Mere Marie de S. 
lofeph ma mifes en main; elles font dit elle fort 
recognoilTantes de I'amour qu'on leur porte, & du 
bien qu'on leur procure. Voyans certain iour, que 
nous anions de la peine d'apprendre leur langue 6 
que volontiers nous vous donnerions nos langues 
difoient elles. Si Madame de la Peltrie les mene en 
quelque endroit elles la fuiuent auec plus d'amour, 
que les enfans ne fuiuent [179] leur vraye mere. 
I'ay admire ce que ie vay dire, quand cette honefte 
Dame les amene "k I'habitation de faindl lofeph ces 
enfans s'en vont voir leurs parens, qui de9a qui delk, 
Madame eft elle prefte de partir, vous les voy6s 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 49 

often perceives the face of my goddaughter, Marie 
Negabamat, wonderfully lighted up with joy; [178] 
if you ask her the reason for this, ' It is because I 
shall soon receive communion,' she answers. I con- 
fess to you, my Reverend Father, that my heart is 
full of delight at seeing them so well disposed, — so 
much so, that when it shall please divine providence 
to take me away from this world, I shall be satisfied, 
since his divine mercy begins to shine upon our little 
seminarists, and seems to be pleased with our insig- 
nificant labors." 

Father Claude Pijard, who had charge of the 
instruction of these children during this last winter, 
has confessed to me that tears fell from his eyes 
when he saw the modesty of these children at their 
first communion. 

Let us come back to the observations that Mother 
Marie de St. Joseph has placed in my hands. ' ' They 
are," says she, " very grateful for the love we bear 
them, and for the blessings we procure for them. 
Seeing one day that we had difficulty in learning 
their language, *0h, how willingly we would give you 
our tongues,' they said. If Madame de la Peltrie 
takes them to any place, they follow her more lovingly 
than children follow [179] their real mother. I have 
wondered at what I am about to tell. When this 
worthy Lady takes them to the settlement of saint 
Joseph, these children go to see their relatives, some 
here and some there. Let Madame be ready to 
depart, — you see them leave their relatives, and 
take their places at her side, embracing her with 
more affection than they do their own parents. 

Three new girls entering the seminary some time 
ago, the older girls brought various articles — one 


50 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 19 


quitter leurs parens pour fe ranger aupres d'elle, 
Vembraffant auec plus d' affection que leurs propres 
parens. 

II y a quelque temps que trois filles entrant de 
nouueau au feminaire, les plus anciennes s'en allerent 
querir, qui I'vne de fes robes, qui vn bonnet pour 
reueftir leurs nouuelles compagnes, en attendant 
qu'on leur eut fait des habits. 

Elles font fi honneftes, que fi quelqu'vne a la gorge 
tant foit peu defcouuerte, les autres luy difent qu'elle 
chaff era f on bon Ange : cela eft maintenant fi receu 
parmy elles, que pour auertir vne fille qu'elle fe 
tienne dans la bien-feance, elles luy difent prenez 
garde que voltre bon Ange ne vous quitte, auffl-toft 
celle k qui on tient ce langage iette la veue fur foy, 
pour voir s'il n'y a rien de mefeant. [i8o] Magde- 
laine Amiskoveian agee d'enuiron dix-fept k dix- 
huidt ans, eft fingulie[re]ment pudique, iamais on 
ne luy a veu rien faire qui foit tant foit peu blaf- 
mable en ce point: c'eft elle qui recommande aux 
autres I'honeflete, les corrigeant quand elles font 
quelque adtion d'enfance; mais auec tant d'adreffe 
que pas vne ne s'en fafche. Agnes ayant prononc^ 
quelque parolle mefeante par megarde, s'en voulut 
confeffer tout fur I'heure, & le fit a la venue du Pere. 

Au refte ces enfans ont le corps bien fait, elles font 
tres-capables de ciuilite. Elles font grandement 
adroites ^ faire tous les petits ouurages, & les autres 
petites fondtions du menage, qu'on leur enf eigne. 
Voyons encor vne lettre ou deux fur le mefme fub- 
je(5t. 

Voicy comma la Mere Superieure m'en efcrit, il 
me feroit impoflible de vous dire la confolation qu'a 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 51 

bringing one of her dresses, another a hat — for their 
new companions to wear, until clothes could be made 
for them. 

' ' They are so modest that, if one of them has her 
throat even a little uncovered, the others tell her 
that she will drive away her good Angel. This is 
now so accepted among them that, to warn a girl to 
keep within the bounds of decorum, they say to 
her, ' Be careful that your good Angel does not 
leave you ; ' and the girl to whom this remark is 
made looks herself over, to see that there is nothing 
unseemly. [180] Magdelaine Amiskoueian, about 
seventeen or eighteen years old, is singularly mod- 
est. She has never been seen to do anything in the 
least culpable, in this respect. It is she who recom- 
mends modesty to the others, correcting them when 
they do something childish, but with so much tact 
that no one gets angry with her. Agnes, having 
used some improper word through inadvertence, 
wished to confess it immediately, and did so at the 
coming of the Father. 

" I will add that these children are very well 
formed, are very ready in politeness, and are won- 
derfully clever in performing all their little tasks 
and the small household duties that we teach them." 
Let us see another letter or two upon the same 
subject. 

The Mother Superior thus writes me about them : 
' ' It would be impossible for me to tell you the con- 
solation my mind has experienced in having had the 
good fortune to see, this week, so many souls who 
have received holy Baptism; and in knowing that 
our Lord has done us this favor, that they have been 
[181] instructed in our little Chapel. To-day our joy 


52 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.19 

receu mon efprit, d'auoir eu le bon-heur de voir cette 
fepmaine tant d'ames, qui ont receu le faindt Bap- 
tefme, & que noftre Seigneur nous ait fait ce bien 
qu'elles ayent efte [i8i] inftruidtes en noftre petite 
Chappelle. Auiourd'huy noftre ioye a recommance, 
lors que nous auons veu chez nous les filles & les 
femmes Chreftiennes, qui doiuent partir pour fuiure 
leurs parens k la chaffe, nous les auons traictees trois 
fois cette fepmaine, mais de bon coeur, mon R. P. il 
femble que ces bonnes gens portent le Paradis auec 
eux, auffi font ce des ames fraichement lauees dans 
le fang de I'agneau: mais que vous diray-je de nos 
feminariftes, Magdelaine Amifkoveian, eft en fes 
moeurs comme fi elle auoit efte efleu6e parmy nous, 
il ne fe peut voir vne humeur plus douce & plus flex- 
ible: elle fait tenir toutes fes compagnes en leur 
deuoir, elle goufte grandement bien les chofes de 
Dieu. Marie Negabamat: deuient tons les iours 
plus accomplie, cette fille eft tellement craintiue des 
iugemens de Dieu, que I'vn de ces iours comme i'in- 
ftruifois les deux qui ne font pas encor baptifees, 
elle auoit les larmes aux yeux elle entend fort bien 
les myfteres de noftre foy, le plus grand plaifir qu'on 
luy puiffe faire, [182] c'eft de luy expliquer ces veri- 
ties par des images, elle a tant de deuotion enuers 
la fain(5te Vierge, qu'elle treffaillit de ioye k la veue 
de fon pourtraidt, elle I'appelle fa mere, la baife, & 
la cherit vniquement, elle ne peut fouffrir aucune 
indecence en fes compagnes, quand on la fait prier 
Dieu en fa langue auec fes compagnes, elle s'en va 
encor auec les petites Frangoifes pour le prier. On 
ne prendroit pas la petite Magdelaine pour vne Sau- 
uage, il ne fe peut voir vn enfant plus obeiffant, ny 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 53 

began anew when we saw at our house the Christian 
girls and women who must go away to follow their 
relatives to the hunt. We have entertained them 
three times this week, but with willing hearts. My 
Reverend Father, it seems as if these good people 
carry Paradise with them; but then, they are souls 
freshly washed in the blood of the lamb. But what 
shall I say to you about our seminarists? Magde- 
laine Amiskoueian is, in her manners, like one who 
has been brought up among us ; you could not find a 
disposition sweeter or more pliable. She keeps all 
her companions to their duty and greatly enjoys 
whatever pertains to God. Marie Negabamat be- 
comes more accomplished every day. This girl is 
so fearful of the judgments of God, that one day, 
when I was instructing the two who are not yet 
baptized, there were tears in her eyes. She under- 
stands very well the mysteries of our faith; the 
greatest pleasure one can give her [182] is to explain 
these truths to her by images. She feels such devo- 
tion towards the blessed Virgin, that she trembles 
with joy at the sight of her picture. She calls her 
her mother, kisses her, and loves her dearly. She 
cannot tolerate any immodesty in her companions. 
When we have her pray to God in her own language, 
with her companions, she goes also and prays with 
the little French girls. One would not take little 
Magdelaine for a Savage ; a more obedient or more 
affectionate child could not be found, — we can make 
her do whatever we like. She is a little Angel in 
innocence, and so is little Ursule. 

" The last three children whom you gave us have 
left their Savage nature at the door; they have 
brought no part of it with them. It seems as if they 


54 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.19 

plus affedtueux, on luy faidt faire ce qu'on veut, c'eft 
vn petit Ange en innocence, & la petite Vrfnle auffi. 

Les trois dernieres que vous nous aues donne, ont 
laiffe leur humeur Sauuage k la porte, elles n'en ont 
rien apporte chez nous, il femble qu' elles y ayent 
eft6 toufiours efleuees, elle ne font point emeues pour 
voir entrer, & fortir des filles, ou femmes Sauuages, 
elles ne font paroiftre aucun defir de les fuiure, elles 
les faliient k la Frangoife, & les quittent en riant, il 
femble que nous foyons leurs meres naturelles ; elles 
fe viennent ietter [183] entre nos bras, comme k leur 
refuge, quand elles ont quelque petite afflidtion. 
L'vn de ces iours ayant quelque douleur de tefle, on 
leur dit que i'eftois malade, que ie mourrois fi elle 
faifoient du bruit, k ce mot de mourir elles fe mirent 
^ pleurer, & h. garder parfai(5lement le filence, que 
defireri^s vous dauantage, ne femble il pas que les 
threfors du ciel fe verfent fur ce pauure peuple. 

Difons encor deux mots des affedtions de Madame 
de la Pelletrie, & puis nous conclurons ce Chapitre, 
elle me parle en ces termes de fes enfans. 

Ie ne ferois pas fatisfaite fi ie ne vous entretenois 
de la confolation que ie regois iournellement de nos 
petites filles, i'en ay tous les plaifirs qu'vne mere 
pourroit fouhaitter de fes bons enfans, tant en I'obe- 
iffance qu'elles me rendent, qu'en vn amour tendre 
& filial, qu'elles me portent. I'auois commiflion 
durant la retraidte de nos meres de les faire prier 
Dieu, de leur faire reciter leur catechifme, & de leur 
faire dire leur lejon, ie reffentois [184] en faifant 
cette adtion vne ioye dans mon coeur, qui ne fe pent 
dire ie ne manque point de leur faire exercer tous 
les iours les adtes, que vous me donnaftes derniere- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 55 

had always been reared here. They are not moved 
at seeing the Savage girls or women come and 
go, — they show no desire to follow them, they salute 
them in the French way, and leave them smilingly; 
it seems as if we were their natural mothers. They 
come and throw themselves [183] into our arms, — 
their refuge, as it were, — when they have any little 
grievance. One day, when I had a pain in my head, 
they were told that I was sick, that I might die 
if they made a noise. At this word * die,' they 
began to weep, and kept perfect silence. What 
more could you wish? Does it not seem that the 
treasures of heaven are being poured down upon 
this poor people?" 

Let us say a few words more of Madame de la 
Pelletrie's love for them, and then we will conclude 
this Chapter. She speaks to me of her children in 
these terms: 

" I would not be satisfied if I did not tell you of 
the comfort that I daily experience in our little girls. 
I have all the pleasure that a mother can wish from 
her good children, — both in the obedience they render 
me, and in the tender and filial love they bear me. 
It was my duty during the retreat of our mothers to 
hear them pray to God, recite their catechism, and 
say their lessons. I felt, [184] in doing this, a joy 
in my heart which I cannot express. I do not fail 
to have them practice daily all the acts that you last 
gave me, and the seminary prayer that you have 
arranged very conformably to my desires. Having 
made them understand that our mothers were with 
God, I had them observe a week's silence, which 
astonished me, for I succeeded in it much more easily 
than with the French children. Having kept my 


6« LES RELATIONS DES J£SUITES [Vol.19 

ment, & I'oraifon du feminaire que vous auez faire 
tres conforme ^ mes delirs, leiir ayant fait entendre 
que nos meres eftoient auec Dieu ; ie leur fi [sc. fis] 
garder vn lilence de huic5t iours, qui m'eftonna i'en 
venois bien plus ayfement h. bout, que des Fra§oifes. 
L'vn de ces iours ayant gard6 le lidt vne matinee 
pour quelque indifpolition, comme ie vins &. paller 
dans leur chambre I'aprefdinee, ce furent des cheres 
& des carelles, qui ne font pas croyables; elles s'e- 
crioient Ninque, Ninque, ma mere, ma mere, elles fe 
iettoient k mon col, li bien que i'eu de la peine de 
m'en defaire, ie vous confeffe mon cher Pere, que 
cela me rauit le coeur de voir vn fi grand naturel en 
des enfans barbares ; auffi eft-il vray que s'ils eftoient 
mes enfans propres, ie ne les pourrois pas aymer 
dauantage. Vous allant voir dernierement ^ I'habita- 
tion de faincfl lofeph, ie laiffay deux de mes [185] 
enfans k la maifon; elles ne firent que lamenter en 
mon abfence, on en trouua vne toute eploree en vn 
petit coing s'efcriant daiar Ninque daiar, venez ma 
mere, venez, daiar Madame, venez Madame; elle 
m'appelloit tantoft d'vne facon, tantofl d'vne autre, 
penfant que ie luy repondrois pluftoft ; ie ne vous 
parle point des carelles qu'elles me firent a mon re- 
tour, de fi loing qu'elles m'apperceurent k trauers la 
pallifl!ade de pieux qui nous ferment, elles eufl!ent 
volontiers faut6 par deffus, pour me venir k la ren- 
contre. I'ay commence ^ leur monflrer k trauailler 
k r aiguille: mais mon principal exercice c'eft de les 
habiler, de les pigner & de les accouftrer, ie ne fuis 
pas capable de chofe plus grande. Helas mon cher 
Pere ! encor trop heureufe de leur pouuoir rendre ce 
petit feruice. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 57 

bed one morning, on account of some indisposition, 
when I chanced to pass into their room after dinner 
there were incredible welcomes and caresses; they 
cried out, Ninque, Ningue, ' My mother, my mother! ' 
They threw their arms around my neck so that I had 
difificulty in disengaging myself. I confess to you, 
my dear Father, that it delighted my heart to see 
such strong feeling in barbarous children ; and, in- 
deed, if they were my own children I could not love 
them more. When I last went to the settlement of 
saint Joseph to see you, I left two of my [185] chil- 
dren at home. They did nothing but lament in my 
absence. One of them was found bathed in tears in 
a little corner, crying, daiar Ninque daiar, * Come, my 
mother, come;' daiar, Madame, 'Come, Madame.' 
She called me now in one way, now in another, 
thinking I would respond sooner. I will say nothing 
about the caresses they showered upon me at my 
return ; as far away as they could see me through the 
palisade of stakes that encloses us, they would have 
willingly leaped over them to come and meet me. 
I have begun to show them how to use the needle ; 
but my principal occupation is to make their clothes, 
comb their hair, and dress them ; I am not capable 
of anything greater. Ah, my dear Father! I am 
only too happy to be able to render them this little 
service." 

See how far this Lady's affection carries her, who 
increased the number of her children, or little semi- 
narists, when she saw the help that was given her in 
France. Her heart is so good and so great, that if 
she had as much strength as she has good will, she 
would have [186] little lodgings constructed for the 
Savages, to render them stationary ; and her happi- 


58 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.19 

Voila iufques oh. fe porte 1' affection de cette Dame, 
qui a augment^ le nombre de fes enfans, ou de fes 
petites feminariftes, voyant le fecours qu'on luy 
donnoit en France, fon coeur eft li bon & fi grand, 
que li elle auoit autant de force que de bonne volon- 
t6, elle feroit conftruire [i86] des petits logemens aux 
Sauuages pour les arrefler, & fon contentement feroit 
d'aller inftruire les nouuelles Chreftiennes, & leur 
apprendre k drelfer & tenir net leur petit menage, de 
leur faire k manger de fes propres mains, la charity 
k la vertu qu'auoient les mains de ce fabuleux Midas, 
elle change tout ce qu'elle touche en or, ou pluftoft 
en vne beaut6 du Paradis, elle releue les plus petites 
actions, & les fait monter bien-haut. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 59 

ness would consist in going to instruct the new Chris- 
tians, in teaching them how to arrange their little 
homes and keep them clean, and in offering them 
food with her own hands. Charity has the virtue 
possessed by the hands of the fabulous Midas, — it 
changes everything that it touches into gold, or 
rather into a beauty of Paradise; it dignifies the 
smallest actions, and exalts them. 


60 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 19 


CHAPITRE XIII. 

DIUERSES CHOSES QUI N'ONT PEU ESTRE RAPPORT^ES 
AUX CHAPITRES PRECEDENS. 

ENCOR que nous viuions icy dans vn fiecle de 
paix, I'afflidlion ne laifle pas de penetrer par 
fois dedans nos grandes forefts, auffi-bien que 
dans vos grandes villes : le R. P. Vimont noftre Supe- 
rieur, [187] ayant pris auec foy le P. Raimbault, & 
moy, pour monter aux trois Riuieres, la barque qui 
nous portoit fe penfa brifer au port, la nuit fuiuante 
comme nous voguions heureufement, nous ^chou- 
afmes dans des roches, la maree fe retirant, noftre 
barque f e couche fur le coft6 : la maree retournant 
elle fe redreffe; mais elle eftoit fi offenf^e qu'elle 
faifoit eau de tous coftez, nous tirafmes ^ I'autre 
bord du grand fleuue pour la radouber, {1 nous euffions 
tard6 vn quart d'heure k trouuer terre, elle fe fut 
abyfm^e fans refource: nous Tallafmes 6clioiier der- 
riere le platon de faindte Croix, la niar6e montant la 
renuerfa en forte qu'elle ne paroiffoit plus: mais en- 
fin s'eftant releuee contre noftre attente, on la racom- 
moda promptement: le vent & la tempefte s'efleuant 
Ik deflus, la ietterent contre vne roche, & la creuerent 
derechef, 11 bien qu'on la penfoit toute brif^e: on la 
radouba encor vne autrefois, & la mit on en rade: 
mais auec vne grand perte : car tout ce qui put depe- 
rir k I'eau fut gaft6, le fecours que nous portions aux 
[188] pauures Sauuages fut tout perdu ; fi toft que la 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 61 


CHAPTER XIII. 

VARIOUS THINGS WHICH COULD NOT BE REPORTED 
IN THE PRECEDING CHAPTERS. 

ALTHOUGH we live here in an age of peace, 
affliction sometimes penetrates, nevertheless, 
into our great forests as well as into your great 
cities. The Reverend Father Vimont, our Superior, 
[187] having taken Father Raimbault and me with 
him to go up to the three Rivers, the bark which 
carried us was almost wrecked in the harbor. The 
next night, while we were making a prosperous voy- 
age, we ran against some rocks, and, the tide receding, 
our bark lay upon its side; the tide returning, it 
righted itself, but it was so damaged that every part 
of it leaked. We turned to the other bank of this 
great river, in order to repair it ; if we had delayed 
a quarter of an hour in reaching land, it would have 
been irretrievably engulfed. We proceeded to beach 
it behind the plateau of sainte Croix. ^ The tide, 
rising, overturned it in such a way that it was no 
longer visible ; but having finally righted, contrary 
to our expectations, it was promptly repaired again. 
The wind and tempest then arising hurled it against 
a rock and split it again, so that we thought it en- 
tirely shattered. Once more we repaired it, and 
put it in the roadstead, but with great loss, — for 
all that could perish in water was spoiled, and the 
relief we were bearing to the [188] poor Savages 
was all lost. As soon as the bark touched bottom 


62 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUJTES [Vou 19 

barque trouua fond on nous mit k terre, ou nous 
prifmes logis k 1 enf eigne de la Lune du froid, & de 
la pluye Voila le premier voyage que noftre R. P. 
Superieur comenga, & qu'il ne put acheuer pour 
lors ; car il fut contraindt de retourner k Kebec. 

Qui n'auroit qu'vne affliction en vne ann^e, ne 
pourroit quail dire de quel gouft font les fruidts de la 
Croix; nous n'auions que quatres hommes de trauail 
en noftre maifon de noftre Dame des Anges, deux fe 
noyerent le premier iour de May, le P. Claude Pijard 
fe penfa perdre auec eux, voicy comme il en parle en 
vn papier qu'il m'a mis entre les mains. le retour- 
nois de noftre Dame des Anges, o\x i'allois ordinaire- 
ment dire la faindle Melle, les Feftes & les Diman- 
ches, trauerfant la riuiere faindt Charles, fort rapide 
par les grandes criies d'eau au Printemps, le Nordeft 
foufflant auec violence, le canot dans lequel deux de 
nos bommes me palfoient renuerfa, I'vn des bommes 
enfon9a incontinent, & ne [189] parut plus, I'autre 
fut emport6 affez loing par le courant de la mar^e, & 
apres s'eftre debattu quelque temps contre la mort fe 
noya, ie me trouuay bien en peine auffi bien que ces 
deux ieunes bommes : car ie ne fgay no plus nager 
qu'vne pierre, Dieu me conferua le iugement fain & 
entier, i'eu recours S. la mere de mifericorde la fain(5te 
Vierge, ie fit voeu de ieufner trois Samedis h. fon 
bonneur; i'y adiouftay I'interceffion de fon tres-pur 
6poux faindt lofepb, auffi-toft ie me fenty ayd^; i'al- 
lois dans I'eau tout debout oh. i'eftois iufques k la 
tefte bien loing du fond ; enfin ie me fenty douce- 
ment port6 vers le bord, oh. ie commencay k toucher 
la terre des pieds, ie fors le plus vifle qu'il me fut 
poffible, ie remercie la diuine bont6, la faindte Vierge 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 63 

we were put ashore, where we took lodging at the 
sign of the cold and rainy Moon. Such was the 
first voyage that our Reverend Father Superior un- 
dertook, and this he could not finish then, for he 
was obliged to return to Kebec. 

He who has only one affliction in a year could 
hardly tell what is the taste of the fruits of the 
Cross. We had only four workingmen in our house 
of nostre Dame des Anges; two were drowned on 
the first day of May, and Father Claude Pijard almost 
perished with them. He thus relates the event, in a 
paper which he has placed in my hands. * * I was 
returning from nostre Dame des Anges, where I 
usually went to say holy Mass on Feast days and 
Sundays. Crossing the river saint Charles, — very 
rapid on account of the great flood of water in Spring, 
the Northeast wind blowing with violence, — the 
canoe in which two of our men were passing me 
upset; one of the men sank immediately, and [189] 
did not appear again. The other was carried 
some distance away by the current of the tide, and, 
after struggling for some time against death, was 
drowned. I found myself indeed in danger, as well 
as these two young men ; for I knew no more than a 
stone about swimming. God kept my judgment clear 
and sound. I had recourse to the mother of mercy, 
the blessed Virgin ; I made a vow to fast three Sat- 
urdays in her honor, and added the intercession of 
her most pure spouse, saint Joseph. I immediately 
felt myself aided; I went into the water, standing 
upright, submerged to my head, and very far from 
the bottom; finally I felt myself gently borne to- 
wards the shore, where I began to touch the ground 
with my feet. I emerged as quickly as I could ; I 


64 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.19 

& fon cher efpoux les larmes aux yeux, & le regret 
au coeur de la perte de ces deux pauures hommes, 
qui venoient de perir deuant moy. 

A quelques iours de Ik deux foldats firent vn fem- 
blable naufrage dans la grande riuiere, leur canot 
tournant ils fe virent emport6s au gre de la maree, 
tenant [190] des mains leur petit batteau d'efcorce. 
L'vn deux qui ne f9auoit point nager fe fouuenant de 
la faueur que le P. Pijard auoit receue par I'entremife 
de la faindte Vierge, luy promit par voeu de ieufner 
trois Samedis au pain, & a I'eau, & d'aller en pele- 
rinage h. noftre Dame des Anges a pieds nuds : cette 
bonne Mere luy fauna la vie, & ce bon ieune homme 
accomplit fon vceu, fe confeflant & communiant k 
pieds nuds, en adtion de grace d'vne faueur fl 
fignalee. 

On arreftoit pluftoft vn torrent que le cours d'vne 
affliction, quand il plaift a Dieu de I'enuoier; apres 
ces pertes le feu fe mit en noflre maifon de Kebec, 
qu'il a reduite en poudre, & la Chappelle de Mon- 
fieur le Gouuerneur, & I'Eglife publique: tout a efl6 
confomme: cela fe fit fi foudainement, qu'en moins 
de deux ou trois heures on ne vit de tons ces bafti- 
mens & de la plufpart de tons nos meubles, qu'vn 
pen de cendres, & quelques pans de murailles qui 
font reft^es, pour publier cette defolation, comme il 
n'y a point icy de boutiques de marchans d'oii on 
puiffe tirer fes befoins; [191] nous faifons venirde 
France tout ce qui nous eft neceffaire pour fubfifter 
en ce nouueau monde : & comme Kebec eft le port 
d'oii on tranfporte aux autres demeures, tout ce que 
les vaiffeaux y dechargent : nous anions ramaffe en 
cette maifon, comme en vn petit magazin tout Tap- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 65 


thanked the divine goodness, the blessed Virgin, and 
her dear spouse, with tears in my eyes, and regret 
in my heart at the loss of those two poor men, who 
had just perished before my eyes." 

A few days after this, two soldiers were similarly 
wrecked in the great river. Their canoe turning 
round, they found themselves carried away at the 
will of the tide, grasping [190] with their hands 
their little boat of bark. The one who did not know 
how to swim, remembering the favor that Father 
Pijard had received through the mediation of the 
blessed Virgin, promised her by a vow to fast three 
Saturdays on bread and water, and to go barefooted 
on a pilgrimage to nostre Dame des Anges. That 
kind Mother saved his life for him ; and this good 
young man fulfilled his vow, confessing and receiv- 
ing communion, barefooted, in thanksgiving for so 
signal a favor. 

One can check a torrent sooner than the course of 
an affliction when it pleases God to send it. After 
these losses, our house at Kebec took fire and was 
reduced to ashes, as was also the Chapel of Monsieur 
the Governor, and the public Church,— all was con- 
sumed. It took place so suddenly, that in less than 
two or three hours nothing was to be seen of all 
these buildings and the greater part of all our furni- 
ture, but a few cinders, and some large pieces of the 
walls which remained, to proclaim this desolation. 
As there are no shops here where one can supply his 
needs, [191] we bring from France all we need for 
subsistence in this new world ; and as Kebec is the 
port whence everything that the ships unload there 
is transported to the other settlements, we had col- 
lected in this building, as in a small storehouse, all 


66 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 19 

puy, & le fupport de nos autres refidences, & de nos 
miflions : Dieu a reduit tout cela au neant le linge, 
& les habits & les autres meubles necelTaires pour 
vingt-fept perfonnes, que nous auons aux Hurons, 
efloient tout prefts d'eftre portes par eau dans ces 
pays fi efloignes, & noftre Seigneur les a fait paffer 
par le feu. Ce qui eft neceffaire pour entretenir 
felon noftre petit pouuoir la refidence de S. lofeph 
ou fe raffemblent les Sauuages. La refidence des 
trois Riuieres oil pareillement les Algoquins s'ar- 
reftent, la maifon de N. D. des Anges & la propre 
maifon de Kebec, tout s'eft confomme dans les fiam- 
mes : le vent affez violent la feicherefTe extreme, les 
bois ondtueux de fapin, dont ces edifices eftoient con- 
flruicfts allumerent vn feu fi prompt & fi violent, qu'on 
ne put quafi rie fauuer, toute la vaifelle & les cloches 
[192] & calices fe fondirent, les 6toffes que quelques 
perfones de vertu nous auoiet enuoiees pour habiller 
quelques feminariftes ou quelques pauures Sauuages, 
furent confomm^es dans ce mefme facrifice. Ces 
habits vrayement Royaux que fa Majeft6 auoit enuoie 
^ nos Sauuages, defquels ils fe feruoient aux actios 
publiques, pour honorer la liberalite d'vn fi grand 
Roy, furent abyfm^s dans ce naufrage de feu, qui 
nous reduifit k I'hofpital: car il fallut aller prendre 
logis a la fale des pauures, iufques k ce que Monfieur 
noftre Gouuerneur, nous preftat vne maifon das 
laquelle eflans loges il fallut chager cette fale des 
malades en vne Eglife. Voila vne perte dont nous 
reflentirons long-temps. 

Quelque temps apres ce grad brafierd Monfieur le 
Cheualier de Montmagny noftre Gouuerneur, afl!em- 
blant les principaux Sauuages des trois Riuieres, & 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 67 

supplies and assistance for our other residences and 
for our missions; God reduced it all to nothing. 
The linen, clothing, and other articles necessary for 
the twenty-seven persons whom we have among the 
Hurons, were all ready to be conveyed by water to 
those so distant countries, and our Lord made them 
pass through the fire. What was needed to maintain, 
according to our limited resources, the residence of 
St, Joseph, where the Savages are assembling; the 
residence of three Rivers, where likewise the Algon- 
quins are settling; the house of Nostre Dame des 
Anges, and this same house of Kebec, was all con- 
sumed in the flames. A rather violent wind, the 
extreme drouth, the oily wood of the fir, of which 
these buildings were constructed, kindled a fire so 
quick and violent that hardly anything could be 
saved. All the vessels and the bells [192] and 
chalices were melted ; the stuffs some virtuous per- 
sons had sent to us to clothe a few seminarists or 
poor Savages, were consumed in this same sacrifice. 
Those truly Royal garments that his Majesty had 
sent to our Savages, to be used in public functions, 
to honor the liberality of so great a King, were 
engulfed in this fiery wreck, which reduced us to 
the hospital ; for we had to go and take lodgings in 
the hall of the poor, until Monsieur our Governor 
loaned us a house, and, after being lodged therein, 
this hall of the sick had to be changed into a Church. 
This was a loss that we shall feel for a long time. 

Some time after this great fire. Monsieur the 
Chevalier de Montmagny, our Governor, assembling 
the principal Savages of the three Rivers and of the 
residence of saint Joseph, — to praise the former for 
the courage they show for the faith, and to encour- 


68 LES RELATIONS DES J£SUJTES [Vol.19 

de la refidence de fainc5t lofeph, pour louer les vns 
du courage qu'ils font paroiflre pour la foy, & pour 
animer les autres k I'embraffer, I'vn de ceux qui par- 
ticipoit le plus h. ces riches prefes, voyat que Mr. 
[193] le Gouuerneur eftoit fur le poindt de congedier 
raffemblee, luy addrejQfa ces paroles: Noftre Capi- 
taine vous fcauez bien reftime que nous faifions des 
prefens de voftre grand Roy, nous les logions bien 
haul, afin que le monde les vift ; nous les conf eruions 
expres pour conferuer la memoire de fes liberalitez, 
& de f on amour en noftre endroit : maintenant que le 
feu nous les a rauis, efcriuez, s'il vous plaifl, au Roy 
que ce n'eft point noftre faute : nous les anions mis en 
garde en la maifon de nos Peres, le feu s'y eflat pris 
nous n'en fommes point coupables. Ces bonnes gens 
qui ne fe font que rire dans leur pertes, nous por- 
toient companion dans la noftre: auffi eft-il vray 
qu'ils y ont de I'intereft que Dieu foit beny h. iamais. 
Fuft-il ainsi que ce brafier euft confomme toutes mes 
offenfes. 

Puis que ie ne fais icy qu'vn ramas de chofes d6- 
coufues, ie toucheray vne ou deux couftumes de ces 
peuples, que i'ay apprifes de nouueau. 

Les ieunes gens qui fe marient viuent quelquefois 
deux ou trois mois auec [194] leurs efpouf6es fans 
les toucher. Nous auons appris cette couftume h. I'oc- 
cafion de quelques ieunes Chreftiens nouuellement 
mariez: car comme on les inftruifoit fur rhonneflet6 
& fur la chaftete coniugale, quelques- vns nous dirent, 
ne vous mettez pas en peine, noftre couftume eft de 
refpedter celles que nous aimons, & de les tenir vn 
long temps comme nos parentes fans les toucher. 

Vn Sauuage eftant fort malade on nous appella 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 69 

age the others to embrace it, — one of them who 
participated most in these rich gifts, seeing that 
Monsieur [193] the Governor was upon the point of 
dismissing the assembly, addressed these words to 
him: " Our Captain, you know very well in what 
esteem we held the presents of your great King, — 
we placed them very high, in order that the world 
might see them ; we carefully kept them, expressly 
to preserve the memory of his liberalities and of his 
love towards us. Now that fire has snatched them 
away from us, write to the King, if you please, that 
it is not our fault. We had placed them for safe- 
keeping in the house of our Fathers, and, as this 
took fire, we are not to blame in the matter. " These 
good people, who only laugh at their own losses, 
felt compassion for us in ours ; but then it is true 
that they had some interest therein. May God be 
forever blessed. Would it were thus that this fire 
had consumed all my sins ! 

Since I am only gathering here various desultory 
matters, I will touch upon one or two customs of 
these peoples which I have recently learned. 

Young men who marry sometimes live two or 
three months with [194] their wives, without ap- 
proaching them. We have learned this custom in 
regard to some young Christians lately married ; for, 
as we were instructing them upon modesty and con- 
jugal chastity, some said to us, " Do not trouble 
yourselves; our custom is to respect the women 
whom we love, and to regard them a long time as 
our relatives, not approaching them." 

A Savage being very sick, we were called to see 
him. His wife waited upon him with great kind- 
ness ; when she saw that he was struggling and be- 


70 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.19 

pour le voir ; fa femme raffiftoit auec vne grande cha- 
rity : comme elle vit qu'il fe debattoit, entrant en 
frenefie, elle prend vn bont de peau qu'elle fit brufler, 
puis luy en frotte la tefte pour empuantir par cette 
mauuaife odeur le Manitou, c'eft k dire le diable, 
afin qu'il n'approchafl de fon mary. 

Voicy vne chofe que plufieurs ont tenu pour remar- 
quable : Vne femme qui a eu neuf enfans, dont le 
dernier efloit marie, & auoit des enfans. le veux 
dire en vn mot que cette femme efloit fort aag6e, ie 
croy qu'elle auoit plus de 60. ans, cependant vne 
fienne fille venant de mourir, & lailTant vn enfant au 
maillot, [195] cette bonne vieille prit I'enfant, luy 
prefenta fa mammelle toute feiche; I'enfant ^ force 
de la tirer fit reuenir le lai(5t en telle forte que fa 
grade mere la nourry plus d'vn an: nous auons veu 
cela de nos yeux. La nature a d'eftranges inuentions 
pour fe conferuer, ou pluftoft celuy qui la conduit 
eft vn grand Maiftre. 

Voicy vne eflrange couftume des Hiroquois. On 
nous a racont6 qu'ils prennent par fois vn enfant 
nouueau n6, le lardent de filches, le iettent au feu, 
la chair eftant confomm^e ils prennent les os qu'ils 
mettent en poudre, & quand ils veulent aller en 
guerre ils boiuent vn peu de cette poudre, croyans que 
ce breuuage leur augmente le coeur. lis fe feruent 
aufli de ces cendres pour leurs forts & pour leurs 
fuperftitions : la mere qui donne fon enfant pour c6t 
abominable facrifice eft recompenfee de quelque beau 
prefent. Cela n'eft-il pas horrible? 

II eft temps de fonner la retraitte, i'ay mille a(5tions 
de graces k rendre ^ toutes les perfonnes qui coope- 
rent au falut [196] de ces pauures peuples, foit par 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 71 

coming frantic, she took a piece of skin and set fire 
to it, then rubbed it upon his head, that she might 
by this foul odor disgust the Manitou, — that is to 
say, the devil, — so that he should not approach her 
husband. 

Here is an occurrence which many have considered 
remarkable. There was a woman who had had nine 
children, the last of whom was married, and had 
children ; I mean to say, in a word, that this woman 
was very old, — I believe that her age was more than 
60 years; yet, one of her daughters happening to 
die, and leaving a child in arms, [195] this good old 
woman took the child, and offered it her withered 
breast. The child, by dint of pulling at it, caused 
the milk to return, so that the grandmother nourished 
it for more than a year. We saw this with our own 
eyes. Nature uses strange devices to preserve itself ; 
or, rather, he who guides it is a great Master. 

Here is a strange Hiroquois custom: We have 
been told that they sometimes take a newborn child, 
stick arrows into it, and throw it into the fire ; when 
the flesh is consumed, they take the bones and 
crumble them to powder ; and when they intend to go 
to war they swallow a little of this powder, believ- 
ing that this beverage increases their courage. They 
also use these ashes for their charms and supersti- 
tions. The mother who gives her child for this 
abominable sacrifice is rewarded with some valuable 
present. Is not this horrible? 

It is time to sound the retreat. I have a thousand 
thanksgivings to offer to all the persons who cooper- 
ate in the salvation [196] of these poor peoples, either 
through the affection of their hearts or through the 
good deeds of their hands. We are obliged even to 


72 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.19 

I'affection de leurs coeurs, foit par les bonnes adtions 
de leurs mains. Nous fommes obligez iufques k 
ceux qui enuoyent quelques chapelets pour nos nou- 
ueaux Chreftiens, & ^ ceux encore qui enuoyent quel- 
que morceau d'eftoffe pour faire des habits aux plus 
pauures. Dieu foit leur recompenfe h. tous. 

Nos Neophytes prient Dieu pour tous. Nous ne 
baptifons ny ne faifons communier perfonne qu'on 
ne le faffe prier pour ceux qui nous preftent la main 
dans ces grandes entreprifes: Mais puis qu'on ne 
s'acquitte iamais de I'obligation que nous auons tous 
contradtee dans le fang de lefu-Chrift, de nous aimer 
les vns les autres, nous auons droit de rechercher le 
reciproque, coniurans V. R. tous nos Peres, & nos 
Freres de fa Prouince, & toutes les perfonnes auec 
lefquelles nous fommes alTociez & alliez en Noftre 
Seigneur de fe fouuenir de nous deuant Dieu, de 
noftre Colonie Frangoife, de tous nos pauures Sau- 
uages, notamment des ieunes plantes nouuellement 
[197] inferees au iardin de I'Eglife, en vn mot d'vn 
pauure pecheur qui auec fa permiffion fe dira ce qu'il 
eft de coeur. 

De V. R. 

Tres-humble & tres-oblig6 
feruiteur en Noftre Seigneur, 
Pavl le Ievne. 
A Kebec, en la nouuelle France. 

ce 10. de Septembre 1640. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 73 


those who send rosaries for our new Christians, and 
to those also who send a little piece of stuff to make 
clothes for the poorest ones. May God be the recom- 
pense of all ! 

Our Neophytes pray to God for all. We do not 
baptize or grant communion to any one whom we 
do not cause to pray for those who lend us their 
hands in these great enterprises. But as one never 
acquits himself of the obligation that we all have 
contracted in the blood of Jesus Christ, — that of lov- 
ing one another, — we have a right to seek a recip- 
rocal kindness, conjuring Your Reverence, all our 
Fathers and our Brethren of your Province, and all 
the persons with whom we are associated and allied 
in Our Lord, to remember us before God, our French 
Colony, all our poor Savages, especially the young 
plants lately [197] placed in the garden of the 
Church, — and, in a word, a poor sinner, who with 
your permission, will call himself what he is from 
his heart. 

Your Reverence's 

Most humble and greatly obliged 
servant in Our Lord, 

Paul le Jeune. 
At K^bec, in new France, 

this loth of September, 1640. 


74 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.19 


Relation de ce qvi s'eft paffe dans 

le pays des Hvrons pays 

de la novvelle 

France. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 7^ 


Relation of what occurred in the 

country of the Hurons, a 

country of new 

France. 


,76 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.19 


[i] Relation de ce qui s'eft paffe en la Miffion 

des Hvrons, depuis le mois de luin de 

I'an 1639. iufques au mois de 

luin de I'annee 1640. 

Enuoyie h KSbec, au R. P. Barthelemy Vzmont, Superieur des 
mifsions de la Compagnie de Iesvs en la nouuelle France. 

MON Reverend Pere, 
Pax Chrifti. 
Voicy la rente que ie dois k V. R. le narre 
de ce qui s'eft pall^ de plus conliderable depuis la 
derniere Relation, toucliant 1' employ des Peres de 
noftre Compagnie qui font icy. 

[2] Nous nous trouuafmes au milieu de cette barba- 
ric au commencement du mois d'Odtobre de Tan 
1639. vingt-fept Franfois, & entre autres treize de 
nos Peres: La bonne volonte, le zele & le courage 
que ie remarque tant aux vns comme aux autres, me 
font beaucoup efperer cette ann6e pour le feruice de 
Dieu, & pour la confolation de voftre Reuerence, elle 
verra cy-apres ce qui en eft. 

Que fi par aduance elle defire fgauoir en peu de 
mots le fruidl de cette annee, voicy ce que i'en puis 
dire: On a fait retentir le fon de I'Euangile aux 
oreilles de plus de dix milles barbares, non tant en 
public & en commun comme en particulier dedans 
les cabanes, & aux feux de chaque famile. On en 
a baptize plus de mille, la plufpart dans la maladie 
de la petite verolle, qui s'eft attacbee indifferemment 


1640J RELA TION OF 1640 77 


[I] Relation of what occurred in the Mission of 

the Hurons, from the month of June in 

the year 1639, until the month 

of June in the year 1640. 

Sent to Kibec, to the Reverend Father Barthelemy Vt'mont, Su- 
perior of the missions of the Society of Jesus in new France. 

MY Reverend Father, 
Pax Christi. 
Here is the rent which I owe to Your Rev- 
erence, — the narrative of what has occurred of most 
moment since the last Relation, with reference to 
the occupation of the Fathers of our Society who 
are here. 

[2] We found ourselves in the midst of this bar- 
barism at the beginning of the month of October in 
the year 1639, — twenty-seven Frenchmen, and among 
others, thirteen of our Fathers. The good will, the 
zeal, and the courage which I remark in all alike, 
cause me to hope much this year for the service of 
God, and for the consolation of your Reverence, — you 
will see below how this is. 

But if beforehand you desire to know in few words 
the result for this year, here follows what I can say 
of it : The sound of the Gospel has been caused to 
resound in the ears of more than ten thousand bar- 
barians, — not only in public and in common, but 
also in private, within the cabins and by the fires of 
each family. We have baptized more than a thou- 
sand, — most of them during the malady of the small- 


78 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.19 

\ toute forte de perfonnes, dont vne bonne partie eft 
f ortie de ce monde auec de grandes marques de pre- 
deflination ; & entre-eux plus de trois cens f oixante 
enfans au deHous de fept ans; fans conter plus d'vne 
centaine d'autres petits enfans, qui ayant efte bap- 
tizez les annees precedentes, ont efte moilTonnez par 
cette mefme maladie, [3] & recueillis des Anges 
comme des fieurs du Paradis. 

Et quoy que pour le regard des perfonnes adultes 
en bonne fante il y ait fort peu de f ruict qui paroille : 
au contraire qu'il n'y ait eu qu'orages & tourbillons 
de ce coft^ 1^ ; fi ne mettons-nous pas au rang des 
peines perdues ce que nous auons fait en leur en- 
droit ; ayant diftribue nos ouuriers Euangeliques en 
cinq miffions, par toute I'eftendue du pays ou nous 
auons pu aller: puis que tant plus qu'ils fe font oppo- 
fez aux deffeins que nous anions de leur falut, & ont 
paru coniurer noftre ruyne ; tant plus ils ont rehaufl^ 
I'eclat & le retentiflement du fon de I'Euangile: & 
feruirot au moins vn iour, k iuftifier la mifericordi- 
eufe prouidece de Dieu en leur endroit. 

Voila, mon Reuerend Pere, en peu de mots ce qui 
en eft, & qui fuffit pour faire voir k V. R. le befoin & 
la necelTit^ que nous auons plus que iamais de fa cha- 
rit6, & fur tout de fes SS. SS. & prieres, aufquelles 
nous nous recommandons tons de coeur & d'affedtion. 
De V. R. 

Tres-humble, & tres-obeiffant feruiteur 
felon Dieu, HIEROSME LALEMANT. 

Des HuronSy ce 2y. de May 1640. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 79 

pox, which fastened itself indifferently upon all sorts 
of persons, — a goodly number of whom went out of 
this world with clear marks of predestination ; and, 
among them more than three hundred and sixty chil- 
dren under seven years, — without counting more 
than a hundred other little children, who, having 
been baptized in the preceding years, have been 
harvested by this same disease, [3] and gathered by 
the Angels like flowers of Paradise. 

And although, as regards adult persons in good 
health, there is very little apparent fruit — on the 
contrary, there have been only storms and whirl- 
winds in that quarter — yet we do not reckon to the 
account of lost pains what we have done in their be- 
half, having distributed our Evangelistic laborers in 
five missions over all the extent of the country whither 
we could go ; since the more they have resisted the 
plans that we had for their salvation, and have 
appeared to plot our destruction, the more have they 
heightened the sound and the resonance of the tone 
of the Gospel ; and will serve, at least some day, to 
justify the merciful providence of God with respect 
to them. 

Such, my Reverend Father, in a few words, is the 
situation ; and this is enough to show Your Rever- 
ence the need and the necessity that we are in, more 
than ever, of your charity, — and especially of your 
Holy Sacrifices and prayers ; whereto we all heartily 
and affectionately commend ourselves. 
Your Reverence's 

Very humble and very obedient servant 
in God, HIEROSME LALEMANT. 

From the Hurons, this 2'jth of May , 1640. 


80 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.19 


[4] CHAPITRE I. 

DE L'ESTAT DU pays. 

DE long temps nos Hurons n'ont eu vne ann6e 
plus fertile & plus abondante que la derniere 
1639. Nous y vifmes pour lors en vn coup 
tout ce que la nature luy a laiffe de beau & de meil- 
leur; le dis laiffe, car en comparaifon de noftre 
France & des autres quartiers du monde, toutes leurs 
richeffes n'eftant que pauuret6, il femble que la 
nature ait trafport^ ailleurs le plus precieux de fon 
bien, & n'ait prefque laiffe icy que le rebut: Mais 
ce qui eft deplorable, c'eft qu'au lieu de recognoiftre 
la principale main qui leur fait ces biens, la plus 
grande part & le meilleur s'en eft all6, felon leurs 
anciennes couftumes, en feftins ordinaires & extra- 
ordinaires, ou pour mieux dire en veritables facrifices 
au diable. 

Quant h. la guerre, leurs pertes ont eft6 plus gran- 
des que leurs aduantages ; car le tout confiftant en 
quelques teftes caffees fur les chemins, ou quelques 
captifs amenez [5] dans le pays pour les y brufler & 
manger, fans autre intention que de miner & exter- 
miner leurs ennemis en les tuant, & les intimider de 
venir k la guerre contre eux, en les traittant cruelle- 
ment dans leurs fupplices ; en tout cela ils y ont plus 
perdu que gaigne. 

Nous remarquons icy I'accompliffement de la parole 
du Prophete, que I'impie s'enfuit quoy que perfonne 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 81 


[4] CHAPTER I. 

OF THE CONDITION OF THE COUNTRY. 

IN a long time, our Hurons have not had a more 
fertile and more plenteous year than the last, 
1639. We then saw there, all at once, every- 
thing beautiful and excellent which nature has left 
them: I say left, because in comparison with our 
France and with the other quarters of the world, all 
their riches being only poverty, it seems that nature 
has carried elsewhere the most precious of her good 
things, and has left here scarcely anything but the 
refuse. But what is deplorable is that, instead of 
acknowledging the principal hand which gives them 
these goods, the greatest part and the best of the 
people have gone away, according to their former 
customs, into ordinary and extraordinary banquets : 
or to speak more properly, into veritable sacrifices 
to the devil. 

As for the war, their losses have been greater than 
their advantages; for, the whole matter consisting 
of a few broken heads along the highways, or of 
some captives brought [5] into the country to be 
burned and eaten there, — without other purpose than 
to ruin and exterminate their enemies by killing 
them, and to frighten them from coming to war 
against them, by treating them cruelly in their tor- 
tures, — in all that, they have lost more than they 
have gained. 

We note here the fulfillment of the word of the 


82 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.19 

ne coure apres : Ces pauures mif erables eftans dans 
des frayeurs 8c alarmes prefque cotinuelles, que leurs 
ennemis font "k leurs portes, & qu'ils viennent enle- 
uer leurs bourgs. 

Ce k quoy trauaillent les principaux miniftres de 
Satan, ou les Magiciens du pays, c'eft k predire les 
fuccez de la guerre, ^ defcouurir par leurs fortileges 
les troupes ennemies qui fe mettent en campagne, & 
le nombre qu'ils font, les endroits ou ils font cachez: 
intimidant par leurs menaces ceux qui n'ont pas 
recours k leur art : & au contraire donnant des affeu- 
rances de proteger puiffamment ceux qui recognoiflent 
par quelque prefent le demon qu'ils adorent. Ces 
impofleurs leuent la tefte, & fe font recognoiftre [6] 
publiquement comme des Anges de lumiere, & les 
protedteurs du pays, on les ayme & honore en cette 
quality, on leur obeyt en tout ce qu'ils commandent, 
quand vne f ois ils f e font donne du credit : mais il y 
en a d'autres qui fe cachent comme des Anges de 
tenebres, & n'ofent pas paroiflre, eftans tenus le mal- 
heur du pays, & les inftrumens du demon, pour pro- 
curer la mort de ceux qu'on croit qu'ils enforcellent. 
Ceux-cy font en horreur, & lors mefme qu'on les 
foup9onne, on les mallacre impunement. II eft bien 
affeure que les vns ne font pas plus blancs que 
les autres, eftant tons des fuppots de fatan: mais 
toutesfois pour ne pas les confondre, nous appellerons 
les premiers Magiciens, d'vn nom plus honorable par- 
my les puillances d'enfer; & les feconds Sorciers, 
qui ne font que les valets du diable. 

A propos de cecy arriua vne chofe remarquable au 
Bourg de la Conception, enuiron la fin du mois de 
luillet. Vn Magicien eftant enquis fur les craintes 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 83 

Prophet, that the wicked flee, though no man pur- 
sue, — these poor wretches being in almost continual 
terrors and alarms, lest their enemies be at their 
gates, and come to carry off their villages. 

What the principal ministers of Satan, or the 
Magicians of the country work for, is to predict the 
results of war, to discover by their spells the hostile 
bands which take the field, and the number of the 
same, with the places where they are concealed, — 
intimidating by their threats those who have not 
recourse to their art, and on the contrary giving 
assurances of powerfully protecting those who ac- 
knowledge by some gift the demon that they adore. 
These impostors hold up their heads, and are acknowl- 
edged [6] in public as Angels of light, and the coun- 
try's defenders; they are loved and honored in this 
capacity; they are obeyed in all that they command, 
when they have once obtained credit. But there are 
others of them who conceal themselves like Angels of 
darkness, and dare not appear, — being accounted the 
country's misfortune, and the instruments of the 
demon for procuring the death of those whom they are 
supposed to bewitch. These are in abomination, and, 
even when they are only suspected, they are slain 
with impunity. It is quite assured that the one set 
is not whiter than the other, all being imps of satan ; 
but yet, in order not to confound them, we will call 
the first set, by a name more honorable among the 
powers of hell. Magicians; and the second, Sorcerers, 
who are merely the valets of the devil. 

In this connection, something remarkable hap- 
pened at the Village of la Conception, about the end 
of the month of July. A Magician — being consulted 
about the fears which prevailed, lest some enemies 


84 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 1^ 


dans lefquelles on eftoit que quelqnes ennemis ne 
fuffent en campagne, apres auoir fait force ceremo- 
nies, dit qu'il en voyoit [7] tant, de telle & telle 
parure, & que dans tant de iours ils arriueroient au 
pays. le ne f9ay ce qui fe paffa, mais il fe comporta 
de la forte, qu'on n'euft pas de creance en luy. Ce 
mal-heureux ne trouuant meilleur moyen de faire 
valoir fon meftier, & de fe maintenir en credit, s'ad- 
uifa vn foir de fuiure fa femme qui alloit aux bois, 
& la prenant 'k I'efcart il luy fendit la tefte, puis 
pour mettre I'effroy dans le bourg, il y accourt tout 
hors d'haleine, faifant le cry d'vne perfonne qui auoit 
defcouuert Tennemy: les ieunes gens fe mettent en 
armes, tout le monde eft dans I'efpouuante & dans 
la crainte que quelqu'vn n'ait efte tu6; on vifite par 
les cabanes, & en effedt on recognoifh bien toft celle- 
la qui manquoit: mais la frayeur & I'obfcurite de la 
nuidt empefche de courrir fus k I'ennemy, & de cher- 
clier cette pauure femme : Le lendemain matin on 
trouua fon cadaure baign^ dedans fon fang: mais 
n'ayant apperceu aucune pifte d'ennemy, on fe douta 
bien-toft du coup, & tant de circonftances augmente- 
rent fi fort le foup9on qu'on n'en doutoit plus: toutes- 
fois ceux du bourg n'oferent defcouurir le fecret 
de r affaire, [8] dans la crainte qu'ils eurent que fi 
elle 6clatoit, il leur fallut felon les loix, fatisfaire pour 
ce meurtre aux parens de la defundle qui eftoit d'vn 
autre bourg. Mais c^t ceil adorable qui voit tout, & 
dont la iuftice fe fait fentir quelquesfois des cette 
vie, ne permift pas que ce mal-heureux la portaft plus 
loin : vingt iours apres allant par les bourgs faire le 
cry d'vn autre maffacre, commis en effect par les 
ennemis, il fut attaqu6 par vn du pais, qui I'accufant 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 86 

were in the field, — after having enacted many cere- 
monies, said that he saw [7] so many, of such and 
such guise, and that in so many days they would 
arrive in the country. I know not what took place, 
but he acted in such a way that they had no faith in 
him. This wretched man, finding no better means 
for utilizing his trade and for maintaining his credit, 
bethought himself one evening to follow his wife, 
who was going to the woods, and taking her aside, 
he split her head. Then, to inspire terror in the vil- 
lage, he hastens thither all out of breath, uttering 
the cry of one who had discovered the enemy; the 
young men rush to arms, everybody is in awe and 
in the dread lest some one has been killed. There 
is visiting through the cabins, and, in fact, they soon 
ascertain the missing one; but the fright and the 
darkness of the night prevent them from pursuing 
the enemy, and from seeking this poor woman. The 
next morning they found her corpse bathed in her 
blood; but, having perceived no trail of an enemy, 
they soon suspected the assault, and so many circum- 
stances so greatly increased the suspicion that they no 
longer doubted it. Nevertheless, those of the village 
dared not reveal the secret of the matter, [8] in their 
fear lest, if it came to light, they would be obliged, 
according to the laws, to make satisfaction for this 
murder to the relatives of the deceased, who was from 
another village. But that adorable eye which sees 
everything, and whose justice sometimes makes it- 
self felt even in this life, did not permit this wretched 
man to proceed further; twenty days later, while 
going through the villages to raise the cry of another 
massacre, committed in fact by the enemies, he was 
assailed by a man of the country, — who, accusing 


86 LES RELATIONS DBS j£SUITES [Vol. 1& 

d'eftre forcier, luy fendit la tefte, fans qu'il en ait 
eft6 fait aucune plainte ny recherche. 

Puis que i'en fuis fur ces miniftres d'enfer, i'ad- 
joufleray encore icy la fuiuante histoire, Vn nou- 
ueau magicien defirant fe donner a cognoiftre, fit f9a- 
uoir partout le pays que les bourgs qui luy feroient 
certains petits prefens, & qui au commencement de 
leur pefche, & de fois k autres pendant qu'elle dure- 
roit, s'afTembleroient en corps, feroient vn feu public 
pour y jetter en facrifice quelques pains de petun en 
fon honneur & de fon demon, I'inuoquant k haute 
voix, retourneroient heureufement auec quantite de 
poilTon: mais que ceux qui mepriferoient [lo i.e., 9] 
cet aduis s'en trouueroient mal. Plufieurs bourgs 
accepterent fon off re, & luy enuoyerent les prefens 
qu'il auoit defire, auec affeurance d'accomplir les 
autres conditions, ce qui en effet leur a bien reiiffi: 
vn feul bourg refufa de luy obei'r, auec quelque mef- 
pris. Eft-il vray qu'ils fe moquent de moy, dit-il? 
qu'ils foient affeurez que tons ceux d'entre-eux qui 
s'embarquent pour aller k la pefche n'en reuiendront 
pas. II faut bien que le diable fuft d' intelligence 
auec luy, car au bout de deux ou trois mois, les deux 
principaux Capitaines de ce bourg retournans de leur 
pefche en compagnie de deux autres de leurs parens, 
furent furpris de la tempefte dans le milieu du lac, 
vn orage vint fondre fur eux, & prefque en vn mo- 
ment ils furent tous abifmez dans les eaux. 

Venons ^ la maladie, qui ayant tout mis en defola- 
tion, nous a donne beaucoup d'exercice, mais aulll 
nous a efte vn fujet de beaucoup de confolation, Dieu 
ne nous ayant donn6 quafi autre moiffon que de ce 
coft6 la. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 87 

him of being a sorcerer, split his head, without any 
complaint or investigation having been made. 

Since I am discussing these ministers of hell, I 
will still add here the following story. A new ma- 
gician, desiring to have himself recognized, published 
throughout the country that the villages which would 
make him certain little presents, — and which at the 
beginning of their fishery, and from time to time 
while it lasted, should assemble in a body, and should 
make a public fire for casting into it, by way of sacri- 
fice, some cakes of tobacco in his honor and his 
demon's, invoking him aloud, — would return pros- 
perously, with many fish ; but that those who should 
despise [10 i.e., 9] this advice, would be badly off. 
Several villages accepted his offer, and sent him the 
gifts which he had desired, with promise of making 
good the other conditions, — which, in fact, succeeded 
well with them: a single village refused to obey 
him, with some contempt. "Is it true that they 
are mocking me ? " he said ; "let them be assured 
that all those among them who embark to go fishing 
will not return." It must indeed be that the devil 
was in league with him ; for, at the end of two or 
three months, the two principal Captains of this vil- 
lage, returning from their fishery, in company with 
two others of their relatives, were surprised by the 
tempest in the midst of the lake, — a thunderstorm 
burst upon them, and almost in a moment they were 
all swallowed up in the waters. 

Let us come to the disease which, having put 
everything in desolation, gave us much exercise, but 
was also an occasion of much consolation to us, — 
God having given us hardly any other harvest than 
from that quarter. 


88 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.19 

Ce fut au retour du voyage que les Hurons auoient 
fait k K6bec, qu'elle fe [lo] mit dedans le pays, nos 
Hurons en remontant icy haut, s'eflans inconfider6- 
ment meilez auec les Algonquins qn'ils rencontrerent 
par le chemin, dont la plufpart eftoient infedlez de 
la petite verole. Le premier Huron qui I'apporta 
vint aborder au pied de noftre maifon, nouuellement 
baftie fur le bord d'vn lac, d'ou eftant port6 a fon 
bourg, 61oigne de nous enuiron vne lieue, il en mou- 
rut incontinent apres. Sans eftre grand propbete on 
pouuoit s'alleurer que le mal feroit bien toft refpandu 
par toutes ces contr^es: car les Hurons, quelque 
pefte ou contagion qu'ils ayent, viuent au milieu de 
leurs malades, dans la mefme indifference & commu- 
nication de toutes chofes que fi on eftoit en pleine 
fante : en effet dans peu de iours, quali tons ceux de 
la cabane du defunt fe trouuerent infectez, puis le 
mal fe refpandit de maifon en maifon, de bourg en 
bourg, & enfin fe trouua diffipe par tout le pays. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 89 

It was upon the return from the journey which the 
Hurons had made to Kebec, that it [10] started in 
the country, — our Hurons, while again on their way 
up here, having thoughtlessly mingled with the 
Algonquins, whom they met on the route, most of 
whom were infected with smallpox. The first Huron 
who introduced it came ashore at the foot of our 
house, newly built on the bank of a lake, — whence 
being carried to his own village, about a league dis- 
tant from us, he died straightway after. Without 
being a great prophet, one could assure one's self 
that the evil would soon be spread abroad through 
all these regions : for the Hurons — no matter what 
plague or contagion they may have — live in the 
midst of their sick, in the same indifference, and 
community of all things, as if they were in perfect 
health. In fact, in a few days, almost all those in 
the cabin of the deceased found themselves infected ; 
then the evil spread from house to house, from vil- 
lage to village, and finally became scattered through- 
out the country. 


90 LES RELATIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol.19 


[II] CHAP. II 

DES PERSECUTIONS EXCIT^ES CONTRE NOUS. 

LES bourgs plus proches de noftre nouiielle mai- 
fon ayant efl6 les premiers attaquez, & de plus 
affligez, le diable ne manqua pas de prendre 
fon temps pour reueiller toutes les vieilles imagina- 
tions, & faire renouueller les anciennes plaintes de 
nous & de noflre demeure en ces quartiers, comme fl 
elle eftoit I'vnique caufe de tous leurs mal-heurs, & 
fur tout des malades. On ne parle plus d' autre 
chofe, on crie tout haut qu'il faut maffacrer les Fran- 
9ois. Ces barbares s'y animent les vns les autres, la 
mort de leurs plus proches leur ofte la raifon, acroift 
leur rage centre nous fi fortement dans chaque bourg, 
que les plus auifez ont de la peine "k croire que nous 
puiffions furuiure k vne fi horrible tempefte. lis 
remarquoient auec quelque forte de fondement, que 
depuis noftre arriu^e dedans ces terres, ceux qui [12] 
auoient efle les plus proches de nous, s'efloient trou- 
uez les plus ruynez des maladies, & que les bourgs 
entiers de ceux qui nous auoient receu fe voyoient 
maintenant du tout exterminez: & affeur6ment, 
difoient-ils, le mefme en arriueroit de tous les autres 
fi on n'arreftoit le cours de ce mal-heur par le maffacre 
de ceux qui en eftoient la caufe. C'efloit vn fenti- 
ment commun, non feulement dans les difcours parti- 
culiers, mais dans les confeils generaux tenus fur ce 
fujet, oil la plurality des voix alloit k noflre mort, 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 91 


[II] CHAP. II. 
OF THE PERSECUTIONS EXCITED AGAINST US. 

THE villages nearer to our new house having been 
the first ones attacked, and most afilicted, the 
devil did not fail to seize his opportunity for 
reawakening all the old imaginations, and causing 
the former complaints of us, and of our sojourn in 
these quarters, to be renewed ; as if it were the sole 
cause of all their misfortunes, and especially of the 
sick. They no longer speak of aught else, they cry 
aloud that the French must be massacred. These 
barbarians animate one another to that effect; the 
death of their nearest relatives takes away their rea- 
son, and increases their rage against us so strongly in 
each village that the best informed can hardly believe 
that we can survive so horrible a storm. They 
observed, with some sort of reason, that, since our 
arrival in these lands, those who [12] had been the 
nearest to us, had happened to be the most ruined by 
the diseases, and that the whole villages of those who 
had received us now appeared utterly exterminated ; 
and certainly, they said, the same would be the fate 
of all the others if the course of this misfortune were 
not stopped by the massacre of those who were the 
cause of it. This was a common opinion, not only in 
private conversation but in the general councils held 
on this account, where the plurality of the votes 
went for our death, — there being only a few elders 


92 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.19 

n'y ayant que quelques anciens qui croyoient nous 
bien obliger de conclure au banniilement. 

Ce qui confirmoit puilTamment cette fauffe imagi- 
nation eftoit qu'en mefme temps ils nous voyoient 
difperfez par tout le pays, cherchans toutes fortes de 
voyes pour entrer dedans les cabanes, inftruire & bap- 
tifer les plus malades auec vn foin qu'ils n'auoient 
iamais veu. Sans doute, difoient-ils, il falloit bie 
que nous euffions vne fecrette intelligence auec la 
maladie (car ils croyent que ce foit vn demon) puis 
que nous feuls eftions tous pleins de vie & de fante, 
quoy que fans [13] ceffe nous ne refpiraffions qu'vn 
air tout infecfte, nous tenant les iournees entieres at- 
tachez au cofte des malades les plus puants, dont tout 
le monde auoit horreur: fans doute nous portions 
auec nous le malheur, puis que par tout ou nous met- 
tions le pied, ou la mort, ou la maladie nous fuiuoit. 

En fuite de tous ces dif cours plufleurs nous auoient 
en horreur, ils nous chalToient de leurs cabanes, & 
ne permettoient pas que nous approchaffions de leurs 
malades, & principalement des enfans, non pas mefme 
que nous peuffions letter la veue fur eux : en vn mot 
on nous redoutoit comme les plus grands forciers de 
la terre. 

En quoy veritablement il faut auoiier que ces pau- 
ures gens font aucunement excufables; car il eft 
arriue tres-fouuent, & on I'a remarque plus de cent 
fois, qu'oti nous ellions les mieux venus, oil nous 
baptifions plus de monde, c' eftoit la en effect oil on fe 
mouroit dauantage ; & au contraire dans les cabanes 
dont on nous deffendoit I'entr^e, quoy qu'ils fuffent 
quelquefois malades k I'extremite, on voyoit au bout 
de quelques iours tout le [14] monde heureufement 


1640] RELATION OF 1640 93 

who thought they greatly obliged us by resolving 
upon banishment. 

What powerfully confirmed this false imagination 
was that, at the same time, they saw us dispersed 
throughout the country, — seeking all sorts of ways 
to enter the cabins, instructing and baptizing those 
most ill with a care which they had never seen. 
No doubt, they said, it must needs be that we had 
a secret understanding with the disease (for they 
believe that it is a demon), since we alone were all 
full of life and health, although [13] we constantly 
breathed nothing but a totally infected air, — staying 
whole days close by the side of the most foul-smell- 
ing patients, for whom every one felt horror; no 
doubt we carried the trouble with us, since, wher- 
ever we set foot, either death or disease followed us. 

In consequence of all these sayings, many had us 
in abomination ; they expelled us from their cabins, 
and did not allow us to approach their sick, and 
especially children: not even to lay eyes on them, — 
in a word, we were dreaded as the greatest sorcerers 
on earth. 

Wherein truly it must be acknowledged that these 
poor people are in some sense excusable. For it has 
happened very often, and has been remarked more 
than a hundred times, that where we were most wel- 
come, where we baptized most people, there it was in 
fact where they died the most ; and, on the contrary, 
in the cabins to which we were denied entrance, 
although they were sometimes sick to extremity, at 
the end of a few days one saw every [14] person 
prosperously cured. We shall see in heaven the 
secret, but ever adorable, judgments of God therein. 
Meanwhile, it is one of our most usual astonishments 


'94 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.19 

guery. Nous verrons dans le ciel les fecrets, mais 
toufjours adorables iugemens de Dieu la deffus. Ce- 
pendant c'eft vn de nos eftonnemens des plus ordi- 
naires, & vn de nos plaifirs des plus folides, de conli- 
derer parmy tout cela les amables bontez de Dieu fur 
ceux qu'il veut k foy, & de voir plus que tous les 
iours fes faindtes & efficaces prouidences, qui vont 
difpenfant tellement les affaires, qu'il fe trouue que 
pas vn des efleus ne fe perd, quoy que I'enfer & la 
terre s'y oppofe. Nous le verrons dans la fuite de 
cette Relation. Seulement diray-je en paffant pour 
ce qui touche les petits enfans qui efloient en danger 
de mort, & qui n'eftoient aucunement coupables du 
refus que fouuent leurs parens nous faifoient de les 
approcher, qu'k peine en eft-il mort vne douzaine 
qui n'ait receu fon paffe-port pour aller au ciel, du- 
rant le temps que nous auons eu libre accez dans les 
bourgs. Le zele & la charite de nos ouuriers euan- 
geliques ayant eft6 plus induflrieufe & plus adtiue k 
leur procurer ce bon-heur, que la rage & la haine 
du diable ^ les empefcher. 

[15] Les raifons que iufques icy nous auons apport6 
pourquoy les barbares nous foupgonnent d'eftre la 
caufe de leurs maladies, femblent auoir quelque fon- 
demet: mais le diable n'en demeura pas Ik; ce feroit 
vn miracle s'il ne baftilloit le plus fort de ces calom- 
nies fur de purs menfonges. 

Robert le Coq, vn de nos domeftiques eftoit retour- 
n6 de Kebec dans vn eftat de maladie qui donnoit 
autat d'horreur que de compaffion k tous ceux qui 
auoient affez de courage pour conliderer les vlceres 
dont tous fes membres eftoiet couuerts : lamais Hu- 
ron n'euft creu qu'vn corps £1 remply de miferes euft 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 95 

and one of our most solid pleasures, to consider, in 
the midst of all those things, the gracious bounties of 
God in the case of those whom he wishes for him- 
self; and to see oftener than every day his sacred 
and efficacious acts of providence, which so arrange 
matters that it comes about that not one of the elect 
is lost, though hell and earth oppose. We shall see 
as much, in the course of this Relation. I will only 
say in passing, — with reference to the little children 
who were in danger of death, and who were nowise 
guilty of the refusal which their parents often made 
us, to approach them, — that hardly did a dozen of 
them die without receiving their passport for going 
to heaven, during the time when we had free access 
to the villages, — the zeal and the charity of our evan- 
gelistic laborers having been more industrious and 
more active to procure them this happiness than the 
rage and the hatred of the devil to hinder them. 

[15] The reasons which we have thus far adduced, 
on account of which the barbarians suspect us of 
being the cause of their diseases, seem to have some 
foundation; but the devil did not stop there, — it 
would be a miracle if he did not build the worst of his 
calumnies on sheer lies. 

Robert le Coq,^ one of our domestics, had returned 
from Kebec in a state of sickness which caused as 
much horror as compassion to all those who had cour- 
age enough to examine the ulcers with which all his 
limbs were covered. Never would a Huron have be- 
lieved that a body so filled with miseries could have 
returned to health ; regarding him then as good as 
dead, there were found slanderers so assured in their 
falsehood that they publicly maintained that this 
young Frenchman had told them in confidence that 


96 LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol. 19 

pu retourner en fant6 : le iugeant done pour mort, il 
fe trouua des calomniateurs li affeurez en leur men- 
fonge, qu'ils maintenoient publiquement que ce ieune 
Frangois leur auoit dit en confiance que les lefuites 
efloient feuls les autheurs & les caufes des maladies 
qui d'annee en annee alloient depeuplant le pays; 
qu'il auoit defcouuert nos myfteres, & les fecrets 
les plus cachez de nos forcelleries. Les vns difoient 
que nous nourrilTions en vn lieu retire de noftre mai- 
fon vn certain ferpent [i6] duquel leurs fables font 
mention, & que c'eftoit la maladie : D'autres difoient 
que c'eftoit vne efpece de crapau tout marqu6 de 
verole, & que mefme on I'auoit apperceu. Quelques 
vns faifoient cette maladie vn demon vn peu plus fub- 
til, & ^ leur dire nous le tenions cache dans le canon 
d'vne arquebufe, & de la il nous eftoit facile de I'en- 
uoyer la part oil nous voulions. On rapportoit mille 
femblables fables, & tout cela eftoit tenu pour vray, 
puis qu'il partoit, difoit-on, de la bouche mefme d'vn 
Frangois, qui auant fa mort auoit rendu ce bon office 
^ tout le pays des Hurons, de les aduertir d'vne ma- 
gic li noire, dont en effec5t tous leurs bourgs fe voy- 
oient defolez, C'eftoient la les plus puifTantes armes 
dont on nous combattoit, c'eftoit la raifon peremp- 
toire qui nous faifoit tous criminels. Les nations 
circonuoifines en furent bien toft inform^es, tout le 
monde en eftoit imbu, & mefme les enfans aufli bien 
que les peres, en quelque lieu que nous peuffions 
aller, portoient 1^ deHus I'arreft certain de noftre 
mort. 

Auant que nous pallions plus outre, ie croy que 
c'eft vne chofe qui merite [17] d'eftre remarqu^e, que 
la maladie & la fant6 de ce ieune homme. Ce feroit 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 97 

the Jesuits alone were the authors and the cause of 
the diseases which from year to year kept depopulat- 
ing the country; that he had discovered our mys- 
teries, and the most hidden secrets of our enchant- 
ments. Some said that we nourished, in a retired 
place of our house, a certain serpent [16] of which 
their fables make mention, and that this was the dis- 
ease. Others said that it was a kind of toad, all 
marked with pits, and that somebody had even per- 
ceived it. Certain ones made out that this disease 
was a somewhat more crafty demon ; and, by what 
they said, we kept it concealed in the barrel of an 
arquebus, and thence it was easy for us to send it 
wherever we would. They reported a thousand like 
fables, and all that was held to be true, since it pro- 
ceeded, they said, from the very lips of a French- 
man, who before his death had rendered this good 
office to the whole country of the Hurons, — of ap- 
prising them of so black a magic, by which in fact 
all their villages appeared to be desolated. Those 
were the most powerful weapons with which they 
combatted us; this was the imperative reason which 
made us all criminals. The surrounding nations 
were soon informed of this ; everybody was imbued 
with it, and even the children, as well as the fathers, 
in whatever place we might go to, favored in that 
matter the definite decree for our death. 

Before we pass on, I think that it is a thing which 
deserves [17] to be remarked, — the sickness and the 
health of this young man. It would be in some sort 
to slight the providence of God, not to bless him 
therefor, since that has greatly shone forth in it. 

This good young man, returning here from Kebec 
in a company of several canoes of Hurons, who had 


98 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 19 


faire tort en quelque fagon k la prouidence de Dieu 
de ne Ten pas benir, puis qu'elle y a grandement 

delate. 

Ce bon ieune homme remontant icy de Kebec en 
troupe de plufieurs canots de Hurons, qui luy auoient 
promis toute afTiftance par le chemin, fe vid bien toft 
abandonn6 de ces barbares, qui luy faufferent la foy, 
incontinent qu'ils furent hors la crainte des ennemis, 
& au de9k des lieux ou la chaffe n'eflant plus heu- 
reufe, ils ne iouyffoiet plus des frui(5ls d'vne harque- 
bufe qu'il portoit. II refta feul, accompagne de deux 
Sauuages das vn petit canot qu'il auoit achepte. 
Eftant dans les faults il les veut foulager, il fe 
charge dans les portages de quelques paquets fi 
pefans que fuccombant deffous le faix il s'en enfuiuit 
vne entorfe & vne rupture de reins fi douloureufe 
qu'k peine croyoit-il pouuoir auancer plus outre, & 
defia ces Sauuages parloient de le quitter, mais Dieu 
lui referuoit vne croix plus pefante. II fut bien toft 
faifi d'vne violente fievre, & en fuite la maladie du 
temps, la [i8] petite verole couurit tout fon corps 
d'vne fa§on fi extraordinaire, que fur tons fes mem- 
bres il ne paroifloit qu'vne croute de puanteur. Au 
lieu de ramer & foulager fes matelots dans les por- 
tages, le voila devenu luy-mefme vne nouuelle charge 
k des gens qui ont incontinent horreur de luy, ny 
mefme n'ont pas affez de coeur pour arrefter leurs yeux 
fur fon corps, tant il eft tiideufement difforme, bien 
loin de le foulager dans le plus fort de fes douleurs, 
& de compatir a fon mal; tant s'en faut, ils parlent 
^ tons momens de s'en deffaire, & de le letter fur le 
riuage comme vn cadaure qui eftoit defia confifqu6 k 
la mort: Ils en viennent k I'execution, mais ce pau- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 99 

promised him every assistance by the way, soon saw 
himself abandoned by those barbarians, who broke 
faith with him as soon as they were past fear of the 
enemies, and within a region where, the chase being 
no longer successful, they no longer enjoyed the 
effects of an arquebus which he carried. He re- 
mained alone, accompanied by two Savages, in a 
small canoe that he had bought. While in the rap- 
ids, he wishes to relieve them ; he loads himself at 
the portages with some bundles so heavy that, suc- 
cumbing beneath the burden, there followed a sprain 
and a rupture in the loins so painful that he hardly 
believed he could proceed further. Those Savages 
were already speaking of leaving him ; but God was 
reserving for him a heavier cross. He was soon 
seized with a violent fever, and thereafter the cur- 
rent malady, [18] smallpox, covered his whole body 
in a manner so extraordinary that on all his members 
there appeared but one crust of foulness. Instead 
of paddling, and relieving his boatmen at the port- 
ages, he has himself become a new burden to people 
who straightway feel horror for him ; nor have they 
even sufficient courage to fix their eyes on his body, — 
so hideously disfigured is he. Far, indeed, from 
relieving him at the height of his pains, and from 
sympathizing with his trouble, — on the contrary, 
they speak at every moment of getting rid of him, 
and of throwing him on the shore like a corpse which 
was already confiscated by death. They come to the 
point of execution ; but this poor sick man, to whom 
nothing was left intact but sense and speech, effected 
so much by dint of reasons, prayers, threats, prom- 
ises, and especially by inordinate gifts, that they 
promised him not to abandon him. That was all the 


100 


LES RELA TIONS DES JP.SUITES [Vol. 19 


ure malade a qui rien ne reftoit d'entier que le iuge- 
ment & la langue, fit tant k force de raifons, de pri- 
eres, de menaces, de promeffes, & fur tout de prefens 
exceffifs, qu'ils luy promirent de ne le point abandon- 
ner. Ce fut la toute la faueur qu'il put efperer 
d'eux: car d'ailleurs ils le traittoient auec moins de 
refpedt & de compaffion que nous ne ferions vn 
cadaure ; iufques la mefme qu'ils auoient honte d'eftre 
[19] chargez de luy, en forte qu'au rencontre qu'ils 
faifoient de quelques canots, ils le cachoient comme 
vne charogne puante, & vn fumier qu'on n'ofe pas 
expofer en veue. 

II fut 12. ou 13. iours k traifner de la forte vne fi 
miferable vie, & fe voyoit en fin dans I'efperance de 
pouuoir en deux bonnes iournees arriuer en cette 
maifon, ou fa confolation feroit de mourir affift6 de 
nous, & encore vne fois iouyr de la douceur des Sa- 
cremens au milieu d'vne compagnie qui ne luy ferui- 
roit pas peu a luy procurer les fentimens de piete, 
dans lefquels il eufl voulu rendre fon ame ^ Dieu. 
Mais quoy, vn Huron infidele eft toufiours barbare. 
Ces malheureux I'abandonnent tout feul fur vne 
longue roche qui eft fur le bord du grand lac qui 
vient baigner ces coftes : ils luy emportent fon canot, 
& tons les prefens qu'ils auoient tire de luy par le 
chemin, fans luy laifTer non pas mefme vne ecorce 
pour fe couurir, ny aucun viure dont il peuft foufte- 
nir ce peu qui luy reftoit de vie. Sans doute fi les 
rochers mefmes fur lefquels il fut expofe, [20] euflient 
eu quelque fentiment, ils auroient pris compafsion 
de voir ce pauure ieune homme abandonn6 de tout 
fecours humain, tout charge de playes & d'vlceres, 
couuert d'vne maladie fi pleine de douleur, fans feu. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 101 

favor that he could hope from them; for in other 
matters they treated him with less respect and com- 
passion than we would show to a dead body, — even 
to the pass that they were ashamed to be [19] charged 
with him, so that, when they encountered some ca- 
noes, they hid him like foul carrion and a dunghill, 
which one dare not expose to view. 

He was 12 or 13 days dragging out in this way 
such a wretched life, and at last saw himself in hopes 
of contriving, within two good days, to reach this 
house, where it would be his consolation to die as- 
sisted by us, and to enjoy once again the pleasure of 
the Sacraments in the midst of a company which 
would serve him not a little to obtain for him the 
feelings of piety in which he would have desired to 
render his soul to God, But what? an infidel Huron 
is always a barbarian. 

These wretches forsake him, all alone on a long 
rock which is on the shore of the great lake that 
comes to bathe these shores ; they carry off his canoe, 
and all the gifts which they had extracted from him 
by the way, without leaving him even a piece of bark 
to cover himself with, nor any food wherewith he 
could sustain the meagre life which he had left. No 
doubt, if the very rocks on which he was exposed 
[20] had had any feeling, they would have taken pity 
to see this poor young man forsaken by all human 
aid, — wholly burdened with sores and ulcers, covered 
with a disease so full of pain, without fire, without 
provisions, and without shelter; lying on a naked 
rock, — which had nothing smooth about it, any more 
than his body, — and wet from head to foot with a 
furious rain, which fell upon him almost an entire 
day. Notwithstanding all that, his courage does not 


102 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.19 

fans viures, & fans abry ; couch6 fur vne roche nue, 
qui n'auoit rien d'egal auffi pen que fon corps, & 
mouille depuis les pieds iufqnes k la tefle d'vne 
pluye furieufe qui tomba deffus luy quafi vn iour en- 
tier. Nonobftant tout cela fon courage ne cede pas 
k fa mifere, il a recours k Dieu, & traifnant fon mife- 
rable corps fur f es coudes & fur f es genoux ; (car il 
ne pouuoit fe tenir fur fes pieds, ny s'appuyer fur 
autre chofe,) les yeux tout bouchez de verole, il s'en 
va dans les buiffons & parmy les broffailles chercher 
a tafhons s'il ne trouuera point quelque racine ou 
quelque fruidt pour rallafier la faim qui le prejffe 
autant & plus que tons fes maux enfemble. 

II falloit que Dieu le conduififl, car fes mains tom- 
boient fi heureufement fur ce qu'il cherchoit, qu'en 
peu de temps il trouua vne certaine efpece de 
grozeilles affez pour foulager aucunement fa faim 
[21] lugez quelle fut la nuidt de ce pauure malade. 

Le lendemain comme il eftoit couche quafi tout 
nud fur le riuage, quelques canots Hurons qui I'a- 
uoient apperceu de loin, croyant que ce fuft quelque 
corps mort, f'approcherent pour le recognoiftre : 
mais luy s'eftant vn peu leue au bruit pour leur crier 
mifericorde, leur donna tant d'horreur, que n'ofans 
aborder plus pres, ils le laifferent impitoyablement 
fans luy prefter aucun fecours, non pas mefme d'vne 
poignee de bled ou de farine. Vn peu de temps 
apres quelques autres palTerent, qui en fin s'eftans 
lailfe flechir par les pre fens qu'il leur offrit, fe refo- 
lurent de s'en charger: mais helas cette ioye fut bien 
courte, ^ peine I'eurent-ils porte enuiron vne demie 
lieue, que ne pouuans plus le fouffrir, ils le remirent 
^ bord auec fes hardes, & vn paquet d'enuiron 50. ou 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 103 

give in to his misery ; he has recourse to God, and, — 
dragging his miserable body on his elbows and on 
his knees (for he could not stand on his feet, nor lean 
on anything else), with his eyes all stopped up with 
sores, — he goes into the bushes and among the bri- 
ars, to seek by feeling about whether he will not find 
some root or some fruit to satisfy his hunger, which 
oppresses him as much as and more than all his 
troubles together. 

It must be that God was guiding him, for his 
hands so fortunately fell on w^hat he sought, that in 
a little while he found a certain kind of currants, — 
enough to relieve his hunger to some extent. [21] 
Judge what this poor sick man's night was. 

The next day, while he lay almost naked on the 
shore, some Huron canoes, which had perceived him 
from a distance, thinking that he was some dead 
body, drew near to make him out; but he, having 
risen a little at the noise, in order to cry them 
mercy, gave them so much horror that, not daring to 
approach nearer, they pitilessly left him, without 
lending him any assistance, — not even a handful of 
corn or meal. A little while after, some others 
passed, who finally having suffered themselves to 
be swayed by the gifts which he offered them, re- 
solved to take charge of him : but alas, this joy was 
very brief; — hardly had they carried him about half 
a league when, unable to endure him longer, they 
put him ashore again with his clothing, and a bundle 
of about 50 or 60 pounds, — more faithful in that 
than the first ones, who carried off his presents. 

So there was this poor fellow again abandoned to 
all these miseries, but worse than before, — for, his 
strength [22] being diminished for want of food, and 


104 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.19 

60. liures ; en cela plus fideles que les premiers qui 
luy emporterent fes prefens. 

Voila done ce pauure gargon de rechef abandonne 
h. toutes ces miferes, mais pis qu'auparauant: car fes 
forces [22] eflant diminu6es manque de nourriture, 
& la maladie ayant creu, il fe vit enfin quafi dans 
I'impuiffance de plus fe remuer. Ce fut alors qu'il 
eut plus a patir, car vn grand orage de pluye eftant 
furuenu & fe trouuant couche au milieu de deux 
roches par ou fe defchargeoient les eaux des colines 
& des butes voifines, il ne peuft pas s'en retirer, & 
fut contraint de croupir la dedans autant que 1' orage 
dura. Ce fut bien pis au retour du beau temps : car 
alors les moucherons venans a trouppe s'attachoient 
au pus qui fortoit de fes playes; d'ou s'enfuiuit vne 
fourmiliere de vermine & de vers vniuerfelle par 
tout le corps. 

A moins que cela on en meurt, auffi ce bon ieune 
homme defefperant tout a fait de fa vie, ne fongea 
plus qu'au Ciel. II regardoit la mort d'vn ceil auffi 
paifible que font ceux qui enuifagent leur bon-heur. 

II s'eftoit charge partant des Trois Riuieres d'vn 
paquet qu'il nous apportoit, ou eftoient plufieurs 
reliques affez notables. C'eftoit 1^ I'vnique fupport 
qui luy reftoit en terre: & du moins ne pouuant [23] 
pas venir mourir entre nos bras, il fe confoloit que 
fon corps repoferoit en paix aupres des reliques des 
Saind:s : mais Dieu le vouloit voir dans vn abandon 
plus entier. 

Ceux qui I'auoient quitte racontoient aux autres 
Hurons dont ils faifoient rencontre, le miferable eftat 
de ce pauure gar9on. Entre ceux qui entendirent 
ces nouuelles fut vn certain barbare, auec lequel 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 105 


the disease having increased, he found himself at 
last almost powerless to stir further. It was then 
that he had most to suffer, for a great storm of rain 
having come up, and he chancing to be lying be- 
tween two rocks along which the waters from the 
hills and neighboring knolls poured down, he could 
not withdraw from them, and was constrained to 
crouch therein as long as the storm lasted. It was 
much worse at the return of fair weather : for then 
the gnats, coming in swarms, attached themselves 
to the matter which issued from his sores ; whence 
there ensued a teeming nest of vermin and of worms, 
everywhere on his body. 

For less than that, one dies ; accordingly this good 
young man, altogether despairing of his life, now 
thought of nothing but Heaven. He looked at death 
with as peaceful a gaze as those do who contemplate 
their happiness. 

He had charged himself, on leaving the Three 
Rivers, with a bundle which he was bringing to us, 
in which were several quite notable relics. That 
was the sole support which was left to him on earth : 
and at least, if unable [23] to come and die in our 
arms, he consoled himself that his body would rest 
in peace beside the relics of the Saints; but God 
willed to see him in a desolation more complete. 

Those who had forsaken him told the other Hu- 
rons whom they met, the miserable condition of this 
poor fellow. Among those who heard these tidings 
was a certain barbarian with whom he had formerly 
made several journeys in the country, and who pro- 
fessed to love him. This man, who was going away 
on a rather long trade, leaves his course, moves 
straight to where the sick man was, to relieve him : 


106 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.19 

autresfois il auoit fait plufieurs voyages dans le pays, 
& qui faifoit profeffion de raymer. Celuy-cy qui 
s'en alloit en vne traitte alTez longue, quitte fa route, 
tire droit la part ou efloit le malade pour le f oulager : 
mais I'ayant abord^, & confidere fa mifere, & encore 
plus le paquet qui eftoit pr6s de luy, ce barbare fit ce 
iugement que c'eftoit vne perfonne dont la mort auoit 
defia pris poffeffion, & qu'ainfi on le pouuoit impun6- 
ment piller. Toutesfois pour ne pas fi ouuertement 
faire vn coup d'ennemy, il le falue ^ la Hurone, & 
pour toute confolation luy prefentant vn morceau de 
mechant pain quafi moify, il prend fon temps, & en- 
leue fubtilement ledit [24] paquet. Le pauure malade 
qui de temps en temps prenoit garde "k ce qui luy 
reftoit de confolation au monde, ne fentent plus fon 
trefor, fe douta auffi-toft de ce qui eftoit arriue. Ce 
coup la luy perga le coeur, fe confiderant dorefnauant 
comme abandonne de I'affiftance du ciel & de la terre. 
Mais c'eft Ik iuftement le moment que Noftre Sei- 
gneur attendoit pour faire paroiflre fa gloire, & le 
foin paternel qu'il a de ceux qui mettent en luy toute 
leur confiance, 

II y auoit vn an que retournant du mefme voyage 
il auoit rencontr6 a cinq ou fix iourn6es au de9a des 
Trois Riuieres vn pauure barbare Huron, delaifl^e par 
fes compagnons pour vn mefme fujet de maladie. II 
fut touche de compaffion, & fe refolut d'affifter ce 
pauure mal-heureux, il luy dreffe vne petite cabane, 
le couure d'vne robbe & de fa cafaque, il va pour luy 
& k la challe, & k la pefche, il luy prepare fon man- 
ger ; bref il luy rend nuidt & iour tant de charity & 
de bons offices qu'il le remet fur pied, & le rend en 
eftat de prendre la premiere commodity des canots 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 107 

but having approached him and considered his mis- 
ery, and still more the bundle which was near him, 
this barbarian came to the conclusion that he was a 
person of whom death had already taken possession, 
and that thus one might with impunity rob him. 
Nevertheless, in order not to do so openly the deed 
of an enemy, he greets him in the Huron style, and, — 
for all comfort offering him a piece of sorry bread, 
almost mouldy, — he takes his time, and craftily re- 
moves the said [24] bundle. The poor sick man, — 
who from time to time gave heed to what comfort 
there was left to him in the world, — no longer feel- 
ing his treasure, straightway suspected what had 
happened. That blow pierced his heart, — account- 
ing himself thenceforth, as it were, abandoned by 
any help of heaven and earth. But that was pre- 
cisely the moment which Our Lord was awaiting, in 
order to manifest his glory, and the paternal care 
that he has for those who put their whole confidence 
in him. 

A year before, while returning from the same voy- 
age, he had met, five or six days' journey on this 
side of the Three Rivers, a poor Huron barbarian, 
forsaken by his companions for a like reason of sick- 
ness. He was touched with compassion, and resolved 
to assist this poor unfortunate ; he erects for him a 
little cabin, and covers him with a skin and with his 
jacket ; he goes both hunting and fishing for him ; 
he prepares for him his food. In short, he renders 
him night and day so much charity, and so many 
kind ofi&ces, that he puts him on his feet again, and 
restores him to a condition for taking the first oppor- 
tunity, by the canoes which should pass there, to [25] 
bring him back. The year had elapsed, and this 


108 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.19 

qui palTeroient par Ik pour [25] le ramener. L'annee 
s'eftoit ecoulee fans que ce barbare euft tefmoigne "k 
f on bien-faidteur aucune recognoiffance : mais le Dieu 
de iuflice & de bonte ne voulut pas que cette ingra- 
titude duraft plus long-temps. Voicy ce barbare qui 
retournant dans vn canot avec vn autre lien cama- 
rade, de ie ne fcay quel voyage, aborde par vn heu- 
reux rencontre au lieu oti eftoit fon ancien bien- 
faidteur: ne fongeant pas k luy. II eft furpris de 
voir Ik vn fi hideux fpedtacle, mais il n'auoit garde 
de le recognoiftre. Ce pauure maladie \sc. malade] 
eut de la peine k entre-ouurir fes yeux bouchez de 
verole, il fe fent tout reuiure apperceuant celuy qu'il 
auoit autresfois tellement oblige. Ha! luy dit-il, 
mon camarade, c'eft moy qui meurs icy malheureufe- 
ment delaiffe, il eft en ton pouuoir de me rendre ce 
que ie t'ay donne. Le barbare recogneuft fa voix, 
& touche de compaffion & de reffentiment du bien de 
la vie qu'en effet l'annee precedente il auoit receu 
par fon afllflance, il luy donne parole qu'il ne I'aban- 
donnera point qu'il ne I'ayt mis en lieu d'alleurance, 
& qu'ils courreroient mefme rifque. 

[26] En effect quoy que ces deux barbares n'euffent 
plus de farine que pour vn iour, & que le temps fuft 
fort fafcheux, ils fe chargerent de cette carcaffe 
viuante abandonn^e depuis quatre iours k toutes les 
iniures des temps, & nuidt & iour ils luy rendirent 
toute rafsi[f]tance dont ils fe peurent aduifer : Mais 
il fembloit que les demons enuiaffent cette charite en 
des perfonnes infideles; la tempefte s'acreuft, les 
vents fe redoublerent, & les orages furent fi vehemens 
qu'ils ne croyoient pas iamais en rechapper: toutes- 
f ois leur courage f urmonta la rage des ilots ; car enfin 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 109 

barbarian had shown his benefactor no gratitude; 
but the God of justice and of goodness did not allow 
this ingratitude to last longer. Here, then, this 
barbarian — returning in a canoe with another, a 
comrade of his, from I know not what journey — 
approaches, by a happy coincidence, the place where 
his former benefactor was, not thinking of him. He 
is surprised to see there so hideous a spectacle, but 
he has no thought of recognizing it. This poor sick 
man could hardly open his eyes, stopped shut with 
sores ; he feels himself quite revived on perceiving 
the one whom he had formerly so much obliged. 
" Ha!" he said to him, "my comrade, it is I who 
am dying here, unhappily forsaken; it is in your 
power to render me what I gave you." The barba- 
rian recognized his voice, and — touched with com- 
passion, and with gratitude for the boon of life which 
in fact, the year before, he had received through his 
assistance — he gives his word that he will not aban- 
don him until he has put him in a place of safety, 
and that they will run the same risk. 

[26] In fact, although these two barbarians had no 
more than one day's meal, and though the weather 
was very irksome, they burdened themselves with 
this living carcass, abandoned for four days to all 
the inclemencies of wind and weather; and night 
and day they rendered him all the assistance they 
could think of. But it seemed that the demons en- 
vied this charity in infidel persons ; the tempest in- 
creased, the winds doubled their force, and the gusts 
were so vehement that they thought they should 
never escape from them again. Howbeit, their cour- 
age overcame the rage of the waves; for finally, — 
after having paddled vigorously for the space of five 


no LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.19 

apres auoir fortement rani6 Tefpace de cinq iours, 
durant lef quels ils moururent quafi de faim, & tra- 
uerf^ le lac (ce qui en temps de calme n'euft eft6 que 
le trauail de deux iourn^es) ils aborderent au pied de 
noftre maifon, & liurerent entre nos mains celuy 
dont ils s'efboient chargez. le ne croy pas qu'on 
puiffe voir vn corps humain plus couuert de miferes ; 
pas vn de nous n'euft iamais pu le recognoiftre ; il 
n'y auoit partie fur luy qui ne relTentit fa douleur: 
mais toutesfois le coeur eftant [27] reft6 entier, le 
mal qui le preffoit le plus eftoit vne faim deregl^e 
qui luy auoit quafi oft6 le fentiment de tous fes autres 
maux. 

Dieu f9ait combien fut grande la confolation qu'il 
fentit : c'eftoit bien k cette heure qu'il mouroit le plus 
content du monde. Nous luy donnafmes les Sacre- 
mens pour I'y mieux difpofer: Mais il pleut telle- 
ment ^ Dieu benir la charity qu'on luy rendit, qu'en- 
uiron quarante iours apres fon arriu^e il fe trouua en 
parfaite fante. 

Que fi luy fut confole en nous voyant peut-eftre 
que noftre ioye ne fut pas moindre que la fienne ; car 
nous I'attendions mort, & nous le vifmes en vie. 
Quelques Hurons de ceux qui les derniers I'auoient 
quitt6, nous en apporterent des premiers nouuelles, 
ceux qui tous les premiers I'auoient plus infidelement 
abandonn6 nous en ayant cach^ la cognoiffance, 
crainte comme on pent penfer, que fi le malade eftoit 
fecouru, il ne leur faluft rendre les prefens & le 
canot dont ils defiroient profiter. Quoy qu'il en foit 
on nous I'auoit fait mort, & [28] auffi toft nous auios 
equipe vn canot d'vn de nos Peres, d'vn de nos 
domeftiques, & de quatre excellens Sauuages pour 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 111 

days, during which they nearly died of hunger, and 
having crossed the lake (which at a time of calm 
would have been but the work of two days), — they 
landed at the foot of our house, and delivered into 
our hands the one with whom they had charged 
themselves. I do not suppose that one can see a 
human body more covered with miseries, — not one 
of us could ever have recognized him ; there was no 
part of him which did not feel his pain, but yet his 
courage having [27] remained, the evil which most 
oppressed him was an inordinate hunger, which had 
almost taken from him the sense of all his other 
troubles. 

God knows how great was the consolation which 
he felt : it was surely then that he could have died 
the most contented man in the world. We gave 
him the Sacraments to dispose him the better there- 
to ; but it so pleased God to bless the charity which 
was rendered him that, about forty days after his 
arrival, he found himself in perfect health. 

But if he was consoled by seeing us, perhaps our 
joy was not less than his ; for we were expecting him 
dead, and we saw him alive. Some Hurons, of those 
who had last left him, first brought us news of him ; 
those who first of all had most faithlessly abandoned 
him having concealed from us their knowledge of 
the matter, — for fear, as one may think, lest, if the 
sick man were aided, they would have to give back 
the presents and the canoe, by which they desired to 
profit. Be this as it may, they had represented to us 
that he was dead; and [28] straightway we manned 
a canoe belonging to one of our Fathers, with one 
of our domestics and with four excellent Savages, to 
go and either assist him alive or fetch him dead. 


112 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.19 

Taller ou fecourir viuant, on querir mort, Mais 
eftans arriuez an lieu qu'on auoit defign^, & apres 
auoir parcouru quafi toute la cofte auec bien du trauail 
fans rien trouuer, Dieu y ayant pourueu d'ailleurs, 
ils ne le virent qu'^ leur retour. 

Or pour comble de benedidtion le iour de la Touf- 
faindls comme nous eftions fur le poincft de dire 
Vefpres, nos Peres de la Miffion de la Conception 
arriuerent icy, & nous apporterent ce dont nous 
auions perdu quali toute efperance, les Reliques des 
Saindts que ce traiftre barbare auoit enleue au pauure 
malade. Ce malheureux volleur n' ayant pas trouu^ 
dans le paquet ce qu'il penfoit y eftre, & n'y ayat 
quafi rie veu que des chofes dont il n'euft pu tirer 
aucun vfage, fe refolut par ie ne fgay quel mouue- 
ment fecret de cacher ledit paquet dans les bois, & 
pourfuiure fa route: de forte qu'au retour de fon 
voyage qui dura 40. ou 50. iours, ayant appris que 
Robert le Coq eftoit encore en vie, fe doutant bien 
que fon vol feroit [29] cogneu, il reprit & rapporta 
ledit paquet, & n'eut pas alTez de front pour le nier 
k nos Peres, qui s'addrefferent k luy auffi toft qu'il 
fut arriue. Sans doute ces bons Saindts k qui fouuent 
nous recommandions affectueufement cette affaire 
qui les touchoit eux-mefmes autat que nous, auoient 
^coute nos prieres. lis n'euffent pas pii nous donner 
cette ioye en vne meilleure iourn^e : nous expofafmes 
incontinent fur noftre Autel toutes ces belles & heu- 
reufes Reliques, auec bon nombre d'autres qui nous 
eftoient venues de France cette annee. Les Vefpres 
de ce faindt iour furent chantees auec vne confolation 
qu'il feroit difficile d'expliquer. 

Mais reuenons k nos Sauuages animez contre nous 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 ] 13 

But, having reached the place which had been des- 
ignated, and after having explored almost the whole 
shore with much labor, without finding aught, — God 
having thus provided, moreover, — they did not see 
him till their return. 

Now for culmination of blessing, on the day of 
All Saints, as we were on the point of saying Ves- 
pers, our Fathers of the Mission of la Conception 
arrived here, and brought us that of which we had 
lost nearly all hope, — the Relics of the Saints, which 
that treacherous barbarian had taken away from the 
poor sick man. This wretched robber, not having 
found in the bundle what he thought to be there, and 
having seen scarcely anything but articles from 
which he could have derived no use, resolved, from 
I know not what secret impulse, to conceal the said 
bundle in the woods, and to pursue his course. The 
result was that, on returning from his journey, 
which lasted 40 or 50 days, having learned that Rob- 
ert le Coq was still alive,— suspecting, indeed, that 
his robbery would be [29] known, — he recovered 
and brought back the said bundle, and had not suffi- 
cient effrontery to deny it to our Fathers, who ad- 
dressed themselves to him as soon as he had arrived. 
No doubt these good Saints — to whom we often 
affectionately commended this matter, which con- 
cerned themselves as much as us — had listened to 
our prayers. They could not have given us this joy 
on a better day ; we forthwith exposed upon our Altar 
all these glorious and auspicious Relics, with a good- 
ly number of others which had come to us from 
France this year. The Vespers of this holy day were 
sung with a consolation which it would be difficult 
to explain. 


114 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 19 

au fujet de la maladie, & k ces impofteurs qui auoient 
maintenu que Robert le Coq les auoit fi confidem- 
ment aduerty des magies noires & des fortileges exe- 
crables dont nous les faifions tous mourir. II ne fut 
pas bien difficile de refuter ces calomnies, puis que 
celuy qu'on difoit auoir efte I'vnique fource de tous 
ces bruits n'eftant pas mort, comme ils auoient iuge, 
mais ay ant recouur6 vne [30] pleine fant6, put demen- 
tir tous ceux qui maintenoient auparauant 1' auoir 
entendu de fa bouche. Mais quoy? le menfonge 
I'emporte au deffus de la verite, les calomniateurs 
trouuet plus de creance que celuy qui nous iuftifie. 
Le diable paffe bien plus outre, car la maladie de ce 
ieune Fran9ois ayant tenu allez long temps I'efprit 
de plufieurs en balance, nous voyant enueloppez dans 
la mefme mifere: lors qu'ils virent en fante celuy 
que tous les hommes euffent iuge pour mort, il leur 
vint en penf6e que tout cela n' auoit efte que collufion 
auec la maladie, & qu'ayant intelligence auec elle, 
nous en anions difpofe de la forte, pour leur letter 
de la pouffiere aux yeux. Quoy qu'il en foit, on crie 
publiquement au meurtre, mais les demons font 
comme des tonnerres, qui font plus de bruit que de 
mal; car toutes ces menaces n'ont pas eu beaucoup 
d'effedt. Nous viuons, Dieu mercy, tous pleins de 
vie & de fante. II eft bien vray que les croix ont 
eft6 abbattues de deflus nos maifons, qu'on eft entr6 
la hache en main dans nos cabanes pour y faire quel- 
que manuals coup; [31] on a, dit-on, attendu fur les 
chemins aucuns des noftres en intention de les tuer ; 
on a leu6 la hache fur les autres, & ramene le coup 
iuf ques ^ vn doigt pres de leur tefte nue ; les Cruci- 
fix qu'on portoit aux malades nous ont eft6 arracbez 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 115 

But let us return to our Savages, excited against 
us on account of the disease, and to those impostors 
who had maintained that Robert le Coq had so con- 
fidentially informed them of the black magic arts and 
the execrable spells with which we were causing 
them all to die. It was not very difficult to refute 
these calumnies, since he who was said to have been 
the sole source of all these rumors — not being dead, 
as they had supposed, but having recovered [30] 
perfect health — could belie all those who previously 
maintained they had heard the thing from his lips. 
But what? falsehood gets the better of the truth; 
the slanderers find more credit than the one who 
justifies us. The devil goes much further, for — this 
poor young Frenchman's sickness having for quite a 
long time kept the minds of several in suspense, see- 
ing us involved in the same misery — when they saw 
him in health whom all men would have accounted 
dead, it came to their thought that the whole affair 
had been only collusion with the disease ; and that, 
having an understanding with it, we had disposed 
of it in this way, in order to throw dust in their 
eyes. However this be, they openly cry * ' murder ; * ' 
but the demons are like thunders, which make more 
noise than they do harm, — for all these threats 
have had but little effect. We are alive, thank God, 
all full of life and health. It is indeed true that the 
crosses have been stricken down from above our 
houses ; that people have entered our cabins, hatchet 
in hand, in order to deal some evil blow there; [31] 
they have, it is said, awaited some of ours on the 
roads, with the intention of killing them; the 
hatchet has been lifted above others, and the blow 
brought within a finger-length of their bare heads ; 


116 LES RELATIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol. 1^ 

par violence, les coups de bafton ont eft6 defchargez 
fortement fur vn de nos miffionnaires, pour Tempef- 
cher de conferer quelque baptefme, Sed nonduni vfque 
ad fanguinem rejiitimus: Noftre fang & nos vies ne 
font pas encore refpandues pour celuy auquel nous 
deuos tous nos coeurs. Noftre ame eft entre nos 
mains, & c'eft la faueur la plus grande que nous 
efperions receuoir du grand Maiftre qui nous em- 
ploye, que de mourir pour fon fainct nom, apres 
auoir beaucoup pdty. 

Ce n'eft pas que ie ne loue k iamais ce grand Dieu 
de bonte, de nous auoir iufques k maintenant proteg6 
auec tant d'amour: car c'eft veritablement vn bon- 
heur indicible pour nous, au milieu de cette barbaric, 
d'entendre les rugilfemes des demons, & de voir tout 
I'enfer, & quail tous les hommes animez & remplis 
de fureur contre vne petite poign6e de [32] gens qui 
ne voudroient pas f e def endre : de nous voir renf er- 
mez en vn lieu k quinze cens lieues de noftre patrie, 
ou toutes les puiHances de la terre ne pourroient pas 
nous garantir de la colere de I'homme le plus foible 
qui auroit deffein fur nos vies, & oil mefme nous 
n'auons pas vn fac de bled qui ne nous foit fourny 
par ceux qui fans ceffe parlementent de nous tuer: 
Et de f entir en mefme temps vne confiance fi particu- 
liere en la bont6 de Dieu, vne affeurance fi ferme au 
milieu des dangers, vn zele fi adtif , & vn courage fi 
refolu h. tout faire & p^tir pour la gloire de noftre 
Maiftre, vne conftance fi infatigable dans les trauaux 
qui augmentent de iour en iour. De forte qu'il eft aif6 
de conceuoir que c'eft Dieu qui prend noftre caufe, 
que c'eft luy feul qui nous protege, & que fa proui- 
dence prend plaifir de fe faire parol ftre ou nous voyos 
moins de I'humain. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 117 

the Crucifixes which were carried to the sick have 
been violently snatched from us ; blows with a club 
have been mightily inflicted upon one of our mission- 
aries, to prevent him from conferring some baptism. 
Sed nondum usque ad sanguinem restitimus; our blood 
and our lives have not yet been poured out for him 
to whom we owe all our hearts. Our soul is in our 
hands, and this is the greatest favor that we hope to 
receive from the great Master who employs us, — 
namely, to die for his holy name, after having suf- 
fered much. 

Not that I do not forever praise this great God of 
goodness, for having thus far protected us with so 
much love : for it is truly an unspeakable happiness 
for us, in the midst of this barbarism, to hear the 
roarings of the demons, and to see all hell and almost 
all men animated and filled with fury against a little 
handful of [32] people who would not defend them- 
selves; to see ourselves shut up in a place fifteen 
hundred leagues from our native land, where all the 
powers of the earth could not warrant us against the 
anger of the weakest man who might have designs 
on our lives, and where we have not even a bag of 
corn which has not been furnished us by those who 
incessantly parley about killing us ; and to feel at the 
same time so special a confidence in the goodness of 
God, so firm an assurance in the midst of dangers, a 
zeal so active, and a courage so resolute to do all and 
to suffer all for the glory of our Master, so indefati- 
gable a constancy in the labors which increase from 
day to day. So that it is easy to conceive that God 
is the one who espouses our cause ; that it is he alone 
who protects us, and that his providence takes pleas- 
ure in manifesting itself where we see least of the 
human. 


118 LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 19 

le parle auec cette liberie du courage de nos ouuriers 
Euangeliques dans leurs trauaux, pour n'auoir autre 
part h. cette gloire, que d'auoir veu & confider^ de 
pres ce qui en eftoit: me fentant d'ailleurs [33] oblig6 
de rendre ce tefmoignage h. leur vertu. On en verra 
les effedts plus en particulier aux Chapitres fuiuans. 


1640] RELATION OF 1640 119 

I Speak with this freedom concerning the courage 
of our Evangelistic laborers in their toils, because 
I have no share in this glory, save having seen and 
closely examined the situation, — feeling myself with- 
al [33] constrained to render this testimony to their 
virtue. We shall see the effects of it more specific- 
ally in the following Chapters. 


120 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.19 


CHAPITRE III. 
DE l'estat general du christianisme en ces 

CONTREES. 

IE ne puis donner vne idee plus conforme k I'eftat 
des affaires du Chriftianifme en ces contr6es, 
que difant que nous fommes icy comme ceux 
qui vont cherchant les mines d'vn pays. Apres 
qu'ils ont mis ordre "k tout I'appareil neceffaire k leur 
delTein, ils conliderent premierement & remarquent 
les terres, puis en ayant recogneu quelques mines qui 
femblent cacher les threfors qu'ils fouhaitent, ils 
foiiillent & creufent en c6t endroit, «& a mefure qu'ils 
rencontrent quel que matiere qui a apparence du me- 
tail qu'ils recherchent, ils I'epurent & I'^prouuent 
au feu: cependant s'ils fe trouuent affez forts de 
monde ils vont en [34] mefme teps fonder d'autres 
endroits pour s'employer fortement felon leur deffein. 
Dans la derniere relation on a peu remarquer trois 
lieux oil nous penlions auoir trouue le metail que 
nous fommes venus chercher dans cette barbarie, 
fgauoir quelques ames capables de la foy, pour en 
former vne couronne a Iesvs-Christ. Ce ^ quoy 
depuis on s'eft eftudi^, a eft6 premierement d'^purer 
ce metail, puis on s'eft auance plus outre pour 
defcouurir quelques nouueaux threfors dignes du ciel. 
Le fruidt qui s'eft enfuiuy du premier trauail, 
a efle de recognoiflre au vray dans les occafions 
qui fe font prefentees, qui efloient les folides Chre- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 121 


CHAPTER III. 

OF THE GENERAL CONDITION OF CHRISTIANITY IN 
THESE COUNTRIES. 

I CANNOT give an idea more apposite to the con- 
dition of the affairs of Christianity in these re- 
gions than by saying that we are here like those 
who go seeking for the mines of a land. After they 
have ordered all the apparatus necessary to their 
purpose, they first consider and observe the kinds of 
soil ; then having ascertained some mines which seem 
to conceal the treasures which they desire, they ran- 
sack and dig in that place ; and, as they encounter 
some substance which has the appearance of the 
metal which they are seeking, they refine it and test 
it in the fire. Meanwhile, if they happen to be in 
sufficiently great number, they go at [34] the same 
time to investigate other places, in order to busy 
themselves actively, according to their design. 

In the last relation, one may have remarked three 
places where we thought we had found the metal 
which we came to seek in this barbarism, — to wit, 
some souls qualified for the faith, so as to form a 
crown of them for Jesus Christ. What we have 
since studied, was first to refine this metal ; then we 
proceeded further, in order to discover some new 
treasures worthy of heaven. The result which en- 
sued from the first labor was to ascertain truly, by 
the occasions which arose, who were the solid Chris- 
tians, who those who had embraced the faith only 


122 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.19 

ftiens, qui ceux qui n'auoient embraffe la foy que 
fur de faulles efperances de quelque bien temporel, 
& fur tout d'vne longue vie. Ne faut-il pas que 
cette Eglife naiffante foit efpuree comme Tor en la 
f ournaif e ? 

Quant ^ la recherche que nous auons faite de quel- 
ques autres nouueaux threfors, le fuccez en a efte 
femblable k celuy de ceux qui fe meflent en effedt 
des mines, qui en creufant la terre trouuent [35] fou- 
uent ce qu'ils ne cherchent pas, & quelquefois plus 
qu'ils n'euffent ofe efperer: car pretendant princi- 
palemet trouuer des ames capables de nos inftructios, 
pour en former quelque partie de 1' Eglife militante, 
nous n'en auons quafl rencontre que de propres pour 
la triomphante : Dieu, ce femble, par vn mefnage- 
ment extraordinaire de fa prouidence nous donnant 
par tout oil nous auons efte les maladies pour ma- 
neuures, qui nous ont fait rencontrer ces precieux 
threfors que nous ne cherchions pas, ou pluftoft d'vne 
fagon que nous ne penfions pas. le veux dire que 
de mille perfonnes baptifees depuis la derniere Rela- 
tion, il n'y en a pas vingt de baptifees hors du dan- 
ger de la mort : dont en effect plufieurs eflans dece- 
dez vn peu apres le baptefme, & entr' autres plus de 
260. enfans au deffous de feptans, & de plus vn tref- 
grand nombre qui n'auoient pas encore atteint dix, 
douze & quatorze ans, dont nous croyons le falut en 
affeurace : Nous nous fommes employez cette annee 
^ accroiftre 1' Eglife triomphante pluftoft que la mili- 
tante. 

[36] le ferois bien en peine li i'eftois oblige de deci- 
der fi nous auons en cela plus ou moins d'aduantage 
que ce que nous pretendions: quoy qu'il en foit, nous 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 123 

upon false hopes of some temporal advantage, and 
especially of a long life. Must not this incipient 
Church be refined like gold in the furnace? 

As for our search for some other new treasures, our 
success has been similar to that of those who liter- 
ally concern themselves with mines ; who while dig- 
ging in the earth find [35] often what they do not 
seek, and sometimes more than they would have 
dared to hope. For, aiming chiefly to find souls 
qualified for our instructions, in order to form with 
them some portion of the Church militant, we have 
scarcely found any except those fit for the Church 
triumphant, — God, it seems, by an extraordinary 
arrangement of his providence, giving us, every- 
where that we have been, diseases for laborers, which 
have enabled us to run across these precious treas- 
ures which we were not seeking ; or rather in a way 
that we were not thinking of. I mean that, of a 
thousand persons baptized since the last Relation, 
there are not twenty baptized ones out of danger of 
death; several of these, indeed, having died shortly 
after their baptism, and among others more than 260 
children under seven years; and, further, a very 
great number who had not yet reached ten, twelve, 
and fourteen years, whose salvation we believe as- 
sured, — we have occupied ourselves, this year, in 
increasing the Church triumphant rather than the 
militant. 

[36] I should be much perplexed if I were obliged 
to decide whether in that we had more or less 
advantage than what we claimed : be this as it may, 
we have reason to be content, since the grand Mas- 
ter who employs us has thus disposed. 

Now of the two methods by which one could pro- 


124 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.19 

auons fujet d'eflre contens, puis que le grand Maiftre 
qui nous employe en a difpofe de la forte. 

Or des deux fagons auec lefquelles on pouuoit 
paffer plus auant en la conuerfion de ces peuples, ou 
par la voye des refidences, ou par celle des Miffions; 
celle des refidences nous ayant paru pleine d'incon- 
ueniens, & bien moins efEicace, nous nous fommes 
refolus k celle des miffions, quoy que plus fafcheufe 
de beaucoup, & plus penible, fur tout en ces contrees. 

En fuite de ce deffein apres auoir mefure nos forces 
en la langue, le departement fut fait de nos ouuriers 
dans tout le pays oil nous pouuions aller, en cinq 
miffions : Sgauoir de f aincte Marie aux Ataronchro- 
nons, de faindt lofeph aux Attinguenongnahac, de la 
Conception aux Attignaouentan, de S. lean Baptifte 
aux Ahrendaronons, & de celle k laquelle nous auons 
donn6 le nom des Apoftres [37] aux Khionontatero- 
nons. 

Ce fut h la Touffaindls que nous nous difperfafmes, 
qui eft le temps du retour des traittes, & la faifon 
iufques au Printemps pour trouuer les hommes, les 
femmes, & les enfans en leur cabane, quoy que la 
plus incommode pour voyager. 

On auoit fait pendant I'Efte vne ronde prefque par 
tout, pour pouruoir au plus preff^, & prendre quel- 
que cognoiff ance de la difpofition des efprits. Dans 
cette courfe on donna le nom de quelque Saindt k 
tous les bourgs & villages qu'on rencontra, ce qui 
depuis dans les miffions d'hyuer a eft6 acheue, dans 
la penfee que fi iamais Dieu donnoit benedidlion k 
nos petits trauaux, & que I'on vint k dreffer vne 
Eglife ou Chapelle en ces lieux, elles feroient erigees 
en I'honneur du Saindt dont on impofoit le nom. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 125 

ceed further toward the conversion of these peoples, — 
either by the plan of residences, or by that of Mis- 
sions, — that of the residences having appeared to us 
full of inconveniences, and much less efficacious, we 
have decided upon that of the missions, although 
much more vexatious and more laborious, especially 
in these regions. 

In consequence of this design, after having meas- 
ured our strength in the language, the distribution 
of our workmen was made, in all the country where 
we could go, into five missions, — to wit, from sainte 
Marie, to the Ataronchronons ; from saint Joseph, 
to the Attinguenongnahac ; from la Conception, to 
the Attignaouentan ; from St. Jean Baptiste, to the 
Ahrendaronons ; and, from the one to which we 
have given the name of " the Apostles," [37] to the 
Khionontateronons.^ 

It was at All Saints that we dispersed, which is 
the time of the return from trading expeditions, and 
the season, until Spring, for finding the men, wom- 
en, and children in their cabins; though the most 
inconvenient time for travel. 

We had made, during the Summer, a round nearly 
everywhere, to provide for what was most urgent, 
and to gain some knowledge of the disposition of 
minds. In this expedition, we gave the name of 
some Saint to all the hamlets and villages that we 
encountered, which was later completed in the winter 
missions, — with the thought that, if ever God gave 
his blessing to our slight labors, and any should 
come to erect a Church or Chapel in these places, 
such would be erected in honor of the Saint whose 
name we bestowed. 

Next, we have had means to take the census not 


126 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.19 

En fuite nous auons eu le moyen de faire le denom- 
brement non feulement des bourgs & bourgades, 
mais auffi des cabanes, des feux, & mefme k pen pres 
des perfonnes de tout le pays, n'y ayant autre moyen 
de prefcher I'Euangile en ces contr^es qu'au foyer 
de chaque famile, [38] dont on a tafch6 de n'ob- 
mettre pas vne. II fe trouue dans ces cinq miflions 
trente-deux tant bourgs que bourgades, qui compren- 
nent en tout enuiron fept cens cabanes, de feux enui- 
ron deux mille, & enuiron douze mille perfonnes. 

Ces bourgs & cabanes eftoient bien autrement 
peupl6es autresfois, mais les maladies extraordinaires 
& les guerres depuis quelques annees en 9a, femblent 
auoir emporte le meilleur, ne reftant que fort peu de 
vieillards, fort peu de perfonnes de main & de co- 
duite. II eft k craindre que le comble de leurs pechez 
ne s'approche, qui porte la luftice diuine k les exter- 
miner, aufli bien que plufieurs autres nations, dont 
les reftes fe font venus refugier parmy eux. Ce qui 
doit exciter plus que iamais la charit6 & le zele de 
tout le monde pour fecourir ces pauures miferables, 
crainte qu'ils ne tombent dans leur dernier mal- 
heur. 

Voila le champ ou ont trauaill6 depuis I'Automne 
nos ouuriers Euangeliques, ou il faifoit le plus chaud. 
C'eft Ik oil premierement on a tourn^ la tefte, oil on 
a eft^ k I'attaque ; & iamais pour quelque [39] aduis, 
menaces, ou manuals traittement que le diable ait 
pu fufciter, on n'a quitt6 aucun deffein, ny perdu 
aucune occafion de feruir le maiftre qui nous employe. 

le ne dis rien icy des iniures du temps qu'il a fallu 
que nos ouuriers ayent fouffert pendant leurs voyages 
de bourg en bourg de leur departement, voyageant 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 127 

only of the villages, large and small, but also of the 
cabins, the fires, and even very nearly of the persons 
in all the country, — there being no other way to 
preach the Gospel in these regions than at each fam- 
ily's hearth, [38] whereof we tried to omit not one. 
In these five missions there are thirty-two hamlets 
and straggling villages, which comprise in all about 
seven hundred cabins, about two thousand fires, and 
about twelve thousand persons.'^ 

These villages and cabins were much more popu- 
lous formerly, but the extraordinary diseases and the 
wars within some years past, seem to have carried 
off the best portion : there remaining only very few 
old men, very few persons of skill and management. 
It is to be feared that the climax of their sins is 
approaching, which moves divine Justice to extermi- 
nate them as well as several other nations, whose 
remnants have come to take refuge among them, — 
which ought more than ever to rouse the charity and 
the zeal of every one to succor these poor wretches, 
for fear lest they fall into their uttermost misfortune. 

Such is the field in which our Gospel laborers 
have toiled since Autumn, — when it was warmest. 
It is there that we first turned our minds, where we 
have been making the attack ; and never, for any 
[39] warning, threats, or evil treatment which the 
devil may have contrived to stir up, have we for- 
saken any design or lost any opportunity of serving 
the master who employs us. 

I say nothing here of the injuries from the weath- 
er, which our workmen have been compelled to suffer 
during their journeys from village to village in their 
territory, — always traveling on foot during the Win- 
ter, laden with their little goods and chapels, through 


128 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.19 

toufiours k pied pendant I'Hyuer, chargez de leurs 
petites hardes & chapelles, par de petits fentiers cou- 
uerts de neige, qui difparoiflant fouuent, laiflent la 
perfonne dans le doute & I'incertitude des chemins, 
d'ou s'enfuiuent des efgaremens affez ordinaires. 

Mais le comble de ces difgraces eft de n'auoir au- 
cune hoftellerie pour retraite, & d'eftre contraint de 
chercher la cabane de quelque Sauuage qui veuille 
nous receuoir, ou d' ordinaire la plus grande carelle 
qu'on nous ait fait cette annee, ont eft6 des reproches 
continuelles de la perte du pays, dont on nous tenoit 
la caufe; pour lidt, la terre couuerte d'vne mefchante 
efcorce; pour toute nourriture, vne poignee ou deux 
de bled rofty, ou de farine detrempee dedans [40] 
I'eau, qui bien fouuent laiffent noftre faim toute 
entiere ; & apres tout cela, n'ofer faire aucune ac5tion, 
non pas mefmes les plus faindles, qui ne foit fou- 
p9onnee & prife pour des fortileges: n'eft-ce pas Ik 
mener vne vie qui n'a rien de douceur linon la Croix 
de lefus-Chrift? Si nous voulions ou nous mettre k 
genoux, ou dire noftre Office k la lueur de cinq ou 
fix charbons, c'eftoient iuftement \k ces magies noires 
dont nous les faifions tous mourir. Demandions- 
nous le nom de quelqu'vn pour I'efcrire dans le 
regiftre de nos baptifez, & n'en pas perdre la me- 
moire, c'eftoit (nous difoient-ils) pour le piquer fecret- 
tement, & defchirant par apres ce nom efcrit, faire 
mourir d'vn mefme coup celuy ou celle qui portoit 
ce nom Ik ; en tout nous eftions criminels. Au refte, 
il a pleu k Dieu affifter les ouuriers qu'il employoit 
de faueurs extraordinaires, foit par vn don paffager 
de la langue, que plufieurs ont experimente aux occa- 
lions, entendant & parlant au delk de leur portee, foit 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 129 

narrow paths covered with snow, which, frequently 
disappearing, leave the traveler in doubt and uncer- 
tainty as to the ways, whence ensue quite common 
bewilderments. 

But the culmination of these misfortunes is to have 
no hostelry to retreat to, and to be constrained to 
seek the cabin of some Savage who is willing to re- 
ceive us, — where, usually, the greatest affection that 
has been shown us this year was in the way of con- 
tinual reproaches for the ruin of the country, where- 
of we were held to be the cause. To have, for bed, 
the ground covered with a sorry piece of bark ; for 
all food, a handful or two of parched corn, or of meal 
soaked in [40] water, which very often leaves our 
hunger quite undiminished ; and after all that, not to 
dare to do any act, — not even the most holy ones, — 
which is not suspected and mistaken for enchant- 
ments, — is not that leading a life which has naught 
of sweetness except the Cross of Jesus Christ? If we 
would either kneel down, or say our Office by the 
light of five or six coals, those were precisely these 
acts of black magic by which we were causing them 
all to die. If we asked the name of some one, in 
order to write it in the register of our baptized ones, 
and not lose memory of it, it was (they said) that we 
might pierce him secretly, and afterward, tearing 
out this written name, cause the death, by this 
same act, of him or her who bore that name; in 
everything, we were criminals. Howbeit, it has 
pleased God to assist the workmen whom he em- 
ployed, with extraordinary favors, — either by a tem- 
porary gift for the language, which several have ex- 
perienced on occasion, — understanding and speaking 
above their range ; or by the gift of healings, which 


130 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.19 

par le don de guerifons, qui fe font enfuiuies de 
I'vfage & application du Crucifix & eaue [41] benite. 
Mais les fouffrances endur^es pour vn Sauueur cru- 
cifie font preferables k tout cela. 

Voila en general quels ont efte les trauaux & les 
fruidts de cette annee. Deuant que ie I'explique plus 
en particulier, ie ne puis que ie ne remercie icy au 
nom des bons Anges de ce pays, Meffieurs de la Com- 
pagnie de la Nouuelle France, qui vont tous les ans 
augmentant leurs charitez enuers ces pauures peuples, 
lis fe peuueiit bien affeurer qu'a proportion fe trou- 
uera vn iour augmentee la part qu'ils ont fujet de 
pretendre aux merites de tout ce qui fe fait & fe 
palfe icy, dont ie prie Dieu de tout mon coeur de leur 
donner des cette vie des gages & affeurances telles 
qu'ils peuuent defirer. 

Ie ne diray rien icy des obligations continuelles 
que nous auons k Monfieur le Cheualier de Mont- 
magny noflre gouuerneur: tout ce que i'en pourrois 
dire efl au deffous de fon merite, & des reffentimens 
que nous en auons. Ie prie la diuine bote d'auoir 
aggreables les prieres que nous nous tenos obligez 
de faire pour fa fant6 & profperite ; & de celle de 
tous [42] ceux de I'vne & 1' autre France, "k la charity 
def quels cette miffion du bout du monde ^ de fi gran- 
des & particulieres obligations. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 181 

have ensued from the use and application of the Cru- 
cifix and holy [41] water. But the sufferings endured 
for a crucified Savior are preferable to all that. 

Such, in general, have been the labors and the 
fruits of this year. Before I set it forth more partic- 
ularly, I can but thank here, in the name of the good 
Angels of this country, Messieurs of the Company of 
New France, who continue every year to increase 
their charities toward these poor peoples. They 
may be well assured that one day the portion will be 
correspondingly augmented, which they have reason 
to claim in the merits of all that is done and that 
comes to pass here, — whereof I pray God with all 
my heart to give them even in this life such pledges 
and assurances as they may desire. 

I will say nothing here of the continual obligations 
under which we are to Monsieur the Chevalier de 
Montmagny, our governor : all that I could say there- 
of is below his merit, and the gratitude that we feel 
for it. I pray the divine goodness to hold agreeable 
the prayers which we deem ourselves obliged to 
make for his health and prosperity ; and for that of 
all [42] those of either France, to whose charity this 
mission at the end of the world is under so great and 
special obligations. 


132 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.19 


CHAP. IV. 

DE LA RESIDENCE FIXE DE SAINCTE MARIE. 

IESCRIUOIS I'an pair6 que nous auions deux Refi- 
dences dedans le pays des Hurons, I'vne de S. 
lofeph k Teanaufteiy6 : 1' autre de la Conception 
k OfTolTane, outre cela nous eftions dans le deffein 
d'en eriger d'autres nouuelles en quelques bourgs 
plus 61oignez: mais depuis ayant recogneu que la 
multiplicite de tat de Refidences eftoit fujete k beau- 
coup d'inconueniens, & que la conuerlion de ces 
peuples pourroit plus s'aduancer par la voye des 
miffions, nous prifmes la refolution de reiinir nos 
deux maifons en vne : & afin que dans la fuitte des 
ann^es nous ne fuffions point obligez k [43] changer 
de lieu, comme font les Sauuages, qui tranfportent 
leur bourg d'vn endroit k vn autre apres huidt ou 
neuf ans: nous choififmes vne place, ou nous iti- 
geafmes nous pouuoir eftablir k demeure, d'oti nous 
pourrions, felon que nous aurions de force en main, 
detacher vn bon nombre de miffionnaires qui s'y 
feroient formez, pour aller auec bien plus de liberty 
porter aux bourgs & nations circonuoilines le faincft 
Nom de Noftre Seigneur. 

Ce lieu eft fitu6 au milieu du pays, fur la cofle 
d'vne belle riuiere, qui n'ayant pas de longueur plus 
d'vn quart de lieue, ioincft enfemble deux lacs, I'vn 
qui s'eftend k I'Occident, tirant vn peu vers le Sep- 
tentrion, qui pourroit palfer pour vne mer douce, 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 183 


CHAP. IV. 

OF THE PERMANENT RESIDENCE OF SAINTE MARIE. 

1 WROTE last year that we had two Residences 
in the country of the Hurons, — the one of St. 
Joseph, at Teanausteiye ; the other of la Concep- 
tion, at Ossossane; besides these, we were purposing 
to erect other new ones in certain more distant vil- 
lages. But, since then, — having ascertained that 
the multiplicity of so many Residences was subject 
to many inconveniences, and that the conversion of 
these peoples could be further advanced through the 
channel of missions, — we resolved to combine our 
two houses into one. And — so that in the course of 
years we should not be obliged to [43] change places, 
as the Savages do, who transfer their village from 
one place to another after eight or nine years — we 
chose a place where we judged we could settle per- 
manently ; whence we might, according as we should 
have a supply at hand, detach a goodly number of 
missionaries who would have been trained for the 
purpose, to go with much more liberty, and convey 
to the villages and surrounding nations the holy 
Name of Our Lord. 

This place is situated in the middle of the coun- 
try, on the shore of a beautiful river which, being 
not more than a quarter of a league in length, joins 
together two lakes, — one, which extends to the 
West, verging a little toward the North, which might 


134 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 19 

Taiitre qui eft vers le Midy, dont le contour n'k 
guere moins de deux lieues. 

Nous commen9afines d6s I'Efle paffe "k nous y efta- 
blir, & fur le milieu de rAutomne nous y tranfpor- 
tafmes la relidence que nous auions a Offollane, ayant 
differe d'y reiinir pareillement celle de faindt lofeph: 
mais d6s le commencement [44] du Printemps I'info- 
lence des Sauuages nous a oblige de le faire bien 
pluftoft que d'ailleurs nous n'auions refolu. Et ainll 
nous n'auons maintenant dans tout le pays qu'vne 
feule maifon qui fera ferme & ftable, le voifmage 
des eaux nous eftant tres-aduantageux pour fupleer 
au manquement qui eft en ces contrees de toute autre 
voiture ; & les terres eftans affez bonnes pour le bled 
du pays, que nous pretendons auec le temps y recueil- 
lir nous mefmes. 

II y auoit fujet d'aprehender la proportion & ouuer- 
ture de cette affaire aux comunautez des Sauuages 
qui en eftoient les maiftres, mais il pleut k Dieu en 
cela nous affifter : car la propofition fut incontinent 
agre^e, & auffi toft execut6e, & les prefens necellaires 
"k cela deliurez au temps qu'il le faloit: Si nous 
euffions tard6 deux heures, ie ne fgay fi iamais 1' affaire 
euft pu reiifQr. 

Nous trauaillons maintenant k nous y eftablir, & "k 
drelfer quelque logement raifonnable proportionne k 
nos fondtions; mais cela fe fait auec des peines qu'il 
feroit difficile d'expliquer, n' ayant [45] aucun fecours 
ny affiftance du pays, & eftans d'ailleurs dans vne 
difette prefque vniuerfelle d'ouuriers & d'outils. 

Nous auons donn6 k cette nouuelle maifon le nom 
de faindle Marie, ou de Noftre Dame de la Concep- 
tion, Les obligations generales & particulieres que 
nous auons "k cette grande Princeffe du ciel & de la 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 135 

pass for a fresh-water sea ; the other, which is toward 
the South, the contour of which is hardly less than 
two leagues.^ 

We began to establish ourselves there as early as 
last Summer, and about the middle of the Autumn 
we moved thither the residence which we had at 
Ossossane, having delayed to combine with it in like 
manner that of saint Joseph : but, at the beginning 
[44] of Spring, the insolence of the Savages obliged 
us to do so much sooner than on other accounts we 
had decided to. And thus we have now in all the 
country but a single house which is to be firm and 
stable, — the vicinity of the waters being very ad- 
vantageous to us for supplying the want, in these 
regions, of every other vehicle ; and the lands being 
fairly good for the native corn, which we intend, as 
time goes on, to harvest for ourselves. 

There was ground for apprehending the proposal 
and opening of this matter to the communities of the 
Savages who were the masters of it ; but it pleased 
God in that to assist us, for the proposition was at 
once accepted and immediately carried out, and the 
presents necessary thereto delivered at the proper 
time. If we had delayed two hours, I know not 
whether the affair could ever have succeeded. 

We are now laboring to establish ourselves there, 
and to erect some abode reasonably suitable to our 
functions ; but that is done with pains that it would 
be difficult to explain, — having [45] no help or as- 
sistance from the country, and being withal in an 
almost universal dearth of workmen and tools. 

We have given to this new house the name of 
sainte Marie, or Nostre Dame de la Conception. The 
general and special obligations that we are under to 


186 


LES RELATIONS DESj£SUITES [Vol.19 


terre, font qu'vn de nos plus fenfibles defplaifirs eft 
de ne luy en pouuoir tefmoigner allez de recognoif- 
fance. An moins pretendons nous d'orefnatiant cette 
confolation, qii'autant de fois qu'on parlera de la 
principale demeure de cette miffion des Hnrons, la 
nommant du nom de faindte Marie, ce foient autant 
d'hommages qui luy feront rendus de ce que nous 
luy fommes & tenons d'elle, & de ce que nous luy 
voulons eflre a iamais. loindt que fainct lofeph 
ayant efl6 choifi pour le patron de ce pays, & en fuite 
la premiere & principale Eglife qui fe baftira dans 
les Hurons luy eftant deftin6e, nous n'auons pas deu 
prendre d' autre protec5trice de noftre maifon que la 
faindte Vierge fon efpoufe, pour ne pas feparer ceux 
que [46] Dieu a liez fi eftroittement. 

C'auoit bien efte vne de nos penfees faifant vne 
maifon a I'efcart efloignee du voifmage des bourgs, 
qu'elle feruiroit entr'autres chofes h. la retraitte & 
recoUedtion de nos ouuriers euangeliques, qui apres 
leurs combats trouueroient cette folitude pleine de 
delices: mais iamais nous n'euffions creu que le pre- 
mier ^ qui cette maifon feruiroit pour ce fujet, deufl 
eflre vn pauure barbare, dont le genie eft fi fort efloi- 
gne des idees conformes k telles occupations. Ce fut 
lofeph Chihouatenhoua, furnomme icy par excellence 
le Chreftien. 

A I'occafion des tempeftes que nous preuoyions, 
nous iugeafmes a propos de le preuenir de quelque 
inftrudtion plus particuliere, afin de luy fortifier le 
courage, comme k celuy qui deuoit feruir d'exemple 
k tons les autres. On luy en fit done ouuerture, & 
on luy donna quelque idee des exercices fpirituels. 
Helas ! dit-il, pourquoy auez vous eft6 fi long temps 
fans me faire part d'vn fi grand bien. I'auois eu 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 137 

that great Princess of heaven and earth make it one 
of our keenest disappointments that we are not able 
to show her sufficient gratitude. At least we claim 
henceforth this consolation, that as often as people 
shall speak of the principal abode of this mission of 
the Hurons, calling it by the name of sainte Marie, 
it will be so many homages which will be rendered 
to her for what we are to her and hold from her, and 
of what we wish to be to her forever. Besides, saint 
Joseph having been chosen for the patron of this 
country, — and consequently the first and principal 
Church which shall be built among the Hurons be- 
ing destined for him, — we ought not to have taken 
any other protectress for our house than the blessed 
Virgin, his spouse, in order not to separate those 
whom [46] God has bound together so closely. 

It had indeed been one of our thoughts while build- 
ing a house apart, remote from the vicinity of the 
villages, that it would serve, among other things, 
for the retreat and meditation of our evangelistic 
laborers, who after their combats would find this 
solitude full of delights : but never would we have 
believed that the first for whom this house would 
serve for this purpose was to be a poor barbarian, 
whose spirit is so far removed from the ideas answer- 
ing to such occupations. This was Joseph Chihoua- 
tenhoua, surnamed here par excellence * ' the Chris- 
tian." 

On account of the storms which we were anticipat- 
ing, we judged it proper to inform him with some 
more particular instruction, so as to strengthen his 
courage, as the one who was to serve as example to 
all the others. We then broached the matter to him, 
and gave him some idea of the spiritual exercises. 


138 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.19 

mille fois la penf6e de m'enquerir pourquoy vous ne 
m'enfeigniez [47] point ce que ie voyois faire li fou- 
uent aux deux Peres qui font en ma cabane, qui 
prient li long temps Dieu fans remuer les levres : ie 
m'en fuis retenu croyant que fi vous m'en eulTiez iuge 
capable vous me I'euffiez enfeigne, & partant qu'il 
faloit attendre d'en eftre trouu6 digne: deflors Ie 
temps fut pris pour ce deffein, mais des occupations 
extraordinaires luy furuenant les vnes apres les 
autres, la chofe tiroit en longueur. Ce bon homme 
s'en apperceut, & fe doutant bien de luy-mefme qu'il 
pourtoit y auoir de la rufe du diable, il quitte tout ^ 
rbeure mefme, abandonne entre les mains de Dieu 
Ie foin de fa famille, & en effedt nous vint trouuer 
lors que nous I'attendions Ie moins. Peut-eftre on 
fera bien aife de f9auoir quelque partie des fenti- 
mens que noftre Seigneur luy donna pendant cette 
faindte occupation, on verra que Ie S. Efprit eft par 
tout Ie maiflre des coeurs. 

1. Toute ma vie i'ay toufiours efte occupy ; fi ie 
mourois k cette heure, quel profit m'en refteroit-il 
pour I'eternite, fmon du peu que i'ay fait pour Ie 
falut de [48] mon ame depuis que i'ay la foy: I'occu- 
pation que ie vais entreprendre me fera &, iamais pro- 
fitable, il faut done m'y employer plus fortement que 
iamais ie n'ay entrepris affaire du monde, 

2 . Mon Dieu ie viens icy pour f jauoir voftre faindte 
volonte, & en refolution "k quelque prix que ce foit 
de I'accomplir, m'en deufl-il coufter la vie. Si vous 
ne me la donnez k cognoiftre, pardonnez moy mon 
Dieu; vn fubjet a qui fon Capitaine ne declare pas fes 
defirs, eft excufable s'il ne les fait. 

3. Helas que I'appuy des hommes eft peu de 


1640] RELA TJON OF 1640 139 

" Alas! " he said, " why have you been so long with- 
out imparting to me so great a good? I had a thou- 
sand times had the thought of inquiring why you 
did not teach me [47] what I so often saw the two 
Fathers do who are in my cabin, who pray to God so 
long without moving their lips : I restrained myself, 
believing that if you had judged me capable, you 
would have taught me, and consequently that I must 
wait to be found worthy thereof. ' ' After that, the 
time was taken for this purpose ; but extraordinary 
occupations coming upon him, one after the other, 
the matter dragged along. This good man perceived 
as much, and plainly suspecting, of his own accord, 
that there might be some ruse of the devil therein, 
he left in God's hands the care of his family, and 
in fact came to find us when we were least expecting 
him. Perhaps one will be glad to know some 
portion of the sentiments that our Lord gave him 
during this holy occupation ; it will be seen that the 
Holy Ghost is everywhere the master of hearts. 

1 . * * All my life I have always been occupied ; if 
I died at this hour, what profit would there be left 
to me for eternity, unless from the little that I have 
done for the salvation of [48] my soul since I have 
had the faith ? The occupation which I am about to 
undertake will be forever profitable to me ; I must 
then attend to it more mightily than ever I have 
undertaken any business in the world. 

2. " My God, I come here to know your holy 
will, and resolve, whatever cost there be, to fulfill 
it, though it were to cost my life. Unless you give 
me to know it, — forgive me, my God : a subject to 
whom his Captain does not declare his desires, is 
excusable if he do not accomplish them. 


140 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 19 

chofe ! ceux qui ni'aymoient le plus au monde, & de 
qui ie tiens dauantage, mon pere & ma mere font 
morts: Dieu feul par fa bont6 m'a feruy de pere & 
de mere: lors que ie ne fongeois aucunement en 
luy, il a fonge fans celfe h. moy: i'eftois come vn 
enfant k la mammelle, qui mord & tormente fa mere 
lors qu'elle luy fait plus de bien. Ce grand Dieu k 
appell6 du bout du monde & de delk les mers des 
hommes qui font venus pour moy, & pour moy quali 
feul. Helas mon Dieu que voftre amour eft [49] 
grand! me dois-je appuyer fur autre que fur vous? 

4, Vn certain iour il fe trouua le foir dans vne 
grande aridite & euagation d'efprit: quand il fut 
queftion de rendre compte de fa meditation au Pere 
qui le dirigeoit: Mon frere, luy dit-il, ie recognois 
bien que ie n'ay point d'efprit, ie n'ay point bien fait 
mon oraifon, ie me fuis incontinent trouue au bout 
de mes penfees. Helas, qu'eft-ce que de noftre 
efprit! Le Pere luy ayant demande comment il 
s'eftoit comporte en cette occafion; Pay dit a Dieu, 
refpondit-il : Helas mon Dieu ie ne fuis rien, eft ce 
h. moy h. vous porter quelque parole: ie viens icy 
pour vous entendre, parlez done au fond de mon 
cceur, & dites moy, fais cela; ie le feray mon Dieu, 
quand i'en deurois mourir. Puis i'ay dit a la Vierge, 
faindte Marie mere de mon Sauueur lefus, me voicy 
en voftre maifon, & dans voftre Chapelle, qui m'y 
fera du bien fmon vous? ayez piti6 de moy: ie fuis 
icy venu pour cognoiftre la volonte de Dieu, mais ie 
n'ay point d'efprit, & s'il parle, ie ne I'entends point. 
Ie ne fuis [50] rien, vous efles toute puiffante, priez 
pour moy voflre fils bien-aime lefus. Puis ie me 
fuis addrefCe aux Saindts dont les reliques font icy, 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 141 

3. " Alas, how insignificant is the support of 
men! Those who loved me the most in the world, 
and from whom I derive most, — my father and my 
mother, — are dead; God alone, in his goodness, has 
served me as father and mother ; when I was nowise 
thinking of him, he thought incessantly of me. I 
was like a child at the breast, which bites and annoys 
its mother when she is doing it most good. This 
great God has called from the end of the world, and 
from beyond the seas, men who have come for me, 
and for me almost alone. Alas, my God, how great 
is your [49] love ! Shall I lean on another than 
you ? ' ' 

4. On a certain day, he found himself at evening 
in a great aridity and distraction of mind ; when it 
was a question of giving an account of his meditation 
to the Father who was directing him, " My brother," 
he said to him, " I acknowledge, indeed, that I have 
no sense ; I have not said my prayer well, — I straight- 
way found myself at the end of my thoughts. Alas, 
what is our intelligence ! " The Father having asked 
him how he had behaved on that occasion, he an- 
swered: " I said to God, ' Alas, my God, I am noth- 
ing; is it for me to bring you any word? I come 
here to hear you; speak then, in the depth of my 
heart, and tell me, " Do that; " I will do it, my God, 
though I should die for it.' Then I said to the Vir- 
gin: ' Holy Mary, mother of my Savior Jesus, 
here I am in your house and in your Chapel; who 
will do me good if not you? Have pity on me: I 
have come here to know the will of God ; but I have 
no intelligence, and, if he speaks, I do not under- 
stand him. I am [50] nothing; you are all-power- 


142 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.19 

& dont la plus grande part m'a donne bien de la peine 
h. apporter icy haul de Kebec : le leur ay dit, grands 
Saindts, ie ne fcay pas vos noms, neantmoins vous 
ne ponuez ignorer que i'ay apport6 vos reliques en 
ce pays, ayez piti6 de moy: priez pour moy voflre 
maiftre & le mien lefus. Par apres ie me fuis fou- 
uenu des tableaux qui font en cette Chapelle, & ay 
prie les Saindts qui y font depeints, particulierement 
faindt lofeph, dont ie porte le nom. 

5. En la meditation du Paradis il ne voulut point 
s'arrefter k confiderer tout ce qu'on pent fe figurer 
de beau dans le ciel : Mon Dieu, dit-il, ie ne veux 
pas iuger des biens que vous referuez apres cette vie 
h. ceux qui vous feruent, car ie n'ay point d'efprit. 
C'efl alTez que vous ayez dit qu'on y feroit k tout 
iamais content, vous en fcauez mieux les moyens 
que tous les hommes ne le peuuent comprendre. Si 
ie me reprefentois le Paradis comme vn lieu o\x il y 
a de belles cabanes, [51] de belles robbes de caftor, 
des cerfs & des ours ^ manger, ie ne vous ferois pas 
plus riche que les hommes: il n'y a rien de tout cela, 
mais il y a bien plus que tout cela, puis que les hom- 
mes & toutes leurs richeffes ne font rien k I'efgal 
des voftres. On me raconte mille raretez & beautez 
de la France, que ie ne puis comprendre, ie le croy 
toutefois: pourquoy ne ferois-je pas afleur6 des con- 
tentemes ineffables qu'il y a dans le ciel, quoy qu'ils 
furpallent mes penf^es: c'eft allez que vous ayez 
dit qu'on y fera k tout iamais content. 

6. Vn iour on luy apporte vne faulle nouuelle de 
la maladie d'vne de fes niepces. Quand bien, dit-il, 
ma femme & mes enfans feroient malades, ie ne par- 
tiray point d'icy que les huidt iours ne foient expi- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 148 

ful: entreat your well-beloved son Jesus for me.' 
Then I addressed myself to the Saints whose relics 
are here, and the chief part of which gave me much 
trouble to bring up here from Kebec. I said to 
them: ' Great Saints, I do not know your names; 
nevertheless you cannot be ignorant of the fact that I 
have brought your relics to this country. Have pity 
on me ; pray your master and mine, Jesus, for me. ' 
Afterward, I remembered the pictures which are in 
this Chapel; and I prayed to the Saints who are 
depicted there, — especially saint Joseph, whose name 
I bear." 

5. During the meditation on Paradise, he would 
not stop to consider everything beautiful that one can 
imagine to one's self in heaven. " My God," he 
said, " I do not desire to imagine the good things 
which you reserve after this life for those who serve 
you, for I have no sense. It is enough that you have 
said that we should be forever satisfied there; you 
know the means thereto better than all men can 
understand. If I fancied Paradise as a place where 
there are fine cabins, [51] handsome beaver skins, 
deer and bears to eat, I would not make you richer 
than men ; there is nothing of all that, but there is 
much more than all that, since men and all their 
riches are nothing like yours. They tell me a thou- 
sand rare things and beauties of France, which I can- 
not understand, yet I believe it: why should I not 
be assured of the ineffable satisfactions that there 
are in heaven, although they surpass my thoughts? 
It is enough that you have said that we shall be for- 
ever contented there. ' ' 

6. One day, they bring him a false piece of news. 


144 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.19 

rez: ie me confole dans la creance que i'ay que Dieu 
voit tout ce qui fe paffe dans ma famille: ie n'en fuis 
pas Ie chef, c'eft Dieu: s'il veut que tous meurent, 
qui luy pent refifter? ma prefence leur feroit mainte- 
nant inutile : ie f eray plus icy pour eux aupres de 
Dieu. Le diable a fait tout ce qu'il a pu pour [52] 
m'empefcher de commencer ces exercices, il tafche 
maintenant k faire que ie ne les continue pas. Ceux 
qui me dirigent iugeront mieux que moy s'il faut 
que i'aille affifler ceux qu'on me dit eftre malades. 

7. Vne nuidt entr'autres f 'eftant efueille, il fe mit 
en oraifon, & k confiderer la prouidence de Dieu fur 
la conduite de la vie des hommes : que nous eftions 
en la difpofition de Dieu, comme les chiens qu'ils 
nourriffent font en leur pouuoir: que comme eux 
quand ils ont vn ieune chien qui fe fait manuals, ils 
le tuent pour obuier au mal qu'il feroit deuenant 
plus grand: De mefme Dieu preuoyant qu'vn en- 
fant fera mefchant s'il deuient homme, le preuient 
de la mort, par vn effedt de fa bonte, ce que les 
hommes ne voyent pas. Tout de mefme, quoy que 
nous donnions k nos chiens ce qui leur fuffit pour leur 
nourriture, ils ne laiffent pas de manger ce qu'ils 
trouuent, & d'en prendre ou ils peuuent. Ainfi, 
quoy que Dieu nous donne fuffifamment pour viure, 
iamais nous ne fommes contens: nous battons nos 
chiens dans ces rencontres, [53] quoy que nous les 
aimions : de mefme quand nous abuf ons des biens de 
Dieu, il nous chaftie, & toutefois il ne laiffe pas de 
nous aimer: mais ceux qui le feruent fidelement, 
Dieu les aime auec plus de tendreffe qu'vn pere n'aime 
fes enfans. 

8. II difoit fouuent, ie ne crains plus du tout la 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 145 

about the sickness of one of his nieces. " What 
though," he said, " my wife and my children were 
sick, I will not leave here till the eight days have 
expired. I console myself in the belief that God sees 
everything which takes place in my family ; I am 
not the head of it, God is: if he will that all die, who 
can resist him? My presence would be useless to 
them now : I shall do more for them here, near God. 
The devil has done all he could to [52] hinder me 
from beginning these exercises ; he now tries to stop 
me from continuing them. Those who direct me 
will judge, better than I, whether I must go to 
assist those who are reported to me to be sick." 

7. One night, among others, having awakened, 
he proceeded to pray and to consider the providence of 
God over the guidance of the life of men, — that we 
were at the disposal of God, just as the dogs which 
men feed are in their power: that — just as they, 
when they have a young dog that is turning out bad, 
kill him in order to obviate the harm that he might 
do, becoming larger — likewise God, foreseeing that 
a child will be bad if he become a man, anticipates 
him with death, by an effect of his goodness which 
men do not see. Just the same, although we give 
our dogs what suffices them for their food, they nev- 
ertheless eat what they find, and take it where they 
can. Thus, although God gives us sufficient for life, 
we are never satisfied ; we beat our dogs on these 
occasions, [53] although we love them: likewise, 
when we abuse God's favors, he chastises us, and 
yet he does not fail to love us ; but those who serve 
him faithfully, God loves with more tenderness than 
a father loves his children. 


146 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.19 

mort, & ie remercierois Dieu fi ie me voyois "k la fin 
de ma vie, dans la ferme efperance que i'ay, que 
i'irois au ciel: tout de mefme ie n'apprehende plus 
la mort d'aucun de mes parens, pourueu qu'ils meu- 
rent en la grace de Dieu. Lors qu'vne ieune femme 
qui demeure en la maifon de fon beau-pere, eft inui- 
tee par fon pere de venir pafTer quelques mois en fa 
maifon, fi c'eft vn homme riche & liberal, Ie beau- 
pere s'en r6jouit dans la penf^e qu'il a que fa bru 
fera bien ^ fon aife: De mefme fi quelq'vn de 
noftre famille mouroit, i'aurois la penfee que Dieu 
fon pere I'auroit tir6 dans fa maifon, ie m'en rejoui- 
rois, puis qu'elle y feroit mieux que chez moy. 

9. Souuent fortant de I'oraifon il ne [54] trouuoit 

point de paroles pour expliquer les fentimens de fon 

coeur, & repetoit plufieurs f ois taouskeheati iatacan ; 

c'eft vne chofe eflrange, mon frere. O qu'il eft vray, 

adiouftoit-il, que les bommes n'ont point d'efprit, 

c'efl maintenant que ie commence k cognoiftre Dieu. 

O que n'eft-il cogneu! k quoy fongent les hommes! 

& moy qui parle, ou eftoit mon efprit? comment fe 

peut-il faire qu'on demeure infidele, peut-on pecher 

apres cela? II offrit fouuent fon fang & fa vie pour 

la conuerfion de fes compatriotes, & fit vn ferme pro- 

pos de ne point perdre d'occafion de parler de Dieu, 

& iamais ne rougir de profeffer ce qu'il eftoit, Chre- 

ftien iufques ^ la mort. 

Les iourn^es luy eftoient trop courtes, & fouuent 
il demandoit s'il ne pourroit pas faire les exercices 
plufieurs fois I'annee. En vn mot il n'y a point de 
coeur barbare, mefme dans Ie plus profond de la bar- 
baric, lors que Dieu veut en prendre la poffeflion. 
lefus-Chrift n'a pas moins merits de graces aux Sau- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 147 

8. He often said: " I do not longer fear death at 
all, and I would thank God if I saw myself at the 
end of my life, in the firm hope that I have, that I 
should go to heaven : in like manner, I no longer 
apprehend the death of any of my relatives, provided 
that they die in the grace of God. When a young 
woman who lives in her father-in-law's house is 
invited by her own father to come and spend some 
months in his house ; if he is a rich and liberal man, 
the father-in-law rejoices in the thought that his 
daughter-in-law will be much at her ease. Like- 
wise, if some one of our family died, I should have 
the thought that God, her father, had drawn her to 
his house: I should rejoice in the same, since she 
would be better off there than with me." 

9. Often, when leaving prayer, he [54] found no 
words to explain the feelings of his heart, and sev- 
eral times repeated, " taouskeheati iatacan," — "it 
is a strange thing, my brother." " Oh, how true it 
is," he added, " that men have no sense; I now be- 
gin to know God. Oh, why is he not known! what 
are men thinking of! and I who speak, — where was 
my sense ? how can it be that one remains infidel : 
can one sin after that?" He frequently offered his 
blood and his life for the conversion of his fellow 
countrymen, and made a firm resolve not to lose the 
opportunity to speak of God, and never to blush for 
professing what he was, — a Christian, even to death. 

The days were too short for him, and he often 
asked whether he might not make a retreat several 
times a year. In a word, there is no barbarian heart, 
even in the greatest depth of barbarism, when God 
wills to take possession thereof. Jesus Christ has no 


148 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol. 1» 

uages de rAmerique, qu'aux peuples les plus policez 
de r Europe. 

[55] Depuis ce temps-l^ nous I'auons veu croiftre 
fenliblemet dans cet efprit vrayement Chreftien qui 
fe trouuoit en la primitiue Eglife. 

Vn de fes huidt iours d'exercices, pendant qu'il fe 
chauffoit, vne bande de dix ou douze Sauuages des 
plus anciens du pays entra dans noftre cabane ces 
barbares fe mirent aufTi toft fur leur entretien ordi- 
naire, que nous eftions la mine de leur patrie. Ce 
braue Chreftien apres auoir fait vne profeflion publi- 
que & honorable de ce qu'il efloit, fe mit k leur par- 
ler fi k propos, & auec tant de douceur & efficace, 
que de loups qu'ils eftoiet entrez, ils s'en retourne- 
rent agneaux: & I'vn d'eux qui ne trempoit point 
dans ces fentimens, mais de long temps penfoit & 
ruminoit les difcours que nous allions tenant par tout 
de nos myfteres, goufta de telle forte fes paroles & 
fon efprit, qu'il le defira entretenir en particulier, ou 
il pafTa k trois diuers iours qu'il le reuint voir les 
trois & quatre heures chaque iour, fans fentir que le 
temps fe paffoit, tant les difcours de ce bon Chre- 
ftien, ou pluftoft le fainct Efprit qui parloit [56] par 
fa bouche luy donnoit de fatisfadtion. 

En effedt il ne la voulut faire plus longue, il de- 
mande le baptefme, & donna telle fatisfaction qu'on 
ne iugea pas k propos de differer plus long-temps. 
Le iour fut pris a I'odtaue de la fefte des Roys, qui 
eftoit le lendemain de la fin des exercices de noftre 
Chreftien, & le iour de fon depart de chez nous. Ce 
qui nous parut comme vne offrande de cette gentilit6 
que Noftre Dame faifoit "k fon cher fils Noftre Sei- 
gneur, pour y donner fa benedidtion. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 14P 

less merited the thanks of the Savages of America 
than those of the most civilized peoples of Europe. 

[55] Since that time we have seen him grow per- 
ceptibly in that truly Christian spirit which was 
found in the primitive Church. 

On one of his eight days of retreat, while he was 
warming himself, a band of ten or twelve Savages, 
of the eldest in the country, entered our cabin ; these 
barbarians at once began their usual conversation, — 
that we were the ruin of their country. This worthy 
Christian, after having made a public and honorable 
profession of what he was, began to speak to them 
so appropriately, and with so much gentleness and 
effectiveness, that whereas they had come in as 
wolves, they returned thence as lambs; and one of 
them — who had no voice in those former senti- 
ments, but had long been meditating and ruminating 
upon the discourses that we went about everywhere 
delivering on the subject of our mysteries — so rel- 
ished his words and his intelligence that he desired to 
converse with him in private. In such talk he spent, 
on three several days when he came back to see him, 
three and four hours each day, without noticing how 
the time was passing ; so much did the sayings of this 
good Christian, — or rather the holy Ghost, who spoke 
[56] by his lips, — give him satisfaction. 

In sooth, he was not willing to make a longer story ; 
he asked baptism, and gave such satisfaction that we 
did not judge it proper to put him off longer. The 
day was chosen on the octave of Epiphany, which 
was the day after the end of our Christian's exer- 
cises, and the day of his departure from us, — which 
appeared to us as an offering of this gentile race 


160 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.19 

Ce nouueau Chreftien nomm6 Louys en fon bap- 
tefme, eft vn des bons efprits du pays, & qui nous a 
fembl6 des la premiere fois qu'on la abord6, des plus 
capables de nos myfteres : f 'il correfpond au graces 
de Dieu, il eft pour eftre vn des pilliers de cette 
Eglife naiffante. Ce qui nous confirme dans cette 
efperance, eft qu'ayant repall^ la vie & la conduite 
de cet homme, il ne s'eft iamais trouu6 engage dans 
aucune ceremonie diabolique, ny autre vice confide- 
rable, quoy qu'il paffe quarante ans. 

[57] Au fortir de fes exercices noftre lofeph Chi- 
houatenhoua fe fentit pouffe k vifiter quelques fiens 
parens, en vn bourg afTez proche d'icy. Le Pere le 
Mercier qui I'auoit alTift^ en fes exercices, I'accompa- 
gna auffi en ce voyage, pour le mefnager k la gloire 
de Dieu. Ce bon Chreftien s'y comporta auec vn 
efprit qui femble auoir ie ne fgay quoy de celuy des 
Apoftres, lors qu'ils fortirent du lieu ou ils auoient 
receu le faindt Efprit. 

II commenja par la viflte d'vn flen frere, & apres 
quelques complimens ordinaires. Mon frere, luy dit- 
il, il eft vray que ie ne fuis que voftre cadet, mais il 
faut que vous f9acliiez que la grace que Dieu m'a 
fait de receuoir le faincft baptefme, & les fentimens 
qu'il me donne, m'obligent de prendre la quality 
d'aifne : «& en cette qualite ie vous diray que deux 
chofes m'ont amene icy; la premiere, pour vous ap- 
prendre comme vous deuez vous comporter parmy 
les manuals bruits qui courent de moy dans le pays : 
la feconde, pour vous communiquer derechef la doc- 
trine qu'on m'a enfeignee, & vous fommer plus que 
iamais de penfer ferieufement [58] aux affaires de 
voftre falut. Si on a parl6 de moy en manuals termes 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 151 

which Our Lady was giving to her dear son Our 
Lord, that he might bestow his blessing upon it. 

This new Christian, named Louys at his baptism, 
is one of the noble spirits of the country, and seemed 
to us, from the first time that we accosted him, one 
of the best qualified for our mysteries : if he answers 
to the grace of God, he is likely to be one of the pil- 
lars of this rising Church. What confirms us in this 
hope is, that, since we have reviewed the life and 
the conduct of this man, he has never been found 
engaged in any diabolical ceremony or other not- 
able vice, although he is past forty years. 

[57] On leaving his retreat, our Joseph Chihouaten- 
houa felt himself impelled to visit some relatives of 
his, in a village quite near here. Father le Mercier, 
who had assisted him in his exercises, also accom- 
panied him on this journey, in order to direct it to 
the glory of God. This good Christian behaved in 
it with a spirit which seems to possess something 
like that of the Apostles, when they went forth from 
the place where they had received the holy Ghost. 

He began with a visit to a brother of his, and, 
after some usual compliments, said to him: " My 
brother, it is true that I am but your junior ; but you 
must know that the grace which God has shown me 
in receiving holy baptism, and the feelings that he 
gives me, oblige me to assume the rank of senior; 
and in this capacity I will tell you that two things 
have brought me here. The first is, to teach you 
how you are to behave amid the evil reports which 
are current about me in the country ; the second, to 
impart to you again the doctrine which they have 
taught me, and to summon you more than ever to 
think seriously [58] upon the business of your salva- 


152 LES RELATIONS DES jiSUITES [Vol.19 

par le pafle, il faut bien vous attendre que ce fera pis 
^ I'adtienir, puis que ce que i'ay fait iufques ^ prefent 
n'eft rien en comparaifon de ce que ie pretends faire 
d'orefnauant pour Dieu. C'eft maintenant que ie 
commence k le cognoiftre, & que ie ne defire rien 
efpargner pour fon feruice. 

Ce qui me fait parler de la forte, eft que ie viens 
de paffer huidt iours auec mes freres, ou i'ay apris 
que ie ne fuis rien, & les grandes obligations que 
nous auons a vn Dieu Tout-puiffant qui nous a tant 
aym6 : ^ quelque prix que ce foit ie veux accomplir 
f es faindles volontez : iamais ie ne rougiray de faire 
profeffion de ce que ie fuis, & I'apprehenfion de la 
mort ne me fermera iamais la bouche quand il fe pre- 
fentera quelque occafion de parler de fes grandeurs. 
Ie vous dis cecy afin que vous vous difpofiez k tout ce 
que Dieu voudra faire de moy. On vous affeurera 
bien-toft tout de nouueau ce dont on vous a fouuent 
battu les oreilles, que ie fuis vne des caufes de la 
ruyne [59] du pays, que les Frangois m'ont appris le 
f ecret, & que ie fuis paff6 maiftre en matiere de forts : 
D'autres vous viendrot dire que la refolution eft prife 
de me tuer, ou mefme que defia on m'aura fendu la 
tefte. Efcoutez paifiblement tous ces difcours fans 
vous troubler, baiffez la tefte & vous taifez, de peur 
que vous ne parliez mal k propos: car vous n'auez 
point encore d'efprit n'ayant point encore de foy. 
Repofez-vous, {\. vous pouuez fur cette penfee, que 
celuy que ie recognois pour mon maiftre difpofera 
pour mon bien de tout ce qui me touche. Au refte 
ne me tenez pas en mefme rang que ceux qu'on fou- 
p9onne parmy nous eftre f orders : ceux-1^ ont tout 
fujetd'eftre en peine pour leur perfonne,eftant feuls, 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 153 

tion. If they have spoken of me in evil terms in the 
past, you must indeed expect that it will be worse in 
the future ; since what I have done hitherto is noth- 
ing in comparison with what I intend to do hence- 
forth for God. It is now that I begin to know him, 
and that I desire to spare nothing for his service. 

" What makes me speak like this is, that I have 
just spent eight days with my brothers, where I have 
learned that I am nothing, and the great obligations 
that we are under to an Almighty God who has loved 
us so much. At whatever cost it be, I wish to fulfill 
his holy will ; I will never blush to make profession 
of what I am, and the dread of death will never close 
my lips when any opportunity shall present itself for 
speaking of his greatness. I tell you this to the end 
that you may prepare yourself for everything that 
God shall will to do with me. They will soon assure 
you quite afresh, — what they have often assailed your 
ears with, — that I am one of the causes of the ruin 
[59] of the country; that the French have taught me 
the secret, and that I am past master in the matter 
of spells. Others will come to tell you that the reso- 
lution to kill me is adopted, or even that they have 
already split my head. Listen peaceably to all these 
sayings without disturbing yourself; lower your 
head, and be silent, lest you speak inopportunely; 
for you have not yet sense enough, not yet having 
faith. Rest, if you can, upon this thought, that he 
whom I acknowledge for my master will dispose, for 
my good, of everything which concerns me. How- 
beit, do not hold me in the same rank as those who 
are suspected among us of being sorcerers; those 
have every reason to be anxious for their persons, 


154 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.19 

& n'ayant point d' autre fupportque le diable, qui n'a 
aucun pouuoir: mais moy ne penfez pas que ie fois 
feul, i'ay pour moy & auec moy celuy qui eft tout 
puiffant, s'il me prend en fa protedtion, tous les 
hommes, ny mefme tous les demons de I'enfer ne 
peuuent rien contre moy : i'ay pour moy les Anges 
qui font en plus grand nombre que tous les hommes, 
tous [60] les Saindts de Paradis, entre lefquels il y a 
defia vn bon nombre de nos compatriotes, qui prient 
fans celle pour moy. C'eft cela qui m'enfle le cou- 
rage: en vn mot, craignant Dieu ie ne crains rien. 
Enfin le pis qui me puille arriuer k voftre aduis, eft 
qu'on me fende la tefte comme on fait aux forciers 
du pays: mais ie veux bien que vous f9acliiez que ie 
me tiendrois trop heureux de donner ma vie pour 
celuy qui nous a tant ayme. Ne craignez point que 
noftre famille en foit marquee d'aucune infamie, C. 
Dieu fait la grace a noflre pays d'embraffer la Foy 
ma memoire en fera honorable "k toute la pofterit6, & 
f era dit k iamais que i'auray efle le premier qui auray 
mieux aime perdre la vie que la liberte de viure 
ouuertement en Chreftien. Pour vous fl vous auiez 
tant foit peu de foy, comme vous ne manquez pas 
d'affection pour moy, vous vous reiouyriez "k la nou- 
uelle de ma mort, qui me mettroit fans doute pour 
vn iamais en polfeffion de tous les biens imaginables, 
& vous mefme y auriez beaucoup d'intereft: car quel 
bien vous puis-ie faire en cette vie? tout ce [61] que 
ie puis eft de prier Dieu pour vous & voftre famille, 
& vous exciter k embraller la foy: mais c'eft dans le 
ciel que ie pourray beaucoup, & qu'ayant plus de co- 
gnoilTance de voftre mifere, & par confequent plus de 
compaffion pour vous, ie feray plus grande inftance 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 155^ 

being alone, and having no other support than the 
devil, who has no power. But do not think that I 
am alone ; I have for me and with me the one who 
is all-powerful : if he take me into his protection, all 
men, and even all the demons of hell, can do nothing 
against me. I have on my side the Angels, who are 
in greater number than all men, and all [60] the 
Saints of Paradise, among whom there are already a 
good many of our fellow countrymen, who are cease- 
lessly praying for me. That is what swells my cour- 
age ; in a word, fearing God, I fear nothing. Finally, 
the worst that can happen to me, in your opinion, is 
that they may split my head, as they do to the sorcerers 
of the country ; but I would have you know, indeed, 
that I should account myself too happy to give my 
life for the one who has loved us so much. Do not 
fear that our family will be marked by any infamy 
thereby ; if God does the favor to our country to have 
it embrace the Faith, my memory will be honorable 
to all posterity, and it will be said forever that I shall 
have been the first who preferred losing life to losing 
the liberty of living openly like a Christian. As for 
you, if you had even but a little faith, since you are 
not wanting in affection for me, you would rejoice in 
the news of my death, which would no doubt place me 
forever in possession of all good things conceivable, 
and you yourself would have much interest therein : 
for what good can I do you in this life ? All [61] that 
I can do is to pray to God for you and your family, 
and urge you to embrace the faith ; but in heaven 
I shall be able to do much; and, having more 
knowledge of your misery and consequently more 
compassion for you, I will use greater urgency with 


156 LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 19 

aupres de Dieu, pour vous obtenir la grace de reco- 
gnoiftre voftre malheur. 

Ce Sauuage efcouta ce difcours fans dire vn feul 
mot, & demeura dans vn eftonnement incroyable 
voyant fon frere luy parler d'vn langage incogneu. 
Toute fa refponfe fut qu'en effedt on ne parloit dans 
les feflins & les afCembl^es que de luy & des Fran- 
5ois, que les affaires f'alloient aigriffant de plus en 
plus, & que les deffeins fembloient eftre tout formez 
de s'en deffaire. Noftre Chreftien ne luy refpondit 
autre chofe finon qu'il ne s'en mift pas en peine, que 
fa vie & la noftre eftoient entre les mains de Dieu. 

Puis fe tournant vers tous ceux qui eftoient 1^ dans 
la cabane, il continue vne bonne partie de la nuidt a 
les inftruire des chofes de noftre foy, tantofl leur [62] 
parlant des beautez eneffables du Paradis, puis des 
effroyables tourmens de I'Enfer. II addreffoit plus 
ordinairement la parole k fon frere, fans le lafler de 
battre ce coeur plus dur que la pierre. En fin voy- 
ant qu'il ne pouuoit tirer de luy aucune bonne parole : 
Mon frere, ie recognois bien, luy dit-il, que vous ne 
faites pas beaucoup d'eftat de ce que ie vous enf eigne, 
vn iour viendra que vous regretterez de n'en auoir 
pas fait voftre profit: Nous fommes comme des en- 
fans pendant cette vie, nous fommes fans efprit, nous 
n'eftimons que des paffetemps inutiles; & fur tout 
ceux qui n'ont pas encore la foy, ny receu le bap- 
tefme, n'ont non plus de raifon que des enfans. 
C'eft alors que nous deuiendrons grads, & que noftre 
efprit f'ouurira quand noftre ame fera feparee du 
corps: mais las il fera troptard! Vous m'efcoutez 
comme vn homme "k demy endormy, ou qui a I'efprit 
ailleurs: vous eftes encore enfant tandis que vous 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 157 

God, in order to obtain for you the grace of recogniz- 
ing your misfortune." 

That Savage listened to this speech without saying 
a single word, and remained in an incredible aston- 
ishment, hearing his brother speak to him in un- 
known terms. His whole answer was that, in fact, 
they talked at the feasts and the assemblies of 
nothing but him and the French ; that matters were 
becoming more and more exasperating; and that 
plans seemed to be completed for getting rid of 
them. Our Christian answered him nothing else, 
except that he should not be anxious, — that his life 
and ours were in the hands of God. 

Then, turning toward all those who were there in 
the cabin, he continues a good part of the night 
instructing them in the things of our faith, — now 
[62] speaking to them of the ineffable beauties of 
Paradise, then of the awful torments of Hell. He 
most commonly addressed his remarks to his brother, 
without growing weary of striking that heart, harder 
than stone. Finally, seeing that he could draw no 
good word from him, he said: " My brother, I plain- 
ly discern that you do not make much account of 
what I teach you; a day will come when you will 
regret not to have made your profit thereof. We 
are like children, during this life ; we are without 
understanding, we esteem only useless pastimes, — 
and especially those who have not yet the faith, nor 
have received baptism, have no more judgment than 
children. It is then that we shall become grown, 
and our minds will unfold, when our souls shall be 
separated from the body: but alas, it will be too late! 
You listen to me like a man half asleep, or who has 
his mind elsewhere : you are still a child, as long as 


158 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.19 

vous amufez apres vos fonges & autres fuperftitios 
du pays. O malheureux frere, luy difoit-il d'vn 
autre ton, li Dieii n'a pitie de toy, tu [63] viuras iuf- 
ques h. la mort dans I'enfance, tu ouuriras pour lors 
les yeux k ton malheur, tu feras dans le repentir de 
n'auoir pas prefle I'oreille, & donne tout ton coeur 
aux veritez que les Fran9ois viennent icy nous enfei- 
gner: mais ce repentir fera fans remede, & le mal- 
heur qui t'accueillera te rendra miferable pour vn 
iamais. Mon frere ie m'afleure que tu ferois eftat de 
mes dernieres paroles fi i'efiois "k Tarticle de la mort; 
au refte voila ce que ie te dirois. II n'y a qu'vn feul 
maiftre de tout le monde, ceux qui le feruent feront 
k iamais bien-heureux, ceux qui I'offenfent & ne luy 
obeilTent pas, feront bruflez apres leur mort dans les 
Enfers: choifis I'vn de ces deux, ou vn bon-heur, ou 
vn mal-heur eternel. Voila ce que ie te dirois fi 
i'ellois fur le poindt de mourir. Mais en fin il faut 
que tu fgaches le fond de mes f entimens ; tandis que 
tu feras efclaue du diable ie ne te regarderay pas 
comme mon frere, mais comme vn eflranger, duquel 
ie dois eftre fepar6 pour vn iamais; car le peu de 
temps que nous auons k viure enfemble n'eft pas con- 
fiderable; ceux [64] qui m'ont enfeigne font propre- 
ment mes freres, & ie ne tiens pour mes parens que 
ceux qui ont renonc6 au diable & receu le fainc5t Bap- 
tefme. C'eft auec ceux-1^ que ie viuray eternelle- 
ment bien-heureux dans le Ciel, ce font ceux-la que 
veritablement i'appelle mes freres : fi nous n'auons 
la Foy, nous ne f9auons ce que c'efl que nous entre- 
aymer, il n'y a que les Chreftiens qui ioiiiffent de cette 
douceur en cette vie. Ce fut vne chofe qui me tou- 
cha bien fenfiblement eftant k K6bec, & fi ie n'eufl!e 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 159 

you amuse yourself with your dreams and other 
superstitions of the country. O unhappy brother, " 
he said to him in another tone, " unless God take 
pity on thee, thou [63] wilt live in childhood till 
death. Thou wilt then open thine eyes to thy mis- 
fortune ; thou wilt repent not having listened and 
given thy whole heart to the truths which the French 
come here to teach us; but this repentance will be 
without a remedy, and the misfortune which will 
greet thee will render thee miserable forever. My 
brother, I am assured that thou wouldst make account 
of my last words, if I were at the point of death ; 
howbeit, this is what I would say to thee. There is 
but one sole master of all the world ; those who serve 
him will be forever happy; those who offend him 
and do not obey him will be burned after their death, 
in Hell; choose one of these two, — either an eternal 
happiness, or an eternal woe. That is what I would 
say to thee, if I were on the verge of dying. But 
finally, thou must know the substance of my thoughts ; 
as long as thou shalt be the devil's slave, I will not 
regard thee as my brother, but as a stranger, from 
whom I am to be separated forever; for the little 
time that we have to live together is not considerable. 
Those [64] who have taught me are properly my 
brothers, and I regard as my relatives only those who 
have renounced the devil, and received holy Baptism. 
Those are the ones with whom I shall live eternally 
blessed in Heaven ; those are the ones whom I truly 
call my brothers. If we have not the Faith, we 
know not what it is to love one another; it is only 
the Christians who enjoy that pleasure in this life. 
It was a thing which very sensibly touched me when 


180 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.19 

appris de longue main I'eftroite amiti6 qui eft entre 
les Chrefliens, ie me fuffe perfuade que tous les Fran- 
gois de Kebec n'euffent efl6 qu'vne mefme famille, 
tant ils s'entre-ayment & s'entre-cheriffent, Ie me 
trouuay k I'arriu^e d'vn vaifTeau, ie ne vis iamais 
telle rejouiffance, & tant de tefmoignages d'amiti6, 
& toutesfois plufieurs ne s'eftoient iamais veus ny 
cogneus que dans ce rencontre. Mais ce qui m'e- 
flonna eft ce que i'ay defia racontd cent fois, ce fut 
de voir de faindtes filles habillees de noir, foibles de 
complexion, qui n'ont quitte la France & palT^ la 
mer [65] qu'en noftre confideration, dont les vnes 
prirent en leur maifon de petites filles Montagnaifes, 
les habillerent a la Frangoife, les faifoient mager 
auec elles pour les inftruire & leur apprendre a co- 
gnoiftre Dieu : les autres font venues pour auoir f oin 
des malades, tandis que ie fus ^ Kebec elles prirent 
Ie foin de quatre ou cinq Montagnaifes bien malades, 
les retirerent en leur maifon, leur donnerent de 
bonnes couuertures pour fe couurir, les veilloient les 
nuidts entieres, & leur donnoient toutes les douceurs 
qu'ils euffent pu fouhaiter. Ha! que nous fommes 
bien efloignez de cette amiti6. 

Ce bon Chreftien ne pouuoit finir, & ne fe lalfoit 
point de dire des merueilles de noftre f oy : mais il 
eft bien vray que Spiritus vbi vult fpirat ; car ny f on 
frere, ny les autres n'eftoient guere bien difpofez "k 
faire profit de ces bons difcours. Aulfi leur dit-il, 
que nous ne pretendions point faire des Chreftiens 
par force, que Dieu ne nous auoit enuoyez icy que 
pour leur faire voir leur miferable condition, & leur 
defcouurir ces belles veritez; que c'eftoit "k eux ^ 
voir ce qu'ils auoient a [66] faire, que la perte en 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 161 

I was at Kebec ; and if I had not learned long ago of 
the intimate friendship which exists between the 
Christians, I should have persuaded myself that all the 
French of Kebec had been but one and the same fam- 
ily, — so much do they love and cherish one another, 
I happened to be there at the arrival of a vessel ; I 
never saw such rejoicing and so many demonstrations 
of friendship; and yet, several had never seen or 
known one another except at this meeting. But 
what astonished me is that which I have already 
related a hundred times, — namely, to see holy maids 
dressed in black, of frail constitution, who left France 
and crossed the sea [65] only in our interest. Some 
of these took into their house little Montagnais girls, 
dressed them in the French style, and had them eat 
with them, in order to instruct them, and to teach 
them to know God ; the others came to take care of 
the sick. While I was at K^bec, they took care of 
four or five Montagnais women, very sick ; they 
withdrew them to their house, gave them good blan- 
kets to cover themselves with, watched over them 
whole nights, and gave them all the delicacies they 
could have desired. Ah ! but we are very far from 
such friendship! " 

This good Christian could not finish, and was not 
weary of telling the wonders of our faith : but it is very 
true that Spiritus ubi vult spirat; for neither his brother 
nor the others were at all well disposed to profit by 
these good discourses. Accordingly he told them 
that we were not intending to make Christians by 
force ; that God had sent us here only to cause them 
to see their miserable condition, and to discover to 
them these beautiful truths ; that it was for them to 


- 162 LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol. 19 

tomberoit fur etix s'ils negligeoient la vifite de Dieu. 
Le lendemain il alia dans quelques autres cabanes, 
oti ayant trouu6 vne affembl6e de plufieurs anciens, 
il leur parla auec vn afcendant que I'efprit de Dieu 
luy donnoit. Tous admiroient fon eloquence; (car 
il parloit les heures entieres dans vn air qu'ils n'a- 
uoient iamais veu.) La verity & la raifon, leur dit-il, 
ne fe trouue que dans la foy ; ie ne fuis qu'vn enfant, 
& ferois vn fuperbe fi i'entreprenois de moy-mefme 
de vous conuaincre: cen'eftpas de moy que ie parle, 
c'eft le maiftre que ie fers qui me donne les penf^es, 
& me rend eloquent k fouftenir fa caufe. Ces vieil- 
lards luy firent quantity de queftions, il fatisfit "k 
tous leurs doutes. En fin vn de la troupe leuant vn 
pen plus haut fa voix : II eft vray, luy dit-il, que ce 
que les Fran9ois font enfeigne eft raifonnable, ie 
ferois bien d'aduis que nous nous fiffions tous Chre- 
ftiens comme toy; mais c'eft k noftre Capitaine ^ 
parler Ik deffus, c'eft luy qui manie les affaires. Vray- 
ment, repliqua-il, vous auez moins d'efprit que des 
enfans, fi vos \^']'\ Capitaines fe damnent, voulez vous 
vous damner auec eux ; vn enfant s'enfuiroit qui ver- 
roit tous les Capitaines brufler an milieu des flammes. 
Qui de vos Capitaines vous a iamais appris a bien 
viure? qui d'eux a defendu le larcin ou I'adultere? 
tant s'en faut, ils font plus larrons & impudiques que 
les autres. II les confondit Ik delTus, & les contrai- 
gnit d'aduoiier qu'ils eftoient fans efprit. Apres 
tout, le Pere le Mercier, auquel apres fon retour ie 
recommanday d'efcrire tout cecy, puis qu'il y auoit 
aflifte, m'afleura que les paroles qui fortoient toutes 
de feu de la bouche de ce Chreftien, eftoient receues 
dans des coeurs plus froids que des marbres: mais 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 163 

see what they had to [66] do ; that the loss would fall 
upon them if they neglected God's visitation. 

The next day, he went into some other cabins, 
where having found a concourse of several elders, he 
spoke to them with a superiority that the spirit of 
God gave him. All admired his eloquence (for he 
spoke whole hours with an air which they had never 
seen). "Truth and reason," he told them, "are 
found only in the faith ; I am but a child, and should 
be an arrogant fellow if I undertook by myself to 
convince you : it is not by myself that I speak ; the 
master whom I serve gives me thoughts, and renders 
me eloquent in maintaining his cause." Those old 
men put many questions to him ; he satisfied all their 
doubts. Finally, one of the company raising his 
voice a little higher, said to him : "It is true that 
what the French have taught thee is reasonable, — I 
would be quite in favor of our all becoming Chris- 
tians like thee ; but it is for our Captain to speak in 
that matter, he is the one who manages our affairs," 
" Truly," he replied, " you have less understanding 
than children ; if your [67] Captains are damned, do 
you wish to be damned with them? A child would 
flee, who would see all the Captains bum in the 
midst of the flames. Which of your Captains has 
ever taught you to live well? who of them has for- 
bidden theft or adultery? Far from it; they are 
more thievish and indecent than the others." He 
confounded them therein, and constrained them 
to avow that they were without sense. After all, 
Father le Mercier — whom after his return I directed 
to write all this, inasmuch as he had been present — 
assured me that the words which issued all on fire 
from the lips of this Christian were received in hearts 


164 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 19 

c'eft vne femence que le fainc5t Efprit fera germer 
quand il luy plaira. 

Ce premier effedt des exercices fpirituels de ce bon 
SauTiage fut fuiui de plufieurs autres, qui fe verront 
en leur lieu. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 165 

colder than marble : but it is a seed which the holy- 
Ghost will cause to sprout when he pleases. 

This first effect of the retreat of this good Savage 
was followed by several others, which will appear in 
their place. 


166 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.19 


[68] CHAP. V. 

DE LA MISSION DE SAINCTE MARIE AUX ATARON- 
CHRONONS. 

CETTE maifon de faindte Marie ne porte pas 
feulement la qualite de Relidence, mais encore 
de Miflion, comtne ayant quatre bourgs depen- 
dans du foin & de la culture de ceux qui y font leur 
demeure. Ces quatre bourgs font faindte Anne, S. 
Louys, S. Denys, & S. lean, le nombre des ames peut 
arriuer k quatorze cens. 

Le bourg de faindte Anne fut le premier qui nous 
donna de I'exercice, ayant efl6 tout le premier affii- 
g6 de la maladie. II pleut "k Dieu nous donner cette 
benedidtion que pas vn prefque n'y mourut llnon 
baptif6, ou inftruit fuffifamment pour iouir de ce 
bon-heur. Ce ne fut pas fans effuyer beaucoup de 
difgraces qu'on emporta cet aduantage: car comme 
les baptefmes n'eurent pas le fuccez que plulleurs 
[69] auoient pretendu de rendre la fant6 du corps, ils 
furent bien toft d6criez, & le bruit fut incontinent 
refpendu que cette eau facr6e du baptefme eftoit mor- 
telle "k ceux qui en efloient lauez. 

En fuite de cela les cabanes de plulleurs nous 
furent ferm6es, on nous regarde comme portans le 
malheur du pays, on nous menace & on nous dit tout 
liaut que iamais forcier Huron n'auoit eft6 tu6, qui 
en euft donn6 plus d'occafion que nous. Nonobftant 
nous fuiuons noftre pointe, gaignant touliours quel- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 167 


[68] CHAP. V. 

OF THE MISSION OF SAINTE MARIE TO THE ATA- 
RONCHRONONS. 

THIS house of sainte Marie bears not only the 
character of a Residence but also of a Mission, 
as having four villages depending on the care 
and the attention of those who make their abode in 
it. These four villages are sainte Anne, St. Louys, 
St. Denys, and St. Jean; the number of souls may 
reach fourteen hundred.^ 

The village of sainte Anne was the first which gave 
us exercise, — having been the very first afflicted 
with the disease. It pleased God to give us this 
blessing, that almost no one died in it, except bap- 
tized, or sufficiently instructed to enjoy this good for- 
tune. It was not without experiencing many humili- 
ations that we gained this advantage; for, as the 
baptisms had not the result which many [69] had 
claimed, — the restoration of bodily health, — they 
were soon denounced, and the report was immedi- 
ately spread abroad that this sacred water of baptism 
was fatal to those who were bathed with it. 

In consequence of that, the cabins of many were 
closed to us ; they regard us as bringing disaster to 
the country ; they threaten us, and tell us aloud that 
never had a Huron sorcerer been killed who had 
given more occasion for it than we. Nevertheless, 
we follow up our point, continually gaining some 


168 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.19 

que ame k Dieu, & nous voyons fenfiblement que 
Dieu s'en mefle. 

On nous chafTe d'vne cabane ou nous voulos bapti- 
fer vn malade, nous entrons en vne autre voifine: 
incontinent le malade que nous cherchios, par ie ne 
f§ay quel accident eft tranfport6 d'vne maifon ^ I'au- 
tre, on Tapporte ou nous fommes, il y a tout loifir 
de I'inflruire, on le baptife, il meurt, & s'en va dans 
le Ciel. 

Vn enfant de trois ans qu'on auoit porte k la 
pefche, y eft faifi de maladie, on le rapporte par canot, 
il aborde au pied de nofhre maifon ; vn de nos Peres 
fe [70] trouue Ik par vn heureux rencontre lors qu'on 
defcharge c6t enfant, il fe doute bien que c'eft fait 
de fa vie ; il fe bailie, prend de I'eau au lac & le bap- 
tife. Ce petit innocent n'eft pas pluftoft enfant de 
Dieu qu'on I'enleue de la, il eft porte dans vne cabane 
du village prochain, qui nous eft interdite, le lende- 
main il eft entre les Anges. 

Les autres bourgs de cette miffion vn peu plus eloi- 
gnez nous donnerent bien-toft apres affez de peine, 
la maladie n'ayant pas tarde long-temps k s'y refpan- 
dre: mais le maiftre qui nous employe continue de 
nous affifter. 

Vn de nos Peres faifant la vifite au bourg de fainct 
lean, trouue fans y penfer au fonds d'vne cabane vn 
grand homme, affreux au poffible, tout couuert de 
verole, affis fur fon feant: Approche ie te prie, mon 
frere, s'efcria le malade, & donne moy de I'eau: Le 
Pere fe perfuadant que le malade defiraft d'vne cer- 
taine eau deftrempee dans deux ou trois grains de 
raifin, ou dans vn peu de fucre, dont quelquesfois 
nous donnons aux enfans pour prendre I'occalion de 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 169 

soul to God ; and we plainly see that God takes part 
with us. 

They expel us from a cabin in which we wish to 
baptize a sick man. We enter another, near by; 
straightway the patient whom we were seeking is 
removed, — by I know not what accident, — from one 
house to the other; they bring him where we are. 
There is complete leisure to instruct him ; we baptize 
him ; he dies, and goes thence to Heaven. 

A child of three years, who had been carried to 
the fishery, is seized with sickness; they bring him 
back by canoe. He lands at the foot of our house ; 
one of our Fathers [70] happens, by a fortunate acci- 
dent, to be there when they set this child ashore ; he 
suspects, indeed, that it is over with his life; he 
stoops down, takes water from the lake and baptizes 
him. This little innocent is no sooner a child of God 
than they take him away from there ; he is carried 
into a cabin in the next village, which is forbidden 
to us : the next day, he is among the Angels. 

The other villages of this mission, a little more 
distant, soon afterward gave us a good deal of trouble, 
the disease having not long delayed to spread thither ; 
but the master who employs us continues to assist us. 

One of our Fathers, making his visit to the village 
of saint Jean, finds unawares in the middle of a cabin 
a tall man, utterly hideous, entirely covered with 
sores, and in a sitting posture. " Come here, I beg 
you, my brother," exclaimed the sick man, " and 
give me some water." The Father, persuading him- 
self that the sick man desired some water flavored 
with two or three grapes, or with a little sugar, 
which we sometimes give the children in order to 
obtain opportunity to [71] baptize them, produces 


170 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.19 

les [71] baptifer; tire quelques grains de raifm pour 
les mettre dans I'eau: Non, non, dit ce barbare, ce 
n'eft pas la I'eau que i'entends. le te parle de celle 
qui efface tous les pechez, & qui empefche d'eftre 
brufl6 dans les enfers : Tres volontiers ; mais il faut 
croire auparauant, & detefter de tout ton coeur les 
pechez de ta vie paffee. Enfeigne moy, replique ce 
pauure homme, il n'y a rien que ie ne faffe. Quel 
plaifir de parler k vne ame que Dieu luy mefme nous 
difpofe? Ce bon Catechumene eft auffi toft Chre- 
ftien, & benift Dieu d'auoir receu le faindt Baptefme. 
Au refte, adjoufta-il, il faut que tu f§ache, mon frere, 
ce qui me fait mourir : ce n'eft pas la verole dont tu 
me vois couuert: mais deux coups de coufteau que 
par defefpoir ie me fuis enfonc6 dans le ventre, & 
vne alaifne que i'ay aual^e, voyant que les medecins 
du pays & nos magiciens ne me donnoient aucun 
contentement : i'en demande pardon a Dieu, & d'oref- 
nauant i'attendray de fa main fouueraine tout ce qu'il 
luy plaira ordonner de ma vie. Le Soleil n'eftoit pas 
couch^ qu'il mourut. N'auons nous pas fujet [72] de 
croire qu'il benit maintenant les mifericordes de Dieu. 

Mais cette bonte infinie nous paroift bien plus ado- 
rable quand quelquesfois elle nous ameine fans que 
nous allions les chercher, ceux qu'elle ne veut pas 
perdre au moment de leur mort, quoy que toute leur 
vie ils n'ayent rien fait que I'offenfer. 

II y a quelques iours qu'vn ieune homme de faincft 
Fran9ois Xauier entra de grand matin dedans noftre 
cabane, il eftoit venu d'vn pas ferme, & chantant 
comme ceux qui vont a la guerre : A peine eft-il afTis 
que le cceur luy manque, il tombe k terre & ne peut 
pas fe releuer: Nous croyons ou qu'il faffe le fol, 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 171 

some grapes to put them in the water. " No, no," 
said this barbarian, "it is not that water which I 
mean. I speak to you of the kind that effaces all 
sins, and that prevents us from being burned in 
hell." " Most willingly ; but you must first believe, 
and detest with all your heart the sins of your past 
life. " " Teach me, ' ' this poor man answers ; * ' there 
is nothing that I will not do." What pleasure to 
speak to a soul which God himself prepares for us ! 
This good Catechumen is at once a Christian, and 
blesses God for having received holy Baptism. 
" Moreover," he added, " you must know, my broth- 
er, what is making me die; it is not the smallpox 
with which you see me covered, but two stabs with 
a knife that in despair I have thrust into my belly, 
and an awl that I have swallowed, — seeing that the 
physicians of the country, and our magicians, gave 
me no satisfaction. I ask pardon of God, and hence- 
forth I will await from his sovereign hand all that 
he shall please to ordain for my life." The Sun had 
not set when he died. Have we not reason [72] to 
believe that he now blesses the mercies of God? 

But this infinite goodness appears to us much 
more adorable when it sometimes brings to us, with- 
out our going to seek them, those whom it wills not 
to destroy at the moment of their death, though in 
all their life they have done nothing but offend it. 

Some days ago, a young man from saint Frangois 
Xavier entered our cabin early in the morning ; he 
had come with a firm step, and singing like those 
who go to war. Hardly is he seated when his heart 
fails him; he falls to the ground and cannot rise 
again. We suppose that he is either acting the luna- 
tic, or that he is one; we try to put him out; he 


172 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.19 

ou qu'il le foit: nous le voulons mettre dehors, il 
nous prie doucement d'attendre. Les yeux luy roiil- 
lent en tefte, refcume luy vient ^ la bouche, nous ne 
fgauons que veulent dire ces fymptomes, nous luy 
demandons fon nom, d'ou il eft, & quels font fes 
parens, pour les aller querir : "k cela il ref pond : mais 
las! adjoufta-il, ie feray mort auant qu'ils viennent: 
feulement donnez leur cela, dit-il, tirant [73] de fon 
fac a petun vn morceau de racine. Nous ignorons 
ce qu'il pretend: toutesfois vn de nos Peres part en 
hafte pour aller querir fes parens: "k peine auoit-il 
trauerfe la moitie de la largeur du lac, dont les glaces 
eftoient encores affez fermes, qu'il rencontra 9^ & Ik 
quelques Sauuages qui pefchoient: il dit k celuy qui 
efloit le plus proche, qu'vn tel ieune homme du bourg 
prochain eftoit bien malade dedans noftre maifon, & en 
mefme teps luy pref ente ce morceau de racine : celuy- 
cy le met en la bouche, & fans faire autre refponfe 
an Pere, il s'efcrie k fes camarades, Vn tel eft mort, 
il a mange de I'aconit: alios querir fon corps. lis 
quittent Ik leur pef che, accourent en hafte : mais le 
Pere tafche k les preuenir, il vient courant tout hors 
d'haleine, & s'efcriant qu'on euft au pluftoft k bap- 
tifer c6t homme, qu'il auoit mange du poifon. Ce 
fut vn grand bon-heur [pour] luy qu'on y auoit vn 
peu auparauant mis ordre: car tandis que le Pere 
alloit, le malade nous auoit dit que c' eftoit du poi- 
fon qui le faifoit mourir : Ik delfus on I'auoit inftruic5t 
& heureufement difpofe a receuoir le [74] fainc5t Bap- 
tefme. On acheuoit le coup de fon falut, lors que 
ces barbares arriuerent en fouUe, le mirent fur vne 
claye pour le traifner fur les glaces du lac, & le me- 
ner en fa maifon, mais helas ! il fe mifl bien toft k 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 173 

gently begs us to wait. His eyes roll in his head, 
the foam comes to his mouth; we know not what 
these symptoms mean. We ask him his name, 
where he is from, and who are his relatives, that one 
may go and fetch them: to that he answers, but 
' ' Alas ! " he added, ' ' I shall be dead before they 
come; only give them that," he said, drawing [73] 
from his tobacco pouch a piece of root. We are 
ignorant of his meaning: nevertheless, one of our 
Fathers leaves in haste to go and fetch his relatives ; 
hardly had he crossed half the width of the lake, on 
which the ice was still quite firm, when he met here 
and there some Savages who were fishing. He said 
to the one who was nearest, that such a young man 
from the next village was very sick in our house, and 
at the same time hands him the piece of root. This 
man puts it to his lips, and without making other 
answer to the Father, exclaims to his comrades: 
" Such a one is dead, — he has eaten aconite; let us 
go and get his body." They leave their fishing 
there, they run in haste; but the Father tries to 
anticipate them, — he comes running, all out of 
breath, and exclaiming that we must baptize this 
man as soon as possible, — that he had eaten poison. 
It was a great good fortune for him that we had 
arranged for that a little beforehand, for, while the 
Father was on his way, the sick man had told us that 
poison was causing his death; thereupon we had 
instructed him, and happily disposed him for receiv- 
ing [74] holy Baptism. We were completing the act 
of his salvation, when those barbarians arrived in a 
crowd, and put him on a hurdle to draw him over 
the ice of the lake, and convey him to his house; but 
alas! he soon began to vomit even blood, and sud- 


174 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.19 

vomir iufques au fang, & mourut incontinent dans 
le chemin. Le tout ne dura pas vne heure. Cecy 
arriua le 21. de Mars, iour de S. Benoift. Pouuoit 
on rencontrer vn nom plus conuenable pour luy don- 
ner en fon Baptefme, puifque la benedidtion du ciel 
tomba 11 ^ propos fur luy. 

Ce font Ik des victoires remport^es deffus les de- 
mons : mais ce n'eft pas fans bien combattre : il faut 
fouuent fouftenir des attaques & des blafphemes 
contre la Foy de lefus-Chrifl, & contre nous qui la 
prefchons. 

Vn nomm6 Ofcouenrout, des principaux capitaines 
de la nation des ours, ayant fait rencontre du Pere le 
Mercier dans vne des cabanes du bourg de fainct 
Louys, ou le Pere faifoit fes vifites, ne I'eufl pas 
pluflofl apperceu qu'il entre dans vne manie qui 
le rendit plus femblable k vn polled^ qu'k vn homme 
en [75] colere. Ce mal-heureux "k vne langue des 
plus pergantes qui foient dans le pais : mais fi iamais 
il fut eloquent, il le fit paroiftre dans le difcours 
qu'il tint alors, nous faifant les reproches de toutes 
leurs miferes, d'vn ton & d'vn accent plein de furie. 
Apres tout, il prend vn tifon ardent de feu, & 
s'approchant du Pere: Refous-toy, luy dit-il, k ne 
pas partir de la place, aujourd'huy tu feras brufl6. 
Le Pere, qui auoit la langue k commandement, & 
le courage meilleur que ce mal-heureux, leue fa 
voix plus haut que luy : Ce n'eft pas \\ dit-il, ce 
que ie crains, ma vie ne defpend pas de toy, mais du 
Dieu que les croyans adorent, qui eft le maiftre de 
ta vie autant que de la mienne: s'il permet aux 
demons d'enfer de fe feruir de ta main pour faire ce 
coup, pour moy ie ne puis faire vn plus heureux ren- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 175 

denly died by the way. It all lasted not an hour. 
This happened on the 21st of March, day of St. 
Benoist. Could one hit upon a more suitable name 
to give him at his Baptism, since the blessing of heav- 
en fell so timely upon him? 

Those are victories gained over the demons: but 
not without stout fighting; it is often necessary to 
sustain attacks and withstand blasphemies against 
the Faith of Jesus Christ, and against us who preach 
the same. 

A certain Oscouenrout, of the principal captains of 
the nation of the bear, — having met Father le Mer- 
cier in one of the cabins of the village of saint Louys, 
where the Father was making his visits, — had no 
sooner perceived him than he fell into a frenzy which 
rendered him more like one possessed than a man in 
[75] anger. This wretch has one of the sharpest 
tongues in the country: but, if ever he were elo- 
quent, he showed it in the speech that he then made — 
reproaching us for all their miseries, in a tone and 
with an accent full of fury. After all, he takes a 
glowing firebrand, and approaching the Father, says 
to him: " Resolve not to leave the place; to-day 
thou wilt be burned." The Father, who had his 
tongue at command, and better courage than this 
wretch, raises his voice higher than he. " That," 
he said, " is not what I fear; my life does not depend 
on thee, but on the God whom the believers adore, 
who is the master of thy life as much as of mine. 
If he allow the demons of hell to use thy hand to 
deal this blow, for my part I cannot find a happier 
encounter ; but as for thee, thou wilt forever bear, — 
thou and all thy posterity, — shame and confusion on 
your faces." At the same time, God gave the Fa- 


176 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUIT£S [Vol.19 

contre : mais quand k toy tu en porteras k tout iamais 
toy & toute ta poflerit6 la honte & la confufion fur 
le vifage. En mefme temps Dieu donna la penf6e 
au Pere, que la meilleure fa§on de coniurer cette 
tempefte feroit de prefcher, y ayant Ik vne grande 
aflemblee. II pleufl k Dieu \_'j6'\ par la force de fon 
difcours abbattre cet efprit orgueilleux, qui depuis 
ne parla plus: & le Pere apres auoir fait ce qu'il pre- 
tendoit en cette cabane s'en alia acheuer le refte de 
fes vifites, oti par tout il fut receu auec admiration de 
ce qu'il eftoit encore en vie, le bruit ayant courut 
que s'en eftoit fait, & qu'on auoit brule & fendu la 
tefte h. la robbe noire. 

Sans doute nous auons tout fujet au milieu de ces 
peuples barbares, de chanter : mais d'vn accent rem- 
ply de ioye, ce Pfeaume du Prophete : Quare fremue- 
runt gentes & populi meditati funt inania: car Dieu 
diffipe leurs efforts, va fe moquant de leurs confeils, 
& y iettant la confufion lors qu'ils concluent plus f orte- 
ment noftre ruyne. 

II n'y a que deux mois qu'on tint vn confeil gene- 
ral du pays au mefme bourg de faindl Louys, nos 
vies y furent puiffamment balott6es I'efpace d'vne 
nuic5t entiere: (car c'eft le temps de leurs confeils, 
eft-ce merueille que les efprits des tenebres y prefi- 
dent) la plufpart concluoient k la mort, & le plus 
promptemet, difoient-ils, ce fera le meilleure vne 
feule \j'j'\ nation y refifta, faifant voir les confe- 
quences de cette refolution qui alloit k la ruine de la 
patrie: les efprits fe mutinent k cette oppofition: 
ceux qui tenoient pour nous fe voyant les plus foibles, 
faifons done mourir les Fran9ois, difent-ils, puis que 
vous le voulez, mais que ceux qui pourfuiuent li 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 177 

ther the thought, that the best way to exorcise this 
storm would be to preach, — there being a great 
assembly there. It pleased God, [76] by the force 
of his remarks, to abase that haughty spirit, which 
then spoke no more; and the Father, after having 
done what he was intending to do in this cabin, went 
on to finish the rest of his visits, wherein he was 
everywhere received with wonder because he was 
still alive, — the rumor having circulated that it 
was all over with him, and that they had burned the 
black gown and split his head. 

No doubt we have every reason, in the midst of 
these barbarous peoples, to sing, — but with an accent 
filled with joy, — that Psalm of the Prophet: Quare 
fremuerunt gentes, et populi meditati sunt inania; for 
God scatters their efforts, and continues to mock 
their counsels, and cast confusion upon them, when 
they most strongly resolve upon our ruin. 

Only two months ago, they held a general council 
of the country, at the same village of saint Louys; 
our lives were vigorously tossed about there, for the 
space of a whole night (for this is the time of their 
councils, — is it a wonder that the spirits of darkness 
preside there?); most of them resolved upon death, 
" And the more promptly," they said, " the better it 
will be." A single \_TJ^ nation resisted, showing the 
consequences of this resolution, which tended to the 
ruin of the country. Minds rebel against this oppo- 
sition: those who were on our side, seeing them- 
selves the weaker, say, * ' Let us then put the French 
to death, since you wish it; but let those who so 
eagerly prosecute this affair, themselves begin the 
execution thereof : we can well clear ourselves from 
it." Thereupon they all send back the ball to one 


178 LES RELATIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol.19 

viuement cette affaire en commencet eux-mefmes 
rexeciition, nous f9aurons bien nous en purger. lA 
deffus ils fe renuoyent tous reftoeuf I'vn h. I'autre, 
pretendant que ce n'eft pas h. eux h. commencer: les 
heures entieres fe coulent en ce debat. Vn ancien 
qui a de I'affedtion pour nous prend la parole, apres 
s'eflre teu bien long-temps: Pour moy, dit-il, ie fuis 
d'aduis que nous commencions par nous mefmes, 
nous fommes affeurez qu'il y a parmy nous grand 
nombre de forciers, ceux-lk continueroient h. nous faire 
mourir, quand bien nous aurions maffacr^ toutes les 
robbes noires: faifant vne exadle recherche de ces 
mal-heureux qui nous enforcellent, puis quand ils 
feront mis k mort, alors li le cours de la maladie ne 
ceffoit pas, nous aurions occalion de tuer les Fran- 
9ois, & [78] efprouuer fi leur maflacre arrefteroit le 
mal. Cette penf6e pour ce coup arrefla I'execution 
de leur mauuais dellein. 

Le diable fe mefle bien auant dedans ces parties, 
puis que c'eft luy qui y perd dauantage. 

A ce propos ie raconteray vne chofe qui nous eflon- 
na il y a quelque iours. Le P. Pierre Pijart eflant en 
difpute dans le bourg de faindt lean auec vn vieux 
Magicien du pays: Ce barbare s'eftant mis en colere, 
le menace que nous pouuions bien nous refoudre ^ 
mourir, & que defla Echon (c'eft le Pere de Brebeuf) 
eftoit frappe de maladie. Le Pierre Pijart fe mocque 
de ce vieillard, n'y ayant pas trois heures qu'il auoit 
laiff6 le Pere de Brebeuf h. la maifon de S. lofeph en 
fort bonne fante. Le Magicien luy repart, tu verras 
fi ie fuis menteur, ie t'en ay affez dit. En effedt le 
Pere Pijart s'en eftant retourn^ le mefme iour k S. 
lofeph, efloign6 de deux bonnes lieues, trouue le 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 179 

another, pretending that it is not for them to begin ; 
whole hours elapse in this debate. An elder who is 
favorable to us begins to speak, after having long 
been silent. ** As for me," he said, " I am of the 
opinion that we begin with ourselves ; we are assured 
that there are a great many sorcerers among us, — 
those would continue to cause us to die, even though 
we should have massacred all the black robes. Let 
us make a strict investigation of those wretches who 
bewitch us ; then, when they shall have been put to 
death, if at that time the course of the disease does not 
cease, we will have reason to kill the French, and 
[78] to prove whether their massacre will stop the 
trouble." This thought for the time stopped the 
execution of their evil purpose. 

The devil intrudes very far in these proceedings, 
since it is he who loses most in them. 

In this connection, I will relate a thing which 
astonished us some days ago. Father Pierre Pijart 
having a dispute, in the village of saint Jean, with an 
old Magician of the country, this barbarian, having 
become angry, threatens him that we might surely 
make up our minds to die, and that already Echon 
(Father de Brebeuf) was stricken with disease. Fa- 
ther Pijart laughs at this old man, — it not being 
three hours since he had left Father de Brebeuf at 
the house of St. Joseph, in very good health. The 
Magician answers him : ' ' Thou wilt see whether I 
am a liar; I have told thee enough." In fact, 
Father Pijart having returned the same day to St. 
Joseph, two good leagues distant, finds Father de 
Brebeuf attacked with a heavy fever, a pain in the 
stomach, and headache, and in all the symptoms of 
a severe illness ; at the moment when the Magician 


180 LES RELA TJONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 19 

Pere de Brebeuf attaqu^ d'vne groffe fievre, d'vn 
mal de coeur & mal de tefte, & dans tons les fymp- 
tomes d'vne grande maladie; au moment que le 
Magicien en [79] auoit port6 la parole aucun Sauuage 
n'en auoit eft6 aduerty. Mais £1 le diable & fes 
miniflres minutent noftre mort, la prompte guerifon 
du Pere, qui ne fut pas malade plus de 24. heures, 
nous fit bien voir qu'il y a des efprits mille fois plus 
puiffans qui veillent k noflre defenfe & conferuation. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 181 

[79] had spoken, no Savage had been warned of it. 
But if the devil and his ministers are devising our 
death, the Father's prompt cure — he was not sick 
more than 24 hours — plainly showed us that there 
are spirits a thousand times more powerful, who 
watch for our defense and preservation. 


182 LES RELATIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol.19 


CHAPITRE VI. 

DE LA RESIDENCE & MISSION DE SAINCT lOSEPH AUX 
ATTINGNEENONGNAHAC. 

1L eft bien difficile de viure en paix parmy vne 
ieuneffe barbare, altiere de fon naturel, & d'ail- 
leurs aigrie par les mauuais bruits qui courent 
inceflamment de nous. Nos Peres I'ont efprouu6 
dans le bourg de S. lofeph, car c'eft \k que les pier- 
res ont vol6 fur nos teftes iufques au fond de noftre 
cabane ; c'eft Ik que les croix ont eft6 abattues & arra- 
cb^es, les baches & les tifons leuez fur nous, les 
coups de bafton defchargez, & [74 i.e., 80] le fang 
refpendu : en vn mot quafl chaque iour on a f ouff ert 
mille infoleces, & mefme quelques Capitaines des 
plus confiderables voyant la ieuneffe della dans la 
fureur, & les armes en main, I'ont excite k faire pis 
qu'elle ne faifoit, nous ont condamn6 publiquemet 
comme des malfaidleurs, & les plus grands forciers 
qui fuffent dans leurs terres, ont command^ qu'on euft 
au pluftoft k demolir noftre cabane, & la mettre par 
terre : adiouftant que quand mefme on nous maffacre- 
roit, nous n'aurions que felon nos merites : Bien loin 
de reprimer les violences, & arrefter les coups de ceu:x 
qui defia s'6toient ruez fur nous. 

Le P. lean de Brebeuf & le P. Pierre Chaftelain 
ont le plus ordinairemet cultiu6 cette vigne : outre 
le bourg de faindt lofeph ils ont eu foin des bourgs 
de faincil Michel & de faindt Ignace. Le bourg de 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 183 


CHAPTER VI. 

OF THE RESIDENCE AND MISSION OF SAINT JOSEPH TO 
THE ATTINGNEENONGNAHAC. 

IT is very difficult to live in peace amid a barba- 
rous youth, naturally haughty, and withal exas- 
perated by the evil reports which are incessantly 
current about us. Our Fathers have experienced the 
same in the village of St. Joseph, for that is where 
the stones have come flying over our heads even to 
the middle of our cabin ; that is where the crosses 
have been felled and torn away, hatchets and fire- 
brands lifted against us, blows given with clubs, and 
[74 i.e., 80] blood shed, — in a word, almost every 
day we have suffered a thousand insolences. And 
even some of the most considerable Captains, seeing 
the youth already furious and with arms in hand, 
have excited them to do worse than they were doing ; 
have openly condemned us as malefactors, and the 
greatest sorcerers in their lands ; have decreed that 
our cabin must be demolished and razed to the 
ground as soon as possible, — adding that even though 
we should be massacred, we would only get accord- 
ing to our deserts. So they were far from repress- 
ing the acts of violence, and stopping the blows of 
those who had already rushed upon us. 

Father Jean de Brebeuf and Father Pierre Chaste- 
lain have most habitually cultivated this vine- 
yard : besides the village of saint Joseph, they have 
cared for the villages of saint Michel and saint 


184 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.19 

fainct lofeph eflant le plus grand & le plus peupl6 
de tout le pays, leur a auffi fourny durant la maladie 
plus d'occupation luy feul que plulleurs autres en- 
femble n'ont fait ailleurs. 

Le nombre des baptifez en ce feul [8i] bourg, de- 
puis la derniere Relation, monte "k plus de deux cens 
foixante, dont plus de foixante & dix enfans au 
deffous de fept ans eftans morts heureufement apres 
le fainc5t Baptefme : cette conf olation nous f era atten- 
dre auec plus de patience le temps auquel nous efpe- 
rons vn iour ce que fera deuenu le refle. 

Plus les demons fe font oppofez en tout cela k nos 
deffeins, plus la gloire de Dieu, & les trai(5ts de fa 
prouidence nous y ont paru remarquables ; en voicy 
quelques exemples tirez d'vne lettre que m'efcriuit 
fur ce fujet le P. Pierre Chaftelain, felon que ie luy 
auois exprellement recommand^. 

Ie voulois dernierement entrer en vne cabane pour 
voir s'il n'y auroit point quelque malade, on me 
ferme la porte, on dit qu'il y a feftin : Sur le poindt 
d'entrer en vne autre maifon, il me vint en penf^e 
que la cabane dont on me venoit de refufer I'entr^e, 
eftoit longue, & que peut-eftre il y auoit quelque 
malade k I'autre bout, & point de feftin: I'y vay, 
i'entre, il n'y a point de malade, le feftin fe fait au 
milieu: le maiftre du feftin [82] m'appelle, difant 
qu'il ne craignoit point que ie gaftalfe fon feftin: Ie 
luy parle, & voyant que rien ne m'arrefte, ie palle 
outre pour m'en retourner par oil Ton m'auoit refu- 
f^: ie trouue que le diable auoit raifon, & qu'il gar- 
doit vne proye qu'il deuoit emporter deux heures 
apres, & qui luy fuft rauie de la forte. Ie m'appro- 
che, le pauure malade ne fait plus que fouffler les 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 185 

Ignace.^° That of saint Joseph being the largest and 
most populous in all the country, has therefore alone 
furnished them more occupation during the disease, 
than several others together have done elsewhere. 

The number of the baptized in this single [81] 
village, since the last Relation, has risen to more 
than two hundred and sixty; of whom more than 
seventy children under seven years having happily 
died after holy Baptism, this consolation will enable 
us to await with more patience the time when, we 
hope, the others shall, some day, have become like- 
wise baptized. 

The more the demons have opposed our plans in 
all that, the more the glory of God and the acts of 
his providence have appeared to us remarkable there- 
in; here follow some instances of the same, taken 
from a letter which Father Pierre Chastelain wrote to 
me on this subject, according to my express direction. 

" I lately wished to enter a cabin, to see whether 
there might not be some sick person ; they close the 
door on me, — they say that there is a feast. As 
I was on the point of going into another house, the 
thought came to me that the cabin to which I had 
just been refused admittance was long, and that per- 
haps there was some one sick at the other end, and 
no feast at all. I go thither, and I enter; there 
is no one sick, — the feast is going on in the midst. 
The master of the feast [82] calls me, saying that 
he did not fear that I would spoil his feast. I 
speak to him, and seeing that nothing stops me, I 
pass on, to return by the spot where they had refused 
me. I find that the devil was right, and that he 
was keeping a prey that he was likely to carry off 
two hours later, and which was thus snatched from 


186 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.19 

derniers abois : ie demande I'aliiftance du S. Efprit, 
inftruis ce moribond, & luy demande s'il entend, & 
s'il delire eftre fauti6, i'approche I'oreille de fa bou- 
che, i'entends tirer du fond de fon eflomach vne & 
deux fois le mot que ie cherchois auec effort & tef- 
moignage d'vne puiffante volont6: ie luy demande 
s'il veut eftre baptife; il me refpond auec autant 
d'effort que la premiere fois qu'il le vouloit. Ie le 
baptife, & le nomme lofeph : deux heures apres il efl 
dans la iouiffance de ce qu'il efperoit. 

Vne autre fois voulant entrer en vne cabane pour 
vifiter vne femme fort malade, on me dit d'abord que 
e'en eftoit fait, & qu'il y a deux heures qu'elle auoit 
expire: comme on ne nous voit pas volontiers [83] 
oii il y a quelques morts, i'entre dans vne cabane voi- 
line, mais ie n'y puis eftre en repos ie me fens prelfe 
interieurement de retourner & entrer chez ladite 
morte ; fon mary la garde comme vn cadaure auec 
beaucoup de trifleffe, toutefois ie I'apergois encore 
qui refpire. Ie me recommande ^ Dieu, & ne crai- 
gnant rien que mes pechez en femblables affaires, 
luy en ayant demand^ le pardon, ie m'approche auec 
confiance en fa bont6 pour I'inftruire : on fe mocque 
de moy, difant qu'elle auoit perdu I'oiiye & la parole, 
il y auoit della long temps ; ie fais inftance difant que 
i'en auois defia trouu6 plufleurs autres qui ayant per- 
du les fens pour les chofes ordinaires, auoient par 
vne incomparable mifericorde de Dieu entendu ce qui 
eftoit de leur falut, & parl6 f uffifamment pour cela : 
ie m'approche en mefme temps & I'instruis auec vne 
confiance extraordinaire k vn coeur infidele ^ fon 
Dieu comme le mien, ie luy demande fon confente- 
ment, voila que d'immobile qu'elle eftoit elle com- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 187 

him. I draw near; the poor sick man does nothing 
more than breathe his last gasp. I ask the assistance 
of the Holy Ghost ; I instruct this dying man, and 
ask him whether he understands, and whether he 
desires to be saved. I bring my ear close to his 
lips ; I hear him once or twice heave from the depth 
of his chest the word which I was seeking, with effort 
and the manifestation of a powerful will. I ask 
him whether he wishes to be baptized; he answers 
me, with as much stress as the first time, that he 
wished it. I baptize him and name him Joseph: 
two hours later he is in the enjoyment of what he 
hoped for. 

" Another time, wishing to enter a cabin to visit 
a very sick woman, they tell me at first that it was 
all over with her, and that she had expired two hours 
before. As they do not willingly see us [83] where 
there are any dead, I enter a neighboring cabin, but 
I cannot be at rest there ; I feel myself inwardly im- 
pelled to return, and enter the house of the woman 
reported dead. Her husband keeps her as a corpse,^ 
with much sadness : nevertheless I perceive her still 
breathing. I commend myself to God, and — fear- 
ing nothing but my sins in such matters, and having 
asked his pardon — I draw near to instruct her, with 
confidence in his goodness. They make sport of me, 
saying that she had long ago lost hearing and speech ; 
I insist, saying that I had already found several 
others who, having lost their faculties for ordinary 
things, had by an incomparable mercy of God under- 
stood the matter of their salvation, and spoken suffi- 
ciently for that. At the same time, I draw near and 
instruct her with a confidence extraordinary for a 
heart faithless to its God, like mine. I ask her con- 


188 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.19 

mence k remuer la tei?te, les bras, & tout le corps, & 
parle fuffifamment pour me tefmoigner [84] fon de- 
lir: fon mary maintient que c'eft vne auerfion de ce 
que ie luy dis qu'elle fait paroiflre, il ne veut pas que 
ie la baptif e : ie maintiens ce que i'auois aduanc^ : il 
I'interroge luy-mefme, la prelTe de dire vn teouaftato, 
ie ne le veux pas, ^ cela elle ne dit mot : ie luy rede- 
made en mefme temps s'il n'eft pas vray qu'elle 
deflre eftre baptif^e, elle refpond diftindtement 
qu'oiiy. Le mary furpris, quoy done, luy dit-il, 
veux tu quitter tes parens, tes peres, meres & enfans 
qui font morts pour aller auec des eflragers. Dieu 
f9ait li ie redoublois mes prieres : elle refpond auec 
vn effort & feruer \sc. ferueur] que ie n'euffe of 6 
efperer, ouy: ie la baptif e, elle meurt incontinent 
apres. 

Dans vne certaine cabane qui eft des plus fuperfti- 
tieufes du pays, tous ceux qui y font morts fe moc- 
quoient du baptefme, & ie n'y eftois veu peu de tres- 
mauuais ceil, c'eft pourquoy ie iugeay k propos de 
n'y pas aller fi fouuent. Ie m'auife vn iour d'y en- 
trer, pour voir fi ie trouuerois toullours les mefmes 
vifages : i'y rencontr6 vne fille de f eize ans qui alloit 
rendre I'efprit, ie m'en approche, [85] ils me lailTent 
faire, parce que la malade eftoit abandonn6e, & iug6e 
en eftat de ne pouuoir plus entendre ce que ie luy 
dirois: ie ne f§ay mefme s'ils ne I'auoient point h. 
mefpris, car elle eftoit fans natte, fans feu, & mife- 
rablement couuerte. Ce fpectacle me touche au vif, 
ie Ten inftruis auec plus d'affedtion ; elle m'entend, 
me demande inftamment le baptefme pour eftre heu- 
reufe dans le ciel. Ie la baptife, & la prie de prier 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 189 

sent; whereupon, motionless as she was, she begins 
to move her head, arms, and all her body, and speaks 
enough to show me [84] her desire; her husband 
insists that what she signifies is an aversion for what 
I say to her, — he does not wish me to baptize her. 
I maintain what I had asserted: he questions her 
himself, — urges her to say ' teouastato,' ' I am not 
willing ; ' whereto she says not a word. I ask her 
again, at the same time, whether it be not true that 
she desires to be baptized: she distinctly answers 
' Yes. ' The husband, surprised, says to her : ' What, 
then? do you wish to leave your relatives, your 
fathers, mothers, and children who are dead, in order 
to go with strangers ? ' God knows whether I 
redoubled my prayers: she answers with an effort 
and a fervor that I would not have dared to hope 
for, — 'Yes.' I baptize her; she dies immediately 
after. 

" In a certain cabin, which is among the most 
superstitious in the country, all those who have died 
in it mocked baptism, and I was there scanned not a 
little with most evil glances ; wherefore I judged it 
proper not to go there so often. I bethink me one 
day to enter, in order to see whether I should still 
find the same faces ; I there encountered a girl of six- 
teen years, who was about to give up the ghost. I 
draw near; [85] they suffer me to proceed, because 
the sick girl was given up, and supposed to be in a 
condition where she could no longer understand what 
I should say to her: I know not, indeed, whether 
they did not regard her with contempt, — for she was 
without a mat, without fire, and wretchedly covered. 
This sight touches me to the quick ; I instruct her 
with all the more affection ; she understands me, — 


190 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.19 

Dieu pour moy quand elle y fera arriuee, elle me le 
promet de bon coeur, elle mourut le mefme iour. 

Toricli6s efloit vn Capitaine qui nous tefmoignoit 
de I'affedtion, mais eftoit eiloigne des fentimens du 
Chriftianifme plus qu'homme de fa forte : il me difoit 
fouuent entendant les inftru(5tions que ie faifois aux 
raalades de fa cabane, tu nous defoblige de parler du 
Paradis: dis feulement, courage, tu retourneras en 
fant6 fl tu fais ce que ie te dis. II tombe malade luy 
mefme, & vient "k I'extremit^ : ie luy parle du Para- 
dis, il prefle I'oreille comme k vne chofe que iamais 
il n'auoit entendu : il voit que cela le touche de bien 
pres, il me demande le baptefme. Mais, [86] luy 
dis-je, il faut detefler tes pechez : ie les detefte, me 
refpond-il: efcoute moy. Ie croyois qu'il allaft faire 
vn adte de contrition, mais ce bon homme commence 
auparauant k faire vne confeffion generale de toute 
fa vie pafI6e : ie le baptize. Le lendemain ie le retour- 
nay voir: il me promet de prier Dieu pour moy lors 
qu'il feroit au ciel, qu'il n'oubliera pas fon pays, & 
tous tant que nous f ommes qui les venions infbruire : 
incontinent apres il meurt. 

On me vient querir vn iour pour aller voir vn ma- 
lade; c'eftoit vn ieune homme de 14. ans, qui vou- 
loit, difoit-il, aller au ciel, parce que dans fon nom il 
portoit le nom du ciel, & concluoit de 1^ que le ciel 
luy feroit k bon-heur. Ie I'inftruis, ie le baptife, il 
meurt au bout de deux iours. 

L^ mefme ie baptifay fecrettement deux petits in- 
nocens, qui s'enuolerent incontinent au ciel. Ie ne 
fcay li ces pertes n'irriterent point les demons: 
quoy qu'il en foit, vn ieune homme de cette cabane 
fe leue, & fe met k blafphemer en ma prefence: 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 191 

she urgently asks me for baptism, in order to be hap- 
py in heaven. I baptize her, and ask her to pray to 
God for me when she shall have arrived there ; she 
promises me this with a good heart ; she died the 
same day. 

' ' Torich^s was a Captain who showed us affection, 
but he was averse to the sentiments of Christianity 
more than any man of his kind: he often said to me, 
while hearing the instructions which I dispensed to 
the sick of his cabin : * You displease us by speaking 
of Paradise : only say, ' ' Courage ; you will return to 
health, if you do what I tell you." ' He himself falls 
sick, and comes to his last hour; I speak to him of 
Paradise ; he listens as to a thing which he had never 
heard of ; he sees that that concerns him very close- 
ly, — he asks me for baptism. * But,' [86] I say to 
him, ' you must detest your sins.' ' I detest them,* — 
he answers me; ' listen to me.' I supposed that he 
was about to perform an act of contrition ; but this 
good man first begins to make a general confession 
of all his past life ; I baptize him. The next day, 
I returned to see him : he promises me to pray to 
God for me when he should be in heaven, and that 
he will not forget his country, and all of us who 
came to instruct them ; immediately after, he dies. 

" They come to fetch me one day, to go and see a 
sick man ; this was a young man of 14 years who, he 
said, wished to go to heaven because in his name he 
bore the name of heaven, and inferred from that 
that heaven would be to his happiness. I instruct 
him, I baptize him, he dies at the end of two days. 

" There, also, I secretly baptized two little inno- 
cents, who straightway took flight for heaven. I 
know not whether these losses did not irritate the 


192 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.19 

ie le reprends, & luy dis qu'il prenoit le chemin de 
TEnfer: i'y fuis tout [87] refolu, me refpondit-il: tu 
verras ce que e'en eft, luy dis-je, & puis ie fors. Le 
foir fe fait, la nuicSt vient, le diable luy apparoift, 
luy dit qu'il luy faut vne tefte, autrement qu'il bafte 
mal pour luy: il le polTede, il deuient furieux, il 
court par le bourg vne hache k la main, chercliant 
vn Francois : quelques Capitaines nous vinrent prier 
de ne point fortir, le chef de la cabane me vint dire 
en particulier que c6t enrage me cherchoit nomm6- 
ment, comme I'ayant maudit, & luy ayant caufe ce 
malheur: on le lie, on luy met vn cuir double fur les 
yeux, il voit "k trauers comme vn demon, me difoit 
c^thomme: bref 'k I'entendre parler, on n'auoit ia- 
mais rien veu de femblable. En fin on s'aduife de luy 
prefenter vne tefte d'ennemy, enleu^e depuis peu, 
aufll toft le voila guery : le diable par fon equiuoque 
luy ayant port6 la penf^e fur la tefte d'vn Frangois. 

Voila quelques articles de la fufdite lettre du P. 
Cbaftelain. 

Plufieurs chofes non moins confiderables font arri- 
u6e au P. de Brebeuf Superieur de cette Refidence, 
qui dans la mifere [88] de ce pauure peuple n'a oubli^ 
aucune affiftance fpirituelle & corporelle en leur 
endroit, iufques k s'ofler fouuent le morceau de la 
bouche. Charity d'autant plus precieufe aux yeux des 
Anges, qu'elle n'a eft6 iufques k maintenant recom- 
penf6e que par ingratitude, par des menaces & des 
coups ; encore depuis peu il a eft6 indignement trait- 
t6 & battu auec outrage dans le bourg de fainct lo- 
feph. C'eft luy qui dans I'efprit de ces pauures Sau- 
uages paffe touliours pour le plus grand forcier des 
Fran9ois, & la fource de toutes les miferes qui rui- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 193 

demons : be this as it may, a young man of this cabin 
stands up, and begins to blaspheme in my presence. 
I rebuke him, and say to him that he was taking the 
way to Hell ; ' I am quite [87] resolved on that, ' he 
answered me; ' You will see what it is like,' I say to 
him, and then I leave. Evening sets in, the night 
comes on ; the devil appears to him, and tells him 
that he wants a head, — that otherwise he may work 
mischief for him. The devil possesses this man ; he 
becomes furious, — he runs through the village, 
hatchet in hand, looking for a Frenchman. Some 
Captains came to beg us not to go out ; the chief of the 
cabin came to tell me in private that this madman 
was expressly seeking me, as having cursed him and 
having caused him this misfortune. They tie him, 
they put a double piece of leather over his eyes ; he 
looks through it like a demon, this man told me; in 
short, to hear him speak, they had never seen any- 
thing like it. Finally they bethink themselves to 
offer him the head of an enemy, lately seized, and 
thus he was immediately cured, — the devil, by his 
duplicity, having turned his thought upon the head 
of a Frenchman." 

Those were some incidents from the above-men- 
tioned letter of Father Chastelain. 

Several things not less notable have happened to 
Father de Brebeuf, Superior of this Residence, who 
in the misery [88] of this poor people has forgotten 
no spiritual and bodily assistance with respect to 
them, even to the point of often taking the morsel 
from his own lips, — a charity the more precious in 
the sight of the Angels, as it has hitherto been recom- 
pensed only with ingratitude, threats, and blows; 
even lately he has been unworthily treated and 


194 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.19 

nent le pays: quoy que d'ailleurs, lors qu'ils conful- 
tent quelquefois la raifon, ils fe fentent contrains de 
recognoiftre & aduoiier, nonobftant toute leur barba- 
ric, qu'il y a des bontez fur terre qui palTent tout h. 
fait rhumain. 

Nous auons toute occafion de croire que les bons 
Anges fe font fouuent intereffez en la plufpart de 
ces baptefmes : au moins il nous eft apparu plus f en- 
fiblement en d'aucuns. 

Vne bonne femme qui depuis plus d'vn an prelloit 
nos Peres de la baptifer, tombe [89] griefuement 
malade, elle eft lieureufe de trouuer h. la mort ce que 
durant fa vie elle n'a pas obtenu: mais il falut pour 
obeir a fon faindl defir, auant qu'en venir Ik, dire le 
Veni creator, faire quelques autres prieres, «& y gar- 
der les ceremonies que le temps & le lieu pouuoient 
permettre. Cette lieureufe Neophite vn peu deuant 
fa mort aper9oit a fon cofte vne troupe de vifages 
incogneus d'vne rare beaute, qui luy prefentent de 
tres-belles eftoff es pour la couurir : elle eft furprif e k 
cette veue. Retirez vous, dit-elle h. fa grand mere 
qui eftoit proche d'elle: retirez vous d'icy, voila ce 
que ie voy, vous m'empefcliez : peu aprez elle expire 
paifiblement, & comme nous croyons elle fe vit reue- 
ftue de la robbe de gloire, dont elle auoit des gages fi 
alTeurez, ayant receu peu auparauant la grace du 
baptefme. 

Vne autre petite fille d'enuiron dix ans, parente 
d'vne excellente Chreftienne, dont nous parlerons cy 
apres, eft k I'extremit^: elle confent k fon baptefme, 
fes parens s'y oppofent : lors qu'on eftoit dans le con- 
tefte, cette petite innocente [90] efleue doucement fa 
voix: On m'auertit, s'6crie-t'elle, que ie ne fuiue 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 195 

outrageously beaten in the village of saint Joseph. 
He is the one who in the minds of these poor Sav- 
ages always passes for the greatest sorcerer of the 
French, and the source of all the miseries which 
ruin the country: although, moreover, when they 
sometimes consult reason, they feel constrained to 
acknowledge and avow, notwithstanding all their 
barbarism, that there are acts of goodness on earth 
which altogether exceed what is human. 

We have every occasion to believe that the good 
Angels have often interested themselves in most of 
these baptisms, — at least, it has appeared to us more 
perceptibly in some of them. 

A good woman, who for more than a year had 
been urging our Fathers to baptize her, falls [89] 
grievously sick ; she is happy to find at death what 
she has not obtained during her life ; but it was nec- 
essary, in order to obey her holy desire, — before 
coming to the point, — to say the Veni creator, offer 
some other prayers, and observe therein the cere- 
monies which the time and place could allow. This 
fortunate Neophyte, a little before her death, per- 
ceives at her side a company, with unknown faces of 
a rare beauty ; these beings offer her very handsome 
cloth, with which to cover her; she is surprised by 
this sight. " Withdraw," she said to her grand- 
mother, who was near her; " withdraw from here; 
what a vision I see ! you hinder me. * ' Soon after, 
she peacefully expires; and, as we believe, she finds 
herself clothed in the robe of glory whereof she had 
such assured pledges, — having received, shortly be- 
forehand, the grace of baptism. 

Another, a little girl of about ten years, akin to an 
excellent Christian woman, of whom we shall speak 


196 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 19 


pas ma foeur, que ie n'aille pas auec elle: c'eftoit fa 
foeur aifnee, qui depuis quelques iours eftoit morte 
malheureufement, ay ant refuf6 le baptefme: fans 
doute celle-cy ne la fuiuit pas, car elle le receut 
faindtement. Ce font des bontez ineffables de Dieu, 
qui veut accroiflre de la forte Yk haut dedans le ciel 
I'Eglife qui y triomphe. 

Maintenant pour parler de cette Eglife militante, 
nous auons veu, ^ noftre grand regret, durant le 
cours de cette maladie, la nature du fol fur lequel 
elle eiloit baflie: c'efloit fable pour la pluspart, les 
vents & les orages ont quafi tout iette par terre. 
C'efl vne chofe difficile ^ adoucir que la perte de 
la vie, ou de celle de ceux d'ou elle defpend, fur tout 
a des barbares qui depuis deux & trois mille fiecles 
n'auoient iamais eu la penfee qu'il y eufl d' autre 
bien que celuy de la vie pref ente ; de 1^ fe fait que 
les chofes du ciel ne font quafi aucune impreffion fur 
leur efprit, que pour le temps de la profperit6 : car 
auffi tofl qu'il fe rencontre [91] quelque chofe qui 
heurte I'eftat de la vie pref ente, ^ peine peuuent-ils 
fe tenir qu'ils n'ayent recours k leurs danf es & feftins, 
k I'obferuance de leurs fonges, & autres inuentions 
diaboliques, dont ils efperent tirer quelque fecours. 
La creance publique que nous eftions la caufe de leur 
mifere s'emparant en fuite de leurs efprits, & la 
crainte d'eftre compris dans le malfacre general dont 
nous eftions continuellement menacez: toutes ces 
chofes ont fait que plufieurs qui auoient profeff6 
la foy les anuses precedentes, non feulement font 
retournez k I'vfage de leurs anciennes fuperftitions, 
mais encore ont tefmoigne publiquement qu'ils renon- 
goient k ce qu'ils auoient embrafI6. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 197 

below, is in extremity; she consents to her baptism, 
her relatives oppose it. While the contest was going 
on, this little innocent [90] gently raises her voice ; 
" They warn me," she exclaims, " not to follow my 
sister, not to go with her; " this was her elder sister, 
who had wretchedly died some days before, after 
refusing baptism : no doubt this one did not follow 
her, for she received it devoutly. These are inef- 
fable goodnesses of God, who wills thus to increase, 
up yonder in heaven, the Church which is there tri- 
umphant. 

Now to speak of this Church militant, — we have 
seen, to our great regret, during the course of this 
disease, the nature of the soil on which it was built; 
it was mostly sand, — the winds and the storms have 
almost thrown everything to the ground. The loss 
of life, or of that of those on whom it depends, is a 
difficult matter to smooth over; especially with 
barbarians who for two or three thousand ages had 
never had the thought that there was any other good 
than that of the present life. Thence it happens that 
the things of heaven make scarcely any impression 
on their minds, except for the time of prosperity; 
for as soon as there occurs [91] anything which 
clashes with the state of the present life, they can 
hardly contain themselves from having recourse to 
their dances and feasts, to the observance of their 
dreams, and other diabolical inventions, from which 
they hope to derive some help. The public belief 
that we were the cause of their misery then possess- 
ing their minds, and the fear of being included in the 
general massacre with which we were continually 
threatened, — all these things have brought it about 
that many who had professed the faith in the pre- 


198 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.19 

Entre ceux-cy a efte vn des plus confiderable du 
bourg, & des meilleurs efprits de tout le pays, dont 
rhumeur & les bonnes qualitez nous auoient toujours 
fait fouhaitter la conuerfion, & la demander k Dieu 
auec beaucoup d'inftance ; en effedt vn peu aupara- 
uant le course de la maladie il demanda le baptefme, 
& fut baptife. Sed ?ion hos elegit Dominus-. [92] II 
femble que Dieu ne nous euft accorde noflre requefte 
que pour nous apprendre que nous ne deuons non 
plus que luy auoir acception de perfonnes, ou pluftoft 
que c'eftoit k luy & non pas k nous de choifir fes 
efleuz: tant y a qu'aux premiers tourbillons qui 
s'61euerent contre nous il rendit fon chappellet, & fit 
toute forte de proteflation publique & particuliere de 
fon renoncemet au Chriftianifme. Au refle, il a 
efle vn des plus mal traittez, la maladie luy ayant 
enleu6 vne partie de ce qu'il auoit de meilleur dans 
fafamille; Peut-eftre Dieu I'a il conferu6 pour luy 
faire vn iour mifericorde, 

Vn autre ayant pareillement renonc6 au Chrifti- 
anifme, eftant frappe de la maladie euft recours ^ 
leurs remedes diaboliques : Dieu luy a prolong6 la 
vie, mais il femble que ce n'ait eft6 que pour le ren- 
dre vn fpedtacle de fa luftice : luy feul de tous ceux 
qui font rechappez eftant reft6 aueugle, & fee comme 
vne fquelette : depuis peu il eft mort impenitent. 

Or fi la cheute de plufieurs de nos Chreftiens nous 
a afflig6, la refolution & [93] le courage de quelques 
autres nous a remply de confolation. N'eft-ce pas 
vn plaifir de confiderer vne bonne f emme feptuage- 
naire, qui en ce temps n'entendoit rien que des blaf- 
phemes contre Dieu, eftoit contrainte tous les iours 
de voir en fa cabane des diableries de toutes fortes, 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 199 

ceding years, have not only returned to the practice 
of their former superstitions, but have also publicly 
declared that they renounced what they had em- 
braced. 

Among these latter was one of the most important 
in the village, and one of the best minds in all the 
country, whose temperament and good qualities had 
always caused us to desire his conversion, and to ask 
it of God with much earnestness; in fact, a little 
before the course of the disease, he requested bap- 
tism and was baptized. Sed non hos elegit Dominus; 
[92] it seems that God had granted our request only 
to teach us that we, no more than he, must have 
respect for persons, — or rather, that it was for him 
and not for us to choose his elect ; insomuch that, at 
the first whirlwinds which arose against us, this man 
gave up his chaplet, and made every sort of public 
and private protestation of his renouncing Christian- 
ity. Howbeit, he has been one of the worst treated, 
the disease having taken from him a part of the best 
he had in his family; perhaps God has preserved 
him, in order one day to show him mercy. 

Another man, having likewise renounced Chris- 
tianity, being stricken with the disease, had recourse 
to their diabolical remedies. God has prolonged 
his life, but it seems that it has been only to render 
him a spectacle of his Justice, — he alone, of all those 
who have escaped, having remained blind, and thin 
as a skeleton ; not long ago he died impenitent. 

Now if the fall of many of our Christians has 
afflicted us, the resolution and [93] the courage of 
some others has filled us with consolation. Is it not 
a pleasure to consider a good woman of seventy 
years, who at that time heard nothing but blasphe- 


200 LES RELATIONS DESjtSUITES [Vol.19 

n'auoit deuant les yeux que des morts, des malades, 
des fpedlacles d'horreur, & parmy tout cela n'a pas 
manqu^ d'vn poindt aux deuoirs de Chreftien, iufques 
k fe d^rober les Feftes & les Dimanclies, pour ^ 
I'infceu de fes plus proches, qui la perfecutoient & 
vouloient Tempefclier de profeffer la Foy, fe trouuer 
^ temps "k la Meffe, & Ik faire fes deuotions auec 
autant de paix que fi elle eufl efte hors I'orage & k 
I'abry de ces tempeftes. Vere talium eji regnum Dei'. 
elle fut nominee Anne en fon baptefme. C'eft vn 
efprit fimple, m'efcrit le Pere de Brebeuf, d'vn natu- 
rel fort doux & benin: il femble qu'elle a toufiours 
vefcu dans vne grande innocence, horfmis les fupper- 
ftitions en I'obferuance defquelles elle a efle nourie. 
Ayant entendu parler de Dieu, elle fut incontinent 
6prife de [94] fon amour, & du defir de croire en luy 
& de le feruir. Elle ne demande iamais rien, & 
quand elle a quelque chofe elle nous en fait part, & 
ne veut receuoir de nous aucune recompenfe (c'eft 
peut-eflre I'vnique en fon efpece) elle apprehende 
fort le peche, & dans le doute elle vient demander 
confeil. Elle fe confeffe des moindres cliofes, & ce 
incontinet qu'elle les a commis, fans dilayer. Vn iour 
luy ayant dit qu'elle ne mangeaft point de chair hu- 
maine: Comment, dit-elle, enmangerois-je? pendant 
tout le Carefme ie me fuis abftenu de toute viande & 
feflins, quoy que nous \sc. vous] m'euffiez permis d'y 
alTifter & d'en manger. Auparauant que d'eftre bap- 
tif^e elle auoit de continuels vertiges, & chaque 
annee, enuiron I'Automne, elle faifoit faire des chan- 
fons & des danfes pour fa guerifon : mais depuis fon 
baptefme elle n'a plus efte tourment^e de ce mal: & 
c'eft ce qu'elle va racontant k tout le monde, auffi 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 201 

mies against God ; who was constrained every day to 
see in her cabin deviltries of all sorts: who had 
before her eyes only dead people, sick people, sights 
of horror, — and amid all that has not failed by one 
point in the duties of a Christian? She has even 
concealed herself on Feasts and Sundays, that she 
might — unknown to her nearest friends, who perse- 
cuted her, and wished to prevent her from professing 
the Faith — be present punctually at Mass, and there 
perform her devotions with as much peace as if 
she had been outside the storm and under shelter 
from these tempests. Veri talium est regnum Dei. 
She was named Anne at her baptism. " Hers is a 
simple spirit," Father de Brebeuf writes to me, " a 
nature very gentle and kindly ; it seems that she has 
always lived in a great innocence, apart from the 
superstitions in the observance of which she was 
brought up. Having heard mention of God, she was 
at once captivated with [94] his love, and with the 
desire of believing in him and of serving him. She 
never asks for anything, and, when she has some- 
thing, she shares it with us, and will receive no 
recompense from us (she is perhaps the only one of 
her kind) ; she greatly fears sin, and in case of doubt, 
she comes to ask advice. She confesses the smallest 
matters, and that straightway when she has com- 
mitted them, without delaying. One day, having 
told her not to eat human flesh, * How,' said she, 
'should I eat any? During all Lent, I abstained 
from all meat and from feasts, although you had 
permitted me to attend them and eat of them.' Be- 
fore being baptized, she had continual vertigoes, and 
every year, about Autumn, she had songs and dances 
performed for her cure ; but since her baptism she 


202 LES RELATIONS DES JP.SUITES [Vol.19 

bien que quelques autres faueurs qu'il a pleu a Dieu 
de faire ^ quelques petits enfans aufquels elle auoit 
procur6 le baptefme. Elle a vne grande tendreffe 
pour tous nos interefts, [95] & fe fafche des mauuais 
bruits qu'on fait courir contre nous: & quand elle a 
apris quelque mauuaife nouuelle elle nous la vient 
raconter, II y a quelque temps que parlant k vne 
fienne amie de I'efficace du Baptefme, & du change- 
ment qu'il caufe en nos ames: On eft fi bon, difoit 
cette bonne femme, depuis qu'on eft baptif6, que 
I'autre iour voyant qu'on me defroboit vn plat, iamais 
ie n'en dis mot. N'eft-ce pas Ik vne fimplicite extra- 
ordinaire, & vne difpofition bien grande a pratiquer 
le confeil de noftre Seigneur, & donner fon manteau 
k celuy qui veut nous rauir noftre robbe. 

II eft vray que cete nouuelle Eglife n'a pas beau- 
coup de courages femblables, quoy qu'il s'en retrouue 
encore quelques autres qui donnent alTez de contente- 
ment: mais ce fera vne grande confolation, s'il plaift 
a Dieu donner benedidtion a la conftance de nos 
petits trauaux, de fe fouuenir de ces premiers com- 
mencemens, & de ce grain de moutarde. 

Auant que finir ie ne puis taire vne chofe prodi- 
gieufe qui eft arriuee k vn [96] Sauuage baptif6 de- 
puis quelque temps il efloit encore catechumene, & 
ne donnoit pas la fatisfacftion que nous euffions defir6 
pour luy conferer le baptefme, que d'ailleurs il nous 
demandoit auec affez de ferueur: fur tout nous ne 
voyios pas qu'il priaft Dieu auec le refpedt qui eft 
infeparable d'vne vraye foy. Vn iour comme vn de 
nos Peres le faifoit prier Dieu dans leur Chapelle, ce 
Sauuage fut tout furpris d'vne chofe qui luy ofta 
quafi la parole. II vit vn tableau de Noftre Seigneur 


1640] RELA TJON OF 1640 203 

has no more been tormented with this evil. This 
she goes about relating to every one, as well as some 
other favors which it has pleased God to show some 
little children whose baptism she had procured. She 
has a great affection for all our interests, [95] and is 
vexed by the evil reports which are circulated against 
us; and when she has learned any bad news, she 
comes to tell it to us. Some time ago, while speak- 
ing to a friend of hers about the efficacy of Baptism, 
and the change which it causes in our souls, ' One is 
so good,' said this worthy woman, ' after one has 
been baptized, that the other day, on seeing that 
some one was stealing a dish from me, I never said 
a word.' Is not that an extraordinary simplicity, 
and a very great readiness to practice our Lord's 
counsel, giving one's cloak to him who wishes to 
rob us of our robe? 

"It is true that this new Church has not many 
such courageous hearts, although there occur some 
others, too, which give sufficient contentment ; but it 
will be a great consolation, if it please God to give 
his blessing to the constancy of our little labors, to 
remember these first beginnings, and this mustard 
seed. 

" Before finishing, I cannot be silent about a won- 
drous thing which happened to a [96] Savage, bap- 
tized some time ago ; he was still a catechumen, and 
was not giving the satisfaction that we would have 
desired in order to confer baptism upon him, — which, 
moreover, he kept asking from us with sufficient fer- 
vor ; especially we did not see that he prayed to God 
with the respect which is inseparable in case of a 
true faith. One day, when one of our Fathers was 
having him pray to God in their Chapel, this Savage 


204 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.19 

fe remuer de foy-mefme, le regarder d'vn oeil de 
courroux, & remuer les leures d'vne facon qui luy 
donna horreur; Ce barbare s'arrefte tout court, & 
ne put pourf uiure fa priere : apres eftre vn peu reue- 
nu h. foy, Que voy-je Ik, dit-il, quel prodige? ce ta- 
bleau me menace-t'il de la mort? que veut-il dire 
par Ik? Le Pere qui n'auoit rien veu eft eftonne de 
I'eftonnement de cet homme, luy fait expliquer ce 
qui luy donne ces craintes & ces penf6es: Ayant 
entendu fa refponfe, le ne fjay pas, luy dit le Pere, 
fi tu ne veux point me tromper, mais fi la chofe eft 
comme tu me la raconte, [97] c'eft peut-eftre que 
Noftre Seigneur te reprend du peu de refpedt que 
tu apporte en le priant, il eft arriue qtielquefois en 
I'Eglife des chofes femblables. Ce barbare alTeure 
derechef ce qu'il a veu, & la peur dans laquelle il eft 
donne occafion k quatre de nos Peres qui examinerent 
par apres cette affaire, de croire que la chofe eftoit 
veritable. 

le veux eftre Chreftien, continue ce Catechumene, 
baptife moy: pourquoy tant differer? tandis que ie 
ne feray pas dans la grace de Dieu, i'ay crainte qu'il 
ne me punilfe. On n'y va pas fi chaudement, on le 
diff ere pour toufiours I'efprouuer : luy de fon coftd 
vient toufiours prier Dieu, & preffer fon baptefme: 
mais fes prieres font du depuis accompagnees de re- 
fpedt, & la deuotion qui paroift au dehors, & qui conti- 
nue les mois entiers donne fujet de croire que vraye- 
ment fon coeur eft touche, & que la grace y eft, ou 
que Dieu I'y veut mettre : on examine de plus pres 
fes deportemens, & on recognoift qu'en effedt il a 
abandonne tout ce que la foy nous defend. En fin 
on ne pent differer plus long temps, il fut baptif6 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 205 

was wholly surprised at a thing which almost took 
away his speech. He saw a picture of Our Lord 
move of itself, look at him with an eye of anger, and 
stir its lips in a manner which horrified him. This 
barbarian stops quite short, and cannot continue 
his prayer : after having somewhat returned to him- 
self, he says : ' What do I see there ? what prodigy ? 
Does this picture threaten me with death ? what does 
it mean by that? ' The Father, who had seen noth- 
ing, wonders at this man's astonishment, and makes 
him explain what gives him these fears and these 
thoughts. Having heard his an.swer, * I know not,' 
the Father said to him, ' whether thou dost not mean 
to deceive me ; but if the matter is as thou relatest 
it to me, [97] it may be that Our Lord rebukes thee 
for the little respect that thou usest while praying to 
him; such things have sometimes happened in the 
Church. ' This barbarian again afiirms what he has 
seen, and his fear gives occasion to four of our Fa- 
thers, who afterward examined this affair, to believe 
that the thing was real. 

" * I wish to be a Christian,' continues this Cate- 
chumen; 'baptize me; why defer so long? As long 
as I shall not be within the grace of God, I am afraid 
that he will punish me.' We do not proceed so hot- 
ly ; we put him off continually, in order to try him. 
He, for his part, still comes to pray to God, and urge 
his baptism ; but his prayers have since been accom- 
panied with respect, and the devotion which appears 
outwardly, and which continues through whole 
months, gives occasion to believe that his heart is 
truly touched, and that grace is in it, or that God is 
willing to put it there ; his actions are examined very 
closely, and one discerns that in fact he has forsaken 


206 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.19 

[98] folennellement en compagnie de deux autres. 
Depuis quelques iours ayant eft^ moy-mefme au 
bourg de faindt lofeph, i'ay examine cette hifloire, 
& ay trouu6 qu'elle eftoit veritable. Ce nouueau 
Chreftien s'appelle lofepb Teaoiich6, & eft gendre de 
ce renegat, fi bon efprit, dont nous auons parl6 quel- 
ques pages auparauant dans ce mefme chapitre. 

On s'eft tellement appliqu^ au foin du bourg de 
faindt lofeph, qu'on n'a pas obmis les deux autres 
appartenans &, cette miffion, faindt Michel &S. Ignace, 
oh plufieurs tant enfans qu'adultes ont efte baptifez 
pendant la maladie, auec des prouidences de Dieu 
tres-particulieres, que ie ferois trop long k deduire. 
On a fait auffi le poflible pour y conferuer ce peu de 
Chreftiens qu'on y auoit acquis par le palI6: mais 
c'eft oil on a eu beaucoup de peine, tant le mal qui 
les preffoit, & les manuals bruits qui couroient de 
nous leur auoient renuerf^ la ceruelle. 

Ces deux bourgs ont efl6 les premiers qui nous 
furent folennellement interdits [99] par les Capi- 
taines & Anciens, qui prirent pour pretexte que quel- 
ques-vns de leurs ieunes gens auoient deffein fur nos 
vies; il falut interrompre pour quelque temps, mais 
depuis peu nous auons trouu^ le moyen de reprendre 
le cours de nos vifites, les efprits s'eftans aucunement 
appaifez. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 207 

everything which the faith forbids us. Finally, we 
could not longer defer ; he was solemnly baptized, [98] 
in company with two others." Some days ago, hav- 
ing myself been at the village of saint Joseph, I 
examined this story, and found that it was true. 
This new Christian is called Joseph Teaouch^, and is 
son-in-law to that renegade, — such a good spirit, — 
of whom we have spoken, a few pages above, in this 
same chapter. 

We have thus applied ourselves to the care of the 
village of saint Joseph, though we have not omitted 
the two others belonging to this mission, — saint 
Michel and St. Ignace, where several children as well 
as adults have been baptized during the disease, with 
very special providences of God, in relating which I 
should be too long. We have also done our utmost 
to preserve there those few Christians whom we had 
acquired there in the past ; but this is where we have 
had much trouble, — to such a degree had the disease 
which beset them, and the bad reports which were 
current about us, upset their brains. 

These two villages have been the first which were 
solemnly forbidden to us [99] by the Captains and 
Elders, who took for a pretext that some of their 
young men had designs on our lives ; it was neces- 
sary, for some time, to interrupt, but lately we have 
found the way to resume, the course of our visits, 
their minds being somewhat pacified. 


208 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.19 


CHAP. VII. 

DE LA MISSION DE LA CONCEPTION AUX ATTIGNA- 
OUENTAN. 

AYANT quitte la Refidence que nous auions les 
annees precedentes au bourg de la Conception, 
ou OfTofTane, on a continue de cultiuer ce mef- 
me bourg par voye de miffion, ^ laquelle ont de plus 
efte adioints douze autres tant bourgs que petits 
villages. S. Fran9ois Xauier, S. Charles, Saincfte 
Agnes, fainc5te Magdelaine, faindte Geneuiefue, S. 
Martin, S. Antoine, faindte Cecile, faindte Catherine, 
faindte Terefe, faindte Barbe, & faindt Eftienne. 

[lOo] Le Pere Paul Ragueneau a eu le foin princi- 
pal de cette miffion ; le P. du Perron & le Pere Chau- 
monot I'ont affifle I'vn apres 1' autre : & tous trois n'ont 
pas eu peu k fouffrir & trauailler, tant pour I'eften- 
due de leur departement, que pour la qualite des 
perfonnes qui s'y rencontrent: car ayant toufiours 
habits parmy eux depuis que nous fommes dans le 
pays, ils fe trouuent pour la plufpart battus & rebat- 
tus de nos myfteres, & par le mefpris qu'ils ont fait 
de la grace de Dieu, leur coeur eft endurcy, 8c tous 
les iours de plus en plus ils fe vont aigrilTant contre 
luy, h. mefure que cette main paternelle les va cha- 
ftiant pour les reduire h. leur deuoir. C'efl de 1^ 
que font venus les plus manuals bruits & les plus 
pernicieux deffeins contre nous; ce font ceux Ik qui 
dans les confeils publics crioient le plus fort au maf- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 209 


CHAP. VII. 

OF THE MISSION OF LA CONCEPTION TO THE AT- 
TIGNAOUENTAN. 

HAVING left the Residence whichi we had in 
former years at the village of la Conception, 
or Ossossan^, we have continued to cultivate 
this same village by means of a mission, to which 
twelve other hamlets and little villages have also 
been added, — St. Fran9ois Xavier, St. Charles," 
Sainte Agnes, sainte Magdelaine, sainte Geneviefve^ 
St. Martin, St. Antoine, sainte Cecile, sainte Catherine,, 
sainte Terese, sainte Barbe, and saint Estienne. 

[100] Father Paul Ragueneau has had the prin- 
cipal care of this mission; Father du Perron and 
Father Chaumonot successively have assisted him; 
and all three have had not a little to suffer and 
labor, — both because of the extent of their depart- 
ment, and because of the character of the persons 
who are encountered therein. For, having always 
lived among them since we have been in the coun- 
try, they happen to be for the most part cudgeled 
over and over again by our mysteries ; and by the 
contempt with which they have treated the grace of 
God, their heart is hardened, and every day they 
become more and more embittered against him, in 
proportion as this fatherly hand keeps chastising 
them to bring them down to their duty. Thence have 
come the worst reports and the most pernicious 
designs against us ; those are the ones who in the 


210 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.19 

facre, & qui ont remply de calomnies centre nous les 
nations ou nous auons efl6 de nouueau annoncer I'E- 
uangile, lef quels ils ont folicit^ de nous mettre ^ 
mort, pour fe pouuoir deffaire de nous auec moins 
de confequence, 

[loi] Voicy ce que m'efcrit le P. Ragueneau de 
I'eftat de cette miffion, en vne de fes lettres. 

Les cabanes de nos Chreftiens font dans ce bourg 
de la Conception, les plus afflig^es de la maladie: 
outre vne feule de lofeph Chihouatenhoua, ou cinq 
•enfans n'ont eu que le mal: il n'y en a pas vne qui 
ne fe voye plus rigoureufement traitt^e que ne font 
les families des infideles. Ren6 conte dans fa cabane 
iufques k onze morts ; la bonne Anne fe voit def poiiil- 
l^e de tous enfans, vnique appuy de fa vieillefle, 
tandis que des efprits rebelles "k Dieu, & qui touiiours 
fe font bandez contre la foy, fe vantent de voir toute 
leur famille en fante, & que malgr6 le ciel ils font 
heureux en ce monde. En fuite de cela les bruits 
fe confirment plus que iamais que la Foy eft inutile 
^ ceux qui rembraffent; que fi Dieu ne les conferue 
pas, c'eft ou manque d'affedtion, ou manque de pou- 
uoir; que du mauuais traittement qu'ils efprouuent 
en cette vie on ne pent raifonnablement tirer autre 
confequence, fmon que les efperances du Paradis 
dont nous les voulons [102] confoler, ne font rien que 
des fables : qu'au refte la mortalite eftant principale- 
ment fur les enfans qui font encore dans 1' innocence, 
nous ne pouuons attribuer aux pechez des parens la 
mort de ces petites creatures, puis que Dieu eftant 
iufte ne doit pas punir I'innocent pour le coupable. 
En vn mot, nous pouuons dire que la Foy eft main- 
tenant en opprobre non feulement en ce bourg, mais 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 211 

public councils cried loudest for massacre, and who 
have stuffed with calumnies against us the nations 
among whom we have recently gone to announce 
the Gospel, whom they have solicited to put us to 
death, in order to be able to get rid of us with less 
consequence to themselves. 

[loi] Here follows what Father Ragueneau writes 
to me of the state of this mission, in one of his 
letters. 

" The cabins of our Christians in this village of la 
Conception are the most afflicted with the malady : 
besides that alone of Joseph Chihouatenhoua, where 
five children have had the disease, there is not one 
which does not find itself more severely treated than 
are the families of the infidels. Ren^ counts as 
many as eleven dead in his cabin ; the good Anne 
sees herself robbed of all her children, the sole 
support of her old age, — whereas minds rebellious 
against God, and those which have always leagued 
themselves against the faith, boast to see their whole 
family in health, and that, in spite of heaven, they 
are happy in this world. In consequence of that, 
the reports are more than ever confirmed, that the 
Faith is useless to those who embrace it ; that, if God 
do not preserve them, it is a want of affection, or 
want of power ; that from the evil treatment which 
they experience in this life one cannot reasonably 
draw any other conclusion than that the hopes of 
Paradise, with which we try [102] to console them, 
are nothing but fables; that, furthermore, the mor- 
tality being chiefly among the children, who are still 
in innocence, we cannot attribute the death of these 
little creatures to the sins of the parents, — since 
God, being just, ought not to punish the innocent 


212 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.19 

auffi dans toutes les bourgades voifines ; qui f e voy- 
ans moins attaqu6es du mal, fe reliouiffent d'eftre 
demeur6es oppiniaftres dans 1' infidelity, & s'endur- 
cilTent pins que iamais dans les refolutions non feule- 
ment de refufer la Foy, mais mefmes de ne pas efcou- 
ter ceux qui leur vont annoncer. En effedt en la 
ronde que nous venons de faire nous auons trouu6 
quali par tout les cabanes ferm^es, & plulieurs qui 
fe voyoient furpris pluftoft qu'ils n'auoient pu pre- 
uoir noflre arriu^e, nous ont incontinent chaffs ; 
d'autres ont dit qu'ils efhoient fourds, & mefme fe 
font malicieufement boucli6 les oreilles, crainte de 
nous entendre: d'aucuns faifoient des fols & demoni- 
acles, [103] & s'efcrioient qu'ils ne pouuoient fuppor- 
ter noftre veue : Quelques-vns s'enfuyoient & nous 
laifloient la cabane quafi vuide: en vn mot ils ne 
veulent pas entendre ce qu'ils ne font pas refolus de 
faire. Nous n'auos pas laiffe quafi en chaque bourg 
de gaigner quelques ames k Dieu, finon dans celuy 
de faindte Terefe ou nous eufmes vn plus manuals 
accueil. Nous ne fufmes pas pluftoft arriuez qu'vn 
ieune homme bien fait nous prie de I'inftruire; il 
efcoute volontiers, & ^ le voir on euft iug6 qu'il gou- 
ftoit les paroles de Dieu. Apres vn long temps voicy 
vn autre Sauuage fort mal fait, qui fe prefente le 
vifage tout enflamm6, & nous commande de fortir. 
le me leue, ce ieune homme que nous anions inftruit 
m'arache auec effort le Crucifix que ie portois au col, 
il prend vne hache en main, dit que refolument i'en 
mourois. Ie ne crains pas la mort, luy dis-je, tu de- 
urois me remercier de ce que nous venons t'enfei- 
gner: fi tu me veux tuer, ie ne fuiray pas, car la 
mort me mettra au Ciel. II leue la hache droit fur le 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 213 

for the guilty. In a word, we may say that the 
Faith is now in disgrace not only in this village, but 
also in all the neighboring hamlets, — which, see- 
ing themselves less attacked with the trouble, rejoice 
to have continued obstinate in infidelity, and harden 
themselves more than ever in the resolve not only to 
refuse the Faith, but even not to listen to those who 
go to announce it to them. In fact, on the round 
that we have just made, we have found almost every- 
where the cabins closed, and several, who saw them- 
selves surprised before they had contrived to antici- 
pate our arrival, forthwith drove us out; others said 
that they were deaf, and even maliciously stopped 
their ears, for fear of hearing us ; some acted as mad- 
men and lunatics, [103] and exclaimed that they 
could not bear the sight of us : some fled and left the 
cabin almost empty for us ; in a word, they will not 
hear what they are not persuaded to do. We have 
nevertheless, in almost every village, gained some 
souls for God, — save in that of sainte Terese, where 
we had a worse reception. We had no sooner arrived 
than a well-built young man begs us to instruct him ; 
he listens gladly, and, to see him, one would have 
supposed that he relished the words of God. After 
a long time, here comes another Savage, much 
deformed, who presents himself with his face quite 
inflamed, and commands us to leave. I rise; this 
young man whom we had instructed forcibly seizes 
the Crucifix which I wore about my neck, takes a 
hatchet in his hand, and says that positively I should 
die. 'I do not fear death,' I say to him; 'thou 
shouldst thank me because we come to teach thee : if 
thou wish to kill me, I will not flee, for death will 
place me in Heaven. ' He lifts the hatchet directly 


214 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.19 

milieu de ma tefte alors defcouuerte, & def charge 
fon coup li [104] roidement que le Pere Chaumonot 
& moy croyons voir en ce moment ce que nous fou- 
haittons il y a fi long-temps : ie ne f 9ay ce qui arrefla 
le coup, finon la grandeur de mes pechez: mais ^ 
moins que de fentir la hache fendre vne tefte en 
deux, on ne pent pas fe voir plus proche de la mort : 
11 veut recommancer fon coup, vne femme luy arrefte 
le bras & le faifift : ie benis Dieu de la refolution 
qu'il nous donna ; au moins ces pauures barbares peu- 
rent voir que ceux qui ont leur efperance dans le 
Ciel ne craignent pas la mort, & qu'ils I'enuifagent 
aufll affeurement que des ames infideles foufpirent 
apres la vie. Ie redemande mon Crucifix, ce ieune 
homme veut le letter au feu, redouble f es menaces : 
mais enfin on le fait difparoiftre. Nous demandons 
le capltalne du village, 11 vient: nous luy formons 
noftre plainte, enuiron vn quart d'heure apres ce 
Ieune homme retourne, offre de me rendre mon Cru- 
cifix en cas que nous leur promettions que la maladie 
n'attaquera pas leur village: vous pouuez voir quelle 
fut la refponfe. Nous prifmes de 1^ occafion de les 
Inftruire, [105] car 11 y auoit bon nombre de Sau- 
uages. Noftre Seigneur nous y aflifta : nous le pri- 
ons qu'vn lour cette femence frudtifie: mais pour 
lors nous n'en vifmes point d'autre effedt, finon 
d'appaifer les efprits qui s'eftoient efmeus. lufques 
icy le Pere. 

C'eft vne chofe pitoyable de voir ces pauures bar- 
bares accufer tout autre que eux mefmes des mal- 
heurs dont Dieu les punit : toutesfois 11 s'en trouue 
qui en cela ont les yeux affez clair-voyans. Vn des 
mellleurs efprits du bourg de la Conception, & des 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 215 

above the middle of my head, — then uncovered, — 
and deals his blow so [104] steadily that Father Chau- 
monot and I think to see at that moment what we 
have so long desired ; I know not what stopped the 
blow, unless the greatness of my sins, but, short of 
feeling the hatchet cleave a head in twain, one cannot 
see one's self closer to death. He is fain to repeat 
his stroke; a woman stops his arm, and seizes him. 
I bless God for the resolution which he gave us ; at 
least, these poor barbarians could see that those who 
have their hope in Heaven do not fear death, and 
that they face it as confidently as infidel souls sigh 
after life. I ask to have my Crucifix again; this 
young man wishes to throw it into the fire, and 
redoubles his threats ; but finally he is made to disap- 
pear. We ask for the captain of the village; he 
comes, and we word our complaint to him ; about a 
quarter of an hour later this young man returns, and 
offers to give back my Crucifix in case we promise 
them that the disease will not attack their village : 
you may see what was the response. We then took 
occasion to instruct them, [105] for there were a good 
many Savages. Our Lord assisted us there ; we pray 
him that one day this seed may bear fruit, but at that 
time we saw no other effect of it unless that of quiet- 
ing the minds which had become roused." Thus 
far the Father. 

It is a pitiful thing to see these poor barbarians 
accuse everything but themselves for the misfor- 
tunes with which God punishes them : nevertheless 
there occur some who in that are sufficiently clear- 
sighted. One, — one of the best minds in the village of 
la Conception, and of those best informed in matters 
of the Faith, but withal an infidel, — having spoken 


216 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.19 

mieux informez des chofes de la Foy, mais d'ailleurs 
infidelle, ayant parle k nos Peres de la mortality qui 
rauageoit tout le pays, & des mauuais bruits qu'on 
faifoit courir centre nous: Ce font Ik pures calom- 
nies, adjoufta-il, vous n'auez pas quitt^ voftre patrie, 
vos biens, & tout ce que vous pouuiez auoir de plus 
cher en ce monde, pour venir icy procurer noftre 
mort : quel profit en retireriez vous ? Mais ie voy bien 
que Dieu s'irrite centre nous, de ce qu'ayant eft6 
fuffifamment inftruits, nous refufons de croire & de 
luy obeir, [io6] Qu'ainfi ne foit, le mal-heur a com- 
mence par Ihonatiria, qui fe void maintenant ruyne, 
& c'eft le lieu ou ayant fait premierement voftre 
demeure, auffi vous y auez premierement annonc6 la 
parole de Dieu: OlIolTane vous a depuis receu, la 
plufpart ont refufe de croire, en fuitte voila le mal- 
heur qui nous accueille, & qui ruyne toutes nos 
families. Cette ann6e vous auez couru tout le pays, k 
peine auez vous trouu6 quelqu'vn qui voulut aban- 
donner ce que Dieu deffend, incontinent le mal s'eft 
efpandu par tout, & le pays fe void ruyn6, Que 
pouuoit-on attendre apres vn difcours fi raifonnable, 
finon qu'il fe rendift luy mefme k Dieu, & adoraft 
cette puilTance qu'il recognoiffoit vengerelle de leurs 
pechez: mais voicy vne conclufion bien differente: 
Mon fentiment, adioufla-il, feroit qu'on vous fermaft 
toutes les cabanes, ou que vous y laiffant entrer, 
quand vous parlez de Dieu on baiffaft la tefbe, & on 
fe bouchaft; les oreilles, fans plus difputer contre 
vous ; car ainfi nous ferions moins coupables, & Dieu 
ne nous puniroit pas fi cruellement. 

[107] N'eft-ce pas la refifter obftinement au S. Ef- 
prit, & vouloir ne pas voir ce qu'on void. Pleuft k 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 217 

to our Fathers about the mortality which was ravag- 
ing the whole country, and about the evil reports 
which were circulated against us, added: " Those 
are sheer calumnies ; you have not left your native 
land, your goods, and all that you could hold dearest 
in this world, in order to come here and procure our 
death: what profit would you derive from it? But I 
see well that God is angry with us, because, having 
been sufficiently instructed, we refuse to believe and 
obey him. [106] However that may be, the misfor- 
tune began with Ihonatiria, which now finds itself 
ruined; and that is the place where, having first 
made your abode, you also first announced the word 
of God. Ossossane has since received you; most 
have refused to believe ; in consequence, lo, the mis- 
fortune which assails us, and which ruins all our 
families. This year you have traversed the whole 
country ; you have hardly found any one who would 
abandon what God forbids : immediately the trouble 
has spread everywhere, and the country finds itself 
ruined. " What could one expect after so reasonable 
a speech, unless that he should surrender himself to 
God, and adore that power which he recognized as 
the avenger of their sins? But here follows a very 
different conclusion. " My opinion," he added, 
' ' would be that all the cabins should be closed to 
you; or, while allowing you to enter them, one 
should lower the head when you speak of God, and 
stop one's ears, without further disputing against 
you ; for thus we should be less guilty, and God would 
not punish us so cruelly." 

[107] Is not that obstinately resisting the Holy 
Ghost, and refusing to see what one sees ? Would to 
God that this misfortune might not again occur, save 


218 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol. 1& 


Dieu que ce mal-heur ne fe retrouuaft que parmy les 
Hurons. En effedl il femble qu'ils foient pour la pluf- 
part dans vn fens reprouu6. 

Mais toutefois la mifericorde de Dieu y delate au- 
tant qu'en aucun autre lieu: car nonobftant toutes 
ces difpofitions contraires, on y a baptif6 malgr6 les 
demons & I'enfer plus de 250. perfonnes, la plufpart 
au fort de la maladie : & de ce nombre plus de 70. 
enfans baptifez au deffous de 7. ans font maintenant 
en Paradis, fans y comprendre plus de 60. autres 
petits innocens, qui ayant efl6 baptifez les ann^es 
paffees, ont efl6 celle-cy rauis de la mort, crainte que 
la malice des parens ne changeafl leur efprit, & ne 
les mift au rang des reprouuez. 

Dans ces baptefmes la prouidence de Dieu fur fes 
efleus s'y eft fait fouuent recognoiftre. Voicy ce que 
m'en efcrit le P. Ragueneau. 

Vn foir nous arriuons "k OfTofTan^ bien fatiguez 
d'vne excurfion aflez penible; auant que nous peuf- 
fions nous repofer [108] on nous aduertit que la fille 
d'vn de nos bons Chreftiens eft h I'extremit^ : ie m'y 
porte de ce mefme pas, entrant en la cabane ie trouue 
au premier feu vne femme qui fe mouroit, & qui, me 
difoit-on, auoit perdu & I'ouye & la parole: ie m'ap- 
proche pour luy parler de Dieu, elle m'entend fans 
aucune difficulte: c'eft en Paradis, me dit-elle, oil ie 
pretens aller: Faut done te refoudre, luy dis-je, ^ 
eftre baptif^e. C'eft pour cela, dit-elle, que tous les 
iours depuis ma maladie ie te demande : mais las ou 
eftois-tu? Ie la baptife en la prefence de fes parens, 
qui ne me difent pas vn mot. Ie paffe au fecond 
feu, oil eftoit celle qui m'amenoit: helas! ie trouue 
vne ame endurcie dedans f on pech6 ; elle fait mali- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 21* 

among the Hurons. In fact, it seems that they are 
mostly in a reprobate condition. 

But yet the mercy of God shines out there as much 
as in any other place ; for, notwithstanding all these 
contrary dispositions, we have baptized there, in spite 
of the demons and hell, more than 250 persons, most- 
ly at the height of the disease. Of this number, 
more than 70 baptized children, under 7 years of age, 
are now in Paradise, — without including with them 
more than 60 other little innocents who, having been 
baptized in past years, have this year been carried 
away by death, for fear lest the parents' malice 
might change their minds, and put them on the list 
of the reprobates. 

In these baptisms the providence of God over his 
elect has often manifested itself. Here follows what 
Father Ragueneau writes to me in the matter : 

" One evening, we arrived at Ossossan6, very 
weary from a somewhat laborious excursion ; before 
we could rest ourselves, [108] they warned us that 
the daughter of one of our good Christians is in her 
last hour. I betake me thither instantly; entering 
the cabin, I find by the first fire a woman who was 
dying, and who, they said to me, had lost both hear- 
ing and speech. I draw near to speak to her of God; 
she understands me without any diSiculty; ' Para- 
dise, ' she tells me, ' is whither I intend to go. ' ' You 
must then resolve,' I say to her, 'to be baptized.' 
' That is why, ' she says, ' I have asked for you every 
day since my illness began; but alas, where were 
you ? ' I baptize her in the presence of her relatives, 
who say not a word to me. I proceed to the second 
fire, where that woman was who was bringing me 
thither : alas ! I find a soul hardened in its sin ; she 


220 LES RELATIONS DBS jASUITES [Vol.19 

cieufement de la fourde, & ne veut pas refpondre 
vn mot. le fais tout mon poffible, mais 11 Noftre Sei- 
gneur ne parle au cceur luy-mefme, que faifons nous 
finon du bruit. le quitte cette malheureufe, & pafle 
outre fans autre deffein, finon de fortir par I'autre 
porte de la cabane, mais Dieu me conduifoit: ie trouue 
en mon chemin deux autres femmes qui n'en peuuent 
[109] plus, ie les inftruis I'vne apres I'autre, «& les 
difpofe &, bien mourir. Que les graces du bon lefus 
font adorables, & qu'elles font puilTantes lors qu'il 
efclaire vne ame ; ces bonnes femmes me contentent, 
elles re9oiuent le baptefme, & puis la nuidt m'auer- 
tit de me retirer au plutoft. Ie ne fus pas long 
temps fans entendre la mort de ces quatre malades. 
Ne font-ce pas des iugemens adorables de Dieu, celle- 
Ik feule qui me menoit efl du nombre des reprouuez, 
& nous auons fujet de croire que les trois autres font 
au ciel. La premiere auoit depuis vn mois vn petit en- 
fant dans le ciel, qui pent eftre y attira fa mere; les 
deux dernieres furent bien toft fuiuies chacune d'vn 
enfant qu'elles auoient laifI6 dans le berceau, & qui 
tons deux furent heureufement baptifez vn peu de- 
uant leur mort. 

Nous ne pouuons auoir entree dans vne certaine 
cabane qui n'eft remplie que de malades: lors que 
nous fommes dans la rue vn enfant d'enuiron quatre 
ans qui efl plein de fante accourt ^ nous, & nous 
fiatte extraordinairement : nous [no] luy demandons 
fa maifon, il nous I'enfeigne, nous nous doutons 
qu'en I'aage oil il eftoit, au milieu de tant de ma- 
lades, la mort pourroit bien le rauir fans que nous 
peuffions dans 1' extreme necelTit^ pouruoir au falut 
de fon ame. Ie me fens pouff6 fortement k ne pas 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 221 

maliciously pretends to be deaf, and will not answer 
a word. I do my utmost, but if Our Lord do not 
himself speak to the heart, what do we but make a 
little noise? I leave this unhappy one, and pass on 
with no other purpose except to leave through the 
other door of the cabin ; but God was gfuiding me ; I 
find on my way two other women who are in extrem- 
ity; [109] I instruct them one after the other, and 
prepare them for dying happily. How adorable are 
the favors of the good Jesus, and how powerful they 
are when he enlightens a soul ! These good women 
satisfy me and receive baptism ; and then night warns 
me to withdraw as soon as possible. I was not long 
without hearing of the death of these four patients. 
Are not these adorable judgments of God? That 
woman alone, who led me thither, is in the number 
of the reprobates ; and we have reason to believe that 
the three others are in heaven. The first one had 
had a little child in heaven for a month past, which 
perhaps attracted its mother to that place ; the two 
latter ones were soon followed, each by a child which 
they had left in the cradle ; and both children were 
fortunately baptized a little before their death. 

" We cannot have admittance to a certain cabin, 
which is filled only with sick people ; when we are 
in the street, a child of about four years, full of 
health, runs up to us and pleases us uncommonly. 
We [no] ask him his house, he points it out to us ; we, 
suspecting that at his age, in the midst of so many sick 
people, death might easily seize him before we could, 
in case of extreme necessity, provide for the salva- 
tion of his soul. I feel strongly impelled not to lose 
the opportunity ; I beg Father Chaumonot to baptize 
him in secret. He takes from the road a handful of 


•222 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.19 

perdre I'occalion, ie prie le P. Chaumonot de le bap- 
tifer en fecret. II prend dans le chemin vne poign6e 
de neige, I'efchatiffe dans fa main, & verfe I'eau fur 
ce petit enfant, qui luy foufrit en mefme temps: & 
puis apres, comme s'il auoit receu tout ce qu'il defi- 
roit de nous, il fe retire en courant deuers fa cabane : 
11 tombe incontinent malade. Tons ceux de fa 
maifon que nous n 'anions pu aborder retournent en 
fant6, luy feul efl emport6 de la force du mal, & fon 
ame s'enuole au Ciel. 

Vn petit enfant nouueau n6, n'eft pas fi tofl venu 
au monde qu'il efl attaque de verole : ie f ongeois k 
le baptifer, mais les parens ne font pas difpofez k le 
fouffrir, & I'eau me manque: fans que i'y penfe on 
apporte vn grand vaiffeau remply d'eau tiede pour le 
lauer: ie me iette [m] dans la mefl6e, & me faifls 
gayement de c6t enfant : Ie le plonge tout nud, & 
le replonge en I'eau, & le baptife tout "k mon aife, 
vfque ad trinam immerjionem: au bout de quelques 
iours il meurt. Les parens eftoient bien efloignez 
de croire que c'eftoit Xk la meilleure fa9on de bap- 
tifer. 

Au bourg de faindt Xauier ie trouue trois freres 
malades, ie les inftruits, leur mere s'oppofe k leur 
baptefme: Vn de leur frere, dit-elle, mourut I'Efte 
pafI6 pour auoir eft6 baptifd, elle adioufte d'autres 
blafphemes contre Dieu. Ie quitte 1&, cette megere, 
& me tourne vers les enfans: ie leur parle le plus 
fortement que ie puis de I'enfer & de ces flammes 
qui iamais ne s'efteignent. Ie m'addrefle k I'aifn^ 
aag6 pres de vingt ans : Es-tu refolu k ces peines, 
luy dis-je? Helas nanny! baptife moy. Quoy, mal- 
heureux, luy dit fa mere, es-tu done refolu de mou- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 223 

snow, warms it in his hand, and pours the water over 
this little child, who at the same time smiled at him. 
And then, as he had received all that he desired 
of ns, he runs away toward his cabin ; he straight- 
way falls sick. All those of his house whom we had 
not been able to approach, return to health ; he alone 
is carried off by the violence of the disease, and his 
soul takes flight to Heaven. 

" A little child, newly born, has no sooner come 
into the world than it is attacked by smallpox. I 
thought of baptizing it, but the parents are not dis- 
posed to allow this, and water fails me. Without 
my thinking of it, they bring a great vessel filled 
with lukewarm water, to bathe it; I mingle [m] 
with the company, and joyously seize this child; I 
plunge it again and again, all naked, into the water, 
and baptize it quite at my ease, usque ad trinam im- 
mersionem; after some days it dies. The parents 
were very far from believing that that was the best 
way to baptize. 

" At the village of saint Xavier, I find three sick 
brothers; I instruct them; their mother opposes 
their baptism. ' One of their brothers, ' she says, ' died 
last Summer for having been baptized;' she adds 
other blasphemies against God. I leave there this 
Megera, and turn toward the children: I speak to 
them as strongly as I can about hell, and of those 
flames which are never quenched. I turn to the 
eldest, aged nearly twenty years : ' Art thou resolved 
for these pains?' I say to him. ' Alas, no indeed! 
baptize me.' ' What? wretch,' said his mother to 
him, * art thou then resolved to die? thou art dead if 
they baptize thee.' ' I wish them to baptize me,' he 
answers, ' for I too greatly dread those flames, which 


224 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.19 

rir. tu es mort fi on te baptife. le veux qu'on me 
baptife, refpond-il, car ie redoute trop ces flammes 
qui bruflent tout, & iamais ne finiffent. Dieu f9ait 
de quel coeur ie conferay ce S. Baptefme, mais les 
deux [112] autres freres n'eurent pas affez de cou- 
rage pour en cela defobeir faindtement k leur mere. 
Huidl iours apres ie retourne les voir, celuy que i'a- 
iiois baptife ne I'auoit pas fait longue, les deux autres 
eftoient rechapez : de quel oeil pouuoit on me voir ? 
& cette pauure mere n'auoit-elle pas quelque raifon 
d'auoir le baptefme en horreur, & celuy qui I'auoit 
confer^. 

Au re fie c6t autre frere qui leur eftoit mort rEfl6 
precedent, apres auoir receu le faindt baptefme, nous 
auoit fait paroiftre vne prouidence de Dieu bien 
particuliere fur luy. Le P. Garnier arriua heureufe- 
ment en ce bourg, k I'heure mefme qu'on y rappor- 
toit ce ieune homme qui eftoit defia quafi mort : lors 
qu'ils eftoiet k la pefcbe k deux iourn^es de leur 
pays, vne nation incogneue s' eftoit venu letter fur 
leur cabane, & auoit tu6 fur le lieu trois ou quatre 
de nos Hurons, quelques autres eftans efchappez. 
Celuy-cy voyant vne grefle de fleches fondre fur eux, 
au lieu de prendre la fuite, prit entre fes bras vn 
petit frere qu'il auoit, & auoit par6 tous les coups 
qu'on decochoit [113] fur ce petit innocent, les rece- 
uant luy-mefme fur fon corps, auec vn courage & vn 
amour fraternel qui femble auoir quelque chofe plus 
que la nature. En effect il conferua ce petit frere, 
mais luy fut tranfperc6 de fleches, & tomba comme 
mort fur celuy qu'il vouloit couurir de fon corps en 
mourant. Les ennemis s'eftans retirez, ceux qui 
auoient pris la fuite retournerent au lieu ou s'efloit 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 225 


bum everything and never cease.' God knows with 
what heart I conferred that Holy Baptism ; but the 
two [112] other brothers had not sufficient courage 
therein holily to disobey their mother. Eight days 
later, I return to see them : the one whom I had bap- 
tized had not lived long ; the two others had escaped. 
With what eyes could they look at me ? and had not 
this poor mother some reason to hold baptism in 
abomination, and him who had conferred it? 

" Howbeit, that other brother who had died among 
them the Summer before, after having received holy 
baptism, had shown us a very special providence of 
God over him. Father Gamier fortunately arrived 
in this village at the very hour when they were 
bringing home this young man, who was already 
nearly dead ; while they were fishing, two days' jour- 
ney from their own country, an unknown nation had 
come to fall upon their cabin, and had killed on the 
spot three or four of our Hurons, some others having 
escaped. This man, seeing a shower of arrows burst 
upon them like hail, instead of taking flight, seized 
in his arms a little brother that he had, and parried 
all the darts which they were letting loose [113] upon 
this little innocent, — receiving them upon his own 
body with a courage and a brotherly love which 
seems to be marked by something more than nature. 
In fact, he preserved this little brother, but himself 
was pierced through with arrows, and fell, as if dead, 
upon the one whom he tried to cover with his body 
in dying. The enemies having withdrawn, those 
who had taken flight returned to the place where the 
attack had occurred, and, having found this man 
with some remnants of life, they brought him to 
their village. Father Garnier, then, happening to 


22G LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol. 19 

fait le meurtre, & ayant trouti6 celuy-cy auec quel- 
ques reftes de vie, ils ramenerent en leur bourg. 
Le Pere Garnier s'eftant done Ik trouue lors que ce 
pauure moribund arriuoit, s'approcha de luy pour 
I'inftruire: mais las il n'auoit plus de iugement, fon 
efprit eftoit fans arreft dans des folies continuelles. 
Le Pere iette fes yeux & fon coeur vers le ciel, & 
voyant bien que fi Dieu n'auoit piti6 de ce pauure 
homme, c'eftoit fait k iamais de fon ame, il a recours 
aux merites de S. Frangois Xauier, il implore fon 
alTiftance, & voiie quelques Meiles & quelques morti- 
fications en fon honneur. A I'heure mefme le ma- 
lade comme reuenant d'vn profond fommeil, f 'eerie, 
[i 14] Toy qui as fait le monde aye pitie de moy : A 
ce cry les barbares qui font la pref ent font tous eflon- 
nez, le Pere benit Dieu, inftruit ce pauure moribund, 
qui luy demande le baptefme, deteftefespecliez, fouf- 
pire apres le ciel, ou fans doute il fe vit bien toft, 
n'ayant pas furvefcu vn iour k fon baptefme. 

Voicy encore quelques autres coups de faueur de 
Dieu fur les efleus. 

Allant en vn endroit nous nous efgarons fans y 
penfer, & nous trouuons engagez dans des routes que 
nous ne cherchions pas : nous rencontrons deux pe- 
tits enfans qui fe meurent, couchez pres de leur mere 
toute efplor^e ; ils re§oiuent tous deux le baptefme, 
& puis s'enuolent au ciel. N'eft-ce pas Dieu qui 
nous guidoit. 

La veille de la Touffaincts ie fuis contraint de cou- 
rir feul en deux ou trois cabanes, au milieu d'vne 
efpoifle foreft, ou la maladie les ruinoit. Ie mets le 
pied dans vne pauure maifonnette ou iamais ie n'e- 
flois entr6, ie trouue vn ieune gargon en bien grand 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 227 

be there when this poor dying man arrived, ap- 
proached him to instruct him ; but alas, he had no 
further judgment, his mind was, without pause, in 
continual frenzies. The Father casts his eyes and 
his heart toward heaven, and, seeing well that unless 
God had pity on this poor man it was forever done 
with his soul ; he has recourse to the merits of St. 
Fran9ois Xavier; he implores his assistance, and 
vows some Masses and some mortifications in his 
honor. At that very time, the patient, as if coming 
back from a deep sleep, exclaims: [114] ' Thou who 
hast made the world, have pity on me ! ' At this 
cry, the barbarians who are there present are all 
astonished: the Father blesses God, instructs this 
poor dying man, who asks him for baptism, who 
detests his sins, and sighs after heaven, where no 
doubt he soon found himself, — not having survived 
his baptism one day." 

Here are also some other acts of God's favor over 
the elect. 

' ' On our way to a place, we go astray unawares, 
and find ourselves involved in routes that we were 
not seeking. We meet two little children who are 
dying, — prostrate near their mother, who is all in 
tears; they both receive baptism, and then take 
flight to heaven. Was it not God who guided us? 

" On the eve of All Saints, I am constrained to 
run alone into two or three cabins, in the midst of a 
dense forest, where the disease was ruining them. I 
set foot in a poor little house where I had never 
entered ; I find a young lad in very gfreat danger of 
dying. I instruct him, and prepare him for holy bap- 
tism; [115] his father opposes it, and will not allow 
me this, unless at the same time I baptize another, 


228 LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 19 

danger de mourir: ie rinftruis & le difpofe an faindt 
baptefme, [115] fon peres s'y oppofe, & ne veut pas 
me le permettre, li en mefme temps ie n'en baptife 
vn autre qui eftoit encore an berceau ; i'en fais diffi- 
cult6, ce plus petit n'eftant aucunement malade : le 
pere de fon cofte perfifte auffi dans fon refus, me 
difant qu'il vouloit que fi fes deux enfans mouroient 
ils allaffent de compagnie ou dans le ciel, ou aux 
enfers. Ie fuis contraint de luy accorder ce qu'il 
veut pour ne pas perdre vne ame, ie les baptife done 
tons deux, au bout de huidt iours ie retourne, ie ne 
les trouue plus en vie, on me chaffe de la cabane, & 
on n'y veut plus entendre parler de Dieu. C'eft 
ainfi que Noftre Seigneur fe fert mefme des reprou- 
uez pour auoir fes efleus. 

Ie paffe proche d'vne cabane ou trois petits enfans 
fe meurent, on m'appelle comme vn grand medecin 
pour porter iugement combien il leur refhoit de vie : 
en entrant ie voy bien qu'il en reftoit encore allez 
pour les faire viure ^ iamais dans le ciel: en leur 
taflant le poux ie prens mon temps fecrettement, & 
les baptife : ils n'attendoient rien que cela pour mou- 
rir ^ toutes leurs miferes. En vn mot [116] nous 
faifons icy les affaires de Dieu, eft-ce merueille qu'il 
s'en mefle? 

lufques icy le Pere. 

N'y a-il pas dans ces rencontres dequoy benir ^ 
iamais les mifericordes de Dieu : mais auffi tres-fou- 
uent les effec5ts adorables de fa iuftice fe font voir 
clairement fur vne quantit6 d'infideles & de reprou- 
uez qui vomillent leur ame blafphemant contre vn fi 
bon Seigneur, dont ils refufent les faueurs gratuites 
^ rheure de la mort, qu'ils voudroient dedans I'eter- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 229 

who is still in the cradle. I object to that, this 
smaller one being nowise sick; the father, on his 
side, also persists in his refusal, telling me that he 
wished that, if his two children died, they should go 
in company, either to heaven or to hell. I am con- 
strained to grant him what he desires, in order not 
to lose a soul ; I then baptize them both. After 
eight days I return ; I find them no longer alive ; I 
am driven from the cabin, and they will hear no 
further mention of God. Thus it is that Our Lord 
uses even reprobates in order to possess his elect. 

" I pass near a cabin where three little children 
are dying ; I am called, as if I were a great physi- 
cian, to declare how much life was left to them. On 
going in, I plainly see that they still had enough 
left to make them live forever in heaven ; while feel- 
ing their pulses, I take my opportunity secretly, and 
baptize them ; they were awaiting nothing but that 
in order to die to all their miseries. In a word, 
[116] we are transacting the affairs of God here: is 
it a wonder that he takes part in them ? ' ' 

Thus far the Father. 

Is there not in these incidents reason to bless for- 
ever the mercies of God? But also very often the 
adorable effects of his justice clearly reveal them- 
selves upon a number of infidels and reprobates, who 
vomit forth their soul by blaspheming against so 
good a Lord, whose free favors they refuse at the 
hour of death, — which in eternity they would fain 
have brought back at the cost of all the sufferings of 
hell. I adduce but one instance hereof, which causes 
me as much pity as indignation. 

One of our Fathers enters a cabin; he accosts a 
sick man there who is drawing near death ; he ob- 


230 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.19 

nit^ auoir rachept6 au prix de toutes les fouffrances 
d'enfer. le n'en apporte qu'vn exemple, qui me 
donne autant de piti6 que d' indignation. 

Vn de nos Peres entre en vne cabane, il y aborde 
vn malade qui tire ^ la mort, il obtient auec bien de 
la peine de plulieurs qui eftoient \k prefens le loifir 
d'inflruire ce pauure moribond; il eft inflruit & dif- 
pofe, il donne fon confentement au baptefme, il ne 
faut plus que de I'eau. A ce moment vne petite 
fille de fept "k huidt ans fe leue, prend le feau ou 
eftoit I'eau, la verfe en terre, & la foule aux pieds, 
elle f'6crie que refolument le malade [117] ne feroit 
point baptif6. Tu es mort, luy dit-elle, fi tu permets 
qu'on te baptife, retrac5te ton confentement, pour 
moy quoy que tu fafle, i'empefcheray bien qu'on ne 
trouue de I'eau. En fin cette petite furie d'enfer efl 
fi eloquente que le malade fe dedit, ne veut plus 
eftre baptif^. Veux tu done te damner? Ouy da. 
le fuis tout refolu, dit-il, de fouffrir les feux & les 
flammes d'enfer; ie me fuis difpof6 d6s mon bas 
aage ^ eflre cruellement brufl(S, i'y ferray paroiflre 
mon courage. Le diable qui fans doute auoit anim6 
c6t enfant, n'entra-il point dans le corps de c6t 
homme: quoy qu'il en foit, ce malheureux perfifta 
iufques k la mort dans fon refus. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 231 

tains with much difficulty, from several who were 
there present, the leisure to instruct this poor dying 
man. He is instructed and made ready; he gives 
his consent to baptism; there needs nothing more 
but some water. At this moment, a little girl of seven 
or eight years gets up, takes the bucket in which 
the water was, pours it on the ground, and tramples 
it with her feet ; she exclaims that upon her word 
the sick man [117] should not be baptized. " Thou 
art dead," she says to him; " if thou allow them to 
baptize thee; retract thy consent: as for me, what- 
ever thou doest, I will surely prevent them from 
finding water." To conclude ; this little fury of hell 
is so eloquent that the sick man goes back on his 
word, and will no more be baptized. " Dost thou 
wish then to be damned? " " Certainly; I am fully 
resolved, ' ' he says, * * to suffer the fires and the flames 
of hell. I have prepared myself from my early 
youth to be cruelly burned : I will show my courage 
therein." Did not the devil, who no doubt had ani- 
mated this child, enter this man's body? However 
that be, this wretch persisted in his refusal, even 
until death. 


282 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.19 


[ii8] CHAPITRE VIII. 

DES CHRESTIENS DE CETTE MESME MISSION DE LA 
CONCEPTION. 

L?AN palI6 cette Eglife floriffoit aflez heureufe- 
ment pour les commencemens d'vne Eglife 
nailTante au milieu d'vne barbarie, qui n'auoit 
rien que de fauuage depuis la creation du monde. 
Cette ann6e le nombre en eft notablement decheu, 
plulieurs ont eft^ renuerfez par terre, qui dans la mort 
de leurs parens, de leurs nepueux, de leurs enfans, & 
la mine de leur famille n'ont pas eu aflez de foy pour 
fupporter auec courage ces coups-Ik de la main de 
Dieu, mais ont blafpheme contre luy, & fe voyant 
plus mal traittez que ceux qui eftoient infideles, ont 
abandonn^ le Chriftianifme, comme fi ce malheur ne 
leur fuft arriu6 que par I'impuillance de Dieu, qui 
auroit eu moins de pouuoir "k les preferuer du fleau 
qui rauageoit tout le pays, [119] que n'auoient les 
demons pour ceux qui fe rangeoient de leur party. 
Nous apprendros dans Teternit^ les relTorts adorables 
de c6t ceil qui voit tout, & va difpofant en cette fa9on 
les ordres de fa prouidence : mais cependant nous ne 
ceffons de le benir de tout : car fi plufieurs en ces ren- 
contres ont efte infideles k Dieu, nous auons admir6 
le courage de quelques vns, qui fe font conferuez 
entierement dans leur ferueur, & mefme ont aug- 
ment6 leur zele au plus fort de toutes ces bouraf ques. 
Vne bonne vieille d'enuiron feptante ans, de mefme 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 233 


[118] CHAPTER VIII. 

OF THE CHRISTIANS OF THIS SAME MISSION OF LA 
CONCEPTION. 

LAST year, this Church flourished quite happily 
for the beginnings of a Church born in the 
midst of a barbarism which from the creation 
of the world had none but savage attributes. This 
year, the number of members has notably fallen off ; 
many have been overthrown to the ground, who at 
the death of their parents, of their nephews, of their 
children, and at the ruin of their family, have not 
had faith enough to endure with courage those blows 
from the hand of God, but have blasphemed against 
him. These, seeing themselves more severely dealt 
with than those who were infidels, have abandoned 
Christianity, — as if this misfortune had befallen them 
only through the impotence of God, who had had less 
power to preserve them from the scourge which was 
ravaging the whole country, [119] than the demons 
had for those who took sides with them. We shall 
learn in eternity the adorable activities of that eye 
which sees everything, and keeps disposing in this 
way the orders of its providence ; but yet we do not 
cease to bless it for everything ; for if many on these 
occasions have been faithless to God, we have ad- 
mired the courage of some who have maintained 
themselves altogether in their fervor, and have even 
augmented their zeal at the height of all these squalls. 
A good old woman of about seventy years, — of the 


234 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.19 

nom d'Anne que celle dot nous auons parl6 au cha- 
pitre fixiefme, pour eftre agreable aux yeux de Dieu, 
n'a pas efle exempte du fleau qui a rauag6 cette petite 
Eglife, pluftoft ie puis dire que peut-eftre dans tout 
le pays il n'y a eu aucun plus auant dans I'afflidtion 
qu'elle. Elle n'auoit que deux grandes filles & vne 
niepce, qui efloient I'vnique appuy de fa vieillelTe, 
& toutes les richefles de cette pauure femme, 
Dieu les prit toutes trois a foy en moins de trois 
femaines: elle fe vit done abandonn^e, [120] non 
pas toute feule, mais pour accroiftre fa mifere, 
trois petits enfans orphelins fur les bras. Ce n'eft 
pas tout, ces trois petits innocens tombent malades 
quafi en mefme iour, & font fi bas qu'ils ne peuuent 
demander alTiftance que par leurs cris: lors qu'elle 
foulage I'vn, I'autre pleure voyant qu'on le quitte: 
I'vn eft dans le berceau, & crie apres le laidt: il tend 
les mains k fa grand-mere pour fe pendre a vne mam- 
melle fieftrie, & qui n'a plus de fuc; les deux autres 
meurent auffi de faim, & luy demandent "k manger: 
cette pauure vieille efl fi foible qu'^ peine peut-elle 
en vne heure brifer entre deux pierres vne poignee 
de bled : de plus le bois luy manque, & n'a pas dans 
la rigueur du froid dequoy entretenir fon feu: d'en 
aller couper dans les bois, outre qu'elle fe voit quafi 
toute nue, la veue & les forces luy deff aillent : dans 
tout fon bourg ils ont eu alTez de langue & de malice 
pour plaindre fa mifere, & accufer Dieu comme im- 
puiflant ou iniufte en fes prouidences : mais ^ peine 
y en eut-il aucun, mefme de fes plus proches qui fe 
mit en deuoir de luy donner quelque [121] affiflance. 
Son afiflicStion en a efpouuant6 plufieurs, & leur a fait 
perdre courage, craignant, difoient-ils, vn femblable 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 235 

same name, Anne, as the one of whom we spoke in 
the sixth chapter, — though acceptable in the sight of 
God, has not been exempt from the scourge which 
has ravaged this little Church : rather I may say that 
perhaps in all the country there has been no one 
deeper in affliction than she. She had only two 
grown daughters and a niece, who were the sole sup- 
port of her old age, and all this poor woman's riches; 
God took them all three to himself in less than three 
weeks; she then saw herself desolate, — [120] not 
indeed quite alone, but, to increase her misery, with 
three little orphan children on her hands. This is 
not all ; these three little innocents fall sick almost on 
the same day, and are so low that they can ask help 
only by their cries. When she soothes one, the other 
weeps on seeing her leave it ; one is in the cradle, 
and cries after milk ; he stretches out his hands to 
his grandmother, in order to cling to a withered 
breast, which has no more juice ; the two others are 
also dying with hunger and ask her for food. This 
poor old woman is so weak that hardly in course of 
an hour can she crush a handful of corn between two 
stones. Moreover, wood fails her, and during the 
rigor of the cold she has no fuel to maintain her fire ; 
to go and cut some in the woods, — besides the fact 
that she sees herself almost entirely naked, — her 
sight and strength fail her. Throughout her village, 
they have had speech enough and malice enough to 
bewail her misery, and accuse God as being power- 
less or unjust in his providence: but there was 
scarcely any one, even of her nearest relatives, who 
assumed the obligation of giving her any [121] assist- 
ance. Her affliction has terrified many, and has 
made them lose courage, — fearing, they said, a like 


236 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 19 

malheur s'ils perfifloient dedans la Foy. Mais elle 
feule fupporta plus conftamment fon mal que las 
autres ne le confidererent. Quant k nous, quoy que 
nous fifmes le poffible pour raffifler, & que cette mi- 
fere nous touchaft viuement, nous prifmes toutefois 
plaifir auffi bien que le ciel, h. voir fa fidelity & la fer- 
mete de fon coeur en vne efpreuue fi affeur6e. Du- 
rant tout ce temps iamais elle ne dit aucun mot contre 
Dieu, pluftoft c'eftoit fa plus grande confolation 
d'auoir recours k luy, & de leuer les yeux au ciel oil 
elle efpere apres la mort fe trouuer exempte de fes 
miaux. Ses filles furent baptif^es, & fa niepce qui 
I'auoit efte, fut confefC^e vn peu deuant la mort. 
Cette bonne femme les voyant mortes toutes trois, 
fe confoloit dans la penfee qu'elles eftoient au ciel 
bien-heureufes. Sa fimplicit6 fut bien 11 grande que 
voyat ces petits orphelins qui luy reftoient malades, 
quoy que defia ils eullent eft6 baptifez, elle fe tourna 
vers vn de nos Peres: [122] Tu vols bien, luy dit 
elle, que ces enfans fe meurent, ie te prie rebaptife 
les, afin que plus alfeur^ment ils aillent dans le ciel, 
ce fera ma confolation de les voir mourir par apres. 
Vn d'eux ne la fit pas longue, I'autre ^ qui le laidt 
manque le fuiura bien-tofl. Qu'il eft bien vray que 
Dieu f e plaift k f aire fes graces aux plus fimples ? car 
cette bonne femme continue autant que iamais dans 
la pratique des Sacremens, & dans les deuoirs d'vne 
bonne Chreftienne. Vne ame fi fidele k Dieu quand 
bien elle feroit toute feule meriteroit qu'on employaft 
cent vies pour la conduire dans les voyes de la fain- 
(5let6, que luy a merits le Sang & la PalTion de lefus- 
Chrift. 

Vn autre bon Chreftien, chef d'vne famille des 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 237 

misfortune if they persisted in the Faith ; but she, 
alone, more steadfastly bore her trouble than the 
others considered it. As for us, although we did our 
utmost to aid her, and though this misery touched us 
keenly, we nevertheless took pleasure, as well as 
heaven, in seeing her fidelity, and the firmness of 
her heart, in so genuine a trial. During all this 
time she said never a word against God ; rather, it 
was her greatest consolation to have recourse to him 
and to lift her eyes to heaven, where she hopes after 
death to find herself exempt from her troubles. Her 
daughters were baptized, and her niece, who had 
been [baptized before], was heard in confession a 
little before death. This good woman, seeing them 
all three dead, consoled herself in the thought that 
they were blessed in heaven. Her simplicity was 
indeed so great that, seeing those little orphans who 
remained sick with her, although they had already 
been baptized, she turned to one of our Fathers: 
[122] " Thou seest well," she says to him, "that 
these children are dying; I beg you, baptize them 
again, to the end that they may more certainly go to 
heaven ; it will be my consolation to see them die 
thereafter. ' * One of them made no long stay ; an- 
other — the one who lacks milk — will soon follow 
him. How true it is indeed, that God takes pleasure 
in imparting his graces to the most simple ; for this 
good woman continues as much as ever in the observ- 
ance of the Sacraments, and in the duties of a good 
Christian. A soul so faithful to God, — even though 
it were quite alone, — would deserve that one should 
spend a hundred lives to lead it into the ways of holi- 
ness which the Blood and the Passion of Jesus Christ 
have merited for it. 


238 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.19 

plus confiderables, du mefme bourg de la Concep- 
tion, & qui depuis fon baptefme nous a donn6 I'ef- 
pace de treize mois toute forte de fatisf action, efhant 
venu vn iour dans la chappelle entendre Meffe & 
prier Dieu k fon ordinaire, apres auoir acheue quel- 
ques prieres qu'il a apris par coeur : Mon Dieu, dit-il, 
[123] efcoutez moy, car c'eft maintenant que ie vais 
vous prier : Tons mes enfans font maintenant atta- 
quez de la maladie, & quali tons en danger de mou- 
rir : vous diray-je guariffez les? vous le pouuez d'vne 
feule parole, Ce n'eft pas Ik, mon Dieu, ce que ie 
veux vous dire : Efcoutez les penf 6es de mon ame, 
vous qui cognoilTez tous nos coeurs. Vous eftes le 
grand maiftre de tout, vous qui auez cr6e le monde. 
& toutesfois i'ay deflr auiourd'huy de vous faire vn 
pref ent : ie regarde par tout, & ne rencontre rien qui 
foit digne de vous. Helas! ie ne fuis que pouffiere 
en voftre prefence, & les balieures d'vne cabane qu'on 
nettoye : Tous les bommes ne font rien deuant vous : 
que puis-je done vous ofifrir, grand Dieu? tout ce que 
i'ay, mon Dieu: Vous eftes le maiftre de nos vies: 
c'eft auiourd'buy que ie vous les off re: non feule- 
ment la vie de mes enfans, mais la mienne, & de tous 
ceux de ma famille. Si ie fuis le dernier h. mourir, 
ie vous diray, prenez ma vie, mon Dieu, tout ce que 
vous voulez eft raifonnable. C'eft auiourd'huy, mon 
Dieu, que vous pouuez m'efprouuer en [124] me pre- 
nant au mot : Ouy, ie ne diray rien autre chof e finon 
que voftre volont6 eft fain(5te en tout ce qu'elle or- 
donne. Mais vous lefus, mon Sauueur, que puis-je 
maintenant vous offrir? il ne me refte rien apres le 
don que ie viens de faire: mais auffi vous y auez 
part, puis que vous eftes Dieu. Ayez piti6 de moy, 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 239 

Another good Christian — head of one of the most 
important families of the same village of la Concep- 
tion, who since his baptism has given us all every 
sort of satisfaction for the space of thirteen months — 
having come to the chapel one day to hear Mass and 
pray to God as was his wont, after having finished 
some prayers which he has learned by heart, said: 
" My God, [123] listen to me, for now is the time I 
am going to pray to you. All my children are now 
attacked by the disease, and almost all in danger of 
dying. Shall I say to you, ' Cure them?' You can 
do so by a single word. That, my God, is not what 
I wish to tell you: listen to the thoughts of my soul, 
you who know all our hearts. You are the great 
master of everything, you who have created the 
world ; and yet I desire to-day to make you a pres- 
ent ; I look everywhere, and encounter nothing which 
is worthy of you. Alas! I am but dust in your 
presence, and the sweepings of a cabin that is 
cleaned. All men are nothing before you, — what 
can I then offer you, great God? all that I have, my 
God. You are the master of our lives ; to-day I offer 
them to you, not only the life of my children, but 
mine, and that of all those in my family. If I am 
the last to die, I will say to you: * Take my life, my 
God, all that you wish is reasonable.' To-day, my 
God, you can try me by [124] taking me at my word. 
Yes, I will say nothing else than that your will is 
holy in everything which it ordains. But you, Jesus, 
my Savior, what can I now offer you ? I have noth- 
ing left, after the gift which I have just made ; but 
you, too, have a share in it, since you are God. 
Have pity on me ; it is enough for me that the pres- 
ent which I have just made is acceptable to you." 


240 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.19 

ce m'eft alTez que le prefent que ie viens de faire 
vous agree. 

Vn de nos Peres qui efcoutoit cette priere, lors que 
le bon homme ne croyoit pas auoir aucun tefmoin, 
m'affeure au bas de la lettre qu'il m'en efcriuoit, 
qu'il n'y a du tout rien adioufte, & que mefme il n'a 
pas peu exprimer en noftre langue Fran9oife I'effi- 
cace & r affection de la deuotion qui luy paroiffoit 
bien plus grande dans les termes Hurons 

II pleuft "k Dieu prendre au mot ce bon Chreftien : 
celuy de fes enfans qu'il cheriffoit le plus mouruft, 
apres des douleurs quail infupportables : mais fans 
doute Dieu fit mifericorde au fils pour recompenfer 
les faindtes volontez du pere. Ce ieune gar9on de- 
puis fon baptefme n'auoit pas quafi fait aucune 
profefiion du [125] Cbriflianifme, la ieunelTe I'ayant 
emporte dans le libertinage. 

Vn iour que les deux Peres qui ont foin de cette 
miffion retourneret audit bourg, apres quelques 
courfes qu'ils auoient fait, on leur dit que ce ieune 
gargon eftoit mort : ils vont incontinent en la cabane 
pour confoler le pere, ils trouuent le fils encore en 
vie, & auec vn plein iugement, mais tirant k la fin; 
on luy parle du Ciel, il efcoute tres-volontiers : il s'ac- 
cufe de fes pechez, & demande pardon "k Dieu : on 
luy donne I'abfolution, & le difpofe k bien mourir. 
A peine les Peres furent retournez en leur cabane, 
qu'on leur vint apporter les nouuelles affeur6es de 
fa mort. 

Cette mort ref ona bien haut : par tout il f e difoit 
que Dieu abandonnoit fes plus fideles feruiteurs, que 
la Foy ne feruoit qu'k les faire mourir, & que le defir 
que nous anions de les mettre au pluftoft dans le 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 241 

One of our Fathers, who was listening to this 
prayer when the good man did not think he had any 
witness, assures me at the end of the letter which 
he wrote to me about it, that he has added nothing 
at all to it, and that indeed he has not been able to 
express in our French language the efficacy and the 
affection of the devotion, which appeared to him much 
greater in the Huron terms. 

It pleased God to take this good Christian literal- 
ly, — that one of his children which he cherished the 
most died, after almost unendurable pains; but no 
doubt God showed mercy to the son in order to 
recompense the holy wishes of the father. This 
young lad, after his baptism, had scarcely made any 
profession of [125] Christianity, his youth having 
carried him away into license. 

One day, when the two Fathers who have charge of 
this mission returned to the said village, after some 
errands which they had despatched, it was told them 
that this young lad was dead. They straightway go 
into the cabin to console the father ; they find the 
son still alive, and with his faculties complete, but 
approaching his end. They speak to him of Heav- 
en ; he listens very willingly : he accuses himself of 
his sins, and asks pardon of God ; they give him 
absolution, and prepare him to die happily. Hardly 
had the Fathers returned to their cabin when some 
one came to bring them the certain news of his death. 

This death resounded very loudly; it was every- 
where said that God was forsaking his most faithful 
servants, that the Faith availed only to cause them 
to die, and that our desire to put them in Heaven as 
soon as possible caused us to hasten the days of 
those whom we believe to be the best prepared there- 


242 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 19 

Ciel, faifoit que nous auancions les iours de ceux que 
nous croyons y eftre les mieux difpofez. Le pere en 
la perte de ce fils, qui fuiuit la mort de deux autres 
petits enfans, ne manqua pas d' eftre [126] puiflam- 
ment attaque & dedans & dehors fa maifon: Ses 
amys & fa femme luy difoient auffi bien qu'autresfois 
on difoit au bon lob, Benedic Deo & morere. Nonob- 
ftant il fut entierement fidele k Dieu, il continua 
dans fa mefme ferueur, & vint de recbef en noftre 
Chappelle remercier Dieu de la mort de ce fils bien- 
ayme, & luy offrir tout de nouueau tout ce qui luy 
xefloit d' enfans. 

Mais, belas! li I'efprit eft prompt la foiblelTe de la 
chair eft grande: le pauure homme fe trouua fur- 
pris: Noftre Seigneur ayant continue d'efprouuer 
fa fidelite & fa conftance : Voicy ce que nos Peres 
m'en efcriuent. Helas! que le bon Ren6 a befoin 
que nous redoublions nos prieres pour luy. Cecidit 
de ccelo Lucifer qui mane oriebatur ; tant de morts de 
fa cabane & de fes propres enfans, & I'extremite dans 
laquelle il void enfin vne fienne fille de vingt ans, 
r importunity de fa femme qui ne ceffe de le tour- 
menter, les afleurances qu'vn impofteur magicien 
leur a donn6 qu'il gueriroit leur fille: toutes ces 
chofes enfin I'ont fait tomber dans le peche, & recou- 
rir k ces remedes [127] diaboliques. Au refte on ne 
parle dans tout ce bourg que de ce magicien : il a pro- 
mis publiquement de guerir tons les malades qu'il 
arroferoit d'vne eau, que fon demon, dit-il, luy a 
enfeigne. On a tenu confeil trois iours entiers pour 
vne affaire de telle confequence : on a fait treize pre- 
fens notables ^ cet impoiteur, incontinet apres il 
commen9a fon operation : il arrofa tous les malades 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 243 

for. The father, at the loss of this son, which fol- 
lowed the death of two other little children, did not 
escape being [126] vigorously attacked both within 
and without his house ; his friends and his wife said 
to him, the same as was formerly said to the good 
Job: Benedic Deo, et morere. Nevertheless, he was 
entirely faithful to God ; he continued in his same 
fervor, and again came into our Chapel, to thank 
God for the death of this well-beloved son, and to 
offer him quite anew all the children whom he had 
left. 

But alas ! if the spirit is prompt, the weakness of 
the flesh is great: the poor man was taken by sur- 
prise, — Our Lord having continued to try his fidelity 
and his constancy. Note what our Fathers write to 
me in the matter. * ' Alas ! how the good Ren6 has 
need that we redouble our prayers for him. Cecidit 
de coelo Lucifer qui mane oriebatur; so many dead from 
his cabin and of his own children, and the extremity 
in which he finally sees a daughter of his, twenty 
years old ; the importunity of his wife, who does not 
cease to torment him; the assurances that a false 
magician has given them, that he would cure their 
daughter, — all these things at last made him fall 
into sin, and have recourse to those diabolical [127] 
remedies. For that matter, this magician is the 
only subject of conversation in all this village; he 
has openly promised to cure all the sick, whom he 
would sprinkle with a water about which his demon, 
he says, has taught him. They have held a coun- 
cil three whole days, for an affair of such conse- 
quence : they have made thirteen notable presents to 
this impostor. Straightway afterward, he began his 
operation : he sprinkled all the sick of the village. 


244 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol, 19 

du village. Dieu foit beny des heureux commence- 
mens qu'il a donn6 a ce mal-heureux medecin, qui a 
efte fi bien pay6 par aduance : quatre de ceux qu'il 
afpergea moururent la mefme nuidt, & vne autre eftoit 
morte fur I'heure entre fes mains. lufques icy le 
Pere. 

Voila ce femble des tefmoignages bien affeurez du 
grand pouuoir que les demons ont acquis fur ces pau- 
ures barbares, de voir qu'il fe faffe adorer fl facile- 
ment pour leur maiftre, quoy qu'il les trompe li 
publiquement. Quoy qu'il en foit, Noftre Seigneur 
cut piti6 de ce pauure Chreftien, cette fille qui auoit 
efl6 I'occaflon de fa cbeutte mourut bien tofl entre 
les mains du Magicien aulTi bien [128] que les autres. 
Cette mort fut la vie du pere, il ouurit incontinent 
les yeux h. fon malheur, il recogneut fa faute, & fe 
vint conf elTer : & depuis ce temps-1^ continue en la 
pratique des Sacremes. Dieu veuille que fa femme 
ne luy foit point encore vne Eue, car cette malheu- 
reufe n'eft pas reduite en fon deuoir. 

Venons h. la perle de nos Chreftiens, lofeph Chi- 
houatenhoua. Voicy ce que m'en efcriuent nos 
Peres. 

Noftre bon Chreflien fe comporte genereufement 
au milieu de toutes ces tempeftes : il parle plus ref o- 
lument & plus bautement que iamais, il reprend 
publiquement les fuperftitions diaboliques, & la fot- 
tife de fes compatriotes. Nous prenions plaifir h. 
I'entendre il y a quelques iours ; parlant k des Anciens 
& Capitaines: I'eftois, difoit-il, ces ann^es pallees 
appell6 k tous vos confeils, femblables k ceux qu'on 
a tenu ces iours derniers ; ie m'eftonnerois de n'auoir 
point efl6 inuite k ceux-cy, n' eftoit que ie f§ay bien 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 245 

May God be blessed for the happy beginnings that 
he has given to this wretched physician, who has 
been so well paid in advance ; four of those whom he 
sprinkled died the same night, and another had 
suddenly died in his hands." Thus far the Father. 

There are, it seems, well attested demonstrations 
of the great power which the demons have acquired 
over these poor barbarians, — to see that he contrives 
to be so easily adored as their master, although he so 
openly deceives them. Be this as it may. Our Lord 
took pity on this poor Christian ; that daughter who 
had been the occasion of his fall, soon died in the 
Magician's hands, as well [128] as the others. This 
death was the life of the father ; he forthwith opened 
his eyes to his misfortune ; he acknowledged his fault 
and came to confess; and since that time he has 
continued in the observance of the Sacraments. God 
grant that his wife be not again an Eve to him ; for 
this unhappy woman is not brought down to her duty. 

Let us come to the pearl of our Christians, — Joseph 
Chihouatenhoua. Here is what our Fathers write to 
me of him. 

" Our good Christian behaves himself nobly in 
the midst of all these tempests, — he speaks more 
positively and more loudly than ever; he publicly 
reproves the diabolical superstitions and the folly of 
his fellow countrymen. We took pleasure in hear- 
ing him some days ago; speaking to some Elders 
and Captains, he said : ' I was called, in these past 
years, to all your councils, like those which have 
been held in these last days ; I would be astonished 
not to have been invited to these, were it not that I 
well know that the Magician has not wished the 
believers to be present there. I would have gladly 


246 LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol. 1^ 

que le Magicie n'a pas voulu que les croyans y 
affiftaff ent : i'y eufle parl6 volontiers, & quoy que ie 
vous honore, & vous appelle [129] tous mes oncles, 
ie vous euffe dit publiquement qu'en toutes ces 
affaires vous vous comportez comme des enfans fans 
efprit. Vn forcier vous perfuade ce qu'il veut: il a 
promis de guerir tous vos malades, vous I'auez creu, 
& luy auez fait de grands prefens felon qu'il les a 
defir^. Le diable eft vn meteur, & nonobftant vous 
le croyez ; il efl inf olent en f es demandes, & toutef ois 
quoy qu'il vous coufte vous luy obeifTez de poindt 
en poindt: Dieu eft veritable en fes promefTes, vous 
luy refufez la croyance; fes commandemens font 
faciles & raifonnables, pas vn ne fe met en peine de 
luy obeir. Le diable prend plaiHr k receuoir des bon- 
neurs qui ne font deus qu'^ Dieu feul, & apres il fe 
mocque de vous : la maladie continue aufli fort que 
iamais, la mortalite rauage vos cabanes, & ceux que 
cet impofteur Magicien a le plus arrof6 de fon eau, 
ce font ceux-la iuflement qui font morts. Vous voy- 
ez cela auffi bien que moy, & nonobftant vous per- 
liftez dans voftre aueuglement : ouurez les yeux, & 
vous confefferez que le diable vous trompe. Au refte 
i'entends qu'on parle de moy [130] comme d'vn 
homme qui a intelligence auec les robbes noires. Ie 
veux qu'on f9aclie que ie fuis lie auec eux, non pas 
pour miner le pays comme difent les langues mefdi- 
fantes, mais pour maintenir les veritez qu'ils font 
venus nous annoncer : Ie f eray heureux de mourir 
pour ce fujet, ie fuis tout preft d'eftre brufl6 pour 
cette caufe. Ie ne pretens rien en croyant que d'ho- 
norer le maiftre de nos vies, non pas pour I'efperance 
d'aucun bien que i'attende de luy en ce monde, mais 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 247 

spoken there ; and, althougli I honor you, and call 
you [129] all my uncles, I would have told you pub- 
licly that in all these affairs you behave like children 
without intelligence. A sorcerer persuades you 
what he will ; he has promised to cure all your sick ; 
you have believed him, and have made him great 
presents, according as he has desired them. The 
devil is a liar, and, for all that, you believe him ; he 
is insolent in his demands, and yet, whatever it cost 
you, you obey him in every point. God is true in 
his promises; you refuse belief in him; his com- 
mandments are easy and reasonable ; not one puts 
himself to the trouble of obeying him. The devil 
takes pleasure in receiving honors which are due 
only to God alone, and afterward he mocks you ; the 
disease continues as strongly as ever; the mortality 
ravages your cabins, and those whom this false Magi- 
cian has sprinkled most with his water, are the 
very ones who have died. You see that as well as I, 
and yet you persist in your blindness; open your 
eyes and you will acknowledge that the devil deceives 
you. Moreover, I hear that they speak of me [130] 
as of a man who is in league with the black gowns. 
I wish them to know that I am allied with them, — 
not to ruin the country, as the slanderous tongues 
say, but to maintain the truths which they have come 
to announce to us. I shall be happy to die for this 
reason ; I am quite ready to be burned for this cause. 
I aim at naught, in believing, save to honor the 
master of our lives, — not for the hope of any good 
that I expect from him in this world, but only in the 
hope of Paradise, whereof we had no knowledge 
before they came to teach us. That is why I do not 
fear to die; let them kill me for this cause, — I will 


248 


LES RELATIONS DES J£SUITES [Vol.19 


fous les feules efperances du Paradis, dont nous n'a- 
uions pas cognoilTance auant qu'on fuft venu nous 
enfeigner. Cela fait que ie ne crains pas de mourir ; 
qu'on me tue pour ce fujet, ie ne fuiray pas la mort. 
Dites cela k tout Ie monde, ie Ie dis ^ tous ceux qui 
me parlent de ma croyance, afin qu'on fgache nette- 
ment I'eflime que ie fais de la Foy. 

La puretd de fa confcience ne luy permet pas de 
porter plus d'vn iour ce qui luy femble Ie moins du 
monde defagreable k Dieu; il a horreur du peche 
veniel autant qu'il feroit fouhaitable que tous les 
Chreftiens eulTent des pechez mortels. [131] Ses 
difcours ne font que de Dieu, lors qu'il fe trouue en 
lieu ou il puifTe fans donner occafion aux blafphemes 
parler de noflre Foy, & il en parle fi fortement, que 
les plus infideles qui I'entendent k loifir, font con- 
trains d'auoiier qu'ils fouhaiteroient que tout Ie pays 
fufl Chreftien : mais tous ceux qui approuuoient ce 
que difoit Noftre Seigneur ne fe rangeoient pas de 
fon party. II fouffre maintenant plus que iamais 
perfecution, il n'oferoit paroiftre en compagnie qu'on 
ne fe raille de fa bont6, qu'on ne fe mocque de fon 
innocence, & qu'on ne I'accufe de participer auec 
nous aux deffeins de miner ce pays; mais il n'a point 
de honte de I'Euangile, il profelfe par tout ce qu'il 
eft, & ce qu'il voudroit que tous les autres fuffent: 
quoy que pour ne pas donner fujet aux impies de 
pecher blafphemant centre Dieu, il fe foit priue de 
foy-mefme de tous les feflins, qui eft Ie fouuerain 
bien des Hurons: parce, dit-il que dans les feftins 
les fuppofts de Satan trouuent toufiours affez de 
temps pour y vomir leur poifon, & s'animer les vns 
les autres k offenfer Dieu; & moy ie n'ay [132] pas 
Ie loifir & I'audience pour iuftifier la verity. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 249 


not shun death. Tell that to every one ; I tell it to 
all those who speak to me of my belief, to the end 
that they may plainly know the value which I 
attach to the Faith.' 

' ' The purity of his conscience does not allow him 
to contain for more than one day that which seems 
to him in the least displeasing to God ; he has as 
great a horror of venial sin, as it would be desirable 
that all Christians should have for mortal sins. [131] 
His conversations are only of God, when he happens 
to be in a place where, without giving occasion for 
blasphemies, he can speak of our Faith, — and he 
speaks of it so stoutly that the greatest infidels who 
hear him at leisure are constrained to avow that they 
could wish that the whole country were Christian ; 
but not all those who approved what Our Lord said 
took their stand on his side. He now suffers perse- 
cution more than ever ; he dare not appear in com- 
pany that they do not make sport of his goodness, 
mock his innocence, and accuse him of participating 
with us in designs for ruining this country. But he 
is not ashamed of the Gospel; he professes every- 
where what he is, and what he would that all the 
others were, — although, in order not to give occa- 
sion to the impious to sin by blaspheming against 
God, he has deprived himself of all the feasts, the 
supreme good of the Hurons, ' Because,' he says, 
* at the feasts the tools of Satan always find oppor- 
tunity enough to vomit forth their poison, and to 
excite one another to offend God ; and I have not 
[132] the leisure and the audience to justify the 
truth. ' 

" He allows no transgression in his family with- 
out correction, and, in fact, they live there like Chris- 


250 LES RELATIONS DES jiSUITES [Vol.19 

II ne permet aucune offenfe en fa famille fans cor- 
rec5lion, & en effedt on y vit Chrefliennement & auec 
edification: c'efl Ik fon premier foin de bien enfei- 
gner ceux que Dieu a mis en fa charge. 

II efl encor pins eloquent parlant k Dieu en fes 
prieres, qu'il ne I'eft en parlant aux hommes: fur 
tout c'eft vn plaifir de 1' entendre apres la commu- 
nion, car c'efl Ik qu'il va gouftant la deuotion auec 
vne douceur incroyable, & ne pent fe faouler de 
benir celuy qui alors fe fait fenfiblement cognoiftre 
par les effedts de la grace qu'il va produifant en fon 
ame. Quelqu'vn de fes enfans eft-il tomb6 malade ; 
Mon Dieu, dit-il, cette maifon eft la voftre: ie f9ay 
le foin que vous en deuez auoir, puis que vous nous 
aimez, foit en la vie, foit en la mort de cel-cy qui eft 
malade, en tout il eft fans doute que vous aurez 6gard 
k noftre plus grand bien: grand Dieu que voftre 
volonte foit faite, & que la voftre foit la noftre. 

Va-il en quelque voyage: Mon Dieu, [133] dit-il, 
que i'ay fait de pas inutiles en ma vie, parce que ie 
ne vous ay pas cogneu : faites mon Dieu en quelque 
endroit ou i'aille, que iamais ie ne m'oublie que vous 
eftes auec moy, afin qu'en aucun lieu ie n'aye I'affeu- 
rance de vous y offenfer. 

L'Eft6 paffe allant & retournant de K6bec, dans 
les faults & portages il faif oit trois & quatre voyages 
charge quafi au deffus de fes forces, & tout cela pour 
Dieu. Au commencement du portage il offroit fon 
trauail k noftre Seigneur, dans le chemin il f'entre- 
tenoit continuellement auec luy, & k la fin il le remer- 
cioit de luy auoir donn6 la force de faire quelque 
chofe pour luy. 

Dans les pacquets qu'il rapporta pour nous il y 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 251 

tians and with edification ; that is his first care, — to 
teach well those whom God has placed in his charge. 

" He is still more eloquent when speaking to God 
in his prayers, than he is when speaking to men: 
especially it is a pleasure to hear him after commun- 
ion, — it is there that he repairs to enjoy devotion 
with an incredible delight, and cannot surfeit him- 
self with blessing him who then makes himself mani- 
festly known by the effects of the grace which he is 
producing in his soul. If one of his children has 
fallen sick, * My God,' he says, * this house is yours; 
I know the care that you must have for it, since you 
love us. Whether in the life or in the death of the 
one who is sick, in it all there is no doubt that you 
will have regard for our greatest good ; great God, 
your will be done, and let your will be ours.' 

" If he goes on some journey, ' My God,' [133] he 
says, * what useless steps I have taken in my life 
because I have not known you: grant, my God, in 
whatever place I may go, that I may never forget 
that you are with me, — so that in no place I may 
have the boldness to offend you. ' 

" Last Summer, on his way to and from Kebec, at 
the rapids and portages he made three or four trips, 
laden almost above his strength ; and all that for God. 
At the beginning of the portage, he offered his labor 
to our Lord ; on the way, he continually conversed 
with him ; and at the end, he thanked him for hav- 
ing given him the strength to do something for him. 

" In the bundles which he brought back for us, 
there were among other things some precious Relics 
of some Saint; that was his consolation, and he 
would never allow that another than he should 
charge himself with a burden so holy, though heavy; 


•252 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.19 

auoit entr'autres chofes des Reliques precieufes de 
quelque Saindl: c'eftoit 1^ fa confolation, & iamais 
ne voulut permettre qu' autre que luy fe chargeaft 
d'vn fi faindt, quoy que pefant, fardeau, & fes deuis 
plus ordinaires dans le plus fort de fes trauaux 
eftoient auec ceux qu'il ne cognoifloit pas mefme de 
nom, mais qu'il aimoit & honoroit puis qu'ils eftoient 
amis de Dieu. De fept caches [134] de bled qu'il 
auoit fait en defcendant, pour les reprendre "k fon 
retour, il n'en trouua que deux, les cinq autres luy 
ayant efte defrobees: c'eft k dire qu'il falut redou- 
bler fes trauaux, & diminuer fes viures, fe voyant 
quafi condamn6 "k mourir de faim. Ce bon Chreftien 
receuoit ces difgraces comme faueurs du ciel; aufll 
f9auoit-il bien auant que vifiter fes caches difpofer 
faindtement fon coeur a tout ce qui luy pouuoit arri- 
uer. Mon Dieu, difoit-il, vous ne manquez pas aux 
beftes qui viuent dans les bois, & toutefois elles 
n'ont ny champs, ny lieu oil elles cachent leurs 
viures; elles ne meurent que quand vous I'ordonnez: 
difpofez grand Dieu de nos viures, & par confequent 
■de nos vies felon vos volontez. 

Le P. le Mercier qui fit tout ce voyage auec luy, 
eftoit tout confole de le voir en tout temps egal ^ 
foy-mefme, toufjours & par tout dedans les fenti- 
mens de Dieu. 

A-il fait quelque perte: helas, dit-il, mon Dieu, il 
n'y a rien que vous de precieux au monde, pourueu 
que ie ne perde [135] pas ce qui rend mon ame agre- 
able k vos yeux, ie fuis toufiours trop riche : ie deuois 
quitter ^ la mort ce que ie viens de perdre, & ainfi ie 
n'ay fait qu'auancer quelque peu le temps de cette 
perte. 


1640] RELATION OF 1640 253- 

and his most usual discourses, at the height of his 
toils, were with those whom he knew not even by- 
name, but whom he loved and honored, inasmuch as 
they were friends of God. Of seven caches [134] of 
corn which he had prepared on the way down, in 
order to recover them on his return, he found only 
two, the five others having been stolen from him, — 
that is to say, it was necessary to redouble his labors 
and to diminish his victuals, on seeing himself almost 
condemned to die of hunger. This good Christian 
received these disasters as favors from heaven ; accord- 
ingly, he well knew before visiting his caches, that 
he must piously dispose his heart for everything 
which could befall him. ' My God,' he said, ' you 
do not fail the beasts which live in the woods, and yet 
they have neither fields, nor place where they may- 
hide their provisions ; they die only when you ordain 
it. Dispose, great God, of our victuals, and conse- 
quently of our lives, according to your will.' 

" Father le Mercier, who made this whole journey 
with him, was much consoled to see him at all times 
equal to himself, — always and everywhere in a mind 
for God. 

"When he has incurred some loss, 'Alas!' he 
says, ' my God, there is nothing precious in the world 
but you: if only I do not lose [135] that which ren- 
ders my soul acceptable in your sight, I am always 
too rich. I must give up at death what I have just 
lost, and thus I have merely shortened to some slight 
extent the time of this loss.' 

" When he has received some favor, he says, * My 
God, how many graces and benefits have I received 
in my life, without thanking you for them ! If I had 
not the Faith, I would still be in the same blindness. 


254 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.19 

A-il receu quelque faueur: Mon Dieti, dit-il, que 
i'ay receu de graces & de biens en ma vie fans vous 
en recognoiftre : H ie n'auois la Foy ie ferois encore 
dans Ie mefme aueuglemet que mes compatriotes : 
ils vous cognoiffent affez pour blafphemer voftre 
f aindt nom, mais pas encore afCez pour vous benir : 
qu'ay je fait plus qu'eux pour que vous ayez voulu 
me preferer "k eux? Ie vous rends graces de tant de 
biens, aydez moy, mon Dieu, afin que iamais ne foit 
dit que vous ayez abandonne celuy qui fe confie 
entierement en vous. 

En effedt fa confiance eft auffi grande que fa foy : & 
Dieu nous a voulu monftrer qu'il I'agreoit. II y a 
quelques iours qu'vne de fes petites niepces eflant 
inquiet6e de terreurs qui luy prenoient dans f on fom- 
meil, & luy faifoient palTer les nuidts dans des cris 
.& frayeurs eftranges : tous ceux de fa cabane fe trou- 
uerent [136] en grande peine, ne pouuant iuger autre 
cbofe finon que quelque efprit malin tourmentoit 
ainfi. c6t enfant: Ils auoient trop d'horreur du pecli6 
pour feulement fonger k fe feruir des danfes fuper- 
flitieufes du pays, feuls remedes k ces fortes de mala- 
dies ; mais ils n'auoient pas affez de confiance en Dieu 
pour efperer que la foy feule deuoit eftre plus puif- 
fante en ce poindt que ces inuentions diaboliques: 
Le bon lofeph fe leue voyat fa niepce au plus fort de 
ces craintes; Non, non, dit-il, les diables ne feront 
pas les maiftres en vne maifon qui ne veut point 
auoir d' autre maiftre que Dieu: fi ce font eux qui 
efpouuantent c6t enfant, il faut refolument qu'ils 
ceffent. II prend la croix de fon chapelet en la main, 
s'approche de I'enfant: Courage, luy dit-il, fouuiens 
toy que tu es baptifee, que tu n'es plus creature du 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 255 

as my fellow countrymen. They know yon enough 
to blaspheme your holy name, but not yet enough to 
bless you ; what have I done more than they, that 
you have willed to prefer me to them ? I render you 
thanks for so many benefits : help me, my God, so 
that it may never be said that you have abandoned 
the one who wholly trusts in you.' 

* * In fact, his confidence is as great as his faith ; 
and God has chosen to show us that he accepted 
him. Some days ago, one of his little nieces being 
disturbed by terrors which seized her in her sleep, 
and caused her to pass the nights in cries and strange 
alarms, all those of his cabin were [136] in great dis- 
tress, being unable to suppose any other thing than 
that some evil spirit was thus tormenting this child. 
They had too much horror of sin even to think of 
using the superstitious dances of the country, the 
only remedies for these kinds of disease; but they 
had not enough confidence in God to expect that the 
faith alone should be more powerful in this matter 
than those diabolical inventions. The good Joseph 
rises, on seeing his niece at the height of these fears. 
* No, no,' he says, ' the devils shall not be the mas- 
ters in a house which will have no other master than 
God: if they are the ones who terrify this child, I 
am resolved that they shall stop.' He takes the 
cross from his chaplet in his hand, approaches the 
child, and says to her: 'Courage, — remember that 
you are baptized, that you are no longer a creature 
of the devil; only believe, and hang this cross to 
your neck; these terrors will cease.* No sooner 
done, than at that very time the child feels released ; 
those terrors are scattered; calm returns to that 
mind, and then sleep overcame her, so gently that 


256 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.19 

diable: croy feulement, & pend cette croix k ton 
col, ces frayeurs cefferont. Auffi toft fait, k mefme 
temps cet enfant fe fent deliure, ces terreurs fe diffi- 
pent, le calme retourne en c6t efprit, & depuis le 
fommeil la faiHt fi paifliblement, qu'il fut aife [137] 
de iuger que ces infomnies & frayeurs noc5turnes 
n'eftoient caufees que de c6t efprit de tenebres qui 
porte le trouble auec foy, «& ne redoute rien au monde 
qu'vne vraye foy, & vn coeur genereux, qui met en 
Dieu feul toutes fes confiances. 

Nos Peres qui ont eu foin de cette miffion, ont eu 
tout loifir de confiderer fes deportemens, n'ayant 
point eu de retraite plus ordinaire que fa cabane plus 
de cinq mois entiers. 

Ce fut vn bon-heur pour nous quittant le bourg de 
la Conception & la chapelle qui y auoit efl6 dreff^e 
en fon honneur, de trouuer vn fi bon Chrefkien pour 
en eftre le gardien, tandis que nos Peres deuoient 
I'abandonner de fois "k autres pour parcourir les 
bourgs & vilages circonuoilins dans I'eftendue de 
leur reflort. Mais luy de fon cofte s'en rellentit plus 
oblig6 k Dieu; c'eftoit Vk fa confolation, de mener 
toute fa famille foir & matin en ce faindt lieu pour y 
faire plus denotement leurs prieres. Pour luy il y 
pafCoit les beures entieres dans la meditation, quoy 
que fouuent fon coeur s'efpanchaft [138] par fa bou- 
che. Helas! mo Dieu, s'efcrioit-il, fi ie garde voftre 
maifon vous conferuez la mienne; i'ay foin de voftre 
temple, ayez foin de mon ame. II faut vn Saindl 
pour garder des chofes fi faindtes: mon Dieu c'eft ^ 
vous k me fandtifier. Et quoy, mon Dieu, difoit-il 
autre fois, faut il que les demons foient fi puiHans en 
ce pays, toute la terre vous adore, pourquoy permet- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 257 

it was easy [137] to infer that those wakeful spells 
and nocturnal frights were caused only by that spirit 
of darkness who carries trouble with him, and dreads 
nothing in the world but a true faith and a gen- 
erous heart, which places all its confidence in God 
alone." 

Our Fathers who have had the care of this mission 
have had abundant leisure to watch his actions, hav- 
ing had no more usual retreat than his cabin for 
more than five whole months. 

It was a happiness for us, on leaving the village 
of la Conception, and the chapel which had been 
erected there in its honor, to find so good a Christian 
to be the guardian of the same, while our Fathers 
were obliged to abandon it from time to time, in 
order to go the round of the circumjacent hamlets 
and villages within the compass of their district. 
But he, on his side, felt himself the more obliged to 
God; that was his consolation, — to lead all his fami- 
ly, evening and morning, into this holy place in 
order more devoutly to say their prayers in it. As 
for him, he spent whole hours there in meditation, — 
although often his heart overflowed [138] through his 
lips. "Alas! my God," he exclaimed; "if I keep 
your house, you preserve mine ; I take care of your 
temple, — take care of my soul. It needs a Saint to 
keep things so holy ; my God, it is for you to sancti- 
fy me. And what? my God," he said at other times, 
" must the demons be so powerful in this country? 
All the earth adores you ; why do you allow that this 
land should know you not? Do you not fill it, as 
well as the rest of the world ? It is true that our sins 
have justly provoked you: but what? where is your 
mercy seen unless where there is the most misery?" 


268 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol.19 

tez-vous que celle cy ne vous cognoilTe pas? ne Tem- 
pliff ez-vous pas auffi bien que le refte du monde ? II 
eft vray que nos pechez vous ont iuftement irrite : 
mais quoy ou voit-on voftre mifericorde linon ou il y 
a plus de mifere? 

le Grains d'eftre ennuyeux: mais ie croy que de 
voir tant de bons fentimens en Tame d'vn barbare, 
c'eft eftre conuaincu que Dieu par tout eft femblable 
k foy-mefme, & qu'iln'eftpasmoins Dieu des Scythes 
que des Grecs & Romains. 

Ce bon Chreftien eftant retourne il y a quelques 
mois d'vn voyage qu'il auoit fait aux Khionontatero- 
nons, ou il eftoit alle affifter nos Peres en la predica- 
tion de I'Euangile, fe voyant fatigu^ du chemin, 
[139] fift fuerie (c'eft vne certaine fa9on de bain 
qu'ont ces Sauuages pour fe delaffer) eftant entre 
dedans ce bain, ce fut vn plaifir de 1' entendre, non 
pas chanter des fonges & des chanfons de guerre, 
comme font en ce rencontre tons fes compatriotes, 
mais s'animer k vn nouueau combat, fe refoudre k 
mourir pour la deffenf e de la Foy , promettre k Dieu de 
parcourir tout le pais, & annoncer par tout fon faindt 
nom. En vn mot, ce qu'il a plus auant dans le coeur 
eft le fujet plus ordinaire de fes difcours, de fes chan- 
fons, de fes plus aymables entretiens. 

II a fait cette annee tout ce qu'on pent attendre 
d'vn excellent Chreftien: il s'eft iett6 dans I'employ 
apoftolique au plus fort de toutes ces bourafques, 
qu'il a toufiours enuifage auec I'oeil de la Foy. II 
n'y a contr6e dans le pays ou il n'ait affifte nos Peres 
^ la publication de I'Euangile: par tout il a rendu 
publiquement tefmoignage k la verite qu'il cognoit, 
& tous ces peuples infidelles ont eft6 contraints d'ad- 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 259 

I fear to be tiresome, — but I think that to see so 
many good sentiments in the soul of a barbarian, is 
to be convinced that God is everywhere like unto 
himself, and that he is not less the God of the Scy- 
thians than of the Greeks and Romans. 

This good Christian, — having returned some 
months ago from a journey that he had made to the 
Khionontateronons, whither he had gone to assist our 
Fathers in the preaching of the Gospel, — seeing him- 
self wearied with travel, [139] took a sweat (this is a 
certain kind of bath which these Savages use, with 
which to refresh themselves). Having entered this 
bath, it was a pleasure to hear him, — not singing of 
dreams, and war songs, as all his fellow countrymen 
do on this occasion, but animating himself to a new 
combat ; resolving to die for the defense of the Faith ; 
promising God to scour the whole country, and an- 
nounce everywhere his holy name. In a word, what 
is deepest in the heart is the most ordinary subject 
of his conversation, of his songs, of his most affec- 
tionate intercourse. 

He has done, this year, everything that one can 
expect from an excellent Christian ; he has thrown 
himself into the apostolic occupation at the height 
of all these squalls, which he has always faced with 
the eye of Faith. There is no region in the country 
where he has not assisted our Fathers in the publica- 
tion of the Gospel ; he has everywhere openly borne 
witness to the truth which he knows ; and all these 
infidel peoples have been constrained to avow that 
the Faith and the law of God was not beyond their 
possibilities, — [140] seeing a Huron like them, who 
from his birth has been nourished and brought up in 
the same customs as they, seeing him not only pro- 


260 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 19 

Tioiier que la Foy & la loy de Dieu ne leur eftoit pas 
impolTible, [140] voyant vn Huron comtne eux, qui 
depuis fa naiffance a efte nourry & eleu6 dans les 
mefmes couftumes qu'eux, le voyant non feulemet 
profeffer cette Foy, & pratiquer en toutes occafions 
les commandemens [de] ce grand maiftre de nos vies 
qu'on leur vient annoncer : mais protefter publique- 
ment qu'il eft prefl de mourir pluftofl que d'offenfer 
en ce poindt la fa confcience. Spedlacle vrayement 
digne de Dieu, & qui fans doute a rauy tous les 
Anges, quoy que cette terre infidelle n'en ait pas 
retire le profit que meritoit vn fi faindt zele. Dieu 
luy falle la grace de perfeuerer iufques k la mort. 

Toute la famille de ce bon Chreftien s'eft reffentie 
de fa piet6: fa femme, fes enfans, fes nepueux, & 
fes niepces fuiuent tous fon exemple: tous quafi fe 
font veus dedans la maladie, leur vnique recours a 
efte en Dieu feul. II n'y a pas iufques "k vne petite 
fille de liui(5l ans, qui fe voyant la premiere attaqu6e 
de verole ne iettaft fes penfees au ciel : grand mai- 
ftre de nos vies, difoit-elle plufieurs fois le iour, 
ordonnez de ma mort felon qu'il [141] vous plaira; 
ie n'ay point d'efprit & ne f9ay pas ce qui m'eft bon, 
ie ne vous demande que voftre paradis ; mais le coeur 
parloit plus que la bouche. 

Auffi Dieu les a il conferue, & 9'a efte vn argument 
bien fort pour rembarer les infideles lors qu'ils 
maintenoient que la Foy les f aifoit mourir ; & que ce 
grand Dieu des Chrefliens eftoit impuiffant. 

La femme de ce Chreftien, Marie Aonnetta, com- 
munique le plus au zele de fon mary lofeph : il y a 
quelques mois qu'elle le fifl bien paroiftre. 

Le Pere Paul Ragueneau ayant apris le iour du 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 261 

fess this Faith, and practice on all occasions the com- 
mandments of that great master of our lives whom 
we come to announce to them, but protesting openly 
that he is ready to die rather than offend in that 
matter his conscience. A spectacle truly worthy of 
God, and one which no doubt has delighted all the 
Angels ; although this infidel land has not derived 
from it the advantage which so holy a zeal deserved. 
God grant him the grace to persevere even till death. 

The whole family of this good Christian has felt 
the effects of his piety; his wife, his children, his 
nephews and his nieces all follow his example. 
Nearly all have fallen into the disease ; their only 
recourse has been to God alone. Even a little girl 
of eight years, seeing herself the first one attacked 
with smallpox, cast her thoughts to heaven. " Great 
master of our lives," she said several times in the 
day, " ordain concerning my death just as [141] you 
shall please. I have no sense, and know not what 
is good for me ; I ask you nothing but your para- 
dise; " but her heart spoke more than her mouth. 

Accordingly, God has preserved them; and that 
has been a very strong argument to put down the 
infidels when they maintained that the Faith caused 
them to die, and that this great God of the Chris- 
tians was powerless. 

This Christian's wife, Marie Aonnetta, contributes 
the most to her husband Joseph's zeal: some months 
ago, she plainly showed so. 

Father Paul Ragueneau, having learned on Shrove 
Tuesday that a woman of the village of Ossossan^ was 
dying, went thither as soon as possible. Our Lord 
himself had prepared for him this poor patient ; he 
no sooner opens his mouth to speak to her of God 


262 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.19 

mardy gras qu'vne femme du bourg d'Offoffane fe 
mouroit y alia au plufloft: Noftre Seigneur luy 
auoit difpofe luy mefme cette pauure malade: il 
n'ouure pas plufloft la bouche pour luy parler de 
Dieu qu'elle embraffe la Foy, detefte fes pechez, & 
fe prepare k mourir Chreftienne. Rien ne luy man- 
que pour c6t effedt que le Baptefme : mais le diable 
ne vouloit pas quitter h. li bon marclie vne ame qu'il 
auoit poffede depuis fa naiffance. Voicy le mary de 
cette pauure languillante qui entre bruf quement : 
Jamais [142] ie ne permettray que ma femme foit 
baptif^e, dit-il: ie detefte la Foy, & ie maudis le 
Dieu des croyans: fors d'icy & ne parle plus. Quoy 
done, luy refpond le Pere, veux tu que ta femme foit 
k iamais mal-heureufe dans les flammes d'enfer? quoy 
que tu faffe tu ne peux pas I'empefcher de croire: 
Dieu aura piti6 d'elle, & ton impiete ne la rend pas 
coupable, attens ie te prie vn moment. C'eftoit 
trop au iugement de ce coeur infidelle: il fe faifit 
d'vn gros bafton au defaut d'vne hache qu'il ne put 
pas trouuer : il def charge fa colere f ortement fur le 
Pere, ne donnant autre refponfe k tout ce qu'il pent 
dire, fmon de redoubler fes coups : & quoy que fon 
bafton f e fufl rompu en deux apres cinq ou fix bonnes 
def charges, il continue de ce qui luy reftoit en main. 
II falut obeyr k ce malheureux, & fortir, puis que la 
prefence du Pere ne feruoit rien qu'k I'irriter, & ne 
pouuoit plus en ce temps-Ik eflre vtile k cette ma- 
lade, qui quoy qu'elle peufl s'ef crier, trouua fon 
mary aufH fourd pour elle que pour celuy qui la ve- 
noit inftruire. Ce nous euft efte vn coup bien fen- 
llble fi [143] cette bonne ame n'eufl pas trouu6 deuant 
la mort la grace du Baptefme: de le tenter en la 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 263 

than she embraces the Faith, detests her sins, and 
makes ready to die a Christian. Nothing fails her 
for this purpose but Baptism ; but the devil was un- 
willing to give up so cheaply a soul which he had 
possessed from its birth. At this point, this poor 
languishing one's husband comes in abruptly. " Nev- 
er [142] will I permit that my wife be baptized," he 
said; *' I detest the Faith, and I curse the God of 
the believers. Begone from here, and say no more. " 
"What then?" the Father answers him; "do you 
wish your wife to be forever unhappy in the flames 
of hell ? Whatever you do, you cannot prevent her 
from believing ; God will take pity on her, and your 
impiety does not render her guilty; — wait a mo- 
ment, I beg you." This was too much, in the opin- 
ion of that infidel heart ; he seized a large stick, for 
want of a hatchet, which he could not find. He 
mightily discharged his anger on the Father, giving 
no other response to all that he could say, except to 
redouble his blows ; and although his stick was brok- 
en in two, after five or six good strokes, he contin- 
ued with what was left in his hand. It was neces- 
sary to obey this wretch and leave, since the Father's 
presence served only to provoke him, and at that 
time could no longer be useful to this sick woman, — 
who, although able to cry out, found her husband as 
deaf toward her as toward him who came to instruct 
her. It would have been a very sharp blow for us 
if [143] this good soul had not found the grace of 
Baptism before her death ; to attempt it in her hus- 
band's presence would have been a temerity. Marie 
Aonnetta, cousin of the dying one, undertakes to 
procure for her this charity, though it should cost 
her life. She then goes to visit her cousin once, 


264 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.19 

prefence du mary, c'eufl eft6 vne temerity. Marie 
Aonnetta, couline de celle qui fe mouroit, entreprend 
de luy procurer cette ciiarite luy en deufl-il coufter 
la vie. Elle va done vifiter fa confine vne, deux, 
& trois fois, elle luy repete les principaux myfleres 
de la Foy, I'inftruit tout de nouueau, I'anime ^ ne 
pas obei'r aux volontez de fon mary, & ne pas perdre 
auant la mort vn bien qui la rendroit "k iamais 
heureufe. En vn mot elle fait I'office d'Apoflre, & 
voyant en fin vn temps fauorable, vient aduertir 
nos Peres qu'il efloit temps de faire le coup. Ce fut 
vn coup vrayement heureux pour cette pauure lan- 
guiffante, car toft apres elle rendit fon ame k Dieu. 

Pas vn de la cabane n'agreoit le baptefme que celle 
qui le receuoit, aulTi falut-il que la bonne Marie 
Aonnetta rendifl bien du combat, Et quoy, luy 
difoit-on, veux tu que ta coufme meure? Si elle 
meurt ce fera, refpond-elle, le plus grand bon-heur 
qui luy puifTe arriuer: ie I'ayme autant que moy, 
mon mary, [144] mes enfans, qui tons auons receu le 
faindt baptefme, & ferons profeffion de la Foy iuf- 
ques au dernier foufpir. Dequoy te mefles-tu, luy 
difent-ils? eft-ce "k toy k prendre le foin d'elle? oily 
da, quand il s'agit du falut de fon ame. Prends 
done aufil le foin du corps ; volontiers, leur dit-elle ; 
lors qu'elle a efte en fante, ma cabane luy a toufiours 
efte ouuerte, elle ne luy fera pas ferme au temps de 
la maladie ; non feulement "k elle, mais aufTi k tons 
fes freres, aufquels ie procureray le baptefme, fi ie 
voy que leur maladie fe rengrege: nous ne ferons 
qu'vne famille au ciel, comme nous n'en faifons 
qu'vne en terre. 

Plaife k Noftre Seigneur nous donner quantite de 


1640] RELATION OF 1640 265 

twice, and thrice ; she repeats to her the principal 
mysteries of the Faith, instructs her quite anew, 
incites her not to obey the wishes of her husband, 
and not to lose before her death a benefit which 
would render her forever happy. In a word, she 
does the office of Apostle; and seeing, at last, a 
favorable time, comes to notify our Fathers that it 
was time to do the deed. It was a deed verily hap- 
py for this poor languishing one, for soon afterward 
she yielded up her soul to God. 

Not one in the cabin would consent to the baptism 
but the one who received it; accordingly the good 
Marie Aonnetta was obliged vigorously to contend. 
" What? " they said to her, " do you wish your cous- 
in to die?" " If she die, it will be," she answers, 
" the greatest happiness which can befall her. I 
love her as much as myself, my husband, [144] my 
children, who have all received holy baptism, and 
will make profession of the Faith even till the last 
breath." "What are you meddling in?" they say 
to her ; * * is it your place to take care of her ? " " Yes, 
indeed, when the salvation of her soul is at stake." 
" Then take also the care of her body." "With 
pleasure," she tells them; " when she was in health, 
my cabin was always open to her: it will not be 
closed to her in the time of sickness, — not only 
to her, but also to all her brothers, whose baptism I 
will obtain if I see that their sickness becomes 
aggravated ; we shall be but one family in heaven, as 
we constitute but one on earth." 

May it please Our Lord to give us many faithful 
ones similar to these two, — Joseph and Marie: could 
one desire a more perfect marriage ? 

Those are the most beautiful riches of this poor 


266 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.19 

fideles femblables k ces deux cy, lofeph & Marie, 
pourroit-on fouhaiter vn mariage plus accomply. 

Ce font la les plus belles richelles de cette pauure 
Eglife; il y en a encore quelques autres, mais ils 
n'approchent pas de ces courages. 

De nouueaux baptifez cette annee en eflat de fan- 
t6, "k peine s'en retrouue-il quatre ou cinq: ce n'efl 
pas peu pour les [145] temps oii nous fommes, encore 
ce font de bonnes vieilles gens plus qu'odtogenaires, ci 
qui il femble que Dieu veuille faire mifericorde vn 
peu deuant leur mort. Sans doute il y a dequoy 
benir Dieu, mais craignant la longueur, attendons 
dans I'eternite k adorer les ineffables bontez de ces 
mifericordes qui nous paroilTent icy de iour en iour 
furpaller tous les autres ouu rages de Dieu. 


1640] RELA TION OF 1640 267 

Chtirch ; there are also some others, but they do not 
approach these courageous natures. 

Of newly baptized ones, this year, in a state of 
health, hardly four or five occur ; this is no trifle for 
the [145] times that we are in; these, too, are good 
old people, more than octogenarians, to whom it 
seems that God wills to show mercy a little before 
their death. No doubt there is cause for blessing 
God : but for fear of tediousness, let us wait in eter- 
nity to adore the ineffable favors of his mercies, 
which here appear to us from day to day to surpass 
all the other works of God. 


NOTES TO VOL. XIX 

(Figures in parentheses, following number of note, refer to pages 
of English text. J 

1 (p. 25). — For names of these Hospital nuns, see vol. xvi., note 2. 

2 (p. 27). — This was a prisoner whom the Algonkins near Quebec 
presented to Duplessis-Bochard, August, 1636 (vol, ix., pp. 255, 
265-269). 

3 (P- 37)' — The names of the Ursulines are given in vol. xvi., note 
4. The two additions (1640) to their number were Mother de Ste. 
Marie and Sister de St. Nicolas, from the Dieppe convent, sent by 
Madame de la Peltrie. 

4 (p. 61). — Platon de saint e Croix: the Pt. Platon of to-day (vol. 
ii., note 66), nearly opposite Portneuf, Que. Platon is a corruption 
oi plateau; the name originates in the singular formation of this 
headland, — " its sides are high and steep, and the top is so perfectly 
flat that it seems as if leveled by the hand of man." It is, indeed, 
often called ' ' le plateau ' ' by residents of that vicinity. For infor- 
mation thereon, we are indebted to Rev. Arthur E. Jones, S.J., 
Montreal ; and Crawford Lindsay, Quebec. 

5 (p. 95). — Robert Le Coq, — surnamed " the Good," according to 
Dionne (7?^z/«^ Canadienne, 1888, p. 389), — one of the Jesuit don- 
nes, went to the Huron mission at its commencement (1634). It is 
probable that he remained there until the destruction of the mission 
by the Iroquois. The following winter (1649-50) he spent at Sil- 
lery ; and in April of the latter year went to Three Rivers, where he 
was slain by Iroquois invaders (Aug. 20, 1650). 

6 (p. 125). — Concerning the Khionontateronons, see vol. v., note 
18; the Ataronchronons, vol. xiii., note 7; the remaining tribes, 
vol. viii., notes 23, 24. 

7 (p. 127). — The thirty-two villages here mentioned, are thus reck- 
oned: Attignawantan (Bear clan), thirteen; Ataronchronons, four; 
Arendaronons, three; Attignenongnac, three; Tobacco Nation, 
nine. — A. F. Hunter. 

8 (p. 135). — There is no question as to the location of Ste. Marie. 
The fort was erected on the east bank of the Wye, where the river 
leaves Mud Lake; its site is in lot 16, in the third concession of 
Tay township, on the line dividing the lot in halves. The east half 


270 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 


was purchased (June, 1845) by Rev. Jean Baptiste Proulx, of Pene- 
tanguishene, on account of its association with the early missions 
(vol. v., p. 295), The four bastions of the fort were of stone, as also 
were two walls. The other walls — those facing the lake and river — 
consisted merely of palisades, protected by trenches which are still 
visible. The enclosure formed a parallelogram about 175 x 90 feet 
in extent. Since the settlement of the neighborhood, these ruins 
have undergone great changes. Public attention was first directed 
to the destruction of the walls, by James Bain, Jr., in Canad. Inst. 
Proc, 3rd series, vol. iii. (1886), pp. 278, 279 (a brief abstract of his 
paper being there given). Cf. Boyle, in Ont. Arch. Mus. Rep., 

189I, pp. 18, 19.— A. F. HUNTBR. 


j^^iIaiiA^ivi 



^ionC^ 


Miid Lake 

Sketch Map of Stk. Marie-on-the-Wye, by A. F. Hunter. 

Cf. Martin's description of Ste. Marie {Jogues, pp. 232, 233,, — 
probably the earliest of modern accounts of these ruins ; his visit 
there was made in 1845. Harris {Miss. West. Canada, p. 90, note) 
gives this highly interesting information regarding the construction 
of the fort: "The foundations of this building still remain, and, 
though overgrown with weeds and underbrush, may yet be distinct- 
ly traced. Major Henry H. Gray, of the Government Staff of Civil 
Engineers, expressed to me his surprise that the Jesuits had suc- 
ceeded in manufacturing a cement equal to the best Portland, and 
the secret of which seems to have been lost. On Christian Island, 
the foundations of their building were laid in hydraulic cement, that 
to this day excites the wonder of engineers and contractors. In 


NOTES TO VOL. XIX 271 

quality, this cement is much like the Vicat, a standard article, 
manufactured and much used in France. The distance was too 
great, and the transportation too difficult, for the Jesuits to have 
brought the cement from Europe; consequently, the raw material 
must have been discovered at or near the mission, and manufac- 
tured on the spot." 

9 (p. 167). — Ste. Anne is also mentioned by Lalemant (Huron 
Relation of 1643, chap, iii.) as near Ste. Marie; its site would, ac- 
cordingly, be near the present town of Penetanguishene. The new 
memorial church at that place bears the name of Ste. Anne (vol. v., 
p. 297; see illustration of the building, facing p. 295). 

St. Denis is evidently the same as the place located by Du Creux, 
under the Latinized name of St. Dionisius, on the east bank of Hogg 
River. A considerable part of that neighborhood is still wooded, 
and the sites have not yet been exposed by cultivation. 

St. Jean is placed by Du Creux on the east side of Sturgeon River, 
near its outlet, and there are sites which correspond with this posi- 
tion ; but it has not yet been clearly distinguished. 

The location of St. Louis is uncertain, as there is some reason to 
believe that this mission, like many others, had been shifted, and 
that the St. Louis of 1640 was not the one captured in 1649. At 
least three different sites have been assigned, in modem times, to 
this ill-fated village: (i) Du Creux' s map, which shows the missions 
as they existed about 1640, places it on the east side of Hogg River, 
near its mouth, — a location accepted by some antiquarians. (2) 
Others regard the Errington farm, in lot 10, third concession, Tay 
township, as the site of St Louis, — a large bonepit being discovered 
there in the autumn of 1878, and its distance from Ste. Marie being 
about a league. The late Rev. J. W. Annis (vol. v., p. 297) who ex- 
amined this site, and collected relics thereon, held the same opinion. 
It seems more probable, however, that this bonepit indicates merely 
one of the historic ten-year accumulations of human remains, than 
that it was the result of a massacre. (3) On lot 12, in the fifth con- 
cession of Tay, are the remains of a village which some have 
thought to be St. Louis. When the occupant of the farm, named 
Evans, built his house, many years ago, he found numerous indica- 
tions of early Indian occupation, — deposits of ashes, remains of corn 
enclosed in birch bark, charred remains of palisades indicating 
destruction by fire, and numerous tomahawks, knives, and other 
articles. Examination of this site, a few years ago, induced A. C. 
Osborne (vol. v., p. 297) to conclude that it was that of the St. Louis 
of 1649. 

It may be frankly admitted that our present knowledge is insuffi- 
cient to decide which of these three sites is the true one. It is not 


272 LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES 

improbable, however, that several missions of 1640 had been shifted 
before 1649; ^i^d St. Louis may easily have been moved from the 
east to the west side of Hogg River. — A. F. Hunter. 

Martin {/ogues, p. 232) locates St. Louis " near the mouth of the 
little river which empties into Hog Bay." 

In a MS. map prepared by Rev. Arthur E. Jones, S.J., after sev- 
eral years' careful study of the field, — and which we expect soon to 
publish in this series, — he places St. Louis about i|^ miles above 
the mouth of Hogg River. St. Jean, he locates about J^ mile S. W. 
of Fesserton ; St. Denis, a mile N. of Vasey ; and Ste. Anne, about 
a mile farther north, but a little to the west. 

10 (p. 185). — These were, respectively, the villages of Teanaus- 
tayae, Scanonaenrat, and Tahenhatontaron. 

11 (p. 209). — Du Creux locates St. Charles on a small peninsula, 
apparently between Penetanguishene and Midland harbors. Sites 
have been found there corresponding to this. He places St. Fran- 
cis Xavier on the west side of Wye River; and the Relation of 1642 
states that it was near Ste. Marie. These data point to the vicinity 
of the modern village of Wyebridge, and Jesuit relics have been 
found there ; but there are three or four distinct sites in that local- 
ity, and it is not yet possible to decide which of these is that of St. 
Francis. A short sword, bearing the date 1619, was found near 
one of these sites, about seventeen years ago; and various other 
relics found at all of them suggest early French occupation. — A. F. 
Hunter. 





MmMMH^1\^/I 



■ 
■ 
■ 
■ 

■ ■■[ 

■■3 




