Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 10: Hurons, 1636
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1897 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits10jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits10jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits10jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 10 of 73.

---

w 
C)=---=---- 

  ............... c.o 
6 - CO 
u 

  = IJ) 
ü1 :----- 0> 

  =-- 
  

  
= (õ 

  = 0 

  = 
-- (õ 

  = ,..... 
ffi 
' 
>="""""""M 
z - 
=> 

of: 

. 

  ., 
j 

  

  . 
, 
  
,1.'.0/ f 
'" . .. 
  
... 
..r. i"7'i'; 


Fe:, 
317 
'j H-1J 
,g
fo 
v, 1 0 

  
V) 
  


VOL. X 

THE JESUIT RELATIONS 

AND 

ALLIED DOCUMENTS 


Tlte edition consists of sev- 
In hundred and fifty sets 
all numbered 

ú ) ':/ 
No. _..:L.1.!...w. 

/, , 



, 

/ 

", 
. 


'1 
'. ï'l" '- 
1- 
The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 

TRAVELS AND EXPLORATIONS 
OF THE JESUIT MISSIONARIES 
IN NEW FRANCE 

1610- 1 79 1 

THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES; ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 

EDITED BY 
REUBEN GOLD THW AITES 
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 

Vol. X 
HURONS: 1636 

CLEVELAND: ttbe J3urrows J3rotbere 
(tompan\2, PUBLISHERS. M DCCC XCVII 


COPYRIGHT, 1897 
BY 
THE BURROWS BROTHERS Co 

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 

The Imþerial Press, Cleveland 


EDITORIAL STAFF 

Editor 

Translators. 

Assistant Editor 
Bibliogra phical Adviser 

REUBEN GOLD THW AITES 
! FINLON ALEXANDER 
PERCY FAVOR BICKNELL 
WILLIAM FREDERIC GIESE 
l CRAWFORD LINDSAY 
WILLIAM PRICE 
EMMA HELEN BLAIR 
VICTOR HUGO PALTSITS 



CONTENTS OF VOL. X 

PREFACE TO VOLUME X 
DOCUMENT:- 
XXVI. Relation de ce qui s'est passé en la Nov- 
velIe France, en l'année 1636. [Part 
II., being Brébeuf's Relation of the 
Huro1ls for this year, originally pub- 
lished as an appendix to Le jeune's 
Relation of I636, and thus complet- 
ing the document.] Jean de Brébeuf; 
Ihonatiria, July 16, 16 3 6 

1 

NOTES 

5 
. 3 1 9 


ILLUSTRATION TO VOL. X 

I. Map showing sites of Huron Missions, by 
Andrew F. Hunter, of Barrie, Onto Facing 3 1 9 


PREFACE TO VOL. X 

Following is a synopsis of the third and final in- 
stallment of Document XXVI., contained in the pres- 
ent volume: 
XXVI. In the Preface to VoL VIII., we explained 
that the Relation of 1636, like many others of the 
series, is a composite. Part I. is a general report to 
the provincial of the jesuits, at Paris, upon the prog- 
ress and condition of the missions in New France, in 
1636, from the pen of the superior, Le jeune; Part 
II. consists of a specific Relation, addressed to the 
latter by Brébeuf, of the mission to the Hurons for 
this year. In V ols. VIII. and IX. were presented Le 
jeune's Relation proper, the present volume being 
devoted to Brébeuf's Huron Relation, thus completing 
the document. 
As usual, Brébeuf commences his annual letter 
by describing" the conversion, baptism, and happy 
death of some Hurons." During the year, the mis- 
sionaries in that far-away field have baptized eighty- 
six savages,- an encouraging gain over the fourteen 
who were "rescued from the service of the devil" 
during the first year of their labors. Their great 
hope is in the conversion of the children, who, they 
report, show surprising aptitude and willingness 
to learn the doctrines of the Christian faith; and, 
through them, many parents have been reached. 
At a council of the Huron chiefs, Brébeuf produces 


2 

PREFACE TO VOL. X 

letters from Champlain and Duplessis-Bochart, who 
exhort the tribesmen to follow the teaching of the 
missionaries, and embrace Christianity; to emphasize 
this advice, and in accordance with the custom of the 
country, he "presents to the assembly a collar of 
twelve hundred beads of Porcelain, telling them that 
it was given to smooth the difficulties of the road to 
Paradise.' , 
The writer describes the unusual and intense 
drought which prevailed throughout Canada, in the 
spring and early summer of 1635. The Huron coun- 
try, being sandy, is especially affected, and is threat- 
ened with a total failure of the crops. The" sorcer- 
ers, " or medicine men, practice all their arts to bring 
rain, but without success, and attribute their failure 
to the cross erected by the missionaries. The latter, 
.as a last resort, appeal to their patron saints; and 
abundant rains are secured,- in June, by a novena 
of masses in honor of St. Joseph; and in August, by 
another novena for St. Ignace. The result is a plenti- 
ful harvest, which increases the good will of the sav- 
ages toward the black gowns. 
The Hurons are in constant dread of hostile incur- 
sions from the Iroquois; the missionaries promise to 
assist them in such emergencies, and instruct them 
how to improve the fortifications around their vil- 
lages; for this, the Hurons are duly grateful. 
In August, Mercier and Pijart arrive from Que- 
bec,- a welcome reinforcement. Many details of 
missionary work are given,-journeys, instructions, 
debates with Indians, conversions, baptisms, etc. 
Louis de Sainte-Foi (Amantacha), who had been 
educated in France during 1626-28, is praised for 
his intelligence, fidelity, and Christian character; 


PREFACE TO VOL. X 

3 

and he greatly aids the labors of the missionaries. 
An embassy of Island savages (from the AlIu- 
mettes) visits the Hurons, attempting, but in vain, 
to incite them to an attack on the Iroquois. Bré- 
beuf takes this opportunity to win, for himself and 
his brethren, the friendship of these Islanders,- giv- 
ing them a canoe and other presents. 
For the benefit of those of his brethren in France 
who desire to undertake missionary work in the Hu- 
ron country, Brébeuf recounts the many perils of the 
journey hither, and the annoyances and dangers to 
which apostles of the faith are continually exposed 
among the savages; but he offers much encourage- 
ment and consolation to those who are willing, never- 
theless, to brave all obstacles, and to devote them- 
selves to the conversion of the natives. 
The missionaries are compiling a grammar and 
dictionary of the Huron dialect; and Brébeuf devotes 
a chapter to the peculiarities of this tongue. 
The second part of this Relation, is occupied by a 
minute account of "the beliefs, manners, and cus- 
toms of the Hurons, "-their myths of Deity and 
creation; their notions regarding the nature of man's 
soul, and its condition after death; their worship of 
the sky, and of demons; their superstitions, and faith 
in dreams; their feasts and dances; their games, and 
the general habit of gambling. Then are described, 
at length, the tricks of medicine men; the national 
characteristics of the Huron tribes; their customs, 
both in peace and war; their councils and oratory; 
and, finally, their solemn feast of the dead,- at 
which ghastly ceremony, once in twelve years, the 
corpses of all who have died during that time receive 
a public and common burial. 


4 

PREFACE TO VOL. X 

Brébeuf closes his account with an expression of 
much hope for the future success of their labors,- 
mingled, however, with fear lest these savage neo- 
phytes may grow restive when placed under greater 
restrictions on their moral and social conduct, than 
have thus far seemed advisable to the cautious mis- 
sionaries. 

The translation of Brébeuf's portion of the Relation 
of 1636, contained in the present volume, was made 
by the late James McFie Hunter, M. A., of Barrie, 
Onto 

R. G. T. 

MADISON, WIS., October, 1897. 


XXVI (concluded) 

LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 

PARIS: SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, 1637 

Part I. (Le Jeune's own Relation) appeared in Volumes 
VIII., IX. The present installment, which closes the docu- 
ment, is Part II., consisting of Brébeuf's annual report on 
the Huron mission. 


6 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSVITES 

[VOL. 10 

[I] Relation de ce qui s'eft paffé dans Ie Pays 
des Hvrons en l'annee 1636. 

Enuoyée à Kébec au R. P. Paul Ie Iezme Suþerieur de la Miffion 
de la Comþag1lie de IEsvs, en la Nouuelle France. 

M ON REVEREND PERE, 
Ayant appris, tant par vos lettres, que par 
Ie recit des Peres, qui arriuerent heureufe- 
ment l'an paffé, comme l'ancienne France bruile de 
tres-ardens defirs pour la N ouuelle; que noftre R. P. 
General cherit cette Million comme la prunelle de 
fes yeux; que Ie P. Prouincial s'y porte de tout fon 
cæur; que Ie feu eft fi grand dans nos Colleges, qu'il 
eft plus difficile d'appaifer les [2] larmes de ceux 
qu'on éconduit, & aufquels on refufe de nous venir 
ayder, que de trouuer des ouuriers; qu'vne infinité 
de perfonnes Relig[i]eufes & feculieres, offrent conti- 
nuellement à Dieu leurs prieres & leurs væux pour 
la conuerfion des pauures Barbares de tout ce pays, 
& qu'en la Maifon de Montmartre, fans parler des 
autres, i1 y a inceffamment nuict & iour vne Reli- 
gieufe profternée deuant Ie S. Sacrement, qui prie à 
cefte intention: Tout eel a nous fait croire & efperer, 
que Dieu veut maintenant ouurir les threfors de fes 
graces & faueurs deffus ces pauures Peuples, & leur 
deffiller les yeux de l'ame pour cognoiftre la verité. 
Car il n'inciteroit pas tant de deuotes perfonnes à de- 
mander, s'i1 n'auoit enuie de les exaucer: Ioint que 
nous fçauons que la peuplade de Kebec fe va grande- 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELATION, r636 

'1 

(I] Relation of what occurred in the Country of 
the Hurons in the year 1636. 

Sent to Kébec to Reverend Father Paul Ie .Ieune, Suþerior of the 
Mission of the Society of JESUS, in New France. 

M y REVEREND FATHER, 
Having learned from your letters, and 
from the statements of the Fathers who ar- 
rived here fortunately last year, how old France is 
burning with ardent desires for the New; that our 
Reverend Father General cherishes this Mission as 
the apple of his eye; that the Father Provincial is 
inclined to it with his whole heart; that the ardor in 
our Colleges is so great that it is more difficult to 
check the [2] tears of those who are turned away, and 
refused permission to come to our assistance, than to 
find those who will work; that a very great number 
of persons, Religious and secular, are continually 
offering their prayers and their vows to God for the 
conversion of the poor Barbarians of this whole coun- 
try; and that in the House of Montmartre, not to 
speak of others, a Nun is prostrated night and day 
before the Holy Sacrament, praying for this result; 
all this makes us hope and believe that God will now 
open the treasures of his grace and favor upon these 
poor Peoples, and unseal the eyes of their souls to 
know the truth. For he would not incite so many 
devout persons to ask, if he had not the inclination to 
grant their prayers. Besides, we learn that the colo- 
nyof Kebec is rapidly increasing, through the efforts 


8 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSVITES 

[VOL. 10 

ment multipliant par les foins de Meffieurs les Affo- 
ciez de la Compagnie de la Nouuelle France, qui n'ef- 
pargnent rien de leur cofté; & que nous efperons que 
Ie bon exemple de nos François feruira grandement, 
tant à ramaffer & encourager les Sauuages errants, & 
faineants au trauail, qu'à les porter à vouloir faire 
pour Dieu ce qu'ils verront eftre faifable. Outre 
que ie puis dire [3] auec raifon, que fi la diuine Bonté 
continuë à répandre fes faueurs & benedictiõs fur nos 
Hurons, & fur nous, qui les cultiuons, ainfi comme 
elle a fait depuis noftre arriuée, il faut dans [sans] 
doute attendre icy vn iour vne plantureufe moiffon 
des ames. Ce n'eft pas qu'il n'y ait parmy ces Peu- 
pIes beaucoup d'erreurs, de fuperftitions, de vices, & 
de tres-mauuaifes couftumes à dèraciner, encore plus 
que nous ne nous eftions figurez au commencement, 
ainfi qu'il fe verra au cours de cefte Relation. Nlais 
auec Dieurien n'eftimpoffible; c'eft par fon ayde que 
nous auons defia planté la Croix parmy cefte Barba- 
rie, & que nous commençõs & continuërons, s'i1luy 
plaift, à publier Ie nom & les merueilles de celuy, 
qui par la Croix a racheté Ie monde. Mais en voila 
affez en general, il faut defcendre plus en particu- 
lier; ce que ie feray volontiers, & amplement, vous 
affeurant que ie n'auanceray rien que ie n'aye veu 
moy-mefme, ou que ie n'aye appris de perfonnes 
dignes de foy. 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

9 

of Messieurs the Associates of the Company of New 
France, who spare no pains on their side; and we 
hope the good example of our Frenchmen will greatly 
aid not only to bring together and encourage to work 
the idle and wandering Savages, but to incite them 
to do for God what they shall find practicable. 
Moreover, I can say [3] with reason that if divine 
Goodness continues to scatter his favors and blessings 
on our Hurons, and on us who labor among them, 
as freely as he has done since our arrival, we ought, 
without doubt, to expect here some day an abundant 
harvest of souls. I t is true, there are among these 
Tribes many errors, superstitions, vices, and utterly 
evil customs to uproot,-more than we had imagined 
at first, as will be seen in the course of this Relation; 
but with God nothing is impossible. It is by his aid 
that we have already planted the Cross in the midst 
of this Barbarism, and are beginning and will con- 
tinue, if it please him, to make known the name and 
marvelous works of him who by the Cross has re- 
deemed the world. But enough has been said in a 
general way; it is time to enter into particulars, 
which I shall willingly and fully do, assuring you 
that I shall state nothing that I have not seen myself 
or have not learned from persons worthy of credence. 


10 

LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

[4] Premiere Partie. 

CHAPITRE PREMIER. 

DE LA CONUERSION, BAPTESME & HEUREUSE MORT 
DE QUELQUES HURONS, & DE L'ESTAT DU 
CHRISTIANISME EN CESTE BARBARIE. 

I L y en a eu cefte année quatrevingts fix de bapti- 
fez, aufquels ioignant les quatorze de l' année 
paffée, ce font en tout cent, que nous croyons 
eftre fortis de la feruitude du diable en ce pays de- 
puis noftre retour. De ce nõbre Dieu en a appellé 
dix au Ciel, fix en bas aage, & quatre plus aduancez. 
L'vn d'iceux nõmé François Sang
aÜ eftoit Capitaine 
de noftre village; il eftoit naturellement bon, & con- 
fentit tres volontiers à eftre inftruit, & receuoir Ie S. 
Baptefme, qu'il auoit auparauant loüé & approuué en 
autruy. I'admiray la douce Prouidence de Dieu en 
la conuerfion d'vne femme, qui eft l'vne des quatre 
decedez; laquelle ie baptifay [5] cet Automne au vil- 
lage de Scanollaellrat, en retournant de la maifon de 
Louys de faincte Foy, où no us eftions allez inftruire 
fes parens. La furdité de cefte malade, & la profon- 
deur des myfteres que ie luy propofois, faifoit qu'elle 
ne m'entendoit pas fuffifamment, ioinct que l'accent 
de cefte Nation, vn peu different de celuy des Ours 
où nous fommes, mefme mon ignorance en la langue, 
accroiffoient la difficu1té, & me rendoient moins intel- 
ligible. Mais Noftre Seigneur qui vouloit fauuer 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, r636 

11 

[4] Part First. 

CHAPTER FIRST. 

OF THE CONVERSION, BAPTISM, AND HAPPY DEATH OF 
SOME HURONS; AND OF THE CONDITION OF 
CHRISTIANITY AMID THIS BARBARISM. 

D URING the present year, eighty-six have been 
baptized, and, adding to these the fourteen of 
last year, there are a hundred souls in all who, 
we believe, have been rescued from the service of 
the devil in this country since our return. Of this 
number God has called ten to Heaven,- six while they 
were young, and four more advanced in age. One 
of these, named François Sangwati, was Captain of 
our village. He had a naturally good disposition, 
and consented very willingly to be instructed and to 
receive Holy Baptism, a course he had previously 
praised and approved in others. I admired the ten- 
der Providence of God in the conversion of a woman, 
who is one of the four deceased. I baptized her [5] 
this Autumn at the village of Scanonaellrat,l when re- 
turning from the house of Louys de saincte Foy, 
where we had gone to instruct his parents. The 
deafness of this sick woman, and the depths of the 
mysteries I brought to her notice, prevented her 
from sufficiently understanding me; and, besides, 
the accent of that Nation is a little different from 
that of the Bears, with whom we live. :Myown im- 
perfect acquaintance with the language rendered me 


12 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[V OL. 10 

cefie ame, nous pourueut incontinent d'vn ieune 
hõme, lequel nous feruit de truchement. II s'efioit 
trouué auec nous en la Cabane de Louys, & nous 
auoit ouy difcourir de nos myfieres, de forte qu'il en 
poffedoit defia vne bonne partie, & conceuoit fort 
bien ce que ie luy difois. On dit que cefie femme qui 
fut nommée Marie, dans fes plus grandes foibleffes, 
predit qu'elle ne mourroit de huict iours; ce qui 
arriua. 
IIs ne recherchent prefque Ie Baptefme que pour 
la fanté. N ous tafchons de purifier cefie intention, 
& les difpofer à receuoir également de la main de 
Dieu la maladie & la fanté, la mort & la vie, & leurs 
enfeignons que les eaux viuifiantes du S. [6] Bap- 
tefme, nous conferent principalement la vie de l' arne, 
& non celIe du corps. Cependant ils ont cefie opi- 
nion fi fort imprimée, que les baptifez, nommément 
les enfans, ne font plus maladifs, qu'ils l'auront tãtofi 
diuulguée & publiée par tout, de forte qu' on nous 
apporte plu1ìeurs enfans à baptifer de deux, de trois, 
voire mefmes de fept lieuës. 
Au refie la diuine Bonté, qui agit en nous fuiuant 
la mefure de la Foy, a conferué iufques à prefent ces 
petits enfans en bonne fanté: de forte que la mort de 
ceux qui font decedez, a efié attribuée aux maladies 
incurables & defefperées dont ils efioient malades 
auparauant, & fi quelqu'autre a efié par fois atteint 
de quelque petite maladie, les parens bien qu' encores 
infideles, l'ont rapportée à la negligence & au mef- 
pris qu'ils ont fait paroifire au feruice de Dieu. 
II y a en nofire village vne petite fille Chrefiienne 
nommée Louyfe, laquelle à fix mois a commencé à mar- 
cher toute feule: les parens affeurent n'auoir encor 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I636 

13 

still less intelligible, and increased my difficulties. 
But Our Lord, who willed to save this soul, immedi- 
ately sent us a young man, who served us as inter- 
preter. He had been with us in the Cabin of Louys, 
and had heard us talking of our mysteries, so that 
he already knew a considerable part of them, and 
understood very well what I said. It is said that this 
woman, who was named Marie, in the midst of her 
greatest weakness foretold that she would not die for 
eight days; and so it happened. 
They seek Baptism almost entirely as an aid to 
health. \Ve try to purify this intention, and to lead 
them to receive from the hand of God alike sickness 
and health, death and life; and teach them that the 
life-giving waters of Holy [6] Baptism principally im- 
part life to the soul, and not to the body. However, 
they have the opinion so deeply rooted that the bap- 
tized, especially the children, are no longer sickly, 
that soon they will have spread it abroad and pub- 
lished it everywhere. The result is that they are 
now bringing us children to baptize from two, three, 
yes, even seven leagues away. 
:110reover, the divine Goodness which acts in us 
according to the measure of our Faith, has thus far 
preserved these little ones in good health; so that 
the death of those who have passed away has been 
attributed to incurable and hopeless maladies con- 
tracted beforehand; and, if another has occasionally 
suffered from some trifling ailment, the parents, al- 
though still unbelieving, have attributed it to the 
neglect and irreverence they have shown toward the 
service of God. 
There is in our village a little Christian girl named 
Louyse, who at six months began to walk alone; the 


14 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

rien veu de femblable, & l'attribuent à l'efficace du 
S. Baptefme. V n autre nous difoit vn iour auec 
beaucoup de ioye, que fon petit [7] garçon, qui eftoit 
prefque toufiours malade, & comme tout etique auant 
Ie Baptefme, s'eftoit du depuis parfaictement bien 
porté. Cecy fuffira pour monfirer comme Nofire 
Seigneur va leur imprimant vne gran de opinion de ce 
diuin Sacrement; laquelle fe fortifie par la bonne & 
entiere fanté que Dieu nous donne, & qu'il a toufiours 
donnée à tous les François qui ont efté en ce pays: 
car, difent-ils, c'eft merueille qu'horfmis vn feul qui 
efi mort icy de fa mort naturelle, tous les autres, de- 
puis vingt-cinq ans ou enuiron qu'on y hante, n'ayent 
quafi pas efté malades. 
De tout cecy on pourra facilement recueillir l'efiat 
prefent du Chriftianifme naiffant en ce pays, & l'ef- 
perance du futuro Deux ou trois chofes y feruiront 
encor. La premiere eft la methode que nous tenons 
à l'inftruction des Sauuages. Nous affemblons les 
hommes Ie plus fouuent que nous pouuons, car leurs 
confeils, leurs feftins, leurs ieux, & leurs danfes ne 
nous permettent pas de les auoir icy à toute heure, 
ny tous les iours. N oUS auons égard particulierement 
aux Anciens, d'autant que ce font eux qui determi- 
nent & decident des affaires, & tout fe fait fuiuant 
leurs aduis. [8] Tous viennent volontiers nous en- 
tendre, tous vniuerfellement difent qu'ils ont enuie 
d'aller au Ciel, & qu'i1s redoutent ces braÏfes ardentes 
de l'enfer: ils n'ont quafi rien à nons repliquer, nous 
íouhaitterions quelquesfois qu'ils propofaffent plus de 
doutes, ce qui nous donneroit toufiours plus d'occafiõ 
de leur déchiffrer par Ie menu nos faincts Myfieres. 
En verité les Cõmandemens de Dieu font tres-iuftes 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

15 

parents declare they have seen nothing like it, and 
attribute it to the efficacy of Holy Baptism. Another 
person told us one day, with great delight, that his 
little [7] boy, who had always been sick and much 
emaciated before Baptism, had been very well since 
then. This will suffice to show how Our Lord is in- 
spiring them with a high opinion of this divine Sac- 
rament, which is strengthened by the perfect health 
God gives us, and which he has given to all the 
French who have been in this country; for, they 
say, it is very strange that, except a single man who 
died here from natural causes, all the others, during 
the twenty-five years or thereabout in which the 
French have been frequenting this region, have 
scarcely ever been sick. 
From all this may be easily gathered the present 
state of the young Christianity of this country, and 
the hope for the future. Two or three things be- 
sides will help to the same end. The first is the 
method we pursue in the instruction of the Savages. 
We gather together the men as often as we can; for 
their councils, their feasts, their games, and their 
dances do not permit us to have them here at any 
hour, nor every day. We pay especial attention to 
the Old Men, inasmuch as they are the ones who de- 
termine and decide all matters, and everything is 
ordered by their advice. [8] All come willingly to 
hear us; all, without exception, say they have a de- 
sire to go to Heaven and fear the fiery torments of 
hell. They have hardly anything to answer us 
with; we could wish sometimes that they would bring 
forward more objections, which would always afford 
us better opportunity to explain our holy Mysteries 
in detail. Of a truth, the Commandments of God 


16 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

& tres-raifonnables, & ceux là doiuent eftre moins 
qu'hommes qui y trouuent à redire; car nos Hurons 
qui n'ont encor que la lumiere naturelle, les ont trou- 
ué fi beaux, & fi conformes à la raifon, qu'apres en 
auoir ouy l'explication, ils difoient par admiration ca 
chia att
ai1l aa arrih
aa, certes voila des affaires d'im- 
portance, & dignes d'eftre propofées dans des con- 
feils; ils difent la verité, ils ne difent rien hors de 
propos, no us n'auons iamais entendu de tels difcours. 
Entre aut res chofes qui leur ont fait auoüer la verité 
d'vn Dieu, Createur, Gouuerneur & Conferuateur de 
to utes chofes, fut l'exemple que ie leur apportay de 
l'enfant cõçeu dans Ie ventre de la mere. Car qui 
eft-ce, difois-ie, finõ Dieu, qui organife Ie corps de 
cet enfant, qui d'vne Inefme matiere [9] forme le 
cæur, Ie foye, Ie poulmon, bref vne infinie varieté de 
membres fi neceffaires, & tous fi bien proportionnez & 
ioints les vns auec les autres: ce n' eft pas Ie pere, car 
ces merueilles s' accompliffent en fon abfence, & quel- 
quesfois apres fa mort. Ce n' eft non plus la mere, 
car elle ne fçait ce qui fe paffe dedans fon ventre: 
que fi c' eft Ie pere ou la mere qui forment ce corps à 
difcretion, pourquoy n'engendrent-ils vn fils ou vne 
fille quand ils veulent? pourquoy ne produifent-ils des 
enfans beaux, grands, forts & adroits. Et fi les pa- 
rens donnent l' ame à leurs enfans? pourquoy ne leur 
departent-ils à tous de grands efprits, vne heureufe 
memoire, & toutes fortes de belles & loüables quali- 
tez, veu qu'i1 n'y a perfonne qui ne defiraft auoir de 
tels enfans, s'il eftoit en fon pouuoir? A eel a nos 
Hurons s'eftonnent, & n'ayant que refpondre, ils cõ- 
feffent que nous difons la verité, & qu'en effet il y a 
vn Dieu, que d' orefnauant ils Ie veulent recognoiftre. 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, r6jÓ 

17 

are very just and reasonable, and they must be less 
than men who find therein anything to censure. 
Our Hurons, who have as yet only the light of nature, 
have found them so noble, so agreeable to reason, 
that after having heard the explanation of them they 
would say, in admiration, ca chia attwain aa arrihwaa, 
" Certainly these are important matters, and worthy of 
being discussed in our councils; they speak the truth, 
they say nothing but what is to the purpose; we 
have never heard such discourse." Among other 
things which made them acknowledge the truth of 
one God, Creator, Governor, and Preserver of all 
things, was the illustration I employed of the child 
conceived in its mother's womb. "Who," said I, 
" but God forms the body of this child; who out of 
one and the same material [9] forms the heart, the 
liver, the lungs,-in short, an infinite variety of 
members, all necessary, all well-proportioned, and 
joined one to another? Not the father, for these 
wonders take place in his absence, and sometimes 
after his death. N or is it the mother, for she does not 
know what takes place in her womb. If it be the 
father or the mother that forms this body at discre- 
tion, why is not a son or a daughter begotten at will? 
Why do they not produce children, handsome, tall, 
strong, and active? And, if parents give the soul to 
their children, why do they not impart to all of them 
great minds, a retentive memory, and all sorts of 
noble and praiseworthy qualities, seeing that there is 
no one who would not desire to have such children 
if this were in his power?" To all this the Hurons, 
full of wonder, make no reply. They confess that 
we speak the truth, and that indeed there is a God; 
they declare that henceforth they will recognize, 


18 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

Ie feruir & honorer, defirans d'eftre promptement in- 
ftruits, de forte qu'ils demandent que nous leur faffions 
tous les iours Ie Catechifme: mais cõme i' a y defia 
dit, leur[s] occupations & diuertiffemens ne Ie per- 
mettent pas. 
[10] Outre cela, la conformité de tous les poincts de 
la Doctrine Chreftienne leur plaift merueilleufement ; 
car, difent-ils, vous parlez conformément, & toufiours 
confecutiuement à ce que nous auez dit; vous n'ex- 
trauaguez point; vous ne dites rië hors de propos, 
mais nous autres nous par1õs à l'étourdy, fans fçauoir 
ce que nous difons. C' eft Ie propre de la fauffeté de 
s'ëbaraffer dans vne infinité de contradictions. 
Le mal eft, qu'ils font fi attachez à leurs vieilles 
couftumes, que cognoifsãt la beauté de la verité ils fe 
contentent de l'approuuer fans l'embraffer. Leur ré- 
põfe ordinaire eft, on'iondeclÛJten, la couftume de noftre 
pais eft telle. Nous auons combattu cefte excufe, & 
la leur auons oftée de la bouche, mais non encores du 
cæur; noftre Seigneur Ie fera quand il luy plaira. 
C'eft ainfi que nous agiffons auec les Anciens; car 
pour aut ant que les femmes & les enfans nous cau- 
foient beaucoup de trouble, nous auons trouué cefie 
inuention, qui nous reüffit affez bien: Ie P. Antoine 
Daniel, & les autres Peres vont tous les iours par 
toutes les Cabanes en feigner aux enfans, foit baptifez 
ou non, la doctrine Chreftienne, fçauoir eft Ie figne 
de la Croix, [I I] Ie Pater, I'Aue, Ie Credo, les Com- 
mandemens de Dieu, l'Oraifon à l'Ange Gardien, & 
autres briefues prieres; Ie tout en leur langue, pource 
que ces Peuples ont vne ineptitude naturelle d'en ap- 
prendre vne autre. 
Les Dimanches nons affemblons to ute cefie ieu- 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, z6.JÓ 

19 

serve, and honor him; and, desiring to be promptly 
instructed, they ask us to teach them the Catechism 
every day; but, as I have said, their occupations and 
amusements do not permit that. 
[10] Moreover, the harmony of all points of Chris- 
tian Doctrine pleases them wonderfully; "For," they 
say, " you always speak connectedly, and consistent- 
ly with what you have said; you never wander off, 
you never speak save to the purpose; we, on the con- 
trary, speak heedlessly, not knowing what we say." 
It is a characteristic of falsehood to embarrass itself 
in a multitude of contradictions. 
The evil is, they are so attached to their old cus- 
toms that, knowing the beauty of truth, they are 
content to approve it without embracing it. Their 
usual reply is, oniondeclwlltell, " Such is the custom 
of our country." 'Ve have fought this excuse and 
have taken it from their mouths, but not yet from 
their hearts; our Lord will do that when it shall 
please him. 
Thus, then, we deal with the Old Men. As the 
women and children caused us much trouble, we 
have hit upon this plan, which succeeds fairly well. 
Father Antoine Daniel and the other Fathers go 
every day through the Cabins, teaching the children, 
whether baptized or not, Christian doctrine,- name- 
ly, the sign of the Cross, [I I] the Pater, the Ave, the 
Credo, the Commandments of God, the Prayer to the 
Guardian Angel, and other brief prayers, all in their 
own tongue, because these Peoples have a natural 
inaptitude for learning any other. 
On Sundays, we assemble all these young people 
twice in our Cabin, which serves as a Chapel. In 
the morning we get them to assist at Mass, even 


20 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

neffe par deux fois dãs noftre Cabane qui nous fert 
de Chappelle. Le matin nous les faifons affifter à la 
Meffe iufques à l'offertoire; deuant laquelle nous fai- 
fons íolemnellement l'eau benifte, puis ie leur fais 
dire à tous enfemble apres moy Ie Pater, l' Aue, & 
autres prieres qu'ils fçauent. L'aprefdinée ie leur 
propofe quelque petite demande du Catechifme, &. 
leur fais rendre compte de ce qu'ils ont appris pendant 
la femaine, donnant à chacun quelque petit prix fe- 
lon fon merite. 
Cefie methode coniointe auec ces petites recom- 
penfes a des effects incroyables: car premierement 
cela a all umé parm y tous les enfans vn fi grand defir 
d'apprendre, qu'il n'y en a point du tout, pourueu 
qu'ils fçachent tant foit peu beguayer, qui ne vueillent 
eftre infiruits, & comme ils font quafi tous d'vn affez 
bon efprit, c' eft auec vn grand progrez; car mefme 
ils [12] s'infiruifent les vns les autres. 
Ie ne fçaurois dire Ie contentement & la confolation 
que nous donne cefte petite ieuneffe, quand nous con- 
fiderons leurs Peres plongez encor dans leurs fuperfti- 
tions, quoy qu'ils recognoiffent fuffifamment la verité. 
11 nous vient en penfée de craindre que Dieu irrité 
par leurs pechez ne les ayt rebutez encor pour vn 
temps; car pour les enfans fans doute il leur tend les 
bras, & Ies attire à foy; l'ardeur qu'ils tefmoignent à 
apprendre ce qui regarde Ie deuoir d'vn Chreftien 
nous empefche d'en douter; Ies plus petits fe vien- 
nent ietter entre nos bras quand nous allons par les 
Cabanes, & ne fe font point prier pour dire & eftre 
inftruits. Le P. Daniel a trouué l'inuention d'appai- 
fer vn petit enfant, quand il Ie trouue pleurant entre 
les bras de fa mere; qui eft de luy faire faire Ie figne 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, z636 

21 

to the offertory, before which we solemnly bless the 
holy water; then I make them say all together, after 
me, the Pater, the Ave, and other prayers they know. 
In the afternoon I propose to them some little ques- 
tion from the Catechism, and make them give ac- 
count of what they have learned during the week, 
giving to each some little prize according to his merit. 
This method, along with the little rewards, has 
wonderful results. For, in the first place, it has 
kindled among all the children so great a desire to 
learn that there is not even one who, if it can stam- 
mer out words at all, does not desire to be instructed; 
and, as they are almost all fairly intelligent, they 
make rapid progress, for they even [12] teach one 
another. 
I cannot tell you the satisfaction and consolation 
these little children give us. When we consider 
their Fathers, still plunged in their superstitions, 
although recognizing sufficiently the truth, we are 
afraid that God, provoked by their sins, has rejected 
them for a time; but, as for the children, without 
doubt he holds out his arms to them and draws them 
to himself. The eagerness they show to learn the 
duties of a Christian keeps us from doubting it. The 
smallest ones throw themselves into our arms, as we 
pass through the Cabins, and do not require to be 
urged to talk and to learn. Father Daniel hit upon 
the plan of quieting a little child, crying in its 
mother's anus, by having it make the sign of the 
Cross. And indeed, one day when I had just been 
teaching the Catechism to them in our Cabin, this 
child made us laugh; its mother was carrying it in 
her arms, and was going out; but, as soon as she 
reached the door, it began to cry so that she was com- 


22 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

de la Croix: Et de fait, vn iour que ie venois de leur 
faire Ie Catechifme en noftre Cabane ;:cet enfant nous 
fit rire: fa mere Ie portoit entre fes bras, & s'en al- 
loit, mais elle ne fut pas fi toft fur Ie feüil de la porte 
qu'il fe prit à pleurer, de forte qu'elle fut contrainte 
de rentrer; elle luy demande ce qu'il auoit, Que ie 
recommence, [13] dit-il, que ie recommence, ie veux 
encor dire. Ie luy fis done faire derechef Ie figne de 
la Croix, & il fe prit incontinent à rire, & à fauter 
d'aife. I'ay veu Ie mefme vne autrefois pleurer bien 
fort pour auoir eu Ie doigt froiffé, cependant s'appai- 
fer, & rire, auffi-toft qu'on luy euft fait faire Ie figne 
de la Croix. Ie m'eftend volontiers fur ce fuiet, ne 
doutant point que les bonnes ames ne prennent plai- 
fir d'entendre toutes ces particularitez; dans les com- 
mencemens de cefte Eglife naiffante, que pouuons 
nous raconter finon les begayemens de nos enfans 
fpirituels? Nous auons vne petite fiUe entre autres 
nõmee Marie Aoefi
a, qui n'a point fa pareille; vous 
diriez que tout fon contentement foit de faire le figne 
de la Croix, & de dire fon Pater & Aue, à peine auons 
nous mis Ie pied dans fa Cabane, qu'elle quitte tout 
pour prier Dieu. Quand nous affemblons les enfans 
pour la priere ou pour Ie Catechifme, elle fe trouue 
toufiours des premieres, & yaccourt plus gayement 
que plufieurs ne feroient au ieu; elle ne bouge de 
chez nous, & ne fe laffe point de faire Ie figne de la 
Croix, & de dire & redire cinquante fois Ie iour Ie 
Pater & Aue; eUe Ie fait faire aux autres, & vn de nos 
[14] François eftant arriué de nouueau; pour tout 
compliment, elle luy pritt la main, & luy fit faire Ie 
figne de la Croix. Souuent elle fe trouue dans la 
campagne quand nos Peres y recitent leur Office elle 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I636 

23 

pelled to turn back. She asked it what was the mat- 
ter. "Let me begin again," [13] it said, " let me 
begin again, I want to say more." I then got it to 
make again the sign of the Cross, and it immediately 
began to laugh and to jump for joy. I saw the same 
child, another time, crying hard because it had had 
its finger frozen; but it quieted down and laughed, 
as soon as they had it make the sign of the Cross. I 
dwell willingly upon this matter, as I am sure pious 
souls take pleasure in hearing all these particulars. 
In the beginnings of this infant Church, what can we 
speak about if not the stammerings of our spiritual 
children? We have one little girl, among others, 
named lYlarie Aoesz"wa, who has not her equal. Her 
whole satisfaction seems to be in making the sign of 
the Cross and in saying her Pater and Ave. Scarcely 
have we set foot in her Cabin, when she leaves every- 
thing to pray to God. When we assemble the chil- 
dren for prayers or for Catechism, she is always 
among the first, and hastens there more cheerfully 
than many would to play. She does not stir from 
our Cabin, and does not omit making the sign of the 
Cross, and saying over and over fifty times a day the 
Pater and Ave. She gets others to do the same; and, 
one of our [14J Frenchman having newly come, her 
only greeting was to take his hand, and have him 
make the sign of the Cross. Often she is in the 
field when our Fathers recite their Office there; she 
stands in the road, and, almost every time they re- 
turn, she begins to make the sign of the Cross, and 
to pray to God in a loud voice. 
Another little girl named Catherine had often been 
wayward about receiving instruction, and so had not 
been rewarded like the others. Some days afterward, 


24 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

fe tient dans Ie chemin, & prefque aut ant de fois 
qu'ils fe retournent, elle fe met à faire Ie figne de la 
Croix, & à prier Dieu à haute voix. 
V ne autre petite nommee Catherine, auoit fait fou- 
uent la difficile à fe faire inftruire, & en fuite n' auoit 
point efté recompenfee comme les autres: quelques 
iours apres vne fienne compagne l'amena à vn des 
noftres, luy faifant accroire qu'elle eftoit toute difpo- 
fee à dire; mais quand ce fut au fait & au prendre, 
elle fit à l'ordinaire; alors cefte petite qui l'auoit ame- 
nee fe mift en humeur, & employa toute fa petite 
rhetorique naturelle pour luy déferrer les levres, & 
la faire parler, tantoft vfant de menaces, tan toft luy 
faifant efperer quelque recompenfe de moy, fi elle 
difoit bien, & fit fi bien qu'elle en vint à bout au grand 
contentement de celuy des noftres qui l'efcoutoit. 
Vn autre bien qu'apporte cefte practique conforme 
à noftre Inftitut, eft que les grãds mefmes demeurent 
[deviennent] par ce moyen inftruits; [IS] car Ie de fir 
que les peres & meres ont que leurs enfans foient 
loüez & recompenfez de quelque prix, fait qu'ils s'in- 
firuifent eux-mefmes pour inftruire leurs enfans; par- 
ticulierement beau coup de gran des filles prennent 
plaifir à imiter les petites. Quand elles retournent 
du bois, fouuent elles s'arrefient au premier de nos 
Peres qu'elles rencontrent, & luy difent fa arrihNaz"ens- 
tan jell, enfeigne moy ie te prie, & quoy qu' elles 
foient bien chargees, elles ne font point contentes 
qu'on ne leur ait fait dire Ie Pater & l'Aue. Quelques- 
fois mefmes elles nous preuiennent, & de fi loin 
qu'elles apperçoiuent quelqu'vn de nous autres, elles 
fe mettent à dire ce qu'elles fçauent. QueUe confo- 
lation d'entendre retentir ces campagnes du nom de 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, r636 

25 

one of her companions brought her to one of our Fa- 
thers, giving him to understand that she was quite 
disposed to learn; but. when it came to the point, she 
acted as usual. The little girl who had brought her 
became annoyed, and used all her little natural rhet- 
oric to make her open her lips and to get her to 
speak,- sometimes using threats, sometimes holding 
out a reward from me if she spoke properly; she was 
so earnest that she succeeded, to the great satisfac- 
tion of those of our Fathers who were listening to her. 
Another benefit that results from this practice- 
which is in conformity with our Institute - is, that 
even the adults become instructed by this means; 
[IS] for the desire of the fathers and mothers that 
their children should be praised and rewarded leads 
them to be instructed themselves, in order to teach 
their children; particularly many older girls take 
pleasure in imitating the younger ones. \Vhen they 
are returning from the forest, they often stop the 
first of our Fathers whom they meet, and say to him, 
ta arrihwaiensta1l Sell, " Teach me, I pray thee;" and 
although they may be well laden, they are not satis- 
fied unless he has them say the Pater and the Ave. 
Sometimes they anticipate us, and, from as far as 
they can see one of our Fathers, they begin to recite 
what they know. \Vhat a consolation to hear these 
districts resound with the name of JESUS, where 
the devil has been, so to speak, adored and recog- 
nized as God during so many ages. 
This exercise also enables us to improve greatly in 
the use and knowledge of the language, which is no 
small gain. Generally speaking they praise and ap- 
prove the Christian Religion, and blame their wicked 
customs; but when will they leave them off entirely? 


26 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

IESVS, où Ie diable a efié, pour ainfi dire, adoré & 
recognu pour Dieu par tant de fiec1es. 
Ce mefme exercice fait que nous profitons beaucoup 
en l'vfage & cognoiffance de la langue, qui n'efi pas 
vn petit fruict. Vniuerfellement parlant ils loüent & 
approuuent la Religion Chrefiienne, & blafment leurs 
mefchantes coufiumes; & quand fera-ce qu'ils les 
quitteront tout à fait? Quelques-vns nous difent, 
Penfez-vous [16] venir à bout de renuerfer Ie Pays, 
c'eft ainfi qu'ils appellent Ie changement de leur vie 
Payenne & Barbare, en vne vie ciuile & Chreftienne? 
Nous refpondons que nous ne fommes pas fi prefomp- 
tueux, mais que ce qui eft impoffible aux hommes, efi 
non feulement poffible, mais facile à Dieu. V oicy 
encor vn autre indice de leur bonne volonté pour la 
Foy. Monfieur de Champlain & Monfieur Ie General 
du Pleffis Bochart, nous obligerent grandement l' an- 
nee paffee, exhortant les Hurons en plein confeil à 
embraffer la Religion Chrefiienne, & leur difant que 
c'efioit là l'vnique moyen non feulement d'eftre vn 
iour veritablement heureux dans Ie Ciel, mais auffi 
de lier à l'auenir vne tres-efiroite amitié auec les 
François, lefquels en ce faifant viendroient volontiers 
en leur Pays, fe marieroient à leurs filles, leurs ap- 
prendroient diuers arts & meftiers, & les affifieroient 
contre leurs ennemis; & que s'ils vouloient amener 
quelques-vns de leurs enfans ran prochain, qu'on les 
inftruiroit à Kébec, que nos Peres en auroient vn 
grand foin. Et pour autant que les Capitaines du 
pays n'efioient pas là bas, ils leur dirent qu'ils tinffent 
confeil tous enfemble quand ils [17] feroient de retour 
touch ant les poincts fufdits, & qu'ils me rendiffent les 
lettres dont il leur pleuft m'honorer, par lefquelles 
ces :Meffieurs nous donnoient aduis de ce qui auoit 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION. I636 

27 

Some say to us: II Do you think [16] you are going 
to succeed in overturning the Country?" Thus do 
they style the change from their Pagan and Barba- 
rous life to one that is civilized and Christian. We 
reply that we are not so presumptuous, but that what 
is impossible to man is not only possible but easy to 
God. Here is another indication of their good will 
toward the Faith. J\10nsieur de Champlain and Mon- 
sieur the General du Plessis Bochart rendered us 
great service last year, by exhorting the Hurons in 
full council to embrace the Christian Religion, and 
by telling them that it was the only means not only 
of being some day truly happy in Heaven, but also 
of cementing in the future a very close alliance with 
the French,-who, if this were done, would readily 
come into their Country, marry their daughters, teach 
them different arts and trades, and assist them 
against their enemies; and that, if they would bring 
some of their children next year, to be instructed at 
Kébec, our Fathers would take good care of them. 
And, inasmuch as the Captains of the country were 
not there, they asked them to hold a general council 
on their [17] return, concerning the points mentioned: 
also to give me the letters with which they were 
pleased to honor me, in which these Gentlemen in- 
formed us of what had been said, in order that we 
might be present at the Huron Council, and be able 
to avail ourselves of what they had done. In accord- 
ance with this, in the month of April last, having 
been invited to an Assembly or Council, where all 
the Old Men and Chiefs of the Nation of the Bear 
met to deliberate on their great feast of the dead, I 
took occasion to show them the letters of these Gen- 
tlemen, and asked them to decide, after careful delib- 


28 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

efié dit, afin que nous affiftaffions au Confeil des Hu- 
rons, & fçeuffions nous preualoir de ce qu'ils auoient 
fait. Conformement à cela au mois d' Auril dernier 
ayant efté inuité à vne A1Iemblee ou Confeil, où 
eftoient tous les Anciens & les Chefs de la Nation des 
Ours, pour deliberer fur leur grande fefte des morts, 
ie pris l'occaÍÌon de leur reprefenter la lettre de ces 
Meffieurs, & demander qu'ils delibera1Ient meurement 
ce qu'ils defiroient y refpondre. Ie leur dis que tou 
les hommes ayant l'ame immortelle alloient finale- 
ment apres cefte vie en l'vn de ces deux lieux, fçauoir 
en Paradis ou en Enfer, & ce pour vn iamais: mais 
que ces lieux eftoiët grandement differents, car Ie 
Paradis eftoit vn lieu remply de toutes fortes de biens, 
& exempt de toutes fortes de maux; & l'Enfer eftoit 
vn eftat deftitué de tout bien, & remply de toutes 
fortes de maux, que c.eftoit vne fournaife tres-ardente 
au milieu de laquelle les damnez feroient à iamais 
tourmentez & brulez fans eftre confommez, [18] qu'ils 
auifaffent maintenant auquel de ces deux lieux ils 
defiroient vn iour aller pour vn iamais, & ce pendant 
qu.i1s eftoiët encor en vie; car pour tous les defunts 
pour qui ils auoient fait, & alloient faire la fette, que 
c'eftoit vne affaire decidee, que tous ayãt ignoré Dieu, 
& outrepa1Ié fes cõmandemens, auoiêt fuiuy Ie che- 
min de l'Enfer, où ils eftoient maintenant tourmen- 
tez de fupplices qui ne fe peuuent imaginer, & qu'il 
n'yauoit plus de remede. Que pour eux s'ils vou- 
loient aller au Ciel nous leur enfeignerions Ie chemin; 
& pour autant que to utes les affaires d'importans fe 
font icy par prefens, & que la Pourcelaine qui tient 
lieu d'or & d'argent en ce Pays, eft toute pui1Iante, 
ie prefentay en cefte Affemblee vn collier de douze 
cens grains de Pourcelaine, leur difant, que c'eftoit- 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, r6jÓ 

29 

eration, what they wished to answer thereto. I told 
them that every man, as possessing an immortal soul, 
would at last, after this life, go to one or the other of 
two places, Paradise or Hell, and that forever; but that 
these places were widely different, since Paradise is 
a place abounding in blessings of all kinds, and free 
from all manner of ills; Hell, a place where no bless- 
ing comes, and where ills of all kinds abound; that 
it is a fiery furnace, in the midst of which the 
damned would be forever tormented, and burned 
without ever being consumed; [18] that they must 
now consider to which of these two places they pre- 
ferred to go some day, forever, and to do this while 
they were still in this life, because the matter was 
decided so far as it concerned all the dead for whom 
they had made or were going to make feasts; that 
all those who had slighted God and broken his com- 
mandments had followed the path to Hell, where 
they now were tormented by punishments that could 
not be imagined, and for which there was no remedy. 
I told them that, if they wished to go to Heaven, we 
would teach them the way; and, inasmuch as all 
affairs of importance are managed here by presents, 
and as the Porcelain that takes the place of gold and 
silver in this Country is all-powerful, I presented in 
this Assembly a collar of twelve hundred beads of 
Porcelain, telling them that it was given to smooth 
the difficulties of the road to Paradise. It is custom- 
ary to employ such terms, when they make presents 
to succeed in some difficult enterprise. Then all, in 
turn expressing their opinions, said that they dreaded 
these glowing fires of Hell, and that they preferred 
the road to Heaven. There was, nevertheless, one 
who- either seriously, or more probably [19] in 


30 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

là pour applanir les difficultez du chemin de Paradis; 
ce font les termes dont ils ont coufiume de fe feruir 
quand ils font quelques prefens pour venir à bout de 
quelque difficile entreprife. Alors tous opinans à 
leur tour, dirent qu'ils redoutoient ces feux ardens 
de l' Enfer, & qu' ils aymoient mieux prendre Ie che- 
min du Ciel: il y en eut neãtmoins vn lequel ou feri- 
eufement, ou plutofi [19] en gauffant dit, que cela 
alloit bien que tous vouluffent aller au Ciel, & efire 
bien-heureux, pour luy qu'il n'importoit pas quand il 
feroit brulé dedans l'Enfer. Ie repartis que Dieu 
nous donnoit à tous l'option de l'vn & de l'autre, 
mais qu'il ne fçauoit pas que1 efioit Ie feu d'Enfer, 
& que i'efperois qu'il changeroit de refolution quand 
il en feroit mieux informé. 
Voila la difpofition qu'ont les Hurons, & notam- 
ment la Nation des Ours à receuoir Ie Chrifiianifme, 
à quoy feruira grandement que nous auons defia bap- 
tifé beaucoup d'enfans; car, difent-ils, nous ne vou- 
Ions pas abandonner nos enfans, nous defirons aller 
au Ciel auec eux. Tu peux iuger, difent ils, combien 
nous agreons tes difcours, puis que nous-nous y trou- 
uons volontiers, & fans mot dire, & que nous permet- 
tõs que nos enfans foient baptifez. II ne faut pas 
que ie m'oublie à cefie occafion de tefmoigner la fa- 
tisfaction que nous donne Louys de faincte Foy; i1 
efi vray qu'il nous a autant edifiez & contentez dans 
Ie deuoir de Chrefiien, qu'il y auoit manqué par Ie 
paffé. A ce mois de Septembre i1 eut vn de fir de re- 
tourner pour hyuerner chez nous à Kébec, afin d'y 
rapprendre paifiblement [20J les bons enfeignemens 
qu'il auoit eu autrefois de nos Peres en France, & fe 
remettre parfaictement dans Ie train de la vertu & 
pieté Chrefiienne. N ous approuuions fort ce deffein, 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION. r636 

31 

jest - said it was very fine that all should wish to go 
to Heaven, and be happy; but that, as far as he was 
concerned, it did not matter even if he should be 
burned in Hell. I replied that God gave us all the 
choice of the one or the other; that he did not know 
what Hell fire was, and that I hoped he would change 
his mind when he was better informed. 
You see the inclination of the Hurons, and espe- 
ciallyof the Nation of the Bear, to receive Christian- 
ity; and this will be greatly increased by the fact 
that we have already baptized many of their chil- 
dren. For they say, " We do not wish to be sepa- 
rated from our children, we desire to go to Heaven 
with them. You can judge," they say, " how much 
we approve your talk, seeing we willingly listen to 
it, without contradiction, and permit you to baptize 
our children." I must not forget to express on this 
occasion the satisfaction which Louys de saincte Foy 
gives us; he certainly performs his duties as a Chris- 
tian as much to our edification and pleasure as for- 
merly he failed therein. In this month of Septem- 
ber he had a desire to return to our house at Kébec 
for the winter, in order to resume quietly [20] the 
good instructions he had had formerly from our Fa- 
thers in France, and to devote himself again to the 
practice of virtue and Christian piety. We strongly 
approved this design, the more so as he could have 
taken with him some young relative who might have 
been instructed and baptized there; but as some diffi- 
culty came in the way of his resolution, he concluded 
that he would pass a good part of the Winter... with 
us. This he has done with much satisfaction and 
profit, both to himself and to us; for he has resumed 
attendance upon the Sacraments, and the habit of 


32 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

veu mefmement qu'i1 eufi mené auec luy quelque 
ieune homme de fes parens, qui eufi pû efire infiruit 
& baptifé là bas: mais quelque difficulté ayant tra- 
uerfé cefie refolution, i1 fe delibera de paffer vne 
bonne partie de l'Hyuer auec nous, ce qu'il a fait 
auec beau coup de contentement & de profit, tãt de 
fon cofié que du nofire; car il s'efi remis dans la han- 
tife des Sacremens, & dans l'vfage de la priere. A 
N oël il fit vne fort bonne Confeffion generale depuis 
fon Baptefme: d'autre part en nos Catechifmes & in- 
fiructions que nous faifons aux Sauuages il nous fer- 
uoit de Truchement, & nous a traduit plufieurs chofes 
en langue Huronne, où nous admirions la facilité qu'il 
auoit à entendre no fire langue, & à comprendre & 
expliquer les myfieres les plus difficiles. Bref il tef- 
moigne que veritablement il a la crainte de Dieu. 
Pour conc1ufion de ce chapitre nous efperons vous 
renuoyer les Peres Antoine Daniel, & Ambroife Da- 
uot auec vne bande de braues petits Hurons, afin de 
donner [2 I] commencement au Seminaire, duquel on 
peut efperer auec raifon de grands fruits pour la con- 
uerfion de ces Peuples. Que s'il yauoit à Kébec des 
Religieufes, ie croy qu'on vous pourroit auffi enuoyer 
de petites Seminarifies, il y a icy quantité de braues 
petites filles, lefquelles fi elles efioient bien eíleuees 
ne cederoient en rien à nofire ieuneffe Françoife. Ce 
nous efi vn grand creue-cæur de voir ces petites inno- 
centes foüiller incontinent la pureté de leur corps & 
beauté de leur ame faute de bon exemple & bonne 
infiruction; ie ne doute nullement que la diuine Bon- 
té ne comble de grands biens, particulierement ceux 
qu'elle infpirera de contribuer à la fondation de ces 
Seminaires, & â l' education de ces petites plantes de 
cefie Eglife naiffante. 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1636 

33 

prayer. At Christmas he made a very good general 
Confession for the period since his Baptism. Be- 
sides, in our Catechizing and teaching of the Sav- 
ages, he served as Interpreter, and has translated 
several things into the Huron language for us, w here- 
in we admired the facility with which he understood 
our language, and comprehended and explained the 
most difficult mysteries. In short, he gives evidence 
that truly he has the fear of God before his eyes. 
To conclude this chapter, we hope to send you Fa- 
thers Antoine Daniel and Ambroise Davot with a 
band of honest little Hurons, to make [2 I] a begin- 
ning for the Seminary, from which we can reasonably 
expect much fruit in the conversion of these Peoples. 
If there were Nuns at Kébec, I believe we might be 
able to send also girls for a Seminary. There are 
here a number of fine little girls, who, if they were 
well brought up, would not yield in any respect to 
our young French girls. It makes our hearts ache 
to see these innocent young girls so soon defile their 
purity of body and beauty of soul, for lack of a good 
example and good instruction. I doubt not at all 
that the divine Goodness will crown with great bless- 
ings those in particular whom he inspires to con- 
tribute to the foundation of these Seminaries, and to 
the education of these young plants of this infant 
Church. 


34 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

CHAPITRE II. 

CONTENANT SELON L'ORDRE DES TEMPS LES AU- 
TRES CHOSES REMARQUABLES ADUENUËS 
PENDANT CESTE ANNÉE. 

L A premiere chofe eft la fechereffe de l'Efté paffé 
laquelle a efté fort vniuerfelle [22] en tous ces 
Pays, autant que i' ay peu apprêdre tant des 
lettres de Kébec, comme de diuers Sauuages reuenans 
des traittes loingtaines, tout eftoit fi fee & fi aride 
qu'à la moindre étincelle de feu les forefts & les cam- 
pagnes eftoient incontinent embrafées: d'où arriua 
,que plufieurs Sauuages allans par pays, & n'eftans 
pas fur leur garde eurent leurs Cabanes & viures 
bruflez, comme auffi deux de nos hommes. Mais 
pour ne parler que du Pays des Hurons, la fechereffe 
y fut tres-grande, car depuis Pafques iufques a la 
my-ruin il ne pleut point, ou fort peu; rien ne pro- 
fitoit, tout deperiffoit, de forte qu'on apprehendoit 
vne grand famine, & à bon droit; car tout Ie terroir 
des Hurons & des lieux circonuoifins eftans tout fa- 
blonneux, s'il eft trois iours fans eftre arroufé des 
pluyes du Ciel, tout commence à faner & d. baiffer la 
tefte. Dans ces apprehenfions tout Ie Pays eftoit en 
alarme de la famine, veu mefmement que Ie Prin- 
temps paffé trois villages auoiêt efté bruflez, qui fans 
cet accident euffent pû feruir dans la neceffité de gre- 
niers à tout Ie Pays. Tous crioient à l'ayde, & im- 
ploroient à leur ordinaire Ie fecours des Sorciers ou 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

35 

CHAPTER II. 

CONTAINING IN THE ORDER OF TIME THE OTHER 
REMARKABLE THINGS THAT HAPPENED 
DURING THIS YEAR. 

F IRST, I notice the dryness of the past Summer, 
which has been very general [22] throughout 
these Regions, so far as I can learn from Kébec 
letters, and from Savages returning from distant 
trading expeditions; everything was so dry and so 
arid tbat at the least spark of fire the forests and 
fields were at once in a blaze. Thus it happened 
that many Savages, going about the country and not 
being on their guard, had their Cabins and provisions 
burned, as did also two of our men. But to speak 
only of the Huron Country,-the drought was very 
great, for from Easter until the middle of June there 
was no rain at all, or very little. Nothing was grow- 
ing, everything was dying, so that we apprehended 
a serious famine, and rightly; for, the soil of the 
Huron country and adjacent regions being sandy, if 
three days pass without its being watered with rain 
from Heaven, everything begins to fade and hang 
its head. Filled with these apprehensions, the whole 
Country was dreading a famine, especially as last 
Spring three villages had been burned which, but 
for this accident, might have served in case of neces- 
sity as granaries to the whole Country. All were 
crying for help, and imploring, according to their 
custom, the help of the Sorcerers, or Arelldiowalle, 


36 

LES Rr-'LA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

Arelldioð'alle, qui fe font icy adorer, [23] promettans 
qu'ils deftourneroit les malheurs dont Ie Cielles me- 
nace. Ces abufeurs firent ioüer tous les refforts que 
les fonges, & leur ceruelle creufe leur peut fuggerer, 
afin de faire pleuuoir, mais en vain, Ie Ciel eftoit 
d'airain à leurs fottifes. II y eut vn de ces Sorciers 
nommé Teltorellltaeglloll plus fameux que les autres, 
qui promifi merueilles, pourueu que tout Ie Pays luy 
fift vn prefent de la valeur de dix haches, fans con- 
ter vne infinité de feftins: mais ces efforts furent en 
vain, i1 auoit beau fonger, feftiner & danfer, il n'en 
tomboit pas vne goutte d'eau, de forte qu'i1 cõfeffoit 
qu'il n' en pouuoit venir à bout, & affeuroit que les 
bleds ne meuriroient point; mais Ie mal eftoit pour 
nous, ou pluton Ie bon-heur, qu'il difoit qu'il eftoit 
empefché de faire pleuuoir par vne Croix qui eft vis 
à vis de nofire porte, & que la maifon des François 
el10it vne maifon de demons, ou de gens méfaifans 
qui eftoiêt venus en leur Pays afin de les faire mou- 
rir. Quelques-vns encheriffans là deffus difoient que 
parauanture nous auions des reffentimens de la mort 
d'Eftienne Brufié, & que nous voulions tirer ven- 
geance de tout Ie Pays pour la mort d'vne feu Ie per- 
fonne. [24] D'autres adiouftoient que les Algonquins 
leur auoient dit que les François ne venoient icy que 
pour les faire mourir, & que d'eux eftoit prouenuë la 
contagion de l'année paffée. En fuite de ces difcours 
on nous difoit que nous abatiffions la Croix, & que fi 
les bleds ne meuriffoient pas, on nons pourroit bien 
affommer ainfi comme on fait icy les Sorciers, & 
autres gens pernicieux. Quelques-vns, à no fire grand 
regret & creue-cæur, difoient qu'ils abbattroient la 
Croix, & vinrent iufques à ce poinct, que des ieunes 
gens en ayants fait vne autre, & l'ayans plantée fur 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, ;636 

37 

who are here held in reverence, [23J because they 
promise to turn aside the misfortunes with which 
Heaven threatens them. These deceivers played all 
the tricks that dreams and their own empty heads 
could suggest to them, in order to bring rain, but in 
vain, the Heavens were as brass to their foolishness. 
There was one of these Sorcerers named TehorcJllwcg- 
non, more famous than the others, who promised 
marvels, provided the whole Country made him a 
present of the value of ten hatchets, not to speak of 
a multitude of feasts; but these efforts were in vain,- 
dreaming, feasting, dancing, were all to no purpose, 
there fell not a drop of water; so that he had to con- 
fess that he could not succeed, and he declared that 
the crops would not ripen; but unfortunately, or 
rather fortunately for us, he said that he was hin- 
dered from making it rain by a Cross which is before 
our door, and that the house of the French was a 
house of demons, or of ill-disposed people who had 
come into their Country in order to make them die. 
Some thereupon, trying to outdo him, said perhaps 
we cherished resentment for the death of Estienne 
Bruslé and that we wished to draw down vengeance 
upon the whole Country for the death of a single per- 
son. [24] Others added that the Algonquins had told 
them that the French came here only to compass 
their death, and that from them had come the con- 
tagion of last year. In consequence of these state- 
ments we were told that we must take down our 
Cross; and that, if the crops should not mature, they 
might beat us to death as they do the Sorcerers and 
other pernicious people here. Some, to our great 
regret and sorrow, said that they would pull down 
the Cross; and it even went so far that some young 


38 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

Ie faifte d'vne Cabane, fe mirent à tirer à l'encontre, 
comme au blanc, auec leurs arcs & leurs fleches; mais 
noftre Seigneur ne permift pas qu'ils la frappaffent 
d'vn feu 1 coup. D'autres eftoient d'autant plus mé- 
chans qu'ils eftoient defia mieux informez de la co- 
gnoiffance d'vn Dieu Createur & Gouuerneur de toutes 
chofes, car ils accufoient fa Bonté & Prouidence auec 
d'horribles blafphemes. II eufi. fallu eftre de bronze 
pour n'eftre pas irrité de ces infolences. Ce qui nous 
touchoit dauantage eftoit la mifere de ce pauure 
Peuple, [on aueuglement, & fur tout l'iniure qu'on 
faifoit [2 5J à Dieu Ie quittant pour des Sorciers: car 
pour la mort ie croy que tous euffent efté tres aifes 
de la fubir pour la defenfe de la Croix. Nous affem- 
blafmes done en noftre Cabane les hommes & les 
femmes de noftre village, attendu particulierement 
qu'eux feuls n'auoient point eu recours aux Sorciers, 
ains nous demandoièt continuellement que nous 
fiffions pleuuoir. Ils ont cefte penfee que rien ne 
nous eft impoffible: Ie leur dis que ny nous, ny au- 
cun homme ne difpofoit de la pluye, ou du beau 
temps; que celuy qui a fait Ie Ciel & la terre en eftoit 
feulle maiftre, & la diftribuoit felon fon bon plaifir; 
que c'eftoit à luy à qui il falloit auoir recours; que la 
Croix que nous auions plantee n'empefchoit point la 
pluye, veu que depuis que nous l'auions erigee il 
auoit pleu & tonné par plufieurs fois; mais que para- 
uanture Dieu eftoit fafché de ce qu'ils en parloient 
mal, & de ce qu'ils recouroient à de mefchans Are1l- 
dioYalle, lefquels ou n'auoient point de pouuoir, ou 
bien peut-eftre caufoient eux-mefmes les fechereffes 
par les hantifes & pacts qu'ils auoient auec Ie diable: 
& qu'au refte tout ce qu'ils en fai[oient n'eftoit que 
pour auoir des prefens; que s'i1s y pouuoient [26] 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, z636 

39 

people, having made another and having placed it 
on the ridge of a Cabin, began to shoot at it as at a 
target with their bows and arrows, but our Lord did 
not permit them to hit it even once. Others were 
much more wicked, since they were more fully ac- 
quainted with the knowledge of the one God, Creator 
and Governor of all things, for they accused his Good- 
ness and Providence with horrid blasphemies. One 
would have to be of bronze not to be irritated by 
such insolence. What touched us most keenly was 
the misery of these poor People, their blindness, 
and above all the offense they committed [25] against 
God by forsaking him for the Sorcerers. As to death, 
I believe that all of us would have been very glad to 
submit to it for the defense of the Cross. We there- 
fore assembled in our Cabin the men and women of 
our village, especially because they alone had not 
resorted to the Sorcerers, but had always asked 
us to make it rain. They believe that nothing is im- 
possible for us. I told them that neither we nor any 
man could bring rain or fine weather; that he who 
made Heaven and earth alone was master of them, and 
distributed them according to his good pleasure; that 
recourse must be had only to him; that the Cross we 
had planted had not hindered the rain, as it had 
often rained and thundered since we had erected it; 
but that perhaps God was angry because they had 
spoken ill of him and had had recourse to wicked 
Arelldiowane, who either had no power, or, indeed, 
perhaps had themselves caused the drought by their 
intercourse and pacts with the devil; that, besides, 
everything they did was only to get presents, and 
that, if they could do [26] anything, they should 
make rain. Consequently, if they would obtain what 


40 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

quelque chofe, qu'ils fiffent dõc plouuoir. Partant 
que s'ils vouloient obtenir ce qu'ils defiroient, ie leur 
dis qu'ils s'adreffaffent à celuy qui a tout fait, & qui 
eft feul Auteur de tous biens, duquel nous leur auions 
tant par1é, & que nous leur enfeignerions la façon de 
Ie prier. Cefte Nation eft fort docile, & fous la con- 
fideration des biens temporels vous les flechiffez où 
vous voulez. lIs me refpondirent tous, qu'ils n'ad- 
iouftoient point foy à leurs deuins, & que c'eftoient 
des abufeurs, qu'ils ne vouloient point d'autre Dieu 
que celuy que nous leur enfeignions, & qu'ils feroient 
ce que nous leur dirions. Ie leur dis donc qu'ils de- 
uoient detefter leurs pechez, & fe refoudre à bon 
efcient à feruir ce Dieu que nous leur annoncions, & 
que d' orefnauant nous ferions tous les iours vne Pro- 
ceffion pour implorer fon ayde, que c'eftoit ainfi que 
faifoient tous les Chreftiens; qu'ils fuffent conftans 
& perfeuerans, ne perdant pas courage s'ils n'eftoient 
incontinent exaucez; nous adiouftafmes à cela vn 
væu de neuf Meffes en l'honneur du glorieux Efpoux 
de noftre Dame Protecteur des Hurons; nous expo- 
fafmes auffi le S. Sacremet à l' occafion de fa Fefte 
qui arriua en ce temps-là. 
[27J Or il auint iuftement que la neufuaine eftãt 
accomplie, qui fut le treiziefme Iuin, nous ne peufmes 
paracheuer la Proceffion fans pluye, qui fuiuit fort 
abondante, & dura à diuerfes reprifes l'efpace de plus 
d'vn moisauec vn grand amandement & accroiffement 
des fruicts de la terre, & d'autant que, comme i'ay 
dit, ces terres fablonneufes demanderoient quafi des 
pluyes de deux iours l'vn, vne autre fechereffe eftant 
furuenuë depuis la my-Iuillet iufques à la fin du mois, 
nous entreprifmes vne autre neufuaine en l'honneur 
de noftre B. Pere S. Ignace, par les prieres duquel 


1636] 

LE ./EUNE'S RELA TIOIV, I636 

41 

they desired, I urged them to address him who made 
everything, and who alone is the Author of all bless- 
ings, of whom we had so often spoken to them, and 
to whom we would teach them to pray. This Na- 
tion is very docile, and when influenced by temporal 
considerations it can be bent as one pleases. They 
all replied that they put no faith in their soothsay- 
ers, and that they were deceivers: that they wished 
no other God than him whom we taught to them, 
and that they would do what we told them. I then 
told them that they must hate their sins, and resolve 
in earnest to serve that God whom we announced to 
them; that henceforth we would every day make a 
Procession to implore his help, that all Christians 
did this; that they should be constant and persever- 
ing, not losing courage if they were not immediately 
heard. We added to this a vow of nine Masses in 
honor of the glorious Spouse of our Lady, the Pro- 
tector of the Hurons. We exposed also the Blessed 
Sacrament on the occasion of its Feast, which hap- 
pened at that time. 
[27] Now it happened that, exactly as the novena 
was completed, which was on the thirteenth of June, 
we could not finish the Procession on account of the 
rain, which followed very abundantly and lasted, 
with several intervals, the space of a month, with a 
great improvement and growth of the fruits of the 
earth; and because, as I have said, these sandy soils 
need rain almost every other day, another drought 
having occurred from the middle of July until the 
last of the month, we undertook another novena in 
honor of our Blessed Father St. Ignatius, through 
whose prayers we had, from the day after this nove- 
na began and since, such an abundance of rain that 


42 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

nous eufmes dés Ie lendemain de la neufuaine encom- 
mencée, & du depuis, telle abondance de pluyes 
qu'elles firent parfaictement efpier les bleds, & les 
amenerent à maturité, de forte qu'i1 y a eu cefte an- 
née autant de bled que de long temps. 
Or ces pluyes ont fait deux biens; l'vn en ce 
qu'elles ont accreu les fruicts de la terre, & l'autre en 
ce qu' elles ont étouffé toutes les mauuaifes opinions 
& volontez conçeuës contre Dieu, contre la Croix, & 
contre nous; car tous les Sauuages de nofire cognoif- 
fance, & notamment de noftre village, font venus ex- 
preffément nous trouuer [28] pour nous dire qu'en 
effet Dieu efioit bon, & que nous efiions auffi bons, 
& qu'à l'auenir ils vouloient feruir Dieu, adiouftant 
mille poüilles à l'encontre de leurs Arendio
ane, ou 
deuins. ADieu foit pour iamais la gloire de tout; 
i1 permet la fechereffe des terres, pour arroufer les 
cæurs de fes benedictions. 
L'année 1628. que les Anglois defirent [defirent] la 
flotte de la Compagnie de la Nouuelle France, dont 
la perte a efié la damnation de plufieurs Canadois, & 
Ie retardement de la conuerfion de quelques autres, 
cõme i1 eft à croire, i1 m'arriua en ce pays vne hiftoire 
quafi pareille à la precedente, laquelle à raisõ de la 
conformité ie penfe efire bõ de raconter icy. La fe- 
chereffe efioit extraordinaire par tout, mais finguliere- 
ment en no fire village, & aux enuirons. Cettes [cer- 
tes] ie m'efionnois de voir quelquesfois l'air tout 
chargé de nuées ailleurs, & ouyr bruire les tonnerres 
& au contraire en nos quartiers Ie Ciel y eftre tres 
pur, tres ferain. & très ardent. II fembloit mefme 
que les nuées fe diuifoient à l'abord de no fire contrée; 
Ce mefme fuppofi du diable, que i'ay nommé cy-de- 
uant Tehorenhaegnoll, efiant prié de faire plouuoir, 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELATION, z6þ 

43 

it caused the corn to form perfect ears, and ripened 
them; so that there was this year as much corn as 
there has been for a long time. 
Now these rains have produced two good results: 
one in that they have increased the fruits of the 
earth; the other that they stifled those false opinions 
and notions conceived against God, against the Cross, 
and against ourselves. For all the Savages that 
knew us, and especially those of our village, came 
expressly to see us, [28] to tell us that God was in 
truth good, and that we also were good; and that in 
the future they would serve God, adding a thousand 
abusive words in reference to all their A relldio'lfJalle, 
or soothsayers. To God be forever the glory of the 
whole; he permits the drought of the soil, to bedew 
all hearts with his blessings. 
In the year [628, when the English defeated the 
fleet of the Company of New France,2-whose loss 
was the damnation of many Canadians and the post- 
ponement of the conversion of many others, as may 
be believed,- there happened to me in this country 
an incident almost the same as the preceding, which, 
by reason of its likeness to it, seems to me worth re- 
lating here. The drought was very great every- 
where, but particularly so in our village and its 
neighborhood. I was indeed astonished, sometimes, 
to see the air heavily laden with clouds elsewhere, 
and to hear the thunders roaring; while in our neigh- 
borhood, on the contrary, the Sky was clear, very 
bright and very hot. It seemed even that the clouds 
separated as they approached our region. That 
same tool of the devil that I have mentioned before, 
TellOrozltacgllon, having been entreated to make rain, 
replied that he could not [29] make it; and that the 


44 

LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[YOLo 10 

refpondit qu'il ne Ie pouuoit [29] pas faire, & que Ie 
tonnerre qu'ils feignent efire vn oyfeau, auoir peur de 
la Croix qui eftoit deuant la maifon des François, & 
que cefte couleur rouge dont elle eftoit peinte, eftoit 
comme vn feu ardent & flamboyant qui diuifoit les 
nuées en deux, quand elles venoient à paffer par 
defí us. 
Les Capitaines du village ayant entendu ces nou- 
uelles me firent appelIer, & me dirent; Ivlon nepueu, 
voila ce que dit vn tel, que refponds-tu à cela? nous 
fommes perdus, car les bleds ne meuriront point. 
Si au moins nous mourrions par la main & les armes 
de nos ennemis, qui font prefts de venir fondre fur 
nous, encor à la bonne heure, nous ne languirions 
pas, mais fi eftans efchapez de leur fureur, nous tom- 
bons dãs la famine, c'eft aller de mal en pis, qu'en 
penfe-tu? tu ne voudrois pas eftre cause de noftre 
mort? & puis il t'importe autant qu'à nous: nous fe- 
rions d'auis que tu abbatiffe cefte Croix, & que tu la 
cachaffe pour vn temps ou dedans ta Cabane, ou 
bien dans Ie lac, afin que Ie tonnerre & les nuées ne 
la voyent plus, & qu'ils n'en ayent plus de peur, & 
puis apres la moiffon tu la replanteras. A cela ie 
refpondis, Pour moy iamais ie n'abbattray, ny ne ca- 
cheray la Croix [30] où eft mort celuy qui eft la caufe 
de tous nos biens. Pour vous fi vous la voulez a b- 
batre, auifez-y ie ne pourray pas vous en empefcher, 
mais prenez garde qu'en l'abbatant vous n'irritiez 
Dieu, & que vous n'accroiffiez voftre mifere. Croyez- 
vous à cet abufer; il ne fçait ce qu'il dit, il y a plus 
d'vn an que cefte Croix a efté plantée voyez combien 
de fois il a pleu icy du depuis: c' eft vn ignorant de 
dire que Ie tonnerre craint; ce n' eft pas vn animal, 
mais vne exhalaifon feiche & embrafée, qui eftant 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, z6þ 

45 

thunder, which they pretend is a bird, was afraid of 
tbe Cross tbat was in front of tbe Frenchmen's bouse, 
and tbat tbe red color witb wbicb it was painted was 
like a fire burning and flaming, which divided the 
clouds in two wben tbey passed above it. 3 
The Captains of the village, having heard these 
stories, sent for me and said, " 
1:y nephew, bere is 
wbat so-and-so says; wbat dost thou answer to it? 
Weare ruined, for the corn will not ripen. If at 
least we should die by tbe bands and arms of our 
enemies who are ready to burst upon us, well and 
good,- we should not at any rate pine away; but if, 
baving escaped from tbeir fury, we are exposed to 
famine, that would be to go from bad to worse. 
\Vhat dost tbou think of it? Thou dost not wisb to 
be tbe cause of our death? besides, it is of as mucb 
im portance to thee as to us. Weare of the opinion 
tbat tbou sbouldst take down tbat Cross, and bide it 
awhile in thy Cabin, or even in the lake, so that the 
tbunder and the clouds may not see it, and no longer 
fear it; and then after tbe barvest tbou mayest set it 
up again." To this I answered, " As for me, I sball 
never take down nor bide the Cross [3 0 ] where 
died he who is tbe cause of all our blessings. For your- 
selves, if you wisb to take it down, consider the mat- 
ter well; I sball not be able to hinder you, but take 
care that, in taking it down, you do not make God 
angry and increase your own misery. Do you be- 
lieve in this deceiver? He does not know what he 
says. Tbis Cross bas been set up for more than a 
year, and you know bow many times tbere bas been 
rain here since. Only an ignorant person would say 
tbat the tbunder is afraid; it is not an animal, it is a 
dry and burning exhalation which, being shut in, 


46 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

enfermée court ça & là pour fortir; & puis que craint 
Ie tonnerre? cefte couleur rouge de la Croix? oftez 
donc auffi vous mefmes toutes ces figures & peintures 
rouges qui font fur vos Cabanes. A cela ils ne fça- 
uoient que me repartir, ils s'entre-regardoient, & di- 
foient, il dit vray, il fe faut bien garder de toucher à 
cefte Croix; & cependant, adiouftoient-ils, TdlOren- 
lzaegnon dit cela. II me vint vne penfée, Puis, difie, 
que TehorcllJzaeg1lon dit que Ie tonnerre apprehende 
cefte couleur de la Croix, fi vous voulez nous la pein- 
drons d'vne autre couleur, de blanc ou de noir, ou en 
quelqu'autre façon; & fi incontinent apres i1 vient à 
plouuoir, vous croirez que Tehorellllaegnð a [3 I] dit 
vray, finon que c'eft vn impofteur. C'eft fort bien 
auifé, dirent-ils, ainfi Ie faut-il faire. On peint done 
la Croix de blanc, mais vn, deux, trois & quatre iours 
fe paffent qu'il ne plouuoit non plus qu'auparauant; 
& cependant tous ceux qui voyoient la Croix fe faf- 
choient contre ce Sorcier, qui auoit efté la caufe de la 
défigurer de la forte: Sur cela i'allay trouuer les An- 
ciens; Et bien a-il pleu dauantage qu'auparauant? 
Eftes vous contens? Ouy, dirent.ils, nous voyõs bien 
que TeJlOrenhaegnon n'eft qu'vn abufeur: mais dis 
nous toy, qu'eft-ce que nous ferons, & nous t'obey 
rons. Alors noftre Seigneur m'infpira de les inftruire 
du myftere de la Croix, & de l'honneur que par tout 
on luy rendoit, & de leur dire que i'eftois d'auis 
qu'ils vinffent tous en corps, hommes & femmes ado- 
rer la Croix, pour reparer l'honneur d'icelle: & d'au- 
tant qu'il s'agifíoit de faire croiftre les bleds, qu'ils 
apportaffent chacun vn plat de bled pour en faire 
offrande à noftre Seigneur, & que ce qu ïls donne- 
roient fuft puis apres diftribué aux pauures du vil- 
lage. L'heure eft dõnée au lendemain; lIs ne l'at- 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, r6þ 

47 

seeks to get out this way and that. And then what 
does the thunder fear? This red color of the Cross? 
Take away then, yourselves, all those red figures and 
paintings that are on your Cabins." To this they 
did not know what to reply; they looked at each 
other and said, " It is true, we must not touch this 
Cross; and yet," added they, "Tehorenhaeglloll says 
so." A thought came to me. "Since," said I, 
"Tehorenhaegnon says that the thunder is afraid of 
this color of the Cross, if you like we will paint it 
another color, white, or black, or any other; and if, 
immediately after, it begins to rain, you will be sure 
TellOrenhaegnoll has [3 I] told the truth; but if not, 
that he is an impostor." "Well said," they replied, 
" we will do that." The Cross was therefore painted 
white, but one, two, three, four days passed without 
any more rain than before; and meanwhile all who 
saw the Cross became angry at the Sorcerer who had 
been the cause of disfiguring it thus. Thereupon I 
went to see the Old 11en. ' , Well, has it rained any 
more than before? Are you satisfied?" "Yes," said 
they, " we see clearly enough that TehorenllaegllOn is 
only a deceiver; but now, do thou tell us what to do, 
and we will obey thee." Then our Lord inspired 
me to instruct them in the mystery of the Cross, and 
speak to them of the honor that was everywhere ren- 
dered to it; and to tell them that it was my opinion 
that they should all come in a body, men and wom- 
en, to adore the Cross in order to restore its honor; 
and, inasmuch as it was a matter of causing the crops 
to grow, they should each bring a dish of corn to 
make an offering to our Lord, and that what they 
gave should afterwards be distributed to the poor of 
the village. The hour is appointed for the morrow; 


48 

LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[V OL. 10 

tendent pas, mais la preuiennent: nous entourons la 
Croix repeinte de fes premiers couleurs, [32] fur la- 
queUe i'auois mis vn Crucifix; Nous faifons quelque 
priere, puis i'adoray & baifay la Croix pour leur 
monftrer comme ils deuoient faire, ils me fuiuirent 
les vns apres les autres apoftrophants noftre Sei- 
gneur crucifié par des prieres que la Rhetorique na- 
tureUe, & la neceffité du temps leur fuggeroit. Certes 
leur feruente fimplicité me donnoit de la deuotion; 
bref ils firent fi bien que dés la mefme iournée Dieu 
leur donna de la pluye, & enfin vne tres-heureufe re- 
colte, auec vne tres-grande admiration de la Puiffance 
diuine. 
Pour conc1ufion de ces deux hiftoires, ie diray que 
ces Peuples font grands admirateurs, & font eftat des 
perfonnes qui ont quelque chofe de releué par deffus 
Ie commun; à cefie occafion ils les appellent, oki du 
mefme nom qu'ils donnent aux demõs: Partant s'il y 
auoit icy quelqu'vn doüé du don de miracles, ainfi 
qu'eftoient les premiers qui ont annoncé l'Euangile 
au monde, i1 conuertiroit à mon aduis fans difficulté, 
tous ces Barbares; mais Dieu depart telles faueurs, 
quand, à qui, & comment illuy plaift, & parauanture 
veut-il que nous attêdions la recolte des ames auec 
patience & perfeuerance. Auffi certes ne fe portent- 
ils [33] encore à leur deuoir que par vn refpect tem- 
porel, fur lequel on pourroit bien leur faire ce re- 
proche de l' Euangile; A mcn, amcn dico 1-'obis, quæritis 
me, non quia vidißis figna, .fed qu'ia manducajlis ex pani- 
bus, & .faturati ejHs. 
N ous auons eu cefte année deux alarmes, dont en- 
fin, Dieu mercy, il ne nous eft refté que la peur; ç' a 
efté fur l'apprehenfion des ennemis. La premiere, 
qui auoit quelque apparence, fut l'Efté paffé, & dura 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELATION, .1636 

49 

they do not wait for it, they anticipate it. We sur- 
round the Cross, painted anew in its first colors, [32] 
upon which I had placed the body of our Lord cruci- 
fied; we recite some prayers; and then I adored and 
kissed the Cross, to show them how they ought to do 
it. They imitated me one after the other, apostro- 
phizing our crucified Savior in prayers which natural 
Rhetoric and the exigency of the time suggested to 
them. In truth, their fervent simplicity inspired me 
with devotion; briefly, they did so well that on the 
same day God gave them rain, and in the end a 
plentiful harvest, as well as a profound admiration 
for the divine Power. 
In concluding these two accounts, I shall say that 
these Peoples admire and esteem highly those persons 
who have anything that elevates them above the 
crowd. Such persons they call okz", the same name 
as they give to demons; consequently, if there were 
anyone here endowed with the gift of miracles, as 
were those who first announced the Gospel to the 
world, he would, in my opinion, convert all these 
Barbarians without difficulty. But God dispenses 
such favors when, how, and to whom he pleases; 
and perhaps he wishes us to wait for the harvest of 
souls with patience and perseverance. Besides, cer- 
tainly, they are inclined [33] as yet to their duty 
only by temporal considerations, so that we may well 
apply to them the reproach of the Gospel: Amen, 
amen dico vobÙ, quærz'/zs me, non quia vidÙtÙ siglla, sed 
quia manducastis ex panibus, et sat2trati estis. 
We have had this year two alarms, which resulted, 
thank God, in nothing worse than the fear aroused 
by the apprehension of enemies. The first, for 
which there were some grounds, occurred last Sum- 


50 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

tout Ie mois de Iuin; c'eft vn des temps des plus 
propres à íemblables eípouuantes, d'autant que pour 
lors Ie Pays eft deínué des hommes, qui vont en 
traitte qui d'vn cofté, qui d'vn autre. L'autre a efté 
cet Hyuer, & s'eft trouuée fauffe; en l'vne & en 
l'autre on la nous donnoit bien verte affez íouuent, 
tant de iour que de nuict; les femmes & les enfans 
commençoient à plier bagage fur Ie rapport des cri- 
eurs; ce íont icy nos eípions. La fuite eft aucune- 
ment tolerable en Efté, car on íe peut échaper en 
quelque IDe, ou cacher dans l'obíurité de quelque 
épaiffe foreft; mais en Hyuer quand les glaces fer- 
uent de pont pour aller fureter les IDes, & que la 
cheute des fueilles a éc1aircy les forefts, vous ne íçau- 
riez [34] où vous retirer, puis on deícouure inconti- 
nent les vestiges fur la neige; ioinct qu'il fait bien 
froid en Hyuer pour coucher long temps à l'eníeigne 
de la Lune. II y a quelques villages affez bien forti- 
fiez, où on pourroit demeurer, & attendre le fiege & 
l'affaut, ceux qui peuuent s'y retirent, les autres ga- 
gnent au pied, ce qui eft le plus ordinaire; car Ie 
petit nombre d'hommes, Ie manquement d'armes, Ie 
grand nombre d'ennemis, leur font redouter la foi- 
bleffe de leurs forts, il n'y a que les vieilles gens qui 
pour ne pouuoir aller attendent de pied quoy la mort 
dans leurs Cabanes. Voilà où nous en íommes d'or- 
dinaire. Cet Hyuer nous fuímes íur Ie poinct de 
fuyr, mais où cacher nos petites commoditez? car les 
Hurons en íont auffi frians que les Iroquois. D'ail- 
leurs neantmoins ces efpouuantes n'ont pas efté inu- 
tiles; car outre les prieres & les væux que nous auons 
faits pour deftourner les fleaux; outre Ie íoin que 
chacun apportoit pour íe difpofer à la mort, ou à l'eí- 
clauage, & outre que de là nous prenions occafion 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELATION. .163 6 

51 

mer and lasted the whole month of June. It is one 
of the most fitting times for such fear, inasmuch as 
then the Country is stripped of the men, who have 
gone trading, some one way, some another. The 
other was this Winter, and turned out to be false; in 
both cases the alarm was quite often given very un- 
expectedly, sometimes by day, sometimes by night; 
the women and children began packing up their bag- 
gage on the report of the criers, who are our spies 
here. Flight is to some extent tolerable in Summer, 
for one can escape to an Island or hide in the obscu- 
rity of some dense forest; but in Winter, when ice 
serves as a bridge to enable the enemy to search the 
Islands, and when the fall of the leaves has laid bare 
the forest recesses, you do not know [34] where to 
hide; besides, the tracks on the snow are immedi- 
ately discovered; and it is, moreover, extremely cold 
in Winter to sleep long at the sign of the Moon. 
There are some villages tolerably well fortified, 
where one might remain and await siege and assault; 
those who can, withdraw there; the others take to 
flight, which is most commonly done; for the small 
number of men, the lack of arms, the multitude of 
enemies, cause them to dread the weakness of their 
forts. Only a few old people, who are not able to go 
away, quietly await death in their Cabins. That is 
our usual condition. This Winter, we were on the 
point of fleeing; but where could we conceal our few 
belongings? for the Hurons are as fond of them as 
are the Iroquois. In other ways, however, these fears 
have not been useless, for besides the prayers and 
vows we made to turn aside the scourge, the pains 
each one took to prepare himself for death or slav- 
ery, and the opportunity we had to impress upon the 


52 

LES RELATIOiVS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

d'inftruire les Sauuages du fecours qu'ils doiuent 
attendre de Dieu; nous-nous fommes rendus ay- 
mables, recommandables, & vtiles à tout Ie [35] Pays, 
tant en leur donnant des fers de fleches, comme en 
nous difpoíant de les aller fecourir dans leurs forts 
felon noftre pouuoir. En effect nous auions quatre 
de nos François munis de bonnes arquebufes, qui 
eftoient tous prefts de courir au premier village où 
íe fust donné l'affaut, & moy i'eftois refolu de les 
aller accompagner pour les affifter fpirituellement, & 
pour prendre les autres occafions qui fe fuffent pre- 
fentées d'auancer la gloire de Dieu. De là ie vous 
laiffe à pen fer fi nous auons befoin du íecours d'en- 
haut, & que ceux qui viuent en repos & en affeurance, 
Ie nous obtiennent par leurs prieres; c'eft ce que nous 
leur demandons humblement. 
Les Hurons nous font demeurez fort affectionnez 
de la promptitude que nous leur auons monftrée à 
les affifter. Nous leur auons dit auffi que d'orefna- 
uant ils fiffent leurs forts quarrez, & tiraffent leurs 
pieux en ligne droicte, & qu'au moyen de quatre pe- 
tites tourelles aux quatre coings, quatre François 
pourroient facilement auec leurs arquebuíes ou mouf- 
quets conferuer & defendre tout vn village. lIs ont 
fort goufté cet aduis, & ont defia commencé à Ie prac- 
tiquer à la Rochelle, où il[s] fouhaittent [36] paffionné- 
ment auoir des noftres. Dieu fe fert de tout pour 
donner entrée aux porteurs de l'Euangile. 
L'Efté eft icy vne íaiíon fort incommode pour in- 
ftruire les Sauuages; les traittes & les champs em- 
menent tout hommes, femmes & enfans, il ne de- 
meure quafi perfonne dans les villages; voicy comme 
nous paffafmes Ie dernier. 
En premier lieu nous-nous recueillifmes tous par 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELATION, r636 

53 

Savages the help they might expect from God,-we 
were able to win for ourselves the regard and esteem 
of the People, and to make ourselves useful to them, 
[35] as well by giving them iron arrow-heads as by 
arranging to assist them in their forts, according to 
our power. In fact, we had four of our Frenchmen 
furnished with good arquebuses, who were ready to 
hasten to the first village where an attack should be 
made; and I had resolved to accompany them, to as- 
sist them in spiritual matters and to take advantage 
of any other occasions which might present them- 
selves to advance the glory of God. From this I 
leave you to imagine whether or not we need help 
from on high; and may those who live in comfort 
and safety obtain it for us by their prayers, which 
we humbly ask from them. 
The Hurons have remained very friendly to us, 
on account of the promptitude we showed in assist- 
ing them. We have told them also that henceforth 
they should make their forts square, and arrange 
their stakes in straight lines; and that, by means of 
four little towers at the four corners, four French- 
men might easily with their arquebuses or muskets 
defend a whole village. They are greatly delighted 
with this advice, and have already begun to practice 
it at la Rochelle, where they eagerly desire [36] to 
have some of our Fathers. God employs all means 
to give an entrance to those who bear the Gospel. 
Summer here is a very inconvenient season for in- 
structing the Savages. Their trading expeditions 
and the farms take everyone away, men, women, 
and children -almost no one remains in the vil- 
lages. I will tell you how we spent last Summer. 
In the first place, we all came together for the 


54 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

les exercices fpirituels à la façon de nofire Compa- 
gnie. Nous en auons d'autant plus befoin, que 
l'excellence de nos fonctions requiert plus d'vnion 
auec Dieu; & que nous fommes contraints de viure 
continuellement dans le tracas; c'eft ce qui nous fait 
íouuent recognoiftre qu'il faut que ceux qui viennent 
icy y apportent vn bon fonds de vertu, s'ils veulêt y 
en cueillir les fruicts. Apres nos exercices nous fif- 
mes vn memorial confus des mots que nous auions 
remarquez depuis noftre arriuée, & puis nous efbau- 
chafmes vn Dictiõnaire de la langue des Hurons, qui 
íera tres-profitable. On y verra les diuerfes fignifi- 
cations, on y recognoiftra ayfément la difference des 
mots par eníemble, qui ne confifte quelquesfois qu'en 
vne íeule lettre, ou mefme [37] en vn accent. Finale- 
ment nous-nous occupaímes à reformer, ou plutoft à 
ranger vne Grammaire. Ie crains qu'il ne nous faille 
faire fouuent de íemblables reformes, car tous les 
iours nous allons deícourans de nouueaux íecrets en 
cefie fcience; ce qui nous empeíche d'enuoyer rien à 
imprimer pour Ie prefent. Nous en fçauons, graces à 
Dieu, tantoft fuffifamment, tant pour entendre que 
pour eftre entendus, mais non encor pour mettre au 
iour. C'eft à la verité vne chofe bien laborieufe de 
vouloir comprendre de tous poincts vne langue eftran- 
gere, tres-abondante, & autant differente de nos 
langues Europeanes qu' eft Ie Ciel de la terre, & ce 
fans maiftre & fans liures. Ie n'en dis pas dauan- 
tage, parce que i'en fais vn Chapitre plus bas. Nous 
y trauaillons tous auec ferueur; c'eft vne de nos plus 
ordinaires occupations, i1 n'y en a point qui ne iar- 
gonne defia, & ne fe faffe entendre, les Peres nou- 
uellement venus auffi bien que les anciens; i'efpere 
en particulier que Ie P. :Mercier y fera bientoft maiftre. 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I636 

55 

spiritual exercises, as is the custom of our Society. 
We had the more need of these exercises, as the 
high duties we are called upon to perform need more 
union with God, and because we are compelled to 
live in a continual bustle. For this reason we often 
acknowledge that those who come here should bring 
a good reserve fund of virtue, if they wish here to 
gather the fruits thereof. After our exercises we 
made a confused memorandum of the words we had 
learned since our arrival, and then we outlined a 
Dictionary of the Huron language which will be very 
profitable. In it will be seen the various meanings; 
one will easily recognize in it, when the words are 
grouped, their differences, which consist sometimes 
in only a single letter, or even [37J in an accent. 
Finally we busied ourselves in revising, or rather 
in arranging, a Grammar. I fear we shall often have 
to make similar revisions; for every day we discover 
new secrets in this science, which for the present 
hinders us from sending anything to be printed. 
We know now, thank God, sufficient to understand 
and to be understood, but not yet to publish. It is 
indeed an exceedingly laborious task to endeavor to 
understand in all points a foreign tongue, veryabun- 
dant, and as different from our European languages 
as Heaven is from earth,- and that without master 
or books. I say no more about it here, as I shall 
write a Chapter about it, further on. We all work 
at it diligently; it is one of our most common occu- 
pations. There is not one of us who does not al- 
read y talk a jargon, and make himself understood, 
the newly-arrived Fathers as well as the others. I 
trust that Father Mercier, in particular, will soon be 
master of it. 


56 

LES RELATIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

Le neufiefme d'Aouft arriua de Kébec vn de nos 
hommes, deux mois & douze iours apres fon embar- 
quement d'icy, Dieu [38] fçait auec quel contente- 
ment nous l'écoutafmes fur l'eftat de tous les Fran- 
çois de Kébec, & des trois Riuieres, que Ie bruit nous 
auoit dépeints comme tous morts de la contagion. 
N ous fufmes auffi tres-aifes d' entendre l'heureufe ar- 
riuée des cinq vaiffeaux de Meffieurs de la Compa- 
gnie, commandez par Monfie[u]r Ie General du Pleffis 
Bochart, qu'on nous faifoit croire s'eftre perdus dans 
les glaces. N oftre ioye fut vn peu rabatuë par la 
crainte qu' on auoit qu'il ne fuft arriué quelque acci- 
dent au Capitaine Bontan; mais on nous a releuez de 
cefte apprehenfion. 
Le treiziefme du mois d'Aoufi le P. Mercier arriua, 
& le P. Pijart le dix-fept, Ie P. Mercier s'eftant tres-bien 
porté depuis la France, fut faifi d'vne petite fiéure vn 
iour ou deux auant fon arriuée aux Hurons, mais dés 
Ie lendemain qu'il fut arriué, il en fut quitte pour vne 
legere émotion, qui fut fuiuie d'vne parfaite fanté. 
C'eft vne benediction du Ciel, ce femble, que ce nous 
eft affez d'eftre aux Hurons pour nous bien porter. Au 
refte tous les Peres ont efté fort doucement conduits, 
ils n' ont ny ramé, ny porté, finon leurs petites hardes; 
mais plutofi ont efté honorez, & portez [39] eux- 
mefmes aux endroits fafcheux & difficiles: & partant 
qu'aucun n'apprehende les difficultez qu'il y a à mon- 
ter icy, pour auoir leu nofire Relation de l'an paffé; 
les commencemens font toufiours difficiles, & puis les 
caufes de nos peines eftoient extraordinaires; & en fin 
ie croy que mes pechez qui demandoient cela pour 
may, redonderent encor fur les autres; mais plaife à 
Dieu que nous ayons épuifé Ie calice des amertumes 
iufques à la derniere goutte; quay que nul ne deuroit 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, .1636 

57 

On the ninth of August, one of our men arrived 
from Kébec two months and twelve days after de- 
parting hence. God [38J knows how glad we were 
to hear of the state of all the French at Kébec and 
the three Rivers, who report had declared were all 
dead of the plague. We were also very glad to hear 
of the happy arrival of five ships of the Gentlemen 
of the Company, commanded by Monsieur the General 
du Plessis Bochart, which we had been informed were 
lost in the ice. Our joy was somewhat lessened by 
the fear they had that some accident had befallen 
Captain Bontan; but we have been relieved of this 
apprehension. 
On the thirteenth of the month of August, Father 
Mercier arrived, and Father Pijart on the seven- 
teenth. Father :Mercier, who had had good health 
all the way from France, was seized with a slight 
fever a day or two before his arrival among the Hu- 
rons; but the day after his arrival he was free from 
it, except for a slight disturbance, which was fol- 
lowed by perfect health. It is a blessing from-Heav- 
en, it seems, that as soon as we are in the Huron 
country we should have good health. For the rest, 
all the Fathers have been well treated on the way. 
They have neither paddled, nor carried burdens, ex- 
cept their little supply of clothing: but, on the con- 
trary, have been honored and have been themselves 
carried [39J over troublesome and difficult places. 
Consequently let no one fear difficulties in coming 
up here, from having read my Relation of last year. 
Beginnings are always hard, and then the causes of 
our troubles were extraordinary; and, moreover, I 
believe that my sins, which required that I should 
suffer these things, fell also upon the others; but, 


58 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

perdre courage quand les trauaux feroient toufiours 
égaux, noftre Seigneur en a bien enduré dauantage 
pour Ie falut des ames. Noftre petit bagage nous a 
efté auffi apporté tres-fidelement, & affez bien confer- 
ué; vous ne íçauriez croire Ie bien qu' ont fait les 
pois, Ie pain, & Ie íagamité que vous diftribuaftes 
l'an paffé à nos Hurons, & le bon vifage que vous 
leur monftrâtes. Ce bon traictement vous a gagné, 
& nous auffi, leurs cæurs; nous n'allons en aucun 
lieu qu' on ne nous diíe, que nos Freres de Kébec 
font tres courtois & tres liberaux: Toutes choíes 
nous difpofent ces Peuples à receuoir la femence de 
l'Euangile, car l'affectiõ qu'ils nous portent leur rend 
croyable ce que nous leur difons. 
[4 0 J Sur l'Ec1ypfe de Lune du vingt-feptiefme 
d' Aouft, nos Barbares s' attendoient à vne grande dé- 
faite des leurs parce qu'elle parut fur Ie Pays enne- 
my, qui eft à leur égard au Su-eft; car fi elle paroift en 
Orient c'eft à leur cõpte que la Lune eft malade, ou 
qu' elle a receu quelque defplaifir; iufques à nous inui- 
ter, ie ne fçay fi c'efioit en riant, de tirer contre Ie Ciel, 
pour la deliurer du danger, nous affeurans que c'eftoit 
leur couftume d'y décocher plufieurs fleches à cet 
effect. 11 eft vray qu'ils crient tous tant qu'ils peu- 
uent en ces occafions, & font des imprecations à leurs 
ennemis, difans, que telle & telle Nation periffe. 
I'eftois pour lors en vn autre village, où demeuroit 
ce fameux Sorcier, dont i'ay defia parlé, Tehorenhae- 
gnon: il fit feftin, ce dit-on, pour deftourner les mal- 
heurs de cefte Ec1ypfe. 
Le vingtieíme Octobre mourut dans íon infidelité 
vn vieillard de noftre village, dont la fin eftonna plu- 
!leurs, & leur laiffa de bons defirs de fe conuertir; il 
femble que noftre Seigneur luy auoit communiqué 


1636] 

LE /EUNE'S RELATION, I636 

59 

please God, we have drunk the cup of bitterness to 
its dregs. Yet no one should lose courage, even if 
our labors were always equally hard; for truly our 
Lord has endured more for the salvation of souls. 
Our scanty baggage was also faithfully brought, and 
in fairly good condition. You would scarcely be- 
lieve the good done last year by the distribution you 
made to our Hurons of peas, bread, and sagamité, 
and by the kindly attentions you showed them. 
That good treatment has won their hearts for you 
and for us also. We do not go anywhere without 
hearing that our Brothers at Kébec are very cour- 
teous and liberal. Everything is leading these Peo- 
ples to receive the seed of the Gospel, for the 
affection they have for us renders them disposed to 
believe what we tell them. 
[40] On the Eclipse of the Moon, of August twen- 
ty-seventh, our Barbarians expected a great defeat of 
their men, because it appeared over their enemies' 
Country, which is on their Southeast; for if it ap- 
pears in the East, it is on their account that the Moon 
is sick, or has experienced some displeasure; they 
even invited us, perhaps in jest, to shoot at the Sky, 
to deliver it from danger, assuring us that it was 
their custom to discharge several arrows for this pur- 
pose. Indeed, they all cry out as loudly as they can 
on such occasions, and make imprecations against 
their enemies, saying, " May such and such a Na- 
tion perish." I was at that time in another village, 
where was living the famous Sorcerer of whom I 
have already spoken, TellOrenhaegnon; he made a 
feast, I was told, to turn aside the unluckiness of this 
Eclipse. 
On the twentieth of October, an old man of our vil- 


60 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

depuis vn an plufieurs bons mouuements, il affiítoit 
volontiers à toutes nos Affemblées, efcoutant nos in- 
ftructions; c'eftoit Ie premier à faire Ie figne de la 
Croix: [41] mais apres il tafchoit d'accorder noftre 
creance auec leurs fuperftitions & refueries, & difoit 
qu'i1 vouloit aller auec fes Anceftres. Quelque fonge 
fembloit l'auoir difpofé au bie; mais comme il aymoit 
à faire bonne chere, & à dire Ie mot, Dieu Ie chaftia. 
Eftant malade pour la derniere fois, il fit fon Atha- 
taioll, ou feftin d'adieu, en vne grande Affemblée, où 
i1 fe traicta des mieux à leur façon; renouuellant ces 
careffes à chaque fyncope qui luy furuenoit. Nous 
l'allafmes voir, & ce fut à nous inuiter d'autant, nous 
menaçant que fi nous ne luy faifions raifon de chanter 
à noftre mode, il renuerferoit tout apres fa mort dans 
noftre Cabane, & mefme l'emporteroit. Vn iour i1 
nous demãda Ie Baptefme, mais comme il sebloit fe 
remettre, nous-nous défiafmes de fon humeur. Sur 
Ie foir y eftans retournez il dormoit. A peine eftions 
nous hors de fa Cabane qu'i1 expira, & Dieu ne per- 
mit pas que ce qu'il auoit mefprifé pendant la vie, luy 
fuft accordé à la mort. Iudicia Dei abyJJus 1Ilulta. 
Le vingtiefme de Septembre Ie pere de Louys de 
faincte Foy nous vint vifiter en noftre Cabane, & nous 
dire la volonté qu'il auoit luy & toute fa famille de fe 
faire baptifer, [42] pouffé à cela, difoit-il, entre autres 
motifs, parce que en leur défaite par les Iroquois Dieu 
luy auoit conferué extraordinairement la vie. 
Le quatriefme de Nouembre nous partifmes pour 
aller inftruire cefte maifon, & confiderer plus exacte- 
ment la difpofition qu'ils auoient à la Foy. En che- 
min nous baptifafmes deux malades, que nous croy- 
ons eftre maintenant dans Ie Ciel; nous demeurafmes 
fept iours en noftre voyage, pendant lequel nous in- 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I6.J6 

61 

lage died in his unbelief; his end frightened some, 
and awakened in them good resolutions to become 
converted. It seems that our Lord had communi- 
cated to him, a year ago, several good impulses. He 
was willingly present at all our Assemblies, listening 
to our instructions; he was the first to make the sign 
of the Cross; [4 I] but afterwards he tried to blend 
our creed with their superstitions and nonsense, and 
said that he wished to go with his Ancestors. Some 
dream seemed to have inclined him to good; but as 
he liked to live well, and to have his say, God pun- 
ished him. Being sick for the last time, he made 
his Athataion or farewell feast, in a large Assembly, 
where he partook of the best, after their fashion, re- 
newing his indulgences after each syncope which 
came upon him. We went to see him, and he again 
sought our good offices,- threatening that, if we did 
not satisfy him by singing in our way, he would over- 
turn everything in our Cabin after his death, and 
even carry it away. One day he asked us for Bap- 
tism; but, as he seemed to be recovering, we dis- 
trusted his mood. When we returned in the even- 
ing, he was sleeping. Scarcely were we outside his 
Cabin, when he expired; and God did not permit 
that what he had scorned during life should be 
granted him at death. Judicia Dei abyssus multa. 
On the twentieth of September, the father of Louys 
de saincte Foy came to visit us in our Cabin, and told 
us of his desire that he and all his family should be 
baptized,- [42] urged, he said, among other motives, 
by the fact that, in their defeat by the Iroquois, God 
had extraordinarily preserved his life. 
On the fourth of November, we set out to instruct 
this household, and to consider more exactly their 


62 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

Hruififmes toute cefie famiUe de tous les poincts im- 
portans de la Religion Chrefiienne. Louys nous 
feruoit en cela de truchement, lequel poffede fort 
bien nos myfieres, & les explique auec affection. 
Tous approuuoient & goufioient gran dement les veri- 
tez Chrefiiennes, & tant s'en faut qu'ils iugeaffent 
aucun des commandemens de Dieu difficiles, que 
mefmes ils les trouuoient faciles. La continence con- 
iugale, & l'indiffolubilité du mariage, leur fembloit 
deuoir plus empefcher le progrez de l'Euangile, & en 
effect ce nous fera entre autres vne pierre d'achop- 
pement. Cependant ils difoient qu'eu égard à vne 
vie eternellement heureufe, ou eterneUement malheu- 
reufe, rien [43] ne deuoit fembler difficile. Et puis, 
difoit Ie pere de Louys, fi vous difiez qu'il fallufi: 
paffer les deux, les trois, & plufieurs iours fans man- 
ger, on y pourroit trouuer de la peine; mais en tout 
Ie refie il n'y en a point. II difoit que les François 
qui auoient efié icy, ne leur auoient iamais par1é de 
Dieu, ains s'efioient eux-mefmes adonnez comme eux 
à courir & folaftrer auec les femmes. Au refie il di- 
foit au P. Pijart qui eftoit auec moy, qu'il apprift 
promptement la langue, afin d'aUer demeurer à leur 
village, & y efire Ie Superieur d'vne maifon. 
En cefie vifite ie remarquay deux ou trois chafes. 
Le pere de Louys entendant qu'il faUoit apprendre le 
figne de la Croix, Ie Pater, l' Ave, & Ie Symbole des 
Apoftres, dit que tout cela eftoit peu, & qu'il n'auroit 
gueres d'efprit s'il ne pouuoit l'apprendre; qu'eftant 
allé en diuerfes NatioE.s on luy auoit commis quel- 
quesfois plus de vingt fortes d'affaires, & qu'au retour 
il les auoit to utes rapportées tres-fidelement, & par- 
tant qu'il auroit bien-toft appris & retenu ce peu que 
nous luy impofions; cependant ce bel efprit trauaiUa 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I636 

63 

disposition towards the Faith. On the way we bap- 
tized two sick persons whom we believe to be now in 
Heaven. We remained away seven days, during 
which we instructed the whole family in all the im- 
portant points of the Christian Religion. Louys 
served us in this as interpreter, as he is well ac- 
quainted with our mysteries, and explains them with 
enthusiasm. They all approved and enjoyed greatly 
the Christian truths; and, far from judging any of 
the commandments of God difficult, they even found 
them easy. Conjugal continence, and the indissolu- 
bility of marriage, seemed to them the most serious 
obstacles in the progress of the Gospel; and indeed 
this will be, among other things, a stumbling-block. 
However, they said that, in view of a life of eternal 
happiness or of eternal misery, nothing [43] ought 
to seem difficult. "And then," said Louys's father, 
" if you said that we must pass two, three, or more days 
without eating, we might find that a hardship; but 
there is none in all the- rest." He said that the 
French who had been here had never spoken to them 
of God, but had been as much addicted as they to 
run after and dally with the women. Moreover he 
urged Father Pijart, who was with me, to learn the 
language quickly, that he might settle in their vil- 
lage, and be there the Superior of a house. 
On this visit I noticed two or three things. Louys's 
father, hearing that it was necessary to learn the 
sign of the Cross, the Pater, the Ave, and the Apos- 
tles' Creed, said that all that was a small matter, and 
that he would have little intelligence if he could not 
learn it; that, having gone to various Nations, he 
had sometimes been entrusted with more than twenty 
different kinds of business, and that on his return he 


64 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

fort à apprendre Ie figne de la Croix. C'eft merueille 
combien les hommes font prompts [44] & éueillez 
aux affaires du monde, eftans hebetez en celles de 
Dieu. 
I'eus du plaifir à oüir Louys expliquant nos 

I yfieres à fes parens, ille faifoit auec grace, & mon- 
firoit qu'i1les comprenoit & poíIedoit tres-bien; Ah 
que ie fouhaitterois parler en Huron auffi bien que 
luy, car il eft vray qu'en comparaifon ie ne fais que 
begayer, & cependant la façon de dire donne toute 
vne autre face. Comme i'eus mis en auant l'embrafe- 
ment des cinq villes abominables, & la preferuation 
de Loth & de fa familIe, pour monftrer comme Dieu 
chaftie feuerement dés cefte vie les mefchans & les 
vilains, & comme i1 fauue les bons, Louys en tira 
cefte confequence pour fes parents, que s'ils feruoient 
fidelement Dieu, leur Cabane ne bruleroit pas, quand 
bien tout Ie village feroit embrafé. 
Parauanture trouuera-on ces chofes trop baffes 
pour eftre efcrites; mais quoy? Cùm eram paruulus, 
loquebar vt paruulus, fapieba11l vt paruulus; cùm autem 
factus ero vir, euacuabo quæ erant paruuli. Quand cefte 
Eglife fera creuë, elle produira d'autres fruits, on 
efcrira peut-eftre vn iour les grandes aumofnes, les 
ieufnes, les mortifications, la patiêce admirable, voire 
les martyres des Hurons [45] Chreftiens: Maintenant 
qu'ils ne font encor qu'au berceau, on ne do it attendre 
que des begayemens d'enfans; & partant ie conti- 
nueray dans Ie recit de ces petites chofes, qui feront, 
Dieu aydant, la femence de plus grandes. 
Expofant aux parens de Louys Ie commandement 
de ne point defrober, & difant qu'en France on faifoit 
mourir les larrons, fon pere demanda fi deuenant Capi- 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

65 

had reported them all faithfully; and consequently 
he could very soon learn and remember the little we 
asked. . Yet this intelligent man had to work hard to 
learn the sign of the Cross. It is wonderful how 
prompt [44] and wide awake men are in worldly af- 
fairs, and how dull they are in Spiritual things. 
I took pleasure in hearing Louys explain our Mys- 
teries to his relatives; he did it with grace, and 
showed that he had understood them and made them 
his own. Ah! how I wish I could speak Huron as 
well as he does, for indeed in comparison with him 
I only stutter; and yet the way of saying a thing 
gives it an entirely different meaning. When I 
brought forward the burning of the five wicked cities, 
and the preservation of Lot and his family, to show 
how God chastises severely even in this life the 
wicked and vile, and how he saves the good, Louys 
drew the conclusion from it for his relatives that, if 
they served God faithfully, their Cabin would not be 
burned even if all the village were afire. 
Perhaps some one will think these things too tri- 
fling to be written; but why? Cùm era/n parvulus, 
loquebar ut parvulus, sapieba/n ut parvulus; CÙ/n autem 
factus ero vir, evacuabo quæ erant parvuli. When this 
Church shall attain its growth, it will produce other 
fruits. Some day, perhaps, will be told the great 
alms, the fasts, the mortifications, the admirable pa- 
tience, even the martyrdoms of the Huron [45] Chris- 
tians. N ow that they are yet in their cradle, we 
ought to expect only the stammerings of children; 
and so I shall continue the recital of these little things 
which shall be, with God's aid, the seed of greater. 
In eXplaining to Louys's relatives the commandment 
not to steal, and mentioning that in France thieves 


66 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

taine illes feroit auffi mourir? Et Louys luy repartit, 
que Ie Pays feroit bien toft dépeuplé, car i1 faudroit 
tout tuer; vn Huron & vn larron eftant prefque la 
mefme chofe. Tandis que nous eftions icy nous 
fìfmes obferuer Ie premier Vendredy & Ie premier 
Samedy qui ayt efté iamais obferué par les Hurons. 
Dés Ie Ieudy ils porterent ailleurs le refte de leur 
fagamité, & de leur viande, & Ie Vendredy & Samedy 
ayans efté inuitez au feftin, ils difoient que fi on leur 
donnoit de la viande ils la garderoient pour Ie Di- 
manche; & de fait nous auons veu vne fois en noftre 
village Ie pere de Louys refufer en vn feftin Ie Ven- 
dredy, vn morceau de chair qu'on luy prefentoit, ne 
faifant pas neantmoins de fcrupule de mãger du faga- 
mité où on l'auoit cuit. Ce nouueau [46] profelyte 
n'en fçauoit pas dauantage. Nous les laiffafmes en 
bonne difpofition & bonne volonté, & ce fut tout; Ie 
fruict n' eft pas encor meur. 
Le quinziefme d'Octobre nous allafmes au village 
d' 8enrio vifiter quelques malades, où noftre Seigneur 
nous ayda par Ie moyen d'vne ieune fille de noftre 
village qui s'y trouua, & defabufa fi à propos vne 
pauure femme malade, fur la crain [ d]re qu' elle auoit 
que Ie Baptefme ne luyaduançafi fes iours, qu'elle fe 
rendit enfin, & vne autre auec elle. 
Le premier de Nouembre voyant vne femme groffe 
aux abois de la mort, nous fifmes vn væu à fainct 
Iofeph, au cas qu'elle guerift, & que l' enfant fuft 
baptifé, auffi toft elle commença à fe bien porter, & 
quelque temps apres accoucha d'vne fille, laquelle 
par Ie Baptefme a efté mife au rang des enfans de 
Dieu. 
Le huictiefme de Decembre nous celebrafmes auec 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

67 

were put to death, his father asked him if, when he 
became Captain, he would also put them to death. 
Louys replied that in that case the Country would 
very soon be depopulated, as it would be necessary 
to kill every one,- a Huron and a thief being almost 
the same. "\Vhile we were here, we made them keep 
the first Friday and the first Saturday that had ever 
been observed by the Hurons. From Thursday they 
laid aside the remainder of their sagamité and their 
meat; and on Friday and Saturday, having been in- 
vited to a feast, they said that if meat were given to 
them they would keep it until Sunday; and, indeed, 
once in our village we saw Louys's father refuse, at a 
feast given on Friday, a piece of meat that was offered 
him, but not scrupling to eat some of the sagamité 
with which it had been cooked. This new [46] pros- 
el yte knew no better. We left them kindly disposed 
and well-intentioned, and that was all; the fruit is 
not yet ripe. 
On the fifteenth of October, we went to the village 
of Wen rio, to visit some sick people, in which our 
Lord helped us by means of a young girl of our vil- 
lage who was there, and who so opportunely dis- 
pelled the fear of a poor sick woman that Baptism 
would shorten her life, that she at last gave way, 
and another with her. 
On the first of N ovem ber, seeing a woman with 
child at the point of death, we made a vow to saint 
Joseph that, in case she recovered, the child should 
be baptized. Immediately she began to improve, 
and some time afterward gave birth to a daughter, 
who by Baptism has been brought within the ranks 
of the children of God. 
On the eighth of December, we celebrated with all 


68 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

toute la folemnité poffible, la Fefte de l'immaculée 
Conception de la Vierge, & voüafmes de dire chacun 
vne Meffe tous les mois de l'année en l'honneur de ce 
mefme fainct Myftere, auec les autres particularitez 
que voftre R. nous [47J auoit prefcrites. N ous croy- 
ons que la Bienheureufe Vierge a eu pour agreables 
nos petites deuotions, car dés la mefme iournée nous 
baptifafmes trois petites filles, dont l'vne nommée 
Marie de la Conception eft cefie petite qui eft fi fer- 
uente à apprendre, dont nous auons par1é cy-deffus, 
& deuant la fin du mois nous en eufmes baptifé vingt- 
huict; & du depuis nous y voyons vn notable change- 
ment, fi bien que chaque mois nous en auons toufiours 
gagné bon nombre, en fuite de cefte offrande. 
Le iour de la Purification ayant affem blé taus les 
enfans Chrefiiens parez Ie mieux qu'il fe peût, auec 
leurs parens; nous fifmes en leur prefence la bene- 
diction des cierges, puis ayant expliqué aux grands 
cõme à tel iour noftre Dame auoit offert fon Fils au 
Tell1ple au Pere Eternel, & qu'à fon imitation ils de- 
uoient auffi prefenter leurs enfans au feruice de Dieu, 
& qu'en ce faifant Dieu en prendroit vn foin plus par- 
ticulier, ils en furent tres-contens. C'eft pourquoy 
prenant vn Crucifix en main ie prononçay en leur 
langue cefte Oraifon. 

[48] Sus efcoutez vous 
10 fakhrihote de 

qui auez fait la terre, 
Sondechichiai, 

qui Pere vous appellez, 
efa d'Oiftan ichiatfi, 
qui vous appellez, & vous Efprit 
ichiatfi, dinde de EfKen 

&vous 
dinde de 

& vous 
dinde 
fon Fils 
hoen 

Sainct qui vous appel- 
d' oatatoecti ichiat- 

lez, fus efcoutez carcen'eft paschofe de peu d'importance que 
fi; 10 fakhrihote, onekindé oeron d 'ic
a- 


1636) 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION. I636 

69 

possible solemnity the Festival of the immaculate 
Conception of the Virgin, and each of us vowed to 
say a Mass every month in the year in honor of this 
same holy Mystery, with the other details your Rev- 
erence [47] had laid down for our guidance. We be- 
lieve that the Blessed Virgin has accepted our humble 
devotions; for that very day 
e baptized three little 
girls,-one of whom, named Marie of the Conception, 
is that little girl so eager to learn, of whom we have 
spoken above,-and before the end of the month we 
had baptized twenty-eight; since then, we see a not- 
able change, so much so that every month we have 
gained a goodly number, in consequence of that 
offering. 
On the day of the Purification, having assembled 
all the Christian children, adorned as best they could, 
along with their parents, we performed in their pres- 
ence the benediction of the tapers; then we ex- 
plained to the adults how on such a day our Lady 
had offered her Son in the Temple to the Eternal 
Father; and how, in imitation of her, they ought also 
to present their children to the service of God, and if 
they did so God would take a more particular care of 
them; they were very well pleased with these state- 
ments. Hence, taking a Crucifix in my hand, I pro- 
nounced in their language this Prayer: 

[4 8 ] Come listen you who have made the earth, and you 
10 sakhrihote de Sondechichiai, dinde 
who Father call yourself, and you his Son 
esa d'Oistan ichiatsi, dinde de hoen 
who call yourself, and you Spirit Holy who call yourself; 
ichiatsi, dinde de Esken d' oatatoecti ichiatsi ; 
come listen, for it is not a thing of small importance that 
10 sakhrihote onekindé oeron d'icwa- 


70 

LES RELA TIONS DE'S JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

nous faifons, 
kerha, 
enfans, 
Atichiahà, 

regardez ces 
atifacagnren cha 
defia ce font tes creatures 
onne atifata
an 

affemblez 
ondikhuc
até 

tous; 
á
eti ; 

parce que 
aerhon 

on les a baptifez. 
onatindec
aefti. 

Mais voicy que 
Caati onne 

vne autrefois 

áto 

nous 
efátaan- 

te les prefentons eux tous, nous te les abandonnons tous, 
c
as echa á
eti, á
eti efátonkhiens, 
c'eft ce que penfent ce que voila affem- 
ondayee echa 
enderhay cha 
endikhu- 
blées femmes, elles penfent maiftre 
c
até otindekhien, 
enderhay a
andio 
qu'i1 foit de tous les enfans. Sus donc maintenant 
a
aton e
a tichiaha. 10 ichien nonh
a 

prenez courage gardez-les. defendez-les. Qu'ils 
etfaon hatfacara tai, atfatanonftat. Enon- 
ne deuiennent point malades, qu'i1s ne pechent 
che 
atinonh
aKé, enonché 
atirih
an- 
iamais, deftournez tout ce 
derâké, aonh
entfannenhan, ferre
a e
a 

auffi. Finalement deftourne tout ce 
itondi. oc
etac
i ferre
a e
e 
Iefus noftre Seigneur de Dieu Fils, 
1efus onandaerari Dieu hoen 

qui eft mal; que fi la contagion nous attaque 
d'otechienti, din de ongnratarríé etfefo- 
derechef, deftourne-là auffi; que fi la famine 
nachien, ferre
a itondi; din de onrendich 
[49] nous attaque defiourne-la auffi ; que fi la guer- 
efonachien, ferre
a itondi; din de 
sken- 
re nous affault deftourne la auffi; que fi 
raetac efonachien, ferre
a itondi; din de 
Ie demon nous prouoque, c'eft à dire Ie mauuais demõ, & 
OKi efoniatoata ondayee d'okiafti. chi a 
les rnefchans qui par poifon font mourir, deftourne les 
daononc
aieffa d' oki afaoio, ferre
a 
qui eft de mauuais. 
d' otechienti. 
c'eft ce à quoy tu 
ondayee 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

71 

we do; look upon these assembled 
kerha, atisacagnren cha ondikhucwaté 
children, already these are thy creatures all; because that 
Atichiahà, onne atisatawan áweti; aerhon 
they have been baptized. But lo! again we 
onatindecwaesti. Caati onne wáto esátaan- 

to thee present them 
cwas echa 

all, 
áweti, 

all we give them up to thee, 
áweti esátonkhiens, 

this is what 
ondayee 
bled 
cwaté 
that he is 
awaton 

take courage, 
etsaon 

these 
echa 

think, these 
wenderhay cha 
they think 
wenderhay 

master 
awandio 

assem- 
wendikhu- 

women, 
otindekhien, 
of all the children. 
ewa tichiaha. 

Come, 
10 

then, 
ichien 

now 
nonhwa 
That they 
Enon- 

keep them; 
hatsacaratai, 

defend them. 
atsatanonstat. 

become sick, that they may sin 
watinonhwaké, enonché watirihwan- 
never, turn away all that 
derâké, aonhwentsannenhan, serrewa ewa 
which is evil; and if the plague attack us 
d' otechienti, din de ongnratarríé etseso- 
again, turn away that also; and if famine 
nachien, serrewa itondi; din de onrendich 
[49] attack us, turn away that also; and if war 
esonachien, serrewa itondi; din de ousken- 
assail us, turn away that also; and if 
raetac esonachien, serrewa itondi; din de 
the demon provoke us, that is, the bad demon, and 
oki esoniatoata ondayee d'okiasti. chia 
the wicked ones who through poison cause death, turn them away 
daononcwaiessa d' oki asaoio, serrewa 
also. Finally, turn away all that which is evil. 
itondi. ocwetacwi serrewa ewe d' otechienti. 
Jesus our Lord of God the Son, for this 
Jesus onandaerari Dieu hoen ondayee 

may not 
che 


72 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

exhorteras ton Pere, car il ne te refufe 
achiehetfaron de hiaiftan, oneké tehia- 
point. Et vous auffi Marie de Iefus la Mere qui 
nonftas. chia defa 
arie Iefus ond
e de 

el1es Vierge, 
chiKhonc
an, 
foit-il. 
haya
an. 
Cefte Oraifon entre autres leur aggrea, d'autant 
que nous demandions à Dieu qu'il les preferuaft de 
la contagion, de la famine, & de la guerre; ils n 'y defire- 
rent de plus que ces deux prieres, qu'ils ne fiffent 
point naufrage, & ne fe bruflaffent point: enonclle 

ati
areha, enonche 
atiátaté; cela y efiant ils la iu- 
gerent accomplie. Dieu foit infiniement loüé, & la 
B. Vierge, car nous pouuons dire que de ce iour-là 
nous prifmes poffeffion de cefte petite ieuneffe, qui 
[50] a continué depuis à s'affembler tous les Dimanches 
dans noftre Cabane pour prier Dieu. II eftoit bien 
raifonnable que puis qu'ils auoient commencé à 
naiftre enfans de Dieu Ie iour de l'immaculée Concep- 
tion de cefte faincte Vierge, ils commençaffent auffi 
Ie iour de fa Purification à practiquer Ie deuoir de 
Chreftien, pour Ie continuer Ie refte de leur vie; c'eft 
ce que nous efperons par l'entremife de cefte 11ere 
de mifericorde, qui nous fait affez paroiftre que fans 
doute elle veut eftre la Mere de cefte nouuelle Eglife. 
Le vingt-vniefme de Mars vne femme qui auoit 
efté enuiron vingt-quatre heures en trauail d'enfant, 
accoucha heureufement, auffi toft qu'on luy eut ap- 
pliqué vne Relique de N. B. P. S. Ignace; fon fruict 
ne vefquit qu'autant qu'il fallut pour aller au Ciel 
par Ie Baptefme. 

cela 
ondayee 

auffi 
itondi 

dis. 
chihon. 

Ainfi 
to 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

73 

thou wilt exhort thy Father, for he does not refuse thee 
achiehetsaron de hiaistan, oneké tehia- 
anything. And you also Mary, of Jesus the Mother who 
nonstas. chia desa Warie Jesus ondwe de 
art Virgin, that also say. So 
chikhoncwan, ondayee itondi chihon. to 
be it. 
hayawan. 
This Prayer, among others, pleased them, inas- 
much as we asked God to preserve them from pesti- 
lence, famine, and war. They desired nothing more 
than these two prayers, that they might not be ship- 
wrecked, and might not suffer by fire: enollche wati- 
wareha, eJlollclle watz'átaté/ these being added, they 
thought it complete. God and the Blessed Virgin 
be praised forever; for we can say that, from that 
day, we took possession of these little ones, who [50] 
have continued since then to gather every Sunday in 
our Cabin, to worship God. It was very fitting that, 
since they had become children of God on the day of 
the immaculate Conception of the holy Virgin, they 
should also begin on the day of her Purification to 
practice Christian duty, to continue it the rest of 
their lives. This we hope through the mediation 
of the :Mother of mercy, who has shown us plainly 
that she will be the Mother of this rising Church. 
On the twenty-first of 1vlarch, a woman, who had 
been about twenty-four hours in travail, brought 
forth a child happily, as soon as we had applied to 
her a Relic of Our Blessed Father St. Ignatius. Her 
child lived only long enough to enable us to send it 
to Heaven by Baptism. 
On the twenty-eighth of lVlarch, François Margue- 
rie, who had gone to winter with the Savages of the 


74 

LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

Le vingt-huictiefme de Mars François Marguerie 
qui eftoit allé hyuerner auec les Sauuages de 1'Iíle, 
nous en amena quatre; Ce nous fut vne grande con- 
folation de receuoir des vifites Françoifes en vne telle 
faifon, & d'entendre des nouuelles de Kébec, & des 
trois Riuieres. Nous fufmes auffi furpris d'eftonne- 
ment de voir qu'vn ieune [5 I] homme comme luy 
aagé de vingt à vingt-deux ans, euft Ie courage de 
fuiure les Sauuages fur les glaces, dans les neiges, & 
au trauers des forefts quarante iours continus, & l' ef- 
pace de quelques trois cens lieuës, portant, trainant 
& trauaillant autant & plus que pas vn de fa bande, 
car ces Barbares efians arriuez au gifie luy faifoient 
faire leur chaudiere, tandis qu'ils fe chauffoient & fe 
repofoient; I1 nous fait au refte vne belle leçon, car 
fi pour contenter vn defir de voir, il a tant pris de 
peine, & deuoré tant de difficultez venant en une fai- 
fon fi fafcheufe, & par des chemins fi étranges, cer- 
tainement des perfonnes Religieufes poufIées du 
fainct de fir de gagner des ames à Dieu, ne doiuent 
nullement redouter l'afpreté des chemins, que la com- 
modité des Canots, la faifon plaifante de l' Efté, & la 
compagnie des Sauuages afIez fecourables, rendent 
non feulement beaucoup moindre, mais auffi en quel- 
que façon agreable; outre que Dieu a des confolations 
admirables pour ceux qui le craignent, mais beau- 
coup plus pour ceux qui l' ayment. 
L'occafion de la venuë des Sauuages de 1'Ifle en ce 
pays des Hurons, eftoit la mort [52] de vingt-trois 
perfonnes que les Iroquois auoient mafIacrez nonob- 
fiãt la paix: Cette perfidie leur caufoit vn grand defir 
de fe venger. Ils auoient amafIé quelques vingt-trois 
colliers de Pourcelaine afin de fouíleuer les Hurons 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I636 

7õ 

Island,4 brought four of them to us. It was a great 
consolation to receive visits from Frenchmen at such 
a season and to hear news of Kébec and the three 
Rivers. We were also deeply astonished to see that 
a young [S I] man like him, only twenty to twenty- 
two years old, had the courage to follow the Savages 
over ice and snow, and through forests, forty succes- 
sive days, and for the space of some three hundred 
leagues,-carrying, dragging, and working as much 
as, and more than any of his band, for these Barbari- 
ans, having arrived at their halting place, made him 
get ready their meal, while they warmed themselves 
and rested. Furthermore, he taught us a good les- 
son; for if, to satisfy a wish to see, he took so much 
pains, and endured such hardships in a season so 
rude and over roads so strange,-surely Religious 
persons, urged on by a holy desire to win souls to 
God, ought in no way to dread the roughness of the 
roads which the convenience of Canoes, the pleasant- 
ness of the Summer season, and the company of 
generally helpful Savages, render not only much less 
annoying, but even to some extent agreeable. Be- 
sides, while God has admirable consolations for 
those who fear him, he has much greater ones for 
those who love him. 
The occasion of the coming of these Island Sav- 
ages to the country of the Hurons was the death [52] 
of twenty-three persons whom the Iroquois had mas- 
sacred, notwithstanding the peace. This perfidy had 
excited a strong desire for vengeance. They had 
collected some twenty-three collars of Porcelain, to 
rouse the Hurons and the Algonquins to take up 
arms and lend them assistance, promising that our 
French would be of the party, as against the com- 


76 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

& les Algonquins à prendre les armes, & leur prefier 
main forte, fe promettant que nos François feroient 
de la partie, comme contre vn commun ennemy; Mais 
ny les Hurons ny les Algonquins n'y ont point voulu 
entendre, & ont refufé leurs pre fens ; les Biffiriniens 
n'y ont non plus voulu entendre à caufe des extor- 
tions qu'ils fouffrent defdits Sauuages de l'Ifle en 
defcendant à la traitte; Pour les Hurons, ils ont cou- 
uert leurs refus de l'apprehenfion d'vne armée dont 
on les menaçoit en bref. Mais en effet ç'a efté pour 
ce que la Nation des Ours qui fait la moitié des Hu- 
rons, s'eft piquée de ce que les Sauuages de l'Ifle ne 
les inuitoient point comme les autres, ne leur faifants 
point part de leurs prefens, au contraire defendant 
qu'on ne leur en parlaft. 
Cependant d'vn autre cofté nous apprehendons que 
ce ne foient tous ítratagémes de Satan pour empefcher 
la conuerfion de ces Peuples, car ceux de l'Ifle fe voy- 
ans [53] éconduits s'en font retournez fort mefcontês 
tant des Hurons, que des Biffiriniens, & ont menacé 
qu'ils ne lairroient Ese. laiffoient] paffer ny les vns, 
ny les autres pour aller aux François. 
Le Borgne de l'Ifle difoit aux Hurons en nofire 
prefence, pour recommander Ie fuiet de fon Am- 
baffade, que fon corps eftoit des haches, il vouloit 
dire, que la conferuation de fa perfonne, & de fa Na- 
tion, eítoit la conferuation des haches, des chaudieres, 
& de toute la traitte des François pour les Hurons; 
mefmes on dit, foit vray, foit faux, qu'il s'eft vanté 
qu'il efioit maiftre des François, & qu'il nous remene- 
roit à Kébec, & nous feroit repaffer la mer à tous; ie 
dis qu'on Ie dit, & qu'on luy attribuë ces Todomon- 
tades. car nous ne les auons pas ouyes, au contraire 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I636 

77 

mon enemy; but neither the Hurons nor the Algon- 
quins have been willing to listen to them, and have 
refused their presents. The Bissiriniens likewise 
have refused to listen to them, on account of the ex- 
tortion practiced on them by the Island Savages in 
going down for trade. As to the Hurons, they have 
covered their refusal with the apprehension they 
have of an army with which they were lately threat- 
ened. But the real cause was in fact th
t the Nation 
of the Bear, which constitutes the half of the Hu- 
rons, was piqued because the Island Savages did not 
invite them as well as the others,- offering them no 
presents, and on the contrary forbidding that they 
should be told of the matter. 
Meanwhile, on the other hand, we are afraid that 
these are all stratagems of Satan to hinder the con- 
version of these Peoples; for the men of the Isle, 
seeing themselves [53] refused, have returned very 
much discontented at the Hurons as well as at the 
Bissiriniens, and have threatened that they would let 
neither of them pass down to the French. 
Le Borgne [the One-eyed] of the Isle said to the 
Hurons, in our presence, in order to recommend the 
subject of his Embassy, that his body was hatchets; 
he meant that the preservation of his person and of 
his Nation was the preservation of the hatchets, the 
kettles, and all the trade of the French, for the H u- 
rons. They even say, whether true or false, that he 
has boasted that he is master of the French, and 
that he would lead us back to Kébec and make us all 
recross the sea. I am telling what is said, and the 
boasts attributed to him, for we did not hear them; on 
the contrary, they went away, so far as we are con- 


78 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[V OL. 10 

ils fe departirent d'auec nous auec toute forte de fatis- 
faction & de contentement. 
lIs nous firent à la verité vn grand difcours comme 
d'amis, qui tendoit, ou à nous faire quitter tout à fait 
le Pays des Hurons, ou au moins la Nation des Ours, 
comme la plus mefchante de toutes, qui auoit maffa- 
cré Efiienne Bruf1é, & Ie bon Pere Nicolas Recolet 
auec fon compagnon; [54J & qui pour vn coup leur 
auoit autrefois affommé huict de leurs hommes; Et 
pour moyen particulier, en me flattant & me loüant, 
ils me dirent, que plutofi que de rifquer ma vie par- 
my vne Nation fi perfide, ils me confeilloient de 
defcendre à Kébec, au moins apres auoir paffé icy 
encor vn an, pour fçauoir parfaictement la langue, 
que ie ferois vn grand Capitaine, & qu'il n'y auroit 
que moy qui parleroit dans les confeils; C'efi ainfi 
que ces braues confeillers nous donnoient des aduis, 
auec plufieurs & long difcours, pour monfirer l'amitié 
qu'ils auoient toufiours portée aux François par deffus 
toutes les Nations. Nous leur refpondifmes que nous 
n' efiiõs pas venus en ces Pays pour feruir de truche- 
ment, ny fous efperance de nous y enrichir, ou de 
deuenir vn iour grands Capitaines; mais que nous 
auions abandonné nos parens, nos moyens, & toutes 
nos poffeffions, & auions trauerfé la mer afin de leur 
venir enfeigner la voye de falut, au peril de nos vies; 
qu' au refte nous tafchions, & que nous tafcherions de 
fi bien nous cõporter, que les autres Nations auroient 
plus de fuiet de nous aymer, que de nous mal-faire. 
Bref nous leur difmes qu'vn iour [55] quelqu'vn des 
noftres pourroit demeurer en leur Pays pour les in- 
firuire, & qu'il y en auroit defia n'efioit leur vie 
errante; Ils tefmoignerent en eftre fort contens, & 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I636 

79 

cerned, with every appearance of satisfaction and 
contentment. 
They had, in fact, a long and friendly talk with 
us, with the object in view of making us entirely 
leave the Country of the Hurons or at least the Na- 
tion of the Bear, as the most wicked of all the tribes, 
since it had murdered Estienne Bruslé and good Fa- 
ther Nicolas, the Recolet, with his companion; [54J 
and had some time before, for a blow, slain eight of 
their men. To me in particular, in the way of flat- 
teryand praise, they said that, rather than risk my 
life among a Nation so perfidious, they would advise 
me to go down to Kébec, at least after having passed 
another year here to learn the language perfectly; 
and that I would be a great Captain, and the only 
one who could speak in their councils. Thus these 
brave counsellors gave us advice, with many and 
long speeches, to show the friendship they had al- 
ways had for the French above all Nations. We re- 
plied that we had not come into this Country to act 
as interpreters, nor in the hope of getting riches, 
nor yet in the hope of becoming one day great Cap- 
tains; but that we had left behind our parents, our 
means, and all our possessions, and had crossed the 
sea in order to come to teach them the way of salva- 
tion, at the peril of our lives; that, for the rest, we 
were trying and would try so to comport ourselves 
that other Nations would have more reason to love 
us than to do us harm. In short, we told them that 
one day [55J some of our Fathers might stay in their 
Country, to instruct them; and that they would have 
had them before this, had it not been for their wan- 
dering life. They declared that they were well 


80 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

acquiefcerent à nos raifons: pour comble defquelles 
nous leur donnafmes vn Canot, auec quelques autres 
petits prefens, dont ils demeurerent tres-fatisfaits, di- 
fans qu'ils eftoient defia de retour en leur Pays, & 
firent mille remerciemens auec forces promeffes de 
bien traitter les noftres quand ils pafferont fur leurs 
terres. N ous tafchons de nous concilier l' amitié de 
tous ces Peuples afin de les conquefier à Dieu. 
La Semaine Saincte Louys de faincte Foy nous vint 
vifiter, & fit fes Pafques auec nous pour fe difpofer à 
aller à la guerre auec vn fien onc1e contre les Iro- 
quois; i1 n'eft pas encor de retour; on nous veut faire 
accroire qu'il eft defcendu à Kébec; ie m'en rap- 
porte. 
Le quatorziefme d' Aurille fils du Capitaine Aenons 
apres auoir perdu au ieu de pai1les vne robe de Caftor, 
& vn collier de quatre cens grains de Pourcelaine, 
eut vne telle apprehenfion de fes parens, que n'ofant 
entrer dans la Cabane, il fe defefpera, & fe pendit à 
vn arbre. C'eftoit vn efprit [56] fort melancholique; 
dés cet Hyuer il auoit efté defia fur Ie point de fe dé- 
faire foy-mefme, mais vne petite fille Ie prit fur Ie 
fait: comme on luy demandoit qui l'auoit porté à cefie 
mefchante refolution, Ie ne fçay, dit-il, mais i1 me 
femble que i'ay quelqu'vn dedans moy qui me dit 
continuellement, pends toy, pends toy. Le ieu ne 
porte iamais à rien de bon; en effet les Sauuages 
mefmes remarquent que c'eft quafi l'vnique caufe des 
batteries & des meurtres. 
Le huictiefme de May, efiant allé à la Rochelle, 
vne femme qui venoit d'accoucher, me prefenta fon 
petit enf
nt à baptifer; comme il íe portoit bien, & 
que noftre couftume eft, finon en cas de neceffité de 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELATION, r636 

81 

content, and acquiesced in our reasons; to confirm 
which, we gave them a Canoe with some other little 
presents, with which they were very well satisfied,- 
saying that they were already on their return to 
their own Country, and uttering a thousand thanks 
and many promises to treat our Fathers well when 
they should pass through their territory. We en- 
deavor to gain for ourselves the friendship of all 
these Peoples, in order to obtain them for God. 
During Holy vVeek, Louys de saincte Foy came to 
visit us, and spent Easter with us in order to prepare 
himself to go to war with his uncle against the Iro- 
quois. He has not yet returned; they try to make 
us believe that he has gone down to Kébec; but I 
have confidence in him. 
On the fourteenth of April, the son of Chief 
Aenons, after having lost at the game of straws 5 a 
Beaver robe and a collar of four hundred Porcelain 
beads, had such a fear of meeting his relatives that, 
not daring to enter the Cabin, he became desperate, 
and hanged himself to a tree. He had a [56] very 
melancholy disposition. The first of the Winter he 
was on the point of putting an end to himself, but a 
little girl caught him in the act. vVhen asked what 
had led him to this wicked resolution, " I do not 
know," said he, " but some one within me seems al- 
ways to be saying, ' Hang thyself, hang thyself.''' 
Gambling never leads to anything good; in fact, the 
Savages themselves remark that it is almost the sole 
cause of assaults and murders. 
On the eighth of May, having gone to la Rochelle, 
a woman who had just given birth to a child pre- 
sented it to me for baptism. As it was well, and as 


82 

LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

ne baptifer que dans noftre Cabane auec les ceremo- 
nies de l'Eglife, pour plus grand refpect de ce Sacre- 
ment; ie fus tout preft de luy dire que ce feroit affez 
qu'elle nous l'apportaft à la premiere commodité: 
neanmoins ie me fenty infpiré de paffer outre; & fans 
doute ce fut vne Prouidence toute particuliere, car 
peu de iours apres fes parens nous vinrent apporter 
la nouuelle de fa mort. 
Le huictiefme de Iuin, Ie Capitaine des Naiz per- 
cez, ou de la Nation du Caftor, [57] qui eft à trois 
iournées de nous, vint nous demander quelqu'vn de 
nos François pour aller auec eux paffer l'Efté dans 
vn fort qu'ils ont fait, pour la crainte qu'ils ant des 
AlJeatfilJaellrrlzonon, c'eft à dire, des gens puants, qui 
ont rompu Ie traicté de paix, & ont tué deux des 
leurs, dont ils ont fait feftin. 
Le neufiefme aborda icy vn Sauuage mort fous les 
glaces. Tout Ie village y accourut, & rendit à fes 
parens les deuoirs accouftumez de fi bonne grace, que 
parmy les prefens mutuels l'intendance des ceremo- 
nies leur fut deferée en cefte occafion, Ie mort s'eftant 
trouué n'eftre point des leurs. 
Le treiziefme du mefme mois nous eufmes nou- 
uelle qu'vne troupe de Hurons qui s'en alloient en 
guerre, & s'eftoient cabanez à la portée d'vn mouf- 
quet du dernier village, à vne iournée de nous, apres 
auoir paffé pres de deux nuicts à chanter & à manger, 
furent furpris d'vn fi profond fommeil, que l'ennemy 
furuenant en fendit la tefte à douze fans refiftance, 
Ie refte fe fauua à la fuite. 
I'euffe pû adioufter icy beaucoup de chofes qui fe 
font paffées cefte année, & dont nous auons efté tef- 
moins oculaires: mais [58J i'ay iugé plus à propos de 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, r6.JÓ 

83 

our custom is, except in case of necessity, to baptize 
only in our Cabin with the ceremonies of the Church, 
in order to cause the Sacrament to be more highly 
respected, I was about to say that she might bring it 
at her first convenience, when I felt inspired to de- 
part from our custom; and no doubt it was a special 
Providence, for, a few days after, its parents brought 
us news of its death. 
On the eighth of June, the Captain of the Naiz 
percez, or Nation of the Beaver,6 [57] which is three 
days journey from us, came to request one of our 
Frenchmen to spend the Summer with them, in a 
fort they had made from fear of the A weatsiwaenrrho- 
non, or stinking tribe, 7 who have broken the treaty 
of peace, and have killed two of their men, of whom 
they made a feast. 
On the ninth, a Savage who lay dead under the ice 
was cast ashore here. The whole village hastened out 
and paid to his relations the accustomed devoirs, with 
so good a grace that the management of the cere- 
monies was given over to the villagers on this occa- 
sion, among mutual presents, although the dead man 
had been found to be not one of their people. 
On the thirteenth of the same month, we had news 
of a troop of Hurons who had gone to war, and who 
were encamped at the distance of a musket-shot from 
the last village, a day's journey from us; after hav- 
ing passed two nights in singing and eating, they 
were overtaken with so profound a sleep, that the 
enemy, coming suddenly upon them, cleft open the 
heads of a dozen without resistance, the rest escaping 
by flight. 
I might have added here many things that have 


84 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

les referuer à la feconde partie de cefte Relation; 
I'efpere que i'éuiteray par ce moyen plus ayfément 
la confufion, & contenteray à mon aduis dauantage 
tous ceux qui font curieux de fçauoir les mæurs & les 
couftumes de ces Peuples. 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, r6.J6 

85 

taken place this year, and of which we have been 
eyewitnesses, but [58] I have thought it best to re- 
serve them for a second part of this Relation. I hope 
in this way more easily to avoid confusion, and to 
satisfy more fully those who are curious to know the 
manners and customs of these Tribes. 


86 

LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

CHAPITRE III. 

ADUERTISSEMENT D'IMPORTANCE POUR CEUX QU'IL 
PLAIRROIT À DIEU D' APPELLER EN LA NOU- 
UELLE FRANCE, & PRINCIP ALEMENT 
AU PAYS DES HURONS. 

N OUS auons appris que le falut de tant d'ames 
innocentes lauées, & blanchies dans Ie Sang 
du Fils de Dieu, touche bien fenfiblemêt le 
cæur de plufieurs, & yallume de nouueaux de firs de 
quitter l'ancienne France, pour fe tranfporter en la 
Nouuelle. Dieu foit beny à iamais qui nous fait pa- 
roiftre par là qu'il a enfin ouuert à ces Peuples les 
entrailles de fon infinie mifericorde. Ie ne fuis pas 
pour refroidir cefte genereufe refolution; helas ce 
font ces [59] cæurs felon Ie cæur de Dieu que nous 
attendons; mais ie defire feulement leur donner vn 
mot d'aduis. 
II eft vray que fortz"s vI mors dz"tectz"o, l'amour de 
Dieu a la force de faire ce que fait la mort, c' eft à 
dire, de nous détacher entierement des creatures & 
de nous mefmes; neantmoins ces defirs que nous fen- 
tons de cooperer au falut des Infideles ne font pas 
toufiours des marques aiIeurées de cet amour épuré; 
il peut yauoir quelquesfois vn peu d'amour propre, 
& de recherche de nous mefme, fi nous regardons 
feulement le. bien & le contentement qu'il y a de 
mettre des ames dans Ie Ciel, fans confiderer meure- 
ment les peines, les trauaux, & les difficultez qui font 
infeparables de ces fonctions ,Euangeliques. 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, r636 

87 

CHAPTER III. 

IMPORTANT ADVICE FOR THOSE WHOM IT SHALL PLEASE 
GOD TO CALL TO NEW FRANCE, AND ESPE- 
CIALLY TO THE COUNTRY OF 
THE HURONS. 

W E have learned that the salvation of so many 
innocent souls, washed and made white in 
the Blood of the Son of God, is stirring 
very deeply the hearts of many, and is exciting new 
desires in them to leave old France that they may 
come to the New. God be forever blessed that he, 
as this shows us, has at last opened to these Tribes 
the bowels of his infinite pity. I wish not to chill 
the ardor of this generous resolution. Alas! it is 
those [59] hearts after God's own heart whom we are 
expecting; but I only wish to give one word of 
advice. 
It is true that fortis ut mors dz"lecÛo, the love of God 
has power to do what death does,-that is to say, to 
detach us entirely from creatures and from our- 
selves; nevertheless, these desires that we feel of 
working for the safety of Infidels are not always sure 
signs of that pure love. There may be sometimes a 
little self-love and regard for ourselves, if we look 
only at the blessing and satisfaction of putting souls 
in Heaven without considering fully the pains, the 
labors and the difficulties which are inseparable from 
these Evangelical functions. 
On this account, in order that no one may be de- 


88 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

Doncques afin que perfonnne ne foit abufé en ce 
point, ojlelldam z"lli quanta Idc oporteat pro nomille Iefu 
patio II eft vray que les deux derniers venus, les 
Peres Mercier & Pijart, n'ont pas eu tant de peine en 
leur voyage, mais en comparaifon de nous qui eftions 
montez l'année precedente; ils n'õt point ramé, leurs 
gens n'ont point efté malades comme les noftres, il 
ne leur a point fallu porter de pefantes charges. Or 
nonobftant [60] cela pour facile que puiffe eftre la 
trauerfée des Sauuages, il y a toufiours afíez dequoy 
abbatre bien fort vn cæur qui ne feroit pas bien mor- 
tifié; la facilité des Sauuages n'accourcit pas Ie che- 
min, n'applanit pas les roches, n'éfloigne pas les dan- 
gers. Soyes auec qui que vous voudrez i1 faut vous 
attendre à eftre trois & quatre femaines par les che- 
mins tout au moins, de n'auoir pour compagnie que 
des perfonnes que vous n'auez iamais veu, d'efire 
dans vn Canot d'efcorce en vne pofture affez incom- 
mode, fans auoir la liberté de vous tourner d'vn cofté 
ou d' autre, en danger cinquante fois Ie iour de verfer, 
ou de brifer fur les roches. Pendant Ie iour Ie Soleil 
vous brufle, pendant la nuict vous courez rifque 
d'eftre la proye des Maringoins. Vous montez quel- 
quesfois cinq ou fix faults en vn iour, & n'auez le foir 
pour tout recõfort qu'vn peu de bled battu entre deux 
pierres, & cuit auec de belle eau claire; pour lit la 
terre, & bien fouuent des roches inégales & raboteufes, 
d'ordinaire point d'autre abry que les eftoiles, & tout 
cela dans vn filence perpetuel; fi vous vous bleffez à 
quelque rencontre, fi vous tombez malade, n'atten- 
dez de ces Barbares d'affiftance, [61) car où la pren- 
droient-ils. Et fi la maladie eft dangereufe, & que 
vous foyez éloignez des villages, qui y font fort rares, 


1636] 

LE /EUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

89 

ceived in regard to this, ostendam illi quanta hie opor- 
teat pro nomine Jesu patio True, the two who came 
last, Fathers Mercier and Pijart, had no such trouble 
in their journey as those of us who came here the 
year before. They did not paddle, their men were 
not sick, as ours were; they had not to bear the 
heavy loads. Yet notwithstanding [60J this, easy as 
may be a trip with the Savages, there is always 
enough to greatly cast down a heart not well under 
subjection. The readiness of the Savages does not 
shorten the road, does not smooth down the rocks, 
does not remove the dangers. Be with whom you 
like, you must expect to be, at least, three or four 
weeks on the way, to have as companions persons 
you have never seen before; to be cramped in a bark 
Canoe in an uncomfortable position, not being free 
to turn yourself to one side or the other; in danger 
fifty times a day of being upset or of being dashed 
upon the rocks. During the day, the Sun burns 
you; during the night, you run the risk of being a 
prey to Mosquitoes. You sometimes ascend five or 
six rapids in a day; and, in the evening, the only re- 
freshment is a little corn crushed between two stones 
and cooked in fine clear water; the only bed is the 
earth, sometimes only the rough, uneven rocks, and 
usually no roof but the stars; and all this in perpet- 
ual silence. If you are accidentally hurt, if you fall 
sick, do not expect from these Barbarians any assist- 
ance, [61] for whence could they obtain it? And if 
the sickness is dangerous, and if you are remote from 
the villages, which are here very scattered, I would 
not like to guarantee that they would not abandon 
you, if you could not make shift to follow them. 
\Vhen you reach the Hurons, you will indeed find 


90 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

ie ne voudrois pas vous affeurer, que fi vous ne vous 
pouuez ayder vous mefme pour les fuiure, ils ne vous 
abandonnent. 
Quand vous arriuerez aux Hurons vous trouuerez à 
la verité des cæurs pleins de charité, nous vous rece- 
urons à bras ouuerts comme vn Ange de Paradis, 
nous aurons toutes les bonnes volontez du monde de 
vous faire du bien, mais nous fommes quafi dans l'im- 
poffible de Ie faire; nous vous receurons dans vne fi 
chetiue Cabane que ie n'en trouue point quafi en 
France d'affez miferables pour vous pouuoir dire, 
voila comment vous ferez logé. Tout haraffé & fati- 
gué que vous ferez, nous ne pouuons vous donner 
qu'vne pauure natte, & tout au plus quelque peau 
pour vous feruir de lict; & de plus vous arriuerez en 
vne faifon où de miferables petites beftioles, que 
nous appellons icy Ta
hac, & pukes en bon François, 
vous empefcheront quafi les nuits entieres de fermer 
l'æil; car elles font en ces pays-cy incomparablement 
plus importunes qu'en France; la pouffiere de la Ca- 
bane les nourrit, les Sauuages nous les apportêt, [62] 
nous les alIons querir chez eux, & ce petit martyre, 
fans parler des Maringoins, Moufquites, & autre fem- 
blable engeance dure d'ordinaire les trois & quatre 
mois de l'Efté. 
II faut faire eftat pour grãd maiftre & grãd 'l'heolo- 
gien que vous ayez efté en France d'eftre icy petit 
Efcolier, & encor, ô bon Dieu, de quels maiitres! des 
femmes, des petits enfans, de tous les Sauuages, & 
d'eftre expofé à leur rifée. La langue Huronne fera 
vofire fainct Thomas, & voftre Ariftote, & tout habile 
homme que vous eftes, & bien difant parmy des per- 
fonnes doctes & capables, il vous faut refoudre d'eftre 


1636] 

LE /EUNE'S RELA TION, r636 

91 

hearts full of charity; we will receive you with open 
arms as an Angel of Paradise, we shall have all the 
inclination in the world to do you good; but we are 
so situated that we can do very little. We shall re- 
ceive you in a Hut, so mean that I have scarcely 
found in France one wretched enough to compare it 
with; that is how you will be lodged. Harassed and 
fatigued as you will be, we shall be able to give you 
nothing but a poor mat, or at most a skin, to serve 
you as a bed; and, besides, you will arrive at a sea- 
son when miserable little insects that we call here 
Taouhac, and, in good French, pukes [fleas], will keep 
you awake almost all night, for in these countries 
they are incomparably more troublesome than in 
France; the dust of the Cabin nourishes them, the 
Savages bring them to us, [62J we get them in their 
houses; and this petty martyrdom, not to speak of 
:Mosquitoes, Sandflies, and other like vermin, lasts 
usually not less than three or four months of the 
Summer. 
Instead of being a great master and great Theo- 
logian as in France, you must reckon on being here 
a humble Scholar, and then, good God! with what 
masters! -women, little children, and all the Sav- 
ages,-and exposed to their laughter. The Huron 
language will be your saint Thomas and your Aris- 
totle; and clever man as you are, and speaking glibly 
among learned and capable persons, you must make 
up your mind to be for a long time mute among the 
Barbarians. You will have accomplished much, if, 
at the end of a considerable time, you begin to stam- 
mer a little. 
And then how do you think you would pass the 
Winter with us? After having heard all that must 


92 

LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

affez long-temps muet parmy des Barbares; ce fera 
beaucoup pour vous, quand vous commencerez à be- 
gayer au bout de que1que temps. 
Et puis comment penferiez-vous paffer icy l'Hyuer? 
apres auoir ouy tout ce qu'on endure hyuernant auec 
les Sauuages Montagnets, ie puis dire que c'eft à peu 
prés la vie que nous menons icy parmy les Hurons; 
ie Ie dis fans exaggeration, les cinq & fix mois de 
l'Hyuer íe paffent dans ces incommoditez prefque 
continuelles, les froidures exceffiues, la fumée, & 
l'importunité des Sauuages; nous auons vne Cabane 
baftie [63] de fimples écorces, mais fi bien iointes, 
que nous n'auons que faire de fortir dehors pour íça- 
uoir quel temps i1 fait: la fumée eft bien fouuent fi 
efpaiffe, fi aigre & fi opiniafire, que les cinq & fix 
iours entiers, fi vous n'eftes tout à fait à l'efpreuue, 
c'efi bien tout ce que vous pouuez faire que de co- 
gnoiftre quelque chofe dans voftre Breuiaire: Auec 
cela nous auons depuis Ie matin iufques au foir noftre 
foyer quafi toujours affiegé de Sauuages; íur tout ils 
ne manquent gueres à l'heure du repas: que s'il ar- 
riue que vous ayez quelque chofe d'extraordinaire, fi 
peu que ce foit, il faut faire eftat que la plus part de 
ces Meffieurs font de la maifon; fi vous ne leur en 
faites part, vous pafferez pour vn vilain. Pour la 
nourriture, elle n'eft pas fi miferable, bien que nous 
nous paffions d'ordinaire d'vn peu de bled, auec vn 
morceau de poiffon fee & fumé, outre quelques fruicts 
dont ie parleray icy bas. 
Au refte iufques à prefent nous n'-auons eu que des 
rofes, d'orefnauant que nous auons des Chret1iens 
quafi en tous les villages; i1 faut bien faire eftat d'y 
faire des couríes en quelque faifon de l' annee que ce 


1636] 

LE /EUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

93 

be endured in wintering among the Montagnets Sav- 
ages, I may say that that is almost the life we lead 
here among the Hurons. I say it without exaggera- 
tion, the five and six months of Winter are spent in 
almost continual discomforts,-excessive cold, smoke, 
and the annoyance of the Savages; we have a Cabin 
built [63] of simple bark, but so well jointed that we 
have to send some one outside to learn what kind of 
weather it is; the smoke is very often so thick, so 
annoying, and so obstinate that, for five or six days 
at a time, if you are not entirely proof against it, it 
is all you can do to make out a few lines in your Bre- 
viary. Besides, from morning until evening our fire- 
place is almost always surrounded by Savages,- 
above all, they seldom fail to be there at mealtimes. 
If you happen to have anything more than usual, let 
it be ever so little, you must reckon on most of these 
Gentlemen as your guests; if you do not share with 
them, you will be considered mean. As regards the 
food, it is not so bad, although we usually content 
ourselves with a little corn, or a morsel of dry smoked 
fish, or some fruits, of which I shall speak further on. 
For the rest, thus far we have had only roses; 
henceforth, as we have Christians in almost every 
village, we must count upon making rounds through 
them at all seasons of the year, and of remaining 
there, according to necessity, [64] for two or three 
whole weeks, amid annoyances that cannot be de- 
scribed. Add to all this, that our lives depend upon 
a single thread; and if, wherever we are in the 
world, we are to expect death every hour, and to be 
prepared for it, this is particularly the case here. 
For not to mention that your Cabin is only, as it 
were, chaff, and that it might be burned at any mo- 


94 

LES RELA TIONS DE'S .I É SUITES 

[VOL. 10 

foit, & d'y demeurer felon les occurrences [64] les 
quinze iours & les trois femaines entieres, dans des 
incommoditez qui ne fe peuuent dire. Adiouftez à 
tout cela que noftre vie ne tient quail qu'à vn filet, 
& il en quelque lieu du monde que nous foyons nous 
deuons attendre la Inort à toute heure, & auoir tou- 
fiours noftre ame entre 110S mains, c' eft particuliere- 
ment en ce pays. Car outre que voftre Cabane n' eft 
que comlne de paille, & que Ie feu y peut prendre à 
tout moment, nonobftant Ie foin que vous apportez 
pour deftourner ces accidens, la malice des Sauuages 
vous donne fujet de ce cofté-là d'eftre dans des 
craintes quail perpetuelIes: vn mefcontant vous peut 
brufler, ou fendre la tefte à l'efcart. Et puis vous 
eftes refponfable de la fterilité ou fecondité de la 
terre, fous peine de la vie; vous eftes la caufe des 
fechereffes, il vous ne faites plouuoir, on ne parle 
pas Inoins que de fe défaire de vous. Ie n'ay que 
faire de parler du danger qu'il ya du cofté des enne- 
mis, e'en affez de dire que Ie treiziefme de ce mois 
de Iuin ils ont tué douze de nos Hurons auprés du 
village de Contarrea qui n' eft qu'à vne iournée de 
nous; que peu de temps auparauant à quatre lieuës 
du noltre, on defcouurit dans les chaInps quelques 
[65] Iroquois en ambufcade, qui n'efpioient que l'oc- 
cailon de faire vn coup aux defpens de la vie de quel- 
que paffant. Cefte Nation eft fort craintiue, ils ne 
fe tiennent pas fur leur garde, ils n'ont pas quail Ie 
foin de preparer des armes & de fermer de pieux 
leurs villages; leurs recours ordinaire, principale- 
ment quand l'ennemy eft puiffant, eft à la fuite. 
Dans ces alarmes de tout Ie Pays ie vous laiffe à pen- 
fer il nous auons fuiet nous autres de nous tenir en 
affeurance. 


1636] 

LE /EUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

95 

ment, despite all your care to prevent accidents, the 
malice of the Savages gives especial cause for almost 
perpetual fear; a malcontent may burn you down, 
or cleave your head open in some lonely spot. And 
then you are responsible for the sterility or fecundity 
of the earth, under penalty of your life; you are the 
cause of droughts; if you cannot make rain, they 
speak of nothing less than making away with you. 
I have only to mention, in addition, the danger there 
is from our enemies; it is enough to say that, on the 
thirteenth of this month of June, they killed twelve 
of our Hurons near the village of Contarrea, 8 which 
is only a day's journey from us; that a short time 
before, at four leagues from our village, some Iro- 
quois were discovered in the fields [65] in ambuscade, 
only waiting to strike a blow at the expense of the 
life of some passer-by. This Nation is very timid,- 
they take no precautions against surprise, they are 
not careful to prepare arms or to inclose their villages 
with palisades; their usual recourse, especially when 
the enemy is powerful, is flight. Amid these alarms, 
which affect the whole Country, I leave you to im- 
agine if we have any grounds for a feeling of safety. 
After all, if we had here the exterior attractions 
of piety, as they exist in France, all this might pass. 
In France the great multitude and the good example 
of Christians, the solemnity of the Feasts, the majes- 
ty of the Churches so magnificently adorned, preach 
piety to you; and in the Houses of our order the fer- 
vor of our brethren. their modesty, and all the noble 
virtues which shine forth in all their actions, are so 
many powerful voices which cry to you without ceas- 
ing, respice, et fac similiter. You have the consola- 
tion of celebrating every day the holy Mass; in a 


96 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

Or apres tout, fi nous eftions icy pour les attraits 
exterieurs de la pieté, comme en France, encore fe- 
roit-ce. En France la grande multitude, & Ie bon 
exemple des Chreftiens, la celebrité des Feftes, la 
maiefté des Eglifes fi bien parées vous prefchent la 
pieté; & dans nos Maifons la ferueur des noftres, leur 
modeftie, & tant de belles vertus qui éc1atent en 
toutes leurs actions, font autant de voix puiffantes 
qui vous crient fans ceffe, rejpice, & fac fimz"lÜer. 
V oUS auez la confolation de celebrer tous les iours la 
faincte Meffe; en vn mot vous eftes quafi hors des 
dangers de tomber, ou au moins les cheutes ne font 
que fort legeres, & vous auez incontinent les fecours 
en main. Icy nous n'auons rien, ce femble, qui [66J 
porte au bien; N ous fommes parmy des Peuples qui 
s'eftonnent quand vous leur parlez de Dieu, qui n'ont 
fouuent que d'horribles blafphemes en la bouche. 
Souuent il vous faudra vous priuer du fainct Sacrifice 
de la Meffe, & quand vous aurez la commodité de la 
dire, vn petit coing de voftre Cabane vous feruira de 
Chapelle, que la fumée, la neige, ou la pluye vous 
empefchent d'orner & embelIir, quand mefme vous 
auriez dequoy. Ie laiffe à part Ie peu de moyen qu'il 
y a de vous recolliger parmy des Barbares, qui ne 
vous quittent prefque point, qui ne fçauent ce que 
c'eft de parler bas. Sur tout ie n'oferois parler des 
dangers de fe perdre parmi leurs impuretez, à qui n'a 
Ie cæur plein de Dieu, pour reietter fortement ce poi- 
fon. En voila bien affez, Ie refte fe cognoift en l'ex- 
perience. 
Mais quoy, me dira quelqu'vn, n'y a-il que cela? 
Penfez-vous par vos raifons auoir ietté de l'eau fur 
Ie feu qui me brule, & diminué tant foit peu le zele 


1636] 

LE /EUNE'S RELA TION, 1636 

97 

word, you are almost beyond the danger of falling,- 
at least, the falls are insignificant, and you have help 
immediately at hand. Here we have nothing, it 
seems, which [66] incites towards good; we are 
among Peoples who are astonished when you speak 
to them of God, and who often have only horrible 
blasphemies in their mouths. Often you are com- 
pelled to deprive yourself of the holy Sacrifice of the 
Mass; and, when you have the opportunity to say 
it, a little corner of your Cabin will serve you for 
a Chapel, which the smoke, the snow, or the rain 
hinders you from ornamenting and embellishing, 
even if you had the means. I pass over the small 
chance of seclusion there is among Barbarians, who 
scarcely ever leave you, who hardly know what it is 
to speak in a low tone. Especiall y I would not dare 
to speak of the danger there is of ruining oneself 
among their impurities, in the case of anyone whose 
heart is not sufficiently full of God to firmly resist 
this poison. But enough of this; the rest can only 
be known by experience. 
" But is that all?" some one will exclaim. "Do 
you think by your arguments to throw water on the 
fire that consumes me, and lessen ever so little the 
zeal I have for the conversion of these Peoples? I 
declare that these things have served only to confirm 
me the more in my vocation; that I feel myself more 
carried away than ever by my affection for New 
France, and that I bear a holy jealousy [67] towards 
those who are already enduring all these sufferings; 
all these labors seem to me nothing, in comparison 
with what I am willing to endure for God; if I knew 
a place under Heaven where there was yet more to 
be suffered, I would go there." Ah! whoever you 


98 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

que i'ay pour la conuerfion de ces Peuples? Ie VOliS 
declare que cela n'a feruy qu'à me confirmer dauan- 
tage dans ma vocation, que ie me fens plus porté que 
iamais d' affection pour la N ouuelle France, & que 
ie porte vne faincte enuie [67] à ceux qui font defia 
prifes auec toutes ces fouffrances; tous ces trauaux 
ne me femblent rien en comparaifon de ce que ie vou- 
drois endurer pour Dieu; fi ie fçauois vn lieu fous Ie 
Ciel où on fouffrift encor dauantage ie voudrois y 
aUer. Ah qui que vous foyez à qui Dieu donne ces 
fentimens & ces lumieres, venez, venez, mon cher 
Frere, ce font des ouuriers tels que VOliS eftes que 
nous demandons icy; c'eft à des ames femblables à 
la voftre, que Dieu a deftiné la conquefte de tant 
d'autres que Ie Diable tient encor maintenant en fa 
puiffance; n'apprehendez aucunes difficultez, il n'y 
en aura point pour vous, puis que toute voftre confo- 
lation eft de vous voir crucifié auec Ie Fils de Dieu; 
Ie filence vous fera doux, puis que vous auez appris à 
vous entretenir auec Dieu, & à conuerfer dans Ies 
Cieux auec les Saints, & les Anges: les viãdes fe- 
roient bien infipides fi Ie fiel de noftre Seigneur ne 
vous les rendoit plus douces & plus fauoureufes que 
les mets les plus delicieux du monde. Quel contente- 
ment d'aUer par ces faults, & de grauir fur les roches, 
à celuy qui a deuant les yeux cét aymable Sauueur 
haraffé de tourmens, & montant le Caluaire chargé 
de fa Croix; [68] l'incommodité du Canot eft bien 
aifée à fouffrir à qui Ie confiderera crucifié. Quelle 
confolation? car il faut que i'vfe de ces termes, autre- 
ment ie ne vous ferois pas plaifir; queUe confolation 
done de fe voir mefme par les chemins abandonné 
des Sauuages, languir de maladie, ou mourir de faim 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, r636 

99 

are to whom God gives these sentiments and this 
light, come, come, my dear Brother, it is workmen 
such as you that we ask for here; it is to souls like 
yours that God has appointed the conquest of so many 
other souls whom the Devil holds yet in his power; 
apprehend no difficulties,- there will be none for 
you, since it is your whole consolation to see yourself 
crucified with the Son of God; silence will be sweet 
to you, since you have learned to commune with 
God, and to converse in the Heavens with Saints and 
Angels; the victuals would be very insipid if the 
gall endured by our Lord did not render them sweet- 
er and more savory to you than the most delicious 
viands of the world. What a satisfaction to pass 
these rapids, and to climb these rocks, to him who 
has before his eyes that loving Savior, harassed by 
his tormentors and ascending Calvary laden with 
his Cross; [68] the discomfort of the Canoe is very 
easy to bear, to him who considers the crucified one. 
What a consolation! - for I must use such terms, as 
otherwise I could not give you pleasure-what a 
consolation, then, to see oneself even abandoned on 
the road by the Savages, languishing with sickness, 
or even dying with hunger in the woods, and of be- 
ing able to say to God, " My God, it is to do your 
holy will that I am reduced to the state in which you 
see me,"-considering above all that God-man who 
expires upon the Cross and cries to his Father, Deus 
meus, Deus meus, ut quid dereliqui'stz" me. If God among 
all these hardships preserve you in health, no doubt 
you will arrive pleasantly in the Huron country with 
these holy thoughts. Suav'iter lzav'igat quem grat'ia 
Dei portat. 
And now, as regards a place of abode, food, and 


100 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

dans les bois, & de pou uoir dire à Dieu; Mon Dieu 
c'eft pour faire voftre fainte volonté que ie fuis re- 
duit au poinct où vous me voyez; fur tout confide- 
rant cét homme-Dieu qui expire en la Croix, & crie 
à fon Pere, Deus melts, Deus melts, vt qu'id dereliquijli 
me. Que fi Dieu parmy toutes ces incommoditez 
vous conferue en fanté, fans doute vous arriuerez 
doucement au pays des Hurons dans ces fainctes pen- 
fées. Suauz"ter lzauigat quem gratia Dei portat. 
Maintenant pour ce qui eft de l'habitation, du viure, 
& du coucher, oferay-ie dire à vn cæur fi genereux, 
& qui fi mocque de tout ce que i'en ay touché cy- 
deffus; qu'encore bien que nous n'ayons en cecy 
gueres d'auantage par deffus les Sauuages, neant- 
moins ie ne fçay conlment la diuine Bonté adoucit 
tout ce qu'il y pourroit auoir de difficile, & tous tant 
que nous fommes nous trouuons tout cela quafi auffi 
peu étrange [69] que la vie de France. Le fommeil 
que nous prenons couchez fur nos nattes, nous femble 
auffi doux que dans vn bon lit; les viandes du Pays 
ne nous dégouftent point, quoy qu'il n'y ait gueres 
d'autre affaifonnement que celuy que Dieu y a mis, 
& nonobftant les froidures d'vn hyuer de fix mois 
pafIé à l'abry d'vne Cabane d'écorces percée à iour, 
nous fommes encor à en reffentir les effets, perfonne 
ne s' eft plaint de mal de tefte ou d' eftomac; nous ne 
fçauons ce que c'eft que fluxions, reumes, catarres; 
ce qui me fait dire que les delicats n'entendent rien 
en France à fe defendre contre Ie froid; ces chambres 
fi bien tapiffées, ces portes fi bien ioinctes, & ces 
feneftres fermées auec tant de foin, ne feruent qu'à 
en faire reffentir des effets plus cuifans; c'eft vn en- 
nemy auec lequel on gagne quafi plus à luy tendre 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1636 

101 

beds,-shall I dare to say to a heart so generous, and 
that mocks at all that of which I have already spok- 
en, that truly, even though we have hardly more of 
those necessities than the Savages have, still, I know 
not how, the divine Goodness renders every difficult 
thing easy; and all and everyone of us find every- 
thing almost as comfortable [69] as life is in France. 
The sleep we get lying on our mats seems to us as 
sweet as if we were in a good bed; the food of the 
Country does not disgust us, although there is scarce- 
ly any other seasoning than that which God has put 
into it; and, notwithstanding the cold of a winter 
six months long, passed in the shelter of a bark Cabin 
open to the daylight, we have still to experience its 
evil effects; no one complains of his head or his stom- 
ach; we do not know what diarrhæa, colds, or ca- 
tarrh are. This leads me to say that delicate persons 
do not know, in France, how to protect themselves 
from the cold; those rooms so well carpeted, those 
doors so well fitted, and those windows closed with 
so much care, serve only to make its effects more 
keenly felt; it is an enemy from whom one wins al- 
most more by holding out one's hands to him than 
by waging a cruel war upon him. As to our food, I 
shall say this further, that God has shown his Provi- 
dence very clearly to our eyes; we have obtain
d in 
eight days our provision of corn for a whole year, 
without making a single step beyond our Cabin. 
They have brought us dried fish in such quantities 
that we are constrained to refuse some of it, and to 
say [70] that we have sufficient; you might say that 
God, seeing we are here only for his service, in order 
that all our work may be for him, wishes to act him- 
self as our provider. This same Goodness takes care 


102 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

les bras, qu'à luy faire vne fi cruelle guerre. Pour 
Ie viure, ie diray encor cecy, que Dieu nous a fait 
paroiftre à l'æi1 fa Prouidence tres-particuliere, nous 
auons fait en huict iours noftre prouifion de bled pour 
toute l' année, fans faire vn feul pas hors noftre Ca- 
bane; on nous apporte auffi du poiffon fee en telle 
quantité, que nous fommes contraincts d'en refufer, 
& de dire [70] que nous en auons affez; vous diriez 
que Dieu voyant que nous ne fommes icy que pour 
fon feruice, afin que nous ne trauaillions que pour 
luy, nous vueille luy mefme feruir de pour[u]oyeur. 
Cefte mefme Bonté ne laiffe pas de nous donner de 
temps en temps quelques rafraichiffemens de poifsõ 
frais. Nous fommes fur Ie bord d'vn grãd Lac qui 
en porte d'auffi bons que i'aye gueres veu, ou mangé 
en France; il eft vray, comme i'ay defia dit, que 
nous n'en faifons point d'ordinaire; & encore moins 
de la chair, qui fe void icy plus rarement. Les fruicts 
mefmes felon la faifon, pourueu que l'année foit vn 
peu fauorable, ne no us mãquent point, les fraifes, les 
framboifes & les meures y font en telle quantité qu'il 
n'eft pas croyable. Nous y cueillons force raifins, & 
affez bons, les citroüilles nous durent quelquesfois les 
quatre & cinq mois, mais en telle abondance qu'elles 
fe donnet prefque pour rien; & fi bonnes qu'eftant 
cuites dans les cendres, elles fe mangent comme on 
fait les pommes en France: de forte qu'à vray dire, 
pour ce qui touche les viures nous nous pouuons fort 
aifément paffer de la France; Ie feul bled du Pays 
eft vne nourriture fuffifante quand on y eft vn peu 
habitué; [71] les Sauuages l'appreftent en plus de 
vingt façons, & ne fe feruent cependant que de feu & 
d'eau; il eft vray que la meilleure fau1ce eft celle 
qu'il porte auec foy. 


1636] 

LE JEUNE' S RELA TION, 1636 

103 

to give us from time to time a change of provisions 
in the shape of fresh fish. We live on the shore of a 
great Lake, which affords as good fish as I have ever 
seen or eaten in France; true, as I have said, we do 
not ordinarily procure them, and still less do we get 
meat, which is even more rarely seen here. Fruits 
even, according to the season, provided the year be 
somewhat favorable, are not lacking to us; strawber- 
ries, raspberries, and blackberries are to be found in 
almost incredible quantities. We gather plenty of 
grapes, which are fairly good; the squashes last some- 
times four and five months, and are so abundant that 
they are to be had almost for nothing, and so good 
that, on being cooked in the ashes, they are eaten as 
apples are in France. 9 Consequently, to tell the 
truth, as regards provisions, the change from France 
is not very great; the only grain of the Country is a 
sufficient nourishment, when one is somewhat accus- 
tomed to it. [71] The Savages prepare it in more 
than twenty ways and yet employ only fire and wa- 
ter; it is true that the best sauce is that which it car- 
ries with it. tO 
As for the dangers of the soul, to speak frankly, 
there are none for him who brings to the Country of 
the Hurons the fear and love of God; on the contra- 
ry, I find unparalleled advantages for acquiring per- 
fection. Is it not a great deal to have, in one's food, 
clothing, and sleep, no other attraction than bare 
necessity? Is it not a glorious opportunity to unite 
oneself with God, when there is no creature whatso- 
ever that gives you reason to spend your affection 
upon it? when the exercises you practice constrain 
you without force to inward meditation? Besides 
your spiritual exercises, you have no other employ- 


104 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

Pour les dangers de l'ame à parler nettement, il n'y 
en a point pour celuy qui apporte aux Pays des Hu- 
rons la crainte & l'amour de Dieu; au contraire i'y 
trouue des aduantages nompareils pour acquerir la 
perfection. N'efi-ce pas defia beaucoup de n'auoir 
dans Ie viure, Ie vefiir & Ie coucher aucun attrait que 
la fimple neceffité? N' efi-ce pas vne belle occafion 
de s'vnir à Dieu, quand il n'y a creature que1conque 
qui vous donne fuiet de vous yattacher d'affection? 
quand les exercices que vous practiquez vous obligent 
fans violence à la recollection interieure? Outre vos 
exercices fpirituels vous n'auez point d'autre employ 
que l'eftude de la langue, & la conuerfation auec les 
Sauuages. Ah! qu'il y a de plaifir pour vn cæur 
felon Dieu de fe faire Ie petit Efcolier d'vn Sauuage, 
& d'vn petit enfant pour les gagner par apres à Dieu, 
& les redre Difciples de nofire Seigneur! Que Dieu 
fe communique volontiers, & liberalement à vne ame 
qui practique pour fon amour ces actes heroïques [72] 
d'humilité; autant de mots qu'il apprend ce luy font 
autant de threfors qu'il amaffe, autant de defpoüilles 
qu'il enleue fur l'ennemy commun du genre humain; 
de forte qu'il auroit fuiet de dire cent fois Ie iour, 
Lætabor Juper eloqu'ia tua tmzquam qui Ùzucllit Jpolz"a 
'1Jlulta. Pour cefie confideration les vifites des Sau- 
uages, quoy que frequentes, ne luy peuuent efire im- 
portunes; Dieu luy apprend cefie belle leçon qu'il fit 
autrefois à Saincte Catherine de Sienne, de luy faire 
vn cabinet ou vn temple de fon cæur, où il ne manque 
iamais de Ie trouuer toutes & quantesfois qu'il s'y re- 
tire: que s'il y rencontre des Sauuages, ils ne luyap- 
portent aucun trouble dans fes prieres, ils ne feruent 
qu'à les rendre plus feruentes; il prend de là occafion 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 

105 

ment than the study of the language, and conversa- 
tion with the Savages. Ah! how much pleasure there 
is for a heart devoted to God to make itself the little 
Scholar of a Savage and of a little child, thereby to 
gaiI1 them for God, and to render them Disciples of 
our Lord! How willingly and liberally God commu- 
nicates himself to a soul which practices from love to 
him these heroic acts [72] of humility! The words he 
learns are so many treasures he amasses, so many 
spoils he carries off from the common enemy of the 
human race; so that he has reason to say a hundred 
times a day, Lætabor super eloquz'a tua tallquam qui in- 
venit spolia 1Jlulta. Viewed in this light, the visits of 
the Savages, however frequent, cannot be annoying 
to him. God teaches him the beautiful lesson he 
taught formerly to Saint Catherine of Sienna, to 
make of his heart a room or temple for him, where 
he will never fail to find him, as often as he with- 
draws into it; that, if he encounters Savages there, 
they do not interfere with his prayers, they serve only 
to make them more fervent; from this he takes occa- 
sion to present these poor wretches to this sovereign 
Goodness, and to entreat him warmly for their con- 
version. 
Certainly we have not here that exterior solemnity 
which awakens and sustains devotion. Only what is 
essential in our Religion is visible, the holy Sacra- 
ment of the Altar, to the marvels of which we must 
open the eyes of our Faith without being aided by 
any sensible mark of its grandeur, any more than the 
[73] :Magi were in the stable. But it seems that God, 
supplying what we lack,-and as a recompense of 
grace that he has given us in transporting it, so to 
speak, beyond so many seas, and in finding a place 


106 

LES RELA TJONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

de prefenter ces pauures miferables à cefle fouueraine 
Bonté, & la fupplier inflamment pour leur conuerfion. 
II eft certain que nous n'auons point icy cet appa- 
reil exterieur, qui réueille & entretient la deuotion. 
N ous n'y voyons proprement que le fubflantiel de 
noftre Religion, Ie fainct Sacrement de l' Autel, où 
il faut que noftre Foy ouure les yeux fur fes mer- 
ueilles, fans y eftre aidée d'aucune marque fenfible 
de fa grandeur, non plus que les [73] Mages iadis en 
l'eftable. Mais il femble que Dieu fuppleant à ce 
qui nons manque, & comme en recompenfe de la fa- 
ueur qu'il nous a faite de Ie tranfporter, pour ainfi 
dire, au deça de tant de mers, & de luy auoir trouué 
place dans ces pauures Cabanes, nous vueille combler 
des mefmes benedictions parmy ces Peuples infideles, 
dont il a accouftumé de fauorifer quelques Catholiques 
perfecutez en Pays heretique. Ces bonnes gens ne 
voyent gueres ny d'Eglifes ny d' Autels; mais ce peu 
qu'ils en voyent leur fert au double de ce qu'il feroit 
en pleine liberté. QueUe confolation à voftre aduis 
de fe profterner par fois deuant vne Croix au milieu 
de cefle Barbarie? de porter les yeux & penetrer au 
milieu de nos petites fonctions domefliques, iufques 
au departement que Ie Fils de Dieu a daigné prendre 
dans noflre petite habitatiõ? N'eft-ce pas eflre en 
Paradis iour & nuict, de n'eftre feparé de ce Bien- 
aymé des Nations, que de quelque efcorce ou branche 
d'arbre? Ell ip.fe flat post parietem noflrum. Sub vm- 
bra illz"us quem defideraueram, .fedi. Voila pour Ie de- 
dans. Sortons-nous hors du logis, le Ciel nous eft 
ouuert, & ces grands baftiments, qui portent leur 
tefte dans les [74] nuës, au milieu des bonnes villes 
ne nous en dérobent point la veuë; de façon que nous 


1636] 

LE JE UNE , S RELA TION, 1636 

107 

for it in these poor Cabins,- wishes to crown us with 
the same blessings, in the midst of these infidel 
Peoples, with which he is accustomed to favor perse- 
cuted Catholics in the Countries of heretics. These 
good people scarcely ever see either Church or Altar; 
but the little they see is worth double what they 
would see in full liberty. What consolation would 
there be, in your opinion, in prostrating ourselves at 
times before a Cross in the midst of this Barbarism! 
to turn our eyes toward, and to enter, in the midst 
of our petty domestic duties, even into the room 
which the Son of God has been pleased to take in our 
little dwelling. Is it not to be in Paradise day and 
night, that we are not separated from this Well- 
beloved of the Nations except by some bark or the 
branch of a tree? Ell ipse stat post þar-ietem 1l0strum. 
Sub umbra ,ill-ius quem des'ideraveram, sedz'. See what 
we have within. If we go outside our cabin, Heaven 
is open to us; and those great buildings which lift 
their heads to the [74] clouds, in large cities, do not 
conceal it from our view; so that we can say our pray- 
ers in full liberty before the noble Oratory that saint 
François Xavier loved better than any other. If the 
question is of the fundamental virtues, I will glory 
not in myself, but in the share which has fallen to 
me; or, if I must, acknowledge it humbly beside the 
Cross which our Lord in his grace gives us to bear 
after him. Certain it is that this Country, or our 
work here, is much more fitted to feed the soul with 
the fruits of Heaven than with the fruits of earth. I 
may be deceiving myself, but I imagine that here is 
a grand means of increasing the soul in Faith, in 
Hope, and in Charity. Should we scatter the seeds 
of the Faith without ourselves profiting by them? 


108 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

pouuons faire nos prieres en toute liberté deuant 
ce bel Oratoire, que fainct François Xauier aymoit 
mieux qu'aucun autre. Que s'il eft quefHon des ver- 
tus au fonds, ie me glorifieray, non pas en moy, mais 
au partage qui m'eft efcheu, ou s'il faut Ie reco- 
gnoiftre humblement au cofté de la Croix, que noftre 
Seigneur de fa grace nous donne à porter apres foy; 
il eft certain que ce Pays, ou l'employ que nous y 
auons, en beaucoup plus propre à engraiffer vne ame 
des fruicts du Ciel, que de ceux de la terre. Ie ne 
fçay fi ie me trompe, fi eft-ce que ie me reprefente, 
qu'il y a beau moye d'y croifire en la Foy, en l'Efpe- 
rance, & en la Charité. Y ietterions-nous la femence 
de la Foy fans en profiter pour nous? Seroit-il 
poffible que nous miffions noftre confiance hors de 
Dieu en vne Region, où du cofté des hommes toutes 
chofes no us manquent? Pourrions-nous fouhaitter 
vne plus belle occafion d'exercer la Charité, que dans 
les afpretez & mef-aifes d'vn monde nouueau, que 
pas vn art ny induftrie humaine n'a encore pourueu 
d'aucune commodité? & d'y viure pour ramener à 
Dieu des hommes fi [75] peu hommes, qu'il faut s'at- 
tendre iournellemet de mourir de leur main, fi la 
fantaifie leur en prend, fi vn fonge les y porte, fi nous 
ne leur fermons & ne leur ouurons Ie Ciel à difcre- 
tion, leur donnant la pluye & Ie beau temps à com- 
mandement. Ne nous font-ils pas refponfables de 
ces difpofitions de l'air? & fi Dieu ne no us infpire, ou 
que nous ne voulions pas cooperer à la foy des mi- 
racles; ne fommes nous pas continuellement en dan- 
ger, comme ils nous en ont menacé, de les voir courir 
fus à ceux qui n'auront point Ie tort? Certes fi celuy 
qui eft la Verité mefme ne l'auoit aduancé, qu'il n'y 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, r6j6 

109 

Could we put our confidence anywhere but in God in 
a Region where, as far as man is concerned, every- 
thing is lacking to us? Could we wish a nobler op- 
portunity to exercise Charity than amid the rough- 
ness and discomfort of a new world, where no human 
art or industry has yet provided any conveniences? 
and to live here that we may bring back to God men 
who are so [75] unlike men that we must live in daily 
expectation of dying by their hand, should the fancy 
take them, should a dream suggest it to them, or 
should we fail to open or close the Heavens to them 
at discretion, giving them rain or fine weather at 
command. Do they not make us responsible for the 
state of the weather? And if God does not inspire 
us, or if we cannot work miracles by faith, are we 
not continually in danger, as they have threatened 
us, of seeing them fall upon those who have done no 
wrong? Indeed, if he who is the Truth itself had 
not declared that there is no greater love than to lay 
down one's life, verily and once for all, for one's 
friends, I should conceive it a thing equally noble, or 
even more so, to do what the Apostle said to the 
Corinthians, Quotz"d-ie morz"or þer vestram gloyz'am, fra- 
tres, quam /labeo Ùz C/lrÙto Jesu Domino 1Zostro, than to 
drag out a life full of misery, amid the frequent and 
ordinary dangers of an unforeseen death, which those 
whom you hope to save will procure for you. I call 
to mind occasionally what Saint François Xavier once 
wrote to Father Simon, and wish that it may please 
God to so act that at least the same thing may be said 
or written one [76] day even of us, although we may 
not be worthy of it. Here are the words: OþtÙnz" è 
Moluco þer ferun tur nuntÜ, quzpþe Ùz maxÙIlÙ æru11Z1lÙ 
þerþetuísque vitæ dÙcrÙninibus, Joa1l1zes Bez"ra eÙlsque socii 


110 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

a pas plus grande charité que de mourir par effect 
vne fois pour fes amis. Ie conçeurois quelque chofe 
d'égal ou de plus releué, à faire ce que difoit l' A- 
poftre aux Corinthiens. Quotz"dÙ morior per vejlram 
gloriam, fratres, quam habeo in Chrzjlo Ie.fu Domino 
nojlro. A traifner vne vie affez penible dans des 
dangers affez frequens & ordinaires d'vne mort inopi- 
née, que ceux-là vous procureront, que vous preten- 
diez fauuer. Ie me remets par fois en memoire ce 
qu'efcriuoit iadis Sainct François Xauier au P. Simon, 
& fouhaitte qu'i1 plaife à Dieu de faire en forte que 
pour le moins on puiffe dire ou efcrire vn [76] iour le 
mefme de nous, quoy que nous n'en foyons pas 
dignes. V oicy fes termes. OptÙJli è Moluco perferun- 
tur nuntij, quzppe in maximis ærumnis perpetuifque vitæ 
di./crÙnÙÚbus, Ioallnes Beira eÙlfque .focij ver .fantur, 
mag1l0 cum Cflrijlianæ Religi01lls Ùzcremento. 
Vne chofe, ce femble, auroit à donner icy de l'ap- 
prehenfion à vn Enfant de la Compagnie, de fe voir 
au milieu d'vn Peuple brutal & fenfuel, de qui l'ex- 
emple pourroit ternir Ie luftre de la vertu la plus & 
la moins delicate d'entre toutes, qui n'en prendroit 
vn foin particulier, c'eft la Chafteté. 
Oferay-ie dire pour effuyer cefte difficulté, que s'i1 
y a lieu au monde où cefte vertu fi precieufe foit en 
affeurance, pour vn homme d'entre nous qui veut 
eftre fur fes gardes, c'eft icy. Niji Dominus cujlodie- 
rit ciuitatê, frujlrà vigilat qui cujlodit ea1Jl. Sciui quo- 
niam aliter non pof(e'm ef(e continens, nzji Deus det. Et 
hoc iþ.fum erat .fapientia, .fcire cuius ef(et flOC d01zum. On 
dit que les victoires que cefte Fille du Ciel emporte 
fur fon ennemy, fe gagnent en fuyant; mais ie croy 
que c'eft Dieu fans plus, qui fait fuyr ce mefme enne- 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, r636 

111 

versantur, magno cum Christianæ Relzgz'onis incremento. 
There seems to be one thing here which might 
give apprehension to a Son of the Society, to see him- 
self in the midst of a brutal and sensual People, 
whose example might tarnish the luster of the most 
and the least delicate of all the virtues, unless espe- 
cial care be taken - I mean Chastity. 
In order to obviate this difficulty, I make bold to 
say that if there is any place in the world where this 
so precious virtue is safe, for a man among us who 
wishes to be on his guard, it is here. Nisi Dominus 
custodierit civitatem, frustrà vzgilat qui custodit eam. 
Scivi quoniam, aliter non þossem esse continens, nisi Deus 
det. Et hoc tpsum erat saþz'entia, scire cu/us esset hoc 
donum. It is said that the victories which this 
Daughter of Heaven gains over her enemies, are 
gained by flight; but I believe it is God and no one 
e1se who puts to flight this very enemy in the most 
severe encounters, before those who, fearing nothing 
so much as his approaches, go with bowed heads, and 
[77] hearts full of confidence in his Goodness, where 
his glory calls them. And where should we seek 
this glory? I should say, where find it more fully 
purified and disentangled from our own interests, 
than in a place where there is nothing more to be 
hoped for than the reward of having left all for the 
love of him of whom S1. Paul said, Scio cui credidz". You 
remember that plant, named "the fear of God," with 
which it is said our Fathers at the beginning of our 
Society charmed away the spirit of impurity; it does 
not grow in the land of the Hurons, but it falls there 
abundantly from Heaven, if one has but a little care 
to cultivate that which he brings here. Barbarism, 
ignorance, poverty, and misery, which render the life 


112 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[V OL. 10 

my aux plus grandes occafions, deuant ceux qui ne 
craignans rien tant que fes approches, vont la tefte 
baiffée, & le [77] cæur plein de confiance en fa Bon- 
té, où fa gloire les appelle. Et où pourrions nous 
chercher cefte gloire? ie diray miellx, où la trouuer 
plus épurée & defgagée de nos propres interefts; 
qu'en vn lieu auquel i1 n'y a rien à efperer que la 
recompenfe de les auoir tous quittés pour l'amour de 
celuy, de qui S. Paul difoit. Sào cuz' credz"di. V ous 
fouuient-il de cefte herbe, nommée la crainte de 
Dieu, dont on difoit au commencement de noftre 
Compagnie, que nos Peres charmoient l'efprit d'im- 
pureté; elle ne croin point dans la terre des Hurõs, 
mais il yen tombe du Ciel à foifon; fi peu qu'on foit 
foigneux d'y cultiuer celIe qu'on yapporte. La bar- 
barie, l'ignorance, la pauureté & la mifere, qui rend 
la vie de ces Sauuages plus déplorable que la mort, 
nous eft vne leçon continuelIe, de regreter la cheute 
d' Adam, & de nous foufmettre entierement à celuy 
qui chaftie encore fa defobeyffance en fes enfans, 
d'vne façon fi remarquable, apres tant de fiec1es. 
Saincte Therefe difoit autrefois, qu'elle ne fe trou- 
uoit iamais mieux en fes meditations, que dans les 
myfteres où elle trouuoit noftre Seigneur à l'efcart, 
& fans compagnie, cõme fi elle euft efié au iardin des 
Oliues. Et [78] elle appelloit cela vne de fes fimpli- 
citez. On comptera cecy fi l'on veut parmy mes fot- 
tifes; mais i1 me femble que nous auons icy d'autant 
plus de loifir pour careffer, par maniere de dire, & 
entretenir noftre Seigneur à cæur ouuert, au milieu 
de ces terres inhabitées, que moins i1 y a de per- 
fonnes qui s'en mettent en peine. Et moyennant 
cefte faueur, nous pouuons dire hardimet, NOll timebo 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELATION, r636 

113 

of these Savages more deplorable than death, are a 
continual reminder to us to mourn Adam's fall, and 
to submit ourselves entirely to him who still chas- 
tises disobedience in his children, in so remarkable 
a way, after so many centuries. Saint Theresa said 
once that she never found her meditations more prof- 
itable than in the mysteries in which she found our 
Lord apart and alone, as if she had been in the gar- 
den of Olives; and [78] she called this a part of her 
simplicity. You lnay reckon this among my follies, 
if you like; but it seems to me that we have here so 
much the more leisure to caress, so to speak, and to 
entertain our Lord with open heart, in the midst of 
these uninhabited lands, because there are so few 
people who trouble themselves about him. And, on 
account of this favor, we can boldly say, Non timebo 
mala, quom'am lu mecum es. In short, I imagine that 
all the Guardian Angels of these neglected and aban- 
doned Nations are continually endeavoring and labor- 
ing to save us from these dangers. They know well 
that if there were anything in the world that ought 
to give us wings, to fly back whence we came both 
by obedience and by our own inclination, it would 
be this misfortune, if we were not shielded from it 
by the protection of Heaven. This is what excites 
them to procure for us the means to guard against 
it, that they may not lose the brightest hope they 
have ever had, by the grace of God, of the conver- 
sion of these Peoples. 
I finish this discourse and this Chapter with this 
sentence: If, at the sight of the difficulties and 
Crosses that are here prepared for us, some one feels 
himself so fortified from above that he [79] can say 
it is too little, or like St. François Xavier, Ampliùs, 


114 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

mala, quoniam tu mecum es. Bref ie me reprefente 
que tous les Anges Gardiens de ces Nations incultes 
& delaiffées, font continuellement en peine & en 
action, pour nous fauuer de ces dangers. Ils fçauent 
bien que s'il y auoit chofe au monde qui nous deuft 
donner des aHles, pour retourner d' où nous fommes 
venus, & par obeyffance, & par inclination propre, 
ce feroit ce malheur, fi nous n'en eftionsà couuert fous 
la protection du Ciel. C'eft ce qui les réueille à nous 
en procurer les moyens, pour ne perdre la plus belle 
efperance qu'ils ayent iamais euë par la grace de 
Dieu, de la conuerfion de ces Peuples. 
Ie finis ce difcours & ce Chapitre auec ce mot. Si 
dans la veuë des peines & des Croix qui nous font 
icy preparées, quelqu'vn fe fent fi fortifié d'en-haut, 
que de [79] pouuoir dire que c' eft trop peu, ou comme 
S. François Xauier, Amþliùs, amþliùs; i'efpere que 
noftre Seigneur tirera auffi de fa bouche au milieu 
des confolations qu'il luy donnera, cefte autre con- 
feffion, que ce fera trop pour luy, qu'il n'en pourra 
plus. Satis eft, Domine, fatis eft. 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, r636 

115 

a mþliz/s , I hope that our Lord will also draw from his 
lips this other confession, in the midst of the consola- 
tions he will give him, that it will be too much for 
him, that he cannot endure more. Satis est, Domine, 
satis est. 


116 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

CHAPITRE IV. 

DE LA LANGUE DES HURONS. 

C E n'eft que pour en donner quelque petit auant- 
gouft, & en marquer quelques particularitez, 
attendant vne Grammaire, & vn Dictionnai- 
re entier. 
lIs ont vne lettre dont nous n'auons point la 
pareille, nous l'exprimons par Khi, l'vfage en eft 
commun aux Montagnés & Algonquins. lIs ne co- 
gnoiffent point de B. F. L. M. P. X. Z. & iamais I. 
E. V. ne leur font confones. La plus part de leurs 
mots font compofez de voyelles. Toutes les lettres 
labiales leur manquent; c'eft volontiers la caufe qu'ils 
ont tous les lévres ouuertes de fi mauuaife grace, & 
qu'à peine les entend-t'on [80J quand ils fifient, ou 
qu'ils parlent bas. Comme ils n'ont prefque ny ver- 
tu, ny Religion, ny fcience aucune, ou police, auffi 
n'ont-ils aucuns mots fimples propres à fignifier tout 
ce qui en eft. Delà eft que nous demeurõs courts à 
leur expliquer plufieurs belles chofes tirées de ces 
cognoiffances. Les mots compofez leur font plus en 
vfage, & ont la mefme force que l'adiectif & fubftan- 
tif ioints enfemble parmy nous. Andatara.fé, pain 
frais Ac/zitetji, vn pied long. La varieté de ces noms 
compofez eft tres-grande, & c' eft la clef du fecret de 
leur Langue. Ils ont diuerfité de genres comme 
nous, de nombre comme les Grecs. De plus vne cer- 
taine dec1inaifon relatiue qui enueloppe toufiours 


1636] 

LE JEUNE' S RELA TION, r636 

117 

.. 
CHAPTER IV. 

OF THE LANGUAGE OF THE HURONS. 

T HIS is only to give some little foretaste of the 
language, and notice some of its peculiarities, 
in anticipation of a Grammar and a complete 
Dictionary. 
They have a letter to which we have nothing to 
correspond - we express it by Khi; the use of it is 
common to the Montagnés and to the Algonquins. 
They are not acquainted with B. F. L. M. P. X. Z; 
and 1. E. V. are never consonants to them. The 
greater part of their words are composed of vowels. 
They lack all the labial letters. This is probably 
the reason why they all open their lips so awkward- 
ly, and why we can scarcely understand them [80] 
when they whistle or when they speak low. As they 
have hardly any virtue or Religion, or any learning 
or government, they have consequently no simple 
words suitable to express what is connected with 
these. Hence it is that we are at a loss in explain- 
ing to them many important matters, depending 
upon a knowledge of these things. Compound words 
are most in use with them, and have the same force 
as the adjective and substantive joined together, 
among us. Andatarasé, fresh bread; Achz"tetsi, a foot 
long. The variety of these compound nouns is very 
great, and that is the key to the secret of their Lan- 
guage. They have, like us, a diversity of genders; 
and, like the Greeks, of number; besides a certain 


118 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

auec foy Ie pronom poffeffif, meus, tuus, .fuus, par ex- 
empIe, Iatacan, mon frere, aiataca1l, mes freres, .fata- 
can, ton frere, t.fátacan, tes freres, otacall, fon frere, 
atotacan, fes freres. 
Pour les cas ils les ont tous, ou les fuppléent par 
des particules fort propres. 
La merueille eft que tous leurs noms vniueríelle- 
ment íe coniuguent; par exemple, Affé, il eft frais, 
affé chen, il eftoit frais, gaon, vieux, agaon, il eft 
vieux, agaonc, i1 eftoit vieux, agaonha, il va deuenir 
vieux; & ainfi [8 I] du refte. De meíme en eft-il de 
ce mot 'iatacan, qui fignifie, mon frere, om:atacan, nous 
íommes freres, olliatacan ehen, nous eftions freres; 
eel a eft riche. Voicy qui ne l'eft gueres. Vn nom 
relatif parmy eux enueloppe toufiours la fignification 
d'vne des trois períonnes du pronom poffeffif, fi bien 
qu'ils ne peuuent dire fimplement, Pere, Fils, Maiftre, 
Valet, mais font contraincts de dire 1 'vn des trois, mon 
pere, ton pere, fon pere. Quoy que i'aye traduit cy- 
deuant en vne Oraifon vn de leurs noms par celuy de 
Pere, pour plus grande facilité. Suiuant cela nous- 
nous trouuons empefchez de leur faire dire propre- 
ment en leur Langue, Au nom du Pere, & du Fz"ls, & 
du .faine! E.fþrz"t. Iugeriez-vous à propos, en attendãt 
mieux, de fubftituer au lieu, Au. nom de 1l0flre Pere, 
& de .fon Fz"ls, & de leur .faÙle! E.fþrit. Certes il femble 
que les trois Perfonnes de la tres-faincte Trinité fe- 
roient fuffifamment exprimées en cefie façon, la troi- 
fiefme eftant en effect l'Efprit fainct de la premiere 
& de la feconde; la feconde, Ie Fils de la premiere; 
& la premiere, noftre Pere, aux termes de l' Apoftre, 
qui luy affecte ces propres mots aux Ephef. 3. Ad- 
iouftez que noftre Seigneur a donné exemple de cefte 


1636] 

LE /EUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

119 

relative declension which always includes in itself 
the possessive pronoun, 11leus, tuus, SU1tS,- for ex- 
ample, Iatacan, my brother, az.atacan, my brothers; 
satacan, thy brother; tsátacan, thy brothers; otacan, 
his brother, atotacan, his brothers. 
As to cases, they have them all, or supply them 
by very appropriate particles. 
The astonishing thing is that all their words are 
universally conjugated, for example, Assé, it is fresh, 
assé ellen, it was fresh; gaon, old, agaOll, he is old, 
agaOllc, he was old, agaollha, he is growing old; and 
so [81] with the rest. It is the same with that word 
iatacan, which means, my brother; Oil iatacan , we are 
brothers, om'atacall ellen, we were brothers; that is 
copious. Here is one which is not so. A relative 
noun with them includes always the meaning of one 
of the three persons of the possessive pronoun, so 
that they can not say simply, Father, Son, Master, 
Valet, but are obliged to say one of the three, my 
father, thy father, his father. However, I have 
translated above in a Prayer one of their nouns by 
the word Father, for greater clearness. On this ac- 
count, we find ourselves hindered from getting them 
to say properly in their Language, hz tIle name of the 
Fatller, and of tllc Son, and of tIle holy Ghost. 'V ould 
you judge it fitting, while waiting a better expression, 
to substitute instead, bl tile name of our Father, and 
of his Son, and of their holy Glzost.'? Certainly it SeelTIS 
that the three Persons of the most holy Trinity would 
be sufficiently expressed in this way, the third being 
in truth the holy Spirit of the first and of the sec- 
ond; the second being Son of the first; and the first, 
our Father, in the terms of the Apostle, who applies 
to him those fitting words in Ephesians 3. It may 


120 

LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

façon [82J de parler, non feulement en l'Oraifon Do- 
minicale, ainfi que nous la nommons pour fon re- 
fpect; mais auffi commandant à la Magdelaine, en 
fainct lean 20. de porter de fa part ces beaux mots à 
fes Freres ou Difciples. Ie monte à mOll Pere & au 
voßre. Oferions-nous en vfer ainfi, iufqu'à ce que 
la langue Huronne foit enrichie, ou l'efprit des Hu- 
rons ouuert à d'autres langues? nous ne ferons rien 
fans confeil. 
Or à propos de ce nom de Pere, ie ne veux pas ou- 
blier la difficulté qui s'eft auffi rencontrée à faire dire, 
Noßre Pere quz' es aux CÙux, à ceux qui n'en auoient 
point fur terre; leur parler des morts qu'ils ont aymé, 
c'eft les iniurer. Peu s'en fallut qu'vne femme à 
qui fa mere eftoit morte depuis peu, ne perdift tout 
à fait l'enuie de fe faire baptifer, fur ce qu'on luy 
auoit aduancé par mefgarde, Pere & .fifcre IlOnoreras. 
Quant aux verbes ce qui eft de plus remarquable 
en leur langue eft; 1. Qu'ils en ont d'autres pour 
fignifier des chofes animées, & d'autres pour celles 
qui font fans vies. 2. Qu'ils varient leurs temps en 
autant de façons que les Grecs; leurs nombres auffi, 
outre que la premiere perfonne tant du duel que du 
plurier, eft encor double, car [83J pour dire, par ex- 
empIe, nous partons toy & moy, il faut dire, kiara.râla, 
& pour dire noUs partons luy & moy, aiara.râla. De 
mefme au plurier, nous partons nous autres, plufieurs, 
að'ara.râla, nous partons auec vous, cð'ara.râla. 
Outre tout cela il fe remarque double coniugaifon, 
& ie croy que cecy eft commun aux langues Ameri- 
caines: l'vne eft fimple & abfoluë femblable à nos 
coniugaifons Latine & Françoife; Par exemple, ce 
verbe ahz:aton, qui fignifie efcrire, fe coniuge abfolu- 


1636] 

LE IEUNE'S RELATION, I636 

121 

be added that our Lord has given example of this 
way [82) of speaking, not only in the Lord's Prayer, 
as we call it from respect to him, but by way of com- 
mandment to Mary Magdalaine in saint John 20. 
to bear from him these beautiful words to his Breth- 
ren or Disciples, I ascend to my Fatlter and to yours. 
Would we venture to employ it thus until the Huron 
language shall be enriched, or the mind of the H u- 
rons opened to other languages? We will do noth- 
ing without advice. 
Now in connection with this name Father I must 
not forget the difficulty there is in teaching to say 
Our Father 'Who art l'n Heaven, to those who have none 
on earth; to speak to them of the dead whom they 
have loved, is to insult them. A woman, whose 
mother had died a short time before, almost lost her 
desire to be baptized because the command, TILOu 
shalt h01lor thy Fatlter and thy .JI;lotlter, had been inad- 
vertently quoted to her. 
As for the verbs, what is most remarkable in their 
language is: I. That they have some to signify 
animate things, and others to signify things without 
life. 2. That they vary their tenses in as many 
ways as did the Greeks; their numbers also,- be- 
sides that the first person, of both the dual number 
and the plural, is, moreover, double; thus [83] to 
say" we set out, thou and I," we must say kiarascwa, 
and to say" we set out, he and I," aiarascwa. Like- 
wise in the plural, .. we, several of us, set out," awa- 
rascwa/ "we, together, set out," cwarascwa. 
Besides all this, there is to be noticed a double 
conjugation, and I believe that this is common to the 
American languages. The one is simple and absolute, 
like our Latin and French conjugations. For ex- 
ample, the verb ahiaton, meaning" to write," is con- 


122 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

ment de cefte façon; Ùkz"atoll, i' eícris, ckz"ekz"atonc, tu 
eícris, z"lzal12:atonc, il efcrit, a
akz"atonc, nous efcriuons, 
fc
ahz"atonc, vous efcriuez, attz"kz"atonc, ils efcriuent. 
L'autre façon de coniuguer fe peut nommer reci- 
proque, d'autant que l'action fignifiée par Ie verbe íe 
termine toufiours à quelque períonne, ou à quelque 
chofe; de forte que au lieu que nous difons en trois 
mots ie m'ayme, les Hurons difent feulement z'ate- 
nonll
é, ie t'ayme, omlOllh8é, ie vous ayme tous deux, 
z"nonh8é, ie vous ayme vous plufieurs, 8anonlz8é, & 
ainfi d u refte. 
Ce que ie trouue de plus rare, eft qu'il y a vne 
coniugaifon feminine, au moins en la troifiefme per- 
íonne, tant du fingulier que [84] du plurier; car nous 
n'en auons pas découuert dauantage, on bien peu. 
En voicy vn exemple; z"haton, il dit z"8aton, elle dit, 
z"llOnton, ils difent, z"01lton, elles difent. La principale 
diftinction de cefte coniugaifon feminine d'auec la 
maículine eft Ie manquement de la lettre H. dont la 
maículine abonde, peut-eftre pour donner à entendre 
aux femmes qu'il ne doit yauoir rien d'afpre ny de 
íeuere en leurs paroles, & en leurs mæurs, mais que 
la grace & la loy de clemence doiuent eftre pofées 
íur leurs langues, íuiuant ce traict du Sage, lex cle- 
11lC1ztiæ ill lingua eius. C'eft affez de ce fuiet pour 
cefte heure, fi ce n'eft que quelqu'vn foit bien ayfe 
d'apprendre auffi quelque chofe de leur ftile. lIs 
víent de comparaifons, de mots du temps, & de pro- 
uerbes affez fouuent. En voicy vn des plus remar- 
quables. Tichiout etoátendi; voila, difent-ils, l' efioile 
cheute, quand ils voyent quelqu'vn qui eft gras & en 
bon poinct; c'eft qu'ils tiennent qu'vn certain iour 
vne efioile tomba du Ciel en forme d'vne Oye graffe. 
A mantes fibi f011Znia fi1lgunt. 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I636 

123 

jugated absolutely in this way: iehiaton, I write; 
ehiehzatone, thou writest, ihalliatone, he writes, awahi- 
atone, we write, sewahiatone, you write, attikiatone, 
they write. 
The other method of conjugation may be called 
the reciprocat inasmuch as the action signified by the 
verb terminates always on some person or thing; so 
that, instead of saying, as we do, in three words, " I 
love myself," the Hurons say only iatenonhwé/ "I 
love thee," onnonllwé J . " I love you both," in onllwé J . 
" I love you" (several), wflllonhwé, and so for the 
rest. 
What I find most extraordinary is that there is a 
feminine conjugation, at least in the third person both 
of the singular and [84] of the plural; for we have 
not discovered more of it, or very little. Here is an 
example of it: ikaton, he says; iwaton, she says; 
illOnton, they say [masculine]; ionton, they say [femi- 
nine]. The principal distinction of this feminine 
con jugation from the masculine is the lack of the 
letter H, in which the masculine abounds,-perhaps 
to give the women to understand that there ought to 
be nothing rough or coarse in their words or in their 
manners, but that the grace and law of gentleness 
ought to be upon their tongues, following that rule 
of the Sage, lex clement'l.æ in lingua efus. This is 
enough of this subject for the present, unless it be 
that some one may wish to hear something about 
their style. They use comparisons, time-words, and 
proverbs very often. Here is one of the most remark- 
able, Tiehiout etoátendi, "Behold," they say, "the 
fallen star," when they see some one who is fat and 
corpulent; for they hold that once upon a time a star 
fell fr01TI Heaven in the form of a fat Goose. A man- 
tes sibi somnia fingunt. 


124 

LES RELATIONS DES ./ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

[85] Seconde Partie. 

De la creance, des mæurs & des coufiumes des 
Hurons. 

CHAPITRE PRE1iIER. 

CE QUE PENSENT LES HURONS DE LEUR ORIGINE. 

O N s'eftonnera de voir tant d'aueuglement pour 
les chofes du Ciel, en vn Peuple qui ne 
manque point de raifon & de lumiere, pour 
celles de la terre. C'eft ce que leurs vices & leurs 
brutalitez leur ont merité enuers Dieu. II y a quel- 
que apparence qu'ils ont eu autrefois quelque co- 
gnoiffance du vray Dieu pardeffus la nature, comme i1 
fe peut remarquer en quelques circonftances de leurs 
fables; & quand ils n' en auroient point eu que celIe 
que la Nature leur pouuoit fournir, encore euffent-ils 
deu eftre plus raifonnables en ce fuiet, s'il ne leur fuft 
[86] arriué felon Ie dire de l' Apoftre. CÙm cogno- 
ui.IJent Demn, non fiat! Deum glorzficauerunt, aut gratias 
egerunt, .fed CllallUenl11t in cogitatÙmibus .fu'Ù, & ob.fcura- 
tum eft 'Ùzfip-Ùns cor eorU1Jl. Pour n'auoir pas voulu 
recognoifire Dieu en leurs mæurs & actions, ils en 
ont perdu la penfée, & font deuenus pires que beftes 
pour fon regard, & pour l'efiime qu'ils en onto 
Or pour commencer par ce qui eft comme Ie fonde- 
ment de leur croyance, la plus part fe vantent de 


1636] 

LEJEUNES RELATION, I6.J6 

125 

[85] Part Second. 

On the belief, manners, and customs of the 
Hurons. 

CHAPTER FIRST. 

WHAT THE HURONS THINK OF THEIR ORIGIN. 

O NE is astonished to see so much blindness in 
regard to the things of Heaven, in a People 
who do not lack judgment and knowledge in 
reference to those of earth. This is what their vices 
and brutality have merited from God. There are 
some indications that they had formerly some more 
than natural knowledge of the true God, as may be 
remarked in some particulars of their fables; and 
even if they had had only that which Nature can fur- 
nish to them, still they ought to have been more rea- 
sonable on this subject, if it had not [86] happened 
to them according to the word of the Apostle, Cùm 
cognovissent Deum, non sz.cut Deum glorificaverunt, aut 
gratias egerunt, sed evanuerUllt in cogitat'l'onibus suis, et 
obscuratum est insipiens cor eorum. For not having 
been willing to acknowledge God in their habits and 
actions, they have lost the thought of him and have 
become worse than beasts in his sight, and as regards 
the respect they have for him. 
Now, to begin with the foundation of their belief,- 


126 

LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

tirer leur origine du Ciel, ce qu'ils fondent fur cefte 
fable, qui paffe parmy eux pour vne verité. 
lIs recognoiffent pour chef de leur Nation vne cer. 
taine femme qu'ils appellent Ataentfic, qui leur eft, 
difent-ils, tombée du Ciel; car ils fuppofent que les 
Cieux eftoiêt long-temps auparauant cefte merueille, 
& ne fçauroient vous dire, ny quand, ny comment 
ces grands corps ont efté tirez des abyfmes du neant; 
ils fuppofent mefme que fur les voûtes des Cieux il 
y auoit, & y a encor maintenant, vne terre femblable 
à celle-cy, des bois, des lacs, des riuieres & des 
champs, comme nous auons icy bas, & des Peuples 
qui habitent ces terres. lIs ne s'accordent pas en la 
façõ qu'arriua cefte cheute [87] fi heureufe. Les vns 
difent qu'vn iour qu'elle trauailloit dans fon champ 
elle apperçeut vn Ours, fon chien fe mit à Ie pour- 
fuiure, & elle mefme apres: l'Ours fe voyant preffé 
de prés, & ne cherchant qu'à efquiuer les dents du 
chien, tõba par mefgarde dans vn trou: le chien Ie 
fuiuit, Aataentfic, s'eftant approchée de ce precipice, 
voyant que ny l'Ours ny le chien ne paroiffoient plus, 
touchée de defefpoir, s'y ietta auffi; neantmoins fa 
cheute fe trouua plus fauorable qu'elle n'euft penfé; 
car elle tomba icy bas dans les eaux fans fe blefíer, 
quoy qu'elle fuft enceinte, apres quoy les eaux s'eftant 
affechées peu à peu, la terre parut, & fe rendit ha- 
bitable. 
Les autres attribuent cefte cheute à vne autre 
caufe, qui femble auoir quelque rapport au fait d' A- 
dam, mais Ie menfonge y a preualu. lIs difent que 
Ie mary d' Aataentfic eftant fort malade fongea qu'il 
falloit couper vn certain arbre dont viuoient ceux qui 
demeuroient dans Ie Ciel, & qu'i1 n'auroit pas fi toft 


1636] 

LE/EUNE'S RELATION, I6þ 

127 

the greater part boast of deriving their origin from 
Heaven, which they found on the following fable, 
which passes among them for a truth. 
They recognize as head of their Nation a certain 
woman whom they call Ataentsic, who fell among 
them, they say, from Heaven. 11 For they think 
the Heavens existed a long time before this wonder; 
but they cannot tell you when or how its great bodies 
were drawn from the abysses of nothing. They sup- 
pose, even, that above the arches of the Sky there 
was and still is a land like ours, with woods, lakes, 
rivers and fields, and Peoples who inhabit them. 
They do not agree as to the manner in which this so 
fortunate descent occurred. [87] Some say that one 
day, as she was working in her field, she perceived a 
Bear; her dog began to pursue it and she herself 
afterwards. The Bear, seeing himself closely pressed, 
and seeking only to escape the teeth of the dog, fell 
by accident into a hole; the dog followed him. 
Aataentsz.c, having approached this precipice, finding 
that neither the Bear nor the dog were any longer to 
be seen, moved by despair, threw herself into it also. 
Nevertheless, her fall happened to be more favorable 
than she had supposed; for she fell down into the 
waters without being hurt, although she was with 
child,- after which, the waters having dried up little 
by little, the earth appeared and became habitable. 
Others attribute this fall to another cause, which 
seems to have some relation to the case of Adam, but 
falsehood makes up the greater part of it. They say 
that the husband of Aataentsic, being very sick, 
dreamed that it was necessary to cut down a certain 
tree from which those who abode in Heaven obtained 
their food; and that, as soon as he ate of the fruit, 


128 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

mangé de fon fruict qu'il feroit incontinent guery. 
Aataentfic cognoiffant la volonté de fon mary, prend 
fa hache, & sten va auec la refolutiõ de n'en faire à 
deux fois, mais elle n'eut pas plutofi affené Ie premier 
[88] coup, que l'arbre fondit en mefme temps prefque 
fous fes pieds, & tomba icy bas, dequoy elle demeura 
fi efionnée, qu'apres en auoir porté la nouuelle à fon 
mary, elle retourna & fe ietta apres. Or comme elle 
tõboit, la Tortuë leuant par hazard la tefie hors de 
l' eau l' apperçeut, & ne fçachant à quoy fe refoudre, 
eftonnée qu'elle efioit de cefie merueille, elle appelle 
les autres animaux aquatiques pour prendre leurs 
aduis; les voila incontinent affemblez, elle leur 
monfire ce qu'elle voyoit, leur demande ce qu'ils 
iugent à propos de faire; la plufpart s'en rapportent 
au Cafior, lequel par bienfeance remet Ie tout au 
iugemêt de la Tortuë, qui fut done enfin d'aduis 
qu'ils miffent tous promptement la main à l'æuure, 
qu'ils fe plongeaffent au fond de l'eau, & en appor- 
taffent de la terre, & la miffent fur fon dos. Auffi-tofi 
dit, auffi-tofi fait, & la femme tomba fort doucement 
fur cefie HIe. Quelque temps apres, comme elle 
efioit tombée enceinte, elle fe deliura d'vne fille, la- 
quelle ne demeura gueres fans eftre groffe, fi vous 
leur demandez comment, vous les mettez bien en 
peine; tant y-a, vous difent ils, qu'elle fe trouua 
groffe; quelques-vns en reiettent la caufe fur quel- 
ques efirãgers [89] qui aborderent à cefie HIe. Ie 
vous prie accordez cecy auec ce qu'ils difent, qu'a- 
uant qu'Aataentfic fuft tombée du Ciel, il n'y auoit 
point d'hõmes fur la terre. Quoy que s'en foit elle 
enfanta deux garçons, Ta!lifcaron & I
skeha, lefquels 
efiant deuenus grands eurent quelque pique par en- 


1636] 

LE /EUNE'S RELATION, r636 

129 

he would be immediately healed. Aataentsic, know- 
ing the desire of her husband, takes his axe and goes 
away with the resolution not to make two trips of it; 
but she had no sooner dealt the first [88] blow than 
the tree at once split, almost under her feet, and fell 
to this earth; whereupon she was so astonished that, 
after having carried the news to her husband, she re- 
turned and threw herself after it. Now, as she fell, 
the Turtle, happening to raise her head above water, 
perceived her; and, not knowing what to decide upon, 
astonished as she was at this wonder, she called to- 
gether the other aquatic animals to get their opinion. 
They immediately assembled; she points out to them 
what she saw, and asks them what they think it fit- 
ting to do. The greater part refer the matter to the 
Beaver, who, through courtesy, hands ove! the whole 
to the judgment of the Turtle, whose final opinion was 
that they should all promptly set to work, dive to 
the bottom of the water, bring up soil to her, and put 
it on her back. No sooner said than done, and the 
woman fell very gently on this Island. Some time 
after, as she was with child when she fell, she was 
delivered of a daughter, who almost immediately be- 
came pregnant. If you ask them how, you puzzle 
them very much. At all events, they tell you, she 
was pregnant. Some throw the blame upon some 
strangers, [89] who landed on this Island. I pray 
you make this agree with what they say, that, be- 
fore Aataelltsic fell from the Sky, there were no men 
on earth. However that may be, she brought forth 
two boys, Tawiscaroll and Iouskeha, who, when they 
grew up, had some quarrel with each other; judge if 
this does not relate in some way to the murder of 
Abel. They came to blows, but with very different 


130 

LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

femble; iugez fi cela ne reffent point quelque chofe 
du maffacre d' Abel. IIs en vindrent aux mains; mais 
auec des armes bien differentes; D!skeha auoit Ie bois 
d'vn Cerf, Ta
i.fcaron fe contenta de quelques fruits 
de rofier fauuage, fe perfuadant qu'il n'en auroit pas 
fi toH frappé fon frere, qu'il tomberoit mort à fes 
pieds; mais il en arriua tout autrement qu'il ne 
s'eHoit promis, & I
skeha au contraire luy porta vn fi 
rude coup dans les flancs, que Ie fang en fortit en 
abõdance. Ce pauure miferable fe miH auffi-toH en 
fuite, & de fon fang, dont ces terres furent arroufées, 
nafquirent certaines pierres femblables à celles dont 
nous nous feruons en France pour baUre Ie fufil, que 
les Sauuages appellent encor auiourd 'huy Ta
z:.rcara, 
du nom de cet infortuné, fon frere Ie pourfuiuit & 
l'acheua: voila ce que la plufpart croyent de l'origine 
de ces Nations. 
[90] II yen a qui ne montent pas fi haut, & ne font 
pas ambitieux iufques à ce poinct, que de croire qu'ils 
ayent tiré leur origine du Ciel. IIs difent qu'au com- 
mencement du monde la terre eHoit toute couuerte 
d'eau, à la referue d'vne petite IOe qui portoit toute 
l'efperance du genre humain, fçauoir eH vn feul 
homme, qui n'auoit pour toute compagnie qu'vn Re- 
nard & vn petit animal femblable à vne Foüine, qu'ils 
appellent T.r
heJZdaZ:a. L'homme ne fçachant que 
faire fe voyant retranché dans vne fi petite étenduë 
de pays inuita Ie Renard à fe plonger dans l'eau pour 
voir s'il yauoit fonds, mais il ne fe fut fi toft moüillé 
les pattes qu' il fe retira, craignant que ceHe experi- 
êce ne luy couHaH la vie, Dequoy 1 'homme s'efiant 
indigné, TeJJand-iõ tu n'as point d'efprit, luy dit-il, & 
Ie ietta dans l'eau d'vn coup de pied, où i1 beut vn 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, r636 

131 

weapons. Iouskella had the horns of a Stag; Tawis- 
caron, who contented himself with some fruits of the 
wild rosebush, was persuaded that, as soon as he had 
struck his brother, he would fall dead at his feet. 
But it happened quite differently from what he had 
expected; and Iouskeha, on the contrary, struck him 
so rude a blow in the side, that the blood came forth 
abundantly. This poor wretch immediately fled; 
and from his blood, with which the land was 
sprinkled, certain stones sprang up, like those we 
employ in France to fire a gun,-which the Savages 
call even to-day TawÙcara, from the name of this un- 
fortunate. His brother pursued him, and finished 
him. This is what the greater part believe concern- 
ing the origin of these Nations. 
[90] There are some who do not soar so high, and 
are not so ambitious as to believe that they derive 
their origin from Heaven. They say that, in the be- 
ginning of the world, the land was quite covered 
with water, with the exception of a little Island on 
which was the sole hope of the human race,-to wit, 
a single man, whose sole companions were a Fox and 
a little animal like a Marten, which they call Tsou- 
hendaia. The man, not knowing what to do, seeing 
himself cut off in so narrow a range of country, asked 
the Fox to plunge into the water, to see if there were 
any bottom to it; but he had no sooner wet his paws 
than he drew back, fearing that this experience would 
cost him his life. Whereupon the man became in- 
dignant; " TessalldÙm, thou hast no sense," he said to 
him, and kicked him into the water, where he drank 
a little more than his fill. However he did not de- 
sist from his design, and so encouraged the little ani- 
mal that was now his sole companion, that it finally 


132 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. ]0 

peu plus que fon faoul. Cependant i1 ne defii1a point 
de fon deffein, & encouragea fi bien ce petit animal 
qui luy refioit de compagnie, qu'il fe refolut en fin 
de fe plonger, & comme i1 ne s'imaginoit pas qu'il y 
eufi fi peu de fond, i1 Ie fit fi rudement, qu'il fe heur- 
ta bien fort contre la terre, & en rapporta Ie muzeau 
tout couuert de vafe; l'homme bien refiouy [91] de 
cefie heureufe defcouuerte, l'exhorte de continuer, 
& d'apporter de la terre pour croii1re cei1e lfiette; ce 
qu'il fit auec tant d'affiduité, qu'il luy fit perdre fon 
nom, & la changea en ces vafies campagnes que nous 
voyons. Si vous les preffez encor icy, & leur deman- 
dez ce qu'ils penfent de cet homme, qui luy a donné 
la vie? qui l'a mis fur cefie petite lfie? comment il a 
peu efire Ie pere de toutes ces Nations, puis qu'il 
ei10it feul, & n'auoit point de compagne; vous ne 
gagnerez rien de leur faire toutes ces quefiions, au 
moins n'aurez vous que cefie folution, qui ne feroit 
pas mauuaife, fi leur Religion efioit bonne; Nous ne 
/fauolls, on Ie dit aÙlfi, nos Peres lze nous en ont pas enJei- 
gné dauantage. Que diriez vous à cela? tout ce que 
nous faifons c'efi de leur tefmoigner que nous leur 
portons compaffion de les voir dans vne fi groffiere 
ignorance; nous prenons de là fuiet, quand nous les 
en iugeons capables, de leur expliquer quelques vns 
de nos Myf1eres, & de leur monítrer combien ils font 
conformes à la raifon; ils les entendent fort volon- 
tiers, & en demeurent grandement fatisfaits. 
Mais pour retourner à AataC11tfic & I
skeha, ils tien- 
nent que I
skeha efi le Soleil, & [92] Aatae1ztfic la 
Lune, & toutesfois que leur Cabane eft fituée au bout 
de la terre, c' eft à dire vers no fire mer Oceane: car 
au delà c'efi vn pays perdu pour eux, & auant qu'ils 


1636] 

LE /E UNE , 5 RELA TION, I636 

133 

resolved to plunge in; and as it did not imagine that 
the water was so shallow, it did this so violently as 
to dash itself against the bottom, and came back with 
its snout all covered with slime. The man, very 
glad [91] at this happy discovery, exhorts it to con- 
tinue, and to bring up soil to increase the size of the 
Islet; which it did with so much assiduity, that the 
Islet lost its identity, and was changed into these 
vast fields that we see. If you again press them 
here, and ask them what they think of this man,- 
who gave him life, who put him upon this little Is- 
land, how he could become the father of all these N a- 
tions, since he was alone and had no companion; you 
will gain nothing by asking all these questions, ex- 
cept that you will get this solution, which would not 
be bad, if their Religion were good, We do not know
. 
we were told so
. our Fatllers ?lever taugllt us any more 
about it. \Vhat would you say to that? All that we 
do is to bear witness to them that we feel compassion 
for their so gross ignorance; we take thence occa- 
sion, when we judge them capable of appreciating 
it, for explaining some of our Mysteries, and of 
showing them how fully they conform to reason. 
They listen very willingly, and are well satisfied 
therewi th. 
But to return to Aataentsic and Iouskeha; they hold 
that Iouskella is the Sun 12 and [92] Aataentsz'c the 
Moon, and yet that their Home is situated at the ends 
of the earth, namely, toward our Ocean sea; for be- 
yond that it is a lost country to them, and before 
they had any commerce with the French they had 
never dreamed that there was under Heaven a differ- 
ent land from their own,-and, now that they are 
disabused of this idea, many still believe that their 


134 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

euffent eu quelque commerce auec nos François, ils 
De s'imaginoient pas qu'il y eufi fous Ie Ciel vne 
autre terre que la leur, & maintenant qu'ils font def- 
abufez de ce cofié-là, encor croyent-ils, au moins plu- 
fieurs, que leur terre & la nofire font deux pieces 
tout à fait detachées, & parties des mains de diuers 
ouuriers. lIs difent done que quatre ieunes hommes 
entreprirent autresfois ce voyage pour s'informer 
eux-mefmes de la verité, qu'ils trouuerent I
skelta 
tout feul dans fa Cabane qui les reçeut fort humaine- 
ment. Apres quelques complimës de part & d'autre 
à la mode du Pays, illeur donna aduis de fe cacher 
en quelque coing, autrement qu'il ne refpondoit pas 
de leur vie, qu'Aataentfic efioit pour leur ioüer vn 
mauuais tour, s'ils ne fe tenoient fur leur garde. 
Cefie Megere arriue fur Ie foir, & comme elle prend 
telle figure que bon luy femble, s'apperceuant qu'i1 
yauoit de nouueaux hofies en la maHon, elle prifi 
la forme d'vne belle ieune fille bien parée, auec vn 
beau collier, & des bracellets de [93J Pourcelaine, & 
demanda à fon fils où efioient fes hofies; il refpond 
qu'il ne fçauoit ce qu'elle vouloit dire, là de:!Ius elle 
fort de la Cabane, I
skelta fe feruit de l'occafion pour 
auertir fes hofies, & leur fauua la vie. Or encor que 
leur Cabane foit fi fort eí1oignée, ils fe trouuent ne- 
antmoins l'vn & l'autre aux fefiins, & aux danfes qui 
fe font par les villages, Aataentfic y en fouuent bien 
bourrée, I
skeha en reiette la faute fur vn certain oKi 
cornu appellé TehõrrejJalldeeJl, mais il fe trouue au 
bout du conte que c'efi luy mefme qui fe defguife, & 
outrage ainfi fa mere. 
Au rene ils s'efiiment grandement obligez à ce per- 
fonnage; car premierement, au dire de quelques- vns 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

135 

country and ours are two pieces quite separate, and 
made by the hands of different workmen. They 
say, therefore, that four young men once undertook 
a journey to find out the truth about it; that they 
found /ouskeha quite alone in his Cabin, and that he 
received them very kindly. After some compliments 
on both sides, in the fashion of the Country, he ad- 
vised them to conceal themselves in some corner, 
otherwise he would not answer for their lives; that 
Aataentsic was sure to play them a bad trick, if they 
did not keep on their guard. This Fury arrives to- 
ward evening, and, as she assumes any form she 
sees fit, perceiving that there were new guests in the 
house she took the form of a beautiful young girl, 
handsomely adorned, with a beautiful necklace and 
bracelets of [93] Porcelain, and asked her son where 
his guests were. He replied that he did not know 
what she meant. Thereupon she went out of the 
Cabin, and /OltSkella took the opportunity to warn his 
guests, and thus saved their lives. Now, although 
their Cabin is so very distant, they are nevertheless 
both present at the feasts and dances which take 
place in the villages. Aataentsic is often badly abused 
there. /ouskeha throws the blame on a certain horned 
oki named Tehollrressalldeen; but it is found at the 
end of the tale that it is he himself who, under that 
disguise, thus insults his mother. 
Moreover, they esteem themselves greatly obliged 
to this personage; for, in the first place, according 
to the opinion of some,-who hold a belief quite con- 
trary to that of those whom we have mentioned thus 
far,-without him we would not have so many fine 
rivers and so many beautiful lakes. In the begin- 
ning of the world, they say, the earth was dry and 


136 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

qui font dans vne opinion toute contraire à ceux dont 
nous auõs par1é iufques à prefent, fans luy nous n'au- 
rions pas tant de belles riuieres, & taut de beaux 
lacs. Au commencement du monde, difent-ils, la 
terre efioit feiche & aride, & toutes les eaux efioient 
ramaffées fous l'aiffelle d'vne groffe grenoüille, de 
forte que I
skeha n'en pouuoit auoir vne goutte que 
par fon entremife. V n iour il fe refolut de fe deli- 
urer luy & toute fa Pofierité de cefie feruitude, & 
pour en venir à bout, illuy fit [94] vne incifion fous 
l'aiffelle, d'où les eaux fortirent en telle abondance, 
qu'elles fe répandirent par toute la terre, & de là les 
fleuues, les lacs, & les mers ont pris naiffance. V oiés 
fi ce n'efi pas fouldre fubtilement la quefiiõ de nos 
Echoles fur ce poi net. 11s tiennent auffi que fans 
I
skeha leur chaudiere ne pourroit bouillir, & qu'il a 
appris de la Tortue l'inuention de faire du feu. Sans 
luy ils ne feroient pas fi bonne chaffe, & n'auroient 
pas tant de facilité à prendre, comme ils font, les 
animaux à la courfe; car ils font dans cefie croyance 
que les animaux n'ont pas efié en liberté dés Ie com- 
mencement du monde, mais qu'ils efioient renfermez 
dans vne grande cauerne, où I
skella les gardoit: 
peut-efire ya-il en cela quelque allufion à ce que 
Dieu amena tous les animaux à Adam. Qu'vn iour 
il fe refolut de leur donner congé afin qu'i1s multipli- 
affent, & rempliffent les forefis, en telle façon neant- 
moins qu'i1 en peufi ayfément difpofer quand bon 
luy fembleroit. Voicy ce qu'il fit pour en venir à 
bout. A mefure qu'ils fortirent de cét antre, illes 
bleffa tous au pied d'vn coup de Heche; toutesfois Ie 
Loup efquiua le coup; de là vient, difent-ils, qu'ils 
ont de la peine à Ie prendre à la courfe. 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I636 

137 

arid; all the waters were collected under the armpit 
of a large frog, so that /ouskeha could not have a drop 
except through its agency. One day, he resolved to 
deliver himself and all his Posterity from this servi- 
tude; and, in order to attain this, he made [94] an 
incision under the armpit, whence the waters came 
forth in such abundance that they spread throughout 
the whole earth, and hence the origin of rivers, lakes, 
and seas. Behold here a subtle solution of the ques- 
tion of our Schools upon this point. They hold also 
that without /ollskelta their kettles would not boil, as 
he learned from the Turtle the process of making 
fire. Were it not for him, they would not have such 
good hunting, and would not have so much ease in 
capturing animals in the chase, as they now have. 
For they believe that animals were not at liberty 
from the beginning of the world, but that they were 
shut up in a great cavern, where /ouskeha guarded 
them. Perhaps there may be in that some allusion 
to the fact that God brought all the animals to Adam. 
However, one day he determined to give them liber- 
ty in order that they might multiply and fill the for- 
ests,-in such a way, nevertheless, that he might 
easily dispose of them when it should seem good to 
him. This is what he did to accomplish his end. 
In the order in which they came from the cave, he 
wounded them all in the foot with an arrow. How- 
ever, the Wolf escaped the shot; hence, they say, 
they have great difficulty in catching him in the 
chase. 
[95] They pass yet beyond this, and regard him as 
profane Antiquity once did Ceres. According to 
their story, it is /ouskelta who gives them the wheat 
they eat, it is he who makes it grow and brings it to 


138 

LES RELA TIOl\-S DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

[95] lIs paffent encor plus auant, & Ie regardent 
comme faifoit iadis l' Antiquité profane, vne Cerés; à 
les entendre c'eft I
skeha qui leur donne Ie bled qu'ils 
mangent, e'en luy qui le fait croinre, & Ie conduit à 
maturité; s'ils voyent leurs campagnes verdoyãtes au 
Printemps, s'ils recueillent de belles & plantureufes 
moiffons, & fi leurs Cabanes regorgent d'efpics, ils 
n'en ont I'obligation qu'à D!skeha. Ie ne fçay ce que 
Dieu nous garde cefte année, mais à entendre les 
bruits qui courent nous fommes menacez tout de bon 
d'vne grande fterilité. On a veu, dit-on, I
skeha, 
tout .défait & maigre comme vne fquelete, auec vn 
épy en fa main mal fourny; d'autres adiounent qu'il 
portoit vne iam be d 'homme, & la déchiroit à belles 
dents; tout ceIa, difent-ils, eft vne marque indubi- 
table d'vne fort mauuaife année: mais Ie plaifir eft, 
qu'il ne fe trouue dans Ie Pays qui dife, ie l' ay veu, 
ou ay parIé à homme qui 1'a veu, & cependant tout 
Ie monde croit cecy comme vne chofe indubitable, & 
perfonne ne fe met en peine de faire vne plus curi- 
eufe recherche de la verité. S'il plaifoit à la diuine 
Bonté faire mentir ces faux Prophetes, ce ne nous fe- 
roit pas vn petit auantage pour authorifer nonre [96] 
croyance dans Ie Pays, & donner cours à la publica- 
tion du fainct Euangile. Nous auõs receu, & rece- 
uons tous les iours tant de faueurs du Ciel, que nous 
auons fuiet d'efperer encor celle-cy, fi tant eft que 
ce foit la gloire de Dieu. 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

139 

maturity. If they see their fields verdant in the 
Spring, if they reap good and abundant harvests, and 
if their Cabins are crammed with ears of corn, they 
owe it to Iouskeha. I do not know what God has in 
store for us this year; but, to judge from the reports 
going round, we are threatened in earnest with a 
great scarcity. Iouskeha, it is reported, has been seen 
quite dejected, and thin as a skeleton, with a poor 
ear of corn in his hand. Some add that he was car- 
rying a man's leg and was tearing it with sharp 
teeth. All this, they say, is an indubitable sign of a 
very bad year. But the fun of it is, no one can be 
found in the Country who will say, "I have seen 
him, or I have spoken to a man that has seen him;" 
and yet everyone deems this an indubitable fact, 
and no man takes the trouble to make a more search- 
ing inquiry into the truth of it. If it should please 
the divine Goodness to prove these false Prophets 
untruthful, it would be no small advantage to add 
authority to our [96] faith in this Country, and to 
open the way for the publication of the holy Gospel. 
We have received and are receiving every day so 
many favors from Heaven that we have reason to 
hope for this one as well, if it is for the glory of God. 


140 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

CHAPITRE II. 

QUEL EST LE SENTIMENT DES HURONS TOUCHANT 
LA NATURE & L'ESTAT DE L'AME, TANT EN 
C'EST VIE, QU' APRES LA MORT. 

C ' EST vn plaifir de lesentendre parler des ames, 
ou pour mieux dire, c' eft vne chofe tout à 
fait digne de compaffion, de voir des hommes 
raifonnables, auoir des fentimens fi bas, d'vne effence 
fi noble, & qui porte des traicts fi vifs de la Diuinité. 
Ils luy donnent diuers noms felon fes diuers eftats 
ou diuerfes operations. Entant qu' elle anime feule. 
ment le corps, & luy donne la vie, ils l'appellent klti- 
01ldheâJi; entant qu'elle eft raifonnable, oKi andaérandi, 
femblable à vn demon, qui contrefait le demon: en- 
tant qu'elle penfe & delibere [97] fur quelque chofe, 
ils l'appellët elldÙmrra, & gonennonâJal, en tant qu'elle 
fe porte d'affection vers quelque obiect, d'où vient 
qu'ils difent fouuent, ondayee ikaton one1t1tonc
at; voila 
ce que le cæur me dit, voila ce que mon appetit de. 
fire. Maintenant fi elle eft feparée du corps, ils l'ap- 
pellent esken, & les os mefmes des morts atiskcn; à 
mon auis fur cette fauffe perfuafion qu'ils ont, que 
l' ame y demeure en quelque façõ attachée quelque 
temps apres la mort, au moins qu'elle n'en eft pas 
beaucoup éloignée, ils fe la figurent diuifibles; & 
vous auriez toutes les peines du monde à leur faire 
croire, que noftre ame eft toute entiere en toutes les 
parties de noftre corps, ils luy donnët mefme vne 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

141 

CHAPTER II. 

THE IDEAS OF THE HURONS REGARDING THE NATURE 
AND CONDITION OF THE SOUL, BOTH IN 
THIS LIFE AND AFTER DEATH. 

I T is amusing to hear them speak of their souls,- 
. or rather, I should say, it is a thing quite worthy 
of compassion to see reasonable men, with senti- 
ments so low concerning an essence so noble and 
bearing so distinct marks of Divinity. They give it 
different names according to its different conditions 
or different operations. In so far as it merely ani- 
mates the body and gives it life, they call it kkio1t- 
dhecwi
' in so far as it is possessed of reason, oki an- 
daéra1tdz', "like a demon, counterfeiting a demon;" 
in so far as it thinks and deliberates [97J on any- 
thing, they call it endz'o1trra
' and go1te1tnoncwal, in so 
far as it bears affection to any object; whence it hap- 
pens that they often say o1tdayee z'haton 01te1l1t01tcwat, 
" That is what my heart says to me, that is what my 
appetite desires." Then if it is separated from the 
body they call it esken, and even the bones of the 
dead, ati'sken,- in my opinion, on the false persua- 
sion entertained by them that the soul remains in 
some way attached to them for some time after death, 
at least that it is not far removed from them; they 
think of the soul as divisible, and you would have all 
the difficulty in the world to make them believe that 
our soul is entire in all parts of the body. They 
give to it even a head, arms, legs,- in short, a body; 


142 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

tefte, des bras, des iambes, en vn mot vn corps; & 
pour les mettre bien en peine, il ne faut que leur de- 
mander par où l' ame fort à la mort, fi tant eft qu' elle 
foit corporelle, & ayt vn corps auffi grand que celuy 
qu'elle anime; car à eel a ils n'ont point deréponfe. 
Pour ce qui eft de l' eftat de l' ame apres la mort, 
ils tiennent qu' elle fe fepare tellement du corps, 
qu'elle ne l'abandonne pas incontinent: quand on Ie 
porte au [98J tombeau, elle marche deuãt, & demeure 
dans Ie cimetiere iufques à la fefte des Morts; de 
nuict elle fe pourmene par les villages, & entre dans 
les Cabanes, où elle prend fa part des feftins, & 
mange de ce qui eft refté le foir dans la chaudiere; 
d' où vient que plufieurs, pour cette confideration, 
n' en mangent pas volontiers Ie lendemain; il y en a 
mefme qui ne fe trouuent point aux feftins qui fe font 
pour les ames, croyans qu'ils mourroient indubitable- 
ment, s'ils auoient feulement goufté des viandes qui 
leur font preparées; d'autres neantmoins ne font pas 
fi fcrupuleux, & en mangent tout leur faoul. 
A la fefte des Morts, qui fe fait enuiron de douze 
en douze ans, les ames quittent les cimetieres, & au 
dire de quelques-vns fe changent en Tourterelles, 
qu'ils perfecutent par apres à coups de fleches dans 
les bois pour en faire grillade & les manger; neant- 
moins la plus commune creance eft, qu'apres cette 
ceremonie, dont ie parleray icy bas, elles s'en vont 
de compagnie, couuertes qu'elles font des robbes & 
des colliers qu' on leur a mis dans la foffe, à vn grand 
Village, qui eft vers le [99J Soleil couchant, excepté 
toutefois les vieillards & les petits enfans, qui n'ont 
pas fi bonnes iambes que les autres, pour pouuoir 
faire ce voyage: ceux-cy demeurent dans Ie pays, où 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, I6.J6 

143 

and to put them in great perplexity it is only neces- 
sary to ask them by what exit the soul departs at 
death, if it be really corporeal, and has a body as 
large as that which it animates; for to that they 
have no reply. 
As to what is the state of the soul after death, they 
hold that it separates in such a way from the body 
that it does not abandon it immediately. When they 
bear it to the [98] grave, it walks in front, and re- 
mains in the cemetery until the feast of the Dead; 
by night, it walks through the villages and enters 
the Cabins, where it takes its part in the feasts, and 
eats what is left at evening in the kettle; whence it 
happens that many, on this account, do not willingly 
eat from it on the morrow; there are even some of 
them who will not go to the feasts made for the 
souls, believing that they would certainly die if they 
should even taste of the provisions prepared for them; 
others, however, are not so scrupulous, and eat 
their fill. 
At the feast of the Dead, which takes place about 
every twelve years, the souls quit the cemeteries, 
and in the opinion of some are changed into Turtle- 
doves, which they pursue later in the woods, with 
bow and arrow, to broil and eat; nevertheless the 
most common belief is that after this ceremony, of 
which I shall speak below, they go away in company, 
covered as they are with robes and collars which 
have been put into the grave for them, to a great 
Village, which is toward the [99J setting Sun,-ex- 
cept, however, the old people and the little children 
who have not as strong limbs as the others to make 
this voyage; these remain in the country, where 
they have their own particular Villages. Some as- 


144 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

ils ant leurs Villages particuliers; on entend quel- 
quefois, difent-ils, le bruit des portes de leurs Ca- 
banes, & les voix des enfans qui chaffent les oyfeaux 
de leurs champs, ils fement des bleds en la faifon, 
& fe feruent des champs que les viuans ont abandon- 
nez; s'il fe bruí1e quelque Village, ce qui arriue fou- 
uent en ce pays, ils ont foin de ramaffer du milieu de 
cette incendie Ie bled rofiy, & en font vne partie de 
leurs prouifions. 
Les ames qui font plus fortes & plus robufies, ont 
leur rendez-vous, comme i'ay déja dit, vers l'Occi- 
dent, où chaque Nation a fan Village particulier, & 
fi l'ame d'vn Algonquin efioit fi hardie de fe prefenter 
au Village des ames de la Nation des Ours, el1e n'y 
feroit pas la bien venuë. 
Les ames de ceux qui font morts en guerre font 
bande à part, les autres les craignent, & ne leur per- 
mettent point l'entrée de leur Village, non plus 
qu'aux [100] ames de ceux qui fe font défaits eux- 
mefmes. Quant aux ames des larrons, elles y font 
les bien venuës, & fi elles en efioiët bannies, il n'y 
refieroit ame qui viue. Car, comme i'ay dit, Huron 
& larron ne font qu'vn; & Ie plus homme de bien du 
Pays fera tout ce qu'il pourra pour faire fa main, s'il 
trouue quelque chofe chez vous à l'écart qui luy 
agrée. 
Ie demandois vn iour à vn de nos Sauuages, où ils 
penfoient que fufi Ie Village des ames, il me répon- 
dit qu'il efioit vers la Nation du Petun, c'efi à dire 
vers l'Occident, à huict lieuës de nous, & que quel- 
ques-vns les auoient veuës comme elles y alloient, 
que Ie chemin qu'elles tenoient efioit large, & affez 
battu, qu'elles paffoient aupres d'vne roche, qu'ils ap- 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I6.J6 

145 

sert that at times they hear the noise of the doors of 
their Cabins, and the voices of the children chasing 
the birds in the fields. They sow corn in its season, 
and use the fields the living have abandoned; if any 
Village takes fire, which often happens in this coun- 
try, they take care to gather from the middle of this 
fire the roasted corn, and lay it by as a part of their 
provisions. 
The souls which are stronger and more robust 
have their gathering place, as I have said, toward 
the West, where each Nation has its own Village; 
and if the soul of an Algonquin were bold enough to 
present itself at the Village of the Bear Nation's 
souls, it would not be well received. 
The souls of those who died in war form a band 
by themselves; the others fear them, and do not per- 
mit their entry into their Village, any more than to 
the [100] souls of those who have killed themselves. 
As to the souls of thieves, they are quite welcome, 
and, if they were banished from them, there would 
not be a soul left ; for as I have said, Huron and thief 
are one and the same thing; and the wealthiest man 
in the Country will do all he can to try his hand at 
it, if he finds something in your house lying apart 
which he likes. 
I asked one day one of our Savages where they 
thought the Village of souls was; he answered that 
it was toward the Tobacco Nation,13 that is to say, 
toward the vVest, eight leagues from us, and that some 
persons had seen them as they were going; that the 
road they took was broad and well-beaten; that they 
passed near a rock called Ecareg1Z'i01zdz', which has 
often been found marked with the paint which they 
use to smear their faces. 


146 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

pellent Ecaregnz'ondz., qui s'efi trouuée fouuent mar- 
quée des peintures, dont ils ont accoufiumé de fe bar- 
boüiller Ie vifage. 
Vn autre me dit, que fur Ie mefme chemin, auant 
que d'arriuer au Village, on rencontre vne Cabane, 
où loge vn certain nommé Ofcotarach, ou Perce-tefie, 
qui tire la ceruelle des tefies des morts, & la garde; 
il faut paffer vne riuiere, & pour [101] tout pont 
vous n'auez que le tronc d'vn arbre couché en trauers, 
& appuyé fort legerement. Le paffage efi gardé par 
vn chien qui donne Ie fault à plufieurs ames & les fait 
tomber; elles font en mefme temps emportées par 
la violence du torrent, & étouffées dans les eaux; 
mais, luy dif-ie, d'où auez vous appris toutes ces nou- 
uelles de l'autre monde? Ce font, me dit-il, des per- 
sõnes refufcitées qui en ont fait Ie rapport. C'efi 
ainfi que Ie diable les abufe dans leurs fonges; c'efi 
ainfi qu'il parle par la bouche de quelques-vns, qui 
ayans efie laiffez comme pour morts, reuiennent par 
apres en fanté, & difcourent à perte de veuë de l'autre 
vie, felon les idées que leur en donne ce mauuais 
maifire: à leur dire Ie Village des ames n'efi en rien 
diffemblable du Village des viuans, on y va à la 
chaffe, à la pefche, & au bois; les haches, les robbes, 
& les colliers y font autant en credit, que parmy les 
viuants. En vn mot tout y efi pareil, il n'y a que 
cette difference, que iour & nuict elles ne font que 
gemir & fe plaindre; elles ont des Capitaines, qui de 
teps en temps mettent Ie hola, & tafchent d'apporter 
quelque moderation à leurs [102] foûpirs, & à leurs 
gemiffemes. Vray Dieu que d'ignorance & de fiupi- 
dité! Illuminare hz"s qui in tenebris & Ùz vmbra mortis 
fedent. 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I6.J6 

147 

Another told me that on the same road, before ar- 
riving at the Village, one comes to a Cabin where 
lives one named Oscotarach, or "Pierce-head," who 
draws the brains out of the heads of the dead, and 
keeps them. You must pass a river, and [101] the 
only bridge you have is the trunk of a tree laid 
across, and very slightly supported. The passage is 
guarded by a dog, which jumps at many souls, and 
makes them fan; they are at the same time carried 
away by the violence of the torrent, and stifled in 
the waters. "But," said I to him, " whence have 
you learned all this news of the other world?" "It 
is," he told me, "persons brought back to life, who 
have reported it." Thus it is the devil deceives them 
in their dreams; thus he speaks by the mouth of 
some, who having been left as dead, recover health, 
and talk at random of the other life, according to the 
ideas that this wretched master gives them. Accord- 
ing to them the Village of souls is in no respect un- 
like the Village of the living,-they go hunting, 
fishing, and to the woods; axes, robes, and collars 
are as much esteemed as among the living. In a 
word, everything is the same; there is only this 
difference, that day and night they do nothing but 
groan and complain. They have Captains, who from 
time to time put an end to it and try to moderate 
their [102] sighs and groans. God of truth, what 
ignorance and stupidity! Illum'inare his qui Ùz tene- 
bris, et in u1JZbra mortz's sedent. 
N ow this false belief they have about souls is kept 
up among them by means of certain stories which 
the fathers tell their children, which are so poorly 
put together that I am perfectly astounded to see 
how men believe them and accept them as truth. 


148 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

Or cette fauffe creance qu'ils ont des ames s'entre- 
tient parmy-eux, par Ie moyen de certaines hifioires 
que les peres racontent à leurs enfans, lefquelles font 
fi mal coufuës, que ie ne fçaurois affez m'efionner de 
voir comme des hommes les croyent, & les prennent 
pour veritez. En voicy deux des plus niaifes, que ie 
tiens de perfonnes d'efprit & de iugement parmy-eux. 
VnSauuage ayantperdu vnefienne fæurqu'i1aymoit 
vniquement, & ayant pleuré quelque temps fa mort, 
fe refolut de la chercher en quelque part du monde 
qu'elle peufi efire, & fit douze iournées tirant vers Ie 
Soleil couchant; où il auoit appris qu'efioit Ie \Tillage 
des ames, fans boire ny mãger; au bout defquels fa 
fæur luy apparut fur Ie foir, auec vn plat de farine 
cuite à l'eau, à la façon du pays, qu'elle luy donna, 
& difparut en mefme temps qu'il voulut mettre la 
main fur elle pour l'arrefier; i1 parra outre, & che- 
mina trois mois entiers, efperant toufiours venir à 
[103] bout de fes pretenfions; pendant tout ce temps 
elle ne manquoit pas tous les iours de fe monfirer, & 
luy rendre Ie mefme office qu'elle auoit commencé, 
allant ainfi augmentant fa paffion, fans luy donner 
autre foulagement, que ce peu de nourriture qu'elle 
Iuyapportoit. Les trois mois expirez, i1 rencontra 
vne riuiere, qui Ie mit en peine d'abord, car elle efioit 
fort rapide, & ne paroiffoit pas gayable; i1 y auoit 
bien quelques arbres abbatus qui tenoient Ie trauers, 
mais ce pont efioit fi branlant qu'i1 n'auoit pas la har- 
dieffe de s'y fier. Que fera-il? I1 y auoit au delà 
quelque piece de terre défrichée, ce qui luy fit croire 
qu'il y trouueroit quelques habitans. De fait apres 
auoir regardé de cofié & d'autre, i1 apperceut à l'en- 
trée du bois, vne petite Cabane, i1 crie à diuerfes re- 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I6.J6 

149 

Here are two of the most stupid ones, which I get 
from persons of intelligence and judgment among 
them. 
A Savage having lost one of his sisters, whom he 
loved above all the rest, and having wept for some 
time after her death, resolved to seek her, in what- 
ever part of the world she might be; and he trav- 
eled twelve days toward the setting Sun, where he 
had learned the Village of souls was, without eating or 
drinking. At the end of this time, his sister ap- 
peared to him in the night, with a dish of meal 
cooked in water, after the fashion of the country, 
which she gave to him, and disappeared at the moment 
he wished to put his hand on her and stop her. He 
went on, and journeyed three whole months, hoping 
always to succeed [103] in claiming her. During all 
this time she never failed to show herself every day, 
and to render him the same service that she had at 
first,- increasing in this way his desire, without giv- 
ing it any other consolation than the little nourish- 
ment which she brought him. The three months 
expired; he came to a river, which presented great 
difficulty to him at first, for it was very rapid and did 
not appear fordable. There were, indeed, some fall- 
en trees thrown across it; but this bridge was so 
shaky that he did not dare to trust himself to it. 
What should he do? There was on the other side a 
piece of cleared land, which made him think there 
must be some inhabitants near. In fact, after look- 
ing in all directions he perceived, on the outskirts of 
the wood, a little Cabin. He calls several times. A 
man appears and shuts himself up immediately in 
his Cabin; this gives him great joy, and he resolves 
to cross. Having successfully accomplished this, he 


150 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

prifes, vn homme paroifi & fe renferme incontinent 
en fa Cabane: ce qui Ie réioüit, & Ie fit refoudre à 
franchir Ie pas, l'ayant fait heureufement, i1 va droit 
à cette Cabane, mais il y trouue vifage de bois, il ap- 
pelle, il heurte à la porte; on luy répond qu'il attende, 
& qu'il paffe premierement fon bras, s'i1 veut entrer; 
l'autre fut bien efionné de voir vn corps, il [104] luy 
ouure, & luy demande, où il alloit, & ce qu'il preten- 
doit, que ce pays n'efioit que pour les ames. Ie le 
fçay bien, dit cét Auenturier, c'efi pourquoy i'y viens 
chercher l'ame de ma fæur. Oüy da, repart l'autre, 
à la bonne-heure; allez, prenez courage, vous voila 
tantofi au Village des ames, vous y trouuerez ce que 
vous defirez; toutes les ames font maintenant affem- 
blées dans vne Cabane, où elles danfent pour guerir 
Aataentfic, qui efi malade; ne craignez point d'y en- 
trer, tenez voila vne courge, vous y mettrez l'ame de 
vofire fæur; ilIa prend, & demande en mefme temps 
congé à fon hofie, bien aife d'auoir fait vne fi bonne 
rencontre. Sur Ie depart il luy demãde fon nom: 
Contente toy, dit l'autre, que ie fuis celuy qui garde 
la ceruelle des morts; quand tu auras recouuré l'ame 
de ta fæur, repaffe par icy, ie te donneray fa ceruelle. 
II s'en va done, & arriué qu'il efi au Village des ames, 
i1 entre dans la Cabane d'Aatacntfic, où i1les trouue 
en effet qu'elles danfoient pour fa fanté, mais i1 ne 
peut encor voir l'ame de fa fæur: car elles furent fi 
effrayées à la veuë de cét homme, qu'elles s'éuanoüi- 
rent en vn infiant; de forte qu'il demeura [105] 
maifire de la Cabane toute la iournée. Sur Ie foir, 
comme il efioit affis aupres du foyer, elles retour- 
nerent, mais elles ne fe monfirerent du commence- 
ment que de loing, petit à petit s'efiant approchées 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I6.J6 

151 

goes straightway to this Cabin, but finds the door 
closed; he calls, he beats on the door. He is told to 
wait, and first to pass in his arm, if he wishes to en- 
ter; the other one is much astonished to see a living 
body. He [104] opens to him, and asks him where he 
was going and what his purpose was, as this country 
was only for souls. "I know that well," says this 
Adventurer, "and that is why I came here to seek 
the soul of my sister." "Oh indeed," replies the 
other one, " well and good; come, take courage, you 
will be presently in the Village of souls, where you 
will find what you desire. All the souls are now 
gathered in a Cabin, where they are dancing to heal 
Aataentsic, who is sick. Don't be afraid to enter; 
stay, there is a pumpkin, you can put into it the soul 
of your sister." He takes it, and at the same time 
bids good-bye to his host, very glad of so fortunate 
a meeting. On his departure he asks the host his 
name, " Be satisfied," says the other, " that I am he 
who keeps the brains of the dead." So he goes away 
and reaches the Village of souls. He enters the 
Cabin of Aataentsic, where he finds that they are in- 
deed dancing for the sake of her health; but he can- 
not yet see the soul of his sister, for the souls were 
so startled at the sight of the man that they vanished 
in a moment, so that he remained [105] all day the 
master of the Cabin. In the evening, as he was 
seated by the fire, they returned; but they showed 
themselves at first only at a distance. Approaching 
slowly, they began again to dance; he recognized his 
sister amid the troop, he endeavored even to seize 
her, but she fled from him. He withdrew some dis- 
tance, and at last chose his time so well that she could 
not escape him. Nevertheless, he made certain of 


152 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

elles fe mirent de rechef à danfer; il recogneut fa 
fæur parmy la troupe, i1 s'efforça mefme de la pren- 
dre, mais elle s'enfuit de luy, i1 fe retira à l'écart, & 
prit enfin fi bien fon temps qu'elle ne peût échapper; 
neantmoins i1 ne fut pas affeuré de fa proye qu'à 
bonnes enfeignes; car i1 luy fallut luiter cõtre elle 
toute la nuict, & dans Ie combat elle diminua telle- 
ment, & deuint fi petite, qu'il la mit fans difficulté 
dans fa courge: l'ayant bie bouchée, il s'en retourne 
fur la champ, & repaffe chez fon hofie, qui luy donne 
dans vne autre courge la ceruelle de fa fæur, & l'in- 
firuit de tout ce qu'il deuoit faire pour la refufciter. 
Quand tu feras arriué, luy dit-il, va t'en au cime- 
tiere, prends Ie corps de ta fæur, porte Ie en ta Ca- 
bane, & fais fefiin: tous les conuiez efiãs affemblez, 
charge Ie fur tes épaules, & fais vn tour par la Ca- 
bane, tenant en main les deux courges, tu n'auras 
pas fi tofi repris ta place, que ta fæur refufcitera, 
[106] pourueu que tu donne ordre que tous tiennent 
la veuë baiffée, & que pas vn ne regarde ce que tu 
feras, autrement tout ira mal. Le voila done retour- 
né dans fort peu de temps à fon Village, il prend Ie 
corps de fa fæur, fait fefiin, & execute de point en 
point, tout ce qui luy auoit efié prefcrit; & de fait il 
fentoit déja du mouuement dans ce cadaure demy 
pourry; mais comme il efioit à deux ou trois pas de 
fa place, il y eut vn curieux qui leua les yeux, & en 
mefme temps cette ame s'échappa, & ne luy demeura 
que ce cadaure fur les bras, qu'il fut contrainct de re- 
porter au tombeau d'où ill'auoit t
ré. 
SI CREDERE FAS EST. 

V oicy vne autre de leurs fables de mefme tiffure. 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELATION. I636 

153 

.his prey only by securing her well; for he had to 
struggle against her all night, and in the contest she 
grew so little that he put her without difficulty into 
his pumpkin. Having corked her in well, he imme- 
diately returns by way of the house of his host, who 
gives him his sister's brains in another pumpkin, and 
instructs him in all he must do to resuscitate her. 
"When thou reachest home," he says to him, " go 
to the cemetery, take the body of thy sister, bear it 
to thy Cabin, and make a feast. When all thy 
.guests are assembled, carry it on thy shoulders, and 
take a walk through the Cabin holding the two 
pumpkins in thy hands; thou wilt no sooner have 
resumed thy place than thy sister will come to life 
again, [106] provided thou givest orders that all keep 
their eyes lowered, and that no one shall look at 
what thou art doing, else everything will go wrong." 
Soon the man returns to his Village; he takes the 
body of his sister, makes a feast, carries out, in due 
order, all the directions given him,-and, indeed, he 
already felt motion in the half-decayed corpse; but, 
when he was two or three steps from his place, one 
.curious person raised his eyes; at that moment the 
soul escaped, and there remained to him only the 
'Corpse in his arms, which he was constrained to bear 
to the tomb whence he had taken it. 14 

SI CREDERE FAS EST. 

Here is another of their fables, of like tissue. A 
young man of the highest standing among them, be- 
ing ill, after much entreaty finally answered that his 
dream showed a bow rolled in bark; that if anyone 
wanted to go with him as an escort, there was but 
one man on earth who had one of the sort. A com- 


154 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

Vn ieune homme des plus qualifiez d'entr'eux apres 
s'efire bien fait prier, répondit enfin efiant malade, 
que fon fonge portoit vn arc roulé en écorce, que fi 
on vouloit luy faire efcorte, il n'y auoit qu'vn feul 
homme fur terre qui en eufi vn. V ne troupe de deli- 
berez fe mettent en chemin auec luy; mais au bout 
de dix iours il ne luy refia que fix compagnons, Ie 
refie rebrouffa à caufe de la faim qui les preffoit: les 
fix vont auec luy [107] à grandes iournées, & fur les 
pifies d'vne petite befie noire rencontrent la Cabane 
de leur homme, qui les aduertit de ne manger rien 
de ce qu'vne femme qui alloit reuenir leur apprefie- 
roit pour la premiere fois; à quoy ayant obeï, & ren- 
uerfé les plats par terre, ils s'apperceurent, que ce 
n'efioient que befies venimeufes, qu'elle leur auoit 
prefenté. S'éfians refaits du fecond feruice, il fut 
quefiion de bander l'arc roulé, dont pas vn n'ayant 
pû venir à bout, que Ie ieune hõme, pour qui Ie voy- 
age auoit efié entrepris: ille receut en don de fon 
hofie, qui l'inuita de fuer auec luy, & au fortir de la 
fuerie metamorphofa vn de fes compagnons en Pin. 
Delà ils aborderent au Village des ames, d'où ils ne 
reuindrent que trois en vie, & tous effarez chez leur 
hofie, qui les encouragea de retourner chez eux, à la 
faueur d'vn peu de farine, telle que les ames la man- 
gent, & qui fufiente les corps à merueilles. Qu'au 
refie ils alloient paffer à trauers des bois, où les Cerfs, 
les Ours, les Orignacs eftoient auffi communs que les 
fueilles des arbres; & qu'efians pourueus d'vn arc fi 
merueilleux, ils n'auoient rien à craindre, que [108] 
leur chaffe feroit des meilleures. Les voila de retour 
en leur Village, & tout Ie monde à l'entour d'eux, à 
fe réiouïr & apprendre leurs diuerfes rencontres. 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, ;636 

155 

pany of resolute men put themselves on the road 
with him; but at the end of ten days there remained 
to him only six companions, the rest turning back on 
account of the hunger which pressed them. The six 
go with him [107] many a day's journey, and in fol- 
lowing the tracks of a little black beast, come upon 
the Cabin of their man, who warns them not to par- 
take of what a woman who was to be present should 
offer them for the first time. Having obeyed him, 
and having upset the dishes upon the ground, they 
perceived it was only venomous reptiles she had 
presented to them. Having refreshed themselves 
with the second course, it was a question of bend- 
ing the rolled bow, which not one of them suc- 
ceeded in doing, except the young man in whose 
behalf the journey had been undertaken. He re- 
ceived it as a gift from his host, who invited him to 
take a sweat with him, and, upon emerging from the 
sweat- box, metamorphosed one of his companions 
into a Pine tree. From there they advanced to the 
Village of souls, whence only three returned alive, 
and all frightened, to the house of their host; he en- 
couraged them to return home with the help of a 
little meal, such as the souls eat, and which sustains 
the body wonderfully. He told them, moreover, 
that they were going to pass through woods where 
Deer, Bears, and Moose were as common as the 
leaves on the trees; but that, being provided with 
so marvelous a bow, they had nothing to fear, that 
[108] they would be very successful in the chase. 
Behold them returned to their Village, with every 
one around them rejoicing, and learning their differ- 
ent adventures. 
Forsall et hæc olim memz"nzSse juvabz"t, when these: 


156 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

For/an & hæc olim meminiffe iuuabz"t, lors que ces 
pauures gens éc1airez du ciel fe riront de leurs fot- 
tifes, comme nous l'efperons. 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 

157 

poor people, enlightened by heaven, will laugh at 
their own stupidities, as we hope. 


158 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITE 

[V OL. 10 

CHAPITRE III. 

QUE LES HURONS RECOGNOISSENT QUELQUE DIUI- 
NITÉ: DE LEURS SUPERSTITIONS, & DE LA 
CREANCE QU'ILS ONT AUX SONGES. 

C OMME ces pauures Sauuages pour efire hommes 
n'on pû mécognoifire Dieu tout à fait, & pour 
efire vicieux n' en ont fceu auoir que des con- 
ceptions indignes de fa grãdeur, ils ne l'ont ny sher- 
ché, ny recogneu qu'en la furface des creatures, où 
ils ont efperé leur bon-beur, ou redouté quelque mal- 
heur. lIs s'addreíIent à la Terre, aux Riuieres, aux 
Lacs, aux Rochers dangereux, mais fur tout au Ciel, 
& croyent que tout cela efi animé, [109] & qu'il y re- 
fide quelque puiíIant Demon. lIs ne fe contentent 
pas de former de fimples væux, il[s] les accompagnent 
fouuent d'vne efpece de facrifice. I'en ay remarqué 
de deux fortes. Les vns font pour fe les rendre pro- 
pices & fauorables; les autres pour les appaifer, 
quand ils en ont receu, felon qu'il s'imaginent, quel- 
que difgrace, ou fe perfuadent auoir encouru leur ire 
et leur indignation. V oicy les ceremonies qu'ils gar- 
dent en ces facrifices. lIs iettent du Petun dans Ie 
feu, & fi c'efi par exemple au Ciel qu'ils s'addreffent, 
ils difent, AronhÙlté onné aonflani8as taitenr, Ciel voila 
ce que ie t' offre en facrifice, aye pitié de moy, affifie 
moy: fi e'efi pour impetrer la fanté, taellguiaens, gue- 
ris moy. lIs ont recours au Ciel prefque en toutes 
leurs neceffitez, & ref pee tent ces grands corps fur 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I6.J6 

159 

CHAPTER III. 

THAT THE HURONS RECOGNIZE SOME DIVINITY; OF 
THEIR SUPERSTITIONS, AND THEIR 
FAITH IN DREAMS. 

A s these poor Savages, being men, have not been 
able altogether to deny God, and, being given 
to vice, could have only conceptions of him 
unworthy of his greatness,- they have neither sought 
nor recognized him except on the surface of created 
things, in which they have hoped for happiness or 
dreaded some misfortune. They address themselves 
to the Earth, to Rivers, to Lakes, to dangerous 
Rocks, but above all, to the Sky; and believe that 
all these things are animate, [109] and that some 
powerful Demon resides there. They are not con- 
tented with making simple vows, they often accom- 
pany them with a sort of sacrifice. I have remarked 
two kinds of these. Some are to render them propi- 
tious and favorable; others to appease them, when 
they have received in their opinion some disgrace 
from them, or believe they have incurred their anger 
or indignation. Here are the ceremonies they em- 
ploy in these sacrifices. They throw some Tobacco 
into the fire; and if it is, for example, to the Sky 
that they address themselves, they say, Aronhz"até 
onné aonsta71iwas taitenr, " 0 Sky, here is what I offer 
thee in sacrifice; have pity on me, assist me." If it 
is to im plore health, taenguiaens, "Heal me. " 15 
They have recourse to the Sky in almost all their ne- 


160 

LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

toutes les creatures, & y remarquent particulierement 
quelque chofe de diuin: auffi eft-ce apres l'homme 
la plus viue image que nous ayons de la Diuinité; i1 
n'y a rien qui nous la reprefente fi clairement: nous 
y remarquons fa toute-puiffance dans les prodigieux 
effets qu'ils caufent icy bas; fon immenfité dans leur 
vafte eftenduë; fa fageffe dans l'ordre [110] de leurs 
mouuemens; fa bonté dans les benignes influences 
qu'i1s verfent continuellement fur toutes les creatures; 
& fa beauté dans Ie Soleil, & fur Ie front des Eftoilles. 
Ie dis cecy pour monftrer combien il fera facile auec 
Ie temps, & l'affiftance diuine, de conduire ces Peuples 
à la cognoiffance de leur Createur, puis qu'ils hon- 
norent déja fi particulierement vne creature, qui en 
eft vne fi parfaite image: & encore puis ie dire que 
c'eft proprement Dieu qu'ils honnorent, quoy qu'à 
l'aueugle, car ils s'imaginent dans les Cieux vn Oki, 
c'eft à dire vn Demon, ou vne puiffance qui regIe les 
faifons de l'année, qui tient en bride les vents, & les 
flots de la mer, qui peut rendre fauorable Ie cours de 
leurs nauigations, & les affifter en toutes leurs neceffi- 
tez: ils redoutent mefme fon ire, & l'appellent à tef- 
moin pour rendre leur foy inuiolable, quand ils font 
quelque promeffe d'importance, ou paffent quelque 
accord, ou traitté de paix auec l'ennemy. Voicy les 
termes dont ils fe feruent, Hakhrihóté ekaronhiaté t
t 
Ic
akhier ekentaté, Le Ciel entend ce que nous fai- 
fons auiourd'huy: & croyent apres cela que s'ils [I I I] 
venoient à contreuenir à leur parole, ou à rompre 
cette alliance, Ie Ciel les chaftieroit infalliblement. 
Bien dauantage, ils eftiment qu'il ne fait pas bon fe 
moquer du Ciel. En voicy vne preuue bien remar- 
quable. V n Sorcier fort renommé dans Ie Pais nous 


]636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, [636 

161 

cessities, and respect the great bodies in it above all 
creatures, and remark in it in particular something 
divine. Indeed, it is, after man, the most vivid 
image we have of Divinity; there is nothing which 
represents him to us so clearly; we remark his omnip- 
otence in all the prodigious effects they cause here 
below, his immensity in their vast extent, his wis- 
dom in the order [110] of their movements, his good- 
ness in the benign influences they shed continually 
over all creatures, and his beauty in the Sun and in 
the aspect of the Stars. I say this to show how easy 
it will be, with time and divine aid, to lead these 
Peoples to the knowledge of their Creator, since they 
already honor so especially a creature which is so 
perfect an image of him. And, furthermore, I may 
say it is reaDy God whom they honor, though blind- 
ly, for they imagine in the Heavens an Oki, that is 
to say, a Demon or power which rules the seasons of 
the year, which holds in check the winds and the 
waves of the sea; which can render favorable the 
course of their voyages, and assist them in every 
time of need. They even fear his anger, and invoke 
him as a witness in order to render their faith invio- 
lable, when they make some promise of importance, 
or agree to some bargain or treaty of peace with an 
enemy. Here are the terms they use, Hakkrihótl 
ekaronkiaté tout /cwakhier ekelltatl, "The Sky knows 
what we are doing to-day;" and they think that if, 
after this, they [II I] should violate their word or 
break their alliance, the Sky would certainly chas- 
tise them. More than that, they do not think it right 
to mock the Sky. Here is a very remarkable proof of it: 
A very renowned Sorcerer of this Country threatens 
us this year with a great famine. The corn will 


162 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

menace cette année d'vne grãde famine; Les bleds 
croiftront, dit-il, & monteront en épics, les enfans 
mefmes en feront roftir en leur verdure; mais vne 
gelée blanche furuiendra, qui moiffonnera les efpe- 
ranees du Pais. Au refte il ne fonde pas fon dire fur 
ces apparitions pretenduës d'I
skeha; voicy ce qui Ie 
fait parler de la forte. On erie, dit-il, tous les iours 
au Ciel, Aronhz"até onne aonjiaanâlas, & cependant on 
ne luy donne rien, eel a irrite Ie Ciel, il ne manquera 
pas de s'en venger, & Iors que les bleds commeceront 
à entrer en maturité, il fera fans doute éc1atter les 
effets de fa colere. 
Ils croyent encore que Ie Ciel eft couroucé quand 
quelqu'vn fe noye, ou meurt de froid; il faut vn facri- 
fice pour l'appaifer: mais, ô bon Dieu! quel facri:fice, 
ou pluftoft quelle boucherie! La chair du mort eft 
Ia victime qui doit eftre immolée, [112] il fe fait vn 
concours des villages circonuoifins; on faÌt force 
feftins, & on n'épargne point les prefents, comme 
eftãt queftion d'vne chofe à laquelle tout Ie Pays a 
intereft: on porte Ie mort dans Ie cimetiere, on 
l'efiend fur vne natte; d'vn cofté eft vne foffe, & de 
l'autre vn feu pour Ie facri:fice: en mefme temps 
quelques ieunes hommes choifis par les parens fe 
prefentent, & fe rangent autour du corps, chacun Ie 
couteau à la main; & Ie protecteur du defunt ayant 
marqué auec du charbon les parties qui doiuent 
eftre couppées, ils trauaillent à qui mieux mieux fur 
ce cadaure, & en enleuent les parties les plus char- 
nuës; en:fin ils Iuy ouurent Ie corps, & en tirent les 
entrailles, qu'ils iettent au feu auec toutes ces pieces 
de chair qu'ils ont couppées, & mettent dans la foffe 
Ia carcaffe toute décharnée. I'ay remarqué que pen- 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

163 

grow, he says, and will shoot into ear; the children 
will even cause the ears to be roasted when they are 
green; but a white frost will occur, which will de- 
stroy the hopes of the Country. Moreover he does 
not base his statements on those pretended appari- 
tions of Iouskeha/ here is what leads him to speak in 
this way. "The people," he says, " are crying every 
day to the Sky, Aronhiaté Ollne aOllstaancwas J ' and yet 
nothing is given to it. This irritates the Sky, it will 
not fail to take revenge; and, when the corn shall 
begin to mature, it will without doubt vent upon it 
the effects of its wrath. " 
They believe that the Sky is angry, when anyone is 
drowned or dies of cold; a sacrifice is needed to ap- 
pease it, but, good God! what a sacrifice, or rather 
what a butchery! The flesh of the dead man is the 
victim who is to be immolated. [112] A gathering of 
the neighboring villages takes place; many feasts 
are made, and no presents are spared, as it is a mat- 
ter in which the whole Country is interested. The 
dead body is carried into the cemetery, and is stretched 
out on a mat. On one side is a ditch, and on the 
other a fire for a sacrifice. At the same time, some 
young men chosen by the relatives present them- 
selves, and station themselves around the corpse, 
each with a knife in his hand; and the protector of 
the dead person having marked with a coal the parts 
which are to be cut, they vie with each other in cut- 
ting the body, tearing off the fleshiest parts. At last 
they open the body and draw out its entrails, which 
they throw into the fire with all the pieces of flesh 
they had cut off, and throw into the ditch the carcass 
quite stripped of flesh. I have observed that during 
this butchery the women walk around them several 


164 

LES RELATIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

dant cette boucherie les femmes tournent tout aut our 
à diuerfes fois, & encouragent ces ieunes hommes qui 
decouppent ce corps à rendre ce bon office à tout Ie 
Païs, leur mettant des grains de Pourcelaine dans la 
bouche. Quelquefois mefme la mere du defunt toute 
baignée dans fes larmes fe [I 13] met de la partie, & 
chante d'vn ton pitoyable en fe lamentant fur la mort 
de fon fils. Cela fait, ils croyent fermement auoir 
appaifé Ie Ciel: s'ils manquent à cette ceremonie ils 
regardent toutes les mauuaifes difpofitions de fair, 
& tous les finifires accidens qui leur arriuent par 
apres comme autant d'effets de fa colere. 
L'an paffé au commencement de Nouembre Vll Sau- 
uage fe noya retournant de la pefche, on l'enterra Ie 
dix-feptiéme, fans autres ceremonies; Ie mefme iour 
les neiges tomberent en telle abondance. qu'elles nous 
cacherent la terre pour tout l'hyuer; & nos Sauuages 
ne manquerent pas d'en reietter la caufe fur ce qu'on 
n'auoit pas decoupé Ie mort à l'ordinaire. Voila les 
facrifices qu'ils font pour fe rendre Ie Ciel fauorable. 
Sur Ie chemin des Hurons à Kébec il y a des Ro- 
chers qu'ils refpectent particulierement, & aufquels 
ils ne manquent iamais, quand ils defcendent pour 
la traitte, d'offrir du Petun. lIs appellent l'vn Hilzi- 
/Ûlra)', e'en à dire vne Roche où Ie Chahuan fait fon 
nid: mais Ie plus celebre eft celuy qu'ils appellent, 
Tjankohi AraJla, la demeure d'Tjanhoki, qui eft vne 
[114] efpece d'oifeau de proye. lIs difent des mer- 
ueilles de cette Roche: à les entendre c'eftoit autre- 
fois vn homme qui a efté ie ne fçay comment changé 
en pierre; tant y a qu'ils y diftinguent encore la 
tefte, les bras, & Ie corps: mais il falloit qu'il fust 
merueilleufement puiffant; car cette maffe eft fi vafie 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELATION, I636 

165 

times, and encourage the young men who cut up this 
body to render this good service to the whole Coun- 
try, putting Porcelain beads into their mouths. 
Sometimes even the mother of the deceased, all 
bathed in tears, [I 13] joins the party and sings in a 
pitiful tone, lamenting the death of her son. That 
done, they firmly believe they have appeased the 
Sky. If they fail in this ceremony, they look upon 
all the disastrous changes of the weather, and all the 
untoward accidents which happen to them after- 
wards, as so many results of its anger. 16 
Last year, at the beginning of November, a Savage 
was drowned when returning from fishing; he was 
interred on the seventeenth, without any ceremonies. 
On the same day snow fell in such abundance that it 
hid the earth all the winter; and our Savages did 
not fail to cast the blame on their not having cut up 
the dead person as usual. Such are the sacrifices 
they make to render Heaven favorable. 
On the way by which the Hurons go to Kébec, 
there are some Rocks that they particularly reverence 
and to which they never fail, when they go down to 
trade, to offer Tobacco. They call one of them Hihi- 
houray, meaning "a Rock where the Owl makes its 
nest." But the most celebrated is the one they call 
Tsanhohi Arasta, "the home of Tsa71flohi," which is 
a [114] species of bird of prey. They tell marvels of 
this Rock. According to their story, it was formerly 
a man who was, I know not how, changed into stone. 
At all events, they distinguish still the head, the 
arms, and the body; but he must have been extraor- 
dinarily powerful, for this mass is so vast and so 
high that their arrows cannot reach it. Besides, they 
hold that in the hollow of this Rock there is a De- 


166 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

& fi haute, que leurs fleches n'y peuuent atteindre. 
Au refte ils tiennent que dans Ie creux de ce Rocher 
il y a vn Demon qui eft capable de faire reüffir leur 
voyage; c'eft pourquoy ils s'y arreftent en paffant, & 
luy offrent du Petun, qu'ils y mettent fimplement 
dans vne des fentes, en luyaddreffant cette priere, 
Oki ca ickikholt condayee acJt
ae1t ondayee d' aonJlaanâlas, 
&c. Demon qui habites en ce lieu, voila du Petun 
que ie te prefente, affifte nous, garde nous de nau- 
frage, defends nous contre nos ennemis, & fais qu'a- 
pres auoir fait vne bonne traitte, nous retournions 
fains & faufs à noftre Village. Ie dirois volontiers 
là deffus, Voluntart"a oris eorum beneplacita fac Domine: 
Mon Dieu, efcoutez-les, & vous faites eognoiftre à 
eux, car ils veulent s'addreffer à vous. 
lIs tiennent les poiffons raifonnables, [115] comme 
auffi les Cerfs, & Orignaux; c'eft ce qui fait qu'ils 
ne iettent aux Chiens ny les os de ceux cy quand ils 
font à la chaffe, ny les arêtes de eeux là tandis qu'i1s 
pefchent: autrement fur l'aduis que les autres en 
auroient, ils fe cacheroient, & ne fe laifferoient point 
PFendre. lIs mariêt tous les ans leur rets on Seine à 
deux petites filles, qui ne doiuent eftre que de fix à fept 
ans, de peur qu'elles n'ayent déja perdu leur virgi- 
nité, qui eft vne qualité bien rare parmy eux. La 
ceremonie de ces époufailles fe fait en vn bon feftin, 
où la Seine eft placée au milieu de ces deux vierges: 
e'eft pour la rendre heureufe à prendre du poiffon. 
Encore fuis je bien aife que la virginité reçoiue par- 
my eux cette forte d'honneur; cela nous pourra fer- 
uir vn iour pour leur en faire conceuoir Ie prix. Les 
poiffons, difent-ils, n'aiment point les morts, & là 
deffus ils s'abftiennent d'aller à la pefche quand 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I636 

167 

mon, who is capable of making their journey success- 
ful; that is why they stop as they pass, and offer it 
Tobacco, which they simply put into one of the 
clefts, addressing to it this prayer, Oki ca ichikhon 
conda)'ee aenwaen ondayee d' aonstaancwas, etc., " Demon 
who dwellest in this place, here is some Tobacco 
which I present to thee; help us, guard us from ship- 
wreck, defend us from our enemies, and cause that 
after having made good trades we may return safe and 
sound to our Village. "15 I could willingly say there- 
upon, Voluntarz'a orzS eorU11l belzeplaâta fac DOl1dne: 
My God, listen to them, and make yourself known 
to them, for they desire to address themselves to you. 
They hold that fish are possessed of reason, [I I 5] 
as also the Deer and Moose; and that is why they 
do not throw to the Dogs either the bones of the lat- 
ter when they are hunting, or the refuse of the 
former when fishing; if they did, and the others 
should get wind of it, they would hide themselves, 
and not let themselves be taken. Every year they 
marry their nets or Seines to two little girls, who 
must be only from six to seven years of age, for fear 
they may have lost their virginity, which is a very 
rare quality among them. The ceremony of these 
espousals takes place at a fine feast, where the Seine 
is placed between the two virgins; this is to render 
them fortunate in catching fish. Still, I am very glad 
that virginity receives among them this kind of 
honor; it will help us some day to make them un- 
derstand the value of it. Fish, they say, do not like 
the dead; and hence they abstain from going fishing 
when one of their friends is dead. But lately, when 
they took up from the cemetery the bodies of their rel- 
atives and carried them into their Cabins, on the oc- 


168 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

quelqu'vn leur eft mort. Nagueres qu'ils tirerent 
du cimetiere les corps de leurs pares, & les porterent 
dans leurs Cabanes, à l' occafion de la fefie des morts, 
quelques vns nous apporterent chez nous leurs rets, 
allegants pour pretexte la crainte qu'ils [116] auoient 
du feu; car c'eft d'ordinaire en cette faifon que Ie 
feu ruine fouuent les Villages en tiers ; que chez nous 
nous eftions quafi toufiours fur pied, & dormions fort 
peu; que nous eftions éloignez du Village, & par con- 
fequent moins en danger de ce cofté là: mais tout 
cela n 'eftoit que difcours; la vraye raifon eftoit, 
comme nous apprifmes par apres, qu'ils craignoient 
que leurs rets ne fuffent profanez par Ie voifinage de 
ces carcaffes: voila bien quelque chofe; mais voicy 
Ie fond de la plus grand part de leurs fuperftitions. 
lIs ont vne croyance aux fonges qui furpaffe toute 
croyance, & fi les Chreftiens mettoient en execution 
toutes les infpirations diuines auec autant de foin que 
nos Sauuages executent leurs fonges, fans doute ils 
deuiendroient bien toft de grands Saincts. lIs pren- 
nent leurs fonges pour des ordonnances & des arrefts 
irreuocables, & dont il n'eft pas permis fans crime de 
differer l' execution. V n Sauuage de noftre Village 
fongea cét hyuer dés fon premier fommeil qu'il de- 
uoit faire promptement feftin, & fur Ie champ toute 
nuit qu'il eftoit, fe leua. s'en vint nous [117] éueil- 
ler, et nous emprunter vne de nos chaudieres. 
Le fonge eft l' oracle que tous ces pauures Peuples 
confultent & efcoutent, Ie Prophete qui leur predit 
les chofes futures, la Caffandre qui les aduertit des 
malheurs qui les menacent, Ie Medecin ordinaire dans 
leurs maladies, l' Efculape & Ie Galien de tout Ie 
Pays, c'eft Ie maiftre Ie plus abfolu qu'ils ayent; fi 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TIOIV, I636 

169 

casion of the feast of the dead, some brought into 
our Cabin their nets alleging as a pretext the fear 
they [116] had of fire,-for it is usually in this sea- 
son that fire often ruins entire Villages; that in our 
Cabin we were almost always moving about, and 
slept very little; that we were at some distance 
from the Village, and consequently were in less dan- 
ger in that respect. But all this was talk; the true 
reason was, as we learned afterwards, that they were 
afraid their nets would be profaned by the proximity 
of these dead bodies. That is something, to be 
sure; but here is the foundation of the greater part 
of their superstitions. 
They have a faith in dreams which surpasses all 
belief; and if Christians were to put into execution 
all their divine inspirations with as much care as 
our Savages carry out their dreams, no doubt they 
would very soon become great Saints. They look 
upon their dreams as ordinances and irrevocable de- 
crees, the execution of which it is not permitted 
without crime to delay. A Savage of our Village 
dreamed this winter, in his first sleep, that he ought 
straightway to make a feast; and immediately, night 
as it was, he arose, and came [117] and awakened us 
to borrow one of our kettles. 
The dream the oracle that all these poor Peoples 
consult and listen to, the Prophet which predicts to 
them future events, the Cassandra which warns them 
of misfortunes that threaten them, the usual Physi- 
cian in their sicknesses, the Esculapius and Galen of 
the whole Country,- the most absolute master they 
have. If a Captain speaks one way and a dream an- 
other, the Captain might shout his head off in vain,- 
the dream is first obeyed. It is their Mercury in 


170 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

vn Capitaine parle d'vn cofté, & vn fonge de l'autre, 
Ie Capitaine a beau fe rompre la tefte à crier, Ie fonge 
eft Ie premier obey. C'eft leur Mercure dans leurs 
voyages, leur Oeconome dans leurs famines: Ie fonge 
prefide fouuent à leurs confeils; la traitte, la pefche 
& la chaffe s'entreprennent ordinairement fouz fon 
aueu,' & ne font quafi que pour luy fatisfaire; ils ne 
traittent rien de fi precieux dont ils ne fe priuent vo- 
lontiers en vertu de quelque fonge: s'ils ont fait vne 
heureufe chaffe, s'ils retournët de la pefche leurs Ca- 
nots chargez de poiffon, tout cela eft à la difcretion 
du fonge; vn fonge leur enleuera quelquefois leur 
prouifion de toute vne année: il prefcrit les feftins, 
les danfes, les chanfons, les ieux, en vn mot Ie fonge 
fait [118] icy tout, & eft à vray dire comme Ie prin- 
cipal Dieu des Hurons. Au refte qu'on ne penfe pas 
que ie face icy vne amplification ou exaggeration à 
plaifir, l'experience de cinq ans qu'il y a que ie fuis 
à eftudier les mæurs & les façons de faire de nos 
Sauuages, m'obligent de parler de la forte. 
n eft vray que tous les fonges ne font pas dans ce 
credit, on a égard aux perfonnes, & il Y en a tel qui 
aura beau fonger, pas vn ne s'en remuëra pour cela; 
de mefme fi c' eft vn pauure, fes fonge font en fort 
peu de confideration: il faut que ce foit vne perfonne 
affez accommodée, & dont les fonges fe foient trouuez 
plufieurs fois veritables: & encor ceux qui ont Ie don 
de bien réuer n'écoutent pas tous leurs fonges in- 
differemment; ils en recognoiffent de faux & de ve- 
ritables; & ceux-cy, difent-ils, font affez rares. 
Toutefois dans la pratique ils agiffent d'vne autre 
façon, & en executent de fi mal fagotez, & compofez 
de tant de pieces qui ont fi peu de rapport, qu'il ne 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I636 

171 

their journeys, their domestic Economy in their fami- 
lies. The dream often presides in their councils; 
traffic, fishing, and hunting are undertaken usually 
under its sanction, and almost as if only to satisfy it. 
They hold nothing so precious that they would not 
readily deprive themselves of it for the sake of a 
dream. If they have been successful in hunting, if 
they bring back their Canoes laden with fish, all this 
is at the discretion of a dream. A dream will take 
away from them sometimes their whole year's provi- 
sions. It prescribes their feasts, their dances, their 
songs, their games,-in a word, the dream does [118] 
everything and is in truth the principal God of the 
Hurons. Moreover, let no one think I make herein 
an amplification or exaggeration at pleasure; the ex- 
perience of five years, during which I have been 
studying the manners and usages of our Savages, 
compels me to speak in this way. 
It is true that all dreams are not held in such cred- 
it; regard is had to the persons, and there are some 
who dream in vain; for these no one will stir a step. 
Likewise if it is a poor person, his dreams are held 
in very little consideration. It must be a person in 
fairly good circumstances, and one whose dreams 
have been found several times true. And even those 
who have the gift of dreaming well do not all give 
heed to their dreams indifferently; they recognize 
some of them as false and some as true,-the latter, 
they say, being quite rare. Yet in practice they act 
in another way, and carry out some so badly put to- 
gether, and made up of so many parts having so little 
connection, that it would not be possible to say what 
are in their own judgment false, and what true; I 
fancy they [II9] themselves would find considerable 


172 

LES RELATIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

me feroit pas poffible de dire quels font à leur iuge- 
ment les faux fonges, ou les veritables; ie penfe 
qu'eux [I 19J mefmes y feroient bien empefchez; c'efi 
pourquoy, de peur de manquer en ce point, plufieurs 
en executent la plus part; s'il y a quelque obfcurité 
dans vn fonge, ou fi les chofes qu'ils ont fongées, 
font, ou impoffibles, ou difficiles à recouurer, ou hors 
de faifon, il fe trouue des Artemidores qui les inter- 
pretent, & qui y coupent & tranchent comme bon 
leur femble. Quand les enfans font malades, les 
peres, ou les meres fongent pour eux; nous en vifmes 
vn exemple cét hyuer dans nofire Village. Vn de 
nos petits Chrefiiens efioit fort malade, fa mere fongea 
qu'i1luy falloit pour fa fanté cent pains de Petun, & 
quatre Cafiors, dont elle feroit fefiin; mais parce que 
Ie Petun efioit rare, les cent pains furent reduits à 
dix, & les Cafiors qui efioient hors de faifon, chan- 
gez en quatre grands poiffons qui pafferent pour 
Cafiors dans Ie fefiin, & dont les queuës furent don- 
nées aux principaux pour des queuës de Cafior. Apres 
cela ce petit Ange ne laiffa pas de s' enuoler au ciel, 
au grand regret de fes parens, mais auec beaucoup 
de confolation de nofire cofié. Ces ames innocentes 
ont fans doute vn grand pouuoir aupres [120J de Dieu, 
pour moyenner la conuerfion de leurs peres, & pour 
impetrer mefme des graces fort particulieres pour 
ceux qui s'employent au falut de ces Peuples, & qui 
leur ont procuré Ie bien, dont ils fe voyent en poffef- 
fion pour iamais. Mais paffons, nous ne fommes pas 
encor au bout de leurs fuperfiitions. 


1636] 

LE JEUNE' S RELA TION, J636 

173 

difficulty in doing this; that is why, for fear of fail- 
ing in this point, many carry out the greater part of 
them. If there be any obscurity in their dreams, or 
if the things they have dreamed are either impossible 
or difficult to recover, or are out of season, there are 
found Artemidores who interpret them, and who cut 
and slice them as seems good to them. When chil- 
dren are sick, the fathers or mothers dream for them; 
we saw an example of this in our Village this winter. 
One of our little Christians was very sick; his mother 
dreamed that to make him well he must have a hun- 
dred cakes of Tobacco, and four Beavers, with 
which she would make a feast; but, because the To- 
bacco was very rare, the hundred cakes were reduced 
to ten, and the Beavers which were out of season 
were changed to four large fish that passed for Beav- 
ers in the feast, and the tails of which were given to 
the principals as Beaver tails. But this little Angel, 
for all that, flew away to heaven, to the great grief 
of its parents, but with much consolation to us. 
These innocent souls have no doubt great power with 
[120] God to bring about the conversion of their fa- 
thers, and even to request very special graces for 
those who employ themselves in the salvation of these 
Peoples, and who have procured for them the good 
of which they see themselves in possession forever. 
But let us pass on; we are not yet at the end of their 
su persti tions. 


174 

LES RELATIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

CHAPITRE IV. 

DES FESTINS, DANSES, IEUX DE PLAT, & DE CROSSE, 
DE CE QU'ILS APPELLENT ONONHAROIA. 

I E n'entreprends pas de deduire par Ie menu, tout 
ce que nos Sauuages ont couftume de faire en 
vertu de leurs fonges, il faudroit étaler fur ce 
papier trop de chimeres; ie me contenteray de dire 
que leurs fonges fe raportent ordinairement, ou à vn 
feftin, ou à chãter, ou à danfer, ou à ioüer, ou enfin 
à vne certaine efpece de manie qu'ils appellent en 
effet Onollltaroz"a, c' eft à dire renuerfement de cer- 
uelle. Si done il efchet que quelqu'vn de quelque 
confideration tombe malade, [12 I] Ie Capitaine luy 
va demander fi fouuent, de la part des Anciens, ce 
qu'il a fongé, qu'enfin il tire de luy ce qu'il defire 
pour fa fanté, & lors ils fe mettent tous en peine de 
Ie luy trouuer, n'en fut-il point, il en faut auoir. De 
cette façon d'agir, & de ce qu'ils exercent entr'eux 
l'hofpitalité gratuitement, ne prenant rien que de 
nous, de qui ils attendent toufiours quelque chofe, 
i'entre en efperãce, qu'ils fe rendront vn iour fufcep- 
tibles de la charité Chreftienne. 
L' ononhara eft pour les fols; quand quelqu'vn dit 
qu'il faut qu'on ai1le par les Cabanes dire qu'on a 
fongé. Alors dés Ie foir vne troupe d'infenfez s'en 
vont par les Cabanes, & renuerfent tout: Ie lendemain 
ils y retournent crians à pleine tefte, N ous auons 
fongé, fans dire quoy. Ceux de la Cabane deuinent 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

175 

CHAPTER IV. 

CONCERNING FEASTS, DANCES; THE GAMES OF DISH 
AND CROSSE; WHAT THEY CALL ONONHAROIA. 

I DO not undertake to mention in detail every- 
thing our Savages are accustomed to do in virtue 
of their dreams; I should be compelled to display 
on this paper too many absurdities. I shall content 
myself with saying that their dreams usually relate 
either to a feast, or to a song, or to a dance, or to a 
game,-or, lastly, to a certain sort of mania that they 
in fact call Ononltaroz"a, or "turning the brain upside 
down. It If therefore it happens t
at some one of 
some consideration falls sick, [12 I] the Captain goes 
to inquire so often, on behalf of the Old Men, what 
he has dreamed, that at last he draws from him what 
he desires for his health, and then they all put them- 
selves to trouble to find it for him; if it does not ex- 
ist, it must be found. From this mode of acting, 
and from the fact that they exercise hospitality among 
themselves gratuitously, taking nothing except from 
us, from whom they always expect something, I en- 
tertain the hope that they will one day become sus- 
ceptible of Christian charity. 
The ononhara is for the sake of mad persons, when 
some one says that they must go through the Cabins 
to tell what they have dreamed. Then, as soon as 
it is evening, a band of maniacs goes about among 
the Cabins and upsets everything; on the morrow 
they return, crying in a loud voice, "We have 


176 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[V OL. 10 

ce que ce peut eftre, & Ie prefentet aux compagnõs, 
qui ne refufent rien, iufqu'à ce qu'ils ayent rencontré. 
V ous les voyez fortir Ie col chargé de Haches, de 
Chaudieres, de Pourcelaine, & femblables prefens à 
leur façon. Quand ils ont trouué ce qu'ils cher- 
choient, ils remercient celuy qui Ie leur a donné, & 
apres auoir receu encore [122J quelques accompagne- 
mens de ce prefent myfterieux; comme du cuir, ou 
vne aleine, fi c' eftoit vn foulier; ils s' en vont de com- 
pagnie au bois y ietter, difent-ils, la folie, hors du 
Village; & Ie malade commence à fe guerir. Pour- 
quoy non? il a ce qu'il cherchoit, ou ce que Ie Diable 
pretendoi t. 
Pour Ie regard des feftins; c'eft vne chofe infinie, 
Ie Diable les y tient fi fort attachez, qu'il n'eft pas 
poffible de plus, fçachant bien que c'eft Ie moyen de 
les rendre toufiours plus brutaux, & moins capables 
des veritez furnaturelles. lIs en rapportent l'origine 
à vne certaine entreueuë des Loups & du Hibou, où 
cét animal nocturne leur predit la venuë d' Ontarraou- 
ra, c'eft vne befte qui retire au Lyon par la queüe; 
lequel Ontarraoura, refufcita, difent-ils, vn ie ne fçay 
quel bon Veneur, grand amy des Loups, au milieu 
d'vn bon feftin: d' où ils conc1uent qu'ils faut que 
les feftins foient capables de guerir les malades, puis 
que mefmes ils rendent la vie aux morts. N'eft-ce 
pas bien raifonné pour des gens de ventre & de table? 
Tous ces feftins peuuent eftre reduits [123J à quatre 
efpeces. Athataion, eft Ie feftin des adieux. Endi- 
teuh!la, d'action de graces & de conioüiffance. At!lront 
aochz"en eft vn feftin à chanter autant qu'à manger. 
A!lataerohi, eft la quatriefme efpece, & fe fait pour la 
deliurance d'vne maladie ainfi appellée. 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

177 

dreamed," without saying what. Those of the Cabin 
guess what it is, and present it to the band, who re- 
fuse nothing until the right thing is guessed. You 
see them come out with Hatchets, Kettles, Porcelain, 
and like presents hung around their necks, after their 
fashion. When they have found what they sought, 
they thank him who has given it to them; and, after 
having received further [122] additions to this mys- 
terious present,-as some leather or a shoemaker's 
awl, if it were a shoe,-they go away in a body to 
the woods, and there, outside the Village, cast out, 
they say, their madness; and the sick man begins to 
get better. Wh y not? He has what he was seeking 
for, or what the Devil pretended. 
As regards feasts, it is an endless subject; the 
Devil keeps them so strongly attached thereto that 
they could not possibly be more so, he knowing well 
that it is a means of rendering them still more brutal, 
and less capable of supernatural truths. They as- 
cribe their origin to a certain meeting of Wolves and 
of the Owl, in which that nocturnal creature pre- 
dicted for them the coming of Ontarraoura, a beast 
allied to the Lion, by its tail. This 01ltarraoura re- 
suscitated, they say, I know not what good Hunter, a 
firm friend of the Wolves, in the midst of a great 
feast. 17 From this they conclude that feasts must be 
capable of healing the sick, since they even restore 
life to the dead. Is it not well reasoned for people 
who are slaves of the belly and of the table? 
All their feasts may be reduced [123J to four kinds. 
A thataz.oll is the feast of farewells. Enditeuhwa, of 
thanksgiving and gratitude. Atouront aochien is a 
feast for singing as well as for eating. Awataeroht. 


178 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

Les ceremonies y font prefque femblables à celles 
des :ðlontagnés; c' efi pourquoy ie m' en remets de la 
plus part aux Relations des années precedentes. 
Ie rougis de dire que fouuent ils y font les iours & 
les nuicts entieres: car en fin , i1 faut vuider la chau- 
diere. Et fi vous ne pouuez aualler tout ce qu'on 
vous a feruy en vn iour, fi vous ne trouuez qui vous 
vueille ayder, pour quelque prefent, quand les autres 
auront fait leur deuoir, on vous laiffera-là dans vn 
petit retranchement, où perfonne n'entrera que vous, 
les vingt-quatre heures entieres. C' efi vne chofe 
d'importance qu'vn fefiin, crient-ils, en chaffant ceux 
qui fe prefentent quand Ie ieu des dents a commencé, 
& que Ie difiributeur a remply à chacun fon écuelle, 
où d'ordinaire il y a à manger de puis Ie matin iuf- 
qu'au foir, & qui a Ie plufiofi fait; c'efi à luy en fer- 
uir [124] toufiours de nouueau, iufqu'à ce que la chau- 
diere foit neUe. N'efi-il pas vray à ouïr tout cecy, 
& plufieurs autres traicts de gourmandife, que i'ob- 
mets par bienfeance, de dire, que .fi Regnum Dei non 
eft efca & potus; fi Ie Royaume de Dieu n'efi pas à 
boire & à manger; fi efi bien celuy que Ie Diable a 
vfurpé fur ces pauures aueugles. Plaife à nofire 
Seigneur auoir pitié d'eux, & les deliurer de cette 
tyrannie. 
Mais il n'y a rien de magnifique comme les fefiins 
qu'ils appellent At
rollta ochieJZ, c'efi à dire fefiins à 
chanter. Ces fefiins dureront fouuent les vingt- 
quatres heures entieres, quelquefois il y aura trente 
& quarante chaudieres, & s'y mangera iufques à 
trente Cerfs: cét hyuer dernier il s'en fit vn au vil- 
lage d'Andiata de vingt-cinq chaudieres, où il yauoit 
cinquante grands poiffons, qui valent bien [que] nos 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELATION, I636 

179 

is the fourth kind, and is made for deliverance from 
a sickness thus named. 
The ceremonies here are almost like those of the 
Montagnés; on this account, I refer for the most part 
to the Relations of preceding years. 
I blush to say that they engage in them often whole 
days and whole nights, for they must, at the last, 
empty the kettle. And if you cannot, in one day, 
swallow all that has been provided for you, if you 
cannot find anyone who will help you in considera- 
tion of a present, when the others have done their 
utmost you will be left there in a little enclosure, 
where no one but yourself will enter for twenty-four 
whole hours. It is a matter of importance, this feast- 
ing, they cry, driving away those who present them- 
selves when the game of teeth has begun, and when 
the distributor has filled for each his bowl, in which 
usually there is enough to keep one eating from morn- 
ing until night. And, whoever soonest accomplishes 
this, it is for him to be served [124] again and again, 
until the kettle be empty. Is it not true, on hearing 
all this, and several other traits of gluttony, which I 
omit out of respect for good taste, to say that si Reg- 
11U1Jl Dei non est esca et potus, verily the Kingdom of 
God is not in eating and drinking; such is indeed the 
one which the Devil has usurped over these poor 
blind beings. May it please our Lord to have pity 
on them, and to deliver them from this tyranny. 
But the most magnificent of these feasts are those 
they call Atourollta ochÙll, that is, singing feasts. 
These feasts will often last twenty-four entire hours; 
sometimes there are thirty or forty kettles, and as many 
as thirty Deer will be eaten. This last winter one was 
made in the village of Alldiata, 18 of twenty-five kettles, 


180 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

plus grands Brochets de France, & fix vingts autres de 
la grandeur de nos Saulmons. II s'en fit vn autre à 
Contarrea, de trente chaudieres, où il y auoit vingt 
Cerfs & quatre Ours, auffi y a t'il ordinairement 
bonne compagnie, les huict & neuf villages y feront 
fouuent [125] inuitez, & mefme tout Ie Païs; & en 
ce cas Ie maiftre du feftin enuoye à chaque Capitaine 
autant de buchettes qu'il inuite de perfonnes de cha- 
que Village 
Ils font ces Feftins quelquefois purement par ma- 
gnificence, & pour fe faire renommer; d' autrefois lors 
qu'ils prennent vn nouueau nom, principalement s'ils 
reffufcitent, comme ils difent, Ie nom de quelque 
Capitaine defunct, qui ait efté en confideration dans 
Ie Païs pour fa valeur & fa conduite au maniement 
des affaires; mais fur tout lors qu'ils fe difpofent à 
prendre les armes, & aller à la guerre. La plus 
gran de Cabane du Village eft deftinée pour receuoir 
la compagnie: ils ne font point de difficu1té de s'in- 
commoder les vns pour les autres en ces occafions; 
la chofe ett eftimée de telle importance, qu'en mefme 
temps qu' on baftit quelque Village, on dreffe vne 
Cabane exprez, plus gran de de beaucoup que les 
autres; quelquefois on luy donnera iufques à vingt- 
cinq & trente braffes de longueur. 
La compagnie eftant affemblée, quelquefois on fe 
met à chanter auant que [126] de manger, quelque- 
fois pour auoir meilleur courage on mange aupara- 
uant: fi Ie feftin doit durer, comme il arriue fouuent, 
toute la iournée, vne partie des chaudieres fe vuide 
Ie matin, & l'autre partie fe referue pour Ie foir. 
Parmy ces chants & ces danfes quelques-vns pren- 
nent occafion d'affommer comme en ioüant leurs en- 


1636] 

LE .IE UNE , 5 RELA TION, /636 

181 

in which there were fifty great fish, larger than our 
largest Pike in France, and one hundred and twenty 
others of the size of our Salmon. Another took 
place at Contarrea, of thirty kettles, in which there 
were twenty Deer and four Bears. Also there is 
usually a large company, for eight or nine villages 
will often be [125] invited, and even the whole Coun- 
try. In this case the master of the feast sends to 
each Captain as many sticks as the number of persons 
he invites from each Village. 
Sometimes they make these Feasts purel y from dis- 
play, and to become renowned; at other times, when 
they take a new name, principally when they raise 
from the dead, as they say, the name of some de- 
ceased Captain who has been held in esteem in the 
Country for his valor and his skill in the manage- 
ment of affairs, but above all when they are inclined 
to take arms and go to war. The largest Cabin of 
the Village is set aside for the reception of the com- 
pany. They do not hesitate to inconvenience them- 
selves for each other on these occasions. The matter 
is esteemed of such importance that, when a Vil- 
lage is built, they purposely put up one Cabin much 
larger than the others, sometimes making it as much 
as twenty-five or thirty brasses in length. 
When the company is assembled, they sometimes 
begin to sing before [126] eating; sometimes, to have 
more courage, they eat first. If the feast is to last, 
as is often the case, the whole day, one portion of 
the kettles is emptied in the morning and the other 
is reserved for the evening. 
During these songs and dances, some take occa- 
sion to knock down, as if in sport, their enemies. 
Their most usual cries are !ten, Ilen, or hlllll, or else 


182 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

(VOL. 10 

nemis. Leurs cris plus ordinaires font hen, hen, ou 
Itlllll, ou bien 
iiiiÙï. lIs rapportent l' origine de 
tous ces myfteres à vn certain Geant plus qu'homme, 
qu'vn dés leurs bleça au front, lors qu'ils habitoient 
fur Ie bord de la mer, pour n'auoir point répondu, 
Ie compliment K
ai, qui eft la repartie ordinaire de 
ceux qu'on faluë. Ce monftre leur ietta la pomme 
de difcorde en punition de fa bleffeure, & apres leur 
auoir recommandé les feftins de guerre, l' Onollharoia, 
& ce refrain 
iiiiiii, il s'enfonça dans la terre, & difpa- 
rut. Auroit-ce bien efté quelque efprit infernal? 
Puis que nous fommes fur ce propos, ie diray qu'ils 
recognoiffent comme vne efpece de Dieu en guerre: 
ils Ie figurent comme vn petit N ain. A les entendre 
il paroift à plufieurs, lors qu'on eft fur Ie [127] poinct 
d'aller en guerre; il careffe les vns, & c'eft vn figne, 
difent-ils, qu'ils retourneront victorieux; les autres 
il les frappe au front, & ceux-la peuuent bien dire 
qu'ils n'iront point à la guerre fans y laiffer la vie. 
Retournons aux feftins. L' A 
taerohi eft vn remede 
qui n'eft que pour vne certaine forte de maladie, 
qu'ils appellent auffi A
tat'rohi, du nom d'vn petit 
Demon gros comme Ie poing, qu'ils difent e[tre dans 
Ie corps du malade, & fur tout dans la partie qui luy 
fait mal; ils recognoiffent quïls font malades de cette 
maladie par Ie moyen d'vn fonge, ou par l'entremife 
de quelque Sorcier. Eftant vn iour allé vifiter vne 
femme qui fe faifoit malade de l'A
tacrohi, comme 
ie luy affignois vne autre caufe de fa maladie, & me 
mocquois de fon A
taerohi, elle fe mit à dire apol1ro- 
phant ce Demon A 
taerolli Ilecllrio KilzenkllOn. A 
tae- 
rolli, ah! ie te prie, que cettuy-cy cognoiffe qui tu es, 
& luy fais fentir les maux que tu me fais fouffrir. 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE' 5 RELA TION, I636 

183 

wiiiiiii. They ascribe the origin of all these myste- 
ries to a certain Giant of more than human size, 
whom one of their tribe wounded in the forehead 
when they dwelt on the shore of the sea, for not hav- 
ing given the complimentary answer, Kwai, which 
is the usual response to a salute. The monster cast 
among them the apple of discord. in punishment for 
his wound; and after having recommended to them 
war feasts, 01lollharoia. and this refrain wÙ"Ùiii, he 
buried himself in the earth, and disappeared. Might 
this indeed have been some infernal spirit? 
Since I am speaking on this subject, I will say that 
they recognize a sort of war God; they imagine him 
as a little Dwarf. By what they say, he appears to 
many when they are on the [127] point of going to 
war. He caresses some, and that is a sign, they say, 
that they will return victorious; others he strikes 
upon the forehead, and these can truly say that they 
will not go to war without losing their lives. 
Let us return to the feasts. The Aoutacrohi is a 
remedy which is only for one particular kind of dis- 
ease, which they call also AoutacroJu", from the name 
of a little Demon as large as the fist, which they say 
is in the body of the sick man, especially in the part 
which pains him. They find out that they are sick 
of this disease, by means of a dream, or by the inter- 
vention of some Sorcerer. Having one day gone to 
visit a woman who thought herself sick of Aoutaerohi, 
w hen I assigned another cause for her sickness, and 
laughed at her Aoutaerolzi, she began to say, apos- 
trophizing this Demon, Aoutaerolu" hechrio Killellkhon. 
Aoutaerohi, " Ah, I pray thee that this one may know 
who thou art, and that thou wilt make him feel the 
ills that thou makest me suffer. ' , 


184 

LES RELATIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

Or pour chaffer ce Demon, ils font des feftins 
qu'ils accompagnent de quelques chanfons, que fort 
peu fçauent bien [128] chanter. Voila bien de quoy 
pleurer aux pieds des Autels; mais helas ce n'est pas 
encor tout. Outre ce que ie viens de dire, ie pour- 
rois diftinguer encor autant d'efpeces differentes de 
feftins, qu'il y a de diuerfes extrauagances dans leur 
fonges; car, comme i'ay dit, ce font ordinairement 
les fonges qui commandent les feftins, & ordon- 
nent mefmes iufques aux moindres ceremonies qui 
y doiuent eftre obferuées. De là viennent ces feftins 
à rendre gorge, qui font horreur à la plus part, & 
neantmoins, quiconque y eft inuité, il faut qu'il en 
paffe par la, & fe refolue d'écorcher Ie renard, autre- 
ment Ie feftin fera gafté. Quelque fois vn malade 
fongera qu'il faut que les conuiez entrent par vne 
certaine porte de la Cabane, & non par l'autre, qu'ils 
ne paffent que par vn certain cofté de la chaudiere; 
autrement faute de eel a il ne fera pas guery; y a fil 
rien de plus ridicule? 
II y a iufques à douze fortes de danfes, qui font 
autãt de fouuerains remedes pour les maladies, de 
fçauoir maintenant fi celle-cy, ou celle là eft pro pre 
pour telle, ou telle maladie, il n'y a qu'vn fonge qui 
Ie [129] puiffe determiner, ou bien l'Arendio
ane, c'eft 
à dire Ie Sorcier. 
De trois fortes de ieux qui font particulierement 
en vfage parmy ces Peuples, fçauoir de croffe, de 
plat, & de paille. Les deux premiers font tout à 
fait, difent-ils, fouuerains pour la fanté. Cela n'eft- 
il pas digne de compaffion? Voila vn pauure malade 
qui a Ie feu dans Ie corps, & l'ame fur Ie bout de 
levres, & vn miferable Sorcier luy ordonnera pour 


1636] 

LE /EUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

185 

Now, to drive away this Demon, they make feasts 
that they accompany with songs which very few in- 
deed can [128] sing. There is, indeed, much to be- 
wail at the foot of the Altars. But alas! this is not 
yet all. Besides what I have just mentioned, I might 
speak of as many different sorts of feasts as there are 
extravagances in their dreams, for, as I have said, it 
is usually dreams that ordain feasts, and fix even to 
the smallest details the ceremonies that must be" 
observed there. Hence come those feasts where they 
disgorge, which cause horror to most of them; and 
yet whoever is invited must resign himself, and re- 
solve to skin the fox, otherwise the feast will be 
spoiled. Sometimes the sick man will dream that 
the guests must enter by a certain door of the Cabin, 
and not by the other, or that they must pass only on 
one side of the kettle, else he will not be healed. 
Can anything be more ridiculous? 
There are as many as twelve kinds of dances that 
are so many sovereign remedies for sickness; now to 
know whether this or that is the proper remedy for 
such and such a disease, only a dream [129] or else 
the Arendiowane, or Sorcerer, can determine. 
Of three kinds of games especially in use among 
these Peoples,- namely, the games of crosse, dish, 
and straw,19-the first two are, they say, most heal- 
ing. Is not this worthy of compassion? There is a 
poor sick man, fevered of body and almost dying, 
and a miserable Sorcerer will order for him, as a 
cooling remedy, a game of crosse. Or the sick man 
himself, sometimes, will have dreamed that he must 
die unless the whole country shall play crosse for his 
health; and, no matter how little may be his credit, 
you will see then in a beautiful field, Village con- 


186 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

tout remede refrigeratif vn ieu de croffe; ou Ie ma- 
lade mefme quelquefois aura fongé, qu'il faut qu'i1 
meure, ou que tout le pays croffe pour fa fanté, & en 
mefme temps s'i1 a tant foit peu de credit, vous ver- 
rez dans vn beau champ Village contre Village, à 
qui croffera Ie mieux, & parient 1'vn contre 1'autre, 
pour s'animer dauantage, les robes de Caftor, & les 
colliers de Pourcelaine. 
Quelqnefois auffi vn de ces Jongleurs dira que tout 
Ie Pays eft malade, & qu'il demande vn ieu de croffe 
pour fa guerifon; il ne faut pas en dire dauantage, 
cela fe publie incontinent par tout, & tous les Capi- 
taines de chaque Village donnent ordre que toute la 
ieuneffe faffe fon deuoir en ce point, autrement quel- 
que grand [130] malheur accueilleroit tout Ie Pays. 
Le ieu de plat eft auffi en grand credit en matiere 
de medecine, fur tout fi Ie malade l' a fongé. Ce ieu 
eft purement de hazard; ils vous ont fix noyaux de 
prunes, blancs d'vn cofté & noirs de 1'autre, dedans 
vn plat qu'ils heurtent affez rudemet contre terre, en 
forte que les noyaux fautent, & fe tournent tan toft 
d'vn cofté, tantoft de 1'autre. La partie confifte à 
amener tous blancs, ou tous noirs; ils iouënt d' ordi- 
naire Village contre Village. Tout ce monde s'a- 
maffe dans vne Cabane, & fe range fur des perches 
dreffées iufques au haut, de part & d'autre. On y 
apporte Ie malade dans vne couuerture, & celuy du 
Village, qui doit remuer Ie plat; (car i] n'y en a 
qu'vn de chaque cofté étably pour cet effet) celuy là 
dif-ie marche apres, la tefte & ]e vifage enueloppé de 
fa robe. On parie fort & ferme de part & d'autre. 
Quãd celuy de la partie aduerfe tient Ie plat, ils crient 
à pleine tefte achz"nc, achz"nc, aclÛnc, trois, trois, trois, 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

187 

tending against Village, as to who will play crosse 
the better, and betting against one another Beaver 
robes and Porcelain collars, so as to excite greater 
interest. 
Sometimes, also, one of these Jugglers will say 
that the whole Country is sick, and he asks a game 
of crosse to heal it; no more needs to be said, it is 
published immediately everywhere; and all the Cap- 
tains of each Village give orders that all the young 
men do their duty in this respect, otherwise some 
great [130] misfortune would befall the whole Country. 
The game of dish is also in great renown in affairs 
of medicine, especially if the sick man has dreamed 
of it. This game is purely one of chance: they play 
it with six plum-stones, white on one side and black 
on the other, in a dish that they strike very roughly 
against the ground, so that the plum-stones leap up 
and fall, sometimes on one side and sometimes on 
the other. The game consists in throwing all white 
or all black; they usually play Village against Vil- 
lage. All the people gather in a Cabin, and they 
dispose themselves on poles, arranged as high as the 
roof, along both sides. The sick man is brought in 
in a blanket, and that man of the Village who is to 
shake the dish (for there is only one on each side set 
apart for the purpose), he, I say, walks behind, his 
head and face wrapped in his garment. They bet 
heavily on both sides. When the man of the oppo- 
site party takes the dish they cry at the top of their 
voice achinc, achinc, ach , i1lC "three, three, three," or 
perhaps ioio, z'oio, ioio, wishing him to throw only 
three white or three black. You might have seen 
this winter a great crowd returning from here to their 
Villages, having lost their moccasins [13 I] at a time 


188 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

ou bien z'oio, ioio, ioio, fouhaittans qu'il n'amene que 
trois blancs ou trois noirs. V ous en euffiez veu cét 
hyuer vne bonne troupe s'en retourner d'icy à leurs 
Villages, ayans perdu leurs chauffes [131] en vne fai- 
fon, où il y auoit prés de trois pieds de neige, auffi 
gaillards neantmoins en apparence que s'ils euffent 
gagné. Ce que ie trouue de plus remarquable en ce 
point, e'en la difpofition qu'ils y apportent. II s'en 
trouue qui ieufnent plufieurs iours auparauant que de 
iouër: la veiUe ils s'affemblent tous dans vne Cabane, 
& font feftin pour cognoiftre queUe fera l'iffuë du 
ieu. Celuy qui eft choifi pour tenir le plat, prend les 
noyaux, & les met indifferemment dans vn plat, & Ie 
couure, en forte que perfonne n'y puiffe mettre la 
main; cela faict on chante; la chanfon acheuée, on 
découure Ie plat, & les noyaux fe trouuent ou tous 
blancs, ou tous noirs. Là deffus ie demanday à vn 
Sauuage, fi ceux contre lefquels ils deuoient iouër, 
ne faifoient pas Ie mefme de leur cofté, & s'i1s ne 
pouuoient pas rencontrer les noyaux en mefme eftat: 
il me dit qu'ouy; & cependant luy dif-ie, tous ne 
peuuent pas gagner; à cela il ne fceut que répondre. 
II m'apprit encor deux chofes remarquables: premi- 
erement qu'on choififfoit pour manier Ie plat, quel- 
qu'vn qui auoit fongé qu'il gagneroit, ou qui auoit 
vn- fort; au refte ceux qui en ont pour quoy que ce 
foit, ne s'en cachent point, & [132] Ie portent par tout 
auec eux; nous en auõs, dit-on, vn dans noftre Vil- 
lage, qui froUe les noyaux d'vn certain onguent, & 
ne manque quafi iamais de gagner. Secondement 
qu'en faifant l'effay, quelques vns des noyaux difpa- 
roiffoient, & fe retrouuoient quelque temps apres 
dans Ie plat anec les autres. 


1636] 

LE.lEUNES RELATION, I636 

189 

when there was nearly three feet of snow,-appar- 
ently as cheerful, nevertheless, as if they had won. 
The most remarkable thing I notice in regard to this 
matter is the disposition they bring to it. There are 
some who fast several days before playing: the even- 
ing before, they all meet together in a Cabin, and 
make a feast to find out what will be the result of 
the game. The one chosen to hold the dish takes 
the stones, and puts them promiscuously into a dish, 
and covers it, so as to prevent anyone from putting 
his hand into it. That done, they sing; the song 
over, the dish is uncovered, and the plum-stones are 
found all white or all black. On this point, I asked 
a Savage if those against whom they were to play 
did not do the same on their side, and if they might 
not find the plum-stones in the same condition. He 
said they did; "And yet," said I to him, " all can not 
win;" to that he knew not what to answer. He in- 
formed me besides of two remarkable things: in the 
first p1ace, that they choose, to handle the dish, some 
one who had dreamed that he would win, or who had 
a charm; moreover, those who have a charm do not 
conceal it, and [132] carry it everywhere with them: 
we have, they tell me, one of these in our Village, 
who rubs the plum-stones with a certain ointment 
and hardly ever fails to win. Secondly, that in mak- 
ing the attempt some of the plum-stones disappear, 
and are found some time after in the dish with the 
others. 
Among all these fooleries, I dare not speak of the 
infamies and uncleanness which the Devil makes to 
slip into them. causing them to see in a dream that 
they can only be healed by wallowing in all sorts of 
filth. May he who has saved us by the blood of the 


190 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

Parmy toutes ces niaiferies ie n'oferois dire les in- 
famies & lubricitez, que Ie Diable y fait gliffer, leur 
faifant voir en fonge, qu'ils ne fçauroient guerir, 
qu'en fe veautrant dans toute forte d'ordures. Celuy 
qui nous a fauuez par le fang de l' Agneau immaculé, 
y veüilIe remedier au pluftoft, acceptant pour cet 
effect, fi befoin eft, nos ames & nos vies, que nous 
luy offrons de tres-bon cæur. pour le falut de ces 
Peuples, & la remiffion de nos pechez. 


1636] 

LE /EUNE'S RELA TION. I636 

191 

Lamb grant to remedy this as soon as possible, ac- 
cepting for this purpose, if need be, our souls and 
lives, that we most willingly offer to him for the 
salvation of these Peoples, and the remission of our 
own sins. 


192 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

CHAPITRE V. 

S'IL Y A DES SORCIERS AUX HURONS. 

E N voicy quelques coniectures; les plus fages en 
iugeront. Premierement ce Peuple n'eft pas 
fi hebeté, qu'il ne cherche & ne reconnoiffe 
quelque chofe de releué [133] au deffus des fens: & 
d'ailleurs fa vie licentieufe & res débordemens l'em- 
pefchans de rencontrer Dieu; il eft bien facile au 
Diable de s'ingerer & luy offrir fon feruice, dans les 
neceffitez preffantes où ille void, fe faifant payer d'vn 
culte qui ne luy eft pas deut, & fe familiarifant à 
quelques efprits plus fubtils, qui Ie mettent en credit 
auprés de ces pauures gens. 
2. Vous ne voyez icy rien de plus frequent que 
les forts; les enfans en heritent de leurs peres, s'ils 
ont efté trouuez bons, & ils ne s'en cachent point, 
comme ie viens de dire. Nous auons vn Sauuage en 
noftre Village, furnomme Ie PeJdleur, pour l'heur 
qu'il a à pefcher; cét homme aUribuë tout fon bien 
aux cendres d'vn certain petit oyfeau qu'on appelle 
OhguÙme; qui penetre, à l'entendre dire, les troncs 
des arbres fans refiftance. Allant à la pefche il de- 
mefie auec vn peu d'eau fes cendres, & en ayant 
froUé fon rets, il s'affeure, que Ie poiffon donnera de- 
dans en abondance; en effect i1 en a acquis Ie renom. 
3. II Y a parmy ce Peuple des hommes qui font 
eftat de commander aux pluyes & aux vents; d'au- 
tres, de predire les chofes à venir; d'autres, de trou- 


1636] 

LE /EUNE'S RELATION, r6.J6 

193 

CHAPTER V. 

WHETHER THERE ARE SORCERERS AMONG THE HURONS. 

H ERE are some conjectures, let the wiser ones 
judge of them. In the first place, these People 
are not so foolish as not to seek and to acknowl- 
edge something [133] above the senses; and, since 
their lewdness and licentiousness hinder them from 
finding God, it is very easy for the Devil to thrust him- 
self in and to offer them his services in their pressing 
necessities, causing them to pay him a homage that 
is not due him, and having intercourse with certain 
more subtle minds, who extend his influence among 
these poor people. 
2. You see nothing more common here than 
charms; children inherit them from their fathers, if 
they have been proved good; and they do not make 
any secret of them, as I have just said. We have a 
Savage in our Village, surnamed the FÚher, on ac- 
count of his good fortune in fishing; this man attrib- 
utes all his success to the ashes of a certain little bird 
that is called Ollguz"one, which, according to his state- 
ment, penetrates the trunks of trees without resist- 
ance. When he goes fishing, he mixes his ashes 
with a little water, and, having rubbed his nets with 
them, he feels confident that the fish will enter them 
in abundance; in fact, he has acquired fame from 
this. 
3. There are among these People men who pre- 
sume to command the rain and winds; others, to 


194 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

uer celles qui font [134] perduës; d'autres finalement 
de rendre la fanté aux malades, & ce auec des re- 
medes, qui n'ont aucun rapport aux maladies. Qu'ils 
ayent ces dons de Dieu, perfonne, à mon aduis, ne 
l' ofera dire. Que tout leur faict foit tromperie ou 
imagination, cela ne s'accorde gueres bien auec Ie 
credit qu'ils ont acquis, & Ie long-temps qu'il y a 
qu'ils font cette profeffion. Quel moyen que leurs 
fourbes n'euffent point efté découuertes depuis tant 
d'années, ou que leur meftier euft efté fi bien accre- 
dité, & fi bien recompenfé de tout temps, s'il n'euft 
iamais reüffy que par pure fantaifie. Perfone 
n'ofe leur contredire; ils font continuellement en 
feftins, qui fe font par leur ordonnance. I1 y a done 
quelque apparence, que le Diable leur tient la main 
par fois, & s' ouure à eux pour quelque profit tempo- 
reI, & pour leur damnation eternelle. V oyons-en 
quelques exemples. Ondz"taclzz'al eft renommé en la 
Nation du Petun, comme vn Iuppin parmy les Pay- 
ens iadis, pour auoir en main les pluyes & les vents, 
& Ie tonnerre. Ce tonnerre, à fon conte, eft vn 
homme femblable à vn coq-d'Inde; Ie Ciel eft fon 
Palais, il fe retire là quand l'air eft ferain; il en de- 
icend & vient fur terre faire fa prouifion [135] de cou- 
leuures & de ferpens, & de tout ce qu'ils appellent 
Oki, quand les nuës grondent; les éc1airs fe font à 
mefure qu'il étend ou replie fes aiíles. Que fi le tin- 
tamarre eft vn peu plus grand, ce font fes petits qui 
l'accompagnent, & l'aydent à bruire du mieux qu'ils 
peuuent. Oppofant à celuy qui m'en faifoit Ie conte, 
d'où venoit done la feichereffe; il me repartit qu'elle 
venoit des chenilles, fur lesquelles Ondz'aachiaé, n'a 
point de pouuoir. Et luy demandant pourquoy Ie 


1636] 

LE /EUNE'S RELA TION, r636 

195 

predict future events; others, to find things that are 
[134] lost; and, lastly, others to restore health to the 
sick, and that with remedies that have no relation to 
the sicknesses. That they have these gifts from God, 
nobody in my opinion will dare to say; that all they 
do is deception or imagination, hardly accords with 
the reputation they have acquired, and the length of 
time they have followed this profession. How is it 
that their tricks have not been discovered during so 
many years, and their business has acquired so much 
reputation, and been always so well rewarded,-if 
they have never succeeded except by sheer imagina- 
tion? Noone dares to contradict them. They are 
continually at feasts, which take place at their com- 
mand. There is, therefore, some foundation for the 
belief that the Devil occasionally gives them assist- 
ance, and reveals himself to them for some temporal 
profit, and for their eternal damnation. Let us see 
some examples of it. 01ldz"tachial is renowned among 
the Tobacco Nation, like a Jupiter among the Heath- 
ens of former times, from having in hand the rains, 
the winds, and the thunder. This thunder is, by his 
account, a man like a Turkey-cock; the Sky is his 
Palace, and he retires there when it is serene; he 
comes down to earth to get his supply [135] of adders 
and serpents, and of all they call Okz', when the 
clouds are rumbling; the lightnings occur in propor- 
tion as he extends or folds his wings. 3 If the uproar 
is a little louder, it is his little ones who accompany 
him, and help him to make a noise as best they can. 
Raising the objection to him who told me the tale, 
"whence, then, came dryness?" he replied that it came 
from the caterpillars, over whom 01ldiaachiaé had no 
power. And asking him " why the lightning struck 


196 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

tonnerre tomboit fur les arbres; c'eft là, dit-il, qu'il 
fait fes prouifions. Pourquoy bruíle-il les Cabanes, 
pourquoy tuë il les hommes. Clzz"eskc; que fçay-ie, 
me dit-il, c' eft leur refrain quand ils demeurent 
courts. Pour la prediction du futur, mais qui n'eft 
gueres eíloigné ny difficile à connoiftre en ces caufes, 
Louys de faincte Foy m'a affeuré, qu'allant à la 
guerre, vn de ces Jongleurs, leur predit à poinct nom- 
mé la rencontre des Iroquois, au fortir de la Suerie. 
II y a bien de la probabilité, que Ie Diable eftoit en 
fentinelle pour luy. I'en dirois bien d'autres qui à 
la verité fe font trouuées fauffes, & fur lefquelles vn 
bon vieillard me rauit il y a quelque temps. All, 
dit-il, il y a V1l plus grand hfaiJlre [136J que luy; i1 par- 
loit d'vn certain faux Prophete, qui s'eftoit trOlnpé 
en fon calcul. N'eftoit-ce pas bien dit pour vn Sau- 
uage? & n'y a-il pas en cela dequoy efperer quelque 
chofe de ce que nous cherchons icy. 
Les plus fameux d'entre ces Sorciers ou Trompeurs 
font les A rOldið'allt', qui fe meílent de dire à vn ma- 
lade Ie poinct & la qualité de fa maladie, apres vn 
feíHn ou vne Suerie, & Ie laiffent là. II eft vray que 
quelques-vns ordonnent, qui de faire feftin d'vn chien, 
qui de faire croffer, ou ioüer au plat, qui de dormir 
fur vue telle & telle peau, & autres extrauagances ni- 
aifes ou diaboliques; qui vn vomitoire, pour faire for- 
tir Ie fort s'i1 y en a; comme ie veis moy-mefme 
eftant à la Rochelle vne pauure femme, qui ietta vn 
charbon gros d'vn poulce, apres quelques prifes d'eau; 
& vn Sauuage m'a affeuré auoir veu fortir du fable 
de. toutes les parties du corps d'vne autre qui eftoit 
ethique, apres que fon A rC1ldið'alle l' eut fecoüée comme 
on feroit vn crible. Autrefois ces offices d'ArendiYane 


1636] 

LE /EUNE' S RELA TI01V, r636 

197 

trees?" "It is there," said he, "that it lays in its 
supply." "\Vhy does it burn Cabins, why does it 
kill men?" Chieske . "How do I know?" he said. 
That is their refrain when they are driven to the 
wall. As regards predicting the future which is not 
remote, nor hard to know for that reason, I have 
been assured by Louys de saincte Foy that, when 
they were going to war, one of their Jugglers, as he 
came forth from the Sweat- box, predicted a meeting 
with the Iroquois at a certain spot. There is indeed 
much probability that the Devil was sentinel for him. 
I could say this of others who, in truth, have been 
found false, and about whom a good old man enter- 
tained me some time ago. A 11, said he, tllere -is a 
greater .lJ,f aster [136] than he. He spoke of a certain 
false Prophet who had been deceived in his calcula- 
tion. \Vas it not well said for a Savage? and is there 
not something in this to inspire some hope in regard 
to what we are seeking here? 
The most famous among these Sorcerers or Deceiv- 
ers are the Arelldiwalle, who make it their business to 
tell a sick man the extent and nature of his sickness, 
after a feast or a Sweat, and leave him there. True, 
they prescribe for one a dog feast; for another, that 
a game of crosse or dish should be played; for an- 
other, sleep on such and such a skin, and other stupid 
and diabolical extravagances; another still, an emet- 
ic, to make the charm, if there be any, come forth,- 
as I myself saw, when at la Rochelle, a poor woman 
who threw up a coal as large as one's thumb, after 
some doses of water; and a Savage assured me that 
he had seen sand coming forth from all parts of the 
body of another, who had hectic fever, after his Aren- 
diwalle had shaken him as one would shake a sieve. 


198 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

efioient à plus haut prix qu'à prefent; ils les ont à 
cette heure à force de fefiins. V n temps fut, qu'il 
falloit ieufner les trente iours entiers dans vne Ca- 
bane à 1'efcart, [137] fans que perfonne en approchafi, 
qu'vn feruiteur, qui pour efire digne d'y porter du 
bois, s'y difpofoit luy-mefme en ieufnant. Les hon- 
neurs & les émoluments en font toufiours grands. 
Ces pauures gens n'ayans rien de plus cher que cette 
vie, faute d'en connoifire vne meilleure, mettent tout 
à cela, au recouurement de leur fanté, & à qui fait 
mine de les ayder. II nous ferment quelquefois la 
bouche, lors que nous les voulons defabufer fur ces 
charlatanneries, difans, gueriffez nous done. Si quel- 
que fage & vertueux Medecin vouloit venir icy, il y 
feroit de belles cures pour les ames, en foulageant 
les corps; & ie m'affeure que Dieu prendroit plaifir 
vn iour de luy dire comme à Abraham. Ego ero mer- 
ces t21a magna 1limzS. les miracles de la nature font 
de grandes difpofitions à ceux de la grace, quand il 
plaifi à l' Autheur des vns & des autres, de s'en feruir. 
Ie laiffe à part vne infinité d'autres remarques fur 
ce fujet, pour raconter vne partie de ce qui a tenu 
vn mois entier tout ce pays en haleine. Vn Sauuage 
nommé IlzollgYalza fongea vne nuict qu'il deuiendroit 
Arelldz"Yallc, c'efi à dire maifire Sorder, pourueu qu'il 
ieunafi tren te iours fans manger. [ 1 38] Le lende- 
main à fan réueil il trouua cette qualité fi honorable 
& fi aduantageufe qu'il fe refolut de garder ce ieufne 
tres-efiroictement. Sur ces entrefaites on 1'inuite à 
vn fefiin d' A Ytacrohi: i1 y en a peu qui fçachent 
chanter au gré de ce Demon; cettuicy efi vn des 
Maifires. II fe laiffe enfin emporter, & y mangea fi 
bien & y chanta auec telle contention, qu'il en fort it 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

199 

Formerly these offices of Arendiwane were more val- 
ued than they are at present; they have them now 
at many of the feasts. Time was when it was neces- 
sary to fast thirty entire days, in a Cabin apart, [137] 
without anyone approaching it except a servant, 
who, in order to be worthy of carrying wood there, 
prepared himself for it by fasting. The honors and 
emoluments are always great. These poor people, 
having nothing dearer than this life, knowing noth- 
ing of abetter, will give their all for the recovery of 
their health, and to anyone who pretends to help 
them. They sometimes close our mouths when we 
wish to undeceive them about this charlatanry, say- 
ing, " Do you cure us, then." If some wise and up- 
right Physician would come here, he would perform 
noble cures for their souls, in relieving their bodies; 
and I am certain God would take pleasure in saying 
to him some day, as to Abraham, Ego ero merces tua 
magna nz"mis. Thè miracles of nature are great aids 
to those of grace, when it pleases the Author of both 
to employ them. 
I pass by many other remarks on this subject, to 
relate a part of what has astounded this country for 
a whole month. A Savage named Ihongwalza dreamed 
one night that he could become Arendiwane,-that 
is, a master Sorcerer,-provided he could fast thirty 
days without eating. [138] On the morrow, when he 
awoke, he considered this accomplishment so honor- 
able and so advantageous that he resolved to keep 
this fast very strictly. In the meantime, he was in- 
vited to a feast of Aoutaerolti. There are few who 
can sing to the satisfaction of this Demon; this one 
is one of the Masters. He allowed himself, at last, 
to be so carried away, and ate so heartily and sang 


200 

LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

la ceruelle en écharpe; Ie voila en mefme temps la 
tortuë, ou pour mieux dire la marote à la main, en 
la faifon la plus fafcheufe de l'hyuer, en l'efiat qu'il 
efioit forty du ventre de fa mere, il court par les 
neiges, & chante nuict & iour; Ie lendemain, c'efioit 
Ie vingt-huictiéme de Ianuier, il alla au village d' ð'ell- 
rio, où on luy fit trois ou quatre fefiins pour fa fanté, 
& en retourna auffi fol qu'il y efioit al1é. Quelques 
Sauuages difoient que nous efiions caufes de tout 
cela, mais les plus fages remarquerent qu'il s'efioit 
mocqué lors qu'expliquant les Commandemens de 
Dieu, i' auois condamné l' A ð'taerolli, & attribuerens 
fa folie à vne punition diuine. 
La nuict du trente-vn il fongea qu'il luy falloit vn 
Canot, huict Cafiors, deux Rays, fix vingts æufs de 
Mauue, vne Tortuë, & [139] vn homme qui l'adoptafi 
pour fon fils; ie vous prie quelle chimere, & cepen- 
dant on luy doit faire comme vn cataplafme de tout 
cela pour luy guerir la ceruelle. De fait il n'a pas 
plufiofi, fait recit de fon fonge, que les anciens du 
village s'affemblent pour aduifer là deffus; ils fe 
mettent en peine de luy trouuer ce qu'il auoit deman- 
dé auec aut ant de foin & d'empreffement que s'il eufi 
efié quefiion de la conferuation de tout Ie Pays; Ie 
pere du Capitaine Ie prit pour fon fils, & tout ce qu'il 
auoit fongé luy fur liuré Ie mefme iour; pour les æufs 
de Mauue, ils furent changez en aut ant de petits pains 
qui donnerent de l'exercice à toutes les femmes du 
village. Le fefiin fe fit fur Ie foir, & tout cela fans 
effect: Ie Diable n'auoit pas encor tout. 
Le premier de Feurier on Ie danfa derechef, i' euffe 
fouhaitté que plufieurs Chrefiiens euffent affifié à ce 
fpectac1e, ie ne doute point qu'ils n'euffent honte 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELATION, L636 

201 

with so much vehemence that he left the feast with 
his brain in a sling. See him then with the turtle, 
or more correctly, with the fool's cap in his hand, in 
the most trying season of winter,-naked as when 
he was born, running about in the snow, and sing- 
ing night and day. Next day-it was the twenty- 
eighth of January - he went to the village of TYellrio, 
where they made three or four feasts for his health; 
and he returned thence, as mad as when he went 
away. Some Savages said we were the cause of this; 
but the wiser ones remarked that he had mocked 
when, in explaining the Commandments of God, I 
had condemned the Aoutaerohi/ and they attributed 
his madness to divine punishment. 
On the night of the thirty-first, he dreamed that 
he must have a Canoe, eight Beavers, two Rays, six 
score Gull's eggs, a Turtle, and [139] a man who 
would adopt him as his son; just think, what a fan- 
cy! and yet they must make for him a cataplasm of 
all that, to heal his brain. Indeed, he had no sooner 
recited his dream than the old people of the village 
met to talk it over. They set about finding what he 
had asked with as much care and eagerness as if it 
had been a question of preserving the whole Coun- 
try; the Captain's father adopted him as his son, and 
everything he had dreamed was given up to him, the 
same day; as for the Gull's eggs, they were changed 
into as many small loaves, which kept busy all the 
women of the village. The feast took place in the 
evening, and all without effect. The Devil had not 
everything yet. 
On the first of February, there was another feast; 
I would have liked several Christians to be present 
at this sight; I doubt not they would have been 


202 

LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

d'eux-mefmes, voyans combien ils fymbolifent auec ces 
Peuples dans leurs folies du carnaual, ils fe traueftirent 
& fe déguiferent, non à la verité fi richement, mais 
à peu prés auffi ridiculement qu' on fait ailleurs. 
Vous en euffiez veu les vns auec vn fac [140] en la 
tefte, percé feulement aux yeux, les autres en auoient 
vn plein de paille à l' entour du ventre pour contrefaire 
les femmes groffes. Plufieurs eftoient nuds comme 
la main, blanchis par tout Ie corps, noirs par le vifage 
comme des Diables, des plumes ou des cornes à la 
tefte; les autres barboüillez de rouge, de noir, & de 
blanc; enfin chacun fe para auec Ie plus d' extraua- 
gance qu'il peut pour danfer ce Balet, & contribuer 
quelque chofe à la fanté du malade. Mais ie m'ou- 
bliois d'vne circonftance notable, les bruits de guerre 
eftoient grands, ils eftoient dans des alarmes continu- 
elles, on attendoit 1 'Ennemy à toute heure, on auoit 
inuité toute la ieuneffe à fe tranfporter au village 
d'Allgð'iells, pour trauailler à vne palliffade de pieux 
qui n'eftoit qu'à demy faite; Ie Capitaine eut beau 
crier à pleine tefte e1l01lð' eiellti ccð'arltakllioll, ieunes 
gens allons, perfonne ne s'en remua, aymans mieux 
efcouter ce fol, & executer toutes fes volontez; cette 
medecine n'opera pas plus que les precedentes. 
Apres auoir ieufné dix-huict iours, fans manger ce 
dit-on que du petun, il me vint voir, ie luy donnay 
fept ou huit raifins, il me remercia, & me dit qu'il en 
mangeroit [141] vn tous les iours, ce n'eftoit pas pour 
rompre fon ieu[ne. Le quatorziéme de Feurier fai- 
fant la ronde par les Cabanes à fon ordinaire, il trou- 
ua qu'on preparoit vn feftin, & alors, Ce fera moy, 
dit-il, qui feray feftin, ie veux que ce foit icy mon 
feftin, & en mefme temps il prend des raquettes, & 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

203 

ashamed of themselves, seeing how like these Peoples 
they act in their carnival follies; these dress and dis- 
guise themselves, not in truth so richly, but almost 
as ridiculously as they do elsewhere. 
You would have seen some with a sack [140] on the 
head, pierced only for the eyes; others were stuffed 
with straw around the middle, to imitate a pregnant 
woman. Several were naked as the hand, with bod- 
ies whitened, and faces as black as Devils, and 
feathers or horns on their heads; others were smeared 
with red, black, and white; in short each adorned 
himself as extravagantly as he could, to dance this 
Ballet, and contribute something to the health of the 
sick man. But I would not forget one notable cir- 
cumstance. The reports of war were serious, they 
were in continual alarms, they expected the Enemy 
every hour; all the youth had been invited to go to 
the village of Angwiols,?JJ to work at a palisade of 
stakes, that was only half-made. The Captain had 
to cry in vain, as loudly as he could, elzonou eiellti 
ecwarllakllioll, " Young men, come." No one stirred, 
preferring to listen to this fool, and to carry out all 
his wishes. This medicine accomplished no more 
than the preceding. 
After having fasted eighteen days without tasting 
anything, it was said, except tobacco, he came to see 
me; I gave him seven or eight raisins; he thanked 
me and told me he would eat [141] one every day- 
that was in order not to break his fast. On the four- 
teenth of February, making the round of Cabins as 
usual, he found the people preparing a feast; "I 
shall prepare a feast," said he then, " I wish this to 
be my feast;" and immediately he took his snow- 
shoes and himself went around to invite the people 


204 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

s'en va luy mefme pour inuiter ceux des Villages cir- 
conuoifins: mais il y a bien de l'apparence qu'il ne 
fut pas plufiofi en campagne, qu'il s'oublia de fon 
deffein, car il ne retourna que prés de deux fois vingt- 
quatre heures apres, & fit, où il fe trouua, fept ou 
huit fefiins pour vn. II luy arriua dit-on en cette 
courfe trois chofes memorables. La premiere, qu'il 
n'enfonça point du tout dans les neiges, quoy qu'elles 
fuíIent de trois pieds de haut. La feconde, qu'il fe 
ietta du haut d'vne groffe roche fans fe bleffer. La 
troifiéme, qu'efiant de retour il ne parut non plus 
mouïllé, & fes fouliers auffi fees, que s'il n'eufi pas 
mis Ie pied hors la Cabane: celuy qui nous racontoit 
cecy, adioufia qu'il ne falloit pas s'en efionner, qu'vn 
Diable Ie conduifoit. Sur la fin de fa maladie il me 
fit prier de l'aller voir; ie Ie trouuay en apparence 
en affez bon fens; il me raconta Ie progrés, & la caufe 
de fa maladie, [142] qu'il attribuoit à la rupture de 
fon ieufne, & me dit qu'il efioit refolu d'aller iufques 
au bout, c'efi à dire iufques au terme que fon fonge 
luyauoit ordonné. Vn autre iour il nous vint vifiter, 
& nous dit, que c' efioit tout de bon qu'il efioit deue- 
nu oki, c'efi à dire Demon, c'efioit bien encherir par 
deíIus la qualité de Sorcier, à laquelle feulement il 
afpiroit, toutefois il n'efioit pas hors de fa folie; il 
luy fallut encor refuer vne bonne fois pour en fortir; 
il fongea done qu'il n'y auoit qu'vne certaine forte de 
danfe, qui luy peufi rendre tout à fait la fanté. lIs 
l'appellent aklzrendoz"aen, d'autant que ceux qui font 
de cette danfe, s'entredonnent du poifon; elle n'auoit 
iamais efié pratiquée parmy cette Nation des Ours: la 
faifon efioit fort fafcheufe, la troupe efioit grande, 
& ne pouuoit qu'apporter beaucoup de defordre dans 


1636] 

LE .fEUNE'S RELA TION, z636 

205 

of the neighboring Villages. But it seems probable 
that he was no sooner in the country than he forgot 
his errand; for he only returned almost forty-eight 
hours later, and made, where he was, seven or eight 
feasts for one. It is said there happened to him on 
this journey three memorable things. The first, 
that he was not buried in the snow, though it was 
three feet deep. The second, that he threw himself 
from the top of a large rock, without being hurt. 
The third, that when he came back he was not at all 
wet, and his shoes were as dryas if he had not set 
foot outside the Cabin. The one who told us this 
added that no one need be astonished,- that a Devil 
had guided him. At the end of his sickness, he 
begged me to go to see him; I found him, to all ap- 
pearances, perfectly right in his mind. He told me 
the progress and cause of his malady, [142] which he 
attributed to the breaking of his fast; and he told 
me he had resolved to go on to the end,- that is, 
during the term prescribed by his dream. Another 
day, he visited us, and told us that it was in earnest 
he had become oki, that is to say, Demon. This was 
to rise aboye the title of Sorcerer, to which alone he 
aspired; still he was not free from his madness,- he 
must yet dream, once for all, to free himself from it. 
He dreamed, therefore, that there was only one cer- 
tain kind of dance which would make him quite well. 
They call it akhrl'1ldoiaell, inasmuch as those who 
take part in this dance give poison to one another. 
I t had never been practiced among this Nation of the 
Bear. The season was very disagreeable, the com- 
pany very large, and it could only create a great deal 
of disorder in a little Village; all these considera- 
tions did not stop them. So, behold, couriers are 


206 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

vn petit Village; on ne s'arrefta point à toutes ces 
confiderations. V oila incontinent des courriers en 
campagne, quize iours fe paffent à les affembler; la 
bande eftoit compofée d'enuiron quatre-vingts per- 
fonnes, il y auoit fix femmes; ils fe mettent en che- 
min fans delay; il faut remarquer icy qu'ils eftiment 
que Ie ieufne leur rend la veuë perçante à [143] mer- 
ueille, & leur donne des yeux capables de voir les 
chofes abfentes & les plus éloignées, n'eft ce pas ren- 
uerfer toute l'Efcole, qui tient, ce me femble, que 
rien n' affoibli t tan t la veuë, que le ieufne excefIìf; 
quoy que e'en foit, il y a bien de l'apparence que 
noftre fol n'auoit pas encor affez ieufné, car fa veuë 
Ie trompa bien fort, & commença fort mal pour fe 
mettre en credit de Prophete. La troupe n'eftoit 
pas partie, qu'illa faifoit à deux lieuës du Village. 
Or eftans arriuez enuiron à la portée d'vn mouf- 
quet, ils s'arrefterent & fe mirent à chanter; ceux 
du Village leur répondirent. Dés Ie foir mefme de 
leur arriuée ils danferent, pour prendre cognoiffance 
de la maladie, Ie malade eftoit au milieu de la Cabane 
fur vne natte; la danfe finie, parce qu'il eftoit tombé 
à la renuerfe, & auoit vomy, ils Ie declare rent tout à 
fait de la Confrairie des fols, & en vinrent au remede 
qui leur eft ordinaire en cette maladie, & qui feroit 
capable de les faire paffer pour tels, quand ils feroient 
les plus fages du monde. C'eft la danfe qu'ils appel- 
lent Otakrelldoiae, les Confreres Alirellda. I'en décri- 
rois les particularitez, fi ie n'auois peur d'eftre trop 
long. Ce fera pour vne autre fois, fi i'apprends [144] 
qu'on de fire les fçauoir. Suffit pour Ie prefent de 
dire en general, que iamais les Bacchantes forcenées 
du temps paíIé ne firent rien de plus furieux en leurs 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, z636 

207 

sent immediately in all dire"ctions; a fortnight passes 
in assembling the company, which is composed of 
about eighty persons, including six women; they 
set off without delay. Here I must remark that they 
think fasting renders their vision wonderfully pierc- 
ing, [143] and gives them eyes capable of seeing 
things absent and far removed. Is not this to over- 
throw the belief of all that School, who, if I am not 
mistaken, hold that nothing so much weakens the 
sight as excessive fasting? However that may be, 
there is considerable ground for the belief that our 
madman had not yet fasted enough, for his sight de- 
ceived him very thoroughly, and did not help in- 
crease his reputation as a Prophet. The troop had 
not set out when he declared it was two leagues from 
the Village. 
Now having arrived within musket-range, they 
stopped and began to sing; those of the Village re- 
plied. From the evening of their arrival, they 
danced, in order to get an understanding of the dis- 
ease; the sick man was in the middle of the Cabin, 
on a mat. The dance being ended, because he had 
fallen over backward and vomited, they declared him 
to belong entirely to the Brotherhood of lunatics; 
and came to the remedy therefor which is usual in 
this disease, and which would be sufficient to make 
them pass for fools, even if they were the wisest 
men in the world. It is the dance they call Otakren- 
doiae; the Brethren they call A tirenda. I would de- 
scribe the details of it, were I not afraid of being too 
long. I will do so another time, if I learn [144] that 
there is any desire to know them. Let it suffice for 
the present to say, in general, that never did fren- 
zied Bacchantes of bygone times do anything more 


201'- 

LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

orgyes. C'eft icy à f'entretuer, difent-ils, par des 
forts qu'ils s' entreiettent, dont la compofition eft 
d'ongles d'Ours, de dents de Loup, d'ergots d'Aigles, 
de certaines pierres, & de nerfs de Chien. C' eft à 
rendre du fang par la bouche, & par les narines, ou 
pluftoft d'vne poudre rouge qu'ils prennent fubtile- 
ment, eftans tombez fous Ie fort, & bleffez. Et dix 
mille autres fottifes que ie laiffe volontiers. Le plus 
grand mal eft, que ces malheureux fous pretexte de 
charité vengent fouuent leurs iniures, & donnent à 
deffein vn boucon à leurs malades au lieu de mede- 
cine. Ce qui y eft de plus remarquable, eft l'experi- 
ence qu'ils ont pour guerir les ruptures, à quoy s'en- 
tendent auffi plufieurs autres en ces quartiers. La 
fuperftition la plus notoire eft, que leurs drogues & 
leurs onguens fe plaifent, à leur dire, au filëce & aux 
tenebres. S'ils font recogneus, ou fi leur fecret eft 
découuert, il eft fans fuccez. L'origine de toute 
cette folie vient d'vn nommé Oatarra, ou d'vne petite 
idole en forme d'vne poupée, quïl demanda, [145] 
pour fa guerifon à vne douzaine d'Enchanteurs qui 
l'eftoient venus voir, & laquelle ayant mis en fon fac 
de Petun, elle fe remua là dedans, ordonna les ban- 
quets, & autres ceremonies de la danfe, à ce qu'ils 
cõtent. Certes, voila bië des fornettes, & i'ay bien 
peur qu;il n'y ait quelque chofe de plus noir & de 
plus caché. 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, I6.J6 

209 

furious in their orgies. It is a question of killing 
one another here, they say, by charms which they 
throw at each other, and which are composed of 
Bears' claws, Wolves' teeth, Eagles' talons, certain 
stones, and Dogs' sinews. Having fallen under the 
charm and been wounded, blood pours from the 
mouth and nostrils, or it is simulated by a red pow- 
der they take by stealth; and there are ten thousand 
other absurdities, that I willingly pass over. The 
greatest evil is, that these wretches, under pretext of 
charity, often avenge their injuries, and purposely 
give poison to their patients, instead of medicine. 
What is very remarkable is their experience in heal- 
ing ruptures, wherein many others in these regions 
are also skillful. The most extraordinary supersti- 
tion is that their drugs and ointments take pleasure, 
so to speak, in silence and darkness. If they are 
recognized, or if their secret is discovered, success is 
not to be expected. The origin of all this folly 
comes from one named Oatarra, or from a little idol 
in the form of a doll, which he asked, [145] for the 
sake of being cured, from a dozen Sorcerers who had 
come to see him; having put it into his Tobacco 
pouch, it began to stir therein, and ordered the ban- 
quets and other ceremonies of the dance, according 
to what they say. Certainly you have here many 
silly things, and I am much afraid there may be some- 
thing darker and more occult in them. 


210 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL 10 

CHAPITRE VI. 

DE LA POLICE DES HURONS, & DE LEUR GOUUERNE- 
MENT. 

I E ne pretends pas icy mettre nos Sauuages en pa- 
rallele auec les Chinois, Iaponnois, & autres 
Nations parfaitement ciuilifées; mais feulement 
les tirer de la condition des beftes, où l' opinion de 
quelques-vns les a reduits, leur donner rang parmy 
les hommes, & faire paroiftre qu'il y a mefme parmy 
eux quelque efpece de vie Politique & Ciuile. C'eft 
déja beaucoup à mon aduis de dire qu'ils viuent 
affemblez dans des Villages, quelquefois iufques à 
cinquante, foixante, & cent Cabanes, c'eft à dire trois 
cens & [146] quatre cens ménages; qu'ils cultiuent 
des champs, d'où ils tirent à fuffifance pour leur 
nourriture de toute l'année, & qu'ils s'entretiennent 
en paix & amitié les vns auec les autres. II eft vray 
que ie ne penfe pas qu'i1 yayt peut-eftre Nation fouz 
le ciel plus recõmandable en ce point qu'eft la Nation 
des Ours; oftez quelques mauuais efprits qui fe ren- 
contrent quafi par tout, ils ont vne douceur, & vne 
affabilité quafi incroyable pour des Sauuages; ils ne 
fe picquent pas aifément: & encor s'ils croyent auoir 
receu quelque tort de quelqu'vn, ils diffimulent fou- 
uent Ie reffentiment qu'ils en ont; au moins en 
trouue-on icy fort peu qui s'échapent en public pour 
la colere, & la vengeance. lIs fe maintiennent dans 
cette fi parfaite intelligence par les frequentes vifites, 


1636] 

LE /EUNE'S RELATION. z6þ 

211 

CHAPTER VI. 

OF THE POLITY OF THE HURONS, AND THEIR GOV- 
ERNMENT. 

I DO not claim here to put our Savages on a level 
with the Chinese, Japanese, and other Nations 
perfectly civilized; but only to put them above 
the condition of beasts, to which the opinion of some 
has reduced them, to give them rank among men, 
and to show that even among them there is some 
sort of Political and Civil life. It is, in my opinion, 
a great deal to say that they live assembled in Vil- 
lages, with sometimes as many as fifty, sixty, and one 
hundred Cabins,-that is, three hundred and [146] 
four hundred households; that they cultivate the 
fields, from which they obtain sufficient for their 
support during the year; and that they maintain 
peace and friendship with one another. I certainly 
believe that there is not, perhaps, under heaven a 
Nation more praiseworthy in this respect than the 
Nation of the Bear. Leaving out some evil-minded 
persons, such as one meets almost everywhere, they 
have a gentleness and affability almost incredible for 
Savages. They are not easily annoyed, and, more- 
over, if they have received wrong from anyone they 
often conceal the resentment they feel,- at least, 
one finds here very few who make a public display 
of anger and vengeance. They maintain themselves 
in this perfect harmony by frequent visits, by help 
they give one another in sickness, by feasts and by 


212 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

les fecours qu'ils fe donnent mutuellement dans leurs 
ma1adies, par les fefiins, & les alliance[sJ. Si leurs 
champs, la pefche, la chaffe, ou la traitte ne les occupe 
ils font moins en leurs Cabanes que chez leurs amis; 
s'ils tombent malades, & qu'ils defirent quelque 
chofe pour leur fanté, c' eft à qui fe monftrera Ie plus 
obligeant. S'ils ont vn bon morceau, ie l'ay déja 
dit, ils [147J en font feftin à leurs amis, & ne Ie mangêt 
quafi iamais en leur particulier. Dans leurs ma- 
riages il ya cecy de remarquable, qu'ils ne fe marient 
iamais dans la parenté en quelque degré que ce foit 
ou direct, ou collateral, mais font toufiours de nou- 
uelles alliances, ce qui n'eft pas vn petit auantage 
pour maintenir l'alnitié. Dauantage en cette fre- 
quentatiõ fi ordinaire, comme ils ont la plus part l' ef- 
prit affez bon, ils s'éueillent & fe façonnent merueil- 
leufement; de forte qu'il n'y en a quafi point qui ne 
foit capable d'entretien, & ne raifonne fort bien, & en 
bons termes, fur les chofes dont il a la cognoiffance: 
ce qui les forme encor dans Ie difcours font les confeils 
qui fe tiennent quafi tous les iours dans les Villages 
en toutes occurrences: & quoy que les anciens y tien- 
nent Ie haut bout, & que ce foit de leur iugement 
que dépende la decifion des affaires; neantmoins s'y 
trouue qui veut, & chacun a droit d'y dire fon aduis. 
Adioûtez mefme que 1'honnefteté, la courtoifie & la 
ciuilité, qui eft comme la fleur & l'aggréement de la 
conuerfation ordinaire & humaine, ne laiffe pas encor 
de fe remarquer parmy ces Peuples; ils [148J appel- 
lent vn homme ciuil A z"ellda
astz". A la verité vous 
n'y voyez pas tous ces baife-mains, ces complimens, 
& ces vaines offres de feruice, qui ne paffent pas Ie 
bout des léures; mais neantmoins ils fe rendent de 


1636] 

LE .IE UNE , S RELA TIO.N, z636 

213 

alliances. When they are not busy with their fields, 
hunting, fishing, or trading, they are less in their 
own Houses than in those of their friends; if they 
fall sick, or desire anything for their health, there 
is a rivalry as to who will show himself most oblig- 
ing. If they have something better than usual, as I 
have already said, they [147J make a feast for their 
friends, and hardly ever eat it alone. In their mar- 
riages there is this remarkable custom,- they never 
marry anyone related in any degree whatever, either 
direct or collateral; but always make new alliances, 
which is not a little helpful in maintaining friend- 
ship. Moreover, by this so common habit of fre- 
quent visitation, as they are for the most part fairly 
intelligent, they arouse and influence one another 
wonderfully; so that there are almost none of them 
incapable of conversing or reasoning very well, and 
in good terms, on matters within their knowledge. 
The councils, too, held almost every day in the Vil- 
lages, and on almost all matters, improve their capac- 
ity for talking; and, although it is the old men who 
have control there, and upon whose judgment depend 
the decisions made, yet everyone who wishes may 
be present, and has the right to express his opinion. 
Let it be added, also, that the propriety, the courtesy, 
and the civility which are, as it were, the flower and 
charm of ordinary human conversation, are to some 
extent observed alnong these Peoples; they [148] 
call a polite person Az"endawasti. To be sure, you do 
not observe among them any of those hand-kissings, 
compliments, and those vain offers of service which 
do not pass beyond the lips; but, nevertheless, they 
render certain duties to one another, and preserve, 
through a sense of propriety, certain customs in their 


214 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

certains deuoirs les vns aux autres, & gardent par 
bien-fceance de certaines couít.umes en leurs vifites, 
dãfes, & fefiins, aufquelles fi quelqu'vn auoit manqué, 
il ne manqueroit pas d'efire releué fur l'heure; & 
s'il faifoit fouuent de femblables pas de clerc, i1 
pafferoit bien tofi en prouerbe par Ie village, & per- 
droit tout a fait fon credit. A la rencontre pour 
toute falüade, ils s'appellent chacun de leur nom, ou 
difent mon amy, mon camarade, mon oncle, fi c'efi 
vn ancien. Si vn Sauuage fe trouue en vofire Ca- 
bane lors que vous mangez, & que vous luy prefen- 
tiez vofire plat, n'y ayant encor guieres touché, i1 fe 
contentera d'en goufier, & vous le rendra. Que fi 
vous luy prefentez vn plat en particulier, il n'y por- 
tera pas la main qu'il n'en ait fait part à fes compa- . 
gnons; & ceux-cy fe contentent d'ordinaire d'en 
prendre vne cuillerée. Ce font petites chofes à la 
verité, mais qui monfirent neantmoins que ces Peuples 
[149] ne font pas tout à fait fi rudes & mal polis que 
quelqu'vn fe pourroit bien figurer. En outre, fi les 
loix font comme la maifireffe rouë qui regIe les Com- 
munautez, ou pour mieux dire l'ame des Republiques: 
il me femble que i'ay droit, eu égard à cette fi par- 
faite intelligence qu'ils ont entr'eux, de maintenir 
qu'ils ne font pas fans loix. Ils puniffent les meur- 
triers, les larrons, les traifires, & les Sorciers: & 
pour les meurtriers quoy qu'ils ne tiennent pas la feue- 
rité que faifoient iadis leurs ancefires, neantmoins Ie 
peu de defordre qu'il y a en ce point, me fait iuger 
que leur procedure n'efi guieres moins efficace qu'efi 
ailleurs Ie fupplice de la mort: car les parens du de- 
funct ne pourfuiuent pas feulement celuy qui a fait 
Ie meurtre, mais s'addreffent à tout Ie Village, qui 


1636] 

LE /EUNE'S RELA TION, z636 

215 

visits, dances, and feasts,- in which if anyone failed, 
he would certainly be criticised on the spot; and, if 
he often made such blunders, he would soon become 
a byword in the village, and would lose all his influ- 
ence. When they meet, the only salutation they 
give is to call the other by name, or say, " my friend, 
my comrade,"-" my uncle," if it is an old man. If 
a Savage finds himself in your Cabin when you are 
eating, and if you present to him your dish, having 
scarcely touched anything, he will content himself 
with tasting it, and will hand it back to you. But, 
if you give hitn a dish for himself, he will not put 
his hand to it until he has shared it with his compan- 
ions; and they content themselves usually with tak- 
ing a spoonful of it. These are little things, of 
course; but they show nevertheless that these Peo- 
ples [149] are not quite so rude and unpolished as 
one might suppose. Besides, if laws are like the 
governing wheel regulating Communities,-or to be 
more exact, are the soul of Commonwealths,- it 
seems to me that, in view of the perfect understanding 
that reigns among them, I am right in maintaining 
that they are not without laws. They punish mur- 
derers, thieves, traitors, and Sorcerers; and, in re- 
gard to murderers, although they do not preserve 
the severity of their ancestors towards them, never- 
theless the little disorder there is among them in this 
respect makes me conclude that their procedure is 
scarcely less efficacious than is the punishment of 
death elsewhere; for the relatives of the deceased 
pursue not only him who has committed the murder, 
but address themselves to the whole Village, which 
must give satisfaction for it, and furnish, as soon as 
possible, for this purpose as many as sixty presents, 


216 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

en doit faire raifon, & fournir au pluftoft pour cét 
effet iufques à foixante prefens, dont les moindres 
doiuent eftre de la valeur d'vne robbe neufue de 
Caftor: le Capitaine les prefente luy mefme en per- 
fonne, & fait vne longue harangue à chaque prefent 
qu'il offre; de façon que les iournées entieres fe 
paffent quelquefois dans cette ceremonie. [150] II 
y a deux fortes de prefens; les vns, tels que font les 
neuf premiers qu'ils appellent andaonhaall, fe mettent 
entre les mains des parens, pour faire la paix, & ofier 
de leur cæur toute l'aigreur, & les defirs de ven- 
geance, qu'ils pourroient auoir contre la perfonne du 
meurtrier: les autres fe mettent fur vne perche, qui 
eft éteduë au deffus de la tefte du mort, & les appel- 
let Alldaerraelzaall; e'en à dire qui fe mettent fur la 
perche. Or chacun de ces prefens a fon nom parti- 
culier. V oicy ceux des neuf premiers, qui font les 
plus confiderables, & quelque fois chacun de mille 
grains de Pourcelaine. Le Capitaine parlant, & 
hauffant fa voix au nom du coulpable, & tenant en 
fa main Ie premier prefent, comme fi la hache eftoit 
encor dans la playe du mort, condayee olifallacll
ta
as; 
voila, dit-il, dequoy il retire la hache de la playe, & 
la fait tomber des mains de celuy qui voudroit ven- 
ger cette iniure. Au fecond prefent, condayee of cot a- 

eallon; voila dequoy il effuie le fang de la playe de 
fa tefte: par ces deux prefens il témoigne Ie regret 
qu'il a de l'auoir tué, & qu'il feroit tout preft de luy 
rendre la vie s'i} eftoit poffible. [151] Toutefois 
comme fi Ie coup auoit reially fur la Patrie, & comme 
fi Ie Païs auoit receu la plus grande playe; il adioufte 
au troifiéme prefent, en difant condayee OJifalwlldecllari; 
voila pour remettre le Païs en eftat, condayee onfalwn- 


1636] 

LE./EUNE'S RELATION, I6þ 

217 

the least of which must be of the value of a new 
Beaver robe. The Captain presents them in person, 
and makes a long harangue at each present that he 
offers, so that entire days sometimes pass in this 
ceremon y . [ ISO] There are two sorts of presents; 
some, like the first nine, which they call andao1lhaan, 
are put into the hands of the relatives to make peace, 
and to take away from their hearts all bitterness and 
desire for vengeance that they might have against the 
person of the murderer. The others are put on a 
pole, which is raised above the head of the murderer, 
and are called Alldaerraeltaa1l, that is to say, " what 
is hung upon a pole." Now each of these presents 
has its particular name. Here are those of the first 
nine, which are the most important, and sometimes 
each one of them consists of a thousand Porcelain 
beads. The Captain. speaking, and raising his voice 
at the name of the guilty person, and holding in his 
hand the first present as if the hatchet were still in 
the death wound, cOlldayee ollsaltacllOutazt..'as, " There," 
says he, " is something by which he withdraws the 
hatchet from the wound, and makes it fall from the 
hands of him who would wish to avenge this injury." 
At the second present, conda)'ee oscotawea1l01l, " There 
is something with which he wipes away the blood 
from the wound in the head." By these two pres- 
ents he signifies his regret for having killed him, 
and that he would be quite ready to restore him to 
life, if it were possible. [IS I] Yet, as if the blow 
had rebounded on their Native Land, and as if it had 
received the greater wounds, he adds the third pres- 
ent, saying, cOlldayee onsahondecltari, "This is to re- 
store the Country;" cOlldayee 01lSahOlldwarollti, etoton- 
hwelltsiai, " This is to put a stone upon the opening 


218 

LES RELA TIONS DES .I É SUITES 

[VOL. 10 

d
arollti, ctotOllh
e1Ztfiaz'; voila pour mettre vne pierre 
deffus l'ouuerture & la diuifion de la terre, qui s'efioit 
faite par ce meurtre. Les metaphores font grande- 
ment en vfage parmy ces Peuples; fi vous ne vous y 
faites, vous n'entendez rien dans leurs confeils, où 
ils ne parlent quafi que par metaphores. lIs preten- 
dêt par ce prefent reünir les cæurs & les volontez, & 
mefmes les Villages entiers, qui auoient efié comme 
diuifez. Car ce n'efi pas icy comme en France & 
ailleurs, où le public & toute vne ville entiere n'é- 
poufe pas ordinairement la querelle d'vn particulier. 
Icy vous n'y fçauriez outrager qui que ce foit, que 
tout Ie Pais ne s'en reffente, & ne fe porte contre 
vous, & mefme contre tout vn Village; c'efi de là 
que naiffent les guerres, & c'efi vn fujet plus que 
fuffifant de prendre les armes contre quelque Village, 
quand il refufe de fatisfaire par les prefence [prefents] 
ordonnez [152] pour celuy qui vous auroit tué quel- 
qu'vn des vofires. Le cinquiéme fe fait pour appla- 
nir les chemins, & en ofier les broffailles, condayee 
onfa ha 1lJlOJlkz'a 1:, c'efi à dire afin qu'on puiffe aller 
dorefnauant en toute feureté par les chemins, & de 
Village en Village. Les quatre autres s'adreffent 
immediatement aux parês, pour les. confoler en leur 
affliction, & effuyer leurs larmes, condayee ollfa IlOhe- 
rontz'; voila, dit-il, pour luy donner à petuner, par- 
lant de fon pere, de fa mere, ou de celuy qui feroit 
pour venger fa mort; ils ont cette creance qu'il n'y 
a rien fi propre que Ie Petun pour appaifer les paffions; 
c'efi pourquoy ils ne fe trouuent iamais aux confeils 
que la pippe ou calumet à la bouche; cette fumée 
qu'ils prennent leur donne, difent-ils, de l'efprit, & 
leur fait voir clair dans les affaires les plus embroüil- 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELATION, I636 

219 

and the division of the ground that was made by this 
murder." Metaphor is largely in use among these 
Peoples; unless you accustom yourself to it, you will 
understand nothing in their councils, where they 
speak almost entirely in metaphors. They claim by 
this present to reunite all hearts and wills, and even 
entire Villages, which have become estranged. For 
it is not here as it is in France and elsewhere, where 
the public and a whole city do not generally espouse 
the quarrel of an individual. Here you cannot in- 
sult anyone of them without the whole Country re- 
senting it, and taking up the quarrel against you, 
and even against an entire Village. Hence arise 
wars; and it is a more than sufficient reason for tak- 
ing arms against some Village if it refuse to make 
satisfaction by the presents ordained [152] for him 
who may have killed one of your friends. The fifth 
is made to smooth the roads and to clear away the 
brushwood; cOJlda)lee Ollsa Ilannonkiai, that is to say, 
in order that one may go henceforth in perfect secur- 
ity over the roads, and from Village to Village. The 
four others are addressed immediately to the rela- 
tives, to console them in their affliction and to wipe 
away their tears, cOlldayee onsa IlOher01zti, " Behold," 
says he, "here is something for him to smoke," 
speaking of his father or his mother, or of the one 
who would avenge his death. They believe that 
there is nothing so suitable as Tobacco to appease 
the passions; that is why they never attend a coun- 
cil without a pipe or calumet in their mouths. The 
smoke, they say, gives them intelligence, and en- 
ables them to see clearly through the most intricate 
matters. 21 Also, following this present, they make 
another to restore completely the mind of the offended 


220 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

lées. Auffi en fuitte de ce prefent on en fait vn autre 
pour remettre tout à fait l' efprit à la perfonne offen- 
fée, condayee onfa hondz"onroenkhra. Le huictiefme efi 
pour donner vn breuuage à la mere du defunct, & la 
guerir comme efiant griefuement malade à l' occafion 
de la mort de fon fils, condayee onfa a
{'aJlllonâ!a [153] 
d'oc
eton. Enfin Ie neufiéme efi, comme pour luy 
mettre, & étendre vne natte, fur laquelle elle fe repofe, 
& fe couche durant Ie temps de fon deüil, cOJldayee 
ollfa hohz"oldaal. Voila les principaux prefens, les 
autres font comme vn furcroifi de confolation, & re- 
prefentent toutes les chofes dont fe feruoit Ie mort 
pendant fa vie; l'vn s'appellera fa robbe, l'autre fon 
collier, l'autre fon Canot, l'autre fon au iron , fa rets, 
fon are, fes fleches, & ainfi des autres. Apres cela, 
les pares du defunt fe tiennet plainemet fatisfaits. 
Autrefois les parties ne s'accordoient pas fi aifémet, 
& à fi peu de frais: car outre que Ie public payoit 
tous ces prefens, la perfonne coupable efioit obligée 
de fubir vne honte, & vne peine que quelques-vns 
n' efiimeroient peut efire gueres moins infupportable 
que la mort mefme. On étendoit Ie mort fur des 
perches, & Ie meurtrier efioit contraint de fe tenir 
deffous, & receuoir deffus foy Ie pus qui alloit dé- 
goutant de ce cadaure; on luy metoit aupres de luy 
vn plat pour fon manger, qui efioit incontinent plein 
de l'ordure & du fang pourry qui peu à peu en tom- 
boit, & pour obtenir feulemet que Ie plat fufi tãt 
[154] foit peu reculé, illuy en coufioit vn prefent de 
fept cens grains de Pourcelaine, qu'ils appelloient 
haJJaendifla; pour luy il demeuroit en cét efiat tant 
& fi long temps qu'il plaifoit aux parens du defunct; 
& encore apres eel a pour en fortir luy falloit-il faire 


1636] 

LE /EUNE'S RELA TION, I6.J6 

221 

person, condayee Ollsa hondionroenkhra. The eighth is 
to give a drink to the mother of the deceased, and to 
heal her as being seriously sick on account of the 
death of her son, cOlldayee onsa aweallnoncwa [153] d'oc- 
'weton. Finally, the ninth is, as it were, to place and 
stretch a mat for her, on which she may rest herself 
and sleep during the time of her mourning, COnda)1ee 
onsa hohiendaeJl. These are the principal presents,- 
the others are, as it were, an increase of consolation, 
and represent all the things that the dead man would 
use during life. One will be called his robe, another 
his belt, another his Canoe, another his paddle, his 
net, his bow, his arrows, and so on. After this, the 
relatives of the deceased regard themselves as per- 
fectly satisfied. Formerly, the parties did not come 
to terms so easily, and at so little expense; for, be- 
sides that the public paid all these presents, the guil- 
ty person was obliged to endure an indignity and 
punishment that some will perhaps consider almost 
as insupportable as death itself. The dead body was 
stretched upon a scaffold, and the murderer was com- 
pelled to remain lying under it and to receive upon 
himself all the putrid matter which exuded from the 
corpse; they put beside him a dish of food, which 
was soon filled with the filth and corrupt blood which 
little by little fell into it; and merely to get the dish 
[154] pushed back ever so little would cost him a 
present of seven hundred Porcelain beads, which they 
called hassaendista; as for the murderer, he remained 
in this position as long as the relatives of the de- 
ceased pleased, and, even after that, to escape it he 
had to make a rich present called akhiataendista. If, 
however, the relatives of the dead man avenged 
themselves for this injury by the death of him who 


222 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

vn riche prefent qu'ils appelloient akhzOataendifla. Que 
fi les parens du mort fe vengeoient de cette iniure, 
par la mort de celuy qui auoit fait Ie coup, toute la 
peine retomboit de leur cofté; c' eftoit auffi à eux à 
faire des prefens à ceux mefmes qui auoient tué les 
premiers, fans que ceux cy fuffent obligez à aucune 
fatisfaction, pour montrer combien ils eftiment que 
la vengeance eft deteftable, puis que les crimes les 
plus noirs, tel qu' eft le meurtre, ne paroiffent quafi 
rien en fa prefence, qu'elle les abolit, & attire deffus 
foy toute la peine qu'ils meritento Voila pour ce 
qui eft du meurtre: les bleffeures à fang ne fe gue- 
riffent auffi qu'à force de prefence [prefents], de col- 
liers, de haches, felon que la playe eft plus ou moins 
notable. 
Ils puniffent auffi feuerement les Sorciers, c' eft à 
dire, ceux qui fe mel1ent d'empoifonner, & faire mou- 
rir par fort; [155] & cette peine eft authorifée du 
confentement de tout Ie Païs; de forte que quiconque 
les prend fur le fait, il a tout droit de leur fendre la 
tefte, & en défaire Ie monde fans crainte d'en eftre 
recherché, ou obligé de faire aucune fatisfaction. 
Pour les larrons, quoy que Ie Païs en foit remply, 
ils ne font pas-pourtant tolerez; fi vous trouuez quel- 
qu'vn faifi de quelque chofe qui vous appartienne, 
vous pouuez en bonne confcience ioüer au Roy dé- 
poüillé, & prendre ce qui eft voftre, & auec cela Ie 
mettre nud comme la main; fi c' eft à la pefche, luy 
enleuer fon Canot, fes rets, fon poiffon, fa robbe, tout 
ce qu'il a: il eft vray qu'en cette occafion le plus fort 
l'emporte: tant y a que voila la couftume du Païs, 
qui ne laiffe pas d'en tenir plufieurs en leur deuoir. 
Or s'ils ont quelque efpece de Loix qui les main- 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, I6.J6 

223 

gave the blow, all the punishment fell on them; it 
was their part also to make presents to those even 
who were the first murderers, without the latter be- 
ing obliged to give any satisfaction,- to show how 
detestable they regard vengeance; since the blackest 
crimes, such as murder, appear as nothing in com- 
parison with it, as it does away with them and at- 
tracts to itself all the punishment that they merit. 
So much for murder. Bloody wounds, also, are 
healed only by means of these presents, such as belts 
or hatchets, according as the wound is more or less 
serious. 
They also punish Sorcerers severely, that is, 
those who use poisoning, and cause death by 
charms; [155] and this punishment is authorized by 
the consent of the whole Country, so that whoever 
takes them in the act has full right to cleave their 
skulls and rid the world of them, without fear of be- 
ing called to account, or obliged to give any satisfac- 
tion for it. 
As to thieves, although the Country is full of them, 
they are not, however, tolerated. If you find any 
one possessed of anything that belongs to you, you 
can in good conscience play the despoiled King and 
take what is yours, and besides leave him as naked 
as your hand. If he is fishing, you can take from 
him his Canoe, his nets, his fish, his robe, all he 
has; it is true that on such an occasion the strongest 
gains the day,-still, such is the custom of the Coun- 
try, and it certainly holds some to their duty. 
Besides having some kind of Laws maintained 
among themselves, there is also a certain order estab- 
lished as regards foreign Nations. And first, con- 
cerning commerce; several families have their own 


224 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

(VOL. 10 

tiennent entre eux, il y a auffi quelque ordre efiably 
pour ce qui regarde Ies Peuples eftrangers: & pre- 
mierement pour le commerce; plufieurs familIes ont 
leurs traittes particulieres, & celuy-là efi cenfé Mai- 
fire d'vne traitte qui en a fait Ie premier la décou- 
uerte: les enfans [156] entrent dans Ie droict de leurs 
parens pour ce regard, & ceux qui portent Ie mefme 
nom; perfonne n'y va fans fon congé, qui ne fe 
donne qu' à force de prefens; il en affocie tant & fi 
peu qu'il veut; s'il a beaucoup de marchandife c'eft 
fon aduantage d'y aller en fort petite compagnie, car 
ainfi i1 enleue tout ce qu'il veut dans Ie Pais: c' eft 
en cecy que confifie Ie plus beau de leurs richeffes. 
Que fi quelqu'vn efioit fi hardy que d'aller à vne 
traitte, fans Ie congé de celuy qui en eft Ie Maiftre, 
il peut bien faire fes affaires en fecret & à la defro- 
bée, car s'il eft furpris par Ie chemin, on ne luy fera 
pas meilleur traittement qu' à vn larron, & il ne rap- 
portera que fon corps à la maifon, ou il faut qu'il 
foit en bonne compagnie: que s'il retourne bagues 
fauues, on fe contente de s'en plaindre, fans en faire 
autre pourfuitte. 
Dans les guerres mefmes où regne fouuent la con- 
fufion, ils ne laiffent pas d'y tenir quelque ordre: ils 
n'en entreprennent point fans fuiet, & le fuiet Ie plus 
ordinaire qu'ils ayent de prendre les armes, efi lors 
que queIque Nation refufe de fatisfaire pour quelque 
mort, & de [157] four[n]ir les prefens que requierent 
les conuentions faites entre eux; ils prennent ce re- 
fus pour vn acte d'hoftilité, & tout Ie pais mefme 
efpoufe cette querelIe: fur tout Ies parens du mort 
s'efiiment obligez par honneur de s'en reffentir, & 
font vne leuée pour leur courir fus. Ie ne parle 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, r636 

225 

private trades, and he is considered Master of one 
line of trade who was the first to discover it. The 
children [156J share the rights of their parents in 
this respect, as do those who bear the same name; 
no one goes into it without permission, which is given 
only in consideration of presents; he associates with 
him as many or as few as he wishes. If he has a 
good supply of merchandise, it is to his advantage to 
divide it with few companions, for thus he secures 
all that he desires, in the Country; it is in this that 
most of their riches consist. But if anyone should 
be bold enough to engage in a trade without permis- 
sion from him who is Master, he may do a good busi- 
ness in secret and concealment; but, if he is sur- 
prised by the way, he will not be better treated than 
a thief,- he will only carry back his body to his 
house, or else he must be well accompanied. If he 
returns with his baggage safe, there will be some 
complaint about it, but no further prosecution. 
Even in wars, where confusion often reigns, they 
do not fail to keep some order. They never under- 
take them without reason; and the commonest rea- 
son for their taking arms is when some Nation refuses 
to give satisfaction for the death of some one, and to 
[157] furnish the presents required by the agreements 
made between them; they take this refusal as an act 
of hostility, and the whole country espouses the quar- 
reI; in particular, the relatives of the dead man con- 
sider themselves obliged in honor to resent it, and 
raise a force to attack them. I am not speaking of 
the leadership they display in their wars, and of 
their military discipline; that comes better from 
Monsieur de Champlain, who is personally acquainted 
with it, having held command among them. More- 


226 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

point de la conduite qu'ils tiennent en leurs guerres, 
& de leur difcipline militaire, cela vient mieux à 
Monfieur de Champlain qui s'y eft trouué en per- 
fonne, & y a commandé; auffi en a-t- 'il par1é ample- 
ment, & fort pertinemment, comme de tout ce qui 
regarde les mæurs de ces Nations barbares. Ie diray 
feulement, que fi Dieu leur faifoit la grace d'embraffer 
la Foy, ie trouuerois à reformer en quelques vnes de 
leurs procedures; car premierement il y en a tel qui 
leuera vne trouppe de ieunes gens deliberez pluftoft, 
ce femble, pour venger vne querelle particuliere, & 
la mort d'vn amy, que pour l'honneur & la conferua- 
tiõ de la Patrie: & puis quand ils peuuêt tenir quel- 
ques-vns de leurs ennemis ils les traittent auec toute 
la cruauté qu'ils fe peuuent imaginer: les cinq & fix 
iours fe pafferont quelquefois à affouuir leur rage, & 
les bruler à petit [158] feu, & ne fe contentent pas de 
leur voir la peau toute grillée, ils leur ouurent les 
iambes, les cuiffes, les bras, & les parties les plus 
charnuës, & y fourrent des tifons ardens, ou des 
haches toutes rouges; quelquefois au milieu de ces 
tourmens ils les obligent à chanter; & ceux qui ont 
du courage Ie font, & vomiffent mille imprecations 
cõtre ceux qui les tourmentêt: Ie iour de leur mort 
i1 faut encor qu'ils pafsêt par là, s'ils ont les forces; 
& quelquefois la chaudiere dãs laquelle on les doit 
mettre boüillir fera fur Ie feu, que ces pauures mife- 
rabIes chanteront encore à pleine tefte. Cette inhu- 
manité eft tout à fait intolerable; auffi plufieurs ne 
fe trouuent pas volontiers à ces funeftes banquets. 
A pres les auoir en fin affommé, s' ils eftoiêt vailIãs 
hommes, ils leur arrachêt le cæur, Ie font griller fur 
les charbons, & Ie diftribuent en pieces à la ieuneffe; 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

227 

over, he has spoken of it fully and very pertinently, 
as of everything which concerns the manners of these 
barbarous Nations. I will only say that, if God 
gives them the grace to embrace the Faith, I shall 
find certain matters in some of their procedures to 
reform; for, in the first place, there are some who 
raise a band of resolute young braves for the pur- 
pose, it seems, of avenging a private quarrel and the 
death of a friend, rather than for the honor and pres- 
ervation of the Fatherland,- and then, when they 
seize some of their enemies, they treat them with all 
the cruelty they can devise. Five or six days will 
sometimes pass in assuaging their wrath, and in burn- 
ing them at a slow [IS 8J fire; and they are not satis- 
fied with seeing their skins entirely roasted,-they 
open the legs, the thighs, the arms, and the most 
fleshy parts, and thrust therein glowing brands, or 
red-hot hatchets. Sometimes in the midst of these 
torments they compel them to sing; and those who 
have the courage do it, and hurl forth a thousand 
imprecations against those who torment them; on 
the day of their death they must even outdo this, if 
they have strength; and sometimes the kettle in 
which they are to be boiled will be on the fire, while 
these poor wretches are still singing as loudly as they 
can. This inhumanity is altogether intolerable; and 
so many do not go willingly to these baleful feasts. 
After having at last brained a victim, if he was a 
brave man, they tear out his heart, roast it on the 
coals, and distribute it in pieces to the young men; 
they think that this renders them courageous. Others 
make an incision in the upper part of their necks and 
cause some of his blood to run into it,-which has, 
they say, this virtue, that since they have mingled 


228 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

ils efHment que cela les rëd courageux: d' autres leur 
font vne incifion au deffus du col, & y font couler de 
leur fang, qui a, difent-ils, cette vertu, que depuis 
qu'ils l'ont ainfi mef1é auec Ie leur, ils ne peuuent 
iamais efire furpris de l'ennemy, & ont toufiours con- 
noiffancede fes approches, pour fecrettes [159] qu'elles 
puiffent efire. On les met par morceaux en la chau- 
diere; & quoy qu'aux autres fefiins la tefie, foit d'vn 
Ours, foit d'vn Chien, d'vn Cerf, ou d'vn grand 
poiffon efi Ie morceau du Capitaine; en cetuy-cy la 
tefie fe donne au plus malotru de la compagnie: en 
effet quelques-vns ne goufient de ce mets non plus 
que de tout Ie refie du corps, qu'auec beaucoup d'hor- 
reur: il yen a qui en mangent auec plaiúr; i'ay veu 
des Sauuages en nofire Cabane parler auec appetit de 
la chair d'vn Iroquois, & loüer fa bonté en mefmes 
termes que ron feroit la chair d'vn Cerf, ou d'vn 
Orignac: c' efi efire bien cruel; mais nous efperons 
auec l'affifiance du Ciel, que la cognoiffance du vray 
Dieu bannira tout à fait de ce Païs cette barbarie. Au 
refie pour la garde du Païs, ils entourët les princi- 
paux Villages d'vne forte palliffade de pieux, pour 
foufienir vn fiege: ils entretiennent des penfionnaires 
dans les Nations neutres, ou mefmes parmy les enne- 
mis, par Ie moyen defquels ils font aduertis fouz 
n1ain de to utes leurs menées: il font bien fi aduifez 
& circonfpects en ce poinct, que s'il ya quelque Peu- 
pIe auec qui ils [160] n'ayent pas entierement rompu, 
ils leur donnent en effet la liberté d' aller & venir dans 
Ie Païs; mais neantmoins pour plus grande affeurance 
on leur affigne des Cabanes particulieres où ils fe doi- 
uent retirer; fi on les trouuoit ailleurs on leur feroit 
vn mau uais party. 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, r6.J6 


29 

his blood with their own they can never be surprised 
by the enemy, and have always knowledge of their 
approach, however secret [159] it may be. They 
put him in the kettle piece by piece; and although 
at other feasts the head,- whether of a Bear. or a 
Dog, or a Deer, or a large fish,-is the Captain's 
share, in this case the head is given to the lowest 
person in the company; indeed some taste of this 
part, or of all the rest of the body, only with great 
horror. There are some who eat it with pleasure; I 
have seen Savages in our Cabin speak with gusto of 
the flesh of an Iroquois, and praise its good qualities 
in the same tenns as they would praise the flesh of a 
Deer or a Moose. This is certainly very cruel; but 
we hope, with the assistance of Heaven, that the 
knowledge of the true God will entirely banish from 
this Country such barbarity. :Moreover, for the se- 
curity of the Country, they surround the principal 
Villages with a strong palisade of stakes, in order to 
sustain a siege. They maintain pensioners in the 
neutral Nations, and even among their enemies, by 
means of whom they are secretly warned of all their 
plots; they are, indeed, so well advised and so cir- 
cumspect on this point that, if there be some People 
with whom they [160] have not entirely broken, they 
give them, in truth, the liberty of going and coming 
in the Country,- but, nevertheless, for greater as- 
surance, they assign to them special Cabins, to which 
they must retire; if they found them elsewhere, they 
would do them grievous harm. 
As regards the authority of commanding, here is 
what I have observed. All the affairs of the Hurons 
are included under two heads: The first are, as it were, 
affairs of State,-whatever may concern either citi- 


230 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

Pour ce qui regarde l'autorité de commander, voicy 
ce que i'en ay remarqué. Toutes les affaires des Hu- 
rons fe rapportent à deux chefs: les vnes font comme 
les affaires d'Efiat, foit qu'elles concernent ou les 
citoyens, ou les Efirangers, Ie public ou les particu- 
liers du \Tillage, pour ce qui efi des fefiins, danfes, 
ieux, croffes, & ordre des funerailles. Les autres 
font des affaires de guerre. Or il fe trouue autant 
de fortes de Capitaines que d'affaires. Dans les 
grãds Villages il y aura quelquefois plufieurs Capi- 
taines tant de la police, que de la guerre, lefquels diui- 
fent entre eux les familles du Village, comme en au- 
tant de Capitaineries; on y void mefme par fois des 
Capitaines, à qui tous ces gouuernemens fe rapportent 
à caufe de leur efprit, faueur, richeffes, & autres qua- 
litez, qui les rendent confiderables dans Ie Pays. II 
n'y en a point, qui en vertu de leur election foient 
plus grands les vns [161] que les autres. Ceux là 
tiennent Ie premier rang, qui fe Ie font acquis par 
leur efprit, eloquence, magnificence, courage, & fage 
conduite, de forte que les affaires du Village s'ad- 
dreffent principalement à celuy des Capitaines, qui 
a en luy ces qualitez; & de mefme en efi-il des 
affaires de tout Ie Pays, où les plus grands efprits 
font les plus grãds Capitaines, & d'ordinaire i1 n'y 
en a qu'vn qui porte Ie faix de tous. C'efi en fon 
nom que fe paffent les Traictez de Paix auec les Peu- 
ples efirangers; Ie Pays mefme porte fon nom: & 
maintenant par exemple, quand on parle d' Allenklu"- 
olldz"c dans les Confeils des Efirangers, on entend la 
Nation des Ours. Autrefois il n'y auoit que les 
braues hommes qui fuffent Capitaines, & pour cela 
on les appelloit E1lolldecha, du mefme nom qu'ils ap- 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, r6.JÓ 

231 

zens or Strangers, the public or the individuals of the 
Village; as, for example, feasts, dances, games, crosse 
matches, and funeral ceremonies. The second are 
affairs of war. Now there are as many sorts of Cap- 
tains as of affairs. In the large Villages there will 
be sometimes several Captains, both of administra- 
tion and of war, who divide among them the families 
of the Village as into so many Captaincies. Occa- 
sionally, too, there are even Captains to whom these 
matters of government are referred on account of 
their intellectual superiority, popularity, wealth, or 
other qualities which render them influential in the 
Country. There are none who, by virtue of their 
election, are of higher rank [161] than others. Those 
hold the first rank who have acquired it by intellec- 
tual preëminence, eloquence, free expenditure, cour- 
age, and wise conduct. Consequently, the affairs of 
the Village are referred principally to that one of the 
Chiefs who has these qualifications; and the same is 
true with regard to the affairs of the whole Country, 
in which the men of greatest ability are the leading 
Captains, and usually there is one only who bears 
the burden of all; it is in his name Treaties of Peace 
are made with foreign Peoples; the Country even 
bears his name,-and now, for example, when one 
speaks of A nenklu"ondz"c in the Councils of Foreigners, 
the Nation of the Bear is meant. Formerly only 
worthy men were Captains, and so they were called 
Enondecha, the same name by which they call the 
Country, Nation, district,- as if a good Chief and 
the Country were one and the same thing. But to- 
day they do not pay so much attention to the selec- 
tion of their Captains; and so they no longer give 
them that name, although they still call them atiwa- 


232 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

pellent Ie Pays, Nation, terre, comme fi vn bon Capi- 
taine & Ie Pays eftoient vne mefme chofe; mais au- 
iourd'huy ils n'ont pas vn tel égard en l'élection de 
leurs Capitaines; auffi ne leur donnent-ils plus ce 
nom là, quoy qu'ils I'appellent encor atÜJarontas, 
atÜJanens, ondakhÙnha'i, les grolIes pierres, les an- 
ciens, les fedentaires. Cependant ceux là ne laiffent 
pas de tenir, comme i'ay dit, Ie premier rang tant 
dans [162] les affaires particulieres des Villages, que 
de tout Ie Pays, qui font les plus grands en merites 
& en efprit. Leurs parens font cõme autant de Lieu- 
tenans & de Confeillers. 
Ils arriuent à ce degré d'honneur, partie par fuc- 
ceffion, partie par élection, leurs enfans ne leur 
fuccedent pas d'ordinaire, mais bien leurs neueux & 
petits fils. Et ceux cy encor ne viennent pas à la fuc- 
ceffion de ces petites Royautez, comme les Dauphins 
en France, ou les enfans en l'heritage de leurs peres; 
mais en tant qu'ils ont les qualitez conuenables, 
& qu'ils les acceptent, & font acceptez de tout 
Ie Pays. 11 s'en trouue qui refufent ces honneurs, 
tant parce qu'ils n'ont pas Ie difcours en main, 
ny affez de retenuë ny de patience, que pource qu'ils 
ayment Ie repos; car ces charges font pluftoft de fer- 
uitudes, qu'autre chofe. II faut qu'vn Capitaine faffe 
efiat d'eftre quafi touiours en campagne: fi on tient 
Confeil à cinq ou fix lieuës pour les affaires de tout 
Ie Pays, Byuer ou Efté en quelque faifon que ce foit 
il faut marcher: s'il fe fait vne Affemblée dans Ie 
Village, c'eft en la Cabane du Capitaine: s'il y a 
quelque chofe à publier, c'eft à luy à Ie faire; & puis 
Ie peu d'authorité qu'il a d'ordinaire fur fes fuiets, 
n'efi pas [163] vn puiffant attrait pour accepter cefie 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S R
LA TIO
V, I636 

233 

rontas, atz'wanens, olldakhz"enlzai, .. big stones, the elders, 
the stay-at-homes." However, those still hold, as I 
have said, the first rank as well in [162] the special 
affairs of the Villages as of the whole Country, who 
are most highly esteemed and intellectually preëmi- 
nent. Their relatives are like so many Lieutenants 
and Councilors. 
They reach this degree of honor, partly through 
succession, partly through election; their children do 
not usually succeed them, but properly their nephews 
and grandsons. And the latter do not even come to 
the succession of these petty Royalties, like the Dau- 
phins of France, or children to the inheritance of 
their fathers; but only in so far as they have suitable 
qualifications, and accept the position, and are ac- 
cepted by the whole Country. Some are found who 
refuse these honors,-sometimes because they have 
not aptitude in speaking, or sufficient discretion or 
patience, sometimes because they like a quiet life; 
for these positions are servitudes more than anything 
else. A Captain must always make it a point to be, 
as it were, in the field; if a Council is held five or 
six leagues away for the affairs of the Country, Win- 
ter or Summer, whatever the weather, he must go. 
If there is an Assembly in the Village, it is in the 
Captain's Cabin; if there is anything to be made 
public, he must do it; and then the small authority 
he usually has over his subjects is not [163] a power- 
ful attraction to make him accept this position. 
These Captains do not govern their subjects by means 
of command and absolute power; they have no force 
at hand to compel them to their duty. Their gov- 
ernment is only civil; they represent only what is to 
be done for the good of the village, or of the whole 


234 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

charge. Ces Capitaines icy ne gouuernent pas leurs 
fuiets par voye d'empire, & de puiffance abfoluë; 
ils n'ont point de force en main, pour les ranger à 
leur deuoir. Leur gouuernement n'eft que ciuil, ils 
reprefentent feulement ce qu'il eft queftion de faire 
pour Ie bien du village, ou de tout Ie Pays. Apres 
cela fe remuë qui veut. II y en a neantmoins, qui 
fçauent bien fe faire obeyr, principalement quand ils 
ont l'affection de leurs fuiets. Quelques vns font 
auffi reculez de ces charges. pour la memoire de leurs 
anceftres qui ont déferuy la Patrie. Que s'ils y font 
receus, c' eft à force de prefens, que les Anciens ac- 
ceptent en leur Affemblée, & mettent dans les coffres 
du Public. Tous les ans enuiron Ie Printemps fe 
font ces refurrections de Capitaines, fi quelques cas 
particuliers ne retardent ou n'aduancent l'affaire. Ie 
demanderois volontiers icy à ceux qui ont peu d'opi- 
nion de nos Sauuages, ce qu'illeur femble de cette 
conduite. 
Mais en preuue de ce que ie viens de dire de l'ef- 
prit de nos Capitaines, il faut que ie concluë ce Cha- 
pitre par vn difcours que me fit ce Printemps vn 
Capitaine, nommé [164] Acnons, il pretendoit nous 
perfuader de tranfporter noftre Cabane en fon Vil- 
lage. Surquoy nous auons à loüer Dieu, de ce qu'il 
nous fait la grace d'eftre aymez & recherchez dans 
Ie Pays; c'eft à qui nous aura en fon Village: les 
Arcndoronnon nous en ont fouuent porté la parole, les 
Attz"gnOlOllghac, & ceux du Village O.JJo.JJa1ll, que nous 
appellons la Rochelle, nous font encor plus d'in- 
ftance: mais fi nous auons égard aux importunitez, 
affeurément ce Capitaine l'emportera; il y a plus de 
fix mois qu'il ne nous donne aucun repos, quelque 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, r636 

235 

Country. That settled, he who will takes action. 
There are, however, some who know well how to se- 
cure obedience, especially when they have the affec- 
tion of their subjects. Some, too, are kept back from 
these positions by the memory of their ancestors who 
have badly served their Country. But, if they are 
received therein, it is by dint of presents which the 
Old :Men accept in their Assembly and put into the 
Public coffers. Every year, about Spring, these res- 
urrections of Captains take place, if some special 
cases do not delay or hasten the matter. I should 
like here to ask those who have a low opinion of our 
Savages, what they think of this method of conduct- 
ing affairs. 
But, in proof of what I have just said of the intel- 
ligence of our Captains, I must conclude this Chap- 
ter with a speech, made to me, this Spring, by a 
Captain named [164] Aeno1Zs. He was trying to per- 
suade us to transfer our Cabin to his Village. For 
this we have to praise God, that he gives us the 
favor to be loved and sought after throughout the 
Country; there is a strife as to who will have us in 
his Village. The Arendoroll1zon 2' have often invited 
us; the Attignenonghac, and the people of the Vil- 
lage of Ossossanl, which we call la Rochelle, have 
pressed us still more earnestly; but, if we have re- 
gard to importunities, assuredly this Chief will pre- 
vail. For more than six months he has given us no 
rest; whatever Public affair he may relate to us, he 
never fails to draw expressly or tacitly this conclu- 
sion; but this Spring, more than ever, he has em- 
ployed all his Rhetoric to secure our promise, and 
gain our full consent. Going then one day to Wen- 
rio, to visit one of our Christians sick unto death, I 


236 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

affaire du Païs qu'il nous raconte, il ne manque point 
d'en tirer expreffément ou tacitement cette conclu- 
fion; mais fur tout à ce Printemps il a employé toute 
fa Rhetorique pour nous faire dire le mot, & obtenir 
tout à fait noftre confentement. Allant done vn 
iour à lIenrio, pour affifter vn de nos Chreftiens ma- 
lade à la mort, ie trouuay par Ie chemin vn Sauuage 
qui me venoit querir de la part d'Aenons; ie l'allay 
voir apres auoir fatisfait à noftre malade, qui nous 
menoit particulierement. II me fit ce difcours: mais 
ie luy feray tort de Ie mettre icy, car ie ne luy don- 
neray pas la grace qu'il auoit en la bouche [165] de 
ce Capitaine; n'importe, on verra toufiours fes pen- 
fées, que i' ay rangées à mon aduis à peu prés dans 
leur ordre. V oicy comme i1 commença. 
Echo1Z, ie vous ay mandé pour fçauoir au vray voftre 
derniere refolution: ie ne vous euffe pas donné la 
peine de venir iufques icy, n'euft efté que ie crai- 
gnois de ne pas trouuer chez vous la commodité de 
vous parler: voftre Cabane eft toufiours pleine de 
tant de perfonnes qui vous vifitent, qu'il eft quafi 
impoffible de vous y communiquer quelque chofe en 
particulier: & puis maintenant que nous fommes fur 
Ie poinct de nous affembler pour deliberer touchant 
l'eftabliffement d'vn nouueau Village, cette entre- 
ueuë euft peû eftre fufpecte à ceux qui defirent vous 
retenir. 
Les François ont toufiours efté attachez à moy, & 
m'ont aymé, ie les ay auffi toufiours affifté en tout ce 
que i'ay peu, & n'ont pas trouué en toutes ces terres 
de meilleur amy que moy: ce n'a pas efté fans en- 
courir l'enuie de tout Ie Païs, qui m'en regarde i1 y 
a long temps de mauuais æil, & a fait tout ce qu'il 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, r636 

237 

met by the way a Savage who was coming with a 
message for me from Aenolls. I went to see the lat- 
ter after having attended to our sick man, and he 
took me to one side. He made to me this speech, 
but I shall do him wrong to put it here, for I shall 
not give it the grace it had in the mouth [165] of this 
Chief; no matter, the reader will see his ideas, which 
I have set down, as I think, almost in their order. 
See how he began. 
" Eclwll, I have sent for you to learn your final de- 
cision. I would not have given you the trouble to 
come here, had I not been afraid that I should not 
find at your house the opportunity of speaking to 
you. Your Cabin is always full of so many people 
visiting you, that it is almost impossible to say any- 
thing to you in private; and then, now that we are 
on the point of assembling to deliberate regarding 
the establishment of a new Village, this interview 
might have aroused the suspicions of those who wish 
to keep you. 
"The French have always been attached to me, 
and have loved me; I have always assisted them in 
every way I could, and they have not found in all 
this land a better friend than I. This has not been 
without incurring the envy of others throughout the 
Country, who have therefore for a long time regarded 
me with an evil eye, and have done all they could to 
prejudice you against me. They have even, as you 
[166] know, imputed to me the death of Bruslé; and 
immediately after he was killed, when the question 
of going down to Kébec was discussed, it was said 
loudly and distinctly that, if I went, I would without 
doubt lose my head. Notwithstanding all that, the 
following year (for that year I went elsewhere to 


238 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

a peu pour me mettre mal aupres de vous; iufques 
là que, comme vous [166] fçauez, on m'a imputé la 
mort de Bruf1é, & incontinent apres qu'il eut efté tué, 
quand i1 fut quefiion de defcendre à Kébec, on difoit 
haut & clair que fi i'y allois, fans doute i'y laifferois 
la tefie: nonobftant tout cela l'année fuiuante (car 
pour cette année là i'allay en traite ailleurs) ie ne 
laiffay pas de m'embarquer, & defcendre, appuyé 
que i'eftois fur mon innocence. Au refte fi ce mal- 
heur me fuft arriué, la hache eftant leuée fur ma 
tefte, i'euffe demandé vn peu de temps pour parler, 
& ie croy que ie me fuffe fi bien iuftifié, que i'euffe 
obligé celuy qui commandoit ou de faire manifefte- 
ment vne iniuftice, ou me laiffer la vie. 1Iais ie n'en 
fus pas en la peine, & ceux qui s'attendoient de me 
voir affommer furent bien eftonnez, quand ils virent 
l'honneur qu'on me fit; iufques là que quelques vns 
difoient, que puis qu'on traitoit fi fauorablement vn 
meurtrier, Ie vray moyen de fe faire aimer des Fran- 
çois eftoit de fendre la tefte à quelqu'vn. Tous ces 
difcours n'ont point empefché que mon innocence 
n'ait efté toufiours au deffus de l'cnuie: quoy qu'on 
dife, i'aimeray & obligeray toute ma vie les François 
en tout ce que ie pourray. 
Eclwn, nous penfions que voftre Village [167] deufi 
nous fuiure. & fe ioindre à nous, maintenãt que nous 
sõmes fur Ie poi net d'en faire vn autre ailleurs, & il 
n'a pas tenu à vous, les prefens que vous fiftes l'an 
paffé fur ce fuiet n'eftoient que trop capables de les 
porter à cette refolution; mais cependant, à ce que 
nous voyons, il n'en faut plus parler; c'eft vne piece 
tout à fait détachée, & nagueres que i'allay chez vous 
pour fçauoir voftre refolution, ie perdis courage, vous 


1636] 

LE .IEUNES RELA TION, I636 

239 

trade) I was not hindered from embarking and going 
down, supported as I was by my innocence. More- 
over, if that misfortune had happened and the axe 
been raised over my head, I should have asked a little 
time to speak; and I believe I should have so fully 
cleared myself that I would have compelled him who 
ordered it either to do a manifest injustice, or to 
leave me my life. But I had no trouble about it, 
and those who expected to see me struck down were 
very much astonished when they saw the honor that 
was done me; so astonished were they, that some 
said, since a murderer was so favorably dealt with, 
the true way to get oneself liked by the French was 
to cleave some one's head open. All these speeches 
have not prevented my innocence from always being 
above suspicion; whatever may be said, I shall, all 
my life, love and serve the French, in every way I 
can. 
" Echo1Z, we thought that your Village [167] ought 
to follow ours, and join itself to ours, now that we 
are on the point of establishing another one else- 
where, and it is not your fault, since the presents 
you made on this account, last year, were only too 
well calculated to bring them to this resolution. 
Nevertheless, as far as we can see, it is not necessary 
to say anything more regarding this,- it is a matter 
quite aside; and lately when I was going to your 
house to learn your decision, I lost courage; you an- 
swered me so coldly that I had almost resolved not 
to speak to you anymore a bou tit. 
" Yet the thing is of such importance, as well for 
your interests as for ours, that I have judged it fit- 
ting to speak my feelings about it once more. If 
you do not answer me clearly to-day, I shall never 


240 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[V OL. 10 

me refpondiftes fi froidement, que ie m'eftois comme 
refolu de ne vous en plus parler. 
Toutefois la chofe eft de telle importance, tant 
pour vos interefts que pour les nofires, que i' ay iugé 
à propos de vous en dire mon fentiment encore vne 
fois: fi vous ne me refpondez auiourd'huy diftincte- 
ment, iamais plus ie ne vous en ouuriray la bouche. 
Nous nous affemblerons demain cinq Villages que 
nous fommes pour conc1ure Ie deffein que nous 
auons de nous vnir, & n' en faire qu'vn. N ous 
auons fuiet de prendre cette refolution, puis que fi 
nous fommes en paix cette année, nons ne pouuons 
manquer le Printemps fuiuant d'auoir l'ennemy fur 
les bras: nous n' en fommes que trop bien informez; 
en l'eftat que [168] vous nous voyez maintenant nous 
ferions en peine, au moins pour nos femmes, & nos 
enfans, fi la neceffité nous contraignoit de prendre les 
armes: au lieu que fi nous fommes en vn bon Village 
bien fermé de pieux, noftre ieunefIe aura fuiet de 
faire paroiftre Ion courage, & nous mettrons nos 
femmes & nos enfans en afIeurance. A cette occa- 
fion tout Ie Païs iette les yeux fur vous; nous nous 
eftimerons tout à fait hors de crainte, pourueu que 
nous vous ayons auec nous; vous auez des armes à 
feu dont le feu 1 bruit eft capable de donner l'épou- 
uante à l'ennemy, & le mettre en fuite. 
Au refte, il y va auffi de vos interefts; voyez en 
quelle peine vous eftes au moindre bruit de guerre: 
& puis fi on vous fait quelque tort, à qui aurez vous 
recours demeurans en ce petit Hameau où vous eftes? 
Vous n'auez point là de Capitaine qui vous prenne en 
fa protection, & vous fafIe faire raifon; i1 n'y a per- 
fonne qui tienne la ieunefIe en deuoir: fi les bleds 
vous manquent, qui donnera ordre qu'on vous en pour- 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TIOJ.V, I636 

241 

more open my lips to you about it. Five of our Vil- 
lages meet to-morrow, to settle the plan we have of 
uniting and making only one of them. We have 
reason to take this resolution, since, if we are at peace 
this year, we are certain next Spring to have the ene- 
my on our hands. We are only too well informed 
about them; in the position in which [168] we are 
now, we should be in trouble, at least for our wives 
and our children, if necessity should compel us to 
take arms; whereas if we are in one good Village, 
well protected by stakes, our youth will have occa- 
sion to show their courage, and we will place our 
wives and children in safety. On this account the 
whole Country turns its eyes upon you; we shall es- 
teem ourselves quite beyond fear, if we have you 
with us; you have firearms, the mere report of which 
is capable of inspiring dread in the enemy, and put- 
ting him to flight. 
" Moreover, these are also your own interests; see 
in what trouble you are at the least report of war; 
and then, if any harm is done to you, to whom will 
you have recourse, living in that petty Hamlet where 
you are ? You have no Captain there who will take 
you under his protection, and cause right to be done 
you; there is no one to keep the young men wi thin 
bounds; if corn is lacking to you, who will give orders 
to provide you with it? for your Village is not capable 
of furnishing you with a sufficiency of it, and how 
much trouble it would be to go yourselves in search 
of it [169] elsewhere. On the other hand, if you 
were with us, you would lack for nothing; as we shall 
have asked you to come with us, so we shall be 
obliged to support you; and, in case they should be 
lax in furnishing you your provisions, I give you my 


242 

LES RELATIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[V OL. 10 

uoye, car vofire Village n'efi pas capable de vous en 
fournir à fuffifance, & queUe peine d'en aller vous 
mefmes chercher [169] ailleurs. Au lieu que fi vous 
efies des nofires, rien ne vous fçauroit manquer; 
cõme nous vous aurons voulu auoir aupres de nous, 
auffi íerons nous obligez de vous nourrir: & au cas 
que l' on fe portafi laíchement à vous fournir vofire 
prouifion, ie vous donne parole que i'employeray 
tout mon credit pour reprefenter à nos gens l' obliga- 
tion quïls vous auront, & ie íçay bien qu'il n'y en a 
pas vn qui ne íe mette incontinent en deuoir de vous 
feruir: de mefme quand il fera quefiion de drefIer 
vofire Cabane, ie commanderay à toute la ieuneffe 
de mettre la main à 1'æuure, & vous vous verrez in- 
continent auffi bien logez que vous pouuez fouhaitter 
dans le Pais. 
II s'arrefia icy, & il me dit qu'il n'auoit pas neant- 
moins encor acheué, mais qu'il defiroit auant que de 
pafIer outre, que ie communiquaffe à vn de nos Peres 
qui efioit auec moy ce qu'il venoit de dire. Puis i1 
continua en ces termes: 
Echo1Z, ie vois bien que vous m'allez dire que vous 
craignez d'efire plus éloignez du Lac que vous n'efies 
maintenant; & moy ie vous donne parole que vous 
n'en ferez pas fi éloignez que vous pourriez bien pen- 
fer; [170] & puis quand ainfi feroit, dequoy vous 
mettez vous en peine? V ous n'allez point à Ia pefche, 
tout Ie Village y ira pour vous: V ous aurez de la 
peine à embarquer vos paquets pour Kébec; rien 
moins, il n'y aura perfonne dans Ie Village qui ne fe 
tienne heureux de vous feruir en cette occafion. II 
efi vray que vous ne ferez pas au bord du Lac pour re- 
ceuoir les paquets qu'on vous enuoyera; mais qu'im- 
porte, puis qu'on vous les apportera iufques chez 


1636] 

LE .fEUNE' S RELA TION, I6.J6 

243 

word that I will use all my influence in representing 
to our people the obligations they are under to you, 
and I know well there is not one of them who will 
not put himself immediately to work to serve you; 
in the same way, when the question arises of erect- 
ing your Cabin, I shall command all the young men 
to put their hands to the work, and you will see your- 
self immediately as well lodged as you can wish in 
this Country." 
He stopped at this point, and told me that he had 
not yet finished; but he desired that, before proceed- 
ing further, I should communicate to one of our Fa- 
thers who was with me what he had just said. Then 
he continued in these words: 
" EcllOn, I see well that you were going to say to 
me that you fear to be further distant from the Lake 
than you are now; but I give you my word that you 
will not be as far from it as you might think; [17 0 ] 
and then, even if it were so, how could it inconven- 
ience you? You do not go fishing; the whole Village 
will go for you. You will have difficulty in embark- 
ing your parcels for Kébec? Not at all; there will 
be nobody in the Village who will not consider him- 
self happy to serve you in this matter. It is true, you 
will not be on the shore of the Lake to receive the par- 
cels sent to you; but what does it matter, since they 
will be brought all the way to your house? And in case 
you desire to employ the people of la Rochelle, if 
they love you, as they must usually pass before the 
Village we intend to build, they will not give you 
the trouble to go and seek for them in their Village. 
Echon, this is what I had to say to you; I beg that I 
may learn now your final decision, in order that I 
may report it to the Council to-morrow." 


244 

LES RELATIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

vous: & au cas que vous defiriez vous feruir de ceux 
de la Rochelle, s'ils vous aiment, comme ils doiuent 
ordinairement paffer deuant Ie Village que nous pre- 
tendons bafiir, ils ne vous donneront pas la peine de 
les aller querir à leur Village. EcllOll, voila ce que 
i'auois à vous dire: ie vous prie que ie fçache main- 
tenant vofire derniere refolution, afin que i'en faffe 
demain le rapport au Confeil. 
Voila la harangue de ce Capitaine, qui pafferoit, à 
mon aduis au iugement de plufieurs pour vne de 
celles de Tite Liue, fi Ie fuiet Ie portoit: elle me 
fembla fort perfuafiue. En effet ie luy fis refponfe, 
qu'il nous obligeoit de l'affection qu'il tefmoignoit 
pour nous, qu'il l'auoit afIez faict paroifire [17 1 ] en 
plufieurs occauons; mais fur tout en celIe cy: que 
nous efiions tres-contens de tranfporter noftre Caba- 
ne en fon Village; qu'il y auoit long temps que nous 
en auions Ie deffein; que nous ne nous efiions arreftez 
à JllOnatiria, que comme en vn Village qui releuoit de 
luy, & qui ne faifoit bande à part que pour vn temps: 
mais neantmoins que nous ne pouuions pas encor 
nous refoudre à engager nofire parole, que les Capi- 
taines des cinq Villages qui fe deuoient affembler ne 
nous promiffent premierement au nom de tous leurs 
fuiets, qu'ils feroient contens de receuoir la Foy, 
croire tout ce que nous croyons, & viure comme nous. 
Ie pris de là occaffion de luy repeter quelques prin- 
cipaux myfieres de nofire Foy, & tafchay fur tout de 
luy monfirer queUe facilité ils deuoient auoir en ce 
poinct, puis que Dieu ne nous commandoit rien qui 
ne fuft tres-raifonnable, & qu'ils ne iugeafIent eux 
mefmes par apres tres-aduantageux pour le Pais. II 
m'écouta fort attentiuement, & me promit d'en faire 
fidelement fon rapport au Confeil, adiouftant que pour 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, r636 

245 

That is the harangue of this Captain; and, in my 
opinion, it would, if the subject moved him, pass in 
the judgment of many for one of those of Titus Livi- 
us; it seemed to me very persuasive. In effect, I 
replied that he laid us under obligations by the affec- 
tion he showed for us, \xthich he had made apparent 
[171] on several occasions, but above all on this one; 
that we were perfectly satisfied with the idea of trans- 
porting our Cabin to his Village; that we had in- 
tended doing this for a long time, and had only 
stayed at lhonatiria as in a Village which was depend- 
ing on him, and was keeping apart only for a time; 
but, nevertheless, we could not yet resolve to pledge 
our word unless the Captains of the five Villages 
which were to meet would promise us, in the first 
place, in the name of all their subjects, that they 
would be content to receive the Faith, to believe all 
that we believe, and to live as we do. I then took 
occasion to repeat to him a few of the principal mys- 
teries of our Faith, and tried especially to show him 
how easy it ought to be for them on this point, since 
God commanded us to do nothing which was not 
most reasonable, and which they themselves would 
not afterwards consider very advantageous for the 
Country. He listened to me very attentively, and 
promised to make a faithful report of our talk to the 
Council,- adding that, so far as he was concerned, 
he was of a mind to be baptized, and that all in his 
Cabin were similarly inclined. 
[172] The Council took place some days after; this 
Captain was there. He was asked what was the final 
sentiment and decision of the French. He replied 
that we made some objection. They asked him what 
it was. "They do not wish," he said, " to go to a 


246 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

luy il efioit dans la refolution de fe faire baptifer, & 
que toute fa Cabane auoit la mefme penfée. 
[17 2 ] Le Confeil fe tint quelques iours apres; ce 
Capitaine s'y trouua. On luy demanda que1 efioit 
enfin Ie fentiment & la refolution des François. 11 
leur répondit, que nous faifions quelque difficulté. 
Ils luy demanderent, quel1e difficulté nous pouuions 
faire. I1s ne veulent point, dit-il, fe mettre dans vn 
Vil1age, qu'ils ne foient affeurez d'auoir affaire à des 
perfonnes, qui écouteront, & feront tout ce qu'ils en- 
feignent. A cela ils repartirent. V oila qui va bien: 
Nous en fommes contens, i] nous enfeignera puis 
nous ferons tout ce qu'il defirera. En effect ils creu- 
rent l'affaire fi bien conc1uë, qu'ils nous vindrent 
dire par apres qu'ils venoient querir nofire Cabane 
pour la tranf porter: mais ce ne fera pas encor pour 
cette année, la fefie des 
lorts a trauerfé, dit-on, ce 
deffein. Cependant ce Capitaine qui efi fi échauffé 
à nous auoir auec luy en ce nouueau Vil1age, voyant 
que nofire Cabane efioit quafi inhabitable, & qu'il 
fembloit que nofire Vil1age fe vouluft diffiper: & 
craignant que nous ne priffions party ail1eurs, nous 
vint offrir fa Cabane, à peine de s'incommoder, luy, 
& toute fa famil1e. N eantmoins nous auons iugé 
plus à propos de paffer encor vn [173] Hyuer où nous 
fommes, tant pour cultiuer ces nouuel1es plantes que 
nous y auons acquifes à nofire Seigneur, par Ie moy- 
en du fainct Baptefme; que parce que nous efperons 
que les Chefs de ces Vil1ages qui pretendent de 
s'affembler, & font maintenant en diuifion auec le 
refie du Pays, pourront entre cy & Ie Printemps fe 
reünir, & ainfi nous pourrons plus aifément tourner 
du cofié que nous iugerons plus à propos pour la gloire 
de Dieu. fans craindre d'offenfer perfonne. Ce qui 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

247 

Village where they will not be certain of having to 
do with persons who will listen to them, and will do 
all they teach. " To that they replied, " That is well, 
we are satisfied. He will teach us, and we will do 
all he desires." In short, they believed the matter 
so fully concluded that they came to tell us afterward 
that they were coming for our Cabin to transport it 
there. But this will not occur this year; the feast of 
the Dead, they say, has come in the way of this ar- 
rangement. In the meantime, this Chief who is so 
anxious to have us with him in this new Village, 
seeing that our Cabin was almost uninhabitable, and 
that our Village seemed about to be scattered, and 
fearing lest we should go elsewhere, came to offer 
us his Cabin at the risk of inconveniencing himself 
and his whole family. Nevertheless, we have judged 
it best to pass one more [173] vVinter where we are,- 
as much to cultivate these new plants we have won 
for our Lord by means of holy Baptism, as because we 
hope the Captains of those Villages who intend to 
come together, and are now at variance with the rest 
of the Country, will be able between now and Spring 
to reunite, and thus we can more readily take such 
action as we shall judge most proper for the glory 
of God, without fear of offending anyone. which 
would be very difficult in the present condition of 
affairs. 
This resolution taken, we were obliged to think of 
repairing and enlarging our Cabin. I broached the 
matter to the Captain of our Village. He imnledi- 
atelyassembled the Old Men, and communicated to 
them our plan. They were so pleased that they came 
to us to present their congratulations, for they were 


248 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

nous feroit main tenant bien difficile en l'eftat où font 
les affaires. 
Cette refolution prife no us a obligez de penfer à 
reftablir & accroiftre noftre Cabane: i'en fis ouuer- 
ture au Capitaine de noftre Village; il affembla in- 
continent les Anciens, & leur communiqua noftre 
deffein, ils en furent fi contens, qu'ils nous en vin- 
rent faire des coniouïffances; car ils craignoient de 
iour en iour que nous ne les quitaffions. 
Pour les encourager ie leur fis prefent d'vne dou- 
zaine de pains de Petun, & quelques peaux; ils me 
rendirent les peaux, difant que c'eftoit à eux à nous en 
donner; & que d'ailleurs ils nous auoient déja affez 
[174] d'obligation. que nous les obligions tous les 
iours à vne infinité d' occafions; que fi quelques-vns 
auoiët befoin d'vn coufieau, ou d'vne alaifne, ils 
n'auoient qu'à venir chez nous, & que nous les leurs 
donnions incontinent. Au refte ces témoignages de 
bien-veillance ne furët pas feulement des paroles, ils 
furent fuiuis de bons effets; ils mirent diligemment 
la main à l'æuure, & trauaillerët auec tãt d'affiduité, 
qu'ils nous drefferent prefque en trois iours vne nou- 
uelle Cabane; auffi persõne ne s'y épargna, les vieil- 
lards y eftoient les premiers. Quelques-vns mefmes 
s'oublians de leur aage montoient iufques au haut de 
la Cabane, les autres alloient querir & preparoient 
force écorces pour lier, ou trauailloient à dreffer Ie 
bas de la Cabane. 
La diligence du Capitaine empefcha Ie dernier iour 
quatre d'entre nous de dire Meffe; cas dés le point 
du iour il fe mit en befogne, & du haut de la Cabane 
où il eftoit crioit à pleine tefte, & inuitoit au trauail 
toute la ieuneffe qui n'eftoit pas encor bien éueillée. 
lvlais difons vn mot de leurs Confeils. 


1636] 

LE /EUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

249 

afraid from day to day that we were going to leave 
them. 
To encourage them, I made them a present of a 
dozen cakes of Tobacco, and some skins. They gave 
me back the skins, saying that it was their duty to 
give some to us, and that, besides, they were already 
under sufficient [174] 0 bligation to us,- that we 
helped them every day, in an infinite variety of ways; 
that if any had need of a knife, or an awl, they had 
only to come to us, and we gave them to them at once. 
Moreover, these pledges of good will were not mere 
words, they were followed by good results. They 
set to work so diligently and worked with so much 
zeal that they erected a new Cabin for us in less than 
three days. Indeed, no one spared himself; the old 
people were foremost in the work. Some, forget- 
ting their age, even climbed to the top of the Cabin; 
others went to seek and prepare plenty of bark to coyer 
it, or worked at setting up the frame thereof. 
The zeal of the Captain prevented four of us from 
saying Mass on the last day; for, as soon as it was 
daylight, he set himself at work; and from the top 
ridge of the Cabin, where he was, he shouted as 
loudly as he could, and invited all the youth who 
were not already awake to come and get to work. 
But let us say a word about their Councils. 


250 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[V OL. 10 

[175] CHAPITRE VII. 

DE L'ORDRE QUE LES HURONS TIENNENT EN LEURS 
CONSEILS. 

I E parleray icy principalement des Confeils ou 
Affem blees generales, les particuliers eftant 
quafi ordonnez de mefme façon, quoy qu' auec 
moins d'appareil. 
Ces Affemblées generales font comme les Eftats 
de tout Ie Païs, & partant il s' en fait autant, & non 
plus que la neceffité Ie requiert. Le lieu d'iceux eft 
d'ordinaire Ie Village du principal Capitaine de tout 
Ie Païs: la Chambre de Confeil eft quelque fois la 
Cabane du Capitaine, parée de nattes, ou ionchées de 
branches de Sapin, auec diuers feux, fuiuant la fai- 
fon de l'année. Autrefois chacun y apportoit fa 
bufche pour mettre au feu; main tenant cela ne fe 
pratique plus, les femmes de la Cabane fupportent 
cette dépenfe, elles font les feux, & ne s'y chauffent 
pas, fortant dehors pour ceder la place à Meffieurs Ie 
Cõfeillers. Quelquefois l'affemblée fe fait au milieu 
du Village, fi c'eft en Efté, & [176J quelquefois auffi 
en l'obfcurité des forefts à l'écart, quand les affaires 
demandent Ie fecret: Ie temps eft pluftoft de nuict 
que de iour, ils y paffent fouuent les nuicts entieres. 
Le Chef du Confeil eft Ie Capitaine qui l'affemble. 
Les affaires s'y decident à la pluralité des voix, où 
l'authorité des Chefs en attire plufieurs à leur opi- 
nion: de fait la commune façon d'opiner eft de dire 


1636] 

LE /EUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

251 

[175] CHAPTER VII. 

OF THE ORDER THE HURONS OBSERVE IN THEIR 
COUNCILS. 

I SHALL speak here of the general Councils or 
Assem blies, the special ones being ordered in 
alnlost the same way, although with less display. 
These general Assemblies are, as it were, the States- 
General of the Country, and consequently they 
take place only so often as necessity requires. The 
place of these is usually the Village of the principal 
Captain of the whole Country. The Council Cham- 
ber is sometimes the Cabin of this Captain, adorned 
with mats, or strewn with Fir branches, with several 
fires, according to the season of the year. Former- 
ly, each one brought his fagot to put on the fire; this 
is now no longer the custom, the women of the Cabin 
take this responsibility; they make the fires, but do 
not warm themselves thereat, going outside to give 
place to Messieurs the Councilors. Sometimes the 
assembly takes place in the midst of the Village, if 
it is Summer; and [176J sometimes also in the ob- 
scurity of the forest, apart, when affairs demand se- 
crecy. The time is oftener night than day, whole 
nights often being passed in council. 
The Head of the Council is the Captain who calls 
it. !vlatters are decided by a plurality of votes, in 
which the authority of the Captains draws over many 
to their views; in fact, the usual way of coming to a 
decision is to say to the Old Men, Do you give adi'lce
' 
you are the Masters. 


252 

LES RELATIONS D
:; .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

aux Anciens. Aduljez Y VOltS autres, vous efles les 
M aijlres . 
Les gages ordinaires de ces Meffieurs font affignez 
fur la force de leurs bras, fur leur diligence & bon 
ménage: s'ils effartent mieux que les autres, s'ils 
chaffent mieux, s'ils pefchent mieux; bref s'ils font 
heureux à la traitte, ils font auffi plus riches qu'eux; 
finon ils font les plus neceffiteux, ainfi comme l'expe- 
rience Ie fait voir en quelques-vns. 
Leurs parties cafuelles font premierement les meil- 
leurs morceaux des feftins, où on ne manque point de 
les inuiter. 2. Quand quelqu'vn fait quelque pre- 
fent ils y ont la meilleure part. 3. Quand quelqu'vn 
foit Citoyen, foit Eftranger, veut obtenir quelque 
chofe du Païs, la couftume [177] eft de graiffer les 
mains des principaux Capitaines, au branle defquels 
tout Ie refte fe remuë. Ie fuis tres affeuré de ce que 
ie viens de dire, Ie regret que quelques particuliers 
ont de femblables defordres, & l'enuie mefme des 
autres Capitaines, qui ne font pas appellez au butin, 
en découurêt plus qu'on ne defireroit; ils fe décrient 
les vns les autres, & Ie feul foupçon de ces prefents 
fecrets émeut quelquefois de grands de bats & diui- 
fions, non pas tant pour Ie defir du bien public, que 
pour Ie regret de n' eftre pas de la partie; & cette ia- 
loufie empefche par fois de bonnes affaires. Mais 
venons à l'ordre qu'ils tiennent en leurs Confeils. 
Premierement Ie Chef ayant déja confulté en par- 
ticulier auec les autres Capitaines & Anciens de fon 
Village, & iugé que l'affaire merite vne affemblée 
publique, il enuoye conuier au Confeil par chaque 
Village autant de perfonnes qu'il defire; les Meffa- 
gers font ieunes hommes volontaires, ou aucunefois 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, r636 

253 

The usual wages of these Gentlemen are assigned 
according to the strength of their arms, to their zeal 
and good management. If they clear the ground 
better than the others, hunt better, fish better,-in 
short, if they are successful in trading, they are also 
richer than the others; but if not, they are the most 
necessitous, as experience has shown in the cases of 
some. 
The incidental advantages are, in the first place, 
the best portions of the feasts, to which they are sure 
to be invited. 2. When anyone makes a present, 
they get the best part of it. 3. When some one, 
be he Citizen or Stranger, wishes to obtain some- 
thing from the Country, the custom [177] is to grease 
the palms of the principal Captains, at whose beck 
and call all the rest move. I am quite sure of what 
I have just said. The regret that some private in- 
dividuals have for such irregularities, and the envy 
of the other Captains who have not been called upon 
to share the booty, discourage the practice more than 
they like; they decry one another, and the mere sus- 
picion of these secret presents stirs up sometimes 
great debates and divisions,-not so much through 
desire of the public good as from regret at not hav- 
ing a share in them; and this jealousy sometimes 
hinders good measures. But let us come to the or- 
der they keep in their Councils. 
In the first place, the Captain, having already con- 
sulted in private with the other Captains and Old 
Men of his Village, and having concluded that the 
affair warrants a public assembly, sends invitations 
to the Council, to as many persons of each Village as 
he desires. The Messengers are young men who 
volunteer or sometimes an Old Man, in order that 


254 

LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

vn Ancien, afin que la femonce foit plus efficace, 
d'autant qu'on n'adioufte pas toufiours foy aux ieunes 
gens. Ces Meffagers addreffent leur commiffion au 
principal Capitaine [178] du Village, ou bien en fon 
abfence à celuy qui Ie fuit de plus prés en authorité, 
defignant Ie iour auquel on fe doit affembler. Ces 
femonces font des prieres, non pas des commande- 
mens, & partant quelques-vns s'excufent tout à fait, 
d'autres dilayent à partir; d'où vient que ces affem- 
blées font quelquefois longues, car ils ne fe mettent 
pas volontiers en chemin auec Ie mauuais temps, & 
certainement ils ont encor affez de peine de venir à 
beau pied par fois de dix & douze lieuës, & ce en 
Hyuer & fur les neiges. 
Tous eftans arriuez, ils prenl1ent feance chacun en 
fon quartier de la Cabane; ceux d'vn mefme Village 
ou mefme Nation proche l'vn de l' autre, afin de con- 
fulter par enfembIe: fi d'auenture quelqu'vn mãque, 
on met en queftion, fi nonobftant fon abfence cette 
affemblée feroit legitime, & quelquefois faute d'vne 
ou de deux perfonnes toute 1'affemblée fe diffout, & 
fe remet à vne autre fois. Que fi tous font affem- 
blez, ou que nonobftant ils iugent deuoir paffer outre, 
alors on donne ouuerture au Confeil. Ce ne font pas 
touiours Ies Chefs du Confeil qui la font, la difficu1té 
de parler, leur indifpofition, [179] ou mefme leur 
grauité les en difpenfe. 
Apres les falutations, les remerciemens de la peine 
qu'ils ont prife à venir, les actions de graces renduës 
ie ne fçay à qui, de ce que tout Ie monde eft arriué 
fans fortune, que perfonne n'a efté furpris des enne- 
mis, n'eft point tombé en quelque ruiffeau ou Riuiere, 
ou ne s' eft point bleffé; bref de ce que to us font arri- 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, r636 

255 

the summons may be more efficacious, inasmuch as 
they do not always put faith in young people. These 
Messengers address their errand to the principal Cap- 
tain [178] of the Village, or, in his absence, to the 
one who is nearest him in authority, stating the day 
on which they are to assemble. These summons are 
entreaties, not commands, and accordingly some ex- 
cuse themselves entirely, others delay setting out; 
whence it happens that these assemblies are some- 
times tedious, for they do not like to set out in bad 
weather, and certainly they have enough difficulty in 
sometimes coming ten or twelve leagues on foot, and 
this in Winter and over the snow. 
All having arrived, they take their seats each in 
his own quarter of the Cabin, those of the same Vil- 
lage or of the same Nation near one another, in order 
to consult together. If by chance some one is ab- 
sent, the question is raised whether, notwithstand- 
ing this, the assembly would be legitimate; and some- 
times, from the absence of one or two persons, the 
whole gathering is dissolved, and adjourns until an- 
other time. But if all are gathered, or if, notwith- 
standing, they think it their duty to go on, the Coun- 
cil is opened. It is not always the Leaders of the 
Council who do this; difficulty in speaking, unwill- 
ingness, [179] or even their dignity dispenses them 
from it. 
After salutations, thanks for the trouble taken in 
coming, thanksgivings rendered, I know not to whom, 
that everyone has arrived without accident, that no 
one has been surprised by enemies, nor has fallen 
into any stream or River, nor has been injured,-in 
brief, that everyone has arrived happily, all are ex- 
horted to deliberate maturely. Then the affair to be 


256 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

uez heureufement; on exhorte tout Ie monde à deli- 
berer meurement: en apres on propofe l'affaire dont 
il eft queftion, & dit on à Meffieurs les Confeillers 
qu'ils y aduifent. 
C'eft alors que les Deputez de chaque Village, ou 
ceux d'vne mefme Nation confultent tout bas ce qu'ils 
doiuent refpondre. Lors qu'ils ont bien confu1té par 
enfemble ils opinent par ordre, & s'arrefient à la plu- 
ralité des opinions, où plufieurs chofes font dignes de 
remarque. La premiere eft en la maniere de parler, 
laquelle à caufe de fa diuerfité a vn nom different, & 
s'appelle ad/en/o1lch; elle eft commune à tous les 
Sauuages; ils hauffent & flechiffent la voix COffime 
d'vn ton de Predicateur à l' antique, mais lentement, 
pofément, diftinctement, mefmes [180] repetant vne 
mefme raifon plufieurs fois. La feconde chofe remar- 
quable eft, que les opinans reprennent fommaire- 
ment la propofition, & toutes les raifons qu'on a 
alleguées auant que dire leur aduis. 
I'ay autrefois ouy dire à quelque Truchement, 
que ces Nations icy auoient vn langage particulier en 
leurs Conseils; mais i'ay experimenté Ie contraire: 
ie fçay bien qu'ils ont quelques termes particuliers, 
ainfi qu'on a en toutes fortes d'arts, & de fciences, 
comme au Palais, aux Efcoles, & ailleurs. II eft 
vray que leurs difcours font d'abord difficiles à en- 
tendre, à caufe d'vne infinité de Metaphores, de plu- 
fieurs circonlocutions, & autres façons figurées: par 
exemple parlant de la Nation des Ours, ils diront, 
l'Ours a dit, a fait cela; l'Ours eft fin, eft mefchant; 
les mains de }'Ours font dangereufes: quand ils par- 
lent de celuy qui fait Ie feftin des :Morts, ils difent, 
celuy qui mange les ames: quand ils parlent d'vne 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S Rl:.:LA TION, I6,16 

257 

discussed is brought forward, and Messieurs the 
Councilors are asked to give their advice. 
At this point the Deputies of each Village, or those 
of one Nation, consult in a low tone as to what they 
will reply. Then, when they have consulted well 
together, they give their opinions in order, and decide 
according to the plurality of opinions, in which 
course there are some things worthy of remark. The 
first is in the manner of speaking, which, on account 
of its unlikeness [to common speech], has a different 
name and is called acwentonch; it is common to all 
Savages; they raise and quaver the voice, like the 
tones of a Preacher in olden times, but slowly, decid- 
edly, distinctly, even [180] repeating the same rea- 
son several times. The second remarkable thing is, 
that the persons giving their opinions go summarily 
over the proposition and all the considerations 
brought forward, before giving their advice. 
I once heard it said by some Interpreter, that these 
Nations had a private language in their Councils; 
but I have learned by experience that this is not so. 
I know well that they have some private terms, as 
there are in all kinds of arts and sciences, as in the 
Palace, the Schools and elsewhere. It is true that 
their speeches are at first very difficult to understand, 
on account of an infinity of Metaphors, of various cir- 
cumlocutions, and other rhetorical methods: for ex- 
ample, speaking of the Nation of the Bear they will 
say, "the Bear has said, has done so and so; the 
Bear is cunning, is bad; the hands of the Bear are 
dangerous." When they speak of him who con- 
ducts the feast of the Dead, they say" he who eats 
souls;" when they speak of a Nation, they often name 
only the principal Captain,- thus, speaking of the 


25b 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

Nation, ils n'en nomment fouuent que Ie principal 
Capitaine: comme parlant des Montagnets, ils diront, 
Atjirond dit: c'eft Ie nom d'vn des Capitaines. Bref, 
c'eft en ces lieux où ils releuet leur !tile, & tafchet 
[181] de bien dire. Quail tous ces efprits font natu- 
rellemet d'vne affez bonne trempe, ratiocinent fort 
bien, & ne bronchent point en leurs difcours; auffi 
font-ils eitat de fe mocquer de ceux qui bronchent: 
quelques vns femblent eftre nés à l'eloquence. 
3. Apres que quelqu'vn a opiné, Ie Chef du Con- 
feil repete, ou fait repeter ce qu'il a dit: de forte que 
les chofes ne peuuent qu'elles ne foient bien enten- 
duës eftans tant de fois rebatuës. Ce qui m'arriua 
fort heureufement au Confeil dont ie vous ay parlé, 
où ie leur fis vn prefent pour les encourager à pren- 
dre Ie chemin & la route du Ciel; car vn des Capi- 
taines repeta fort heureufement tout ce que i'auois 
dit, & Ie dilata, & amplifia mieux que ie n'auois fait, 
& en meilleurs termes; car en effet dans Ie peu de 
cognoiffance que nous auons de cette Langue, nous 
ne difons pas ce que nous voulons, mais ce que no us 
pouuons. 
4. Chacu cõc1ud {on aduis en ces termes, Con- 
dayaucndi Icrlta)1de cha n011h
Ù;h'ahacltell; c'eft à dire, 
Voila ma pefée touchãt Ie fuiet de noftre Con- 
feil: puis toute l' Affemblée répond par vne forte re- 
fpiratiõ tirée [182] du creux de l'eftomach, Haau. 
I'ay remarqué que quand quelqu'vn a parlé au gré, 
ce Haau fe tire auec beaucoup plus d'effort. 
La cinquiéme chofe remarquable eft leur grande 
prudence & moderation de paroles: ie n' oferois pas 
dire qu'ils vfent toufiours de cette retenuë, car ie fçay 
que quelquefois il {e picquent; mais cependant vous 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I6þ 

259 

Montagnets, they will say, " Atsl:rond says:" this is 
the name of one of their Captains. In short, it is in 
these places they dignify their style of language, 
and try [18 I] to speak well. Almost all their minds 
are naturally of very good quality; they reason very 
clearly, and do not stumble in their speeches; and so 
they make a point of mocking those who trip; some 
seem to be born orators. 
3. After some one has given his opinion the Head 
of the Council repeats, or causes to be repeated, what 
he has said; consequently, matters must be clearly 
understood, so often are they repeated. This was 
very fortunate for me, at the Council of which I 
have spoken to you, where I made them a present to 
encourage them to take the road to Heaven; for one 
of the Captains felicitously repeated all that I had 
said, and dilated upon it and amplified it better than 
I had done, and in better terms; for, in truth, owing 
to our limited knowledge of the Language, we say 
not what we wish, but what we can. 
4. Each one ends his advice in these terms, Con- 
dayauendi Ierlzayde c1la nonhwicwahachen: that is to 
say, " That is my thought on the subject under Dis- 
cussion :,. then the whole Assembly responds with a 
very strong respiration drawn [182] from the pit of 
the stomach, Haau. I have noticed that when any 
one has spoken to their liking, this Haau is given 
forth with much more effort. 
The fifth remarkable thing is their great prudence 
and moderation of speech; I would not dare to say 
they always use this self-restraint, for I know that 
sometimes they sting each other,- but yet you always 
remark a singular gentleness and discretion. I have 
scarcely ever been present at their Councils; but, 


260 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

remarquez toufiours vne finguliere douceur & difcre- 
tion. Ie n'ay gueres affifté en leurs Confeils, mais 
toutes les fois qu'ils m'y ont inuité i'en fuis fortyauec 
eftonnement fur ce poinct. 
Vn iour ie vis vn debat pour la prefeance entre 
deux Capitaines de guerre: vn Vieillard qui efpou- 
foit Ie party de l'vn, dit qu'il eftoit fur Ie bord de fa 
foffe, & que parauenture Ie lendemain fon corps fe- 
roit placé dans Ie Cimetiere; mais cependant qu'il 
diroit ingenuëment ce qu'il croyoit eftre de iuftice, 
non pour aucun intereft qu'il y euft, mais pour l'a- 
mour de la verité: ce qu'il fit auec ardeur, quoy 
qu'affaifonnée de difcretion. Et lors vn autre An- 
cien reprenant la parole Ie reprit, & luy dit fort à 
propos: N e parle point maintenant de ces chofes, ce 
n'en eft pas [183J la faifon; voila l'ennemy qui nous va 
affieger, il eft queftion de nous armer, & de fortifier 
vnanimement nos palliffades, & non pas de difputer 
des rangs. Sur tout ie fus eftonné de la fage conduite 
d'vn autre Confeil, où i'affiftay, qui fembloit eftre 
con fit en humeur condefcendante & belles paroles, 
nonobítant l'importance des affaires dont il s'agiffoit. 
Ce Confeil eftoit l'vn des plus importans que les 
Hurons ayent: fçauoir de leur fefte des Morts: ils 
n'ont rien de plus facré: la chofe eftoit fort chatoüil- 
leufe; car il s'agiffoit de faire que tout Ie Païs mit 
fes morts en vne mefme foffe, fuiuant leur couftume: 
& cependant il y auoit quelques Villages mutinez qui 
vouloient faire bande à part, non fans vn regret de 
tout Ie Païs. Cependant la chofe fe paffa auec toute 
la douceur & paix imaginable: à tous coups les 
Maiftres de la Fefte qui auoient affemblé Ie Confeil 
exhortoient à la douceur, difant que c'eftoit vn Con- 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATIO.N, I636 

261 

every time I have been invited, I have cqme out from 
them astonished at this feature. 
One day I saw a debate for precedence between 
two war Captains: An Old Man who espoused the 
side of one, said that he was on the edge of the grave, 
and that perhaps on the morrow his body would be 
placed in the Cemetery; but yet he would say frank- 
ly what he believed to be justice, not for any interest 
he had in the matter, but from love of truth: which 
he did with ardor, though seasoned with discretion. 
Then another Old Man, beginning to speak, replied 
to him and said, very properly: " Do not speak now 
of those things, this is no [183] time for them; see 
the enemy, who is going to attack us; the question 
is one of anning ourselves and fortifying with one 
mind our palisades, and not of disputing about ra.nk. ' , 
I was particularly astonished at the wise conduct of 
another Council, at which I was present, which 
seemed to be steeped in a condescending humor and 
fine words, notwithstanding the importance of the 
questions discussed. 
This Council was one of the most important that 
the Hurons have: to wit, concerning their feast of 
the Dead: they have nothing more sacred. The 
question was a very delicate one, for the matter dis- 
cussed was whether the whole Country should put 
their dead in the same grave, according to their cus- 
tom; and yet there were some discontented Villages, 
who wished to remain apart, not without the regret 
of the whole Country. Yet the thing passed over 
with all the gentleness and peace imaginable: at 
every turn the Masters of the Feast, who had as- 
sembled the Council, exhorted to gentleness, saying 
that it was a Council of peace. They call these 


262 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

feil de paix. lIs nomment ces Confeils, Endz.onraon- 
daonl, comme fi on difoit, Confeil égal & facile comme 
les plaines & rafes campagnes. Quoy que di:ffent les 
opinãs, les Chefs du Confeil ne faifoient que [184] 
dire, Voila qui va bien. Les mutins excufoient leur 
diuifion, difant qu'i1 n'en pouuoit arriuer du mal au 
Pais: que par Ie pa:ffé il y auoit eu de femblables diui- 
fions, qui ne l'auoient pas ruiné. Les autres addou- 
ci:ffoient les affaires, difans que fi quelqu'vn des leurs 
s'égaroit du vray chemin, il ne faUoit pas inconti- 
nent l'abandonner; que les freres auoient par fois des 
riotes par enfemble. Bref, c'efioit chofe digne 
d'efionnement de voir dans des cæurs aigris vne telle 
moderation de paroles. Voila pour leurs Confeils. 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE' S RELA TION, I636 

263 

Councils, E1ldionraondaonl, as if one should say, ,. A 
Council even and easy, like the level and reaped 
fields. ., Whatever the speakers say, the Leaders of 
the Council always say only this, [184] " That is very 
well." The mutinous persons excused their divi- 
sion, saying that no evil could arise therefrom to the 
Country; that in the past there had been similar divi- 
sions, which had not ruined it. The others softened 
matters, saying that, if one of their friends went 
astray from the true road, they must not immediately 
abandon him; that brothers sometimes had quarrels 
with each other. In short, it was a matter for great 
astonishment to see in these embittered hearts such 
moderation of words. So much for their Councils. 


264 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

CHAPITRE VIII. 

DES CEREMONIES QU'ILS GARDENT EN LEUR SEPUL- 
TURE, & DE LEUR DUElL. 

N OS Sauuages ne font point Sauuages en ce qui 
regarde les deuoirs, que la Nature mefme nous 
oblige de rendre aux morts: ils ne cedent 
point en cecy à plufieurs Nations beau coup mieux 
policées. V ous diriez que toutes leurs fueurs, leurs 
trauaux, & leurs traittes, ne fe rapportent quafi qu'à 
amaffer dequoy [185J honorer les Morts; ils n'ont 
rien d' affez precieux pour cét effet; ils profiituent 
les robbes, les haches, & la Pourcelaine en telle quan- 
tité, que vous iugeriez à les voir en ces occafions, 
qu'ils n'en font aucun efiat, & toutefois ce font toutes 
les richeffes du Pais; vous les verrez fouuent en plein 
hyuer quafi tous nuds, pendant qu'ils ont de belles & 
bonnes robbes en leurs quaiffes qu'ils mettent en re- 
ferue pour les :rvlorts; auffi efi-ce là leur point d'hon- 
neur. C'efi en cette occafion qu'ils veulent fur tout 
paroifire magnifiques. Mais ie ne parle icy que de 
leurs funerailles particulieres. Ces bonnes gens ne 
font pas comme beaucoup de Chreftiens, qui ne peu- 
uent fouffrir qu'on leur parle de la mort, & qui dans 
vne maladie mortelle, vous mettent en peine toute 
vne maifon pour trouuer moyen de faire porter cette 
nouuelle au malade, fans Ie faire mourir par auance. 
Icy quand on defefpere de la fanté de quelques-vns, 
non feulement on ne fait point de difficu1té de leur 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

265 

CHAPTER VIII. 

OF THE CEREMONIES THEY OBSERVE IN THEIR 
BURIALS AND MOURNING. 

O DR Savages are not Savages as regards the du- 
ties that Nature itself constrains us to render 
to the dead; they do not yield in this re- 
spect to many Nations much more civilized. You 
might say that all their exertions, their labors, and 
their trading, concern almost entirely the amassing 
of something with which [185] to honor the Dead. 
They have nothing sufficiently precious for this pur- 
pose; they lavish robes, axes, and Porcelain in such 
quantities that, to see them on such occasions, you 
would judge that they place no value upon them; 
and yet these are the whole riches of the Country. 
You will see them often, in the depth of winter, al- 
most entirely naked, while they have handsome and 
valuable robes in store, that they keep in reserve for 
the Dead; for this is their point of honor. It is on 
such occasions they wish above all to appear magnifi- 
cent. But I am speaking here only of their private 
funerals. These simple people are not like so many 
Christians, who cannot endure that anyone should 
speak to them about death, and who in a mortal sick- 
ness put a whole house to trouble to find means of 
breaking the news to the sick man without hastening 
his death. Here when anyone's health is despaired 
of, not only do they make no difficulty in telling him 
that his life is near its close, but they even prepare 


266 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

(VOL. 10 

dire, que c'eft fait de leur vie; mais mefme on pre- 
pare en leur prefence tout ce qui eft neceffaire pour 
leur fepulture: on leur monftre fouuent la robbe, les 
chauffes, les fouliers, [186] & la ceinture qu'ils doi- 
uent emporter; fouuent on les enfeuelit à leur mode 
auãt qu'i1s ayet expiré, ils font leur feftin d'adieu à 
leurs amis, où ils chantent quelquefois fans mõftrer 
aucune apprehenfiõ de la mort, qu'ils regardent fort 
indifferemment, ne fe la figurant que cõme vn paffage 
à vne vie fort peu differete de celIe cy. Auffi-toft 
que Ie malade a rendu Ie dernier foufpir, ils Ie met- 
tent en l'eftat qu'il doit eftre dans Ie tombeau, ils ne 
l'étendet pas de fon long cõme nous faifons; mais ils 
le mettent en peloton, quafi en la mefme pofture que 
les enfans font au vetre de la mere. Iufques là Us 
tiennent la bonde de leurs larmes. Apres luy auoir 
rendu ces deuoirs, toute la Cabane commence à reten- 
tir de foufpirs, de gemiffemens, & de plaintes, les 
enfans crient A ijlan, fi c' eft leur pere, & la mere 
A Ùn, A zen; mon fils, mon fils. Qui ne les verroit 
tout baignez de leurs larmes, iugeroit à les entendre, 
que ce ne font que pleurs de ceremonies; ils flé- 
chiffent leurs voix taus d'vn mefme accord, & en vn 
ton lugubre, iufques à ce que quelque perfonne d'au- 
thorité faffe Ie hola; en mefme temps ils s'arreftent, 
Ie Capitaine s'en va promptement [187] par les Ca- 
banes aduertir qu'vn tel eft mort. A l'arriuée des 
amis ils recommencent de nouueau à pleurer, & fe 
plaindre. Souuent quelqu'vn des plus confiderables 
prendra la parole, & confolera la mere & les enfans, 
tantoft s'étendant fur les loüanges du defunct, loüant 
fa patience, fa debonnaireté, fa liberalité, fa magni- 
ficence, & s'il eftoit guerrier, la grandeur de fon cou- 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELATION, I636 

267 

in his presence all that is needed for his burial; they 
often show him the robe, the stockings, the shoes, 
[186] and the belt which he is to wear. Frequently 
they are prepared after their fashion for burial, be- 
fore they have expired; they make their farewell 
feast to their friends, at which they sometimes sing 
without showing any dread of death, which they re- 
gard with very little concern, considering it only as 
the passage to a life differing very little from this. 
As soon as the sick man has drawn his last breath, 
they place him in the position in which he is to be in 
the grave; they do not stretch him at length as we 
do, but place him in a crouching posture, almost the 
same that a child has in its mother's womb. Thus 
far, they restrain their tears. After having per- 
formed these duties the whole Cabin begins to re- 
sound with cries, groans, and wails; the children cry 
Aistall, if it be their father: and the mother, Az"eJl, 
Aien, " My son, my son." Anyone who did not see 
them, quite bathed in their tears, would judge, to 
hear them, that these are only ceremonial tears; they 
make their voices tremble all with one accord, and 
in a lugubrious tone, until some person of authority 
makes them stop. As soon as they cease, the Cap- 
tain goes promptly [187] through the Cabins, mak- 
ing known that such and such a one is dead. On the 
arrival of friends, they begin anew to weep and com- 
plain. Frequently some one of importance begins 
to speak, and consoles the mother and the children,- 
at times launching into praises of the deceased, laud- 
ing his patience, his good-nature, his liberality, his 
magnificence, and, if he were a warrior, the great- 
ness of his courage; at times he will say, " What 
would you have? there was no longer any remedy, 


268 

LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

rage: Tantofi il dira, Que voulez-vous, il n'y a plus 
de remede, il falloit bien qu'il mourufi, N ous fommes 
tous fujets à la mort, Et puis il y auoit trop long 
temps qu'il trainoit, &c. II efi vray qu'en cette occa- 
fion, ils ne manquent point de difcours. Ie me fuis 
queIquefois eftonné de les voir long temps fur ce pro- 
pos, & apporter auec tant de difcretion, toutes les 
confiderations capables de donner quelque confolation 
aux parens du defunct. 
On enuoye auffi donner auis de cette mort aux amis 
qui demeurent és autres Villages; & comme chaque 
famille en a vn autre qui a le foin de fes Morts, ceux- 
là viennent au pluftoft pour donner ordre à tout, & 
determiner Ie iour des funerailIes: d' ordinaire ils en- 
terrent les Morts [188] Ie troifiéme iour; & dés Ie 
matin la Capitaine donne ordre que par tout Ie Vil- 
lage on faffe chaudiere pour le mort. Perfonne n'é- 
pargne ce qu'il a de meilleur. lIs font cecy à mon 
auis pour trois raifons. Premierement pour fe con- 
foler les vns Ies autres, car ils s'entr'enuoyent des 
plats, & quafi perfonne ne mange de la chaudiere 
qu'il a preparée. Secondement, à l' occafion de ceux 
des autres Villages, qui viennent fouuent en affez 
bon nombre. Tiercement, & principalement pour 
obliger l'ame du defunct, qu'ils croyent y prêdre 
plaifir, & en mãger fa part. Toutes les chaudieres 
eftant vuidées, ou au moins difiribuées, Ie Capitaine 
publie par Ie Village, que ron va porter Ie mort au 
Cimetiere. Tout Ie Village s'affemble en Ia Cabane; 
on renouuelle Ies pIeurs, & ceux qui ont foin des fune- 
railles appreftêt vn brancard, où Ie mort eft couché 
fur vne natte, & enueloppé d'vne robbe de Caftor, & 
puis ils Ie Ieuent & Ie portent à quatre: tout le Vil- 


1636] 

LE JEUNE' S RELA TION, I6.J6 

269 

he must indeed die, we are all subject to death, and 
then he dragged on too long," etc. It is true that, 
on such occasions, they are never lacking in speech. 
I have sometimes been surprised to see them dwell- 
ing a long time on this subject, and bringing for- 
ward, with much discretion, every consideration 
that might give consolation to the relatives of the 
deceased. 
Word of the death is also sent to the friends who 
live in the other Villages; and, as each family has 
some one who takes care of its Dead, these latter 
come as soon as possible to take charge of every- 
thing, and determine the day of the funeral. Usually 
they inter the Dead [188] on the third day; as soon 
as it is light, the Captain gives orders that through- 
out the whole Village a feast be made for the dead. 
No one spares what he has of the best. They do 
this, in my opinion, for three reasons: First, to con- 
sole one another, for they exchange dishes, and hard- 
ly anyone eats any of the feast he has prepared; 
secondly, on account of those of other Villages, who 
often come in great numbers. Thirdly, and princi- 
pally, to serve the soul of the deceased, which they 
believe takes pleasure in the feast, and in eating its 
share. All the kettles being emptied, or at least dis- 
tributed, the Captain publishes throughout the Vil- 
lage that the body is about to be borne to the Ceme- 
tery. The whole Village assembles in the Cabin; 
the weeping is renewed; and those who have charge 
of the ceremonies get ready a litter on which the 
corpse is placed on a mat and enveloped in a Beaver 
robe, and then four lift and carry it away; the whole 
Village follows in silence to the Cemetery. A Tomb 
is there, made of bark and supported on four stakes, 


270 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

lage fuit en filence iufques au Cimetiere. II y a là 
vn Tombeau fait d'écorce & dreffé fur quatre pieux 
d'enuiron huit à dix pieds de haut. Cependant que 
l'on y accommode le [189] mort, & qu'on agence les 
écorces, Ie Capitaine publie les prefens qui ont efié 
faits par Ies amis. En ce Pais auffi bien qu'ailleurs 
les confolations les plus agreables dans la perte des 
pares font toufiours accompagnez de prefens, qui font 
chaudieres, haches, robes de Cafior, & colliers de 
Pourcelaine. Si Ie defunct efioit en quelque confide- 
ration dans Ie Pais, non feulement les amis & les voi- 
fins, mais mefmes les Capitaines des autres Villages 
viendront en perfonne apporter leurs prefens. Or 
tous ces prefens ne fuiuent pas Ie mort dans le tom- 
beau: on luy mettra quelquefois au col vn collier de 
Pourcelaine, & aupres de luy vn peigne, vne courge 
pleine d'huile, & deux ou trois petits pains: voila 
tout. Vne grande partie s'en va aux parens pour 
effuyer leurs larmes: l'autre partie fe donne à ceux 
qui ont donné ordre aux funerailles pour recompenfe 
de leur peine. On met auffi fouuent en referue quel- 
ques robes, ou quelques haches pour faire largeffe à 
la Ieuneffe. Et Ie Capitaine met entre les mains de 
quelqu'vn d'entre eux vn bafion d'enuiron vn pied, 
propofant vn prix à celuy qui Ie luy ofiera. lIs fe 
iettent [190] deffus en troupe à corps perdu, & de- 
meurent quelquefois vne heure entiere aux prifes. 
Cela fait chacun s'en retourne paifiblement en fa 
Cabane. 
Ie m'efiois oublié de dire que d'ordinaire pendant 
toute cette ceremonie la mere ou la femme feront aux 
pieds du tombeau appellant le defunct en chantant, 
ou plufiofi en fe plaignant d'vn ton lugubre. 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, r636 

271 

eight to ten feet high. However, before the corpse 
is put into it, [189] and before they arrange the bark, 
the Captain makes known the presents that have 
been given by the friends. In this Country, as well 
as elsewhere, the most agreeable consolations for the 
loss of friends are always accompanied by presents, 
such as kettles, axes, Beaver robes, and Porcelain 
collars. If the deceased was a person of importance 
in the Country, not only the friends and neighbors, 
but even the Captains of other Villages, will come in 
person and bring their presents. N ow all the pres- 
ents do not follow the dead man into the grave; 
sometimes a Porcelain collar is put around his neck, 
and near by a comb, a gourd full of oil, and two or 
three little loaves of bread; and that is all. A large 
share goes to the relatives, to dry their tears; the 
other share goes to those who have directed the fu- 
neral ceremonies, as a reward for their trouble. 
Some robes, also, are frequently laid aside, or some 
hatchets, as a gift for the Youth. The Chief puts 
into the hand of some one of the latter a stick about 
a foot long, offering a prize to the one who will take 
it away from him. They throw themselves [190] 
upon him in a body, with might and main, and re- 
main sometimes a whole hour struggling. This over, 
each one returns quietly to his Cabin. 
I had forgotten to say that usually, during this 
whole ceremony, the mother or the wife will be at 
the foot of the grave calling to the deceased with 
singing, or more frequently complaining in a lugu- 
brious voice. 
Now all these ceremonies do not always take 
place; as for those killed in war, they inter them, 
and the relatives make presents to their patrons, if 


272 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

Or toutes ces ceremonies ne fe gardent pas tou- 
fiours; car pour ceux qui font morts en guerre, ils les 
mettent en terre, & les parens font des prefens à 
leurs patrons,
s'ils en auoient, ce qui eft affez ordi- 
naire dans Ie Païs, pour les encourager à faire vne 
leuée de foldats, & venger la mort du defunct. Pour 
les noyez on les enterre auffi apres auoir enleué par 
pieces les parties du corps les plus charnuës, comme 
i'ay expliqué plus en particulier, parlant de leurs 
fuperftitions. On double les prefens en cette occa- 
fion, & tout Ie Païs s'y trouue fouuent, & y contribuë 
du fien; & tout cela, difent-ils, pour appaifer Ie Ciel, 
ou Ie Lac. 
II y a mefmes des ceremonies particulieres [19 1 ] 
pour les petits enfans decedez au deffous d'vn mois 
ou deux; ils ne les mettent pas non plus comme les 
autres dans des fepulchres d'écorce dreffez fur des 
pieux; mais les enterrent fur Ie chemin, afin, difent- 
ils, que quelque femme paffant par là, ils entrent fe- 
cretement en fon ventre, & que de rechef elle leur 
donne la vie, & les enfante. Ie me doute que Ie bon 
Nicodeme y eufi trouué bien de la difficu1té, quoy 
qu'il n'oppofaft que pour les vieillards, Quomodo potest 
homo na/d cùm fit fenex. Cette belle ceremonie fe fit 
cét Hyuer en la perfonne d'vn de nos petits Chre- 
ítiens, qui auoit efté nommé Iofeph au baptefme. 
Ie l'appris à cette occafion de la bouche mefme du 
pere de l'enfant. 
Les funerailles faites, le deüi] ne ceffe pas, la 
femme le continuë toute l'année pour Ie mary, & Ie 
mary pour la femme: mais Ie grand deüil propre- 
ment ne dure que dix iours: pendant ce temps ils 
demeurent couchez fur leurs nattes, & enueloppez 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELATION, I6.1 6 

273 

they had any, which is rather common in this Coun- 
try, in order to encourage them to raise a force of 
soldiers, and avenge the death of the deceased. As 
to the drowned, they are interred also, after the most 
fleshy parts of the body have been taken off, piece 
by piece, as I have explained more in detail in speak- 
ing of their superstitions. Double the presents are 
given on such an occasion, and people from the whole 
Country often gather there, and contribute of their 
property; and this is done, they say, to appease the 
Sky, or the Lake. 
There are even special ceremonies [191] for little 
children who die less than a month or two old; they 
do not put them like the others into bark tombs set 
up on posts, but inter them on the road,-in order that, 
they say, if some woman passes that way, they may 
secretly enter her womb, and that she may give them 
life again, and bring them forth. I doubt not the 
good Nicodemus would have found much difficulty 
about this, although he only raised the objection in 
regard to old people, Quomodo potest homo nasâ cùm sit 
senex? This fine ceremony took place this Winter in 
the person of one of our little Christians, who had 
been named Joseph at baptism. I learned it on this 
occasion from the lips of the child's father himself. 
The funeral ceremonies over, the mourning does 
not cease, the wife continues it the whole year for 
the husband, and the husband for the wife; but the 
great mourning properly lasts only ten days. Dur- 
ing this time they remain lying on mats and envel- 
oped in furs, their faces against the ground, without 
speaking or answering anything except Cway, to 
those who come to visit them. They do not warm 
themselves even in Winter, they [192] eat cold food, 


274 

LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

dans leurs robbes, la face contre terre, fans parler, 
ny refpondre, que C
ay, à ceux qui les viennent vifi- 
ter: ils ne fe chauffent point mefmes en Hyuer, ils 
[I92J mangent froid, ils ne vont point aux fefiins, ne 
fortent que de nuit pour leurs neceffitez: ils fe font 
cou pper au derriere de la tefie vne poignée de che- 
ueux, & difent que ce n' eft pas fans grande douleur 
principalement quand Ie mary pratique cette ceremo- 
nie à l' occafion de la mort de fa femme, ou la femme 
à l'occafion de la mort du mary. Voila pour ce qui 
eft d u grand deüil. 
Le petit deüil dure toute l'année: quand ils veu- 
lent vifiter ils ne faluent point, & ne difent point 
C
ay, ils ne fe graiffent point les cheueux; les fem- 
mes neantmoins Ie font quand leurs meres Ie leur 
commandent, qui ont en leur difpofition leur cheue- 
lure, & mefmes leur perfonnes; c'efi à elles de les 
enuoyer aux fefiins, fans cela plufieurs n'y iroient 
point. Ce que ie trouue de remarquable eft que pen- 
dant toute l' année la femme ny Ie mary ne fe rema- 
rient point, autrement ils feroient parler d'eux dans 
Ie Pays. 
Les fepultures ne font pas perpetuelIes; comme 
leurs Villages ne font fiables que pour quelques an- 
nées que dure la commodité des bois: les corps ne 
demeurent dans les Cimetieres que iufques à la fefie 
des [193] Morts, qui fe fait d'ordinaire de douze en 
douze ans. Or dans ce terme ils ne laiffent pas 
d'honnorer fouuent les defuncts: de temps en temps 
ils font faire chaudiere pour leur r]s ames par tout 
Ie Village, comme Ie iour des funerailles, & reffuf- 
citent leur nom Ie pluftoft qu'ils peuuent. A cét effet 
ils font des prefens aux Capitaines, pour donner à 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, T6.J6 

275 

they do not go to the feasts, they go out only at 
night for their necessities; they cause a handful of 
hair to be cut from the back of the head; they say 
this is done only when the grief is profound,-the 
husband practicing this ceremony generally on the 
death of his wife, or the wife on the death of her hus- 
band. This is what there is of their great mourning. 
The lesser mourning lasts all the year. When 
they go visiting they do not make any salutation, 
not even saying Cway, nor do they grease their hair; 
the women do it, however, when their mothers com- 
mand them, as the latter have at their disposal their 
hair, and even their persons; it is their privilege to 
send the daughters to feasts, for without the command 
many would not go. \Vhat I find remarkable is 
that, during the whole year, neither the husband nor 
the wife remarries; if they did, they would be talked 
about throughout the Country. 
The graves are not permanent; as their Villages 
are stationary only during a few years, while the sup- 
plies of the forest last, the bodies only remain in the 
Cemeteries until the feast of the [193] Dead, which 
usually takes place every twelve years. Within this 
time they do not cease to honor the dead frequently; 
from time to time, they make a feast for their souls 
throughout the whole Village, as they did on the day 
of the funeral, and revive their names as often as 
they can. For this purpose they make presents to 
the Captains, to give to him who will be content to 
take the name of the deceased; and, if he was held 
in consideration and esteem in the Country while 
alive, the one who resuscitates him,-aftera magnifi- 
cent feast to the whole Country, that he may make 
himself known under this name,- makes a levy of 


276 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

celuy qui fera content de prendre Ie nom du defunct; 
& s'il eftoit en confideration & en eftime dans Ie 
Païs de fon viuant, celuy qui Ie reffufcite apres vn 
feftin magnifique à tout Ie Païs, pour fe faire co- 
gnoiftre fous ce nom, fait vne leuée de ieunes gens 
deliberez, & s'en va en guerre pour faire quelque 
braue coup, qui faffe paroiftre à tout Ie Païs, qu'il a 
non feulement herité du nom, mais auffi des vertus 
& d u courage d u defunct. 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, r6.J6 

277 

the resolute young men and goes away on a war ex- 
pedition, to perform some daring exploit that shall 
make it evident to the whole Country that he has in- 
herited not only the name, but also the virtues and 
courage of the deceased. 


278 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

CHAPITRE IX. 

DE LA FESTE SOLENNELLE DES MORTS. 

L A fefte des Morts eft la ceremonie la plus celebre 
qui foit parmy les Hurons; [194] ils luy donnent 
Ie nom de feftin, d'autant que, comme ie diray 
tout maintenant, les corps eftans tirez des Cime- 
tieres, chaque Capitaine fait vn feftin des ames dans 
fon Village: Ie plus confiderable & Ie plus magni- 
fique eft celuy du Maifire de la Fefte, qui eft pour 
cette raifon appellé par excellence Ie Maiftre du 
feftin. 
Cette Fe-fte eft toute pleine de ceremonies, mais 
vous diriez que la principale eft celIe de la chau- 
diere, cette-cy étouffe toutes les autres, & on ne parle 
quafi de la fefte des Morts, mefmes dans les Confeils 
les plus ferieux, que fous le nom de chaudiere: ils y 
approprient tous les termes de cuifine; de forte que 
pour dire auancer ou retarder la fefte des Morts, ils 
diront détifer, ou attifer Ie feu deffous la chaudiere: 
& quand on eft fur ces termes, qui diroit la chau- 
diere eft renuerfée, ce feroit à dire, i1 n'y aura point 
de fefte des Morts. 
Or il n'y a d'ordinaire qu'vne feule fefie dans 
chaque Nation; tous les corps fe mettent en vne 
mefme foffe: ie dis d'ordinaire, car cette année que 
c'eft faite la fefte des Morts, la chaudiere a efié diui- 
fée, [195] & cinq Villages de cette pointe où nous 
fommes ont fait bande à part, & ont mis leurs 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

279 

CHAPTER IX. 

OF THE SOLEMN FEAST OF THE DEAD. 

T HE feast of the Dead is the most renowned cere- 
mony among the Hurons; [194] they give it 
the name of feast because, as I shall now fully 
relate, when the bodies are taken from their Ceme- 
teries, each Captain makes a feast for the souls in his 
Village,-the most considerable and most magnifi- 
cent having been that of the Master of the Feast, 
who is for that reason called par excellence, the Mas- 
ter of the feast. 
This Feast abounds in ceremonies, but you might 
say that the principal ceremony is that of the kettle; 
this latter overshadows all the rest, and the feast of 
the Dead is hardly mentioned, even in the most im- 
portant Councils, except under the name of "the 
kettle. " They appropriate to it all the terms of cook- 
ery, so that, in speaking of hastening or of putting 
off the feast of the Dead, they will speak of scatter- 
ing or of stirring up the fire beneath the kettle; and, 
employing this way of speaking, one who should say 
" the kettle is overturned," would mean that there 
would be no feast of the Dead. 
Now usually there is only a single feast in each 
Nation; all the bodies are put into a common pit. I 
say, usually, for this year, which has happened to be 
the feast of the Dead, the kettle has been divided; 
[195] and five Villages of the part where we are have 
acted by themselves, and have put their dead into a 


280 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

morts dans vne foffe particuliere. Celuy qui eftoit 
Capitaine de la fefte precedente, & qui eft comme Ie 
Chef de cette pointe, a pris pour pretexte que fa 
chaudiere & fon feftin auoit efté gafté, & qu'il eftoit 
obligé d'en refaire vn autre: mais en effet ce n'eftoit 
qu'vn pretexte; la principale caufe de ce diuorce eft 
que les groffes teftes de ce Village fe plaignent i1 y 
a long temps de ce que les autres tirent tout à eux; 
qu'ils n'entrent pas comme ils voudroient bien dans 
la cognoiffance des affaires du Pais, & qu' on ne les 
appelle pas aux Confeils les plus fecrets & les plus 
importans, & au partage des prefens. Cette diuifion 
a efté fuiuie de défiance de part & d'autre; Dietl 
vueille qu'elle n'apporte point d'empefchement à la 
publication du fainct Euangile: mais il faut que ie 
touche briefuement l'ordre & les circonftances de 
cette fefte, & que ie finiffe. 
Les douze ans ou enuiron eftant expirez, les An- 
ciens & les Notables du Pais s'affemblent pour deli- 
berer precifément de la faifon en laquelle fe fera la 
fefte, au contentement de tout Ie Pais, & des Nations 
[196] eftrangeres qui y feront inuitées. La refolu- 
tion prife, comme tous les corps fe doiuent tranfpor- 
ter au Village où eft la foffe commune, chacque fa- 
mille donne ordre à fes morts, mais auec vn foin & 
vne affection qui ne fe peut dire: s'ils ont des parens 
morts en quelque endroit du Pais que ce foit, ils 
n 'épargnent point leur peine pour les aller querir: 
ils les enleuent des Cimetieres, les chargent fur leurs 
propres épaules, & les couurent des plus belles robes 
qu'ils ayent. Dans chaque Village ils choififfent vn 
beau iour, fe tranfportent au Cimetiere, où chacun 
de ceux qu'ils appellent, Aihconde, qui ont eu foin de 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I636 

281 

private pit. He who was Captain of the preceding 
feast, and who is regarded as the Chief of tbis place, 
has given as an excuse that his kettle and his feast 
had been spoiled, and that he was obliged to make 
another; but in reality this was only a pretext. The 
principal cause of this separation is that the notables 
of this Village have been complaining this long time 
that the others take everything upon themselves; 
that they do not become acquainted as they would 
like with the affairs of the Country; that they are not 
called to the most secret and important Councils, and 
to a share of the presents. This division has been 
followed by distrust on both sides; God grant that it 
may not cause any hindrance to the preaching of the 
holy Gospel. But I must touch briefly on the order 
and the circumstances of this feast, and then I must 
finish. 
Twelve years or thereabout having elapsed, the 
Old Men and Notables of the Country assemble, to 
deliberate in a definite way on the time at which the 
feast shall be held to the satisfaction of the whole 
Country and of the foreign Nations [196] that may 
be invited to it. The decision having been made, as 
all the bodies are to be transported to the Village 
where is the common grave, each family sees to its 
dead, but with a care and affection that cannot be 
described: if they have dead relatives in any part of 
the Country, they spare no trouble to go for them; 
they take them from the Cemeteries, bear them on 
their shoulders, and cover them with the finest robes 
they have. In each Village they choose a fair day, 
and proceed to the Cemetery, where those called A ihe- 
onde, who take care of the graves, draw the bodies 
from the tombs in the presence of the relatives, who 


282 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

la fepulture, tirent les corps du tombeau en prefence 
des parens qui renouuellent leurs pleurs, & entrent 
dans les premiers fentimens qu'ils auoient Ie iour des 
funerailles. Ie me trouuay à ce fpectacle, & y inuitay 
volontiers tous nos domefiiques; car ie ne penfe pas 
qu'i1 fe puiffe voir au monde vne plus viue image & 
vne plus parfaite reprefentation de ce que c'efi que 
l'homme. II efi vray qu'en France nos Cimetieres 
prefchent puiffamment, & que tous ces os entaffez 
les vns fur les autres fans difcretion des pauures 
[197] d'auec les riches, ou des petits d'auec les 
grands, font autant de voix qui nous crient continuel- 
lement la penfée de la mort, la vanité des chofes du 
monde, & Ie mépris de la vie prefente: mais il me 
femble que ce que font nos Sauuages à cette occafion 
touche encor dauantage, & nous fait voir de plus 
prés, & apprehender plus fenfiblement no fire mifere. 
Car apres auoir fait ouuerture des tombeaux, ils vous 
étallent fur la place toutes ces Carcaffes, & les laiffent 
affez long temps ainfi découuertes, donnant tout loifir 
aux fpectateurs d'apprendre vne bonne fois ce qu'ils 
feront quelque iour. Les vnes font tautes déchar- 
nées, & n' ont qu'vn parchemin fur les os; les autres 
ne font que comme recuites & boucannées, fans mon- 
firer quafi aucune apparence de pourriture; & les 
autres font encor toutes groüillantes de verso Les 
parens s'eftant fuffifamment contentez de cette veuë, 
les couurent de belles robes de Cafior toutes neufues: 
en fin au bout de quelque temps ils les décharnent, 
& en enleuent la peau & la chair qu'ils iettent dans 
Ie feu auec les robes & les nattes dont its ont efié 
enfeuelis. Pour les corps entiers de ceux qui [19 8 ] 
font nouuellement morts, ils les laiffent en mefme 


1636] 

LE JEUNE' S RELA TION, I636 

283 

renew their tears and feel afresh the grief they had 
on the day of the funeral. I was present at the spec- 
tacle, and willingly invited to it all our servants; for 
I do not think one could see in the world a more 
vivid picture or more perfect representation of what 
man is. It is true that in France our Cemeteries 
preach powerfully, and that all those bones piled up 
one upon another without discrimination,-those of 
the poor [197] with those of the rich, those of the 
mean with those of the great,-are so many voices 
continually proclaiming to us the thought of death, 
the vanity of the things of this world, and contempt 
for the present life: but it seems to me that what 
our Savages do on this occasion touches us still more, 
and makes us see more closely and apprehend more 
sensibly our wretched state. For, after having 
opened the graves, they display before you all these 
Corpses, on the spot, and they leave them thus ex- 
posed long enough for the spectators to learn at their 
leisure, and once for all, what they will be some day. 
The flesh of some is quite gone, and there is only 
parchment on their bones; in other cases, the bodies 
look as if they had been dried and smoked, and show 
scarcely any signs of putrefaction; and in still other 
cases they are still swarming with worms. When 
the friends have gazed upon the bodies to their satis- 
faction, they cover them with handsome Beaver 
robes quite new: finally, after some time they strip 
them of their flesh, taking off skin and flesh which 
they throw into the fire along with the robes and 
mats in which the bodies were wrapped. As regards 
the bodies of those [198] recently dead, they leave 
these in the state in which they are, and content 
themselves by simply covering them with new robes. 


284 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

rVOL. 10 

efiat, & fe contentent feulement de les couurir de 
robes neufues. Ils ne toucherent qu'à vn Vieillard 
dont i'ay par1é cy-deuant, qui efioit mort cette Au- 
tomne au retour de la pefche: ce gros corps n'auoit 
commencé à fe pourrir que depuis vn mois à l'occa- 
fion des premieres chaleurs du Printemps; Ies vers 
fourmilloient de toutes parts, & Ie pus & l'ordure qui 
en fortoit rendoit vne puanteur prefque intolerable; 
cependant ils eurent bien Ie courage de Ie tirer de la 
robbe où i1 efioit enueloppé, Ie nettoyerent Ie mieux 
qu'ils peurent, Ie prirent à belles mains, & Ie mirent 
dans vne natte, & vne robbe toute neufue, & tout 
cela fans faire paroifire aucune horreur de cette 
pourriture. N e voila pas vn bel exemple pour ani- 
mer les Chrefiiens, qui doiuent auoir des penfées 
bien plus releuées, aux actions de charité, & aux 
æuures de mifericorde enuers Ie prochain. Apres 
cela qui aura horreur de la puanteur d'vn Hofpital, 
& qui ne prendra vn fingulier plaifir de fe voir aux 
pieds d'vn malade tout couuert de playes, dans la 
perfonne duquel i1 confidere Ie Fils de [199] Dieu. 
Comme ils eftoient à décharner toutes ces carcaffes, 
ils trouuerent dans Ie corps de deux vne efpece de 
fort, I'vn que ie vis de mes yeux efioit vn æuf de 
Tortuë auec vne courroye de cuir; & l'autre que nos 
Peres manierent efioit vne petite Tortuë de la grofíeur 
d'vne noix; ce qui fit croire qu'ils auoient efié enfor- 
celez. & qu'il y auoit des Sorciers en nofire Village; 
d'où vint la refolution à quelques-vns de Ie quitter au 
plufiofi: en effet deux ou trois iours apres vn des 
plus riches, craignant qu'il ne luy arriuafi quelque 
malheur, tranfporta fa Cabane à deux lieuës de nous 
.au Village d'Arontaen. 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

28:> 

Of the latter they handled only one Old Man, of 
whom I have spoken before, who died this Autumn 
on his return from fishing: this swollen corpse had 
only begun to decay during the last month, on the 
occasion of the first heat of Spring; the worms were 
swarming all over it, and the corruption that oozed 
out of it gave forth an almost intolerable stench; and 
yet they had the courage to take away the robe in 
which it was enveloped, cleaned it as well as they 
could, taking the matter off by handfuls, and put the 
body into a fresh mat and robe, and all this without 
showing any horror at the corruption. Is not that a 
noble example to inspire Christians, who ought to 
have thoughts much more elevated to acts of charity 
and works of mercy towards their neighbor? After 
that, who will be afraid of the stench of a Hospital; 
and who will not take a peculiar pleasure in seeing 
himself at the feet of a sick man all covered with 
wounds, in the person of whom he beholds the Son 
of [199] God? As they had to remove the flesh from 
all these corpses, they found in the bodies of two a 
kind of charm,- one, that I saw myself, was a Tur- 
tle's egg with a leather strap; and the other, which 
our Fathers handled, was a little Turtle of the size 
of a nut. These excited the belief that they had 
been bewitched, and that there were Sorcerers in 
our Village,- whence came the resolution to some 
to leave at once; indeed, two or three days later one 
of the richest men, fearing that some harm would 
come to him, transported his Cabin to a place two 
leagues from us, to the Village of Arontaen. CJ.2 
The bones having been well cleaned, they put 
them partly into bags, partly into fur robes, loaded 
them on their shoulders, and covered these packages 


286 

LES RELATIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

Or les os eftans bien nettoyez, ils les mirent partie 
dans des facs, partie en des robbes, les chargerent 
fur leurs épaules, & couurirent ces pacquets d'vne 
autre belle robbe pendante. Pour les corps entiers, 
ils les mirent fur vne efpece de brãcart, & les por- 
terent auec tous les autres chacun en fa Cabane, où 
chaque famille fit vn feftin à fes morts. 
Retournant de cefte fefte auec vn Capitaine qui a 
l'efprit fort bon, & eft pour eftre quelque iour bien 
auant dans les affaires [zoo] du Païs, ie luy demanday 
pourquoy ils appelloient les os des morts Atz"sken. II 
me répondit du meilleur fens qu'il euft, & ie recueil- 
ly de fon difcours, que plufieurs s'imaginent que nous 
auons deux ames, toutes deux diuifibles & mate- 
rielles, & cependant toutes deux raifonnables; l'vne 
fe fepare du corps à la mort, & demeure neantmoins 
dans Ie Cimetiere iufques à la fefte des :Morts, apres 
laquelle, ou elle fe change en Tourterelle, ou felon 
la plus commune opinion, elle s'en va droit au village 
des ames. L'autre eft comme attachée au corps & 
informe, pour ainfi dire, Ie cadaure, & demeure en 
la foffe des morts, apres la fefte, & n' en fort iamais, 
fi ce n'efi que quelqu'vn l'enfante de rechef. II 
m'apporta pour preuue de cette metempfychofe, la 
parfaite reffemblance qu'ont quelques-vns auec quel- 
ques perfonnes defuntes; Voila vne belle Philofophie. 
Tant y a, que voila pourquoy ils appellent les os des 
morts, Atisken, les ames. 
V n iour ou deux auparauant que de partir pour la 
fefte, ils porteret toutes ces ames dans vne des plus 
grandes Cabanes du Village, où elles furent vne par- 
tie attachée [ZOI] aux perches de la Cabane, & l'autre 
efiallée par la Cabane, & Ie Capitaine les traita, & 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I636 

287 

with another beautiful hanging robe. As for the 
whole bodies, they put them on a species of litter, 
and carried them with all the others, each into his 
Cabin, where each family made a feast to its dead. 
Returning from this feast with a Captain who is 
very intelligent, and who will some day be very in- 
fluential in the affairs [200] of the Country, I asked 
him why they called the bones of the dead Atz"sken. 
He gave me the best explanation he could, and I 
gathered from his conversation that many think we 
have two souls, both of them being divisible and 
material, and yet both reasonable; the one separates 
itself from the body at death, yet remains in the 
Cemetery until the feast of the Dead,-after which it 
either changes into a Turtledove, or, according to the 
most common belief, it goes away at once to the vil- 
lage of souls. The other is, as it were, bound to the 
body, and informs, so to speak, the corpse; it re- 
mains in the ditch of the dead after the feast, and 
never leaves it, unless some one bears it again as a 
child. He pointed out to me, as a proof of this me- 
tempsychosis, the perfect resemblance some have to 
persons deceased. A fine Philosophy, indeed. Such 
as it is, it shows why they call the bones of the dead, 
Atz"sken, " the souls." 
A day or two before setting out for the feast, they 
carried all these souls into one of the largest Cabins 
of the Village, where one portion was hung [201] to 
the poles of the Cabin, and the other portion spread 
out through it; the Captain entertained them, and 
made them a magnificent feast in the name of a de- 
ceased Captain, whose name he bore. I was at this 
feast of souls, and noticed at it four peculiar things. 
First, the presents which the relatives made for the 


288 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

leur fit vn fefiin magnifique au nom d'vn Capitaine 
defunct, dont il porte Ie nom. Ie me trouuay à ce 
fefiin des ames, & y remarquay quatre chofes parti- 
culieres. Premierement, les prefens que faifoient 
les parens pour la fefie qui confifioient en robbes, 
colliers de Pourcelaine, & chaudieres, efioient éten- 
dus fur des perches tout Ie long de la Cabane, de part 
& d'autre. Secondement, Ie Capitaine chanta la chan- 
fon du Capitaine defunct, felon le defir que luy mefme 
auoit témoigné auant fa mort, qu' elle fufi chantée en 
cette occafion. Tiercement, tous les conuiez eurent 
la liberté de fe faire part les vns aux autres de ce 
qu'ils auoient de bon, & mefmes d'en emporter chez 
eux contre la coufiume des fefiins ordinaires. Qua- 
triefmement, à la fin du fefiin pour tout compliment 
à celuy qui les auoit traitez, ils imiterent, comme ils 
difent Ie cry des ames, & fortirent de la Cabane en 
criant Izall, Ital. 
Le maifire du fefiin, & mefme A llcnklzz'oJldic, Capi- 
taine general de tout Ie Païs, nous enuoya inuiter 
plufieurs fois [202] auec beaucoup d'infiance. Vous 
euffiez dit que la fefie n'eufi pas efié bonne fans nous. 
I'y enuoyay deux de nos Peres quelques iours aupara- 
uant pour voir les preparatifs, & fçauoir au vray le 
iour de la fefie. Allcnkkiolldz'c leur fit tres-bon accueil, 
& à leur depart les conduifit luy-mefme à vn quart de 
lieuë de là où efioit la fofíe, & leur monfira auec 
grand témoignage d'affection tout l'appareil de la 
fefie. 
La fefie fe deuoit faire le Samedy de la Pentecofie; 
mais quelques affaires qui furuindrent, & 1 'incertitude 
du temps la fit remettre au Lundy. Les fept ou 
huict iours de deuant la fefie fe pafferent à affem- 


]636] 

LE .IE UNE 'S RELATION, r636 

289 

feast, and which consisted of robes, Porcelain collars, 
and kettles, were strung on poles along the Cabin, on 
both sides. Secondly, the Captain sang the song of 
the deceased Captain, in accordance with the desire 
the latter had expressed, before his death, to have it 
sung on this occasion. Thirdly, all the guests had 
the liberty of sharing with one another whatever 
good things they had, and even of taking these home 
with them, contrary to the usual custom of feasts. 
Fourthly, at the end of the feast, by way of compli- 
ment to him who had entertained them, they imi- 
tated the cry of souls, and went out of the Cabin 
crying hall, hal. 
The master of the feast, and even Anenkhz'olldz'c, 
chief Captain of the whole Country, sent several 
[202] pressing invitations to us. You might have 
said that the feast would not have been a success with- 
out us. I sent two of our Fathers, several days be- 
forehand, to see the preparations and to learn with 
certainty the day of the feast. Anenklu"ondz'c gave 
them a very hearty welcome, and on their departure 
conducted them himself a quarter of a league thence, 
where the pit was, and showed them, with great dem- 
onstrations of regard, all the preparations for the 
feast. 
The feast was to take place on the Saturday of Pen- 
tecost; but some affairs that intervened, and the un- 
certainty of the weather, caused it to be postponed 
until Monday. The seven or eight days before the 
feast were spent in assembling the souls, as well as 
the Strangers who had been invited; meanwhile from 
morning until night the living were continually mak- 
ing presents to the youth, in consideration of the 
dead. On one side the women were shooting with 


290 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

bIer, tant les ames, que les Eftrangers, qui y furent 
inuitez; cependant depuis Ie matin iufques au foir, 
ce n' eftoit que largeffe que faifoient les viuans à la 
ieuneffe en confideration des defuncts. D'vn cofté 
les femmes tiroient de l'arc à qui auroit Ie prix, qui 
eftoit quelque ceinture de Porc-épic, ou quelque col- 
lier, ou chaifne de Pourcelaine; de l'autre cofté en 
plufieurs endroits du Village les ieunes hommes 
tiroient au bafton à qui l'emporteroit. Le prix de 
cette victoire eftoit vne [203] hache, quelques cou- 
fteaux, ou mefme vne robbe de Caftor. De iour à 
autre arriuoient les ames. 11 y a du contentement de 
voir ces conuois, qui font quelquefois de deux & trois 
cens perfonnes; chacun porte fes ames; c'eft à dire, 
fes offemens empacquetez fur fon dos, à la façon que 
i'ay dit, fouz vne belle robbe. Quelques-vns auoient 
accommodé leurs pacquets en figure d'homme ornez 
de colliers de Pourcelaine, auec vne belle guirlande 
de grand poil rouge. A la fortie de leur Village, 
toute la troupe crioit ltaéé, haé, & reïteroient ce cry 
des ames par Ie chemin. Ce cry, difent ils, les fou- 
lage grandement; autrement ce fardeau, quoy que 
d'ames, leur peferoit bien fort fur Ie dos, & leur cau- 
feroit vn mal de cofté pour toute leur vie. IIs vont à 
petites iournées; noftre Village fut trois iours à faire 
quatre lieuës, & à aller à O.JJo.JJallé, que nous appellons 
la Rochelle, où fe deuoient faire toutes les ceremo- 
nies. Auffi-toft qu'ils arriuent aupres de quelque 
Village, ils crient encor leur haéé, haé: Tout Ie Vil- 
lage leur vient au deuant, il fe fait encor à cette oc- 
cafion force largeffes. Chacun a fon rendez vous 
dans quelqu'vne des [204] Cabanes, tous fçauent où 
ils doiuent loger leurs ames; eel a fe fait fans confu- 


1636] 

LE .I E UNE'S RELATION, I636 

291 

the bow for a prize,- a Porcupine girdle, or a collar 
or string of Porcelain beads; elsewhere in the Vil- 
lage, the young men were shooting at a stick to see 
who could hit it. The prize for this victory was an 
[ 20 3] axe, some knives, or even a Beaver robe. From 
day to day the souls arrived. It is very interesting 
to see these processions, sometimes of two or three 
hundred persons; each one brings his souls, that is, 
his bones, done up in parcels on his back, under a 
handsome robe, in the way I have described. Some 
had arranged their parcels in the form of a man, or- 
namented with Porcelain collars, and elegant bands 
of long red fur. On setting out from the Village, 
the whole band cried out hall, hal, and repeated this 
cry of the souls by the way. This cry they say re- 
lieves them greatly; otherwise the burden, although 
of souls, would weigh very heavily on their backs, 
and cause them a backache all the rest of their lives. 
They go short journeys; our Village was three days 
in going four leagues to reach Ossossallé, which we 
callla Rochelle, where the ceremonies were to take 
place. As soon as they arrive near a Village they 
cry again hall, hal. The whole Vil1age comes to 
meet them; plenty of gifts are given on such an oc- 
casion. Each has his rendezvous in one of the [ 20 4J 
Cabins, all know where they are to lodge their souls, 
so it is done without confusion. At the same time, 
the Captains hold a Council, to discuss how long the 
band shall sojourn in the Village. 
All the souls of eight or nine Villages had reached 
la Rochelle by the Saturday of Pentecost; but the 
fear of bad weather compelled them, as I have said, 
to postpone the ceremony until 1vlonday. \Ve were 
lodged a quarter of a league away, at the old Vil- 


292 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

fion. En mefme temps les Capitaines tiennent Con- 
feil pour deliberer combiê de temps la troupe feiour- 
nera dans Ie Village. 
Toutes les ames de huict ou neuf Villages, s'e- 
ftoient rend us à la Rochelle dés Ie Samedy de la 
Pentecofte; mais la crainte du mauuais temps obli- 
gea, comme i'ay dit, de remettre la ceremonie au 
Lundy. N ous eftions logez à vn quart de lieuë de 
là, au vieux Village dans vne Cabane, où i1 y auoit 
bien cent ames penduës & attachées à des perches, 
dont quelques vnes fentoient vn peu plus fort que Ie 
m ufq. 
Le Lundy fur le midy, on vint auertir qu'on fe 
tinft preft, qu'on alloit commencer la ceremonie; on 
détache en mefme temps ces pacquets d'ames, les pa- 
rens les déueloppent derechef pour dire les derniers 
adieux; les pleurs recommencerent de nouueau. 
I'admiray la tendreffe d'vne femme enuers fon pere, 
& fes enfans; elle eft fille d'vn Capitaine, qui eft mort 
fort âgé, & a efté autrefois fort cõfiderable dãs Ie 
Païs; elle luy peignoit fa cheuelure elle manioit fes 
os les vns apres les autres, auec la mefme affectiõ que 
fi elle luy euft voulu [205] rendre la vie; elle luy mit 
aupres de luy fon Atfatone
ai, c'eft à dire fon pacquet 
de buchettes de Confeil, qui font tous les liures & 
papiers du PaÏs. Pour fes petits enfans elle leur mit 
des braffelets de Pourcelaine & de raffade aux bras, & 
baigna leurs os de fes larmes; on ne l'en pouuoit 
quafi feparer, mais on preffoit, & il fallut incontinent 
partir. Celuy qui portoit Ie corps de ce vieux Capi- 
taine marchoit à la tefte, les hommes fuiuoient, & 
puis les femmes, ils marchoient en cét ordre, iufques 
à ce qu'i1s arriuerent à la foffe. 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, I636 

293 

lage, in a Cabin where there were fully a hundred 
souls hung to and fixed upon the poles, some of which 
smelled a little stronger than musk. 
On Monday, about noon, they came to inform us 
that we should hold ourselves in readiness, for they 
were going to begin the ceremony; they took down 
at the same time, the packages of souls; and the rel- 
atives again unfolded them to say their 1ast adieus; 
the tears flowed afresh. I admired the tenderness 
of one woman toward her father and children; she is 
the daughter of a Chief who died at an advanced age, 
and was once very influential in the Country; she 
combed his hair and handled his bones, one after the 
other, with as much affection as if she would have 
desired [205] to restore life to him; she put beside 
him his A tsatonewai, that is, his package of Council 
sticks, which are all the books and papers of the 
Country. As for her little children, she put on their 
arms bracelets of Porcelain and glass beads, and 
bathed their bones with her tears; they could scarce- 
ly tear her away from these, but they insisted, and it 
was necessary to depart immediately. The one who 
bore the body of this old Captain walked at the head; 
the men followed, and then the women, walking in 
this order until they reached the pit. 
Let me describe the arrangement of this place. It 
was about the size of the place Royale at Paris. 
There was in the middle of it a great pit, about ten 
feet deep and five brasses wide. All around it was 
a scaffold, a sort of staging very well made, nine to 
ten brasses in width, and from nine to ten feet high; 
above this staging there were a number of poles laid 
across, and well arranged, with cross-poles to which 
these packages of souls were hung and bound. The 


294 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

V oicy la difpofition de cette place, elle efioit enui- 
ron de la grandeur de la place Royale à Paris. II y 
auoit au milieu vne grande foffe d'enuiron dix pieds 
de profondeur, & cinq braffes de diametre; tout au- 
tour vn échaffaut & vne efpece de theatre, affez 
bien fait de neuf à dix braffes de diamettre, & 
de dix a neuf pieds de hauteur; au deffus du 
theatre il y auoit quantité de perches dreffées, & bien 
arrangées, & d'autres en trauers pour y pendre, & 
attacher tous ces pacquets d'ames. Les corps en tiers 
comme ils deuoient eftre mis au fond de la foffe 
eftoiët [206J dés Ie iour precedent fouz l'échaffaut, 
étendus fur des écorces, ou des nattes dreffées fur des 
pieux de la hauteur d'vn homme aux enuirons de 
la foffe. 
Tout la Compagnie arriua auec fes corps enuiron 
à vne heure apres Midy, & fe departirept en diuers 
cantons, felon les familIes & les Villages, & déchar- 
gerent à terre leurs paquets d'ames à peu prés 
comme on fait les pots de terre à ces Foires de Vil- 
lages: ils déployerent auffi leurs pacquets de robbes, 
& tous les prefens qu'i1s auoiët apporté, & les éten- 
dirët fur des perches, qui eftoient de 5. à 600. toifes 
d'étenduë; auffi y auoit i1 iufques à douze cens pre- 
fens qui demeurerent ainfi en parade deux bonnes 
heures, pour donner loifir aux Eftrangers de voir 1es 
richeffes & la magnificence du PaÏs. Ie ne trouuay 
pas que la Compagnie fuft grãde comme ie m'eftois 
figuré: s'il y auoit deux mille perfonnes c'eftoit quafi 
tout. Enuiron les trois heures chacun ferra fes 
pieces, & pEa fes robbes. 
Sur ces entrefaites chaque Capitaine par ordre 
donna Ie fignal, & tout incontinent chargez de leurs 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELATION, z636 

295 

whole bodies, as they were to be put in the bottom 
of the pit, had been [206] the preceding day placed 
under the scaffold, stretched upon bark or mats fas- 
tened to stakes about the height of a man, on the bor- 
ders of the pit. 
The whole Company arrived with their corpses 
about an hour after Midday, and divided thelTIselves 
into different cantons, according to their families and 
Villages, and laid on the ground their parcels of 
souls, almost as they do earthen pots at the Village 
Fairs. They unfolded also their parcels of robes, 
and all the presents they had brought, and hung 
them upon poles, which were from 5 to 600 toises in 
extent; so there were as many as twelve hundred 
presents which remained thus on exhibition two full 
hours, to give Strangers time to see the wealth and 
magnificence of the Country. I did not find the 
Company so numerous as I had expected; if there 
were two thousand persons, that was about all. 
About three o'clock, each one put away his various 
articles, and folded up his robes. 
Meanwhile, each Captain by command gave the 
signal; and all, at once, loaded with their packages 
of souls, running as if to the assault of a town, as- 
cended [207] the Stage by means of ladders hung all 
round it, and hung them to the cross poles, each Vil- 
lage having its own department. That done, all the 
ladders were taken away; but a few Chiefs remained 
there and spent the rest of the afternoon, until seven 
o'clock, in announcing the presents which were made 
in the name of the dead to certain specified persons. 
" This," said they, " is what such and such a dead 
man gives to such and such a relative." About five 
or six o'clock, they lined the bottom and sides of the 


296 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

paquets d'ame[s] courans comme à l'affaut d'vne vilIe, 
monterent [207] fur ce Theatre à la faueur des échelles 
qui eftoient tout aut our , & les pendirent aux perches: 
chaque Village y auoit fon departement. Cela fait, 
on ofta toutes les échelIes, & quelques Capitaines y 
demeurerent, & pafferent tout Ie refte de l'aprefdinée 
iufques à fept heures à publier des prefens qu'ils fai- 
foient au nom des defuncts à quelques perfonnes par- 
ticulieres. 
Voila, difoient ils, ce qu'vn tel defunct donne à vn 
tel fon parent. Enuiron les cinq à fix heures ils pa- 
uerent Ie fond de la foffe, & la borderet de belles 
grãdes robes neufues de dix Caftors, en telle façon 
qu'elles s'eftendoient plus d'vn pied au dehors de la 
foffe. Comme ils preparoient les robbes qui deuoient 
efire employées à cét vfage, quelques-vns defcendi- 
rent au fond, & en apporterent leurs mains pleines 
de fable: ie m'enquis que vouloit dire cette ceremo- 
nie, & appris qu'i1s ont cette creance que ce fable les 
rend heureux au ieu. De ces douze cens prefents, 
qui auoient efté étallez fur la place, quarante-huit 
robbes feruirent à pauer & border la foffe, & chaque 
corps entier, outre la robbe dont il eftoit enueloppé, 
[208] en auoit encor vne, & quelques-vns iufques à 
deux, dont ils furent couuerts. V oila tout; de forte 
que ie ne penfe pas que chaque corps eufi la fienne, 
l'vn portant l'autre, qui eft bien Ie moins qu'il peuft 
auoir pour fa fepulture; car ce que font les draps & 
les linceux en France, font icy les robbes de Cafior. 
Mais que deuient done Ie refte, ie Ie diray tout main- 
tenant. 
Sur les fept heures ils defcendoient les corps en- 
tiers dans la foffe: nous eufmes toutes les peines du 


1636J 

LE JE UNE , S RELA TIOIV, I636 

297 

pit with fine large new robes, each of ten Beaver 
skins, in such a way that they extended more than a 
foot out of it. As they were preparing the robes 
which were to be employed for this purpose, some 
went down to the bottom and brought up handfuls 
of sand. I asked what this ceremony meant, and 
learned that they have a belief that this sand renders 
them successful at play. Of those twelve hundred 
presents that had been displayed, forty-eight robes 
served to line the bottom and sides of the pit; and 
each entire body, besides the robe in which it had 
been enveloped, [208] had another one, and some- 
times even two more, to cover it. That was all; so 
that I do not think each body had its own robe, one 
with another, which is surely the least it can have in 
its burial; for what winding sheets and shrouds are 
in France, Beaver robes are here. But what becomes 
then of the remainder? I will explain, in a moment. 
At seven o'clock, they let down the whole bodies 
into the pit. We had the greatest difficulty in get- 
ting near; nothing has ever better pictured for me 
the confusion there is among the damned. On all 
sides you could have seen them letting down half- 
decayed bodies; and on all sides was heard a hor- 
rible din of confused voices of persons, who spoke 
and did not listen; ten or twelve were in the pit and 
were arranging the bodies all around it, one after an- 
other. They put in the very middle of the pit three 
large kettles, which could only be of use for souls; 
one had a hole through it, another had no handle, 
and the third was of scarcely more value. I saw 
very few Porcelain collars; it is true, they [209] put 
many on the bodies. This is all that was done on 
this day. 


298 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

monde d' en aborder; iamais rien ne ill' a mieux figuré 
la confufion qui eft parm y les damnez. V ous euffiez 
veu décharger de tous coftez des corps à demy pour- 
ris, & de tous coftez on entendoit vn horrible tinta- 
marre de voix confufes de perfonnes qui parloient & 
ne s'entendoient pas: dix ou douze eftoient en la foffe 
& les arrangeoient tout autour les vns aupres les 
autres. Ils mirent tout au beau milieu trois grandes 
chaudieres qui n'eftoient bonnes que pour Ies ames; 
l'vne eftoit percée, l'autre n,'auoit point d'anfe, & la 
troifiéme ne valloit gueres mieux: i'y vis fort peu de 
col1iers de Pourcelaine; il eft vray qu'ils [ 20 9] en 
nlettent beaucoup dans les corps. Voila tout ce qui 
fe fit cette iournée. 
Tout Ie monde paffa la nuit fur la place, ils alIu- 
merent force feux, & firent chaudiere. N ous autres 
nous nous retirafmes au vieux Village auec refolution 
de retourner Ie lendemain au poinct du iour qu'ils 
deuoient ietter les os dans Ia foffe; mais nous ne 
peufmes quafi arriuer affez à temps, nonobftant toute 
la diligence que nous apportafmes, à raifon d'vn acci- 
dent qui arriua. Vne de ces ames qui n'eftoit pas 
bien attachée, ou peut eftre trop pefante pour la corde 
qui la portoit, tomba d'elle mefme en la foffe: ce 
bruit éueilla la Compagnie, qui courut & monta in- 
continent à Ia foule fur l' échaffaut, & vuida fans 
ordre chaque paquet dans la foffe, referuant neant- 
moins les robbes defquelles e1les eftoient enuelop- 
pées. Nous fortions pour lors du Village, mais le 
bruit eftoit fi grand, qu'il nous fembloit quafi que 
nous y eftions. Approchans nous vifmes tout à fait 
vne image de l' Enfer: cette grande place eftoit toute 
remplie de feu x & de Hammes, & l'air retentiffoit de 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I636 

299 

All the people passed the night on the spot; they 
lighted many fires, and slung their kettles. We 
withdrew for the night to the old Village, with the 
resolve to return the next morning, at daybreak, 
when they were to throw the bones into the pit; but 
we could hardly arrive in time, although we made 
great haste, on account of an accident that happened. 
One of the souls, which was not securely tied, or was 
perhaps too heavy for the cord that fastened it, fell 
of itself into the pit; the noise awakened the Com- 
pany, who immediately ran and mounted in a crowd 
upon the scaffold, and emptied indiscriminately each 
package into the pit, keeping, however, the robes in 
which they were enveloped. vVe had only set out 
from the Village at that time. but the noise was so 
great that it seemed almost as if we were there. As 
we drew near, we saw nothing less than a picture of 
Hell. The large space was quite full of fires and 
flames, and the air resounded in all directions with 
the confused voices of these Barbarians; the noise 
ceased, however, [210] for some time, and they be- 
gan to sing,- but in voices so sorrowful and lugu- 
brious that it represented to us the horrible sadness 
and the abyss of despair into which these unhappy 
souls are forever plunged. 
N early all the souls were thrown in when we ar- 
rived, for it was done almost in the turning of a 
hand; each one had made haste, thinking there 
would not be room enough for all the souls; we saw, 
however, enough of it to judge of the rest. There 
were five or six in the pit, arranging the bones with 
poles. The pit was full, within about two feet; they 
turned back over the bones the robes which bordered 
the edge of the pit, and covered the remaining space 


300 

LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

toutes parts des voix confufes de ces Barbares: ce 
bruit neantmoins ceffa [210] pour quelque temps, & 
fe mirent à chanter, mais d'vn ton fi lamentable & fi 
lugubre, qu'il nous reprefentoit l'horrible trifieffe & 
l'abyfme du defefpoir, dans lequel font plongées pour 
iamais ces ames malheureufes. 
Tout efioit prefque ietté quand nous arriuafmes, 
car cela fe fit quafi en vn tour de main; chact1n 
s'efioit preffé, croyant qu'il n'y eufi pas affez de 
place pour toutes ces ames; nous en vifmes neant- 
moins encore affez pour iuger du refie. Ils efioient 
cinq ou fix dans la foffe auec des perches à arrãger 
ces os. La foffe fut pleine à deux pieds prés: ils 
renuerferent par deffus les robbes qui la débordoient 
tout autour, & couurirent tout Ie refie de nattes, & 
d' écorces. Pour la foffe ils la comblerent de fable, 
de perches, & de pieux de bois qu'ils y ietterent fans 
ordre. Quelques femmes yapporterêt quelques plats 
de bled, & Ie mefme iour & les fuiuants plufieurs 
Cabanes du Village en fournirent des manes [ma- 
nets?] toutes pleines qui furent iettées fur la foffe. 
Nous auons quinze ou vingt Chrefiiens enterrez 
auec ces Infideles, nous difmes pour leurs ames vn 
De projimdis: auec vne [2 I I] ferme efperance, que fi 
la diuine bonté n'arrefie Ie cours de fes benedictions 
fur ces Peuples, cette fefie ne fe fera plus, ou ne fera 
que pour les Chrefiiens, & fe fera auec des ceremo- 
nies auffi fainctes, que celles-là font foUes & inutiles; 
auffi commencent-elles à leur efire à charge, pour les 
excez & dépenfes fuperfluës qui s'y font. 
Toute la matinée fe paffa en largeffes; & la plus- 
part des robbes, dans lefquelles auoient efié toutes 
ces ames, furent coupées par pieces, & iettées du haut 


1636] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I636 

301 

with mats and bark. Then they heaped the pit with 
sand, poles, and wooden stak es, which they threw in 
without order. Some women brought to it some dishes 
of corn; and that day, and the following days, sev- 
eral Cabins of the Village provided nets quite full of 
it, which were thrown upon the pit. 
We have fifteen or twenty Christians interred with 
these Infidels; we said for their souls a De profundis, 
with a [211] strong hope that, if divine goodness 
does not stop the course of its blessings upon these 
Peoples, this feast will cease, or will only be for 
Christians, and will take place with ceremonies as 
sacred as the ones we saw are foolish and useless; 
they are even now beginning to be a burden to them, 
on account of the excesses and superfluous expenses 
connected with them. 
The whole morning was passed in giving presents; 
and the greater part of the robes in which the souls 
had been wrapped were cut into pieces, and thrown 
from the height of the Stage into the midst of the 
crowd, for anyone who could get them; it was very 
amusing when two or three got hold of a Beaver 
skin, since, as none of them would give way, it had 
to be cut into so many pieces, and thus they found 
themselves almost empty-handed, for the fragment 
was scarcely worth the picking up. In this connec- 
tion, I admired the ingenuity of one Savage,- he 
did not put himself to any trouble to run after these 
flying pieces, but, as there had been nothing so valu- 
able in this Country, this year, as Tobacco, he kept 
some pieces of it in his hands which he immediately 
offered to those who were disputing over a skin, and 
[212] thus settled the matter to his own advantage. 
Before going away from the place, we learned that, 


302 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

du Theatre au milieu de l'affemblée à qui les empor- 
teroit: c' efioit vn plaifir quand ils fe trouuoient deux 
ou trois fur vne peau de Cafior; car pour s'accorder 
il falloit la couper en autant de pieces; & ainfi ils fe 
trouuoient quafi les mains vuides, car ce lambeau ne 
valloit pas quafi Ie ramaffer. I'admiray icy l'indufirie 
d'vn Sauuage, il ne fe preffoit pas bien fort pour 
courir apres ces pieces volantes; mais comme il n'y 
a rien eu de fi precieux cette année dans Ie Païs que 
Ie Petun, il en tenoit quelque morceau dans fes 
mains, qu'il prefentoit incontinent à ceux qui difpu- 
toient à qui auroit la peau, & en [212] conuenoit ainfi 
à fon profit. 
Auant que de fortir de la place, nous apprimes que 
la nuict qu'on auoit fait des prefens aux Nations 
efirangeres de la part du maifire du fefiin, on nous 
auoit auffi nommez; & de fait comme nous nous en 
allions Anenkltiondic, nous vint prefenter vne robbe 
neufue de dix Cafiors, en confideration du collier, 
dont ie leur auois fait prefent en plain Confeil, pour 
leur faire Ie chemin du ciel. I1[s] s'efioient trouuez fi 
fort obligez de ce prefent, qu'ils en auoient voulu té- 
moigner quelque recognoiffance en vne fi belle affem- 
blée. Ie ne l'acceptay pas neantmoins, luy difant, 
que comme nous ne leur auions fait ce prefent, que 
pour les porter à embraffer nofire foy, ils ne nous 
pouuoient obliger dauantage qu'en nous écoutant vo- 
lontiers, & en croyant en celuy qui a tout fait. II me 
demãda ce que ie defirois done qu'il fift de la rob be; 
Ie luy répondis qu'il en difpofafi comme bon luy fem- 
bleroit, dequoy il demeura parfaitement fatisfaict. 
Pour Ie refie des douze cens prefens, quarante huict 
robbes furent employées à parer la foffe. Chaque 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I6þ 

303 

during the night, when they had made presents to 
outside Nations on behalf of the master of the feast, 
our names had been mentioned. And indeed, as we 
were going away, Anenkhz"ondz"c came to present to us 
a new robe of ten Beaver skins, in return for the col- 
lar that I had given them as a present in open Coun- 
cil, to open for them the way to heaven. They had 
felt themselves under such obligations for this gift 
that they desired to show some gratitude for it in so 
great an assembly. I did not accept it, however, 
telling him that, as we had only made this present 
to lead them to embrace our faith, they could not 
render us greater service than by listening to us 
willingly, and believing in him who made all things. 
He asked me then what I desired he should do with 
the robe; I replied that he might dispose of it as 
seemed good to him, whereat he remained perfectly 
satisfied. 
As to the rest of the twelve hundred presents, forty- 
eight robes were used in adorning the pit. Each 
whole body had [213] its robe, and some had two or 
three. Twenty were given to the master of the feast, 
to thank the Nations which had taken part therein. 
The dead distributed a number of them, by the hands 
of the Captains, to their living friends; some served 
only for show, and were taken away by those who 
had exhibited them. The Old Men and the notables 
of the Country, who had the administration and 
management of the feast, took possession secretly of 
a considerable quantity; and the rest was cut in 
pieces, as I have said, and ostentatiously thrown into 
the midst of the crowd. However, it is only the rich 
who lose nothing, or very little, in this feast. The 
middle classes and the poor bring and leave there 


304 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[V OL. 10 

corps entier emporta [213] fa robbe, & quelques-vns 
deux & trois. On en donna vingt au maiftre du 
feftin pour remercier les Nations qui auoient affifté à 
la fefte. Les defuncts en diftribuerent quantité, par 
les mains des Capitaines, à leurs amis viuans. Vne 
partie ne feruit que de parade, & fut retiré de ceux 
qui les auoient expofées. Les Anciens, & les groffes 
teftes du Pais, qui en auoient l'adminiftration & Ie 
maniment, en tirerent auffi fouz-main vne affez bonne 
quantité, & Ie refte fut coupé en pieces, comme i'ay 
dit, & ietté par magnificence au milieu de l'affem- 
blée. Cependant il n'ya que les riches qui ne per- 
dent rien, ou fort peu, à cette fefte. Les medions, 
& les pauures y apportent, & y laiffent ce qu'ils 
auoient de plus precieux, & fouffrent beaucoup pour 
ne point paroiftre moins que les autres en cette cele- 
brité. Tout Ie monde fe picque d'honneur. 
Au refte i1 ne s'en eft prefque rien fallu, que nous 
n'ayons auffi efté de la fefte: dés cét Hyuer Ie Capi- 
taine Aellolls, dont i'ay par1é cy-deuant, nous en vint 
faire ouuerture de la part des Anciens de tout le 
Pais. Pour lors la chaudiere n'eftoit pas [214] encor 
diuifée. II nous propofa done, fi nous ferions con- 
tens de leuer les corps des deux François, qui font 
morts en ce Pais, fçauoir eft de Guillaume Chau- 
dron, & Eftiêne Brufié, qui fut tué il y a quatre ans, 
& que leurs os fuffent mis dãs la foffe commune de 
leurs morts. Nous luy répondifmes d'abord, que cela 
ne fe pouuoit faire; que cela nous eftoit defendu, que 
comme ils auoient efté baptifez, & eftoiêt comme 
nous efperions dans Ie ciel, nous refpections trop 
leurs os pour permettre qu'ils fuffent mefiez auec les 
os de ceux qui n' ont point efté baptifez; & puis que 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELATIOJ.V, r636 

305 

whatever they have most valuable, and suffer much, 
in order not to appear less liberal than the others in 
this celebration. Everyone makes it a point of 
honor. 
Let me add that we narrowly escaped not being 
present at the feast. During this Winter the Cap- 
tain Aenons, of whom I have spoken before, came to 
us to make an overture on behalf of the Old Men of 
the whole Country. At that time, the kettle was not 
[z 14] yet divided. They asked, therefore, if we 
would be satisfied to raise the bodies of our two 
Frenchmen who died in this part of the Country, 
Guillaume Chaudron, and Estienne Bruslé, who was 
killed four years ago, that their bones might be put 
in the common grave with their dead. We answered, 
first of all, that that could not be, that it was forbid- 
den to us; that, as they had been baptized and were, 
as we hoped, in heaven, we respected their bones too 
much to permit them being mingled with the bones 
of those who had not been baptized; and, besides, 
that it was not our custom to raise the bodies. 
We added, nevertheless, that as they were interred 
in the woods, and as they desired it so much, we 
would be pleased to raise their bones if they would 
grant us permission to put them into a private grave, 
along with the bones of all those we had baptized in 
the Country. 
Four principal reasons induced us to give this an- 
swer. I. As it is the greatest pledge of friendship 
and alliance they have in the Country, we [zI5] were 
already granting to them on this point what they 
wished, and were making it appear thereby that we 
desired to love them as our brothers, and to live and 
die with them. 2. We hoped that God would be 


306 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

ce n'efioit pas nofire coufiume de releuer les corps. 
N ous adioufiafmes neantmoins apres tout cela, que 
comme ils efioient enterrez dans les bois, & puis 
qu'ils Ie defiroiêt fi fort, nous ferions contens de leuer 
leurs os, à condition qu'ils nous accordaffent de les 
mettre en vne foffe particuliere auec les os de tous 
ceux que nous auions baptifez dans Ie Pais. 
Quatre raifons principales nous porterent à leur 
faire cette réponfe. 1. Comme c'efi Ie plus grand 
témoignage d'amitié & d'alliance qu'ils ayent dans Ie 
Pars, nous [2 I 5] leur accordions déja en ce point ce 
qu'ils fouhaittoient, & faifions paroifire par là, que 
nous defirions les aymer comme nos freres, & viure 
& mourir auec eux. 2. Nous efperions que Dieu 
en feroit glorifié, principalement, en ce que feparant 
par l'aueu de tout Ie Pais les corps des Chrefiiens, 
d'auec les corps des Infideles, il n'eufi pas efié diffi- 
cile par apres d'obtenir des particuliers que leurs 
Chrefiiens fuffent enterrez en vn Cimetiere à part, 
que nous benirions pour cét effect. 3. Nous preten- 
dions les enterrer auec toutes les ceremonies de l'E- 
glife. 4. Les Anciens de leur pro pre mouuement 
defiroient que nous y fiffions drefIer vne belle & ma- 
gnifique Croix, comme ils nous témoignerent par 
apres plus particulierement. Ainfi la Croix eufi efié 
authorifée de tout Ie Pais, & honorée en cette Barba- 
rie, & ils n'euffent eu garde par apres de luy impu- 
ter, comme ils ont fait par Ie paffé, les malheurs qui 
leur arriueroient. 
Ce Capitaine trouua nofire propofition fort raifon- 
nable, & les Anciens du Pais en demeure rent fort con 
tens. Quelque temps apres la chaudiere fut diuifée, 
& [216] comme i'ay dit, cinq Villages de cette pointe 


1636] 

LE JEUNES RELA TION, I636 

307 

glorified thereby,-mainly in this, that, in thus sep- 
arating, with the consent of the whole Country, the 
bodies of Christians from those of Unbelievers, it 
would not have been difficult afterwards to obtain 
from private persons that their Christians should be 
interred in a Cemetery apart, which we would con- 
secrate for that purpose. 3. We were intending to 
inter them with all the ceremonies of the Church. 
4. The Elders, of their own accord, wished us to 
erect a beautiful and magnificent Cross, as they stated 
afterwards more particularly. Thus the Cross would 
have been authorized by the whole Country, and 
honored in the midst of this Barbarism, and they 
would not have taken pains thereafter to impute to 
it, as they have done in the past, the misfortunes that 
might overtake them. 
This Chief found our proposition very reasonable, 
and the Elders of the Country seemed to be pleased 
with it. Some time after, the kettle was divided, 
and, [216] as I have said, five Villages of the part 
where we are, resolved to have their feast by them- 
selves. 
In the Spring, a general Assembly of the Notables 
of the whole Country took place, to consider every- 
thing connected with this feast, to endeavor to heal 
this schism, and to reunite the kettle. The disaffected 
ones were there, and I was invited also. The same 
proposition was made to me; I replied that we would 
be quite satisfied provided the conditions we had 
asked should be fulfilled. They referred to the di vi- 
sion of the kettle, and asked me,- since there were 
two kettles, that is, two pits,-with which did I de- 
sire our private grave to be. To this I answ
red, in 
order not to offend anyone, that I referred the mat- 


308 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

où nouS fommes, fe refolurent de faire leur fefte à 
part. 
Au Printemps il fe fit vne Affemblée generale des 
Notables de tout Ie Païs, pour aduifer à tout ce qui 
concernoit cette fefte, & pour tafcher d'ofter ce 
fchifme, & reünir la chaudiere. Ces efprits mécon- 
tens s'y trouuerent: i'y fus auffi inuité; on me fit la 
mefme propofition: ie refpondis que nous en ferions 
tres-contents, pourueu que cela fe fift auec les condi- 
tions que nous auions demandé. On me fit inftance 
fur la diuifion de la chaudiere, & me demanc1erent, 
puis qu'il y auoit deux chaudieres, c'eft à dire deux 
foffes, de quel cofté ie defirois que fuft noitre foffe 
particuliere. A cela ie leur fis refponfe, pour n'offen- 
fer perfonne, que ie remettois la chofe à leur iuge- 
ment, qu'ils eftoient bons & fages, qu'i1s yaduifaíIent 
entre eux. Le Maiftre du feftin de la Rochelle dit là 
deíIus par condefcendance, que pour luy il n'y pre- 
tendoit rien, & qu'il efioit content que l'autre, qui 
ei1le Chef de cette pointe, euft de fon cofté les corps 
de nos deux Francois. Cetui-cy refpondit qu'il ne pre- 
tendoit rien à celuy qui auoit [217] efté enterré à la 
Rochelle; mais que pour Ie corps d'Eftienne Brui1é i1 
luy appartenoit, que c'eftoit luy qui l'auoit embarqué 
& emmené en ce Païs: ainfi voila les corps diui- 
fez l'vn d'vn cofté, l'autre de l'autre. Là deíIus quel- 
qu'vn dit fous main, qu'en effet il auoit droit de de- 
mander Ie corps d'Eftienne Brui1é, & qu'il eftoit bien 
raifonnable qu'ils rendiíIent quelque honneur à fes 
os, puis qu'ils l'auoient tué. Cecy ne fe peût dire fi 
fecrettement, que ce Capitaine n' en euft Ie vent; il 
difÜmula neantmoins fur l'heure fes fentimens. Apres 
Ie Confeil, comme nous eftions déja fortis, il releua 


1636] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TIG1\!, /63 6 

309 

ter to their judgment; that they were good and wise, 
and could talk over the affair among themselves. 
The 1vlaster of the feast of la Rochelle then said, 
condescendingly, that, so far as he was concerned, 
he claimed nothing; that he was perfectly satisfied 
that the other, who is the Chief at this place, should 
have on his side the bodies of our two Frenchmen. 
The other replied that he laid no claim to him who 
had [ 21 7] been buried at la Rochelle; but, as for the 
body of Estienne Bruslé it belonged to him, since he 
had embarked him and brought him into the Coun- 
try; and thus the bodies were divided, one on one 
side, one on the other. Thereupon some one said, 
in an undertone, that he was quite right in asking 
the body of Estienne Bruslé,- that it was very rea- 
sonable that they should render honor to his bones, 
since they had killed him. This was not said so dis- 
creetly as not to be heard by the Captain; he dis- 
sembled his feelings, however, for the time being. 
After the Council, when we had left, he took notice 
of the reproach, and had very high words with the 
Captain of la Rochelle; and finally ceased to lay any 
claim to the body of Bruslé, in order not to irritate 
and reopen this wound, from which those of this part 
have not yet purged themselves. 
This made us also deem it best, with those of la 
Rochelle, not to touch either the one or the other. 
Truly there is reason here to admire the secret judg- 
ments of God; for that infamous wretch did not de- 
serve to have this honor shown him; and, to tell the 
truth, we would have had [218] much difficulty in 
resolving to make on this occasion a private Grave, 
and in transporting to consecrated Ground a dead 
man that had lived so scandalous a life in the Coun- 


310 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

cette reproche, & fe prit bien fort de parole auec Ie 
Capitaine de la Rochelle; & en fin fe deporta entiere- 
ment du corps de Bruf1é, pour ne point aigrir & en- 
fanglanter dauantage cette playe, de laquelle ceux 
de cette pointe n' ont peu encor fe purger. 
Ce qui nous fit auffi refoudre à faire trouuer bon à 
ceux de la Rochelle, que nous ne touchaffions ny à 
l'vn, ny à l'autre. Veritablement i1 y a dequoy ad- 
mirer icy les fecrets iugemens de Dieu; car cét in- 
fame auffi bien ne meritoit pas cét honneur; & pour 
dire le vray nous euffions eu [2 I8J afIez de peine à 
nous refoudre de faire à fon occafion vn Cimetiere 
particulier, & de tranf porter en Terre faincte vn 
corps qui a mené vne vie fi fcandaleufe dans le Pais, 
& donné aux Sauuages vne fi mauuaife impreffion des 
mæurs des François. D'abord quelques-vns trou- 
uerent mauuais que nous en demeuraffions là, & s'en 
offenferent, nous alleguant que cela efiant, ils ne 
pourroient pas fe vanter, comme ils efperoient, aupres 
des Peuples efirangers d' efire parens des François; 
autrement qu'on leur pourroit dire qu'il n'y auoit 
gueres d'apparence, puis que nous n'auons voulu 
mettre les os des nofires auec les leur[s]: par apres 
neantmoins ayant ouy toutes nos raifons, ils iugerent 
que nous faifions prudemment, & que c'efioit Ie vray 
moyen de nous maintenir en amitié les vns auec les 
autres. 
Finiray-ie la prefente par cette ceremonie funebre? 
Ouy, puis qu'elle efi vne marque afIez claire de l'efpe- 
ranee d'vne vie future, que la nature femble nous four- 
nir dans l'efprit de ces Peuples, comme vn moyen 
tres-propre à leur faire goufier les promefIes de 
Iefus-Chrifi. N'y a-t'il pas occafion d'efperer qu'ils 


1636] 

LE .I E UNE'S RELA TION, r636 

311 

try, and had given to the Savages so bad an impres- 
sion of the morals of the French. At first, some felt 
annoyed that we did not join in the feast, and were 
offended,-saying to us that our action prevented 
them from boasting, as they had hoped, to strange 
Tribes that they were relations of the French; and 
they were afraid they would say that the friendship 
was only in appearance, since we had not allowed the 
bones of our Frenchmen to mingle with theirs. Af- 
terward, however, when they had heard all our rea- 
sons, they thought we had acted prudently, and that 
it was the true way to maintain friendship with both 
parties. 
Shall I finish the present letter with this funeral 
ceremony ? Yes, since it is a very clear token of the 
hope of a future life that nature herself seems to fur- 
nish us in the minds of these Tribes, as a most fitting 
means to get them to taste the promises of Jesus 
Christ. Is there not reason to hope that they will do 
so, [ 21 9] and as soon as possible? Of a truth, I dare 
indeed affirm that, judging from present appearances, 
we have grounds for strengthening our courage, and 
saying about our Hurons what saint Paul wrote to 
the Philippians, C01Zfidells hoc zþsu 111 , quia qui cæpit in 
vobis opus bOllum, per ficiet usque in diem Christi Jesu. 
These poor people open their ears to what we say to 
them about the Kingdom of Heaven; they find it 
very reasonable, and dare not contradict it; they fear 
the judgments of God in a future life; they are be- 
ginning to have recourse with us to his goodness in 
their necessities, and Our Lord seems to favor them, 
at times, with some special assistance. They pro- 
cure Baptism for those whom they see in danger of 
death; they give us their children to be instructed, 


312 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

Ie ferront, [219J & au plufiofi. Certes i'oferay bien 
affeurer que eû égard à ce qui paroifi, nous auons 
dequoy fortifier nos courages, & dire fur nos Hurons 
ce que fainct Paul efcriuoit aux Philippiens: C01zfi- 
dens hoc zp.fum, quia qui cæpit Í1z 'vobis opus bonum, per- 
ficiet 'lifque in diem Cllrijli Ie.fu. Ces pauures gens 
ouurent les oreilles à ce que nous leur difons du Roy- 
aume du Ciel, ils Ie trouuent fort raifonnable, & 
n' ofent y contredire: ils apprehendent les iugemens 
de Dieu en l' autre vie, ils commencent à auoir recours 
auec nous à fa bonté en leurs neceffitez; & N oftre Sei- 
gneur femble les y fauorifer par fois de quelque 
affifiance particuliere. lIs procurent Ie Baptefme à 
ceux qu'ils voyent en danger de mort: ils nous don- 
nent leurs enfans pour efire infiruits, iufques à per- 
mettre qu'ils faffent les trois cens lieuës à cét effet, 
nonobfiant les tendres affections qu'ils ont pour eux; 
ils fe promettent de les fuiure vn iour, & nous témoi- 
gnent qu'ils ne nous donneroient pas des gages fi pre- 
cieux, s'ils n'auoient enuie de nous tenir parole. 
V ous diriez qu'ils ne s'attendent qu'à en voir vn 
d'entre eux qui franchiffe Ie premier ce pas redou- 
table, & [220J qui ofe aller contre la coufiume du 
Pays. C'efi au refie vn Peuple qui a fa demeure ar- 
reftée, iudicieux, capable de raifon, & affez multiplié. 
Ie fis mention l'an paffé de douze Nations toutes 
fedentaires & nombreufes, qui entendent la langue 
de nos Hurons: & nos Hurons font en vingt Villages 
enuiron trente mille ames; fi Ie refte eft à propor- 
tion, en voila plus de trois cens mille de la feule 
langue Huronne. Dieu nous donne du credit parmy 
eux, nous y met en efiime, & fait que nous y foyons 
aimez iufques là, que nous ne fçauons à qui entendre, 


1636] 

LE jEUNE'S RELA TIOJV, I636 

313 

even permitting them to come three hundred leagues 
for that purpose, notwithstanding the tender affection 
they have for them; they promise to follow them some 
day, and declare they would not give us pledges so 
precious, if they were not desirous of keeping their 
word. You might say they are only waiting to see 
one of their number take the first dreaded step, and 
[220] venture to run counter to the customs of the 
Country. Let me add they are a People who have a 
settled habitation,- judicious, capable of reason, and 
sufficiently numerous. 
I made mention last year of twelve Nations, all 
being sedentary and populous and who understand 
the tongue of our Hurons; and our Hurons make, 
in twenty Villages, about thirty thousand souls. If 
the remainder is in proportion, there are more than 
three hundred thousand of the Huron tongue alone. 
God gives us influence among them, causes us to be 
held in estimation, makes us so much loved that we 
do not know to whom to listen, so eager is everyone 
to have us. In truth, we should be very ungrateful 
to the mercy of God if we lost courage amid all this, 
and did not give him time to bring forth the fruit in 
its due season. 
It is true I have some little fear in regard to the 
time when I must employ a new language in refer- 
ence to their morals, and teach them to keep down 
the flesh, and hold them in the honesty of Marriage, 
preventing divorces by fear of the judgments of God 
on the lewd; when it will be a question of [22 I] say- 
ing to them on all occasions, Quom:a11l qui taÜa agullt 
regllum Dez" 1101l possz"debullt. I am afraid they will be- 
come restive when we shall speak to them of being 
reclothed in Jesus Christ, of wearing his livery, and 


314 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

tant vn chacun eft afpre à nous auoir. En verité 
nous ferions bien ingrats à la grace de Dieu, fi nous 
perdions courage parmy tout cela, & ne luy donnions 
Ie loifir de porter fon fruit en fa faifon. 
II eft vray que i'ay quelque peu d'apprehenfion 
pour Ie temps auquel il faudra leur tenir vn langage 
nouueau fur leurs. mæurs, & leur apprendre à c10uër 
leurs chairs, & les retenir dans l'honnefteté du Ma- 
riage, en retranchant les diffolutions par la crainte 
des iugemens de Dieu fur les luxurieux; lors qu'il 
fera question de [221] leur dire en tout plein d'occa- 
fions, Quoniam qui taHa agunt regnum Dez' non poßide- 
bunt. I'ay peur qu'ils faffent les rétifs, quand on 
leur parlera de fe reueftir de Iefus-Chrift, de porter 
fa liurée, & fe diftinguer en qualité de Chreftiens 
d'auec ce qu'ils auront efté auparauant, par vne vertu 
dont à peine cognoiffent-ils Ie nom, quand on leur 
criera auec l' Apoftre, C' ejllà la volontl de Dz"eu, vojlre 
j"anctijicatz"on, qu'vn clzacun j"cache conj"eruer j"on corps 
comme 'l'n vaj"e preczEuz en j"anctijicatioll & en h01zneur, & 
1lOIl Ie laz1fallt aller auz paffions de fes dcfirs, C011l1ne les 
Gcntils qui ne cognoz1fcnt point Dieu. II eft, dis-ie, bien 
à craindre qu'ils ne s'effrayent fur Ie propos de la 
pureté & chafteté, & qu'ils ne fe rehutent à fon occa- 
fion de la doctrine du Fils de Dieu, difans auec les 
Capharnaïtes fur vn autre fuiet, Durlts ejl Izic .fenno, 
& quzS polest eum audire? Toutefois puis qu'auec la 
grace de Dieu nous auons déia obtenu d'eux par la 
profeffion ouuerte que nous auons fait de cette vertu, 
qu'ils n' ofent ny faire, ny dire en noftre prefence 
chofe aucune qui luy foit contraire, iufques à mena- 
cer les Eftrangers quand ils s'échappent deuant nous, 
& les aduertir que les François [222] & fur tout les 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELATION, r636 

315 

of being distinguished in the capacity of Christians, 
from what they were previously, by a virtue of which 
they scarcely recognize the name, when we shall say 
to them with the Apostle, For this is tIle will of God, 
your sanctlficati01z
. that everyone of you should know how 
to preserve his body as a precious vessel in sanctification 
and in IlOnor, and not give way to the passion of his lusts, 
like the Gentiles that know not God. It is, I say, much 
to be feared that they will be alarmed at the proposal 
of purity and chastity, and that they will reject, 
when it is presented, the doctrine of the Son of God, 
saying with the men of Capernaum, on another subject, 
Durus est hic sermo, et quis potest eum audire? Since, 
however, by the grace of God, through the open pro- 
fession we have made of this virtue, we have secured 
thus much, that they dare neither to do nor to mention 
anything contrary to it in our presence,- even going 
so far as to threaten Strangers when they offend 
against propriety before us, warning them that the 
French [222J and especially the black Robes, detest 
such liberties,-is it not most probable that, if once 
the holy Spirit takes them in hand, he will impress 
upon them so deeply, in every place and time, the 
respect they owe to his divine presence and immen- 
sity, that they will be very glad to be chaste in order 
to be Christians, and will ask earnestly to be Chris- 
tians in order to be chaste? I imagine that it was 
for this particular purpose that Our Lord inspired us 
to put them under the special protection of saint 
Joseph. This great Saint,-who was in other times 
given as a Spouse to the glorious Virgin, to conceal 
both from the eyes of the world and from the Devil 
a virginity that God honored by his Incarnation,- 
has so much power with this Holy Lady, in whose 


316 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 10 

Robbes noires detefient ces priuautez. N'efi-il pas 
plus croyable que fi le fainct Efprit les entreprend 
vne fois, il leur imprimera fi auant en tout lieu & en 
tout temps Ie refpect qu'ils doiuent à fa diuine pre- 
fence & immenfité, qu'ils feront bien aifes d'efire 
chafies pour efire Chrefiiens, & demanderont auec 
infiance dtefire Chrefiiens pour pouuoir efire chafies. 
Ie me figure que c'efi pour ce deffein particulier que 
N ofire Seigneur nous a inf piré de les mettre en la 
protection de fainct lofeph: Ce grand Sainct qui a 
efié donné autresfois pour Efpoux à la glorieufe 
Vierge, & pour cacher aux yeux du monde, & du 
Diable vne virginité que Dieu honora de fon Incarna- 
tion, a tant de pouuoir enuers cette Saincte Dame t 
entre les mains de laquelle fon Fils a mis comme en 
depofi nommément toutes les graces qui concourent 
à cette vertu celefie, qu'il n 'y a prefque rien à crain- 
dre dans Ie vice contraire pour ceux qui luy font de- 
uots folidement, tels que nous defirons efire nos Hu- 
rons & nous. C'efi à cét effet, & pour la conuerfion 
entiere de tous ces Peuples, que nous [223] nous re- 
commandons cordialement aux prieres de tous ceux 
qui aiment, ou veulent aimer Dieu, & en particulier 
de tous nos Peres & Freres. 
De fa Rejidence de S. Io.feph, auz Hu- 
rons, au Village nomml Ihonatiria, 
ce 16. de Iuillet, 1636. 

V ofire tres-humble, & tres- 
obeïffant feruiteur en nofire 
Seigneur, 
lEAN DE BREBEVF. 


1636] 

LE .IEUNE' S RELA TION, I636 

317 

hands her Son has placed, as in deposit, all the graces 
which assist this celestial virtue, that there is scarce- 
ly anything to fear in the contrary vice for those who 
are fully devoted to her, such as we desire our Hu- 
rons and ourselves to be. It is for this end, and for 
the complete conversion of these Tribes, that we [223] 
commend ourselves cordially to the prayers of all 
those who love or wish to love God, and in particu- 
lar of all our Fathers and Brothers. 
From the Resz'dence of St. Joseph in 
tlte Huron Country, at tIle Village called 
lhonatiria, this 16th of July, 16 3 6 . 
Your very humble and very 
obedient servant in our 
Lord, 

JEAN DE BREBEUF. 


:Þ 
Z 
o 
JJ 
IT! 
::\: 

J: 
C 
:tJ 
o 
23; 
:Þ 

"U 
to (jj 
  
-< en 0 
-::\: 
0_ 
2 z 
G) 
en 
-I 
111 
en 

  

TI 
JJ 
o IT! 
.., 0 
to IT! 

  
  
:D 0 
;;; ^ 
. :I: 
o C 

  Z 
-I 
IT! 
JJ 

)> 

to 

  

z 
o 
-1 

  

  

  
Cl 
>- 

" 



?> 
Cij 
.t> 
ij 

"' 
t>" 
Iò 

  
I 
  
:;; 
, 
" 


NOTES TO VOL. X 

(Figures in þarentheses, following number of note, refer to þages 
of English text.) 

Maþ of Huron Country.-The (subsidiary) map of the Huron 
country which appears on the large map accompanying vol. i. of 
this series is substantially the same as that given in Parkman's 
Jesuits, which was based on Taché's researches. The map in the 
present volume, facing this page, embodies the results of the archæ- 
ological investigations pursued in the Huron country during the 
thirty years and more since Taché (vol. v., pp. 295-298). in the 
identification of mission sites-notably those of St. Michael, St. 
Joseph, and St. Ignace, which are now more satisfactorily estab- 
lished than when Parkman wrote his Jesuits. This map has been 
prepared especially for this work, by Andrew F. Hunter, of Barrie, 
Ont., whose careful and enthusiastic researches are already known 
to our readers through his notes, contributed to this series, on Huron 
tribes and localities; and it will aid the reader to follow more accu- 
rately the vicissitudes of the ill-fated Huron missions. 
Localities indicated on this map are described in preceding vol- 
umes as follows: V 01. v. ,- country of the Attignaouantan (Bear clan), 
note 17; Ossossané and Ihonatiria, notes 60, 61. Vol. viii.,-Oënrio 
(Wenrio), note 31; Scanonaenrat, note 38; Onentisati, note 42. See 
also vol. viii.. note 23, for location of the Attiguenongha clan of 
Hurons. 
Through an oversight, the map does not indicate the name of the 
township of Tiny; this lies west of the township of Tay, and ex- 
tends from Thunder Bay, on the north, to Cranberry Lake on the 
southern end. 

1 (p. II ).- For location of Scanonaenrat, see vol. viii., note 38. 
2 (p. 43).- Regarding the capture of the fleet, here mentioned, 
see vol. iv., 1ZOte 46. 
3 (p. 45).-The myth of the Thunder-Bird was, in some form or 
other, common to all North American tribes, from Mexico to Hud- 
son's Bay. and from the St. Lawrence to Bering Strait; and it is still 
current among most of the northern and western tribes. They ex- 
plain the vivid and (to them) mysterious and terrible phenomena of 
the thunderstorm as proceeding from an immense bird, so large 


3211 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

that its shadow darkens the heavens; the thunder is the sound made 
by flapping its wings, the lightning is the flashing or the winking of 
its eyes, and the deadly and invisible thunderbolts are arrows sent 
forth by the bird against its enemies. The Indians greatly dread 
this imaginary bird, often addressing prayers to it during a thunder- 
storm; and they have many traditions and superstitions regarding 
it. The tribes about Puget Sound and in Alaska perform the" black 
tamahnous," or .. thunder-bird ceremony," - a rite often savage and 
bloody. Many tribes regarded the thunder-bird as the Creator of 
the world, to which it brought fire from heaven; and Dakota legends 
relate the unceasing strife between Unktahe, the god of waters, and 
Wauhkeon, the thunder-bird. For details of this myth, see Eells's 
.. The Thunder-Bird," and Chamberlain's .. Thunder-Bird among 
the Algonkins," in Amer. Anthroþologist, vol. ii., pp. 329- 336; 
vol. iii., pp. 51 - 54. Cf. the legend ofthe "W eendigoes," in School- 
craft's A 19ic Researches, vol. ii., pp. II4- II6; and that of the 
.. sacred pole" of the Omahas, Amer. Antiquarian, vol. xvii., pp. 
265-268; also Mrs. Eastman's Dahcotah; or, Legends of the Sioux 
(N. Y., 1849), pp. 212-242. 
Brinton (
Jfyths of New World, pp. 239, 240) thus explains this 
myth: ., The intimate connection that once existed between the 
myths of the deluge and those of the creation is illustrated by the 
part assigned to birds in so many of them. They fly to and fro over 
the waves ere any land appears, though they lose in great measure 
the significance of bringing it forth, attached to them in the cosmog- 
onies as emblems of the divine spirit. The dove in the Hebrew 
account appears in that of the Algonkins as a raven, which Michabo 
sent out to search for land before the muskrat brought it to him 
from the bottom. A raven also in the Thlinkit and derived myths 
saved their ancestors from the general flood, and in this instance it 
is distinctly identified with the mighty thunder-bird, who at the be- 
ginning ordered the earth from the depths. Prometheus-like. it 
brought fire from heaven, and saved them from a second death by 
cold. This wondrous bird Yeti was the central character of the 
myths of all the coast tribes from the Eskimos well into and beyond 
Vancouver Island; and under various names, but playing the same 
rôle in the mighty drama of the creation and destruction of things, 
was familiar to the Athapascan tribes far inland. In all 
these and similar legends, the bird is a relic of the cosmogonal myth 
which explained the origin of the world from the action of the winds, 
under the image of the bird, on the primeval ocean. .. 
4 (p. 75).-François Marguerie, a native of Normandy. came to 
Canada about 1627, and served as interpreter for the Algonkins. 
During the English occupation of the country, he lived among the 


NO TES TO VOL. X 

321 

savages; upon the return of the French, he settled at Three Rivers 
(still acting as interpreter), where an estate was granted to him. As 
Brébeuf here informs us, he spent the winter of 1635-36 at Allu- 
mettes Island. In February, 1641, Marguerie and Thomas Gode- 
froy de Normanville were captured by the Iroquois, who. however, 
brought their prisoners back to Three Rivers in the following April. 
This episode is described at length by Vimont in the Relation of 
1641, chaps. ix. and x. 
Oct. 26, 1645, Marguerie married Louise, daughter of Zacharie 
Cloutier, a carpenter who had come over with Sieur Giffard (vol. vi., 
note 8). While crossing the St. Lawrence near Three Rivers (May 
23, 1648), Marguerie and a companion. Jean Amiot. were drowned- 
their canoe being overturned in a sudden storm. Marguerie was 
noted for his fine physique, courage, and address. Lalemant praises 
both him and Amiot, not only for courage and skill, but because 
they" had, in the opinion of all the country, led blameless lives." 
Marguerie's sister Marie became the wife of Jacques Hertel (vol. 
ix., note 3). 
5 (p. 81 ).- This was a favorite game among the Canadian Indians. 
Boucher (Hz"st. vb.it., chap. x.) thus mentions it: .. The Game of 
Straws is played with little straws, which are made for this purpose, 
and which are divided very unequally in three parts, as in hazard. 
Our Frenchmen have not yet been able to learn this game. It is 
full of vivacity; and straws are among them what cards are with 
us." Perrot (Mémoire, Tailhan's ed., pp. 46- 50) gives a detailed 
account of the game; but his description is, according to Lafitau 
(Mæursdes Sauvages, part 2, pp. 350-352), .. so obscure as to beal- 
most unintelligible." Charlevoix and La Potherie also attempt, 
but not very successfully, to describe the game; the former con- 
fesses C/ourn. Hz"st., p. 318) that" he does not at all understand it, 
except that sometimes the number nine wins the game." Tailhan 
(ut suþra, pp. 187, 188) cites these writers, and adds, .. I am not 
more fortunate than my predecessors, and the game of straws re- 
mains for me an undecipherable enigma." In gener
1. however, it 
may be said that this was a game partly of chance, partly of skill; 
it was played with straws or rushes, the size of a wheat-stalk, and 
about ten inches in length. These were unequally divided into 
small bunches, and passed to and fro in the hands of the players- 
.. with inconceivable dexterity," as Lafitau says. He adds: .. Un- 
even numbers are always lucky, and the number nine higher than 
all others. The division of the straws makes the game run high or 
low, and increases the bets, according to the different numbers, until 
the game is won. It is sometimes so eager, when the Villages play 
against one another, that it lasts two or three days." This game 


322 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

was also played, at times, in a manner resembling that of the mod- 
ern" jackstraws." The writers above mentioned all confirm the 
statements of the Jesuits as to the infatuation of the savages for 
this and other forms of gambling, and their accompanying evils. 
6 (p. 83).-Naiz þercez (Nez Percés): the Beaver tribe (Algon- 
kin, Amiskou, "a beaver;" French, Natitm du Castor). These 
were the Amikouas, an Algonkin nation with headquarters near La 
Cloche and the outlet of Spanish River (in the present district of Al- 
goma), on the north shore of Georgian Bay. 'fheir location is made 
clear by Le Jeune (Relatitm of 1640, chap. x.), and also on maps 
of that period-Galinée, 1670; Senex. 1710; etc. They should not 
be confused with the modern Nez Percés of the Rockies.-A. F. 
HUNTER. 
St. Lusson and Perrot, who at Michilimackinac took possession of 
the western regions in the name of France Gune 4, 1671), spent the 
preceding winter with the Beaver tribe. Missions to these savages 
were undertaken by Louis André (in the spring of 1671), and Henri 
Nouvel (1671 -72). 
7 (p. 83).-Aweatsiwaenrrhonons: the Nipissiriniens (vol. v., 
1ZOtes 19, 51). The French term, gnu þuants, was also applied to 
the Winnebago tribe. The confusion thus arising in the identity 
of these tribes may have been occasioned from the fact that numer- 
ous places were marked on the early maps as "puant,"-presum- 
ably meaning" alkaline." For instance, Cattaraugus Creek, near 
Chautauqua, N. Y., is named on one of Sanson's maps R. à la 
terre þuante.-A. F. HUNTER. 
8 (p. 95).-Contarea, one of the principal Huron strongholds, 
was situated close to a small lake in Tiny township, now known as 
Lannigan's Lake, the position of which is indicated on Du Creux's 
map. Brébeuf mentions this water as distant from Ihonatiria a 
day's journey; but it is not more than ten miles from the mission 
headquarters. Laverdière, arguing from a remote similarity in 
names, suggests the identity of Contarea with Carmaron, seen by 
Champlain in 1615 (Voyages, Laverdière's ed., p. 515); but it is 
not probable that any Huron town or village continued to exist at 
one place for so long a period as twenty years.-A. F. HUNTER. 
9 (p. 103).- Citrouilles: the summer squash (Cucurbita þoly- 
morþha).. it is figured on Champlain's map of 1612. Boucher (Hist. 
vérit., chap. viii.) thus describes them: "Citrouilles, of a species 
different from those of France; they are smaller, and not so un- 
substantial; their flesh is firmer and less watery, and of a better 
flavor. .. 
10 (p. 103).- Concerning the use and preparation of corn as food, 
<:ee vol. v., note 28. 


NOTES TO VOL. X 

323 

II (p. 127).-See also Brébeuf's account of Ataentsic in the Rela- 
tion of 1635, vol. viii. of this series. 
12 (p. 133).- For citations regarding the meaning of the myths of 
Ataentsic and ]ouskeha, see vol. viii., note 36. 
Cf. Hewitt's II Cosmogonic Gods of the Iroquois," (A mer. A sso. 
Adv. Sa: Proc., 1895, pp. 241-250); he takes issue with Brinton as 
to the interpretation of these myths. He says: .. If the evidence of 
language may be trusted, it seems safe to regard these gods as crea- 
tions indigenous to the primitive philosophy of the Iroquois regard- 
ing the origin of themselves and their environment-the protology 
of their existence and that of the earth and the heavens. 
Tha-ron-hya-wd' -kon was the ruler of the sky . ever benign 
and beneficent, at all times solicitous to promote the welfare of 
man, and in great emergencies even descending among men per- 
sonally to aid them against adverse powers and beings of sinister 
aspect and malevolent purpose. From the brief introductory ac- 
count of the protology of the Iroquois, it would seem to be erroneous 
to identify Tha-ron-hya-wd'-ko1z with Yoskehd/ of the Huronian 
version, or with Otliï-toii-1Û'.d' of that of the Onondagas and other 
tribes; for the latter is the demiurge, being, strictly speaking, the 
grandson of the spouse of Tha-ron-hya-wd'-kon, E-yd'-ta-hln/- 
tsik. It was the daughter of E-yd'-ta-hen/-tsik who be- 
came the moon which changes its form continually. It is a very 
common thing among writers to confound E-yd' -ta-hen/-tsik with 
her daughter, and hence arises the erroneous identification of E-yd'- 
ta-hbz/-tsz"k with the moon. On both linguistic and func- 
tional grounds, I am inclined to regard E-yd'-ta-hin/-tsik as the 
impersonation or goddess of night and the earth. . Lastly, 
the usual application of the appellation II grandmother" to the 
moon must not be construed as evidence that the grandmother of 
O-tÛi-toii-ni' -d/ is meant; for the mother of 0-teii-toii-1Zi' -d/, being 
born on the earth, was in fact regarded as the grandmother of the 
race in a stricter sense than her mother, E-yd'-ta-hen/-tsz"k. 
In the protology of the Iroquois, Yoskehd/ or O-teii-toii-nZ'-d/ is the 
demiurge in contrast with TawÙ/kara' his brother, who represented 
the destructive or Typhonic power in nature, as exemplified by the 
destructiveness of frost, hail, and ice. The people held in high 
esteem the great and bounteous benefits they believed they enjoyed 
only through the care and benevolence of Yoskehd/. It is, 
I believe, the reproductive, rejuvenating power in nature that is 
personified in Yoskehlr, and not the sun, which is ever portrayed 
as retaining the full vigor of manhood, undiminished by the lapse 
of years. Tawis'kara' was so called because he spread 
forth hail, sleet, and ice, and the blighting frosts; because he was 


324 

LES RELATIONS DES.lÉSUITES 

the cold ice-king, the enemy and despoiler of the planted crops of 
man. In whatever Tawis' kara' did, he was instigated and abetted 
by his grandmother E-yèí'-ta-hen'-tsik, the goddess of night and the 
earth. The effects of frost and cold are best seen in the morning, 
when the god of ice and cold has accomplished his nefarious work 
under cover of darkness. " 
13 (p. 145).-The Tobacco Nation adjoined the Huron territory 
on the west (vol. v., note 18). 
14 (p. 153).-This legend, in one form or another, was current 
among all the Algonkin nations. Moore's ballad, .. The Lake of the 
Dismal Swamp," preserves in outline the version of the Powhatans 
or some kindred tribe in Virginia. The version found among the 
Ottawas in Ontario is known by the name of" The White Stone 
Canoe; " and the Manitoba Algonkins held it in remembrance in the 
beautiful legend of .. Qu'appelle?" (" Who calls ?").-See Maclean's 
Indians; their Manners and Customs (Toronto, 1889), p. 179. The 
occurrence of this legend among the Hurons, in the form given by 
Brébeuf in the text, suggests their long residence near the Algon- 
kins.-A. F. HUNTER. 
15 (p. 159).-The offering of tobacco was one of the commonest 
rites among the Indian tribes, especially the Algonkins. Several 
places on the east shore of Georgian Bay are still shown where until 
recent years they made these offerings; that located about twenty 
miles north of Parry Sound, rather than another on Christian Island, 
suggests the place mentioned in the text.-A. F. HUNTER. 
Cf. Hariot's Brief and true reþort of Vzrginia (De Bry's ed., 
Frankfort, 1590), p. 16: "This Vpp6woc [tobacco] is of so precious 
estimation amongest them, that they thinke their gods are maruel- 
ously delighted therwith: Wherupon sometime they make hallowed 
fires & cast some of the pouder therein for a sacrifice: being in a 
storme vppon the waters, to pacifie their gods, they cast some vp 
into the aire and into the water: so a weare for fish being newly set 
vp, they cast some therein and into the aire: also after an escape of 
danger, they cast some into the aire likewise: but all done with 
strange gestures, stamping, some dauncing, clapping of hands, hold- 
ing vp of hands, & staring vp into the heauens, vttering therewithal 
and chattering strange words and noises." 
Cf. also Perrot (Tailhan's ed.), p. 20: "In journeys that they un- 
dertake, whether short or long, they utter invocations after this 
fashion: · Thou who art the master of the winds, be favorable to 
our journey, and give us calm weather.' This is said while smok- 
ing a pipe of tobacco, the smoke of which they toss into the air. 
If in winter they have to make an extraordinary journey 
upon the ice, there is a certain spirit that they invoke for this pur- 


NOTES TO VOL. X 

325 

pose, called by the Algonkins Mateomek, to whom they similarly 
offer tobacco-smoke, praying him to be favorable to them and propi- 
tious during their march." 
Of interest in this connection are the following statements regard- 
ing the tobacco used in religious rites: Smith says, "It may be 
worthy of remark that the tobacco burnt as an offering to the Hon- 
dó'-i, and in other religious ceremonies, is not the ordinary tobacco 
of commerce, but the original tobacco of the Iroquois, which they 
still cultivate for that purpose. I have not yet been able to ascer- 
tain whether this plant is identical with that (N. quadrivalvis.') 
which the Prince of N euwied cites as being raised in his time, and 
used only for similar purposes and for smoking on solemn occa- 
sions by the Mandans and Meunitarris of the Upper Missouri." 
Beauchamp says, "The small tobacco which the New York Onon- 
dagas raise, and which all seem to prefer, is called O-yen-kwa hon- 
we, or · real tobacco.' It is N. rustic a (Linn.), introduced by the 
Indians in Western New York, and sparingly naturalized there. It 
may be the old kind from which the Tobacco Nation of Canada had 
its name. "-See Jour. of Amer. Folk-Lore, vol. i., pp. 193, 196. 
16 (p. 165).-This superstition as to drowning is remarkably simi- 
lar to that current among the Mississagas and other Algonkin tribes 
of this region before their Christianization in recent years. Susan- 
na Moodie, a Canadian authoress, writing half a century ago of the 
Mississagas-in Roughing it in the Bush (London, 1850; Canad. re- 
print, Toronto, r870), p. 302-says: "The soul of an Indian that has 
been drowned is reckoned accursed, and he is never permitted to 
join his tribe in the happy hunting grounds, but his spirit haunts 
the lake or river in which he lost his life. His body is buried on 
some lonely island, which the Indians never pass without leaving a 
small portion of food, tobacco, or ammunition, to supply his wants; 
but he is never interred with the rest of his people. "- A. F. HUNTER. 
17 (p. 177).-This passage is obscure in meaning-as regards 
both the French phrase, qui retire au Lyon þar la queue, and the 
myth related of the origin of the Hurons. J. N. B. Hewitt explains 
it as follows: "It is probable that Brébeuf here refers to a legend 
(imperfectly comprehended by him) that is found to this day, in 
several versions, among the tribes of the Six Nations,-which may 
be briefly stated thus: It was the invariable custom of a certain 
noted hunter to sacrifice to the fowls of the air and the beasts of the 
forest the first game animal he might kill, in every hunting expedi- 
tion. This was very acceptable to the fowls and the beasts. One 
day it came to pass that the enemies of the hunter's people made an 
incursion, and killed, among many others, this famous hunter. His 
death becoming known to the birds and beasts of prey, they greatly 


326 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

mourned his loss; and at a grand council held by them, their chiefs 
resolved to restore their friend to life. The legend relates that their 
purpose was accomplished at a great feast. The several versions 
of the legend differ as to the chief actors in this alleged resuscita- 
tion of a human being; but they all agree that it was the chiefs of 
the beasts and birds of prey who took part in the affair. In the 
story here told by Brébeuf, the panther, the wolf, and the owl are 
the conspicuous figures. The sovereign remedy used on this occa- 
sion was, chiefly through the instrumentality of the wolves, bestowed 
by the assembly on man, as a gift, and is still in great repute and 
use among the Iroquois; it is called Kanü ta'. It cures wounds and 
internal injuries. It is difficult to identify the animal called Ontar- 
raoura. The Hurons probably had, like the Iroquois, several ver- 
sions of this legend, in which different animals were given preëmi- 
nence. " 
W. M. Beauchamp suggests another interpretation: II The whole 
is a fable, though a reference to the Petun Wolf tribe is ingenious. 
I have little doubt that Ontarraoura is the panther, which alone of 
our Northern quadrupeds draws near or is allied to the lion by its 
tail (its distinguishing feature to a primitive people),-so much so, 
that it is sometimes called the American lion. It is a nocturnal 
animal, and so the owl would be the one to observe it. The Jesuits 
never mention this animal elsewhere, and perhaps the Hurons sel- 
dom saw it, as it frequents mountains. Professor Baird says that 
its habitat extends as far as 50 0 or even 60 0 N. lat., in mountains; 
but De Kay thinks its present northern (limits in the East) do not 
extend beyond New York. The latter also says that · the screams 
attributed to this animal during the night are supposed by many 
hunters to proceed from some species of owl' - an odd coincidence, 
in view of the legend related by Brébeuf." 
18 (p. 179}.-The village of Andiata was notable for the feasts 
and minor councils held there,-chiefly because of its centralloca- 
tion (near the center of Tiny township). This place and Onentisati 
were close to the fork of the forest trail- one of its branches lead- 
ing to o ssossané, the other to St. Michael and St. Joseph.- A. F. 
HUNTER. 
19 (p. 185).- Crosse (from Lat. crux, through L. Lat. crucia; 
Eng. II crozier,"-in allusion to the shape of the implement used in 
the game) was a favorite sport of many North American tribes. It 
is thus described by Perrot (Tailhan's ed.), pp. 43-46: II There is 
among them a certain game, · crosse,' which has much similarity to 
ours of tennis. In playing this, it is their custom to set tribe 
against tribe, in equal numbers. Each person is equipped with a 
crosse,-that is, a staff which has a great curve at the end, laced 


NOTES TO VOL. X 

327 

like a racket; the ball that they use in playing is of wood, and 
nearly the shape of a turkey's egg. The goals of the game are 
marked off on a level surface, and face the points of the compass. 
In order to win the game, one of the two parties must, in its prog- 
ress, carry its ball beyon<1 the eastern and western goals-the 
other, beyond the northern and southern. Men, women, 
girls, and boys are admitted to the games that take place, and bet 
against one another-the wagers being more or less valuable, ac- 
cording to the means of each. These games usually begin after the 
melting of the winter's ice, and last until seed-time. 
All assemble in a body, in the middle of the place selected; and one 
of the chiefs of the two parties, who holds the ball in his hands, 
throws it in the air. Each player undertakes to send it to that side 
for which he is bound; if it fall to the ground, he endeavors to 
draw it toward him with his crosse; and if it is sent outside the 
crowd of players, this is an opportunity for the most alert to dis- 
tinguish themselves beyond the others by closely following it. One 
can hear the noise they make in striking against one another, while 
they strive to ward off the blows in order to send the ball in a 
favorable direction. If one keeps it between his feet, without letting 
it escape, it is for him to avoid the blows that his adversaries rain 
incessantly upon his feet; and if, in this encounter, he happens to 
be wounded. that is his own affair. Some of them are seen with 
broken legs Or arms, and some even have been killed. It is very 
common to see them crippled for the rest of their days." 
Charlevoix gives the following account of the game (Journ. Hist.. 
p. 319), as played by the Miamis: .. It is played with a Ball, and 
with Staffs recurved and terminated by a sort of Racket. Two 
Posts are set up, which serve as Bounds, and which are distant from 
each other in proportion to the number of Players. For instance, 
if there are eighty of these, there will be a half-league between the 
Posts. The Players are divided into two bands, each having its 
own Post; and it is a question of driving the Ball as far as the Post 
of the opposing Party, without falling upon the ground or being 
touched by the hand. If either of these happens, the Game is 10st,- 
unless he who has committed the mistake repairs it, by driving the 
Ball with one stroke to the Bound, which is often impossible. 
These Savages are so adroit in catching the Ball with their Crosses, 
that these Games sometimes last several days in succession." 
Lafitau (Mæurs des Sauvages, part 2, p. 356) quotes Pollux to 
show that crosse is precisely the same as the Greek game of eþi'- 
skyros; Tailhan thinks it resembles the þaliean of the Chilean abo- 
rigines; and Clapin (Diet. Canad.-Fran.) says that it is almost 
the same as the soule of the Ardennes mountaineers in France, and, 


328 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

in the opinion of many, is but a modification of the latter game as 
brought hither by the first French colonists of America. 
Crosse (in modern phrase, "lacrosse") has been the national 
game of Canada since 1859-adopted from the Indian game, with 
modifications and improvements which have rendered it less danger- 
ous and more scientific. For description and history of the modern 
game, see Lowe's" Lacrosse," in A thle/ic Sþorts in A merica, Eng- 
land, and Australia (Phila., 1889), pp. 519- 543. The earlier 
form of the game, as played by the Indians, is described by one 
of their own race, George Copway, in his Traditional History of 
the Ojibway Nation (London, 1850), pp. 42-47. Cf. Hoffman's 
account of this sport among the Menomonees, in Bur. Ethll. Reþ., 
1892-93, pp. 127-136; and Mooney's, among the Cherokees, in 
A mer. Anthroþ., vol. iii., pp. 105-132. 
A game of ball was made, by stratagem, the opportunity for the 
capture of old Fort Mackinac from the English, during the Pontiac 
uprising (June 4, 1763). 
20 (p. 203).-Angwiens (also written Angoutenc) was the nearest 
of all the towns to the capital, Ossossané, and was situated on the 
trail leading thence to the mission towns in northern Tiny. In 
1636, Angwiens was but newly laid out.- A. F. HUNTER. 
21 (p. 219).-Concerning the use of tobacco, see vol. vi., note 25. 
Much curious information about this plant, and its history, culture, 
use, manufacture, and commerce, is given in Tatham's Essay on 
Tobacco (London, 1800); Billings's Tobacco (Hartford, 1875); and 
Fairholt's Tobacco (London, 1876). For bibliography of the subject, 
see Bragge's Bibliotheca nicotiana (Birmingham, Eng., 1880). 
22 (p. 235).-Arendoronnons: see vol. viii., note 24. 
23 (p. 285).-The village of Aronté (where was established the 
mission of Ste. Madeleine) is located by Du Creux's map on the west 
shore of Tiny township. near Dault's Bay. Taché seems to have 
regarded it as farther inland, although Du Creux's location cor- 
responds much better with the references in the text. Remains of 
sites have been found, however, agreeing with both positions 
cited.-A. F. HUNTER. 




  


. 


\iHAEl S 
c}. "a 

  
  

  LIBRARY 
  
ëï 
  

  
  

I} o\. 



