Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 5
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1897 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits05jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits05jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits05jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 5 of 73.

---


* 































































































































b^ES ' 




B' 



^^v? 







^^g 




^^c> 








^^K 







^^B 





H 








^K'' 



^K' -' 






^^» 



^^p 


K 


^■i. 



H' 









^K - 


^^K 


^B 



K 





Bs^^B^fl^^^H 

^^^^^^K 


^B^^B|^^^^H 

^^^^^■>' 





^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^1 ^^^^^^^^kf 




^^^^^^^^^n 










^^^^^■. 


^^^^h' 



^^^^H 

> 

^^^^^^^^^K 



^^^Hr: 


^^^B^^^^^B- 




^^^^^^^^^^D- ' 



^Hl 


























' v'v^^^^-^^H^BtAHH^b 

e; 

I' 



". 




>-^^^^^^^^^^H 

[ 

'-oB^HP? 





511 
v, 5" 


13 



THE JESUIT RELATIONS 

AND 

ALLIED DOCUMENTS 


Vol. V 



The editiofi consists of sev- 
en hu7idred and fifty sets 
all numbered 


No. 



W^^U 


M> 




Paul Le Jeune, S.J. 


f (t n,^i THE PROPERTY OF 

'l^^ THE LAW SOCIETY 

The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 


Travels and Explorations 

OF THE Jesuit Missionaries 

IN New France 

1610-1791 

THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES ; ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 

EDITED BY 

REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 

Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 


Vol. V 
Quebec:] 1632-1633 


CLEVELAND: TTbc JButrowg JStotbew 

CompaitB, PUBLISHERS, MDCCCXCVII 


Copyright, 1897 

BY 

The Burrows Brothers Co 


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 


The Imperial Press, Cleveland 


EDITORIAL STAFF 


Editor . . Reuben Gold Thwaites 

Translator from the 
French . . John Cutler Covert 

Assistant Translator from 
the French . Mary Sifton Pepper 

Translator from the 

Latin . . William Frederic Giese 

Translator from the 

Italian . . Mary Sifton Pepper 

Assistant Editor . Emma Helen Blair 


CONTENTS OF VOL. V 

Preface to Volume V . . . i 

Documents: — 
XX. Brieve Relation dv voyage de la Nov- 
velle France, fait au mois d'Auril 
dernier. Paulleleune; Kebec, August 
28, 1632 .... 5 

XXI. Relation de ce qui s'est pass6 en La 
Novvelle France, en I'ann^e 1633. 
Paul le leune (first installment) . TJ 

Bibliographical Data: Volume V . . 269 

Notes ...... 275 



ILLUSTRATIONS TO VOL. V 

I. Portrait of Paul le Jeune, SJ. Photo- 
engraving from oil painting by Donald 
Guthrie McNab . . . Frontispiece 

n. Photographic facsimile of title-page, Le 

Jeune's Relation of 1632 . . .8 

in. Photographic facsimile of title-page, Le 

Jeune's Relation of 1633 . . .80 

IV. R. C. Church at Penetanguishene, Ont., 
built in memory of the Jesuit Martyrs 
in the Huron country ; now in course of 
construction. (From a recent photo- 
graph.) . . . . -295 


PREFACE TO VOL V 


Following is a synopsis of the documents contained 
in the present volume: 

XX. This document (dated Quebec, August 28, 
1632) is Le Jeune's famous Relation of 1632, the first 
of the Cramoisy series, which were thereafter annual- 
ly issued until 1672. In this document, Le Jeune, 
the new superior of the Canada mission, relates to 
the French provincial of his order, in Paris, the par- 
ticulars of the stormy passage recently made by the 
two missionaries to the New World, in De Caen's 
ship. Le Jeune gives his impressions of the country, 
and of the natives. He describes the tortures in- 
flicted by some of them, upon three Iroquois captives. 
Schools should be established for the youth, if the 
adults are to be properly influenced. Mosquitoes 
greatly torment the missionaries. The circumstances 
are related of the landing of De Caen's party at Que- 
bec, which is found in ruins ; mass is celebrated in the 
house of Mme. Hubert, and the condition of that 
pioneer family is described. Quebec being surren- 
dered to De Caen by the English garrison, the Jesuits 
return to their old habitation on the St. Charles, 
only the walls of which have withstood the shock of 
war. Le Jeune then reverts, in his story, to the condi- 
tion of the savages, telling of their simplicity and their 
entire confidence in the missionaries. The Jesuits 
baptize an Iroquois lad, and a native child has been 


PREFACE TO VOL. V 


left in their charge. The successful garden of the 
mission is described, and the relator tells how he al- 
most lost his life by drowning. 

XXI. Le Jeune's Relation for 1633 is addressed 
from Quebec to the French provincial of the order, 
Barthelemy Jacquinot, in Paris. In the first install- 
ment of the document, given in the present volume, 
Le Jeune, as superior of his order in Canada, men- 
tions the kindness shown the mission by the Com- 
pany of New France, and the good behavior of the 
French at Quebec, during the preceding winter. A 
description is given of a visit he made to the savages 
in the vicinity of that settlement, and his attempts to 
learn their language; he tells how the Montagnais 
sought shelter near the fort, from the Iroquois ; men- 
tions an eclipse of the moon (October 27); records, as 
they happened, whatever events of interest occurred 
in the colony, giving, in this connection, considerable 
information about the traits, customs, and religious 
ideas of the Indians. 

The narrator tells how his Montagnais interpre- 
ter, Pierre, who had been educated in France, fell 
into disgrace with the commandant, and was received 
by the missionaries, that he might instruct them in 
his language. The narrator describes his own diffi- 
culties in that pursuit, and in compiling a native dic- 
tionary and grammar. 

Le Jeune describes the climate as very cold in win- 
ter, and hot in summer, but healthful ; and tells how 
he learned to use raquettes, or snowshoes. He has 
two little boys given him by the savages, and under- 
takes to educate them. In his school, are over twen- 
ty Indian children, whose attainments in scholarship 
are described ; and this leads the way to a strong ap- 


PREFACE TO VOL. V 


peal to the ladies of France to establish in New 
France a seminary for girls. He recounts the leg- 
ends of the natives about Messou, Manitou, and 
other deities ; also their superstitions about dreams. 
In speaking of Father de Noue's visit to some of the 
neighboring tribes, Le Jeune enumerates the hard- 
ships endured by the missionaries in attempting to 
dwell in the savage camps ; nevertheless, he speaks 
hopefully of the prospect for mission labors, espe- 
cially among stationary tribes, like the Hurons. 

A description is given of Champlain's return as 
governor of the colony ; and of a conference held by 
the latter (May 24) with the Ottawas, on their annual 
trading visit to Quebec. The eloquence and shrewd- 
ness displayed by the savages are dwelt upon. 

The Iroquois attack a party of French, wounding 
and killing several. The settlement is visited by 
natives from various tribes from the upper country; 
a Frenchman is slain by one of the tribesmen ; much 
drunkenness occurs among the Indians, who craftily 
excuse themselves from responsibility for any crime 
committed while in that condition, by telling the 
Frenchmen it was caused by liquors supplied by 
them. The Fathers baptize some savage children, 
and in caring for the sick encounter the enmity of 
the medicine men. 

The conclusion of this document will be presented 
in Vol. VI, of our series. 

R. G. T. 

Madison, Wis., February, 1897. 


XX 

Le Jeune's Brieve Relation 

Kebec, Aoust 28, 1632 
Paris: SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, 1632 


Source : Title-page and text reprinted from original in 
Lenox Library. 


BRIEVE 

RELATION 

DV VOYAGE 

D E L A 
NOVVELLE FRANCE, 

Fait au raois d'Auril dernier par le 
P.Paul Ic Icunc delaCompagnie 
de I ES vs. 

EnUBjee au R . P- Barthekmy lacquinit 
PromncUlie U mefme Com^ami 
.. en U Prouittce de France. . i. 


'4h^ 



f4 \ 


A PARIS, 

Chez Sebastien Cramoisyj 
rue $. Iacqucs,aux Cicogncs. 

^MTDcrxxxur" 


BRIEF 

RELATION 

OF THE JOURNEY 

TO 

NEW FRANCE, 

Made in the month of April last by Fa- 
ther Paul le Jeune, of the Society 
of Jesus. 

Sent to Reverend Father Bartbelemy Jacqui- 

not, Provincial of the same Society, 

in the Province of France. 


PARIS, 

Sebastien Cramoisy, rue St. Jacques, 
at the sign of the Storks. 


M. DC. XXXII. 

By Royal License. 


10 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 


[3] Brieve Relation dv Voyage de la Novvelle 
France. 

MON R. Pere, Eftant aduerti de voftre part, le 
dernier iour de Mars, qu'il falloit au plufloft 
ra'embarquer au Haure de grace, pour tirer 
droit a la Nouuelle France: I'aife & le contentement 
que i'en refenti en mon ame fut li grand, que de 
vingt ans ie ne penfe pas en auoir eu vn pareil, ny 
qu'aucune lettre m'ait efle tant agreable. Ie forti de 
Dieppe le lendemain, & paffant a Roiien, nous [4] 
nous ioignimes de compagnie le Pere de Noue, noflre 
Frere Gilbert & moy. Eftans au Haure nous allafmes 
faluer monfleur du Pont, neueu de Monfeigneur le 
Cardinal, lequel nous donna vn efcrit figne de fa 
main, par lequel il temoignoit que c'eftoit la volonte 
de mondit Seigneur que nous paflaffions en la Nou- 
uelle France. Nous auons vne fmguliere obligation 
"k la charite de de monfieur le Cure du Haure, & des 
Meres Vrfulines; Car comme nous n' anions point 
preueu noflre depart, fi le Pere Charles Lallemant k 
Roiien, & ces honneftes perfonnes au Haure ne nous 
euffent afllftez dans remprelTement, oil nous nous 
trouuions, fans doute nous eftions mal. Du Haure 
nous tirames a Honfleur, & le iour de Quafimodo 18. 
d'Auril nous fimes voile. 

Nous eumes au commencement [5] vn tres-beau 
temps, & en dix iours nous fimes enuiron fix cens 
lieues, mais a peine en peumes nous faire deux cens 
les trente trois iours fuiuans. Ces bons iours pafl^ez 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1632 \\ 


[3] Brief Relation of the Journey to New 
France/ 

Mv Reverend Father: Having been notified 
by you on the last day of March that I should 
embark as early as possible at Havre de 
grace, to sail directly for New France, the joy and 
happiness that I felt in my soul was so great that I 
believe I have experienced nothing like it for twenty 
years, nor has any letter been so welcome to me. I 
left Dieppe the next day, and, going to Roiien, [4] 
Father de Noue, our Brother Gilbert, and I united in 
one company. Being in Havre, we went to pay our 
respects to monsieur du Pont, nephew of Monseigneur 
the Cardinal, who gave us a passport '^ signed by his 
own hand, in which he said that it was the wish of the 
Cardinal that we should go to New France. We are 
under peculiar obligations to the benevolence of mon- 
sieur the Cur6 of Havre, and of the Ursuline Moth- 
ers ; ^ for, as we had not foreseen our departure, if 
Father Charles Lallemant, of Roiien, and these good 
people in Havre, had not assisted us in the hasty prep- 
arations we were obliged to make, we should, with- 
out doubt, have been very badly off. From Havre we 
went to Honfleur, and on Low Sunday,* April i8th, 
we set sail. 

We had fine weather at first, [5] and made about 
six hundred leagues in ten days ; but we could hardly 
cover two hundred on the following thirty-three days. 
After this fine weather we had little but storms and 


12 


LES RELA TIONS DES J t SUITES [Vol. 5 


nous n'eumes quafi que tempeftes, ou vent contraire, 
liormis quelques bonnes heures qui nous venoient de 
temps en temps. I'auois quelquefois veu la mer en 
cholere des feneftres de noftre petite maifon de Di- 
eppe .• mais c'eft bien autre chofe de fentir deffous 
foy la furie de 1' Ocean, que de la contempler du ri- 
uage ; nous eftions des trois & quatre iours a la cappe, 
comme parlent les mariniers, noftre gouuernail atta- 
che, on lailToit aller le vaiffeau au gre des vagues & 
des ondes, qui le portoient par f ois fur des montagnes 
d'eau, puis tout a coup dans des abyfmes; vous 
euffiez dit que les vents eftoient dechainez contre 
nous; a tous coups [6] nous craignions qu'ils ne bri- 
faffent nos mats, ou que le vaiffeau ne s'ouurit: & 
De fait il fe fit vne voye d'eau laquelle nous auroit 
coule a fond, fi elle fut arriuee plus bas, ainfi que 
i'entendois dire. C'efl autre chofe de mediter de la 
mort dans fa cellule deuant 1' image du Crucifix, 
autre chofe d'y penfer dans vne tempefte, & deuant 
la mort mefme. le vous diray neantmoins ingenue- 
ment, qu'encor que la nature defire fa conferuation, 
que neantmoins au fond de I'ame ie fentois autant ou 
plus d'inclination a la mort qu'k la vie; ie me met- 
tois deuant les yeux que celuy qui m'auoit conduit 
deffus la mer, auoit de tres-bons deffeins; & qu'il le 
falloit laiffer faire ; ie n' of ois luy rien demander pour 
moy, fmon de luy pref enter ma vie pour tout 1' equi- 
page. Quand ie me figurois que peut-eftre dans peu 
d'heures, ie me verrois au milieu des [7] vagues, & 
par aduanture dans I'epaiffeur d'vne nuicit tres-ob- 
fcure, i'auois quelque confolation en cette penf^e, 
m'imaginant que la oil il y auroit moins de la crea- 
ture, qu'il y auroit plus du Createur, & que ce feroit 
la proprement mourir de fa main : mais ma foibleff e 


1632-33] LE/EUNE'S RELATION, i6s2 13 


contrary winds, except a few pleasant hours which 
were vouchsafed us from time to time. I had some- 
times seen the angry sea from the windows of our 
little house at Dieppe ; but watching the fury of the 
Ocean from the shore is quite different from tossing 
upon its waves. During three or four days we were 
close-reefed, as sailors say, our helm fastened down. 
The vessel was left to the will of the billows and 
the waves, which bore it at times upon mountains of 
water, then suddenly down into the depths of the 
sea. You would have said that the winds were un- 
chained against us. Every moment [6] we feared 
lest they should snap our masts, or that the ship 
would spring a leak ; and, in fact, there was a leak, 
which would, as I heard reported, have simk us if it 
had been lower down. It is one thing to reflect 
upon death in one's cell, before the image on the 
Crucifix ; but quite another to think of it in the midst 
of a tempest and in the presence of death itself. But 
I say to you honestly, that, although nature longs 
for its preservation, nevertheless, in the depths of 
my soul, I felt quite as much inclination to death 
as to life; I kept constantly before my eyes, that 
he who had brought me upon the sea had some good 
purpose, and that he must be allowed to do as he 
pleases. I dared not ask of him anything for myself, 
unless it were to offer up my life for all on the ship. 
When I realized that in a few hours I might see my- 
self in the midst of the [7] waves, and perhaps in the 
depths of the blackest night, I found some consola- 
tion in the thought that there, where there would be 
less of the creature, there would be more of the Cre- 
ator, and that it would be really dying by his hand. 
But my weakness makes me fear that perhaps, if that 


14 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.5 

me fait craindre, que peut-eftre fi cela fuft arrm6 
i'eulTe bien change de penfee & d' affection. 

Au refle nous auons trouue I'hyuer dans I'efte, c'eft 
k dire dans le mois de May & vne partie de luin, les 
vents, & la bruine nous gla9oient, le Pere de None a 
eu les pieds & les mains gelees, adiouftez vne dou- 
leur de tefhe ou de coeur qui ne me quitta quafi iamais 
le premier mois ; vne grande foif , pour ce que nous 
ne mangions que chofes falees, & il n'y auoit point 
de fontaine d'eau douce dans noflre vaiffeau. Nos 
cabanes efloient [8] fi grades, que nous n'y pouuions 
eflre ny debout, ny a genoux, ny affis, & qui pis eft, 
I'eau pendant la pluie me tomboit par fois fur la face. 
Toutes ces incomoditez eftoient communes aux 
autres, les pauures mattelots enduroient bien dauan- 
tage. Tout cela eft paffe, Dieu mercy, ie n'euffe 
pas voulu eftre en France. Tous ces petits trauaux 
ne nous ont point encor, comme ie croy, donne la 
moindre trifteffe de noftre depart. Dieu ne fe laiffe 
iamais vaincre ; fi on luy donne des oboles, il donne 
des mines d'or, encor me femble-il que ie me fuis 
mieux porte que le Pere de Noue, lequel a efte fort 
longtemps fans quafi pouuoir manger; pour noftre 
Frere, il eft comme ces animaux Amphibies, il fe 
porte auffi bien fur la mer que fur la terre, 

Le iour de la Pentecofte, comme i'eftois preft de 
prefcher, ce que ie faifois [9] ordinairement les Di- 
manches, & bonnes Feftes, vn de nos mattelots fe 
mit k crier molue, molue, il auoit iette fa ligne, & en 
tiroit vne grande. II y auoit defia quelques iours 
que nous eftions fur le banc, mais on n'auoit quafi 
rien pris. Ce iour la on en prit tant qu'on voulut. 
C'eftoit vn plaifir de voir vne fi grande tuerie, & 
tant de ce fang repadu fur le tillac de noftre nauire. 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1632 15 

had really happened, my thoughts and inclinations 
might have been greatly changed. 

But, to speak of other things, we found winter in 
summer; that is to say, in the month of May and a 
part of June, the winds and the fogs chilled us ; Fa- 
ther de Noue's feet and hands were frozen; and, 
besides this, I had pains in my head or heart, which 
scarcely left me at all during the first month ; and a 
keen thirst, because we ate nothing but salted food, 
and there was no fresh water upon our vessel. The 
size of our cabins w^as [8] such that we could not 
vStand upright, kneel, or sit down ; and, what is worse, 
during the rain, the water fell at times upon my face. 
All these discomforts were shared by the others ; but 
the poor sailors suffered many more. All that is past ; 
thank God, I would not have wished to be in France. 
All these little afflictions have not as yet, I believe, 
caused us the least sadness over our departure. God 
never suffers himself to be vanquished ; if you give 
him mites, he gives mines of gold. Still, it seems 
to me that I get along better than Father de None, 
who, for a long time, was hardly able to eat; as to 
our Brother, he is like the Amphibious animals ; he is 
just as much at home on the sea as on the land. 

On Pentecost day, just as I was ready to preach, 
as I usually [9] did on Sundays and great Fete days, 
one of our sailors began to cry out, " codfish! cod- 
fish! " He had thrown in his line and had brought 
out a large one. We had already been on the banks 
several days, but had caught very little. On that 
day we drew in as many as we liked. It was a pleas- 
ure to see so great a slaughter, and so much of this 
blood shed upon the deck of our ship. These fresh 


16 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 

Ce rafraichiffement nous vint fort a propos, apres de 
fi longues bourrafques. 

Le Mardy d'apres, premier iour de luin, nous 
vimes les terres, elles eftoient encor toutes couuertes 
de neiges, I'hyuer toufiours grand en ces pais, & I'a 
efte extremement cette annee. Quelques iours au- 
parauant, fgauoir eft le 15. & 18. de May, eftans en- 
cor eloignez des terres enuiron deux cens lieues, nous 
auions rencontre deux glaces d'vne enorme grandeur 
[10] flottantes dans la mer, elles eftoient plus longues 
que noftre vaiffeau, & plus hautes que nos mafts, le 
Soleil donnant deffus vous euffiez dit eftre des Eglifes, 
ou pluftoft des montagnes de crystal : a peine auroy-ie 
creu cela fi ie ne I'auois veu. Quand on en ren- 
contre quantite, & qu'vn nauire fe trouue embarraffe 
la dedans, il eft bien toft mis en pieces. 

Le leudy 3. de luin nous enframes dans le pais par 
I'vn des plus beaux fleuues du monde, la grand Ifle 
de terre neuue le ferme en fon emboucheure, luy 
laiffant deux endroits, par ou il fe degorge dans la 
mer, I'vn au Nord, & I'autre au Sud: nos entrames 
par celuy-cy qui eft large enuiron de 13. ou 14. 
lieues. Si toft que vous eftes entrez, vous decouurez 
vn golfe de 150. lieues de largeur; en montant plus 
haut au lieu ou cette grande riuiere commence a s'e- 
ftreffir, elle a [11] bien encor de largeur 37. lieues: 
oil nous fommes a Quebec, efloignez plus de 200. 
lieues de 1' emboucheure, elle a bien encor demie 
lieue. 

A r entree de ce golfe nous vimes deux rochers, 
I'vn paroiffoit rond, I'autre quarre; vous diriez que 
Dieu les a plante au milieu des eaux comme deux 
colombiers pour feruir de lieu de retraitte aux 
oyfeaux, qui s'y retirent en fi grande quantite, qu'on 


1632 - 33] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1632 17 

supplies were very welcome to us after such continu- 
ous storms. 

On the following Tuesday, the first day of June, we 
saw land. It was still covered with snow, for the 
winter, always severe in this country, was extremely 
so this year. Some days before, to wit, the 15th and 
1 8th of May, being still distant from land about two 
hundred leagues, we had encountered two icebergs 
of enormous size, [10] floating upon the sea. They 
were longer than our ship and higher than our masts, 
and as the Sunlight fell upon them you would have 
said they were Churches, or rather, mountains of 
crystal. I would hardly have believed it if I had 
not seen it. When a great number of them are en- 
countered, and the ship finds itself caught among 
them, it is very soon broken into pieces. 

On Thursday, June 3rd, we passed into the country 
through one of the most beautiful rivers in the world. 
The great Island of newfoundland intercepts it at its 
mouth, leaving two openings whereby it can empty in- 
to the sea, one to the North and the other to the South. 
We sailed in through the latter, which is about 13 
or 14 leagues wide. Upon entering, you discover a 
gulf 150 leagues wide; going farther up, where this 
grand river begins to narrow, it is [11] even there 
37 leagues wide. Where we are, in Quebec, distant 
over 200 leagues from its mouth, it is still half a 
league wide. 

KX. the entrance of this gulf we saw two rocks, one 
appearing to be round, the other square. You would 
say that God had thrown them into the midst of the 
waters, like two dovecotes, as a retreat for the birds 
that withdraw there in such multitudes that you 
would almost tread upon them ; and if you do not ob- 


18 LES RELATIONS DBS j£SUITES [Vol.5 

marche deffus eux: & fi on ne fe tient bien ferme, 
ils s'eleuent en fi grand nombre, qu'ils renuerfent les 
perfonnes: on en rapporte des chalouppes ou petits 
bateaux tons pleins quand le temps permet qu'on 
les aborde : les Frangois les ont nommez les Ifles aux 
oyfeaux. On vient dans ce Golfe pour pefcher des 
baleines, nous y en auons veu quantite, pour pefcher 
aufli des molues. I'y ay veu grand nombre de loups 
marins, nos gens [12] en tuerent quelques-vns. II fe 
trouue dans cette grande riuiere nommee de S. Lau- 
rens, des marfoins blancs & non ailleurs ; les Anglois 
les appellent des baleines blanches, pource qu'elles 
font fort grandes a comparaifon de marfoins; ils 
montent iufques a Quebec. 

Le iour de la Saindte Trinite nous fumes contraints 
de relaf cher ^ Gaf pay ; c'eft vne grande bale d'eau 
qui entre dans ce pais .• c'efl icy ou nous mimes pied 
^ terre pour la premiere fois depuis noftre depart. 
Jamais homme apres vn long voyage n'efl rentre 
dans fon pais auec plus de contentement que nous en- 
trions au noftre; c'eft ainfi que nous appellions ces 
miferables contrees. Nous y trouuames deux vaif- 
feaux, I'vn de Honfieur, I'autre de Bifcaye, qui 
efloient venus pour la pefche des molues. Nous 
priames ceux de Honfieur de [13] nous dreffer vn au- 
tel pour dire la Saindte Meffe dans leur cabane. Ce 
fut a qui y mettroit la main, tant ils eftoiet aifes: 
aufTi leur difoy-ie en riant, qu'en baftiffant leur ca- 
bane ils ne penfoiet pas baftir vne Chapelle. Comme 
ie vins k I'Euangile qui fe lit ce iour-la a la Meffe, & 
qui efloit le premier que ie pronongois en ces terres, 
ie fus bien eflonne entendant ces paroles du Fils de 
Dieu a fes Difciples, Data ejl mihi omnis potejlas hi 
ccelo & in terra, euntes ergo docete omnes gentes baptif antes 


1632-33] LEJEUNE'S RELA TION, 1632 19 

tain a good foothold, they rise tip in such numbers 
that they may knock you over. Boats, or little skiffs, 
full of them are brought back to the ships, when the 
weather permits approach to these islands, which the 
French have named the Isles of birds. ^ Ships come 
into this Gulf on whaling expeditions. We have 
seen a great many fishing also for cod. I saw here 
a number of seals, and our people [12] killed some 
of them. In this great river, which is called the St. 
Lawrence, white porpoises are found, and nowhere 
else. The English call them white whales, because 
they are very large compared with the other por- 
poises ; they go up as far as Quebec.'' 

On the day of Holy Trinity, we were compelled to 
stop at Gaspay," a large body of water extending in- 
to this country. It was here that we trod land for 
the first time since our departure. Never did man, 
after a long voyage, return to his country with more 
joy than we entered ours; it is thus we call these 
wretched lands. We found here two ships, one from 
Honfleur and the other from Biscaye, which had come 
to fish for cod. We begged the people from Hon- 
fleur to [13] raise an altar for us, that we might cele- 
brate the Holy Mass in their cabin ; and there was a 
strife among them as to who should work upon it, 
so greatly were they pleased. So I said to them, 
laughingly, that in building their cabin they did not 
think they were building a Chapel. When I came 
to the Gospel appointed for that day in the Mass, 
and which was the first that I had read in these 
lands, I was very much astonished in hearing these 
words of the Son of God to his Disciples, Data est viihi 
omnis potestas in coelo & in terra, euntes ergo docete omnes 
gentes baptisantes eos in nomine Pat r is, etc. Ecce ego 


20 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 

eos in nomine Patris, &c. Ecce ego vobiscum &c. le pris 
bon augure de ces paroles, quoy que ie vifle bien 
qu'elle ne f'addrelToient pas a vne perfonne fi mife- 
rable que moy; auffi m'eft-il aduis que ie viens icy 
comme les pionniers, qui marchent les premiers pour 
faire les tranchees, & par apres les braues foldats 
viennent affieger, & prendre la place. 

[14] Apres la Meffe nous entrames dans les bois, il 
y auoit encor quantite de neige, fi ferme qu'elle nous 
portoit. Le matin il gela affez fort, comme i'allois 
lauer mes mains a vn torrent d'eau qui decouloit des 
montagnes, ie trouuay les bords tous glacez. Nos 
gens tuerent icy quelques perdrix fort grifes, & auffi 
groffes que nos poulles de France. lis tuerent auffi 
quelques lieures plus pattus que les noftres, & encor 
vn peu blancs, car les lieures en ce pais cy font tous 
blancs, pendant les neiges, & pendant I'efte ils re- 
prennent leur couleur f emblable a celle des lieures de 
TEurope. 

Le iour fuiuant nous nous remimes fous voile, & 
le 18. de luin nous moiiillames a Tadouffac; c'eft 
vne autre bale d'eau, ou vne anfe fort petite, aupres 
de laquelle fe trouue vn fleuue nomme Sague qui fe 
iette dans la grande riuiere de S. Laurens, ce fleuue 
[ 1 5] eft auffi beau que la Seine, quafi auffi rapide que le 
Rofne, & plus profond que plufieurs endroits de la 
mer, car on dit qu'il a bien 80. braffes de profondeur 
aux endroits ou il eft le moins profond. Comme 
nous allions dire la Saindte Meffe a terre, I'vn de nos 
foldats tua vn grand aigle aupres de fon aire, il auoit 
la tefle & le col tout blanc, le bee & les pieds iaunes, 
le refte du corps noiratre, il efloit gros comme vn 
coq d'Inde. Nous auons icy feiourne depuis le 14. 
luin, iufques au 3. de lulliet, c'eft a dire 19. iours. 


1632-33] LE/EUNE'S RELATION, 1632 21 

vobiscum, etc. I took these words as a good omen, 
although I clearly saw that they were not addressed 
to so poor a person as I, But it is my opinion that I 
come here like the pioneers, who go ahead to dig the 
trenches; after them come brave soldiers, who be- 
siege and take the place. 

[14] After Mass we went into the woods; the snow 
was still very deep, and so strong that it bore our 
weight. In the morning there was a hard frost ; and, 
when I went to wash my hands in the torrent of wa- 
ter which flowed down from the mountains, I found 
the edges of it completely frozen. Here our people 
killed a number of large gray partridges, as large as 
our chickens in France. They also killed some 
hares, larger-footed than ours, and still a little white ; 
for in this country the hares are all white, while the 
snow lasts, and during the summer they resume their 
color like that of the European hares. 

The next day we again set sail, and on the i8th of 
June we cast anchor at Tadoussac. This is another 
bay or very small cove, near which there is a river 
named Sague [Saguenay], which empties into the 
great river St. Lawrence. This river [15] is as beau- 
tiful as the Seine, about as rapid as the Rosne 
[Rhone], and deeper than many places in the sea, for 
it is said to be 80 fathoms deep in its shallowest 
places. As we were on our way to say the Holy Mass 
on the shore, one of our soldiers killed a great eagle 
near its eyrie. Its head and neck were entirely white, 
the beak and feet yellow, the rest of the body black- 
ish ; it was as large as a Turkey-cock. We sojourned 
here from the 14th of June to the 3rd of July; that 
is to say, 19 days. It was still very cold when we 
arrived, but before leaving we felt excessive heat; 


22 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.5 

II faifoit encor grand froid quand nous y arriuames, 
mais auant que d'en partir nous y auons reffenty de 
grandes chaleurs; & ce pendant ce n'efloit que le 
printemps, puifque les arbres eftoient feulement 
fleuris. En fort peu de temps les feiiilles, les bou- 
tons, les fleurs & les fruits paroillent icy, & meu- 
rillent, i'entends les fruic5ts [i6] fauuages, car il n'y 
en a point d'autres. Or c'eft icy que i'ay veu des 
Sauuages pour la premiere fois. Si toft qu'ils apper- 
ceurent noftre vaiffeau ils firent des feux, & deux 
d'entr'eux nous vindrent aborder dans vn petit cauot 
fait d'efcorce fort proprement. Le lendemain vn 
Sagamo auec dix ou douze Sauuages nous vint voir; 
il me fembloit, les voyant entrer dans la chambre de 
noftre Capitaine, oil i'eftois pour lors, que ie voyois 
ces mafques qui courent en France a Carefme-pre- 
nant. II y en auoit qui auoient le nez peint en bleu, 
les yeux, les fourcils, les ioues peintes en noir, & le 
refte du vifage en rouge ; & ces couleurs font vines 
& luifantes comme celle de nos mafques: d'autres 
auoient des rayes noires, rouges & bleues, tiroes des 
oreilles a la bouche : d'autres eftoient tons noirs 
hormis le haut du front, & les parties voifmes [17] 
des oreilles & le bout du menton, fl bien qu'on eut 
vrayement dit qu'ils eftoient mafquez. II y en auoit 
qui n 'auoient qu'vne raye noire, large d'vn ruban, 
tiree d'vne oreille a I'autre, au trauers des yeux, & 
trois petites rayes fur les ioues, Leur couleur natu- 
relle eft come celle de ces gueux de France qui font 
demy roftis au Soleil, & ie ne doute point que les 
Sauuages ne fuffent tres-blacs f'ils eftoiet bien cou- 
uerts. De dire comme ils font veftus, il eft bien 
difficile ; les hommes quand il fait vn peu chaud vont 
tons nuds, hormis vne piece de peau qu'ils mettent 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1632 23 


and yet it was only the spring, since the trees had 
only just begun to put forth their foliage. In a 
very short time the leaves, the buds, the flowers, 
and the fruit appear here and ripen ; I mean the wild 
[16] fruit, as there is no other. It was here that I 
saw Savages for the first time. As soon as they saw 
our vessel, they lighted fires, and two of them came 
on board in a little canoe very neatly made of bark. 
The next day a Sagamore, with ten or twelve Sav- 
ages, came to see us. When I saw them enter our 
Captain's room, where I happened to be, it seemed 
to me that I was looking at those maskers who run 
about in France in Carnival time. There were some 
whose noses were painted blue, the eyes, eyebrows, 
and cheeks painted black, and the rest of the face 
red; and these colors are bright and shining like 
those of our masks ; others had black, red, and blue 
stripes drawn from the ears to the mouth. Still 
others were entirely black, except the upper part of 
the brow and around [17] the ears, and the end of the 
chin ; so that it might have been truly said of them 
that they were masquerading. There were some 
who had only one black stripe, like a wide ribbon, 
drawn from one ear to the other, across the eyes, and 
three little stripes on the cheeks. Their natural 
color is like that of those French beggars who are 
half -roasted in the Sun, and I have no doubt that the 
Savages would be very white if they were well cov- 
ered. To describe how they were dressed would be 
difficult indeed. All the men, when it is a little 
warm, go naked, with the exception of a piece of skin 
which falls from just below the navel to the thighs. 
When it is cold, or probably in imitation of the 
Europeans, they cover themselves with furs of the 


24 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 

au deffous du nombril iufques aux cuiffes. Quand il 
fait froid, ou bien a 1 'imitation des Europeans, ils fe 
couurent de peaux de Caflor, d'Ours, de Renard, & 
d'autres tels animaux, mais li maufladement, que 
cela n'empefche pas qu'on ne voye la plufpart de 
leurs corps, [i8] Ten ay veu de veftus de peau 
d'Ours, iuftement comme on peint S. lean Baptifte. 
Cette peau velue au dehors, leur alloit fous vn bras 
& fur I'autre, & leur battoit iufques aux genoux, ils 
eftoient ceints au trauers du corps d'vne corde de 
boyau. II y en a de veftus entierement, ils ref- 
femblent tous a ce Philofophe de la Grece, qui ne 
portoit rien fur foy qu'il n'eut fait. II ne faut pas 
employer beau coup d'annees pour apprendre tous 
leurs meftiers. lis vont tous tefle nue hommes & 
femmes; ils portent les cheueux longs; ils les ont 
tous noirs, graiflez, & luifans ; ils les lient par der- 
riere, fmon quand ils portent le dueil. Les femmes 
font honneftement couuertes; elles ont des peaux 
iointes fur les efpaules auec des cordes, & ces peaux 
leurs battent depuis le col iufques aux genoiiils ; elles 
fe ceignent auffi d'vne corde, le refte du corps la 
tefte, les [19] bras & les iambes font def couuertes : il 
y en a neantmoins qui portent des manches, des 
chaulles, & des fouliers, mais fans autre fa9on que 
celle que la neceffite leur a appris. Maintenant 
qu'ils traittent des capots, des couuertures, des draps, 
des chemifes auec les Frangois, il y en a plufieurs 
qui fen couurent, mais leurs chemifes font auffi 
blanches & auffi gralles que des torchons de cuifme, 
ils ne les blanchiffent iamais. Au refte ils font de 
bonne taille, le corps bien fait, les membres tres-bien 
proportionnez, & ne font point fi maffifs que ie les 
croyois ; ils ont vn affez bon fens ; ils ne parlent point 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6j2 25 

Beaver, Bear, Fox, and other animals of the same 
kind, but so awkwardly, that it does not prevent the 
greater part of their bodies from being seen. [i8] I 
have seen some of them dressed in Bear skin, just as 
St. John the Baptist is painted. This fur, with the 
hair outside, was worn under one arm and over the 
other, hanging down to the knees. They were girdled 
around the body with a cord made of a dried intes- 
tine. Some are entirely dressed. They are like the 
Grecian Philosopher who would wear nothing that 
he had not made. It would not take a great many 
years to learn all their crafts. All go bareheaded, 
men and women ; their hair, which is uniformly 
black, is long, greasy, and shiny, and is tied behind, 
except when they wear mourning. The women are 
decently covered ; they wear skins fastened together 
on their shoulders with cords; these hang from the 
neck to the knees. They girdle themselves also with 
a cord, the rest of the body, the head, the [19] arms 
and the legs being uncovered. Yet there are some 
who wear sleeves, stockings, and shoes, but in no 
other fashion than that which necessity has taught 
them. Now that they trade with the French for 
capes, blankets, cloths, and shirts, there are many 
who use them ; but their shirts are as white and as 
greasy as dishcloths, for they never wash them. 
Furthermore, they have good figures, their bodies 
are well made, their limbs very well proportioned, 
and they are not so clumsy as I .supposed them to be. 
They are fairly intelligent. They do not all talk at 
once, but one after the other, listening patiently. 
A Sagamore, or Captain, dining in our room one 
day, wished to say something; and, not finding an 
opportunity, because they were all talking at the 


26 


LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 5 


tous enfemble, ains les vns apres les autres, f 'ecou- 
tans patiemment. Vn Sagamo ou Capitaine diftiat 
vn iour en la chatnbre du noflre, voulant dire quelque 
chofe, & ne trouuant point le loifir pource qu'on par- 
loit toufiours, [20] en fin pria la compagnie qu'on luy 
donnaft vn peu de temps pour parler a fon tour, & 
tout feul, comme il fit. 

Or comme dans les grandes efhendues de ces pais 

cy, il y a quantite de nations toutes barbares, auffi fe 

font-elles la guerre les vnes les autres fort fouuent. 

A noflre arriuee a Tadouffac les Sauuages reuenoient 

de la guerre contre les Hiroquois, & en auoient pris 

neuf, ceux de Quebec en tenoient fix, & ceux de Ta- 

doufliac trois. Monfieur Emery de Caen les fut voir, 

il defiroit fauuer la vie au plus ieune, ie plaiday fort 

pour tous trois, mais on me dit qu'il falloit de grands 

prefens, & ie n'en auois point. Arriuez done que 

nous fumes aux cabanes des Sauuages, qui font faites 

de perches, & couuertes d'ecorces affez groflierement, 

le faifte n'efl point couuert pour receuoir le iour par 

la, & donner [21] yffue a la fumee. Nous enframes 

dans celle du Capitaine de guerre qui eftoit lon- 

guette ; il y auoit trois f eux au milieu, les vns eloi- 

gnez des autres de cinq ou fix pieds. Eftans entrez 

nous nous afiimes de part & d' autre a plate terre, 

couuerte de petite branches de fapin; ils n'ont point 

d'autres fieges. Cela fait, on fit venir les prifonniers 

qui f'affirent les vns aupres des autres; le plus age 

auoit plus de 60. ans, le fecond enuiron 30. le troi- 

fiefme eftoit vn ieune gar9on de 15. a 16. ans. Ils fe 

mirent tous k chanter, pour montrer qu'ils ne crai- 

gnoiet point la mort, quoy que tres-cruelle ; leur 

chant me femble fort defagreable, la cadence finifl!oit 

toufiours par ces afpirations reiterees oh! oh! oh! 


1632-33] LE/EUNE'S RELATION, 1632 27 

same time, [20] at last prayed the company to give 
him a little time to talk in his turn, and all alone, as 
he did. 

Now, as in the wide stretches of territory in this 
country there are a great many wholly barbarous 
tribes, so they very often make war upon each other. 
When we arrived at Tadoussac the Savages were 
coming back from a war against the Hiroquois, and 
had taken nine of them ; those of Quebec took six, 
and those of Tadoussac three. Monsieur Emery de 
Caen went to see the captives, hoping to save the life 
of the youngest one. I pleaded very earnestly for 
all three, but was told that great presents were nec- 
essary, and I had none. Having arrived at the cabins 
of the Savages, which are made of poles, clumsily 
covered with bark, the top left uncovered for the pur- 
pose of letting in light and of leaving [2 1] an opening 
for the smoke to go out, we entered that of the war 
Captain, which was long and narrow. There were 
three fires in the middle, distant from each other 
five or six feet. Having entered, we sat down here 
and there on the ground, which was covered with 
little branches of fir, for they have no other seats. 
This done, they brought in the prisoners, who sat 
down beside each other. The eldest was over 60, 
the second about 30, and the third was a young boy 
from 1 5 to 16 years old. They all began to sing, in or- 
der to show that they were not at all afraid of death, 
however cruel it might be. Their singing seemed 
to me very disagreeable ; the cadence always ended 
with reiterated aspirations, ' * oh ! oh ! oh ! ah ! ah ! 
ah! hem! hem! hem!" etc. After singing for some 
time, they were made to dance, one after the other. 
The eldest one rose first, and began [22] to walk 


28 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 5 


ah! ah! ah! hem! hem! hem! &-c. Apres qu'ils 
eurent bien chants, on les fit dancer les vns apres les 
autres, le plus age fe leue le premier, & commance 
[22] fi marcher du long de la cabane tout nud, hors 
mis, comme i'ay dit, vn morceau de peau qui luy 
couuroit ce que la nature a cache. II frappoit des 
pieds la terre en marchant, & chantoit inceilamment. 
Voyla toute fa dance, pendant laquelle tons les autres 
Sauuages qui efloient dans la cabane frappoient des 
mains ou fe battoient la cuiffe, tirans cette afpiration 
du fondde I'eftomach a — ah, a — ah, a — ah, & puis 
quand le prifonnier s'arrefloit, ils crioient o — oh! 

o — oh! o oh! & I'vn fe raffeant, 1' autre fe mettoit 

^ dancer. Monfieur de Caen demanda quand on les 

feroit mourir, ils refpondirent le lendemain. le les 

fut voir encor, & ie trouuay trois pieux de bois dref- 

f ez, oil on les deuoit executer : mais il vint nouuelle 

de Quebec qu'on traittoit de paix auecles Hiroquois, 

& qu'il faudroit peut-eflre rendre les prifonniers, 

ainfi [23] leur mort fut retardee. II n'y a cruaute 

femblable k celle qu'ils exercent contre leurs enne- 

mis. Si toft qu'ils les ont pris ils leurs arrachent les 

ongles k belles dents ; ie vis les doigts de ces pauures 

miferables qui me faifoient pitie, & vne playe affez 

grande au bras de I'vn d'eux, on me dit que c'eftoit 

vne morfure de celuy qui I'auoit pris, I'autre auoit 

vne partie du doigt emporte, & ie luy demanday fi 

le feu luy auoit fait cela, ie croyois que ce fuft vne 

bruflure, il me fit figne qu'on luy auoit emporte la 

piece auec les dents. Ie remarquay la cruaute 

mefme des filles & des femmes, pendant que ces 

pauures prifonniers dan9oiet : car comme ils palToient 

deuant le feu, elles foufloient & pouffoient la flamme 

deflus eux pour les brufler. Quand ils les font mou- 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i632 29 

through the room, entirely naked, except, as I have 
said, for a piece of fur which covered what nature has 
hidden. He stamped his feet upon the ground while 
marching, and sang continuously. This was all the 
dance ; and while it was going on all the other Sav- 
ages in the hut clapped their hands, or beat their 
thighs, drawing this aspiration from the depths of 
their stomachs, " a — ah, a — ah, a — ah; " and then 

when the prisoner stopped they cried, "o — oh, o 

oh, o — oh;" and, when the one reseated himself, 
the other took up the dance. Monsieur de Caen 
asked when they would be killed. " To-morrow," 
they answered. I went to see them again, and I 
found three wooden stakes erected where they were 
to be executed ; but news came from Quebec that a 
treaty of peace was being negotiated with the Hiro- 
quois, and it would perhaps be necessary to sur- 
render the prisoners, and thus [23] their death was 
delayed. There is no cruelty comparable to that 
which they practice on their enemies. As soon as 
the captives are taken, they brutally tear off their 
nails with their teeth; I saw the fingers of these 
poor creatures, and was filled with pity, also I saw a 
large hole in the arm of one of them ; I was told that 
it was a bite of the Savage who had captured him; 
the other had a part of a finger torn off, and I asked 
him if the fire had done that, as I thought it was a 
bum. He made a sign to show me that it had been 
taken off by the teeth. I noticed the same cruelty 
among the girls and women, when these poor prison- 
ers were dancing; for, as they passed before the fire, 
the women blew and drove the flame over in their 
direction to burn them. When the hour comes to 
kill their captives, they are fastened to a stake ; then 


30 


LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol. 5 


rir ils les attachent k vn poteau, puis les filles aufli 
bien que les hommes leur appliquent [24] des tifons 
ardents & flambans aux parties les plus fenfibles du 
corps, aux coftez, aux cuilles, a la poitrine, & en plu- 
fieurs autres endroits : ils leurs leuent la peau de la 
tefte, puis iettent fur le crane ou le tefl d^couuert, 
du f ablon tout bruflant ; ils leurs percent les bras au 
poignet auec des baftons pointus, & leurs arrachent 
les nerfs par ces trous. Bref ils les font fouffrir tout 
ce que la cruaute & le Diable leur met en I'efprit. 
En fin pour derniere cataflrophe ils les mangent & 
les deuorent quafi tout crus. Si nous eftions pris des 
Hiroquois, peut-eftre nous en faudroit-il paffer par 
Ik, pour autant que nous demeurons auec les Monta- 
gnards leurs ennemis. lis font fi enragez contre tout 
ce qui leur fait du mal, qu'ils mangent les poux & 
toute autre vermine qu'ils trouuet fur eux, non pour 
aucun gouft qu'ils y ayent; mais feulement, [25] di- 
fent-ils, pour fe vanger & pour manger ceux qui les 
mangent. 

Pendant que ces pauures captifs chantoient & dan- 
9oient, il y en auoit de noftre equipage qui fe rioient 
voyans cette barbaric : mais 6 mon Dieu quel trifle 
fubiet de rire ! c'efl la verite que le coeur me fendoit. 
le ne penfois nullement venir en Canada quand on 
m'y a enuoye; ie ne fentois aucune affection parti- 
culiere pour les Sauuages, fi bien k faire I'obeilfance, 
quand on m'euft deu enuoyer encor plus loin mille 
fois: mais ie puis dire que quand i'aurois eu de I'a- 
uerfion de ce pais, voyant ce que i'ay defia veu ie 
ferois touch6, euiI6-ie le coeur de bronze. Pleut k 
Dieu que ceux qui peuuent affifter ces pauures ames, 
& contribuer quelque chofe a leur falut, fuffent icy 
feulement pour trois iours; ie ne croy pas que I'af- 


1632-33] LK JEUNE'S RELATION, i6j2 31 


the girls, as well as the men, apply [24] hot and flam- 
ing brands to those portions of the body which are 
the most sensitive, to the ribs, thighs, chest, and 
several other places. They raise the scalp from the 
head, and then throw burning sand upon the skull, 
or uncovered place. They pierce the arms at the 
wrists with sharp sticks, and pull the nerves out 
through these holes. In short, they make them suf- 
fer all that cruelty and the Devil can suggest. At 
last, as a final horror, they eat and devour them al- 
most raw. If we were captured by the Hiroquois, per- 
haps we would be obliged to suffer this ordeal, inas- 
much as we live with the Montagnards, their ene- 
mies. So enraged are they against every one who 
does them an injury, that they eat the lice and other 
vermin that they find upon themselves, — not because 
they like them, but only, [25] they say, to avenge 
themselves and to eat those that eat them. 

While these poor captives were dancing and sing- 
ing, there were some men of our crew who laughed 
when they saw this exhibition of barbarism. But 
oh, my God, what a sad subject for laughter ! it 
made my heart ache. I thought nothing of coming 
to Canada when I was sent here ; I felt no particular 
affection for the Savages, but the duty of obedience 
was binding, even if I had been sent a thousand 
times further away; but I may say that even if I 
had had an aversion to this country, seeing what I 
have already seen, I should be touched, had I a 
heart of bronze. Would to God that those who can 
aid these poor souls and contribute something to 
their salvation could be here, if only for three days. 
I believe that a longing to help them would seize 
powerfully upon [26] their souls. But let no one be 


82 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 


fedlion de les fecourir ne faifit puiilamment [26] leur 

ame. Qu'on ne s'eftonne point de ces barbaries, 

auant que la foy fnt receue en Allemagne, en Ef- 

pagne, en Angleterre, ces peuples n'efloient pas plus 

polls. L'efprit ne manque pas aux Sauuages de 

Canada, fi bien I'education & rinftru(5tion. lis font 

de-ja las de leurs miferes, & nous tendent les bras 

pour eftre affiftez. II me femble que les nations 

qui ont vne demeure ftable fe conuertiroient aife- 

ment, ie puis dire des Hurons tout ce que nous en a 

efcrit il y a quelque temps le Pere d'vn ieune-homme 

des Paraquais, fgauoir eft, qu'il y a grandement k 

fouffrir parmy eux, mais qu'il s'y pent faire de 

grands fruidts, & que fi les confolations de la terre y 

manquent, celles du Paradis s'y gouftent defia, il ne 

faut que f9auoir la langue, & fi le Pere Brebeuf n'eut 

point efte contraint par les Anglois de s'en retourner 

[27] d'icy, lefquels s'eftoient emparez du fort des 

Fran§ois, il auroit defia bien aduance la gloire de 

Dieu en ce pays \k. Pour les nations etranges & 

vagabondes, comme font celles ou nous fommes de- 

meurans k Kebec, il y aura plus de difficulte; Le 

moyen a mon aduis de les ayder, c'eft de dreffer des 

feminaires, & predre leurs enfans qui font bien 

eueillez & fort gentils : on inftruira les peres par le 

moyen des enfans, voire-mefme, il y en a defia quel- 

ques vns d'entr'eux qui commencent a cultiuer la 

terre, & femer du bled d'Inde, leur vie facheufe & 

tres-miferable leur ennuye: mais en vn mot, la pro- 

meffe du Pere Eternel k fon Fils s'effedtuera toft ou 

tard. Dabo tibi gentes hcereditatevi tuam, & pojffejsionem 

tuani terminos terrce. On a fait de grands fruic5ts dans 

les Indes Orientales, & dans I'Amerique meridionale. 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, idjs 33 

astonished at these acts of barbarism. Before the 
faith was received in Germany, Spain, or England, 
those nations were not more civilized. Mind is not 
lacking among the Savages of Canada, but education 
and instruction. They are already tired of their mis- 
eries, and stretch out their hands to us for help. It 
seems to me that the tribes which have stationary 
homes could be easily converted. I can say of the 
Hurons all that was written to us a while ago by the 
Father of a young Paraguayan: to wit, that much 
suffering must be endured among them, but that 
great results may be expected ; and that, if the con- 
solations of the earth are lacking there, those of 
Paradise may already be enjoyed. It is only neces- 
sary to know the language ; and, if Father Brebeuf 
had not been compelled by the English to leave 
[27] here, they having taken possession of the French 
fort, he would already have advanced the glory of 
God in that country. As to the strange and wander- 
ing tribes like those near Kebec, where we live, 
there will be more difficulty. The means of assist- 
ing them, in my opinion, is to build seminaries, and 
to take their children, who are very bright and ami- 
able. The fathers will be taught through the chil- 
dren. Even now there are some among them who 
have begun to cultivate the soil and sow Indian corn, 
having become weary of their difficult and miserable 
way of living. But, in a word, the promise of the 
Eternal Father to his Son will remedy this sooner or 
later: Dabo tibi gentes Jicercditatcm tuam, & possessionem 
tuam terminos terrcB. Great fruits have been obtained 
in the East Indies and in south America, although 
[28] there have been found in those countries not 
only vices to combat, but also strange superstitions, 



34 LES RELATIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol.5 

quoy [28] qu'on ait trouue en ces pais 1^ non feule- 
met des vices ^ combattre, mais encor des fuperfli- 
tions eftranges, aufqnelles ces peuples eftoient plus 
attachez qu'k leur propre vie. En la nouuelle France 
il n'y a que les pechez a deflruire, & encor en petit 
nombre: car ces pauures gens fi eloignez de toutes 
delices, ne font pas adonnez a beaucoup d'offenfes. 
De fuperftition ou faulfe religion, s'il y en a quel- 
ques endroits, c'eft bien peu. Les Canadiens ne 
penfent qu'a viure & a fe venger de leurs ennemis; 
ils ne font attachez au culte d'aucune Diuinite. lis 
peuuent predre plufieurs femmes, cependant ils n'en 
ont qu'vne; i'ay ouy parler d'vn feul qui en a deux, 
encor luy en fait-on reproche. II eft vray que celuy 
qui fgauroit leur langue les manieroit comme il vou- 
droit, c'eft k quoy ie me vais appliquer, mais i'aduan- 
ceray [29] fort peu cette annee, pour les raifons que 
i'ecriray en particulier a voftre Reuerence. Mais 
retournons ^ la fuite de noftre voyage. 

Quelque temps auparauant que nous leuaffions les 
ancres de TadoulTac, il s'eleua vn grain, comme 
parlent les mattelots, ou vne tempefte fi furieufe, 
qu'elle nous ietta bien auat dans le peril, quoy que 
nous fufTions en la maifon d'alTeurance: c'eft ainll 
que i'appelle la bale de Tadouflac. Les tonnerres 
grondoient horriblemet, les vents furieux firent telle- 
met plier noftre vaiffeau, que fi ce grain eut conti- 
nue, il I'eufl renuerfe fans deffus deffous: mais cette 
furie ne dura pas, & ainfi nous echapafmes ce danger. 

Le 3. iour de luillet nous fortimes de TadoulTac, 
& nous allames mouiller a I'ecliaffaut aux Bafques, 
c'eft vn lieu ainfi appele, a caufe que les Bafques [30] 
viennent iufques Ik pour prendre des baleines. 
Comme il eftoit grand calme, & que nous attendions 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1632 36 

to which the people were more attached than to their 
lives. In new France there are only sins to destroy, 
and those in a small number; for these poor people, 
so far removed from all luxury, are not given to many 
offenses. If there are any superstitions or false reli- 
gions in some places, they are few. The Canadians 
think only of how to live and to revenge themselves 
upon their enemies. They are not attached to the wor- 
ship of any particular Divinity. They are permitted 
to take a number of wives, but they do not take more 
than one. I have heard of one man only who had 
two, and he was censured for it.^ In truth, any one 
who knew their language could manage them as he 
pleased. Therefore I will apply myself, but I shall 
make [29] very little progress this year, for reasons 
which I shall write in detail to your Reverence. But 
let us come back to the continuation of our voyage. 

Some time before we weighed anchor in Tadoussac 
there rose a squall, as the sailors say, or a storm so 
furious that it threw us into great peril, although we 
were in the house of safety; it is thus that I call 
the bay of Tadoussac. The thunder grumbled ter- 
ribly, furious winds made our vessel roll so that, if 
this squall had continued, it would have turned us 
upside down ; but the fury of the storm abated, and 
thus we escaped this danger. 

The 3rd of July we left Tadoussac and went to 
cast anchor at the Basque scaffold,^ a place so called 
because the Basques [30] go there to catch whales. 
As it was very calm and we were awaiting the tide, 
I went ashore. I thought I would be eaten up by 
the mosquitoes, which are little flies, troublesome in 
the extreme. The great forests here engender sev- 
eral species of them ; there are common flies, gnats, 


36 LES RELATIONS DBS J^SUJTES [Vol.5 

la maree, ie mis pied k terre: ie penfay eftre mange 
des maringoins, ce font petites mouches importunes 
au poffible ; les grands bois qui font icy en engendrent 
de plufieurs efpeces/ il y a des mouches communes, 
des moufquilles, des mouches luifantes, des marin- 
goins, & des groffes mouches, & quantity d'autres: 
les groffes mouches piquent furieufement, & la dou- 
leur qui prouient de cette piqueure, & qui eft fort 
cuifante, dure affez long temps, il y a peu de ces 
groffes mouches; les moufquilles font extremement 
petites, ^ peine les peut-on voir, mais on les fent 
bieny les mouches luifantes ne font point de mal, 
vous diriez la nuidt que ce font des eftincelles de feu ; 
elles iettent plus de lumiere que les vers luifants [31] 
que i'ay veus en France: tenant vne de ces mouches 
& I'appliquant aupres d'vn liure ie lirois fort bien. 
Pour les maringoins c'eft I'importunite mefme, on 
ne fgauroit trauailler notamment S. I'air pendant leur 
regne, fi on n'a de la fumee aupres foy pour les 
chaffer: il y a des perfonnes qui font contraintes de 
fe mettre au lit venans des bois, tant ils font offenfez. 
I 'en ay veu qui auoient Ie col, les ioiies, tout Ie vi- 
fage fi enfle, qu'on ne leur voyoit plus les yeux; ils 
mettent vn homme tout en fang quand ils I'abordent; 
ils font la guerre aux vns plus qu'aux autres; lis 
m'ont traite iufques icy affez doucement, ie n'enfle 
point quand ils me piquent, ce qui n'arriue qu'a fort 
peu de perfonnes fi on y efb accouftume : fi Ie pais e- 
floit effarte & habite, ces beftioles ne s'y trouueroient 
point; car defia il s'en trouue fort [32] peu au fort de 
Kebec, k caufe qu'on couppe les bois voifins. 

Le 4. de luillet nous leuames I'ancre pour aborder 
a quatre lieues de Kebec : mais le vent eftoit fi f uri- 
eux que nous penfames faire naufrage dans le port. 


1832-33] LE JEUNES RELATION, ib32 37 

fireflies, mosquitoes, large flies, and a number of 
others; the large flies sting furiously, and the pain 
from their sting, which is very piercing, lasts for a 
long time ; there are but few of these large flies. The 
gnats are very small, hardly visible, but very per- 
ceptibly felt ; the fireflies do no harm ; at night they 
look like sparks of fire, casting a greater light than 
the glowworms [31] that I have seen in France; 
taking one of these flies and holding it near a book, 
I could read very easily. As to the mosquitoes, they 
are disagreeable beyond description. No one could 
work, especially in the open air, during their reign, 
unless there were smoke near by to drive them away. 
Some people are compelled to go to bed after coming 
from the woods, they are so badly stung. I have 
seen men whose neck, cheeks, and whole face were 
so swollen that you could not see their eyes. They 
cover a man completely with blood when they attack 
him ; they war upon some people more than others. 
Thus far they have treated me kindly enough ; I do 
not swell when they sting me, which is the case with 
very few people unless they are accustomed to them. 
If the country were cleared and inhabited, these lit- 
tle beasts would not be found here, for already there 
are but [32] few of them at the fort of Kebec, on ac- 
count of the cutting down of the neighboring woods. 
The 4th of July we weighed anchor to land at a 
place four leagues from Kebec ; but the wind was so 
furious that we thought we would be wrecked in the 
port. Before reaching Kebec we came to an Island 
called saint Lawrence,^" in the middle of this great 
river, which is fully seven leagues in length; the 
western end of it is only about one league distant 
from the French settlement. We cast anchor near 


88 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 

Auant que d'arriuer ^ Kebec on rencontre au milieu 
de cette grande riuiere vne Ifle nommee de faindt 
Laurens, qui a bien fept lieues de long: elle n'eft 
efloignee du bout plus occidental que d'vne lieue de 
la demeure des Frangois. Enuiron le milieu de cette 
Ifle on ietta I'ancre pour s'arrefter: mais les vents & 
la mar6e pouffoient noftre nauire auec vne telle im- 
petuolit^, que le cable fe rompit comme vn filet, & 
I'ancre demeura dans I'eau. A vn quart de lieue de 
la on en iette vne autre, le cable fe romp[i]t tout de 
mefme que le premier. Dedans ce trouble, comme 
les vents redoubloient, le cable qui [33] tenoit noftre 
batteau attache derriere noftre nauire, fe rompit auffi, 
& en vn inftant noftre batteau difparut. A trois 
iours de Ik quelques Sauuages nous vindrent apporter 
nouuelle du lieu ou il s'eftoit alle echouer; s'il eut 
rencontre des roches aulTi bien qu'il rencontra de la 
vafe, il fe fut brife en cent pieces. Si cette bourafque 
nous eut pris vne heure pluftoft, en vn endroit fort 
dangereux, nos Pilotes difoient que c'eftoit fait de 
nous. En fin quand nous fumes enuiron trois quarts 
de lieues du bout de noftre pellerinage, on ietta le 
troifiefme ancre qui nous arrefta: vne barque Fran- 
9oife que nous anions rencontre a TadoulTac, & qui 
venoit auec nous, perdit deux ancres auffi bien que 
nous. 

En fin le 5. de luillet qui eftoit vn Lundy, deux 
mois & 18. iours depuis le 18. d'Auril que nous par- 
times, [34] nous arriuames au port tant defire. Nous 
moiiillames I'ancre deuant le fort que tenoient les 
Anglois ; nous vimes au bas du fort la pauure habita- 
tion de Kebec toute bruflee. Les Anglois qui eftoient 
venus en ce pais cy pour piller, & non pour edifier, 
ont brufle, non feulement la plus grande partie d'vn 


1632-33] LE JEUNES RELATION, ib32 39 


the middle of this Island, intending to land ; but the 
wind and tide struck our ship with so much force 
that the cable broke like a thread, leaving the anchor 
in the water. At a quarter of a league distant an- 
other anchor was cast, and the cable broke just as 
the first one did. In the midst of this struggle, as 
the violence of the winds redoubled, the cable [33] 
fastening the boat to the stern of our ship also broke, 
and in an instant our boat disappeared. Three days 
later some Savages came and told us where it had 
grounded. If it had been driven upon the rocks, as 
it was upon the mud, it would have been broken in- 
to a hundred pieces. If this hurricane had fallen 
upon us an hour earlier, in a very dangerous place, 
our Pilots say it would have been all over with us. 
At length, when we were about three-quarters of a 
league from the end of our pilgrimage, the third an- 
chor was cast, and it stopped us. A French barque 
that we had met at Tadoussac, and which came with 
us, lost two anchors as we did. 

At length, on the 5th of July, which was Mon- 
day, — two months and 18 days since the i8th of 
April, when we sailed, — [34] we reached the much 
desired port. We cast anchor in front of the fort 
which the English held ; we saw at the foot of this fort 
the poor settlement of Kebec all in ashes. The Eng- 
lish, who came to this country to plunder and not 
to build up, not only burned a greater part of the de- 
tached buildings which Father Charles Lallement 
had had erected, but also all of that poor settlement 
of which nothing now is to be seen but the ruins of 
its stone walls. This greatly inconveniences the 
French, who do not know where to lodge. The next 
day Captain Thomas Ker was summoned, a man of 


40 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.5 

corps de logis, que le Pere Charles Lallement auoit 
fait dreffer, mais encor toute cette pauure habitation, 
en laquelle on ne voit plusque des murailles de 
pierres toutes bouleuerfees / cela incommode fort les 
Fran9ois, qui ne fgauent oil fe loger. Le lendemain 
on enuoya fommer le Capitaine Thomas Ker, Fran- 
9ois de nation, ne a Dieppe, qui f'eft retire en An- 
gleterre, & qui auec Dauid & Louys Ker fes freres, 
& vn nomme lacques Michel auffi Dieppois, tous hu- 
guenots, f 'eftoient venus ietter fur ce pauure pais, ou 
ils ont fait de grads [35] degafts, & empefche de tres- 
grands bies. Ce pauure lacques Michel plein de me- 
lancholie, ne fe voyant point recompenfe des Anglois, 
ou pluftofl des Fran9ois reniez & anglifez, comme il 
pretendoit, prefTe en outre d'vn remors de confcience 
d'auoir afllfte ces nouueaux Anglois contre ceux de 
fa patrie, mourut fubitement quelque temps apres la 
prife de ce pais cy. II fut enterre "k TadoulTac. I'ay 
appris icy que les Sauuages le deterrerent, & firent 
toute forte d'ignominie k fon corps, le mirent en 
pieces, le donnerent k leurs chiens : voyla le falaire 
des perfides, ie prie Dieu qu'il ouure les yeux aux 
autres. Monfieur Emery de Caen auoit defia enuoy6 
de TadoulTac vne chalouppe, auec vn extraidt des 
Commiffions & Lettres Patentes des Roys de France 
& d'Angleterre, par lefquelles il eftoit command^ au 
Capitaine Anglois de [36] redre le fort dans huidt 
iours. Les Lettres veues, il fit reponfe qu'il obei'roit 
quand il auroit veu 1' original. On luy porta done le 
lendemain de noftre arriuee, cependant nous allames 
celebrer la faindte MelTe en la maifon la plus an- 
cienne de ce pais cy, c'eft la maifon de madame He- 
bert, qui f'eft habituee aupres du fort, du viuant de 
fon mary; elle a vne belle famille, fa fille eft icy 


1682-33] LE JEUNRS RELATION, 1632 41 

French nationality, born at Dieppe, who had gone 
over to England, and who, with David and Louys 
Ker, his brothers," and one Jacques Michel, also born 
at Dieppe, all huguenots, had thrown themselves 
upon this poor country, where they have done great 
[35] damage and have prevented the doing of much 
good. This poor Jacques Michel, full of sadness at 
not having been rewarded as he desired, by the Eng- 
lish, — or rather by the renegade and anglicized 
French, — also a prey to conscience at having assisted 
these new Englishmen against his own countrymen, 
died suddenly, some time after the surrender of this 
country. He was buried at Tadoussac. I have 
learned here that the Savages exhumed his body, 
and showed it every imaginable indignity, tore it to 
pieces and gave it to their dogs; but such are the 
wages of traitors. I pray God that he may open the 
eyes of the others. Monsieur Emery de Caen had 
already sent a boat from Tadoussac with an extract 
from the Commissions and Letters Patent of the 
Kings of France and of England,^' by which the Eng- 
lish Captain was commanded [36] to surrender the 
fort in eight days. Having seen the Letter, he an- 
swered that he would obey when he had seen the 
original . It was therefore brought to him the day after 
our arrival ; and in the meantime we celebrated the 
holy Mass in the oldest house in this country, the 
home of madame Hebert,^'^ who had settled near the 
fort during the lifetime of her husband. She has a 
fine family, and her daughter is married here to an 
honest Frenchman. God is blessing them every day ; 
he has given them very beautiful children, their cattle 
are in fine condition, and their land produces good 
grain. This is the only French family settled in 


42 


LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 5 

mariee k vn honnefte Fra9ois, Dieu les benit tons les 
iours, il leur a donne de tres-beaux enfans, leur 
beftial eft en tres-bon point, leurs terres leurs rap- 
portent de bon grain; c'eft I'vnique famille de Fran- 
5ois habituee en Canada. lis cherchoient les moyens 
de retourner en France, mais ayans appris que les 
Fran9ois retournoient a Kebec, ils commencerent a 
reuiure. Quand ils virent arriuer ces pauillons blancs 
fur les mats de nos vaiffeaux, ils ne f§auoient [37] a 
qui dire leur contentement : mais quand ils nous 
virent en leur maifon pour y dire la faindte Meffe, 
qu'ils n'auoient point entedue depuis trois ans, bon 
Dieu, quelle ioye! les larmes tomboient des yeux 
quafi k tous, de I'extreme cotentement qu'ils auoiet. 
O que nous chatames de bon coeur le Tc Dcum lauda- 
mus, c'eftoit iuftement le iour de I'odtaue de faindt 
Pierre & S. Paul. Le 7> Demn chante i'offris ^ Dieu 
le premier Sacrifice a Kebec. L'Anglois ay ant veu 
les Patentes fignees de la main de fon Roy, promit 
qu'il fortiroit dans la huidtaine, & de fait il com- 
men9a k s'y difpofer, quoy qu'auec regret: mais fes 
gens eftoient tous bien aifes du retour des Fran9ois, 
on ne leur donnoit que fix liures de pain au poids de 
France, pour toute leur femaine. Ils nous difoient 
que les Sauuages les auoient aid6 a viure la plufpart 
du teps. [38] Le Mardy fuiuant 13. de luillet, ils re- 
mirent le fort entre les mains de monfieur Emery de 
Caen, & de monfieur du Pleffis Bochart fon Lieute- 
nant. Et le mefme iour firent voile dans deux na- 
uires qu'ils auoient a I'ancre. Dieu f9ait fi nos Fran- 
9ois furent ioyeux, voyans deloger ces Fran9ois 
Anglifez, qui ont fait tant de maux en ces miferables 
contrees, & qui font caufe que plufieurs Sauuages ne 
font pas baptifez, notamment aux Hurons ou la Foy 


1632-33] LE/EUNE'S RELATION, 1632 43 


Canada. They were seeking some way of returning 
to France ; but, having learned that the French were 
coming back to Kebec, they began to regain courage. 
When they saw our ships coming in with the white 
flags upon the masts, they knew not [37] how to ex- 
press their joy. But when they saw us in their home, 
to celebrate the holy Mass, which they had not heard 
for three years, good God! what joy! Tears fell 
from the eyes of nearly all, so great was their happi- 
ness. Oh, with what fullness of heart we sang the 
TV Dcuvi laudamus ; it happened to be, very appro- 
priately, the day of the octave of saint Peter and 
St. Paul. After singing the TV Deum, I offered to 
God the first Sacrifice in Kebec. The English- 
man, having seen the Patents signed by the hand of 
his King, promised that he would go away within a 
week, and in fact, he began preparations for going, 
although with regret ; but his people were all very 
glad of the return of the French, for they had been 
given only six pounds of bread, French weight, for 
an entire week. They told us that the Savages had 
helped them to live during the greater part of the 
time. [38] On the following Tuesday, the 13th of 
July, they restored the fort to the hands of monsieur 
Emery de Caen, and monsieur du Plessis Bochart, 
his Lieutenant ; and on the same day set sail in the 
two ships that they had anchored here. God knows 
if our French People were happy, seeing the dislodg- 
ment of these Anglicized Frenchmen, who have done 
so much injury to these poor countries, and who have 
prevented many Savages from being baptized, espe- 
cially among the Hurons, where the Faith would now 
produce fruits worthy of the table of God, if these 
enemies of the truth, of real virtue and of their coun- 


44 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 

produiroit maintenant des fruid:s dignes de la table 
de Dieu, fi ces ennemis de la verite, de la vraye ver- 
tu, & de leur patrie, ne fe fulTent point iettez a la 
trauerfe. Dieu foit beny de tout; c'eft a nos Fran- 
9ois de penfer a leur conferuation, & a mettre en peu 
de temps ce pais cy en tel eftat, qu'ils ayent fort peu 
affaire des viures de France, ce qui leur fera bien aife 
s'ils veullent trauailler. Les Anglois [39] delogeans 
nous fommes rentrez dans noftre petite maifon. 
Nous y auons trouue pour tous meubles deux tables 
de bois telles quelles, les portes, feneflres, chaffis, 
tous brifez & enleuez, tout s'en va en ruine, c'eft 
encor pis en la maifon des Peres Recolets ; nous 
auons trouue nos terres d^frichees couuertes de pois, 
nos Peres les auoient laiffees a 1' Anglois couuertes 
de fourment, d'orge, & de bled d'Inde, & cependant 
ce Capitaine Thomas Ker a vendu la recolte de ces 
pois, refufant de nous les donner pour les fruic5ls 
qu'il auoit trouue fur nos terres; noftre Seigneur foit 
honore pour iamais; quand on eft en vn manuals 
paffage il s'en faut tirer comme on pent; c'eft beau- 
coup qu'vn tel hofle foit forty de noltre maifon, & 
de tout le pais ; nous auons maintenant prou dequoy 
exercer la patience, ie me trompe, c'eft [40] Dieu 
mefme qui porte la Croix qu'il nous donne: car en 
verite elle nous femble petite, quoy qu'il y ait de- 
quoy fouffrir. Retoumons aux Sauuages, & en 
difons encor deux petits mots. 

La veille de noftre depart de Tadouffac, vindrent 
nouuelles que les prifonniers Hiroquois auoient efte 
mis ^ mort a Kebec, & que ceux de Tadouffac de- 
uoient le lendemain paffer le pas : ie me remets a 
plaider leur caufe, & promets de donner ce qu'il fail- 


1632-33] LE /RUNE'S RELATION, j632 46 

try, had not thrown themselves in the way. God be 
blessed for all; it is the duty of our French people 
to think of their preservation, and to put this coun- 
try, in a short time, in such a condition that they 
will not have to depend upon supplies from France, 
which will be easy enough to do if they will only 
work. The English [39] dislodged, we again entered 
our little home. The only furniture we found there 
was two wooden tables, such as they were ; the doors, 
windows, sashes, all broken and carried away, and 
everything going to ruin. It is still worse in the 
house of the Recolet Fathers. We found our cleared 
lands covered with peas ; our Fathers had left them 
to the English covered with wheat, barley, and In- 
dian corn ; and meantime this Captain Thomas Ker 
has sold the full crop of peas, refusing to give them 
to us for the harvest he had found upon our lands. 
Our Lord be forever honored ; when a person is in 
dire distress, he must deliver himself as best he can. 
It is a great deal that such a guest has left our house 
and the entire country. We have now enough to 
try our patience, but I am mistaken, it is [40] God 
himself who carries the Cross which he gives us; 
for, in truth, it seems very little to us, although 
there may be something to suffer. Let us go back 
to the Savages, and say a few words more about 
them. 

On the eve of our departure from Tadoussac, news 
came that the Hiroquois prisoners had been put to 
death at Kebec, and that those at Tadoussac must 
share the same fate the next day. I undertook to 
plead their cause, and promised to give what would 
be necessary to feed them during their passage to 
France, even to find some one to receive them as 


46 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 


droit pour les nourrir paffant en France, voire de trou- 
uer perfonnes qui les receuroiet fi toft qu'ils y fe- 
roient arriuez ; ie me confiois en la charite de 
plufieurs honneftes perfonnes qui n'auroient pas re- 
fufe vne aumofne pour racheter les corps de ces mi- 
ferables des fupplices qu'ils ont endure, & leur ame 
de la damnation eternelle. I'aborde done monfieur 
[41] du Pleffis noftre Lieutenant, ie luy fay apprehen- 
der r affaire. On fait des aumofnes en France pour 
retirer des emprifonnez pour des debtes, & pourquoy 
ne trauaillera-on point pour ces pauures efclaues de 
Satan? Ie luy fay mes off res, que nous donnerions 
tout ce que nous pourrions: il embraffe I'affaire, & la 
propofe Ie foir entre ceux qui mangeoient en la table 
de noftre Capitaine: on repart qu'il faudroit de 
grands prefens pour leur fauuer la vie, monfieur du 
PlefTiS dit qu'on donneroit ce qu'on pourroit, & 
qu'au refte il ne faudroit pas grande chofe, qu'on 
pourroit demander ces trois prifonniers Hiroquois 
comme en efchange d'vn Frangois qu'ils ont tue il y 
a quelques annees, ou h. tout Ie moins en demander 
deux, & qu'affeurement on les auroit: Ie truchement 
qui leur auoir parle m'auoit alfeure que la chofe 
eftoit [42] facile: Yk delfus on forme mille difficultez, 
& I'vn de la compagnie f'ecria qu'il falloit qu'ils 
mouruffent, qu'il les eftrangleroit pluftoft, que c'e- 
ftoient des coquins, & que parlat h. vn Sauuage de 
Kebec il luy auoit done aduis de les faire mourir. 
Si la mort de ces miferables apportoit quelque profit 
k la traidte des peaux, qu'on vient faire en ce pais cy, 
ce zele de mort auroit quelque couleur; mais leur 
vie & leur mort ne fait rien pour la traidte. O qu'il 
importe beaucoup de bien choifir les perfonnes qu'on 


1632 - 83] LE JE UNE S RELA TION, 1632 47 

soon as they would reach there. I trusted to the 
charity of many good people who would not with- 
hold alms to rescue the bodies of these poor creatures 
from the sufferings they endured, and their souls 
from eternal damnation. So I approached monsieur 
[41] du Plessis, our Lieutenant, and explained the 
situation to him. Alms are given in France to re- 
store men to liberty who are imprisoned for debt, 
and why should not something be done for these 
poor slaves of Satan ? I promised him that we would 
give all that we could. He took up the subject, 
and in the evening presented it to those who ate at 
our Captain's table. They answered that it would 
require large gifts to save their lives. Monsieur du 
Plessis said that they [the French] would give what 
they could, and that, besides, large gifts were un- 
necessary, as the three Hiroquois prisoners could be 
demanded in exchange for one Frenchman who had 
been killed a few years ago, or at least two could be 
demanded, and they would be surely given up. The 
interpreter who had talked to them assured me that 
it was an easy [42] matter. Thereupon a thousand 
objections were urged, and one of the company cried 
out that the captives ought to die ; that he would rath- 
er strangle them, that they were rascals, and that 
in talking to a Savage in Kebec, he [the Savage] had 
advised him to have them killed. If the death of 
these poor wretches brought profits to the fur trade 
which people come here to carry on, there would be 
some reason for this eagerness for their death ; but 
neither their life nor their death could affect it. Oh, 
how important it is that those sent to this country 
should be carefully chosen ! It is true that monsieur 
Emery de Caen did not approve of this cruelty. 


48 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 


enuoye en ce pais cy ! II efl vray que monfieur Eme- 
ry de Caen n'approuua point cette cruaute. Quoy 
que §'en foit le vent nous eftant fauorable le iour 
fuiuant nous fimes voile, & laiflames-lk ces trois 
pauures abandonnez entre les mains de leurs enne- 
mis, qui en traitterent deux d'vn horible fagon, car 
ils n'ont point tue [43] le plus ieune a ce qu'on nous 
a dit. 

Arriuez que nous fumes a Kebec on nous raconta 
la mort de fix prifonniers que les Sauuages tenoient, 
laquelle efl arriuee pour I'yurongnerie que les Euro- 
peans ont icy apporte. Le Miniftre Anglois, qui au 
refhe n'eftoit point de la mefme Religion que fes 
oiiailles, car il eftoit Proteftat ou Lutherien, les Kers 
font Caluiniftes, ou de quelque autre Religion plus 
libertine, auffi ont-ils tenu fix mois en prifon ce 
pauure Miniftre dedans noftre maifon: lequel m'a ra- 
conte que les Montagnards vouloient traitter la paix 
auec les Hiroquois, & que celuy qui tenoit les prifon- 
niers luy auoit promis qu'on ne les feroit point mou- 
rir: neantmoins ce miferable eftant yure d'eau de vie, 
qu'il auoit traitte auec les Anglois pour des Caflors, 
appella fon frere, & luy commanda d'aller donner vn 
[44] coup de coufteau a I'vn des Hiroquois & le tuer, 
ce qu'il fit. Voyla les penfees de la paix euanoUies/ 
on parle de la mort des autres. Le Miniftre enten- 
dant cela dit a ce Sauuage qu'il n' auoit point tenu fa 
parole faifant mourir ce prifonnier. Cell; toy, re- 
pond le Sauuage, & les tiens qui I'ont tue, car fi tu 
ne nous donnois point d'eau de vie, ny de vin, nous 
ne ferions point cela. Et de fait depuis que ie fuis 
icy ie n'ay veu que des Sauuages yures, on les en- 
tend crier & tempefter iour & nuidt, ils fe battent & 


1632-33] LE JEUNBS RELATION, 1632 49 

However, the wind being favorable to us on the fol- 
lowing day, we spread our sails, and left these poor 
abandoned creatures there in the hands of their ene- 
mies, who disposed of two of them in a horrible man- 
ner, for, as we were told, [43] they did not kill the 
youngest. 

Upon our arrival in Kebec, we heard of the death 
of six prisoners held by the Savages, the result of 
the drunkenness which has been introduced here 
by the Europeans. The English Clergyman, who 
was not of the same Faith as his people, — for he was 
a Protestant or Lutheran, and the Kers are Calvinists 
or of some other more libertine Religion (they held 
this poor Minister a prisoner in our house for six 
months), — told me that the Montagnards wanted to 
negotiate a peace with the Hiroquois, and that the one 
who was in charge of the prisoners had promised him 
that they would not be killed. Nevertheless, this 
wretch being drunk with brandy, which he had pro- 
cured from the English in exchange for Beavers, 
called his brother and commanded him to go and 
strike [44] one of the Hiroquois with a knife and kill 
him, which he did. Thus all thoughts of peace van- 
ished. They were talking about killing the others. 
The Minister, hearing this, said to the Savage that in 
killing this prisoner he had not kept his word. " It 
is thou," answered the Savage, "and thine, who 
killed him ; for, if thou hadst not given us brandy or 
wine, we would not have done it." And, in fact, 
since I have been here, I have seen only drunken 
Savages; they are heard shouting and raving day 
and night, they fight and wound each other, they kill 
the cattle of madame Hebert; and, when they have 
returned to their senses, they say to you, '' It is not 


50 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.5 

fe blellent les vns les autres, ils tuent le beftial de 
madame Hebert: & quand ils font retournez ^ leur 
bon fens, ils vous difent, Ce n'eft pas nous qui auons 
fait cela, mais toy qui nous donne cette boiffon : ont 
ils cuu6 leur vin, ils font entr'eux auffi grands amis 
qu'auparauant, fe difans I'vn I'autre tu es mon frere, 
ie t'ayme, ce n'eft pas [45] moy qui t'ay bleffe, mais 
la boiffon qui s'efl feruy de mon bras. Ten ay veu 
de tous meurtris par la face; les femmes mefmes 
s'enyurent, & crient comme des enragees? ie m 'at- 
tend bien qu'ils tueront I'vn de ces iours quelques 
Franfois, ce qu'ils ont deja penfe faire, & paffe huidt 
heures du matin il ne fait pas bon les aller voir fans 
armes, quand ils ont du vin. Quelques vns de nos 
gens y eflant allez apres le difner, vn Sauuage les 
voulut affommer a coups de baches : mais d'autres Sau- 
uages qui n'eftoient pas yures vindrent au fecours. 
Quand I'vn d'eux eft bien yure, les autres le lient 
par les pieds & par les bras, s'ils le peuuent attraper. 
Quelques- vns de leurs Capitaines font venus prier les 
Frangois de ne plus traitter d'eau de vie, ny de vin, 
difans qu'ils feroient caufe de la mort de leurs gens. 
C'efl bien le pis quand ils en voyent deuant [46] eux 
d'autres autant yures qu'ils fgauroient eftre. Mais 
finilTons le difcours de ces Hiroquois ; on fit parler au 
Capitaine Anglois s'il en vouloit quelquesvns, comme 
il entendit qu'il falloit faire quelque prefent, il re- 
pondit que non, & qu'ils en fiffent ce qu'ils vou- 
droient. Voicy done comme ils les traitterent. 

lis leurs auoient arrache les ongles auec les dents 
fl toft qu'ils furent pris : lis leurs couperent les doigts 
le iour de leur fupplice, puis leurs lierent les deux 
bras enfemble par le poignet de la main auec vn cor- 
deau, & deux hommes de part & d' autre, le tiroient 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6j2 51 

we who did that, but thou who gavest us this drink." 
When they have slept off their drunkenness, they 
are as good friends with each other as ever, saying 
to each other : ' ' Thou art my brother, I love thee ; 
it is not [45] I who wounded thee, but the drink 
which used my arm." I have seen some of them 
with very badly bruised faces ; even the women get 
drunk, and shriek like furies. I expect that they 
will kill some of us French People one of these days, 
as they have already thought of doing; and after 
eight o'clock in the morning it is not safe to go to see 
them without arms, if they have any wine. Some 
of our men going to see them after dinner, a Savage 
tried to kill them with his hatchet, but other Savages 
who were not drunk came to their assistance. When 
one of them is very drunk, the others tie him by his 
feet and arms, if they can catch him. Some of their 
Captains have come to plead with the French not to sell 
them brandy or wine, saying that they would be the 
cause of the death of their people. It is by far the 
worst when they see before [46] them others as drunk 
as they can be. But let us end the talk about these 
Hiroquois. The English Captain was asked if he 
wanted some of them. As he supposed he would 
have to make them a present, he answered, " no," 
and said that they might do with them what they 
pleased. Now this is the way they were treated : 

They had pulled out their nails with their teeth as 
soon as they were taken. They cut their fingers off on 
the day of their torture ; then they tied their two arms 
together at the wrist with a cord, and two men pulled 
it as hard as they could at both ends, the cord entering 
into the flesh and breaking the bones of these poor 
wretches, who cried out in a horrible manner. Thus 


52 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 


tant qu'ils pouuoient, ce cordeau entroit dans la chair 
& brifoit les os de ces pauures miferables, qui crioient 
horriblement. Ayans les mains ainfi accommodees 
on les attacha a des potteaux, & les filles & les 
femmes donnoient des prefents aux hommes [47] h 
fin qu'ils les laiffaffent tourmenter a leur gre ces 
pauures vid;imes. le n'affiftay point a ce fupplice, 
ie n'aurois peu fupporter cette cruaute diabolique; 
mais ceux qui eftoient prefens me dirent, li tofl que 
nous fumes arriuez, qu'ils n'auoient iamais veu rien 
de femblable. Vous euffiez veu ces femmes enra- 
gees, crians, hurlans, leur appliquer des feux aux 
parties les plus fenfibles, & les plus vergogneufes, les 
picquer auec des aleines, les mordre a belle dents, 
comme des furies, leurs fendre la chair auec des 
coufteaux ; bref exercer tout ce que la rage pent fug- 
gerer a vne f emme. Elles iettoient fur eux du feu, des 
cendres bruflantes, du fable tout ardent, & quand les 
fuppliciez iettoiet quelques cris, tons les autres 
crioient encor plus fort, a fin qu'on n'entendit point 
leurs gemiffemens, & qu'on ne fut touche de com- 
palTion. On leur [48] couppa le haut du front auec 
vn coufleau, puis on enleua la peau de leur tefte, & 
ietta-on du fable ardent fur le teft decouuert. Main- 
tenant il y a des Sauuages qui portent ces peaux cou- 
uertes de leurs cheueux & mouftaches par brauade ; on 
voit encor plus de deux cent coups d'aleines dans ces 
peaux : bref ils exercerent fur eux toutes les cruau- 
tez que i'ay dit cy deffus parlant de ce que i'auois 
veu a Tadoulfac, & plufieurs autres, dont ie ne me 
fouuiens pas maintenant. Quand on leur reprefente 
que ces cruautez font horribles & indignes d'vn 
homme; ils repondent, Tu n'as point de courage de 
lailTer viure tes ennemis, quand les Hiroquois nous 


1632-33] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6j2 53 

having their hands tied, they were bound to posts, 
and the girls and women gave presents to the men 
[47] to be allowed to torment the poor victims to 
their heart's content. I did not remain during this 
torture, I could not have endured such diabolical cru- 
elty ; but those who were present told me, as soon as 
we arrived, that they had never seen anything like 
it. " You should have seen those furious women," 
they said, "howling, yelling, applying the fire to the 
most sensitive and private parts of the body, pricking 
them with awls, biting them with savage glee, laying 
open their flesh with knives ; in short, doing every- 
thing that madness can suggest to a woman. They 
threw fire upon them, burning coals, hot sand; and, 
when the sufferers cried out, all the others cried still 
louder, in order that the groans should not be heard, 
and that no one might be touched with pity. The 
upper [48] part of their forehead was cut with a 
knife, then the scalp was raised, and hot sand thrown 
upon the exposed part. ' ' Now there are some Savages 
who wear, through bravado, these scalps covered 
with hair and moustaches.^'' One can still see over two 
hundred dents made by the awls in these scalps. In 
short, they practiced upon them all the cruelties that 
I have above related in speaking of what I had seen 
at Tadoussac, and many others, which do not occur 
to me at present. When they are told that these 
cruelties are horrible and unworthy of a man, they 
answer you : ' ' Thou hast no courage in allowing thine 
enemies to live ; when the Hiroquois capture us, they 
do still worse ; this is why we treat them as cruelly 
as we can." They killed an Hiroquois Sagamore, a 
powerful and courageous man who sang [49] while 
being tortured. When he was told that he must die, 


64 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.5 


prennent, ils nous en font encor pis, voyla pourquoy 
nous les traittons le plus mal qu'il nous eft poffible. 
lis firent mourir vn Sagamo Hiroquois, homme puif- 
fant & courageux, il chantoit [49] dans fes tourmens. 
Quand on luy vint dire qu'il falloit mourir: il dit, 
comme tout ioyeux, Allons i'en fuis content, i'ay pris 
quantite de Montagnards, mes amis en prendront en- 
cor, & vengeront bien ma mort. La deffus il fe mit 
a raconter fes proiieffes, & dire adieu a fes parents, 
fes amis, & aux alliez de fa nation, au Capitaine Fla- 
mand qui va traicfter des peaux au pais des Hiroquois 
par la merd du Nord. Apres qu'on luy eut coupe 
les doits, brife les os des bras, arrache la peau de la 
tefte, qu'on I'eut rofty & brufle de tons coftez, on le 
detacha, & ce pauure miferable fen courut droit a la 
riuiere, qui n'eftoit pas loin de la, pour fe rafraif- 
chir: ils le reprirent, luy firent encor endurer le feu 
vne autrefois, il eftoit tout noir, tout grille, la graiffe 
fondoit & fortoit de fon corps, «& auec tout cela il 
f 'enfuit encor pour la feconde fois, & [50] I'ayans re- 
pris, ils le bruflerent pour la troifiefme; en fin il 
mourut dans ces tourmens: comme ils le voyoient 
tomber, ils luy ouurirent la poitrine, luy arrachant le 
coeur, & le donnant a manger a leurs petits enfans, 
le refte eftoit pour eux. Voyla vne eftrange barba- 
ric. Maintenant ces pauures miferables font en 
crainte, car les Hiroquois font tons les iours aux 
aguets pour furprendre les Montagnards, & leur en 
faire autant. C'eft pourquoy noftre Capitaine vou- 
lant enuoyer quelqu'vn aux Huros, n'a iamais pen 
trouuer aucun Sauuage qui y voulut aller. C'eft 
affez parle de leur cruaute ; dif ons deux mots de leur 
fimplicite. Vn Sauuage venant voir cet hyuer le 
Capitaine Anglois, & voyant que tout eftoit couuert 


1632-33] LE JEUNETS RELATION, i6j2 56 

he said, as if overjoyed, " Good, I am very much 
pleased; I have taken a great many of the Monta- 
gnards, my friends will take still more of them, and 
they will avenge my death," Thereupon he began 
to tell about his prowess, and to say farewell to his 
relatives, to his friends and to the allies of his tribe, 
to the Flemish Captain who goes to trade for furs in the 
country of the Hiroquois by the Northern sea. After 
they had cut off his fingers, broken the bones of his 
arms, torn the scalp from his head, and had roasted 
and burned him on all sides, he was untied and the 
poor creature ran straight to the river, which was not 
far from there, to refresh himself. They captured 
him again, and made him endure the fire still another 
time ; he was blackened, completely scorched, and the 
grease melted and oozed out of his body, yet with 
all this he ran away again for a second time, but, [50] 
having captured him again, they burned him a third 
time ; at last he died during these tortures. When 
they saw him fall, they opened his chest, pulled out 
his heart and gave it to the little children to eat ; the 
rest was for them. This is a very strange species of 
barbarism. Now these poor wretches live in fear be- 
cause the Hiroquois are always on the watch for the 
Montagnards to do as much for them. That is why 
our Captain, wishing to send some one to the Hu- 
rons, could never find any Savage who would go. 
This is enough about their cruelty ; let us say a few 
words about their simplicity. A Savage coming to 
see the English Captain this winter, and seeing that 
everything was covered with snow, felt compassion 
for his brother who was buried near the French set- 
tlement. Hence [51] he said to the Captain: "Mon- 
sieur, you have no pity for my poor brother; the air 


66 LES RELATIONS DES jRSUITES [Vol.6 


de neige, eut compaffion de fon frere qui eft enterre 
aupres de 1' habitation des Fra9ois; voyla pourquoy 
[51] il luy dit, Monfieur vous n'auez point pitie de 
mon pauure frere, I'air eft fi beau, & le Soleil fi 
chaud, & neantmoins vous ne faites point ofter la 
neige de deffus fa foffe pour le rechauffer vn petit. 
On eut beau luy dire que les corps morts n'auoient 
aucun fentiment, il fallut decouurir cette foffe pour 
le contenter. 

Vn autre affiftant aux Litanies que difoient quel- 
ques Fran9ois, & entendant qu'on difoit fouuent ces 
paroles, ora pro nobis, comme il ne les entendoit pas 
bien prononcer, il croyoit qu'on difoit, carocana ouabis, 
c'eft a dire du pain blanc, il f'eftonnoit que fi fou- 
uent on reiteraft ces paroles, carocana onabis, du pain 
blac, du pain blanc, &c. lis croyent que le tonnerre 
eft vn oyfeau, & vn Sauuage demandoit vn iour ^ vn 
Frangois fi on n'en prenoit point en France, luy 
ayant dit qu'ouy il le fupplia de [52] luy en apporter 
vn, mais fort petit; il craignoit qu'il ne I'efpouuan- 
taft f 'il euft efte grand. 

Voicy vne chofe qui m'a confole, vn certain Sau- 
uage nomme la NafCe, qui demeuroit aupres de nos 
Peres, & cultiuoit la terre ; voyant que les Anglois le 
moleftoient, f'eftoit retire dans des Ifles ou il auoit 
continue a cultiuer la terre; entendant que nous 
eftions de retour, nous eft venu voir, & nous a pro- 
mis qu'il reuiendra a fe cabaner aupres de nous, qu'il 
nous donnera fon petit fils ; ce f era noftre premier 
penfionnaire, nous luy apprendrons ^ lire, & ^ efcrire ; 
ce bon homme dit que les Sauuages ne font pas bien, 
qu'il veut eftre noftre frere, & viure comme nous ; 
madame Hebert nous a dit qu'il y a long temps qu'il 
fouhaittoit noftre retour. 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ibjz 57 

is SO beautiful and the Sun so warm, but nevertheless 
you do not have the snow taken off his grave to warm 
him a little." It was in vain that he was told that 
dead bodies have no feeling- ; it was necessary to clear 
away the snow from the grave to satisfy him. 

Another who was present at the Litanies repeated 
by some Frenchmen, hearing the frequent use of the 
words or a pro nobis, and not hearing the pronuncia- 
tion distinctly, thought they said car oc ana ouabis, that 
is to say, "white bread ;" he was astonished that they 
should so often repeat the words carocana ouabis, 
"white bread, white bread," etc. They believe that 
the thunder is a bird, and a Savage one day asked a 
Frenchman if they did not capture them in France ; 
having told him yes, he begged him to [52] bring 
him one, but a very little one ; he feared that it 
would frighten him if it were large. 

Here is something that has consoled me : A certain 
Savage named la Nasse, who lived near our Fathers 
and cultivated the land, seeing that the English mo- 
lested him, withdrew to the Islands, where he contin- 
ued to cultivate the land; hearing that we had re- 
turned, he came to see us and has promised that he will 
come back and build his cabin near us, and that he 
will give us his little boy. This will be our first 
pupil; we shall teach him to read and write. This 
good man told us that the Savages do not act right ; 
that he wished to be our brother, and live as we do. 
Madame Hebert told us that he has wished for our re- 
turn for a long time. 

Several Savages ask us news of the Reverend Fa- 
ther Lallemant, [53] of Father Masse, and of Father 
Brebeuf, whom they very readily call by their 
names, and inquire if they will not return next 


58 LES RELATIONS DES /As UITES [Vol. & 

Plufieurs Sauuages nous demandent des nouuelles 
du R. Pere Lallemant, [53] du Pere MafTe, & du Pere 
Brebeuf, qu'ils appellent fort bien par leur nom, & 
f'enqueflent f'ils ne retourneront point I'annee qui 
vient: ces bonnes gens ont confiance en nous, en 
voicy vn exemple. 

Le 6. d' Aouft monfieur Emery de Caen nous eftant 
venu voir en noflre petite maifon, eloignee du fort 
vne bonne demie lieue, il demeura ^ difner auec nous. 
Pendant que nous eftions en table, voyla deux fa- 
milies de Sauuages qui entrent iufqu'au lieu ou nous 
eftions, hommes, femmes, & petits enfans. La pre- 
miere porte de noflre maifon eftant ouuerte tout eft 
ouuert, les Anglois ont brif^ les autres : voyla pour- 
quoy ces bonnes gens furent plufloft dans la chambre 
oil nous eftions, qu'on ne f 'en fut pris garde. lis me 
vouloient prier de leur garder quelque bagage, ie re- 
marquay [l]eur patience, car quoy qu'ils fuffent [54] 
en chemin d'vn long voyage qu'ils alloient faire, ia- 
mais neantmoins ils ne nous interrompirent pendant 
le difner, ny apres tandis qu'ils me virent auec noftre 
Capitaine. lis f'affirent de part & d'autre, & ie leur 
fis donner k chacun vn morceau de pain, ce qu'ils 
ayment fort: en fin monfieur de Caen eftant party, 
I'vn d'eux m'aborde, & me dit, Ania Kir Capitana ? 
mon f rere es tu Capitaine ? lis demandoient le f upe- 
rieur de la maifon. lis appellent leur Capitaine Sa- 
gamo, mais par la frequentation des Europeans, ils 
fe feruent du mot de Capitana. Noftre Frere leur re- 
pondit, eoco, c'eft ^ dire oUy. L^ dellus il me fait 
vne harangue, me difant qu'ils fen alloient ^ la 
chaffe, ou k la pefche des Caflors, & que ie leur gar- 
dalTe leur equipage, qu'ils reuiendroient quand les 
fueilles tomberoiet des arbres. lis me demanderent 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 163a 59 


year. These simple creatures have confidence in us ; 
here is an example of it. 

The 6th of August, monsieur Emery de Caen com- 
ing to see us in our little house, distant a good half- 
league from the fort, remained to dine with us. 
While we were at the table, two families of Savages, 
men, women, and little children, approached the spot 
where we were. The outside door of our house 
being open, all is open, the English having broken 
the others ; that is why these simple people were in 
the room, where we were, before we were aware of it. 
They wanted to ask me to keep some of their bag- 
gage for them. I noticed their patience, for, al- 
though they had [54] started on a long journey which 
they were going to make, nevertheless they did not 
interrupt us once during the dinner, nor afterwards 
while they saw me with our Captain. They sat 
down in one place or another, and I had a piece of 
bread, of which they are very fond, given to each of 
them. At last, monsieur de Caen having departed, 
one of them approached me and said: Ania Kir Capi- 
tana ? "My brother, art thou Captain?" They were 
asking for the superior of the house. They call 
their Captain " Sagamore," but by associating with 
the Europeans they have come to use the word Capi- 
tana. Our Brother answered them, eoco ; that is to 
say, "yes." Thereupon he made a speech to me, 
saying that they were going hunting or fishing for 
Beavers, and that I should keep their baggage ; that 
they would return when the leaves fell from the 
trees. They asked me very [55] often if thieves 
ever came into our house, and very carefully scruti- 
nized the places where their baggage might be best 
concealed. I answered that everything was safe in 


60 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 5 


fort [55] fouuent s'il n'y venoit point de larrons en 
noftre maifon, & regardoiet fort bien les endroits on 
leur bagage feroit plus a couuert. le leur repondy 
que tout eftoit chez nous en affeurance, & leur ayant 
monftre vne chambrette qui fermoit k clef, ils furent 
fort contents, mettant Yk dedans trois ou quatre pa- 
quets couuerts d'6corces d'arbres fort proprement, 
difans qu'il y auoit Ik dedans de grandes richeffes. 
le ne f9ay ce qu'il y a, mais au bout du conte toutes 
leurs richeffes ne font que pauurete, leur or & argent, 
leurs perles & diamans font de petits grains blancs 
de porcelaine qui ne paroiffent pas grade chofe. 
Ayant ferre leur bagage ils me demanderent vn cou- 
fleau, ie leur en donnay vn, puis ils me demanderent 
vn peu de ficelle pour attacher apres vn fer de fleche, 
ou vn dard, qui a des dents comme vne cramaillere. 
lis lancent ces [56] dards contre le Caflor, & tiennent 
toufiours le bout de la ficelle, la laiffant filer iufques 
au fond de I'eau, ou fe retire le Caftor bleffe: lequel 
ayant perdu fon fang s'affoiblit, & ils le retirent par 
cette ficelle, qu'ils ne quittent iamais qu'ils n'ayent 
leur proye. Leur ayant done fait prefent d'vn mor- 
ceau de ficelle, ils me dirent Afiia Qapitana ouias amif- 
cou, mon frere le Capitaine, nous t'apporterons la 
chair d'vn Caflor, & me firent bien entendre qu'elle 
ne feroit point bouquanee, ils fgauet bien que les 
Fran$ois n'ayment point leur bouquan, c'eft de la 
chair feichee a la fumee, ils n'ont point d' autre fel 
que la fumee pour conferuer leur viande. 

Vn autre Sauuage, eftant encor a Tadouffac, m'ap- 
porta deux bouteilles de vin pour luy garder dans 
ma cabane. Comme il tardoit long temps a les venir 
requerir, i'aduerty le Pere [57] de None, & noflre 
Frere, que f'il f'addreffoit k eux qu'ils me I'enuoy- 


1632 - 33] LE JE UNE' S RELA TJON, 1632 61 


our house, and having shown them a little room 
which could be locked, they seemed very happy, 
placing therein three or four packages covered very 
neatly with the bark of trees, telling me that they 
contained great riches. I do not know what is there ; 
but, at the best, all their riches are only poverty. 
Their gold and silver, their diamonds and pearls, are 
little white grains of porcelain which do not seem to 
amount to much. Having piled up their baggage, 
they asked me for a knife, and I gave them one ; then 
they asked me for some string to tie to an iron ar- 
row-point or dart, with barbed teeth. They throw 
these [56] darts against the Beavers, and hold the 
end of the string, letting it go to the bottom of the 
water where the wounded Beaver dives ; and, when 
it has lost blood and become weak, they draw it back 
by this string, of which they never let go until they 
have their prey. Having then made them a present 
of the piece of string, they said to me: Ania Capitana 
ouias amiscou : "My brother, the Captain, we will 
bring thee the meat of a Beaver, ' ' and they gave me 
very clearly to understand that it would not be 
smoked. They know very well that the French 
people do not like their dried food: that is, their 
meat dried in smoke, for they have no other salt 
than smoke to preserve their meats. 

Another Savage, while we were at Tadoussac, 
brought me two bottles of wine to keep in my cabin. 
As he was very long in coming back after them, I 
notified Father [57] de None and our Brother that, if 
he applied to them, they should send him to me. I 
feared that he would take one of them for me; but 
he made no mistake. In the evening, as I was say- 
ing my breviary, he came and sat down beside me, 


62 


LES RELA TIONS DES jlSUITES [Vol. 5 


affent, ie craignois qu'il ne les prift pour moy: mais 
il ne fe trompa point. Le foir comme ie difois mon 
breuiaire, il fe vint affeoir aiipres de moy, & attendit 
que i'eulle acheue, alors il me tira & me dit, Ania 
Cabana, mon frere allons k ta cabane, ie I'entendy 
bien, & luy rendy fes bouteilles qui luy auoient 
coufle de bonnes peaux. Ces exemples font voir la 
confiance qu'ils ont en nous: en verite qui f9auroit 
parfaittement leur langue, feroit puiffant parmy eux. 
Ie fuis deuenu regent en Canada, i'auois 1' autre 
iour vn petit Sauuage d'vn cofte, & vn petit Negre 
ou Maure de I'autre, aufquels i'apprenois a cognoiftre 
les lettres. Apres tant d'annees de regence, me 
voyla enfin retourne a 1' A, B, C. mais auec vn conten- 
tement & vne fatisfaAion fi grande, [s8] que ie n'euffe 
pas voulu changer mes deux efcoliers pour le plus bel 
auditoire de France : ce petit Sauuage eft celuy qu'on 
nous lailTera bien tofl tout a fait, ce petit Neigre a 
efle laifTe par les Anglois k cette famille Fragoife qui 
eft icy, nous 1' anions pris pour I'inftruire & le bapti- 
fer, mais il n'entend pas encor bien la langue, voyla 
pourquoy nous attendrons encor quelque temps. 
Quand on luy parla du baptefme il nous fit rire, fa 
maiflreffe luy demandant s'il vouloit eflre Chreflien, 
s'il vouloit eftre baptife, & qu'il feroit comme nous, 
il dit qu'oiiy: mais il demanda fi on ne I'efcorclieroit 
point en le baptifant, ie croy qu'il auoit belle peur: 
car il auoit veu efcorcher ces pauures Sauuages. 
Comme il vit qu'on fe rioit de fa demande, il repartit en 
fon patois, comme il pent, Vous dites que par le ba- 
ptefme ie feray comme vous, ie [59] fuis noir & vous 
eftes blancs, il faudra done m'ofter la peau pour de- 
uenir comme vous: Ik delTus on fe mit encor plus k 
rire, & luy voyant bien qu'il f'efloit trompe, fe mit 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1632 63 

and waited until I had finished. Then he pulled me 
and said: Ania Cabana, " My brother, let us go to 
thy cabin." I understood him very well, and re- 
stored him his bottles, which had cost him some good 
furs. These examples show what confidence they 
have in us. In fact, any one who knew their lan- 
guage perfectly would be powerful among them. 

I have become teacher in Canada : the other day I 
had a little Savage on one side of me, and a little 
Negro or Moor on the other, to whom I taught their 
letters. After so many years of teaching, behold me 
at last returned to the A, B, C, with so great con- 
tent and satisfaction [58] that I would not exchange 
my two pupils for the finest audience in France. 
This little Savage is the one who will soon be left 
entirely with us. The little Negro was left by the 
English with this French family which is here. We 
have taken him to teach and baptize, but he does not 
yet understand the language well ; therefore we shall 
wait some time yet. When we talked to him about 
baptism, he made us laugh. His mistress asking him 
if he wanted to be a Christian, if he wanted to be bap- 
tized and be like us, he said "yes;" but he asked if 
he would not be skinned in being baptized. I think 
he was very much frightened, for he had seen those 
poor Savages skinned. As he saw that they laughed 
at his questions, he replied in his patois, as best he 
could : * ' You say that by baptism I shall be like you : 
I [59] am black and you are white, I must have my 
skin taken off then in order to be like you." There- 
upon all began to laugh more than ever, and, seeing 
that he was mistaken, he joined in and laughed with 
the others. When I told him to take his blanket 
and return to his master until he should understand 
our language better, he began to cry, and refused to 


64 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.5 

^ rire comme les autres. Quand ie luy dy qu'il prit 
fa couuerture, & qu'il fen retournaft chez fon maiftre 
iufques a ce qu'il entendit mieux la langue, il fe mit 
k pleurer, & ne voulut iamais reprendre fa couuer- 
ture, ie luy dy qu'il s'en allaft au fort auec le Pere 
de Noue qui s'y en alloit, il obeit, mais on le rendit 
en palTant k fon maiftre qui ne s'en pent pas long 
temps paffer, autrement nous I'aurions retenu auec 
nous. Sa maiftreffe luy demandant pourquoy il n'a- 
uoit point rapporte fa couuerture, il repondit, Moy 
point baptife, point couuerture: ils difoient viens ba- 
ptife toy, & moy point baptife, moy point baptife, point 
retourne, point couuerture. II [60] vouloit dire, que 
nous luy anions promis le baptefme, & qu'il ne vou- 
loit point retourner qu'il ne I'eut receu, ce fera dans 
quelque temps, s'il plaift a Dieu. 

Ie fupputois r autre iour combien le Soleil fe leue 
pluftoft fur voftre horifon, que fur le noftre, & ie 
trouuois que vous auiez le iour fix heures & vn pen 
dauantage plutoft que nous. Nos Mariniers content 
ordinairement 17. lieues & demie pour vn degr^ de 
I'equinodtial & tout autre grand cercle, & d'ailleurs 
font eftat qu'il y a d'icy iufques ^ vous 1000, lieues 
& dauantage, qui feront par confequent 57. degrez & 
12. minutes d'vn grand cercle, fur lequel fe doit con- 
ter le droit chemin qu'il y a d'icy ^ vous. Suppofant 
done noftre latitude de 46. degrez & deux tiers, & 
celle de Dieppe de 49. & deux tiers, la fupputation 
faite exac5tement par la refolution [61] d'vn triangle 
qui fe fait fur la terre entre nos deux lieux, & le 
pole, nous donnera 91. degrez & 38. minutes pour 
Tangle qui fe fait au pole par nos deux meridiens, & 
par confequent pour la piece de I'equinocftial, qui eft 
la mefure dudit angle, laquelle eft iuftement la diffe- 


1632-33] LE JEUNBS RELATION, i63» 65 


take his blanket again. I told him to go away to 
the fort with Father de None, who was going there. 
He obeyed, but he was restored on the way to his 
master, who cannot do long without him ; otherwise 
we would have retained him with us. His mistress, 
asking him why he had not brought back the blanket 
with him, he answered : "Me not baptized, no blank- 
et. They said: ' Come, baptize thee,' and me not 
baptized ; and me not baptized, no return, no blanket. 
He [60] meant that we had promised him the bap- 
tism, and that he did not wish to return until he had 
received it; that will be in a short time, if it please 
God. 

I calculated the other day how much earlier the 
Sun rises on your horizon than it does on ours, and 
I found that you have daylight a little over six hours 
earlier than we do. Our Sailors usually count 17 
leagues and a half for a degree of the equinoctial and 
all other great circles, and otherwise reach the con- 
clusion that there are from here to you 1000 leagues 
and over, which will consequently make 57 degrees 
12 minutes of a great circle upon which we ought to 
calculate a direct route from here to you. Suppose 
then our latitude to be 46 and two-thirds degrees and 
that of Dieppe 49 and two-thirds ; the computation 
made exactly by the solution [61] of a triangle which 
might be made on the earth, between our two places 
and the pole, will give us 91 degrees and 38 minutes for 
the angle which is made at the pole by our two me- 
ridians, and consequently for the part of the equinoc- 
tial which is the measure of the said angle, and this is 
just the difference in our longitudes. Now, this num- 
ber of degrees being reduced to time, counting one 
hour for every 15 degrees, we shall have six hours 
and six minutes earlier, for the time that the Sun rises 


66 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.5 


rence de nos longitudes. Or ce nombre de degrez 
eftant reduit en temps, contant vne heure pour 
chaque 15. degrez, nous aurons fix heures & fix mi- 
nutes pour le temps que le Soleil fe leue pluftoft chez 
vous que chez nous : fi bien que quand vn Dimanche 
vous contez trois heures du matin, nous ne fommes 
encor qu'a neuf heures du Samedy au foir. I'efcry 
cecy enuiron les huidt heures du matin, & vous auez 
deux heures apres midy. Que fi auec les Geographes 
pour vn degr6 d'vn grand cercle on contoit 25. lieues, 
comme on fait ordinairement des [62] lieues Frangoifes 
de moyenne grandeur, alors nos 1000. lieues ne fe- 
roient que 40. degrez de droit chemin d'icy a vous, 
& par confequent la fupputation faite comme dellus 
ne donneroit pour la difference de nos longitudes que 
61. degrez & 34. minutes, c'eft ^ dire 4. heures & 6. 
minutes de temps. 

Au refte ce pais cy eft tres-bon, fi toft que nous 
fommes rentrez en noftre petite maifon enuiron le 
13. de luillet nous auons foiiy & befch6 la terre, 
feme du pourpier, des naueaux, plants des faifoles, 
tout n'a point tarde a leuer, nous auons bien toft 
apres recueilly de la falade, le mal elt;oit que nos 
graines eftoient gaftees, ie dy d'vne partie, fgauoir eft 
qu'on a enuoye ^ monfieur du PlefTis: car celles que 
noftre Frere a apporte, ont tres-bien reiifh, vous fe- 
riez eflonne de voir quelque nombre d'efpics de 
[63] feigle qui fe font trouuez parmy nos pois, elles 
font plus longues & mieux gren6es que les plus belles 
que i'aye iamais veu en France. 

Vendredy dernier 20. d'Aouft, iour de faind: Ber- 
nard, eftant alle voir vn malade a noftre bord, c'eft 
a dire ^ noftre vaiffeau, pour aller de Ik faluer mon- 
fieur de la Rade, & le Capitaine Morieult nouuelle- 


1632-33] LE JE UNE S RELA TION, 1632 67 

with you than it does here ; so that on Sunday when 
you count three o'clock in the morning, it is here 
still only nine o'clock on Saturday night. I am 
writing this about eight in the morning, and it is two 
in the afternoon where you are. So if, with the Geog- 
raphers, for one degree of a great circle, we counted 
25 leagues, as is generally done with the [62] French 
leagues of medium size, then our 1000 leagues would 
only be forty degrees in a straight line from here to 
you ; and consequently the computation, made as 
above, would give for the difference of our longitude 
only 61 degrees and 34 minutes, — that is to say, 4 
hours and 6 minutes of time. 

All considered, this country here is very fine. As 
soon as we had entered into our little home, the 13th 
of July, we began to work and dig the earth, to sow 
purslane and turnips, and to plant lentils, and every- 
thing grew very well ; a very short time afterwards 
we gathered our salad. But the misfortune was that 
our seeds were spoiled, I mean a part of them ; name- 
ly, those sent to monsieur du Plessis : for those our 
Brother brought us grew very well. You would be 
astonished to see the great number of ears of [63] rye 
which were found among our peas; they are longer 
and more grainy than the most beautiful I have ever 
seen in France. 

Last Friday, August 20th, the day of saint Ber- 
nard, having gone to see a sick person on board, 
that is to say, on our vessel, and going thence to 
greet monsieur de la Rade '^ and Captain Morieult, 
newly arrived, I thought I would be drowned, 
with two Frenchmen who were with me in a little 
Native canoe which we use. The tide was very vio- 


68 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 

ment arriuez, ie penfay eftre noye auec deux Fran- 
9ois qui eftoient auec moy dans vn petit cauot de Sau- 
uage, dont nous nous feruons. La mar6e eftoit vio- 
lente, celuy qui eftoit derriere dans ce cauot le vou- 
lant detafcher du nauire la mar^e le fit tourner, & le 
cauot & nous auffi, nous voyla tous trois emportez par 
la furie de I'eau, au milieu de cette grande riuiere 
de faindt Laurens. Ceux du nauire crie fauue, fauue, 
au fecours, mais il n'y auoit point la de chalouppe, 
nous attrapons le [64] cauot, comme ie vy qu'il tour- 
noit fi fort que I'eau me paffoit de beaucoup par dellus 
la tefle, & que i'eflouffois, ie quittay ce cauot pour 
me mettre a nager, ie n'ay iamais bien fceu ce me- 
ftier, & il y auoit plus de 24. ans que ie ne I'auois ex- 
erce : a peine auoy-ie auance de trois braffes, que ma 
fotane, m'enueloppant la tefte & les bras, ie m'en 
allois k fond, i'auois defia donne ma vie a noftre 
Seigneur, fans luy demander qu'il me retiraft de ce 
danger, croyant qu'il valloit mieux le lailler faire, 
i'acceptois la mort de bon coeur; bref i'eftois defia ^ 
demy eftouife, quand vne chalouppe qui eftoit fur le 
bord de la riuiere, & deux Sauuages accoururent dans 
leur cauot, il ne paroiffoit plus qu'vn petit bout de 
ma fotane, on me retira par la, & fi on eut encor tar- 
de vn Pater, i'eftois mort, i'auois perdu tout fenti- 
ment, pour ce que I'eau m'eftouffoit, [65] ce n'eftoit 
point d'apprehenfion, ie m'eftois refolu k mourir 
dans les eaux, des le premier iour que ie mis le pied 
dans le vaiffeau, & i'auois prou exerce cette re Agna- 
tion dans les tempeftes que nous auons palf e fur mer, 
le iugement me dura tant que i'eu des forces, & me 
femble que ie me voyois mourir, ie croiois qu'il y 
eut plus de mal a eltre noye qu'il n'y en a : bref nous 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s2 69 

lent ; the person who was behind in this canoe wish- 
ing to detach it from the ship, the tide gave him a 
turn, also the canoe and ourselves, and behold us all 
three carried away by the fury of the waves to the 
middle of the great saint Lawrence river. Those 
in the ship cried, " Save them, save them, help! " 
but there was no shallop there. We caught hold of 
the [64] canoe ; as I felt that it was whirling about so 
rapidly that the water came a great way over my 
head, and that I was suffocating, I let go of the 
canoe to swim. I never knew this exercise very 
well, and it was over 24 years since I had tried it. 
I had made scarcely sixteen feet^^ when, my cas- 
sock winding around my head and my arms, I felt 
that I was going to the bottom. I had already given 
my life to our Lord, without asking him to rescue me 
from this danger; believing it better to let his will 
be done, I accepted death cheerfully; in short, I was 
already half drowned, when a boat that was on the 
shore of the river, and two Savages in their canoe, 
hastened towards us. Nothing was seen of me but 
a little end of my cassock ; they dragged me out by 
that, and if they had been one Pater later I would 
have been dead. I was so choked by the water that 
I had lost all feeling; [65] it was not fear, for I was 
resigned to die in the water from the first day I had 
put my foot on the vessel, and I had strengthened 
this resignation a great deal in the tempests which we 
had upon the ocean. My faculties remained as long 
as I had any strength left, and it seemed to me that 
I saw myself dying ; I thought there was more pain 
in drowning than there is. To be brief, we were all 
three saved. I still feel some indisposition in my 


70 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.5 

fumes tons trois fauuez, i'en fuis refte indifpofe de 
reftomach, i'efpere que ce ne fera rien, la volont6 
de Dieu foit faite, cela ne m'eflonne point. Deux 
Anglois f 'eftant noyez dans ces cauots faits d'ecorces, 
qui font extrememet volages, le Capitaine Ker fit 
faire vne petit bateau de bois pour paffer de noftre 
maif on au fort ; car il y a vne riuiere entre deux ; ie 
croiois que ce bateau nous demeureroit, celuy qui 
fen eft faifi I'auoit promis au Pere de None, [66] 
mais depuis il f'eft rauife, s'il nous I'eut donne cela 
ne feroit pas arriu6/ patience, il importe peu oil on 
meure, mais fi bien comment. 

Demain 25. d'Aouft ie dois baptifer vn petit enfant 
Hiroquois qu'on doit porter en France pour ne re- 
toumer iamais plus en ces pais cy, on I'a donne a vn 
Francois qui en a fait prefent k monfieur de la Rade. 
C'eft alfez, nous fommes fi emprefl:ez que ie n'ay 
garde aucun ordre en ce narre, V. R. m'excufera 
s'il luy plaifl, ie la fupplie de fecourir ces pauures 
peuples qui font en bon nombre, les Canadiens, Mon- 
tagnards, Hurons, Algonquains, la Nation des Ours, 
la Nation du Petun, la Nation des Sorciers, & quan- 
tite d'autres: Ie vy arriuer les Hurons, ils eftoient 
plus de 50. cauots, il faifoit fort beau voir cela fur la 
riuiere, ce font de grands hommes bien faits, & tres- 
dignes de [67] compaffion, pour ne cognoiftre pas 
I'Autheur de vie dont ils iouiffent, & pour n'auoir 
iamais oUy parler de celuy qui a donne fa vie, & re- 
pandu fon fang pour eux. 

Ie penfois conclure ce petit narre le 24. d'Aouft: 
mais ce ne fera qu'apres le baptefme de ce petit en- 
fant. Ie viens done de le baptifer, monfieur Emery de 
Caen eft fon Parrain, madame Coullart fille de ma- 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1632 71 

stomach, which is not to be wondered at, but I hope 
that it will be nothing ; may the will of God be done. 
Two Englishmen having been drowned in those bark 
canoes, which are very frail, Captain Ker had a little 
wooden boat made for passing from our house to the 
fort, because there is a river between the two; I 
thought this boat would remain with us. The per- 
son who took possession of it promised it to Father 
de Noue, [66] but he has since changed his mind; if 
he had given it to us, this would not have happened. 
Patience; it matters but little where we die, but a 
great deal, how. 

To-morrow, on the 25th of August, I am to baptize 
a little Hiroquois child who is to be taken to France, 
never to return to this country ; he was given to a 
Frenchman, who made a present of him to monsieur 
de la Rade. Enough of this, we are in such a hurry 
that I have not observed any order in this narrative ; 
Your Reverence will excuse me, if you please. I be- 
seech you to give succor to these poor people who 
are in goodly numbers, the Canadians, Montagnards, 
Hurons and Algonquains, the Nation of the Bear,^~ the 
Tobacco Nation, ^^ The Nation of the Sorcerers, ^^ and 
many others. I saw the Hurons arrive ; in their 50 
canoes and more, they made a very fine sight upon 
the river. They are large, well-made men, and are 
to be [67] pitied because they do not know the Author 
of the life they enjoy, and have never heard of him 
who gave his life and shed his blood for them. 

I expected to end this little narrative on the 24th 
of August, but it will not be until after the baptism 
of this little child. I have just baptized him. Mon- 
sieur Emery de Caen is his Godfather ; madame Coul- 
lart, daughter of madame Hebert, his Godmother. 


72 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.5 

dame Hebert eft fa Marraine, il a nom Louys, auffi 
a-il efte baptife le iour de faindt Louys. Ce pauure 
petit qui n'a enuiron que quatre ans pleuroit incef- 
famment deuant le baptefme, & s'enfuioit de nous, 
ie ne le pouuois tenir: fi toft que i'eu commence les 
ceremonies, il ne dit pas vn mot, il me regardoit 
attentiuement, & faifoit tout ce que ie luy faifois 
faire. Ie croiois qu'il fut Hiroquois, mais i'ay appris 
qu'il eft de la Nation de feu [68] fon Pere & fa Mere, 
& luy ont efte pris en guerre par les Algonquains, qui 
ont brufle les parents, & donne 1' enfant a nos Fran- 
9ois. 

Louys iadis Amantacha nous eft venu voir, & nous 
a promis qu'il viendroit I'annee fuiuante, pour s'en 
retourner auec le Pere Brebeuf en fon pais; il a de 
I'efprit, & m'a t^moigne qu'il auoit de bons fentimens 
de Dieu; cette Nation eft rufee, ie ne f9aurois qu'en 
dire : mille recommandations aux faindls facrifices 
de voftre R. & aux prieres de toute fa Prouince. 
De V. R. 

T res-humble & obeiflant feruiteur 

felon Dieu, Pavl le Ievne. 

Du milieu d'vn bois de plus de 8oo. lieu'es d'ejlendue. It 
Kebec ce 2S. d'AouJl 1632. 


1632-33] LE JE UN E'S RELATION, i6s2 73 


His name is Louys and he was baptized on saint 
Loiiys's day. This poor little one, who is only about 
four years old, cried all the time before his baptism, 
and ran away from us; I could not hold him. As 
soon as I began the ceremony, he did not say a 
word; he looked at me attentively and did every- 
thing that I would have him do. I believed that he 
was an Hiroquois, but I have learned that he belongs 
to the fire Nation ;^ [68] his Father and his Mother 
and he were taken in war by the Algonquains, who 
burned the parents and gave the child to the French. 
Louys, formerly Amantacha,'-^^ came to see us and 
promised that he would come back next year, to re- 
turn with Father Brebeuf to his country ; he is rath- 
er intelligent, and showed me that he had a correct 
conception of God. I could not tell you how cun- 
ning this Nation is. I recommend myself a thou- 
sand times to the holy sacrifices of your Reverence and 
to the prayers of your whole Province. 
Of Your Reverence, 

The very humble and obedient servant, 

in God, Paul le Jeune. 

From the midst of a forest more than 8oo leagues in ex- 
tent, at Kebec, this zZth of August, 1632. 


74 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUJTES [Vol.5 


[69] Privilege dv Roy. 

NOVS Barthelemy lacquinot, Prouincial de la 
Compagnie de Iesvs, en la Prouince de France, 
fuiuant le Priuilege qui nous a efte odlroye 
par les Roys tres-Chreftiens, Henry III. le 10. May 
1583. Henry IV. le 20. Decembre 1606. & Louys 
XIII. a prefent regnant le 14. Feurier 1612. par le- 
quel il eft defendu ^ tous Imprimeurs, ou Libraires, 
de n'imprimer ou faire imprimer aucun liure de ceux 
qui font compofez par quelqu'vn de noflredite Com- 
pagnie, fans permiffion des Superieurs d'icelle. Per- 
mettons a Sebastien Cramoisy Libraire lure Bour- 
geois de Paris, de pouuoir imprimer pour fix ans, 
Brieue Relation du voyage de la Nouuelle France, &c. 
En foy de quoy nous auons figne la prefente le 15. 
Nouembre 1632. 

B. Iacqvinot. 


1632-S3] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6j2 75 


[69] Royal License. 

WE, Barthelemy Jacquinot, Provincial of the 
Society of Jesus, in the Province of France, 
in accordance with the License which has 
been granted us by the most Christian Kings, Henry 
in. the loth of May 1583, Henry IV. the 20th of De- 
cember 1606, and Louys XIII. now reigning, the 14th 
of February 16 12, by which it is prohibited to all 
Printers or Booksellers to print or cause to be printed 
any book of those which are composed by any of our 
said Society, without the permission of the Superiors 
of the same : We permit Sebastien Cramoisy,*^ Book- 
seller under Oath, Citizen of Paris, to print for six 
years, Brieve Relation du voyage de la Nouvelle France, 
etc. In attestation of which we have signed the 
present the 15th of November 1632. 

B. Jacquinot. 


XXI 

Le Jeune's Relation, 1633 

Paris: SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, 1634 


Source : Title-page and text reprinted from original of 
" H. 55" edition, in John Carter Brown Library, Provi- 
dence, R. I. 


lu^Y& 




.^ J^m^^^ 



DE CE QVI S'EST PASSE EN 

LA NOVVELLE FRANCE 

EH L ANNS B I^f?.. 

Enuoyee 

/[V II. P. BARTH. lACQYlNOT 

Prouincial de la Compagnicdc 

I E s V s en la prouince dc 

France, 

'Pat le P. Paul le leune de la mefme Com^a^ 
gme^SffcrieHrdeLirejidcncedeKehea 



A P A R I S,, 

, Chez S E B A s T I E. N Cram dt i¥j 
I rue S. iacques,, aux Cicognts, 

[ '^^ M. DC, XXxWr~* 
^ AVBC FRIFILB.CB BF S,oti 


RELATION 

OF WHAT OCCURRED IN 

NEW FRANCE 

IN THE YEAR 1633. 

Sent to the 

REV. FATHER BARTH. JACQUINOT 

Provincial of the Society of Jesus, 

in the province of 

France. 

By Father Paul lejeune of the same Society, 
Superior of the Residence of Kebec. 


PARIS, 

Sebastien Cramoisy, rue St. Jacques, 
At the Sign of the Storks. 

M. DC. XXXIV. 

BY ROYAL LICENSE. 


82 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 5 


[3] Relation de ce qvi s'est passe en la Novvelle 
France en I'annee 1633. 

MON R. Pere, 
Les lettres qu'on enuoie en ces pais cy, font 
comme des fruic5ts bien rares & bien nou- 
ueaux: on les re9oit auec contentement, on les re- 
garde auec plaifir : on les f auoure comme des f ruidts 
du Paradis terreftre. II y auoit vn an que V. R. ne 
nous auoit parle ; ce peu de mots qu'il luy a pleu 
nous coucher fur le papier, nous femblent [4] des 
paroles de I'autre monde, aufTi font elles pour moy, ie 
les preds come des paroles du ciel. C'eft affez didt 
pour tefmoigner les fentimens qu'a eu mon ame a la 
veue de fes lettres. Et afin que la ioye poffedaft en- 
tieremet noftre coeur, il ne falloit point d'autres mef- 
fagers pour les apporter, que ceux qui font venus. On 
efkoit icy en doubte fi Monfieur de Champlain, ou 
quelque autre de la part de Meffieurs de la Compagnie 
de la Nouuelle France, ou bien fi le fieur Guillaume de 
Caen deuoit venir, comme il en auoit I'an palTe done 
parole publiquement dans noftre vaiffeau au fortir de 
France. Chacun defendoit fon party, & produifoit fes 
raifons probables auec refpect & modeftie,quand tout 
d vn coup Mofieur de Champlain, auec les ordres de 
Monf eigneur le Cardinal eft venu terminer le differend 
en faueur de la [5] Compagnie de la Nouuelle France, 
ce iour nous a efte I'vn des bos iours de I'annee, nous 
fommes entrez das de fortes efperances qu'en fin apres 


1632-33] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1633 83 


[3] Relation of what occurred in New France in 
the year 16^3. 

MY Reverend Father: 
The letters that are sent to this country 
are like very rare and very fresh fruits ; they 
are received with joy, are regarded with pleasure, 
and are relished as fruits of the terrestrial Paradise. 
It had been a year since Your Reverence had spoken 
to us, and the few words which you were pleased to 
place upon paper seemed to us [4] like words from 
the other world. Thus they are for me ; I receive 
them as messages from heaven. Enough has been 
said to show the sentiments which were awakened 
in my soul at the sight of your letters. And in or- 
der that joy should take complete possession of our 
hearts, no other messengers were needed to bring 
them than those who came. We were in doubt 
whether Monsieur de Champlain, or some one else 
in behalf of the Gentlemen of the Company of New 
France, or whether sieur Guillaume de Caen was to 
come, as he had last year announced in our ship as 
we were leaving France. Each one defended his 
side, and presented his probable reasons respectfully 
and modestly ; when all at once Monsieur de Cham- 
plain arrived with the orders of Monseigneur the 
Cardinal, and ended the dispute in favor of the [5] 
Company of New France.^ That day was one of the 
good days of the year; we have been filled with 
strong hopes that at last, after so many storms, God 


84 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol.5 


tat de bourrafques Dieu vouloit regarder nos pauures 
Sauuages de I'oeil de fa bonte & de fa mifericorde ; puis 
qu'il donnoit coeur k ces Meffieurs de pourfuiure leur 
pointe inalgr6 les contrafles que les demons, I'enuie, 
& I'auarice des hommes leur ont fufcitez. le ne f9ay 
comme cela fe fait, mais ie fgay bien que puis qu'ils 
s'intereffent en la gloire de Dieu, en la publication 
de I'Euangile, en la conuerfion des ames, nous ref- 
fentons ie ne f9ay quel intereft d' affection das leurs 
affaires, en telle forte que fi nos fouhaits auoyent 
lieu, ils recueilleroyent plus en vn mois, qu'ils n'ont 
perdu en tant d'ann^es que leurs deffeins ont efte 
trauerfez. Auffi font ils nos Peres, puis qu'ils nour- 
riffent icy [6] vne partie de nous autres ; & nous de- 
partent k tous leur affe(5tion abodamment. I'efpere 
que dans quelques ann^es ils verront des fruicts du 
Ciel, & de la terre fortir du grain qu'ils ont feme 
auec tant de peine. C'eft la coniecture qu'on pourra 
tirer des petites remarques que ie vay brieuement 
tracer. 

Et afin d'euiter la confufion, ie fuiuray I'ordre du 
temps : Mais au prealable il faut que ie die que nous 
auons pris vn lingulier plailir dans les deportemes de 
nos Fran9ois hyuerans. II n'en faut point mentir, 
i'eus quelque apprehenfion dans la trauerfe que le 
libertinage ne paffaft la mer auec nous : mais le bon ex- 
emple des chefs qui commandoyet icy, I'^loignement 
des debauches, le petit trauail que nous auons pris 
dans les predications, & adminiftration des facre- 
ments, les ont retenus tellement [7] dans le debuoir, 
qu'encor bien que nous eulTions des perfonnes de 
deux partis bien differents, neantmoins il fembloit 
que I'amour & le refpect commandoit pour I'ordinaire 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 85 

would look upon our poor Savages with a merci- 
ful and kindly eye, as he has given courage to those 
Gentlemen to carry out their purpose in spite of the 
opposition that demons, envy, and the avarice of 
men, have aroused against them. I know not how 
it happens, but I do know well that since they inter- 
est themselves in the glory of God, in the spread of 
the Gospel, in the conversion of souls, we feel an in- 
explicable and affectionate interest in their affairs ; 
so much so that, if things would go according to our 
wishes, they would gain more in one month than 
they have lost in all the years that their plans have 
been thwarted. They are also our Fathers, since 
they provide here [6] for a part of us, and bestow 
their affection abundantly upon us. I hope that in a 
few years they will see the fruits of Heaven and 
of earth growing from the seeds which they have 
planted with so much trouble. This is the inference 
that may be drawn from the few observations which 
I am about briefly to record. 

And. in order to avoid all confusion, I shall follow 
the order of time. But, as a prefatory remark, I must 
say that we have felt a peculiar pleasure in the be- 
havior of the French who are wintering here. I con- 
fess I had some fear during our voyage that libertin- 
age might cross the sea with us; but the good 
example of the chiefs who were in command at this 
place, the distance from all debauchery, the little 
work which has been done in preaching, and in the ad- 
ministration of the sacraments, have held all strictly 
[7] in the line of duty ; and, although we had among 
us persons of two quite different parties, neverthe- 
less it seemed that love and respect generally ruled 
both sides. A number made a general confession of 


86 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 5 

& aux vns & aux autres. Plufieurs fe font confeffez 
generalement de toute leur vie. Ceux qui n'auoyent 
quali iamais parle du ieufne que par rifee, I'ont 
eflroittement garde, fe rendans obeiffans k leur mere 
I'Eglife Chreflienne & Catholique. 

Mais venous au depart des vaiffeaux de I'an paffe, 
pour fuiure les mois qui fe font efcoulez depuis ce 
teps Yk que nous auifames le Pere de Noue & moy, 
qu'il falloit chercher les moyens de s'addonner a 
I'eflude de la langue, fans la cognoifTance de laquelle 
on ne peut fecourir les Sauuages. le quittay done 
tout autre foing, & commen9ay k fueilleter vn petit 
Dictionnaire efcrit a la main, [8] qu'on m'auoit done 
en France ; mais tout remply de fautes. 

Le 12 d'Octobre voyant que i'auan9ois fort peu, ap- 
prenant auec beaucoup de peine des mots decoufus. 
ie m'en allay vifiter les cabanes des Sauuages a 
deffeing d'y aller fouuent, & me faire I'oreille k leur 
langue. lis eftoient cabanez a plus d'vne grande 
lieue loing de noflre maifon, & de peur de m'egarer 
dans les bois ie pris vn long deflour fur le bord du 
grand fieuue de Saindt Laurens. O que de peine a 
trencher les roches de la pointe aux diamans! C'efl 
vn lieu ainfi appelle de nos Fran9ois, pource qu'on y 
trouue quantite de petits diamants affez beaux. Ces 
chemins font affreux: i'allois des pieds & des mains, 
auec belle peur de me laiffer tober. Ie pafTay par 
des endroits fi eftroits, que la maree montant, & m'em- 
pef chant de pourfuiure mon [9] chemin, ie ne pouuois 
retourner en arriere, tant le palTage me fembloit dan- 
gereux. Ie grimpay au deffus des rochers, & m'a- 
graffant k vne branche qui arreftoit vn arbre abattu, 
cet arbre s'en vint rouler vers moy auec vne telle im- 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 87 

their whole lives. Those who hardly ever spoke of 
fasting, except in jest, have observed it strictly, be- 
coming obedient to their mother, the Christian and 
Catholic Church. 

But let us begin with the departure of our vessels 
last year, and follow the months which have glided 
away since then, when we, Father de Noue and I, 
concluded that we must find some means of devoting 
ourselves to the study of the language, without a 
knowledge of which we cannot help the Savages. I 
then threw all other cares aside, and began to turn 
over the leaves of a little manuscript Dictionary [8J 
that had been given to me in France ; but it was full 
of errors.** 

On the 1 2th of October, seeing that I made very 
little progress, learning a few stray words with a 
great deal of trouble, I went to visit the cabins of the 
Savages, with the intention of going there often, and 
accustoming my ear to their tongue. They were en- 
camped at a distance of more than a full league from 
our house, and through fear of getting lost in the 
woods, I made a long detour on the shores of the 
great Saint Lawrence river. Oh what a trial it was 
to climb the rocks on diamond point ! The place is 
thus named by the French, because a quantity of 
very pretty little diamonds are found there. ^ These 
roads are frightful ; I went on my hands and knees, 
with great fear of falling. I passed through places 
so narrow, that when the tide arose and prevented 
me from continuing on my [9] way, I could not turn 
back, the passage seemed to me so dangerous. I 
climbed upon the rocks and, seizing a branch which 
had arrested the fall of an uprooted tree, this tree 
came rolling toward me with so much force, that if I 


88 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 5 

petuofit6, que fi ie n'etiffe efquiue fon coup, il m'eut 
tout brife, & iette dans la riuiere. 

Arriud que ie fus aux cabanes des Sauuages, ie vey 
leur fecherie d'anguilles. Ce font les femmes qui 
exercent ce meflier. Elles vuidet ce poiffon, Ie 
lauent fort bien, I'ouurant no par Ie ventre, mais par 
Ie dos, puis Ie pendent a la fumee, I'ayant faict au 
prealable efgoutter fur des perches hors de leurs 
cabanes, Elles Ie tailladent en plufieurs endroits, 
afin que la fumee Ie delleche plus aifement. La 
quantite d'anguilles qu'ils prennent en ce temps Ik 
«ft incroyable: ie ne voyois autre chofe dedans & 
[lo] dehors leurs cabanes. Les Fran9ois & eux en 
manget inceffamment pendant ce temps-Ik, & en 
gardent quatit6 pour Ie iours qu'on ne mange point 
de chair, ientens les Frangois; car les Sauuages 
n'ont point d'autres mets pour 1' ordinaire que celuy- 
Ik, iufques a ce que les neges foient grades pour la 
chafTe de I'Orignac. Come i'allois de cabane en ca- 
bane, vn petit gargon aage d'enuiron douze ans s'en 
vint droidt a moy. Ie I'auois careffe I'ayant trouue 
quelques iours au parauant en quelque endroit, me 
femblat fort pofe & mode fie. M'ayant recognen, il 
me didt Ania achtam achtam : Mon frere, viens, viens. 
II me mene en la cabane de fes parens: i'y trouuay 
vne vieille femme qui eftoit fa grad'mere, il luy dit 
-deux ou trois mots que ie n'entendis pas; & cette 
bonne vieille me prefenta quatre anguilles boucanees. 
Ie n'ofay les refufer, [ii] de peur de la facher. Ie 
m'alTis a platte terre aupres de fon petit fils: ie tiray 
vn morceau de pain que i'auois porte auec moy pour 
mon difner, i'en donnay a ce petit gar9on, k fa 
grand'mere, & a fa mere qui furuint. lis me firent 


1 632 - 33] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1633 8» 

had not escaped the blow, it would have crushed and 
thrown me into the river. 

When I reached the cabins of the Savages, I saw 
their place for drying eels. This work is done en- 
tirely by the women, who empty the fish, and wash 
them very carefully, opening them, not up the belly 
but up the back ; then they hang them in the smoke, 
first having suspended them upon poles outside their 
huts to drain. They gash them in a number of places, 
in order that the smoke may dry them more easily. 
The quantity of eels which they catch in the season 
is incredible. I saw nothing else inside and [10] 
outside of their cabins. They and the French eat 
them continually during this season, and keep a large 
quantity of them for the time when meat is not eaten ; 
I mean the French, for the Savages usually have no 
other meat than this until the snow is deep enough 
for Moose hunting. As I went about from hut to 
hut, a little boy about twelve years old came straight 
up to me. A few days before, meeting him some- 
where, I had given him a caress, as he seemed to me 
quite bright and modest. Having recognized me he 
said : Ania achtant achtam ; * ' My brother, come, come." 
He conducted me to the hut of his parents, where I 
found an old woman who was his grandmother; he 
said two or three words to her which I did not under- 
stand, and this good old woman presented me with 
four smoked eels. I dared not refuse them [11] for 
fear of making her angry. I sat down upon the 
ground near her grandson, and took out a piece of 
bread that I had brought with me for my dinner ; I 
gave some to the little boy, to his grandmother, and 
to his mother, who came in. They roasted an eel for 
me upon a little wooden spit, which they thrust into 


90 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.5 

roftir vne anguille auec vne petite broche de bois 
qu'ils picquent en terre aupres du feu, puis ils me la 
prefenterent fur vn petit morceau d'efcorce: ie la 
mangeay auec cet enfant, auquel ie demanday de 
I'eau: il m'en alia querir dans vne efcuelle ou plat 
fait d'efcorce. Si toft que i'eus beu, tons ceux qui 
eftoient dans la cabane beurent apres moy. Pour 
feruiette ce petit gar9on ayant niani6 cette anguille 
cuite qui eftoit fort graffe, il fe feruoit de fes che- 
ueux, les autres frottent leurs mains a leurs chiens : 
cette bonne vieille voiant que ie cherchois ou efluier 
les miennes, me donna de la poudre de [12] bois fee 
& pourry, c'eft dequoy les meres nettoient leurs pe- 
tits enfans, ils n'ont point d' autre linge. Apres que 
i'eu difne, cette bonne femme me fit vne harangue, 
me donna encore de I'anguille: elle me fembloit re- 
comander fon fils, mais ie ne I'entendois pas. Ie ti- 
ray mon papier, & luy dis Ie mieux que ie pu que fon 
fils me vint voir, & qu'il m'apportat les anguilles 
qu'elles m'auoyent done, ne les pouuat apporter auec 
moy pour la difficulte du chemin, luy promettant 
quelque chofe pour fa peine. Ie ne f9ay s'ils enten- 
dirent mon baragoin, mais ie ne I'ay point veu de- 
puis. Eftant de retour au logis, & racontant au Pere 
de Noue la difiiculte du chemin, il me dift pour me 
confoler, qu'allant aux Hurons on rencontroit qua- 
rante endroits plus difficiles que celuy dont ie luy par- 
lois. Dieu foit beny de tout. Si nos [13] Peres qui 
iront en ces pais Ik, ont de la peine, Dieu les f9aura 
fort bien recompenfer. Voyant done que ie perdois 
beaucoup de temps en ces allies & venues aux ca- 
banes, ie cherchay vn autre moye de tirer quelque 
chofe de la langue, dont ie parleray tantoft. 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, idjs 91 

the ground near the fire. They then presented it to 
me upon a small piece of bark. I ate it with the child, 
of whom I asked some water ; he brought me some in 
a dipper or dish made of bark. As soon as I had 
drunk, all those in the cabin drank after me. The 
little boy, having handled the roasted eel, which was 
very greasy, used his hair as a napkin, and the others 
rubbed their hands on the dogs. The good old 
woman, seeing that I was looking for something 
upon which to wipe my hands, gave me some pow- 
der made of [12] dry and rotten wood. It is with this 
that the mothers clean their little children, for they 
have no other towels. After having dined, this 
simple woman made me a speech, and gave me some 
more eel: it seemed that she was commending her 
son to me, but I did not understand. I took out my 
paper, and told her as well as I could that her son 
should come to see me and bring the eels they had 
given me, as I could not carry them back with me 
on account of the difficulties of the road, promising 
her something for her trouble. I do not know 
whether they understood my jargon, but I have not 
seen them since. Having returned to our lodgings, 
and recounted to Father de None the difficulties of 
the road, he told me, by way of consolation, that in 
going to the Hurons one would encounter forty places 
much more difficult then the one of which I spoke. 
God be blessed for all things. If our [13] Fathers 
who are going to those countries have trials, God will 
know very well how to compensate them. Seeing 
that a great deal of time was lost in going to and 
from the cabins, I sought another means of finding 
out something about the language, of which I shall 
soon speak. 


92 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 


Le 13. du mefme mois d'Odtobre le Sauuage nom6 
Manitougache, furnomme des Fran9ois La Naffe, 
nous vint voir auec quantite d'autres, qui nous firent 
depofitaires & gardiens de leurs facs & richeffes. le 
demanday k I'vn d'eux fon nom, il baiffa la tefte fans 
rien dire : vn Fran9ois le demanda a vn autre, luy di- 
fant Khiga ichenicajfon ? comment t'appelles tu? II 
refpondit, narnanikijleriten, ie n'en fcay rien. I'ay 
depuis appris qu'ils ne veulent point dire leur nom 
deuant les autres, ie ne fcay pourquoy. Si neatmoins 
vous demandez k quelqu'vn [14] comme vn autre s'ap- 
pelle, il vous le dira librement, mais il ne dira pas 
fon nom. II eft vray que ie I'ay faidt dire h. quelques 
enfans, lefquels me demandans le mien, & voyans 
que ie le difois librement, ils me difoyent aufll le 
leur. 

Le 24* eflant alle dire la Meffe a 1 'habitation de nos 
Fran9ois, vn Capitaine des Sauuages vint voir le fleur 
Emery de Caen, & luy didt que les Algonquains eflas 
allez h. la guerre contre les Hiroquois vn de leurs 
hommes auoit efte tu6, & 1 'autre pris prifonnier. Ce 
qui auoit tellement efpouuante les Montagnaits, 
qu'ils fen reuenoyent tous de la chafTe du caflor, & 
de I'ours, pour fe cabaner pres du fort, crainte d'eflre 
furpris de leurs ennemis. Ils fe vouloyent r'allem- 
bler pour eflre plus forts : mais ils craignoient la faim 
en quittant leur chaffe. lis demanderent done [15] fi 
on ne les fecoureroit pas de viures au cas qu'ils de- 
meuraffent enfemble. La refponfe fut qu'on ne vou- 
loit rie donner a credit cette an nee Ik; ce k quoy ils 
f 'attendoyent. On me racota vne generofite de ce capi- 
taine, eflant enuoie pour efpion vers les Hiroquois, 
il rencontra 1' efpion des ennemis: fe voians tefte a 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 93 

On the 1 3th of the same month of October the Sav- 
age named Manitougache, surnamed by the French 
La Nasse,^ came to see us with a number of others, 
making us the trustees and guardians of their sacks 
and possessions. I asked one of them his name; he 
bowed his head, without saying a word. A French- 
man asked it of another, saying to him : Khiga iche- 
nicasson ? — ' ' What is thy name ? " He answered, ' ' na- 
manikisteriten, — I know nothing about it." I have 
since learned that they do not like to tell their names 
before others, I know not why. If, however, you 
ask some one [14] what another's name is, he will tell 
you very freely, though he will not tell his own. It 
is true that I have had a number of children tell me, 
who asked me my name, and, seeing that I told them 
freely, they told me theirs also. 

On the 24th, having gone to say Mass at the 
French settlement, a Captain of the Savages came to 
see sieur Emery de Caen, and told him that, the Al- 
gonquains having gone to war against the Hiroquois, 
one of their men had been killed and the other taken 
prisoner. This had so frightened the Montagnaits, 
that they all returned from the hunt for beavers and 
bears, to camp near our fort, for fear of being sur- 
prised by their enemies. They wanted to unite, 
that they might be stronger ; but they feared famine 
in abandoning the chase. They asked us therefore 
[15] if we would supply them with food, in the event 
of their remaining together. The answer was that 
we would not give anything on credit that year ; this 
was what they were relying upon. I was told about 
an act of generosity on the part of this captain. 
Having been sent as a spy upon the Hiroquois, he 
encountered the spy of the enemy, and seeing each 


94 


LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 5 


tefle, I'Hiroquois fe croiant plus fort que le mota- 
gnaits, lui dit, Ne faisos point tuer nos gens; mais 
luitons enfemble, & voions qui pourra emporter fon 
copagnon. La propofition acceptee, ce capitaine qui 
pour lors efloit efpio des Montagnaits, fatigua fi fort 
fon homme, que I'ayant terraffe, il le lia, le chargea 
fur fon dos comme vn fagot, & I'emporta vers fes 
gens. Voila ce qu'on me didt de luy. 

Le mefme iour le Sauuage Manitougache, autre- 
ment La Naffe (c'efl celuy dont i'efcriuis a V. R. I'an 
paffe, [i6] qu'il fe vouloit venir cabaner aupres de 
nous, comme il a fait depuis) retournant de la chaffe 
aux ours, fen vint fouper & coucher chez nous. Ay- 
ant bien mange, il commence en riant a frapper dou- 
cement fon ventre tout nud, difant, tapond niki/poun, 
en verite ie fuis faoul. voila comme ils remercient 
leurs hofles de la bonne chere qu'on leur a faidl: 
quand ils difent niki/poun, ie fuis faoul, c'eft h. dire 
qu'on les a bien traittez. II portoit auec foy vn fort 
grand bouclier fort log & fort large : il me couuroit 
tout le corps aifemet, & m'alloit depuis les pies iuf- 
ques k la poidtrine: ils le releuet & fen couurent en- 
tieremet, il efloit fait d'vne feule piece de bois de 
cedre fort leger : ie ne f cay comme ils peuuent doler 
vne fi grande & fi large planche auec leurs couteaux : 
il eftoit vn petit plie ou courbe pour mieux couurir le 
corps, & afin que [17] les coups de fleches ou de 
maffes venans a le fendre, n'emportaffent la piece, il 
I'auoit coufu hault & bas auec de la corde faite de 
peau : ils ne portent point ces boucliers au bras, ils 
paffent la corde qui les fouftient fur I'efpaule droicte, 
abriant le cofle gauche: & quand ils ont tire leur 
coup, ils ne font que retirer le cofle droidt pour fe 
mettre a couuert. 


1632-33] LE/EUNE'S RELATION, i6j3 95 

other face to face, the Hiroquois, believing himself 
stronger than the montagnaits savage, said to him: 
" Do not let us have our people killed, but let us 
wrestle and see which can carry his companion 
away." The proposal being accepted, this captain, 
who at that time was the spy of the Montagnaits, so 
tired out his man that, having thrown him down, he 
bound him, loaded him upon his back like a piece of 
wood, and carried him away to his people. This was 
what they told me about him.^ 

The same day the Savage Manitougache, other- 
wise La Nasse, (it is he of whom I wrote to Your 
Reverence last year, [i6] that he wanted to come and 
settle near us, as he has since done), returning from 
the bear hunt, came to sup and sleep with us. Hav- 
ing eaten well, he began to laugh and gently strike 
his naked belly, saying, tapon^ nikispoun, " in truth, I 
am full." This is the way they thank their hosts for 
the good treatment they have received. When they 
say nikispoun, " I am full," that is to say that they 
have been handsomely entertained. He carried with 
him a great shield, very long and very wide. It 
easily covered my whole body, and reached from my 
feet to my chest. They raise it up and entirely 
cover themselves with it. It is made of one single 
piece of very light cedar. I do not know how they 
can plane so large and so wide a plank with their 
knives ; it was a little bent or curved, the better to 
cover the body; and, in order that [17] if an arrow 
or blow should split it, it might still hold together, 
it was sewed at the top and bottom with a leather 
string. They do not carry these shields upon their 
arms ; they pass the cord which holds them over the 
right shoulder, protecting the left side, and when 


96 


LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol. 5 


le diray icy que les Sauuageais aimet fort la faga- 
mite, le mot de Sagamiteou en leur langue fignifie 
proprement de I'eau, ou du brouet chaud: mainte- 
nant ils eftendent fa fignifi cation ^ toute forte de po- 
tage, de bouillie, & chofes femblables. La fagamit^ 
qu'ils aiment beaucoup, ell faite de farine de bled 
d'Inde: au defaut de cette farine nous leur en auos 
quelquefois donne de la noflre de France, laquelle 
eftant bouillie auec de I'eau, ne fait que de la colle. 
Ils ne [1 8] laiffent pas de la manger auec appetit, 
notamment fi on y met vn peu de pimi, c'eft k dire 
de riiuile, c'eft leur fucre, ils en mettent dans les 
fraifes & framboifes quand ils en mangent, k ce qu'on 
m'a diet: & leurs plus grads feftins font de graiffe ou 
d'huile. lis mordent par fois dans vn morceau de 
graiffe blache figee comme nous mordrions dans vne 
pomme: voila leur bonne chere. On m'a diet encor 
qu'autant qu'on leur apportat des chaudieres de France, 
ils faifoyent cuire leur chair dans des plats d'efcorce, 
qu'ils appellent ouragana. le m'eflonnois comme ils 
pouuoyent faire cela, car il n'y a rien fi aif6 k bruler 
que cette efcorce. On me refpodit qu'ils mettoyent 
leur chair & de I'eau dans ces plats, puis qu'ils met- 
toyet cinq ou fix pierres dans le feu, & quand I'vne 
eftoit toute bruflante, ils la iettoyent dans ce beau 
potage, [19] & en la retirant pour la remettre au feu, 
ils en mettoyet vne autre toute rouge en fa place, & 
ainfi continuoyent ils iufques k ce que leur viade fut 
cuite. Pierre le Sauuage, dont ie parleray cy apres, 
m'a affeure que quelques-vns ayant perdu ou rompu 
leur chaudiere, fe feruoyent encor de cette ancienne 
couflume, & que la chair n' eftoit point fi long temps 
a cuire qu'on f'imagineroit bien. 


1632-33] LE/EUNE'S RELATION, i6s3 97 

they have cast their missile they have only to with- 
draw the right side to put themselves under cover. 
I shall say here that the Savages are very fond of 
sagamite.'^ The word " Sagamiteou " in their lan- 
guage really means water, or warm gruel. Now 
they have extended its meaning to signify all sorts of 
soups, broths, and similar things. This ' * sagamit6, ' ' 
of which they are very fond, is made of cornmeal; 
if they are short of that, we sometimes give them 
some of our French flour, which, being boiled with 
water, makes simple paste. They do [i8] not fail to 
eat it with appetite, especially when we place in it a 
little "pimi;" that is to say, oil, for that is their 
sugar. They use it with their strawberries and 
raspberries when they eat them, as I am told, and 
their greatest feasts are of fat or of oil. They some- 
times bite into a piece of solid white grease as we 
would bite into an apple ; this is their high living. 
I have been told that, before kettles were brought to 
them from France, they cooked their meat in bark 
dishes which they called ouragana. I wondered how 
they could do that, for there is nothing easier to 
burn than this bark. I was answered that they put 
their meat and water into these dishes, then they 
place five or six stones in the fire; and, when one is 
burning hot, they throw it into this fine soup, [19] 
and, withdrawing it to place it in the fire again, they 
put another one which is red-hot in its place, and 
thus continue until their meat is cooked. Pierre, the 
Savage, of whom I shall speak hereafter, assured me 
that some of them, having lost or broken their ket- 
tles, still resorted to this old custom, and that it did 
not take so long to cook the meat as one would im- 
agine. 


98 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 

Le 27. d'Octobre veille de fainct Simon & fainct 
lude nous vifmes vne eclipfe de lune, qui me confir- 
ma dans la remarque que ie fis I'an paffe que vous 
auiez en France le iour fix heures & vn peu dauan- 
tage, pluftoft que no^ : car TAlmanach difoit que 
cette eclipfe deuoit arriuer en France fur la minuict, 
& nous la vimes fur les fix heures du foir ; dont ie con- 
clus que la difference du commencement de nos iours 
& de nos nuidts [20] eft de fix heures : fi bien que main- 
tenant vous eftes dans la profondeur de la nuidt au 
temps que i'efcris cecy fur les fix heures du foir. 

Le 28^ quelques chafl!eurs Frangois retournans des 
ifles qui font das le grand fleuue S. Laurens nous 
diret qu'il y auoit du gibier h. foifon, des outardes, 
des oyes, des canards, des farcelles, & autres oyfeaux. 
lis nous affeurerent encore qu'il y auoit des pommes 
dans ces ifles, fort douces, mais fort petites, & qu'ils 
auoyent mange des prunes qui ne cederoient point 
k nos abricots de France fi ces arbres eftoient culti- 
uez. Les Sauuages gaftent tout, car rencontrans vn 
arbre fruidtier, ils I'abbattent pour auoir le fruidt. 

Le 31. vn Sauuage furnomme Brehault, pource 
qu'il parloit fort haut, reuenant de la chaff e demada 
le couuert chez nous pour vne nuidt, & ^ [21] fouper 
par confequent. On luy donna des pois, & ^ fes deux 
enfans qui I'accompagnoyent: il mangeoit auec fi 
grand appetit, que pour exploitter dauatage il quitta 
vne cueiller d'eftain qu'on luy auoit prefentee, & prit 
la grande cueiller du pot, fen feruant pour manger: 
Et pource que le plat n'eftoit pas affez profond il 
puifoit dans la marmite, de laquelle il fe feruoit pour 
6cuelle, fans garder autre ciuilite que celle que fon 
grand appetit luy f ournifl!oit. Ie le lailf ay faire quel- 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 99 

On the 27th of October, the eve of saint Simon 
and saint Jude, we saw an eclipse of the moon, which 
confirmed the observations which I made last year, 
that in France it is daylight a little over six hours 
sooner than it is here. For the Almanac had an- 
nounced that the eclipse would commence at mid- 
night in France, and we saw it about six o'clock in 
the evening. Therefore I concluded that the differ- 
ence in the beginning of our days and our nights [20] 
is six hours ; so that now you are in the middle of 
night, while I am writing this about six o'clock in 
the evening. 

On the 28th, some French hunters, returning 
from the islands which are in the great St. Lawrence 
river, told us that game swarmed there; bustards, 
geese, ducks, teal, and other birds. They assured 
us also that there were apples in those islands, very 
sweet but very small ; and that they had eaten plums 
which would not be in any way inferior to our apri- 
cots in France if the trees were cultivated. The Sav- 
ages spoil everything, for, when they come to a fruit 
tree, they cut it down to get the fruit. 

On the 3 ist, a Savage, surnamed Brehault on account 
of his loud voice, in coming back from the hunt asked 
us for a night's lodging and [21] consequently for his 
supper. We gave peas both to him and to his two 
children who were with him. He ate so ravenously, 
that to make the best of the occasion, he threw aside 
the pewter spoon that had been given to him, and 
took the great pot-ladle to eat with ; and, as his dish 
was not big enough, he dipped into the saucepan, and 
even used it as a ladle, observing no other law of 
politeness than what his great appetite suggested to 
him. I let him go on for some time. After he had 


100 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 5 

que temps. Apres qu'il eut bien mange, il fen va 
prendre de I'eau auec la mefme cueiller du pot, beti- 
uant cela auec plailir, & reiettant fon refte dans le 
feau. voila toute I'honneftete qu'ils f9auent. 

I 'en ay veu quantite d'autres cherchans quelque 
chofe pour puifer de I'eau, prendre vn petit poeflon, 
dont le deffous eft comme celuy d'vne [22] marmite, 
& boire brauement auec cela, & auec autant de con- 
tentement qu'on boiroit en Frace d'vn vin fort excel- 
lent dans vn verre de cryftal : les vaiffeaux les plus 
gras leur sot les plus agreables, pource qu'il n'y a 
rien qu'ils aiment tant que la graiffe, ils boiuent 
chaud ordinairement, & mangent a terre: ceux qui 
maintenant nous cognoiffent ne font plus ces groffes 
inciuilitez deuant nous. 

Le premier iour de Nouembre fefte de tous les 
Saints, aiant appris qu'vn pauure miferable Sauuage 
mag6 d'vn chancre ou des ^croiielles, eftoit das vne 
mefchante cabane dela le grand fleuue de S. Laurens, 
abandonn6 de tout le monde, horfmis de la feme qui 
I'affiftoit le mieux qu'elle pouuoit, nous fifmes ce 
que nous peumes pour le faire apporter pres de noftre 
maifon, afin de le pouuoir fecourir felon le corps & 
felon I'ame: [23] le Pere de None & noftre Frere le 
furent voir, ils en eurent grande compafllon. le 
priay noftre truchement fracois d'induire les Sau- 
uages k nous 1' apporter: car nous ne pouuions Taller 
querir; il en parla a I'vn d'eux en ma prefence, qui 
demanda ce qu'on luy donneroit, on luy dit qu'on luy 
donneroit a manger, ie luy fis dire qu'il eftoit gran- 
dement ingrat, que cet homme eftoit de fa nation, & 
que nous qui n'en eftions pas, le voulios fecourir, & 
cependant qu'il luy refufoit ce peu d'alTiftance. A 
cela point d' autre refponfe, flnon qu'il s'en alloit 


1632-33] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s3 101 

eaten well, he dipped some water out with the same 
pot-ladle, drinking it with great relish and throwing 
back into the pail what was left. This is all the 
manners they have. 

I have seen many others, looking for something 
with which to dip water, take a little kettle, the bot- 
tom of which is like that of a [22] saucepan, and drink 
cheerfully from it and with as much satisfaction as 
you would in France drink excellent wine from a 
crystal glass. The most greasy vessels are the most 
agreeable to them, for there is nothing they relish so 
much as grease ; they usually drink liquids hot and 
they eat from the ground. Those who know us do not 
now indulge in such gross incivilities in our presence. 

On the first day of November, all Saints' day, 
having learned that a poor miserable Savage, eaten 
by a malignant ulcer or scrofulous affection, was in 
a wretched hut beyond the great St. Lawrence, aban- 
doned by everybody except his wife, who was caring 
for him the best she could, we did all in our power 
to have him brought near our house, in order that we 
might help him both in regard to his body and his 
soul. [23] Father de None and our Brother went to 
see him, and they were filled with compassion for 
him. I begged our french interpreter to persuade 
the Savages to bring him to us, for we could not go 
and fetch him. He spoke to one of them in my 
presence, who asked what he would be given for it. 
He was told that he would be given something to 
eat. I had them tell him that he was very ungrate- 
ful; that the sick man was of his tribe, and that we 
who were not of it wished to help him, and still he 
refused him that little assistance. For this he made 
no other excuse than that he was going very soon to 


102 LES RELATIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol.5 

bien-toft k la chalTe, & qu'il n'auoit pas le loifir de 
mener Id fon canot. 

I'ay remarque que les Sauuages font tres-peu d'e- 
ftat d'vn homme de la fante duquel ils defefperent, 
voire mefme ils les tuent par fois, ou les laillent das 
les bois pour s'en deffaire, [24] ou pour ne les voir 
languir. 

Le 5. du mefme mois de Nouembre, vn grand ieune 
Sauuage s'en vint chez nous retournant de la chaffe 
aux caftors, criant qu'il mouroit de faim, il apportoit 
quantity de racines, entr'autres force oignons de mar- 
tagons rouges, dont il y a icy tres-grand nobre, nous 
luy donnafmes quelque chofe, & gouftafmes de ces 
oignons, ils font tres-bons k manger, il n'y fit point 
d' autre faulce que de les faire boiiillir dans I'eau fans 
fel, car les Sauuages n'en mangent point, quoy que 
maintenant ils s'y accouflument fort bien. 

Le buictiefme Manitougache furnomme la Nalle, 
& toute fa famille compofee de deux ou trois me- 
nages, fe vindrent cabaner aupres de noftre maifon, 
ils nous dirent que deux ou trois cabanes de Sauuages 
auoient eft6 deuor^es par de grands animaux inco- 
gnus, [25] qu'ils croioient que c'etoient des Diables, & 
que les Montagnaits ayant peur, ne vouloient point 
aller h. la chalTe du coft6 du Cap de Tourmente, & de 
TadoulTac, ces moflres ayans paru de ce cofte 1^. 
On foup9onna par apres que les Sauuages auoient fait 
courir ce bruit, pour tirer de 1' autre cofte de la riuiere. 

Le 9. ie m'en allay voir ces nouueaux hofles; 
comme i'eftois dans leur cabane, i'entendois chanter 
deux hommes fans fgauoir ou ils eftoient, ie regarde 
dans toute la cabane, ie ne les voy point & cependat 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 103 

the hunt, and that he had no time to take his canoe 
there. 

I have observed that the Savages care but little for 
men whose condition is so low that life is despaired 
of; indeed they sometimes kill them, or leave them 
in the woods to get rid of them, [24] or to avoid 
seeing them gradually fail. 

On the 5 th of the same month of November, a 
tall young Savage, returning from beaver hunting, 
called upon us, crying out that he was dying of 
hunger. He brought a number of roots, among 
them several bulbs of the red lily variety, of which 
there are a great many here. We gave him some- 
thing, and tasted these bulbs, which are very good 
to eat ; ^ he made no other sauce than to boil them in 
a little water without salt, which the Savages do not 
use, although they are now accustoming themselves 
to it very well. 

On the eighth, Manitougache, sumamed la Nasse, 
and all his family, consisting of two or three house- 
holds, came and encamped near our house. They 
told us that two or three families of Savages had 
been devoured by large unknown animals, [25] which 
they believed were Devils ; and that the Montagnaits, 
fearing them, did not wish to go hunting in the 
neighborhood of Cape de Tourmente and Tadoussac, 
these monsters having appeared in that neighbor- 
hood.*' It was afterward suspected that the Savages 
had spread this report, to draw them from the other 
side of the river. 

On the 9th I went to see these newcomers; and 
while in their cabin I heard two men singing, but I 
could not tell where they were. I looked all around 
in the cabin, but did not see them, and yet they 


104 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.5 

ils eftoient tout au milieu, renfermes comme dans vn 
four, oti ils fe mettent pour fe faire fuer. Ils drelTent 
vn petit tabernacle fort bas, entour6 d'ecorces, & tout 
couuert de leurs robbes de peaux: ils font chauffer 
cinq ou fix cailloux qu'ils mettent dans ce four oti 
ils entrent tous nuds, [26] ils chantent Ik dedans in- 
ceffamment, frappans doucement les coftez de ces 
eftuues. le les veis fortir tous moiiillez de leur 
fueur: voila la meilleure de leurs medecines. 

Le 12. de Nouembre, I'liyuer fit fes approches, 
commengant k nous aflieger de fes glaces. Ayant 
efte fort long temps ce iour Ik dans vne grande ca- 
bane de Sauuages, oil il y auoit plufieurs hommes, 
femmes, enfans de toutes fa9ons, ie remarquay leur 
admirable patience, s'il y auoit tant de families en- 
femble en noftre France, ce ne feroiet que difputes, 
que querelles, & qu'iniures; les meres ne s'impati- 
entent point apres leurs enfans, ils ne f§auent que 
c'eft que de iurer, tout leur ferment confifte en ce 
mot tapon^, en verity, point de ialoufie les vns enuers 
les autres, ils s'entr'aident & fecourent grandement, 
pource qu'ils efperent le reciproque, [27] cet efpoir 
manquant, ils ne tiennent compte de qui que ce foit. 

Tout ainfi qu'vn homme en Europe fe compofe & 
s'habille honneflement quand il veut aller en quel- 
que honnefte maif on ; de mef me les Sauuages f e font 
peindre la face quad ils font quelques vifites. Le 
fils de Manitougache voulant aller k 1' habitation, ie 
vy fa mere qui le graiffoit & le peignoit de rouge, 
elle en fit autant k fon mary: ils trouuent cela fi 
agreable, que les petits enfans ne penfent pas eftre 
beaux, s'ils ne font barboiiillez : i'en voiois vn qui 
frottoit fes doigts fur vne hache roiiillee, puis fe fai- 
foit des rayes au vifage auec cette roiiillure, ie fis vne 


1632-33J LEJEUNE'S RELATION, i6s3 105 

were there in the very middle of it, shut up as in an 
oven, where they had placed themselves to have a 
sweat. They make a little low tent of bark, and 
cover it with their fur robes ; then they heat five or 
six stones and put them into this oven, which they en- 
ter entirely naked. [26] They vSing all the time while 
in there, gently striking the sides of these stoves. I 
saw them come out all wet with perspiration ; this is 
the best of their medicines. ^^ 

On the 1 2th of November, winter made its first 
appearance, beginning to besiege us with its ice. 
Having spent a long time on that day in one of the 
large cabins of the Savages, where there were a 
number of men, women, and children of all kinds, I 
noticed their wonderful patience. If so many fami- 
lies were together in our France, there would be 
nothing but disputes, quarrels, and revilings. The 
mothers do not get impatient with their children, 
they do not know what it is to swear, their only oath 
consisting of this one word tapon^, * ' in truth ; " ^^ 
there is no jealousy among them ; they aid and re- 
lieve each other very generously, because they ex- 
pect a return of the favor. [27] If this expectation 
fail, they respect the person no longer, whoever he 
may be. 

Just as a man in Europe arranges his toilet with 
care when he is going to pay a visit to some respect- 
able family, so these Savages have their faces painted 
when they make visits. The son of Manitougache 
wishing to go to our settlement, I saw his mother 
grease him and paint him red; she did the same to 
her husband. They find this so agreeable that the 
little children do not think they are beautiful unless 
their faces are smeared over with something. I saw 


106 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.5 

petite croix auec vn peu d'encre fur le front d'vn pe- 
tit gar9on, il fe tenoit bien braue, & les autres trou- 
voient cela fort beau. Ou que le iugement des 
hommes eft foible! les vns loget la beaute [28] oil les 
autres ne voient que la laideur, Les dents les plus 
belles en France font les plus blanches, aux Ifles des 
Maldiues la blancheur des dents eft vne difformit6, 
ils f e les rougilTent pour eftre belles : & dans la Co- 
chinchine, fi i'ay bonne memoire, ils les teignent en 
noir. Voyez qui a raifon. 

Le 13. Manitougache noftre hofle & voifin nous 
vint dire qu'on auoit veu quantite d'Hiroquois qui 
auoiet paru iufques aupres de Kebec. Tous les Mon- 
tagnaits trembloient de peur. Celuy-cy nous deman- 
da fi fa femme & fes enfans ne pourroient pas bien 
venir coucher chez nous, nous luy refpondifmes que 
luy & fes fils feroient les tres-bien venus, mais que 
les filles & femmes ne couchoient point dans nos mai- 
fons, voire mefme qu'elles n'y entroient point en 
France, & qu'auffi-toft que nous ferions fermez, que 
la porte ne leur feroit [29] plus ouuerte. II enuoya 
done tout fon train, tous les ieunes gens aux cabanes 
voifmes de Kebec, oti Ton difoit que Ton enuoyeroit 
quelques harquebufiers pour les garder. Pour luy 
eflant inuite du Capitaine des Sauuages de prendre 
fa cabane iufques ^ ce que I'effroy fufl paff^, il fit 
refponfe que s'il deuoit mourir, qu'il vouloit mourir 
aupres de nous, & ainfi ayant mis fes gens en affeu- 
rance, il nous reuint trouuer. 

Ce mefme iour Pierre Paftedechouan nous vint 
voir pour demeurer auec nous. le ne puis obmettre 
icy vn trait fort particulier de 1' admirable bonte & 
prouidence de Dieu en noftre endroit. Ce ieune 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, idjs 107 

one rubbing his fingers upon a rusty axe, and then 
making streaks upon his face with the rust, I made 
a small cross with some ink upon the brow of a 
little boy; he acted very proud, and the others con- 
sidered him quite beautiful. Oh, how weak are the 
judgments of men! Some place beauty [28] where 
others see nothing but ugliness. The most beautiful 
teeth in France are the whitest ; in the Maldive 
Islands whiteness of teeth is considered a deformi- 
ty, they paint them red to be beautiful ; and in Co- 
chin China, if my memory serves me, they paint 
them black. Which is right? 

On the 1 3th, Manitougache, our guest and neigh- 
bor, came to tell us that a great many Hiroquois had 
been seen near Kebec. All the Montagnaits trembled 
with fear. He asked if his wife and children could 
not come and lodge with us. We answered him 
that he and his sons would be very welcome, but that 
girls and women were not permitted to sleep in our 
houses, indeed, they never entered them in France; 
and that, just as soon as we could close our doors, 
they would not again be [29] opened to them. He then 
sent his whole party, all the young people, to cabins 
in the neighborhood of Kebec, where they were told 
that some arquebusiers would be sent to protect them. 
As to himself, having been invited by the Captain of 
the Savages to accept his cabin until the fright should 
have passed away, he answered that, if he had to die, 
he wanted to die near us; and, having thus placed 
his people in security, he returned to us. 

On this same day, Pierre Pastedechouan came^ to 
make his home with us. I cannot omit here an in- 
cident especially exhibiting the admirable kindness 
and providence of God in our behalf. This young 


108 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.5 

homme a eft€ conduit en Frace en fon bas age par 
les RR. Peres Recolets, il a efte baptife a Angers 
Monfieur le Prince de Guimenee eftoit so parrain, il 
parle fort bie Francois, & fort bon Sanuage, [30] 
ayant efte ramen^ en fon pays on le remit entre les 
mains de fes freres pour reprendre les idees de fa 
langue qu'il auoit prefque oubliees: ce patiure mife- 
rable eft deuenu barbare comme les antres, & a tou- 
fiours continue dans fes barbaries pendant que les An- 
glois ont icy feiourne. S9achant le retour de Fran- 
9ois, il vient voir le fieur Emery de Caen a TadoulTac, 
qui I'inuita de monter a Kebec, ce qu'il fit. II le 
vouloit prendre pour fon truchement, le faifant man- 
ger k fa table, luy temoignant vn fort bon vifage. 
Moy cependant comme ie defirois grandement d'en- 
trer dans la cognoiffance de la langue, & voyant que ie 
n'auangois rie faute de maiflre, ie deliberay de m'ad- 
dreffer a Dieu, efperant que nous aurions ce ieune 
homme pour quel que temps : nous nous mifmes tous 
a folliciter cette affaire aupr^s de noftre Seigneur, ie 
fentois [31] vn li grand deflr, ioinct auec vne fi 
grande confiace, qu'il me fembloit que nous 1' anions 
defia contre toutes les apparences humaines: car 
comme on fe vouloit feruir de luy au fort, on le trait- 
toit fauorablement, veu d'ailleurs que ne refpirant 
que la liberte, il abhorroit pluftoft noftre maifon, 
qu'il ne I'aimoit. Dieu eft plus fort que tous les 
hommes, il n'appartient qu'a luy de tirer le bie du 
mal. Ce pauure ieune homme eftant trop a fon aife 
ne s'y pent tenir, il mefcontente le fieur de Caen vne 
& deux fois il eft difgracie, & remis en faueur, cepen- 
dant ie follicite le fieur de Caen de nous I'enuoyer 
au cas qu'il ne fe put accommoder au fort, qu'il nous 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 109 

man had been taken to France in his childhood by 
the Reverend Recolet Fathers. He had been bap- 
tized at Angers, Monsieur the Prince of Guimen^e 
being his godfather. He speaks French and the 
Savage Tongue very well. [30] Having been brought 
back to his country, he was again placed in the hands 
of his brothers, to recover the use of his own lan- 
guage, which he had almost forgotten. This poor 
wretch has become a barbarian like the others, and 
persistently followed barbaric customs while the 
English were here. Hearing of the return of the 
French, he visited sieur Emery de Cagn, at Tadoussac, 
who invited him to go to Kebec, which he did. He 
intended to take him for his interpreter, having him 
eat at his table, and treating him kindly. Mean- 
while, I desired to obtain a greater knowledge of the 
language; and seeing that I made no progress, for 
want of a teacher, I had been thinking for some time 
of asking God, hoping that we should have this 
young man with us for a while. We all began to 
pray for this favor at the throne of our Lord ; I felt 
[31] so strong a desire, combined with so great con- 
fidence, that it seemed to me we had him already, 
all human appearances to the contrary notwithstand- 
ing ; for, as they wanted to make use of him at the 
fort, he was treated very kindly. Besides, while 
breathing only liberty, he rather abhorred our house 
than loved it. God is stronger than all men; it 
belongs only to him to draw good out of evil. 
This poor young man, being in too easy a position, 
could not stand his prosperity. He displeased sieur 
de Caen ; once and twice, he was disgraced, and re- 
stored to favor. In the meantime, I solicited sieur 
de Caen to send him to us, in the event that it was not 


110 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 

obligeroit, & feroit du bien a ce pauure abandonn^: 
luy qui nous faifoit I'honeur que de nous aimer, s'y 
accorde aifement. Or ce pauure gar§on fe voiant de- 
cheu de I'amitie du fieur de [32] Caen fe iette du 
cofte du lieur du Pleffis, c'eftoit tomber pour luy de 
fieure en chaud mal : car le fieur du Pleffis cognoiflant 
fes fripponneries, & delirant qu'il demeuraft auec 
nous, le rebuta, luy promettant fon amitie au cas qu'il 
vouluft palTer quelques mois en noftre maifon pour 
fe remettre dans les deuoirs d'vn bon Chreftien. 
Monfieur de Caen luy temoignoit le mefme: le voila 
done exclus du fort. II ne falloit plus qu'eflre aba- 
donne en quelque fa9on des Sauuages. II auoit 
efpoufe la fille de Manitougache, elle ayant receu 
quelque mefcontentement de luy, le quitta 1^, ce font 
les mariages des Sauuages, qui ne fe lient que par vn 
lacs courant, il faut peu de chofe pour les feparer, fi 
ce n'eft qu'ils ayent des enfans, car alors ils ne fe 
quittent pas fi aifement. 

Eftant done ainfi rebute, il fe vint letter entre nos 
bras qui n'eftoient [33] que trop ouuerts pour luy, 
nous luy procurafmes vn habit de Fra9ois, que le 
valet de chambre du fieur du Pleffis luy donna, bref 
nous luy fifmes tout I'accueil qui nous fut poffible, 
rendans mille graces au bon Dieu de ce qu'il luy 
auoit pleu exaucer nos prieres. 

Ayant done cefte commodite, ie me mets ^ trauail- 
ler fans ceffe, ie fay des coniugaifons, declinaifons, 
quelque petite fyntaxe, vn dictionnaire, auec vne 
peine incroyable, car il me falloit quelquefois deman- 
der vingt queftions pour auoir la cognoiffance d'vn 
mot, tant mon maiftre peu duit a enfeigner varioit. 
O que ie fuis oblige h. ceux qui m'enuoierent I'an 


1632-33] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6ss HI 

agreeable to him to keep him at the fort; that he 
would oblige us, and do a service to this poor aban- 
doned creature. He, who honored us with his affec- 
tion, granted our request readily ; now this poor boy, 
seeing that he has lost the friendship of sieur de [32] 
Caen, goes over to sieur du Plessis.'^ This was but 
going from bad to worse. For sieur du Plessis, 
knowing his knavish tricks, and desiring that he 
should live with us, rejected him, promising him 
his friendship provided that he would spend some 
months in our house, where he might resume the du- 
ties of a good Christian. Monsieur de Caen treated 
him in the same way ; behold him thus excluded from 
the fort. Nothing was lacking but that he should 
in some way be abandoned by the Savages also. 
He had married the daughter of Manitougache ; she, 
having become somewhat dissatisfied with him, left 
him. Such are the nuptial ties of the Savages, who 
bind themselves by only a loose knot; but little is 
necessary to separate them, unless they have chil- 
dren, for then they do not leave each other so easily. 

Being thus repulsed, he came and threw himself 
into our arms, which were only [33] too widely 
opened for him. We provided him with a suit of 
French clothes, that a valet de chambre of sieur du 
Plessis gave him. In short, we gave him as warm a 
welcome as was possible, returning a thousand thanks 
to the good God for having answered our prayers. 

Now, having gained this advantage, I begin to 
work incessantly. I make conjugations, declensions 
and some little syntax, and a dictionary,^ with in- 
credible trouble, for I was compelled sometimes to 
ask twenty questions to understand one word, so 
changeable was my master's way of teaching. Oh, 


112 LES RELATIONS DESj£SUITES [Vol.5 

pair6 du Petum. Les Sauuages raiment d^regle- 
ment. A toutes les difficultez que ie rencotrois, 
i'en donnois vn bout k mo maiftre pour le rendre plus 
attentif. Ie [34] ne f9aurois alTez rendre graces k 
Noftre Seigneur de cet heureux rencontre. En tant 
d'annees qu'on a efte en ces pais, on n'a iamais rien 
pu tirer de I'interprete ou truchement nomme Mar- 
folet, qui pour excufe difoit qu'il auoit iure qu'il ne 
donneroit rien du lagage des Sauuages a qui que ce 
flit. Le Pere Charles Lallemant le gagna, ie penfe 
auoir ce qu'il luy bailla, mais cela ne m'eut de rien 
feruy, I'oeconomie de la langue toute differente de 
celles d' Europe n'efl point declaree 1^ dedans. Que 
Dieu foit beny pour vn iamais, fa prouidence eft ado- 
rable, & fa bonte n'a point de limites. 

II m 'a fallu auant que de fgauoir vne langue faire 
des liures pour I'apprendre, & quoy que ie ne les 
tienne pas fi corrects, fi eft-ce que maintenant de 
I'heure que ie parle, quand ie compofe quelque chofe, 
ie me fay bien entendre aux Sauuages; le tout [35] 
gift a compofer fouuent, a apprendre quantite de 
mots, a me faire a leur accent, & mes occupations ne 
me le permettent pas : ie penfois m'en aller cet hyuer 
prochain auec eux dans les bois, mais ie preuoy qu'il 
me fera impolTible, lie comme ie fuis: fi mon maiftre 
ne m'euft point quitt^, dans peu de mois i'aurois bien 
auance. 

I 'ay remarque dans I'eftude de leur langue qu'il y 
a vn certain barragoin entre les Fran9ois & les Sau- 
uages, qui n'eft ny Frangois, ny Sauuage, & cepen- 
dant quand les Frangois s'en feruent, ils penfent par- 
ler Sauuage, & les Sauuages en I'vfurpant croyent 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, idjs 113 

how grateful I am to those who sent me some Tobacco 
last year. The Savages love it to madness. When- 
ever we came to a difficulty, I gave my master a piece 
of tobacco, to make him more attentive. I [34] never 
can thank our Lord enough for this fortunate circum- 
stance. In all the years that we have been in this 
country no one has ever been able to learn anything 
from the interpreter named Marsolet,'^ who, for ex- 
cuse, said he had sworn that he would never teach 
the Savage tongue to any one whomsoever. Father 
Charles Lallemant won him, and I think I have 
acquired what he learned from him, but I could 
not make use of it at all ; the construction of the lan- 
guage, entirely different from that of the European 
languages, is not declared therein. May God be 
praised forever ; his providence is adorable, and his 
goodness unbounded. 

Before knowing a language, it was necessary for me 
to make the books from which to learn it; and, al- 
though I do not hold them to be so correct, yet now, 
at the time when I am writing, when I compose any- 
thing I make myself understood very well by the 
Savages. It all [35] lies in composing often, in learn- 
ing a great many words, in acquiring their accent; 
and my occupations do not permit it. I was thinking 
of going with them next winter into the woods, but I 
foresee that it will be impossible, tied as I am. If 
my teacher had not left me, I should have made con- 
siderable progress in a few months. 

I have noticed in the study of their language that 
there is a certain jargon between the French and the 
Savages, which is neither French nor Savage; and 
yet when the French use it, they think they are speak- 
ing the Savage Tongue, and the Savages, in using it, 


114 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.5 

parler bon Fran§ois. I'en efcriuy quelques mots I'an 
paffe, que ie qualifiois de mots de Sauuages le pe- 
fant ainfi. Par exeple le mot ^' Ania, dont i'ay en- 
core fait mention cy-delTus, eft vn mot barbare, les 
Sauuages s'en feruent "k tout bout [36] de champ par- 
lant aux Fran9ois, & les Frangois parlant aux Sau- 
uages, & tous s'en feruent pour dire mon frere, mais 
en vray Sauuage de Montagnaits, Nichtais, c'eft ^ 
dire mo frere aifn6, Nichhn, mon cadet: le mot de 
Saganio ne s'vfurpe icy que par quelques-vns, pour 
dire Capitaine, le vray mot c'eft Oukhimau, ie croy 
que ce mot de Saganio vient de I'Acadie, il y en a 
quantity d'autres femblables. Au commencement 
qu'on entre en vn pays, on efcrit plufieurs chofes, les 
penfant vrayes fur le rapport d'autruy, le temps d6- 
couure la verity. 

On m'a^difcouru de plufieurs famous de faire de ces 
nations, nous aurons aflez de temps pour voir ce qui 
en eft. 

Ie diray en palTant que cette langue eft fort pauure, 
& fort riche. Elle eft pauure, pour autant que n'ayas 
point de cognoillance de mille & [37] mille chofes 
qui font en 1' Europe, ils n'ont point de noms pour les 
fignifier. Elle efl riche, pource qu'6s chofes dont 
ils ont cognoillance elle eft foeconde, & grandement 
nombreufe, il me femble qu'ils ne la prononcent pas 
bien. Les Algonquains qui ne different des Monta- 
gnaits que come les Prouen9aux des Normands, ont 
vne prononciation tout a fait gaye «& gentille. 

Ie ne croy pas auoir ouy parler d'aucune langue qui 
procedafl de mefme fagon que celle-cy. Le Pere Bre- 
beuf m'affeure que celle des Hurons eft d'vne mefme 
oeconomie. Qu'on les appelle Barbares tant qu'on 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, idjj 115 

think they are speaking good French. I wrote a few 
words of it last year that I characterized as Savage 
words, believing them to be so. For example, the 
word, Afiza, which I have mentioned above, is an 
alien word,* the Savages making use of it on every 
[36] occasion in speaking to the French, and the 
French in speaking to the Savages, and all use it to 
say " my brother;" but in the real Savage Tongue of 
the Montagnaits, Nichtais means " my eldest broth- 
er," Nichim " my youngest;" the word Sagamo is used 
by only a few here to say " Captain." The correct 
word is Oukhimau ; I believe this word, Sagamo, comes 
from Acadia ; ^" there are many others like it. When a 
person first visits a country, he writes a great many 
things upon the word of others, believing them to be 
true ; time reveals the truth. 

I have been told many different things about the 
customs of these tribes; we shall have time enough 
to learn how true they are. 

I shall say, in passing, that this language is very 
poor and very rich. It is poor; because, having no 
knowledge of thousands and [37] thousands of things 
which are in Europe, they have no names to indicate 
them. It is rich, because in the things of which they 
have a knowledge, it is fertile and plentiful ; it 
seems to me that they do not pronounce it well. 
The Algonquains, who differ from the Montagnaits 
only as the Proven9als from the Normans, have a 
pronunciation that is altogether charming and agree- 
able. 

I do not think that I have ever heard any lan- 
guage spoken which is formed in the same manner 
as this. Father Brebeuf assures me that the lan- 
guage of the Hurons is of the same construction. 


116 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 

voudra, leur langue eft fort regime, ie n'y fuis pas 
encore grand maiftre, i'en parleray quelque iour auec 
plus d'affeurance. Si ie n'auois peur d'eftre trop 
long, ie mettrois icy vne grande & tout h. fait eftrange 
[38] difference entre les langues d' Europe & celles-cy. 

Le 14. de Nouembre, Ie Sauuage la Naffe eftant 
chez nous, ie luy fis parler de la Creation du monde, 
de 1' Incarnation, & de la Pafllon du Fils de Dieu, 
nous pafTafmes bien auant dans la nuict, tout le monde 
s'endormoit horfmis luy. Eftant de retour en fa ca- 
bane, il dit k Pierre, qu'il entendoit volontiers parler 
de cela. 

Nous voiant vn iour prier Dieu apres le difner, il 
tira vn profond foufpir, difant: O que ie fuis mal- 
heureux de ce que ie ne fyay pas prier Dieu comme 
vous! 

II a fouuent dit k Pierre, enfeigne viftement c^t 
homme 1^, parlant de moy, afin que nous puifQons en- 
tendre ce qu'il dit. II vient le foir aux Litanies en 
noftre Chappelle quand il couche chez nous, & 
comme il refpondoit auec nous ora pro ?iobis, [39] 
Pierre fe riant de cela, luy demanda s'il entendoit 
bien ce qu'il auoit dit; Non, dit-il, mais ie croy que 
cela eft bon, puis que ces Peres le difent en priant 
Dieu. II nous a tefmoign^ qu'il vouloit mourir auec 
nous, & qu'il ne s'en iroit point que nous ne la 
chalfaffions; s'il n'eftoit charge d'vne fi grande fa- 
mille, ie fouhaitterois bie qu'il fut noftre domeftique. 
II eft quafi affez inftruict pour eftre baptif^ s'il tom- 
boit en danger de mort ; mais nous ne nous hafterons 
point, que nous ne fgachions bien parler. Comme i'in- 
ftruifois fon petit fils, il me dit, Inftruis moy, ie re- 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, t633 117 

People may call them Barbarians as much as they 
please, but their language is very regular. '^^ I am not 
yet a perfect master of it ; I shall speak of it some 
day with more assurance. If I were not afraid of 
being tedious, I should note here a striking and radi- 
cally strange [38] difference between the languages 
of Europe and those of this country. 

On the 14th of November, the Savage la Nasse 
being with us, I instructed him about the Creation of 
the world, the Incarnation, and the Passion of the 
Son of God. We talked well into the night, everyone 
being asleep except him. Returning to his cabin, he 
said to Pierre that he was much pleased to listen 
to such talk. 

Seeing us praying to God one day after dinner, he 
sighed deeply, saying: "Oh, how unhappy I am that 
I am not able to pray to God as you do ! " 

He has often said to Pierre : ' * Teach that man as 
soon as you can," speaking of me, " in order that we 
may be able to understand what he says." In the 
evening when he sleeps with us, he attends the Lit- 
anies in our Chapel ; and as he was answering with 
us, ora pro nobis, [39] Pierre, laughing at this, asked 
him if he had thoroughly understood what he had 
said: " No," said he, "but I believe it is good, since 
those Fathers say it in praying to God." He has of- 
ten given proof that he would be willing to die with 
us, and says he will not go away from us unless we 
drive him. If he were not burdened with so large a 
family, I would like very well to have him for our do- 
mestic. He is sufficiently instructed to be baptized, 
should he be in danger of death ; but we shall not 
make haste until we know how to speak the language 
well. As I was instructing his grandson, he said to 


118 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 

tiendray pluftofl que luy, & ioignat les mains, il 
difoit la benedidtion de table. 

le luy dis vne fois que Dieu defendoit de trauailler 
certains iours, pource qu'il trauailloit vn Dimanche. 
II me dit, Aduertis moy de ces [40] iours, & ie les 
garderay. Lifant les Commandemens de Dieu en fa 
cabane, quand ie vins a celuy qui recomande aux en- 
fans d'obeir a leurs pere & mere, il fe tourna vers les 
fiens, & leur fit figne qu'ils efcoutaffent; Ayant en- 
tendu cet autre Commandement, Tu ne tueras point, 
il me dit qu'on I'auoit voulu inciter h. tuer quelqu'vn ; 
mais que voyant que c'etoit mal fait, qu'il ne I'auoit 
pas voulu faire. Voicy vn autre difcours. 

Pierre Paftedechouan nous a rapporte que fa 
grand'mere prenoit plaifir k raconter I'eftonnement 
qu'eurent les Sauuages voyans arriuer le vailTeau des 
Frangois qui aborda le premier en ces pays cy, ils pen- 
foient que ce fuft vne Ifle mouuante, ils ne f9auoient 
que dire des grades voiles qui la faifoiet marcher, 
leur eftonnement redoubla voyans quatite d'hommes 
fur le tillac. Les femmes [41] commencerent h. leur 
dreffer des cabanes, ce qu'elles font ordinairement 
quand de nouueaux hoftes arriuent, & quatre canots 
de Sauuages fe hazarderent d'abborder ces vaiffeaux, 
ils inuitent les Fran9ois a venir dans les cabanes 
qu'on leur preparoit, mais ils ne s'entendoient pas les 
vns les autres. On leur donna vne barique de pain 
ou bifcuit, I'ayant emport6 & reuifit^, n'y trouuant 
point de gouft, ils la ietterent en I'eau: en vn mot 
ils eftoient dans le mefme eftonnement qui fut iadis 
le Roy de Calecut a I'abbord du premier nauire Euro- 
pean qu'il veit pr6s de fes terres; car ayant enuoy6 
quelques perfonnes pour recognoiftre quels gens 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 119 

me: " Teach me; I shall retain it better than he; " 
and, joining his hands, he pronounced the blessing 
at the table. 

Once, while he was working on Sunday, I told him 
that God forbade work upon certain days ; he said : 
" Teach me those days, [40] and I shall keep them." 
Reading the Commandments of God in his cabin, 
when I came to that one which commands children to 
obey their father and mother, he turned toward his, 
and signed to them to listen. Having heard that 
other Commandment, " Thou shalt not kill," he told 
me some one had tried to incite him to murder ; but, 
seeing that it was an evil deed, he did not wish to 
do it. That was another conversation. 

Pierre Pastedechouan has told us that his grand- 
mother used to take pleasure in relating to him the 
astonishment of the Natives, when they saw for the 
first time a French ship arrive upon their shores. 
They thought it was a moving Island ; they did not 
know what to say of the great sails which made it 
go ; their astonishment was redoubled in seeing a 
number of men on deck. The women [41] at once 
began to prepare houses for them, as is their custom 
when new guests arrive, and four canoes of Savages 
ventured to board these vessels. They invited the 
Frenchmen to come into the houses which had been 
made ready for them, but neither side understood the 
other. They were given a barrel of bread or biscuit. 
Having brought it on shore they examined it; and, 
finding no taste in it, threw it into the water. In a 
word, they were as much astonished as was the King 
of Calecut, in olden times, when he saw the first 
European ship nearing his shores ; for, having sent 
some one to investigate the character and appearance 


120 LES RELATIONS DES JRSUITES [Vol.5 

amenoit cefte grande maifon de bois, les meffagers 
rapporterent a leurmaiftre que c'eftoiet des hommes 
prodigieux «& efpouuentables ; qu'ils s'habilloient de 
[42] fer, mangeoient des os, & beuuoiet du fang; ils 
les auoient veu couuerts de leurs cuiraffes, manger 
du bifcuit & boire du vin. Nos Sauuages difoient 
que les Fran9ois beuuoient du fang, «& mangeoient 
du bois, appellant ainli le vin, & le bifcuit. 

Or comme ils ne pouuoient entendre de quelle na- 
tion eftoient nos gens, ils leurs donnerent vn nom, 
qui eft toufiours demeur6 depuis aux Fran9ois ouemich- 
tigouchiou, c'eft k dire vn homme qui trauaille en 
bois, ou qui eft en vn canot ou vaiffeau de bois: ils 
voyoient noftre nauire fait de bois, leurs petits canots 
n'eftans baftis que d'efcorce. 

Le 20. de Nouembre noftre Sauuage, c'eft ainfi. 
que i'appelleray ce bon Manitougache, furnomme la 
NafTe, fe mit a faire vne cabane de bois dans le bafti- 
ment que nous ont brufle les Anglois tout aupres [43] 
de noftre petite maifon, il fit luy-mefme de la planche 
auec vne hache, couppant certains arbres aifez ^ re- 
fendre: il alia brufler vne vieille cballouppe qu'il 
auoit veu echoiiee & abandonnee dans vne Ifle, & du 
clou qu'il en retira, il fe fit auec fes planches vne 
petite maif onnette ou cabane alTez paffable ; les autres 
Sauuages la venoient voir, & nos Fran§ois auffi, loii- 
ans fon inuention. le luy donnay vn nom de lefus 
en papier pour le mettre dedas en quelque endroit, il 
Tattacha au pl^* beau lieu. 

II arriua vne chofe plaifante a vn Sauuage qui le 
venoit voir: ce bon homme regardoit cette maif on- 
nette de bois, & ne f9auoit par ou entrer, ne pouuant 
trouuer la porte, il tourne & retourne "k I'entour de 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j633 121 


of the men brought by that great house of wood, 
the messengers reported to their master that these 
men were prodigious and horrible; that they were 
dressed in [42] iron, ate bones, and drank blood. 
They had seen them covered with their cuirasses, 
eating biscuits, and drinking wine. Our Savages 
said the Frenchmen drank blood and ate wood, thus 
naming the wine and the biscuits. 

Now as they were unable to understand to what 
nation our people belonged, they gave them the name 
which has since always clung to the French, ouemich- 
tigouchiou ; that is to say, a man who works in wood, 
or who is in a canoe or vessel of wood. They saw 
our ships, which were made of wood, their little ca- 
noes being made only of bark. 

On the 20th of November, our Savage, — it is thus 
that I shall designate this good Manitougache, — sur- 
named la Nasse, began building a wooden cabin near 
our little house, on the site of the one which the 
[43] English had burned down. He himself made 
boards with a hatchet, cutting certain kinds of wood 
that are easily split. He burned an old boat, that he 
had seen stranded and abandoned upon an Island ; and, 
with the nails which he obtained, he made a very 
fair little house or cabin with his boards. The other 
Savages came to see it, and we Frenchmen also, prais- 
ing his ingenuity. I gave him the name of Jesus on a 
paper, to put inside of it somewhere, and he hung it 
up in the best place. 

Something very amusing happened to a Savage who 
came to see it. This simple man examined the little 
wooden house, and not knowing where to enter, being 
unable to find the door, he went round and round 
it, and, thinking there was no entrance, went away 


122 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.5 

cette cabane, & croyant qu'il n'y auoit point d' en- 
tree, il s'en alia comme il eftoit venu, on dira qu'il 
deuoit [44] f rapper, ce n'eft point la coufbume des 
Sauuages, ils entrent par tout fans dire mot, ny fans 
vous faliier: leurs cabanes ne fermet point, y entre 
qui veut, ils n'ont qu'vne vieille peau qui leur fert 
de porte; on n'entend point neantmoins parler de 
larrons parmy eux, cela eft fort rare i'entend des 
Montagnaits : car les Hurons font mefkier de derober, 
aufli font ils de meilleures cabanes, eftans feden- 
taires, & non vagabons & errans comme ceux de ce 
pays-cy. I'apprend que ces Hurons tiennent vn 
homme pour auoir de I'efprit qui efquiue la main du 
larron, ou qui f9ait derober fans eflre recognu : que 
s'il eft furpris, battez-le tat que vous voudrez, il ne 
vous dira rien : il fouffre patiemment ce chaftiment, 
non en punition du larcin, mais de fa lourdife, s'e- 
ftant laiff6 furprendre. 

Le 27. du mefme mois de Nouembre, [45] I'hyuer 
qui auoit defla paru comme de loin, de temps en 
temps, nous affiegea tout ^ fait. Car ce iour & les 
autres fuiuans, il tomba tant de neige, qu'elle nous 
deroba la veue de la terre pour cinq mois. 

Voicy les qualitez de I'hyuer, il a eft6 beau & bon, 
& bien long. II a efte beau, car il a efte blanc comme 
neige, fans crottes & fans pluye. ie ne f§ay s'il a pleu 
trois fois en quatre ou cinq mois, mais il a fouuent 
neige. 

II a efl6 bon, car le froid y a eft€ rigoureux; on le 
tient pour I'vn des plus fafcheux qui ait efte depuis 
log temps. II y auoit par tout quatre ou cinq pieds 
de neige, en quelques endroicts plus de dix, deuant 
noftre maifon vne montagne : Les vents la raffem- 


i 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1633 123 

as he came. One would say that he ought [44] to 
have knocked ; but this is not the custom of the Sav- 
ages. They enter everywhere without saying a 
word, or without any greeting. Their houses are 
not closed ; all can enter who will, as they have only 
an old skin which serves as a door. Nevertheless, 
we never hear of thieves among them, or very sel- 
dom, — I mean among the Montagnaits; but the Hu- 
rons make a business of thieving. They also make 
better houses, being sedentary, and not leading a 
vagabond and wandering life like those of this coun- 
try. I learn that the Hurons consider a man very 
clever who can escape the hand of a thief, or who 
knows how to steal without being caught. But, if he 
be discovered, you may whip him as much as you 
like and he will say nothing. He suffers his punish- 
ment patiently, not as a penalty for his crime, but 
for his awkwardness in being caught. 

On the 27th of the same month of November, [45] 
the winter, which had already appeared in the dis- 
tance from time to time, completely besieged us, for 
on that and the following days the snow fell so heavi- 
ly that it deprived us of the sight of the earth for five 
months. 

I shall tell you what sort of winter we have had 
here. It has been beautiful, and good, and very long. 
It was beautiful because it was as white as snow, 
without mud and without rain. I do not know that 
it has rained three times in four or five months, but 
it has often snowed. 

It was good, because the cold has been severe ; it 
is considered one of the most rigorous winters that 
they have had for a long time. There was every- 
where four or five feet of snow, in some places, over 


124 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 5 


blans, & nous d'autre coft6 la releuans, pour faire vn 
petit chemin deuant noftre porte, elle faifoit come 
vne muraille toute blanche, plus [46] haute d'vn ou 
deux pieds que le toict de la maifon. Le froid eftoit 
par fois fi violent, que nous entendions les arbres fe 
fendre dans le bois, & en fe fendans faire vn bruit 
comme des armes a feu. II m'efl arriue qu'en efcri- 
uant fort pres d'vn grand feu, mon encre fe geloit, 
& par neceffite il falloit mettre vn rechaut plein de 
charbons ardens proche de moin efcritoire, autre- 
ment i'euffe trouu6 de la glace noire, au lieu d' encre. 
Cette rigueur demefuree n'a dure que dix iours ou 
enuiron, non pas continuels, mais a diuerfes reprifes, 
le refle du temps, quoy que le froid furpaffe de beau- 
coup les gel^es de France, il n'y a rien d' intolerable, 
& ie puis dire qu'on pent icy plus aifement trauailler 
dans les bois, qu'on ne fait en France, ou les pluyes 
de I'hyuer font fort importunes. Mais il fe faut ar- 
mer de bonnes mitaines, [47] fi on ne veut auoir les 
mains gelees: Nos Sauuages neantmoins s'en ve- 
noient quelquefois chez nous a demy nuds, fans fe 
plaindre du froid: ce qui m'apprend que fi la nature 
s'habitue a cela, la nature & la grace pourront bien 
nous donner affez de coeur & de force pour le fuppor- 
ter ioieufement; s'il y a du froid, il y a du bois. 

I'ay dit que I'hyuer a efle long; depuis le 27. de 
Nouembre iufques a la fin d' Auril la terre a toufiours 
efte blanche de neige: & depuis le 29. du mefme 
mois de Nouemb. iufques au 23. d'Auril, noftre pe- 
tite riuiere a toufiours efle glacee ; mais en telle 
forte, que cent carofl^es auroient paffe deffus fans I'e- 
branler: les glaces font de telle efpaifleur, que quand 
on vint k les rompre, proche de Kebec, pour mettre 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 125 

ten, before our house, a mountain: the wind drifting 
it, and we, on the other hand, shovelling it away to 
make a little path before our door. It rose like a 
wall, all white, higher [46] by one or two feet than 
the roof of our house. The cold was at times so 
violent that we heard the trees split in the woods, 
and in breaking make a noise like that of firearms. 
It happened to me that while writing very near a 
big fire, my ink froze ; and I had to place a little pan 
full of hot coals near my inkstand, otherwise I should 
have found black ice instead of ink. 

This extreme cold lasted only ten days or there- 
about, not continuously, but at different times. The 
rest of the time, although the cold greatly exceeds 
that of France, it is not at all intolerable ; and I can 
say that it is easier to work here in the woods than it 
is in France, where the winter rains are so penetrat- 
ing. But one must be provided with good mittens, 
[47] unless he wants to have his hands frozen ; and 
yet our Savages visited us sometimes half-naked, 
without complaining of the cold. This teaches me 
that, if nature can accustom itself to this cold, nature 
and grace can very well give us the heart and 
strength to support it cheerfully. If there is cold, 
there is wood. 

I have said that the winter has been long ; from 
the 27th of November up to the end of April, the 
ground was all the time white with snow ; and from 
the 29th of the same month of November up to the 
23rd of April, our little river was frozen, but in such 
a way that a hundred wagons could have passed over 
it without shaking it. The ice is of such thickness 
that, when they were breaking it near Kebec, to 
launch a bark, sieur du Plessis told me that, being 


126 


LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 5 

vne barque ^ I'eau, le fieur du Pleffis me dit qu'e- 
ftant a terre, c'eftoit [48] tout ce qu'il pouuoit faire 
d'atteindre au haut d'vne glace auec la fourchette 
d'vn moufquet qu'il tenoit en fa main. Tout cela ne 
doit efpouuanter perfonne. Chacun dit icy, qu'il a 
plus endure de froid en France, qu'en Canada: le 
Scorpion porte f on contrepoif on : dans les pais plus 
fubiedts aux maladies, il fe trouue plus de remedes: 
Si le mal efl prefent, la medecine n'eft pas loing. 

Le 3. de Decembre nous commengafmes a changer 
de chauffure, & nous feruir de raquettes: quand ie 
vins ^ mettre ces grands patins tout plats k mes 
pieds, ie m'imaginois qu'^ tons coups ie donnerois 
du nez dans la neige: mais 1' experience m'a fait voir 
que Dieu pouruoit commodement toutes les nations 
des cbof es qui leur font necelTaires : ie marche fort 
librement auec ces raquettes ; Pour les Sauuages, cela 
ne les empefche [49] ny de fauter comme des daims, 
ny de courir come des cerfs. 

lis font des fouliers de peaux d'El'an pour s'e feruir 
fur ces raquettes. lis n'ont pas I'inuention de durcir 
ou tanner le cuir, aulTi n'en ont ils que faire. L'eft6 
ils vont pieds nuds, I'hyuer il faut que leurs fouliers 
foyent d'vne peau maniable, autrement ils gafte- 
royent leurs raquettes: ils les font larges, & fort 
amples, pour les garnir de nippes ou de vieux hail- 
Ions contre le froid; fi nous anions quelques peaux 
de France vn pen plus douces que les groffes am- 
paignes de vache, cela nous feroit vn bien incom- 
parable, notamment fur le renouueau, quand les 
neges viennent k f e f ondre fur le midy ; car les fou- 
liers des Sauuages boiuent I'eau comme vne efponge, 
& ces peaux venues de France tiendroyet le pied fee. 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 127 

on land, it was [48] all he could do to reach the top 
of a piece of ice with the rest of a musket that he 
held in his hand. All this should not astonish any- 
one. All who are here say that they have suffered 
more from cold in France than in Canada. The 
Scorpion carries its own antidote: in the countries 
most subject to sickness, more remedies are found: 
if disease is there, medicine is not far away. 

On the 3rd of December we began to change our 
footgear, and to use raquettes;^^ when I first put 
these great flat skates on my feet, I thought that I 
should fall with my nose in the snow, at every step 
I took. But experience has taught me that God 
provides for the convenience of all nations according 
to their needs. I walk very freely now on these ra- 
quettes. As to the Savages, they do not hinder them 
[49] from jumping like bucks or running like deer. 

They make shoes of Elk skins, which they use 
with their raquettes. They have not ingenuity 
enough to harden or tan leather; therefore they use 
none. In the summer, they go barefooted; in the 
winter, their shoes must be of a pliable skin, other- 
wise they would spoil their raquettes. They make 
them broad and very ample, in order to line them 
inside with a layer of old rags against the cold. If 
we had some French leather here a little softer than 
the hard, untanned cowhide, it would be of incom- 
parable service to us, especially in the spring, when 
the snow begins to melt toward the south. For the 
shoes of the Savages take water like a sponge, and 
those leathers from France would keep the feet dry. 

[50] On the 5 th of December there was a very 
strong wind, which has happened several times. 
The Northeastern is violent here; one day it tore 


128 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol.5 

[50] Le 5^ de Decembre il fit de grands vents, ce 
qui eft arriue par plufieurs fois. Le Nordeft eft icy 
violet, il emporta certain iour vne partie de la cou- 
uerture d'vn baftiment du fort. Le Pere de None 
reuenant ce iour la d'y celebrer la faincte MelTe, nous 
dit qu'ils eftoient contraints luy & vn ieune garc5 
qui Taccompagnoit, de fe tenir I'vn I'autre de peur 
que le vent ne les enleuaft. 

Paffant vers ce mefme temps dans le bois ou 
eftoient cabanez quantity de Sauuages, ie trouuay vn 
corps mort, enf eueli par les Sauuages : il eftoit efleue 
fort haut fur des fourclies de bois, accompagne de 
fes robes & autres richeffes, couuert d'vne efcorce 
(c'eft leur drap mortuaire.) Ie demanday quand on 
I'enterreroit, ils me refpondirent, quand il ne neige- 
roit plus; la neige tomboit pour lors en abondance. 

[51] A I'occafion de ce rencontre quelqu'vn me dit 
qu'vn Sauuage eftant mort, les autres frappent fur 
la cabane crians oue, oue, ou6, &c. & comme i'en de- 
madois la raifon "k vn Sauuage, il me didt que c' eftoit 
pour faire fortir I'efprit de la cabane. 

Le corps du mort ne fort point par la porte ordi- 
naire de la cabane, ils leuent I'efcorce voiline du lieu 
oti il eft mort, & le tirent par la. Ie demanday pour- 
quoy : ce Sauuage me repartit que la porte ordinaire 
eftoit la porte des viuas, & non des morts: & par 
confequent que les morts n'y deuoient point paffer. 
Or comme il croioit m'auoir bien fatisfait, & qu'il fe 
mocquoit, ie luy demanday, fi quad il auoit tue vn 
Caftor, il le f aif oit entrer & fortir par la porte comune ? 
ouy, dit-il: elle eft done, luy dis-ie, la porte des 
morts auffi bien que des viuans: il repart qu'vn Caftor 
eftoit [52] vne befte : alors ie repliquay en riant, voftre 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 129 

away a part of the roof of a house at the fort. Fa- 
ther de Noue, returning that day from celebrating 
holy Mass, said that he and the young man accom- 
panying him were compelled to hold on to each other, 
for fear that the wind would carry them away. 

About this time, in going into the woods where 
there were a number of Savages encamped, I found a 
dead body which the Savages had enshrouded ; it was 
raised high upon wooden scaffolds, and near it were 
its clothes and other belongings, covered with bark 
(that is their mourning cloth). I asked when they 
would bury it. They answered me: "When it stops 
snowing." The snow was then falling very fast. 

[51] At the time of this occurence some one told 
me that, when a Savage dies, the others strike on his 
cabin, crying: " ou6, ou^, oue," etc. And when I 
asked a Savage the reason for this, he told me that it 
was to make the spirit come out of the cabin. 

The body of the dead man is not taken out of the 
common door of the cabin. They raise the bark from 
the spot where he died, and take it out through that. 
I asked why ; the Savage answered me that the com- 
mon door was the door of the living, and not of the 
dead, and consequently the dead ought not to pass 
there. Now, as he believed that he had perfectly 
satisfied me, and as he was laughing at me, I asked 
him if, when he had killed a Beaver, he made it en- 
ter and go out by the common door. "Yes," said he. 
"It is then," said I, " the door for the dead as well 
as for the living." He replied that a Beaver is [52] 
an animal. Then I answered him, laughing, " Your 
door then is a door for animals, and you call it a door 
for the living." He cried out, " Certainly, that is 
true," and began to laugh. 


130 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.5 

porte eft done la porte des befles, auffi bien que 
vous I'appellez la porte des viuans; il s'ecria, afleur6- 
ment cela eft vray, & fe mit a rire. 

le luy demanday encor pourquoy ils enterroient les 
robes des morts auec eux: Elles leur appartiennent, 
refpondit-il, pourquoy leur ofteroit-on? 

Si vous les preffez, ils ne s'opiniaftrent point, ils 
fuiuent vne certaine routine dans leurs fuperftitions, 
dot ils ne peuuent rendre aucune raifon. Voila pour- 
quoy ils sot les premiers k s'en mocquer, quand vous 
leur faites voir qu' elles font ridicules. II eft vray 
que i'en ay veu quelques-vns extremement attachez 
k leurs fonges, 

lis font diuerfes fortes de feflins: i'en f9ay quel- 
ques particularitez, maisji'attendray vne autre annee 
[53] poiir en parler auec plus d'alTeurance. Aux 
feftins des morts ils iettent le refte dans le feu : aux 
autres feftins, c'eft a manger tout, & faut creuer 
pluftoft que de rien laifler. 

Quafi tous les Sauuages ont vn petit Caftipitagan, 
ou fac a petum ; les vns font faits d'vne peau de rat 
mufque, en telle forte que 1' animal femble tout en- 
tier: il n'a qu'vne petite ouuerture par la tefte par oil 
ils I'ont ^corche: les autres font faits d'autres ani- 
maux ; il y en a qui ont vne partie du bras & la main 
de quelque Hiroquois qu'ils ont tue: cela eft fi biens 
vuide que les ongles reftet toutes entieres: vous di- 
riez vraiemet vne main folide, quand ils I'ont rem ply 
de petum, ou autre chofe ie n'en ay point veu, mais 
on m'a affeure que cela eftoit ainfi. 

Quelquefois pour monftrer qu'ils [54] ont du cou- 
rage, vn Sauuage fe liera le bras nud auec vn autre, 
puis mettant entre leurs deux bras fur la chair vn 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1633 131 

I asked him also why they buried the clothes of 
the dead with them. " They belong to them," said 
he, "why should we take them away from them?" 

If you press them, they are not very obstinate. 
They follow a certain routine in their superstitions, 
for which they can give no reason. This is why they 
are the first to laugh when you make them under- 
stand that their customs are ridiculous. True, I 
have seen some who are very much attached to their 
dreams. 

They have different kinds of feasts. I know some 
special features of them, but shall wait until another 
year, [53] that I may speak of them with more cer- 
tainty. At the feasts for the dead, they always 
throw what is left into the fire. At other feasts the 
rule is to eat all, and it is better to burst than to 
leave anything. 

Nearly all the Savages have a little Castipitagan 
or tobacco pouch. Some are made from the skin of the 
muskrat, in such a way that the animal seems quite 
entire, there being only a little opening at the head 
made in skinning it. Others are made of other ani- 
mals. Some of them carry a part of an arm or a hand 
of a Hiroquois whom they have slain, which is so 
skillfully prepared that the nails remain entire. You 
would really think it was a solid hand, when they fill 
it with tobacco or something else. I have not seen 
any of these, but I have been assured that it is so. 

Sometimes, in order to show that they [54] have 
courage, a Savage will bind his bare arm to that of 
another; then putting between the two arms, upon 
the flesh, a piece of lighted tinder, they leave it un- 
til it is entirely consumed, burning themselves to the 
bone. The man who withdraws his arm and shakes 


132 LES RELA TIOXS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 5 

morceau de tondre allum6, ils le laiffent confommer 
iufques au bout, fe bruflans iufques aux os: celuy 
qui retire le bras, & fecoue le feu, eft tenu pour 
moins courageux: ie n 'ay point veu cette barbarie; 
on m'a dit qu'vn Frangois eftant aux Hurons penfa 
perdre le bras, voulant ioiier a ce beau ieu contre vn 
Sauuage. 

II eft vray que les Sauuages font fort patiens, 
mais I'ordre qu'ils gardent en leurs exercices les ayde 
a cof eruer la paix dans leurs mef nages : les f emmes 
f9auent ce qu'elles doiuent faire, & les hommes aufli: 
& iamais I'vn ne fe mefle du meftier de I'autre: les 
hommes font le corps de leurs canots, les femmes 
coufent I'ecorce auec de I'ofier, ou vn petit bois fem- 
blable: Les hommes font le [55] bois des raquettes, 
les femmes la tiffure : Les hommes vont ^ la chaffe 
& tuent les animaux, les femmes les vot querir, les 
ecorchent & palTent les peaux : ce font elles qui vont 
querir le bois qu'ils bruflet, bref ils fe mocqueroient 
d'vn homme qui hors d'vne grande necelTite feroit 
quelque chofe qui deuft eftre fait par vne femme. 
Noftre Sauuage voyant le Pere de Noue apporter du 
bois, fe mit h. rire, difant, En verite c'eft vne femme; 
voulant donner a entendre qu'il faifoit I'office d'vne 
femme : mais quelque temps apres la fienne tombant 
malade, & n'ayant perf onne en fa cabane qui le put fou- 
lager, il fut contraint d'en aller querir luy mefme, vray 
eft qu'il n'y alia que fur la nuict pour n' eftre veu. 

Vn vieillard auoit fonge, ou pluftoft veu, a ce qu'il 
difoit, vne quantite d'Hiroquois, qui fe difperfans 5k 
[56] & la cherchoient les Montagnaits : les autres Sau- 
uages confultent la deffus ce qu'il falloit faire, quel- 


1632 - 33] LE JEUNE ' S RELA TION, 1633 133 

off the fire is considered lacking in courage. I have 
not seen this act of barbarism. I am told that a 
Frenchman who was among the Hurons, came very- 
near losing his arm in trying to play at this fine 
game with a Savage. 

It is true that the Savages are very patient, but 
the order which they maintain in their occupations 
aids them in preserving peace in their households. 
The women know what they are to do, and the men 
also ; and one never meddles with the work of the 
other. The men make the frames of their canoes, 
and the women sew the bark with willow withes or 
similar small wood. The men shape the [55] wood 
of the raquettes, and the women do the sewing on 
them. Men go hunting, and kill the animals; and 
the women go after them, skin them, and clean the 
hides. It is they who go in search of the wood that 
is burned. In fact, they would make fun of a man 
who, except in some great necessity, would do any- 
thing that should be done by a woman. Our Sav- 
age, seeing Father de None carrying wood, began 
to laugh, saying: " He's really a woman;" meaning 
that he was doing a woman's work. But a short 
time afterward, his wife falling sick, and having no 
one in his cabin who could assist him, he was com- 
pelled to go out himself in search of supplies; but 
in truth he went only at night, when no one could 
see him.'*^ 

An old man had dreamed, or rather seen, as he 
said, a large number of Hiroquois who were dispers- 
ing here [56] and there, and searching for the Mon- 
tagnaits. The other Savages consulted thereupon as 
to what they should do, some saying that it would 
be well to take the advice of those people who spoke 


134 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.5 

ques-vns dirent qu'il falloit prendre aduis de ces gens 
qui parlet a Dieu, entendant parler de nous autres, 
Ce fonge s'en alia en fumee. 

Comnae ie demandois a Pierre Paftedechouan com- 
ment on difoit en fa langue ou font tes freres, vne 
femme Sauuage furuenant la deffus, il ne me vouloit 
pas refpondre, me donnant pour raifon qu'il attrifte- 
roit cefte femme, & qu'il la feroit pleurer, &, caufe 
que fes freres eftoient morts; On ne parle plus des 
morts parmy nous, me dit-il, voire mefme les parents 
du defunct ne fe feruent iamais des chofes dont le 
mort fe feruoit pendant fa vie. 

Le 15. du mefme mois de Decembre, quantity d'Al- 
guonquains nous eftans venus voir, I'vn d'eux me [57] 
voyat efcrire, print vne plume, & voulu faire le 
mefme: mais voyant qu'il ne faifoit rien qui vaille, & 
que ie foufriois, il fe mit a fouffler fur ce qu'il auoit 
efcrit, penfant le faire en aller comme de la poudre. 
Ie leur fis dire "k tous que nous eflios venus pour les 
inftruire, ils refpondirent que ie faifois bien d'ap- 
prendre la langue, & quand ie la f9aurois, q tout feroit 
facile de part & d' autre. 

Le 19. la neige eftant defia fort haute, les Sauuages 
prirent huidl elans, ou orignaux. Vers ce temps-1^ 
I'vn d'eux nomme Naflitamirineou, & furnomme des 
Fran9ois Brehault, leur dit qu'il auoit fonge qu'il fal- 
loit manger tous ces Orignaux, & qu'il f§auoit bien 
prier Dieu, & qu'il luy auoit parle, que telle eftoit fa 
volonte, qu'on mangeaft tout, & qu'on n'en donnaft 
rien, fi on en vouloit prendre d' autres : les Sauuages 
le creurent, & n'en donnerent pas vn [58] morceau 
aux Fran9ois. On me raconta cecy en la prefence 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, idjs 135 

to God, meaning us. This dream passed away in 
smoke. 

When I asked Pierre Pastedechouan how to say in 
his language : ' ' Where are thy brothers ? " as a 
woman Savage was passing by, he was loath to an- 
swer ; giving me as a reason that it would make her 
sad, and make her cry because her brothers were 
dead. " We do not speak any more of the dead 
among us," said he, " indeed, the relatives of the 
dead never use anything that was used by the dead 
man during his lifetime." 

On the 15 th of the same month of December, a 
large number of Alguonquains having come to see us, 
one of them seeing [57] me writing, took a pen and 
wanted to do the same; but seeing that he did not 
accomplish much, and that I was smiling, he began 
to blow upon what he had written, thinking that he 
could blow it away like powder. I had them all told 
that we came to teach them. They answered that 
I was doing well to learn their language ; and that, 
when I should know it, everything would be easy 
on both sides. 

On the 19th, the snow being already very deep, the 
Savages captured eight elks or moose. About that 
time one of them, named Nassitamirineou, and sur- 
named by the French Brehault, told them that he 
had dreamed that they must eat all of those Moose ; 
and that he knew very well how to pray to God, who 
had told him that it was his will that they should eat 
all, and that they should give none of them away, if 
they wanted to capture others. The Savages be- 
lieved him, and did not give a [58] piece to the 
Frenchmen. This was related to me in the presence 
of the dreamer. He did not admit all, yet it seemed 


136 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 5 

du fongeur, il n'aduoiioit pas tout, neantmoins la 
chofe femble bien probable, car ay at cabane aupres 
de nous, & nous ayant ouy parler de Dieti, il eftoit 
homme pour en parler par apres, & faire de I'entendu 
parmy fes gens. 

Le 2 1. de Decembre, le bon Dieu nous dona deux 
petits penlionnaires, Manitougache nous en aydnt 
prefent6 vn petit ^ qui il auoit fauue la vie, nous I'ac- 
ceptafmes; & comme nous eftions en crainte qu'il ne 
s'ennuyaft tout feul, nous penfions a en trouuer encor 
vn autre pour luy tenir compagnie. Au mefme 
temps voila vne feme qui entre chez nous auec fon 
petit fils aage d'enuiron fept ans, nous le regardions, 
difans I'vn k 1' autre, voila iuftement ce qu'il nous 
faudroit. le prends la parole & [59] m'addrefle h. fa 
mere, luy demandant fi elle ne voudroit pas bien 
nous doner fon enfant, que nous le nourririons le 
mieux qu'il nous feroit poffible. Helas, dit-elle, i'e- 
ftois venue icy pour prier Manitougache de vo^ le pre- 
f enter, & vous fupplier de 1' accepter, Dieu f9ait fi 
nous fufmes cotens. 6 que fa prouidence eft admi- 
rable ! 

Le plus age que nous a donne Manitougache n'a 
ny pere ny mere, celuy-lk nous eft bien alfeure, nous 
luy auons donne nom Fortune, en attendant qu'il 
foit capable d'eftre baptife. 6 qu'il a rencontre vne 
bone fortune ! Eftant k Tadoulfac, come il eftoit de- 
lailfe de tout le monde, vn Sauuage prefenta vne har- 
quebufe h. noftre Pierre, luy difant, tue ce miferable 
enfant, auffi bien n'aiat point de parents, il fera 
toute fa vie abandonne d'vn chacun: Noftre [60] 
Sauuage entendant cela en eut compalTion, il le reti- 
ra, & I'a nourry iufques a prefent qu'il nous I'a don- 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib33 137 

very probable ; for having settled near us, and hav- 
ing heard us speaking of God, he was just the man 
to talk about it afterward, and to play the learned 
among his people. 

On the 2 1 St of December, God sent us two little 
pensioners, Manitougache having presented to us a 
little one whose life he had saved, and whom we ac- 
cepted ; and, as we were afraid that he would be lone- 
some, we thought to try and find another to keep 
him company. At the same time, a woman came 
bringing her little son, about seven years old. When 
we saw him, we said to each other, " This is just 
what we wanted." I at once asked [59] the mother, 
if she would not like to give us her child, saying 
that we would care for it as best we possibly could. 
"Ah," said she, "I came here to beg Manitougache 
to give him to you, and to beg you to take him." 
God knows how happy we were! Oh, how admir- 
able is his providence ! 

The oldest, the one given to us by Manitougache, 
has neither father nor mother, and hence we are 
sure of keeping him. We have named him Fortune, 
until he can be baptized. Oh, what good fortune he 
has met with ! Being at Tadoussac, forsaken by every 
one, a Savage gave an arquebus to our Pierre, tell- 
ing him to kill this miserable child, because, having 
no parents, he would be abandoned by every one 
during his lifetime. Our [60] Savage, on hearing 
that, had pity on the little one, took him, and fed 
him up to the time when he gave him to us. We 
have called the younger one Bienvenu. He seems 
intelligent, and of a pleasant and endearing nature. 
We are not so sure that he will remain with us, be- 
cause the Savages are extremely fickle and capricious. 


138 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.5 

ne. Nous auons appelle le plus ieune Bienuenu, 
celuy-cy a de Tefprit, il eft d'vn naturel complaifant, 
& flatteur: Nous ne fommes pas fi alleurez qu'il 
nous demeure, car les Sauuages font extremement 
changeas & volages. Vn fien parent entendant qu'il 
nous eftoit donne, s'y voulut oppofer, difant que leur 
Capitaine auoit defendu qu'on ne donnaft aucun en- 
fant aux Francois: la mere de 1' enfant furuient \k 
deffus, & dit que le Capitaine n'a point nourry fon 
fils, & par confequet que ce n'eft pas "k luy d'en dif- 
pofer, fi. bien ^ elle qui en eftoit la mere, & qui I'a- 
uoit toufiours eleue des fa ieuneffe. Le pere de I'en- 
fant ay ant fceu que fon ancienne femme qu'il a quit- 
t6e nous r auoit donne, en a efte bien aife, difant 
qu'il feroit [6i] tres-bien auec nous. Celuy qu'on 
nous auoit promis I'an paffe voudroit bien eftre main- 
tenant auec les deux autres: mais il n'eft pas encore 
temps de s'e charger, il ne faut point embralfer par 
deffus fes forces. C'eft vn plaifir de voir ces deux 
enfans, ce font mes petits efcoliers, ils commecent k 
lire, ils f9auent prier Dieu en Latin, & en leur 
langue. lis nous fot quelquefois rire par leurs pe- 
tits difcours: deuant qu'ils mangent nous leur faifons 
dire le Benedicite. Voila pourquoy quand ils veulent 
mager, ils s'en viennent nous dire, Mon Pere, Bene- 
dicite : c'eft k dire, donnez moy k difner. Comme 
ils voyoient donner k manger "k vn petit chien, ils nous 
difoient qu'il n' auoit pas dit fon Benedicite. le m'en 
vay, dit I'vn d'eux, le dire pour luy; comme nous 
rions, fon compagno luy dit, nama irinijionakhi atti- 
moukhi, les chiens n'ont point [62] d'efprit, ils ne di- 
fent pas leur ^^w^^/aV^, c'eft a faire aux hommes feu- 
lement ; vous les entendriez allans & venans ruminer 


1632-33] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6ss 139 

One of his relatives, hearing that he had been given 
to us, objected, saying that their Captain had forbid- 
den them to give any of their children to the French. 
Thereupon the mother of the child interposed, de- 
claring that the Captain had not taken care of her 
child; and that, consequently, it did not belong to 
him to dispose of it, but to her who was the mother, 
and who had reared him since his infancy. The 
father of the child, having learned that his former 
wife, who had left him, had given the child to us, 
was greatly pleased, saying that it would fare [6i] 
very well with us. The one who was promised to us 
last year would like very much now to be with these 
two others. But we cannot charge ourselves with 
him now, we must not undertake more than we can 
perform. It is a pleasure to see these two children; 
they are my little pupils. They are beginning to 
read, and know how to pray to God, in Latin and in 
their own language. Sometimes they make us laugh 
by their childish prattle. Before eating we make 
them say the Benedicite. Hence, when they want to 
eat, they come tons and say, "My Father, Benedicite;"' 
that is to say, "Give me something to eat." When 
they saw a little dog given something to eat, they 
told us that it had not said its Benedicite. ' * I am go- 
ing, " said one of them, "to say it for him." As we 
laughed at this, his companion said to him: 7iama 
irinisionakhi attimoukhi ; that is, "The dogs have no 
[62] mind, they do not say their Beiiedicite, it is only 
for men to say that. ' ' You can hear them, going and 
coming, humming the Pater noster, pronouncing first 
one part and then another, in the course of which 
there happened the other day a very amusing inci- 
dent. Sieur Emery de Caen was dining at our house. 


140 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.5 

le Pater nojier, en prononcer tantoft vne partie, tan- 
toft r autre; en quoy il arriua vn iour vn rencontre 
agreable. Le fieur Emery de Caen difnant en noftre 
maifon, comme on feruoit fur table le peu que nous 
anions, I'vn de ces enfans regardant ce qu'on prefen- 
toit, & voyant bien que ce n'eftoit pas pour luy, com- 
mence a dire par rencontre ; & ne nos inducas in ten- 
tationem, cela fit rire toute la compagnie. 

Le fecond iour de lanuier, ie vey quelques Sau- 
uages qui s'efforgoient de paffer dans leurs canots la 
grande riuiere de S. Laurens: ce fleuue ordinaire- 
ment ne gele point au milieu: il charie ou porte 
d'horribles glaces, felon le cours & mouuement de 
la maree. Ces pauures gens abordoient [63] de 
grandes glaces flottantes, les fondoient auec leurs 
auirons montoiet deffus, tiroient leurs canots apres 
eux pour s'en aller prendre I'eau a 1' autre cofte de 
ces glaces; quoy qu'ils foient tres-habiles, il ne laifle 
pas de s'en noyer quelques- vns. 

Voyant vn Sauuage qui traifnoit fa mere apres foy 
fur la neige. Les chariots & carrofles de ce pays-cy 
font des traifnes faictes d'efcorce ou de bois, les che- 
uaux font les hommes qui les tirent apres eux : voy- 
ant done cefle pauure vieille liee fur vne d'icelles, 
fon fils ne la pouuant commodement faire defcendre 
par le fentier ordinaire d'vne montagne qui borde la 
riuiere ou il alloit, la lailfa rouler h bas par I'endroidt 
le plus roide, & s'en alia la requerir par vn autre che- 
min. Ne pouuant fupporter cette impiete, ie le dy k 
quelques Sauuages qui efloient aupres de [64] moy : 
ils me refpondirent, Que veux-tu qu'il en falfe, aulTi 
bien s'en va elle mourir, prens la & la tue, puis que 
tu en as compafQon, tu luy feras du bie, car elle ne 


1632 - 33] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1633 141 

As we served upon the table the little that we had, 
one of the children, looking at what was set forth 
and seeing very well that it was not for him, began 
to say as it happened to occur to him : Et ne nos 
inducas in tentationem, causing the whole company to 
laugh. 

On the second day of January, I saw a number 
of Savages trying to cross the great river St. Law- 
rence in their canoes. Usually this river does not 
freeze in the middle ; it drifts or floats immense pieces 
of ice, according to the course and movement of the 
current. These poor fellows approached [63] large 
pieces of the floating ice, sounded them with their 
paddles, then mounted them, and drew their canoes 
up after them, crossing over to reach the water on 
the other side of the ice. Nimble as they are, not 
infrequently some of them are drowned. 

I saw a Savage dragging his mother behind him 
over the snow. The coaches and wagons of this 
country are sledges made of bark or wood, the horses 
are the men who draw them. Now this poor old 
woman was tied upon one of these sleighs; and her 
son, being unable, conveniently, to take her down by 
the common path of a mountain which borders the 
river along which he was going, let her roll down 
the steepest place to the bottom, and then went by 
another route to find her. As I could not bear this 
act of impiety, I said so to some of the Savages who 
were near [64] me. They answered : ' ' What wouldst 
thou have him do with her? She is going to die 
any way ; take her and kill her, since thou hast pity 
for her; thou wilt do her a service, because she will 
not suffer so much ; perhaps her son will leave her in 
the midst of the woods, as he is unable either to cure 


142 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.5 

fouffrira pas tat, peuteftre que fon fils la laiffera an 
milieu des bois, ne la pouuat ny guerir ny traifner 
apres foy, s'il ne trouue point dequoy manger. Voi- 
la comme ils foulagent les malades qu'ils croyent de- 
uoir mourir, ils leur aduancent la mort par quelque 
coup de baflon ou de hache, quand ils ont beaucoup 
de chemin k faire, & cela par compaffion. 

Le troiliefme du mefme mois, la femme de noflre 
Sauuage eftant malade, il me vint demander mon ca- 
nif pour la faigner. Les Sauuages fe tirent du fang 
de la tefte. Eftant vn iour en vne cabane, vne Sau- 
uage regardant vne efcritoire que ie tenois, prit dex- 
trement le canif fans qui ie [65] m'en apperceuffe, & 
s'en fit quelques ouuertures au hault du frond, puis 
elle me le rendit: ie fus eftonne la voyant faigner; 
elle me dit qu'elle auoit mal a la tefte, & qu'elle fe 
vouloit guerir. Or comme ils ont veu noftre fa9on 
de faigner, & qu'ils la trouuent bonne. La NalTe me 
vint prier d'aider en cela fa femme. Ie luy refpon- 
dis que ie n'y entendois rien: & comme il vouloit 
prendre mon canif, ie luy dis qu'il attendift au iour 
fuiuant, & que ie prierois le Chirurgien de la venir 
voir; ce qu'il fit. Ce pendant ie I'allay vifiter en fa 
cabane: il faifoit vn grad froid, elle eftoit tefte nue 
^ leur accouftumee, mordant dans vn peloton de 
nege; c'eftoit feulement pour guerir vn gros rhume 
qui I'eftouffoit. Voila les delicatefles du pais. Le 
lendemain eftat faignee elle ne tarda gueres ^ aller 
querir du bois ^ fon ordinaire. Voiez [66] fi ceux qui 
font profeffion de fouffrir quelque chofe pour Dieu, 
ne doiuent pas eftre confus voyans de tels exemples. 

Nous n'auons point eft6 folitaires tout I'hiuer, nom- 
bre de Sauuages nous font venus voir, ils font palTez 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, idjj 143 

her or to drag her after him, if he does not find some- 
thing to eat." This is the way they take care of the 
sick that they think are going to die. They hasten 
death by a blow from a club or an axe, when they 
have a long journey to make, and do this through 
compassion. 

On the third of the same month, the wife of our 
Savage being sick, he came to ask me for my knife 
with which to bleed her. The Savages draw blood 
from the head. One day when I was in a cabin, a 
Savage Woman, looking at a writing case, I was hold- 
ing, adroitly took my penknife, without my [65] per- 
ceiving it, and made several openings in the upper 
part of her forehead, then returned it to me. I was 
astonished when I saw her bleeding. She told me she 
had a headache, and wanted to cure it. Now that they 
have seen our way of bleeding, and believe it to be 
good, La Nasse came and begged me to aid his wife 
in the same way. I told him that I knew nothing 
about it; and, as he wanted to take my knife, I told 
him to wait until the next day, when I would beg the 
Surgeon to go and see her, which he did. In the 
meantime I went to see her in her cabin ; it was very 
cold; she was bareheaded, according to their custom, 
biting a lump of snow, trying to cure a bad cold which 
almost choked her! Such are the delicate usages of 
the country. The next day, after having been bled, 
she went out to gather wood as usual. Think [66] 
if those who make a profession of suffering some- 
thing in the cause of God ought not to feel ashamed, 
when they see such examples. 

We have not been lonely all winter, as a number 
of Savages have been to see us. They pass by our 
house in large crowds, going Moose hunting. 


144 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.5 

a grofles bandes deuant noftre maifon s'en allans ^ 
la challe de I'Orignac. 

Le Prince, & fa mere la Princeffe, c'eft ainfi que 
les FranQois appellant vn Sauuage de bonne fagon : 
Vous diriez que cefte famille a ie ne f9ay quoy de 
noble; & s'ils eftoient couuerts a la Fran9oife, ils ne 
cederoient point en bonne mine a nos gentils-hommes 
Frangois. 

Ce ieune homme nous eflant venu vifiter, ie luy de- 
manday s'il auoit vn fils, & s'il ne feroit pas bien con- 
tent de nous le donner pour I'inftruire, il me dit 
que ouy; fa mere \^^^ conduifant vne petite fille, 
moy croyant que ce fut vn gar9on, ie I'appelle, difant 
a fa grand'mere qu'elle nous le donnaft, elle fe mit 
^ rire: me doutant que c'eftoit vne fille, ie luy dis 
que nous ne les prenions point, mais qu'il y viendroit 
quelque iour d'honneftes filles de Frace pour enfei- 
gner leurs filles : alors, me dit-elle, ie donneray 
celle-cy. 

Ie preuois qu'il eft tout k fait neceffaire d'inflruire 
les filles aufli bien que les garfons, & que nous ne 
ferons rien ou fort pen, fi quelque bone famille n'a 
f oin de ce f exe ; car les gar9ons que nous aurons ele- 
uez en la cognoilTance de Dieu venans k fe marier ^ 
des filles ou femmes Sauuages accouftumees a courre 
dans les bois, leurs maris feront obligez de les fuiure, 
& ainfi retomber dans la barbarie, ou bien de les quit- 
ter, qui feroit vn autre mal fort dangereux. 

[68] N'y a-il point quelque Dame en France, qui 
ait afl!ez de coeur pour fonder icy vn Seminaire de 
filles, dot la conduitte feroit premierement donnee ^ 
quelque bone veufue courageufe, accompagnee de 
deux braues filles, qui demeureroient en vne maifon 


1632-33] LE JEUNE^S RELATION, i633 145 

[Among them were] the Prince and his mother, 
the Princess. It is thus that the French call a fine 
looking Savage. You would say that this family has 
something inexpressibly noble about it ; and, if they 
were dressed in the French style, they would not 
yield in good appearance to our French gentlemen. 

When this young man came to see us, I asked him 
if he had a son, and if he would not like to give him 
to us to teach. He answered me "yes. ' ' His mother 
[67] had a little girl with her; and I, thinking that 
it was a boy, called her, asking her grandmother to 
give him to us. She began to laugh. Thinking 
that it might be a girl, I said that we did not take 
them, but that some day some worthy women would 
come from France, who would teach their daughters. 
" Then," said she, " I shall give her to them." 

I see that it is absolutely necessary to teach the 
girls as well as the boys, and that we shall do noth- 
ing or very little, unless some good household has 
the care of this sex ; for the boys that we shall have 
reared in the knowledge of God, when they marry 
Savage girls or women accustomed to wandering in 
the woods, will, as their husbands, be compelled to 
follow them and thus fall back into barbarism, or to 
leave them, another evil full of danger. 

[68] Is there not some Lady in France who has 
enough courage to found here a Seminary for girls, 
to be under the care of some good courageous widow, 
assisted by two brave young women, who would live 
in a house which might be built near the home of that 
estimable family that is here? There are Ladies in 
Paris who yearly spend over ten thousand francs in 
pocket-money ; if they would apply a part of this to 
gather in the drops of blood that the Son of God shed 


146 LES RELATIONS DBS jASUITES [Vol.5 

qu'on pourroit dreffer proche de cefte honnefle fa- 
mille qui eft icy? II y a des Dames dans Paris qui 
emploient tous les ans plus de dix mille francs en 
leurs menus plaifirs : fi elles en appliquoient vne par- 
tie pour recueillir les gouttes du fang du Fils de 
Dieu refpandu pour tant d'ames qui fe vont perdans 
tous les iours faute de fecours, elles ne rougiroient 
pas de honte au iour qu' elles paroiftront deuant Dieu, 
pour rendre compte des biens dont il les a faits oeco- 
nomes: cela eft bien plus aife "k dire, qu'k executer. 

Le lo. de lanuier le froid eftoit [66 i.e., 69] fort vio- 
let, le ne voy le iour la plus part de I'hyuer qu'au 
trauers des glaces : il f e fait vne croufte de glace fur 
les chaffis de ma cellule ou chambrette, laquelle tombe 
comme vne lofange ou carreau de verre quand le 
froid fe vient a relafcher: C'eft au travers de ce 
cryftal que le Soleil nous communique fa lumiere. 
Fay fouuent trouue de gros gla§ons attachez le matin 
a ma couuerture, formez du fouffle de I'haleine; & 
m'oubliant de les ofter le matin, ie les trouuois en- 
core le foir: Ten ay quelquefois veu en France, mais 
peu fouuent & bien petits, a comparaifon de ceux-cy. 

Comme nous n'auons ny fontaine, ny puy, il nous 
faut aller tous les iours puifer de I'eau a la riuiere, de 
laquelle nous fommes efloignez enuiron 200 pas: 
mais pour en auoir, il faut fendre la glace k grands 
coups [70] de hache, & encor faut-il attendre que la 
mer monte, car le maree eftat balTe, on ne pent auoir 
d'eau pour refpaiffeur des glaces. Nous iettons 
cefte eau dans vn poin9on qui n'eft pas loing d'vn 
bon feu ; & cependat il faut auoir vn grand f oin tous 
les matins de rompre la croufte de glace qui fe forme 
dans ce vailfeau, autrement en deux nuidls tout ne 
feroit qu'vn gla9on, le poin9on fut-il plein. 


1632-33] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, r6j3 147 

for SO many souls that are going astray daily for 
want of help, then they would not be put to shame 
when they appear before God, and must give an ac- 
count of the goods of which he has made them stew- 
ards. That is a great deal easier to say than to do. 

On the loth of January the cold was [66 i.e., 6q] very 
severe. I see daylight a great part of the winter only 
through ice. The crusts of ice gather upon the win- 
dows of my cell or little room, and fall like a lozenge, 
or a piece of glass, when the cold relaxes. It is 
through this crystal that the Sun sends us his light. 
Several times I have found large pieces of ice, formed 
by my breath, attached to my blanket in the morn- 
ing ; and, forgetting to shake them off, I found them 
there still in the evening. I have sometimes seen 
them in France, but rarely, and they were very small 
compared with these. 

As we have neither a spring nor a well, we are 
obliged to go for water every day to the river, from 
which we are distant about 200 steps. But to get 
it, we must first break the ice with heavy blows [70] 
from an axe ; and after that we must wait until the 
sea comes up, for when the tide is low you cannot 
get water because of the thickness of the ice. We 
throw this water into a barrel, which is not far from 
a good fire ; and yet we must be careful to break the 
layer of ice every morning, otherwise, in two nights, 
it would be one mass of ice, even if the barrel were 
full. 

One of our countrymen was thirsty, when in the 
woods, and so thought to lap a little snow from the 
axe which he held ; when he touched the iron his 
tongue stuck fast, and froze so quickly and so solidly, 
that in suddenly withdrawing the axe, on account of 


H8 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.5 

Vn de nos Francois ayant foif das les bois, & vou- 
lant lefcher vn pen de neige qui eftoit fur vne hache 
qu'il tenoit, venat "k toucher le fer, fa langue fe cola 
& gela fi promptement & li fortement, que venant k 
retirer foudainement la hache pour le froid qu'il fen- 
toit, il enleua quant & quat toute la peau de fa 
langue. 

Tout cecy m'auroit quafi fait croire en France que 
ce pays eft infupportable : [71] i'aduoue qu'il y a 
quelques iours bien ferrans & preffans, mais ils font 
peu en nombre, le refte eft plus que tolerable. On 
fe roule icy fur la neige, comme en France fur I'herbe 
de nos prairies, pour ainfi dire, ce n'eft pas qu'elle 
ne foit aufli froide comme elle eft blanche, mais les 
iours font beaux, le Soleil plus chaud qu'en plufieurs 
endroicts de France; nous fommes, dit-on dans le 
mefme parallelle que la Rochelle ; la moindre adtion 
qu'on fait la plufpart du temps bannit la rigueur du 
froid. 

Combien de fois trouuant quelque colline ou mon- 
tagne a defcendre, me fuis-je lailTe rouler a bas fur 
la neige, fans en receuoir autre incommodite, fmon 
de changer pour vn peu de temps mon habit noir en 
vn habit blanc, & encore cela f e fait-il en riant ; car 
fi on ne fe fouftient bien aflis fur fes raquettes, on fe 
blachit [72] auffi bien la tefte, que les pieds. 

Combien de fois ay-ie fait le mefme fur des glaces 
fort hautes, qui bordoient la riuiere fur laquelle ie 
voulois aller? Ce fut vn Sauuage qui m'apprit ce fe- 
cret cognu de tout le monde : il pafloit deuant moy, 
& voyant que fa tefte eftoit en danger d'arriuer a la 
riuiere pluftofl que fes pieds, il fe laiffa rouler tout 
du long des glaces, & moy apres luy : le bon eft qu'il 


1682-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 149 

the cold that he felt, he at the same time tore almost 
all the skin from his tongue. 

All of this would have almost made me believe in 
France that this country is unbearable. [71] I ad- 
mit that some days are very cold and penetrating, but 
they are few, and the rest are more than tolerable. 
Here they roll on the snow as they do in France upon 
the grass of our meadows, so to speak ; I do not mean 
to say that it is less cold than it is white, but the days 
are fine, and the Sun is warmer than in many parts 
of France. We are, they vSay, on the same parallel 
with la Rochelle. The least exercise we take gen- 
erally dispels the rigor of the cold. 

How often, when coming to a hill or a mountain 
which I must descend, I have rolled down to the bot- 
tom on the snow, experiencing no other discomfort 
than to change for a little while my black habit for 
a white one, and all this is done with much laughter. 
For if you do not stand firmly upon your raquettes, 
you will whiten [72] your head as well as your feet. 

How many times have I done this also upon the icy 
heights of the river banks along which I was going. 
It was a Savage who taught me this trick, known to 
everybody here; he went ahead of me, and, seeing 
that his head was in danger of reaching the river be- 
fore his feet, he let himself roll the whole length of 
the ice, and I after him. The best of it is that you 
have only to do it once, in order to understand the 
trick. I was afraid, at first ; for the rising tide, lift- 
ing up those great blocks of ice, cracks them in many 
places, and the water, splashing up on the banks of 
the river, makes a thin layer of ice over the thicker 
one. When you try walking upon the thin ice, it 
breaks under you. The first time I tried it, I thought 


150 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 5 

ne faut que faire cela vne feule fois, pour f9auoir le 
meftier. I'auois peur au commencement, car la ma- 
ree montant, & foufleuant ces grands corps de glaces, 
les onure en plufieurs endroits : & quelques bouillons 
rejalliffans fur les bords de la riuiere, font vne glace 
affez mince fur la plus epaiffe: quand vous venez ^ 
marcher fur cefte premiere glace, elle rompt fous 
vous: fi bien qu'au commencement ie pefois que [73] 
tout alloit fondre, mais ie ne croy pas que des canons 
fiffent branfler la plus grolTe glace. Quand on vient 
fur le printemps, c'eft alors qu'il y a du danger de 
rencontrer quelque ouuerture qui vous faffe couler \k 
defCous. 

Le 12. du mefme mois, vn Sauuage me vint dire 
que le Pere de Noue efloit caufe d'vn vent qui fouf- 
floit: ie luy en demanday la raifon; il me dit qu' en- 
core bien que le ciel fut fort rouge au matin, le Pere 
n'auoit point lailTe d'aller trauailler au bois de bone 
heure, & que cela efloit caufe du vent : Que les Mon- 
tagnaits voyans le ciel enflamme, fe tiennent en repos 
dans leurs cabanes, & par ce moyen arreftent le vent. 
I'aduertiray, dit-il, vne autrefois le Pere de Noue 
qu'il ne parte point fl matin quand le temps fera 
rouge, & il verra par experience qu'il ne ventera [74] 
point. Ie me mis "k rire, & tachay le mieux que ie 
peu d'effacer de fa penfee cefte f uperftition : en fin il 
s'en mocqua auffi bien que moy; ce n'eft pas pour- 
tant qu'il la quitte fi aifement, car les Sauuages vous 
accordent facilement ce que vous leur dites, mais ils 
ne laiffent pas d'agir toufiours a leur fa9on. 

Paffans de difcours en difcours, ie luy parlay de 
Dieu qui a tout fait; car c'eft la oil ie vife de leur do- 
ner quelque cognoilTance de celuy qui leur a donne la 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1633 161 

it [73] was all going to sink under me. But I do not 
believe that a cannon could crack the thickest ice. 
When you walk upon it in the spring, it is then that 
there is danger of stepping into a hole and going 
under. 

On the 1 2th of the same month, a Savage came to 
me, and said that Father de Noue was the cause of a 
heavy wind which was blowing; I asked him why. 
He told me that, although the sky had been very red 
in the morning, the Father had not failed to go and 
work in the woods at an early hour, and that that was 
the cause of the wind ; that, when the Montaignaits 
saw a flaming sky, they remained at rest in their 
cabins, and so arrested the wind. "I shall warn Fa- 
ther de Noue," said he, "that another time he should 
not leave his cabin when the sky is so red ; and he 
will see, by trying it, that the wind will not [74] 
blow." I began to laugh, and tried by every means 
in my power to drive this superstition from his mind, 
and at last he laughed at it just as much as I did. 
It was not so easy for him to give it up ; for the Sav- 
ages agree very readily with what you say, but they 
do not, for all that, cease to act upon their own ideas. 

Passing on from one subject to another, I talked to 
him of God, who has made everything ; because it is 
thus I aim to give them some knowledge of him who 
gave them life, in order that they may talk with each 
other thereupon, and that the children may hear it 
spoken of from their youth. Talking to him thus in 
my jargon, and more frequently by signs and ges- 
tures than otherwise (for I talk more with my hands 
than with my tongue), I made him comprehend some- 
thing of the power of God. Then he told me that 
the God of France was [75] a great deal more power- 


152 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.5 

vie, afin qu'ils s'en entretiennent les vns les autres, 
& que les enfans en oyent parler des leur ieuneffe. 
Luy difcourant done en mon barragoin, & plus fou- 
uent par geftes & par fignes qu'autrement (car ie 
parle plus de la main que de la langue) ie luy fis con- 
ceuoir quelque chof e de la puilTance de Dieu : alors il 
me dit que Ie Dieu de France eftoit [75] bien plus 
puiffant & plus grand Capitaine ou Seigneur que Ie 
Dieu de fon pays: Car, dit-il, voftre Dieu eft grand, 
& Ie noftre, ou bien fes enfans viennent d'vn rat 
d'eau que les Fra9ois appellent rat mufque. 

Mais k propos de mufc, les Sauuages n'en peuuent 
fupporter I'odeur: Quelqu'vn m'a dit qu'aiant fur 
foy quelque chofe femblable, ils luy difoient qu'il 
fentoit mal; aufli tiennent ils cet animal puant, & 
quelque vieux morceau de grailTe leur femblera de 
bonne odeur. Or iugez maintenant s'il y a des ob- 
iedts plus conformes k I'odorat les vns que les autres, 
& fi nos fantaifies auec raccouflumance n'ont pas vn 
grand pouuoir fur nous. 

Puis que ce Sauuage m'a donn^ occafion de parler 
de leur Dieu, ie diray que c'eft vn grand erreur de 
croire que les Sauuages n'ont cognoilfance [76] d'au- 
cune diuinite: ie m'etonnois de cela en France, voy- 
ant que la nature auoit donn6 ce fentiment ^ toutes 
les autres nations de la terre. Ie confelTe que les 
Sauuages n'ont point de prieres publiques & com- 
munes, ny aucun culte qu'ils rendent ordinairemet ^ 
celuy qu'ils tiennent pour Dieu, «& que leur cognoif- 
fance n'eft que tenebres: mais on ne pent nier qu'ils 
ne recognoiffent quelque nature fuperieure ^ la na- 
ture de I'homme : comme ils n'ont ny loix, ny police, 
auffi n'ont-ils aucune ordonnance qui concerne Ie fer- 


1632 - 33] LE JEUNE ' S RELA TION, 1633 153 

ful and a greater Captain or Lord than the God of 
his country. " For," said he, " your God is great; 
and ours, or his children at least, come from a water 
rat which the French call the muskrat." 

But, speaking of musk, the Savages cannot bear 
the odor of it. Some one said to me that once, when 
he had something about him like mUvSk, they told him 
he smelled bad. So they hold that this animal has a 
bad smell, while an old piece of fat would seem to 
them to have a pleasant odor. Now you may judge 
if certain things are not more acceptable to the smell 
of some people than others, and whether our fancies 
and customs have not great power over us. 

As this Savage gave me an occasion to speak of 
their God, let me say that it is a great mistake to 
think they have no knowledge [76] of any divinity. 
When in France I was astonished at that, knowing 
that Nature has given this sentiment to all other na- 
tions of the earth. I confess that the Savages have 
no public or common prayer, nor any form of worship 
usually rendered to one whom they hold as God, and 
their knowledge is only as darkness. But it cannot be 
denied that they recognize some nature superior to the 
nature of man. As they have neither laws nor govern- 
ment, therefore there is no ordinance which concerns 
the service of this superior nature ; each one acts ac- 
cording to his own understanding. I do not know 
their secrets; but, from the little that I am about to 
say, it will be seen that they recognize some divinity. 

They say that there is a certain one whom they 
call Atahocan, who made all things. Talking one day 
of God, in a cabin, [y-j^^ they asked me what this God 
was. I told them that it was he who could do every- 
thing, and who had made the Sky and earth. They 


154 LES RELATIONS DES jiSUITES [Vol.5 

nice de cefte nature fuperieure, chacun fait comme il 
I'entend: ie ne f9ay pas leurs fecrets, mais de ce pen 
que ie vay dire, on verra qu'ils cognoilTent quelque 
diuinite. 

lis difent qu'il y a vn certain qu'ils nomment Ata- 
hocan, qui a tout fait : parlant vn iour de Dieu dans 
vne cabane, [J7'] ils me demanderent que c'etoit que 
Dieu, ie leur dis que c'eftoit celuy qui pouuoit tout, 
& qui auoit fait Ie Ciel & la terre : ils commencerent 
a fe dire les vns aux autres Atahocan, Atahocan, c'eft 
Aiahocan. 

lis difent qu'vn nomme Meffou repara Ie monde 
perdu das les eaux; Vous voyez qu'ils ont quelque 
tradition du deluge, quoy que meflee de fables, car 
voicy comme Ie monde fe perdit, ^ ce qu'ils difent. 

Ce Meffou allant a la chaffe auec des loups ceruiers, 
au lieu de chiens, on I'aduertit qu'il faifoit dangereux 
pour fes loups (qu'il appelloit fes freres) dans vn cer- 
tain lac aupres duquel il efloit. Vn iour qu'il pour- 
fuiuoit un eflan, fes loups luy donneret la chaffe iuf- 
ques dedans ce lac: arriuez qu'ils furent au milieu, 
ils furet abyfmez en vn inflant. Luy furuenat 1^ 
deffus, & cherchant fes freres de [78] tons coftez, vn 
oifeau luy dit qu'il les voyoit au fond du lac, & que 
certaines beftes ou monftres les tenoient Ik dedans: 
il entre dans I'eau pour les fecourir, mais auffi-toft ce 
lac fe defborde, & s'aggrandit fi furieufemet, qu'il 
inonda & noya toute la terre. 

Le Meffou bien eftonne, quitte la penfee de fes 
loups, pour fonger a reftablir le monde. II enuoye 
vn corbeau chercher vn peu de terre, pour auec ce 
morceau en reftablir vn autre. Le corbeau n'en peut 
trouuer, tout eflant couuert d'eau. II fait plonger 


1632-33J LEJEUNE'S RELATION. i6jj 165 

began to say one to the other, ''Atahocan, Atahocan, it 
is Atahocan.'' 

They say there is one named Messou, who restored 
the world when it was lost in the waters. You see 
that they have some traditions of the deluge, although 
mingled with fables. This is the way, as they say, 
that the world was lost. 

This Messou, going hunting with lynxes, instead 
of dogs, was warned that it would be dangerous for 
his lynxes (which he called his brothers), in a certain 
lake near the place where he was. One day as he 
was hunting an elk, his lynxes gave it chase even 
into the lake ; and, when they reached the middle of 
it, they were submerged in an instant. When he 
arrived there and sought his brothers [78] every- 
where, a bird told him that it had seen them at the 
bottom of the lake, and that certain animals or mon- 
sters held them there. He leaped into the water to 
rescue them; but immediately the lake overflowed, 
and increased so prodigiously that it inundated and 
drowned the whole earth. 

The Messou, very much astonished, gave up all 
thoughts of his lynxes, to meditate on creating the 
world anew. He sent a raven to find a small piece 
of the earth, with which to build up another world. 
The raven was unable to find any, everything being 
covered with water. He made an otter dive down, 
but the depth of the water prevented it from going 
to the bottom. At last a muskrat descended, and 
brought back some earth. With this bit of earth, he 
[Messou] restored everything to its condition. He 
remade the trunks of the trees, and shot arrows 
against them, which were changed into branches. It 
would be a long story to recount [79] how he reestab- 


156 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 

vne loutre, mais la profondeur des eaux I'empefcha 
de venir iufques a terre. En fin vn rat mufqti6 def- 
cendit, & en rapporta: Auec ce morceau de terre il 
remit tout en eftat: il refit des troncs d'arbres, & ti- 
rant des filches ^ I'encontre, elles fe changeoient en 
branches. Ce feroit vne longue fable de raconter 
[79] comme il repara tout : comme il f e vangea des 
moftres qui auoient pris fes chaffeurs, fe transformant 
en mille fortes d'animaux pour les furprendre: bref 
ce beau Reparateur eftant marie k vne foury muf qu6e, 
eut des enfans qui ont repeuple le monde. 

On voit par ces contes que les Sauuages ont quel- 
que id6e d'vn Dieu: le dis bien dauantage, qu'ils 
ont quelque efpece de facrifice. Le Pere Brebeuf m'a 
affeure qu'hyuemant auec eux, il leur vit mettre vn 
petit Eflan ou Orignac fouz la cendre, & le brufler. 
II cogneut depuis qu'k mefme temps on en auoit brul6 
vn en la mefme fa§on en vne autre cabane, & deman- 
dant la raifon de cela, ils luy dirent que c'eftoit pour 
la fant6 d'vn malade. 

II y a des hommes parmy eux qui font prof elTion de 
confulter leur [80] Manitou ; il me f emble que par ce 
mot de Manitou ils entendent, comme entre nous, vn 
Ange, ou quelque nature puiffante. le croy qu'ils 
penfent qu'il y en a de bons & de manuals, i'en par- 
leray plus afleur6ment quelque iour. 

Le Gendre de noflre Sauuage voulant aller ^ la 
chafle, le confulta tout aupres de noftre maifon : II fit 
vne petite Cabane de bois, fe renferma la dedans. 
Sur la nuict, chantant, criant, hurlant: les autres 
eftoient k I'entour de luy: ie priay vn Fran§ois de 
tirer vn coup d'arquebufe pour les efpouuanter par le 
bruit, mais ie ne f9ay s'ils I'entendirent, tant ils fe 


] 632 - 33] LE JEUNE 'S RELA TION, 1633 157 


lished everything; how he took vengeance on the 
monsters that had taken his hunters, transforming 
himself into a thousand kinds of animals to circum- 
vent them. In short, this great Restorer, having 
married a little muskrat, had children who repeopled 
the world. 

You see by these stories that the Savages have 
some idea of a God: I say even more, they have 
some form of sacrifice. Father Brebeuf assured me 
that, when passing the winter with them, he saw them 
put a little Elk or Moose under the ashes and burn 
it. He has learned since then that another was 
burned at the same time and in the same manner, in 
another cabin; and, asking the reason for it, they 
answered that it was for the recovery of a sick man. 

There are some men among them who make a pro- 
fession of consulting their [80] Manitou. It seems to 
me that by this word ' ' Manitou ' ' they understand, 
as among us, an Angel or some powerful being. ^i J 
believe they think that there are good and bad Mani- 
tous ; I will speak of this with greater certainty some 
day. 

The Son-in-law of our Savage, wishing to go hunt- 
ing, took counsel with him [the Manitou] near our 
house. He made a little wooden Cabin, shutting 
himself inside toward nightfall, singing, crying, and 
howling. The others were around him. I begged 
a Frenchman to fire a shot of the arquebus, to 
frighten them with the noise ; but I am not sure that 
they heard it, so great was the uproar. The Mani- 
tou told him to go hunting in a certain direction, 
that he would find Moose there, and no Hiroquois. 
The Manitou was proved a liar; for the hunter re- 
turned almost starved, having found very little. 


168 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.5 

demenoient. Le Manitou luy dit qu'il allafl k la 
chaff e d'vn certain cofte, qu'il y trouueroit des Ori- 
gnaux, & point d'Hiroquois; le Manitou fut trouue 
mentenr, car il reuint bien affame, n'ayant quafi rien 
trouue. [8i] Pour les Hiroquois, il n'en pouuoit ren- 
contrer, car il s'ecartoit bien loin d'eux: ie croy que 
la plufpart de ces confulteurs de Manitou ne font que 
des trompeurs «& charlatans; neantmoins quand ils 
recommandent quelque chofe, cela eft execute de 
point en point. S'il difoit aux Sauuages que le Mani- 
tou veut qu'on fe couche nud dans la neige, qu'on 
fe brufle en quelque endroidt, il feroit obey.- & au 
bout du conte ce Manitou ou Diable ne leur parle non 
plus qu'k moy. 

Ie me doute neantmoins qu'il y en a quelquesvns 
qui ont vrayemet communication auec le Diable, s'il 
eft vray ce qu'en difent les Sauuages, car on les voit 
marcher fur leurs cabanes fans les rompre: ils de- 
iiienent furieux & comme polTedez, donent des coups 
capables d'alfommer vn boeuf, & neantmoins la dou- 
leur palf e [82] en peu de temps : fans grand outrage 
on les void tout en fang, puis gueris en vn moment, 
lis racontent quantite d'autres chofes femblables, 
mais quad ie les prelTe, ils m'aduouet francliement 
qu'ils n'ont point veu cela, ains feulement qu'ils I'ont 
ouy dire. II ne faut pas leur faire grandes obiedtions 
fur leurs fables, pour les arrefler, & leur faire perdre 
terre. 

Le 1 5 . du mefme noflre Sauuage nous vint trouuer, 
& nous dit qu'vn de fes gendres auoit fonge que nous 
luy donnaflions auffi long que la main de petum, ou 
tabac ; Ie luy refufay, difant que ie ne donnois rien 
pour les fonges, & que ce n'eftoit que folic, que ie 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib33 15» 

[8i] As to the Hiroquois, he could not have run 
against any, because he kept at a great distance from 
them. I believe that the greater number of these 
consulters of the Manitou are only deceivers and 
charlatans. Notwithstanding this, when they advise 
anything it is carried out exactly. If one of them 
should tell the Savages that the Manitou wanted 
them to lie down naked in the snow, or to burn them- 
selves in a certain place, he would be obeyed. And, 
after all, this Manitou, or Devil, does not talk to 
them any more than he does to me. 

Nevertheless, I am inclined to think that there are 
some among them who really have communication 
with the Devil, if what the Savages say is true; be- 
cause some are seen to walk upon their huts, without 
breaking them down. They become furious and act 
as if possessed, striking blows hard enough to fell an 
ox, and yet the pain passes [82] away very soon. 
Without any great injury, they cover themselves with 
blood, and are healed in a moment. They relate 
many other similar things ; but, when I question them 
closely, they frankly admit that they have not seen 
them, but have only heard of them. One does not 
need to offer any very serious objections to their 
stories, to interrupt and confuse them. 

On the 15th of the same [month], our Savage came 
to see us, and said that one of his sons-in-law had 
dreamed that we would give him a piece of petun, or 
tobacco, as long as his hand. I refused him, saying 
that I did not give anything on account of dreams ; 
that they were only folly, and that, when I knew his 
language, I would explain to him how they originated. 
He replied to me that all nations had something es- 
pecially their own ; that, if our dreams were not true, 


160 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 

leur expliquerois comme ils fe forment quand ie fcau- 
rois leur lague. II me repart que toutes les nations 
auoient quelque chofe de particulier, que fi nos 
fonges n'eftoient pas vrays, fi bien les leurs: [83] & 
qu'ils mourroient s'ils ne les mettoient en execution. 
A ce conte nos vies dependet des fonges d'vn Sau- 
uage, car s'ils refuoiet qu'il nous faut tuer, infailli- 
blement ils nous tueroient, s'ils pouuoient. On m'a 
dit qu'autrefois I'vn d'eux ayant fonge que pour 
eftre guery d'vne maladie qui le trauailloit, il luy 
falloit tuer vn certain Fran9ois, il I'enuoye appeller. 
Entre qu'il fut en fa cabane, il luy difoit, approche 
mon frere, ie te veux parler: fa femme qui fcauoit 
le deffein de fon mary, dit au Fran9ois qu'il fe don- 
nafl bien garde d'approcher: & de fait ce malade 
auoit mis vne hache k fon cofte pour I'affommer. 
Voila I'vne des rifques de noftre vie; cela ne m'e- 
ftonne point, on pent mourir pour Dieu en mourant 
par vn fonge. 

Pour reuenir a noftre Sauuage, ie luy demanday 
s'il faudroit executer [84] mon fonge, au cas que 
i'euffe fonge que ie le deurois tuer? il repart que le 
fonge de fon gendre n'eftoit point manuals: & tout 
ainfi qu'il nous croyoit quad nous luy difions quelque 
chofe, ou que nous luy monftrions quelque image: 
de mefme que nous luy deuions croire quand il nous 
difoit quelque chofe propre de fa nation: qu'au refte 
il s'eftonoit que nous autres qui n'vfions point de ta- 
bac, I'aimions tant. En fin il luy en fallut bailler, 
en luy faifant bien entendre que ce n'eftoit point en 
confideratio de fon fonge, & qu'on luy refuferoit 
tout ce qu'il demanderoit fous ce pretexte. II nous 
dit qu'il ne croiroit plus a ces fantaifies, mais que fon 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 161 

theirs were; [83] and that they would die if they did 
not execute them. According to this idea, our lives 
depend upon the dreams of a Savage ; because, if they 
dream that they have to kill us, they will surely do 
it if they can. I am told that, at another time, one 
of them had a dream that to be cured of a disease, 
from which he was suffering, he must kill a certain 
Frenchman ; so he sent for him. When the French- 
man entered his cabin, he said to him: "Come near- 
er, my brother, I want to talk with you." His wife, 
who knew the designs of her husband, told the 
Frenchman to be on his guard in going near him ; 
and, in fact, the sick man had placed an axe at hand, 
with which to kill him. This shows one of the great 
risks that we run here ; it does not frighten me ; we 
may die for God in dying because of a dream. 

But to return to our Savage; I asked him if it 
would be necessary to execute [84] my dream, in case 
I had dreamed that I should kill him. He replied 
that his son-in-law's dream was not bad; and just as 
he believed us when we told him something, or when 
we showed him a picture, so likewise we ought to 
believe him when he told us something that was ac- 
cepted by his people. More than that, he was aston- 
ished that we, who did not use tobacco, liked it so 
much. Finally, we found it necessary to give him 
some, taking good care to make him understand that 
it was not in consideration of his dream, and that we 
would refuse him whatever he asked under that pre- 
text. He said he would no longer believe in such 
fancies, but that his son-in-law could do as he liked. 
This superstition is too deeply implanted in his mind 
for him to give it up so easily. 

On the 2ist of the same [month], I baptized a [85] 


162 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 

gendre eftoit libre: cefte fuperftition eft trop enra- 
cinee dans fon efprit pour la quitter fi aif^ment. 

Le 21. du mefme, ie baptifay vn [85] petit Sau- 
uage age d'enuiron 3 ans, frappe d'vne maladie 
mortelle: & voyant qu'il eftoit en danger de mourir 
dans les bois, fa grand'mere le traifnant auec foy 
de part & d' autre, nous luy demandafmes au cas 
qu'il guerit, fi elle ne voudroit pas bien nous le don- 
ner pour le nourrir & I'inftruire: Elle refpondit que 
s'il n'eftoit fi malade, qu'elle nous le doneroit des 
lors. Ses parents y conf entirent : ce qui nous fit 
refoudre h. le baptifer. Noftre Pierre luy donna 
fon nom : ce pauure enfant pourra traifner quelques 
annees, mais il n'y a gueres d'efperance qu'il puiffe 
iamais recouurer fa fante. 

Sur la fin de lanuier, le fils & les gendres de noftre 
Sauuage eftans vers le Cap de Tourmete, manderet 
a leur pere, qui eftoit cabane aupres de nous, qu'il y 
auoit bonne chaff e en ce quartier la: II s'y en alia 
auec [86] le refte de fa famille .• puis nous retournant 
voir, il nous dit que fi nous I'aimions nous I'allaffions 
vifiter en fa cabane, qu'il nous donneroit de la chair 
d'Eflan: Vous m'auez, difoit-il, donne de vos biens 
quand i'auois faim : mes gens croiront que vous 
eftes fafchez cotre moy fi vous ne nous venez pas 
voir. II nous donna nouuelle que le Sauuage Bre- 
haut eftoit mort, & qu'il auoit laiffe deux enfans, vn 
gar9on & vne petite fille. Or comme nous difirerions 
bien d'en enuoyer quelques- vns en France pour les 
faire inftruire, afin qu'ils peuffent par apres fecourir 
leur nation, le Pere de None prit refolution de fuiure 
ce bon Sauuage, ce ne fut pas fans peine, voicy les 
particularitez de fon voyage. Les hoftelleries qu'on 


1632 - 33] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1633 163 

little Savage about three years old, stricken with a fatal 
disease ; and, seeing that he was in danger of dying 
in the woods, his grandmother had dragged him 
about with her from one place to another; we asked 
her, if he should recover, if she would not like to 
give him to us, to care for and teach. She answered 
that, if he were not so sick, she would give him to 
us at once. His parents consented, so we resolved 
to baptize him. Our Pierre gave him his name. 
This poor child may drag on a few years, but there 
is hardly a hope that he will ever recover his health. 
Toward the end of January the son and the sons-in- 
law of our Savage, being near Cape de Tourmente, 
told their father, who was settled near us, that there 
was good hunting in that quarter. He went there 
with [86] the rest of his family. Then, coming back 
to see us, he said that if we loved him, we would go 
to visit him in his cabin, and he would give us some 
Venison. " You have given me," said he, " of your 
store when I was hungry ; my people will think you 
are very angry with me, if you do not come to see 
us. ' ' He brought us news that the Savage, Brehault, 
was dead; and that he had left two children, a boy 
and a little girl. Now as we desired very much to 
send some children to France to have them educated, 
that they might afterward help their people. Father 
de None made up his mind to follow this good Sav- 
age, a journey not without difficulties. Here are the 
particulars thereof: The inns found on the way are 
the woods themselves, where at nightfall they stop to 
camp ; each [87] one unfastens his snowshoes, which 
are used as shovels in cleaning the snow from the 
place where they are going to sleep. The place 
cleaned is usually made in the form of a circle ; a fire 


164 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.5 

trouue en chemin font les bois mefmes: k I'entree de 
la nnidt on s'arrefle pour cab'aner; chacun [87] des- 
fait fes raquettes, defquelles on fe fert comme de pefle 
pour vuider la neige de la place ou on veut coucher. 
La place nette, & faite en rond ordinairement, on 
fait du feu tout au bien milieu, & tous les hoftes 
s'affient "k I'entour, eflans abriez par le dos d'vne 
muraille de neige, ayans le Ciel pour couuerture de 
la maifon. Le vin de cefle hoftellerie c'eft I'eau de 
neige fondue dans vne petite chaudiere qu'on porte 
auec foy, £i on ne veut manger la neige pour boiffon : 
Les meilleurs mets font vn peu d'anguille boucanee. 
Comme il faut porter fa couuerture auec foy pour fe 
couurir la nuict, on ne fe charge que le moins qu'6 
peut d'autres chofes. 

Le Pere eftant arriue dans la cabane, on ne fcauoit 
quelle chere luy faire: II n'y a point icy de compli- 
mens, on ne dit ny bon iour, ny [88] bon foir. Tout 
leur tefmoignage de refioiiylTance ou adtion de graces 
conflfte en cefle afpiration, Ho! ho! ho! ho! &c. 
On falue icy le monde par effects. Auffi-toft cha- 
cun fe met en deuoir, I'vn met de I'eau dans la chau- 
diere, ou pluftofl de la neige; I'autre la met fur le 
feu; I'autre iette dedans de grandes pieces de chair 
d'Eflan, fans la lauer de peur de perdre la graiffe: 
cela eflant cuit a demy, on le retire pour en remettre 
d' autre. Comme on eftoit en cet exercice, voicy I'vn 
des gendres de la Naffe qui reuient de la chaff e, ap- 
portant deux Caftors: aufli-toft en tefmoignage de 
refioiiyffance de la venue du Pere, il les met en 
pieces, & les iette dans la chaudiere. Vn autre luy 
fait prefent d'vn ieune Caftor fort delicat, mais auec 
prieres qu'on fe donnaft bien garde de donner les os 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s3 165 

is made in the very middle of it, and all the guests 
seat themselves around it, having a wall of snow be- 
hind them, and the Sky for a roof. The wine of 
this inn is snow, melted in a little kettle which they 
carry with them, provided they do not wish to eat 
snow in lieu of drink. Their best dish is smoked eel. 
As they must carry their blankets with them for cover 
at night, they load themselves with as few other 
things as possible. 

When the Father reached the cabin, they did not 
know what welcome to give him. There are no 
greetings here; they say neither "good day" nor 
[88] " good evening." Their manifestations of re- 
joicing, or expressions of thanks, consist of this as- 
piration; " Ho! ho! ho! ho! " etc. They greet 
people here by actions. Immediately each begins 
his work ; one puts water, or rather snow, in a kettle ; 
another places it on the fire ; another throws in large 
pieces of Venison, not washing them for fear of los- 
ing the grease. This being half cooked, it is with- 
drawn in order to put in some more. While so en- 
gaged, one of the sons-in-law of la Nasse returns 
from the hunt, bringing two Beavers ; he tears them 
to pieces at once, and throws them into the kettle, in 
proof of his joy at seeing the Father. Another gives 
him a young and very tender Beaver, with the request 
that he should be most careful not to give the bones 
to the dogs, otherwise they believe [89] they will 
take no more Beavers. They bum these bones very 
carefully. If a dog should eat them, there would be 
no more good hunting. The Father told me that he 
was astonished at their waste of meat. This is a 
great misfortune for these miserable people, for they 
have nothing but feasts when they have plenty, and 


166 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.5 

aux chiens, autrement ils croient [89] qu'ils n'en 
prendroient plus : ils bruflent ces os fort f oigneufe- 
ment, li les chiens les mangeoient, la chafle ne vau- 
droit plus rien. Le Pere me dit qu'il s'eflonnoit du 
degaft de viande qu'ils faifoient. Voila vn grand 
mal pour ce miferable peuple, quand il a dequoy, ce 
ne font que f eftins ; & la plufpart du temps il meurt 
de faim le lendemain. On alia k trois lieues de 1^ 
chercher vn Orignac qu'ils auoient tue, pour en don- 
ner la chair au Pere, auec mille excufes, en deux 
mots, que peuteftre ne le trouuerios nous pas bon. 
lis preffoient le Pere de demeurer quelques iours 
auec eux, difans qu'ils auoient veu du bois ronge, & 
qu'infailliblement ils trouueroient d'autres Elans. 

Le Pere voulant partir, Ion fait trois traifnes qu'on 
charge de chair; I'vne pour luy, I'autre pour noftre 
Pierre qui eftoit alle 1^; la troifiefme [90] pour vn 
Frangois qui accompagnoit le Pere. A peine 
auoient-ils fait deux cens pas apres leurs adieux, 
que le Pere demeure tout court, il ne voyoit goutte, 
& n'entendoit rien: la fumee de la cabane, les neiges 
de dehors, le defaut de nourriture; car il n'auoit 
mange qu'vn peu de cefte chair k demy crue, le tra- 
uail du chemin I'affoiblirent fi fort, qu'il fut con- 
traint de retourner d'oii il venoit. II auoit bien por- 
te vn peu de pain & de pois, mais les Sauuages s'en 
faifirent incontinent, tant ils en font auides, luy difant 
qu'il en mangeroit tant qu'il voudroit eflant de re- 
tour en noflre maifon. Le bon Sauuage La NaiTe 
voyant la debilite du Pere, luy demande s'il veut de- 
meurer; Non, dit-il, mais ie ne puis traifner ce far- 
deau que tu m'as donne. AUons, refpond le Sau- 
uage, ie le traifneray pour toy, & ie prendray [91] 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 167 

are generally dying of hunger the next day. They 
went a distance of three leagues from there to get a 
Moose they had killed, to give the meat of it to the Fa- 
ther, with a thousand excuses, saying, in short, that 
perhaps we might not find it good. They pressed 
the Father to remain with them a few days, saying 
that they had seen wood which had been gnawed, an 
infallible sign that they would find more Elk. 

When the Father wished to depart, they made 
three sledges which they loaded with meat ; one for 
him, another for our man Pierre, who was there, and 
the third [90] for a Frenchman who accompanied the 
Father. They had moved scarcely two hundred 
steps, after their farewells, when the Father sudden- 
ly stopped short; he could see nothing and could 
hear nothing. The smoke of the cabin, the snow out- 
side, the lack of nourishment, for he had eaten only 
a very little of that half-cooked meat, and the diffi- 
culties of the way had weakened him so that he was 
compelled to return whence he came. He had car- 
ried with him a little bread and a few peas ; but the 
Savages had taken possession of them at once, so 
fond are they of them, telling him that he could eat 
as much as he wanted of these things on his return 
to our house. The good Savage La Nasse, seeing 
the Father's weakness, asked him if he wished to re- 
main. "No," said he, " but I cannot drag this load 
which you have given me." "Very well," answered 
the Savage, " I will drag it for thee, and I will take 
[91] this great sealskin to wrap thee up in, and 
draw thee to thy house. If thou art sick, take courage, 
I will not abandon thee." They returned to the house 
as best they could, our Pierre running before them 
to bring the news. We hurriedly sent a boy with a 


I fill 

If 


I i 


mnU 


iiiiiiiii.iiiiiti:ij;ii;iiii 



1632-33] 


LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1633 


169 


bottle of cider and some bread to renew their 
strength. The wind blew so violently in their faces 
that they were compelled to leave their sledges three 
leagues from Kebec, and send for them on the fol- 
lowing day. The Father, who was sick only from 
weakness and overwork, having rested, immediately 
recovered. 

In this narrative, my Reverend Father, you have 
an illustration of what we have to suffer in accompa- 
nying the Savages in their wanderings, and what 
must necessarily be done if we wish [92] to aid in 
saving them. And from this Your Reverence may 
see, if you please, what kind of men should be chos- 
en for this mission. We do not suffer these discom- 
forts while remaining in the house. All that we 
have to bear here is endurable. But, when it is nec- 
essary to become a Savage with the Savages, one 
must take his life and all that he has, and throw it 
away, so to speak, contenting himself with a very 
large and very heavy cross for all riches. It is true 
that God does not allow himself to be conquered, and 
that the more one gives, the more one gains; the 
more one loses, the more one finds; but God some- 
times hides himself, and then the Cup is very bitter. 

One thing seems to me more than intolerable. It is 
their living together promiscuously, girls, women, 
men, and boys in a smoky hole. And the more 
progress one makes in the knowledge [93] of the lan- 
guage, the more vile things one hears. May it please 
God that one's eyes be not offended ; I am told that 
they are not. I did not think that the mouth of the 
Savage was so foul as I notice it is every day. To 


cif»f»T> on 



170 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.5 

fois pas que les Sauuages euffent la bouche fi puante 
comme ie le vay remarquant tous les iours. Couclier 
fur la terre couuerte d'vn peu de branches de pin, 
n'auoir qu'vne ecorce entre la neige & voftre tefte, 
traifner voftre bagage fur des montagnes, fe laiffer 
rouler dans des vallons efpouuatables, ne manger 
qu'vne fois en deux ou trois iours quand il n'y a 
point de chaffe, c'eft la vie qu'il faut mener en fui- 
uant les Sauuages. II efl vray que fi la chaffe eft 
bonne, la chair ne vous eft point epargnee: fmon il 
faut eftre en danger de mourir de faim, ou de bien 
fouffrir. Vn de nos Frangois qui a demeure auec 
eux cet hyuer paffe, nous a dit qu'il n'auoit mange 
en deux iours qu'vn petit bout de [94] chandelle qu'il 
auoit porte par mef garde dans fa pochette. Voila 
peuteftre mon traittement pour I'hyuer prochain, 
car fi ie veux f9auoir la langue, il faut de neceffite 
fuiure les Sauuages. Ie crains neantmoins que noftre 
famille accreue ne me retienne cette annee, mais il y 
faut aller toft ou tard, i'y voudrois defia eftre, tant 
i'ay de mal au coeur de voir ces pauures ames errates 
fans aucun fecours faute de les entendre. On ne 
peut mourir qu'vne fois, le pluflofl n'eft pas toufiours 
le pire. Changeons de propos: II faut que ie re- 
marque icy vne iniure que les Sauuages donnent aux 
Fran9ois, c'eft qu'ils aiment ce qu'ils ont: quand 
vous refufez quelque chofe a vn Sauuage, aufli-toft 
il vous dit Khifakliitan : tu aime cela, fakhita, fakhita, 
aime le, aime le, comme s'ils vouloient dire qu'on eft 
attache k ce qu'on aime, & qu'on [95] le prefere "k 
leur amitie. 

Noftre Sauuage voudroit bien viure auec nous 
comme frere, en vn mot il voudroit entrer en com- 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 171 

your head ; to drag your baggage over the mountains, 
to let yourself roll down into frightful valleys ; to eat 
only once in two or three days, when there is no 
hunting, — that is the life you must lead in following 
the Savages. It is true that, if the hunting is good, 
there is no lack of meat ; if not, one must be in dan- 
ger of dying from starvation, or of enduring great 
suffering. One of our Frenchmen, who lived with 
them last winter, told us that during two days he ate 
nothing but a small piece of [94] candle, that he had 
accidentally carried in his pocket. This is the treat- 
ment that I shall perhaps have next winter ; because, 
if I wish to learn the language, I must necessarily 
follow the Savages. I fear, however, that our grow- 
ing family may keep me here this year ; but sooner 
or later I must go. I would like to be there already, 
I am so sick at heart to see these poor straying souls, 
without any help because of our inability to under- 
stand them. We can die but once; the soonest is 
not always the worst. Let us change the subject ; I 
must speak here of the charge which the Savages 
make against the French. It is that they love what 
is theirs ; when you refuse anything to a Savage, he 
immediately says Khisakhitan, "Thou lovest that," 
sakhita, sakkita, " Love it, love it; " as if they would 
say that we are attached to what we love, and that 
we [95] prefer it to their friendship. 

Our Savage would like to live with us as a brother ; 
in a word, he would like to have us divide with him 
all that we have. " I will give thee," said he, " of 
all that I possess, and thou shalt give me of all that 
belongs to thee." In this way, we should eat in a 
month all the provisions for a year, for they never 
stop eating as long as they have anything. Hav- 


172 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.5 

munaute de tout. le te donneray, dit-il, de tout ce 
que i'ay, & tu me donneras de tout ce que tu as: Ce 
feroit le moyen de manger en vn mois toutes les pro- 
uifions d'vne annee, car ils ne ceffent de manger tant 
qu'ils ont dequoy, n'en ayant plus, ils en cherchent, 
& en demandent auec importunite. II eft vray que 
ce bon homme voit bien que cefte procedure n'efl pas 
bonne: & quand ie luy reprefente qu'il ne fait pas 
bien, prodiguant fes viures en peu de temps: ce n'eft 
pas moy, dit-il, qui fait cela, c'eft ma femme. II 
s'efbonne quand nous luy faifons manger d'vn mor- 
ceau d'Ours ou d'Orignac fix fepmaines apres qu'il 
nous I'a donne; car en ce temps-la on mangera deux 
& trois [96] & quatre ours en fa cabane, fi on en prend 
autant. 

Le 13. de Feurier Dieu nous fit vne faueur fort 
fignalee: Mon mail^re nomme en fa langue comme 
i'ay defia fouuent dit, Pierre Paftedechouan, s'en 
alia fans nous rien dire. Depuis qu'il eftoit auec 
nous, il s'eftoit vn peu remis: il fe confelfoit de teps 
en teps sas fe vouloir comunier quoy qu'on luy dit. 
Sa raifon eftoit que iamais il ne s'eftoit comunie en 
fon pays, fi bie en France: mais i'eftois Ik mieux dif- 
pofe qu'icy, difoit-il. Comme il fentit approcher le 
Carefme, il nous fit plufieurs interrogations fans que 
nous prilTios garde ou elles buttoient: fcauoir mo k 
quel age on eftoit oblige de ieufner, fi dans tout le 
Carefme on ne mangeroit point de chair, & chofes 
femblables. La peur qu'il eut du ieufne, & la croy- 
ance qu'il auoit que [97] les gens de La Nalle au- 
roient bone chaffe, fit qu'il s'en alia les trouuer fans 
nous en parler. Voyant mon fecours perdu pour la 
langue, nous demandafmes derechef a Dieu qu'il 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s3 173 

ing nothing more, they go in search of something, 
and beg for it persistently. It is true that this 
simple fellow realizes that this is not a good way, 
and, when I show him that it is not well to use 
up his food so quickly, he says: "It is not I who do 
that, it is my wife." He is astonished when we give 
him a piece of Bear or Moose six weeks after he has 
given it to us, for in that time they eat two, three, 
[96] and four bears in his cabin, if they capture that 
many. 

On the 13th of February God did us a very signal 
favor. My teacher, named in his language, as I have 
often said already, Pierre Pastedechouan, went off 
without giving us notice. Since he had been with 
us, he had somewhat improved ; he had been to con- 
fession from time to time, but would not take com- 
munion, whatever might be said to him. His reason 
was that he had never taken communion in his coun- 
try, though he had in France; "But I was," he said, 
"more disposed to it there than here." As he felt 
that Lent was approaching, he asked us a number of 
questions, the full tendency of which we did not com- 
prehend; namely, at what age it was necessary to 
fast ; if one should not eat meat at all during Lent, 
and similar things. The fear he had of fasting, and 
his belief that [97] the people of La Nasse would be 
lucky in their hunt, led him to go to them without 
telling me. Seeing that I had lost my help in learn- 
ing the language, we again asked God to give us, if 
it pleased him, for a second time, the one he had 
given us at first. The Theology of that worthy man, 
blind from birth, who says that God does not hearken 
to sinners except when it is agreeable to him, is not 
good. La Nasse having eaten all his game, and find- 


174 LES RELATIONS DBS jtSUITES [Vol.5 

luy pleuft nous donner pour la feconde fois celuy 
qu'il nous auoit done pour la premiere. La Theologie 
de ce bon aueugle ne n'eft pas bonne, qui dit que Dieu 
n'exauce point les pecheurs, fi fait bien quand il luy 
plaift. La Naffe ayant mange toute fa chafle, & n'en 
troiiuant plus dans les bois, la faim le prelTa fi fort, 
qu'il ne f9auoit de quel cofte fe tourner. Noftre 
Pierre fe voyant dans le ieufne deuant que d'eflre en 
Carefme, ayant penfe perdre la vie fur vne glace qui 
coula delTous luy, & paffe quatre iours fans quafi 
rien manger, nous reuient voir tout defait apres 15 
iours d'absece, il ne nous dit point que la famine le 
ramenoit, auITi attribuay-ie [98] fon retour a celuy 
qui nous le donnoit pour la feconde fois : II demeura 
done auec nous iufques a Pafques, m'aydant ^ con- 
clurre ce que i'auois enuie d'acheuer de noftre Dic- 
tionnaire. 

Le Vendredy Saindt, il s'en voulut aller k la chafle 
auec noftre Sauuage qui eftoit du retour, mais ie luy 
dis qu'il n'iroit point qu'il ne fe fuft acquitte du de- 
uoir que doiuent rendre a Dieu tons les Chreftiens 
en ce teps-la ; i'aduerty noftre Sauuage de ne le point 
receuoir en fa copagnie; ce qu'il fit. II fe confeffa 
done & fe communia le iour de Pafques. Le lende- 
main noftre Sauuage retournant pour vendre au fieur 
de Caen vn ieune Eflan qu'il auoit pris tout vif (le- 
quel mourut depuis) noftre homme I'accofta, & luy 
dit que nous ne I'auions retenu fmon pour prier Dieu 
le iour precedet, & que I'ayant [99] fait nous eftions 
contens qu'il le fuiuit : II eft vray que pour le conten- 
ter nous luy anions dit que s'eftant acquitte de fes 
deuotios, il pourroit s'en aller k la chalTe "k la premi- 
ere occafion, ce qu'il a fait auec promefle de retour- 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j633 175 

ing no more in the woods, was so pressed with 
hunger that he knew not on which side to turn. Our 
Pierre found himself fasting before the beginning of 
Lent; having nearly lost his life upon the ice, which 
slipped from under him, he passed four days with 
scarcely anything to eat and returned to us complete- 
ly exhausted, after 15 days of absence. He did not 
tell us that hunger brought him back, therefore I 
attributed [98] his return to him who gave him to us 
for a second time. He remained with us until Easter, 
helping me to finish what I was very anxious to com- 
plete, our Dictionary. 

On Good Friday, he wanted to go hunting with 
our Savage, who had returned; but I told him that 
he should not go until he had rendered to God the 
devotion that all Christians owed to him at that time. 
I charged our Savage not to receive him in his com- 
pany, and he did not. Then he confessed and received 
his Easter communion. The next day, our Savage 
returning to sell to sieur de Caen a young Elk that 
he had taken alive (which died afterward), our man 
accosted him, and said that we had only detained 
him that he might pray to God on the preceding 
day; and that, having done [99] so, we were will- 
ing that he should go with him. It is true that, in 
order to please him, we told him that, if he performed 
his devotions, he might go hunting upon the first op- 
portunity; which he did with the promise to return, 
but we have not seen him since. But God be praised 
for all ; I dared not promise myself all that I have 
drawn from him ; I have enough to fit me for going 
to pass the winter among the Savages with profit. 

When La Nasse returned from hunting, he told us 
that this poor young man had gone through the 


176 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.5 

ner, mais nous ne I'auos point veu depuis. Dieu foit 
beny de tout: ie ne m'ofois promettre tout ce que 
i'ay tire de luy, i'en ay alTez pour me rendre capable 
d'aller hyuerner parmy les Sauuages, auec profit. 

La NalTe reuenant de la chaffe nous dit que ce 
pauure ieune homme auoit trauerfe les bois pour al- 
ler trouuer fes freres a Tadoullac : pour moy i'eftime 
qu'il a la foy, i'en ay de tres-grands indices: mais 
comme c'eft vne foy de crainte & de feruitude, & 
que d'ailleurs il eft enchaifne par vne infinite de mau- 
uaifes habitudes, il a de la peine de quitter la liberte 
blafmable des Sauuages, [loo] pour s'arrefter fous le 
ioug de la loy de Dieu. 

Le 2 1 , de Mars, vn Sauuage mangeant chez nous 
^ terre, felon leur couftume, s'arrefta tout court, di- 
fant qu'il ne mangeroit pas dauantage, autrement 
qu'il mourroit : le luy demanday pourquoy, il me dit 
qu'il auoit veu vne lumiere brillate tourner tout a 
I'entour du plat: ie voulus mettre la main fur le plat, 
il s'efcria, Y^higa nipin, Y>.higa nipin, tu mourras, tu 
mourras : Or comme ie commence a cognoiftre leurs 
fantaifies, pour luy faire voir fa fimplicite : ie prends 
vne cuilleree on deux de ce qu'il mageoit, & en man- 
geay moy-mefme, il commence k me regarder comme 
tout eflonn6, & voyant que ie n'auois point de mal; 
i'en mageray auffi, fit-il, puis que tu en as mange. 

On dit que quelques Bafques ou Anglois leurs ont 
bailie I'apprehenfion [loi] que les Fran§ois les vou- 
loient empoifonner. C'eft pourquoy plufieurs vous 
inuitent de goulter le premier de ce que vous leur 
prefentez. En quoy il arriua vne chofe agreable ^ 
vn Sauuage fort adonne a boire : le fieur du Pleffis 
luy ayat fait pref enter vn verre de vin, ou de fidre ; 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib33 Vll 

woods to find his brothers at Tadoussac. For my 
part I think he has faith ; I have seen strong indica- 
tions of it ; but as it is a faith born of fear and slav- 
ishness, and as, moreover, he is enchained by a mul- 
titude of bad habits, he has great difficulty in aban- 
doning the wicked liberty of the Savages [lOo] and 
submitting to the yoke of the law of God. 

On the 2ist of March, a Savage who was eating at 
our house, upon the ground, according to their cus- 
tom, stopped suddenly,' saying that he would eat no 
more, — if he did, he would die. I asked him why, 
and he told me that he had seen a bright light re- 
volve around his plate. I was about to put my hand 
upon the plate, and he cried out, Khiga nipin, Khiga 
nipin, "Thou wilt die, thou wilt die." Now as I am 
becoming familiar with their fancies, to make him 
understand his simplicity, I took a spoonful or two of 
what he was eating, and ate it myself. He looked 
at me with astonishment, and, seeing that I was not 
sick, "I will eat also," vsaid he, "since thou hast eat- 
en of it." 

It is said that some Basques or Englishmen have 
communicated to them the fear [loi] that the French 
were seeking to poison them. That is why many of 
the Savages invite you to first taste whatever you 
give them. Apropos of this, a very amusing thing 
happened to a Savage who was much addicted to 
drink. Sieur du Plessis having presented him with 
a glass of wine, or of cider, he turned about, and 
gave it to a Frenchman to taste ; this Frenchman 
tasted it so well, that there was none of it left. The 
Savage, who saw what he was doing, cried out, 
egouspd, egouspif, "It is enough, it is enough." But the 
other drank the last drop, giving the empty glass to 


178 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 

il fe tourne, & le donne h. vn Frangois pour en tafter : 
ce FrangoLs le tafta fi bien, qu'il n'y laiffa rien. Le 
Sauuage qui le voyoit faire, crioit prou egou/p^, 
egou/pd, c'efl alTez, c'eft affez: mais I'autre tira iuf- 
ques au bout, puis prefenta le verre tout vuide au 
Sauuage, pour I'apprendre vne autre fois k quitter 
ces deffiances. 

Le 22. noftre Pierre ayant pris vn Caftor, vne Sau- 
uage I'ayant ecorche, noftre frere le prit & le laua: 
cefte femme voyant qu'il faif oit tomber a terre le fang 
de c6t animal, s'ecria, en verite cet homme n'a point 
[102] d'efprit, & fe tournant vers Pierre, luy dit, tu 
ne prendras plus de Caftors, on a refpandu le fang 
du tien : c'eft vne de leurs fuperftitions, qu'il ne faut 
point refpandre k terre le fang pur du Caftor, li on 
veut auoir bonne chalfe, du moins Pierre nous le dit 
ainfi. 

Le premier iour d'Auril le Capitaine des Algon- 
quains nous vint voir, & nous apporta de la chair 
d'Elan, fes gens en auoient tue dix, quoy qu'vn Sau- 
uage vous donne pour vn grand mercy, (c'eft vn mot 
qu'ils ont appris des Fran§ois) il leur faut rendre quel- 
qu'autre chofe pour vn autre grand'mercy, autrement 
vous ferez tenu pour vn ingrat. lis re9oiuent affez 
volontiers fans donner: mais ils ne fgauent que c'eft 
de donner fans receuoir. II eft vray que fi vous les vou- 
lez fuiure das les bois, ils vous nourriront fans vous 
rie demander, [103] s'ils croient que vous n'ayez rie: 
Mais s'ils s'appergoiuet que vous ayez quelque chofe, 
& qu'ils en ayet enuie, ils ne cefferont de vous preffer 
que vous ne leur ayez donne. 

Pour retourner k ce Capitaine, ie luy demanday 
s'il auoit vn fils, & s'il ne vouloit point nous le doner 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j6s3 179 

the Savage, as a lesson that, another time, he must 
be less suspicious. 

On the 22nd, our Pierre having caught a Beaver, 
a Savage skinned and our brother washed it. This 
woman, seeing that he let some of the blood of the 
animal fall to the ground, cried out: "In truth, this 
man has no [102] sense; " and turning to Pierre she 
said : "Thou wilt take no more Beavers, for the blood 
of thine has been spilled." It is one of their super- 
stitions that you must not spill the pure blood of the 
Beaver upon the ground, if you wish to have good 
hunting, at least Pierre has told us so. 

On the first day of April, the Captain of the Algon- 
quains came to see us, and brought us some Elk 
meat, his people having killed ten of these animals. 
Although the Savages will give you something for a 
" thank you," (this is a word they have learned from 
the French), you must make them some return for 
another " thank you," otherwise you will be looked 
upon as ungrateful. They are willing enough to re- 
ceive without giving ; but they do not know what it 
is to give without receiving. It is true that, if you 
will follow them into the woods, they will feed you 
without asking anything of you, [103] if they think 
that you have nothing. But if they see that you have 
something, and they want it, they will not stop ask- 
ing you for it until you have given it. 

To return to this Captain ; I asked him if he had a 
son, and if he would not give him to us to be edu- 
cated. He asked me how many children I wanted, 
and [said] that I already had two. I told him 
that in time I should perhaps feed twenty. He was 
astonished. " Wilt thou clothe so many as well?" 
asked he. I answered him that we would not take 


180 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.5 

pour rinftmire ; il me demanda combien ie voulois 
d'enfans, & que i'en auois delia deux: ie luy dis qu'a- 
uec Ie teps peuteftre i'en nourrirois vingt, il s'^tonna: 
Habilleras-tu bien, me dit-il, tant de mode? Ie ref- 
pondis que nous ne les prendrions pas que nous 
n'euffions Ie moyen de les habiller, il repart qu'il fe- 
roit bien content de nous donner Ie fien, mais que fa 
feme ne Ie voudroit pas. Les femmes ont icy vn 
grand pouuoir: qu'vn home vous promette quelque 
chofe, s'il ne tient pas fa promeffe, il penfe s'eftre 
bien excufe, quand il vous a [104] dit que fa femme 
ne I'a pas voulu: ie luy dis done qu'il eftoit Ie 
maiftre, & qu'en France les femmes ne commandoient 
point a leurs maris: cela eft bien, dit-il, mais pour 
mon fils ie fuis affez fgauant pour I'inftruire, ie luy ap- 
predray a haranguer : inftruits premierement les 
Montagnaits, fi cela reiiffit bien, nous te donnerons 
nos enfans. 

Ie luy parlay de Dieu, il m'efcoutoit fort attentiue- 
ment : Ie luy enf eignay quelque petite priere en Ian- 
gage Montagnaits qu'il entend fort bien ; il les pro- 
nongoit en fa langue, & me promit qu'il les diroit 
fouuet. Or come Ie teps me preffoit d'aller reciter 
mon office, ie luy dis que i'allois prier Dieu : il me 
fuiuit, entra das ma chambrette, & s'y tint iufques a 
ce que i'eulTe acheue, me faisat apres plufieurs inter- 
rogations ; bref il ne s'en retourna qu'k la nuidt. 

[105] Le 18. & Ie 20. d'Auril, il tonna fort & ferme 
auec de grands eclairs, & cependant la riuiere eftoit 
encor glacee, & la terre couuerte de neige ; ce qui fait 
voir qu'il y a de la chaleur en I'air, & que ces neiges 
& froids font accidentels, & contre la nature du cli- 
mat : no^ fommes parallelles k la Rochelle, come i'ay 


1632-33] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6ss 181 

them until we had the means to clothe them. He 
replied that he would be very glad to give us his son, 
but that his wife did not wish to do so. The women 
have great power here. A man may promise you 
something, and, if he does not keep his promise, he 
thinks he is sufficiently excused when he tells you 
[104] that his wife did not wish to do it. I told him 
then that he was the master, and that in France 
women do not rule their husbands. "That is very 
well," said he, " but I know enough to instruct my 
son ; I shall teach him to make speeches. Instruct 
the Montagnaits first; if thou succeedest well, then 
we will give thee our children." 

I talked to him about God, and he listened very 
attentively. I taught him a little prayer in the Mon- 
tagnaits language, which he understands very well. 
He repeated it in his tongue, and promised me that 
he would say it often. Then, as the time had come 
for me to go and recite my office, I told him that I 
was going to pray to God. He followed me, entered 
my little room, and remained there until I had 
finished, asking me a number of questions afterward. 
In short, he did not go away until night. 

[105] On the 1 8th and 20th of April, it thundered 
loudly and violently, with sharp flashes of light- 
ning, and yet the river was still frozen, and the 
ground white with snow ; this showed us that there 
was heat in the air, and these snows and this cold 
were accidental and contrary to the nature of the 
climate. We are on a parallel with la Rochelle, as I 
have already said. All the Frenchmen can testify 
that they have never seen in the heart of France so 
warm a month of May as they have experienced in 
Kebec. 


182 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.5 

delia dit. Tons les Frangois pourront tefmoigner 
qu'ils n'ont point veu dans le coenr de la France mois 
de May fi chand, que celuy qu'ils ont efprouue ^ 
Kebec. 

La chaleur eft icy grande & briilante ; & cependant 
i'ay remarque depnis que ie fuis icy qu'il a gele tons 
les mois le I'annee. Ie ne m'eftonne point de ces 
gelees : nous auons du cofte du Nord vne cliaifne de 
montagnes peut-eftre de cent ou deux cens lieues 
d'eftendue. Nous ne fommes pas eloignez de fix 
lieues de ces [io6] monts prodigieux, & peuteftre touf- 
iours couuerts de neiges : Ie vous laiffe "k penfer fi les 
vents qui paffent par la nous peuuent apporter beau- 
coup de chaleur. De plus nous fommes dans les bois 
de 800 ou mille lieues. Nous babitons les bords de 
deux fleuues, dont I'vn engloutiroit les quatre beaux 
fleuues de France fans regorger. Voila les vrayes 
caufes & alimens du froid. Si le pays eftoit decou- 
uert iufques k ces montagnes ; nous aurions peuteftre 
I'vne des plus foecondes vallees qui foient en I'vni- 
uers: L'experience nous fait voir que les bois en- 
gendrent les frimas & les gelees. Les terres de cefte 
famille qui eft icy eftant plus decouuertes que les 
noftres, font pluftoft dechargees de neiges, & moins 
fujettes a ces froids du matin. Les noftres auffi ne 
fentent point ces rigueurs fi fouuent, que celles de la 
[107] maifon des RR. Peres Recolets qui font plus 
referrez dans les bois. 

II y a quantite de iours en hyuer dont I'ardeur du 
Soleil fe fait bien plus fortement rellentir qu'en 
France. Le premier iour que ie vey noftre riuiere 
prife, ie m'eftonnay, car le temps eftoit fort doux; 
& cherchant la raifon de cela, celle-cy me vint en 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 183 

The heat here is intense and burning, and yet I 
have observed since I have been here that there has 
been frost every month of the year. I am not sur- 
prised at these frosts. We have on the North of us a 
chain of mountains, probably one or two hundred 
leagues in extent. We are not distant six leagues 
from these [io6] stupendous mountains, probably al- 
ways covered with snow. ^"^ I leave you to decide 
whether the wind coming from that direction can 
bring much heat. Besides, we are in a forest cover- 
ing from 800 to a thousand leagues. We live upon 
the banks of two rivers, one of which would swallow 
up the four great rivers of France without over- 
flowing. Behold herein the real cause and source of 
the cold. If the country were cleared as far as the 
mountains, we should probably have one of the most 
fruitful valleys in the universe. Experience teaches 
us that the woods engender cold and frosts. The 
lands owned by the family living here, having been 
cleared more than ours, are sooner freed from snow, 
and less subject to cold in the morning. Neither do 
we feel these rigors so often as do those who live 
in the [107] house of the Reverend Recolet Fathers, 
who are farther in the woods. 

There are many days in the winter when the heat 
of the Sun makes itself felt a great deal more than it 
does in France. The ifirst day that I saw our river 
frozen, I was astonished, because it was very mild 
weather; and, in seeking a reason for it, this came to 
my mind. A river always freezes first along its 
banks ; and, when the tide rises, it loosens this ice 
and carries it higher up. Now, not far from us 
there is a waterfall or some rocks, which prevent the 
tidal ice from passing beyond them. This ice being 


184 LES RELA TIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol. 5 

penf^e. La riuiere fe glace toufiours fur les bords, 
& quand la maree viet h. monter, elle detache ces 
glaces, & les ameine en haut. Or efl-il que no pas 
loin de nous il y a vn fault, ou des rochers qui em- 
pefchent les glaces a la maree de pailer plus outre. 
Ces glaces eftant done ramailees & preffees fur cette 
riuiere, qui efl au milieu d'vn fi grand bois, oil le 
froid & la neige fe conf eruent aifement : elles f e lient 
enfemble, & ainfi de mille & mille glaces il s'en fait 
vne qui fe va groffiffant tons les iours, & [io8] qui 
fait vn grand pont fur toute la riuiere. La Lombar- 
die n'eft pas loin des Alpes dont le fommet efl 
toufiours blanc de neige, & neantmoins ie ne f9ay li 
r Europe a quelque vallee plus agreable & plus fer- 
tile que cette contree : i'en dy le mefme du lieu que 
nous habitons s'il eftoit deferte & cultiue. Voila ma 
penfee touchant le pays : fi ie me trompe ce n'eft pas 
merueille, cela m'arriue affez fouuent, tout gift h. le 
deferter: mais 6 mo Dieu, que de peine k purger 
vne f oreft embaraffee d'arbres tombez ! ie dirois vo- 
lontiers depuis le deluge. 

Le 23. du mefme mois d'Auril, nous veifmes par- 
tir les glaces, cela eft effroyable: on m'a dit qu'on 
en auoit veu palfer devat le fort logues d'vne demie 
lieue ; ce font des ances d'eau glacee que la maree 
de la grade riuiere va detacbant. Sur noftre [109] pe- 
tite riuiere les glaces n'y sot pas fi affreufes, & neant- 
moins ie leur ay veu emporter de gros morceaux de 
terre, arracher des f ouches, brifer quelques arbres 
qu'elles entouroiet. On en voit marcher de tous 
droits deffus ces glaces au beau milieu de la riuiere, 
qui en vne feule maree paroift auffi belle & auffi 
claire, comme fi elle n'auoit point efte glacee. 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 185 

thus massed and pressed together in the river, which 
is in the midst of so great a wood that the snow and 
cold are easily preserved, it becomes consolidated; 
and thousands and thousands of blocks of ice are 
frozen into one mass which goes on increasing every 
day, [io8] making a great bridge over the whole 
river. Lombardy is not far from the Alps, the sum- 
mits of which are always white with snow, and yet 
I do not know that Europe has a more agreeable and 
more fertile valley than that country. I would say 
the same of the place in which we live, if it were 
cleared and cultivated. This is my opinion touching 
this country ; if I am mistaken, it is not strange, as 
that happens to me often ; everything depends upon 
clearing the land. But oh, my God! What labor 
there will be in clearing a forest encumbered with 
fallen trees, I might well say, since the deluge. 

On the 23rd of the same month of April we saw 
the ice float away ; it is a frightful spectacle. I was 
told that pieces half a league long were seen passing 
before the fort. These are the banks of frozen wa- 
ter which the current of the great river goes on 
loosening. Upon our [109] little river the ice is not 
so alarming ; nevertheless I have seen it carry away 
large pieces of earth, tear up stumps, and crush the 
trees which it had enclosed. You can see them [the 
trees] moving erect on these pieces of ice, in the 
very middle of the river, which in a single tide ap- 
pears as beautiful and as clear as if it had never been 
frozen. 

On the 7th of May a Savage called to see la Nasse, 
our neighbor; as I saw that he was not well, I ad- 
dressed him, speaking to him of God and exhorting 
him to have recourse to him. He answered me: 


186 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.5 

Le 7. de May, vn Sauuage eflant venu voir la Naffe 
noftre voifm: come ie vey qu'il fe portoit mal, ie I'a- 
borday, & luy parlay de Dieu, I'exhortant "k auoir 
recours k luy : il me refpondit, Toy, tu cognois lefus, 
prie le pour moy, car moy ie ne le cognois point, ie 
ne cognois que noftre Manitou. Ie luy dis qu'il pro- 
nongaft fouuet de coeur ces paroles, O lefus qui eftes 
bon, ayez pitie de moy, il mourut quelque temps 
apres. 

Les Montagnaits le tenoient pour [no] I'vn de leurs 
grands forciers, ou confulteurs de Manitou: ie f9au- 
ray quelque iour li vrayement il y a de la diablerie 
en leur fait: pour le prefent ie ne puis dire autre 
chofe que les vns difent que ouy, les autres que non : 
c'eft k dire qu'il n'y a rien d'alleure. 

I'eftois I'an paffe maiftre de deux efcoliers, ie fuis 
deuenu riche, i'en ay maintenant plus de vingt. 
Apres le depart de mon maiftre, i'ay recueilly & mis 
en ordre vne partie de ce qu'il m'auoit enfeign6, & 
que i'auois efcrit §k & Ik, m'accommodant "k fon hu- 
meur, qui fouuent ne me dictoit que ce qui luy venoit 
en fantaille. Ayant done ralli^ la pluspart de mes ri- 
chelTes, ie me fuis mis a compofer quelque chofe fur le 
Catechifme, ou fur les principes de la foy ; & prenant 
mon papier en main, i'ay commence k appeller quel- 
ques enfans auec vne petite clochette. La premiere 
[in] fois i'en auois fix, puis douze, puis quinze, puis 
vingt; & dauantage ie leur fais dire le Pater, Aue, & 
Credo, en leur langue: ie leur explique grolTierement 
le myftere de la Sainte Trinity, & de 1' Incarnation; 
& a tous bouts de champ ie leur demande fi ie dis 
bien, s'ils entendent bien, ils me refpondent tous, eoco, 
eoco, ninijitoutenan: ouy, ouy, nous entendons. Ie 


1632-33] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, j6s3 187 

"Thou knowest Jesus, pray to him for me, for I do 
not know him; I know only our Manitou." I told 
him to say these words often from his heart : " Oh 
Jesus, who art good, have pity on me." He died a 
short time afterward. 

The Montagnaits held him as [no] one of their 
great sorcerers or consulters of Manitou. "^^ I shall 
know for certain, some day, whether there is any 
jugglery in their doings or not. At present, I can 
only say that some of them say " yes" and others 
" no." That is to say that there is nothing sure. 

Last year I was master of two pupils ; I have be- 
come rich, for I now have more than twenty. After 
the departure of my teacher, I gathered up and ar- 
ranged in order a part of what he taught me, and 
what I had written here and there, accommodating 
myself to his humor, he often dictating only what 
happened to suit his fancy. Having thus brought 
together the greater part of my riches, I began to 
compose something in the way of a Catechism, or on 
the principles of the faith. Taking my paper in 
hand, I began to call a few children by ringing a 
little bell. At first [i 1 1] I had six, then twelve, then 
fifteen, then twenty, and more. I have them say the 
Pater, the Ave, and the Credo, in their language. I 
explain to them, very crudely, the mysteries of the 
Holy Trinity and of the Incarnation, and at every 
few words I ask them if I speak well, if they can un- 
derstand perfectly; they all answer me: eoco, eoco, 
ninisitoutenan, " yes, yes, we understand." After- 
wards I ask them whether there are several Gods, 
and which of the three persons became man. I coin 
words approximating to their language, which I make 
them understand. We begin the Catechism by this 


188 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.5 

les interroge par apres s'il y a plufieurs Dieu, & la- 
quelle des trois perf onnes s'efl fait homme : ie forge 
des mots approchans de leur lague, que ie leur fais 
entendre. Nous comme§ons Ie Catechifme par cefte 
priere, apres auoir fait Ie figne de la Croix ; Noukhi- 
mami le/us, iagoua Yihijlinohimaonitou KhiK hitouina caid 
Yikiteritamoum. Ca cataouachichien Maria ouccaonia lefu, 
cacataouachichien Joseph aiamihitouinan. Mo Seigneur 
ou Capitaine lefus; enfeignez moy vos paroles & 
voftre volonte! [112] 6 bonne Marie Mere de Dieu! 6 
bon lofeph priez pour nous. 

Nous finiffons par Ie Pater noster que i'ay compof6, 
quafi en rimes en leur langue, que ie leur fais chan- 
ter: & pour derniere conclufion, ie leur fais donner 
cbacun vne efcuellee de pois qu'ils mangent de bon 
appetit: quand ils font beaucoup, i'en donne feule- 
ment k ceux qui ont bien refpondu. C'eft vn plaifir 
de les entendre chanter dans les bois ce qu'ils ont 
appris : les f emmes mefme Ie chantent, & me viennent 
par fois efcouter par la feneftre de ma claffe, qui 
nous fert auffi de refedloir, de defpenfe, de tout. 
I'eftois prefl d'aller par les cabanes affembler tons 
les enfans, mais la venue de mofieur Champlain qui 
nous a amene du monde, m'occuppe pour quelque 
temps: fi toft que ie me feray degage de la plus 
grande preffe, ie commenceray [113] cet exercice, ie 
prie Dieu, pour lequel ie I'entreprens, de Ie benir. 

Mes efcoliers me viennent trouuer d'vne demie 
lieue loing pour apprendre ce qui leur eft nouueau : 
il y en a defia quelques-vns qui fcauent fort bien 
qu'il n'y a qu'vn Dieu, que Dieu a tout faict, qu'il s'eft 
faict home pour nous, qu'il luy f aut obei'r, & que ceux 
qui ne croiront pas en luy iront dans les feux, & ceux 
qui luy obeiront iront dans Ie ciel. 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 189 

prayer, after having made the sign of the Cross: 
Noukhimami Jesus, tagoua Khistinohimaonitou Khik hi- 
touina cai^ Khiteritamouin. Ca cataoiiachichicn Maria 
ouccaonia Jesu, cacataouachichicn Joseph atamihitouinan. 
"My Lord, or Captain, Jesus, teach me your words 
and your will! [112] Oh, good Mary, Mother of 
God! Oh, good Joseph, pray for us! " 

We finish with a Pater iioster that I have com- 
posed almost in rhyme, in their language, which I 
have them sing; and, in conclusion, I have each one 
of them given a bowlful of peas, which they enjoy very 
much. When there are many of them, I give only 
to those who have answered well. It is a pleasure 
to hear them sing in the woods what they have 
learned. The women sing also, and come occasion- 
ally to listen at the windows of my class room, which 
serves also as a refectory, pantry, and everything 
else. I was ready to go to the cabins, to gather in 
all the children ; but the arrival of monsieur Cham- 
plain, who brought us some visitors, occupied me 
for some time. As soon as I am freed from the 
more pressing duties, I shall again take up [113] this 
work, praying God, for whom I do it, to bless what 
I am about to undertake. 

My pupils come to me from a distance of half a 
league to learn what is so new to them. A number 
of them know already that there is but one God, that 
God made all ; that he made himself man for us ; that 
we must obey him ; and that those who do not be- 
lieve in him will go into the fire, and that those who 
obey him will go to heaven. 

When I talk to them about the Son of God, they 
ask me if God is married, as he has a son. It is the 
men that ask that question. They are astonished 


190 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 

Quand ie leur parle du Fils de Dieu, ils me de- 
mandent fi Dieu efl marie, puis qu'il a vn fils; ce 
font les hommes qui font cefte queflion. lis s'e- 
ftonnent quand ie leur dis que Dieu n'eft ny homme 
ny f emme : ils demandent comme il efl done fait : ie 
refponds qu'il n'a ny chair, ny os, qu'il relTemble a 
Tame. II y en eut vn qui me fit rire, car il repartit; 
il efl [114] vray, I'ame n'a point d'os, ny de chair, 
I'ay veu la mienne, elle n'en auoit point; ie voulus 
I'inflruire la deflus, mais ils n'ont point de paroles 
pour fignifier vne chofe puremet fpirituelle, ou s'ils 
en ont ie ne les fcay pas. Ie ne vay encore qu'a 
taflos, & ce qui me donne plus de regret ne les pou- 
uant entendre, c'efl que ie preuoy bien que mon 
ignorance fera de longue duree, tat pour ce qu'ils n'ar- 
reflet point en vn lieu, que pour-autant que mes 
foings vont eflre plus partagez qu'ils n'efloient. 
Dieu pouruoira k tout, il efl plus grand que noflre 
coeur. 

Au refle Ie fruict qu'on peut recueillir de cefte 
miffion fera grand, s'il plaifl a Dieu : Si les Peres qui 
font deflinez pour les Hurons, natio flable, peuuent 
entrer dans Ie pays ; & que les guerres ne troublent 
point ces peuples: il efl croyable que dans [115] vne 
couple d'annees, on verra qu'il n'y a nation fi barbare 
qui ne foil capable de recognoiflre & honorer fon 
Dieu. On s'eflonne que depuis tant d'annees qu'on 
viet en la Nouuelle France, on n'entend rien dire 
de la conuerfion des Sauuages, il faut defricher, la- 
bourer, & femer, deuant que de receuillir. Qui des 
Religieux qui ont efle icy a iamais fgeu parfaitement 
la langue d'aucune nation de ces contr^es? fides ex 
auditu, la foy entre par I'aureille. Comment peut vn 


1632-33] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i633 191 

when I tell them that God is neither a man nor a 
woman, they ask how he is made then ; I answer that 
he has neither flesh nor bones, and that he is like the 
soul. One of them made me laugh, for he replied: 
"It is [i 14] true the soul has neither bones nor flesh, 
I saw mine, and it had neither." I wished to in- 
struct him thereupon ; but they have no words to ex- 
press the purely spiritual ideas, or, if they have, I 
do not know them. Thus far, I am only feeling my 
way; and what causes me the most regret is that, 
not being able to understand them, I perceive that 
my ignorance will be of long duration, inasmuch as 
they do not remain long in one locality, and because 
my cares are going to be more numerous than they 
have been. God will provide for all ; he is greater 
than our courage. 

However, the fruit which may be gathered from 
this mission will be great, if it please God. If the 
Fathers who are assigned to go to the Hurons, a sta- 
tionary tribe, are able to enter the country, and if 
war does not trouble these people, probably in [115] 
two years it will be seen that there is not a nation so 
barbarous as not to recognize and honor God. Some 
are astonished that they hear nothing about the con- 
version of Savages during the many years that we 
have been in New France. It is necessary to clear, 
till, and sow, before harvesting. Who of the Reli- 
gious who have been here have ever known perfectly 
the language of any tribe in these countries? Fides 
ex auditu, faith enters by the ear. How can a mute 
preach the Gospel ? When Father Brebeuf was be- 
ginning to make himself understood, the arrival of 
the English compelled him to leave these poor peo- 
ple, who said to him, at his departure: "Listen, thou 


192 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 

muet prefcher I'Euangile? Au temps que le Pere 
Brebeuf commengoit k fe faire entendre, la venue 
des Anglois le contraint de quitter ces pauures 
peuples, que luy dirent a fon depart: Efcoute, Tu 
nous as dit que tu auois vn Pere au Ciel qui auoit 
tout fait, & que celuy qui ne luy obeilToit pas, eftoit 
iette dans des feux. Nous t'auons demande d'eflre 
inftruidls: [i i6] & tu t'en vais, que ferons nous? Vn 
Capitaine I'abordant luy dit Efchotn, ie ne fuis pas 
baptife, & tu t'en vais, mon ame fera done perdue, 
que feray-ie a cela? Tu dis que tu reuiendras; va- 
t'en done, & prends courage, reuiens deuant que ie 
meure. Vn vieillard d'vn autre village que celuy ou 
habitoit le Pere I'entendant parler des chofes der- 
nieres, de la recompenfe des bons, & du chaftimet 
des mefchans, luy dit, e/chom, les gens de ton village 
ne valient rien; voila de mefchans hommes, ils ne 
nous communiquent point ce que tu leur dis : & ce- 
pendant cela eft fi important, qu'il en faut parler au 
Confeil de tout le pays. Sont-ce pas la des indices 
d'vne heureufe moiffon? Le Diable preuoit bien ce 
fruic5t, car de I'heure que ie parle, il fait ce qu'il pent 
pour empefcher la venue des Hurons; & par confe- 
quent pour fermer [117] la porte ^ I'Euangile, & a 
ceux qui I'annoncent. 

Pour ces peuples errants & vagabonds, parmy lef- 
quels Dieu m'a done mon departement, quoy que 
mes fouhaits me fillent pancher du cofte des nations 
ftables & permanentes, le fruict fera plus tardif, il 
viendra neantmoins en fon temps, i'y voy de bonnes 
difpofitions. Premierement la crainte qu'ont les Al- 
gonquains de leurs ennemis les Hiroquois, leur fait 
abandonner leur pays : & comme ils I'aiment naturel- 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 193 

hast told US that thou hast a Father in Heaven who 
made all, and that he who did not obey him was cast 
into the flames. We have asked thee to instruct 
us; [ii6] when thou goest away, what shall we do?" 
A Captain, approaching, said to him: ''Escho7n,^ I 
am not baptized and thou art going away ; my soul 
will be lost. What can I do for it? Thou sayest 
thou wilt return. Go then, and have courage ; return 
before I die." An old man, in a village other than 
that where the Father lived, hearing him speak of 
the end of all things, of the reward of the good, and 
of the punishment of the wicked, said to him: 
'' eschom, the people of thy village are worthless; 
they are wicked men ; they do not tell us what you 
tell them, and, nevertheless, it is so important that 
we ought to talk of it at the Council of the whole 
land." Are not these indications of a very gratify- 
ing harvest? The Devil foresees this harvest; for, 
while I am speaking, he is doing all in his power to 
prevent the Hurons from coming and consequently 
to shut [117] them out from the Gospel and from 
those who bring it to them. 

For these wandering and vagabond people, among 
whom God has given me my work, although my 
wishes cause me to prefer the stable and permanent 
tribes, the harvest will be later, but it will come in 
its own time ; I see favorable indications of it. In 
the first place, the fear that the Algonquains have of 
their enemies, the Hiroquois, makes them abandon 
their country; and, as they naturally love it, they 
are earnestly requesting that some of us settle among 
them, having planned to enclose a village around the 
fort which they will build there, and to gather all of 
their forces therein, which the Gentlemen of the 


194 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.5 

lement, ils demandent inftament qu'on aille faire vne 
habitation parmy eux, ay as deffein de fermer vn 
bourg k I'entour du fort qu'on drellera 1^, & de fe 
ramaffer la dedans : ce que MelTieurs de la Compagnie 
de cefte Nouuelle France auront bien agreable. Se- 
condement qui fcauroit parfaitement leur langue, il fe- 
roit tout-puiflant [i i8] parmy eux, ayant tant foit peu 
d'eloquence. II n'y a lieu au monde oil la Rhetori- 
que foit plus puiffante qu'en Canadas : & neantmoins 
elle n'a point d'autre habit que celuy que la nature 
luy a baill6: elle eft toute nue & toute fimple, «& 
cependant elle gouuerne tous ces peuples, car leur 
Capitaine n'eft efleu que pour fa langue : & il eft au- 
tant bien obey, qu'il I'a bien pendue, ils n'ont point 
d'autres loix que fa parole. II me femble que Cice- 
ron dit qu'autrefois toutes les nations ont eft4 vaga- 
bondes, & que I'eloquence les a ralTemblees : qu'elle 
a bafti des villes & des citez. Si la voix des hommes 
a tant de pouuoir, la voix de I'efprit de Dieu fera- 
elle impuiffante? Les Sauuages fe rendent aifement 
k la raifon, ce n'eft pas qu'ils la fuiuent toufiours, 
mais ordinairement ils ne repartent rien contre vne 
raifon qui [119] leur conuainc I'efprit. 

Vn Capitaine demandant fecours a I'Anglois qui 
eftoit icy pour aller en leurs guerres, I'Anglois vou- 
lant ef quiuer, le payoit de raif ons apparentes : f 9auoir 
eft qu'il auoit des malades, que fes gens ne s'accom- 
moderoient pas bien auec les Sauuages. Et ce Capi- 
taine refuta li pertinemment toutes ces defaites, que 
I'Anglois fut contraint de luy dire ; iay befoin de mes 
gens, ie crains que les Frangois ne nous viennent 
alTaillir. Alors le Sauuage luy dit, Tu parle mainte- 
nant, nous t'entendons bien iufques icy, tu n'as rie 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s3 195 

Company of New France will consider with favor. 
Secondly, he who knew their language well would 
be all-powerful [ii8] among them, however little 
eloquence he might have. There is no place in the 
world where Rhetoric is more powerful than in Can- 
ada, and, nevertheless, it has no other garb than 
what nature has given it; it is entirely simple and 
without disguise ; and yet it controls all these tribes, 
as the Captain is elected for his eloquence alone, and 
is obeyed in proportion to his use of it, for they 
have no other law than his word. I think it is Cicero 
who says that all nations were once vagabond, 
and that eloquence has brought them together ; that 
it has built villages and cities. If the voice of men 
has so much power, will the voice of the Spirit of 
God be powerless? The Savages listen to reason 
readily, — not that they always follow it, but gener- 
ally they urge nothing against a reason which [119] 
carries conviction to their minds. 

A Captain once asked the Englishman who was 
here to help them in their wars; the Englishman, 
wishing to evade him, answered with superficial rea- 
sons: to wit, that some of his men were sick, and that 
his people would not get along well with the Sav- 
ages. And this Captain so pertinently refuted all his 
objections that the Englishman was compelled to say: 
" I need my men, I am afraid the French will come 
and attack us." Then the Savage said: "Now thou 
art talking, we understand thee well ; thus far, thou 
hadst said nothing." They acquiesced in this reason. 
When they are made to see the conformity of the 
law of God with reason, I do not think that much 
opposition will be found in their minds. Their will, 
which is extremely volatile and changeable, when 


196 LES RELA TIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol. 5 

dit: ils acquiefcerent a cette raifon, quand on leur 
fera voir la conformity de la loy de Dieu, auec la 
raifon, ie ne croy pas qu'on trouue grande refiftance 
en leur entendement : leur volont^ qui eft extreme- 
ment volage & changeante, appriuoifee par les graces 
de [120] celuy qui les appellera, fe rengera en fin ^ 
fon deuoir. En troifiefme lieu, ce peuple peut eftre 
conuerty par des feminaires : mais voicy comment il 
faut efleuer k Kebec les enfans des Sauuages, qui fe- 
ront plus haut en cefle autre habitation. On les aura 
h. la fin, ils les donneront s'ils voyent qu'on ne les 
enuoye point en France, Pour les enfans de ce pai's- 
cy, il les faudra enuoyer la haut : La raifon efl que 
les Sauuages empefchent leur inflrudtion, ils ne fgau- 
roient fupporter qu'on chaflie vn enfant, quoy qu'il 
faffe, ils n'ont qu'vne fimple reprehenfion: de plus 
c'eft qu'ils penfent tellement vous obliger en vous 
donnant leurs enfans pour les inflruire, nourrir, & 
habiller : qu'en outre ils vous demanderont plufieurs 
chofes, & vous feront extr^mement importuns, vous 
mena9ant de retirer leur enfant fi [121] vous ne leur 
accordez leur demande. 

Le 14. de May, ie baptifay le petit Negre, duquel 
ie fis mention I'an palTe : quelques Anglois I'ont ame- 
ne de I'ifle de Madagafcar, autrement de Sainct Lau- 
rens, qui n'eft pas loin du Cap de Bonne Efpe- 
rance, tirant h. I'Orient, c'eft fon pais bien plus chaud 
que celuy oil il eft maintenant. Ces Anglois le don- 
nerent au Kers, qui ont tenu Kebec, & I'vn des Kers 
le vendit cinquante efcus a ce qu'on m'a dit, k vn 
nomm6 le Bailly, qui en a fait prefent a cefte hon- 
nefte famille qui efl icy. Get enfant eft fi content 
que rien plus, il m'a encor bien recree en I'inftrui- 


1632 - 33] LE JE UNE ' 5 RELA TION, 1633 


197 


enlightened by the grace of [120] him who will call 
them, will at last be brought into the line of duty. 
In the third place, these people may be converted by 
means of seminaries; and how necessary it is to 
educate at Kebec the children of the Savages, who 
belong to settlements farther up the river. We shall 
have them [the children] at last ; for they will give 
them, if they see that we do not send them to France. 
As to the children of this section, they must be sent 
up there. The reason is, that the Savages prevent 
their instruction ; they will not tolerate the chastise- 
ment of their children, whatever they may do; they 
permit only a simple reprimand. Moreover, they 
think they are doing you some great favor in giving 
you their children to instruct, to feed, and to dress. 
Besides, they will ask a great many things in return, 
and will be very importunate in threatening to with- 
draw their children, if [121] you do not accede to 
their demands. 

On the 14th of May, I baptized the little Negro of 
whom I spoke last year. He was brought here by 
Englishmen from the island of Madagascar, other- 
wise Saint Lawrence, which is not far from the Cape 
of Good Hope, toward the East. It is a great deal 
warmer in his country than here. These English- 
men gave him to the Kers, who held Kebec ; and one 
of the Kers sold him for fifty ecus, I am told, to a 
person named le Bailly, who presented him to this 
estimable family that is settled here.*^ This child 
could not be more contented than he is, and it has 
been a recreation for me to teach him. Wishing to 
know whether the inhabitants of his country were 
Mahometans or Pagans, I asked him if there were no 
houses there in which they prayed to God, if there 


198 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 

fant: car voulant recognoiftre fi les habitans de fon 
pais eftoient Mahometans, ou Payens ; ie luy deman- 
dois s'il n'y auoit point de maifon en fon pais ou on 
priaft Dieu, s'il n'y auoit point de Mofquees, fi on n'y 
parloit point [121 i.e., 122] de Mahomet. II y a, dit- 
il, des Mofquees en noftre pais: Sont-elles grandes? 
luy repartis-ie, elles font, repond-il, comme celles 
de ce pais-cy. Et luy difant qu'il n'y en auoit point 
en Frace, ny en Canada. Ten ay veu, dit-il, entre les 
mains des Frangois & des Anglois qui en ont port6 
en noftre pais, & maintenant on s'en fert pour tirer. 
Ie recognus qu'il vouloit dire des moufquets, & non 
des Mofquees ; ie me foufris & luy auffi : il eft gran- 
dement naif, & fort attentif h. la Meffe & au Sermon. 
C'eft Ie quatriefme que i'ay baptife depuis mon arri- 
uee; car Dieu ayant donne a Madame Coullart vn 
petit enfat, ie luy ay adminiflre ce Sacremet, ce que 
i'auois defia fait ^ 2 petits Sauuages. 

Le 19. on nous vint apporter nouuelle qu'vn vaif- 
feau Anglois eftoit entre a Tadouffac depuis quel- 
ques iours: Nous ne fgauions fi c'etoit [123] vn cour- 
reur, ou s'il y auoit quelque trouble entre la France 
& r Angleterre ; chacun baftifToit fur fes coiedtures, 
8c tout le monde fe tenoit fur fes gardes. Le Di- 
manche fuiuat, iour de la Saindte Trinite, eflant all6 
dire la Sainte Meffe au fort, on me dit que fi nous 
entendions tirer deux coups de canon, que nous nous 
retiraffions promptement auec nos Frangois dans la 
fortereffe. 

Le lendemain 22. du mefme mois de May, nous 
ouyfmes ioiier le canon de bon matin, fur I'incerti- 
tude de ce que ce pourroit eftre. 

Le Pere de None prend noftre Sauuage, & s'en va 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 199 

were no Mosques, if they did not talk there [121 i.e., 
122] of Mahomet. "There are," said he, "Mosques 
in our country." "Are they large?" I asked him. 
"They are," he answered, "like those of this coun- 
try." On telling him that there were none in France 
nor in Canada, "I have seen some," said he, "in the 
hands of the French and English who brought them 
into our country, and now they use them to shoot 
with." I perceived that he meant to say muskets, and 
not Mosques; I smiled, and so did he. He is most 
ingenuous, and very attentive to Mass and to the Ser- 
mon. He is the fourth that I have baptized since 
my arrival ; for, God having given a little child to 
Madame Coullart, I administered this Sacrament to 
him, as I had done before to 2 little Savages. 

On the 19th, news was brought that an English 
vessel had entered Tadoussac a few days before ; we 
did not know whether it was [123] a trading vessel, or 
whether there was some trouble between France and 
England. Each one formed his own conjectures, and 
every one was upon his guard. The following Sun- 
day, day of Holy Trinity, having gone to say Holy 
Mass at the fort, I was told that, if we heard two can- 
non shots, we should promptly withdraw with our 
French people into the fortress. 

The next day, on the 22nd of the same month of 
May, we heard the sound of the cannon very early in 
the morning. 

In the uncertainty as to what was going on. Father 
de None took our Savage and started for Kebec ; and 
he brought back without delay the news that sieur 
de Champlain had arrived, and that Father Brebeuf 
was coming as fast as possible to our little house. 
We hastened to thank our Lord. In the meantime, 


200 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 

^ Kebec; & fans y tarder, nous rapporte nouuelle 
que le fieur de Champlain eftoit arriue : que le Pere 
Brebeuf s'en venoit incontinent en noftre petite mai- 
fon. Nous allafmes remercier noftre Seigneur. Ce- 
pendant voicy le Pere [124] Brebeuf qui entre, Dieu 
fcait fi nous le receufmes & embraffafmes de bo 
coeur. Quelques Sauuages eftas chez nous, & voyas 
noflre ioye a cet heureux rencontre, s'6crierent felo 
leur couftume quand ils admirent quelque chofe: 
chte^ ! chte^ ! fe refiouiffans auec nous de I'arriuee du 
Pere, lequel apres auoir falue noftre Seigneur en 
noflre petite chapelle, nous dit que le pere Maffe 
efloit a Tadouffac, que le Pere Daniel, & le Pere 
Dauofl nous venoient voir du grand Chibou. II 
m'apporta fi grande quantite de lettres, que ie fus 
confus voyat le fouuenir & tefmoignage d'affection 
de tant d'honneftes perf onnes : Quid retribuam Domi- 
no pro omnibus quce retribuit mihi : Qu'il f oit beny pour 
vn iamais s'il veut, en reconoiffance de fes bien-faits : 
que nous beuuions f on calice : fiat, fiat, ce nous fera 
trop d'honneur. Mais ie le prie d'appliquer [225 i.e., 
125] en particulier vne feule goutte de celuy qu'il a 
beu pour ceux qui nous obligent tat, pour les affociez 
de la Compagnie de cette Nouuelle France, defquels 
Dieu fe veut feruir pour fa gloire, pour V. R. pour 
toute fa Prouince, & pour tons ceux qui cooperent au 
falut de tant de pauures ames efgar^es: Vne petite 
gouttelette de ce diuin calice nous enrichira tons : & 
puis que mes prieres font trop foibles pour obtenir vn 
^v grand bien, ie fupplie V. R. d'interpofer les fiennes, 
& celles encore de tant d'ames faindles qui font def- 
fous fa charge : Mais pafTons outre. 

Ayant f9eu I'arriuee de Monfieur de Champlain, ie 


1632 - 33] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1633 201 


behold, Father [124] Brebeuf enters. God knows 
whether we received and embraced him with glad 
hearts. Several Savages were with us, and, seeing 
our joy at this happy meeting, cried out, according 
to their custom when they are pleased, chte^ ! chtei ! 
rejoicing with us over the arrival of the Father, who, 
after having honored our Lord in our little chapel, 
told us that father Masse was at Tadoussac, and that 
Father Daniel and Father Davost were also coming 
to see us from the grand Chibou.^^ He brought me 
such a quantity of letters that I was overcome upon 
seeing the souvenirs and testimonials of affection of 
so many estimable people. Quid retribuam Domino 
pro omnibus quce retribuit mihi : Blessed be he for- 
evermore, if it be his will that in return for these 
benefits we should drink of his cup; fiat, fiat, that 
would be too great honor for us. But I entreat him 
[225 i.e., 125] to apply one single drop of what he 
drank, especially to those who have helped us so much, 
to the associates of the Company of New France, of 
whom God wishes to make use for his glory, ^" to 
Your Reverence, to all your Province, and to all those 
who cooperate in the salvation of so many poor lost 
souls ; a little drop of this divine cup will enrich us 
all; and as my prayers are too weak to obtain so 
great a blessing, I beg Your Reverence to interpose 
yours, and those also of so many saintly souls who 
are under your charge. But let us pass on. 

Having learned of the arrival of Monsieur de Cham- 
plain, I went to greet him. Arriving at the fort, I 
saw a squad of French soldiers, armed with pikes and 
muskets, who approached, beating their drums. As 
soon as they had entered. Monsieur de Caen gave [226 
i.e., 126] the keys of the fort to Monsieur du Plessis 


202 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.5 

Tallay faliier. Arriuant au fort, ie veis vne efcoiiade 
de foldats Fran9ois armez de piques & de moufquets 
qui s'e approchoiet tambour battant : fi toft qu'ils y 
furent entrez, Monfieur de Caen remit [226 i.e., 126] 
les clefs du fort entre les mains de Monfieur du Pleflis 
Bochard, qui les remit le lendemain entre celles de 
Monfieur de Champlain, pour entrer dans la conduite 
des vaiffeaux, felon I'ordonnance de Monfeigneur le 
Cardinal. 

Ie remerciay le mieux qu'il me fut poffible Mofieur 
de Champlain de la charite qu'il auoit exercee enuers 
nos Peres qui a efte tres-grande, come me temoignoit 
le Pere Brebeuf. 

Le 24. de May, dixhuict canots de Sauuages eftans 
defcendus a Kebec, le fieur de Champlain fe doutat 
qu'ils pourroient paller iufques aux Anglois, qui 
auoient trois vaiffeaux k Tadouflac, & vne barque 
bie haut dans la riuiere, s'en alia dans les Cabanes 
de ces Sauuages, & leur fit parler fort k propos par 
le fieur Oliuier, truchement, honnefte homme, & 
bien propre pour ce [227 i.e., 127] pays-cy. II leur 
dit done par la bouche de cet interprete, que les Fran- 
cois les auoient toufiours aimez & defendus, que luy 
les auoit f ecourus en perf onne dans leurs guerres : qu'il 
auoit grandement chery le Pere du Capitaine auquel il 
parloit ; lequel fut tu6 k f es coftez en vn combat oti 
luy-mefme fut blefle d'vn coup de fleche, qu'il eftoit 
homme de parole ; que nonobftant les incommoditez 
des mers, il les eftoit reuenu voir come fes freres: 
qu'eux ayant defir6 & demand^ qu'on fit vne habita- 
tion de Frangois en leur pays pour les defendre con- 
tre les incurfions de leurs ennemis, qu'il auoit eu 
deflein de leur accorder, & que cela feroit defia mis 


1632-33] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6ss 208 

Bochard,'** who delivered them the next day to Mon- 
sieur de Champlain, to take command of the ships 
according to the decree of Monseigneur the Cardinal. 

I thanked Monsieur de Champlain, as well as I 
could, for the kindness shown by him to our Fathers, 
for it was very great, as Father Brebeuf has testi- 
fied to me.*^ 

On the 24th of May, eighteen canoes of Savages 
having descended to Kebec, sieur de Champlain, sus- 
pecting that they might go on to the English, who 
had three vessels at Tadoussac and a bark far up the 
river, went into the Cabins of these Savages, and 
made to them a very suitable address through sieur 
Olivier the interpreter,'*'-^ who is an excellent man and 
well fitted for this [227 i.e., 127] country. He said 
to them through the lips of this interpreter that the 
French had always loved and defended them, that he 
had assisted them in person in their wars ; that he had 
greatly cherished the Father of the Captain to whom 
he was talking, who was killed at his side in a battle 
where he himself was wounded by an arrow ; ^ that 
he was a man of his word, and that, notwithstanding 
the discomforts of the sea voyage, he had returned to 
see them again, as if they were his brothers ; as they 
had expressed a wish that a French settlement should 
be made in their country, to defend them against the 
incursions of their enemies, he contemplated grant- 
ing this desire, and it would already have been 
granted but for the obstacles created by the English ; 
he was, moreover, then engaged in repairing the 
ruins that these wicked guests had left behind them ; 
that he would not fail to satisfy them [228 i.e., 128] 
all as soon as he attended to the more urgent affairs ; 
that the Fathers (speaking of us), would remain 


204 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.5 

en execution fans le detourbier des Anglois: qu'au 
refle il eftoit pour le prefent occupe a la reparation 
des mines qu'auoient fait ces mauuais hoftes : qu'il ne 
manquera pas de leur [228 i.e., 128] donner conten- 
tement fi toft qu'il aura pourueu aux affaires plus pref- 
fantes ; que les Peres (parlant de nous autres) demeu- 
reroient parmy eux, & les infbruiroient, come auffi 
leurs enfans. Cependant, nonobftant les grandes ob- 
ligations qu'ils auoient aux Frangois, ils eftoient def- 
cendus en intentio d'aller voir des voleurs qui venoient 
pour derober les Fran§ois, qu'ils auifaffent bien a ce 
qu'ils feroient, que ces voleurs eftoient paffagers, & 
que les Frangois demeuroient au pays comme leur 
appartenant. Voila vne partie du difcours que leur 
fit tenir le fieur de Champlain, autant que i'ay peu 
fgauoir, par le rapport qui m'en a efte fait par ceux 
qui eftoient prefents. 

Pendant cette harangue, le Capitaine & fes gens 
efcoutoient fort attentiuement, luy entr' autres paroif- 
foit profondement penfif, tirant [229 i.e., 129] de fon 
eftomach cette afpiration de temps en temps, pendant 
qu'on luy parloit, hdm\ hdm\ hdm\ comme approu- 
uant le difcours du truchement : lequel eftant acheue, 
ce Capitaine prend la parole pour refpodre, mais 
auec vne rhetorique auffi fine & deliee, qu'il en fcau- 
roit fortir de I'efcolle d'Ariftote, ou de Ciceron. II 
gagna au commencemet de fon difcours la bienueil- 
lance de tous les Frangois par vne profonde humi- 
lite, qui paroifl^oit auec bonne grace dans fes geftes 
& dans fes paroles. 

le ne fuis, difoit-il, qu'vn pauure petit animal qui 
va rampant fur la terre: Vous autres Frangois vous 
eftes les grands du monde, qui faites tout trembler. 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1633 


205 


among them and would instruct them as well as their 
children. Yet, notwithstanding the great obligations 
that they [the Savages] were under to the French, 
they had descended the river with the intention of 
going to see the thieves who came to pillage the 
French. He said they should consider well what 
they were doing ; that these robbers were only birds 
of passage, while the French would remain in the 
country as it belonged to them. This is a part of 
the discourse that sieur de Champlain delivered to 
them, as far as I have been able to learn, from the 
report made to me by those present. 

During this speech, the Captain and his men lis- 
tened very attentively. He, among others, appeared 
to be in deep thought, drawing [229 i.e., 129] from his 
stomach from time to time this aspiration, while they 
were speaking to him, hdni ! ham ! hdm ! as if approv- 
ing the speech of the interpreter, which, when fin- 
ished, this Captain arose to answer, but with a 
keenness and delicacy of rhetoric that might have 
come out of the schools of Aristotle or Cicero. He 
won, in the beginning of his discourse, the good will 
of all of the French by his profound humility, which 
appeared with exceeding grace in his gestures and in 
his language. 

''I am," said he, ''only a poor little animal, crawl- 
ing about on the ground; you Frenchmen are the 
great of the earth, who make all tremble. I do not 
know how I dare to talk before such great Captains. 
If I had some one behind me who would suggest 
what I ought to say, I would speak more boldly. 
[230 i.e., 130] I am bewildered; I have never had 
any instruction; my father left me very young; if 
I say anything, I go seeking it here and there, 


206 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.5 

le ne fcay comme i'ofe parler deuant de li grands Ca- 
pitaines: fi i'auois quelqu'vn derriere moy qui me 
fuggeraft ce que ie dois dire, ie parlerois plus hardi- 
met. [2 30 i.e., 130] Ie me trouue eftonne, ie n'ay 
iamais eu d'inflruction, mon pere m'a laille fort ieune, 
li ie dis quelque chofe ie le vais recueillant 9k & Ik 
"k I'aduanture, c'efl ce qui me fait trembler. 

Tu nous dis que les Fran§ois nous ont toufiours 
aimez, nous le fgauons bien, & nous mentirions fi nous 
difions le contraire. Tu dis que tu as toufiours efte 
veritable, aulii t'auos-nous toufiours creu. Tu nous 
as affifle en nos guerres, nous t'en aimons tous da- 
uantage, que veux-tu qu'on refponde? tout ce que 
tu dis eft vray. 

Tu dis que les Fran9ois font venus habiter k Kebec 
pour nous defedre, & que tu viendras en noftre pays 
pour nos proteger, Ie me fouuiens bien d'auoir ouy 
dire k nos pares que quand vous eftiez Ik bas a Ta- 
doullac, les Montagnaits vous allerent voir, & vous 
inuiterent k noftre deceu de monter 9k haut, ou nos 
peres [231 i.e., 131] vous ayant veu, vous aimerent, & 
vous prierent d'y faire voftre demeure. 

Pour rhabitation que tu dis que nous auons deman- 
ds aux trois riuieres, ie ne fuis qu'vn enfant, ie n'ay 
point de memoire, ie ne f9ay fi ie I'ay demand6e: 
vous autres vous auez voftre Maflinahigan, (c'eft k 
dire, vous auez cognoilTance de I'efcriture,) qui vous 
fait fouuenir de tout: mais quoy que e'en foit, tu fe- 
ras toufiours le bien venu. Remarquez la prudence 
de c^t homme, k faire voir que non feulemet les Sau- 
uages, mais encor que les Fran9ois defirent cette ha- 
bitatio; il pourfuiuit fon difcours, difant: Quand tu 
viendras la haut auec nous, tu trouueras la terre meil- 


1632-33] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, j6js 207 

at hazard, and it is that which makes me tremble. 

" Thon tellest us that the French have always 
loved us; we know it well, and we would lie if we 
said the contrary. Thou say est that thou hast always 
been true, and we have always believed thee. Thou 
hast assisted us in our wars, we love thee all the 
more for it ; what dost thou wish that we should an- 
swer? All that thou sayest is true. 

" Thou sayest that the French have come to live 
at Kebec to defend us, and that thou wilt come into 
our country to protect us. I remember well to have 
heard our fathers say that, when you were below at 
Tadoussac, the Montagnaits went to see you and in- 
vited you, unknown to us, to ascend [the river] above 
here, where our fathers, [231 i.e., 131] having seen 
you, loved you, and prayed you to make your home 
there. 

"As to the settlement thou sayest we have asked 
for at the three rivers, I am only a child ; I have no 
recollection, I do not know that I have asked for it! 
You, you have your Massinahigan ; (that is to say, 
you have a knowledge of writing), which makes you 
remember everything. But, however that may be, 
thou wilt always be welcome." Note the discretion 
of this man, to make it plain that not only the Sav- 
ages, but the French, desire this settlement. He con- 
tinued his discourse, saying, " When thou shalt come 
up there with us thou wilt find a land better than this ; 
thou wilt make, to begin with, a house like this to 
live in" (he indicated a little space with his hand); 
" that is to say, thou wilt make a [232 i.e., 132] for- 
tress. Then thou wilt make another house like that," 
designating a large space, "and then we shall no 
longer be dogs who sleep outside, we shall go into that 


208 LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol. 5 

leure qu'icy : tu f eras au commencement vne maifon 
come cela pour te loger (il delignoit vne petite efpace 
de la main :) c'eft a dire tu feras vne [232 i.e., 132] for- 
tereffe, puis tu feras vne autre maifon comme cela, de- 
fignant vn grand lieu, & alors nous ne ferons plus des 
chiens qui couch et dehors : nous entrerons dans cette 
maifon, il entendoit vn bourg ferm^ : En ce temps-la 
on ne nous foup9onnera plus d'aller voir ceux qui ne 
vous aiment pas: tu femeras des bleds, nous ferons 
comme toy, & nous n'irons plus chercher noftre vie 
das les bois nous ne ferons plus errans & vagabonds. 

Voila le fieur de Caen qui a creu que i'auois en- 
uoye des Caftors vers les eflrangers ; i'ay enuoye 
vers ce quartier la quelques peaux d'Orignac, non 
pour traitter, mais pour coupper les bras a nos enne- 
mis. Tu fcais que les Hiroquois ont de grads bras, 
11 ie ne leur couppois, il y a longtemps que nous fe- 
rios tous pris : i'enuoye des pref ents aux nations qui 
[233 i.e., 133] leur font voifines, afin qu'elles ne fe 
ioignent pas auec eux ; ce n'eft pas pour off enfer les 
Frangois, mais pour nous conferuer. 

Tu dis que nous voulons aller a I'Anglois, ie m'en 
vay dire a mes ges qu'on n'y aille point: ie te pro- 
mets que ny moy, ny ceux qui ont de I'efprit n'iront 
pas: que s'il y a quelque ieune homme qui faffe vn 
fault iufques la fans eftre veu, ie n'y f9aurois que 
faire, tu fcais bien qu'on ne peut pas tenir la ieu- 
neffe. Ie le difendray a tous, fi quelqu'vn y va, il 
n'a point d'efprit : tu peux tout, mets des chalouppes 
aux auenues, & prends les Caftors de ceux qui iront. 

Tu nous dis que les Peres viuront parmy nous, & 
nous inftruiront, ce bon-heur fera pour nos enfans, 
nous qui fommes defia vieux, nous mourrons igno- 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1633 209 

house." He meant to say an enclosed village. " Then 
we shall no longer be suspected of going to see those 
who do not love you. Thou wilt sow wheat; we 
shall do as thou dost, and we shall no longer go 
to seek our living in the woods ; we shall no longer 
be wanderers and vagabonds. 

" It was sieur de Caen, who believed that I had 
sent Beavers to the foreigners ; I sent to those quar- 
ters a few Moose skins, not in trade, but to cut off 
the arms of our enemies. Thou knowest that the 
Hiroquois have long arms; if I had not cut them, we 
should have been taken by them long ago. I send 
presents to tribes who [233 i.e., 133] are their neigh- 
bors, to the end that they should not unite with 
them; it is not to offend the French, but to preserve 
ourselves. 

" Thou sayest that we wish to go to the English ; 
I will tell my men that they should not go there. I 
promise thee that neither I myself, nor they who 
have any sense, will do that; but if there is some 
young man who jumps over there without being seen, 
I shall not know what to do ; thou knowest well that 
youth cannot be restrained. I shall forbid every one 
from going there. Any one who does so has no sense. 
Thou canst do everything, place thy boats in the way 
and capture the Beavers of those who attempt to go. 

"Thou sayest that the Fathers will live among us, 
and will teach us. This good fortune will be for our 
children ; we, who are already old, shall die ignorant. 
This blessing will not come as soon as we should 
like to have it. 

[234 i.e., 134] "Thou sayest that we must be care- 
ful what we do ; grasp us by the arm, and we shudder ; 
grasp us afterward by the heart, and the whole body 


210 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.5 

rans, ce bien n'arriuera pas litofb que nous voudrions. 

[2 34 i.e., 134] Tu dis que nous prenions garde a ce 
que nous ferons, tu nous pinfe au bras, & nous fremif- 
fons: tu nous pinfe puis apres au coeur, et tout le 
corps nous tremble. Nous ne voulos point aller aux 
Anglois, leur Capitaine a voulu faire alliance auec 
moy, & me tenir pour fon frere & ie n'ay pas voulu, 
ie me fuis retire difant, qu'il eftoit trop grand Capi- 
taine. Ie me fouuenois bien d'vne parole que tu 
nous auois dit, que tu retournerois : ie t'attendois 
toufiours, tu as efte veritable, tu le feras encore en 
nous venant voir en nortre pays: ie n'ay qu'vne 
crainte, c'eft qu'en ce commerce des Frangois auec 
nos gens, il n'y ait quelqu'vn de tue, & alors nous 
ferios perdus : mais tu f cais que tout le monde n'eft 
pas fage, les plus aduifez fe tiendront toufiours dans 
leur deuoir. 

[235 i.e., 135] Voila a peu pres la refponfe de ce 
Sauuage qui eftonna nos Frangois, lefquels m'ont tef- 
moigne qu'il releuoit fa voix felon les fuiets qu'il 
traitoit, puis la rabbaiffoit auec tant d'humilite, & vne 
pofture ou adtion fi foubmife, qu'il gagnoit I'affedtion 
de tons ceux qui le regardoient fans 1' entendre. 

La conclufion fut que le fieur de Champlain leur 
dit, quad cette grade maifon fera faite, alors nos gar- 
96s fe marieront a vos fiUes, & nous ne ferons plus 
qu'vn peuple : ils f e miret k rire ; repartans : Tu nous 
dis toufiours quelque chofe de gaillard pour nous 
refiouyr, fi cela arriuoit nous ferions bien-heureux. 
Ceux qui croient que les Sauuages ont vn efprit de 
plomb & de terre, cognoiftront par ce difcours qu'ils 
ne font pas fi maffifs qu'on les pourroit depeindre. 

[236 i.e., 136] Ce Capitaine nous vint voir quelques 


1632 - 33] LE JEUNE ' S RELA TION, 1633 211 

trembles. We do not want to go to the English; 
their Captain wanted to make an alliance with me and 
take me for his brother, and I did not desire it ; I with- 
drew, saying that he was too great a Captain. I be- 
thought myself well of a word that thou hadst said to 
us, that thou wouldst return ; therefore I always 
awaited thee. Thou hast been truthful, thou wilt still 
be so in coming to see us in our country. I have but 
one fear ; it is that in the association of the French 
with our people, some one may be killed, then we 
would be lost ; thou knowest all are not prudent, but 
that the wiser ones will always do their duty." 

[235 i.e., 135] This is about the answer of this Sav- 
age, who astonished our French people. They told me 
how he raised his voice according to the subjects he 
treated, then lowered it with so much humility, and 
with such an attitude of submission, that he won the 
hearts of all who looked at him, though they did not 
understand him. 

The conclusion was that sieur de Champlain said 
to them : "When that great house shall be built, then 
our young men will marry your daughters, and we 
shall be one people." They began to laugh, answer- 
ing: " Thou always sayest something cheering to re- 
joice us. If that should happen, we would be very 
happy." Those who think that the Savages have dull 
and heavy intellects will recognize by this speech that 
they are not so stupid as they may have been painted. 

[236 i.e., 136] This Captain came to see us a few 
days later in our house, but I did not have leisure to 
entertain him as I desired. 

On the 29th, sieur de Champlain came to hear Mass 
in our little chapel and we kept him for dinner. As 
good luck had it, our Savage had brought us a small 


212 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 5 


iours apres en nojflre maifon, mais ie n'eus pas le loifir 
de Tentretenir comme ie defirois. 

Le 29. le fieur de Champlain vint entendre la MefTe 
en noftre petite chapelle, nous le retinfmes a dif- 
ner : de bonne fortune noftre Sauuage nous auoit ap- 
port6 vn petit morceau d'Ours, nous luy en prefen- 
tafmes ; en ayant goufle il fe mit h. rire, & me dit fi 
on f9auoit en Frace que nous mageons des Ours, on 
detoumeroit la face de noftre haleine, & cependant 
vous voyez combien la chair en eft bonne et delicate. 

Apres le difner, i'allay faliier le Capitaine de Nefle 
das fon vailTeau, quantite de petits Sauuages me fui- 
uoient. Fen pris feulement fix ou lept auec moy, ie 
les fis chanter leur Pater en Sauuage dans le Nauire : 
nos Frangois y prenoient grand plaifir. [237 i.e., 137] 
Le bon pour eux fut que le Capitaine de Nefle leur 
fit donner du Cafcaracona, & du toutouch pimi; c'eft 
ainfi qu'ils appellent le bifcuit & le formage. Au 
depart comme le Capitaine eut fait tirer vn coup de 
canon par honneur, ces enfans regardoient auec efton- 
nement, & fe monftroient fi conftans, que fi on leur 
vouloit payer leur chanfon en mefme monnoye, ils 
voudroient gagner leur vie en chantant. 

Le dernier iour de May, la Naffe noftre Sauuage 
nous vint dire qu'vn de leurs gens auoit fonge qu'il 
y auroit des Frangois tuez. Or foit que le Diable leur 
ait donne ce fentimet, foit que de plufieurs fonges il 
s'en rencontre quelqu'vn de veritable par cas fortuit. 
Quoy que e'en foit, le 2 iour de luin les Hiroquois 
tuerent deux de nos Fragois, & en blefferent quatre 
autres, dont I'vn mourut [238 i.e., 138] bien-toft apres: 
voicy comme arriua ce malheur. Vne barque & vne 
chalouppe montoient dans le grand fleuue de S. Lau- 


1632 - 33] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1633 213 

piece of Bear, which we presented to him. Having 
tasted it, he began to laugh, and said to me: "If they 
knew in France that we were eating Bears, they 
would turn their faces away from our breath, and yet 
you see how good and delicate the meat is." 

After dinner, I went to greet Captain de Nesle in 
his ship, a number of little Savages following me. I 
took but six or seven with me, and had them sing 
their Pater in the Savage Tongue aboard the Ship. 
Our Frenchmen enjoyed it greatly. [237 i.e., 137] 
The best of all for them [the little savages] was that 
Captain de Nesle gave them some "Cascaracona," and 
some "toutouch pimi ;" it is thus they call biscuits and 
cheese. Upon our departure, as the Captain had the 
cannon fired in our honor, the children looked on with 
amazement, and showed themselves so happy that, if 
one would pay for their songs in that way, they would 
like to gain their livelihood by singing. 

On the last day of May, la Nasse, our Savage, came 
to tell us that one of their men had dreamed that 
some Frenchmen would be killed. Now, either be- 
cause the Devil had given them this sentiment, or 
that among all their dreams there is now and then one 
that happens perchance to be true, however that may 
be, on the 2nd day of June the Hiroquois killed two 
of our Frenchmen and wounded four others, one of 
whom died [238 i.e., 138] shortly afterward. This 
catastrophe happened in this way : A bark and shal- 
lop were ascending the great river St. Lawrence ; the 
latter went ahead, and, to hasten its speed, sailors 
went ashore to tow it with lines or cords. As they 
came to double a point of land, thirty or 40 Hiro- 
quois, who were in ambush, fell upon them with hor- 
rible cries ; they killed the two men first encountered. 


214 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 

rens, la chalouppe paffa deuant; & pour aller plus 
vifte, quelques mattelots mirent pied h. terre pour la 
tirer, auec des amares ou des cordes : comme ils vin- 
drent a doubler vne pointe de terre, trente ou 40. Hiro- 
quois qui eftoiet en embufcade viennent fondre deflus 
eux, auec des cris efpouuetables : ils tuent d'abbord 
les deux premiers qu'ils ont k la rencotre h. coups de 
haches : ils decochent vne grefle de fleches auec vne 
telle viftelTe & promptitude, que nos Fran§ois ne 
fgauoient de quel cofte fe tourner, n'ayans pas preueu 
ce coup Yk. lis eurent bien la hardielTe de vouloir 
aborder la chalouppe auec leur canots, & n'euft efte 
qu'vn Fran§ois les coucha en ioue auec fon harque- 
bufe, & que la [239 i.e., 139] barque qui n'eftoit pas^ 
loin, equippa vifte vne chalouppe pour venir au fe- 
cours, ayat entedu les cris du combat, il eft croyable 
que pas vn n'en fut echappe. Les Hiroquois voyant 
cette harquebufe, & cefte autre chalouppe qui venoit 
au fecours, s'enfuirent, ecorchant au preallable les 
teftes de ceux qu'ils auoient tuez, & remportans ces 
peaux par brauade. 

Le 8. de luin, le Pere Mafle arriua de Tadouffac, 
il reueilla noftre ioye, voyant qu'apres auoir efte fi 
long temps malade fur la mer il fe portoit bien. II 
nous dit que Pierre Paftedechouan eftoit plus mef- 
chant que iamais. Que les Anglois qui eftoient h. 
Tadouffac I'auoient perdu par I'yurognerie : O que 
celuy-lk fera coupable deuant Dieu, qui a introduict 
I'herefie en ces contrees ! Si ce Sauuage auoit de 
I'efprit, eftant comme il eft corrompu par ces mife- 
rables [240 i.e., 140] heretiques, il feroit vn puiffant 
obftacle a la publication de la foy, encore n'y apporte- 
ra-il que trop d'empefchement, fi Dieu ne luy touche 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 215 

with blows from their hatchets, then discharged a 
storm of arrows so suddenly and unexpectedly that 
our Frenchmen did not know which way to turn, not 
having foreseen the attack. They even dared to try 
to board the shallop in their canoes ; and, had it not 
been that a Frenchman took aim at them with his 
arquebus, and that the [239 i.e., 139] bark, which was 
not far away, speedily equipped a boat to come to the 
rescue, having heard the cries of the combat, it is 
probable that not one of them would have escaped. 
The Hiroquois, seeing the arquebus, and the other 
boat coming to their help, fled, first skinning the 
heads of those whom they had killed and bearing 
away the scalps by way of bravado. 

On the 8th of June, Father Masse arrived from 
Tadoussac, and caused us great joy, as he had been 
so long sick upon the sea, and is now well. He told 
us that Pierre Pastedechouan *^ was more wicked than 
ever ; that the English who were at Tadoussac had 
ruined him by drunkenness. Oh, how guilty before 
God will he be who has introduced heresy into this 
country! If this Savage were intelligent, corrupted 
as he is by these miserable [240 i.e., 140] heretics, he 
would be a powerful obstacle to the spread of the 
faith ; even now, he will cause only too much injury 
to it, if God does not touch his heart. To judge from 
his conduct, it would seem that he was given to us to 
draw from him the principles of his language, and not 
for the welfare of his soul, as he now leagues against 
his God and against the truth. 

I have never experienced in France anything like 
the heat and the drought which we have had here 
during this month of June. Everything on the earth 
burns, and nothing prospers in such weather; and 


216 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 5 

le coeur. II fait paroiftre par fes deportemens qu'il 
nous efkoit donn6 pour tirer de luy les principes de 
fa lague, & non pas pour le bien de fon ame, puis qu'il 
fe bande contre fon Dieu & contre la verite. 

II fait icy des chaleurs fi violentes en ce mois de 
luin, & vne fi grade feichereffe, que ie n'ay rien veu 
ny fenty de femblable en France, tout brufle fur la 
terre, rien n'aduance par ce temps-la ; & neantmoins 
il a gele "k glace en vn matin en la maifon des Peres 
Recolets. La nuict fortifiant la fraicheur des bois, 
caufe de ces gelees du matin ; nous fommes voifms 
de cette maifon, & cependant cela n'eft point arriue 
chez nous, pource que nous auons vn plus grand air. 

[241 i.e., 141] Le 16 du mefme mois de luin, nous 
auons rendu I'vn de nos petits enfans a fa mere, voflre 
Reuerence nous ayant mande qu'il n'y auoit pas encore 
dequoy eftablir vn f eminaire : & par conf equent n'ay- 
ant enuoye ceux qu'elle deftine pour auoir foin d'in- 
ftruire les enfans que nous aurions peu auoir, crai- 
gnant d'ailleurs que cefle femme ne retiraft fon fils 
en cachette, & s'enfuit dans les bois de peur qu'on ne 
fift palfer en France: i'ay mieux aime luy rendre 
franchement, afin de luy donner a cognoiftre que li 
nous tenons des enfans, ce n'eft point pour les dero- 
ber "k leurs parets, ains pour leur propre bien : afin 
auffi qu'elle dife aux autres Sauuages qu'ils font bien 
nourris auec nous, pour les induire a nous donner les 
leurs quand on aura moyen de les nourrir. Cette 
pauure femme me demanda pourquoy ie [242 i.e., 
142] luy rendois fon fils? & quand elle le rameneroit? 
Ie luy refpondis que depuis la venue des vaiffeaux, ie 
I'auois toufiours veu en crainte qu'on ne I'enuoyaft en 
France, nonobftat les alTeurances que ie luy auois 


1632-33] LE/EUNE'S RELATION, i6s3 217 

yet it froze one morning in the house of the Recolet 
Fathers. The night so intensifies the coolness of the 
woods as to cause these morning frosts. We are near 
that house, and yet it did not happen with us, be- 
cause we are more exposed to the air. 

[241 i.e., 141] On the i6th of the same month of 
June, we restored one of our little children to its 
mother, your Reverence having informed us that you 
did not yet have the means to establish a seminary 
here, and consequently had not sent those who had 
been appointed to look after the instruction of these 
children. Apprehending, moreover, that this woman 
might take away her child secretly, and fly with it to 
the woods, for fear that we might send it to France, I 
preferred to restore it to her freely, that she might 
understand that, if we kept children, it was not to hold 
them by force from their parents, but for their own 
good ; also that she might say to the other Savages that 
the children were well fed with us, and so lead them 
to let us have theirs, when we have the means to care 
for them. This poor woman asked me why I [242 i.e., 
142] gave up her child, and when she should bring 
it back. I answered that, since the arrival of the 
ships, I had always noticed that she was afraid we 
would send it to France, notwithstanding the assur- 
ances I had given her to the contrary. [We did this] 
to prove to her that we were true to our word, and 
also in order to relieve her of all apprehension that 
we might not restore it to her hands ; that, as soon 
as I knew their language, and after we had built, we 
would take it again with many others. But, in fact, 
the principal reason which induced me to restore it 
to her is that I feared she might take it unknown to 
us ; and then she would have forged a thousand lies 


218 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.5 

bailie qu'il n'iroit point: & pour luy monftrer que 
nous eftions veritables, come auffi pour luy ofter 
toute crainte que nous luy remettions entre les mains : 
qu'aulTi-toft que ie f9aurois la langue, & que nous fe- 
rios baftis, que nous le reprendrions auec plufieurs 
autres. Au bout du compte la principale raifon qui m'a 
induit a luy rendre, eft que i'apprehendois qu'elle 
ne remmenafl k noftre defceu: car alors elle eut 
forge mille menteries parmy les Sauuages pour fe 
couurir: & comme ie ne fcay pas bien la langue, ie 
n'euffe peu nous iuftifier: ce qui auroit induit les 
Sauuages a nous refufer leurs enfans quand il fera 
temps [243 i.e., 143] de les demander: 6 que c'eft vn 
grad mal de ne pouuoir produire f es raifons ! de ne 
parler qu'en begayant, & par fignes ! 

Le 23. du mefme mois, le fieur du PlefQs nous en- 
uoya dire que douze ou quatorze canots de la nation 
des forciers eftoient defcendus iufques a Saindte 
Croix, quinze lieues ou enuiron au deffus de Kebec, 
quelques iours auparauant nous en anions veu def- 
cendre vne douzaine d'vne autre nation nommee la 
nation d'Iroquet, du nom de leur Capitaine; Dieu 
foit beny, puis que la crainte des Hiroquois ne les a 
point empefche de venir. Ces forciers, c'eft ainfi 
que les Frangois appellent cefte natio, pource qu'elle 
fait vne particuliere profeffion de confulter leur Ma- 
nitou, ou parler au diable. Ces forciers, dis-ie, font 
venus iufques a Kebec; I'vn deux regardant fort at- 
tentiuement [244 i.e., 144] vn petit Fran9ois qui bat- 
toit vn tambour, & s'approchant fort pres pour le mieux 
confiderer, ce petit gar9on luy donna vn coup de I'vn 
de fes baftos, & le fit faigner par la tefte a bon ef- 
cient ; aufli-toft tous ceux de fa nation qui regardoient 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 219 

among the Savages to excuse herself, and, as I do 
not know their language well, I should not have been 
able to justify ourselves! This would have caused 
the Savages to refuse their children to us when the 
time comes [243 i.e., 143] to ask them. Oh, what a 
great misfortune it is not to be able to give one's rea- 
sons, to speak only stammeringly and by signs. 

On the 23rd of the same month, sieur du Plessis 
sent word to us that twelve or fourteen canoes of the 
tribe of sorcerers had gone down as far as Sainte 
Croix, fifteen leagues or thereabouts above Kebec.^^ 
A few days before, we had seen a dozen belonging to 
another tribe called Iroquet, from the name of their 
Captain,^- also going down. God be blessed, since the 
fear of the Hiroquois did not prevent their coming. 
These sorcerers, — it is thus that the French call that 
tribe, because they make a special profession of con- 
sulting their Manitou, or talking to the devil, '*'^ — 
these sorcerers, I say, came as far as Kebec. One of 
them was looking very attentively [244 i.e., 144] at a 
little French boy who was beating a drum ; and, go- 
ing near to him so as to see him better, the little boy 
struck him a blow with one of his drumsticks, and 
made his head bleed badly. Immediately all the 
people of his tribe who were looking at the drummer, 
seeing this blow given, took offense at it. They 
went and found the French interpreter, and said to 
him: "Behold, one of thy people has wounded one 
of ours ; thou knowest our custom well ; give us pres- 
ents for this wound." As there is no government 
among the Savages, if one among them kills or 
wounds another, he is, providing he can escape, 
released from all punishment by making a few 
presents to the friends of the deceased or the wound- 


220 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 

ce tambour, voyant ce coup, s'offencerent : ils s'en vont 
trouuer le truchement Frangois, & luy difent: voila 
I'vn de tes gens qui a bleffe I'vn des noftres, tu fcais 
bien noftre couftume, fais nous des prefens pour 
cette bleffure. Come il n'y a point de police parmy 
les Sauuages, fi I'vn d'eux en tue ou bleffe vn autre, 
s'il peut euader, il en eft quitte pour quelques preses 
qu'il fait aux amis du defundt, ou de I'offenfe. 
Noftre truchement luy repartit ; toy-mefme tu fgais 
bien nos fagons de faire, quad quelqu'vn de nous fait 
mal, on le chaftie: Cet enfant a bleffe I'vn de vos 
gens, il fera [245 i.e., 145] tout maintenant foiiette en 
ta prefence. On fait venir le petit gargon; quand les 
Sauuages veirent que c'eftoit tout de bon qu'on def- 
poiiilloit ce petit batteur de Sauuages & de tambour, 
& que les verges eftoient toutes preftes, ils commen- 
ceret k prier qu'on luy pardonnaft, alleguans que 
c'eftoit vn enfant, qu'il n'auoit point d'efprit, qu'il ne 
fcauoit pas encor ce qu'il faifoit ; mais comme on le 
vouloit chaftier a toute force, I'vn d'eux fe met tout 
nud, iette fa robe fur I'enfant, s'ecriant a celuy qui 
le vouloit frapper ; touche fur moy, fi tu veux, mais 
tu ne le frapperas point : voila comme le pauure pe- 
tit euada. Toutes les nations Sauuages de ces quar- 
tiers, & du Brafil, k ce qu'on nous temoigne, ne fcau- 
roient chaftier ny voir chaftier vn enfant : que cela 
nous donnera de peine dans le deffein que nous [246 
i.e., 146] auons d'inftruire la ieuneffe! 

Le 24. du mefme mois, le Pere Daniel arriuant, 
nous apporta nouuelle de la venue du Capitaine Mori- 
eult, dans le vaiffeau duquel il auoit laiffe le Pere 
Dauoft k Tadouffac : ayant pris le deuant par le moy- 
en d'vne barque qui montoit a Kebec. 

Le dernier iour de luin, le Truchement Frangois 


3632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 221 

ed one. Our interpreter said : ' ' Thou knowest our 
custom; when any of our number does wrong we 
punish him. This child has wounded one of your 
people; he shall be [245 i.e., 145] whipped at once in 
thy presence." The little boy was brought in; and 
when they saw that we were really in earnest, that we 
were stripping this little pounder of Savages and 
drums, and that the switches were all ready, they im- 
mediately began to pray for his pardon, alleging that 
it was only a child, that he had no mind, that he did 
not know what he was doing ; but, as our people 
were nevertheless going to punish him, one of the Sav- 
ages stripped himself entirely, threw his blanket over 
the child, and cried out to him who was going to do 
the whipping : ' ' Strike me , if thou wilt, but thou shalt 
not strike him ;" and thus the little one escaped. All 
the Savage tribes of these quarters, and of Brazil, as 
we are assured, cannot chastise a child, nor see one 
chastised. How much trouble this will give us in 
carrying out our plans [246 i.e., 146] of teaching the 
young ! 

On the 24th of the same month. Father Daniel,^ ar- 
riving, brought us news of the coming of Captain 
Morieult in the ship in which he had left Father Da- 
vost ^ at Tadoussac ; he having come up ahead, by 
means of a bark which was going on to Kebec. 

On the last day of June, the French Interpreter, 
who had been a long time among these sorcerers, and 
who but recently came from them, came to see us 
with three Savages who were his guests; we gave 
them something to eat ; they recognized Father Bre- 
beuf at once, having passed the winter with him 
among the Hurons.^^ We took them into our little 
Chapel, which we have this year begun to decorate. 


222 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.5 

qui a demeure long-temps parmy ces forciers, & qui 
en eft reuenu nouuellemet, nous vint voir auec trois 
Sauuages fes hoftes, nous leur donnafmes k mager: 
lis recognurent fort bien le Pere Brebeuf , ayant hy- 
uerne auec luy aux Hurons : Nous les menafmes en 
noftre petite Chappelle, qui a commece cefle annee k 
s'embellir. L'an palfe pour tableau de I'Autel c'e- 
ftoit vn mefchat linceul, & deux petites images de 
carton : en vn mot il n'y auoit purement que ce qu'il 
falloit pour [2 47 i.e., 147] celebrer la Saincte Meffe. Or 
comme on nous a enuoye cefte ann6e quelques pe- 
tits ornemens, nous I'auons embellie le mieux que 
nous auons peu: ils regardoient tous fort attentiue- 
ment : iettans les yeux fur le ciel de I'Autel, ils veiret 
vn S. Efprit figure par vne colombe, entouree de ray- 
ons : ils demanderent fi cet oifeau n'eftoit point le ton- 
nerre, car ils croyent, comme ie remarquay l'an palle, 
que le tonnerre efb vn oifeau; & quand ils voyent 
quelque beau panache ils demandent fi ce ne font 
point des plumes du tonnerre. 

Ie leur fis demander s'ils feroient bien contens 
qu'on les allaft inftruire en leur pays, & qu'on leur 
donneroit 1' explication des images que nous leur fai- 
fions voir; ils temoignerent qu'ils en feroient bien 
contens. 

Le fecond iour de luillet, vn de nos Fran9ois fut 
alTomme lauant la lelTiue [248 i.e., 148] en vn ruilTeau 
voifin du fort, on creut que c'efkoit quelque Hiroquois ; 
on court, on cherche, on ne trouue rien. Le Pere Bre- 
beuf & le Pere de Noue eftoient proche de I'habita- 
tion, dans vne cabane de Hurons: ils accoururent au 
bruit, ils vont voir le pauure blelfe, qui n'a point 
parle, & n'a furuefcu que deux iours depuis les coups 
receus: En fin deux Sauuages Montagnaits ont don- 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ibjj 223 

Last year, for Altar-piece, we had nothing but an old 
sheet with two little card pictures upon it. In a word 
we had only what was absolutely necessary for the 
[247 i.e., 147] celebration of the Holy Mass. Now, as 
they have sent us this year a few little ornaments, we 
have decorated it as best we could. The Savages 
gazed at it with fixed attention ; raising their eyes to 
the Altar ceiling, and seeing the Holy Spirit pictured 
as a dove, surrounded by rays of light, they asked if 
that bird was not the thunder ; for they believe, as I 
wrote last year, that the thunder is a bird ; and, when 
they see beautiful plumes, they ask if they are not 
the feathers of the thunder. 

I asked if they would be glad to have some one go 
and teach them in their country, and give them an 
explanation of the pictures that we showed them. 
They said that they would be very glad. 

On the second of July, one of our Frenchmen was 
struck down while washing some clothes [248 i.e., 
148] in a brook near the fort. It was believed to 
have been the act of some Hiroquois; there was a 
great deal of running and searching, but nothing was 
found. Father Brebeuf and Father de Noue were 
near the settlement in a cabin of the Hurons. On 
hearing the noise, they ran out and went to see the 
poor man who had been wounded; he was speech- 
less and survived only two days after receiving the 
blows. Finally two Savages, Montagnaits, informed 
the French who the murderer was. He was seized 
and taken to the fort, where he confessed that he 
had committed the crime. He is a Savage of the 
petite nation.^ This is what led him to the act of 
cruelty: One of his relatives, upon going to war, 
recommended him to kill a certain Savage whom he 


224 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.5 

116 aduis aux Fran§ois du meurtrier, qui a efte pris 
& coduit au fort ; ou il a confeff e qu'il auoit fait ce 
meurtre : c'eft vn Sauuage de la petite nation. Voi- 
cy le fuiect qui Ta port6 k cette cruaute ; Vn lien pa- 
rent s'en allant a la guerre, luy recommanda de tuer 
vn certain Sauuage qu'il luy nommoit : ce miferable 
auoit fouuet tafche de le furpredre, & de le mafla- 
crer: mais voyant qu'il n'en pouuoit venir a bout, 
I'autre fe tenant toufiours [249 i.e. , 149] fur fes gardes : 
il a defcharg6 fa cholere fur le premier Fran9ois qu'il 
a trouue a I'efcart. 

Voila comme nos vies font peu alleurees parmy 
ces Barbares: mais nous trouuons Ik dedans vne 
puiffante confolation, qui nous met hors de toute 
crainte, c'eft que mourans de la main des Barbares 
en venant procurer leur falut, c'eft imiter en quelque 
fa9on noftre bon Maiftre, k qui ceux-la mefme don- 
nerent la mort, aufquels il venoit apporter la vie. 

Le 3. du mefme mois, le Pere Dauoft arriua de 
Tadoulfac, il fut contrainct de fe faire apporter dans 
vn canot par des Sauuages, voyant que le vailleau au- 
quel il eftoit ne pouuoit monter faute de vent, craignat 
d'ailleurs que les Hurons ne defcendillent, & ne s'en 
retournaffent fans luy en leur pays. Dieu foit glori- 
fie [250 i.e., 150] pour iamais, qui nous a raffemblez 
tous en noftre petite maifonette, auec vne grande ioye 
& vn grad defir de luy offrir nos vies pour fon feruice. 

Le 4. Louys Amantacha Huro qui a efte baptif^ en 
France, & inflruit par nos Peres, & qui auroit fait 
merueille en fon pays s'il n'eut efte pris des Anglois, 
fe vint confeller & communier en noftre petite Cha- 
pelle. II y auoit deux iours qu'il eftoit defcendu k 
Kebec, nous venant vifiter des le commencement de 
fon arriu6e, ie I'inuitay k penfer vn petit a fa con- 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j6s3 225 

named. This wretch had often tried to surprise and 
kill him ; but, seeing that he had not accomplished it, 
the other being always [249 i.e., 149] on the lookout, 
he vented his wrath upon the first Frenchman whom 
he found alone. 

This shows you how unsafe our lives are among 
these Barbarians ; but we find therein exceeding con- 
solation, which relieves us from all fear; it is that 
dying at the hands of these Barbarians, whose .salva- 
tion we come to seek, is in some degree following the 
example of our good Master, who was put to death 
by those to whom he came to bring life. 

On the 3rd of the same month Father Davost arrived 
from Tadoussac. He was forced to have himself 
brought down in a canoe by some Savages, as his ves- 
sel could not come up the river, because there was no 
wind; he also feared that the Hurons might come 
down, and return to their country without him. May 
God be forever [250 i.e., 1 50] praised, who has brought 
us together in our own little cottage, in great joy, and 
with a strong desire to give our lives to his service. 

On the 4th, Louys Amantacha,^^ a Huron who was 
baptized in France, and taught by our Fathers, and 
who would have done wonders in his country if he 
had not been captured by the English, came to con- 
fession and communion at our little Chapel. Two 
days before, he had arrived at Kebec, coming to see 
us immediately. I asked him to think about his 
conscience a little; he promised me that he would, 
and he has kept his word. 

On the 5 th, three Captains of different tribes came 
to see us. We showed them several pictures, trying 
to make them understand what they represented. We 
gave them something to eat and then I made each 


226 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 

fcience, il me promit qu'il le feroit, aufli n'y a-il pas 
manque. 

Le 5. trois Capitaines de diuerfes nations nous 
vindrent voir, nous leur moftrafmes quelques ta- 
bleaux, tafchant de leur faire entendre ce qu'ils re- 
prefentoient, nous les fifmes manger, puis ie leur fis 
prefent h. [251 i.e., 151] chacun d'vn chappelet de raf- 
fade, ils eftoient les plus contens du monde ; ie leurs fis 
le meilleur accueil qui me fut poffible f cachant que nos 
Peres qui vont aux Hurons, deuoient palTer par leur 
pays. 

Le 10. on nous donna aduis fur le foir qu'vn petit 
Sauuage eftoit malade k la mort, il y auoit vne bonne 
demie lieue de chemin h. faire depuis noftre maifon 
iufques k fa cabane. La nuic5t approchoit, la mort du 
dernier Fran9ois a iette quelque defiance dans I'efprit 
des autres, fi bien qu'on fe tient vn peu fur fes gardes : 
nonobftant cela, ie ne pouuois permettre que ce 
pauure petit fut abandonne : i'auois defir de Taller ba- 
ptif er moy-mefme, mais ayant efte indifpofe, & reflenty 
quelques acces de fieure depuis quelque teps : nos Peres 
trouuerent plus h. propos que le Pere Brebeuf y allafl. 
II part [252 i.e., 152] done auec le Pere de Noue 
dans vn canot, ils rencontrerent vn Fran§ois aupres 
des Cabanes, qui leur dit que ces Sauuages ne vou- 
loient point monftrer leur enfant aux Fran9ois, cela 
ne les arrefte point, ils entrent dans la Cabane, & le 
Pere Brebeuf qui iargonne aufli bien que moy en 
Sauuage, leur fit entendre le mieux qu'il put la caufe 
de fa venue : le Pere de Noue courut incontinent vers 
le Truchement, pour le fupplier de venir faire vn 
tour vers ce malade. Come il efl fort honnefle 
homme & bien vertueux, il quitte fon foupper, & 
s'en vient trouuer les Peres, qui le fupplient de de- 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6ss 227 

one [251 i.e., 15 1] a present of a rosary of glass beads. 
They were the happiest men in the world. I gave 
them as warm a reception as I could, knowing that 
our Fathers who were going to the Hurons would 
pass through their country. 

On the loth, toward evening, we received news 
that a little Savage was sick unto death. It was a 
good half league from our house to his cabin. Night 
was approaching; the death of the last Frenchman 
had caused some fear in the minds of the others, so 
much so that we were on our guard. Notwithstanding 
that, I could not suffer this poor little one to be aban- 
doned. I wished to go and baptize it myself; but, 
being indisposed, and having felt for some time a 
slight attack of fever, our Fathers thought it best that 
Father Brebeuf should go. So he started [252 i.e., 
152] off with Father de None in a canoe. They en- 
countered a Frenchman near the Cabins, who said that 
these Savages did not want to show their child to 
the French. That did not stop them. They entered 
the Cabin, and Father Brebeuf, who can jargon as 
well as I can in Savage, made them understand as 
best he could the cause of his visit. Father de None 
ran hurriedly to the Interpreter, to beg him to come 
and do a service for the sick. As he was a very hon- 
est and worthy man, he left his supper and joined 
the Fathers, who besought him to inform the Sav- 
ages why they had come so late ; that it was because 
they loved that little child, and that if it died with- 
out baptism it would not go to Heaven ; on the con- 
trary, if it were baptized it would be forever happy. 
They asked [253 i.e., 153] also if its parents would 
not be very glad to have it baptized. The mother 
answered that for her part she would be very well 


228 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.5 

clarer aux Sauuage pourquoy ils venoiet li tard : f ca- 
uoir eft qu'ils aimoient ce petit enfant, & que s'il 
mouroit fans baptefme, qu'il n'iroit point an Ciel : au 
contraire fi on le baptifoit, qu'il feroit toufiours bien- 
heureux. lis demandent en [253 i.e., 153] outre fi fes 
parens ne feroient pas bie contens qu'on le baptifaft : 
la mere refpond que pour elle qu'elle en eftoit tres- 
contente, que fon mary eftoit yure, & qu'il dormoit 
dans vne autre Cabane. Le Pere paffe outre, & 
demande fi au cas qu'il mourut, ils ne voudroiet pas 
bien I'apporter en noftre maifon, pour I'enterrer 
en noftre Cimetiere: & f'il retournoit en fante, fi 
elle ne voudroit pas bien nous le doner pour I'in- 
ftruire : elle refpond que fon fils eftoit mort, & que 
s'il rechappoit, qu'auffi-toft qu'il pourroit marcher 
(car il n'a enuiron que fix mois) qu'elle nous I'ame- 
neroit. Vn Sauuage entedat cela, courut voir le pere 
de I'enfant; & I'eueilla; luy ayant rapporte tout ce 
qu'auoient dit les Peres, il refpodit; encore que ie 
fois yure, i'entend bie tout ce que tu dis: va t'en, 
& dis h. ces Peres qu'ils baptifent mo fils? ie fcay 
[254 i.e., 154] bien qu'ils ne luy feront point de mal; 
s'il meurt, c'eft qu'il eft mortel; s'il rechappe, ie 
leur donneray pour I'inftruire. Le MelTager rap- 
porta la nouuelle, & le Pere Brebeuf enuoye querir 
de I'eau k la riuiere, cependant le Pere de Noue 
& le Truchement fe mettent "k genoux, recitent 
I'Hymne Veni Creator; & le Pere Brebeuf baptife ce 
pauure petit, luy donnant le nom de Frangois, en 
I'honeur de S. Frangois Xauier: difant aux parens 
que d'orefnauant il le falloit nommer Fran§ois, & que 
s'il mourroit, qu'il iroit tout droit au Ciel, oii il fe- 
roit k iamais bien-heureux. Ces pauures gens te- 
moignerent vn tres-grand contentement, rei'terans 


1 632 - 33] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1633 229 

pleased, but that her husband was drunk, and asleep 
in another Cabin. The Father continued, and asked, if 
the child should die, if they would not bring it to our 
house and bury it in our Cemetery ; and, if it were 
restored to health, if they would not give it to us to be 
educated. She answered that her son was dead ; but 
that if he revived, as soon as he should be able to 
walk (for he was only about six months old) she 
would bring him to us. A Savage, who heard this, 
ran to the father of the child and aroused him ; having 
reported to him all that the Fathers had said, he 
answered: " Though I am drunk, I understand very 
well all that thou sayest; go and bid those Fathers 
baptize my son; I know [254 i.e., 154] very well that 
they will do him no harm ; if he dies, it is because he 
is mortal ; if he recovers, I shall give him to them to 
be educated." The Messenger brought the news, and 
Father Brebeuf sent to the river for water, while Fa- 
ther de Noue and the Interpreter knelt down, reciting 
the hymn Veni Creator ; and Father Brebeuf baptized 
this poor little one, giving him the name of Fran- 
9ois, in honor of St. Francois Xavier, telling the par- 
ents that they must hereafter call him Fran§ois, and 
that if he died he would go straight to Heaven, where 
he would be forever blest. These poor people gave 
evidence of their great happiness, often repeating the 
name "Frangois, Fran9ois," and showing that they 
had taken a great deal of pleasure in what we had 
done. One of the Savages in the Cabin said that if 
the Savage who had recently killed [255 i.e., 155] the 
Frenchman, belonged to his tribe, he would have 
prayed the Captain of the French to kill him, wish- 
ing to give a proof of the love that they bore to all 
Frenchmen. In short, the Fathers returned home at 


230 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 


fouuent ce nom Fran9ois, Fran§ois: & faifans voir 
qu'ils auoiet pris vn fmgulier plaifir en cette action. 
L'vn des Sauuages de la Cabane fe mit k dire que fi 
le Sauuage qui a tue le [255 i.e., 155] Fran9ois dernier 
mort eftoit de leur nation qu'il auroyent prie le Capi- 
taine des Frangois de le faire mourir voulat doner 
vne preuue de Tamour qu'il portoit a tous les Fra9ois. 
Enfin les Peres retournerent h, dix heures du foir bien 
ioyeux, & comme ie demandois au Pere Brebeuf s'il 
n'eftoit pas bien content d'auoir fi bien conclud la 
iourn^e: helas! dit-il, ie viendrois tout expres de 
France, & trauerferois tout I'Ocean pour gagner vne 
petite ame k N. Seigneur. 

II m'adioufta que le Pere de I'enfant s'appelloit la 
Grenouille, alors ie le cognus fort bien, c'eft vn Capi- 
taine des Algonquains ; il nous eft venu voir, ie luy 
ay quelquefois parle de Dieu, i'en fais mentio cy- 
deffus : c'eft luy qui me demandoit combien ie vou- 
lois d'enfans, & qui s'eftonna quand ie luy repartis 
que nous en voulions vingt, & bien dauantage [256 
i.e., 156] quand nous les pourrions nourrir. 

Au refte, c'eft chofe eftrange combien les Sauuages 
font addonn^s h. I'yurongnerie, nonobftat les defenfes 
du fleur de Champlain, il y a toufiours quelqu'vn qui 
leur traite, ou vend quelque bouteille en cachette : fi 
bien qu'on ne voit qu'yurongnes hurler parmy eux,. 
fe battre & fe quereler. Le Truchement m'a dit que 
les Sauuages de la nation de celuy qui eft prifonnier 
au fort pour auoir tue ce Fran§ois, luy reprochoiet 
que c'eftoit I'eau de vie, & non ce Sauuage, qui auoit 
comis ce meurtre; voulant dire qu'il eftoit yure 
quand il fit ce coup : Tiens ton vin & ton eau de vie 
en prifon, difent-ils, ce font tes boiflons qui font tout 
le mal, & non pas nous autres. lis penfent s'eftre 


1632 - 33] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1633 231 

ten o'clock at night very happy; and when I asked 
Father Brebeuf if he were not glad to have ended 
the day so well: "Ah!" said he, "I would come ex- 
pressly from France, and cross the great Ocean, to 
reclaim one little soul for Our Lord." 

He added that the Father of the child was called "la 
Grenouille" [the Frog]. Then I knew him very well, 
as a Captain of the Algonquains. He had been to 
see us, and I had spoken to him sometimes of God. 
I have mentioned him above. It was he who asked 
me how many children I wanted, and who was aston- 
ished when I replied that we wanted twenty, and 
many more [256 i.e., 156] when we should be able to 
feed them. 

Further, it is very strange how these Savages are 
given to drunkenness. In spite of the prohibition of 
sieur de Champlain, there is always some one who 
trades with them, or who will sell them a bottle now 
and then in secret. So that drunkards are continual- 
ly seen among them, shouting, fighting, and quarrel- 
ing. The Interpreter told me that the Savages of 
the tribe to which the prisoner in the fort belonged 
who had killed the Frenchman, told him reproach- 
fully that it was brandy and not that Savage who had 
committed this murder, meaning to say that he was 
drunk when he struck the blow. ' * Put thy wine and 
thy brandy in prison, ' ' they say : " It is thy drinks that 
do all the evil, and not we." They believe them- 
selves to be entirely excused from the crimes they 
commit, when they say that they were drunk. I do 
not readily believe [257 i.e., 157] in this, because 
they feign this madness very well when they wish to 
hide their malice. 

To return to this newly baptized child : it died the 


232 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.0 

bien exctifez du mal qu'ils ont fait, quand ils difent 
qu'ils efloient yures: ie ne voudrois pas les croire 
aif^ment [257 i.e., 157] en ce poindt, car ils feignent 
fort bien cette manie quand ils veulent couurir leur 
malice. 

Pour retourner a c6t enfant nouuellement baptif6, 
il mourut le lendemain au f oir : & le iour fuiuant le 
Pere Brebeuf allant au fort, veit les Sauuages qui 
trauerfoient le grand fleuue S. Laurens, pour le por- 
ter en terre k I'autre port. Ie croy qu'ils ne I'appor- 
terent pas chez nous pour auoir plus de liberte de 
faire feftin fur fa foffe, felo leur couftume. Quafi ^ 
mefme temps vn ieune gar9on huguenot qui a palle 
dans les vaiffeaux, & qui deuoit retourner auec eux, 
s'eft noye tout deuant le fort, eftrange effedt de la 
prouidence & predeftination du bon Dieu ! vnus affu- 
metur, alter relinquetiir. 

Le Pere Brebeuf ne lailTa point d'entrer dans la Ca- 
bane d'ou on auoit tire c6t enfant mort. II y en [258 
i.e., 158] trouua encorvn autre malade: il parla de le 
baptifer, fa grand'mere refpondit; ie fuis contente 
que tu le baptife, pourueu que tu le gueriffe. Le 
Truchement des Algonquains qui fe fait bien en- 
tendre des Montagnaits fe trouuant Ik, le Pere leur fit 
vn petit difcours du Baptefme, & de fes eff edts : Vous 
ne recherchez, leur difoit-il, que le corps, & nous re- 
cherchons Tame, qui efb purifiee par ce Sacrement, 
faifant approprier leurs paroles le mieux qu'il pou- 
uoit k nos myfteres. Le Baptefme guarit toufiours 
Tame, ne fait point de mal au corps: ains au con- 
traire luy rend fouuent la fante. lis demanderent 
combien il falloit d'eau pour baptifer: Le Pere ref- 
pond qu'on n'auoit point d'efgard k la quantity. La 
conclufion fut que les pares prirent eux-mefmes Ten- 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, idjs 23» 

next evening; and on the following day Father Bre- 
beuf , going to the fort, saw the Savages crossing the 
great St. Lawrence river, to bury it on the other side. 
I believe they did not bring it to us, because they 
wanted to enjoy more liberty in feasting over the 
grave, according to their custom. About the same 
time, a young huguenot boy who came over in the 
ship, and who was to return with them, was drowned 
right in front of the fort. Strange effect of the provi- 
dence and the predestination of the good God ! Unus 
assujuetur y alter relinquetur. 

Father Brebeuf lost no time in going to the Cabin 
from which they had taken the dead child. Here he 
[258 i.e., 158] found another sick child; he spoke of 
baptizing him, when the grandmother answered: "I 
shall be satisfied to have thee baptize him, provided 
that thou canst cure him." The Interpreter of the 
Algonquains, who makes himself readily understood 
by the Montagnaits, being present, the Father gave 
them a little talk upon Baptism and its effects. ' ' You 
care only for the body," said he, "we care for the 
soul, which is purified by this Sacrament," adapting 
their words as best he could to our mysteries. "Bap- 
tism always cures the soul, and does no harm to the 
body, but on the contrary often restores it to health." 
They asked how much water it took for baptism. 
The Father answered that no attention was paid to 
the quantity. The result was that the parents them- 
selves took the child, and prepared it to receive this 
blessing. [259 i.e., 159] But the Father, thinking 
that it was not in danger of death, did not wish to 
hasten matters. 

The next day Father de Noue and I went to see 
the child. Our fear lest he should die without being 


234 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.5 

fant, & le difpoferent pour receuoir cette benedidlion : 
[259 i.e., 159] mais le Pere iugeant qu'il n'eftoit pas 
en dager de mort, ne fe voulut point hafter. 

Le lendemain no^* rallafmes voir le Pere de None 
& moy, la crainte que nous auios qu'il ne mourut fans 
eftre baptife, nous fit partir par vn temps tout k fait 
violent : les vents & la pluye f embloient vouloir tout 
rompre, & tout noyer. le voulois aulTi aller entendre 
de confeffion vn Bengalois qui auoit efl6 bleffe, & 
qui me demandoit: c'eft vn ieune homme amene des 
Indes Orientales, & fait Chreftien en Frace, qui a 
hyuerne icy auec nous. le le veis, & le cofolay le 
mieux que ie pus. Pour le petit Sauuage m'eflant pre- 
f ent^ k I'vne des portes de fa Cabane, on me dit aouef- 
fe, retire toy : mais ayans ouy ma voix, ils me dirent 
que ie palTalle par I'autre porte : i'entre done pendant 
que le Pere de Noue cherchoit le [260 i.e., 160] Tru- 
chement. Vne femme m'arrefta au premier pas, me 
difant, appitou, fieds toy Ik. Ie luy refponds, ouy, ie 
veux voir I'enfant. attend, attend, me dit-elle, tu le 
verras. Le plus grad forcier d'entr'eux, k ce que me 
dit le Truchement, qui arriua bien-toft apres, chan- 
toit & fouffloit cet enfant pour le guerir. Ils auoient 
fait vn petit retrenchement oii eftoit I'enfat, i'en 
voulus deux ou trois fois approcher, mais on ne me 
le voulut pas permettre. Les Sauuages m'arreftoient 
h. tous coups. Attendant que ce beau medecin eut 
traits fon malade, I'enfant eftoit nud comme la main, 
couche dans vn petit berceau d'ecorce, fur de la 
poudre de bois pourry. II auoit vne grofCe fi^vre qui 
le brufloit, & ce charlatan pour le guerir battoit & 
toumoit vn inftrument remply de petites pierres, 
fait iuftement comme vn tambour de [261 i.e., 161] 
Bafque, II chantoit auec cela k gorge defployee : en 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 235 

baptized made us set out in the midst of very stormy- 
weather; the wind and rain seemed bent on break- 
ing and drowning everything. I also wanted to go 
and hear the confession of a Bengalese, who had been 
wounded, and had sent for me. He is a young man 
brought from the East Indies, who had been con- 
verted to Christianity in France, and has been pass- 
ing the winter here with us. I saw him, and con- 
soled him as best I possibly could. As to the little 
Savage, having presented myself at one of the doors 
of the Cabin, they said to me: aoiiesse, " go away." 
But, having heard my voice, they told me to come in 
by the other door; I went in, while Father de Noue 
was seeking the [260 i.e., 160] Interpreter. A wom- 
an stopped me at the first step, saying, appitou, "sit 
thee down there." I answered her, "yes, I want to 
see the child." "Wait, wait," said she tome, "thou 
shalt see him." The greatest sorcerer they have 
among them, according to the Interpreter, who ar- 
rived shortly afterward, sang and blew upon the child 
to cure him. They had made a little retreat where 
the child was. Two or three times I tried to get near 
it, but was not permitted. The Savages stopped 
me every time. I waited until this fine doctor had 
treated his patient; the child, naked as one's hand, 
lay in a cradle of bark, upon pulverized rotten wood. 
He was burning with a high fever ; and this charla- 
tan, to cure him, was beating upon and whirling 
around an instrument full of little stones, made ex- 
actly like a [261 i.e., 161] tambourine. With all this 
he howled immoderately. In a word, he and his 
companion, in order to cure this little boy of a fever, 
made enough noise to give one to a healthy man. 
The sorcerer approached the patient, and blew all 


236 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 

vn mot luy & so copagnon pour ofter la fieure a ce petit 
gar9on faifoient vn bruit capable de la donner ^ vn 
home bie fain. Le forcier s'approchoit du malade, le 
fouffloit par tout le corps, k ce que ie pouuois coniec- 
turer, car ie ne le voiois pas, mais i'entendois fon fouf- 
fle tire du profond de reftomach : il battoit ce tam- 
bour a f es oreilles, cependant il y auoit vn grand filence 
parmy les autres Sauuages qui eftoient dans la mefme 
cabane. Sa medecine donnee il m'appelle, & me dit 
que ie ville I'enfant, & que ie luy en diffe mon aduis : 
pour luy qu'il croioit qu'il avoit ie ne f9ay quoy de 
noir dans le corps, & que c'eftoit cela qui le faifoit 
malade, voila le refultat de ce grad bruit. Ie m'ap- 
proche, ie touche le poulx de I'enfant, ie luy trouue 
vne groffe fieure, & leurs dy qu'il auoit vne maladie 
[262 i.e., 162] que nous appellions la fieure, & qu'il le 
falloit laifler repofer, & non pas le tuer auec ce grand 
bruit qui augmentoit fa maladie, & qui depuis peu 
i'auois eu quelques acces de fieure, & que le repos 
m'auoit guery. Le forcier me repart, cela eft bon 
pour vous autres, mais pour nous c'elt ainfi que nous 
gueriffons les malades. Helas que les hommes qui ne 
cognoiflent pas Dieu font ignorans, voire mefme dans 
les chofes naturelles! Pour coclure ce point, nous 
nous en retournafmes par eau comme nous eftions 
venus, fans baptifer I'enfant, ne iugeant pas fa mala- 
die mortelle, la fiebure quoy que bien grande eftat 
intermittente. 

A quelques iours de la ie le retournay voir, fes pa- 
rents nous ayans fignifie qu'ils eftoient bien aifes que 
nous y allaffions, i'y rencontray encor vn forcier qui le 
fouffloit, mais [263 i.e., 163] celuy cy n'entendoit pas fi 
bien fon meftier que I'autre, auffi eft il plus ieune, il 
me laifia voir fes beaux myfteres, il battoit fon tam- 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s3 237 

over the body, as I conjectured, for I could not see 
what he was doing, but I heard his breath drawn 
from the depths of his stomach. He beat the tam- 
bourine in the child's ears, during which there was 
great silence among the other Savages who were in 
the same cabin. His medicine having been given, 
he called me and told me I might then see the child, 
and that I should give him my opinion ; as to him, 
he believed that the child had something or other 
black in his body, and it was that which made him 
sick. Behold the result of this gfreat noise. I ap- 
proach, I feel the pulse of the child, I discover a 
raging fever ; and I tell him that he has a sickness 
[262 i.e., 162] which we call fever, that he must be 
left to rest, and not be killed by this great noise 
which makes him worse; that recently I had an at- 
tack of fever, and that rest had cured me. The sor- 
cerer replied : ' * That is very good for you people ; 
but, for us, it is thus that we cure our sick." Alas! 
how ignorant are they who do not know God, indeed 
even in natural things! To end this story, we re- 
turned by water as we came, without baptizing the 
child, believing that the disease was not mortal ; the 
fever, although very high, being intermittent. 

After a few days I returned to see him, his par- 
ents having made known to us that they would be 
very glad if we should come. Again I met a sorcerer 
who was blowing upon the body, but [263 i.e., 163] 
this one did not understand his trade so well as the 
other ; he was also younger, and allowed me to see his 
beautiful mysteries. He beat his tambourine in the 
ears of this poor little child, who was almost choking 
with tears. He blew upon his head, with a whistling 
sound made between his teeth ; he turned his tam- 


238 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.5 

hour aux oreilles de ce pauure petit qui s'6gorgeoit de 
pleurer, il luy fouffloit fur la tefte auec vn fifflement 
qu'il faifoit bruire entre fes dents: il tournoit fon 
tambour de9a dela a fes cofles, derriere fon dos, 
puis le ramenoit fur 1' enfant; En vn mot il fe tuoit 
de bien faire, & ne faifoit rien qui vaille. II n'en- 
tendoit rien k faire le iongleur "k comparaifon de 
I'autre. C'eft chofe eftrage que les Sauuages aient 
tat de creance k ces charlatans ! ie ne f 9ay comme le 
menfonge efb plus adore que la verite ! Bref ce petit 
enfant fe gueriffant, fon pere & fa mere nous font 
venus voir, & I'ot apporte auec eux, nous remercians 
par cette vifite de la peine que nous anions pris 
pour luy. 

[264 i.e., 164] I'en ay efte voir d'autres de puis au 
dela du grand fieuue Sainct Laurens, ou vne partie 
des Sauuages s'eftoient cabanes. Si ie continue cet 
exercice les meres me tiendront bie toft pour medecin 
des petits enfans, car elles me difent defia leurs mala- 
dies, mais nous f ommes appointes bien contraires : ils 
penfent feulement aux corps, & nous k I'ame. 

Le 27 de luillet Louys de Sain(5te Foy furnomm6 
des Sauuages Amantacha, duquel i'ay parl6 cy delTus, 
retourna vers le fieur de Champlain qui I'auoit enuoi6 
au deuat de la grofle trouppe de Hurons qu'on atten- 
doit de iour en iour : il en eftoit defia venu quelques 
canots en diuers iours tantoft fept ou huit, & tantoft 
dix ou douze k la fois, mais en fin le 28. de luillet il en 
eft arriu6 cent quarate ou enuiron tout a la fois qui 
portoient bie cinq cens Hurons, d'autres difent [265 
i.e., 165] 700 auec leurs marchadifes. Les Sauvages 
de rifle & les Algoquains, qui font deux nations qu'on 
rencontre venant des Hurons k Kebec, les auoient 
voulu diffuader de venir iufques aux Franfois, difans 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 239 

bourine on this side and that side of his ribs, behind 
his back, and then brought it again over the child. 
In a word, he nearly killed himself with exertion, 
but accomplished nothing of any account. He knew 
nothing at all about playing the juggler, compared 
with the other. Strange that the Savages have so 
much faith in these charlatans ! I do not know why 
falsehood is worshipped more than truth. In short, 
this little child being cured, its father and mother 
came to see us and brought it with them, thanking 
us by this visit for the trouble we had taken for it. 

[264 i.e., 164] Since then, I have been to see others 
beyond the great Saint Lawrence river, where a com- 
pany of Savages were encamped. If I continue this 
business, the mothers will soon regard me as the lit- 
tle children's physician, for they already come to me 
with their ailments, but we have a much higher call- 
ing ; they think only of the body, and we of the soul. 

On the 27th of July, Louys de Saincte Foy, sur- 
named by the Savages Amantacha,^* of whom I have 
spoken above, came back to sieur de Champlain, who 
had sent him to meet a great crowd of Hurons who 
were expected from day to day. Already a few ca- 
noes had arrived on different days, sometimes seven 
or eight, sometimes ten or twelve at a time ; but at 
last, on the 28th of July, there arrived about one 
hundred and forty all at once, carrying easily five hun- 
dred Hurons — or [265 i.e., 165] 700, as some say — 
with their merchandise. The Island Savages^" and 
the Algonquains, two tribes on the route from the 
Hurons to Kebec, had tried to dissuade them from 
visiting the French, saying we would do them a bad 
turn on account of the death of one Brusl^,^ whom 
they had killed ; and that an Algonquain of the petite 


240 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.5 

qu'on leur ioueroit vn mauuais party a caufe de la 
mort d'un nomme Brufle qu'ils auoient tue, & qu'vn 
Algonquain de la petite nation aiant tue vn Fran9ois, 
on I'auoit pris prifonnier, & que c'eftoit fait de fa vie, 
qu'on en feroit autant a quelque Huron. Leur delTein 
efloit de tirer toute la marchandife de ces Hurons k 
tres-bas prix pour la venir par apres traiter eux 
mefmes foit aux Fran9ois, foit aux Anglois. Louys 
Amantacha fe rencontrant la deffus affeura ceux de fa 
nation de la bienueillance des Fra9ois, proteftant qu'il 
eftoit content qu'on le mit a mort au cas que les Fran- 
9ois ne leurs filfent vn tres-bon [266 i.e., 166] accueil. 
Que pour Brufle qui auoit efte maffacre, on ne le te- 
noit point pour Fran9ois, puis qu'il auoit quitt6 fa 
nation pour fe mettre au feruice de 1' Anglois. En- 
fin il a fi bien fait que fix ou fept cens Hurons font 
venus iufques a Kebec ; v;n plus grand nombre s' eftoit 
mis en chemin, mais les vns s'en font retourn6s pour 
la peur qu'on leur donnoit, les autres pour auoir 
iou6 & perdu leurs marchandifes, car les Sauuages 
font grands ioueurs, & quelques-vns d'entre eux ne 
viennent a la traite auec les Fran9ois que pour iouer, 
d'autres pour voir, quelques vns pour derober, & les 
plus fages & les plus riches pour trafiquer. le ne 
croy pas qu'il y ait nation fous le ciel plus portee au 
larcin que la Huronne, il faut toufiours auoir les 
yeux fur leurs pieds & fur leurs mains quad ils en- 
trent en quelque endroit. On dit qu'ils derobent [267 
i.e., 167] des pieds aufli bien que des mains. I'en re- 
gardois vn dies nous qui auoit iette les yeux fur vn des 
outils de la menuiferie de noftre frere, la penfee me 
venant qu'il s'en pourroit faifir, ie le veillay tant 
que ie peu, mais il fut plus adroit k prendre que moy "k 
regarder. II cache I'outil fi dextrement que ie ne luy 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 241 

nation, having killed a Frenchman, had been taken 
prisoner, and had been condemned to death ; also that 
the same would be done to some Huron. Their de- 
sign was to get all the merchandise from these Hu- 
rons at a very low price, in order afterwards to come 
themselves and trade it, with either the French or 
the English. Louys Amantacha, meeting them 
above, assured those of his tribe of the good feeling 
of the French toward them, declaring that they might 
put him to death if the French did not give them a 
very warm [266 i.e., 166] welcome. As to Brusl^, 
who had been murdered, he was not looked upon as 
a Frenchman, because he had left his nation and 
gone over to the service of the English. In short, 
he convinced them so thoroughly, that six or seven 
hundred Hurons came to Kebec; a greater number 
were on the way, but some of them went back be- 
cause they had become frightened, and others be- 
cause they had lost their merchandise in gambling. 
For these Savages are great gamblers, and some of 
them come to trade with the French for this purpose 
alone ; others come to look on, some to steal, and the 
wisest and the richest to trade. I do not believe that 
there is a people under heaven more given to stealing 
than the Hurons. It is necessary to have your eye 
both on their feet and on their hands, when they 
enter a place. It is said that they steal [267 i.e., 167] 
with their feet as well as with their hands. I saw 
one, at our house, casting his eyes on one of the car- 
penter's tools of our brother. Thinking he might 
take it, I watched him as well as I could, but he was 
more skillful in taking than I was in watching. He 
concealed the tool so adroitly that I did not see him 
make any movement. But seeing that the place 


242 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.5 

vy faire aucune ac5lion. Voiant neantmoins la place 
vuide ie me doubtay de ce qui eftoit, i'en donnay 
aduis au Pere Brebeuf qui entend affes bien leur 
langue : il accofte mon homme qui voulut nier le fait 
au commencement, mais en fin il cofeffe la debte, rend 
fon larcin en riant, tant il eftoit contrit de fon peche. 
Le Pere de Noue en furprit vn autre qui enleuoit 
vn petit morceau de fer blanc qui feruoit d'aiguille 
'k vn mefchant quadran que i'ay trac6, vn autre d6- 
roba vne lettre par la feneftre de la chambre du Pere 
MalTe. [268 i.e., 168] prendre & n'eftre point decou- 
uert eftant vne marque d'efprit parmy eux. L'vtilit6 
n'eft pas toufiours le feul obiet de leur larcin. Vn 
Fran9ois aiant ouy dire que les Sauuages de cette na- 
tion eftoient grands larrons, fe moqua de leur fubti- 
lit6, difant qu'il leur donnoit tout ce qu'ils luy pren- 
droient : quelques vns I'allerent voir, il leur pref enta 
"k boire, pour toutes adtions de graces ils luy enle- 
uerent fa tace, mais fi finement qu'il ne s'en prit point 
garde qu'ils ne fuffent partis. 

Ie ne fcaurois dire comme cette nation porte les 
cbeueux, chacii fuit fa fantaifie : les vns les ont longs 
& pendans d'vn cofte comme les femmes, & courts & 
retroullez de I'autre, fi bien qu'ils ont vne oreille ca- 
ch^e, & I'autre defcouuerte. Quelques-vns font iufte- 
ment rafez a I'endroit ou les autres portent vne longue 
[269 i.e., 169] mouftache. I'en ay veu qui auoient vne 
grande raye toute rafee, qui leur trauerfoit toute la 
tefte pafTant par le f ommet & venant rendre au milieu 
du front : d'autres portent au mefme endroit comme 
vne queue de cheueux qui paroift releuee ^ caufe qu'ils 
fe rafent de part & d'autre de cette queue. O que 
I'efprit des bommes eft foible ! II y a plus de quatre 
mille ans qu'ils cherchent a s'embellir & ^ s'orner, & 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j6s3 243 

was empty, I suspected what had happened. I told 
Father Brebeuf of it; and, as he understands their 
language tolerably well, he spoke to my man, who 
tried to deny the theft at first, but at last confessed 
and laughingly returned the property, showing how 
contrite he was over his sin. Father de Noue de- 
tected another, who stole a little piece of tin which 
served as a needle to a poor quadrant that I had fash- 
ioned ; another stole a letter through the window of 
Father Masse's room. [268 i.e., 168] To steal, and 
not to be discovered, is a sign of superior intelligence 
among them. Utility is not always the sole object 
of their thefts. A Frenchman, having heard that 
the Savages of this tribe [the Hurons] were great 
thieves, sneered at their boasted cunning, saying 
that he would give them all they could steal from 
him ; some of them called upon him and he gave them 
something to drink ; all their thanks was to steal his 
cup, and so shrewdly did they do it that he did not 
miss it until they were gone. 

I could scarcely tell you how the people of this tribe 
wear their hair; each one follows his own fancy. 
Some wear it long and hanging over to one side like 
women, and short and tied up on the other, so skill- 
fully that one ear is concealed and the other uncov- 
ered. Some of them are shaved just where the 
others wear a long [269 i.e., 169] moustache.^'* I have 
seen some who had a large strip, closely shaved, ex- 
tending across the head, passing from the crown to 
the middle of the forehead. Others wear in the same 
place a sort of queue of hair, which stands out be- 
cause they have shaved all around it. Oh, how 
weak is the spirit of man ! For over four thousand 
years he has been seeking to ornament and beautify 


244 LES RELATIONS DES jASUTTES [Vol.5 

toutes les nations de la terre n'ont pen encore conuenir 
au point de la beaute & de Tornement. 

Le 29 du mefme mois de luillet ayant appris que 
les Hurons deuoyent tenir confeil oil il fe debnoit 
agir de nos Peres qui font deflinez pour leur pais, 
nous les allafmes voir le Pere Brebeuf & moy. le 
trouuay Louys Amantacha au fort, ie m'entretins 
auec luy de chofes bonnes : & paffant [270 i.e., 170] de 
difcours en difcours, il me temoigna qu'il efloit tres- 
contet de ce que nos Peres alloy ent fecourir fa natio. 
II s'efl employ^ pour trouuer qui les embarquaft, ou 
pluftot pour les choifir ; car vn grand nombre s'of- 
froit au Pere Brebeuf, luy-mefme en vouloit prendre 
vn auec foy. II nous promet merueille, & pour tef- 
moigner le fentiment qu'il a du fecours que Voft. 
Reu. enuoye aux Hurons fes compatriotes, il luy ref- 
crit de fa propre main, m'alleurat qu'il retournera 
I'an qui vient k Kebec pour mener en fon pais les 
autres Peres qu'6 y enuoyera. C'eft trop peu (dit-il) 
de trois Religieux pour tant de milles ames qui fe 
trouuent parmy nous. II me demadoit vn liuret d'i- 
mages des myfteres de noftre Foy, pour les faire 
voir k ceux de fa nation, ^ fin de prendre de Ik occa- 
fion de les inftruire : mais comme ie n'en auois point, 
il [271 i.e., 171] me dit qu'il en efcriroit au fieur le 
Maiftre. I'ay mis les lettres qu'il enuoye k V. R. auec 
celles-cy, ie prie Dieu qu'elle les re§oiue toutes. Ie 
croy que ce ieune homme luy efl bie cogneu : il a eft6 
conduit en France par nos Peres, baptife k Rouen 
par leur entremife : Monfieur le Due de Longueuille 
fut fon parain, & Madame de Villars fa maraine : il 
demeura entre les mains des Anglois par la prife 
qu'ils firent de la flotte Frangoife & de tout ce pais 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, idjs 245 


himself, and all the nations of the world have not yet 
been able to agree as to what is true beauty and 
adornment. 

On the 29th of the same month of July, having 
learned that the Hurons were to hold a council, when 
they would take some action concerning our Fathers 
who were destined for their country, Father Brebeuf 
and I went to see them. I found Louys Amantacha 
in their midst. I had an interview with them about 
some serious matters ; and, passing [270 i.e., 170] from 
one subject to another, he told me that he was highly 
pleased because our Fathers were going to the help of 
his tribe. He was trying to find some one who 
would take them, or rather to choose some one, for 
a great number had offered themselves to Father Bre- 
beuf ; he himself wanted to take one with him. He 
promised us wonders, and, as evidence of his apprecia- 
tion of the assistance Your Reverence is sending to 
the Hurons, his countrymen, he writes to you with 
his own hand, also assuring me that he will return 
the coming year to Kebec, to take back to his coun- 
try the other Fathers who will be sent there. "It is 
too few," said he, "only three Religious for so many 
thousand souls which make up our tribe." He asked 
me to give him a little book containing the pictures 
of the mysteries of our Faith, that he might show 
them to the people of his tribe, and thus take the op- 
portunity to teach them. But as I did not have any 
he [271 i.e., 171] told me that he would write sieur le 
Maistre.^^ I have enclosed the letters he sends to Your 
Reverence with these ; I pray God that you may re- 
ceive them all. I believe that this young man is well 
known to you. He was taken to France by our Fa- 
thers, and baptized in Rouen through their agency ; 


246 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.5 

cy: il efloit fi bien inftruit, que I'vn des Capitaines 
nomm6 Kers, pen affectionne k noftre Compagnie, 
comme eftant heretique, temoigna publiquemet qu'il 
appartenoit aux lefuiftes de bie efleuer les enfans, 
voyant les deportemens de ce ieune Sauuage. Le 
fieur Oliuier Truchement des Frangois m'a rapporte 
cecy come I'aiant ouy de la bouche mefme de ce Ca- 
pitaine [272 i.e., 172] Huguenot. Depuis cette prife 
ce panure ienne homme a efl6 quelqne temps anec les 
Anglois, & puis anec les Saunages de fa natio : Dien 
vueille que la cognoiffance de lenr herelie & de lenrs 
vices (car il anoue que les Anglois font diffolus iuf ques 
an dernier point) n'empefche pas que la premiere fe- 
mence qu'on a iettee das fon ame ne produife les 
fruits que le Ciel attend, & que nous efperons. 
Mais venons au Confeil de fa natio. Eftant affemble, 
le fieur de Chaplain nous fit appeller. Fay appris 
que Louis XI. tint vn iour fon confeil de guerre en 
la campagne, n'ayant pour throfne ou pour chaire 
qu'vne piece de bois, ou vn arbre abbattu qu'il recon- 
tra par fortune au milieu d'vn champ. Voila le por- 
traidt du confeil des Hurons, excepte qu'ils font alTis 
encore vn pen plus bas, c'eft ^ dire k platte terre, 
tons pefle-meflez fans [273 i.e., 173] aucun ordre, fmon 
que ceux d'vne nation ou village fe mettent les vns 
pres des autres, pendant qu'on difpute en France de 
la prefeance, & qu'6 f 'amufe k pref enter vne chaire ^ 
celuy qu'on iugeroit impertinent de I'accepter, on au- 
roit acheue, & conclu trois cofeils parmy les Sau- 
uages, qui au bout du conte ne laiffent point d'eftre 
fort graues, & ferieux dans leurs harangues alTez 
longues : ils eftoient enuiron f oixante hommes en leur 
affemblee fans conter la ieunelTe qui eftoit efparfe 9^ 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib33 24t 

Monsieur the Due de Longueville was his godfather, 
and Madame de Villars his godmother. He remained 
in the hands of the English, after they had taken the 
French fleet and all this country. He was so well 
taught that one of the Captains, named Kers,**^ who 
had but little liking for our Society, as he is a heretic, 
publicly confessed that the Jesuits know how to bring 
up children well, seeing the deportment of this 
young Savage. Sieur Olivier,*^ the French Inter- 
preter, reported this to me as something which he had 
heard himself from the mouth of this Huguenot [272 
i.e., 172] Captain. After this capture [of the French] 
this poor young man remained some time with the 
English, and then with the Savages of his tribe. May 
God grant that the knowledge of their heresy and of 
their vices (for he declares that the Englishmen are 
in the highest degree dissolute) may not prevent the 
first seed sown in his soul from bringing forth the 
fruit that Heaven awaits, and for which we hope. 
But let us speak of the Council of his tribe. After it 
had assembled, sieur de Champlain had us sum- 
moned. I have been told that Louis XI. once held 
his council of war in the country, having for throne 
or chair only a piece of wood, or a fallen tree, that 
he happened to find in the midst of a field. This is 
the picture of the council of the Hurons, only they 
are seated a little lower still, that is to say, flat upon 
the ground, all pellmell without [273 i.e., 173] any 
order, unless it be that the people of one tribe or vil- 
lage are placed near those of another. While in 
France they are discussing precedence, and amusing 
themselves in offering a chair to one whom they 
would consider impertinent if he accepted it, here 
they will have held and concluded three councils 


248 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 5 


& Ik. Chaqu'vn f'eftant plac^ le mieux qu'il put, vn 
Capitaine commen9a fa harangue, le fommaire eftoit 
que la nation des Hurons, des Ours & autres efloient 
affemblees pour tenir cofeil auec les Fracois. Sa ha- 
rague finie tous les Sauuages pour approbation de ce 
difcours tirerent du profond de I'eftomach cefte afpira- 
tion, ho, ho, ho, releuant [374 i.e., 174] fort la derniere 
fyllabe. Cefte harangue finie, & le confeil declare 
legitimemet airembl6 par cette belle approbation, le 
mefme Capitaine en recommenga vne autre, qui ne 
vouloit dire autre chofe fmon qu'ils eftoyet venus 
voir leurs amis & leurs freres les Frangois, & pour 
affermir cefte amitie & alliance, qu'ils offroient tous 
des prefens k leur capitaine le Sieur de Champlain, 
& Ik deffus luy prefenterent trois paquets de robbes 
de caftor. La conclufion fut que tous les Sauuages 
approuuerent cefte harangue par leur afpiratio de 
ho! ho! rei'teree, & les Fran9ois par 1' acceptation des 
prefens qu'on offroit. Le mefme capitaine pourfui- 
vat fon difcours, difant que tous ces peuples fe re- 
fiouifloyent du re tour du Sieur de Champlain, & qu'ils 
fe venoyent tous chauffer k fon feu: le bois qu'ils y 
mirent furent encore [275 i.e., 175] deux ou trois pa- 
quets de robbes de caftor dont ils luy firent prefent. 
Sur I'heure mefme ce troifiefme difcours fut ap- 
prouu6 comme le fecond. 

Lk deffus le fieur de Champlain prit la parolle, & 
leur fit dire qu'il les auoit toufiours aim6s, qu'il de- 
firoit grandement de les voir comme fes freres, & 
qu'aiant eft6 enuoi^ de la part de noftre grand Roy 
pour les proteger, qu'il le feroit tres-volontiers : qu'il 
auoit enuoi6 au deuant d'eux vne barque & une cha- 
louppe, & que les Hiroquois auoient tue trois de nos 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j633 249 

among the Savages, who, upon the whole, do not cease 
to be very grave and serious in their rather long 
speeches. There were about sixty men in their assem- 
bly, without counting the young men who were scat- 
tered here and there. Each one getting the best place 
he could find, a Captain began his harangue, the sub- 
stance of which was that the Huron tribe, the tribe of 
the Bear, and others, had met for the purpose of hold- 
ing a council with the French. When this speech was 
finished, all the Savages, as a sign of their approval, 
drew from the depths of their stomachs this aspira- 
tion, ho, ho, ho, raising [374 i.e., 174] the last syllable 
very high. When this speech was finished, and the 
council had declared itself lawfully assembled by this 
fine method of assent, the same Captain began another 
speech, adding nothing to what he had said already, 
unless it were that they had come to see their friends 
and brothers, the Frenchmen, and, to strengthen this 
friendship and alliance, they all offered presents to 
their captain, Sieur de Champlain, and thereupon 
they presented to him three packages of beaver skins. 
The end was that the Savages expressed their ap- 
proval of this harangue by reiterating their aspira- 
tion, ho! ho! and the Frenchmen by accepting the 
presents offered. The same captain, continuing his 
speech, said that all these people were rejoiced at the 
return of Sieur de Champlain, and that they all came 
to warm themselves at his fire. The fuel they 
brought to the fire was [275 i.e., 175] two or three 
more packages of beaver skins, which they gave him 
as a present. This third speech was immediately 
approved like the second. 

Thereupon sieur de Champlain began to speak, and 
told them that he had always loved them, that he 


250 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 

homes en trahifon, que cela ne luy faifoit point 
perdre coeur, que les Francois ne craignoient rien, & 
qu'ils cheriffoient grandement leursamis: qu'ils ne 
creulTent point ceux qui les voudroient diuertir de 
les venir voir, & que leur ayant donn^ leur parolle ils 
eftoient veritables, ainfi qu'ils I'auoient [276 i.e., 176] 
peu remarquer par le paff^ qu'il recognoilloit encor les 
vieillards de leur nation pour auoir efte h. la guerre 
auec eux: qu'il les remercioit de leurs prefens, & 
qu'il fgauroit bien les recognoiftre. II adioufta que 
nos Peres les alloient voir en leur pais en tdmoignage 
de I'affedtio que nous leur portions, difant des mer- 
ueilles en noftre faueur. Ce font nos Peres, leur 
difoit-il, nous les aimons plus que nos enfans & que 
nous mefmes : on fait grand eftat d'eux en France, ce 
n'eft point la faim ny la difette qui les amene en ce 
pais cy : ils ne vous vont pas voir pour vos biens ny 
pour vos pelleteries. Voicy Louis Amantacha de 
voftre nation, qui les cognoift, & qui f§ait bie que ie 
dy vray: li vous aimez les Fran9ois comme vous 
dites, aimez ces Peres, honorez les, il vous enfei- 
gneront le chemin du Ciel, c'eft ce qui leur fait [177] 
quitter leur pais & leurs amis & leurs commodit^s pour 
vous inftruire, & notamment pour enfeigner k vos 
enfans vne fi grande fcience & fi necelTaire. 

Deux Capitaines haranguerent apres cela, ce fut ^ 
qui honoreroit le plus le fieur de Champlain & les 
Fran9ois, & h. qui nous tefmoigneroit de I'aff edtion : 
I'vn d'eux difoit que les Fran9ois n'eftans plus icy, la 
terre n'eftoit plus terre, la riuiere n'efloit pP riuiere, 
le ciel n'efloit pP ciel : mais qu'au retour du fieur de 
Champlain tout eftoit retourne k fon eftre, la terre 
eftoit deuenue terre, la riuiere efboit deuenue riuiere, 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 251 

wished very much to have them as his brothers, and, 
having been sent in behalf of our great King to pro- 
tect them, he would do it very willingly; that he had 
sent to meet them a bark and a shallop, and that the 
Hiroquois had treacherously killed three of our men ; 
that he did not lose heart on that account, that the 
French feared nothing, and that they cherished their 
friends very dearly ; that they must not believe those 
who would like to divert them from coming to see 
the French, and that, having given them their word, 
they would keep it, as they had been [276 i.e., 176] able 
to observe in the past ; that he still recognized old 
men among their people, from having gone to war 
with them ; that he thanked them for their presents, 
and would know very well how to requite them. He 
added that our Fathers were going to see them in 
their country, as a proof of the affection which we 
bore them, telling marvelous things in our favor. 
" These are our Fathers," said he, " we love them 
more than our children or ourselves ; they are held in 
very high esteem in France ; it is neither hunger nor 
want that brings them to this country ; they do not 
come to see you for your property or your furs. Here 
is Louis Amantacha, of your own tribe, who knows 
them, and who knows very well that I tell the truth. 
If you love the French people, as you say you do, 
then love these Fathers ; honor them, and they will 
teach you the way to Heaven. This is what makes 
them [177] leave their country, their friends, and 
their comforts, to instruct you, and especially to 
teach your children a knowledge so great and so nec- 
essary. 

Two Captains spoke after that. They vied with 
each other in trying to honor sieur de Champlain 


252 LES RELATIONS DES JJiSUITES [Vol.5 

& le del auoit paru ciel. L'autre confelToit que les 
Sauuages eftoyent tous craintifs & paoureux, mais 
que le fieur de Champlain efloit effroiable en fes re- 
gards ; qu'eftant en guerre il iettoit d'vne oeillade la 
terreur dans le coeur de fes [178] ennemis: & apoftro- 
phant la ieunelTe de fon pais il luy difoit: Prenez 
garde maintenant, efcoutez ce qu'on nous dit: ne 
dites pas qu'on n'a point parle de tout cecy en plein 
confeil : ie vous aduertis, afin que par apres vo^ 
obeyffiez. 

La conclufion du confeil fut que le Pere Brebeuf 
leur dit en leur langue, que nous allions auec eux 
pour y viure & mourir: qu'ils feroyent nos freres, 
que d'orefnauant nous ferions de leur nation : & que 
fl nos Peres ne demeuroyent point dans tous leurs 
villages, ce n'eftoit point qu'ils n'aimaffent toute la 
nation, mais qu'ils ne pouuoyent pas habiter en tant 
de lieux, eftans vn i^\. petit nombre, que le temps 
viendroit que nos freres nous viendroyet fecourir, 
& que no^ ferios en chacune de leurs demeures : que 
nous leur enfeignerions le moye d'eftre "k iamais 
bien-heureux. Louys [179] Amantacha confirma 
tout cecy, & tous les Sauuages k leurs accouftumees 
tefmoignerent leur contentement par leur profonde 
afpiration ho ho ho ho ! Puis entourant le Pere Bre- 
beuf, c'eftoit h. qui I'embarqueroit, les vns me ve- 
noient prendre & me toucher en la main, & fe di- 
foient I'vn I'autre, regarde comme ils fe rellemblent, 
parlans du Pere «& de moy, ce font deux freres: bref 
les homes du village oil auoient demeur6 nos Peres 
s'addreffans au Pere Brebeuf luy dirent, ouure nous 
to coeur, ne cache, rien ou veux tu demeurer en 
noftre pais? Veux tu eflre dans nos Cabanes, ou en 


1632-33] LE/EUNE'S RELATION, rdjs 263 

and the French, and in testifying their affection for 
us. One of them said that, when the French were 
absent, the earth was no longer the earth, the river 
was no longer the river, the sky was no longer the 
sky; but upon the return of sieur de Champlain 
everything was as before; the earth was again the 
earth, the river was again the river, and the sky was 
again the sky. The other confessed that the Savages 
were very timid and apprehensive, but that sieur de 
Champlain was frightful in his looks ; that, when he 
was in battle, a glance from his eye struck terror into 
the hearts of his [178] enemies; and, apostrophizing 
the youth of his tribe, he said: "Be careful now, 
listen to what you are told ; do not say we have not 
talked this all over in open council ; I warn you now, 
in order that you shall obey later." 

The conclusion of the council was that Father Bre- 
beuf told them, in their language, that we were going 
with them to live and to die in their country ; that 
they would be our brothers, that hereafter we would 
be of their people ; and, that if our Fathers did not 
live in each one of their villages, it would not be be- 
cause they did not love the whole tribe, but because 
they could not live in so many places, being so few 
in number ; that the time was not distant when our 
brothers would come to aid us, and then one of us 
would live in each one of their villages, and that we 
would teach them how to be forever happy. Louys 
[179] Amantacha confirmed all this; and all the Sav- 
ages, according to their custom, evinced their satis- 
faction by their profound aspiration : ho, ho, ho, ho ! 
Then they surrounded Father Brebeuf, each one 
wanting to carry him away in his boat. Some came 
to me and touched my hand, saying to each other : 


254 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol.5 

auoir vne "k part? Fen veux auoir vne "k part, dit le 
Pere. He bien, repartent ils, nous irons tons nous 
cabaner k I'entour de toy, nous nous fommes fepares, 
& auons rompu noftre village a la mort du Fran9ois 
qui a efte tue en noftre pais: [i8o] chacun s'en eft 
all6 qui de9k qui delk. Si toft que tu auras pris 
place, nous reuiendrons tous auec toy, & tu nous de- 
f endras ; car que f erions nous fans toy ? Voila comme 
nos Peres eftoiet aimez de ce pauure peuple. O que 
ie dirois volotiers mes fentimens voiat ces pauures 
barbares careffer auec tant d'amour ceux qu'ils ne 
cognoilTent pas! O s'ils penetroyent dans les def- 
feins que nous auos ! Que Dieu foit beny pour 
iamais, ie le fupplie de leur ouurir le coeur: pour 
moy i'efpere que fi vn feul village fe couuertit, le 
feu ne tardera point d'en brufler beaucoup d'autres, 
& que les nations voifines qui font fort peuplees, fe 
voudront chauffer auffl bien que les Hurons k ce 
diuin braller. 

Le dernier de luillet iour de fefte de noftre S. 
Pere Ignace, le Sieur de Champlain & les capitaines 
des vaiffeaux qui eftoyent icy, eftans venus [i8i] 
gagner les Indulgences en noftre petite Chapelle, 
quantite de Hurons nous venans voir, nous fufmes 
contraints de f ermer noftre porte, & de leur dire qu'on 
faifoit feftin, afin de les empefcher d'entrer. C'eft 
vne maxime entr'eux qui'ils ne mettront iamais le 
pied dans la cabane de celuy qui fait feftin : il n'y a 
que les conuiez k qui cela foit loifible. Or neatmoins 
comme ils defiroient de voir, I'vn d'eux ayant mis la 
tefte a vne feneftre appella fes compagnons, & le 
fleur de Champlain prenant plaifir a les voir admirer, 
donna ^ I'vn d'eux vn morceau d'ecorce de citron, il 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 266 

"See how much they look alike," speaking of the 
Father and of me, "they are two brothers." In short, 
the people of the village where our Fathers had lived, 
addressing Father Brebeuf , said to him : ' ' Open thy 
heart to us, conceal nothing; where dost thou wish 
to live in our country ? Dost thou wish to live in our 
Houses or have one apart?" "I wish to have a sepa- 
rate one," said the Father. "Very well," answered 
they, "we will all go and build our houses around 
thee ; we separated, and broke up our villages on the 
death of the Frenchman who was killed in our coun- 
try; [i8o] and every one went away, some here and 
some there. As soon as thou shalt have chosen thy 
place, we will return with thee, and thou wilt defend 
us ; for what would we do without thee ? " This shows 
how our Fathers were loved by these poor people. 
Oh, how I wish I could describe my feelings on see- 
ing these poor barbarians so lovingly caress those 
whom they did not know ! Oh, if they could only 
penetrate into our purposes ! God be forever blessed ! 
I beseech him to open their hearts. As for me, I 
hope that, if a single village is converted, the fire will 
not be long in spreading to a great many others ; and 
that the neighboring tribes, which are very popu- 
lous, will wish to warm themselves with the Hurons 
at this divine flame. 

On the last of July, the fete day of our Holy Father 
Ignace, Sieur de Champlain and the captains of the 
vessels here, having come [i8i] to receive Indulgences 
in our little Chapel, so many Hurons came also that 
we were compelled to close our door, saying that we 
were having a feast, in order to prevent them from 
entering. It is a maxim among them that they will 
never put their feet in the cabin of any one who is 


256 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 

en goufte, & commence a s'ef crier, 6 que cela eft bon ! 
II en depart a ceux qui eftoient auec luy, qui furent 
faifis de la mefme admiration: ils demanderent ce 
que c'efloit, le fieur de Champlain leur dit en riant, 
que c'eftoit de I'ecorce des citroiiilles de [182] France, 
les voila bien eftonnes, & comencet a fe dire les vns 
aux autres, que nos citroiiilles eftoient admirables : la 
delTus ceux qui n'en auoient point goufte fe mettent 
a la feneftre, & demandent au fieur de Chaplain fi 
toutes les citrouilles eftoient mangees, & qu'ils vou- 
droient bien en tafter, pour en porter les nouuelles 
en leur pais. le vous laifTe k penfer fi tous ceux qui 
eftoient dans la chambre fe mirent a rire. On les 
fit entrer apres les Vefpres dans la Chappelle qui 
eftoit gentiment orn^e felon nos petites richeffes, ce 
nous eft vn contentement bien fenfible de voir que 
noftre Seigneur ait vne petite maifon au milieu des 
grands bois que nous habitons: c'eft icy qu'ils furent 
eftonnes tout a fait : nous anions mis les Images de 
S. Ignace, & de S. Xauier fur noftre autel, ils les re- 
gardoient auec eftonnement: ils croyoient que [183] 
ce fuffent perfonnes viuantes, ils demandoient fi c'e- 
ftoient des Ondaqui : le mot Ogui & au plurier Ondaqui 
fignifie entre eux quelque diuinite, en vn mot ce qu'ils 
recognoiffent par deffus la nature humaine : ils de- 
mandoient encor fi le tabernacle eftoit leur maifon, 
& fi ces Ondaqui s'habilloient des ornemens qu'ils 
voyoient k I'etour de I'Autel. Le Pere Brebeuf leur 
aiant explique ce que reprefentoient ces Images, ils 
mettoient la main a la bouche, & fe la frappoient 
en figne d'eftonnement ; II y auoit trois Images de la 
Vierge, en diuers endroits : ils demanderent fuccef- 
fiuement de I'vne apres I'autre qui c'eftoit: le Pere 


1632 - 33] LE JEUNE ' S RELA TION, 1633 257 

having a feast. It is only to the invited that en- 
trance is permitted. Now, notwithstanding this, as 
they were very curious to see, one of them put his 
head in at a window and called his comrades; sieur 
de Champlain, enjoying their wonder, gave a piece 
of lemon peel to one of them, who, on tasting it, cried 
out: " Oh, how good that is!" He divided it with 
those who were with him, who were all seized with 
the same admiration. They asked what it was ; sieur 
de Champlain said to them, laughing, that it was the 
rind of a French [182] pumpkin. This astonished 
them very much, and they said to each other that 
our pumpkins were wonderful. Thereupon, those 
who had not tasted appeared at the window, and 
asked sieur de Champlain if all the pumpkins were 
eaten, saying that they would like to taste them, so 
as to tell about them in their country. You can 
judge for yourself how all in the room began to 
laugh ! After Vespers, they were allowed to enter 
the Chapel, which was neatly decorated according to 
our limited means. It is a source of infinite satisfac- 
tion to us to see that our Lord has a little house in 
the midst of the great forests in which we live. It 
was here that they were completely astonished. We 
had placed Statues of St. Ignace and of St. Xavier 
upon our altar; they looked upon them with awe, be- 
lieving [183] them to be living persons; they asked 
if they were Ondaqui. The word Oqiii, and its 
plural Ondaqui, signifies among them some divinity ; 
in a word, what they recognize as above human na- 
ture. They asked also if the tabernacle was their 
house, and if those Ondaqui dressed themselves in the 
ornaments which they saw around the Altar. Fa- 
ther Brebeuf having explained to them what these 


258 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.5 

leur difant k toutes que c'eftoit la mere de celuy qui 
a tout fait, ils fe mirent "k rire, demandans comment 
cela fe pouuoit faire qu'vne feule persone eut trois 
meres: car ils prenoient ces trois figures [184] pour 
la reprefentation de trois perfonnes differentes, on 
leur fit entendre que ces trois images figuroient la 
mefme persone. 6 qu'il feroit bon d'auoir tous les 
myfteres de noftre foy bien figures ! ces images 
aident grandement, & parlent defia d'elles mefmes. 
Sur le foir le Pere Brebeuf eftant alle k Kebec ou 
au fort des Fran9ois, ou eftoient les Hurons pour voir 
ceux auec lefquels nos Peres s'embarqueroient, le 
Capitaine de la Rochelle (c'eft ainfi que nos Frangois, 
ont appelle I'vn de leurs villages ou Bourgades) do- 
nans les noms des villes de France k ces pauures bi- 
coques. Ce Capitaine done aborde le Pere Brebeuf, 
& s'efforce de luy perfuader qu'il aille demeurer en 
fa bourgade fe prefentant pour I'embarquer ou tout 
autre qu'il voudra, vies, difoit il, auec moy, tu feras 
affure parmy nous, [185] on ne te d6robera point, ie 
fouftiens tout le pays fur mes efpaules, ie te prote- 
geray, nous t'aimos tous, tu ne manqueras de rien, 
noftre pays eft le meilleur entre les Hurons. Le 
Pere s'arreflat vn petit sas refpodre. Ie voy bien, 
dit-il, que tu crains d'offenfer ceux du village oil tu 
as demeure qui te veulent auoir, tu es maiftre de tes 
actions, dy leur que tu veux venir auec nous, & ils 
ne te diront plus rie. Le pere prent delay pour y 
penfer. Nous aiant communique cette emulation 
entre les villages qui vouloient tous auoir nos Peres, 
ie luy dy qu'il me fembloit qu'ils deuoient imiter S. 
Pierre & S. Paul, qui s'en allerent attaquer I'idolatrie 
dans la principale ville du monde, & ainfi que la 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6ss 269 

Images represented, they put their hands on their 
mouths and struck them in sign of astonishment. 
There were three Images of the Virgin in different 
places. They asked successively about each one, 
who it was; the Father explaining to them, that it 
was the mother of him who had made everything. 
They began to laugh, asking how it could possibly 
be that a single person had three mothers ; for they 
took the three figures [184] for the representation of 
three different persons. They were made to under- 
stand that these three images represented the same 
person. Oh, how fortunate it would be if all the 
mysteries of our faith could be well represented! 
These images help a great deal, and speak for them- 
selves. 

Toward evening, Father Brebeuf having gone to 
Kebec, or to the French fort, where the Hurons were, 
to see those with whom our Fathers were to embark, 
the Captain of la Rochelle^ (it is thus our French 
people have named one of the Huron villages or Set- 
tlements, having given the names of the French 
cities to these poor straggling villages) accosts Father 
Brebeuf and tries to persuade him to go and live in 
his village, offering to carry him and as many more 
as he wished to have go. "Come with me," said he, 
"thou wilt be safe with our people, [185] no one will 
steal from thee ; I hold the whole country upon my 
shoulders, I shall protect thee ; we all love thee, thou 
wilt want for nothing; our country is the best 
among the Hurons." The Father, pausing a little 
before answering, "I see clearly," continues he, "that 
thou hast fear of offending those of the village where 
thou hast lived, and who wish to have thee. Thou 
art master of thy actions, tell them that thou wishest 


260 LES RELATIONS DBS J^SUITES [Vol.5 

Bourgade la plus renomm^e entre les Hurons deuoit 
eftre le lieu de leur demeure: car celle-cy faifant 
ioug "k la loy de Dieu, toutes les autres [i86] s'y foub- 
mettroient aifement. Le voila done delibere de de- 
meurer das la Rochelle, cette bourgade eftant I'vne 
des plus grandes, & des plus peuplees de cette nation, 
veu mefme que c'eft 1^ oil les Confeils de tout le pais 
fe concluent en dernier relTort: le mal eftoit qu'il 
n'ofoit declarer fa volote, de peur d'ecourir la dif- 
grace des autres Bourgades. II s'aduifa de prier le 
fieur de Champlain de tefmoigner a tous les Capi- 
taines que fa volonte eftoit que tous les Francois 
allaffent demeurer a la Rochelle, ce qu'il fit. ces 
Capitaines demanderent pourquoy les autres villages 
feroient priues de ce bien, & puis que fix Fra9ois 
alloient Ik, qu'il les falloit loger en {\.yi villages ou 
bourgades. Non pas, dit le fieur de Champlain, ie 
defire qu'ils foient tous enfemble, pour deux raifons 
(remarques qu'il faut payer ces peuples de raifon 
pour calmer [187] leur efprit) I'enuoye, ce dit-il, 
deux petits gargons & vn ieune home auec les Peres: 
s'ils font feparez, ils feront pent eflre des querelles 
auec vos gens, car ils n'auront perfonne qui les gou- 
uerne : de plus, ^\. nos Frangois font difperfez, ils fen 
iront oil ils voudront, & li quelqu'vn des autres Fran- 
§ois ou de vous autres defire de luy parler, on ne 
f9aura oil il eft : mais s'ils demeurent tous enfemble, 
ceux qui demeureront a la maifon fcauront le lieu oil 
fe feront tranfportez ceux qui en fortiront. Ayez un 
peu de patience, & vous aurez tous des Fran9ois en 
vos bourgades. Les voila done tous contens, horf- 
mis le capitaine du village ou le Pere Brebeuf & le 
Pere de None auoient demeure ; car il s'attendoit 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i633 261 

to come with us, and they will say nothing more to 
thee." The father took time to think it over. Hav- 
ing told us of this rivalry among the villages, each 
desiring to have our Fathers, I said to him that it 
seemed to me they ought to imitate St. Peter and St. 
Paul, who went forth to attack idolatry in the prin- 
cipal city of the world, and in like manner the most 
renowned Village of the Hurons ought to be their 
dwelling place ; for, if that one came under the yoke 
of the law of God, all the others [186] would easily 
submit to it. So he decided to remain at la Rochelle, 
this place being one of the largest and the most popu- 
lous of this tribe ; and besides, it is there that all the 
Councils of this country are held for final action. 
The trouble was that he dared not declare his wish, 
for fear of offending the other Villages. He made 
up his mind to ask sieur de Champlain to notify all 
the Captains that it was his wish that all the French 
should go and live at la Rochelle, which he did. 
These Captains asked why all of the other villages 
should be deprived of this blessing, saying that, as 
six Frenchmen were going, they ought to be lodged 
in six villages or towns. "No," said sieur de Cham- 
plain, "I desire that they should all live together, for 
two reasons " (notice that reasons must be given to 
these people to pacify [187] them): ** I send," said 
he, '' two little boys and a young man with the Fa- 
thers. If they are separated, they will perhaps quar- 
rel with your people, for they will have no one to 
govern them ; besides, if our Frenchmen are sepa- 
rated, they will go where they please, and, if some of 
the other Frenchmen or your people wish to talk to 
one of them, they will not know where to find them. 
But, if they all live together, those who remain at 


262 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.5. 

qu'on retourneroit Ik pour reftablir ce village, qui 
s'efl difperfe. Voila done le lieu de la demeure de 
nos [i88] Peres arreflee, re fie k voir qui les embar- 
quera. Pour euiter toute enuie, le Pere Brebeuf fit 
aflembler les capitaines, & les plus agez d'entr'eux 
en confeil. Ce capitaine mefcontent ne s'y trouua 
point, ains reprocha au capitaine de la Rochelle qu'il 
eftoit caufe que les Fra9ois n'alloyet point en fon vil- 
lage. Celuy-cy fe purge le mieux qu'il peut, difant 
que c'eftoit le Sieur de Champlain qui auoit defire cela : 
au refte, pour ne point choquer cet homme fafch6, il 
s'excufa d'embarquer I'vn de nos Peres, difant qu'il 
n'auoit dans fon canot que de la ieuneffe qui n'eftoit 
pas propre k ramer, mais que nous ne trouuerions 
que trop de perfonnes qui no^' porteroyent. Nos 
Peres auoyent bien defir d'eftre embarquez dans les 
canots d'vn mefme village, mais il fut arrefte dans 
leur confeil qu'il falloit donner ce contentement aux 
[189] autres villages, d'en paller quelqu'u iufques 
dans le pays & ainfi nos Peres deuoyent eftre portez 
en diuers villages, pour fe ralTembler par apres dans 
la Rochelle. 

Le premier iour d'Aouft les Huros venoyent voir 
noftre Chapelle en ayant ouy parler k ceux qui I'a- 
uoient veue, & ie croy que f'ils faifoyet quelque fe- 
iour k Kebec qu'il n'y en a pas vn qui ne la vint vifi- 
ter. Leur foire eft bien toft faidte. Le premier iour 
qu'ils arriuent ils font leur cabane, le fecond ils 
tiennent leurs confeils, & font leurs pref ents ; le troi- 
fiefme & quatriefme ils traittent, ils vendent, ils 
acheptent, ils troquent leurs pelleteries & leur petun 
contre des couuertures, des baches, des chaudieres, 
des capots, des fers de fieches, des petits canons de 


1632 - 33] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1633 26S 

home will know where the absent ones can be found. 
Have a little patience, and you will all have French- 
men in your villages." They were all then satisfied, 
except the captain of the village where Father Bre- 
beuf and Father de Noue had lived, for he expected 
that they would return to rebuild the village which 
had been abandoned." Thus, the place of habitation 
of our [188] Fathers being fixed, it remained to be 
seen with whom they would each embark. To avoid 
all jealousies, Father Brebeuf had all the captains and 
the oldest among them assemble in council. This 
discontented captain did not go there, but he re- 
proached the captain of la Rochelle with having been 
the cause of the French not going to his village. The 
latter defended himself from the charge as best he 
could, saying that such was the wish of Sieur de 
Champlain. Finally, lest he should offend this angry 
man, he excused himself from furnishing passage 
for one of the Fathers, saying that his canoe was 
manned only by young people who were not fit to 
paddle, and that we would find only too many other per- 
sons who would be glad to convey us. Our Fathers 
were very anxious to embark together in the canoes 
of one village, but it was decided in the council that 
it was necessary to satisfy the [189] other villages by 
allowing them to carry some of the Fathers up into 
the country. And so it was that our Fathers were to 
be taken to different villages, to meet afterward at la 
Rochelle. 

On the first day of August, the Hurons came to 
see our Chapel, having heard it spoken of by those 
who had seen it ; and I believe that, if they had made 
a longer stay at Kebec, there would not have been 
one who did not visit it. Their fair is soon over. 


264 


LES RELA TIONS DES /£S UJTES [Vol. 


vn 


verre, des chemifes, & chofes femblables, C'eft 
plaifir de les voir pedant cette traitte, laquelle [190] 
eflant finie ils prennent encore vn iour pour leur der- 
nier confeil, pour le feflin qu'on leur fait ordinaire- 
met, & pour danfer, & puis le lendemain de grand 
matin ils paffent comme vne volee d'oifeaux. Or 
ceux qui auoient debit6 leur marchandife de bonne 
heure venoyent voir noi?tre maifon allechez par le re- 
cit qu'on leur faifoit de la beaute de noftre Chappelle. 
Le Pere Brebeuf les entretenoit: & comme il eut 
parle du Paradis & de I'Enfer a I'vne de leurs bandes, 
I'vn d'eux I'arrefle, & luy diet : Et que f erons nous, 
Efcho7n, (c'eft le nom qu'ils donnet au Pere) afin que 
nous n'allions point dans ces grands tourmens? Le 
Pere leur ayant dit ce qu'il falloit faire, ils tefmoi- 
gnerent qu'ils efloyent prefts d'obeir. II leur dit 
que cette Chapelle efloit le lieu oil nous prions le 
grad Dieu du ciel, & qu'ils fe miffent tons a genoux, 
& [191] qu'ils luy fiffent leurs prieres en leur coeur. 
le les vey tons s'y mettre les vns apres les autres, ou 
pluftoft s'accroupir deuant I'Autel, car ils ne f9auent 
que c'eft de s'agenouiller, ce n'eft point I'vne de leurs 
poftures. Leur oraifon faidte, qui ne fut pas longue, 
le Pere demanda a I'vn d'eux ce qu'il auoit dit a ce 
grand Dieu : II repart : le luy ay didt, Prens courage 
^ nous aider & a nous fecourir, & k nous donner vn 
bo voyage: Voila la priere de ce pauure barbare. 
Pendant que I'vn d'eux prioit, vn autre luy dit : Re- 
garde bien en ton coeur ce que tu diras a ce grand 
Maiftre. O que ne fgauons nous les Ungues de ces 
pauures Sauuages ! Ce fera quand il plaira a Noftre 
Seigneur; Que fon faindt nom foit beny pour vn 
iamais. 


1632-33] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6ss 265 

The day of their arrival they erect their huts ; the 
second, they hold their councils and make their pres- 
ents ; the third and fourth, they trade, sell, buy, bar- 
ter their furs and their tobacco for blankets, hatchets, 
kettles, capes, iron arrow-points, little glass beads, 
shirts, and many similar things. It is a pleasure to 
watch them during this trading. When it [190] is 
over they take one day more for their last council, for 
the feast which is generally made for them, and the 
dance; and early the next morning they disappear 
like a flock of birds. Now those who had sold their 
goods early came to see our home, attracted thither 
by the description they had heard of the beauty of 
our Chapel. Father Brebeuf entertained them ; and, 
after he had discoursed upon Paradise and Hell to one 
of their companies, a man interrupted him, asking: 
" And what shall we do, Eschom " (that is the name 
they give to the Father), "that we may escape these 
great torments?" When the Father told them what 
they must do, they assured him that they were ready 
to obey. He said that this Chapel was the place in 
which we offered prayers to the great God of the 
sky, that they must kneel down, and [191] that they 
should pray to him in their hearts. I saw them all get 
on their knees one beside the other, before the Altar, 
or rather they squatted down, for they do not know 
what kneeling is, as it is not one of their postures. 
Their prayer, which was not long, having been made, 
the Father asked one of them what he had said to 
the great God. He replied: " I said to him, ' Have 
courage to aid and succor us, and to give us a good 
voyage.' " That was the prayer of this poor barba- 
rian. While one was praying, another said to him: 
" Look well into thy heart for what thou wilt say to 


266 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.5 


i 


Le 3. du mefme mois d'Aouft le Sieur de Cham- 
plain feftina tons les [192] Hurons. Les mets du 
f eftin furent de la fagamite copof^e de pois, de pain ■ 

efmie ou de galette puluerifee, & de pruneaux, tout 
cela bouilly dans vne grande chaudiere dont on fe 
fert pour faire de la biere, auec de I'eau sas fel, leur a 
f enable tres-excellente. le ne declareray point les ■ 

particularitez de ce banquet, ny de leur chant & de 
leur danfe : ce fera pour vn autre fois. 
(Continued in Vol. vi.) 


1632-33] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, idjs 267 

this great Master." Oh, if we only knew the lan- 
guage of these poor Savages ! That will come when 
it pleases Our Lord. May his holy name be forever 
blessed ! 

On the 3rd of the same month of August, Sieur de 
Champlain made a feast for all the [192] Hurons. 
The dishes of this feast were sagamit^, composed 
of peas, of bread-crumbs or powdered sea biscuit, and 
of prunes ; all this was boiled together in a great 
kettle which is used for making beer, with water and 
no salt, and they thought it very good indeed. I 
shall not go into details about this banquet, nor 
about their songs and their dances. That will be 
for another time. 

(Continued in Vol. vi.) 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA : VOL V 

XX 

In reprinting Le Jeune's Brief Re/ation (1632), com- 
monly classed as the first Relation of the regular 
series, we follow the original Cramoisy in Lenox 
Library. This is the copy marked "G B" in Win- 
sor's list: it was formerly in the Bancroft collection, 
which was absorbed by the Lenox, being considered 
the chief jewel therein. Other copies are known to 
be in Brown Library, Providence ; British Museum ; 
and Bibliothfeque Nationale and Bibliothfeque de 1' Ar- 
senal, Paris. Winsor mentions a copy in the Murphy 
collection, but it was not included in the sale cata- 
logue ; the Kalbfleisch collection mentioned by Win- 
sor had a copy, but that library is now dispersed. 

Extracts from this Relation, for which "privilege" 
was issued Nov., 1632, appear in Mercure Francois, 
vol. xviii., pp. 56-72 ; the date of the "privilege" for 
this volume of Mercure is March, 1633. The Relation 
given in the Quebec Reprint (1858), is after the copy 
in the Bibliotheque Nationale. 

Further references are in Sabin, vol. x., no. 39946, 
and vol. xvi., under caption " Relations;" Carayon, 
no. 1 260; Winsor, p. 301 ; Brown, vol. ii., no. 381 ; Len- 
ox, p. 4; and Harrisse, no. 49. Harrisse, in describ- 
ing the title-page, misspells Barthelemy lacquinot, 
"Bartelemy lacquinet," — an error in which Lenox 
and Sabin follow him ; the Brown Catalogue gives 
the name correctly, and has a facsimile of the page. 


270 LES RELA TIONS DES JJ&SUITES 

Title-page. We present a photographic facsimile of 
the original at Lenox. 

Collation. Title, i p.; blank, i p.; text, pp. 3-68; 
privilege, dated Nov., 1632, i unnumbered p. ; blank, 
I p. 

XXI 

In our reissue of Le Jeune's Relation of 1633 (No. 2 
of the Cramoisy series), we follow the original in the 
Brown Library, at Providence, R. I. Harvard Col- 
lege Library possesses a copy which is evidently, in 
the main, from the same setting of type as the 
Brown copy, but with variations. It is apparently 
the Harvard copy which is described in Harrisse's 
Notes, no, 55, although, in the catalogues of these re- 
spective libraries, each example is entered as " H. 
55." We shall for convenience designate them as 
"Brown H. 55," and "Harvard H. 55," respectively. 
A word-for-word collation of these two examples 
of H. 55 convinces us that the original issue of the 
press is the one at Brown, making this, so far as we 
are aware, a unique copy. As the working of the 
edition progressed, some occasion arose for changing 
the phraseology of the text upon pp. 225, 226 (i.e., 
125, 126, correct pagination) in signature H, these 
two pages being in part reset. The following sen- 
tences, which appear on p. 225 (i.e., 125) of the 
Brown copy, were expunged from the sheet, and do 
not appear in the Harvard and other examples of this 
Relation : 

pour 
toute fa Prouince, & pour tons ceux 
qui cooperent au falut de tant de 
pauures ames efgarees: Vne petite 
gouttelette de ce diuin calice nous 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. V 271 

enrichira tons: & puis que mes prie- 
res font trop foibles pour obtenir 
vn fi grand bien, ie fupplie V. R. d'in- 
terpofer les fiennes, & celles encore 
de tant d'ames faindtes qui font def- 
fous fa charge: Mais pafTons outre. 

There was also expunged from pp. 225, 226 (i.e., 
125, 126) the following paragraph, which appears only 
in the Brown copy: 

Ie remerciay le mieux qu'il me fut 
poffible Mofieur de Champlain de 
la charit6 qu'il auoit exerc^e enuers 
nos Peres qui a efl6 tres-grande, co- 
me me temoignoit le Pere Brebeuf. 

To occupy the space, the following fifteen lines 
were substituted on pp. 225, 226 (i.e., 125, 126), and 
these appear in the Harvard and later issues of the 
document, but not in the Brown copy : 

II me vient quelquefois en pen- 
f6e, que ce Grand Homme, qui par 
fon admirable fagefle, & non-pareil- 
le conduite ez affaires f'efl tant ac- 
quis de renommee fur la terre, fe pre- 
pare vne couronne de gloire tres- 
efclatante dans le Ciel, pour le foing 
qu'il tefmoigne auoir en la conuer- 
fion de tant d'ames que I'infidelit^ 
perd en ces pays fauuages: Fen prie 
tons les iours affedtueufement pour 
luy, & noftre compagnie ayant par 
fon moyen occafion de glorifier 
Dieu en cette fi noble entreprife, luy 
en aura vne obligation eternelle. 


272 LES RELA TIONS DES j£ SUITES 

While form H was off the press, and the above al- 
teration of text taking place, certain types appear to 
have dropped out or been moved in other pages of 
the same form, making a half-dozen verbal errors on 
pp. 115, 119. The form, with the text thus altered, 
was again sent to press, and apparently Harvard H. 
55 is the result. Another peculiarity in the Harvard 
copy is, — and this is noted by Harrisse, — that the 
letter P in the word " Par," on the title-page, has 
been partially dropped : the Brown copy is perfect, 
in this respect. 

In due course, a second issue of the Relation became 
necessary, — but in what year it is now impossible to 
say ; for, after the custom of Cramoisy, the dates of 
the original title-page and Privilege were reproduced 
in the new edition, which is the one known to bibliog- 
raphers as "H. 56," having been described by Harrisse 
in his Notes, no. 56. This edition — we describe the 
example in Lenox Library — was printed from an en- 
tire resetting of type, the altered text of Harvard H. 
55 having been selected for " copy," although the 
orthography was occasionally modernized. Harrisse, 
in giving the title-page of H. 56, accidentally omits 
two line-ending indicators ; with these exceptions, his 
description applies to the copy of H. 56 in Lenox. 
But he errs in saying that H. 56 does not differ from 
H. 55 (he describes the Harvard copy), save in the 
arrangement of the title with its repetition of " de," 
in the substitution of a ram's head for a cupid in the 
vignette of p. i, and a few errors in pagination. The 
differences are more numerous : in page-numberings, 
are many discrepancies ; in the contents of lines, on 
several of the pages of each, there is considerable 
variance, — although both continue to end their pages 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. V 273 

uniformly, save that H. 56 is on p. 57 a line short; 
there are also frequent variations in spelling and 
capitalization. 

An abridgment of the Relation appears in Mercure 
Franqois, vol. xix., pp. 771-802. The Privilege for 
this volume, which covers events in 1633, bears date 
March, 1636. 

The Quebec reprint (1858) follows H. 56, 

See further references in Carayon, no. 1261 ; Sabin, 
vol. X., nos. 39,947, 39,948, and vol. xvi., p. 536 (this 
bibliographer strictly follows Harrisse) ; Brown Cata- 
logfue, vol ii., nos. 118, 417; Filling's Bibliography of 
the Algonquian Languages {WB-shington, 1891), p. 307; 
O'Callaghan Sale Catalogue, no. 12 12 (wherein the 
description follows Lenox H. 56) ; Barlow's Rough List 
(N. Y., 1885), no. 338, p. jy; Barlow Sale Catalogue, 
no. 1273 (the copy therein mentioned sold for $120); 
Graesse, tome iv., livr. i., p. 154; Murphy Sale Cata- 
logue, no. 1344; O'Callaghan's Bibliography (1850), p. 
36; Sommervogel, tome iv., p. 795, no. 2 ; Winsor, p. 
301 (the Bancroft copy referred to is now in Lenox); 
and Dodd, Mead & Co.'s Trade Catalogue {K^r\\, 1896), 
wherein a copy, with " the date cut from title," is 
priced at $200. 

Examples of the Relation of 1633 may be found in 
the following libraries: Harvard (H. 55), Brown (H. 
55 and 56), Lenox (H. 56, two copies), and British 
Museum (ed. not specified). 

Title-page. Given in photographic facsimile, from 
the copy of H. 55, in Brown Library, Providence. 

Collation of Browfi H. 55. Title, 1 p. ; blank at back 
of title, 1 p. ; text, pp. 3-216; Privilege, in small 
type, on p. 216. 


I 


NOTES TO VOL V 

(Figures in parentheses, following number of note, refer to pages 
of English text. J 

1 (p. ii). — Paul le Jeune was bom in July, 1591, at Chalons- 
sur-Marne, France. His parents were Huguenots; but, upon at- 
taining his majority, he became a Catholic, and entered the Jesuit 
noNntiate, at Rouen, Sept. 22, 1613. Pursuing his studies at La 
Fleche and Clermont, he became an instructor at Rennes and 
Bourges, and, later, professor of rhetoric at Nevers (1626-28) and at 
Caen (1629 - 30). He then spent two years as a preacher at Dieppe, and 
two years more as superior of the residence there. On the return of 
the French to Quebec, he came there with De Caen, as superior of 
the Canadian mission. His first year was spent in the French set- 
tlements ; in the second, he wintered among the Montagnais, in or- 
der to learn their language. When the settlement of Three Rivers 
was founded (1634; see vol. iv., note 24), he went there with Buteux, 
returning to Quebec before the death of Champlain, whose funeral 
sermon he preached. Le Jeune remained superior of the mission 
until 1639, and continued his labors in Canada during ten years 
more. In 1649, ^^ returned to France, where he became procurer 
of foreign missions; and died there Aug. 7, 1664. Besides his Rela- 
tions of the missions, he wrote several religious works ; one of these, 
A Ten Days' Retreat, was reprinted at Rennes in 1843. Roche- 
monteix says of Le Jeune: " He carried a will of steel in a heart of 
tire." Suite thus characterizes him: "He was a typical mission- 
ary — fervent, devoted, asking only to be directed towards sacrifice." 

2 (p. ii). — This document is given in Martin's Bressani, pp. 
295, 296. It states that Richelieu had already offered the Canadian 
mission to the Capuchins, but that they had declined to enter the 
field formerly occupied by the Jesuits. 

3 (p. 11). — The order of Ursulines was founded Nov. 25, 1535, 
at Brescia, by Angela Merici. To the three vows of Augustine, it 
added a fourth, requiring the instruction of girls. It became estab- 
lished in France by the end of the sixteenth century, thence spread- 
ing to Germany. The first Ursuline convent in America was estab- 
lished at Quebec, in 1639, ^Y the efforts of Madame de la Peltrie. 

4 (p. 11). — Low Sunday : the first Sunday after Easter, so called 


276 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 


because Easter is High Sunday. It is also called White Sunday, 
because on that day the neophytes wear their white robes to the 
church ; and Quasimodo Sunday, because the introit for this day be- 
gins with the words, "Quasi modo geniti infantes." 

5 (p. 19). — See vol. i., note 6g. 

6 (p. 19).— Cartier (Brief Rdcit, fol. 12) describes "a sort of 
fish as large as porpoises, but not like them; their bodies well- 
shaped, and heads like that of the greyhound ; as white as snow, 
without any spot ; in that river [Saguenay] there are a great num- 
ber of them, living between the sea and the fresh water. The 
people of that country call them Adhothuys ; and we were told that 
they are very good to eat." Packard, in Labrador Coast (N. Y., 
1 891), p. 443, mentions the white whale {Delphinapterus Catodon, 
Linn.) as " not uncommonly seen passing in schools along the [Lab- 
rador] coast, in the summer time." 

7 (p. 19). — Gaspay bay: on the coast of Gaspe (see vol. iii., 
note 45), south of Cape Rosiere. This bay appears on De Fer's map 
(1705), as G. de Gas; its present name is Gaspe. 

8 (p. 3S)-—But one wife: Cf. the accounts of Membertou's 
unique monogamy, given by Lescarbot and Biard, — vol. i., p. 215; 
and vol. ii., pp. 23, 227, 229. 

9 (P- "hi)- — Basque scaffold: a point two leagues above Tadous- 
sac ; mentioned by Champlain, and shown on a map by Lotter (n. 
d.), as Cape Chafaut aux Basques; Bellin (1744) names it Echafaut 
aux Basques ; obviously a place used by the Basque fishermen for 
drying fish. 

Margry says (Navig. Fr., pp. 113, 114): "The Basques made 
their way at first to the ports on the eastern shore of the island 
[Newfoundland]. There they invented the process of drying cod- 
fish, that they might carry a greater quantity on their ships. This 
was done on scaffolds, which they called pignalac; and the ship- 
owners of St. Jean de Luz and Siboure sent out vessels expressly for 
this catching and drying fish, independently of those sent for the 
whale fishery. ' ' 

10 (p. 37). — St. Lawrence Lsland: evidently another name for the 
Isle of Orleans. 

11 (p. 41). — These were the sons of Gervase (or Jervis) Kirk (see 
vol. iv., note 46), who was born in 1568, in Derbyshire, England, the 
eldest son of a gentleman's family; later, he became a merchant in 
London. In 1596, he married Elizabeth Goudon, of Dieppe, France, 
by whom he had seven children. His sons David, Lewis, and 
Thomas, were aged respectively 32, 30 and 26 years, at the time 
Quebec was taken. They were all prominent members of the Mer- 
chant Adventurers to Canada. Gervase died Dec. 17, 1629. David 


NOTES TO VOL. V 277 

was knighted by Charles I., in 1633, as a reward for his services in 
taking Quebec ; but (according to H. Kirke) neither he nor his heirs 
ever received any pecuniary recompense for the heavy losses he in- 
curred in that enterprise, although, in the negotiations for the resti- 
tution of Canada, the French King had agreed to pay the sum of 
82,700 livres to Kirk. 'Rrymner (Can. Archives, 1S94, pp. viii.-x.) 
gives a document (probably 1683) detailing the claims of the Kirks 
to the territories of Nova Scotia and Quebec. 

A colony had been established in Newfoundland, in 1621, by 
George, Lord Baltimore, who received from James I. a large tract 
of land in the southeastern part, extending westward to Placentia 
Bay, which he named Avalon ; but he abandoned it in 1629. A grant 
of the whole island was made by Charles I., Nov. 13, 1637, to the 
Duke of Hamilton, Sir David Kirk, and others ; and Kirk, who after 
a few years became the sole owner of Newfoundland, continued as 
its ruler until his death (about 1653). He did much to develop the 
resources of the island, — encouragfing immigration, opening the 
fisheries to other nations as well as to the English, and protecting 
the industry from pirates. As the Kirk family were devoted loyal- 
ists, they sufifered many losses under the Commonwealth, and Sir 
David's property was for some time sequestrated as that of a ma- 
lignant. Finally, in 1660, his heirs were obliged to yield possession 
of Newfoundland to Cecil, Lord Baltimore, who claimed it under 
the g^ant made to his father. — See Henry Kirke's First English 
Conquest of Canada (London, 1871); Prowse's Hist. N. F., pp. 
138-1571 ^■Dd Kingsford's Canada, vol. i., pp. 142, 143. 

The name is also variously spelled Ker, Kerk, Kertk, Kirke, Kirtk, 
Kyrck, Quer, Querch, and Quercq. 

A daughter of David Kirk became the second wife of Pierre Ra- 
disson, the Hudson Bay explorer. 

12 (p. 41). — Laverdiere gives (at end of Champlain, "Pieces 
justificatives," pp. 25, 26) the letters from Charles " to ye Canadian 
marchants and ye comanders under them for rendring Kebeck." 
The merchants claimed to have spent ;ff 60,000 in their Canadian ex- 
pedition ; and they were greatly incensed at the restitution of Cana- 
da to France, ignoring as it did the rights granted them by the crown. 
Their letter to Isaac Wake, the representative of England in the 
treaty of St Germain, is also given by Laverdiere fut supra, pp. 
27-31); they complain that the interests of English subjects were 
neglected in the treaty. 

13 (p. 41). — The widow of Louis Hebert (see vol. ii., note 80). 
Her name was Marie RoUet; her second husband was Guillaume 
Hubou, whom she married May 16, 1629; she died May 27, 1649, at 
Quebec. 


278 LES RELA TIONS DES j£s UITES 


14 (P- 53)- — Moustache : a name applied, in olden times, to a long 
lock of hair hanging from one side of the head. 

15 (P- 67).— Raymond de la Ralde has been already mentioned 
as De Caen's successor (see vol. iv., note 27); he was a Catholic, but 
was unfriendly to the Jesuits, who complained of him as leagued 
with De Caen against them. He attacked the English fishing ves- 
sels in Newfoundland, in the summer of 1628, capturing several of 
them, but on one occasion losing 67 of his rnen as prisoners ; an ac- 
count of this affair is given in letters from Lord Baltimore to Charles 
I. and the Duke of Buckingham. — English Colonial Papers, vol. 
iv., nos. 56, 57. 

16 (p. 69). — The phrase in the original is trots brasses ; the 
brasse was a linear measure, of five old-French feet, or 1.62 metres, 
equivalent to 5.318 English feet. 

17 (p. nx).— Nation of the i9^«r (Attignaouantans).— The terri- 
tory of this nation, the most westerly of the Huron confederacy, 
was sharply defined on all four sides. Portions of Georgian Bay 
formed two of these, — Nottawasaga Bay, on the west, and Matche- 
dash Bay, on the north. Along their eastern side, the river Wye 
separated them from the other Huron tribes. Another natural 
boundary afforded them a partial protection on the south ; this was 
Cranberry Lake and marsh, which extended up the Wye River to 
Orr Lake, twelve miles farther east, forming a wide, impassable, 
marshy tract, which protected all of the Huron tribes along their 
southern frontier. This important water system is indicated by the 
name of Lake Anaouites on Ducreux's map. The country of the 
Bear clan nearly coincided with the boundaries of the present town- 
ship of Tiny, in which have been found, up to the present year 
(1897), the remains of about thirty-five village sites and twenty os- 
suaries. The surface of Tiny is undulating, nowhere exceeding 500 
feet above the level of Georgian Bay. At the north, the ground 
rises as it recedes from the shore, around which there still remains 
a fringe of the original forest. Along the southern half, there is a 
long reach of shore, with bleak sand-dunes, where a stunted vegeta- 
tion barely exists, — a feature common to the southeastern shores of 
all the great lakes. Behind these, the soil of the interior is now occu- 
pied by agricultural settlers. It was also on the higher ground of 
these interior parts that the Attignaouantans, as their remains show, 
had their habitations when the Jesuits were among them. It should 
be observed that Champlain used the name Attignaouantans (Ocha- 
tequins; see vol. ii. of this series, note 58) for the entire Huron con- 
federacy. The generic name, Ouendat (Wyandot), including the 
Attignaouantans as one of the confederates, appears to have been 
brought into use at a later date (Lalemant's' Relation, 1639). If the 


NOTES TO VOL. V 279 

others were in the district at the time of Lalemant's visit, he over- 
looked their differences, as he makes no distinction in the case of 
the inhabitants of even the most easterly town of the district, Cahi- 
agua. Yet we know that Arendarrhonons were at Cahiagua in his 
time, as these were said to cherish his memory twenty-two years 
afterward (Lalemant's Relation, 1640). — A. F. Hunter. 

18 (p. 71). — Tobacco Nation (Khionontaterrhonons; also called, 
by the French, Nation du Petun). — The territory of this tribe coin- 
cided closely with the present township of Nottawasaga, Simcoe 
county, their villages having been situated on rising spurs along the 
eastern side of the Blue Mountains. This country is now covered by 
well-cultivated farms. Remains of the aborigines are abundant 
there, as many as thirty-two village sites and forty ossuaries having 
been found at various times. David Boyle, of the Provincial Ar- 
chaeological Museum, has devoted much time to a minute examina- 
tion of several of these, and the museum contains many relics from 
this locality. Most frequently found, has been the tobacco-pipe, es- 
pecially the trumpet-mouthed variety, which is found in great abun- 
dance and diversity of pattern, and of which many specimens are 
contained in the museum. This is a natural result of their exten- 
sive raising and marketing of tobacco, from which their name was 
derived. In a scholarly paper, " Historical Sketch of the Tionon- 
tates, or Dinondadies, now called Wyandots " (Hist. Mag., vol. v., 
p. 262), J. G. Shea traces the wanderings of the remnant of this 
tribe, after it was almost annihilated by the Iroquois in 1649-50, 
down to their settlement on the reserve in Anderdon township, near 
Amherstburg, Ont. , where their descendants may be found to this 
day. James H. Coyne, B. A., of St. Thomas, Ont., points out, in a 
recent pamphlet. The Country of the Neutrals (St. Thomas, 1895), 
p. 19, that some of the survivors of the Neutrals had united with 
this remnant of the Tobacco Nation while they were at Mackinac. — 
A. F. Hunter. 

19 (p. -ji).— Nation of the Sorcerers ( Aoueatsiouaenrrhonons ; 
also named "Gens puants ").— This was an Algonkin tribe of Nipis- 
sings, at the lake of that name. They were also called Bissiri- 
niens ; and their Huron name was sometimes spelled Askicouanero- 
nons. Like other Northern Algonkin nations, they rendezvoused at 
the lake only in the winter season (Lalemant's Relation, 1641, chap, 
vii. ). During the later wars between the Hurons and Iroquois, they 
withdrew toward Hudson Bay, to avoid the fury of the latter, and 
there mingled with other nations. In recent years, graves, and 
other remains of this tribe, have been found on Biscuiting Island, 
and at other points about Lake Nipissing. — A. F. Hunter. 

20 (p. ii).— Fire Nation: so named by the French — a transla- 


280 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 

tion of Assistaeronnons, the name applied to the tribe by the Hu- 
rons; also known as Mascoutins (with numerous variants in spell- 
ing). This was an Algonkin tribe, located in Southern Michigan, 
Northern Indiana and Illinois, and Central and Southeastern Wis- 
consin. Nicolet visited them (1634) on the upper Fox River of Wis- 
consin, probably near Berlin. Champlain mentions them as enemies 
of the Ottawas and Neutrals ; they were probably driven by those 
tribes westward from the vicinity of Detroit. Shea thinks the Mas- 
coutins "were probably at last confounded with the Kickapoos," 
of Western and Southwestern Wisconsin. 

21 (p- 73)- — Amantacha : also known among the French as Louis 
de Sainte-Foi; the Huron lad mentioned by Lalemant (vol. iv. of 
this series, p. 225), who in 1626 was sent to France by the missiona- 
ries, and baptized. Having been instructed there by the Jesuits, he 
returned to Canada before the capture of Quebec, after which event 
he entered into the service of the English ; but, after the return of 
the French, he was very useful to the missionaries in their inter- 
course with the natives. 

22 (p. 75). — Sebastien Cramoisy, a well-known publisher, was 
bom at Paris in 1585, and died there in January, 1669. The Impri- 
merie Royale was established in 1640, by Louis XIII., who placed it 
in charge of Cramoisy. His brother Gabriel was his partner during 
1644-58, and, beginning with 1663, Sebastien Mabre- Cramoisy (ac- 
cording to Harrisse, a son of another brother, Claude ; but, accord- 
ing to Baillet, Sebastien's grandson). Upon Sebastien's death, he 
was succeeded by Mabre-Cramoisy, who retained the title of Printer 
to the King, until 1687. This family became widely known as the 
printers of the entire original series of the Jesuit Relations (1632- 
73) ; but some of their other publications have been more famous as 
specimens of book-making, — for instance, Wveir Nzcefihorz Callistt 
historicE ecclesiasticcz, lib. 18, etc. (1630). 

Sebastien was an alderman, an administrator of the hospitals, 
and president of the Grande Navire, an association of the booksell- 
ers of Paris ; his name also appears as a charter member of the 
Hundred Associates (1627). 

23 (p- 83). — Otherwise known as the " Hundred Associates " (see 
vol. iv., note 21). 

24 (p. 87). — This "MS. dictionary" was probably the work of 
Masse or Brebeuf, while engaged upon the first Canadian mission 
(1625 - 29) ; some of their translations into Montagnais are mentioned 
in vol. iv., note 30. In acquiring the native dialects, they were 
greatly aided by the Recollet missionaries. Le Clercq states that 
the latter had prepared Huron, Montagnais, and Algonkin dictiona- 
ries, and that he himself had seen fragments of these, in their hand- 


NOTES TO VOL. V 281 

writing. He also says that copies of these dictionaries were pre- 
sented to Louis XIII., in 1625; but Shea remarks that " no trace of 
these has ever been found." — Shea's Le C/ercq, vol. i., pp. 248, 249. 

Dictionaries and other MSS. in Algonkin, the work of Jesuit mis- 
sionaries, are still extant, in the archives of the mission of Lac des 
Deux Montagnes (Oka), Quebec; one of these is dated 1661. — See 
Filling's Bibltog. Algon. Lang., pp. 6, 7. Several MSS. of this 
character are also in the archives of St. Mary's College, Montreal. 
"^25 (p. 87). — Hakiuyt's account of Cartier's third voyage (1540) 
thus mentions the ' ' diamonds ' ' of this locality : ' ' And vpon that 
high cliff wee found a faire fountaine very neere the sayd Fort: 
adioyning whereunto we found good store of stones, which we es- 
teemed to be Diamants. . . . the most faire, poUished, and ex- 
cellently cut that it is possible for a man to see, when the Sunne 
shineth vpon them, they glister as it were sparkles of fire." After- 
wards, meeting Roberval at St. John's Bay, Cartier " tolde him that 
hee had brought certaine Diamonts, and a quantitie of Golde ore, 
which was found in the Countrey. Which ore the Sunday next en- 
suing was tryed in a Furnace, and found to be good." — Goldsmid's 
Hakluyt, vol. xiii., pp. 150, 151, 164. On p. 155 of the same volume 
is a letter from Jacques Noel, a grandnephew of Cartier, in which 
Noel declares that he has seen a map of Canada, drawn by his uncle, 
on which the latter had written these words: " By the people of 
Canada and Hochelaga it was said, That here is the land of Sague- 
nay , which is rich and wealthy in precious stones. ' ' 

Champlain says, in Voyages (Prince ed. ), vol. i., p. 253: " Along 
the shore of Quebec, there are diamonds in some slate rocks, which 
are better than those of Alengon. ' ' Kalm describes the black lime- 
slate of this region, in his Travels into North America (Forster's 
trans., London, 1772), vol. ii., p. 371, and adds: " The large cracks 
are almost filled up with transparent quartz crystals, of different 
sizes. One part of the mountain contains vast quantities of these 
crystals, from which the comer of the mountain which lies to the S. 
S. E. of the palace has got the name of Pointe de Diamante or Dia- 
mond Point." 

26 (p. 93). — La Nasse : Champlain mentions this savage as warn- 
ing the French of Kirk's approach to Quebec (1629). Le Jeune de- 
scribes (Relation, 1634, post) the baptism of La Nasse, under the 
name of Joseph, and his pious death some months later. 

27 (p. 95). — Cf. Jouvency's account of a similar occurrence (vol. 
i. of this series, p. 269). 

28 (p. 97). — Sagamiti : a word derived by Maurault (Hist. 
Abenakis, p. 13) from sogmoipi, " the repast of chiefs." The most 
common form in which the Indians prepared maize as food ; termed 


282 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 


" samp," or " hominy," by the English. The corn, usually pounded 
into meal, was boiled in water, with the addition of meat, fish, or 
oil, when they had such, to enrich and flavor it. Various kinds of 
vegetables, in their season, — beans, peas, pumpkins,— were boiled 
with the com, especially when the latter was still green : a survival 
of this usage remains in our modern " succotash," of corn and beans. 
Sagard describes, in Grand Voyage {'Yros.s ed., 1865), pp. 94-98, 
this and various other methods of cooking maize. Creuxius gives 
(Hist. Canad., p. 23), a picture of Indian women preparing corn; 
and Lafitau describes at length the cultivation of maize, its use as 
food, and the preparation of sagamite, in his Mceurs des Sauvages 
Amerzquazns (Paxis, 1724), t. ii., pp. 63-89. Cf. Carr's Food of 
Amer. Ind., pp. 178-182. 

29 (p. 103).— The bulbs were those of the yellow lily /^Zz7/«;« 
Canadense), which have been, from the earliest historic times, used 
as food by the Indians. — Pickering's Chronological History of 
Plants (Boston, 1879), P- 641; and Thoreau's Maitte Woods, p. 194, 
284, 326. Trumbull says (Conn. Hist. Colls., vol. ii., p. 26) that 
" sheep' nak is the modem Abnaki name for the bulbous roots of the 
yellow lily," — possibly the Micmac sgabun or shuben (see our vol. 
ii., note 77). Cf. Josselyn's New England's Rarities Discovered 
(London, 1672), reprinted, with introduction and valuable annota- 
tions by Tuckerman, in Trans. Atner. Antiq. Soc, vol. iv., (Bos- 
ton, i860), pp. 105 - 238 ; on p. 176, he says of the water lily (Nuphar 
advenaj : "The Indians eat the roots, which are long a-boiling. 
They tast like the liver of a sheep. The moose-deer feed much upon 
them ; at which time the Indians kill them, when their heads are un- 
der water." 

Cf. also Brunet's note on Nelumbium luteum, in Tailhan's ed. of 
Nicolas Perrot's Memoire sur les Sauvages (Leipzig and Paris, 
1864), p. 194. Nuttall says of the Nelumbium (which he calls Cya- 
mus luteusj : " The Osages and other Western natives employ the 
roots of this plant for food, preparing them by boiling. When fully 
ripe, after a considerable boiling, they become as farinaceous, agree- 
able, and wholesome a diet as the potato. This species is every- 
where made use of by the natives, who collect both the nuts and the 
roots." — " Flora of Arkansas Territory," in Trans, of Am. Philos. 
Soc, new series, vol. v. (Phila., 1837), p. 160. 

30 (p. 103). — Cf. the legend of Gougou (vol. ii., note 44). 

31 (p. 105). — Cf. vol. i., p. 261 ; and Sagard's Canada, pp. 271-273, 
for descriptions of the vapor-bath as a therapeutic agent, among 
the North American aborigines. 

32 (p. 105).— Maurault (Hist. Abenakis, p. 15) says that the Abe- 
nakis " were not wont to show their discontent or hatred by oaths or 


NOTES TO VOL. V 283 


blasphemies. The same thing may still be noticed among them. 
They have the g^reatest horror of imprecations and blasphemies ; and 
there are no words in their language to express these, so often ut- 
tered by Canadians." Cf. Schoolcraft (hid. Tribes, vol. vi., p. 
682): " The Algonquin language has no words for the expression of 
oaths; an Algonquin can neither swear nor blaspheme." 

33 (p'. 107). — Pierre Antoine, sumamed Pastedechouan (Patetchou- 
non, or Atetkouanon) ; a young Montagnais or Canadian, who was 
taken to France (1620) by the Recollet missionaries, and there bap- 
tized and educated. Sagard says that " he became proficient in 
Latin and French; and, on his return to Quebec [1625], the missiona- 
ries were obliged to send him back to his relatives for a time, that 
he might regain his native language, which he had almost forgot- 
ten." Captured by Admiral Kirk in 1628, he refused to serve as an 
interpreter, and soon after escaped. See an account of this youth 
in Sagard's Canada, pp. 865, 936-938; cf. Creuxius's Hist. Canad., 
p. no; Shea's Le Clercq, vol. i., pp. 235, 273, 294-296. 

34 (p. in). — Guillaume Guillemot, sieur Duplessis-Bochart (some- 
times written Duplessis-Querbodo) ; the lieutenant of Emery de 
Caen, upon the latter's return in 1632, and afterwards admiral of 
the fleet, under Champlain. In 1634, he transported Robert Gif- 
fard's colony to Beauport; and, in the same year, he took an active 
part in the foundation of Three Rivers. He seems to have been a 
prominent and influential member of the Quebec colony, for nearly 
twenty years, though but few details of his life are known. In No- 
vember, 1651, he was appointed governor of Three Rivers (his sala- 
ry being 5,250 li\Tes per annum), in which position he remained un- 
til Aug. 19, 1652, when he was slain by the Iroquois, while endeavor- 
ing to repel their attack upon his post. Charlevoix mentions him as 
" a good officer and a worthy man ;" and Mother Mary of the Incar- 
nation writes of him as " a very brave and honorable gentleman." 
See Suite's account of him, Chron. trifiuv., pp. 126, 136, 137; and 
Can.-Fran^ais, vol. ii., p. 45; also Ferland's Cours d'Histotre, vol. 
i., p. 406. 

35 (p. 113). — Nicolas Marsolet (MarsoUet), bom at Rouen, 1587; 
he seems to have come to Canada with Champlain (about 1608, ac- 
cording to Suite; but 1613, according to Tang^ay), and was long 
an interpreter for the Montagnais and Algonkin tribes. Champlain 
says (Laverdiere's ed., pp. 1229, 1249- 1263) that, when Kirk cap- 
tured Quebec, Marsolet, with several other Frenchmen, deserted to 
the English; and that it was through Marsolet's trickery that he 
himself was not allowed by Kirk to take with him to France the 
three Indian girls who had been presented to him some time before. 
Marsolet, however, afterwards asserted that the English forced him 


284 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 

to remain with them. He married Marie La Barbide, probably 
about 1636; and their daughter Marie, born in the following year, 
is mentioned in the Journal des Jisuites, under date of 1647. In 
1646-47, Marsolet figures as a leader of the habitants in their quar- 
rels with the Hundred Associates. April 16 of the latter year, he 
obtained from the company the fief of St. Aignan, with a half -league 
frontage on the St. Lawrence, and a depth of two leagues ; but in 
1669 he sold it to Michel Pelletier. In 1672, Marsolet obtained from 
Talon another grant, nearly as large as the former, on the Grande 
Riviere du Chene, apparently in the present Lotbiniere county; 
this fief was known as Prairies Marsolet. He died May 15, 1677. — 
Suite's Can.-Frangais, vols, ii.-v. ; and Ferland's Cours d'Htstozre, 
vol. i., p. 234. Suite calls him " the little king of Tadoussac;" dur- 
ing most of his life, he was engaged in trade at that port. Many of 
his descendants now live in the vicinity of Three Rivers. 

36 (p. 115). — Alien word: Maurault, speaking of the alliance 
between the English and the Mohicans (1621), says of the latter that 
" many of them had learned to speak English passably. " He adds : 
" All the savages of New England showed great aptitude for learn- 
ing the English language, and gradually introduced many English 
words into their own. The Abenakis showed the same aptitude for 
that language. But it was not the same with the French ; these 
savages knew only a few words of that language, which they pro- 
nounced almost unintelligibly, although a great many of them spoke 
English quite readily." — Hist. Abenakis, pp. vii.-ix., 39. 

37 (p. 115). — Sagamo : cf. vol. i., note 16. This word appears, in 
varying forms, in many Algonkin dialects. The Abenaki word, ac- 
cording to Kidder, is " sogmt'," — being a nasal vowel; Vetromile 
writes it "saghem," or "sangman," and defines it as "over the 
whole world." Maillard gives the Micmac word as"chaiman." 
The Lenape word was "sakima;" the Algonkin is "okima," as 
given by Cuoq. 

Schoolcraft relates ( Ind. Tribes, vol. vi., p. 202) a legend current 
among the Ottawas, concerning ' ' Sagima, a renowned personage, 
to whom they attribute the origin of their tribe. ' ' 

38 (p. 117). — See Cuoq's " Grammaire de la langue algonquine," 
in Canad. Roy. Soc. Proc, vol. ix., sect, i, p. 85; and vol. x., sect. 
I, p. 41. Cf. Filling's Bibliog. Algon. Lang., pp. 6-9. 

39 (p. \2i).— Raquettes : snowshoes. This word is very old; its 
earlier forms were rachete or rasquete. It is derived by Littr6 
(through Low Latin racha) from the Arabic rdha, " palm of the 
hand;" by Menage and others, from Latin reticulata, "netted." 
In either case, its present use is traceable to certain ball-games. 
The earliest of these was that called by the French " paume " (from 


NOTES TO VOL. V 286 


Latin palma), in which the ball was struck with the palm of the 
hand; it was exceedingly popular in the countries of Western Eu 
rope, and was common at least as early as the thirteenth century 
afterwards becoming known as "tennis" (a word of uncertain 
derivation). Of historic interest, in this connection, is the serment 
dujeupaume (oath of the tennis court), a name given to that ses 
sion of the Third Estate at Versailles. June 20, 17S9, at which the 
deputies swore not to adjourn till they had given a constitution to 
r ranee. 

Heathcote, in Tennis (London, 1890), says: "It is probable that 
the Italians, when playing la paume, found that a glove was a use 
ful protection to the hand; and. when balls were made harder and 
heavier that a thicker glove was required. The transition from 
the thick glove to a network of strings, and the adoption of the lever- 
age afforded by the use of a handle, may have suggested to an in- 
genious inventor the prototype of the implement we now use - 
The racket was introduced into France, probably in the fourteenth 
century. 

To apply the name of this instrument to the snowshoe, so similar 
in shape to the former, was an obvious and easy transition The 
use of netted snowshoes was universal among the North American 
tnbes from whom it has been adopted by the white inhabitants of 
Canada and the mountainous regions of the United States. Lafitau 
describes snowshoes and their use, in his Mwurs des Sauva^es 
tome u.. pp. 220-223; as does Schoolcraft, in Ind. Tribes vol iii ' 
p. 68.- several illustrations being given, of specimens from Minne- 
sota, Utah, and Oregon. Among the different tribes, they are of 
various sizes and shapes; their length varies from fifteen inches to 
six feet, and the width from thirteen to twenty inches; those used 
by the Western tribes turn upward at the front end. The snowshoes 
worn by the women are shorter, often painted and other^vise orna- 
mented. 

40 (p. 133)-— Concerning the division of labor between men and 
women, see vol. ii., note 33. Cf. the references given by Carr in 
Mounds of Mississippi Valley; this paper has also been published 
separately (Cincinnati. 1S83); see pp. 7-35, in that edition. Cf. 
also Tailhan's Per rot, pp. 29. 30, 181. 

41 (p. 157)-— The aborigines of North America had but vague and 
uncertain ideas of a Supreme Being or Creator. They believed in 
certain supernatural Beings, called Manitous (Algonkin), or Okis 
(Huron-Iroquois), which they conceived under the forms of beasts 
birds, or reptiles.— occasionally in human form, or even that of 
stones. Another class of beings embodied the polytheistic tenden- 
cies of the savage mind.— the manitous of the sun and the moon, of 


286 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 

the water, of the winds, etc. ; and the progenitors or ' ' Kings ' ' of 
various animals, — of which Michabou, Messou, or Manabozho (" the 
Great Hare ' ' ) was the chief. The Huron deity Jouskeha and the 
Huron-Iroquois Areskoui are apparently personifications of the Sun. 
Sometimes, too, are found deifications of heroes, as the Iroquois 
Taounyawatha, or Hiawatha, the Northern counterpart of the Peru- 
vian Viracocha, the Carib Tamu, or the Aztec Quetzalcoatl, — all 
suggestive, in personal characteristics, and in their influence upon 
their respective peoples, of the Greek Prometheus. 

Charlevoix, in Journal Historique (Paris, 1744), pp. 344-347, 
gives an account of Michabou, Areskoui, and other deities, and of 
the tutelary genius that each Indian adopts. Lafitau (Moeurs des 
Sauvages, tome i., pp. 126, 127, 145) says that Areskoui is the Su- 
preme Being, in the belief of the Hurons ; and he cites the saying of 
a Huron convert that Areskoui was such as the missionaries de- 
scribed their God to be. Lafitau tries to prove, by arguments more 
ingenious than convincing, that Areskoui was the same as the Ares 
(or Mars) of the Thracians. Perrot relates the legends of the Great 
Hare, in his Memoir e (Tailhan's ed.), pp. 3-7. Many legends of 
Manabozho and Manitou are collected by Schoolcraft in his Algic 
Researches (N. Y., 1839); cf. Ind. Tribes, vol. i., p. 317. Parkman 
(Jesuits, pp. Ixxii.-lxxv.) outlines the whole subject as connectedly 
as is possible, giving many references to other authors. Brinton 
has just issued (1896) a third and revised edition of his Myths oj 
the New World, which fully treats these legends ; he regards Ma- 
nabozho as an impersonation of Light, and belonging to the world- 
wide cycle of Sun-myths. Cf. A. F. Chamberlain's " Nanibozhu 
among the Algonkian Tribes," in Jour. Am. Folk-Lore, vol. iv. 
(1891), pp. 193-213. 

42 (p. 183). — The mountains here referred to are the Laurentian; 
they extend along the north shore of the St. Lawrence from Belle 
Isle Straits to Quebec, and thence N. W. to the Arctic Ocean, — a 
distance of about 3, 500 miles. They form the watershed between 
the St. Lawrence and Hudson Bay, and also between that bay and 
the region of the Mackenzie River. The general elevation of the 
Laurentian range is 1,500 to 2,000 feet, although some peaks in the 
neighborhood of the Saguenay reach a height of 4,000 feet. The 
valleys are often worn into deep pits, containing ponds and lakes ; 
and some of the streams are formed by a succession of these lakes, 
united by short outlets. These mountains are generally thickly 
wooded; the rocks are eozoic; and the region is rich in minerals, — 
graphite, asbestos, phosphates, mica, iron, etc. — See Annual Re- 
ports of Canadian Geological Survey 

43 (p. 187). — Coftsulter of Manitou ; diviner or soothsayer, often 


NOTES TO VOL. V 


287 


called "sorcerer" by the French; the aouimom or pzlototS de- 
scribed by Lescarbot CNouv. France, pp. 678 -C8i. 683), Biard (vol 
11.. of our series, pp. 75, 77), and Champlain (Laverdiere's ed ) pp 
335. 336— See note 41, ante; cf. Rochemonteix's //j«//^j vol i 
pp. no, III. ' ' 

44 (P- i<)3)-—Eschom: more correctly written Echon, since ac- 
cording to Br^h^yxirRelatwn 1636, part 2, chap, iv.), the sound of 
M is unknown in the Huron dialect. A name given to Brebeuf by 
the Hurons, during his first stay among them (see vol. iv note 30) 
After his death, they similarly named Chaumonot, in accordance 
with their custom of bestowing a dead man's name upon one of his 
relatives, or upon some person adopted by the tribe, who thus be- 
came the representative and successor of the deceased. The word 
ecAon is the Huron name of a certain tree, valued by the natives for 
its medicinal properties,- according to Suite de la vie du Chaumo- 
not (1693), pp. 13, 14. 

45 (p. 197)— This negro lad is mentioned by Le Jeune in the 
Relation of 1632, p. 63, ante. Ker is one of the numerous variants 
of Kirk's name. "The estimable family living" at Quebec was 
that of Madame Hebert and her son-in-law, Guillaume Couillard 
(vol. 11., note 80; vol. iv., note 'i'i); see note 13, ante. For value 
of ecu, see vol. i., note 34. 

Le Baillif, a native of Amiens, had come with De Caen in 1622 
as a clerk. Champlain says (Laverdiere's ed., pp. i228-i'23i) that 
this man was discharged by his employer, as being extremely vicious • 
that he deserted to the English, in 1629 ; that Kirk gave him the keys 
of the company's buildings; that Le Baillif availed himself of this 
opportunity to plunder the stores of all their contents, including 3 500 
to 4,000 beaver skins belonging to De Caen ; that his scandalous con- 
duct displeased even the English; and that he iUtreated the French 
who remained at Quebec. Le Clercq says that Le Baillif tried to 
induce the English to plunder the Jesuit residence. 

46 (p. 201).— Grand Ckibou: see vol. iv., note ^t. 

47 (p. 201).— The remainder of this paragraph is not found in the 
Lenox copy (H. 56); see Bibliographical Data, ante, document xxi. 

48 (p. 203).— An important variation in the text occurs at this 
point in the Lenox copy, for which see Bibliographical Data, ante 
document xxi. ' ' 

49 (P- 202,).— Oliver the interpreter: Oliver Le Tardif, bom at 
Honfleur, in 1601. He probably came over with Champlain, when 
a mere lad; his name first appears as one of the signers of a petition 
from the Quebec settlers to Louis XHL, dated Aug. 18, 1621. asking 
that the disputes between the rival commercial companies in Cana- 
da, and the disorders arising therefrom, might be settled by royal 


288 


LES RELATIONS DES J ^SUITES 


authority. This petition was sent to France by the Recollet Father 
George Le Baillif ; it is given in full by Le Clercq (Shea's ed., vol. 
i. pp. 161-174). By Champlain we are told (Laverdiere's ed., pp. 
1042, 1113, 1228) that Le Tardif was serving as an interpreter in 
1623'; that he was proficient in the Montagnais, Algonkin, and Hur- 
on dialects; that he was, in 1626-29, a sub-agent for the Hundred 
Associates; and. at the capture of Quebec, he gave up the keys of 
the storehouse to Kirk. Returning at that time to France, he came 
back to Quebec with either De Caen or Champlain. Nov. 3, 1637, 
he married the eldest daughter of Guillaume Couillard, Louise, 
then less than thirteen years of age. Seven years later, his 
adopted daughter, Marie Manitouabewich, was married to Martin 
Prevost.— the first marriage in Canada of a Frenchman to an In- 
dian woman. In 1642, he was general manager for the Hundred 
Associates; and, in 1650, the agent of a company (including Lauson, 
Rosee CheflEault, and others) to whom had been conceded the Isle of 
Orleans. Laverdiere says that Le Tardif was at one time seignior 
over part of Beaupre. His death occurred Jan. 28, i665.-Sulte's 
Can.-Frangais, vols. ii. and iii. 

50 (p. 202,).— Assisted in their wars. Champlain here refers to 
his expeditions, with the Ottawas and other tribes of the St. Law- 
rence valley, against the Iroquois, in 1609, 1610, and 1615. In the 
last of these, during an attack made by the allies on an Iroquois fort 
(Oct II), Champlain was wounded by arrows, as were also two Ot- 
tawa chiefs, Ochateguin and Or2ca:x (Voyages, Laverdiere's ed., pp. 
528 532, 533, 919). Laverdiere reproduces Champlain's illustration 
of the b'attle', and thinks this fort was near the foot of Lake Canan- 
daigua, in Ontario county, N. Y. ; but Slafter identifies it with one 
the remains of which were discovered years ago, on the shore of 
Nichols's Pond, in Fenner township, Madison county, N. Y.— Cham- 
-plain (Prince Soc), vol. i., pp. 130-132- 

51 (p ■2Y<)).— Sorcerers: the Nipissiriniens, or Nipissmgs, around 
Lake Nipissing; Ferland says (Cours d'Histoire, vol. i., p. 92) that 
the term "Sorcerers" was given them " because more sorcerers 
[medicine men] were found among them than among other tribes. 
Charlevoix says of them (Journ. Hist., pp. 186, 187): " These are 
the true Algonquins, and they alone have retained the Algonquin 
Language without alteration. "-See Hunter's account of their habi- 
tat, note 19, attte. 

In regard to Ste. Croix, see vol. ii., note 66. 

52 (p. 2i9).-Iroquet (also written Hiroquet, Hirocay, Iroquay. 
and Yroquet): the name of both the tribe and its chief , the latter 
being frequently mentioned by Champlain. He took part in two ot 
the latter's expeditions against the Iroquois (1609 and 161 5). m 


NOTES TO VOL. V 


1610, Champlain persuaded Iroquet to allow a French lad to spend 
the winter with his tribe, to learn their language and become ac- 
quainted with the country and its people; Laverdiere thinks this 
boy was fitienne Brule (see note 58, post). After the Iroquois ex- 
pedition of 161 5, Iroquet and his men, as well as the French, spent 
the winter in the Huron country ; and quarrels which then arose be- 
tween the Iroquets and their hosts compelled Champlain reluctantly 
to abandon a journey of exploration northward from Lake Nipis- 
sing, which he had long desired to undertake. He states that Iro- 
quet lived about 80 leagues from the Grand Sault (Sault St. Louis) ; 
Ferland (Cours d'Histotre, vol. i., p. 91) says the tribe "occupied, 
southwest of the Ottawa, the interior of a triangular territory of 
which Vaudreuil, Kingston, and Ottawa form the angles." Their 
Huron name was Onontchataronons (Relation of 1646). 

Charlevoix relates, in his Hist aire de la Nouvelle France (Paris, 
1744). vol. i., p. 228, that in August, 1642, two old men of the Iro- 
quets told Maisonneuve, at Montreal, that " their tribe formerly lived 
on this island ; that they were driven out by the Hurons ; and that 
they took refuge, some with the Abenakis, some among the Iroquois, 
and some with the conquering Hurons. " He also describes (Joiirn. 
Hist., pp. no. III) a sanguinary conflict which had occurred, in 
former times, between the Iroquets and the other Algonkin tribes, 
in which the former were almost exterminated. This battle took 
place near the mouth of the Becancourt River, a little below Three 
Rivers. So many dead bodies remained in the stream and on its 
banks, that it was called, even till Charlevoix's time, "la Riviere 
Puante " (stinking river). 

Suite (Can. Francais, vol. i., pp. 76-83) thus epitomizes the suc- 
cessive changes in tribal locations on the St. Lawrence: " The Al- 
gonquins dwelt along the Ottawa ; the Iroquois, on the St. Lawrence. 
About the year 1500, the Algonquins drove the Iroquois from the 
shores of their river, and there established themselves. The Iro- 
quois settled between Lake Champlain and Lake Ontario. Between 
1500 and 1530, the Hurons (or some other Iroquois tribe) retook 
Montreal from the Iroquets, an Algonquin tribe ; and most of the 
Iroquets passed into the ranks of the Iroquois by this conquest 
[adopted by the conquerors, according to the custom prevalent 
among most of the aboriginal tribes]. . . . In 1535. Jacques 
Cartier visited, at Montreal, the Huron-Iroquois. . . . Towards 
1560, the Algonquins massacred nearly all the Iroquet warriors at 
the Riviere Puante, and the rest of this tribe returned to the Algon- 
quins. Between 1560 and 1600, the Iroquois tribe of Agniers [Mo- 
hawks] was the one chiefly at war with the Algonquins. From 1560 
to 1600, the Algonquins gained the ascendency in every direction. 


290 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 

The Iroquois tribe that held Montreal retired westward ; this was, 
apparently, the Huron tribe that Champlain found, in 1615, near 
Lake Simcoe. It was about 1600 that the league of the Five Nations 
seems to have commenced, and it swept the shores of the river. 
. . . The Algonquins, crushed by the Iroquois, fell back upon 
the Ottawa. In 1609, Champlain was accompanied, in his expedition 
against the Iroquois, by bands of Hurons, Algonquins, Iroquets, and 
Montagnais ; and the French alliance again attracted Algonquins to 
the St. Lawrence, who settled chiefly at Three Rivers. . . . 
About 1630, the Iroquois gained ascendency over the Algonquins, 
thanks to the firearms sold them by the Dutch. In 1 647, Piescaret, 
an Algonquin chief, was assassinated; and, after that, his tribe, as 
well as the Hurons, was destroyed. Until 1665, the Iroquois reigned 
supreme in the greater part of Canada." See also Perrot's Memoir e, 
chap, iv., and Tailhan's notes thereon, pp. 165, 166. 

53 (p. 221). — Antoine Daniel was born at Dieppe, May 27, 1601; 
and, at the age of twenty, entered the Jesuit novitiate at Rouen. 
This completed, he was an instructor there, during 1623-27; then 
for three years studied theology at Clermont. He was, after 1630, a 
teacher and preacher at the college of Eu, until his departure for 
Canada (1632), whither he went with his brother. Captain Charles 
Daniel (see vol. iv. , ttote 46). He endeavored, with Brebeuf and 
Davost, to go at once to the Huron country ; but the savages refused 
to take them, and they were compelled to wait for a more favorable 
opportunity. This came a year later, when these three returned 
with the Hurons who had come down to Three Rivers for trade, — 
reaching their destination after a journey full of hardships and suf- 
fering, in which Daniel was abandoned on the way by his savage 
guides. They established themselves at Ihonatiria (see noie 60, 
post J, and Daniel remained there until his death, — except during 
the two years 1636-38, when he was at Quebec, attending to some 
Huron lads whom he had taken thither to instruct in religion and in 
the ways of civilization. In the summer of 1648, the Iroquois made 
a sudden raid, and, on July 4, surprised and utterly destroyed the 
town of Teanaustaye (called by the missionaries St. Joseph). Daniel, 
after doing all in his power to encourage and console his people, 
was murdered at his church door by the Iroquois ; his body, riddled 
with arrows, was thrown into the flames that consumed the build- 
ing. He was the second martyr among the Jesuits sent to New 
France. The Hurons called him "Antwen " (also written Antouen- 
nen), a corruption of his Christian name. He was distinguished for 
his humility, obedience, patience, and courage. — See Rochemon- 
tQiiCsJd suites, vol. ii., p. 74. 

54 (p. 221). — Ambroise Davost came (1632), with Charles and An- 


NOTES TO VOL. V 291 

toine Daniel, to St. Anne's, Cape Breton Island (see vol. iv., note 
46) ; but in May, 1633, both missionaries went to Quebec with Cham- 
plain, who, on his way thither, had stopped at Cape Breton. In 
July, 1634, he was assigned to the Huron mission, where he tarried 
two years, returning to Quebec with Daniel in 1636. He seems to 
have remained there and at Montreal until 1643; then, with health 
broken by toil and hardship, he departed for France, but died while 
on the voyage. 

55 (p. 221). — For sketch of Brebeuf, see vol. iv., note 30. 

56 (p. 223). — Petite nation : an Algonkin tribe, living east of the 
Ottawa River, which is " even to this day," says Laverdiere, " called 
the river of the Petite Nation." Their name was also given to the 
falls of the Chaudiere; and to a seigniory granted, in 1674, to Mgr. 
de Laval, and situated some fifteen leagues below the falls. Cham- 
plain mentions this tribe (161 3) as the Ouescharini (their Algonkin 
appellation, written by Ferland Ouaouechkalrini). 

57 (p. 239). — The French called this tribe Nation de I'lsle, because 
their principal habitat was on AUumettes Island, in the Ottawa 
River. Their Algonkin name was Kichesipiirini ; the Huron (used 
by Lalemant, in Relation of 1639), Ehonkehronons. Around their 
island the river was obstructed by dangerous rapids, involving a 
portage of canoes and goods. They profited by this position to levy 
a toll on all travelers who passed them. 

58 (p. 239). — Etienne Brule, a native of Champigny, France, 
came to Quebec with Champlain, at an early age, probably as early 
as 1608. He was an interpreter for the Hurons during many years, 
and lived with various tribes, — spending thus eight years, according 
to Champlain. In 161 5. he went with the latter to the Huron coun- 
try, and was sent by his commander to the Carantouanais (allies of 
the Hurons, and probably the Andastes, living on the upper Susque- 
hanna), to hasten the coming of their warriors on the expedition 
against the Iroquois. Champlain saw no more of him until three 
years later, when he came down to Quebec with the annual trading 
party of the Hurons. He told Champlain that he had been obliged 
to remain among the Carantouanais, and had explored the country 
southward to the sea (Slafter thinks, to Chesapeake Bay) ; had been 
captured by Iroquois, and narrowly escaped death by torture ; but 
had finally succeeded in making his way back to the Hurons. After 
the capture of Quebec (1629), Brule deserted to the English; but, 
soon afterward, he went with Amantacha to the Huron country, 
where (1633) he was murdered by the savages. Sagard says this 
was in revenge for some misdemeanor he had committed there, and 
that his flesh was eaten by his murderers. Champlain says that 
Brule was licentious and otherwise depraved, thus setting a bad ex- 


292 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES 

ample to the savages, for which he should have been severely pun- 
ished. — See Voyages ( Laverdiere's ed. ), pp. 523, 621, 629, 1065, 
1249-51; also Sagard's Canada, pp. 465-467. 

59 (p. 245). — This was Simon Le Maistre, a merchant of Rouen, 
and one of the Hundred Associates, — later, a member of the royal 
council, and receiver-general of tithes in Normandy. He aided in 
fitting up the expedition sent by Madame de Guercheville to found 
St. Sauveur (see vol. iii., p. 261). Jan. 15, 1636, he obtained a seign- 
iory on the Bruyante (Chaudiere) river, extending three leagues on 
each side of the river, and six leagues in depth. Two weeks later, 
he transferred this concession to Jean de Lauson, for whom it was 
named Cote de Lauson. 

60 (p. 259). — La Rochelle. Sagard mentions {Canada, p. 208) 
' ' Tequeunoikuaye, also named Quieuindohian ; by the French called 
La Rochelle, and by us [the Recollets] the town of St. Gabriel 
. . . the chief town of that region, and the guardian and ram- 
part of all the towns of the Bear Nation, where they generally de- 
cide all affairs of great importance. ' ' This town was afterwards 
known as Ossossane; and the Jesuit mission established there was 
named for the Immaculate Conception. 

A. F. Hunter supplies the following information regarding La Ro- 
chelle: " There is scarcely any doubt as to its location. It was on 
the frontier toward the Iroquois, near the pass between Cranberry 
Lake and Nottawasaga Bay. Du Creux's map places it (under the 
name of Conception) at a short distance from Nottawasaga Bay, in 
the S. W. part of the Huron territory ; and there is, within and ad- 
joining the sixth concession of Tiny township, a group of remains 
of village sites and ossuaries corresponding exactly with this posi- 
tion. All the references in Champlain, Sagard, and the Relations, 
seem to indicate the same locality. The identity is so evident, that 
this group has been regarded as Ossossane since the first discovery 
of remains there, several years ago. When first visited by Cham- 
plain, it was well palisaded, as it also was when, twelve years later, 
the Recollets conducted there the mission of St. Gabriel. After- 
wards, its position was changed; and again, in 1636, five villages 
were consolidated into one. The ' feast of the dead, ' witnessed by 
Brebeuf in that year, was held at this place. These data, and the 
discovery of ossuaries, indicate the existence of various village 
sites in one neighborhood. From the earliest visit of Champlain 
(161 5) until the dispersion of the Hurons, it was the capital of their 
confederacy, — the place where the most important councils were 
held. Pi j art founded the mission of the Conception there in 1637; 
and it was the headquarters of the entire Huron mission, after the 
destruction of Ihonatiria by a pestilence, in 1638, until the establish- 


NOTES TO VOL. V 293 


ment of Ste. Marie-on-the-Wye. At a meeting of the Canadian In- 
stitute on March 19, 1887, the Reverend Father Laboreau, of Pene- 
tanguishene, presented to the Provincial Archseological Museum a 
brass finger-ring found in one of the ossuaries at Ossossane. On 
the seal of this ring are engraved the letters I. H. S., with a cross 
standing on the bar of the H." 

(See Hunter's "Archaeological Research in the Huron Country," 
at end of this volume. ) 

61 (p. 263). — This abandoned village was known among the Hu- 
rons as Toanche. As stated in note 58, ante, Etienne Brul6 was 
murdered there in 1633. The Indians, dreading lest the French 
should take revenge upon them for this deed, hastily abandoned 
Toanche, and fixed their dwellings at a spot two or three miles dis- 
tant, naming their new village Ihonatiria (see vol. iv. , note 30). A. 
F. Hunter writes, concerning the locality of these towns : 

' ' The exact positions of these villages have not yet been estab- 
lished beyond question. Martin thinks the various data furnished 
by Sagard and Brebeuf ' seem to indicate the west entrance of what 
is now called Penetanguishene Bay ' (Life of Jogues, appendix A.). 
But Tache thinks the borders of the small inlet called Thunder Bay, 
fully six miles farther west, the more probable location. This bay 
is a small natural harbor, where landing is easy. At the time of 
Tache's researches (1865), it was the nearest point to any village 
site then discovered, the remains of one having been traced at a 
place distant about a mile from its shore. Parkman and Laverdiere 
adopted Tache's opinion, — the latter assuming that Toanche was 
identical with Otoiiacha, where Champlain had landed. The evi- 
dence in favor of Thunder Bay as the landing place of Brebeuf, al- 
though scanty, is superior to that produced for any other locality. 
The exact site of Toanch6, however, can not yet be determined, be- 
cause, except in a few places, the original forest still covers the 
shores of the inlet, with those of Matchedash Bay adjoining it, and 
to some distance inland. Farther back in the country, the farms of 
the settlers are mostly cleared, and village sites have been exposed 
by plowing ; but these are too far distant from the Bay to correspond 
with either of the villages in question. A large ossuary in this vicin- 
ity, discovered in 1846, at the distance of about two miles from Thun- 
der Bay, is described by Martin in his edition of Bressani's Relation, 
p. loi ; also more fully by Edward W. Bawtree (Edinburgh New 
Philosophical fournal, July, 184S), whose account is reprinted in 
Squier's Antiquities of the State of New York (Buffalo, 1851), pp. 
100-107. Bawtree there describes another bone-pit, found two 
miles farther west, and at about the same distance from the inlet. 
The present writer also examined, in July, 1887, another large ossu- 


294 LES RELA TIONS DES JJ^SUITES 

ary, and a small one beside it, then in the woods, and distant about 
a mile from the southwest angle of Thunder Bay. Martin and Ta- 
che apparently agree in placing Ihonatiria west of Penetangjuishene 
Bay ; but no site has yet been found there which will entirely corre- 
spond with the statements made by early writers. As in the case 
of Toanche, Du Creux's map is silent as to its position. Rough es- 
timates of its distances from other villages sometimes appear in the 
Relations ; as, that it was two leagues from Aronte, or four leagues 
from Ossossane (La Conception). But, even when the positions of 
these others are known, such data, without the direction of the com- 
pass being given, are insuflBcient to determine its position, or dis- 
tinguish it among the sites of any given neighborhood. It was the 
seat of the mission of St. Joseph, and for nearly four years (1634- 
38) the headquarters of the Huron missions, until the destruction 
and dispersion of the village by a pestilence." 



Memorial Church at Penetanguishene, Ont. 


NOTES TO VOL. V 295 


ARCH^OLOGICAL RESEARCH IN THE HURON 
COUNTRY. 

BY ANDREW FREDERICK HUNTER, A.M. 

Father Brebeuf and his associates planted the missions to the Hu- 
rons in what is now the extreme northern part of Simcoe County. 
Or, more exactly defined, they were included within the boundaries 
of the present townships of Medonte, Tay, and Tiny, which the 
Canadian Government surveyed and opened for settlement in the 
period between the years 1820 and 1828. An influx of European set- 
tlers began soon after the latter date, and, in the course of clearing 
the forest and cultivating the soil, they found numerous remains of 
the Hurons, with here and there traces of the Jesuits. Brief notices 
here follow of those students of history and archaeolog^y who have 
labored to identify the sites of the Huron missions, or to throw light 
upon the subject. Other references to their work will be made in 
the notes on the respective mission sites. 

In 1835, Father Jean Baptiste Proulx came to St. Anne's church, 
Penetanguishene, as its first resident pastor. His attention was 
soon drawn to the Jesuit remains in that vicinity; and in June, 1845, 
he purchased, for the sum of £^'^. 15s., (old Canadian currency), the 
east half of lot no. 16 in the third concession of the Township of 
Tay (100 acres), on which are situated the ruins of Fort Ste. Marie- 
on-the-Wye. On account of its associations with the pioneers of 
their church in Canada, this property is still owned by the Jesuit 
Society. 

Father Felix Martin, S. J., visited, in 1845, the ruins of Fort Ste. 
Marie-on-the-Wye, and the mission sites whose exact positions were 
then known with certainty. His descriptions of these appear in his 
edition of Bressani's Relation, and in his Life of Jogites. The 
former work contains a reproduction of Creuxius's map (1660), 
which includes his " Chorogfraphia Regionis Huronum." 

Rev. G«o. Hallen, an Episcopal clerg^'man resident at Penetan- 
guishene after 1840, contributed tracings of the two mission forts 
(one on the Wye, the other on Christian Island), to Father Martin's 
Bressani. 

During two years of service as staff assistant-surgeon at Penetan- 
guishene (1846-48), Dr. Edward W. Bawtree examined six large 
Huron ossuaries, the first found in the district. He described these 


296 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 


at some length in an article, "Indian Sepulchral Pits in Canada" 
(see reference to this article in note 6i, ante). Bawtree's collection 
of Huron relics is in the Museum of the Army Medical Department 
at Netley, Eng. 

Within the first six years after his appointment to the chair of his- 
tory, in Toronto University (1854-60), Sir Daniel Wilson made sev- 
eral visits to the Huron country, to examine village sites and ossua- 
ries, and his publications concerning the Hurons were numerous, 
not only during this period but throughout the rest of his lifetime. 
His visits after i860 appear to have been less frequent, probably be- 
cause Tache's survey had covered the ground. Wilson made a 
special study of crania ; and of his archaeological memoirs his best 
known is " The Huron Race and its Head-form," in Canadian Jotir- 
nal, 2nd series, vol. xiii. (1871-73), pp. 113-134, in which he com- 
pares the Huron skull with that of the mound-builder. 

While Dr. J. C. Tache held the chair of physiology in Laval Uni- 
versity, Quebec (1860-64), he devoted his summer vacations to ex- 
plorations in the Huron country, and attempted, by examination of 
the published records and maps, to identify the sites of the missions. 
In this period he carefully examined some fourteen village sites and 
sixteen ossuaries, his identifications of which are adopted by Park- 
man and Laverdiere. Tache drafted a map of the Huron country, 
which, together with the records of his explorations, is in the Mu- 
seum of Laval University, besides many Huron relics secured by 
him. With the exception of some extracts from letters to the histo- 
rians just named, and to a few others, scarcely anything appeared 
from his pen on the subject.— See Hamel's sketch of Tache in An- 
nuaire de /' Universite Laval (Quebec, 1894), pp. 98- 103. 

Prof. Henry Montgomery, of Trinity University, Toronto, visited, 
during 1876-78, twelve Huron ossuaries. He minutely examined 
one of these, as well as several village sites and earthworks, in the 
immediate neighborhood of St. Louis, at which town Brebeuf and 
Lalemant were captured in 1649. He gave a short account of his in- 
vestigations in an article, " Indian Remains in Simcoe and Musko- 
ka," (Toronto Globe, Augusts, 1878) ; and he donated the principal 
part of his collection of Huron relics to the Toronto University mu- 
seum, since destroyed by fire. 

Charles A. Hirschf elder, Toronto, in a paper, "Anthropological 
Discoveries in Canada" (Toronto Mail, Dec. 2, 18S2; also. Proceed- 
ings of Brit. Assoc, for Adv. of Science, Montreal, 1884, pp. 915, 
916), described the Huron ossuaries and other remains which he 
had examined. He made, in the Huron country and in other parts 
of Ontario, a collection of four thousand specimens, which are pre- 
served in the museum of the Dominion Government at Ottawa. In 


NOTES TO VOL. V 297 


the course of his work, he investigated the sites of the missions of 
St. Joseph, St. Ignace, and Ste. Marie, on Christian Island. 

Rev. J. W. Annis, M. A., of the Methodist Episcopal church, 
while residing in the district (1884- S7). made a collection of Huron 
relics, many of them from the sites of the mission towns. Since his 
death', this collection (400 specimens) has been placed in the Pro- 
vmcial Archaological Museum at Toronto. His investigations ex- 
tended to the sites of St. Ignace, St. Louis, Ste. Marie-on-the-Wye, 
and Wenrio. 

James Bain, Jr., librarian of the Toronto Public Library, has 
thrown some light on the subject of the Huron missions. A paper 
read by him before the Canadian Institute in April, 1885, on " The 
Present Condition of the old French Fort at St. Marie," of which 
an abstract appears in the Proceedings, 3rd series, vol. iii. (1886), 
pp. 278, 279, describes, from personal inspection at different times, 
the razing of these ruins during the previous thirty years. 

Since Father Th. F. Laboreau became (1873) pastor of St. Anne's, 
Penetanguishene, he has devoted much time to the examination of 
mission sites. A paper, " Reminiscences of the Huron Missions," 
read before the Canadian Institute, Toronto, March 19, 1887, de- 
scribes some of his investigations. Another paper read before the 
same body, Sept. 25, 1891, on " The Early History of the Mission of 
St. Anne's, Penetanguishene," reviews its history from the year of 
its foundation (1835) until the commencement of the memorial 
church in memory of the martyred Jesuits, Brebeuf and his compan- 
ions, in the erection of which Father Laboreau himself has shown 
so much zeal. The corner stone of this edifice was laid Sept. 5, 
1886; and by 1890 the work had advanced so far that the basement 
could be used for regular services. 

David Boyle, curator of the Ontario Archaeological Museum, To- 
ronto, in the course of his scientific work has made numerous visits 
to the Huron country. More than a thousand relics in the museum 
have been taken from village sites of the Hurons and Tobacco Na- 
tion, inckiding the mission towns in both. His nine Annual Re- 
ports, and a small work. Primitive Man in Ontario, which are the 
most valuable contributions to the archaeology of Ontario yet pub- 
lished, abound in many references to the relics of these localities. 

A. C. Osborne, a journalist, formeriy of Penetanguishene, has 
written various articles on the Huron missions— " The Land of the 
Wyandots," "The Flight of the Hurons from Ste. Marie to Chris- 
tian Island," etc. 

An article by Joseph Wallace, Sr., Orillia, Ont., in Tlie Canadian 
Indian (Sault Ste. Marie, Ont), Feb. 1891, p. 134, entitled "A Fish- 
ing Station of the Ancient Hurons Identified," describes the channel 


298 


LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES 


between Lakes Simcoe and Couchiching, staked across by the Hu- 
rons for catching fish, the stakes having been preserved under water 
to the present day. A series of eleven articles, " Scenes from the 
Past," in the Orillia Packet (Feb.-June, 1896), relates the story of 
the Huron missions in a concise form. 

Space is lacking to enumerate all those who have devoted their 
energies to this work, though in less degree than the foregoing. 
Notwithstanding all their efforts, however, the work cannot be re- 
garded as complete. 









