Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 17: Hurons and Three Rivers, 1639-1640
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1898 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits17jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits17jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits17jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 17 of 73.

---

w 

  
  , 00 
c5 :"""- oo 
u - M 

  - N 
uJ
O 

  = N 
u
,... 

  
  <O 
"': ::::::::::: 0 
fn = 

  


  
  

  - ,... 

  _ M 
I z ____ 
,:;) 

. 

If 
.. 
....... 
c;t) 
>II e , 
I- 

  
l' 
l' . , 

" 



  
3 Ii 
...JH-ï': 
8 
,/, "1 
f 


THE JESUIT RELATIONS 

AND 

ALLIED DOCUMENTS 

VOL. XVII 


The edition consists of sev- 

n hundred and fifty sets 
all numbered 

No.Â.
d___. 
., 

. 

;, 
. 




  
J -; r
{ I ri;tr- 
,-, r, ) 
  . 
  
  

  
  
  
  
  
  ., 

  ,) I . t. v 
  

* <fJ 
. '" t. 
.J 1 

  
], t- J 
  
  

  
  t '
.. 
  
  . 
  i 
  
i 
h
i
'L 
  

  


  f) 
  I
r 
  
f1 
  J-p i J a : 
  {. 
. : 

of)
i1 
  C't\1
('t 
  
\c i 
  


  -I\ 8 
.f"\ 
  1'-= 
  
: 
  ; 


  i 
  ",;t)' t P 
  

  

  , i 
  .. J .þ {" · 
  i\ 
  
  
  
. vr\... - \ 
  c q 
  · c 

  . 
  
  1 
  
' l t 
  11.þ-I 
  
l t{ i
' 
j*1 
  


  

) 4l.;1 

  
  . 
-:. oft 
...... 


82.l3 
- . 
The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 

TRAVELS AND EXPLORATIONS 
OF THE JESUIT MISSIONARIES 
IN NEW FRANCE 

1610- 1 79 1 

THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES; ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 

EDITED BY 

REUBEN GOLD THW AITES 
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 

Vol. XVII 
HURONS AND THREE RIVERS: 1639 - 1640 

CLEVELAND: trbe jßurrows jßrotbns 
(tompan'Q, PUBLISHERS, M DCCCXCVIII 


COPYRIGHT, 18 9 8 
BY 
THE BURROWS BROTHERS Co 

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 

The Imþerial Press, Cleveland 


EDITORIAL STAFF 

REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
! FINLOW ALEXANDER 
PERCY FAVOR BICKNELL 
WILLIAM FREDERIC GIESE 
CRAWFORD LINDSAY 
WILLIAM PRICE 
HIRAM ALLEN SOBER 
Assistant Editor EMMA HELEN BLAIR 

Editor 

Translators. 

Bibliographical Adviser VICTOR HUGO PALTSITS 


CONTENTS OF VOL. XVII 

PREFACE TO VOLUME XVII 
DOCUMENTS :- 
XXXI V . Relation de ce qvi s' est passé en la 
NovveUe France, en l'année 16 39. 
[Chaps. iii.-viii., of Part 11., com- 
pleting the document.] HÙrosme 
Lalemallt; Ossossané, June 7, 16 39 7 
XXXV. Lettre à Monseigneur l'Eminentis- 
sime Cardinal Duc de Richelieu. 
HÙrosme Laleman/; Des Hurons en 
laNouvelle-France, March 28,1640 218 
XXXVI. Epistola ad R. P. Mutium Vitelleschi, 
Præpositum Generalem Societatis 
J esu, Romæ. HÙronymus Lale- 
man/; Apud Hurones, April I, 1640 226 
XXXVII. Epistola ad R. P. Mutium Vitelleschi, 
Præpositum Generalem Societatis 
J esu, Romæ. Jacobus Buteux; Tria 
Flumina, [ 16 4 0 ] . 23 2 
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA : VOLUME XVII . 239 
NOTES . 24 1 



  I., " i!: 
'T .:' 1 \ ' 
t"t: f , J øu
;- 
, . . _.,'" ' ',: 
  'I ,'r' 
,-.
,
!. . 
"I1
' 

';1 

. - 
  ' -,.,; ( - y ;- 
'. ,.___.t. ..
.,. \\,,
.u ""
' @ 'L \ 
-""--
"!>'I
' , >f' 
  j ' t l l . 
',r.:4'--. >' (Ii IX
' 

: ",_ 
  
L . 
rt
_:: 
:j,
r - 1.

1
- 

;: 

- 
\, .-c- t 

ILLUSTRATION TO VOL. XVII 

I. Photographic facsimile of handwriting of 
Jacques Buteux, S.J., in Register of Par- 
ish of Notre Dame, Montreal . Frontispiece 


PREFACE TO VOL. XVII 

Le Jeune's Relatz"on of 1639 (Doc. XXXIV.) is, like 
the majority of the regular series, in two parts,-the 
first (by Le Jeune) devoted to the field at large, with 
especial reference to the Lower St. Lawrence region, 
and the second (by Jerome Lalemant) giving an ac- 
count of the year's work among the Hurons. Part I., 
begun in our Vol. XV., was concluded in Vol. XVI., 
which also contained the first two chapters of Part 
II., concluded in the present volume. 
Following is a synopsis of the material contained 
in this volume: 
XXXIV. Father Lalemant continues his account 
to Le Jeune (his superior, at Quebec) of the Huron 
mission. He briefly reviews the year's work, and, 
though the missionaries still have many difficulties 
to contend with, he looks forward hopefully to the 
future. He enumerates the baptisms of the past year. 
Many of these conversions have occurred among the 
Wenrôhronons, a tribe forced by its weakness to take 
refuge with the Hurons, who receive the strangers 
with the utmost kindness and hospitality,- even 
meeting them halfway, to aid them in carrying their 
goods and infant children. The hardships of the 
journey are, nevertheless, so great that many of the 
refugees die on the way, and those who survive are 
afflicted by illness. In this emergency, the Fathers 
are able to render great aid, especially as their do- 


2 

PREFACE TO VOL. XVII 

mesties, or donnés, have learned in Europe the use 
of the lancet and other remedies; thus they are en- 
abled to reach the savages, and minister at once to 
their temporal and spiritual necessities. Most of the 
refugees have settled at Ossossané, and the infant 
church in that village now numbers almost sixty per- 
sons, which affords the missionaries great consolation. 
Valuable aid in their labors is given by the earliest 
real convert, Joseph Chihwatenhwa, who improves 
every opportunity to profess his faith and to exhort 
his countrymen to embrace it. On Christmas night, 
" not contenting himself with one Mass, he hears five 
in succession,- during most of them, on his knees; 
this, for a Barbarian, who has never known what that 
posture is, might well pass for a petty martyrdom." 
While dangerously ill, and delirious, " his utterances 
and ravings are only about the things of God and the 
Faith;" and, going to the fire, he defies imaginary 
enemies to " burn him, and see if it is in earnest he 
believes, or only with his lips." 
Lalemant reports that several causes have aided 
the progress of their work - the patience and cour- 
age of the pioneer missionaries, despite persecutions 
and dangers; the irreproachable lives led by lay 
Frenchmen in the Huron country; the aid of Joseph 
Chihwatenhwa, just mentioned; the favors and graces 
of the Virgin Mary; and finally, " the holy prayers 
.and devotions of so many good souls in France,"- 
to which last, the writer, like St. Francis Xavier, as- 
cribes great power and efficacy. 
The writer narrates their change of residence from 
Ihonatiria to Teanaustayaé, the most important of 
the Huron villages. He enumerates the conversions, 
since that event; but regrets that many persons, who 
were baptized when in danger of death, now fail to 


PREFACE TO VOL. XVII 

3 

appreciate the benefits of the holy rite. He then 
relates "the. most note worth y particulars of these 
baptisms." The Hurons, having captured in war 
over a hundred Iroquois prisoners, bring these home, 
and, according to their custom, put many of them to 
death, with most cruel torments. "All those," says 
Lalemant, " who were assigned to the Villages where 
we have residences, or which are near these, were, 
thank God, instructed and baptized. These 
afterward displayed so much fortitude in their tor- 
ments that our Barbarians resolved no longer to allow 
us to baptize these poor unfortunates, reckoning it a 
misfortune to their country when those whom they 
torment shriek not at all, or very little. Indeed, this 
has given us so much trouble since then, that there 
has not been one of these for whose baptism we have 
not been obliged to give battle to those who are their 
Masters and Guardians; and sometimes it has been 
necessary to atone for this violence by some present. " 
One of these prisoners, an Oneida chieftain, encour- 
ages his companion in misery by reminding him of 
the blessedness prepared for them in heaven. The 
hideous cruelties inflicted on this chief are related at 
length; he dies at last, and" we have reason to be- 
lieve that this brave spirit now enjoys in heaven the 
freedom of the children of God, since even his ene- 
mies loudly exclaimed that there was something more 
than human within him, and that without doubt bap- 
tism had given him his strength and courage, which 
surpassed all that they had ever seen." 
The Father then narrates the birth of their little 
church in Teanaustayaé, where about fifteen per- 
sons receive baptism on New Year's day, 1639, others 
being from time to time added to this number. He 
then describes the establishment of the new mission 


4 

PREFACE TO VOL. XVII 

at Scanonaenrat, and states that it has gained, since 
the beginning of the year, about twenty converts. 
Among those baptized was" a poor Hiroquois pris- 
oner," who" during his last and fatal night" of tor- 
ments, had endeavored to choke himself. " This 
obliged the Fathers to go and visit him a little while 
before the final cruelties were exercised upon him, to 
make him acknowledge his fault, to lead him to 
accuse himself thereof, and to ask pardon for it. 
Having done this, he was granted absolution; and two 
hours later he was boiling in a kettle, of which the 
inmates of the Fathers' cabin were invited to come 
and get their share." 
The Fathers had hoped to begin other missions, but 
find it necessary to devote all their care to the up- 
building of the three churches already established. 
In the summer, the savages being then scattered in 
various directions, the missionaries spend a little time 
in rest and spiritual refreshment, and then make 
short journeys to the neighboring villages, baptizing 
here and there a few converts,- among these, several 
Iroquois prisoners, who are afterward tortured to 
death. 
Lalemant goes on to describe the obstacles and 
difficulties that beset their work,- hindrances raised 
by the evil demons that rule the land of the Hurons. 
The " black gowns" are again accused of spreading 
disease and death, to the ruin of the country; their 
instructions to neophytes are interrupted by infidel 
blasphemies; snowballs or clubs are flung at them 
as they pass, or through the openings in their cab- 
ins; and they are even threatened with death. The 
demons aforesaid have sent certain New England In- 
dians into these regions, who repeat the calumnies 
against the Jesuits, that they have learned from the 


PREFACE TO VOL. XVII 

5 

English. Even some of the native Christians think 
that the Fathers cause their death, through love to 
them, that they may the sooner enter upon the bliss 
of Paradise. The converts also are persecuted, 
threatened, and almost ostracized by their own peo- 
pIe; and from this arises the chief anxiety of the 
missionaries, that their flock may, despite all their 
efforts, be led back to the paths of evil. Notwith- 
standing the ignorance and weakness of the neo- 
phytes, there are some of them who, through their 
faith and virtue, daily awaken in the Fathers feel- 
ings of consolation and gratitude. 
Lalemant describes various feasts, dances, and 
other superstitious ceremonies, especially those cele- 
brated by the savages as a result of their dreams,- 
these latter being directly inspired by the devil. 
This belief of the Fathers is confirmed by the tales 
of the old men, whose traditions state that these so- 
lemnities were taught them by the demons. They 
regard these observances as affairs of great impor- 
tance, and by them regulate all their proceedings. 
The Father describes their ceremony of " marrying 
the seine" to young girls; also the game of " dish,"- 
in which latter they think success depends main- 
ly upon their charms and dreams. He recounts 
their devotion to their Ascwandics, or " familiar de- 
mons," - a sort of fetich, which is kept in a pouch, and 
to which its owner prefers his request for any desired 
article or event. ,. Some of these are more positive 
and efficacious than others. Some buy them from 
the Algonquains, who are reputed to have excellent 
ones, and this is the most costly and precious mer- 
chandise of the country; others have inherited them 
from their relatives." 
Lalemant again mentions the practices of the med- 


6 

PREFACE TO VOL. XVII 

lClne men; and closes by invoking the prayers of the 
faithful to aid the missionaries in their struggle 
against these several agencies of the devil. 
XXXV. Jerome Lalemant writes to Cardinal 
Richelieu (March 28, 1640), mentioning the successes 
and the hindrances of the Huron mission, and request- 
ing that he will interfere, in behalf of the savage allies 
of the French, to check the hostile ad vances of the 
Iroquois, who are encouraged and incited by the 
English and Flemish (Dutch) colonists on the coast. 
If this be not done, he dreads the ruin of the Hurons, 
and the consequent cessation of the mission work. 
XXXVI. Jerome Lalemant writes (April I, 1640) 
a brief letter, apparently to the Father General at 
Rome, summarizing the progress of the Huron mis- 
sion, and mentioning the dangers, even to life, that 
have menaced them during the year. Of late, perse- 
cution had prevented any increase in the number of 
converts, and their last-formed church has been near- 
ly dispersed; but their faith remains unshaken. 
XXXVII. Jacques Buteux sends (in 1640) to the 
Father General a brief epitome of the work accom- 
plished in the mission at Three Rivers. This has 
been more successful than that among the Hurons,- 
principally because of the influence exerted by the 
new Indian colony at Sillery, and of Montmagny's 
excellent government. He mentions the great ex- 
tent of the field, in which they are the only laborers, 
and the need of additional men, who should be " of 
good health, excellent memory, and proved virtue. Jt 
R. G. T. 

MADISON, WIS., February, 1898. 


XXXIV (concluded) 

LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1639 

PARIS: SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, 1640 

Part I. (Le Jeune's Relatz'on proper) of this document was 
given in Volumes XV. and XVI.; and, in Volume XVI., the 
first two chapters of Part II. (Lalemant's Huron report for the 
year). In the present volume, we give chaps. iii.- viii. of 
Part II., thus concluding the document. 


8 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

[25J CHAP. III. 

DE L'ESTAT GENERAL DU CHRISTIANISME EN CES 
CONTRÉES 

E NUISAG EANT de loin les affaires du Chrifiia- 
nifme de la N ouuene France, & particuliere- 
ment cel1e des Hurons, elle me femb[lJoient 
bien à la verité, vn ouurage particulier de la Proui- 
dence diuine. Mais ie me fuis beaucoup dauantage 
trouué confirmé en cefie penfée, les ayant veus de 
pres. Qui n'eufi dit, lors que pour la premiere fois, 
nos Peres arriuerent en ce païs, que Ie meil1eur eufi 
efté, qui en eufi eu Ie pouuoir, de s'efiablir dans les 
premieres & princi pales places, comme nous fommes 
maintenant; Mais fi cela eufi efié, qu'yeuffions nous 
fait n'ayans aucune notion ny ufage de la langue, ny 
cognoiffance des coufiumes du païs, & de 1'humeur 
des Barbares; 11 y a grande apparence, que n' ayans 
rien d'ailleurs qui nous peût faire fubfifier dans 1'ef- 
prit & l' eftime de ces Sauuages, nous fuffions tom- 
bez dans vn tel mefpris general de [26J tout Ie païs, 
que nous euffiõs eu de la peine de nous en releuer, & 
nous mettre de long temps en efiat de les affifter 
effectiuement. Et en effeét, ie ne fçay fi ce n' eft 
point de là qu'efi arriué, qu'õ a fi peu profité au lieu 
où on s'efioit premierement efiably. 
Dieu done dif pofa les affaires de Ia forte, que nous 
fufmes contraints au commencement, d'arrefier en 
vn petit coin du païs; où on a forgé les armes necef- 


1639-40] 

LE .I E UNE'S RELA TIO.A 16 39 

9 

[25J CHAP. III. 

OF THE GENERAL STATE OF CHRISTIANITY IN THESE 
COUNTRIES. 

S URVEYING from afar the progress of Chris- 
tianity in New France, and especially among 
the Hurons, it seemed to me, in very truth, a 
special work of divine Providence. But I have been 
far more strongly confirmed in this idea since I have 
had a nearer view of it. Who would not have said, 
when our Fathers first arrived in this country, that 
it would be best for those who could do so to estab- 
lish themselves in the chief and more important local- 
ities, as we are now? But if that had been done, 
what could we have accomplished there,- having no 
idea of the language or experience therein, and no 
knowledge of the custom of the country and the dis- 
position of the Barbarians? It is very probable that, 
having nothing else which could give us a foothold 
in the understanding and esteem of these Savages, 
we would have incurred so general contempt [26J 
throughout the country, that we could with difficulty 
have recovered therefrom, or for a long time have 
been in a position to give efficient aid to these peo- 
ple. And, indeed, I do not know if this were not 
the reason why the people of the place where we 
first fixed our residence profited so little. 
God so arranged matters, then, that we were 
obliged to settle at first in a little corner of the coun- 
try, where we forged the arms necessary for war,- 


10 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

faires à la guerre, ie veux dire qu'on s'y eft efiudié 
à la cognoiffance & vfage de la langue, & qu' on y a 
commencé à la reduire en preceptes, en quoy i1 a faUu 
eftre à foy-mefme & maiftre & efcholier tout enfemble, 
auec vne peine incroyable, & de là au bout de trois 
années, on eft venu, pour ainfi parler, enfeigne dé- 
ployée au bourg d'Offofané, vn des plus confiderables 
de tout Ie pais; en l'année d'apres au bourg de Tea- 
nauftayaé Ie principal de tous, laiffant entierement, 
& abandonnant la premiere demeure, à faute d'habi- 
tans, & de perfonnes capables de profiter de nos tra- 
uaux, tous prefque efians dillipez ou morts de mala- 
die. Ce qui femble, non fans fondement, eftre vne 
punition du Ciel, pour Ie mefpris qu'ils ont fait de la 
[27J grace de la vifite, que la diuine bonté leur auoit 
ménagée. 
De prem[iJere abord on a eu grand foing des enfans 
& des plus aagées malades à l'extremité, qu'on ne 
laiffoit point mourir fans Baptefme, ou au moins 
fans inftruétion pour ceux qui en auoit befoin; Nos 
Peres entrant librement par toutes les cabanes pour 
ce fuiet. C'efi vn bien & vn aduantage qui ne fe 
peut eftimer; & ceux à qui il en a penfé coufter la 
vie plufieurs fois, ainfi qu'il fe peut voir dãs la Rela- 
tion de l' an paffé, font fi fatisfait de cefte conquefte, 
qu'ils en expoferoient encore mille s'il les auoient, 
pour fe là conferuer. 
Dans les inftruétions generales & particulieres, 
comme auffi dans les courfes ou millions, on gaigne 
par fois quelques efprits: quoy que pour Ie prefent 
ce ne foient d'ordinaires que mocqueries, & menaces, 
qui feront, comme i'efpere, la femence qui produira 
en fon temps Ie fruiét de l'Euangile, & la reduétion 
generale de ces peuples à la foy. 


1639-40] 

( 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, r639 

11 

I mean to say that we there devoted ourselves to the 
study and practice of the language, and began to re- 
duce it to rules; in this it was necessary to be at once 
both master and pupil to oneself, with incredible 
difficulty. Thence, at the end of three years we 
went with flying colors;so to speak, to Ossosané, one 
of the principal villages of the whole country; the 
next year, to Teanaustayaé, the most important vil- 
lage of all, leaving and entirely abandoning the first 
residence, for lack of inhabitants there, and of per- 
sons capable of profiting by our labors,- nearly all 
being scattered or dead from the malady, which 
seems to be, not without reason, a punishment from 
Heaven for the contempt that they showed for the 
[27J favor of the visit that the divine goodness had 
procured for them. 
At the outset, we gave special care to the children 
and to elderly sick persons who were near death; 
these we did not allow to die without Baptism, or at 
least without instruction to those who most needed 
it, our Fathers freely entering all the cabins for this 
purpose. This is a boon and an advantage which 
cannot be estimated; and those whom it almost cost 
their lives several times, as may be seen in the Rela- 
tion of last year, are so satisfied with this victory that 
they would expose a thousand more lives, if they had 
them, to maintain it. 
In the general and individual "instructions, as also 
in our journeys or missions, we occasionally gain a 
few souls, although for the present there are usually 
only mockeries and threats,- which will be, I hope, 
the seed that shall produce, in its own time, the fruit 
of .the Gospel, and the general subjection of these 
people to the faith. 


12 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

N ous auons queIquefois douté, fcauoir fi on pou- 
uoit efperer Ia conuerfion de ce pais fans qu'il y eufi 
effufion de fang: Ie principe receu ce femble dans 
l'EgIife de [28] Dieu que Ie fang des Martyrs eft la 
femence des Chreftiens, me faifoient conc1urre pour 
lors, que cela n'efioit pas à efperer: voire mefme qu'il 
n'efioit pas à fouhaiter, confideré Ia gloire qui reuient 
à Dieu de la confiance des 1-lartyrs, du fang defquels 
tout Ie refte de la terre ayant tantofi efté abreuué, ce 
feroit vne efpece de malediétion, que ce quartier du 
monde ne participafi point au bon-heur d'auoir con- 
tribué à I' efc1at de cefie gloire. 
Mais i'aduoüe que depuis que ie fuis icy, & que ie 
vois ce qui fe paffe, fçauoir les combats, les batailles, 
les attaques, & les affauts generaux à toute Ia N a- 
ture, que fouffrent tous les iours icy les ouuriers de 
l' Euangile, & cependant leur patience, leur courage 
& leur application continuelle à pourfuiure leur 
pointe, ie commence à douter fi quelque autre mar- 
tyre eft neceffaire que ceIuy-cy, pour l' effet que nous 
pre tendons : & ie ne doute point qu'il ne fe trouuaft 
plufieurs perfonnes qui aymaffent mieux tout d'vn 
coup receuoir vn coup de hache fur Ia tefte, que de 
mener les années durant la vie qu'il faut mener icy 
tous les iours, trauaillant à la conuerfion de ces bar- 
bares. 
[29] Si vous les allez trouuer dans leurs cabanes; & 
i1 y faut aller plus fouuent que tous Ies iours, fi vous 
voulez vous acquiter comme il faut de vofire deuoir: 
vous y trouuerez vne petite image de rEnfer, ny 
voyant pour l' ordinaire que feu & fumée, & des corps 
nuds deça & del a noirs & à demy rofiis, peile-meilez 
auec les chiens, qui font auffi cheris que les enfants 


1639-40] 

LE .I E UNE'S RELA TION, r639 

13 

We have sometimes wondered whether we could 
hope for the conversion of this country without the 
shedding of blood; the principle received, it seems, 
in the Church of [28] God, that the blood of Martyrs 
is the seed of Christians, made me at one time con- 
clude that this was not to be expected,-yea, that it 
was not even to be desired; considering the glory 
that redounds to God from the constancy of the Mar- 
tyrs, with whose blood all the rest of the earth has 
been so lately drenched, it would be a sort of curse 
if this quarter of the world should not participate in 
the happiness of having contributed to the splendor 
of this glory. 
But I confess,- now that I am here, and see what 
is taking place, namely, the com bats, battles, attacks, 
and the general assaults against all Nature, which 
the Gospel laborers suffer here every day, and at the 
same time their patience, their courage, and their 
continual assiduity in pursuing their object,- that 
I begin to wonder whether any other martyrdom than 
this is necessary for the results that we aim at; and 
I do not doubt that many persons could be found who 
would prefer to receive at once a hatchet blow upon 
the head, than to spend their years enduring the life 
that one must every day lead here, working for the 
conversion of these barbarians. 
[29] If you go to visit them in their cabins,- and 
you must go there oftener than once a day, if you 
would perform your duty as you ought,- you will 
find there a miniature picture of Hell,-seeing noth- 
ing, ordinarily, but fire and smoke, and on every side 
naked bodies, black and half roasted, mingled pell- 
mell with the dogs, which are held as dear as the chil- 
dren of the house, and share the beds, plates, and 


14 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

de la maifon, & dans vne communauté de lid, de plat 
& de nourriture auec leurs maiftres. Tout y eft dans 
la pouffiere, & fi vous entrez dedans, vous ne ferez 
pas au bout de la cabane, que vous ferez tout couuert 
de noirceur de fuye, d' ordure & de pauureté. 
Leurs paroles fouuent ne font que blafphemes con- 
tre Dieu & nos myfteres; & des iniures contre nous 
accompagnées d'ingratitude incroyable, nous repro- 
chants que ce font nos vifites & nos remedes qui les 
font malades & mourir; & que noftre fejour icy eft la 
feule caufe de tous leurs maux. Si vous leur voulez 
parler pour les inftruire, il faudra quelquefois attendre 
les heures entieres deuant que de trouuer l' occafion 
de leur dire à propos vn bon mot; & apres toutes vos 
peines & vos [30] vifites, vn fonge, qui eft à pro pre- 
ment parler Ie Dieu du pais, en defera plus en vne 
nuid, que vous n'aurez auancé en trente iours: & 
vous pourroit bien, pour toute recompenfe, procurer 
vn coup de hache ou de fleche. S'ils viennent en 
voftre cabane, ne penfez pas que vous puiffiez facile- 
ment leur refufer voftre porte; ny quand ils font 
dedans, les gouuerner à voftre mode. Ils fe mettent 
-où il leur plaift, & n'en fortent pas quand il vous 
plaift, 11 faut qu'ils entrent par tout, & qu'ils voiêt 
tout, & fi vous les volez empefcher, ce font querelles 
& reproches auec iniures. Et dans tout cela il faut 
filer doux: vn coup de hache eft bien toft donné par 
ces Barbares: & Ie feu mis à vne eícorce, & de re- 
cherche de iuftice pour Ie crime, il n'y en a point 
dans Ie pais, & au plus qu'on en pourroit attendre, ce 
íeroit quelques prefens. De forte qu'il faut toufiours 
eftre en garde, & fur la patience, & faire eftat qu'on 
n'a icy, & moins encore qu'en tout autre lieu du 
monde, aucun moment de fa vie affeuré. 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, r639 

15 

food of their masters. Everything is in a cloud of 
dust, and, if you go within, you will not reach the 
end of the cabin before you are completely befouled 
with soot, filth, and dirt. 
Their words are often onl y blasphemies against 
God and our mysteries, and insults against us, ac- 
companied with incredible evidences of ingratitude,- 
hurling at us the reproach that it is our visits and 
our remedies which cause them to sicken and die, 
and that our sojourn here is the sole cause of all their 
troubles. If you wish to converse, in order to in- 
struct them, it will sometimes be necessary to wait 
whole hours before finding opportunity to say to 
them at the right time one profitable word; and after 
all your pains and your [30] visits, a dream, which is, 
properly speaking, the God of the country, will undo 
more in one night than you will have accomplished 
in thirty days; and you may, indeed, as your sole 
reward, get a stroke from the hatchet or arrow. If 
they come to your cabin, do not imagine that you can 
easily refuse them admittance, or, when they are 
within, manage them in your own way. They sit 
down where they please, and do not go away at your 
pleasure. They must enter everywhere, and see 
everything, and if you try to prevent them, there are 
quarrels and reproaches and insults. And, in all this, 
one must act submissively; a blow from the hatchet 
is soon given by these Barbarians, and the bark set on 
fire; as to seeking redress for the crime, there is none 
in the country, and the most one could expect would 
be a few presents. In consequence, one must always 
be on the watch and be patient, and consider that 
here, still less than in any other place in the world, 
can one be sure of a moment of his life. 


16 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

Adiouftez à ce que defIus, que voftre fa con de loger, 
de coucher, & de viure eftant en tout femblable à 
celle des Sauuages; [13 i.e., 31] la nature ne trouue 
guere de confolation parmy tous ces trauaux. Vn 
peu de bled d'Inde boully dedans reau, & pour Ie 
meilleur ordinaire du païs, vn peu de poifIon puant 
de pourriture dedans, ou de la pouffiere de poifIon fec 
pour tout afIaifonnement, voila Ie manger & Ie boire 
ordinaire du païs. Pour l' extraordinaire vn peu de 
pain de leur bled, cuit fous la cendre, fans aucun 
leuain, ou l'on meíle quelquefois quelques febves ou 
fruiéts fauuages: Voila vne des grandes regales du 
païs. Le poifIon frais & la chafIe, font chofes fi rares, 
qu'elles ne valent pas Ie parler, y ayant toutes les 
peines du monde d'en recouurer pour les malades. 
Vne natte fur la terre, ou fur vne efcorce, eft voftre 
coucher. Le feu voftre chandelle. Les trous par 
ou paffe la fumée, vos feneftres qui ne ferment 
iamais. Des perches courbées couuertes d'efcorces, 
vos murailles & vofire lambris, par où Ie vent bafIe 
de tous coftez. En vn mot tout Ie refte à l'auenant 
des Sauuages, excepté Ie vefiir, auquel encore faut-il 
commencer à fe reduire. 
Ie ne d'yrien de la rigueur des faifons; de l'incom- 
modité des chemins qu'on ne peut faire qu'à pied où 
fur Ie dos d'vn autre, [32] des dangers continuels des 
Ennemis du païs, qui font tous les iours à vos portes, 
& rempliffent tout de frayeur nouuelle, arriuant à 
toute heure de quelque mafIacre ou prifonnier qu'ils 
ont enleué, & de leur refolution de venir bruíler tout 
le païs. Ie ne dis rien dif-ie de tout cela, & d'infi- 
nies autres petites difgraces qui accompagnent & s'en- 
fuiuent de tout ce que deffus. Pour conclurre en fin 


1639-40] 

LE .fEUNE' S RELA TION, I6.J9 

17 

Add to the above that your way of lodging, sleep- 
ing, and eating being in every respect similar to that 
of the Savages, [13 i.e., 31] nature finds but fewalle- 
viations amid all these hardships. A little Indian 
corn boiled in water, and for the better fare of the 
country a little fish, rank with internal rottenness, or 
some powdered dried fish as the only seasoning,- 
this is the usual food and drink of the country; as 
something extra, a little bread made of their corn, 
baked under the cinders, without any leaven, in 
which they sometimes mix some beans or wild fruits; 
this is one of the great dainties of the country. Fresh 
fish and game are articles so rare that they are not 
worth mentioning, it being all the trouble imaginable 
to secure these for the sick. A mat upon the ground, 
or upon a piece of bark, is your bed; the fire, your 
candle; the holes through which the smoke. passes, 
your windows, which are never closed; bent poles, 
covered with bark, your walls and your roof, through 
which the wind enters from all sides. In a word, all 
remains in keeping with the Savages, except the 
clothing, to which we must yet begin to reduce our- 
selves. 
I say nothing of the severity of the seasons; of the 
inconveniences of the roads, which can be traveled 
only on foot or upon some one's back; [32] of con- 
tinual dangers from the Enemies of the country, who 
are daily at your gates, filling all with a terror 
renewed every hour by some massacre, or some 
prisoner whom they have carried away, and by their 
detennination to come and consume the whole coun- 
try,- I say nothing, I repeat, of all this, and of an 
infinite number of other little misfortunes which 
accompany and follow all the above. As a final con- 


18 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. Ii 

qu'il femble qu'vne feule année de patience & de cou- 
rage, parmy ces combats & batailles continuelles vaut 
bien vn petit martyre, & qu'ainfi, quoy qu'il n'y ait 
point encore de fang de martyrs refpandu, nous n'a- 
uons pas toutesfois fuiet de defefperer la conuerfion 
de ces peuples. 
II en fera toutefois tout ce qu'il plaira à Dieu: & 
on s'attend bien que Ie fort armé, qui commande abfo- 
lument dans ce pais depuis tant de fiecles, ne laiffera 
pas fi facilement efchapper de fes mains tant de vieilles 
& anciennes conqueftes; & qu'il fera tout poffible 
pour prendre & extenniner tous ceux qui s'oppofent 
à fon empire, & qui n'en cherchent que la ruine. 
Mais qu'il faffe du pis qu'il pourra, tofi ou tard Ie 
tout reüffira à fa plus grande confufion, [33] & à l'a- 
uancement de la gloire de Dieu, quand ce ne feroit 
qu'en iufiifiant fa bonté & mifericorde, fur ce pais. 
Et rien cependant n'arriuera fans fa permiffion, pour 
l'amour duquel mourir, c'efi viure; & efire abbatu, 
c'efi vaincre & triompher. 
Que fi ce que dit vn des SS. Peres de l'Eglife efi 
veritable, que les bien-faits prefents de Ia diuine Ma- 
iefié enuers les hommes feruent de caution & d'affeu- 
rance pour ceux de I' aduenir; Ie repos, la confiance, 
la ioye & la confolation dans laquelle viuent icy les 
ouuriers de l'Euangile parmy ce premier genre de 
martyre, faid qu'on n'a pas fuiet de redouter dauan- 
tage Ie fecond, que Ie premier. 
Mais deuant que de paffer plus auant à declarer 
l'efiat particulier, & Ie détail du Chrifiianifme en ce 
pais: ie prie vne fois pour toutes, tous ceux & celles 
qui iufques icy ont contribué aux moyens d'infiruire 
ces Peuples, foit par leurs prieres, foit par leurs autres 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE' S RELA TION, I639 

19 

elusion, it seems as if a single year of patience and 
courage amid these continual struggles and battles 
is indeed equal to one short martyrdom; and that, 
therefore, although no blood of martyrs has yet been 
shed, we have, nevertheless, no reason to despair of 
the conversion of these peoples. 
It will be, however, wholly as God shall please; 
and we fully expect that the strong man armed, who 
has commanded absolutely in this country during so 
many centuries, will not easily let slip from his hands 
so many old and former conquests. and that he will 
do all he can to capture and exterminate all those 
who oppose his empire, and who seek only its ruin. 
But let him do the worst he can; sooner or later all 
will result in his greatest confusion, [33] and in the 
advancement of the glory of God, if it be only in jus- 
tifying his goodness and mercy towards this country. 
And yet nothing will happen without his permission, 
for love of whom to die is to live, and to be defeated 
is to conquer and triumph. 
And, if what one of our Holy Fathers of the Church 
says is true, that the present benefactions of the 
divine Majesty toward men serve as a security and 
pledge for those of the future, then the peace, confi- 
dence, joy, and consolation in which the Gospel 
workers live here in this first state of martyrdom con- 
vince us that we have no reason to dread the second 
more than the first. 
But before proceeding to make known in detail the 
exact condition of Christianity in this country, I beg, 
once for all, that all those men and women who have 
hitherto contributed to the means for the instruction of 
these Peoples, either through their prayers, or through 
their other charities and benefactions, or to whom 


20 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

charitez & bien-faits; ou à qui Dieu en donneroit 
d'orefnauant la penfée, de confiderer que Ie fruid 
apres lequel nous trauaillons, eft fruid de 1'Euãgile, 
lequel s'il doit eftre bon & de durée, ne viendra [34] 
qu'apres beaucoup de patience: & par confequent de 
ne fe point lafíer d'exercer cefte charité, la plus 
grande qui puifíe eftre exercée en ce monde. Enui- 
fageant toufiours ces affaires auec 1'æil de la foy, qui 
feul leur en fera veoir Ie merite & l' excellence; & 
que de fi grands ouurages ne fe font pas tout d'vn 
coup. Combien faut-il en France de temps & de 
peine, pour conuertir vn feul heretique, ou bien quel- 
que ieune ou vieux Pecheur? Hé qu'eft-ce de cela 
en comparaifon de la conuerfion de tout vn monde, 
terreftre & brutal au dernier point, enuieilly depuis 
tant de fiec1es dans fes erreurs & fuperftitions? 
Nous nous trouuons icy comme au milieu d'vne 
mer, où vn million de perfonnes fe noyent: & ne fça- 
chants auquel courir, nous fentons nos cæurs fe fendre, 
& nous nous trouuons reduits au point d' experimenter 
ce que dit l' Apoftre des Gentils, CharÜas Chrijli vrget 
nos. Le malheur n'arriue qu'à faute d'ouuriers, ou 
pluftoft des moyens de les pouuoir faire icy fubfifter, 
& de les entretenir dans vn Pays, & parmy des peu- 
pIes, où il faut par neceffité, auec Saind Paul, renon- 
cer aux droiéts de 1'Euangile, & viure du [35] fien, 
au moins pour Ie prefent: fi on ne veut, en vn mo- 
ment, voir Ie tout renuerfé & les affaires reduites au 
defe[f]poir. 
Ie fçay bien que les difficultez d' apporter de dehors 
dequoy y fubfifter, font extremes: mais apres tout, 
il ne laifíe pas d'y auoir vn monde entier à conuer- 
tir; & n'y a point de porte plus commode pour y 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I639 

21 

God shall hereafter grant the purpose to do this, will 
consider that the fruit for which we labor is the fruit 
of the Gospel,- which, if it is to be good and dur- 
able, will only come [34] after much patience. I beg 
them, therefore, not to grow weary of practicing this 
charity, the greatest that can be exercised in this 
world,-looking at these matters always with the 
eye of faith, which alone will reveal to them the 
merit and excellence thereof,-and to consider also 
that works so important are not accomplished all at 
once. How much time and trouble is necessary in 
France to convert a single heretic, or, indeed, any 
Sinner, young or old? Ah! what is that in compari- 
son with the conversion of a whole world, earthy and 
brutal to the last degree, grown old in its errors and 
superstitions during so many centuries? 
We find ourselves here as if in the midst of a sea 
where a million persons are drowning, and, not know- 
ing to which one we should hasten, we feel our hearts 
breaking, and find ourselves reduced to the point of 
experiencing what the Apostle of the Gentiles said, 
Charitas Christi urge! nos. This misfortune occurs 
only through a lack of workers, or rather of means 
of affording them subsistence here and of maintain- 
ing them in a Country and among peoples, where 
one must of necessity, with Saint Paul, renounce the 
dues of the Gospel and live upon [35] his own means, 
at least for the present, if one would not see, in a 
moment, all overthrown, and affairs reduced to a 
hopeless condition. 
I know very well that the difficulties of bringing 
hither from outside the means of subsistence are ex- 
treme; but after all, there remains here a whole world 
to be converted, and there is no more convenient gate 


22 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

paffer, que celIe où nous fommes auiourd'huy & c'efi 
ce qui afflige nofire cæur & nofire efprit. 
Que fi ces pertes nous font fi fenfibles à qui ces 
peuples ne font rien; combien a-on fuiet de croire, 
qu'elles font confiderables à celuy qui leur à donné 
refire, pour les rendre bien-heureux; & de plus vne 
vie diuine, & fon fang pour leur rachapt, Heureufes 
les Ames à qui Ie S. Efprit donne & conferue la deuo- 
tion de contribuer felon leur pouuoir à efiancher la 
foif de IESVS Chrifi mourant en Croix; & à ramaffer 
les gouttes de fon fang precieux, on pour mieux 
dire; la marchandife dont ce fang adorable a efié Ie 
prix. 
Ie ne puis icy obmettre la loüãge qui efi deuë à 
meffieurs les affociez de la Compagnie de la N ouuelle 
France, qui continuënt plus que iamais, à contribuer 
de ce [36] qutils peuuent pour vne fi fainte entreprife. 
Et cét ouurage auffi bien que tous les autres de la 
Nouuelle France, aura à iamais vne tres-particuliere 
obligation à Monfieur Ie Cheualier de Mont-magny 
nofire Gouuerneur; à la prudence, generofité, charité 
& zele duquel, il ne femble pas qu'il foit poffible de 
rien adioufier: toutes lefquelles vertus & belles qua- 
litez fe font auffi bien fentir icy à trois cent lieuës, 
que nous fommes de fon fejour, que fur les lieux où 
i1 fait fa demeure. 
II y en a encore plufieurs autres, qui meriteroiêt 
vne bõne part à la loüange de contribuer felon leur 
pouuoir à vn fi faint ouurage, Mais ce ne feroit iamais 
fait, & c'efi Ie point, que Ie liure de vie en cõferue 
pour iamais la memoire. Pour nous, tout ce que 
nous pouuons, c'efi de leuer les mains au Ciel, & de 
dire de tou t nofire cæur, de rore cæli & de pingued'in 
Ürræ, & de.fuper fit benedlclio veflra. 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, r639 

23 

through which to reach them than this where we are 
to-day; and it is this which afflicts our hearts and 
minds. 
And if these losses are so keenly felt by us, to 
whom these peoples are nothing, how much reason 
have we to believe that they are important to him 
who has given them existence, in order to render 
them happy,-and, more, a divine life, and his own 
blood to redeem them. Happy the Souls in whom 
the Holy Ghost inspires and maintains the devout 
purpose to contribute according to their power to 
quench the thirst of JESUS Christ, dying upon the 
. Cross, and to collect the drops of his precious blood,- 
or, to express it better, the wares of which this ador- 
able blood was the price. 
I cannot omit here the praise that is due to mes- 
sieurs the associates of the Company of New France, 
who continue more than ever to contribute [36] what 
they can to so holy an enterprise. And this work, 
as well as all the others of New France, will always 
be under most special obligation to Monsieur the 
Chevalier de Mont-magny, our Governor, to whose 
prudence, generosity, charity, and zeal it does not 
seem possible to add anything; all of which virtues 
and noble qualities make themselves felt as well here 
where we are, three hundred leagues from his resi- 
dence, as in the locality where he makes his home. 
There are still many others who would merit a 
good share of praise for contributing according to 
their means to so holy a work, but that would never 
be completed, and the point is this, that the book of 
life preserves the memory thereof forever. As for 
us, all that we can do is to raise our hands to Heav- 
en, and to say with all our hearts, de rore cæli et de 
pinguedine terræ, et desuper sit benedz"ctio vestra. 


24 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

[37] CHAP. IV. 

DE CE QUI EST ARRIUÉ DE PLUS REMARQUABLE EN 
LA RESIDENCE DE LA CONCEPTION AU BOURG 
D'OSSOSSANE, & PARTICULIEREMENT 
DE LA NOUUELLE EGLISE 
DE CE BOURG. 

L E nombre des enfans baptifez en maladie en cette 
Refidence, eft de 52. dont vingt-fept s'en font 
enuolez au Ciel. Celuy des plus aagées qui 
ont efté baptifez à la mort, ou en extremité de mala- 
die, de feptante-quatre dont vingt-deux font morts, 
& comme il eft à prefumer de la bonté & mifericorde 
de Dieu, ont pris Ie mefme chemin du Ciel. Celuy 
des Catechumenes, baptifez en bonne fanté, de qua- 
rante-neuf. 
Deuant que de declarer ce qu'il y a eû de plus 
remarquable en tout cecy, il faut que ie parle de ceux 
qui ont dauantage participé à ce bon-heur, & qui 
nous rendront en fuite, plus que iamais, adorables 
les fecrets profonds, & les abyfmes de la fageffe, 
Bonté & Prouidence diuine fur [38] fes Efleûs. 
Les 
enrôhronons faifoient par Ie paffé vne des 
Nations affociées à la Nation Neutre, & eftoient fituez 
fur les con fins du cofté des Hiroquois les Ennemis 
communs de tous ces Peuples. Tant que cette Na- 
tion d'
enrôhronons a efté en bonne intelligence auec 
ceux de la Nation Neutre, elle a efté baftante pour 
refifter aux Ennemis, fubfifter & fe maintenir contre 


1639-40] 

LE .fEUNE'S RELATION, r639 

25 

[37] CHAP. IV. 

OF THE MORE REMARKABLE EVENTS THAT HAVE OC- 
CURRED IN THE RESIDENCE OF LA CONCEPTION 
AT THE VILLAGE OF OSSOSSANE, AND ES- 
PECIALLY OF THE NEW CHURCH 
OF THAT VILLAGE. 

T HE number of children baptized in sickness at 
this Residence is 52, of whom twenty-seven 
have flown away to Heaven; that of elderly 
persons who were baptized at death, or at the crisis 
of their illness, is seventy-four, of whom twenty-two 
died, and, as may be presumed from the goodness 
and mercy of God, took the same road to Heaven; 
that of Catechumens, baptized while in good health, 
forty-nine. 
Before relating what was especially remarkable in 
all these baptisms, I must speak of those who have 
longest partaken of this blessing, and who will there- 
fore render, more than ever, adorable to us the pro- 
found secrets and the abysses of divine wisdom, Good- 
ness, and Providence respecting [38] his Elect. 
The Wenrôhronons 1 formed in the past one of the 
associate Nations of the N eutral Nation, and were 
located on its boundaries, toward the Hiroquois, the 
common Enemies of all these Peoples. As long as 
this Nation of Wenrôhronons was on good terms with 
the people of the Neutral Nation, it was sufficiently 
strong to withstand its Enemies, to continue its exist- 
ence, and maintain itself against their raids and in- 


26 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

leurs courfes & inuafions: mais par ie ne fçay que! 
mefcontentement, ceux de la Nation Neutre s'efians 
retirez & feparez d'interefis auec eux, ils font demeu- 
rez en proye à leurs Ennemis, & n' euffent pas efié 
encore long temps fans efire du tout exte-rminez, s'ils 
n' euffent fongé à la retraite, & à fe mettre à couuert 
de la proteétion, & affociation de quelque autre 
Nation. 
Tout bien confideré, ils aduiferent qu'ils ne pou- 
uoient mieux choifir que celIe de nos Hurons. lIs 
deputent done les plus intelligens d'entr'eux, pour 
en venir faire la propofition: qui fut faite aux confeils 
& affemblées particulieres & generales de tout Ie 
Païs: où en fin fut conclu, de les receuoir, leur ar- 
riuée ne feruant pas de [39] peu à la defenfe & con- 
feruation du païs. 
En fuite de cefie refolution, Ie temps: fut pris 
pour les aller querir, & affifier en leur voyage: foit 
pour les foulager, au portage de leurs meubles & en- 
fants, n'y ayant en toutes ces contrées autre voiture 
par terre, que celIe de la tefie, ou des efpaules des 
hommes & des femmes; foit auffi pour les defendre 
de leurs ennemis communs, & leur faire efcorte, 
Quelque foulagement qu'on leur peufi donner, la 
fatigue & les incommoditez d'vn tel voyage, de plus 
de quatre-vingts lieuës, où efioient plus de fix cens 
perfonnes, dont les femmes & les petits enfants fai- 
foient Ie plus grand nombre; furent fi grandes, que 
plufieurs en moururêt en chemin, & prefque tous arri- 
uerent malades, ou Ie furent incontinent apres. 
Ce Bourg fut Ie premier du païs où ils aborderent, 
& auffi-tofi que la nouuelle fut venuë qu'ils apro- 
choient, tout Ie monde forti[t], pour aller au deuant; 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, L639 

27 

vas ions; but the people of the N eu tral Nation having, 
through I know not what dissatisfaction, withdrawn 
and severed their relations with them, these have 
remained a prey to their Enemies; and they could 
not have remained much longer without being entire- 
lyexterminated, if they had not resolved to retreat 
and take refuge in the protection and alliance of some 
other Nation. 
All things considered, they decided that they could 
not do better than to choose that of our Hurons. Ac- 
cordingly, they deputed the most intelligent among 
them to come and make such proposal, which was 
done in the councils and assemblies, both special and 
general, of the whole Country; here, finally, it was 
concluded to receive them, their arrival serving not 
a [39] little for the defense and preservation of the 
country. 
In consequence of this resolution they took the 
time to go after them and assist them in their jour- 
ney, both to relieve them in carrying their household 
goods and children,-as they have in all these coun- 
tries no other conveyance on land than the heads or 
shoulders of men and women,- and also to defend 
them from their common enemies and act as escort 
for them. 
Notwithstanding the help that could be given them, 
the fatigue and inconveniences of such a voyage - of 
more than eighty leagues, made by over six hundred 
persons, of whom the majority were women and little 
children-were so great that many died on the way, 
and nearly all were sick when they arrived, or imme- 
diatelyafterwards. 
This Village was the first one in the country, at 
which they arrived; and as soon as the news of their 


28 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

& les Capitaines s'y trouuerent, & exhorterent leurs 
gens auec tant d'ardeur & de compaffion, à prendre 
courage, & affifier ces pauures efirangers, que ie ne 
fçay pas qui eufi peu faire dauantage Ie Predicateur 
[40] Chrefiien Ie plus zelé pour les æuures de chari- 
té, & de mifericorde. 
Ils furent incontinent difiribuez par les principaux 
Bourgs du païs. La plus gran de part toutefois s'ar- 
refia en celuy-cy, comme vn de plus ayfez & accom- 
modez de tous; mais par tout où ils furent receus, 
les meilleures places dans les cabane leur furent don- 
nées; les greniers ou quaiffes de bled ouuertes auec 
liberté d'en difpofer comme fi elles leur apparte- 
noient. 
Le gros arriua en ce bourg, au mefme temps que 
i'y arriuay auec quelques domefiiques intelligens à 
la faignée, & aux remedes, que nous auions amené 
de France: & iamais rien ne fe rencontra plus à pro- 
pos. Car auffi-tofi auec ce fecours, on courut aux 
plus malades, qui efioient en danger de mort, pour 
auoir entrée par là, de pouruoir à leur falut. C'efi 
icy que nous parurent premierement les fecrets ado- 
rabIes de la bonté de Dieu, fur ces pauures refugiez, 
car ce fecours vint fi à propos pour quelques-vns 
d'entr'eux, tant enfants que plus aagez qu'ille trou- 
ua que depuis leur arriuée iufques à la mort, il n'y 
eufi que Ie temps qu'il falloit, pour les infiruire & 
ba ptif er. 
[4 1 ] Depuis ce temps, ces malades donnerent tant 
d'occupation, qu'ils emporterent, 1'efpace de quelque 
temps, la plus grand part de l' employ de nos ouun- 
ers, qui ne pouuoient retenir les regrets & les plaintes 
innocentes, de ne pouuoir pour ce fuiet, vacquer à la 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, r639 

29 

approach had been brought, everyone went out to 
meet them; the Captains were present, and exhorted 
their people with so much earnestness and compas- 
sion to take courage and help these poor strangers, 
that I do not know what more could have been done 
by a Christian Preacher, [40 J most zealous in works 
of charity and mercy. 
They were immediately distributed through the 
principal Villages of the country; the greater part of 
them, however, remained in this Village, as one of 
the most commodious and suitable of all. But, wher- 
ever they were received, the best places in the cabins 
were given to them, the granaries or chests of corn 
were opened and they were given liberty to dispose 
of them as if they were their own. 
The main body of them arrived in this village at 
the same time that I came here with some domestics 
whom we had brought from France, who were skill- 
ful in bleeding and in the use of remedies; and noth- 
ing ever happened more opportunely. For, with this 
help, we immediately hastened to the very sick, who 
were in danger of death, that we might, being thus 
admitted, provide for their salvation. It was here 
that the adorable secrets of the goodness of God 
towards these poor refugees first appeared to us; for 
this help came so opportunely to some of them, both 
children and older people, that it was found that 
between their arrival and their death there was only 
the time necessary to instruct and baptize them. 
[41J From that time, these sick people gave us so 
much to do that, for some time, they almost wholly 
engrossed the attention of our wOTkers, who could 
not repress their regrets and innocent complaints at 
not being able, on this account, to devote themselves 



o 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

culture de ceux de leur quartier, dont, comme nous 
auons dit, vn chacù efi chargé. Mais ils ne s'apper- 
ceuoient pas, que tandis qu'ils gardent I' ordre de la 
charité, la mifericorde de Dieu paffe par deffus l'ordre 
de leurs penfées & indufirie, & aduance luy mefme 
leur tafche, qu'ils efiimoient de beaucoup reculer. 
Deux mois done ou enuiron apres l'arriuée de ces 
pauures efirangers, leurs malades commençant à dimi- 
nuer: nos ouuriers eurent plus de temps & de loifir, 
de vifiter les champs, que par Ie paffé ils auoient en- 
femencé. Et voila qu'auffi-tofi, contre toute leur 
attente, ils en apperçoiuent la plus part, tout difpo- 
fez à la moiffon, rencontrants les efprits de plufieurs 
de ceux qu'ils auoient par Ie paffé cultiué, pleins de 
fatisfaétion, & de conuiétion des veritez de la Foy, 
& ne defirans autre chofe, que d'efire au plufiofi 
baptifez. 
[42] Leur ferueur paffa fi auant, que nous nous 
trouuâmes obligez de mettre en deliberation, fi nous 
les differerions iufques aux temps qu'il femble que 
l'Eglife defiine pour Ie Baptefme des Cathecumenes, 
fçauoir Pafques & la Pentecofie: mais l'vn & I' autre 
fe trouuoit trop eíloigné; tout bien confideré, il fut 
refolu, d'ouurir à ce commencement la porte à tous 
ceux qui fe prefenteroient, à mefure qu'ils s'en trou- 
ueroient capables; puis qu'il efioit quefiion d'vne 
nouueUe Eglife, à laqueUe il faUoit fonger de don- 
ner l'efire, deuant que des s'appliquer, à luy donner 
fa perfeétion. Que toutefois il y faUoit proceder 
auec beaucoup de retenuë, & nous fouuenir toufiours 
que nous auions a faire à des Sauuages; à la diffimu- 
lation & legereté defquels il ne femble pas qu'il y ait 
rien de pareil. 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, r639 

31 

to the cultivation of the people of their quarter, with 
whom, as we have said, each one is charged. But 
they did not perceive that, while they observe the 
mandate of charity, the mercy of God overlooks the 
order of their thoughts and industry, and itself 
advances their task which they considered so greatly 
retarded. 
Two months or thereabout, then, after the arrival 
of these poor strangers, the number of their sick be- 
ginning to diminish, our laborers had more time and 
leisure to visit the fields that they had sown in the 
past. And lo! they immediately perceived, contrary 
to all their expectations, the greater part of it all 
ready for harvest, finding the minds of many of those 
whom they had cultivated in the past fully satisfied 
with and convinced of the truths of the Faith, and 
desiring nothing else than to be baptized as soon as 
possible. 
[42] Their fervor went so far that we found our- 
selves obliged to deliberate whether we should put 
them off until the times that the Church seems to 
appoint for the Baptism of Catechumens, namely, 
Easter and Pentecost; but both were too far away. 
Upon careful consideration, it was decided to open 
the door, in this beginning, to all those who should 
present themselves, according as they were found to 
be qualified therefor; since it was a question of a 
new Church, which it was necessary to think of bring- 
ing into existence before applying ourselves to give 
it perfection. But nevertheless it was necessary to 
proceed with much reserve in this matter, and always 
to remember that we had to do with Savages, for 
whose dissimulation and fickleness there would seem 
to be no comparison. 


32 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

C'efi ce qui nous fit conclure, de n'en receuoir au 
commencement, que fort peu, & des Anciens & plus 
confiderables des Chefs de familles, & perfonnes 
mariées auec fiabilité. Crainte que fi nous en admet- 
tions d'autres, fans vne plus grande experience, les 
fondemens venans à crouler, nous ne viffions bien- 
toft tout l'edifice [43J à bas, & fa ruine totale aupara- 
uant fon eftabliffement, & Ie fepu[lJchre de cefte 
nouuelle Eglife dans fon berceau. 
Ayant donc l'æil à toutes ces circonfiances, & fur 
ce que la diuine Prouidence nous prefentoit, on donna 
iour à la fefte de S. Martin à trois chefs de famille 
des plus anciens, & plus confiderables du Bourg. 
Donc 1'vn fut baptifé auec fa femme, & trois de fes 
enfants. Des deux autres 1'vn efioit veuf & fans 
enfants qui fuffent petits; I' autre ne iugea pas que fa 
femme fufi encore capable de ce bien, comme en 
effeét elle ne l' efioit pas. 
Enuiron vn mois apres, fçauoir à la Fefte de la Con- 
ception de la fainéte Vierge, fe firent les feconds 
baptefmes de feize perfonnes: entre lefquels efioient 
trois ou quatre chefs de familles, auec leurs femmes 
& enfans; ce qui joint auec les precedens, en la famille 
de Iofeph Chih
atenh
a, celuy dont a efié par1é 
amplement en la derniere relation, faifant vne compa- 
gnie d'vne trentaine de perfonnes, qui affifierent 
enfemble ce iour là à la fainéte Meffe pour la pre- 
miere fois, où fe communierent tous ceux qui eftoient 
en aage de Ie faire; il femble que nous auons tout 
[44] fubieét de recognoifire, & de remarquer ce fainét 
iour, deftiné à la memoire & à 1 'honneur de la pre- 
miere grandeur de cefte fainéte Vierge; pour celuy 
de la Naiffance de cefie nouuelle Eglife, & du com- 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I639 

33 

This made us conclude to receive at first only a 
very few,-some Old :Men, and the more prominent 
Heads of families, and persons whose marriages were 
stable,- fearing that, if we admitted others without 
more experience, the foundations would begin to 
crumble, and we would soon see the whole edifice 
[43] prostrated, its total ruin before its establishment, 
and the grave of this new Church in its cradle. 
Having in view, then, all these circumstances, and 
what divine Providence offered us, we devoted a day, 
on the feast of St. Martin, to three heads of families, 
among the oldest and most prominent of the Village. 
One was baptized, then, with his wife and three of 
his children. Of the two others, the one was a 
widower and without small children, the other did 
not think his wife was yet capable of receiving this 
blessing, as, in fact, she was not. 
About a month later, namely, on the Feast of the 
Conception of the blessed Virgin, occurred the second 
group of baptisms, of sixteen persons, among whom 
were three or four heads of families, with their wives 
and children,- who, added to the previous baptisms 
in the family of Joseph Chihwatenhwa, of whom we 
spoke fully in the last relation, make a company of 
thirty persons, who together attended the holy Mass 
that day for the first time, where all those who were 
of an age to do so received communion. It seems 
that we have every [44] reason to acknowledge and 
to observe this holy day, devoted to the memory and 
to the honor of the first dignity of this holy Virgin, 
as that of the Birth of this new Church, and of the 
beginning of happiness and blessing for this country. 
We are certainly right in believing that she to 


34 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. ]7 

mencement du bon-heur & de la benediétion du pais. 
Nous auons bien raifon de croire, que celle en 
I 'hõneur de laquelle efi confacrée cefie Fefie, a mis 
la main à cet ouurage, & l'a conduit depuis, au point 
que nous dirons cy-apres, & que nous voyons de nos 
yeux, auec vne confolation, qui ne fe peut expliquer. 
11 y eut trois ans à ce mefme iour, que Ie væu fut 
fait par nos Peres, pour obtenir la faueur de cefie 
grand Princeffe, en I' eftabliffement du Chrifiianifme 
en ces contrées de ieufner la veille de cefte Fefie, & 
de dire tous les mois vne Meffe, en I 'honneur de 
cefte fienne premiere grandeur: & en outre que la 
premiere Chappelle que nous bafiirions dans Ie pais, 
feroit en fon honneur, & fous Ie titre de fa fainéte 
Conception. Cefie Chapelle a efié celIe dans laquelle 
Ie font faits ces premiers Baptefmes, dans laquelle 
nous auons veu l'effeét [45] que nous pretendions, 
deuant que d' eftre parfaiétement defchargez de l' obli- 
gation de ce que nous auions promis, puis que la 
Chappelle n'efioit encore acheuée iufqu'au point, 
qu'on y peuft dire la Meffe auec bien feance, & ne 
fembloit eftre capable que d'y faire les Baptefmes, 
qui en effeét y furent faits. 
Que loüange done & aétion de graces foient à iamais 
renduës à cefie grande Reyne du Ciel, & de la terre, 
par tous ceux qui ont & auront cy-apres intereft à cét 
ouurage, & quant aux perfonnes qui ont vne pieufe 
& fainéte affeétion pour cette entreprife, elle nous 
obligeront grandement de nous ayder à remercier 
cefte fainéte Vierge de tant de graces que nous auons 
receu, & receuons continuellement de fa faueur & 
affiftance, laquelle nous fait efperer que fon facré 
Fils nofire tres-honoré Seigneur & Maifire, qui feu I 
pouuoir mettre Ie fondement de cét edifice, aura agre- 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I6.J9 

35 

whose honor this Feast is consecrated has put her 
hand to this work, and has since conducted it to the 
point that we shall mention hereafter, and which we 
see with our own eyes, with a consolation which can- 
not be expressed. 
It was three years before, on this same day, that 
our Fathers had made the vow, in order to obtain the 
favor of this great Princess in the establishment of 
Christianity in these countries, to fast on the eve of 
this Feast, and to say a Mass every month in honor 
of this her first dignity; and also, that the first 
Chapel we should build in the country should be in 
her honor, and under the title of her holy Concep- 
tion. This Chapel is the one in which these first 
Baptisms took place; in this we saw the result [45] 
that we desired, even before we were entirely released 
from the obligations of our vow-since the Chapel 
was not yet finished so far that we could conveniently 
say Mass therein, and seemed fit only for the Bap- 
tisms, which were, in fact, administered there. 
Let, then, praise and thanksgivings be forever 
rendered to this great Queen of Heaven and of earth, 
by all those who have and shall hereafter have an 
interest in this work; and as for persons who have a 
pious and holy affection for this enterprise, they will 
oblige us greatly by helping us thank this blessed 
Virgin for the many gifts we have received and are 
continually receiving through her favor and assistance, 
which makes us hope that her divine Son, our most 
honored Lord and Master, who alone can lay the 
foundation of this edifice, will be pleased to continue 
his blessing upon it and to bring it to the summit and 
height of its perfection. 
Since that day we have continued at intervals to 


36 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

able d'y continuer fa benediétion, & Ie conduire iuf- 
ques au comble & au point de fa perfeétion. 
Depuis ce iour on a continué par intervalles de 
baptifer ceux & celles qui fe font prefentez, qu'on a 
iugé capables de ce bon-heur, [46J en forte que Ie 
nombre des fideles faifant profeffion du Chriftianifme, 
monte prefentement ce Bourg à pres de 60. dont plu- 
fieurs font 
enroronons, du nombre de ces pauures 
Eftrangers refugiez en ce pais, comme nous auons dit 
au commencement de ce Chapitre; la diuine Proui- 
dence les ayant attendu pour donner commencement 
à cette nouuelle Eglife, comme predeftinez de toute 
Eternité, pour en eftre vne partie des pierres fonda- 
mentales. Dans ce nombre fe font trouuez encore 
quelque aut res Eftrangers de diuerfes Nations qui 
depuis fe font retirez en leur pais, qui toft ou tard 
pourront bien feruir à quelque deffein de Prouidence, 
Bonté & Mifericorde de Dieu. 
Ie dy pres de 60. Fideles, faifants profeffion du 
Chriftianifme; car de baptifez en extremité de mala- 
die, il y en a beaucoup d'autres dans Ie Bourg, mais 
qui ayans recouuré la fanté, n'ont fait aucun eftat du 
bien qu'ils auoient receu, auquel toutesfois il eft croy- 
able, au moins pour quelques-vns, qu'ils luy font 
encore obligez de la vie, temporelle. 
11 faut aduoüer que Ie trauail d'vn enfantement 
fpirituel, eft grand pour Ie regard [47J de ces peuples 
Barbares & fauuages au dernier point; mais auffi eft- 
il veritable que la confolation eft gran de de voir ces 
pauures creatures reduites à la reconnoiffance, refpeét, 
& obeiffance à leur Createur & Redempteur, & fe 
ranger aux deuoirs de veritables Chreftiens. 
Seroit-il poffible de retenir les larmes de ioye, voy- 
ant vn Dimanche matin, arriuer chez nous, pour 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION. I639 

37 

baptize men and women who have presented them- 
selves, who have been deemed qualified for this bless- 
ing, [46] so that the number of the faithful who 
make profession of Christianity in this Village now 
amounts to nearly 60, of whom many are Wenroro- 
nons from among those poor Strangers taking refuge 
in this country, whom we mentioned at the begin- 
ning of this Chapter,- divine Providence having 
waited for them to furnish the nucleus for this new 
Church, as if they were predestined, from all Eter- 
nity, to be a part of the foundation stones. In this 
number are also some other Strangers of different 
Nations who have since retired to their own country, 
who, sooner or later, may be very useful in carrying 
out some design of the Providence, Goodness, and 
Mercy of God. 
I said, " nearly 60 of the Faithful making a profes- 
sion of Christianity;" for of those baptized in the 
extremity of their sickness there are many others in 
the Village, who, nevertheless, having recovered 
their health, have attached no value to the blessing 
they had received,- to which, for all that, it may be 
believed, at least in the case of some, that they are 
indebted also for temporal life. 
It must be confessed that the travail of a spiritual 
birth is painful, in the case [47] of these peoples, Bar- 
barous and savage to the last degree. But it is also 
true that there is great consolation in seeing these 
poor creatures brought to recognize, to respect, and 
to obey their Creator and Redeemer, and to assume 
the duties of real Christians. 
Hardly could one repress the tears of joy, who 
should see, on a Sunday morning, these poor people 
arrive at our house to hear Mass, having departed 


38 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

entendre la Meffe, ces pauures gens partis de leurs 
cabanes à point nommé, & quelque temps qu'il faffe 
trauerfer vn efpace notable qu'i} y a de leur Bourg 
à noftre demeure, nuds pour la plufpart, comme la 
main, excepté vne fimple peau qu'ils ont fur Ie dos 
en forme de mante; & dans la rigueur de l'hyuer 
quelques peaux à l' entour de leurs pieds, & de leurs 
iambes, 
Mais fur tout quand on les voit fe mettre à genoux, 
ce qui leur eft vne pofture du tout eftrange & extra- 
ordinaire, faire leurs prieres à haute voix, en la pre- 
fence du fainét Sacrement, & fe communier peíle- 
meíle auec nos François. 11 faut confeffer que Ie 
contentement eft tel, que Ie centuple la dedans, nous 
eft richement payé, & au delà, & que nous n'aurons 
iamais fuiet [48] d'eftre en peine de voir en ce point 
accomplies les promeffes de l' Euangile. 
On a foin 1'hyuer de tenir en plufieurs endroiéts 
de la Chappelle des foyers pIe ins de braife, pour reme- 
dier aux inconueniens qui s'en pourroient enfuiure 
du froid, & de leur nudité. Cela les fatisfait de la 
forte, que quelques-vns demeurent fouuent de leur 
plein gré les heures entieres apres Ie feruice, à s'en- 
tretenir de nos myfteres, & à fe faire inftruire touf- 
iours de plus en plus. 
La premiere occafion qui fe prefenta apres leurs 
baptefmes, de faire paroiftre leur deuotion, fut à la 
nuiét de N oël, laquelle plufieurs pafferent partie dans 
noftre cabane, partie dans la Chappelle nouuelle, qui 
fe trouua en eftat de feruir à cefte folemnité. On 
difpofa les chofes auec Ie plus d'ornement, & d'efclat 
qui fut poffible, pour leuT faire apprehender Ie merite 
de ce iour. Et la chofe reüffit de la forte, que ces 
pauures gens ont fouuent depuis demandé, quand eft- 


1639-40] 

LE.lEUNE'S RELATION, r6j9 

39 

from their cabins at the appointed time, and some- 
times when they had to traverse a considerable dis- 
tance which lies between their Village and our dwell- 
ing,-naked, for the most part, as the hand, except 
a single skin that they wear upon their backs in the 
form of a mantle, and in the rigor of winter some 
skins around their feet and legs. 
But above all [would one rejoice] to see them get 
upon their knees, which to them is a posture alto- 
gether strange and extraordinary, and offer their 
prayers aloud in the presence of the blessed Sacra- 
ment, and receive communion promiscuously with 
our French people. It must be confessed that the 
satisfaction is such that by it we are inwardly repaid 
a hundredfold, and more, and that we shall never 
have reason [48] for difficulty in seeing the promises 
of the Gospel fulfilled in this respect. 
In winter, we are careful to have fireplaces full of 
burning coals in several parts of the Chapel, to pro- 
vide against the discomforts that might arise from 
the cold and their nakedness. This so pleases them 
that some often remain, of their own free will, whole 
hours after the service, to converse about our mys- 
teries, and to become better and better instructed. 
The first occasion that presented itself after their 
baptisms to show their devotion was on Christmas 
night, part of which several spent in our cabin, others 
in the new Chapel, which proved to be in condition 
for use at this solemnity. Things were arranged 
with as much decoration and splendor as possible, to 
make them realize the importance of this day; and 
the affair succeeded so well that these poor people 
have often asked since then when that night would 
return,- or rather this kind of a beautiful day; for, 


40 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

ce que cette nuiét reuiendroit, ou pluftoft cette forte 
de beau iour: car ces peuples n'ayans aucun vfage de 
chandelles, voyant quantité de lumieres qui bril- 
loient & efc1attoient [49] dans cefte Chapelle, auoient 
quelque fujet de doute s'il faifoit iour ou nuiét. 
N oftre Chreftien, ainfi appellons nous Iofeph Chi- 

atenh
a, tant par ce qu'il a efté Ie premier en ce 
Bourg, & feul neuf ou dix mois auec fa famille, 
faifant profeffion du Chriftianifme, nonobftant tous 
les difcours & les perfecutions de langue de fes Com- 
patriotes; que par ce qu'il eft incomparablement emi- 
nent par deffus tous les autres, en connoiffance & 
pieufe affeétion à nos myfteres, & à l' ef prit du Chri- 
ftianifme. Ce braue Chreftien dif-ie ne man qua pas 
en cefte occafion de prendre fouuent la parole, & y 
faire fonétion de fraire aifné, en inftruifant & enfei- 
gnant fes cadets auec vn aduantage & fuccez tout 
particulier, pour auoir tout enfemble 1'efprit, la pa- 
role, la probité, la reputation, la cognoiffance de nos 
myfteres, & l'affection en vn eminent degré; de 
forte que nous commençons à Ie regarder pluftoft 
comme vn Apoftre, que comme vn Barbare de ces 
contrées. Ah, difoit-il, mes Freres, que veulent dire 
ces lumieres brillantes & ec1atantes au milieu de la 
nuiét, finon que celuy dont nous honorons mainte- 
nant la memoire, a par fa naiffance [So] diffipé les 
tenebres & 1'ignorance du monde; ce qu'ayant fait 
pour la premiere fois depuis tant de fiec1es, il nous 
va auiourd'huy pour la premiere fois en ces contrées, 
faifant la mefme grace & mifericorde. Ce font des 
deffeins & des iugemens qu'il ne faut qu'adorer, 
pourquoy c'eft qu'il ne 1'a pas fait pluftoft, mais c'eft 
vne grace & vne faueur pour nous, qui ne fe peut 
prifer, ny recognoiftre fuffifamment, que fa proui- 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, r6.19 

41 

as these people are not in the habit of using candles, 
seeing many lights shining and sparkling [49] in this 
Chapel, they had some reason to question whether 
it were day or night. 
Our Christian,- it is thus we call Joseph Chiwa- 
tenhwa, both because he was the first one in this Vil- 
lage, and for nine or ten months the only one who, 
with his family, made a profession of Christianity, 
notwithstanding all the speeches and the verbal per- 
secutions of his Countrymen; and because he is 
incomparably superior to all the others in knowledge 
of and pious affection to our mysteries and to the 
spirit of Christianity,-this brave Christian, I say, 
did not fail on this occasion often to address the peo- 
ple, and to perform the duty of an elder brother by 
instructing and teaching his juniors with most special 
benefit and success, because he had at once intelli- 
gence, eloquence, integrity, reputation, the knowl- 
edge of our mysteries, and the affection for them, 
in an eminent degree; so we are beginning to regard 
him as an Apostle rather than a Barbarian of these 
countries. "Ah, my Brothers," said he, ., what do 
these lights shining and sparkling in the midst of the 
night mean, if not that he whose memory we are now 
honoring has through his birth [50] dissipated the 
shadows and the ignorance of the world; having done 
this the first time so many centuries ago, he is about 
to grant us to-day, for the first time in these coun- 
tries, the same grace and mercy. There are purposes 
and reasons, which can only be adored, for which he 
has not done this sooner; but it is a grace and a favor 
toward us, which cannot be sufficiently estimated or 
acknow ledged, that his providence has arranged this 
blessing for our country while we are still living." 


42 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

dence ait menagé ce bien à nofire pais, pendant que 
nous fommes encore en vie. 
De tels & femblables difcours entretint ce bon 
Chrefiien vne bonne partie de la nuiét, Ie petit trou- 
peau de cefie Eglife naiffante, laquelle il n'edifia pas 
moins de fes exemples que de fa parole. Car entre- 
autres ne fe contenant pas d'vne Meffe, il en entendit 
cinq tout de fuite, la plus part à genoux: Ce qui pour 
vn Barbare, qui n'a iamais fçeu que c'efioit de cefie 
contenance, pourroit bien paffer pour vn petit mar- 
tyre. D'autres à fon imitation n'en entendirent gui- 
ere moins, & tous fe confefferent, communierent, & 
donnerent en cefie occafion tant de contentement & 
de fatisfaétion, qu'on n'en pouuoit [5 I] plus fouhai- 
ter dauantage. 
Ie puis dire Ie mefme à proportion de toutes les 
grandes Fefies & Dimãches, qui depuis ont fuiuy, 
aufquels on garde tout ce qui fe peut des ceremonies 
de l'Eglife; entr'autres celle du pain benit, que ces 
bons Neophytes font chacun à fon tour, auec beau- 
coup de deuotion, particulierement quelques-vns. 
Ce n'efi pas que pour conduire Ie tout de la forte, 
il n'y faille apporter beaucoup de peine & de foin. & 
autant pour Ie moins qu'à eíleuer des enfans malades, 
mais Ie contentement d'auoir en:fin mis ces enfans 
au mõde, ou plufiofi dans la grace du Chrifiianifme, 
& Ie defir & ef perance de les voir deuenir hommes 
dans l'Eglife de Dieu, fait qu' on ne fent prefque 
point fon mal, & qu'on efi tout difpofé à en fouffrir 
beaucoup dauantage. 
Cefie grace de Dieu fur ces peuples, n'efi conce- 
uable qu'à ceux qui fçauent iufques à que 1 point ces 
pauures Barbares font terrefires, & d'eux-mefmes 
enoignez, & incapables de conceuoir & efiimer les 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION. I6.J9 

43 

With this and similar discourses this good Chris- 
tian entertained for a great part of the night, the 
little flock of this rising Church, whom he edified no 
less by his exam pIes than by his words. For, among 
other things, not contenting himself with one Mass, 
he heard five in succession,- during most of them, 
on his knees; this, for a Barbarian, who has never 
known what that posture is, might well pass for a 
petty martyrdom. Others, imitating him, heard 
almost as many Masses, and all confessed and re- 
ceived communion, and on this occasion gave so much 
comfort and satisfaction, that one could not [5 I] wish 
for more besides. 
I can say the same, relatively, of all the great 
Feasts and Sundays which have followed that time, 
on which occasions we observe as many as possible of 
the ceremonies of the Church,- among others, that 
of the consecrated bread, of which these good Neo- 
phytes partake, each in his turn, with great devotion, 
some in especial. 
Not that, in order to direct all in this way, a great 
deal of trouble and care must not be taken,-as much, 
at least, as to raise sickly children; but the satisfac- 
tion of having finally brought these children into the 
world, or rather into the grace of Christianity, and 
the desire and hope of seeing them become men in 
the Church of God, renders one almost insensible to 
his pains, and makes him quite ready to suffer a great 
many more. 
This grace of God upon these peoples is not con- 
ceivable except to those who know to what extent 
these Barbarians are of the earth, and of themselves 
disinclined and incompetent to understand or con- 
sider the things of the spirit and of Eternity. But 


44 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

chofes de l'efprit & de l'Eternité, mais celuy à qui 
rien n'efi impoffible, & qui n'efi pas mois puiffant en 
vn temps qu'en vn [52] autre, femble en fin aggreer, 
de fufciter de ces pierres & rochers des vrays enfans 
d'Abraham, & de 1'Eglife. 
Ce qui apres 1'affifiance du Ciel femble auoir Ie plus 
contribué à l'aduancement de cét ouurage, font; 
Premierement, la patience & Ie courage des Peres qui 
ont efié icy par cy-deuant, qui ne fe font pas rebutez 
ny laffez dans l'attente des temps & des moments de 
la diuine Prouidence: & qui nonobfiant toutes les per- 
fecutions & dangers de maffacre, dont ils fe font veus 
à la veille fouuent, & particulierement l' année prece- 
dente, n' ont rien relafché de leurs foins & charitez à 
vifiter & affifier les malades, voire mefme dans les 
cabanes de ceux qui fembloient leur vouloir Ie plus 
de mal. 
Et il femble en effet que Dieu ait voulu tefmoigner 
que c' efioit là Ie grain, qui auoit produit ce fruiét, 
difpofant les chofes de la forte, qu'au mefme mois 
d'Oétobre, auquell'année d'auparauant on auoit con- 
elu leur mort, ça [sc. c'a] efié en ce mefme mois 1'an- 
née d'apres, que penfants efire encore bien ef10ignez 
de la recolte, ils ont aperceu les fruiéts tous meurs 
& prefis à cueillir. 
[53] En fecond lieu, l'exemple de nos François 
feculiers ou domefiiques, n'y a pas de peu feruy. 
Nous n'experimentons que trop la force de cét article, 
foit pour Ie bien, foit pour Ie mal. Et ie ne doute 
point que l' affaire ne fe fufi pluftofi aduancée, fi 
tous les François qui ont monté en ce pais iufques 
icy, euffent efté d'vne vie irreprochable. Au moins 
eft-it affeuré que les Barbares ne nous euffent pas fi 
fouuent arrefié, leur propofant les Commandements 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELATION, r639 

45 

he to whom nothing is impossible, and who is not 
less powerful at one time than at [52] another, seems 
finally pleased to raise up from these stones and rocks 
true children of Abraham and of the Church. 
The things which seem, after the aid of Heaven, 
to have contributed most to the advancement of this 
work, are: First, the patience and the courage of the 
Fathers who were here before, who were not rebuffed 
or wearied in waiting for the times and moments of 
divine Providence, and who,- notwithstanding all 
the persecutions and dangers of massacre, on the 
verge of which they often found themselves, and par- 
ticularly last year,- in no wise relaxed their atten- 
tions and kindnesses in visiting and assisting the sick, 
yea, even in the cabins of those who seemed to have 
the most ill-will towards them. 
And indeed it seems that God wished to show that 
that was the seed which produced this fruit,- so ar- 
ranging matters that in the very month of October 
in which, the year before, their death had been 
decreed, in this same month the next year, when 
they thought themselves to be still very far from the 
harvest, they perceived the fruit quite ripe and ready 
to be gathered. 
[53] In the second place, the example of our secular 
French, or domestics, has been of no little service. 
We experience only too strongly the force of this 
element, either for good or for evil; and I do not 
doubt that the cause might have been sooner advanced 
if all the French who have come up to this country 
had been of irreproachable lives. At least it is cer- 
tain that the Barbarians would not so often have 
stopped us when we were proposing to them the Com- 
mandments of God, and brought forward, in the 


46 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

de Dieu, & reprefenté Ie contraire de ce que nous 
enfeignons dans les aétions & les æuures de quelques 
perfonnes. Mais Dieu difpofant les affaires au poind 
que nous les voyons, femble auoir infpiré à Meffieurs 
de la Compagnie de la N ouuelle France de fi bonnes 
penfées & refolutions là deffus, & Monfieur Ie Cheua- 
lier de Montmagny no fire Gouuerneur y apporte vn 
11 bon ordre, que nous efperons que cette pierre d'a- 
choppement ne fe trouuera plus en nofire chemin. 
Et en effeét ceux qui font icy de prefent, non feule- 
ment meinent vne vie irreprochable, mais en outre 
viuent & fe comportent de la forte, que nous auons 
tout fuiet de croire que Dieu en leur confideration, 
[54] a donné vne particuliere benediétion a cét ou- 
urage, auquel ils s' efiudient felon leur pouuoir & 
induftrie, de prendre vne bonne part. 
Ie mets au rang des caufes de l' aduancement de 
ce mefme ouurage, les difcours & comportemens de 
Iofeph Chih
atenh
a, ce bon Neophyte, duquel nous 
2.uons defia plufieurs fois par1é, qui femble auoir efté 
ce leuain de l'Euangile, qui a faiét leuer toute la 
ma1Ie de cette nouuelle Eglife des Hurons, non feule- 
ment en ce bourg, mais encore par tout ailleurs où 
nous auons trauaillé à faire des Chreftiens, foit en 
celuy de Teanaufiayé où nous auons vne Refidence, 
foit aux Miffions; s' efiant trouué par tout aux meil- 
leures occafions, pour faire profeffion publique, & 
rendre cõpte de fa foy & de fa conuerfion. En quoy 
il s'efi comporté par tout auec vne fatisfaétion pleine 
& entiere de fes compatriotes, qui ne fe laffent iamais 
de l'entendre. Vous vous rebutez, mes Freres, (leur 
dit-il quelquefois) fur ce que les affaires de vofire 
falut que vous propofent les François, font chofes 
nouuelles, & leurs propres coufiumes qui renuer- 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I6.J9 

47 

actions and deeds of certain persons, the opposite of 
what we were teaching. But God, in bringing affairs 
to the condition in which we see them, seems to have 
inspired the Gentlemen of the Company of New 
France with so good ideas and resolutions thereupon, 
and Monsieur the Chevalier de Montmagny, our Gov- 
ernor, has brought about so good order, that we hope 
this stumbling-block will no longer be found in our 
way. And, in fact, those who are here at present 
not only lead irreproachable lives, but besides live 
and behave in such a way that we have every reason 
to believe that God upon their account [54J has given 
a special blessing to this work, in which they strive, 
according to their power and skill, to take a worthy 
part. 
I place among the causes for the advancement of 
this same work the speeches and behavior of Joseph 
Chihwatenhwa, the good Neophyte of whom we have 
already spoken several times, who seems to have been 
the leaven of the Gospel that has made the whole 
lump of this new Church of the Hurons rise,-not 
only in this village, but also everywhere else where 
we have striven to make Christians, either in the 
town of Teanaustayé where we have a Residence, or 
in the Missions,-he having been everywhere pres- 
ent on the most suitable occasions, to make a public 
profession and to render an account of his faith and 
his conversion. In this he conducted himself every- 
where to the full and entire satisfaction of his com- 
patriots, who were never tired of hearing him. "Y ou 
are disheartened, my Brothers" (he sometimes said 
to them), "because the matters of your salvation that 
the French propose to you are new things, and cus- 
toms of their own which overthrow ours. You tell 


48 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

fent les noftres. Vous leur dites, que chaque pais 
[55] a res façons de faire: que comme vous ne les 
preffez pas de prendre les noftres, auffi vous efton- 
nez-vous de ce qu'ils nous preffent de prendre en 
cela les leur, & de recognoiftre auec eux Ie mefme 
Createur du Ciel & de la Terre, & Ie Seigneur vni- 
uerfel de toutes chofes. Ie vous demande, quand 
au commencement vous veiftes de leurs haches & 
chaudieres, apres auoir recognu qu' elles eitoient 
incomparablement meilleures & plus commodes que 
nos haches de pierre, & que nos vaiffeaux, de bois & 
de terre, auez vous pour cela reietté leurs haches & 
chaudieres, parce que c'eftoit chofe nouuelle à voftre 
païs, & la couftume de France de s'en feruir, & non 
pas la voftre. Que s'ils nous preffent de croire ce 
qu'ils croyoient, & de viure conformement à cefte cre- 
ance, nous leur en auons beaucoup d' obligation: car 
en effet fi ce qu'ils difent eft vray, comme il eft, nous 
fommes les plus miferables gens du monde, fi nous 
ne faifons ce qu'ils nous difent. 
Ie n' aurois iamais faiét, fi ie me voulois eftendre 
plus au long fur tous les difcours, ou pluftoft fur 
toutes les faillies de l'efprit de Dieu, qui femble par- 
ler fouuent par la [56] bouche de ce bon Neophyte. 
Ie dis faillies de l'efprit de Dieu, car nous ne fçauons 
que penfer autre chofe, Ie voyant quelquefois fe 
mettre à benir Dieu, & Ie loüer tout en la mefme 
façon & maniere, que firent autrefois les enfans dãs 
la fournaife, fans que iamais il ait eu cognoiffance de 
ce que la fainéte Efcriture nous en apprend. 
Ie ne me trouuerois pas moins empefché, fi i' auois 
entrepris de declarer tous les aétes de vertu remar- 
quables, & tous les bons exemples qu'il a continué 
de faire paroiftre depuis Ie temps de la derniere Rela- 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I639 

49 

them that every country [55] has its own ways of 
doing things; that, as you do not urge them to adopt 
ours, so you are surprised at their urging us to adopt 
theirs in this matter, and to acknowledge with them 
the same Creator of Heaven and of Earth, and the 
universal Lord of all things. I ask you, when at first 
you saw their hatchets and kettles, after having dis- 
covered that they were incomparably better and more 
convenient than our stone hatchets and our wooden 
and earthen vessels, 2 did you reject their hatchets 
and kettles, because they were new things in your 
country, and because it was the custom of France to 
use them and not yours? N ow if they urge us to 
believe what they believe, and to live conformably 
to this belief, we are under great obligations to them; 
for indeed, if what they say is true, as it is, we are 
the most miserable people in the world if we do not 
do as they tell us." 
I would never finish if I were to dwell at length 
upon all the discourses, or rather upon all the flashes 
of the spirit of God, which often seems to speak 
through the [56] mouth of this good Neophyte. I 
say" flashes of the spirit of God, " for we cannot think 
of anything else when we see him sometimes begin- 
ning to bless God and to praise him in the same fash- 
ion and manner as did in olden time the children in 
the furnace, without his ever having learned what 
the holy Scriptures teach us thereof. 
I would not find myself less embarrassed if I had 
undertaken to declare all the acts of remarkable vir- 
tue and all the good examples he has continued to 
manifest since the time of the last Relation, whether 
in health or in sickness, in prosperity or in adversity. 
When it was a question of going after those poor 


50 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

(VOL. 17 

tion, foit en fanté, foit en maladie, foit dans la prof- 
perité, foit dans I' aduerfité. 
Quand il fut quefiion d'aller querir ces pauures 
efirangers dont nous auons parlé cy-deffus, i1 ne fe 
contenta pas d'aller à my chemin comme plufieurs 
autres; mais il fit Ie voyage entier, & prifi tant de 
peine & de foin à les affifier, par des motifs veri- 
ta[b]lement Chrefiiens, qu'efiant icy de retour, iI en 
tomba malade d'vne fiévre qui luy dura 40 iours, pen- 
dant lefquels on Ie tint par plufieurs fois pour defef- 
peré. I1 pleût toutefois à Dieu donner benediétion 
aux remedes & aux charitez [57] dont nous l'affi- 
fiâmes, en forte qu' au bout des 40 iours il fe trouua 
entierement hors de danger. Au plus fort de fon 
mal, efiant furpris de refuerie, fes difcours & extra- 
uagance n'efioient que des chofes de Dieu & de la 
Foy: i1 fe leuoit quelquesfois tout nud, & fe tenant 
aupres du feu: Qu'ils viennent, qu'ils viennent, di- 
foit-iI, qu'ils me bruílent, & qu'ils voyent fi c'efi tout 
de bon que ie croy, où fi c'efi feulement du bout ùes 
levres. 
Depuis ce temps, cefie bonne Arne nous a femblé 
de plus en plus fe remplir du S. Efprit, & entrer dans 
fe .fentier des Saints, dont i1 a donné plufieurs autres 
preuues, tant aux attaques contre la chafieté, & la 
Religion, qu'aux exercices de charité & de mife- 
ricorde. 
Ie ne fçay à quoy ie dois attribuer, ce qui luy arri- 
ua l' Efié pafsé, lors qu' efiant à la pefche, il pleut 
par tout Ie pais, & fpecialement tout à l'entour du 
lieu où il efioit, ce qui caufa vn grand degafi de poif- 
fon, & cependant i1 ne plût iamais à l'endroit où i1 fe 
trouua auec ceux de fa cõpagnie, & fit fa pefche fort 


163 -40J 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION. I639 

51 

strangers whom we have mentioned above, he was 
not satisfied to go halfway, like many others; but 
he made the entire journey, and took so much pains 
and care to assist them, through truly Christian mo- 
tives, that after he returned hither he fell sick of a 
fever that lasted 40 days, during which he was 
several times considered a hopeless case. It pleased 
God, however, to grant a blessing to the remedies and 
charities [57] with which we assisted him, so that at 
the end of 40 days he proved to be entirely out of 
danger. At the height of his illness, being overtaken 
with delirium, his utterances and ravings were only 
about the things of God and of the Faith. He some- 
times arose, entirely naked, and, keeping near the 
fire, " Let them come, let them come," said he; "let 
them burn me, and let them see if it is in good ear- 
nest that I believe, or if it is only with my lips." 
Since that time, this good Soul has seemed to us to 
be more and more filled with the Holy Ghost, and to 
have entered the path of the Saints, of which he has 
given many other proofs, not only in attacks against 
his chastity and Religion, but in his exercises of 
charity and mercy. 
I do not know to what I should attribute what hap- 
pened to him last Summer,-when, being engaged 
in fishing, it rained throughout the country, and 
especially all around the place where he was, which 
caused great havoc among the fish; and yet it never 
rained in the locality where he was with his com- 
pany, and his fishing was very successful. One thing 
is certain-he never omitted in all that time to pray, 
[58] and to have all those who were with him pray, 
to God morning and evening; besides this, he with- 


52 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

heureufement. \
ne chofe eft affeurée, qu'il n'obmit 
iamais en tout ce temps de prier, [58] & faire prier 
Dieu matin & foir tous ceux qui eftoient auec luy: 
Outre que tous les iours i1 fe retiroit feul dans Ie bois, 
pour vacquer auec moins de diuertiffement, & plus 
long-temps à l' oraifon. 
En fin, il me femble que ce foit ce bon grain de 
1'Euangile, & du meilleur, qui rend non feulement 
60. mais 100. puis qu'à la S. Iofeph de 1'an pafsé, n'y 
ayãt que luy en fa famille de baptifez, faifants pro- 
feffion du Chrifiianifme; vn an apres au mefme iour, 
il y en auoit prés de cent dans Ie pais, faifants la 
mefme profeffion, à la conuerfion defquels i1 n'auoit 
pas peu contribué. 
Ie ne m'eftendray point dauantage en ce Chapitre, 
ny aux fuiuants, fur plufieurs autres particularitez 
des affaires qui fe font paffées, nommément fur les 
Baptefmes, tant des enfants que des adultes malades; 
tant pour éuiter la longueur, que pour ne donner de 
l' ennuy à ceux qui pourront ietter les yeux fur ce 
Narré. Car quoy qu'en plufieurs i1 y ait beaucoup 
de chofes confiderables, & qui font ouurages excel- 
lens de la bonté, iuftice & Prouidence de Dieu fur 
ces Creatures, il en eft toutefois de ces affaires, comme 
des ouurages de [59] peinture ou de fculpture, def- 
quels fi les traits font fubtils & delicats, ils ne fe peu- 
uent voir de loin auec contentement, pour excellês 
qu'ils puiffent eftre, & demandent des perfonnes qui 
ne foiet point elloignées pour les voir de prés, & en 
conceuoir Ie merite. Ces cas donc feront referuez à 
l' entretien des faindes Ames au feiour bienheureux 
de l'Eternité. Qui cependant no us ayderont encore, 
s'il leur plaifi, à remercier la diuine Maiefié, auffi 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION. /639 

53 

drew alone into the woods, every day, that he might, 
with less interruption and for a longer time, devote 
himself to prayer. 
Finally, it seems to me that it is this good Gospel 
seed, the very best, which yields not only 60 but 
loa-fold; since on St. Joseph's day of last year we 
had only him with his family, of those baptized, who 
made a profession of Christianity; one year after- 
wards, on the same day, there were nearly a hundred 
in the country making the same profession, to whose 
conversion he had contributed not a little. 
I shall not dwell further in this Chapter, nor in 
the following ones, upon many other details of the 
events which have taken place,-especially upon the 
Baptisms of children and of sick adults,- both to 
2.void prolixity, and not to weary those who may cast 
their eyes over this Narrati
le. For although in sev- 
eral there are many important features, which are 
notable achievements of the goodness, justice, and 
Providence of God toward his Creatures, yet some of 
these things are like works of [59] painting or of 
sculpture, which, if the lines are subtle and delicate, 
cannot be seen satisfactorily from a distance, how- 
ever excellent they may be, and require persons who 
2.re not far away, that they may see them close at 
hand and judge their merits. These cases, then, 
will be reserved for the entertainment of the saintly 
Souls in the blessed sojourn of Eternity ,- who, 
meanwhile, will still aid us, if they please, in thank- 
ing the divine Majesty for special and hidden favors, 
as well as for manifest and general ones. 
I would be wholly wrong if I were to close this 
Chapter before enumerating another cause for the 


54 

LES RELATIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

bien des faueurs particulieres & occultes, que des 
efc1atantes & generales. 
I'aurois tous les torts du monde fi ie fermois ce 
Chapitre, deuant que d'adioufter vne autre caufe de 
I' aduancement de cét ouurage. Ce font les fainétes 
prieres & deuotions de tant de bonnes Ames qui 
font en France, & qui prennent vne fi grande part, & 
vn fi grand intereft à toutes ces affaires. 
Ie me fuis quelquefois eftonné de l'ordre que tenoit 
autrefois ce grand Apoftre des lndes S. François 
Xauier, inuitant & coniurant la diuine Maiefté de 
l'affifter à l'entreprife de la conuerfion des infidelles 
des contrées où i1 eftoit, en vne fienne Oraifon qu'i1 
difoit tous les iours à ce fuiet, [60] & qui fe trouue 
dans fa vie, il y met en premier lieu les prieres des 
fainétes Ames, comme les plus puiffants moyens qu'il 
euft de flechir Dieu, & Ie porter a faire mifericorde à 
ces pauures Errans. 
Mais l'experience me fait fortir de l'eftonnement, 
car confiderant dans la recolte de cefte année, ce qu'ii 
plaift à Dieu nous faire efperer à l'aduenir de nos 
trauaux en ces contrées, & cependant Ie peu de pro- 
portion de nos forces auec tels ouurages, ie me fens 
forcé de recognoiftre que comme dans Ie Ciel, qui 
rouie deffus nos teftes, il y a des Eftoilles & des con- 
ftellations fi puiffantes, que la premiere & principale 
vertu produétiue de certaines richeffes de la terre 
leur eft attribuée; ce qui fe fait ordinairement par les 
Philofophes, lors qu'ils ne rencontrent icy bas aucune 
cauie proportionnée à l'effeét: Que pareillement dans 
Ie Ciel de l'Eglife, il y a des Eftoilles & des conftel- 
lations myftiques fi puiffantes à influer fur les affaires 
que nous auons entre les mains, que la premiere & 


1639-40] 

LE /EUNE'S RELATION, r639 

55 

advancement of this work,- the holy prayers and 
devotions of so many good Souls in France, who take 
so great a share and so much interest in all these 
affairs. 
I am sometimes astonished at the order formerly 
cbserved by that great Apostle of the Indies, St. 
François Xavier,- when he was engaging and en- 
t
ating the divine Majesty to assist him in the enter- 
prise of converting the unbelievers of the countries 
wl.ere he was,- in one of his Prayers which he said 
evtry day with this object, [60] and which is found 
in the narrative of his life; in this he gives the first 
plaæ to the prayers of saintly Souls, as the most 
po
rful means he had of influencing God and caus- 
ing iim to show mercy to those poor Wanderers. 
B
t experience causes me to recover from this 
astonishment. For considering, in the harvest of 
this year, what it pleases God to make us hope for 
the future of our labors in these countries, and yet 
the small ratio of our forces to such labors, I feel 
myself compelled to acknowledge that, as in the Sky 
which turns above our heads there are some Stars 
and 
onstellations so powerful that the first and prin- 
cipa. virtue productive of certain riches of the soil 
is a:tributed to them,-this being done usually by 
Phrosophers, when they cannot find here below any 
cause proportionate to the effect,- so, likewise, in 
the Sky of the Church there are some mystical Stars 
anë constellations so powerful to influence the affairs 
thGt we have in hand, that the first and principal vir- 
tu productive of the good that we can do here should 
bt: attributed to them, since, in fact, we do not see 
dJwn here any other causes proportionate [61] to 
tJ.ese effects. 


56 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

principale vertu produétiue des biens que nous pou- 
uons faire icy, leur doit eftre attribuée, puis qu'en 
effeét nous n'y voyons point icy bas d'autres caufes 
proportionnées [61] à ces effeéts. 
Ie pretens par cecy en faire vne reconnoiffance, & 
vn remerciement general, duquel chaque fainéte Arne 
& communauté prendra s'il luy plaift la part qu'elle 
y pretend, & qui luy eft deuë, fi elle n'ayme miell.x 
quittant fes droits, attendre de Dieu fa recompenfe. 

\ 

  


1639-40] 

LE /EUNE'S RELATION, r639 

57 

I intend by this to offer a general acknowledg- 
ment and expression of thanks, of which each saintly 
Soul and community will take, if it please, the share 
that it claims, and that is its due, unless it prefer to 
give up its rights to wait for its reward from God. 


58 

LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL 17 

CHAPITRE V. 

DE LA RESIDENCE DE S. IOSEPH AU BOURG DE TEA- 
NAUSTAY[AÉ]; DE CE QUI S'Y EST PASSÉ DE PLUS 
REMARQUABLE, & PRINCIPALEMENT DE LA 
NAISSANCE & ESTABLISSEMENT DE LA 
NOUUELLE EGLISE DE 
CE BOURG. 

L A refolution eftant prife de quitter la demeure 
d'lhonatiria, à faute d'habitans, la pluípart 
ayant efté emportez ou diffipez par la maladie, 
comme a efté dit cy-deffus, & plus amplement encore 
en la precedente Relation: on ne fut pas long-temps 
à aduiíer de quel cofté it feroit à propos de tirer. Le 
bourg de Teanauftayaé eftant Ie plus confiderable de 
tout Ie [62] païs, & qui par confequent eftant vne fois 
gagné à Dieu, donneroit vn grand branf1e à la con- 
uerfion de tout Ie refte. 
Mais queUe apparence d'entamer cefte affaire, & 
moins encore d'en venir à bout; ce bourg ayant efté 
vn peu auparauant vne des principales boutiques, où 
s'eftoient forgées des calomnies
.1es plus noires, & les 
deffeins les plus pernicieux contre nous. lufques-Ià 
que les Capitaines auoient publiquement exhorté la 
ieuneffe à nous venir maffacrer à ce bourg-icy où nous 
eftiõs d'Offofane. Toutefois celuy à qui rien n'eft 
impoffible, a donné plus de facilité à l'vn & à l'autre 
que no us n'euffions iamais oíé efperer. 
. Appuyé donc íur Dieu feul,:le P. lean de Brebeuf 


1639-40] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELATION, 1639 

59 

CHAPTER V. 

OF THE RESIDENCE OF ST. JOSEPH AT THE VIL- 
LAGE OF TEANAUSTAY[AÉ]; OF THE MORE RE- 
MARKABLE EVENTS THAT HAVE OCCURRED 
THERE, AND ESPECIALLY OF THE BIRTH 
AND ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NEW 
CHURCH OF THAT VILLAGE. 

H AVING resolved to abandon the dwelling at 
Ihonatiria, on account of its lack of inhab- 
itants,- the majority of them having been 
carried off or scattered by the disease, as has been 
related above, and still more fully in the preceding 
Relation,-we were not long in deciding to what 
place it would be wise to go, the village of Teanaus- 
tayaé 8 being the most important in the whole [62] 
country, and one which, consequently, being once 
won to God, would give a strong impulse to the 
conversion of all the rest. 
But what a prospect for commencing this undertak- 
ing, to say nothing of success therein! For that 
village had been, a little while before, one of the 
principal shops in which were forged the blackest 
calumnies and most pernicious plots against us,- to 
such an extent that the Captains had publicly ex- 
horted the young men to come and massacre us at 
this village of Ossosane, where we then were. Never- 
theless, he to whom nothing is impossible has facili- 
tated the enterprise, in both respects, more than we 
would ever have dared to hope. i.J 


60 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

fe tranfporte à ce Bourg, parle aux particulieres, puis 
au Cõfeil, & faiét fi bien, qu'il gagne les vns & les 
autres; de forte qu'en peu de temps ils arrefterent de 
nous receuoir dans leur bourg, & de nous y donner 
vne cabane. Ce qui fut executé, la premiere Meffe 
y fut dite Ie 25. de Iuin, au grand contentement de 
nos Peres, qui auoient de la peine de croire ce qu'ils 
voyoient; tant vn peu auparauant, ce bourg nous 
auoit eu en abomination. 
[63] II eft vray que cefte cabane eft fi pauure & fi 
chetiue, que fi Ie Sauueur du monde n'eût autrefois 
pris luy-mefme dans Ie neceffité, Ie logement de l' e- 
ftable de Bethleë, nous aurions de la peine de luy 
donner tous les iours vne efpece de nouuelle naiffance 
en ce lieu, qui n'eft couuert que de mefchantes efcor- 
ces, par où Ie vent entre de tous coftez. Mais Ie 
neceffité & 1'impuiffance de mieux, nous excufe facile- 
ment enuers la diuine Maiefté. Voila la premiere 
année accomplie depuis 1'eftabliffement de cefte Refi- 
dence: voicy les fruiéts qu' elle a porté. 
Enfants baptifez en danger de mort, au nombre de 
49. dont dix-huiét s'en font enuolés au Ciel. Des 
autres qui font réchapez, ie ne fçay fi plufieurs n'en 
ant point l'obligation au fainét Baptefme. 
Adultes baptifez dans la maladie, apres auoir efté 
inftruits au nombre de quarante-quatre, dont vingt- 
fix ont pris, comme il eft à efperer, Ie mefme chemin 
du Ciel. De ceux qui font racheptez, quelques-vns 
ont fait profeffion d'en auoir l'obligation au fainét bap- 
tefme; mais tous ceux qui luy ont cefte obligation, 
n'en ont pas, à noftre grãd regret, tel reffentimet 
qu'ils deuroiët. 
[64] Adultes Cathecumenes baptifez en plaine fanté 
auec leurs enfans, au nombre de vingt-huiét. 


1639-40] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELATION, 1639 

61 

Accordingly, sustained by God alone, Father Jean 
de Brebeuf repaired to this Village, spoke to individ- 
uals and then to the Council, and did so well that he 
won them both over,-so that in a little while they 
decided to receive us in their village and give us a 
cabin there. This was accomplished, and the first 
Mass was said there on the 25th of J une,- to the 
great satisfaction of our Fathers, who could hardly 
believe what they saw, so greatly had this village 
abominated us a little while before. 
[63] It is true that this cabin is so poor and so mean 
that, if the Savior of the world had not himself 
once, in time of need, taken lodging in the stable of 
Bethlehem, we would be at a loss to give him each 
day a sort of new birth in this place, which is covered 
only with wretched bark, through which the wind 
enters on every side. But necessity, and our inabil- 
ity to have anything better, excuses us easily to the 
divine Majesty. Now is completed the first year since 
the establishment of this Residence; behold the fruits 
it has borne. 
Children baptized, in danger of death, to the num- 
ber of 49, of whom eighteen have flown away to 
Heaven. Of the others who have recovered I do not 
know if several are not under obligation therefor to 
holy Baptism. 
Adults baptized in sickness after having been in- 
structed, to the number of forty-four, of whom twen- 
ty-six, it is to be hoped, have taken the same road to 
Heaven. Of those who survived, some have professed 
to be under obligations to holy baptism; but, to our 
great regret, not all those who are under this 0 bliga- 
tion feel such gratitude as they should. 
[64] Adult Catechumens, baptized in full health 


62 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

Venons aux particularitez les plus remarquables 
de ces baptefmes. 
Le premier baptisé dans ce bourg ayant efté vn 
pauure malheureux Hiroquois, prifonnier de guerre, 
qu' on menoit à vn autre bourg voifin, pour Ie donner 
en recompenfe, aux parents de ce braue TaraU
ane, 
qui fut pris ces années paffées par les ennemis, 
comme il a efté remarqué dans les precedentes Rela- 
tions. Ie ne fçay fi ie ne dois point vn peu arrefter 
à confiderer & admirer I' adorable Prouidence de Dieu, 
fur ce pauure mal heureux, & fur fes femblables, au 
nombre de 12. ou 13. baptifez par les Peres de cefte 
Refidence, mais i'ayme mieux laiffer cefte reflexion 
à ceux qui ietteront les yeux fur ce Narré, & m'ar- 
refter feulemët à remarquer quelques circonftance de 
ces rencõtres qui les rendent plus confiderables. 
De long-temps les Hurons n'ont eu plus de bon- 
heur & dauantage fur leurs ennemis, que l'année 
derniere. Eftants allez à la guerre auec quelques 
Algonquains leuTs voifins, ils prirent pour vn [65] 
coup, de leurs ennemis enuiron quatre-vingts, qu'ils 
amenerent en vie dans Ie pais. Outre cét aduantage 
Ie plus confiderable de tous, ils en ont eu d'autres de 
moindre importance, qui en tout leur ont donné plus 
de cent prifonniers. 
Tous ceux qui ont efté deftinez pour les Bourgs où 
nous auons des refidences, ou pour les voifins; ont efté, 
graces à Dieu, inftruiéts & baptifez; & prefque pas 
vn fans des rencontres fi particulieres, qu'il y a fuiet 
de croire, qu'il y auoit en leur fait quelque conduite 
fpeciale de la diuine Prouidence & de leur predefti- 
nation. En plufieurs on n'a eu que Ie temps precifé- 
ment qu'il falloit pour leur inftruétion & baptefme: 


1639-40] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELATION, 16.19 

63 

with their children, to the number of twenty-eight. 
Let us come to the most noteworthy particulars of 
these baptisms. 
The first one baptized in this village was a poor un- 
fortunate Hiroquois, a prisoner of war, who was taken 
to another village, near this, to be given as a recom- 
pense to the relatives of that brave Taratwane who 
was captured during these last years by the enemy, as 
has been mentioned in previous Relations. I do not 
know if I should not tarry for a moment to consider 
and admire the adorable Providence of God towards 
this poor wretch, and his fellow prisoners, to the 
number of 12 or 13, baptized by the Fathers of this 
Residence; but I prefer to leave these reflections to 
those who shall cast their eyes over this Narrative, 
and to stop onl y to observe some circumstances of 
these events which render them more important. 
For a long time, the Hurons had no more good 
fortune or advantage over their enemies until last 
year. Having gone to war, together with some AI- 
gonquains, their neighbors, they captured at one [65] 
stroke about eighty of their enemies, whom they 
brought home alive. Besides this victory, the most 
notable of all, they had others of less importance, 
which in all gave them more than a hundred pris- 
oners. 
All those who were assigned to the Villages where 
we have residences, or which are near these, were, 
thank God, instructed and baptized, and hardly one 
without circumstances so peculiar that there is reason 
to believe that there was, in their cases, some special 
guidance of divine Providence and of their predestina- 
tion. In many instances, we had only the exact time 
necessary for their instruction and baptism; others, 


64 

LES RELATIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

d'autres apres efire baptifez, fe font trouuez fi confo- 
lez, qu'ils ne fe pouuoient tenir de mettre en chanfon 
ce fuiet de leur confolation, qu'au moins dorefnauant 
ils efioient affeurez d'aller au Ciel. D'autres ont 
refufé genereufement de contrefaire des aétions fales 
& impudiques, à quoy on les vouloit porter: Ð'au- 
tres en fuite ont fait paroifire tant de con fiance dans 
leurs tourmens, que nos Barbares prirent refolution 
de ne plus fouffrir qu'on baptifafi ces pauures infor- 
tunez, reputans [66] à mal-heur pour leur pais, quand 
ceux qu'ils tourmentent ne crient point ou fort peu. 
En effet, cela nous a donné depuis tant de peine, 
qu'il n'y en a eu pas vn pour lequel baptifer il n'ait 
faUu donner des bataiUes contre ceux qui en font les 
Maifires & les Gardiens. Et quelquefois [il] a efié ne- 
ceffaire de redimer cefie violence de quelque prefent. 
Entre ceux qui ont fait paroifire plus de con fiance 
& plus de cognoiffance de leur bon-heur, a efié vn 
nommé Ononel
aia, & en fon baptefme Pierre, qui 
fut vn des prifonniers de cette principale défaite, dont 
nous venons de parler, Capitaine des Onei
chronons 
nation d'Hiroquois. Celuy-cy efiant attaché à vn 
pieu fur vn theatre, non guiere loin d'vn fien compa- 
gnon attaché à vn autre, où nos barbares les tour- 
mentoient à l'enuy les vns des autres, par l'applica- 
tion des flammes, des tifons, & des fers ardents, auec 
des façons cruelles au delà de tout ce qui s'en peut 
efcrire, & de toute l'imagination de ceux qui ne l'ont 
point veu. Pierre, dif-ie, voyant ce fien compagnon 
perdre patience dans ces tourmens, Ie confoloit & 
l'encourageoit [67] par la reprefentation du bon-heur 
qu'ils auoient rencontré dans leur mal-heur, & de 
celuy qui leur efioit preparé apres cette vie. En fin 


1639 -40] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, L639 

65 

after having been baptized, were so comforted that 
they could not refrain from putting into song the 
cause of their consolation,- that thenceforward, at 
least, they were sure of going to Heaven. Others 
nobly refused to imitate foul and immodest actions to 
which their captors tried to incite them. Others 
afterward displayed so much fortitude in their tor- 
ments that our Barbarians resolved no longer to allow 
us to baptize these poor unfortunates, reckoning [66] 
it a misfortune to their country when those whom 
they torment shriek not at all, or very little. 
Indeed, this has given us so much trouble since 
then, that there has not been one of these for whose 
baptism we have not been obliged to give battle to 
those who are their Masters and Guardians; and some- 
times it has been necessary to atone for this violence 
by some present. 
Among those who showed most fortitude, and most 
appreciation of their good fortune, was one Ononel- 
waia, in baptism named Pierre, who was one of the 
prisoners at that principal defeat of which we have 
just spoken, a Captain of the Oneiouchronons, a na- 
tion of the Hiroquois. 4 This man, being fastened to 
a stake upon a platform, not very far from his com- 
panion fastened to another,-where our barbarians, 
everyone according to his pleasure, tormented them, 
by the application of flames, firebrands, and glowing 
irons, in ways cruel beyond all power of description, 
and beyond all imagination of those who have not 
seen it,- Pierre, I say, seeing this companion of his 
lose patience in the midst of these torments, com- 
forted and encouraged him [67] by representing the 
blessedness they had found in their misfortune, and 
that which was prepared for them after this life. 


66 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. ]7 

Ie voyant mort, ah, dit-il, mon pauure camarade, as 
tu demandé pardon à Dieu deuant que de mourir? 
craignant que ce qu'il auoit tefmoigné de douleur, ne 
fut quelque peché confiderable. 
Ce braue courage qui meritoit vne meilleure for- 
tune, ne fut iamais plus tourmenté par nos barbares 
que depuis la mort de ce fien compagnon. Car celuy- 
cy efiãt mort plufiofi qu'ils ne s'attendoient, ils def- 
chargerent tous enfemble Ie refie de leur fureur fur 
celuy qui refioit. La premiere chafe donc qu'en fuite 
ils luy firent, fufi qu'vn d'eux lui cerna auec vn cou- 
íteau la peau de la tefie, laquelle il efcorcha, pour 
emporter la cheuelure, & la garder felon leur cou- 
flume fort precieufement. 
Apres vn tel traiétement, à peine croyoit-on qu'il 
reftafi en vn corps fi vsé de tourments aucun fenti- 
ment de la vie: mais voila qu'il fe leue fubitement, 
& ne voyant fur l'efchaffaut que Ie cadaure de fon 
cher compagnon, il arme fes mains qui [68] efioient 
toutes en lambeaux, d'vn tifon, pour ne pas mourir 
en captif, & defendre ce peu de liberté qu'il auoit 
recouurée vn peu auparauant la mort. La rage & les 
cris de fes ennemis redoublent à ce fpeétac1e, ils ac- 
courent à luy les fers tous rouges à la main. Son 
courage luy donne des forces, il fe met en deffences, 
il darde fes tifons fur ceux qui l'approchët plus pres, 
il abat les efchelles pour leur rom pre chemin, & fe 
fert des feux & des flammes dont il venoit d'efprou- 
uer la rigueur, pour repouffer fortement leur affaut. 
Le fang qui rejalliffoit de fa tefte fur tout fon corps 
eufi fendu de pitié vn cæur qui euft eu quelque refte 
d'humanité: mais la fureur de nos barbares y trou- 
uoit fon contentement. Les vns luy iettent des char- 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, J639 

67 

Finally seeing him dead, " Ah, my poor comrade," 
said he, "didst thou ask pardon of God before dy- 
ing? "- fearing that the evidence of suffering he had 
given was some grievous sin. 
This brave spirit, who merited a better fate, was 
more tormented than ever by our barbarians after 
the death of his companion; for, the latter having 
died sooner than they expected, they all wreaked the 
rest of their fury upon him who remained. Accord- 
ingly, the first thing they did to him afterward was 
that one of them cut with a knife around his scalp, 
which he stripped off in order to carry away the hair, 
. and, according to their custom, to preserve it as very 
precious. 
After such treatment one would hardly believe that 
there could remain any sensation of life in a body so 
worn out with tortures. But lo! he suddenly rises, 
and, seeing upon the scaffold only the corpse of his 
dear companion, he takes in his hands, which [68] 
were all in shreds, a firebrand, that he might not die 
as a captive, and that he might defend the brief liber- 
ty he had recovered a little while before death. The 
rage and the cries of his enemies redouble at this 
sight; they rush towards him with pieces of red-hot 
iron in their hands. His courage gives him strength; 
he puts himself on the defensive; he hurls his fire- 
brands upon those who come nearest him; he throws 
down the ladders, to cut off their way, and avails 
himself of the fire and flame, the severity of which 
he has just experienced, to repel their attack vigor- 
ously. The blood that streamed down from his head 
over his entire body would have rent with pity a 
heart which had any remnant of humanity; but the 
fury of our barbarians found therein its satisfaction. 


68 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

bons & des cendres ardentes, les autres de deffous 
l'efchafaut trouuent paffage à leurs tifons. II voit 
de toutes parts quafi autant de bourreaux que de 
fpeétateurs, lors qu'il éuite vn feu, il en rencontre vn 
autre, & ne fait aucune démarche qu'il ne tombe dans 
le mal-heur qu'il fuit. 
En fe defendant vn long temps de la forte, vn faux 
pas Ie fait tomber en arriere [69J par terre. Ses 
ennemis en mefme temps fondent fur luy, Ie bruf1ent 
derechef, puis Ie iettent au feu. Ce courage inuin- 
cible fe releue du milieu des flammes, tout reuefiu 
du cendres qui s'efioient imbuës dans fon fang. Deux 
tifons tous flambans en fes mains, il fe tourne vers 
Ie gros de fes ennemis, pour leur donner la peur 
encore vne fois auant que de mourir. Pas vn n'efi fi 
hardy que de l'attendre, il fe fait place & marche vers 
Ie Bourg, comme pour y mettre Ie feu. 
II auance enuiron cent pas, qu'on luy iette vn 
bafion qui Ie renuerfe à terre; ruant [sc. auant] qu'il 
fe releue, on efi fur luy, ils luy coupent les pieds & 
les mains, & ayants pris Ie refie de ce corps tronçon- 
né, ils Ie tournent de tous cofiez fur neuf diuers bra- 
ziers, qu'il efiouffa quafi to us de fon fang. En fin 
ils Ie fourrent fous vn tronc d'arbre tout en feu, ren- 
uersé par terre; afin qu'en mefme temps il n'y eut 
partie de fon corps qui ne fufi cruellement bruf1ée. 
Ce fut alors que la nature, deuant que ceder à Ia cru- 
auté des fupplices, fit vn dernier effort que iamais on 
n'eufi attendu. Car n'ayant ny pieds ny mains, il 
fe rouIa dedans les flammes, & s' en efiant mis hors, 
marcha [70] pI us de dix pas fur les coudes & fur les 
genoux du cofié de fes ennemis, qui s'enfuirent de 
luy, redoutans les approches d'vn homme auquel rien 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, J639 

69 

Some throw upon him coals and burning cinders; 
others underneath the scaffold find open places for 
their firebrands. He sees on all sides almost as many 
butchers as spectators; when he escapes one fire, he 
encounters another, and takes not one step without 
falling into the evil that he flees. 
While defending himself thus for a long time, a 
false step causes him to fall backward [69J to the 
ground. At the same time, his enemies pounce upon 
him, burn him anew, then throw him upon the fire. 
This invincible spirit, rising again from the midst of 
the flames,- all covered with cinders that were im- 
bued in his blood, two flaming firebrands in his 
hands,- turns towards the mass of his enemies, to 
inspire them with fear once more before he dies. 
Not one is so hardy as to touch him; he makes a way 
for himself, and walks towards the Village, as if to 
set it on fire. 
He advances about a hundred paces, when some 
one throws a club which fells him to the ground; be- 
fore he can rise again, they are upon him; they cut 
off his feet and hands, and, having seized the rest of 
this mangled body, they turn it round and round 
over nine different fires, which he almost entirely 
extinguished with his blood. Finally they thrust him 
under an overturned tree-trunk, all on fire, so that, 
at the same time. there may be no part of his body 
which is not cruelly burned. It was then that nature, 
before yielding to the cruelty of these torments, 
made one last effort, that could never have been 
expected. For, having neither feet nor hands, he 
rolled over in the flames, and, having fallen outside 
of them, he moved [70J more than ten paces, upon 
his elbows and knees, in the direction of his enemies, 


70 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

ne refioit que Ie courage, qu'ils ne pou[u]oient pas 
luy rauir, finon Iuy arrachant la vie. 
Ce qu'ils firent en fin, vn d'eux luy couppant la 
tefie avec vn coufieau: coup heureux qui luy donne 
la liberté, car nous auons fuiet de croire que ce braue 
courage ioüit maintenant dans Ie Ciel de la liberté 
des enfans de Dieu, puifque mefme fes ennemis 
crioyent tout haut qu'il y auoit plus que de l'humain 
là dedans, & que fans doute Ie baptefme luy auoit 
donné fes forces & ce courage, qui furpaffoit tout ce 
que iamais ils auoient veu. 
Quelques Sauuages ont rapporté auec admiration, 
& quelque efpece de conuiétion des veritez que nous 
leurs prefchõs, qu'vn peu deuant qu'il receut Ie der- 
nier coup qui luy apporta la mort, illeua les yeux au 
Ciel, & s'efcria auec ioye; Allons done, allons, comme 
s'il eufi refpondu à vne voix qui l'inuitoit. 
Certes il femble qu'il ne s'agiffoit d'autre voyage 
que de celuy du Ciel, OU fans difiinétion Ie captif s'il 
Ie veut a autant de [71] droiét & d'accez que celuy 
qui efi en liberté. On apprit des autres prifonniers 
fes compagnons de fortune & de mifere ce qui fuit. 
Quelques Auanturiers de la bande de nos Hurons 
& Algonquains, ayans en cefie principale défaite 
deuancé leur troupe qui efioit de trois cens hommes; 
pour découurir s'il n'y auoit point d'ennemis en 
embufcade, s'en trouuerent plufiofi plus proches qu'ils 
penfoient. Ils ne furent pas toutesfois tellement fur- 
pris, que la plufpart ne peût fe retirer vers Ie gros: 
vn d'eux feulement fut atrappé par les ennemis, qui 
fe voyans defcouuerts prinrent refolutiõ de s'en re- 
tourner auec cefie feule conquefte, quoy qu'ils fuffent 
au nombre de cent. Mais Ie captif les voyant en cefie 


]632-40] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, r639 

7] 

who fled from him, dreading the approach of a man 
to whom nothing remained but courage, of which 
they could not deprive him except by wresting away 
his life. 
This they finally did, one of them cutting off his 
head with a knife. Happy stroke which gave him 
freedom! For we have reason to believe that this 
brave spirit is now enjoying in Heaven the freedom 
of the children of God, since even his enemies loudly 
exclaimed that there was something more than human 
within him, and that without doubt baptism had given 
him his strength and courage, which surpassed all 
that they had ever seen. 
Several Savages have reported with wonder, and a 
sort of conviction of the truths that we preach to 
them, that, shortly before he received the last blow 
which caused his death, he raised his eyes to Heaven 
and cried out joyfully, " Let us go, then, let us go," 
as if he were answering a voice that invited him. 
Surely it would seem that he had in mind no other 
journey except that to Heaven, to which, without 
distinction, the captive, if he so will, has as much 
[71] right and admission as he who is free. The fol- 
lowing was learned from some of the other prisoners, 
his companions in misfortune and misery: 
Some Adventurers from the band of our Hurons 
and Algonquains having, in that most important 
defeat, gone on ahead of their troop of three hundred 
men to discover if there were any of the enemy in 
ambush, found themselves rather nearer than they 
thought. They were not, however, so greatly taken 
by surprise that the majority of them could not retreat 
to the main body; only one of them was caught by 
the enemy, who, finding that they were discovered, 


72 

LES RELATIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

difpofition, leur donna à entendre que ceux qui 
venoient apres eux n'efioient pas en tel nombre qu'ils 
n'en peuffent facilement venir à bout: II leur dit 
cela d'vn tel air, & d'vn tel accent, qu'ils Ie creurent, 
& fe refolurent de faire vn fort, & là d'attendre tout 
Ie gros de leurs ennemis. Mais ils furent bien efion- 
nez à l'approche de nos Barbares d'en voir la multi- 
tude, & de fe voir entournez de la forte, qu'à peine 
[72] auoient-ils Ie moyen de fuyr. Toutefois y ayant 
encore quelque endroit par où ils pouuoient efchap- 
per, apres auoir déchargé leur colere fur leur captif, 
qu'ils mirent auffi-tofi en pieces, on mit en delibera- 
tion ce qu'il y auoit à faire. 
La plufpart opinant à la fuite, Ononkgaia ou Pierre, 
celuy dont nous venons de parler, iettant les yeux au 
Ciel, & voyant Ie Soleil fans aucun nuage. Cefie re- 
folution, dit-il, feroit paffable, fi Ie Ciel efioit couuert 
& fi Ie Soleil ne deuoit efire fpeétateur de cefie laf- 
cheté; mais cela: n'efiant pas, il faut combattre tant 
que nous pourrons, & puis vn chacun aduifera à ce 
qu'il a à faire, ainfi dit, ainfi executé. Mais nos 
Hurons & Algonquains ioüerent fi bien leur perfon- 
nage, que n'en ayant tué fur la place que 17. ou 18. 
ils prirent tout Ie refie en vie, à la referue de quatre 
ou cinq qui leur efchaperent. Et les ayans tous 
amenez au pais, ils furent difiribuez par tous les 
bourgs, où on leur fit fouffrir ce qu'il n'efi pas 
poffible d'expliquer. 
Ie ne puis toutefois obmettre icy vne circonfiance 
des cruautez que l'on exerça fur celuy qui Ie premier 
depuis mon arriuée en ce pais, y fufi amené prifon- 
nier de [73J guerre, ce fut Ie premier iour de Decem- 
bre, ce qui donna occafion de Ie nommer en fon Bap- 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELATION, r639 

73 

decided to return with this one trophy, although they 
were a hundred in number. But the captive, seeing 
them in this mind, gave them to understand that 
those who were coming against them were not so 
numerous that they could not easily overpower them. 
He told them this in such a manner and such a tone 
that they believed him, and resolved to make a fort, 
and there await the entire body of their enemies. 
But they were utterly astounded, when our Barba- 
rians approached, to see the multitude of these, and 
to find themselves so surrounded that they hardly 
[7 2 ] had a chance to flee. However, there being still 
a certain place through which they could escape, 
they began-after having vented their wrath upon 
their captive, whom they immediately tore to pieces- 
to consider what was to be done. 
The majority advising flight, Ononkwaia, or Pierre, 
he of whom we have just spoken, casting his eyes on 
the Sky and seeing the unclouded Sun, said, " This 
resolution would be passable if the Sky were covered 
and if the Sun were not a spectator of this coward- 
ice; but as it is, we must fight as stoutly as we can, 
and then each one shall decide what he ought to do." 
No sooner said than done. But our Hurons and AI- 
gonquains played their parts so well that, having killed 
upon the spot only 17 or 18, they took alive all the 
rest, except four or five who escaped them; and all 
these, having been brought to this country, were 
distributed through all the villages, where they were 
made to endure sufferings which it is not possible to 
describe. 
I cannot, however, omit here one detail of the 
cruelties that were practiced upon the first captive 
tormented after my arrival in this country, who had 


74 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

teíme François, en l'honneur de íainét François 
Xauier, dont Ie lendemain nous faifions la fefte. Ce 
pauure mal-heureux la nuiét de fes tourmens (car il 
eft de l'effence d'y employer au moins toute vne 
nuiét) fut entr'autres entrepris par vn de nos Bar- 
bares: qui luy ayant commandé de mettre les mains 
contre terre, les luy perça 1'vne aupres l' autre auec 
vn fer ardent. & ne ceffa de les hauffer & baiffer, & 
les tirailler Ie long du fer, iufques à ce que Ie feu en 
fut efieint. On a dit qu'vne autre luy en fit autant 
aux pieds: il ne falloit plus que luy ouurir Ie cofié, 
pour eftre en quelque maniere femblable à celuy dont 
Ie fang luy auoit efié vn peu auparauant appliqué 
par Ie S. Baptefme, & cela pareillement ne luy man- 
qua pas: car vn peu deuant que d'expirer, on Ie luy 
ouurit pour luy arracher Ie cæur. Si cefie efpece de 
tourment n'a feruy à ce pauure infortuné pour fe con- 
foler de fe voir en cefie façon femblable à celuy qu'il 
ne cognoiffoit que pour ne Ie pas ignorer, & autant 
feulement qu'il efioit neceffaire pour l'experimenter 
fon Sauueur; au moins a-il [74J feruy à d'autres qui 
ont reffenty des touches particulieres de l' obligatiõ 
que nous auions à ce bon Seigneur & Maifire, qui 
par les playes qu'il a voulu receuoir pour nous, 
nous a deliuré des feux & des tourmens, dont ceux 
que nos Barbares exercent enuers leurs captifs ne 
font qu'ombres & figures paffageres. 
Nos Barbares qui fçauent Ie defplaifir que nous 
auons de ces cruautez, & en particulier de leur inhu- 
manité à manger les corps de ces pauures vidimes 
apres leur mort, trouuerent Ie moyen pour nous faire 
defpit, de ietter par vne cabane vne des mains de ce 
pauure defunét, comme nous donnant nofire part du 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, r639 

75 

been brought hither as a prisoner of [73] war. It 
was the first day of December, which gave us reason 
to name him, at his Baptism, François, in honor of 
saint François Xavier, whose feast we celebrated the 
next day. This poor wretch on the night of his tor- 
tures (for it is essential to employ therein at least one 
whole night) was, among others, taken in hand by 
one of our Barbarians, who, having commanded him 
to put his hands to the ground, pierced them one 
after the other with a heated iron, and did not cease 
raising and lowering them, and sliding them along- 
the iron, until its glow was quenched. It was said 
that some one else did the same thing to his feet. 
Nothing more was wanting, except to open his side, 
to make him in some sort like him whose blood a 
little while before had been applied to him through 
Holy Baptism,-that, likewise, did not fail him, for 
shortly before expiring, it was opened to tear out his 
heart. If this kin d of torture did not serve this poor 
wretch as a consolation,- in seeing himself in this 
respect like him whom he knew simply in not being 
ignorant of him, and only as much as was necessary 
to experience him as his Savior,-at least it [74] 
availed with the others, who experienced a special 
sense of the obligation laid upon us by this good 
Lord and Master, who, by the wounds that he con- 
sented to receive for us, has delivered us from the 
fires and torments, of which those that our Barba- 
rians exercise upon their captives are only transient 
shadows and images. 
Our Barbarians,- who know the displeasure that 
we feel at these cruelties, and particularly at their in- 
humanity in eating the bodies of these poor victims 
after their death,- found means, in order to annoy 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

feftin. Nous fufmes furpris voyans à nos pieds cefte 
main percée; & confiderans que c'eftoit la main d'vn 
Chreftien, nous l' enterrafmes en noftre Chapelle, & 
priafmes Dieu pour Ie repos de fon ame. 
On feroit vn Roman des aduentures de ce pauure 
-captif. II eftoit Agnierhonon de Nation, qui fait vne 
des cinq des Hiroquois, la plus efioignée de nos Hu- 
rons, il partit de fon païs pour venir aux nations des 
Hiroquois les plus proches de nous, auec deffein d'y 
traiter quelque pourcelaine [75J qu'il portoit, pour 
des caftors. Mais eftant arriué, au lieu de faire ce 
pourquoy i1 eftoit venu, il fe met à ioüer, & perd 
tout ce qu'il auoit apporté. Honteux de retourner 
au païs fans autre effeét, il prend refolution de s'ar- 
refter là quelque temps, & voyant vn peu apres que 
quelques-vns du lieu où il eftoit s'en venoient à la 
guerre en nos quartiers, il fe met de la partie, mais 
leurs deffeins ayants mal reüffi, il fut du nombre des 
captifs, & amené en ce bourg, où il fit la fin que nous 
venons de reprefenter. 
Mais laiffons ces pauures captifs, & venons à d'au- 
tres fortes de baptefme & de conuerfion. 
Ce n' eft pas l' ordre de la Nature de dõner les fruiéts 
de la terre finon apres vne année efcoulée des influ- 
ences des aftres, du Ciel, & du trauail des hommes: 
mais la grace ne s'attache pas toufiours aux loix de 
la Nature, & il a pleû à Dieu en difpenfer en l'efia- 
bliffement de la nouuelle Eglife de ce bourg. Ou 
apres fix mois de trauail on a veu ce qu'en plufieurs 
années on n'a peu faire ailleurs. En fuitte donc des 
inftruétions generales & particulieres qui ont efté 
données aux habitans de ce bourg [76J par les Peres 
de cefie Refidence, felon l'ordre dec1aré au chap. 2. 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, r639 

77 

us, of throwing one of the hands of this poor dead 
man into our cabin, as if giving us our share of the 
feast. We were surprised to see at our feet this 
pierced hand; and considering that it was the hand 
of a Christian, we buried it in our Chapel and prayed 
to God for the repose of his soul. 
One could make a Romance of the adventures of 
this poor captive. He was of the Agnierhonon Na- 
tion, which forms one of the five Nations of the Hiro- 
quois, the one farthest from our Hurons. He left 
his own country to come to the Hiroquois nations 
nearer to us, intending to trade some porcelain [75] 
that he had brought for some beavers. But, when 
he arrived, instead of doing this for which he had 
come, he began to gamble and lost all he had brought 
with him. Ashamed to return home without any 
other achievement, he decided to remain there for 
some time; and, a little while afterwards seeing some 
people from that place who were undertaking a raid 
into our region, he became one of the party; but, 
their plans having resulted unsuccessfully, he was 
one of the captives, and was brought to this villåge, 
where he came to the end we have just described. 
But let us leave these poor captives and come to 
other kinds of baptism and conversion. 
It is not the order of Nature to give the fruits of 
the earth until after a year spent under the influences 
of the stars, of the Sky, and of the work of man; but 
grace does not always adhere to the laws of Nature, 
and it has pleased God to dispense with them in the 
establishment of the new Church of this village, 
where, after six months of labor, has been seen what 
one could not expect to do elsewhere in several years. 
In consequence, then, of the instructions, both gen- 


78 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

Ie premier des Cathecumenes qui fe declare pour con- 
u[a]incu & refolu de fuiure la Vocation & femonce du 
S. Efprit, qui en fuite demanda inftamment Ie Bap- 
tefme, fut vn bon vieillard d'enuiron 70 ans nommé 
Aochia ti. 
On ne fuft pas long temps à reconnoiftre qu'il par- 
Ioit tout de bon, & qu'en effeét il croyoit, & vouloit 
tout ce qui eftoit neceffaire pour receuoir Ie Bap- 
tefme. Et quoy qu'en fuitte on euft fuiet d'efperer 
qu'il ne feroit pas moins qu'il promettoit, toutefois 
fa qualité de Sauuage nous empefchoit de nous hafter 
en cefte affaire, & de luy donner contentement auffi- 
toft qu'ille defiroit. Mais Ie temps Ie preffant d'aller 
à vne traite, où il deuoit paffer trois mois de temps 
auec beaucoup de dangers de fa vie, il redoubla fes 
inftances, priant qu' on donna cefte confolation à fon 
arne, qui ne pouuoit autrement, difoit-il, efire en 
repos; puis qu'apres Ia mort, ceux qui n'efioient 
point baptifez alloient en des feux qui ne s'efteignent 
iamais. 
Nonobftant toutes ces infiances, on iugea à propos 
de Ie differer, & fe contenta-on de Ie bien inftruire 
& infonner de I'aéte [76 i.e., 77] de contrition: & ce 
pour bonnes raifons & confiderations. Mais il femble 
que la diuine Prouidence nous voulut faire voir claire- 
ment qu'elle l'auoit defiiné de toute Eternité pour 
eftre la premiere pierre fondamentale de la nouuelle 
Eglife de ce bourg. Car deux iours apres fon depart, 
Ie voila fu[r]pris d'vn fi mauuais temps, & aduerty 
par tant de perfonnes des embufches des ennemis, 
qu'il fut contraint de rebrouffer chemin, & de reuenir 
icy attendre vn temps plus fauorable, & de meilleurs 
nouuelles. 


1639-40] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELATION. r639 

79 

eral and individual, that were given to the inhab- 
itants of this village [76J by the Fathers of this Resi- 
dence, according to the order mentioned in chapter 
2nd, the first of the Catechumens who declared him- 
self convinced, and detennined to follow the Call and 
invitation of the Holy Ghost, and who, consequently, 
earnestly desired Baptism, was a good old man about 
70 years old, named Aochiati. 
It did not take long to recognize that he spoke in 
earnest, what he said, and that he really believed and 
purposed all that was necessary in order to receive 
Baptism. And although we therefore had reason to 
hope that he would not do less than he promised, yet 
his Savage character forbade us to be hasty in this 
matter, and to give him satisfaction as soon as he 
desired it. But - as he had little time before de- 
parting for the trade, in which he must pass three 
months with many dangers to his life - he redoubled 
his entreaties, praying that this consolation might be 
given to his soul, which could not otherwise, said he, 
remain at peace, since after death those who were 
not baptized went into fires which were never ex- 
tinguished. 
Notwithstanding all these entreaties, they con- 
sidered it wise to put him off, and contented them- 
selves with instructing him thoroughly and teaching 
him the act [76 i.e., 77J of contrition, and this for 
excellent reasons and considerations. But it seems 
that divine Providence wished to make us see clearly 
that it had destined him from all Eternity to be the 
first foundation stone of the new Church of this vil- 
lage. For, two days after his departure, he was 
overtaken by so bad weather, and warned by so many 
persons regarding ambushes of the enemy, that he 


80 

LES RELA TIONS DES jÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

Au mefme temps de fon retour, fe trouua icy ce 
braue Chreftien de la Refidence de la Conception 
Iofeph Chih
atenh
a, les difcours & la conuerfation 
duquell'ayant efchaufé plus que iamais, il redoubla 
fes inftances du baptefme, qui en fin fut accordé Ie 
20. de Decembre, & fut nommé Mathias, comme celuy 
fur lequel eftoit tombé Ie fort de premier Chreftien 
de ce bourg, comme de Cathecumene baptisé en 
pleine fanté, & auec folemnité. Et il fe trouua que 
fa cabane portoit Ie nom de ce fainét Apofire, con for- 
mément à la deuotion qu'on a euë de mettre chaque 
cabane de Sauuages, des bourgs où no us trauaillons, 
[78] fous Ie patronage & la proteétion de quelque 
fainét ou fainéte du Paradis. 
Ce qui nous fit plus facilement condefcendre à fon 
defir, fut qu'il efioit tous les iours fur Ie poinét de fe 
mettre en chemin, & que quatre ou cinq iours aupara- 
uant il auoit protefté a quelques Chefs du bourg qu'il 
efioit prefi de quitter toutes les danfes & fuperftitions 
diaboliques du païs, mais particulierement la danfe 
des Nuds, dont il eftoit Ie chef & Ie 
1aiftre. Ce bon 
homme apres auoir refpondu & fatisfait à toutes Ies 
abrenonciations qui fe trouuent dans les ceremonies du 
Baptefme, pendant la Meffe repaffant dans fon efprit 
s'il y auoit plus rien de mal à quoy il eufi de l' at- 
tache, ne luy efiant rien venu dont il douta, que Ie 
Petun; il demanda auffi-tofi fi Ie petun eftoit defendu, 
& donna à entendre qu'il eftoit tout preft de Ie quitter, 
& abandonner en cas qu'il ne fuft pas permis de s'en 
feruir. Cefie refolution peut paffer pour des aétes 
des plus heroïques que puiffe faire vn Sauuage, qui fe 
pafferoit ce femble auffi-toft de viure que de petuner. 
Auec ce bon homme qui eftoit veuf, furent bapti- 


1639-40] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELATION, r6.19 

81 

was obliged to retrace his steps and return hither to 
await more favorable weather, and better news. 
At the very time of his return, there happened to 
be here that brave Christian of the Residence of la 
Conception, Joseph Chihwatenhwa, whose speeches 
and conversations having more than ever kindled 
him, he redoubled his earnest requests for baptism, 
which was finally granted him on the 20th of Decem- 
ber; he was named Mathias, as the one to whose lot 
it had fallen to be the first Christian of this village, 
as well as the first Catechumen baptized in good 
health and with solemnity. And it happened that 
his cabin bore the name of this holy Apostle, in 
accordance with the devout purpose that we have 
entertained to place every cabin of the Savages, in 
the village where we labor, [78] under the patronage 
and protection of some saint of Paradise. 
What caused us the more readily to yield to his 
wishes was that he was daily upon the point of set- 
ting out on his journey, and that, four or five days 
before, he had protested to some Chiefs of the village 
that he was ready to give up all the dances and dia- 
bolical superstitions of the country, but particularly 
the dance of the Naked ones, of which he was the 
head and Master. This good man, after having 
answered and performed all the renunciations that are 
found in the ceremonies of Baptism, during Mass 
mentally revolving the question if there were any 
evil thing to which he was attached, and nothing 
occurring to him but Tobacco, immediately asked if 
tobacco were forbidden, explaining that he was quite 
ready to give it up and abandon it, in case it were 
not allowable to use it. This resolution may pass 
for one of the most heroic acts of which a Savage is 


82 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

fées deux fiennes petites fì1les, lefquelles i1 cheriffoit 
vniquement, ce [79J qui n'efioit pas vne petite mar- 
que de fa foy, & de fon affeétion au Chrifiianifme, 
veu l'imagination commune de tout Ie pais que Ie 
Baptefme fait mourir toute forte de perfonnes, mais 
particulierement les enfants. 
L'exemple de celuy-cy fut fuiuy quelques iours 
apres d'onze autres perfonnes, choifies du nombre 
des Cathecumenes, qu'on auoit foigneufement in- 
firuiéts, & qui ne ceffoient de demander Ie baptefme. 
Ces douze ou quinze donc fe trouuãs to us enfemble 
à la Meffe Ie premier iour de l'année 1639. c'efi Ie 
iour que nous remarquerons & -recognoifirons à iamais 
pour celuy de la naiffance de cette N ou. Eglife, comme 
celuy de la Conception de la Vierge, pour la naiffance 
de celle de la Refidence de la Conception. 
Depuis ce temps on a continué de fois à autre de 
baptifer ceux & celles qui fe font trouuez difpofez & 
capables de ce bien; de forte que Ie nombre des per- 
sõnes baptizées en ce Bourg, faifans profeffion du 
Chrifiianifme, monte de prefent à pres de trente, 
comme nous auons dit cy-deffus. 
Ie ne m'efiendray point icy fur Ie contentement & 
la fatisfaétion que nous donne [80J ce petit troupeau, 
& particulierement quelques-vns: non plus que fur les 
caufes qui ont precedé & concouru à ce faint Ouurage, 
Ie tout efiant femblable, & prefque en rien different 
de ce que nous auons deduit au Chapitre precedent, 
parlant de la naiffance de la Nou. Eglife de la Refi- 
dence de la Conception. Quand it n'y auroit que la 
refolution, & la confiance de ces Neophytes, à faire 
profeffion du Chrifiianifme au beau milieu de leur 
Nation, l'vne des plus peruerfes de la terre; où ils fe 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, r6.J9 

83 

capable, who, it seems, would as soon dispense with 
eating as with smoking. 
With this good man, who was a widower, were 
baptized two of his granddaughters, whom he singu- 
larly cherished, which [79] was no small mark of his 
faith and of his love for Christianity, considering the 
idea common throughout the country that Baptism 
caused all classes of people to die, but especially 
children. 
This man's example was followed a few days 
afterwards by eleven other persons, chosen from the 
. number of Catechumens, who had been carefully 
instructed and who were continually asking for bap- 
tism. Accordingly, these twelve or fifteen being all 
present at Mass on the first day of the year [639, this 
is the day which we shall always observe and recog- 
nize as that of the birth of this New Church,-as 
that of the Conception of the Virgin, as the birthday 
of the church at the Residence of la Conception. 
Since then we have continued from time to time to 
baptize men and women who have been found willing 
and fitted to receive this blessing; so that the num- 
ber of persons baptized in this Village, making pro- 
fession of Christianity, at present amounts to nearly 
thirty, as we have said above. 
I shall not enlarge here upon the comfort and satis- 
faction that is afforded us [80] by this little company, 
and especially by some of them, nor upon the causes 
which have preceded and contributed to this holy 
Work,-the whole resembling, and in scarcely any 
respect unlike, what we have related in the preced- 
ing Chapter, in speaking of the birth of the New 
Church of the Residence of la Conception. If it were 
only a matter of resolution and courage of these Neo- 


84 

LES RELATIONS DES .IÉSUfTES 

[VOL. 17 

trouuent dans les attaques continuelles des railleries 
& calomnies, des craintes & frayeurs, des mal-heurs 
dont on les menace de tous cofiez; en fuite de ce 
qu'ils fe font faits Chrefiiens: Quand, dif-ie, i1 n'y 
auroit que ce poind, nous aurions tout fuiet d'efire 
contens. Et cét article femble fi confiderable, qu'il 
merite qu'on en parle vn peu plus au long, mais cela 
fe fera plus commodement en l'vn des Chapitres fui- 
uants; où nous traiéterons des trauerfes & difficultez 
qui fe font trouuées, & fe rencontrêt encore to us les 
iours en la naiffance & efiabliffement de ces nou- 
uelles Eglifes. Difons auparauant quelque chofe des 
Miffions. 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, J6j9 

85 

phytes in professing Christianity in the very midst of 
their N ation,- one of the most perverse on earth, 
where they find themselves continually assailed by 
mockery and slander, by fears and panics, by misfor- 
tunes threatening them on all sides, in consequence 
of their having become Christians,-if, I say, this 
were the only thing, we would have every reason to 
be satisfied. And this feature seems so important, 
that it deserves to be spoken of somewhat more at 
length; but that will occur more conveniently in one 
of the following Chapters, where we shall treat of 
the obstacles and difficulties that still exist, and are 
every day encountered, in the birth and establish- 
ment of these new Churches. Let us first say some- 
thing of the 1Iissions. 


86 

LES RELATIONS DES.lÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

[81] CHAP. VI. 

DE CE QUI S'EST PASSÉ DE PLUS REMARQUABLE DANS 
LES MISSIONS. 

D E dix Peres de nofire Compagnie qu'il ya icy, 
s'en efiant trouué fept fur la fin de l'année 
paffée (non fans vne grace & faueur tres fpe- 
ciale de Dieu) qui entendoient la langue de nos Sau- 
uages, & la parloient fuffifamment pour conuerfer 
auec fruiét parmy eux, & leur donner les infiruétions 
neceffaires pour leur falut: Et trois autres derniers 
venus, qui deux ou trois mois apres leur arriuée, par 
Ie fecours & affifiance des autres, qui ont heureufe- 
ment reüffi à reduire cette langue & preceptes, & en 
faciliter l'entrée à ceux qui viennent de nouueau, fe 
trouuoient capables de tenir vne petite efcole, pour 
enfeigner les enfans à prier Dieu: On confidera que 
trois des anciens, auec vn nouueau, pouuans en quel- 
que façon fuffire au trauail de la vigne de chaque 
Refidence, on pourroit fe feruir d'vn ancien auec vn 
. [82] nouueau, pour aller battre la campagne, & feruir 
aux deffeins de la diuine Prouidence fur quelque 
predefiiné. 
Le Bourg fur lequel d'abord on ietta les yeux, fut 
celuy de Scanonaenrat, tant parce que c'efi vn des 
plus considerables du pays, faifant luy feul vne nation 
entiere, des quatre qui compofent les Hurons, ainfi 
que nous auons declaré au Chapitre premier, que 
parce qu'il n'eft efioigné que de cinq quarts de lieuës 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, r639 

87 

[8IJ CHAP. VI. 

OF THE MOST REMARKABLE EVENTS THAT HAVE OC- 
CURRED IN THE MISSIONS. 

O F the ten Fathers of our Society who are here, 
there were seven at the end of last year (not 
without most special grace and favor of God) 
who understood the language of our Savages, and 
spoke it well enough to converse profitably among 
them, and give them the instruction necessary for 
their salvation; and three others, newcomers, who, 
two or three months after their arrival,- by the help 
and assistance of the others, who fortunately have 
succeeded in reducing this language to rules, thereby 
facilitating its acquisition by those who have recently 
come,- found themselves qualified to conduct a little 
school where they might teach the children to pray 
to God. We considered that,- as three of the sen- 
iors, with one new man, would be sufficient, in some 
fashion, for the work of the vineyard in each Resi- 
dence,-one senior, with one new man, could be 
employed [82J to go and scour the country, and help 
to execute the designs of divine Providence upon 
some predestined soul. 
The Village upon which, at the outset, we cast our 
eyes was Scanonaenrat, both because it is one of the 
most important of the country,-itself alone forming 
one entire nation of the four that compose the Hu- 
rons, as we have eXplained in the first Chapter,-and 
because it is distant only one and one-fourth leagues 


88 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

de la Refidence de fainét Iofeph. D'où s'enfuiuoit, 
que fi Dieu donnoit benediétion au trauail qu'on auoit 
à prendre en ce bourg, les Peres de cette Refidence 
pourroient facilement entretenir & arroufer Ie champ, 
qui auroit efte enfemencé. 
Si nous n'euffions eu efgard à la puiffance du Mai- 
fire que nous feruons, & dont nous portons la parole, 
fans doute il y auoit dequoy s'effrayer, & fe rebuter 
de ce deffein, les barbares de ce bourg paffans en 
commun difcours des habitans de ces contrées pour 
les Demons du pays. Mais tant s'en faut que cette 
qualité qu'on leur donne nous deftournaft, que plu- 
fioft elle nous porta, appuiez vniquement fur Ie feul 
fondement & reffort de telles entreprifes, [83] qui eft 
IESVS-CHRIST, à donner d'orefnauant à ce bourg Ie 
nom de fainét Michel, en l'honneur des fainéts Anges; 
aufquels nous ne defefperions pas que ces pauures 
peuples vn iour feroient pluftoft femblables, qu'à 
ceux dont on leur donnoit Ie nom. 
Ie ne fcay fi ce fut de l'inuention & ftratageme de 
l'ennemy commun des hommes, qui n'agreoit pas 
vne telle refolution; que Ie iour que les deux Peres 
partirent, deuant arriuer au gifie fur les quatre heures 
du foir, en cette mefme heure ils s'efgarent de la 
forte dans les bois, qu'ils n'y arriuerent qu'aux quatre 
heures du matin du lendemain, ayans marché douze 
heures durant & toute la nuiét, chargez pour la pluf- 
part du temps chacu d'vn paquet, dont en fin ils 
furent contraints de fe décharger du pl9 pesãt, & Ie 
cacher proche d'vn ruiffeau, pour Ie pouuoir plus aife- 
ment retrouuer, quand on feroit en eftat de Ie pou- 
uoir chercher. 
II auoit neigé vne bonne partie du iour & fi la nuiét 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, J639 

89 

from the Residence of saint Joseph; whence it fol- 
lowed that, if God gave his benediction to the work 
that had been undertaken in that village, the Fa- 
thers of this Residence could easily maintain and 
water the field that had been sown. 
If we had not been regardful of the power of the 
Master whom we serve, and whose message we carry, 
doubtless there would have been reason to be daunt- 
ed, and to recoil from this plan,- the barbarians of 
that village passing, in the common talk of the inhab- 
itants of these regions, for the Demons of the coun- 
try. But this character that was given them, far 
from turning us back, rather incited us - resting 
solely upon the only foundation and resource of such 
enterprises, [83] which is JESUS CHRIST-to give 
henceforth to this village the name" saint Michel," 
in honor of the holy Angels, like to whom we did 
not despair that these poor peoples would one day 
become, rather than like to those whose name had 
been given them. 
I do not know whether it was due to the ingenuity 
and strategy of the common enemy of mankind, who 
was not pleased with such a determination, that on 
the day when the two Fathers set out, expecting to 
reach their destination about four o'clock in the even- 
ing, at that same hour they went so far astray in the 
woods that they did not arrive until four o'clock the 
next morning, having walked twelve hours, through- 
out the night,- each burdened, for the greater part 
of the way, with a bundle, from the heaviest part of 
which they were finally obliged to free themselves, 
and to hide it near a brook, that they might be able 
the more easily to find it when it should be possible 
for them to search it out. 


90 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

eut efié telle qu'il fembloit qu' elle deuoit efire: les 
deux Peres poffible n'en eufsêt pas efié quittes à 
meilleur marché que quelques-vns de nos Sauuages 
qui [84] s'efians pareillemêt quelque temps apres, 
efgarez dans les bois pendant la nuiét, furent trouuez 
morts de lendemain. La neige qui efioit tombée, 
leur fit plus de bien que de mal; car elle leur feruit à 
appaifer la faim, & fur tout la foif, qui dans Ie tra- 
uail & Ie foucy de perfonnes efgarées ne leur donnoit 
pas peu de peine: Et, à leur rapport, la neige n'efi 
pas vn fi mauuais manger qu'on pourroit penfer: ou 
pour mieux dire, la neceffité efi vn maifire cuifinier. 
Quoy que sten foit, ils fe trouuerent fains & faufs 
à la maifon fur les quatre heures du matin, & leur 
pacquet laiffé proche d'vn ruiffeau, où efioit vne 
bonne partie de la Chappelle, fut heureufement re- 
trouué Ie mefme iour. 
II pleut à Dieu difpofer les affaires de la forte, que 
l'on fit rencontre d'vne cabane dans Ie bourg de 
fainét 
1ichel, la plus commode qui fe pouuoit rencon- 
trer, pour ce qu'on y pretendoit. II n'y auoit qu'vn 
feul feu ou famille, qui efioit iufiement ce qu'il fal- 
loit pour efire defchargez du foin du viure: il s'y 
trouua vn petit retranchement propre à y dreffer vne 
Chappelle, où ron dit tous les iours la Meffe, tant 
[85] qu'on y demeura, qui fut l'efpace de trente 
iours. 
De premier abord, on parle à l'affemblée des Capi- 
taines, qui efioiêt au nombre de dix ou douze, à qui 
on declare ce qu'on pretendoit: qui efioit de leur 
donner & à tout Ie bourg, la cognoifsãce d'vn feul 
Dieu, & de IESVS-CHRIST N. Seigneur & Redemp- 
teur. Pourquoy leur dõner mieux à entendre les 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELATION, J6.]9 

91 

It had snowed a good part of the day, and, if the 
night had been such a one as it seemed bound to be, 
the two Fathers possibly would not have come out of 
it more cheaply than did some of our Savages, who, 
[84] having likewise, some time later, gone astray in 
the woods during the night, were found dead the 
next day. The snow which had fallen did them 
more good than harm, for it served to appease their 
hunger, and above all their thirst, which, in their 
labor and anxiety as lost persons, gave them no little 
trouble; and, according to their story, snow is not so 
poor eating as one might imagine,- or, to put it bet- 
ter, necessity is a master cook. 
Be that as it may, they reached home safe and 
sound towards four 0' clock in the morning, and their 
bundle, that had been left near a brook, and con- 
tained a good part of the Chapel, was fortunately 
recovered the same day. 
It pleased God to so arrange matters that they came 
across a cabin in the village of saint Michel, the 
most convenient that could be found for the use that 
was to be made of it. There was only a single fire- 
place or family, which was precisely the condition 
necessary to relieve them from care in regard to 
food; there was a little compartment suitable for 
erecting a Chapel, where Mass was said daily, as long 
[85] as they stayed there, which was for the space of 
thirty days. 
At the very outset, they spoke in the assembly of 
the Captains, who were ten or twelve in number, to 
whom they declared their intention, namely, to give 
to them and to the entire village the know ledge of 
the one and only God, and of JESUS CHRIST, Our 
Lord and Redeemer. To make them understand 


92 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

Peres portoient ordinairement vn Crucifix pendu au 
co!. Le confeil agrea la propofition de ce deffein, 
auec des fonnes & des complimens qui furpaffent 
de beaucoup l'imagination ordinaire qu'on a des 
Sauuages. 
Dés Ie lendemain, l'vn des Peres commença, à 
faute de la c1ochette, d'aller fa ire vne criée par tout 
Ie bourg, felon la couftume du pays pour les affem- 
blées generales: en fuite de laquelle on ne manqua 
pas de voir bien-toft la cabane toute pleine. II y 
auoit trop de nouueauté & d'appareil, pour en atten- 
dre moins, mais la confufion obligea les iours fuiuans 
d'en exc1urre les enfans, & leur affigner Ie temps 
d'apres les affemblées pour venir à la petite efcole. 
Ce concours toutesfois fi general ne dura [86J pas 
long-temps. On veit bien-toft la feparation du bon 
grain d'auec Ie mauuais, & qui eftoiêt les brebis 
entendant la voix du Pafteur, & qui ne l'eftoiêt pas. 
Les premiers continuoient d'y venir, & efcoutoient 
volontiers: les autres apres auoir fatisfait à leur curi- 
ofité, ne s'y trouuerent plus: ou s'ils y venoient, ce 
n'eftoit que pour y broüiller, & pour y commettre 
des infolences. C' eft ce qui obligea de changer de 
batterie, & de s'appliquer totalement à la vifite des 
cabanes: ou apres qu'on auoit recogneu plus particu- 
lierement les terres où Ie grain auroit pris racine, 
ou pourroit faire des affemblées particulieres de ceux 
qu' on auroit recogneu auoir quelque pieufe affeétion 
au Chriftianifme qu'on leur auoit publié. 
L'experience nous a fait voir par tout que c'eftoit 
de la forte qu'il en falloit vfer, au moins auec ce 
Barbares, parmy lefquels nous viuons. Au com- 
mencement qu'on les aborde, il eft à propos, voire 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, r639 

93 

this better, the Fathers usually wore each a Crucifix 
suspended from his neck. The council accepted the 
statement of this purpose, with formalities and com- 
pliments which greatly exceed what one usually 
imagines of the Savages. 
From the next day, one of our Fathers began, for 
lack of a bell, to go throughout the village, making an 
announcement, according to the custom of the coun- 
try for general assemblies,- in consequence of which, 
they soon saw the cabin entirely filled. There was 
too much novelty and preparation to expect anything 
less; but the confusion obliged them, on the follow- 
ing days, to exclude the children and to appoint the 
time after the assembly for them to come to the 
little school. 
This so general concourse, however, did not con- 
tinue [86J long. Soon was seen the separation of the 
good seed from the bad,-and of those who were 
the sheep waiting for the voice of the Shepherd, from 
those who were not. The former continued to come, 
and listened willingly; the latter, after having satis- 
fied their curiosity, were no longer to be seen there,- 
or, if they did come, it was only to make mischief 
and perpetrate insolent acts. It was this that obliged 
us to change our tactics, and to devote ourselves 
entirely to visiting the cabins,- where, after we had 
more carefull y surveyed the soil w here the seed 
might have taken root, we could form special gather- 
ings of those whom we recognized as having some 
pious inclinations towards the Christianity that had 
been proclaimed to them. 
Experience has shown us everywhere that this is 
the method that must be adopted, at least with these 
Barbarians among whom we live. When one first 


94 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

neceffaire, de faire tant de predications publiques 
que l'on peut, puis dans la continuation s'il arriue 
du defordre, & de l'infolence, on fe contete des vifites 
dans les cabanes, & des fufdites affemblées particu- 
lieres, [87] & feulement de fois à autre renouueller 
Ie cry, en la publication de l'Euangile, pour feruir au 
moins à iufiifier vn iour la bonté & mifericorde de 
Dieu fur ces peuples. 
On iugea auffi que des affemblées particulieres de 
Capitaines & plus anciens du bourg, pourroient efire 
de grand profit, Ce que iugeans bien qu' on ne pou- 
uoit pas efperer que par quelque attraiét temporel, il 
fallut fe refoudre de ietter chaque fois quelques pains 
de petun au milieu de l'affemblée, lefquels auffi tofi 
efioient couppez par morceaux, & difiribuez par les 
principaux Capitaines, ou par leur ordre. Ce qui 
reüffit comme on Ie pretendoit. C'efi en ces affem- 
blées où fe trouua quelquefois Ie Chrefiien de la 
Conception Iofeph Che
atenh
a, dans lefquels il fit 
merueilles de bien parleI' & expliquer nos m yfieres. 
Mais il faut aduoüer, que fi Dieu ne met fortement 
la main à tels ouurages, il n'ya rien à gaigner que 
des paroles, & des propofitions qui s'en vont en fumée. 
II s'en efi trouué tel dans ces affemb[l]ées particu- 
lieres de Capitaines, qui [iJettant fa peau ou mante 
bas, venoit tout nud proche des [88J Peres, pre fen- 
tant fa tefie & tout fon corps à baptifer, mais c'efioient 
des faillies qui n'efioient pas de faifon, dont Ie len- 
demain on ne voyoit ny fruiét, ny fleur. 
En fin tout bien confideré, l'efienduë d'vn mois, 
qui efioit Ie temps qu'on s'efioit proposé, s'en allant 
efcouler, on fe refolut de prendre ce qui fembloit 
paroifire de plus affeuré: & Ie fort tomba fur quatre 


1639 -40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I6.J9 

95 

approaches them, it is wise, even necessary, to have 
as much public preaching as possible; then if, while 
continuing the work, disorder and insolence occur, 
we content ourselves with visits in the cabins, and 
with the aforesaid special meetings,- [87J only now 
and then renewing our public utterance, in the proc- 
lamation of the Gospel, that at least it may serve to 
justify some day the goodness and mercy of God 
toward these peoples. 
It was thought also that special assemblies of Cap- 
tains and the elders of the village might be highly 
profitable. Judging rightly that this could not be 
hoped for except through some temporal attraction, 
the Father felt obliged to throw, each time, some 
cakes of tobacco into the midst of the assembly, 
which were immediately cut into pieces, and dis- 
tributed by the principal Captains. or by their order. 
This succeeded as it was intended. It was in these 
assemblies that the Christian of la Conception, Joseph 
Chewatenhwa, was sometimes present, where he did 
wonders in praising and explaining our mysteries. 
But it must be confessed that if God does not put 
his hand powerfully to such works, there is nothing 
to be gained but words and propositions that go up 
in smoke. There was a certain man in these special 
assemblies of Captains, who, casting down his skin 
or mantle, came up to the Fathers entirely naked, 
[88J presenting his head and his whole body to be 
baptized; but these were shoots that were out of sea- 
son, of which neither flower nor fruit could be seen 
the next day. 
Finally, having taken everything into considera- 
tion,- the period of a month, the time they had 
planned, having elapsed,- it was decided to receive 


96 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

chefs de famille, qui furent baptifez folemnellement: 
dont l'vn eftoit noftre Hofte. Ce qui donna beau- 
coup de cõfolation aux Peres, & deux autres Capi- 
taines du bourg; dont l'vn femble eftre plus du nom- 
bre de ceux pour lefquels les Anges viendroient du 
Ciel au defaut des hommes, pluoftoft que Dieu man- 
quaft à leur pouruoir des moyens de fe fauuer, tant 
ce bon homme & toute fa famille fe font trouuez rai- 
fonnables, & exaéts obferuateurs de la loy de Nature. 
Leurs femmes toutefois & leurs enfans ne furent 
point baptifez, la crainte & la frayeur reftant encore 
trop grande dans ce bourg, auffi bien que dans Ie 
refte du pays, que Ie baptefme faifoit mourir, ou ren- 
doit ceux qui Ie receuoient fuiets à mille maux & mi- 
feres. En quoy eft de plus confiderable la refolution 
[89] de ces pauures Neophytes, dont quelques-vns fe 
font portez au baptefme, auffi bie que plufieurs autres 
aux autres edroits, auec cette pensée. En deuffe-ie 
mourir. 
Ce fut Ie premier iour de l'an 1639. que ces bap- 
tefmes fe firent, dont Ie lendemain qui eftoit Diman- 
che, ces Neophytes s'eftant trouuez enfemble pour 
la premiere fois à la Meffe, au nombre de cinq ou 
fix, on pourroit remarquer ce 2. iour de la prefente 
année, pour la premiere de la naiffance de cefte Eglife 
nouuelle, Ie nombre eftãt fuffifant pour porter Ie nom 
d'affemblée ou Congregation. Quelques iours apres 
on en baptifa quelques autres, & en fuite encore d'au- 
tres en diuerfes occafions & vifites qui ont efté faites 
depuis en ce bourg: de forte que de prefent Ie nombre 
des Chreftiens qui y monte à vne vingtaine, quel- 
qu'autre perfonnes, foit enfans ou plus aagées, y ont 
efté baptifées en extremité de maladie ou mifere, 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, r6.J9 

97 

those who apparently manifested the most stability; 
and the lot fell upon four heads of families, who were 
solemnly baptized,- one of these being our Host, 
which gave great consolation to the Fathers, and two 
others, Captains of the village, one of whom seems 
to be more of the number of those for whose sake 
Angels would come down from Heaven in default 
of men, rather than that God should fail to provide 
them with a means of escape, so reasonable and exact 
observers of the law of Nature are this good man and 
all his family. Their wives and children, however, 
were not baptized,- the fear and terror still remain- 
ing too strong in this village as well as in the rest 
of the country, that baptism causes death, or renders 
those who receive it liable to a thousand evils and 
miseries. In view of this, is most important the 
resolution [89J of these poor Neophytes, several of 
whom, as well as many others in other places, have 
resorted to baptism with this thought, " [I will re- 
ceive it,] even if I must die for it." 
It was on the first day of the year 1639 that these 
baptisms were administered. On the following day, 
which was Sunday, these Neophytes being present 
together for the first time at Mass, to the number of 
five or six, we could note this 2nd day of the present 
year as the first of the birth of this new Church, the 
number being sufficient to bear the name of assem- 
bly or Congregation. Some days later, a few others 
were baptized, and thereafter others besides, on 
different occasions, and on visits which were after- 
wards made in this village, so that at present the 
number of Christians amounts to about twenty. A 
few more, either children or elderly persons, were 
baptized in the extremity of sickness or misery, as, 


98 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

comme entr'autres vn pauure prifonnier Hiroquois, 
qui y fut amené pendant que les Peres y efioient 
pour Ia premiere fois. Ce pauure mal heureux ayant 
duré 24 heures apres fon baptefme, on aprit qu'en fa 
derniere & funefte nuiét i1 auoit fait effort, pour [9 0 J 
s'eftouffer de luy-mefme. Cela obligea de l'allertrou- 
uer, vn peu deuant qu'on exerçaft fur luy les dernieres 
cruautez, & Iuy faire recognoiftre fa faute, Ie porter 
à s'en accufer, & en demander pardon; ce qu'ayant 
fait, on luy donna l'abfolution, & deux heures apres 
i1 boüilloit dans vne chaudiere, dont ceux de Ia ca- 
bane des Peres furent inuitez de venir prendre leur 
part. 
Voila la principale Miffion de cette année. C'eftoit 
bien Ie deffein d'en faire aU moins vne ou deux autres 
femblables pendant Ie refte de l'hyuer, qui eft Ie feul 
temps qu'on peut ioüir des Sauuages: qui en toute 
autre faifon font en guerre ou en traite. Mais s'eitant 
trouué plus de peine & de foin à nourrir & eßeuer les 
enfans fpirituels de ces trois nouuelles Eglifes, qu' on 
n'auoit eu à leur donner la vie de la grace, & beau- 
coup plus d'affaire à l'affermiffement qu'à l'eftabliffe- 
ment de ces Ouurages, i1 a fallu vacquer au plus 
prefsé. On n'a pas laiffé de faire quelques courfes 
en diuers endroits de moins de durée, qui ont eu de 
bons effets. En voicy quelques exemples. 
Le 3 0 . de Decembre [sc. Nouembre] iour de fainét 
André, [91J vn de nos Peres eftant allé au Bourg de 
Tahententaron, que nouS auons furnommé de fainét 
Ignace, eßoigné d' enuiron 2 lieuës de celuy de la Re- 
fidence de fainét Iofeph, i1 y baptiza vn ieune enfant 
fort malade, & vn vieillard d'enuiron quatre-vingts 
ans, qui n'auoit autre maladie que celle de fa vieil- 


1639-40J 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I639 

99 

among others, a poor Hiroquois prisoner, who was 
taken thither while the Fathers were there for the 
first time. This poor unfortunate having held out 24 
hours after his baptism, it was learned that during 
his last and fatal night he had made an effort to [90] 
choke himself. This obliged them to go and visit 
him a little while before the final cruelties were exer- 
cised upon him, to make him acknowledge his fault, 
to lead him to accuse himself thereof, and ask par- 
don for it. Having done this, he was granted abso- 
lution; and two hours later he was boiling in a kettle, 
of which the inmates of the Fathers' cabin were 
invited to come and take their share. 
That is the principal Mission of this year. It was, 
indeed, the intention to form at least one or two other 
similar ones during the remainder of the winter, 
which is the only time when one can hold the Sav- 
ages, who, in all other seasons, are engaged in war 
or in trade. But having found more trouble and 
anxiety in nourishing and rearing the spiritual chil- 
dren of these three new Churches than it had been to 
give them the life of grace, and much more to do in 
strengthening than in establishing these Works, it 
has been necessary to devote ourselves most closely 
to them. We have not omitted to make some shorter 
visits to various places, which have had some good 
results. Of these, I will give some examples. 
On the 30th of November, saint Andrew's day, 
[9 1 ] one of our Fathers having gone to the Village of 
Tahententaron,5-which we have surnamed saint 
Ignace, distant about 2 leagues from that of the 
Residence of saint Joseph,-he there baptized a 
young child who was very sick, and an old man aged 
about eighty years, who had no other ailment except 


100 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 11 

leffe; mais au refie fe trouuoit tout difpofé à efcouter. 
Et en fuite donna à entendre qu'il croyoit, & efioit 
tout refolu de faire ce qu'il falloit pour efire fauué. 
Le Pere fentit de l'inclination à ne point differer 
plus long-temps à Ie metre en efiat de ce faire, & là- 
deff us Ie baptize. 
Deux iours apres, iour de fefie de S. François Xa- 
uier, la nouuelle efiant venuë affeurée de l'arriuée 
d'vn prifonnier de guerre, Hiroquois de nation, au 
fufdit bourg, qu'on y auoit amené des dernieres bour- 
gades du pais, pour Ie donner à quelque parent de 
ceux qui auoient efié pris autrefois par les Ennemis. 
Le mefme Pere qui yauoit efié deux iours aupara- 
uant, fut deputé auec vn autre, pour aller prompte- 
ment à la def poüille de ce pauure mal-heureux; & 
trauailler pour leur part au gain de fon Arne. Comme 
ils approchent du [92] bourg, ils aperçoiuent vne foffe 
que l'on faifoit; ils demandent pour qui? on refpond 
que c' efi pour vn tel vieillard mort Ie iour precedent, 
& c'efioit iufiement celuy qu'on auoit baptifé, qui 
efioit mort Ie lendemain de fon Baptefme. lIs s'en- 
quefient des nouuelles de l'enfant qui fut baptifé en 
mefme temps; & ils apprirent qu'il fe portoit mieux. 
Parrant plus auant, ils arriuerent à la cabane où efioit 
ce pauure prifonnier. C'efioit vn ieune hõme de 22 
ans d'auffi bonne grace, & auffi bien fait qu'on en 
puiffe rencontrer, qui ne fembloit auoir rien de bar- 
bare, que Ia mifere & la condition où il efioit. II 
portoit deux mains toutes faigneufes des doigts qu' en 
riant & par plaifir on Iuy auoit coupez par auance du 
traitement qu'on s'attendoit de luy faire la nuiét 
fuiuante. 
Ce pauure ieune homme, aux premieres paroles que 


1639-40] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, 1639 

101 

that of his old age, and, moreover, proved to be very 
willing to listen; he afterwards gave us to understand 
that he believed and had firmly resolved to do what 
was necessary to be saved. The Father felt inclined 
no longer to defer enabling him to do this, and there- 
upon baptized him. 
Two days later, the day of the feast of 81. François 
Xavier, authentic news was brought of the arrival of 
a prisoner of war, a Hiroquois by nation, to that 
village, who had been brought thither from the fron- 
tier villages of the country, that he might be given 
to some relative of those who had been formerly cap- 
tured by the Enemies. The same Father who had 
been there two days before was appointed, with 
another, to go promptly to the execution of this poor 
wretch, and to labor, on their part, for the welfare 
of his Soul. As they approached the [92] village, 
they perceived that a grave was being made; they 
asked for whom, and were told that it was for a 
certain old man who had died the day before, and it 
was the very one who had been baptized, who had 
died the day after his Baptism. They inquired for 
news of the child that had been baptized at the same 
time, and were told that it was better. Passing 
farther on, they arrived at the cabin where this poor 
prisoner was. He was a young man of 22 years, as 
graceful and well-made a savage as one could meet, 
seeming to have nothing of the barbarian about him 
except the wretched condition in which he was. 
Both of his hands were all covered with blood, because, 
as a jest and for diversion, two of his fingers had 
been cut off, in anticipation of the treatment that his 
captors expected to give him the next night. 
This poor young man, at the first words our Fa- 


102 

LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

luy dirent nos Peres, parut fi abatu de la douleur 
qu'il fouffroit, & de fon mal-heur, que l'on douta fi 
on en pouuoit efperer beaucoup de contentement, on 
s'aduifa de tirer quelque image de N. Seigneur. A 
cette veuë l'efprit de ce ieune homme fe refueille; i1 
efcoute ce qu' on luy dit. Et pour Ie faire court, i1 
donne toute [93] la fatisfaétion neceffaire pour ce 
qu'on pretendoit; voire mefme fe met à chanter fon 
aéte de contrition, tefmoignant beaucoup de contente- 
ment & de confolation, il fut donc baptifé. 
Mais voicy où parut particulierement adorable la 
Prouidence diuine fur ce pauure infortuné: car les 
affaires ne s'efiant pas trouuées telles qu'il falloit 
pour Ie laiffer à la difpofition de ceux de ce bourg, 
on prit refolution de Ie remener d'où i1 efioit party, 
pour aduifer de rechef à ce qu'on en feroit. Mais y 
efiant vne fois arriué, i1 n' en fortit plus, & paffa là 
par les cruautez ordinaires aux Barbares de ces cõ- 
trées: comme s'il n'y pouuoit mourir, qu'auparauant 
il n'eufi efié bapti[z]é, & comme s'il n'y auoit autre 
affaire pour luy en nos quartiers, que d'y recontrer 
cette heureufe fortune, par laquelle il fe trouua en 
efiat d' efchanger fon extreme mifere en vne felicité 
Eternelle. 
Au commencement du Printemps, les Chrefiiens 
des Bourgs où nous auons des Refidences, & qui font 
les 2. principales Eglifes ou affemblées, s'efians diffi- 
pez, & allez qui deçà qui delà, les vns en traite, les 
autres à la pefche, d'autres principalement [94] à la 
guerre: les ouuriers de l'Euangile fe trouuerent auec 
vn peu de relafche. Apres auoir donc vn peu refpiré 
des trauaux paffez, & s'eftre rafraifchis fpirituelle- 
met, on en a appliqué ce qu'on a peu aux Miffions, 


1639-40] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION. I639 

103 

thers said to him, appeared so depressed by the pain 
he was suffering, and by his misfortune, that they 
doubted whether they could look for much satisfac- 
tion from him. They bethought themselves to take 
out a picture of Our Lord; at this sight the young 
man's interest was aroused; he listened to what was 
said to him, and, to be brief, he gave all [93] the 
satisfaction necessary for their purpose - even begin- 
ning to chant his act of contrition, and evincing much 
satisfaction and consolation; he was, therefore, bap- 
tized. 
But behold where divine Providence appeared 
especially adorable toward this poor unfortunate. 
For, since affairs were not found to be in the condi- 
tion necessary to leave him at the disposition of the 
people of this village, it was decided to take him 
back to the place whence he had come, to consider 
again what should be done with him. But, having 
once reached that place, he did not leave it again, 
and there passed through the cruelties common to 
the Barbarians of these countries,- as if he could not 
die until he had been baptized. and as if he had no 
other business in our quarters than to meet there this 
blessed fate, by which he was enabled to exchange 
his extreme misery for Eternal happiness. 
Early in the Spring, the Christians of the Villages 
where we have Residences, and which form the 2 
principal Churches or assemblies, having dispersed 
here and there,- some to engage in trading, others 
in fishing, others principally [94J in war,- the Gos- 
pel laborers obtained a little relaxation. After hav- 
ing breathed a little, then, from our past labors, and 
become spiritually refreshed, we applied ourselves 
as well as we could to the Missions, and to visiting 


104 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

& aux vifites des bourgs & bourgades du pais, auec 
deffein de ne laiffer pas vne cabane de Sauuages, 
dans laquelle on ne fe prefente, & qu'on n'y parle & 
agiffe autant qu'il faut, pour feruir aux deffeins de 
Dieu fur fes Eí1eus. Pour ce fuiet, quatre Peres ont 
efié defiinez, deux d'vn cofié, & deux de l'autre, qui 
apres auoir parcouru leur quartier, retournent fur 
leurs pas pour arroufer ce qu'ils ont femé. Leur 
foin principal efi d'auoir 1'æil aux enfans, vieillards 
& malades, fans negliger 1'infiruétion des autres. 
Nous auons tous fuiet de croire que Dieu reçoit 
beaucoup de contentement de cét exercice: & nos 
confciences fe trouuent en fin par là en repos, & en 
affeurance, que rien n'efi oublié, de ce qui peut efire 
fait maintenant pour fa gloire & pour fon feruice en 
ces contrées. Ces Miffions depuis Pafques iufques à 
l' Afcenfion, nous ont donné 28 baptifez, dont plu- 
fieurs font allez au Ciel, comme nous Ie prefumons 
de la [95] bonté & mifericorde de Dieu. Mais ie n'e- 
fiime pas moins l'impreffion & la difpofition qu'on a 
laifsé dans les efprits & les cæurs de tous ceux du 
pays, ce qui en fon temps, comme nous efperons, fer- 
uira aux deffeins de la Prouidence diuine, & nous 
donnera des fruiéts lors que nous y penferons Ie 
moins 
Entr' autres baptifez par les Perez deítinez aux 
Miffions, ont efié onze prifonniers de guerre, de douze 
qui furent amenez au pays fur la fin du mois de May 
de cette prefente annee. Ce ne fut pas fans peine & 
trauail qu'ils vindrent à bout d'vne telle entreprife, 
pour les difficultez qui fe rencontrent aux baptefmes 
de telles perfonnes, comme nous auons plus ample- 
ment declaré au chap. 5. mais i1 faut aduoüer qu'il 
n'y a rien que la charité ne furmonte. 


1639-40] 

LE./EUNE'S RELATION, T639 

105 

the villages of the country, large and small, intend- 
ing not to leave a cabin of the Savages in which we 
did not present ourselves, and say and do whatever 
was necessary to carry out God's plans for his Elect. 
For this object, four Fathers were appointed,- two 
to go in one direction, two in another,-who, after 
having traveled over their districts, retrace their 
steps to water what they have sown. Their chief 
care is to have their eyes upon the children, the old, 
and the sick, without neglecting the instruction of 
the others. We have every reason to believe that 
God has received much satisfaction from this prac- 
tice; and our consciences are, in short, thereby at 
peace, and assured that nothing is neglected that can 
now be done for his glory and for his service in these 
countries. These Missions, from Easter until Ascen- 
sion day, have given us 28 baptized, of whom several 
have gone to Heaven, as we judge from the [95] good- 
ness and mercy of God. But I do not less value the 
impression and disposition that have been left in the 
minds and hearts of all those of the country,-which 
in due time, as we hope, will subserve the designs 
of divine Providence and will give us fruits when we 
shall least expect them. 
Among others baptized by the Fathers appointed 
to the Missions, were eleven prisoners of war, out of 
twelve that were brought into the country toward the 
end of the month of May of this present year. It 
was not without difficulty and hard work that they 
succeeded in this undertaking, on account of the hin- 
drances that are encountered in the baptisms of such 
persons, as we have more fully stated in chapter 5; 
but it must be acknowledged that there is nothing 
that charity will not conquer. 


106 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

II femble que Dieu nous voulut confirmer en ce 
rencontre dans la penfee que l'experience nous auoit 
defia fait auoir d'autres occafions femblables. Que 
les baptefmes de telles perfonnes n'efioient pas fans 
vne fpeciale difpofition de fa bõté & mifericorde, fur 
ces pauures mal heureux, & fans que luy-mefme y 
mit la main, [96] celuy feul des douze qui ne fut pas 
baptisé, ne fut pas celuy qui yeuft moins de vocation 
& d'atrait. On trouua moins de refifiance à l'abor- 
der de la part des Sauuages qui Ie gardoient, qu'on 
n'auoit faid aux autres: On eufi Ie moyen de luy 
rendre plus de tefmoignages de bône volonté & affe- 
dion, & cependant il ne fut iamais poffible d'obtenir 
de ce mal-heureux aucun agreement de ce qui luy 
efioit dit & reprefenté. On l'attaque par trois diuers 
iours, & Ie fuit-on la part où on Ie menoit, on ne 
penfi iamais rien gagner fur cet efprit, voire mefme 
empefcha-il pour vn temps qu'vn fien compagnon ne 
fe fit baptifer, qui d'ailleurs tefmoignoit autant d'in- 
c1ination & de pieufe affeétion à eftre inftruit, que ce 
mal heureux en auoit d'auerfion: mais vne fois ayant 
efté trouué feparez, on accomplit enuers ce 2. ce dont 
la compagnie de l'autre I 'auoit deftourné, l'ayant 
rencontré en auffi bonne difpofition qu' auparauant. 
Dés 12. i1 y en euft deux qui furent defiinez pour 
ce bourg d'où i'efcris, & abandonnez à l'ordinaire, 
par ceux qui en eftoient les mai11res, aux cruautez 
ordinaires du pays. Tous deux eftoient du [97] nom- 
bre des baptifez: dont l'vn particulierement fit pa- 
roifire vne conftance dans fes tourmens, au delà non 
feulement de ce que iamais on n'a veu, mais peut- 
efire au delà de ce qu'on euft peu s'imaginer fi on ne 
reufi veu. L'efpace des deux premieres heures de 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I639 

107 

It seems as if, in this occurrence, God intends to 
confirm us in the thought that experience had already 
suggested to us on other similar occasions,- that the 
baptisms of such persons were not without a special 
arrangement of his goodness and mercy toward those 
poor unfortunates, and without himself putting his 
hand thereto. [96J The only one of the twelve who 
did not receive baptism was not the one who had 
the fewest calls and inducements to do so. Less 
resistance in approaching him was met from the 
Savages who were guarding him, than would have 
been made in the case of the others, and opportunity 
was found to show him more evidences of good will 
and affection; yet it was never possible to obtain 
from this poor wretch any acceptance of what was 
said and represented to him. They accosted him on 
three different days, and followed him to the place 
whither he was taken, but nothing could ever be 
gained from this man. He even prevented, for a 
time, one of his companions from being baptized, 
who otherwise showed as much inclination and pious 
desire to be instructed as this wretch had felt aver- 
sion to it. But happening once to be apart, we 
accomplished for this 2nd man what the companion- 
ship of the other had diverted him from, having 
found him as favorably inclined as before. 
Of the 12, two were assigned to this village whence 
I am writing, and abandoned, as usual, by those who 
were their masters, to the customary cruelties of the 
country. Both were of the [97J number of the bap- 
tized; one of them, especially, showed a constancy 
in his torments beyond not only anything that one 
had ever seen, but perhaps beyond what one could 
have imagined if one had not seen it. During the 


108 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

la nuiét qu'il fut tourmenté de toutes les façons, auec 
tifons ardens, haches brul1antes, & autres ferremens 
tout en feu qu'on luy appliquoit par tout, il ne branl1a 
ny remua non plus que s'il euft efté de marbre. II 
ne fe plaignit iamais, ny ne ietta aucun cry, non pas 
mefme vn foufpir qui tefmoignaft de la douleur: ce qui 
mettoit en furie ceux qui Ie tourmentoiet, qui impu- 
tent à grand mal-heur quand ils font rencontre d'vne 
telle conftance, ils eurent beau faire, ils fe lafferent 
pluftoft de Ie tourmenter, que luy de fouffrir; luy- 
mefme s'arreftoit & fe prefentoit à ceux qui plus Ie 
vouloient tourmenter: & tandis qu'ils Ie faifoient il 
s'entretenoit auffi froidement auec tous ceux qui Ie 
vouloient queftionner, de mefme que fi c'euft efté vn 
autre qu'on euft tourmenté: & au defaut d'entretien 
il ne ceffoit de chanter, & fouuent repetoit dans fa 
chanfon Aronhiac Eskenonteta, ie m'en vay done au 
Ciel: [98] Quoy qu'il n'y euft pas vn des noftre pre- 
fens pour Ie faire reffouuenir de fon bon-heur. Lors 
qu'on l'aborda pour l'inftruire la premiere fois, vous 
euffiez dit qu'on luy euft porté vne nouuelle qu'il y 
a trente ans qu'il attendoit, & à laquelle de longue 
main il s'eftoit preparé, tant il agrea & conceut tout 
d'vn coup Ie poinét de l'affaire. Toutes ces rencon- 
tres nous font toucher au doigt les fecrets adorables 
de la predeftination de Dieu fur fes El1eus. En fin 
Ie matin venu, nos Barbares Ie firent mourir prompte- 
ment, voyans que la prolongation de fes tourmens 
eftoit celle de leur confufion, & qu'ils ne perdoient 
que leur peine fans en retirer ny donner au public 
aucun plaifir, qui confifte fur tout à entendre crier 
ces pauures viétimes de leur fureur. Vn entr'autres 
qui pendant fon inftruétion n'y auoit pareillement 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I6.19 

109 

first two hours of the night, while he was tormented 
in every way,- with burning brands, glowing hatch- 
ets, and other iron tools, red-hot, that were applied 
to every part of his body,-he did not tremble or 
flinch any more than if he had been of marble. He 
never complained or cried out, or even sighed, as an 
indicati
::m of his suffering,-which threw into a fury 
those who tormented him, who count it a great 
misfortune when they encounter such steadfastness. 
They strove in vain,-they sooner became weary of 
tormenting him than he of suffering; he himself 
stood still, and offered himself to those who most 
desired to torment him; and, while they did this, he 
conversed as coolly with all those who chose to ques- 
tion him as if it were some one else that was being 
tortured. And, when he was not talking, he never 
ceased to sing, often repeating in his song, " Aron- 
hiac Eskenonteta," "I am going away to Heaven, 
then, , , - [98] although there was not one of ours 
present to remind him of his good fortune. When 
they first accosted him to give him instruction, you 
would have said that they brought him tidings for 
which he had been waiting thirty years, and for which 
he was long since prepared, so readily did he accept 
and grasp all at once the essential points. All these 
occurrences make us see close at hand the adorable 
secrets of God's predestination concerning his Elect. 
Finally, when morning came, our Barbarians quickly 
put him to death, seeing that the prolongation of his 
tortures was that of their own confusion, and that 
their exertions were only thrown away, without 
obtaining therefrom, or giving to the public, any 
pleasure, which consists above all in hearing these 
poor victims of their fury shriek. One, among others, 


110 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

(VOL. 17 

donné beaucoup de contentement ayant efté donné à 
quelques peuples eíloignez; ceux-cy par ie ne fçay 
queUe confideration fe refoluënt de luy donner la vie, 
& de Ie remener à fon pais; mais lors qu'on fut fur 
Ie poind de l'y conduire, comme fi fon baptefme ne 
luy eut deu de rien feruir s'il fortoit de ces contrées, 
il tomba dans vne [99] maladie, qui luy apportant la 
mort luy donna la vie, & fuft l'accompliffement de fa 
predeftination. 
Ie ne fçay fi ce que nos Sauuages apprehendent de 
mal-heur du prefage de conftance de leurs prifonniers 
leur arriuera: Ie prie Dieu qu'ille deftourne de deffus 
leurs teftes: mais ie fçay bien qu'ils ont tout fuiet 
d'aiUeurs de l'apprehender. Ces 12. prifonniers font 
les premices d'vne guerre qu'ils ont entrepris de nou- 
ueau cette année contre vn Peuple puiffant, nommé 
Senontouerhonons, les plus proches de tous leurs en- 
nemis, auec qui depuis quelques années ils auoient la 
paix. Ils voyent bien que cela ne leur peut apporter 
que malheur: mais quelques- vns de leurs ieunes gens 
ayans recommencé l'année paíIée à tuer quelqu'vn 
de cette Nation; Ie refouuenir & Ie refentiment de 
ceux de leurs parens, qui autrefois ont efté mal trai- 
tez par ces peuples, a fait refoudre tout Ie pais, à re- 
prendre la guerre contr'eux, & les attaquer pluftoft 
qu'à reparer la faute. 


1639-40] 

LE IEUNE's RELA TION, I6.J9 

]11 

who during his instruction, unlike this man, had not 
afforded much satisfaction, having been given to 
some remote tribes,-they, from I know not what 
motives, resolved to grant him his life, and to take 
him back to his own country. But when they were 
on the point of conducting him thither, as if his bap- 
tism would have availed him nothing if he left these 
countries, he perished in an [99] illness, which, in 
bringing him death, gave him life, and was the ful- 
fillment of his predestination. 
I do not know whether the misfortune our Savages 
apprehend, as presaged by the fortitude of their pris- 
oners, will happen; I pray God that he may avert it 
from their heads,- but I know very well that they 
have every reason, on other accounts, to apprehend 
it. These 12 prisoners are the first fruits of the war 
that they have undertaken anew this year against a 
powerful Tribe, named Senontouerhonons, the near- 
est of all their enemies, with whom they were at 
peace for several years. They see clear! y that this 
can only bring them misfortune; but, some of their 
young men having last year recommenced hostilities, 
by killing some member of that Nation, the bitter 
memories and the resentment of those of their kin- 
dred who were formerly badly treated by those tribes, 
have caused a determination throughout the country 
to resume war against them, and to attack them, 
rather than to make amends for the fault. 


112 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

[100] CHAP. VII. 

DE DIUERSES TRAUERSES & DIFFICULTEZ QUI SE 
SONT RENCONTREES EN LA NAISSANCE DE CES NOU- 
UELLES EGLISES: & DE CELLES QUI SE PRE- 
SENTENT ENCORE TOUS LES lOURS 
EN LEUR ESTABLISSEMENT. 

C ONSIDERANT de prés auffi bien que de loing 
ce païs des Hurons, & autres peuples voifins, 
i1 m'a toufiours femblé vne des principales 
fortereffes, & comme vn donjon des Demons. Et en 
effed: ie ne penfe pas qu'il y ait perfonne qui ayant 
confidere ou veu les difficultez d'y aborder, & d'y fub- 
fifter; Ie fouuerain Empire, & Ie repos auec lequel 
les Demons y ont dominé depuis tant de fiecles, en 
faffe vn autre iugement. 
La refolution des ouuriers de l'Euangile en ces der- 
nieres années, de les venir attaquer en vn tel Fort, & 
leur donner l'alarme, les auoir irrité iufques au poind: 
qu' on a bien veu: particulierement ces deux dernieres 
années, qu'ils auoient coniuré leur [101] ruine. 
Mais comme iis ne peuuent pas tout ce qu'ils voulent, 
leurs efforts ont abouti, où depuis Ie commence- 
ment du monde ils font arriuez & arriueront à iamais; 
fçauoir à la plus grande gloire de Dieu, & à leur con- 
fufion, comme on a peu voir aux Chapitres precedës. 
Ce n'eft pas toutefois l'humeur de ces efprits orgueil- 
leux de fe rendre fi toft: tant plus leur confufion eft 
grande, tant plus leur rage croift, qui leur fournit tous 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I639 

113 

[100] CHAP. VII. 

OF VARIOUS OBSTACLES AND DIFFICULTIES ENCOUN- 
TERED IN CONNECTION WITH THE BIRTH OF 
THESE NEW CHURCHES; AND OF THOSE 
THAT STILL APPEAR DAILY IN 
THEIR ESTABLISHMENT. 

C ONSIDERING from anear as well as from afar 
this country of the Hurons, and other neigh- 
boring peoples, it has always seemed to me 
one of the principal fortresses and, as it were, a don- 
jon of the Demons. And, in fact, I do not think 
there is any person who-having considered or seen 
the difficulties of reaching it and of subsisting here, 
as well as the sovereign Power and the security with 
which the Demons have ruled here during so many 
centuries,-could form any other opinion of it. 
The resolution of the Gospel workers in these lat- 
ter years to come and attack them in such a Fort, and 
give them the alarm, has irritated them to the utmost, 
as we have plainly seen,- especially in these last two 
years, when they had plotted our [101] ruin. But as 
they cannot do all that they would, their efforts have 
resulted as they have since the beginning of the 
world, and as they always will result,-namely, in 
the greater glory of God, and in their own confusion, 
as may be seen in the preceding Chapters. It is not, 
however, the humor of these proud spirits to yield 
so soon; the greater their confusion, the more their 
rage increases, which daily furnishes them with new 


114 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

les iours de nouuelles inuentions de trauerfer Ies 
affaires de Dieu; fur tout quand ils voyent qu'il s'agift 
de l'eftenduë du Royaume de Iefus Chrift, de Iuy 
former de nouuelles Efpoufes; en vn mot d'eftablir 
de nouuelles Eglifes ou affemblées de Chreftiens, cela 
allant à la ruine fondamentale de leur Empire, & au 
renuerfement de leurs principales pretentions. 
En effeét, lors que i'arriuay icy fur la fin du mois 
d' Aouft, i'y trouuay les efprits des Sauuages en affez 
grand repos, & comme dans Ie regret & Ie repentir 
de ce qui s'eftoit paffé, s'eftonnans de leur aueugle- 
ment & peu d'efprit d'auoir de tels ombrages, & de 
fi mauuaifes inclinations pour des perfonnes comme 
nous, [102] qui ne leur faifions que du bien. Mais 
apres le retour des traites, on n' euft pas pluftoft re- 
doublé les bateries des Predications & inftruétions, 
tant generales que particulieres; & à trauailler tout 
de bon à l' eftabliffement de l' ouurage que I' on preten- 
doit, que voila les langues qui fe deílient plus que 
iamais: on renouuelle toutes les plaintes & les cris. 
Que de puis que nous eftions au païs, & que nous y 
auions femé nofire doétrine, on n'y voyoit plus que 
mal heur & mifere; on n'y voyoit plus de vieillards; 
que tout Ie païs s'en alloit en decadence & en ruine; 
qu'apres auoir fait mourir tous ceux du quartier ou 
nous nous eftions mis d'abord, nous allions par tous 
les autres bourgs pour faire Ie mefme dégaft; que fi 
on n'arreftoit la caufe de tous ces maux, bien-toft on 
verroit toute leur nation aneantie. 
Ces difcours ne fe tenoient pas feulement dans Ie 
particulier & en cachette, mais auffi en public & dans 
nos cabanes mefmes, & aux affemblées de nos Cate- 
chifmes. II s'eft trouué quelquefois qu'en mefme 


163U-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I639 

115 

devices for hindering the affairs of God,- above all, 
w hen they see that it is a question of extending the 
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, of creating new Brides for 
him, in a word, of establishing new Churches or 
assemblies of Christians, this tending to the funda- 
mental ruin of their Empire, and to the overthrow of 
their principal claims. 
In fact, when I arrived here toward the end of the 
month of August, I found the minds of the Savages 
quite tranquil, and, as it were, in a condition of 
regret and repentance for what had taken place, being 
astonished at their own blindness and lack of sense in 
holding such umbrage and so evil passions toward 
persons like us, [102J who had only done them good. 
But after their return from trading, no sooner had 
we redoubled our batteries of Sermons and instruc- 
tions, general as well as individual, and labored in 
earnest for the establishment of our intended enter- 
prise, than 10, tongues were more than ever loosened. 
All their complaints and clamors were renewed,- 
that since we were in the country, and had sown our 
doctrine there, one saw no longer aught but misfor- 
tune and misery, and no more old men were seen; that 
the whole country was going to decay and ruin; that, 
after having caused the death of all those in the quar- 
ter where we had first settled, we went through all 
the other villages to create the same havoc; that, if 
the cause of all these evils were not suppressed, they 
would soon see their entire nation annihilated. 
These speeches were not made only in private and 
secretly, but also in public and even in our cabins, 
and in the meetings of our Catechumens. It hap- 
pened sometimes that at the same time that a Father 
was going through the village to ring the bell, or to 


116 

LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

temps qu'vn Pere alloit par Ie bourg, {onner où faire 
Ia criée pour affembler Ie monde; au mefme temps 
quelque [103J Capitaine mal affeétionné {ortoit de fa 
cabane, qui faifoit vn cry contraire, difant qu'on fe 
donnaft bien de garde d'y venir, que nous eftions for- 
ciers, qui n'auions autre deffein que de les perdre & 
ruiner? qu'il falloit pluftoft fonger à fe défaire de 
nous, que de croire & faire ce que nous difions. 
Ces me{mes difcours {e font faits pendant les Cate- 
chifmes, ou ces organes du diable interrompoient Ie 
Catechifte, pour faire leur Prefche, auec des blaf- 
phemes qui donnoient bien auant dans Ie cæur de nos 
Peres; mais qui pour cela ne leur oftoient pas la pa- 
role, pour refpondre à ces fols, & les traiter comme 
il faUoit; non pas toutefois tant felon leur merite, 
qu'auec la patience & la compaffion auec laquelle il 
faut agir auec ces pauures malheureux. 
L'infolence de telles perfonnes d'authorité, aug- 
mente beaucoup la hardieffe des enfans & des per- 
fonnes du commun, defquelles en fuite il n'a pas fallu 
peu fouffrir. On a veu les plotes de neige, les ba- 
ftons, les troignons de bled, & autres fatras, à faute de 
pierres, (qu' on ne trouue pas toufiours quand on veut 
en ce païs) voler fur les teftes des Peres, pendant 
mefme [104] les Catechifmes: & Ie long de la iour- 
née, par les trous de la cabane qui feruent de feneftre 
& de cheminée. Pour ne point parler dauantage de 
plufieurs autres difgraces qui s'enfuiuent tous les 
iours, viuans parmy vn peuple barbare, contre lequel 
nous n' auons ny ne pouuons auoir aucune defenfe. 
Quelques-vns des plus aduifez entre les Capitaines 
& anciens, voyans bien que cela eft contre les droiéts 
de l'alliance dont ils font profeffion auec les François, 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I639 

117 

make the announcement for assembling the people, 
at this very time some [103] evil-minded Captain 
would come out from his cabin and declaim against 
this,- warning the people to beware of going there; 
that we were sorcerers, who had no other purpose 
than to undo and ruin them; that they ought rather 
to think of getting rid of us than to believe and do 
what we said. 
These same speeches were made during the Cate- 

hisms, where these instruments of the devil inter- 
rupted the Catechist to preach their own Sermon, 
with blasphemies which sank deep into the hearts of 
our Fathers, but which, nevertheless, did not deprive 
them of speech to answer these fools, and treat them 
as they deserved,- not, however, so much according 
to their merit, as with the patience and compassion 
with which one should deal with these poor unfor- 
tunates. 
The insolence of such persons of authority greatly 
increases the boldness of the children and common 
people, from whom, consequently, one has to suffer 
not a little. Snowballs, clubs, cornstalks, and other 
rubbish, for lack of stones (which are not always to 
be found in this country when they are wanted), have 
been seen flying over the Fathers' heads, even during 
[104] the Catechisms, and, in the course of the day, 
through the holes of the cabin which serve as win- 
dow and chimney,-to say nothing of many other 
indignities that occur every day, living among a bar- 
barous people, against whom we have, and can have, 
no defense. 
Some of the more prudent among the Captains and 
old men, seeing clearly that this is contrary to the 
rights of the alliance that they profess with the 


118 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

en font bien quelquefois des excufes, & tafchent d'y 
apporter quelque ordre: mais Ie tout fe fait fi froide- 
ment, & auec fi peu d' authorité, que cela fouuent 
augmête plus Ie mal, qu'il ne Ie guerit. 
Toutes ces imaginations de ces pauures Barbares, 
que nous fommes la ruine & la perte de leur pais, 
s'augmente autant de fois que quelque mal-heur leur 
arriue de nouueau, foit maladie, foit famine, laquelle 
regne maintenant en quelques endroits du pais, par- 
ticulierement au bourg de la Refidence de la Concep- 
tion, nous imputans tous ces mal-heurs, comme fi 
nous en efiions la caufe, ou qu'y pouuans apporter 
remede, nous ne Ie vouluffions pas. 
[105] Sur ce que nous leur predifons les Ecc1ypfes 
de la Lune & du Soleil, dont ils ont beaucoup de 
peur, ils fe font imaginez que nous en efiions les 
maifires; que nous fçauions toutes les chofes à adue- 
nir; & que c'efi nous qui en difpofons. Et en cefie 
cõfideration, ils s'adreffent à nous pour fçauoir fi 
leurs bleds reüffiront; où font leurs ennemis, & en 
quelle quantité ils viennent; ne fe pouuans perfuader 
qu'en toutes chofes nous n'en fçachions dauantage 
que leurs forders, qui font profeffion de defcouurir 
femblables fecrets. Et voicy ce qui les confirme 
encore dauantage dans leur imagination; car la cou- 
fiume du pais efiant qu'aux neceffitez publiques on a 
recours aux Sorciers les plus fameux; ceux cy ne 
manquans pas de promettre merueilles, pourueu qu' on 
leur faffe des pre fens ; nous ne pouuons pas, en telles 
occafions nous taire: particulierement depuis que nous 
auons des Chrefiiens qui fe trouuent engagés & enue- 
loppez dans telles affaires, nous parlons donc & difons 
ce qu'il faut: Mais auffi tofi à les entendre, nous voila. 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I6.J9 

119 

French, sometimes make excuses therefor, and try to 
bring about some order; but it is all done so coldly, 
and with so little authority, that it often augments 
more than it remedies the evil. 
All these fancies of these poor Barbarians, that we 
are the ruin and the destruction of their country, 
increase whenever some new misfortune happens to 
them,- be it sickness, or famine, which is now prev- 
alent in some parts of the country, especially in the 
village of the Residence of la Conception,- imputing 
to us all their afflictions, as if we were the cause 
thereof, or, being able to furnish some remedy for 
them, we would not do so. 
[105] Because we predict to them the Eclipses of 
the Moon and Sun, which they greatly fear, they 
imagine that we are the masters of these, that we 
know all future events, and that it is we who order 
them. And with this idea, they address themselves 
to us to know if their crops will succeed ; where their 
enemies are, and in what force they are coming,- 
being unable to persuade themselves that we are not 
wiser in all things than their sorcerers, who profess 
to discover such secrets. And what confirms them 
still more in their notion is that,-it being the 
custom of the country in public necessities to have 
recourse to the most famous Sorcerers, and these not 
hesitating to promise wonders, provided they are 
given presents,- we cannot, at such times, keep 
silent, especially since we have Christians who are 
found to be engaged and involved in such matters; 
we speak, therefore, and say what we ought. But 
forthwith, according to them, we are declared ar- 
raigned and convicted of that of which they accuse 
us,- of intending nothing else than the destruction 


120 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

declarez atteints & conuaincus de ce dont on nous 
accufe. De ne pretendre autre chofe que la perte & 
la [106] taine [sc. ruine] du monde, puifque nous ne 
les voulons pas deliurer de leurs miferes, ny leur per- 
mettre qu'ils fe pouruoient des remedes ordinaires 
praétiquez dans leurs pays, de tout temps contre 
leurs mal heurs, particulierement dans la creance 
qu'ils ont que c'eft nous qui en fommes la came. Et 
en fuite on ne menace de rien moins que de coups 
de hache, & de toute forte de maffacre. 
Ces diîcours fe tiennent plus fouuent que tous les 
iours, à r occafion des affliétions particulieres, parti- 
culierement de leurs maladies. Car comme ils n'ont 
point d'autres Medecins que Sorciers ou Magiciens, 
& que la plufpart de leurs remedes confiftent en des 
danfes, feftins, ceremonies, & circonftances du tout 
diaboliques; nous ne pouuons pas ne leur declarer 
que tout cela ne vaut rien, & qu'ils ioüent en fin à fe 
perdre, & tout leur pays. Cela les met au defefpoir; 
car d'vn cofté ils ne fe peuuent refoudre de quitter 
ces remedes, qu'en quittant l'efperance de viure, qui 
eft cependant leur fouuerain bien: de l'autre ils voy- 
ent des perfonnes qui les menacent de la colere & 
de la Iuftice de Dieu, s'ils continuent de s'en feruir. 
11 eft croyable [107] que ce defefpoir les portera vn 
iour à faire pis qu'ils n'ont encore fait par Ie paffé, 
mais nous feruons vn maiftre qui fçaura bien tirer fa 
gloire dequoy que ce foit qui puiffe arriuer: Et on 
eft bien refolu de faire voir que ceux qui Ie feruent 
ne craignet rien finon de luy defplaire. 
Les Demons, pour fouffier & efchauffer dauantage 
cette fournaife, femblent auoir acheminé quelques 
eftrangers en ces contrées des derniers confins de la 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELATION. r6.J9 

121 

and the [106] ruin of the world, since we win not 
deliver them from their troubles, nor permit them to 
provide themselves with the ordinary remedies em- 
ployed in their country from all time against their mis- 
fortunes, especially when, in their belief, it is we 
who are the cause of these. And consequently, there 
are threats of nothing less than blows with the 
hatchet, and every kind of murder. 
These speeches are made oftener than once a day, 
in times of special afflictions, particularly in their 
sicknesses. For - as there are no other Doctors than 
Sorcerers or Magicians, and as the greater part of 
their remedies consists of dances, feasts, ceremonies, 
and accompanying details altogether diabolical- we 
cannot refrain from telling them that all that avails 
nothing, and that they are, in the end, risking their 
own ruin and that of the whole country. This 
throws them into despair; for, on the one hand, they 
cannot resolve to abandon these remedies without 
giving up therein the hope of living, which is, how- 
ever, their sovereign good; on the other, they see 
persons who threaten them with the anger and the 
Justice of God, if they continue to use them. It is 
probable [107] that this despair will some day prompt 
them to act worse than they have yet done in the 
past. But we serve a master who knows how to 
derive his own glory from every possible occurrence, 
and we are fully resolved to show that those who 
serve him fear nothing but his displeasure. 
The Demons, to fan and heat this furnace more, 
seem to have despatched some strangers to these 
countries at the outer confines of the earth. These 
are barbarians of the countries near the Ocean, deal- 
ing with certain European Islanders who have settled 


122 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

terre. Ce font barbares des pays voifins de I Ocean, 
qui ont habitude auec certains Europeans Infulaires, 
qui fe font habituez aux cofies de la mer, tirant aux 
Midy; & qui font perfonnes qui ont toufiours paru 
efgalement mal affeétionnez à l'Eglife Romaine, & à 
ceux de nofire robe. Ces barbares efirangers, dif-ie, 
fe trou[u]ans en ces quartiers par ie ne fçay qu'elle 
rencontre, ont donné à entendre que ces Europeans, 
dont nous venons de parler, ayans fceu que nous 
efiions icy; leur auoient dit de nous, que nous efiions 
gens à perdre & ruiner Ie monde! qu'il y en auoit 
comme nous en leur pays en Europe, mais qu'ils y 
efioient cachez fans ofer fe monfirer, & [108] qu'au- 
tant qu'on en attrappoit on les faifoit mourir. 
Toutes ces rencontres ont tellement confirmé ces 
pauures gens en leur imagination, qu'aux premieres 
prifes que nous auons auec eux à I' occafion de leurs 
infolences, c'efi auffi tofi à tomber fur ces reproches, 
& à prier qu'on ne les faffe pas languir, mais qu'on 
les depefche promptement comme on fait les autres. 
It s'efi trouué des proches parens, cõme neueux, 
qui à la mort de leurs oncles ont fait tout leur poffible 
pour leur faire dire que c'efioit no 9 qui les faifiõs, 
mourir, afin d'auoir fondement de defcharger leur ref- 
fentiment fur nous, & fe confoler de la mort des per- 
fonnes qu'ils cheriffoient tendrement, par Ie maffacre 
de ceux qui en auroient efié declarez la caufe, par la 
bouche des defunéts. Mais Dieu n'a pas permis que 
ceux qui, peut-efire, pendant leur vie l' auoient dit 
plufieurs fois en general, Ie confirmaffent pour leur 
regard à la mort, mais plufiofi ont tefmoigné tout Ie 
con traire. 
Nonobfiant tout ce que deffus, c'efi vn plaifir de 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I639 

123 

on the seacoast towards the South, and are persons 
that have always seemed alike hostile to the Roman 
Church and to those of our robe. These outlying 
barbarians, I say, finding themselves in these quarters 
through I know not what chance, have stated that 
these Europeans of whom we have just spoken, hav- 
ing learned that we were here, told them that we 
were associated to destroy and ruin the world! - that 
there were some like us in their own country in 
Europe, but concealed there without daring to show 
themselves; and [108] that, as soon as any of them 
were caught, they were put to death. 
All these incidents have so confirmed these poor 
people in their ideas that, at the first disputes we 
have with them on account of their insolent acts, we 
immediately stumble upon these reproaches, and are 
entreated not to make them linger, but to despatch 
them promptly, as we have the others. There have 
been near relatives, such as nephews, who at the 
death of their uncles did all they could to make them 
say that it was we who made them die, in order to 
have an excuse to vent their resentment upon us, 
and to solace themselves for the death of persons 
whom they tenderly cherished, by the massacre of 
those who would have been declared, by the lips of 
the deceased, the cause thereof. But God did not 
permit that those who, perhaps, during their lifetime 
had often said so in a general way, should confirm it 
for their sake at death, but rather that they should 
testify quite the contrary. 
Notwithstanding all the above, it is interesting to 
reflect upon what takes place during the course of a 
week. For, bringing together the various opinions 
that we have encountered [109] in discoursing with 


124 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

faire reflexion fur ce qui fe paffe Ie long d'vne fep- 
maine: car ramaffant enfemble les diuers fentimens 
qu'on a reconneu, [109] traiétant auec les Sauuages 
qu'on a vifité: vous y voyez ce femble c1airement 
l'efprit de Dieu & du diable fe combattans dans leur 
efprit & dans leur cæur. On voit vn iour tout Ie 
monde qui fe tuë de dire qu'il croid, & qu'il veut 
eftre baptizé: vn autre iour tout fe trouue renuersé 
& defefperé. Ce contrafte eft vn figne manifefte de 
combat & de bataille: mais il faut aduoüer que nous 
ne voyons pas encore de quel cofté panche l'entiere 
viétoire. Et fi nous n'auions autre principe pour 
nous conduire dans nos ef perances, que ce qui paroifi 
aux yeux, nous aurions fujet de penfer que l'affaire 
eft encore fort efloignée, mais comme il n'y a rien 
d'impoffible à Dieu, & que fa benediétion depend 
fouuent de certains temps & moments, & de certains 
refforts qui nous font inconneus, il nous faut attendre 
auec patience & courage tout ce qu'il luy plaift en 
ordonner. 
L'excellence eft, que les plus fpirituels entre ces 
pauures Barbares ne pouuans comprendre Ie fuieé\: & 
Ie motif qui nous a fait quitter la France, & venir de 
fi loing auec tant de peine & de trauail, ne nous voy- 
ans pretendre aucun profit ny aduantage [110] de 
noftre demeure parmy eux, ny des biens que nous 
leurs faifons continuellement; ils conc1uent, qu'il 
faut donc que nous pretendions leur ruine; puifque 
nous ne pouuons pas ne pretendre quelque chofe de 
grand dans vne telle refolution. 
On a beau leur dire que c'eft pour leur annoncer 
les biens & les richeffes de l'autre vie, ils n'y con- 
çoiuent rien: n'apprehendans autres biens que ceux 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, r6.J9 

125 

the Savages whom we have visited, you see therein 
clearly, it would seem, the spirit of God and of the 
devil struggling in their minds and hearts. One day, 
you see them all killing themselves to say that they 
believe, and that they wish to be baptized; another 
day, everything is overthrown and hopeless. This 
contrast is a manifest sign of combat and battle; but 
it must be confessed that we do not yet see to which 
side the complete victory leans, and if we had no 
other principle to guide us in our hopes than what 
appears to our eyes, we would have reason to think 
that the end is still very far away; but, as there is 
nothing impossible to God, and as his blessing often 
depends upon certain times and moments, and cer- 
tain resources that are unknown to us, we must await 
with patience and courage all that it may please him 
to ordain. 
The climax of it is, that the most intelligent among 
these poor Barbarians, not being able to comprehend 
the object and motive that have caused us to leave 
France and come so far, with so much difficulty and 
labor, and not seeing us claim any profit or advan- 
tage [110] from our residence among them, nor from 
the kindnesses that we are continually rendering to 
them, conclude that we must, therefore, desire their 
ruin, since we can only aim at some object of great 
importance in such a resolution. 
I t is useless to tell them that this is to announce to 
them the blessings and riches of the other life; they 
have no conception of these, realizing no other good 
things than those they see with their eyes. And as 
we are 0 bliged to tell them that the blessings we 
preach to them are seen only after death, those 
speeches into which death enters confirm them more 


126 

LES RELATIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

qu'ils voyêt de leurs yeux. Et com me on eft con- 
traint de leur dire que les biens que nous leur pref- 
chõs ne fe voyent qu'apres la mort; ces difcours où 
la mort entre, les confirment plus que iamais dans 
leur imagination que nous les faifons mourir. De 
forte que les plus moderez, & mefmes quelques-vns 
de nos pauures Chreftiens, penfent tout fimplement 
qu'il en eft ainfi: mais que ce que no us en faifons, 
c'eft par amour & affection que noUs auons de leur 
faire voir Dieu au pluftoft, & de les rendre ioüyffans 
de ces biens dont nous faifons tant d'eftat. Mais là 
deffus ces pauures gens fe trouuent bien empefchez. 
Les vns difent qu'ils ne voyent pas comment ayans 
de fi mauuaifes iambes ils pourront faire vn fi [III] 
grand voyage, & arriuer iufques au Ciel. D' autres 
tefmoignent auoir defia peur, & craindre de cheoir de 
fi haut: ne pouuans pas aprehender cõment ils fe 
pourron t tenir la long-temps fans tom ber. V ous en 
trouuerez qui font en peine s'il y aura du petun, di- 
fant qu'ils ne s'en peuuent paffer. Bref ce font des 
foibleffes inimaginables, qu'à ceux qui les voyent. 
Or apres tout, ce font creatures raifonnables, capa- 
bles du Paradis & de l'Enfer, racheptez du fang de 
IE S V S - C H R 1ST, defquelles il eft efcrit: Et alz"as 
()ues habeo quæ non funt ex hoc ouili, & zïlas oportet me 
adducere. Et pour cét effeét il les enuoye chercher 
dans les buiffons, & par tout. 
Les orages dont nous venons de parler eftoient à 
la verité confiderables, & de cõfequence, puis qu'ils 
alloient à la ruïne ou à l'efloignement des vniques 
ouuriers de cette vigne. Ce ne font pas toutesfois 
ces rencontres qui nous ont donné plus de peine & de 
foucy: mais bien dauantage, les tempeftes & les ten- 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I639 

127 

than ever in their notion that we make them die - so 
that the most moderate, and even some of our poor 
Christians, quite artlessly think that it is so in their 
case, but that what we accomplish upon them is 
through love, and through our desire to reveal God 
to them the sooner, and to give them the enjoyment 
of those blessings that we value so highly. But 
these poor creatures find themselves greatly per- 
plexed thereat; some say that they do not see how, 
as they have so weak legs, they can make so [III] 
long a journey and reach Heaven. Others assert 
that they are already afraid, and dread lest they 
may fall from so great a height, not being able to 
understand how they can remain there long without 
falling. You will find some of them anxious to know 
if there will be tobacco there, saying that they can- 
not dispense with it. In short, there are weaknesses 
unimaginable except to those who see them. But, 
after all, these are rational creatures, capable of 
Paradise and of Hell, redeemed by the blood of 
J E S us C H R 1ST, and of whom it is written, Et alias 
oves habeo quæ non sunt ex hoc ovili, et z"llas oportet me 
adducere. And for this reason he sends to seek them 
in the hedges, and everywhere. 
The storms of which we have just spoken were, in 
truth, serious and of consequence, since they tended 
toward the ruin or banishment of the sole laborers in 
this vineyard. It was not those incidents, however, 
that gave us the most trouble and anxiety, but far 
more, the tempests and temptations that our N eo- 
phytes have encountered since their baptism and the 
birth of these new Churches, of which we have spoken 
in the preceding Chapters,- considering the tender- 
ness of these young plants [112] and the little founda- 


128 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

tations furnenuës à nos Neophytes depuis leur bap- 
tefme, & la naiffance de ces nouuelles Eglifes, dont 
nous auons par1é dans les Chapitres pre cedens. Veu 
la tendreffe de ces ieunes plantes, [I 12 J & Ie peu de 
fond qui fe trouue dans Ie naturel & Ie genie des 
Barbares, pour aider la femence de l'Euangile à y 
ietter de grandes & profondes racines. 
Si vn pauure Barbare fe fait Chrefiien, auffi-tofi it 
efi accueilly de tous ceux de fa cognoiffance, qui Ie 
lamentent & Ie déplorent comme s'il efioit defia per- 
du, & que ce fufi fait de luy. Les vns l'affeurent, fi 
c'efi l'hyuer, qu'au Printemps (s'il efi encore en vie) 
to us les cheueux luy tomberont. Les autres, qu'il 
ne faut plus qu'il faffe efiat d'aller à la chaffe, en 
traite, ou à la guerre, deuant efire affeuré, que par 
tout dorénauant i1 fera mal-heureux. On donne 
l'apprehenfion aux femmes qu'elles ne porteront plus 
d'enfans, bref on les menace tous, ou plufiofi on les 
affeure que ce qu'ils craignent Ie plus au monde, ne 
manquera pas de leur arriuer. 
On leur reprefente en outre, que les voila dorefna- 
uant frufirez de fefiins, & par confequent de l'vnique 
douceur ou beatitude du pays. Qu'il faut neceffaire- 
ment en fuite qu'ils renoncent à tous les droiéts & 
entretiens de l'amitié enuers leurs proches & compa- 
triotes. Et fi ce font Capitaines qui ayent charge de 
faire les [1I3J criées, & les ceremonies, qu'ils faffent 
efiat de fe voir defpoüillez de leur credit & authorité. 
Et voila la plus forte batterie, & qui en effet en 
empefche Ie plus. & en a Ie plus esbranlé du nombre 
de ces pauures Neophytes. Car en effet, la plufpart 
de leurs danfes, fefiins, Medecins & medecines, cere- 
monies & coufiumes efiant ou manifefiement diabo- 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, r639 

129 

tion there is in the nature and spirit of the Barba- 
rians to help the seed of the Gospel throw out therein 
strong and deep roots. 
If a poor Barbarian become a Christian, he is im- 
mediately assailed by all those of his acquaintance, 
who lament and deplore him as if he were already 
lost, and it were all over with him. Some assure 
him, if it be winter time, that in the Spring (if he is 
still living) all his hair will fall off; others, that he 
need no longer count upon going hunting, trading, 
or to war, except with the certainty that thenceforth 
he will be unlucky in everything; they inspire in 
the women the fear that they will bear no more chil- 
dren. In short, they are all threatened, or rather 
assured, that what they fear the most in the world 
will surely happen to them. 
It is represented, besides, that thenceforth they 
will be defrauded of feasts, and consequently of the 
sole delight or bliss of the country; that, as a neces- 
sary result, they must renounce all the rights and 
intercourse of friendship with their kinsmen and 
compatriots. And if they be Captains who have 
charge of making the [113] announcements and man- 
aging ceremonials, they are told that they may count 
upon seeing themselves despoiled of their influence 
and authority. 
And in this behold the strongest battery, and that 
which, in reality, has most hindered and most dis- 
quieted the majority of these poor Neophytes. For, 
indeed, the greater part of their dances, feasts, Physi- 
cians, and medicines, ceremonies, and customs, being 
either manifestly diabolical, or filled with so many 
senseless ceremonies that it is almost impossible to 
judge or interpret them as being free from supersti- 


130 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

liques, au remplies de tant de ceremonies imperti- 
nentes, qu'il eft prefque impoffible de les iuger au 
interpreter exemptes de fuperftition, ou pad & com- 
munication tacite auec Ie diable; on eft contraint de 
tenir tout pour fufpeét, & d'en donner Ie fcrupule à 
nos Catechumenes & Neophytes. Arriuant done, ce 
qui arriue tous les iours, que quelqu'vn de la famille, 
par exemple, tombe malade: voila auffi-toft Ie pauure 
Catechumene au Neophyte pourfuiuy de toute la 
parenté, à ce qu'il ait à faire venir Ie Medecin, c' eft à 
dire Ie vifiteur ou Sorcier, & faire mettre en execu- 
tion les remedes ordinaires du païs, qui font les ordon- 
nances du Sorcier, lequel on n'agift que dependem- 
ment de la cognoiffance que luy donne Ie diable, de 
Ia nature de la maladie, & des remedes [114] qu'il y 
faut apporter; on ordonne des chofes qui ne font qu'a- 
bomination au diableries. Que fera en ces rencon- 
tres vn pauure Neophyte? S'il Ie fait, il renonce 
publiquement à fa profeffion; s'il ne Ie fait, Ie voila 
dans Ia haine & l'abandonnement des fiens, qui luy 
reprochent, qu'à fon tour on l'affiftera comme i1 a 
affifté Ies autres; & que pour lors il ait recours à de 
mal-heureux eftrangers, qui ne font venus à leurs 
païs que pour les perdre & les ruiner. 
Ala verité toutes ces rencontres ne feruiroient que 
de matiere & de fuiet de vidoire & de triomphe à ces 
nouueaux Champions, s'ils auoient affez de refolution 
& de courage: mais Ie mal de tous les maux eft au 
dedans de ces pauures creatures. Leur efprit, pour 
Ia plufpart, eft foible au dernier poind, pour conce- 
uoir & apprehender les chofes qu'ils ne voyent pas, 
& pour fe fouftenir dans ces attaques par l'efprit de 
Ia Foy, en l'efperance du futuro Et leur cæur femble 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, r639 

131 

tion or tacit pact and communication with the devil, 
we are obliged to hold all these under suspicion, and 
to raise scruples against them in our Catechumens 
and Neophytes. When there happens, then, what 
happens every day, that one of the family, for ex- 
ample, falls ill,- behold the poor Catechumen or 
Neophyte immediately beset by all his relatives to 
go to summon the Physician, that is, the visitor or 
Sorcerer, and to put into execution the usual reme- 
dies of the country, which are the decrees of the 
Sorcerer, who acts only as dependent upon the knowl- 
edge that the devil gives him of the nature of the 
disease, and of the remedies [114] that must be em- 
ployed therein; he orders things that are nothing 
but abominations or deviltries. What shall a poor 
Neophyte do in such emergencies? If he take part 
in them, he publicly renounces his profession; if he 
do not, he incurs the hatred and desertion of his 
people, who fling the taunt at him that he, in his 
turn, will be assisted as he has assisted the others, 
and that then he may have recourse to some wretched 
foreigners, who have come to their country only to 
destroy and ruin them. 
In truth, all these occurrences would serve only as 
material and occasion for victory and triumph to 
these new Champions, if they had enough resolution 
and courage. But the evil of all evils is within these 
poor creatures,- their minds, for the most part, are 
weak in the extreme in conceiving and apprehending 
things that they do not see, and in sustaining them- 
selves in these attacks, by the spirit of Faith, in the 
hope of the future. And their hearts seem incapable 
of resisting the assaults of the affection of corrupted 
nature for kindred, and for the comforts and con- 


132 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

incapable de pouuoir refifter aux affauts de I' affeétion 
de la nature corrompuë enuers les proches; & pour 
les douceurs & commoditez de cette vie, dans laquelle 
depuis vn fi [115] long temps ils ont mis leur íou[u]e- 
rain bi en. 
L'attache qu'ils ont là dedans, fait que ce qui leur 
paroiffoit au commencement facile, lors qu'ils ne Ie 
mefuroient que par la raifon, leur deuient dans l' ex- 
ecution fi difficile: que vous les voyez à tous coups 
donner du nez en terre, & perdre courage, fe plai- 
gnans que Ie Chriftianifme ne leur fert de rien, & ne 
leur apporte aucun profit en cette vie. 
Ces reffentimens fe renouuellent autant de fois que 
quelqu'vn dés leur deuient malade, ou íe meurt, ou 
que quelque autre mal heur leur arriue. V oUS diriez, 
à les entêdre parler, qu'ils n'ont pretendu, íe faifans 
Chreftiens, que de viure long-temps, eux ou au moins 
leurs enfans. Et ie ne fçay fi ce qui fe trouue dans 
la façon de propofer les Cõmandements de Dieu, où 
il eft promis vne longue vie à ceux qui honorent pere 
& mere, ne les abufe & trompe point pour l'ordi- 
naire. 
Ie ne m'eftonne plus d'où vient que les Epiftres 
des Apoftres font fi fort rem plies du modicum nunc ji 
oportet contrzjlari in variÙ tribulaÛonz"bus. IIs efcri- 
uoient à des Cathecumenes & Neophytes qui ne fçau- 
roient [116] eftre affez eftançonnez de ce cofté là. 
Et nous nous trouuons fort fouuent dans la mefme 
peine, que ce grand Apoftre des Gentils, qui difoit, 
Filz"olz" quos zterum parturzo, donec formetur Chriflus in 
vobis. 
II femble que Ie paffage du chapitre 14. de l'Euan- 
gile de fainét Luc, ne fe peut mieux entendre que de 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I639 

133 

veniences of this life, in which so [115] long they 
have placed their supreme good. 
Their inward attachment for these things makes 
that which at first seemed to them easy. when they 
only measured it by reason, to become so difficult in 
the execution, that you see them becoming confused 
at every turn, and losing courage, complaining that 
Christianity is of no service to them and brings them 
no profit in this life. 
These feelings are revived whenever any of them 
become sick, or die, or when some other misfortune 
happens to them. You would say, to hear them 
talk, that their sole aim in becoming Christians was 
to live long,-they, or at least their children. And 
I do not know if the manner of stating the Com- 
mandments of God, where a long life is promised to 
those who honor father and mother, does not, ordi- 
narily, impose upon and deceive them. 
I no longer wonder why the Epistles of the Apostles 
are so full of 11Zodz"cum nunc si oportet cOlltristari in 
varÙ"s tribulationibus. They wrote to Catechumens 
and Neophytes who could not [II6] be sufficiently 
fortified on that side; and we very often find ourselves 
in the same trouble as that great Apostle of the Gen- 
tiles, who said. Filioli quos iterum parturio, dOllec forme- 
tur Christus in vobis. 
It seems that that passage in the 14th chapter of 
the Gospel of saint Luke cannot be better understood 
than in reference to our poor barbarians, in the men- 
tion there made of those who, at the very last, were 
invited to the supper of the adorable 11an-God to fill 
the places which remained empty at the banquet 
table, and, in fine, to supply the absence of all those 
who had been earlier invited. These were people 


134 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

nos pauures barbares, lors qu'il y efi par1é de ceux 
qui tous les derniers furent inuitez au fouper de l'ado- 
rable Homme-Dieu, pour parfournir les places qui 
refioient vuides dans la table du banquet, & fuppleer 
en fin au defaut de tous ceux qui auparauant auoiët 
efié inuitez. C'efioient des perfonnes qu'on aUa 
chercher dans les fentiers, parmy les ronces & les 
broffaiUes, & qu'on auoit commiffion d'amener, & 
faire entrer par force. Nous n'auons icy & n'y pou- 
uons auoir, ny la force de la contrainte, ny les 
chaines des bien-faits, au point qu'il faudroit, pour 
rendre ces peuples entierement nofires. Tout nofire 
force efi au bout de la langue; en la monfire & pro- 
duétion de nos liures & Efcritures, dõt ils ne ceffent 
tous les iours d'admirer les effets. Ce qui nous fert 
vniquement enuers [117] ces peuples, au lieu de tout 
autre motif de credibilité. Leur faifans voir par là, 
que ceux qui nous ont precedé, & qui ont efié depuis 
Ie commencement du monde, ont peu nous donner 
cognoiffance & affeurance de ce que nous leur pref- 
chons; là où eux ne peuuent auoir aucune marque, 
que ce que leurs peres leur ont enfeigné n'a point 
efié controuué par eux, ou par d'autres qui leur en 
ont voulu faire accroire. 
11 efi croyable que quelque grand don de miracle, 
feroit bien capable d'efbranler les vns, & confirmer 
les autres. Mais outre que tous ceux qui ont veu les 
miracles du Sauueur du monde, & ceux des Apofires, 
n' ont pas pour cela creu, au moins auec fermeté & 
confiance, i1 femble que Dieu nous ait mefme voulu 
faire voir par experience, que ce n'efioit pas cela à 
quoy il tenoit. Et qu'il faUoit quelque autre chofe 
que des miracles pour conuertir des Sauuages, auffi 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I639 

135 

whom they sought for in the lanes, among the bram- 
bles and hedges, and whom they were commissioned 
to bring, and compel to enter. We have not here, 
nor can we have, either the power of constraint or the 
chains of benefits, to the extent that would be neces- 
sary to render these people entirely ours. All our 
power lies at the end of our tongues, in the exhibi- 
tion and production of our books and Writings, the 
effects of which they never cease to wonder at. This 
is the only thing that avails us with [117] these peo- 
ples, in lieu of all other ground for credibility,- 
causing them to see through this means that those 
who have preceded us, and who have existed from 
the beginning of the world, have been able to impart 
to us a knowledge and assurance of what we are 
preaching to them, while they can have no proof that 
what their fathers have taught them was not invented 
by them, or by others who wished to make them 
believe it. 
It is probable that some great gift of miracle would 
be quite capable of shaking some and confirming 
others. But,- besides that not all those who saw 
the miracles of the Savior of the world, and those of 
the Apostles, as a result thereof believed, at least 
with firmness and constancy,-it would seem that 
God may have even intended to make us see, through 
experience, that it was not that which he was con- 
sidering, and that something else beside miracles 
was needed to convert Savages, as well as to convert 
all other classes of people. 
In the extreme heat of last Summer, when the 
fields around the village of the Residence of la Con- 
ception were all parched with heat and drouth for 
want of rain, the inhabitants, being in despair, ad- 


136 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

bien que pour eonuertir toute autre forte de perfonnes. 
Au plus fort de l'Efié dernier, les champs d'alen- 
tour Ie bourg de la Refidence de la Conception efians 
tous grillez de ehalleur & de feichereffe à faute de 
pluye, les habitans efians au defefpoir, s'adrefferent 
à nos [118] Peres, qui firent væu de dire quelques 
Meffes. Le lendemain on n'eut pas plufiofi com- 
mencé la premiere, qu'it commença à pleuuoir vne 
pluye la plus fauorable qu'on eufi peu fouhaitter, 
qui dura trois iours. Ce ne furent fur Ie champ 
qu'admiTations & remerciemens; mais en fuite, de 
renoncer à leurs fuperfiitions, c'efi à quoy its ne fe 
peuuent refoudre. 
Au bourg de la Refidence de fainét Iofeph, vn des 
principaux & plus anciens Capitaines, nommé Ondi- 
horrea, efiant par maladie reduit à l' extremité, & 
ayant au commencement refusé nos vifites & nofire 
affifiance, apres auoir experimenté en vain tous les 
remedes ordinaires du païs pour Ie recouurement de 
fa fanté: Efiant abandonné & comme aux abois de 
la mort, fe fentit porté par quelque efpece de vifion 
qu'il eufi de nous efcouter en fin, & receuoir Ie bien 
& les bons offices que nous luy defirions rendre en 
telle occafion, comme à eeluy qui auoit Ie plus contri- 
bué à nofire efiabliffement dans ce bourg. Le voila 
done infiruiét & baptisé; & auffi tofi Ie voila fur pied, 
auec l'efionnement de tous ceux qui l'auoient vn 
peu [119] auparauant tenu pour defefperé, aufquels 
comme à toute autre forte de perfonnes qui Ie 
venoient voir de tout Ie païs, il ne fe laffoit iamais 
de leur racõter ce qui s'efioit paffé; & qu'il tenoit 
entierement fa vie du baptefme qu'il auoit receu. 
Qui n'eufi penfé que eette rencontre en vne per- 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I639 

137 

dressed themselves to our [118] Fathers, who made a 
vow to say several Masses. The next day, they had 
no sooner begun the first one, than there began to 
pour down a rain, the most favorable that one could 
have desired, which lasted three days. There was, 
at the time, only admiration and thanks; but after- 
ward, to renounce their superstitions was something 
they could not resolve to do. 
In the village of the Residence of saint Joseph, 
one of the principal and oldest Captains, named Ondi- 
horrea, being brought very low by sickness, at first 
refused our visits and our help. After having tried 
in vain all the usual remedies of the country for the 
recovery of his health,- being abandoned and, as it 
were, confronted by death,-he was prompted, by 
some sort of vision that he had, at last to listen to 
us, and to receive the kindness and the good offices 
that we would desire to render him in such an emer- 
gency, as to the one who had contributed most to 
our establishing ourselves in that village. Accord- 
ingly, he was instructed and baptized; and behold 
him immediately upon his feet, to the astonishment 
of all those who had a little while [119] before 
despaired of his life,-to whom, as to all other per- 
sons who came to see him from an parts of the coun- 
try, he never wearied recounting what had occurred, 
and that he owed his life entirely to the baptism he 
had received. 
Who would not have thought that this event, hap- 
pening to so important a personage, would affect, as 
it ought, the whole country? But, so far from any 
one profiting thereby, the very man to whom it had 
happened, who testified so much gratitude for it, 
after having been present once at Mass, did not 


138 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

fonne fi confiderable, n'euft deu esbranler tout Ie 
pais? mais tant s'en faut qu'elle ait profité à perfonne: 
que celuy mefme à qui elle eft arriuée, qui en tefmoi- 
gnoit tant de recognoiffance, apres auoir affifté vne 
fois à la Meffe, n'y eft pas retourné pour la feconde; 
voyant qu'en fuite de la profeffion qu'il feroit du 
Chriftianifme, il luy falloit quitter certaines confrai- 
ries diaboliques, dont il eftoit Ie chef; & les fonétions 
& exercices du miniftere de Satan, en qualité d'an- 
cien & principal Capitaine, à qui il appartient de 
regler & maintenir les couftumes du pays. 
Ie pourrois produire quelques autres exemples fem- 
blables des merueilles qu'il a pleu à Dieu de faire 
en de pareille[s] rencontres, lefquelles fi elles ne font 
miracles, n' en font guieres loin. Mais ce n' eft pas 
icy ce que nous pretendons. Cecy feulement foit dit, 
pour faire voir qu'il femble [120] que ce n'eft pas à 
vn defaut des merueilles, que Ie retardemet de la 
conuerfion generale de ces peuples doit eftre attri- 
bué: & qu'il y a quelque autre chofe d'où depend ce 
bon heur, qu'il faut attendre auec patience de la 
main de Dieu. 
Au refte, il femble que Dieu nous ait encore voulu 
faire voir, que ce n'eft pas feulement pour Ie temps 
paffé qu'il a choifi les pauures, & non les riches. les 
perfonnes de peu de confideration aux yeux du 
monde, & non pas celles qui font dans l'efclat, & en 
dignité; pour eftre les pierres fondamentales de fon 
Eglife, mais encore au temps prefent. Toutes les 
perfonnes les plus confiderables des bourgs où nous 
auons trauaillé à faire des Chreftiens; ou on fait la 
fourde oreille; ou, apres auoir em braffé Ie Chrifti- 
anifme, l'ont d'eux mefmes abandonné; ou fe font 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELATION, I639 

139 

return a second time,-seeing that, as a result of his 
profession of Christianity, he would have to leave 
certain diabolical fraternities, of which he was the 
chief, and also the functions and duties of the ministry 
of Satan, in his character of old and principal 
Captain, to whom it belongs to regulate and maintain 
the customs of the country. 
I could produce some other like examples of the 
wonders it has pleased God to perfonn in like cases,- 
which, if they are not miracles, are not far from 
them. But this is not our object. Let that alone 
be said, in order to show that apparently [120] it is 
not to a lack of miracles that we should attribute the 
delay in the general conversion of these tribes; and 
that there is some other thing upon which this bless- 
ing depends, which must be awaited with patience 
from the hand of God. 
Moreover, it seems that God has also wished to 
make us see that it is not only in times past that he 
has chosen the poor and not the rich, persons of little 
importance in the eyes of the world, and not those who 
are eminent and of high rank, to be the foundation 
stones of his Church, but in the present time also. 
All the more prominent persons of the villages where 
we have labored to make Christians either have turned 
a deaf ear, or, after having embraced Christianity, 
have of themselves abandoned it, or have behaved in 
such a manner - resuming their wicked customs, and 
showing a desire to continue in them -that we have 
been obliged to advise them not to be present any 
more at the meetings of the Christians. Weare 
determined sooner to see the whole undertaking 
reduced to naught than to suffer such an intermix- 
ture, and spots and wrinkles so enormous upon these 


140 

LES RELA TI01\
S DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

comportez de la forte, reprenans leurs mauuaifes cou- 
fiumes, auec volonté d'y perfeuerer, que nous auons 
efié contraints de leur donner aduis de ne fe plus 
trouuer à l'affemblée des Chrefiiens, refolus de voir 
plufiofi Ie tout reduit au neant, que de fouffrir vn tel 
meßange, & des tafches & des rides fi enormes dans 
ces nouuelles [12 I] Efpoufes, que nous pretendons 
offrir à celuy qui a refpandu fon fang diuin, pour 
leur donner l'efire & la vie: & qui nous a icy enuoyé 
pour en recueillir les fruids. Cette douce rigueur 
que nous auons exercée enuers ces pauures efclaues 
de Satan, n'a pas feruy de peu à releuer l'efiime de 
nos myfieres & du Chrifiianifme, dans l'efprit de 
tous ceux qui en ont eu la cognoiffance, & a com- 
mencé à les defabufer de la creance que plufieurs 
ont, que lors que nous defirons & les preffons de fe 
faire Chrefiiens, & d'en faire profeffion, c'efi nofire 
interefi & nofire affaire, non la leur; & qu'il n'y a 
rien pour eux à y profi ter . 
Apres tout, ie ne fçay fi nous auons plus de fuiet 
de plaindre & déplorer ces defaftres, que de nous en 
refiouïr, & remercier Dieu des lumieres & du cou- 
rage qu'il donne à quelques-vns de ce petit troupeau: 
n'y ayant pas vne de ces trois Eglifes, dans laquelle 
il ne fe trouue des Chrefiiës, en la procedure defquels 
i1 ne femble pas qu'il yait rien à fouhaiter de plus 
net & de plus accomply, auec des tendreffes de con- 
fcience & vn recours cordial à la confeffion, qui ne 
furent iamais du creu d'vn [122] Sauuage. Ce que 
nous auons dit aux Chapitres precedens, fuffira pour 
Ie prefent. C'efi vn leuain que Ie S. Efprit va for- 
mant & conferuant, qui en fon temps feruira & fera 
de bons effeds comme nous efperons, & nous nous 
promettons de la bonté mifericorde de Dieu. 


1639-40] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELATION, I639 

141 

new [12 I] Brides, whom we purpose to offer to him 
who has shed his divine blood to give them being 
and life, and who has sent us here to gather the 
fruits thereof. This gentle severity which we have 
exercised towards these poor slaves of Satan has 
served not a little to raise the value of our mysteries 
and of Christianity in the minds of all those who had 
any knowledge of them; and it has begun to disabuse 
them of the belief that many have, that, when we 
desire and urge them to become Christians, and to 
make such profession, it is our interest and our busi- 
ness, not theirs, and that there is no profit therein 
for them. 
After all, I do not know whether we have more 
reason to complain of and deplore these disasters 
than to rejoice over them, and to thank God for the. 
light and courage he has given to some of this little 
band,-for there is not one of these three Churches 
in which are not found Christians, in whose practice, 
it would seem, nothing purer or more complete could 
be desired, combined with a tenderness of conscience, 
and a cordial recourse to confession, which were 
never natural to a [122] Savage. What we have said 
in the preceding Chapters will suffice for this one. 
It is a leaven that the Holy Ghost continues to form 
and preserve, which will, in its time, be of service 
and have good results, as we hope and promise our- 
selves from the merciful goodness of God. 
I have said nothing here, to avoid tediousness, of 
the difficulty these Barbarians have in abstaining 
from work on Sundays,- these tribes living only 
from hand to mouth, and finding it hard to do other- 
wise. N either have I spoken of the trouble they 
have in observing Lent,- which always comes in the 


142 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

Ie n'ay rien dit icy, pour éuiter la longueur, de la 
difficu1té que ces Barbares ont de chommer les Di- 
manches: ces peuples ne viuans qu'au iour la iour- 
née, & y ayant de la peine à Ie faire autrement. Ie 
n' ay point auffi parlé de la peine qu'il y a de garder 
Ie Carefme, qui fe trouue toufiours en la faifon, dans 
laquelle eft Ie retour de leur chaffe; & par confequent 
l'vnique temps de l'année auquel ils ont quelque peu 
de chair; non plus que de tout plein d autres diffi- 
cultez qui fe rencontrent en l'eftabliffement de ces 
nouuelles Eglifes; dont l'vne des plus confiderables 
eft l'inftabilité de leurs mariages; ce font difficultez 
qui fe conceuront ayfement, & mieux peut-eftre que 
ie ne les pourrois expliquer: Venons à la principale 
de toutes leurs difficultez, où pour mieux dire à la 
fource de tous leurs mal-heurs. 


1639 -40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I639 

143 

season when they return from the chase, and conse- 
quently is the only time of the year when they have 
a little meat,-any more than of many other difficul- 
ties which are encountered in the establishment of 
these new Churches, one of the most important of 
which is the instability of their marriages. These 
are difficulties which will be easily imagined, and 
perhaps better than I could explain them. Let us 
come to the chief of all their difficulties,- or, to 
express it better, to the source of all their misfortunes. 


144 

LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

[123] CHAP. DERNIER. 

DU REGNE DE SATAN EN CES CONTRÉES. ET DES 
DIUERSES SUPERSTITIONS QUI S'Y TROUUENT IN- 
TRODUITES & ESTABLIES, COMME PREMIERS 
PRINCIPES & LOIX FONDAMENT ALES 
DE L'ESTAT & CONSERUA- 
TION DE CES PEUPLES. 

I E n'entreprends pas de traiter cefte affaire à fonds. 
Quiconque l' entreprendroit, fe trouueroit à mon 
iugement plus empefché que ne fuft iamais Her- 
cule à efcurer les eftables d' Augée. 
Ce que ie pretends, n'eft autre chofe que de par- 
courir quelques adions particulieres qui fe font 
paffées cet hyuer au feul bourg de la Refidence de la 
Conception, où i' ay fait ma principale demeure, dans 
lefquelles nous no us fommes trouuez obligez d'exa- 
miner les tenants & aboutiffants de ces miferes, en 
confideration de nos Chreftiens, à la confcience def- 
quels nous eftions obligez de pouruoir. 
Iettans les yeux fur les couftumes & façons [124] 
de faire de ces peuples, elles nous auoient toufiours 
bien paru, comme de vieilles mares puantes, toute- 
fois nous n'en auions quafi veu par Ie paffé, que Ie 
deffus. Mais depuis qu'à 1'occafion de nos Chre- 
ftiens, il nous a fallu foüiller dedans, & remuer ce 
c1oaque, il n'eft pas croyable combien on y a trouué 
de puanteur & de mifere. 
V n vieillard de ce bourg nommé Taorhenché, 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I6.19 

145 

[123] CHAP. THE LAST. 

OF THE REIGN OF SATAN IN THESE COUNTRIES; AND 
OF THE VARIOUS SUPERSTITIONS INTRODUCED AND 
ESTABLISHED THEREIN, AS THE FIRST PRIN- 
CIPLES AND FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF 
THE CONDITION AND PRESERV A- 
TION OF THESE PEOPLES. 

I DO not undertake to treat this subject exhaust- 
ively,-whoever should undertake this would. 
in my opinion, find himself before a greater task 
than ever had Hercules in cleansing the Augean 
stables. 
What I do intend to do is merely to survey briefly 
some special incidents that have occurred this win- 
ter,-only in this village of the Residence of la Con- 
ception, where I have made my principal abode,-in 
which we have found ourselves obliged to examine 
the circumstances and details of these calamities, in 
behalf of our Christians, for whose consciences we 
are obliged to provide. 
Casting our eyes over the customs and practices 
[124] of these peoples, they had always appeared 
to us like stagnant, ill-smelling pools; yet we had 
hardly seen, in the past, more than the surface. But 
since we have been obliged, on account of our Chris- 
tians, to search within, and remove this sewer, it 
cannot be believed what a stench and what wretched- 
ness we have found there. 
An old man of this village, named Taorhenché, 


146 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

(VOL. 17 

auoit depuis enuiron deux ans vn chancre au bras, 
qui du poignet où il commença, luyefioit toufiours 
monté vers l' efpaule, & commençoit à entrer dans Ie 
corps. L'on dit que par Ie paffé it n'auoit oublié au- 
cune ceremonie, ou pour mieux dire, aucune fuper- 
fiition de celles qui fe pratiquent dans Ie païs, pour Ie 
recouurement de fa fanté. Cét hyuer dernier, vn 
peu deuant que de mourir, il donna à entendre aux 
Capitaines qu'il defiroit quelque chofe pour fa confo- 
lation, & pour faire vn dernier effort de fa guerifon. 
On affemble Ie Confeil, on depute des perfonnes, 
pour aller apprendre fes defirs, qui aboutiffoiêt à cinq 
ou fix chefs: A quelque nombre de chiens d'vne cer- 
taine façon & couleur pour faire fefiin trois iours 
[125] durant: à quantité de farine pour Ie mefme 
fuiet: à quelques danfes & chofes femblables: mais 
principalement à la ceremonie de l'andac
ander, qui 
efi vn accouplement d'hommes auec filles qu'il fe 
fait à l'iffuë du fefiin, il fpecifia qu'il falloit 12 filles, 
& vne treiziefme pour luy. 
La refponfe portée au confeil, on luy fo[u]mit auffi 
tofi ce qui fe pouuoit donner fur Ie champ; & ce de 
la liberalité & contribution volontaire des particu- 
liers, qui fe trouuerent là, où en entendirent parler. 
Ces peuples faifants gloire en telles rencontres, de fe 
defpoüiller de ce qu'ils ont de plus precieux. En 
{uite, les Capitaines furent par les ruës & carrefours, 
& par les cabanes crier à pleine tefie, declarants les 
defirs du malade, & exhortants qu'on eufi à y fatis- 
faire promptement. 
Ils ne fe contentent pas d 'y aller vne fois, ils y re- 
toument trois & quatre, auec des termes & des accents 
tels, qu'en effeét on eufi iugé qu'il y alloit du bien 


1639 -40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1639 

147 

had, for two years past, an ulcer on his arm, which 
continued to increase from the wrist, where it com- 
menced, towards the shoulder, and began to enter 
the body. It was said that in the past he had not 
forgotten any ceremony -or, to express it better, 
any superstition - of all those which are practiced 
in the country, for the recovery of his health. This 
last winter, a little before his death, he gave the 
Captains to understand that he desired something as 
a consolation, and that one last effort should be made 
for his recovery. The Council is assembled, and 
some persons are deputed to go and learn his desires; 
these turn upon five or six points,-a number of 
dogs of a certain shape and color, with which to 
make a three days' feast; [125] a quantity of flour for 
the same purpose; some dances, and like perform- 
ances; but principally upon the ceremony of the 
" andacwander," a mating of men with girls, which 
is made at the end of the feast. He specified that 
there should be 12 girls, and a thirteenth for himself. 
The answer being brought to the council, he was 
furnished immediately with what could be given at 
once, and this from the liberality and voluntary con- 
tributions of individuals who were present there and 
heard the matter mentioned,-these peoples glory- 
ing, on such occasions, in despoiling themselves of 
the most precious things they have. Afterward, the 
Captains went through the streets and public places, 
and through the cabins, announcing in a loud voice 
the desires of the sick man, and exhorting people to 
satisfy them prom ptl y. 
They are not content to go on this errand once,- 
they repeat it three or four times, using such terms 
and accents that, indeed, one would think that the 


148 

LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

de tout Ie pais. Ils ont cependant foin de marquer 
le nom des filles & des hommes qui fe prefentent 
pour l'execution du principal defir du malade, & dans 
l' affemblée du feftin, on les nomme tout hant, apres 
[126] quoy s'enfuiuent les congratulations de toute 
l'affiftance, & les meilleurs morceaux qui font portez 
à ces deputez & deputées, qui doiuent ioüer de fi 
mal-heureux perfonnages à l'iffuë du feftin, apres 
quoy s' enfuiuent les remerciements de la part du 
malade, & de la fanté qu' on luy a redonnée, fe pro- 
feffant tout à fait guery par vn tel remede. 
Ce miferable jeu continua deux iours, Ie troifiefme 
il ne fe fift pas, quoy qu'il fe deuft faire felon Ie pre- 
mier deffein & intention du malade. On nous a vou- 
lu faire croire que ce fuft nous qui en fufmes la 
caufe, pour auoir tefmoigné Ie defplaifir & la peine 
que nous en auions. Quoy qu'il en foit, toute la 
ceremonie fe paffa, fans que la mala de pour cela s'en 
porta mieux, & bien toft apres il mourut. Dans fon 
dernier feftin auant la mort, i1 dit qu'il mouroit vo- 
lontiers, & qu'il n'auoit qu'vn feul regret de fe voir 
priué des bons morceaux dont toute fa vie on l'auoit 
honoré dans les feftins. Cefte ame eftoit trop de 
chair, pour goufter les chofes de l'efprit. 
Deuant que Ie fort de la maladie euft attaché ce 
pauure mal-heureux fur fa natte, il venoit quelque- 
fois en noftre cabane, [127] & en fuite dans noftre 
Chappelle; ou apres auoir confideré toutes les images; 
ie ne fçay, difoit-il, qui eft celuy-Ià, monftrant l'i- 
mage de noftre Seigneur, mais il n'y a que luy qui 
me faffe peur. 
Il auoit bien raifon de Ie dire, particulierement 
apres auoir tant de fois mefprifé fes fainétes femonces. 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, r639 

149 

welfare of the whole country was at stake. Mean- 
while, they take care to note the names of the girls 
and men who present themselves to carry out the 
principal desire of the sick man; and in the assem- 
blyof the feast these are named aloud, after [126] 
which follow the congratulations of all those pres- 
ent, and the best pieces, which are carried to the 
men and women deputed to appear in so wretched 
characters at the end of the feast; then ensue the 
thanks of the sick man for the health that has been 
restored to him, professing himself entirely cured by 
this remedy. 
This wretched play continued for two days; on the 
third, it was not enacted, although it should have 
been, according to the first plan and intention of the 
patient. They tried to make us believe that it was 
we who were the cause of this, for having shown the 
displeasure and pain that we felt. Be that as it may, 
the whole ceremony took place without the sick man 
feeling any better in consequence, and soon after- 
ward he died. In his last feast before death, he said 
that he died willingly, and that he had only one 
regret,- that of seeing himself deprived of the deli- 
cious morsels with which he had all his life been 
honored in the feasts. This soul belonged too much 
to the flesh to enjoy the things of the spirit. 
Before the severity of the disease had confined 
this poor creature to his mat, he sometimes came to 
our cabin, [127] and afterward to our Chapel,-where, 
after having surveyed all the images, he said, " I do 
not know who that one is "-pointing to the image 
of our Lord-" but he is the only one who makes 
me afraid." 
He had good reason to say this, especially after 


150 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

On fit tous les efforts imaginables pendant fa maladie 
pour Ie gaigner à Dieu; mais cét efprit railleur n'a- 
uoit de la langue que pour demander des pruneaux 
& des raifins, & des oreilles pour entendre la refponfe: 
hors de cela on luy rompoit la tefie, ou fe mettoit à 
railler. 
On redoubla Ies efforts à fa mort; & en fin on fit 
tant, qu'au moins en apparence il tefmoigna de firer 
Ie baptefme. On l'infiruit donc plus particuliere- 
ment encore que par Ie paffé. Mais comme il auoit 
toute fa vie, mefprifé nos myfieres, & qu'il venoit 
tout fraifchement de donner vn fcandale public, on 
iugea à propos qu'il donnafi queIque marque de fa 
bonne volonté, & qu'il n'y auoit point de fiétion, ny 
en fa foy, ny en fa penitence. 
On luy propofe donc qu'il eufi au moins à inuiter 
deux ou trois perfonnes du [128] bourg, des plus 
confiderables, aufquels il s'efioit adreffé pour ces 
mefchãtes aétions; & qu'en leur prefence i1 tefmoi- 
gnafi Ie defir qu'il auoit du baptefme; & fon defplaifir 
& regret de ce qui s'efioit paffé pendant fa vie fi 
detefiable & abominable. 11 receut fort froidement 
cefie propofition, & ne fe voulut mettre en peine de 
l'executer. Ce qu'efiant adioufié, auec plufieurs 
autres indices de peu de difpofition qu'il y auoit en 
luy. on fut contraint de l'abandonner. 
Ce miferable vn peu deuant que de mourir, tomba 
en pafmoifon, de laquelle reuenant il dit, à ce qu'on 
nous a rapporté, qu'il venoit de l'autre monde, où il 
n'auoit rien veu de ce que difent les François; mais 
bien qu'il y auoit rencontré plufieurs de fa famille 
& parenté, qui Iuy auoient fait tres-bon accueil, l'af- 
feurants qu'il y auoit long-temps qu'on l'attendoit 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELATION, r639 

1:51 

having so often despised his holy invitations. All 
imaginable efforts were made during his sickness to 
win him to God; but this scoffing spirit had a tongue 
only to ask for prunes and raisins, and ears to hear 
the answer; beyond that one would either split his 
head or set him to scoffing. 
These efforts were redoubled, at the time of his 
death; and, finally, so much was done that, at least 
in appearance, he showed a desire to be baptized. 
He was instructed, therefore, still more thoroughly 
than he had been in the past; but, as he had all his 
life despised our mysteries, and as he had quite 
recently caused a public scandal, it was considered 
best that he should give some sign of his good will, 
and proof that there was no hypocrisy in his faith or 
in his penitence. 
It was proposed to him, then, that he should at least 
invite two or three of the [128] more prominent 
persons of the village, to whom he had addressed 
himself in regard to these wicked actions; and that 
in their presence he should declare the desire he had 
for baptism, and his displeasure and regret at what 
had taken place during his so detestable and abom- 
inable life. He received this proposition very coldly, 
and would not put himself to the trouble of execut- 
ing it. This, added to several other indications of 
the little willingness that he felt, obliged us to aban- 
don him. 
This wretch, a little while before he died, fell into 
a swoon; comíng out of it, he said, according to what 
was told us, that he came from the other world, 
where he had seen nothing of what the French told; 
but, rather, that he had met there several of his own 
family and relatives, who had most kindly welcomed 


]52 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

en bonne deuotion, & qu'on fe difpofoit pour faire en 
fa confideration force danfes & feftins excellens. En 
effeét fe Ie perfuadent de la forte, pour s'y trouuer 
dans Ie mefme equipage & appareil qu'il auoit veu 
les autres, il fe fift peindre tout Ie vifage de rouge; 
fe fift apporter & mettre deffus-foy ce [129] qu'il 
auoit de plus beau, on luy donne fon plat & fa culier; 
& là deff us meurt. 
Ce barbare paffoit dans Ie iugement commun des 
Sauuages, pour vn des plus hõneftes hommes & des 
plus gens de bien de tout Ie païs. Que fi vous leur 
demandez, en vertu de quoy? c'eft, difoient-ils, que 
c' eftoit vn homme paifible, qui ne faifoit mal à per- 
fonne, & qui fe plaifoit fort à fe réioüir & faire feftin. 
Si Ie iugement des Sauuages eft veritable, ie laiffe à 
penfer ce que valent tous les autres. 
A l'occafion de ce mal-heureux qui s'eftoit plu- 
fieur's fois feruy des remedes dont nous venons de 
parler, & qui auoit certaine danfes & chanfons affeétées 
en toutes les ceremonies qui fe faifoient à fon occa- 
fion. Nous apprifmes qu'il n'y a point, ou prefque 
point de famille en ces contrées, dont les chefs n'ay- 
ent quelques danfes, feftins & autres ceremonies 
affeétées pour Ie remede de leurs maladies, & Ie bon- 
heur de leurs affaires: mais que Ie tout a efté enfei- 
gné par les Demons, foit en la façon que nous dirons 
tantoft, foit en leur apparoiffant en fonge, tantoft en 
forme de corbeau, ou autre oyffeau; tan toft en forme 
de couleuure, comme il eftoit arriué [130] celuy dont 
nous venons de parler, ou d'autre animal, qui leur 
parle, & leur declare Ie fecret de leur bon-heur, foit 
pour Ie recouurement de leur fanté, quand ils feront 
tombez malades, foit pour Ie bon fuccez de leurs 


16:
9-40] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, r639 

153 

him,- assuring him that his coming had been devout- 
ly awaited for a long time, and that they were ready 
to have many fine dances and feasts on his account. 
In fact, he so convinced himself of the truth of this, 
that, in order to be present there in the same dress 
and magnificence in which he had seen the others, 
he had his whole face painted red, had brought and 
placed over him [129] the finest articles he had, was 
given his plate and spoon; and thus he died. 
This barbarian passed, in the common opinion of 
the Savages, as one of the most respectable and vir- 
tuous men of the whole country; if you asked them 
upon what grounds, they said, "Because he was a 
peaceable man, who did no harm to anyone, and who 
greatly delighted in merrymaking and in giving 
feasts. " If the opinion of the Savages is correct, I 
leave you to imagine of what value all the others are. 
In connection with this unhappy man, who had 
several times employed the remedies of which we 
have just spoken, and who had certain special dances 
and songs in all these ceremonies which were per- 
formed in his behalf,- we learned that there is 
hardly any family in these countries, the heads of 
which do not have some dances, feasts, and other 
ceremonies suitable for the cure of their diseases and 
the success of their business; but that all these have 
been taught by the Demons, either in the manner 
that we shall presently describe, or by appearing to 
them in dreams,- now in the form of a raven, or 
some other bird, now in the form of a serpent, as 
happened [130] to him of whom we have just spoken, 
or of some other animal, which speaks to them and 
reveals the secret of their good fortune, either in the 
recovery of their health when they fall sick, or in the 


164 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

affaires. Et ce fecret s'appelle Ondinoc: c'eft à dire, 
defir infpiré par Ie Demon. Et en effeét fi vous 
demandez à celuy qui defire en cette maniere qu'elle 
eft la caufe de ce defir, il n'a autre refponfe, fin on 
on days ihatonc oKi haendaerandic, la chofe fous l'ap- 
parence de laquelle mon Démon familier m'apparoift 
m'a donné cét aduis. 
Ces Ondinoncs font toufiours accompagnez de 
feftins ou de danfes, dont les ceremonies, & mefmes 
les chanfons qui s'y chantent, font pour la plufpart 
diétées, par Ie Démon, qui exprime Ie tout auec des 
precautions & menaces, que tout eft perdu fi on man- 
que à la moindre circonftance. C' eft ce qui fait, 
que lors que les Capitaines vont publier les defirs des 
malades, ou autres, perfonnes qui ont fongé, & qu'ils 
difent que c'eft IOndinonc d'vn tel, auffi-toft chacun 
fe met en peine, & s'applique de tout fon pouuoir à 
donner contentement & fatisfaétion à qui il appar- 
tient. [131] Cecy femble entierement confirmé par 
la formule, de laquelle fe feruent les Capitaines, 
apportants à la perfonne les chafes qu'elle a defirées, 
au temps de la premiere aflemblée. Efcoute vn tell, 
ou vne telle, crient-ils, & toy voix de Demon (fçauoir 
qui ras infpiré) voila ce qu'vn tel, ou vne telle 
donnent. Et en difant cela, ils iettent les prefents 
fur la malade. 
C'eft la forme dont on s'eft feruy dans vne cere- 
monie qui s'eft paffée pendant que i'efcriuois ce que 
deffus; à l'occafion d'vne femme malade, qui felon 
l'vn de fes defirs, fuft danfée d'vne danfe particu- 
liere trois heure durant, par cinquante perfonnes. 
On a efté trois iours à fe preparer a cefte danfe, & Ie 
iour qu'elle s'eft faite, les Capitaines firent plus de 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, r639 

155 

successful issue of their business. And this secret 
is called " Ondinoc," that is to say, " a desire inspired 
by the Demon. ' , And, in fact, if you ask, from him 
who desires in this manner, what is the cause of the 
desire, he makes no answer except, " ondays ihatonc 
oki haendaerandic," "the thing under the form of 
which my familiar Demon appeared to me, gave me 
this advice." 
These Ondinoncs are always accompanied by feasts 
or dances; the ceremonies of these and even the 
songs that are sung there are for the most part dic- 
tated by the Demon, who utters all with cautions and 
threats that all will be lost if they fail to carry out 
the least detail. The result is, that, when the Cap- 
tains go about publishing the desires of the sick, or 
other persons who have dreamed, and when they 
say that it is the Ondinonc of a certain person, each 
one immediately takes pains and applies himself with 
all his might to give pleasure and satisfaction to that 
one to whom it belongs. [13 I] This seems entirely 
confirmed by the formula observed by the Captains 
when they take to the person the things that he 
desired, at the time of the first assembly. "Listen, 
such a man or woman," they cry, "and thou, voice 
of Demon" (meaning the one who has inspired him), 
c<< behold what such a man or woman gives;" and, 
thus saying, they throw the presents upon the patient. 
This is the formula used in a ceremony which took 
place while I was writing the above, in bebalf of a sick 
woman, who, according to one of her desires, had per- 
formed for her, by fifty persons, a special dance last- 
ing three hours. Three days were spent in prepar- 
ing for this dance; and, on the day it took place, the 
Captains made more than five public announce- 


156 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

cinq criées publiques, tantoft pour aduertir qu'on 
commençaft à fe lauer Ie corps, tan toft que l' on fe 
graiffaft, tantoft que l'on fe paraft d'vne parure, & 
puis d'vne autre. En fin vous euffiez dit que Ie feu 
eftoit au bourg, & que tout alloit eftre confommé. 
La derniere criée fe fift, pour exciter tout Ie monde 
à s'y trouuer, & d'entrer auparauant l'arriuée de 
ceux qui deuoient danfer, deuant Iefquels vint vn 
Capitaine [132] qui apportant Ie refte des de firs de 
la malade, fift fa c1ameur en la forme que nous ve- 
nons de dire, fuiuit vn peu apres la compagnie des 
danfeurs hommes & femmes, à la tefte de laquelle 
marchoient deux maiftres de ceremonie, chantants, 
& la Tortuë en main, de laquelle ils ne ceffoient de 
ioüer. Cette Tortuë n' eft pas vne veritable Tortuë, 
i1 n'y a que l'efcaille & la peau, difpofez à faire vne 
efpece de tambour, dans Iequel iettans certains petits 
noyaux, ils en font vn inftrument femblable à celuy 
dont fe feruent quelques enfans en France pour 
ioüer. II y a ie ne fçay quoy de mifterieux dans 
cefte apparence de Tortuë, à laquelle ces peuples 
attribuent leur origine. N ous fçaurons auec Ie temps 
ce qui en eft. 
Ces maiftres de ceremonie fe mettent tantoft à la 
tefte de la malade, qui eft au milieu de Ia cabane; & 
tan toft fe diuifant, l'vn demeurãt à Ia tefte, & l'autre 
allãt aux pieds. Tous les autres qui danfent font 
vne efpece d'oüale, & ne ceffent de tourner à l'en- 
tour de la malade tant que les maiftres de la ceremo- 
nie chantent, & ioüent de la tortuë. 11 ne fembloit 
pas qu'on y peuft apporter plus de foin, & de [133] 
myftere; & qu'il fut poffible d'y auoir plus d'appli- 
cation, que celle que chacun auoit à bien ioüer fon 


1639-40] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, I639 

157 

ments,- now to warn them that they should begin 
to wash their bodies, now that they should grease 
them, now that they should adorn themselves with 
one ornament, and again with another. In short, 
you would have said there was a fire in the village, 
and that everything was about to be consumed. The 
final announcement was made to urge all the people 
to be there, and to enter before the arrival of those 
who were to dance, before whom came a Captain 
[132] who, bearing the rest of the desires of the 
patient, made his announcement in the form that we 
have just mentioned; there followed, a little distance 
behind, the company of dancers, men and women, 
at whose head marched two masters of ceremonies, 
singing, and holding the Tortoise, on which they did 
not cease to play. This Tortoise is not a real Tor- 
toise, but only the shell and skin so arranged as to 
make a sort of drum; having thrown certain pebbles 
into this, they make from it an instrument like that 
which children in France use to play with. There is 
a mysterious something, I know not what, in this 
sem blance of a Tortoise, to which these peoples attrib- 
ute their origin. We shall know in time what there 
is to it. 
These masters of ceremony now place themselves 
at the head of the patient, who is in the middle of 
the cabin, and now move apart, one remaining at her 
head, the other going to her feet. All the others who 
dance form a sort of flock, and incessantly wheel 
round and round the patient as long as the masters 
of the ceremony sing and play on the tortoise. It 
did not seem as if they could use more care, or more 
[133] mystery, or that there could be more earnest 
attention than each one gave to playing well his 


158 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

perfonnage, & cependant la malade ne fe plaignit 
d'autre chofe, finon qu'on n'auoit pas gardé toutes 
les formes, & qu' elle n' en gueriroit pas, comme en 
effeét elle empira. 
Cinq ou fix iours apres, elle fe fait porter en vn 
autre bourg, où elle a efié danfée & redanfée dere- 
chef, auec auffi peu de fuccez, & Ie mefme mefcon- 
tentelnent de fa part. Retournée qu'elle a efié icy, 
on a recommencé à luy ordonner de pareils remedes, 
& entr'autres force feftins de Feu, de la nature def- 
quels a efié r amp lement parlé aux precedentes Rela- 
tions. En fin au milieu de l'vne de ces ceremonies, 
cefie pauure mal-heureufe a miferablement expiré, 
paffant d'vn fefiin de feu, à vne autre, mais qui a 
bien d'autres mets, & d'autres feruices; & pour comble 
de malheur n'a aucune iffuë 
Elle efioit fille d'vn Sauuage, qui eft en reputa- 
tion d'efire vn des plus riches & des plus confide- 
rabIes du pais en nombre de forts dits Afc
andies, 
ou diables familiers, qui y foit; & qui pour I' affection 
qu'il leur portoit voulut que cette fienne fiUe [134] 
qu'il cheriffoit vniquement portafi Ie nom d'Afc
an- 
dic: ce barbare fut prié de prefier ces forts pour vne 
ceremonie du jeu de Plat, dont nous parlerons cy- 
apres, fa fille s'yen va, ou fe fiant fur les threfors de 
fon pere, elle fe met à parier comme les autres; 
comme elle efialloit les forts, la voila furprife de la 
maladie, qui fit tant danfer de monde, & dont en fin 
elle mourut, comme nous venons de dire. Tous lef- 
quels mal-heurs ne fõt attribuez à autre chofe qu'aux 
defauts & manquemets aux formes & circonfiances 
des ceremonies. 
C' efi la plainte ordinaire des Capitaines que tout fe 


1639-40] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELATION, I6.J9 

159 

part; yet the sick woman only complained that they 
had not observed all the forms, and that she would 
not recover; and, in fact, she grew worse. 
Five or six days later, she had herself carried to 
another village, where dances were again and again 
performed for her, with as little success, and the same 
discontent on her part. Having returned hither, 
people began to prescribe similar remedies for her, 
and among others many Fire feasts, the nature of 
which has been amply set forth in preceding Rela- 
tions. Finally, in the midst of one of these ceremo- 
nies, this poor unhappy woman miserably expired, 
passing from one fire feast to another, but one which 
has quite different dishes, and different attendance, 
and, as a climax of misfortune, has no end. 
She was the daughter of a Savage who is reputed 
to be one of the richest and most important persons 
that there is in the country, in the number of charms, 
called Ascwandies, or familiar demons,- and who, 
on account of the affection he had for them, ordered 
that this daughter of his, [134] whom he singularly 
loved, should bear the name Ascwandic. This bar- 
barian was requested to lend these charms for a cele- 
bration of the game of Dish, of which we shall speak 
hereafter. 6 His daughter went to this game, and, 
relying upon her father's treasures, she began to bet 
like the others. As she was displaying these charms, 
she was suddenly overtaken by the illness which 
caused the people to dance so much, and of which 
she finally died, as we have just said. All these mis- 
fortunes are attributed to nothing else than to the 
defects and omissions in the forms and details of the 
ceremonies. 
It is the common complaint of the Captains that 


160 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

va perdant, à faute de garder les formes & couftumes 
de leurs anceftres. Si on bruíle vn prifonnier, & que 
la ieuneffe là dedãs fait infolente, vn vieillard fe met 
à crier & tempefter qu'on iouë à perdre Ie pais, que 
c'eft vne affaire d'importance & qu'on n'y procede pas 
affez ferieufemêt. Si on refufcite vn Capitaine, ou, 
pour mieux dire, fon nom, quand on vient à chanter 
la chanfon des morts, fi deux femmes ne font entrées 
pour donner Ie ton, tout eft pe[r]du, & on ne s'at- 
tend à voir que teftes caffées fous vn tel Capitaine 
qui prend Ie nom. 
[135] Bref, c'eft la feruitude & l'efc1auage Ie plus 
eftrange qu'on fe puiffe imaginer; & iamais galerie 
ne craignit tant de manquer à fon deuoir, que ces 
peuples ont de frayeur de faillir à la moindre des cir- 
conftances de toutes leurs mal-heureufes ceremonies, 
s'enfuiuant de ce defaut, non feulement la priuation 
de ce qu'ils attendoient, mais encore punition fen- 
fible, que Ie diable pour ce fuiet exerce fur ces pau- 
ures mal-heureux. Les plus iudicieux d'entr'eux 
aduoüent franchement leur mifere, & difent nette- 
ment que les feuls demons font les veritables maiftres 
du pais. Que ce font eux qui reglent & ordonnent 
tout, foit en fonge, foit autrement: qu'ils voyent bien 
cela, mais qu'il n'y a point de remede; qu'ils ont 
toufiours vefcu de la forte, & qu'il n'y a apparence 
ny moyen de viure d'autre maniere, autrement que 
tout feroit perdu. 
Les Capitaines & anciens difent, que s'ils auoient 
entrepris ce changement, ils verroient bien-toft leur 
bourgs abandonnez, & que chacun infailliblement fe 
retiroit, où il verroit les couftumes du pais obferuées, 
& où il trouueroit les remedes ordinaires de leurs 


1639 - 40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I639 

161 

everything is going to destruction through their fail- 
ure to observe the forms and customs of their ances- 
tors. When a prisoner is burned, if the young men 
are turbulent thereat, some old man begins to exclaim 
and storm because they are risking the ruin of the 
country, saying that this is a matter of importance 
and that they do not behave seriously enough in it. 
If they resuscitate a Captain,- or, to speak more cor- 
rectly, his name,7 -when they come to sing the song 
of the dead, if two women do not come in to pitch 
the tone, all is lost, and they expect to see only brok- 
en heads under a Captain who assumes the name. 
[135J In short, it is the strangest servitude and 
slavery that can be imagined; and never did galley 
slave so fear to fail in his duty as these peoples dread 
to fall short in the least detail of all their wretched 
ceremonies,- for there would follow from this omis- 
sion, not only the privation of what they were expect- 
ing, but even physical punishment, which the devil 
for this reason exercises upon these poor wretches. 
The more thoughtful among them freely admit their 
misery, and frankly say that the demons alone are 
the real masters of the country,-that it is they who 
regulate and decree everything, whether in dreams 
or otherwise; that they see this plainly, but that 
there is no remedy for it; that they have always 
lived in this way, and that there is no prospect or 
means of living differently,-in other words, that 
[were any detail omittedJ all would be lost. 
The Captains and old men say that if they under- 
took to make this change, they would soon see their 
villages abandoned, and that each one would infalli- 
bly retire where he could see the customs of the 
country observed, and where he could find the usual 


162 

LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 

[VOL. ] ï 

maladies. Cét article [136J eft Ie pretexte que pren- 
nent quelques-vns de ces plus anciens & Capitaines, 
pour ne fe pas encore rendre aux femonces du fainét 
Efprit. Celuy qui leur frappe fi fouuent l'oreille, 
ouurira la porte du cæur quand illuy plaira. 
Outre les Ondinoncs ou Defirs dont nous venons 
de parler, didez par Ie demon qui apparoifi fous 
quelque forme empruntée, il y a d'autres fecrets & 
defirs moins confiderables qui viennent de certains 
fonges, dont ils croient leurs demons les autheurs, 
aufquels ils n'ofent refufer d'obeïr, à moins que de 
s'expofer à vn danger de quelque grand mal-heur. 
Les plus confiderables pour Ie iugement & l'experi- 
ence d'entre nos Chrefiiens, nous ont donné à en- 
tendre qu'il ne fe fait quafi dans Ie païs aucune danfe 
ny feftin qui ne vienne de ce mefme principe du 
démon: d'où vient qu'on y tient toutes ces chofes pour 
fi auguftes, que nous n'en ferions pas dauantage pour 
les chofes les plus faindes & facrées de nos myfteres. 
S'il arriue quelquefois que les enfans fe veulent 
refiouïr, & danfer quelques-vnes des danfes qu'ils ont 
veu danfer à leurs ceremonies; auffi-toft on les tanfe, 
& reprend, [137] on fort rudement. Comme fi en 
France on voyoit quelques perfonnes profaner vne 
chofe fain de ; qui ne doit auoir autre vfage que celuy 
auquel elle eft confacrée. 
Que dire là deffus à nos pauures Chrefiiens, quand 
ils demandent s'ils pourront affifier aux feftins, qui 
font les feuls repas extraordinaires du païs? Tout Ie 
meilleur poiffon & la chair ne fe mangeant ordinaire- 
Inent qu'à tels feftins? Ou en outre pour Ie plus 
fouuent, on exige des affifians, des prefens & des 
ceremonies, qu'on a bien de la peine d'excufer 


1639-40j 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I639 

163 

remedies for their diseases. This idea [136] is the 
pretext that some of the older men and Captains 
assume for not yet yielding to the admonitions of the 
holy Ghost. He who so often knocks at the ear will 
open the door of the heart when it shall please him. 
Besides the Ondinoncs or Desires, of which we 
have just spoken, dictated by the demon who appears 
under some borrowed form, there are other secrets 
and desires, less important, that come from certain 
dreams, of which they believe their demons to be 
the authors, which they dare not refuse to obey, at 
least fearing to expose themselves to the risk of some 
great misfortune. Those most eminent in judgment 
and experience, among our Christians, have given us 
to understand that hardly any dance or feast in the 
country is given that does not come from this same 
theory of the demon; whence it happens that all 
these things are looked upon as so august, that we 
would not do more for the sake of the holiest and 
most sacred of our mysteries. 
If it sometimes happens that the children wish to 
enjoy themselves, and dance some of the dances they 
have seen danced at their ceremonies, they are imme- 
diately chided and reproved [137J very roughly for it, 
as would happen in France if people were seen pro- 
faning some holy thing, which ought not to have any 
other use than that to which it is consecrated. 
What is to be said on this subject to our poor 
Christians, when they ask if they may be present at 
the feasts, which are the only extraordinary repasts 
of the country, all the best fish and meat being usu- 
ally eaten at such feasts? There, besides, they usu- 
ally exact, from those who attend, presents and cere- 
monies that one can hardly' exonerate from being 


164 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

d'hommage rendu à ce cruel tyran & vfurpateur de 
l'empire de Dieu: voire mefme que plufieurs à ces 
fefiins femblent de veritables facrifices, fur tout quand 
i1 s'agit d'vn chien qui fe tuë, & fe mange particu- 
lieremet en quelques rencontres, auec telles circon- 
fiances & ceremonies, qu'il ne femble pas qu'on en 
puiffe faire vn autre iugement. Mais ce n' efi pas 
maintenant dequoy i1 efi quefiion, venons à d'autres 
hifioires. 
V ne femme natifue de ce b011rg, mais mariée dans 
vn autre prochain nommé Anggtenc, fortant vne 
nuiét de fa cabane auec vne fienne petite fille entre 
fes bras, au temps que ron faifoit dans Ie bourg vne 
[138] fefie femblable à celle que ie m'en vay racon- 
ter: veifi en vn infiant, dit-elle, la Lune fondre fur 
fa tefie, qui auffi-tofi luy parut comme vne belle 
grande femme, tenant vne petite fiUe femblable à la 
fienne entre fes bras. 
Ie fuis, luy dit ce fpeétre, l'immortel feigneur 
general de ces contrées, & de ceux qui y habitent: 
en foy dequoy ie veux & ordonne que tous les quar- 
tiers de mon domaine ceux qui y habitent t'offrent 
des prefents, qui foient du creu de leur païs. Des 
Khionontaterons ou Nation du petun: des Attiganda- 
rons ou Nation neutre, des robes d'gtay: des Aski- 
cganeronons, ou Sorciers, vne ceinture & chauffes, 
auec leur ornement de por[c]s-efpics: des Ehonkero- 
nons ou de ceux de l'Iíle, vne peau de cerf. Et con- 
tinuë ainfi à luy nommer quelques autres nations, 
dont il vouloit que de chacune on luy fit quelque 
prefent, & entr'autres nomma les François qui habi- 
toient en ce païs, comme nous dirons incontinent. 
La folemnité qui fe fait maintenant dans Ie bourg 


1639-40] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELATION, r639 

165 

homage rendered to this cruel tyrant and usurper of 
the empire of God, especially as many of these feasts 
seem to be veritable sacrifices,- above all, when it 
is a question of killing a dog and eating it, especially 
in some cases, with such details and ceremonies, that 
it does not seem as if one could come to any other 
conclusion. But that is not the question now; let us 
come to other stories. 
A woman, born in this village, but married in 
another, near by, named Angoutenc, going out one 
night from her cabin with one of her little daughters 
in her arms, at a time when they were celebrating 
in the village a [138] feast like that I have just 
described, saw in an instant, she said, the Moon stoop 
down from above, forthwith appearing to her like a 
beautiful tall woman, holding in her arms a little 
girl like her own. 
" I am," quoth this specter to her, " the immortal 
seignior general of these countries, and of those who 
inhabit them; in testimony whereof I desire and 
order that in all quarters of my domain, those who 
dwell therein shall offer thee presents which must be 
the product of their own country,- from the Khio- 
nontaterons or tobacco Nation, some tobacco; from 
the Attiwandarons or neutral Nation, some robes of 
outay; 8 from the Askicwaneronons, or Sorcerers, a 
belt and leggings, with their porcupine ornaments; 
from the Ehonkeronons or Islanders, a deer skin." 
Thus it continued to name to her certain other 
nations, each one of which it ordered to make her 
some present, and, among others, named the French 
who dwelt in this country, as we shall soon relate. 
" The feast which is now being solemnized in the 
town" (adds this Demon) " is very acceptable to me, 


166 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

(adioufie ce Demon) m'efi fort agreable; & ie pre- 
tends bien que ron en faffe plufieurs femblables dans 
tous les autres [139] endroits & bourgs du pays. Au 
refie, luy dit-il, ie t'ayme; & en cefie confideratiõ ie 
veux que dorefnauãt tu me fois femblable, & que 
comme ie fuis tout de feu, que tu fois auffi au moins 
en couleur de feu. Et là deffus luy ordõne vn bõnet 
rouge, vne plume rouge, vne ceinture, chauffes, fou- 
Hers, & Ie refie de fes vefiements auec leurs orne- 
mens rouges: qui efi en effet l'appareil auee lequel 
elle parut dans la ceremonie qui fut faite en fuite 
à fon occafion. 
Cefie pauure creature retourne en fa cabane, & 
auffi-tofi qu'elle y efi arriuée, la voila par terre auee 
vn tournoyement de tefie, & vne contraétion de nerfs, 
qui fit iuger qu'elle efioit malade d'vne maladie, 
dont Ie remede eft vne ceremonie, qui en la langue de 
nos barbares s'appelle Ononh
aroia, ou tournoyement 
de tefie; mot pris du premier fymptome de cefie mala- 
die, ou plufiofi belle fuperfitiõ. La malade fufi con- 
firmée en cefie creance, ne voyant en fonge qu' allées 
& venuës, & c1ameurs par fa cabane; ce qui l'a fit 
refoudre de demander au public qu'on luy celebrafi 
cefie fefie. 
Sa deuotion, ou plufiofi celIe du diable pour nous 
faire defpit & trauerfer les affaires [140] du Chrifti- 
anifme qui efioient en leur premier lufire & efc1at, 
la porta à s'adreffer à ce bourg icy ou nous fommes 
d'Offofane ou refidence de la Conception, d'où, comme 
nous auons dit, elle efioit natifue. On vient done 
de fa part en faire la propofition aux Capitaines, qui 
auffi-tofi affemblent Ie confeil. Où i1 fut dec1aré, 
que cefie affaire efioit vne de celles qui efioient des 


1639-40] 

LE /EUNE'S RELA TION, I6.J9 

167 

and I desire that many like it be held in all the other 
[139] quarters and villages of the country. Besides," 
it informs her, " I love thee, and on that account I 
wish that thou shouldst henceforth be like me; and,. 
as I am wholly of fire, I desire that thou be also at 
least of the color of fire; " and thereupon it ordains 
for her a red cap, a red plume, a belt, leggings, shoes, 
and the rest of her clothes with red ornaments; this 
is, indeed, the garb in which she appeared at the 
ceremony that afterward was solemnized for her 
benefit. 
This poor creature returned to her cabin, and no 
sooner had she reached it than behold her prostrated 
with a giddiness in the head and a contraction of the 
muscles, which made them conclude that she was 
sick of a disease of which the remedy is a ceremony, 
which is called, in the language of our barbarians, 
Ononhwaroia, or turning round the head,-a name 
taken from the first sym ptom of this disease, or 
rather, this pretty superstition. 9 The sick woman 
was confirmed in this belief by seeing in her dreams 
only goings and comings and outcries through her 
cabin; this made her resolve to demand in public 
that they should celebrate this feast for her. 
Her devotion - or rather the purpose of the devil 
to spite us, and to thwart the affairs [140] of Chris- 
tianity, which were in their first splendor and glory- 
prompted her to address herself to this village where 
we are, Ossosane, or residence of la Conception, of 
which, as we have said, she was a native. They 
came, then, in her behalf, to make the proposition to 
its Captains, who immediately summoned the coun- 
cil. There it was declared that this affair was one 
of those most important to the welfare of the coun- 


168 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

plus importantes pour Ie bien du pais, & qu'il fal- 
loit bien fe donner de garde de manquer en telle 
occafion, de donner tout contentement & fatisfaétion 
à la malade. 
Le lendemain matin on publie I' affaire par Ie 
bourg, & exhorte-on puiffamment, qu'on eufi à aller 
promptement querir la malade, & à fe preparer à la 
fefie. On y court plufiofi que d'y aller, de forte que 
{ur Ie midy la voila qu'elle arriue, ou plufiofi qu'on 
la porte fur les efpaules, dans vne certaine efpece de 
hotte, auec vn conuoy de vingt-cinq ou trente per- 
fonnes qui fe tuoient de chanter. 
Vn peu deuant qu'elle arriuafi, on affemble Ie con- 
feil general, auquel nous fufmes inuitez. Trois de 
nos Peres s'yen vont fans fçauoir dequoy il efioit 
quefiion. D'abord [141] on leur donne à entendre 
qu'on auoit defiré de nous voir en ce confeil, pour 
fçauoir nofire aduis fur la propofition qu'vne telle 
malade auoit fait, & ce que nous en penfions. La 
refponce & fubfiance fut qu'ils ne pouuoient faire vne 
plus mauuaife affaire pour Ie pays: que c'efioient des 
hommages qu'ils continuoient de rendre aux malins 
efprits, defquels par confequent ils confirmoient de 
plus en plus l'empire fur eux, & fur Ie pais, & qu'il 
ne leur pouuoit arriuer que mal-heur, continuant de 
f eruir vn fi ma u uais maifire. 
Le principal Capitaine qui fous main dirigeoit 
toute l'affaire, homme adroit & delié fi iamais la terre 
en porta, au lieu de parler à propos de ce que nous 
auions dit, s'adreffe à toute l'affemblée, & fe met à 
crier, courage done ieuneffe, courage femmes, cou- 
rage mes freres, rendons à nofire pais ce feruice fi 
neceffaire & important, fuiuant les coufiumes de nos 


1639-40] 

LE /EUNE'S RELA TION, I6.J9 

169 

try, and that they certainly ought to avoid any fail- 
ure, on such an occasion, to give every pleasure and 
satisfaction to the sick woman. 
The next morning, the matter was published 
throughout the village, and people were vigorously 
exhorted to go promptly to bring the sick woman, 
and to prepare themselves for the feast. They ran 
thither, rather than walked, so that towards noon 
she arrived,- or, rather, she was carried upon their 
shoulders in some kind of basket, with an escort of 
twenty-five or thirty persons who were killing them- 
selves with singing. 
A little while before she arrived, the general coun- 
cil was assembled, to which we were invited. Three 
of our Fathers went to it without knowing the sub- 
ject for discussion. At the outset, [141] we were 
informed that they desired to see us at this council in 
order to get our advice upon the proposition that 
such a sick woman had made, and to know what we 
thought of it. The substance of the response was, 
that they could not do a worse thing for the coun- 
try,-that they were continuing to render homage 
to evil spirits, whose empire, consequently, they 
were more and more confirming over themselves and 
over the country; and that only misfortune could 
happen to them if they continued to serve so bad a 
master. 
The principal Captain, who secretly directed the 
w hole affair,- an adroit and crafty man, if ever the 
earth bore one,- instead of speaking in reference to 
what we had said, addressed the entire assembly, and 
began to exclaim, " Courage, then, young men; cour- 
age, women; courage, my brothers; let us render to 
our country this service, so necessary and important, 


170 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

(VOL. 17 

ancefires. Et continuë vn grand difcours de mefme 
air & accent, puis d'vne voix vn peu plus baffe, s'a- 
dreffant à ceux qui efioient à l'entour de luy: c'efi, 
dit-il, Ie confeil que i'auois donné à mes nepueux les 
François, l'Automne paffé. Vous verrez cét Hyuer, 
[142J leur diíois-ie plufieurs chofes qui vous deplai- 
ront, des Ononh
aroia, des 
taerohi, & femblables 
ceremonies: ne dites mot ie vous prie, leur difois- 
ie ne faites pas femblant de voir ce qui fe paffera, 
auec Ie teps cela pourra changer. On nous a dit 
autrefois aux trois Riuieres & à Quebec, adioufia-il, 
que pourueu que dans quatre ans l'on creufi, c'efioit 
affez. 
Comme il continuoit femblables difcours, entrent 
les deputez de Ia part de la malade, qui venoient figni- 
fier fon arriuée au confeil, & dire de fa part qu'on Iuy 
enuoyafi deux hommes & deux fines parées de robes 
& de coliers de telle & telle façon, auec tels & tels 
poiffons & prefents en main; & ce pour apprendre 
de fa propre bouche fes defirs, & ce qu'illuy falloit 
pour fa guerifon: auffi-tofi propofé, auffi tofi executé. 
Deux hommes done & deux filles s'en vont chargez 
de tout ce que la mala de auoit defiré, & retournerent 
auffi-tofi nuds d'vn cofié comme Ia main, excepté Ie 
brayé; tout ce qu'on auoit porté, efiant demeuré à la 
malade; mais de l'autre chargez de demandes qui 
efioient les importantes, & celles dont l'accompliffe- 
ment [143] deuoit commencer Ie recouurement de fa 
fanté, ce qu'on luyauoit porté ne paffant que pour 
compliment & agreement de fon arriuée. Les depu- 
tez done dec1arent vingt-deux prefents qu'elle defiroit 
qu'on luy fifi, qui efioient ceux que Ie diable Iuy 
auoit fpecifiez en fon apparition, ainfi que nous auons 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, I6.J9 

171 

according to the customs of our ancestors! " Now 
followed a great speech in the same strain and tone; 
then, in a somewhat lower voice, he said, addressing 
himself to those who were around him, " This is the 
advice I gave to my nephews, the French, last Au- 
tumn. 'You will see this Winter,' [142] I said to 
them, 'many things that will displease you,- the 
Ononhwaroia, the Outaerohi, 9 and similar ceremo- 
nies; do not say a word, I pray you,' I said to them; 
, pretend not to see what shall take place; with time, 
it may change.' We were formerly told at the three 
Rivers and Quebec," he added, " that, provided we 
believed in four years, it was enough." 
As he continued the like discourse, the deputies 
entered on the part of the patient, who came to an- 
nounce her arrival to the council, and to say for her 
that they should send her two men and two girls 
arrayed in robes and collars of such and such a fash- 
ion, with certain fish and presents in their hands,- 
and this, in order to learn from her own lips her 
desires and what was necessary for her recovery. 
No sooner proposed, than executed. 
Two men, therefore, and two girls went, loaded 
with all that the sick woman had desired, and imme- 
diately returned,-for one thing, as naked as the 
hand, except their clouts, all they had carried having 
been left with the sick woman; and, for another, 
charged with demands which were the essential ones, 
and those the fulfillment of which [143] should begin 
the recovery of her health, what had been carried her 
being accepted only as a compliment, and a token of 
their pleasure at her arrival. Accordingly, the depu- 
ties announced twenty-two presents that she desired 
they should give her, which were those the devil had 


172 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

dit vn peu auparauant. L'vn efioit fix chiens d'vne 
certaine façon & couleur. Vn autre efioit cinquante 
pains de petun. Vn autre, vn grand canot; & ainfi 
du refie, & entr' autre fut nommée vne couuerture 
bleuë, mais auec cefie circonfiance, qu'il falloit 
qu'elle appartint à vn François. 
Le rapport fait par les deputez, les Capitaines fe 
mettêt à exhorter tout Ie monde de fatisfaire prom p- 
tement aux defirs de la malade, leur reprefentant & 
inculquant fans ceffe l'importance d'vne telle affaire. 
On s'y efchauffe de la forte, que deuant que nos Peres 
fuffent fortis de l'affemblée, on auoit defia fourny 
quinze de ces prefens. 
On attaque cependant nos Peres à diuerfes occafions 
& reprifes, & les exhorte-on de ne pas efpargner au 
moins ce qui les regardoit & dependoit d'eux. Nos 
Peres [144J à cela refpondent qu'on fe mocque de 
nous, & que fi c'efi pour ce fuiet qu'on nous a appel- 
lez au confeil, que Ie malade s' en peut bien retour- 
ner, fi fans no fire contribution & nofire hommage 
rendu au diable & à fes ordonnances elle ne peut 
guerir. 
Nonobfiant cela, vne demie-heure apres que nos 
Peres furent retournez à la cabane, vne Capitaine y 
vint de la part du confeil: pour nous dire que tout 
efioit fourny, excepté la couuerture qu'on attendoit 
de nous, fuiuant Ie defir de la malade. Cefie recharge 
n'eut autre refponfe, finon qu'en cas qu'on ne vou- 
Iufi pas paffer outre en cefie ceremonie, qui n'efioit 
encore qu'a fon commencement, & qu'on voulufi ren- 
uoyer Ia malade d'où elle efioit venuë, qu'en ce cas 
nous ferions volontiers au public prefent d'vne cou- 
uerture, ou de quelque autre chofe de plus gran de 
valeur. 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, r639 

173 

specified to her in the apparition, as we related a 
little earlier. One was six dogs of a certain form 
and color; another was fifty cakes of tobacco; an- 
other, a large canoe; and so on,- among other things, 
was named a blue blanket, but with this condition, 
that it must belong to a Frenchman. 
The report having been made by the deputies, the 
Captains began to exhort everyone to satisfy prompt- 
ly the desires of the sick woman, constantly repre- 
senting and inculcating upon them the importance 
of such a matter. They became so excited over it 
that, before our Fathers went out of the assembly, 
fifteen of these presents had already been furnished. 
Meanwhile, our Fathers were repeatedly attacked, 
on various occasions, and exhorted not to spare what 
at least concerned them, and depended upon them. 
Our Fathers [144J answered to this that they were 
making sport of us, and that, if it were for this pur- 
pose that we had been called to the council, the sick 
woman might as well return, if, without our con- 
tribution and our homage rendered to the devil and 
to his ordinances, she could not recover. 
Notwithstanding this, a half-hour after our Fathers 
had returned to the cabin, a Captain came there on 
behalf of the council, to tell us that everything was 
furnished except the blanket they were expecting 
from us, according to the desire of the sick woman. 
This second charge received no answer except that, 
in case they would go no further in this ceremony, 
which was still only in its beginning, and if they would 
send the sick woman back to the place whence she 
came, we would, in such case, willingly make to the 
public a present of a blanket, or of some other article 
of greater value. 


174 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

Voila la premiere ceremonie de la fefie. Ie luy 
euffe volontiers dõne Ie nom de premier aéte, fi i' euffe 
peu efire affeuré de la catafirophe de toute l'affaire, 
pour Ie qualifier felon fon efpece; ce terme toutefois 
nous feruira d' orefnauant. 
[145] Le fecond aéte done, ou la feconde ceremonie 
de cefie fefie, fut que tous les prefents efians fournis 
& portez à la malade, auec les formes ordinaires dont 
nous auons parlé cy-deuant, fur Ie foir on fit vn cry 
public, pour aduertir toutes les cabanes & toutes les 
familles de tenir leurs feux, allumez & les places de 
part & d'autre toutes difpofées pour la premiere 
vifite que la malade y deuoit faire fur Ie foir. 
Le Soleil done efiant couché, au fon de la voix des 
Capitaines qui redoubloient Ie cry, on attife les feux, 
& les entretient-on auec grand foin, la malade faifant 
recommander par tout qu'on les faffe les plus grand 
& les meilleurs qui fe pourra, & que cela feruiroit 
beaucoup à fon foulagement. 
L'heure venuë qu'il luy fallut partir, fes nerfs, ce 
dit-on fe deffererent, & la liberté de marcher mieux 
qu'auparauant luy fut renduë, mais il femble plus 
affeuré que cela ne fe fit qu'apres auoir paffé par quel- 
ques feux, ce qui efi l'ordinaire; quoy que s'en foit 
deux Sauuages fe tinrent toufiours à fes cofiez pen- 
dant fa promenade, luy foufienans chacun vne main; 
& elle ainfi [148 i.e., 146] appuyée, marcha au milieu 
des deux, & s'en alla par toutes les cabanes du bourg. 
Dans les cabanes des Sauuages, qui font en longueur 
& en façon comme des berceaux de jardins, les feux 
font au beau milieu de la largeur; & plufieurs feux 
dans la longueur felon Ie nom bre des familles, & la 
grandeur de la cabane, difiãts ordinairemêt de deux 


1639-40] 

LE JE UNE , S RELA TION, I639 

175 

Such was the first ceremony of the feast. I would 
prefer to call it the first act, if I could be sure of the 
catastrophe of the whole affair, that I might accu- 
rately characterize it; this term, however, will serve 
us henceforward. 
[145] The second act, then, or the second ceremony 
of this feast, was that-all the presents being fur- 
nished and carried to the patient, with the customary 
forms of which we have spoken above-towards 
evening public notice was given, warning all the 
cabins and all the families to keep their fires lighted, 
and the places on both sides of them all read y for 
the first visit which the sick woman was to make 
there, in the evening. 
Accordingly, the Sun having set, upon hearing the 
voices of the Captains, who redoubled their cries, all 
stirred up their fires, and tp.aintained them with great 
care,- the patient having caused it to be recom- 
mended everywhere that these should be made as 
large and bright as possible, and that this would avail 
much for her relief. 
The hour having come when she was to set out, 
her muscles, it was said, relaxed, and the freedom to 
walk, even better than before, was restored to her; 
but it seems more certain that this did not occur until 
after she had passed through several fires, which usu- 
ally results thus. Be that as it may, two Savages 
remained beside her all the time during her prom- 
enade, each one holding up one of her hands; and, 
thus [148 i.e., 146] supported, she walked between 
the two, and went through all the cabins of the 
village. 
In the cabins of the Savages, which are in length 
and form like garden arbors, the fires are in the 


176 

LES RELA TIONS DES jÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

à trois pas. C' efi par Ie milieu des cabanes, & par 
confequent par Ie beau milieu des feux que paffa & 
marcha la malade pieds & jambes nuës, c'efi à dire, 
par plus de deux & trois cent feux, fans fe faire 
aucun mal, voire fe plaignant continuellement du peu 
de feu qu' elle trouuoit qui ne la foulageoit point con- 
tre Ie froid qu'elle fentoit aux pieds & aux iambes. 
Ceux qui luy foufienoient les mains paíIerent aux 
deux cofiez du feu; & l'ayant conduite de la forte 
par toutes les cabanes, ils la ramenerent au lieu d' où 
elle efioit partie, fçauoir en la cabane où elle auoit 
fa retraiéte, & ainfi fe finit Ie fecond Aéte. 
Suiuit Ie troifiefme, qui felon les formes & cou- 
fiumes confifie en vne manie generale de tous ceux 
du bourg; qui excepté peut-efire quelques Vieillards, 
fe mettent à courir par tout ou a paffé la malade; 
matafchiez [147] ou barboüillez à leur mode, auec des 
deformitez efpouuantables de vifage, à fenuy les vns 
des autres, faifant par tout vn tintamarre, & des ex- 
trauagances telles, que pour les exprimer, & les 
mieux donner à entendre, ie ne fçay fi ie les dois 
com parer, ou à nos mafcarades les plus extrauagants, 
dont on ait oüy parler, ou aux baccantes des anciens, 
ou plufiofi aux furies d'Enfer. I1s entrent donc par 
tout, & ont pendant Ie temps de la fefie fur tous les 
foirs & les nuiéts des trois iours qu'elle dure, liberté 
de tout faire, fans qu' on leur ofe rien dire. S'ils 
trouuent des chaudieres fur Ie feu, ils les reuerfent; 
caffent les pots de terre, affomment les chiens, jettent 
Ie feu & les cendres par tout, fi bien & fi beau, que 
fouuent les cabanes & les bourgs entiers en brufient. 
Mais Ie poinét efiant, que tant plus on fait de bruit 
& de tempefie, tant plus la perfonne malade en 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I639 

177 

very middle of their breadth, and there are several 
fires along its length, according to the number of 
families and the size of the cabin, usually two or three 
paces apart. It was through the middle of the cab- 
ins, and consequently through the very middle of the 
fires, that the sick woman marched, her feet and legs 
bare,-that is to say, through two or three hundred 
fires,-without doing herself any harm, even com- 
plaining all the time how little heat she felt, which 
did not relieve her of the cold she felt in her feet and 
legs. Those who held up her hands passed on either 
side of the fires; and, having led her thus through 
all the cabins, they took her back to the place whence 
she had departed, namely, to the cabin where she 
was sheltered; and thus ended the second Act. 
The third followed, which, according to forms and 
customs, consists in a general mania of all the people 
of the village, who,- except, perhaps, a few Old 
Men,-undertake to run wherever the sick woman 
has passed, adorned [147] or daubed in their fashion, 
vying with one another in the frightful contortions 
of their faces,-making everywhere such a din, and 
indulging in such extravagances, that, to explain 
them and make them better understood, I do not 
know if I ought not to compare them, either to the 
most extravagant of our maskers that one has ever 
heard of, or to the bacchantes of the ancients, or 
rather to the furies of Hell. They enter, then, 
everywhere, and have during the time of the feast, 
in all the evenings and nights of the three days that 
it lasts, liberty to do anything, and no one dares say 
a word to them. If they find kettles over the fire, 
they upset them; they break the earthen pots, knock 
down the dogs, throw fire and ashes everywhere, so 


178 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

reffent de foulagement, on ne fe íoude de rien: & 
chacun íe tuë à faire pis que fon compagnon. 
Nos cabanes qui íont dans les bourgs, ne íont pas 
exemptes des fruiéts d'vne telle fefie. La porte de 
Ia cabane de la Refidence de íainét Iofeph fut brisée 
trois fois [148] en vne pareille ceremonie. Pour 
cefie refidence icy où ie fuis, de Ia Conception, nous 
auons efié plus en repos pendant telles tempefies, 
pour efire eíloignez du bourg d' enuiron vne portée 
de moufquet. Voila quel efi Ie troifiefme aéte, ve- 
nons au quatriefme. 
Le Soleil du lendemain efiant Ieue, tout Ie monde 
íe difpofe à aller derechef par toutes les cabanes où 
la malade a pafsé, & particulierement en celIe où eUe 
efi retirée. Et ce pour propoíer à chaque feu, fon 
propre & particulier defir ou Ondinonc, felon que 
chacun en peut auoir eu lumiere & efc1airciffement 
en fonge; non pas toutefois ouuertement, mais par 
Enigmes. Par exemple, quelqu'vn dira ce que ie 
defire & que ie cherche, c'efi ce qui porte vn lac 
dedans foy, & par cela il entend vne courge ou cale- 
bace. Vn autre dira, ce que ie demande fe voit à 
roes yeux, qui feront marquez de diuerfes couleurs, 
& par ce que Ie mefme mot Huron, qui fignifie æi1, 
fignifie auffi de la raffade, on a entrée à deuiner qu'il 
en de fire fçauoir quelque forte de grains de cefie 
nature, & de diueríes couleurs. Vn autre donnera 
à entendre qu'il defire vn fefiin d'Andac
andet, c'efi 
[149] à dire, force fornications & adulteres. Son 
Enigme efiant deuiné, on ne manque pas de períon- 
nes qui íatisfont à fon defir. 
Ie ne m'efionne plus que Satan ait fì fort agreable 
cefie fefie & folemnité, felon qu'il Ie teímoigna à 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I639 

179 

thoroughly that often the cabins and entire villages 
burn down. But the point being that, the more noise 
and uproar one makes, the more relief the sick per- 
son will experience, they have no concern for any- 
thing, and each one kills himself to do worse than 
his companion. 
Our cabins that are in the villages are not exempt 
from the results of such a feast. The door of the 
cabin of the Residence of saint Joseph was broken 
down three times [148] in a like ceremony. As for 
this residence here where I am, that of la Concep- 
tion, we have been more quiet during such storms, 
because we are about a musket-shot from the village. 
This, then, is the third act; let us come to the fourth. 
The next day's Sun having risen, everyone pre- 
pares to go again through all the cabins where the 
sick woman has passed, and particularly to that one 
in which she is harbored. This is for the purpose 
of proposing at each fire each person's own and spe- 
cial desire or " Ondinonc," - according as he is able to 
get information and enlightenment by dreams,- not 
openly, however, but through Riddles. For example, 
some one will say, "What I desire and what I am 
seeking is that which bears a lake within itself;" and 
by this is intended a pumpkin or calabash. Another 
will say, "What I ask for is seen in myeyes,-it 
will be marked with various colors;" and because 
the same Huron word that signifies" eye" also sig- 
nifies " glass bead," this is a clue to divine what he 
desires,-namely, some kind of beads of this mate- 
rial, and of different colors. Another will intimate 
that he desires an Andacwandet feast,-that is [149] 
to say, many fornications and adulteries. His Riddle 
being guessed, there is no lack of persons to satisfy 
his desire. 


180 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

cefie pauure mal-heureufe creature dont i1 s'agifi: 
puis qu'en icelle toutes les facultez interieures & 
exterieures femblent trauailler à luy rendre vne 
efpece d'hommage & de reconnoiffance. Et i1 femble 
qu' entre toutes les ceremonies de la fefie, i1 faffe vn 
particulier efiat de celIe cy, où 1'efprit mefme tra- 
uaille de la forte à fon occafion, comme i1 fe peut 
voir en ce qui fuit. 
Auffi-tofi donc que l'Enigme eft proposé, auffi- 
tofi on s'efuertuë de Ie deuiner: & en difant c'efi cela, 
en mefme temps on Ie jette à la perfonne qui de- 
mande & propofe fes defirs. Si c'efi en effet fon mot, 
elle s'efcrie qu'on l'a trouué, & là deffus c'efi vne 
refioüiffance de toute la cabane, qui fe met d'aife à 
frapper contre les efcorces, qui font les murailles de 
leurs cabanes: & en mefme temps, la malade fe fent 
foulagée, & ce autant de fois qu'on trouue les defirs 
de ceux qui les ont proposé par Enigme. II fe trou- 
ua dans Ie confeil qui fut tenu [I50J pour conc1ufion 
de cefie prefente ceremonie, ou cela s'examina felon 
les formes & coufiumes que cent Enigmes auoient 
efié tro[uJuées cefie fois. 
Que fi ce que l' on deuine n' efi pas Ie mot de celuy 
qui a propofé 1'Enigme, i1 dit qu'on en a approché, 
mais que ce ne l' efi pas: il ne laiffe pas pour cela 
d'emporter ce qu'on luy a donné, pour Ie monfirerpar 
les autres cabanes, & par là leur faire voir & donner 
mieux à entendre que ce n'efi pas cela, afin que par 
l'exc1ufion de plufieurs chofes on ait plus d'entrée à 
dire ce que c'efi. II eft vray qu'apres i1 reporte ce 
qu'on luya donné, foit qu'on ait en fin trouué fon 
defir, foit qu'on ne l'ait pas trouué, ne referuant que 
ce qui efioit veritablement fon mot. Quelques-vns 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I639 

181 

I am no longer surprised that Satan is so greatly 
pleased with this feast and solemnity,-as he declared 
to the poor, wretched creature concerned therein,- 
since in it all the internal and external faculties 
apparently strive to render him a sort of homage and 
acknowledgment. And it would seem that, of all 
the ceremonies of the feast, he especially values this 
one, where even the mind so labors in his behalf, as 
may be seen in what follows. 
As soon, then, as the Riddle is proposed, they im- 
mediately strive to guess it; and saying, " It is that," 
they at the same time throw the object to the person 
who demands and announces his desires. If this is 
really his thought, he exclaims that it has been found, 
and thereupon there is rejoicing by all those in the 
cabin, who manifest their delight by striking against 
the pieces of bark that form the walls of their cabins; 
at the same time the patient feels relieved; and this 
happens as often as they find the desires of those who 
have proposed them in Riddles. It was found in the 
council that was held [150] as the conclusion of this 
present ceremony,-where this matter was examined, 
according to their forms and customs,- that a hun- 
dred Riddles had been guessed this time. 
But if what is guessed is not the answer of him 
who has proposed the Riddle, he says that they are 
near it, but that that is not it; he does not refrain, 
for all that, from carrying away what has been given 
him, in order to show it through the other cabins, 
and thus make them see and understand better that 
it is not that,-so that, by the exclusion of many 
things, one is better prepared to tell what it is. True, 
he afterward brings back what was given him,- 
either because his desire has finally been ascertained, 


182 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

obferuent Ie tout fort religieufement, mais ie ne 
doute point qu'il ne fe gliffe auffi là dedans beau- 
coup de frafque & de friponnerie. Tant y a que 
voila Ie 4. aéte, qui auec Ie precedent recommence 
toutes les trois nuiéts, & les trois iours que dure la 
fefie. 
Le cinquiefme ou dernier fe commence Ie 3. iour. 
Cela confifie en vn fecond voyage ou promenade de 
la malade par les cabanes [15 I] qui fenne toute Ia 
fefie, & ce pour propofer fon dernier & principal 
defir, non pas ouuertement, comme eUe auoit fait 
d'abord en arriuãt, mais par Enigme, comme les 
autres ont fait les iours precedents. C'efi icy où Ie 
diable triomphe, & fait Ie maiftre & Ie feigneur tout 
de bon. Car premierement, cefte pauure mal-heu- 
reufe fortant de la cabane efi affifiée de nombre de 
perfonnes, qui la fuiuent, & de quelques-vns qui vont 
deuant, tous file à file, & vn à vn fans dire mot, auec 
des vifages, des mines & des contenances de perfon- 
nes affligées & penitentes: & fur tous la malade qui 
paroifi feule au milieu, & dont tous les autres deuant 
& derriere font vn peu efioignez; de forte que Ie voy- 
ant marcher comme ils marchent, il eft impoffible de 
faire vn autre iugement, finon que ce font perfonnes 
qui pretendët de donner de Ia compaffion, & flechir à 
mifericorde quelque puiffance fouueraine qu'ils re- 
connoiffent efire Ie principe & Ia caufe du mal de la 
perfonne dont i1 s'agit; & de Ia volonté duquel en 
dépend, à leur iugement, la continuation ou la gueri- 
fon, & en effeét, c' eft cela mefme. 
Or i1 ne faut pas que pendant que cefte [152] efpece 
de proceffion dure, pas vn Sauuage paroiffe au de- 
hors des cabanes: de forte que de fi loing qu' on en 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, r639 

183 

or because it has not, only reserving what was really 
his thought. Some observe the whole ceremony very 
religiously; but I do not doubt that many tricks and 
cheats also creep into it. At all events, behold the 
4th act,-which, with the preceding, is repeated on 
each of the three nights and the three days that the 
feast lasts. 
The fifth or last is begun on the 3rd day. This 
consists of a second journey or promenade by the 
sick woman through the cabins, [151] which closes 
the whole feast, this being done to propose her last and 
. principal desire,-not openly, as she did when she 
first arrived, but in a Riddle, as the others had done 
on the preceding days. It is here that the devil 
triumphs, and acts the master and lord in earnest. 
For first, when this poor unhappy woman goes out 
from her cabin she is attended by a number of per- 
sons, some following her, and some going before; all 
filing along, one by one, without saying a word, with 
the faces, appearance, and attitudes of persons afflicted 
and penitent,- and especially the sick woman, who 
appears alone in their midst, all the others, before 
and behind, being at some distance from her. See- 
ing them, then, walk as they do, it is impossible to 
form any other opinion than that they are persons 
who desire to inspire with compassion, and bend to 
mercy, some powerful sovereign whom they recognize 
as the origin and cause of the trouble of the person 
in question, and on whose will depends, in their 
opinion, its continuation or its cure; and, in fact, 
such is precisely the case. 
Now it is necessary that while this [152] sort of 
procession lasts, not one Savage should appear out- 
side of the cabins,--so that, as far away as one can 


184 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

(VOL. 17 

voit, ceux qui affifient Ie malade, fe tuent de faire 
des fignes & des gefies qu'on ait à fe retirer, & à 
rentrer au dedans. 
Entrée qu'efi la malade dans les cabanes, c'efi à 
racompter fa mifere d'vne voix plaintiue & languif- 
fante: donnant au refie à entëdre que fa guerifon 
dépend de la fatisfaétion à fon dernier defir, dont 
elle propafe l'Enigme. Auffi-tofi vn chacun s'ap- 
plique à en trouuer l'explication, & en mefme-temps 
iettent-ils à la malade ce qu'ils ont penfé que ce 
pouuoit efire, ainfi que nous venons de declarer. 
Ceux qui affifient la maladie ramaffent tout; & 
fortent chargez de chaudieres, de pots, de peaux, de 
robes, de couuertes, de capats, de coliers, ceintures, 
chauffes, fouliers, de bled, de poiffon, bref de tout 
ce qui efi dans l'vfage des Sauuages, & qui leur efi 
peu venir en penfée, pour arriuer à la fatisfaétion du 
defir de la maladie. 
Voila ce qui paroifi, & non fans grand fondement, 
aux yeux efclairez de la lumiere de la foy, de veri- 
tables trophées de Satan; ou plufiofi vne ceremonie 
accomplie [153J de foy & hommage que ces peuples 
rendent à celuy qu'ils recognoiffent pour fouuerain 
maifire & Seigneur, d'où ils efiiment que depend tout 
leur bon heur ou mal-heur. 
En fin, la malade fait tant, & donne tant & tant 
d' ouuertures pour l' explication de fon Enigme, que 
l' on trouue fon mot. Et auffi-tofi voila vne clameur 
& refiouiffance generale de tout Ie monde, on frappe 
par tout contre les efcorces, ce ne font que congratu- 
lations qu'on luy fait; & de fa part des remerciemens 
de" la fanté qu' elle a recouurée. Elle retourne pour 
ce fuiet vne troifiefme fois par toutes les cabanes, 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I639 

185 

see them, those who are escorting the sick person 
nearly kill themselves making signs and gestures 
that all must retreat and go indoors. 
The sick woman having returned to the cabins, 
she begins to relate her troubles in a plaintive and 
languishing voice, giving the rest to understand that 
her recovery depends upon the satisfaction of her last 
desire, of which she proposes the Riddle. Each one 
straightway applies himself to ascertain its solution, 
and at the same time they throw to the sick woman 
whatever they imagine it may be, as we have just 
stated. 
Those who are attending the sick woman collect 
all these things and go out burdened with kettles, 
pots, skins, robes, blankets, cloaks, necklaces, belts, 
leggings, shoes, corn, fish,- in short, everything 
that is used by the Savages, and which they have 
been able to think of, to attain the satisfaction of the 
sick woman's desire. 
These appear, and not without good cause, to eyes 
illumined by the light of faith, as veritable trophies 
of Satan,-or, rather, a thorough ceremony [153] of 
faith and homage that these peoples render to him 
w horn they recognize as their sovereign master and 
Lord, upon whom they consider that all their happi- 
ness or unhappiness depends. 
Finally, the patient does so much, and gives so 
many and such hints as to the explanation of her Rid- 
dle, that her answer is found; and at once there is 
a general outcry and rejoicing of all the people, who 
everywhere strike against the bark walls,- which is 
only by way of congratulations offered her, and, on 
her part, of thanks for the health she has recovered. 
She returns, for this purpose, a third time through 


186 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

apres quoy fe tient Ie dernier confeil general, ou on 
fait rapport de tout ce qui s'efi paffé, & entr'autres 
du nombre des Enigmes trouuez. S'enfuit Ie dernier 
prefent de la part du public, qui confifie à parfournir 
& combler Ie dernier defir de la malade par deffus ce 
que celuy des particuliers qui l'aura deuiné, aura peu 
donner; & là fe termine la ceremonie. 
II eft à prefumer que la veritable fin de cet Aéte & 
fa catafirophe, ne fera autre que d'vne Tragedie, 
n'eftant pas la couftume du diable de fe comporter 
autrement. [154] Toutesfois cefte pauure mal heu- 
reufe s'efi trouué apres la fefte plus foulagée de beau- 
coup qu'auparauant, quoy qu'elle ne fuft pas entiere- 
met libre & deliurée de fon mal. Ce qui eft attribué 
par les Sauuages à l'ordinaire, au defaut & manque- 
ment de quelque circonftance & perfeétion de la cere- 
monie; ce qui entretient ces peuples dans les frayeurs 
continuelles, & applications fi exaétes aux formes & 
particularitez de leurs ceremonies. 
Ie ne fçay fi felon l'ordinaire du diable de ne s'ab- 
fienir iamais d'vn mal, que pour en faire vn autre, i1 
n'auoit pas deffein de faire mourir en contr'efchange, 
la petite fille de cefte femme, dont nous auons parlé 
au commencement de cefte hiftoire. 
Tant y a qu'apres la fefie elle deuint grandement 
malade: & qui porta celuy de nos Peres qui auoient 
charge de la cabane où elle eftoit de la baptifer comme 
en extremité au defceu de fa mere; apres quoy la 
petite fille fe porta mieux: nous ne fcauons pas toute- 
fois au vray ce qui eft depuis arriué, foit à la mere, 
foit à la fille, qui font retournez à leur bourg. 
Pendant la maladie de la fille, vne bruilure qui luy 
arriua, pour laquelle on cherchoit [155] quelque 


1639-40] 

LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1639 

187 

all the cabins, after which the last general council is 
held, where a report is made of all that has taken 
place, and. among other things, of the number of 
Riddles solved. Then follows the last present, on 
the part of the public, which consists in completing 
and crowning the last desire of the sick woman, over 
and above what that individual who has guessed it 
has been able to give; and there ends the ceremony. 
It is to be presumed that the true end of this Act, 
and its catastrophe, will be nothing else but a Trag- 
edy, the devil not being accustomed to behave other- 
wise. [I 54] Nevertheless, this poor unhappy crea- 
ture found herself much better after the feast than 
before, although she was not entirely free from, or 
cured of her trouble. This is ordinarily attributed 
by the Savages to the lack or failure of some detail, 
or to some imperfection in the ceremony,-which 
keeps these peoples in continual fears, and in so exact 
observance of the forms and details of their cere- 
monies. 
I do not know whether the devil-according to his 
common practice of never abstaining from one evil 
act, except to commit another,-intended, in ex- 
change, to kill the little daughter of this woman, of 
whom we spoke at the beginning of this account. 
At all events, she became very ill after the feast, 
which induced that one of our Fathers who had charge 
of the cabin where she was to baptize her, when in 
a critical condition, without the knowledge of her 
mother; after this, the little girl grew better. We 
do not know with certainty, however, what has hap- 
pened since then, either to the mother or the daugh- 
ter, who have returned to their own village. 
During the daughter's sickness, a burn that she 


188 

LES RELA TIO
VS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

remede, ayant donné accez au fufdit Pere au feu où 
elle efioit auec fa mere. Les careffes qu' on fit à la 
fille, appriuoifoient l'efprit de la mere; de forte que Ie 
Pere trouua entrée fuffifante pour l'aborder, & luy 
faire raconter tout ce qui s' efioit pafsé. Ce fuft de fa 
bouche que nous eufmes la confirmation & l' efclar- 
ciffement de ce que deffus, que nous auions defia 
appris d'ailleurs, tant pour ce qui regardoit cefie 
hifioire particuliere, que pour la nature de la mala- 
die en foy, & ce par des perfonnes qui auoient eu Ie 
mefme mal, & qui auoient efié gueris par vn fem- 
blable remede. Elle nous apprit toutefois plufieurs 
circonfiances, que nous ne fçauions pas: & en outre 
nous dit que Ie diable apres Ie refus que nous luy 
fifmes de donner la couuerture qu'il auoit ordonnée, 
qu'on nous demanda, luy efioit apparu de nuiét, & 
luy auoit dit que nous faifions bande à part, & que 
partant nonobfiant nofire refus, elle ne laiffoit pas 
de guerir, Ie refie alloit bien: qu'au refie, dorefna- 
uant il ne nous mettroit plus de la partie. 
Si cela eft, ie ne fcay pas comme ill' entend, où fi 
c'efi vn tour du mefiier qu'il a [156] exercé dés Ie 
commencement du monde Quz" mend ax eSl ab inz"tt"o. 
Mais il efi affeuré que depuis ce temps, il n'a pas 
laiffé de nous faire folliciter, foit à la Refidence de 
fainét Iofeph en cas pareil, foit icy en quelques autres 
rencontres, & toufiours auec auffi peu de fuccez. 
11 faut qu'à ce propos ie raconte en paffant ce qui 
efi icy arriué pendant que i'efcriuois ce que deffus. 
Vn Sauuage d'vn bourg voifin eft entré chez nous, 
portant derriere foy vn pacquet d'vne robe de Cafior, 
difant qu'illa venoit traiter pour vne couuerture, ou 
quelque autre piece d'efioffe; la refponfe a efié, qu'il 


1639 -40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1639 

189 

had received, for which they were seeking [155] some 
remedy, having given to this Father access to the fire 
where she was with her mother, the caresses given 
to the daughter so mollified the mother's heart that 
the Father found sufficient opportunity to approach 
her, and induce her to relate to him all that had 
taken place. It was from his lips that we had the 
confirmation and elucidation of the above, which we 
had already learned elsewhere, both as regarded this 
particular story, and the nature of the malady itself,- 
and this from persons who had had the same disease, 
and had been cured by a similar remedy. She in- 
formed us, however, of many circumstances that we 
did not know, and told us, besides, that the devil- 
after our refusal to give her the blanket that he had 
ordered and that was asked of us-had appeared to 
her in the night, and had told her that we remained 
aloof, and that therefore, notwithstanding our refusal, 
she would not fail to recover if the rest went well; 
that, moreover, thenceforward he would no longer 
have us participate therein. 
If that be so, I do not know how he understands it, 
or whether it is a trick of the trade which he has 
[156] practiced since the beginning of the world, Qui 
mend ax est ab Ùzitio J " but it is certain that since that 
time he has not ceased to have us solicited, both at 
the Residence of saint Joseph in a similar case, or 
here on certain other occasions, and always with as 
little success. 
In this connection, I must relate in passing what 
happened here while I was writing the above. A 
Savage from a neighboring village came into our 
house, carrying behind him a Beaver robe in a pack- 
age, saying that he had come to trade it for a blanket, 


190 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

(VOL. 17 

n'y en auoit point à la maifon qui fut à cet vfage. 
Helas, dit-il, ie n'en demande qu'vn petit morceau 
grand comme Ie coude. On fe douta auffi-toft qu'il 
y auoit de 1'Ondinonc: C'efi pour quelque perfonne 
malade: luy dit-on; Helas oüy, refpond-il, i'ay vne 
pauure petite fille aagée de quatre ans ou enuiron, 
qui de puis l' Automne dernier eft dans Ie plus piteux 
eftat qui fe puiffe voir. ray fait iufques icy tout ce 
que i'ay peu pour Ie recouurement de fa fanté. En 
fin Ie Sorcier 1'a vifitée pour la derniere fois, & a dit 
que fon ame defiroit ce que ie [157] fuis venu vous 
demander, & qu'au pluftoft ie vous vinffe trouuer 
pour ce f uiet. 
II n'en faUut pas dauantage. Incontinent vn de 
nos Peres fe difpofe pour partir auec Ie Sauuage, & 
aller trouuer la Petite fiUe là part où elle feroit, fous 
pretexte de luy porter quelque douceur, qui paffe icy 
pour medecine. II y va, la trouue teUe qu'on auoit 
dit, la baptife fans faire femblant de rien, parcourt 
quelques autres cabanes felon leur loifir, pour voir s'il 
n'y auoit point encore quelque autre proye à enleuer 
des mains de Satan. Et voila d'ordinaire ce qu'i! 
gaigne, à rechercher de nous des hommages & des 
recognoiffances de fa fouueraineté en ces contrées, 
cette pauure petite fille eft morte heureufement quel- 
que temps apres. 
Ce Loup infernal ne gaigneroit guiere dauantage 
fUT les oüailles que fur les Pafteurs, fi toutes eftoient 
femblables à Iofeph Chi
atenh
a, ce braue Neophyte, 
duquel nous auons parlé aux Chapitres precedens. 
Ce bon homme nourrit en fa cabane vne Brenefche, 
qui eft vne efpece d'oye fauuage; qui a defia efié ie 
ne fçay combien de fois l'Ondinonc, ou Ie fonge de 


1639 -40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, r639 

191 

or some other piece of stuff; the answer was that 
there was none in the house suitable for such use. 
4 C Alas!" said he, eel only ask for a little piece as 
long as your arm." We immediately wondered if 
ne had not some Ondinonc in this. eels it for some 
sick person?" we said to him. C C Alas, yes!" he 
answered; (C I have a poor little girl about four years 
old, who, since last Autumn, has been in the most 
pitiable state that one could see. I have until now 
done all that I could for the recovery of her health. 
Finally the Sorcerer visited her for the last time and 
said that her soul desired that which I [157] have 
come to ask from you, and that as soon as possible I 
should come and see you for this purpose." 
Nothing more was needed. Immediately one of 
our Fathers arranged to depart with the Savage, and 
to go and find the Child, wherever she was, under 
pretext of carrying her some dainty that passes here 
for medicine. He went, found her as the man had 
said, baptized her without appearing to do so, and 
went through some of the other cabins, where they 
were at leisure, to see if there were not yet some 
other prey to rescue from Satan's hands; and this is 
what he usually gains by seeking from us homage 
and acknowledgment of his sovereignty in these 
countries. This poor little girl died happily, some 
time a
terward. 
This infernal Wolf would gain but little more over 
the flock than over the Shepherds, if all were like 
Joseph Chiwatenhwa, that brave Neophyte of whom 
we have spoken in preceding Chapters. This good 
man was raising in his cabin a Brenesche, which is 
a sort of wild goose,10 and which has already been, 
I know not how many times, the Ondinonc, or dream, 


192 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

tout plein de perfonnes; & pour laquelle [158] en 
fuite auoir de luy, ie ne fçay ce qu'on ne luy a pas 
presëté. Ce n' eft pas toutefois ce qui luy a donné 
plus de peine, que de refufer ceux qui fe font prefen- 
tez pour la traiter: mais bien dauantage, de refufer à 
fes amis qui la luy ont demandé pour ce fujet iufques 
à l'importunité: mais encore, dit fa femme, s'ils nous 
la demandoient, fans dire que c'eft l'Ondinonc, mais 
vous diriez qu' on veut que ce foit expreffement pour 
cela, ils ne tiennent rien! Plaife à Dieu nous donner 
plufieurs familles de Barbares femblables à celle-Ià. 
Mais retournons à noftre hiftoire. 
11 arriue quelquefois que Ie diable en cefte grande 
ceremonie dont nous venons de parler, a recommandé 
entr'autres chofes à la perfonne malade, de faire 
maÏfon nouuelle. En ce cas, il ne faut pas qu' elle 
retienne chofe du monde de ce qui luy appartient: 
elle doit donc donner tout ce qu'elle a, à mefme que 
ceux du bourg pendant les trois iours, vont propofer 
leurs defirs par les cabanes. Et il eft queIquefois 
arriué, que pour vn feul plat de bois retenu par affe- 
ction & attache, Ie Diable s'en eft fi fort reffenty; 
qu'outre qu'il n'a pas accordé la guerifon, il a mar- 
qué en fonge à [159] Ia perfonne malade, Ie lieu & 
l'endroit où elle en deuoit mourir, pour auoir man- 
qué, en ce point d'obeïffance & de deference à fes 
ordres, ce qui en effeét eft arriué. 
Vne ceremonie fi folemnelle nous porta à en re- 
chercher la fource & l' origine; & nous auons trouué 
par Ie rapport des anciens, tant de ce bourg, que de 
celuy de la Refidence de S. Iofeph. Que les autheurs 
tant de cefte fefte, que de toutes les autres ceremo- 
nies du pais, & nommement des danfes nuës, & 


. 

1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, r639 

193 

of many persons, and for which, [158] consequently, 
to obtain it from him, I do not know what they have 
not offered him. That which has given him the 
most trouble, however, is not to refuse those who 
have presented themselves to barter for it, but, far 
more, to refuse his friends, who have demanded this 
from him until he is vexed. "But," said his wife, 
" even if they should demand it from us without say- 
ing that it was the Ondinonc,- but, you would say, 
they desired it expressly for that purpose,- they 
would get nothing!" May it please God to give us 
many families of Barbarians like that one. But let 
us return to our story. 
It sometimes happens that the devil in this great 
ceremony of which we have just spoken has recom- 
mended to the sick person, among other things, to 
furnish his house anew. In this case, he must not 
keep anything whatever of his possessions, and must, 
therefore give away all that he has, while those of the 
village, during three days, go through the cabins, 
stating their desires. And it sometimes happens 
that, for a single wooden plate retained through affec- 
tion and attachment, the Devil has become so incensed 
that, besides not granting a cure, he has pointed out 
in a dream to [159] the sick person the place and spot 
where he was to die, for having failed in this matter 
of obedience and respect for his orders,-which really 
happened. 
A ceremony so solemn prompted us to search for 
its source and origin; and we have found, through 
the accounts of the old men, both of this village and 
of that of the Residence of St. Joseph, that the authors 
of this feast,- as well as of all the other ceremonies 
of the country, and especially of the nude dances and 


194 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. ]7 

chofes fembIabIes, ne font autres que les Demons. 
On nomme Ia Nation & Ie bourg où cela commen- 
çaj & Ie Capitaine qui les ayant apperceu fur vn lac 
paffer Ie temps de la forte, les pria infiamment d'a- 
border à fon Bourg, & leur enfeigner tous ces beaux 
myfieres. Ce qu'apres beau coup d'infiance, & de 
facrifices de chiens, que ce Capitaine leur fit, its 
s'accorderent en fin. 
Or nos barbares aduoüent que de la s' êfuiuit la 
mort du Capitaine & la ruine du bourg, & apres celIe 
de toute la Nation, dont quelques reliquats à peine 
refient refugiez parmy eux, defquels ils ont appris 
plus particulierement toutes les ceremonies de ces 
folemnitez. Toutesfois [160] ils affeurent que ceux 
qui par apres les ont praétiqué, s'en font bien trouuez; 
& partant que les mal-heurs de mortalité & de mi- 
fere, qui les achemine à vne pareille fin, ne doiuent 
pas efire attribuez à cela, comme nous leur difons & 
prefchons cõtinuellement, mais à nofire demeure 
parmy eux, à laquelle feule ils s'en prennent. 
Au refie, Ie corps des Hurons n'efiant qu'vn amas 
de diuerfes familIes & petites Nations, qui fe font 
iointes les vns aux autres pour fe maintenir contre 
leurs ennemis communs. chacune a apporté fes dan- 
fes, fes coufiumes & ceremonies particulieres toutes 
emanées du mefme principe, qui fe font communi- 
quées à tout Ie pais, & qui fe font en fuite dependem- 
met du fonge au de l'ondinonc d'vn chacun, quand i1 
efi malade, ou par l'ordonnance du Medecin du pays, 
-ou vifiteur qu' on a eu fuiet de nommer Sorcier au 
Magicien, comme nous pourrons dire cy-apres. Et 
telles affaires s'appellent chez-eux Onderha, c'efi à 
.ùire la terre; comme qui diroit, Ie foufiien & la ma- 


1639-401 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, 1639 

195 

like performances,- are no others than the Demons. 
The Nation and the village where this began are 
named, also the Captain who, having perceived them 
upon a lake passing away the time thus, begged them 
earnestly to come to his Village and teach them all 
these fine mysteries, to which, after much urging, 
and many sacrifices of dogs which this Captain 
offered to them, they finally consented. 
Now our barbarians admit that thence ensued the 
death of the Captain and the ruin of the village, and, 
later, that of the whole Nation,-of which some few 
remain as refugees among them, from w horn they 
have most minutely learned all the ceremonies of 
these solemnities. However, [160] they assert that 
those who practiced them afterwards were much 
benefited thereby; and that, therefore, the evils of 
mortality and misery, which condemn them to a like 
end, are not to be attributed to that, as we are con- 
tinually saying and preaching, but to our dwelling 
among them, upon which alone they lay the blame. 
Moreover, the body of the Hurons being only an 
assemblage of various families and petty Nations, 
which are associated together for the purpose of 
maintaining themselves against their common ene- 
mies, each one has brought its special dances, cus- 
toms, and ceremonies, all emanating from the same 
source, which are communicated to the whole coun- 
try, and which are then observed according to the 
dream or the ondinonc of each one, when he is sick, 
or by the order of the native Physician, or visitor, 
who has with reason been styled "Sorcerer" or 
" Magician," as we shall relate hereafter. And such 
observances are called among them" Onderha," that 
is to say" the ground," as one might say, the prop 


196 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

nutention de tout leur Efiat. Voila nous difent les 
anciens & les Capitaines ce que nous appellons affaires 
d'importance. 
[161] Pour plufieurs de ces fuperfiitions it y a des 
Confrairies infiitutées, aufquelles & particulierement 
aux Maifires d'icelles il fe faut adreffer. 
Tous ceux qui ont efié autrefois Ie fuiet & 1'occa- 
fion de la danfe ou de la fefie font de la Confrairie, 
aufquels apres leur mort fuccede vn de leurs enfans: 
quelques-vns en outre ont vn fecret ou vn fort qui 
leur a efié dec1aré en fonge auec la chanfon; pour 
s'en feruir deuant que d'aller, par exeple, au fefiin 
de feu: apres quoy ils manient Ie feu fans s' offenfer. 
V oicy vne hifioire qui fe paffa pendant Ie temps 
de cette gran de ceremonie. V n des ieunes gens du 
bourg des plus confiderables, courant l'vne de ces 
trois nuiéts, & faifant l' enragé fit rencontre d'vn 
fpeétre ou demon, auec lequel il eut quelque parole 
cefie rencontre luy renuerfa de la forte la ceruelle, 
qu'i! tomba, & en effet en deuint fol. De remede 
fuft de tuer promptement deux chiens, & entr'autres 
vn qu'il cheriffoit vniquement, dont on fit feftin: en 
fuite dequoy il fe porta mieux, & en fin retourna en 
fon bon fens. 
Ce ne feroit iamais fait, fi i'auois entrepris [162] 
de dire tous les tenans & aboutiffans de ces miferes. 
En voila affez de cette façon, venons à d'autres 
m yfteres. 
Sur Ie milieu du mois de Mars, Ie faifon de pefcher 
à Ia Seine efiant venuë, on parla de la marier felon 
la coufiume du pais à deux ieunes filles, ou pluftofi 
à deux enfans, qui n'euffent iamais eu connoiffance 
d'homme: Et en fuite de faire les nopces ou Ie feftin" 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I639 

197 

and maintenance of their whole State. "These," the 
old men and the Captains say to us, " are what we 
call affairs of importance." 
[161] For several of these superstitions there are 
organized Fraternities, to which, and especially to 
the Masters of which, one must address himself. 
All those who have once been the object and occa- 
sion of the dance or the feast, belong to the Frater- 
nity, to which, after their death, one of their chil- 
dren succeeds; some have, besides, a secret or a 
charm which has been declared to them in a dream, 
with the song to be used before going, for example, 
to the fire feast, after which they can handle the fire 
without hurting themselves. 
I will give an account of something that happened 
during the time of this great ceremony. One of the 
prominent young men of the village, while running 
during one of those three nights, and acting the mad- 
man, encountered a specter or demon, with whom 
he had some words; this meeting so upset his brain 
that he fell down, and actually became insane. The 
remedy was, promptly to kill two dogs, and, among 
others, one which he held especially dear, of which 
a feast was made. In consequence of this he became 
better, and finally returned to his senses. 
I would never reach the end, if I should undertake 
[1621 to tell all the circumstances and details of these 
wretched affairs. But enough of this; let us come 
to other mysteries. 
In the middle of the month of March, the season 
having arrived for fishing with the Seine, they talked 
of marrying it, according to the custom of the coun- 
try, to two young girls, or rather to two children, 
who had never had intercourse with men,-and then 


198 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

auquel felon la forme, la Seine feroit au milieu, & 
les deux ieunes filles aupres. C'eft la où on exhorte 
puiffamment la Seine à prendre bon courage, & de 
faire en forte que la pefche foit heureufe, comme a 
efté dit plus amplement aux precedentes Relations. 
On ietta les yeux entr'autres fur vne de nos petites 
Chrefiiennes, aagée de quatre ou cinq ans, pour eftre 
l'vne des deux mariées; On nous en donne aduis, 
nous voila auffi toft à la recherche du fond de 1'affaire, 
pour aduifer à ce que nous auions à dire là deffus. 
II fe trouue donc qu'il y à quelques années que les 
Algonquains, qui font peuples voifins tres-intelligens 
& excellents en toute forte [163J de pefche, y eftans 
allez en cette faifon, pour pefcher auec la Seine, du 
commencement ne prirent rien. Surpris & efton- 
nez d'vn fuccez, qui leur eftoit fi extraordinaire, ils 
ne fçauoient que penfer. Là deffus, l' Arne, Ie Ge- 
nie, ou 1'OKi de la Seine, car nos Sauuages l'appel- 
lent de toutes ces façons, leur apparoift en forme 
d'vn grand homme bien faid, tout mécontent & en 
colere, qui leur dit. ray perdu ma femme, & ie 
n'en puis trouuer qui n'ait cogneu d'autres hommes 
deuant moy: voila ce qui fait que vous ne reüffiffez 
pas, & ne reüffirez iamais iufques à ce qu'on m'ait 
donné contentement fur ce poinét. 
Les Algonquains là deffus tiennent confeil, & ad- 
uifent que pour appaifer & donner fatisfaétion à la 
Seine, i1luy falloit prefenter des FiUes en fi bas aage, 
qu'il n'euft plus de fuiet de fe plaindre; & que pour 
plus grande fatisfaétion, it luy en faUoit prefenter 
deux pour vne, ils Ie font donc en la maniere que 
i'ay marqué cy-deffus dans vn feftin, & auffi-toft leur 
pefche reüffit à merueilles. 


1639-40] 

LE /EUNE'S RELA TION, I639 

19
' 

of celebrating the nuptials or feast, at which, accord- 
ing to the formality, the Seine would be in the mid- 
dle, and the two young girls beside it. On this 
occasion, then, the Seine is vigorously exhorted to 
be of good courage, and so to act that the fishing be 
successful, as has been more amply told in preceding 
Relations. 
They had in mind, among others, one of our little 
Christian girls, four or five years old, to be one of the 
two brides. Weare informed of this, and immedi- 
ately begin to investigate the matter, in order to 
understand what we ought to say about it. We have 
ascertained, then, that some years ago the Algon- 
quains,-who are neighboring people, very intelli- 
gent, and excelling in all kinds [163] of fishery,- 
having gone at this season to fish with the Seine, at 
first took nothing. Surprised and astonished at a 
result which was for them so unusual, they knew not 
what to think. Thereupon, the Soul, the Genie, or the 
Oki of the Seine, for our Savages call it by all these 
names, appeared to them in the form of a tall, well- 
formed man, greatly dissatisfied and in a passion, 
who said to them, " I have lost my wife, and I can- 
not find one who has not known other men before 
me; that is the reason why you do not succeed, and 
you never will succeed until I have been given satis- 
faction in this respect." 
The Algonquains, thereupon, hold a council and 
decide, that to appease and give satisfaction to the 
Seine, they must present him Girls so young that he 
would no longer have reason to complain,-and that, 
for his greater satisfaction, they must present him 
two for one. They do this, then, in the manner that 
I have related above, at a feast; and immediately 
their fishing succeeds wonderfully. 


200 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

Les Hurons leurs voifins n'en eurent pas plufiofi 
Ie vent, que voila vne fefie [164] & folemnité infii- 
tuée, qui depuis a toufiours duré, & fe celebre tous 
les ans en cette mefme faifon. Cela efiant, ie laiffe 
à penfer ce que nous difmes & confeillafmes aux 
parents de la Fille: mais voicy Ie grief; car toute la 
famille profitant notablement d'vn tel mariage, vne 
partie de la pefche, luy reuenant l'année quelle fe 
faid; en quoy luy efiant deuë & affeétée en confide- 
ration d'vne telle alliance; refufer fon confentement 
à tel mariage, c'efi fe priuer & frufirer toute vne 
famille de la pI us grande douceur, & de la meilleure 
rencontre qui fe faffe dans Ie pais. 
Ie De fçay fi Dieu eut agreable de mettre particu- 
lierement la main à cette affaire, pour la rompre tout 
à fait, tant y a que la ceremonie ne fe fit, ny d'vne 
façon, ny d'autre. 
Vne des dernieres folies qui fe foit paffée en ce 
bourg a efié à l'occafion d'vn malade d'vn bourg voi- 
fin, qui pour fa fanté, fongea ou receut I' ordonnance 
du Medecin du pais, qu'on luy fifi vn ieu de plat. II 
en parle aux Capitaines, qui auffi-tofi affemblent Ie 
confeil, arrefient Ie temps, & Ie Bourg qu'il falloit 
aller inuiter [165] pour ce fuieét, & ce bour[g] fut Ie 
nofire. On depute de là pour en venir faire icy la 
propofition; elle efi agreée, & en fuite on fe pre- 
pare de part & d'autre. 
Ce jeu de plat confifie à faire fauter dans vn plat 
de bois quelques noyaux de prunes fauuages, chacun 
blanc d'vn cofié, & noir de l'autre, d'où s'enfuit 
perte ou gain felon les loix du jeu. 
II eft hors de mon pouuoir de reprefenter l'appli- 


1639-40] 

LE .IEUNE'S RELA TION, I639 

201 

The Hurons, their neighbors, no sooner got wind 
of this, than 10, there was a feast, [164] and a solem- 
nity was instituted, that has ever since continued, and 
is celebrated every year at this same season. This 
being so, I leave it to be imagined what we said and 
counseled to the parents of this Girl; but 10, there 
ensued a grievance. For, as the whole family profit 
considerably from such a marriage,- part of the fish 
caught reverting to them in the year when it takes 
place, and being then due and appropriated to them, 
in consideration of such an alliance,- to refuse their 
consent to such a marriage is to deprive and defraud 
an entire family of the greatest pleasure and the best 
opportunity that can be found in the country. 
I do not know whether God were pleased to inter- 
vene especially in this affair, and break it up alto- 
gether or not; at all events, the ceremony did not 
take place, in any form. 
One of the latest fooleries that has occurred in this 
village was in behalf of a sick man of a neighboring 
village, who, for his health, dreamed, or received the 
order from the Physician of the country, that a game 
of dish should be played for him. He tells it to the 
Captains, who immediately assemble the council, fix 
the time, and choose the Village that they must invite 
[165] for this purpose,-and that village is ours. An 
envoy from that place is sent hither to make the 
proposition; it is accepted, and then preparations 
are made on both sides. 
This game of dish consists in tossing some stones 
of the wild plum in a wooden dish,-each being 
white on one side, and black on the other,-whence 
there ensues loss or gain, according to the laws of 
the game. 


202 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

cation & l'aétiuité de nos Barbares à fe preparer, & à 
rechercher tous les moyens & les augures de quelque 
bon-heur & fuccez en leur ieu. lIs s'affemblent les 
nuiéts, & les paffent partie à remuer Ie plat, & à re- 
cognoiftre qui a la meilleure main; partie à eftaller 
leurs forts, & à les exhorter. Sur la fin ils fe met- 
tent à dormir dans la mefme cabane, ayans au prea- 
lable ieufné, & s'eftans abl.lenus quelque temps de 
leurs femmes: Ie tout pour auoir quelque fonge fauo- 
rabIe, & Ie matin c'eft à raconter ce qui s'eft paffé 
la nuiét. 
En fin on affemble tout ce qu'on a fongé qui pour- 
roit apporter bon-heur, & en remplit-on des facs pour 
porter. On [166J recherche en outre par tout, ceux 
qui ont des forts prop res pour Ie jeu, ou des Afd
an- 
dics ou diables familiers, pour affifter celuy qui tient 
Ie plat, & eftre Ie plus proche de luy, lors qu'ille 
remuera. S'il y a quelques vieillards dont la pre- 
fence foit recognuë efficace, & augmenter la force & 
la vertu de leur fort, on ne fe contente pas de porter 
leur forts, mais encore les charge-on quelquefois eux 
mefmes fur les efpaules des ieunes gens, pour les 
porter au lieu de l'affemblée. Et d'autant que nous 
paffons dans Ie pais pour maiftres forciers, on ne 
manque pas de nous aduertir, de nous mettre en 
prieres, & faire force ceremonies pour les faire 
gaigner. 
On n'eft pas plufioft arriué au lieu de l'affignation, 
que chaque party fe range de cofié & d'autre de la 
cabane, & la rempliffent depuis Ie haut iufques en 
bas, deff us & deffous les Andichons, qui font efcorces 
faifant comme vn ciel de liét, ou couuerture ref- 
pondant à celIe d'enbas colé fur terre, fur laquelle 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, r639 

203 

It is beyond my power to picture the diligence and 
activity of our Barbarians in preparing themselves, 
and in seeking all the means and omens for good luck 
and success in their game. They assemble at night, 
and spend the time partly in shaking the dish and 
ascertaining who has the best hand,-partly in dis- 
playing their charms, and exhorting them. Towards 
the end they lie down to sleep in the same cabin, 
having previously fasted, and for some time abstained 
from their wives,- and all this to have some favor- 
able dream; in the morning, they have to relate what 
happened during the night. 
Finally, they collect all the things which they 
have dreamed can bring good luck, and fill pouches 
with them, in order to carry them. They [166] 
search everywhere, besides, for those who have 
charms suitable to the game, or Ascwandics or famil- 
iar demons, that these may assist the one who holds 
the dish, and be nearest to him when he shakes it. 
If there be some old men whose presence is regarded 
as efficacious in augmenting the strength and virtue 
of their charms, they are not satisfied to take the 
charms to them, but sometimes even load these men 
themselves upon the shoulders of the young men, to 
be carried to the place of the assembly. And, inas- 
much as we pass in the country for master sorcerers, 
they do not fail to admonish us to begin our prayers, 
and to perform many ceremonies, in order to make 
them win. 
They have no sooner arrived at the appointed 
place than the two parties take their places on oppo- 
site sides of the cabin and fill it from top to bottom, 
above and below the Andichons,-which are sheets 
of bark making a sort of canopy for a bed, or shelter, 


204 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

on fe couche la nuid. II s' en met fur les perches 
couchées & fufpenduës Ie long de la cabane. Les 
deux ioüeurs font au milieu [167] auec leurs affef- 
feurs qui tiennent les forts, Chacun de ceux qui font 
à l'affemblée, partie contre quelqu'autre ce qu'il 
veut: & on commence Ie ieu. 
C'eft pour lors que tout Ie monde fe met à prier 
ou marmoter ie ne fçay qu'elles paroles, auec des 
geftes & des empreffemens de mains, d'yeux, & de 
tout Ie vifage: Ie tout pour attirer à foy Ie bon-heur, 
& exhorter leurs Demons de prendre courage, & de 
ne fe pas laiffer tourmenter. 
Quelques-vns font deputez pour faire des execra- 
tions & des geftes tout contraires, à deffein de re- 
pouffer Ie mal-heur de l'autre cofté, & en faire peur 
au Demon du parti contraire. 
Ce ieu s' eft ioüé cét H yuer plufieurs fois par tout 
Ie pais; mais ie ne fçay comment il eft arriue que 
ceux des bourgs où nous auons des Refidences y ont 
toufiours efté mal heureux au dernier poind; & tel 
bourg y a perdu trente colliers de pourcelaine, cha- 
cun de mille grains, qui eft en ce pais, comme fi 
vous difiez en France cinquante mille pedes ou 
piftoles. Mais ce n'eft pas tout, car efperants tou- 
fiours regaigner ce qu'ils ont vne fois [168) perdu, 
its ioüent facs à petun, robes, foüillers & chauffes, en 
vn mot tout ce qu'its onto De forte que fi Ie maI- 
heur leur en veut, comme it eft arriué à ceux-cy, its 
reuiennent à la maifon nuds comme la main, ayans 
quelquefois perdu iufques à leur brayé. 
Ils 'ne s'en vont pas toutesfois deuant que Ie ma- 
lade les ait remercié de Ia fanté qu'il a recouurée 
par leur moyen, fe profeffant toufiours guery à la fin 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELATION. I6.J9 

205 

which corresponds to that below, which rests upon 
the ground, upon which they sleep at night. It is 
placed upon poles laid and suspended the whole 
length of the cabin. The two players are in the 
middle, [167J with their assistants, who hold the 
charms; each of those in the assembly bets against 
whatever other person he chooses, and the game 
begins. 
It is then that everyone begins to pray or mutter 
I know not what words, with gestures, and eager 
motions of the hands, eyes, and the whole face,- all 
to attract to himself good luck, and to exhort their 
Demons to take courage and not let themselves be 
tormented. 
Some are deputed to utter execrations, and to make 
precisely contrary gestures,-with the purpose of 
driving ill luck back to the other side, and of impart- 
ing fear to the Demon of the opponents. 
This game was played several times this Winter, 
all over the country; but I do not know how it has 
happened that the people of the villages where we 
have Residences have always been unlucky to the 
last degree, and a certain village lost thirty porce- 
lain collars, each of a thousand beads.-which are 
in this country equal to what you would call in France 
fifty thousand pearls or pisto1es. But this is not all; 
for, hoping always to regain what they have once 
[168] lost, they stake tobacco pouches, robes, shoes, 
and leggings,- in a word, all that they have. So 
that if ill luck attack them, as happened to these, 
they return home as naked as the hand, having some- 
times lost even their clouts. 
They do not go away, however, until the patient 
has thanked them for the health he has recovered 


206 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

de toutes ces belles ceremonies; quoy que fouuent ils 
ne la faffent pas longue apres en ce monde. 
Le bon eft qu'en fuite de ces pertes, nos Barbares 
retournez à la maifon, ne manquent pas de nous 
venir reprocher, que voila iuftement à quoy profite 
de croire, & qu'on voit bien en effet que tout ce que 
nous pretendons, n'eft que de ruiner les lieux où 
nous faifons noftre demeure, & ainfi peu à peu ruiner 
tout Ie pais. Que depuis que nous fommes auec eux 
& qu' on leur a parlé de Dieu ils ne fongent plus, 
leurs forts & Afc
andics n'ont plus de forces, ils font 
mal-heureux par tout, bref il n'y a mifere qui ne les 
accompagne. 
[ 16 9J Ie ferois infiny fi ie voulois raconter tout ce 
qui s'eft pafsé de femblable à ce que deffus, qui 
regarde les ceremonies publiques, les danfes diffe- 
rentes, les feftins d'
taerohi, ou du feu, & de fem- 
blables fuperftitions, qui fe font dif-je paffées cét 
hyuer dernier en ce feul bourg d'où i'efcry: ou to ute- 
fois ie puis dire auec affeurance, qu'on en a moins 
faiét qu'en pas vn autre bourg du pays. Ie ne puis 
me refoudre voyant la longueur ou cela me porteroit, 
à entamer Ie narré, & Ie difcours à fonds des autres 
fuperftitions particulieres qu'on defcouure tous les 
iours. Ie me contenteray de ce qui fuit. 
Quelques-vns de nos Barbares, & entr'autres vn 
de nos pauures Renegats, racontant vn iour à vn de 
nos Peres les aduantages qu'ils ont à retenir & con- 
feruer leur Afc
andic, ou diable familier, que Ie Pere 
l'exhortoit de quitter. Helas, dit-il, que me dis-tu 
là? quand ie vay en traite ie n'ay qu'à ouurir Ie fac 
où il eft, ie Iuy recommande de me faire auoir vn 
colier de pourcelaine de tant de grains, vne robe ou 


1639-40] 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, I639 

207 

through their help, always professing himself cured 
at the end of all these fine ceremonies,- although 
frequently he does not do this long afterward in this 
world. 
The best of it is, that, in consequence of these 
losses, our Barbarians upon returning home do not 
hesitate to come and reproach us,- saying that this 
is precisely what they gain by believing; and that 
indeed they plainly see that our sole intention is but 
to ruin the places where we have made our abode, 
and thus, little by little, to ruin the whole country; 
that since we have been with them, and have told 
them of God, they no longer dream, their charms 
and Ascwandics have no more power, they are un- 
lucky in everything,-in fact, there is no evil that 
does not accompany them. 
[169] My task would be endless if I should recount 
all that has taken place like the above, as regards 
public ceremonies, the various dances, the feasts of 
Outaerohi and of fire, and like superstitions,- which 
have, I say, taken place this last winter in this one 
village whence I am writing, where, however, I can 
say with certainty that fewer of them have been 
observed than in any other village of the country. 
I cannot bring myself, seeing the length to which 
that would take me, to enter upon a narrative and 
exhaustive discussion of the other individual super- 
stitions that one encounters every day. I will con- 
tent myself with the following: 
Some of our Barbarians, and, among others, one 
of our poor Renegades, were recounting one day to 
one of our Fathers the advantages that they possess 
in retaining and preserving their Ascwandic, or 
familiar demon. When the Father exhorted him to 


208 

LES RELA TIONS DES jÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

mante de tant de peaux de caftor; ie luy iette en 
hommage & recognoifIance [170] quelques grains de 
pourcelaine, & quelque piece ou morceau de caftor; 
finalement ie fais Ie feftin: Ie m' en vay là deffus, & 
ce que i'ay pretendu ne manque iamais. Ma femme, 
dit-il, tremble quand ie la tire pour luy parler, mais 
c'eft vne femme: Le Pere Ie pria de Ie l'y faire voir. 
0, dit-il, mon nepueu voila vne grãde demande; 
mais que donneras tu? Cét homme paffe pour vn 
des plus fages & des plus referuez du bourg, & en 
effet ill' eft! iugez du refte. Ce pauure malheureux 
eft allé à la guerre auec des regrets de noftre part 
qui ne fe peuuent expliquer, & des craintes des mal- 
heurs qui luy peuuent arriuer, & en fuitte à fa famille, 
qui eft grande & confiderable. 
Vn autre fe plaignant que fon fort n'auoit plus de 
force, ny pour la pefche, ny pour la chaffe, ny pour 
la traiéte, mais fur tout pour Ie jeu. Le Pere luy 
demanda, que faudroit-il pour luy rendre fa vertu? 
vn feftin, refpond Ie barbare, mais quoy ie n'ay ny 
chair, ny poiffon. 
Ie ne fçay comme qualifier les feftins au regard de 
nos Sauuages, c' eft l'huyle de leurs onguents, Ie miel 
de leurs medecins, Ie preparatif de leurs maux, I' e- 
ftoille [171] de leur conduite, l' Alcyon de leur repos, 
Ie reffort de leurs refforts & Afc
andics, bref l'inftru- 
ment general ou condition fans laquelle rien ne fe 
fait, C' eft à cela & pour eel a que font referuez les 
meilleurs morceaux defquels toute la famille fe pri- 
uera pour les conferuer pour les occafions d'vn fonge 
ou de maladie. Le Diable ayant gaigné qu'on Iuy 
gardaft toufiours & referuaft-on Ie meilleur & Ie plus 
beau: Et c'eft ce qui donne fuiet de Ies qualifier veri- 


1639-40] 

LE /EUNE'S RELA TION, 16.19 

209 

give it up, cc Alas!" said he, cc what is that thou art 
saying to me? When I go to trade, I have only to 
open the pouch where he is; I request him to procure 
for me a porcelain collar of so many beads, or a 
robe or mantle of so many beaver skins; I throw 
him, in homage and gratitude, [170] some porcelain 
beads, and a piece or morsel of beaver; finally, I 
make the feast; then I go away, and what I have 
aimed at never fails me. My wife," said he, cc trem- 
bles when I draw him out to speak to him; but she is 
a woman. " The Father begged that he would let him 
see it. cc Oh, my nephew, what a great favor thou 
askest!" said he; "but what wilt thou give? " This 
man passes for one of the wisest and most discreet 
men of the village; and, in fact, he is! Judge of 
the rest. This poor wretch has gone to war, with 
inexpressible regrets on our part, and fears of mis- 
fortune that may happen to him, and consequently 
to his family, which is a large and prominent one. 
Another, complaining that his charm had no more 
power,-either in fishing, or hunting, or trading, 
but above all, in gambling,-the Father asked him 
what would be necessary to restore to it its virtue. 
" A feast, " replied the barbarian, 'c but how? I have 
neither meat nor fish! " 
I do not know how to characterize feasts, as regards 
our Savages. They are the oil of their ointments, 
the honey of their medicines, the preparations for 
their hardships, a star [17 I] for their guidance, the 
Alcyon of their repose, the spring of their activities 
and of their Ascwandics,- in short, the general 
instrument or condition without which nothing is 
done. It is to this and for this that the best pieces 
are reserved, of which the whole family will deprive 


210 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

(VOL. 17 

tables facrifices, particulierement lors que Ie fonge 
ou la maladie demande Ie maffacre d'vn chien, com- 
me nous auons tantoft dit; ce qui n'arriue que trop 
fouuent. 
Mais pour retourner à nos Afc
andics ou diables 
familiers, la ref ponfe commune de ceux que nous 
perfecutons fur ce fujet; eft, qu'il n'y a perfonne qui 
n'en ait, & que s'ils n'en auoient, ils feroient en tout 
& par tout mal-heureux. II eft vray, qu'il y a en 
cela du plus & du moins: quelques vns en ont en 
nombre & de plus exprés & plus efficaces que les 
autres. Les vns les acheptent des Nations voifines, 
particulierement des Algonquains qui font en repu- 
tation d'en auoir d'excellens, [172] & c'eft la mar- 
chandife la plus chere & precieufe du pais, les autres 
les ont herité de leurs parens. C'eft de la façon 
qu'en auoit eu Ie Chreftien fufmentionné de ce bourg, 
Iofeph Chih
atenh
a, qui auffi-tofi qu'il eut appris 
que cela eftoit contre les commandemens de Dieu, & 
Iuy defplaifoit, Ie ietta bien loing au premier voyage 
qu'il fit: par ou depuis lors qu'il repaffe, il a tou- 
fiours peur qu'il ne fe remette dans fon fac, comme 
il eft arriué à plufieurs, qui par defpit de n'auoir pas 
eu ce qu'ils auoient demandé ayans ietté leur Afc
an- 
die, I' ont apres trouué, ou dans leur fac, ou dans 
quelqu'vne de leur quaiffe. 
Ie ne diray rien des Vifiteurs ou Medecins, nom- 
mez en leur langue Ocata: ny auffi des Apotiquaires, 
ou donneurs de remedes, nommez Ontetfans. Ie 
diray feulement que les premiers fe feruent fouuent 
d' eau ou de feu pour recognoifire I' eftat & Ie mal de 
la perfonne malade, & prononcer en fuite leurs ordon- 
nances: & ce toufiours auec les circonftances de tortuë 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE' S RELA TION. r6.J9 

211 

itself in order to save them for the emergencies of a 
dream or of sickness, the Devil having induced them 
always to keep and reserve for him the best and finest. 
And it is this that gives reason to call them veri- 
table sacrifices, especially when the dream or the 
sickness requires the slaughter of a dog, as we said a 
little while ago,- which happens only too often. 
Bu t to return to our Ascwandics or familiar demons; 
the common answer of those whom we importune 
upon this subject is, that there is not one who does 
not have them, and that, if they did not have them, 
they would be always and everywhere unlucky. It 
is true that there is more or less difference in these; 
some persons have many of them, and some are more 
positive and efficacious than are others. Some buy 
them from the neighboring Nations, especially from 
the Algonquains, who are reputed to have excellent 
ones, [172] and this is the most costly and precious 
merchandise of the country; others have inherited 
them from their relatives. It was in this way that 
one came into the possession of the above-mentioned 
Christian of this village, Joseph Chihwatenhwa,- 
who, as soon as he learned that this was contrary to 
the commandments of God and displeased him, 
threw it far away on the first journey he made; and 
since then, when he passes over that route, he is 
always afraid that it will return into his pouch,- as 
has happened to several, who, through vexation at 
not having obtained what they had asked for, hav- 
ing thrown away their Ascwandic, found it after- 
wards in their pouch, or in one of their chests. 
I will say nothing of the Visitors or Physicians, 
called in their language C C Ocata;" nor of their Apoth- 
ecaries, or givers of remedies, called C C Ontetsans." 


212 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

qu'ils remuent, dont nous auons parlé cy-deffus, & 
de chanfon qu'ils chantent, & autres circonfiances 
du tout impertinentes. 
[173] Les feconds ne donnent auffi d'ordinaire 
leurs remedes qu'auec 1'appareille de femblables cir- 
con fiances , & des exhortations à leurs remedes, d'a- 
uoir l'effeét pretendu. Que fi l'Ocata, ou Vifiteur a 
prononcé que c' efi vn fort; l' Apotiquaire ou l' Aret- 
fan ne manque pas de faire voir quelque chofe dans 
fa main par foupleffe ou autrement, & quelquefois 
dans la matiere qu'il a fait vomir, de ce qui dans Ie 
fens commun de ceux du pais paffe pour fort. 
Les 
enroronons, qui font ces efirangers arriuez de 
nouueau en ce pays, dont nous auons par1é aux Cha- 
pitres precedens, font excellens pour tirer vne Heche 
du corps & en guerir Ia playe, mais la recepte n'a 
point de force qu'en pre fence d'vne femme groffe: 
dont Ie diable a rendu Ia circon fiance gran dement 
confiderable en ces pays, foit à bon-heur, foit à mal- 
heur en mille rencontres & occafions, mais il faut bri- 
fer icy. 
En voila affez pour fair voir vn efchantillon de 
l' eftat miferable de ces pauures peuples parmy lef- 
quels nous viuons. Ce qui ne peut qui ne donne de 
la compaffion à tous ceux qui ont vne foy fainéte 
[174] & viue, de ce que les hommes font à Dieu, 
& Dieu aux hommes, & de ce que nous deuenons 
apres la mort. 
Ie prie tous ceux qui ietteront les yeux fur ce narré 
de confiderer Ie befoin que nous auons de leurs 
fainétes prieres & deuotions? veu Ies combats & batail- 
les que nous auons à liurer & à fouftenir tous les 
iours, pour efiablir en ce pays vn autre Souuerain 


1639-40] 

LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, r639 

213 

I will only mention that the former often employ 
water or fire to ascertain the condition and disease 
of the sick person, and to give their orders accord- 
ingly,-this being always accompanied by the shak- 
ing of the tortoise, which we have already mentioned, 
and the singing of songs, and by other altogether 
senseless adjuncts. 
[173] The latter class also do not usually give their 
remedies except with the pomp of similar accompani- 
ments, and with exhortations to their remedies to 
attain the desired effect. But if the Ocata, or Visitor, 
has declared that it is a case of a charm, the Apothe- 
cary, or the Aretsan, does not fail to show something 
in his hand, by dexterity or otherwise, and some- 
times in the matter that has been vomited up, which, 
in the general opinion of the natives, passes for a 
charm. 
The Wenroronons,- those strangers who recently 
arrived in this country, and of whom we have spok- 
en in preceding Chapters,- excel in drawing an arrow 
from the body and in curing the wound; but the pre- 
scription has no efficacy except in the presence of a 
pregnant woman, whose condition the devil has 
rendered highly important in these countries, for 
good as well as bad luck, in a thousand contingencies 
and occasions. But we must break off here. 
This is enough to give a specimen of the wretched 
condition of these poor peoples among whom we 
live, which cannot fail to inspire with compassion all 
those who possess a holy and living faith [174] in 
what men are to God, and God is to men, and in 
what becomes of us after death. 
I pray all those who shall cast their eyes over this 
narrative to consider the need we have of their holy 


214 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL 17 

que celuy qui depuis tous les fiecles y a fi tirannique- 
ment vfurpé l'empire de Dieu & de IESVS CHRIST, 
pour les droids & la gloire duquel puiffions nous tous 
efire confommez. Ainfi foit-il. 


1639-40) 

LEJEUNE'S RELATION, r639 

215 

prayers and devotions,-seeing the combats and bat- 
tles we have to give and sustain every day, in order 
to establish in this country a Sovereign other than 
he who, since all ages, has tyranically usurped the em- 
pire of God and of JESUS CHRIST, for whose rights and 
glory may we all entirely devote ourselves. Amen. 


xxxv - XXXVII 

MISCELLANEOUS DOCUMENTS, 16 4 0 

XXXV.- Lettre du P. Hierosme Lalemant, à Mgr. Cardinal 
Duc de Richelieu; Des Hurons, 28 mars, 164 0 
XXXVI.- Epistola Patris Hieronymi Lalemant, ad R. P. 
Mutium Vitelleschi, Præpositum Generalem; 
Apud Hurones, I ApriL, 1640 
XXXVII.- Epistola Patris Jacobi Buteux, ad R. P. Mutium 
Vitelleschi, Præpositum Generalem; Tria Flu- 
mina, [1640] 

SOURCE: Document XXXV. is reprinted from Roche- 
monteix's Les Jésuz"tes et la Nouvelle-France, vol. i., pp. 
479 - 481; the French original is in the Archives du minis- 
tère des Affaires étrangères, Paris. For Documents XXXVI. 
and XXXVII., we follow Father Felix Martin's apographs 
of the original Latin, MSS. Soc. Jes. 


218 

LES RELA TIOJ'.lS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL 17 

[479] Lettre du P. Hierosme Lalemant de la Com- 
pagnie de Jésus à Monseigneur l'Emi- 
nentissime Cardinal Due 
de Richelieu. 

Des Hurons en la N ouvelle- France 
28 mars 1640. 
M ONSEIGNEUR, 
Les dernières lettres qui nous sont venues 
de France l' automne passé, nous ont fait sca- 
voir entr'autres choses qu'il avoit plû à V ostre Emi- 
nence estendre son zele et sa charité jusques à ce 
bout du monde où nous sommes, assignant un fond 
pour l' entretien de quelques uns de nostre Compa- 
gnie qui y travaillent à la conversion des barbares. 
11 faut avouër, Monseigneur, que c'est une des sen- 
sibles consolations que nous ayons receu, que de nous 
voir dans Ie souvenir d'une personne que les glori- 
euses actions ont rendu recommandable à toute la 
postérité: et les espérances que nous avons, du bon 
succès des affaires que la divine providence nous a 
mis en main, se sont trouvées accrües de beaucoup, 
nons voyant doresnavant employés par celui à qui se 
mesler d 'une affaire et lui causer un bon succès, sem- 
ble estre une mesme chose. Nous n'avons jamais 
pensé pouvoir faire à V otre Eminence un remerci- 
ment digne d'une telle faveur, mais nous avons bien 
eu du regret de ne pouvoir faire au moins plustost 
nous mesmes: celuy que nous pouvions. En atten- 


1639-40] 

.f. LA LEMA NT TO RICHELIEU 

219 

[479] Letter from Father Hierosme Lalemant of 
the Society of Jesus, to Monseigneur the 
Most Eminent Cardinal, Duke 
de Richelieu. 

From the Hurons in New France. 
March 28, 1640. 
M ONSEIGNEUR. 
The last letters that came to us from France 
last autumn made known to us, among other 
things, that it had pleased Your Eminence to extend 
your zeal and your charity even to this end of the 
world:where we are, assigning a fund for the main- 
tenance of some of our Society who work here for 
the conversion of the barbarians. It must be con- 
fessed, Monseigneur,_ that it is one of the touching 
consolations that we have received, to see ourselves 
remembered by a personage whom; glorious deeds 
have rendered deserving of praise from all posterity; 
and the hopes that we entertain, of a favorable out- 
come to the affairs that divine providence has placed 
in our hands, are materially strengthened by seeing 
ourselves henceforth employed by one to whom tak- 
ing
part in an affair and bringing it to a successful 
issue, seem to be one and the <;ame thing. We never 
expected to be able to render Your Eminence thanks 
worthy of such a favor, but we have deeply regretted 
our inability to accomplish, at least sooner, what may 
be in our power. While awaiting the opportunity 


220 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

dant Ie moyen de nous en acquitter, nous avons tas- 
ché de satisfaire à l'intérest de ce retardement, par 
un redoublement de prières envers Dieu pour la santé 
et prospérité de V ostre Eminence: et voicy mainte- 
nant qu'au nom de tous ceux de nostre Compagnie 
qui sont icy, je Iuy en fay Ie plus humble et Ie plus 
cordial remerciment qui m'est possible. 
Que si V ostre Eminence désire scavoir en peu 
de mots quel bien a produit sa charité, voicy, Mon- 
seigneur, ce que j' en puis dire: On a annoncé 
l'Evangile à plus de dix mille sauvages, non tant en 
général, qu'à chaque famille, et presque à chaque 
personne [480] en particulier: on en a baptisé dans 
les maladies extraordinaires qui sont survenues plus 
de mille, dont au moins plusieurs petits enfans s'en 
sont envolés au Ciel; et pour comble de bonheur, on 
a enduré force persécutions. 
N ous trouvans assés forts de langue, pour nous 
estendre encore davantage, nous ne songeons qutau 
plus ultra; mais i1 faut avouër que les difficultés en 
sont du tout extraordinaires. 
j'abuserais de la patience de Vostre Eminence, de 
Ies Iuy déc1arer plus particulièrement; je lui diré 
seulement que nous avons icy toutes les difficultés 
de ceux qui ont travaillé en ces derniers sièc1es à la 
conversion des gentils, ou d'autres, qui pour Ie moins 
les esgalent; et nous n'avons, ny ne pouvons avoir, 
les secours et assistances qu' ont eu les autres pais. 
Cela ne nous fait aucunement perdre courage, nous 
souvenant du Maistre, qui nous applique à cette par- 
tie de son champ; au contraire, nous ne sommes pas 
peu consolés de nous voir engagés par son ordre à un 
employ, où nous sommes contraints de dépendre 
uniquement de sa Providence, et assistance. 


1639-40] 

J. LALEMANT TO RICHELIEU 

221 

for acquitting ourselves thereof, we have tried to 
make amends, with interest, for this delay by redou- 
bling our prayers to God for the health and prosperity 
of Your Eminence; and here I now offer you, in the 
name of all those of our Society who are here, the 
most humble and most cordial thanks that I am able 
to express. 
N ow if Your Eminence desire to know in a few 
words what good your charity has accomplished, this, 
Monseigneur, is what I can say: The Gospel has 
been announced to more than ten thousand savages, 
not only in general, but to each family, and almost 
to every person [480] individually; more than a 
thousand have been baptized, in the extraordinary 
epidemics which have come upon them, and of these 
many little children, at least, have taken flight to 
Heaven; and to crown this good fortune, we have 
endured many persecutions. 
Finding ourselves strong enough in the language 
to launch out still more, all our thoughts are of the 
plus ultra; but it must be confessed that the difficul- 
ties therein are altogether extraordinary. 
I would abuse the patience of Your Eminence by 
mentioning these in more detail; I will only say that 
we have here all the difficulties of those who have 
labored in these later centuries for the conversion of 
the Gentiles, or others that are at least equal to 
them,- and we have not, nor can we have, the suc- 
cor and assistance that the other countries have had. 
This causes us in no wise to lose courage, keeping 
in mind the Master who assigns us to this part of his 
field; on the contrary, we are not a little consoled at 
seeing ourselves engaged by his order in an occupa- 
tion in which we are obliged to depend solely upon 
his Providence and aid. 


222 

LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

Entre les difficultés que nous apprehendons plus 
grandes que jamais, au progrès des affaires de sa 
divine Majesté, est Ie voisinage des Anglais et Fla- 
mans, qui bordent les costes de l' océan de nostre 
costé, et qui rehaussent et fortifient puissament Ie 
courage des ennemis des peuples qui sont nos alliés, 
parmy lesquels nous vivons, et par Ie seul moyen 
desquels nous pouvons passer plus avant soit au mi- 
dy, soit à l'occident. Les entreprises de ces nations 
ennemies leur ayant, particulièrement depuis quel- 
ques années, réussi à souhait, ils ont reduit ces pauvres 
peuples icy à un tel poinct, que je ne croy pas que, 
si on n'arreste Ie mal en sa source, il puissent plus 
longtemps subsister; c'est ce qu'on accordera facile- 
ment si on considère qu' en moins de dix ans, ils se 
trouvent réduits du nombre de trente mille ames à 
celuy de dix mille; de sorte que si par Ie passé, dans 
la multitude qu'ils étoient, ils n'ont pu résister à leurs 
ennemis, qu'en pouvons nous esperer à I'avenir? 
Et quoy qu'ils se trouvassent assez puissans pour 
y résister encore quelque temps dans leur pais, il se 
faudrait au moins attendre, d'en voir bientost Ie com- 
merce entierement rompu avec nos françois, les enne- 
mis devenant tous les ans plus puissans, et plus re- 
doutables sur la rivière qui est I'unique passage qu'ils 
[481] ayent pour y arriver: cette rupture nous seroit 
esgale à leur ruine, puisqu' elle nous mettroit dans 
I'impuissance de subsister icy plus longtemps, et y 
faire les affaires de nostre Maistre, cela ne se pou- 
vant sans communication avec nostre France. 
Oserais-je, Monseigneur, dire la dessus à Vostre 
Eminence 
une de roes pensées, qu'il semble que Ie 
ciel attende de son zèle et de sa générosité, que 
comme elle n'a pu soufrir que l'heresie et les estran- 


1639-40] 

J. LALEMANT TO RICHELIEU 


23 

Among the difficulties that we apprehend to be 
more formidable than ever to the progress of the 
affairs of his divine Majesty, is the proximity of the 
English and Flemish, who line the seacoasts on our 
side, and who excite and strongly fortify the courage 
of the enemies of the tribes allied to us, among whom 
we live, and by whose means alone we can advance 
farther, either to the south or to the west. The 
enterprises of these hostile nations having succeeded, 
especially within a few years, according to their 
desires, they have reduced these poor peoples here to 
such a degree that I do not think, unless the evil be 
stopped at its source, that they can much longer exist. 
This will be readily granted, when one considers that 
in less than ten years they have become reduced from 
thirty thousand souls to ten thousand; so that if in 
the past, when their numbers were great, they were 
unable to resist their enemies, what can we expect 
for them in the future? 
And although they might prove strong enough to 
resist them for some time yet in their own country, 
we must at least expect soon to see their trade with 
our French entirely broken off,- for the enemies 
become every year stronger and more formidable 
upon the river, which is the only road they [481] 
have for access thither. This rupture would be, for 
us, equivalent to their ruin, since it would render us 
unable to subsist here longer, and to carryon among 
them the affairs of our Master, which cannot be done 
without communication with our France. 
Might I dare, 11onseigneur, to express thereupon 
to Your Eminence one of my thoughts,-that it 
seems as if heaven expects from your zeal and gen- 
erosity that, as you could not suffer heresy and for- 


224 

LES RELATIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

gers jettassent en France de plus grandes racines, 
aussy ne permette elle pas qu'en ce nouveau fleuron 
de la couronne, ils y prennent pié. 11 semble jus- 
ques icy, que Dieu a eu aggréable de reserver à Vos- 
tre Eminence l' exécution de tous les de sirs et sou- 
haits de la France, voire mesme pour Ie regard de la 
nouvelle. On demandait autrefois avec tant d'ardeur 
l'expulsion des huguenots qui tenaient Ie milieu de 
ces terres; sans Vostre Eminence, qui a pour ce sujet 
sacrifié ses propres intérests, la chose serait encore à 
faire, au grand préjudice du bien de ce pays: je tiens 
pour assuré, que de cent ans d'icy, et peut-estre ja- 
mais, nous ne nous voirons quittes de ces autres enne- 
mis de Dieu et de I' Estat, si V ostre Eminence ne 
met la main à cet ouvrage. Peut estre que les ad- 
vantages que l' on feroit à quelque particulier assisté 
de vos faveurs, Monseigneur, et de l'autorité de sa 
Majesté, leveroient bien des difficu1tés, qui se pou- 
ront rencontrer en ce dessein; mais il nous suffit 
pour en bien espérer que V ostre Eminence l' ayt 
agréé. J' espère, Monseigneur, que vous me par- 
donnerez cette liberté; mais je m'assure que Vostre 
Eminence Ie feroit encore plus volontiers, si elle 
pouvait connoistre l'inclination et 1'affection avec 
laquelle [nous] touts tant qui sommes icy de nostre 
Compagnie, souhaitons et demandons à Dieu la con- 
servation, et Ie comble de tant de bénédictions que 
son infinie liberalité a versé sur elle, mais moy par- 
ticulièrement qui suis, 
Monseigneur, 
Les Hurons en la Nouvelle- 
France, ce 28 de mars 1640. 

Vostre tres humble, tres 
obeissant, e très obligé 
serviteur selon Dieu. 
Hierosme LALEMANT, 
de la Compagnie de J ésus. 


1639-40] 

J. LALEMANT TO RICHELIEU 

225 

eigners to take deeper root in France, so you will not 
permit them to gain a foothold in this new jewel of 
the crown? It would seem that, hitherto, God has 
been pleased to reserve to Your Eminence the execu- 
tion of all the desires and wishes of France, even as 
regards new France. Some time ago, the expulsion 
of the Huguenots, who occupied the midst of these 
lands, was so eagerly desired; without Your Emi- 
nence, who for this object sacrificed your own inter- 
ests,11 the thing would still remain to be done, to 
the great detriment of the welfare of this country. 
I regard it as certain, that not for a hundred years 
hence, and perhaps never, shall we see ourselves rid 
of these other enemies of God and of the State, if 
Your Eminence do not put your hand to this work. 
Perhaps the advantages that might accrue to some 
individual assisted by your favors, Monseigneur, and 
by the authority of his Majesty, would remove many 
of the difficulties that may be encountered in this 
plan; but it is enough for us to hope that it may be 
acceptable to Your Eminence. I trust, Monseigneur, 
that you will pardon me this liberty. but I am sure 
that Your Eminence would do so still more willingly 
if you could know the interest and affection with 
which all of our Society who are here desire, and 
request from God, the continuance and the plenitude 
of the many blessings that his infinite liberality has 
poured out upon you,- but especially I, who am, 
Monseigneur, 
The H UTons, New France, 
this 28th of March, 1640. 

Your most humble, most 
obedient, and most 
obliged servant in God, 
Hierosme LALEMANT, 
of the Society of Jesus. 


226 

LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

Epistola Patris Hieronymi Lalemant, Superioris 
Missionis Huronensis, ad Reverendissimum 
Patrem Mutium Vitelleschi, Præ- 
positum Generalem Socie- 
tatis Jesu, Romæ. 

M ISSIONES habuimus 5 in his huronum regio- 
nibus: amplius quam 10,000 barbaris prædi- 
cantium Evangelium, idq. singulis eorum 
familiis. Linguam habebamus et ipsi aures. Deo 
in quibusdem occasionibus ministri defectum sup- 
plente, et tamen dum sani corpore fuerunt, non au- 
dierunt: placuit igitur Deo aures vellere per quoddam 
pestilentiæ genus, quod universam regionem perva- 
sit et plures sepulchro addixit, verum nihilo meliores 
facti sunt, immo solito amplius exacerbati, in nos 
tanquam in autores mum suorum malorum conversi 
sunt: nescio quibus nos calumniis non oppresserunt, 
ventum ad minas, ad infestationem, ad privata et 
generalia de internecione nostra consilia, ad verbera 
denique sed levia et non dum sanguine multo tincta; 
aliquid amplius nisi Deus aliter statuat, prima occa- 
sione suspicamur et speramus. Certe mi- 
rari satis non possumus quod nUnc etiam vivimus; 
nam præterquam quod sine ullo milite, aut loci 
præsidio hie sumus, cum ne una quidem frumenti pa- 


1639-40] J. LA LEMA NT TO THE GENERAL 227 

Letter from Father Jerome Lalemant, Superior 
of the Huron Mission, to the Very Rev- 
erend Father Mutio Vitelleschi, 
General of the Society of 
Jesus, at Rome. 

W E have had 5 Missions in these regions of the 
H urons,- preaching the Gospel to more 
than 10,000 barbarians, and that to their 
several families. We had the tongue, and they them- 
selves the ears,-God on certain occasions supplying 
the want of a minister,-and yet, while they were 
sound in body, they did not hear; it therefore pleased 
God to pull their ears through a certain kind of pes- 
tilence, which spread over the whole country, and 
adjudged many to the grave. Nevertheless, they 
have become nowise better,-nay, they are even 
more incensed at us than usual, and have turned upon 
us as if we were the authors of all their troubles. I 
know not with what calumnies they have not loaded 
us; they have come to threats, to hostility, to private 
and public councils respecting our slaughter, and 
finally to blows,- but light ones, and not yet stained 
with much blood. We suspect and look for some- 
thing further, on the first occasion, unless God deter- 
mine otherwise. Certainly, we cannot suffi- 
ciently wonder that we are even now alive; for- 
besides the fact that we are here without any soldier 
or local defense,- since we have not even a grain of 


228 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

trii granum nisi barbaris illis vendentibus habeamus, 
ne sine ipsis ab ullo aut ulla ratione habere hactenus 
potuerimus, facillimum erat ipsis, et nunc adhuc est 
vel ex condicto victum negando, eoque tendere visi 
sunt pervenire: et tamen quæ fuit erga nos Dei pro- 
videntia, nec nobis, nec domesticis nostris 27 scilicet 
capitibus, nihil quicquam defuit eorum quæ his in 
locis ad victum et vestitum sunt usui immo et viliori 
pretio õia nobis quam indigenis ipsis, abunde sup- 
peditata. 
Cæterum nequicquam fremente dæmone, ex mori- 
bundis baptisati plus 1000, inter quos infantes pluri- 
mi vitam infelicem felici morte prævenerunt. Istud 
nos feliciter dicam, an infeliciter fefellet, cum enim 
non exiguos nascentis ecclesiæ nostræ progressus hoc 
anno speraremus, ecclesiam quidem nova prole fæ- 
cundavimus, sed non eam quam intendebamus, de 
militanti enim erat cogitatio nostra, et providit Deus 
triumph anti. Is enim fuit his temporibus persecu- 
tionis turbo ut non tantum nulla facta fuerit ad 
militantem nostram ecclesiam accessio, verum etiam 
congregatam illam superiore anno, pene omnino dis- 
persarit et aboleverit: suspicamur eum forte ordinem 
esse in decretis Dei, et per triumphantem barbaro- 
rum nostrorum ecclesiam, militans hæc statuatur; 
Dominus est, quod bonum est in oculis suis faciat; 
certe semen nobis reliquit, sed exiguum illud et te- 
nue, capita tria vel quatuor familiarum, anus aliquot 
semen omnino sinapis dicas, aut fermentum illud 


1639-40] J. LALEMANT TO THE GENERAL 229 

native corn, except as these barbarians sell it,-nor 
without them have we hitherto been able to obtain 
it from anyone or by any process-it was therefore, 
and certainly is now, very easy for them by conven- 
tion to cut off our food, and this they have appar- 
ently striven to accomplish. And yet, such has been 
God's providence toward us that neither for us nor 
for our 27 domestics, forsooth, has anything at all 
been wanting of those things which in these places 
are usual in the way of food and clothing: nay, even, 
all things were abundantly supplied to us at a cheap- 
er rate than to the natives themselves. 
But, the demon raging in vain, more than 1,000 
were baptized from among the dying, among whom 
a great number of children prevented an unhappy 
life by a happy death. This, I will say, deceived us, 
whether happily or unhappily; for, while we hoped 
for no small progress in our infant church this year, 
we did indeed enrich the church with a new offspring, 
but not the one which we had in mind: for our 
thought was of the church militant, whereas God 
provided for the church triumphant. For such was 
the disturbance in these times of persecution, that 
not only has no addition been made to our church 
militant, but even the one congregated last year has 
been almost altogether dispersed and disbanded: we 
surmise that this disposition is perhaps in the decrees 
of God, and that, through the triumphant church of 
our barbarians, this militant one may be established. 
He is the Lord: let him do what is good in his sight. 
Certainly he has left us a seed, but that a small and 
scanty one,- three or four heads of families, a few 
old women,-a seed altogether as of mustard you 
may say, or that hidden leaven of the gospel, and 


230 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

evangelii absconditum, atque utinam! verum quid 
non speramus adjuti Væ pis vix et totius Societatis 
nostræ SS. et pp. 
apud hurones in nova Gallia 
I april. 1640 

A. R. P. V. 
servus humill. et obseq. idemq. 
fil. in C. indig. 
HIERON. LALEMANT. 


1639-40] J. LALEMANT TO THE GENERAL 231 

would it might be that! What indeed do we not 
hope in the way of help from Your Paternity and 
from the Sacrifices and prayers of our whole So- 
ciety? . 
Among the Hurons in new France, 
I April, 16 4 0 . 
Your Very Reverend Paternity's 
most humble and obedient and 
likewise unworthy son in Christ, 
JEROME LALEMANT. 


232 

LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

Epistola Patris Jacobi Buteux ad Reverendissimum 
Patrem Mutium Vitelleschi, Præpositum 
Generalem Societatis Jesu, Romæ. 

A. R. IN XoP. 

P.C. 

Sex anni sunt, cum missus in canadensem pro- 
yinciam totidem annos in residentia. Conceptæ B. V. 
ad tria flumina peregi. De qua paucis scribere ad 
V. P. ex officio. Quartum jam annum superioris 
habeo. Quod si adhuc non præstiti, dabit hoc potius 
animo pusillo vel ignorantiæ vitio quam negligentiæ. 
Sita est hæc residentia ad ripas fluminis quod à sep- 
tentrionali parte in celeberrimum Sti Laurentii flumen 
per tres alv[eJos influit. cælum habet salubre, 
solum vero ferendis frugibus, turn nostratibus tritico 
scilicet, ordeo, pisis, cujusque generis oleribus, turn 
indicis seminibus idoneum. frequentibus undique 
fluviis ac stagnis, iisque piscibus abundantissimis in- 
tersecatur. Vnde fit ut a Gallis juxta ac sylvestri- 
bus ametur. hi non ita multi cum prim urn huc 
appulimus imo et sequentibus 4 annis nos quasi leta- 
lis morbi (quo absumebantur) autores publice con vi- 
teabantur. Sed tandem (quod est Dei beneficium) 
procul ab eorum mentibus recessit hæc opinio. Pa- 
rentum loco nos habent, mansuetiores fiunt, et qui 


1639-40] 

BUTEUX TO THE GENERAL 

233 

letter from Father Jacques Buteux to the Very 
Reverend Father, Mutio Vitelleschi, General 
of the Society of Jesus, at Rome. 

V ERY REVEREND FATHER IN CHRIST, 
Pax Christi. 
Six years have elapsed since I was sent to 
the Canadian province; I have spent the same num- 
ber of years in the residence of the Conception of 
the Blessed Virgin at the three rivers, concerning 
which I have a few things to write to Your Paternity 
officially. I am now serving my fourth year as 
superior. But if hitherto I have not fulfilled this 
office, you will assign the fact rather to my limited 
mind or to the fault of ignorance, than to neglect. 
This residence is situated on the banks of a river 
which flows into the very famous river Saint Law- 
rence by three mouths, from the north. The climate 
is salubrious; the soil, indeed, adapted to bearing 
fruits not only for our fellow countrymen,-namely, 
w heat, barley, peas, and vegetables of every kind,- 
but also Indian grains. It is everywhere cut up by 
numerous rivers and marshes; and these are very 
abundant in fish. Whence it happens that it is loved 
nearly as much by the French as by the savages. 
These, not in very great numbers, publicly abused 
us when we first landed here,-and that, too, in the 
following 4 years,- as the authors of a certain mor- 
tal disease (by which they were consumed). But 
finally (which is a favor from God), this opinion has 


234 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

ultra hominum memoriam quærendo per sylvas victu 
assuescebant, agros hoc anno sedesque fixas juxta nos 
habere cæperunt. Magnum certe imo et necessari- 
um adjumentum ad illos informandos, continendos- 
que in officio christiano. Crescit in dies crescetque 
illorum numerus. Alios enim sylvestres tum finiti- 
mos turn remotos quibuscum agunt muneribus ad nos 
pellicere sibique concives adsciscere nituntur. fre- 
quentes intersunt iis quæ spectant ad pietatem cul- 
tumq. divinum. Ab eo tempore quo versamur inter 
eos hic ad 500 sacris aquis lustravimus quorum pleri- 
que (infantes certe) cælo fruuntur. Alii non minus 
assidui sunt in obeundis hominis christiani partibus, 
quam nostrates Galli aliunde sane pii, quibus adagium 
immerito tribuebatur. cælum, non animum mutant, 
qui trans mare currunt. Adeo ut tritum sit inter 
Gallos qui velit melior fieri transeat in novam fran- 
dam. 
Ad hoc magnopere confert Gubernatoris hujusce 
novi orbis Dni. Montmagny, militensis eques viri 
sane satis nunquam laudati, singularis prudentia, 
quæ non vulgari adjuncta pietati omnia continet in 
officio. Sed de hac nostra residentia jam satis. 
De superioribus novæ franciæ partibus dicam bre- 
viter quod a sylvestribus accepi, septentrionem inter 
meridiemq. fixæ sunt nationes oppidis hominibusq. 
numerosissimæ. Ad illas Europæorum nemo, nec- 
dum Evangelii præco accessit, saltern Europæus. De 
barbaris aliquis ad quasdam eorum perferre potuit 


1639-40] 

BUTEUX TO THE GENERAL 

2
!} 

receded far from their minds. They regard us as 
parents; they become gentler; and those who beyond 
the memory of men were accustomed to seek their liv- 
ing through the forests, begin this year to have fields 
and fixed abodes the same as we. It is surely a great, 
nay, even a necessary, help for training them and 
keeping them in the Christian duty. Their number 
grows and will increase from day to day. For they 
strive to allure to us, by means of rewards, other sav- 
ages, both neighboring and remote, with whom they 
deal; and to unite these with themselves as fellow 
citizens. They are frequently interested in those 
things which regard piety and divine worship. Since 
we have been occupied among them, we have here 
purified about 500 with the sacred waters; most of 
whom (certainly the children) are enjoying heaven. 
Others are no less assiduous in discharging the duties 
of a Christian man than our French fellow country- 
men,-truly pious, moreover; to whom the adage 
was unjustly applied, cælum, non animum mutant, qui 
trans mare currunt,-insomuch that it is proverbial 
among the French, that" he who wishes to become 
better, let him cross over to new France." 
To this there greatly contributes the singular pru- 
dence of the Governor of this new world - the Sieur 
de Montmagny, a military man surely never suffi- 
ciently praised - which, in connection with an uncom- 
mon piety, keeps all things in due order. But 
enough of this our residence. 
Concerning the upper parts of new France, I will 
briefly say what I have learned from the savages: 
between the north and the south are some stationary 
nations, greatly abounding in towns and men. To 
these, no European, nor yet a herald of the Gospel, 


236 

LES RELA TIO.NS DES JÉSUITES 

[VOL. 17 

quod a nobis audivit de evangelio; bene spero de 
nostris sy1vestribus christianis. horum enim bene- 
ficio (juvante Deo) patebit aditus Evangelio ejusq. 
lumen affu1gebit ambu1antibus in tenebris et umbra 
mortis. 
Ad opus tam arduum opus est hôibus bonæ va1e- 
tudinis, felicis memoriæ probatæq. virtutis. Sunt 
hie ubi jam degimus obviæ passim cruces (ut ita 10- 
quar) at i1lic tota nostrorum vita quos Spiritus sanctus 
ad suum opus segregavit tota crux erit. Quod de me 
futurum sit ignoro. Quod si me divina bonitas 
(nil sub meritum) tanti boni participem faciat, 0 me 
beatum! qui ad impleam in corpore mea quæ desunt 
passionum Christi. Interim sacris vestræ P. geni- 
bus advo1var a qua pusillus sacram benediction em 
præsto1abor. 

A. R. in C. P. 
humill. in D. fil. 
JACOBUS BUTEUX 

In Residentia Conceptionis 
ad 3 fiumina. 


1639-40] 

BUTEUX TO THE GENERAL 

237 

has come,- at least not a European herald. Some 
one of the barbarians may have conveyed to certain 
of these nations what he has heard of the gospel from 
us. I hope well of our Christian savages: for by 
their favor (God helping), entrance for the Gospel will 
be opened, and its light will shine upon them that 
walk in darkness and in the shadow of death. 
For a work so arduous there is need of men of good 
health, excellent memory, and proved virtue. There 
are here where we have already lived, crosses every- 
where at hand (so to speak), but there the whole of 
our life,- of those whom the holy Ghost has set 
apart for his work,- will be one whole cross. What 
is to become of me, I know not. But if the divine 
goodness make me (not at all through my deserts) 
partaker of so great a good,- 0 happy me! who 
shall fulfill in my body what sufferings are wanting 
to Christ. Meanwhile I am prostrate at your Pater- 
nity's sacred knees: whose holy blessing I shall 
humbly expect. 

Very Reverend Father in Christ, 
your most humble son in the Lord, 
JACQUES BUTEUX. 
At the Residence of the Conception 
at 3 rivers. 



BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XVII 

XXXIV 
For bibliographical particulars of this document, 
see Vol. XV. 

XXXV - XXXVII 
Document XXXV. is a letter sent by Jerome Lale- 
mant to Cardinal Richelieu, from the Huron coun- 
try, under date of March 28, 1640. The original 
French MS. is in the archives of the minister of 
Foreign Affairs, in Paris. We follow the version 
given in Rochemonteix's Jlsuz"tes et la Nouvelle-France, 
vol. i., PP.479-481. 
Document XXXVI. is a Latin letter written to the 
Father General by Lalemant, also from the Huron 
country, under date of April I. The original is in 
the archives of the Society. vVe follow Father Felix 
Martin's apograph thereof, made by him while in 
Europe in 1858, and now in the Archives of St. Mary's 
College, Montreal. 
Document XXXVII. is also a Latin letter to the 
Father General, written by Jacques Buteux, at Three 
Rivers. It is undated, but internally bears evidence 
of having been sent in 1640. The original is in 
the Society's archives; we follow Father Martin's 
-apograph, as above. 



NOTES TO VOL. XVII 

(Figuru in þarenthues, following member of note, rifer to þagu 
of English text.) 

I {p. 2s).-Regarding the Wenrôhronons, see vol. xvi., note IS. 
2 {p. 49).-The arms, utensils, ornaments, and dress introduced 
by the French, in their barter for peltries, were at once seen by the 
IndIans to be superior to those manufactured by themselves, and 
were eagerly sought. The French early induced the natives to turn 
their attention almost exclusively to the hunting of fur-bearing ani- 
mals,- to this end teaching them the use of European firearms. 
The tribesmen finding it easier to acquire what goods they needed 
by trading furs for them, many of the arts of domestic manufacture 
were soon lost among them; and, in time, they became almost 
wholly dependent on white traders for their supplies. 
3 (p. 59).-For location of Teanaustayaé, see vol. xiii., note 2; 
also map in vol. x., facing p. 319. 
4 (p. 65).- For sketch of this and of the other Iroquois clans, see 
vol. viii., note 34. 
5 {p. 99).-Martin (Life of Jogues, app. A.) is correct in saying 
that there were two missions bearing the name of St. Ignace. The 
one captured by the Iroquois in 1649 was apparently thus named but 
a short time before its destruction (Relation of 1648, chap. ix.); it 
was not more than five miles from Ste. Marie-on-the-Wye. 
The other, known by the Hurons as Taenhatentaron, is placed by 
Lalemant (Relation of 1644, chap. vii.) at a distance of about six 
leagues from Ste. Marie; this is evidently the St. Ignace marked on 
Du Creux's map as near Sturgeon River. Martin inclined to the 
view that this mission was situated on what is now the Fox farm- 
lot no. 20, in concession 10 of Medonte township, on the slope facing 
Coldwater River; for, when he visited the district (1845; see vol. v., 
p. 295), the remains found on this farm were upon the only sIte then 
known in the neighborhood. In subsequent years, however, when 
the forest came to be cleared, remains indicating other sites were 
found from two to three miles west of this one, and facing Sturgeon 
River. One of these corresponds more closely than does the Fox 
site, with the reference in the text to Taenhatentaron, as being 
about five miles from St. Joseph (Teanaustayaé), and also with the 


242 

LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 

position assigned to that village by Du Creux; it also furnishes 
better evidence in other respects. 
Taché appears to have overlooked the distinction between the two 
villages named St. Ignace. He minutely examined the site on the 
Fox farm in the mistaken belief that it was the scene of Brébeuf's 
and Lalemant's martyrdom (Parkman's Jesuits, p. 385, note),-in 
this, adopting Martin's view, and also forgetting that there was a 
second St. Ignace; so that the site thus designated by him does not 
correspond with the true position of either mission. The St. Ignace 
at which the martyrs perished was in the present Tay township, 
about ten miles distant from Taenhatentaron.-A. F. HUNTER. 
6 (p. 159).-See Brébeuf's account of the game of dish, in vol. x., 
pp. 187, 189. Cf. Davis's II Indian Games," in Essex Inst. Bull., 
vol. xvii., pp. 106-114; by him it is called" the game of platter." 
7 (p. 161).-This II resuscitation" of a dead person is thus de- 
scribed by Sagard (Voy. Hurons, pp. 289, 290): .. The Attiuoin- 
darons celebrate Resurrections of the dead,- especially of persons 
who deserved well of the country by their signal services,- in order 
that the memory of illustrious and valorous men may, in some sort, 
IÏ\ye again in others. Accordingly, they convene assemblies for this 
purpose, and hold councils, at which they choose one of their num- 
ber who has the same virtues and characteristics (if such a person 
can be found), as he whom they purpose to resuscitate,- or, at 
least, his life must be without reproach among a Savage people. 
Proceeding, then, to the Resurrection, they all stand upright, except 
him who is to raise the dead; on him they impose the name of the 
deceased, and all, placing their hands low down, feign to raise him 
from the ground,- meaning by this that they draw out of the tomb 
that eminent deceased personage, and bring him back to life in the 
person of this other man. The latter stands up, and, after loud 
acclamations from the people, he receives the gifts offered by those 
who are present, who repeat their congratulations at many feasts, 
and thenceforth regard him as if he were the deceased person whom 
he represents. Thus the memory of good persons, and of worthy 
and valorous Captains, never dies among them." The names given 
by the Indians to the missionaries were, in accordance with this 
custom, continued to their respective successors,- as Echon, pass- 
ing from Brébeuf to Chaumonot (vol. v., note 44); and Teharonhia- 
gannra, as Le Mercier and Milet were entitled by the Iroquois, was 
their name, two hundred years later, for Father Marcoux (Shea's 
Cath. Missions, p. 345). Cf." Patliasse," among the Micmacs (vol. 
i., note 25). 
Of interest, in this connection, is a phase of the belief in transmi- 
gration of souls, current among the tribes of the Northwest, thus 


NOTES TO VOL. XVII 

243 

described by Dorman (Prim. Suþersti'ti'ons, P.45): II The medicine- 
men of the Cocomes pretend to receive the spirit of the dead in their 
hands, and are able to transfer it to anyone, who then takes the 
name of the dead person. When a body is burned among the Tacul- 
lies, the priest receives the spirit of the deceased into his hands; 
and, with a motion as though throwing it, he blows the spirit into 
some person selected, who takes the name of the deceased in addi- 
tion to his own. " 
8 (p. 165).- Outay: probably the black squirrel, then abundant 
in the region of the Great Lakes, and valued for its fur. Sagard 
thus describes the Huron Otay (Voy. Hurons, p. 308), which he 
probably fails to class among the squirrels of that country (pp. 
305-306) only because of its size-the other Canadian species of 
squirrel being much smaller than those of France: .. They have 
another species of animal named Otay, as large as a small Rabbit; 
this has very black fur, so soft, smooth, and fine that it resembles 
plush. They highly value these skins, of which they make robes, 
placing around the edges of these all the heads and tails." This 
sort of trimming suggests to Lafitau .. the Amices of the Canons." 
Charlevoix (Nouv. France, vol. i., p. 273) says: II But the finest 
Peltry of this [Iroquois] country is the skin of the black Squirrel. 
This animal is as large as a Cat three months old; it is exceedingly 
agile, but very gentle and easily caught. The Iroquois make robes 
of this, which they sell for as much as seven or eight pistoles." Cf. 
Le Jeune (vol. vii. of this series, p. 13). 
9 (p. 167).-Cf. Brébeuf's description of Ononharoia and other 
superstitious rites (vol. x., pp. 175, 183). 
10 (p. 191).-Brenesche: the wild goose of Canada (Bernicla 
canadensis, Baird; Anser canadensis, Audubon), or outarde (Prov. 
austarda, from Lat. avi's tarda); it is especially abundant along 
the lower St. Lawrence and the Atlantic coast. 
II (p. 225).- Reference is here made to the compensation given 
to the De Caens for their losses in connection with the dissolution 
of their company by Montmorency, and, later, with Kirk's capture 
of Quebec; see vol. iv., pp. 257, 258. Cf. Le Jeune's allusion (vol. 
viii., p. 229): II They rejoice to be delivered from the importunity 
of a man whose hands it has been necessary to bind with chains of 
gold." 



I") <'1:1 

\ 
'J 


.. 
) 

. 

. 
. 
. 


