Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 9: Quebec, 1636
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1897 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits09jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits09jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits09jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 9 of 73.

---

ii— 



to 

3)1 



THE JESUIT RELATIONS 

AND 

ALLIED DOCUMENTS 


VOL. IX 



The edition consists of sev- 
en hundred and fifty sets 
all numbered 



l-^hi^ 


^nLaC '^^^ PROPERTY OF 

THE LAW SOCIET 

The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 


Travels and Explorations 
OF THE Jesuit Missionaries 

IN New France 

1610-1791 

THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES ; ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 

EDITED BY 

REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 


Vol. IX 

QUEBEC: 1636 


CLEVELAND: ttbe J8urtow6 Brotbetg 

Compatlfi, PUBLISHERvS. MDCCCXCVII 


Copyright, 1897 

BY 

The Burrows Brothers Co 


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 


The Imperial Press, Cleveland 


EDITORIAL STAFF 


Editor 


Translators 


Assistant Editor 


Reuben Gold Thwaites 
Mary Sifton Pepper 
William Frederic Giese 
Crawford Lindsay 
William Price 
Percy Favor Bicknell 
Finlon Alexander 
Emma Helen Blair 


Bibliographical Adviser Victor Hugo Paltsits 


CONTENTS OF VOL. IX 

Preface to Volume IX • • • ^ 

Document: — 

XXVI. Relation de ce qui s'est passe en la Nov- 
velle France, en I'annee 1636. [Chap- 
ters iii.-xi., completing Part I. of the 
document.] PauUeJeune; Kebec, Au- 
gust 28, 1636 . • -5 

Notes . • • • * -35 


PREFACE TO VOL. IX 

Following is a synopsis of the second installment 
of Document XXVL, contained in the present vol- 
ume: 

XXVI. A resume of the contents of the first two 
chapters of Part I. of Le Jeune's Relation of 1636, was 
given in Vol. VIII. of our series. In chapters iii.- 
xi., which close this portion of the document, Le 
Jeune continues his narrative of conversions and bap- 
tisms. One of these converts was a son of Carigoiian, 
the " sorcerer" who had so tormented the superior. 
The annalist describes the wretched deaths of Cari- 
goiian and his brothers, Mestigoit and Pierre (" the 
Apostate "), which he regards as the righteous judg- 
ments of an offended Deity. Several other savages 
have also died miserably, in their sins and impeni- 
tence ; and Le Jeune has met with much annoyance 
from the medicine men, whose tricks are described 
in some detail. 

Considerable space is then devoted to explaining, 
for the benefit of sundry impatient patrons of the mis- 
sion, in France, the difficulties necessarily encoun- 
tered in the conversion of the natives; satisfaction 
is expressed at the progress that has, nevertheless, 
been made in this work. The number of baptisms 
is greatly increasing, especially as the Indians are, 
since the coming of the missionaries, in wholesome 
dread of the fires of hell. 


PREFACE TO VOL. IX 


Le Jeune hopes much from the hospital for the In- 
dians, which some pious friends at home are propos- 
ing to establish in Canada. He also anticipates good 
results from the education, in the French manner, of 
several little native girls who have been given him 
for that purpose ; these, he expects, will become the 
wives of Frenchmen or of baptized savages, and thus 
exert a great influence in civilizing their country- 
men. He also desires to establish at Quebec a semi- 
nary for the youth of both races — the native schools 
at Notre Dame des Anges being too remote from the 
settlement, to be available for the children of the 
colonists. 

The writer recounts various minor superstitions 
current among the natives, also some of their legends 
concerning the Manitou. 

The versatile superior next describes with admira- 
tion the skill with which the beaver constructs its 
dwelling. He mentions the attempt made by Mont- 
magny, the governor, to domesticate the native elk ; 
and hopefully anticipates the time when this animal 
may be trained as a beast of burden, thus greatly aid- 
ing the labors of both the missionaries and the colo- 
nists. He also has a plan for a * ' park, ' ' in which 
beavers may be enclosed and raised on a large scale, 
for both their skins and their flesh. 

Turning easily from natural history to social and 
economic conditions, the superior surveys the present 
state of Canada : he congratulates the Hundred Asso- 
ciates on their efforts to support the colony ; describes 
the fortifications, new buildings, and other improve- 
ments at the French settlements ; mentions the rapid- 
ly-increasing population ; and praises the peace, sim- 
plicity, and honesty that prevail in the community. 


PREFACE TO VOL. IX 


Severe penalties are imposed, he says, for drunken- 
ness, blasphemy, and failure to attend mass; the 
chapel of the Jesuits has been considerably enlarged ; 
and the officials and prominent families set an edify- 
ing example of piety and devotion. Various ques- 
tions propounded by intending immigrants are 
answered, regarding the situation, resources, and op- 
portunities of this new land ; and eminently practical 
and sensible advice is proffered to those who wish to 
settle in New France. The annalist discusses at 
length, and justifies, the handling of peltries by the 
Jesuits, which had aroused in France much hostile 
criticism. 

The Relation concludes by the usual recital, in jour- 
nal form, of the more important events of the past 
year. The sale of intoxicating liquors to the Indians 
had been forbidden, under severe penalties. The 
death and burial of Champlain are described; also 
Indian councils held at Three Rivers and Quebec, 
and various conversations between the missionaries 
and the savages. Fathers Ragueneau, Du March6, 
and Jogues arrive from France, and Gamier and 
Chastellain are sent as reinforcements to the Huron 
mission. The Algonkins, having been rebuked for 
their atrocious cruelty toward an Iroquois prisoner, 
as a peace offering present to the French a woman of 
that nation, who is forthwith sent to France for edu- 
cation. Daniel and Davost return from the Huron 
country with some Indian boys for the Jesuit semi- 
nary ; on the way, they are delayed by the savages 
resident at Allumettes Island, but propitiate them 
with gifts of tobacco. Apropos of these Huron chil- 
dren, Le Jeune naively remarks, " It is a Providence 
of God that Father Daniel is not bringing as many 


PREFACE TO VOL. IX 


of them as he hoped to," since at Quebec they have 
neither lodging, food, nor clothing for many besides 
those already on their hands. The superior ends by 
giving a list of the various missions in New France, 
and of the priests and brethren employed therein. 

The second part of the Relation of 1636 consists of 
Brebeuf's report of the Huron mission; it will occu- 
py all of Vol. X. Bibliographical Data for this Rela- 
tion were given in Vol. VIII. 

R. G. T. 

Madison, Wis., June, 1897. 


XXVI (continued) 

Le Jeune's Relation, 1636 

Paris: SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, 1637 


Chaps, iii.-xi. of Part 1. (Le Jeune's own Relation) are 
given in the present volume, thus closing this portion of the 
document. Part II. (Brebeuf's Huron report) will occupy 
Volume X. 


LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 


[51] CHAPITRE III. 

CONTINUATION DE LA MESME MATIERE. 

COM ME les Sauuages fe plaifent dauantage aux 
trois Riuieres, que non [52] pas k K6bec, auffi 
font-ils Ik plus fouuent leur fejour, & en plus 
grand nombre: c'eft pourquoy les Peres qui ont de- 
meure cette ann^e en noftre Refidence de la Conce- 
ption, ont baptif6 plus de perfonnes, que ceux qui 
font reflez k K6bec, oh ces Barbares n'arreflet pas fi 
long- temps. On n'a pas laifle neantmoins d'y faire 
quelque fruit auec eux: puis qu'on a obtenu qu'ils 
nous donnaffent quelques enfans, dont ie parleray cy 
apres, & que quelques- vns d'entre-eux ayent receu le 
fainct Baptefme. Ie ne les diflingue point des au- 
tres, qui ont receu ce Sacrement a la Conception, par- 
lant d'eux tons, felon I'ordre du temps qu'ils font 
entrez en I'Eglife. 

Le neufiefme de Feurier, vn Sauuage nomm6 At- 
tikamegouy 8c furnomm6 le Prince par nos Fran9ois, 
s'eftant cabane affez proche de noftre Dame des 
Anges, enuoya querir en diligence vn de nos Peres 
pour baptifer vn fien petit fils, qui fe mouroit. Le 
Pere prend vn peu d'eau auec foy, craignant de n'en 
point trouuer en leur maifon d'^corce, k raifon que 
le f roid auoit gel6 les ruilTeaux & les fleuues ; il f e 
preffe le plus qu'il luy eft pofllble; [53] arriue enfin 
tout hors d'haleine, oh. eftoit I'enfant, qui s'en alloit 
expirer. Son pere s'6crie qu'on le faffe Chreflien 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1636 


[51] CHAPTER III. 

CONTINUATION OF THE SAME SUBJECT. 

AS the Savages like the three Rivers better than 
[52] Kebec, they stop there oftener, and in 
greater numbers. This is why the Fathers 
who have been living this year in our Residence of 
the Conception have baptized more people than did 
those who remained at K6bec, where these Barba- 
rians do not stay so long. We have not failed, how- 
ever, to gather some fruit among them, as we have 
induced them to give us some of their children, of 
whom I shall speak hereafter, and as some of them 
have received holy Baptism. I do not separate them 
from the others who received this Sacrament at the 
Conception, speaking of all according to the time 
when they entered the Church. 

On the ninth of February, a Savage named Attika- 
megou, and surnamed " the Prince" by our French- 
men, having camped quite near nostre Dame des 
Anges, sent posthaste for one of our Fathers to bap- 
tize a little boy of his, who was dying. The Fa- 
ther took a little water with him, fearing he might 
not find any in their bark house, as the cold had 
frozen the brooks and rivers. He hurried as fast as 
he could, [53] and finally, all out of breath, arrived 
at the place where lay the child, who was on the 
verge of death. His father begged that he should 
be made a Christian before his death ; his mother op- 
posed this, saying quite harshly that she did not 


LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 9 


auant fa mort; fa mere s'y oppofe, difant tout crue- 
ment, qu'elle ne vouloit point qu'il fufl baptif^, & 
que tous ceux qui eftoient baptifez mouroient. On 
luy replique, que tous les Fran9ois eftoient bapti- 
fez ; on luy nomme quelques-vns de fa nation, qui 
Tefloient aufli, & qui cependant iouilToient d'vne par- 
faite fant6. Que fi apres le baptefme plufieurs Sau- 
uages mouroient, cela ne prouenoit pas du Sacre- 
ment, mais de la maladie, qui ne laifferoit pas de les 
tuer, quand ils ne feroient point baptifez, comme 
elle le voyoit en quelques-vns, qui mouroient fans 
receuoir ce Sacrement. Son mary la tance, Efl-ce le 
baptefme, dit-il, qui fait mourir maintenant ton fils? 
& cependant le voila qui trepalle, ie veux qu'il foit 
Chreftien. La mere refifloit toujours, & I'enfant s'en 
alloit mourant, ne pouuant quafi plus refpirer. Le 
Pere preffoit la mere de fon cofte, I'affeurant que le 
baptefme, non feulement ne faifoit mourir perfonne, 
mais au contraire qu'il rendoit quelquefois la vie du 
corps, [54] & la vie de I'ame tout enfemble, & que fi 
elle vouloit croire que Dieu peuft operer cette mer- 
ueille, que fon fils pourroit guerir. Tout fur I'heure 
mefme, fur ce propos cette femme commence k ouurir 
les oreilles; Si tu le peux guerir, repart-elle, baptife 
le, finon ne le touche pas. Pour moy, dit le pere de 
I'enfant, ie croy que celuy qui a tout fait le pent gue- 
rir. Si ta femme auoit la mefme creance, luy dit on, 
tu verrois bien-toft ton fils en vie. II commence a 
la preffer, Tu n'as point d'efprit, tu crains que le 
baptefme ne le faffe mourir, & tu vols qu'il meurt 
fans baptefme ; celuy qui a tout fait, & qui pent tout, 
eft afl:ez fort pour luy rendre la vie ; & quand il ne la 
luy rendroit pas, il aura toufiours piti6 de fon ame. 


1636] LE JEUNES RELATION, 1636 9 

wish him to be baptized, and that all those who were 
baptized would die. She was told that all the 
French were baptized, and named some of her own 
tribe who also had been, and who nevertheless en- 
joyed perfect health ; that, if some Savages died after 
baptism, it did not result from the Sacrament, but 
from the disease, which would not fail to kill them 
even if they were not baptized, as she could see in 
the cases of some who died without receivins: this 
Sacrament. Her husband chided her: "Is it bap- 
tism," said he, " that makes thy son die now? And 
yet he lies there dying. I wish him to be a Chris- 
tian." The mother continued to object, while the 
child was approaching nearer to death, being hardly 
able to breathe. The Father, on his part, urged the 
mother, assuring her that baptism not only did not 
make one die, but on the contrary sometimes restored 
the life of the body [54] and the life of the soul to- 
gether; and that, if she would believe God could 
perform this wonder, her son might recover. In- 
stantly, upon hearing this suggestion, the woman be- 
gins to open her ears: " If thou canst cure him," 
she replies, " baptize him; if not, do not touch him." 
" As for me," says the father of the child, " I be- 
lieve that he who has made all can cure him." " If 
thy wife had the same belief," said some one, " thou 
wouldst soon see thy son alive." He began to urge 
her: " Thou hast no sense; thou fearest that bap- 
tism will make him die, and thou seest he is dying 
without baptism ; he who has made all, and can do 
all, is strong enough to restore him to life ; and, even 
if he does not restore him, he will at least have pity 
on his soul." " Let them baptize him then," said 
the mother. " Take courage," replied her husband, 


10 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.9 

Qu'on le baptize done, dit la mere, Prends courage, 
fait fon mary, & confidere bien fi tu crois ; car fi tu 
ments en ton coeur, Dieu ne guerira pas ton enfant, 
le croy, dit-elle; qu'on le baptife. Le Pere fe vit vn 
peu en peine ; car il cognoiffoit bien que cette femme 
ne s'accordoit au baptefme de fon enfant, que fouz 
efperance de guerifon; & par confequent (i I'enfant 
venoit k mourir, k quoy tons s'attendoient, [55] qu'af- 
feur^met elle decrieroit fort ce Sacrement: neant- 
moins, comme il ne le pouuoit voir perir deuant fes 
yeux, il prend refolution de le baptifer, demandant 
aux parens, qu'au cas qu'il guerifl, qu'on nous le don- 
naft, quand il feroit grandelet pour I'inftruire. A 
cette demande la mere fe rebute derechef . le voy 
bien qu'il veut auoir mon fils, il ne I'aura pas. Son 
mary fe tournant vers le Pere. Demandes-tu mon 
fils pour toujours, ou feulement pour I'enfeigner? le 
ne le demande que pour I'inftruire, & encor quand il 
fera ag6 de fix ou fept ans. Baptife le, tu I'auras, & 
preffant fa femme, il I'alleura qu'on luy rendroit fon 
enfant, quand il feroit bien inftruit, au cas que Dieu 
luy rendift la fante. Les Sauuages qui eftoient 1^, 
s'^tonnoient qu'on debatoit d'vn enfant qui eftoit aux 
abois; Le voila qui meurt, & vous debattez ^ qui 
I'aura. En effect, dit fon pere, il efl mort, fi le ba- 
ptefme ne le guerit. On les afl!eure done derechef, 
que s'ils croyoient que Dieu fuft alTez puifl!ant, & 
affez bon pour rendre la vie k leur enfant, qu'il le fe- 
roit. La mere enfin le prefente elle mefme au ba- 
ptefme. En t^moignage de [56] fa foy, & de fon efpe- 
rance; I'enfant eft baptife fur I'heure mefme, fans 
ceremonie, & fans luy donner nom, car la maladie 
n'en permettoit pas dauantage. Chofe eftrange! Le 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ibsb 11 

* * and consider well if thou believest ; for, if thou 
liest in thy heart, God will not cure thy child." " I 
believe," said she, " let them baptize him." The 
Father found himself in a rather difficult position ; 
for he understood perfectly that this woman gave 
consent to the baptism of her child only in the hope 
of his recovery; and that, consequently, if the child 
died, which all were expecting, [55] she would be 
certain to greatly decry this Sacrament. Neverthe- 
less, as he could not see him die before his eyes, he 
resolved to baptize him, — asking the parents, in case 
he recovered, to give him to us when he grew lar- 
ger, to instruct him. At this request the mother 
again became obstinate. " I see plainly that he 
wishes to have my son; he shall not have him." 
Her husband, turning toward the Father, said, '* Dost 
thou ask my son for all time, or simply to instruct 
him? " "I only want him to instruct him, and not 
that until he is six or seven years old." " Baptize 
him, thou canst have him; " and, urging his wife, 
he assured her that they would restore her her child 
when he should be well instructed, in case God grant- 
ed him health. The Savages who were there were 
surprised that there should be any discussion about a 
child who was in the throes of death. " There he 
lies dying, and you are debating as to who shall have 
him." " In fact," said his father, "he is dead if 
baptism does not restore him." They were again 
assured that, if they believed that God was powerful 
enough and good enough to restore life to their child, 
he would do it. At last the mother herself presents 
him for baptism, as an evidence of [56] her faith 
and of her hope. The child is baptized on the in- 
stant, without ceremony and without giving him a 


12 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 


Pere qui le baptifoit n'eut pas acheue de prononcer 
les paroles faintes, verfant vn peu d'eau, fur la tefte 
de ce pauure petit, que fa mere decouuroit; qu'il 
ouure les yeux, commence k refpirer, k s'etendre, & 
k fe remuer dans fon petit berceau portatif . Sa mere 
toute eperdue, luy prefente le tetin, qu'il ne pouuoit 
plus prendre; il le prend fans difficulte, & deuant 
que le Pere fortift de la Cabane, il fut entierement 
guery. Quelques Sauuages accourent; Le pere de 
I'enfant, leur dit ce qui eftoit arriue, ils demeurent 
eftonnez fans mot dire. Maintenant ce petit Chre- 
ftien eft beau & graffet, la ioye de fes parens, & I'ad- 
miration de ceux qui I'ont veu dans fa maladie. 

Cet effet du Sacrement a beaucoup feruy pour ar- 
racher de I'efprit de ces Barbares, que la mort eftoit 
dans ces eaux falutaires, & qu'il ne falloit qu'eftre 
baptife pour bien-toft mourir. Le Prince, c'eft le 
furnom du pere de I'enfant, allant depuis [57] aux 
trois Riuieres, racontoit cecy par tout. Si bien que 
le Pere qui I'auoit baptife, entrant certain iour dans 
vne Cabane, par ou il auoit paff6; ceux qui I'habi- 
toient luy demanderent, s'il n'auoit plus de cette eau 
qui auoit guery le fils d' Aitikamegou, & qu'il en don- 
naft vn peu a vn malade qu'ils auoient. Helas! il 
en auoit affez ; mais le pauure malade n'en peut boire ; 
c'eft k dire que le Pere ne le voyant qu'en paflant 
chemin, il n'eut pas le loifir de I'inftruire, de forte 
qu'il le trouua mort au retour. Mais pour acheuer 
ce point, le Prince voyant fon fils guery, dit ^ fa 
femme, Aye foin de c6t enfant, & garde toy bien 
d'empefcher vn iour qu'il ne foit inftruit : car la mort 
dont il deuoit mourir tomberoit fur ta tefte. Le Pere 
luy demanda s'il ne feroit pas bien aife qu'on luy ap- 


1636J 


LE /EUNE'S RELA TION, 1636 18 


name, because the malady did not permit more. 
Strange to say, the Father who baptized him had no 
sooner finished pronouncing the holy words, pouring 
a little water upon this poor infant's head, which his 
mother uncovered, than he opened his eyes, began 
to breathe, to stretch, and to move about in his little 
portable cradle. His mother, completely beside her- 
self, offered him the breast, which he could not take 
before ; he took it now without difficulty, and before 
the Father departed from the Cabin he had entirely 
recovered. Some Savages hastening in, the father 
of the child told them what had occurred, and they 
were struck dumb with amazement. Now this little 
Christian is fine-looking and plump, the joy of his 
parents and the admiration of those who saw him 
in his sickness. 

This result of the Sacrament has aided greatly in 
uprooting from the minds of these Barbarians the 
belief that death was in these health-giving waters, 
and that it was only necessary to be baptized to soon 
die. The Prince, — this is the surname of the child's 
father.— going afterwards [57] to the three Rivers, 
related this everywhere ; so that the Father who had 
baptized him, upon entering one day a Cabin in which 
this man had been, was asked by those who lived 
there if he had any more of that water which had 
cured the son of Attikamegou, and if he would give 
some of it to a sick man who was there. Alas! he had 
enough of it, but the poor sick one could not drink 
it, —that is, the Father only seeing him in passing, 
had not leisure to instruct him, and on his return found 
him dead. But, to finish this subject,— the Prince, 
seeing his son recovered, said to his wife, " Take care 
of this child, and see that thou dost not prevent him 


14 LES RELATIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol.9 


pliquaft les faintes Ceremonies dans la Chapelle de 
K^bec. Fais luy, repond-il, tout ce que tu fais aux 
enfans des Frangois; il luy afligne iour pour I'appor- 
ter, & luy donne aduis de choifir vn Frangois ; & vne 
Frangoife, pour eftre Parrain & Marraine de fon en- 
fant. Luy expliquant ce que vouloient dire ces mots. 
II doutoit fi les Frangois [58] luy voudroient faire 
cette faueur ; mais I'ayant affeure qu'ils en f eroient 
bien aifes, il inuita le fieur Oliuier, Commis & Inter- 
prete, & Madame Hebout, qui exercerent volontiers 
cet acte de charite. Vn Dimancbe au matin ces deux 
pauures Barbares apporterent eux-mefmes leur en- 
fant h. I'Eglife de K6bec. Le Pere qui I'auoit ba- 
ptif6, declara k nos Frangois, qui eftoient affemblez 
pour entendre la grande Melle, comme tout s'efloit 
paff6 ; que les eaux facrees du Baptefme auoient ren- 
du la vie a ce petit enfant, & qu'ils le venoient pre- 
fenter eux-mefmes pour receuoir les faintes Ceremo- 
nies, qu'on ne luy auoit peu appliquer. Qu'au refle 
ils promettoient de le donner vn iour pour le faire 
inflruire ; & comme on leur demanda derechef , en la 
prefence de tout le monde, ils confirmerent la pro- 
meffe qu'ils auoient faite. La deffus on fonne la 
cloche ; vne de nos Fran9oifes prend ce petit, & le 
prefente; fon Parrain, & fa Marraine, luy donnent 
nom Fran9ois Oliuier ; on luy applique les Huiles fa- 
crees, & les autres faintes Ceremonies, auec vne 
grande confolation de tous nos Fran9ois, & vn con- 
tentement ^i fenfible [59] du pere & de la mere, que 
la ioye en redondoit fur leur face. 

On auoit emmaillotte ce petit Chreftien a la Fran- 
9oife, fa mere le tenant difoit k fon mary, le ne f9ay 
qu'a noftre petit Fran9ois Oliuier; quand il eft accom- 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 15 

from being instructed some day ; for the death which 
was to have killed him would fall upon thy head." 
The Father asked him if he would not like to have 
them administer to him the holy Rites in the Chapel 
at K^bec. "Do to him," said he, " all thou doest 
to the French children," The Father appointed a 
day for him to bring the boy, and advised him to 
choose a man and a woman from among the French 
to act as Godfather and Godmother to his child, ex- 
plaining to him what these words meant. The man 
doubted if the French [58] would consent to do him 
this favor; but, having assured him that they would 
be very glad to do it, he invited sieur Olivier, Clerk 
and Interpreter, and Madame Hebout,^ who willingly 
performed this act of charity. One Sunday morning 
these two poor Barbarians themselves brought their 
child to the Church of K6bec. The Father who had 
baptized him explained to our French, who had as- 
sembled to hear high Mass, how it had all happened ; 
that the consecrated waters of Baptism had restored 
life to this little child, and that they had come them- 
selves to present him to receive the holy Ceremonies 
that he had not been able to administer to him ; that, 
furthermore, they promised some day to give him to 
be instructed; and, being asked again in the presence 
of all, they confirmed the promise they had made. 
At this point the bell is rung; one of our French 
women takes the little one and presents him; his 
Godfather and Godmother give him the name of 
Fran9ois Olivier ; they apply to him the consecrated 
Oils and administer the other holy Rites, to the great 
satisfaction of all our French, the happiness of the 
[59] father and mother being so great that joy beamed 
upon their faces. 


16 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 

mod6 k la Frangoife, il rit touliours; quand ie I'ac- 
commode k noftre fagon il pleure & fe chagrine, & 
quand ie le tiens il eft tout trifle & tout morne, & 
quand vne Frangoife le tient; vous diriez qu'il veut 
touliours fauter. Elle vouloit par ce difcours tefmoi- 
gner le contentement qu'elle auoit de voir fon fils 
comme deuenu Fran9ois. Son pere auoit bien de 
meilleures penfees, car certain iour ie I'efcoutois 
comme il difoit k fa femme, que les Sorciers n'auoient 
plus de pouuoir fur fon fils, & que par le Baptefme 
il auoit efl6 mis en la protection de celuy qui a tout 
fait. II tenoit ce difcours k I'occafion de deux Sor- 
ciers qui s'efloient entrebattus, & qui s'eftoient re- 
prochez qu'ils auoient tue par leur art les parens Tvn 
de 1 'autre. Les Sauuages craignent grandement ces 
longleurs, & quelqu'vn de nos Frangois m'a alTeure 
qu'ordinairement ils font mourir ceux contre lef quels 
ils [6o] dreffent leur fort, & que neantmoins ils n'ont 
iamais rien pu faire aux Chrefliens. Or foit qu'en 
effect ils ayent quelque communication tacite auec le 
Diable, dequoy ie doute fort, ou qu'ils n'en ayent 
point; ayant eu prife auec I'vn de ces deux Sorciers, 
ie le d^fiay de me tuer par fes fortileges; TafTeurat 
qu'eftant baptife, & croyat en Dieu, i'eflois hors de 
fes prifes. Le pere du petit Frangois Oliuier efloit 
prefent quand ie difois cela: Quoy done, fit-il, mon 
fils eflant baptife, ne pent il point eflre mis k mort 
par ces gens-la? Non, luy repartis-je, ne les crains 
pas, & qu'ainfi ne foit, porte leur parole de ma part, 
que ie leur pardonne ma mort, s'ils me tuent par 
leurs iongleries: mais aulTi qu'au cas que leurs en- 
chantemens foient trop foibles pour me nuire, dis 
leur que ie les prie de fe letter auec moy fouz la 


1636] L£ JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 17 

They had swaddled this little Christian in the 
French fashion ; its mother, holding it, said to her 
husband : " I do not know what ails our little Fran- 
9ois Olivier; when he is dressed in the French way 
he laughs all the time, when he is dressed in our 
way he cries and grieves; when I hold him he is 
quite sad and mournful, and when a French woman 
holds him he acts as if he wants to jump all the 
time. ' ' She wished by these words to show her sat- 
isfaction at seeing her son become French, as it were. 
His father had still better ideas, for one day I heard 
him say to his wife that the Sorcerers had no longer 
any power over his son, and that through Baptism 
he had been placed under the protection of him who 
made all. He held this conversation apropos of two 
Sorcerers who had been fighting together, each re- 
proaching the other that he had killed the other's 
parents by his arts. The Savages greatly fear these 
Jugglers, and one of our Frenchmen has assured me 
that they usually kill those against whom they [60] 
aim their charms, and that nevertheless they have 
never been able to do anything to Christians. Now 
whether they have really some secret communication 
with the Devil, which I greatly doubt, or whether 
they have not, — having taken issue with one of these 
two Sorcerers, I defied him to kill me with his magic, 
assuring him that, as I was baptized and believed in 
God, I was beyond his reach. The father of little 
Fran9ois Olivier was present when I said this : ' ' Well 
then," said he, " my son being baptized, cannot he 
be put to death by these people ? " " No, ' * I an- 
swered him, " do not fear them. And even if they 
could, give them my word that I will forgive them 
for my death if they kill me by their sorceries; but 


18 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 

fauuegarde de celuy qui tient tous les demos ^ I'at- 
tache. Ce pauure home auoit bien retenu cette le- 
9on, voila pourqaoy il fe reioiiyffoit auec fa femme 
de ce que fon fils eftoit hors des prifes de ces loups- 
garous. Vne autre fois il m.e vint trouuer tout tre- 
blant de peur qu'il ne luy mef-arriuaft, fur ce que fa 
femme ayat porte fon enfant en [6i] vn baquet ou 
elle alloit h. fa place ; vn Jongleur le luy ayant pris, 
& r ayant chante, auoit dit tout haut pour nous de- 
crediter, que nous eftions des trompeurs, que le Ba- 
ptefme n'auoit pas guery cet enfant, puis qu'il ne pa- 
roifToit aucune marque, qu'il euft eft6 malade. le 
Talleuray, & me mocquay de ce baladin, Au fur- 
plus le pauure bomme m'a fouuent tefmoign^ defirer 
le Baptefme ; ie luy ay donne quelque inflruction, & 
pour I'arrefler ie I'auois mis en la compagnie de quel- 
ques Frangois h. cultiuer la terre, mais il n'a pas tenu 
bon. Or comme depuis peu il eftoit en la compagnie 
de trente k quarante Sauuages, qui s'en alloient k la 
guerre, ie le fonday en la prefence de fes compatrio- 
tes, luy reprochant qu'il les craignoit, & que par 
refpect humain il ne vouloit pas croire en Dieu, encor 
que fouuent il m'euft affeure qu'il y falloit croire. 
II me repondit deuant tous, qu'il auoit eu cette vo- 
lonte, & qu'il I'auoit encor; qu'il ne craindroit point 
de prof elTer fa creance deuant tout le monde ; mais 
toy-mefme, me fit-il, tu m'as quitte fur la difficulte 
que i'ay eu auec I'vn de tes Fran9ois. Ie fus fort 
aife de cette r^ponfe, car il n'y a [62] rien qui re- 
tienne tant les Sauuages de profeller la foy, que la 
crainte d'eflre mocquez de leurs femblables. Ar- 
riuez que nous fufmes aux trois Riuieres, faisat feflin 
^ ces guerriers, ie luy donnay encor vne attaque, & 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1636 19 

also, in case their enchantments are too weak to in- 
jure me, tell them that I pray them to throw them- 
selves with me under the safeguard of him who holds 
all demons in check." The poor man had remem- 
bered this lesson well, and hence he was rejoicing 
with his wife because his son was out of the clutches 
of these human wolves. Another time he came to 
me trembling with fear lest some misfortune should 
happen to him, because, his wife having carried the 
child to [61] a banquet, where she was going in his 
place, a Juggler took it from her and sang to it ; then 
said aloud, to discredit us, that we were deceivers, — 
that Baptism had not cured this child, since there 
was no sign that it had been sick. I reassured him, 
and ridiculed this mountebank. Furthermore, the 
poor man has often shown me that he desired Bap- 
tism; I have given him some instruction, and to 
make him stationary I placed him in the company of 
some Frenchmen to cultivate the land, but he did 
not stick to it. Now as, a short time ago, he was in 
company with from thirty to forty Savages, who were 
going to war, I sounded him in the presence of his 
compatriots, — reproaching him with being afraid of 
them, and that out of regard for others he would not 
believe in God, although he had often assured me 
that he ought to believe in him. He answered me 
before all of them that he had had this desire, and 
that he had it still ; that he would not be afraid to 
profess his belief before everybody. " But thou 
thyself, ' ' he replied, ' ' thou hast deserted me on ac- 
count of the difficulty I had with one of thy French- 
men." I was very glad to hear this response, for 
there is [62] nothing which so deters the Savages 
from professing the faith as the fear of being mocked 


20 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.9 

il me tefmoigna deuant tous qu'il n'eftoit ny men- 
teur, ny enfant, & qu'il feroit conftant en noftre foy, 
quand il I'auroit embralTee. Cela fut caufe que ie 
I'appellay en particulier, & que ie luy dis qu'au re- 
tour de la guerre ou il alloit, que ie I'inflruirois, s'il 
vouloit fe faire inftruire. Ten fuis content, me fit- 
il. Va t'en done, luy repartis-ie, en la Chapelle, & 
prie celuy qui a tout faict de te conferuer, afin que tu 
puifle eftre baptif e ; il Ie fit, & k f on depart il me 
pria d'auoir foin de fon petit Frangois Oliuier, s'il 
mouroit en guerre, & de fecourir fa femme : s'il re- 
tourne i'efpere que Dieu luy fera mifericorde. Ie Ie 
recommande aux prieres de ceux qui liront cecy ; car 
fi vne fois Dieu en auoit fortement touche quelqu'vn 
qui fufl capable de bie inftruire les autres, cela feroit 
puiflant pour les attirer a la cognoifTance de la verite. 
Le dix-feptiefme de Mars vn ieune Frangois hiuer- 
nant auec les Sauuages [63] baptifa vn petit enfant, 
qui s'en alloit mourir. Dieu eft admirable dans le 
choix des vns, & dans le rebut des autres. Ce ieune 
Fran9ois voyant que quelques Sauuages fe venoient 
pourmener aux trois Riuieres, efcriuit fur vn bout 
d'efcorce k fon frere, qu'il y auoit des malades en la Ca- 
bane oil il eftoit, & qu'il en donnaft aduis aux Peres, 
notamment d'vn petit gargon qui s'en alloit mourant. 
Les Peres iugerent que ce feroit alTez de bien infor- 
mer ce ieune gar9on, ou pluftoft de luy refcrire de 
poinct en poinct tout ce qu'on luy auoit d6ja enfei- 
gn6, pour baptifer les petits enfans; ce qu'ils firent. 
Le Fils de Dieu qui dit qu'on laifle aller vers luy les 
petits, recent celuy-cy ; car comme ce ieune Frangois 
lif oit les lettres que nos Peres luy auoient enuoye ; 
le pere du petit malade I'interrogea fur ce qu'on luy 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 21 

by their fellows. When we arrived at the three Riv- 
ers, while giving a feast to these warriors, I attacked 
him again ; and he proved to me before all that he 
was neither a liar nor a child, and that he would be 
constant in our faith if he should embrace it. For 
this reason I spoke to him in private, and told him 
that, on his return from the war to which he was go- 
ing, I would instruct him, if he wished to be in- 
structed. " I would like it," he replied. " Go 
then," I said to him, " into the Chapel and pray him 
who has made all to preserve thee, that thou mayest 
be baptized." He did so, and at his departure he 
begged me to look after his little Francois Olivier if 
he died in war, and to assist his wife ; if he returns, 
I hope God will be merciful to him. I commend 
him to the prayers of those who shall read this ; for 
if once God should effectually move some one of them 
who might be able properly to instruct the others, 
he would be a powerful help in attracting them to 
the knowledge of the truth. 

On the seventeenth of March, a young Frenchman 
wintering with the Savages [63] baptized a little child 
which was going to die. God is admirable in his 
choice of some and his rejection of others. This 
young Frenchman, seeing that some Savages were 
coming to visit the three Rivers, wrote on a piece of 
bark to his brother that there were some sick people 
in the Cabin where he was, and that he should in- 
form the Fathers of it, especially of a little boy who 
was going to die. The Fathers judged that it would 
be enough to carefully instruct this young man, or 
rather to rewrite for him, exactly, all that he had al- 
ready been taught for the baptism of little children; 
this they did. The Son of God, who says that we 


22 LES RELA TIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol. 9 

mandoit. Les Peres, refpond-il, m'efcriiient qu'ils 
ayment ton fils; qu'ils font bien manis de fon mal, 
& m'inflruifent comma il le fant baptifer, an cas qu'il 
foit en danger de mort; ils m'efcriuent auffi que li 
les grandes perfonnes font bien malades, ils vien- 
dront icy. Le Sauuage repartit, le fnis bien aife que 
mon fils foit baptife; [64] Tiens voila de I'eau, ba- 
ptife le, car il s'en va mourir. Si tofl qu'il fera mort, 
ie leur enuoyeray fon corps, afin qu'ils I'honnorent 
d'vne fepulture k la Fran5oife. L'enfant fut baptif6, 
& le pere tint fa parole, nous I'enuoyant apres fa 
mort par quelques Sauuages, auec fes d^poiiilles. 
Sur quoy nos Peres euffent eft6 en peine de f9auoir 
s'il auoit efte baptife, & s'ils le pouuoient mettre en 
terre fainte; fi I'vn des Sauuages ne les en eufl alleu- 
rez, exprimant ce qu'il auoit veu faire au ieune Fran- 
cois. 

Le premier iour d'Auril, le Pere Buteux baptifa 
vne petite fille, qu'il alia cliercher enuiron dix bonnes 
lieues, plus haut que la demeure de nos Francois. 
En voicy I'occafion, Quelques Algonquins eftant ve- 
nus chercher du Petun au Magafin, vindrent voir nos 
Peres deuant que de s'en retourner, & leur donnerent 
aduis qu'ils auoient quelques perfonnes fort malades 
en leurs Cabanes. Surquoy le Pere Buteux prenant 
vn ieune garjon, qui demeure en noflre Refidence, 
fait deieuner ces Barbares, & puis fe met en leur com- 
pagnie. II ne fut pas bien loing de la maifon, qu'il 
trouua, comme Ton [65] dit, ^ qui parler, les che- 
mins font icy plus blancs qu'en France, & bien plus 
fafcheux ; il leur falloit tantofl prendre des raquettes, 
tantofl les quitter ; ils marchoient fur le grand Fleuue 
glace, qui leur d^roboit bien la veue de fes eaux, 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 28 

must suffer the little ones to come unto him, received 
this one. For, as this young Frenchman was reading 
the letters our Fathers had sent him, the father of 
the little sick boy asked him what they had written 
him. "The Fathers," he replied, "write me that 
they love thy son, that they are very sorry he is 
sick; and they instruct me how he should be bap- 
tized, in case he is in danger of dying; they also 
write me that, if the older persons are very sick, they 
will come here." The Savage replied, " I am very 
glad to have my son baptized. [64] Here is water; 
baptize him, for he is going to die. As soon as he is 
dead, I will send them his body, in order that they 
may honor it with a French burial." The child was 
baptized, and the father kept his word, sending him 
to us after his death by some Savages, with his be- 
longings. Whereupon our Fathers would have been 
at a loss to know whether he had been baptized, and 
whether they could put him in consecrated ground, 
if one of the Savages had not assured them of it, ex- 
plaining what he had seen the young Frenchman do. 
On the first day of April, Father Buteux baptized 
a little girl, whom he went to find about ten good 
leagues higher up than our French settlement. This 
was the occasion of it: Some Algonquins who had 
come to the Store to get Tobacco, came to see our 
Fathers before returning, and informed them that 
they had some persons in their Cabins who were 
very sick. At this Father Buteux, taking a young 
man who lives in our Residence, gave these Barba- 
rians their breakfast, and then placed himself in 
their company. He had not gone far from the house 
before he met, as they [65] say, with his match. The 
roads here are much less used than in France, and very 


U LES RELATIONS DBS JESUITES [Vol.9 

mais non pas Tapprelienfion du danger de s'y perdre: 
car le Soleil auoit commence "k fondre fes glaces, qui 
en plulieurs endroits n'auoient plus qu'vn doigt d'4- 
paiffeur. La neige aux autres endroits venant ^ mol- 
lir fur le haut du iour, les faifoit enfoncer auec leurs 
raquettes, qui fe chargeoient de ces gla9ons, & leur 
donnoient vne ef pece de torture aux iambes : fi f allut- 
il tirer cette charue depuis fix heures du matin iuf- 
ques k fix heures du foir, fans d6teler, finon pent eftre 
I'efpace d'vn petit quart d'heure, qu'ils s'arrefterent 
pour boire vn peu d'eau, dans vne hoftellerie de 
glace. En verity fi Dieu ne donnoit d' autres rafrai- 
chillemens que ceux-cy, "k des perfonnes qui ne font 
accouflum^es k ces courfes, la chair f uccomberoit : 
mais c'eft chofe Strange que ces iours de peines, font 
des iours de douceurs, & le corps femble mettre en 
oubly fes foibleffes, quand I'efprit [66] goufte la force 
de Dieu. le n'auois garde, dit le Pere, de me repen- 
tir d'auoir entrepris ce voyage, puis que ie trouuois 
du contentement dans ce trauail, & de I'affeurance 
dans la crainte, Enfin eftant arriue dans les Caba- 
nes, il trouue que fes Sauuages I'auoient tromp^, d6- 
criuans comme moribons, ceux qui n'efloient pas 
quafi malades; il leur temoigne neantmoins qu'il 
eftoit bien aife de les voir hors de danger; qu'il 
efloit venu pour les inftruire, & qu'il y auroit plus 
de moyen de le faire, quand ils feroient de retour 
vers les Fran9ois. La plufpart s'6tonnoient de la 
peine qu'il auoit prife, & fe reiouiffans de le voir, 
luy faifoient feflin de langues & de muffles d'Orignac, 
dont ils auoient abondance. La neige ayant efle pro- 
fonde & dure cette annee, a cauf6 la mort k vn tres 
grand nombre d' Elans, & a donn6 la vie k plufieurs 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1636 25 

much worse ; sometimes they had to wear their snow- 
shoes, sometimes take them off; they walked upon 
the great frozen River, which deprived them indeed 
of the sight of its waters, but not of the apprehension 
of the danger of being lost therein ; for the Sun had 
begfun to melt the ice, which in some places was no 
more than a finger-breadth in thickness. In other 
places, the snow beginning to melt in the middle of 
the day, they sank into it with their snowshoes ; and 
these, becoming loaded with pieces of ice, made them 
suffer a species of torture in their legs. Yet they 
had to drag this plow from six o'clock in the morning 
until six at night, without unharnessing, except per- 
haps for a little quarter of an hour when they stopped 
to drink some water in a hostelry of ice. In truth, 
if God did not give other refreshments than these to 
people who are not accustomed to such journeys, the 
flesh would succumb. But it is wonderful how these 
days of hardship are days of peace, and how the body 
seems to forget its weakness when the spirit [66] 
tastes the strength of God. " I had no inclination," 
said the Father, ' ' to repent having undertaken this 
journey, since I found content in this labor, and se- 
curity in fear." At last, having arrived at the Cab- 
ins, he finds that his Savages had deceived him, for 
they had described as dying those who were hardly 
sick; he shows them, nevertheless, that he is very 
glad to see them out of danger, that he has come to 
instruct them, and that he would have better means 
of doing so if they would return towards the French 
settlement. Most of them were astonished at the 
trouble he had taken, and, rejoicing to see him, they 
made him a feast of Moose tongues and muzzles, 
which they had in abundance. The depth and hard- 


26 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.9 

Sauuages. Dieu ne voultit pas que le Pere s'en re- 
tournaft les mains vuides: il eftoit venu pour de 
g^andes perfonnes, & il luy donna le falut d'vne pe- 
tite fille : car comme il vifitoit les todis de ces pau- 
ures Barbares, il apperceut cette enfant toute abba- 
tue, il recogneut qu'il auoit eu d6ja \6'j'] enuie de la 
baptifer, auant qu'elle fuft conduite dans les bois; 
mais I'occafion luy ayant efchapp^, il en auoit du 
fcrupule en fon ame, la demandant ^ ce fujet tous les 
iours ^ r Autel ^ noftre Seigneur. Se voyant done en 
main I'occalion qu'il n'attendoit pas, il demade a fa 
grade mere permiflion de la baptifer. Cette bonne 
vieille luy repond, Vous eftes bons, vous autres, vous 
auez pitie des malades, Tu as bien eu de la peine ^ 
nous venir viliter. Fais tout ce que tu iugeras k pro- 
pos, ie te la donne. Le ieune homme qui accompa- 
gnoit le Pere, luy donne nom Marie, & le Pere la ba- 
ptife. Apres cette action vn Sauuage f9acliant que le 
Pere auoit deffein de s'en retourner, fe prefente pour 
le reconduire; le Pere s'etonnant de cette courtoifie; 
ce Barbare luy dit qu'il auoit efte delegue auec fon 
gendre par les autres Sauuages, pour le remercier. 
Adiouftant qu'il vouloit aufli mener auec foy le corps 
d'vn fien fils mort depuis quinze iours, pour eftre en- 
terre au Cimetiere des Frangois. Le Pere I'ayant re- 
mercie, luy fit entendre, que cet enfant n'ayant pas 
eft^ baptife, n'auroit point de place parmy les Fran- 
9ois. Ces bonnes [68] gens nonobflant s'opiniaflre- 
rent, & fe mirent en chemin, deuan9ans le Pere de 
beaucoup: Ce qu'ils y gagnerent, fut de s'en retour- 
ner, apres vn affez bon traitement qu'on leur fit. 

Le dix-feptiefme du mefme mois d'Auril, vne ieune 
fille recent le fainct Baptefme, qu'elle auoit ardem- 


1636] LE JEUNBS RELATION, 1636 27 

ness of the snow this year has been the cause of 
death to a great many Elk, and has given life to 
many Savages. God did not will that the Father 
should return with empty hands; he had gone for 
grown persons, and he gave him the salvation of a 
little girl. For, as he was visiting the huts of these 
poor Barbarians, he perceived this child very low; 
he remembered that he had already \6y'\ wished to 
baptize her before she had been taken into the woods, 
but, as the opportunity had slipped by, he had mis- 
givings about it in his soul, asking her from our Lord 
for this purpose every day at the Altar. Now, seeing 
at hand the opportunity which he had not expected, 
he asked her grandmother's permission to baptize her. 
This good old woman answered, " You are good, 
you people, you take pity on the sick ; thou hast in- 
deed taken the trouble to come and visit us. Do all 
that thou deemest proper; I give her to thee." The 
young man who accompanied the Father gave her 
the name Marie, and the Father baptized her. After 
this act a Savage, knowing the Father intended to 
return, presented himself to conduct him; the Fa- 
ther was surprised at this courtesy, and the Barba- 
rian told him that he and his son-in-law had been 
delegated by the other Savages to thank him, add- 
ing that he wished also to take with him the body 
of one of his sons who had been dead for two weeks, 
to be buried in the French Cemetery. The Father 
having thanked him, gave him to understand that 
this child, not having been baptized, could not be 
placed among the French. These simple [68] people 
insisted, however, and started on their way some 
distance ahead of the Father. All they gained by 
doing this was to come back again, after receiving 
very good treatment. 


88 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.9 

ment defir^. Noftre Seigneur, ayant chafli6 fort nide- 
ment tons ceux auec lesquels i'ay hiuerne, pour n'a- 
uoir pas voulu accomplir la promelTe qu'ils luy auoient 
faite de le recognoiftre, tn'a confole en la conuerfion 
de deux enfans de ces Barbares; I'vn eft le fils du 
Sorcier defunct, qu'on nommoit Carigoiian, ie parle- 
ray de c6t enfant en fon temps : I'autre eft cette fille, 
qui par fois me rendoit quelque petit fecours, quand 
i'eftois malade en la Cabane de fon parent; m'allant 
querir vn peu d'eau, ou me faifant fondre de la neige 
pour boire. Cette pauure enfant eftant reftee fans 
pere ny mere, afflige d'vne maladie fort fafcheufe, 
eftoit delaiflee, & en borreur &, ceux de fa natio, Dieu 
voulut que nos Peres, qui eftoient aux trois Riuieres, 
ou elle fe trouua, luy payaffent au centuple la charity 
qu'elle auoit exercee [69] en mon endroit: car ils 
prirent foin de fon corps, & de fon ame. On luy fit 
vne Cabane au Fort, & tons les iours les Peres la 
nourriffoient, la faifoient penfer, & I'inftruifoient. 
Comme elle auoit I'efprit bon (m'ecriuent les Peres) 
elle concent bien toft, & goufla la doctrine du Fils 
de Dieu, s'affectionnant particulierement ^ la faincte 
Vierge, dont elle voulut prendre le nom au baptefme. 
En peu de temps elle fembla fe mieux porter. Si 
bien qu'on parloit de la remettre entre les mains des 
Sauuages, cette pauure fille apprehendoit ce retour 
plus que la mort. Dieu qui la vouloit auoir pour foy, 
luy enuoya vne fieure qui la mit fi bas, qu'elle co- 
gneut bien que c'efloit fait de fa vie ; c'efl pourquoy 
on luy confera le baptefme, ce qui la confola fort: 
Car quelqu'vn luy difant qu'elle s'en alloit mourir. 
Ie le voy bien, r6pond-elle, mais ie me confole de ce 
que i'iray au Ciel. O que vous ferez heureufe, luy 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1636 29 

On the seventeenth of the same month of April, a 
young girl received holy Baptism, which she had ar- 
dently desired. Our Lord, having chastised very 
severely all those with whom I passed the winter, 
for not having tried to fulfill the promise they had 
made him to acknowledge him, consoled me in the 
conversion of two children of these Barbarians. One 
is the son of the dead Sorcerer, who was called Cari- 
goiian;^ of this child I shall speak at the proper time. 
The other is the girl who occasionally did me some 
little service when I was sick in the Cabin of one of 
her relations, getting me a little water or melting 
the snow for me to drink. This poor child, being 
left without father or mother, afflicted by a very 
grievous malady, was forsaken and looked upon with 
horror by the people of her own tribe. God willed 
that our Fathers, who were at the three Rivers, 
where she was, should repay her a hundredfold for 
the charity she had exercised [69] toward me, for 
they took care of her body and of her soul. They 
made her a Cabin at the Fort, and every day the Fa- 
thers gave her food, had her cared for, and instructed 
her. As she had a good mind (the Fathers wrote 
me), she understood readily and enjoyed the doctrine 
of the Son of God, showing an especial affection for 
the holy Virgin, whose name she wished to take at 
baptism. After a little while she seemed to im- 
prove, so much so that they talked of sending her 
back to the Savages. This poor girl dreaded this 
return worse than death. God, who wished to have 
her for himself, sent upon her a fever which reduced 
her so low that she saw clearly her life was at stake. 
Hence they administered baptism to her, which 
greatly comforted her; for when some one said to 


30 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 

dit-on, de voir celuy qui a tout fait dans fa gran- 
deur! Ne verray-ie pas auffi, dit-elle, la bone Ma- 
rie mere de Dieu : & comme on luy eut affeur^ 
qu'elle la verroit, le luy diray, repliqua-elle, ce que 
ie luy ay toufiours dit d'vn bon coeur. [70] Ou kaouia 
Iesvs Khifadkihitin. Ie vous ayme, 6 la Mere de 
I E s V s . Cette bonne ame lauee dans le fang de 1' A- 
gneau, prie maintenant pour fa Nation, & pour tons 
ceux qui la fecourent en quelque facon que ce foit. 

Le vingt quatriefme du mefme mois, vn Algon- 
quain voulant mourir Chreftien, fut baptife, & nom- 
me lacques. Apres fa mort, en Tabfence de nos 
Peres, le Capitaine de la Nation ayant efl6 gagne par 
vn difne k d^couurir le lieu de fa fepulture, & per- 
mettre qu'on I'enleuaft; comme on eftoit k mefme, 
on fut contraint de defifter fur les plaintes de quel- 
ques femmes, qui crioient k pleine tefte, qu'on leur 
d^roboit leurs morts. II faut par fois condefcendre 
^ leur foibleffe. 

Le trentiefme du mefme mois, les mefmes Peres 
baptiferent deux petits enfans, vn gargon & vne fille ; 
comme ils demanderent au pere du petit gar9on, s'il 
ne trouueroit pas bon qu'on fift "k fon enfant, ce qu'on 
faif oit aux enfans des Fran9ois ; il repondit fort f age- 
ment, Ie vous ay trouu6 fl bons, & li charitables, que 
ie ne croy pas que vous vouliez faire du mal k I'en- 
fant, ayant fait du bien au [71] pere. Au commence- 
ment de cette Lune vous ayant amen6 mon fils aifn6 
mort, pour I'enterrer k voftre fa9on, vous me repon- 
dites, que vous ne le pouuiez faire, pource qu'il n'e- 
ftoit pas Chreftien ; ie ne delire pas que le mefme ar- 
riue "k ce pauure petit. De plus, comme le temps 
eftoit fafcheux, & que ie ne pouuois m'en retoumer 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1636 31 

her that she was going to die, " I know it well," she 
answered, " but I console myself that I shall go to 
Heaven." " Oh, how happy you will be," some 
one remarked to her, " to see him who has made all 
in his grandeur! " " Shall I not also see," said she, 
' ' the good Mary, mother of God ? ' ' and when she 
had been assured that she would see her, " I will 
tell her, * ' she replied, ' ' what I have always said to 
her with a sincere heart, — \y6\0u kaouia Jesus 
Khisadkihitin , I love you, O Mother of Jesus." 
This good soul, washed in the blood of the Lamb, 
now prays for her Nation and for all those who suc- 
cor it in any way whatsoever. 

On the twenty-fourth of the same month, an Al- 
gonquain, wishing to die a Christian, was baptized 
and named Jacques. After his death, [which oc- 
curred] in the absence of our Fathers, the Captain of 
the Nation was won over by means of a dinner to re- 
veal the place of his burial and to permit his remains 
to be disinterred ; while this was being done, it had 
to be discontinued, on account of the complaints of 
some women, who cried loudly that their dead were 
being stolen. One must at times humor their weak- 
ness. 

On the thirtieth of the same month, the same Fa- 
thers baptized two little children, a boy and a girl. 
When they asked the little boy's father if he did not 
approve of their doing to his child what they did to 
the children of the French, he answered very sage- 
ly, "I have found you so good and so charitable, 
that I do not believe you wish to do any harm to the 
child, having done good to the [71] father. In the 
beginning of this Moon, having brought to you the 
dead body of my oldest son, to bury him in your 


32 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.9 

en ma Cabane, fans danger de me perdre dans les 
glaces qui fe deprenoient, vous me retintes, & nour- 
rifles quelques iours en voftre maifon, auec mon gen- 
dre, quoy que nous nous en vouluflions aller de peur 
de vous eftre ^ charge. le ne croy pas, que des 
hommes qui font tant de bien, vouluffent faire mal ^ 
nos enfans ; Tenez voila mon fils, faites luy ce que 
vous voudrez. On luy fit vn bien, dont il ioui'ra dans 
I'etendue de tons les fiecles, & au del^ : car on luy 
confera le fainct Baptefme, auec le nom de lacques, 
que fon Parrain le fieur Hertel luy donna. 

Pour la petite fille, fa mere fut tres contente de 
I'offrir k Dieu : le fieur Godefroy la nomma Magde- 
laine : elle eftoit fille d'vn nomme Eroachi, qui tran- 
choit du Capitaine parmy les Sauuages: ce [72] pau- 
ure miferable gemira aufli long-teps dans les enfers, 
que fa fille fe r^ioiiira dedans les Cieux. O que ces 
deux conditions font diff erentes ! k iamais damn6, & "k 
iamais fauu6; k iamais compagnon des Anges, & k 
iamais compagnon des diables : nous rapporterons fa 
mort en fon lieu. 

Le troifiefme de May, fut baptife vn petit Sauuage 
Algonquain, age d'enuiron neuf ans, il fut appell^ 
lean. Les Peres qui m'ont mis ces memoires en 
main, n'^criuent point les circonftances de ce ba- 
ptefme ; c'eft beaucoup que fon nom foit €crit au liure 
de vie. 

Le vingt vniefme du mefme mois, Monfieur Gand 
eflant all6 faire vn tour aux trois Riuieres, donna le 
nom de lofeph a vn ieune gar9on, age d'enuiron 
quinze ans. Les Peres le faifoient venir tous les ma- 
tins en leur chambre, pour luy donner la nourriture 
du corps, & de Tame, le renuoyans fur le foir en fa 


1636J LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 88 

way, you answered me that you could not do it be- 
cause he was not a Christian; I do not wish the 
same thing to happen to this poor little one. More- 
over, as the weather was bad and I could not return 
to my Cabin without danger of being lost in the ice 
which was breaking up, you kept me and my son-in- 
law for some days in your house and fed us, although 
we wished to return lest we be a burden to you. I 
do not believe that men who do so much good would 
do any harm to our children. Look, here is my son; 
do what you please with him." We did do him a 
service which he will enjoy through the lapse of all 
the centuries, and beyond them; for we conferred 
holy Baptism upon him, and the name Jacques, given 
by his Godfather, sieur Hertel.'^ 

As to the little girl, her mother was very glad to 
offer her to God. Sieur Godefroy * named her Mag- 
delaine. She was the daughter of one called Ero- 
achi, who played the Captain among the Savages. 
This [72] poor wretch will groan in hell as long as 
his daughter will rejoice in Heaven. O how differ- 
ent are these two states ! Forever damned, and for- 
ever saved! Forever a companion of Angels, and 
forever an associate of devils! We will speak of 
his death in the proper place. 

On the third of May there was baptized a little Al- 
gonquain Savage, about nine years of age ; he was 
called Jean. The Fathers who placed these memoirs 
in my hands did not write me the circumstances of 
this baptism ; it is a great deal that his name is writ- 
ten in the book of life. 

On the twenty-first of the same month Monsieur 
Gand,^ being on a journey to the three Rivers, gave 
the name Joseph to a young lad, about fifteen years 



84 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 

Cabane voifme du Fort: mais quand ce pauure en- 
fant ne pent plus marcher, le Pere Qnentin I'alloit 
querir luy mefme, & I'apportoit fur fes bras, auec 
grande edification de nos Fran9ois, qui loiioient [73] 
cette charity. Le Pere Buteux luy demandant apres 
fon baptefme, s'il efloit bien aife d'eftre Chreftien, & 
s'il ne craignoit point la mort; il repartit qu'il eftoit 
bien ioyeux de n'eflre plus Sauuage, & qu'il ne vou- 
loit plus qu'on Tappellaft Miskouaskoutan, c' eftoit fon 
ancien nom; mais qu'on le nommafl lofepb. Pour 
la mort ie ne la crains non plus que cela, monftrant 
le petit bout du doigt; Pourquoy la craindray-ie ? 
puis qu'en mourant ie m'en iray au Ciel. Le Pere 
Quentin le voulat aller querir vn beau matin le trou- 
ua en I'agonie. Vne vieille Sauuage luy dit, em- 
porte le, puis qu'il efl mort; il attendit qu'il fuft ex- 
pire, puis I'embraffant il le porta cbez nous, oil I'ay- 
ant enfeuely on luy fit fes funerailles comme aux 
autres. 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 35 

old. The Fathers had him come to their room every 
morning to give him nourishment for the body and 
for the soul, sending him back towards evening to 
his Cabin near the Fort. But, when this poor child 
could no longer walk, Father Quentin himself went 
after him and brought him in his arms, to the great 
edification of our French, who lauded [73] this act of 
charity. Father Buteux asked him, after his baptism, 
if he were well-pleased to be a Christian, and if he did 
not fear death. He answered that he was very glad 
that he was no longer a Savage, and that he did not 
wish to be called hereafter Miskouaskoutan, which 
was his old name, but that he should be called 
Joseph, " As to death, I fear it no more than that," 
showing the little end of his finger ; ' * why should I 
fear it? since in dying I shall go to Heaven." Fa- 
ther Quentin, on going after him one morning, found 
him in the death throes. An old Savage woman said 
to him, " Take him away, since he is dead," He 
waited until he expired, then, taking him in his 
arms, he brought him to our house where, having 
laid him out, he was buried like the others. 


36 


LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 9 


S 


CHAPITRE IV. 

CONTINUATION DES SAUUAGES BAPTISEZ. 

I quelqu'vn trouue ces narrez vn pen longs; ie le 
prie d'auoir egard, que de gagner quelque pau- 
ure Sauuage k Dieu, [74] & a I'Eglife; c'eft 
tout noflre trafic en ce nouueau monde, toute la 
manne, que nous cueillons en ces def erts ; que nous 
ne chaffons qu'k cela dans ces grads bois, «& que nous 
ne faifons autre pefche fur ces larges Fleuues. 

Le vingt-troifiefme de May, la mere de cette fille 

tant aym^e, dont i'ay parle au Chapitre fecond, fuiuit 

fon enfant au baptefme, ^ la mort, k la fepulture, & 

comme nous croyons en Paradis. C'efloit la femme 

dVn nomme Mataouau, furnomme des Fran9ois le 

grand Oliuier, que i'ay dit auoir du credit parmy les 

fiens. II eft grand en trois fa§ons, grand de corps, 

grand difcoureur, & grand longleur. II s'eft mon- 

flr6 autant port6 au baptefme de fa femme, qu'il 

auoit eu de peine ^ fe refoudre qu'on baptifaft fa 

fille. Et comme il auoit fait ioiier tons les reflorts 

de fon art, pour donner la vie du corps k 1' enfant, 

aufli n'a-il rien epargn6 pour donner celle de I'ame k 

la mere. Cette femme qui auoit obtenu de fon mary 

permiffion de faire fa fille Chreftienne, ne vouloit 

pas I'eftre, & auoit fi grand horreur des Peres, qu'elle 

ne leur vouloit rendre aucune reponfe. Eftant [75] 

all6 pour quelque affaire aux trois Riuieres, ie la fus 

vifiter; elle cogneut que ie n'eftois pas celuy qui 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1636 37 


CHAPTER IV. 

BAPTISMS OF SAVAGES, CONTINUED, 

IF any one finds these stories a little tedious, I beg 
him to remember that to win some poor Savage 
to God, [74] and to the Church, is our sole busi- 
ness in this new world, and all the manna that we 
gather in these deserts; that we hunt for no other 
game in these vast forests, and fish for nothing else 
in these broad Rivers. 

On the twenty-third of May, the mother of that so 
beloved girl, of whom I have spoken in Chapter sec- 
ond, followed her child to baptism, to death, to buri- 
al, and, as we believe, to Paradise. She was the 
wife of one named Mataouau, surnamed by the 
French, '* big Olivier," who I have said had some 
standing among his people. He is great in three 
ways, great in body, a great talker, and a great Jug- 
gler. He showed himself as well disposed to the 
baptism of his wife, as he had been opposed to allow- 
ing the baptism of his daughter. And as he had 
brought into play all the resources of his art to give 
the life of the body to the child, so he did not spare 
anything to give that of the soul to the mother. 
This woman, who had obtained her husband's per- 
mission to have her daughter made a Christian, did 
not wish to be one herself, and so abhorred the Fa- 
thers that she would make them no answer. Having 
[75] gone on some business to the three Rivers, I 
made her a visit ; she recogfnized that I was not the 


38 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.9 

auois inflruit fa fille, & me r^pondit; le luy repre- 
fente doucement le danger, oil elle fe iettoit d'eftre 
k iamais fepar^e de fon enfant, qu'elle aymoit auec 
li grande paflion ; qu'k mon aduis elle en eftoit malade 
de regret & de triftelle. Ta fille, luy difois-ie, eft 
bien-heureufe, & tu feras malheureufe k iamais: elle 
efl au Ciel, & tu feras dans le fond des abyfmes, tu 
dis que tu I'aymes, & tu ne veux pas aller auec elle; 
tu ne la fgaurois fuiure, fi tu ne crois, & fi tu n'es 
baptif^e Elle fe mit k pleurer; I'adioutay, que fi ie 
faifois fejour aux trois Riuieres, ie la verrois fouuent; 
mais puis qu'il me falloit defcendre k K6bec, ie la 
priois de prefter I'oreille k mon frere; elle le fit ve- 
ritablement, mais non pas fl toft. Les Peres apres 
mon depart I'ayat plufieurs fois vifit6e, la quitterent 
pour vn temps, comme vne acariaftre; fon mary s'en 
formalifa, & fe vint plaindre "k I'lnterprete, difant 
qu'on auoit tort de laiffer mourir fa femme fans ba- 
ptefme ; qu'il efl vray que iufques a prefent elle auoit 
perdu I'efprit, mais qu'elle eftoit [76] rentree en fon 
bon fens, & que les Peres en fiflent I'experience. Ja- 
mais plainte ne leur fut plus agreable; ils vifitent 
cette pauure femme malade, I'inftruifent quelques 
iours durant, fon mary fe trouuant toufiours prefent, 
& luy difant beaucoup de bien des Peres, pour la 
rendre plus affectionnee k noftre creance. Tu f9ais, 
difoit-il, que ces gens-lk font grands Capitaines, que 
tons les Frangois les ayment, qu'ils font perpetuelle- 
ment du bien "k nos malades, que tout I'liyuer quand 
nous fommes affamez, ils donnent k manger a ceux 
qui n'en ont point, pourquoy ne leur croiras tu pas? 
Si feray bien, refpond-elle, ils difent vray. Le Pere 
Buteux Ik delTus luy demanda, fi retournant en fant^ 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, T636 39 

one who had instructed her daughter, and answered 
me. I mildly represented to her the danger into 
which she was throwing herself of being forever 
separated from her child, whom she loved so passion- 
ately that, in my opinion, she was sick from grief 
and sadness. "Thy daughter," I said to her, "is 
very happy, and thou wilt be forever unhappy ; she 
is in Heaven, and thou wilt be at the bottom of the 
abyss. Thou sayest that thou lovest her, yet thou 
dost not wish to go with her; thou canst not follow 
her, if thou dost not believe and if thou art not bap- 
tized." She began to weep. I added that if I were 
going to remain at the three Rivers I would see her 
often ; but, as I had to go down to K6bec, I begged 
her to listen to my brother. She indeed did this, 
but not immediately. After my departure, the Fa- 
thers having visited her several times, gave her up 
for a while as a bad-tempered woman. Her husband 
took offense at this, and complained to the Inter- 
preter, saying that it was wrong to let his wife die 
without baptism; that it was true that up to that 
time she had been out of her mind, but she had [76] 
returned to her senses, and the Fathers should try 
her again. Never was a complaint more agreeable 
to them . They visited this poor sick woman and in- 
structed her during several days, — her husband al- 
ways being present and saying a great deal of good 
to her about the Fathers, to make our belief more 
acceptable to her. ' ' Thou knowest, ' ' he said to her, 
" that these people are great Captains, that all the 
French love them ; that they are always doing good 
to our sick, that all winter, when we are hungry, 
they give food to those who have none ; why then 
wilt thou not believe them?" "Yes, I will," she 


40 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.9 

elle ne promettoit pas d'eftre fidelle "k la creance 
qu'elle vouloit embralTer: Soit que ie vine, on que ie 
meure, ie croiray toufiours en Dieu, refpondit-elle. 
Eftant fuffifamment inflruite, fon mary enuoya certain 
iour querir les Peres, & tons les parens de la malade, 
pource qu'elle fe mouroit. Le Pere Buteux I'appro- 
chant la voulut interroger, mais on luy dit qu'elle 
auoit perdu la parole depuis minuit, & qu'il fe haftaft 
de la baptifer \;jy~] puis qu'elle mouroit. Le Pere la 
regarde. & luy dit qu'elle ouurift les yeux pour mar- 
que de fa creance, & pour tefmoigner qu'elle defiroit 
le fainct Baptefme : auffi toft elle ouure les yeux, re- 
garde le Pere, & luy dit, Ie croy en Dieu, & ie croy 
aufli ce que tu m'as dit: c'efloit plus qu'on n'en de- 
uoit efperer d'vne f emme tenue pour morte : on la 
baptife done, & fon parrain luy donna nom Michelle. 
Si toft qu'elle fut lauee dans ce facre bain, elle parle 
plus libremet, & appellat fon mary le pria de faire 
fortir beaucoup de perfonnes qui eftoiet entrez en fa 
Cabane; Feray-je auffi fortir les Peres, luy dit-il? 
Non pas, repond-elle, mais bie les autres. Apres 
que le Pere I'eut confolee, il loiia le mary d'auoir ay- 
me fa femme d'vn vray amour. Si ie ne I'eulTe pas 
aimee, replique-il, ie ne I'aurois pas preflee de croire 
en celuy qui a tout faict ; mais ie me r6ioiiis de ce 
qu'elle verra au Ciel celuy qui eft tout bon, eflant 
baptifee en fon nom. C'eft chofe eftrange que ces 
Barbares trouuent nos veritez tres-adorables ; ie veux 
dire que plufieurs d'entre eux approuuent noftre cre- 
ance, & cependant ils ne la veulent receuoir qu'^ la 
mort : ils ont peur d'eftre [78] mocquez de leurs com- 
patriotes, faifant comme plufieurs Chreftiens qui iu- 
gent au fond de leur ame, que c'eft vn bie tres-grand 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6j6 41 

answered, " they speak the truth." Whereupon Fa- 
ther Buteux asked her whether, if she was restored 
to health, she would promise to be faithful to the 
belief she wished to embrace. " Whether I live or 
whether I die, I will always believe in God," she an- 
swered. Being sufficiently instructed, her husband 
one day sent for the Fathers and all the relatives of 
the sick woman, as she was dying. Father Buteux, 
approaching her, wished to question her; but they 
told him she had lost her speech since midnight, and 
that he should hasten to baptize her, \^yy^ since she 
was dying. The Father looked at her, and told her 
to open her eyes as a sign of her belief, and as a 
proof that she desired holy Baptism. She immedi- 
ately opened her eyes, looked at the Father, and said 
to him, " I believe in God, and I believe also what 
thou hast told me." This was more than could have 
been hoped for from a woman in the grasp of death. 
She was then baptized, and her sponsor gave her the 
name Michelle. As soon as she had been cleansed in 
this sacred bath, she spoke more freely, and, calling 
her husband, she begged him to send out many of 
the people who had come into the Cabin. " Shall I 
make the Fathers go out also ? " he asked her. 
" No," she replied, " but all the others." After the 
Father had consoled her, he praised her husband for 
having loved his wife with a true love. " If I had 
not loved her," he answered, " I would not have 
urged her to believe in him who has made all ; but I 
rejoice that she will see in Heaven him who is all 
good, being baptized in his name." It is strange 
that these Barbarians find our truths very adorable, — 
I mean that many of them approve our belief, — and 
yet do not wish to receive it until they are dying; 


42 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.9 

de frequenter les Sacremens, mais comrae ils ont peur 
d'eflre tenus pour deuots, & de receuoir quelque petit 
coup de dent des bouffons ou des impies ; la crainte 
d'vn petit mal leur faict perdre le fruit d'vn tres- 
grand bien. 

Le trentiefme du mefme mois, Dieu fit vne efpece 
de miracle au baptefme d'vne fille Algonquine, les 
Peres" I'ayant trouu^e fans parole & fans iugement 
defefperoient de la pouuoir inftruire ; ils s'addreffent 
h. S. Frangois Xauier, luy promettant de faire porter 
fon nom h. cette pauure creature, s'il luy plaifoit de 
luy obtenir autant de force qu'il eftoit neceffaire pour 
receuoir le Baptefme. Chofe eftrange! cette mori- 
bonde que fes parens auoient defia peinte de noir 
comme vne trefpalTee, reuint a foy: on appelle le 
truchement Algonquin, on I'inftruit, elle croit, elle 
fouhaite le Baptefme, on le luy donne, & fuiuant la 
promeffe faicte a ce grand Sainct, le truchement la 
nomma Fran9oif e : fi toft qu'elle fut def charg^e du 
fardeau de fes pechez elle s'endormit [79] en terre 
pour fe refueiller au Ciel : 6 quelles benedictions ! 6 
quelles actions de graces ! de f e voir au mefme mo- 
ment dans la creance, dans le fouhait, & dans la ioiiif- 
fance d'vn bien que I'oeil n'a veu, ny I'efprit conceu. 

Le cinquiefme iour de luin vne bonne femme Sau- 
uage porta fon petit fils malade en noftre Chappelle 
des trois Riuieres pour receuoir le fainct Baptefme, 
Monfieur Roulfeau le nomma Denys: cette bonne 
mere auoit defia donne deux enfans ^ Dieu, ces trois 
ames adoreront a iamais les trois adorables perfonnes, 
& obtiendront le falut d'vne fi bonne mere, comme 
nous efperons. 

Le fixiefme de luin le Pere de Quen baptifa vn 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1636 43 

they are afraid of being [78] mocked by their coun- 
trymen, — acting as a great many Christians do who 
think in the depths of their souls that it is a very 
great benefit to attend the Sacraments ; but, as they 
are afraid of being considered devotees and of re- 
ceiving little bites from scoffers or impious people, 
the fear of a little annoyance makes them lose the 
fruit of a very great good. 

On the thirtieth of the same month, God performed 
a kind of miracle in the baptism of an Algonquin 
g^rl. The Fathers, having found her speechless and 
out of her senses, despaired of being able to instruct 
her. They addressed themselves to St. Franyois 
Xavier, promising him to give his name to this poor 
creature if it pleased him to obtain for her the neces- 
sary strength to receive Baptism. Strange to say, 
this dying girl, whom her parents had already painted 
black, as if she were dead, returned to her senses. 
The Algonquin interpreter was called, she was in- 
structed, she believed, she desired Baptism ; it was 
given to her, and, in accordance with the promise 
made to this great Saint, the interpreter called her 
Fran9oise. As soon as she was freed from the burden 
of her sins, she went to sleep [79] on earth, to awake 
in Heaven. O what blessings ! O what acts of grace ! 
To see one's self at the same moment in the belief, 
in the desire, and in the enjoyment of a good that 
the eye has not seen, nor the mind conceived. 

On the fifth day of June, a good Savage woman 
brought her little sick son to our Chapel at the three 
Rivers to receive holy Baptism ; Monsieur Rousseau ® 
named him Denys. This good mother had already 
g^iven two children to God; these three souls will 
forever adore the three adorable persons, and, as we 


44 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.9 

grand ieune Sauuage, k qui Monfieur Gand donna le 
nom de lofeph, il fe nommoit en fa langue Echkanich, 
c'eft a dire vne petite come ; ce pauure homme eflant 
tombe malade aux trois Riuieres pendant I'hyuer, & 
fouhaittant d'eftre auec fes parens qui couroient les 
bois voifins de Kebec, vn autre Sauuage fon parent 
I'attache fur fa traifne & le traifne trente lieues du- 
rant fur la neige & fur les glaces, ie vous lailTe k pen- 
fer quels reftaurans [80] il donnoit k ce pauure ma- 
lade, en quelle hoftellerie il paffoit les nuicts, il n'y 
a que les corps de bronze qui refiftent aux fatigues 
des Sauuages. Ce pauure miferable fut amene encor 
en vie iufques "k Kebec, vn de nos Peres le va voir, 
aulTi eftonne de I'entreprife de celuy qui fe portoit 
bien, comme de la refolution du malade; il donne ^ 
manger a tous deux, & pendant qu'ils eftoient atten- 
tifs a leurs corps, le Pere penfoit au falut de leur ame. 
Comme il les inftruifoit il vit que le pauure malade 
prenoit plaifir a ouyr parler de I'autre vie, cognoilTant 
bien que celle qu'il menoit tres-miferable luy alloit 
efchapper: pour celuy qui eftoit en fante, comme il 
fe vit deceu de fon efperance, croyant rencontrer k 
Kebec les parens du malade, il le quitte \k fous vn 
mef chant todis, & les va chercher dans les bois : le 
Pere en attendant prit le foin de ce Sauuage, & fur 
tout demanda k noftre Seigneur au fainct facrifice de 
la Meffe qu'il offrit pour fon falut, que fa Majefl6 
accordaft le Baptefme a cette pauure ame qui fem- 
bloit goufter fa parole : il f e trouua k 1' Autel dans 
vne grande confians qu'il eftoit exauc6, mais au [81] 
f ortir delk il creut quafi tout le contraire : car voicy 
arriuer les plus proches parens de cette carcaffe, qui 
n'auoit plus que les os, lefquels ayas garotte ce far- 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 45 

hope, will secure the salvation of so good a mother. 
On the sixth of June, Father de Quen baptized a 
stout young Savage, to whom Monsieur Gand gave the 
name Joseph ; he was called in his language Echka- 
nich, meaning " a little horn." This poor young 
man having fallen sick at the three Rivers, during 
the winter, and wishing to be with his relations who 
were ranging the woods near Kebec, another Savage, 
a relative, fastened him to his sledge, and dragged 
him for thirty leagues over the snow and ice. I 
leave you to imagine what restoratives [80] he gave 
to this poor invalid and in what hostelries he passed 
the nights. None but bodies of bronze can endure 
the hardships of the Savages. This poor wretch 
was brought, still alive, as far as K6bec. One of our 
Fathers went to see him, as greatly astonished at the 
enterprise of the one who was well as at the deter- 
mination of the sick man. He gave them both some- 
thing to eat ; and, while they were attending to their 
bodies, the Father was thinking of the salvation of 
their souls. As he instructed them, he saw that the 
poor invalid took pleasure in hearing about the other 
life, knowing well that the present most miserable 
one was slipping from him. As to the well man, 
seeing himself deceived in the hope of meeting the 
sick man's relations at Kebec, he left him there in a 
wretched hut, and went to look for them in the woods. 
Meanwhile, the Father took care of this Savage, and 
above all asked our Lord in the holy sacrifice of the 
Mass which he offered for his salvation, that his Ma- 
jesty would grant Baptism to this poor soul which 
seemed to enjoy his word. At the Altar, he was 
very confident that his prayer had been heard; but, 
on [81] going out, he thought almost the contrary. 


46 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUJTES [Vol.9 

deau mourant fur les traifnes, remmenent auec eux 
bien auant dans les forefts. Ceux qui le virent par- 
tir, ne luy donnoient pas cinq iours de vie. Cepen- 
dant il a paffe I'hyuer, fa pauure mere, & fes parens 
le traifnant par toutes les ftations des Sauuages, tan- 
toft fur des Montagues, tantoft dans des Valines, 
maintenant fur des Fleuues, ou des Lacs tout glaces ; 
le plus fouuent fur la neige, & toufiours dans les bois: 
le Printemps venu ils I'ont amene k Kebec. Le Pere 
qui I'auoit demand^ k Dieu, le voyant fut bien efton- 
ne, il s'approche de luy pour I'inftruire. Ce pauure 
homme n'auoit plus que le fentiment necellaire pour 
la f oy ; c'eft ^ dire les oreilles, car il auoit perdu la 
veue, & tous les autres fentimens eftoient fort allou- 
pis, reffemblant h. vn fquelet pluftoft qu'^ vn homme. 
II ecoute volontiers ce qu'on luy dit, fa mere mefme 
luy inculque, & luy fait doucement rendre reponfe. 
En vn mot il croit, & donne des preuues de fa cre- 
ance, inuoquant tantoft I'vne, tantoft I'autre [82] des 
trois perfonnes de la faincte Trinite, particuliere- 
ment le fainct Efprit, lequel enfin il recent par le 
Baptefme, que luy confera le Pere de Quen. II ne 
refta que cinq ou fix iours en terre apres cette faueur, 
fa Patrie eftoit le Paradis, ou il fe retira, laiHant fon 
corps k fa pauure mere, qui I'enueloppa dans diuerfes 
robbes, & fans nous en donner aduis I'alla loger fur 
de hautes fourches, pour I'enterrer par apres felon 
leur ancienne couftume. Le Pere qui I'auoit inftruit 
eut le vent qu'on auoit enleue ce corps, il fe tranf- 
porte aux Cabanes des Sauuages, demande h. fa mere 
& k fes parens, ou on I'a mis, ils ne fonnent mot. II 
va voir le Capitaine de cette Nation, le prie de luy 
faire rendre ces d^poiiilles, que cet homme eftoit ba- 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 47 

For lo, there arrived the nearest relatives of this car- 
cass, which had no longer aught but bones ; and they, 
having fastened this dying bundle upon the sledges, 
took it with them into the depths of the forests. 
Those who saw him depart would not give him five 
days of life. However, he lived through the winter, 
his poor mother and relations dragging him through 
all the stations made by the Savages, — now over 
Mountains, now through Valleys, now upon frozen 
Rivers or Lakes, oftenest upon the snow and always 
in the woods. Spring came, and they brought him 
back to K€bec. The Father who had asked him of 
God was greatly astonished when he saw him, and 
approached him, to give him some instruction. This 
poor young man had only the sense necessary for 
the faith, namely, the ears; for he had lost his sight, 
and all his other senses were greatly dulled, — he 
was more like a skeleton than a man. He listened 
willingly to what was told him, his mother herself 
impressing it upon him and making him softly an- 
swer. In a word, he believed and gave proof of his 
belief, invoking sometimes one, sometimes another 
[82] of the three persons of the holy Trinity, especial- 
ly the holy Ghost, which he finally received through 
Baptism, which Father de Quen conferred upon him. 
He remained only five or six days upon earth after 
this favor; his Country was Paradise, to which he 
withdrew, leaving his body to his poor mother, who 
enveloped it in many robes, and, without giving us 
notice, went and placed it upon a high scaffold, to 
bury it afterwards according to their ancient custom. 
The Father who had instructed him, hearing that 
they had elevated this body, went to the Cabins of 
the Savages, and asked his mother and relatives 


48 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUJTES [Vol.9 

ptif^, & que Monfieur le Gouuerneur feroit fafch6 fi 
on ne le plagoit an Cimetiere des Fran9ois. Attend, 
fit-il au Pere, ie te feray donner ce que tu delires; il 
s'en va de ce pas voir les parens du defunct, leur fait 
vne belle harangue, declarant I'affection que nous 
portions h. leur Nation, raffiftance que nous rendions 
k leurs malades, & les honneurs que nous faifions ^ 
leurs morts. Auffi-toft [83] la mere acquiefce ^ no- 
ftre delir, & ce Capitaine preffe la ieunefTe d'aller 
querir le corps, & de nous le mettre entre les mains. 
Comme le Pere les preffoit; I'vn d'eux repartit, Ne 
te hafle pas tant, peut eflre que fon ame n'eft pas 
encore fortie de fon corps, qu'elle eft encor au bout 
de fa tefte, & cependant il y auoit deux iours qu'il 
eftoit mort. Le Pere ayant receu ce depofb, fit pre- 
parer les chofes necelTaires au conuoy, & donner ad- 
uis h. Monfieur de Montmagny noftre Gouuerneur de 
tout ce qui fe paffoit. C6t homme de piete & de cou- 
rage, qui auoit trois iours auparauat, faifant fon en- 
tree au Pais, ayde a donner I'entree a I'Eglife, & ^ la 
grace, ^ vn pauure Sauuage, comme ie vay dire tout 
maintenant, quitta les delineamens des fortifications 
qu'il tra9oit, & qu'il fait maintenant baftir, pour ho- 
norer ces funerailles de fa prefence. II prend luy 
mefme vn flambeau, ou vn cierge en main. Monfieur 
le Cheualier de I'lfle fon Lieutenant en fit autant, 
Monfieur de Repentigny, Monfieur de fainct lean, 
tons braues Gentilshommes, quantite de foldats, & 
d'autres perfonnes rendirent les demiers deuoirs k 
ce [84] nouueau Chreftien, Le Pere Garnier & le 
Pere Chaftelain, portoient fon corps, que les Sau- 
uages fuiuoient, auec beaucoup de modeftie & de 
filence. Comme on vint a le defcendre dedans la 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 49 

where they had put it. They uttered not a word. 
He went to see the Captain of this Nation, and begged 
him to restore to him the remains, saying that this 
young man was baptized, and that Monsieur the Gov- 
ernor would be angry if they did not place him in 
the Cemetery of the French. "Wait," said he to 
the Father, " I will make them give thee what thou 
desirest." He went straightway to see the relatives 
of the dead man, made them a fine speech, declaring 
the affection we bore to their Nation, the help we 
gave to their sick, and the honors we showed to their 
dead. At once [83] the mother yielded to our desire, 
and this Captain urged the young men to go and get 
the body and place it in our hands. As the Father 
was urging them, one of them replied, " Do not be in 
such haste; perhaps his soul has not yet left his 
body, it maybe still at the top of his head. " And 
yet he had been dead for two days. The Father, 
having received this trust, had the necessary ar- 
rangements made for the funeral, and notified Mon- 
sieur de Montmagny, our Governor, of all that had 
passed. This man of piety and courage, who had, 
three days before, upon his arrival in the Country, 
aided in giving a poor Savage admittance to the 
Church and to grace, as I have just related, left the 
outlines of the fortifications which he was marking 
out, and which he is now having built, to honor 
these funeral ceremonies with his presence. He 
himself bears a torch or a candle in his hand. Mon- 
sieur the Chevalier de I'lsle, his Lieutenant, does the 
same ; Monsieur de Repentigny, Monsieur de sainct 
Jean, all gallant Gentlemen, a number of soldiers, 
and other persons, render the last rites to this [84] 
new Christian. Father Garnier and Father Chaste- 


50 LES RELATIONS DBS jtSUITES [Vol.9 

foffe, fes parens y ietterent outre les robbes, dont il 
eftoit couuert, vne Caftelogne, vn Capot, vn fac con- 
tenant fon petit equipage, & vn rouleau d'efcorce. 
Le Pere leur dit affez que cela ne feruoit de rien a 
vne ame, qui eftoit au Ciel ; mais ils repartiret, que 
c'eft leur couftume, & qu'ils n'oftent rien au mort, de 
ce qui luy appartient. le vous lailTe a penfer fi nos 
Frangois & nos Frangoifes nouuellement venus, qui 
affiftoient k c6t enterrement, c'eftonnoient de ces fa- 
§ons de faire. lis portoient compaflion aux viuans, 
& vne fainte enuie au mort, croyans ceux-lk mife- 
rables, & celuy-cy bien-heureux. 

L'onziefme du mefme mois, iour de fainct Barna- 
b6, nous fut vn iour de r6iouiffance en toutes fagons, 
comme i'ay t6moign6 "k I'entr^e de cette Relation. 
Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur mettant pied ^ terre, 
voulut eftre Parrain d'vn Sauuage qui demandoit le 
baptefme, il luy donna nom lofeph. Le Pere Cha- 
ftellain, [85] comme i'ay d6ja dit, defcendant du 
VaifTeau, commenga fon apprentiffage en la Nouuelle 
France, par ce baptefme. Ayant fait mention de 
cette action, ie diray feulement ce que i'ay obmis, 
touchant ce Neophyte, I'vn des mieux difpofez pour 
le Ciel, que nous ayons veu. Le Pere qui I'inftrui- 
foit, le voyant d'vn bon naturel, & cognoillant que la 
foy s'enracinoit dans cette ame, eut grand defir de 
luy fauuer la vie. II employe nos Chirurgiens Fran- 
§ois, le penfe luy mefme, le vifite, luy porte quel- 
ques raff raichiffemens ; mais la maladie eftant plus 
forte que les remedes, ce pauure homme luy dit, Ni- 
kanis, mon grand amy, penfons h, I'ame; baptife moy, 
pour le corps ie voy bien qu'il faut mourir. Le Pere 
le differoit, pour luy faire defirer plus ardemment vn 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, jbsb 51 

lain bore his body, which was followed by the Sav- 
ages with much humility and in silence.'' When 
they were lowering it into the grave, his relatives 
threw in, besides the robes with which he was cov- 
ered, a Blanket, a Cloak, a bag containing his little 
belongings, and a roll of bark. The Father insisted 
that these things were of no use to a soul which was 
in Heaven ; but they replied that this was their cus- 
tom, and that they would not take, at his death, any- 
thing that belonged to him. I leave you to imagine 
how astonished were our French men and women, 
who had just arrived and who were present at this 
burial, at this way of doing things. They looked 
with compassion on the living, and with a pious en- 
vy upon the dead, considering the former miserable 
and the latter blest. 

The eleventh of the same month, day of saint Bar- 
nabas, was to us a day of rejoicing in every way, as 
I have testified at the beginning of this Relation. 
Monsieur our Governor, upon landing, consented to 
be Godfather to a Savage who had asked for baptism, 
and gave him the name Joseph. Father Chastellain, 
[85] as I have already said, upon disembarking be- 
gan his apprenticeship in New France by this bap- 
tism. Having mentioned this act, I will only tell 
what I have omitted concerning this Neophyte, who 
was one of the best prepared for Heaven that I have 
ever seen. The Father, who instructed him, seeing 
he had a good disposition, and knowing that the faith 
was taking root in this soul, had a great desire to 
save his life. He employs our French Surgeons, 
takes care of him himself, visits him, carries him re- 
freshing food. But, as the malady was stronger 
than the remedies, this poor man said to him, '' Ni- 


52 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.9 

fi grand bien. Or il arriua, qu'en le vifitant certain 
iour, il trouua vn longleur qui le foufiloit, criant, 
hurlant, battant fon tambour, faifant mille grimaces 
^ leur fa9on. II les tance tous deux fort feichement, 
le malade d'auoir eu recours k d'autres qu'^ Dieu ; le 
Charlatan de s'eftre ingere d cymbalifer vne perfonne 
qui croyoit d^ja en lefus-Christ. Celuy-cy [86] re- 
garde le Pere fans dire mot, & tire pais : le pauure 
patient prenant la parole, luy dit, Nikanis, pourquoy 
te fafche-tu ? cet homme m'efl venu faire felon la 
couftume de noftre Nation : s'il y a du mal, il le faut 
quitter; nous ne faifons pas ces chofes a manuals 
deffein : ceux qui eftoient prefens, adioufterent, par- 
lant au Pere, Tu n'as point d'efprit, Tu fais ce que 
tu peux pour guerir ce malade, tu n'en f9aurois ve- 
nir k bout; I'autre te veut ayder, & tu t'en fafche? 
Ce n'efl pas trop de deux perfonnes, pour guerir vne 
fi grande maladie. Fais de ton cofte, & luy du fien; 
voila comme il fe faut accorder. lis faifoient iufte- 
ment comme les Philiftins, qui vouloient ioindre 
I'Arche, & Dagon tout enfemble. I E s v s ne s'ac- 
corde point auec Belial. II eft bien vray neantmoins, 
que ces badineries font plus innocetes, que ie ne pen- 
fois au commencement. Les plus fimples croyent 
qu'ils font fecourus par ces chants, fans fgauoir com- 
ment; d'autres les prennent, pour ainfi dire, comme 
on prendroit vne medecine ; quelques vns penfent 
que ces bruits chafTent le Manitou ; & les Charlatans 
font ces fmgeries pour en tirer du [87] profit. Noftre 
malade s'^toit laifTe foufiler pour fuiure la couftume 
de fes Anceftres: il me promit fort de n'auoir iamais 
plus de recours a ces remedes. Mais ils ont beau 
faire, leurs parens les leurs procuret cotre leur gr6. 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 53 

kanis, my good friend, let us think of the soul ; bap- 
tize me ; as to the body, I see clearly that it must 
die. ' ' The Father deferred doing so in order to make 
him desire more ardently so great a blessing. Now 
it happened that, when he visited him one day, he 
found a Juggler blowing upon him, crying, howling, 
striking his drum and making a thousand grimaces, 
according to their custom. He reproached both of 
them very severely, the sick man for having had 
recourse to any one else but God, the Charlatan 
for having intruded with his drumming upon a per- 
son who already believed in Jesus Christ. The lat- 
ter [86] looked at the Father, without saying a 
word, and withdrew. The poor patient, address- 
ing him, said, * ' Nikanis, why art thou angry ? this 
man came to treat me according to the custom of 
our Nation ; if there is any harm in it, it must be 
stopped, for we do not do these things with bad in- 
tentions." Those who were present added, speak- 
ing to the Father, ' ' Thou hast no sense ; thou dost 
what thou canst to cure this sick man, thou canst not 
succeed ; the other wishes to aid thee, and thou art 
angry thereat. Two persons are not too many to 
cure so bad a disease. Do thy part, and let him do 
his; thus the matter must be arranged." They 
acted exactly like the Philistines who wished to join 
together the Ark and Dagon. Jesus does not agree 
well with Belial. It is true, however, that these ab- 
surdities are more innocent than I thought in the be- 
gfinning. The most simple believe that they are re- 
stored through these songs, without knowing how ; 
others take them, so to speak, as one would take 
medicine ; some think that these noises drive away 
the Manitou; and the Charlatans engage in these 


54 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 


Come done on continuoit de luy declarer les veritez 
Chreftiennes, il preffa le Pere de le faire Chreflien, 
& de penfer a fon ame : Tu vols, difoit-il, que ie croy, 
& que pour t'obeir, ie ne veux pas, que nos Mede- 
cins m'approchent, ie ne f9aurois quafi plus me mou- 
uoir; fi ie meurs fans Baptefme, tu dis que i'iray dans 
des f eux qui iamais ne s'eteignent ; Pourquoy retarde 
tu tant? Les vailTeaux arriuans fur cette entrefaite, 
on luy donna raccomplilTement de fon defir. Eftant 
baptif6, il appelle le Pere, & luy dit, Nikafiis mon 
ame eft toute confol6e, elle a neantmoins encor vn 
fouhait, c'eft de voir mes parens pour la derniere 
fois ; ils font 1^ haut aux trois Riuieres, trouueras-tu 
^ propos que i'y aille? Si tu n'en es pas content, ie 
mourray icy aupres de toy ; mais tu as Ik des freres, 
efcris leurs qu'ils ayent foin de mon ame, comme tu 
as eu. Le Pere luy repliqua qu'il mourroit en che- 
min ; Non, dit-il, ie ne mourray pas, [88] ie fens bien 
mon coeur, i'arriueray aux trois Riuieres, i'y feray 
quelque fejour, & puis ie mourray : tout cela fut vray. 
Le Pere luy donne des lettres, on I'embarque dans vn 
Canot, fa femme & fes enfans I'emmenent; eftant 
arriue, il enuoye querir le Pere Buteux, le fait affeoir 
aupres de foy, & luy rend les lettres qu'on luy auoit 
donnees. Le Pere cognoilTant par ces lettres, qu'il 
eftoit Chreftien, & filieul de Monfieur le Gouuerneur, 
I'embraffe etroitement, & luy promet toute affiftance. 
Ses parens qui I'eftoient venus voir, admiroient ces 
careffes, & ces temoignages de charity, qui ne fe 
voyent point parmy eux. Prenant done la parole, il 
dit au Pere, Ton frere aifne m'a bien fecouru a Ke- 
bec : Nous ferons le mef me icy, repart le Pere ; mais 
te fouuiens tu bien de ce que mon frere t'a enfeign^? 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 55 

apish tricks for their own [87] profit. Our patient 
allowed himself to be blown upon, to follow the cus- 
tom of his Ancestors. He firmly promised me never 
again to have recourse to these remedies. But, do 
what they will, their relations procure these for 
them, against their own wish. Now, as they con- 
tinued to explain to him the Christian truths, he 
urged the Father to make him a Christian and to take 
care of his soul. "Thou seest," he said, "that I 
believe, and that, to obey thee, I will not have our 
Medicine Men come near me; I can now scarcely 
move; if I die without Baptism thou say est that I 
will go into the fires that are never extinguished. 
Why dost thou delay so long ? ' ' The ships having 
meanwhile arrived, he was granted the accomplish- 
ment of his desire. After being baptized, he called 
the Father and said to him, '' Nikanis, my soul is full 
of comfort ; it has, nevertheless, one more desire, — 
that is, to see my relatives for the last time ; they are 
up there at the three Rivers ; dost thou see fit that I 
should go there? If thou dost not approve this, I 
will die here near thee ; but thou hast some brothers 
up yonder; write them to take care of my soul, as 
thou hast done." The Father answered him that he 
would die on the way. " No," said he, " I shall not 
die ; [88] I feel in my heart that I shall reach three 
Rivers, and make a short stay there, and then I shall 
die;" all this was true. The Father gave him some 
letters, and they placed him in a Canoe, his wife and 
children taking him away. When they arrived, he 
sent for Father Buteux, had him sit down near him, 
and handed him the letters that had been given him. 
The Father, learning through these letters that he 
was a Christian and godson of Monsieur the Govern- 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 

Ouy da, fit-il, & quittant vn plat d'ecorce qu'il tenoit 
entre fes mains, il commence a marquer fur fes 
doigts les trois perfonnes de la faincte Trinity, & ^ re- 
citer les premiers rudimens du Chreflien : s'il oublioit 
quelque chofe, fa femme le luy remettoit en me- 
moire. Veritablement a peine pouuois-ie retenir mes 
[89] larmes, ecrit le Pere, voyant vn homme de qua- 
rante ans inflruit dans le fond de la Barbaric, parler 
le langage des enfans de Dieu, & rendre compte de 
fa Foy & de fon Catechifme, auec I'humilite d'vn en- 
fant, & la deuotion d'vne grande perfonne. II mou- 
rut enfin le trentiefme de luin, apres auoir pafl^ quel- 
ques iours aux trois Riuieres, comme il auoit predit- 
& fon corps nous fut donn^ pour I'enterrer, non fans 
en faire inflance en vne affemblee, que ces Barbares 
firent exprez. 

Le feiziefme du mefme mois, deux petits Sauuages 
furent changez en deux petits Anges. Le fieur lean 
Paul Vint donner aduis aux Peres de la maladie 
preffante de I'vn des deux: les Peres fe tranfportent 
aux Cabanes, le font Chreftien, & le nom de lean 
Paul luy fut donne par celuy qui auoit donne aduis 
de fa maladie, lequel defira d'eftre fon Parrain; il 
efloit age d'vn an feulement, fon pere promit qu'il 
le feroit Francois, s'il rechappoit. A mefme temps 
qu'on venoit de baptifer celuy-cy, Robert Hache; 
c'eft le nom d'vn ieune homme qui demeuroit auec 
nos Peres aux trois Riuieres, [90] vint crier qu'on fe 
depefchaft de venir baptifer vn enfant de huict iours 
qui efloit aux abbois. Le Pere Buteux y accourt, & 
fur la remonftrance que fit a la mere la femme du 
Capitanal, obtint permiffion de le baptifer, de le nom- 
mer Ignace, & de I'enterrer bien toft apres. 


1(536] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, tdjd bl 

or, embraced him warmly, and promised him all as- 
sistance. His relations who had come to see him, 
wondered at these caresses and evidences of charity, 
which are not seen among them. Then, addressing 
the Father, he said, " Thy older brother has helped 
me at Kebec." " We will do the same here," an- 
swered the Father, ' ' but dost thou keep in mind what 
my brother has taught thee? " " Yes, indeed," said 
he ; and, dropping a bark dish that he held in his hand, 
he began to indicate with his fingers the three per- 
sons of the holy Trinity, and to recite the first les- 
sons of the Christian ; if he forgot anything, his wife 
reminded him of it. " Truly, I could scarcely re- 
strain my [89] tears," writes the Father, "when I saw 
a man of forty years reared in the depths of Barba- 
rism, speaking the language of the children of God, 
and reciting his Faith and his Catechism with the 
meekness of a child and the devotion of a mature 
person." He finally died on the thirtieth of June, 
after having passed a few days at three Rivers, as he 
had predicted; and his body was given to us for 
burial, not without making entreaty for it in an as- 
sembly which these Barbarians had purposely called 
together. 

On the sixteenth of the same month two little Sav- 
ages were changed into two little Angels. Sieur 
Jean Paul came to advise the Fathers of the danger- 
ous illness of one of them. The Fathers went to the 
Cabins, made him a Christian, and the name Jean 
Paul was given him by the one who had given notice 
of his sickness, and who wished to be his Godfather. 
He was only one year old; his father promised that 
he would make him a Frenchman, if he recovered. 
At the same time that they came to baptize this one, 


58 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.9 

Le vingt-fixiefme du mefme mois, Monfieur le Che- 
ualier de I'lfle fut Parrain d'vne petite fille Sauuage, 
qu'vn de nos Peres baptifa h Kebec, & la nomma Ma- 
rie, la voyant prefque mourir aufli-toft. 

Le feptiefme de luillet, vne femme Sauuage vint 
oflfrir vne petite fille qu'elle auoit, h, nos Peres des 
trois Riuieres, pour eftre baptifee, auec promeffe de 
la faire inftruire en la foy, quand elle feroit grande. 
Le Pere Gamier qui efboit 1^ attendant les Hurons 
pour s'embarquer auec eux, la baptifa folemnellement 
en noflre Chapelle. Le fieur de la Treille la nomma 
Marie. 

Le huictiefme du mefme mois vn Sauuage aag6 
d'enuiron quarante ans, delirant de palTer le refle de 
fes iours en la loy de Dieu, fut baptife par le Pere 
Charles [91] du Marche, il recent le nom de lofeph 
que luy donna Monfieur de Repentigny fon Parrain. 
II y auoit long-temps qu'il auoit efte guery, k ce qu'il 
difoit, d'vne maladie, par les prieres qu'vn de nos 
Peres auoit fait pour luy, ou plufloft qu'il luy auoit 
apprifes: car le Pere qui I'auoit inflruit en la foy, vi- 
fitant vne Cabane des Sauuages, vne femme malade 
luy dit, Apprends moy les paroles que tu as enfei- 
gnees k Naaktuck, c'efl ainfi qu'il fe nommoit, pource 
qu'il dit qu'elles luy ont feruy, & qu'eflant en danger 
de fa vie, il s'eft veu deliure pronon9ant ces paroles. 
Quand les Sauuages auant fon Baptefme tomboient 
fur le propos de noflre Religion, ce pauure homme 
fe monftroit trifle, voyant que quelques-vns le blaf- 
moient, & s'en mocquoient: le Pere I'a tenu long 
temps fort fufpect, le croyant diifimule, mais en fin 
il a fait voir qu'il auoit bon coeur. Quelque-fois il 
entroit tout feul en la Chappelle, & faifoit fa priere. 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, tbjb 59 


Robert Hache,^ a young man who lived with our 
Fathers at the three Rivers, [90] came to us exclaim- 
ing that we should hasten to baptize a child but eight 
days old, who was at the last gasp. Father Buteux 
ran thither, and upon the remonstrance made to the 
mother by the wife of Capitanal,* he obtained permis- 
sion to baptize it, to name it Ignace, and to bury it 
shortly afterwards. 

On the twenty-sixth of the same month, Monsieur 
the Chevalier de I'lsle became Godfather to a little 
Savage girl that one of our Fathers baptized at Ke- 
bec ; he named her Marie, seeing her die almost im- 
mediately. 

On the seventh of July, a Savage woman came to 
offer to our Fathers at the three Rivers, a little girl 
that she had, to be baptized, with the promise to 
have her instructed in the faith when she was large 
enough. Father Garnier, who was there waiting for 
the Hurons, to embark with them, baptized her sol- 
emnly in our Chapel. Sieur de la Treille ^° named 
her Marie. 

On the eighth of the same month, a Savage of 
about forty years, wishing to pass the rest of his days 
under the law of God, was baptized by Father Charles 
[91] du Marche; " he was named Joseph by his God- 
father, Monsieur de Repentigny. A long time ago, 
he had been cured of a disease, as he said, through 
the prayers one of the Fathers had offered for him, 
or rather had taught him. For the Father who had 
instructed him in the faith, upon visiting one of the 
Cabins of the Savages, was asked by a sick woman, 
" Teach me the words thou hast taught to Naaktuch,'* 
this was the man's name, " for he says they have 
helped him, and that, when his life has been in dan- 


60 


LESRELA TIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol. 9 


II demanda certain iour de fon propre mouuement 
vne image pour fe reffouuenir de celuy qui eftoit 
mort pour nous; le Pere le voyant tefmoigner publi- 
quement deuant tous ceux de fa [92] Cabane qu'il 
vouloit eare Chreftien, I'inftruifit plainement, & puis 
luy accorda le fainct Baptefme. Sa femme voyant 
qu'on fe difpofoit pour le baptifer, fe mit a pleurer, 
difant que {i on le baptifoit qu'il mourroit bien-tofl.' 
Luy I'entendant, s'ecria, Tu ne fgais ce que tu dis, 
tais-toy, ie n'en mourray pas, & quand i'en deurois 
mourir, ie voudrois eflre baptife pour purifier & lauer 
mon ame. Monfieur & Madamoifelle de Repentigny 
& quelques autres perfonnes qui eftoient prefentes 
furent tous attendris, quand le Pere leur eut explique 
ce qu'il difoit, mais leur fentimet de deuotion s'ac- 
creut quand ils le virent receuoir le Baptefme d'vne 
fa§on pleine de piet^; I'ayant receu il prit la main du 
Pere qui I'auoit enfeign^, & de celuy qui I'auoit ba- 
ptife, comme auffi de Monfieur de Repentigny, & les 
baifa d'vne grande tendreffe, les remerciant du bien 
qu'ils luy auoient procure. Apres le Baptefme de 
ce pauure homme ie fus contraint de m'en aller au 
deuant des Hurons pour faire embarquer les Peres 
que nous y deftinions. Eaant aux trois Riuieres ie 
receus vne Lettre du Pere de Quen, qui parloit en 
ces termes [93] de ce Neophyte que ie luy auois re- 
commande. lofeph iadis 7iomme Nahakhich a pense 
mourir auiourd'huy, il m'a enuoy^ querir comme i'allois 
dire Vefpres: V y fuis alU prompt ement auec le fieur He- 
bert qui in a fort aj^ijl^. II per/euere dans la bonne vo- 
lont^ de croire, noiis luy auons fait faire quelques actes de 
contrition, il les fait volontiers, il dit qu'il ne veut pas 
eflre brufl^ auec les mefchans, qu'il veut toufiours croire 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, r6s6 61 

ger, he has been delivered by pronouncing these 
words." When the Savages, before his Baptism, 
happened to speak of our Religion, this poor man 
seemed to be cast down, seeing that some of them 
found fault with, and made sport of it. For some 
time the Father suspected him greatly of being de- 
ceitful, but at last he was convinced that he had a 
good heart. Sometimes he entered the Chapel all 
alone, and offered his prayer. One day he asked of 
his own accord for a picture, to remind himself of 
him who had died for us. The Father, seeing him 
show publicly before all those of his [92] Cabin that 
he wished to be a Christian, instructed him fully, and 
then granted him holy Baptism. His wife, seeing 
they were getting ready to baptize him, began to 
weep, saying that if they baptized him he would die 
immediately. When he heard her, he exclaimed, 
' * Thou dost not know what thou art saying ; keep 
still; I will not die from it, and, even if I should die, 
I wish to be baptized, to purify and wash my soul." 
Monsieur and Madamoiselle de Repentigny, and 
some other persons who were present, were greatly 
touched when the Father explained to them what he 
had said ; but their sense of devotion was increased 
when they saw the pious manner in which he re- 
ceived Baptism. Having received it, he took the 
hand of the Father who had taught him, and of the 
one who had baptized him, as also that of Monsieur 
de Repentigny, and kissed them with great tender- 
ness, thanking them for the good they had procured 
him. After the Baptism of this poor man, I was 
obliged to go away to meet the Hurons, in order to 
secure the embarkation of our Fathers who were ap- 
pointed to go there. Being at the three Rivers, I re- 


62 LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 9 

ce que luy a dit le Pcre le leune, en difant cela il pleuroit. 
II a vn grand dejir de vous voir, ie dis tres-grand; ie crains 
neantmoins quit ne vous voye plus qu en V autre monde. 
Pour moy vojire ret our in apporteroit vne grande confola- 
tion, & vn grand foulagement; car tandis qu'il /era ma- 
lade, il /era necejfaire que ie V aille fouuent voir durant le 
iour\ & ce qui me fafche^ c est que ie ne fqaurois parler. 
Ce font les propres mots du Pere, qui eft fort occup^ 
& diuerty auffi bien que les autres ; voila pourquoy 
il n'aduance pas tant en la cognoiffance de la langxie 
comme il defireroit. De verite c'eft vne chofe bien 
fafcheufe de voir vn pauure homme demander le pain 
de I'Euangile a la mort, & de ne luy pouuoir donner 
que de petites mies, qui ne font pas [94] capables de le 
raffafier. Le Pere du March6, qui m'a rendu les 
Lettres du Pere de Quen, m'adiouftoit que ce pauure 
Sauuage pleuroit de tendreffe, & qu'au rapport du 
truchement il exhortoit vn lien compatriote la larme 
"k I'oeil k croire en Dieu, & embraffer fa faincte foy. 
En fin il mourut le dernier iour de luillet ; les Sau- 
uages auoient deja mis fon corps dans vn Canot pour 
le porter au Sault de Montmorency, quand le Pere 
Malle furuenant les arrefta, & le fit rendre pour I'en- 
terrer auec les Chreftiens. Le Pere de Quen m'ecri- 
uit fa mort: lofeph, dit-il, tant & Ji /ojiuent recomman- 
di, a quitte cette vie le iour de nojire bien-heureux Pere & 
Fonda t eur fainct Ignace. Ie V ay vifite tous les iours trois 
fois : i'ay fait mon apprentijjage a V enfeigner, & luy fair e 
faire des actes de foy & de douleur, fans emprunter la 
langue d'autruy. II me faifoit par fois reiterer ce que ie 
luy faifois dire pour marque qii il y prenoit goust. Mon- 
fieur de Repentigny fon Par rain V a fouuent vifiti dans fa 
maladie, luy faifant porter tantofl des oeufs, tantofi des 


1636] LEJEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 63 

ceived a Letter from Father de Quen, who spoke in 
these terms [93] of this Neophyte, whom I had rec- 
ommended to him. Joseph, formerly called Nahakhich, 
thought he was going to die to-day. He sent for me as I 
was about to say Vespers; I went to him promptly with 
sieur Hebert,'^^ zvho assisted me greatly. He perseveres in 
his good intentions to believe; we have had him perform 
some acts of contrition, which he does willingly; he said 
that he did not wish to be burned with the wicked, that 
he always wished to believe what Father le Jeune told 
him; in saying this he wept. He has a great desire to see 
you, I say very great; I fear, however, that he will never 
see you again, except in the other world. As for me, your 
return would give me great comfort and relief; for as 
long as he is sick I shall have to go to see him frequently 
during the day ; and what grieves me is, that I cannot 
speak. These are the very words of the Father, who, 
as well as the others, is very busy, and has many dis- 
tractions ; and this is why he has not advanced in the 
knowledge of the language as he would desire. In 
truth, it is a very sad thing to see a poor dying man 
ask for the bread of the Gospel, and only be able to 
give it to him in little crumbs, which are not [94] 
sufficient to satisfy him. Father du Marche, who 
delivered to me Father de Quen's Letters, added that 
this poor Savage wept pathetically; and that, accord- 
ing to the report of the interpreter, he exhorted one 
of his countrymen, with tears in his eyes, to believe 
in God and to embrace his holy faith. Finally he 
died, on the last day of July. The Savages had al- 
ready placed his body in a Canoe to take it to the 
Falls of Montmorency, when Father Masse, coming 
upon the scene, stopped them and made them give it 
back to be buried with the Christians. Father de 


64 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.9 

Tourterelles, quelquefois des confitures : en fin il luy a 
rendu les derniers deuoirs, l' accompagnant h, la fepulturc, 
conime auj^i [95] Madamoifelle fa mere, & Madamoi- 
felle fa femme, & autres perfoiines de fa maifon. le 
donneray cette loiiange k nos Frangois, qu'ils hono- 
rent volontiers les obfeques & les Baptefmes de nos 
Sauuages de leur prefence : ce qui edifie grandement 
ces Barbares, voyant qu'on fait eflat de ceux de leur 
nation, qui regoiuent noftre faincte foy. Quatre 
Fran9ois portoient le corps de celuy-cy. Monfleur de 
Courpon, Monfieur Gand, Monfieur de Caftillon, & 
plufieurs autres, fe trouuerent au conuoy fuiuy des 
Sauuages qui fe trouuoient pour lors ^ Kebec. 

Le quatorziefme du mois d'Aoufl, le Pere Antoine 
Daniel, defcendant du Pays des Hurons, & palTant par 
la petite Nation des Algonquins, baptifa vn pauure 
prifonnier Hiroquois, que les Sauuages alloient fup- 
plicier. Voyant done que c6t homme entendoit bien 
le Huron, il fait quelques pre fens a fes gardes pour 
le pouuoir aborder, & luy parler auec liberty ; il luy 
reprefente que c'eft fait de fa vie, qu'apres fa mort 
fon ame doit fouffrir des tourmens incomparablemet 
plus grands, que ceux qu'il auoit defia experimente, 
& deuoit experimenter en fon [96] corps ; que fi ne- 
antmoins il veut croire en celuy qui a tout fait, il 
echapera ces tourmens, & ioiiira des delices du Ciel. 
En vn mot il I'inftruit, & le baptife immediatement 
deuant qu'on le menafl a la mort. II nous difoit 
qu'eftant vn foir aupres de luy, les Sauuages le vin- 
drent lier, afin qu'il ne fe fauuaft point la nuict; ils 
luy attachoient les bras & les pieds a deux gros ba- 
rtons, qui ioignoient fon pauure corps tout eftendue 
fur la terre, & place en telle pofture qu'il ne le^pou- 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 65 


Quen wrote me about his death. Joseph, said he, so 
much and so often commended, quitted this life on the day 
of oiir blessed Father and Founder, saint Ignace. I visited 
him three times every day; I served my appreyiticeship by 
teaching him; and had him perform acts of faith and con- 
trition, xvithout borrowing any one else s language. At 
times, he made me repeat what I had had him say, to show 
me he had become fond of it. Monsieur de Repentigny, 
his Godfather, visited him often in his sickness, and sent 
him sometimes a few eggs, sometimes some Pigeons, occa- 
sionally some preserves. At the end, he rendered him the 
last offices, accompanying him to the grave, as also did 
[95] Madamoiselle his mother and Madamoiselle his 
wife,^^ and other members of his family. I will say thus 
much in praise of our French, they are willing to 
honor the obsequies and Baptisms of our Savages by 
their presence ; this is greatly to the edification of 
these Barbarians who see that we make a great deal 
of those of their nation who receive our holy faith. 
Four Frenchmen bore his body : Monsieur de Cour- 
pon, Monsieur Gand, Monsieur de Castillon,^* and a 
number of others were in the funeral procession, and 
were followed by the Savages who were then at 
Kebec. 

On the fourteenth of the month of August, Father 
Antoine Daniel, coming down from the Huron Coun- 
try, and passing by the petite Nation of the Algon- 
quins,^^ baptized a poor Hiroquois prisoner whom 
the Savages were going to torture. Seeing that this 
man understood the Huron language well, he there- 
fore made some presents to his guards, in order to 
be able to approach him and speak with him freely. 
He represented to him that his life was done ; that 
after death his soul would have to suffer torments, 
incomparably greater than those he had already ex- 


66 


LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 9 


uoit remuer. Pendant que I'vn le lioit, vn autre 
6clairoit auec vn flambeau d'ecorce, & tout exprez fe- 
coiioit ce flambeau, parfemant de feu ce pauure mife- 
rable, nud comme la main, lequel ne pouuoit fe d6- 
faire de ces flammes, qui s'attachoient h. fa chair, & 
la brufloient auec vne grande douleur; il ne crioit 
point neantmoins, endurant ce tourment auec vne 
conftance digne d'etonnement. 

Le vingt-deuxiefme du mefme mois, vne femme 
Sauuage apporta fon petit fils au Fort, demandant 
pour luy quelques raifms ou quelques pruneaux; 
voyant ce pauure enfant fort malade, ie m'enquis fi 
elle ne feroit pas bien contente qu'on le [97] bapti- 
fafl, elle s'y accorda fort volontiers, on le porte tout 
fur I'heure h. la Chapelle, Monfieur le General fe 
trouuant 1^ voulut eftre fon Parrain, il luy donna nom 
Theodore, il fut baptife folemnellement en la pre- 
fence de la plus part de nos Frangois. 

Voila tons ceux qui ont efte baptifez aux Refi- 
dences plus proches de Kebec, tous les autres ont efle 
faits Chrefliens aux Hurons. La Relation de ces 
Pais fi eloignez, que i'enuoye, en fera mention, comme 
aufli de beaucoup d'autres chofes fort remarquables. 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, tb36 67 

perienced and would experience in his [96] body; 
that if, however, he would believe in him who has 
made all, he would escape these torments, and 
would enjoy the delights of Heaven. In a word, he 
instructed him and baptized him immediately, be- 
fore he should be led to death. The Father told us 
that one evening, when he was near him, the Sav- 
ages came and bound the prisoner so that he might 
not escape in the night ; they tied him by the arms 
and feet to two heavy pieces of wood, which fas- 
tened his poor body, stretched out upon the earth in 
such a position that he could not move. While one 
was binding him, another furnished light with a 
bark torch, purposely shaking this torch in order to 
scatter the sparks over this poor wretch, as naked as 
the hand, while he could not brush away these 
sparks, which stuck to his flesh and burned him with 
an intense pain. Yet he did not cry out, enduring 
this torment with a firmness worthy of admiration. 

On the twenty-second of the same month, a Sav- 
age woman brought her little son to the Fort, asking 
for him some raisins or prunes. Seeing this little 
child very sick, I asked if she would not like to have 
him [97] baptized. She willingly agreed to it, and he 
was immediately carried to the Chapel. Monsieur 
the General was there, and consented to act as God- 
father, giving him the name Theodore. He was sol- 
emnly baptized, in the presence of most of our 
French people. 

These are all who have been baptized at the Resi- 
dences nearest to Kebec, all the others having been 
made Christians among the Hurons. The Relation 
of those so distant Countries, which I send, will 
mention these baptisms, as well as many other very 
remarkable things. 


68 LES RELATIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol.9 


CHAPITRE V. 

DE LA MORT MISERABLE DE QUELQUES SAUUAGES. 

VN certain difoit que Dieu auoit des pieds de laine, 
& des mains de plomb ; il me femble qu'il a eu 
des pieds de Cerf, & des bras de fer ou de 
bronze en la punition de quelques Sauuages. L'A- 
poftat duquel i'ay amplement parle les annees paffees 
menera la bande. le [98] me fuis fouuent eftonne 
repallant par ma memoire, comme Dieu auoit fou- 
droye, pour ainfi dire, les trois freres, auec lefquels 
i'ay hyuern6 ; pour auoir m6chamment fauffe la pro- 
meffe qu'ils luy auoient faite de le recognoiftre pour 
leur fouuerain, de I'aymer, & de luy obei'r, comme h. 
leur Seigneur. lis auoient eu recours a fa bonte dans 
leur famine extreme ; il les auoit fecourus, leur don- 
nant dequoy manger abondamment: Adhuc efc(E erant 
in ore ipfortim, & ira Dei afcendit fuper eos. lis n'a- 
uoient pas encore auale le morceau, que Dieu les prit 
^ la gorge. Auant que I'annee fuft expiree, I'aifn^ 
qui eftoit ce miferable Sorcier, qui m'a bien donn6 
de I'exercice, fut brufle tout vif dans fa propre mai- 
fon. Le fecond qui eftoit mon hofte, homme d'vn 
affez bon naturel; mais qui pour complaire k fon 
frere, voulut deplaire a Dieu, fut noye, ayant perdu 
la ceruelle, comme i'ay deja eery. Reftoit I'Apoflat, 
le plus ieune des trois. le croy que le charactere de 
Chreflien luy a pour vn peu de temps arrefl6 la iu- 
flice diuine; mais comme il ne s'eft pas voulu reco- 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1636 


69 


CHAPTER V. 

ON THE MISERABLE DEATH OF SOME SAVAGES. 

SOME one has said that God has feet of wool and 
hands of lead. It seems to me that he has had 
the feet of a Deer and arms of iron or bronze, 
in the punishment of certain Savages. The Apos- 
tate, of whom I have spoken fully in past years, will 
lead the band. I [98] have often been astonished in 
thinking it over, how God has let his thunderbolts 
fall, so to speak, upon the three brothers with whom 
I passed the winter, ^^ for having wickedly violated 
the promise they had made to acknowledge him as 
their sovereign, to love and to obey him as their 
Lord. They had had recourse to his goodness in 
their extreme famine ; he had succored them, giving 
them food in abundance. Adhuc escce erant in ore ipso- 
rum, et ira Dei ascendit super eos. They had not yet 
swallowed the morsel when God took them by the 
throat. Before the year had expired, the eldest, that 
wretched Sorcerer, who had given me a great deal of 
trouble, was burned alive in his own house. The 
second, who was my host, a man who had naturally 
a good disposition, but who, to please his brother, 
was willing to displease God, was drowned, having 
lost his mind, as I have already related. There re- 
mained the Apostate, the youngest of the three. I 
believe that the stamp of the Christian for a little 
while arrested divine justice. But, as he would not 
acknowledge it, the same thunderbolt, that struck 


70 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.9 

gnoiftre, le mefme carreau de foudre, qui a frapp6 [99] 
fes freres, I'a reduit en cendres. Ce miferable eft 
mort cette annee de mal-faim, delaille dans les bois, 
comme vn chien; chofe bien remarquable, qu'il n'ait 
pas eu dequoy manger dans I'abondance: car il y a 
peut eftre dix ans, que les Sauuages n'ont tu6 tant 
d' Elans, qu'ils ont fait cet hyuer, la neige ayant eu 
toutes les conditions qu'ils dellrent pour leur chaffe. 
le ne fgay pas bien les particularitez de cet accident : 
les Sauuages nous ont dit feulement, qu'on I'auoit 
trouu6 mort de faim dans les bois. C'eftoit bien la 
raifon que cette bouche impie manquaft de viures, 
qui auoit fi fouuent blafpheme Dieu, & que Dieu con- 
damnaft a ce genre de mort, celuy qui auoit veu mou- 
rir deuant fes yeux de pauures malades, fans iamais 
me vouloir ayder a leur donner vn morceau de pain 
de la parole de Dieu. En vn mot I'Apoftat eft mort; 
s'il eft mort Apoftat, ie n'en f9ay rien, du moins il 
eft mort fans aucun fecours de la terre; le ne f9ay 
s'il en a eu du Ciel ; ie ferois bien aife qu'il fuft ainfi. 
Quelqu'vn me temoignant, n'y a pas longteps, qu'il 
eftoit bie aife de fa mort, m'obiectoit que ie I'auois 
encor cette ann6e [100] inuite k me venir trouuer, 
f9achant bien que c'eftoit vn mef chant bomme. I'a- 
uoue qu'il eftoit mefchant, ie confeffe que I'annee 
paffee, & encore celle-cy, i'auois eery a Tadoujfac, 
pour le faire venir aupres de moy. Ie dy bien da- 
uantage, s'il eftoit en mon pouuoir de le tirer des 
fers, & de la cadene, ou peut eftre il eft maintenant, 
que ie I'en tirerois, pour en contre-efchage du mal 
qu'il m'a fait, luy procurer le plus grand bien, que 
Ton puiffe procurer a vne creature raifonnable le falut 
eternel. Helas! eft ce done 11 peu de chofe qu'vne 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ibsb 71 

[99J his brothers, reduced him to ashes. That wretch 
died this year of hunger, abandoned in the woods 
like a dog. It is very remarkable that he did not 
have anything to eat, in their abundance; for per- 
haps not since ten years have the Savages killed so 
many Elk as they have this winter, the snow being in 
exactly the condition they desired for hunting them. 
I do not know the particulars of this accident ; the Sav- 
ages merely told us that they had found him starved 
to death in the woods. It was very reasonable that 
his impious mouth, which had so often blasphemed 
God, should lack food ; and that God should condemn 
to this kind of death him who had seen poor sick per- 
sons die before his eyes, without ever consenting to 
aid me in giving them a piece of the bread of the 
word of God. In a word, the Apostate is dead. 
Whether he died an Apostate or not, I do not know, 
at least he died without any earthly help ; I do not 
know whether he received any from Heaven ; I would 
be very glad if it were so. Some one assuring me, 
not long ago, that he was pleased to hear of his 
death, reproached me for having this year again 
[100] invited him to come and see me, knowing well 
that he was a wicked man. I admit that he was a 
wicked man. I confess that last year, and again this 
year, I wrote to Tadoussac to have him come to me. 
I say even more ; that, if it wer^ in my power to free 
him from the irons and chains in which perhaps he 
now is, I would release him, that I might procure 
for him, in exchange for the wrongs he has done 
me, the greatest blessing that can be obtained for a 
reasonable creature, eternal salvation. Alas! is it 
then so small a thing that a soul be damned ? All 
the gfreat affairs of Conclaves, of the Courts of sov- 


72 


LES RELA TJONS DES /^SUITES ; [Vol. 


ame foit damn^e! Totites les grandes affaires des 
Conclaues, des Cours fouueraines, des Palais, & des 
Cabinets, ne font que ieux d'enfans, en comparaifon 
de fatiuer, on de perdre vne ame. Mais paifons 
outre. 

Vne femme Sauuage eftant tomb^e malade h K€- 
bec, vn de nos Peres la voulut inftruire, elle faifoit 
femblant de I'ecouter; mais quoy qu'on die que les 
Sauuages nous trompent par fois, faifant mine de 
prefter I'oreille k vne doctrine, que leur cceur ne 
g-oufle pas; fi eft-ce qu'il eft bien aif6 de recognoiftre 
dans vne inftruction de dur^e, ^i le coeur s'accorde 
auec [loi] la langue, iamais le Pere n'eut opinion, 
qu'elle fe vouluft veritablement faire Chreftienne.' 
Elle vit de fes yeux la guerifon foudaine du petit fils 
du Prince, dot i'ay parle au Chapitre III. Cela luy 
fit demander fouuet le Baptefme, pour eftre auffi gue- 
rie. Le Pere qui ne voyoit qu'vn foin du corps en 
cette ame, ne le luy voulut pas accorder, luy promet- 
tant qu'auffi toft qu'elle feroit mieux inftruite, qu'on 
la baptiferoit. Baptife moy, difoit elle, & puis tu 
m'inftruiras: cet ordre n'eftoit pas bon. Enfin y^/- 
tikam^gou, c'eft ce Sauuage nomm6 le Prince, s'en 
voulant aller h. la chalfe dans les bois, luy demanda fi 
elle vouloit refter pour eftre inftruite, que nos Fran- 
cois I'affifteroient, & que nous la nourririons; iamais 
elle n'y voulut confentir. On la iette done fur vne 
traifne pour I'emmener. Le Pere defendit fort au 
Sauuage qui la traifnoit, de la tuer, car c'eft ainfi 
qu'ils fe dechargent de leur fardeau. il ne la tua 
pas en effet; mais elle mefme par defefpoir, ou par 
accident: difons pluftoft par vn iufte chaftiment de 
Dieu, fe fit mourir. Pendant certaine nuict, comme 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 78 

ereigns, of Palaces, and of Cabinets, are only child's 
play, in comparison with saving or losing a soul. 
But let us pass on. 

A Savage woman having fallen sick at K^bec, one 
of our Fathers wished to instruct her ; she pretended 
to listen to him. But, although they say the Sav- 
ages sometimes deceive us, pretending to lend the 
ear to a doctrine which their heart does not relish, 
yet it is easy to recognize in a continued instruction 
whether or not the heart agrees with [loi] the 
tongue. The Father never believed that she really 
wished to become a Christian. She saw with her 
own eyes the sudden recovery of the Prince's little 
son, of which I have spoken in Chapter III. This 
made her often ask for Baptism, that she also might 
be cured. The Father, who saw only concern for 
the body in this soul, did not wish to grant it to her, 
promising that, as soon as she was better instructed, 
they would baptize her. " Baptize me," she said, 
" and then thou shalt instruct me," but this was not 
the proper order. At last Attikam^gou, the Savage 
called " the Prince," wishing to go off into the woods 
to hunt, asked her if she would not remain, to be in- 
structed ; that our French would assist her, and that 
we would feed her; but she would never consent to 
this. Then she was thrown upon a sledge, to be 
taken away. The Father very positively forbade 
the Savage who dragged her to kill her, for it is thus 
they rid themselves of their burdens. Indeed, he 
did not kill her ; but she herself, through despair or 
by accident, — let us say rather, through a just chas- 
tisement of God, — caused her own death. During a 
certain night, as there was a good fire in her Cabin 
and while every one was sleeping [102] soundly, this 


74 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.9 

il y auoit bon feu dans fa Cabane, & que tout le 
monde dormoit [102] profondement, cette femme fe 
voulant leuer tomba dans les flammes, & fut eflouff^e 
en vn moment; beuuant le feu des cette vie, qu'elle 
alloit trouuer bien plus ardent en 1' autre. Le Prince 
nous eftant venu voir, & nous ayant racont6 cette ca- 
taftrophe; le Pere qui I'inftruit luy demanda, s'il ne 
f9auoit point la raifon, pourquoy cette femme n' auoit 
pas voulu croire, ny demeurer pour eftre inflruite. 
Elle difoit, repondit il, que mourant parmy les Fran- 
9ois, on ne luy donneroit qu'vn drap apres fa mort. 
Et que luy as tu donne? luy demanda-on. le I'ay 
enuelopp6e dans la peau d'Ours, que vous luy auiez 
donnee, qui eftoit deja k demy pourrie. le m'affeure, 
dit-il, en fe gauffant, que fon ame ne prendra pas la 
peine de la venir querir, car elle ne I'empefcheroit 
guieres de rellentir les feux, qui bruflent les infidelles. 
Ceux qui ay dent "k la conuerfion des ames ne font 
pas toufiours fauuez, la premiere conuerfion qu'on 
doit faire c'eft de foy mefme. Malheur k celuy qui 
fait comme les balais, qui nettoyent la maifon, & fe 
falliflent eux-mefmes; c'eft ce qu'vn Sauuage a fait 
cette annee. Ce miferable [103] a fait baptifer fon 
propre fils, fa fille, fa niepce, & quelques autres, & 
luy ne I'a pas voulu eftre. Eftant tomb6 malade aux 
trois Riuieres, le Pere Buteux I'allant vifiter trouua 
vn longleur aupres de luy : il le voulut faire f ortir de 
la Cabane ; mais ce Charlatan repartit qu'il 6coute- 
roit luy mefme ce qu'on enfeigneroit au malade. Le 
Pere luy demande done, s'il ne vouloit pas croire en 
Dieu, qui feul le pouuoit guerir en cette vie, & le 
rendre bien-heureux en I'autre. Ouy da, fit-il, ie 
croy que voftre Manitou eft tout puiflant, dis luy qu'il 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ibjt 75 


woman, in trying to arise, fell into the flames and 
was instantly suffocated, drinking in this life the fire 
which she was about to find much hotter in the 
other. The Prince having come to see us, and hav- 
ing related this catastrophe, the Father who in- 
structed her asked him if he knew the reason why 
this woman had not been willing to believe, nor to 
remain to be instructed. "She said," he replied, 
" that if she died among the French they would on- 
ly give her a sheet after her death." " And what 
didst thou give her ? " he was asked. " I wrapped 
her in a Bear skin that you had given her, that was 
already half- rotten. I am sure," he continued, 
mockingly, " that her soul will not take the trouble 
to come back and inquire about it, for it would hard- 
ly prevent her from feeling the fires which bum un- 
believers." 

Those who aid in the conversion of souls are not 
always saved ; the first conversion one ought to make 
is that of one's self. Woe unto him who acts as 
a broom, cleaning the house but soiling itself. 
Thus a Savage has done this year. This wretch 
[103] has had his own son baptized, his daughter, 
his niece, and several others, and would not be bap- 
tized himself. Having fallen sick at the three Riv- 
ers, Father Buteux, upon visiting him, found a Jug- 
gler beside him ; he wished to make him leave the 
Cabin, but this Charlatan replied that he himself 
would listen to what he was going to teach the 
sick man. So the Father asked him if he did not 
wish to believe in God, who alone could cure him 
in this life, and make him happy in the other. 
"Yes indeed," he replied, "I believe that your 
Manitou is all-powerful ; tell him to cure me, and I 


76 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.9 

me gueriffe, & ie te donneray dix Caflors. Tu f$ay 
bien, repartit le Pere, que nous ne voyons pas les ma- 
lades pour tirer d'eux quelque prefent; mais pluftofl 
pour leur en faire. Ie le f§ay bien, & partant reuiens 
moy voir fur le midy. II fe vouloit faire chanter par 
ce Jongleur; mais le Pere le fit venir fecrettement, 
& I'intimida en forte qu'il ne chanta point, ny ne 
fouffia ce pauure miferable, comme il s'y attendoit. 
Le Pere I'eftant retourn^ voir fur le midy, foit qu'il 
fuft touche par les prieres de fes enfans, qui font au 
Ciel, ou qu'il fift I'hypocrite, il promit merueille; 
mais comme [104] il eftoit extremement fuperbe, la 
foy ne peut entrer, ou faire long fejour dans fon ame. 
Quomodo vos potejiis credere , qui gloriam ah inuicem acci- 
pitis. L'orgueil met de grands obftacles entre Dieu 
& I'ame, & ferme la porte a la Foy, auffi bien qu'a la 
Charit6. Quelques iours apres il fit venir le Pere, & 
luy dit qu'on I'auoit affeur^ qu'il gueriroit s'il dor- 
moit auec vn chappeau, le fuppliant de luy en don- 
ner vn ; comme on le voulut detourner de cette fuper- 
flition, cette ame altiere ne voulant pas eftre contre- 
dite, fe cabre, dit des iniures aux Peres, & k tous 
les Frangois, les appellans menteurs & impofleurs. 
On le voulut ramener "k la raif on par la douceur ; mais 
il fe tourna par d6pit de 1' autre cofte, fans iamais 
vouloir repondre. Quelque temps apres fon frere le 
voyant approcher de I'agonie, dit a vn ieune gar9on 
Fran9ois, qu'il en aduertifl les Peres, celuy-cy s'en 
oublia : la mort le pourf uiuant de pres, vn autre Sau- 
uage vint frapper k la porte des Peres, mais I'vn 
d'eux difoit la faincte Meffe, & I'autre eftoit empefche 
ailleurs, fi bien qu'il ne trouua perfonne; il retourne 
encore vne fois, rencontre le Pere Buteux, I'emmene 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1636 77 

will give thee ten Beavers." " Thou knowest well," 
replied the Father, ' ' that we do not come to see the 
sick in order to get presents from them, but rather 
to give to them." " I know it very well, and there- 
fore come and see me again about noon. ' ' He wished 
to have himself sung to by this Juggler ; but the Fa- 
ther had the latter come to him privately and so 
frightened him that he did not sing nor blow upon 
this poor wretch, as he expected to do. The Father 
having returned to see him about noon, found that 
he had either been touched by the prayers of his 
children, who are in Heaven, or else that he was act- 
ing the hypocrite, for he promised wonders. But as 
[104] he was extremely proud, the faith could not 
enter nor make a long sojourn in his soul. Quomodo 
vos potestis credere^ qui gloriam ab invicem accipitis. 
Pride places great barriers between God and the 
soul, and closes the door to Faith as well as to Chari- 
ty. Some days afterward, he sent for the Father, 
and told him that he had been assured he would re- 
cover, if he would sleep with a hat on, begging him 
to give him one. When they tried to divert him 
from this superstition, this haughty spirit, impatient 
of contradiction, flew into a passion and uttered in- 
sults against the Fathers and against all the French, 
calling them liars and impostors. They tried to re- 
store him to reason by gentleness ; but he spitefully 
turned over, and would not answer a word. A little 
later, his brother, seeing he was nearing the end, 
said to a young French boy that he should inform 
the Fathers of it, but he forgot to do so. As death 
was rapidly approaching, another Savage came and 
rapped at the Fathers' door; but one of them was 
saying the holy Mass, and the other was otherwise 


78 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.9 


[105] auec foy; mais comme ils entroient en la Ca- 
bane, ce fuperbe rendit le dernier foufpir. Ces acci- 
dens deuat les hommes, ne font que des accidens, 
mais deuant Dieu font de grands iugemens. II efloit 
tenu des Fran9ois pour vn mefchant homme ; quoy 
que fur la fin de fes iours il euft tafch6 par quelques 
bonnes actions d'effacer cette mauuaife reputation. 
Nous auons remarque fouuent, que ceux qui auoient 
quelque bonte naturelle ont efte fecourus de Dieu, & 
que les luxurieux, les arrogans, & autres femblables 
n'ont point ioiiy des mefmes faueurs "k la mort. On 
m'a dit que e'eftoit ce Sauuage qui auoit mis le feu 
dans la Cabane du Sorcier, dont ie viens de parler, le 
faifant brufler tout vif pour fe deliurer de I'importu- 
nite qu'il luy caufoit par fa maladie, femant par apres 
vn bruit pour couurir fa cruaute, que ce feu s' efloit 
pris par 1' operation d'vn autre Sorcier, auec lequel 
celuy-cy auoit eu quelques prifes, iufque Ik que quel- 
qu'vn me dit, que ce feu efloit venu par defTous terre. 
Le fils du Capitanal ag6 d'enuiron dixhuict ans a 
reflembl6 k ce malbeureux; [106] paffant en 1' autre 
vie d'vne fa9on tres-miferable ; il efloit enfant de 
bons parens pour eflre Sauuages, fon Pere mourut il 
y a deux ans en reputation de fage, & de vaillant Ca- 
pitaine parmy fon peuple ; fa mere efl encor viuante, 
c'efl la femme Sauuage la plus modefle que i'aye 
point veu ; leur fils degeneroit de ces bonnes quali- 
tez. II y a vn an que le Pere Buteux & vn autre de 
nos Peres s'eflant rencontrez en vn feflin des morts 
que faifoient les Sauuages proche du f epulchre de fon 
pere : ils furent contraints de luy donner la chafTe pu- 
bliquement, fur vne action brutale qu'il alloit com- 
mettre "k leurs yeux : les afliflans recogneurent fa f aute 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1636 79 

prevented, so he could find no one. He returned 
again, met Father Buteux, and took him [105] with 
him; but, as they were entering the Cabin, this 
proud man drew his last breath. These accidents in 
the eyes of men are only accidents, but in the sight 
of God they are great judgments. He had been re- 
garded by the French as a wicked man, although 
toward the end of his days he had tried by some good 
deeds to efface this bad reputation. We have often 
observed that those who are naturally good, have 
been succored by God, while the lustful, the arro- 
gant, and other such persons, have not enjoyed the 
same favors at death. I was told that it was this 
Savage who set on fire the Cabin of the Sorcerer, of 
whom I have just spoken, burning him alive to get 
rid of the annoyance he caused him by his disease, — 
afterwards spreading the report, to cover up his cru- 
elty, that this fire had been caused by the perfor- 
mance of another Sorcerer, with whom the former 
had had some quarrel, this report being so exagger- 
ated that some one told me the fire had come up out 
of the ground. 

Capitanal's son, about eighteen years old, like this 
unfortunate man, [106] passed into the other world 
in a very pitiable way. He was the child of very 
good parents, for Savages ; his Father died two years 
ago enjoying the reputation among his people of a 
wise and valiant Captain;^ his mother is still liv- 
ing, being the most modest Savage woman I have 
yet seen; their son fell short of these good qualities. 
A year ago, Father Buteux and another of our Fa- 
thers, having met at a feast of the dead, which the 
Savages were holding near the grave of his father, 
were constrained to drive him away publicly, on ac- 


80 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 9 

pour luy, & firent cas de la remonftrance de nos 
Peres ; car ces Sauuages ont cela de bon, de ne con- 
tredire iamais la verity cogneue, bien qu'ils ne la fui- 
uent pas toufiours. le ne f9ay pas ce que fit du de- 
puis cet infame, mais voicy fa mort deplorable. Efhant 
tombe malade le Pere Buteux I'alla vifiter, demande 
k fa mere fi elle ne feroit pas bien-aife qu'il parlafl ^ 
fon enfant; elle repart qu'elle en eftoit fort contente, 
mais que pour I'heure il y auoit quelque empefche- 
ment dans la Cabane, [107] & partant qu'il retournaft 
dans quelque temps. Cet empefchement prouenoit 
de deux longleurs : le Pere nonobflant cela le voulut 
aborder, mais ces beaux Medecins luy firent figne 
qu'il le congediaft abfolument, ce qu'il fit. A peine 
le Pere eftoit-il forty que ces trompeurs fe mettet k 
crier, hurler, battre leur tambour, & faire leur tinta- 
marre ordinaire: cela fait, ils abordent le pauure ma- 
lade, font retirer ceux qui I'auoifinoient de trop pr6s, 
luy crient, Prens courage mon enfant, nous auons 
trouue la caufe de ta maladie, ferme les yeux feule- 
ment, & nous lailTe faire: ce pauure patient ferme 
les paupieres tant qu'il pent, pendant que ces lon- 
gleurs vifitent fon corps, & tirant de leur fac vn grand 
coufteau de boucher, ils font femblant de luy ouurir 
le cofte, & comme s'ils eufl^ent foiiille dans la playe, 
ils produifent vn petit coufteau tout fanglant qu'ils 
monflrent aux alfiftans, s'ecrians, Voila la caufe du 
mal, courage le Manitou t'auoit mis cela dedans le 
corps, te voila foulage, ne le fens tu pas bien? Oiiy, 
repart le malade, ie me porte bien mieux. Tous les 
affiflans s'eftonnent regardans ce coufteau [108] auec 
admiration. La deffus mes Charlatans pour couurir 
leur ieu & leur tromperie font vne emplaftre de cen- 


1636] LE/EUNE'S RELATION, 1636 81 

count of a brutal action he was about to commit be- 
fore their eyes. Those present recognized his fault, 
and showed their appreciation of our Fathers' re- 
monstrance. For these Savages have this good qual- 
ity, that they never contradict the truth when they 
know it, although they do not always follow it. I 
do not know what this wretch did afterwards; but 
the following is his deplorable death. Falling sick, 
Father Buteux went to visit him, and asked his 
mother if she would not like to have him talk to her 
child ; she replied that she would like it very much, 
but at present there was some obstacle to it in the 
Cabin, [107] and therefore he should return in a lit- 
tle while. This obstacle arose from two Jugglers. 
Nevertheless, the Father wished to approach him; 
but these fine Physicians signaled him to peremp- 
torily dismiss him, which he did. Scarcely had 
the Father gone out, when these impostors began to 
cry, howl, beat their drums, and make their usual 
uproar. When this is done, they approach the poor 
sick boy, make those who are too near him retire, 
and then exclaim to him, " Take courage, my child; 
we have found the cause of thy sickness ; only close 
thy eyes, and let us do our work." The poor pa- 
tient closes the lids as tightly as he can, while the 
Jugglers, examining his body, draw from their bag 
a gfreat butcher knife, and pretend to be opening 
his side and probing a wound ; then they produce a 
little knife covered with blood, which they show to 
those present, exclaiming, ' ' Behold the cause of the 
trouble; courage! the Manitou had placed this in 
thy body ; behold thee relieved, dost thou not feel 
well?" "Yes," replied the patient, "I am much 
better. ' ' All those present were surprised, looking at 


82 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.9 

dres d^trempees auec de I'eau, & I'appliquent fur le 
coft6 qu'ils feignoient auoir ouuert, auec defenfes bie 
exprefles ^ la mere & "k T enfant de toucher "k ce baume 
qui le deuoit guerir de tout mal, s'il fe fuft reco- 
gneu. Vn Sauuage donne aduis de tout ce proced^ 
aux Peres, ils courent k la Cabane du malade : le Pere 
Buteux preffe la mere de luy dire ce qu'on a fait k 
fon fils: apres quelques refiftances elle d^couure le 
fecret, & le Pere la fourbe des longleurs, car ayans 
leue doucement ce beau cataplafme, il ne trouua ny 
playe ny cicatrice. Ne vois tu pas, fit-il "k cette pau- 
ure mere, que ces Manitojiouekhi \^ d\y\xiQ,Ti\.'i te faifant 
croire que ce coufteau efl forty du corps de ton fils, 
fans qu'il en paroiffe aucun veflige. C'efl en cela, 
qu'efl la merueille, repart-elle, qu'ils ayent fi dextre- 
ment fait leur operation, que le corps en foit foulag^, 
& en rien du monde endommag6 : Peux-tu nier que 
mon fils ne fe porte mieux? Tu le vois "k I'oeil. En 
effet foit que le malade eufl quelque relafche, ou que 
I'imagination qui opere par tout [109] puiflamment 
luy fifl croire qu'il fe portoit mieux, on le voyoit plus 
gay qu'^ I'ordinaire; ie croy que I'efperance que luy 
auoient donn6 ces faux Efculapes d'vne vraye gueri- 
fon luy caufoit cette ioye trompeufe. Le Pere con- 
tefte, mais en vain, que I'abfence de ce coufleau 
fanglant ne luy rendroit non plus la fant€, que fa pre- 
fence I'auoit fait malade, & pour n'alterer d'auantage 
cette femme il la quitte. Le lendemain matin elle 
enuoye vn Capitaine Montagn6s porter la nouuelle 
aux Peres que fon fils eftoit mort la nuit, fans que 
perfonne I'euft veu expirer, qu'elle efloit fort defo- 
16e, & qu'elle leur donnoit mort celuy qu'ils auoient 
defir^ en vie, & qu'encor bien qu'il eufl fouliaitt6 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1636 83 

this knife [108] with wonder. Thereupon my Char- 
latans, to cover up their game and their deceit, make 
a plaster of ashes mixed with water, and apply it to 
the side they pretend to have opened, expressly for- 
bidding the mother and child to touch this balm, 
which must cure him of all disease if its value is rec- 
ognized. A Savage informs the Fathers of all these 
proceedings, and they hasten to the Cabin of the sick 
boy. Father Buteux urges the mother to tell him 
what they have done to her son. After some resis- 
tance, she discloses the secret; and the Father ex- 
poses the Jugglers, for, having gently raised this 
fine plaster, he finds neither wound nor scar. ' ' Dost 
thou not see," he said to this poor mother, "that 
these Manitosiouekhi'^'^ are abusing thee, making thee 
believe that this knife has come out of thy son's 
body, without leaving any trace thereof?" "That 
is just the wonder of it," she replied; " they have 
performed their operation so deftly that the body has 
been relieved and yet in no wise injured thereby. 
Canst thou deny that my son is better? Thou canst 
see it at a glance." In fact, either the invalid had 
some respite, or the imagination, which everywhere 
operates [109] powerfully, made him believe he was 
better ; he even seemed to be gayer than usual. I 
believe the hope of a sure recovery, which these false 
Esculapii had inspired in him, had caused this de- 
ceptive joy. The Father contends, but in vain, that 
the absence of this bloody knife restores his health 
no more than its presence had made him sick ; and, 
in order not to irritate the woman any more, he 
leaves her. The next morning she sent a Montagn6s 
Captain to bear the news to the Fathers that her son 
had died during the night, without any one having 


84 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.9 

d'eftre enterr6 aupr^s de fon pere, qu'elle leur laiffoit 
I'entiere difpolition de fon corps. Les Peres repar- 
tent qu'eftant mort en Barbare, il ne pouuoit pas eflre 
enterr^ en Chreftien. Voila vne mauuaife fin d'vn 
ieune homme qui auoit commence vne mauuaife vie. 
I'aime mieux parler des rofees du Ciel, que de fes 
foudres, & des benedictions de la bont6 de Dieu, que 
des rigueurs de fa iuftice. le laille ce difcours pour 
en [no] commencer vn plus doux: apres auoir dit 
qu'vn ieune homme Algonquin recent pareille & en- 
core pire recompenfe de s'eftre fi6 k ces longleurs; 
car ils luy fendirent en effet la gorge en trois en- 
droits, comme s'ils en euffent tir^ trois morceaux de 
fer recourbe, qu'ils luy mirent en main. Nos Peres 
de la refidence des trois Riuieres le vifiterent, & fans 
profit; car voulant pactifer auec Dieu d'vne fant6 
paffagere, il mourut, & s'en alia commencer vn tour- 
ment etemel. 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1636 85 

seen him expire ; that she was very disconsolate, and 
would give them the corpse of him whom they had 
desired living ; and that, although he had wished to 
be buried near his father, she would leave to them 
the entire disposition of his body. The Fathers an- 
swered that, as he had died a Barbarian, he could 
not be buried as a Christian. This was the bad end 
of a young man who had begun a bad life. 

I would rather speak of the dews of Heaven than 
of its thunderbolts, and of the blessings of the good- 
ness of God than of the severity of his justice. I 
leave this subject, to [no] begin a pleasanter one, 
after saying that a young Algonquin man received a 
like and even worse reward for having trusted to 
these Jugglers; for, in fact, they cut open his throat 
in three places, to make it appear they had drawn 
therefrom three pieces of curved iron, which they 
placed in his hand. Our Fathers of the residence at 
the three Rivers visited him, but without profit; for 
in trying to make a compact with God for transitory 
health, he died and went away to begin an eternal 
torment. 


86 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.9 


CHAPITRE VI. 

DES ESPERANCES DE LA CONUERSION DE CE PEUPLE. 

ENTRE quelques propofitions qu'on m'a fait de 
I'Ancienne France, quelqu'vn me demande, 
d'oti vient qu'en tant d'ann6es on a baptif6 li 
pen de perfonnes? II me femble qu'il faudroit ren- 
uerfer la propofition, & dire, d'oti vient qu'en li pen 
d'ann^es on a baptife tant de perfonnes?, L'Efcriture 
faincte parlant de Saiil dit qu'il n'a regn6 que deux 
ans; & cependant [in] il eft affeur^ qu'il a port6 le 
Sceptre & la Couronne bien plus long-temps. Le 
fainct Efprit compte en c6t endroit fa vertu, & non 
pas les ann6es de fon Sceptre & de fa Couronne. I 'en 
dis le mefme, fi vous comptez combien il y a d'ann6es 
qu'on vient recherclier en la Nouuelle France la d6- 
poiiille des animaux, vous en trouuerez bon nombre : 
mais li vous demandez combien il y en a qu'on leur 
annonce le fainct Euangile, ie r^ponds qu'jl peine 
a-t'on encores commence ; car "k bien prendre la chofe, 
il ne faut compter que depuis le temps que Meflieurs 
de la Nouuelle Compagnie font rentrez dans K^bec. 
Et 11 vous remontez plus haut, vous ne vous eflonne- 
rez point que la foy n'aye rien auance en ces contr^es, 
pendant qu'vn heretique y auoit la principale con- 
duite des affaires, & 1' authority fur ceux qui eulTent 
peli s'y employer. Or le terme eft fi court du depuis, 
qu'on a fujet de donner mille loiianges ^ Dieu du 
progrez qui s'eft faict en la Religion, dans les pre- 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 8R 


CHAPTER VI. 

ON THE HOPES OF CONVERTING THIS PEOPLE. 

AMONG various propositions that have been made 
to me from Old France, some one asks me 
how it happens that in so many years so few- 
persons have been baptized. It seems to me that 
the proposition ought to be reversed, and stated, 
* How happens it that in so few years so many per- 
sons have been baptized? " The holy Scriptures, in 
speaking of Saul, say that he reigned only two 
years; and yet [m] it is certain that he bore the 
Scepter and the Crown a much longer time. In this 
regard, the holy Spirit estimates his virtue, and not 
the years of his Scepter and his Crown. I say the 
same ; if you count how many years it has been since 
men came to New France in search of the spoils of 
animals, you will find it a long time. But if you ask 
how many years they have been preaching the holy 
Gospel, I answer that they have hardly yet begun ; 
for, to speak correctly, we should only reckon from 
the time that the Gentlemen of the New Company 
reentered K6bec. And if you go further back, you 
will not be astonished that the faith made no prog- 
ress in these countries, while a heretic had the prin- 
cipal administration of affairs here, and authority 
over those who might have devoted themselves to 
that work. Now the time has been so short since 
then, that we have reason to offer a thousand praises 
to God for the progress that has been made in Reli- 


88 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.9 

miers begaiemens d'vne langue qu'il faut apprendre, 
maniant la truelle d'vne main, & I'efpee de I'autre; 
c'efl ^ dire en faifant mille autres [112] chofes. Ceux 
qui fgauent ce que c'efl des langues, iugeront bien 
que d'en apprendre vne fans liures, & prefque fans 
Truchement, parmy des peuples vagabonds, & au 
milieu de plufieurs autres occupations, n'efl pas I'oeu- 
ure d'vn iour. N'eft-ce rien, de prefcher auec cela 
h. nos Fran9ois, entendre les ConfefTions, adminiftrer 
les Sacremens, vifiter les malades, afToupir les petits 
diuorces, qui peuuent furuenir, & faire beaucoup 
d' autres fonctions, capables d' employer tout vn 
homme. le veux conclure, que faute d'auoir vne 
pleine cognoifTance de la langue, nous n'auons pas 
encor bien commence a deployer les grandeurs de 
nofkre croyance. Themiflocle difoit au Roy de Perfe, 
que la parole refTembloit k vne belle tapiflerie, qu'il 
faut d^rouler pour en voir les beautez: en effect il 
faut parler pour eftre entendu; c'efl ce que nous ne 
pouuons encore faire qu'en enfans. S'il ne falloit 
que propofer en begayant quelques veritez, pour con- 
uaincre les Sauuages plainement, ce feroit bientofl 
fait ; mais il faut interroger & repondre, fatisfaire aux 
demandes, obuier aux obiections, difpofer fon audi- 
teur. Bref nos [113] veritez qui font plus nouuelles 
a ces Barbares, que ne feroient les operations de 1' Al- 
gebre, k qui ne pourroit compter iufqu'a dix, leur de- 
uroi[en]t prefque faire oublier leur langue, quad nous 
nous en feruos pour les leur expliquer ; tant s'en faut 
que nous ayons peu fi toft, la nous rendre familiere 
en de fi hauts myfleres. Et puis on demande d'oti 
vient qu'on ait fi peu auance en la conuerfion de ces 
Barbares? Les grandes affaires ne fe font que dans 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 99 

gion, in the first stammerings of a language which 
has to be learned, holding the trowel in one hand 
and the sword in the other, — that is to say, while 
doing a thousand other [112] things. Those who 
know what languages are, will rightly consider that 
to learn one without books and almost without an 
Interpreter, among wandering people, and in the 
midst of several other occupations, is not the work of 
a day. Is it nothing, in addition to that, to preach 
to our French, to hear Confessions, to administer 
the Sacraments, to visit the sick, to adjust little 
differences which are liable to occur, and to perform 
many other duties sufficient to keep one man con- 
stantly employed ? It is my decisive opinion that for 
lack of a complete knowledge of the language we 
have not yet even begun to unfold the grandeurs of 
our belief. Themistocles said to the King of Persia 
that language was like a piece of beautiful tapestry, — 
one must unroll it, in order to see its beauties. Cer- 
tainly, one must speak in order to be understood ; 
and this is what we cannot do yet, except as chil- 
dren. If nothing else were needed than to propose a 
few truths stammeringly, in order to fully convince 
the Savages, this would soon be done. But one 
must question and answer, satisfy inquiries, dispose 
of objections, and prepare one's hearers. In short, 
our [113] truths, which are newer to these Barbarians 
than the operations of Algebra would be to a person 
who could only count to ten, must almost make them 
forget their own language, when we use it to explain 
these to them. In the same way, are we far from 
being sufficiently familiar with it, in so short a time, 
for the explanation of mysteries so deep. And then 
they ask why it is that we have advanced so little in 


t9 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.9 

vn grand temps pour 1' ordinaire. Celuy qui entre- 
prit la batifle du Temple de faincte Sophie, k Con- 
ftantinople, s'enfuit fi tofl qu'il eut pof6 les fonde- 
mens de ce miracle de I'induftrie humaine. On le 
fit f ouuent chercher, mais en vain ; au bout de trois 
ans parut ce braue Architecte. L'Empereur luy de- 
mandant pourquoy il s'eftoit efloign^, il repart qu'vne 
fi grande Machine ne fe pouuoit faire en peu de 
temps, qu'il falloit laiffer repofer & affermir fes fon- 
demens deuant que de les charger, & qu'il fe doutoit 
bien que fa Majefle n'auroit pas eu la patience re- 
quife en cet affaire. C'eft la vertu qu'il faut auoir, 
non feulement pour baftir vne Eglife de pierres; 
mais encore plus pour [114] vne Hierufalem celefle. 
Les ames qui doiuent eftre les materiaux de c6t edi- 
fice ne reffemblent pas aux pierres dont fut bafty le 
Temple de Salomon; qu'on tailloit; & qu'on mettoit 
en ceuure fans bruit, elles ne crient que trop, elles 
refiftent, & d'vne double refiflance naturelle & ac- 
quife; eftre Barbare & bon Chreftien, viure en Sau- 
uage & en enfant de Dieu, font deux chofes bien dif- 
ferentes. Cette metamorphofe ne fe fait pas en vn 
mot, ny en vn moment. Plufieurs eflas en France, 
fe figurent qu'il ne faut qu'ouurir la bouche, & dire 
quatre paroles, & voila vn Sauuage conuerty. Et 
quand ils font icy, & qu'ils voyent ces Barbares dans 
leurs refiflances, ils crient que c'efl temps perdu de 
leur prefcher la parole de Dieu. Quel moyen de les 
contenter, & de peupler le Ciel, de cette barbaric? 
Si ie n'entrois point deja dans la longueur, ie fe- 
rois voir que la plufpart des Chreftiens font de plus 
grandes refiftances a Dieu que les Sauuages. Laiffez 
ces gueux, difent quelques-vns, vous perdez vos 


1636] LE JEUNETS RELA TION, 1636 91 

the conversion of these Barbarians. Great affairs 
are usually concluded only in a long time. He who 
undertook the building of the Temple of saint So- 
phia, in Constantinople, ran away as soon as he had 
laid the foundations of this miracle of human inge- 
nuity. He was often sought for, but in vain ; at the 
end of three years this honest Architect reappeared. 
When the Emperor asked him why he went away, 
he answered that so great a piece of Mechanism could 
not be made in a short time, — that the foundations 
must be allowed to settle and solidify before loading 
them down ; and that he feared his Majesty would 
not have had the patience needful for that. It is 
virtue that is necessary, not only to build a Church 
of stones, but still more for [114] a celestial Jerusa- 
lem. The souls which must be the materials of this 
edifice are not like the stones of which the Temple 
of Solomon was built, which were cut and placed in 
position without noise. These cry out only too 
much, they resist, and with two kinds of resistance, 
natural and acquired. To be a Barbarian and a good 
Christian, to live as a Savage and as a child of God, 
are two very different things. This metamorphosis 
is not accomplished by a word nor in a moment. A 
great many people in France imagine that all we have 
to do is to open our mouths and utter four words, and 
behold, a Savage is converted. And when they are 
here, and see these Barbarians in their resistance, 
they exclaim that it is time lost to preach to them 
the word of God. How can they be satisfied, and 
Heaven peopled, with these barbarians? If I were 
not already somewhat tedious, I would show that 
the greater number of Christians resist God more 
than do the Savages. "Leave these beggars, " say 


92 LES RELATIONS DES jASUJTES [Vol.9 

peines, vous-vous rompez la tefte fans fruict. le dirois 
volontiers vn mot k I'oreille h. ces gens-lk. Combien 
de fois, ou [115] voftre Confeffeur, ou les Predica- 
teurs, ou quelque bon Liure, ou voftre propre con- 
fcience, vous ont-ils repris de ce peche fecret, que 
vous commettez il y a dix ans? Que de folicitations 
de la part du Ciel, & de voftre bon Ange, pour vous 
le faire quitter? Vous auez refifte k toutes ces batte- 
ries, & h. tous ces canons? Vous qui auez efl6 nourry 
dans la maifon de Dieu, qui eftes marque k fa mar- 
que, qui croyez que ce monftre luy deplaift, qui ne 
doutez pas que fa iuftice ne foit epouuantable ; & 
vous criez qu'vn pauure Sauuage eft vn coquin, vn 
gueux, vn opiniaftre. Que c'eft perdre le temps que 
de I'enfeigner, pour le voir faire le retif k la pre- 
miere ou feconde propofition qu'on luy fait d'vne 
doctrine fi nouuelle, a luy, & h. tous fes anceflres. Et 
pour autant que vous ne le voyez pas courir k bras 
ouuerts apres ces veritez, qu'il ne croit pas encor, 
vous le dedaignez, & condamnez ceux qui I'inftrui- 
fent, vous qui auez des pieds de plomb pour aller 
apres la vertu que vous croyez adorable. H6 pour 
Dieu donnez vous patience ! Referunt fructum in pa- 
tientia, les affaires les plus precipitees ne font pas les 
mieux faites, [116] qui court trop fort, eft bien toft 
hors d'baleine. lufques icy nous n'auons pas fujet 
de nous plaindre, graces a Dieu. Pour le futur nous 
entrons dans de bonnes efperances, que ie vous vay 
brieuement deduire. 

Premierement vous m'auouerez, que s'il y a des 
bontez en Dieu, qu'il en fait participans fes amis; 
que s'il a des oreilles, c'eft notamment pour fes fa- 
uoris, Voluntatem timentium. fe faciet. II fait la vo- 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 93 

some, " you are losing your labors, you are racking 
your brain for nothing. ' ' I would like to whisper a 
word into the ears of those people. How many times 
has either [115] your Confessor, or the Preachers, or 
some good Book, or your own conscience, reproved 
you for that secret sin you committed ten years ago? 
How many were the entreaties on the part of Heaven 
and of your good Angel, to make you give it up? 
Did you resist all these batteries and all these can- 
nons? You who have been reared in the house of 
God, who have been stamped by his stamp, who be- 
lieve that this monstrous sin displeases him, who do 
not doubt that his justice is terrible, — and you cry 
out that a poor Savage is a rascal, a beggar, an ob- 
stinate fellow; that it is losing time to teach him, 
when you see him grow restless at the first or second 
statement made to him of a doctrine so new to him and 
to all his ancestors. And inasmuch as you do not see 
him running with open arms to embrace these truths, 
which he does not yet believe, you despise him and 
condemn those who instruct him, — you, who have 
feet of lead in seeking the virtue which you believe 
to be adorable. Oh, that God may give you patience ! 
Referunt fructum in patientia. The most hasty affairs 
are not the best conducted; [116] he who runs too 
fast is soon out of breath. Up to the present we 
have no reason to complain, thank God. For the fu- 
ture, we entertain good hopes, which I shall proceed 
briefly to explain. 

In the first place, you will grant me that if there 
is any goodness in God, he will share it with his 
friends ; that if he has ears, they are especially for 
his favorites. Voluntateni timentium se faciei. He 
does the will of those who fear him with love and 


94 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.9 

lont^ de ceux qui le craignent auec amour & ref pect : 
or eft il qu'vne infinite d'ames tres pures le folicitent 
inceffamment pour la conuerfion de ces Peuples. I 'ay 
fait mention de quelques-vnes cy-deffus ; i'en fgay plu- 
fieurs autres: & toutes celles dont i'ay parle, ou dont 
i'ay cognoiffance, ne font qu'vn petit nombre, en 
comparaifon de tant d' autres qui combattent pour 
nous, comme Moife pour le peuple d'Ifrael. Le 
fainct Efprit qui caufe ce grand vuide dans ces volon- 
tez fi pures, n'eft-il pas alTez puiffant pour le remplir? 
le coniure toutes ces bonnes ames de continuer ; leurs 
prieres ne font pas fans benediction. Vne marque 
que Dieu veut donner, eft quand il fe fait demander, 
[117] & demander auec amour, auec ardeur, & auec 
perfeuerance. Nous fentons les effets de ce puiffant 
fecours; fi ce bruit des trompettes du Ciel dure, les 
murs de lericho tomberont; ils femblent deja s*6- 
branler. 

Secondement, la bonte de Dieu leuant quelques ob- 
ftacles k la foy, iette petit ^ petit fa crainte dans ces 
ames. Initium fapienti(B timor Domini. Plulieurs 
Sauuages fe font eftonnez auffi bien que nous des 
chaftimens du Sorcier, & de f es complices ; la mort 
de I'Apoftat ne nuira point k fomenter les apprehen- 
fions que plufieurs ont de fe ioiier ^ Dieu. Mais ie 
ne puis affez admirer, comme il a abbaiffe I'orgueil 
des plus fuperbes d'entre-eux, notamment d'vn cer- 
tain nomm6 Oumajiikoueiau, furnomme des Fran9ois, 
la Grenoiiille. Ce mefchant homme auoit plus d'au- 
thorite que les Capitaines; mefme fon credit s'eften- 
doit parmy toutes ces Nations. Ses deffeins eftoient 
de les diuertir entierement du commerce, & de I'a- 
miti^ des Frangois. II auoit k cette fin traicte de 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1636 95 

respect. Now is it not true that a vast number of 
pure souls entreat him incessantly for the conversion 
of these Peoples? I have mentioned some of them 
above ; I know of several others. And all those of 
whom I have spoken, or of whom I have any knowl- 
edge, are only a few in comparison with the many 
others who wrestle for us, as Moses did for the peo- 
ple of Israel. Is not the holy Spirit, which causes 
this great void in these so pure wills, powerful enough 
to fill it ? I conjure all these good souls to continue ; 
their prayers are not without blessing. A sign that 
God wishes to give, is that he causes himself to be 
asked, [117] and asked with love, with ardor, and 
with perseverance. We feel the effects of this pow- 
erful assistance; if this blare of the trumpets of 
Heaven continue, the walls of Jericho will fall; they 
seem already to be shaking. 

In the second place, the goodness of God, while 
raising some obstacles to the faith, little by little 
casts fear into these souls. Initium sapientics timor 
Domini. Many Savages, as well as we ourselves, 
were astonished at the chastisement of the Sorcerer 
and his accomplices. The death of the Apostate will 
not allay the fear that many have of mocking God. 
But I cannot sufficiently admire his mode of hum- 
bling the pride of the haughtiest among them, espe- 
cially of a certain man named Oumastikoueiau, sur- 
named by the French la Grenoiiille [" the Frog "].^^ 
This wicked man had more authority than the Cap- 
tains, and his influence extended even among all these 
Tribes. His plans were laid to divert them entirely 
from commerce and friendship with the French. To 
this end he had negotiated peace with his enemies ; 
but God, who knew the malice of his heart, crushed 


96 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.9 

paix auec fes ennemis; mais Dieu qui cognoifloit la 
malice de fon coeur, I'a foudroye, & a permis que les 
[ii8] plus mef chants des Sauuages fe trouuaflent en- 
ueloppes dans fes crimes. Car voulant frayer le 
chemin chez I'Eftranger par les terres de fes enne- 
mis, qu'il croyoit auoir gagn6, ils ont tremp6 leurs 
mains dans fon fang, I'egorgeant miferablemet auec 
tous ceux dont I'orgueil nous faifoit plus de refiftance. 
Quand Goliat fut terraff6, I'arm^e des Philiftins n'eut 
plus de force. La mort de ceux-cy rend les autres 
plus fouples, & mieux difpofez k nous accorder ce que 
nous defirons d'eux. 

En troifiefme lieu, plus la fplendeur des Fran9ois 
ira croiffant en ces Pais, plus les Barbares les refpe- 
cteront-ils, & plus grande crainte auront-ils de les 
offenfer. Les Peuples de I'lnde Orientale, ayans les 
Portugais en grande eftime, receurent plus aif6ment 
leur creance ; & les Sauuages venans petit ^ petit ^ 
admirer la puiffance, I'induftrie & les bonnes moeurs 
de nos Fran§ois: ie tremble ecriuant ces derniers 
mots, tant i'ay peur d'eftre fruftr^ de mon attete en 
ce point: feront eftat de leur foy, & I'embrafferont 
plus aif^ment. 

En quatriefme lieu, S'ils commencent [119] deja k 
procurer le Baptefme k leurs enfans malades, il faut 
efperer qu'vn iour ils defireront pour eux, ce qu'ils 
penfent eftre bon pour les autres. Ie vous fupplie 
de remarquer ce point icy, & celuy qui vient apres. 
Vous voyez des meres qui apportent elles-mefmes 
leurs enfans au Baptefme, quand elles les voyent en 
danger de mourir, & quelques-vnes pleurent abondam- 
ment, entendans dire que leurs enfans font dans les 
flammes, pour n'auoir voulu croire, ou qu'ils font pri- 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 97 

him, and permitted the [118] most wicked of the 
Savages to be involved in his crimes. For in trying 
to open a way to the Foreigners through the lands 
of their enemies, whom he thought he had won over, 
they imbrued their hands in his blood, slaughtering 
him miserably, as well as all those whose pride had 
caused us the most trouble. When Goliath was slain, 
the army of the Philistines no longer had any 
strength. The death of these men renders the others 
more pliable and more disposed to grant us what we 
desire from them. 

In the third place, the more the glory of the 
French continues to increase in these Regions, the 
more these Barbarians will respect them, and the 
more fear they will have of offending them. The 
Inhabitants of the East Indies, holding the Portu- 
guese in great esteem, more readily received their 
belief; and the Savages, coming little by little to 
admire the power, ingenuity and morality of our 
French, — I tremble while writing these last words, 
so greatly do I fear being disappointed in this ex- 
pectation, — will make much of their faith, and will 
more readily embrace it. 

In the fourth place, if they begin [119] already 
to secure Baptism to their sick children, one must 
hope that some day they will desire for themselves 
what they consider good for others. I beg you to 
note this point and the one that follows. You see 
mothers themselves bringing their children to Bap- 
tism when they see them in danger of death ; and 
some weep bitterly when they hear it said that their 
children are in the flames, for not having wished to 
believe, or that they are deprived of the pleasures of 
Heaven because they were not baptized. Is not this 


98 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.9 

uez des plailirs du Ciel, pour n'eftre baptifez. Eft-ce 
pas 1^ vn bon commencement? II efl tel, que ie ne 
I'euffe of 6 efperer en fi peu de temps. On voit par 
ces actions comme Dieu va exau9ant les prieres de 
ceux qui le follicitent pour cette Nation. 

En cinquiefme lieu, nous auons vn indice encor 
bien plus certain, que la femence de TEuangile com- 
mence k germer dans les coeurs de ces Barbares ; c'eft 
que beaucoup d'entre-eux font bien aifes de mourir 
Chreftiens ; non tant ^ la verite par amour, que pour 
la crainte de tomber dans les feux, dont on les me- 
nace: Toufiours n'efl-ce pas peu. Encore [120] plus, 
de ce qu'ils commencent a perdre Tapprelienfion 
qu'ils auoient du Baptefme, & la croyance que ce Sa- 
crement leur doiue caufe la mort; qu'ils s'affeurent 
que leur ame efl nettoyee par ces faintes eaux ; qu'ils 
defirent d'eftre enfeuelis auec nous: ^i cette foy n'efl 
pas encor fi forte dans leurs ames, c'efl quelque 
chofe qu'elle commence d'y germer. I 'en ay veu 
qui m'ont dit, Ie f9ay bien que ie fuis mort, laiffons 
1^ le corps, penfons k I'ame, cela fe peut-il dire fans 
auoir la foy? Tout ce que nous difons n'efl que ref- 
uerie, s'^crient quelques-vns : vous autres vous auez 
cognoiffance de la verity. Ces penfees ne monflrent- 
elles pas que le iour commence ^ poindre dans leurs 
ccEurs ? Le filieul de Monfieur le Gouuerneur, eflant 
all6 aux trois Riuieres, demandoit au Pere Buteux, 
s'il efloit permis de demander a Dieu la fant6, comme 
s'il eufl voulu f9auoir, s'il ne feroit pas meilleur de 
le lailler faire. 

En fixiefme lieu, I'Hofpital qu'on nous fait efperer, 
aura, comme nous croyons, de puiffans eff ets. II efl 
certain que tous les Sauuages malades viendront [121] 


1636] LEJEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 


99 


a good beginning? It is such as I would not have 
dared to hope for in so short a time. We see in 
these acts how God hearkens to the prayers of those 
who entreat him for this Nation. 

In the fifth place, we have a still surer indication 
that the seed of the Gospel is beginning to germi- 
nate in the hearts of these Barbarians. It is that 
many of them are very glad to die Christians ; not, 
in truth, so much through love as through fear of fall- 
ing into the fires with which they are threatened. 
This is surely not a little. Still [120] more, they 
are beginning to lose the dread they had of Baptism, 
and the belief that this Sacrament must cause them 
to die ; they are confident their souls are cleansed by 
these holy waters ; they desire to be buried with us. 
If this faith is not yet quite strong in their souls, it 
is something that it is beginning to grow there. I 
have seen those who have said to me, " I fully re- 
alize that I am to die ; let us give up the body, and 
think of the soul." Can that be said unless they 
have faith ? All that we say is only idle fancy, some 
exclaim. You know what the truth is. Do not 
these thoughts show that light is beginning to dawn 
in their hearts? The godson of Monsieur the Gov- 
ernor, having gone to the three Rivers, asked Fa- 
ther Buteux if it were permitted to ask God for health, 
as if he wished to know whether it would not be bet- 
ter to leave that to him. 

In the sixth place, the Hospital that we are en- 
couraged to hope for, will have, we believe, power- 
ful results. ^'^ It is certain that all the sick Savages 
will come [121] to die there. For to be sick among 
these Barbarians, and to have already one foot in the 
grave, is one and the same thing; of this they are 


100 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.9 

fondre 1^ dedans; car eflre malade parmy ces Bar- 
bares, & auoir deja vn pied dans la foffe, c'eft la 
mefme chofe, ils cognoilTent fort bien cela; voila 
pourquoy ie n'en fjache point parmy eux qui ne pre- 
fere en fa maladie la plus pauure maifon des Fran9ois 
^ la plus riche Cabane des Sauuages. Quand ils fe 
verront bien couchez, bien nourris, bien logez, bien 
penfez, doutez vous que ce miracle de charity ne 
leur gagne le coeur? II nous tarde en verite que 
nous ne voyons cette merueille. Mais ie fupplie ces 
bonnes fiUes, qui en doiuent prendre le foin, de ne 
point paffer la mer, que leur Maifon ne foit en eflat 
d'exercer leurs fonctions. Ce n'eft pas tout que 
d'eflre icy, il y faut eflre auec fruict; autrement il 
vaudroit bien mieux eflre en France. Si toft qu'elles 
f eront baflies on les mandera ; vne grande maifon ne 
fe fait pas bie en peu de temps, & par vn petit nobre 
de perfonnes. Nous auons plus grand defir de voir 
nos malades entre leurs mains, qu'elles n'ont de les 
penfer; quoy qu'elles en bruflent, pour ainll dire. 
Nous voyons bien que leur Hofpital peuplera les Se- 
minaires de gar9ons & de fiUes : car les enfans de ceux 
[122] qui y mourront leur demeureront. Ie dy bien 
dauantage, qu'en fecourat les peres & les meres, il 
leur faudra nourrir «fe veflir les enfans; c'eft iufle- 
ment ce qu'on demade pour les pouuoir inflruire. 
Pleuft a Dieu qu'elles fuffent deja chargees d'vne cin- 
quantaine de petites filles penfionnaires ; elles au- 
roient bien toft de braues Vrfulines qui prendroient 
ces enfans, & leur laifferoient leurs malades, qui leur 
donneront prou d'exercice; & par confequent que les 
vnes & les autres s'exercent dans les folides vertus, 
elles auront icy enquoy les employer. Et puis il fau- 


1G36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 101 

very well aware. Hence, I know none among them 
who do not prefer in sickness the poorest house of 
the French to the richest Cabin of the Savages. 
When they find themselves in comfortable beds, well 
fed, well lodged, well cared-for, do you doubt that 
this miracle of charity will win their hearts? We 
are very impatient indeed to see this wonder. But 
I beg those good sisters who are to have the care of 
them, not to cross over the sea until their House is 
in such a condition that they can exercise their du- 
ties. Simply to be here, is not all ; they must 
accomplish something ; otherwise, it would be far 
better to be in France. As soon as buildings are 
erected, we shall send for them ; but a large house 
cannot be built well in a short time, and by a few 
people. We are more desirous of seeing our sick in 
their hands than they are of nursing them, although 
they burn with desire, so to speak. We see clearly 
that their Hospital will fill the Seminaries with boys 
and girls; for the children of those [122] who die 
there, will belong to them. I will say still more, — 
that, in succoring the fathers and mothers, it will be 
necessary to feed and clothe the children ; it is pre- 
cisely this that is requisite, that they may be instruct- 
ed. Would to God that they were already charged 
with fifty little girls as boarders ; they would soon 
have some brave Ursulines here, who would take 
these children, and would leave the sisters to their 
sick, who will give them enough to do; and thus 
both, in exercising the practical virtues, will have 
something to keep them busy here. And then they 
must have a good income, to feed and maintain per- 
sons who will use more clothes in one year than 
others would in three. In short, let them bear in 


102 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.9 

dra qu'elles foient bien rent^es pour nourrir & entre- 
tenir des perfonnes, qui vferont plus d' habits en vn 
an, que d'autres ne feroient en trois. Bref qu'elles 
fe fouuiennent qu'elles quittent la France, vn Pais 
plein de douceur, & de courtoifie, pour venir en vn 
Pais fauuage & barbare. 

En feptiefme lieu. Nous auons tant fait enuers ces 
pauures mecreans, qu'ils nous ont donnez quelques- 
vnes de leurs filles, ce qui me femble vn coup de 
Dieu. Ces petites filles eftans nourries k la fagon des 
Chrefliens, puis marines ^ quelques [123] Frangois, 
ou quelques Sauuages baptifez, retireront tant d'en- 
fans de leur Nation que nous voudrons. Tout con- 
fiftera k les fecourir, a les doter, k les ayder dans 
leur mariage; c'eft ce que ie ne croy pas qui leur 
manque, Dieu eft trop bon, & trop puiffant. Ces en- 
fans font nourris chez le fieur Hebout, qui a efpoufe 
la vefue de defunct Monfieur Hebert, premier habi- 
tant de Kebec; luy mefme en a vne a foy qu'il nour- 
rit & entretient. Le fieur Oliuier le Tardif en ticnt 
vne autre dans la mefme maifon, que les Sauuages 
luy ont donnee ; il paye fa penfion, c5me nous faifons 
celle des autres qui font au mefme logis. Ces petites 
filles sot veftues a la Frangoife, elles ne fe foucient 
non plus des Sauuages, que fi elles n'eftoient pas de 
leur Nation : Neantmoins afin de les depai'fer, & de 
leur donner le moyen d'apprendre la langue, & I'hon- 
neftete Frangoife, pour fecourir par apres leurs com- 
patriotes; nous auons delibere d'en enuoyer deux ou 
trois en France, pour les faire loger & inftruire en la 
maifon des Hofpitalieres qu'on defire faire pafl^er en 
la Nouuelle France. Ie fupplie toutes les Commu- 
nautez qui [124] m'en demandent d'auoir patience, & 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 103 

mind that they are leaving France, a Country full of 
comfort and politeness, to come to a Country of 
rudeness and barbarism. 

In the seventh place, we have done so much for 
these poor unbelievers, that they have given us some 
of their daughters, which seems to me an act of God. 
These little girls, brought up a§ Christians and then 
married to [123] Frenchmen, or baptized Savages, 
will draw as many children from their Nation as we 
shall desire. All will lie in our succoring them, in 
giving them a dowry, in helping them to get mar- 
ried, which I do not think they will fail to secure ; 
God is too good and too powerful. These children 
are being kept at the house of sieur Hebout [Hubou], 
who married the widow of the late Monsieur Hebert, 
first resident of K6bec. He has one of them him- 
self, whom he feeds and supports. Sieur Olivier le 
Tardif keeps another of them in the same house, 
whom the Savages have given him; he pays her 
board, as we do that of the others who are in the 
same lodging. These little girls are dressed in the 
French fashion ; they care no more for the Savages 
than if they did not belong to their Nation. Never- 
theless, in order to wean them from their native cus- 
toms, and to give them an opportunity of learning 
the French language, virtue, and manners, that they 
may afterwards assist their countrywomen, we have 
decided to send two or three to France, to have them 
kept and taught in the house of the Hospital Nuns, 
whom it is desired to bring over into New France. 
I beg all Societies that [124] ask me for them to have 
patience, and to believe that, if I do not satisfy their 
desire, it is because I have not the power. As to 
these first ones, it seems to me that the glory of our 


104 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.9 

de croire que ii ie ne fatisfais k leur delir, que c'eft 
par impuiffance. Pour ces premieres il me femble 
que la gloire de noftre Seigneur requiert qu'elles 
f oient inftruites en la maifon des Filles qui les doiuent 
ramener en la fagon qu'on leur prefcrira. II ne me 
femble non plus "k propos de les feparer, de peur 
qu'elles ne perdent la cognoilTance de leur langue : 6 
s'il nous eftoit permis d'en enuoyer vne qui doit refter 
en la maifon dont i'ay parl6, que ie confolerois les 
perfonnes qui I'auroient; cet enfant n'a rien de fau- 
uage que Ie teint & la couleur, fa douceur, fa docilite, 
fa modeftie, fon obeyffance la feroient paffer pour 
vne petite Frangoife bien nee, & bien capable d'in- 
ftruction: fon pere ne nous I'a donn^e que pour deux 
ans, k condition qu'elle n'iroit point en France: M, 
que i'ay peur que cet enfant ne nous echappe ! ie prie 
Dieu de luy donner vn fi puifCant defir de perfeuerer 
auec les Frangois, que fes parens ne Ten puillent ia- 
mais retirer. Puis que ie parle des enfans qu'on en- 
uoye en France, ie diray auffi que Monfieur Gand fait 
prefent "k Monfieur de Noyers Secretaire d'Eftat d'vn 
[125] petit Sauuage; i'ay bonne efperance qu'vne li 
bonne main nous Ie rendra vn iour fi bien inftruit, 
qu'il pourra feruir d'exemple "k ceux de fa nation. 

En dernier lieu, ie tiens pour tres-probable, que fi 
nous eftions bien baftis k Kebec, que nous aurions 
beaucoup d'enfans par les mefmes voyes par lefquel- 
les nous defefperions d'en auoir. Nous anions tou- 
fiours penf6 que 1' amour exceffif que les Sauuages 
portent k leurs enfans nous empef cheroit de les auoir ; 
c'eft par ce moyen Vk mefme qu'ils feront nos penfi- 
onnaires; car en ayant quelques-vns affidez qui ap- 
pellent &^retiennent les autres, les peres & meres 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 106 

Lord requires that they be taught in the house of 
the Sisters who will bring them back in such way 
as shall be prescribed to them. It does not seem 
best to separate them, lest they lose the knowledge 
of their own language. Oh, if we could only send a 
certain one who is to remain in the house of which I 
have spoken, what comfort I could give those who 
would get her ! This child has nothing savage about 
her except her appearance and color ; her sweetness, 
her docility, her modesty, her obedience, would 
cause her to pass for a young well-born French girl, 
fully susceptible of education. Her father gave her 
to us only for two years, on condition that she should 
not go to France. Ah, how I fear that this child will 
escape us ! I pray God to give her so strong a de- 
sire to continue with the French, that her parents 
will never be able to take her away. Since I am 
speaking of the children who are being sent to 
France, I will also say that Monsieur Gand makes a 
present to Monsieur de Noyers, Secretary of State, 
of a [125] little Savage boy. I have great hopes 
that so good a hand will return him to us some day, 
so well educated that he will serve as an example to 
the people of his nation. 

In the last place, I consider it very probable that, 
if we had a good building in Kebec, we would get 
more children through the very same means by which 
we despaired of getting them. We have always 
thought that the excessive love the Savages bear 
their children would prevent our obtaining them. It 
will be through this very means that they will be- 
come our pupils ; for, by having a few settled ones, 
who will attract and retain the others, the parents, 
who do not know what it is to refuse their children, 


106 LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol. 9 

qui ne f9auent ce que c'eft de contrarier leurs enfans, 
les laifferont fans contredit ; & comme on leur per- 
mettra les premieres annees de viure dans vne grande 
liberie, ils s'accouftumeront tellement k nos viures, 
& ^ nos habits, qu'ils auront horreur des Sauuages 
& de leurs faletez. Nous auons veu I'exemple de 
cecy en tous les enfans nourris parmy nos Fran9ois ; 
ils font telle cognoilTance les vns auec les autres 
dans leurs ieux d'enfans, qu'ils ne regardent les Sau- 
uages que pour les fuir, ou fe [126] mocquer d'eux. 
Noflre grande difficulte eft a baftir, & a trouuer de- 
quoy nourrir ces enfans : il eft vray que nous auons 
dequoy les loger a Noflre Dame des Anges: mais 
comme ce lieu eft folitaire ; qu'il n'y a point d'enfans 
Fran9ois, nous changeons la penf^e que nous auons 
eu autrefois d'arrefter la le Seminaire. L'experience 
nous fait voir qu'il le faut neceffairement placer oti 
eft le gros de nos Frangois, pour arrefler les petits 
Sauuages par les petits Fran9ois. Et puis quVne 
perfonne de merite & de vertu a commence de don- 
ner quelque chofe pour vn Seminaire, nous allons 
quitter le foin de d6fricher quelques terres, pour faire 
vn effort de baftir "k Kebec ; ie dis vn effort, car ce 
font des frais & des peines incroyables de baftir en 
ces commencemens. Quelle benediction de Dieu, fi 
nous ecriuions I'an prochain qu'on regente en trois 
ou quatre langues en la Nouuelle France: i'efpere, 
Q nous pouuons auoir du logement, de voir trois claffes 
k K6bec : la premiere de petits Francois, qui f eront 
peut-eftre vingt ou trente Efcoliers: la feconde de 
quelques Hurons: la troifieme de Montagues: nous 
pouuons auoir [127] ceux-cy tout I'hyuer; mais ie 
m' attends bien qu'ils pafleront plus auant, ayans 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 107 


will let them come without opposition. And, as they 
will be permitted during the first few years to have 
a great deal of liberty, they will become so accus- 
tomed to our food and our clothes, that they will 
have a horror of the Savages and their filth. We 
have seen this exemplified in all the children 
brought up among our French. They get so well 
acquainted with each other in their childish plays, 
that they do not look at the Savages except to flee 
from them, or [126] make sport of them. Our great 
difficulty is to get a building, and to find the means 
with which to support these children. It is true, 
we are able to maintain them at Nostre Dame des 
Anges; but as this place is isolated, so that there 
are no French children there, we have changed the 
plan that we formerly had to locate the Seminary 
there. Experience shows us that it must be estab- 
lished where the bulk of the French population is, 
to attract the little Savages by the French children. 
And, since a worthy and virtuous person has com- 
menced by giving something for a Seminary, we 
are going to give up our attempts to clear some land, 
and shall make an effort to build at K^bec. I say an 
effort, for it is with incredible expense and labor 
that we build in these beginnings. What a blessing 
from God if we can write next year that instruction 
is being given in New France in three or four lan- 
guages. I hope, if we succeed in getting a lodging, 
to see three classes at Kebec, — the first, of little 
French children, of whom there will be perhaps 
twenty or thirty Pupils; the second, of Hurons; the 
third, of Montagues. We can have [127] the latter 
all winter. But I confidently expect that they will 
continue right on, after once having tasted the sweet- 


108 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.9 

goufte la douceur d'vne vie qui ne crie pas toufiours 
\ la faim, comme font ces Barbaras. Bien heureux 
ceux qui contribuent du leur "k ces genereufes entre- 
prifes : il y a nombre de riches au monde, mais il y 
en a peu de choifis pour ces grands ouurages : auoir 
des biens de la terre, c'efl vne benediction de la 
terre: les employer pour le Ciel, c'efl vne benedi- 
ction du Ciel: les employer pour recueillir & appli- 
quer le fang de lefus-Chrift, cefl entrer dans les me- 
rites des Apoftres, fe ranger au nombre des amis 
plus intimes de lefus Chrift. 

Voila vne partie des raifons qui nous font efperer 
qu'auec le temps on tirera quelque chofe de nos Sau- 
uages errans : ie ne parle point des fedentaires, 
comme des Hurons, & autres Peuples qui babitent 
des bourgades, & cultiuent la terre : fi nous auons vn 
grain d'efperance de ces premiers inconftans & fu- 
gitifs, nous en auons vne liure, pour ainfi dire, des 
derniers, qui viuent ramaflez enfemble. La Relation 
qu'on nous enuoye de leur pais, & que nous faifons 
tenir en France, fera [128] voir les grandes difpofi- 
tions qu'ils ont ^ la foy. 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 109 

ness of a life that is not always crying hunger, as 
do these Barbarians. Blessed are those who con- 
tribute from their means to this generous enterprise. 
There are many rich persons in the world, but few 
of them are chosen for these great works. To have 
the riches of the earth, is a blessing of the earth ; to 
use them for Heaven, is a blessing of Heaven. To 
so use them as to gather up and apply the blood of 
Jesus Christ, this is to participate in the merits of 
the Apostles, to range one's self in the number of the 
most intimate friends of Jesus Christ. 

These are some of our reasons for hoping that in 
the course of time we shall make something out of 
our wandering Savages. I say nothing of the seden- 
tary ones, like the Hurons and other Tribes who 
live in villages and cultivate the land. If we have 
a grain of hope for the former, who are fickle and 
wandering, we have a pound, so to speak, for the lat- 
ter, who live clustered together. The Relation sent 
to us from their country, which we forward to 
France, will [128] show how strongly inclined they 
are to the faith. 


110 


LES RELA TIONS DES j£s UITES [Vol. 


CHAPITRE VII. 

DE QUELQUES PARTICULARITEZ REMARQUABLES EN 
CES QUARTIERS. 

pENTREPRENDS ce difcours pour adioufter ou 
1 corriger en mes Relations precedentes ce que 
de iour en iour ie d^couure de nouueau, ou de 
plus affeure. Commenfons par les feflins des Sau- 
uages: ils en ont pour la guerre; & c'eft ^ chanter, 
'k danfer par tour, felon I'aage; que {i les plus ieunes 
prennent le deuant, les vieillards leur portent com- 
paffion de s'expofer a la mocquerie des autres. Cha- 
cun a fa chanfon, qu'vn autre n'oferoit chanter, & il 
s'en offenferoit. C'eft pour ce mefme fuiet que pour 
d^plaire ^ leurs ennemis, ils entonnent quelquefois de 
celles du party contraire. II s'y glilTe auffi quelques 
nuditez aflfectees, non par lafciuete, mais par com- 
plaifance enuers le Manitou qui s'y plaifl, difent-ils. 
Le Pere Buteux m'efcrit que le Prince [129] s'abftint 
vn iour de la dance des filles nues, pour ce, difoit-il, 
que celuy qui a tout fait hait ces vilainies, & que le 
Pere le leune fe fafcheroit contre moy fi ie m'y trou- 
uois. Leurs viandes en ces feftins, font les ordinaires ; 
fi ce n'eft qu'en fuitte de leurs fonges, ils y mangent 
quelque chien par fois, qui efl vn mets auffi honteux 
pour nos Montagues, que rare & delicieux pour les 
Hurons. 

I'ay deja fait mention, comme les Charlatans, ou 
longleurs & Sorciers, font icy obeis ; par fois mieux 


1636] LEJEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 111 


CHAPTER VII. 

ON SOME REMARKABLE PECULIARITIES OF THESE 
REGIONS. 

I TAKE up this subject in order to add or cor- 
rect in my preceding Relations what from day 
to day I discover to be new or more positive in- 
formation. Let us begin with the feasts of the Sav- 
ages. They have one for war. At this, they sing 
and dance in turn, according to age; if the younger 
ones begin, the old men pity them for exposing 
themselves to the ridicule of the others. Each has 
his own song, that another dare not sing lest he give 
offense. For this very reason, they sometimes strike 
up a tune that belongs to their enemies, in order to 
aggravate them. An unusual exhibition of naked- 
ness sometimes slips in, not through lewdness, but 
to propitiate the Manitou, who, they say, is pleased 
with this. Father Buteux wrote me, that the Prince 
[129] one day absented himself from the dance of the 
naked girls, " Because," said he, " he who has made 
all hates these indecent acts, and Father le Jeune 
would be angry with me if I went there." They 
have the usual food at these feasts, — except that in 
accordance with their dreams they occasionally eat 
a dog, a dish as shameful in the eyes of our Monta- 
gues as it is rare and delicious in those of the Hurons. 
I have already mentioned how the Charlatans, or 
Jugglers and Sorcerers are obeyed here ; sometimes 
more than he who has made all, as we say in these 


112 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.9 


que n'eft celuy qui a tout fait, comme nous parlous 
en ce Pai's, parmy ceux qui le recognoiffent. Vn de 
ces nouueaux Medecins ordonna vn iour k vn malade 
vne paire de bas de chauffes k la fa9on des robbes 
Noires, c'eft ainfi qu'ils nous appellent: le Pere Bu- 
teux vilitant ce pauure homme, fes parens luy dirent 
qu'il ne tenoit qu'a luy que le malade ne guerift. Le 
Pere en demandant la raifon, ils luy repartirent, 
Donne luy tes chaufles noires, & bien toft tu le ver- 
ras fur pied: car le Manitou I'a ainfi afreur6. Le 
Pere leur replique, que ces fonges n'eftoient que fo- 
lie, & que pour en voir la preuue, qu'il [130] luy don- 
neroit ce qu'il demandoit, a condition que les ayant 
port^es quatre iours, plus ou moins, s'il ne guerifloit, 
11 quitteroit ces refueries, & croiroit en Dieu, lis r€- 
pondirent, qu'il les falloit donner fans condition, & 
que le malade mefme les deuoit emporter en 1 'autre 
monde, s'il venoit k mourir. Quel difcours! N'e- 
floit-ce pas vne bonne medecine, qui deuoit profiter 
en ce monde, & en I'autre; & qui ayant d'alleurance 
"k guerir fon malade ne laiffoit pas neantmoins de 
pouruoir qu'il n'euft froid aux pieds apres la mort, fi 
d'auenture elle I'emportoit. 

I'ay parle fort amplement en la Relation de Tannic 
mil fix cens trente quatre, d'vn certain Tabernacle 
qu'ils font, dans lequel les longleurs font venir, & 
confultent les Genies de I'Air, ou du iour. Or non 
feulement les hommes, mais encor les femmes entrent 
dans ce beau Tabernacle. Aux trois Riuieres vn 
longleur ayant appelle le Manitou, ou autre Genie, 
& ne r ayant peu faire venir, vne femme y entra, elle 
comence k fi bien ebranler fa maifon, & k chanter & 
crier fi fortement, qu'elle fit venir le diable, qui en 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1636 113 

Countries, is obeyed by those who acknowledge him. 
One of these new Physicians one day ordered a pa- 
tient to get a pair of stockings like those of the Black 
robes, the name they give us. When Father Bu- 
teux visited this poor man, his relatives declared that 
the patient's recovery depended only upon him. 
The Father asking what they meant, they replied, 
" Give him thy black stockings, and thou wilt soon 
see him upon his feet, for thus the Manitou has told 
him. ' ' The Father answered them that these dreams 
were but nonsense; and, to prove it to them, that he 
[130] would give him what he wanted, on condition 
that after he had worn them four days, more or less, 
if he did not recover he would abandon these idle fan- 
cies and believe in God. They replied that he must 
give them without any condition, and that the sick 
man must even wear them into the other world if 
he died. What talk ! Is not that a good medicine 
which is to benefit both in this world and in the other, 
and which being sure of curing its patient, does not 
fail, nevertheless, to provide that he does not have 
cold feet after death, in case it carries him off ? 

I have spoken very fully in the Relation of the 
year one thousand six hundred and thirty-four, of a 
certain Tent they make, to which the Jugglers sum- 
mon and consult the Genii of the Air, or of light. 
Now not only the men, but even the women, enter 
this fine Tent. At the three Rivers, a Juggler hav- 
ing called the Manitou, or some other Genius, and 
not having succeeded in making him come, a woman 
entered and began to so shake the house and to sing 
and cry so loudly, that she caused the devil to come, 
who [131] told them more than they wanted. First, 
he said that the sick man for whom they were con- 


114 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.9 

[131] dit plus qu'on ne vouloit. Premierement il 
dit, que le malade pour lequel on le confultoit en 
mourroit, & que fa maladie prouenoit de ce qu'ayant 
fait quelque iniure k la fille d'vn Algonquin, cette fille 
auoit prie fon pere d'en tirer vengeance, & que fon 
pere auoit fi bien fait par f es f ortileges, que fa f emme, 
c'eft k dire la femme du diable, s'eftoit iett^e dedans 
fon corps, & le rongeoit interieurement, & partant 
que c'efloit fait de fa vie. Secondement, ce Diable 
ou ce Manitou, temoigna que s'il n 'auoit point repon- 
du au longleur qui auoit precede, c'eftoit pour autat 
que ce longleur efloit Algonquin, & de la Nation de 
celuy qui auoit fait le mal. En troiliefme lieu, 
comme quelqu'vn luy demanda s'il ne voyoit point 
d'Hiroquois, fortir de leur Pais pour les venir fur- 
prendre. II r^pondit, apres que cette femme I'eut 
inuoqu6 par fes fifflemens & agitations & tintamarres. 
Haftez-vous, haftez-vous d'aller k la guerre, ie voy 
le Pais des Hiroquois remply de toute forte d'armes, 
d'arcs, & de fleches, qu'on prepare pour vous venir 
attaquer. Ce Demon, ou pluftofl cette Demoniaque, 
car c'eftoit cette impudente [132] qui faifoit croire 
que c'eftoit le Manitou qui parloit, adioufta qu'il auoit 
mang6 (\}ie\q}iG,s Attikamegouekhi, ce font des Peuples, 
qui demeurent au deffus du Fleuue, qu'on nomme 
les trois Riuieres; qu'il en mangeroit bien d'autres, 
s'il n' efloit appelle ailleurs. Mais q}i'Atchen, c'efl 
vne efpece de loup garou, viendroit en fa place pour 
les deuorer, s'ils faifoient vne bourgade, comme ils 
s'y eftoient refolus, qu'il les viendroit prendre iuf- 
ques aupres du Fort des Fran9ois, qu'il ^gorgeroit 
des Fran9ois mefmes. O la mefchante femme ! 
comme elle eft habitude k courre dejk, del^, elle auoit 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1636 116 

suiting him, would die; and that the cause of his 
sickness was that, having offered some insult to the 
daughter of an Algonquin, this girl had prayed her 
father to take vengeance upon him ; and her father 
had done this so well by his sorceries, that his 
wife, — that is, the devil's wife, — had cast herself 
into his body, and was gnawing it from the inside, 
and hence it was all over with him. Secondly, this 
Devil, or this Manitou, testified that if he had not 
responded to the preceding Juggler, it was because 
this Juggler was an Algonquin and of the same Na- 
tion as the one who had caused the sickness. In the 
third place, when he was asked if he saw any Hiro- 
quois leaving their own Country to come and surprise 
them, he answered, after this woman had invoked 
him by hissings and shakings and uproar, " Hasten, 
hasten to go to war, I see the Hiroquois Country 
filled with all sorts of arms, with bows and arrows, 
that they are preparing, to come and attack you." 
This Demon, — or rather this Devilish woman, for it 
was this shameless person [132] who made them be- 
lieve that it was the Manitou who spoke, — added 
that he had eaten some Attikamegouekhi,^ — these are 
Tribes that live north of the River which is called 
the three Rivers, — and that he would eat a great 
many more of them if he were not called elsewhere. 
But that Atchen (a sort of werewolf), would come in 
his place to devour them, if they made a village, as 
they had decided to do; that he would come to get 
them, even up to the French Fort; that he would 
slaughter the French themselves. Oh, wicked 
woman ! As she was in the habit of running here 
and there, she was afraid of being restricted to one 
village ; and consequently she wished to impart fear, 


116 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.9 


peur d'eftre retenue dans vn bourg, & par confequent 
elle voulut donner I'^poutiante, & en effet la donna k 
fa Nation, qui ne penfa plus qu'k la guerre. Le Pere 
Buteux la reprenant de fa malice, elle tira vn cou- 
fleau, & le niena9a de le tuer. Mais ne feroit-ce pas 
icy vne rufe de I'ennemy, qui craint de perdre en 
vne vie fedentaire, ceux qui luy font tous acquis dans 
leurs courfes vagabondes. 

Voicy quelques menues fuperftitions qui leur iet- 
tent bien de la pouffiere aux yeux, & des tenebres 
dans I'efprit. lis ne [133] font pas bien aifes d'oui'r 
parler de la mort, ny de la maladie, ny d'aucun mal- 
heur, quel qu'il foit, de peur que le Manitou enten- 
dant ce difcours, ne prenne de la occafion de les affli- 
ger, ou de les faire mourir, I 'ay dit autrefois qu'ils 
craignent fort la mort; cela efl veritable, car ils n'en 
peuuent fupporter le nom ; neantmoins quand ils font 
malades, ils ne I'abhorrent pas tant ; notamment 
quand ils fouffrent beaucoup, & quelques-vns mefmes 
prient qu'on les tue, ou pour fe deliurer des tour- 
mens qu'ils endurent, ou pour deliurer de peine ceux 
qui les doiuent traifner auec eux. 

Ils portent par fois au bas de leurs robbes de petits 
omemens fais en pattes d'Ours, afin de tuer aif6ment 
ces animaux, & de n'eflre point offenfez d'eux. 

II y en a certains d'entre-eux, qui difent que la poi- 
trine, ou la mammelle leur f remit, quand quelqu'vn 
doit arriuer. Vn d'entre-eux, alTeurant que les Sau- 
uages de I'lfle eftoient proche de la Riuiere des Hiro- 
quois, ou fe faifoit cette annee I'allembl^e de guerre, 
n'en donna point d'autre raifon, finon que la poitrine 
luy fremiffoit. Vn de nos Fran9ois, qui a long-temps 
[134] conuerf6 auec ces Barbares, m'a alTeur^ qu'il a 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 117 

and in fact did impart it, to her Nation, who no 
longer thought of anything but war. When Father 
Buteux took her to task for her maliciousness, she 
drew a knife, and threatened to kill him. But was 
this not a ruse of the enemy, who fears to lose, in a 
sedentary life, those who in their vagrant journeys 
are wholly his? 

Here are some minor superstitions, which throw 
dust in their eyes and darkness over their minds. 
They [133] are not pleased to hear one speak of 
death, or of sickness, or of any misfortune, whatever 
it may be, lest the Manitou, hearing this talk, may 
take occasion to afflict them, or make them die. I 
have said before that they have a great fear of death ; 
it is true, for they cannot endure the word. Yet, 
when they are sick, they have not such a horror of it; 
especially when they suffer a great deal ; then some 
even beg to be killed, either to be delivered from 
the torments they are enduring, or to relieve from 
trouble those who have to drag them about with 
them. 

They sometimes wear on the bottom of their gar- 
ments little ornaments made from Bears' claws, that 
they may more easily kill these animals, and not be 
hurt by them. 

There are some among them who say that their 
chest or breast throbs when some one is about to 
come. One of them, declaring that the Savages of 
the Island were near the River of the Hiroquois,^^ 
where this year the council of war is to be held, gave 
no other reason than that his chest was throbbing. 
One of our Frenchmen, who has long [134] associ- 
ated with these Barbarians, has assured me that he 
has frequently found out by experience the truth of 


118 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 

plufieurs fois experiment^ qu'ils efloient veritables en 
leurs fauffes propheties, & de nouueau, difoit-il, vne 
telle femme Sauuage fentant fremir fa mamelle, dit 
h. fa mere, & aux autres, qui eftoient dans la Cabane, 
les Frangois arriueront bien toft icy, ce qui fut vray ; 
il efloit I'vn de ceux qui parurent. le ne f§ay fi le 
diable s'y fourre: cela fjay-ie bien, qu'examinant 
toutes ces fourbes de plus pr6s, vous trouuerez que 
les premiers autbeurs en font morts ou abfens. 

Le ieune homme qui eft auec nos Peres des trois 
Riuieres, ay ant pris certain poiffon, qui reffemble en 
quelque fa9on h. vn gros lezart ; car il a quatre pattes 
& vne queue affez longue ; quelques Sauuages s'en 
eftant apperceus, vindrent dire aux Peres, qu'on 
auoit mal fait de prendre c6t animal, qui caufoit les 
vents, & que de long-temps les barques n'arriue- 
roient a caufe de cela, & partant qu'on feroit bien de 
le letter au plus toft h. la riuiere pour appaifer le vent 
qui eftoit contraire; ces bonnes gens n'entendent pas 
que Dieu tire les vents de fes threfors, & non pas du 
ventre & de I'eftomach d'vne [135] befte. Les ieunes 
femmes & les filles ne veulent point manger de teftes 
de brochets, de peur de n'auoir point d'enfans. 

II y en a qui portent fur eux quelque chofe par 
I'ordonnance du Manitou, pour viure long-temps, k 
ce qu'on m'a dit; en quoy il arriua vne chofe agre- 
able k I'vn de nos Peres aux trois Riuieres. Voyant 
vn Sauuage par6 d'vne belle ceinture, il luy demanda 
s'il I'aymoit beaucoup ; Ouy, repond-il, car le Mani- 
tou m'a fait dire, que ie la portalle pour viure long- 
temps. Et celuy qui a tout fait, repart le Pere, dit 
que cela ne fert de rien, pour la mort, ny pour la vie. 
Ce Sauuage s'en va; mais ruminant h. part foy, ce 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, r6s6 119 

these pretended prophecies; and lately, said he, a 
certain Savage woman, feeling her breast throb, said 
to her mother and the others who were in the Cabin, 
" The French will soon come here," which was true; 
he was one of those who appeared, I do not know 
whether the devil thrusts himself into this ; but I do 
know well that, in examining these frauds a little 
closer, you will find that the first inventors of them 
are either dead or absent. 

The young man who is with our Fathers at the 
three Rivers, having caught a certain fish which in 
some respects resembles a great lizard, as it has four 
feet and a rather long tail, — some Savages who saw 
him came to tell our Fathers that it was wrong to 
catch this animal, which caused the winds, and that 
the barks would not arrive for a long time, on ac- 
count of this ; hence it would be better to throw it 
immediately into the river, to appease the wind, 
which was contrary. These simple people do not 
understand that God draws the winds from his treas- 
ure-house, and not from the belly and chest of a 
[135] beast. The young women and girls will not 
eat the heads of pike, for fear they will have no chil- 
dren. 

There are those who carry about them some article 
prescribed by the Manitou, in order to live a long 
time, as I am told. Concerning this custom, some- 
thing very amusing happened to one of our Fathers 
at the three Rivers. Seeing a Savage adorned with 
a handsome belt, he asked him if he was very fond of 
it. ' ' Yes, ' ' he replied, * ' for the Manitou told me 
to wear it, in order to live long. " " And he who 
has made all," replied the Father, " says that it is 
of no use whatever, either for death or for life." 


120 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.9 

que luy auoit dit le Pere, le retourne voir, & luy dit, 
Tiens voila ma ceinture, donne m'en quelque chofe; 
i'ay penf6 que ton Manitou auoit plus d'efprit que le 
noflre ; & par confequent ie ne me foucie pas de m'en 
deffaire. Le Pere fe mit a rire voyant vn homme 11 
d^gage. 

Vn autre voyant la folemnite qu'on fait la veille de 
la fainct lean, croyoit qu'on faifoit cette fefle pour 
chaffer le Manitou, & difoit que nous entendions bien 
mieux a I'eloigner & le bannir de [136] nous, que non 
paseux; c'efl pourquoy nous viuions plus long-temps ; 
cela me confirme dans 1' opinion que i'ay qu'ils font 
leurs tintamarres, & battent leurs tambours pour 
chaffer le diable, afin qu'il ne tue point les malades: 
ie Grains que I'vn de ces iours ils ne nous viennent 
prier de tirer nos canons pour les guerir. 

II arriue par fois, que les Sauuages fe faf chants 
I'hyuer contre la rigueur du froid, qui les empefche 
de chaffer, dechargent leur colere d'vne fa9on ridi- 
cule. Tous ceux qui font nez I'eft^, fortent de leurs 
Cabanes, armez de feux, & de tifons ardens, qu'ils 
lancent contre Kapipou noiikhet, c'efl k dire contre ce- 
luy qui a fait I'hyuer, & par ce moyen le froid s'ap- 
paife. Ceux qui font nez I'hyuer, ne font point de la 
partie ; car s'ils fe mefloiet auec les autres, le froid 
s'augmenteroit au lieu de s'appaifer. Ie n'ay point 
veu cette ceremonie; ie I'ay apprife de la bouche 
d'vn Sauuage. 

Vn Sauuage voyant qu'vn Francois mangeoit le 
cceur d'vn certain oyfeau: Comment, luy dit-il, toy 
qui es homme ofe tu manger de cela? Si nous en 
mangions nous autres, nos ennemis [137] nous fur- 
prendroient, & nous tueroient; c'eft vn manger de 
femme. 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 163b 121 

This Savage went away; but, upon thinking over 
what the Father had said to him, he returned and 
said to him, "Here, take my belt, give me something 
for it ; I have concluded that thy Manitou has more 
sense than ours, and consequently I do not mind 
parting with it." The Father began to laugh at see- 
ing a man so easy-going. 

Another one, seeing the solemn ceremonies per- 
formed on the eve of saint John, thought this feast 
was observed to drive away the Manitou; and said 
that we understood much better how to send him 
away and banish him from [136] us than they did, 
and that was the reason why we lived longer. This 
confirms me in my opinion that they make their up- 
roars and beat their drums to drive away the devil, so 
that he will not kill the sick person. I fear that 
one of these days they will come and beg us to 
shoot off our cannons in order to cure them. 

It sometimes happens that the Savages get angry 
in the winter at the severity of the cold, which pre- 
vents them from hunting, and give vent to their 
wrath in a ridiculous manner. All those who were 
bom in the summer go out from their Cabins, armed 
with fire and blazing torches, which they throw at 
Kapipou noukhet, namely, at him who has made the 
winter,^ and by this means the cold is appeased. 
Those who were born in winter are not among the 
company; for, if they were to mingle with the 
others, the cold would increase instead of diminish- 
ing. I have not seen this ceremony, but have heard 
of it from the lips of a Savage. 

A Savage, seeing a Frenchman eat the heart of a 
certain bird, said to him, "How! thou who art a 
man, darest thou eat that ? If we people should eat 


122 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.9 

Vn autre difoit, que les oifeaux faifoient ordinaire- 
ment leurs feftins pendant les plus courtes nuits de 
I'annee : les Orignaux dans les longues, & les Caftors 
dans les mediocres. 

Vn des noflres vifitant vn Sauuage malade, & le 
trouuant tout deconfort^, luy demanda ce qui luy 
eftoit furuenu de nouueau. Helas, luy dit il, ie com- 
menfois k me mieux porter, ie fuis forty de de ma Ca- 
bane, vne fille qui a fes mois m'a regard^, ie fuis re- 
tomb6 dans la rigueur de mon mal. Fay d6ja dit que 
ces filles fe retirent hors la Cabane quand elles ont 
cette infirmity, & que les Sauuages apprenhendent 
mefme leur rencontre. Le Pere le confola, luy fai- 
fant entendre que ce regard eftoit incapable de luy 
nuire. 

Voicy le voyage admirable d'vn Nipijirinien, qui 
m'a efte racont6 par vn Montagues. C^t homme s'en 
eftant all6 bien loing, arriua en fin k la Cabane ou 
maifon de Dieu, qu'il nommoit celuy qui donne ^ 
manger: il le trouua feul, mais fa fille furuint bien- 
tofl apres; il n'a que cette [138] fille, & encor ne 
f9ait-on comme il I'a eue, car il n'a point de femme. 
Toutes fortes d'animaux I'enuironnet, il les touche, 
les manie comme il veut, fans qu'ils s'enfuient, auffi 
ne leur fait-il aucun mal, car comme il ne mange 
point, il ne les tue pas ; il demanda neantmoins ^ ce 
nouuel hofte, ce qu'il defiroit manger, & ayant fceu 
qu'il mangeroit volontiers d'vn Caftor, il en prend 
vn fans peine, & le luy fait manger, puis luy demanda 
quand il s'en vouloit aller; Dans deux nuits, refpond- 
il: Bien, dit-il, vous ferez deux nuits auec moy: ces 
deux nuits f urent deux ann^es ; car ce que nous ap- 
pellons vn an, ce n'efl qu'vn iour, ou vne nuit, au 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 123 

it, our enemies [137] would surprise us and would 
kill us; that is a woman's food." 

Another one said the birds usually made their 
feasts during the shortest nights of the year; the 
Moose, in the longest; and the Beavers, in those of 
average length. 

One of our people, visiting a sick Savage and find- 
ing him very disconsolate, asked him what new thing 
had happened to him. " Alas," said he, " I was be- 
ginning to get better; I went out of my Cabin, a girl 
in her courses looked at me, and my disease attacked 
me as severely as ever. ' * I have already said that 
these girls withdraw from the Cabin when they are 
subject to this infirmity, and that the Savages dread 
even to meet them. The Father consoled him, and 
made him understand that this glance was incapable 
of injuring him.^s 

Here is the wonderful voyage of a Nipisirinien, 
which was related to me by a Montagues. This 
man, having traveled a long distance^ at last reached 
the Cabin or house of God, as he named one who 
gave him something to eat. He found him alone, 
but his daughter came in soon afterwards. He has 
only this [138] girl, and still it is not known how he 
came by her, for he has no wife. All kinds of ani- 
mals surround him, he touches them, handles them 
as he wishes, and they do not fly from him ; but he 
does them no harm, for, as he does not eat, he does 
not kill them. However, he asked this new guest 
what he would like to eat, and having learned that 
he would relish a Beaver, he caught one without any 
trouble, and had him eat it; then asked him when 
he intended going away. " In two nights," was the 
answer. " Good," said he, " you will remain two 


124 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.9 

compte de celuy qui fait trouuer ^ manger; & on eft 
fi content auec Iny, que deux hyuers, ou deux ann6es 
ne femblent que deux nuits. Quand il fut retourn6 
en fon pays, il fut bien eftonne du retardement qu'il 
auoit fait. le demanday fi on ne pouuoit pas aller 
encor vne fois ou ce Sauuage auoit eft6 ; il n'y a me 
dit-on qu'vne feule perfonne qui puiffe y aller, & non 
pas encor touliours, & cela au rapport de celuy qui 
en eft reuenu : Cela reffent ie ne f^ay quoy de bon, 
qui en prendroit le fuc, comme [139] auffi ce que ie 
m'en vay raconter. Le Pere Buteux entrant dans 
vne Cabane auec le Sieur Nicolet, qui entend fort 
bien la langue Algonquine, vn Algonquin qui fait 
du Docteur les inuita de s'alleoir aupres de luy, ce 
qu'ils firent; & la delTus il leur dit que les Sauuages 
recognoiffent deux Manitous, mais pour luy qu'il en 
recognoifloit vn troifiefme, qui prefidoit aux guerres. 
Que I'vn de ces trois auoit fait la terre, du moins 
celle de fon pays ; car pour celle du pais des Fran9ois, 
qu'il n'en eftoit pas bien affeure: ayant fait la terre 
il produifit les animaux & toutes les autres chofes de 
fon pais : il luy donnoit vn grand lac, ou vn Sault 
d'eau pour refidence, come on donne la mer ^ Ne- 
ptune : ce bon Createur de la terre tirant certain iour 
fur vn Caftor, pour le chaffer bien loing, afin d'en 
peupler le pais, il le manqua, & la fleche rencontrant 
vn arbre elle le rendit beau & fort poly ; & que cela 
ne fut vray; i'ay, difoit-il, cognu des vieillards, lef- 
quels ont veu c6t arbre : il rapporta mille autres ba- 
dineries. Le Pere luy fit demander oil eftoit ce Dieu 
deuant qu'il creaft la terre: dans fon Canot, r^pond- 
il, lequel flottoit fur les eaux. S'il [140] auoit vn 
Canot, luy dit-on, il falloit qu'il y euft des arbres. 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 126 

nights with me." These two nights were two years; 
for what we call a year is only a day or a night, in 
the reckoning of him who procures us food. And 
one is so contented with him that two winters, or 
two years, seem only like two nights. When he re- 
turned to his own country, he was greatly astonished 
at the delay he had experienced. I asked if a per- 
son could not go again to this place where the Sav- 
age had been. There is but one person, I was an- 
swered, who can go there, and even he not always, 
according to the report of him who has returned 
thence. This contains I know not what of good, for 
one who can get the essence of it, as [139] also does 
this, which I am going to relate. Father Buteux en- 
tering a Cabin with Sieur Nicolet,^ who understands 
the Algonquin tongue very well, an Algonquin, who 
acts the part of a Wiseacre, invited them to sit down 
near him, which they did. And thereupon he told 
them that the Savages recognized two Manitous ; but, 
for his part, he recognized a third, who presided over 
war. That one of the three had made the land, at 
least, that of his country; as to that of the French, 
he was not entirely certain. Having made the land, 
he produced the animals and all the other things of 
his country. The narrator gave him a great lake, 
or a Waterfall, for his home, as we give the sea to 
Neptune. This worthy Creator of the earth, draw- 
ing his bow one day upon a Beaver, to chase it far 
away, in order to people the country with them, 
missed it; and the arrow, lodging in a tree, had 
made it very beautiful and smooth ; and as for this 
not being true, " I have," said he, " known old men 
who have seen this tree." He related a thousand 
other foolish tales. The Father had him asked 


126 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.9 

car il eft fait d'6corce d'arbres; s'il y auoit des 
arbres, il y auoit de la terre ; fi la terre eftoit, coment 
I'a il cre6e? La terre, repart-il, auoit efte aupara- 
uant, mais elle auoit efte inond^e par vn deluge. Et 
deuant ce deluge qui auoit cree cette terre? le n'en 
f9ay rien, vous auez plus d'efprit que moy, n'en de- 
mandez pas d'auantage. Puis que tu I'ignores, prefte 
nous I'oreille, luy dit-on. Si i'eftois ieune vous au- 
riez raifon de me vouloir inftruire, mais eftant d6ja 
vieil, vous perdrez vos peines, car ie n'ay plus de me- 
moire. C'eft pour autant que tu es ag6, luy dit le 
truchement, qu'il te faut hafter d'apprendre ces ve- 
ritez, car fi tu ne les crois tu feras tres malheureux 
apres ta mort. \A deffus il luy toucha quelque chofe 
de la creation du monde, & de la redemption, des 
peines & des recompenfes de I'autre vie. Ie n'ay 
pas, repartit-il, I'efprit de pouuoir retenir tant de 
chofes, enfeignez-le aux enfans qui ont bonne me- 
moire ; neantmoins cette doctrine fit quelque im- 
preffion fur fon efprit, car du depuis il enfeignoit ^ 
quelques malades ce qu'il auoit retenu. Ie logeray 
en cet endroit, [141] ne fgachant oti le mieux placer 
ailleurs, ce que i'ay appris de nouueau du Caftor ; c^t 
animal eft admirable, il fait fa Cabane, comme i'ay 
dit, fur le bord d'vn Fleuue, ou d'vn Eftang: il a 
comme vn double eftage dans fa maifon toute ronde, 
faite a la fa9on d'vn four, tres bien maffonn6. Le 
premier eftage, c'eft le fond de fa Cabane, oil I'eau 
entre par fon ouuerture ; mais le Caftor met de gros 
bois en trauers, fur lefquels il iette des branches de 
fapin, & d'autres arbres qui luy feruent de plancher. 
II perce le fecond eftage fur le milieu, & par I'ouuer- 
ture il defcend dans I'eau, qui eft au fond de fa Ca- 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1636 127 

where this God was before he created the earth. 
" In his Canoe," he replied, " which was floating 
upon the waters." "If he [140] had a Canoe," was 
said to him, " there must have been trees, for it is 
made of the bark of trees ; if there were trees, there 
was land; if there was land, how has he created it? " 
" The land," he replied, " was there before, but it 
was flooded by a deluge." "And before the del- 
uge, who created this land?" " I know nothing 
about it; you have more intelligence than I have, 
do not ask me anything more." " Since thou dost 
not know it, listen to us," was said to him. " If I 
were young, you would be right in wishing to teach 
me; but as I am already old, you would lose your 
pains, for I have no longer any memory." " It is be- 
cause thou art old, ' ' said the interpreter, ' ' that thou 
must hasten to learn these truths ; for, if thou dost not 
believe, thou wilt be very unhappy after thy death." 
Thereupon he outlined for him the creation of the 
world, redemption, and the punishments and rewards 
of the other life. " I have not," said he, " the mind 
to be able to retain so many things ; teach them to 
the children, who have a good memory." Neverthe- 
less, this doctrine made some impression upon his 
mind ; for since then he has taught some sick persons 
what he could remember of it. I will set down in 
this place, [141] not knowing where better to record 
it, what I have recently learned about the Beaver. 
This animal is wonderful. He makes his Cabin, as 
I have said, upon the banks of a River or of a Pond ; 
he has a sort of double story in this house, which is 
quite round and is built like a well-plastered oven. 
The first story is the lower part of the Cabin, into 
which water enters through its opening: but the 


128 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.9 

bane, c'eft k dire ati plus bas efkage ; d'oii il fe coule 
dans I'Eftang, par la porte de fa maifon. On m'a- 
uoit dit qu'il portoit fa prouilion de bois pour mager 
pendant I'hyuer dans fa demeure : mais vn Sauuage 
m'a afleur^ du contraire. II dit done qu'il couppe 
force bois pendat TAutonine, & le met das le Fleuue 
ou Eftang, fur le bord duquel il fait fa maifon ; & 
afin que ce bois ne furnage, & ne fe prenne auec les 
glaces, quand le deffus de I'eau fe gele : il fait couler 
fa prouifion au fonds, au moyen d'vn certain bois 
plus [142] pefant, dont il la charge, & la garentit par 
ce moyen. Que Dieu eft admirable en fes oeuures! 
I'hyuer eftant venu le dellus de I'eau fe glace, & la 
glace couure I'ouuerture, ou la porte de fa maifon; 
en forte neantmoins que le profond de I'eau n' eftant 
point gel^, cet animal ne laiffe pas de fortir de fa pe- 
tite tour, pour s'aller pourmener dans I'Eftang ou 
dans le Fleuue par deffous les glaces. Mais voicy 
vne chofe qui me femble encore plus merueilleufe. 
Les Caftors fe trouuant par fois en trop grand nombre 
en quelque endroit, & ne fe pouuans accorder, quel- 
ques-vns fe retirent, & vont chercher pais ailleurs : 
trouuant quelque ruiffeau commode ils s'arreftent-lk, 
& fi ce ruiffeau n'eft pas affez profond ils le barrent, 
& font vne chauffee qui donne de I'eftonnement h. 
I'efprit de I'homme. Ils couppet de gros arbres auec 
les dents, ils iettent des bois ^ trauers le Fleuue de 
toutes fagons, puis ils maffonnent auec de la terre, fi 
proprement, du coft6 qu'ils veulent retenir I'eau, que 
des artifans feroient bien empefchez de mieux faire. 
Ces chauff^es ont enuiron trois toifes de large, & de 
longueur, plus ou moins, felon [143] la largeur du 
Fleuue ou du Ruiffeau qu'ils ont barr6. Le fieur 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1636 129 

Beaver places heavy pieces of wood across, upon 
which he scatters branches of fir and other kinds of 
trees, which he uses as a floor. The second story 
has a hole in the middle, through which he descends 
into the water at the bottom of his Cabin, that is, in 
the lower story, whence he slips into the Pond 
through the door of his house. I have been told that 
he carries his winter store of wood, which forms his 
food, into this house ; but a Savage has contradicted 
this. He says that he cuts a quantity of wood dur- 
ing the Autumn, and places it in the River or Pond 
on the shores of which he has made his house ; and 
in order that this wood may not float away and get 
caught in the ice, when the surface of the water 
freezes, he sinks his stores to the bottom, by means 
of a certain heavier [142] wood with which he loads 
it, and thus makes it secure. How wonderful are the 
works of God ! When winter comes, the surface of 
the water freezes, and the ice covers the opening or 
door of his house; but, as the water is not frozen be- 
low the surface, this animal is free to leave his little 
tower and swims about in the Pond or in the River 
under the ice. But here is something that seems to 
me still more marvelous. When the Beavers some- 
times find themselves too numerous in one place, and 
are not able to agree among themselves, some of 
them withdraw and go to seek a home elsewhere. 
Finding a suitable stream, they stop there; and, if 
this brook is not deep enough, they bar it and make 
a dam, which fills the mind of man with wonder. 
They cut large trees with their teeth, they throw the 
wood across the River in every way ; then they plas- 
ter it with mud, so neatly on the side where they 
wish to retain the water, that artisans would certain- 


130 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.9 

Oliuier m'a rapports, qu'il auoit paffe fur vne de ces 
chauff^es, longue de plus de deux cens pas. Le Ceur 
Nicolet en a veu vne autre quafi d'vn quart de lieue, 
li forte & fi bien faite, qu'il en efloit tout eftonne. 
Les eaues arreft^es par cette chauff^e deuiennent 
profondes, & font comme vn bel Eflang ou le Caftor 
fe va pourmener; on m'a dit iufques-1^, que la terre 
manquant au lieu ou ils font ce grand trauail, ils en 
vont querir ailleurs, & I'apportent fur leur dos; ie 
ne f9ay qu'en croire, finon que mirabilis Deus in omni- 
bus operibus fuis. 

Comme nous auons icy quelques Elans deuant nos 
yeux, que Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur fait dome- 
fliquer, i'ay remarque que ce haut animal fe met 
aufll aifement "k genoux que le Chameau, foit pour 
boire ou manger, ou pour fe coucher. La Nature, 
ou plufloft fon Autheur, pouruoit fagement a tout: 
comme I'Elan eft haut mont^, il luy a donn6 cette 
facilit6 de plier les genoux, & de fe fouflenir aife- 
ment deffus, ce qu'il n'a pas accord^ aux autres ani- 
maux, plus petits & plus bas. 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 131 

ly find it hard to do better. These dams are about 
three toises broad, ^ and in length more or less, ac- 
cording to [143] the width of the River or Brook they 
have dammed. Sieur Olivier informed me that he 
crossed over one of these dams, which was more 
than two hundred steps long. Sieur Nicolet has seen 
another of almost a quarter of a league, so strong 
and so well made that he was filled with astonish- 
ment. The waters that are checked by this dam be- 
come deep, and form, as it were, a beautiful Pond in 
which the Beaver goes to swim. I am told even 
this, that, when soil is lacking in the place where 
they do this great work, they go and get it else- 
where, bringing it upon their backs. I do not know 
what to believe of this except that mirabilis Dens in 
omnibus operibus suis. 

As we have some Elks here among us, which Mon- 
sieur our Governor is domesticating, I have noticed 
that this tall animal gets on its knees as easily as the 
Camel, either to drink, eat, or sleep. Nature, or 
rather its Author, has wisely provided for all ; as the 
Elk is of high stature, he has given it this facility of 
bending its knees and of easily sustaining its body, 
which he has not granted to other animals that are 
smaller and of less height. 


132 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 


[144] CHAPITRE VIII. 

DE L'ESTAT present [DE] LA NOUUELLE FRANCE, 
SUR LE GRAND FLEUUE DE S. LAURENS. 

IL me femble qu'en conteplant le progrez des af- 
faires de la Nouuelle Frace, ie voy fortir vne 
Aurore des profondes tenebres de la nuict, la- 
quelle embellifsat de fes rayons dorez la furface de 
la terre, fe change h. la parfin en ce grand Ocean de 
lumiere que le Soleil apporte. Les grandes pertes 
qu'ont fait ces Meffieurs en la premiere naiffance de 
leur Compagnie, font iuflement comme vne nuict 
tres efpaiffe, qui couuroit d'horreur toutes ces con- 
tr^es. On n'y penfoit que pour les rebutter; on ne 
les regardoit que pour les fui'r ; on debattoit en France 
la iufte poffefHon de ces terres ; pendant que la fa- 
mine, & I'Anglois les partageoient & les affligeoient 
I'vn apres I'autre. Les Lys y mouroient en leur 
naiffance, le peu de Frangois qui les babitoient 
eftoiet Eflragers dans leur propre Pais. Bref ces 
grandes Prouinces ne pouuoient afpirer ^ vne [145] 
plus grande fortune que d'eftre faites vn magazin de 
peaux de beftes mortes, que de nourrir des bouches 
fauuages, des Elans, des Caftors, & grand nombre 
d'Arbres. Voila iufques ou fe pouuoit 61euer la 
gloire de la Nouuelle France, fouz la captiuite de 
I'Eftranger, ou fouz la conduite deceux qui ne I'ay- 
moient que pour fes depoiiilles : mais Dieu ayant ver- 
fe fa benediction fur cette nouuelle Compagnie, cette 


1636] LE JEUNRS RELATION, 1636 133 


[144] CHAPTER VIII. 

ON THE PRESENT STATE OF NEW FRANCE, ON THE 
GREAT RIVER ST. LAWRENCE. 

IN contemplating the progress of affairs in New 
France, I seem to see an Aurora emerging from 
the profound darkness of the night, which, light- 
ing up the surface of the earth with its golden rays, 
finally changes into that great Ocean of light brought 
in by the Sun. The great losses incurred by these 
Gentlemen in the early infancy of their Company are 
indeed like a most heavy night, which covered all 
these countries with horror. They were never 
thought of except to be rebuffed, they were never 
looked upon except with aversion. The rightful 
possession of these lands was debated in France, 
while famine and the English, one after the other, 
divided and afflicted them. The Lilies died here in 
their birth; the few French who dwelt here were 
Strangers in their own Land. In short, these im- 
mense Provinces could aspire to no [145] higher for- 
tune than to be made a storehouse for the skins of 
dead animals, than to fill savage mouths, to support 
Elk, Beaver, and great quantities of Trees. Behold 
to what height the glory of New France could attain 
under the bondage of the Foreigner, or under the 
administration of those who love it only for its spoils ! 
But, God having poured out his blessings upon this 
new Company, that night has been scattered ; and 
now the Dawn of a mild and peaceful prosperity is 


134 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 

nuict s'eft diffipee, & maintenant I'Aurore d'vne 
douce & paifible profperite fe va repandant le long 
de noftre grand Fleuue : ce qui nous fait efperer que 
le Soleil de I'abondance fuiura ces heureux commen- 
cemens. s'auan9ant tous les iours iufques au plus 
haut point de fon Apogee pour n'en iamais defcendre ; 
puis que la plus grande abondance qu'on luy fou- 
haite, c'efl I'abondance des vertus, dont les fruicts 
font eternels. Mais decouurons quelques rayons de 
cette Aurore, qui commence h. produire fes beautez. 
le donne h. cognoiflre par I'infcription de ce Cha- 
pitre, que ie ne parle point de ce qui fe paffe, ou de 
ce qui fe rencontre dans toute I'etendue de la Nou- 
uelle [146] France; comme par exemple de I'Aca- 
die, ny de la Refidence de faincte Anne au Cap Bre- 
ton, ny de I'habitation de S. Charles en I'lfle de 
fainct Louis k Mifcou : car encor bien que le premier 
des Fleuues nous ouure vn grand chemin royal pour 
nous entre-viliter, & nous entre-communiquer les 
biens, que Dieu depart k chaque contr6e, fi eft-ce 
que nos havres ne font pas encor alTez peuplez de 
vaiffeaux, ny nos demeures d'vn alTez grand nombre 
de perfonnes pour entreprendre ce commerce. Les 
Sauuages feulement trauerfans les terres, ou nauigeas 
dans leurs petites gondoles fur les Fleuues, nous rap- 
portent par fois quelques nouuelles de ces habitations 
plus efloignees. Comme de nouueau vn grand ieune 
homme venu de I'Acadie, nous a fait entendre que 
Monfieur de Rafilly eftoit dans I'eltime d'vn tres 
grand Capitaine, non feulement parmy les Fran9ois 
& les Anglois ; mais encor dans la creance de tous 
les Peuples de fon Pais. II ne s'eft pas tr6p6. La 
vertu de ce grand homme merite d'eftre honoree, 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 135 

spreading along our great River. This makes us 
hope that the Sun of plenty will follow these happy 
beginnings, every day advancing until it reaches the 
highest point of its Apogee, never to descend there- 
from. For the greatest abundance that can be wished 
for it, is the abundance of virtues, whose fruits are 
eternal. But let us point out some of the rays of 
this Dawn, which is beginning to show forth its 
beauties. 

I made it understood by the heading of this Chap- 
ter that I would not speak of what occurs or of 
what is encountered in the whole extent of New 
[146] France, — as, for example, in Acadia, or the 
Residence of saint Anne at Cape Breton, or the set- 
tlement of St. Charles on the Island of saint Louis at 
Miscou.* For although the greatest of Rivers in- 
deed opens to us a royal highroad by which we may 
visit one another, and exchange the good things 
that God has bestowed upon each country, yet our 
harbors are not yet sufficiently stocked with ships, 
nor our dwellings numerous enough for people to un- 
dertake this commerce. The Savages, who alone 
journey over these lands or sail in their little gon- 
dolas upon these Rivers, occasionally bring us news 
of these more distant settlements. For instance, 
lately a stout young fellow coming from Acadia in- 
formed us that Monsieur de Rasilly was considered 
a very great Captain, not only among the French 
and English, but also in the estimation of all the 
Tribes of his Country.^ He is not mistaken. The 
integrity of this great man deserves to be honored, 
even in the midst of Barbarism. This preamble is 
long; let us enter our place of residence. 

[147] Four things make a Country desirable : good 


136 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.9 

mefmes an milieu de la Barbaric. Ce preambule eft 
long, entrons dans nos demenres. 

[147] Quatre chofes rendent vn Pais recomman- 
dable, la bonte du fol, les places fortes & mnnies, la 
quality & la quantity des habitans, & la police. 

Pour la bont6 des terres qui font les riues du grand 
Fleuue, i'en parleray cy apres. Quand aux places 
fortes, ie diray fimplement ce qui en eft. Monfieur 
de Champlain deuant que de mourir, fortifia la place 
que les Anglois auoient vfurpee, & qu'ils ont rendue: 
depuis fa mort on y a encor trauaille, on a entretenu 
vne redoute qu'il auoit drellee pour comander le long 
du Quay, & Ton a multiplie les canons qui battent 
fur la riuiere, renforcant la platte forme qui les porte. 
L'Iflet de Richelieu demeure comme il eftoit auec 
fes pieces de batterie. Fen parlay I'an paiTe, & n'en 
diray pas dauantage a prefent. Les delTeins croiffent 
auec le temps. Monfieur de Montmagny noftre Gou- 
uerneur a trace le plan, comme i'ay d6ja dit, d'vne 
forterelTe qu'on doit baftir regulierement. Les vns 
trauaillent k la chaux, les autres "k la brique, les 
autres tirent de la pierre, d 'autres explanadent la 
place. On a tire les allignemens d'vne ville, afin que 
tout ce qu'on baftira [148] dorefnauant foit en bon 
ordre ; on a vi£it6 vn endroit fur la riuiere qui pour- 
ra empefcher, non feulement les grands Vaifleaux de 
paffer outre, mais encor les petites Barques, & pent 
eftre encor les Chalouppes. 

L' habitation des trois Riuieres eft agrandie de deux 
corps de logis, d'vn magazin, & d'vne platte forme 
garnie de canon. Voila ce qui s'eft fait, mais non 
pas tout ce qui fe doit faire pour la conferuation du 
Pais. 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1636 137 

soil, Strong and fortified localities, the character and 
number of inhabitants, and the government. 

As to the excellence of the land which forms the 
banks of the great River, I shall speak hereafter. 
As to strongholds, I shall simply tell what there are. 
Monsieur de Champlain, before his death, fortified 
the place that the English had usurped and that they 
surrendered. Since his death, the work has been 
continued there, and the redoubt which he raised 
to command the length of the Quay has been re- 
paired ; the cannons which faced upon the river have 
been increased in number, the platform upon which 
they rest has been strengthened. The Islet de Riche- 
lieu remains as it was, with its heavy ordnance. I 
spoke of it last year, and will say no more about it 
at present. Plans grow with time. Monsieur de 
Montmagny, our Governor, has traced the plan, as 
I have already said, of a fortress which is to be reg- 
ularly built. Some are working at the lime, others 
at the brick, others are hauling stone, and others 
leveling the ground. They have drawn the plans of 
a city, in order that all building [148] hereafter shall 
be done systematically. A place on the river has 
been visited which can prevent not only the passage 
of big Ships, but also of little Barks and perhaps even 
of Shallops. 

The settlement at the three Rivers has been in- 
creased by two detached buildings, by a store, and 
by a platform provided with cannon. Now this is 
what has been done, but not all that ought to be 
done, for the preservation of the Country. 

I say nothing about the houses of private persons, 
which have been built and are building every day, 
some here, some there, according to the inclination 


138 LES RELATIONS DES J£SUITES [Vol.9 

le ne dis rien des maifons des particuliers, qu'ils 
ont fait & font drefler encor tous les iours, qui de^k, 
qui delk, fuiuant I'affectioii, & la commodity d'vn 
chacun. Ceux qui n'ont point veu le Pays dans fa pau- 
urete, n'admirent pas peut-eftre ces commencemens 
encore affez petits ; pour moy ie conf effe ingenuement 
que K^bec me femble vn autre Pais, & qu'il n'eft 
plus ce petit coin cache au bout du monde, oil on ne 
voyoit que quelques mazures, & quelque petit 
nombre d'Europ6ens. Le courage de ces Meffieurs 
paffe bien plus auant, ils meditent diuerfes demeures 
ou habitations iufques au grand Sault de fainct 
Louys, qui feront [149] pent eftre vn iour autant de 
Villes. Voire mefme auec le temps ils pourront 
s'affeurer de la grande riuiere, iufques ^ la mer douce 
des Hurons ; c'eft vn lac de plus de cinq cens lieues 
d'eftendue: mais il faut reiinir, & rallier nos forces 
en quelques endroits ftables & bien conferuez, de- 
uant que de nous repandre fi loing. 

Quand aux habitans de la Nouuelle France, ils fe 
font multipliez au delk de nos efperances. Entrant 
dans le Pais, nous y trouuames vne feule famille, qui 
cherchoit paffage en France, pour y viure fouz les 
loix de la vraye Religion : «fe maintenant nous voy- 
ons tous les ans aborder bon nombre de tres-hono- 
rables perfonnes, qui fe viennent letter dans nos 
grads bois, comme dans le fein de la paix, pour viure 
icy auec plus de piete, plus de franchife, & plus de 
liberte. Le bruit des Palais, ce grand tintamarre de 
Sergens, de Plaideurs & de Solliciteurs ne s'entend 
icy que de mille lieues loing. Les exactions, les 
tromperies, les vols, les rapts, les affaflins, les per- 
fidies, les inimitiez, les malices noires ne fe voyent 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 139 

and convenience of each. Those who have not seen 
the Country in its poverty, perhaps do not admire 
these still quite small beginnings. As to me, I 
frankly confess that Kebec seems to me another 
Country, and no longer the little corner hidden away 
at the end of the world, where could be seen nothing 
but some dilapidated huts and a few Europeans. 
The courage of these Gentlemen is going much 
farther ; they are thinking about a number of homes 
or settlements as far up as the great Sault de saint 
Louys, which will be [149] some day perhaps as many 
Cities. Indeed, in the course of time they will even 
be able to secure the great river up as far as the 
fresh-water sea of the Hurons, which is a lake of 
more than five hundred leagues in extent. But we 
must unite and rally our forces in some permanent 
and well-protected places, before spreading out so far. 
As to the inhabitants of New France, they have 
multiplied far beyond our hopes. When we entered 
the Country, we found here only a single family, 
who were seeking a passage back to France in order 
to live there under the laws of the true Religion. 
And now we see a great number of very honorable 
persons land here every year, who come to cast them- 
selves into our great forests as if into the bosom of 
peace, to live here with more piety, more immunity, 
and more liberty. The din of Palaces, the great up- 
roar of Lawyers, Litigants, and Solicitors is heard here 
only at a thousand leagues' distance. Exactions, de- 
ceits, thefts, rapes, assassinations, treachery, enmity, 
black malice, are seen here only once a year, in the let- 
ters and Gazettes which people bring from Old [150] 
France. Not that we have not our maladies, but they 
are easier to cure ; and, besides, no money is needed 


140 LES RELA TJONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 9 

icy qu'vne fois Tan fur les papiers & fur les Gazettes, 
que quelques vns apportent de I'Ancienne [150] 
France. Ce n'eft pas que nous n'ayons nos maladies, 
mais elles font plus aif ees h. guerir ; & encor ne f aut- 
il point d'argent pour payer le foin des Medecins. 
Pleuft a Dieu que les ames amoureufes de la paix 
peulTent voir combien douce eft la vie efloignee des 
gehennes de mille complimens fuperflus, de la ty- 
rannie des procez, des rauages de la guerre, & d'vne 
infinite d'autres beftes fauuages qu'on ne rencontre 
point dans nos forefts. Mais ie ne prends pas garde, 
que voulant parler des nouueaux habitans de la Nou- 
uelle France, ie vay difcourant de la paix qu'elle 
poffede. Difons done que nous auons icy deux braues 
Cheualiers, I'vn pour Gouuerneur, c'eft Monfieur de 
Montmagny: I'autre pour fon Lieutenant, c'eft Mon- 
fieur de rifle; nous y auons auffi de tres bonneftes 
Gentilshommes ; nombre de foldats de fa§on, & de 
refolution ; c'eft vn plaifir de leur voir faire les exer- 
cices de la guerre, dans la douceur de la paix, de 
n'entendre le bruit des moufquetades & des canons, 
que par reioiiiffance, nos grands bois & nos mon- 
tagnes repondans a ces coups par des Echos roulans 
comme des tonnerres innocens, qui n'ont ny [151] 
foudres, ny eclairs. La Diane nous reueille tons les 
matins, nous voyons pofer les fentinelles, le corps de 
garde eft touiours bien muny ; chaque ef coiiade a f es 
iours de faction ; en vn mot, noftre forterelle de K6- 
bec eft gardee dans la paix comme vne place d'im- 
portance dans I'ardeur de la guerre. Le refte des ha- 
bitans fait vn gros de diuerfes fortes d'artifans, & de 
quelques honorables families, qui s'eft notablement 
accreu cette ann^e. Nos Sauuages mefmes, qui ne 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1636 141 

to pay for the attendance of the Physicians. Would 
to God that souls enamored of peace could see how 
sweet is life remote from the gehenna of a thousand 
superfluous compliments, of the tyranny of lawsuits, 
of the ravages of war, and of an infinite number of 
other savage beasts that we do not encounter in our 
forests. But I am not taking heed, — while intend- 
ing to speak of the new inhabitants of New France, 
I go on talking about the peace they possess. Let 
us say then that we have here two brave Chevaliers, 
one as Governor, Monsieur de Montmagny, the other 
as his Lieutenant, Monsieur de I'lsle. We have also 
some very worthy Gentlemen here, and a number of 
fine-looking and resolute soldiers. It is a pleasure 
to see them engage in their warlike exercises during 
the calmness of peace, to hear the noise of muskets 
and of cannon, only in rejoicing, — our great forests 
and mountains responding to these reports by Echoes 
rolling as innocent thunders, which have neither 
[151] bolts nor lightning. The Diane ^wakens us 
every morning; we see the sentinels resting upon 
their arms. The guardhouse is always well sup- 
plied; each squad has its days of sentry duty. In a 
word, our fortress at Kebec is guarded in time of 
peace as is an important place in the midst of war. 
The remaining and greater part of the population is 
composed of different kinds of artisans, and of some 
respectable families, and has considerably increased 
this year. Our Savages themselves, who are not 
great admirers of the Universe, are astonished to see, 
they say, so many Captains and so many children of 
Captains. Among the families that have come re- 
cently, those of Monsieur de Repentigny and Mon- 
sieur de la Poterie, gallant Gentlemen, hold the first 


142 LES RELATIONS BES J£SUITES [Vol.9 

font pas des grands admirateurs de I'Vniuers, s'6ton- 
nent de voir, difent-ils, tant de Capitaines, & tant 
d'enfans de Capitaines. Entre les families qui font 
venues de nouueau, celles de Monfieur de Repenti- 
gny, & de Monfieur de la Poterie, braues Gentils- 
hommes, tiennent le premier rang. Quand on nous 
dit ^ K^bec, qu'il y auoit nombre de perfonnes h. Ta- 
douffac, qui venoient groffir noftre Colonic, qu'on ne 
voyoit Ik bas qu'hommes, femmes, & petits enfans; 
nous loiiafmes Dieu, & le priafmes de repandre fa 
faincte benediction fur cette nouuelle Peuplade; 
mais quand on nous affeura qu'il y auoit entre autres 
fix Damoifelles, des enfans beaux [152] comme le 
iour: que Meffieurs de Repentigny, & de la Poterie, 
compofoient vne grolTe famille, qu'ils eftoient en 
bonne fante; ie vous laille a penfer, ^i la ioye ne 
s'empara pas de noftre coeur, & I'eftonnement de no- 
flre efprit : tout cela redoubla par leur prefence ; leur 
grace, leur entretien nous fit voir la grande difference 
qu'il y a entre nos Fran5ois & nos Sauuages. Qui 
fera maintenant difficulte de palTer nos mers? puis 
que des enfans li tendres, des Damoifelles fi delicates, 
des femmes naturellement apprehenfiues fe moquent 
& fe rient de la grandeur de I'Ocean? FinilTons bien 
tofl ce Chapitre. Refle k parler de noftre police Ec- 
cleliaftique & Ciuile ; Fay deja dit qu'il n'y a point 
icy de pratique pour les Chiquaneurs. Les differens 
que i'y ay veu naiftre iufques h. prefent, n'ont paru 
que pour difparoiftre bien toft ; chacun eft fon propre 
Aduocat; & la premiere perfonne qu'on rencontre 
iuge en dernier reffort fans appel; s'il y a quelque 
chofe qui merite d'eftre rapport^ k Monfieur le Gou- 
uerneur, il I'expedie en deux mots, ou le fait con- 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 148 

rank.'-^ When we were told at K6bec that there 
were many persons at Tadoussac who were coming 
to increase our Colony, — that nothing was seen down 
there but men, women and little children, — we 
praised God, and prayed him to bestow his holy 
benediction upon these new Emigrants; but when 
we were assured that there were, among others, six 
Damsels, and some children as beautiful [152] as the 
day, that Messieurs de Repentigny and de la Poterie 
were establishing a large household, and that they 
were in good health, I leave you to imagine if joy 
did not take possession of our hearts, and surprise 
of our minds. All this was doubled in their presence ; 
their elegance, their conversation, showed us the 
great difference there is between our French and our 
Savages. Who will now find difficulties in crossing 
our seas, since children so tender. Damsels so deli- 
cate, women naturally timid, ridicule and laugh at 
the vastness of the Ocean ? Let us quickly bring this 
Chapter to a close. It remains to speak of our gov- 
ernment. Ecclesiastical and Civil. I have already 
said that there is no chance here for Tricksters. The 
quarrels which I have seen arise up to the present 
have appeared only soon to disappear. Every one 
is his own Advocate, and the first person one meets 
judges as a final tribunal from which there is no ap- 
peal. If there is anything that is worth reporting to 
Monsieur the Governor, he despatches it in two 
words, or has it arranged and concluded by those 
who may have knowledge of the affair. [153] This 
is not saying that one cannot proceed judicially 
here, and that this has not been done occasionally; 
but as there are no great causes for dispute, so 
we can have no great trials, and consequently the 


144 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol. 9 

dure & terminer par ceux qui peuuent auoir co- 
gnoiffance de 1' affaire. [153] Ce n'efl pas qu'on ne 
puiffe proceder icy iuridiquement, & que par fois on 
ne I'ait fait; mais comme il n'y a point de grandes 
occafions de difputer, auffi n'y peut-il y auoir de 
grands procez, & par confequent toute la police eft 
douce, & agreable. II y a par tout quelques efprits 
plus libertins, qui croyent que les loix les plus douces 
font des chaifnes ; mais leurs mecontentemens font 
les maladies de leur efprit, & non la rigueur des or- 
donnances qui n'ont point d'amertume. Au refte 
celles qui fe font icy, y font gardees en mefme temps. 
En voicy des preuues. Le vingt neufiefme Decembre 
de I'an mil fix cens trente cinq, furent mifes k vn 
pillier deuant I'Eglife, des affiches & defenfes, fur 
certaines peines; de blafphemer, de s'enyurer, de 
perdre la Melfe & feruice diuin aux iours de Feftes. 
En fuite dequoy, vn carcan fut attache au mefme 
pilier, & vn cheualet aupres, pour les delinquants; oil 
fut mis par effet le fixiefme lanuier vn yurogne & 
blafphemateur. Et le vingt-deuxiefme, vn de nos 
habitans fut condamne a cinquante liures d 'amende 
pour auoir fait enyurer quelques Sauuages. Les 
meilleures loix du monde [154] ne valent rien, 
fi on ne les fait garder. Pour la lurifdiction Ec- 
clefiaftique, elle ne s'eft encor exercee que dans 
les coeurs, & dans les confciences. Veritablement 
nous auons fujet de benir Dieu, voyant que I'ac- 
croiffement de nos Parroifliens eft 1' augmentation de 
fes loiianges. Les premiers facrifices de la Melfe, 
que nous prefentafmes en ces contrees furent offerts 
dans vn mefchant petit todis, qui maintenant nous 
feroit honte; nous-nous feruifmes par apres d'vne 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 145 

whole system of government is mild and agree- 
able. Everywhere there are libertine spirits who 
consider the mildest laws as chains; but their dis- 
content is a disease of the mind, and does not 
arise from the severity of the laws, which are in no 
wise characterized by bitterness. Furthermore, those 
laws enacted here are also observed. Here are 
some proofs of this. On the twenty-ninth of De- 
cember of the year one thousand six hundred and 
thirty-five, there were placed upon a pillar in front 
of the Church certain notices and prohibitions, with 
certain penalties, against blasphemy, drunkenness, 
failing to attend the Mass and divine services on 
Holydays. In pursuance of which an iron collar 
was fastened to the same pillar, and a chevalet*' 
near by for the delinquents; and here in fact, on the 
sixth of January, a drunkard and blasphemer was 
placed ; and on the twenty-second, one of our resi- 
dents was condemned to fifty livres fine for having 
made some Savages drunk. -^^ The best laws in the 
world [154] are of no value, if they are not observed. 
As to Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, it is only exercised 
as yet in the hearts and consciences. Truly, we have 
reason to bless God, seeing that the increase of our 
Parishioners is the augmentation of his praises. The 
first sacrifices of the Mass that we presented in this 
country were offered in a wretched little hut that we 
would be ashamed of now; afterwards we used a 
room, then they had a Chapel built. They have 
tried to change it into a Church, enlarging it by half 
or thereabout; and with all that, on Fete-days the 
first two Masses which are said at Kebec are so fre- 
quented that this large Chapel, or this little Church, 
is full usque ad cornu altaris, from one end to the 


146 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.9 

chambre, puis on fit baftir vne Chapelle ; on a tafch^ 
de la changer en Eglife, Taugmentant de moitie, ou 
enuiron, & auec tout cela les iours de Feftes, les deux 
premieres MelTes qui fe difent "k K6bec font fi fre- 
quent^es, que cette grande Chapelle, ou cette petite 
Eglife fe voit remplie vfque ad cornu altaris, d'vn bout 
k r autre. Le feruice fe fait maintenant auec folem- 
nite; outre les Meffes baffes, on en chante vne tous 
les Dimanches & toutes les Feftes, oil fe fait I'Eau 
benifte, & le Pain benit; on recite le Profne pour 
I'inftruction des plus ignorans, on ne manque pas de 
prefcher en fon temps, d'expliquer le Catechifme 
apres les Vefpres. Nos Francois y afliftent, [155] 
les vns pour y eftre mieux inftruits, les autres pour 
donner courage aux enfans, qui font auffi bien qu'en 
aucune ParroifTe que i'aye veu en France. Si toft 
qu'on nous eut loge proche de 1' Eglife, le Pere Lal- 
lemant commen9ant d'habiter cette Refidence donna 
en mefme temps commecement a fes folennitez: le 
Pere de Quen luy a fuccede dans la mefme affection 
& fplendeur. le confeffe ingenuement que mon 
coeur s'attendrit la premiere fois que i'affiftay ^ ce 
diuin feruice, voyant nos Francois tous rdjoiiis d* en- 
tendre chanter hautement & publiquement les loii- 
anges du grand Dieu au milieu d'vn Peuple barbare, 
voyans de petits enfans parler le langage Chreftien 
en vn autre monde. II me fembloit qu'vne Eglife 
bien reiglee oti Dieu eft feruy auec amour & refpect, 
auoit trauerfe la mer; ou que ie me trouuois tout 
d'vn coup dans noftre France, apres auoir paff6 quel- 
ques annees au pais des Sauuages : ce qui vous eft 
commun en I'Ancienne France, & qui ne touche que 
les ames les mieux difpofees, nous reioiiit iufques au 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 147 

other. The service is now conducted with solem- 
nity ; besides the low Masses, one is sung every Sun- 
day and every Fete-day, when the holy Water and 
Bread are blessed; a Lecture is given, for the in- 
struction of the more ignorant ; and there is preach- 
ing at the proper time, and an explanation of the 
Catechism after Vespers. Our French are present, — 
[155] some to be better instructed, others to give cour- 
age to the children, who do as well as in any Parish I 
have ever seen in France. As soon as we had been 
lodged near the Church, Father Lallemant, who had 
just begun to live at the Residence, at the same time 
initiated its solemnities; Father de Quen has suc- 
ceeded him with the same inclination for ceremony. 
I frankly confess that my heart melted the first time 
I assisted in this divine service, at the sight of our 
Frenchmen so greatly rejoicing to hear sung aloud 
and publicly the praises of the great God in the 
midst of a barbarous People, at the sight of little 
children speaking the Christian language in another 
world. It seemed to me that a well-regulated Church, 
where God is served with love and respect, had 
crossed the sea ; or that I found myself all of a sud- 
den in our own France, after having passed some 
years in the country of the Savages. What is a com- 
mon thing for you in Old France, and touches only 
the best-disposed souls, rejoices us to the bottom of 
our hearts in our little Churches built of foreign 
wood. As often as we present to the God of Heaven 
[156] the adorable sacrifice of the Altar, in some new 
place, it seems to us that we banish therefrom the 
demons, and that we take possession of these lands 
in the name of Jesus Christ our sovereign Lord and 
Master, whom we wish to see reigning fully in the 


148 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.9 

fond du coeur dans nos petites Eglifes bafties de bois 
eflranger. Autat de fois que nous prefentons au 
Dieu du Ciel [156] I'adorable facrifice de I'Autel, en 
quelque nouuel endroit, il nous femble que nous en 
bannillons les demons, & que nous prenons poffeffion 
de ces terres au nom de lefus Chrifl noftre fouuerain 
Seigneur & Maiftre, que nous defirons de voir regner 
pleinement dans les coeurs de nos Frangois, & dans 
la creance de nos Sauuages. Le zele de Monlieur 
Gand k procurer de toutes fes forces, que nos Fran- 
9ois aiment ces deuotions folennelles & publiques, 
me femble fort loiiable: mais les ordonnances de 
Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur, fon exemple tres-remar- 
quable, & la piete des plus apparens tiennent tout en 
deuoir; qui refufera d'affifter a I'explication du Ca- 
techifme, puis que ces perfonnes de^merite_;i& d'au- 
thorite I'honorent de leur prefence, & prennent vn 
grand plaifir d' entendre par fois chanter en langue 
Sauuage I'oraifon du Fils de Dieu, & les articles de 
noftre creance par les bouches encor enfantines de 
petits gar9ons, & de petites filles Frangoifes & Sau- 
uages. Dieu foit loii6 dans le temps & dans I'eter- 
nite par les langues de toutes les Nations de la terre. 
le m'oubliois de dire que Teftablilfement [157] 
d'vn College fert encor beaucoup pour le bien du 
pays: auffi quelques perfonnes tres-honneftes nous 
fQauent fort bien dire, que iamais elles n'euflent paffe 
rOcean pour venir en la Nouuelle France, fi elles 
n'eullent eu cognoillance qu'il y auoit' des perfonnes 
capables de diriger leurs confciences, de procurer 
leur falut, & d'inftruire leurs enfans en la vertu, & 
en la cognoillance des Lettres. 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6j6 149 

hearts of our French and in the belief of our Sav- 
ages. Monsieur Gand's zeal in exercising all his 
energies to cause our French to love these solemn 
and public devotions, seems to me very praiseworthy. 
But the regulations of Monsieur our Governor, his 
very remarkable example, and the piety of the more 
prominent people, hold all in the line of duty. Who 
would refuse to attend the explanation of the Cate- 
chism, since these persons of worth and authority 
honor it with their presence, and take great pleasure 
in occasionally hearing sung in the Savage language 
the prayer of the Son of God, and the articles of our 
belief by the still childish mouths of little boys and 
girls, French and Savage? God be praised through 
time and through eternity by the tongues of all the 
Nations of the earth. 

I forgot to say that the establishment [157] of a 
College is also of great service for the welfare of the 
country.*^ Also, a number of very respectable per- 
sons can assure us that they would never have crossed 
the Ocean to come to New France, if they had not 
known that there were persons there capable of di- 
recting their consciences, of procuring their salvation, 
and of instructing their children in virtue, and in the 
knowledge of Letters. 


150 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.9 


CHAPITRE IX. 

R^PONSES A QUELQUES PROPOSITIONS QUI M'ONT 
ESTE FAITES DE FRANCE. 

QVELQVES perfonnes de condition m'ont faict 
propofer fous main, & de diners endroits, cer- 
taines difficultez dont elles delirent eftre 6clair- 
cies, pour fe refoudre k palTer en ces contrees. II eft 
raifonnable de leur fatisfaire auec fidelite. 
I. On demande fi le pais eft hors des incurfions de 
I'Efpagnol, & 1&, delTus on defire vne Chorographie 
pour voir la diftance qu'il y a entre la nouuelle 
France, & les terres qu'il poffede en TAmerique. 

[158] le ref ponds qu'il n'eft pas befoin de Choro- 
graphie pour cognoiftre cet eloignenaent ; adiouftez 
que ie n'en fgaurois faire que fur les cartes qui 
on d6ia cours, n'en ayant ny le temps, ny le loilir, 
ny les moyens de me tranfporter en tant d'endroits 
pour prendre les hauteurs necellaires; neantmoins 
ce que ie vay dire fatisfera pleinement a la de- 
mande. L'Efpagnol ne nous f9auroit venir trou- 
uer que par mer ou par terre: de venir par terra 
c'eft I'impollibilite mefme, & quiconque a tant foit 
peu de cognoiffance du Pais fe rendroit ridicule, s'il 
apprehendoit fa venue au travers de tant de centaines 
de lieues de bois, de forefts, de fleuues, de lacs, & de 
montagnes. Pour venir par eau, il a vn tres-grand 
chemin a faire, car entre nous & luy il y a toute la 
Floride, & peut-eftre plufieurs autres contrees au de- 


1636] LE/EUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 l^l 


CHAPTER IX. 

ANSWERS TO SOME PROPOSITIONS SUBMITTED TO ME 
FROM FRANCE. 

SOME persons of standing have caused to be pro- 
posed to me, privately and from different places, 
certain difficulties in regard to which they 
wish to be enlightened, in order to decide whether 
to cross over into these countries. It is reasonable 
to give them exact and satisfactory answers. 
I. It is asked whether this country is beyond the 
incursions of the Spaniard ; and thereupon a Chorog- 
raphy is desired, to see the distance there is be- 
tween new France and the lands he possesses in 
America. 

[158] I answer that there is no need of a Chorog- 
raphy to know this distance; besides, I could only 
indicate it on the maps already in circulation, hav- 
ing neither the time, nor the leisure, nor the means 
of visiting so many places to take the necessary alti- 
tudes; nevertheless, what I am going to say will 
fully satisfy the question. The Spaniard could only 
come to us by sea or by land. To come by land is 
impossibility itself, and he who has ever so little 
knowledge of the Country would make himself ridic- 
ulous by fearing his approach across so many hun- 
dreds of leagues of woods, of forests, of rivers, of 
lakes, and of mountains. To come by water, he has 
a long voyage to make; for between him and us 
there is the whole of Florida, and perhaps several 


152 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.9 

Ik ; toute la Virginie & toutes les autres terres qui 
appartiennent a la France, qui font de tres-grande 
eflendue. Ce n'eft pas tout, ayant trouue I'embou- 
cheure de noftre grand fleuue, il faut monter quali 
deux cens lieues felon les mariniers, qui ne donnent 
qu'enuiron dix-fept lieues & demy pour degre. Que 
fi nous fuiuons [159] les Geographes qui en afTignent 
vingt-cinq, il faut monter plus de trois cens lieues 
fur cette grande Riuiere pour nous rencontrer: & 
quand tout ce chemin feroit fait, nous fommes main- 
tenant en tel eflat & en tel nombre, que nous ne 
craindrions pas fes forces. Si Monlieur de Cham- 
plain euft eu des viures, & de la poudre, & autres 
munitions de guerre, iamais I'Anglois ne fuft entre 
das le fort de Kebec; il auoit le courage trop bon, & 
la place efloit d'ailleurs trop tenable, bien que ce ne 
fuft encore rien, au prix de ce qu'on y a adiouft6, & 
qu'on y adioufle tous les iours. Pour les munitions 
de bouche, on nous en enuoye toufiours pour deux 
ans, & fi nous ferons bien-tofl fur le poinct de nous 
nourrir icy de noftre trauail. Mais c'eft ce qu'on me 
demande en fecond lieu. 

II. Si defrichant les terres & les labourant, elles 
produiront affez pour leurs habitans. 

le refponds qu'ouy ; c'eft le fentiment de ceux qui 
s'y entendent. Le Sieur Giffard qui n'a d^friche 
que durant deux ans, & encor laiffant plufieurs fou- 
ches, efpere recueillir cette annee, fi fon bled [160] 
correfpond a ce qu'il monflre maintenant, pour nour- 
rir vingt perfonnes: d6s I'an paffe il recueillit huit 
poin9ons de fourment, deux poingons de pois, trois 
poin9ons de bled d'Inde; & tout cela au moye de 
fept hommes qui ont encor efte bien diuertis a baftir, 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 153 

other countries beyond; all of Virginia, and all the 
other lands which belong to France, which are of 
vast extent. This is not all ; after having found the 
mouth of our great river, he would have to go up about 
two hundred leagues, according to the sailors, who 
only allow about seventeen leagues and a half to a 
degTce. So if we follow [159] the Geographers, who 
make it twenty-five leagues, he would have to come 
over three hundred leagues up this great River to 
reach us; and, when all this distance is covered, we 
are now in such a condition and in such numbers that 
we do not fear his forces. If Monsieur de Champlain 
had had food and powder and other munitions of 
war, the English would never have entered the fort 
of Kebec. He had the right kind of courage, and 
the place was besides easy enough to hold, although 
it was nothing compared to what has been added and 
is being added to it every day. As to provisions, 
they always send us enough for two years ; and in- 
deed we shall soon be in a condition to support our- 
selves from our own labor. But that is what I am 
asked in the second place. 

II. The land being cleared and ploughed, will it 
produce enough for the inhabitants? 

I answer, yes; this is the opinion of those who 
understand the subject. Sieur Giffard, who has been 
clearing the land for only two years, and still leav- 
ing a great many stumps, hopes to harvest enough 
this year, if his wheat [160] yields in proportion to 
present indications, to maintain twenty persons. 
The last year's harvest was eight puncheons of 
wheat, two puncheons of peas, three puncheons of 
Indian corn ; and all this was done by the labor of 
seven men, who were at the same time engaged in 


154 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.9 

^ faire des foins, & k d'autres manufactures ; fa terre 
efl bonne, toutes ne font pas femblables. 

III. S'il y a efperance que les pommiers & autres 
arbres fruictiers y puiflent porter du fruict. 

le n'en puis repondre auec affeurance, pour n'en 
auoir aucune experience oculaire. Le fieur Hebert 
auoit plants quelques pommiers pendant fa vie, qui 
ont porte de fort bons fruicts, "k ce qu'on m'alleure; 
le beftail a gafl6 ces arbres ; nous auons greffe quel- 
ques fauuageons cette annee, les antes font tres-bien 
reprifes. Le temps nous apprendra ce qui en eft; 
on voit icy des poiriers, pommiers, pruniers, ceri- 
fiers; & autres arbres portans des fruits fauuages; 
s'ils refiftent aux rigueurs de rhyuer; ie ne vois pas 
pourquoy ils doiuent mourir pour eftre antez de bons 
greffes. II y a en quelques endroits force lambruches 
chargees de [i6i] raifms; quelques-vns en ont fait du 
vin par curiofit^, i'en ay gouft^, il m'a femble fort 
bon. Plufieurs tiennent pour certain que la vigne 
reiiffiroit icy, & comme i'oppofois la rigueur des 
froids, on me repondit que les feps feront en affeu- 
rance tout I'Hyuer fouz la neige, & qu'au Printemps 
on ne doit pas tant craindre que les vignes gelent, 
comme on fait en France, pour ce qu'elles ne s'auan- 
ceront pas fi toft. Tout cela femble probable. 

IV. Combien vingt hommes feroient de temps k de- 
fricher vn arpent de terre ? ce que coufteroit vn cha- 
cun ^ nourrir durant vn an ? & quelles prouifions il 
faudroit faire? 

Vingt hommes d^fricheront en vn an trente arpens 
de terre, au net, en forte que la charue y paffe; s'ils 
eftoient intereffez dans I'affaire, pent eftre en feroiet- 
ils dauantage ; il y a des endroits bien plus aifez les 


1636] 


LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1636 155 


building, in making hay, and in other work. His 
land is good; not all is like it. 

III. Is there any hope of apple and other fruit trees 
producing fruit here ? 

I cannot answer positively, as I have had no ocular 
proof of this. Sieur Hebert planted some apple trees 
during his lifetime, which have borne some very 
good fruit, as I have been assured; but the cattle 
spoiled these trees. We have grafted some wild 
trees this year, and the scions have united very well. 
Time will show us what there is in it. One sees 
here pear, apple, plum, cherry, and other trees bear- 
ing wild fruit; if they can stand the severity of the 
winter, I do not see why they should die for being 
grafted with good shoots. In some places there are 
many wild vines loaded with [161] grapes; some 
have made wine of them through curiosity; I tasted 
it, and it seemed to me very good. Many are sure 
that the vine would succeed here ; and, when I urged 
against this the rigor of the cold, they replied that 
the vine-stock will be safe all Winter under the snow, 
and that in the Spring it need not be feared that the 
vines will freeze as they do in France, because they, 
will not sprout so early. All this seems probable. 
IV. How long would it take twenty men to clear an 
arpent of land? What would it cost apiece to main- 
tain them for a year? And what provisions would it 
be necessary to furnish? 

Twenty men will clear in one year thirty arpents 
of land, so clean that the plow can pass through it ; 
if they had an interest in the matter, perhaps they 
would do more. There are some places which are 
much easier than others. The usual task for each 
man is an arpent and a half a year, if he is not en- 


166 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.9 

vns que les autres; la tafche ordinaire de chaque 
homme par an eft vn arpent & demy, n'eftant point 
diuerty en d'autres chofes. On donne k chacun pour 
fon viure deux pains d'enuiron fix ou fept liures par 
femaine, c'eft a dire qu'il faut vn poinffon de farine 
par an, [162] deux liures de lard, deux onces de 
beurre, vne petite mefure d'huile, & de vinaigre, un 
peu de molue feiche, c'eft enuiron vne liure, vne 
6cuel6e de pois, c'eft enuiron vne chopine, tout cela 
par femaine. Pour leur boilTon, on leur donne vne 
chopine de fydre par iour, ou vn pot de biere, & par 
fois vn coup de vin, comme aux bonnes feftes. L'hy- 
uer on leur donne vne prife d'eau de vie le matin, fi 
on en a. Tout ce qu'on pent retirer fur le Pais, foit 
par la chaffe, ou par la pefche, n'eft point compris Ik 
dedans. Suiuant ce memoire on peut voir ce qu'il 
coufte pour nourrir vn homme, & les prouifions qu'il 
faut faire. le ne parle point des autres rafraichille- 
mens, qu'il eft bon d'apporter, des pruneaux, ris, rai- 
lins, & autres chofes qui peuuent feruir pour les 
malades. le ne parle non plus des habits, des couuer- 
tures, des mattelats, & autres chofes f emblables, qu'vn 
chacun peut apporter felon fa condition, & felon fon 
pouuoir. 

V. Comme eft fait le grand Fleuue fainct Laurens, 
quels font fes riuages, iufques oii vont les grands Na- 
uires, de quel port font ceux qui montent iufques 
[163] k Kebec, & iufques aux trois Riuieres, quel eft 
I'eftat des fortifications qu'on a fait pour la feuret6 du 
Pais. 

Voila bien des demandes tout h. la fois, aufquelles 
il eft bien difficile de r^pondre, fans faire de longues 
pourmenades. Quand on monte k Kebec, & qu'on a 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 167 

gaged in other work. As rations, each one is given 
two loaves of bread, of about six or seven pounds, a 
week, — that is, a puncheon of flour a year; [162] 
two pounds of lard, two ounces of butter, a little 
measure of oil and of vinegar; a little dried codfish, 
that is, about a pound ; a bowlful of peas, which is 
about a chopine [pint], — and all this for one week. 
As to their drinks, they are given a chopine of cider 
per day, or a quart of beer, and occasionally a drink 
of wine, as on great fete-days. In the winter they 
are given a drop of brandy in the morning, if one 
has any. What they can get from the Country, in 
hunting or fishing, is not included in this. By fol- 
lowing this memorandum, one can see what it costs to 
keep a man, and the provisions that must be supplied. 
I say nothing of the other edibles which it is well to 
bring, — prunes, rice, raisins, and other things that 
can be used for the sick. Neither do I speak of the 
clothes, blankets, mattresses, and other such things, 
that every one can bring according to his condition 
and ability. 

V. How is the great saint Lawrence River formed ? 
What kind of banks has it? How far up do the 
great Vessels go, and of what burden are those which 
go up as far [163] as Kebec and the three Rivers? 
What is the condition of the fortifications that have 
been made for the safety of the Country? 

Here are a great many questions, all at once, which 
it is difficult to answer without making long journeys. 
When you come up to K6bec and have the wind 
astern, you hardly notice the banks of the great Riv- 
er, which sometimes do not appear at all, either from 
their great distance, the River being very wide, or 
from the fogs that obscure the view. To coast along 


168 LES RELA TJONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 

le vent en pouppe, on ne s'arrefte gueres ^ remarquer 
les riues du grand Fleuue, qui par fois ne parroiffent 
point, foit pour leur efloignement, le Fleuue eftant 
fort large, foit pour les bruines qui en derobent la 
veue. D'aller cottoyer ces riuages, il faudroit faire 
quatre ces lieues, & mener des homes & des viures 
pour vn long-teps. Si faut il toutesfois donner quel- 
que reponfe. Quand on eft entr6 dans les terres, on 
rencontre vn Golphe grand comme vne mer: mon- 
tant plus haut ce Golphe fe change en vn Fleuue fort 
large, car a peine en voit-on les riues nauigeant au 
milieu. II fe va toufiours etreffiffant: en forte ne- 
antmoins qu'il a bien encor dix lieues de large k plus 
de cent lieues de fon emboucheure. Deuant K^bec, 
oti il fe r6treint fort, il a fix cens feptante deux toifes, 
on I'a mefur6 fur la glace: quatre lieues au dellus il 
elargit encore [164] fon lict, & deuant I'habitation des 
trois Riuieres, qui eft h. trente lieues au deffus de Ke- 
bec, il a bien encor deux ou trois mille pas communs ; 
comme ie I'^criuy I'an palI6: vn peu plus haut, il 
fait le grad Lac de fainct Pierre, large d'enuiron fept 
lieues. Ce Roy de tons les Fleuues eft bord6, tan- 
toft de montagnes, tantoft d'vn pais plat, ou bien peu 
releue. I'ay fouuent nauig6 de Kebec aux trois Ri- 
uieres. I'ay remarqu6 des riues pierreufes, d'autres 
fablonneuf es ; en d'autres on trouue de I'argille, des 
terres graffes, tres-bonnes pour faire de la brique ; le 
Pais eft beau & bien agreable, entre-coupp6 de ri- 
uieres, de ruiffeaux, de torrens qui viennent des 
terres. Les Sauuages m'ont monftr^ quelques en- 
droits, ou les Hiroquois ont autrefois cultiue la terre. 
I'vfe^^'mon aduis de redite; mais ceux qui deman- 
dent ces r6ponfes le fouhaittent ainfi. Ce Fleuue de- 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 


159 


these shores, you would have to make four hundred 
leagues, and carry men and provisions for a long 
time. Yet I must give some answer. Upon enter- 
ing these lands, you encounter a Gulf as large as a 
sea; farther up, this Gulf changes into a very broad 
River, for you can scarcely see the banks while sail- 
ing in the middle of it. It keeps on narrowing, and 
yet it is fully ten leagues wide at more than a hun- 
dred leagues from its mouth. Opposite Kebec, where 
it becomes very narrow, it is six hundred and seven- 
ty-two toises wide, this distance having been meas- 
ured on the ice. Four leagues farther up, its bed 
widens [164] out again, and opposite the settlement 
of the three Rivers, which is thirty leagues above 
K6bec, it is still two or three thousand ordinary 
paces in width, as I wrote last year; a little higher 
it forms the great Lake of saint Peter, about seven 
leagues wide. This King of all Rivers is bordered 
sometimes by mountains, sometimes by a flat coun- 
try, or by land but slightly elevated. I have often 
navigated it from Kebec up to the three Rivers. I 
have observed that some of the banks are rocky, 
others sandy; upon others one finds clay, — heavy 
soil, very good for making brick. The Country is 
beautiful and very attractive, intersected by rivers, 
brooks, and torrents issuing from the ground. The 
Savages pointed out to me some places where the 
Hiroquois once cultivated the land. It seems to me 
I am going into repetitions, but those who ask for 
these answers wish it so. This River from the Cape 
of saint Lawrence, that is, from its mouth, up to 
Tadoussac flows partly toward the Northwest, a quar- 
ter from the West, partly toward the West, a quar- 
ter from the Southwest, according to Monsieur Cham- 


160 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.9 

puis le Cap de fainct Laurens ; c'eft a dire depuis fon 
emboucheure iufques a TadoulTac, tire en partie au 
Nordoiiefl, quart d'Oiieft, en partie k rOiieft, quart 
de Suroiieft, felon les cartes de Monfieur de Cham- 
plain : car ie n'ay point fait ces obferuations voguant 
deffus, ne me figurant [165] pas que cela fuft ne- 
ceffaire "k mon deffein. Pour la grandeur des Vaif- 
feaux qui peuuent entrer dans ce Fleuue, ie me per- 
suade que tous ceux qui marchent en alTeurance fur 
r Ocean peuuent venir en feuret6 iufques "k Tadouflac, 
& peut-eftre encor iufques k Kebec, & vn peu plus 
haut : neantmoins on n*y en fait ordinairement mon- 
ter que de cent a deux cens tonneaux : au delk de 
K6bec on n'enuoye que des Barques, qui pafTent bien 
Icing au deffus des trois Riuieres. C'eft affez fur ce 
point. Fay repondu au Chapitre precedent k la de- 
mande des fortifications. 

VI. Remarquer la qualite des terres, exprimer celles 
qui font propres au labourage, au plant, aux paftu- 
rages ; s'il f era neceffaire pour les labourer de har- 
nois, de boeufs, de cheuaux, quelles graines on peut 
apporter. 

Si tous nos grands bois efloient abbatus, ie fatisfe- 
rois bien aifement k ces demandes; mais comme ils 
font encor debout, & qu'on ne les vifite pas aifement ; 
ie diray que i'ay veu de bonnes & de mauuaifes terres 
aux lieux que i'ay frequente. II faut philofopher fur 
ce point de [166] la Nouuelle France, comme de 
I'Ancienne. II y a des terres fertiles, en quelques 
endroits des fables, en d'autres il y a des prairies, & 
des lieux tres propres pour en faire. Ie croy qu'il y 
a quelques quartiers propres pour la vigne, pour le 
plant ; mais tout cela n'eft pas raffemble : & c'eft ce 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 161 

plain's maps ; for I have not made these observations 
while sailing upon it, not supposing [165] that that 
would be necessary for my purposes. As to the size 
of the Ships that can enter this River, I am per- 
suaded that all those which can sail the Ocean with 
safety can safely come up as far as Tadoussac, and 
perhaps even to Kebec, and a little higher. How- 
ever, they do not generally bring vessels up here ex- 
cept those of one hundred to two hundred tons. 
Beyond Kebec only Barks are sent, which pass far 
above the three Rivers. Enough upon this point. 
As to the question about fortifications, I have an- 
swered it in the preceding Chapter. 
VI. In regard to the quality of the soils, to describe 
those which are suitable for tillage, for planting, for 
pasture ; whether it will be necessary to work them 
with teams of oxen, or horses; what grains will they 
bear? 

If our great forests were leveled, I could very eas- 
ily answer these questions ; but as they are still stand- 
ing, and as one does not easily visit them, I will say 
that I have seen both good and bad land in the 
places I have frequented. One must reason about 
[166] New France in this respect the same as one 
does about the Old. There are fertile lands, in some 
places sand, in others meadows, and places very fit to 
make meadows. I believe there are some quarters 
adapted to vines, to plants ; but all these are not to- 
gether, and yet this is what one would desire. 
In these beginnings, as all these experiments have 
not yet been made, I cannot indicate the peculiar 
quality of every soil with certainty. The three Riv- 
ers seems to me like Anjou ; it is a sandy country, 
and I believe the vine would flourish there. K6bec 


162 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.9 

pendant ce qu'on defireroit. En ces commencemens, 
comme on n'a point encor fait toutes ces experiences ; 
ie ne f9aurois marquer la propriety d'aucun terroir 
auec affeurance. Les trois Riuieres me femblent 
comme I'Anjou ; c'eft vn pais fablonneux, ie croy que 
la vigne s'y plairoit. K6bec eft diuerfifie, il y a des 
endroits fort bas, les bleds y pourront eftre bons, fur 
Ie haut la vigne & les bleds y pourroient profiter ; 
pour Ie bled, I'experience en fait foy ; on peut faire 
des prairies en mille endroits. II y en a fur Ie bord 
du grand Fleuue, mais les marges les incommodent. 
II n'eft pas befoin d'apporter des grains pour femer, 
on en trouuera icy en ^change d'autre bled, ou autre 
chofe. Le bled marfais fem6 au renouueau reiiffit 
bien mieux que le bled fem€ deuant I'hyuer ; ce n'eft 
pas que ie n'en aye veu de tres-beau fem^ en Octobre. 
[167] Mais comme on ne f9ait pas bien encor reco- 
gnoiftre le temps & la nature du fol & du climat, il eft 
plus alleur6 de le femer au Printemps, que deuant 
THyuer; I'orge commun, & I'orge monde reuflillent 
en perfection : le f eigle y vient fort bien ; au moins 
ie puis affeurer que i'ay veu croiftre icy de tous ces 
grains aufli beaux comme en France. Les pois font 
plus tendres & meilleurs que ceux qu'on y apporte 
par la nauigation. Les herbes potageres y viennent 
fort bien, il en faut apporter des graines. II eft vray 
que le voifinage des forefts, & tant de bois pourry, 
dont les terres fe font comme form^es & nourries, 
nous engendrent par fois des vermines qui rongent 
tout: ces animaux venans "k mourir parmy les cba- 
leurs de I'Eft^ tout vient en perfection ; mais quel- 
quefois plus tard qu'il ne faudroit pour retirer des 
graines & des femences. Nous auons icy des bceufs 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 163 

is diversified ; there are very low places where wheat 
might do well, upon the heights the vine and wheat 
might flourish. As to wheat, experience has given 
us faith. Meadows can be made in a thousand places. 
There are some upon the borders of the great River, 
but these are greatly injured by the tides. There is 
no need to bring over grains as seed ; they will be 
found here in exchange for other grains, or some- 
thing else. March wheat sown in the spring suc- 
ceeds better than wheat sown before winter. Not 
that I have not seen some very fine wheat that was 
sown in October. [167] But as we are not yet thor- 
oughly acquainted with the weather and the nature 
of the soil and climate, it is safer to sow in the Spring 
than before the Winter. Common barley and hulled 
barley succeed to perfection, and rye does very well ; 
at least I can assert that I have seen all these grains 
grow here, as beautiful as they have in France. The 
peas are better and more tender than those they 
bring over in ships. Pot-herbs do very well, but the 
seeds must be brought over. It is true that the 
nearness of the forests, and so much rotten wood, of 
which the land is, as it were, formed and nourished, 
engender, at times, insects which gnaw everything; 
as these animals die during the heat of Summer, 
everything comes to perfection, but sometimes later 
than is desirable to secure the grain and seed. We 
have here oxen and cows, which we use to cultivate 
the cleared land; this year some asses have been 
brought over, which will be of great service ; horses 
could be used, but there is no hurry about bringing 
them. 

VII. Is building stone to be found there, [168] also 
clay, sand ? All these are here in abundance in some 


164 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.9 

& des vaches qui nous feruent ^ labourer les terres 
defrich^es: on a cette annee amene quelques afnes 
qui rendront de tres-bons feruices : les cheuaux pour- 
roient feruir, mais rien ne prelTe d'en amener. 

VII. Trouue-t'on de la pierre pour baftir, [i68] de 
I'argille, du fable? Tout cela eft icy en abondance 
en quelques endroits, en d'autres non : a deux lieues 
k la ronde de Kebec on fait de la chaux, on tire de 
bonnes pierres "k baftir, qui f e taille fort bien ; on y 
fait d'excellente brique ; le fable fe trouue quafi par 
tout. 

VIII. Remarquer les commoditez que le pays pro- 
duit pour la vie de rhomme. les efpeces d'animaux, &c. 

La chaile des oifeaux de riuiere efl abondante en 
fon temps, c'eft ^ dire au Printemps & ^ 1' Automne ; 
mais comme elle eft fort battue aux endroits plus ha- 
bitez, elle s'^loigne de plus en plus : il y a des Ifles 
toutes pleines d'Oyes, d'Outardes, de Canar[d]s de di- 
uerfes efpeces, de Sarcelles, & d'autre Gibbier : comme 
on s'occupe aux chofes les plus neceffaires, on va peu 
fouuent apres ces animaux. II y a des Elans, des 
Caftors, des Pores-epics, des Lievres, & quelques 
beftes fauues, come des Cerf s ; vne efpece de vaches, 
qui femblent auoir quelque rapport aux noftres. 
Cette chaffe des plus grandes teftes n'appartient quafi 
encor qu'aux Sauuages, qui eloignent par leurs 
courfes ces animaux de nos habitations; [169] quel- 
ques Francois neantmoins ont tue des Elans, mais 
peu : le temps viendra qu'on pourra les domeftiquer, 
& en tirer de tres bons feruices, traifnant fur la neige 
les bois & autres chofes dont on aura befoin: ces 
MelTieurs en nourriffent trois, deux mafles & vne fe- 
melle ; nous verrons comme ils reuffiront ; s'ils s'ap- 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 165 

places, in others not. For a distance of two leagues 
round about Kebec lime is made ; good building stone 
is quarried, which can be easily cut ; excellent brick 
is made, and sand is found almost everywhere. 
VIII. Notice what the country furnishes to sustain 
human life, the kinds of animals, etc. 

Game among river birds is abundant in season, 
that is, in the Spring and Autumn ; but as it has been 
so greatly disturbed in the more inhabited localities, 
it is going farther and farther away. There are Is- 
lands which are full of Geese, Bustards, Ducks of 
various kinds. Teal and other Game ; but, as we are 
occupied with more necessary affairs, we do not often 
engage in hunting these animals. There are Elks, 
Beavers, Porcupines, Hares, and some of the deer 
family, — such as the common red Deer, and a kind 
of cow that appears to have some affinity with ours.^ 
This chase of the larger animals is as yet mainly in- 
dulged in by the Savages, who, by the pursuit of 
them, have driven these animals from our settle- 
ments; [169] some of the French, however, have 
killed Elks, but not many. The time will come 
when they can be domesticated, and we shall make 
good use of them, having them drag over the snow 
the wood and other things which we shall need; 
these Gentlemen are keeping three of these animals, 
two males and one female, and we shall see how 
they will succeed; if they become tame, it will be 
eavSy to provide for them, as they eat nothing but 
wood. In time, parks can be made, in which to keep 
Beavers ; these would be treasure-houses, besides fur- 
nishing us with fresh meat at all times. For if one 
sees so many ewes, sheep, and lambs in France, al- 
though the Ewe generally bears but one lamb a year, 


166 


LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol. 9 


priuoifent il fera aife de les nourrir, car ils ne man- 
gent que du bois. On pourra quelque iour faire des 
pares pour tenir des Caltors; ce feroit vn threfor, 
outre qu'on auroit en tout temps de la chair fraifche. 
Que fi on voit tant de brebis, tant de moutons, & tant 
d'aigneaux en France, encor que la Brebis pour I'or- 
dinaire ne face tous les ans qu'vn aigneau ; ie vous 
laiffe a penfer combien les Caftors fe multiplieroient 
dauantage, puis que la femelle en porte plufieurs. 

Pour le poiffon il eft icy comme en fon empire ; 
il ya vn grand nombre de Lacs d'Eftangs, & de Ri- 
uieres tres-poifTonneufes. Le grand fleuue eft rem- 
ply d'Eftourgeons, de Saumons, d'Alofes, de Bro- 
chets, de Barbues, de poillons dorez, de poiffons 
blancs, de Carpes de diuerfes efpeces, d'Anguilles 
&c. non qu'on les [170] prenne en mefme quantity 
par tout, mais il y a des endroits ou la pefche femble 
prodigieufe. De I'heure que i'ecris cecy, voila vn 
gar9on qui apporte vingt-cinq ou trente Barbues prifes 
en vne nuit. II y a des Lacs ou on fe pent nourrir 
de poiffon hyuer & efte : nos Fran9ois cet hyuer paffe 
y prenoient des Brockets de trois ou quatre pieds, 
des Efturgeons de quatre ou cinq pieds, & d'autres 
poiffons en abondance: c'eft vn Sauuage qui m'en 
decouurit I'induftrie. Elle fait maintenant grand plai- 
fir k nos Fran9ois qui font aux trois Riuieres, ou la 
pefche fans mentir furpaffe la creance qu'on en pent 
auoir ; il n'en eft pas de mefme par tout. Quand on 
pourra faire icy comme on fait en France, que les vns 
s'addonnent feulement a pefcher, les autres k chaffer, 
d'autres k cultiuer la terre, d'autres a baftir, on fera 
foulage autant qu'en France : mais nous ne pouuons 
pas encore efperer cela, n'eftans pas en affez gfrand 
nombre. 


LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 167 

I leave you to imagine how much more Beavers will 
multiply, since the female bears several. 

As to the fish, he is here, as it were, in his empire. 
There are a great many Lakes, Ponds, and Rivers, 
filled with them. The great river is full of Stur- 
geon, Salmon, Shad, Pike, Flounders, goldfish, white- 
fish. Carp of different kinds. Eels, etc. Not that they 
[170] can be caught everywhere in the same abun- 
dance, but there are places where the quantity of fish 
seems marvelous. While I am writing this, here 
comes a boy bringing twenty-five or thirty Flounders, 
caught in one night. There are some Lakes where 
one could live on fish, winter and summer. This 
last winter our French caught Pike there three or 
four feet long, Sturgeons of four or five feet, and 
other fish in abundance. It was a Savage who made 
me acquainted with this trade. It is now being en- 
joyed by our French at the three Rivers, where the 
fishing, to tell the truth, exceeds all ideas that we may 
have of it ; but it is not that way everywhere. When 
we can do here as we do in France, where certain 
ones give themselves up solely to fishing, others to 
hunting, others to tilling the soil, others to building, 
we shall have as many comforts as we do in France ; 
but we cannot yet hope for that, as there are not 
enough of us. 

IX. What kind of merchandise can we send from 
here to France, such as Peltries; Codfish, dry and 
fresh ; oil of the Whale, and of other big fish? What 
minerals can be found here, [171] gummy woods 
which produce resin, Pines, Firs, Cedars, Oak planks, 
materials with which to build our Ships? 

I answer that all these things are found in this 
country, but there are not yet enough people here to 


168 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 

IX. Quelles marchandifes on peut enuoyer d'icy en 
France, comme les Pelleteries, les Moulues feiches, 
& vertes, les huiles de Baleine & d'autres grands 
poiffons, les mineraux que Ton y peut trouuer, [171] 
les bois goumeux qui donnent la refine, les Pins, Sa- 
pins, Cedres, les ais de Chefnes, la commodity de ba- 
ftir des Nauires. 

le reponds que tout cela f e trouue en ce pays-cy : 
mais il n'efl pas encor alTez fort de monde pour re- 
cueillir fes richeffes. Nous auons de la MoluS a 
noftre porte, pour ainfi dire ; on la vient pefcher de 
France dans noftre grand fleuue a Gafpe, a I'lfle per- 
c€, h. Bonauenture, a Miskou; & cependant la Molue 
qu'on mange a Kebec vient ordinairement de France, 
pource qu'il n'y a point encore affez d'hommes icy 
pour defcendre a cette pefche. Ten dis de mefme 
du charbon de terre & du plaftre ; tout cela f e trouue 
icy, mais il faut des vaiileaux pour Taller querir; 
ces forces nous manquent encor, pource que le foin 
principal doit eftre de fe loger, fortifier, & d^fricher 
la terre. Les Bafques viennent tuer les Baleines 
iufques dans Tadouffac & plus liaut; on s'efforcera 
cette ann6e, me dit-on, de prendre des Marfoins, ou 
des Baleines blanches, qui pafCent fans nombre de- 
uant K6bec : il y a fi log temps que nous les voyons 
fe pourmener deuant nos yeux, & cependat [172] les 
affaires plus preffantes ont retarde iufques icy cette 
entreprife ; & encor s'il les falloit aller chercher k dix 
ou vingt lieues d'icy, on les y laifferoit dans leur li- 
berte : tout f e fera en fon temps. Quelques perfonnes 
foigneufes de leurs affaires, telles qu'il en faut en ce 
pais-cy, me temoignent qu'elles enuoyent en France 
du Mairin, & des ais de Chefne, & quelques autres 
bois pour des Nauires iufqu'a la valeur de dix mille 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 169 

gather in its riches. We have Codfish at our door, 
so to speak. They come from France to fish for it 
in our great river, at Gaspe, at I'lsle perc^, at Bona- 
venture,** at Miskou; and yet the Codfish that is 
eaten at Kebec generally conies from France, be- 
cause there are not yet enough men here to go down 
to that fishery. I can say the same of the coal and 
gypsum, — these are found here, but ships are needed 
to go and get them ; these forces are as yet lacking, 
for our chief care must be to provide for lodgings, 
fortifications, and the clearing of the land. The 
Basques come up as far as Tadoussac, or farther, to 
kill Whales; effort will be made this year, I have 
been told, to take Porpoises, or white Whales, which 
pass in numberless shoals before K^bec.^ For a 
long time we have seen them swimming before our 
eyes, and yet [172] more urgent affairs have thus far 
retarded this enterprise. And yet, if it were neces- 
sary to go ten or twenty leagues from here to get 
them, they would be let alone. Everything will 
come in its turn. Some persons of good business 
ability, such as are needed in this country, assure me 
that they are sending to France Clapboards, Oak 
planks, and those made of other woods, for Ships, to 
the value of ten thousand francs ; and all this has not 
taken one year's work, for they have been engaged 
part of the time in clearing the land. I should like 
to have fifty such families here, but not all are so 
capable. If any profit can be made out of Firs, Ce- 
dars, Pines, vSpruce, there are plenty of them here 
and in many places. As to the mines, the land must 
first be cleared, because we must not expect from 
France the quantity of flour necessary for so many 
mouths, and for so many persons who will have to 


170 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 


francs, & tout cela n'eft pas le trauail d'vn an; car 
ils ont employe vne partie du temps an defrichement 
des terres ; ie f onhaitterois vne cinquantaine de fa- 
milies femblables a celle Ik, tout le monde n'a pas la 
mefme induftrie. Si on pent retirer quelque profit 
des Sapins, des Cedres, des Pins, des Pruches, il y en 
a icy vne infinite, & en plufieurs endroits. Pour les 
mines il faut auparauant auoir des terres defrich^es, k 
caufe qu'il ne faut pas attendre de France la quantity 
de farines necefl^aires k tant de bouches. & k tant de per- 
fonnes, qui fe doiuent occuper aux forges. Quelqu'vn 
penfe y auoir trouue vne mine d'or, & vn autre vne 
d' argent; ie m'en rapporte k ce qui en eft. On pent 
non feulement trouuer [173] des Molues de toutes 
fortes, mais encor du Saumon en quelques endroits ; 
on pent encor faller de I'Anguille en abondance, 
qui efl fort bonne ; nous pefchons, & faif ons prouifion 
de ces longs poifl!ons, pour ce qu'ils fe rencontrent 
k K6bec, le Saumon & la Molue eftans plus efloignez 
font hors de nos prifes; mais ce ne fera pas pour 
toufiours. Quant aux Pelleteries de Caftors, de Lou- 
tres, de Renards, & autres ; c'eft k quoy il ne faut point 
penfer ; ces Meffieurs fe referuent cette traitte. On en 
pent neantmoins tirer quelque profit fur le Pais, car 
ils ne f e f ouciet pas par quelles mains paflent leurs Ca- 
ftors, pourueu qu'ils viennent en leurs magazins. Les 
habitans en peuuent acheter des biens qu'ils recueil- 
lent fur leurs terres ; mais a condition qu'ils ne les fe- 
ront point paffer en France. Ce qui femble tres rai- 
fonnable : car il eft impoffible de fournir aux grands 
frais de leurs embarquemens, s'ils ne retirent quel- 
que vtilite de ces contrees. Ie voudrois que tout le 
monde prift ma penfee; qu'on conceuft bien cette 
verity, que la force de cette honorable Compagnie eft 


1636J LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 171 

work at the furnaces. One man thinks he has found 
a gold mine, and another a silver mine; I am not 
prepared to say whether this is true or not. Not 
only can [173] Codfish of all kinds be found here, 
but also Salmon in some places; one can also salt 
Eels in abundance, which are very good; we catch 
and make provisions of these long fish because they 
are found at Kebec; the Salmon and Codfish, being 
farther away, are out of our reach ; but it will not be 
always so. As to the Peltries of Beavers, Otters, 
Foxes, and other animals, this is something which 
need not be considered, for these Gentlemen reserve 
this business for themselves. One can, however, 
make something from these, inside the Country, for 
they do not care through what hands their Beavers 
pass, provided they come to their storehouses. The 
inhabitants can barter the products of their own 
lands, but on condition that they will not have these 
sent over to France. This seems very reasonable, 
for it is impossible to defray the heavy expenses of 
their shipments if they do not derive some benefits 
from these countries. I wish every one would grasp 
my idea, that all would thoroughly comprehend this 
truth, that the power of this honorable Company is the 
support of the Country. If their resources are taken 
away, [174] we shall all be undone ; if we all contribute 
to their prosperity, we shall build up and strengthen 
our own. 

Now, in regard to this Trading; Your Reverence 
wrote me and called my attention to the rule of the 
seventh general Congregation of our Society, which 
absolutely forbids all kinds of commerce and busi- 
ness, under any pretext whatever. Some others of 
our Fathers send me word that we must not even look 


172 LES RELA TIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol. 9 

Tappiiy du Pais; i^i on leur couppe les bras [174] nous 
donnerons tons du nez en terre ; fi nous confpirons 
tous ^ leur profperite, nous baftiffons & affermilTons 
la noftre. 

Or k propos de ces Traictes V. R. m'ecrit, & me 
cite I'ordonnance de la feptiefme Congregation gene- 
rale de noftre Compagnie, qui defend abfolument 
toute forte de commerce & de negotiation, fouz quel- 
que pretexte que ce foit. Quelques autres de nos 
Peres, me mandent, qu'il ne faut pas mefmes regar- 
der du coin de I'oeil, ou toucher du bout du doigt la 
peau d'aucun de ces animaux, qui font icy de prix; 
d'ou peuuent venir ces aduis ? Sans doute, ce n'eft 
pas que noftre Compagnie fe defie de ceux qu'elle 
enuoye en ces quartiers, en ce qui eft de ce point, 
non plus qu'en beaucoup d'autres. II me femble 
que i'ay eu le vent, qu'en France quelques- vns qui 
ne nous cognoifent, ny ne nous veulent cognoiftre, 
crient que nous n'auons pas les mains nettes de ce 
trafic, Dieu les beniffe, & leur faffe recognoiftre la 
verity, telle que ie m'en vay la dire; quand il fera h, 
propos pour fa gloire; car il ne faut pas s'attendre 
de feruir long-temps le Maiftre que nous feruons 
fans eftre calomniez. Ce [175] font fes liur^es, il ne 
nous recognoiftroit pas luy mefme, pour ainli dire, fi 
nous ne les portions. 

Voicy done ce que i'en puis ecrire auec la mefme 
flncerit^, dont ie voudrois rendre vn iour compte ^ 
Dieu, de toutes mes actions. La Pelleterie eft non 
feulement la meilleure etoff e & la plus facile a mettre 
en vfage, qui foit en ces contrees ; mais aufli la mon- 
noye de plus haut prix. Et le bon eft, qu'apres 
qu'on s'en eft feruy pour fe couurir, on trouue que 
c'eft de I'or & de I'argent tout fait. On fjait en 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 173 

at from the corners of our eyes, or touch with the 
ends of our fingers, the skin of any of these animals, 
which are of great value here ; what can be the cause 
of this advice? Surely, it cannot be that our Society 
distrusts those it sends to these regions, in regard to 
this matter, any more than in a great many others. 
It seems to me I have heard that, in France, some 
who do not know us, and do not wish to know us, 
cry out that our hands are not clean from this trafiic. 
May God bless them and make them understand the 
truth, as I am about to utter it, when it will conduce 
to his glory. We cannot expect long to serve the 
Master we serv^e, without being slandered. These 
[175] are his liveries and he himself would not recog- 
nize us, so to speak, if we did not wear them. 

Now here is what I can write about it, with the 
same sincerity with which I would some day render 
an account to God of all my actions. Peltry is not 
only the best thing and the easiest to make use of in 
this country, but it is also the coin of the greatest 
value. And the best of it is that, after it has been 
used as a covering, it is found to be ready-made gold 
and silver. You know in France how much consid- 
eration is gfiven the style of a gown. Here all 
there is to do is to cut it out of a Beaver skin, and 
the Savage woman straightway sews it to her little 
child with a Moose tendon, with admirable prompt- 
ness. Whoever wishes to pay in this coin for the 
goods he buys here, saves thereby the twenty-five 
per cent that the market price gives them over that 
in France for the risk they run upon the sea. The 
day-laborers also would rather receive the wages for 
their work in this money than in any other. And 
certainly it seems that commutative justice allows 


174 LES RELA TIONS DES J£SUITES [Vol. 9 

France, combien vaut la fa9on d'vn habit. Icy. il 
n'y a qti'k le coupper fur vne peau de Caftor; auffi- 
toft vne Sauuageffe vous le coud h fon petit enfant. 
auec du nerf d'Orignac, d'vne promptitude admi- 
rable. Qui veut icy payer en cette monnoye les den- 
r^es qu'on y achete, y fauue les vingt-cinq pour cent, 
que le prix du marche leur donne plus qu'en France, 
pour les dangers qu'elles courent fur mer. Les iour- 
naliers auffi ayment mieux y receuoir le falaire de 
leur trauail en cette mefme monnoye, qu'en aucune 
autre. Et certes il femble que la iuflice commuta- 
tiue veut, que fi ce qui nous [176] vient de France en- 
cherit, pour auoir flotte fur mer ; ce que nous auons 
icy y vaille quelque chofe pour auoir e{i€ couru dans 
les bois, & fur la neige, & pour eflre les richeffes du 
Pais : veu nommement que ceux qui f e payent de cette 
monnoye, y treuuent toufiours leur compte, & quel- 
que cbofe de plus. C'efl ce qui fait que Meffieurs de 
la Compagnie permettent raifonnablemet cette pra- 
tique ^ vn cbacun, & ne fe foucient pas qu'on 
employe ces peaux pour le commerce, ou pour f e garen- 
tir du froid; moyennant qu'apres tout, elles reuien- 
nent en leur magazin, & qu'elles ne paffent la mer, 
que fur leurs VailTeaux. En fuite dequoy, fi parfois 
il nous en viet quelqu'vne entre les mains, nous ne 
faifons point de difficulte de les employer felon le 
cours du marche; non plus que d'en couurir les pe- 
tits Sauuages, qui font a nos frais, ou de nous faire 
des fouliers de celles d'Orignac, pour marcher fur les 
raquettes, h. quoy les ordinaires ne valent rien, a rai- 
fon de leur durete. Tel eft icy I'vfage des Fran9ois 
& des Barbares. Nous enuoyons auffi quelques peaux 
d'Elan paffees a nos Peres, qui font aux Huron s, & de la 


1636] LEJEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 175 

that, if what comes [176] to us from France is dearer 
for having floated over the sea, what we have here is 
worth something for having been chased in the woods 
and over the snow, and for being the wealth of the 
Country ; especially as those who are paid with this 
coin always find therein their reckoning and some- 
thing more. It is for this reason that the Gentlemen 
of the Company permit to a reasonable extent this 
practice to every one, and do not care whether these 
skins are used for trade or for protection from the 
cold, — provided that, in the end, they come back to 
their storehouse, and do not cross the seas except in 
their own Ships. In consequence of this, if occasion- 
ally one of them gets into our hands, we do not 
scruple to use it in the way of a purchase, any more 
than we would as a covering for the little Savages 
who cause us expense, — or to make for ourselves 
shoes from the skins of Moose, that we may walk 
upon our snowshoes, for which the common ones are 
of no use whatever, because they are so hard. Such 
is here the custom of both the French and the Bar- 
barians. We send also some old Elk skins to our 
Fathers who are among the Hurons, and some Porce- 
lain, [177] when we have any; it is the best part of 
their money, and with it they pay for their frugal 
provisions of Indian corn and smoked fish, as also 
for the materials and making of their bark Palaces. 
This, in truth, is all the profit we derive here from 
Peltries and other rare things of the Country, — all 
the use that we make of them. If it is dispassion- 
ately believed that there is some kind of traffic, or 
even if Your Reverence deems it best to drop all this, 
in order not to offend any one, we are all ready to 
give it up entirely. I say all, meaning as many of 


176 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.9 

Pourcelaine, [177] quand nous en pouuons auoir; c'efl 
la meilleure partie de la monnoye, dont ils achetent 
leurs petites prouifions de bled d'Inde, & de poiffon 
fum6, auec les materiaux, ou la fagon de leurs Palais 
d'ecorce. Voila en verite tout le profit que nous ti- 
rons icy de la Pelleterie, & des autres raretez du 
Pais ; tout IVfage que nous en faifons. Si on iuge 
fans paffion qu'il y ayt quelque efpece de trafic; ou 
mefme fi V, R. trouue plus a propos de retrancher 
tout cela, pour ne donner aucun ombrage ; nous 
fommes tous prefls de nous en deporter entierement ; 
ie dis, tous tant que nous fommes icy; & fi i'ofe ef- 
perer de la bonte de noflre Seigneur, que ceux qui 
viendront apres nous, garderont la mefme loy. Quel 
aueuglement nous feroit-ce de venir icy, pour defo- 
beir k nos Superieurs, ou pour fcandalifer ceux k qui 
nous voudrions auoir immole nos vies? Que fi au 
contraire on nous ecrit, que tout cela efb felon Dieu, 
fans aucune apparence de trafic, bien que quelques 
medifants, dont il ne faut point fe mettre en peine, 
en f ometent leur palTion & le tournent en venin ; nous 
ne laiiTerons pas de continuer, apres [178] auoir 
fupplie ces mefmes efprits noirs & ombrageux de 
croire, que s'il leur plaifl de nous obliger k quitter 
cette pratique innocente, il faut qu'ils ouurent leurs 
coffres, pour nous fecourir en ces Pais eloignez, 
quand ils nous auront retrancli6 par caprice vne par- 
tie de ce qui nous y eftoit neceflaire. Quelque bon 
manage que nous ayons peu faire iufques ^ cette 
heure, les dernieres lettres de celuy de nos Peres, 
qui manie nos rentes ou nos aumofnes par delk, & 
qui nous enuoyent nos prouifions, portent que fans 
vn petit miracle qu'il a experimente nouuellement 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 177 

US as are here, — and, if I dare to build hopes upon 
the goodness of our Lord, those who come after us 
will keep the same rule. What blindness would it 
be for us to come here to disobey our Superiors, or to 
scandalize those for whom we would willingly have 
sacrificed our lives! But if, on the contrary, you 
write us that all this is according to God, without 
semblance of traffic, — although a few slanderers, 
about whom we should not trouble ourselves, may 
stir up their passions at it, and turn it into poison, — 
we shall not fail to go on, after [178] having entreated 
these same lugubrious and irritable natures to believe 
that, if it pleases them to make us give up this inno- 
cent practice, they must open their own coffers to as- 
sist us in these distant Countries, after they have, 
through caprice, cut off a part of what was necessary 
to us. However carefully we have been able to man- 
age things up to the present time, the last letters 
from that one of our Fathers who handles our income 
or our charitable gifts over there, and who sends us 
our supplies, indicate that without a little miracle he 
experienced lately in the assistance of saint Joseph, 
he would not have been able to furnish us anything 
this year. Now how would it be if we had to buy 
the remainder here, and send to him its items in- 
creased by a third or a fourth? Besides, if there is 
any charity in the world, no one should envy our 
little Seminary children because we cover them with 
stuffs which originate among them, and which last 
longer, especially upon their rather uneasy shoulders, 
and which protect them better from the cold than 
anything else. Nor should we be blamed for using 
[179] the money of the Country to save something for 
the benefit of these poor abandoned creatures; to 


178 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 

en rafliftance de fainct lofeph, il n'auroit peu nous 
fournir cette ann^e. Que feroit-ce done s'il nous 
falloit acheter icy le furplus, & luy en enuoyer les 
parties plus hautes d'vn tiers ou d'vn quart? Outre 
que, s'il y a de la charite au monde, il ne faut point 
porter enuie k nos petits Seminarifles, de ce que nous 
les couurons des etoffes qui nailTent chez eux, «& qui 
font plus de dur6e, nommement fur leurs epaules 
affez fripponnes, & les garantiflent mieux du froid 
qu'aucune autre. Non plus qu'on ne nous doit blaf- 
mer, fi nous-nous feruons [i 79] de la monnoye du Pais, 
pour epargner quelque chofe au profit de ces pauures 
abandonnez ; pour leur doner le couuert & la nour- 
riture pendant qu'ils fe laiflent inftruire, & veulent 
eftre Chreftiens, s'ils ne le font deja, & pour auoir 
dequoy les mettre en terre, quand ils viennent k mou- 
rir. Si la France en eftoit reduite Ih., que la mon- 
noye n'y ayant cours, on fuft contraint de fe feruir 
pour le commerce des chofes mefmes, & des denrees, 
les trocquant les vnes auec les autres; ou mefme 
qu'il y eufl du gain ^ le faire hors de cette neceffit^; 
& fi I'vfage y eftoit tel, pourroit-on trouuer mauuais, 
que quelque profeffion que nous faffions de pauurete, 
nous fuiuilfions le train des autres, & quand quelques 
denrees de prix nous feroient, ou vendues, ou don- 
nees, foit en echange, foit en pur don, nous-nous en 
feruiffions felon les occafions? Nous n'auons pas de 
plus grands attraits pour ces pauures gens, que Tef- 
perance qu'ils ont de tirer de nous quelque afliftance 
corporelle ; ils ne ceff ent de nous demander. Si nous 
les refufons, c'eft les eftranger. Si nous leur don- 
nons toufiours fans rien prendre d'eux, nous [180] fe- 
rons bien toft au bout ; & fi encore nous leur oflerons 
la liberty de demander, ou ils ne fe poliront iamais. 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, J636 179 

give them covering and food while they are willing 
to be instructed and desirous of becoming Christians, 
if they are not so already; and to have something 
with which to bury them, when they come to die. 
If France were reduced to such a condition that 
money was not in circulation, one would be obliged 
in commerce to use the articles and commodities 
themselves, trading one for the other; or even if 
there were any profit in doing this beyond the mere 
necessity, and if such were the custom, could any 
one find it wrong that, no matter what profession we 
make of poverty, we should follow the way of others, 
and when some objects of value should become ours, 
whether by purchase or donation, — either in ex- 
change, or as a pure gift, — we should make use of 
them according to circumstances ? We have no great- 
er attractions for these poor people than their hope 
of getting from us some material assistance, and they 
never cease asking us for it. To refuse them is to 
estrange them. If we always give to them without 
taking anything in return, we [180] shall soon be 
at the end of our string; and yet, if we take away 
from them the liberty of asking, they will never 
become civilized. What remains then? To tell 
them to apply to those who have more to give than 
we? That will hardly help us, or render them 
more familiar with us. Shall we receive in order 
to give to those who would furnish us with some- 
thing to satisfy them? This would be making us 
their Agents. But who has ever imagined that it is 
trafficking to give and take according to the necessity 
of the ordinary occurrences of human life ? inasmuch 
as what you get in one place will exceed the value 


180 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.9 

Que refte-il done? de leur dire qu'ils donnent ^ eeux 

qui en ont plus que nous? Cela ne nous foulagera 

guieres, ny ne nous les rendra guieres plus familiers. 

De prendre pour donner k eeux qui nous fourniroient 

dequoy leur fatisfaire ? ce feroit nous rendre leurs 

Facteurs. Mais qui s'eft iamais imaging, que ce foit 

trafiquer de prendre & donner felon la neceflit^ des 

occurrences ordinaires en la vie humaine ; pour au- 

tant que ce que vous prenez en vn endroit, excedera le 

prix de ce que vous y aurez donne, quand vous-vous 

trouuerez en vn autre? Voila ce que i'auois ^ dire 

fur ce point, m'en remettant apres tout, a ce que I'o- 

beillance en iugera, ou que I'edification y reglera, 

comme i'ay deja proteft^. Car de vouloir r^pondre 

^ eeux qui nous calomnient, comme fi nous faifions 

fouz main quelqu' autre employ de ces peaux. & en 

enuoyons en France ; ce feroit fe rendre ridicule. II 

faut bien leur laiffer quelque chofe a dire, & s'ils treu- 

uent des oreilles f uf ceptibles de ces niaif eries ; ie f e- 

rois coupable [i8i] de penfer les trouuer ouuertes ^ 

la verite. Quoy done ? des hommes qui ont quitt^ 

plus de bien au monde, qu'ils n'en fgauroient efperer 

dans les imaginations de ces calomniateurs, fe feront 

finalement refolus de changer la France en Canada, 

pour y venir chercher deux ou trois peaux de Caftor, 

& en trafiquer au defceu de leurs Superieurs; c'efk ^ 

dire aux depens de leur confcience, & de la fidelity 

qu'ils doiuent ^ celuy, pour lequel imiter ils fe font 

reduits k ne pouuoir pas difpofer librement d'vne 

6pingle ? 

CREDITE POSTERI. 

Au furplus, ie f9ay mauuais gre a toute cette tres- 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 181 

of what you have given for it in another place. This 
is what I had to say on this point, yielding after all, 
as I have already declared, to what obedience shall 
deem proper or what shall be considered most edify- 
ing. For to consent to answer those who slander us, 
as if we were secretly making some other use of these 
skins and sending them to France, this would be 
making ourselves ridiculous. It is just as well to 
leave them something to say ; and if they find ears 
ready to listen to these absurdities, I would be cul- 
pable [181] in expecting to find them open to the 
truth. What then? Shall men who have given up 
greater worldly blessings than they could hope for 
in the imaginations of these slanderers, finally decide 
to exchange France for Canada, to go there for the 
sake of two or three Beaver skins, and to trade them 
off unknown to their Superiors, — that is to say, at 
the expense of their consciences and of the loyalty 
they owe to him, to imitate whom they have so sub- 
jugated themselves that they cannot freely dispose 
of even a pin? 

CREDITE POSTERI. 

Moreover, I shall be displeased with all this honor- 
able Company of New France, if they are aware of 
anything like this in us, and do not speak of it. 
What fruit for heaven can they hope from our works, 
if they see us attached to the earth by avarice of any 
kind? Some one will also urge for us that, if we be- 
came implicated in these infamous transactions, with- 
out these Gentlemen finding it out, they would not 
be very vigilant in their affairs and in the principal 
part of their business. But I am abusing my leisure 


182 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.9 

honorable Compagnie de la Nouuelle France, fi elle 
apper9oit quelque chofe de femblable en nous, & le 
diflimule; quel fruict peut-elle efperer de nos tra- 
uaux, pour le ciel, li elle nous voit attachez h. la terra, 
par quelque forte d'auarice? Quelqu' autre aufll 
auancera pour nous, que fi nous trempions dans ces 
infamies, fans que ces Meflieurs en euffent cognoif- 
fance, ils feroient bien peu vigilants en leurs affaires, 
& au poinct principal de leur traicte. Mais i'abufe 
de mon loifir, & de voftre patience, d'eftre [182] 11 
long, fur ce qui ne meritoit pas de r6ponfe. 
X. On me demande finalement ce que c'efl du Pais 
des Hurons, & quelle efperance il y a pour ceux qui 
voudroient y aller. 

A cela ie ne f9aurois mieux repodre que par la Re- 
latio, que i'en enuoye auec celle-cy. Ie prie Dieu, 
qu'il y enuoye nombre de ieunes hommes forts, vail- 
lants, & courageux ; mais fur tout fmgulierement 
vertueux, & qui ayment mieux perdre tout que fa 
faincte grace, quand ce ne feroit que pour vn mo- 
ment: fans cette qualite, ils s'y ruineroient corps & 
ame, veu les occafions qui s'y rencontrent. Auec 
cette quality ils y feroient Toflfice d'autant d' Apoftres. 
Et fi en outre ils pourroient dans quelque temps y 
viure k leur aife, & y eftre en honneur comme de pe- 
tits Rois. Mais il faut qu'ils entreprennent ce voy- 
age, pour le refpect de Dieu feul. Qui ne cherche 
que luy, fe trouue 6tonne de fe voir enuironn^ de 
tout le refte. 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, rbjd 183 

and your patience, in dwelling [182] so long on what 
did not merit an answer.*^ 

X, I am asked finally what this Country of the Hu- 
rons is, and what prospects there would be for those 
who would like to go there. 

To this I could not answer better than by the Re- 
lation which I send with this one. I pray God that 
he may send there a number of young men, strong, 
bold, and courageous, but, above all, singularly vir- 
tuous, and who would prefer to lose all else, rather 
than his holy grace, even if it were only for a mo- 
ment. Without this qualification, they would ruin 
body and soul, considering the occasions for it that 
are encountered there. With this qualification, they 
would perform the offices of so many Apostles. And, 
besides, they could after a while live there at their 
ease, and be held in honor like so many little Kings. 
But they must undertake this voyage for the love of 
God alone. He who seeks only him is astonished to 
see himself surrounded by all the rest. 


184 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 


[183] CHAPITRE X. 

QUELQUES ADUIS POUR CEUX QUI DESIRENT PASSER 
EN LA NOUUELLE FRANCE. 

TOVS cenx qui defirent venir groffir cette Colo- 
nic, font gens moyennez, ou perfonnes pau- 
ures ; ie parleray aux vns & aux autres. Com- 
men§ons par les pauures. 

Vn panure homme charge de femme, & d'enfans, 
ne doit point paffer icy les premieres ann^es auec fa 
famille, s'il n'eft aux gages de Meffieurs de la Com- 
pagnie, ou de quelque autre qui les y vueille predre ; 
autrement il fouffrira beaucoup, & n'auancera rien, 
Le Pais n'eft pas encor en eflat de foulager les pau- 
ures, qui ne f9auroient trauailler. Mais s'il fe rencon- 
troit de bons ieunes gar9ons, ou hommes mariez bien 
robufles, qui fceuffent manier la hache, la houe, la 
befche, & la charue; ces gens la voulans trauailler 
fe rendroient riches en peu de temps en ce Pais; oti 
enfin ils pourroient appeller [184] leurs families. 
Voicy comme ils deuroient proceder. 

11 fau droit qu'ils fe ioignilTent quatre ou cinq en- 
femble, & qu'ils s'engageaffent k quelque famille 
pour cinq ou iva ans, aux conditions fuiuantes; qu'on 
les nourriroit pendant tout ce temps 1^ fans leur don- 
ner aucun gage; mais aufli qu'ils auroient la moiti6 
en fond, & en propre, de toute la terre qu'ils defriche- 
roient. Et pour ce qu'il leur faut quelque chofe pour 
fe pouuoir entretenir, le marche porteroit, que tout 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1636 185 


[183] CHAPTER X. 

SOME ADVICE TO THOSE WHO DESIRE TO CROSS 
OVER INTO NEW FRANCE. 

ALL those who desire to come and increase this 
Colony are either people of means, or poor 
people; I will speak to both., Let us begin 
with the poor. 

A poor man burdened with a wife and children 
should not come over here the first years with his 
family, if he is not hired by the Gentlemen of the 
Company, or by some one else who will bring them 
hither: otherwise he will suffer greatly, and will not 
make any headway. The Country is not yet in a 
condition to care for the poor who cannot work. But 
if there happen to be some worthy young men or 
able-bodied married men, who can handle the axe, 
the hoe, the spade, and the plough, — such people, if 
willing to work, could become rich in a little while 
in this Country, to which they could finally bring 
[184] their families. This is the way they should 
proceed. 

Four or five of them would have to join together, 
and engage themselves to some family for five or six 
years on the following conditions : That they should 
be boarded during all this time without receiving 
any wages, but also that they should possess entirely 
and in their own right one-half of all the land they 
clear. And, as they will need something for their 
own support, the contract should provide that all they 


186 LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUJTES [Vol. 9 

ce qu'ils retireroient tous les ans des terres, qu'ils 
auroient d6ia d^frichees, feroit partag^ par moiti6; 
cette moitie, auec les petits profits qu'ils peuuent 
procurer fur le Pais, fufl&roit pour leur entretien, & 
pour payer apres la premiere ou feconde annee la 
moitie des outils, dont on fe fert au d^frichement, & 
au labourage. Or fi quatre hommes peuuent def ri- 
cher par an huict arpens de terre, ne faifant autre 
chofe ny hyuer ny efle; en fix ans voila quarante 
huict arpens, dont les vingt-quatre leur appartien- 
droient : auec ces vingt-quatre arpens ils pourroient 
nourrir trente-fix perfonnes, ou mefme quarante- 
huict, [185] fi la terre eft bonne. N'efl-ce pas-Ik le 
moyen de s'enrichir en peu de temps? & ce d'autant 
plus que la terre fera un iour icy tres-vtile, & rappor- 
tera de grands grains. On fait maintenant venir de 
France tant de farines, qu'on rifque fur la mer, fi 
quelqu'vn auoit icy des bleds pour racheter ces 
rifques, & rembaraffement des vailfeaux, il en tire- 
roit bien du profit. II y a tant de forts & robuftes 
paifance en France, qui n'ont pas du pain k mettre 
fouz la dent, efl-il polfible qu'ils ayent fi peur de 
perdre la veue du clocher de leur village, comme Ton 
dit, qu'ils ayment mieux languir dans leurs miferes 
& pauuretez, que de fe mettre vn iour a leur aife, 
parmy les habitans de la Nouuelle France, oil auec 
les biens de la terre ils trouueroient bien plus aife- 
ment ceux du ciel, & de I'ame; les debauches, les 
diffolutions, les procez n'ayant point encor icy de 
cours. Mais a qui eft-ce que ie parle? k des per- 
fonnes qui n'ont garde de f9auoir rien de ce que i'6- 
cris, fi plus capables qu'eux ne leur en font le recit. 
Ie les en prie, au nom de Dieu, & du Roy; car il y 
va de I'intereft des deux, que ce Pais fe peuple. 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6j6 187 

get every year, from the lands they have already 
cleared, should be shared by half; this half, with 
the little profits they can make in the Country, would 
be enough to keep them, and to pay after the first or 
second year for half the tools which they will use in 
clearing and in tilling the land. Now if four men 
could clear eight arpents of land a year, doing noth- 
ing else, winter or summer, in six years forty-eight 
arpents would be cleared, of which twenty-four would 
belong to them. With these twenty-four arpents 
they could support thirty-six persons, or even forty- 
eight, [185] if the land is good. Is not this a way of 
becoming rich in a little while? And all the more 
so, as the land here will one day become very profit- 
able and will bear a great deal of grain. There is 
now brought from France so much flour, with its at- 
tendant risks upon the sea, that if some one had 
wheat here these risks and the incumbrance of the 
vessels would be obviated, and he would derive much 
profit therefrom. There are so many strong and 
robust peasants in France who have no bread to put 
in their mouths ; is it possible they are so afraid of 
losing sight of the village steeple, as they say, that 
they would rather languish in their misery and pov- 
erty, than to place themselves some day at their ease 
among the inhabitants of New France, where with 
the blessings of earth they will far more easily find 
those of heaven and of the soul ? For debauchery, 
dissoluteness and intrigues are not yet current here. 
But to whom do I speak? To people who cannot 
know what I am writing, unless more capable ones 
than they tell it to them. These I beg to do so, in 
the name of God and of the King ; for the interests 
of both are involved in peopling this Country. 

[186] As to people of wealth and rank, I would ad- 


188 LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 9 

[i86] Pour les perfonnes riches & de condition, ie 
leur confeillerois denant que de paffer icy d'obtenir 
de Mellieurs de la Compagnie, vne place pour baftir 
vne maifon dans la ville defign^e, comme auffi quel- 
ques arpens de terre proches de la ville, capables de 
nourrir leur famille. En outre vne conceffion de 
quelque bel endroit qu'ils choifiront auec le temps. 
Cecy fait, il faut faire paffer du moins deux Maffons, 
deux Charpentiers, & des manoeuures, & s'ils veulent 
encor des d^fricheurs armez d'outils propres de leur 
meftier: fur tout qu'ils faffent faire des haches ex- 
prez, & qu'ils n'y epargnent pas I'argent; car I'liyuer 
efl plus dur que le mef chant acier. II faut vn homme 
qui ait foin de tous ces gens la, qu'il foit d'authori- 
t^, & de prudence, pour les diriger & pour conferuer 
les viures, qu'on fera venir. Le plus de bonnes fa- 
rines qu'on pent faire paffer, c'efl le meilleur, & le 
plus affeur6. Monfieur de Repentigny en a apport^ 
pour deux ans, en quoy il a fait fagement. II feroit 
bien a propos d'apporter en faiffeau quelque gribane, 
ou grand batteau, capable de voguer dans les marges; 
c'eft a dire qu'il doit eftre releue [187] de bord, il 
pent eftre plat pour tirer moins d'eau. II faut qu'il 
foit fort, & grand pour porter du bois, de la pierre, 
de la chaux, & autres chofes femblables; on le pour- 
roit faire dreffer a Tadouffac. Tous ces hommes 
rendus fur le Pais s'occuperont les vns k d6fricher fe- 
lon le deffein de celuy qui leur commandera. Le 
baftiment fait, propre pour les loger, eux & leurs 
gens, toute la famille paffera & amenera du beftial, 
fi on luy mande qu'il foit k propos: car pent eftre en 
pourra on recouurer fur les lieux ; d'en auoir d'abord, 
cela d^tourne de chofe meilleure, & coufte infiniment, 
fi ce n'eft qu'on les mette auec celuy qui eft au Cap 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, J636 189 

vise them before coming- here to obtain from the 
Gentlemen of the Company a place to build a house 
in the town which has been laid out, and also a few 
arpents of land near the town, capable of sustaining 
their families. In addition to this, a grant of some 
fine locality which they will choose in the course of 
time. When this has been accomplished, they must 
bring over at least two Masons, two Carpenters, and 
some laborers; and, if they desire more, some work- 
men to clear the land, provided with tools adapted to 
their trade. Above all, let them have some axes 
made expressly, sparing no money on them, for the 
winter is harder than bad steel. There must be a 
man of authority and discretion to take care of all 
these people, to direct them, and to take charge of 
the provisions which are sent over. The more good 
flour that can be sent here the better, and the more 
security there will be. Monsieur de Repentigny has 
brought enough for two years, and in doing so has 
acted wisely. It would be a good thing to bring 
over in a bundle the parts of a gribane, or large boat, 
capable of sailing upon the tides ; that is to say, it 
ought to be elevated [187] at the sides, and perhaps 
flat, in order to draw less water. It must be strong 
and large, to carry wood, stone, lime, and other such 
things. It could be put together at Tadoussac^ All 
these men having reached the Country, some of them 
will be occupied in clearing the land, according to the 
plan of the one who will direct them. When a 
building capable of accommodating them and their 
servants is finished, the whole family will come over, 
and will bring some cattle if they receive word that 
it is best to do so, for perhaps these can be found 
upon the ground; to have them on board prevents 
better things from being taken, and costs enormous- 


190 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.9 

de Tourmente, s' accordant auec les Meffieurs, qui en 
tiennent Ik. Si on fuit cet ordre, les femmes & les 
enfans arriuans icy f eront tons confolez de trouuer vn 
logement pour eux, vn iardin pour leurs rafraichiffe- 
mens, des perfonnes k leur feruice qui auront co- 
gnoiffance du Pais. Puis qu'on me dit, fans me nom- 
mer perfonne, qu'il y a de tres-honorables families 
qui veulent venir goufler la douceur du repos & de 
la paix dans la Nouuelle France, i'ay creu que I'a- 
mour que [188] ie leur porte deja, fans auoir I'hon- 
neur de leur cognoiffance, m'obligeoit "k leur donner 
ces aduis, qui ne leur f9auroient nuire ; ie leur diray 
encor deux petits mots. Le premier, que fi pour Ie 
defrichement de la terre, ils peuuent auoir des 
hommes interellez en I'affaire, felon que ie viens de 
dire, ce fera le meilleur. Les hommes qu'on tient k 
gages, pour la plus part, veulent reffembler k ceux 
d'entre nos voifins, qui k peine ont-ils paffe la ligne 
de I'Equateur, qu'ils fe difent tons Gentilshommes, 
& ne veulent point trauailler; quand ils fe verront 
obligez k faire pour eux, ils ne s'y endormiront pas. 
En fecond lieu, ie prie ceux qui viendront, de venir 
auec enuie de bien faire. La Nouuelle France fera vn 
iour vn Paradis terreflre, li nostre Seigneur continue 
k la combler de fes benedictions, tant corporelles, que 
fpirituelles : mais il faut en attendant, que fes pre- 
miers habitas y faffent ce qu'Adam auoit receu com- 
mandement de faire en celuy qu'il perdit par fa faute. 
Dieu I'y auoit mis pour I'engrailTer de fon trauail, & 
le conferuer par fa vigilance, & non pour y eftre fans 
rien faire. I'ay plus d'enuie de voir ce pais defriche, 
[189] que peuple. Les bouches inutiles y feroient k 
charge pour ces premieres annees. 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 191 

ly, unless they are placed with those which are at 
Cap de Tourmente/*^ by an understanding with the 
Gentlemen who have some there. If this order is 
followed, when the women and children reach here 
they will all be comforted at finding a dwelling ready 
for them, a garden for their refreshment, and people 
at their service who will have a knowledge of the 
Country. As I have been told, without any one be- 
ing named, that there are very honorable families 
who wish to come to enjoy the delights of rest and 
peace in New France, I have thought that the love 
[188] I already feel for them, without having the 
honor of their acquaintance, obliges me to give them 
this advice, which cannot injure them. I will make 
two more suggestions. The first, that if they can 
have men who have interests at stake, to clear the 
land, as I have just said, it will be much better. 
The men who work for wages, for the most part try 
to be like some of our neighbors, who, having scarce- 
ly passed the line of the Equator, all begin to call 
themselves Gentlemen, and no longer care to work ; 
if they felt constrained to do it for themselves, they 
would not sleep over it. 

In the second place, I beg those who shall come, 
to come with a desire to do good. New France will 
some day be a terrestrial Paradise if our Lord con- 
tinues to bestow upon it his blessings, both material 
and spiritual. But, meanwhile, its first inhabitants 
must do to it what Adam was commanded to do in 
that one which he lost by his own fault. God had 
placed him there to fertilize it by his own work and 
to preserve it by his vigilance, and not to stay there 
and do nothing. I have more desire to see this coun- 
try cleared, [189] than peopled. Useless mouths 
would be a burden here, during these first years. 


192 LES RELATIONS DBS j£SUITES [Vol.9 


CHAPITRE XI. 

OU JOURNAL DES CHOSES QUI N'ONT PEU ESTRE 
RAPPORTEES SOUS LES CHAPITRES PRECEDENS. 

LE quinziefme Septembre m'eftant embarque pour 
noftre refidence de la Conception, ie fus con- 
fole de voir que les Nibriliriniens peuple voifm 
des Hurons entendoient mon baragoin Montagn6s. 
Qui fgauroit parfaitement la langue des Sauuages de 
Kebec, fe feroit entendre, comme ie coniecture, de 
tous les Peuples qui font depuis la grande Ifle de 
Terre-neufue iufques aux Hurons du cofte du Nord; 
car la difference qu'il y a entre ces langues ne con- 
lifte qu'en certaines Dialectes qu'on apprendroit aife- 
ment, fi on frequentoit ces Nations. 

Le neufuieme Octobre Ie Pere Buteux eflant en- 
tre en la Cabane d'vn Capitaine Montagues, oil efloi- 
ent arriuez quelques [190] Eftrangers, ce Capitaine 
le fit afTeoir aupres de foy, puis s'addreffant ^ fes 
hofles, leur dit tout plein de bien de nous autres. 
Ces gens, difoit-il, out de grandes connoilTances, ils 
font charitables, il nous font du bien dans nos ne- 
ceflitez; I'vn d'eux a guery ma fille qui s'en alloit 
mourant: le Pere Quentin luy auoit donn6 quelques 
onguents, dont elle fe trouua bien. Cependant, ad- 
iouftoit il, ils ne demandent aucune recompenfe, au 
contraire ils donnent a manger aux malades, en 
leur procurant la fante. Et afin que vous cognoif- 
fiez leur efprit, il dit au Pere, Prends ton MaJ^i- 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 193 


CHAPTER XI. 

or, JOURNAL OF THE THINGS THAT COULD NOT BE 
RELATED IN THE PRECEDING CHAPTERS. 

ON the fifteenth of September, having embarked 
for our residence of the Conception, I was con- 
soled at seeing that the Nibrisiriniens, a tribe 
living near the Hurons, could understand my Mon- 
tagues jargon. Any one who knows perfectly the 
language of the K^bec Savages can make himself un- 
derstood, I conjecture, by all the Tribes from the 
great Isle of Newfoundland to the Hurons of the 
Northern regfion. For the difference in these lan- 
guages consists only in certain Idioms, that one 
could easily learn if he frequented these Nations. 

On the ninth of October, Father Buteux having en- 
tered the Cabin of a Montagues Captain, where some 
Strangers had [190] arrived, this Captain made him 
sit down beside him, and then, addressing his guests, 
openly told them many good things about us. 
" These people," said he, " have great knowledge; 
they are charitable, they are kind to us in our neces- 
sity ; one of them has cured my daughter, who was 
going to die." Father Quentin had given her some 
ointments which had helped her. '' Nevertheless," 
he added, *' they never ask anything in return; but, 
on the contrary, they feed our sick people, while re- 
storing them to health. And that you may know how 
intelligent they are, "Take thy Massinatrigan," he 
said to the Father, — that is to say, " thy Book or thy 


IW LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vou 9 

natrigan, c'eft ^ dire ton Liure, ou tes Tablettes, 
6cris ce que ie te diray. II luy nomme les noms de 
douze ou treize petites Nations qui font vers le Nord, 
& le prie de les prononcer tout haut ; le Pere luy obe- 
ift. Quad ces Eflrangers entendirent nommer ces 
Nations, ils s'eflonnoient de voir tant de Peuples 
renfermez dans vn petit morceau d*6corce, c'efl ainfi 
qu'ils appelloient les feuillets de fes Tablettes. La 
dellus le Pere prit occafion de leur dire, que Dieu 
par Tentremife de fon liure nous auoit donn^ ^ co- 
gnoiftre les biens du Ciel, & le [191] tourment des En- 
fers: I'vn d'eux luy demanda, s'il ne luy auoit point 
dit de quelle profondeur feroit la neige I'hyuer fui- 
uant : Omnes guce fua funt qucerunt. Les hommes de 
terre ne penfent qu'k la terre. 

Le premier de Decembre le feu s'eftant pris k I'ha- 
bitation des trois Riuieres, vn Capitaine des Sauuages 
les exhorta fi viuement de nous fecourir, & de fauuer 
le pain & les pois, qu'en effet le magazin fe fauua: 
Autrement, difoit-il, nous fommes perdus, li cela 
brufle. 

Le lixieme du mefme mois vn Sauuage voyant vne 
Image de Noftre Seigneur en noflre Maifon, me dit 
que i'auois tu6 fon frere auec vn femblable pour- 
traict: ie fus bien eftonn^, ie luy demanday done 
comment ie m'eflois feruy de cette Image pour tuer 
vn homme. Te fouuiens-tu, me fit-il, que I'hyuer 
paffe tu donnas k Sakapouan, mon beau-frere vne 
Image femblable h. celle-lk; il fut malade bien toft 
apres, & en mourut. Alors ie me fouuins qu'en effet 
voyant la mifere de ces Peuples qui crioient k la 
faim, apres en auoir fait manger chez nous vne bonne 
bande, ie leur parlay d 'auoir recours au Dieu du Ciel, 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 195 

Tablets," — " write what I shall say." He repeated 
to him the names of twelve or thirteen little Nations 
which are towards the North, and begged him to 
pronounce them aloud. The Father obeyed him. 
When these Strangers heard him name these Nations, 
they were astonished to see so many Tribes enclosed 
in a little piece of bark, — it is thus they call the 
leaves of his Tablets. Thereupon the Father took 
occasion to tell them that God, through the medium 
of his book, had made us know about the blessings 
of Heaven, and the [191] torments of Hell. One of 
them asked him if God had not told him how deep 
the snow would be the next winter. Omnes qiice sua 
sunt quarunt. Men of earth think only of earth. 

On the first of December, the settlement at the 
three Rivers being on fire, a Captain of the Savages 
urged them so vigorously to come to our aid, and to 
save the bread and the peas, that in fact the store- 
house was saved. " For," said he, " we are lost, if 
that bums. ' ' 

On the sixth of the same month, a Savage, seeing 
an Image of Our Lord in our House, told me that I 
had killed his brother with a portrait like that. I 
was quite astonished, and asked him how I had made 
use of this Image to kill a man. " Dost thou remem- 
ber," said he, " that last winter thou gavest to Saka- 
pouan, my brother-in-law, such an Image as that? 
He became sick soon after, and died." Then I re- 
membered that, in fact, upon seeing the wretched- 
ness of these People who were crying from hunger, 
after having had a large band of them eat with us, I 
spoke to them about having recourse to the God of 
Heaven, saying that he would assuredly succor them. 
[192] I showed them the Image of his Son and placed 


196 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol.9 

& qu'affeurement il les fecoureroit; [192] ie leur fis 
voir r Image de fon Fils, & la mis entre les mains de 
ce Sakapoiian, les inftniifans tous comme ils deuoient 
auoir recours dans letirs neceflitez a celuy qu'elle re- 
prefentoit, les affeurans auffi que s'ils croioient & ef- 
peroient en luy, qu'ils feroient fecourus; mais s'ils 
fe gauffoient, qu'il les puniroit. Ce miferable n'eut 
iamais la hardieffe de monftrer cette Image, ny de 
prier celuy qu'elle figuroit, de peur d'eftre gauff^ des 
fiens: peut-eftre qu'en punition de cette perfidie Dieu 
le punit d'vne maladie qui I'emporta, comme ie I'e- 
criuis I'an pafTe, Voila ce que me vouloit dire mon 
Sauuage, m'imputant la mort de cet homme en la 
pref ence de plufieurs autres de fa Nation : mais leur 
ayant expliqu6 comme la chofe s'eftoit paffee, ie com- 
men9ay a reprocher a mon accuf ateur que ie luy auois 
fauu^ la vie, comme il efl vray ; il voulut me d^mentir ; 
mais quand i'eus mis au iour toutes les circonflances 
de I'affaire; tous les Sauuages luy dirent, Tais toy, 
tu n'as point d'efprit, le Pere dit vray. II fut bien 
eftonn^ quand ie luy declaray que fon beau frere & 
fa propre foeur auoient determine de le tuer en dor- 
mant, & que [193] fi ie ne les euffe empefche, qu'il 
ne feroit plus au monde. Ce pauure homme tout 
eflourdy commence k me dire qu'il n'auoit point de 
ceruelle, & que la menace qu'il m'auoit fait fe deuoit 
decharger contre les Hiroquois, & non pas contre au- 
cun Frangois, que ie ne me fafchaffe point contre 
luy. I'ay remarque que les Sauuages relTemblent 
aux Demons en vn poinct, fi on leur tient tefte ils 
font poltrons, fi on leur cede ils font furieux : ie veux 
dire qu'il y a danger d'vfer de trop grande rigueur, 
ou de trop de diflimulation enuers eux; I'vne de ces 


1636] LE JEUNBS RELATION, ibsb 197 

it in the hands of this Sakapouan, explaining to them 
all how they must have recourse in their need to him 
whom it represented, assuring them also that if they 
believed and hoped in him, they would be assisted; 
but if they ridiculed him, he would punish them. 
This wretch never had the courage to show this 
Image, nor to pray to him whom it represented, for 
fear of being mocked by his people. Perhaps as a 
punishment for this treachery, God afflicted him with 
a sickness which carried him off, as I wrote last year. 
So this was what my Savage was trying to tell me, 
imputing to me the death of this man in the pres- 
ence of several others of his Nation. But, having 
explained to them how the thing happened, I began 
to reproach my accuser with having saved his life, 
which was true. He wished to deny it; but, when I 
had related all the circumstances of the affair, all the 
Savages said to him, *' Hold thy tongue, thou hast 
no sense; the Father tells the truth." He was much 
surprised when I told him that his brother-in-law 
and his own sister had determined to kill him in his 
sleep; and that, [193] if I had not prevented them, 
he would no longer be in this world. This poor man, 
quite astounded, began to tell me that he had no 
brains, and that the threat he had made against me 
should have been directed against the Hiroquois, 
and not against any Frenchman, and that I should 
not get angry with him. I have noticed that the 
Savages are like Demons in one respect, — if you car- 
ry a high hand with them, they are cowards; if you 
yield to them, they are furious. I mean that it is 
dangerous to use too much severity or too much dis- 
simulation toward them, for either of these two ex- 
tremes will one day arouse them against us, if we 


198 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.9 

deux extremitez les armera vn iour centre nous, fi on 
n'y prend garde. Vous voyez des perfonnes qui ne 
leur oferoient dire mot, d'autres les menent k ba- 
gfuette: ceux-la les rendront infolens & infuppor- 
tables ; ceux-cy les f eront cabrer : faire du bien aux 
Sauuages, les fecourir dans leurs neceflitez, ne leur 
faire aucun tort, ny aucune iniure, exercer quelque 
efpece de luftice contre les particuliers qui font les 
infolens, notamment fi leurs Capitaines n'en peuuent 
tirer raifon, c'eft le moyen de tenir long-temps ces 
Barbares dans leur deuoir. 

[194] Le dixi6me du mefme mois de Decembre le 
Pere Buteux eftant entre en vne Cabane ou on fai- 
foit vn feftin de graiffe d'Ours k tout manger, s' eftant 
mis en rang auec les autres fans y prendre garde, on 
luy donne vn grand plat tout plein de ce Nectar ; luy 
bien eftonne le refufe, difant qu'il venoit de difner; 
le diftributeur du feftin fe fafche, luy difant, Pour- 
quoy es-tu done entre icy, fi tu ne veux pas eftre du 
feftin? II faut que tu mange tout cela, autrement 
noftre banquet feroit gafte. Le Pere pour le conte- 
ter en goufte vn peu. \A deffus arriue le Pere Quen- 
tin, qui entre aufll fans y penfer, le voila condamne h. 
en manger fa part, comme ils difoient tous deux, que 
cela leur eftoit impoffible, on les condamna de ftupi- 
dit6, & de n'auoir qu'vn petit coeur, puis qu'ils n'a- 
uoient pas vn grand eftomach ; Fen ay plus mange, 
difoit I'vn d'eux, que n'en fgauroient manger toutes 
les robbes noires. Les Peres luy repartirent. Puis 
que tu es fi vaillant homme mange encore noftre 
mats, Ouy da, r^pond-il ; il le fit en effect, h. condi- 
tion qu'on luy donneroit encore a manger en noftre 
petite Maifon. 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, zdjd 199 

are not careful. You see some persons who dare not 
say a word to them, others drive them with a switch ; 
the former will make them insolent and unbearable, 
the latter will make them refractory. Being kind 
to the Savages, helping them in their need, doing 
them no wrong or injury, exercising some kind of 
Justice toward those individuals who are insolent, 
especially if their Captains cannot make them listen 
to reason, — these are the means of holding these 
Barbarians a long time in the line of duty. 

[194] On the tenth of the same month of Decem- 
ber, Father Buteux having entered a Cabin where 
they were having an eat-all feast of Bear fat, and 
taking his place with the others without having no- 
ticed this, some one gave him a great dish full of 
this Nectar. Very much surprised, he refused it, 
saying he had just dined. The distributor of the 
feast became angry, and said to him, " Why hast 
thou come here, then, if thou dost not wish to take 
part in the feast? Thou must eat all that, otherwise 
our feast will be spoiled." To please him, the Fa- 
ther tasted a little of it. Just then Father Quentin 
arrived, who also entered without heeding the feast ; 
and behold him doomed to eat his share. When 
they both declared that it would be impossible, they 
were accused of stupidity, and of having only a small 
heart, since they did not have a large stomach. " I 
have eaten more," said one of them, " than all the 
black robes together could eat." The Fathers an- 
swered him, " Since thou art so valiant a man, eat 
our share too." "Yes, indeed," said he; and he 
really did it, on condition that we would give him 
something more to eat in our little House. 

[195] On the same day, — which was the second 


200 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol. « 

[195] Le mefme iour, qui efloit le fecond depuis le 
voeu que nous auions fait k Dieu en I'honneur de la 
Conception de la faincte Vierge, pour la conuerfion 
de ces Peuples: vn Sauuage me vint amener de fon 
propre mouuement, ou pluftofl par vne conduite fe- 
crette du faint Efprit, vne petite fiUe pour m'en faire 
prefent ; cela nous reioiiit fort, car iuf ques icy la diffi- 
cult6 d'auoir des filles a efl6 fort grande. Or pour 
me deliurer de I'importunite de ces Barbares, ie leur 
confeillay de la pref enter a quelque Capitaine Fran- 
9ois; c'eft ainli qu'ils nomment tons ceux qui ont 
quelque authority ; ie luy infinuay Monfieur Gand, le- 
quel ie fuppliay d'accepter cet enfant, & de faire 
quelque prefent 'k ce Sauuage, Taffeurant que nous 
fatisferions ^ tout ; il n'y manqua pas, il f e monftra 
fort content, il t^moigna de I'affection a ce Barbare, 
luy fit prefent d'vne couuerture, & d'vne barrique de 
galette qu'on mit fur nos parties : la fit loger chez le 
fieur Hebout, & incontinent nous la fifmes habiller ^ 
la Fran9oife, payans en outre fa penfion ; il eft vray 
que Monfieur Gand luy voulut donner vne robbe a 
fes propres coufts, tant il eftoit [196] ioyeux de voir 
cette pauure fille dans les voyes de fon falut, & en- 
core de plufieurs autres. Nous auons gard6 & garde- 
rons le mefme proced6 en celles qu'on nous a donne 
depuis, & qu'on nous donnera dorefnauant, pour ce 
que ces Barbares fe voulans d^dire, ie les renuoye au 
Capitaine Frangois, & leur dy qu'ils I'offenferont, s'ils 
fe comportent comme des enfans, qui changent 21 
tous momens de volont6 ; cecy les retient dans leur 
deuoir. 

Le dix-huictiefme du mefme mois, Monfieur de 
Champlain eftant fort malade, Monfieur Gand s'en 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 201 

since the vow we had made to God in honor of the 
Conception of the holy Virgin, for the conversion of 
these Peoples, — a Savage came and brought me of 
his own accord, or rather through the unseen guid- 
ance of the holy Spirit, a little girl, to make me a 
present of her. That greatly rejoiced us, for hereto- 
fore there has been great difficulty in obtaining girls. 
Now to free myself from the importunity of these 
Barbarians, I advised them to present her to some 
French Captain ; it is thus they call all those who 
have any authority. I hinted at Monsieur Gand, 
whom I begged to accept this child, and to make 
some present to this Savage, assuring him that we 
would be responsible for everything. He did not fail 
us, but appeared to be very well pleased, — evincing 
an interest in this Barbarian, and making him a pres- 
ent of a blanket and a keg of sea biscuit, which were 
placed upon our accounts. He had her lodged at 
sieur Hebout's, and we immediately had her dressed 
like a French child, paying her board besides. It is 
true Monsieur Gand wished to give her a dress at his 
own expense, so glad was [196] he to see this poor 
girl in the way of obtaining her own salvation, and 
that of many others also. We have observed and 
will observe the same plan in regard to those who 
have been given to us since, and who will be given to 
us hereafter; for, as these Barbarians are disposed to 
retract their promises, I send them to the French 
Captain, and tell them that he will be offended if 
they act like children, who change their minds every 
moment; this holds them to their duty. 

On the eighteenth of the same month, Monsieur 
de Champlain being very sick. Monsieur Gand went 
to the Cabins of the Savages to give orders about the 


202 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 

alia aux Cabanes des Sauuages, pour mettre ordre aux 
traictes qu'on faifoit d'eau de vie, & d'autres boiffons, 
qui enyurent & tuent ces Barbaras ; lef quels k la par- 
fin affommeront dans leur yurognerie quelque Fran- 
9ois, les Francois fe defendans tueront quelques Sau- 
uages : & voila la mine de la traicte pour vn temps. 
Les defenfes de vendre de ces boiffons, ayant eft€ re- 
iter^es parmy nos Frangois, on voulut en donner vn 
bon aduis aux Sauuages. Monfieur Gand leur fit 
dire, que fi quelqu'vn d'eux s'enyuroit dorefnauant, 
qu'on luy demanderoit, eftant retourne en fon bon 
[197] fens, qui luy auroit donne ou vendu cette boif- 
fon, que s'il difoit la verity qu'on ne luy feroit aucun 
mal ; mais qu'on feroit payer au Fran9ois I'amende 
port^e dans les defenfes; qu'au cas qu'il refufafl de 
declarer celuy duquel il auoit tire cette boifl^on, qu'on 
luy defendroit 1' entree aux maifons des Fran9ois; & 
que fi quelque Francois I'admettoit chez foy, que tons 
les deux en feroient chaftiez egalement. Voila vne 
excellente inuention pour obuier h. ce mal, qui exter- 
minera ces Nations, fi on n'y remedie efficacement. 
Les Sauuages furent tres-contens de ce proced6, difans, 
que fi les Fran9ois ne leur donnoient ny vin, ny eau 
de vie, que leurs femmes & leurs enfans auroient de- 
quoy manger, d'autant qu'ils auroient de bons viures 
de leurs Pelteries, mais que les echangeans contre des 
boiffons, il n'y auoit que les hommes & quelques 
femmes qui s'en relfentifl!ent, & encor auec detriment 
de leur fant6, & perte de leur vie; & afin de nous 
preffer de faire garder ces ordonnances, ils demande- 
rent plus de trois fois fi Monfieur Gand parloit tout 
de bon, s'il ne donnoit point feulement des paroles 
comme on auoit fait, [198] difoient-ils, iufques alors. 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, tdjd 203 

trafl&c that was being carried on in brandy and other 
drinks, which intoxicate and kill these Barbarians. 
They will finally murder some Frenchman in their 
drunkenness ; and the Frenchmen, in defending them- 
selves, will kill some Savages, and behold the ruin 
of trade for a time. The prohibition against selling 
these drinks having been repeated among our French 
people, it was desired to give fair warning of it to 
the Savages. Monsieur Gand had it announced to 
them, that, if any one of them became intoxicated 
hereafter, he would be asked, when he returned to 
his [197] senses, who had given or sold him this 
drink ; and that, if he told the truth, no harm would 
be done to him, but that the Frenchman would have 
to pay the fine provided in the regulations. In case 
he should refuse to name the one from whom he had 
obtained this drink, he would be forbidden to enter 
the houses of the French ; and if any Frenchman ad- 
mitted him to his own house, both would be punished 
alike. This is an excellent device to obviate this 
evil, which will exterminate these Nations if an 
effective remedy is not found for it. The Savages 
were very glad of this procedure, — saying that, if the 
French did not give them either wine or brandy, 
their wives and children would have something to 
eat, inasmuch as they would make a good living from 
their Peltries ; but that, when it came to exchanging 
them for drinks, there were only the men and a few 
women who enjoyed them, and that to the detriment 
of their health and the loss of their lives. Finally, 
in order to urge us to enforce these regulations, they 
asked three times if Monsieur Gand spoke in earnest, 
or if he were only indulging in words, as had been 
done, [198] they said, up to that time. They were 


204 LES RELA TJONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 

On les affeura que les Francois & eux aufli feroient 
chaftiez a la fagon fufdite s'ils n'obeiff oient, Voila qui 
eft bien, r6pondent-ils, i^i quad nous allons dans vos 
maifons on nous donnoit vn morceau de pain au lieu 
d'vn coup d'eau de vie, nous ferions bien plus con- 
tens ; ouy bien felon le difcours de la raifon qui leur 
fait voir, que ces eaux de vie leur donnent la mort ; 
mais non pas felon le fens : car ils font trop auides 
de nos boiffons, & hommes & femmes, prenans vn fm- 
gulier contentement, non a boire, mais a s'enyurer, 
faifans gloire d'eftre yures, & d'auoir enyur^ les 
autres. Or I'execution des peines port^es par ces 
ordonnances, ayant fuiuy bien toft apres en quelques 
Fran9ois oublieux de leur deuoir; les Sauuages eu- 
rent bien I'efprit de dire, que iadis on parloit, mais 
qu'^ prefent on faifoit. Les maux ne fe corrigent 
qu'eftans cogneus. 

le remarqueray deux particularitez fur ce point, 
deuant que de palfer outre. La premiere eft, que 
I'vn des Sauuages qu'on auoit enyur^ penfa tuer vn 
ieune Fran§ois, en effect il I'auroit affomm^ s'il I'euft 
peu attraper: ayant cuue fon vin, [199] il fceut que 
le Fran9ois qui luy auoit donne cette boiffon auoit 
eft^ condamne ^ cinquante francs d'amende; on m'a 
dit, ie ne f9ay s'il eft vray, qu'il promit de luy don- 
ner la valeur en Pelteries. C'eft vne marque d'vne 
bonte naturelle ; mais ie cognois le pelerin, il dit bien 
plus aif^ment qu'il ne fait. La deuxieme eft, que 
Monlieur Gand parlant aux Sauuages, comme i'ay dit 
cy-deffus, leur remonftroit, que s'ils mouroient fi. fou- 
uent, il s'en falloit prendre k ces boiffons, dont ils ne 
fcauroient vfer par mefure. Que n'6cris tu ^ ton 
grand Roy, firent-ils, qu'il defende d'apporter de ces 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 205 

assured that the French and they themselves would 
be punished in the way described above, if they did 
not obey. '* See who of us is good," they answer; 
" if, when we go into your houses, we are given a 
piece of bread instead of a drink of brandy, we shall 
be far better satisfied." Very well spoken, accord- 
ing to the voice of reason, which makes them see that 
these ' * waters of life ' ' cause death ; but not accord- 
ing to the senses, for they are only too eager for our 
drinks, — both men and women experiencing a singu- 
lar pleasure, not in drinking, but in becoming drunk, 
glorying in this and in making others so. Now the 
penalties provided by these ordinances having been 
executed soon afterwards against some Frenchmen 
who had been forgetful of their duty, the Savages 
had intelligence enough to say that formerly we had 
talked, but at present we were acting. Evils cannot 
be corrected until they are known. 

I will notice two instances bearing on this point 
before proceeding further. The first is, that one of 
the Savages who had been made drunk, was meditat- 
ing the murder of a young Frenchman ; in fact, he 
would have killed him, if he could have surprised 
him. Having slept off the effects of his wine, [199] 
he learned that the Frenchman who had given him 
this drink had been condemned to fifty francs fine ; 
I have been told, I know not how true it is, that he 
promised to give him the value of it in Peltries. 
This is a proof of natural goodness ; but I know the 
hypocrite, — he talks much more readily than he acts. 
The second is, that Monsieur Gand, in his talk to the 
Savages, which I have mentioned, remonstrated with 
them, saying that if death was so common among 
them they must ascribe it to these drinks, which they 


206 LES RELATIONS DES J£SUITES [Vol.9 

boiffons qui nous tuent. Et fur ce qu'on leur repar- 
tit, que nos Frangois en auoiet befoin fur la mer, & 
dans les grandes froidures de leur pais ; Fais done en 
forte qu'ils les boiuent tons feuls. On s'efforcera, 
comme i'efpere, d'y tenir la main ; mais ces Barbares 
font importuns au dernier point. Vn autre prenant 
la parole, prit la defenfe du vin & de I'eau de vie. 
Non, dit-il, ce ne font pas ces boiffons qui nous oftent 
la vie ; mais vos Ventures : car depuis que vous auez 
d6cry noftre pais, nos fleuues, nos terres, & nos bois, 
[200] nous mourons tous, ce qui n'arriuoit pas deuant 
que vous vinfliez icy. Nous-nous mifmes k rire en- 
tendans ces caufes nouuelles de leurs maladies. le 
leur dy que nous decriuions tout le monde, que nous 
d^criuions noflre pais, celuy des Hurons, des Hiro- 
quois; bref toute la terre, & cependant qu'on ne mou- 
roit point ailleurs, comme on fait en leur pais, qu'il 
falloit done que leur mort prouint d'ailleurs; ils s'y 
accorderent. 

Le vingt-cinquieme Decembre iour de la naiffance 
de noflre Sauueur en terre, Monfieur de Champlain 
noflre Gouuerneur prit vne nouuelle naiffance au 
Ciel ; du moins nous pouuons dire que fa mort a efl6 
remplie de benedictions. le croy que Dieu luy a fait 
cette faueur en confideration des biens qu'il a pro- 
cur6 k la Nouuelle France, ou nous efperons qu'vn 
iour Dieu fera aime & feruy de nos Fran9ois, & co- 
gnu & ador^ de nos Sauuages: il efl vray qu'il auoit 
vefcu dans vne grande iuflice & equity, dans vne fide- 
lit6 parfaite enuers fon Roy, & enuers Meflieurs de 
la Compagnie : mais ^ la mort il perfectionna fes ver- 
tus, auec des fentimens de piete li grands, qu'il nous 
eftonna [201] tous. Que fes yeux ietterent de larmes ! 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 207 

did not know how to use with moderation. " Why 
dost thou not write to thy great King," said they, 
" to have him forbid them from bringing over these 
drinks that kill us? " And when they were answered 
that our Frenchmen needed them upon the sea, and 
in the intense cold of their country, " Arrange it, 
then, so that they alone drink them." An attempt 
will be made, as I hope, to keep this business under 
control; but these Barbarians are troublesome to the 
last degree. Another one, breaking into the con- 
versation, took up the defense of wine and brandy. 
" No," said he, " it is not these drinks that take away 
our lives, but your writings ; for since you have de- 
scribed our country, our rivers, our lands, and our 
woods, [200] we are all dying, which did not happen 
until you came here." We began to laugh upon hear- 
ing these new causes of their maladies. I told them 
that we described the whole world, — that we de- 
scribed our own country, that of the Hurons, of the 
Hiroquois, in short, the whole earth; and yet they 
did not die elsewhere as they did in their country. 
It must be, then, that their deaths arose from other 
causes. They agreed to this. 

On the twenty-fifth of December, the day of the 
birth of our Savior upon earth. Monsieur de Cham- 
plain, our Governor, was reborn in Heaven ; at least, 
we can say that his death was full of blessings. I 
am sure that God has shown him this favor in consid- 
eration of the benefits he has procured for New 
France, where we hope some day God will be loved 
and served by our French, and known and adored by 
our Savages. Truly he had led a life of great justice, 
equity, and perfect loyalty to his King and towards the 
Gentlemen of the Company. But at his death he 


208 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol. 9 

que fes affections pour le feruice de Dieu s'echaufe- 
rent! quel amour n'auoit-il pour les families d' icy ! 
difant qu'il les falloit fecourir puiffamment pour le 
bien du Pays, & les foulager en tout ce qu'on pour- 
roit en ces nouueaux commencemens, & qu'il le fe- 
roit, li Dieu luy donnoit la fante. II ne fut pas fur- 
pris dans les comptes qu'il deuoit rendre ^ Dieu, il 
auoit prepare de longue main vne Confeflion gene- 
rale de toute fa vie, qu'il fit auec vne grande douleur 
au Pere Lalemant, qu'il honoroit de fon amiti^; le 
Pere le fecourut en toute fa maladie qui fut de deux 
mois & demy, ne I'abandonnant point iufques k la 
mort. On luy fit vn conuoy fort honorable, tant de 
la part du Peuple, que des Soldats, des Capitaines, & 
des gens d'Eglife: le Pere Lalemant y officia, & on 
me chargea de I'Oraifon funebre, oil ie ne manquay 
point de fuiet. Ceux qu'il a laiffez apres luy ont oc- 
cafion de fe loiier; que s'il eft mort hors de France, 
fon nom n'en fera pas moins glorieux ^ la Pofteritd. 

Au fortir de ces deuoirs funebres Monfieur de Cha- 
fteau-fort, qui commande ^ [202] prefent aux trois 
Riuieres, prit fa charge, felon le pouuoir que luy en 
donnoient MefTieurs de la Compagnie, par les Lettres 
qui furent ouuertes, & leues a I'heure mefme en pre- 
fence du Peuple affemble en I'Eglife: ces Meffieurs 
m'en auoient fait le depofitaire pour les produire en 
temps & lieu, comme ie fis. 

Le trentieme du mefme mois vn Sauuage eftant 
entr6 en difpute auec vn de nos Peres, fur la caufe 
de la mort, fouftenoit toufiours que le Manitou cau- 
foit les maladies & la mort. Le Pere luy ayant parl6 
du peche, & voyat que cela eftoit trop fubtil pour 
luy, le conuainquit par vne fimilitude grolliere, laif- 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 209 

crowned his virtues with sentiments of piety so lofty, 
that he astonished us [201] all. What tears he shed! 
how ardent became his zeal for the service of God ! 
how great was his love for the families here ! — saying 
that they must be vigorously assisted for the good of 
the Country, and made comfortable in every possible 
way in these early stages, and that he would do it if 
God gave him health. He was not taken unawares 
in the account which he had to render unto God, for 
he had long ago prepared a general Confession of his 
whole life, which he made with great contrition to 
Father Lalemant, whom he honored with his friend- 
ship. The Father comforted him throughout his 
sickness, which lasted two months and a half, and 
did not leave him until his death. He had a very 
honorable burial, the funeral procession being formed 
of the People, the Soldiers, the Captains, and the 
Churchmen. Father Lalemant officiated at this bur- 
ial, and I was charged with the funeral Oration, for 
which I did not lack material. Those whom he left 
behind have reason to be well satisfied with him ; for, 
although he died out of France, his name will not 
therefor be any less glorious to Posterity. 

After these funeral ceremonies, Monsieur de Chas- 
teau-fort,^ who now commands [202] at the three 
Rivers, assumed his office, in pursuance of the power 
which had been given to him by the Gentlemen of 
the Company, through the Letters which were opened 
and read at once in the presence of the People as- 
sembled in the Church. These Gentlemen had made 
me the trustee of these documents, to produce them 
at the proper time and place, which I did. 

On the thirtieth of the same month, a Savage, 
having engaged in a dispute with one of our Fathers 


210 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.9 

fant \ part la caufe morale de la mort, pour luy faire 
comprendre la phylique. Quand ta hache eft emouf- 
f6e, luy fit il, ou qu'elle eft vn peu ebrecli6e, tes bras 
ne s'en feruent pas fi bien, pource qu'elle eft malade 
en fa fajon: quand elle eft toute rompue, & qu'elle 
ne vautplus rien, tu la iette Ik, tu I'abandonne; elle 
eft comme morte, tes bras ne s'en fgauroient plus fer- 
uir. Or ce qu'eft ta hache entre tes mains, cela eft 
ton corps au regard de ton ame ; quand tu es blelTe 
en I'oeil, ton ame ne s'en fert [203] pas fi aifement 
pour voir, pource qu'il eft malade: ainfi en eft-il des 
autres parties eftant offenfees, I'ame ne s'en fert pas 
fi aifement: mais fi le poulmon, fi la rate, fi le ccEur, 
ou autre partie noble viennent "k eftre gaftees tout a 
faict, ton ame ne s'en pouuant plus feruir, les quitte 
Ik, & voila comme Ton meurt. Or ce n'eft pas le 
Manitou qui gafte ces parties, mais le trop grand 
froid, le trop de chaleur, les exces de quoy que ce 
foit : ne fens tu pas que tu brufle quand tu as beu de 
I'eau de vie, cela confomme ton foye, & le defCeiche, 
cela altere les autres parties interieures, & caufe la 
maladie, qui venant k fe rengreger corrompt entiere- 
ment quelque partie; d'ou s'enfuit que ton ame s'en 
va, & te voila mort, fans que le Manitou t'ayt tou- 
ch6. le croy, difoit-il, que tu as raifon, nous autres 
nous manquons d'efprit de croire que c'eft le Mani- 
tou qui nous tue. 

Le quinzieme du mefme il fit vn grand vent de 
Nordeft accompagne d'vne pluie qui dura fort long 
temps, & d'vn froid affez grand pour geler ces eaux 
auffi toft qu'elles touchoient a quelque chofe que ce 
fuft, fi bien que comme cette pluie [204] tomboit fur 
les arbres depuis la cime iufques au pied, il s'y fit vn 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1636 211 

on the cause of death, insisted that the Manitou 
caused sickness and death. The Father, having 
talked to him of sin, and seeing that this was too 
deep for him, convinced him by a homely compari- 
son, setting aside the moral cause of death to make 
him comprehend the physical. " When thy hatchet 
is dull," said he, " or when it is nicked a little, thy 
arms do not serve thee so well, because it is sick in 
its way; when it is entirely broken, and no longer 
worth anything, thou throwest it away, thou aban- 
donest it ; it is as if dead, thy arms can no longer 
make use of it. Now what thy axe is to thy hands, 
thy body is in regard to thy soul ; when thine eye is 
hurt, it does not serve thy soul [203] so readily in 
seeing, because it is sick ; thus it is with other in- 
jured organs, the soul cannot use them so easily ; but 
if the lungs, the spleen, the heart, or any other vital 
organ, is completely ruined, thy soul, being no 
longer able to use it, drops it then, and this is how 
we die. Now it is not the Manitou that spoils these 
organs, but too great cold, too much heat, excess of 
any kind. Dost thou not feel thyself burn when 
thou hast drunk brandy? That consumes thy liver 
and dries it up, it impairs the other internal organs, 
and causes sickness, which, becoming more aggra- 
vated, entirely destroys some organ ; whence it hap- 
pens that thy soul goes away, thou art dead, and this 
without the Manitou having touched thee." " I be- 
lieve," said he, " that thou art right; we are lacking 
in wit to believe that it is the Manitou who kills us." 
On the fifteenth of the same, there was a great 
Northeaster accompanied by a rainfall which lasted a 
long time, and by a cold severe enough to freeze this 
water as soon as it touched anything ; so that when 


212 


LES RELATIONS DESjtSUITES [Vol.9 


criftal de glace, qui enchaffoit & la tige & les bran- 
ches ; en forte qu'vn fort long temps durant tons nos 
grads bois ne paroiffoiet qu'vne foreft de criftal ; car 
en verite la glace qui les reueftoit vniuerfellement 
par tout eftoit epaiffe de plus d'vn tefton ; en vn mot 
toutes les broffailles & tout ce qui eftoit fur la neige 
efloit enuironn6 de tous coftez, & enchalTe de glace : 
les Sauuages m'ont dit qu'il n'en arriuoit pas fouuent 
de mefme. 

I'ay veu ton Manitou, & moy ton I E s v s , difoient 
enuiron ce temps deux Sauuages venans voir vn de 
nos Peres; 6 qu'il nous promet bonne annee! que de 
Caftors, que d' Elans! moyennant que tu nous donnes 
bien du Petun pour luy facrifier. Allez, Galands, 
ce n'eft ny ce qu'il demande en facrifice, ny ce que 
vous voulez luy donner: croyez en luy, & feruez-le 
comme on le vous enfeignera, & vous ferez trop heu- 
reux, leur repondit le Pere. Ce font de leurs inuen- 
tions pour auoir ce qu'ils pretendent, ou celles qu'ils 
ont retenues de quelques-vns de nos Francois, qui 
les trompoient [205] iadis fous ces belles apparences. 

Le douzieme de Feurier vn de nos Peres parlant 
aux Sauuages de la luftice de Dieu, & qu'il nous me- 
furoit 'k la mefme mefure que nous mefurions nos 
femblables: vn Sauuage duquel i'ay parle cy-delTus 
luy dit par apres en particulier ; le croy ce que tu as 
dit de la luftice de Dieu, i'en ay veu vn exemple de 
mes yeux. Nous eftios allez chaffer vn mien frere 
& moy, & comme nous n'auions que fort peu de 
viures, mon frere me dit, que nous miflions ^ mort 
vn pauure gargon orphelin qui nous accompagnoit, 
& en difant cela luy ietta vne corde au col, & me fait 
tirer d'vn coft6, luy tirant de I'autre; ie luy obeis ^ 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 


213 


this rain [204] fell upon the trees, from the summit 
to the roots it was converted into ice-crystals, which 
encased both the trunk and the branches, causing for 
a long time all our great forests to seem but a forest 
of crystal, — for, indeed, the ice which everywhere 
completely covered them was thicker than a teston.^ 
In a word, all the bushes and everything above the 
snow were surrounded on all sides and encased in 
ice. The Savages told me that this did not happen 
often. 

' ' I have seen thy Manitou, and I thy Jesus," said 
two Savages who came to see one of our Fathers 
about this time. " Oh what a good year he prom- 
ised us ! What Beavers, what Elks ! providing thou 
givest us a good lot of Tobacco to sacrifice to him." 
" Go away. Frauds; that is neither what he asked in 
sacrifice, nor what you intend to give him. Believe 
in him, and serve him as you shall be taught, and 
you will be blessed," answered the Father. These 
are their tricks for obtaining what they lay claim to, 
or devices they have retained from some of our 
French, who formerly deceived [205] them under 
these fine pretenses. 

On the twelfth of February, one of our Fathers 
speaking to the Savages about the Justice of God, 
and how he would measure us by the same standard 
by which we measured our fellow-beings, a Savage 
of whom I have spoken above said to him afterward 
in private, " I believe what thou hast said about the 
Justice of God, I have seen an example of it with 
my own eyes. We had gone hunting, one of my 
brothers and I ; and, as we had very few provisions, 
my brother said to me that we should kill a poor 
orphan boy who accompanied us; and while saying 


214 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.9 

centre coeur. Quoy que s'en foit, ayans tu^ ce ieune 
homme, nous-nous feparafmes pour trouuer la pifte 
de quelque Orignac, en ayant trouu6 vne, ie la fuy, 
ie recontre la befte, ie la tue, i'en porte la monftre 
en noftre Cabane, ou ie ne trouuay point mon frere. 
Comme il ne retournoit point, & qu'il fe faifoit tard, 
ma mere Ie va chercher, elle Ie rencontre tout malade, 
a tout effare. Cette pauure femme bien etonnee, Ie 
prelle doucement de retourner; Non, dit-il, il [206] 
faut que ie meure; enfin ayant fait mine d'obei'r, il 
dit "k ma mere qu'elle marchaft deuant, qu'il la fui- 
uroit doucement. Ma pauure mere eftant vn peu 
61oignee, ce miferable tourne vifage, & s'en va, 11 
bien que iamais depuis on ne I'a reueu, ny ouy par- 
ler de luy, quoy qu'on I'aye diligemment cherche. 
En cela, difoit ce Sauuage, ie recognois, que celuy 
qui a tout fait nous paye k la mefme monnoye, que 
nous nous traittons les vns les autres. 

Le deuxieme iour d'Auril, Ie Pere Quentin fit vn 
voyage a quelques lieues des trois Riuieres, pour quel- 
ques malades, dont on nous auoit donne aduis, Le 
fruict qu'il en rapporta fut d'auoir expofe plufieurs 
fois fa vie pour Dieu, parmy les dangers des glaces 
& du manuals temps. II fe cotenta de leur donner 
quelque inftruction, fans en baptifer aucun, ne les 
voyant ny en peril de mort, ny fufiifamment inftruits. 
Le fieur lean Nicolet luy feruit de truchement, auec 
fa charite & fidelity ordinaire, dont nos Peres tirent 
de grands feruices en femblables occafions. Pay 
quelques memoires de fa main, qui pourront paroiflre 
vn iour, touchant les Nipifiriniens, auec lefquels il a 
[207] fouuent hyuerne, & ne s'en eft retire, que pour 
mettre fon falut en alleurance dans I'vfage des Sacre- 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, J636 216 

this he put a cord around his neck, and made me 
pull at one end while he pulled at the other. I 
obeyed him against my will. Be that as it may, 
having killed this young man, we separated to seek 
for the trail of a Moose ; and, having found one, I 
followed it, I encountered the animal, and killed it; 
I carried the great beast to our Cabin, where I did 
not find my brother. As he did not return and as it 
was growing late, my mother went to seek him ; she 
found him very sick and wild-looking. The poor 
woman, very much disturbed, begged him gently 
to return. 'No,' said he, 'I [206] must die.' Fi- 
nally, making a pretense of obeying her, he said to 
my mother that she should walk on ahead and he 
would follow slowly. When my poor mother had 
gone a little distance, this wretched man turned 
around and went away, so that we have never seen 
him nor heard of him since, although we have made 
diligent search for him. In that," said this Savage, 
" I recognized that he who has made all pays us in 
the same money that we use with each other." 

On the second day of April, Father Quentin made 
a journey a few leagues from the three Rivers, to 
visit some sick persons of whom we had heard. The 
fruit that he brought thence was that he several 
times risked his life for God among the dangers of 
ice and bad weather. He contented himself with 
giving them some instruction, without baptizing any 
of them, seeing that they were neither in danger of 
death nor sufficiently instructed. Sieur Jean Nicolet 
served him as interpreter, with his usual kindness 
and fidelity, of which our Fathers make good use on 
similar occasions. I have some memoirs from his 
hand, which may some day appear, concerning the 


216 


LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 9 


mens, faute defquels il y a grande rifque pour I'ame, 
parmy les Sauuages. 

Le quatriefme de May, Monfieur Gand allant faire 
vn tour aux trois Riuieres, ie montay dans fa barque, 
defirant me trouuer en vne alTemblee de Sauuages 
qui fe deuoit tenir la. Le vent nous eftant contraire, 
de bonne fortune pour moy pafTa vn Canot de Sau- 
uages qui m'enleua, & me rendit bientofl ou ie defi- 
rois eftre. Monfieur Gand eftant enfin arriue les 
Sauuages le vindrent voir, & tindrent confeil pour le 
fupplier de faire aupres des Capitaines qui viendroiet, 
qu'on leur donnaft fecours pour leurs guerres. Le 
premier qui parla nous contenta fort, il commenga 
par vne exclamation. Que puis-ie dire? ie n'ay plus 
de voix, ne pretez point I'oreille "k mes paroles, ecou- 
tez ces pauures vefues, & ces pauures orphelins, qui 
orient qu'ils n'ont plus de peres, & de maris, voulez 
vous feuls, vous autres Francois, fubfifler en ce pais- 
cy, tenes vous en repos, ne nous fecourez point, & 
dans peu de temps vous ne verrez plus [208] que des 
femmes & des enfans. Nous allons mourir auec nos 
Capitaines, que nos ennemis ont egorgez, Ie me 
trompe, vous auez trop de bonte pour nous voir 
courre 'k la mort, sas nous prefter la main. Vn petit 
nombre de vous autres nous pent a tous fauuer la vie, 
& faire reuiure tout le pais, Prenez done courage, & 
quand les Capitaines feront arriuez parlez pour nous. 
Monfieur Gand vifant autant & plus au falut de leurs 
ames, qu'au bien de leurs corps, leur fit repondre 
qu'il les aymoit, & qu'il parleroit volontiers pour eux 
aux Capitaines; neantmoins qu'il craignoit que ces 
Capitaines n'euffent non plus d'oreilles pour fes pa- 
roles, que les Sauuages n'auoient monflre d 'affection 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1636 217 


Nipisiriniens, with whom he has [207] often win- 
tered, and from whom he only withdrew to place his 
salvation in safety by the use of the Sacraments, 
without which there is great risk for the soul among 
the Savages. 

On the fourth of May, as Monsieur Gand was going 
to make a visit to the three Rivers, I entered his 
bark, desiring to be present at an assembly of Sav- 
ages which was to be held there. The wind being 
against us, fortunately for me a Canoe of Savages 
passed us which took me on board, and soon set me 
down where I wished to be. Monsieur Gand having 
at last arrived, the Savages came to see him, and held 
a council to implore him to induce the Captains who 
were coming to give them assistance in their wars. 
The first one who spoke pleased us greatly. He be- 
gan with an exclamation: " What can I say? I have 
no longer any voice ; heed not my words ; listen to 
these poor widows and these poor orphans, who cry 
that they no longer have fathers or husbands. Do you 
alone, you Frenchmen, wish to exist in this country? 
Keep your hands folded, do not help us; and in a 
little while you will see [208] but women and chil- 
dren. We are going to die with our Captains whom 
our enemies have slaughtered. No, I am wrong, 
you are too good to see us rush headlong to death 
without lending us a hand. A very few of you can 
save all our lives, and make the whole country live 
again. Come, take courage; and, when the Captains 
arrive, speak for us." Monsieur Gand, looking quite 
as much to the salvation of their souls as to the wel- 
fare of their bodies, answered that he loved them, 
and would willingly speak in their behalf to the Cap- 
tains; yet he feared that these Captains would no 


218 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.9 

pour les Fran9ois. Premierement vous ne vous efles 
point alliez iufques icy de nos Frangois, vos filles fe 
marient h. toutes les Nations voifmes, & non pas k 
nous autres. Vos enfans demeurent an pais des Ni- 
pifirinies, des Algonquins, des AttiKamegues, des 
peuples du Sagne, & dans les autres Nations. Iuf- 
ques icy vous ne les auez point prefentez aux Fran- 
9ois pour les inftruire. Si vous euffiez fait cela d6s 
noftre premiere entree dans le Pais, [209] vous fgau- 
riez tous maintenant manier les armes, comme nous, 
& vos ennemis ne fubfifteroient pas en voftre pre- 
fence, vous ne mourriez pas tous les iours comme 
vous faites. Celuy qui a tout fait, & qui nous pro- 
tege, vous conferueroit aulfi bien que nous, puis que 
nous ne ferions plus qu'vn mefme Peuple. Seconde- 
ment, nous-nous fouuenons bien que les Hiroquois 
ont tue de nos gens, nous en prendrons raif on ; mais 
nous ne nous precipitous pas. Vous voyez que nous- 
nous peuplons tous les iours. Quand nous ferons bon 
nombre, nous les attaquerons, & ne quitterons point 
la guerre, que nous ne les ayons exterminez. Si vous 
voulez venir auec nous, vous y viendrez, mais comme 
vous ne f9auez pas obeir en guerre, nous ne nous at- 
tendrons pas a voftre fecours. En troifiefme lieu, fi 
les Capitaines me demandent fi vous n'allez point voir 
I'Eftranger pour vos traictes; ie ne fgay ce que ie leur 
pourray repondre; neantmoins fi vous aymez noftre 
alliance, ie les prieray pour vous, ce n'eft point que 
nous ayons befoin de vos filles ny de vos enfans ; nous 
fommes peuplez comme les feiiilles de vos arbres; 
mais nous [210] voudrions bien ne voir plus qu'vn 
Peuple en toutes ces terres. lis repondirent que tout 
cela eftoit raifonnable, & que Monfieur de Champlain 


1636] LE /RUNE'S RELATION, jbjd 219 


more lend their ears to his words, than the Savages 
had shown affection for the French. " In the first 
place, you have not allied yourselves up to the pres- 
ent with our French people, your daughters have 
married with all the neighboring Nations, but not 
with ours. Your children live in the land of the 
Nipisiriniens, of the Algonquins, of the Attika- 
megues, of the people of the Sagne, and in all the 
other Nations. Up to the present you have not 
offered them to the French for instruction. If you 
had done this from the time of our first arrival in the 
Country, [209] you would all know by this time how 
to handle arms as we do, and your enemies would 
not exist in your presence, — you would not die every 
day as you are doing. He who has made all, and 
who protects us, would preserve you as well as he 
does us, as we would then be only one and the same 
People. Secondly, we remember very well that the 
Hiroquois have killed our people, and we will get 
satisfaction for it; but we will not be too hasty. 
You see that we are increasing every day ; when our 
numbers shall be large enough we will attack them, 
and will not give up the war until we have extermi- 
nated them. If you wish to come with us, you may 
come ; but, as you do not know how to obey in war, 
we shall not count upon your assistance. In the 
third place, if the Captains ask me if you do not seek 
Foreigners in your trading, I do not know what I 
can answer them. Nevertheless, if you are partial to 
an alliance with us, I will petition them in your be- 
half. Not that we have need of your daughters or 
your children ; we are as populous as the leaves of 
your trees. But we [210] would like to see only one 
People in all this land." They answered that all 


220 


LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.9 


en auoit autrefois parl6 en particulier ; qn'il en falloit 
parler en la face de toutes les Nations. 

Le vingt-deuxiefme du mefme mois k K6bec, i'ap- 
pris vne fort mauiiaife nouuelle. Vn ieune Sauuage 
baptife, qui demeuroit en noftre maifon, eftant auec 
vn de nos Frangois qui chaffoit de 1^ le Sault de 
Montmorency, I'arquebufe du Fran§ois s'eflant cre- 
uee entre fes mains, & I'ayant offenf6, il s'en reuint 
en diligence pour fe faire penfer, laiffant du feu & de- 
quoy viure au petit Sauuage qui ne le pouuoit fuiure ; 
c^t enfant ayant peur de refler feul, comme nous con- 
iecturons, venant au torrent qui tombe du Sault de 
Montmorency, le voulut palTer, mais comme il eft 
fort rapide il fe noya. O que cet accident nous a 
cauf e de douleur ! car ce pauure petit efloit fort do- 
cile, & nous donoit de bonnes efperrances de fecourir 
vn iour par fon bo exemple fes copatriotes, fon inno- 
cence nous confole, & nous efperos qu'il ne fera pas 
moins puilTant au ciel, qu'il euft efte fur la terre. 
le [211] craignois fort que les Sauuages ne nous re- 
prochaffent cette mort, & de fait quelques-vns m'en 
parlerent ; mais comme ils furent inf ormez du fait, & 
qu'ils fceurent les diligences qu'on apporta pour al- 
ler au deuant de luy ; comme ils virent que nous leur 
offrions mefme de beaux prefens s'ils le pouuoient 
trouuer vif ou mort, cela les appaifa. II eft vray 
que ie me feruy de leur couflume pour me defendre 
contre-eux : car comme ils donnent des iniures "k ceux 
qui leur parlent de leurs morts, ie les tan9ois quand 
ils en ouuroient la bouche, difant qu'ils reueilloient 
ma douleur, que ie I'aymois comme mon frere, cela 
les faifoit taire, fe difans I'vn I'autre, N'en parle 
plus, car tu I'attrifte; ne voids-tu pas qu'il I'aymoit. 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 221 

this was reasonable, and that Monsieur de Cham- 
plain had previously talked about this in private; 
that it must be spoken of in the presence of all the 
Nations. 

On the twenty-second of the same month, I learned 
some very bad news at Kebec. A young baptized 
Savage, who lived in our house, being with one of 
our Frenchmen who was hunting beyond the Sault de 
Montmorency, the Frenchman's gun having burst in 
his hands and having wounded him, he returned in 
haste to have himself cared for, leaving a fire and 
some food to the little Savage, who could not follow 
him. This child, being afraid to be left alone, as 
we conjecture, coming to the torrent which falls at 
the Sault de Montmorency, tried to pass it; but, as 
it is very rapid, he was drowned. Oh what grief 
this accident caused us ! For this poor little child 
was very docile, and gave us great hopes of some 
day succoring his compatriots by his good example. 
His purity consoles us and we hope he will not be 
less effective in heaven than he would have been 
upon earth. I [211] greatly feared that the Savages 
would reproach us for this death ; and, in fact, some 
of them spoke to me about it. But when they were 
told how it happened, and learned of the promptness 
with which we went after him ; when they saw that 
we even offered them beautiful presents if they 
would find him, alive or dead, they were pacified. 
It is true that I followed their custom in defending 
myself against them; for as they abuse those who 
speak to them of their dead, I chided them when 
they opened their mouths about this, saying they re- 
vived my grief, that I loved him like a brother ; this 
made them keep still, saying to each other, " Speak 


222 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.9 

Or pour monflrer que la feule education manque aux 
Sauuages, cet enfant n'ayant efl6 qu'vne ann6e en 
France, fe rangea fi bien icy ^ fon deuoir, qu'il fe 
rendoit aymable k nos Francois. Noftre Seigneur 
I'auoit beny notamment depuis fon Baptefme, de 
trois ou quatre belles qualitez bien contraires aux 
grands defaux des Sauuages. II n'efloit ny menteur, 
ny acariafbre, ny gourmand, ny pareffeux. Ce font 
les quatre [212] vices qui femblent eflre nes auec ces 
Peuples faineans & libertins au dernier point. Or ce 
pauure petit auoit les perfections toutes contraires. 
le ne f9aclie aucun Fran§ois qui I'ayt cogneu, qui ne 
I'ayt ayme, & qui n'ayt t6moign6 vn grand regret de 
fa mort. II fe confefloit auec tant de candeur, & fai- 
foit paroiftre tant de douleur de fes oifenfes fort le- 
geres, qu'on iugeoit bien qu'il y alloit de coeur. II 
prioit Dieu fort volontiers, entendoit tons les iours la 
Meffe d'aflez bon matin. Que fi pour quelque occu- 
pation il ne r entendoit pas k fon heure, & qu'on luy 
prefentafl h. d^ieuner en quelque endroit, il n'y tou- 
choit point qu'il n'eufl aflifl6 h ce fainct Sacrifice. 
Si quelque petit Sauuage faifoit quelque chofe meffe- 
ante deuant luy, il en efloit honteux, & difoit, II 
n'efl pas encor baptif6, il n'a pas d'efprit. Nous 
auos fceu que le mediant Apoftat voyat que nous 
I'aymions pour fa docility, le folicita fort fouuent de 
nous quitter, iufques k le battre & le foiietter deux 
ou trois f ois pour ce f ujet ; mais ce bon petit gar9on 
ne luy voulut obeir. II recognoifl^oit bien la falet^ & 
la cruaut6 de fa Nation, & I'auoit en horreur. [213] 
II me monflra certain iour I'endroit ou fa mere mou- 
rut, & me dit qu'aufli toft qu'elle eut expire, les Sau- 
uages tuerent vn fien petit frere, pent eflre pour le 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 223 


of it no more, for thou makest him sad ; dost thou not 
see that he loved him ? ' ' Now to prove that educa- 
tion alone is lacking to the Savages, this child, who 
had been only one year in France, fulfilled his du- 
ties here so well that he made himself greatly loved 
by our French. Our Lord had blessed him, espe- 
cially since his Baptism, with three or four good quali- 
ties quite the opposite of those great defects of the 
Savages. He was neither a liar, nor a scold, nor a 
glutton, nor lazy. These are the four [212] vices 
which seem to be born in these People, who are lazy 
and dissolute to the last degree. Now this poor little 
boy had just the opposite perfections. I do not 
know of a single Frenchman who knew him who did 
not love him, and who did not show great regret at 
his death. He confessed with so much candor, and 
showed so much grief at his lightest offenses, that it 
was very evident he took them to heart. He was 
very fond of praying to God and attended Mass quite 
early every morning. But if, on account of some 
occupation, he did not hear it at the usual hour, and 
if meanwhile he was somewhere offered his break- 
fast, he would not touch it until he had taken part 
in this holy Sacrifice. If a little Savage did some- 
thing unseemly in his presence, he was ashamed of 
him, and said, " He is not yet baptized; he has no 
sense." We have learned that the wicked Apostate, 
seeing that we loved him for his docility, very often 
urged him to leave us, even going so far as to strike 
and whip him two or three times on this account ; 
but this good little fellow would not obey him. He 
fully appreciated the coarseness and cruelty of his 
Nation, and held it in horror. [213] He one day 
showed me the place where his mother died, ' and 


224 LES RELATIONS DBS J£SUITES [Vol.9 

deliurer de la peine qu'il auroit fouffert apres le de- 
cez de fa mere ; ils en auroient fait tout autant de luy, 
s'il n'euft deja efle grandelet. Nous I'auions nom- 
va.€ Fortune deuant fon baptefme. Monfieur de 
Champlain, luy donna nom Bonauenture, quand il 
fut fait Chreftien ; & certes, funes cecideriint ei in pr<2- 
claris. Son exemple nous fait efperer, qu'il n'y aura 
naturel fi farouche en ces deferts, que noftre Seigneur 
n'adoucilTe par fa grace, quand il luy plaira. 

Le quatrieme de luin, arriua des Hurons vn ieune 
Fran9ois, lequel s'eftant mis auec quelques Algon- 
quins au commencement de I'hyuer, k delTein d'ap- 
prendre leur langue, ils le conduiferent par terre, ou 
pluftofl par neige, iufques aux pais des Hurons; ce 
fut vne hardie entreprife & bien difficile. Nos Peres 
furent bien eflonnez, & bien ioyeux de le voir en vn 
temps fi extraordinaire, ils nous ecriuirent k fon re- 
tour, qu'ils auoiet baptif^ pres de foixante Sauuages 
depuis [214] le voeu que nous fifmes tous le iour de la 
Conception de la faincte Vierge, & que les Peres que 
nous leur enuoyafmes I'an palTe eftoient arriuez en 
bonne fante par la grace de noftre Seigneur, qui va 
tous les iours applanilTant les plus grandes difficultez 
de ce voyage. Ces Algonquins alloient Ik pour folli- 
citer les Hurons de venir en guerre auec eux contre 
les Hiroquois. 

Le vingt-huictiefme du mefme mois, Monfieur du 
Pleffis Bochart General de la flotte, monta iufques k 
K^bec, & nous r^ioiiit fort par fa prefence ; nous le 
remerciafmes de fa faueur ordinaire, & de la charite 
qu'il exerce enuers les Peres qui palfent dans fon 
Vaifleau; le Pere Ragueneau, & noftre Frere Louis 
Gobert eftoient dans fa Barque. 


163()J LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 225 


told me that, as soon as she expired, the Savages 
killed a little brother of his, perhaps to save it from 
the suflFering it would have to endure after the death 
of its mother ; they would have done the same to him 
if he had not already been quite large. We had 
named him Fortune before his baptism. Monsieur 
de Champlain gave him the name Bonaventure when 
he was made a Christian, and certainly, funes cecide- 
runt ei in prceclaris. His case makes us hope that 
there will not be found in these wildernesses a na- 
ture so ferocious that our Lord may not tame it by 
his grace when it shall please him. 

On the fourth of June, came from the Hurons a 
young Frenchman, who had gone with some Algon- 
quins, at the beginning of the winter, for the pur- 
pose of learning their language. They took him by 
land, or rather by snow, up to the country of the 
Hurons, a daring and very difficult enterprise. Our 
Fathers there were surprised indeed, and very much 
pleased, to see him at so unusual a time. They 
wrote us, upon his return, that they had baptized 
nearly sixty Savages since [214] the vow we all made 
on the day of the Conception of the holy Virgin, and 
that the Fathers we sent to them last year had ar- 
rived in good health, by the grace of our Lord, who 
is daily smoothing away the greatest difficulties in 
this journey. These Algonquins went there to solic- 
it the Hurons to enter with them into a war against 
the Hiroquois. 

On the twenty-eighth of the same month. Mon- 
sieur du Plessis Bochart, Commandant of the fleet, 
came up to Kebec, and rejoiced us greatly by his 
presence. We thanked him for his usual courtesy 
toward us, and for the kindness he showed our Fa- 


226 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.9 

Le premier de luillet, le Pere Chaflellain, & le 
Pere Garnier, s'embarquerent pour aller attendre les 
Hurons, ^ la Relidence de la Conception aux trois 
Riuieres, Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur les condnilit 
iufques au bord du grand Fleuue, auec vne courtoilie, 
& vne affection nompareille, faifant tirer trois coups 
de canon de falut k leur depart. Ce grand [215] Dieu 
qui nous donne le coeur, & I'amour de tant de per- 
fonnes de merite, nous oblige par mefme moyen k 
vne faincte & fidelle recognoiffance. 

Le fecond du mefme mois, le Pere logues, & le 
Pere du Marcli6 vindrent accroiflre noftre ioye, qui 
nous fut d'autant plus fenfible, que noftre Seigneur 
nous les auoit tous rendus en bonne fant^. le prie 
fa bont^ qu'elle nous donne a tous les forces necef- 
faires pour accomplir fidellement fes fainctes volon- 
tez en I'auancement du falut de nos Fran9ois, & de 
nos Sauuages. 

Ce mefme iour le Capitaine des Sauuages de Ta- 
douffac eftant ^ Kebec, auec vne efcoiiade de fes 
gens, qui s'en alloient a la guerre, defira de parler en 
confeil "k Monfieur le Gouuerneur, & k Monfieur le 
General ; en vn mot aux Fran9ois. Le Capitaine des 
Sauuages de K^bec y aflifta; I'affembl^e fe faifoit au 
magazin de Meflieurs de la Compagnie; oil ie me 
trouuay par le commandement de Monfieur le Gou- 
uerneur. Cbacun eftant aflis, les Frangois d'vn coft€, 
les Sauuages de 1' autre, le Capitaine de Tadouffac 
commen9a k haranguer ; il eftoit veftu 'k la [2 16] Fran- 
9oife, d'vn fort bel habit, fouz vne cafaque d'^car- 
late. Voulant parler, il ofta fon chapeau, & fit vne 
reuerence affez gentiment k la Fran9oife, puis ad- 
dreffant fa parole aux Capitaines, notamment "k Mon- 


1636 J LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 227 


thers who crossed in his Ship, Father Ragiieneau^ 
and our Brother Louis Gobert being in his Bark. 

On the first of July, Father Chastellain and Father 
Garnier embarked to go and await the Hurons at the 
Residence of the Conception, at the three Rivers. 
Monsieur our Governor escorted them to the banks 
of the great River, with matchless courtesy and affec- 
tion, having three cannon shots fired as a salute at 
their departure. This great [215] God, who gives 
us the hearts and the love of so many worthy people, 
constrains us, by the same means, to a holy and true 
gratitude. 

On the second of the same month, Father Jogues*^ 
and Father du Marche came to add to our great joy, 
which we felt all the more deeply, as our Lord had 
brought them both to us in good health. I pray that 
his goodness may give us all the strength necessary 
to faithfully carry out his holy will in promoting the 
salvation of our French and of our Savages. 

This same day, the Captain of the Tadoussac Sav- 
ages, being at Kebec with a squad of his people, who 
were going to war, desired to hold a council with 
Monsieur the Governor and with Monsieur the Com- 
mandant; in a word, with the French. The Captain 
of the Kebec Savages took part in it ; the assembly 
was held at the storehouse of the Gentlemen of the 
Company, where I also was present, by command of 
Monsieur the Governor, All being seated, the 
French on one side and the Savages on the other, 
the Tadoussac Captain began to make a speech. He 
was dressed in the [216] French fashion, with a very 
handsome coat under a scarlet cloak. Wishing to 
speak, he took off his hat and made a very polite 
bow in the French way, then directing his words to 


228 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.9 

fieur du Pleffis, qu'il appella fon puifne : Vous voyez, 
dit-il, que ie fuis Francois; tu fgais, mon frere, que 
ma Nation me tient pour tel; on croit que i'ay le 
bon-heur d'eflre aime des Capitaines, & que ie fuis 
leur parent; pour moy vous fgauez que i'ay le coeur 
Fran9ois, ie vous ay toufiours aimez, doiz-ie douter 
du reciproque? Dites moy, ie vous prie, fi ie me 
puis preualoir de voftre amitie, comme vous eftes 
affeure de la mienne? Cela dit, il s'arrefta pour oui'r 
la reponfe: comme on I'eut affeure qu'on I'aimoit, il 
pourfuiuit : Mes compatriotes me preffent fort de faire 
paroiftre le credit que i'ay aupres de vous; ils croy- 
ent que vous m' aimez, mais ils le voudroient voir 
par effet: quelle parole leur porteray ie 1^ haut, oti 
ie les vay trouuer? vous f9auez que c'eft le propre 
des amis de fecourir ceux qu'ils aiment au bef oin : 
le fecours que vous nous donnerez dans nos guerres 
f era le tefmoin fidelle de voflre [2 1 7] amitie ; voftre 
refus me couurira le vifage de confufion. Voila "k 
peu pr6s le difcours de ce Barbare, qui eftonna Mon- 
fieur noftre Gouuerneur. L'autre Capitaine prenant 
la parole dit, Quand il fait manuals temps nous en- 
trons dans nos maifons, nous prenos nos robbes, nous 
fermos nos portes pour nous defendre des iniures de 
I'air: nous voicy dans vne faifon de guerre fort faf- 
cbeufe, nous n'auons pas affez de force pour nous 
mettre ^ couuert de nos ennemis ; nous recherchons 
voftre abry, ne le refufez pas; voftre amy vous en 
coniure : fi vous ne luy preftez la main vous le ver- 
rez difparoiftre dans la meflee de f es ennemis ; vous 
le chercherez dez yeux & de la bouche, demandans, 
oil eft vn tel, qui nous aimoit tant, & que nous ai- 
mions; apprenant fon defaftre vous ferez triftes, & 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 229 

the Captains, especially to Monsieur du Plessis, 
whom he called his younger brother, "You see," 
he said, "that I am a Frenchman; thou knowest, 
my brother, that my Nation regards me as one ; it is 
believed that I have the good fortune to be loved by 
the Captains, and that I am their relation. As for 
me, you know that I have a French heart, I have 
always loved you ; ought I to doubt that it is recipro- 
cated? Tell me, I pray you, if I can count upon your 
friendship, as you can be assured of mine?" When 
this was said, he paused for an answer. Being as- 
sured that he had our love, he continued: " My coun- 
trymen urge me very strongly to show some evidence 
of the credit I have among you ; they believe that 
you love me, but they would like to see it put into 
practice; what word shall I carry them, up there, 
where I am going to see them ? You know it is the 
peculiar privilege of friends to succor in time of need 
those whom they love ; the help that you will give 
us in our wars will be the true proof of your [2 1 7] 
friendship ; your refusal will cover my face with con- 
fusion." The above is very nearly the speech of 
this Barbarian, who astonished Monsieur our Gov- 
ernor. The other Captain, beginning to speak, said : 
" When the weather is bad, we go into our houses, 
we put on our robes, we close our doors to defend 
ourselves from the injurious effects of the air. We 
are now in a time of very troublesome war ; we have 
not enough strength to place ourselves under cover 
from our enemies; we seek shelter from you, do not 
refuse it. Your friend conjures you to do this; if 
you do not lend him your hand, you will see him 
disappear in the conflict against his enemies ; you 
will seek him with your eyes and with your lips, de- 


230 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 

voftre coeur vous dira; Si nous reuflions fecotini nos 
yeux prendroient plaifir h. le voir, & noftre coeur h. 
I'aimer, & nous voila dans Tamertume : or il ne tient 
qu'^ vous de vous deliurer de cette angoille, & de 
vous donner le contentement de le voir retourner du 
combat plein de vie & de gloire. le n'adioufle rien 
au difcours de ce Sauuage, il toucha toutes [218] ces 
raifons, & plufieurs autres qu'il deduifit fort graue- 
ment en fon langage. Vn vieillard tout chenu parla 
par apres a I'antique; ces bonnes gens auoient fait 
ietter aux pieds de nos Capitaines vn paquet. de peaux 
de Caflors, fuiuant la couftume qu'ils ont de faire des 
prefens, quand ils veulent obtenir quelque chofe, 
c'eft par oil commen9a ce vieillard. Quand nous vifi- 
tons les Peuples qui nous font voifms & alliez, nous 
leur faifons des prefens, qui parlent pendant que nous 
nous taifons: ceux qui re9oiuent ces prefens s'ad- 
dreffent h. leur ieuneffe, & les apoflrophent en cette 
fagon; Courage, ieunes hommes, faites voir voflre 
generofite, voila de belles robbes, qui vous attendent 
au retour du combat ; f ouuenez-vous de ceux qui vous 
ont fait ces dons, tuez beaucoup de leurs ennemis: 
voila vne bone couftume, vous la deuriez garder auffi 
bien que nous, difoit ce bon vieillard. On prit de Ik 
fuiet de leur repondre, que quand ils rempliroient la 
maifon de Cafbors, qu'on n'entreprendroit pas la 
guerre pour leurs prefens; que nous fecourions nos 
amys, non pour I'efpoir d'aucune recompenfe, mais 
pour [219] leur amitie. Qu'au refte on n'auoit pas 
amene d'hommes pour eux, ne f9acliant pas qu'ils 
fuffent en guerre ; que ceux qu'ils voyoient ne por- 
toient pas tous les armes, & que ceux qui les por- 
toient n'eftoient pas contens de ce que les Sauuages 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 231 


manding, ' Where is such a one, who loved us so 
much, and whom we loved? ' Learning of his disas- 
ter, you will be sad, and your heart will say to you, 
' If we had succored him, our eyes would have taken 
pleasure in looking at him and our heart in loving 
him ; but lo, we are in bitter grief. ' Now it depends 
only upon you to avoid such anguish, and to give 
yourselves the pleasure of seeing him return from 
the combat full of life and glory. ' ' I add nothing 
to the discourse of this Savage ; he touched upon all 
[218] these arguments and several others, that he rea- 
soned out very gravely in his own language. A hoary- 
headed old man talked afterwards, after the fashion 
of the aged. These simple people had had a bundle 
of Beaver skins thrown at the feet of our Captains, 
according to their custom of making presents when 
they wish to obtain something. It was in reference 
to these that the old man began. " When we visit 
the Tribes which are our neighbors and allies, we 
make them presents, which speak while we keep 
silence. Those who receive these presents address 
themselves to their young men, apostrophizing them 
in this way: ' Courage, young men, show your gen- 
erosity; behold these fine robes, which await you 
upon your return from the combat ; remember those 
who have made these gifts, kill many of their ene- 
mies.' This is a good custom, you ought to observe 
it as well as we," said this simple old man. From 
this we took the text of our answer, saying that if 
they should fill the house with Beavers, we would 
not undertake the war for the sake of their presents ; 
that we helped our friends, not in the hope of any re- 
ward, but for the sake of [219] their friendship. 
That, besides, we had not brought any men for them, 


LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol. 9 


ne s'eftoient point encor alliez des Francois par au- 
cun mariage, & qu'on voyoit bien qu'ils ne vonloient 
pas eftre vn mefme Peuple auec nous, donnans leurs 
enfans degk del^ aux Nations leurs alliees, & non pas 
aux Frangois. Le Capitaine de TadoulTac repliqua, 
que le moye de faire vne forte alliance eftoit de faire 
paroiflre noflre courage, & noffcre bonne volont^; car, 
difoit-il, vos ieunes gens retournans de la guerre apres 
le malTacre de nos ennemis, n'auront pas de peine "k 
trouuer de nos filles en mariage. Pour les enfans, on 
ne voit, dit-il, autre chofe que petits Sauuages aux 
maif ons des Francois ; on y voit des gargons, on y voit 
des filles; que voulez vous dauantage? ie croy que 
I'vn de ces iours on nous demandera nos femmes. 
Vous nous demandez inceffamment nos enfans, & 
vous ne donnez point les voftres: ie ne f5ache aucune 
famille parmy nous, qui tienne auec [220] foy aucun 
Fran9ois. Monfieur le Gouuerneur entendant cette 
r^ponfe, me dit, Ie ne f9ay ce qu'vn Senateur Ro- 
main auroit repondu de plus a propos fur le fuiet pro- 
pofe. Ie luy repliquay, qu'on faifoit nos Sauuages 
en France bien plus maffif s qu'ils ne font : mais met- 
tons fin k cette allemblee. On leur repliqua que de- 
funt Monfieur de Champlain de bonne memoire les 
auoit fecourus en guerre, & que pour cela ils ne s'e- 
ftoient pas alliez de nous : on leur fit entendre qu'on 
ne vouloit leurs enfans que pour les inflruire, & pour 
n'eflre vn iour qu'vn mefme Peuple auec eux; que 
nous n'auions aucun befoin de nous en charger : que 
fi nous ne leur en donnions pas des noftres, c'eft pour 
autant qu'ils demandent de grandes recompenf es, quoy 
qu'ils n'ayent pas dequoy les nourrir : mais que nous 
entretenions & inftruifions les leurs gratuitement. 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 233 

not knowing that they were carrying on war; that 
those whom they saw with us did not all bear arms ; 
and those that did bear them were not satisfied be- 
cause the Savages were not yet allied with the French 
by any marriage ; and that it could easily be seen that 
they did not care to be one People with us, giving 
their children here and there to their allied Nations, 
and not to the French. The Captain of Tadoussac 
replied that the way to make a strong alliance was to 
show our courage and our good will. " For," said 
he, " when your young men return from the war 
after the massacre of our enemies, they will not have 
any trouble in obtaining our girls in marriage. As 
to children," said he, '* one does not see anything else 
but little Savages in the houses of the French ; there 
are little boys there and little girls, — what more do 
you want? I believe that some of these days you 
will be asking for our wives. You are continually 
asking us for our children, and you do not give yours ; 
I do not know any family among us which keeps 
a [220] Frenchman with it." Monsieur the Gover- 
nor, upon hearing this answer, said to me, " I do not 
know what a Roman Senator could have answered 
that would have been more appropriate to the subject 
under discussion." I replied that in France our Sav- 
ages were represented as far more obtuse than they 
are. But let us finish with this assembly. They 
were answered that the deceased Monsieur de Cham- 
plain, of happy memory, had helped them in war, 
and that even then they had not allied themselves 
with us ; they were given to understand that we de- 
sired their children only for instruction and that we 
might be some day one People with them ; that we 
were under no necessity to burden ourselves with 


234 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 

Cette verity les arrefta tout court. Pour ce qui con- 
cernoit la guerre, on repliqua qu'on ne pouuoit leur 
donner ny vn grand, ny vn petit nombre de Fran- 
9ois; d'en donner & [un] grand nombre, ils voioient 
bien que la chofe ne fe pouuoit pas faire, les vaiffeaux 
ne fe voulans pas [221] degarnir de leurs hommes: 
d'en donner peu, nos Fran9ois ne vouloient point al- 
ler auec eux, pour ce, difent-ils, que les Sauuages ne 
fgauroient obeir, ny tenir pied ferme en guerre, k la 
premiere fantaifie ils s'enuolent comme des oyfeaux ; 
fi bien qu'il faudroit aufli que nos Fran9ois eftas vn 
petit nombre prilTent la fuitte, ce qui les rendroit fort 
honteux : car on f e moque parmy nous des fuyards. 
Les braues foldats, tels que nous auons icy, veulent 
vaincre ou mourir. Ils furent fatisfaits de ces rai- 
fons, & ainli le confeil finit. 

Le neufieme du mefme mois de luillet, ie montay 
dans vne barque pour aller au deuant des Hurons, 
qui ne deuoient pas defcendre iufques h. Kebec. II 
fe faut trouuer au rendez vous, pour faire paffer nos 
Peres qui y vont, & r^pondre aux lettres de ceux qui 
y font. Nous n'eftions gueres auancez, quand vn 
vent contraire nous arrefle au milieu du grand Fleu- 
ue ; & comme i'ay deja fouuent experiment^, que nos 
Vaiffeaux ne font ny affeurez, ny fi viftes, fi ce n'efl 
dans les bons vens, que les petits Canots d'^corce des 
Sauuages. I'auois donn^ le mot h. quelques-vns qui 
deuoient monter aux trois Riuieres d'aborder [222] 
noftre Barque, pour me prendre en palfant. Ils n'y 
manquerent pas. Ie me mets done auec eux. lis 
eftoient douze Canots, & enuiron trente ou quarante 
ieunes gens pour la plus part, qui s'en alloient k la 
guerre ; ils m'enuironnent de tons coftez, & me prient 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6j6 236 

them; that if we did not give ours to them, it was 
because they asked great recompense, although they 
had nothing for them to eat ; but that we maintained 
and instructed theirs for nothing. This truth silenced 
them. As to whatever concerned the war, the answer 
was that we could not give to them either a large or 
a small number of French. As to giving them a 
large number, they could see that the thing could 
not be done, as the ships would not consent to be 
[221] stripped of their men; as to giving them a few, 
our Frenchmen did not wish to go with them, " Be- 
cause," say they, " the Savages cannot obey nor stand 
firm in war, — at the first whim that takes them, fly- 
ing off like birds ;" so that our Frenchmen also, being 
few in number, would have to take to flight, which 
would make them greatly ashamed, for deserters are 
ridiculed among us. Brave soldiers, such as we have 
here, wish to conquer or die. They were satisfied 
with these arguments, and thus the council ended. 

On the ninth of the same month of July, I entered 
a bark to go and meet the Hurons, who were not 
coming down as far as Kebec. We had to be at the 
rendezvous, to obtain passage for our Fathers who 
were going there, and to answer the letters of those 
who are there. We had not advanced far, when an 
adverse wind stopped us in the middle of the great 
River; and as I have already often found, by experi- 
ence, that our Ships are not as safe nor as swift, if 
the wind is not fair, as the little bark Canoes of the 
Savages, I had suggested to some of those who were 
going up to the three Rivers to come alongside [222] 
our Bark and take me up in passing. This they did 
not fail to do, and I took my place among them. 
There were twelve Canoes and about thirty or forty 


28« LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 

de les accompagner iufques au pais des Hiroquois; 
ie me mis k rire, & les entretiens d'autres chofes. 
Sur les trois ou quatre heures apres midy, comme ils 
eftoient las de ramer contre vn vent affez violent, ils 
mirent tons pied k terre: chacun prend fon Nauire, 
le range aupres du bois, dans leqtiel nous entrons 
pour preparer nofbre maifon, & pour faire du feu, ou 
plufloft de la fumee pour chaffer les maringoins. 
Noftre hoftellerie fut bien tofl faite, car on rompit 
quelques bouts de branches d'arbres, on les ietta fur 
la terre, & voila noftre palais dreff^, ie iettay Ik deffus 
vne mechante peau pour diflinguer ma chambre, & 
mon lict des autres. Quand nous allons h. la cam- 
pagne, Fran9ois & Sauuages, Religieux & autres, 
nous n'auons point d'autres licts que quelque me- 
chante peau, ny de tente que le ciel, quand il ne 
pleut pas; pendant la pluye, on fe couure [223] 
comme Ton peut; les Sauuages ont a c6t effet des 
6corces fort legeres, & fort commodes. Comme ie 
m'eltois retire pour faire mes prieres, vn Capitaine 
me vint trouuer, & me tirant encor plus k I'ecart, me 
dit, Tu nous a fouuent fait entendre, que ^i celuy qui 
a tout fait ne nous fauorif e, que nous auros du pire ; 
que faudroit-il faire afin qu'il m'aydaft. Ie vis bien 
qu'il parloit pour fa perfonne, & qu'il n'auoit pas 
affez de courage de propofer h. fon efcoiiade ce qu'on 
luy auroit confeill6. Ie luy dy done que Dieu fe plai- 
foit fort qu'on creuft en luy, & qu'on s'y confiaft, & 
par confequent que des a prefent il deuoit croire, que 
luy feul le pouuoit fecourir; qu'il luy deuoit deman- 
der fecours, & luy promettre, qu'au cas qu'il retour- 
naft fain & fauue, qu'il croiroit publiquemet en fon 
Nom. Luy donnant aduis, que s'il fe trouuoit inuefty 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1636 237 

people, mostly young men who were going to war; 
they surrounded me on all sides, and begged me to 
accompany them to the country of the Hiroquois ; I 
began to laugh, and to talk to them about other things. 
About three or four o'clock in the afternoon, as they 
were tired of paddling against a rather violent wind, 
they all landed ; each one took his Boat and laid it 
down near the woods which we entered for the pur- 
pose of preparing our house, and of making a fire, or 
rather some smoke, to drive away the mosquitoes. 
Our hostelry was soon made, for they broke off a few 
ends from the branches of trees, and threw them upon 
the ground, and lo, our palace was ready. I threw 
over these a wretched skin, to distinguish my cham- 
ber and my bed from the others. When we go into 
the country, French and Savages, Religious and 
others, we have no other beds than some wretched 
skins, no other tent than the sky, unless it rains; 
during the rain, we cover ourselves [223] as best we 
can ; the Savages have for this purpose very light and 
convenient pieces of bark. Having withdrawn to say 
my prayers, a Captain came after me, and, drawing 
me still further to one side, said, " Thou hast often 
given us to understand that, if he who has made all 
does not favor us, the worst will happen to us ; what 
must I do to make him aid us?" I saw very clearly 
that he was speaking for himself, and that he did not 
have the courage to propose to his men the counsel 
he would receive. So I told him that God was great- 
ly pleased to have one believe and trust in him ; and 
that consequently he must believe, from this moment, 
that God alone could help him ; that he must ask him 
for help, and promise him that, in case he should re- 
turn safe and sound, he would openly express his be- 


288 LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol. 9 

(le fes ennemis, ou en danger de fa vie, il fe fouuinft 
de liiy demander la deliurance pour auoir moyen 
d'eflre baptife; il me promit de le faire. La nuict 
s'approchant, les principaux d'entre-eux m'accoftent, 
& me parlant de nos fagons de faire, me dirent que 
quand ie priois Dieu qu'ils [224] approuuoient fort 
cela, comme aufii quand ie leur difois quelque chofe ; 
& par confequent qu'il falloit auffi que i'approuuafle 
leurs couftumes, & que ie creulTe en leurs fagons de 
faire; que I'vn d'eux alloit bien toft prier "k leur 
mode, & que ie r^coutalle patiemment. Ie vy incon- 
tinent qu'ils preparoient vn petit tabernacle, pour 
confulter le Manitou ou quelque Genie ; ie leur de- 
manday s'ils croyoient que le Manitou ou les Genies 
deullent venir dans cefte petite tour, & ^\. ce n'efloit 
pas le Sorcier qui 6branloit cette maifon ou ce taber- 
nacle: ils me proteflerent que ce n'efloit pas luy. 
Lk deffus ie leur fay vn offre ; Quand ce tabernacle 
fera 6branl6, leur dy-ie, permettez moy que que i'en- 
tre dedans, & fi me faififfant des deux mains du lon- 
gleur, vous voyez encore branler fon tabernacle, ie 
vous promets de vous donner vn baril de pois, fi toft 
que nous ferons arriuez aux trois Riuieres; Donne 
nous vne Barique de pain, dit laieunelle; Ten fuis 
content, faites entrer le longleur ; mais les plus agez 
ne voulurent pas accepter la propofition : & comme 
il efloit deja fort nuict, le Capitaine s'ecria, Dormez 
ieunelTe, [225] & prenez garde k ce que vous fonge- 
rez, ne cachez rien de ce que vous aurez veu en fonge. 
\A deffus tout le monde s'endort, ie me iette fur mon 
grabat, & fais comme les autres. Enuiron la minuict 
i'entends trois ou quatre hommes qui chantoient & 
hurloient dans les bois; ie me leue, mais ces chan- 


1636] LEJEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 239 

lief in his Name. I advised him, if he found himself 
surrounded by his enemies, or if his life was in dan- 
ger, to remember to ask deliverance of him, so that 
he might have an opportunity to be baptized. He 
promised me he would do so. In the twilight, the 
more prominent ones among them accosted me, and 
began to talk about our ways of doing things. They 
said that when I prayed God they [224] greatly ap- 
proved of it, as well as of what I told them; and 
hence, that I must also approve of their customs, and 
I must believe in their ways of doing things; that 
one of their number was going to pray in their way, 
soon, and that I should listen patiently. I saw at 
once that they were preparing a little tent, in order 
to consult the Manitou, or some Spirit ; I asked them 
if they believed that the Manitou or Demons would 
come into this little tower, and if it was not the Sor- 
cerer who was shaking this house or tent ; they pro- 
tested that it was not he. Thereupon I made them 
an offer. " When this tent is shaking," I said to 
them, " allow me to enter it; and if, after I have 
seized the two hands of the Juggler, you still see his 
tent shaking, I promise that I will give you a keg of 
peas as soon as we reach the three Rivers." " Give 
us a Cask of bread," said the young fellows. " Very 
well; let the Juggler enter." But the older ones did 
not wish to accept this proposition ; and, as it was al- 
ready quite dark, the Captain cried out, " Go to sleep, 
young men, [225] and note carefully what you dream; 
conceal nothing of what you shall see in your dreams." 
Thereupon all go to sleep, and I throw myself upon 
my pallet and do as the others do. About midnight, 
I heard three or four men singing and howling in the 
woods : I arose, but these singers soon afterward be- 


240 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 

teurs fe teurent bien toft apres; c'eftoit le Charlatan 
qui vouloit faire fa confulte. Or ie ne f9ay s'il m'en- 
tendit, quoy que e'en foit, il fortit de fon tabernacle 
fans rien faire, difant que le Manitou ne vouloit pas 
venir. Le lendemain matin ayant veu la pifte de 
quelques Caftors, & rencontre Ik du bois propre pour 
faire des boucliers, ils y vouloient palTer la iourn6e, 
ce qui me fafchoit fort, car ie defirois d'offrir le fainct 
Sacrifice de la MelTe le iour fuiuant, qui eftoit vn Di- 
mancbe, efperant que nous arriuerions aux trois Ri- 
uieres; ie les prie, ie les preffe; point de nouuelles: 
ils me demandoient fi i'eftois enfant pour m'attrifter, 
& que ie ferois encore bien loing fi ie fuffe reft6 dans 
la Barque : enfin leur ayant dit que ie voulois le iour 
fuiuant prier celuy qui pent tout, que ie le prierois 
pour eux, afin qu'il les ay daft dans [226] leurs com- 
bats, ils laifferent partir celuy qui me menoit dans 
fon Canot, & eux-mefmes s'embarquerent bien toft 
apres ; le manuals temps nous fit demeurer k fix lieues 
pr6s des trois Riuieres. Le foir deuant qu'on s'en- 
dormit, le Capitaine s'ecria, Tenez vos armes preftes, 
6 ieunefle, que chacun ayt fon 6pee, fa hacbe & fon 
coufteau aupres de foy en dormant. lis commen- 
goient k craindre les furprifes de leurs ennemis. Sur 
la minuict voila vne abondance d'eau, qui fe d^charge 
fur ceux qui n'eftoient pas abriez ; ie me mis en pe- 
loton fous la peau qui me feruoit de mattelas, & que 
ie fis feruir de couuerture ; & la dellous aufTi content, 
que fous vn lambry dore, ie regoy plus d'vn poinflon 
d'eau fans me beaucoup moiiiller. Le iour fuiuant, 
I'Aurore commengant "k poindre, i'eueille mes gens, 
ie les pre fie tant que ie peux, & m'addreflant k mon 
hofte ; ie luy promets, que fi nous arriuions deuant 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 241 

came silent. It was the Charlatan who was trying 
to have his consultation. Now I do not know whether 
he heard me ; be that as it may, he went out from his 
tent, without accomplishing anything, saying that the 
Manitou would not come. The next morning having 
discovered some Beaver tracks, and having found 
some wood suitable for making shields, they wished 
to pass the day there ; this annoyed me greatly, for 
I desired to offer the holy Sacrifice of the Mass on 
the following day, which was Sunday, hoping we 
would reach the three Rivers. I prayed them, I 
urged them ; no change. They asked me if I was a 
child, that I should be cast down, saying that I would 
be still farther away, if I had remained in the Bark ; 
finally, having told them that I wished upon the fol- 
lowing day to pray to the one who can do all things, 
and that I would pray for them that he would aid 
them in [226] their combats, they allowed the one 
who took me in his Canoe to depart, and they them- 
selves embarked soon after. Bad weather caused us 
to remain at a standstill, six leagues from the three 
Rivers. In the evening, before any one went to 
sleep, the Captain cried out, " Keep your arms ready, 
O young men; let each one have his javelin, his 
hatchet, and his knife near him while asleep." They 
were beginning to fear ambushes from their enemies. 
Toward midnight there fell a heavy shower of rain 
upon those who were not under shelter ; I rolled my- 
self like a ball, under the skin which served me as 
mattress, and which I made serve as a covering ; and 
beneath this, as happy as under a gilded roof, I re- 
ceived over a cask of water without getting very wet. 
The next day, when the Dawn begins to appear, I 
waken my people ; I urge them all I can, and, address- 


242 LES RELATIONS DBS jtSUITES [Vol.9 

midy aux trois Ritiieres, ie luy ferois vn beau pre- 
fent; mais auffi ie I'afTeuray, que fi nous arriuios plus 
tard qu'il n'en auroit que la moitie. Ne void tu pas, 
me fait-il, que ie ne puis pas fauffer compagnie. Ie 
m'eflois iuftement [227] adreffe k vn Canot, dans le- 
quel il y auoit vn ieune homme qui tomboit du haul 
mal, & qui en fut faifi deuant mes yeux, vn peu de- 
uant que de nous rembarquer : cela metonna, car fi ce 
mal I'euft pris au milieu de la riuiere, c'eftoit pour 
renuerfer & nous & Ie Canot, & nous faire perdre ; ie 
ne voulus pas neantmoins changer de vaiffeau pour 
Ie peu de chemin qui reftoit. Nous arriuafmes enfin 
comme il falloit pour auoir Ie temps d'offrir k Dieu 
Ie faint facrifice de I'Autel : approchans des trois Ri- 
uieres, nos Canots fe raffemblerent en vn gros, & nos 
Peres les voyas venir de loing, fe doutans que ie fe- 
rois dans cette trouppe, vindrent au deuant de moy ; 
mes Sauuages les voyans me dirent, Voicy tes Freres 
qui te viennent receuoir. Ie mets done pied k terre, 
& comme nous vinfmes ^ nous entre-faliier, nous em- 
braffans par figne de charite, mon efcoiiade de Sau- 
uages commence ^ pouffer vn grand cry du fond de 
la poitrine, t^moignans tons enfemble par cette voix 
d'allegrelTe, qu'ils approuuoient ces marques d'affe- 
ction & de deference, que nous-nous portions les vns 
aux autres. Le Pere Buteux & Ie Pere Chaftelain 
[228] efloient les deux premiers; ie me mis auec eux, 
marchant fur la greue, pendant que mes Sauuages ra- 
moient doucement en bel ordre, fur le bord du Fleu- 
ue, n'aduan9ant pas plus que nous : rencontrant par 
apres le Pere Quentin, & le Pere Gamier, qui eftoient 
venus au premier bruit, & les faluant comme les au- 
tres, ces pauures Barbares redoublans tons enfemble 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1636 


243 


ing myself to my host, I promise him that if we 
reach the three Rivers before noon, I will make him 
a fine present ; but I also assure him that, if we ar- 
rive later, he will have only the half of it. ' ' Dost 
thou not see," he replied, " that I cannot slip away 
from my company?" I had just [227] applied to a 
Canoe in which there was a young man who had the 
falling sickness [epilepsy], and who was taken with 
it before my eyes, a little while before we reem- 
barked; this alarmed me, for, if the attack had seized 
him in the middle of the river, it would have resulted 
in upsetting both us and the Canoe, and we would 
have been lost ; I did not wish, however, to change 
boats for the little distance that remained. At last 
we arrived so as to have time enough to offer to 
God the holy sacrifice of the Altar. Nearing the 
three Rivers, our Canoes were brought together in a 
body, and our Fathers, seeing them come from afar, 
and thinking I might be in the crowd, came to meet 
me; my Savages, seeing them, said to me, " Behold 
thy Brothers, who come to receive thee." I stepped 
on shore, then ; and as we were saluting each other, 
embracing as a sign of affection, my crowd of Sav- 
ages begin to utter a loud cry from the depths of 
their chests, all showing by this joyful cry that they 
approved these marks of affection and of deference, 
which we were bestowing upon each other. Father 
Buteux and Father Chastelain [228] were the first 
two; I joined them, and we walked along the strand, 
while my Savages paddled slowly, in fine order, along 
the shores of the River, not advancing any more than 
we. Later, encountering Father Quentin and Father 
Gamier, who had come at the first sound, and salut- 
ing them as we did the others, these poor Barbarians 


244 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.9 

leurs cris de ioye, nous donnerent vn fecond t6moi- 
gnage de leur affection. Le lendemain nous leurs 
fifmes feflin, qu'ils agreerent fort felon leur couftume ; 
ce mot de feflin parmi eux leur eft infinimet agre- 
able ; c'efl par 1^ qu'on les gaigne. 

Le quinziefme du mefme mois, arriua Monfieur le 
General dans fa Barque aux trois Riuieres. Le 
mefme iour arriuerent fept Hurons dans vn Canot, 
qui nous apporterent des lettres du Pere Breboeuf, 
lefquelles nous reioiiirent fort: car on nous auoit 
comme affeurez que les Hurons ne defcendroient point 
cette annee pour les grands bruits de guerre, qui cou- 
roient par toutes les Nations, par lefquelles ils doi- 
uent paffer. 

Le dix-huictiefme Monfieur le General partit des 
trois Riuieres, pour monter [229] ^ la riuiere des Hi- 
roquois, ou il eftoit attendu des Sauuages iufques au 
nombre de deux ou trois cens, pour parler de leurs 
guerres; il me dit qu'il y alloit auffi pour les recon- 
cilier, car il y auoit quelque dilTention entre eux : & 
de fait vn Capitaine Montagues s' eftoit comme venu 
letter fouz fa protection; II n'y a plus que toy, & le 
Pere le leune, luy difoit-il, qui m'aymiez; mes Alliez 
fe bandent contre moy, les Algonquins me veulent 
mettre a mort, & perdre le Pais. On le foup9onnoit, 
mais "k tort, d'auoir receu des prefens des Hiroquois, 
& d'auoir trahy la Grenoiiille, & les autres qui auoient 
efte maffacrez; ils en penfoient autant d'vn autre, 
qu'ils vouloient aufli ^gorger. Monfieur du Pleffis a 
appaife tout cela, comme nous dirons bien toft. 

Le vingt-vniefme du mefme mois de luillet, le 
Pere Chaftelain & le Pere Gamier s'embarquerent le 
plus heureufement du monde pour aller aux Hurons. 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 245 


all redoubled their cries of joy, thus giving us a sec- 
ond time evidence of their affection. The next day 
we made a feast for them, which, according to their 
custom, they readily accepted; this word " feast" is 
among them wonderfully agreeable ; it is by this that 
one wins them. 

On the fifteenth of the same month, Monsieur the 
Commandant arrived at the three Rivers in his Bark. 
On the same day there arrived seven Hurons in a 
Canoe, who brought us letters from Father Breboeuf 
which caused us great rejoicing, for we had been al- 
most sure that the Hurons would not come down this 
year, on account of the great rumors of war which 
were heard in all the Nations through which they 
must pass. 

On the eighteenth. Monsieur the Commandant de- 
parted from the three Rivers, to go up [229] to the 
river of the Hiroquois, where he was awaited by the 
Savages to the number of two or three hundred, to 
talk about their wars ; he told me that he went there 
also to reconcile them, as they had some dissensions 
among themselves; and, in fact, one of the Mon- 
tagn6s Captains had come to throw himself under his 
protection. " There is no one left but thou and Fa- 
ther le Jeune," said he, " who loves me; my Allies 
are banded against me ; the Algonquins wish to kill 
me and to ruin the Country." He was suspected, but 
wrongly, of having received presents from the Hiro- 
quois, and of having betrayed la Grenoiiille ["the 
Frog"] and the others who had been massacred. 
They had the same opinion of another, whom they 
wished also to slaughter. Monsieur du Plessis settled 
all that, as we shall soon see. 

On the twenty -first of the same month of July, Fa- 


246 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.9 

II y eut tant de facilit6 en cet affaire, que nous I'a- 
uions pref que pour fufpecte ; les affaires de Dieu font 
au commencement trauuerf^es, mais elles ne laiffent 
pas d'auoir leur effet. Ces fept Hurons que i'ay 
[230] dit eftre arriuez le quinziefme de ce mois par- 
tans de leur Pais, n'auoient pas deffein de venir iuf- 
ques aux Frangois, mais feulement d'aller iufques ^ 
rifle, pour voir fi leur Nation auroit le paffage libre; 
car le bruit couroit que ces Sauuages de I'lfle, les 
plus fuperbes de tous ces Peuples vfoient de quelques 
menaces. Tout fut appaif^ par les Hurons, qui ren- 
uoyerent deux des leurs donner aduis, que la riuiere 
eftoit libre, & cependant defcediret aux trois Riui- 
eres. Or come I'vn de ces fept efloit Capitaine de la 
Bourgade ou font nos Peres aux Hurons, & qu'il auoit 
porte I'an paffe le P. le Mercier, & t6moign6 beau- 
coup d' affection, il nous demanda fi perfonne de nos 
Peres n'alloit "k fon Pais, qu'il en voudroit bien me- 
ner vn, pourueu qu'on luy donnaft vn Canot, car ils 
efloient fept dans celuy qu'ils auoient; on luy trouue 
auffl toft vn Canot de Montagues, bien plus petit que 
les Canots des Hurons; I'ayant veu il s'en contenta. 
L'affaire eftant conclue, on luy fait des prefens, & ^ 
ceux qui s'embarquoient auec luy; les voila tres con- 
tens, & le Pere Chaftelain encor plus de fe voir defti- 
n€ pour partir auec ce Capitaine. Ceux qui eftoiet 
[231] dans r autre Canot, voyans qu'il y auoit encor vn 
Pere k embarquer, nous vindrent dire qu'il ne falloit 
pas le feparer d'auec fon Compagnon, & qu'ils fe- 
roient bien aif es de le loger auec eux dans leur petit 
Nauire d'^corce. Voila les temps bien changez, les 
annees paff^es il falloit aller & venir, interpofer 1' au- 
thority de tout le monde, & I'affection de plufieurs, 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, Tdjd 247 

tlier Chastelain and Father Gamier embarked, the 
happiest men in the world, to go to the Hurons. 
This affair seemed so easy of accomplishment that 
we almost suspected something was wrong. The 
affairs of God are generally crossed in the beginning, 
but they do not fail to produce results. These seven 
Hurons who, as I [230] said, arrived on the fifteenth 
of this month, when leaving their Country did not 
intend to come so far as the Frenchmen, but only to 
go up to the Island to see if their Nation would have 
a free passage ; for it was rumored that these Island 
Savages, the haughtiest of all these Tribes, were 
using threats. All was made right by the Hurons, 
who sent back two of their men to give notice that 
the river was free, and meanwhile they descended to 
the three Rivers. Now as one of these seven was 
Captain of the Village where our Fathers are, with 
the Hurons, and as he had last year taken Father le 
Mercier, and had shown a great deal of interest in us, 
he asked if none of our Fathers were going to his 
Country, saying that he would gladly take one of 
them, provided they would give him a Canoe, for 
there were seven in the one they had. They imme- 
diately found for him a Montagues Canoe, much 
smaller than those of the Hurons; having seen it, he 
was satisfied. The affair being concluded, they gave 
presents to him and to those who were embarking 
with him ; they were well pleased, and Father Chas- 
telain still more so at seeing himself destined to de- 
part with this Chief. Those who were [231] in the 
other Canoe, seeing there was still another Father to 
embark, came to tell us that it was not necessary to 
separate him from his Companion, and that they 
would be very glad to have him with them in their 


248 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.9 

pour trouuer place a vn de nos Peres parmy ces Bar- 
bares, & cette annee les fept premiers qui font def- 
cendus en ont eux-mefmes demand^. On donna aux 
deux chefs & gouuerneurs de ces deux Canots, cha- 
cun vne couuerture, aux autres chacun vn capot, vn 
baril de pois, du pain, & quelques pruneaux ; c'eft la 
nourriture de nos Peres, & de leurs Sauuages, qui 
n'auoient point fait de caches en defcendant, & tout 
cela pour vingt ou trente iours, dans des chemins qui 
font horreur k en ouir parler; noflre Seigneur leur 
veiiille donner fa faincte benediction. 

Le dernier iour de ce mois, Monfieur le General 
retourna aux trois Riuieres. Voicy les particularitez 
de fon voyage. Ayant trouue les Sauuages affem- 
blez a la Riuiere des Hiroquois, il leur parla des [232] 
differens qu'ils auoient les vns auec les autres, & leur 
fit faire quelques prefens, pour aualer plus douce- 
ment, comme ils parlent, leurs mecontentemens. En 
vn mot, il mit la paix parmy-eux ; & pour accouftu- 
mer toufiours leurs oreilles a entendre parler de noflre 
creance, il leur difoit, que s'ils aymoient les Fran- 
9ois, ils deuoient aymer & ecouter ceux que les Fran- 
9ois cherifCent, «& aufquels ils pretent I'oreille; qu'ils 
leurs deuoient donner leurs enfans pour les inflruire, 
il parloit de nous, adiouftant que le grand Capitaine 
venu de nouueau a Kebec auoit efte inftruit dans nos 
ecoles ; que luy mefme auoit efte enf eigne de noftre 
main, & que s'ils defiroient que nous ne fuffions qu'vn 
Peuple par enfemble, qu'il falloit commencer par Ik. 
A tout cela ils repondirent, ho ! ho ! ho ! felon leur 
couftume, quand ils approuuent quelque difcours. 

Au depart ces Barbares s'en allerent chercher quel- 
que pauure miferable Hiroquois ; car la plus part de 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 249 


little bark Ship. See how the times are changed! 
In past years we had to go and come, to interpose 
the authority of everybody and the affection of many, 
to find a place for one of our Fathers among these 
Barbarians; and this year the first seven who have 
come down have themselves asked for them. There 
was given to the two chiefs and governors of these 
two Canoes, each a blanket, — to the others each a 
cloak, — a keg of peas, some bread, and some prunes; 
this is for the maintenance of our Fathers, and of 
their Savages, who had not made any caches on their 
journey down, and all this is for twenty or thirty 
days, over roads that make one shudder to hear 
about. May our Lord give them his holy benediction. 
On the last day of this month. Monsieur the Gen- 
eral returned to the three Rivers, and here are the 
particulars of his voyage. Having found the Sav- 
ages assembled at the River of the Hiroquois, he 
spoke to them of the [232] quarrels that existed among 
them, and had some presents given to them to make 
them more easily swallow, as one may say, their 
grievances. In a word, he restored peace among 
them ; and, that he might ever accustom their ears to 
hear our belief spoken of, he told them that, if they 
loved the French, they should love and listen to those 
whom the French cherish, and to whom they open 
their ears ; that they must give them their children 
for instruction; he spoke of us, — adding that the 
great Captain who had recently come to Kebec had 
been instructed in our schools, that he himself had 
been taught by us ; and that, if they wished us all to 
be but one People, they must begin there. To all 
this they answered, ho! ho! ho! according to their 
custom when they approve a speech. 


260 LES RELA TIONS DES j£ SUITES [Vol. 9 

leiirs guerres fe paffent dans les furprifes, fe guet- 
tans les vns les autres, comme on feroit vn Sanglier. 
Cependant Monfieur le General [233] monte plus 
haut, donne iufques ^ la Riuiere des Prairies. A 
fon retour il nous decriuit ces lieux comme vn Para- 
dis terreftre : Les terres, difoit-il, y font meilleures, 
les arbres mieux nourris, les prairies en abondance, 
la beaute du Pais rauiffante, la pefche monftrueufe 
en quantity, en quality, & grandeur de poifTon; voila 
bien des richeffes affembl6es en vn endroit ; mais les 
Maringoins font les petits dragons qui gardent ces 
belles pommes d'or, qu'on n'aura pas fans peine, non 
plus que les autres prefens de la terre. 

Le treizieme iour d'Aouft, arriua vn Canot du Pais 
des Hurons qui auoit rencontre le Pere Garnier, & le 
Pere Chaftelain k la petite Nation des Algonquins. 
Les Peres m'^criuoient ce peu de mots fur vn feiiillet 
de tablettes, faute de papier. Ces porteurs vous diront 
mieux comme s appelle le lieu oil ils nous ont rencontr^ 
que nous autres; nous fommes en bonne fanti, graces a 
Dieu ; nous-nous en allons tous courans dans nos gondoles 
d'^corce; nous volons h ce Paradis tat dejir^ auec vn fur- 
croijl de courage, que Dieu nous a donn^. Kionch^ fait 
pour le mollis auj^i bon traittement au Pere Garnier, 
^a'Aenons au Pere Chajlelain ; ils ont bien m^nag^ [234] 
nos viures, nous auons encor vn peu de pain : ie n'ay peu 
lire le refte. 

Le dixiefme du mefme mois, le Capitaine de Ta- 
douflac retourna de la guerre auec fon efcoiiade ; il 
nous dit qu'ils auoient trouue vne Cabane delailTee, ou 
peut eflre trois cens Hiroquois auoient couche, qu'vne 
partie de leurs trouppes les pourfuiuoient, plufieurs 
ayant tourn6 vifage, dont il eftoit du nombre, pour 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 251 

When they parted, these Barbarians went off in 
search of some poor wretched Hiroquois; for the 
greater part of their wars consists in ambushes, lying 
in wait for each other as one would for a Wild Boar. 
Meanwhile Monsieur the Commandant [233] goes up 
higher, continuing as far as the River of the Prai- 
ries.'*^ Upon his return he described these places to 
us as a terrestrial Paradise. The land there, he says, 
is better, the trees more flourishing, the meadows 
abundant, the beauty of the Country ravishing ; the 
fish enormous in quantity, in quality, and in size. 
There indeed are riches, collected in one place ; but 
the Mosquitoes are the little dragons that guard these 
beautiful golden apples, which cannot be had without 
difficulty, any more than the other gifts of the earth. 

On the thirteenth day of August, there arrived a 
Canoe from the Country of the Hurons which had 
encountered Father Garnier and Father Chastelain 
at the petite Nation of the Algonquins. The Fathers 
wrote me these few words upon the leaf of a tablet, 
for lack of paper: The bearers of this will tell you, bet- 
ter than we can, the name of the place where they met us; 
we are in good health, thank God; we are gliding along 
swiftly in our bark gondolas; we are flying to this so- 
desired Paradise with an increase of courage that God has 
given us. Kionche shows at least as good treatment to 
Father Garnier, as Aenons does to Father Chastelain; 
they have managed our [234] provisions well, we have still 
a little bread. The rest I could not read. 

On the tenth of the same month, the Captain of 
Tadoussac returned with his company from the war. 
He told us that they had found an abandoned Cabin 
where perhaps three hundred Hiroquois had slept ; 
that part of their troop were still pursuing them, — 


262 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.9 

quelque difpute qui efloit furuenue entre-eux. Le 
lendemain vindrent nouuelles que le refte de rarm^e 
retournoit, & qu'on auoit mis a mort quelques enne- 
mis. Enfin le treizi^me parurent vne partie de ces 
guerriers dans leur Canot, ils portoient en forme de 
Guidons les perruques de ceux qu'ils auoient tuez, 
car c'eft leur couftume d'arracher la peau de la tefle 
auec tout le poil de celuy qu'ils maflacrent. Ces 
peaux font de grands trophees. On les voyoit volti- 
ger auec leurs mouftaclies chacune au bout d'vn long 
bafton qu'ils eleuoient en I'air, comme des guidons ; 
les femmes accoururent incontinent k la veue de ces 
palmes, & de ces lauriers, quitterent leurs robbes, & 
fe ietterent k la nage apres ces guirlandes; [235] c'e- 
ftoit h. qui en attraperoit quelqu'vne pour la pendre 
dans leurs Cabanes comme vne marque de leur gene- 
rofit6. On nous vint racompter cette barbaric ; nous 
nous tranfportafmes aux Cabanes; comme ie regar- 
dois ces perruques, les femmes qui s'en eftoient fai- 
fies, s'en voulurent glorifier; mais elles furent bien 
eftonnees quand elles entendirent les reproches que 
nous leur fifmes de leur vanite. Or pour deduire en 
deux mots le fuccez de cette guerre, quelques cent 
Sauuages & plus s'eftans debandez, le refte pourfui- 
uit fa pointe. Ils s'en vont h. cofl^ d'vne bourgade 
de leurs ennemis, rencontrans vn ou deux pauures 
miferables, ils les faififlent, & leur promettent la vie 
s'ils d^couurent en quel endroit on pourroit faire ren- 
contre de leurs compatriotes ; ils leurs enfeignent 
vne riuiere non pas bien efloigne de Ik, ou quelques 
hommes eftoient allez, partie pour la pefche, partie 
pour faire de grands colets d'ecorces propre a prendre 
des Cerfs. II y auoit aufli plufieurs femmes qui re- 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 253 

many having turned their faces about, he being of 
this number, on account of some dispute which had 
arisen among them. The next day, the news came 
that the rest of the army was returning, and that 
some of the enemy had been put to death. Finally, 
on the thirteenth, a party of these warriors appeared 
in their Canoe ; they bore in the form of Guidons the 
scalps of those whom they had killed, for it is their 
custom to tear the skin, with all the hair, from the 
head of him whom they slay. These scalps are great 
trophies. One sees them with moustaches waving, 
each on the end of a long pole that they raise in the 
air, as if they were banners. The women ran hur- 
riedly at the sight of these palms and these laurels, 
dropped their clothes, and leaped in to swim after 
these garlands. [235] There was a struggle among 
them as to which should catch one to hang it in their 
Cabins, as a token of the warriors' generosity. Some 
one came and told us of this barbarity ; we went to 
the Cabins, and, as I was examining these scalps, the 
women who had captured them began to boast of it ; 
but they were greatly surprised when they heard the 
reproaches we heaped upon them for their vanity. 
Now to express in two words the result of this war, 
some hundred Savages and more having disbanded, 
the rest followed up their purpose. They went off 
into the neighborhood of one of their enemy's settle- 
ments, and, encountering one or two poor wretches, 
they seized them, and promised to spare their lives 
if they revealed in what place their compatriots 
might be found. These showed them a river not far 
distant, where some men had gone, partly to fish and 
partly for the purpose of making stout snares of bark, 
suitable for catching Deer. There were also several 


264 LES RELATIONS DES jiSUITES [Vol.9 

cueilloient le chanvre du pais, ce font des horties, 
dont ils font de fort bons cordages ; ces Barbaras y 
accourent aufli toft, fe iettent [236] fur ces pauures 
gens, comme des loups deffus letir proye ; voila vn cry 
qui fe fait de tous coftez, les vns s'enfuient, les autres 
fe defendent, les femmes hurlent, & tafchet de fe fau- 
uer; bref ils prennent, & tuent en tout vingt-huict 
perfonnes, "k ce qu'ils difent, tant hommes, que 
femmes & enfans; la plus grande partie eftoit de 
femmes, ils ramenerent en vie trois hommes, vne 
ieune femme, & vne ieune fille. Les Sauuages qui 
font au delTus des trois Riuieres eurent pour leur part 
deux homes & la fille, ceux d'icy bas en eurent vn & 
la ieune femme; ils en eulTent amen6 dauantage, 
mais come ils craignoient d'eftre pourfuiuis de leurs 
ennemis, il tuoiet en chemin ceux qui ne marchoiet 
pas bien; ils difent que cette ieune femme voyat 
qu'on en tuoit pour ne pouuoir cheminer, eftoit la 
premiere en tefte de toute I'arm^e, portat la fatigue 
mieux qu'vn homme ; car figurez vous qu'ils f urent 
plufieurs iours fans rien manger du tout, fuyans ^ 
perte d'haleine, par vn teps de pluie fort fafcheux ; 
on ne trouue point \k de maifon de retraitte pour fe 
feicher, celuy qui les moiiille les feiche, come Ton 
dit. Cette pauure femme ne difoit aucun [237] mot, 
paroiffant fans crainte au milieu de ces Loups; elle 
auoit la face modefte, mais I'oeil fi alTeure, que ie la 
prenois pour vn homme. II eft vray que les Barbaras 
ne font point ordinairement de mal aux femmes, non 
plus qu'aux enfans, finon dans leurs furprifes, voire 
mefme quelque ieune homme ne fera point de diffi- 
culte d'epoufer vne prifonniere, fi elle trauaille bien, 
& par apres elle pafTe pour vne femme du pays. 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELA TION, 1636 


255 


women who were gathering the hemp of the country, 
that is, nettles, of which they make very strong 
ropes. These Barbarians immediately run thither, 
and throw themselves [236] upon these poor people, 
like wolves upon their prey. Now cries are heard 
from all sides; some flee, others defend themselves; 
the women scream, and try to escape; in short, they 
take and kill in all twenty-eight persons, according 
to their story, as many men as women and children, 
there being more women than children. They 
brought alive three men, a young woman, and a 
young girl. The Savages who live above the three 
Rivers had as their share two men and the girl, those 
here had one man and the young woman. They 
would have brought back more of them, but, as they 
were afraid of being pursued by their enemies, they 
killed on the way those who did not walk fast enough. 
They say that this young woman, seeing them kill 
those who could not keep up, was at the head of the 
whole troop, enduring the fatigue better than a man. 
For imagine that they were several days without any- 
thing at all to eat, flying in breathless haste in rainy 
and disagreeable weather. No house of retreat was 
to be found there where they could dry themselves ; 
he who wets them, dries them, as the saying is. 
This poor woman did not say a [237] word, being ap- 
parently without fear in the midst of these Wolves. 
She had a modest face, but so bold an eye that I took 
her for a man. It is true that the Barbarians do not 
usually harm the women or the children, except in 
their sudden attacks. Indeed, many a young man will 
not hesitate to even marry a prisoner, if she is very 
industrious ; and thereafter she will pass as a woman 
of his country. As to the men, they do not receive 


26d LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.9 

Pour les hommes il n'en va pas ainli, c'eft la cruaut6 
mefme qui les martyrife. Si toft que celuy qui fut 
conduit aux trois Riuieres eut mis pied ^ terre, les 
femmes & les enfans fe iettent delTus; c'eft k qui luy 
allenera le mieux fon coup ; cependant le prifonnier 
chante, palTe chemin fans fe retourner pour voir qui 
le frappe : vn miferable boitteux le voyant tout nud 
prend vne groffe corde en double & la d6charge fur 
ce pauure corps, fur le dos & fur le ventre, & fur I'e- 
flomach, en forte qu'il chancela & penfa tomber, fa 
chair en refta toute liuide, & toute morte : d'autres 
luy mirent du feu dans la bouche, d'autres appro- 
choient des tifons en diuers endroits, pour le faire 
roftir, puis on luy donnoit vn peu de relache, [238] 
le f aifant chanter & dancer : vne f emme le vint mor- 
dre par vn doigt, taf chant de I'arracher, comme fe- 
roit vn chien; en fin n'en pouuant venir a bout elle 
prend vn coufleau, & le coupe, puis luy met dans la 
bouche pour luy faire aualer, il tafche de le faire, 
mais il ne put; I'ayant rendu ^ cette Tygreffe, elle 
le fait roftir pour le donner ^ manger k des enfans, 
qui le fuc9oient deja ; vn de nos f oldats furuenant le 
demanda, k peine ces enfans le vouloient-ils quitter; 
il s'en faifit done, & le ietta dans la riuiere abhorrant 
ces cruautez. Deux ieunes hommes prirent vne autre- 
fois ce pauure miferable par les deux bras, & k belles 
dents comme des Loups enragez mordoient dedans, 
le fecoiiant comme vn dogue furieux fecoue vne cha- 
rongne pour en emporter la piece. D6s que i'eus 
appris que ces rages fe faifoient a noftre porte, & 
deuant les yeux de nos Fran9ois, ie defcendis aux Ca- 
banes, & tan9ay fort & ferme ces bourreaux, les me- 
na9ans que les Fran9ois ne les aimeroient plus : & en 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 257 

the same treatment ; it is cruelty itself which mar- 
tyrs them. As soon as the one who had been brought 
to the three Rivers had set foot upon land, the women 
and children fell upon him, each one trying to see 
which could strike the hardest blows. Meanwhile 
the prisoner sings, and continues on his way without 
turning around to see who strikes him. A wretched 
cripple, seeing him entirely naked, took a heavy 
doubled rope, and lashed this poor body, upon the 
back, upon the stomach, and upon the chest, so that 
he staggered and was about to fall, his flesh becom- 
ing quite livid and dead. Others put fire in his 
mouth, others thrust firebrands at him from different 
directions, to roast him ; then he was given a little 
respite, [238] and was made to sing and dance; a 
woman came and bit into his finger, trying to tear it 
off, as a dog would do; not being successful, she 
finally took a knife and cut it off, then put it in his 
mouth, to make him swallow it; he tried to do so, 
but could not. Having restored it to this Tigress, 
she roasted it, to give it to some children to eat, who 
continued to suck it for some time. One of our sol- 
diers coming along, asked them for it, but these chil- 
dren were reluctant to give it up ; then he snatched 
it, and threw it into the river, in abhorrence of these 
cruelties. Another time two young men took this 
poor wretch by his two arms, and bit into them as 
greedily as rabid Wolves, shaking him as an angry 
dog shakes a carcass to get a piece off. As soon as I 
learned that these insane acts were being committed 
at our door and before the eyes of our French people, 
I went down to the Cabins, and reproached these tor- 
mentors severely and emphatically, threatening that 
the French would no longer love them. And, in 


258 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.9 

effet il faudroit remarquer ceux qui exercent ces ma- 
nies, & les exclurre des maifons de tons les Frajois, 
cela les retiendroit: les hommes ne [239] me repar- 
tirent rien, baiflans la tefte tous honteux & confus. 
Quelqiies femmes nous dirent que les Hiroquois fai- 
foient encore pis ^ leurs peres, ^ leurs maris, & k 
leurs enfans, me demandant li i'amois vne fi mefchante 
Nation: ie leur repars que ie ne I'aimois pas, mais 
qu'ils pouuoient tuer ce miferable fans Ie traitter 
auec cette fureur. En vn mot ie leur fis entendre 
que fi leurs ennemis n'auoient point d'efprit, qu'il 
ne falloit pas les imiter; que ce n'eftoit pas vne 
marque de courage & de generofit^ de battre & de 
mordre vn homme lie, que parmy eux mefmes les 
plus vaillans n'exergoient point ces cruautez, & me 
tournant vers ceux que ie iugeois les plus genereux ; 
ce font ceux 1^ qui pourfuiuent les Hiroquois, qui les 
tuent dans la chaleur du combat, qui les prennent, 
qui les lient, & qui les amenent; & les poltrons qui 
demeurent au foyer des Cabanes en font cur^e comme 
des chiens ; ils fe mirent k rire, & m'aduouerent qu'ils 
n'eulTent pas voulu exercer cette boucherie. II y 
eut neantmoins vn Capitaine eftranger nomme la 
Perdrix, qui fe fafcha, me dit-on, par apres de ce que 
i'auois dit, affeurant que [240] fi Ie prifonnier luy 
euft appartenu, qu'il m'auroit chaffe de fa Cabane. 
Ie fgay bien qu'il ne I'auroit pas faict, car ie n'aurois 
garde de parler aux Algonquins, notamment S. ceux 
de rifle, comme ie parle "k nos Montagues. Ie me 
fuis laifl!e dire que Monfieur de Champlain les eftant 
alle fecourir dans leurs guerres, & voyans que I'vn 
d'eux traittoit rudement quelque femme prifonniere, 
ou quelque enfant, il leur voulut faire entendre que 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 259 

fact, it would be well to make a note of all those who 
perpetrate these outrages, and to exclude them from 
the houses of all the French; that would restrain 
them. The men [239] did not answer me, holding 
down their heads, ashamed and confused. Some of 
the women told me that the Hiroquois did still worse 
things to their fathers, husbands, and children, ask- 
ing me if I loved such a wicked Nation. I replied 
that I did not love them, but that they could kill this 
wretch without treating him with such cruelty. In a 
word, I gave them to understand that, if their ene- 
mies had no intelligence, they should not imitate 
them ; that it was no sign of courage and generosity 
to beat and bite a man who was bound ; that among 
themselves the most valiant did not engage in these 
cruel acts ; and, turning toward those whom I consid- 
ered the most humane, I said, " These are they 
who pursue the Hiroquois, who kill them in the heat 
of combat, who capture them, who bind them, and 
who lead them away, — while the cowards who re- 
main at the Cabin fireside devour them like dogs." 
They began to laugh, and admitted that they would 
not willingly practice such butchery. There was, 
however, a strange Captain called la Perdrix [ ' ' the 
Partridge"],'*^ who, I was told, became angry after 
hearing me say this, asserting that, [240] if the pris- 
oner had belonged to him, he would have driven me 
out of his Cabin. I am quite sure he would not have 
done so ; for I would be careful not to speak to the 
Algonquins, especially to those of the Island, as I 
speak to our Montagues. I permitted myself to say 
that when Monsieur de Champlain went to help them 
in their wars, and saw one of them treat roughly a 
woman prisoner, or a child, he tried to make them 


260 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.9 

cette barbaric eftoit aliene de la bonte naturelle "k 
rhomme: vn Sauuage de I'lfle I'entendant luy dit, 
Regarde comme ie feray, puis que tu en paries, il 
prend par le pied vn enfant qui eftoit encor k la mam- 
melle, & luy caffe la tefte centre vne roche, ou contre 
vn arbre. Si ces fuperbes ont parl^ en cette forte k vn 
Capitaine qui auoit les armes en main, que feroient 
ils a vne perfonne qui n'a que fa parole ? Ie fcay bien 
qu'il faut vfer de grande difcretion auec ces Peuples, 
qui ne veulent receuoir aucun ioug. Ie fcay bien en- 
cor qu'ils ont quelque forte de raifon, ou plufloft 
d'excufe, traittans leurs ennemis en cette forte; car 
les Hiroquois les tenans font encor plus enragez 
qu'eux; mais ie f9ay [241] bien auffi que qui iamais 
ne commence vne affaire, iamais ne I'acheue: ie ne 
pre fie point I'oreille a ceux qui penfent auoir tout 
dit, quand ils vous ont reprefent^ que c'eft leur cou- 
ftume, qu'il les faut laifTer faire, qu'on n'y gaignera 
rien ; ils f e trompent ; nous ne fommes pas feuls qui 
cognoilTons a I'oeil qu'on a beaucoup gaigne depuis 
quelque temps fur vne bonne partie de ces Barbares; 
quand ce ne feroit que de fe donner la hardielTe & 
I'authorite de les reprendre lors qu'ils commettent 
ces grands defordres, cela profite toufiours. La pre- 
miere ann^e que nous vinfmes icy quand i'eulle fceu 
la Langue en perfection, ie n'aurois eu garde de 
prendre fur eux I'afcendant que ie pourrois prendre 
maintenant auec mon begayement, ils m'auroient 
bien-toft impofe le filence. Mais quand ie voy des 
hommes crians tons les iours a la faim ^ nos portes, 
que nous obligeons inceflamment, qui n'ont point 
d'autre appuy que nos Frangois; il me femble qu'en 
contrechange des fecours qu'ils regoiuent de nos 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 261 

understand that such barbarity was foreign to the 
kindness natural to man. An Island Savage, upon 
hearing this, said to him, " See what I shall do, now 
that thou speakest of it ; " and he took by the foot a 
nursing child, and struck its head against a rock or a 
tree. If those proud spirits spoke thus to a Captain 
who had arms within reach, what would they do to a 
man who has nothing but his voice? I know full 
well that great discretion must be used with these 
Tribes, who will not submit to any yoke. I also 
know well that they have some reason, or rather ex- 
cuse, for treating their enemies in this way; for, 
when the Hiroquois get hold of them, they are still 
more rabid. But I know [241] well, also, that, if one 
never commences a thing, he will never finish it. I 
pay no attention to those who think they have said 
all when they have represented to you that it is their 
custom, that you must let them go on, and that noth- 
ing will be gained. They are mistaken. We are 
not the only ones who can see at a glance that a great 
deal has been achieved within a certain time among 
a good part of these Barbarians ; if it were only that 
we have gained the hardihood and authority to rep- 
rimand them when they commit these great wrongs, 
that is always some advantage. The first year we 
came here, if I had known the Language to perfection, 
I would not have dared to assume over them the as- 
cendency which I can take now with my stammerings, 
for they would have soon imposed silence upon me. 
But when I daily see men crying with hunger at our 
doors, whom we are constantly favoring and who 
have no other support than our Frenchmen, it seems 
to me that, in return for the help they receive from 
our hands, we can exact from them some courtesy. 


262 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 

mains, nous pouuons exiger d'eux quelque courtoif [i]e : 
il eft vray que quand on les reprend il ne faut iamais 
les mena9er [242] d'aucune violence, ce feroit tout 
perdre: auffi leur dis-ie ordinairement que s'ils veu- 
lent eftre opiniaftres dans leurs couftumes, que nous 
tiendrons ferme dans les noflres : que s'ils ne nous 
aiment iufques k ce poinct de quitter quelque chofe 
de leur cruaut6 en noflre confideration, qu'k la veri- 
ty nous ne leur ferons aucun mal, mais que nous ne 
les cherirons pas iufques Ik, que nous nous oflions le 
morceau de la bouche pour les aflifter dans leurs be- 
foins: que nous remarquerons fort bien ceux qui fe- 
ront quelque impudence publique, ou qui entreront 
dans ces rages, & dans ces manies, pour leur fermer 
la porte, & I'ouurir k ceux qui font bons parmy eux; 
pleufb a Dieu que tons nos Fra9ois fiffent le mefme. 
Les Sauuages nos voifins dependent beaucoup de 
nous; li nous nous accordions tons h. renuoyer fans 
iniure ceux qui font des chofes fi ^loignees de la rai- 
fon & de la nature, on verroit bien-toft du change- 
ment parmy eux. Au refhe ils fgauent que ie les 
aime, c'efl pourquoy ils ne me veulent pas fi aife- 
ment choquer. Ce n'eft pas qu'il n'y en ait encor qui 
fe gauffent, & qui fe rient de ce que nous leur difons: 
[243] mais ce n'eft rien en comparaifon des iniures 
que i'ay beu autrefois: & apres tout cela ie ne puis 
dire qu'on trouue plus de refiftance interieure en vn 
Chreftien enchaifne des mauuaifes habitudes de fes 
vies, qu'en vn Sauuage tant barbare foit-il. Pour 
conclure ce poinct, le Capitaine que i'auois notam- 
ment tance, car c'eft h. luy le prifonnier, on le luy a 
donne en echange d'vn flen frere tue par les Hiro- 
quois: ce Capitaine, dis-ie, m'eftant venu voir le len- 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 263 

Of course, when we reprimand them we must never 
threaten them [242] with any violence, for this would 
be to lose all ; therefore I generally tell them that, if 
they are going to be stubborn about their customs, we 
will hold fast to ours ; that, if they do not care enough 
for us to give up some of their acts of cruelty for our 
sake, we will certainly not do them any harm, but 
we will not cherish them to the extent of taking the 
morsel from our own mouths to assist them in their 
needs ; that we will observe very carefully those who 
perpetrate any public indecency, or who take part in 
these outrages and insane acts, so that we may close 
our doors against them and open them to those among 
them who are good. Would to God that all our 
French people would do the same. Our neighboring 
Savages depend greatly upon us; if we all should 
agree to exclude without doing them any harm, those 
who commit acts so at variance with reason and na- 
ture, we would soon see a change among them. Be- 
sides, they know I love them, and that is why they 
are not willing to offend me. Not that some of them 
do not still sneer and laugh at what we say to them ; 
[243] but this is nothing in comparison with the in- 
sults I formerly had to swallow. And, after all, I 
cannot say that one finds more internal resistance in 
a Christian enchained by the bad habits of his life 
than in a Savage, however barbarous he may be. To 
conclude this subject, the Captain whom I particular- 
ly chided, — for the prisoner belonged to him, having 
been given to him in exchange for a brother of his, 
who had been killed by the Hiroquois, — this Cap- 
tain, I say, having come to see me the next day, I 
explained to him that he ought to take all I had said 
to him as a mark of my affection for him ; that I was 


264 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.9 

demain, ie Itiy reprefentay qu'il deuoit prendre tout 
ce que ie luy auois dit cotnme vne marque de mon 
affection en fon endroit; que i'eftois marry dans Ie 
coeur que luy qui fait profeffion d' aimer les Fran§ois, 
permifl qu'on fift en leur prefence des actions qu'ils 
haiffent comme la mort; que nos foldats s'en retour- 
nans en France diroient a nos compatriotes, que ces 
Peuples icy font des chiens, & qu'ils font prouenus 
de quelques chiens ; & que moy qui les aime ferois 
fafche de cette nouuelle: qu'il ne peut pas douter 
de mon amitie; que luy mefme a dit a Monfieur 
Ie General qu'il n'y auoit plus que luy & moy 
qui I'aimaffions; que i'ay pri6 ce grand Capitaine 
de Ie prendre fouz [244] fa protection, contre ceux 
qui Ie vouloient tuer; qu'il a fait des prefens en 
fa confideration pour appaifer leurs differens ; qu'il 
fgait bien que ie I'ay fecouru dans fa necelTite; 
qu'il a toufiours efte aflifte des Fran§ois; qu'il veut 
hyuerner ^ Kebec, oti ie me dois trouuer aupres du 
grand Capitaine de tous les Capitaines Fran§ois qui 
font en leur pais ; que ce Capitaine eft vn homme 
doux & humain; qu'il n'aime point Ie fang, ny Ie 
carnage, finon dans la fureur de la guerre. Nous 
vous accordons quelquef ois ce que vous nous deman- 
dez, accordez nous auffi ce que nous vous demandons, 
afin que nous venions petit k petit k n'eftre plus qu'vn 
mefme Peuple. II m'auoiia que i' auois raifon, & 
qu'il aimeroit toufiours fon amy Monfieur noftre Gou- 
uerneur, me priant de Ie fecourir en fes neceCTitez, 
qui vont eflre d'autant plus grandes, que I'age luy 
va interdire la guerre & la chaff e. 

Le quatorzieme du mefme mois d'Aourt les Sau- 
uages vindrent voir en corps Monfieur le General, 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1636 265 

heartily sorry that he, who professed to love the 
French, should permit to be done in their presence 
deeds that they hated like death ; that our soldiers, 
upon returning to France, would say to our country- 
men that these Peoples here are dogs, and that they 
have sprung from dogs ; — and that I, who love them, 
would be annoyed at such statements. I told him 
that my friendship could not be doubted, — that he 
himself had said to Monsieur the Commandant that 
there was no one now that loved him but he and 
I ; that I had prayed that great Captain to take 
him under [244] his protection, in opposition to those 
who wished to kill him ; that the Captain had made 
presents in his behalf, to settle their quarrels ; that 
he was well aware that I had helped him in his time 
of need. I reminded him that he had always been 
assisted by the French ; that he wished to spend the 
winter in K6bec, where I expected to be, near the 
great Captain of all the French Captains who are in 
their country ; that this Captain is a gentle and hu- 
mane man ; that he is not fond of blood nor of car- 
nage, unless in the fury of war. " We sometimes 
gfrant you what you ask of us ; grant us also what we 
ask of you, so that we may come to be, little by little, 
only one and the same People." He admitted that I 
was right, and that he would always love his friend 
Monsieur our Governor, — begging me to succor him 
in his need, which would become greater and greater 
as age interdicted him from war and the chase. 

On the fourteenth of the same month of August, 
the Savages came in a body to see Monsieur the Com- 
mandant, to present to him the young Hiroquois 
woman. The one who had captured her, seeing that 
all were seated on one side or the other, arose and 


266 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.9 

pour luy pref enter cette ieune Hiroquoife : celuy qui 
I'auoit prife voyant tout le monde affis de part & 
d'autre, fe leua & harangua en cette [245] forte. Ef- 
coutez, Frangois, ie vous vais tancer, car que pourroit 
faire autre chofe vn gros animal comme moy, qui 
prend la hardieffe de parler deuant des Capitaines? 
Si i'eftois Capitaine i'aurois droit de parler; ie ne 
fuis qu'vn chien, fi faut-il que ie parle, & que ie vous 
faffe vne querelle d'amiti^. Nos Peres & nos vieux 
Capitaines fe font entr'aimez, ils font morts mainte- 
nant, nous nous entr'aimons & Frangois & Sauuages; 
nous nous entr'aimons, oiiy nous nous entr'aimons: 
c'eft pourquoy il eufl efte bie k propos de voir quel- 
ques-vns de vos ieunes gens parmy nous ^ la guerre ; 
mais cela nous ayant manque, nous auons fait ce que 
nous auons pu. Voicy vne ieune prifonniere que 
nous vous prefentons pour mettre en la place de I'vn 
des trois Frangois qui ont efl^ tuez il y a quelque 
temps bien pres d'icy: ie voy encor le fang tout 
rouge qui accufe la cruaut6 de nos ennemis & des 
voftres: ce prefent en cachera vne partie, c'eft peu 
de chofe, mais c'eft tout ce que nous auons, le refte 
ayant efte tue : 'li nous euffions eft6 fecourus, nous 
eufTions fait dauantage, mais on nous a quitt6 de tous 
coftez. Ce fut "k peu pres le fommaire de [246] fon 
difcours, qui finit par cette acclamation ho, ho, ho, 
tir6e du creux de I'eftomach de tous fes compagnons. 
Cela fait, on prefente cette pauure ieune femme, qui 
me parut cette fois fort trifte, & me femble que baif- 
fant les yeux elle ietta quelques larmes : on luy de- 
manda neantmoins fi elle n'eftoit pas bien-aife d'eftre 
donne a vn {\. braue Capitaine, qui I'aimeroit fort, & 
qui la mettroit auec fa Soeur; elle tefmoigna qu'elle 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j6s6 . 267 

harangued in this [245] fashion: " Listen, French- 
men, I am going to chide you, for what else could be 
done by a great beast like me, who has the boldness 
to speak in the presence of Captains? If I were Cap- 
tain, I would have the right to speak ; I am only a 
dog, yet I must speak, and have a friendly quarrel 
with you. Our Fathers and our old Captains loved 
each other ; they are dead now ; we love each other, 
both French and Savages ; we love each other, yes, 
we love each other; therefore it would have been 
very fitting to see some of your young men with us 
in the war ; but as that failed us, we have done as 
well as we could. Here is a young female prisoner 
whom we present to you, to take the place of one of 
the three Frenchmen who was killed quite near here, 
some time ago. I still see the deep red blood that 
accuses the cruelty of our enemies and of yours ; this 
present will conceal a part of it ; it is a little thing, 
but it is all we have, the rest having been killed; if 
we had been helped, we would have done more, but 
we were deserted on all sides." This was about the 
substance of [246] his discourse, which was finished 
with the exclamation, ho, ho, ho, which all his com- 
panions drew from the pit of their stomachs. This 
done, they presented the unfortunate young woman, 
who appeared this time very sad, and, lowering her 
eyes, seemed to me to shed some tears. She was 
asked, however, if she was not glad to be given to so 
gallant a Captain, who would be very fond of her, 
and who would place her with his Sister. She 
showed that she was well satisfied at this ; but she 
was greatly cheered afterward when they told her 
that the French were very honorable, and that they 
would do her no harm ; that in crossing over to 


268 


LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.9 


en eftoit bien contente ; mais on la r^iouyt grande- 
ment puis apres, quand on luy dit que les Fran9ois 
eftoient fort honneftes, & qu'on ne luy feroit au- 
cune iniure; qu'elle feroit accompagnee palfant en 
France de quelques filles de ce pays-cy ; elle foufrit 
de bonne grace a cette nouuelle, qui luy agrea fort, 
le luy fis dire par vn Sauuage deux iours apres, que 
fi quelqu'vn dans vn fi grand nombre de perfonnes 
qu'elle rencontreroit en la flotte qui repaffe en 
France, luy vouloit faire quelque infolence, qu'elle 
en auertifl le Capitaine, Monfieur le general, ou bien 
I'vn de mes Freres qui deuoit repaffer. Elle repar- 
tit qu'elle efloit maintenant de leur Nation, qu'elle 
ne craignoit point qu'on luy fifl [247] aucune iniure; 
que fi on luy commandoit de fe marier, qu'elle obei- 
roit, mais qu'autre que celuy qu'on luy auroit donne 
ne I'approcheroit. le fupplierois Meffieurs de la Com- 
pagnie ^ qui on la doit prefenter, de la loger auec les 
Hofpitalieres qui doiuent pafler en la Nouuelle 
France, pour apprendre en leur maifon ^ cognoiftre 
Dieu, & "k fecourir les malades, ^ deffein de la mener 
auec elles, fi elle retiflit. Mais retournons ^ noftre 
harangueur. Monfieur le General luy fit r^pondre, 
qu'il cheriroit ce prefent en confideration de la main 
de fes amis, dont il partoit, & non pas du Pais d'oii 
il eftoit forty, qu'il haiffoit k mort; qu'au refte ils 
voyoiet bien eux-mefmes, que fi les Fran9ois les 
euffent fuiuis, qu'ils les auroient abandonnez fur le 
difcord furuenu parmy eux ; & que fi nous allions ia- 
mais en guerre, nous irions forts & puiffans, pour ne 
point retourner que nous n'ayons detruit les bour- 
gades entieres. lis prirent plaifir ^ cette r^ponfe, 
fupplians qu'en figne de reioiiiflance, & d' amour mu- 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 269 

France she would be accompanied by some girls of 
this country; she smiled gratefully at this news, 
which was very agreeable to her. Two days later, I 
had a Savage tell her that if any person, among so 
many as she would encounter in the fleet which was 
going to France, tried to offer her any insults, she 
should inform the Captain, Monsieur the comman- 
dant, or else one of my Brothers who was going 
across. She replied that she was now of their Na- 
tion ; that she did not fear they would do her [247] 
any harm ; that, if she were commanded to marry, 
she would obey; but that no one, except he to 
whom she had been given, should approach her. I 
begged the Gentlemen of the Company, to whom she 
was to be presented, to lodge her with the Hospital 
Nuns who were coming over to New France, to learn 
in their house to know God and to nurse the sick, so 
that they might bring her with them, if she suc- 
ceeded. But let us return to our orator. Monsieur 
the Commandant made known to him that he would 
cherish this present for the sake of the hand of his 
friends, whence it proceeded, and not for the Country 
from which it had come, which he hated like death ; 
that, besides, they themselves could see clearly that 
if the French had followed them they would have 
deserted them, when the quarrels arose among them- 
selves ; and that, if we ever did go to war, we would 
go strong and powerful, and not return until we had 
destroyed entire villages. They received this answer 
with pleasure, begging that, as a sign of mutual re- 
joicing and love, some of our young people should 
dance to the sound of a hurdy-gurdy, that a little 
Frenchman held. This was granted [248] them, to 
their great satisfaction. 


270 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.9 

tuel les vns les autres, on fift danfer quelques-vns de 
nos ieunes gens au fon d'vne vielle, que tenoit vn pe- 
tit Francois. Ce qui leur fut [248] accord^ ^ leur 
grand contentement. 

Le quinziefme du mefme mois, iour dedie ^ la glo- 
rieufe Affomption de la fainte Vierge, quelques Ca- 
nots defcendans a K^bec, car tout cecy fe paffoit aux 
trois Riuieres, emmenerent le prifonnier pour le 
faire mourir Ik ; ie marqueray cy apres les particula- 
ritez de fa mort, fi on me les mande, ou fi ie les ap- 
prends defcendant bien toft Ik bas; car i'ecry mainte- 
nant iour pour iour, ce que ie penfe meriter vn traict 
de plume. 

Ce mefme iour arriua vn Canot des Hurons, qui r6- 
ioiiit fort Monfieur le General, ayant pris refolution 
de partir dans cinq iours, s'il n'euft receu cette nou- 
uelle ; la faifon de nauiger eftant fafcheufe fur le de- 
clin de I'Automne. Ce Canot fut enuoy6 deuant par 
le Pere Daniel, lequel ayant apris de nos Peres, qu'il 
auoit rencontr^ en chemin, que Monfieur le General 
ne s'engageroit pas dans I'arriere faifon pour retour- 
ner, luy enuoya, auec bien de la peine, ce Courrier 
d'enuiron cent cinquante lieues au delTus des trois 
Riuieres, pour Talfeurer de la defcente des Hurons. 
Voicy comme il m'ecrit. Ie demeure a I'ljle, en atten- 
dant le [249] gros de la bande, tant des Hurons, que des 
Nipijiriniens. Les Sauuages de ce lieu auoient de'ja ren- 
uoy^ treize Canots de Hurons, leur defendant de pajfer 
aux Francois; mats leur Capitaine nomm^ Taratouan, 
ayant apris que ie defcendois, a tenu ferine iufques h mon 
arriue'e; car comme il ejl party deuant nous des Hurons, 
aujsi fommes 7tous arriuez apres luy a r IJle. II m'a done 
dit, que les habit ans de cette IJle luy defendoient le pajfage; 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, J636 271 

On the fifteenth of the same month, the day dedi- 
<:ated to the glorious Assumption of the holy Virgin, 
some Canoes which were going down to K6bec, — for 
all this took place at the three Rivers, — brought the 
prisoner, to put him to death there. I will mention 
further on the particulars of his death, if they send 
them to me, or if I hear them, since I go down there 
soon; for I am writing now, from day to day, what 
I think deserves a stroke of the pen. 

This same day there arrived a Canoe of Hurons, 
which greatly pleased Monsieur the Commandant, as 
he had resolved to depart in five days, if he had not 
received the news they brought, — the season being 
very unfavorable to navigation toward the end of Au- 
tumn. This Canoe was sent on ahead by Father 
Daniel, who, having learned from our Fathers, whom 
he encountered on the way, that Monsieur the Com- 
mandant would not undertake to return at the end of 
the season, sent to him, with a great deal of trouble, 
this Courier from about one hundred and fifty leagues 
above the three Rivers, to assure him that the Hurons 
were coming down. This is how he writes me. / 
am staying at the Island, waiting for the [249] main part 
of the band, composed equally of Hurons and Nipisiriniens . 
The Savages of this place have already sent back thirteen 
Canoes of Hurons, forbidding them to go to the French; 
but their Captain, called Taratouan, having learned that 
I was coming down, held firm until my arrival; for as he 
had departed before we did from the Huron country, so we 
reached the Island after he did. Then he told me that 
the inhabitants of this Island forbade them to pass; when 
I asked him the reason for this, he answered that he had 
heard nothing except that the body of a recently-deceased 
Captain — it was le Borgne^ of the Island — had 7iot yet 


272 


LES RELA TIONS DES J£SUJTES [Vol. 9 


comme ie luy en demandois la raifon, il ma r^pondu, qu" on 
ne luy a dit autre chofe, finon que le corps d'vn Capitaine 
nouuellement mart, c' ejioit le Borgne de I'ljle, n'ejioit pas 
encor cach^; vous fqauez ce que c ejl a dire, & part ant 
que pajfer par deuant, c ejioit letter du feu pour accroijlre 
leur douleur, & irriter de nouueau les ieunes gens, qui 
font fort fafcheux & mutins. Ie luy ay reparty quil 
prifl courage, que ie parlerois a ce Capitaine. En effet 
ie Vay veu, il ma fait affez bon accueil Dieu mercy. 
Leur propofition efioit, quils nous remeneroient nous 
autres Franqois vers vous, mais que les Hurons euffent h 
s'cn retourner. Or t ay pris refolution de ne point paffer, 
ft les Huros ne paffcnt ; ie le leur ay d(;'a promis, dont ils 
ont eft^ fort ioyeux. Ces dijfficultez leur font voir qu'il 
efi important que nous detncurions dans leur Pais, ce qu'ils 
[250] cognoiffe?tt fort bien. Fay pri^ le Capitaine de 
trouuer bon que V enuoyajfe deuant vn Canot pour donner 
aduis de noflre defcente; c efi celuy qui vous porte ces 
let t res. Ie rencontray nos Peres le troifihne d" Aoufi, trois 
iourndes au deffus de V Ifle; ils efloient tous deux chauffez 
dans leurs Canots fans ramer, ce qui me fait penfer quils 
font doucement traittez ; cela me fit faire pour leur\s'\ gens, 
ce que ie nauois pas encor voidu faire pour les miens, ce 
fut de leur faire prefent d'vne her be quils adorent, & que 
nous n'aymons point', cefl du Petun, dont la cherts efi 
grande cette ann^e. Ie voudrois bien en efire quit te pour 
dix fois autant h V Ifle, & vous voir au pluflofl auec de 
ieunes Hurons ; ie n' ^pargneray rien pour ce fujet. Cit 
affaire efi trop important. De douze petits enfajis, qui 
mauoient promis de me fuiure auec le confentement de 
leurs parens, ie nen ay que trois auec moy, dont Vvn efi 
petit fils d'vn fort grand Capitaine; i en efpere affez de 
grandelets, ft vous en voulez, nous les verrons enfemble, 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELA TION, 1636 278 


been ''cached; " you know what that means, and therefore 
that to go on ahead would be merely scattering fire to aug- 
ment tlieir grief and to irritate afiew the young men, who 
are very angry and mutinous. I told him that he must 
pluck up courage, that I would speak to the Captai?i here. 
In fact I did see him and he received me well, thank God. 
Their proposition was that they should take us Frenchmen 
on to you, but that the Hurons should turn back. Now I 
had resolved not to proceed, unless the Hurons did; I had 
already promised them this, and they were greatly pleased 
over it. These difficulties show them that it is important 
for us to remain in their Country, which they [250] kfiow 
very well. I begged the Captain to consent to my sending 
a Canoe on ahead, to give notice of our coming; it is the 
one which brings you these letters. I met our Fathers pn 
the third of August, three days' journey above the Island; 
both wore their shoes in the Canoe and were not paddling, 
ivhich made me think they were being well treated; this 
caused me to do something for their men which I had not 
yet zvished to do for my own, which was to make them, a 
present of an herb that they adore and that we do not 
care for, namely, Tobacco, ivhich is very high-priced this 
year. I would willingly give up ten times as much of it at 
tlie Island, and see you so much the sooner, together with 
my young Hurons; I shall spare nothing to accomplish it. 
This is a matter of the greatest importance. Of the twelve 
children who promised to follow me with the consent of 
their parents, I have only three with me, one of whom, is 
the grandson of a very great Captai^i; I am very hopeful 
about getting some larger ones, if you wish them; we shall 
see them together when I have the pleasure of meeting you; 
the little ones had some trouble in leaving their mothers to 
make a journey of three hundred leagues. I am writing 
to Monsieur du Plessis that there are few Canoes, but that 


274 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.9 

quand i auray le bonheur de vous voir ; les petits ont de la 
peine h quitter leurs meres pour /aire trois cens lieues. 
r^cry a Monfieur du Plef^is qiiil y a peu de Canots, mats 
quils portent tres grande quantite de marchandifes. Je 
vous recommande les porteurs, que mes promejfes [251] s^il 
y a moyen fe trouuent veritables ; cela ejl de con/equence . 
Voila le contenu, voicy la datte de fa Lettre. De 
V IJle ce fepti^me d'AouJi, a la lueur d'vne icorce brulante; 
ce font les chandelles & les flambeaux du Pais. 

le penfe auoir d6ja dit autrefois que cette Ifle, dont 
il efl icy parle, eft dans le grand Fleuue de fainct 
Laurens, enuiron ^ cent cinquante lieues au deffus 
des trois Riuieres; que les Sauuages qui I'habitent 
font extrem^ment fuperbes. Les Hurons & les Fran- 
9ois qui demeurent en leur pais, voulans defcendre 9a 
bas, paflent premierement par les terres des Nipifiri- 
niens, & puis viennent aborder cette Ifle, dont les 
habitans leur font tous les ans quelque peine. Ces 
Infulaires voudroient bien que les Hurons ne vinffent 
point aux Frangois, & que les Fran9ois n'allaffent 
point aux Hurons, afin d'emporter eux feuls tout le 
trafic; c'efl pourquoy ils ont fait tout ce qu'ils ont 
peu pour nous boucher le chemin : mais comme ils 
craignent les Fran9ois, ceux qui accompagnent les 
Hurons, leurs facilitent le chemin. C'efl chofe 
eftrange, que quoy que les Hurons foient dix contre 
[252] vn feul Infulaire, fi eft-ce qu'ils ne pafferont 
pas, fi vn feul Infulaire s'y oppofe, tant ils gardent 
^troittement les loix du Pais. Les prefens ouurent 
pour r ordinaire cette porte, quelque fois on les fait 
plus grands, quelquefois plus petits, felon les occur- 
rences. Cette annee ils doiuent eftre plus riches, 
pour ce qu'vn Capitaine de I'lfle eflat mort ce Prin- 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ibjb 275 


they carry a great amount of merchandise. I commend 
the bearers to you, that my promises^ [251] if there are 
means of doing so, may be fulfilled; this is of importance. 
These are the contents, and here is the date of his 
Letter. From the Islatid, this seventh of August, by the 
glimmer of a piece of burning bark, which forms the 
candles and the torches of this Country. 

I think I have said before that this Island, which I 
mention here, is in the great River saint Lawrence, 
about one hundred and fifty leagues above the three 
Rivers, and that the Savages who inhabit it are very 
haughty. The Hurons, and the French who are 
now staying in their country, wishing to come down 
here, pass first through the lands of the Nipisiriniens, 
and then come alongside this Island, the inhabitants 
of which every year cause them some trouble. These 
Islanders would prefer that the Hurons should not 
come to the French nor the French go to the Hurons, 
so that they themselves may carry away all the trade ; 
for this reason, they have done all they could to block 
the way ; but, as they fear the French, those who ac- 
company the Hurons make the journey easier for 
them. It is strange that although the Hurons may be 
ten against [252] one Islander, yet they will not pass 
by if a single inhabitant of the Island objects to it, 
so strictly do they guard the laws of the Country. 
This portal is usually opened by means of presents, 
sometimes greater and sometimes smaller, according 
to the emergency. They ought to be very rich this 
year; for, a Captain of the Island having died this 
Spring, and their tears being not yet dried, no strange 
Nation can pass by there without making them some 
gift, to make them more easily swallow, as they say, 
the grief occasioned by the death of their Chief. 


276 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.9 

temps, les larmes n'eftans pas encor effuy^es, aucune 
Nation eftrangere ne pent paffer par Ik qu'elle ne 
faffe quelque don, pour leur faire aualer, comme ils 
difent, plus doucement la trifteffe qu'ils ont receuala 
mort de leur Capitaine. Quand on a fait reuiure ce 
trepaffe ; c'eft "k dire, quand on a donne fon nom k vn 
autre, & des prefens k fes parens, alors on dit que le 
corps eft cache, ou pluftoft que le mort eft refufcite, 
& ainfi on ne paye que le tribut ordinaire quand on 
paffe fur les marches, & fur les limites de ces Infu- 
laires. 

Puis que i'ay dit cecy pour 1' intelligence de cette 
Lettre; i'adioufteray encor fur ce que le Pere Daniel 
coclud que le Pere Garnier, & le Pere Chaftelain 
eftoient doucement traittez par leurs hoftes, puis 
qu'ils eftoient chauilez, & [253] qu'ils ne ramoient 
point; c'eft k dire, que quand on va auec ces Bar- 
bares, il fe faut bien donner de garde de porter tant 
foit peu de terre ou de fable dans leurs Canots ; c'eft 
pourquoy les Peres y entrent pieds nuds, qu'il faffe 
froid ou chaud, il en faut paffer par Ik, fi on ne ren- 
contre de bons Sauuages, qui nous laiffent faire k 
noftre mode. De plus il faut fgauoir manier I'auiron, 
qui veut voguer auec eux; & comme c'eft vn grand 
trauail, notamment au commencement qu'on n'y eft 
pas accouftume, nous donnons k chaque Canot oh. 
s'embarque quelque Pere vn grand drap qui fert de 
voile, pour les racheter de cette peine : mais encore 
qu'on dife k ces Barbares, que cette voile eft I'auiron 
des Peres, qu'ils n'en manient point d'autres, ils ne 
laiffent pas quelquefois de leur en faire prendre vn 
de bois, qu'il faut bien remuer pour les contenter. 
Quant aux enfans dont le Pere fait mention, c'eft 


1636] LE JEUNRS RELATION, 163b Til 

When he who has passed away has been raised from 
the dead, — that is, when his name has been given to 
another, and presents have been offered to his rela- 
tives, — then it is said that the body is " cached," or 
rather, that the dead is resuscitated ; and then only 
the usual tribute is paid when one passes over the 
highways and boundaries of these Islanders. 

Since I have told this, for the better understanding 
of this Letter, I will explain what made Father 
Daniel conclude that Father Gamier and Father 
Chastelain were being well treated by their hosts, 
since they wore shoes, and [253] were not paddling. 
It was this, — that, when one goes with these Bar- 
barians, he must be very careful not to carry the 
least dirt or sand into their Canoes; for this reason, 
the Fathers go into them barefooted ; whether it is 
cold or warm, they must do this, unless they encoun- 
ter some good Savages who let them follow their own 
custom. Moreover, he who would sail with them 
must know how to handle the paddle ; and, as it is hard 
work, especially at first, when one is not accustomed 
to it, we give to every Canoe in which any of our 
Fathers embark a large sheet which serves as sail, to 
relieve them from this work; but, although these 
Barbarians may be told that this sail is the Fathers' 
paddle, that they do not wield any others, they do not 
fail sometimes to make them take one of wood, which 
has to be well worked, to satisfy them. As for the 
children the Father mentions, it is a Providence of 
God that he is not bringing as many of them as he 
hoped to, for we have neither houses at Kebec in 
which to lodge them, nor food to nourish them, nor 
stuff with which to comfortably clothe them, as we 
would desire and [254] as is fitting in these begin- 


278 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.9 

vne Prouidence de Dieu, qu'il n'en amene pas ce qu'il 
efperoit, car nous n'auons ny baftimens a Kebec pour 
les loger, ny viures pour les nourrir, ny eftoffes pour 
les couurir commodement, comme nous defirerions, & 
[254] qu'il eft ^ propos en ces commencemens, veu 
mefme qu'il nous en faut deja entretenir quelques 
autres; nous ne laifferons pas d'en efperer vne demy 
douzaine. Dieu qui nourrit les oyfeaux du ciel ne 
les abandonnera pas; il a commence I'ouurage, il 
ffaura bien le mettre k chef. 

Le dix-huictiefme du mefme mois, le fieur Gode- 
froy, ieune homme fort lefte, & difpoft de fon corps, 
deuan9a a la courfe vn Huron aux yeux de quatre on 
cinq Nations, fur vne gageure qu'auoit fait pour luy 
vn Montagues ; dequoy les Hurons demeurerent bien 
eftonnez, car ils nous tiennent pour des tortues, au 
refpect de tous les Sauuages. 

Le dix-neufiefme du mefme mois d'Aouft, arriua 
vne partie du gros des Hurons. Si toft que nous 
vifmes paroiftre leurs Canots fur le grand Fleuue, 
nous defcendifmes du Fort pour receuoir le Pere Da- 
niel & le Pere Dauoft, & quelques-vns de nos Fran- 
§ois que nous attendions: Monfieur le General s'y 
trouua luy mefme. Le Pere Daniel eftoit en cette 
premiere trouppe, le Pere Dauoft en I'arriere garde, 
qui ne paroifToit point encor ; & mefme on nous fai- 
foit douter fi [255] les Sauuages de I'lfle ne les fe- 
roient point retourner. A la veue du Pere Daniel, 
noftre coeur s'attendrit; il auoit la face toute gaye & 
ioyeufe, mais toute d^faite, il eftoit pieds nuds, I'a- 
uiron k la main, couuert d'vne m^chante foutane fon 
Breuiaire pendu au col, fa chemise pourrie fur fon 
dos. II faliia nos Capitaines & nos Fran§ois; nous 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1636 279 

nings, especially as we already have some others to 
maintain. We still have hopes of half a dozen. 
God, who feeds the birds of the air, will not abandon 
them; he has begun the work, he will know well 
how to make it succeed. 

On the eighteenth of the same month, sieur Gode- 
froy, a young man of light and agile body, beat one 
of the Hurons in a race, before the eyes of four or 
five Nations, upon a wager that a Montagues had 
made for him; at which the Hurons were greatly 
astonished, for they look upon us as turtles in com- 
parison with all the Savages. 

On the nineteenth of the same month of August a 
part of the main body of the Hurons arrived. As 
soon as we saw their Canoes appear upon the great 
River, we descended from the Fort to receive Father 
Daniel and Father Davost, and a few of our French, 
whom we were expecting ; Monsieur the Commandant 
himself was there. Father Daniel was in this first 
company, Father Davost in the rear guard, which did 
not yet appear ; and we even began to doubt whether 
[255] the Island Savages had not made them return. 
At the sight of Father Daniel, our hearts melted ; his 
face was gay and happy, but greatly emaciated ; he 
was barefooted, had a paddle in his hand, and was 
clad in a wretched cassock, his Breviary suspended to 
his neck, his shirt rotting on his back. He saluted our 
Captains and our French people ; then we embraced 
him, and, having led him to our little room, after 
having blessed and adored our Lord, he related to us 
in what condition was the cause of Christianity among 
the Hurons, delivering to mJb the Letters and the 
Relation sent from that Country, which constrained 
us to sing a Te Deum, as a thanksgiving for the bless- 


280 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 9 

rembralTaines, & I'ayans conduit en noflre petite 
chambre, apres anoir beny & adore noflre Seigneur, 
il nous raconta en quel point eftoient les affaires du 
Chriftianifme aux Hurons, me rendant les Lettres & 
la Relation qu'on enuoyoit de ce Pais. Et nous obli- 
geant ^ chanter vn Te Deum, en action de grace des 
benedictions que Dieu va verfant fur cette Nouuelle 
Eglife. le ne parleray point des difficultez de fon 
voyage, tout cela eft d6ja dit; ce luy efloit affez d'a- 
uoir baptife vn pauure miferable qu'on menoit a la 
mort, pour adoucir tons fes trauaux 

I'appris de luy, que Louys de faincte Foy, deuant 
que de partir pour aller h. la guerre, tint ce difcours 
k fon pere, comme il I'a fceu du pere mefme. Mon 
pere, puis que vous defirez d'eftre Chreflien, [256] 
& que vous voulez def cendre \h, bas aux Franjois ; ie 
vous fupplie de prendre garde pourquoy vous defires 
le Baptefme, n'y meflez point les confiderations hu- 
maines ; faites le pour honorer Dieu, & pour le falut 
de voftre ame, & non pour I'attente de quelque bien, 
ou de quelque faueur des Fran9ois. Vous auez d6ja 
affez de coliers de Porcelaine; i'en ay encor que ie 
vous laiffe. Tout eft h. vous, n'en recherchez pas 
dauantage ; nous aurons affez de bien, fi nous croyons 
en Dieu, & fi nous luy obeiffons. Quand vous ferez 
Ik bas aux Fran9ois n'allez point ioiier de Cabanes en 
Cabanes, n'allez point par les maifons des Frangois, 
faire Timportun, ou le caimant; vifitez fouuent Mon- 
fieur de Champlain, & ne vous efloignez que fort peu 
des Peres. Voila les cofeils que le fils donnoit au 
pere : il le cognoiffoit port6 au ieu, & aux biens de 
la terre; c'efl pourquoy, comme il voyoit que nos 
Peres parloiet de le baptifer pour les inftances qu'il 


1636] LE JEUNETS RELATION, ibjb 281 

ings that God was pouring out upon this New Church. 
I shall not speak of the difficulties of his voyage, all 
that has been already told ; it was enough for him 
that he baptized a poor wretch they were leading to 
his death, to sweeten all his trials, 

I heard from him that Louys de saincte Foy,'*^ be- 
fore leaving to go to the war, held this conversation 
with his father, as he learned from the father him- 
self : " My father, since you wish to be a Christian, 
[256] and to go down there to the French, I beg you 
to understand well why you wish Baptism, and do 
not mingle therein any worldly considerations ; do it 
to honor God and for the salvation of your soul, and 
not in the expectation of deriving some benefit or 
some favor from the French. You already have 
enough Porcelain necklaces; I have still some, that I 
leave you. All is yours, do not seek anything more ; 
we shall be rich enough, if we believe in God and if 
we obey him. When you are down there with the 
French, do not go idling from Cabin to Cabin, do 
not go into the houses of the French, playing the 
nuisance or the beggar ; visit Monsieur de Champlain 
often, and do not go far away from the Fathers." 
These are the counsels that the son gave to the fa- 
ther; he realized that he was fond of gambling and 
of worldly wealth ; for this reason, when he saw that 
our Fathers talked of baptizing his parent, owing to 
his earnest entreaties, he begged them not to be too 
hasty, as he wished to see a better preparation in his 
father for a Sacrament of so great importance. Now, 
our Hurons having arrived, they held their councils, 
[257] and made some presents to cause our French to 
dry their tears, and more easily swallow the bitter- 
ness they experienced at the death of the late Mon- 


282 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.9 

en faifoit, il pria qu'on ne fe hataft point, defirant 
voir vne plus grande difpofition en fon pere, pour vn 
Sacremet de fi grande importance. Or nos Hurons 
eflans arriuez, ils tindrent leurs confeils, [257] & 
firent des prefens pour effuyer les larmes, & aualler 
plus doucement Tamertume que nos Fran9ois rece- 
uoiet de la mort de feu Monfieur de Champlain. 
Item, pour confirmer I'amitie qui efloit contract^e 
des long temps, entre eux & nous. Le Pere Daniel 
affifta k ce confeil, & me dit que Monfieur le General 
auoit fort fatisfait ces Sauuages, par fes reponfes. 
Apres ces confeils ils fe mirent "k traiter, ou vendre 
leurs marchandifes, & cela fait, ils tindrent encor 
vne affemblee auec nos Fran9ois. Et comme les pre- 
mieres allemblees s'eftoient faites en leur confidera- 
tion ; celle-cy fe faifoit pour les affaires des Frangois. 
Ayant done quelque chofe a leur reprefenter, ie pri- 
ay Monfieur le General de m'oui'r fur ce que i'auois 
^ dire; ce qu'il fit, & m'obligea. Ie voulois notam- 
ment parler pour auoir des enfans, & commencer vn 
Seminaire, comme vne chofe tres importante au falut 
de ces Nations, & au bien de Meflieurs de la Compa- 
gnie; car leurs enfans nous feront autant d'oflages, 
pour I'afl'eurace des Fran9ois qui font parmy eux, & 
pour I'affermilfement du commerce. Monfieur le 
General auoit deja bien conceu cette raifon. [258] 
Voila pourquoy il n'epargna rie pour en auoir; il dit, 
& nous laifl^a dire fur ce fujet, tout ce que I'efprit 
nous pouuoit fuggerer. Oil il faut remarquer que 
nos Peres auoient difpofe dans le Pais douze petits 
gargons, fort gentils, & tres-contens de defcendre 9a 
bas, le Pere Daniel venoit pour les drelTer & inftruire, 
comme ayant d6ja vne affez bonne cognoiflance de 


1 636] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1636 


283 


sieur de Champlain, — also, to confirm the friendship 
formed long ago between them and us. Father 
Daniel was present at this council and tells me that 
Monsieur the Commandant gave great satisfaction to 
these Savages by his answers. After these councils 
they began to trade, or to sell their merchandise; 
and, when this was done, they held another meeting 
with our French, and, as the first meetings were on 
their own account, this one was held for the business 
of the French. Now, having certain things to rep- 
resent to them, I prayed Monsieur the Commandant 
to hear what I had to say, which he was kind enough 
to do. I wished particularly to speak about obtain- 
ing their children, and beginning a Seminary, as a 
matter of the greatest importance to the salvation of 
these Nations, and to the success of the Gentlemen 
of the Company; for their children will be as so 
many hostages to us for the safety of the French who 
are among them, and for the strengthening of our 
commercial relations. Monsieur the Commandant 
had already conceived this idea, [258] and hence he 
spared no pains to accomplish it. He said, and al- 
lowed us to say, upon this subject whatever judg- 
ment could suggest. Here it must be remarked that 
our Fathers had prepared twelve very nice little boys 
of the Country, who were quite satisfied to come 
down here. Father Daniel came to train and instruct 
them, as he already possessed a very fair knowledge 
of their language. But when they were about to de- 
part, the mothers, and above all the grandmothers, 
would not allow their children to go away for a dis- 
tance of three hundred leagues, and to live with 
Strangers, quite different from them in their habits 
and customs. Some embarked, however; but, when 


284 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.9 

leur langue : mais quand ce vint ^ partir, les meres, 
& notamment les grades meres, ne pouuoiet lailler 
fortir leurs enfans, pour faire trois cens lieues, & de- 
meurer auec des Eftrangers, de fagons de faire & de 
moeurs, bien differentes des leurs. Quelques-vns ne- 
antmoins s'embarquerent, mais quand ils furent arri- 
uez, les peres de ces enfans reculoient, & clierclioient 
mille excufes. Le pauure Pere Daniel alloit & ve- 
noit de tous coftez, amadoiioit les vns, faifoit quel- 
ques prefens aux autres ; & apres tout cela, il fe vit 
quafi maiftre fans ecoliers, & pafleur fans oiiailles : 
vn feul ieune homme, petit fils d'vn Capitaine, tint 
ferme, n'abandonnant iamais la refolution qu'il auoit 
prife de le fuiure. La deffus on tient confeil, tout le 
monde affemble. Monfieur le General [259] fait fes 
prefens, en confideration de I'amour qu'ils nous por- 
toient, & de leurs vifites. Item, pour alleger leurs 
bras des trauaux qu'ils auoient pris ramans fi long- 
temps pour nous venir trouuer ; pour les induire aufli 
^ continuer leur bien-veillance, & leur affection en- 
uers les Peres, & enuers tous les Fracois qui font en 
leur Pais. Bref pour les exciter ^ venir de bonne 
heure I'an prochain; le Truchement qui fgait les fa- 
§ons de faire du Pais, fe feruoit de leurs fagons de 
s'enoncer. Voila, difoit-il, vn prefent pour graiffer 
vos bras, & les fomenter pour les delaffer du trauail 
qu'ils ont pris en chemin. En voicy vn autre pour 
attacher vne corde h vos Canots, afin de les tirer 9a 
bas de bonne heure I'an prochain ; bref apres que ces 
prefens furent faits, Monfieur le General leur dit, 
qu'il auoit encor quelques points d' importance ^ leur 
communiquer. 

II leur fit done demander s'ils nous aymoient au- 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 285 

they arrived, the fathers of these children drew back 
and sought a thousand excuses. Poor Father Daniel 
went hither and thither, coaxed some, made presents 
to others, and yet after all he saw himself almost a 
master without pupils, a shepherd without sheep. A 
single young man, grandson of a Captain, remained 
steadfast, never yielding in his determination to fol- 
low him. Thereupon a council was held, where all 
assembled. Monsieur the Commandant [259] pre- 
sented his gifts, in consideration of the love they bear 
us, and of their visits, — also, to rest their arms from 
the labor they had in paddling so far to come to see 
us; and to induce them to continue their kindness 
and their affection toward the Fathers and toward all 
the French who are in their Country ; in short, to 
encourage them to come early next year. The Inter- 
preter, who is acquainted with the way of doing 
things in this Country, made the announcements after 
their fashion. " Here," said he, " is a present to 
grease your arms and to limber them, to relax them 
from the work they have had on the way. Here is 
another to fasten a rope to your Canoes, to pull them 
down here early next year. ' ' Soon after these pres- 
ents were made. Monsieur the Commandant told them 
that he had still some points of importance to com- 
municate to them. 

Then he had them asked if they loved us as much 
as we loved them; they answered that they really 
did. " Then why do you not show your friend- 
ship? You give Beaver robes to the French, and 
they give you hatchets and other goods, — [260] 
all this is called trafficking ; these are not the evi- 
dences of the real love that I seek, but to visit and to 
help one another, to go into each other's country, to 


286 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.9 

tant que nous les aymions; ils repondirent, qu'en 
effet ils nous aymoiet. D'ou vient done que vous ne 
temoignez pas voftre amitie. Vous donez des robbes 
de Caflors aux Fran9ois, & ils vous donnent des 
haches & d'autres marchadifes [260] tout cela s'ap- 
pelle trafiquer : ce ne font point les marques du vray 
amour que ie recherche; mais s'entre-vifiter, s'entre- 
fecourir, aller les vns dans le pais des autres, s'allier 
par enfemble come les doigts de la main, ce font des 
actes d'amitie; c'efl ce que nous faifons, nous allons 
dans voftre pais, nous y enuoyons nos Peres, nos 
Maiftres, ce que nous auons de plus cher, ceux qui 
nous enfeignent le chemin du Ciel, & pas vn de vous 
ne veut demeurer auec nos Fran9ois. Pourquoy ne 
vous confiez vous pas autant en nous, comme nous- 
nous confions en vous? Quoy done n'y a-t'il qu'vne 
Bourgade aux Hurons qui nous ayme? Nous met- 
tons r amitie en ce point que nous gardons; pourquoy 
n'y correfpodez-vous? I'auois fait affeoir le ieune 
homme qui auoit efte eonftant entre le Pere Daniel 
& moy, Monlieur le General le careifant, dit tout 
haut, qu'il I'aymoit comme fon frere, que rien ne luy 
manqueroit, que pour faire entendre ^ ceux de fa 
Bourgade I'eftat que nous en faifons, il leur faifoit 
vn prefent : que pour luy il ne pouuoit faire feftin "k 
ceux qui eftoient venus, eftant fort preffe de fon re- 
tour, mais que ce ieune homme le feroit [261] en fa 
place, qu'il luy donneroit dequoy les traiter; qu'au 
refte s'ils vouloiet I'an prochain nous temoigner leur 
affection, qu'ils deuoient amener des enfans pour de- 
meurer auec les Frangois. II leur fit encor dire qu'ils 
eftoient tons les iours dans les alarmes en leur pais, 
qu'ils fouhaitteroiet bien auoir des Fra9ois pour le 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j6s6 287 

ally ourselves together like the fingers of the hand, — 
these are acts of friendship ; that is what we are do- 
ing, we are going into your country, we are sending 
our Fathers there, our Teachers, those whom we 
hold most dear, those who show us the way to Heav- 
en ; and not one of you will live with our French. 
Why do you not trust as much in us as we do in you ? 
Why then is there only one Village among the Hu- 
rons that loves us? We show in this respect our 
friendship toward you, why do you not do likewise? " 
I had seated the young man who remained faithful 
to us between Father Daniel and myself ; Monsieur 
the Commandant, caressing him, said in a loud voice 
that he loved him as his own brother, that he should 
want for nothing; that, to make those of his Village 
understand how great was our regard for him, he 
would make them a present; that, for himself, he 
could not prepare a feast for those who had come, as 
he was in great haste to return, but that this young 
man should make one [261] in his stead, — that he 
would give him something with which to entertain 
them ; that, furthermore, if they wished next year to 
give us an evidence of their affection, they should 
bring down some children to live with the French. 
He had them told also that they were always in a 
state of alarm in their country, that they were very 
anxious to have some French to defend them, and 
that this was in their power ; for, if they were willing 
to give twenty little Hurons, they would get in re- 
turn twenty Frenchmen, and that we had good reason 
for speaking as we did. To all this they replied 
that, first, this matter must be talked over in their 
country. Father Daniel interrupted them, and said 
that Father Brebeuf had spoken of it in la Rochelle, 


288 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. & 

defendre, que cela eftoit en leur pouuoir; car s'ils 
vouloient donner vingt petits Hurons, on leur done- 
roit vingt Fran§ois, que nous ne parlions qu'auec 
grande raifon. A tout cecy, ils repartirent, premiere- 
ment qu'il falloit parler de cela dans le pais. Le 
Pere Daniel prit la parole, & dit, que le Pere Bre- 
beuf en auoit parle dans la Rochelle, c'eft le nom de 
I'vne de leurs Bourgades; qu'il auoit fait des prefens 
fur ce fujet, qu'on les auoit acceptez, & qu'ils man- 
quoient maintenant de parole. Secondement ils diret 
qu'il y auoit de grads dangers de defcendre qh. bas, 
pour les courfes de leurs ennemis. On leur demade, 
s'il y auoit plus de danger pour eux a nous venir 
voir, que pour nous k nous tranfporter en leur pais. 
Ils dirent que les enfans dependoient des parens, que 
le chemin eftoit rude & fafcheux, que les [262] meres 
auoient le cceur tendre. On leur replique que nos 
meres nous aymoient, & que nous enuoyons Xk haut 
des enfans qui n'eftoient pas moins aymez de leurs 
parens, que les petits Hurons d6s leurs; qu'on ne 
laiiToit pas de leur faire paffer ce grand chemin pour 
marque de noftre amour en leur endroit, 8c qu'ils de- 
uoient nous imiter en ce point, s'ils vouloient culti- 
uer noftre amitie. Nous voyons bien que ces pau- 
ures gens eftoient conuaincus; qu'on les prelToit de 
raifons fortes, & qu'ils eftoient en peine. Enfin vn 
vieillard prenant la parole, dit qu'on lailToit ce ieune 
homme comme a I'horenne, qu'on le traitafl bien, & 
que felon le raport qu'il feroit I'annee fuiuante qu'on 
pourroit auoir des enfans : on recent f on excufe, leur 
faifant entendre, que s'ils auoient du cceur & de I'a- 
mour pour nous, qu'ils nous temoigneroient autant 
d'affection qu'auoit fait cette Bourgade, d'oti eftoit 


1638] LE/EUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 289 

one of their Villages ; that, with this in view, he had 
offered them some presents, and they had accepted 
them; and that now they had failed to keep their 
word. Secondly, they said that there was g^eat dan- 
ger in coming down here, on account of the incur- 
sions of their enemies. They were asked if there 
was any more danger in their coming to see us, than 
in our going to their country. They said that the 
children were dependent upon their parents, that 
the way was rough and wearisome, that the [262] 
mothers had tender hearts. We replied to them that 
our mothers loved us, and that we sent up yonder 
children that were not less loved by their parents 
than the little Hurons were by theirs ; that there was 
no hesitation about letting them take this long jour- 
ney as a mark of our love for them ; and that they 
should imitate us in this respect, if they wished to 
cultivate our friendship. We saw clearly that these 
poor people were convinced ; that they were forcibly 
impressed by these considerations, and that they 
were perplexed. At last an old man, taking up the 
word, said that they would leave this young man on 
trial, as it were, — that we should treat him well, and 
that upon his report the following year would depend 
our having their children. His excuse was accepted, 
and it was made clear to them that if their hearts 
were kindly disposed towards us, they would show us 
as much affection as had that Village whence Satouta, 
the young man who remained, had come. There- 
upon they went away ; but they were not gone very 
far when some of the chief men of a certain Village 
held a consultation among themselves, which the 
Captain began [263] by saying that they ought to be 
ashamed to show less affection for the French than 


290 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.9 

Satoua, c'eft le nom de celuy qui demeuroit. lis fe 
departirent Ik deffus, mais ils ne furet pas bien loing, 
que quelques-vns des principaux d'vne certaine Bour- 
gade, ne tinffent entre-eux vne confulte, en laquelle 
le Capitaine commence [263] k dire, qu'ils deuoient 
auoir honte de fe monftrer moins affectionnez aux 
Fran5ois, que la Nation des Ours, d'ou efloit Satouta; 
que nous eftions bons & courtois, qu'il n'y auoit 
point de danger de demeurer auec nous. Et Ik deffus 
fe tournant vers fon neueu, il luy dit, Mon neueu, il 
faut que vous demeuriez auec les Fran9ois, prenez 
courage, ne craignez point ils vous aymeront; & vous 
vn tel, parlant k vn autre, il faut que vous luy teniez 
copagnie. Comment n'auons nous point d'amour? 
Sommes nous des hommes? N'auons nous point de 
cceur, de ne pas aymer vne nation fi bonne; foyez 
conftans, demeurez auec eux, & vous y comportez 
fagement. Ces deux ieunes hommes s'y accordent 
ais^ment, & tout fur rheure vn de leurs parens en 
vint donner aduis au Pere Daniel. Nous I'allons t6- 
moigner k Monfieur le General, qui ne f9auoit com- 
ment declarer fa ioye, tant il efloit content, faifant 
mille careffes au Sauuage qui en apportoit la nou- 
uelle. Comme il efloit deja nuict, on attendit le len- 
demain a nous amener ces deux ieunes gar96s. Le 
pere de I'vn d'iceux, luy fit vne belle harangue, & 
luy dit, Mon fils fois [264] conjia^it, ne defijle point de 
ta refolution ; tu f en vas auec de bonnes per/onnes, tu ne 
mangueras de rien auec ces getts-lh, ne prends rien fans le 
congd d'Antoine\ c'efl ainfi qu'ils appellent le Pere 
Antoine Daniel ; ne frequente point les Montagn^s, mais 
les Franqois feulement; fur tout obey ii ceux qui portent 
des habits noirs, auec lef quels tu dois demeurer \ fi tu 


1636] LE JE UN E'S RELATION, i6s6 291 

did the Nation of the Bear, to which Satouta belonged ; 
that we were good and courteous, and that there was 
no danger in remaining with us. And then, turning 
toward his nephew, he said, " My nephew, you must 
remain with the French ; be courageous, do not fear, 
for they will love you. And you, so and so," speak- 
ing to another, " you must keep him company. How 
now, have we no love? Are we men? Have we no 
hearts, not to love so good a nation? Be faithful, 
remain with them, and act with discretion." These 
two young men readily agreed to this, and straight- 
way one of their relations came to inform Father 
Daniel of it. We went to impart the news to Mon- 
sieur the Commandant, who could hardly express his 
joy, so glad was he, showing the Savage who brought 
the news a thousand kindnesses. As it was already 
night, they waited until the next day to bring us 
these two young boys. The father of one of them 
made him a fine speech, saying, ''My son, be [264] 
firm, do not weaken in thy resolution; thou art going with 
good people, thou wilt want for nothing with them; take 
nothing without the leave of Antoine (this is what they 
call Father Antoine Daniel), do not associate with the 
Montagn^s, but only with the French; above all, obey those 
who wear the black gowns, with whom thoji art to live; if 
thou takest Deer in the chase, give away the flesh and keep 
the skin; do not go into Canoes with the French, lest, by 
not understa?iding each other, you may take offense at 
something. Keep up thy courage until the coming year, 
when I shall see thee. ' ' We made some presents to 
their relations and invited them to a feast before our 
departure. Thereupon one came to ask Father Dan- 
iel, on the part of the Captain and of the inhabitants 
of la Rochelle, if we had less affection for that Vil- 


292 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 

prends des Cerfs h la chajfe, donne la chair, & retiens la 
peau, n'entre point dans les Canots auec les Frdgois, de 
peur que ne vous entendans pas les vns les autres, vous ne 
vous fafchiez; prends courage iufques h Van qui vient, 
que ie te verray. Nous fifmes quelques prefens "k leurs 
parens, & les inuitafmes au feftin deuant noftre de- 
part. La deffus on vint demander an Pere Daniel, 
de la part du Capitaine & des habitans de la Rochelle, 
li nous portions moindre affection a cette Bourgade 
qu'aux autres. Pourquoy done nous ne leur don- 
nions point de Frangois k embarquer? Nous r6pon- 
difmes, que s'ils en defiroient qu'ils en auroient, & 
comme le Pere Brebeuf me demandoit plufieurs Peres 
pour les difpofer Ik haut a la moiflon ; ie leur don- 
nay le Pere Ifaac logues, le Pere Daniel leur fait 
des prefens pour le porter, & le traiter doucement: 
[265] & les voila les plus contens du monde. Or 
comme le temps preffoit Monfieur le General, & qu'il 
fe trouuoit incommode de fa fant6, il voulut partir. 
Comme nous acheuions quelques affaires, & que nous 
ne conduifions point nos Seminarifles, ils nous ve- 
noient deja demander, fi nous ne les embarquerions 
pas auec nous, tant ils en auoient d'enuie, nous les 
prifmes & menafmes k la Chalouppe, il faifoit beau 
voir leurs parens les apoflrophans, & leurs recom- 
mandans d'auoir courage, de ne rien prendre parmy 
nous; que ce n'efloit point noftre couftume d'eftre 
larrons; bref ils firent cette action auec tant de t6- 
moignage d' amour, que tous nos Fran9ois en eftoient 
confolez. Nous montafmes done dans la Barque, on 
leue I'ancre, on tire le canon du Fort, & les pierriers, 
& autres pieces de fonte de la Barque pour falut, & 
nous voila fous voile. Arreftons nous vn peu. 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 293 

lage than for the others. Why then did we not give 
them some French people to embark? We replied 
that, if they wanted some, they should have them ; 
and as Father Brebeuf had asked me for several Fa- 
thers that he might prepare them up there for the 
harvest, I gave them Father Isaac Jogues. Father 
Daniel made them some presents, that they might 
take him and treat him kindly, [265] and behold 
them the happiest people in the world. Now as time 
was pressing Monsieur the Commandant, and as he 
was suffering from poor health, he wished to depart. 
While we were finishing up some business, as we had 
not yet taken our Seminarists, they came and asked 
us if we were not going to let them embark with us, 
so great was their desire to do so. They were taken 
and conducted to the Shallop, and it was pleasant to 
see their kinsmen apostrophizing them and recom- 
mending them to be of good cheer, and not to take 
anything while among us, saying that it was not the 
custom with us to steal ; in short, they did this with 
such an appearance of love that all our French were 
comforted by it. Then we entered the Bark, the an- 
chor was weighed, the cannon of the Fort, the swivel 
guns and other pieces of artillery of the Bark were 
fired off as a salute, and lo, we were under sail. Let 
us pause a little. 

So now, by the grace of God, we have begun a 
Huron Seminary. If you like you can have two 
more; another one for the Hurons and other [266] 
neighboring Tribes in the same territorj'- as the Hu- 
rons, where more than five hundred children could 
be educated if we had people and means enough. 
The third will be among the Montagues; I have al- 
ready said that nothing more is wanting now but a 


294 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.9 

Voila d6ja, par la grace de Dieu, vn Seminaire de 
Hurons commence. Si vous en voulez deux autres, 
vous les aurez, I'vn fera encor de Hurons, & d'autres 
[266] Nations voilines dans le mefme pais des Hu- 
rons, oil Ton pourroit inftruire plus de cinq cens en- 
fans, fi on auoit affez de monde & de forces: le troi- 
f[ijefme fera de Montagues; i'ay d^ja dit qu'il ne 
manque plus linon dequoy loger & entretenir leurs 
enfans. Si Meffieurs de la Compagnie continuent, 
come nous efperons, de nous enuoyer des perfonnes, 
qui employ ent I'authorite qu'ils leur donnent pour 
le feruice de Dieu, tout ira bien, & la Nouuelle 
France imitera vn iour la piete de fa foeur aifnee. 
I'ay deja dit que Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur s'y 
monftra zele au poffible. Monfieur le General de la 
flotte s'en retourne auec cette gloire deuant Dieu, de 
n'auoir rien oublie icy pour fa gloire. 

Le lendemain de noftre depart des trois Riuieres, 
nous arriuafmes ^ Kebec : nos Hurons qui font ieunes 
hommes leftes & bien-faits, le Pere Daniel & moy, 
ayans falu6 noftre Gouuerneur, nous nous retirafmes 
k Noftre Dame des Anges, ou ie trouuay le Pere Ni- 
colas Adam frapp^ d'vne paralyfie, qui luy interdit 
quafi tout I'vfage des pieds & des mains; ce font les 
[267] reliques d'vne fi^vre qui le faifit quelques iours 
apres fon arriu^e : on me parle de le renuoyer pour le 
recouurement de fa fant6, mais il dit qu'il eft venu 
icy pour y donner fa vie ^ noftre Seigneur, & aux 
ames, qu'il a rachete; qu'il eft preft d'obeir, mais 
que le fentiment de fon coeur feroit de ne point recu- 
ler, & d'aller au Ciel du haut de la Croix ou Dieu I'a 
mis : nous le retiendrons done, fon exemple nous in- 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, rdjb 295 

place to lodge and maintain their children. If the 
Gentlemen of the Company continue, as we hope 
they will do, to send us persons who will use the au- 
thority they give them for the service of God, all will 
go well, and New France will some day imitate the 
piety of her elder sister. I have already said that 
Monsieur our Governor shows as much zeal as pos- 
sible. Monsieur the Commandant of the fleet returns 
with this glory in the sight of God, never to have 
neglected anything for his glory here. 

The day after our departure from the three Rivers 
we arrived at K^bec. Our Hurons, who are strong 
and active youths, Father Daniel and I, having sa- 
luted our Governor, withdrew to Nostre Dame des 
Anges, where I found Father Nicolas Adam ^ strick- 
en with paralysis, which deprived him almost entire- 
ly of the use of his feet and hands; this is the [267] 
result of a fever which seized him a few days after 
his arrival. There is talk of sending him back for 
the recovery of his health, but he says that he came 
here to give his life to our Lord and to the souls 
that he has redeemed ; that he is ready to obey, but 
that the sentiments of his heart would be not to re- 
treat, and to go to Heaven from the summit of the 
Cross where God has placed him. So we will retain 
him ; his example will be edifying to us, and his pa- 
tience will procure new blessings upon these wilder- 
nesses. 

I remember saying above that, on the fifteenth of 
this month, the Hiroquois prisoner was brought down 
to K6bec, to be put to death there by the Savages. 
Here are the details of his torture as related to me 
by Father de Quen. As soon, said he, as this poor 


296 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.9 

ftruira, & fa patience obtiendra de nouuelles benedi- 
ctions fur ces deferts. 

le me fouuiens d'auoir dit cy-deffus que le quin- 
zi6me de ce mois le prifonnier Hiroquois eftoit def- 
cendu k K6bec pour y eftre mis a mort par les 
Sauuages : voicy les particularitez de fon fupplice, fe- 
lon que le Pere de Quen m'en a informe. Si toft, dit-il, 
que cette pauure victime mit pied a terre, les femmes 
s'en faifirent, & le menerent en leurs Cabanes; la on 
le fit dafer; cependat vne Megere parut armee d'vn 
foiiet de cordes h. plufieurs noeuds, qui luy decharge 
des coups k tour de bras auec autat de rage, qu'elle 
auoit de force: vne autre luy frappe la poictrine, I'e- 
ftomach, & le vetre d'vn gros caillou; & vne [268] 
troifieme luy decouppe les epaules auec vn couteau, 
& luy fait ruiffeler le fang de tous coflez. Quelque 
temps apres vn Sauuage fee & defait come vn fque- 
let, eftant malade depuis plufieurs mois reprit des 
forces a la veue de ce miferable, il luy faute au col- 
let, I'atrappe par I'oreille comme vn chien, la luy 
emporte a belles dents, la luy met dans la bouche ; 
le prifonnier la prend fans fe troubler, la mache quel- 
que temps, & ne la pouuant aualer, la crache dans le 
feu: voila I'accueil qu'on luy fit. Apres cela on luy 
done quelque relafche, on le traitte des meilleures 
viandes qui fuffent en la Cabane ; & ce qui femble in- 
croyable c6t homme fe r^ioiiyfToit, comme s'il euft ap- 
pris nouuelle de fa liberte. Sur le foir ils le trainent 
li^ de cordes de Cabane en Cabane, pendant qu'vne 
femme enrag^e le foiiettoit h. la cadence d'vne chan- 
fon; on dit qu'ils exercerent vne autre cruaut6 fur 
luy, qui feroit rougir ce papier. Monfieur le Gou- 
uerneur eftant informe de tout cecy, leur fit fignifier 


1636] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1636 297 

victim stepped ashore, the women seized him and 
led him to their Cabins ; there he was made to dance. 
Meanwhile a Fury appeared, armed with a whip of 
knotted cords, with which she rained blows upon him 
around his arms, with as much rage as she had 
strength ; another struck him upon the chest, the 
stomach, and the belly, with a great stone; and a 
[268] third gashed his shoulders with a knife and 
made the blood flow in streams. A little while after- 
wards a Savage, as dry and fleshless as a skeleton, 
having been sick for several months, regained his 
strength at the sight of this wretch, jumped upon 
his neck, caught him by the ear like a dog, greedily 
bit it off, and placed it in his mouth ; the prisoner 
took it without being disconcerted, chewed it a 
while, and, not being able to swallow it, spit it into 
the fire. See what a reception they gave him. After 
this, he was granted a little respite, and was regaled 
with the best food there was in the Cabin. And, what 
seems incredible, this man seemed to be as greatly 
pleased as if he had received news of his liberty. 
Toward evening they dragged him, bound with ropes, 
from Cabin to Cabin, while an infuriated woman 
whipped him to the music of a song. It is said that 
they perpetrated another act of cruelty upon him 
which would make this paper blush. When Mon- 
sieur the Governor was informed of all this, he made 
known to them that he was dissatisfied with these 
outrages, and that they should go somewhere else, 
not to wound the eyes of our French people by these 
acts of barbarity, [269] to our eyes intolerable. This 
caused them to restrain their mad rage ; they then 
crossed over the great river and strangled their vie- 


298 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.9 

qu'il eftoit m^content de ces cniautez, «& qu'ils fe re- 
tirafset ailleurs, pour ne bleffer la veue de nos Fran- 
cois par des barbaries [269] inftipportables ^ nos 
yeux ; cela leur fit abreger leur manie : ils pallerent 
done dela le grand fleuue, & firent eftrangler eette 
vietime, qu'ils roftirent au feu, puis la donnerent aux 
chiens, iettant les os dans la riuiere. C'eft iufques 
oil pent aller la rage & la furie des ames qui ne co- 
gnoillent point Dieu ; ceux ou celles qui s'attaclient 
plus afprement a ces cniautez font gens dont les 
peres, ou les maris, ou les plus proches parens ont 
efte traittez auec pareilles furies aux terres de leurs 
ennemis; c'eft le fouuenir de la mort de leurs plus 
proches, qui iette cette rage dans leur cceur. 

Comme i'6cris cecy le vingt huictieme d'Aoufl, 
voila que le Pere Buteux me mande le depart du Pere 
logues, I'arriuee d'vne autre troupe de Hurons, de 
qui le fieur Nicolet a encores obtenu trois ieunes gar- 
90ns, fur le rapport que leur ont fait leurs compagnos 
du bon traittement que Monfieur le General «& tous 
les autres Francois leur auoient fait, le finis, priant 
Noftre Seigneur de vouloir eftre le Pere nourricier 
pour I'ame & pour le corps de ceux qu'il nous en- 
uoye de furcroift. [270] Des I'hyuer prochain nous 
allons congedier vne partie de nos hommes, h. raifon 
du manquement de viures ; car de refufer cette bene- 
diction du Ciel, & de renuoyer vne partie de nos Sau- 
uages, nous ne le ferons iamais, nous leur donnerions 
pluftoft la moitie de nous mefmes; 1' affaire eft trop 
importante pour la gloire de Noftre Seigneur : qu'il 
foit beny k iamais dans les temps & dans I'eternite. 

Nous fommes icy a defricher ce petit coin de la 
vigne du grand Pere de famille, vingt-fix des noftres 


1636] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, J636 299 

tim, whom they roasted at the fire and then gave to 
the dogs, throwing the bones into the river. To 
such a point can the rage and fury of souls which 
know not God attain. The men or women who in- 
dulge most fiercely in these acts of cruelty are those 
whose fathers or husbands or nearest relatives have 
been treated with equal fury in the country of their 
enemies ; it is the recollection of the death of their 
kindred that fills their hearts with this madness. 

As I am writing this, on the twenty-eighth of Au- 
gfust. Father Buteux sends me word of the departure 
of Father Jogues, and of the arrival of another band 
of Hurons from whom sieur Nicolet has obtained 
three young boys, upon the report made by their com- 
panions of the good treatment that Monsieur the 
Commandant and all the other French people have 
shown them. I finish, praying Our Lord to be a 
foster Father to the souls and bodies of those he 
sends us in addition to the ones we have. [270] The 
coming winter, we are going to dismiss a part of our 
men on account of the scarcity of food ; for to refuse 
this Heavenly blessing by sending away part of our 
Savages, this we will never do, — we would rather 
give them the half of ourselves; the matter is too 
important for the glory of Our Lord. May he be 
blessed forever through time and through eternity. 

We are here to clear this little corner in the vine- 
yard of the great Head of the family. At present 
there are twenty-six of us, — twenty Priests and six 
of our lay Brothers ; they stay in the following 
places, beginning with the most distant : In the resi- 
dence of saint Joseph, among the Hurons, Reverend 
Father Jean Brebeuf , Superior of that Mission ; Fa- 


300 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.9 

pour le prefent, vingt Preflres, & fix de nos Freres 
coadiuteurs: voicy les lieux de leur demeure, com- 
men9ant par les plus eloignez. En la refidence de 
fainct lofeph atix Hurons le R. Pere lean Brebeuf 
Superieur de cette Miffion, le P. Fran§ois Mercier, le 
P. Pierre Pijart, le Pere Pierre Chaftelain, le Pere 
Charles Garnier, & le Pere Ifaac logues. 

En la Refidence de la Conception aux trois Ri- 
uieres, le Pere lacques Buteux, & le Pere Charles 
du Marche : on baftit en cette Refidence, nous y en- 
uoyerons encore vn Pere quand on I'y pourra loger. 

[271] En la Refidence de Noftre Dame de Recou- 
urance k Kebec, le Pere lean de Quen & moy ; on 
baftit encor icy pour le Seminaire & pour le College ; 
fi toft qu'il y aura place i'y feray venir des Peres: 
cependant le Pere de Quen enfeignera les Efcoliers 
Frangois, moy quelques Sauuages ; & auec tout cela 
il faut fecourir nos Fran9ois, qui font deja vne petite 
ParoilTe, & eftudier h. la langue Montagnaife. 

En la Refidence de Noftre Dame des Anges, le R. 
Pere Charles Lallemant Superieur de cette Maifon, 
le Pere Nicolas Adam, le Pere Enemond MalTe, le 
Pere Anne Denoue, le Pere Antoine Daniel, le Pere 
Ambroife Dauoft: nos Freres Gilbert Burel, Pierre 
le Teller, lean Liegeois, Pierre Feaute, Ambroife 
Cauuet, & Loiiys Gobert. 

En la Refidence de Miskou, le Pere Claude Quen- 
tin, s'il y pent arriuer, & le Pere Charles Turgis. 

En la Refidence de S. Anne au Cap-breton, le Pere 
Daudemare, & le Pere Andr6 Richard. Dieu fgait fi 
nous implorons tous auec ardeur, pour nous, & pour 
[272] ces pauures Peuples le fecours des prieres de V. 
R. & de tous nos Peres, & Freres. le le fais pour mon 


1686] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 301 

ther Fran9ois Mercier, Father Pierre Pijart, Father 
Pierre Chastelain, Father Charles Garnier, and Fa- 
ther Isaac Jogues. 

In the Residence of the Conception, at the three 
Rivers, Father Jacques Buteux and Father Charles 
du Marche ; they are building at that Residence, and 
we will send there another Father when they shall 
have a lodging for him. 

[271] In the Residence of Nostre Dame de Recou- 
vrance at K^bec, Father Jean de Quen and I. We 
are building here also, for the Seminary and the Col- 
lege. As soon as there shall be a place for them, I 
shall send for some Fathers; meanwhile Father de 
Quen will teach the French Pupils and I the Savage 
ones, — and with all this we shall have to help our 
French people, who already form quite a little Par- 
ish, and to study the Montagnais language. 

In the Residence of Nostre Dame des Anges, Rev- 
erend Father Charles Lallemant, Superior of that 
House, Father Nicolas Adam, Father Enemond 
Masse, Father Anne Denoue, Father Antoine Daniel, 
Father Ambroise Davost ; our Brothers Gilbert Burel, 
Pierre le Teller, Jean Liegeois, Pierre Feaute, Am- 
broise Cauvet and Loiiys Gobert. 

In the Residence of Miskou, Father Claude Quen- 
tin, if he has succeeded in reaching there, and Father 
Charles Turgis. 

In the Residence of Ste. Anne at Cap-breton, Fa- 
ther Daudemare ^^ and Father Andre Richard. God 
knows with how much ardor we all implore, both for 
ourselves and for [272] these poor Peoples, the help 
of the prayers of Your Reverence and of all our Fa- 
thers and Brothers. I desire it in my own behalf 


302 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.9 

particulier, de toute I'^tendue de mon coeur, comme 
celuy qui me diray au nom de tous, ce que ie fuis en 
verity, 

Voftre tres-humble, & tres- 

obeiffant feruiteur en noftre 
Seigneur, 

Pavl le Ievne. 

I'ay trace fort ^ la hafle cette Relation, tantoft 
en vn endroit, tantoft en vn autre; quelquefois fur 
les eaux, d'autre fois fur la terre; enfin ie la con- 
cluds en la Relidence de noflre Dame des Anges, 
proche de K6bec en la Nouuelle France, ce 28. 
d'Aouft 1636. 


1636] LEJEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 308 

with all my heart, as one who will sign himself in 
the name of all, what he is in fact, 

Your very humble and very 

obedient servant in our 
Lord, 

Paul le Jeune. 

I have jotted this Relation down hastily, now in 
one place, now in another ; sometimes upon the wa- 
ter, sometimes upon the land. I finally conclude it 
in the Residence of nostre Dame des Anges, near 
K^bec in New France, this 28th of August, 1636. 


NOTES TO VOL. IX 

(Figures in parentheses, following number of note, refer to pages 
of English text.) 

1 (p. 15). — Madame He bout : this was Marie Hubou, whose first 
husband was Louis Hebert (see vol. v., note 13). 

2 (p. 29). — Le Jeune gives (in Relation of 1634) a long account 
of the persecutions he endured at the hands of this man. 

3 (P- 33)'— Jacques Hertel, a native of Normandy, came to Cana- 
da in 161 5. He was long employed by Champlain as an interpreter, 
and, upon the capture of Quebec, took refuge with the savages. In 
1633 he obtained a grant of land at Three Rivers, where he was the 
first settler (see vol. iv., note 24); and two other estates there were 
granted him by Montmagny, Aug. 18, 1636. Five years later he 
was married to Marie Marguerie ; their son Francois was ennobled 
by Louis XIV. He died at Three Rivers, Aug. 10, 1651. — See Suite's 
Can.-Frangais, vols, i., ii. 

4 (P- 33)- — Sieur Godefroy : probably the " Sieur Jean Paul" 
mentioned in the next chapter. This was Jean Paul Godefroy (God- 
frey), who came to Canada at an early date, and served as inter- 
preter and trading clerk ; he returned to France with Champlain in 
1629, but his name appears at Three Rivers in 1636, as a clerk there. 
In 1644, he accompanied Pierre Le Gardeur to France, delegated by 
the Canadian colonists (see vol. viii., note 57). In the following 
year, he was commander of a ship, and during 1648-50 was admiral 
of the fleet. Oct. 3, 1646, he married Marie Madeleine, daughter of 
Le Gardeur ; he had by her two daughters, one of whom became an 
Ursuline nun. In 1650, he formed a commercial association with 
Tilly, Buissot, Lespin6, and others, for seal-fishing at Tadoussac 
and fur-trading with the Indians. In June, 1651, he went with the 
Jesuit Druillettes on an embassy to the New England authorities, 
to carry on the negotiations beg^n in 1647, relative to commerce and 
to the formation of an alliance, offensive and defensive, against the 
Iroquois. This proposal, however, was refused by the colonies of 
Plymouth and Massachusetts. Godefroy was elected a member of 
the Quebec council, in 1648; he was apparently a prominent colo- 
nist, and active in developing the commerce and resources of the 
country. He was a relative of the noted Jean Godefroy de Linctot. 


306 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 

The date of his death is not recorded. He is mentioned several 
times in Jour, des Jesuites ; see also Suite's Can.-Erangais, vols, 
ii., iii. 

5 (P- 33)- — For sketch of M. de Gand, see vol. vii., note 22. 

6 (p. 43). — Suite says (Can.-Fran^ais, vol. ii., p. 82) that in the 
register of Three Rivers appears, early in 1636, the name of Jean 
Rousseau, a Parisian; he died there in 1643 (July 21), killed by the 
discharge of a gun. 

7 (p. 51). — M. de Lisle (L'Isle), a chevalier of the knights of 
Malta, was the lieutenant of Montmagny, and commanded at Three 
Rivers in the summer of 1636. He was a man of great piety, and is 
frequently mentioned in the Relations, from 1636 to 1641. as a friend 
of the missionaries, and as participating in various religious cere- 
monies. 

For a sketch of Montmagny, see vol. viii., note 50. 

Suite says {Can.-Frangats, vol. ii., p. 8t): "A gentleman named 
St. Jean, who had come in 1635, if not earlier, accompanied Mont- 
magny on his official journeys;" he appears to have remained in 
Canada until 1641. 

Concerning Chastellain and Gamier, see vol. viii., notes 51, 52. 
Details of the baptism at which the former officiated upon first arriv- 
ing in Canada are given in Le Jeune's Introduction to this Relation 
(see vol. viii., p. 219). Chastellain's Christian name is given in four, 
des /^suites as Guillaume Pierre. 

8 (p. 59). — Robert Hache, a Jesuit donne, who lived in the mis- 
sion at Three Rivers, is named in the register of that town during 
the years 1636-40. Lalemant also mentions him in a letter to the 
provincial in 1634 (see vol. vi., p. 55). Hache was at Sillery in 1645, 
and, in the year after, made a journey to France. He is occasion- 
ally mentioned in \he Jour, des /^suites, — the last time (Sept. 12, 
1659), under the following significant entry: "Item, as for Robert 
Hache, it was decided that he should go away, or come to an under- 
standing with the other donnes. " 

9 (P- 59)- — For ^ sketch of the chief, Capitanal, see vol. viti., 
note 67. 

10 (p. 59). — The register of Three Rivers mentions, in 1637, the 
name of M. de la Treille, clerk. 

11 (p. 59). — For a sketch of Du Marche, see vol. viii., note 19. " " 

12 (p. 63). — This was Guillaume Hebert, eldest child and only son 
of Louis Hfebert (see vol. ii. , note 80) and Marie RoUet. Guillaume 
married, Oct. i, 1634, Helene Desportes. then aged fourteen; he 
died five years later, leaving three children. 

13 (p. 65). — Madamoiselle : in olden times, the appellation g^ven 
to every married lady who was not noble, or who, though noble. 


NOTES TO VOL. IX 307 


bore no title, — the designation "madame" being reserved exclu- 
sively for the wives of those on whom knighthood had been conferred, 

14 (p. 65). — Jacques Castillon, a bourgeois of Pans, and one of 
the Hundred Associates ; the Isle of Orleans was granted him Jan. 
15, 1636, as the representative of a company of eight persons — Lau- 
son, Cheffault, and others. 

15 (p. 65). — For a sketch of Daniel, see vol. v., note 53; con- 
cerning the Petite Nation, note 56 in same volume. 

16 (p. 69). — "The apostate" was Pierre Antoine (see volume v., 
note 33) ; regarding his brothers, see Le Jeune's account of his win- 
ter sojourn with them {Relation of 1634, vol. vii. of this series). 

17 (p. 83). — Manitousiouekht: see vol. v., note ^1. 

18 (p. 95). — This Oumastikoueiau (Oumasaticoueie) was an Al- 
gonkin chief of unusual shrewdness and ability ; it was he who en- 
deavored, in the summer of 1635, to incite strife between the Monta- 
gnais and Hurons — in order, as Le Jeune thought, to divert the 
Huron trade from the French. The latter mentions this Indian 
several times; in July, 1633, his son was baptized by Brebeuf ; and 
in 1636 he was slain by the Iroquois. 

19 (p. 99). — Le Jeune here refers to Madame de Combalet's 
scheme for a hospital at Quebec (see vol. viii., note 62). 

20 (p. 115).— The Attikamegues were a Montagnais tribe, dwell- 
ing on the upper St. Maurice River, by which stream they descended 
to Three Rivers for trade (though not until 1637, when the French 
fort there insured them some protection from the Iroquois). The 
missionaries found them docile and receptive, and made numerous 
converts among them. It was during one of Buteux's journeys to 
visit this tribe that he was slain by the Iroquois, who often made 
hostile incursions even thus far north of the St. Lawrence. Letters 
from the Huron missionaries were often sent to Three Rivers and 
Quebec by the Attikamegues, who traded with the Hurons, as a 
safer though more circuitous despatch than that by the Ottawa 
River, which was especially infested by the Iroquois. The Attika- 
megues, though a timid people, at times valiantly resisted their 
enemies; but by 1661 they had been practically destroyed by the 
Iroquois, and their ruin was completed, a few years later, by the 
ravages of the smallpox. 

Vimont says {Relation of 1641, chap, vii.) that the appellation of 
this tribe was derived from the Montagnais name of a certain white 
fish, of excellent quality, which abounded in the rivers and lakes of 
that region (probably the "whitefish," now found in the Great 
Lakes, Coregonus, of the Salmonidce). 

21 (p. 117). — Riviere des Iroquois : the Sorel or Richelieu River 
(see vol. i., note 67). 


308 LES RELATIONS DES jAsUITES 


Savages of the Island : the tribe that inhabited AUumettes Island 
(see vol. v., fiote 57). Traces of its early occupants are still found 
on this island. 

22 (p. 121). — See Le Jeune's account of the spirits or progenitors 
of the seasons, vol. vi., p. 161. 

23 (p. 123). — Like the Hebrews, the North American aborigines 
regarded a woman in her periodical illness as unclean, defiling all 
that she touched ; but the latter race also cherished a superstitious 
belief that her look, or touch, or even the sight of her, had a malign 
influence — inducing disease, causing ill-luck in hunting or war, and 
bringing misfortune. In consequence, seclusion at this period was 
imposed by custom upon the woman, who must dwell apart from her 
family, in a small hut or wigwam constructed for this purpose (cf. 
Biard's statement, vol. iii., p. 105). This superstition still exists 
among many tribes. Schoolcraft mentions it, and a custom result- 
ing therefrom — that a woman in this condition, and naked, makes 
the circuit of the cornfields at night, to destroy blight, vermin, and 
noxious insects. 

A Menomonee legend given by Hoffman {Bur. of Ethnol. Rep., 
1892-93, p. 175) relates that Manabiish (Manabozho, or Michabou, 
"the Great Hare") once threw a clot of bear's blood at his grand- 
mother, hitting her on the abdomen ; whence originated menstrua- 
tion. An Omaha version of this story is mentioned by Dorsey, who 
gives the following account of the periodical seclusion of women 
among that tribe: "The Omaha woman reckons pregnancy from 
the last time that she ' dwelt alone. ' Among the Omahas and Pon- 
kas, the woman makes a different fire for four days, dwelling in a 
small lodge apart from the rest of the household, even in cold 
weather. She cooks and eats alone, telling no one of her sickness, 
not even her husband. Grown people do not fear her, but children 
are caused to fear the odor that she is said to give forth. If any eat 
with her, they become sick in the chest, and very lean ; and their 
lips become parched in a circle about two inches in diameter. Their 
blood grows black ; children vomit. On the fourth or fifth day, she 
bathes herself, and washes her dishes, etc. ; then she can return to 
the household. Another woman who is similarly affected can stay 
with her in the small lodge, if she knows the circumstances. Dur- 
ing this period, the men will neither lie nor eat with the woman, and 
they will not use the same dish, bowl, and spoon." The Omaha 
name for this illness indicates their superstitious notions regarding 
it, — Wakdndatathica^, "pertaining to Wakanda" ("the Great 
Spirit"). — See Bur. of Ethnol. Rep., 1881-82, pp. 263, 267. 

The same custom of seclusion obtains among many tribes, in con- 
nection with childbirth. MacCauley says {Bur. of Ethnol. Rep., 


NOTES TO VOL. IX 309 


1883 -S4, p. 497) that a Seminole woman, just before childbirth, 
builds a small lodge, not far from the main house of the family, and 
goes there for her confinement. Boas and Murdoch describe a simi- 
lar custom among different tribes of the Eskimos ; a small hut or 
snow house is built for the mother, in which she spends the time of 
her delivery and recovery. Murdoch was told by one of these natives 
that a sore on the latter's face was caused by drinking from a cup 
that had been used by a woman who had recently had a miscar- 
riage.— See Bur. of Ethnol. Rep., 1884-85, p. 610; and 1887-88, p. 

415- 

24 (p. 125). — A sketch of Jean Nicolet is given in vol. viii., note 29. 

25 (p. 131). — The toise is a French linear measure, of six (French) 
feet, equal to 1.949 metres. Littre cites Thaumassiere's Coutume de 
Berry (16th century), thus: "We use in this country two toises — 
one, the carpenter's toise, of sj4 feet; the other, the mason's toise of 
6 feet, with which is measured the square toise." Wurtele's Tables 

for Reducing Measures (Montreal, 1861) makes the toise equivalent 
to 6.395 English feet. 

26 (p. 135).— The early settlement of Acadia by the French is re- 
lated at length by Lescarbot and Biard in vols, i.-iii. of this series. 
A sketch of the first English settlement there is given in vol. iv., 
note 46. After the restoration of New France by England (1632), 
Acadia was governed by Isaac de Razilly until his death in 1635. 
Upon that event, his authority mainly devolved upon his lieutenants, 
D'Aulnay and La Tour; while another of his officers, Nicolas Denys, 
sieur de Fronsac, remained in possession of Cape Breton and other 
islands, with the coasts of the Gulf of St. Lawrence. 

Denys established flourishing settlements at Ste. Anne's, Cheda- 
bouctou (now Guysboro'), and St. Peter's (on the isthmus now cut 
by a ship canal), also at Miscou (see vol. vii., note 19); and carried 
on an extensive trade in fish, lumber, and other products of the 
country. After his return to France (about 1671), he wrote an inter- 
esting account of the territory he had occupied in America, — De- 
scription Giographique et Historique de V Amdrique Septentri- 
onal e i^a-Tis, 1672). Bourinot gives {Cape Breton, pp. 139- 141) a 
bibliography of Denys's work, and translates his description of Cape 
Breton. 

27 (P- 135)- — See sketch of De Razilly in vol. viii., note 2. As 
governor of Acadia, he established his official residence at La Heve 
(see vol. i., note /\2). He erected fortifications there, brought over 
colonists, cultivated grain and fruit, established fisheries, and ruled 
the proN-ince with energy, judgment, and foresight. Williamson 
(Maine, vol. i., p. 263) relates this instance of his generosity towards 
the English: "Afterwards the French treated the colonists with 


310 L£S RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 


more forbearance and kindness. A crew of Connecticut mariners, 
for instance, being wrecked on the Isle of Sables, received from 
them many testimonies of humanity, and were even transported to 
La Heve, the residence of Razilla ; from which place, he gave four 
of them a passage to France, and furnished the others with a shal- 
lop to convey themselves home. These generous acts were in the 
last days of his life — happily monumental of his worth and clem- 
ency." 

28 (p. 141). — Diane: the drumbeat which is sounded at day- 
break. This appellation is, according to Littr6, derived from the 
Italian Stella diana ("the morning star "), originally from Latin 
dies; it has been used as above since the 1 6th century. 

29 (p. 143). — De Repentigny and La Poterie are sketched in vol. 
viii., notes 57, 58. 

30 (p. 145). — Chevalet : an instrument of torture, "a sort of 
wooden horse, with a sharp back, on which soldiers who had com- 
mitted disorders were placed, with cannon balls attached to their 
feet" (Littre). 

31 (p. 145). — Champlain had strictly forbidden any traffic with 
the Indians in intoxicating liquors (see vol. vi., note 19). Cf. pp. 
203-207 of this volume. 

32 (p. 149). — Plans for the establishment of a college at Quebec 
had been made by Rene de Rohault and his father (see vol. vi., note 
9), as early as 1626; but the hostilities between England and France, 
and the capture of Quebec, hindered the execution of their design. 
Le Jeune, however, was able to carry it out later — having received 
from the Marquis de Gamache, in 1635, a large sum of money, and 
from the Company of New France (Mar. 18, 1637) twelve arpents of 
land, for this purpose. The history of this college is related at 
length by Rochemonteix {Jisuites, vol. i., pp. 205-230). 

33 (p. 165). — T'ti^^&xra.'s.vache sauvage, boeuf sa^^vage,2in(^.?,OTa&- 
^^TCi&?, even buffe and bujffle, were applied by the early French writ- 
ers alike to the buffalo, the moose, and the elk, — whence has arisen 
much confusion in regard to the former habitat of the buffalo. But 
examination of the fossil remains of this animal, and of the state- 
ments of early writers, both English and French, indicates at least 
the strong probability that the buffalo was not found east of Hud- 
son's Bay and the Great Lakes, or the AUeghanies. Boucher, in his 
Hist, verit. et nat. (reprinted, with numerous annotations by Suite, 
in Canad. Roy. Soc. Proc, 1896), chap, v., makes (1663) a definite 
statement on this point: "As for the animals called Bufles, they are 
only found in the country of the Outaouais, some four or five hun- 
dred leagues from Quebec, towards the West and North." The 
subject is exhaustively discussed in Allen's valuable monogfraph, 


NOTES TO VOL. IX 311 

"History of the American Bison," published in U. S. Geol. and 
Geogr. Survey of the Territories, Ninth Ann. Rep., 1875 (Wash- 
ington. 1877). PP- 443-587- 

Le Jeune doubtless refers in the text to either the elk or the moose 
(see vol. ii., note 34). 

34 (p. 169). — L'Isle Perce (now called Perce Rock) is situated on 
the eastern coast of Gaspe, opposite the village of Perce, and 36 
miles from the town of Gaspe Basin. It lies at the foot of Mt. Joly, 
from which it has evidently been separated (like Cape Forillon — 
see vol. iii., note 45) by the action, through many centuries, of 
waves and ice. This rocky islet is 288 feet high, i , 200 feet long, 
and about 70 feet wide ; its sides are boldly precipitous, and within 
it, cut by the waters, are three great arches, from which it derives 
its name — the central one large enough to allow the easy passage 
of a boat under sail. Vast numbers of sea fowl resort here every 
summer, to rear their young. Perce is noted for its grand and 
romantic scenery, and as the location of the most extensive cod fish- 
ery in Quebec province. 

Bonaventure is a small island opposite Perce, 2%, miles long, and 
j^ of a mile wide ; it forms a natural breakwater between Perc6 and 
the Gulf. It contains about 50 families. A river of the same name 
empties mto the Bay of Chaleurs. 

35 (p. 169). — Concerning white whales, see vol. v., note 6. 

36 (p. 183). — For citations on the connection of the Jesuits with 
the fur trade, see vol. i., Jiote 31 ; vol. iii., note 33. 

37 (p. 191). — This cape was named by Champlain. In his voyage 
of 1608 (Laverdiere's ed., p. 294), he says: "Coasting the shore from 
the Isle aux Couldres, we made a headland, which we named cap de 
Tourmente, five leagues away ; and we named it thus because, how- 
ever little wind may blow, the sea rises there as if. it were high tide. 
At this place, the water begins to be fresh. ' ' This point is, how- 
ever, eight leagues from Isle aux Coudres, instead of five, and is 
ten leagues below Quebec. It is a lofty, steep promontory, rising 
to the height of 1,900 feet above the fertile meadows at its base 
(whence the name Beaupre). 

Champlain, in 1626, sent to this place the cattle of the colony, with 
a few men to care for them, erecting buildings for their use; and 
every week he made a trip thither to inspect the establishment and 
provide for its needs. This settlement was destroyed by Kirk in 
1628, at which time it was in charge of Nicholas Pivert, who had 
with him his wife and niece, besides the men who took care of the 
cattle. Upon the return of the French, a few colonists settled at 
Beaupre, attracted by its great natural advantages — a little stream 
which furnished a good landing-place, abundant and diversified for- 


312 LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES 


ests, and excellent pasturage, admirably adapting it for stock-rais- 
ing. Jan. 15, 1636, the Company of New France granted to Antoine 
Cheffault, one of its members, the seigniory known as Cote de Beau- 
pre — having six leagues of river frontage, and embracing all of the 
present Montmorency county, and more. Flourishing settlements 
soon arose in this region — among them, one at Ste. Anne, where 
was laid (March, 1658) the corner stone of a church, named Ste. 
Anne de Petit Cap. The Jesuit missionaries frequently visited these 
colonies, to minister to their spiritual needs. 

38 (p. 209). — See sketch of Chasteaufort in vol. viii., note 53. 

39 (p. 213). — Teston (teste, "head"): an old French silver coin, 
stamped with the likeness of the king. It was worth, under Francis 
I., ten sous and a few deniers; under Louis XIII., its value had 
gradually risen to 19^ sous; its use was then discontinued. 

The English shilling of Henry VIII. was called "testoon" — a 
name adopted from that of the above French coin ; it was in use 
during 1544-48. 

40 (p. 227). — Paul Ragueneau, born in Paris, Mar. 18, 1608, be- 
came a Jesuit novice Aug. 21, 1626. His studies were pursued at 
Clermont and Bourges; he was also an instructor in the latter insti- 
tution during 1628-32, among his pupils being "the great Conde" 
(vol. viii., note 13). He came to Canada June 28, 1636, and labored 
in the Huron mission until its close — except during the year 1640- 
41 ; in the spring of the latter year, he, with Nicolet, held an ineffec- 
tual conference with the hostile Iroquois near Three Rivers (vol. 
viii., note 29). He was named by the Hurons Aondechete. 

Ragueneau was superior of the Huron mission from early in 1645 
until its destruction in 1649; and superior of all the Canadian mis- 
sions from 1650 to 1653. In June, 1657, Ragueneau and Joseph Du 
Peron undertook the mission to the Onondagas (for sketch of this 
tribe, see vol. viii. , note 34) ; but they found these savages bitterly 
hostile to the French, and, learning that the former had planned to 
murder them, all the French (March 1658), secretly fled for their 
lives, and escaped in safety, arriving at Quebec April 23. 

Returning to France in August, 1662, Ragueneau became agent 
in that country for the Canadian mission, and died at Paris, Sept. 
3, 1680. As superior, he wrote the Relations of the Huron mission, 
during 1645-49, ^^^ edited the general Relations for the years 1649- 
53; he was also editor of the Jour, des Jdsuites from Nov. i, 1650 
to Aug. 15, 1653. After his return to France, he wrote Vie de Alere 
Catherine de St. Augusiin, a Hospital nun at Quebec (published 
at Paris, 1671). Sommervogel also cites a MS., Memoires touchant 
les vertus des Peres de Noiie, Jogues, Daniel^ etc. (4to, pp. 314), 
as collected from different sources by Ragueneau, in 1652, — "to 


NOTES TO VOL. IX 313 


be used in a plea for beatification," — each memoir bearing at the 
end his signed and sworn attestation. 

Franjois Ragueneau, a brother of Paul, was born at Blois, Jan. 
14, 1597, and entered the Jesuit novitiate Apr. 16, 1614. In 1628, 
he went to Canada with Charles Lalemant, on Roquemont's exp>edi- 
tion; but they were captured by Kirk (vol. iv., notes 20, 46), and the 
Jesuits were obliged to return to France. Francois was rector of 
Bourges, and died there Apr. 10, 1665. A MS. written by him is 
cited by Somraervogel as in the archives of Ste. Genevieve, Paris — 
AntiucE littercE Missionis Canadensis Societatis Jesu, 1663-64 
(dated Feb. i, 1665). 

No information is available concerning the lay brother Louis Go- 
bert. Some writers seem to consider this name as a mere error for 
that of Ambroise Cauvet ; but both these names are mentioned by 
Le Jeune in the text (p. 301). 

41 (p. 227). — Isaac Jogues was born at Orleans, France, Jan. 10, 
1607. At the age of ten, he became a student in the Jesuit college 
just established at Orleans, and a novice in that order Oct. 24, 1624, 
at Rouen, where he was under the care of Louis Lalemant, a rela- 
tive of the missionaries of that name. His studies were pursued at 
Rouen, La Fleche, and Clermont; and he was ordained as a priest, 
early in 1636. In April of that year, he departed for Canada, in 
company with Chastellain, Garnier, Adam, Du Marche, Ragueneau. 
and the lay brother Ambroise Cauvet (vol. viii., note 56) ; they came 
with the fleet that escorted Montmagny, Champlain's successor. 
Jogues went immediately to the Huron mission, and there labored 
six years — mainly at Ste. Marie-on-the-Wye. During this time, he, 
with Garnier (vol. viii., note 52), made an unsuccessful attempt to 
found a mission among the Tobacco tribe (vol. v., note 18). In Sep- 
tember, 1641, Jogues, with Charles Raymbault, made an expedition 
to Sault Ste. Marie, to visit the Chippewas there, and obtain infor- 
mation concerning that region. In June, 1642, they descended to 
Quebec, with a company of Hurons, to obtain supplies for their mis- 
sion. On the return journey, an ambushed band of Iroquois attacked 
the party, 31 miles above Three Rivers, and captured Jogues, the 
donnes Rene Goupil and Guillaume Couture, and several Huron con- 
verts. The captives were taken to the Mohawk villages, where they 
were cruelly tortured, and some burned alive; Goupil was murdered, 
soon after; while Jogues and Couture were given to Indian families 
as slaves. In August, 1643, Jogues contrived to escape by the aid of 
the Dutch commandant at Rensselaerswyck (also called Fort 
Orange; now Albany), and of Jan Megapolensis, a Protestant " dom- 
inie;" and on Nov. 5 he left New Amsterdam (New York) on a 
Dutch vessel, — arriving, after many hardships and dangers, at the 
Jesuit college in Rennes, Jan. 5, 1644. 


314 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 

In the following spring, he returned to the Canadian mission, and 
was stationed at Montreal. For three years past, the Iroquois had 
been especially hostile and dangerous, and their incursions con- 
stantly harassed the French, and so terrified the Hurons and Algon- 
kins that they no longer dared come down the St. Lawrence for 
trade. July 5, 1644, a Mohawk embassy came to Three Rivers, to 
negotiate a treaty of peace ; they brought Couture, and restored him 
to the French. The treaty was concluded, after many delays ; but 
it was not ratified until May, 1646, when Jogues and Jean Bourdon 
were sent to the Mohawks by Montmagny, for this purpose. Their 
commission was safely executed, and they returned to Quebec. In 
the following September, Jogues was again sent to the Mohawk 
country, by his superiors, to spend the winter there ; but the sav- 
ages had renewed their hostility to the French, and, capturing 
Jogues not far from Fort Richelieu (on the Sorel), they took him as 
a prisoner, with his companion Jean de la Lande, to the Mohawk 
town of Ossernenon (now Auriesville, N. Y. ). A council of the tribe 
decided to set the prisoners at liberty ; but they were treacherously 
assassinated (Oct. 18, 1646) by some fanatical members of the Bear 
clan of Mohawks (vol. viii. , note 34). Information of this cruel mur- 
der was sent to Montmagny by Wilhelm Kieft, then governor of New 
Netherlands.— See Martin's Le R. P. Isaac Jogues (Paris, 1873); 
English translation by Shea, under the title, Life of Father Isaac 
Jogues (N. Y., 1885). 

Jogues wrote an account of the life and death of Rene Goupil ; 
and a description of the Dutch colonies on the Hudson, under the 
title Novum Belgium (to be reproduced in this series). These are 
translated by Shea, in Life of Jogues (ut supra). 

42 (p. 251). — The name Riviere des Prairies (vol. viii., note 2s) 
was restricted to the south branch of the Ottawa at an early date, 
as may be seen by the description of the original seigniory of Terre- 
bonne, which was granted Dec. 23, 1673, to Daulier Deslandes — 
"two leagues frontage upon the Riviere Jesus, formerly called 
Riviere des Prairies. ' ' This later name was evidently transferred 
from the Isle J6sus (at first known, during a few years, as Isle Mont- 
magny). In the autumn of 1672, this island was granted to Sieur 
Berthelot, a royal councilor and State officer of France; and the 
Riviere des Prairies to Jean Baptiste Le Gardeur, a grandson of 
Pierre (vol. viii., note 57), whose wife was Marguerite Nicolet (vol. 
viii., note 29). 

43 (p. 259).— Za Perdrix: a chief of the Island tribe (vol. viii., 
note 22). 

44 (p. 271). — Apparently the second of the chiefs known to the 
French by the appellation " Le Borgne" (vol. viii., note 30). 


NOTES TO VOL. IX 315 


45 (p. 281).— Louis de Saincte Foy (vol. v., note 20) returned to 
his own nation, and rendered valuable aid to the missionaries in the 
Huron country. — See Brebeuf's frequent mention of him in the Re- 
lation of 1635, and in this Relation, post. 

46 (p. 295). — See sketch of Nicolas Adam in vol. viii., note 55. 

47 (P- 301)- — Georges d'Eudemare (according to Rochemonteix ; 
Daudemare, in the text; Dendemare, in Jour, des Jdsuites; and 
D'Endemare, in Quebec edition of the Relations) had apparently 
joined Richard at the Ste. Anne (Cape Breton) mission about 1635 ; 
but he is not mentioned elsewhere in the Relations. According to 
Jour, des /^suites, he was at Quebec in 1645, having returned from 
the abandoned Fort Richelieu (built in 1642 by Montmagny, as a 
defense against the Iroquois, at the mouth of the Richelieu or Sorel 
River) ; he is also mentioned several times in the Journal, as taking 
part in important consultations at the headquarters of the mission 
in Quebec, and (May, 1648) as present at negotiations with the Iro- 
quois, at Montreal. 








•^ 


