Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 2
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1896-1901 (the 73-volume series; this volume's own year is not legible in the OCR)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits02jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits02jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits02jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 2 of 73.

---

CD 


-co 










■ ■^ .- - 


^- 

! 









•J Hll3 


I 


^ 



THE JESUIT RELATIONS 


AND 


ALLIED DOCUMENTS 


VOL. 11 


/ 


^ 



The edition consists of sev- 
en hundred and fifty sets 
all numbered 


No. 





^ ' The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 


Travels and Explorations 

OF THE Jesuit Missionaries 

IN New France 

1610-1791 

THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES ; ILLUSTRATED HY 
PORTRAITS. MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 

EDITED BY 

REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
Secretary' of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 


Vol. 11 
ACADIA: 1612-1614 


CLEVELAND: WOC JSutrOWS JStOtbCCS 

Companis. publishers, mdcccxcvi 


\ 


Copyright, 1896 

BY 

The Burrows Brothers Co 


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 


The Imperial Press, Cleveland 


EDITORIAL STAFF 


Editor . . Reuben Gold Thwaites 

Translator from the 

French . . John Cutler Covert 

Assistant Translator from 
the French . Mary Sifton Pepper 

rjy -, ^ r ^1. { William Frederic Giese 

Translators from the ) 

^^^^^ • • ] John Dorsey Wolcott 

Translator from the 

Italian . . Mary Sifton Pepper 

Assistant Editor . Emma Helen Blair 


CONTENTS OF VOL. II 

Preface to VolUxMe II . . . . i 

Documents: — 
IX. Lettre an R. P. Provincial, k Paris. Pierre 

Biard ; Port Royal, January 31, 1612 , 3 
X. Miflio Canadenfis. Epiflola ex Portu- 
regali in Acadia, tranfmiffa ad Prae- 
pofitvm Generalem Societatis Jesu. 
Pierre Biard ; Port Royal , January 3 i , 
1612 . . . . -57 

XI. Relation Derniere de ce qui s'est Passe au 
Voyage du Sieur de Potrincourt. Marc 
Lescarbot; Paris, 161 2 . . .119 

XII. Relatio Rervm Gestarum in Novo-Fran- 

cica Miffione, Annis 1613&1614 . 193 

Bibliographical Data: Volume II . . 287 

Notes . . . . . .291 


ILLUSTRATIONS TO VOL. II 


I. Photographic facsimile of General Map, 
from Les Voyages dii Sieur de Champlain, 
(Paris, 1613) . . . Facing 56 

II. Photographic facsimile of Map of Port 

Royal, from Ibid . . . Facing 118 

III. Photographic facsimile of title-page, Les- 

carbot's Relation Dernitre . . .122 

IV. Photographic facsimile of plan of Fort at 

Port Royal, from Ibid . . Facing 192 


PREFACE TO VOL. II 


Following is a synopsis of the documents contained 
in the present volume : 

IX. The indefatigable Biard presents, herein, a 
graphic recital of his work among the Acadian sav- 
ages, and particularly his journeys into the wilderness. 
His report of a trip with a party of Port Royalists to 
French trading posts on the St. Croix and St. John 
rivers, to an Etchemin town probably on the site of 
the present Castine, Me., and to an English fishing 
station on the Kennebec, is full of interest. 

X. Herein, Biard sends to the general of his order 
a full report concerning : (i) New France, its 
physical characteristics, and its aborigines; (2) the 
circumstances attending the opening of the Jesuit 
mission in Acadia; (3) Fleche's work previous to 
the coming of the Jesuits ; (4) visits to savage tribes 
by Mass6 and himself, with descriptions of conver- 
sions and baptisms, and a statement of the conditions 
and prospects of spiritual work among the aborigines. 

XI. Liescavhot' s Re/ation Derniere gives an account 
of Poutrincourt's voyage to New France, in 1610; of 
the conversion and baptism of the savage chief, Mem- 
bertou, and others, by the priest, Fleche; of Bien- 
court's return to France; and of the experiences of 
Poutrincourt at Port Royal. The writer praises Pou- 
trincourt for his exertions in Canada in behalf of 


PREFACE TO VOL. II 


both religion and civilization ; and urges that he 
should be aided in his colonial enterprise, as a neces- 
sary basis for religious work in this portion of the 
New World. He gives a list of the sponsors of the 
baptized Indians, who included many of the French 
nobility and clergy. The life at Port Royal is pic- 
tured in some detail; its labors and privations are 
dwelt upon ; and the customs of the natives described. 
Lescarbot does not fail, although cautiously, to ex- 
hibit his dislike of the Jesuits, and endeavors to show 
that their coming to Port Royal involved delay and 
expense to the colonial enterprise, thereby injuring 
Poutrincourt. Our author's closing chapter devoutly 
catalogues the " Effects of God's Grace in New 
France ; " he describes how Providence cared for the 
colonists in their distress, saved them from shipwreck, 
kindly disposed the savages toward them and the 
Christian religion, and returned to the Frenchmen 
their ship, in time to prevent starvation. The res- 
cue of Aubry is also mentioned. 

XII. The Rclatio Reriim Gestarum {i6ij & 1^14) 
opens with a description of New France, its geogra- 
phy, its climate, its peoples and their customs. The 
experience of the Jesuit fathers at Port Royal is re- 
lated at length, from their own point of view. A de- 
scription is given of the settlement of St. Sauveur, 
on Mount Desert Island, and its destruction by the 
Virginian, Argall. Then follows an account of the 
life of the Jesuit prisoners, in Virginia and England. 
The conclusion is reached that, despite these draw- 
backs, the Jesuit mission in Canada has made a hope- 
ful beginning. 

R. G. T. 

Madison, Wis., September, 1896. 


IX 

Lettre du p. Biard 

au R. P. Provincial a Paris 

Port Royal, Janvier 31, 1612 


Source : Reprinted from Carayon's Premiere Mission des 
Jesuites au Canada, pp. 44-76. 


LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 2 


[44] Lettre du P. Pierre Biard au R. P. Pro- 
vincial a Paris. 

(Copide sur Vautographe conserve dans les archives du 
Jesus, a Rome.) 

Port-Royal, 31 Janvier 16 12. 

MON Reverend Pere, 
Pax Christi. 
S'il nous failloit entrer en compte devant 
Dieu et Vostre Reverence du ger6 et negoci^ par 
nous en ceste nouvelle acquisition du Fils de Dieu, 
ceste nouvelle France et Chrestient6, depuis nostre 
arrivee jusques k ce commencement de nouvel an, je 
ne doubte point certes, qu'en la sommation et calcul 
final, la perte ne surmontast les profits; le despens6 
follement en offen9ant, le bien et sagement m6nag6 
en obeyssant, et le receu des talents, graces et tole- 
rances divines, le mis et employe au royal et amiable 
service de nostre grand et autant bening Createur. 
Neantmoins, d'autant que (comme je croy) nos mines 
n'^difiroyent personne, et nos rentes n'establiroyent 
aucun, il vaudroit mieux que pour le malacquitt6, 
nous le plorions a part; [45] pour le receu, nous imi- 
tions le metayer d'iniquite loue par Nostre Seigneur 
en I'Evangile, sjavoir est que, faisant part a autruy 
des biens de nostre Maistre, nous nous en faisions 
des amis, et que communiquant a plusieurs ce qui est 
d'^dification en ces premiers fondemens de Chresti- 
ent6, nous obtenions plusieurs intercesseurs envers 
Dieu, et fauteurs de cet oeuvre. Mesme que ce 
faisant, nous ne defrauderons en rien la debte, ainsy 


1612-14] THE JES UIT RELA TIONS 


[44] Letter from Father Pierre Biard to the Rev- 
erend Father Provincial, at Paris. 

{Copied from the autograph preserved in the archives of 
Jesus, at Rome. ) 

Port Royal, January 31, 16 12. 

MY Reverend Father, 
The peace of Christ be with you. 
Were we compelled to give an account before 
God and Your Reverence of our administration and 
our transactions in this newly acquired kingdom of 
the Son of God, this new France and new Christen- 
dom, from the time of our arrival up to the beginning 
of this new year, I certainly do not doubt that, in the 
aggregate and final summing up, the loss would ex- 
ceed the profits; the foolish cost of transgression, 
the goodness and wisdom of obedience; and the 
reception of divine talents, graces, and indulgence 
would exceed their outlay and use in the royal and 
agreeable service of our great and so benign Creator. 
Nevertheless, inasmuch as ( I believe ) no one would 
be edified by our losses, or greatly benefited by our 
gains, it is better that we mourn our losses apart; 
[45] as to our receipts, we shall be like the unjust 
steward commended by Our Lord in the Gospels, 
namely, by sharing our Master's goods with others 
we shall make them our friends ; and in communicat- 
ing to many what is edifying in these early founda- 
tions of Christianity, we shall obtain intercessors with 
God and supporters of this work. Yet in doing this 
we shall in no wise diminish the debt, as did the 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 2 


que fit le Censier inique, baillant k plusieurs le bien 
de Nostre Maistre avec profit, et peut-estre acquitte- 
rons par ceste oeconomie une partie des redevances et 
de leur surcroy. Ainsy soit-il. 

Aujourd'huy, 22 lanvier, 1612, neuf [huict] mois 
sont passez des notre arrivee en ceste nouvelle 
France. Pen apr6s nostre arrivee, i'escrivy I'estat 
auquel nous avons retrouve ceste Eglise et Colonie 
naissante. Voicy ce qui s'en est ensuivy. 

Monsieur de Potrincourt s'en allant en France le 
mois de luin dernier, laissa icy son fils Monsieur de 
Biencourt, ieune seigneur de grande vertu et fort 
recommandable, avec environ 18 siens domestiques, 
et nous deux prestres de la Compagnie. Or la tasche 
et travail de nous deux prestres, selon nostre voca- 
tion, a este, et icy dans la maison et habitation en re- 
sidant, et dehors en voyageant. Commen§ons, comme 
Ton diet, de chez nous, de [46] la maison et habita- 
tion ; puis nous sortirons dehors. 

Icy done nos exercices sont : dire messe tons les 
jours, la chanter solemnellement les dimanches et 
festes, avec les Vespres, et souvent la procession; 
f aire prieres publiques matin et soir ; exhorter, con- 
soler, donner les sacremens, ensevelir les morts; 
enfin faire les ofiices de Cure, puisque autres prestres 
n'y a en ces quartiers que nous, Et de vray, bon 
besoing seroit que fussions meilleurs ouvriers de 
Nostre Seigneur; d'autant que gens de marine, tels 
que sont quasi nos paroissiens, sont assez d' ordinaire 
totalement insensibles au sentiment de leur ame, 
n'ayans marque de religion sinon leurs juremens et 
reniemens, ny cognoissance de Dieu sinon autant 
qu'en apporte la pratique connue de France, offus- 
qu6e du libertinage et des objections et bouffonneries 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 7 

wicked Steward, giving out Our Master's goods with 
profit; but we shall, perhaps, by this prudence ac- 
quit ourselves of a part of the dues and interests. 
So be it. 

To-day, January 22nd, 1612, eight^ months have 
passed since our arrival in this new France. Soon 
after that, I wrote you in regard to the condition in 
which we found this infant Church and Colony. Here 
is what followed: 

When Monsieur de Potrincourt went to France 
last June he left his son here, Monsieur de Biencourt, 
a young man of great integrity and of very estimable 
qualities, with about eighteen of his servants and us 
two priests of the Society. Now our duties and of- 
fices, in accordance with our calling as priests, have 
been performed while residing here at the house and 
settlement, and by making journeys abroad. Let us 
begin, as they say, at home, that is, at [46] the resi- 
dence and settlement; then we shall go outside. 

Here then are our occupations : to say mass every 
day, and to solemnly sing it Sundays and holidays, 
together with Vespers, and frequently the proces- 
sion ; to offer public prayers morning and evening ; 
to exhort, console, administer the sacraments, bury 
the dead ; in short, to perform the offices of the Cu- 
rate, since there are no other priests in these quarters. 
And in truth it would be much better if we were 
more earnest workers here for Our Lord, since sail- 
ors, who form the greater part of our parishioners 
are ordinarily quite deficient in any spiritual feel- 
ing, having no sign of religion except in their oaths 
and blasphemies, nor any knowledge of God beyond 
the simplest conceptions which they bring with 
them from France, clouded with licentiousness and 


8 LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 2 

mesdisantes des heretiques. D'oii Ton peut aussy 
veoir, quelle esperance il y a de planter une belle 
chrestient^ par tels evangelistes. La premiere chose 
que ces pauvres Sauvages apprennent, ce sont les 
juremens, paroUes sales et injures ; et orri^s souvent 
les Sauvagesses (lesquelles autrement sont fort crain- 
tives et pudiques), mais vous les orri^s souvent char- 
ger nos gens de grosses pourries et eshont^es op- 
probres, en langage fran9ois; non qu'elles en sachent 
la signification, ains seulement parce qu'elles voyent 
qu'en telles parolles est leur [47] commun rire et or- 
dinaire passetemps. Et quel moyen de remedier h, 
cecy en des hommes qui mesprennent (malparlent) 
avec (d'autant) plus d'abandon qu'ils mesprisent avec 
audace, 

A ces exercices chrestiens que nous faisons icy h. 
I'habitation, assistent aucune fois les Sauvages, quand 
aucuns y en a dans le port. le dis, aucune fois, d'au- 
tant qu'ils n'y sont gueres styles, non plus les baptises 
que les payens, ne S9achant gueres davantage les uns 
que les autres faute d' instruction. Telle fut la cause 
pourquoy nous resolusmes d^s nostre arriv^e de ne 
point baptiser aucun adulte, sans que prealablement 
il ne fust bien catechis^. Or catechiser ne pouvons- 
nous avant que s9avoir le langage. 

De vray. Monsieur de Biancourt, qui entend le sau- 
vage le mieux de tous ceux qui sont icy, a pris d'un 
grand zele, et prend chaque jour beaucoup de peine k 
nous servir de truchement. Mais, ne S9ay comment, 
aussi tost qu'on vient h. traitter de Dieu, il se sent le 
mesme que Moyse, I'esprit estonne, le gosier tary, et 
la langue nouee. La cause en est d'autant que ces 
sauvages n'ont point de religion formee, point de ma- 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 9 

the cavilings and revilings of heretics. Hence it 
can be seen what hope there is of establishing a 
flourishing christian church by such evangelists. 
The first things the poor Savages learn are oaths 
and vile and insulting words ; and you will often hear 
the women Savages (who otherwise are very timid 
and modest), hurl vulgar, vile, and shameless epi- 
thets at our people, in the French language; not that 
they know the meaning of them, but only because 
they see that when such words are used there is 
[47] generally a great deal of laughter and amuse- 
ment. And what remedy can there be for this evil 
in men whose abandonment to evil-speaking (or curs- 
ing) is as great as or greater than their insolence in 
showing their contempt? 

At these christian services which we conduct here 
at the settlement, the Savages are occasionally pres- 
ent, when some of them happen to be at the port. 
I say, occasionally, inasmuch as they are but little 
trained in the principles of the faith — those who 
have been baptized, no more than the heathen ; the 
former, from lack of instruction, knowing but little 
more than the latter. This was why we resolved, at 
the time of our arrival, not to baptize any adults un- 
less they were previously well catechized. Now in 
order to catechize we must first know the language. 

It is true that Monsieur de Biancourt, who under- 
stands the savage tongue better than any one else 
here, is filled with earnest zeal, and every day takes a 
great deal of trouble to serve as our interpreter. 
But, somehow, as soon as we begin to talk about God 
he feels as Moses did, — his mind is bewildered, his 
throat dry, his tongue tied. The reason for this 
is that, as the savages have no definite religion. 


10 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.2 

gistrature ou police, point d'arts ou liberaux ou me- 
chaniques, point de commerce ou vie civile ; et par 
consequent les mots leur defaillent [48] des choses 
qu'ils n'ont jamais veues ou apprehend^es. 

D'avantage, comme rudes et incultes qu'ils sont, 
ils ont toutes leurs conceptions attachees aux sens et 
k la matiere; rien d'abstraict, interne, spirituel ou 
distinct. Bon, fort, rouge, noir, grand, dur, ils le vous 
diront en leur patois ; bonte, force, rongeur, noircissure, 
ils ne scavent que c'est. Et pour toutes les vertus 
que vous leur sauriez dire, sagesse, fidelity, justice, mi- 
sericorde, recognoissance, piete, et autres, tout chez eux 
tout n'est sinon V heureux, tendre mnour, ban cceur. 
Semblablement un loup, un renard, un esquirieu, un 
orignac, ils les vous nommeront, et ainsy chaque 
espece de celle qu'ils ont, les quelles, hors les chiens, 
sont toutes sauvages; mais une beste, un animal, un 
corps, une substance, et ainsy les semblables univer- 
sels et genres, cela est par trop docte pour eux. 

Ajoutez k cecy, s'il vous plaist, la grande difficulte 
qu'il y a de tirer d'eux les mots mesmes qu'ils ont. 
Car, comme ny eux ne sgavent nostre langage, ny 
nous le leur, sinon fort peu, touchant le commerce et 
vie commune, il nous faut faire mille gesticulations 
et chimagrees pour leur exprimer nos conceptions, et 
ainsy tirer d'eux quelques noms des choses qui ne se 
peuvent monstrer avec [49] le sens. Par exemple, 
penser, oublier, se ressouvenir, doubter : pour s^avoir 
ces quatre mots, il vous faudra donner beau rire k 
nos messieurs au moins toute une apres-disner, en 
faisant le basteleur; et encore, apres tout cela, vous 
trouverez-vous trompe et mocque de nouveau, ayant 
eu, comme Ton dit, le mortier pour un niveau, et le 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 11 

magistracy or government, liberal or mechanical arts, 
commercial or civil life, they have consequently 
no words to describe [48] things which they have 
never seen or even conceived. 

Furthermore, rude and untutored as they are, all 
their conceptions are limited to sensible and material 
things; there is nothing abstract, internal, spiritual, 
or distinct. Good, strong, red, black, large, hard, they 
will repeat to you in their jargon ; goodness, strength, 
redness, blackness — Xh^y do not know what they are. 
And as to all the virtues you may enumerate to 
them, wisdom, fidelity, justice, mercy, gratitude, piety, 
and others, these are not found among them at all 
except as expressed in the words happy, tender love, 
good heart. Likewise they will name to you a wolf, a 
fox, a squirrel, a moose, and so on to every kind of 
animal they have, all of which are wild, except the 
dog ; but as to words expressing universal and gener- 
ic ideas, such as beast, animal, body, substance, and 
the like, these are altogether too learned for them. 
Add to this, if you please, the great difficulty 
of obtaining from them even the words that they 
have. For, as they neither know our language nor 
we theirs, except a very little which pertains to daily 
and commercial life, we are compelled to make a 
thousand gesticulations and signs to express to them 
our ideas, and thus to draw from them the names of 
some of the things which cannot be pointed out [49] 
to them. For example, to think, to forget, to remem- 
ber, to doubt ; to know these four words, you will be 
obliged to amuse our gentlemen for a whole after- 
noon at least by playing the clown ; and then, after 
all that, you will find yourself deceived, and mocked 
anew, having received, as the saying is, the mortar 


12 LES RELATIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol.2 

marteau pour la truelle. Enfin nous en sommes 1^ 
encore, apres plusieurs enquestes et travaux, k dis- 
puter s'ils ont aucune parolle qui corresponde droicte- 
ment a ce mot Credo, je croy. Estimez un peu que 
c'est du reste du symbole et fondemens chrestiens. 

Or tout ce discours de la difficulte du langage, ne 
me servira pas seulement pour monstrer en quels 
efforts et ahan de langue nous sommes, ains aussy 
pour faire veoir a nos Europeans leur felicity mefme 
civile: car il est assure qu'encore mesme enhaneeS 
cette miserable nation demeure touiours en une per- 
petuelle enfance de langue et de raison. le dis, de 
langue et de raison, parce qu'il est evident que Ik oil 
la parolle, messagere et despensiere de 1' esprit et dis- 
cours, reste totalement rude, pauvre at confuse, il est 
impossible que 1' esprit et raison soient beaucoup 
polis, abondans et en ordre. Cependant ces pauvres 
chetifs et enfants s'estiment [50] plus que tons les 
hommes de la terre, et pour rien du monde ne vou- 
droyent quitter leur enfance et chetivete. Mais ce 
n'est pas de merveille; car, comme j'ay diet, ils sont 
enfans. 

Ne pouvans doncques pour encores baptiser les 
adultes, comme nous avons diet, nous restent les en- 
fans, k qui appartient le royaume des cieux ; ainsy 
nous les baptisons de la volonte des parens et soubs 
la caution des parrains. Et en cette fagon, en avons 
jk baptist quatre, Dieu mercy. Les adultes qui sont 
en extreme necessite, nous les instruisons autant que 
Dieu nous en donne le moyen ; et la pratique nous a 
faict veoir, que lors Dieu supplee interieurement le 
d^faut de son outil externe. Ainsy, une vieille 
femme dangereusement malade, et une jeune fille, 

' Vieux mot employe pour signifier extenue de travaux. 


1612-14] THE JES UIT RELA TIONS 13 

for the level, and the hammer for the trowel. In 
short we are still disputing, after a great deal of re- 
search and labor, whether they have any word to 
correspond directly to the word Credo, I believe. 
Judge for yourself the difficulty surrounding the re- 
mainder of the symbols and fundamental truths of 
Christianity. 

Now all this talk about the difficulty of the language 
will not only serve to show how laborious is our task 
in learning it, but also will make our Europeans ap- 
preciate their own blessings, even in civil affairs ; for 
it is certain that these miserable people, continually 
weakened by hardships \enhan^e\* will always re- 
main in a perpetual infancy as to language and rea- 
son. I say language and reason, because it is evi- 
dent that where words, the messengers and dispens- 
ers of thought and speech, remain totally rude, poor 
and confused, it is impossible that the mind and 
reason be greatly refined, rich, and disciplined. 
However, these poor weaklings and children consider 
themselves [50] superior to all other men, and they 
would not for the world give up their childishness 
and wretchedness. And this is not to be wondered 
at, for, as I have said, they are children. 

Since we cannot yet baptize the adults, as we have 
said, there remain for us the children, to whom the 
kingdom of heaven belongs; these we baptize with 
the consent of their parents and the pledge of the 
god-parents. And under these conditions we have 
already, thank God, baptized four of them. We in- 
struct the adults who are in danger of death, as 
far as God gives us the means to do so ; and experi- 
ence has shown us that then God inwardly sup- 
plements the defects of his exterior instruments. 

* An old word used to signify weakened by hard labor. — [Carayon. ] 


14 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.2 

ont est6 receues au nombre des enfans de Dieu. La 
vieille est encore debout ; la fille est allee h. Dieu. 

Je vis cette fille de 8 a 9 ans, toute transie et n 'ay- 
ant pins que la peau et les os. Je la demanday k ses 
parens pour la baptiser. lis me respondirent que si 
je la voulois, ils me la donnoyent tout h. faict. Car 
aussy bien, elle et un chien mort, c'estoit tout un. 
Ainsy parloyent-ils, d'autant que c'est leur coustume 
d'abandonner entierement ceux qu'ils ont une fois 
entierement juges incurables. Nous acceptasmes 
I'offre, affin qu'ils vissent la difference du [51] Chris- 
tianisme et de leur impiet^. Nous fismes conduire 
ce pauvre squelette en une cabane de 1' habitation, la 
secourusmes et nourrismes k nostre possible, et I'ay- 
ant tolerablement instruite, la baptisasmes. Elle fut 
appelee Antoynette de Pons, en memoire et re- 
cognoissance de tant de benefices qu'avons receus et 
recevons de Madame la Marquise de Guercheville ; et 
laditte Dame se pent resjouir que jk son nom est au 
ciel, car quelques jours apr6s son baptesme, cette 
ame choysie s'envola en ce lieu de gloire. 

Ce luy aussy fut nostre premier ne, sur lequel nous 
avons pu dire ce que loseph pronon9a sur le sien, que 
Dieu nous avoit faict oublier tous nos travaux pass6s 
et la maison de nostre Pere. Mais a propos de ce 
que les Sauvages abandonnent leurs malades, une 
autre occasion de semblablement exercer la charity 
chrestienne envers ces delaisses, a eu son issiie plus 
joyeuse, et profitable pour detromper ces nations. 
Cette occasion fut telle. 

Le second fils du grand sagamo Membertou, de qui 
nous parlerons tantost, appel^ Actodin, ja cbrestien 
et marri^, estoit tombe en une grief ve maladie. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 16 

Thus, an old woman, dangerously ill, and a young 
girl have been added to the number of the children 
of God. The woman still lives, the girl has gone to 
Heaven. 

I saw this girl, eight or nine years old, all be- 
numbed and nothing but skin and bone. I asked the 
parents to give her to me to baptize. They answered 
that if I wished to have her they would give her up 
to me entirely. For to them she was no better than 
a dead dog. They spoke like this because they are 
accustomed to abandon altogether those whom they 
have once judged incurable. We accepted the offer, 
so that they might see the difference between [51 J 
Christianity and their ungodliness. We had this 
poor skeleton brought into one of the cabins of the 
settlement, where we cared for and nourished her as 
well as we could, and when she had been fairly well 
instructed we baptized her. She was named Antoy- 
nette de Pons, in grateful remembrance of the many 
favors we have received and are receiving from Ma- 
dame la Marquise de Guercheville, who may rejoice 
that already her name is in heaven, for a few days 
after baptism this chosen soul flew away to that 
glorious place. 

This was also our firstborn, for whose sake we 
could say, as Joseph did about his, that God had 
made us forget all our past hardships and the homes 
of our Fathers. But in speaking of the Savages aban- 
doning their sick, another similar occasion to exer- 
cise charity toward those who are deserted has had a 
more happy issue and one more useful in undeceiv- 
ing these people. This occasion was as follows: 

The second son of the grand sagamore Member- 
tou, of whom we shall speak by and by, named 


16 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.2 

Monsieur de Potrincourt, s'en allant en France, I'a- 
voit visite, et, comme il est bon seigneur, I'avoit 
invito de se faire porter en 1' habitation, pour y estre 
medicamente. Je m'attendois a cela, qu'on [52] le 
nous apporteroit; mais on n'en faisoit rien. Ce voy- 
ant, pour ne laisser cette ame en danger, je m'y en 
allay de Ik "k quelques jours (car il estoit k 5 lieues de 
r habitation). Mais je trouvay mon malade en un 
bel estat. On estoit sur le poinct de faire tabagie ou 
convive solemnel sur son dernier adieu. Trois ou 
quatre vastes chaudieres bouilloyent sur le feu. II 
avoit sa belle robe soubs soy (car c' estoit en este), et 
se preparoit k sa harangue funebre. La harangue 
devoit finir en I'adieu et comploration commune de 
tous. L'adieu et le deuil se clost par I'occision des 
chiens a ce que le mourant ait des avants-coureurs en 
I'autre monde. L' Decision des chiens est accostee de 
la tabagie et de ce qui suyt la tabagie, du chant et 
des danses. Apres cela, il n'est plus loysible au ma- 
lade de manger ou demander aucun secours, ains se 
doibt jk tenir pour un des manes ou citoyens de 
I'autre vie. Je trouvay done mon hoste en tel estat. 
. I'invectivay contre cette fagon de faire, plus de 
geste que de langue, car pour la langue, mes inter- 
pretes ne disoyent pas la dixiesme partie de ce que 
je voulois. Neantmoins le vieil Membertou, pere du 
malade, concent asses 1' affaire, et me promit qu'on 
s'arresteroit k tout ce que j'en dirois. le luy dis done 
que pour l'adieu et deuil modere, et encores pour la 
tabagie, cela se pourroit tolerer; mais [53] que le 
carnage des chiens, et les chants et danses sur un 
trespassant, et beaucoup moins I'abandonnement 
d'iceluy, ne me playsoyent point; que plus tost, selon 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 17 

Actodin, already a christian, and married, fell dan- 
gerously ill. Monsieur de Potrincourt, as he was 
about to depart for France, had visited him; and 
being a kind-hearted gentleman, had asked him to 
let himself be taken to the settlement for treatment. 
I was expecting this suggestion [52] to be carried 
out; but they did nothing of the kind. When this 
became evident, not to leave this soul in danger, I 
went there after a few days (for it was five leagues 
from the settlement). But I found my patient in a 
fine state. They were just about to celebrate taba- 
gie, or a solemn feast, over his last farewell. Three 
or four immense kettles were boiling over the fire. 
He had his beautiful robe under him (for it was 
summer), and was preparing for his funeral oration. 
The oration was to close with the usual adieus and 
lamentations of all present. The farewell and the 
mourning are finished by the slaughter of dogs, that 
the dying man may have forerunners in the other 
world. This slaughter is accompanied by the tabag- 
ie and what follows it — namely, the singing and danc- 
ing. After that it is no longer lawful for the sick man 
to eat or to ask any help, but he must already consider 
himself one of the "manes, " or citizens of the other 
world. Now it was in this state that I found my host. 
I denounced this way of doing things, more by 
actions than by words; for, as to talking, my in- 
terpreters did not repeat the tenth part of what I 
wanted them to say. Nevertheless, old Membertou, 
father of the sick man, understood the affair well 
enough, and promised me that they would stop just 
where I wanted them to. Then I told him that the 
farewells and a moderate display of mourning, and 
even the tabagie, would be permitted, but [53] that 


18 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.2 

qu'ils avoyent promis h. Monsieur de Potrincourt, ils 
I'envoyassent en I'habitation; qu'k I'ayde de Dieu, 
il pourroit bien encore guerir. lis me donnerent 
parolle d'ainsy faire le tout; ce neantmoins, le lan- 
guissant ne nous fut apporte que deux jours apres. 

II prenoit des symptomes si mortels, que souvent 
nous n'attendions sinon qu'il nous demeurast entre 
les mains. En effet un soir, sa femme et enfans 
I'abandonnerent entierement, et s'en allerent cabaner 
ailleurs, pensant que e'en estoit vuid6. Si pleut-il a 
Dieu tromper heureusement leur desespoir; car, de 
1^ a peu de jours, il fut plein de sante, et Test encore 
aujourd'hui (a Dieu en soit la gloire) ; ce que M. He- 
bert, Parisien et maistre en Pharmacie asses cognu, 
qui solicitoit ledit malade, m'a souvent asseure estre 
un vray miracle. De moi, je ne S9ay qu'en dire, 
d'autant que je ne veux affirmer ny le si ny le non en 
ce dont je n'ay evidence. Cela scay-je, que nous 
mismes sur le dit languissant un os des precieuses 
reliques du glorieux Sainct Laurens, archevesque de 
Dublin en Hibernie, que M. de la Place, digne abbe 
d'Eu, et Messieurs les Prieurs et Chapitre de laditte 
abbaye d'Eu nous donnerent de leur grace pour con- 
voyer nostre voyage en ces quartiers. Nous [54] 
doncques mismes sur le malade de ces sainctes re- 
liques, faisant voeu pour luy, et depuis il emmeilleura. 

Par cet exemple, Membertou, le pere du guery, 
comme j'ay diet cy devant, fut fort confirme en la 
foy, et h. cette cause sentant le mal dont depuis il est 
deced^, voulut aussy tost estre apporte icy; et quoy- 
que nostre cabane soit tant estroitte que trois per- 
sonnes estant dedans, h. peine s'y peuvent-elles re- 
muer, neantmoins si demanda-t-il de grande confiance 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 19 

the slaughter of the dogs, and the songs and dances 
over a dying person, and what was much worse, 
leaving him to die alone, displeased me very much; 
that it would be better, according to their promise 
to Monsieur de Potrincourt, to have him brought 
to the settlement, that, with the help of God, he 
might yet recover. They gave me their word that 
they would do all that I wished; nevertheless, the 
dying man was not brought until two days afterward. 

His symptoms became so serious that often we ex- 
pected nothing less than that he would die on our 
hands. In fact, one evening, his wife and children 
deserted him entirely and went to settle elsewhere, 
thinking it was all over with him. But it pleased 
God to prove their despair unfounded; for a few 
days afterwards he was in good health and is so to- 
day (to God be the glory); which M. Hubert, of 
Paris, a well-known master in Pharmacy, who at- 
tended the said patient, often assured me was a 
genuine miracle. For my part, I scarcely know what 
to say ; inasmuch as I do not care either to affirm or 
deny a thing of which I have no proof. This I do 
know, that we put upon the sufferer a bone taken 
from the precious relics of the glorified Saint Law- 
rence, archbishop of Dublin in Ireland, which M. de 
la Place, the estimable abbe d'Eu, and the Priors and 
Canons of the said abbey d'Eu, kindly gave us for 
our protection during the voyage to these lands. 
So we [54] placed some of these holy relics upon 
the sick man, at the same time offering our vows 
for him, and then he improved. 

Influenced by this example, Membertou, the 
father of the one who had recovered, as I have said 
before, was very strongly confirmed in the faith; 


20 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.2 

qu'il avoit en nous, d'estre loge dans I'un de nos 
deuxlicts; ce qu'il fut pour six jours. Mais apres, 
sa femme, fille et brue estans venues, il cogneut bien 
de luy mesme qu'il falloit tramarcher; ce qu'il fit, 
s'excusant fort, et nous demandant pardon du conti- 
nuel travail qu'il nous avoit donn6 jour et nuict en 
son service. Certes le changement de lieu et traite- 
ment ne lui allegea pas son mal. Par ainsy, le voy- 
ant sur son declin, je le confessay au mieux que je 
pus, et luy apres (c'est tout leur testament) fit sa 
harangue. Or en sa harangue, entre autres choses 
11 diet sa volonte estre d'avoir sepulture avec ses 
femmes et enfants, ez-anciens monumens de sa 
maison. 

le me monstray fort mal content de cecy, crain- 
gnant que les Fran9oys et Sauvages ne prinssent de 
la suspicion qu'il n'estoit mort gueres bon Chrestien. 
[55] Mais on m'opposa que telle promesse lui avoit 
este faicte avant qu'il fut baptise; et qu'autrement 
si on I'enterroit en nostre cimetifere, ses enfans et 
amis ne nous viendroyent jamais plus veoir, puisque 
c'est la fagon de cette nation d'abhorrer toute me- 
moire de la mort et des morts. 

Je disputay contre, et avec moy M. de Biancourt 
(car c'est quasi mon unique truchement), neantmoins 
en vain ; le mourant demeuroit resolu. Le soir assez 
tard, nous luy donnasmes 1' extreme onction, puisque 
autrement il y estoit assez prepar6. Voyez I'efficace 
du sacrement: le lendemain matin, il mande M. de 
Biancourt et moy, et de nouveau il recommence sa 
harangue. Par icelle il declaroit avoir de soy mesme 
change de volonte; qu'il entendoit d'estre inhume 
avec nous, commandant a ses enfans de ne point pour 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 21 

and. because he was then feeling the approach of the 
malady from which he has since died, he wished to be 
brought here immediately ; and although our cabin is 
so narrow that when three people are in it they can 
scarcely turn around, nevertheless, showing his im- 
plicit confidence in us, he asked to be placed in one 
of our two beds, where he remained for six days. But 
afterwards his wife, daughter, and daughter-in-law 
having come, he himself recognized the necessity of 
leaving, and did so with profuse excuses, asking our 
pardon for the continual trouble he had g^ven us in 
waiting upon him day and night. Certainly the 
change of location and treatment did not improve 
him any. So then, seeing that his life was drawing 
to a close, I confessed him as well as I could; and 
after that he delivered his oration (this is their 
sole testament). Now, among other things in this 
speech, he said that he wished to be buried with his 
wife and children, and among the ancient tombs of 
his family. 

I manifested great dissatisfaction with this, fearing 
that the French and Savages would suspect that he 
had not died a good Christian. [55] But I was assur- 
ed that this promise had been made before he was 
baptized, and that otherwise, if he were buried in our 
cemetery, his children and his friends would never 
again come to see us, since it is the custom of this na- 
tion to shun all reminders of death and of the dead. 

I opposed this, and M. de Biancourt, for he is al- 
most my only interpreter, joined with me, but in 
vain ; the dying man was obdurate. Rather late that 
evening we administered extreme unction to him, 
for otherwise he was sufficiently prepared for it. 
Behold now the efficacy of the sacrament; the next 


22 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.2 

cela fuyr le lieu comme infideles, ains d'autant plus 
le frequenter comme chrestiens, "k celle fin d'y prier 
pour son ame et pleurer ses pechez. II recommanda 
aussi la paix avec M. de Potrincourt et son fils; que 
de luy, il avait toujours ayme les Frangoys, et avoit 
souvent empesche plusieurs conspirations contre eux. 
De Ik k peu d'heures il mourut entre mes mains fort 
chrestiennement. 

C'a este le plus grand, renomm6 et redout^ sauvage 
qui ayt este de memoire d'homme: de riche [56] 
taille, et plus hault et membru que n'est 1' ordinaire 
des autres, barbu comme un franfoys, estant ainsy 
que quasi pas un des autres n'a du poil au menton; 
discret et grave, ressentant bien son homme de com- 
mandement Dieu luy gravoit en Tame une appre- 
hension plus grande du Christianisme, que n'estoit 
ce qu'il en avoit pu ouyr, et m'a souvent diet en son 
sauvageois. "Apprend vistement nostre langue, car 
aussy tost que tu la sgauras et m 'auras bien enseingn^, 
je veux estre prescheur comme toy. ' ' Avant mesme 
sa conversion, il n'a jamais voulu avoir plus d'une 
femme vivante; ce qu'est esmerveillable, d'autant 
que les grands sagamos de ce pais entretiennent un 
nombreux serail, non plus pour luxure, que pour 
ambition, gloire et necessity : pour ambition, k celle 
fin d 'avoir plusieurs enfans, en quoy gist leur puis- 
sance; pour gloire et necessity, d'autant qu'ils n'ont 
autres artisans, agens, serviteurs, pourvoyeurs ou 
esclaves que les f emmes ; elles soustiennent tout le 
faix et fatigue de la vie. 

C'a este le premier de tons les Sauvages qui en ces 
regions aye receu le baptesme et I'extreme-onction, 
le premier et le dernier sacrement, et le premier qui, 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 23 

morning he asks for M. de Biancourt and me, and 
again begins his harangue. In this he declares that 
he has, of his own free will, changed his mind ; that 
he intends to be buried with us, commanding his 
children not, for that reason, to shun the place like 
unbelievers, but to frequent it all the more, like 
christians, to pray for his soul and to weep over his 
sins. He also recommended peace with M. de Po- 
trincourt and his son; as for him, he had always 
loved the French, and had often prevented conspira- 
cies against them. A few hours afterward he died 
a christian death in my arms. 

This was the greatest, most renowned and most 
formidable savage within the memory of man; of 
splendid [56] physique, taller and larger-limbed than 
is usual among them; bearded like a Frenchman, al- 
though scarcely any of the others have hair upon the 
chin ; grave and reserved ; feeling a proper sense of 
dignity for his position as commander. God im- 
pressed upon his soul a greater idea of Christianity 
than he has been able to form from hearing about it, 
and he has often said to me in his savage tongue: 
" Learn our language quickly, for as soon as thou 
knowest it and hast taught me well I wish to become 
a preacher like thee." Even before his conversion 
he never cared to have more than one living wife, 
which is wonderful, as the great sagamores of this 
country maintain a numerous seraglio, no more 
through licentiousness than through ambition, glory 
and necessity; for ambition, to the end that they 
may fiave many children, wherein lies their power; 
for fame and necessity, since they have no other 
artisans, agents, servants, purveyors or slaves than 
the women ; they bear all the burdens and toil of life. 


24 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.2 

de son mandeinent et ordonnance, aye ete inhume 
chrestiennement. Monsieur de Biancourt honora ses 
obseques, imitant k son possible les [57] honneurs 
qu'on rend en France aux grands Capitaines et Sei- 
gneurs. 

Or, a ce que Ton craigne les jugemens de Dieu, 
aussy bien que I'on ayme sa misericorde, je mettray 
icy la fin d'un frangoys, en laquelle Dieu a monstre 
sa justice, aussy bien qu'en celle de Membertou nous 
recognoissons sa grace. Celuy-cy avoit sou vent esva- 
de le danger d'estre noye, et tout fraischement le 
beau jour de la Pentecoste derniere. Le benefice fut 
mal recogneu. Pour n'en rien dire de plus, la veille 
de S. Pierre et S. Paul, comme le soir on fust entre 
en discours des perils de mer, et des voeux qu'on faict 
aux Saincts en semblables hazards, ce miserable se 
print k s'en rire et moquer impudemment, se gaudis- 
sant de ceux de la compagnie qu'on disoit en telles 
rencontre savoir este religieu. II eut tost son guer- 
don. Le lendemain matin, un coup de vent I'em- 
porta tout seul dehors de la chaloupe dans les vagues, 
et jamais depuis n'est apparu. 

Mais laissons I'eau et venons a la rive. Si la terre 
de cette nouvelle France avoit aucun sentiment, ainsy 
que les Poetes feignent de leur deesse Tellus, sans 
doubte elle eust eu un ressentiment bien nouveau de 
liesse cette ann^e; car, Dieu mercy, ayans eu fort 
heureuses moissons de ce peu qui avoit este laboure 
du recueilly nous avons faict des hosties, et nous les 
avons offertes a Dieu. Ce sont, comme nous [58] 
croyons, les premieres hosties qui ayent este faites du 
froment de ce terroir. Notre Seigneur par sa bonte 
les aye voulu recevoir en odeur de suavite, et, comme 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 25 

He was the first of all the Savages in these parts 
to receive baptism and extreme unction, the first and 
the last sacraments ; and the first one who, by his 
own command and decree, has received a christian 
burial. Monsieur de Biancourt honored his obse- 
quies, imitating as far as possible the [57] honors 
which are shown to great Captains and Noblemen in 
France. 

Now, that the judgments of God may be feared as 
much as his mercies are loved, I shall here record the 
death of a Frenchman, in which God has shown his 
justice as much as he has given us evidence of his 
mercy, in the death of Membertou. This man had 
often escaped drowning, and only recently upon the 
blessed day of last Pentecost. He showed but little 
gratitude for this favor. Not to make the story too 
long, the evening before St. Peter's and St. Paul's 
day, as they were discoursing upon the perils of the 
sea, and upon the vows made to the Saints in similar 
dangers, this wretch began impudently to laugh and 
to sneer, jeering at those of the company who were 
said to have been religious upon such occasions. He 
soon had his reward. The next morning a gust of 
wind carried him, and him only, out of the boat into 
the waves, and he was never seen again. 

But let us leave the water and come on shore. If 
the ground of this new France had feeling, as the 
Poets pretend their goddess Tellus had, doubtless it 
would have experienced an altogether novel sensa- 
tion of joy this year, for, thank God, having had 
very successful crops from the little that was tilled, 
we made from the harvest some hosts [wafers for con- 
secration] and offered them to God. These are, as we 
[58] believe, the first hosts which have been made 


26 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.2 

diet le Psalmiste, veuille donner benignity, puisque la 
terre luy a rendu son fruict. 

C'est ass6s demeure ^ la maison; sortons un peu 
dehors, comme nous avons promis de faire, et racon- 
tons ce qui s'est passe par le pays. 

J 'ay faict deux voyages avec M. de Biancourt, I'un 
de quelques douze jours, I'autre d'un mois et demy, 
et avons rod6 toute la coste des Port- Royal jusques k 
Kinibequi, ouest-sud ouest. Nous sommes entrez 
dans les grandes rivieres de S. lean, de Saincte Croix, 
de Pentegoet et du sus-nomm6 Kinibequi ; avons 
visits les Fran§oys, qui ont hyverne icy cette annee 
en deux parts, en la riviere S. lean et en celle de 
Saincte-Croix: les Malouins en la riviere S. lean, et 
le capitaine Plastrier a Saincte Croix. 

Durant ces voyages, Dieu nous a sauvez de grands 
et bien ^minents dangers, et souvent ; mais quoy que 
nous les debvions tousjours retenir en la memoire 
pour n'en estre ingrats, il n'est pas necessaire que 
nous les couchions tons sur le papier, de peur d'etre 
enuuyeux. le raconteray seulement ce qu'^ mon ad- 
vis on orroit plus volontiers. 

Nous allions voir les Malouins, S9avoir est, le [59] 
Sieur du Pont le jeune, et le capitaine Merveilles, 
qui, comme nous avons diet, hyvernoyent en la rivie- 
re S. Jean, en une isle appelee Emenenic, avant con- 
tremont le fleuve quelques six lieues. Nous estions 
encore k une lieue et demye de I'isle, qu'il estoit j^ 
soir et la fin du crepuscule. Vk les estoilles commen- 
9oyent k se monstrer, quand voicy que vers le Nord 
soudainement une partie du ciel devint aussy rouge 
et sanguine qu'escarlate, et s'estendant peu k peu 
en piques et fuseaux, s'en alia droict reposer sur I'ha- 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 27 

from the wheat of these lands. May Our Lord, in 
his goodness, have consented to receive them as fra- 
grant offerings and in the words of the Psalmist, may 
he give graciously , since the earth has yielded him its 
fruits. 

We have stayed at home long enough ; let us go 
abroad a little, as we promised to do, and relate 
what has taken place in the country. 

I made two journeys with M. de Biancourt, the one 
lasting about twelve days, the other a month and a 
half ; and we have ranged the entire coast from Port 
Royal to Kinib^qui,'^ west southwest. We entered 
the great rivers St. John, Saincte Croix, Pentegoet,-' 
and the above-named Kinib^qui; we visited the 
French who have wintered there this year in two 
places, at the St. John river and at the river Saincte 
Croix; the Malouins at the former place, and cap- 
tain Plastrier at the latter."* 

During these journeys, God often delivered us from 
great and very conspicuous dangers; but, although 
we ought always to bear them in mind, that we 
may not be ungrateful, there is no need of setting 
them all down upon paper, lest we become weari- 
some. I shall relate only what, in my opinion, will 
be the most interesting. 

We went to see the Malouins; namely, [59] Sieur 
du Pont, the younger, and captain Merveilles, who, as 
we have said, were wintering at St. John river, upon 
an island called Emenenic, some six leagues up the 
river. We were still one league and a half from the 
island when the twilight ended and night came on. 
The stars had already begun to appear, when sudden- 
ly, toward the Northward, a part of the heavens be- 
came blood-red : and this light spreading, little by lit- 


28 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.2 

bitation des Malouins. La rougeur estoit si escla- 
tante, que toute la riviere s'en teingnoit et en reluy- 
soit. Cette apparition dura demy quart d'heure, et 
aussy tost aprfes la disparition, en recommen9a une 
autre de mesme forme, cours et consistance. 

II n'y eut celuy de nous qui ne jugeast tel metheore 
prodigieux. Pour nos Sauvages, ils s'escrierent 
aussy tost: Gara gara enderquir Gara gara ; c'est-k- 
dire, nous aurons guerre; tels signales denoncent 
guerre. Neantmoins, et nostre abord cette soiree, et 
le lendemain matin nostre descente fut fort amiable 
et pacifique. Le jour, rien qu'amitie. Mais (mal- 
heur!) le soir venu, tout se vira, ne S9ay comment, 
le dessus dessous; entre nos gens et ceux de S. Malo, 
confusion, brouillis, fureur, tintamarre. le ne doubte 
point qu'une mauditte bande de furieux et [60] san- 
guinaires esprits ne voltigeast toute cette nuit 1^, at- 
tendant k chaque heure et moment un horrible mas- 
sacre de ce peu de Chrestiens qui estions Ik ; mais la 
bonte de Dieu les brida, les malheureux. II n'y eut 
aucun sang espandu, et le jour suyvant, cette noc- 
turne bourrasque finit en un beau et plaisant calme, 
les ombrages et fantosmes ten^breux s'estant esva- 
nouis en serenit6 lumineuse. 

De vray, la bont6 et prudence de M. de Biancourt 
parust fort emmy ce fortunal de passions humaines. 
Mais aussy je recogneus ass6s que le feu et les armes 
estans une fois entre les mains de gens mal discipli- 
nes, les maistres ont beaucoup k craindre et k souffrir 
de leurs propres. le ne sgay s'il y eust aucun qui 
fermast I'ceil de toute cette nuit. Pour moy je fis 
prou de belles propositions et promesses k Nostre 
Seigneur, de ne jamais oublier ce sien benefice, s'il 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 29 

tie, in vivid streaks and flashes, moved directly over 
the settlement of the Malouins and there stopped. 
The red glow was so brilliant that the whole river 
was tinged and made luminous by it. This appari- 
tion lasted some eight minutes, and as soon as it disap- 
peared another came of the same form, direction and 
appearance. 

There was not one of us who did not consider this 
meteoric display prophetic. As to the Savages, they 
immediately cried out, Gara gara enderqiiir Gara 
gara, meaning we shall have war, such signs an- 
nounce war. Nevertheless, both our arrival that 
evening and our landing the next morning were very 
quiet and peaceful. During the day, nothing but 
friendliness. But (alas!) when evening came, I 
know not how, everything was turned topsy-turvy; 
confusion, discord, rage, uproar reigned between our 
people and those of St. Malo. I do not doubt that 
a cursed band of furious and [60] sanguinary spirits 
were hovering about all this night, expecting every 
hour and moment a horrible massacre of the few 
Christians who were there ; but the goodness of God 
restrained the poor wretches. There was no blood- 
shed ; and the next day, this nocturnal storm ended in 
a beautiful and delightful calm, the dark shadows and 
spectres giving way to a luminous peace. 

In truth, M. de Biancourt's goodness and prudence 
seemed much shaken by this tempest of human pas- 
sions. But I also saw very clearly that if fire and 
arms were once put into the hands of badly disci- 
plined men, the masters have much to fear and suffer 
from their own servants. I do not know that there 
was one who closed his eyes during that night. For 
me, I made many fine propositions and promises to 


30 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 2 

plaisoit faire qu'aucun sang ne fust respandu. Ce 
qu'il nous donna de son infinie misericorde. 

II estoit trois heures apres midy du jour suyvant, 
que je n'avois pas eu encores loysir de sentir la faim, 
tant j'estois empesche a aller et venir des uns aux 
autres. Enfin environ ce temps Yk, tout fut accoyse, 
Dieu mercy. 

Certes le capitaine Merveilles et ses gens mons- 
trerent leur piete non vulgaire. Car nonobstant cet 
heurt et rencontre si troublant, le deuxiesme jour [6i] 
d'aprfes, ils se confesserent et communierent avec 
grand exemple, et si, h. nostre departir, ils me prierent 
instamment trestous et par special le jeune du Pont, 
de les aller veoir et demeurer avec eux h. ma commo- 
dite. le leur promis d'ainsy le faire, et n'en at- 
tends que les moyens. Car de vray j'ayme ces gens 
de bien de tout mon coeur. 

Mais, departans un peu de pens^e d avec eux, 
comme nous fismes lors de presence, continuous 
nostre route et voyage. Au retour de cette riviere 
Sainct Jean, nostre voyage s'addressoit jusques aux 
Armouchiquoys. Deux causes principales esmou- 
voyent k cela M, de Biancourt: la premiere, pour 
avoir nouvelle des Angloys, et sgavoir si on pourroit 
avoir raison d'eux; la seconde affin de troquer du 
bled armouchiquoys, pour nous ayder ^ passer nostre 
hyver, et ne point mourir de faim, en cas que nous 
ne receussions aucun secours de France. 

Pour entendre la premiere cause, faut syavoir que 
peu auparavant, le capitaine Platrier de Honfleur, cy 
devant nomme, voulant aller "k Kinib^qui, il fut saisy 
prisonnier par deux navires angloys qui estoient en 
une isle appelee Emmetenic, k 8 lieiies dudit Kinib6- 
qui. Son relaschement fut moyennant quelques pre- 


1612-14J THE JESUIT RELATIONS 31 

Our Lord, never to forget this, his goodness, if he 
were pleased to avert all bloodshed. This he granted 
in his infinite mercy. 

It was three o'clock in the afternoon of the next 
day before I had time to feel hungry, so constantly 
had I been obliged to go back and forth from one to 
the other. At last, about that time everything was 
settled, thank God. 

Certainly captain Merveilles and his people showed 
unusual piety. For notwithstanding this so annoy- 
ing encounter and conflict, two days [6i] afterwards 
they confessed and took communion in a very exem- 
plary manner; and so, at our departure, they all 
begged me very earnestly, and particularly young du 
Pont, to come and see them and stay with them as 
long as I liked. I promised to do so, and am only 
waiting for the opportunity. For in truth I love 
these honest people with all my heart. 

But dismissing them from our thoughts for the 
time being, as we did then from our presence, let us 
continue our journey. Upon our return from this 
river Saint John, our route turned towards the country 
of the Armouchiquoys. Two principal causes led M. 
de Biancourt to take this route: first, in order to 
have news of the English, and to find out if it would be 
possible to obtain satisfaction from them ; secondly, 
to buy some armouchiquoys corn to help us pass the 
winter, and not die of hunger in case we did not re- 
ceive help from France. 

To understand the first cause you must know that, 
a little while before, captain Platrier, of Honfleur, 
already mentioned, wishing to go to Kinibequi, was 
taken prisoner by two English ships which were at 
an island called Emmetenic,* eight leagues from 


32 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.2 


sents (ainsy parle-t-on pour parler doucement) et la 
promesse qu'il fit d'obtemperer aux prohibitions ^ 
luy faictes, de point negotier en toute [62] cette coste. 
Car les Angloys s'en veulent dire maistres, et sur ce 
ils produysoyent des lettres de leur Roy, mais a ce 
que nous croyons fausses. 

Or Monsieur de Biancourt ayant ouy tout cecy de 
la bouche mesme du capitaine Platrier, il remontra 
serieusement a ces gens combien il importoit a luy, 
officier de la Couronne et Lieutenant de son pere, 
combien aussy a tout bon Frangoys, d'aller au ren- 
contre de cette usurpation des Anglois tant contrari- 
ante aux droits et possessions de sa Majeste. "Car, 
disoit-il, il est a tons notoire (pour ne reprendre 1' af- 
faire de plus hault) que le grand Henry, que Dieu 
absolve, suyvant les droicts acquis par ses predeces- 
seurs et luy, donna a Monsieur des Monts, I'an 1604, 
toute cette region depuis le 40^ degre d' elevation jus- 
ques au 46. Depuis laquelle donation ledit Seigneur 
des Monts, par soy mesme et par Monsieur de Potrin- 
court, mon tres-honore pere, son lieutenant, et par 
autres, a prins souvent reelle possession de toute la 
contree, et trois et quatre ans avant que jamais les 
Angloys ayent habitue, ou que jamais on aye rien 
entendu de cette leur vindication. ' ' Ceci et plusieurs 
autres choses discouroit ledit Sieur de Biancourt en- 
courageant ses gens. 

Moy, j'avois deux autres causes qui me poussoyent 
au mesme voyage: I'une, pour accompagner [63] 
d'ayde spirituel ledict Sieur de Biancourt et ses gens; 
r autre, pour cognoistre et voir la disposition de ces 
nations a recevoir le saint evangile. Telles doncques 
estoyent les causes de nostre voyage. 

Nous arrivasmes a Kinibequi, 80 lieues de Port- 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 33 

Kinib^qui. His release was effected by means of 
presents (this expresses it mildly), and by his promise 
to comply with the interdictions laid upon him not 
to trade anywhere upon all [62] this coast. For the 
English want to be considered masters of it, and 
they produced letters from their King to this effect, 
but these we believe to be false. 

Now, Monsieur de Biancourt, having heard all this 
from the mouth of captain Platrier himself, re- 
monstrated earnestly with these people, showing how 
important it was to him, an officer of the Crown and 
his father's Lieutenant, and also how important to 
all good Frenchmen, to oppose this usurpation of the 
English, so contrary to the rights and possessions of 
his Majesty. " For," said he, " it is well known to 
all ( not to go back any farther in the case ) that the 
great Henry, may God give him absolution, in ac- 
cordance with the rights acquired by his predecessors 
and by himself, gave to Monsieur des Monts, in the 
year 1604, all this region from the 40th to the 46th 
parallel of latitude. Since this donation, the said 
Seigneur des Monts, himself and through Monsieur de 
Potrincourt, my very honored father, his lieutenant, 
and through others, has frequently taken actual pos- 
session of all the country; and this, three or foiir 
years before the English had ever frequented it, or 
before anything had ever been heard of these claims 
of theirs." This and several other things were said 
by Sieur de Biancourt to encourage his people. 

As for me, I had two other reasons which impelled 
me to take this journey : One, to give [63] spiritual 
aid to Sieur de Biancourt and his people ; the other, 
to observe and to study the disposition of these na- 
tions to receive the holy gospel. Such, then, were 
the causes of our journey. 



34 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 2 


Royal, le 28 d'octobre, jour de S. Simon et S. Jude, 
de la mesme annee 1 6 1 1 . Aussy tost nos gens mirent 
pied ^ terre, desireux de veoir le fort des Angloys; 
car nous avions appris par les chemins, qu'il n'y 
avoit personne. Or, comme de nouveau tout est 
beau, ce fust a louer et vanter cette entreprise des 
Angloys, et raconter les commodites du lieu ; chacun 
en disoit ce que plus il prisoit. Mais de la a quelques 
jours, on changea bien d'advis; car on vid y avoir 
beau moyen de faire un contrefort qui les eust em- 
prisonnes et prives de la mer et de la riviere ; item 
que quand bien on les eust laissez Ik, si n'eussent-ils 
point jouy pourtant des commodites de la riviere, 
puisqu'elle a plusieurs autres et belles emboucheures 
bien distantes de la. Davantage, ce qu'est le pis, 
nous ne croyons pas que de Yk k six lieues a I'entour 
il y ayt un seul arpent de terre bien labourable, le 
sol n'estant tout de pierre et roche. Or, d'autant que 
le vent nous contrarioit a passer outre, le troisiesme 
jourvenu. Monsieur de Biancourt [64] tourna I'inci- 
dent en conseil et se delibera de recevoir I'ayde du 
vent, h. refouler contremont la riviere, pour la bien 
recognoistre. 

Nous avions advance ja bien trois lieues, et le flot 
nous manquant nous estions mis k I'anchre au milieu 
de la riviere ; quand voicy que nous descouvrons six 
canots Armouchiquois venir a nous. lis estoyent 
24 personnes dedans, tous gens de combat. lis firent 
mille tentatives et ceremonies avant que nous 
aborder. Vous les eussiez parfaictement comparez a 
une troupe d'oyseaux, laquelle desire d'entrer en une 
cheneviere, mais elle craind I'espouvantail. Cela 
nous plaisoit fort, car aussy nos gens avoyent besoin 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 35 

We arrived at Kinibequi, eighty leagues from Port 
Royal, the 28th of October, the day of St, Simon and 
St. Jude, of the same year, 161 1. Our people at once 
disembarked, wishing to see the English fort, for 
we had learned, on the way, that there was no one 
there. Now as everything is beautiful at first, this 
undertaking of the English had to be praised and ex- 
tolled, and the conveniences of the place enumerated, 
each one pointing out what he valued the most. But 
a few days afterward they changed their views ; for 
they saw that there was a fine opportunity for mak- 
ing a counter-fort there, which might have impris- 
oned them and cut them off from the sea and river; 
moreover, even if they had been left unmolested they 
would not have enjoyed the advantages of the river, 
since it has several other mouths, and good ones, 
some distance from there. Furthermore, what is 
worse, we do not believe that, in six leagues of the 
surrounding country, there is a single acre of good 
tillable land, the soil being nothing but stones and 
rocks. Now, inasmuch as the wind forced us to go 
on, when the third day came, Monsieur de Biancourt 
[64] considered the subject in council and decided to 
take advantage of the wind and go on up the river, 
in order to thoroughly explore it. 

We had already advanced three good leagues, and 
had dropped anchor in the middle of the river wait- 
ing for the tide, when we suddenly discovered six 
Armouchiquois canoes coming towards us. There 
were twenty-four persons therein, all warriors. 
They went through a thousand maneuvers and cere- 
monies before accosting us, and might have been 
compared to a flock of birds which wanted to go 
into a hemp-field but feared the scarecrow. We 


36 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.2 

de temps pour s'armer et pavier. Enfin ils vindrent 
et revindrent, ils recogneurent, considererent fine- 
ment nostre nombre, nos pieces, nos armes, tout; et 
la nuict venue, ils se logerent a I'autre bord du 
fleuve, sinon hors la portee, du moins hors la mire 
de nos canons. 

Toute la nuit ce ne fust que haranguer, chanter, 
danser; car telle est la vie de toutes ces gens lors- 
qu'ils sont en troupe. Or comme nous presumions 
probablement que leurs chants et danses estoyent in- 
vocations du diable, pour contrecarrer 1' empire de ce 
maudict tyran, je fis que nos gens chantassent [65] 
quelques hymnes eclesiastiques, comme le Salve, 
V Ave Maris stella et autres. Mais comme ils furent une 
f ois en train de chanter, les chansons spirituelles leur 
manquant, ils se jetterent aux autres qu'ils S9avoyent. 
Estant encores k la fin de celles cy, comme c'est le na- 
turel du Fran9ois de tout imiter, ils se prindrent k 
contrefaire le chant et danse des Armouchiquois, qui 
estoyent k la rive, les contrefaisant si bien en tout, 
que, pour les escouter, les Armouchiquois se tay- 
soient; et puis nos gens se taysans, reciproquement 
eux recommengoyent. Vrayment il y avoit beau rire : 
car vous eussies diet que c' estoyent deux choeurs qui 
s'entendoient fort bien, et a peine eussies vous pu 
distinguer le vray Armouchiquois d'avec le feinct. 

Le matin venu, nous poursuyvions notre route con- 
tremont. Eux, nous ayans accompagnez, nous dirent 
que si nous voulions du piousqncniin (c'est leur bled), 
que nous debvions avec facilite prendre a droicte, et 
non avec grand travail et danger aller contremont; 
que prenant k droicte par le bras qui se monstroit, en 
peu d'heures, nous arriverions vers le grand sagamo 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 37 

were very much pleased at this, for our people also 
needed to arm themselves and arrange the pavesade. 
In short, they continued to come and go ; they re- 
connoitred ; they carefully noted our numbers, our 
cannon, our arms, everything ; and when night 
came they camped upon the other bank of the river, 
if not out of reach, at least beyond the aim of our 
cannon. 

All night there was continual haranguing, singing 
and dancing, for such is the kind of life all these 
people lead when they are together. Now as we 
supposed that probably their songs and dances were 
invocations to the devil, to oppose the power of this 
cursed tyrant, I had our people sing [65] some sacred 
hymns, as the Salve, the Ave Maris Stella, and others. 
But when they once got into the way of singing, the 
spiritual songs being exhausted, they took up others 
with which they were familiar. When they came to 
the end of these, as the French are natural mimics, 
they began to mimic the singing and dancing of the 
Armouchiquois who were upon the bank, succeeding 
in it so well that the Armouchiquois stopped to listen 
to them ; and then our people stopped and the others 
immediately began again. It was really very comi- 
cal, for you would have said that they were two choirs 
which had a thorough understanding with each other, 
and scarcely could you distinguish the real Armou- 
chiquois from their imitators. 

In the morning we continued our journey up the 
river. The Armouchiquois, who were accompanying 
us, told us that if we wanted any piousqueniin (corn), 
it would be better and easier for us to turn to the 
right and not, with great difficulty and risk, to con- 
tinue going up the river ; that if we turned to the 


38 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol.2 

Meteourmite, qui nous f ourniroit de tout; qu'ils nous 
y serviroient de guides, car aussy bien s'en alloyent 
ils le visiter. 

II est a presumer, et en avons de grands indices, 
qu'ils ne nous donnoyent ce conseil sinon en inten- 
tion [66] de nous prendre aux filets, et avoir bon mar- 
che de nous k I'ayde de Meteourmite, lequel ils sga- 
voient estre ennemy des Anglois, et le conjecturoient 
I'estre de tous estrangers. Mais, Dieu mercy, leurs 
embusches se tournerent centre eux. 

Cependant nous les creusmes; aussy partie d'eux 
s'en alloyent devant nous, partie apres, partie aussy 
avec nous dedans la barque. Neantmoins Monsieur 
de Biancourt se tenoit tousiours sur ses gardes, et sou- 
vent faisoit marcher la chaloupe devant avec la sonde. 
Nous n'avions pas faict plus de demy lieue, quand, 
venus en un grand lac le sondeur nous crie : ' ' Deux 
brasses d'eau, qu'une brasse, qu'une brasse partout." 
Aussy tost: Ameine, ameine, lasche I'anchre. Ou 
sont nos Armouchiquois ? oil sont-ils? point. lis 
nous avoyent trestous insensiblement quittes. O les 
traistres ! 6 que Dieu nous a bien aydes ! lis nous 
avoyent conduicts aux pieges. "Revire, revire." 
Nous retournons sur nostre route. 

Cependant Meteourmite ayant este adverty de 
nostre venue, nous courroit au devant, et quoyqu'il 
nous vist tourner bride, si est-ce qu'il nous poursuy- 
vit. Bien valut k Monsieur de Biancourt d'etre plus 
sage que plusieurs de son esquipage, qui ne crioyent 
lors que de tout tuer. Car ils estoyent en grande 
cholere et en non moindre crainte ; mais la cholera 
faisoit plus de bruit, 

[67] Monsieur de Biancourt se reprima, et ne fai- 
sant pas autrement mauvaise chere a Meteourmite, 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 39 

right through the branch which was just at hand, in 
a few hours we would reach the great sagamore 
Meteourmite, who would furnish us with all we 
wanted; that they would act as our guides, since 
they themselves were going to visit him. 

It is to be supposed, and there were strong indica- 
tions of it, that they gave us this advice only with 
the intention [ 66 J of ensnaring us, and making 
an easy conquest of us by the help of Meteourmite, 
whom they knew to be the enemy of the English, and 
whom they supposed to be an enemy of all for- 
eigners. But, thank God, their ambuscade was 
turned against themselves. 

However, we believed them ; so a part of them 
went ahead of us, part behind, and some in the 
barque with us. Nevertheless Monsieur de Biancourt 
was always on his guard, and often sent the boat on 
ahead with the sounding-lead. We had not gone 
more than half a league when, reaching a large lake, 
the sounder called out to us: " Two fathoms of 
water; only one fathom, only one fathom every- 
where," and immediately afterward, "Stop! stop! 
cast anchor. " Where are our Armouchiquois ? 
Where are they? Not one. They had all silently 
disappeared. Oh, the traitors! Oh, how God had 
delivered us! They had led us into a trap. " Veer 
about, veer about." We retrace our path. 

Meanwhile, Meteourmite having been informed of 
our coming, came to meet us, and, although he saw 
our prow turned about, yet he followed us. It was 
well that Monsieur de Biancourt was wiser than many 
of his crew, whose sole cry was to kill them all. For 
they were as angry as they were frightened; but 
their anger made the most noise. 

[67] Monsieur de Biancourt restrained himself, and 


40 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.2 

apprit de luy qu'il y avoit une route par laquelle on 
pourroit passer; qu'a celle fin de ne la pas faillir, il 
nous donneroit de ses propres gens dedans nostre 
barque; qu'au reste vinssions a sa cabane, il tasche- 
roit de nous donner contentement. Nous luy crusmes, 
et pensasmes nous en repentir; car nous passasmes 
des haults et destroicts si perilleux que ne cuidions 
quasi jamays en eschapper. D 'effect, en deux en- 
droits, aucuns de nos gens s'escrierent miserable- 
ment que nous estions trestous perdus. Mais, Dieu 
mercy, ils crierent trop tost. 

Arrives, Monsieur de Biancourt se mit en armes, 
pour en cet arroy aller veoir Meteourmite. II le 
trouva en son hault appareil de majeste sauva- 
gesque, seul dans une cabane bien nattee le haut et 
bas, et quelques quarante puissans jeunes hommes a 
I'entour de la cabane, en forme de corps de garde, 
chacun son pavois, son arc et flesches a terre au 
devant de soy. Ces gens ne sont point niais, nulle- 
ment, et qu'on nous en croye. 

Pour moy, je receus, ce jour la, la plus grande part 
des caresses; car, comme j'estois sans armes, les 
plus honorables, laissans les soldats, se prindrent a 
moy avec mille significations d'amitie. lis me con- 
duysirent en la plus grande cabane de toutes; [68] 
elle contenoit bien 80 ames. Les places prinses, je 
me jettay a genoux, et ayant faict le signe de la 
croix, recitay mon Pater, Ave, Credo, et quelques 
oraisons; puis, ayant faict pause, mes hostes, comme 
s'ils m'eussent bien entendu, m'applaudirent en leur 
fagon, s'escriant Ho ! ho! ho! le leur donnay quel- 
ques croix et quelques images, leur en donnant ^ 
apprehender ce que je pouvois. Eux les baysoient 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 41 

not otherwise showing any ill-will toward Meteour- 
mite, learned from him that there was a route by 
which they could pass ; that in order not to miss it, 
he would let us have some of his own people in our 
barque; that, besides, if we would come to his wig- 
wam he would try to satisfy us. We trusted him, 
and thought we might have to repent it ; for we trav- 
ersed such perilous heights and narrow passes that 
we never expected to escape from them. In fact, 
in two places some of our men cried out in distress 
that we were all lost. But, thank God, they cried 
too soon. 

When we arrived. Monsieur de Biancourt armed 
himself, and thus arrayed proceeded to pay a visit to 
Meteourmite. He found him in the royal apparel of 
savage majCvSty, alone in a wigwam that was well 
matted above and below, and about forty powerful 
young men stationed around it like a body-guard, 
each one with his shield, his bow and arrows upon 
the ground in front of him. These people are by no 
means simpletons, and you may believe us when we 
say so. 

As for me, I received that day the greater part of 
the welcome ; for, as I was unarmed, the most honor- 
able of them, turning their backs upon the soldiers, 
approached me with a thousand demonstrations of 
friendship. They led me to the largest wigwam of 
all; [68] it contained fully eighty people. When 
they had taken their places, I fell upon my knees 
and repeated my Pater, Ave, Credo, and some orisons; 
then pausing, my hosts, as if they had understood 
me perfectly, applauded after their fashion, crying 
Ho ! ho ! ho ! I gave them some crosses and pic- 
tures, explaining them as well as I could. They very 


42 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.2 

fort volontiers, faisoyent le signe de la Croix, et, 
chacun pour soy, s'effor9oyent a me presenter ses 
enfans, a ce que je les benisse et leur donnasse quel- 
que chose. Ainsy se passa cette visite, et une autre 
que je fis depuis. 

Or Meteourmite avoit respondu a Monsieur de 
Biancourt, que pour le bled, ils n'en avoyent pas 
quantite; mais qu'ils avoyent aucunes peaux, s'il luy 
playsoit de troquer. 

Le matin doncques de la troque venu, je m'en allay 
en une isle voysine avec un gar9on, pour Ik offrir 
I'hostie saincte de nostre reconciliation. Nos gens 
de la barque, pour n'estre surprins, soubs couleur de 
la troque, s'estoyent armez et barricadez, laissans 
place au milieu du tillac pour les Sauvages ; mais en 
vain, car ils se jetterent tellement en foule et avec si 
grande avidite, qu'aussy tost ils remplirent tout le 
vaisseau, ja peslemesles avec les nostres. On se mit 
Verier: Retire, retire-toy. Mais [69] a quel profit? 
Eux aussy crioyent de leur coste. 

Ce fut lors que nos gens se penserent estre verita- 
blement prins, et ja tout n'estoit que clameur et tu- 
multe. Monsieur de Biancourt a souvent dit et redit, 
qu'il eut maintes fois le bras lev6 et la bouche ouverte 
pour en frappant le premier crier, "Tue, tue;" mais 
que cette seule consideration, ne sgay comment, le 
retinst, que j'estois dehors, et par consequent que si 
Ton en venoit aux mains, j'estois perdu. Dieu se 
servit de cette sienne bonne volonte, non seulement 
pour ma sauvete, mais autant pour celle de tout I'es- 
quipage. Car, comme tous recognoissent bien k cette 
heure, si la folic eust este faicte, jamais aucun n'en 
fust eschapp6, et les Frangoys eussent este descries 
pour jamays en toute la coste. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 43 

willingly kissed them, made the sign of the Cross, 
and each one in his turn endeavored to present his 
children to me, so that I would bless them and give 
them something. Thus passed that visit, and another 
that I have since made. 

Now Meteourmite had replied to Monsieur de 
Biancourt that as to the corn he did not have much, 
but he had some skins, if we were pleased to trade 
with him. 

Then in the morning when the trade was to take 
place I went to a neighboring island with a boy, to 
there offer the blessed sacrament for our reconcilia- 
tion. Our people in the barque, not to be taken by 
surprise under pretext of the trade, were armed and 
barricaded, leaving a place in the middle of the deck 
for the Savages; but in vain, for they rushed in in 
such crowds and with such greediness, that they im- 
mediately filled the whole ship, becoming all mixed 
up with our own people. Some one began to cry out, 
" Go back, go back." But [69] to what good? On 
the other hand, the savages were yelling also. 

Then our people were sure they were captured, 
and there was nothing but cries and confusion. Mon- 
sieur de Biancourt has often said and said again, that 
several times he had raised his arm and opened his 
mouth to strike the first blow and to cry out, " Kill, 
kill;" but that somehow the one consideration that 
restrained him was that I was outside, and if they 
came to blows I was lost. God rewarded him for his 
good-will by saving not only me but also the whole 
crew. For, as all readily acknowledge at this hour, 
if any foolish act had been committed none of them 
would ever have escaped, and the French would have 
been condemned forever all along the coast. 


44 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.2. 

Dieu voulut que Meteourmite et quelques autres 
capitaines apprehenderent le danger, et ainsy jfirent 
retirer leurs gens. Le soir venu, et ja tons estans 
retires, Meteourmite manda aucuns des siens pour 
excuser 1 'insolence du matin, protestant que tout le 
desordre estoit venu non de soy, ains des Armouchi- 
quois; que mesmes ils nous avoyent desrobe une 
hasche et une gamelle (c'est une grande escuelle de 
bois), lequel meuble il nous renvoyoit ; que ce larcin 
lui avoit tant despleu qu'aussitost apr6s I'avoir des- 
couvert, il avoit congedie les Armouchiquois ; que 
pour luy, il avoit bon coeur, et scavoit bien que [70] 
nous ne tuions ni ne battions point les Sauvages de 
par de9a, ains les recevions a nostre table, leur fai- 
sions souvent tabagie, et leur apportions plusieurs 
bonnes choses de France, pour lesquelles vertus ils 
nous aymoient. Ces gens, croy-je, sont les plus 
grands harangueurs de toute la terre ; ils ne font rien 
sans cela. 

Mais, d'autant que j'ay faict icy mention des An- 
glois, quelqu'un pent estre desirera de sgavoir leur 
adventure, laquelle nous apprismes en ce lieu. II 
est doncques ainsy, que I'an 1608 les Anglois commen- 
cerent a s'habituer en I'une des embouschures de ce 
fleuve Kinibequi, ainsy que nous avons diet cy devant. 
Ils avoyent lors un conducteur fort honneste homme, 
et se comportoit fort bien avec les naturels du pais. 
On dit neantmoins que les Armouchiquois se crai- 
gnirent de tels voysins, et ^ cette cause firent mourir 
ce capitaine que j'ay dit. Ces gens ont ce mestier 
en usage, de tuer par magie. Or la seconde annee 
1609 les Anglois, soubs un autre capitaine, changerent 
de fa9on. Ils repoussoient les Sauvages sans aucun 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 45 

God willed that Meteourmite and some other cap- 
tains should apprehend the danger, and so cause 
their people to withdraw. When evening came and 
all had retired, Meteourmite sent some of his men to 
excuse the misconduct of the morning, protesting 
that all the disorder had originated not with him, 
but with the Armouchiquois ; that they had even 
stolen a hatchet and a platter (a great wooden dish), 
which articles he herewith returned ; that this theft 
had so displeased him that immediately after discov- 
ering it he had sent the Armouchiquois away from 
him; that, for his part, he was friendly towards us 
and knew very well that [70] we neither killed nor 
beat the Savages of those parts, but received them 
at our table and often made tabagie for them, and 
brought them a great many nice things from France, 
for which courtesies they loved us. These people 
are, I believe, the greatest speech-makers in the 
world ; nothing can be done without speeches. 

But as I have spoken here of the English, some 
one perhaps will wish to hear about their adventure, 
which was related to us in this place. So here it is: 
In 1608 the English began to settle at one of the 
mouths of this Kinib^qui river, as we have said be- 
fore. They had then as leader a very honest man, 
who got along remarkably well with the natives of 
the country. They say, however, that the Armou- 
chiquois were afraid of such neighbors, and so put 
the captain to death, as I have said. These people 
make a practice of killing by magic. But the sec- 
ond year, 1609, the English, under another captain, 
changed their tactics. They drove the Savages away 
without ceremony; they beat, maltreated and mis- 
used them outrageously and without restraint ; con- 


46 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.2 

honneur ; ils les battoyent, excedoyent et mastinoyent 
sans beaucoup de retenue : partant ces pauvres tnal- 
inen6s, impatiens du present, et augurants encores 
pis I'advenir, prindrent resolution, comme Ton diet, 
de tuer le louveteau avant qu'il eust des dents et griff es 
plus fortes. La commodite letir en fust un jour, que 
[71] trois chaloupes s'en estoyent allees k I'escart en 
pescherie. Mes conjurez les suyvoient ^ la piste, et 
s'approchans avec beau semblant d'amitie (car ainsy 
font ils le plus de caresses ou plus y a de trahison), 
ils entrent dedans, et au signal donne, chacun choy- 
sit son homme et le tua a coups de cousteau. Ainsy 
fiirent despeschez onze Angloys. Les autres inti- 
mides abandonnerent leur entreprise cette mesme an- 
nee, et ne I'ont point poursuyvie depuis, se conten- 
tans de venir I'este en pescherie en cette isle d'Eme- 
tenic, que nous avons dit estre a 8 lieues de leur fort 
encommence. 

A cette cause doncques, I'exces commis en la per- 
sonne du capitaine Platrier par lesdicts Angloys ayant 
este perpetre en cette isle d'Emetenic, Monsieur de 
Biancourt se delibera de Taller recognoistre, et y 
laisser quelque monument de revindication. Ce qu'il 
fit dressant sur le havre une fort belle croix, avec les 
armes de France. Aucuns de ses gens luy conseil- 
loyent qu'il bruslast les chaloupes qu'il y trouva; 
mais, comme il est doux et humain, il ne le voulut 
point, voyant que c' estoyent vaisseaux non de soldats, 
ains de pescheurs. 

De la, d'autant que la saison nous pressoit, estant 
jk le 6 novembre, nous tournasmes nos voiles pour 
retourner ^ Port-Royal, passant k Pentegoet, ainsy 
que nous avons promis aux Sauvages. 

[72] Pentegoet est une fort belle riviere, et peut 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 47 

sequently these poor, abused people, anxious about 
the present, and dreading still greater evils in the 
future, determined, as the saying is, to kill the whelp 
ere its teeth and claws became stronger. '^ The op- 
portunity came one day when [71] three boat-loads of 
them went away off to the fisheries. My conspirators 
followed in their boat, and approaching with a great 
show of friendliness (for they always make the great- 
est show of affection when they are the most treach- 
erous), they go among them, and at a given signal 
each one seizes his man and stabs him to death. 
Thus were eleven Englishmen dispatched. The 
others were intimidated and abandoned their enter- 
prise the same year ; they have not resumed it since, 
being satisfied to come in the summer to fish, at this 
island of Emetenic, which we have said was eight 
leagues from the fort they had begun building. 

So, for this reason, the outrage to which captain 
Platrier was subjected by these English having 
been committed upon this island of Emetenic, Mon- 
sieur de Biancourt decided to go and reconnoitre it, 
and to leave there some memento in assertion of his 
rights. This he did, erecting at the harbor a beauti- 
ful cross bearing the arms of France. Some of his 
crew advised him to bum the boats which he found 
there; but as he is kind and humane he would not 
do it, seeing they were fishermen's boats and not 
men-of-war. 

Thence, as the season was advancing, it being al- 
ready the 6th of November, we turned our ships 
towards Port Royal, stopping at Pentegoet, as we had 
promised the Savages. 

[72] The Pentegoet is a very beautiful river, and 
may be compared to the Garonne in France. It flows 


48 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.2 

estre comparee "k la Garonne de France. Elle se des- 
charge dans le Golf e f rangois ( bale de Fundy ) et a 
plusieurs isles et roches a I'endroit de son embous- 
chure; de maniere que si on ne monte fort avant, on 
estime que ce soit quelque grand sein ou baye de 
mer, la ou on commence manifestement a recognoistre 
le lict et cours de riviere. Elle a son large d' envi- 
ron 3 lieues "k 44 et demy degre de I'Equateur, On 
ne pent deviner quelle est la Norembegue des an- 
ciens, si ce n'est celle cy : car autrement et les autres 
et moy, nous enquestans de ce mot et lieu, n'en avons 
jamays peu rien apprendre. 

Nous doncques, ayans advance dans le courant de 
cette riviere trois lieues ou plus, rencontrasmes un 
autre beau fleuve appelle Chiboctous, qui du nord-est 
vient se jeter dans ce grand Pentegoet. 

Sur le confluant des deux rivieres, y avoit la plus 
belle assemblee des Sauvages que j'aye point encore 
veue. lis estoyent 80 canots et une clialoupe, 18 
cabanes et bien environ 300 ames. Le plus apparent 
Sagamo s'appelloit Betsabes, homme discret et fort 
modere ; et, sans mentir, on recognoist souvent en 
ces Sauvages des vertus naturelles et politiques qui 
font rougir quiconque n'est eshonte, lorsqu'en com- 
paraison ils regardent une bonne partie des Frangoys 
qui viennent en ces quartiers. 

[73] Apres qu'ils nous eurent recogneus, ils deme- 
nerent grande joye le soir a leur accoustumee, par 
danses, chansons et harangues. Et nous, bien ayses 
d'estre en pais d'asseurance; car entre les Eteche- 
mins, tels que sont ceux cy, et les Souriquois, tels 
que sont ceux de Port-Royal, nous ne nous tenons 
sur nos gardes non plus qu' entre nos propres domes- 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 49 

into french Bay [the bay of Fundy] and has many 
islands and rocks at its mouth ; so that if you do not 
go some distance up, you will take it for a great bay 
or arm of the sea, until you begin to see plainly the 
bed and course of a river. It is about three leagues 
wide and is forty-four and one half degrees from the 
Equator. We cannot imagine what the Norembega 
of our forefathers was, if it were not this river ; for 
elsewhere both the others and I myself have made 
inquiries about this place, and have never been able 
to learn anything concerning it. 

When we had advanced three leagues or more into 
the current of the river we encountered another 
beautiful river called Chiboctous, which comes from 
the northeast to discharge its waters into the great 
Pentegoet. 

At the confluence of these two rivers there was the 
finest assemblage of Savages that I have yet seen. 
There were 80 canoes and a boat, 18 wigwams and 
about 300 people.^ The most prominent Sagamore 
was called Betsabes, a man of great discretion and 
prudence ; and I confess we often see in these Sav- 
ages natural and graceful qualities which will make 
anyone but a shameless person blush, when they 
compare them to the greater part of the French who 
come over here. 

[73] When they had recognized us they showed 
their great joy during the evening by their usual 
demonstrations ; dancing, singing and making speech- 
es. And as for us, we were very glad to be in a coun- 
try of safety; for among the Etechemins, as these 
are, and the Souriquois, as are those of Port Royal, 
we are no more obliged to be on our guard than among 


50 LES RELATIONS DES J£SUITES [Vol.2 

tiques, et Dieu mercy nous ne nous en sommes pas 
encores mal trouvez. 

Le jour suyvant, j' allay visiter les Sauvages, et y fis 
^ mon accoustume, ainsy qu j'ay diet de Kinibequi. 
Cela y fut de plus, qu'eux m'ayans diet y avoir quel- 
ques malades, je les allay visiter, et comme prestre, 
ainsy qu'est porte dans le Rituaire, recitay sur eux les 
sainct Evangile et Oraisons, donnant ^ un chacun 
une croix pour se la pendre au col. 

Entre les autres j'en trouvay un a leur mode esten- 
du aupres du feu, les yeux et visage fort estonnes, 
suant a grosse goutte de la seule teste, qui k peine 
pouvoit parler, en un grand acces. II me dirent 
qu'il estoit malade d6s quatre mois, et que comme il 
apparoissoit, il ne la feroit pas longue. Or ne sgay-je 
quelle estoit sa maladie; si elle venoit seulement 
par intervalles, ou non, je n'en s§ay rien: tant y a 
que le 2. jour d'apres, je le vis dans nostre barque 
sain et gaillard, ayant sa croix pendue au col, et me 
fit recognoissance d'un fort bon visage, [74] me pre- 
nant par la main. Je n'eus moyen de luy parler, 
d'autant que lors on faisoit la troque, et ^ cette cause 
le tillac estoit tout remply des gens, et tons les tru- 
chemens empeschez. De vray je fus fort ayse que 
la bont6 de Dieu commengoit a faire sentir a ces 
pauvres et abandonn^es nations n'y avoir que tout 
bien et que toute prosperity au signe de la saincte et 
salutaire Croix. 

Enfin, pour ne redire souvent le mefme, et en cet 
endroit et en tous les autres oil nous avons pu con- 
verser avec ces pauvres gentils, nous avons tasche de 
leur imprimer quelques premieres conceptions de la 
grandeur et verite du Christianisme, autant que les 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 51 

our own servants, and, thank God, we have never yet 
been deceived in them. 

The next day I went to visit the Savages, and fol- 
lowed my usual custom, which I have described in 
speaking of Kinibequi. But there was more to be 
done here, as they told me they had some sick; I 
went to visit them; and as priest, it being thus 
ordained in the Ritual, I recited over them the 
holy Gospel and Orisons, giving to each one a cross 
to wear around the neck. 

Among others I found one stretched out, after their 
fashion, before the fire, wonder expressed in his 
eyes and face, great drops standing out upon his 
forehead, scarcely able to speak, so severe was the 
attack. They told me that he had been sick for four 
months and, as it appeared, he could not last long. 
Now I do not know what his malady was ; whether 
it only came intermittently or not I do not know ; at 
all events, the second day after that I saw him in our 
barque, well and happy, with his cross around his 
neck. He showed his gratitude to me by a cheerful 
smile [74] and by taking my hand. I had no means 
of speaking to him, as the trading was then going on, 
and for this reason the deck was full of people and 
all the interpreters were busy. Truly I was very 
glad that the goodness of God was beginning to 
make these poor and abandoned people feel that in 
the sign of the holy and salutary Cross there was 
every good and every blessing. 

Finally, not to continue repeating the same story, 
both in this place and in all others, where we have 
been able to talk with these poor gentiles, we have 
attempted to impress upon them some of the simplest 


52 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 2 

moyens s'en addonnoyent. Et pour le sommaire en 
Tin bloc, celuy a este le fruict du voyage : nous avons 
commence de cognoistre et estre cogneus ; nous 
avons prins possession au nom de I'Eglise de Dieu de 
ces regions icy, y asseants le throsne royal de nostre 
Sauveur et Monarque lesus Christ, son sainct autel ; 
les Sauvages nous ont veu prier, celebrer, prescher 
par nos discours, les images et croix, la fa9on de 
vivre et choses semblables, (ils) ont receu les pre- 
mieres apprehensions et semences de nostre saincte 
foy, lesquelles s'esclorront et germeront abondam- 
ment, s'il plaist k Dieu, quelque jour, y survenant un 
plus long est meilleur cultivage. 

[75] De vray aussi, tel est quasi le principal fruict que 
nous faisions pour encores icy mesmes k Port- Royal, 
jusques k ce que nous ayons apris le langage. Ce- 
pendant cela nous console de veoir ces petits Sauva- 
geois, encores que non chrestiens, porter neantmoins 
volontiers, quand ils se trouvent icy, les cierges, les 
clochettes, I'eau benite et autre chose, marchans en 
bel ordre aux processions et enterremens que Ton 
faict. Ainsy s'accoustument-ils k estre chrestiens, 
pour en son temps le bien estre. 

II ne seroit besoin sinon que fussions meilleurs ou- 
vriers de Nostre Seigneur, et n'empeschassions pas 
tant de graces d'iceluy sur nous et autruy, par tant 
de p^ch^s et indignity. Quant h. moy certes, j'ay 
grande occasion d'en battre bien rudement ma poic- 
trine, et tons ceux qui ont le zele de charite en deb- 
vroyent bien estre touches au coeur. Nostre Sei- 
gneur, par sa saincte misericorde et par les prieres 
de sa glorieuse mere et de toute son Eglise celeste et 
militante, en veuille estre fleschy k compassion ! 

Particulierement je supplie Vostre Reverence et 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 53 

conceptions of the grandeur and truth of Christianity, 
in so far as our means would permit. And to sum it 
up in a word, this has been the result of our journey. 
We have begun to know and to be known, we have 
taken possession of these regions in the name of the 
Church of God, establishing here the royal throne of 
our Savior and King, Jesus Christ, his holy altar; 
the Savages have seen us pray, celebrate the mass, 
and preach ; through our conversations, pictures, and 
crosses, our way of living, and other similar things, 
they have received the first faint ideas and germs of 
our holy faith, which will some day take root and 
grow abundantly, please God, if it is followed by a 
longer and better cultivation. 

[75] And indeed such is about all we are accom- 
plishing, even here at Port Royal, until we have 
learned the language. However, it comforts us to 
see these little Savages, though not yet christians, 
yet willingly, when they are here, carrying the 
candles, bells, holy water and other things, march- 
ing in good order in the processions and funerals 
which occur here. Thus they become accustomed to 
act as christians, to become so in reality in his time. 

No need is felt except that we ought to be better 
workers for Our Lord, and ought not to divert from 
ourselves and others so many of his blessings by our 
many sins and great unworthiness. As for me, truly 
I have good reason to severely reproach myself ; and 
all those who are imbued with earnest charity ought 
to be deeply touched in their hearts. May Our Lord, 
by his sacred mercy, and by the prayers of his glori- 
ous mother and of all his Church, both heavenly and 
militant, be moved to compassion ! 

Particularly I beg Your Reverence and all our 


64 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.2 

tons nos RR. PP. et FF. de vouloir se ressouvenir, 
en vos meilleures devotions, et de nous, et de ces 
pauvres ames, esclaves miserablement soubs la tyran- 
nie de Satan. Qu'il plaise k ce bening Sauveur Sjdl 
du monde, la grace duqnel personne ne previent et 
de qui les liberalites sont tousjours par dessus nos 
merites, qui luy plaise, dy-je, regarder enfin d'un oeil 
pitoyable ces pauvres nations, et les retirer tost dans 
sa famille, en I'heureuse franchise des fortunes en- 
fans de Dieu. Ainsy soit-il. 

De Port- Royal, ce dernier de lanvier 1612. 

Cependant que j'escrivois ces lettres, le navire 
qu'on a envoy6 pour nostre secours, est Dieu mercy 
arriv6 sain et sauf , et dans iceluy nostre Frere Gil- 
bert du Thet. Celuy pourra sgavoir I'aise qu'en 
avons receu et recevons, qui aura cogneu les dangers 
et necessit^s oil nous estions. Dieu soit beny. Amen. 
De V. R. filz et serviteur 
bien humble en Nostre Seigneur. 

Pierre BIARD. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 55 


Reverend Fathers and Brothers to be pleased to re- 
member in your most earnest devotions both us and 
these poor souls, miserable slaves under the tyranny 
of Satan. May it please this benign Savior [76] of 
the world, whose grace is denied to no one, and 
whose bounty is ever beyond our merits, may it 
please him, I say, to look down with a pitying eye 
upon these poor tribes, and to gather them soon into 
his family, in the happy freedom of the favored chil- 
dren of God. Amen ! 

From Port Royal, this last day of January, 16 12. 

While I was writing these letters, the ship which 
was sent to our assistance has, thank God, arrived 
safe and sound, and in it our Brother Gilbert du 
Thet. He, who knows the dangers and necessities 
we were in, will appreciate the joy we felt and that 
we feel at its arrival. God be praised. Amen. 
Of Your Reverence, the son and very 
humble servant in Our Lord. 

Pierre BIARD. 








p. J* fcr»llt Y.Por( Jf juuu/h*- (5.Bo>^ </e^(7inf5 l4Jlles wnaffs 

V.^arbresik AW a^^- f' ''^T '9R «-" --' 

..«-«/ v.;iu _.__^ ?o-.-'^L irL«„/,/;, 2oAJJ„,„ 


"iC"" X.llles rcpt^ S.P. 


i IN 1612, FROM Z^^ F^7«^^^ ^?^ Sieur de Champlain (PARIS, 1613). 


X 

BlARD'S EpISTOLA 
ex Portu-regali in Acadia 

Januarii 31, [1612] 
DILLINGEN : MEYER'S PRESS, n. d. 


Source: Reprinted from O'Callaghan's Reprint, No. i. 


Miffio C anadenfis 


E P I S TO L A 


ex 


Portu-regali in AcADiA 

tranfmiffa 

Ad Praepofitvm Generalem Societatis Iesv 
A R. Petro Biardo ejvfdem Societatis 



Secundvm exemplar emiffiim in A N N U I S 
LiTTERIS Anni CIO. lOC. XI 

DiLIN G^. 

Ex Typographeo Mayeria 
na, apud Melchiorem 
Algeyer. 


Canadian Mission 

LETTER 

from 

Port Royal in Acadia 

sent 

To the General of the Society of Jesus by 

Reverend Pierre Biard of the 

same Society 


According to the copy published in the Annu^ 
Litters of the year i6i I 

DiLLINGEN. 

From Meyer's Press, 

at Melchlor 

Algeyer's. 


60 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.2 


[iii] Lectori. 

POSTQUAM Patres Societatis Jefu vialevolentiani 
inimicorum fuorum viccrant et in Galliam reverfi 
erant, vocari vidcbantur alib ad laborcs fuos fru6iu- 
ofi collocandos. 

Multa crat in Nova Francia mejffis, ubi incolce pene 
belliiarum more fine Numinis cognitio7te vivebant. 

IllUc igitur mijji finer unt duo Societatis fiacerdotes, 
Patres ficilicct Petrus Biardus et Enemundus MalTaeus, 
qui in Ac3.dLia.va. pcrve7terutit 22 Maii, Anno Salutis, i6i i. 
Septem per incnfies ibi co7nvioratns, [iv] P. Biardus hanc 
epifiiolam, Superiori fiiw tranfimifiit. 

Quatuor vclluti in capita hcec litera divifia efii, & narrat: 

1°' Quid fiit Nova Francia, qualis regio, qui in ed pop- 
uli, quique mores. 

2°' Quo modo, quibifivc auxiliis aut fiucceffu, Societas 
mifiionem ilia in rcgione confiecuta fiit. 

3°' Quonam in fiiatu rem Chrifiiianam. his in locis offen- 
der it Societas. 

4°" Quid a miffwnariis ha£le?ius effe£lum fieu potius at- 
tentat um fiit. 

Licet epifilola fiub finein habeat : ultimo die Januarii 
CID. IOC. XI. ia quidem aut error in anno efil, aut P. 
Biardus fiecundum filylum vcterem ficripfict, nam debet effe 
annus, CID. IDC. XII. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 61 


[iii] To the Reader. 

AFTER the Fathers of the Society of Jesus had over- 
come the ill-ivill of their enemies and again been 
admitted into France/ they felt themselves called 
to other fields for the fruitful employment of their labors. 

A rich harvest zvas offered in New France, where the 
natives lived almost like anitnals, zvithont a7iy knowledge 
of God. 

To that co7intry, accordingly, were sent two priests of 
the Society, Fathers Pierre Biard and Enemond Masse, 
who reached Acadia on the 22nd of May, 161 1. After 
remaining there seven mottths, [iv] Father Biard sent this 
epistle to his Superior. 

The letter is divided, as it were, under four heads, and 
relates : 

ist. What New France is, the nature of the country, 
what tribes inhabit it, and their customs. 

2nd. In what manner, with what help and with what 
success the Society secured a mission in that coimtry. 

3rd. hi what condition the Society found the Chris- 
tian religion in this region. 

4.1 h. What has been done by the missionaries thus far, 
or rather zvhat has been attempted. 

Although the end of the letter reads : the last day of 
January, 161 1, — either there is an error in the year, or 
Father Biard wrote according to the old style, for the 
year ought to be 1612.^ 


62 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.2 


[5] Missio Canadensis. 

REVERENDE IN ChRISTO PaTER, 
Pax Chrifti. 

VocAT Nos huius anni ci3.i3C.xi. inftans iam atqs 
vrgens exitus ad recognofcendum coram Paternitate 
veftra principium, quo pritniim Societas in has nouse 
Francise regiones delata efl : multorum quoque bene- 
ficionim cumulus, quo nos diuina largitas in his & 
aufpicadis, & fofpitadis initijs profecuta eft, hoc ex- 
igit, vt in hoc tanquam temporum annique portu 
adtionum noftraru, & tanquam velificationis feriem 
relegetes, Charifs: Patres Fratrefq3 noftros inuite- 
mus, & ad gaudium pro ijs, quae feliciter [6] in nobis 
diuina manus operata eft, & fcilicet ad gemitum pa- 
riter & orationem pro ijs, quae in animorum falute 
procuranda, fegniter ipfi nequiterque multa deliqui- 
mus. Quod enim diutius ante Societas multifq3 
conatibus intenderat, vt aliquam fuis laboribus poffet 
huic quoq ; filuaticae genti opem & lucem Euangelio 
inferendo affere, id hoc ipfa demum anno videtur, vt 
in tenui exigudque principio fatis feliciter, prdque 
difiderio efle alTecuta. 

Atque hoc fcilicet mihi iam narrandum eft, expo- 
nend-dmq3 veftrae Paternitati, quae & quanta fit haec 
meffis animorum, quidv6 h. magno Patrefamilias da- 
tum nobis hadtenus, quid etiam porro dandum fpe- 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 63 


[5] Canadian Mission. 

REVEREND Father in Christ, 
The peace of Christ be with you. 

The end of this year 161 1, which is already so 
rapidly drawing near, invites me to write to your 
Reverence in acknowledgment of its beginning, in 
which our Society first penetrated into this territory 
of new France. The profusion of blessings and 
favors which the divine bounty has bestowed upon 
us while undertaking and sustaining this infant en- 
terprise, requires that in this haven, as it were, of 
time and of the year we should, reviewing the course 
of our actions and the occurrences of our voyage, in- 
vite our dear Fathers and Brothers to share both in 
our rejoicing for those things which the hand of God 
has happily [6] effected through us, and, too, in our 
mourning and our prayers for our delinquencies and 
inefficiency in seeking the salvation of souls. The 
object sought by the Society for a long time previ- 
ously and with many efforts, that it might in some 
degree impart help and light to this savage people 
also by its labors in bringing the Gospel among 
them, it seems at last to have attained in this year, 
with a small and slight beginning indeed, yet auspi- 
ciously and in accordance with its hopes. 

This also I must narrate and explain to your Rev- 
erence, of what nature and how numerous is this 
harvest of souls, and what has hitherto been given to 
us by our Heavenly Father, and what further gifts 
we may hope for in the future. But to facilitate my 


64 LES RELATIONS DES jiSUITES [Vol.2 

retur. Sed vt commodiffime tota mihi narratio 
decurrat, neq; decurrentem, vt fit, multa effugiant, 
in quatuor videtur velut capita rei totius expofitio 
effe diuidenda. Expona ergo primum, quae fit haec 
noua Francia, quae regio, qui populi mor6fque : turn 
deinde quomodo, quibufve tande auxilijs, aut fuccefl^u 
Societas miflionem in has regiones [ 7 ] obtinuerit. 
Terti5 quonam in ftatu rem Chriftianam in his terris 
offenderimus. Poftremo quid a nobis effedlum hadte- 
nus, feu potius quid attentatum fit ad diuinam glo- 
riam. Haec mihi videtur effe poffe commodiffima & 
fufficiens narrandorum omnium expofitio. 

Atque vt k capite ordiar explicemque primum, 
quaenam fit haec Noua Francia, quod folum, quive 
ritus gentis, credo non foliini Paternitati veflrae iucun- 
dum, fed nobis quoq3 neceffarium, regionem vniuer- 
fam accuratiiis defcribere. Nam cum hie nobis ad la- 
borandum campus affignatus, certum eft, non poffe 
nos a veftra paternitate dirigi pro occurfuum varie- 
tate, nifi ea fines, adfradtus viarum, viciniorum loco- 
rum diflantiam, ftatum gentis & rerum, noverit. 

Praeterea tot video a Geographis antiquis errores 
tenebrd,fque in banc cognitionem induci, vt nifi a 
nobis fuccurratur rerum non auditoribus fed fpedta- 
toribus, non poflit non in noftris itineribus & veftigijs 
perfequendis baud minus a veritate, qukm k corpore 
cogitatio peregrinari. [8] Norumbegam illi nobis 
nefcio quam, vrbefque & caftella nominant, quorum 
hodie ne vmbra quidem aut ipfa vox extant. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 65 

whole narration, and to obviate the possible omission 
of many details in its course, I think it best to divide 
the whole matter under four heads. I shall there- 
fore first describe new France, the country, the na- 
tives, and their customs ; next, in what manner, and 
with what help, and with what result, our Society 
secured a mission to this country ; [7] thirdly, in what 
condition we found the Christian religion in this 
region ; and, finally, what has been accomplished by 
us thus far, or rather what has been attempted for 
the glory of God, This appears to me a very con- 
venient and sufficient summary of all I am to tell. 

And, in order that I may begin at the beginning 
and explain first what sort of a land New France is, 
the nature of the country and the customs of the 
natives, I think it will be not only a pleasure for 
your Reverence, but also a necessity for ourselves that 
the whole territory be rather accurately described. 
For, since this is the field assigned to us for our 
labors, it is certain that your reverence cannot 
direct us in accordance with our varied needs with- 
out a knowledge of the extent of the country, of the 
impediments to travel, of the distance of neighbor- 
ing settlements, and of the condition of people and 
things. 

Besides, I find this matter involved in so much 
error and darkness by the older Geographers, that 
unless we, who know these things not from hearsay 
only, but are eyewitnesses thereof, come to the res- 
cue, it is impossible that the mind, in tracing our 
footsteps and our journeys, should not wander as far 
away from the truth as it has to do from the body. 
[8] They speak of a certain Norumbega and give the 
names of cities and strongholds of which to-day no 
trace or even report remains. 


66 


LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.2 


Verum quod polliciti fumus exequamur. Noua 
Francia, vti nunc Galli vfurpant, regio ilia eft trans 
Oceanum Gallicum, quae k quadragefimo primo gradu 
vfque ad quinquagefimum fecundum latitudinis, aut 
etiam quinquagefimum tertium procurrit. 

Scio ab alijs mult6 latius fines regionis porrigi, ab 
alijs coardtari anguftius, fed ego hie non difputo: id 
folum expono, quod nunc vti dixi communius vfurpa- 
tnr, vel quod hoc terrarum Gallorum nauigationibus 
ab aliquot iam annis maxime frequentatum & vindi- 
catum eft, vel quod illud idem ferfe antique Franciae 
parallelu aequaliter eam ab occidente refpicit. 

Hsec igitur Noua Francia oram habet fane multi- 
fariam, finubus marinis fluminibiifque exefam, an 
fradtuofam & recurrentem. Sinus duo funt maiores, 
[9] vaftique ; alter is, qui S. Laurentij gurges ; alter, 
qui Francius appellatur. 

Ndmque h. quadragefimo feptimo gradu, vfque ad 
quinquagefimum primum, tellus velut gremium ape- 
rit ; fiue ad accipiendum introrfus Oceanum, fiue ad ex- 
onerandum magnum flumen Canadan. Atque hie 
gurges S. Laurentij dicitur, cuius in introitu ingens 
ilia adiacet infula, quam terras nouas Galli, Barbari 
Praefentis appellant moluarum pifcatu celeberrima; 
oram fmus fluminifque tenent Aquilonem versiis Ex- 
comminqui, fme, vt vulgus indigetat, Excomunicati. 
Fera gens eft, & vt dicitur Anthropophaga, quanquam 
& hi olim fatis diu pacifice cum Gallis agitarunt, 
nunc irreconciliabiles cum his inimicitias exercent. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 67 

However, let me fulfill my promise. New France, 
as the French now call it, is that territory across the 
French Ocean which extends from the forty-first to 
the fifty-second, or even fifty-third degree of lati- 
tude, 

I know that some extend the boundaries of this 
region much farther, while others restrict them 
more narrowly, but I am not arguing this point; I 
merely explain what is, as I have said, the prevailing 
interpretation of them, either because this part of the 
country has been for many years past particularly 
explored and claimed by the French, or because the 
parallels bounding this western region are almost 
the same as those of old France. 

New France has an exceedingly varied sea-coast, 
indented by bays and rivers, broken and irregular. 
There are two principal bays [9] of vast size, one called 
the gulf of St. Lawrence, the other French bay. 

Indeed, from the forty-seventh degree as far as to 
the fifty-first, the land opens its bosom, as it were, to 
receive the Ocean into it, or to facilitate the outflow 
of the great Canadian river. This gulf is known as 
the gulf of St. Lawrence, in the mouth of which 
lies that enormous island which the French call new- 
foundland, the Savages Praesentis [ Plaisance ] ; ^ it is 
famous for its cod-fishery ; the shores of the gulf and 
the rivers are occupied toward the North by the Ex- 
comminqui, or, as they are commonly called, the 
Excommunicated.^'' This tribe is very savage, and, 
it is said, is addicted to Cannibalism ; although once 
in very peaceful relations with the French for a con- 
siderable length of time, it is now on a footing of 
irreconcilable enmity. There follow, in the interior, 
toward the west, the Algonquins; then the Mon- 
tagnais; those dwelling at the head-waters of this 


68 LES RELATIONS DBS J^SUJTES [Vol.2 

Sequuntur interius, occidentem versus Algonquini, 
poft Montagnefij, intimi funt ad capita ipfms magni 
fluminis Canadas, Irocofij, qui etiam late Auftrum 
verfus protenduntur. 

Atque hi fere Irocofij noti funt Gallis duntaxat ob 
perpetua bella, quae cum Montagnefijs, & Algonqui- 
nis foederatis [lo] & amicis populis geruntur. lam 
vero Auftrum versus terra ab hoc S. Laurentij fmu 
paulatim vfque ad quadragefimum tertium gradum 
excurrit, vbi rurfus altero finu maximo inciditur, 
quern Francicum appellant. Hie gurges terras vafl6 
exedens, fefeque Aquilonem verfus & S. Laurentij 
linum incuruans, velut Ifthmum efficit ; Ifthmiimque 
adiuuat S. loannis longiffimum flume, quod orfum ab 
ipfa propemodum ora magni Canadae in hue fefe 
Francicum gurgitem exonerat. Continet hie Ifthmus 
leucas admodu quingentas circuitu fuo, eumque occu- 
pant Soriqui populi. In hoc Ifthmo portus regalis 
eft, vbi nunc degimus, ad gradum latitudinis quadra- 
gefimum quartum cum beffe. Sed habet portus ofti- 
um fuum (ne quis fallatur) non in Oceanum ad orien- 
tem obuerfum, fed in fmum eum, quem dixi Franci- 
cum : ad Occidentem & f eptentrionem a fluuio Sandti 
loannis vfque ad fluuium Potugoet, atque ade6 vfque 
ad flumen Rimbegui habitant Etheminquenfes. Ha- 
bet Rimbegui oftia fua fub gradu quadragefimo [ii] 
tertio cum beffe. Nee procul eft Chouacoet, quod al- 
terum eft latus flue brachium terrse, quod finum Fra- 
cicum excipit. Ndmque ad orientem eft illud, quod 


1612-14J THE JESUIT RELATIONS 69 


same great Canadian river are the Irocois, whose 
territory also extends far to the South. 

These Irocois are known to the French chiefly 
for the perpetual warfare which they maintain 
against the Montagnais and Algonquins, allied [lo] 
and friendly tribes. To the South, however, the coast 
gradually advances up to the forty-third degree, 
where once more it is interrupted by a very large 
bay called French bay. This gulf, advancing far 
into the interior, and bending toward the North and 
the gulf of St. Lawrence, forms a sort of Isthmus; 
and this Isthmus is completed by the St. John, a very 
long river which, taking its rise almost at the very 
banks of the great Canadian river, empties into this 
French bay. This Isthmus has a circuit of fully five 
hundred leagues and is occupied by the Soriquois 
tribe. In this Isthmus is port royal, where we are 
now sojourning, lying on the parallel of 44° 4o^ But 
this port (to obviate misunderstanding) is not on the 
Ocean lying eastward, but on that gulf which I have 
called French bay. To the West and north, from the 
river of St. John to the river Potugoet,^ and even to 
the river Rimbegui,^ live the Etheminqui. The 
mouth of this river is in latitude 43° 40'. [11] Not far 
distant is Chouacoet," which is the other shore 
or arm embracing French Bay. For to the east 
lies what we call cape sable, while Chouacoet 
lies toward the West; both are on the forty- third 
parallel, though they are separated by an interval 
of a hundred leagues. From the Rimbegui* river 
to the fortieth parallel the whole country is in the 
possession of the tribe called the Armouchiquois. 
Such is the distribution of the territory. The tribes 
amount to seven in number, differing from each other 

* Sic. for Kinibequi.— [O'Callaghan.] 


70 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.2 

promontorium fabulofum nominamus : ad Occiden- 
tem Chouacoet ; vtrumque ad quadragefimum tertium 
eleuationis gradum, cum tamen inter hoc atque illud 
centum leucarum intercapedo fit : "k fluuio Rimbegui* 
vfque ad quadragefimum gradum latfe poffident, qui 
Armouchiqui appellantur. Atque haec ferfe partitio 
eft regionis: itdque fi numeres, populi erunt feptem, 
lingua inter fe ac ftudijs dif crepantes ; Excommuni- 
cati, Algonquini, Montagnefij, Irocofij, Soriqui, 
Etheminquenfes, & Armouchiqui. Sed ex ijs nee 
Excommunicati, nee Irocofij, nee Armouchiqui mul- 
tum Gallis noti funt. Reliqui quatuor in firmam 
iam videntur cum ijs amicitiam & cofuetudinem 
coaluiffe. Pernodtant ipfi nobifcum, nos cum iplis 
vagamur, venamur, viuimus fine armis, fine metu; 
& quod adhuc apparuerit, fme periculo. CaufTa fre- 
quentandi pifcatio fuit Moluarum, [12] quibus hoc 
mare abundat, & pellium permutatio. Nam c^m aere, 
ferro, canabe, lana, frugibus, atq3 omni ferfe artificio 
Barbari careant, haec k Gallis accipiunt. Ipfi contrk, 
qui vnicus thefaurus eft, pelles retribuunt. Efl 
autem regio tota magnam partem perfrigida. Cauffae 
funt plures ; vna qu5d valde aquofa eft ; nam prseter- 
quam qu5d vndique ferfe mari alluitur, fluminibus 
praeterea & ftagnis lacubiifque maximis abundat. 
Infulse ita frequentes funt, vt ora tota ijs intercifa, & 
tanquam baccata fit. Hinc fequitur nimirum, vt 
pruinofa fit, & tame ventofa, fed flatu non nifi fere 

* Sic. pro Kinibequi. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 71 


in language and character : the Excommunicated, the 
Algonquins, the Montagnais, the Irocois, the Sori- 
quois, the Etheminqui and the Armouchiquois, But 
of these neither the Excommunicated, nor the Iro- 
cois, nor the Armouchiquois are well known to the 
French. The remaining four tribes appear already 
to be united in firm friendship and intimacy with 
them. They stay over night among us ; we rove 
about with them, and hunt with them and live 
among them without arms and without fear; and, as 
has thus far appeared, without danger. This inti- 
macy arose partly from association while fishing for 
Cod, [ 1 2] which abound in these waters, and partly from 
trading in furs. For the Savages, who have neither 
copper, iron, hemp, wool, vegetables nor manufact- 
ured articles of any kind, resort to the French for 
them, giving in return the only thing of value they 
have, namely, furs. This whole region is for the 
most part very cold, owing to various causes. In 
the first place, the country is a very wet one ; for, 
besides being washed on almost every side by the 
sea, it abounds in rivers and ponds and large lakes. 
Islands are so numerous that the whole shore is cut 
up by a confused procession of them, as it were. 
Moreover, though a land of frost, it is very windy, 
the wind being nearly always a cold one. Another 
cause of cold is the wildness of the country ; for, be- 
ing covered on every side by one continuous forest, 
it naturally follows that the soil hardly ever becomes 
really warmed through. A third cause is the mount- 
ains, covered with snow and perpetual frost, which 
are said to wall us in far away to the North and the 
West. 

We certainly get nothing from that quarter but 
piercing winds and snow-storms. Elsewhere, how- 


72 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.2 

algido. Altera eft caulTa frigoris, qu5d inculta fit; 
nam cum late omnia filua vna contineat, nihil mirum 
eft, ^i vix vnquam polTit humus calefieri. Adde his, 
11 placet, cauffam tertiam, montes videlicet niuofos ac 
perpetuo rigentes, quibus dicimur ab Occidente ac 
Septentrione procul obuallari. 

Certe quidem ab ea parte non nifi gelu perflamur 
& niuibus. Alioqui fane facies regionis eft pera- 
moena, pluribus [13] locis hofpitem inuitans ac bene 
pollicens ; & quod apparuit, fi colatur, non inf oecunda. 
Indigense rari funt. Etheminquenfes mille capita 
numerare non poffent, nee multo plus Algonquini 
fmiul & Montanenf es iundti : Soriqui duo millia non 
conficerent : Itaque fummiim quatuor capitum milli- 
bus tam vafti terrarum & littorum tradtus non tenen- 
tur, fed percurruntur. Gens enim eft vaga, filueftris, 
& fparfa, vt quae venatu folo & pifcatu viuat. Im- 
berbes fere, & quidem ftatura comuni, vel paulo 
breuiore ac graciliore quam noftri, at non degener 
tam en aut indecora ; color non multum fufcus, faciem 
vulgo pingunt, & in ludtu atrant. luris amantes, ac 
vim latrociniumque perofi. Quod fane mirum efl in 
hominibus, qui lege ac magiftratu carent. Sui enim 
quifque dominus eft ac vindex, Sagamos quidem 
habet, hoc eft bellorum dudtores, fed quorum omnino 
precarium fit imperium, fi tamen imperium appellan- 
dum efl, vbi nulla efl neceffitas parendi. Sequuntur 
vel exemplo, vel vfu, vel affinitatis [14] aut generis 
conciliatione induc5ti, nonnunquam etiam certe cuiuf- 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 73 


ever, the appearance of the country is very pleasing, 
and in many [13] places inviting to the settler and 
quite promising; and, as experience has shown, it is 
not unfruitful if cultivated. The natives are not nu- 
merous. The Etheminqui number less than a thou- 
sand, the Algonquins and the Montagnais together 
would not amount to much more, the Soriquois would 
not amount to two thousand. Thus four thousand 
Indians at most roam through, rather than occupy, 
these vast stretches of inland territory and sea-shore. 
For they are a nomadic people, living in the forests 
and scattered over wide spaces, as is natural for those 
who live by hunting and fishing only. They are 
nearly all beardless and of average stature, or even 
a little shorter and more slender than we, but not 
degraded nor ill-favored in appearance ; their color is 
not very swarthy ; they commonly paint their faces, 
and, when in mourning, blacken them. They love 
justice and hate violence and robbery, a thing really 
remarkable in men who have neither laws nor magis- 
trates; for, among them, each man is his own master 
and his own protector. They have Sagamores, that 
is, leaders in war ; but their authority is most precari- 
ous, if, indeed, that may be called authority to which 
obedience is in no wise obligatory. The Indians follow 
them through the persuasion of example or of custom, 
[14] or of ties of kindred and alliance; sometimes 
even through a certain authority of power, no doubt. 
They wage war as a tribe on account of wrongs done 
to a private individual. The whole race is very re- 
vengeful and, after the fashion of savages, insolent 
in victory, carrying about the heads of their captives 
as trophies and spoils of victory. 

They are even said to have been addicted to the 
eating of human flesh, and the Excommunicated and 


74 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.2 

dam potentiae au<5toritate : bella populatim gerunt, ob 
illatas priuatis iniurias. Genus totum vindidtae aui- 
dum ; & vt barbarum, in vidtoria infolens, captiuorum 
capita tanquam opima fpolia & torques magno gaudio 
circumferunt. 

Et quidem dicuntur humanis carnibus non abfli- 
nuiffe, idque etiamnum perhibentur & Excommuni- 
cati & Armonchiqui facere : verum ab ijs, quorum eft 
cum Gallis confuetudo, tantum fcelus procul abeft. 

Religio tota certis incantationibus, choreis, & vene- 
ficijs conftat ; nimirum vt aut neceffaria vitae conqui- 
rant, aut inimicos amoliantur; fuos habent Autmoi- 
nos, hoc eft veneficos, qui malu Daemonem confulant 
de vita & morte, futuronimque euentis ; & quidem fefe 
illis mala bellua praefentem f aepe fiftit, vt ipfi allerunt, 
vindidtam annuit, renuitque, mortem inimicorum 
fuorumve, venationem profperam, & cetera eiufmodi 
ludibria, quorum vt ne quid delit, [15] etiam fomnijs 
fidem habent : fi forte fuper placito & bene aufpicante 
fomnio euigilauerint, confurgunt, vel de nodte con- 
cubia, & omen cantu ac choreis fequuntur. Templa, 
sedefve facras, ritus, casremonias, difciplinam nullam 
habent, vti nee leges aut artificia politiamve vllam, 
praeter certos mores & confuetudinem, quoru funt 
retinentiffimi. Si quem Veneficus refpondit ad certa 
diem moriturum, is deferitur ab omnibus ; quin 
ipfe adeo mifer, vtpote iam mortis certus, vitro fibi 
inediam atque omnium incuriam indicit, credo ne 
videatur contra fatum pugnare. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 75 

Armouchiquois tribes are said to have the same prac- 
tice even now. Those, however, who are intimate 
with the French are far from being guilty of so great 
a crime. 

Their whole religion consists of certain incanta- 
tions, dances and sorcery, which they have recourse 
to, it seems, either to procure the necessaries of life 
or to get rid of their enemies ; they have Autmoinos, 
that is, medicine-men, who consult the evil Spirit 
regarding life and death and future events ; and the 
evil spirit [great beast] often presents himself before 
them, as they themselves assert, approves or disap- 
proves their schemes of vengeance, promises them 
the death of their enemies or friends, or prosperity 
in the chase, and other mockeries of the same sort. 
To make these complete they [15] even have faith in 
dreams ; if they happen to awake from a pleasing and 
auspicious dream, they rise even in the middle of 
the night and hail the omen with songs and dances. 
They have no temples, sacred edifices, rites, cere- 
monies or religious teaching, just as they have no 
laws, arts or government, save certain customs and 
traditions of which they are very tenacious. If the 
Medicine-man predicts that a certain person will die 
before a fixed date, this man is deserted by all ; and, 
in his misery, feeling certain of impending death, he 
voluntarily condemns himself to suffer hunger and 
complete neglect, apparently that he may not seem 
to contend against fate. 

If, however, he does not appear to be in a dying 
condition by the time predicted, his friends and rela- 
tives even hasten his death by pouring jars of cold 
water over his stomach. Such is the piety of these 
servants of Satan. Thus, no doubt because he is 
always deceitful, the soothsayer never appears to 


76 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.2 

Quin etiam fi forte ad praeflitutam diem, vt faepe 
fit, moribundus non videatur, pro fe quifq3 proximi 
vrceis frigidae in ventrem miferi inuergendis celerant 
mortem. Haec pietas eft Sathanse mancipijs: ita 
quoque nimirum, quia femper fallax eft, diuinus 
nunqtiam fallit ; quaquam natio ifta deceptrix aruf- 
picum multum iam de au(5toriate fud ab aduetu Gal- 
lorum amifit ; paffimque nunc quiritantur, fuos iam 
Diabolos viribus exidiffe, [i6] praeut quidam ferut Pa- 
trum fuorum fuilTe temporibus. Mortuorum ita cum 
corpore fepeliunt memoriam, vt ne nomen quidem 
deinceps audire fuftineant. Dei quidem vnius fupre- 
mi tenuem quandam habent cognitionem, verumta- 
men affedtibus & vfu deprauati nihilo fecitis, vt dixi, 
Cacodaemonem etiam colunt ; ob vitae commoda, algo- 
ris & inediae patientes funt fupra modum. Odlo, de- 
cern dies, fi fors ita exigat, feram ieiuni perfequutur, 
fummis niuibus frigoribufq3 tum maxime ardet vena- 
tio. Et tamen hi ipfi Borea, vt fie dicam, & cryftallo 
nati, vbi femel fub fuis tugurijs cum praeda confede- 
runt, inertes illico, & cuiufuis laboris impatientes 
fiunt : f eminis mandant omnia : hae praeter onerofam 
liberorum educations, geftationemque, infuper feram 
ex eo loco vbi ceciderit, aduehunt : hae lignatum & a- 
quatum eunt hae fupelledtilem conficiunt, curantque : 
cibos apparant, feras excoriant, pelles fullonis arte 
conficiunt, veftimenta confuunt, pifcantur & conchavS 
maxime ad cibum legunt, faepe [17] etiam venantur: 
has canoas, hoc eft cymbulas mirae celeritatis e cortice 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 77 


deceive himself ; although this lying race of prophets 
have lost much of their authority since the coming of 
the French, and now universally complain that their 
Devils have lost much of their power, [16] if compared 
with what it is said to have been in the time of their 
Ancestors. They so completely bury the very re- 
membrance of the dead with their bodies that they 
will not even suffer their names to be mentioned after- 
wards. Of the one supreme God they have a certain 
slender notion, but they are so perverted by false 
ideas and by custom, that, as I have said, they really 
worship the Devil. To obtain the necessaries of life 
they endure cold and hunger in an extraordinary 
manner. During eight or ten days, if the necessity 
is imposed on them, they will follow the chase in 
fasting, and they hunt with the greatest ardor when 
the snow is deepest and the cold most severe. And 
yet these same Savages, the offspring, so to speak, of 
Boreas and the ice, when once they have returned 
with their booty and installed themselves in their 
tents, become indolent and unwilling to perform any 
labor whatever, imposing this entirely upon the 
women. The latter, besides the onerous role of 
bearing and rearing the children, also transport the 
game from the place where it has fallen ; they are 
the hewers of wood and drawers of water ; they make 
and repair the household utensils ; they prepare food ; 
they skin the game and prepare the hides like fullers ; 
they sew garments ; they catch fish and gather shell- 
fish for food; often [17] they even hunt; they make 
the canoes, that is, skiffs of marvelous rapidity, out 
of bark ; they set up the tents wherever and when- 
ever they stop for the night — in short, the men con- 
cern themselves with nothing but the more laborious 
hunting and the waging of war. For this reason 


78 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.2 

compingunt, tuguriola, vbi & quando pernoctandum 
eft, aedificant : denique praeter laboriofiorem venatio- 
nem & bella nihil aliud quidquam viris eft penfi. 
Hac de cauffa plures fere vxores quifque habet, 
Sagami maxime, vt qui potentiam fuam & concurfum 
pliiriu tanquam clientium tueri nequeant, non foliim 
fine pluribus liberis, qui valeant ad terrorem & gra- 
tiam, fed etiam fine pluribus mancipijs, quae neceffaria 
vitae officia & exequantur & tolerent. Nam feminas 
mancipiorum loco habent, tradlantq3. Inter fe miri- 
fice liberales fiit, nihil quifquam aut fortunarum, aut 
fibi habere fuftineat, quin partem maxima aftantibus 
eroget, quin etiam qui Tabagiam agit, vt loquutur, 
hoc efl qui conuiuio alios excipit, non accumbit ipfe 
cum reliquis, fed miniftrat, neq3 partem aliquam 
dapis reliduam flbi facit, fed diftribuit omnia, ita vt 
famem cogatur eo die conuiuator pati, nifi quis inui- 
tatoru, ex eo quod fibi fuperfuerit, miferatus ei [i8] 
retribuat. Et fimilis apparuit faepe liberalitas in 
Gallos aliquo cafu oppreffos. Nam erga reliquos, 
aut hie aut in nauibus agentes didicerunt a nobis non 
facile quicqua gratis dare. Pedunculos capitis quaeli- 
tant, & in delicijs habent. In mendicando & poftu- 
lando importuniffimi funt, & qui elfe folent mendicorii 
& inopu mores, falfi, obloquutores, affetatores, vani. 
Gallos quide atq3 omnes gentes cum femel faturi 
funt, longe defpiciunt, irrid6ntq3 clanculum omnia; 
etiam religione, quam fufceperint. Tuguriola fua 
vbiuis facile ac raptim fudibus ramifice aedificant, & 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 79 


almost every one has several wives, and especially 
the Sagamores, since they cannot maintain their 
power and keep up the number of their dependents 
unless they have not only many children to inspire 
fear or conciliate favor, but also many slaves to per- 
form patiently the menial tasks of every sort that 
are necessary. For their wives are regarded and 
treated as slaves. These Savages are extremely 
liberal toward each other; no one is willing to enjoy 
any good fortune by himself, but makes his friends 
sharers in the larger part of it; and whoever re- 
ceives guests at what they call a Tabagie does not 
himself sit down with the others, but waits on them, 
and does not reserve any portion of the food for him- 
self but distributes all ; so that the host is constrained 
to suffer hunger during that day, unless some one of 
his guests takes pity on him [ 1 8] and gives him back 
a portion of what remains over from his own share. 
And they have often shown the same liberality to- 
ward the French, when they have found them in 
distress. For they have learned from us that, toward 
others than these, whether here or in the ships, 
nothing is readily given away. They hunt after the 
lice in their heads and regard them as a dainty. 
They are most importunate beggars and, after the 
fashion of beggars and needy people, they are hypo- 
critical — contradicting, flattering and lying to achieve 
their ends. But when once they have gotten their fill 
they go off, mocking the French and everybody else 
at a distance and secretly laughing at everything, even 
the religion which they have received. They set up 
their tents easily and quickly in any place with 
branching stakes, which they cover either with bark 
or skins or even with mats. The fire is built in the 
middle. But this is enough, and more than enough, 


80 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.2 

aut cortice aut pellibus ant etia tegete cotegunt. 
Ignis in medio extruitur. Sed haec iam fatis fuper- 
qne de regione & hominibus, maxime cum accuratam 
regionis Chorographiam mittam ; ex quo vno intuitu, 
quidquid de terrarum & maris fitu dixi, liquido ap- 
parebit. 

NvNC ad id venio, quod fecundo loco propofui, vt 
fcilicet explicem, quanam tandem via Societas milTio- 
nem in banc prouinciam obtinuerit. Et quidem 
noflri [19] Burdigalenfes pro fuo animarum zelo k 
multis retro annis hue refpedtarant, hue intenderant, 
vt miferae nationi opem ferrent: fed pios eorum & 
ardentes conatus, quos periculi facies non terreret, 
diu fublidiorum ad agendum inopia fruftrata efl. 
Reftituta demum in Galliam Societate, agere feri6 
per P. Cotonum cum Magno Henrico coeperunt, fibi 
vt liceret in his quoque regionibus laborare, & am- 
plexus eft Rex Societatis amans tam piam & propen- 
fam voluntatem, fed nihilominus tamen vtilibus con- 
filijs longa adhuc & odiofa mora interuenit. Nulli 
adhuc Galli regionem incolebant, commorandi animo, 
& qui ante a Rege miffus fuerat, explorandi tentan- 
dique causfa, alienus k facris noftris erat, & ijs pofl- 
modum rebus, non folum infedlis, fed etiam prope 
defperatis domum in Galliam redijt: iuffit tamen 
Princeps inuidtus ne defponderemus animum, mit- 
tendi folum deftinarentur, moniturum fe cum matu- 
rum f oret ; atque adeo vt arrha quaedam elTet f ponfio- 
nis, pecuniam ex eo tepore in [20] viaticum alTignauit. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


81 


regarding the country and the people, especially as 
I send an accurate Map of the region, a single glance 
at which will make clear whatever I have said regard- 
ing the geography of land and sea.^^ 

Now I shall enter upon my second topic and ex- 
plain by what means the Society finally secured the 
sending of a mission to this province. It is true that 
our adherents at [19] Bordeaux, in their zeal for the 
saving of souls, had looked forward to this, and had 
aimed at this for many years back, namely, at bring- 
ing help to this wretched race. But their pious and 
ardent efforts, which recoiled before no danger, 
were long frustrated by lack of means for prosecut- 
ing them. When our Society was at last re-admitted 
into France, they began to negotiate in earnest with 
Henry the Great, through Father Coton, to obtain 
permission to labor in these regions also, and the 
King, so full of good-will toward our Society, es- 
poused this pious and important project ; but, never- 
theless, the taking of active steps was preceded 
by a long and vexatious delay. No Frenchmen as 
yet inhabited this region with the purpose of settling 
here, and such as had been sent by the King as ex- 
plorers and in a tentative way, being indifferent to 
our holy aims, had soon returned to France, leaving 
these things not only unaccomplished but even almost 
hopeless. But our Prince, undeterred by these con- 
siderations, bade us be of good heart, and promised, 
if we would but designate those who were to be sent, 
that he would let us know when he deemed the time 
opportune; and, as an earnest of his promise, from 
that time forward he assigned to us a sum of money 
for the [20] voyage. But at this point, unhappily, 
occurred the tragic death of the King. Yet at this 
very season God came to our help. Some messen- 


82 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.2 

Sed haec agentibus, ecce pij Regis funefta mors inter- 
cedit. No defuit Devs fub idem anni tempus: ad 
nouum regem nuntij redierunt ab eo, qui anno fuperi- 
ore in has fibi terras colonia depopofcerat. 

Is eft loannes Biencnrtius, vulg6 Potrincurtius, 
nobilis & magni animi vir. Ergo accepta occafione 
agitur cum Regina Regente Maria Medicaea, maximse 
pietatis heroina, vt quas maritus tanta virtute defti- 
naffet, per earn efficerentur, daretur locus duobus e 
Noftris in ea naui, quae proxime hue effet ventura. 
Annuit Regina, munific6que refpondit defiderio. 
Ergo ftatim ex Aquitania euocatus Sacerdos vnus, 
alter ex ipfa Francia defumptus. Sed ecce rurfum 
moras, rursum fefe Sathanas excitat. Dieppa erat 
foluendum, & ea nauis, quae hue vela faciebat ita 
erat mercatoribus Haereticis obnoxia, vt fine ipfis 
commouere fe non pofCet. Ergo ij fimul ac Noftros 
vident, negant enimuer5 praecisfe fefe palluros, vt 
rudens expediatur, fi lefuitae nauigaturi lint. Obten- 
ditur [21] Reginse imperium, interponitur etiam 
Gubernatoris auc5toritas. Itur, redittirque ad Regi- 
nam, & ab ea literae, mandatdque afferuntur, fed ob- 
flinationem haereticam, vt Ecclefiae, ita nee Regum 
frangit aut permouet audtoritas. Hsec peruicacia be- 
nigniffimorum Principum illuftriore pietatam fecit. 
Namque Antonia Pontia MarchionilTa Guercheuilia 
matrona clariffima, & vt appellant, filiarum Reginae 
gubernatrix, vbi has tricas audijt, pro fuo in Devm & 
Societatem amore, non dubitauit k maximis quibuf q3 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 83 

gers came to the new king from the man who last 
year solicited the royal permission to found a colony 
in this country. 

This man is Jean Biencourt, commonly called Po- 
trincourt, of noble birth and a magnanimous man. 
Accordingly, seizing this opportunity, we made over- 
tures to the Queen Regent, Marie de Medicis, that 
most pious and exalted lady, begging her to execute 
what her husband had so piously purposed by giving 
a place to two of our Fathers in the ship which was 
to sail shortly for this place. The Queen assented, 
and responded to our request most liberally. Ac- 
cordingly one Priest was immediately summoned 
from Aquitaine, and another was chosen in France. 
But lo ! Satan rouses himself again, and again inter- 
poses new delay. We were to sail from Dieppe, but 
the ship that was to bear us to this country was so 
completely under the influence of Heretical merchants 
that it could not stir without their consent. Accord- 
ingly, as soon as they saw our Priests they refused 
outright to let the ship sail if the Jesuits were to em- 
bark in it. The order of the [21] Queen was alleged, 
and the authority of the Governor was interposed. 
Recourse was had to the Queen, and letters and 
orders were obtained from her ; but even Royal au- 
thority is, like that of the Church, unable to break 
or bend heretical obstinacy. This stubborn resist- 
ance lent all the more lustre to the piety of our 
benignant Rulers. For Antoinette de Pons, Marchion- 
ess de Guercheville, a most illustrious lady, and 
governess to the daughters of the Queen, on learning 
these petty hindrances did not hesitate, in her love 
for God and for our Society, to ask in his name for 
aid from some of the greatest men in the council of 
this realm, that the contumacy of the heretics might 


84 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.2. 

totius curias eleemofynam petere eo nomine, vt vidta 
haereticorum contumacia lefuitis liceret in has terras 
proficifci. Nee difficile ei fuit, in pia caulTa fuapte 
fponte propenfam Catholicorum Principum benigni- 
tatem allicere: breui fumma confec5ta eft librarum 
quatuor millium. Ea & haereticorum repulit iniqui- 
tatem, & Noftros in nauim non iam vt hofpites, fed 
vt magna ex parte Dominos, potentefq3 impofuit. 
Ita nimirum Chriftus, vt folet, per hoftium impugna- 
tionem cofirmauit fuos, [22] per iniquitatem auxilijs 
neceffarijs inftruxit, & per machinationes, atque op- 
probria e tenebris atque ignobilitate vindicauit : ipli 
gloria in faecula. Amen. 

Dieppa foluimus incommodiffimo tempore, vigefimo 
fexto lanuarij Anni huius ci3.iC3.xi. Nauis erat 
non magna, «& haud fatis inflrudta, nautas ex magna 
parte haeretici ; & vt hyeme in procellofo mari, multis 
grauiffimifqs tempeftatibus perfundti fumus, tenuitq3 
nauigatio menfes ipfos quatuor. Ex quibus apparet, 
qukm multa omnis generis perferenda fuerint. Certe 
alter noftrum magnam itineris partem aeger, debili- 
tatiifque iacuit. Conati tamen fumus confueta Socie- 
tatis munia exhibere. Mane ac vefpere ad orationem 
vec5lores conuocabantur quotidie: feftis etiam officia 
quaedam Ecclefiaftica decantabantur ; f aepe habeban- 
tur cohortationes piae, interdum nonnullae cum haere- 
ticis dif putationes : iurandi cofuetudo & verboru 
lafciuia reprimebatur. Non omittebantur multa 
fimul humilitatis, fimul charitatis exempla. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 85 

be subdued and the Jesuits permitted to sail to this 
land. Nor did she have any difficulty in gaining the 
good- will of the Catholic Princes, inclined of their 
own accord to sympathize with this holy cause ; in a 
word, the sum of four thousand livres was collected. 
This not only put an end to the iniquitous resistance 
of the heretics, but gave our Priests the influence of 
Masters rather than of mere passengers in the ship. 
Thus, no doubt Christ, as usual, has strengthened 
his own followers through the attacks of enemies ; 
[22] through their iniquity he has furnished aid to his 
own children and protected them from the darkness 
and the baseness of their foes, even through their 
intrigues and insult; his be the glory forever and 
ever. Amen. 

We sailed from Dieppe in a most unfavorable sea- 
son, on the 26th of January, of this year 161 1. The 
ship was not large and was insufficiently equipped ; 
the sailors were mostly heretics. As it was winter 
and the sea was stormy, we encountered many severe 
tempests and the voyage lasted four whole months, 
from which it is apparent how many sufferings of 
every kind we underwent. Indeed, during the greater 
portion of the voyage one or the other of us lay sick 
and debilitated. Yet we attempted to discharge the 
usual duties of our Society. Morning and evening, 
every day, the passengers were called together for 
prayer; on holidays certain Ecclesiastical services 
were held, pious exhortations were frequently made, 
and sometimes disputations with the heretics took 
place. The habit of swearing and using obscene lan- 
guage was repressed. Nor were there wanting many 
examples of humility and of charity. 

[23] Finally, with God's blessing, we brought the 
Heretics, who, evidently through the preaching of 


86 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.2 

[23] Denique illud Dei beneficio obtentum eft, vt 
Hseretici, qui nos ante velut monftra h fuoru vide- 
licet ore Miniftrorum reputabant, non folum agnoue- 
rint fuorum in hac re impoftorum malitiam, fed etiam 
multis poftea locis laudiini noftrarum praedicatores 
extiterint; hie ergo fummatim fuit nofter in has 
terras ingrelTus. 

Seqvitvr iam ex initio propofitis tertium, niminim 
vt exponatur, quonam tande loco rem Chriftianam 
his in locis offenderimus. Certe ante hoc tempus vix 
vnquam k Gallis vacatum fuit conuertedis incolarum 
ad Chriftum animis. Obftabant multa. Nam & 
peregrinabantur hue tantum, non comorabantur : & 
qui commorari voluerunt, tarn aduerfis conflidlati 
funt cafibus, vt ei rei dare operam fane multam non 
potuerint. Deuehebantur duntaxat interdum non- 
nulli in Galliam, ibiq; baptizabantur, fed ijdem vt 
nee fatis inftituti, & a paftoribus deftituti, fimul ac 
in has oras remigrauerant, ad folita prorfus & vfitata 
reuoluebantur. Appulimus hue nos [24] vigelima 
fecunda Maij, ipfo facro Pentecoftes die, anni huius 
CIO. IDC. XI. Quo duntaxat anno is, quern fsepius ap- 
pellare necelle eft, D. Potrincurtius ad fedes hie 
domiciliumq3 figendum peruenerat, fecumq3 Sacer- 
dotem faecularem aduexerat. Is Sacerdos per eum 
annum dicitur capita fere centum baptimo initiauifle ; 
in his celebrem inter Sagamos, & de quo nos infra 
plura dicemus, Henricum Membertou cum familia 
vniuerfa, hoc eft cum tribus liberis iam coiugibus. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 87 

their own Pastors, regarded us as monsters, to recog- 
nize the malice of these impostors in this matter, so 
that they afterwards on many occasions stood up to 
proclaim our praises. Such, in brief, was our voy- 
age to this land. 

Now FOLLOWS the third of the topics proposed in 
the beginning — the setting forth, namely, of the 
condition in which we found the Christian religion in 
this country. Certainly before this time scarcely any 
attention has ever been given by the French to con- 
verting the souls of the natives to Christ. There 
have been many obstacles. For the French only 
wandered through these regions, but did not remain 
here, and those who wished to remain were harassed 
by so many calamities that they assuredly could not 
give much thought to this matter. Some natives, it 
is true, were occasionally brought to France and bap- 
tized there, but these not being sufficiently instruct- 
ed, and finding themselves without shepherds as 
soon as they returned to these shores, immediately 
resumed their former habits and traditions. We 
landed here [24] on the 22nd of May, on the holyday 
of Pentecost of this year 161 1 . In this very same year 
Sieur Potrincourt, whom I shall have occasion to 
mention several times, had come here to establish 
himself permanently, and had brought a secular 
Priest with him. This Priest, it is said, baptized 
nearly a hundred persons during the year, among 
them one of the most celebrated of the Chiefs, of 
whom we shall have to speak again later, Henry 
Membertou, with his whole family, that is, three 
children already married. But, since neither this 
Priest nor any one else knew their language, save so 
far as pertains to the merest necessities of intercourse 


88 LES RELATIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol 2 

Sed, vt fit, cum nee Sacerdos ipfe, nee alius quifquam 
linguam nollet, nifi quatum attinet ad vitae & merei- 
moniorum neeeffitatem, erudiri videlicet neophyti 
non potuerunt. 

Baptifmum accipiebant velut facrum aliquod fig- 
num fimilitudinis & confcederationis cum Gallis. 
De Chrifto, de Ecclefia, de Fide ac Symbolo, man- 
datis Dei, oratione ac Sacramentis vix quidquam 
nouerant, ignari & crucis efformandae, & iplius nomi- 
nis Chriftiani, Itaque nunc vulg6 fcifcitantibus 
nobis, Chriflianus es? negat optimus quifque, [25] 
fcire f e quid rogetur. Mutata interrogatione quasren- 
tibus, baptizatus es? Annuit vero ac propemodum 
f efe iam Nortmannum pronuntiat ; nam Gallos f erfe 
omnes Nortmannos appellitant. De caetero nulla 
omnino in Chriftianis k Gentilium ritu mutatio. li- 
dem mores, confuetudo & vita, idem cborearum, 
rituum, cantuum, atque ade6 veneficiorum vfus, 
pTorfus antiqua omnia. De vno Deo & bonorum 
retributione dod:i funt aliqua, fed quae fe ipfi femper 
ita audiuiffe & credidifCe profiteantur. Sacellum re- 
perimus vnum valde anguftum & miferum, fed nee 
profedto reliqua habitatio, vt in principijs, aut valde 
laxa aut commoda eft. 

Vnica hie adeft D. Potrincurtij familia, fine feminis 
capita fumus viginti. Nos duo e Societate tugurio- 
lum habemus ligneum, in quo vix pofita mensa com- 
mouere nos pofl^umus. Et reliqua funt huic certe 
habitationi ac noftrse profelTioni, hoc eft, paupertati 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 89 

and trade, the neophytes could of course not be in- 
structed in our doctrines. 

They accepted baptism as a sort of sacred pledge 
of friendship and alliance with the French. As re- 
gards Christ, the Church, the Faith and the Symbol, 
the commandments of God, prayer and the Sacra- 
ments, they knew almost nothing ; nor did they know 
the sign of the cross or the very name of Christian. 
So, even now, whenever we ask any one, "Are 
you a Christian?" every one of them answers that 
he does not understand what [25] we are asking him. 
But when we change the form of our question and 
ask, "Are you baptized?" he assents and declares 
himself to be already almost a Norman, for they call 
the French in general Normans. In other respects 
there is almost no change from the religion of the 
Gentiles to Christianity. They keep up the same 
manners and traditions and mode of life, the same 
dances and rites and songs and sorcery ; in fact, all 
their previous customs. Concerning the one God 
and the reward of the just, they have learned some 
things, but they declare that they had always heard 
and believed thus. We found one little chapel here, 
a very small and poor one, but the other dwellings 
also, as is to be expected among new settlers, are by 
no means large or commodious. 

Sieur Potrincourt's family is the only one here; 
without the women we number twenty. We two of 
the Society have a wooden cabin in which we can 
scarcely turn around when we have a table in it. 
And everything else is certainly in keeping with our 
dwelling and our vocation in life, that is, poverty. 
God grant that from these humble beginnings may 
rise and greatly flourish the work of salvation ; [26] 
to this we bend all our efforts, though, as we are but 


90 LES RELATIONS DES jlSUITES [Vol.2 

cofentanea. Vtinam ab humilibus principijs exurgat 
aliquado, & efflorefcat falus animorum; [26] hue 
incumbimus, fed vt languid! eultores non magno 
fuceeffu, qualis tamen, quantufque is fuerit, hoe mihi 
iam narrandum eft, quoniam id iam explieui, quod 
tertiutn erat ex propofitis, videlicet quonam in flatu 
vineam hanc feu potius virgultum offenderimus. 

Pervenimvs hue (ficut ante numeratum eft) vige- 
fima fecunda Maij. Itaque non multo plus hodie, 
quam feptem menfes hie commorati fumus. Per hoc 
igitur tempus, & domi aliqua gefta funt, & foris. 
Domi primum dedimus operam, vt pro noftris viribus 
officium Ecclefiaftieum ne deeffet. Nam Sacerdos 
ille, qui hue ante nos aduenerat, "k noftro ftatim 
aduetu in Galliam fua ipfe fponte & pro veteri defi- 
derio remigrauit. Dominicis feftifque diebus folem- 
nem miffam & vefperas decantamus, cohortamur, & 
nonnunquam procedimus, ipfis etiam noflrorum 
liluieolarum pueris cereos, vrceos, aut aliud quid 
pium, quando hie adfunt, praeferentibus. Ita enim 
paulatim noftris ceremonijs affuefcunt. Solemnior 
ea proceffio fuit, qua [27] fandtiflimum Sacramentum 
fefto ipfi die cumtulimus. Ipfe enim D. Potrincur- 
tius fedulitatem in eo noftram collaudauit, ficut & in 
facello, quantum poteft, in tanta paupertate coor- 
nando. Et quoniam animaduertimus eos, qui ante 
baptizati effent, vix aliud quidquam cum baptifmate, 
nifi periculum mains fufcepille, proledtationem illam 
proiedtionemqs ad baptifma quomodocumqs offeren- 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 91 

feeble workers, with no great success. What the 
nature and extent of this success has been I must 
now relate, since I have already treated my third 
topic, namely, the description of the state in which 
we found this vineyard, or rather this wildwood. 

We arrived here, as already noted, on the 22nd of 
May. Accordingly, we have now sojourned here a 
little more than seven months. During this period 
we have accomplished some work both at home and 
abroad. Our first efforts we expended at home, so 
that, as far as it lay in our power, there might be no 
interruption of Religious services. For the secular 
Priest who had preceded us here, immediately on our 
arrival, of his own free will and in accordance with a 
long-cherished desire, had returned to France. On 
Sundays and holydays we celebrate solemn mass and 
vespers ; we preach and sometimes have processions, 
the boys of our children of the forest carrying before 
us, when they are present here, tapers and censers 
and other sacred utensils. For thus, little by little, 
they become accustomed to our ceremonies. Our pro- 
cession was, however, a more solemn one on the day of 
Corpus Christi when we carried about the [27] blessed 
Sacrament. Sieur Potrincourt himself praised highly 
our efforts in this, as well as in adorning our chapel as 
much as we could, in spite of our great poverty. Since 
we have observed that those who had been previously 
baptized had gotten scarcely anything else through 
their baptism than increased peril, we have restrained 
this eager inclination to administer this sacrament 
without discrimination, and we insist that no adult 
person shall receive it until he has the necessary un- 
derstanding of his faith and his profession. So, as 
we have thus far been ignorant of the language and 
have been unable to explain our doctrines through 


92 


LES RELA TIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol. 2 


dnm reiecimus, in edqne perftamus, ne quis adultus 
ante neceffariam fuse fidei profeffionifque cognitionem 
initietur. Ita ciim adhuc ignari linguae fimus, neque 
per vllum interpretem enuntiare facra noftra, aut 
fcriptis mandare potuerimus, quantacumque in eo fit 
opera, vti fane pofita eft plurima curfus nimirum 
Euangelij in his ha(5tenus haeret vadis ac fyrtibus. 
Id fuademus, vt infantes ad nos luftrandi afferantur, 
quod etiam Dei beneficio iam coepit fieri. Duos bap- 
tizauimus, & tertiam puellam circiter nouennem. 
Haec puella non magis morbo, qukm efurie neglec- 
tiique contabef cebat ; f olet enim haec natio facile def- 
perare medicinam, [28] & defperatos prorfum ab- 
ijcere, vt antfe didtum eft. Ergo hanc ita depofitam 
k cognatis depofcimus ad baptifmum, illi ver5 perli- 
benter earn nobis concedere, non ad baptifmum 
foltim, fed etiam ad voluntatem, vt quae, inquiebant, 
inftar iam effet canis mortui. At nos, vt fpecimen 
daremus Chriftianae pietatis, in feparatum earn tranf- 
tulimus tuguriolum, ibiqs cam aluimus & curauimus 
ipfi fedul5, inftitutdmque quantum extremo periculo 
conflidtanti neceffe effet, abluimus aqua falutari. 
Nono demum p5ft die abeuntem ad fuperos laeta fpe 
fumus profecuti, cum gauderemus coelo iam nonnihil 
noftri laboris placere. Laetior exitus in alio fuit, fed 
exemplum non difiimile charitatis: hie eft, fecund6 
genitus Celebris illius Sagami Membertou, quem ant^ 
diximus primu omnium Soricorum noftra facra fufce- 
pilTe. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 93 

any interpreter, or to commit them to writing, how- 
soever great a labor that may prove — and it will cer- 
tainly prove a great one — the course of the Gospel 
is, up to this point, embarrassed by these shoals and 
quicksands. We try to persuade the savages to bring 
their babes to us for baptism; and this, with God's 
blessing, they are beginning to do. We have bap- 
tized two boys, and a girl about nine years old. This 
girl was wasting away as much from hunger and 
neglect as from sickness ; for this people very readily 
despair [28] of relief in sickness, and, as previously 
stated, soon abandon those whose recovery is deemed 
hopeless. Thus, when this girl was given up by 
her relatives, we asked that she be g^iven us for bap- 
tism. They very willingly gave her to us, not only 
for baptism but to dispose of at our pleasure, as be- 
ing, they said, no longer of more value than a dead 
dog. But we, to show them an example of Christian 
piety, carried her to a separate cabin and there fed 
her and cared for her; and, after teaching her as 
much as was necessary for one struggling with 
death, we cleansed her with the saving waters. On 
her death, nine days later, we entertained the glad 
hope that our labor had found some favor in heaven. 
We soon found opportunity for another deed of 
charity not dissimilar to this, though its result was 
more auspicious. This was in the case of the second 
son of that famous Chief Membertou, whom I have 
already mentioned as having received our doctrines 
first of all the Soriquois. 

I went to visit this chief's son, who was already at 
death's door. I found that, in accordance with their 
old custom, they were holding a tabagie, that is, a 
solemn feast for the distribution of his property, so 
that after the entertainment he might, not like Jacob 


94 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.2 

Huius ego filium extremo iam difcrimine pericli- 
tantem inuifi : reperio pro more veteri de ipfius bonis 
tabagiam, hoc eft epulum folemne, vt fcilicet poft 
epulas non ficut lacob benediceret fuis, [29] fed vale- 
diceret, ac deinde coclamaretur, & coclamato canes 
praemitterentur ad interitu. Increpaui ego, vt potui, 
per interprete paganicos hos mores in iam Chriflianis. 
Benigne refpodit pater ipfe Membertou neophytos fe 
effe, verum imperarem ; in mea poteftate effe omnia. 
Negaui ego licitam effe illam occifione canum, aut 
deplorati derelidtionem ; choreas, cantufve funeftos 
aegroto ipfo infpedlate mihi non placere ; ipfam alio- 
qui tabagiam, & piam in extremis agetis confalutati- 
onem ac mandata permifi. Refponderunt omnes libi 
hoc fatis effe, reliqna fefe reiedturos. Caeterum D. 
Potrincnrtij nomine ipfos innitaui, vt segrii in iplins 
aedes deportaret (aberat enim valde procul) fperare 
nos de mifericordia Dei fore, vt conualefcat, quo 
tande intelligant falfas atq3 impias effe, aut momorii 
fuoru, hoc eft fatidicorii denunciationes. Paruerunt 
illi, atq3 ad nos depofitum triduo p6ft, hoc eft femi- 
anime detulerunt. Quid multa? Fecit dextera Dili 
virtutem : non eft mortuus, fed vixit ; & nunc inco- 
lumis narrat opera [30] Dtii. Hoc exemplo commotus 
fenior ipfe Membertou cum eam invaletudinem 
fenfiffet, quae poftrema illi fuit, deportari ipfe vitro 
ad nos voluit, atq3 ade5 in noftrum ipforum tugu- 
riolu, & li placet, in ledtum ipfum alterius noftru. 
Ibi decumbentem quinq3 dies profecuti fumus omni 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 95 

give them his blessing, [29] but might bid them 
farewell, after which they were to bewail his death 
and then to offer up a sacrifice of dogs. I rebuked 
as well as I could, through an interpreter, these 
pagan usages among a people who were already 
Christians. The father himself, Membertou, an- 
swered mildly that they were but neophytes ; that I 
had but to command and that everything lay in my 
power. I said that, this slaughtering of dogs was 
wrong, as well as this abandonment of the sick man 
for whom they were mourning ; I added that these 
dances and death-songs in the very presence of the 
sick man displeased me, though I permitted them to 
hold their tabagie elsewhere, as well as to visit the 
dying man and learn his last wishes. All replied 
that this was enough for them, and that they would 
dispense with the rest. Moreover, in the name of 
Sieur Potrincourt I invited them to transport to his 
house the sick man (who was at a very great dis- 
tance), and said that we hoped, with God's mercy, 
for his recovery, so that they might thus learn at last 
that the predictions of their medicine-men or proph- 
ets are false and impious. They obeyed, and the 
third day after brought to us the sufferer, whose life 
they had despaired of, in a half-dying condition. 
God's right hand exerted its power; he did not die, 
but lived, and now, completely recovered, relates what 
[30] God has done for him. Moved by this example, 
the elder Membertou himself, when he began to 
suffer from that sickness which was to be his last, 
desired of his own accord to be brought to us and to 
be received into our own cabin, and even, if it pleased 
us, to occupy one of our beds. He lay there five 
days, during which we performed every friendly 
and even every menial office. But on the sixth day. 


96 


LES RELA TIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol. 2 


no folum officio, fed etiam famulatu. At fexto die 
cum iam vxor eius adueniffet, & cerneret ipfa vix 
alteri noftru, quo mifere humi decubaret, locum effe 
in tuguriolo derelidtu, ali6 fuapte fponte demigrauit, 
vbi & piam morte obijt. Certfe hunc reperimus (quip- 
pe Domini primitias ab hac gete) praeter cseteros mi- 
rabiliter folitu intrinfecus adeo moueri, mult6 vt ipfe 
plus de noftra fide conciperet, qukm quantu potuiffet 
auditione accipere. Itaq3 folebat ipfe crebro didtitare, 
valde optare fe, vt cito lingua nolfemus. Continu5. 
n. poftquam id perdidicillet, fe futuru apud gentem 
fuam coeleftis verbi ac dodtrinae prsedicatorem. De- 
derat ipfe in madatis, vt antiquo in monumeto cu de- 
mortua prius familia (qua fcieba paganic^ obi j He) [3 1] 
fepeliretur. Ego re improbaui, veritus fcilicet, ne 
vel Galli, vel etia Getiles hoc interpretaretur in fidei 
noftrse iniuria. Sed ille hoc refpodebat: ita fibi 
promifsu fuille, antequa Chrifto nomen daret, fore, 
vt locus cofecraretur, & exemplu proferebat ex ante- 
adtis non dilTimile ; alioqui. n. cotrk fe vereri, fi noflro 
in coemeterio humaretur, ne fui deinceps locu refu- 
gerent, atqs ita nunqua ad nos redirent, Oppofui 
ego contrk, q potui, & mecu is, quo fere folo vtor in- 
terprete, D. Biencurtius, fili^ D. Potrincurti j . Difceffi 
moeftus: nihil, n. difputando prof ecera. Extrema ni- 
hilominus vndtionem, ad qua paratus erat, non dene- 
gaui. Valuit vis Sacrameti: poftridie D. Biencurtiu, 
meq3 magnopere aduocat, docet audietibus omnib^ 
mutata fibi sententia, velle fe nobifcu humari, fuifqs 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 97 

when his wife had also come, and when she saw that 
there was scarcely room left for one of us to find a 
wretched couch on the ground in our cabin, he, of his 
own accord, went elsewhere, and there died a pious 
death. We found, indeed, that this man (the first 
fruits of the Lord among this people) was, beyond all 
others, wont to be so wondrously moved within, that 
he apprehended much more of our faith than he 
could have learned from hearing us. Thus he used 
to say frequently that he ardently desired that we 
might soon know his language. He said that as soon 
as he had learned them thoroughly he would become 
the preacher of this heavenly word and doctrine 
among his people. He himself had commanded that 
he should be buried in the ancient burial-place of his 
family, with those who were already dead (who, I 
knew, had died as pagans). [31] I opposed this, fear- 
ing, of course, that the French and even the Gentiles 
might interpret this as an affront to our faith. But 
he answered that it had been promised him, before he 
gave himself to Christ, that this place should be con- 
secrated ; and he cited a past example of something of 
the sort, adding that he feared, on the contrary, that 
if he were buried in our cemetery his people might 
thenceforth avoid the place and thus never return to 
us. I opposed all the reasons I could, and so did 
Sieur de Biencourt, the son of Sieur de Potrincourt, he 
being almost my only interpreter. I went off sadly, 
for I had accomplished nothing by arguing. Never- 
theless, I did not refuse him the extreme unction, for 
which he was prepared. The power of the Sacra- 
ment manifested itself ; the next day he called eager- 
ly for Sieur de Biencourt and myself, and told us in 
the hearing of all the others that he had changed his 
mind, and wished to be buried in our cemetery ; and 


98 LES RELATIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol.2 

pcipere, ne ideo locu refugiant ex veteri errore, quin 
poti^, e Chrifliani populi fapietia magis ob earn ipfatn 
cauff am locu adament, f requententque ; ad pias vide- 
licet pro ipfo preces effundedas. 

Pacem deinde cum Noftris iterum, [32] iteriimque 
commendauit, meq3 ade6 pr^eunte ac manum regen- 
te, fmgulis fuorum pio more benedixit: necloge poft 
extindtus eft. Funus curatum magna ad exemplum 
pompa. Et certe diu inter hos populos tantae audto- 
ritatis Sagamus no fuit. Quo magis eft mirum, quo- 
modo in eo femper inuidtus confilio perftiterit, etiam 
ante conuerfionem, ne plures vnquam fimul vxores 
habere vellet. 

Atque haec domi gefta, nunc exeamus foras. Luf- 
traui ego cum Domino Biencurtio magnam totius 
regionis partem, hoc eft totum id, quod antiqui No- 
rumbedam appellabant, flumina etiam ingreffus fum 
prsecipua. Frudtus is extitit, vt & cognofceremus, 
& cognofceremur ; ipfique filuatici, qui nunquam antea 
Sacerdote, aut facra noftra viderant, inceperint ali- 
quid noftra de Religione apprehendere. Vbicumque 
ac quoties potuimus, infiniti pretij hoftiam obtulimus 
Omnipotenti Deo, vt fcilicet altari, tanquam fede fua 
pofita, inciperet hoc fibi dominium feruator hominum 
vendicare; terrereturque ac fugarentur [33] vfurpa- 
tione fua laruales tyranni. Et aftiterunt frequenter 
Barbari magno femper filentio ac reuerentia. Inuife- 
bam poftea ipforum cafulas, orabam, segris manus 
imponebam, cruciculas senaes aut imagunculas dona- 


3612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 99 


to teach his people that they should not avoid the 
place in accordance with their old and erroneous 
notion, but rather, with the wisdom of a Christian 
people, should love and frequent it, in order to utter 
pious prayers for him. 

Then he recommended to them again [32] and again 
to maintain peace with us, and also piously gave 
his blessing to certain of his people, I dictating 
the words and guiding his hand. A short time after, 
he died. We deemed it well to celebrate his funeral 
with great pomp. And certainly there has for a long 
time been no Chief of such great authority among 
these people. What is still more remarkable is that 
he always adhered firmly to his resolution never to 
have more than one wife at a time, even before his 
conversion. 

Such are the things achieved at home ; let us now 
consider what has been done elsewhere. I have ex- 
plored with Sieur Biencourt a large part of this whole 
region — all that portion, namely, which the old geog- 
raphers called Norumbega, including the principal 
rivers. The result is that not only have we come to 
know the country, but also to be known ourselves, 
and the savages, who had never before seen a Priest or 
the rites of our Religion, have begun to learn some- 
thing concerning it. Wherever and whenever we 
could do so, we offered the priceless host to the Om- 
nipotent God, so that the altar might be as a seat 
dedicated to the savior of men, whence he should 
begin to extend his dominion among this people, 
while their own hobgoblin tyrants are stricken with 
terror and driven [33] from their usurpation. The 
Savages have often been present, always profoundly 
silent and reverent. Afterwards I would visit their 
huts to pray and to lay hands on the sick ; I gave 


100 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.2 

bam, ipfifq3 de collo fufpendebam, & quae poteram 
diuina infmuabam. Excipiebant illi omnia perliben- 
ter, figniimque Crucis me ducente conformabant, 
fereq3 omnes pueri etiam me longe profequebantur, 
vt ipfum fsepius iterarent. Semel contigit, vt quern 
aegrotum altero ante die inuiferam, propemodumque 
depofitum audieram, poft cernere vegetum, hilarem- 
que, cruce fua gloriantem, & mihi vultu mamique 
gratulantem, vt fufpicio magna fit, non folum opem 
crucis fenfiffe, verum etiam agnouifCe. Si quando in 
Gallicas naues incidebamus, vt fsepe incidimus, mo- 
nita falutaria dabantur pro loci & temporis opportu- 
nitate: interdum etiam vedtores expiabantur. Se- 
mel maxima qusedam complurium mala, & animorum 
fortunarumque labes auerfa eft per Dei gratiam : fe- 
mel item [34] exitium certiffimum, csedefque non pau- 
corum. Reconciliatus quoque magni quidam luuenis 
& animi & fpei. Is quod fibi a D. Potrincurtio 
timeret, annum iam vnum cum Siluicolis eorum 
more atque veftitu pererrabat : & fufpicio erat peioris 
quoque rei. Obtulit eum mihi Devs, colloquor, de- 
nique poft multa luuenis fefe mihi credit, deduco 
eum ad D. Potrincurtium, non poenituit fidei datas, 
pax facta eft maximo omnium gaudio, & luuenis 
poftridie, antequam ad facram Euchariftiam accede- 
ret, fuapte ipfe fponte a circumftatibus mali exempli 
veniam petijt. Iam vero vti fuperuacaneum eft de 
nauigantibus dicere, quod multa pericula mirabiliter 
euaferint ; ita & de hie commorantibus, quod multa 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 101 

them little crosses of brass, or images, which I hung 
about their necks, and as far as possible I infused 
some religious notions into their minds. They re- 
ceived all these things very gladly, they made the 
sign of the Cross under my guidance, and nearly all 
the boys followed me a long distance in order to re- 
peat it oftener. Once it happened that a savage 
whom I had visited a couple of days before, finding 
him sick and almost given up by his friends, as I 
heard, met me rejoicing and well, and glorying in 
his cross, manifesting his gratitude toward me with 
hands and countenance, so that I strongly suspected 
that he had not only experienced the help of the 
cross but even recognized it. Whenever we fell in 
with French vessels — and this often happened — salu- 
tary counsels were given to the men, in accordance 
with time and place; sometimes, too, the passen- 
gers made their confession. Sometimes calamities 
that threatened the welfare and fortune of many 
were averted through the grace of God ; sometimes, 
too, [34] certain destruction and the slaughter of no 
small number. We have also succeeded in reclaiming 
a certain Young Man^^ of great courage and hope who, 
through fear of Sieur de Potrincourt, has roamed about 
for a whole year with the Savages, adopting their 
ways and dress — not without suspicion, too, of some- 
thing worse. The Lord brought about a meeting 
between us. I spoke with him, and at last he con- 
fided himself to me. I brought him to Sieur de Po- 
trincourt ; he did not repent of having placed faith in 
me; peace was made, to the great joy of all, and 
next day the young man, before receiving the holy 
Eucharist, of his own free will begged the pardon of 
those who surrounded him, for his evil conduct. But 
as it would be superfluous to speak of the many 


102 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.2 


fuftineant. Quod aqua bibatur, nulla querela eft: 
fiquidem coepit iam nobis ante fex hebdomadas ita 
panis deficere, vt nunc detur in hebdomadam, quod 
ante dabatur in vnum diem. Nauim expedtamus 
fubfidio venturam. Interim Piftores ac Fabri magno 
fcilicet nomine atque antiquo viuimus, & [35] incidi- 
mus quibus vterque in grauem aegritudinem, fed 
Dominus fuppofuit manii fuam. Nam neque id din 
fuit, & femper altero decumbente, alter ftetit. Ex- 
perimur fane, quantum fit onus vitae neceffitas, dum 
lignatum, dum aquatum imus, dum coquimus ipfi 
nobis, dum indumenta aut lauamus, aut reficimus, 
dum farcimus tugurioli labes, dum in reliqua corpo- 
ris cura neceffario detinemur. Inter hsec dies nobis, 
mifere, no<5tef que depereunt ; ilia nos fpes confolatur 
ac fuftentat, fore, vt qui fubleuat abiedlos Devs, vili- 
tatem ipfe noftram pro fua quandoque mifericordia 
non defpiciat. Quamqua certe dum in fubfidiorum 
inopiam, dum in afperitatem regionis & gentis mores, 
dum in difficultates rerum, & coloniae conftituendae, 
dum in mille pericula obicefq3 vel maris vel homi- 
num intendimus, fomnium & idea Platonica videtur 
quod conamur. Demonftrarem hoc figillatim, nifi 
hoc effet cum Hebraeis exploratoribus magis pro hu- 
manis viribus, qukm pro diuino auxilio, nee minus 
ex [36] animi languore, quam ex rei veritate dicere: 
Terra hsec deuorat habitatores fuos; nos locuftae 
fumus, cum hie monftra fmt de genere Giganteo. 
Sed enim tamen, quanticunque fmt hi Gigantes, prae- 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 103 

perils so miraculously escaped by our vessels, so 
would it be to speak of the many sufferings of those 
who sojourn here. We make no complaint of having 
to drink water ; as for bread, in less than six weeks the 
supply ran so short that now no more is allowed for a 
week than formerly for a single day. We are await- 
ing a ship that is to bring supplies. In the mean- 
time, as Bakers and Artisans, a great and ancient qual- 
ity withal, [35] we continue living here, but we have 
each fallen seriously ill ; however, the Lord sustained 
us with his hand. For this did not last long, and 
whenever one of us was sick the other was well. We 
feel, indeed, how great a burden it is to attend to all 
these household duties, in going for wood and water, 
in cooking, in washing and mending our clothes, in 
repairing our cabin, and in giving the necessary time 
and attention to other material cares. Thus our 
days and nights wretchedly slip away ; but the hope 
consoles and sustains us that God, who raises up 
those who are cast down, will some time in his mercy 
not despise our un worthiness. Though, certainly, 
when we consider our lack of resources, the trying 
nature of the country, and the manners of the natives, 
the difficulties incident to our undertaking and those 
incident to the establishing of a colony, the thou- 
sand perils and impediments interposed by the sea or 
by our fellow men, our enterprise seems but a dream 
and a Platonic idea. I might set forth all these 
things one by one, if this were not to imitate the 
Hebrew explorers, and rather with regard to our hu- 
man strength than to God's help, and no less through 
the [36] faintness of our own hearts than in accordance 
with the truth of things, to say : " This land devours 
its inhabitants ; we are locusts, while there are here 
monsters of the race of Giants." But yet, however 


104 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.2 

ualebit ille Dauid in funda & lapide, qui conculcat 
terrain in fremitu fuo, & in furore obftupefacit gen- 
tes; ille Iesvs hominum Seruator, qui benefacit ter- 
rain & perficit earn, quantumcunque infirmata fit; 
ille vero, ille, vti fperamus, benignitatis ac potentiae 
fuse ducet elTe, vt quod vaticinatus eft Ifaias, Exult et 
folitudo & floreat ficut lilium : quemadmodum fapien- 
tiae pariterq3 potentise fuae reputauit id, quod cer- 
nimus, vt cultiffima imperia, atque omnibus elata 
viribus, & gloria, fuae cruci atque humilitati fubiuga- 
rentur. Amen ita fit. Atque hoc noftrum votum 
adiuuent comprecatione fua coelites omnes, atque in 
primis coelitum Regina & praefes; adiuuet Ecclefia 
vniuerfa, fpeciatimque Ecclefiae pars ilia, cui Pater- 
nitas veftra nutu diuino iam diu praeeft, Societas, 
votum meum; adiuuet oro atque obfecro [37] Pater- 
nitas veftra omni ope, fudmque nobis ad id benedic- 
tionem pijflimam, fi placet, largiatur. E portu Re- 
gali in noua Francia vltimo die lanuarij Anni 

CI0.I3C.XI. 

Ve/ircs Paternitatis films ac 

/emus indignus 

Petrvs Biardvs. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 105 


great these Giants be, that David with the sling 
and stone shall prevail against them, even he who 
tramples the earth under foot in his anger, and in 
his rage strikes terror into the senses of men ; that 
Jesus, the Savior of mankind, who blesses the world 
and leads it toward perfection in spite of all its short- 
comings; he, even he, as we hope, will deem it a 
thing worthy of his love and his power that, as 
Isaiah prophesied. The solitude should exult and blossom 
like a lily ; even as he deemed it good in his wisdom 
and his power that, as we see, the most civilized em- 
pires in the height of power and glory should receive 
the yoke of his cross and his humility. Amen, so be 
it. And may all heaven with its prayers further 
this, our hope, and above all the glorious Queen of 
heaven; and my own prayers be aided, too, by the 
universal Church and especially by that portion of 
the Church over which, in accordance with God's 
will, your Reverence has so long presided — the So- 
ciety; and I also pray and beseech [t,"/] your Rever- 
ence to further it with all possible aid, and to be 
pleased to bestow on us toward this end in all charity 
your benediction. From port Royal, in new France, 
the last day of January, i6i i . 

The son and unworthy servant 
of Your Rei'eretice 

Pierre Biard. 


106 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.2 


Index rerum ac nominum nunc primum huic 
Epiftolae adjundus 


ACADIA, duo Societatis Sacerdotcs illuc inifji 
funt .... 

et ibi preveniunt 
Algonquini gerunt bella perpcttia cum Irocojiis 

tribus NovcB Franci(2 . 

et Montagnejii iun6ii, multo plus mille capitum 
fiumerare non poffunt 
Anthropophagi, Excominqui ct Armonchiqui per hi 

bentur effe .... 
Aquitanid euocatus, Sacerdos ad Novani Franciam 

proficifcitur .... 
A rmonchiqui terrani pojjident a fluvio Kinibequi vfqu^ 

ad quadragejimum gradum 

Anthropophagi perhibentiir 
Automoinos, vel vcnejicos, Barbari confulunt 
Baia Fundij. vide, Sinus Francicus. 
Baptifmum velut fignum confcederationis ami Galli 

Barbari accipiunt 
Barbari lege ac magifiratu careyit [40] 
Barbari quomodo viviint 

bella populatim gerunt . 

nee templa nee cedes facras habent 

cum corpore memoriam ac nomen 7nortuorum 
fepeliunt .... 

Cacodcemonem colunt . 

tenuem cognitioneni Dei habent 

nonnulli in Galliam deuehuntur et ibi baptizantur 2 3 

centum in Nova Francid baptizati funt . 24 


111 
26 

9 
II 

9' H 
20 

II 
14 


24 
13 
13 
14 

15 

16 
16 
16 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 107 


An index of matters, persons and places now for 
the first time added to this Letter 

[Figures refer to original paginal ion . — Ed.'\ 

ACADIA, two priests of the Society are sent 
thither .... 

and arrive there 
Algonquins wage perpetual zvar zvith the Irocois 

a tribe of Neiv France 

and the Montagnais together cannot nuich exceed 
a thousand in number 
Cannibals, the Excomminiqui and Armouchiquois 

are said to be . 
Aquitaine, a Priest departs for New France, sum 

moned from .... 
Armouchiquois occupy the region from the Kinihequi 

river to the fortieth parallel . 

are said to be Cannibals 
Autmoins, or medicine-men, the Savages consult 
Bay of Fundy, vide French Bay. 
Baptistn is accepted by the Savages as a sign of con- 
federation with the French . . .24 
Savages, they have neither latus nor magistrates [40] 1 3 
Savages, how they live 

wage war as a ivhole people 

have neither temples nor sacred edifices 

bury the name and memory of the dead with 
their bodies .... 

worship the Evil Spirit 

have a slight notion of God 

some brought to France and baptized there 

a hundred are baptized in New France 


111 
26 

9 
II 

13 

9. H 
20 

II 
H 
H 


13 
15 


16 
16 
16 

23 
24 


108 


LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 2 


velut Jigmim confoederationis cum Gallis bap- 

ti/mum accipiunt 
Gallos Nortmannos appellant . 
canes hmnolant cum mors cuivis fuorum appro 
pinquet 
Barbarorum Novce Francice tribuum nomina 

NovcB Francice numeri ac nomina . 1 1 

pelles unicus thefaiirus 
vultus color ct mores . 
in quo conflat religio . 
in conviviis confuetudo 
infantes baptizantur . 
. P. Biardus invifit cafulas 
Bella Barbari populatim gcrunt 
Biardus, P. Petrus, in Acadid mittitur 
cafulas Barbarorum invifit 
magnam NorumbcgcE partum luftrat 
quemdam iuvenem D. Potrinctirtio reconciliat 
Biencurtius, Joannes, colonos pro Novd Francid de- 
pofcit ..... 

(vide Potrincurtius.) 
Biencurtius D. Potrincurtij filius, interpretis vices 
gerit . . . . • 

magnam Norembegcs partem cum P. Biardo 
luflrat [41] .... 

Cacodcemonem Barbari colunt 

CanadcB, Irocofii degimt ad capita magni flmnitiis . 

S. loannis flumen orfum fuum habet propemo- 

dum or a fluminis . . • • 

Canes, Barbari i^nminente morte affueti funt imlare 

Patres Societatis hunc morem increpa?it 
Canoes e corticc compinguntur 

Chorographiam Novce Francice P. Biardus proponit 
mittere . . . . • 


24 
25 

28 
9 

12 
13 
14 

17 

27 

33 
H 
iii 

33 

32 
34 

20 


31 

32 

19 

9 

10 
28 
29 
17 

18 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 109 

receive baptism as a sign of confederation zuith 

the French . . . . .24 

call the French Normans . . -25 

sacrifice dogs when one of their people is about 
to die . . . . .28 

Savages of New France, names of the tribes . 9 

of New France, their tiufnbers and names -11,13 
hides their only treasure . . .12 

their faces, color, and manners . -13 

in what their religion consists . . .14 

their custom at their feasts . . • ^7 

infants baptized . . . .27 

Father Biard visits their huts . . -33 

Wars, the Indians wage war as a people . -14 

Biard, Father Pierre, is sent to Acadia . . iii 

visits the huts of the Savages . . -33 

explores a large part of Norumbega . -32 

reconciles a certain young fnan with Monsietir 

de Potrincourt . . . .34 

Biencourt,Jean de, asks for colonists for New France 20 
vide Potrincourt. 

Biencourt, son of Potrincourt , serves as interpreter 3 1 
explores with Father Biard a large part of 
Norumbega [41] . . . -32 

Evil Spirit, the Savages worship the . .19 

Canada, the Irocois live at the head-waters of the 

great river of . . . . .9 

the St. John river takes its rise near the river 
of . . . .10 

Dogs, the Savages at the approach of death are ac- 
customed to sacrifice . . . .28 
the Fathers of the Society blame this custom . 29 

Canoes co?istructed out of bark . . • ^7 

Chart of New France, Father Biard proposes to send 18 


no LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.2 

Choucaoet brachiuni efi terrce quodjinuin Francicum 

excipit . . . . .II 

Color Barbaroriim . . . . -13 

Conviviorum apud Barbaros confuetudo . .17 

Cotonus P. vcniani obtinet ut Socictas lefv in Novd 

Francid labor ct . . . .19 

Dei, Barbari habent tenuent cognitionem . .16 

Dieppain, duo lefuitcB eunt ad confcendetidum . 20 

et folvnnt ab hac portu . . .22 

Etheniinqiicnfcs inter S. loannis et Kinibequi fluvios 

habitant . . . . .10 

tribus Novcs Francice . . . .11 

7nille capita niimerare non pojfiint . • ^ 3 

Exconiinqui fera gens eft ct Anthropophaga . 9 

Excommunicati, nomen vulgus Excominquorum . 9 

tribus NovcB Francice . . . 9» 1 1 

Antkropop/iagi perkibentur . . .14 

Expofitio feu capita hujufce Epiflolce . . 6 

Flumina Novcs Francice . . . 9. 10 

Fcemina apud Barbaros . . . .16 

locum viancipii tenet . . . .17 

Francici Jittiis pojitio [42] . . . .10 

Gain, qu(E regie ab illis Nova Francia ufurpatur . 8 

NovcB Francics regionem non incolant . .19 

Galliam, Barbari devehuntur et baptizantur . 23. 

Gallis, Irocofii et Armonchiqui non multum noti funt 1 1 

Galloruvt numerus in Acadid . . ' ^S 

Geographi antiqui erroribus pleni . . .7 

Guerchevilia, Marchionifa, pro Patribus Societatis . 

navem emit .... 
Gurges S. Laurentii 

Hceretici in navem lefuitas recipere nolunt . 
Henricus Rex, veniam dat Societati in Novd Francid 

laborandi, " . . . • .19 


21 

9 

20 


1612-14] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


111 


Chouacoet is a promontory jutting into French bay 

Color of the Savages 

Feasts, customs of, among the Savages 

Cot on. Father, obtains permission for the Society of 

Jesus to labor in New France . 
God, the Savages have a slight knowledge of 
Dieppe, two Jesuits go there to embark 

and sail from this port 
Etheminqui, live betu>een St. John and Kinibequ 

rivers .... 

a tribe of New France 

cannot number a thousand 
Excominqui, a fierce tribe, and Cannibals 
Excommunicated, the, common appellation of the 

Excominqui 

a tribe of New France 

are said to be Cannibals 
Explanation, or heads of this Letter 
Rivers of New France 
Women among the Savages . 

fill the place of slaves . 
French bay, its position, [42] 
French, what coiintry is called by them New France 

do 7iot settle in the country of Netv France 
France, Savages brought there a^id baptized 
French, the Irocois and Armouehiquois little known to 
French, their number in Acadia 
Geographers, old, full of errors 
Guercheville , Marchioness de, buys a ship for the 

Fathers of the Society . 
Gulf of St. Lawrence 

Heretics refuse to receive the Jesuits into their ship 
Henry, King, gives the Society permission to labor 

in New France 


1 1 
13 
17 

19 
16 

20 

22 

10 

1 1 

13 

9 

9 
1 1 

14 

6 

10 

16 

17 

10 
8 

19 
23 
1 1 

25 
7 

21 

9 
20 

19 


112 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.2 


20 

27 

9 

12 

9 


mortnus ejl . 
Infantes Barbaroriim baptizati 
Infula PrcB/entis, Terra Nova Barbaris appellatur 
Infulcz in Nova Francia frequentes funt 
Irocojii ad capita inagni fluviinis Canadce iacent 

perpctua bella cum Mont ague fiis et Algonquiniis 
gerunt .... 

tribus Novce FrancicB . 
Ifihmum, gurges S. Lanroitii et firms Francicus 

efficiunt .... 

Kinibequi fliimcn. vide Rimbequi. 
Latitndo Novce FrancicB 
Leticas qningentas Ifthmus continet . 
Linguce indigeriarum Pat res Societatis ignari 
MaffcBiis, P. Enemundus, in Acadiani mittitur 
Medic cs a Maria, regina re gens, Societati lefv patro 

cinatiir .... 

mandat ut Patres in naveni recepti fint\Af'^ 
Member tou, Henriciis, Sagamus Soricorum, cumfamil 

ia ejus, baptizatur 

filius ejus cegrotus deportatus eft in cedes D 
Potrincurtii 

Sagamus, moritnr 

magna pompd fepulitur 
Moluarum, Terra nova celeberrima pifcatu . 
Montagncfii, ubi habitant . 

tribus Novce FrancicB . 
Montes Novce Francice nivofi et perpetub rigentes funt 1 2 
Mores Barbarorum . . . • I3> ^^ 

Mortuorum memoriam ac nomen Bar bar i cum cor pore 

fepeliunt . . . • .16 

Nomina Barbarorum Novce Francice . . 9 

Nortmannos, Barbari Gallos appellant . .25 

Norumbcga nihil eft quam umbra et vox . . 8 


9 
1 1 

10 

8 

lO 

27 
iii 

20 
21 

24 

28, 29 

30 

32 

9 

9 
1 1 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS us 


his death . . , . .20 

Infants of the Savages baptized . . .27 

Island of Pmsentis {Plaisance'], Newfoundland is 

called by the Indians . . , .0 

Isla7ids are numerous in New France . .12 

Irocois located at sources of great river of Canada 9 
wage perpetual war with the Montagnais and 

Algonquins . . . . .0 

a tribe of New France . . ,11 

Isthmus, gulf of St. Lawrence and French bay form 10 
Kinibequi river, vide Rimbequi. 

Latitude of New France . . , .8 

Leagues, the Isthmus measures five hundred . 10 

Language of the natives, the Fathers ignorant of it . 27 
Masse, Father Ennemond, sent to Acadia . . iii 

M^dicis, Marie de, queen regent, extends her favor 

to the Society of Jesus . . .20 

orders the Fathers to be received into the ship [43] 2 1 
Membertou, Henry, chief of the Soriquois, is bap- 
tized with his family . . . .24 
his son being sick, is carried to the house of 

Monsieur de Potrincourt . . 28, 29 

the Chief dies . . . . . ^o 

is buried with great pomp . . -32 

Cod-fish, Newfoundland celebrated for the taking of 9 

Montagnais, where they dwell . . • Q 

a tribe of New France . . .11 

Mountains of New France are covered with snow and 

perpetual frost . . . .12 

Manners of the Savages . . , 13,16 

Dead, they bury their memory and name with them 16 
Names of the Savages of New France . . 9 

Normans, the Savages call the French . .25 

Norumbega is only a shadow and a name . . 8 


114 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 2 


Norumbegce P. Biardiis magnani partem luftrat 
Nova Francia, qu(B Jit rcgio 

numeri ac tiomina tribuum Barbaroruni in 

quare regio perfrigida eft et valdi aquofa 

Societas lefv perniijfionem obtinet laborare in 
NovcB Francice chorographia a P. Biardo facienda 
Novain Franciam Patres Societatis appellunt ad 
Numerus Galloriun in Acadid 
Panis in Portu-regali coepit dcficere . 
Patres Societatis lefv in Portii-regali degunt 

necejfitates ac oner a eorum 
Pedunculos Bar bar i in deliciis habent 
Pelles unicus thefaurus Barbarorum 
Pontia, Antonia. vide Guerchevilia. 
Potugo'et fliivius [44] 
Portus-rcgalis latitudo ac fitns 

Patres Societatis ibi perveniunt 
Potrincnrtins, D. Joannes, colonos pro Novd Francid 

pofcit 

in Novani Franciaju pervenit . 

familia ejns unica eft in Acadid 

Patrtlm fedulitatem collaudat . 

filius (Bgrotus Membcrtou deportatus eft in cedes 
ejus 
Potrincurtio D. quidam iuvenis reconciliatus efi 
Prcefentis infnla 
Promontoriuni Sabulorum . 
Puella baptizatur 

moritur in Sacerdotnm tuguriolo 
Religio Barbarorum 
Rimbequi {feu potius Kinibequi^ flumen 
Sacerdos fecularis centum fer^ Barbaros in Novd 

Fraticid baptizat 

in Galliam remigrat . 


32 

8 

II 

12 

19 
18 
24 
25 

34 
10 

35 
18 
12 

10 
10 
26 

20 
24 

25 
27 

29 
34 

9 
II 

27 
28 

14 
10 

24 
26 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 115 


Norumbega, FatJter Biard explores a large part of 
New France, what sort of a country 

number a?id names of its Savage tribes 
why the country is very cold and wet . 
Society of Jesus obtains permission to labor in 
New France, its chart to be made by Father Biard 
New France, the Jesuit Fathers land in 
Number of the French in Acadia . 
Provisions at Port Royal become scarce 
Priests, the fcsuit, live at Port Royal 

their needs and cares . 
Lice, the Indians regard them as a dainty . 
Peltries, the only treasure of the Indians . 
Pons, Antoinette de, vide Gucrcheville. 
Potugoet river [44] 
Port Royal, latitude a?id location . 
the Jesuit Priests arrive here . 
Potrincourt, Sieur Jean de, asks for colonists for 
New France 
arrives in New France 
his family is the ojtly one in Acadia . 
praises the zeal of the Fathers . 

the sick son of Member tou is brought to his house 29 
Potrificourt , Sieur de, certain young man reconciled 

with . . . ^ 

Pr(zsentis \Plaisance'\ island 
Sable, Cape 
Girl baptized 

dies in the cabin of the Priests 
Religion of the Savages 
Rimbequi {or rather Kinibequi) river 
Secular Priest, baptizes nearly a hundred Savages in 
New France . 
returns to France 


32 

8 

II 

12 

19 
18 
24 

25 
34 

lO 

35 
18 
12 

10 
10 

26 

20 
24 

25 
27 


34 

9 
II 

27 

28 

14 
10 


24 
26 


116 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 2 


Sagami fiint belloriim dti^ores fed imperium eorum 

precarium eft . • • • ^3 

5. loannis flumen fefe in Franciaun giirgitem 

exonerat . • • • . lO 

5. Laurentii gurges . • • -9 

Sinus Francicus . • • • . lO 

Societas lefv, giianam vid miffionem in hanc pro- 

vinciam obtinet . • • . lo 

permittitur in Novd Francid labor are . -19 

evocat duos Sacerdotes ut ibi proficifcantiir . 20 

impedimenta qucB eis afferunUir . .21 

patres in Portum-regalem perveniunt . 24, 26 

(vide Patres). 

Somniis Barbari fidem habent [45] • 

Soricorum Sagamus Henricus M ember tou 

Soriqui ubi habitant 

tribus NovcB Francics . 
duo millia non conficiunt 
Tabagia, convivium apud Barbaros vocatur 
Tabagiam, apud Barbaros mos efi moribundis facer e 
Temp la nulla Barbari habent 
Terra nova, nomen fuum apud Barbaros 
Tuguriola foemincB cedificant 

quomodo cedificantur 
Venefici apud Barbaros 

pot efi as eorum 
Vultus Barbarorum 


15 
28 
10 
II 

13 
17 
28 

15 

9 

17 

18 

14 
15 
13 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 117 


Sagamores are leaders in war, but their authority 

is precarious 
St. John river empties into French bay 
St. Lazvrence, gulf of . 

French Bay .... 

Society of Jesus, in what way it obtained the sending 

of a mission to this province 

is permitted to labor in New France 

summons two Priests to go there 

the impedi7tie7its put in their way 

the fathers arrive at Port Royal . 24, 26 

vide Priests. 
Dreams, the Savages have faith in [45] 
Soriquois, their Sagamore Henry Me7nbertou 

where they live 

a tribe of New Fraiice 

do not number two thousand . 
Tabagie, feast afuong the Indians is called . 
Tabagie, a custom among the Savages held for the 

dying ..... 
Temples, the Savages have none 
Newfoundland, its name among the Savages 
Tents, the women set them up 

how they are constructed 
Medicine-men among the Indians 

their power .... 
Aspect of the Indians 


13 
10 

9 
10 

18 

19 
20 
21 


15 
28 
10 
II 
13 
17 


28 
15 
9 
17 
18 

14 
15 
13 


(mt ^Jtoyd. 



^. ji% -'X- ^' '^J iA^ 


A. Le lieu de I'habitation. F. Baffes qui affechet de baffe mer 

B. lardin du Sieur de Champlain. G. Riuiere fainct Antoine. 

C. Allee au trauers les bois que fit faire le H. Lieu du labourage ou on feme le ble. 

Sieur de Poitrincourt. I. Moulin que fit faire le Sieur de Poitrin- 
L). Ifle a I'entree de la riuiere de I'Equille. court. 

E. entree du port Royal. L. Prairies qui font innodees des eaux au^ 

grandes marees. 

[Facsimile of map of Port Royal, from ''Les 


1. ki 
La 
). Co 

)■ Ri 

^ At 


yages 



ebie. 
Poitiis- 


Riuiere de I'Equille. S. Riuiere du moulin. 

La cofle de la mer du port Royal. T. Petit lac. 

Cofles de montaignes V. Le lieu ou les fauuages pefchent le 

Ifle proche de la riuiere faindt Antoine harang en la faifon. 

Ruiffeau de la Roche. X. Ruiffeau de la trutiere. 

Autre Ruiffeau. Y. AUee quefitfairele Sieur deChamplain. 


aires du Sieur de Champlain' {Paris, i6jj).'\ 


XI 

Lescarbot's Relation Derniere 

de ce qui s'est Passe au Voyage du Sieur de 
Poutrincourt 

Paris: JEAN MILLOT, 1612 


Source: Reprinted from original in Harvard College 
Library. 



DERNIERE 

DECE QVI SEST 

PASSE' AV VOYAGE 

DV SIEVR DE POVTRINCOVRT 

en la Noiiuelle- France 

depuis io.mois enca. 

Par Map. c Lescarbot ^duocdt 
eh Parlement. 


t , 




^A PARIS, 
Chez Iean Millot., deuanc 
S.BarthclemyauxtroisCouronncs. ^ 

AYEC PRIVZLEGK DY RC^;^ 


_^ 


LAST RELATION 

OF 

WHAT TOOK PLACE 

IN THE VOYAGE MADE 

BYSIEUR DE POUTRINCOURT 

to New France, twenty 

months ago. 

By Marc Lescarbot, Advocate in 
Parliament. 


PARIS: 

Jean Millot, opposite St. Barthelemy, at 
the Three Crowns. 


M DC XII . 

BY ROYAL LICENSE. 


124 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.2 


Relation Derniere de ce qvi s'est passe av voy- 
age dv fieur de Poutrincourt en la Nou- 
uelle-France depuis 20. mois enca. 

PREFACE. 

LE proverbe ancien eft bien veritable, que les 
Dieux nous vendent toutes chofes par labeur. 
Ceci fe reconoit par experience ordinaire en 
plufieurs chofes, mais particulierement au fait duquel 
nous avons k parler: auquel donne fujet par fes in- 
comparables vertus le fieur de Poutrincourt, de qui 
les labeurs plus que Herculeans ont des y a long temps 
merite vne bien ample fortune, & y euft donne 
attainte au temps de nos troubles derniers, s'il n'euft 
efte trop entier k maintenir le party qu'il auoit em- 
braffe. Car le Roy le tenant en perfonne affiege dans 
le chateau de Beaumont [4] lui voulut donner le Com- 
t6 dudit lieu pour fe rendre a fon fervice. Ce qu'ay- 
ant refufe, il le fit toutefois pen apres gratuitement 
voyant fa Majeste reduit 'k I'Eglife Catholique Ro- 
maine. Vray efl que noftre feu Roy Henri le Grand 
I'auoit oblige en vne chofe, c'eft d'avoir rendu par fa 
bouche ce temoignage de lui, qu'il eftoit vn des plus 
hommes de bien, & des plus valeureux de fon roy- 
aume. Suiuant quoy auffi apres noz guerres paif6es, 
lui qui naturellement eft porte aux entreprifes diffi- 
ciles, fuiant la vie oifive, auroit recherche I'occafion 
de faire plus que devant paroitre fon courage, honorer 
fon Prince, & illuftrer fa patrie. Ce qu'il auroit fait 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 126 


Last Relation of what took place in the voyage 

made by sieur de Poutrincourt to New 

France, twenty months ago. 

PREFACE. 

THE old proverb is true that the Gods sell us all 
things for work. This may be recognized in 
many of the ordinary events of life, but espe- 
cially in the matter of which we are about to speak, 
and for which we have a subject in the incomparable 
virtues of sieur de Poutrincourt, whose more than 
Herculean labors have for a long time deserved a 
very ample fortune, which he might have succeeded 
in acquiring during our late struggles, had he not 
been too entirely devoted to the party which he had 
embraced. For the King, holding him besieged in 
person in Beaumont castle, [4] wished to give him 
the County thereof to attach him to his service. Re- 
fusing the gift at this time, he nevertheless accepted 
it freely soon afterwards, when he learned that his 
Majesty had embraced the faith of the Roman Catho- 
lic Church. It is true that our late King Henry the 
Great had rendered him one service ; that is, he had 
testified with his own lips that he was one of the 
most honorable and valiant men in his kingdom. 
Again, after our recent wars, being naturally attracted 
to difficult enterprises and shunning a life of idle- 
ness, he sought some occasion to more effectually 
show his courage, to honor his Prince, and to glorify 
his country. This he did by meeting sieur de 


126 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.2 

par la rencontre dti fieur de Monts, lequel en I'an 
1603. entreprenoit le voyage de la France Nouvelle 
& Occidentale d' outre mer, auec lequel il fe ioignit 
pour y reconoiftre vne terre propre "k habiter & y 
rendre f ervice a Dieu & au Roy. A quoy il a depuis 
travaille continuellement & eufl defia beaucoup 
avanc6 I'oeuvre, fi fa facilite ne fe fuft trop fi6e k des 
hommes trompeurs, qui lui ont fait perdre fon temps 
& fon argent. Voire encore eftant Gentilhomme in- 
domtable a la fatigue, & fans crainte aux hazars, il 
fe pourroit promettre vn alTez prompt avancement ^ 
fon entreprife s'il n'eftoit trouble par 1' avarice de 
ceux qui lui enlevent la graiffe de fa terre fans y faire 
habitation, & avides des Caftors de ce pais Ik y vont 
expres pour ce fujet, & ont fait a I'envi I'un de 1' autre 
que chacune peau de Caftor (qui eft le traffic le plus 
[5] prefent de ces terres) vaut icy auiourd'hui dix 
liures, qui fe pourroit bailler pour la moiti6, fi le com- 
merce d'icelles eftoit permis a vn feul. Et au moyen 
de ce pourroit prendre fondement la Religion Chre- 
ftienne par dela ; comme certes elle y auroit efl6 fort 
avanc^e, fi telle chofe euft efte faite. Et la confide- 
ration de la Religion & de I'eflabliirement d'un pais 
dont la France peut tirer du profit & de la gloire, me- 
rite bien que ceux qui I'habitent ioui'llent pleinement 
& entierement des fruits qui en proviennent, puis 
que nul ne contribue a ce deffein pour le foulagement 
des entrepreneurs, lefquels au peril de leurs vies & 
de leurs moyens ont decouvert par dela tant les or6es 
maritimes, que le profond des terres, oil iamais aucun 
Chretien n'avoit eft6. II y a vne autre confideration 
que ie ne veux mettre par ^crit, & laquelle feule doit 
faire accorder ce que delTus "k ceux qui fe prefentent 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 127 

Monts,^"^ who, in the year 1603, undertook the voyage 
to New and Western France beyond the sea ; and by 
associating himself with him, to find a suitable place 
where he could settle down, and there render service 
to God and the King. To this end he has labored 
continually ever since, and would have already great- 
ly advanced the work, had not his amiable nature 
been imposed upon by dishonest men, who have been 
the cause of great losses to him in time and money. 
But, as he was a Gentleman not to be conquered by 
hardships, and fearing no dangers, he might have 
been sure of prompt advancement in his work had he 
not been hindered by the greed of those who robbed 
him of the fat of his lands, without making any set- 
tlement there. These people, eager to get the Beaver 
skins of that country, go there for no other pur- 
pose ; and so compete with each other, that they have 
caused every Beaver skin (which is the chief traffic 
[5] of these regions) to be worth here to-day ten 
livres, when they might have been sold for one-half 
that price, if the traffic therein had been limited to 
one person. In this way the Christian Religion 
might have also been established there; and it cer- 
tainly would have been greatly advanced, if such a 
course had been pursued. Also for the sake of Re- 
ligion and of permanent colonization, from which 
France can derive both profit and glory, it is well that 
those who settle there should enjoy fully and wholly 
the advantages guaranteed by them ; since no one 
does anything in this direction for the sake of the 
leaders of the enterprise, who, at the risk of their 
lives and their fortunes, have discovered coasts and 
interior lands where no Christian had ever been. 
There is another consideration which I do not wish 
to set down in writing, and which alone ought to ob- 


128 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.2 

& offrent pour habiter & defendre la province, voire 
pour donner du fecours k toute la France de de9a. 
C'a eft6 vne plainte faite de tout temps, que les con- 
fiderations particulieres ont ruine les affaires du gene- 
ral. Ainli eft-il k craindre qu'il n'en avienne en I'af- 
faire des Terres-neuves, fi nous la negligeons, & fl 
Ton ne fouftient ceux qui d'une refolution immuable 
f'expofent pour le bien, I'honneur, & la gloire de la 
France, & pour I'exaltation du nom de Dieu, & de 
fon Eglife. 

[6] VOYAGE EN LA TERRE-NEUVE. 

I'ay rapporte en mon hiftoire de la Nouvelle France 
ce qui eft des deux premiers voyages faits outre mer 
par le lieur de Poutrincourt. Ici i'ay a ecrire ce qui 
s'eft enfuiui es voyages fubfequens. Depuis quelques 
annees vne fucceffion lui eft echeue a caufe de Dame 
lehanne de Salazar fa mere, qui eft la Baronnie de 
Saincft luft en Champagne. Les rivieres de Seine & 
d'Aulbe rendent le lieu de cette Baronnie autant agre- 
able, que fort & avantageux h. la defenfe. Lk au com- 
mencement de Fevrier mil fix cens dix il fit partie de 
fon equippage, y ayant charg^ vn bateau de meubles, 
viures, & munitions de guerre, voire tellement charge 
qu'il n'y reftoit que deux doigts de bord hors de 
I'eau. Cependant la riviere eftoit enflee & ne fe pou- 
uoit plus tenir en fon lidt h. caufe des longues pluies 
hivemales. Les flots le menagoient fouuent, les per- 
ils y eftoient prefens, mefmement €s paffages de No- 
gent, Corbeil, Sain(5t Clou, Ecorche-veau, & autres oil 
des bateaux perirent k fa veue, fans qu'il fuft aucune- 
ment emeu d'apprebenfion. En fin il parvint k Di- 
eppe, & apres quelque fejour il fe mit en mer le 26. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 129 

tain the above-mentioned privileges to those who 
present and offer themselves to settle and defend the 
province, and indeed to give assistance to the entire 
French colony over there. There has always been a 
complaint that affairs of general importance are 
ruined by giving too much attention to the considera- 
tion of personal interests. It is to be feared this 
may be the case in the affairs of the new World, if we 
neglect them, and do not encourage those who, with 
an unchangeable purpose, take great risks for the wel- 
fare, the honor, and the glory of France, and for the 
exaltation of the name of God, and of his Church. 

[6] VOYAGE TO THE NEW WORLD. 

I related in my history of New France what hap- 
pened in the first two voyages made by sieur de 
Poutrincourt to the lands beyond the sea. Here I 
shall give an account of what took place in the sub- 
sequent voyages. Some years ago an inheritance, 
the Barony of Sainct Just, in Champagne, fell to 
Sieur de Poutrincourt through his mother, Lady 
Jehanne de Salazar. The Seine and Aulbe rivers 
render the situation of this domain as beautiful as it 
is strong and eligible for defense. Here, in the be- 
ginning of February, one thousand six hundred and 
ten, he partly equipped his ship, loading it with fur- 
niture, provisions, and munitions of war; and, in- 
deed, so freighted it down that the sides were only 
two finger-lengths out of the water. Meanwhile, 
the river had risen until it could no longer be con- 
fined in its bed, on account of the long winter rains. 
Often threatened by floods and by imminent perils 
in the passages from Nogent, Corbeil, Sainct Clou, 
Ecorche-veau and other places, where vessels were 
wrecked before his eyes, he was not in the least 


130 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.2 

dudit mois de Fevrier. Plufieurs en cette ville la be- 
nilToient fon voyage, & prioient Dieu pour la prof- 
perite d'icelui. La faifon eftoit rude, & les vents le 
plus fouvent contraires. Mais on peut bien appeller 
vn [7] voyage heureux, quand en fin on arrive ^ bon 
port. lis ne furent gueres loin qu'ils rencontrerent 
» Forbaus vers le Cafquet vn nauire de Forbans, ^ lef quels voy- 
cefont ^jjg jg(jj^ Sieur & fes gens bien refolus de fe defendre 

Pyrates. y^ , . „ 

li on les attaquoit, palierent outre. Le 6. de Mars ils 
rencontrerent vnze navires Flamens, & fe faluerent 
I'vn r autre de chacun vn coup de canon. Depuis le 
8. iufques au 15. il y eut tempete, durant laquelle vne 
fois ledit Sieur eftant couche a la poupe, fut porte de 
fon lidt pardeffus la table au lidt de fon fils. Ce mau- 
» Su, c'eji vais temps les fit chercher leur route plus au Su,'' & 
Midi. virent deux iles des Effores, Corbes, & Flore, la oh 
ils eurent le rafraichifl^ement de quelques Marfoins 
qu'ils prindrent. Et comme Ton dit que de la guerre 
vient la paix, Ainfi apres ces tourmentes ils eurent 
des calmes iufques au iour de Pafques Fleuries plus 
facheux que les tourmentes: car quoy qu'on foit en 
repos, il n'y a pourtant fujet de contentement : car les 
vivres fe mangent, & la faifon de bien faire fe paffe : 
bref vn grand calme eft fort mauvais fur la mer. 
Mais cela n'efl point perpetuel: & quelquefois (felon 
I'inconftance d'Eole) apres le calme fuit vn vent fa- 
vorable, tan toft vne tempete, comme il furvint vn peu 
apres (fgauoir le lendemain de Pafques) laquelle fit 
faire eau a la foute, qui eft le magazin du pain, ou 
bifcuit. Occafion que le Charpentier du navire vou- 
lant aller remedier au mal avenu, d'autant qu'en fai- 
fant ce qui eft de fon art il troubloit les prieres pub- 
liques qui fe faifoient du matin, ledit Sieur lui 


1612-14] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


131 


affected by fear. At last he arrived at Dieppe, and, 
after a sojourn there, he put to sea upon the 26th of 
this same month of February. Many people of that 
city wished him well in his voyage and prayed God 
for its success. The season was stormy, and contrary 
winds prevailed the greater part of the time. But 
we may indeed call a [7] voyage fortunate, which 
brings us at last safe into port. They were not far 
away when they met, in the direction of Casquet,''* a 
ship of Forbans,* who, seeing that the Sieur and 
his crew were all ready to defend themselves if at- 
tacked, sailed on past them. On the 6th of March they 
met eleven Flemish ships, and they saluted each 
other by a discharge of cannon. From the 8th to 
the 15th there was a tempest, during which the 
Sieur, who was lying down on the poop, was thrown 
from his bed, over the table, to that of his son. This 
bad weather made them turn their route more to the 
South,'' where they saw two of the Essores islands, 
Corbes and Flore ; and there they had some fresh 
food by catching a few Porpoises. And as, according 
to the old saying, peace follows war, so, after these 
storms, there were calms more trying than the tem- 
pests, until Palm Sunday ; for then, although there 
was rest, there was no satisfaction in it, for the food 
was being consumed and the good season was pass- 
ing away ; in short, a great calm is a very harmful 
thing upon the sea. But it does not last always ; and 
sometimes (according to the fickle moods of ^olus) 
after the calm comes a favorable wind, sometimes a 
tempest ; as happened shortly afterwards (namely, 
the day after Easter), and this caused a leak in the 
soute, which is the storeroom for bread or biscuit. 
Now the ship's carpenter, who went to repair the 
leak, while doing what his trade demanded, inter- 


• Forbans 
are pirates. 


'■ South, 

that is. 

Meridian. 


132 


LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 2 


Peril d' 71 n 

char pen - 

tier. 


1' Voy 

VHiJl. de 

la Nouv. 

France 

liv. 4. 

chap. 12. 


Au memc 

liv. 

ch. 7. 


<> Ceremo- 
nies de 
fufterailles 


commanda [8] de befongner par le dehors, Ih. ou eftant 
alle il trouva le Gouvernail rompu (chofe dangereufe) 
leqtiel voulant aller racoutrer, comme il eftoit k fa be- 
fongne,^ il tomba de fon echaffaut dedans la mer. 
Et bien vint que le temps f 'eftoit ammodere: car au- 
trement c' eftoit vn homme perdu. Mais il fut garenti 
par la diligence des matelots, qui lui tendirent vne 
corde, par laquelle il fe fauva. 

Le II. de May la fonde fut iettee, & fe trouva fond 
a 80.^ bralTes: indice que I'on eftoit fur le Banc 
des Morues. La ils s'arreterent pour auoir le rafrai- 
chiffement de la pecherie foit des poiffons, foit des 
oifeaux qui font abondamment fur ledit Banc, ainli 
que i'ay amplement d6crit en madite Hiftoire de la 
Nouvelle France. Le Banc pafTe, apres auoir foute- 
nu plufieurs vents contraires, en fin ils terrirent vers 
Pemptegoef^ (qui eft I'endroit que noz Geographes 
marquent foubs le nom de Norombega) & fit dire la 
Mefle ledit Sieur en vne Ifle qu'il nomma de 1' Afcen- 
fion, pour y eftre arrive ce iour 1^. De ce lieu ils 
vindrent ^ Sainte Croix premiere habitation de noz 
Fran9ois en cette cote, Ik ou ledit Sieur fit faire des 
prieres pour les trefpaffez qui y eftoient enterrez d6s 
le premier voyage du fieur de Monts en I'an 1603. & 
furent au haut de la riviere dudit lieu de Sainte Croix, 
ou ils trouverent telle quantite de Harens a chaque 
mar^e, qu'il y en avoit pour nourrir toute vne groffe 
ville. En autres faifons il y vient d'autres poiffons. 
Mais lors c' eftoit le tour aux Harens. Lk mefme il 
y a des arbres d'ineftimable [9] beaute en hauteur & 
groffeur. Sur cette m6me cote, devant qu'arriver au 
Port Royal "^ ils virent les ceremonies funebres d'un 
corps mort deced6 en la terre des ;Etechemins. Le 


1612-14] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


133 


fered with the public prayers which were being of- 
fered in the morning, and the Sieur commanded him 
[8] to do his work outside. He obeyed, and there 
found the Rudder broken (which is a very dangerous 
thing) ; wishing to readjust it, while he was engaged 
in the work,* he fell from his scaffolding into the 
sea. And it was well that the weather had moder- 
ated; for otherwise there would have been a man 
lost. But he was rescued by the efforts of the sailors, 
w^ho threw him a rope by which he saved himself. 

On the 1 ith of May, the sounding lead was cast, and 
bottom was found at 8o "^ fathoms ; a sign that they 
were upon the Codfish Banks. There they stopped to 
obtain fresh food, either fish or birds, which are abun- 
dant upon these Banks, as I have described fully in my 
History of New France. When the Banks were 
passed, after having encountered several contrary 
winds, at last they landed in the neighborhood of 
Pemptegoet,'^ (the place that our Geographers des- 
ignate by the name Norembega) ; '^^ and the Sieur 
caused Mass to be said upon an Island, which he 
called Ascension, because they arrived there upon 
that day. Thence they came to Sainte Croix, ^*^ the 
first settlement of our French upon this coast, where 
the Sieur had prayers offered for the dead who had 
been buried there since the first voyage made by 
sieur de Monts, in the year 1603. Then they went up 
the river Sainte Croix, where they found such a great 
number of Herrings at every tide, that they had 
enough to feed a whole city. During the other sea- 
sons there are other kinds of fish, but at that time it 
was the Herring season. Also there are trees there 
of [9] indescribable beauty, height, and grandeur. 
Upon this same coast, before reaching Port Royal, ^ 
they saw the funeral ceremonies over the corpse of a 


* Peril of 
a carpen- 
ter. 


" See His- 
tory of New 
France 
book 4. 
c/t. 12. 


" In the 

same book 

c/i. 7. 


'' Funeral 
ceremonies. 


134 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 2 


defundl eftoit couch6 ftir vn ais appuye de quatre 
fourches, & fut convert de peaux. Le lendemain ar- 
rive Ik grande affemblee d'hommes, lef quels dan- 
ferent a leur mode alentour du deced6. Vn des an- 
ciens tenoit vn long baton, on il y avoit pendues trois 
t^tes de leurs ennemis; D'antres avoient d'autres 
marques de leurs vidloires : & en cet etat chanterent 
& danferent deux on trois heures, difans les loii- 
anges du mort an lieu du Libera que difent les Chre- 
tiens. Apres chacun lui fit don de quelque chofe, 
comme de peaux, chaudieres, pois, haches, couteaux, 
-Mata- fleches, ^Matachiaz & autres hardes Toutes lef- 
chiaz, ce quelles ceremonies achevees, on le porta en fepulture 
font car- ^^ ^^^ .^^ ^ I'ecart loin de la terre ferme. Et au par- 
ec-harpes\&' tir de la tira ledit Sieur au Port Royal lieu de fon ha- 

brajfelets. "bitation. 

RELIGION. 

Le fieur de Poutrincourt n'eut k-peine pris haleine 

apres tant de travaux, qu'il envoya chercher Member- 

tou premier & plus ancien Capitaine de cette contree, 

pour lui rafrechir la memoire de quelques enfeigne- 

mens de la Religion Clir6tienne que nous lui avions 

autrefois [lo] donne, & I'inftruire plus amplement 

es chofes qui concernent le falut de I'ame, afin 

que cetui-ci reduit, plufieurs autres a fon exemple 

fiffent le m6me. Comme de fait il arriva. Car apres 

avoir eft6 catechize, & les fiens avec lui, par quelque 

temps, il fut baptiz^, & vingt autres de fa troupe, le 

iour faindl lehan Baptifte 1610. les noms defquels i'ay 

,Li^ ^ enroll6 en mon Hifloire de la Nouvelle France^ fe- 

ch.l' pa. Ion qu'ils font ecrits au regiftre des baptemes de 

^sS' I'Eglife metropolitaine de dela, qui efl au Port Roy- 


1612-14] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


135 


savage who had died in the land of the Etechemins. 
The body was resting upon a plank supported by- 
four stakes, and covered with skins. The next day, 
a great crowd of men arrived, who performed their 
customary dances around the corpse. One of the old 
men held a long pole, upon which were dangling three 
of their enemies' heads ; others carried other trophies 
of their victories ; and thus they continued to sing 
and dance for two or three hours, chanting the praises 
of the dead instead of the Libera of Christians. 
Afterwards each one made him a gift of some kind, 
such as skins, kettles, peas, hatchets, knives, arrows, 
* Matachiaz,^'' and articles of apparel. When all 
these ceremonies were finished, they carried him 
for burial to an isolated island, far from the main- 
land. And, leaving there, the Sieur sailed for Port 
Royal, the place of his residence. 

RELIGION. 

Sieur de Poutrincourt had hardly taken breath after 
so many labors, when he sent for Membertou, chief 
and oldest Captain of this country, to refresh his 
memory in regard to some of the principles of the 
Christian Religion, which we had [lo] previously 
taught him, and to in.struct him more fully in things 
which concern the salvation of the soul ; so that, he 
being converted, many others might follow his ex- 
ample. As in truth it came to pass. For after hav- 
ing been catechized for some time, and his family 
with him, he was baptized, as were also twenty others 
of his company, upon saint John the Baptist's day, 
1 6 ID. I have enrolled their names in my History of 
New France,'' just as they are written over there 
in the baptismal register of the mother-Church, which 
is at Port Royal. The Pastor who accomplished this 


" Matachiaz 
are neck- 
laces, 
scarfs and 
bracelets. 


*• Book s. 

ch. s- 
page 6j8. 


136 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.2 

al. Le Pafteur qui fit ce chef d'oeuvre fut Meffire 
leffe Fleuche natif de Lantage, diocefe de Langres, 

^Mijjion. homme de bonnes lettres, lequel avoit pris fa miffion * 
de Monfieur le Nonce du Sainc5t Pere Euefque de 
Rome, qui eftoit pour lors, & eft encore a Paris. Non 
qii'un Eueque Fran9ois ne I'eufl peu faire : mais 
ayant fait ce choix, ie croy que ladite miffion eft auffi 
bonne de lui (qui eft Eveque) que d'vn autre, encore 
qu'il foit etranger. Toutefois i'en laifle la cofidera- 
tion a ceuq qui y ont plus d'intereft que moy, eftant 
chofe qui fe pent difputer d'une part & d' autre, parce 
qu'il n'eft pas ici en fon diocefe. Ledit Seigneur 
Nonce, dit Robert Vbaldin, lui bailla permiffion d'ouir 
par dela les confeffions de toutes perfonnes, & les ab- 
foudre de tons peches & crimes non referves expref- 
fement au fiege Apoftolique; & leur enioindre des 
penitences felon la qualite du peche. En outre lui 
donna pouvoir de confacrer & benir des chafubles & 
autres vetemens facerdotaux, & des paremens d'au- 
tels, excepte [i i] des Corporaliers, Calices, & Patenes. 
C'eft ainfi que ie I'ay leu fur les lettres de ce odtroy- 
ees audit Fleuche premier Patriarche de ces terres la. 
Ie di patriarche, par ce que communement on I'appel- 
loit ainfi: & ce mot I'a deu femondre a mener vne 
vie pleine d'integrite & d'innocence, comme ie 
croy qu'il a fait. Or ces baptizailles ne furent fans 
^confejjion folennites. Car Membertou (& confequemment ^ les 

de Foy de autres) avant qu'eftre introduits en I'Eglife de Dieu, 
Membertou. ^^ ^^^ reconoifl:ance de toute fa vie pafl:ee, confeflia 
fes peches, & renon9a au diable, auquel il avoit fervi. 
Lk deffus chacun chanta le Te Deum de bon courage, 
& furent les canons tires avec grand plaifir, a-caufe 
des Echoz qui durent audit Port Royal, pres d'un 


1612-14] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


137 


Commis- 
sion. 


master-piece \^ckef d'ceuvrc'] was Messire Jesse Fleu- 
che, a native of Lantage, in the diocese of Langres; 
he is a scholarly man, and received his commission 
* from Monsieur, the Ambassador of the Holy Father, 
the Bishop of Rome, who was then, and is still, in 
Paris. Not that a French Bishop might not have 
given it to him ; but, as this one was chosen, I believe 
the said commission is as good from him (since he is 
a Bishop), as from another, although he is a stranger. 
However, I leave the consideration of this matter to 
those who have more interest in it than I have, it be- 
ing a question that admits of dispute on both sides, 
since here he is not in his diocese. This Ambassador, 
called Robert Ubaldin,^* gave him permission to hear 
confessions from all people over there, and to ab- 
solve them from all sins and crimes not strictly re- 
served to the Apostolic see ; and to impose upon them 
penances, according to the character of the sin. 
Furthermore, he gave him power to consecrate and 
bless the chasubles, and other priestly vestments, and 
the altar furnishings, except [i i] the Corporals, Chal- 
ices, and Patens. It is thus that I have seen it stated 
in the credentials granted to the said Fleuche, first 
Patriarch of those lands. I say patriarch, because 
that is what he was generally called: and this was 
an incentive to him to lead a life full of integrity 
and innocence, as I believe he has done. Now these 
baptismal ceremonies were not without solemnity. 
For Membertou (and consequently'' the others), '' Confession 
before being introduced into the Church of God, of Mem 
made an examination of all his past life, confessed 
his sins, and renounced the devil, whom he had 
served. Then each one joined heartily in singing 
the Te Detwi, and there was a joyful discharge of 
cannon, so that the Echoes lingered in Port Royal 


bertoit. 


138 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.2 

quart d'heure. C'efl vne grande grace que Dieu a 
fait a cet homme d'avoir receu le don de la Foy, & 
de la lumiere Evangelique, en I'age ou il efl parve- 
nu, qui eft k mon avis de cent dix ans ou plus. II 
fut nomme Henri du nom de noftre feu Roy Henri 
le Grand. D'autres furent nommez des noms du 
faindt Pere le Pape de Rome, de la Royne, & Meffei- 
gneurs & Dames fes enfans, de Monfieur le Nonce, & 
autres fignalez perfonnages de dega, lefquels on print 
*-Pa. 638. pour parrins, comme ie I'ay ^crit en madite Hiftoire.* 
Mais ie ne voy point que ces parrins fe foient fou- 
venus de leurs filieuls, ni qu'ils leur ayent envoye 
aucune chofe pour les fuftenter, ayder, & encourager 
a demeurer fermes en la Religion qu'ils ont receue: 
Car pour du pain on leur fera croire ce que Ton vou- 
dra, & pen a pen leur terre [12] eftant cultivee les 
nourrira. Mais il les faut ayder du commencement. 
Ce qu'a fait le fieur de Poutrincourt tant qu'il a peu, 
voire outrepaffant fon pouvoir il en a ieufn6 par apres, 
comme nous dirons ailleurs. 

RETOUR EN FRANCE. 

Trois femaines apres I'arrivee dudit Sieur en fa 
terre du Port Royal il avifa de renvoyer en France le 
Baron de faindt lust fon fils aine, ieune Gentilhomme 
fort experiment^ k la marine, & lequel k cette occa- 
fion Monfieur 1' Admiral a honore du tiltre de Vice- 
Admiral en la mer du Ponant es cotes de dela. Car 
ayant a nourrir beaucoup d'hommes au moins I'efpace 
d'un an & plus, attendant vne cueillette de blez, il 
eftoit befoin d'une nouvelle charge de vivres & mar- 
chandifes propres au commun vfage tant de lui & des 
fiens, que des Sauvages. II le fit done partir le 8. 


1612-14J THE JESUIT RELATIONS 139 

nearly a quarter of an hour. God has shown great 
mercy in granting that this man should receive the 
gift of Faith, and the light of the Gospel, at the age 
to which he has attained, which is, I believe, one 
hundred and ten years, or more. He was named 
Henry, after our late King, Henry the Great. 
Others were given the names of the holy Father, 
the Pope of Rome, of the Queen, of my Lords and 
Ladies, her children, of Monsieur the Nuncio, and of 
other notable personages over here, who have been 
chosen as godparents, as I have written in my History.* - page 638. 
But I do not see that these godparents have re- 
membered their children, nor that they have sent 
them anything to support, aid, and encourage them in 
remaining firm in the Religion which they have ac- 
cepted: for, if you give them bread, you can make 
them believe almost anything you wish ; when, little 
by little, their land [12] is cultivated, they will de- 
rive from it their support. But they must be assisted 
in the beginning. Sieur de Poutrincourt has done 
this as far as he was able, even going beyond his 
means, for which he fasted afterwards, as we shall 
relate elsewhere. 

RETURN TO FRANCE. 

Three weeks after the Sieur's arrival at his estates 
in Port Royal, he made up his mind to send back 
to France his eldest son, the Baron de sainct Just, a 
young Gentleman who is well versed in seamanship, 
and whom, upon this occasion. Monsieur the Admiral 
has honored with the title of Vice-Admiral of the 
Western ocean and its more distant coasts. For, be- 
ing obliged to furnish food for a great many men at 
least during the space of a year and more, while wait- 


140 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.2 

luillet, lui enioignant d'eftre de retour dans quatre 
mois, & le conduifit dans vne Pinaffe, on grande cha- 
louppe environ cent lieues loin. En cette faifon on 
a beau rire le long de la cote. Car il y a des iles 
en grand nombre vers le Cap Fourchu, & le Cap de 
Sable fi pleines d'oifeaux, qu'il ne faut qu'affommer 
& charger, & avec ce le poifTon y foifonne en telle 
forte, qu'il ne faut que letter la ligne en mer & la re- 
tirer. La contrariete du vent les ayant plufieurs fois 
[13] contraint de mouiller I'ancre parmi ces iles, leur 
fit faire epreuve de ce que ie di. Ainfi ledit de faindt 
luft s'en alia rengeant la terre I'efpace de deux cens 
lieues, iufques a ce qu'il eut pafle I'ile de Sable, ile 
dangereufe pour eftre baffe & fans port affeure, fife a 
vingt lieues de la terre ferme vis a vis la terre de Ba- 
'■Voy caillos. Le 28. de luillet il eftoit fur le Banc^aux 
VHijioire dc Morues, la ou il fe rafraichit de vivres, & rencontra 
France pl^^^^^rs navires de noz havres de France, & vn An- 
liv. 4. glois, d'oti il eut la premiere nouvelle de la mort de 
Chap. 12. notre grand Roy Henri. Ce qui le troubla & fa com- 
pagnie, tant pour 1 'accident fi funefle de cette mort, 
que de crainte qu'il n'y euft du trouble parde9a. Le 
Dimanche premier iour d'Aouft ils quitterent ledit 
Banc, le 20. eurent la veue de la terre de France, & 
le 21. entrerent dans le port de Dieppe. 

AUANCEMENT DE LA RELIGION. 

Comme le fieur de Poutrincourt fuivoit la cote con- 
duifant fon fils fur le retour, il trouva quelques Sau- 
vages de conoilTance en vne ile, oil ils f'eftoient ca- 
bannez, faifans pecherie: lefquels ayant aborde, ils 
en f urent tout ioyeux : Et apres quelques propos tenus 
de Membertou, & des autres, & de ce qui s'eftoit paffe 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 141 

ing for the wheat crop, he needed a new supply of 
provisions and merchandise suitable for general use, 
both for himself and his people, and for the Savages. 
So he had him leave on the 8th of July, enjoining 
him to be upon his return voyage in four months; 
and he accompanied him in a Pinnace, or large boat, 
for about one hundred leagues. At this season it is 
pleasant to sail along the coast, for there are a great 
many islands in the neighborhood of Cape Fourchu ^^ 
and Cape Sable, which are so full of birds, that all 
there is to do is to knock them down and reload ; 
also, fish are so plentiful, that it is only necessar}-- to 
throw out the line and draw it in. Contrary winds 
having several times [13] forced them to cast anchor 
among these islands, this gave them an opportunity 
of verifying what I have said. So sainct Just con- 
tinued to coast along for two hundred leagues, until 
he had passed Sable island,^ a dangerous place be- 
cause it is low and has no safe harbor ; it is twenty 
leagues from the mainland opposite the land of Ba- 
caillos.^^ Onthe28thof July, he reached the Codfish* - See His- 
Banks, where he obtained fresh food and met several ^^''^ "f ^^""^ 
ships from our French ports, and one English ship, ^JIT^' 
whence he received the first news of the death of ,//. 72. 
our great King Henry. This grieved him and his 
crew, on account of the sad circumstances surround- 
ing the death, and because they feared trouble might 
arise from it. Sunday, the first day of August, they 
left these Banks; on the 20th they sighted the land 
of France, and on the 2 ist entered the port of Dieppe. 

PROGRESS OF RELIGION. 

As sieur de Poutrincourt sailed along the coast, 
while accompanying his son upon his return, he found 


142 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.2 


•■Aciede en leurs baptizailles, * il leur demanda s'ils vou- 
pteie. loient point eftre comme luy, & croire en Dieu pour 
eftre auffi baptizes; A quoy ils [14] s'accorderent 
apres avoir efte inftruits. Et la delTus il les envoya 
an Port Royal pour eftre plus a loifir confirmes en la 
Foy & doctrine Evangelique : la oil eftans ils furent 
baptizes. Cependant ledit Sieur pourfuivoit fa route 
allant ton jours avant le long de la cote, tant qu'il 
vint au Cap de la Heve, environ lequel endroit il 
laiffa aller a la garde de Dieu ledit fieur de faindt luft 
fon fils, & virant le cap en arriere cingla vers la rivi- 
ere dudit lieu de la H^ve, qui eft vn port large de 
plus de deux lieues & long de fix, cuidant y trouver 
vn Capitaine des long temps appelle Martin par noz 
Frangois. Mais il fen eftoit retire, ^-caufe de quel- 
que mortalite la furvenue par des maladies dyfente- 
riaques. Depuis, ledit Martin ayant entendu que le- 
dit Sieur lui avoit fait tant d'honneur que de Taller 
chercher, il le fuivit a la pifte avec trente-cinq ou 40. 
hommes, & le vint trouver vers le Cap de Sable pour 
le remercier d'une telle vifite. Ledit Sieur homme ac- 
cort & benin le recent humainement, encores qu'au- 
paravant en I'an 1607. il y euft eu quelque colere 
contre lui, fur ce que palTant icelui Sieur par ledit lieu 
de la Heve foible de gens, & fe voyant environn^ de 
trois chaloupes de Sauvages pleines de peuple, il les 
fit ranger toutes d'un cote. Sur quoy ledit Martin 
ayant dit qu'il avoit done peur d'eux, il fut en danger 
de voir par effet que fa conclufion eftoit faufl!e. A 
cette derniere rencontre ledit Martin fut carefle & in- 

'' Acieyc vite a fe faire Chretien, comme Membertou, & ^ plu- 

ptete. fieurs autres: & [15] s'en aller au Port Royal pour y 

recevoir plus ample inftrudtion. Ce qu'il promit 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 143 

some Savages whom he knew, encamped upon an 
island and engaged in fishing ; they were overjoyed 
at his arrival, and after some talk about Membertou 
and others, and about what had taken place at their 
baptism,* he asked them if they did not wish to be ^ Act of 
like him, to believe in God and be baptized : this they piety. 
[14] agreed to do after they had been instructed. And 
thereupon he sent them to Port Royal, where more 
time could be given to confirm them in the Faith and 
doctrines of the Gospel ; they went there and were 
baptized. Meanwhile the Sieur continued on his 
way, always following the coast, until he came to 
Cape de la Heve, near which place he consigned his 
son, sieur de sainct Just, to the care of God; and, 
veering around the cape, he sailed toward the river 
of la Heve, which forms a port more than two leagues 
wide and six leagues long, expecting to find there a 
Chief, whom the French had for a long time called 
Martin. But he had gone away, on account of the 
deaths which had occurred there from some form of 
dysentery. Afterwards, this Martin, having heard 
that the Sieur had done him the honor of coming to 
visit him, followed him up with thirty-five or forty 
men, and near Cape Sable overtook him and thanked 
him for this visit. The Sieur, who is a pleasant and 
agreeable gentleman, received him kindly; although 
some time before, in the year 1607, he had been 
somewhat angry at him, because when he, (the Sieur), 
with only a few men, was passing this same la Heve, 
seeing himself surrounded by three canoes full of 
Savages, he made them all get in line upon one side. 
Thereupon, Martin having remarked that the Sieur 
was afraid of them, the former was, in fact, in danger 
of seeing that his conclusion was wrong. At this last 


144 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.2 

faire avec fa troupe. Et d'autant que les Sauvages 
ne vont iamais voir leurs amis les mains vuides, il alia 
k la chaffe, afin de porter de la venaifon audit lieu : & 
cependant ledit Sieur s'avance & va devant pour les 
Peril. y attendre. Mais etant environ le Cap Fourchu, *= 
le voila porte d'un vent de terre droit a la mer, & ce fi 
avant, qu'il fut fix iours fans aucune provifion de 
vivres (que de quelques oifeaux pris es iles, qu'il avoit 
de refle) & fans autre eau douce que celle qui fe re- 
cuilloit quelquefois dans les voiles: Bref fans rien 
voir que ciel & eau; & s'il n'eufl eu vne petite bouf- 
folle il efloit en danger d'eftre port^ k la cote de la 
Floride par la violence des vents, des tempetes, & des 
vagues. En fin par fon induftrie & iugement il vint 
terrir vers I'ile fainte Croix, la oil Oagimont Capi- 
taine dudit lieu lui apporta des galettes de bifcuit 
qu'il avoit troquees avec noz Fran9ois. Et dela 
eftant en lieu de conoifTance il traverfa la baye Fran- 
9oife large en cet endroit de vingt lieues, & vint au 
Port Royal cinq femaines apres fa departie ou il 
trouva des gens bien etonnes pour fa longue ab fence, 
& qui defia pourpenfoient vn changement qui ne pou- 
voit eflre que funefte. C'eft ainli qu'au peril de fa 
vie, avec des fatigues & fouff ranees incroyables il va 
chercher des brebis egar^es pour les amener k la ber- 
gerie de lefus-Chrift, & accroitre le Royaume celefle. 
Que fi la converllon de ces peuples ne fe fait par mil- 
liers, il faut penfer [i6] que nul Prince ou Seigneur 
n'a iufques ici alTift^ ledit fieur de Poutrincourt, au- 
quel meme les avares vont ravir ce qui eft de fa pro- 
vince, & fa bonte fouffre cela, pour ne faire rien qui 
puiffe aigrir les grands de de9a, encores que le Roy 
luy ayant donne la terre il puiffe iuflement empecher 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 145 


meeting, Martin was treated with great kindness, and 
invited to become a Christian like Membertou and'' '^ Act of 
several others, and [15] to go to Port Royal to be piety. 
more fully instructed. He promised to do this and 
to bring all his company. And, as the Savages never 
go to visit their friends empty-handed, he went 
hunting, that he might get some venison for this 
occasion; meanwhile the vSieur went on ahead, 
in order to meet them there (i. e. at Port Royal). 
But near Cape Fourchu,*^ behold him carried by a « Peril. 
land breeze straight out to sea, and so far, that he 
was six days without food (except some birds caught 
upon an island, which he still had), and without other 
fresh water than what he could sometimes catch in 
the sails ; in short, seeing nothing but sky and water ; 
and if he had not had a small compass, he would 
have been in danger of being carried to the coast of 
Florida by the violence of the winds, the tempests, 
and the waves. At last, owing to his good judgment 
and energy, he was able to land near the island of 
sainte Croix, where Oagimont, Captain of the place, 
brought him some sea-biscuits, for which he had 
traded with the French people. And thence, being 
familiar with the place, he crossed French bay, about 
twenty leagues wide here, and reached Port Royal, 
five weeks after his departure. Here he found his 
people wondering greatly at his long absence, and al- 
ready meditating a change, which could not have been 
otherwise than disastrous. It is thus, at the peril of 
his life, and with incredible hardships and suffer- 
ings, he goes out to seek the lost sheep, to lead them 
back into the fold of Jesus Christ, and to add to the 
heavenly Kingdom. And if these people are not 
converted by the thousand, it must be remembered 
[16] that no Prince or Lord has, up to the present, 


146 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.2 

qu'on ne lui enleve les fruits d'icelle, & qu'on n'entre 
dans fes ports, & qu'on ne lui coupe fes bois. Quand 
il aura de plus amples moyens il pourra envoyer des 
hommes aux terres plus peuplees, oil il faut aller fort, 
& faire vne grande moiffon pour 1' amplification de 
I'Eglife. Mais il faut premierement batir la Repu- 
blique, fans laquelle I'Eglife ne pent eflre. Et pour 
ce le premier fecours doit eftre a cette Republique, 
& non a ce qui a le pretexte de piete. Car cette Re- 
publique eflant etablie, ce fera k elle a pourvoir k 
ce qui regarde le fpirituel. Retournons au Port Roy- 
al. lA ledit Sieur arrive trouva Martin & fes gens 
baptizes, & tous portes d'un grand zele a la Religion 
Chretienne, oyans fort devotement le fervice divin, 
lequel eftoit ordinairement chante en Mufique de la 
compofition dudit Sieur. 

Ce zele s'ell reconu non feulement aux neophytes 
Chretiens, comme nous particulariferons cy-apres ; 
mais auffi en ceux qui n'eftoient point encore inities 
aux facrez myfteres de notre Religion. Car lors que 
ledit Martin fut baptize, il y en eut vn tout decharne, 
n'ayant plus que les os, lequel n'ayant efte en la com- 
pagnie des autres, fe porta, a toute peine, en trois 
cabannes [17] cherchant ledit Fleuches Patriarche 
pour eftre inftruit & baptize. 

Vn autre demeurant en la baye faindte Marie k 
plus de douze lieues du Port Royal, fe trouvant ma- 
lade, envoy a en diligence faire fgavoir audit Patri- 
arche qu'il eftoit detenu de maladie, & craignant de 
mourir, qu'il defiroit eftre baptize. Ledit Patriarche 
y alia, & avec vn truchement fit envers lui ce qui 
eftoit de'l'office d'un bon Pafteur. 

Quant aux Chretiens, vn defdits Sauvages neo- 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 147 

given any assistance to sieur de Poutrincourt ; the 
avaricious are even stealing from him the wealth of 
his province, and he permits this in his goodness, in 
order to do nothing that will exasperate the nobles 
over here; although, as the King has given him the 
land, he would be justified in refusing to others the 
fruits thereof, as well as entry into his ports, and the 
cutting down of his forests. When he has more 
ample means, he can send men into the more popu- 
lous districts, where they must go in strength, and 
reap a great harvest for the extension of the Church. 
But we must first establish the State, without which 
the Church cannot exist. And for this reason the 
first help should be given to this State, and not to 
what has the pretext of piety. For, when the State 
is founded, it will be its duty to provide for that 
which is spiritual. Let us return to Port Royal. 
When the Sieur arrived there he found Martin and 
his friends, baptized, and all strongly imbued with 
zeal for the Christian Religion, listening very devout- 
ly to divine service, which was usually sung to Music 
composed by the Sieur. 

This zeal is noticeable, not only in the Christian 
neophytes, as we shall state more in detail hereafter; 
but also in those who are not yet initiated into the 
sacred mysteries of Religion. For, as soon as Martin 
was baptized, there was one who was absolutely 
fleshless, having nothing left but bones, who, not 
having been with the others, dragged himself, with 
great suffering, through three cabins, [17] seeking 
the Patriarch Fleuches, to be instructed and baptized. 

Another living at the bay saincte Marie, *^ more 
than a dozen leagues from Port Royal, being sick, 
sent posthaste to the Patriarch, to let him know he 
was detained by sickness, and fearing that he might 


148 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.2 

phytes ci-devant nomme Acoiianis, & maintenant 
Loth, f e trouvant malade, enuoya fon fils en diligence 
de plus de vingt lieues loin fe recommander aux pri- 
eres de I'Eglife: & dire que s'il mouroit il vouloit 
eftre enterre au cimetiere des Chretiens. 

Vn iour le fieur de Poutrincourt eftant alle a la de- 
pouille d'un Cerf tue par Louis fils aine de Henri 
Membertou, comme au retour chacun f'efloit embar- 
que en fa chaloupe & voguoit fur le large efpace de 
la riviere du Port Royal, avint que la femme dudit 
Louis accoucha, & voyans que 1' enfant eftoit de petite 
vie, ils crierent hautement k noz gens Tagaria, Taga- 
ria, c'eft k dire Venez 9a, Venez 9a, fi bien que 1' en- 
fant fut fur I'heure baptize par le Pafteur fufdit. 

Cette ann^e il a couru par dela plufieurs maladies 
de dyfenteries, qui ont efte mortelles a ceux qui en 
efloient attaints. Eft avenu que ledit Martin huit 
iours apres fon bapteme a efte frappe de ce mal, dont 
il efl mort. Mais [18] c'eft chofe digne de memoire 
que cet homme mourant avoit touiours le facre nom 
de Iesvs en la bouche. Et requit en ces extremit6s 
d'eftre enterre apres fa mort avec les Chretiens. Sur 
quoy il y eut de la difficulte. Car les Sauvages ayans 
encore de la reverence aux fepultures de leurs peres 
& amis, le vouloient porter au Cap de Sable h. 40. 
lieues dudit Port. Ledit Sieur d' autre part le vouloit 
faire enterrer felon qu'il 1' avoit demande lA deffus 
vn debat fe prepare. Car lefditz Sauvages prenans 
en main leurs arcs & fleches, vouloient emporter le 
corps. Mais ledit Sieur fit armer vne douzaine d'ar- 
quebuziers, qui I'enleverent fans refiftance, apres leur 
avoir remonflr^ quelle avoit efte 1' intention du dece- 
de, & qu'eftant Chretien il falloit qu'il fuft enterr^ 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 149 

die, desired to be baptized. The Patriarch went 
to him, and, with the help of an interpreter, did for 
him what pertained to his office as a good Pastor. 

As to the Christians, one of these Savage neophytes, 
previously named Acoiianis. and now Loth, becom- 
ing ill, sent his son with all speed more than twenty 
leagues distant, to request the prayers of the Church, 
and to say that, if he died, he wished to be buried in 
the Christian cemetery. 

One day sieur de Poutrincourt went to see the dis- 
memberment of a Deer which had been killed by 
Louis, eldest son of Henry Membertou; and, when 
they had all embarked for their return and were rid- 
ing upon the waves of the broad river of Port Royal, 
it happened that the wife of Louis was delivered of 
a child ; and, seeing that it was short-lived, they cried 
loudly to our people, Tagaria, Trt^^r?'^, that is, " Come 
here. Come here." So the child was immediately 
baptized by the aforenamed Pastor. 

This year the country has been visited, here and 
there, by dysenteric troubles, which have been fatal 
to those affected by them. It happened that Martin 
was stricken a week after his baptism with the dis- 
ease, and died thereof. But [i8] it is worthy of being 
remembered that this dying man always had the 
sacred name of Jesus upon his lips. In his last mo- 
ments he requested that when he died he should be 
buried with the Christians. There was some trouble 
about this. For the Savages having still some rever- 
ence for the burial places of their fathers and friends, 
wished to take him to Cape Sable, forty leagues dis- 
tant from the Port. On the other hand, the Sieur 
wished to have him buried according to his request. 
Thereupon a dispute arose, and the Savages, seizing 
their bows and arrows, wanted to take away the 


150 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.2 


avec fes femblables, comme en fin il fut, avec les prie- 
res accoutumees en I'Eglife. Cela fait on leur bailla 
a tons du pain, & fen allerent contens. 

Mais puis que nous fommes fur le propos des mala- 
dies & mortuaires, ie ne veux paffer fouz filence chofe 
que ie ne fgauoy pas, & laquelle pour ne 1' avoir veu 
pratiquer, ie n'ay point ecrite en mon Hiftoire de la 
Nouvelle France. C'efl que noz Sauvages voyans 
vne perfonne languilTante de vieilleffe ou de maladie 
par vne certaine compaffion ilz lui avancent fes iours, 
lui remonftrent qu'il faut qu'il meure pour acquerir 
vn repos, que c'eft chofe miferable de touiours lan- 
guir, qu'il ne leur fert plus que de fardeau, & autres 
chofes femblables, par lefquelles ils font refoudre le 
patient ^ [19] la mort. Et lors ilz lui otent tous les 
vivres, luy baillent fa belle robbe de Caftors, ou 
d'autre pelleterie, & le mettent comme vn homme qui 
efl ^ demi couche fur fon lidt, lui chantans des lou- 
anges de fa vie paffee, & de fa conftance k la mort : A 
quoy il f 'accorde, & repond comme le Cygne fait fa 
derniere chanfon: Cela fait, chacun le laifle, & f'ef- 
time heureux de mourir pluftot que de languir. Car 
ce peuple eflant vagabond, & ne pouvant touiours 
vivre en vne place, ils ne peuvent trainer apres eux 
leurs peres, ou amis, vieillars, ou malades. C'efl pour- 
quoy ilz les traitent ainfi. Si ce font malades, ilz leur 
font premierement des incifions au ventre, defquelles 
les Pilotois, ou devins fuccent le fang. Et en quelque 
fagon que ce foit, s'ilz voyent qu'un homme ne fe 
puiffe plus trainer, ilz le mettent en I'eftat que deffus, 
& lui iettent contre le nombril tant d'eau froide, que 
la Nature fe debilite peu k peu, & meure nt ainfi fort 
refolument & conftamment. 


1612-14J THE JESUIT RELATIONS 151 

corpse. But the Sieur placed a dozen arquebusiers 
under arms, who carried it off without resistance, 
after he had demonstrated to them that this had been 
the intention of the deceased, and that, being- a Chris- 
tian, he must be buried with his fellow-Christians; 
and so he was, with the usual prayers of the Church. 
When this was done, they were all given some bread, 
and went away happy. 

But as we are now on the subject of sickness and 
death, I do not wish to pass over in silence a custom 
which I did not know about, and which, never hav- 
ing seen practiced, I did not speak of in my History 
of New France. It is, that when our Savages see a 
person gradually failing from old age or sickness, 
through a certain compassion they hasten his death ; 
showing him that he must die to procure rest, that 
it is a wretched thing to languish from day to day, 
that he is only a burden to them, and offer other 
similar arguments, by means of which they make the 
sick man resolve to [19] die. And then they take 
away from him all food, give him his beautiful robe 
of Beaver or other fur, and place him in a half-reclin- 
ing posture upon his bed, singing to him praises of 
his past life, and of his fortitude in death ; to this he 
agrees, and replies with his last chant, like the Swan ; 
When it is finished, all leave him, and he considers 
himself happy to die rather than to linger on. For 
these people, being nomadic, and not being able to 
continue living in one place, cannot drag after them 
their fathers or friends, the aged, or the sick. That 
is why they treat them in this manner. If they are 
sick, they first make incisions into their stomachs, 
from which the Pilotois,^^ or sorcerers, suck the blood. 
And, whatever the cause, if they see a man can no 
longer drag himself along, they put him in the condi- 


152 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.2 

Ainfi en avoit-on fait h. Henri Membertou, qui fe 
trouvoit indifpof6. Mais il manda au fieur de Pou- 
trincourt qu'il le vinft voir ce iour la, antrement qu'il 
eftoit mort. Au mandement ledit Sieur va trouver 
Membertou au fond du Port Royal h. quatre lieues loin 
de fon fort, auquel ledit Membertou conte fon affaire, 
difant qu'il n'avoit point encore envie de mourir. 
Ledit Sieur le confole, & le fait enlever de la pour le 
mener avec lui. Ce qu'ayant fait, & arrive audit Fort, 
il lui fait preparer vn bon feu, le couclie aupres fur 
vn bon lidt, le fait frotter, dorlotter, [20] & bien pen- 
fer, lui fait prendre medecine, d'oii s'enfuivit qu'au 
bout de trois iours voila Membertou debout, preft h. 
vivre encore cinquante ans. 

On ne pent arracher tout d'un coup les coutumes 
& fagons de faire inveterees d'un peuple quel que ce 
foit. Les Apotres ni plufleurs fiecles apres eux ne 
I'ont pas fait, t^moins les ceremonies des chandeles 
de la Chandeleur, les Proceffions des Rogations, les 
Feuz de ioye de la faindt lehan Baptifle, I'Eau be- 
nite, & plufieurs autres traditions que nous avons en 
I'Eglife, lefquelles ont efte introduites k bonne fin, 
pour tourner en bon vfage ce que 1 on faifoit par abus. 
Ainfi ia9oit que la famille de Membertou foit Chre- 
tienne, toutefois elle n'avoit efte encore enfeignee 
qu'il n'eft pas loifible aux hommes d'abbreger les 
iours aux vieillars, ou malades, quoy qu'ilz penfent 
bien faire, mais faut attendre la volont6 de Dieu, & 
laiffer faire fon office k la Nature. Et de verite vn 
Pafleur eft excufable qui manque k faire chofe dont 
il n'a connoiffance. 

Vne chofe de meme merite avint en la maladie de 
Martin. Car on lui ietta de I'eau femblablement, 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 153 

tion above described, and throw upon his navel so much 
cold water, that Nature weakens little by little, and 
thus he dies with great steadfastness and fortitude. 

This is the way they had treated Henry Member- 
tou when he was sick. But he sent and asked sieur 
de Poutrincourt to come and see him that very day, 
otherwise he would be dead. At this request the 
Sieur went to seek Membertou at the farther end of 
Port Royal, four leagues away from his fort ; to him 
the said Membertou related his story, saying he did 
not care to die yet. The Sieur consoled him, and 
had him lifted up and taken away with him. Then, 
when they arrived at the Fort, he had a good fire 
prepared for him, and, placing him near it upon a 
good bed, had him rubbed, [20] nursed, well cared 
for, and doctored ; and the result was, at the end of 
three days, behold Membertou up and about, ready 
to live fifty years longer. 

You cannot all at once eradicate the deep-rooted 
customs and habits of any people, whoever they may 
be. The Apostles did not do it, neither was it done 
several centuries after them ; witness the ceremonies 
of the candles on Candlemas, the Processions of the 
Rogation-days, the Bonfires of saint John the Bap- 
tist's day, the holy Water, and many other traditions 
that we have in the Church, which have been intro- 
duced for a laudable purpose, to convert to a good 
usage what had only been abused. So, although 
Membertou 's family were Christians, nevertheless 
they had not yet been taught that it is not lawful for 
men to shorten the days of the aged, or sick, although 
they think they are doing right ; but rather that they 
must await the will of God, and leave Nature to do 
her work. And certainly a Pastor is excusable who 
fails to do things of which he has no knowledge. 


154 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.2 

pour ne le voir languir: & eftant malade comme le- 
dit Patriarche, & vn nomine de Montfort lui eullent 
pris k la chaffe & fait manger quelques tourtres, lef- 
quelles il trouva bonnes, il demandoit lors qu'on luy 
parloit de Paradis, li Ton y en mangeoit: A quoy on 
lui repondit qu'il y auoit chofe meilleure, & qu'il y 
feroit content. Voila la fimplicite d'un peuple [21] 
plus capable de polTeder le royaume des cieux que 
ceux qui fgavent beaucoup, & font des oeuvres mau- 
vaifes. Car ce qu'on leur propofe, ilz le croyent & 
gardent foigneufement, voire reprochent aux ndftres 
leurs f antes, quand ilz ne prient point Dieu avant & 
apres le repas: ce qu'a fait plufieurs fois ledit Henri 
Membertou, lequel affifte volontiers au fervice divin, 
& porte tou jours le figne de la Croix au devant de fa 
poitrine. M^me ne fe fentant affez capable de former 
des prieres convenables ^ Dieu, il prioit le Pafteur de 
fe fouvenir de lui, & de tons fes freres Sauvages bap- 
tizes. Depuis le dernier bapteme duquel nous avons 
fait mention, il y en a eu plufieurs autres du 14. & 
16. d'Aouft, 8. & 9. d'Octobre i. de Decembre 1610. 
Et en fomme ledit Pafteur fait eftat d'en auoir bap- 
tize fept vingts en vn an, auf quels ont eft6 impofez 
les noms de plufieurs perfonnes fignalees de parde9a, 
felon I'affedtion de ceux qui faifoient 1' office de pa- 
rins, ou marines, lefquels ont bailie des filleuls a ceux 
& celles qui enfuiuent. 

ET PREMIEREMENT, 

Monfieur le Prince de Conde. 
Monfieur le Prince de Conty. 
M. le Comte de Soiffons. 
M. le Due de Neuers. 
M. le Due de Guife. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 165 


Something similar was done in Martin's sickness. 
For they threw water upon him in this way, in order 
not to see him linger along; during his sickness, 
when the Patriarch and a man named de Montfort 
had caught for him, and made him eat some wild 
pigeon, which he liked very much, he asked them, 
as they were speaking to him about Heaven, if there 
would be any wild pigeon there. To which they 
answered that there was something better there, and 
that he would be happy. Such is the simplicity of a 
people [21] more fit to possess the kingdom of heav- 
en than those who know a great deal, and whose 
deeds are evil. For they believe and carefully ob- 
serve what is proposed to them, even reproaching 
our people for their carelessness, if they do not pray 
to God before and after eating; this was done a 
number of times by Henry Membertou, who likes to 
attend divine service, and always wears the sign of 
the Cross upon his bosom. Furthermore, not being 
able to formulate suitable prayers to God, he begged 
the Pastor to remember him, and all his brother Sav- 
ages who have been baptized. Since the last bap- 
tism, of which we have spoken, there were several 
others, on the 14th and i6th of August, the 8th and 
9th of October, and the ist of December, 16 10. And 
altogether the Pastor calculates that he has baptized 
one hundred and forty in one year, to whom have 
been given the names of many distinguished people 
over here, according to the inclinations of those who 
held the position of godfathers or godmothers; 
these have given godsons to the following. 

AND FIRSTLY TO, 

Monsieur the Prince de Conde. 
Monsieur the Prince de Conty. 


156 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 2 


M. le Prince de loinuille. 

M. le Prince de Tingry. 

M. de Praflin. 

M. Roger Baron de Chaource fils dudit fieur de Praflain. 

M. de Grieu Confeiller au Parlement de Paris. [22] 

M. Seruin Aduocat general du Roy audit Parlement. 

M. de la Guefle Procureur general du Roy audit Parlement. 

M. le Comte de Tonnerre. 

Meffire leffe de Fleuchey, Patriarche de Canada. 

M. Belot, dit de Monfort. 

M. de louv. 

M. Bertrand natif de Sefane. prefens & affiftans aufdits baptefmes. 

M. de Villars Archeuefque de Vienne Daulphine. 

M. Defcars Euefque & Due de Langres. 

M. de Gondy Euefque de Paris. 

M. Dormy Euefque de Boulongne. 

M. de BraHay Euefque de Troyes. 

M. I'Abbe de faincite Geneuiefue fils de M. de Beauuais Nangis. 

M. Abbe de Cleruaux. 

M. de Vaufemain Baron de Chapleine, Bailly de Troyes. 

Frere Claude de Vauuillier Penitencier de Molefme. 

M. Bareton Chanoine grand Archidiacre & Official de Troyes. 

M. Douynet, Chanome & Promoteur audit Troyes. 

M. Megard, Chanoine & Threforier de faindt Vrbain audit Troyes. 

M. Megard Licentie es Droidls. Chanoine en VEglife faindt Efti- 
enne audit Troyes. 

M. Fombert Chanoine en I'Eglife de Vienne. 

M. Guilliet Chanoine audit Viennes. 

M. Bourguignon cure de faindt Eftienne au mont a Paris. 

M. Dauiau Vicaire & receueur audit S. Eftienne. 

M. Rouure cure de Lantage. 

M. de Marquemont auditeur de Rothes a Rome. 

M. de Sauarre Confeiller au Parlement de Paris. 

M. Vigor Confeiller au grand Confeil. 

M. de faindt luft. 

M. de Lantage-baratier, fieur dudit Lantage. 

M. Edme baratier fon fils. 

M. de Lantage Motleliart. 

M. de Saindt Simon. 

M. de la Berge. 

M Augufte du Boullot, fieur de I'Eftain. 

M. Regnard Secretaire de la Chambre du Roy. & de Monf.eur le 
Procureur general. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 165 


Something similar was done in Martin's sickness. 
For they threw water upon him in this way, in order 
not to see him linger along; during his sickness, 
when the Patriarch and a man named de Montfort 
had caught for him, and made him eat some wild 
pigeon, which he liked very much, he asked them, 
as they were speaking to him about Heaven, if there 
would be any wild pigeon there. To which they 
answered that there was something better there, and 
that he would be happy. Such is the simplicity of a 
people [21] more fit to possess the kingdom of heav- 
en than those who know a great deal, and whose 
deeds are evil. For they believe and carefully ob- 
serve what is proposed to them, even reproaching 
our people for their carelessness, if they do not pray 
to God before and after eating; this was done a 
number of times by Henry Membertou, who likes to 
attend divine service, and always wears the sign of 
the Cross upon his bosom. Furthermore, not being 
able to formulate suitable prayers to God, he begged 
the Pastor to remember him, and all his brother Sav- 
ages who have been baptized. Since the last bap- 
tism, of which we have spoken, there were several 
others, on the 14th and i6th of August, the 8th and 
9th of October, and the ist of December, 16 10. And 
altogether the Pastor calculates that he has baptized 
one hundred and forty in one year, to whom have 
been given the names of many distinguished people 
over here, according to the inclinations of those who 
held the position of godfathers or godmothers; 
these have given godsons to the following. 

AND FIRSTLY TO, 

Monsieur the Prince de Conde. 
Monsieur the Prince de Conty. 


156 


LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 2 


M. le Prince de loinuille. 

M. le Prince de Tingry. 

M. de Praflin. 

M. Roger Baron de Chaource fils dudit fieur de Pradain. 

M, de Grieu Confeiller au Parlement de Paris. [22] 

M. Seruin Aduocat general du Roy audit Parlement. 

M. de la Guede Procureur general du Roy audit Parlement. 

M. le Comte de Tonnerre. 

Meffire leffe de Fleuchey, Patriarche de Canada. 

M. Belot, dit de Monfort. 

M. de louy. 

M. Bertrand natif de Sefane, prefens & afliaans aufdits baptefmes. 

M. de Villars Archeuefque de Vienne Daulphine. 

M. Defcars Euefque & Due de Langres. 

M. de Gondy Euefque de Paris. 

M. Dormy Euefque de Boulongne. 

M. de Branay Euefque de Troyes. 

M. I'Abbe de faindte Geneuiefue fils de M. de Beauuais Nangis. 

M. Abbe de Cleruaux. 

M. de Vaufemain Baron de Chapleine, Bailly de Troyes. 

Frere Claude de Vauuillier Penitencier de Molefme. 

M. Bareton Chanoine grand Archidiacre & Official de Troyes. 

M. Douynet, Chanome & Promoteur audit Troyes. 

M. Megard, Chanoine & Threforier de faindt Vrbain audit Troyes. 

M. Megard Licentie es Droidts, Chanoine en I'Eglife faindt Efti- 
enne audit Troyes. 

M. Fombert Chanoine en I'Eglife de Vienne. 

M. Guilliet Chanoine audit Viennes. 

M. Bourguignon cure de faindt Eftienne au mont a Paris. 

M. Dauiau Vicaire & receueur audit S. Eftienne. 

M. Rouure cure de Lantage. 

M. de Marquemont auditeur de Rothes a Rome. 

M. de Sauarre Confeiller au Parlement de Paris. 

M. Vigor Confeiller au grand Confeil. 

M. de faindt luft. 

M. de Lantage-baratier, fieur dudit Lantage. 

M. Edme baratier fon fils. 

M. de Lantage Motleliart. 

M. de Saindt Simon. 

M. de la Berge. 

M. Augufte du Boullot, fieur de I'Eftain. 

M. Regnard Secretaire de la Chambre du Roy. & de Monfieur le 
Procureur general. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 157 

M. the Count de Soissons." 

M. the Duke de Nevers." 

M. the Duke de Guise. »« 

M. the Prince de Joinville. 

M. the Prince de Tingry. 

M. de Praslin." 

M. Roger, Baron de Chaource, son of sieur de Praslin. 

M. de Grieu, Counselor in the Parliament of Paris.** [22] 

M. Servin, Advocate-general of the King in Parliament. 

M. de la Guesle, Procuror-general of the King in Parliament. 

M. the Count de Tonnerre. 

Messire Jesse de Fleuchey, Patriarch of Canada. 

M. Belot, called de Monfort. 

M. de Jouy. 

M. Bertrand,*' native of Sesane, present and assisting in these 
baptisms. 

M. de Villars, Archbishop of Vienne, in Daulphine. 

M. Descars, Bishop and Duke de Langres. 

M. de Gondy, Bishop of Paris. 

M. Dormy, Bishop of Boulongne. 

M. de Braslay, Bishop of Troyes. 

M. the Abbe of saincte Geneviefve,^" son of M. de Beauvais 
Nangis. 

M. the Abbe of Clervaux. 

M. de Vausemain, Baron de Chapleine, Bailiff of Troyes. 

Brother Claude de Vauvillier, Penitencier of Molesme. 

M. Bareton, Canon, grand Arch-deacon and Official of Troyes. 

M. Douynet, Canon and Promoter at Troyes. 

M. Megard, Canon and Treasurer of sainct Urbain, at Troyes. 

M. Megard, Licentiate in Law, Canon in the Church of St. Esti- 
enne at Troyes. 

M. Fombert, Canon in the Church of Vienne. 

M. Guilliet, Canon at Vienne. 

M. Bourguignon, pastor of Sainct Estienne au mont, Paris. 

M. Daviau, Vicar and receiver of St. Estienne. 

M. Rouvre, pastor of Lantage. 

M. de Marquemont, auditor of Rothes, at Rome. 

M. de Savarre, Counselor in the Parliament of Paris. 

M. Vigor, Counselor in the grand Council. 

M. de sainct Just. 

M. de Lantage-baratier, sieur of Lantage. 

M. Edme baratier, his son. 

M. de Lantage Montleliart. 

M. de Sainct Simon. 

M. de la Berge. 


158 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.2 

Monf. Symony Sieur de Rouelle Aduocat a Langres. [23] 
M.'Fombert Procureur en Parlement. 
M. Dauant Prefident & Lieutenant general a Troyes. 
M. de Bobus Lieutenant Criminel audit Troyes. 
M. Bazin Procureur du Roy audit lieu. 
M. Parmentier Lieutenant de robbe courte audit Troyes. 
M. lacquinet maiftre des eaux & forefts audit Troyes. 
M. Megard Lieutenant des Chirurgies audit Troyes. 
M. Martin Lieutenant general au Marquifat d'Ifle. 
M. I'Euefque Procureur audit lieu. 
M. lamin Greffier audit lieu. 
M. de la Rue Vicaire de Virey foubs Bar. 
M. Belot threforier extraordinaire des guerres en Guienne. 
M. Belot CommilTaire des guerres. 
M. Belot fieur du Pontor. 
M. Belot Procureur au grand Confeil. 
M. Hardy Receueur des tailles au Mans. 
M. Marteau Secretaire du fieur Preuoft Morel. 
M. Baioue Greffier au bailliage de Monfort Lamaury. 
M. de Creffe Commis de Monfieur Eflienne Controleur des bafti- 
mens du Roy. 

M. du Val luge & Garde de la luflice de Lantage. 

M. de la Creufe Secretaire de Monfieur de Chaftille. 

lean, Mathieu & Gregoire de Fleuchey freres dudit Patriarche. 

Pierre Rouffel fon beau frere. 

Ferry Rouffel fils de Gabriel Rouffel dudit Lantage. 

Robert Roy, Serget Royal Foreftier de la foreft de Romilly. 

Claude loug^elat. 

Quand mix fennncs on a do?md des filleules a celles qui 

enfuiuent. 

Madame la Princeffe de Conde. 
Madame la Princeffe de Conty. 
Mad. la Comteffe de Soiffons. 
Mad. la Ducheffe de Neuers. 
Mad. de Guife. 
Mad. de Longueuille. [24] 
Mad. de Praflam mere du Sieur de Praflain. 
Mad. de Praflain. 

Mefdamoifelles Catherine, Blanche & Claude filles dudit fieur de 
Praflain. 
Mad. la Comteffe de Tonnerre 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 159 

M. Augfuste du Boullot, sieur de I'Estain. 

M. Regnard, Secretary of the King's Chamber and of Monsieur 
the Procuror-general. 

Mons. Symony, Sieur de Rouelle, Advocate at Langres. [23] 

M. Fombert, Procurer in Parliament. 

M. Davant, President and Lieutenant-general at Troyes. 

M. de Bobus, Criminal Lieutenant at Troyes. 

M. Bazin, Attorney of the King at that place. 

M. Parmentier, Lieutenant of the short robe ^' at Troyes. 

M. Jacquinet, master of streams and forests at Troyes. 

M. Megard, Lieutenant of Surgeons at Troyes. 

M. Martin, Lieutenant-general of the Marquisate of Isle. 

M. I'Evesque, Procuror at that place. 

M. lamin, Master of Rolls at that place. 

M. de la Rue, Vicar of Virey soubs Bar. 

M. Belot, treasurer extraordinary of the wars in Guienne. 

M. Belot, military Commissioner. 

M. Belot, sieur du Pontor. 

M. Belot, Procuror in the grand Council. 

M. Hardy, Receiver of taxes at Mans. 

M. Marteau, Secretary to sieur Prevost Morel. 

M. Bajoue, Master of Rolls at the bailiwick of Monfort Lamaury. 

M. de Cresse, Clerk to Monsieur Estienne, Controller of the King's 
buildings. 

M. du Val, Judge and Guard of Justice at Lantage. 

M. de la Creuse, Secretary of Monsieur de Chastille. 

Jean, Mathieu and Gregoire de Fleuchey, brothers of the Patriarch. 

Pierre Roussel, his brother-in-law. 

Ferry Roussel, son of Gabriel Roussel, of said Lantage. 

Robert Roy, Sergeant Royal, Forester of the forest of Romilly. 

Claude Jouguelat. 

As to the women, goddaughters were given to the follow- 
ing. 

Madame the Princess de Condi. 
Madame the Princess de Conty. 
Mad. the Countess de Soissons.'* 
Mad. the Duchess of Nevers.'^" 
Mad. de Guise.'* 
Mad. de Long^eville. [24] 

Mad. de Praslain, mother of Sieur de Praslain." 
Mad. de Praslain. 

Mesdemoiselles Catherine, Blanche, and Claude, daughters of sieur 
de Praslain. 
Mad. the Countess de Tonnerre. 


160 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.2 

Mad. Anne de la Val Dame de Ricey. 

Mad. Fran5oife de Faulch femme du fieur Delantage Baratier. 

Mad. Charlotte leur fille. 

Mad. de Grieu. 

Mad. de la Berge. 

Mad. de Sauare. 

Mad. Anne Arleftain femme du fieur de I'Eftain. 

Mefd. Philippes & Charlotte de Arleftain fes foeurs. 

Madam. Regnard femme dudit fieur Regnard. 

Mad. Belot Treforier. 

Madame Simony vefue de Monfieur Simony Procureur en Parlemet. 

Mad. de Beaulieu. 

Mad. Marguerite Simony. 

Mad. Hardy. 

Mad. Belot femme de Mofieur Belot Procureur. 

Mad. Bajoue. 

Mad. leanne des Marets femme du fieur Megard Chirurgien k 
Troyes. 

Barbe Ramin mere dudit Patriarche. 

Barbe de Fleuchey fa foeur. 

leanne, Clemence Rouffel & Valentine Drouin femes defdits Fleu- 
chey freres dudit Patriarche. 

Voila ce que i'ay extrait d'un ordre confus des 
parins & marines, lef quels i'ay voulu coucher icy 
pour les inuiter a faire du bien "k ceux qui ont et€ 
baptizez foubs leurs noms, dont ie veux bien efperer 
m6me de ceux de balTe condition. Que fi la conver- 
flon de ces peuples ne va par milliers, il faut conlide- 
rer I'eftat du pais qui n'efl fi frequent en hommes 
que noz villages de France. On pourroit faire plus 
grande moiffon qui voudroit paffer plus outre : mais 
il faut vouloir ce que Ton peut, & prie Dieu qu'il 
vueille faire le refte, puifque les hommes ont cette 
entreprife tat "k mepris. 

[25] EXERCICES. 
La piete du fieur de Poutrincourt veut que le pre- 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 161 

Mad. Anne de la Val, Lady of Ricey. 

Mad. Frangoise de Faulch, wife of sieur Delantage Baratier. 

Mad. Charlotte, their daughter. 

Mad. de Grieu. 

Mad. de la Berge. 

Mad. de Savare. 

Mad. Anne Arlestain, wife of sieur de I'Estain. 

Mesd. Philippa and Charlotte de Arlestain, his sisters. 

Madam. Regnard, wife of Sieur Regnard. 

Mad. Belot (wife of Treasurer.) 

Madame Simony, widow of Monsieur Simony, Procurer in Parlia- 
ment. 

Mad. de Beaulieu. 

Mad. Marguerite Simony. 

Mad. Hardy. 

Mad. Belot, wife of Monsieur Belot, Procurer. 

Mad. Bajoue. 

Mad. Jeanne des Marets, wife of sieur Megard, Surgeon at Troyes. 

Barbe Ramin, mother of the Patriarch. 

Barbe de Fleuchey, his sister. 

Jeanne, Clemence Roussel, and Valentine Drouin, wives of said 
Fleucheys, brothers of the Patriarch. 

The above are the extracts I have made from a 
confused list of godfathers and godmothers, whom I 
wish to enumerate here so that they may do some 
good to those who have been baptized under their 
names, which I am willing to hope for, even from 
those of humble condition. And if the conversion 
of these people is not effected by thousands, we must 
consider the state of the country, in which there are 
not as many men as in our villages in France. A 
greater harvest could be reaped by those who could 
go farther beyond; but we must be willing to do 
what we can, and pray God that he may consent to 
do the rest, since men look upon this enterprise with 
so much contempt. 

[25] OCCUPATIONS. 

Sieur de Poutrincourt's piety requires that the first 
exercise of the day in this country be to pray to God 


162 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.2 

mier exercice de la journee en ce pais 1^ foit de prier 
Dieu, k ritnitation d' Abel, lequel (ce dit Philon) offrit 
au matin fon facrifice. Ce que ne fit Cain. Et les 
fages remarquent par la comparaif on de lacob qui re- 
cent la premiere benedidtion d'Ifaac, laquelle fut plus 
forte que celle qui fut donnee a Ef au : que ceux qui 
prient du matin, receuans la premiere benedidtion de 
Dieu, ont auffi plus grande part en fes graces. C'eft 
pourquoy vn illuftre perfonnage de ndtre temps entre 
fes preceptes moraux & fentences vrayement dorees, 
a ecrit. 

Avec le jour commence ta journee 
Dc I' Et erne I le faindl no7n benijfant: 
Le foir aufsi ton labeur jiniffant, 
Loue-le encor, & paffe atnfi I'annee. 

C'est ainfi que ledit Sieur en a fait, ayant expres 
mene ^ fes depens le fufdit Patriarche, lequel ie voy 
par les memoires que i'ay ne s'eftre iamais epargne k 
ce qui eftoit de fa charge s'eftant tranfporte quelque- 
f ois quatre, quelquef ois douze lieues loin pour baptizer 
des enfans de Sauvages, au mandement qu'ilz luy en 
faifoient, difans qu'ils vouloient eftre comme Mem- 
bertou, c'efl ^ dire Chretiens. Quelquefois auffi il a 
conduit fa troupe en proceffio fur vne montagne qui 
efl au Nort de leur habitation, fur laquelle y a vn roc 
quarre de toutes [26] parts, de la hauteur d'une table, 
convert d'vne mouffe epeffe ou ie me fuis quelquefois 
couche plaifammet: i'ay appelle ce lieu le mont de 
la Roque au pourtraidt que i'ay fait du Port Royal en 
mon Hifloire, en faveur d'un mien amy nome de la 
Roque Prevoll: de Vimeu en Picardie, qui defiroit 
prendre Ik vne terre, & y enuoyer des hommes. 

Le fecond exercice c'eft de pourvoir aux neceffitez 
de la vie, k quoy il employa fes gens chacun felon fa 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 163 

like Abel, who (as Philo says) offered his sacrifice to 
God in the morning; which Cain did not do. And 
sages observe, by citing Jacob, who received Isaac's 
first blessing, which was stronger than that given to 
Esau, that those who pray in the morning and receive 
the first benediction of God, always have a greater 
share in his mercies. Hence an illustrious personage 
of our times has written, among his moral precepts 
and truly golden sentences ; 

With the light thy day beginning. 
Then praise the name of the Eternal One; 
Again at evening when thy uork is done. 
Thus spend the year his praises singing. 

, The Sieur has done this, having brought here, ex- 
pressly at his own expense, the aforementioned Pa- 
triarch, who, I see from memoranda which I have, 
has never spared himself in the performance of his 
duties, going sometimes four, sometimes twelve 
leagues away to baptize some of the children of the 
Savages, in answer to their requests, saying they 
wanted to be like Membertou, namely, Christians. 
Also sometimes he has led his band in a procession 
to a mountain North of their settlement, upon which 
there is a square rock [26] as high as a table, covered 
with thick moss, where I have sometimes enjoyed a 
pleasant rest. I have called this place mount de la 
Roque, in the sketch I made of Port Royal in my 
History, after one of my friends named de la Roque, 
Provost of Vimeu in Picardy, who desired to take up 
land there and to send over some men. 

The second duty was to provide for the necessities 
of life, and to this end he employed his people, each 
according to his trade, as soon as they arrived; some 
were employed in tilling the ground, some in build- 


164 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.2 

vacatio, eftant arriue a la terre, qui au labourage, qui 
aux batimens, qui a la forge, qui a faire des ais, &c. 
Le Patriarche fufdit s'empara de mon etude, & de 
mes parterres & jardinages, ou il dit auoir trouve ar- 
rivant 1^, quantite de raves, naveaux, carottes, pa- 
nais, pois, feves, & toutes fortes d'herbes jardinieres 
bonnes & platureufes. A quoy s' eftant occupe, il y 
a laiffe a fon retour (qui fut le 17. de luin dernier) vn 
beau champ de ble a beaux epics, & bien fleuri. 

Plufieurs autres fe font occupes h. la terre, comme 
eflant le premier metier & le plus neceffaire h. la vie 
de I'homme. lis en ont (comme ie croy) maintenant 
recuilli les fruidts, hors-mis des arbres fruitiers qu'ils 
ont plantes, lefquels ne font li prompts k cela. 

Quant aux Sauvages ils ne fgauent que c'eft du la- 
bourage, & ne s'y peuvent addonner, courageux feule- 
ment & penibles a la chaffe, & a la pecherie. Toute- 
fois les Armouchiquois & autres plus efloignes 
plantent du ble & des feves, mais ils laiffent faire 
cela aux femmes. 

[27] Nos gens outre le labourage & iardinage, 
avoient I'exercice de la chaffe, de la pecherie, & de 
leurs fortifications. lis ne manquerent aufli d'exer- 
cice a remettre & couvrir les batimens & le moulin de- 
laiffez depuis ndtre retour en I'an 1607. Et d'autant 
que la fonteine efloit vn peu eloignee du Fort, ils 
firent vn pui dans icelui Fort, de I'eau duquel ils fe 
font fort bien trouvez. De forte que (chofe emer- 
ueillable) ils n'ont eu aucunes maladies, quoy qu'il y 
ait eu beaucoup de fujet d'en avoir par la neceffit^ 
qu'ils ont foufferte. Car le Sieur de Saindt lufl fils 
dudit Sieur de Poutrincourt ayant eu mandement de 
retourner dans quatre mois (comme nous avons dit 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 165 


ing, some at the forge, some in making planks, etc. 
The Patriarch took possession of my apartment, and 
of my parterres and gardens, where he says he found, 
at his arrival, a great many radishes, parsnips, car- 
rots, turnips, peas, beans, and all kinds of good and 
productive culinary herbs. Occupying himself with 
these things, upon his return (which was the 17th of 
last June), he left a beautiful field of wheat with 
fine, well-flowered heads. 

Several others were occupied in agriculture, this 
being the occupation of prime importance, and most 
necessary to human life. They have now (I sup- 
pose ) reaped the harvest thereof, except that of the 
trees they planted, which are not so prompt in bear- 
ing. 

As to the Savages, they know nothing about cul- 
tivating the land, and cannot give themselves up to 
it, showing themselves courageous and laborious 
only in hunting and fishing. However, the Armou- 
chiquois and other more distant tribes plant wheat ^ 
and beans, but they let the women do the work.*^ 

[27] Our people, besides the farm and garden work, 
passed their time in hunting, fishing, and in making 
fortifications. Work was not wanting also in repair- 
ing and roofing the buildings and the mill, aban- 
doned since our return in 1607. And, as the spring 
was some little distance from there, they dug a well 
in the Fort, and found the water very good. So that 
(wonderful to relate) they had no sickness, although 
there was sufficient cause for it in the privations they 
suffered. For Sieur de Sainct Just, son of Sieur de 
Poutrincourt, having been ordered to return in four 
months (as we have said above), was expected the 
last of November, with fresh supplies; yet he did 
not come until the day of Pentecost, the 22nd of the 


166 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.2 

ci-deffus) on Tattendoit dans la fin de Nouembre pour 
avoir du rafraichiffement, & toutesfois il n'arriva que 
le iour de Pentecofte, qui fut le 22. de May enfuivant. 
Cela fut caufe qu'il fallut retrencher les vivres qu'ils 
avoient en affez petite quantite. De manger toujours 
du poiffon (s'il n'est bo & ferme) ou des coquillages 
feuls fans pain, cela eft dangereux, & caufe la dyfen- 
terie, come nous avos rapporte ci-deffus de quelques 
Sauuages qui en font morts, & pouvons en avoir autre 
temoignage par les gens du Sieur de Monts, qui mou- 
rurent en nombre de vingt la premiere ann^e qu'ils 
hivernerent k Kebec, tat pour la nouveaute de la de- 
meure, que pour avoir trop mange d'anguilles & 
autres poiffos. La chaffe auffi ne fe trouve pas "k foi- 
fon en vn lieu ou il faut viure de cela, & oil Ton fait 
vne demeure arreftee, C'eft ce qui rend les [28] Sau- 
vages vagabons, & fait qu'ilz ne peuvent vivre en vne 
place. Quand ils ont efle fix femaines en vn lieu il 
faut changer de demeure. Ilz prindrent au terroir du 
Port Royal fix Grignaces ou EUans, cet hiver, dont 
ils en apportoient vn quartier ou moitie aux notres. 
Mais cela ne va gueres loin k tant de gens. Le iour 
de Pafques fleuries le fils aine de Membertou dit 
Louis, en pourfuivoit vn, qui s'eftant venu rendre au 
Port Royal palToit I'eau, quand la femme dudit Louis 
vint faire vne alarme en criant plufieurs fois, Ecli pa- 
da, Eclipada, c'eft ^ dire, Aux epees, Aux epees. On 
penfoit que ce fuffent quelques ennemis, mais il fut 
le bien venu. Le Sieur de Poutrincourt fe mit dans 
vne chaloupe pour aller au devant, & avec vn dogue 
il le fit tourner en arriere d'oii il venoit. II y avoit 
du plaifir a le cotoyer fi proche de fa mine. Si-toft 
qu'il approcha de terre, ledit Louis le tranfper9a 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 167 

following- May. For this reason they were obliged 
to diminish their rations, of which they had rather a 
small quantity. To always eat fish (unless it is good 
and firm) or shellfish alone, without bread, is dan- 
gerous, and causes dysentery, as we have observed 
above in regard to certain Savages who died of it. 
We can prove this also by Sieur de Monts' men, who 
died, to the number of twenty, the first year they 
wintered at Kebec, both on account of their change 
of dwelling, and because they ate too many eels and 
other fish. Furthermore, game is not always to be 
found in abundance in a place where people are 
obliged to live on it, and where there is a permanent 
settlement. This is what makes [28] nomads of the 
Savages, and prevents them from remaining long in 
one place. When they have been six weeks in a 
place, they are obliged to leave their habitation. 
This winter, in the neighborhood of Port Royal they 
took six Grignaces** or Elks, and brought a quarter or 
half of them to our people. But that did not go far 
with so many men. On Palm Sunday, Louis, the 
eldest son of Membertou, was on the trail of one 
which had reached Port Royal and was just crossing 
the river, when his wife caused an alarm by crying 
out several times, EcJipada, Eclipada, that is, " To 
arms, to arms." They thought it might be an ene- 
my, but it was a welcome one. Sieur de Poutrincourt 
got into a boat to go and head it off, and, with the 
help of a big dog, made it turn back whence it came. 
There was some sport in chasing it so near its death. 
As soon as it approached the land, Louis pierced it 
through with an arrow, Sieur de Jouy discharged his 
arquebuse at its head, but ActaudinccJi , or Paul, the 
younger son of Membertou, dexterously cut a vein in 


168 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.2 

d'une fleche, le Sieur de louy luy tira vne arquebu- 
fade ^ la t^te, mais A6laudinecJi dit Paul fils puifne de 
Membertou lui coupa dextrement vne veine au col, 
qui I'atterra du tout. Ceci donna vne curee & confo- 
lation ftomachale aux ndtres. Mais cela ne dura pas 
ton jours. II fallut revenir k 1' ordinaire. Et faut 
penfer qu'en ce retranchement de vivres dont nous 
avons parle il y eut de grandes affaires pour le chef, 
car des mutineries & confpirations furvindrent, & d'vn 
cofte le cuifmier deroboit vne partie de la portion des 
autres, & tel crioit ^ la faim, qui avoit abondance de 
pain & de chair dans fa [29] cellule, ainfi que s'eft veu 
par experience. Ceux qui portoient le \A€ au moulin, 
de quinze boiffeaux n'en rendoient que douze de farine 
au lieu de dix-huic5t. Et de la neceiTite d'autrui ils 
troquoient avarement des Caftors auec les Sauvages. 
Neantmoins (par trop de bont6) tant de fautes leur 
furent pardonnees apres vifitation faite. Pauvres fots 
qui font des confeils fi legers, & ne voyent point ce 
qu'ils deviendront par apres, & que leur vie ne peut 
eftre affeur^e que par vn perpetuel exil de leur pa- 
trie, & de tout ce qu'ils ont de plus cher au monde. 

En cette difette on eut avis de quelques racines que 
les Sauvages mangent au befoin, lefquelles font 
bonnes comme Truffes. Cela fut caufe que quelques 
pareffeux fe miret avec les diligens a fouiller la terre, 
& firent fi bien par leurs iourn^es qu'ils en defri- 
cherent environ quatre arpens, la ou on a feme des 
fegles & legumes. C'eft ainfi que Dieu f9ait tirer du 
mal vn bien; il chaftie les fiens, & neantmoins les 
foutient de fa main. 

Quand I'hiver fut paffe, & que la douceur du temps 
allecha le poiffon a rechercher les eaux douces, on de- 


1612-14] THE JES UIT RELA TIONS 169 

its neck, which completely finished it. This gave 
our people some game, and consolation to their stom- 
achs. But it did not last always, and they had to 
come back to ordinary fare. You must bear in mind 
that, in this cutting down of supplies, of which we 
have spoken, there were great responsibilities for the 
commandant; for mutinies and conspiracies arose; 
and on the one hand the cook stole a part of what 
belonged to the others, while a certain one cried 
* ' hunger ' ' who had plenty of bread and meat in his 
[29] cell, as has been proven. Those who carried 
wheat to the mill, from fifteen bushels brought back 
only twelve of flour, instead of eighteen. They also 
took advantage of the necessity of others, in miserly 
trafiic in Beaver skins with the Savages. Neverthe- 
less (through too much kindness), all these faults 
were pardoned after they had been looked into. 
Poor fools, who take good counsel so lightly, and do 
not see what will become of them afterwards, and 
that their lives can only be assured by a perpetual 
exile from their country, and from all they hold dear- 
est in the world. 

During this scarcity they heard of some roots 
which the Savages eat in their time of need, and 
which are as good as Truffles.^ To seek for these, 
some of the lazy ones, as well as the more industri- 
ous, began to dig ; and did so well that, by working 
daily, they cleared about four acres, in which rye 
and vegetables were planted. It is thus that God 
can draw good from evil ; he chastises his people, 
and yet sustains them with his hand. 

When the winter was over and the mildness of the 
weather allured the fish to seek fresh water, upon 
the 14th of April, men were sent out fishing. There 


170 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.2 

pecha des gens le 14. Avril pour faire la qii^te de 
cela. II y a nombre infini de ruiffeaux au Port Royal, 
entre lef quels font trois on quatre ou vient k foifon le 
poilTon an renouvean. L'vn apporte I'Eplan en Avril 
en quantite infinie. L'autre le Haren, I'autre I'Etur- 
geon & Saumo, &c. Ainfi furent lors deputez quel- 
ques vns ponr aller voir a la riviere qui [30] eft au 
profond du Port Royal, li I'Eplan eftoit venu. lis 
y allerent, & leur fit Membertou (qui eftoit cabann6 
la) bonne chere, de chair & de poifCon. Dela ils al- 
lerent au ruilTeau nomme Lieffe par le Sieur des 
Noyers Advocat en Parlement, la oil ils trouverent 
tant de poiffon, qu'il fallut envoyer querir du fel pour 
en faire bonne prouifion. Ce poiffon eft fort favou- 
reux & delicat, & ne fait point de mal comme pour- 
roient faire les coquillages: & vient enuiron I'efpace 
de fix femaines en ce ruiffeau: lequel temps paffe il 
y a vn autre ruiffeau audit Port Royal, oil vient le 
Haren, item vn autre oil vient la Sardine en meme 
abondance. Mais quant a la riuiere dudit Port, qui 
eft la riviere de I'Equille, depuis nommee la riviere 
du Dauphin, au temps fufdit elle fournit d'Eturgeons 
& Saumons ^ qui veut prendre la peine d'en faire la 
chaffe. Quand le Haren fut venu, les Sauvages (felon 
leur bon naturel) firent des feuz & fumees en leur 
quartier, pour en doner avis a noz Fran9ois. Ce qui 
ne fut neglige. Et eft cette chaffe beaucoup plus 
certaine que celle des bois, 

RETOVR EN LA NOVVELLE-FRANCE. 

II eftoit le 10. de May quand la derniere cuiffon du 
pain faite, on tint confeil de retourner en France, fi 
das le mois n'arriuoit fecours. Ce qui fut preft 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 171 

are a great many streams at Port Royal, and among 
them three or four where the fish swarm in the 
spawning season. One contains vast numbers of 
Smelts^ in April. Another, Herring, another, Stur- 
geon and Salmon, etc. So some were then sent to 
the river at the [30] back of Port Royal, to see if the 
Smelts had come. When they reached the place, 
Membertou ( who was encamped there ), received 
them hospitably, regaling them with meat and fish. 
Thence they went to the stream called Liesse ^" by 
Sieur des Noyers, an Advocate in Parliament, where 
they found so many fish that they had to send and 
get some salt, to lay in a store of them. These fish 
are very tempting and delicate, and are not so injuri- 
ous as shellfish are apt to be. They remain about 
six weeks in this stream ; after that there is another 
small river near Port Royal, where Herring is found, 
also another to which Sardines come in great abun- 
dance. But as to the river of the Port, which is the 
river Equille, since named the Dauphin,-^ at the time 
of which we speak it furnished Sturgeon and Salmon 
to any one who would take the trouble to fish for 
them. When the Herrings came, the Savages (with 
their usual good-nature ) let the French know it by 
signaling from their quarters with fires and smoke. 
The hint was not neglected, for this kind of hunting 
is much more sure than that of the woods. 

RETURN TO NEW FRANCE. 

It was the loth of May, when the last bread was 
baked, that they took counsel about returning to 
France, if help did not come within a month. This 
they were ready to do. But on the day of Pentecost 
[May 22nd] [31] God sent his consoling spirit to this 


172 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.2 

d'eflre execute. Mais le iour de la Pentecofte [31] 
Dieu envoya fon efprit conf olateur k cette compagnie ja 
languifTante, qui lui furuint bien a propos, par Tarrivee 
du Sieur de Saindt luft, duquel il nous faut dire quel- 
que chofe : car ci-devant nous I'avons laiff6 au port de 
Dieppe, fans avoir veu ce qu'il a fait depuis. S'eftant 
prefente a la Royne; elle fut merveilleufement re- 
jouie d' entendre la converfion de plufieurs Sauvages 
qui avoient efte baptizes avant le depart dudit fieur 
de Saindt luft, dont ie fis vn recit public que ie pre- 
fentay "k fa Majeft^. La deflus les lefuites fe pre- 
setet pour aller au fecours. La Royne le trouve bon. 
Elle les recomande. reuffe defire qu' avant partir 
quelqu'vn euft remontr^ a fa Majeft6 chofe qu'elle 
n'eufl fait que trop volontiers: C'eft d'envoyer quel- 
que prefent de vivres & d 'habits ^ ces Neophytes & 
nouveaux Chretiens qui portet les noms du feu Roy, 
de la Royne Regente, & de MefTeigneurs & Dames 
les enfans de France. Mais chacun regarde a fon 
profit particulier. Ledit fieur de Saindt luft apres 
fon rapport fait, pretendoit obtenir quelques defenfes 
pour le comerce des Caftors, cuidant que la cofidera- 
tion de la religion lui pourroit faire aifement accorder 
cela. Ce qu'il ne pent toutefois obtenir. Et voyant 
que cette affaire tiroit en longueur, & qu'il falloit al- 
ler fecourir fon pere, ayant mandement de faire en 
forte d'eftre de retour dans quatre mois, il print coge 
de la Royne, laquelle luy bailla de compagnie deux 
lefuites pour la converfion des peuples Sauvages de 
del^. Mais puis que le fieur de Poutrincourt avoit 
pris vn [32] homme capable a fon partement, il me 
femble que ceux-ci (qui peuvent eftre plus vtiles par- 
dega) f e hafteret trop pour le profit dudit Sieur : Car 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 173 

company, already so disheartened, and it came to 
them very opportunely in the arrival of Sieur de 
Sainct Just, of whom we must say a few words ; for 
awhile ago we left him at the port of Dieppe, and 
have not seen what he has been doing since. When 
he was presented to the Queen, she was wonderfully 
pleased to hear about the conversion of several Sav- 
ages, who had been baptized before the departure of 
sieur de Sainct Just, an account of which I published 
and presented to her Majesty. Thereupon the Jesuits 
offered themselves to aid in the work. The Queen 
favored the plan, and recommended them. I should 
have been glad, if, before their departure, some one 
had suggested to her Majesty a thing which she 
would willingly have done; namely, to send some 
presents of food and clothes to these Neophytes and 
new Christians, who bear the names of the deceased 
King, of the Queen Regent, and of my Lords and 
Ladies, the children of France. '^^ But every one looks 
out for his own interests. Sieur de Sainct Just, after 
his report had been made, meant to obtain protection 
for the Beaver trade, believing that considerations of 
a religious nature would easily secure this for him. 
However, he could not obtain it. And seeing that 
the affair was dragging on, and that he must go and 
relieve his father, having been ordered to so arrange 
affairs as to be back in four months, he took leave of 
the Queen, who sent with him two Jesuits for the 
conversion of the Savage tribes over there. But as 
sieur de Poutrincourt had taken an [32] able man at 
his departure, it seems to me that these men (who 
can be more useful here) were in too much of a hurry 
for the best interests of the Sieur ; because the delay, 
which took place on their account, was very detri- 


174 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.2 

le retardement echeu a leur occafion lui a prejudici^ 
de beaucoup, & caufe la rupture de fon affociation. 
Et faut en telles affaires fonder la Republique premi- 
erement, fans laquelle I'Eglife ne peut eftre, ainfi que 
i'ay def-ja ecrit ci-deffus. Ten avoy dit mon avis au- 
dit fieur de Saindl lufl, & qu'il falloit affeurer la vie 
avant toutes chofes, faire vne cuillette de bledz, avoir 
des beftiaux, & des volatiles domeftics, devant que 
pouvoir affembler ces peuples. Or cefte precipitation 
penfa, outre la perte fufdite, reduire la troupe qui 
eftoit pardela a vne miferable neceffite, n'y ayant plus 
que la cuiffon de pain ja faite & diftribuee. 

Ledit Sieur de Poutrincourt s'elloit affocie de deux 
marchans de Dieppe, lef quels voyans les fufdits le- 
fuites, f9avoir le Pere Biar homme fort f9avant Gaf- 
con de nation duquel Monfieur le premier Prefident 
de Bordeaux m'a fait bon recit; & le Pere Nemon 
prefh a s'embarquer, s'oppoferent h. cela, & ne vou- 
lurent permettre qu'ils fuffent du voyage, difant qu'ils 
nourriroient volontiers toute autre forte d'hommes, 
Capucins, Minimes, Cordeliers, Recollets, &c. mais 
quant a ceux-ci qu'ils n'en vouloient point, & ne pou- 
voient tenir leur bien-affeure en leur compagnie. 
Que fi la Royne vouloit qu'ils y allaffent, on leur ren- 
dift leur argent, & qu'ils fiffent ce que bon leur fem- 
bleroit. lA deffus voila vn retardemet. [33] II faut 
ecrire en Cour, remontrer h. fa Majefle 1 'occafion de 
cela, demander de I'argent pour rembourfer lefdits 
Marchans, faire des allees & venues: cependant la 
faifon fe paffe. La Royne leur ordonna deux mille 
efcus, outre lefquels ils firent des collec5les par les 
maifons des Princes, Seigneurs, & perfonnes devotes, 
d'oii ilz tirent auffi de bon argent. Bref ilz rem- 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 175 

mental to him, and caused a dissolution of his part- 
nership. In such undertakings the State must first 
be founded, without which the Church cannot exist, 
as I have said before. I expressed my opinion on 
this subject to sieur de Sainct Just, to the effect that 
it was necessary to guarantee a living before any- 
thing else, to obtain a crop of wheat, to have cattle 
and domestic fowls, before they could bring these 
people together. Now this blind haste came very 
near, besides the above-mentioned losses, reducing 
the company that was over there to misery and want, 
as they had nothing left but the one baking of bread, 
already made and distributed. 

Sieur de Poutrincourt had gone into partnership 
with two Dieppe merchants, '*'' who, seeing the two Jes- 
uits, — namely. Father Biar[d], a very learned man, a 
native of Gascony, of whom Monsieur the first Presi- 
dent of Bordeaux has given me a high opinion ; and 
Father Nemon [Ennemond], — ready to embark, they 
objected, and did not want them to go upon the voy- 
age, saying that they would willingly provide for all 
other kinds of men. Capuchins, Minimes, Cordeliers, 
Recollets, etc. ; "^^ but, as to these, they did not want 
them at all, and could not consider themselves safe 
in their company; that if the Queen wished them 
to go there, let their [the merchants'] money be re- 
funded, and they might do whatever they wished. 
Now there is a delay. [33] The Court must be writ- 
ten to, her Majesty must be informed of the situa- 
tion, the money to reimburse the Merchants must be 
collected, and journeys must be made: meanwhile, 
the season is passing away. The Queen granted 
them two thousand ecus, in addition to which collec- 
tions were made from the families of Princes, Nobles, 


176 LES RELATIONS DBS jtSUITES [Vol.2 

bourfent lefditz Marchas de chacu deux milles livres, 
& fe mettent en fin ^ la voile le 26. de lanvier 161 1. 
Le temps eftoit difficile, la plus rude faifon de I'hiver. 
lis furent quelque temps en mer penfans combattre 
le vent, mais ils furent contraints de relacher en An- 
gleterre, Ik oti ils furent iufques au 16. de Fevrier. 
Et le 19. Avril ils furent fur le grand Banc des Mo- 
rues, oil il trouverent des Navires de Dieppe & de 
Saindt Malo. Et le 29. eftans entre ledit Banc «& 
rile de Sable, ils cinglerent I'efpace de douze lieues 
parmi des glaces hautes comme montagnes, fur lef- 
quelles ils defcendirent pour faire de I'eau douce avec 
icelles, laquelle fe trouva bonne. Au fortir defdites 
glaces, fut rencontre vn Navire du Sieur de Monts, 
auquel commandoit le Capitaine Champlein, duquel 
nous attendons le retour, pour entendre quelque nou- 
uelle decouverte, Depuis lefdites glaces, ils en ren- 
contrerent d'autres continuellemet I'efpace de cin- 
quante lieues, lefquelles ils eurent beaucoup de peines 
"k doubler. Et le cinqui6me de May, ils decouvrirent 
la terre & port de Campfeau, duquel on pent voir I'af- 
fiette dant la grande Table geographique de mo Hif- 
toire. [34] Lk ledit Pere Biar chanta la Mefle. Et 
depuis ils allerent cotoyans la terre, en forte que le 
2 1 . de May ils moui'lleret I'ancre k I'entree du palTage 
du Port Royal. 

Le fieur de Poutrincourt avoit cedit iour fait alfem- 
bler fes gens pour prier Dieu, & fe preparer k la cele- 
bration de la fete de Pentecote. Et comme chacun 
c' eftoit range a fon devoir, voici environ trois heures 
apres le coucher vne canonade, & vne trompette, qui 
reveille les dormans. On envoye au devant. On 
trouve que ce font amis. Lk deflus allegrelTe & re- 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 177 


and people devoted to the cause, whence they ob- 
tained a great deal of money. In short, they reim- 
bursed each of the Merchants two thousand livres, 
and at last set sail, the 26th of January, 161 1. The 
weather was disagreeable, this being the roughest 
part of the winter. They were some time upon the 
sea, thinking they would be able to resist the winds, 
but they were compelled to put into port in England, 
where they remained until the i6th of February. 
And the 19th of April they were upon the great Cod- 
fish Banks, where they found some Ships from Dieppe 
and Sainct Malo. The 29th, being between these 
Banks and the island of Sable, they sailed before the 
wind a distance of twelve leagues, in the midst of 
ice, mountain high, upon which they disembarked to 
get some fresh water, which they found good. In 
emerging from this ice, they met one of Sieur de 
Monts' ships, commanded by Captain Champlein,*^ 
whose return we are awaiting to learn of some new 
discoveries. Afterwards, they continued to encoun- 
ter other masses of ice, for a distance of fifty leagues, 
which they had much difficulty in outsailing. The 
fifth of May, they sighted the land and port of Camp- 
seau, the location of which can be seen in the great 
geographical Chart in my History. ^3 [34] Father 
Biar[d] sang Mass there ; then they sailed along the 
coast, so that the 21st of May they cast anchor at the 
entrance to the passage which leads to Port Royal. 
The same day sieur de Poutrincourt had called his 
people together to pray to God, and to prepare them- 
selves for the celebration of the Pentecostal feast. 
And, as each one had placed himself at his post of 
duty, suddenly, about three hours after bedtime, 
there is heard the sound of cannon and trumpet, 


178 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol 2 

jouiffance, «& ac5tions de graces k Dieu en proceffion 
fur la montagne que i'ay mentionne ci-deffus. La 
premiere demande que fit ledit Sieur k fon fils, ce fut 
de la fante du Roy. II luy fit r^ponfe qu'il eftoit 
mort. Et interroge de quelle mort, il lui en fit le recit 
felo qu'il I'avoit entendu en France. Lk defTus cha- 
cun fe print a pleurer, meme les Sauvages apres avoir 
entendu ce defaftre, dont ils ont fait le dueil fort long 
temps, ainfi qu'ils eullent fait d'vn de leurs plus 
grands Sagamos. 

A peine fut arriue ledit fieur de Saindl lufl, que les 
Sauvages Etechemins (qui ayment le fieur de Poutrin- 
court) lui vindrent annoncer qu'il y avoit en leurs cotes 
trois Navires, tant Maloins que Rochelois, lef quels fe 
vantoient de le devorer ainfi que feroit le Gougou vn 
pauvre Sauvage. Ce qu' entendu par ledit fieur de 
Poutrincourt, il n'eut la patience de faire defcharger 
le vailTeau nouuellemet arrive, ains k I'inflant meme 
alia ancrer au-devant defdits [35] trois Navires, & fit 
venir tons les Capitaines parler k lui, qui preterent 
obeiilance, & leur fit ledit fieur reconoitre I'authorite 
de fon fils, comme Vic' Admiral efdidtes terres du 
Ponant. Vn Navire Maloin voulant faire quelque re- 
bellion, fut prins, mais ledit fieur felon fa debonnai- 
rete accouflumee, le relacha, apres lui avoir remontre 
de ne plus venir en mer fans fa Charte partie. lA le 
pere Birat dit la Meffe, & fit ce qu'il pent pour ranger 
vn chacun a ce qui eftoit du devoir. Et particuliere- 
ment il fit reconoitre fa faute k vn ieune home qui 
avoit paffe I'hiver parmi les hommes & les femmes 
Sauvages, lequel demanda pardon k qui il appartenoit, 
& recent la Communion de fa main. Cela fait cha- 
cun revint au Port Royal en grade rejouiffance. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 179 


which awakes the sleepers. Scouts are sent out; 
they are found to be friends. Then there is joy and 
gladness, and thanksgivings to God in a procession 
to the mountain of which I have spoken above. The 
first question which the Sieur asked his son, was 
about the King's health. He answered that he was 
dead. In reply to further inquiries, he told the story 
as he had heard it in France. Thereupon, they all 
began to weep, even the Savages joining in after 
they had heard about the catastrophe ; and they con- 
tinued to mourn for a long time, just as they would 
have done for one of their greatest Sagamores. 

Sieur de Sainct Just had hardly arrived, when the 
Etechemin Savages (who love sieur de Poutrincourt) 
came to announce to him that there were three Ships 
upon their coasts, from St. Malo and Rochelle, which 
were boasting that they would devour him as the 
Gougou^ would a poor Savage. Upon hearing this, 
sieur de Poutrincourt would not even wait to have 
the lately-arrived ship unloaded ; but straightway 
went and anchored opposite [35] these three Ships, 
and summoned all the Captains to come and speak 
with him. They obeyed, and the sieur made them 
acknowledge the authority of his son, as Vice- Admiral 
in the said lands of the West. One of the Malouin 
Ships, while trying to make some resistance, was 
taken, but the sieur, with his usual good-nature, re- 
leased it, after having admonished it never again to 
come to sea without its Charter-party. ^^ There Fa- 
ther Birat [Biard] said Mass, and did all he could 
to bring each one to a sense of his duty. In particu- 
lar, he caused a young man to acknowledge his trans- 
gressions, who had passed the winter with the men 
and women Savages : he [the young man] asked par- 
don from him [Poutrincourt] to whom this was due ; 


180 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.2 

Le retardement fufdit eft caufe que lefditz navires 
& autres eflas arrives devant ledit fieur de S^t, luft, 
ils ont enleve tout ce qui eftoit de bon au pais pour le 
commerce des Caftors & autres pelleteries, lefquelles 
fuffent venues es marins du Sieur de Poutrincourt fi 
fon fils fuft retourne par-dela au temps qui lui avoit 
efte enioint. Et davantage on en eufl fauve pour plus 
de fix mille efcus que les Sauvages ont mangees du- 
rant I'hiver, lefquelles ilz fuffent venus troquer audit 
Port Royal s'il y euft eu les chofes qui leur font ne- 
ceffaires. Vne faute aufQ fut comife avant le parte- 
ment de Dieppe par I'infidelite du Contre-maiftre de 
navire, lequel ayant charge d'enruner (c'eft a dire 
mettre dedans) le ble, le detournoit a fon profit. [36] 
Ce qui ayda a la difette que noz Fran9ois ont par-dela 
foufferte. Et neantmoins Dieu les a tellement fuf- 
tent6s, qu'il n*y a eu aucun malade: voire ceux qui 
en font de retour fe plaifent a cela, & n'y en a pas vn 
qui ne foit en volonte d'y retourner. 

EFFECTS DE LA GRACE DE DIEU EN LA 
NOUVELLE-FRANCE. 

Nous pouvons mettre ce que ie viens de dire entre 
les effedts de la grace de Dieu : comme auffi les ra- 
cines qu'il leur envoya au befoin, dont nous avons 
parle, & fur-ce I'exercice des pareffeux qui ne s'ef- 
toient voulu occuper k la terre, lefquels fans y penfer 
en cultiverent vn beau champ en cherchant defdites 
racines. Mais particulierement encore I'exemption 
de maladies, qui eft vn miracle tres-evident. Car es 
voyages precedens il ne s'en eft iamais pafCe vn feul 
fans mortalite, quoy qu'on fuft bien a I'aife. Et en 
cetui-ci non feulement les fains ont efte preferuez, 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 181 

and received the Commtinion from his [the Father's] 
hand. After this they all returned to Port Royal, 
with great rejoicing. 

In the delay previously mentioned may be found 
the reason why these ships and others, having arrived 
before sieur de Sainct Just, took away all that was 
valuable in the country as regards the Beaver and 
other fur trade, which would have reverted to Sieur 
de Poutrincourt's sailors if his son had returned from 
over the sea at the time stipulated. And besides, 
more than six thousand escus [ecus] worth of peltries 
would have been saved which the Savages devoured 
during the winter, and which they would have come 
to Port Royal to exchange, had they found there 
what they needed. A wicked act was also com- 
mitted before the ship's departure from Dieppe, by 
the Overseer of the boat, who, being charged to load 
\e7iruncr\ the wheat, appropriated it to his own profit, 
[36] which contributed to the scarcity which our coun- 
trymen suffered over there. And yet God so sus- 
tained them, that no one has been sick ; even those 
who have come back, are fortunate in that respect, 
and there is not one of them who would not like to 
return to that country. 

EFFECTS OF GOD'S GRACE IN NEW 
FRANCE. 

What I have just related may be attributed to the 
grace of God ; as also the roots that were sent them 
in their need, which we have already mentioned; 
and furthermore, the exercise given the lazy ones 
who would not take part in tilling the soil, and who, 
without intending it, prepared for cultivation a fine 
field, while seeking for these roots. But more par- 
ticularly the exemption from sickness, which is a 


182 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.2 

mais auffi ceux qui eftoient afifiigez de maladie en 
France ont la receu guarifon. Tefmoin vn hon^te per- 
fonnage nomme Bertrand, lequel a Paris eftoit jour- 
nellement tourmente de la goutte, de laquelle il a 
efte totalement exempt par dela. Mais depuis qu'il 
eft de retour, le meme mal eft retourn6 avec plus 
d'effedts de dotileurs qu'auparauant, quoy qu'il fe 
garde fans aucun exercice. 

[37] Mais qui ne recognoiftra vne fpeciale grace de 
Dieu en la perfone dudit Sieur de Poutrincourt & fes 
gens, lors qu'il fut porte par vn vent de terre h. la 
haute mer en danger d'aller voir la Floride, ou d'eftre 
accable des ondes, au retour de la conduite de fon fils, 
ainfi que nous avons rapports ci-deffus. 

I'appelle aufQ miracle de voir que les pauvres 
peuples de delk ont conceu telle opinion de la Reli- 
gion Chretienne, que 11-toft qu'ilz font malades ilz de- 
madent eftre baptizez, voire encore qu'ilz foient fains, 
lis y vont avec vne grande Foy, & difent qu'ilz 
veulent eftre femblables a nous recognoilfans fort 
bien leur defaut en cela. Membertou grand Sagamos 
exhorte vn chacu des Sauvages a fe faire Chretiens. 
Et tefmoignet tous que depuis qu'ils ont receu le bap- 
teme ils ne craignent plus rien, ilz vont hardiment de 
nuidt, le diable ne les tourmente plus. 

Quand le Sieur de Saincft luft arriva a Campfeau, 
les Sauvages non baptizez s'enfuioient de peur. Mais 
les baptizes en nombre d'environ cinquante s'appro- 
cherent hardiment difans, Nous fommes tes freres 
Chretiens comme toy, & tu nous aymes. C'eft pour- 
quoy nous ne fuyons point, & n'avons point de peur: 
Et porterent ledit Sieur fur leurs bras & epaules juf- 
ques en leurs cabannes. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 183 

very evident miracle. For, as to former sojourns, not 
one has been passed without some deaths, although 
they were well provided for. And in this one not 
only the healthy remained well, but also those who 
were afflicted with ill-health in France have there 
recovered. A witness of this is a worthy man named 
Bertrand,^ who, at Paris, was daily tormented with 
the gout, from which he was entirely free over there. 
But, since he came back here, the same trouble has 
returned with more severity than ever, although he 
takes care not to indulge in excesses. 

[37] But who will not recognize God's peculiar grace 
in the case of Sieur de Poutrincourt and his crew, 
when, upon his return from accompanying his son, 
he was carried by a land breeze out into the open 
sea, in danger of making a visit to Florida, or of be- 
ing overwhelmed by the billows, as we have stated 
above. 

I call it also a miracle that these poor people have 
conceived such an opinion of the Christian Religion, 
that as soon as they are sick they ask to be baptized ; 
and, even when they are well, they approach it with 
great Faith, saying they wish to be like us, fully rec- 
ognizing their own shortcomings. Membertou, the 
great Sagamore, exhorts every one of the Savages to 
become Christians. All bear witness that since they 
have been baptized they are afraid of nothing, and 
go out boldly at night, the devil no longer torment- 
ing them. 

When Sieur de Sainct Just arrived at Campseau, 
the Savages who had not been baptized ran away in 
fear. But those who were baptized, about fifty in 
number, approached boldly, saying, " We are thy 
brothers. Christians as thou art, and thou lovest us. 
Hence we fly not away and are not afraid : ' ' and 


184 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol.2 

Sur la fin du Printemps les enfans de Membertou 
eftans alles k la chalTe, en laquelle ilz firent long 
feiour, avint que ledit Membertou fut prelTe de ne- 
ceffite de vivres, «& en cette difette [38] il fe fouvint 
de ce qu'il avoit autrefois oui dire k noz ges que Dieu 
qui nourrit les oifeaux du ciel, & les betes de la terre, 
ne delailTe iamais ceux qui ont efperance en lui, fe- 
lon la parolle de notre Sauveur. 

En cette necelfite done il fe met h. prier Dieu, ayant 
enuoye fa fille voir au ruiffeau du moulin s'il y auroit 
point apparence de pouuoir faire pecherie. II n'euft 
efte gueres long temps en prieres que voici fadite fille 
arriver criant h haute voix, NouchicJi , Beggin pecJi - 
kmok, Beggin eta peck" kmok : c'efl &. dire: Pere, le ha- 
ren eft venu; le haren certes eft venu. Et vit par 
effedt le foin que Dieu a des fiens, "k fon contente- 
ment. Ce qu'il avoit vne autrefois eprouve, ayant eu 
(ou les fiens) a tel befoin la rencontre d'un Elian, & 
encore vne autrefois vne Baleine echouee. 

Qui voudra nier que ce ne foit vn fpecial foin de 
la providence de Dieu envers les fiens, quand il en- 
uoya au Sieur de Poutrincourt le fecours defire le iour 
de la Pentecofte derniere, duquel nous avons fait men- 
tion cy-defCus? 

le ne veux rememorer ce que i'ay ecrit en mon 
Hiftoire de la Nouvelle- France, livre 4. chap. 4. de 
la merveille avenue au premier voyage du Sieur de 
Monts en la perfonne de Maitre Nicolas Aubri Preftre 
d'vne bonne famille de Paris, lequel fut fe[i]ze iours 
perdu dans les bois, & au bout dudit temps trouve fort 
extenue, "k la verite, mais encore viuant, & vit encore 
^ prefent, aymant fingulierement les entreprifes qui 
fe font pour ce pais Ik, ou le desit [39] le porte plus 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 185 

they carried the Sieur upon their arms and shoulders 
to their wigwams. 

Towards the end of Spring, when Membertou's 
children had gone hunting, where they remained a 
long time, it happened that Membertou was sorely 
pressed for food ; and in this time of need [38] he re- 
membered that he had formerly heard our people say 
that God, who feeds the birds of the air and the 
beasts of the fields, never abandons those who have 
hope in him, according to the words of our Savior. 

So, in this necessity, he began to pray to God, after 
having sent his daughter to see if there were any 
signs of fish in the mill-creek. He had not been a 
long time in prayer, when lo, his daughter comes 
running back crying in a loud voice, Nouchic/i , Beg- 
gin pecli kmok, Beggiti eta peck' kmok ; that is, "Father, 
the herring have come; the herring have come in- 
deed." And he saw effectually, and to his satisfac- 
tion, God's care over his own. He (or some of his 
family) also had proof of this upon another occasion, 
in a like time of need, when he encountered an Elk, 
and another time a stranded Whale. 

Who will deny that it was a special manifestation 
of the providence of God towards his own, when he 
sent to Sieur de Poutrincourt the desired help upon 
the day of last Pentecost, of which we have made 
mention above? 

I will not repeat what I have written in my History 
of New France, book 4, chap. 4, of the wonderful 
thing which happened, during Sieur de Monts' first 
sojourn, to Master Nicolas Aubry,"*^ Priest, of a good 
family in Paris, who was sixteen days lost in the 
woods, and at the end of that time was found, very 
much emaciated, in truth, but still living; and he is 
living yet, and is singularly devoted to the enter- 


186 


LES RELATIONS DBS J^SUITES [Vol.2 


qu'il ne fit iamais, comme aufli tons autres qui y 
ont fait voyage, lef quels i'ay preque tous veux defi- 
reux d'y hazarder leur fortune, fi Dieu leur ouvroit 
le chemin pour y faire quelque chofe. A quoy les 
grans ne veulent point entendre, & les petits n'ont 
les ailes affez fortes pour voler iufques la. Neant- 
moins c'est chofe Strange & incroyable de la refolu- 
tion tant dudit Sieur de Monts, que dudit Sieur de 
Poutrincourt, le premier def quels a tou jours continue 
depuis dix ans d'envoyer par dela: & le fecond, non- 
obflant les difficultez que nous avons recitees ci- 
dellus, n'a laiffe d'y r'envoyer nouuellement, atten- 
dant ici le renouveau, pour aller revoir les qens. 
Dieu doint ^ I'vn & a 1' autre le moyen de faire chofe 
qui reiifilTe h. la gloire de fon nom, & au bien des 
pauvres peuples que nous appellons Sauvages. 

A DIEV SEVL HONNEVR 

ET GLOIRE. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 187 

prises being carried on in behalf of that country, 
whither his [39] desires more than ever attract him, 
as well as all others who have once made the voy- 
age; these I have observed are almost all desirous 
of risking their fortunes there, if God would open 
up the way for them to do something. To this the 
great do not care to lend their ears, and the small 
have not wings strong enough to fly so far. Never- 
theless there is something strange and incredible in 
the perseverance of both Sieur de Monts and Sieur 
de Poutrincourt ; the former having continued to send 
expeditions over there for ten years ; and the latter, 
in spite of the difficulties enumerated above, having 
recently sent over another one, awaiting here the re- 
turn of spring, to go again to see his people. May 
God grant to both the means of doing something 
which may succeed to the glory of his name, and to 
the welfare of the poor people whom we call Sav- 
ages. 

TO GOD ALONE THE HONOR 

AND GLORY. 


188 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.2 


[40] Extrait du Priuilege du Roy. 

Par grace & Priuilege du Roy, il eft permis a lean 
Millot Marchant Libraire en I'Vniverfite de Paris, 
d'imprimer, ou faire imprimer, vendre & distribuer 
par tout noftre Royaume tant de fois qu'il luy plaira, 
en telle forme ou charac5tere que bo luy femblera, vn 
liure intitule Hijloire de la Noiivellc- France contcnant les 
nauigations faitcs par les Franqois ^s hides Occidentales, & 
terres-neuves de la Nouuelle-France, & les decoiiuertes par 
eux faites efditz lieux, A quoy font adjoutees les Mufes 
de la Nouvelle France. Enfemble plufieurs Chartes en 
taille douce, ou font les figures des Provinces, & 
Ports, & autres chofes feruans a ladic5le Hiftoire, com- 
pofee par Marc Lescarbot Advocat en la Cour de 
Parlement. Et ce jufques au temps & terme de fix 
ans finis & accomplis, a copter du jour que ledit livre 
fera acheve d'imprimer. Pendant lequel teps defenfes 
font faictes k tous Imprimeurs, Libraires, & autres de 
quel que eflat, qualite ou condition qu'ils foient, de 
non imprimer, vendre, contrefaire, ou alterer ledit 
liure, ou aucune partie d'iceluy, fur peine de cofifca- 
tion des exemplaires, & de quinze cens livres d 'amende 
appliquable moitie ^ nous, & moitie aux pauvres de 
I'hoftel Dieu de cette ville de Paris, & defpens, dom- 
mages, & interefts dudit expofant : Nonobftant toute 
clameur de Haro, Charte Normande, Privileges, 
lettres ou autres appellations & oppofitios formees ^ 
ce contraires faidtes ou a faire. Et veut en outre le- 
dit Seigneur, qu'en mettant vn extraicft dudit Privi- 
lege au comencement, ou k la fin dudit livre, il foit 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 189 


[40] Extract from the Royal License. 

By the grace and Prerogative of the King, permis- 
sion is granted to Jean Millot, Bookseller in the Uni- 
versity of Paris, to print or to have printed, to sell 
and distribute throughout all our Kingdom, as often 
as he may desire, in such form or character as he 
may see fit, a book entitled. History of New France, 
containing the voyages made by the French to the West In- 
dies, and new countries of New France, and the discoveries 
made by them in said places. To which are added The 
Muses of New France. Also a number of Charts in 
copper-plate, which represent the Provinces, Ports, 
and other things appertaining to said History, com- 
posed by Marc Lescarbot, Advocate in the Court of 
Parliament. And this to remain valid until the ex- 
piration of six full and complete years, counting from 
the day upon which said book shall be finished. 
During said period of time, all Printers, Booksellers, 
and other persons of whatsoever rank, quality, or 
condition, are prohibited from publishing, selling, 
imitating, or changing said book, or any part there- 
of, under penalty of confiscation of the copies, and 
of fifteen hundred livres fine, one half of which is to 
be paid to us, and one half to the poor of the public 
hospital of this city of Paris, together with the 
costs, damages and interests of the aforesaid peti- 
tioner. Notwithstanding all cries of Haro, Norman 
Charter, Licenses, letters, or other appeals and coun- 
ter-claims, opposed to this, now or in future.*^ And 
His Majesty also wills that in placing an extract 


190 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.2 

tenu pour deuement fignifi^, come plus amplement 
eft declare par les patentes de fa Majefte. Donne k 
Paris le 27. iour de Novembre, Tan de grace 1608. 
Et de noftre regne rvnzieme. 

Par le Roy en fon Confeil. 

Signe, Brigard. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 191 

from said License in the beginning or at the end of 
said book, it shall be regarded as a notice duly served, 
as has been more fully described in the patents of 
his Majesty. Given in Paris the 27th day of Novem- 
ber, in the year of grace 1608, and of our reign the 
eleventh. 

By the King in Council. 

Signed, Brigard. 


i 



A. Logeniens des artifans. 

B. Plate forme oii eftoit le canon. 

C. Le magafin. 

I ). Logemet du fieur de Pontgraue 

& Champlain. 
E. La forge. 


F. Paliifade de pieux. 

G. Le four. 
H. La cuifine. 

(). Petite maifonnette ou Ton retir- 
oit les vtanfiles de nos bar- 
ques ; que de puis le (leur de 


Poitrincourt fit rebaftir, & y lo- 
geu le fieur Boul ay quand le fieur 
du Pont s'en riuint en France. 

P. La j)()rte de I'abitation. 

Q. [K] Le cemetiere. 

R. La riuiere. 


Facsimile of Champlain s perspective sketch of fort at Port Royal, from ''Les Voyages du Sicur 

(le Chauiplain'^ {Paris, /^/j" ).] 


XII 

Relatio Rerum Gestarum 

in Nova-Francica Missione, Annis 1613 & 1614 
Lyons: Claude cayne, 1618 


SOURCE: We follow the general style of O'Callaghan's 
Reprint No. 6. The Title and Tabula Rerum are the work 
of that Editor. The Text is from the original volume of An- 
nua? Litters Societatis lesu, Anni CIO IOC XII, pp 562-605, 
in the Riggs Library, Georgetown, D. C. The bracketed 
pagination is that of the Annu« ; that in Roman, of O'Cal- 
laghan. 


RELATIO 


RERVM GESTARUM 


IN 


Novo-Francica Miffione 


ANNIS 1613 & 1614. 



Ex Aimvis Litteris Societatis Iesv imprejjis 


LVGDVNI, 

Apvd Clavdivm Cayne, 
typographvm. 


CID IOC XIIX 


A RELATION 

Of Occurrences 

IN THE 

Mission of New France 

DURING THE YEARS 1613 AND 1614. 


From the Published Annual Letters of the 
Society <?/ Jesus 


LYONS, 

Claude Cayne, 

PRINTER. 

1618 


196 


LES RELA TIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol. 2 


[iii] Tabvla Rervm 


I 

II 
III 
IV 

V 
VI 


VII 

VIII 

IX 

X 

XI 

XII 

XIII 
XIV 


QUID fit Nova Francia 
De climate . 
De moribus gentivm 
De prima exploratione Novcz Francia 
De fitu, flvviis et incolis 
De promontorijs, de quinqve Francorvm domi- 

Delrtu domicilij Sanai Saluatoris ad ojiivm 

amnis Pentegoetij 
Appvlvnt noftri ad Portvm Regalem 
De laboribus nofirorvm 

De rebvs angvjiis . • ' 

Patres radices legvnt et pifces ad fvfientvm 

domicilij [iv] . • ' . „ .' 

Saujrmis ex Francia folvit ad novas mijfionis 

fedes collocandas et Sanai Saluatoris domi- 

cilivm inchoat . • ' '. 

De impetu Anglorum in mijjionem San^t 

Saluatoris et de ruina SanacB Cruets et 

Regii Portis arcium 
Patres in Virginiam et inde in Angliam de- 

portati . • ■ ' . „ * 

Sv7nma rervm in Novo-Francica viijfione 

gejlarvm • • ' * 


Pag. 
I 

2 


4 
4 

5 


9 
i6 

25 
36 


37 


41 


53 


59 


1612-14] 


THE JESUIT RELA TIONS 


197 


I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 


VII 

VIII 

IX 

X 

XI 

XII 

XIII 
XIV 


[iii] Table of Contents. 

WHA T New France is 
Climate . 
Customs of the people 
First exploration of New France 
Location, rivers, and inhabit ayits 
The capes; the five settlements of the 

French ..... 
Origin of the settlement of St. Sanveur at 

the moiitJi of the river Pentego'et 
Our fathers land at Port Royal 
Labors of our fathers 

Their hardships .... 
The Fathers gather roots and fish for the 

support of the colony [iv] 
La Satissaye leaves France for the purpose of 

establishing ftew missionary stations, and 

begins the settlement of St. Sauveur 
Attack of the English upon the mission of 

St. Sauveur, and destruction of the forts 

of Ste. Croix and Port Royal 
The Fathers are carried to Virginia and 

thence to England 
Summary of occurrences in the mission of 

New France 


Page. 
I 
2 
4 
4 
5 


9 
i6 


17 

25 

36 


37 


41 


53 


59 


198 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.2 


[562] In Novam Franciam, sev Canadiam Miffio. 

NOVA FRANCIA, Brafiliae ac Peruuio continens 
ad Boream vafliffima regio, Aquitanico Galliae 
littori ad occafum obuerfa, diredlas ab Occidente 
in Orientem, & contr^, lineas cum [563] noftra Francia 
communes habet ; ab eaque non ita longo maris tra- 
iedtu odlingentarum, aut is vbi latiffimus eft, mille leu- 
carum dirimitur interuallo. Ex huiufmodi oppofitu 
& vicinitate noflratis Fraciae, Nouam Franciam maio- 
res eam appellarunt ; cui nomenclationi & ilia altera, 
rei maxime congruens, accelTit ex euentu caufa, quod 
eam terrarum adhuc incognitam oram primi mor- 
talium Franci noftrates deprehenderunt, crebrifque 
nauigationibus, centum eoque amplius abhinc annis, 
frequentarunt. Canadise vero nomen, quod vulg5 vni- 
uerfam in eam regionem confertur, eius modo plagse 
Septemtrionalis proprium eft, quae Canada fluminis, 
& nobilis fmus, cui a San(5to Laurentio nomen eft, co- 
piofis aquis alluitur. Enimuero vniuerfse Nouse 
Francise amplitudo, nunc, ad Floridae confinia, multo 
licet quam nuper contrad:ior, vndequadragefimo ta- 
men gradu, versus Auftrum, determinatur : vltrdque 
noftratis Francise latitudinem non paucis leucis por- 
rigitur: exinde autem ignotis adhuc finibus in Aqui- 
lonem, ficut & immefis tradtibus in Sinicum mare ad 
Occidentem excurrit: qua denique Eurum fpedlat, 
noftro Aquitanico Oceano, Britannicdque, ipfi linea- 
rum parallelis obiecto, definitur. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 199 


[562] The Mission in New France, or Canada. 

NEW FRANCE, an immense region adjoining 
Brazil and Peru on the North, and opposite 
the coast of Aquitaine in a westerly direc- 
tion, is situated between the same parallels of 
latitude as [563] is our France ; and is separated from 
it by the very moderate voyage of 800 leagues, or, 
where the ocean is broadest, of 1,000 leagues. 
Because it is thus opposite and near to our France, 
our ancestors called it New France; and for this 
nomenclature another especially appropriate reason 
occurred in the good fortune by which our French 
fellow-countrymen were the first to take possession 
of this hitherto unknown region, and visited it in 
frequent voyages more than a hundred years ago. 
But the name of Canada, which is commonly given to 
this entire country, belongs only to that Northern re- 
gion which is washed by the abundant waters of the 
river Canada,'*" and of the noble gulf which is called 
St. Lawrence. Indeed, the whole territory of New- 
France, although now much more confined than for- 
merly, towards the frontiers of Florida, is neverthe- 
less bounded on the South by the thirty-ninth parallel, 
and extends many leagues beyond the breadth of our 
France. Moreover, it stretches with yet unknown 
limits towards the North, and in vast expanses to the 
Chinese sea on the West ; finally it is bounded East- 
ward by our Aquitanian and Breton Ocean, lying op- 
posite and between the same parallels. 


200 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.2 

Caeli eadem omnino, quae noflri Gallici tempera- 
tio, ex ea ratione Climatis eiufdem, quam indicaui- 
mus, ineffe illi regioni debet, vti reuera inefl. Soli 
autem quin par quoque fit ratio, nihil prohiberet, fi 
iugis adeffet campeftris terrae cultura: & perpetua- 
rum ferfe flluartim abelTet denfa opacitas. [564] Nam 
opima omnino vniuerli terreni vifcera, facile prodit 
ingens arborum amplitudo, atque proceritas : fum- 
mam quoque glebam vbertate multa pinguem, tota 
planitie camporum, hilariter herbefcens terrae viridi- 
tas oftendit. 

Gens ea diftinc5tis lingua & fede multis populis con- 
tinetur, nulla vfquam confiliorum aut fortunarum 
communione deuindtis: nulla nee lege, nee arte; 
nullo nifi pif catus, & venatus vitas fubfidio inftrudtis : 
vix vlla Numinis cogitatione, aut falutis cura infor- 
matis: ad omne opus ignauis: ftupidis ad artes, quae 
ingenio aut memoria nitantur: in fumma, belluinis 
paene hominibus conflat ea natio. Populus cum lon- 
ginquo propinqudve populo vix habet commercium, 
nili quod bello inferendo, aut defendendo poteft inter- 
uenire. Immo, neque idem populus, eadem loci re- 
gione, ac tuguriorum vicinitate iunc5tus, ferme vn- 
quam coire folet, nifi vt de armis, aduersum com- 
munes hofles capita conferat. Exterarum ver5 nati- 
onum Francicam vnam fere fuos in portus admittunt, 
Fibrinis, atque huiufmodi pellibus fuis diftrahendis, 
neceffaridque vefte, ac fupelledtile permutandis. 

Hanc noui orbis partem ex Francis nauarchis primi 
explorarunt Britones, anno quarto post millefimum 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 201 

There ought to be in that region the same sort of 
Climate in every respect as that of our France, from 
the fact, as we pointed out, of its similar situation, and 
this is actually the case. Moreover, there is no reason 
why the soil should not be equally fertile, if the cul- 
tivation of the plains were long continued upon the up- 
lands, and if it were not for the dense shades of the al- 
most unbroken forests. [564] For the subsoil of the 
whole country is very rich, as trees of immense size and 
height readily demonstrate. That the surface-soil is 
also endued with great fertility is shown by the pleas- 
ing luxuriance of the vegetation over all the plains. 

The people comprise many tribes diverse in lan- 
guage and situation, united by no mutual purposes or 
interests ; possessing neither laws nor arts, and know- 
ing no other means of gaining a livelihood than by 
fishing and hunting ; having almost no conception of 
Deity or concern for salvation ; indolent in every oc- 
cupation, and dull in those pursuits which depend 
upon talent or memory. On the whole, the race con- 
sists of men who are hardly above the beasts. One 
tribe hardly ever has intercourse with another, either 
distant or near, except such as may arise in the pros- 
ecution of offensive or defensive warfare. Even the 
members of the same tribe, united by a common loca- 
tion and the vicinity of their dwellings, are seldom 
accustomed to meet together, except to take measures 
concerning war against a common enemy. Of for- 
eign nations, the French are almost the only people 
whom they admit to their harbors, for the sake of dis- 
posing of their Beaver skins and other peltries, in 
exchange for necessary clothing and utensils. 

Among French navigators, the Bretons first ex- 
plored this part of the new world in 1504;^^ and 
after they brought back reports of it, they had in 


202 LES RELATIONS DES J£SUITES [Vol.2 

quingentefimum ; de qua vbi renunciauerant, eius 
repetendse nauigationis, vel comites, vel semulatores 
habuenint deinceps frequentiffimfe, turn Normannos, 
turn cseteros Gallici Oceani accolas. Vndeuicefimo 
poft anno, loannes Verazanus [565] Florentinus.vicefi- 
mo item, ac tricefimo quarto lacobus Quartierus Gal- 
lus, Brito, cum imperio mifli ab Francifco Primo, Gal- 
lorum Rege, ipfms aufpiciis occupatam regionem il- 
1am, eius pofterorumque Regum iurifdidtioni vindica- 
runt, cuius polTelGQonem, per interualla fuffedtae aliae 
atque aliae Francorum expeditiones, in banc vfque 
diem Gallorum Regibus afferere perfeuerarunt. De 
noftris vero mifli quoque funt anno fuperiore, qui Hen- 
rici Quarti auc5loritate populos, Francico nomini ami- 
citia & Societate iundtos, ac reliquos etiam Canadios, 
Euangelij tanto fandtiore foedere, Chrifto regum regi 
deuincirent. Quo de negotio antfe qukm inftituamus 
dicere, praster ea quae generatim complexi fumus, ne- 
cefl^e eft de loco ac gente figillatim quaedam capita 
enucleatius explicemus. 

Nova Francia Gallis adeuntibus gemino littore pa- 
tet; altero, quod angufla f route Oceano noflro, & 
Orienti obtenditur : altero, quod produdtiore tradtu ad 
Floridae vfque confinia Auftro obiacet. Iftud latus 
portubus, atque oftiis fluminum frequens eft, quibus 
commode penetrari poflit in regionis mediterranea, & 
hkc ferfe Galli terras illas ineunt : illud ver5, Franciae 
noftrse obiec5tum littus, quoniam oppofitu ingentis in- 
fulae, quam Nouam Terram appellant, importuofum 
paenfe eft, ea regione noftrates non fubeunt. Eius 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 203 

subsequent voyages thither, many companions or 
rivals, — not only the Normans, but also other dwell- 
ers on the Sea-coast of France. In the nineteenth and 
also in the twentieth year thereafter, John Verazano , 
[565] a Florentine; and, in the thirty-fourth year 
thereafter, Jacques Quartier, a Frenchman of Brittany, 
were sent as commanders by Francis I., King of 
France; and, by the occupation of this region under 
his authority, brought it under the jurisdiction of that 
King, and also of his successors. Various French ex- 
peditions, sent out at intervals, continue to this day 
to maintain that possession for the Kings of France. 
Some of our brethren were also sent last year in 
order, by the authority of Henry IV., to unite the 
tribes joined in friendship and Alliance with the 
French, and also the remaining Canadians, by the 
far holier tie of the Gospel, to Christ, the king of 
kings. Before we begin to speak concerning this 
undertaking, we must, in addition to our general de- 
scription, explain more fully some matters concerning 
the country and people. 

New France presents to the French, as they ap- 
proach it, two coasts, one which borders with a nar- 
row frontage upon our Ocean to the East ; and another 
far longer, which extends Southward to the confines 
of Florida. The former side abounds in bays and 
estuaries, by which one may readily penetrate into 
the interior ; by these routes the French usually enter 
these regions ; but, since the other coast, lying oppo- 
site our France, is rendered almost inaccessible by 
the intervention of a great island which they call 
Newfoundland, our people do not approach in that 
direction. The immense plain in that quarter is 
watered by a river of vast size and mighty volume, 
its course directly eastward from almost the farthest 


204 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.2 

orbis vaftiffima planitietn ingentiffimi aluei, aquis co- 
piofiffimum flumen irrigat, diredto limite ab vltimo 
paene occafu ad ortum, quoad angufto freto ad infulam 
Terrse [566] Nouse, ipfiiifque infulae oppofitu, eius of- 
tia in Auftrinum littus infledtantur. Ei fluuio gen- 
tile nomen eft Sacqu^, Sandtum Laurentium Galli ap- 
pellamnt ; cuius caput amplius quingentis inde leucis 
indigenae ab lacu in trecentas patente leucas repetunt. 
In hunc amnium principem alij amnes nobiles ab 
Aquilone influunt, nempe Saguenaiiim, Tergeminus 
amnis, feu tres amnes, fimul coeuntes, Algomequium, 
& caeteri non pauci. Saguenaij quingentarum, Ter- 
gemini quadringentarum leucarum nauigatio longe 
porrigitur in Boream. E montibus, ad ripam Auftri- 
nam Saquei amnis, tranfuerfi feruntur in Meridianum 
Oceani littus alij quoque fluuij celebres; vnde popu- 
lis, atque illius tradtus regionibus plerifque gentilia 
duc5ta funt nomina; fed eorum nonnullis fui moris 
appellationes Franci poftek indiderunt. Fluuij autem 
funt hi ad Auftrum conuerfi, Sandlus loannes, Pente- 
goetius, Quinibequius, Choiiacoetius, Norembega, 
quern poftremum amnem Champlaenius eumdem ac 
Pentegoetium elTe contendit. Populi trans Saque- 
um, Sandtumve-Laurentium, versus Aquilonem, non 
procul illius oftiis, funt Canadij, & Excomminquij : 
longfe vero ab his, eadem Boreali ripa, versus occa- 
fum, e regione Floridae, incolunt Algomeguij, atque 
Ochafteguij. Cis Sandlum-Laurentium, in Auftrali ora 
degunt item Canadij, ad ipfum magni amnis flexum, 
ab Euro in Auftrum declinatis. Poft eos ad Occafum 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 205 

west, until, by reason of the narrow strait at the island 
of Newfoundland [566] and the opposition of the 
island itself, its mouth is broadly curved towards the 
Southern coast. The native name of that river is 
Sacque ;^ the French have called it St. Lawrence; 
its source the natives seek more than 500 leagues 
distant, in a lake 300 leagues in width. Into this 
main stream other noble rivers flow from the North, 
such as the Saguenay,^^ the Three Rivers,^ — or 
three rivers flowing together, — the Algomequi,^ 
and many others. These rivers are open for naviga- 
tion far Northward — the Saguenay five hundred 
leagues, the Three Rivers four hundred leagues. 
From the mountains ^ upon the Southern bank of the 
Sacqu^ River other notable streams flow across to the 
Southern coast of the Ocean, and from these the na- 
tive names for most of the tribes and districts of that 
region are derived; but upon some of them the 
French afterward conferred names after their own 
fashion. The rivers flowing Southward are the St. 
John, Pentegoet, Quinibequi, Choiiacoet," and No- 
rembega, which last stream Champlain ^^ asserts to 
be the same as the Pentegoet, The tribes across the 
Sacque or St. Lawrence, towards the North, not far 
from its mouth, are the Canadis^ and Excommin- 
quis ^" ; but at a distance from these, on the same North- 
ern shore, toward the west, in the direction of Florida, 
dwell the Algomeguis ^" and the Ochasteguis.^ Across 
the St. Lawrence, on the Southern bank, the Canadi 
live also, directly at the bend of the great river, which 
turns from the East towards the South. ^^ Beyond 
them, toward the West, lie the Souriquois, inhabitants 
of the country of Acadia; ^ thence, toward the Pente- 
goet or Norembega River, the Pentegoets;^ [567] to 
their right, looking Westward, about the fortress at 


206 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.2 

vergut Souriquij, Acadiae regionis incolae: deinde ad 
Pentegoetium, feu Norembegam fluuium, Pentego- 
etij : [567] ad horum dextram, Occafum fpedtantium, 
circa Quebecum arcem, Montagnetij : poft Pentegoetios 
rec5to tradtu Eteminquij, ad amnem Quinibequiutn : 
inde Almochiquij ad flumen Choiiacoetium, latilTimis 
campis diffiifi: denique inter Floridam, & Sacqueum 
magntim amnem, Iroquij campeftribus, montofifque 
locis latiffime habitant. Reliquos Nouae Franciae po- 
pulos multos, praefertim trans magnum Sacqueum am- 
nem, Aquilonares, Galli noftrates non nil! exauditione 
norunt. Ex notis autem, amicos, ac paene Socios 
babent Souriquios, Eteminquios, Montagnetios, Almo- 
chiquios, Algomequios, & Ocbafteguios : iftis capi- 
tales hofles Iroquios, hoflili quoque in fe animo ex- 
periuntur, eo maxime nomine, quod Iroquiis Galli 
cum ipforum hoftibus bellum intulerint. Horum 
quidem populorum foli agriculturam, infcienter ta- 
men, exercent Almochiquij, Iroquij, & Ochafteguij, 
miliumque Indicum, & fabam Brafilicam ferunt. 

Promontoria celebria Franciam Nouam ineuntibus 
Meridiano littore occurrunt, Britonicum, ad ipfa oftia 
magni amnis, hoc eft Sandti Laurentij ; ab hoc deinde 
Heuaeum, Arietinum, Sabulofum, Bifidum, Sancitus 
Ludouicus, Album, Sandta Helena. Eamdem oram 
h. Promontorio Britonico legentibus obuij fiunt portus, 
Campfaeus, Sefambraeus, Regius, Pulcher. Mediter- 
ranea ver6 per Sacqueum amnem, & Canadiae fines 
fubire volentibus, praeteruehenda funt, Britonicum, 
ad oftia eiufdem fluuij ; Sandtus-Laurentius ; Epifco- 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS iCH 

Quebec,^ the Montagnais; beyond the Pentegoets, di- 
rectly toward the Quinibequi River, the Eteminquis; 
then the Almochiquois, at the Choiiacoet River, 
scattered over a very extensive region; finally, be- 
tween Florida and the great Sacque River, the Iro- 
quois inhabit enormous tracts of both level and moun- 
tainous country. Many of the remaining tribes of 
New France, especially those of the North, across 
the great Sacque River, our French countrymen 
know only from hearsay. Among those whom they 
know, however, they have secured as friends, and al- 
most as allies, the Souriquois, Eteminquis, Monta- 
gnais, Almochiquois, Algomequois, and Ochasteguis. 
The Iroquois, who are deadly enemies of these tribes, 
prove hostile to the French also, mainly because the 
latter have waged war against them, in company 
with their enemies. Certain of these tribes — the 
Almochiquois, Iroquois, and Ochasteguis — practice 
agriculture, though unskillfully, and plant Indian 
corn and the Brazilian bean.^^ 

Numerous headlands meet those who approach 
New France by the Southern coast: Breton, at the 
very mouth of the great river St. Lawrence ; next in 
order, La Heve, Mouton, Sable, Fourchu, St. Louis, 
Blanc, Ste. Helene.^~ Those who coast along the 
same shore from Cape Breton meet the harbors called 
Campseau, Sesambre, Port Royal, and Beaubassin.^ 
But those who wish to journey inland, beyond the 
borders of Canada, by way of the Sacque river, must 
pass Cape Breton, at the mouth of the St. Lawrence ; 
Cap de I'Eveque, [568] Cap Chat,^ and some other 
headlands, — finally reaching Tadoussac bay, at the 
mouth of the Saguenay river, where it enters the 
Sacqu6. 

Moreover, in this great extent of territory, by 


208 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.2 

pium, [568] Chatseum, & alia nonnulla promontoria : 
TadoulTacus denique portus ad Saguenaij fluminis 
oftia Sacqu^um ineuntis. 

Porro in tarn immenfo terrarum ambitu, frequen- 
tibus expeditionibus, annis ampliils centum, Franci 
domicilia omnino quinque conftituerunt, quorum pri- 
mum pofuit lacobus Quartierus pofteriore fua nauiga- 
tione, non ad San6lcB Crucis, quae nunc eft, importuo- 
fas anguftias, & cautes : fed in iis psene veftigiis vbi 
nunc eft Quebecum, Sandla Cruce quindenis leucis 
citerius. Alterum Petrus du Gas, dominus de Monts, 
anno quarto fupra millefimum fexcentefimum erexit, 
in angufta infula, inter Eteminquios, in Auftrali pro- 
pemodum littore: cui domicilio ac infulse nomen 
San6ia Crux indidit. Idem eodem anno, in quafi pen- 
infula, orae Acadicae, ad Regium Portum, eiufdem 
nominis exiguam arcem foffa & aggere munitam ex- 
ftruxit. Portus Regius, & portui cognominis arx, funt 
in ea, quam Franciam Ba'iam vocant, centum quin- 
quagmta leucis k Campfaeo promontorio, leucas odto 
intra continentem. Baia fcilicet Francis, ficut Hif- 
panis, eft amplior terrae finus ad oram maris, aut flu- 
minis maioris, angulato orbiculatdve receffu, influenti 
aquse ad interiora continentis prsebens aditum. In 
extremo Francico Sinu portus eft odtingentorum paf- 
fuum oflio peruius, duas leucas longus, vnam latus, 
duum millium capax maiorum nauium, cui ab nobili- 
tate Regius Portus nomen "k Champlaenio Franco eft 
inditum. Tertiam fedem quarto poft anno condidit 
dominus de [569] Monts ad Quebecium cornu, in 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 209 

means of numerous expeditions and in more than a 
century, the French have established only five settle- 
ments ; ^ the first of these was founded by Jacques 
Quartier during his last voyage, not at the inaccessible 
narrows and rocks of the place now called Saincte 
Croix, ^ but in almost the very spot where now stands 
Quebec, fifteen leagues on this side of Ste. Croix. An- 
other was built by Pierre du Gas, sieur de Monts, in 
the year 1604, upon a small island, among the Ete- 
minquis, close to their Southern shore, to which settle- 
ment and island he gave the name of Saincte Croix. 
He also in the same year, upon a sort of peninsula 
on the Acadian coast, near Port Royal, erected 
a small fort of the same name, defended by a 
ditch and a rampart. Port Royal, and the fort of 
the same name as the harbor, are on what is called 
French Bay, one hundred and fifty leagues from 
Cape Campseau, eight leagues from the sea. A 
bay among the French, as among the Spanish, 
is a large indentation in the land at the shore 
of the sea or of a great river, angular or round 
in shape, giving the waters entrance to the interior 
regions. At the head of French Bay is a harbor, 
reached by a channel three-quarters of a mile long ; 
it is two leagues long and one wide, capable of re- 
ceiving 2,000 large ships, and because of its majestic 
appearance was named Port Royal by the Frenchman 
Champlain. A third settlement was founded by sieur 
de [569] Monts, four years later, at the point of Que- 
bec, on the Southern bank of the Sacqu6 river, near 
the isle of Orleans,^" in the territory of the Monta- 
gnais; Champlain, who was in charge of the work, 
called this fort Quebec, from the name of the dis- 
trict,^^ and observed that in almost the same place 
Jacques Quartier's post of Ste. Croix had in former 


210 LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol. 2 

Auftrali ripa Sacqu6i amnis, h regione Aurelianae 
infulse, in Montagnetiorum folo; quam arcem Cham- 
plaenius, qui operi praefuit, Quebecum k foli nomine 
appellauit, & eodem psenfe loco Sandtam Cnicem la- 
cobi Quartieri arcem olim conditam fuifle obferuauit. 
Quinti & vltimi Francici domicilij fundamenta Patres 
noftri iaciebant, ad oflium amnis Pentegoetij, cum 
ab irrumpentibus Anglis opere prohibiti, at que in 
captiuitatem contra fas, & ius gentium abdudli funt. 
lis ad hunc modum praemiffis capitibus, quae alioqui 
moratura erant inflitutam rerum narrationem, ad fuf- 
ceptam ^ Patribus noftris Canadicam expeditionem 
flylum conferamus. 

Potrincourtius Regij Portus caftellum k domino de 
Monts libi dono datum, eo ipfo tempore, quo conde- 
batur, ab Henrico Quarto petiuerat, eo iure, quo Op- 
timo, fibi alleri, vindicarique ? ac eius non mod6 vin- 
dicias, fed nexum etiam impetrauerat. Secundum 
quod ius arcis, & imperij praeterek certis finibus in 
Nona Francia Potrincourtio attributi, Rex Patri Cotono 
fignificat, velle fe vti Sociorum opera in Barbaris illis 
ad Chriflum adiungendis ; proinde f criberet ad Gene- 
ralem Societatis Praepofitum fuo nomine, vti defigna- 
rentur Patres in eam rem, quos primo quoque tempo- 
re illuc mittendos ipfe Rex ad fe accerferet, annuis 
duum millium Librarum vec5tigalibus illi Miffioni 
attributis. Annus huius faeculi odtauus agebatur, 
cum Rex ita de Canadicis rebus decerneret, cuius 
tamen cogitationes grauioribus negotiis ali6 feuocan- 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 211 

days been built. Our Fathers were laying the foun- 
dations of the fifth and last French settlement at the 
mouth of the Pentegoet river, when they were pre- 
vented from prosecuting the work by a descent of the 
English, and carried off into captivity, contrary to 
justice and the law of nations. These details, 
which otherwise would have delayed the orderly nar- 
rative of events, having been thus first explained, let 
us devote our pen to the Canadian expedition under- 
taken by our Fathers. 

Potrincourt had asked of Henry IV. the fort at 
Port Royal, because it had been granted as a gift to 
him by sieur de Monts at the very time of its estab- 
lishment, which was perhaps the best reason he could 
give for advancing and maintaining his pretensions, 
and had obtained not merely a claim upon it, but its 
possession. Following the grant of this fort, and also 
the government of a definite territory in New France, 
to Potrincourt, the King informed Father Coton ^ that 
he wished to employ the services of our Brethren in 
bringing the Savages to Christ. He also desired him 
to write to the General of the Society, in his own 
name, in order that Fathers might be selected for 
this undertaking, whom the King himself would take 
measures to send thither at the first available oppor- 
tunity, while an annuity of 2,000 livres was to be al- 
lowed the Mission. It was during the eighth year of 
this century when the King made this decision in re- 
gard to Canadian affairs ; but, in spite of his plans, by 
reason of more weighty business which called his at- 
tention elsewhere, [570] and also the hindrance caused 
by his death, but especially because of the negligence 
of those who were managing the Canadian province 
for the Crown, the departure of our brethren was 
delayed until the third year thereafter. Moreover, 


212 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.2 

tibus, [570] eius quoque interueniente obitu, fed eo- 
rum maximfe negligentia, qui Regio nomine Canadi- 
cam prouinciam adminiftrabant, noftrorum profedtio 
in tertium poft annum eft dilata. Sine autem cafu 
quopiam, fiue hominum confilio, earn proferri trienni 
toto contigit, cum iam in procindtu noftri elTent; 
obortse tamen fubit5 funt eae difficultates, quibus pla- 
num fieret, Cacodaemoni effe inuifa noftrorum in ea 
profedtione conlilia. Regina quingentos aureos 
nummos, ex defundti Regis decreto numerauerat: 
Domina de Vernueil, de Sourdis, de Guercheuille ^ alia 
facrum arae inftrumentum, alia linteam veftem copi- 
ofam, alia peramplum viaticum munilice contribue- 
rant: Pater Petrus Biardus, & Pater Enemundus 
Maffseus e5 deftinati animis ingentibus fe compara- 
uerant, vela & ventos auide praeftolantes. Status 
condidtus dies vela faciendi eis conuenerat cum Bien- 
courtio Potrincourtij filio, & Thoma Robinio, ex- 
peditionis ducibus, ad odtauum calendas Nouembris 
anni decimi fupra f excentefimum ; fed ctim eo die 
adfuiffent, nauigium farciebatur, & ofcitanter qui- 
dem, in continenti; tantum aberat, vt idoneo comme- 
atu & nauigationis, & Canadicae familias inflrudtum 
ellet. Inftaurandae naui fuas operas, materiamque 
locauerant Caluiniani duo, & quia Biencourtio ac Ro- 
binio ad operarum mercedem deerant facultates, Cal- 
uiniani mercatores certam nautici frudlus partem 
padti fibi erant, edque nomine, pro dominis in ea 
naue gerere poffe fibi videbantur lefuitis igitur locum 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 213 

either by some accident, or by the purpose of men, 
it came to be delayed the entire space of three years, 
although our brethren were already equipped. Such 
difficulties, also, suddenly arose as plainly showed that 
our plans for this voyage were displeasing to the Evil 
Spirit. The Queen had paid over 500 golden crowns, 
according to the decree of the late King ; Mesdames 
de Verfiueil, de Soiirdis, and de Giiercheville had given 
generous contributions, — one, the sacred furniture 
of the altar; another, an abundance of linen vest- 
ments ; the third, a very liberal allowance of money 
for the expenses of the voyage. Father Pierre Biard 
and Father Enemund Masse had been selected for 
the undertaking, and had prepared themselves with 
great courage, eagerly awaiting their departure. The 
day for sailing had been agreed upon by them 
with Biencourt, the son of Potrincourt, and Thomas 
Robin, the leaders of the expedition, for the 24th 
day of October, 1610; but, when they arrived upon 
that day, the ship was undergoing repairs, and 
that, too, in a negligent manner, upon the land; so 
far was it from being provided with suitable equip- 
ment either for navigation or for the Canadian colo- 
ny. Two Calvinists had devoted their services and 
resources to the repair of the ship, and, because Bien- 
court and Robin lacked means to pay for the work, 
the Calvinist merchants had contracted for a specified 
portion of the profits of the voyage. By this right, as 
masters in the ship, they thought themselves able to 
declare, in the presence of the Jesuits, that there would 
be no place for them in the vessel; [571] and they 
emphatically asserted that, if it should be otherwise, 
they would straightway forsake the prosecution of the 
work, and all other business in their contract. From 
this resolution, not even the authority of the Queen 


214 LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol. 2 

in nauigio [571] non futurum palam, & affeueranter 
edicunt, aut fi futurum lit, ab illius operis redemtura, 
& caetera omni pac5tione fe iamiam difcedere : qua de 
fententia nee ipfius Reginae audtoritas, ab Domino de 
Cicoignc, Dieppenlis vrbis regio Praefide, grauiter, fe- 
uereque denuneiata, Caluini affeelas non potuit dimo- 
uere. Defperata res plane videbatur, qu5d hsec vna 
mod5 nauis in Nouam Franciam anno illo adomare- 
tur ; & non paterentur duo illi Caluiniani vlla f e ra- 
tione demitigari: quae noftra deflitutio Dominam 
Guercheuillaeam, religiofiffimam, & ingentis animi 
feminam, acriter pupugit; fed ea qua eft follertia, 
confeftim ad manum habuit ration em, qua non iam 
vt vedtores nos, fed vt partiarios, exclufis inhumanis 
Haereticis, in nauem induceret. Quattuor igitur mil- 
lium Librarum flipem de principibus viris ac feminis 
ex Aula, paucis diebus, corrogat, quantum erat opus 
ad nauem inftruendam ; eaque collata fumma, Calui- 
nianos illos duos nautica focietate deiicit, fimulque 
idoneam fortem conftituit, vnde Canadicae negotia- 
tionis praefedti perpetuam quotannis penfionem noftrae 
Miffioni penderent. Sublatis itaque, illius feminae 
induflria, quae nos morabantur impedimentis, ternis 
ferfe menfibus adornandae naui confumtis, huius tan- 
dem faeculi anno vndecimo, ante diem fextum calen- 
das Februarias, e littore Dieppenfi, Deo duce, folui- 
mus, totdque quadrimeftri nauigantes Campfaeum in 
portum, Auftralis littoris Nouae Franciae appulfi fu- 
mus; inde centum viginti leucarum vel maritima, vel 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 215 

herself, pronounced with dignity and severity by 
Sieur de Cicoigne, the royal Governor of the city of 
Dieppe, could move these servants of Calvin. The 
matter was apparently in a desperate condition, be- 
cause only this one ship was that year being fitted 
out for New France, and the two Calvinists would 
not permit themselves to be moved in any respect. 
This difficulty of ours deeply pained Madame 
de Guercheville, a woman of extreme piety and 
great spirit; but her ingenuity speedily devised a 
method by which she might place us on the ship, 
not as passengers, but as partners, to the exclusion of 
the churlish Heretics. She therefore collected in a 
few days, from the leading men and women of the 
Court, 4,000 livres, as much as was necessary for fit- 
ting out the ship ; and by raising that sum deprived 
the two Calvinists of a share in the vessel, establish- 
ing at the same time a sufficient capital from which 
there might each year be paid to the director of the 
Canadian undertaking an allowance for our Mission. 
When, therefore, by the diligence of this woman, the 
obstacles which delayed us had been removed, al- 
though nearly three months had been spent in equip- 
ping the ship, still, in the eleventh year of this cen- 
tury, on the 24th day of January, we set sail under 
the leadership of God, from the shore at Dieppe; 
and, after a voyage lasting in all four months, ar- 
rived at Campseau harbor, on the Southern coast of 
New France; at a distance thence of 120 leagues, 
either by sea or land, we joyfully entered Port [572] 
Royal. The exercises of the members of the Society 
in piety, humility, and kindness toward all manner 
of men, were especially observed by our brethren 
during that sea- voyage, because an expedition of 
great importance was being undertaken, and also for 


216 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.2 

terreflri via Portum [572] Regium laetantes iniuimus. 
Quae follemnia funt Societatis hominibus in eo nauti- 
co curfu pietatis, demilTionis, humanitatis erga omne 
hominum genus, haec, tant6 miniis ab noflris omifTa 
funt, quod ingentis momenti expeditio inftituebatur, 
& praeter Caluinianos nonnullos, iis prsefedtis vel 
fociis rei nauticae vtebamur, quos, noflrae confuetu- 
dinis ratione, omnino oportebat de Societatis Inftituto 
redtiiis, qu^m imbuti accefferant, imbui. Appellenti- 
bus nobis ad illius orbis littora nauigium, fadtus eft 
obuiam Champlaenius, cum caetera virtute, turn fep- 
tenni iam illius maris nauigatione clarus, quem fum- 
mo noftro ftupore fpedtauimus aduerfum glaciatas 
aquae moles, ingentibus terrae collibus magnitudine 
pares, maximis animis, ac fmgulari induftria & arte 
decertantem, interque ilia pericula fortiter enauigan- 
tem. De Sandto-Laurentio, amne Canadienfmm maxi- 
mo, fcribit idem Camplaenius in nauigationum com- 
mentariis, eius fummas aquas tribus totis in imum 
vlnis conglaciari lanuario, & infequentibus menfibus 
duobus ab oflio furfum versus, centum leucarum itin- 
ere, nee vltr^ procedere rigorem aquae, cum tamen 
nulla pars fluminis, diredto alueo ab occafu in ortum 
manantis, lit Aquilonibus altera propior, aut monti- 
bus ad apricationem tedtior. Addit etiam, ineunte 
Aprili, foluta glaciei tanta vi, Sandti-Laurenti laxiffi- 
mum oftium congelatis molibus paene obftrui, quas 
ait in altum mare longiiis prouedtas, doudenis diebus, 
quotannis fere liquari. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 217 


the reason that, besides a few Calvinists, we were as- 
sociated with officers and seamen to whom it was ab- 
solutely necessary that we should, on account of our 
frequent intercourse, give more correct ideas concern- 
ing the Institutum ^^ of the Society than they had for- 
merly received . When we brought the ship to the coast 
of this region, Champlain ™ met us, — a man renowned 
not only for his valor in other respects, but also for 
his voyages in this sea for seven years past; whom, 
to our utter amazement, we have seen battling 
against masses of ice, equal in size to great hills upon 
land, with the greatest courage, and with remarkable 
activity and skill, sailing forth bravely amid all these 
dangers. Concerning the St. Lawrence, the greatest 
river of Canada, this same Champlain writes, in his 
commentaries upon his voyages, that its surface is 
frozen to the depth of three entire yards, during 
January and the two following months, to the 
distance of a hundred leagues upward from its 
mouth; and that the freezing of the water does not 
extend farther, although no part of the river, since it 
flows directly from west to east, is more Northerly 
than another, or more protected by mountains, so as 
to be warmer. He adds also that in the beginning 
of April, by the melting of so great a mass of ice, the 
broad mouth of the St. Lawrence is almost blocked 
with frozen masses, which, he says, are carried forth a 
long distance into the sea, and usually melt within 
twelve days, each year. 

The arrival of our brethren at French Bay [573] and 
Port Royal occurred on the 26th day of June, and -^i ^kc-^ , 
also, — certainly a most auspicious omen, — the sacred 4.,^ f9 ir 7 
feast of Pentecost. Nothing more opportune could ' 

have happened to Potrincourt than the arrival of sup- 
plies, if only these had been abundant, since his priva- 


218 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.2 

Appvlsvs noflrorum ad Francicum Sinum, [573] 
Portumque Regium, in ante diem feptimum calendas 
Quintiles, eumdemqne Pentecoftes facrum feliciffimo 
plane omine incidit. Nihil Potrincourtio accidere 
poterat allato commeatu opportunius, fi tamen is am- 
pins effet, vt quem rei anguftiae coegerant, Barbaris 
partem familise alendam diuidere. Vt ne autem 
inftrudtiores a commeatn veniremus, fecerat tum na- 
uigij, fexaginta dumtaxat doliorum, brenitas; tum 
pins inftrumenti pifcatorij, quam cibariorum in na- 
nem immiffum ; tum deniq ; ab tricenis f enis capiti- 
bus, quot vehebamur, grauior in nauticam penum 
illata folido quadrimeflri labes. Quamobrem Potrin- 
courtio fexaginta hominum contubernio, tenuifllma 
re domeftica, iam eum psene iplis initiis opprimente, 
mature prouidendum fuit, ne Portus Regij penuaria 
cella in fequentem hiemem exhaufta relinqueretur. 
Cuius procurationis, vt familiae patrem decuit, fumto 
fibi onere, ipfe in Galliam traiedturus, de Porturegi- 
enfi multitudine psene quadragefimus medio lulio 
foluit, exeunteque Augufto Gallias littori appulfus 
eft, relidto Biencourtio filio, cum reliqua cohorte, qui 
Porturegienfi arci prsefideret. 

NosTRis interea, quod fuarum partium effet, enixe 
fatagentibus, cordi erat in primis popularis linguae 
cognitio, quam Galli leuiter modo delibatam, fi vnum 
exciperes, tradere praeceptis, vfiive docere non pote- 
rant ; vt vna dumtaxat reliqua effet ratio eius ab flu- 
pidis indigenis, non inflitutione, fed aflidua confue- 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 219 

tions had compelled him to place a portion of the colony 
to be supported among the Savages. Moreover, the 
fact that we had not come well-furnished with provi- 
sions was due, not only to the smallness of the ship, 
which was of only sixty tons burden, but also to 
the placing of more fishing tackle than provisions in 
the cargo; then, finally, by thirty-six persons, the 
number which was on board, there was a great 
consumption of the ship's stores during four en- 
tire months. Wherefore, Potrincourt, almost over- 
whelmed, at the outset, by the necessity of maintain- 
ing sixty men in this scarcity of provisions, was forced 
to take early precautions lest the meagerly furnished 
storehouse at Port Royal should be left bare for the 
coming winter. As behooved the father of the col- 
ony, he took upon himself the burden of managing 
this business, and resolved that he himself would 
cross over to France. With about forty of the people 
at Port Royal, leaving his son Biencourt in command 
of the fort there, and the rest of the company, he set 
sail in the middle of July; and, in the latter part of 
August, he reached the French coast. 

Meanwhile, the greatest desire of our brethren, 
zealously occupied with the performance of their du- 
ties, was at the start to know the language of the 
natives, which the Frenchmen — caring but little for 
it, with one exception — could not impart by rules, or 
teach with advantage ; so only one method remained, 
to learn it from the stupid natives, not by lessons, 
but by constant practice. Consequently, after our 
associates had made various attempts to conciliate the 
Savages, by gifts, by friendliness, and by [574] every 
sort of service, they accomplished little or nothing. 
For, besides the fact that they employed teachers not 
at all fitted for instruction, from whom nothing could 


220 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.2 


tudine tandem exprimendae. His itaque, muneri- 
bus, comitate, atque [574] omni officij genere concili- 
andis ctim noftri nihil non tentaffent, parum aut nihil 
permouerunt. Enimuero, prseterquam quod minime 
idoneis ad difciplinam magiftris vtebantur, k quibus 
nihil expromeres, nifi afflueter ante faginato aquali- 
culo, & quos morae, vel non diuturnse, impatientiffi- 
mos idemtidem abs te abalienaret, auelleretque ftudi- 
ofa cuiufqne rei percontatio: ipfa quoque linguae 
conditio, idoneorum, ad res etiam vulgatiffimas, voca- 
bulorum indigentiffimae, noflrorum incenfa fludia 
deflituit, & animos gauiter afflixit. Rerum fcilicet, 
quae fub afpedtum, tadtum, & reliquos fenfus cadunt, 
ex Barbarorum refponfis nomenclatio vtcumque de- 
prehendebatur : fed earum quae fenfuum vim f ugiunt, 
fumma eft apud earn, gentem appellationum penuria, 
& alta quoque rerum ignoratio. Pofterioris autem 
generis defperata difciplina, cum neque priorem 
Barbari aut poffent, aut vellent tradere ; vna reliqua 
fpes erat in adolefcente Gallo, vernaculae linguae 
bene perito, eximia humanitate, & comitate, quem 
etiam Pater Biardus non vulgari beneficio fibi deme- 
ruerat. Is erat Pontgrauaeus, Pongrauaei filius, egre- 
gij viri fuperioribus annis cum Champlaenio vices 
Domini de Monts in Francia Nona gerentis; quem 
adolefcentem, decem & odto leucis Regio portu non 
longius, hiemare parantem, ad amnem Sandti loan- 
nis, fumma ipfms voluntate, nullius incommode, 
nollri eius inftitutione Canadicum idioma erudiedi 
adire cuperent. Verumtamen Biencourtius eius pro- 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 221 

be obtained unless their stomachs were first liberally 
crammed, and who, being very impatient of even a 
short delay, would often be distracted and drawn 
away from one by earnest inquiry about any subject : 
the very nature of the language, also, so deficient in 
words suitable for the expression of even the most 
common ideas, evaded the eager pursuit of our men, 
and greatly disheartened them. Of those things, in- 
deed, which fall under sight, touch, and the other 
senses, the names were obtained from the answers of 
the Savages in one way or another; but for those 
things which elude the senses, there is the greatest 
scarcity of names among that race, and also a pro- 
found ignorance of the things themselves. The 
knowledge of the latter class was despaired of, since 
the Savages either could not, or would not explain the 
former; one hope remained, in a young Frenchman, 
fluent in the native tongue, of remarkable kindness 
and affability, whom Father Biard also had laid 
under obligations to himself by no ordinary favors. 
This was Pontgrav^, the son of Pontgrave,"^ an ex- 
cellent man, who in former years, together with 
Champlain, represented Sieur de Monts in New 
France; and this youth, who was preparing to pass 
the winter no farther than eighteen leagues from 
Port Royal, at the river St. John, our brethren were 
anxious to meet, with his own ready consent, and 
with inconvenience to no one, for the sake of the aid 
of his instruction in acquiring the Canadian language. 
Although Biencourt was consulted about this expedi- 
tion, and also requested by our comrades that they 
might be allowed by his kind permission [575] to make 
progress through Pontgrave in the foreign idiom, by 
their ignorance of which, they were losing all the 
fruits of their voyage to New France, '''~ they did not 


222 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.2 

fe<5tionis confultus, ac rogatus etiam 'k noftris, vt, eius 
bona venia, [575] proficere per Pontgrauaeum in pere- 
grine idiomate fibi liceret, cuius ignoratione, fuae na- 
uigationis in Nouam Franciam fruc5lu penitus exci- 
derent : qu5d ea communicatio cum Pontgrauaeo noua- 
rum rerum fupicionem moueret Biencourtio, nihil 
impetrarunt. Tantifper ergo noftris has difficultates 
aequo animo tolerantibus, dum qua fe aperiret via fuo 
inftituto conuenientior, Deus materiam non procul 
qusefitam fubiecit, de grauiter aegroto Henrico Mem- 
bertouio, Sagamo, bene merendi; & corporis, & ani- 
mi eius diligenter curanda falute. Sagamo apud 
earn gentem cuiufque populi prsefes appellatur: 
Sagamon ver6 agebat inter Souriquios, in Acadia, 
Membertouius, ad Aquilonare latus Porturegienlis 
caftelli, ad Sandli loannis flumen. Cum tamen dyfen- 
teria coepit tentari, degebat in Ba'ia Mariana, vt vo- 
cant, hoc eft, in Mariano Sinu, Portum Regium inter, 
Meridianumque littus, vnde afportari fe iulTerat in 
arcem, vt medicorum noftrorum curatione vteretur. 
Angufta fua cellula eum noftri exceperunt, diebuf- 
que non paucis, abfente ipfius coniuge, ac filia, diu 
nodluque, in grauilTimo fordidi morbi foetore, pro alTi- 
duifTimis, & maxime follicitis miniftris ei libentifTime 
operam fuam nauauere. Is vbi ConfelTione fuerat 
expiatus, Sacrdque iniindtus oleo, de fepultura fua 
egit cum Biencourtio, feque humari velle ait in maio- 
rum fuo fepulcro. Biencourtius, qui tanti rem elfe 
non putaret, facile alTentiebatur ; auditifque Patris 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 22;i 


succeed ; because such intercourse with Pontgrav6 in- 
spired suspicion in Biencourt. While our brethren 
therefore patiently endured their troubles, until some 
path more suitable to their plans should be revealed, 
God placed within their reach the desired oppor- 
tunity, for doing a kindness to Henry Membertou, 
a Sagamore who was dangerously ill, by caring 
diligently for the salvation of both his soul and his 
body. Among this people the chief of each tribe is 
called a Sagamore, and Membertou was Sagamore 
among the Souriquois, in Acadia, to the St. John 
river, North of the fort at Port Royal. However, 
when he began to be afflicted with dysentery, he 
was residing at Bay Ste. Marie, as they call it, be- 
tween Port Royal and the Southern coast, whence he 
had ordered himself to be brought into the fort, in 
order that he might profit by the care of our physi- 
cians. Our fathers received him into their narrow 
cabin, and, for many days, in the absence of his wife 
and daughter, by day and night, amid the noxious 
filth of a vile disease, freely bestowed upon him their 
services, as most assiduous and exceedingly solicitous 
attendants. When he had been absolved upon Con- 
fession, and anointed with the Holy oil, he arranged 
with Biencourt about his burial, and said that he 
wished to be interred in his own ancestral burial 
place. Biencourt, who did not think the matter of 
much importance, readily consented, and, upon hear- 
ing the objections of Father Biard to his decision, 
believed that trouble might be prevented if [576] that 
grave would be blessed according to the Christian rite. 
This opinion of Biencourt rendered Membertou so 
much the more steadfast in his resolution; Father 
Biard declared that he would not agree with them in 
this, and explained why he would not consent. There 


^24 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.2 


Biardi contra fuam fententiam rationibus, occurri 
poiTe incommodis cenfebat, fi [576] fepulcrum illud 
ritu Chriftiano luftraretur ; quae Biencourtij opinio 
Membertouium tanto conflantiorem in fuo decreto 
cum faceret, Pater Biardus neque id fe illis affenfu- 
rum confirmauit, & cur non allentiretur oftendit. Non 
dubium erat, quin fi Sagamus in confilio perftaret, 
eiufque adftipulator fieri pergeret Biencourtius, offen- 
fionis atque turbaruni inde quidpiam oriretur: fed 
huic malo Diuina occurrit prouidentia ; poftridie 
siquidem Membertouius fua fponte poftulauit com- 
mune Chriflianorum coemeterium, qua & in fententia 
mortem obiit; vti fcilicet hoc fuo facfto fidem fuam 
omnibus Chriffcianis ac Barbaris teflatam relinqueret, 
fuffragiorumque Ecclefiae fieret particeps. Magnus 
omnino vir fuit hie Sagamus, non fuorum magis, 
qu^m noftrorum iudicio, cuius eximiam indolem fu- 
pra vulgare Canadiorum ingenium longe ideo extu- 
liiTe vifus eft Deus optimus, vt hunc fibi iuflas eius 
gentis primitias legeret. Ex o(5togenis fere Nouo- 
Francis, quos ab ineunte lunio anni fexcentefimi de- 
■cimi, nulla plane imbutos catechefi, temere Baptifmo 
impertierat lolTaeus nefcio quis, fui muneris parum 
intelligens facerdos, vnus dumtaxat Membertouius, 
pro eo quantum fuos omnes populares fagacitate & 
prudentia longo interuallo anteibat, follerter difpexe- 
rat, quanti effet, Chriftianum non cenferi quidem, 
fed reipfa idoneis eo nomine praeditum moribus vi- 
iiere. Et certe reliquis omnibus de illo oc5togenario 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 226 


was no doubt that, if the Sagamore persisted in his 
purpose, and Biencourt continued to support him, 
some offense and disturbance would arise therefrom ; 
but Divine providence prevented this evil. The day 
thereafter, Membertou of his own accord requested 
the usual Christian burial, in which resolution he 
died, evidently purposing by this act to leave his 
faith attested to all Christians and Savages, and to 
become a participant in the privileges of the Church. 
This Sagamore was in every respect a great man, 
not only in the opinion of his own people but in 
ours; and the good God seems to have raised this 
man's excellent nature high above the ordinary char- 
acter of the Canadians, in order that he might gather 
him to himself as the first fruits in righteousness 
of his race. Out of some 80 natives of New France 
whom since the beginning of June of the year 
16 10 a certain Josse,'^^ a priest unfamiliar with his 
-duties, had heedlessly baptized, although they cer- 
tainly had had no religious instruction, Membertou 
alone, who greatly excelled all his countrymen in 
acuteness and good sense, had wisely discerned how 
important it is not merely to be considered a Chris- 
tian, but actually to live with a character agreeing to 
the name. And indeed, although the entire remain- 
der of that 80 had continued their brutal mode of life 
ever since Baptism, this man alone deserved to be 
called a Christian, and indeed led a praiseworthy life 
in [577] the midst of dense ignorance, before our breth- 
ren had come thither. As he, first of all the inhabit- 
ants of New France, was sprinkled with the saving wa- 
ters, it seems, beyond doubt, that he so imbibed their 
most potent virtue, that nothing remained for him but 
to secure those teachers, by whose instructions he 
would be trained in Christian principles until he should 


226 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.2 

belluinum a Baptifmo viuendi morerti perpetu5 reti- 
nentibus, hie folus vt Chriftiano dignum erat, in [577] 
multa etiam ignorantia, priufquam eo noftri aduenif- 
fent, vitam cum laude traduxit. Primus omnium de 
Nouo-Francis falutaribus afperfus aquis, earum vim 
potentiffimam ita fcilicet vifus eft combibiffe, vt ei 
nihil longius effet qua vt eos nacifeeretur magiftros, 
quorum difciplina Chriftianis inftitutis eo vfque in- 
ftrueretur, dum idoneus fieret, qui fuos inter popula- 
res Apoflolicum ageret dodtorem. Ardentis huius 
defiderij locupletes teftes noflri, has voces eius ex 
ore faepenumero exceperunt: Per Deum immorta- 
lem, date operam Patres, noflrum vt idioma breui 
perdifcatis, vti vobis do(5toribus vfus, ficuti vos eflis, 
ego quoque concionator, & docendi magifter euada, 
noflraque coniundta opera Nouo-Francoru gens vni- 
uerfa ad Chriflum traducatur. Hunc virum, vix quin- 
decim menfibus, ex quo in Chriftianorum numerum 
venerat, fuperftitem, paucis diebus noftra inflitutione 
informatum, multae tamen vere Chrifliani ac pij ani- 
mi virtutes illuftrem fecerant; quam fcilicet tam 
vberem frugem fmgulares probae indolis dotes in eo 
nuper, patriis etiam moribus viuente, praefagierant. 
Omnium prouincialium teftimonio, quotquot multis 
antfe faeculis floruerant, Sagamos hie vnus animi robo- 
re, muneris militaris fcientia, clientelarum multitu- 
dine, frequentiaque, potentia, & gloriofi nominis cla- 
ritudine inter fuos, atque ipfos hoftes facile fuperauit. 
Quem celebritatis fplendorem perpetuum non potuit, 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 227 

become fit to introduce among his countrymen an 
Apostolic teacher. Our brethren are competent wit- 
nesses of this burning desire ; they often heard from 
his lips these words : " By the immortal God, Fathers, 
endeavor to quickly learn our language, in order that, 
after having employed you as teachers, I also, like 
you, may go forth as a public exhorter and in- 
structor; and by our united labors the entire popula- 
tion of New France may be brought to Christ. ' ' This 
man, who survived hardly fifteen months after be- 
coming a Christian, and was accorded but a few days 
of our training, was nevertheless rendered illustrious 
by many virtues truly Christian and belonging to a 
pious spirit; and, indeed, unique marks of an upright 
character had presaged in him this fruit which was so 
rich, a short time previously, while he was still liv- 
ing according to his ancestral customs. By the testi- 
mony of all the inhabitants of the province, this one 
man, in strength of mind, in knowledge of the mili- 
tary art, in the great number of his followers, in 
power, and in the renown of a glorious name among 
his countrymen, and even his enemies, easily sur- 
passed the Sagamores who had flourished during 
many preceding ages. This universal honor and 
renown he could not have attained, even among 
Savages utterly untaught, except from an established 
reputation, the knowledge also of the exceptional 
justice of his [578] character, and his temperance. 
Indeed, concerning this last virtue, although nothing 
additional can be cited, there was certainly a dis- 
tinguished example of a man of great self-restraint in 
the continual monogamy of Membertou, in which 
rank, thus far. New France has recognized him alone 
as a phoenix indeed. For, though all the rest of 
the natives, but especially the Sagamores, covet above 


228 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.2 

etiam inter Barbaros, nulla villus rei doc5trina imbu- 
tos, confequi, nifi ex certa fama, adedque etiam notitia 
eximise in eo vigentis [578] sequitatis, atque tempe- 
rantiae. De temperantia quidem eius, vt praetere^ ni- 
hil afferri poffit, luculentum fane fuit, fibi magnopere 
moderantis hominis, documentum, perpetua in Mem- 
bertouio monogamia, quo in genere folitarium vere 
phoenicem Nouo-Francia eum adhuc agnouit. Quod 
enim reliqui omnes indigense, fed Sagami prsefertim, 
ex vxorum multitudine ftirpis numerofam feriem ex- 
petunt fummopere, atque fperant, fuse vtique poten- 
tise fmgulare columen ac firmamentum ; id vti more 
gentis vfurparet, adduci numquam potuit Member- 
touius, quod altiore quadam, fupra vulgus Sagamo- 
rum, fapientia perspiceret, grauiora inter difcordes 
vxores, & earum liberos fimultatum, fub eodem tedto, 
detrimenta exiftere, qu^m emolumenta opum, & neu- 
tiquam confentientis potentiae. Sollemne eft illi 
genti, ex fuperftitiofo ritu, quod genus omnes habent 
praecipuum, demortuorum neminem fuo vnquam nom- 
ine appellare, fed aduentitium cuiuis, ex re nata, 
indere, quo cum perpetuo inter commemorandum de- 
notent: quo ex more Henricum Membertouium ab 
virtutibus bellicis nuper clariffimum, congruenti eius 
laudibus nomenclatione, Magnum Imperatorem, fuo 
idiomate, nuncuparunt. 

PoTRiNCOVRTivs Bieucourtij pater, in Galliam 
menfe lulio nauigarat, commeatus fummittendi gra- 
tia, cuius erant magnae anguftiae in Porturegienli 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 229 


all else from a multitude of wives a numerous train 
of progeny, and desire them as the especial support 
and foundation of their power; Membertou could 
never be induced to conform to this custom of the 
race, because, with a certain wisdom deeper than that 
of the mass of Sagamores, he perceived that the evils 
arising among the quarreling wives and among the 
children of these rivals, beneath the same roof, more 
than balanced the increase of resources and of power 
that might arise from a large family. It is an observ- 
ance of that race, from a superstitious rite which all 
especially revere, to never mention by name any de- 
ceased person ; but to give each, according to circum- 
stances, an additional appellation, by which they al- 
ways designate him whenever they mention him. In 
conformity with this custom, they called Henry Mem- 
bertou, because he had of late been highly renowned 
in warlike virtues, by a name agreeing with his repu- 
tation, meaning, in their language. Great Chief. 

POTRINCOURT, the father of Biencourt, had sailed 
for France in the month of July for the sake of pro- 
curing supplies, of which there was a great scarcity 
in the colony at Port Royal ; but up to the following 
month of October no provisions had been sent from 
France; therefore, Biencourt decided to make a trip, in 
company with Father Biard, to the Almochiquois, who 
lived near the Choiiacoet river, [579] and had plenty 
of Indian corn, in order by the exchange of French 
goods to obtain some food for the winter. But be- 
cause he turned aside from the journey across French 
Bay, to the St. John river, in order that he might 
exact from the young Pontgrave and the rest of the 
Maclouins a tax upon their Canadian traffic, and be- 
ing longer delayed by disputes which arose with that 
colony, he waited almost beyond the time for obtain- 


230 LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 2 

familia, Odtobri menfe infequente ; cibariorum tamen 
nihil e Gallia miffum erat ; idcirco Biencourtius ad Al- 
mochiquios, Choiiacoetij fluminis [579] accolas, Indici 
milij copiis abundantes, nauigationem , comite Patre 
Biardo, inftituit, Gallicarum merciutn permutatione 
ad hibernam aliquam annonam frumentaturus. Sed 
quod ex itinere ad Sandti loannis flumen, trans Fran- 
cicum Sinum diuerterat, vt ex adolefcente Pontgra- 
uaeo, reliquifque Maclouienfibus quintas exigeret Ca- 
nadicas negotiationis, diutius eum morantibus fubortis 
cum ea familia difcordiis, tempore frumentationis 
paene exclnfus eft, ad quam deinde ciim eft reuer- 
fus, Barbarorum delufus fraude, qui fpem frumen- 
tariae permutationis fecerant, vacuus in Portum Re- 
gium renauigauit. In ea excurfione feliciter obtigit 
Patri Biardo, vt Pontgrauaeo conciliaret Biencourtium, 
ficuti nuper Potrincourtium eidem infenfum placaue- 
rat, & vt Merueillaeo item Maclouienfi, de falute, ob 
nefcio quas fufpiciones, periclitanti grauiter, eadem 
pacificationis opera, vitam affereret; quo fuo fadto 
vtrumque fibi magnopere deuinxit. Noftro Sacer- 
doti demeritos effe beneficiis homines huiufmodi, 
cum ob caetera multa, turn ob id in primis opportune 
accidebat, quod eorum opera fideli, ac vtili effet vfu- 
rus in difciplina Canadicae linguae, quam Pontgrauaeus 
callebat egregie, fi dies aliquot vna viuere, aut certe 
frequentius congredi liceret. Id certe, vt Pater Biar- 
dus no expeteret, quod expetebat, ipfi vltr5 ambie- 
bant, delate ei perhumaniter fuo contubernio ; quibus 


1612-14J THE JESUIT RELATIONS 231 

ing corn ; and, when he finally returned to that 
business, deceived by the pretensions of the Indians, 
who had held out the hope of buying food, he sailed 
back empty-handed to Port Royal. During this trip 
Father Biard fortunately succeeded in reconciling 
Biencourt to Pontgrave, just as he had lately concili- 
ated Potrincourt, who had been enraged at the same 
man; and also, by the same office of pacification, in 
preserving the life of Merveille, the Malouin, who 
was in great jeopardy on account of certain suspi- 
cions ; by which actions he acquired the greatest in- 
fluence over them both. It was advantageous to our 
Priest to have men of this character indebted for fa- 
vors to him, not only for many other reasons, but 
especially, because he designed to make use of their 
faithful and effective services in learning the Cana- 
dian language, in which Pontgrav^ was unusually 
skilled, if they should be allowed to reside together for 
a few days, or to meet even more frequently. They, 
of their own accord, took care that Father Biard might 
not request what he desired, by very politely offering 
him the privileges of their home ; the Father was 
grateful to them, and for the present returned thanks, 
requesting them, however, to postpone their kind- 
ness to him until that time when it would be proper 
for him to accept it ; for it was not then fitting for 
him [580] to desert Biencourt, especially when he was 
engaged in a dangerous journey. Afterwards, while 
Biencourt was returning from that unsuccessful trip to 
the Quinibequi for provisions, which we have just de- 
scribed, when they had arrived at the Pentegoet river 
and the island of Ste. Croix, Father Biard endeav- 
ored to persuade him, and even begged him, to send 
him to Pontgrave from that place, which was near at 
hand, for the purpose of composing a Canadian cate- 


232 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.2 

in praefentia Pater egit gratias, habuitque, rogatis 
tamen, vt fibi banc benignitatem, in id tempus refer- 
uarent, quo bene vti fas elTet; tunc enim baud [580] 
decere Biencourtium, in periculofa praefertim nauiga- 
tione, ab fe deferi. Biencourtio deinde redeunti ex 
irrita ilia Quinibequienfi frumentatione, quam modo 
indicauimus, cum ad Pentegoetium amnem, & San(5tae 
Crucis infulam ventum elTet, fuadere conatus eft, 
immo fupplex fuit Pater Biardus, vt fe inde, loco ex 
propinquo, ad Pontgrauaeum dimitteret, Canadici ca- 
techifmi contexendi caufa, quod inter eos ante con- 
uenerat. Huic poftulationi, licet aequilTimae, is cuius 
nibil planfe intererat, non nifi eis conditionibus affen- 
fus eft, quae & iniquiflimae, & nequaquam in poteftate 
Patris effent. Quamobrem facultate deiedlus idioma- 
tis vernaculi condifcendi, ad otiofam paene vitam in 
arce degendam ada(5tus eft, ingenti fua moleftia. 
Nouembri exeunte, iam. ferme exaufto penu, nulli 
nuncij afferebantur h Gallia; & quod reliquum effe 
poterat ab venatione fubfLdium, niuibus oblitu fo- 
lum intercipiebat ; vt ex parfimonia petendum elTet 
vedtigal, quo plures in dies annona fufficeret. De- 
menfum igitur cuiuflibet e familia, in quamque heb- 
domadam, ad denas panis vncias, lardi felibram, pifi 
aut fabae ternas fcutellas, & prunorum vnam denique 
, redierat. Atque tametfi familia vniuerfa eo comme- 
atu, quem noftrum e Gallia importaueramus, vitam 
tolerabat, nihil nobis liberalius, qu^m cuiuis de calo- 
nibus eo tempore indultum eft, neque vt indulgere- 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS * 233 

chism, which had previously been agreed upon be- 
tween them. To this request, although most -just, and 
although it certainly made no difference to him, Bien- 
court would not consent, except under conditions 
which were both exceedingly unjust and by no means 
in the power of the Father. Therefore he was disap- 
pointed of the opportunity of learning the language 
of the natives, and was compelled to lead an almost 
inactive existence in the fort, to his great vexation. 
By the end of November, although the provisions 
were already almost exhausted, no tidings were re- 
ceived from France ; and what aid they might have 
obtained by hunting was cut off by the deep snow 
that covered the ground ; so it was necessary to exer- 
cise the greatest economy, in order that the pro- 
visions might last longer. The weekly allowance, 
therefore, of every one in the colony had finally been 
fixed at ten ounces of bread, half a pound of lard, 
three dishes of peas or beans, and one of prunes. And, 
although the whole colony was living upon the pro- 
visions which we had brought from France for our 
own use, we were treated with no more indulgence 
at that time than any one of the servants, nor did 
we wish for special privileges; although a certain 
rascal, in a writing published in France,'^* has not 
hesitated to circulate many statements to the con- 
trary, in the most shameless and calumnious manner. 
Until the 24th of January, in the year [581] 16 12, the 
scarcity of provisions lasted, upon which day a ship 
entered Port Royal with a small quantity of supplies, 
bought and sent over by Madame de Guercheville. 
This pious lady had paid to brother Robert du Thet, 
1,000 golden crowns, contributed according to the 
agreement between Robin ^^ and the Canadian Fa- 
thers, for the purpose of purchasing and conveying 


284 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.2 

tur, optauimus, quamquam nebulo quidam, fcripto in 
Gallia edito, non eft veritus multa fecus per fummam 
impudentiam & caltimniam diffeminare. Ad nonum 
calendas Februarias, anni [581] fexcentefimi duode- 
cimi, tenuerunt cibariorum anguftise, quern ad diem 
in Portum Regium inuedla eft nauis cum mediocri 
admodum annona, Dominae Guercheuillaeae fumtibus 
emta, & tranfmiffa. Mille aureos nummos, ex pac5to 
focietatis cum Robinio & Patribus Canadienfibus ini- 
tae, contributes hsec pia matrona numerauerat Rober- 
to du Thet, fratri noftro coemendis tranfmittendif- 
que Porturegienfi contubernio cibariis ; fed eorum 
quadringentis fratrem noftrum, non fatis cautum de- 
pofiti cuftodem, Potrincourtius oblata fuse fyngraphae 
cautione, confeftim emunxit ; ficque res tota rediit ad 
fexcentos, vnde annona nobis exigua confiaretur. 
Sed neque tot aureorum cibaria in nauem illata funt, 
nam Potrincourtij naualis adminifter partem coemti 
frumenti auertit in Gallia, & eorum quae aduedla 
erant, Porturegienfi Societati quantum collibuit, nee 
amplius, reddidit. Nofter Gilbertus du Thet, cuius 
in oculis horum pleraque commiffa erant, pofteS. 
quam vidit, ab eo qui annonae tranfuehendae prsefue- 
rat, nullas acceptorum rationes referri, alTumto Patre 
Biardo, apud Biencourtium egit modefte, vti ab eo, 
qui mandato parentis eius, pro magiftro in naui gef- 
ferat, acceptorum ratio repof ceretur : intereffe fiqui- 
dem nauticorum omnium fociorum, vt conftaret, 
quantu a fingulis expenfum acceptuque effet. Bien- 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 235 

provisions to the colony at Port Royal; but Po- 
trincourt, by means of his promissory note, straight- 
way cheated our brother out of 400, as he was not a 
sufficiently careful guardian of his trust, and so the 
whole sum was reduced to 600, by means of which a 
scanty store was provided for us. But not even pro- 
visions to the value of that number of crowns were 
placed in the vessel, for Potrincourt's naval agent™ 
embezzled in France part of the grain purchased ; and, 
of the supplies carried over, he delivered to the So- 
ciety at Port Royal as much as he pleased, and no 
more. Our brother Gilbert du Thet, before whose 
eyes most of these acts had been committed, when he 
saw that no account was rendered, by the person in 
charge of the transportation of the supplies, of what 
had been received by him, in company with Father 
Biard modestly requested Biencourt that a reckoning 
concerning his trust be demanded from the man who, 
by order of his father, had acted as captain of the 
vessel ; saying that it was to the interest of all the ship's 
company that it should be made manifest how much 
had been received and expended by each individual. 
Biencourt indeed admitted at that time, and often 
thereafter, that nothing more modest or more just 
could be asked by any person ; but, nevertheless, just 
as if Simon Imbert, whose account in [582] the matter 
was desired, had been cruelly accused by our brother, 
he so represented to the former the request of the lat- 
ter, that he made him our bitter enemy. Therefore 
Imbert, in order to make Biencourt his friend and 
alienate him from us, and to release himself from the 
necessity of rendering an account, placing an evil in- 
terpretation upon the plan of Madame de Guerche- 
ville, who had taken occasion to make an agreement 
between the society and Robin, in order that he 


236 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.2 

courtius quidem & turn, & deinde faspius eft profef- 
fus, nihil moderatiiis, nihil aequitis poftulari h quo- 
quam potuilTe: nihilo tamen minus, quali a noflro 
atrociter infimularetur Simon Imbertus, cuius fides in 
[582] eo negotio defiderabatur ; ita illius poftulata ifti 
de pinxit, vt eum nobis infenfijGTimum faceret. Im- 
bertus ergo vt Biencourtium fibi conciliatum h. nobis 
abalienaret, feque referendae rationis neceffitate abfo- 
lueret, malignfe interpretatus confilium Dominae Guer- 
cheuillaeae, quae pacifcendae focietatis cum Robinio 
anfam captauerat, vt Milfionis noflrae rebus tant6 cer- 
tiiis caueret; fraudulenter cauillatus eft, per caufam 
eius focietatis intendi machina, qua Biencourtiorum 
nome Porturegienfi arce, atque vniuerfa Nona Fran- 
cia detruderetur. Ex hac calumnia illae Biencourtij 
fimultates exftiterunt, quibus facftum eft, vt noftro- 
rum opera Nouo-francis populis, quin & ipfis quoque 
Gallis nihilo fere quam ifti minus egentibus inftitu- 
tione, deinceps effet inutilis. Calumniatoris menda- 
cia facile fuit noflris diluere, & femel, iterum, ac 
terti6 tam aperte ac valide apud Biencourtium, au- 
diente vniuerfo contubernio, diluerunt; vt poflre- 
ma refutatione ad infantiam adac5lus Imbertus e6 
deueniret, vt excufandae noxae gratia profiteri non 
vereretur, fibi largiter temulento illas aduerfum nos 
calumnias excidifle. Biencourtium acriter pupu- 
gerat nuncius, quo afferebatur, etiam confcio pa- 
rente fuo Potrincourtio, vniuerfae Nouse Franciae ius 
imperiumque h. maximo amne Sacqueo ad Flori- 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 287 

might more securely guard the interests of our Mis- 
sion, falsely charged that by means of it a conspiracy 
of the society was in progress, by which the authority 
of the Biencourts was to be destroyed in the fort at 
Port Royal and in the whole of New France. From 
this slander arose those quarrels with Biencourt by 
which our services were rendered useless to the tribes 
of New France, nay, more, to the French themselves, 
who needed instruction scarcely less than the natives. 
It was easy for our brethren to refute the falsehoods 
of their defamer; and once, twice, and a third time 
they so plainly and completely disproved them, be- 
fore Biencourt, in the hearing of the whole settle- 
ment, that Imbert was rendered speechless by the 
final refutation, and was so reduced that he did 
not hesitate to claim, for the sake of excusing his 
wickedness, that these slanders had been uttered by 
him while much intoxicated. Biencourt had been 
deeply vexed by the news which was brought, to the 
effect that, even with the knowledge of his father, Po- 
trincourt, the possession and government of the 
whole of New France from its greatest river, the Sac- 
qu6 to Florida, except Port Royal, had been granted 
by a Royal charter to Madame de GucrcJieville ; and 
that, by documents under public authority, there had 
been transferred to her also by Sieur de Monts every- 
thing which he had recently possessed in this region 
by the grant of Henry IV. And, although he could 
not suppose that these things were done because of our 
[583] influence, still he thereafter acted towards us just 
as if he had so believed. The idea of Madame de 
Guercheville was, indeed, that their respect for her 
authority might serve as a strong restraint to hold to 
their duty the Biencourts, both father and son, who 
up to this time had kept poor faith with us and felt 


238 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.2 

dam, Portu Regio demto, GuercheuillcscB Regio diplo- 
mate elTe cocefftim eidemq ; a Domino de Monts quid- 
quid Henrici Quarti beneficio nuper in eadem ora 
poffediffet, id omne tabulis publice confignatis effe 
tranfcriptum. Atque, vt non putaret, haec nobis 
[583] audtoribus gefla elle, perinde tamen poftea in 
nos affedtus fuit quali credidiffet. Guercheuillaeae qui- 
dem mens, fuit huius principatus fui reuerentia, velut 
potenti freno iniedto, Biencourtiorum vtrumque, pat- 
tern & filium, fidei hadtenus in nos parum fmcerae, ani- 
mique minus grati, fuo in officio continere; nihil au- 
tem de Porturegienfi iure ipfis detrahere. Sed fui ni- 
mio plus amantes homines alienam in re propria 
cautionem, fuam iniuriam interpretabantur : quod 
tamen res iis effet angufta domi, nee viderent vnde 
commodiiis cella Porturegienfis inflrui poffet, qukm 
h. Guercheuillaea in gratiam noftrorum Patrum, ne 
hac annona exciderent, fuum dolorem taciti conco- 
quebant. Noftrorum facillima fuit apud Biencour- 
tium purgatio, quam cum accepilfet in praefentia, re- 
conciliatis animis Patres ad inftitutum Canadienfis 
idiomatis condifcendi magnis animis reuerfi funt, par- 
titis inter fe prouinciis, vt Pater Maffaeus ad Ludoui- 
cum Membertouium, Henrici vita fundti filium, eius 
rei caufa demigraret; Pater Biardus magiftrum eius 
linguse domi Barbarum fibi adhiberet. Patri MalTseo 
ad Sancti loannis flumen apud hofpitem, cum ado- 
lefcente Gallo focio degenti, ex diuturna inedia, & 
Nomadicae vitae continentibus vexationibus, accidit 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 2S» 

little gratitude toward us ; but not by any means to 
deprive them of their right to Port Royal. But these 
men, too fond of their private interests, consid- 
ered as an injury to themselves the solicitude of 
others in regard to their own affairs; but because 
their affairs at home were embarrassed, and they 
knew no more convenient source of provisions for 
Port Royal than Madame de Guercheville, for the 
sake of our Fathers, they silently smothered their 
vexation, in order not to lose these supplies. Our 
brethren very easily exonerated themselves before 
Biencourt, and when he had for the time being ac- 
cepted their excuses, and harmony had been restored, 
the Fathers returned with great determination to 
their purpose of learning the Canadian language, di- 
viding the business between them, so that Father 
Masse should go for this purpose to Louis Member- 
tou, son of the late Henry; while Father Biard 
should have a Savage to teach him the language at 
home. While Father Mass6, with a young French 
companion, was residing with his host at the St. John 
river, he fell seriously ill from long fasting and the 
continual annoyances of a wandering life ; and, al- 
though he did not die, he was reduced to the utmost 
weakness. During this illness a very ridiculous 
discussion, worthy of a Canadian intellect, took 
place between Membertou and his guest, the 
Father. The savage approached the prostrate Fa- 
ther, very anxious and grieved, as his countenance 
actually showed, because of the Priest's unfortunate 
condition, [584] whom he addressed with these words: 
"Hear me. Father, you will surely die, as I indeed an- 
ticipate ; write therefore to Biencourt, and also to your 
brother, that you have by no means perished at our 
hands, but been overcome by disease, in order that no 


240 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.2 

grauis aegrotatio, qua tantum non confedlus ad vlti- 
ma delaberetur, inter quern morbum Membertouio 
cum bofpite Patre accidit ridicula plane, ac Canadico 
ingenio digna fermocinatio. Ad decumbentem fcili- 
cet Patrem is adiit, vt quidem eius vultus praeferebat, 
Patris acerbo cafu [584] valdfe follicitus ac moerens, 
quern in haec verba compellauit. Audi me, Pater, 
moreris omnino, vt ego quidem auguror: fcribe igi- 
tur ad Biencourtium, itemque ad tuum fratrem, te h. 
nobis nequaquam trucidatum occubuilTe, fed morbo 
confumtum, ne qua in nobis tui obitus noxa refideat. 
Cui contr^ retulit Pater Maffaeus: Non committam, 
vd quod mones, imprudenter ad meos fcribam : ne tu 
ex mea imprudentia facftus audacior, fecuriorque vio- 
lentas manus aflferas, nihilo tamen mintis innocentiae 
teftes meas litteras apud te habeas, quae te noxa exi- 
mant. Inexfpedtato, & arguto refponfo perculfus 
Barbarus, quafi ex alto fopore mox ad fe rediit, atque 
renidenti ore, ait: lefum igitur tuis precibus tibi pro- 
pitium facito, vt te periculo mortis eruat, ne quis in 
nos tui occafus culpam conferat. Illud ipfum euro, 
inquit. Pater, define elTe follicitus, nee enim me hie 
morbus exhauriet. In Porturegienfl quiete Pater 
Biardus interea dodtore Barbaro vtebatur ad condif- 
cendam barbariem, quae fe idoneum Euangelij praeco- 
nem in rudi admodum gente praeflaret: cui dodtori 
quamdiu habuit vnde menfam infterneret, eius facili, 
vtilique opera profecit, fed difcendi docendique cur- 
fum pofl aliquot hebdomadas inhibuit penus inopia. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 241 


harm may come to us because of your death." Fa- 
ther Mass^ answered him in turn : " I shall not do as 
you advise me, and imprudently write to my friends, 
lest you should become bolder and more careless, be- 
cause of my lack of foresight, and lay violent hands 
upon me, while nevertheless possessing my letter as 
proof of your innocence, which would save you from 
punishment. ' ' The Savage, astonished by this un- 
expected and keen reply, soon came to himself, as if 
from a deep sleep, and said with a smile: " Therefore 
make Jesus favorable to you by your prayers, in 
order that he may save you from the danger of death, 
and no one may lay the blame of your fate upon us." 
' ' I am attending to that very thing, ' ' said the Father, 
** cease to be anxious, for this disease will not end 
me." In the calm of Port Royal Father Biard, in 
the meantime, employed a Savage as teacher, that 
he might learn the barbarous tongue, which pre- 
sented itself as the suitable vehicle for the Gospel 
among this utterly rude people. As long as he had 
provisions with which to furnish the table for his 
teacher, he made progress by the aid of his willing 
and efficient services, but after a few weeks the scarc- 
ity of supplies interrupted the course of learning and 
teaching. By these difficulties our brethren were also 
hindered in the case of four Savages, whom Father 
Biard and Biencourt, in a time of peril upon tne sea, 
had vowed, with the concurrence of the Savages them- 
selves, to make Christians, if they should safely escape 
from the threatened shipwreck. When they were 
delivered from this danger, and had brought the ship 
to Port Royal, there was nothing in the storehouse 
with which to feed the Savages until they should be 
suitably instructed in the Catechism ; and, because of 
this poverty of our brethren, the opportunity of sue- 


242 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.2 

Cuius anguftiis quoq; prohibit! funt noflri, ne quat- 
tuor Barbaros, quos Pater Biardus & Biencourtius in 
maritimo difcrimine, ipfis Barbaris ratum votum ha- 
betibus, futures Chriftianos vouerant, fi e prsefenti 
naufragio incolumes euaderent. Erepti periculo cum 
ad Regium Portum appulilTent nauem, non fuit in 
cella vnde alerentur Barbari, quoad idonea Catechefi 
effent imbuti, qua deflitutione affedtis nobis rei bene 
gerendae occafio periit, nee poftea rediit. 

In Nouembrem eius faeculi annus duodecimus iam 
procefTerat, cum exigua cibaria fuperiore Februario 
allata, aut abfumta penitus, aut tenuiflimis ardta re- 
liquiis Biencourtium valde anxium habebant: fed 
e6 maxime, quod ex Galliis nauis nulla veniebat. 
Noftris, pofteriore Februarij menfis commeatu, fum- 
milTa fuerant priuatim quaterna puri tritici dolia, 
vnumque hordei, quae in futurum fibi fepofuerant; 
quam annonam, accifis communibus contubernij re- 
bus, conferendam in medium rati, Biencourtio eam 
permiferunt, vt in quotidianos familise totius vfus 
diuideret, ipfofque in diurno demenfo cum caeteris 
domefticis sequaret. Eo fubfidio ad tempus fubleua- 
tae funt publicae necelTitates, fed in tota hiberna mul- 
titudine, tametfi non numerofae, tenuius id fuit vec5li- 
gal, quam pro foli conditione, nullam frumentationis, 
incertam venatus, pifcatufque fpem offerentis. Vt 
autem dierum tempefliuitas omnis adelTet ad pifca- 
tum, locorumque opportunitas : aberat tamen neceffa- 
rium ad banc operam pifcatorij lembi inftrumentum. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 243 

cessfully accomplishing the -undertaking passed by, 
and did not afterwards recur. 

The twelfth year of this century had already ad- 
vanced to November, when the fact that the scanty 
supplies, brought the preceding February, were either 
entirely consumed, or reduced to extremely scanty 
remnants, caused Biencourt great anxiety, but es- 
pecially, because no ship was coming from France. 
There had been sent to our brethren privately, 
among the preceding February's supplies, four casks 
of pure wheat and one of barley, which they had laid 
aside for their own use in the future. This grain, 
because of the general extremities of the colony, they 
judged should be added to the common stock; and 
gave it to Biencourt, in order that he might distribute 
it for the daily needs of the whole settlement, and 
give them an equal allowance each day with the rest 
of the people. By this aid the general necessities 
were relieved for a time; but for the winter, and 
among all that crowd of people, although not numer- 
ous, this was a scanty supply, considering the condi- 
tion of the ground, which presented no opportunity 
for agriculture, and an uncertain chance for hunting 
and fishing. Moreover, even if the weather and the 
accessibility of the places had been every way favor- 
able for fishing, there was still lacking for this pur- 
suit the necessary aid of a fishing boat. Therefore, 
while the rest of the settlers were slothfully enjoy- 
ing winter cheer before the blazing hearth, as if for- 
getful of their poverty, our brethren devoted their 
attention and labor to the construction of a boat. 
While they were engaged in this sort of work, the 
whole colony guessed and wondered what men so un- 
skilled in the carpenter's art, unprovided with work- 
ing tools, and unsupplied with material, were trying 


244 LES RELATIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol.2 

Caeteris igitur contubernalibus hiberna folatia ex 
luciilento foco fegniter capelTentibus, quafi oblitis 
fuam penuriam, noftri appellunt ftudium, operamque 
o-Retfit'us ab* lintrem fabricandam. Eis ad eiufmodi opus ac- 
cindtis, fufpicere, demirari vniuerfiitn contubernium, 
quid moliantur homines k fabrili arte, ab armis fabrili- 
bus, k materia tam imparati : apud focum [586] de tarn 
nouo inftituto multa verba facere, fubitarios Argonau- 
tas didteriis figere : fed noflri ab opere neutiquam dif- 
cedere, rem vrgere. Medio Martio, ftupentibus fuis 
irriforibus, noftri lintrem in aquam deducunt, flumi- 
num ac maris ipfius patientem, nee verentur adolef- 
cente famulo atque alio contubernalium comitibus, 
aduerfo flumine, Sinum Francicum influente, in filuas 
ad glandem Chiquebiamque radicem legendam con- 
tendere. Chiquebi radix eft illius orae praecipua, nof- 
tris tuberibus baud abfimilis, fed vefcentibus iucun- 
dior ac vtilior, cuius multiplices bulbi, tenui filo 
catenati, fub fumma terra nafcuntur. Sed omnia 
eius radicis cubilia iam "k peritis locorum Barbaris 
delibata noflri leguli deprebendebant, vt multa in- 
dagine, quilibet eorum eius cibi vnum diarium vix 
fibi qusereret. Ab hac glandaria, bulbariaque melle, 
quandoquidem eius leue fuit mometum, ad Eplani pif- 
catum ftudia conuertentes, altiiis versiim amnis caput 
nauigium promouent. Eplamis, feu Epelanus, eft pif- 
ciculus Trichiae Rothomagenlis magnitudine, hoc eft 
eius, quem Sardinam vulgus appellat, qui mari egref- 
fus ineunte Aprili, magnis agminibus dulcis aquae 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 246 

to do ; they talked a great deal before the hearth [586] 
concerning this novel venture, and flung taunts at 
these rash Argonauts; but our brethren never left 
their work, and hurried on the undertaking. In the 
middle of March, to the amazement of their scoffers, 
our friends launched their boat, which endured the vio- 
lence of the rivers and even of the sea ; nor did they 
fear, in company with their young servant and an- 
other of the household, to ascend the river flowing 
into French Bay, to gather acorns and the Chiquebi 
root^' in the forest. The Chiquebi root is peculiar to 
this coast, and is not unlike our potatoes, but more 
pleasant and useful for eating ; its numerous bulbs, 
joined by a slender thread, grow deep in the earth. 
However, our collectors found that all the spots 
where this root grew had been already visited by 
the Savages, who were acquainted with the places; 
so that after long search each one of them could 
scarcely find a quantity of this food sufficient for 
one day. From this harvest of acorns and roots, 
since it was of small importance, they turned their 
attention to fishing for the Eplanus,^ and ad- 
vanced their boat farther toward the head of the 
river. The Eplan or Epelan is a little fish of the size 
of the Trichia Rothomagensis, that is, of the fish 
which is commonly called the Sardine ; and, in the be- 
ginning of April, it leaves the ocean, and in great 
shoals enters the fresh-water streams, where it lays 
the eggs for its abundant young, these streams being 
very numerous four leagues from the post at Port 
Royal. Fishing for the Eplanus was succeeded by 
that for the Halecis, and for other sorts of river and 
sea-fishes, just as opportunity and suitable place 
offered for capturing each, up to the month of May ; 
but, contrary to what they most of all wished, our 


,** 


246 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.2 

riuos fubit, vbi fundendis ouis feturae operam det, 
cuius ingens eft copia, quattuor leucis k Porturegienli 
ftatione, frequentibus riuoru alueis. Eplanici pifca- 
tus laborem excepit Halecis, ac caeterorum feu fiuui- 
atilis feu marini generis pifcium prseda, prout cuiuf- 
que captandi fe dabat & tempeftas, & locus idoneus, 
ad Mai'um vfque menf em ; fed contrk qukm maximfe 
omnium vellent, noftri pifcatores, [587] Euangelij vel 
hamo, vel reti capiebant homines, in longfe ampliffimo 
Canadiorum Oceano, non nifi pauciffimos. 

Interea teporis in Gallia Reginae audloritas inter- 
ponebatur, vt primo quoque tepore Porturegiell fer- 
uitute liberaremur, nobis vti liceret, in quolilibet 
Nouae Franciae tradtu, aut patrium idioma perdifcere, 
aut quod iam didicillemus noflro iure, nullius ex- 
fpedlata venia, inter Barbaros exercere. In eam rem 
igitur Regio diplomate inftrudti Sociorum duo, Pater 
Quintinus, & qui ante in Galliam renauigarat e Portu 
Regio, Gilbertus du Thet Nouo-Fracicum littus, an- 
no fexcentefimo decimo tertio, medio Mai'o incolumes 
laetique tenuerunt. Diplomate cauebatur, vti liceret 
nobis nouu domiciliu commodo loco aedificare, ac ido- 
neam familiam domicilio tuendo habere, ad cuius 
inftrudtum annua tricenum capitum cibaria, equi 
praeterea, caprae, ac caetera id genus largiter fummilla 
erant. Ad vim quoque propulfandam inftrumenti 
bellici, & commeatus nonnihil, militaria item quat- 
tuor tabernacula, quibus tegeremur, dum muri allur- 
gerent nouae domus, Reginae beneficentia acceflerant. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 247 

fishermen, [587] with the hook or net of the Gospel, 
took only a very few men in the immense Ocean of 
the Canadian tribes. 

Meantime in France the authority of the Queen 
was interposed, that we might at the first oppor- 
tunity be relieved from our bondage at Port Roy- 
al, and that we might be allowed, in any part of 
New France, either to study the language of the na- 
tives, or practice among the Savages what we had al- 
ready learned by our own right, and seeking the per- 
mission of no man. Therefore two of our members, 
provided with a Royal commission for this undertak- 
ing, — Father Quintin,'^ and he who previously had 
sailed from Port Royal for France, Gilbert du Thet,— 
safely and joyfully reached the coast of New France 
in the middle of May of the year 161 3. It was pro- 
vided in the commission that we should be allowed 
to establish a new settlement in a suitable place, and 
to have a sufficient number of colonists to protect it ; ^ 
and for its provision there had generously been sent 
a year's supply of food for thirty persons, and also 
horses, goats, and other things of the sort. By the 
kindness of the Queen there were also added weap- 
ons for our defense, some supplies, and also four 
military tents, by which we might be sheltered while 
our new residence was being built. La Saussaye, 
with a military title and command, was to have 
charge of the household of colonists, not only while 
the buildings were in process of erection, but also 
when they had been completed and fortified, in order 
that in case of attack nothing might be neglected, 
but the entire colony should be in a condition of de- 
fense, and the buildings in good repair. When the 
supplies were landed at Port Royal, only five of us 
were there, out of the whole population, Biencourt 


248 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.2 

Saulleius militari titulo imperioque domeflicae co- 
hort!, domicilio sedificando, eidemque exflrudto, ac 
munito prsefutnrus erat, vti nihil deeffet ad ingrue- 
tes cafus, quin fedes familidque omnis farta tedla- 
que confifleret. His in Regium Portum appellenti- 
bus, quini tantum de toto contubernio aderamus, ab- 
fente inter caeteros Biencourtio, cuius vices obeunti 
Heberto cum Reginae litterae ledtae fuillent, [588] qui- 
bus dimitti iubebamur, noflras nobis licuit colligere 
farcinas, quibus colledtis poft biduu Porturegienfi fla- 
tione, ad nouas fedes collocandas in Norembegenfi re- 
gione foluimus. Kadefguitmn, Norembegae orae por- 
tus, nautis edicebatur ex pac5to, vt e6 nauigium appel- 
lerent, vnde vniuerfa familia exfcenHonem faceret, 
futuri domicilii locum aufpicat6 captura in proximis 
collibus ; fed cum in propiore portu haefiffent, cui k 
Sancto Saluatore nomen, ex faufto euentu, indidimus, 
afferebant fe padtam fidem abunde exfoluilTe, neque 
longiiis curfum prouedturos. Inter earn contentio- 
nem fermo incidit cum indigenis Barbaris, quibus 
fuam oram mirificfe prae Kadefquito collaudantibus, 
& ad cam fedem deligendam magnoper^ hortantibus, 
eius explorandae cupido nobis inceffit; qua explora- 
ta, impenf^que probata ab omnibus, totius multitu- 
dinis e6 incubuit animus, vt opportune in colle area 
excitando aedificio deflgnaretur. Loco itaque inaugu- 
rando Crux erigitur, folum exftruendis aedibus de- 
f cribitur, iaciendis f undamentis terra effoditur, eodem 
nomine, quo fubiedtus portus, nafcens tenuibus exor- 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 249 

being absent with the others. When the letter of the 
Queen, [588] in which were orders for our dismissal, 
had been read to Hebert,^ who represented Bien- 
court, we were allowed to collect our baggage ; hav- 
ing done this, two days later we left Port Royal, with 
the intention of founding a new settlement in the 
neighborhood of Norembega. The boatmen had 
been notified, according to their agreement, to land 
at Kadesquit,^^ a harbor on the shore of Norembega, 
in order that the whole colony might there disembark, 
and auspiciously take possession of a site for the fu- 
ture settlement upon the neighboring hills ; but when 
we had stuck in a bay, this side of that,^^ to which 
from the favorable outcome we gave the name of St. 
Sauveur, they declared that they had abundantly ful- 
filled their agreement, and that they would not con- 
tinue the voyage any further. During this dispute, 
we engaged in conversation with the Savages inhabit- 
ing the spot ; and since they praised their own coun- 
try as being far superior to that at Kadesquit, and 
earnestly solicited us to choose it for our settle- 
ment, we conceived a desire to explore it. After we 
had examined this region, which was heartily ap- 
proved by all, the whole company turned their atten- 
tion to selecting a site for the building upon a suit- 
able hill. Therefore, a Cross was erected, by way of 
consecrating the place; the ground was marked out 
for the erection of the buildings ; the earth was dug 
up for laying the foundations ; and our abode, while 
still in its infancy, was called by the same name as 
the harbor, St. Sauveur. La Saussaye, the com- 
mander of the colonists, took, from the beginning, so 
deep an interest in agriculture that he thought of that 
alone, and neglected everything else; and through 
his excessive zeal for husbandry, called off a large 


250 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.2 

diis domus Sandtus Saluator appellatur. Sauffeio co- 
hortis Duci nifticae rei tarn acris cura principio infe- 
derat, vt id vnum cogitaret, caetera negligeret omnia, 
exque nimio agriculturse fludio, magnam familise 
partem ab opere fabrili ad ruflicum feuocaret. Mot- 
taeus Sauffeio Legatus, Ronferaeus Signifer, loubertus 
ordinum Inftrudtor, caeterique de Cohorte primores 
erant in ea fententia, omnibus reliquis pofthabitis 
curis, aedificandum [589] effe domicilium, eoque confe- 
rendas vniuerfse cohortis operas, quoad aduerstim hof- 
tile vim munitionibus cindtum, tuto habitari poffet. 
Quamobrem segerrime ferebant, contubemalium ple- 
rofque ab aedificando abdudtos arationibus ab Sauf- 
feio adhiberi, apud quem vehementer inftabant, vt 
omnium manus & fludia in aedificationem, vtilius in 
praefentia vtique negotium, conuerteret; fed furdo 
canebatur. Ita variantibus procerum fententiis atque 
inflitutis, exoriebantur contentiones, cuiufmodi folent 
inter diffentietes nafci, dum quod quifque optimum 
cenfet, id aliorum confiliis atque coeptis praeuerten- 
dum putat : fiebatque vt altercationibus dies ab opera 
inanes traducerentur. Quam inertiam, & difcordan- 
tium iudiciorum obftinationem, rei Chriftianse cultui- 
que Diuino in ea ora valde infeflam, Deus vifus efl 
improuifo infortunio voluiffe multare. 

Angli paucis abhinc annis Virginiam occuparunt, 
quam loannes Vezaranus Francifci I Gallorum Regis 
aufpiciis exploratam, quingentefimo vicefimo tertio 
anno fub eius iurifdidtionem redegerat. Eadem ipfa 
efl continens inter Floridam Nouamque Franciam, 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 261 

portion of the colony from the work of building, and 
set them to farming. La Motte,*^ Satissaye's Lieuten- 
ant, Ronseraye, the Color-bearer, Joubert, the Drill- 
master, and other leading men of the Company were 
of the opinion that, postponing all other enterprises, 
the building [589] ought to be completed, and the en- 
ergies of the entire company be devoted to this, until it 
should be protected by fortifications against hostile 
violence, and might safely be inhabited. Wherefore, 
they were greatly displeased because most of the 
colonists were taken away from building and em- 
ployed in plowing by La Saussaye, whom they eager- 
ly urged to apply the labors and zeal of all in build- 
ing, a more profitable undertaking for the present ; 
but it fell upon deaf ears. So, as the views and plans 
of the leaders were at variance, disputes arose, such 
as usually take place between those who differ, when 
each one thinks that what he deems best ought to be 
preferred to the projects and undertakings of others ; 
the result was, that days were idly spent, away from 
work, in quarreling. This inactivity, and obstinacy 
in contrary opinions, so inimical to Christian inter- 
ests and the Divine worship upon that shore, God 
seems to have willed to punish by means of an un- 
foreseen calamity. 

The English, a few years before, had occupied Vir- 
ginia, which John Verazano, in 1523, had explored 
under the authority of Francis L, King of France, 
and brought under his jurisdiction. It is the portion 
of the continent between Florida and New France, 
which, covering the thirty-sixth, thirty-seventh, and 
thirty-eighth parallels, was formerly called by the 
name of Mocosa,^ situated two hundred and fifty 
leagues Westward from the station at St. Sauveur. 
From the fort [at Jamestown], which they have held 


262 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.2 

quam tricelimo fexto, feptimo, & odlauo gradibus fub- 
ftrata, Mocofce nomine ? veteres defignarunt, du- 
cetenis quinquagenis leucis versus Occafum ab 
Sandti Saluatoris ftatione diffitae. Ex leutomo arce, 
quam egregie munitam, & praelidiario milite in- 
ftrudtam inibi oc5tauo ab hinc anno habent, quotannis 
seftiuam nauigationem inftituunt ad Peucoitiarum in- 
fularum cetarias, pifcariae [590] annonae in futuram 
hiemem comparandae. E6 cum deueherentur huius 
anni aeftate, inciderunt in eas caeli caligines, quae huic 
mari denlilTimae folent per eos menfes incubare, in 
quibus dum incerti locorum diutius haerent, frequen- 
tibus eos trahentibus aeftuariis, paullatim noflru in 
littus delati funt, baud procul portu Sandli Saluatoris. 
Inde Barbarorum imprudentia lapforum indicio, qui 
eos pro foederatis Gallis fumerent, didicerunt Galli- 
cam nauem in proximo portu verfari, atque illam qui- 
dem neque grandem, neque ^ numerolis epibatis, 
neqj ab aeneis tormentis valide inftrudtam. Eo nun- 
cio nihil opportunius accidere poterat hominibus 
feminudis, & cibariorum copia exbauftis, quos praeter 
banc inopiam, inlita rapiendi cupiditas, & praedae ma- 
ioris opinio, qu^m quanta ex direpto noflro nauigio 
poterat cogi, fua fponte ad vim inferenda, etiam con- 
tra ius naturale ac gentium, accendebant. Arma igi- 
tur expediunt, paffis velis, inftrudta acie, diredto curfu 
in noftrum portum inuehuntur. Quibus argumentis 
Barbarus ille, cuius maxime indicio fueramus proditi, 
cum hoftilem in nos Anglorum animum collegiffet, 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 263 

for eight years, strongly fortified and occupied by 
a garrison of soldiers, they make a voyage every sum- 
mer to the fishing grounds of the Peucoit ^^ islands, 
to obtain fish [590] for food during the coming win- 
ter. While they were sailing thither in the summer 
of this year, they encountered the heavy fogs which 
commonly prevail upon this sea during these months ; 
and while they were thus long delayed, and ignorant 
of their situation, they were gradually borne by the 
currents to our shore, not far from the harbor of St. 
Sauveur. Then, by the information of the Savages, 
who sinned unwittingly, and took them for friendly 
Frenchmen, they learned that there was a French 
ship in the next bay, and that, too, not a large ves- 
sel, nor defended by a numerous crew, and but lightly 
armed with brass cannon. Of course, no more wel- 
come news than this could come to half-naked men, 
whose stock of provisions was exhausted, — men 
who, in addition to this poverty, were incited by an 
inborn love of robbery, and an expectation of greater 
booty than could have been obtained from the plun- 
der of our ship, to willingly employ violence, even 
against natural justice and the law of nations. So 
they prepared their weapons, and under full sail, and 
with decks cleared for action, entered directly into 
our harbor.^ When the Savage by whose informa- 
tion we had been especially betrayed perceived from 
these signs the hostile intentions of the English to- 
wards us, he at once recognized his mistake, and with 
many tears declared that he had been at fault toward 
us whom he thought to please. These lamentations 
he often thereafter repeated, when he sought pardon 
from us for his error, and even from his Savage coun- 
trymen, who considered our misfortune their own in- 
jury, and often threatened him with violence. Mean- 


254 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.2 

turn fuum errorem agnofcere, & quod in nos delique- 
rat, quibus fe crederet gratificari, multo deteftari 
fletu, quern fletum deinde crebr5 integrauit, cum a 
nobis errati fui veniam peteret, & k Barbaris ipfis po- 
pularibus, qui noftru cafum, fuam iniuriam interpre- 
tati, fsepe illi manus intentarunt. Nos interea ancipiti 
opinione fufpefi, amicos an hoftes cenferemus, quos 
redtk in nofhra flationem fecundus ventus inferebat, 
euentum trepidi [591] opperiebamur, cum nauigij gu- 
bernator fcapha vedtus ad explorandum obuiam pro- 
ceffit, longo tamen circuitu, ne non elTet receptui lo- 
cus, maxima qu6d is aduerfo, illi obfecundante vento 
vterentur. Sed explorato nihil fuit opus, clafficum 
canentes inuehebantur, tela eatenus mod5 inhibentes, 
du ea ex propinquo liceret adiicere ; atque ipfos nauis 
defenfores figillatim deftinare. Quattuordecim gran- 
dioribus tormentis, catapultis ver5 maioris modi, Mof- 
quetos vocant, fexagenis, impetu fa(5to in nauigium 
noftrum, non fublatis anchoris ad motu inhabilem, 
decem modo propugnatoribus inflrudlum, aerearum 
cannarum abfente libratore, non multse operae fuit 
illius, atque omnium noftrum expugnatio, quos in 
continente Sauflaeius diftinuerat. Gilbertus du Thet 
nofter propugnatorem in naui agebat, ciim ab holli- 
bus funeftarum glandium tempeflas maximfe ingrue- 
ret, qua in procella confoffus letali plaga, chirurgi 
Angli Catholici multa licet diligentia curatus, poftri- 
die Sacramentorum opportune folatio adiutus, religi- 
ofa morte occubuit. Nos ver5 vniuerli in poteftatem 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 255 

while, we were in doubt whether we should judge as 
friends or enemies those whom an in-shore breeze was 
bearing straight towards our position ; [591] while the 
pilot of the ship set out to meet and reconnoiter them 
in a small boat, by a long circuit, however, in order 
that he might not be left without a way of retreat, 
but especially because the wind was contrary to 
him, but favorable to the strangers. But there was 
no need of reconnoitering, for they advanced, sound- 
ing the signal for battle, only reserving their fire un- 
til they could use it at close quarters, and aim at the 
defenders of the ship one by one. With fourteen 
great cannon, and sixty guns of the larger size, which 
they call Mosquets, they made their attack upon our 
ship, which was unprepared for sailing because the 
anchors had not been raised, and was furnished with 
only ten defenders, while the gunner of the brass can- 
non was absent ; and so the capture of our ship and 
all of us, whom La Saussaye had scattered about upon 
the shore, was a matter of no great difficulty. Our 
brother Gilbert du Thet was assisting in the defence 
of the vessel, when an especially violent shower of 
bullets assailed them, in which he was stricken with 
a mortal wound; and, although attended with great 
devotion by an English surgeon who was a Catholic, 
on the following day he died most piously, after re- 
ceiving the consolation of the Sacraments. But all of 
us had come into the power of the English Heretic,^" 
who, being extremely crafty, secretly abstracted from 
La Saussaye 's trunk the Royal commission, upon 
which authority rested the entire establishment of 
our colony in New France, in order that he might ap- 
pear to treat with us not as a robber, but upon an 
equal footing; and then he began to urge La Saus- 
saye to prove by what right he had planted a settle- 


256 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.2 

Hseretici Angli veneramus, qui vt erat infigniter ver- 
futus, clam fubdudto ex Sauffaeij capfis Regio diplo- 
mate, cuius fide noftrse coloniae Nouo-Francicae tota 
ratio nitebatur, vt ne praedatoris more, fed aequo 
iure, nobifcum agere videretur, SaufTaeium vrgere 
inftitit, vti probaret, cuius audtoritate coloniam in 
Canadiae oras deduxiffet. Sauffaeius vbi Gallorii Re- 
gis voluntatem atque diploma laudauerat, quod fe in 
fcriniis luculentum habere diceret, allatis capfis, [592] 
cuius claues adhuc feruauerat, iulTus eft illud expro- 
mere; fed ad capfas vbi ventum eft, caetera omnia 
Integra, fuifque locis digefta agnofcebat Sauffaeius, 
diploma tamen non comparebat: quod vbi nullum 
proferebatur, tum Praetor Anglus vultu ac voce ad 
feueritatem compofitis, vehementer offendi, fugitiuos, 
& meros piratas nos omnes afferere, dignos nece prae- 
dicare, rem noftram militi fuo diripiendam tradere, 
nos denique hoftium loco habere. Quod autem f aci- 
nus Angli ab fumma iniuria exorfi fuerant, videban- 
tur maiore quoque iniquitate pertexturi, vt prioris 
noxae memoriam pofteriore obruerent, nifi mature 
obuia iretur. Quare Praetore noftri adeunt, fe, ad- 
huc ignoranti qui effent, ingenue aperiunt, ne im- 
belli vidtoria elatus de contubernio fuo ftatuat feue- 
riiis, obfecrant; humanae conditionis vti meminerit, 
ftudiosfe admonent: qukm benigne fuis rebus vellet 
confultum, vbi fimilis ipfum perculiffet cafus, tam 
humaniter alienis confuleret: in primis autem confi- 
deraret fibi rem effe cum innocentiffimis hominibus, 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 257 

ment upon the shores of Canada. When La vSaussaye 
had cited the authority and commission of the King 
of France, which important document he declared 
that he had in his chest, his baggage, [592] of which 
he still retained the keys, was brought, and he was 
ordered to produce it ; but when he opened the chest, 
La Saussaye recognized everything else untouched 
and in its proper place, but no commission appeared. 
When this was not forthcoming, the English Com- 
mander assumed a severe countenance and tone, and 
was deeply angered, calling us all runaways and mere 
pirates, and, declaring us worthy of death, handed 
over our property to his crew to be pillaged, and, 
finally, treated us as enemies. Now it seemed prob- 
able that the English, unless they should quickly be 
hindered, were about to cover up the outrage which 
they had already begun, with some greater crime, in 
order that they might conceal the memory of the 
previous injury by a fresh offence. Wherefore 
our brethren approached the Captain ; frankly re- 
vealed themselves to him, as he was still ignorant of 
their identity; and begged him not, in elation over 
his easy victory, to adopt severe measures against 
their colony ; they earnestly warned him to remember 
the conditions of human life, saying that just as he 
would wish his own interests mildly handled, if a 
similar calamity had fallen upon him, so he ought to 
act humanely in the case of others ; moreover, that 
he should especially consider that he was dealing 
with innocent men, to whom no fault could be 
charged beyond the fact that, because of their blame- 
lessness, they had been too careless in a peaceful 
spot. They were heard somewhat kindly by the Cap- 
tain, and received with respectful address; the only 
thing of which he disapproved being that Fathers of 


258 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.2 

quibus nihil noxae obiici pollet, quam ab fua innocen- 
tia in pacato folo fuiffe nimium fecuros. Comiter 
admodum funt auditi "k Prsetore, atq; honorificis ac- 
cepti verbis, id vnum dumtaxat no probante, quod 
Patres Societatis, ab religionis & prudentiae f ama bene 
vulgo audientes, in fugitiuorum & praedonum turba 
verfarentur. Contubernij vero fui vniuerli cum caeter- 
am probam vitam, turn in eo, quo de agebatur, fum- 
mam innocentia cum noftri validis probaffent argu- 
mentis, vifus eft Praetor, [593] allenflonem praebuille, 
atque id mod6 habuilTe, quod in nobis argueret, negli- 
gentiam in conferuado nofkrae expeditionis diplomate. 
Ab eo igitur tepore Patres noftros perhumaniter ba- 
buit, atque honorifice in omnibus, menfdque benign^ 
accepit. Vno interea fcrupulo angebatur, quod cum 
parte remigum gubernator noftrae nauis euaferat, 
cuius fuga, & rei geflae nuncius per ilium allatus, ne 
quid incommodi alicunde fibi arcelTeret, verebatur, 
edque magis, qu6d ille de nodte fcapha fua ad nauim 
captiuam appulfa, reliquam remigum manum inde 
fubduxerat. Hie certe gubernator, tametli Caluinia- 
nus, adiit de nodte ad Patrem Biardum, eiufque ap- 
prehenfa manu, multis obfecrationibus adhibitis, 
iuffit eum caeterofque Patres de fe, quantumuis fide 
ac ritibus alieno, omnia Chriftiani ac popularis 
hominis officia exfpec5lare, ac perfuafum habere, 
nulli rei defuturu, quae falute ipforum fpedtaret: 
vterentur modo libere ipfius opera, videretque quid 
animi fumturi efCent ad fuga capefcenda. Prolix^ 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 259 

the Society, who had commonly so good a reputation 
for piety and wisdom, should be among a band of 
runaways and pirates. When our brethren had proved 
by strong evidence the entire blamelessness of their 
colony, not only in respect to their honorable life in 
other ways, but also in that which was the subject of 
the conversation, the Captain seemed [593] to yield his 
assent, and to find as the only fault in us our neglect 
to preserve the commission of our expedition. From 
that time on, he treated our Fathers with great 
consideration, and received them in all matters with 
honor, and with kindness at his table. In the mean- 
time he was troubled because the pilot ^ of our ship 
had escaped, together with a part of the crew; and 
he feared that harm might in some way fall upon 
himself, because of the pilot's being free to announce 
what had taken place ; and the more so, because the 
latter came in his boat at night to the captured ship 
and took off from it the rest of the crew. This pilot, 
indeed, although a Calvinist, came by night to Father 
Biard, and, taking him by the hand, with many prot- 
estations bade him and the other Fathers to expect 
from him, as far as faithfulness and devotion could 
go toward another, all the services of a Christian and 
a fellow-countryman, and to be persuaded that he 
would neglect nothing which might contribute to 
their safety ; to employ his aid freely, and consider 
what they should decide upon, as to making their es- 
cape. Father Biard thanked him profusely, and 
promised that he would remember such earnest good- 
will towards himself and his associates; but added, 
that he would make no plans concerning himself un- 
til he should see the entire colony placed in safe- 
ty, and then he would leave to God the decision of 
his own case ; that in the meantime the pilot ought 


260 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.2 

gratias egit Pater Biardus, memoremque fe futu- 
rum fpop6d.it tarn ftudiofse in fe ac fuos voluntatis: 
de fe autem ait nihil fe ftatuere, quoad totius con- 
tubernij res tuto loco pofitas videret, turn fui arbi- 
trium Deo permiff urum : caueret interea ipf e fibi gu- 
"bernator, Praetorem quidpe Anglum omnia moliri, vt 
eum comprelienderet. His monitis ille inftrudtus, vt 
fui difceffus opinionem Anglorum animis ingeneraret, 
quali receptus ad notam Gallicam nauem captandi 
caufa feftinaret, per ipf a frementium Anglorum ora 
intrepide, ac infultantis [594] ore voceque, triduo poft, 
fcapham traduxit, longioreque fimulato curfu, pone 
vicinam infula flexit iter, ibique delituit noftrae capti- 
uitatis euentum obferuaturus. Nobis vero inter du- 
biam aut necis aut feruitutis aleam fludtuantibus, cum 
apud notos Barbaros increbuillet noflrse calamitatis 
fama, frequentes ad nos ventitabant, magnopere mife- 
rantes noflrum infortunium, & fuarum fortunarum 
tenuitatem in fequentem annum totum, fi apud fe 
reftare vellemus, officiofilTime deferentes. De nobis 
tamen Argallus Praetor Anglus, & ei Legatus Tur- 
nellus mitius cogitauerant, in fpeciem certe, qukm 
rebamur initio: padti nempe cu SaulTseio coloniae 
noftrae Duce fuerant noftrum in Galliam reditum: 
fed reditus conditiones erant eiufmodi, quae parum 
differrent ab certa noftra pernicie. Triginta capiti- 
bus quot cenfebamur, vnus linter dumtaxat, haud- 
quaquam omnium, etiam denfiffime ftipatorum, capax, 
concedebatur, hafque coditiones acceperat Saulfaeius, 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 261 

to look out for himself, as the English Captain was 
making every effort to capture him. When the pilot 
had received these warnings, in order that he might 
cause the English to think he had gone away, three 
days afterwards, fearlessly, and with taunting [594] 
expression and words, he passed in his boat before the 
faces of the angry English, as if he were hastening to 
seek refuge with some French ship of which he knew ; 
and, while pretending to go farther, turned about be- 
hind a neighboring island and there lay in hiding to 
observe the outcome of our capture. While we were 
wavering between the doubtful chance of either death 
or imprisonment, our Savage acquaintances, having 
received the news of our calamity, visited us in great 
numbers, deeply pitying our misfortune, and most 
dutifully offering us the use of their scanty resources 
for the whole coming year, if we were willing to re- 
niain among them. However, Argall the English Cap- 
tain, and his Lieutenant Turnell,^ had decided upon 
milder measures toward us, in appearance certainly, 
than we at first expected; indeed, they had agreed 
with La Saussaye, the Leader of our colony, to send 
us back to France; but the conditions of return 
were of such a character that they differed little from 
our certain destruction. There was allowed to us, 
although numbering thirty persons, only one boat, 
which could not hold us all, even if we were crowded 
together as closely as possible ; and these conditions 
La Saussaye had accepted, nay, more, he had borne 
witness with his own handwriting that this had been 
his preference, which was really the choice of certain 
shipwreck. However, the efforts of our Brethren 
prevailed, that the whole colony should not together 
incur imminent danger ; and it was allowed that only 
fifteen should be placed on board the boat, of whom 


262 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.2 

quin chirographo fuo erat teflatus, banc fuam fuiffe 
optionem, quae reuera erat optio certiffimi naufragij. 
Noflri tame euicerunt, vt ne prsefens periculum adi- 
ret vniuerfa fimul turba, impetratumque eft, vt quin- 
deni modo cymbae imponerentur, quorum vnus eflet 
Pater MalTaeus, duo reliqui Patres delati ad infulas 
Peucoitias Anglis pifcatoribus traiiciendi in Galliam 
commendarentur : caetera pars contuberni j , quaelibens 
in Virginiam ibat, eo deportaretur. Altera igitur pars 
contubernaliu nauigatura in Galliam SaulTaeio duce 
lintrem confcendit, locorum, & maritimae [595] artis 
ignara, nauticis prseterea tabulis deftituta, cui Deus 
in tempore fummilit Caluinianum ilium nauis guber- 
natorem, valde intentum in popularium fuorum ob- 
feruandos cafus, vt li qua poffet via, ipforum aduer- 
lis rebus opem ferrer. In continentem exfcenderat, 
& Canadico cultu atque more, quafi vnus e Barbaris, 
tota ora maritima ferebatur, res noftras exploraturus, 
cum opportuniffimfe incidit in proficifcentem lintrem, 
qua exceptus, valde idoneum ducem haefitantibus fe 
praebuit, fuamque cymbam & remiges quattuordecim 
eis focios viae ac laborum adiunxit. Eorum penuri- 
am, quoad inuentae effent Gallicae naues, opimus 
pifcatus bis fubleuauit; varius item Barbarorum in 
ea ora occurfus, quorum Ludouicus Membertouius 
lauta vifceratione Orignacij famelicos accepit; Ro- 
landus, & alij Sagami panis nonnullam copiam, alij 
pifcium volucriimque non exiguam annonam beneuo- 
lentilTime diuiferunt. Omnium vero benefadtorum id 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 263 

one should be Father Mass^, while the two remaining 
Fathers should be carried to the Peucoit islands and 
entrusted to English fishermen for conveyance to 
France. The rest of the colonists were, in accord- 
ance with their own desire, to be carried to Virginia. 
Therefore one portion of the settlers, under the lead 
of La Saussaye, entered the boat to set out for 
France, although ignorant of the region and of sea- 
manship, [595] and unprovided with charts, to whom 
God in time sent the Calvinistic pilot, who had taken 
great pains to observe the fortunes of his country- 
men, in order that if any opportunity should offer, he 
might bear aid to them in their distress. He had 
landed upon the continent, and, in the Canadian man- 
ner of life and custom, like one of the Savages, was 
traversing the entire coast, in order to ascertain our 
condition, when very fortunately he happened upon 
the boat which had set out. Upon being received on 
board, he showed himself a truly able leader in their 
perplexities, and united his boat and fourteen sailors 
to ours as comrades in the voyage and its labors. Up 
to the time the French ships were found, a lucky 
catch of fish twice assuaged their hunger ; they were 
also aided by various meetings with the Savages upon 
that coast, of whom Louis Membertou received them, 
when famishing, with a liberal present of elk meat,^ 
Roland and some other Sagamores furnished a sup- 
ply of bread, and others most generously gave a 
bountiful provision of fish and birds. But of all 
blessings, the most grateful was the news, which the 
Sagamore Roland gave us, that on the neighboring 
coast, at Sesambre and Passepec"^ harbor, were two 
ships preparing to return to France. The two boats, 
quickly directing their course thither, fortunately 
arrived before the vessels left; and, all having 


264 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.2 

fuit iucundiffimum, quod Rolandus Sagamus admon- 
uit, in propinquo littore ad Sefambraeum, & Paffe- 
pecum portum verfari geminas naues reditum in 
Franciam adornantes. E6 cum citiffime curfum di- 
rexiffent duae lintres, opportune adfuerunt, ante 
qukm folueretur, admiffique omnes, velis fadtis in 
Francicam Britanniam, falui & incolumes Maclouienfe 
oppidu tenuerunt, vbi Pater Maffaeus fmgulari Ma- 
clouienfis Antiftitis, Magiftratuum, oppidanorumque 
humanitate ac beneficentia liberaliffime acceptus eft. 
De Patribus autem Biardo & Quintino, vti diximus, 
conuenerat, [596] vt in infulas Peucoitias tranfuedti, 
opera pifcatorum Anglorum inde in Franciam depor- 
tarentur : fed mutata p5fl fententia, in Virginia funt 
deftinati, ciim in captiuam nauem cui Turnellus prse- 
erat, effent impofiti cum aliis quinque de contuber- 
nio, caeteris odlo fociis in Argalli Praetoriam ingref- 
fis. Virginienfis praefidij praefedtus de captiuis lefuitis 
nefcio quid inaudierat, eifque diras cruces ftruebat, 
cuius decreti nuncius ad noftros in naues & ad caete- 
ros captiuos aduolarat, qui nonnullis nodlurnam qui- 
etem adimeret, nee ille quide inani rumore nixus ; ciim 
enim ad Virginiam naue appulfi effent noftri, eius 
furori deftinabantur. Argallus autem, qui fidem 
fuam noftris obligaffet, vt fuo nomine ac genere dig- 
num erat, intrepid^ acriterque Praefedto fuppliciis 
noftros addicenti obflitit, feque incolumi captiuis fuis 
nihil periculi futurum affeuerauit: Praefedto tamen 
inftitutum fuu obftinatius tenente, Regium diploma, 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 265 

been received on board, they made sail and arrived 
safe and sound at St. Malo, a town in Brittany, where 
Father Masse was received with the greatest kind- 
ness and generosity by the Bishop of St. Malo and 
the magistrates and people of the town. Moreover, 
concerning Fathers Biard and Quintin, as we have 
said, it had been decided [596] that they should be 
conducted to the Peucoit islands, and thence, by the 
aid of the English fishermen, should be conveyed 
to France ; but these plans having afterward been 
changed, it was resolved that they should be sent to 
Virginia, they, with five others of the colonists, be- 
ing placed on board the captured vessel, which was 
in command of Turnell, while eight other settlers 
had entered Captain Argall's ship. The governor of 
Virginia had heard something concerning the captive 
Jesuits, and was preparing severe punishment for 
them; this news had come to our brethren and the 
rest of the prisoners on board the ships, and deprived 
some of their nightly rest. This report did not rest 
on idle rumor, for when the ship bearing our breth- 
ren had reached Virginia, they were exposed to 
his fury. Argall, however, who had given his word 
to our brethren, boldly and vehemently, as was fit- 
ting his name •''■^ and race, opposed the Governor in his 
attempt to punish them, and declared that, as long as 
he lived, no danger should befall his prisoners. But, 
when the Governor obstinately persisted in his pur- 
pose, Argall produced the Royal charter, in depend- 
ence upon which our colony had been introduced inta 
New France ; and by its authority the Governor was 
restrained, and dared proceed no farther. In a meet- 
ing of the council, therefore, the whole affair was 
more carefully discussed, and all agreed upon the de- 
cision that Argall, with three ships, should take the 


266 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 2 


quo noftra colonia in Nouam-Fraciam deducebatur, 
protulit, cuius audtoritate reprelTus Praefedtus vltr^ 
tendere non aufus eft. Coadto pofte^ concilio, cum 
de re tota deliberaretur accuratius, ab omnibus itum 
eft in earn fententiam, vt Argallus cum triplici in- 
ftrudta naue in Nouam-Fraciam lefuitas reduceret; 
eos inde cum certis captiuis in Galliam tranfmitteret ; 
Sauffaeium, & eius cohortem militarem, qu« in Por- 
turegienfi arce praefidere, falso tamen, dicebatur, in 
crucem ageret ; Gallorum omnia domicilia diriperet, ac 
folo aequaret. Reditum eft igitur in Nouo-Franciae 
Oram Gallis habitatam, vbi San(5tae [597] Crucis, Regij 
Portus arces defenforibus vacuas fpoliauit, & incedit, 
omnia Gallici nominis monumenta deleuit, Britan- 
nici aliquot locis infcripfit, oram omnem in Anglici 
fceptri poteftatem afferuit. His gerendis rebus cum 
inibi degeretur, bis periculum vitae adiit Pater Biar- 
dus, qu6d multis diffuaferat Argallo aditum in Portum 
Regium, vt nullius emolumenti operam, cuius tamen 
no vulgaris fuiffet deinde praeda; qu5d fe indicem 
eorum locorum praebere noluerat, qui ad praedam 
quaerebantur ; nonnullorum praeterea Gallorum ca- 
lumniae iis locis in eum exftitiff ent : quibus omnibus 
grauiter atque ingenti fuo difcrimine apud Argallum 
Turnellumque offendit. 

Regio Portu digreiTus Argallus in Virginiam con- 
tendebat, ineunte Nouembri, anno fexcentefimo deci- 
mo tertio, fed poftridie qu^m foluerat, atrociffima 
tempeftate diuulfae naues in loge diuerfas oras able- 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 267 

Jesuits back to New France; that he should thence 
send them and certain other prisoners to France ; that 
he should chastise La Saussaye and his military force, 
who were said, although falsely, to be in possession 
of the fort at Port Royal ; and that he should plunder 
and level with the ground all the houses of the 
French. He therefore returned to that coast of New 
France occupied by the French, where he despoiled 
and burned the forts of Ste. [597] Croix and Port Roy- 
al, which were bare of defenders, destroyed all evi- 
dences of the French occupation, and erected English 
monuments in various places, declaring the whole 
coast to be under the sway of the British King. 
While Father Biard was present during these pro- 
ceedings, his life was twice endangered, because he 
had dissuaded Argall with many words from entering 
Port Royal, on the ground that there would be no 
profit in the undertaking, from which they, neverthe- 
less, afterwards obtained an uncommon booty ; be- 
cause he was unwilling to become a guide to those 
places where plunder was sought ; moreover, because 
slanders had been uttered against him by some 
Frenchmen in that region ; for all of which reasons 
he offended Argall and Turnell deeply, to his own 
great peril. 

Argall left Port Royal and started for Virginia in 
the early part of November of the year 16 13, but, on 
the day after he set sail, an exceedingly violent storm 
arose, by which the ships were driven asunder in 
very diverse directions. Captain Argall's vessel, in- 
deed, was finally borne to Virginia ; the smaller of 
the two captured ships, with its crew, was never seen 
thereafter; the larger of these, which Turnell com- 
manded, and on board of which we were, after be- 
ing dreadfully beaten for sixteen days by continuous 


268 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.2 

runt: Argalli quidem Praetoria in Virginiam tandem 
eft delata: minor e duabus noflris captiuis cum fuis 
vectoribus niiquam deinde comparuit: alia captiua 
maior, cui Turnellus praefidebat, quaque vehebamur, 
fedecim dierum continentibus procellis foede vexa- 
ta, psene abfumtis cibariis defperationem iam adie- 
rat, ciim cadente denique tempeflate, in Virginiam 
fecundo vento iter intendere ccepimus. Vicenis qui- 
nis leucis, baud amplius, aberamus Virginise littore, 
vbi de noftra nece a Praefedto decernebatur edque 
nobis ea nauigatio erat odiofa, ciim derepente coortus 
aduerfus ventus proram in Aforas Lufitanorum infu- 
las [598] obuertit, feptingentis paene leucis inde redto 
itinere in Ortum litas. Eius certe venti vis qu5d 
nihil intermitteret, Turnellus praeuidebat non nili 
capitis fui periculo in Lufitanorum poteftatem fe vetu- 
rum, qui captiuos Sacerdotes, per fummam iniuriam 
domicilio fuo auulfos, fpoliatofque fecum traheret; 
& eo quidem angebatur magis, quod Patrem Biardum 
Hifpanienfis generis effe crederet, falfis Porturegien- 
fium Gallorum accufationibus perfuafus, vt eius noxae 
criminationem apud Lufitanos non immerito refor- 
midaret, fi noftri Patres ad fe accufandum animos 
adiicerent. Ea re ingenue fatebatur vim Numinis, 
innocentium iniuria vlcifcentis, fibi ac luis in ea 
nauigatione infeftam merito effe, qua calamitate 
fradtus, qui calumniis fua culpa temere perfuafus, 
Patri Biardo valde infenfus in eum diem fuerat, mag- 
nopere deinde mitigari, eique placatior coepit fieri. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 269 

tempests, had reached almost desperate straits, be- 
cause of the exhaustion of its provisions, when the 
storm finally ceased, and we resumed our voyage to- 
wards Virginia with a favoring wind. We were dis- 
tant not more than twenty-five leagues from the coast 
of Virginia, where the Governor was planning our 
destruction, and for this reason the voyage was hate- 
ful to us ; when a contrary wind which suddenly arose 
turned our bow towards the Asores islands of Portugal, 
[598] situated at a distance of almost 700 leagues due 
East from that point. Since the force of this wind did 
not at all abate, Tumell foresaw that his life would 
be endangered should he come into the power of the 
Portuguese, because he was conveying as prisoners, 
Priests, who, with the greatest injustice, had been torn 
from their settlement and despoiled; and he was 
still more troubled because, persuaded by the false 
charges of the French at Port Royal, he believed Fa- 
ther Biard to be a Spaniard, so that he dreaded, with 
good reason, a denunciation of his offense before the 
Portuguese, if our Fathers should resolve to accuse 
him. Therefore he frankly acknowledged that the 
power of the Deity, which avenges injury done to 
the innocent, was deservedly hostile to him and his 
upon that voyage ; and, overcome by this calamity, 
although he had, through his own fault in rashly be- 
lieving slanders, been extremely unfriendly to Father 
Biard up to that time, he began to soften greatly and 
become more amiable toward him. Moreover, even 
if the force of the wind were not driving them to the 
Asores, still, scarcity of provisions and fresh water 
compelled them to go thither, though against their 
will ; wherefore, it was necessary for Tumell to take 
precautions lest the presence of our Fathers should 
cause him damage; as no danger was to be feared 


270 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.2 

Vt autem ventorum violentia non adigeret ad Aforas : 
cibariorum tamen eo etiam nolentes amandabat, & 
aquae dulcis penuria ; quamobrem Turnello videndum 
erat, ne quid ipfi damni arcefferet Patrum noflrorum 
praefentia, ex quibus periculi nihil imminebat, fi naue 
procul in anchoris inhaerente, per fcapham in portum 
miffam neceffaria annona pararetur, quod futurum 
Turnellus fperauerat. Contra vero qukm crederet, 
accidit: appulfis enim ad Faealem infula Aforarum 
vnam, fubeundum fuit in portum intimum, atque in 
ciuium oculis inter caeteras naues confiftendum : qu6 
vehementius paullo inuedtis, cum noftra nauis in 
Hifpanienfem faccari naue impadta, [599] prorae ante- 
rius velum deterfilTet, Nauarchus Hifpanus piratam 
conclamauit, turbamque nauticam ad arma exciuit. 
Paucis ante hebdomadis Gallus fubita irruptione 
nauem in eodem portu fpoliauerat, vnde Hifpani fimi- 
lem cafum veriti, hoc vehementius trepidauerant, 
tantdque fagaciiis in Anglum inquirendum arbitra- 
bantur. Quare Turnello exfcendendum in continen- 
tem fuit, quem obfidis loco haberent Hifpani, dum 
accurate luftrarentur interiora nauis, Patribus interim 
pone lintrem ftudiofifllme delitefcentibus, ne quid 
detrimenti ex eis Anglo crearetur, fi comparerent. 
Perdifficilis erat latebra loco minime idoneo, re ade6 
repentina, tamque accuratis fcrutatoribus, nauis om- 
nia intima rimantibus : fed lynceos eorum oculos fu- 
gerunt noflri, magna fua voluptate, qu6d Anglum ita 
feruaffent: maiore Angli gaudio, quod praeter fpem. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 271 

from them, if the ship should remain at a distance at 
anchor, and the necessary provisions should be se- 
cured by sending a small boat into the harbor, as the 
Captain hoped to do. Matters turned out, however, 
contrary to his expectations ; for when we approached 
Faeal, one of the Asores islands, we were compelled 
to enter the inmost harbor, and take a position among 
the other ships under the eyes of the inhabitants. 
Having entered thither a little too swiftly, when our 
vessel collided with a Spanish treasure-ship [599] and 
carried away its forward jib, the Spanish Captain 
shouted out that we were pirates, and aroused his 
crew to arms. A few weeks before, a Frenchman had 
plundered a ship in the same harbor by a sudden at- 
tack; whence the Spaniards, fearing a similar fate, 
had been the more alarmed on this occasion, and 
thought an investigation still more necessary in the 
case of an Englishman. Turnell was therefore 
obliged to disembark upon the land, where the Span- 
ish held him as a hostage while the interior of the ship 
was being thoroughly searched, the Fathers, in the 
meantime, carefully hiding behind a boat, in order 
that the Englishman might suffer no harm on their 
account if they should be discovered. Concealment 
was very difficult in a place not at all convenient, as 
the affair arose very suddenly, and there were so 
careful searchers, who rummaged the entire interior 
of the ship ; but our brethren escaped their lynx eyes, 
greatly to their own delight, because they had thus 
preserved the Englishman ; but with greater pleasure 
to the Englishman, because he recognized that he 
had been saved, contrary to his expectations and his 
deserts, by those whom he had most wickedly de- 
prived of their liberty. This service and remarkable 
good-faith the English recognized at that time with 


272 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.2 

ac fuum meritum, ab iis feruatum fe agnofceret, qui- 
bus libertatem per furtimu fcelus ademerat. Id bene- 
ficij genus, fmgularemque fidem, Angli & in praefen- 
tia ingentibus g^ati animi argumentis agnofcebant, 
& deinceps fsepenumero, maxime apud fuos Minif- 
tros, cum fumma Patrum laudatione, praedicarunt. 
Tres folidas hebdomadas fubftitit in eo portu nauis 
Anglicana, tantumdemque abditi Patres fole carue- 
runt; inde omilTo in Virginiam itinere, Turnellus in 
Britanniam contendit, fed redta nauigationis femita 
cum nos tempeflas deieciffet, in oram Vuallise ad Oc- 
cafum violenter nos impegit: vbi cum nauem annona 
deficeret, Turnellus Pembrochum [600] oppidum adiit 
commeatus parandi gratia. Eius oppidi magiflrati- 
bus Turnellus mouit fufpicionem maritimi latronis, 
quod & homo Anglus Francica verehetur naui, & nul- 
1am litteram fcriptae audloritatis proferret, qua fuam 
nauigationem tueretur : neque vel iurato affeueranti, 
fe tempeftate diuulfum a Praetore fuo Argallo, fides 
habebatur. Cum eum igitur omne probationum ge- 
nus deftituiffet, citauit didtorum fuorum teftes duos 
lefuitas, quos haberet in naui, quorumque incorruptae 
fidei neminem mortalium diceret poffe merito refra- 
gari. Patribus ergo perhonorifice interrogatis, cum 
pro teftimonio apud magiftratum public^ dixiffent, 
Turnellus fuit in honore, atque vt virum nobilem 
decuerat, probe omnia geiGTiffe creditus eft: noftris 
vero eft honor habitus, & apud Maiorem Vrbis, vt 
vocant, Magiftratum plebeium fcilicet, hofpitium eft 


1612-H] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 273 

marked signs of gratitude, and often thereafter spoke 
of the Fathers with great praise, especially before 
their Ministers. Three entire weeks the English 
ship remained in that harbor, and the same length of 
time the Fathers were hidden away and deprived of 
the sunlight; then, abandoning the voyage to Vir- 
ginia, Tumell proceeded to Britain. But, when a 
storm had diverted us from the direct prosecution of 
our voyage, it carried us violently Westward to the 
coast of Vuallia ; ^'^ and when here provisions failed the 
ship, Tumell entered the town of Pembroke [600] for 
the sake of obtaining supplies. The officials of this 
town suspected him of piracy upon the high seas, be- 
cause, although an Englishman, he was sailing in a 
French vessel, and produced no written testimonials 
of the authority under which he was making his voy- 
age ; and when he made oath that he had been sepa- 
rated by a storm from his Captain, Argall, he was not 
believed. When, therefore, every sort of evidence 
had failed him, he cited as witnesses for his state- 
ments the two Jesuits whom he had on board the ship, 
whose incorruptible integrity, he said, no mortal 
could deservedly call in question. Therefore, when 
the Fathers had been very respectfully interrogated, 
and had given their testimony in public before 
the magistrate, Tumell was placed in honor, and 
was believed to have done everything honestly, as 
befitted a gentleman ; but our brethren were treated 
with distinction, and were entertained as guests by 
the Mayor of the City, as he is called, that is, the 
Magistrate of the common people. When Nicholas 
Adams, who then represented the Minister of the 
marine at Pembroke, and in the presence of whom 
our brethren had given their testimony, heard that 
they had extremely bad fare upon the ship, he di- 


274 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.2 

affignatum. Qui pro Praefe(5to rei maritimae ius Pem- 
brochij turn dicebat Nicolaus Adams, apud quern 
noftri teftimonium dixerant, vbi audiit peffime iis effe 
in nauigio, iuffit eos diuerfari apud eu Magiftratum, 
quern indicauimus, fuaque fide omnia eis fuppeditari 
copiose, quibus fi deelTet vnde fibi rependerent, Dei 
caufa fe iis fumtuum gratiam libenter facere dicebat, 
quod putaret minime decere, ab omni dignitate ac 
dodlrina inftrudlis viris nihil apud Pembrochios ciues 
humanitatis relinqui. Milium erat ad Britanniae 
Regem de noflris, cuius dum refcriptum exfpedtatur, 
frequentes vifendi conferendique gratia vndique ad 
noftros adeunt de nobilitate, de magiflratibus, ac min- 
iftris [60 1 ] etiam, quorum quaternos in difputationis 
palaeftra cum illis commifit quidam de proceribus, 
doctrinae periclitandae ftudio. De illorum autem 
negotio cum in Regiam allatum effet, iam inaudierat 
Regis Chriftianiffimi legatus captiuum efle nauigium, 
& Francos lefuitas, vrgebatque omnium, ac maxime 
noftrorum libertatem, quod eius rei habuerat ab fuo 
Rege fludiofius iniunc5ta mandata. Nihil itaque mo- 
rae fuit, quin noflri Pembrochio Douerum arcefferen- 
tur, vnde breui traiedtu Itium Portum, Francicae orae 
oppidum, incolumes laetique deportati funt, decimo 
fuae captiuitatis paene affedlo menfe, quo loco Dar- 
quieni Dynaftae, Regio praefidio Praefedti, & Baulaei 
Decani eximia humanitate, beneficentiaque lautilTime 
accepti funt, idoneo praeterea donati viatico, quod 
Ambianos iter intendentibus in fuum Collegium 
abunde effet. 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 275 

reeled that they should be entertained at the home of 
the Magistrate whom we have mentioned, and that 
upon his own responsibility everything should be 
abundantly supplied to them ; and if they should lack 
the means to repay him, he said that for the sake of 
God he would willingly do them the favor of meet- 
ing the expense, because he thought it very unbecom- 
ing that no kindness should be shown among the 
citizens of Pembroke to men distinguished in every 
way for merit and learning. A message had been 
sent to the King of Britain concerning our brethren ; 
and, while an answer thereto was being awaited, 
many came, for the purpose of seeing and conversing 
with the fathers, from the ranks of the nobles, of the 
officials, and even of the ministers, [60 1] four of 
whom one of the councilors put into the arena of 
debate with our brethren, with the desire of testing 
their doctrine. Moreover, when their case had been 
reported at Court, the ambassador** of the Most 
Christian King had already heard that a ship with 
French Jesuits had been captured, and urged the re- 
lease of all and especially of our brethren, because he 
had from his King strict commands to this effect. 
There was therefore no delay in the conveyance of 
our brethren from Pembroke to Dover, whence, after 
a short passage, they safely and joyfully arrived, after 
almost ten months of captivity, at Itius Portus,^ a 
town on the French coast. Here they were received 
most honorably, with especial kindness and favor 
from Sieur d'Arquien, Commander of the Royal gar- 
rison, and Dean Boulaye; a suitable viaticum was 
also given to them, which was abundant for their 
needs during the trip to their College at Ambians*^ 
[Amiens]. 

Now he who measures the undertaking by ordinary 


276 LES RELATIONS DES Jj&SUITES [Vol.2 

Iam Nouo-Francicae Miffionis operae quantum pro- 
mouerint rem Chriftianam inter Barbaros, non facile 
difpiciet, qui rem vulgi trutina metietur: qui ver6 
negotium natura fua perarduum, interuenientibus 
etiam aliunde cafibus valde impeditum, aequis mo- 
mentis volet aeftimare, maxima idoneis, atque il- 
luftribus initiis afperrimum folum Euangelicae fe- 
menti prasparatum, fateatur neceffe eft. In primis 
enim quantum, qusefo, illud ejfl, belluini prorfus in- 
genij atque moris gentem, nuper ab omni commercio 
externo alieniffimam, ab fua impotentia fufpiciofiffi- 
mam, fie nunc effe nobis cociliata, ea de noftris homin- 
ibus opinione imbutam, vt eos fummo ambitu quili- 
bet Barbaroru couentus [602] expetat, in fua ora domi- 
cilium habere cupiat, de fuis copiolis annua cibaria de- 
ferat, mcerore ac fletu fuum eorum defiderium tefte- 
tur, implacabili odio in Britannos, noflrae infeftos qui- 
eti, feratur? Magnum quiddam profedto est, & ingen- 
tis ad fidem illis animis ingenerandam momenti, erga 
illius praecones tam propenfa ferri voluntate, fiducia, 
& veneratione. Illud autem alterum longfe maius el^, 
tantdque ad Barbarorum efficiendam falutem poten- 
tius, quant5 alienius eft ab humanarum affedtionum 
ratione, diuinifque motionibus proprium magis. Alte 
iam infedit Canadiorum animis ilia fententia, aeternis 
addici cruciatibus, qui Baptifmi expertes h viuis de- 
cedant, vt tametfi valetes Chriflianae legis conditi- 
ones, fuo fenfu paull5 afperiores, baud facile fubeant, 
moribundi tamen Baptifmum ingentis omnino bene- 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 277 

standards, will not easily see how greatly the work of 
the Mission of New France has advanced the Chris- 
tian religion among the Savages ; he who will fairly 
estimate an enterprise very difficult in its nature, and 
greatly hindered also by the interruption of calamities 
from without, must confess that the rugged soil has 
been prepared for the seed of the Gospel with very 
advantageous and glorious beginnings. For, in the 
first place, is it not a great thing, I ask, that a race of 
utterly brutal disposition and manners, lately keep- 
ing itself far aloof from all external intercourse, ex- 
tremely suspicious by reason of its impotence, should 
be now so conciliated towards us, and entertain 
such sentiments for our brethren, that Savages of 
every tribe seek them out with the greatest pains, 
[602] desire them to have a residence in their terri- 
tory, offer them annual supplies from their scanty 
store, testify by grief and weeping to their longing 
for them, and regard the English, the enemies of our 
peace, with implacable hatred? It is indeed some- 
thing great, and of the utmost importance to the im- 
planting of the faith in those minds, that they meet 
its heralds with such emphatic good-will, confidence, 
and veneration. Moreover there is another influence 
far greater, and so much the more powerful in effect- 
ing the salvation of the Savages as it is remote from 
the sphere of human affections and more characteris- 
tic of heavenly emotions. Already there has become 
deeply seated in the minds of the Canadians the be- 
lief that those who die without Baptism are consigned 
to eternal torments; consequently, as long as they 
are in health, they do not readily submit to the 
rules of the Christian faith, which to their ideas are 
a little too harsh; but when at the point of death, 
they regard Baptism as certainly a great blessing, 


278 LES RELATIONS DES JJ^SUITES [Vol.2 

ficij effe ducant, cupideque appelant. Cuius dodtrinae 
quoniam Patres Societatis audlores habent, eamque 
combiberunt intimis fenfibus, eius fua fponte illos 
admonent, & memores effe iubent, quoties popularium 
quis deterius affedtus decumbit, hortanturque fuos 
Dodtores vti obitum aegroti praeuertant, falutaribus 
aquis lufbrantes, ante quam occumbat. Atque hos 
quidem animorum motus, in barbariffimis alioqui 
hominibus, biennij cultura, & ea quidem non aflidua, 
fed frequentibus interpellata difficultatibus, duo Pa- 
tres effecerunt, non leuibus certe momentis ad Euan- 
gelici verbi fatus in ea gente magnis incrementis pro- 
pagandos. Quam ad propagationem, facrarum pre- 
cationum, & Baptifmi [603] inufitata vis, infignibus 
aliquot documentis apud earn nationem interdum pro- 
dita, incitamento non mediocri videtur olim futura. 
Patri Biardo ad Eplani pifcis amnem die quodam 
agenti affertur nuncius ab segrota, & animam agente 
muliere, quae ipfum videre atque alioqui valde cupe- 
ret, ad Sandlae Mariae Sinum, duabus ab eo amne 
leucis. Eo ducem habuit vnum de contubernio, 
feminamque more gentis praeter focum ftratam depre- 
hendit, tertia iam hebdomada mifere languentem: 
aegram, quoad per eius morbum licuit, Catechefi necef- 
faria inftruit, adhibitifq; pro re nata precibus cruce 
ad pedtus appenfa munit, feque vocari iubet, fi quid 
ei pofte^ deterius accidat. Poftridie mulier bene 
fana e foco exfilit, «& graui onufta facco ad maritum 
quattuor inde leucas vegeta contendit. Eam fanatio- 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 279 

and eagerly seek it. Since they have the Fathers of 
the Society as authorities for this doctrine, and have 
absorbed it into their inmost souls, of their own ac- 
cord they warn and remind their Teachers of it, when- 
ever any one of their friends is prostrated by some 
severe complaint, and urge them to anticipate the 
death of the patient by sprinkling him with the sav- 
ing waters, before he shall perish. And, indeed, 
these emotions of the mind, in men who are in other 
respects most savage, two Fathers have created by a 
training of two years, and that indeed not continuous, 
but interrupted by numerous difficulties, which is 
certainly no light incentive toward propagating the 
seed of the Gospel among that race with flourishing 
increase. To this propagation, the unaccustomed 
power of holy prayers and of Baptism, [603] sometimes 
disclosed among this people in several remarkable 
instances, seems likely to be no small incentive in 
the future. When Father Biard was occupied one 
day at the river of the Eplan fish, a message was 
brought to him from a sick woman at the point of 
death, who was very anxious to see and converse 
with him, at Bay Ste. Marie, two leagues from that 
river. He had one of the colonists as a guide thither, 
and found the woman lying, according to the manner 
of her race, near the hearth, and now miserably lan- 
guishing in the third week of her illness. He in- 
structed the invalid, as far as her disease permitted, 
in the necessary parts of the Catechism; strength- 
ened her by prayers adapted to the circumstances, 
and a cross hung upon her breast ; and directed that 
he should be called, if she should thereafter grow 
worse. The next day the woman arose from the 
hearth entirely well, and, loaded with a heavy bag, 
started briskly for her husband, who was at a dis- 


280 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.2 

nem Caluinianus Dieppenfis omnium primus obferua- 
uit, confellimque illius euentum mirabilem nuncia- 
turus ad Patrem Biardum accurrit. Idem Pater in 
ora Pentegoetia cum Biencourtio verfabatur, vbi pro 
inftituto mapalia Barbarorum circumiens, aegros vife- 
bat, folabatur, precibus, ac Chriftianis documentis 
iuuabat. Ibi tertium iam menfem aeger decum- 
bebat, cuius falus erat conclamata, quem Barbari 
vifendum Patri obtulerunt. Frigido fudore totus 
manabat, certo fere mortis indice, cum iam eum gra- 
uis aeflus tenuiflet, cui poft preces, & breuia fidei 
documenta, ciim Pater crucem faepius exofculandam 
porrexiffet, eique de collo penfilem reliquiffet, fre- 
quentibus Barbaris audientibus, & quae gererentur 
mire [604] probantibus, ab eo ad naue & Biencourtium 
rediit. Poftera vero die Biencourtio cum indigenis 
in naue permutationibus mutuis occupato, in ea 
nauem fanus ingrellus ille aeger, heri moribudus, 
crucemque gratulabudus, magnified oftentas, adiit 
ad P. Biardu, ingentiq; gaudio fuam ei fanitatem 
teflatus, virtuti S. Crucis accepta tulit. Illuflrius 
multo eft id quod fequitur, & ad Barbaroru fenfum 
in Baptifmi laude fmgulare. P. Biardus, & Mottaeus 
Sauffaeij Legatus, Simonque Interpres vnk iuerant 
ad confiderandam area Sandti Saluatoris domicilio 
delignata, vnde redeuntibus procul ad aures accidit 
lametabilis vlulatus quaerentibuf q ; a Barbaro co- 
mite caufa lugubris clamoris, refponfum eft, fol- 
lemne illud elTe alicuius iam iam vita func5ti argu- 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 281 

tance of four leagues. A Calvinist from Dieppe first 
of all observed this cure, and immediately ran to Fa- 
ther Biard to announce the wonderful event. The 
same Father was with Biencourt on the banks of the 
Pentegoet, where, according to his custom, he was 
going about among the cabins of the Savages, visit- 
ing and comforting the sick and aiding them with 
prayers and Christian instruction. There a sick man 
was lying, who had already been ill three months, 
whose recovery had been despaired of, and whom 
the Savages brought to the Father's notice. He was 
completely bathed in cold perspiration, an almost 
certain sign of death, since a heavy fever had taken 
possession of him. After prayers had been said and 
a short lesson in the faith given, when the Father 
had held out a cross to him to be repeatedly kissed, 
and had left it hanging about his neck, many Sav- 
ages listening to him, and heartily [604] approving 
what was done, he returned to the ship and Biencourt. 
But the next day, when Biencourt was engaged 
upon the ship in trading with the natives, that sick 
man, yesterday at the point of death, came on board 
in a state of health, and, joyfully and reverently dis- 
playing the cross, went to Father Biard, and, testi- 
fying with great delight to his recovery, ascribed it 
to the power of the Holy Cross. That which fol- 
lows is much more remarkable, and by the Savages 
was ascribed solely to the merit of Baptism. Father 
Biard, La Motte, the Lieutenant of La Saussaye, and 
Simon the Interpreter, had gone together to examine 
the site selected for the settlement of St. Sauveur. 
While returning thence, they heard at a distance a 
lamentable wail, and, when they asked of their Sav- 
age companion the cause of this mournful outcry, 
the answer was made that it was the customary token 


282 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 2 

mentu. Sed propius ad Barbarica tuguria fucceden- 
tibus puer interrogatus indicauit, no mortui, fed 
morientis elTe coploratione ; atque ad P. Biardum 
conuerfus; Quin tu, inquit, accurris, li forte in vi- 
uente adhuc incidas, & eius morti Baptifmum prse- 
uertas? Ea pueri vox, tamqua caelo milTa, Patrem & 
comites ad curfum vehementer accendit, quibus ad 
agreftes cafas appulfis, Barbarorti fub dio ftantium 
logiffima ala, diredlo ordine infhrudta occurrit, atq; in 
fpedtatis alae, & moerore defixse oculis obambulans 
pater, cuius in vlnis tenellus moriebatur puer. Hie 
vt animam segerrimfe trahebat, interruptis debilitate 
fingultibus ad mortem properans, miferum parentem 
miferatione cruciabat & dolore. Ad quoflibet autem 
infantis fingultus. horrendum eiulabat parens, cuius 
eiulatum adftantis Barbaricae concionis mox lucftuofus 
[605] excipiebat vlulatus. Pater Biardus adiit ad af- 
flidtum puelli parentem, rogauitque an ipfo volente 
moribundum infantem Baptifmo elTet luftraturus. 
Ingenti moerore percitus Barbaras vocem mittere non 
potuit, fed depofito in poftulantis manibus puero, 
reipfa, quid cuperet, oftendit. Pater aquam popofcit, 
puellumque Mottaeo ardentiffime fufcipienti tenen- 
dum tradit, falutaribus aquis afpergit, Nicolaum de 
Mottaei nomine appellat, concepta precum formula 
Barbaris lume ad fidei agnofcendas ingentes opes h. 
Deo precatur. Sub eam precationem receptum de 
Mottaei manibus infantem matri eius praefenti defert, 
mater filio mammam continu5 porrigit, puer oblatam 


1612-14] THE JESUIT RELATIONS 283 

that some one had already departed this life. But 
as they approached nearer to the huts of the Savages, 
a boy, on being questioned, informed them that the 
lamentation was not for a dead, but for a dying per- 
son; and, turning to Father Biard, he said: " Why 
do you not hurry thither, if perchance you may find 
him still living, and administer Baptism before his 
death?" The voice of that boy, just as though sent 
from heaven, caused the Father and his companions 
to run swiftly, and as they reached the rude dwellings, 
there appeared a great crowd of Savages, drawn up in 
regular order, standing in the open air ; and among 
this mournful-looking company a father walked 
about, in whose arms a delicate boy was dying. As 
the child struggled for breath, hastening towards 
death, and weakly gasping, it tortured the unfortunate 
parent with grief and sorrow. Moreover, at each gasp 
of the infant, the father wailed dreadfully, and his 
lamentation was immediately answered by a howl 
from the gloomy throng of Savages standing near. [605] 
Father Biard went to the afflicted parent of the boy, 
and asked whether he might, with his consent, bap- 
tize the dying child. The Savage, overcome by the 
depth of his grief, could not utter a word; but his 
action showed, by placing the child in the arms of 
the petitioner, what he desired. The Father asked 
for water, and giving the child to La Motte to hold, 
who eagerly received it, he sprinkled it with the sav- 
ing waters, christened it Nicholas de la Motte, and 
formulating a prayer, begged from God light for the 
Savages, that they might recognize the immense bless- 
ings of the faith. After this prayer he took the in- 
fant from the hands of La Motte and gave it to its 
mother, who was present; the mother immediately 
gave her breast to the child, who greedily accepted 


284 LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 2 

cupide arripit, lac ad fatietatem haurit, atque dein- 
ceps fanus vegetiifque vixit. Vniuerfus interim Bar- 
barorum, qui circumfteterat, globus rei baud vfitatae 
defixus miraculo, petrarum inftar immotus, ac taci- 
tus haerebat in veftigio. Ad eos igitur fic animo 
comparatos nofter, quae vifa funt in rem praefentem 
quadrare, verba fecit, quae auidis mentibus hauferunt, 
atque vbi perorauerat, iuffit fmgulos in tuguria fe 
recipere. Vti venerabundi ac trementes eius fer- 
monem fumma reuerentia exceperant, ita ctim ccetus 
fa(5ta milTione receptum in fuas cafas indixit, alto 
lilentio praeferentes inufitatum obfequium, in fua 
quifque tuguria pacatiffimfe, citiffimeque dilapfi funt. 
Haec & huiufmodi alia in Barbarorum oculis, fumma 
ipforum admiratione, nee minore frudtu gefta, quif- 
quis perpenderit, vtililTimis principiis inchoatam 
Nouo-Francicam MilTionem merit6 iudicabit. 


1612-14J THE JESUIT RELATIONS 285 

it, partook of the milk to satiety, and finally lived, 
healthy and vigorous. In the meantime, the whole 
circle of Savages who had stood about, struck by the 
marvelousness of the unusual occurrence, remained 
motionless as stones, and stood silently in their 
tracks. Therefore, while they were thus prepared 
in mind, our brother addressed to them such words 
as seemed appropriate to the subject in hand; and 
when he had finished, bade them depart to their 
own huts. As they, trembling and reverential, re- 
ceived his discourse, with the greatest respect, so 
when, the object of their gathering having been ac- 
complished, he ordered them to depart to their huts, 
they slipped away, silently exhibiting this unusual 
obedience, quietly and quickly, each to his own 
dwelling. Whoever shall carefully examine these 
and other like acts which have been performed in the 
sight of the Savages, greatly to their astonishment, 
and no less to their benefit, will justly conclude that 
the Mission of New France has been commenced un- 
der very advantageous beginnings. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA : VOL II 

IX 

Our copy of Biard's letter (written in French) to 
his provincial, dated January 31, 16 12, is from 
Carayon's Premiere Mission, pp. 44-76, noted under 
Bibliographical Data of Documents III.-VL, in our 
Volume L 

X 

We follow the style and make-up of O'Callaghan's 
Reprint of Biard's Missio Canadensis, designated as 
' ' No. I " in the Lenox Catalogue. According to Som- 
mervogel's Bibliotheque de la Campagnie de Jdsus (Paris, 
1890), vol. i., p. 1439, this document was originally 
published in the Annua Litter ce Societatis Jesu, an. 
161 1 (Dillingen, n. d.), pp. 121-143. The British 
Museum has a copy of this volume of Annuce Litter (e, 
described in its catalogue as published at ' ' Dilingae 
[ 1 6 1 5 ?] . " Sommervogel adds, regarding Missio Cana- 
densis : "Was it not published separately? I find it 
thus indicated in the catalogue of Mr. Parison, no. 
1786." According to a letter written by Father 
Carrere (June 17, 1890) to Father Jones, of Montreal, 
the original MS. of this letter was then in the 
archives of Roder, France. 

In Carayon's Premiere Mission (pp. 77-105) there 
is given a French version of this letter. 

It is internally evident that the letter was com- 
menced January 22nd, and finished '* vltimo die Jan- 
uary." In Father Martin's MS. (translated) copy. 


288 BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. II 

preserved in the Library of Parliament, at Ottawa, 
he wrote upon it the former date, and it is so calen- 
dared in the catalogue of that library. Carayon 
first applied to it the latter date. This of itself has 
led to some bibliographical confusion. 

In Carayon 's Bibliographie Historique de la Compagnie 
de Jdsus (Paris, 1864), p. 178, a notice of the original 
publication is thus given: " P. Biard. — Epistola ad 
R. P. Praepositum generalem, e Portu Regali in Nova 
Francia, data ultimo die Januarii anni 161 1, qua 
regionem illam describit, et Patnim Societatis Jesu 
in eam profectionem. — *Ea inserta est annuls litteris 
Soc. Jesus ejusdem anni Provinc. Franc, ad finem.' 
(Sotwell.)." 

O'Callaghan obtained the originals of some of his 
reprints from the Annuce Litterce Societatis Jesu, of 
which there are incomplete files in the libraries 
of John Carter Brown; Harvard College; St. John's 
College, Fordham, N. Y. ; St. Francis Xavier, New 
York City; the Jesuit colleges at Woodstock, Md., 
and Georgetown, D. C. ; and St. Mary's College, 
Montreal. The Brown Library has the richest col- 
lection. 

See references to the O'Callaghan Reprint of Mis- 
sio Canadensis, in Harrisse's Notes, no. 405 ; Lenox 
Catalogue, p. 18; Sabin, vol. xvi., p. 542; Brown 
Catalogue, vol. ii., no. 119; Winsor, p. 300; Henry 
C. Murphy Sale Catalogue (N. Y., 1884), no. 2960; 
O'Callaghan Sale Catalogue (N. Y., 1882), nos. 178, 
1205, 1250. 

Title-page. O'Callaghan's Reprint is closely imi- 
tated. 

Collation of O'Callaghan Reprint. Title, i p.; re- 
verse of title, with inscription: " Editio ad xxv ex- 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DA TA : VOL. II 289 

emplaria reflridta. O'C", i p. ; Lectori, pp. iii.-i v. ; 
text, pp. 5-37; blank, i p.; Index, pp. 39-45; colo- 
phon (p. 46): "Albaniae Excvdebat Joel Munsellius | 
Mense Septembri Anno | CIO.IOCCC.LXX.," i p. 

XI 

The copy of Lescarbot's Relation Derniire herein 
followed is in Harvard College Library, where it is 
bound in with the same author's Les Muses de la Nou- 
velle France (Paris, 16 12). The Harvard copy is the 
only original of which the present editor has knowl- 
edge ; it is not listed in Gagnon's Essaide Bibliographie 
Canadietine (Quebec, 1895), but reference to it will 
be found in Harrisse, no. 26; Sabin, no. 40178; and 
Winsor, p. 300. There is a reprint of it in Cimber 
(Lafaist) and Danjou's Archives Curieuses de V Histoire 
de France, depuis Louis XI. jusqu h Louis XVIII., first 
series, tome xv. (Paris, 1837), pp. 377-406, which, 
however, omits the list of names on pp. 21-24 of the 
original. The first series of this collection (15 vols.) 
was edited by L. Lafaist (" L. Cirah^v,'' pseud.) and 
F. Danjou, assistants in the Bibliothfeque Nationale, 
Paris; the second series (12 vols.), by Danjou alone, 
who, on the title of tome viii. of this series, is styled 
" Bibliothecaire de 1' Arsenal." The 27 volumes 
were published at Paris between 1834 and 1840. 

The orthography of the printed original of the Re- 
lation Derni^re is an interesting mixture of old and 
new styles. It has many instances of modern spell- 
ings not found even in the Craxaoisy Relation of 1632, 
which was printed twenty years later. 

It will be noticed that the ' * Privilege ' ' is that 
granted for the publication of Lescarbot's Histoire 
de la Nouvelle France (1608). 


290 BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. II 

Title-page. The one given in the present volume 
is a photographic facsimile of the Harvard original. 

Collation. Title, i p. ; blank, reverse of title, i p. ; 
text, pp. 3-39; privilege, reverse of p. 39, i p. — mak- 
ing a total of 40 pp. 

XII 

In our reissue of the Rclatio Rerum Gestarum (16 13- 
14), we follow the original text and its pagination, 
as given on pp. 562-605 of the Ayunice Litterce Societatis 
Jesu, for 1612, printed at Lyons in 16 18, which we 
found at the Riggs Memorial Library, Georgetown 
University, Washington, D. C. This forms the text 
of O'Callaghan's Reprint, which is arbitrarily desig- 
nated in the Lenox Catalogue as " no. 6." See ref- 
erences in Sabin, no. 69245 ; Winsor, p. 300; Lenox, 
p. 19; and Brown Catalogue, no. 170, and p. 166. 
Sales are noted in Barlow (no. 1272), Murphy (no. 
2960), and O'Callaghan (no. 1250) sale catalogues. 

Title-page. We closely imitate that of the O'Cal- 
laghan Reprint. 

Collation of Reprint. Title, i p. ; reverse of title, 
with inscription: " Editio viginti quinque exem- 
plaria. O'C," i p. ; Tabula Rerum, pp. iii., iv. ; text, 
pp. 1-66; colophon (p. 67): "Albaniae Excvdebat 
Joel Munsellius | Mense Martis Anno | CIO lOCCC 
LXXI," I p. 


NOTES TO VOL II 

{Figures in parentheses, following number of note, refer to pages 
of English text.') 

1 (p. 7). — Carayon prints neuf, but this is either a slip of the 
pen upon the part of Father Biard, or a misprint. The Fathers 
arrived at Port Royal, May 22, 1611, so that this portion of the letter 
was written just eight {htdt) months after. 

2 (p. 27). — Kennebec River. Sometimes written, also, Rimbegui, 
Kinibequi, Kinibeki, and Qumebequy. Maurault says that the 
Abenakis called this river Kanibesek, meaning " river that leads to 
the lake." — Histoire des Abenakis (Quebec, 1866), pp. iv., 5, and 89, 
note 2. 

3 (p. 27). — Penobscot River. It was sometimes written, also, 
Pemptegoet and Potugoet. 

4 (p. 27). — In their first voyage (1604), De Monts and Poutrin- 
court visited and named the river St. John; and at the mouth 
of the Riviere des Etechemins (so named by Champlain; by the 
Indians called Scoodick or Schoodic), they found an island which 
they called St. Croix, a name in later days given to the river itself. 
It lies in the middle of the river, opposite to the dividing line be- 
tween Calais and Robbinston, Me. Here De Monts, Champlain, 
and their 77 fellows spent a miserable winter, while Poutrincourt re- 
turned to France for colonists and supplies to plant his proposed 
settlement at Port Royal. Thirty-five of the St. Croix party had 
died of scurvy before relieved in June, 1605, by Pontgrave, De 
Monts' lieutenant. In August, after a fruitless voyage along the 
New England coast, De Monts took his party to Port Royal, and 
there began a settlement before Pontgrave's arrival. Biard's letter 
indicates that winter fur-trading posts were maintained both at St. 
Croix and on the St. John, for several years thereafter. — See Park- 
man's Pioneers, pp. 291-293. 

Champlain 's chart of the island may be found in his Voyages 
(Prince Soc), vol. ii., p. 32. Lescarbot, in Nouv. France (Paris, 
1612), p. 469, says of the soil: "It is very good, and delightfully 
prolific. ' ' 

The identity of St. Croix Island was determined in 1798, by the 
commissioners appointed, under the treaty of 1783, to determine the 


292 NOTES TO VOL. II 


boundary-line between New Brunswick and the territory of the 
United States. Holmes says, in Annals of America (Cambridge, 
Mass., 1829), vol. i., p. 122, note i: "Professor (afterwards Presi- 
dent) Webber, who accompanied the commissioners in 1798, in- 
formed me that they found an island in this river, corresponding to 
the French descriptions of the Island St. Croix, and, near the upper 
end of it, the remains of a very ancient fortification, overgrown with 
large trees ; that the foundation stones were traced to a considera- 
ble extent; and that bricks (a specimen of which he showed me) 
were found there. These remains were, undoubtedly, the reliques 
of De Monts's fortification." Several cannon balls were also dis- 
covered while making excavations on this island, about 1S53. The 
island has been known as Dochet's Island and Neutral Island; 
but in recent years it has been formally and appropriately named 
De Monts' Island. See Godfrey's Centennial Discourse (Bangor, 
1870), cited in Champlain's Voyages (Prince Soc), vol. ii., p. 33; 
also Williamson's Maine, vol. i., p. 88, and vol. ii., p. 578- 

5 (p. 47).— George Weymouth, a Bristol navigator, entered Ken- 
nebec River in June, 1605. The stream was called by the na- 
tives Sagadahoc (sometimes spelled Sagadahock). Weymouth's 
enthusiastic reports led the Plymouth Company — of which Lord 
John Popham and Sir Ferdinando Gorges were leading mem- 
bers—to plant a colony in August, 1607, at first probably on Stage 
Island, but later on the shores of Atkins' Bay, ten miles up the 
Kennebec. Owing to the death of Popham, their chief patron, and 
other misfortunes, the colonists returned to England in 1608. For 
several years thereafter. Gorges and Sir Francis Popham — son 
of Lord John — fitted out trading and fishing expeditions to the re- 
gion, but no permanent colony was again attempted on the Kennebec 
until 1630. Weymouth had serious difficulties with the natives 
(1605), and kidnapped several of them; the colonists themselves 
were, 'towards the close of their stay, cruel to their neighbors; 
the outrages in 1609 were doubtless the operations of visiting Eng- 
lish traders. The boats and other English property seen by the 
French in 1611, at the Penobscot and Kennebec, of course be- 
longed to traders, who were at this time numerous along the 
main shore. Cf. Williamson's Maine, vol. i., pp. 53. 191-239; and 
Memorial Volume of Popham Celebration, Aug. 29, 1862. Port- 
land, 1863). 

6 (p. 49).— These Indians were the Tarratines (called Penob- 
scots by the English), one of the three tribes of the Etchemins,— the 
other two being the Openangos (the Quoddy Indians of English 
chronicles) of New Brunswick, and the Marachites of Nova Scotia. 
For origin of their name, see Maine Hist. Colls., vol. vii., p. 100. 


NOTES TO VOL. II 293 

The principal Tarratine village was, a half century later, near where 
Bangor now stands. The town visited by Biard was apparently at 
or near the present Castine, on Major-bigyduce Point (for deriva- 
tion of this name see Maine Hist. Colls., vol. vi., pp. 107-109). 
See topographical description in Williamson's Maine, i., pp. 70, 71. 
The ' ' Chiboctous ' ' River, of Biard, was, apparently, but the 
"wide-spread" of the Penobscot, stretching eastward of Castine. 
French traders were at Castine at a very early date. The English 
built a trading fort there in 1625-26, which fell into the hands of the 
French in 1632. It was styled Pentagoet in those days; but in 1667, 
was rechristened Castine, after Baron de St. Castine. who for several 
years maintained a station there. The Dutch were in possession 
for a time, — indeed, Castine was continuously fortified by English, 
French, and Dutch, in turn, from about iCioto 1783. 

7 (p. 61). — This introductory note, "To the Reader," is fur- 
nished by Dr. O'Callaghan, in his Albany reprint of 1870, which we 
are here following. 

The Jesuits had been banished from France by Henry IV., in 1595. 
He recalled them in 1603, making Father Coton, of their number, 
his confessor. 

8 (p. 61). — It is internally evident that the document, like many 
others of our series, was written at intervals ; this one was undoubt- 
edly commenced in 161 1 and closed in 1612. In a hurry to catch the 
home-returning vessel, the writer appears to have forgotten the 
change in the year. 

9 (p. 67). — It is possible that the Biscayans originally named 
what is still known as Placentia Bay, Newfoundland, after the city 
of that name in Spain. It was known to the English by that name 
in Biard'stime; — see John Guy's letter, May 16, 1611, in Prowse's 
History of Newfoundland (London, 1895), p. 127. Biard merely 
Gallicizes the word. Placentia is the chief seat of French settle- 
ment in Southern Newfoundland. — See Howley's Ecclesiastical 
History of Newfoundland (Boston, 1888), pp. 128, 129. 

10 (p. 67). — Reference is here made to the Eskimos of Labrador. 
Says Prowse, {Hist. N. F., pp. 590, 591); " The name Esquimaux is 
a French corruption of the Abenaki word ' Eskimatsie, ' an eater of 
raw flesh. The native word is 'Innuit,' meaning 'the people.' 
Eskimo is the Danish form of the name, and has now quite sup- 
planted the old French name." They were probably dubbed 
" Excommunicated " in Biard' s time, because of the marked hostility 
to them of all the other savage tribes in Canada ; and the French 
early joined the latter in opposing them. — See Prowse, ut supra, p. 
591. The missionaries found the Eskimos difficult material on 
which to work; although an occasional captive slave, brought to 


294 NOTES TO VOL. I J 

the St. Lawrence by the Indians, would yield to priestly ministra- 
tions. — See Shea's Charlevoix, vol. iii., p. 30. 

11 (p. 69). — Reference is here made to the mouth of what is 
now Saco River. Choiiacoet was the French rendering of a native 
word from which the modern Saco is derived. — Champlain's 

Voyages (Prince Soc), vol. ii., p. 64. 

12 (p. 81). — No map could be found in the archives of the Society 
at Rome, where the original of this letter is preserved. 

13 (p. 127). — See vol. i., note 2. 

14 (p. 131). — Casquet("lesCasquetes," on maps of that period): a 
dangerous group of rocks in the English Channel, seven miles west 
of Alderney. 

15 (p. 133). — See notes 3, 6, ante ; and vol. i., note 11. 

16 (p. 133). — See note 4, a7ite. 

17 (p. 135). — Matachias, or matachiats; described by Champlain, 
in Voyages (Prince Soc), vol. i., p. 241, as " beads and braided strmgs, 
made of porcupine quills, which they dye in various colors. ' ' Les- 
carbot says that the Armouchiquois, like the Brazilians and Flori- 
dians, make ornaments from bits of shell, polished and strung to- 
gether in bracelets, etc. ; these are called boii-re in Brazil, and 
matachiaz among the Northern tribes. — See his Nouv. France, 

P- 732. 

18 (p. 137).— Nuncio of Pope Paul V. to Henry IV. of France; was 
created a cardinal, December 2, 161 5. — See Laverdiere's Champlain, 
p. 492; also Faillon's Col. Fr., vol. i., p. 99. A fortification erected 
by Poutrincourt, at the entrance of Port Royal harbor, was named 
by him Fort d'Ubaldini.— See Lescarbot's chart of Port Royal, in 
vol. i. of this series. 

19 (p. 141).— Named by Champlain, from its forked shape, now 
known as Cape Split; a promontory at entrance of Mines Bay, 
where it opens into the Bay of Fundy. Jean Blaeu's map, Extrema 
Americce (1620), shows it as C. de Poitrincourt ; for explanation of 
this name, see Laverdiere's Champlaiti, pp. 271, 272. 

20 (p. 141).— Sable Island is thus described by Champlain, Voyages, 
(Prince Soc), ii., p. 8: " This island is thirty leagues distant north 
and south from Cape Breton, and in length is about fifteen leagues. 
It contains a small lake. The island is very sandy, and there are no 
trees at all of considerable size, only copse and herbage, which serve 
as pasturage for the bullocks and cows which the Portuguese carried 
there more than sixty years ago." 

The origin of the cattle here mentioned is thus explained by Ed- 
ward Haies, in his report on Sir Humphrey Gilbert's voyage of 1583, 
in Goldsmid's Hakluyt, vol. xii., p. 345: " Sablon lieth to the sea- 
ward of Cape Briton about 25 leagues, whither we were determined 


NOTES TO VOL. II 295 


to goe vpon intelligence we had of a Portugal — who was himselfe 
present when the Portugals (aboue thirty yeeres past) did put in the 
same Island both Neat and Swine to breede, which were since ex- 
ceedingly multiplied." Lescarbot, however, says the cattle were 
landed there about 152S, by Baron de Lery; see his Nouv. France, 
p. 22. Sable Island is noted as the scene of La Roche's unfortu- 
nate attempt at colonization in 1598, for a graphic description of 
which see Parkman's Pioneers, pp. 231-235. See Dionne's note on 
" Les Sablons," in his Nouvelle France (Quebec, 1891), pp. 311-316. 

21 (p. 141). — The name Bacallaos (see vol. i., note 7) was long 
gfiven to the region afterwards known as Canada. Peter Martyr 
says: " Sebastian Cabot him selfe, named those lands Baccallaos 
bycause that in the seas thereabout he founde so great multitudes of 
certeyne bigge fysshes much like vnto tunies (which th[e] inhabi- 
tantes caule Baccallaos) that they sumtymes stayed his shippes." — 
See Eden's Three English Books on America (Arber ed., Birming- 
ham, 1885), pp. 161, 345. Foumier's Hydrographie (Paris, 1667), 
cited 'inBTOvme.'& Hislory of Cape Breton (London, 1869), p. 13, says: 
" It cannot be doubted this name was given by the Basques, who 
alone in Europe call that fish Bacalaos, or Bacaleos ; the aborigines 
term them Apage." See also Lescarbot's Nouv. France, p. 237; 
and Dionne's Nouv. France, pp. 327-331. Cf. Prowse {Hist. A^. F, 
p. 589); he says, in claiming the discovery of Newfoundland for the 
English, that Baccalao was but ' ' an ordinary trade word, in use 
at that period." For an interesting sketch of the Basque fisheries in 
Newfoundland, up to the end of the 17th century, see Prowse, ut 
supra, pp. 47-49. 

That part of the mainland appears on Ribero's map ( 1 529) as " Tiera 
de los Bacallaos," shown also by Agnese (1554), Zaltieri (1566), Mar- 
tines (157S), and in map of "Nova Francia et Canada, 1597," in 
Wytfleit's Descriptionis Ptolemaicce Augmentum. The name was 
restricted to the southern part of the island of Newfoundland, by 
Ramusio (1556); to the island of Cape Breton, by Lescarbot (1612); 
to an island east of Newfoundland, by De Laet (1640). The name 
Baccalos " still clings to an islet about forty miles north of the capi- 
tal [St. John's], in which multitudes of sea-birds now build their 
nests."— Bourinot, in Canad. Mo., vol. vii,, p, 290. See also, An- 
spach's Hist. N. F, pp. 296, 297. 

22 (p. 147)-— Along, narrow inlet, nearly parallel to the sea, on west- 
ern coast of Digby County, N. S., and still known as St. Mary's Bay. 

23 (P- 151)- — A Basque word, meaning sorcerer, corresponding to 
the native aoutmoin.—^QQ Biard's Relation of 1616, post. Cham- 
plain (Laverdiere's ed., p. 82) calls them Pilotoua; and Sagard 
(Canada, pp. 98, 656), Pirotois. 


296 NOTES TO VOL. II 

24 (p. 157). — Henry II. of Bourbon, prince of Cond6, born in 1588; 
nephew of and next in succession to Henry IV. ; a leader in the 
Catholic League, and father of the great Cond6. He married, in 
1609, Charlotte de Montmorency, then fifteen years old, one of the 
most beautiful women of her day. The king fell in love with her, 
and his attempted intrigue led to complications that almost caused 
a war between France and Spain. Cond6 rebelled against Louis 
XIII., and in September, 161 6, was captured and imprisoned; but he 
soon afterwards regained his power, which he retained until the as- 
cendancy of Richelieu displaced it, in 1623; he died in 1646. 

The house of Conti was a younger branch of the house of Cond6 ; 
that of Soissons was also nearly related to the reigning family of 
Bourbon. Charles de Bourbon, count of Soissons, was born in 1556. 
He acted for a time with the League, but left it, in the hope of se- 
curing as his wife Catherine of Navarre, and became a military 
officer under both Henry III. and Henry IV. ; Sully, however, com- 
pelled him to give up his proposed marriage with Catherine. He 
was Grand Master of France, under Henry IV. ; later, was governor 
of Dauphiny, and, at his death, of Normandy. At Champlain's so- 
licitation, he consented to become the head of De Monts's scheme 
for the colonization of Canada; and he was appointed (October 8, 
1612) by the king lieutenant general and governor of New France, 
Champlain becoming commandant under him. But Soissons died, 
on November i following; and he was succeeded by Henry, prince 
of Conde, with the title of viceroy of New France. Mareschal de 
Themins was appointed by Marie de Medicis, acting viceroy during 
Conde's imprisonment. Upon his liberation (1619), Conde sold his 
position as viceroy of Canada to Henry, duke of Montmorency, who 
in turn sold it (January, 1625) to his nephew, Henry de Levis, duke 
of Ventadour.— See Rochemonteix's Jdsuites, vol. i., pp. 126, 127, 
134, 144, 149- 

Champlain (see his map of 1632) named the lake at the mouth of 
the Ottawa River, Lac de Soissons, in honor of his viceroy; it is 
now called Lake of Two Mountains. 

25 (p. 157).— Charles de Gonzague, duke of Nevers, was born 
about 1566; his father was a prominent chief in the Catholic League, 
and, in 1592, introduced the order of Recollets into France. His 
sister, Catherine de Gonzague, married Henry I., duke of Longue- 
ville, in 1588. 

26 (p. 157).— Charles de Lorraine, duke of Guise, Grand Master of 
France, and governor of Champagne and Provence, was born in 
August, 1571, and died 1640. In 1615, he was the proxy of Louis 
XIII., in the marriage of the latter to the Spanish infanta, Anne of 
Austria. 


NOTES TO VOL. II 297 

27 (p. 157). — Sieur de Praslin was captain of the royal body- 
guards, and lieutenant of Champagne. 

28 (p. 157). — The Parliament of Paris originated in a division of 
the king's court, made necessary by the increase of its functions, 
consequent upon the progress of the royal power in France. Judi- 
cial affairs were allotted to the decision of Parliament ; its organiza- 
tion was defined in 1302, by Philip the Fair, who ordained that it 
should assemble at Paris twice a year, for two months, exercising 
jurisdiction over the whole kingdom. Charles V. (1364-80) made the 
Parliament permanent. Its jurisdiction was much restricted, suc- 
cessively by Charles VII., Louis XL, and Francis I.; eight other 
provincial Parliaments had been formed, by the early part of the 
1 6th century, which reduced that of Paris to little more than a munic- 
ipal jurisdiction, and all had been thoroughly subjected to royal 
authority. The Parliament of Paris refused, from 1554 to 1662, to ad- 
mit the Jesuits into the kingdom, and, later, opposed Henry IV. ; but 
it was compelled to submit by Mazarin, and, later, by Louis XIV. and 
Louis XV. In 1762, however, it decreed the abolition of the order of 
Jesuits, and Louis XV. was obliged to confirm this action ; though 
he exiled the Parliament, eight years later. Within four years, it 
was recalled by Louis XVI. ; but supporting, in 1789, the privileged 
orders against the people, it lost all popularity, and in the following 
year was suppressed by the Constituent Assembly. It had been 
mainly composed of lawyers ever since Louis XII. forbade any to 
enter the Parliament, or to sit as judges, who were not "literate 
and graduate. ' ' 

29 (p. 157). — The author of the Lettre Missive (vol. i. of this ser- 
ies). He is again mentioned by Lescarbot, in this Relation. 

30 (p. 157). — The original church of Ste. Genevieve (dedicated to 
the patron saint of Paris) was built by Clovis, about 510. Near the 
beginning of the 13th century, it was replaced by another building, 
erected by King Philippe Augustus; this having, in time, become 
almost a ruin, gave way to the present handsome edifice, which 
was begun in 1758, and built under the auspices of Louis XV. See 
Hunnewell's Historic Monuments of France (Boston, 1884), pp. 
195, 196. 

31 (p. 159). — Short robe. A term used, at that time, to designate 
the military profession. 

32 (p. 165). — Wheat (ble) is here used generically, but meaning 
maize ; or, more probably, as a shortened form of ble d' Inde, the term 
applied by Champlain and other French explorers to the corn culti- 
vated by the aborigines. 

33 (p. 165). — The subject of agfriculture among the Indians is ex- 
haustively treated in Carr's " Mounds of the Mississippi Valley," in 


298 NOTES TO VOL. II 

Smithsonian Report (Washington, 1891), pp. 507-533. His general 
conclusion is that corn was " cultivated in greater or less quantities 
by all the tribes living east of the Mississippi and south of the great 
lakes and the St. Lawrence," — indeed, far more extensively than is 
generally supposed ; and that " the Indian looked upon it as a staple 
article of food, both winter and summer; that he cultivated it in 
large fields, and understood and appreciated the benefits arising 
from the use of fertilizers." Beans, squashes, and pumpkins were 
also staple crops. In regard to the labor of women, Carr says: 
" The Iroquois or Six Nations are the only people among whom, so 
far as I know, it cannot be shown that the warriors did take 
some part either in clearing the ground or in cultivating the crop ; 
and we find that even among them the work was not left exclusively 
to the women, but that it was shared by the children and the old 
men, as well as the slaves, of whom they seem to have had a goodly 
number.*** This statement ['that the field-work was tiot left entirely 
to the women'], as to the actual condition of a large majority of the 
tribes living east of the Mississippi and south of the St. Lawrence, 
is believed to be true ; yet it is not denied that there were many 
instances m which this labor was, practically, left to the women, 
owing to the fact that the men were away from home, hunting or 
fighting. This fact was, unfortunately, of frequent recurrence ; but, 
as it was the result of an accidental and not of a permanent condi- 
tion of affairs, it would hardly be fair to ascribe it to the existence 
of any custom, or to any belief in the derogatory character of the 
work." — Cf. Rochemonteix {/esuiies, vol. i., p. 97, note). 

34 (p. 167). — A word derived, according to Littre, from the Basque 
orenac, meaning "deer;" elsewhere written orignac, orignas, and 
orignat; by modern writers, orignal. The " Canadian elk " {orig- 
nac being used interchangeably with elaft, the elk of Northern 
Europe), or moose (the latter an Indian name), is Alces Anieri- 
canus, the largest of the Ccrvtcs family. The males are said to at- 
tain a weight of 1,100 or 1,200 pounds, and a height of five feet at 
the shoulder. See also Champlain's Voyages (Prince Soc), vol. i. , 
p. 265. 

35 (p. 169). — Slafter thinks that these roots were probably those 
of Jerusalem artichoke, Helianthus ticberosus. This plant, indig- 
enous in the Northern regions of America, had been carried to 
Europe by the Italians, who named it girasole (their word for the 
sunflower, another species of Helianthus), afterwards corrupted to 
Jerusalem. Champlain saw these plants cultivated by the Indians — 
in 1605, near Cape Cod; and again at Gloucester, in 1606. — See 
Champlain's Voyages (Prince Soc), vol. ii., pp. 82, 112. The sav- 
ages also cultivated ground-nuts, of several varieties; among them, 


NOTES TO VOL. II 299 

Arachis hypogcea and Apios tuberosa. — See Carr's " Food of Cer- 
tain American Indians," in Proceedings of American Antiquarian 
Society, vol. x., part i., pp. i68, i6g. 

Lescarbot says the roots mentioned in the text were called ca- 
nadas; Ferland thinks they were those of Apios tuberosa (Cours 
d' Histoire, vol. i., p. 84). 

36 (p. 171). — The smelt, Salnio eperlanus, is found in both salt 
and fresh water; it is four to eight inches in length. 

37 (p. 171). — A small, narrow inlet (Ance, on Bellin's map, 1764), 
at the head of which is a portage to St. Mary's Bay. 

38 (p. 171). — Haliburton, in his Nova Scotia (Halifax, 1829), p. 
15, note, says it is the stream now known as the Allen River; but 
Lescarbot, in our text, and in his chart of Port Royal, identifies it with 
the larger river now called Annapolis. He says it was "named 
I'Equille, because the first fish taken therein was an equille. " Its 
length is about 70 miles, 30 of which are navigable. Littre defines 
Squille as " the name, on the coasts between Caen and Havre, of the 
fish called latigon at Granville and St. Malo, a kind of malacopter- 
ygian fish, living on sandy shores, and hiding in the sand at low tide. ' ' 

39 (p. 173). — The legitimate children of the king himself, as dis- 
tinguished from those of other branches of the royal family, the lat- 
ter being only ' ' princes and princesses of the blood. ' ' 

40 (p. 175). — Du Chesne (or Duquesne), and Du Jardin; see Rela- 
tion of 1616, post. Ferland says (Cours d' Histoire, vol. i., p. 80, 
note) : "In the History of Dieppe, vol. ii. , mention is made of Ab- 
raham Du Quesne, a Calvinist, who commanded a Dieppe vessel 
engaged in the American and Senegal trade. He was father of the 
celebrated admiral of the same name, bom at Dieppe in 1610." 
Shea adds (Charlevoix, vol. 1., p. 262, note), that he " was an ances- 
tor of the Governor of Canada, whose name was once borne by 
Pittsburgh." 

41 (p. 175). — These orders, except the Minimes, were Franciscan. 
The Capuchins (so named from the sharply-pointed capuce, or hood, 
of their robe) were organized in 1528, as a new division of the 
Fratres Minor es of St. Francis of Assisi ; and were received into 
France in 1573, at the request of Charles IX., and at the recommen- 
dation of Cardinal Lorraine. In 1632, they were asked by Richelieu 
to take charge of the religious affairs of Canada ; but, they declined 
this proposal, ostensibly through unwillingness to displace the 
Jesuits, and later went to Acadia. For an account of their work in 
Maine, see Historical Magazine, vol. viii., p. 301. 

The Cordeliers, named from the knotted cord worn at the waist, 
have two branches, — the conventuals, who are allowed to possess 
real estate ; and the observants, who may not own any property. 


800 NOTES TO VOL. II 

The Recollets, strictest of all the Franciscan orders, were thus 
termed because, devoting themselves to religious meditation (Fr. 
rdcollection), they asked from Pope Clement VII., in 1531, permis- 
sion to retire into special convents, that they might more literally 
observe their founder's rule. For an account of their missionary 
work in Canada, see Editor's Introduction, vol. i. of this series. 
They carried on extensive missionary labors in Spanish America, 
where, in 1621, they had 500 convents, distributed in 22 provinces. — 
Ferland's Cours d'Hzstoire, vol. i., p. 169. 

The Minimes were founded in 1453, by St. Francis de Paula, of 
Calabria. Their rule is especially austere, involving total abstinence 
from wine, flesh, and fish, and even from eggs, milk, or butter. 
Their founder named them Mmitnos Fratres, as a special indica- 
tion of humility. He also instituted an order of Minimes for 
women, in 1493. 

42 (p. 177). — Samuel de Champlain was born probably between 
1567 and 1570 (the exact date is unknown); his parents lived at 
Brouage, a fortified town in Saintonge, where was a large manufac- 
ture of salt and the finest harbor on the French coast. Champlain 
became a navigator early in life, and was also a quartermaster in 
the royal army in Brittany, from 1592 to 1598. 

His first voyage to America was in the service of the King of 
Spain; he spent the time from January, 1599, to March, 1601, in the 
West Indies and Mexico, and on the northern coast of South 
America. His valuable MS. report of this voyage, illustrated by his 
own sketches, was first printed in 1859 (but in an English transla- 
tion), by the Hakluyt Society, at London; in it he suggests a ship 
canal across the isthmus of Panama. In 1603, he sailed with Pont- 
grave to Canada, exploring the St. Lawrence as far as the Falls of 
St. Louis; and again, with De Monts, early in 1604, when they 
founded the St. Croix colony. Champlain remained in Canada 
three years, carefully exploring the Atlantic coast from Canso to 
Wood's HoU, and returned to France in October, 1607. The next 
summer, he explored the valley of the St. Lawrence, with the Sa- 
guenay and other tributaries, and founded the settlement of Quebec. 
October 15, 1612, he was formally appointed commandant in New 
France. Quebec was captured by the English, July 20. 1629; but 
was restored to the French by the treaty of St. Germain-en-Laye, 
March 29, 1632. Champlain, being again appointed governor of New 
France, returned to Quebec in May, 1633, where he died December 

25, 1635- 

43 (P- 177)- — This chart was drawn by Lescarbot, and engraved 
by Jan Swelinck; it appears in his Nouv. France (Tross ed., Paris, 
1866), facing page 208. It has been reproduced for the present series. 


NOTES TO VOL. II 301 


44 (p. 179). — Gougou,a. frightful monster, in the superstitious be- 
lief of the savages, who supposed it to dwell on an island near the 
Bay of Chaleurs ; to have the form of a woman, though of horrible 
aspect, and so tall that the masts of a ship would not reach to the 
monster's girdle; and to carry off and devour men. Champlain 
gives a full account of this belief, and regards Gougou as a demon 
who tormented the natives; see Laverdiere's Champlain, pp. 
125-126. Lescarbot, in his Nouv. France, pp. 397-403. gives the 
same description, and tries to prove, in a long discussion, that 
Gougou is a sort of personification of a tormenting conscience. 

45 (p. 179). — Charter party. A document which states the terms 
of rent for the whole or part of a ship. The term is derived from 
an old usage ; instead of makmg a duplicate of the contract, it was 
cut in two, each of the parties retaining one of the halves. — Littr6's 
Dictionnaire de la langiie fran^aise (Paris, 1878). 

46 (p. 185). — This young priest had sailed with De Monts, desiring 
to see the New World. On the shores of St. Mary's Bay, he became 
lost in the woods ; De Monts searched for him, but in vain, and left 
the bay. A fortnight later, an expedition sent to St. Mary's Bay, 
to search for silver and iron ore, accidentally encountered poor 
Aubry, almost dead with fatigue and hunger, and brought him back 
to Port Royal. This rescue was especially gratifying to De Monts. 
as the priest's disappearance had caused a Protestant, who had 
quarreled with him about religious questions, to be accused of mur- 
dering Aubry. — Champlain' s Voyages (?x'\ncQ'S>oc.),wo\. ii., pp. 20, 21. 

47 (p. 189). See vol. i., note 4. 

48 (p. 199). — One of the numerous names given to the St. Law- 
rence by early explorers and writers ; it thus appears on the map of 
Jean Allef onsce, ^\vQn.'va.\i\?, Cosmogr aphie (Va.x\s, ed., 1575), f 01.183^; 
and is so named by Champlain, in his Voyages. The origin of the 
name Canada is variously explained; but there are two leading 
theories: (i) That the word signifies, in Iroquois, "town," or 
"village." See Laverdiere's Champlain, p. 89, note i\; Faillon's 
Col. Fr. vol. i., p. 14; Hist. Mag. vol. i., pp. 153, 217, 349; and 
Mag. Amer. Hist., vol. x., pp. 161, 162. (2) That it comes from 
another and similar Iroquois word, meaning ' ' lake, ' ' being applied 
to the country as a region abounding in lakes. See Hist. Mag. , 
vol. i., pp. 188, 315; cf. Winsor's N. and C. Hist. vol. iv., p. 67, 
note I. — Cf. Ferland's Cours d' Histoire, vol. i., p. 25. The name 
was applied in the earlier maps (e. g., Zaltieri, 1566; Ortelius, 1570; 
Judseis, 1593) to a district lying along the St. Lawrence, between the 
Saguenay and Isle aux Coudres, or thereabouts. Later, it was 
given to all, or nearly all, of the valley of the St. Lawrence. See 
also vol. i., note 6. 


302 NOTES TO VOL. II 

49 (p. 201). — This date is evidently obtained from the " Discorso 
d'un gran Capitano di Mare Francese," found in Ramusio's Raccolta 
(Venice, 1556), vol. iii., p. 423. The " Discorso " is supposed to have 
been written in 1539; the name of the author was unknown to 
Ramusio himself, but is said by Estancelin, in Rccherches * * * 
des navigateurs Normands (Paris, 1832), to be Jean Parmentier, of 
Dieppe. See Winsor's N. and C. Hist., vol. iv., pp. 16, 63: cf. also 
Harrisse's Discovery of North America (London, 1892), p. 180. note 
2, and D'Avezac's Introduction to Cartier's Brief Recit (Tross re- 
print, 1865), fol. vii. ; both say that the " Discorso" was written by 
Pierre Crignon, an astronomer and pilot, and a companion of Par- 
mentier in his voyages. 

50 (p. 205). — Another name for the St. Lawrence River. The 
apparent etymology of this name would suggest that it was given on 
account of the powerful current of the river, and its discharge into 
the Gulf of St. Lawrence. See Trumbull's " Composition of Indian 
Geographical Names," in Conn. His tor. Soc. Colls., vol. ii., p. 30. 
Laverdiere erroneously considers Sacgud as another form of Sagn6. 
or Saguenay. 

51 (p. 205). — One of the principal tributaries of the St. Lawrence, 
entering the latter 120 miles N. E. of Quebec. It is 100 miles in 
length, and remarkable for its wild and picturesque scenery ; along 
the lower half of its course the banks vary in height from 500 to 
1,500 feet, often overhanging the swift current below. Its ordinary 
depth varies from 100 to 1,000 feet, and even reaches over 3,000 feet 
near its mouth. It is the outlet of Lake St. John, and was for the 
French the chief avenue of approach to the Indian tribes around 
that lake, and even (by portages) to those of Hudson Bay region. 
This river was, throughout the French regime, the center of both 
trading and missionary activities for all Northeastern Canada. 
Tadoussac, at its mouth, from earliest times a favorite rendezvous 
of the Montagnais and other Eastern tribes, became under the 
French an important fur-trade center and Jesuit mission ; and is, to- 
day, a notable watering-place. 

The name is also spelled Sagnay, Sagne, Saghuny, etc. Thevet, 
in his Grande Insulaire (a MS. preserved in the Bibliotheque Na- 
tionale of Paris, and written before 1571: see Harrisse's notes sur 
la Nouvelle France, p. 278), declares that the savages then called 
this river Thadoyseau; while Lalemant (in Relation of 1646) says 
that they called Tadoussac Sadilege. Probably these names were 
indifferently applied, in that early time, alike to river and village. 
Laverdiere derives Saguenay from the Montagnais saki-nip, ' ' the 
rushing water." See his Champlain, pp. 68, 69; also Trumbull, in 
Conn. Hist. Colls., vol. ii., p. 31. 


NOTES TO VOL. II 303 

52 (p. 205). — Now the St. Maurice; named Trois Rivieres, be- 
cause two islands at its mouth divide it into three channels. On 
Creuxius' map (1660), it appears as Metaberoutin River, or Three 
Rivers; on Duval's (1679), the Riviere de Foix. This last appella- 
tion seems to be another form of Riuiere du Fouez, given to this 
river by Cartier. — See C/tamplain' s Voyages (Prince Soc. ), vol. i., 
p. 257. At its mouth is the town of Three Rivers, founded by- 
Cham plain in 1634. 

53 (p. 205). — The Ottawa River — Champlain's Riuiere des Al- 
gommequins; see his " Explanation of the Map of New France," in 
Voyages (Prince Soc), vol. i., p. 302. Also named, in early days. 
Riviere des Prairies; so in Relation of 1640, post, and on 
Creuxius' map (1660): Faillon {Col. Fr., i., p. 82, note * * ) says 
it was thus named from its discoverer, a young sailor from St. 
Malo ; he is mentioned by Champlain as " a very courageous man, ' ' 
in Voyages (Paris, 1632), p. 159. 

54 (p. 205). — The Chicchack (or Shickshock) Mountains; called 
Notre-Dame by Champlain and other early writers. A range of 
highlands in the Gaspe peninsula, the easternmost part of the Appa- 
lachian system, forming the watershed between streams flowing into 
the St. Lawrence and Bay of Chaleurs. They lie about twelve miles 
from the St. Lawrence, extending a distance of some 65 miles, be- 
tween the Ste. Anne des Monts and the Matane rivers ; they range 
in height from 3,000 to 4,000 feet. — See Rochemonteix'sy</Ji«'/^.y, 
vol. i., p. 91; also Laverdiere's Champlain, p. 1090. 

55 (p. 205). — See Laverdiere's Champlain, p. 179. 

56 (p. 205). — Canadis, the Indians of the vicinity of Quebec. 
Lescarbot says {Nouv. France, p. 238) that "the tribes of Gachepe 
and Chaleur bay call themselves Canadocoa, that is, Canadaquois, ' ' 
Sagard {Canada, p. 152) mentions a village of Canadians near 
Tadoussac. 

57 (p. 205). — Algomeguis (also spelled Algoumequins, Algonme- 
quins, and Algumquins) ; the Algonquins or Algonkins. Some 
authors consider this name generic for the Armouchiquois, the 
Montagnais, the "Petite Nation," the Nation of the Isle, and the 
Nipissiriniens. — See Martin's edition of Bressani's Relation 
Abrigee (Montreal, 1852), p. 319. Champlain limits this appel- 
lation to the tribes that dwell upon the Ottawa. 

58 (p. 205). — Ochasteguis, according to Laverdiere {Champlain, 
PP- 317. 346) called by Champlain Ochastaiguins or Ochatequins, 
from the name of one of their chiefs; a name applied to the 
Hurons. This last appellation was but a nickname of the tribe, 
which was properly called Wendot or Wyandot. They inhabited 
the region east of Lake Huron, to Lake Simcoe. 


304 NOTES TO VOL. II 

59 (p. 205). — The site of Quebec was first visited by Cartier in 
1535, and was then occupied by an Indian village, named Stadacona. 
The foundation of the present city was laid by Champlain, July 3, 
1608; for his chart of Quebec and vicinity (with valuable notes 
thereon, by the editor), and an engraved illustration of the buildings 
erected by him, see Laverdiere's Champlain, pp. 296, 303. Quebec 
is also written Quebeck, Quebecq (Champlain), and Kebec, Kebec, or 
Kebek {Relations); the word, in various Algonkin dialects, signifies 
' ' the narrowing of the water, ' ' referring to the contraction of the St. 
Lawrence, opposite Cape Diamond, to a space of only 1,314 yards; 
while below, at the confluence of the St. Charles, it spreads into a 
basin over 2,500 yards in width. See Ferland's Cours d' Histoire, 
vol. i., p. 90; and Parkman's Pioneers, p. 329. 

The first known mention of this name, to designate the locality 
of the present city, is in Champlain's Voyages, ut supra, p. 89. 

60 (p. 205). — See vol. i., note 2. 

61 (p. 207). — See notes 22, 33, ante. Brazilian dean; the common 
bean, Phaseolus vulgaris, indigenous to America. Called "Bra- 
zilian bean," because it resembled a bean then known in France by 
that name. — Champlain' s Voyages (Prince Soc), vol. ii., p. 64, note. 

62 (p. 207). — Breton. This name (spelled also Bretton, Briton, 
Brittayne, etc.), was given, at an early date, to the most eastern 
point of Cape Breton Island, "first seen by some French sailors, 
who named it either after Bretagne, or from Cape Breton, a town 
in the election of Landes, in Gascony." — Bourinot {Canad. Mo., 
vol. vii., p. 292). Cf. Margjy's Navigations Francaises (Paris, 
1867), p. 113. It appears on Verrazano's map (1529). See also 
Laverdiere's Champlain, p. 155; and on same page is a quotation 
from Thevet's Gr. Insul. (1556) which mentions " the cape or prom- 
ontory of Lorraine, so named by us; others have given it the name 
of Cape of the Bretons," etc. The island itself was known, during 
the i6th century, as Isle du Cap Breton, or Isle des Bretons; Cham- 
plain, in Voyages (Prince Soc), vol. i., p. 280, calls it St. Lawrence; 
the French named it Isle Royale, upon its cession to them by the 
treaty of Utrecht (1713); its old name, Cape Breton Island, was re- 
sumed in 1758, after the capture of Louisbourg by the English. On 
Gastaldo's map (1548), the name Breton is applied both to this island 
and to Nova Scotia. See Dionne's note on Cape Breton {Nouv. 
France, pp. 283-286). 

On La Heve, see vol. i., note 42. Champlain's chart of the harbor 
of La Heve is given in Laverdiere's Chatnplain, p. 156. 

Mouton, probably at Port Mouton; so named, according to Les- 
carbot, because a drowned sheep came ashore there. — Nouv. France, 
p. 449. 


NOTES TO VOL. II 305 

Sable, the most southern point of Nova Scotia, on Cape Sable Island. 
Champlain says: "The next day we went to Cape Sable, also very 
dangerous, on account of certain rocks and reefs extending almost a 
league into the sea." — Voyages (Prince Soc), vol. ii., p. 13. 

St. Louis, thus named by De Monts, but now known as Brant 
Point ; two leagues from Plymouth Harbor, in Massachusetts. 

Blanc, so named by Champlain, from its white sands; three 
years earlier, named Cape Cod, by Gosnold, from the multitude of 
codfish in its vicinity. It is shown on Juan de la Cosa's map (1500), 
but without name; on Ribero's (1529), as C. de arenas; on Vallard's 
(1543), as C. de Croix. 

63 (p. 207). — On Campseau, see vol. i., note i^o. 

Sesambre, "an island thus named by some Mallouins, distant 15 
leagues from La Heve," says Champlain. Laverdiere thus explains 
the name : "In remembrance of a small island of that name which 
lies in front of St. Malo. Sesambre became S. Sambre ; and the 
English sailors, who are not greatly devoted to the saints, have 
called it simply Sambro" (its present name). A cape and harbor 
near the island bear the same name. Sesambre appears on De 
Laet's map (1633). as Sesambre; on Bellin's (1744), as Sincembre; 
but in his Petit Atlas Maritime (1764), also on Chabert's map 
(1746), as St. Cendre. In Champlain's Voyages (Prince Soc), 
vol. ii., p. 151. note 263, the island at St. Malo is called Cezembre. 

Beaubassin, the present Chignecto Bay; the northern arm at the 
head of the Bay of Fundy. Blaeu's map (1620), and De Laet's (1633), 
show it as B. des Gennes; Bellin's (1744), as Chignitou or Beau- 
bassin. 

64 (p. 207). — Sanson's map of Canada (1656) shows Cap de 
I'Evesque; and Creuxius's (1660), prom. Episcopi. Bellin's map of 
the St. Lawrence River (1761) enables us to identify this point as 
the present Cape Magdalen, or Magdalaine, west of Cape Rosier. 
Cf. Laverdiere's Champlain, p. 116, note; and Champlain (Prince 
Soc), vol. i., p. 281, note. 

Chat, a corruption of Chaste, the name of Champlain's early pa- 
tron. Sieur Aymar de Chaste (Chattes, or Chastes), for many years 
the governor of Dieppe, distinguished both as soldier and sailor, 
and a personal friend of Henry IV., had formed at Rouen, under a 
royal commission, a company to prosecute further explorations in 
Canada. In March, 1603, he sent Pontgrav^ and Champlain thither, 
to select a location for the colony he proposed to establish, and to 
make other preliminary explorations and arrangements ; see Laver- 
diere's Champlain, pp. 700-704, and 1090, note. During their ab- 
sence, De Chaste died (May 13, 1603), and his schemes were soon 
taken up by De Monts (vol. i., note 2). — See Faillon's Col. Fr., vol. 


306 NOTES TO VOL. II 

i., pp. 74-84. An account of De Chaste's voyage to Terceira 
(whither he was sent in 1583, with a military force by Catherine de 
Medicis), forms part of Thevenot's Relations de divers Voyages 
Curieux (Paris, 1596), under the heading " Voyage de la Tercere." 

65 (p. 209). — Of these five settlements, the first was made in 1535, 
by Jacques Cartier, at the mouth of the river called by him St. Croix, 
but afterwards named St. Charles, by the RecoUet missionaries, in 
honor of Charles des Boues, grand vicar of Pontoise. — See Shea's 
ed. of Le Clercq's Establishment of the Faith (N. Y., 1881), p. 149. 
Those of De Monts, at St. Croix and Port Royal, have been already 
described by Lescarbot. In regard to the settlement at Quebec, 
which the text inadvertently mentions as the third, instead of the 
fourth, it was on the northern bank of the St. Lawrence, not the 
southern, as he says here. The fifth, that of St. Sauveur, is fully 
described in the present volume. 

66 (p. 209). — Pointe St. Croix, now named Point Platon, about 
35 miles above Quebec. A small island, not far from this point, 
was called Ste. Croix Island, up to 1633; after that time, Richelieu, 
for the great cardinal. As intimated in the text, there has been a 
difference of opinion as to the place where Cartier spent the winter 
of 1535-36. Charlevoix (Shea's ed., vol. i., p. 116), claimed that the 
point mentioned above (Platon) was the St. Croix of Cartier; but 
Champlain and other authorities have shown that it was, instead, at 
St. Charles River. See Laverdiere's Champlain, pp. 90-93, and 
304-309; also Faillon's Col. Fr. vol. i., pp. 496-499. 

67 (p. 209). — Named by Cartier (1535), Island of Bacchus, from 
the profusion of wild grapes found there. Thevet {Gr. Insul.) says 
it was called by the natives Minigo. Its later name, Isle of Orleans, 
would seem to have been given by Cartier, during his first sojourn 
at Quebec. See Laverdiere's Chafnplain, p. 88. Le Jeune {Re- 
lation of 1632, post) mentions it as St. Lawrence Island. It is 20 
miles long, and six miles in its greatest width. 

68 (p. 211). — Pierre Coton (also written Cotton) was born in 
1564, at Neronde, and belonged to a distinguished family of Forez; 
became a Jesuit priest, and confessor of Henry IV. (see note 7, ante, 
and vol. i., note 39), and afterwards of Louis XIII. This position 
he resigned about 161 8, then spent six years at Rome. Returning 
to France (1624) as provincial of his order, he died at Paris, March 
19, 1626. 

69 (p. 217). — Iftstitutum, the published collection of the laws 
regulating the order of Jesuits (official ed., Prague, 1757; new ed., 
Avignon, 1827-38). For description of this work, see McClintock & 
Strong's Cyclopcedia of Biblical Literature, vol. iv., pp. 865, 866. 

70 (p. 217). — See vol. i., note 2. 


NOTES TO VOL. II 307 

71 (p. 221). — De Monts's lieutenant, Pontgrave, who is men- 
tioned by Champlain as Sieur de Pont Grave, also as Pont. Lescar- 
bot, in Nouv. France, cslX?, the lieutenant " du Pont, surnamed 
Grave. ' ' He was a merchant of St. Malo, interested with Chauvnn 
in the Canada trade, and an intimate friend of Champlain ; he made 
trading voyages to Canada during some thirty years. Concerning 
his son, see vol. i., notes 13, 44. See Dionne's account of Chauvin 
and his enterprises {Nouv. France, pp. 193-212, 318-328); on p. 198, 
he cites from Breard some information regarding Pontgravd's family. 

72 (p. 221).— Faillon discusses at length the statement of Charle- 
voix, that Canada was first called New France in 1609; and he 
brings much evidence, both circumstantial and direct, to show that 
this appellation was of much earlier date. He considers it highly 
probable that this name was applied to Canada at least as early as 
Cartier's first voyage (1534).— See his Col. Fr., vol. i., pp. 511-513. 
The "Shorte and brief e narration" of Cartier's second voyage, 
given in Goldsmid's Hakluyt, vol. xiii., p. 146, says: "Here 
endeth the Relation of lames Cartiers discouery and Nauigation of 
the Newfoundlands, by him named New France." Biard says {Re- 
lafi'on of 161 6, post): " I believe it was Jean Verazan who was god- 
father to the title of New France." 

73 (p. 225). — Josse, the priest Jesse Fleche; see vol. i., note 25. 

74 (p. 233). — Probably referring to the anonymous author of the 
Factum; see post, Relation of 1616, chap, x., and note 97, on the 
Factum. 

75 (P- 233). — Robin de Coulogne; see vol. i., notes 'ii, 37. 

76 (p. 235). — This man, whom Champlain calls Simon Imbert 
Sandrier, is said by Biard (chap, xx., post ) to have been formerly a 
tavern keeper at Paris. 

77 (p. 245). — Chiquebi, the " MicMac potato," as Bourinot calls 
it {Canad. Mo., vol. vii., p. 292); the ground-nut, sgabun or 
segubbtin, in the Micmac tongue. See note 35, a)ite; also Trum- 
bull, in Conn. Hist. Colls., vol. ii., p. 26. 

78 (p. 247).— Father Jacques Quentin, born in February, 1572, 
at Abbeville, France ; entered the order of Jesuits, June 30, 1604. He 
was appointed, at the close of his novitiate, professor at Bourges ; 
here and at Rouen he remained three years ; and in 1609 he was sent 
to the college of Eu, as acting superior. Four years later, he went 
to Acadia. After returning to France he devoted himself to preach- 
ing in cities and villages. In 1616, he became a " spiritual coadju- 
tor " in his order — according to Littre, one who publicly takes the 
three religious vows, but not the fourth, which is to go on whatever 
mission he maybe sent. His death occurred April 18, 1647. — See 
Rochemonteix'syk''jw//'r.y, vol. i., p. 83, note. 


308 NOTES TO VOL. II 


79 (P- 247).— These colonial experiments were not, for a long 
time, favorably regarded by the Protestants, or by most Catholics. 
Sully, minister of Henry IV., says in his Memoirs (Bohn's ed., Lon- 
don, 1856), vol. ii., p. 453: "The colony that was sent to Canada 
this year (1603) was among the number of those things that had not 
my approbation ; there was no kind of riches to be expected from all 
those countries of the New World which are beyond the fortieth de- 
gree of latitude. His majesty gave the conduct of this expedition 
to the Sieur du Mont. ' ' 

80 (p. 249).— Louis Hebert, born at Paris, an apothecary, was 
one of Poutrincourt's colony at Port Royal. In 161 7, he returned to 
Canada with his family, at Champlain's request, as one of the lat- 
ter's colonists at Quebec. He was the first settler with a family, 
and the first at Quebec to cultivate the soil as a means of livelihood; 
and on this account has sometimes been called "the father of 
Canada,"— an appellation also given, and with even more pro- 
priety, to Champlain. His dwelling was the first in Upper Town, 
and, according to Ferland {Cours d'Histoire, vol. i., p. 190), was 
between the present Ste. Famille and Couillard streets.— Cf. Laver- 
diere's Champlain, p. 988. He was in many ways prominent in the 
early history of the colony. In 1621, he bore the title of "royal 
procurator." In 1622, he was, according to Champlain, in Tadous- 
sac, acting as commander of De Caen's ship during the latter's 
temporary absence. In 1626, the fief of St. Joseph, on the river St. 
Charles, was granted by Ventadour to Hebert, under the title of 
Sieur d'Espinay. In January, 1627, a fall caused Hubert's death; 
he was buried in the cemetery of the Recollets, by whom, as well as 
by Champlain, he seems to have been greatly esteemed.— See 
Sagard's Cafiada, pp. 590, 591. When Quebec was taken by the 
English, in 1629, Louis Kirk, at Champlain's solicitation, sent a 
guard of soldiers to protect the widow Hebert's house, as well as the 
mission chapels. Many distinguished Canadian families trace their 
descent from Hebert, as is shown in Tanguay's Dictioittiaire Ginca- 
logique (Montreal, 1871-90), vol. i., p. 301.— Cf. Ferland's Cours 
d'Histoire, vol. i., p. 180, note. His daughter Anne married 
Stephen Jonquest, in the autumn of 161 7 — this was the first mar- 
riage in Canada according to church rites, and was performed by 
the Recollet Father Le Caron; she died in 1620. Another daughter, 
Guillemette, married William Couillard, August 26, 1621 ; she died in 
October, 1684. An island in the harbor of Port Royal was named 
for H6bert, but is now known as Bear Island. 

81 (p. 249).— The name given by the natives to the river now 
called Kenduskeag, apparently a corruption of Kadesquit. It enters 
the Penobscot near the present city of Bangor, on which site Biard 


NOTES TO VOL. II 309 


and Mass6 had intended to establish their mission. — See Cham- 
plain's Voyages (Prince Soc), vol. i., p. 42. 

82 (p. 249). — Frenchman's Bay; see vol. i., note 61. 

83 (p. 251).— Nicholas de la Mothe, or de la Motte le Vilin. After 
his capture by the English, he was among those taken to Virginia, 
and finally sent back to France. In 1618, he came with Champlain 
to Canada, where he remained during the following winter. 

84 (p. 251). — Champlain says (Laverdiere's ed., pp. 61, 1307), that 
Virginia was at first called Mocosa by the English. Ortelius's map 
of 1570 shows Mocosa lying southwest of New France; and his 
second map (1572) names the region south of the St. Lawrence and 
east of the Richelieu River, Moscosa. Biard {Relation of 161 6) 
seems to apply this name to the region of Chesapeake Bay. 

85 (P- 253).— A group of islands 25 leagues from St. Sauveur, ac- 
cording to Biard's Relation of 1616, post ; but 16 leagues, according 
to Champlain (Laverdiere's ed., p. 773). Apparently the Matinic 
or Matinicus Islands (also spelled Emmetinic). See also Emmeten- 
ic,* on p. 31 of this volume. 

86 (p. 253).— Argall's ship was named " Treasurer." Champlain 
says (Laverdiere's ed., p. 773), that ten other English ships were 
approaching, but without the knowledge of the French ; these, how- 
ever, were probably part of the usual fishing fleet, and not directly 
under Argall's command. 

S? (P- 2SS)-— English heretic: Captain Samuel Argall, of Vir- 
ginia, afterwards governor of that colony (see vol. i., note 63): dur- 
ing the first quarter of the 17th century, prominent as an English 
naval commander. His mother was married a second time, to Laur- 
ence Washington, an ancestor of George Washington. His destruc- 
tion of the French settlements has been bitterly censured by some 
writers, as the act of a buccaneer and pirate ; but he was commis- 
sioned to do this by the Virginia colonial authorities, who after- 
wards declared that, in the encounter at St. Sauveur, the first shot 
was fired by the French. A letter was written by Montmorency, 
admiral of France, to King James of England, October 28, 1613, ask- 
ing for the release of the Jesuit fathers, and redress for the injuries 
done to the property of Madame de Guercheville. The Virginia 
Council, when called to account for Argall's doings, made a spirited 
reply in his and their own defense ; and the English Privy Council 
refused to make any reparation to Madame de Guercheville, alleging 
that " her ship entered by force the territory of the said colony [Vir- 
ginia] to settle there, and to trade without their permission." 
These documents are given in Brown's Genesis of the United 
States, pp. 573, 664, 665, 725-734- Cf. "Aspinwall Papers," pp. 
41-46, in Mass. Hist. Colls., 4th series, vol. ix. The ship, how- 


310 NOTES TO VOL. II 

ever, was afterwards restored (see Biard's Relation of 1616, post). 

88 (p. 259). — This pilot is called Le Bailleur, of Rouen, in Biard's 
Relation of 1616. Charlevoix (Shea's ed., vol. i., pp. 280-281) er- 
roneou.sly confounds him with one Lamets, named by Champlain as 
among the five who escaped from the ship, but after the pilot had 
left it on his reconnoitring trip. These men seem to have later 
joined the pilot, as he had 14 men when he encountered La Saussaji-e. 

89 (p. 261). — See vol. i., note 66. 

90 (p. 2(i'i). — 0rtgnac, in the original; see note 34, ante. 

91 (p. 263). — Passepec, shown on Sanson's map (1656), as Pas- 
pey; on Bellin's (1744) and D'Anville's (1746), as Paspebiac; named 
Sheet Harbor on Gesner's (1849). 

92 (p. 265). — This allusion is a word-play upon Argall's name — 
argali being an appellation of the wild ram (Ovis aries), found in 
the mountains of Greece, in Corsica, and in the steppes of Tartary. 

93 (p. 273). — Vuallia ; Wales. 

94 (p. 275). — Sieur de Buisseaux (also spelled Bisseaux) ; he also 
aided Sieur de la Motte to regain his liberty, as Biard narrates in his 
Relation of 1616. In 1617, he was addressed by Raleigh as " mem- 
ber of the Council of State of France. ' ' 

95 (P- 275). — Itius Partus, the place whence Caesar sailed for 
Britain; generally identified with Wissant, a village in Pas-du- 
Calais, ten miles S. W. of Calais. Biard says, however, in the Rela- 
tion of 1616, that it was Calais where they landed. 

96 (p. 275). — The modern Amiens occupies the site of the ancient 
Samarobriva, capital of the Ambiani ; hence its name. 






