Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 23: Hurons, Quebec, Iroquois, 1642-1643
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1898 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits23jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits23jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits23jesuuoft.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered. The item has no *_djvu.txt file; the plain .txt
  file of the same OCR was used.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 23 of 73.

---

w 
CJ- 
w- 
j 
 ,.... 
8 - - 00: 

 
- = 
 
G - N 

----.,. ,.... 

 
 - - 
 
 
u.. " 
r- 
 
 
ffi ,.... 

 
 M 

- 


. 
. 
. 


. 


. 


a 


. 


. 
. . 
.... 


. 
. 


. 
 


... 


:::a: 


. 


.. 
.. 
flI 
. 
. 


. 


. 


. 


. 


... 
.. 
. 


. 
. 
... 


. 
. . 


..- 


. 
.a 


. 
.. 
.. 


.- 


.-. . 
.: . .... 
a. ...,. 
..

-:; 
: .. .. 
. 
. 


. 


('.
 r 


" "J 

 


r- 


J.. 


I 
. 
. 


L. 
... 



.
. 


. 
 
-\1- 
 
....
.. 
.
{\
i
 
... . ".. . ) 
. .
. 
 


. 


.. 
. 


. 
. 

 
. . 
- . 
. 


E:O::I 


.: 


, 


.. 


. 


. 
. - 
. 


.... 
i, 


" 


. . 


. 



FG 
3/7 
J 
).t1J3 
Igq
 
v, 
3 
... r 1 " 



THE JESUIT RELATIONS 


AND 


ALLIED DOCUMENTS 


VOL. XXIII 



\ßHAEL ;r 
c}" tt Q 

 
 

 LIBRARY 
 

 
 

 
 
J7
1} ()....
t:;S 



The edition consiSts of sev- 
en hundred and fifty sets 
all numbered 

J:? 
No. __...___............: 


AIl! 


y
, 


/ 


. 




'" 


ISAAC JOGLTES, S.J. 



The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 


TRAVELS AND EXPLORATIONS 
OF THE JESUIT MISSIONARIES 
IN NEW FRANCE 


1610- 1 79 1 


THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES j ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 


EDITED BY 
REUBEN GOLD THW AITES 
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 


Vol. XXIII 
HURONS, QUEBEC, IROQUOIS 
16 4 2 - 16 43 


CLEVELAND: trbe JSurrowø JSrotberø 
<IompanJ2, PUBLISHERS, M DCCC XVIII 



COPYRIGHT, 1898 
BY 
THE BURROWS BROTHERS Co 


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 


The Imþerial Press, Clevelatzd 



EDITORIAL STAFF 


Editor 


Translators . 


Assistant Editor 
Bibliographical Adviser 


REUBEN GOLD THW AITES 
r FINLOW ALEXANDER 
PERCY FAVOR BICKNELL 
WILLIAM FREDERIC GIESE 
CRAWFORD LINDSAY 
WILLIAM PRICE 
HIRAM ALLEN SOBER 
EMMA HELEN BLAIR 
VICTOR HUGO PALTSITS 



CONTENTS OF VOL. XXIII 


PREFACE TO VOLUME XXIII 9 
DOCUMENTS :- 
XLVIII. Relation de ce qvi s' est passé en la 
N ovvelle France, en l' année 1642. 
[Chaps. ii.-xii. of Part 11., complet- 
ing the document.] H-ieros11le Lale- 
11lant; SteT Marie aux Hurons, June 
10, 1642 17 
XLIX. Lettre à Monsieur J. M. J. Charles 
Garnier; SteT Marie aux Hurons, - 
23, 16 43 . 23 6 
L. Epistola ad R. P. Mutium Vitelleschi, 
Præpositum Generalem Societatis 
Jesu, Romæ. Joannes de Brébeuf; 
Tria Flumina, September 23, 1643 24 6 
LI. Relation de ce qvi s' est passé en la 
Novvelle France, en l'année 1642. & 
1643. [Chaps. L-iiL] Barthelemy 
Vimont; without date . 255 
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOLUME XXIII . 3 21 
NOTES . 3 2 5 



ILLUSTRATIONS TO VOL. XXIII 


I. Portrait of Isaac Jogues, S.J.; photo-en- 
graving from oil portrait by Donald 
Guthrie McNab . Frontispiece 
II. Photographic facsimile of handwriting of 
Charles Raymbault, S.J., Chevalier de 
Montmagny, Guillaume Hébert, Jean 
Bourdon, et al.; from a document in 
archives of St. Mary's College, Mont- 
real . Facing 224 
III. Reduced facsimile of Boisseau's Map of 
New France, 1643 Faâng 234 
IV. Photographic facsimile of title-page, Re- 
lation of 1642 -43 . . 25 8 



PREFACE TO VOL. XXIII 


Following is a synopsis of documents contained in 
the present volume: 
XLVIII. The Relation of 1642 is in two parts,- 
Part I., by the superior Vimont, being dated at Que- 
bec, October 4; Part 11., by Jerome Lalemant, is 
dated at SteT 
Iarie, in the Huron country, June 10. 
In Vol. XXII. we presented Part I., 
nd the opening 
chapter of Part II. We herein give Chaps. ii.-xii. 
of Part 11., thus completing the document. 
In continuing his narrative of the year's work 
among the Hurons, Lalemant describes the appor- 
tionment of work among the missionaries in that 
field, and the great assistance and comfort they de- 
rive from their annual retreat at the residence of Ste. 

larie, which is the central point of all their activi- 
ties, and a refuge for the more devout of their Indian 
converts. The Jesuit chapel there is regarded by 
the savages" as one of the Wonders of the World, 
although in France it would be considered but a poor 
affair. ' , Over 120 baptisms have been solemnized 
therein during the past year; the most notable of 
these converts is Ahatsistari, ., the chief \Varrior in 
the Country," of whose strength and daring marvel- 
ous tales are related. He sets out to the war immedi- 
ately after his baptism; and he and his Christian com- 
rades, before departing, make certain resolutions 
of affection and loyalty to one another and to the 



10 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXIII 


Faith. One of these declares that, if they perish, 
they desire their remains to be buried apart, and not 
mingled with the bones of unbelievers, even if the 
latter be their fathers or their children,-" since our 
Souls will be eternally separated, and our affection 
will not continue beyond this life." 
The missionaries baptize certain Iroquois captives 
during their torments; this incenses the Hurons, 
who already distrust the Fathers, on account of 
slanderous rumors that the latter are secretly leagued 
with the Iroquois. In time, however, this excite- 
ment dies away. 
The residence of SteT Marie is also the center of 
a mission among the Ataronchronons, who at first 
refuse to listen to Pijart, but at last are won by his 
patience, and some acknowledge the truth of the 
Gospel. Chastelain, however, is well received, and 
his preaching has made some con verts. 
From La Conception (Ossossané), the oldest of 
these missions, come encouraging reports of the 
constancy and faithfulness of the converts, under 
many temptations and assaults. They are threatened 
by the medicine men with the loss of their harvest, 
unless they sacrifice to the demons; but they refuse, 
preferring death to sin. The writer adds: "'V e 
do not know whether God willed to reward their 
Faith, and to punish the impiety of the others; but 
we were witnesses that most of the corn did not 
ripen, especially that belonging to those who had 
sacrificed to the Devil, while our Christians gathered 
a fair crop." Many instances of virtuous resistance 
and brave steadfastness are related; and the pious 
acts and devotions of certain converts - notably of 
Joseph Teondechoren and Charles Tsondatsaa - are 



PREFACE TO VOL. XXIII 


11 


recounted in detail. 'Vhen the pagans celebrate 
their 01lo1lha , roia "the dream feast," the Christian 
Indians meet: to state their desires also. One wishes 
to go to heaven; another, that all their brothers 
be converted, and gathered into a village where no 
sin could enter. Another declares that if a pagan 
should ask him the customary question, to guess his 
desire, he " would say to the fool who should pro- 
pound his enigma, ' Thou wishest to burn in the fire 
with the Devil, whose desires thou seekest; throw 
thyself into those fireplaces, and thy desire and his 
will be accomplished.''' "Some of the foolish ones 
became wise, while stopping to hear such pious dis- 
course." Lalemant describes the usual routine of 
pious duties performed by the members of this little 
Huron church,-the daily Mass and evening prayer, 
the weekly confession, and Sunday services. The 
neophytes show great tenderness of conscience, and 
confess, with great contrition, their least shortcom- 
ings; "sometimes there is more holiness than evil in 
acts which they think have been highly criminaL" 
One man was at a council, where a dance in honor 
of the devil was ordered; "being caught there by 
surprise without being able to get away, I begged 
pardon of God; I said many insulting things to the 
Devil, and I went to sleep." The converts watch 
over not only their own consciences, but those of 
their relatives and friends. 
The mission of St. Joseph (the most southerly of 
all) is next discussed. Garnier and Le Moyne, in 
whose charge it is, report several interesting con- 
versions, and relate the persecutions to which these 
new Christians are subjected by their pagan coun- 
trymen. They remain, however, steadfast, and 
profess the Faith boldly. 



12 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXIII 


The itinerant mission of St. Jean Baptiste, among 
the Arendahronons, is in charge of Daniel and 
Chaumonot. The missionaries had at first looked 
for much success because the Indians had no definite 
form of "worship for any false Divinity; but ex- 
perience has shown us that they are full of Diabolical 
superstitions, ,. which greatly hinder them from 
receiving the true faith. Several instances are 
related of demoniacal apparitions and even posses- 
sion. The people sacrifice to these demons, and 
think that the latter predict to them the future; 
relying thereon, these poor dupes are often disap- 
pointed. 
A chief named Atironta is put to death by the 
Iroquois; his brother Aëontahon becomes a Christian 
(the first adult in good health baptized in this mis- 
sion), and is persecuted in consequence, until, in 
accordance with Indian custom, he is elected captain 
in his deceased brother's place, and takes his name, 
Atironta. :Much is said of the savage belief in 
dreams, and the manner in which evil omens are 
averted. Several instances are given of the efficacy 
of prayer to God, offered by the Indian converts when 
in danger; in one case, a violent storm was about to 
engulf them in the waters, when, as soon as prayer 
was offered, " the Canoe was at rest, the waves fell, 
and the tract through which they passed became as 
smooth as a mirror, although all around them the 
wind continued to blow furiously." 
Lalemant describes an eclipse of the moon (April 
14, 1642). He states that the mission to the Tobacco 
Nation, begun last year, cannot be fully sustained, 
on account of the small force of missionaries; but 
Garnier and Pijart make occasional visits thither, to 



PREFACE TO VOL. XXIII 


13 


minister to their few con'Terts in that tribe. The 
great difficulties which, among all these peoples, 
hinder the Faith are recounted - the "diabolical 
superstitions," the impious feasts, and the instability 
of marriages. The fidelity of their few converts, 
however, cheers the missionaries, and they hope for 
stil1 greater blessings in future. 
The final chapter relates the work carried on 
among the Nipissings, north of the Huron country, 
by Claude Pijart and Charles Raymbault, who spend 
the summer with them at Lake Nipissing. V/hile 
there, the Algonkin tribes celebrate their "feast of 
the dead," somewhat similar to that am"Ong the 
Hurons, described earlier by Brébeuf; its special 
rites are graphically depicted - among them, "a 
ballet in three parts," and a competition in climbing 
a greased pole. Gifts are made to one another by 
the tribes present on this occasion; those of the 
Nipissings alone" would have cost in France forty 
or even fifty thousand francs. " The Jesuit mission- 
aries are present at all the ceremonies of this festival, 
and receive numerous marks of honor and affection. 
Following savage custom, they also proffer feasts 
and gifts to the Indians; in consequence of which, 
the Algonkins resident at Sault SteT Marie invite 
the "black robes" to ,.isit them at their home. 
Raymbault and Jogues, in accordance with their 
request, journey to the Sault (September- October, 
1642), and are most hospitably received by their 
Indian friends. On his return from this voyage, 
Raymbault at once begins another journey, with 
1Iénard, to the winter quarters of the Nipissings; but 
storms compel them to return to SteT 
Iarie. The 
exposure and hardship bring on a severe illness for 



14 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXIII 


Raymbault, and wreck his health. 
Iénard and 
Pijart spend the winter in ministering to the Algon- 
kins who come during that season to the Huron 
coun try. 
XLIX. This is a letter from Garnier to a friend 
in France (" :Monsieur J. 
I. J.' '), written from Ste. 
:Marie of the Hurons, the 23rd of some unnamed 
month, - possibly August. The writer mentions the 
captivity of Jogues, and a letter written by that 
unfortunate priest, which has been sent to the 
brethren in France. After certain personal exhor- 
tations to his correspondent, he recounts his own 
work among the savages. He mentions the death 
of several notable Huron converts during the year, 
and certain valuable accessions recently made to the 
infant church, notwithstanding the persecutions they 
meet. 
L. Brébeuf writes from Three Rivers, September 
23, 16 43, to the Father General, at Rome. He refers 
his distinguished correspondent to the Relatio1ls 
written by Bressani and Lalemant, but gives some 
additional information. The reports of the Huron 
mission for the past year, and letters from the 
Fathers there, have, he states, fallen into the hands 
of the Iroquois, owing to the latter's capture of the 
Huron fleet. This and other incursions of these fierce 
enemies have placed the colony and the missions in 
great danger. The current reports of Jogues's death 
in captivity, Brébeuf pronounces untrue; but that 
Father and his companions have been cruelly tortured 
by their savage captors, who as yet refuse to deliver 
them to the French. The writer consoles himself, 
in the midst of these heavy afflictions, not only by 
the unshaken courage and devotion of his Jesuit 



PREFACE TO VOL. XXIII 


15 


brethren, but by the piety of the French colonists 
and of the Indian converts. 
LI. Owing to the fact that the Iroquois had 
captured the year's report of the Huron missions 
(although it had been given to J ogues), the Relation 
for 1642 - 43 is written wholly by the Superior, 
Vimont; it is without date, but doubtless was written 
in the early autumn of 1643, in time for the vessel 
returning to France. \Ve have space in this volume 
for the first three chapters only; the rest will appear 
in V ols. XXIV. and XXV. 
The superior opens his narrative by describing the 
prosperous condition of the French colony. The 
settlers now cultivate the land, and thus produce a 
large part of their own food. They live in the exer- 
cise of virtue and piety; the church at Quebec is 
under the care of Bressani and 
Iassé, who are aided 
on occasion by Vimont and Brébeuf, both of whom 
have resided for some time at Sillery. Raymbault's 
illness has proved fatal: he dies at Quebec, October 
22, 1642, and is buried near Champlain. Ten days 
later, the interpreter Nicolet is drowned, in the St. 
Lawrence; a sketch of his life and achievements is 
given. Vimont mentions the grief of both the 
colonists and savages at the death of the French 
King, Louis XIII., and of Cardinal Richelieu, both 
of whom had greatly aided the Canadian missions. 
The French fleet comes late this year (1643); but it 
brings three new Jesuits- Garreau, Dreuillettes, and 
Chabanel-and three nuns, together with a priest 
for the U rsulines, and a new colonist, Louis d' Aille- 
boust. 
The Ursuline seminary is in a prosperous conùition, 
and has been removed to its own new building, not 



16 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXIII 


far from the fort. The events of special interest 
therein, during the year, are recounted, as also the 
pious and devout practices of the Indian pupils. In- 
struction is given to many adults, as well as to the 
little girls. :Madame de la Peltrie has gone to 
Montreal. 
The Indian colony of Sillery now contains thirty- 
five or forty resident families, :Montagnais and Algon- 
kins; the former tribe- are much more docile than 
the latter, having been longer and more closelyas- 
sociated with the French. :More buildings are needed 
for their families; only four are constructed, though 
three more are planned or in process of erection; it 
is hoped that the mission may soon be able to secure 
the donation given them for this purpose by the late 
Chevalier de Sillery, which has been delayed, prob- 
ably through legal processes. Vimont recounts the 
religious work among the Sillery Indians and their 
Attikamègue friends who have passed the winter 
there; also the manner of life, both social and re- 
ligious, of these former nomads, now learning the 
elements of civilization. In the spring, they have 
barely planted their corn before they are obliged to 
go to Fort Richelieu, to check the raids of the 
Iroquois. They soon return home, however, owing 
to the failure of expected money and supplies from 
France; so they go into the woods to hunt, pending 
the arrival of the ships. 


.MADISO
, WIS., May, IS9S. 


R. G. T. 



XLVIII (concluded) 


RELATION OF 1642 


PARIS: SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, 1643 


Part I. and chap. i. of Part II. were given in Volume XXII; 
we herewith present chaps. ii.- xii. of Part 11., thus conclud- 
ing the document. 



18 


LES RELATIO.VS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


[I1J CHAPITRE II. 


DE LA :MAISON OV RESIDENCE FIXE DE SAINCTE 
::\1ARIE. 


N OVS auons efié cette Année icy dans les Hurons 
quatorze Pre fires de nofire Compagnie; mais 
à peine nous voyons-nous vn mois entier re- 
ünis tous enfemble. Nous nous fommes ordinaire- 
ment diffipez, principalement durant I'Hyuer, qui 
eft Ie fort du trauail pour la Conuerfion de ces 
Peuples. Huiét de ce nombre ont trouué leur em- 
ploy dans Ies quatre principales 1fiffions H urones, 
que nous auons pû cultiuer cette Année. Les Algon- 
quins qui habitent icy proche de nos Hurons, ont 
occupé Ie trauail de trois autres. Nos Peres ainfi 
diuifez chacun dans Ie foin de la ::\liffion qui Iuy eft 
écheuë en partage, m'ayans obligé de me joindre à 
eux, tantofi vn mois en vn en droit puis en vn autre, 
felon Ies occafions qui fe font prefentées, ie n'ay 
pas [12J eu de demeure affeurée: & ainfi Ie foin de 
cette Refidence efi demeuré en partage à deux feuls 
qui reftoient, au P. Ifaac Iogues, & au P. François 
du Peron. 
C'efi vne confolation bien fenfible à tous nos :1Iiffi- 
onnaires, apres les fatigues foit de l' Hyuer foit de 
I'Efié, de fe rendre en cette ::\laifon, pour vaquer à 
eux-mefmes, & refpirer vn peu plus Iibrement auec 
Dieu dans ce repos d'efprit, pour par apres retourner 
au mefme trauail auec plus de vigueur. Outre cela, 
ils en tirent vn notable aduantage des Conferences 



1642 - 43J 


RELA TIO.N OF I642 


19 


[IIJ CHAPTER II. 


OF THE HOUSE OR PERMANENT RESIDENCE OF 
SAINTE MARIE. 


W E have numbered this Year here among the 
Hurons, fourteen Priests of our Society; but 
we hardly ever meet all together for a whole 
month at a time. We are generally scattered, espe- 
cially during Winter, which is the most important 
season of work for the Conversion of these Peoples. 
Eight of the number found their employment in the 
four principal Huron :Missions which we have been 
able to maintain this Year. The Algonquins who 
dwell here, near our Hurons, have occupied the atten- 
tion of three others. Our Fathers being thus dis- 
tributed, each having charge of the l\Iission that 
has fallen to his share, I have been obliged to join 
them,- sometimes for a month at one place, then in 
another, as the occasion presented itself; therefore, 
I have [12J had no fixed abode. Consequently, the 
care of this Residence has been shared by the only 
two who remained-Father Isaac Jogues and Father 
François du Peron. 
It is a profound consolation to all our 
Iissionaries, 
after the fatigues of the \Vinter or of the Summer, 
to return to this House, in order to give some atten- 
tion to themselves, and to breathe a little more free- 
ly with God in tranquillity of spirit, that they may 
return afterwards to the same work with renewed 
vigor. In addition to this, they derive marked bene- 



20 


LES RELATIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


qu'ils y font tous enfemble, tant des lumieres & des 
moyens que Dieu leur ouure pour faciliter l'in- 
ftruétion & la Conuerfion des Sauuages, que des nou- 
uelles connoiffances qu'ils ont receuës pour s'auancer 
en vne Langue où il faut efire & Maifire & Efcholier 
tout en mefme temps. 
Cette mefme Maifon efiant Ie centre du Païs, a 
bien fouuent la confolation de receuoir les Chrefiiens 
qui y viennent de diuers endroits pour y faire leurs 
Deuotions plus en repos que dans les Bourgs, & dans 
cette efpece de Solitude, y conceuoir [13J plus à loifir 
les fentimens de Pieté & de Religion. N ous leur 
auons dreffé pour cet effet vn Hofpice ou Cabane 
d' écorce, où Dieu nous donne les moyens de loger & 
nourrir ces bons Pelerins dans leur propre Païs. Du- 
rant l'Efié, de quinze en quinze jours, il s'en trouue 
toûjours bon nombre, qui de quatre & cinq lieuës s'y 
rendent dés Ie Samedy, pour paffer fainétement Ie 
Dimanche, n'en partant que Ie Lundy matin. Le 
Dimanche fuiuant nous les déchargeons de cette 
peine; nos Peres allans chez eux vn & deux jours 
auparauant, pour les difpofer aux Deuotions de ce 
fainét lour. Et ainfi par ces vifites alternatiues, on 
les entretient doucement dans l'exercice du Chrifii- 
anifme, dont l'Hyuer, demeurant plus afsiduëment 
auec eux, on a tafché de leur donner de plus folides 
connoiffances. 
Si dedans les Miffions quelque Adulte en eitat de 
fanté, eft jugé digne du Baptefme, apres toutes les 
épreuues qu'on a tirées de luy, c'efi en cette Maifon 
qu'on Ie renuoye pour derechef yefire examiné & 
receuoir auec folennité ce Sacrement qui Ie fait 
Enfant de l' Eglife. 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


21 


fit from the Conferences that they hold, all together, 
not only in the enlightenment and the methods 
disclosed to them by God to facilitate the instruction 
and Conversion of the Savages, but in the new 
knowledge they have acquired for their advancement 
in a Language in which one must be both Master and 
Pupil at the same time. 
As this House is the centre of the Country, it fre- 
quently has the consolation of receiving the Chris- 
tians who come to it from various places, to perform 
their Devotions in more quiet than in the Villages, 
and in this sort of Solitude to entertain, [13J at great- 
er leisure, sentiments of Piety and Religion. For 
that purpose we have prepared for them a Refuge or 
Cabin of bark, wherein God gives us the means of 
lodging and feeding these good Pilgrims in their own 
Country. During the Summer, from fortnight to 
fortnight, there are always a goodly number who 
come to it on Saturday, from a distance of four or 
five leagues, to pass the Sunday in a devout manner, 
leaving only on :Monday morning. On the follow- 
ing Sunday, we save them this trouble; for our 
Fathers go to their houses a day or two beforehand, 
to prepare them for the Devotions of that holy Day. 
Thus, by these alternate visits, we gently maintain 
them in the practice of Christianity, whereof during 
the Winter, while we reside more constantly with 
them, we have endeavored to give them more sub- 
stantial knowledge. 
If in the 1Iissions some Adult in good health is 
deemed worthy of Baptism, after all the trials to 
which he is subjected, he is sent to this House to be 
again examined, and to receive with solemnity that 
Sacrament which makes him a Child of the Church.. 



22 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSl1ITES 


[VOL. 23 


[14J Nous auons referué la plus grand' part de ces 
Baptefmes aux Fefies de Noël, de Pafques, & de la 
Pentecofie, d'où nos Chrefiiens qui s'y font affemblez 
de toutes parts, n'ont forty chaque fois, qu'auec vn 
accroiffement fenfible de leur foy. L'éclat exterieur 
dont nous tafchons d'accompagner les Ceremonies de 
l'Eglife, la beauté de nofire Chapelle (qui paffe en ce 
Pais pour vne 1ierueille du 1ionde, quoy qu'en 
France ce ne feroit que pauureté) les 1'feffes, les Ser- 
mons, les Vefpres, les Proceffions, & les Saluts qu'on 
a faits en ce temps-Ià, auec vn appareil qui furmonte 
tout ce que iamais ont veu les yeux de nos Sauuages; 
Tout cela fait vne impreffion dans leur efprit, & leur 
forme vne idée de la Majefié de Dieu, qu'on leur dit 
efire honorée d'vn culte mille fois plus augufie par 
toute la Terre. 
Le nombre de ceux qui ont receu Ie Sét. Baptefme a 
efié de plus de fix-vingt perfonnes. Ie croy que 
Dieu a receu les prieres qu'ils ont offertes pour ceux 
qui demeurans en France, font paffer iufques en ce 
N ouueau Monde les effets de leur Charité, pour 
cooperer fainétement au [15J Salut de ces Peuples & 
achepter ces pauures Ames, qui quoy qu'elles leur 
coûtent, ont coûté mille & mille fois plus cher au 
Sang de IESVS-CHRIST. Quand j'entends les 
aumofnes qui fe fourniffent pour cet effet; quand ie 
lis les Memoires des deuotions publiques de plufieurs 
Maifons Religieufes, qui nuid & jour tout Ie long de 
l'Année, n'ont ce femble rien plus à cæur que de 
hâter les :Mifericordes de Dieu fur ces pauures Sau- 
uages; Quand j'aprends que des particuliers, qui ne 
veulent auoir que les Anges du Ciel pour témoins de 
leur Charité, fe confomment en toute façon pour en 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF r6p 


23 


[14J \Ve have reserved the majority of these Bap- 
tisms for the Festivals of Christmas, of Easter, and 
of Pentecost, from which our Christians, who have 
assembled there from all parts, have always departed 
with a marked increase in their faith. The outward 
splendor with which we endeavor to surround the 
Ceremonies of the Church; the beauty of our Chapel 
(which is looked upon in this Country as one of the 
Wonders of the \Vorld, although in France it would 
be considered but a poor affair); the Masses, Sermons, 
Vespers, Processions, and Benedictions of the Blessed 
Sacrament that are said and celebrated at such times, 
with a magnificence surpassing anything that the 
eyes of our Savages have ever beheld,-all these 
things produce an impression on their minds, and 
give them an idea of the :Majesty of God, who, we 
tell them, is honored throughout the \Vorld by a 
worship a thousand times more imposing. 
The number of persons who have received Holy 
Baptism has exceeded one hundred and twenty. I 
think that God has heard the prayers that they have 
offered to him on behalf of those living in France 
who cause the effects of their Charity to be felt as 
far as this New 'Vorld, to coöperate in a holy man- 
ner in the [ISJ Salvation of these Peoples, and to 
redeem these poor Souls who, whatever they may 
cost them, have cost a thousand times more to the 
Blood of J E S U S C H R 1ST. When I hear of the alms 
that are given for that object; when I read the 
Accounts of the public devotions of many Religious 
Houses who, night and day, throughout the Year, 
seem to have no greater desire than to promote the 
granting of God's :Mercies to these poor Savages; 
when I learn that private individuals, who wish to 



24 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[V OL. 23 


auancer les momens: Quand ie voy tant de jeufnes, 
tant de veilles, tant d'oraifons, tant de ciUces & tant 
de fainétes cruautez, qui ne peuuent partir que d'vn 
cæur enflammé d'vn Amour facré; en vn mot, tant 
de feu qu'autre que Ie fainét Efprit ne peut allumer 
dans les cæurs: Ie confeffe qu'il ne m'eft pas poffible 
entendant tout cela, d'entrer en deffiance, & qu'auffi- 
toft ie douterois d'eftre au lieu où ie fuis, que de dou- 
ter que Dieu qui donne luy-mefme ces defirs, ne 
vueille accorder ces demandes fi juftes, & [16J que Ie 
temps ne foit venu qu'il veut donner à IE S V S- 
C H R 1ST ce qui luy a promis, la ConuerÍÌon de ce qui 
luy refte de Gentils, aufquels fes Diuines Souffrances 
ont efté inutiles par tant de Siec1es. 
Entre ceux que nous auons Baptifez folennellement 
en cette Maifon, vn nommé Ahatfiftcari du bourg de 
Sét. Iofeph, a efté Ie plus confiderable: Son courage, 
& les exploits qu'il fait toutes les Années contre les 
Ennemis, Ie font paffer pour Ie premier Guerrier qui 
foit dans Ie Païs. II n'y a pas encore vn an qu'ayant 
fait rencontre de trois cens Iroquois, it les mit tous 
en fuite, & en prit quelques-vns captifs; quoy que de 
fon cofié ils ne fuffent que cinquante, dont il efioit 
Ie Chef. Et l'Efté precedent, lors qu'il trauerfoit vn 
grand lac, qui fepare les Hurons de leurs Ennemis, 
ayant aperceu nõbre de grands Canots Iroquois qui 
venoient fondre fur luy, fes Compagnons ne fongeans 
qu'à la fuite: Non, non, dit-il, mes Camarades, AI- 
Ions nous mefmes les aborder. Efians venus aux 
approches, i1 faute luy feul & tout nud, dans vn grand 
Canot d'Ennemis, il fend la tefte au premier qu'il 
rencontre, [I 7J en jette deux autres dans l' eau, & f'y 
precipite foy-mefme, renuerfe en mefme teps Ie 



lð42-43] 


RELA TION OF r642 


25 


have the Angels of Heaven as the sole witnesses of 
their Charity, devote themselves in every way to has- 
ten the coming thereof j when I see so many fasts, 
so many vigils, so many prayers, so many cilices, and 
so many acts of holy severity, which can come but 
from a heart inflamed with a sacred Love j in a word, 
such fire, which the holy Ghost alone can kindle in 
hearts,- I confess that it is impossible for me, when 
I hear all this, to be distrustful. And I would as 
soon doubt that I am on the spot where I stand, as 
doubt that God, who himself inspires such desires, 
wills to grant petitions so just, and [16] that the time 
has come when he will give to ] E S U S C H R 1ST what 
he has promised him,- that is the Conversion of 
those who remain of the Gentiles, for whom his 
Divine Sufferings have been useless for so many 
Centuries. 
The man of greatest importance among those whom 
we have solemnly Baptized in this House, has been 
one Ahatsistcari of the village of St. Joseph. His 
courage and his Yearly exploits against the Enemies 
cause him to be looked upon as the chief Warrior in 
the Country. It is not yet a year since, having en- 
countered three hundred Iroquois, he put them all to 
flight, and made some of them prisoners, although on 
his side there were but fifty, of whom he was the 
Chief. And during the previous Summer, while 
crossing a great lake which separates the Hurons 
from their Enemies, having perceived a number of 
large Canoes filled with Iroquois who were coming 
to attack him, his Companions thought of nothing 
but flight, but he said: "No, no, my Comrades. Let 
us attack them ourselves." As they approached each 
other, he jumped, alone and quite naked, into a large 



26 


LES RELATIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Canot & tous ceux qui efioient dedans; puis apres 
nageant d'vne main, it tuë & maffacre de l'autre ceux 
qu'it rencontre prés de foy. Ce fpeétacle fi inopiné 
remplit d'effroy les autres Canots Ennemis, qui fe 
voyans vaincus dans leur viétoire, auant mefme que 
d'auoir combatu, prennent la fuite redoutans ce 
Courage. Mais luy eftant remonté dans fon Canot, 
pourfuit ceux qui reftoient en l'eau & les amene 
viétorieux dans Ie Pais. En vn mot, la vie de cet 
Homme n'eft qu'vne fuite de combats; & depuis fon 
enfance, fes penfées n' ont efié que de guerre; auffi 
efi-ce par là que Dieu 1'a fait Chreftien. 
Iamais it n' a monftré d' alienation de noftre Foy, 
& it y a plus de trois ans qu'it nous demandoit Ie 
Baptefme; mais ne pouuant pas Ie refoudre à quitter 
quelques Superftitions, ordinaires parmy Ies Infideles, 
nous ne pouuions luy accorder. En fin Ies Peres qui 
ont eu Ie foin de Ia Miffion de fainét Iofeph, luy 
ayans donné cet Ryuer, les dernieres inftruétions & 
Iuy leur ayant fatisfait, il vint à Pafques plaider [18] 
fa caufe: I'ay la Foy dans Ie fonds de mon cæur, 
difoit-il, & mes aétions l' ont fait affez paroiftre tout 
Ie long de l'Ryuer; dans deux jours, ie pars pour la 
guerre; fi ie meurs en la meílée, dites-moy, où ira 
mon Arne, fi vous me refufez Ie Baptefme? Si vous 
voyez dedans mon cæur auffi clair que Ie Grand-Mai- 
fire de nos vies, ie ferois déja du nombre des Chre- 
fiiens, & la crainte des flammes d'Enfer ne m'accom- 
pagneroit pas, maintenant que ie yay enuifager la 
Mort. Ie ne puis me Baptifer moy-mefme; tout ce que 
ie puis, efi de vous declarer fincerement les defirs que 
i' en a y: A prés ceIa, fi mon Arne eft brûIée dans les 
Enfers, vous en ferez la caufe: 
lais quoy que vous 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF z6p 


27 


Canoe full of Foes, split open the head of the first 
one that he met, [17J threw two others into the 
water, into which he himself leaped, upsetting at the 
same time the Canoe and all who were in it. Then 
swimming with one hand, he killed and massacred 
with the other all who came near him. So unex- 
pected a sight filled the other Canoes of the Enemy 
with fear; and, they, finding themselves vanquished 
by their own conquest, even before they had fought, 
took to flight from fear of such Courage. But he, 
having regained his own Canoe, pursued those who 
remained in the water, and brought them back in 
triumph to his Country. In a word, this Man's life 
is but a series of combats, and from his childhood his 
thoughts have been only of war; and it was through 
this that God made him a Christian. 
He never manifested any aversion to our Faith, and 
asked us for Baptism more than three years ago; but, 
as he could not make up his mind to abandon some 
Superstitious practices that are customary among the 
Infidels, we could not grant it to him. At last, the 
Fathers who have had charge of the :Mission of saint 
Joseph gave him the final instructions last Winter, 
and, as they were satisfied with him, he came at Eas- 
ter to plead [18J his own case. H I have Faith in the 
depth of my heart," he said, "and my actions have 
sufficiently shown it throughout the Winter. In two 
days I shall leave for the war; if I am killed in battle, 
tell me, where will my Soul go if you refuse me 
Baptism? If you saw into my heart as clearly as 
the Great Master of our lives, I would already be 
numbered among the Christians; and the fear of the 
flames of Hell would not accompany me, now that I 
am about to face Death. I cannot Baptize myself;. 



28 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


faffiez, ie prieray toûjours Dieu, puis que ie Ie co- 
gnois; & peut-efire qu'il me fera mifericorde; car 
vous dites qu'il efi meilleur que vous. Mais d'où te 
font venuës les premieres penfées de croire? luy 
repartit vn de nos Peres. Auant mefme que vous 
fuffiez dans Ie Païs, répondit-il. Ie m'efiois veu 
échaper de mille perils où mes Compagnons demeu- 
roient. Ie voyois bien que ce n'efioit pas moy qui 
me tirois [19] de ces dangers j i'auois cette penfée, que 
quelque Genie plus puiffant, qui m'efioit inconnu, 
me prefioit vn fecours fauorable (quoy que les Hu- 
rons attribuent à leurs fonges les caufes de tout leur 
bon-heur) i'efiois conuaincu que tout cela n'efioit que 
fottife; mais ie n' en fçauois pas dauantage. Lors 
que i'ay entendu parler des Grandeurs de DIE V 
que vous prefchez, & de ce que IESVS-CHRIST a 
fait efiant fur Terre, ie I'ay reconnu pour celuy qui 
m'auoit conferué, & me fuis refolu de l'honorer toute 
ma vie: Allant en guerre, foir & matin ie me recom- 
mandois à luy, c'efi de luy que ie tiens toutes roes 
viétoires, c'efi en luy que ie croy, & vous demande 
Ie Baptefme, afin qu'aprés ma mort, i1 ait pitié de 
moy. 
Eufi-on peu donner vn refus à cet Homme? N ous 
Ie Baptifames publiquement auec quelques autres Ie 
Samedy Sainét, & luy donnâmes Ie nom d'Eufiache. 
Puis ayant fait fes Deuotions Ie iour de Pafques, il 
partit pour la Guerre auec quelques vns de nos meil- 
leurs Chrefiiens, qui n'efioient demeurez que pour 
celebrer ce fainét lour, quoy que les Troupes auf- 
quelles [20] ils deuoient fe joindre, fuffent déja par- 
ties. Mais auant que de fe feparer, fe voyans affem- 
blez vn nombre de perfonnes affez confiderables, de 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I6p 


29 


all that I can do is to declare sincerely the desire that 
I have for it. After that, if my Soul be burned in 
Hell, you will be the cause of it. But, whatever you 
may do, I will always pray to God, because I know 
him; and perhaps he will have mercy on me, for you 
say that he is better than you." "But," said one of 
our Fathers, " what made you first think of believ- 
ing? ,. "Even before you came to this Country," 
he replied, " I had escaped from a great many perils 
in which my Companions perished. I saw very well 
that it was not I who extricated myself [19] from 
these dangers. I had this thought, that some more 
powerful Spirit, who was unknown to me, gave me 
favorable aid" (although the Hurons attribute to 
dreams the source of all their good fortune); "I was 
convinced that all that was only nonsense, but I knew 
no more about it. When I heard of the Greatness of 
GOD, whom you preach, and of what J E S U S 
C H R 1ST had done when he was on Earth, I recog- 
nized him as the being who had preserved me, and 
I resolved to honor him all my life. When I went 
to war, I recommended myself to him night and 
morning. It is to him that all my victories are due; 
he it is in whom I believe: and I ask you for Bap- 
tism, so that he may have pity on me after my death." 
"Vas it possible to refuse such a :Man? We Bap- 
tized him publicly, with some others, on Holy Satur- 
day, and gave him the name of Eustache. vVhen he 
had performed his Devotions on Easter Sunday, he 
started for the War with some of our best Christians, 
who had remained solely for the purpose of celebrat- 
ing that holy Day, although the Troops whom [20] 
they were to join had already departed. But, before 
separating, finding that a considerable number of 



30 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


diuerfes Nations, ils voulurent d'eux-rnefrnes tenir 
Confeil; V oicy en peu de mots les refolutions qui f'y 
prirent. 
Ne foyons plus qu'vn corps & qu'vn efprit, puis 
que nous feruons tous Ie mefme Maifire: Quand 
quelqu'vn paffera par vn Bourg où i1 y aura quelque 
Chrefiien, qu' il n' aille pas loger ailleurs: Quand 
quelqu'vn fera affiigé, qu'il trouue fa confolation chez 
les autres: N e découurons pas aux Infideles mutuel- 
lement nos fautes, mais qu'on reconnoiffe par l'amitié 
que nous aurons les v
s enuers les autres, que Ie 
Nom de Chrefiien efi vn næud plus efiroit que les 
liens de la Nature. 
Témoignons a nos Parens, qui ne font pas de mef- 
me Foy que nous, fuffent-ils nos peres & nos enfans, 
que nous ne voulons pas que nos os aprés nofire 
mort, foient rnefiez enfernble, puifque nos Ames feront 
eternellernent feparées, & que nofire amitié ne con- 
tinuëra pas plus loin que cette vie. 
[2 I] S'il ya chofe au monde qui foit Sainéte parmy 
les Hurons, c' efi Ie droiét de leur Sepulture. Leur 
foin furpaffe de beaucoup en cecy tout ce qu' on fait 
en France: Ils y font des profufions efiranges, felon 
leur portée, & fe dépoüillent eux-rnefrnes pour reuêtir 
leurs Morts & conferuer precieufernent les os de leurs 
Parens, afin de repofer apres leur mort en rnefme 
lieu. Iamais nous n' euffions creu que nos Chreftiens 
euffent deu renoncer fi tofi à ce droiét d'amitié, fondé 
fi forternent dans la Nature; mais la Foy eft vn glaiue 
qui íepare l' Arne d'auec Ie corps, & les enfans, des 
Peres. 
N e profanons pas, adioûterent ces bons Chrefiiens, 
les Myfteres qu'on nous enfeigne, quand nous voy- 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I6.p 


31 


persons were assembled there belonging to various 
Nations, they wished of their own accord to hold a 
Council. Here, in a few words, are the resolutions 
that they took: 
" Let us hereafter be but one body and one mind, 
since we all serve the same Master. Whenever any 
one of us passes by a Village wherein a Christian 
dwells, let him not lodge elsewhere. Whenever any 
one is afflicted, let him seek consolation among the 
others. Let us not reveal one another's faults to the 
Infidels; but let it be recognized, through the friend- 
ship that we shall have for one another, that the 
Name of Christian is a tie more binding than Nature's 
bonds. 
" Let us inform our Relatives who are not of the 
same Faith as we, even if they be our fathers and 
our children, that we do not wish our bones to be 
mingled together after our death, since our Souls will 
be eternally separated, and our affection will not 
continue beyond this life." 
[2 I] If there be anything in the world that is Sacred 
among the Hurons, it is their law of Burial. Their 
care in this matter greatly exceeds anything that is 
done in France. They are singularly lavish in pro- 
portion to their means, and despoil themselves to 
clothe their Dead and to preserve carefully the bones 
of their Relatives, in order that they may repose 
after their death in the same spot. Never would 
we have believed that our Christians would so soon 
renounce this claim of affection so firmly implanted 
in Nature; but Faith is a sword that severs the Soul 
from the body, and children from their Fathers. 
"Let us not," added these Christians, "profane 
the :M:ysteries that are taught us, when we see souls 



32 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


ons des ames de chiens & de beftes brutes, ains 
publions par tout les auantages de la Foy; mais fur 
tout, que nofire vie & nos exemples faffent connoiftre 
que nous auons la Foy plus auant que fur Ie bout des 
léures. 
DIE V beniffe ces bon propos. Quoy qu'il en foit, 
nous voyons plus clair que iamais, que Ie Ciel veut 
faire quelque [22J chofe. II a fes Ames defiinées 
pour Ie Paradis, autant dans ce Païs Barbare, que 
dans l'Europe; pas vne ne perira: quand mefme 
elle íeroit dans Ie milieu de nos plus cruels Ennemis 
& en vn lieu dépourueu de toutes les voyes de Salut, 
nous la mettrons dans Ie Ciel, lors mefme qu'elle 
femblera plus efioignée de fon bon-hetH. En voicy 
vn exemple: 
L'Efié dernier, quelques Captifs de. guerre furent 
diuifez par Ie Païs, afin que chaque Nation puft fe 
vanger fur ces pauures Viétimes des pertes de leurs 
Parens encore toutes fanglantes, qui animoient leur 
cruauté. Nos Peres y coururent fans delay, les vns 
au Bourg de la Conception, les autres à celuy de 
fainét Michel, les autres pouffent plus auant, & apres 
treize ou quatorze lieuës de chemin Ie plus dange- 
reux, pour la cruauté des Iroquois, qui fait dans les 
Hurons, à peine arriuerent-ils de iour, vne heure 
auant l'execution. II faut fendre la preffe, receuoir 
les iniures, & entendre mille blafphemes contre 
DIE V d'vne troupe d'impies qui f' oppofent au bon- 
heur de leurs Ennemis, & voudroient leur faire endu- 
rer en leur [23] Ame autant de fupplices, qu'ils en 
font fouffrir au corps, mais l' amour d'vne Arne à qui 
on veut ouurir Ie Ciel, fe fait chemin par tout. Tous 
ces pauures Captifs ouurent bien-toft & leur cæur & 



1642-43J 


RELA TION OF I642 


33 


of dogs and of brute beasts; but let us publish every- 
where the advantages of the Faith. Above all, let 
our lives and our examples show that our Faith does 
not rest merely on our lips." 
May GOD bless these good resolutions. In any 
case, we see more clearly than ever that Heaven will 
do [22] something. It has its Souls destined for 
Paradise, as much in this Barbarous Country as in 
Europe. Not one shall perish; were one in the midst 
of our most cruel Enemies, and in a place devoid of 
all means of Salvation, we will place it in Heaven, 
even when it seems the furthest from its happiness. 
Here is an instance: 
Last Summer, some Prisoners of war were divided 
throughout the Country in order that each Nation 
might revenge itself upon these unfortunate Victims 
for the still recent loss of their Relatives, which in- 
flamed their cruelty. Our Fathers hastened to them 
without delay. Some went to the Village of la Con- 
ception; others to that of saint Michel: others pro- 
ceeded still further, and after a journey of thirteen 
or fourteen leagues through that part of the Huron 
Country which the ferocity of the Iroquois rendered 
most dangerous, they arrived by day, barely an hour 
before the execution. They had to force a passage 
through the crowd, receiving insults, and hearing 
a thousand blasphemies against GOD, from a band 
of impious men who were opposed to the happi- 
ness of their Enemies and who wished to make 
them endure [23] as much torment in their Souls 
as they inflict on their bodies. But love for a Soul, 
to whom one desires to open Heaven, will make 
its way anywhere. All these unfortunate Captives 
soon opened their hearts, and their hopes to the 



34 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[V OL. 23 


leur efperances aux nouuelles du Paradis; les feux 
dont its fentent déia la cruauté, leur font apprehender 
plus viuement les flammes de 1 'Enfer: ils reconnoiffent 
DIE v, luy demande mifericorde, & dans ce dernier 
aéte tragique de leur vie, reçoiuent des gages affeu- 
rez du bon-heur qui les attendoit dans Ie Ciel. He- 
las! feray-ie feul qui ioüiray de ce Bien, f'écrioit 
doucement Ie plus ieune de tous, à peine aagé de 
dix-neuf à vingt ans, auez-vous eu pitié de mes com- 
pagnons de fupplice? leur a-t'on annoncé ces Veritez 
fi importantes & fi inconnuës? En vn mot, la Chari- 
té Ie preffe déia plus que la douleur d'vne main qu'on 
luy auoit tout fraifchement coupée. 
En mefme temps quafi tout Ie Pais efioit animé 
contre nous. Par tout on ne crioit qu'aux Traifires, 
& fans doute it yauoit grand fuiet de Ie croire. Dés 
l'Hyuer precedent, que Ie P. lean de Brebeuf [24] 
efioit allé en Million dans la Nation N eutre; Ie bruit 
auoit couru qu'en ce voyage les Ennemis ayans traité 
fecrettement auec luy, l'auoient corrompu par pre- 
fens, & qu'on verroit en fon temps les funefies effets 
de cette trahifon. Au retour de cette Million, Ie 
cours de nos affaires nous obligea d'enuoyer à Kebec 
Ie mefme Pere. Pour cet effet nous équipâmes deux 
Canots de quatre François, & fix Sauuages, tant Chre- 
fiiens que Catechumenes, qui ayans les premiers 
defcendu la Riuiere, échaperent heureufement trois 
rencontres des troupes lroquoifes dans lefquelles tom- 
berent cinq Canots de Hurons, qui fuiuoient vn ou 
deux iours apres. Le bruit confus de ces nouuelles, 
fit paffer pour veritez certaines les foupçons de 
l'Hyuer, qui déja auoient alteré les efprits: Mais plus 
encore, quand quelque temps aprés vn malheureux 



1642-43] 


RELA TIOJ\T OF I6p 


35 


tidings of Paradise. The fires, the pain from which 
they already felt, inspired them with still greater 
dread of the flames of Hell. They acknowledged 
GOD, craved his mercy, and, in this last tragic 
act of their lives, received a sure pledge of the hap- 
piness that awaited them in Heaven. "Alas! " grate- 
fully exclaimed the youngest of all, who was barely 
nineteen or twenty years of age, "shall I alone 
enjoy this Blessing? Have you had pity on my com- 
panions in suffering? Have they been told of these 
so important and so unknown Truths? to In a word, 
he was more moved by Charity than by the pain that 
he suffered from a recently-severed hand. 
At the same time, nearly the whole Country was 
incensed against us. "\Ve were denounced on all 
sides as Traitors, and doubtless there was very good 
reason for believing it. During the previous Winter 
Father Jean de Brebeuf [24] had gone on a :Mission 
to the N eutral Nation, and the rumor had spread that 
on that journey the Enemies had treated secretly with 
him, and had bribed him by presents, and that in due 
time the disastrous effects of this treachery would 
be felt. On his return from that Mission, we were 
compelled, in the course of our affairs, to send the 
same Father to Kebec. To that end we manned two 
Canoes with four Frenchmen and six Savages, both 
Christians and Catechumens, who, being the first to go 
down the River, fortunately escaped three encounters 
with Iroquois bands, in which five Canoes of Hurons 
who followed a day or two after were attacked. The 
vague rumors of these occurrences caused them to 
regard as certainly true the suspicions aroused 
during the Winter, which had already agitated their 
minds. But this was still more the case when, some 



36 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Huron, qui ayant brûlé fes liens f'eftoit efchapé des 
mains des Iroquois, maintint publiquement auoir 
entendu de la bouche des Ennemis, les intelligences 
fecretes qu'ils auoient auec nous: adioûtant mefme 
que Ie P. de Brebeuf [25] leur auoit par1é au ren- 
contre, & receu d'eux de nouueaux prefens, pour 
falaire de fa trahifon, les ayans aduertis que là mefme 
ils attendirent au paffage quelques Canots qui Ie 
íuiuoient d'vn iour, & que c'eftoit vne proye affeurée 
pour eux. 
En fuite de cela, eft-ce merueille qu'on eut de 
mauuais deffeins contre nous? mais qui met fa con- 
fiance en Dieu, entend en affeurance Ie bruit de ces 
tempeftes. Sa proteétion eft fi fenfible fur nous & 
fon amour fi continuel, pour nous preferuer des pe- 
rils qui nous enuirõnent de toutes parts, que cela feul 
nous feroit croire affeurément qu'il veut faire mife- 
ricorde à tous ces Peuples, puifque ce ne peut eftre 
que pour eux, qu'il nous conferue d'vne Prouidence 
fi forte & fi amoureufe. En fin, Ie temps & Ie retour 
des Hurons qui eftoient defcendus de compagnie auec 
Ie P. de Brebeuf, diffiperent to utes ces calomnies. 



1642 -43] 


RELA TION OF I6p 


31 


time afterward, a wretched Huron, who had burned 
his bonds and escaped from the hands of the Iro- 
quois, asserted publicly that he had heard from the 
mouths of the Enemies the secret understanding that 
they had with us. He even added that Father de 
Brebeuf [25] had spoken to them when he met them; 
had received new presents from them, as a reward 
for his treachery; and had told them to lie in wait 
on that very spot for the passage of some Canoes that 
were following him, a day's journey behind, and 
that these would be a sure prey for them. 
After all this, is it to be wondered that evil designs 
were harbored against us? But whosoever places his 
trust in God listens in security to the roaring of such 
tempests. So manifest is his protection over us, and 
so constant is his love in preserving us from the perils 
that surround us on all sides, that this alone would 
suffice to make us firmly believe that he will have 
mercy on all these Peoples, since it can be but on 
their account that he guards us with a Providence so 
powerful and so loving. Finally, time, and the re- 
turn of the Hurons who had gone down in company 
with Father de Brebeuf, dispelled all these calum- 
nies. 



38 


LES RELA TI01VS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


[26J CHAPITRE III. 


DE LA MISSION DE SCTE. MARIE AUX ATARON- 
CHRONONS. 


C ETTE Maifon de Sainéte Marie, porte auffi Ie 
titre de Million, à raifon de quatre Bourgs 
afíez proches qui en font dependans. Le Pere 
Pierre Chaftelain en a cultiué deux, de fainét Loüis & 
de S. Denys. Le P. Pierre Pijart a eu Ie foin des deux 
autres, de fainéte Anne & de fainét François Xauier. 
Le P. Pierre Pijart trouua d'abord les efprits fort 
reuefches, qui luy fermoient & leurs oreilles & leurs 
Cabanes, refufans d'efcouter ce qu'ils n'entendoient 
qu'auec vn efprit de blafpheme: :Mais en fin fa pa- 
tience les a apriuoifez pour la plufpart, & en a con- 
duit quelques-vns iufqu'à ce poinét qu'i1s connoifíent 
la Verité, & fe plaignent d'eux-mefmes de n'auoir pas 
afíez de forces pour embrafíer vn fi grand bien. 
[27J Le P. Pierre Chaftelain a par tout efté bien 
venu, & entr'autres ayant fait rencontre de quelques 
bons efprits. leur a fait penetrer fi auant la fainéteté 
de nos Myfteres, qu'ils en parlent tres-hautement, 
iufqu'à inftruire & toucher les autres. l\1ais ce fruiét 
n' eft pas meur, & leur Foy n' eft pas encores affez 
forte dans l' occafion, pour en faire eftat, comme de 
perfonnes gagnées à Dieu; c' eft à luy de faire Ie 
coup, & nous deuons eftre con tens d'auoir jetté & 
arroufé cette Semence. 
Les Peres n' eftans pas obligez de faire aucun 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I6.p 


39 


[26] CHAPTER III. 


OF THE MISSION OF STE. MARIE A
IONG THE 
A T ARONCHRONO
S. 


T HIS House of Sainte :Marie also bears the title 
of Mission, on account of four Villages close 
by, which are dependent thereon. Father 
Pierre Chastelain has had the direction of two- 
those of saint Louis and St. Denys. Father Pierre 
Pijart has had charge of the two others-those of 
sainte Anne and of saint François Xavier. l 
At first, Father Pierre Pijart met with very stub- 
born-minded persons, who closed their ears and their 
Cabins to him and refused to listen to what they 
heard, except in a spirit of blasphemy. But, in the 
end, his patience tamed the majority of them, and 
influenced some of them to such an extent that they 
know the Truth, and complain of themselves that 
they have not strength enough to embrace so great 
a blessing. 
[27] Father Pierre Chastelain was welcomed every- 
where, and, having met among them some right- 
minded persons, he caused these to enter so far into 
the holiness of our :Mysteries that they speak very 
highly of them and even instruct and impress oth- 
ers. But this fruit is not ripe, and their Faith is not 
strong enough at present to regard them as persons 
who are won over to God. It is for him to accom- 
plish the result, and we must rest satisfied with 
having sown and watered this Seed. 



40 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


fejour dehors, veu la proximité des Bourgs; outre les 
courfes qu'ils y ont faites, ont eu Ie moyen de vac- 
quer à la reception des Chrefiiens, & à l'infiruétion 
de plufieurs infideles, qui pafíans par cette Maifon, 
y reçoiuent des enfeignemens, que quelquefois on 
n'eufi pas pû ailleurs leur donner auec tant d'aduan- 
tage. Souuent Ie Cerf reçoit Ie coup de mort en vn 
endroit, & tom be aux abois loin de là. Souuent auffi 
nous auons veu qu'vn Infidele aura receu Ie coup de 
vie en cette Maifon, qui efiant retourné dans fon [28] 
Bourg, fe jette entre les bras des Miffionnaires qui y 
font, & leur de man de Ie Baptefme. Pourueu qu'vn 
iour nous les voyons tous dans Ie Ciel, n'importe où 
Dieu leur aura fait mifericorde. 



1642-43] 


Rl:.:LA TION OF I642 


41 


Although the Fathers are not obliged to make a 
long stay outside, owing to the proximity of the 
Villages, nevertheless, in addition to the visits they 
have made there, they have found means to attend 
to the reception of Christians .and the teaching of 
many infidels, who, passing through this House, re- 
ceive therein instruction that could not be so advan- 
tageously given to them elsewhere. Often the Hart 
receives its deathblow in one place, and falls dead 
far away from it. Frequently, also, we have observed 
that our Infidel has felt the life-giving influence in 
this House, who, upon returning to his own [28] 
\T i1lage, has thrown himself in to the arms of the 
:l\Iissionaries who dwell there, and has asked them 
for Baptism. Provided we see them all one day in 
Heaven, it matters little where God has had mercy 
on them. 



42 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


CHAPITRE IV. 


DE LA MISSION DE LA CONCEPTION, AUX ATIGNA- 
OÜANTAN. 


L E foin de cette :Miffion efi tombé en partage au 
Pere François Ie :Mercier & au P. Paul Rague- 
neau. Et c'efi dans Ie principal Bourg de 
cette Million, qui en porte Ie nom, où nous auons 
recueilly les fruiéts de la Foy, les plus meurs qui 
nous ayent paru dans ce Païs, depuis qu'on y a ietté 
la femence de I' Euangile. Aulli efi-ce en ce Bourg 
où depuis quelques Années nous auons apliqué plus 
fortement nofire trauail. Ie puis dire qu'on y void, 
par la grace de DIE v, vne Eglife formée, & des 
Chrefiiens qui viuent non feulement dans l'exercice 
de la Foy, mais qui triomphent [29J au milieu du 
regne de Sathan, de l'impieté mefme. Ie ne dis pas 
que tout Ie Bourg foit conuerty, ny que Ie nombre 
des Chrefiiens y furpaffe celuy des Infideles; mais 
ie veux dire, que le[urJ courage, leur zele, leur fide- 
lité, leur confiance fe rend viétorieufe de tout ce qui 
s'opofe à leur Vertu, & donnent cent fois plus de 
credit à la fainéteté de nos 11yfteres, que nos paroles 
& nos exemples. On y a veu tous les Chrefiiens 
combatus par les puiffances les plus fortes qui foient 
dans Ie Païs, & Ie mefme iour a efié témoin de leur 
Viétoire, fans que pas vn ait fuccombé, quoy que 
chacun fufi attaqué feparément, fans fçauoir Ie 
courage & la refifiance des autres. 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I6p 


43 


CHAPTER IV. 


OF THE MISSION OF LA COXCEPTIO
 AMONG THE 
ATIGNAOUANTAN. 


T HE charge of this :Mission has fallen to the share 
of Father François Ie l\lercier and Father Paul 
Ragueneau. It is in the principal Village of 
this :l\Iission-which bears its name-that we have 
gathered the ripest fruits of the Faith that we have 
seen in this Country since we have sown the seed of 
the Gospel here. It is in this Village also that, for 
some Years, we have most vigorously carried on our 
work. I may say that here is seen, through the 
grace of Go D, a Church established, and Christians 
who not only live in the practice of the Faith, but 
who triumph, [29] in the midst of Satan's reign, over 
impiety itself. I do not assert that the entire Village 
is converted, nor that the number of the Christians 
in it exceeds that of the Infidels; but I mean to say 
that their courage, their zeal, their faithfulness, their 
constancy, prove victorious over everything that is 
opposed to their Virtue, and secure respect for the 
sacredness of our :Mysteries a hundred times more 
than our words or our examples can do. "\Ve have 
seen all the Christians assailed by the most powerful 
influences in the Country, and the same day witnessed 
their Victory, without a single one yielding, although 
each was attacked separately and was not aware of 
the firmness and resistance of the others. 
It was in the middle of '\Tinter; everywhere 



44 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Ce fut au milieu de l'Hyuer, que tout efioit remply 
de fuperfiitions Diaboliques, & que les puiffances 
d'Enfer s'efioient fait rendre deux iours entiers vn 
homage continuel, promettant la guerifon d'vne 
malade. Le plus impie qui foit dans Ie Bourg, auoit 
entrepris cette cure, auec l' aide de fon Demon; mais 
voyant tout fon art fans effet, il fe plaint de ce que 
les Chrefiiens ne paroiffoient [30] point dans vne 
Fefie fi publique: & fur tout il demande qu'vn nou- 
ueau Chrefiien nommé Charles Tfondatfaa, joigne fa 
voix auec la fienne, pour inuocquer plus fortement 
l'affifiance du Demon, qui deuoit rendre la fanté à 
cette malade. C'efi Ie plus noble employ des Capi- 
taines, d'obeir à ces Impofieurs. On tient Confeil, 
l'affaire efi jugée d'importance, les principaux font 
deputez par Ie Public, pour attaquer en mefme temps 
tous les Chrefiiens. 
Charles efi tout efionné de voir trois des plus 
confiderables Capitaines entrer en fa Ca bane. Mon 
Dieu, s'écrie-t'il dans Ie fonds de fon cæur, arrefiez 
l'effort de ces efc1aues de Satan, qui viennent me 
porter quelque chofe de fa part: Confeillez-moy, 
mon Dieu, dans ce rencontre. II ne fçait pas ce qui 
les amene, mais i1 fe doute bien qu' efians dans Ie 
plus fort de ces ceremonies d'Enfer, l'efprit de ces 
malheureux n'efi poffedé que du Demon. Bonjour, 
mes freres, leur dit-il; puifque vous me venez voir, 
c'efi à moy à vous entretenir. Ie vous diray les pen- 
fées que i'auois de vous-autres, i1 n'ya pas long- 
temps: [3 I] Ie vous porte compaffion, vous obeiffez à 
vn maifire Ie plus infame qu'il y ait au monde, vous 
emploiez tous les iours vofire voix à proc1amer fes 
commandemens, ce n' efi pas vous qui commandez, 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


45 


abounded Diabolical superstitions, and the powers of 
Hell had caused continual homage to be rendered to 
them for two entire days, promising the cure of a 
sick person. The most impious man in the Village 
had undertaken the cure, with the assistance of his 
Demon; but, seeing that all his arts were of no avail, 
he complained that the Christians did not make their 
appearance [30J in so public a Festival, and, in partic- 
ular, he asked that a new Christian, named Charles 
Tsondatsaa, should unite his voice to his, more stren- 
uously to invoke the aid of the Demon who was to 
restore the health of the sick person. It is the high- 
est duty of the Captains to obey these Impostors. 
A Council was held; the matter was deemed impor- 
tant; the chief men were deputed by Public author- 
ity to attack all the Christians at the same time. 
Charles was greatly surprised at seeing three of the 
leading Captains enter his Cabin. ":My God!" he 
exclaimed in the depths of his heart, "stay the 
efforts of these slaves of Satan, who come to bring 
me something on his behalf. Counsel me, 0 God! 
in this emergency." He did not know what brought 
them, but he was quite sure that, as these Hellish 
ceremonies were at their height, the minds of those 
wretches were possessed only by the Devil. "Good 
day, my brothers," he said to them. "As you have 
come to see me, it is for me to entertain you. I will 
tell you the thoughts that I had of you not long ago. 
[3IJ I feel compassion for you; you obey a master 
who is the most infamous in the world; you use your 
voices every day to proclaim his commandments. It 
is not you who command, but he. 'Vhy do not all 
the people believe? and why do not you yourselves 
believe the first of all? Then would you really be 



46 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


mais luy. Que tout Ie monde ne croyt-il? & vous- 
mefmes, que ne croyez-vous les premiers.'I ce feroit 
bien alors que vous feriez veritablement Capitaines, 
qui obeiffans à DIE V feul, vous rendriez no fire Pais 
Ie plus heureux du monde. Apres cela, comme il 
ne manque pas d'efprit ny de langue, il leur declare 
l'equité des Commandemens de DIE v, la verité & 
la grandeur de fes promeffes, & Ie malheur eternel 
de tous ceux qui refufent de luy obeir. 
Comme i1 ne trouuoit point de fin, l\leffieurs les 
Capitaines auoient bien de la peine à trouuer quel- 
que entrée fauorable. En fin Ie plus hardy f'auance: 
Mon frere, luy dit-il, ie ne viens pas icy tout feul ny 
de mon propre mouuement, Ie Confeil nous a enuoiez 
pour te porter vne parole, mais ie n' ofe parler. Non, 
ce n'efi pas moy qui te parle, mais toutes ces Caba- 
neST As tu veu cette malade languiffante? [32J elle 
n'en peut plus, & n'a de voix qu'autant qu'i1luy en 
faut, pour te dire: Tfondatfaa, a yes pitié de moy. 
Tout Ie Public f'efi emploié depuis deux iours pour 
elle, mais nos remedes font fans force, n'efians pas 
animez de ta voix.... vn tel, defire que ce foit toy qui 
prefide auec luy à la ceremonie: ne refufe pas au 
Public cette faueur, pour vn iour feulement. 
:Mes freres, leur replique-t'il, vous fçauez que ie 
croy; cette Cabane efi fainéte; fi ie pechois, quel 
exemple donneroif-ie aux autres qui font fur Ie poinét 
d'efire Baptifez? Commandez-moy quand nous irons 
en guerre, de me jetter dans Ie peril, quand ie ferois 
moy feul, ie feray tefie à l'Ennemy; mais plufiofi 
mourir que pecher. 
Mon frere, luy dit vn Apofiat, ce n'eít pas vn mal 
fans remede; nous venons de parler aux Robes noires 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


47 


Captains who, by obeying GOD alone, would make 
our Country the happiest on earth." After this, as 
he is not deficient in wit or in language, he declared 
to them the equity of GOD'S commandments, the 
truth and greatness of his promises, and the eternal 
misery of all who refuse to obey him. 
As his speech had no end, :Messieurs the Captains 
had great difficulty in securing any opportunity for 
answer. At last, the boldest advanced. "My broth- 
er," said he, " I do not come here alone, or of my 
own accord. The Council has sent us to say a word 
to thee, but I dare not speak. No, it is not I who 
speak, but all the Cabins. Hast thou seen that sick 
woman who languishes? [32J She is exhausted, and 
her voice has but strength enough to say to thee: 
'Tsondatsaa, have pity on me!' All the People 
have striven for her during the past two days, but 
our remedies are without effect, not being animated 
by thy voice. Such a one desires that thou shouldst 
be the one to preside with him at the ceremony. Do 
not refuse the People that favor, for a single day." 
" :ßly brothers," he replied, " you know that I am 
a believer. This Cabin is holy. \Vere I to sin, what 
example would I give to those who are on the point 
of being Baptized? Command me, when we shall 
go to war, to put myself in a dangerous place, and, 
even if I were alone, I would make head against the 
Enemy; but I would rather die than commit sin." 
" 1Iy brother," said an Apostate to him, " this is 
not an evil without remedy. vVe have just spoken 
to the black Gowns who teach thee. It is true that 
they do not wish to exhort thee to obey us on this 
point; but they have promised us that to-morrow 
they will wipe out thy sin. Courage, therefore, and 



48 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


qui t'enfeignent; i1 eft vray qu'i1s ne veulent pas 
t'exhorter à nous obeir en ce poinét, mais ils nous 
ont promis que demain ils t'effaceront ton peché. 
Courage done, & ne crains pas vn peché qui demain 
ne fera plus, quand tu te feras ConfeíIé. 
[33J Le Diable eft bien rufé; Mais vn cæur qui a 
pour fa deuife: Pluftoft mourir que de pecher, n' eft 
pas pour eftre pris dedans ces pieges. Le combat 
n'en demeura pas là, mais toûjours ce nouueau 
Fidele, eft femblable à foy-mefme. lIs tâchent en fin 
de corrompre fa Femme, mais ils trouuent par tout 
vn genereux refus. 
A mefme temps vn Capitaine plus fougueux que 
ceux-cy, eftoit entré en la Cabane de quelques autres 
Chreftiens. II f'adreíIe au plus jeune de tous: :Mon 
nepueu, f'écrie-t'il d'vne voix infernale, fais tréue 
pour vn iour, de la Foy, noftre Pais fe perd, les 
malades fe meurent, où fuirons-nous, pour éuiter la 
mort? pourquoy vous retirez-vous de nos dances? 
pourquoy refufez-vous de rendre cette charité au 
Public? Ce font les Chreftiens qui nous tuënt, puif- 
qu'ils ne nous veulent pas fecourir. Viens, mon 
nepueu, danfer auiourd huy, & demain tu reprendras 
les exercices de la Foy. 
Ce jeune Chreftien répond à tout cela, fans dire 
mot. II met fa tefte entre fes jambes, felon la cou- 
ftume du Pais, c'eft à dire qu'il n'en fera rien. Le 
Chef de la [34J Cabane n'eft pas content de ce fimple 
refus, il veut vne proteftation plus viue de la Foy qui 
regne dans toute fa Famille. Tu perdras icy ton 
temps, dit-il au Capitaine, les enfans mefmes ne 
t'obeiront pas: Ie Diable n'a point icy d'empire où 
DIE V feu I eft Ie 1Iaiítre. Ie porte la parole pour 



1642-43] 


RELATION OF I6p 


49 


fear not a sin that to-morrow will no longer exist, 
when thou shalt have Confessed." 
[33J The Devil is very cunning, but a heart whose 
motto is " Death before sin" is not to be taken in 
such snares. The struggle did not end there, but 
this new Believer remained ever consistent. Final- 
ly, they endeavored to bribe his \Vife, but they met 
at all points a brave refusal. 
At the same time, a Captain, more impetuous than 
they, had entered the Cabin of some other Christians. 
Addressing the youngest, he said to him in a fiendish 
voice: "My nephew, make a truce for one day with 
the Faith. Our Country is going to ruin: the sick 
are dying. Whither can we flee to avoid death? 
'Vhy do you keep away from our dances? 'Vhy do 
you refuse to do this act of kindness to the People? 
It is the Christians who kill us, since they will not 
help us. Come and dance to-day, my nephew, and 
to-morrow thou shalt resume the practice of the 
Faith. " 
To all this the young Christian answered not a 
word. He bowed his head between his knees, accord- 
ing to the custom of the Country, meaning thereby 
that he would do nothing of the kind. The Head 
of the [34J Cabin was not satisfied with so simple a 
refusal; he preferred a more energetic protestation 
of the Faith that reigned in all his Family. "Thou 
wilt lose thy time here," he said to the Captain; 
"even the children will not obey thee. The Devil 
has no authority here, where GOD alone is :\laster. 
I speak in the name of all, for I know that their Faith 
is like unto mine. 'Ve Inay, indeed, all be mas- 
sacred; but no one can force us to pay the homage 
that you render to the DeviL" 



50 


LES RELA TIù
VS DES JÉSVITES 


[VOL. 23 


tous, fçachant bien que leur Foy efi femblable à la 
mienne: on peut bien tous nous maffacrer, mais non 
pas extorquer de nous cet hommage que vous rendez 
au Diable. 
Ce Capitaine entre en fureur, redouble fes cris, fes 
menaffes, & fes blafphemes contre Dieu. En fin il 
efi contraint de quitter la partie, voyant mefme que 
les enfans Ie regardoient d'vn æil auffi affeuré que 
f'illes euft fimplement vifitez. 
II n'y eut pas vne Cabane où habitafi quelque 
Chrefiien, qui ce iour là ne rendifi témoignage que 
leur Foy efioit plus forte que Ie pouuoir de tous les 
Capitaines. 11 n'y eut pas mefme iufqu'à vn pauure 
petit Homme, nommé :Mathias Atieffa, qui eftant Ie 
rebut de tous ceux de fon Bourg, eut toutefois affez 
d'efprit [35J & de courage, pour arrefier l'infolence 
d'vn Capitaine qui Ie vouloit forcer à luy obeir en ce 
poind. Ceffe de croire, luy dit en fin ce Capitaine, 
apres mille efforts inutiles. Et moy & mon fils, 
répondit-il, nous mourrons pluftofi. Mais fi ton fils 
tombe malade? Pluftoft, répond Ie pere, ie Ie verray 
mourir, que de me feruir de vos remedes & danfes 
Diaboliques. Que te donnent ces Robes noires pour 
croire de Ia forte? Le Paradis, réplique-t'il. Tu 
parIes bien refolument pour vn Gueux; encore f'ils 
te donnoient queIque robe pour te couurir. Ie feray 
riche dans Ie Ciel; mais à ce que ie vois (répondit-il 
au Capitaine, qui autrefois auoit témoigné quelque 
volonté pour la Foy) e'en juftement cela qui t'em- 
pefche de croire, tu ne fonges qu'à la vie prefente & 
non pas à l'Eternité. Ce pauure Homme a plus de 
bonne volonté que d'efprit; mais fi DIE V rend les 
langues des Enfans difertes, ce n'ell pas d'auiour- 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I6.p 


51 


The Captain became furious, and redoubled his 
cries, his threats, and his blasphemies against God. 
In the end, he was compelled to abandon his design 
when he saw that even the children looked at him 
with as untroubled a gaze as if he were merely 
paying a visit. 
There was not one Cabin where any Christian 
dwelt that did not bear witness, on that day, that 
their Faith was stronger than the power of all the 
Captains. Even one poor little 
lan, named )'lathias 
Atiessa, who was the butt of the Village, had never- 
theless sufficient wit [35] and courage to check the 
insolence of a Captain who tried to compel him to 
obedience in that respect. "Cease to believe," the 
Captain said to him at last, after many useless efforts. 
"Both my son and I," he replied, "would sooner 
die." "But if thy son should fall ill? .. "I would 
rather see him die," replied the father, " than have 
recourse to your Diabolical remedies and dances." 
" 'Vhat do the black Gowns give thee, to induce thee 
to believe thus? .. "Paradise," he replied. "Thou 
speakest very boldly for a Beggar, even if they gave 
thee a robe to cover thee." "I shall be rich in Heav- 
en; but from what I see" (he replied to the Captain, 
who had formerly sho-wn some inclination toward 
the Faith) " it is precisely that which prevents thee 
from believing,-thou think est only of this life, and 
not of Eternity." This poor :Man has more good 
will than wit; but if GOD makes the tongues of Chil- 
dren eloquent, this is not the first time that he has 
given to the Souls of the weakest the means of con- 
founding those who think that they are the greatest 
minds of the Earth. 
'Vhen evening came, the Christians [36] felt great- 



52 


LES RELA TIOiVS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


dhuy qu'il donne aux Ames les plus foibles, dequoy 
confondre ceux qui penfent eftre des plus forts efprits 
de la Terre. 
Le foir eftant venu, ce fut à ces ChreíHens [3 6 ] 
vne confolation bien fenfible, de fçauoir l'vn de 
l'autre, ce qu'illeur eftoit arriué. Les Diables, difoit 
Charles, ont paru aujourd'uy dedans ma Cabane, oüy 
trois Diables d'Enfer, mais reueftus de chair; ils ont 
voulu la renuerfer, mais DIEV la foûtenuë. C'eft 
.ainfi qu'ils en donnent toute la gloire à DIE V . 
Ces attaques n' ont pas efté pour vn iour feulement, 
ce feroit en eftre quite à trop bon marché. A peine 
y a-il aucun iour en l' Année, que quelque Demon 
ne fe faffe rendre vn homage particulier: mais cõme 
dans Ie Chriftianifme chaque Sainét ayant eu fon 
lour, il fe fait vne Fefte plus celebre où tous les 
Sainéts font honorez de Compagnie, de mefme auffi 
dans ce Pais, chaque Demon ayant efté honoré à fon 
tour, il fe fait durant l'Hyuer vne folennité publique, 
.où les Demons fe font tous honorer en mefme iour. 
On appelle cette celebrité Ononhoüaroia, ou renuer- 
fement de tefte, parce que toute la jeuneffe, & mefmes 
les femmes & enfans, courent comme des furieux 
exigeans qu' on obeiffe à leurs Demons, en leur faifant 
prefent d'vne chofe qu'ils [37J propofent auec enigme 
& qui leur a efté diétée en fonge. 
On ne pû cette Année tirer de nos Chreftiens aucuns 
de ces homages, ils en ont refufé conftamment mefme 
tous leurs intimes. Ce pauure 1YIathias, dont ie viens 
de parler, feft veu arraché de la place, il a efcouté 
les menaces qu'on luy faifoit, & a confideré la hache 
déja leuée deffus fa tefte, fans iamais auoir ouuert la 
bouche pour dire vn mot qu'on vouloit tirer de luy. 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


53 


ly consoled at learning from one another what had 
happened to them. "The Devils, to said Charles, " ap- 
peared to-day in my Cabin,- yes, three Devils from 
Hell, but clothed with flesh. They wished to over- 
turn it, but GOD held it up." Thus did they attrib- 
ute all the glory thereof to GOD. 
These attacks were not for one day only; that 
would have been escaping too easily. There is hard- 
ly a day in the Year on which some Demon does not 
have special homage rendered unto him. But, as 
among Christians, after each Saint has had his own 
Day, there is a more solemn Festival on which all the 
Saints are honored in Company, so likewise in this 
Country., after each Demon has been honored in his 
turn, there is a public celebration during \Vinter, at 
which all the Demons are honored on the same day. 
This celebration is called Ononhouaroia, or " upset- 
ting of brain," because all the youth, and even the 
women and children, run about as if they were mad, 
insisting upon obedience being paid to their Demons 
by making them a present of something which they 
[37J proffer with an enigma, and which has been 
suggested to them in a dream. 
This Year, it was found impossible to secure from 
our Christians any such homage; they always refused 
it, even for all their intimate friends. Poor Mathias, 
whom I have just mentioned, was lifted up from the 
ground, heard the threats uttered against him, and 
saw the hatchet already raised over his head, without 
opening his lips to say a single word that they wished 
to draw from him. 
An hour afterward, they did the same to another 
Christian named Pierre Andation, and the same 
Silence was his sole complaint. His Wife, a Chris- 



54 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Vne heure apres, on fit Ie mefme à vn autre Chre- 
{lien, nommé Pierre Andation, & Ie mefme Silence en 
fut auffi toute fa plainte. Sa Femme, Chreftienne 
comme luy, qui Ie tenoit d'vn bras pour arrefter 
celuy qui Ie tiroit auec violence, l'accufe doucemêt 
quelque tëps apres, de n'auoir pas eu affez d'affeu- 
rance puifque la fuëur luy en eftoit venuë par tout Ie 
corps. Vn des Peres fe trouuant là heureufement, 
eut la confolation d'eftre témoin de toute cette fide- 
lité. 
Ce n' eft pas feulement dans les Hommes que fe 
rencontre cette force; la Foy ne trouue point de 
difference entre les fexes, [38] elle affermit auffi Ie 
courage des Femmes. L'Efté dernier, Ie plus fameux 
Magicien qui foit dans Ie Païs, fut confu1té, quel fuc- 
cés on deuoit efperer des bleds qui eftoient fur terre. 
II répondit deux chofes: Premierement, Qu'il falloit 
que chaqu'vn allaft tous les iours dedans fon champ, 
jetter du petun dans Ie feu & l'y confommer en I hon- 
neur du Demon qu'il adore; criant à haute voix cette 
formule: Efcoute, Ciel, goufte de mon petun, ayes 
pitié de nous. 
Secondement, il ordonna, que pas vn n'allaft cueil- 
lir du chanvre (c'eft Ie temps où on va d'ordinaire 
cueillir dans les campagnes defertes, vne certaine 
herbe fauuage dont on fait du fil à retz:) Et ce mal- 
heureux adioûta, que fi en cela on manquoit à obeir 
à fon Demon, tous les bleds eftoient perdus. Le 
commandement eft incontinent proclamé par les 
Capitaines. Mais les Chreftiens ne font pas pour 
facrifier au Diable, pluftofi refolus de mourir de faim: 
Et deux fæurs qui f'étoient donné parole d'aller Ie 
lendemain cueillir du chanvre, croyans qu'elles ne 



1642-43] 


RELATION OF r642 


55 


tian like himself, who held him by one arm in order 
to stop the man who pulled him violently, gently 
reproached him some time afterward with not having 
had enough confidence, for the sweat had broken out 
all over his body. One of the Fathers, who was for- 
tunately on the spot, had the consolation of witness- 
ing all this faithfulness. 
It is not only among the :1Ien that one meets such 
strength. Faith finds no difference between the 
sexes; [38] it fortifies the courage of the Women as 
well. Last Summer, the most famous Magician in 
the Country was consulted to learn what success 
might be expected from the corn that had been 
planted. He gave two answers,- in the first place, 
that it was necessary that each one should go every 
day to his field, throw some tobacco on the fire, and 
burn it in honor of the Demon whom he worshiped, 
calling aloud this form of prayer: " Listen, 0 Sky! 
Taste my tobacco; have pity on us." 
Secondly, he ordered that no one should go to 
gather hemp (that was the time when they usually 
go to the untilled plains, in order to gather a certain 
wild plant, from which twine for their nets is made).2 
And the wretch added that, if they failed to obey 
therein his Demon, all the grain would be lost. This 
command was at once proclaimed by the Captains; 
but the Christians would not offer sacrifices to the 
Devil, being resolved to die of hunger, rather than 
do so. Two sisters, who had agreed together to go 
out on the following day to gather hemp, thought 
that they could not without sin [39] break this agree- 
men t; they went with bowed heads, and returned in 
the sight of all the Infidels. Complaints of this were 
made to the Captains, who proclaimed through the 



56 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


pourroient pas íans peché [39] rompre cette partie; y 
vont tefte baiffée, & en reuiennent à la veuë de tous 
les Infideles. Les Capitaines en reçoiuent les plain- 
tes, ils vont crier par tout Ie Bourg qu'il ne falloit 
pas eíperer vne heureuíe recolte, que les Chreftiens 
íeroient cauie de la famine, & qu'il eftoit bien vray 
que la Foy eftoit la ruine du Pais. Tous accuíent 
ces pauures innocentes, mais Ie cæur d'vn Fidele ne 
craint que Dieu, & Ie peché. Nous ne íçauons fi 
DIE V a voulu recompeníer leur Foy & punir l'impi- 
eté des autres, mais nous auons efté témoins que la 
pluípart du bled ne vint pas à maturité, & de ceux 
nommément qui auoient íacrifié au Diable, nos Chre- 
ftiens ayans fait vne recolte affez heureuíe. 
Quelques mois par apres, loríque Ie Bourg trem- 
bloit de peur de l'Ennemy: Ne nous venez pas 
íecourir, nous diíoient ces deux bonnes íæurs, quand 
bien les Iroquois viendroient brûler nos palliffades, 
puiíque les Capitaines excitent tout Ie monde au íer- 
uice du Diable. Mais ie ne íçay fi leur zele n'eftoit 
point du genre de celuy de ces deux Freres Boanerges, 
au moins auoient-elles quelque choíe de [40] plus, puif- 
qu'elles meímes euffent pery dans l'embrazement de 
leur Bourg. 



1642 - 43] 


RELA TION OF L642 


57 


Village that a good harvest could not be expected, 
that the Christians would be the cause of famine, and 
that it was quite true that the Faith was the ruin of 
the Country. Everyone accused these poor inno- 
cent women, but the hearts of the Faithful fear only 
God and sin. We do not know whether GOD willed 
to reward their Faith, and to punish the impiety of 
the others; but we were witnesses that most of the 
corn did not ripen, especially that belonging to those 
who had sacrificed to the Devil, while our Christians 
gathered a fair crop. 
Some months afterward, when the Village trembled 
with fear of the Enemy, these two good sisters said 
to us, " Do not come to our succor, even if the Iro- 
quois come and burn our palisades, because the Cap- 
tains are urging all the people to the service of the 
DeviL" But I do not know whether their zeal was 
not like that of the Brothers Boanerges,- at least 
these women had somewhat [40] more, for they them- 
selves would have perished in the burning of their 
Village. 



58 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[V OL. 23 


CHAPITRE V. 


QVELQVES BONS SENTI MENS DE QUELQUES CHRESTIENS 
DE CETTE MESME MISSION. 


C E n'eft pas feulement en public que les Chre- 
ftiens ont fait paroiftre leur fidelité: Ie Ciel 
en veut auoir des preuues, dont quail luy feul 
en veut eftre témoin. Vn nommé Iofeph Teonde- 
choren, auoit vne fiUe de neuf à dix ans, qu'vne mala- 
die foudaine emporta lors qu'i1 f'y attendoit Ie moins. 
Incontinent les Infideles luy reprochent que cette mort 
eft vn fruiét de la Foy, qu'il auoit embraffée depuis 
Ie maffacre de feu Iofeph Chihoâtenhoüa fon frere 
qu' autrefois fa femme eftoit morte vn jour apres 
qu'on l'auoit baptifée, quoy qu'à l'heure de fon Bap- 
tefme elle fuft pleine de fanté; en vn mot, que fa 
Famille fe voyoit depeuplée depuis qu' on y auoit 
[4 1 ] admis la Foy. Ayans apris cette nouuelle, vn 
Pere va pour Ie confoler; mais vn cæur qui reçoit les 
confolations de D lEV mefme, n'a pas befoin d'autre 
confolation. I1 m'eft aduis, difoit ce bon Chreftien, 
que ie voy ma fille joyeufe deuant moy, fa mort m'a 
plus confolé que fa vie, mon efprit n'en a point efté 
alteré: 11 y a quelque temps que ie l'auois donnée à 
DIEV, i1 en a difpofé, elle eftoit plus à luy qu'à moy. 
Ie ne fay pas beaucoup d'eftat de la vie que nous roul- 
Ions icy bas fur terre, ie ne prife que l'Eternité, & 
les entretiens qu'à iamais nous aurons enfemble. 
Marie Aonetta ve[u]fue de feu Iofeph Chihoâten- 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF r642 


59 


CHAPTER V. 


OF THE GOOD SENTIMENTS OF SOME CHRISTIANS OF 
THIS SAME MISSION. 


N OT only in public have the Christians mani- 
fested their faithfulness. Heaven desires 
proof of the same, whereof it alone, so to 
speak, will be the witness. One Joseph Teondecho- 
ren had a daughter, nine or ten years old, who was 
carried away by a sudden illness when he least 
expected it. The Infidels at once reproached him, 
saying that her death was a result of the Faith. which 
he had embraced after the murder of the late Joseph 
Chihoâtenhoua, his brother; that, some time previ- 
ously, his wife had died a day after having been 
baptized, although at the hour of her Baptism she 
was in good health,- in a word, that his Family was 
being destroyed since they had [4 I] accepted the 
Faith. A Father who had heard the news went to 
console him; but a heart that receives its consolation 
from GOD alone needs no other. "It seems to me," 
said this good Christian, "that I see before me my 
daughter, full of joy; her death has consoled me 
more than her life; my mind has not been disturbed 
by it. Some time ago, I gave her up to Go D; he 
has disposed of her; she belonged to him more than 
to me. I do not place much value upon the life we 
lead here below on earth. I prize Eternity alone, 
and the intercourse that we will have together 
forever. ., 



60 


LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


hoüa, cet infigne Chrefiien, fe comporta auec vn fem- 
blable courage, la mort luy ayant ofié vne petite fille 
de trois ans, nommée Geneuiefue, qui fouuent durant 
fa maladie, monfirant Ie Ciel difoit qu'elle cherchoit 
fon pere, & vouloit aUer auec luy. Les Peres qui 
efioient pour lors à la Conception, quinze iours ou 
trois femaines deuant fa mort, la voyant griefuement 
malade, f'aduiferent de dire quelques Meffes V otiues 
en l'honneur de fa bonne Patronne fainde Geneuiefue, 
[42] pour la prier de procurer à cette petite creature 
ce qui feroit pour fon mieux, ou la vie ou la mort en 
cet efiat d'innocence. II femble que cette bonne 
Sainéte leur voulut faire fentir qu' eUe auoit oüy leur 
requefie, la vie efiant refiée à cette petite fiUe iuf- 
qu'au troifiéme iour de l' An, iour de la fefie de la 
Sainéte, que cette petite Geneuiefue expira. C' efioit 
la premiere qu'vn de nos Peres auoit baptifée arri- 
uant au Païs, & à laqueUe, par væu, i1 auoit donné ce 
Nom, auec prieres à cette bonne Patronne, que 
comme elle deuenoit la Gardienne de cette premiere 
grace, i1luy pleufi fa ire en forte que par fon moyen 
eUe obtint la derniere. Sa mere Aonetta ayant affifié 
à l'enterement de fa fiUe, voyant que fes parens Chre- 
fiiês f'arefioient à pleurer fur la foffe de fon feu 
mary, ne pût arrefier les plus vifs fentimens de fon 
cæur. A quoy bon toutes ces larmes, leur dit elle? 
tafchons à les fuiure là haut dedans Ie Ciel; faifons 
y vne famille toute entiere de Sainéts, feruons tous 
Dieu fidelement: que les mefcroyans recognoiffent 
que nofire Foy n'efi pas morte auec les deffunts, & 
que [43J l'efperance du Paradis efi capable d'arrefier 
nos larmes. 
Vn jeune Homme Chrefiien efiant dans vn voyage, 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


61 


Marie Aonetta, widow of the late Joseph Chihoâ- 
tenhoua, that distinguished Christian, behaved with 
similar courage when death robbed her of a little 
daughter three years old, named Geneviefve, who, 
during her illness, frequently pointed to Heaven say- 
ing that she was looking for her father, and wished 
to go with him. When the Fathers who at that time 
were at la Conception, a fortnight or three weeks be- 
fore her death, saw her grievously ill, they bethought 
themselves of having some Votive Masses said in 
honor of her good Patroness sainte Geneviefve, [42] 
to pray her to obtain for the little creature whatever 
might be best for her,-either life, or death while in 
that state of innocence. It would seem that the good 
Saint wished to show them that she had heard their 
prayer; for life lingered in the little girl until the 
third day of the Year, the feast day of the Saint, 
when little Geneviefve expired. She was the first 
whom one of our Fathers had baptized on his arrival 
in the Country, and to whom, in fulfillment of a vow, 
he had given that Name, praying that good Patroness 
that, as she had become the Guardian of this first 
grace, she might be pleased so to act that by her 
means she would obtain the last. \Vhen her Inother 
Aonetta, who had attended her daughter's interment, 
saw her Christian relatives stop to weep over the 
grave of her late husband, she could not restrain the 
liveliest emotions of her heart. "vVhat is the good 
of all these tears?" she said to them. "Let us 
endeavor to follow them up there, in Heaven; let us 
gather there an entire family of Saints; let us all 
serve God faithfully, so that the unbelievers may see 
that our Faith has not died with those who have 
departed, and that [43] the hope of Paradise is suffi- 
cient to check our tears. " 



62 


LES RELA TIO.NS DES JÉSUITES 


[V OL. 23 


fait rencontre d'vne femme infidelle qui Ie fol1icite à 
ce qu'il ne peut luy accorder qu'auec interefi de fa 
confciece. Tu es vne chienne, luy refpondit-il, retire 
toy de moy. Mais que crains-tu de dans ces bois, 
repart cette impudente, perfonne ne nous void. Mais 
Ie grand maifire de nos vies ales yeux arreftez fur 
nous, luy replique ce bon fidele, & c'eft celuy-Ia que 
je crains. 
Vn bon Neophyte efioit allé en vn bourg voifin, en 
vn fefiin celebre, où les guerriers qui y font inuitez 
f'animent mutuellement par leurs chanfons à faire 
quelque aéte de valeur. Au fortir de cette affem- 
blée, efiant déja bien tard, vne femme luy prend la 
main, & l'inuite à loger chez-elle. I'ay déja, luy- 
dit-il, pris mon logis ailleurs. La nuiét t'empefche 
de me recognoiftre, repart cette affaitée, c'efi en cette 
maifon, où tu as autrefois 10gé; oüy dea, dit-il, mais 
alors ie n'efiois pas Chrefiien. Dieu fçait lequel des 
deux fut Ie plus efionné. Quoy que c'en foit, ce bon 
Neophyte craignant [44] que dans cette occafion, Ie 
Diable ne Ie tentafi plus fortement, fe refolut de 
conferuer fa vk<toire en fuyant. II part toute nuiét 
de ce bourg, & arriue fur la minuit en fa Cabane, où 
on ne l'attendoit qu'au lendemain. 
Vn Chrefiien s'eftoit refolu de jeufner, par deuo- 
tion, vn mois entier. A peine a il cõmencé que les 
chaffeurs retournêt des bois, chargez de chairs d' ours 
& de cerfs. Autant de fefiins qui fe font par toutes 
les Cabanes, ce font autant de tentations bien fortes 
pour vn Homme, qui en tout autre temps efi con- 
traint par neceffité de mener vne vie plus aufiere que 
celIe du Carefme. On l'inuite au fefiin deux, trois 
& quatre fois Ie jour; mais crainte de fe voir engagé 



1642-43] 


RELATION OF I6.p 


63 


A Christian young Man on a journey met an infi- 
del woman, who solicited him to do what he could 
not yield to her without prejudice to his conscience. 
"Thou art a bitch," he replied to her; "withdraw 
from me." "But what fearest thou in these woods?" 
answered the shameless woman, "no one sees us." 
" But the great master of our lives has his eyes fixed 
upon us," replied the good believer, "and it is he 
whom I fear." 
A good Neophyte went to a neighboring village on 
the occasion of a noted feast, at which the invited 
warriors excited one another by their songs to per- 
form some deed of valor. When he left the meet- 
ing, at a very late hour, a woman took his hand and 
invited him to lodge with her. "I have already 
secured my lodgings elsewhere," he replied. "The 
darkness prevents thee from recognizing me, " said 
the decoy; "it was in that house that thou didst for- 
merly lodge." , , Yes indeed," he said, "but then I 
was not a Christian." God knows which of the two 
was the more astonished. However, the good N eo- 
phyte, fearing [44J that on this occasion the Devil 
might tempt him more energetically, resolved to 
make sure of his victory by flight. He left the vil- 
lage that very night, and about midnight he reached 
his own Cabin, where he was not expected till the 
following day. 
A Christian resolved, through devotion, to fast for 
an entire month. Hardly had he begun when the 
hunters returned from the woods, loaded with the 
flesh of bears and of deer. All the feasts that were 
held, in all of the Cabins, were so many very strong 
temptations for a :ðlan who, at all other times, is com- 
pelled through necessity to lead a life more austere 



64 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[V OL. 23 


dans quelqu'vn qui pût rompre fon jeufne, il fe 
priue de to us les autres, où fouuent il n'y auoit que 
du poiffon. On Ie preffe de n'eftre pas fi auftere à 
íoy-mefme, & les Peres luy-difent, Que fans fcru- 
pule, il peut remettre fa Deuotion à quelque autre 
íaiíon, puifqu'il n'y eft pas obligé. II eft vray, reí- 
pondit-il, que ie mangerois volontiers de la chair; 
mais aujourd'huy, ie fuis bien aife de m'en [45J eftre 
hier abftenu: & quand Ie mois fera paffé, la confola- 
tion m' en fera toute entiere: chaque fois que ie 
confidere que mon jeufne íera recompenfé à iamais 
dans Ie Ciel, ie n'y fens plus de peine. 
Ie ne fçay pas, difoit Ie mefme en vne autre occa- 
lion, ce qui fe paffe dans mon Arne, mais ie n'ay point 
plus grand plaifir que lors que ie prie Dieu. l' at- 
tends Ie temps de la Priere, comme vn homme qui 
a grand faim, fe difpofe à vn repas qu'il void qu'on 
luy prepare: Quand on m'inuite à vn fefUn proche 
du temps de la Priere, ie n'ay garde de m'y engager. 
II me femble, difoit vne certaine, que quelqu'autre 
que moy parle dedans mon cæur. Lors que ie fuis à 
trauailler dedans mon champ, fans ceffe il m'eft 
aduis que quelqu'vn m'aduertit, que j'offre mon 
trauail à DIE V . Quoy que fouuent ie l' aye fait, i1 
ne ceffe pas de parler: fouuent ie differe long-temps, 
& il me preffe dauantage. Plus ie Ie fay, & plus ie 
reffens vn plaifir que ie ne puis dire, & toutefois ie 
fuis en cela comme ces pareffeux, qui ne font pas ce 
que toûjours ils font obligez de faire. 
[46J Vn pauure Homme, feul Chreftien de toute 
fa Famille, eft tourmenté de fes parens, qui Ie 
preffent de quitter la Foy. lIs Ie chaffent de leurs 
Cabanes, ils luy refufent à manger; ils luy repro- 



1642-43] 


RELATION OF z642 


65 


than in the time of Lent. He was invited to a feast 
twice, thrice, and four times a day; but, through 
fear of pledging himself to attend one where he 
might break his fast, he refrained from attending all 
the others, at which often fish alone was served. He 
was urged not to be so severe wi th himself; and the 
Fathers told him that he might without scruple post- 
pone his Devotion to some other season, as he was 
not obliged to perform it. "It is true," he replied, 
"that I would willingly eat flesh; but to-day I am 
well pleased at [45J having deprived myself of it 
yesterday; and, when the month shall have passed, 
my satisfaction will be unalloyed. Whenever I think 
that my fast will be rewarded forever in Heaven, I 
experience no more difficulty in it." 
" I know not, " said the same man on another occa- 
sion, " what passes in my Soul, but I feel no greater 
pleasure than when I pray to God. I look forward 
to the hour of Prayer, just as a very hungry man 
makes ready for a meal that he sees being prepared 
for him. When I am invited to a feast near the 
hour of Prayer, I am careful not to pledge myself 
for it." 
" It seems to me," said a certain woman, " that 
some one other than myself speaks within my heart. 
While I am working in my field, I think all the time 
that some one is advising me to offer my work to 
GOD. Although I have frequently done so, he does 
not stop speaking. Sometimes I put it off for a long 
time, and he urges me still more earnestly. The 
more I do so, the more do I experience a pleasure 
that I cannot describe; and yet I am in this matter 
like those sluggards who do not always do what they 
are obliged." 



66 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


chent la mort d'vne fienne niepce qui auoit efté bap- 
tifée. II refte fans fupport, il eft contraind de faire 
ce qui eft de l' office des Femmes. On fe mocque 
de luy, on Ie rebute des Compagnies, on luy fufcite 
des querelles: & fi quelquefois on l'appelle en quel- 
que feftin, il fe trouue des infolens qui crient tout 
haut, qu'il ne falloit pas l'inuiter parce qu'il eft Chre- 
ftien & qu'il porte malheur où il va: qu'il doit bien 
fe refoudre à mourir pluftoft qu'il ne penfe, & qu'on 
l'affommera comme vn Sorcier. N'importe, a répon- 
du fouuent ce bon Chreftien, à toutes ces menaces, 
ie perfifteray dans la Foy, pas vn ne me la peut 
rauir, plus ie fuis pauure moins ie perdray à la mort, 
& ceux qui me méprifent, trouueront apres cette vie, 
que ie feray plus riche qu' eux: ils ont leur cæur en 
Terre, & mes defirs font dans Ie Ciel, depuis que ie 
fuis baptifé. 
Ce pauure Homme fit cet Hyuer vn [47J ade de 
Charité, qui luy penfa coûter la vie, & qui mit dans 
Ie chemin du Ciel, vne Arne qui eftoit bien proche 
de l'Enfer. Ils eftoient en voyage: Apres cinq ou 
fix lieuës de chemin dans les neiges, vne fienne niepce 
qui les fuiuoit eft arreftée par la rigueur du froid. 
Le foir ayans pris leur gifte au milieu de cette cam- 
pagne, ils f' aperçoiuent que cette fille manque, ils fe 
doutent de ce qui eft arriué: Ce bon Ch[rJeftien part 
au mefme moment pour aller fecourir fa niepce. 
Apres vne traitte affez longue, il trouue cette pauure 
fille toute roide au milieu des neiges, ilIa charge fur 
fes épaules, la Charité luy fait doubler fes pas, mais 
en fin il n'a plus de forces luy-mefme, i1 fuccombe 
fous la pefanteur de ce faix & demeure par Ie che- 
min. Vn de nos domeftiques qui eftoit de la bande, 



1642-43] 


RELA TIO.N OF I642 


67 


[46J A poor 1ian, the only Christian in all his Fam- 
ily, was persecuted by his relatives who urged him 
to abandon the Faith. They drove him away from 
their Cabins, and refused to give him anything to 
eat; they reproached him with the death of one of 
his nieces, who had been baptized. He was left 
without means of support, and was compelled to do 
what is usually the work of Women. He was 
mocked at, and spurned from every Company; and 
quarrels were picked with him. If at any time he 
was invited to a feast, some insolent persons present 
would call out that he should not have been invited, 
because he was a Christian, and because he brought 
misfortune wherever he went; that he might certain- 
ly make up his mind to die sooner than he expected; 
and that he would be clubbed to death as a Sorcerer. 
II Never mind," this good Christian would often 
reply to all these threats, Ie I will persevere in the 
Faith; no one can ravish it from me. The poorer I 
am, the less shall I lose at death; and those who 
despise me will find after this life that I shall be 
richer than they. Their hearts are on Earth; while 
my desires are in Heaven, since I have been bap- 
tized. " 
Last \Vinter this poor 11an performed an [47J act 
of Charity which nearly cost him his life, and placed 
on the road to Heaven a Soul that was very near 
Hell. They were on a journey; and, after they had 
made their way for five or six leagues through the 
snow, one of his nieces, who followed them, had to 
stop in consequence of the severe cold. At evening, 
having chosen a place for their lodging in the midst of 
the open country, they noticed that the girl was miss- 
ing and suspected what had happened. This good 



68 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


voyant Ie iour finy, a crainte que ce Chreftien fe foit 
efgaré: il va fuiure fes piftes dans l'obfcurité de la 
nuiét. HIe trouue en prieres, qui ne pouuant paffer 
plus outre, fe difpofoit à bien mourir. La fille n'a- 
uoit plus ny mouuement ny connoiffance. Ce ieune 
Homme, François, fe dépoüille pour couurir ce [48] 
pauure Chreftien, & fe charge de ce fardeau mou- 
rant. Ils demandent l'affiftance de Dieu, ils luy 
offrent leur vie, & apres bien des peines fouffertes, 
ils arriuent au gifte. On aproche du feu cette 
fille plus que demy-morte, elle n' a ny poulx ny fenti- 
ment; pour toute rnedecine ils luy verfent dedans la 
bouche de la neige fonduë en eau: en fin elle reuient 
à foy, rnais c'eftoit pour bien-toft rnourir. On eut 
toutefois tout Ie temps de l'inftruire à loifir pour 
receuoir Ie fainét Baptefme. Et fi elle eft maintenànt 
dans Ie Ciel, elle eft redeuable de fon Salut à ce chari- 
table Chreftien, car fes paroles entroient plus auant 
dans fon cæur, & luy ne pouuoit fe laffer de l'animer 
dans l'efperance du Paradis. 
Vne Chreftienne racontoit vn jour à vn de nos 
Peres, vne glorieufe viétoire qu'elle auoit remportée 
fur Ie Diable, penfant f'accufer d'vn grand peché. I'ay 
porté, difoit-elle, Ie Diable dedans mon corps quafi 
vn jour entier. Sans ceffe i1 parloit dans mon cæur 
& y mettoit des penfées deshonneftes. I'allois & ie 
venois à mon trauail tafchant de Ie quitter, [49] mais 
il eftoit fi attaché dedans mon Arne, que par tout il 
venoit auec moy. As-tu prié, te voyant ainfi atta- 
quée? Non, difoit-elle, ie n'ay pas bien prié, fans 
ceffe ie ne fongeois qu'à Dieu, & au feu qui brûle 
dans l'Enfer. Ie difois toûjours, Non, ie ne veux 
point pecher; mais nonobfiant ie pechois toûjours, 



1642-43] 


Rl:.'LA TION OF L6.p 


69 


Christian started immediately to the assistance of his 
niece. After going a long distance, he found the 
poor girl lying quite stiff in the snow, and placed her 
on his shoulders. Charity made him hasten his 
steps, but at last his own strength failed him; he fell 
under the weight of his burden, and lay down by the 
road. One of our servants, who was with the band, 
seeing that the daylight was gone, feared that this 
Christian might be lost, and followed his tracks in 
the darkness of the night. He found him praying, 
for, as he could go no further, he was preparing to 
die well. The girl was both motionless and uncon- 
scious. The young Frenchman divested himself of 
his coat to cover the [48] poor Christian and took 
charge of the dying burden. They prayed to God 
for aid, offered him their lives, and, after enduring 
many hardships, they reached shelter. The girl, 
who was more than half dead, was placed near the 
fire; she had neither pulse nor feeling; for all medi- 
cine, they poured into her mouth some water obtained 
by melting snow. At last, she regained conscious- 
ness, but only to die soon afterward. They had, 
however, sufficient time to give her ample instruc- 
tion in order to receive holy Baptism; and, if she be 
now in Heaven she owes her Salvation to that char- 
itable Christian, for his words sank more deeply into 
her heart, and he was never tired of animating her 
with hopes of Paradise. 
A Christian woman related one day to one of our 
Fathers a glorious victory that she had won over the 
Devil, while she thought that she was accusing 
herself of a great sin. "I carried the Devil in my 
body," she said, " nearly a whole day. He spoke to 
my heart without ceasing, and suggested immodest 



70 


LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


& Ie Diable rendoit fans ceffe mon Arne mal-faite: 
c'eft fans doute qu'alors ie ne priois pas bien. Mais 
en quoy pechois tu? Le Diable, difoit-elle, euft-il 
efté Ie maiftre, fi ie n'euffe peché? ne ['en fuft-il pas 
fuy, fi i'euffe prié comme il faut. Mais en fin, 
comment a-t'il ceffé de te tourmenter de la forte? 
Apres auoir fouuent dit & redit les Prieres que ie 
fçay, répondit-elle, ne fçachant plus que faire, i'ay 
dit de toutes mes forces IESOVS, TAÏTENR, IE- 
SVS, A YEZ PITIÉ DE MOY! Et au mefme moment, 
mon Arne a ceffé d'eftre mal-faiéte: c'eft comme cela 
que ie deuois prier dés Ie commencement. 
Vne autre ayant remarqué qu'vn certain Infidele 
venoit fouuent en fa Cabane, fe trouua vn jour inte- 
rieurement fort confufe, fe voyant regardée de cet 
Homme, [50J d'vne façon qui luy fit foupçonner quel- 
que mauuais deffein. Elle tourne incontinent fon 
cæur à Dieu, & fe refout de ne pas ietter mefme vne 
æillade vers Ie cofté d' où elle craignoit l' Ennem y : 
& dés Ie foir ne manqua pas de découurir Ie tout au 
Pere qui la conduifoit, luy adiouftant qu'elle auoit 
penfé que cette découuerte affoibliroit Ie Diable, qui 
ne luy vouloit que du mal & tafchoit à l'induire au 
peché; pour par apres, luy faire perdre la Foy. 
Vne fille Chreftienne eftoit interrogée, fi dans la 
licence que prennent icy les ieunes gens, elle n'auoit 
point prefté l'oreille à quelque mauuais difcours. 
Pas vn ne me parle, répondit-elle, fin on que [ouuent on 
me dit que ie fuis trop melancholique: mais à cela 
ie ne replique rien, feulement ie prie DIE V dans mon 
cæur, afin qu'il me garde, parce que i'ay crainte de 
pecher. lIs ne fçauent pas mes penfées, adioûta- 
t' elle, ie ne fais paroiftre ma ioye que dans ma 



1642-43] 


RELA TI01V OF 1642 


71 


thoughts to it. I came and went while occupied with 
my work, endeavoring to leave him; [49] but so fixed 
was he in my Soul that he accompanied me every- 
where." "Didst thou pray when so tempted?" 
" No, It she said, " I did not really pray; my thoughts 
were ever of God alone, and of the fire that burns in 
Hell. I said continually: ' No, I will not sin.' But, 
nevertheless, I sinned all the time, and the Devil 
ever kept my Soul in evil. Doubtless that was 
because I did not then pray as I ought." "But in 
what didst thou sin?" , , Would the Devil," she 
said, "have been the master had I not sinned? 
\Vould he not have fled, had I prayed as I should 
have done?" "But, at last, how did he cease to 
torment thee so? It "After having frequently re- 
peated the Prayers that I know," she replied, " as I 
could not find anything else to do, I said with all my 
strength: J E 5 0 U 5, T A Ï TEN R , 'J E 5 U 5 , H A V E 
PIT YON ME!' and at the same instant my Soul 
ceased to be wicked. It is thus that I should have 
prayed at the very beginning." 
Another woman, who had observed that a certain 
Infidel came frequently to her Cabin, was one day 
greatly disturbed in mind when she saw that Man 
looking at her [soJ in a way that made her suspect 
him of some evil design. She at once turned her 
heart to God, resolved not even to cast a glance in 
the direction whence she feared the Enemy; and that 
very evening she did not fail to tell everything to 
her Father director,-adding that she had thought 
that this discovery would weaken the Devil, who 
sought only to do her evil, and to tempt her to sin, 
in order to make her afterwards lose the Faith. 
A Christian girl was asked whether in the license 



72 


LES RELATIONS DES .fÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Cabane, lorfque ie fuis auec mes fæurs & mes parens. 
Quand ie vay quelque part. ie change de vifage: ie 
tiens la veuë baiffée, Ie front ridé, & tafche de [5 I] 
paroiftre trifte, afin qu'aucun ne trouue abord aupres 
de moy. 
n n'y a que DIE v qui puiffe donner ces defirs de 
la pureté en des cæurs, & en vn Pais où l'impureté 
ne paroift qu'auec gloire: mais quand la Foy eft 
dans vn cæur, elle y fait des changemens eftranges. 
Nous l'allons voir dans Ie Chapitre fuiuant. 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF z642 


73 


which the young men here assume, she had not lent 
an ear to some improper discourse. II No one speaks 
to me," she said; II except that I am often told that 
I am too melancholy; but to this I answer nothing. 
I only pray to GOD in my heart so that he may keep 
me safe, because I fear to commit sin. They do not 
know my thoughts," she added; "I manifest my 
joy only in my Cabin, when I am with my sisters 
and my parents. When I go anywhere, I alter my 
appearance; I keep my eyes cast down, and my fore- 
head wrinkled, and I try to [5 I] look sad so that no 
one is encouraged to accost me. ' , 
It is only GOD who can inspire such desires for 
purity in hearts and in a Country where impurity is 
viewed only with honor. But when Faith is in a 
heart, it effects wonderful changes therein. We 
shall see this in the next Chapter. 



74 


LES RELATIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


CHAPITRE VI. 


DES DEPORTEMENS DE QVELQUES CHRESTIENS EN PAR- 
TICULIER, DE CETTE MESME MISSION. 


I OSEPH Teondechoren, auant fon Baptefme, efioit 
vne maffe de chair, qui couuroit vne Arne auffi 
épaiffe que fon corps. Tous les iours on luy 
prefchoit Ies myfieres de nofire Foy, & it ne 
pouuoit les entendre. II voyoit des exemples de 
íainéteté deuant fes yeux, en vn frere moins aagé 
que luy, qui ne refpiroit que Ie Ciel; & Iuy n'auoit 
que des penfées de terre. Depuis Ia mort [52] de ce 
fien frere, prenant fon nom Iofeph, it a tellement 
herité de fa Foy, de fon efprit & de [on zele, qu'on 
void bien que c'eft vn coup du Ciel. 
II y a quelque temps qu'vn nombre d'Infideles, 
apres auoir admiré fes difcours, & Ie zele dont illeur 
parloit des chofes de Ia Foy, plus encore fa vie, qui 
depuis fon Baptefme, a efié fans reproche: Mais, 
í'écrierent-ils, que t'ont ils fait, les Robes noires, 
pour t'auoir changé de la forte? IIs m'ont tiré, leur 
repartit ce bon Chrefiien, tout Ie mal qui efioit en 
mon Arne. Croyez tous comme i1 faut, & vous 
l'éprouuerez mieux que ie ne puis pas vous Ie dire? 
Vne autrefois, rendant conte de fa confcience au 
Pere qui Ie gouuerne: II me femble, difoit-il, que 
nous ne fommes qu'vn, DIE V & moy: où it me fuit, 
ou ie Ie trouue par tout où ie vay: il ne me feroit pas 
poffible de me feparer d'auec luy. Ie voy bien quand 



1642-43] 


RELATION OF I642 


75 


CHAPTER VI. 


OF THE CONDUCT OF SOME CHRISTIA
S IN PARTICU- 
LAR, OF THIS SA
IE MISSION. 


J OSEPH Teondechoren, before his Baptism, was 
a mass of flesh, that covered a Soul as gross as 
his body. Every day the mysteries of our Faith 
were preached to him, and he could not understand 
them. He saw examples of godliness before his 
eyes in a brother younger than he, who thought but 
of Heaven, while his own thoughts were ever of 
earth. After the death [52] of that brother, taking 
his name of Joseph, he inherited his Faith, his 
spirit, and his zeal to such an extent that one can 
easily see that it is an effect of Heaven. 
Some time ago, a number of Infidels,- after admir- 
ing his discourses and the zeal with which he spoke 
to them on matters of Faith, and still more his 
manner of living, which since his Baptism has been 
beyond reproach,- exclaimed: "But what have the 
black Gowns done to thee to alter thee so?" "They 
have drawn out all the evil that was in my Soul," 
said this good Christian. "Believe as you ought, 
all of you, and you will experience it better than I 
can tell you." 
On another occasion, when he was baring his con- 
science to his Father director, he said: "It seems to 
me that we are but one, GOD and myself. Either 
he follows me, or I find him, wherever I go. It 
would be impossible for me to separate from him. 



76 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


ie peche, qu'il y eft; mais quoy [que] ie n'aye point 
d'efprit, ie voy continuellement vn changement 
dedans mon Arne. Quafi chaque iour, ie dis en moy- 
mefme, me voila bien; & Ie lendemain, [53] i'ay pitié 
de ce que i'eftois, me yoyant deuenu tout autre. 
Vn iour qu'il parloit à vn vieil Sauuage, des plus 
riches du Bourg, mais des plus attachez au feruice 
du Diable. Mon onc1e, luy difoit-il, tu crois eftre 
bien riche, tu es vn gueux, & plus miferable que 
moy: fi ie fuis pauure, ie fuis content dedans ma 
pauureté; & toy, tu n'as iamais ton efprit en repos. 
Si on te difoit des iniures, & fi on médifoit de toy, 
cela te troubleroit, & toutes tes richeffes ne te gueri- 
roient pas. Pour moy, i"ay Ie cæur difpofé à tous 
les maux qui me peuuent arriuer: ie me réioüirois 
me voyant dans l'opprobre, & mefme en cet eftat, ie 
ferois plus heureux que toy. Ie ne fonge qu'au 
Ciel: & tout ce que ie voy en Terre, foit de bien, foit 
de mal, me femble comme vne fumée qui naift, & 
puis f'éuanoüit en vn moment. Ie n'ay pas toûiours 
efté dans ces penfées, adioûtoit-il, peut-eftre en ay-ie 
efté plus eí10igné que toy. Si iamais tu as recours à 
DIE V de tout ton cæur, il eft tout preft de te faire 
les mefmes graces. 
Vn nommé René Sondihouâne, vn des [54] pre- 
miers Fideles que nous ayons eu, nous fait bien voir 
par fes deportemens, qu'il eft enfeigné d'vn autre 
Maiftre que de nous. Souuent, dit-il, ie me réueille 
au milieu de la nuiét, ie fonge à DIE v, & fans y 
prendre garde, ie trouue la nuiét écoulée plus douce- 
ment que ie n' euffe fait dans vn profond fommeil. 
Ie ne fçay qui me met les penfées que i' ay dans Ie 
cæur, mais il m'eft impoffible de repeter ce que mon 



1642-43] 


RELATION OF I642 


77 


When I sin, I see very well that he is there; but, 
although I have no sense, I constantly observe a 
change within my Soul. N early every day, I say to 
myself: 'Now I am well,' and the next day [53] I 
have pity on what I was, seeing myself become quite 
another. " 
One day, he was speaking to an old Savage, one of 
the wealthiest of the Village but also one of the most 
attached to the service of the Devil. ":My uncle," 
he said to him, "thou think est thyself very rich; 
thou art a beggar, and more miserable than I am. If 
I be poor, I am content in my poverty, while thy mind 
is never at ease. If one were to say insulting things 
to thee, or slander thee, thou wouldst be troubled, 
and all thy wealth would not cure thee. As for me, 
my heart is prepared for all the evils that may 
happen to me; I would be pleased if I saw myself 
in disgrace, and even in that condition I should be 
happier than thou. I think only of Heaven, and all 
that I see on Earth, whether of good or of evil, seems 
to me like smoke that rises and disappears in a 
moment. I have not always had such thoughts," he 
added; "perhaps I have been more averse to them 
than thou art. If ever thou hast recourse to GOD 
with all thy heart, he is quite prepared to grant thee 
the same graces." 
A man named René Sondihouâne, one of the [54] 
first of our Believers, shows us clearly by his conduct 
that he is taught by a better 1faster than ourselves. 
" Frequently," he says, " I awake in the middle of 
the night; I think of GOD, and I find that the night 
passes without my noticing it, more pleasantly than 
if I had slept soundly. I do not know who puts in 
my heart the thoughts that I have there, but it is 



78 


LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 


[V OL. 23 


cæur me dit. Souuent de iour i1 va dans la Chapelle, 
& y demeure en oraifon les heures entieres, fans 
auoir eu aucune difiraétion d'efprit. .Vn foir qu'il 
faiíoit vn f[r]oid exceffif, vn de nos Peres l'en voyant 
fortir tout tremblant, long-temps apres qu'i1 y efioit 
entré, n'ayant pour tout veftement qu'vne peau 
d'ours, qui ne luy couuroit que la moitié du corps, 
Ie tença doucement d'eftre demeuré fi long-temps en 
fon Oraiíon, veu la rigueur du froid. Ie fuis entré 
tout nud, n'ayant qu'vne petite Priere à faire, répon- 
dit fimplement ce bon Homme, aagé du moins de 
foixante ans; mais ayant commencé, dit-il, ie ne me 
fuis pas aperceu que i 'y fuffe long-temps, & ie ne 
fongeois pas [55J que i'y auois grand froid. Souuent 
chofes femblables luy arriuent, illes fait exprés pour 
meriter dauantage, & fe punir foy-mefme. Pourquoy, 
dit-il, ne ferois-je pas fouffrir quelque chofe à mon 
corps? ie luy rends ce qu'i1 fait fouffrir à mon Arne; 
i1 m'a troublé l'efprit durant que ie priois, & faifoit 
que mon Arne f'ennuyoit parlant à ÐIEV, peu f'en 
eft fallu que ie n'aye tout quitté là: fi cela demeuroit 
impuny, il me feroit toûiours Ie mefme. 
Vn iour eftant entré feul dans la Chapelle, fe met- 
tant à prier, il fent vne perfonne fe mettre à genoux 
prés de luy, il eft furpris; mais fon étonnement 
redouble, entendant vne voix inconnuë, dire les mef- 
mes Prieres que luy. Apres vn temps affez notable, 
i1 fe laiffe em porter à la curiofité, & comme il faifoit 
fombre là dedans, i1 demande qui c'eft; perfonne ne 
répond, & toutefois il fent encore cette perfonne prés 
de foy; il auance fa main pour la reconnoiftre; mais 
cela difparoift tout d'vn coup. Eftant forty de là, 
i1 dit à vn des Peres, qu'vne chofe prodigieufe [l]uy 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


79 


impossible for me to repeat what my heart tells me." 
Often during the day he goes to the Chapel, and 
remains there in prayer for hours at a time, without 
any distraction of mind. One night, when it was 
exceedingly cold, one of our Fathers who saw him 
come out of it all trembling, a long while after he 
had gone in,- having only a bearskin for clothing, 
which covered but half of his body ,- gently rebuked 
him for remaining so long at his Prayers, consider- 
ing the severity of the cold. "I went in quite naked, 
having only a short Prayer to say," simply replied 
the good Man, who is at least sixty years of age; 
" but, having begun, I did not notice that I was there 
a long time, and I did not think [55] that I was very 
cold." Such things frequently happen to him; he 
does them on purpose to gain greater merit, and to 
punish himself. "Why," he says, "should I not 
make my body suffer something? I pay back to it 
what it makes my Soul suffer. It disturbed my mind 
while I prayed, and caused my Soul to become weary 
while speaking to GOD. But little more, and I 
should have left everything there. If it remained 
unpunished, it would always do the same to me." 
One day, when he had entered the Chapel alone 
and had commenced to pray, he felt a person kneel 
near him. He was astonished, but his surprise was 
still greater when he heard an unknown voice repeat- 
ing the same Prayers as himself. After some time, 
he allowed his curiosity to overcome him; and, as it 
was dim in there, he asked who it was. No one 
answered, and yet he still felt that person near him. 
He stretched out his hand to discover who it was, 
but the other suddenly disappeared. When he came 
forth from that place, he told one of the Fathers that 



80 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


eftoit arriuée, & raconte Ie tout. Qu'as-tu fait, luy 
dit-on, apres l'auoir [56] cherché? I'ay repris ma 
Priere, répond-il, & ie me fuis trouué en mefme efiat 
qu'auparauant: feulement i'ay penfé que tu m'en- 
feignerois ce que ce pourroit eftre.... car ie n'ay point 
d'efprit. Nous n'en fçauons pas en ce poind plus 
que luy: mais nous n'ignorons pas que Dieu fe plaift 
à parler auec les Ames les plus fimples. 
Vne nuiét, ce bon-homme apres f'efire long-temps 
entretenu fur les grandeurs de DIE v, f'y trouua 
fans y penf er, engagé dans la profondeur d 'vn M yfiere 
dont il ne trouuoit point d'iffuë. Mais comment, 
difoit-il, fe peut-il faire qu'vn Pere & vn Fils, foient 
de mefme, fans eftre Ie mefme? Si Dieu Ie Pere eft 
vrayement Pere, fe produit-il foy-mefme, puis qu'il 
ne produit pas vn autre Dieu? C'efioient des tene- 
bres pour luy, plus obfcures que celles de la nuid. 
Le iour eftant venu, il vint chercher lumiere fur fon 
doute. Mais, luy dit-on, quelle penfée as-tu euë la 
deffus? Qu'euffé-ie penfé autre chofe, refpondit-il, 
finon que DIE V n' eft pas vn Homme comme moy? 
Si vn chien, difois-ie en moy-mefme, vouloit fonger 
queUes font les penfées des Hommes, [57] que 
deuroit-il dire autre chore, finon que I'Homme n'eft 
pas tout de mefme qu'vn chien. DIE V ne feroit pas 
Tout-puiffant & ce qu'il eft, fi ie pouuois comprendre 
quel il eft. 
L' An paffé, vn de nos Catechumenes, nommé Tfon- 
datfaa, eftant décendu à Ke bee auec Ie P. lean de 
Brebeuf, fatisfit tellement dans tout Ie chemin, que 
Monfieur Ie Cheualier de Montmagny noftre Gouuer- 
neur, luy ayant voulu parler; & ayant reconneu fon 
efprit, & entendu les defirs qu'il auoit de fe voir 



1642-43] 


RELA TIO.N OF I6p 


81 


a wonderful thing had happened to him; and he 
related all. "What didst thou," he was asked, 
"after having [56] looked for him? " "I resumed 
my Prayer," he said, "and I found myself in the 
same condition as before; only I thought that thou 
couldst tell me what this might be, for I have no 
sense." We knew no more than he does, on that 
point; but we are not ignorant of the fact that God 
is pleased to converse with the simplest Souls. 
One night this good man, after having for a long 
time meditated upon the greatness of GOD, found 
himself unexpectedly plunged in the depths of a 
:Mystery from which he could find no issue. "But 
how," said he, "can it be that a Father and a Son 
are the same, without being the same person. If 
God the Father be really the Father, does he 
produce himself, since he does not produce another 
God?" All this was darkness to him, more obscure 
than the darkness of night. 'Vhen day broke, he 
came to seek light upon his doubts. "But," he was 
asked, "what idea hadst thou on the subject?" 
"\Vhat else could I think," he replied, "but that 
GOD is not a 
lan like myself? 'If a dog" I said to 
myself, 'wished to imagine what the thoughts of Men 
are, [57] what else could he say but that :Man is not 
the same as a dog? GOD would not be All-powerful. 
and what he is, if I could understand what he is.' " 
Last Year, one of our Catechumens, named Tson- 
datsaa, who had gone down to Ke bee with Father 
Jean de Bre beuf, gave such satisfaction throughout 
the journey that l\Ionsieur the Chevalier de 1fontma- 
gny, our Governor, who talked with him, having 
recognized his intelligence and heard his desire to 
be baptized. decided that we were too strict in refus- 



82 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


baptifé, trouua que nous eftions trop rigoureux de luy 
refufer vne demande fi fainéte. Ce qui nous auoit 
arrefté, eftoit que nous craignions que ce Sauuage, 
eftant des plus engagez dans les fuperftitions du Pais, 
& Chef de bande en ce meftier, n'euft pas affez de 
force pour nous tenir la parole qu' il nous donnoit, 
qu'au moment qu'il feroit baptifé, il abandonneroit 
tout ce que DIE V a defendu: nous euffions fouhaitté 
de luy qu'il euft commencé, mefme au ant fon Bap- 
tefme. Quoy qu'il en foit, l'effet nous a fait recon- 
noiftre que ce fut vn mouuement de D I EV, qui porta 
Monfieur Ie [58] Gouuerneur, à de firer de Ie voir bap- 
tifé, & luy-mefme d'eftre fon Parrain. Ie croy que la 
relation de rAn paffé, auoit fait quelque mention de 
fon Baptefme, qui fe fit là bas à Kebec; & ainfi ie 
n'en diray rien crainte de redites. 
Cet heureux Neophyte, nommé Charles en fon 
Baptefme, n'eft pas fi toft arriué icy en fon Pais, qu'il 
inuite tous les principaux de fon Bourg. l\1es freres, 
leur dit-il, vous voyez vn Chreftien, qui pluftoft 
mourra que de quitter la Foy. C'eft au Grand l\1ai- 
ftre de nos vies, auquel ie me fuis engagé de promeffe. 
Iamais Ie Diable, & tout ce qui vient de Iuy, n'au- 
ront aucun pouuoir fur moy. Que pas vn n'ait defor- 
mais à m'inuiter à quelque peché que ce foit, f'il 
n' eft tout refolu de remporter vn refus. Ie vous 
veux deliurer, & moy auffi, de peine, vous donnant à 
tous cet aduis. Mes biens, ma vie & mon courage 
font à vous, pourueu qu' on n' exige rien de moy qui 
foit contre D lEV. Ie n'en fçais pas beaucoup, mais 
ie m'offre d'enfeigner tous ceux qui aurõt quelque 
defir de m'imiter. Ie voy bien que ie vous aban- 
donne dans les couftumes du [59] Pais, i'y ay efté 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


83 


ing to grant him so holy a demand. 'V'hat had pre- 
vented us was that we feared that this Savage, who 
was one of those most involved in the superstitions 
of the Country, and a Leader in that trade, would 
not have sufficient strength to keep the promise that 
he gave us,-that, when once baptized, he would 
abandon all that GOD has forbidden. We could 
have wished that he had begun to do so, even before 
his Baptism. In any case, the event showed us that 
it was an inspiration from GOD that led Monsieur 
the [58] Governor to wish to see him baptized, and 
himself to be his Godfather. I think that the rela- 
tion of last Year made some mention of his Baptism 
which took place down there at Kebec, therefore I 
will say nothing about it for fear of repetition. 
This happy Neophyte, who received the name of 
Charles at his Baptism, had no sooner arrived here 
in his own Country than he invited all the leading 
men of his Village. "11y brothers," he said to them, 
"you see a Christian who would rather die than 
abandon the Faith. It is to the Great Master of our 
lives that I have pledged myself by promise. Never 
shall the Devil, or anything that comes from him, 
have any power over me. Let no one in future 
tempt me to commit any sin whatever, unless he be 
prepared to take away a refusal. I wish to save 
you, and myself also, from trouble, by giving you all 
this notice. My property, my life, and my courage 
belong to you, provided that I am not cal1ed upon to 
do anything that is opposed to GOD. I do not know 
much; but I offer myself to teach all those who may 
feel any desire to imitate me. I see very well that 
I abandon you in the customs of the [59] Country; I 
have been engaged in them as deeply as you have. 



84 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


auffi auant que vous; fi vous auez quelque regret 
que ie vous quitte, fuiuez moy, & nous ferons plus 
liez que iamais par-enfemble. 
Depuis ce temps-Ià, il a fait tout ce qu'il auoit dit. 
Ce feroit en peu de paroles afíez Ie loüer, fi nous 
n' auions autre defíein: mais ie croy qu' on en don- 
nera toute la gloire à DIE V, entendant quelque chofe 
plus en particulier de ce bon Neophyte. 
L'aduertifíement du Sage eft bien veritable, Que 
celuy qui commence à vouloir feruir DIE V, doit 
preparer fon Arne aux attaques de la tentation. La 
Cabane de ce nouueau Chreftien fe trouue bien-toft 
affaillie de toutes parts. Vn fien nepueu tombe 
malade, & tous defefperent de fa fanté: on luy vient 
aporter la nouuelle de la mort d'vn autre noyé dans 
les eaux: Ie Diable entre dans Ie corps d'vne fienne 
niepce infideIe, & la rend frenetique. Ses plus pro- 
ches parens forment vn party contre luy, & la que- 
relle en viet quafi iufqu'au meurtre de part & d'autre. 
Moins que cela eft capable d'abatre vn cæur que 
DIEV ne foûtient pas, mais lors [60] qu'on met en luy 
toute fa confiance, il viuifie apres auoir mortifié. Ces 
querelles f' étouffent h
ureufement; Ie Diable quitte 
cette femme: la nouuelle de mort de ce fien nepueu 
en fin fe trouue faufíe, & rend Ia fanté à celuy que 
tous, hormis vn de nos Peres auoient abandonné. 
Ce bon Chreftien eft fi touché de tant de graces, 
que pour reconnoiftre la main dont il les receuoit, il 
promet de baftir vne Chapelle plus grande que celle 
qui eft de prefent dans Ie Bourg, où tous les Chre- 
ftiens fe pourroient plus facilement affembler. 
Le Diable n'en demeure pas Ià. QueIque temps 
apres vn autre de fes niepces d'enuiron quatre ou 



1642-43] 


RELATION OF r642 


85 


If you feel any regret at my leaving you, follow 
my example, and we shall be bound together more 
closely than ever." 
Since then, he has done all that he promised. To 
say this would be to praise him sufficiently in a few 
words, had we no other object in view; but I think 
that all the glory thereof will be given to GOD, after 
hearing something more in detail about this good 
Neophyte. 
The warning of the Sage is very true, that he who 
begins to wish to serve GOD must prepare his Soul 
against the assaults of temptation. The Cabin of this 
new Christian is soon assailed on all sides. One of 
his nephews falls ill, and all despair of his recovery; 
he is informed of the death of another, who has been 
drowned in the waters. The Devil enters into the 
body of one of his nieces, who is an infidel, and 
makes her frenzied. His nearest relatives conspire 
against him and the quarrel almost extends to mur- 
der on both sides. Less than that suffices to break 
down a mind that is not sustained by GOD; but when 
[60] we place all our trust in him, he gives new life 
after having chastised us. The quarrels are happily 
settled; the Devil leaves the woman; the news of 
his nephew's death proves in the end to be untrue; 
and health is restored to him who was given up by 
all, except one of our Fathers. 
This good Christian was so touched by all these 
favors that, in order to acknowledge the hand from 
which he received them, he promised to build a 
Chapel, larger than that which is now in the Village, 
in which all the Christians might more conveniently 
meet. 
The Devil does not stop there. Some time after- 



86 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


cinq ans, tombe malade: Le bruit court que cette 
maladie eít du genre de celles que procure vn certain 
Demon, qui iamais ne f'apaife qu'apres qu'on luy a 
fait homage d'vne danfe, dont ce nouueau Chreítien 
eítoit Ie Chef, auparauant que d' eítre baptifé. Mais, 
dit-il, qu'elle meure pluítoít, que i'aye recours à 
l'affiítance d'vn ennemy juré de DIE V . 
Vn iour qu'il eítoit abfent, tous ceux de la Cabane 
font furpris de voir cette fille [61J quafi reuenuë en 
fanté, retomber tout d'vn coup malade & à l'extre- 
mité. Elle pert Ie jugement & la parole, & on 
n'atend plus que Ie dernier foûpir. Charles retourne 
bien fatigué de fon voyage, affez auant dedans la 
nuiét: II n' entend que des pleurs, & aprend de fes 
yeux, ce que pas vn n'a Ie courage de luy dire. Vous 
pleurez, leur dit-il, fa mort, & moy ce qui m'atriíte 
Ie plus, eít qu' elle ne foit point baptifée: demain 
matin les Peres doiuent eítres de retour icy, mais 
1'enfant n'aura plus de vie, ayons done noítre recours 
à Dieu: difant cela, il fort, & va affembler prompte- 
ment les plus principaux Chreítiens du Bourg, leur 
reprefente fa peine, leur difant: Helas! quelqu'vn 
de vous autres ne fçait-il point les paroles facrées qu'il 
faut dire pour baptifer? On me les a aprifes, répond 
Iofeph Teondechoren; Allons donc de ce pas, dit 
Charles. voila mon efprit grandement foulagé. IIs 
entrent tous de compagnie dans cette Cabane defolée, 
ils y font leurs Prieres: Iofeph baptife cet Enfant, 
qui tire à la mort; puis fe retournant vers l' Affi- 
ítance, dit: Arreítons maintenant nos larmes, confo- 
lons-nous, [62 J fon Arne eít en a ffeurance , elle f' en- 
uolera dans Ie Ciel, où elle priera DIE V pour nous: 
pour moy, adjoûta-il, ie me tiens bien-heureux d'a- 



1642-43] 


RELA TIO.N OF I642 


87 


ward, another of his nieces, aged about four or five 
years, falls ill. It is rumored that this illness is of 
the sort caused by a certain Demon, who is never ap- 
peased until homage has been paid to him in a dance, 
of which this new Christian had been the Leader 
before he was baptized. "But, " said he, "let her 
die, rather than that I should have recourse to the 
assistance of a sworn enemy of GOD." 
One day, when he was absent, all those who were 
in the Cabin were surprised to see this girl, [61J who 
was almost restored to health, suddenly fall ill again, 
and in danger of death. She loses both her senses 
and her speech, and they await but her last breath. 
Charles returns, greatly fatigued from his journey, 
quite late at night. He hears nothing but weeping, 
and learns with his own eyes what no one has the 
courage to tell him. " You weep," he says, " be- 
cause of her death; but what causes me the most sor- 
row is, that she is not baptized. To-morrow morn- 
ing the Fathers will return here, but the child will 
no longer be alive. Let us therefore apply to God." 
Having said this, he went out and quickly assembled 
the principal Christians of the Village, to whom he 
told his trouble, saying: "Alas! does not some one 
among you know the sacred words that must be pro- 
nounced in baptizing?" "They were taught to me," 
replied Joseph Teondechoren. "Let us then go at 
once," said Charles; "my mind is now greatly re- 
lieved." They entered together the afflicted Cabin, 
and there offered their Prayers; then Joseph bap- 
tized the Child, who was nigh unto death, and, turn- 
ing towards those who were Present, he said: ,. Let 
us now cease weeping, and console ourselves; [62J 
her Soul is safe; she will fly to Heaven where she 



88 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


uoir quatre de mes enfans en Paradis, & ie les inuoque 
auec confolation. Charles prend la parole & s'adref- 
fant à la mere de l'enfant baptifé, qui alors eítoit 
encore Catechumene, c'eít toy, luy dit-il, qui dois 
reffentir plus particulierement ce bien-fait, remercie 
DIEV pour ton enfant, de la grace qu'elle vient de 
receuoir par Ie Baptefme: conte la fi tu veux pour 
morte, mais tu la dois tenir pour bien-heureufe dans 
Ie Ciel. N on, non, reprend Iofeph, Dieu en difpo- 
fera; il peut, s'il veut, luy rendre la fanté: prions-le 
tous qu 'en cela fa volonté fait faite. Ils font dere- 
chef leurs Prieres, puis apres fe retirent chacun chez 
foy. Le lendemain matin les Chreítiens s'étans 
affemblez à l' ordinaire dans la Chapelle: La bapti- 
fée eít-elle morte? demandent-t'ils à Charles. Nen- 
ny, dit-il, Dieu a eu pitié de nous, elle eít maintenãt 
dedans la Cabane, & fe portera bien. DIE V fçait 
quelle joye fe répandit dedans les cæurs de ces bons 
Fideles, qui [63] fur l'heure luy en rendirent toute 
la gloire. 
Si cette guerifon a quelque chofe d'extraordinaire, 
il n'y a que Ie Ciel qui fçache à la foy de qui on Ie 
doit attribuer. Quoy qu'il en foit, la Foy de ce 
courageux Neophyte fe fait affez connoiítre dans fes 
æuures. Parlant à quelques Infideles; ce n'eít pas 
de jour feulement que ie croy, difoit-il, & que ie fuis 
tout refolu de me voir maffacrer plûtoít que de qui- 
ter la Foy: ie croy mefme la nuiét au plus profond de 
mon fommeil. Ie refufe en dormant, d' obeïr à mes 
fonges, & n'y a pas beaucoup de nuiéts que ie voyois 
tout Ie Païs bandé contre moy feul, pour me faire 
abandonner la Foy, ie refufay tous leurs prefens, ie 
me mocquay de leurs menaces, & me fentois plus 



1642-43] 


RELATION OF I642 


89 


will pray to Go D for us. As for me," he added, " I 
consider myself very happy because four of my chil- 
dren are in Paradise, and I invoke them with con- 
solation." Charles then spoke, and, addressing the 
mother of the baptized child, who was yet a Catechu- 
men, he said to her: "It is thou who shouldst more 
especiall y appreciate this blessing. Thank GOD on 
behalf of thy child, for the grace that she has just 
received through Baptism. Consider her as dead, if 
thou wilt; but thou must consider her as blessed in 
Heaven." "No, no," answered Joseph, " God will 
dispose of her; he can, if he will, restore her to 
health; let us all pray that in this his will be done." 
They again said their Prayers, and then each with- 
drew to his home. When the Christians met as 
usual on the following day, in the Chapel, they asked 
Charles: "Is the girl dead who was baptized?" 
" }.I ot at all," he replied; "God has had pity on us. 
She is now in the Cabin and will do well." GOD 
knows what joy diffused itself through the hearts of 
these good Believers, who [63J on the spot gave to 
him all the glory therefor. 
If this cure be at all extraordinary, Heaven alone 
knows to whose faith it is to be attributed. In any 
case, the Faith of this brave Neophyte manifests 
itself sufficiently in his works. Speaking to some 
Infidels, he said: "Not only by day do I believe, 
and am fully resolved to let myself be killed rather 
than abandon the Faith. I believe even at night, in 
my soundest slumber. While sleeping, I refuse to 
obey my dreams. Not many nights ago, I saw the 
whole Country leagued against me, to make me aban- 
don the Faith. I refused an their presents, I laughed 



90 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


courageux, que iamais ie ne fus au combat contre 
mes Ennemis. 
I1 y a du plaifir à l'entendre parler des auantages 
de la Foy. Eít-il auec des jeunes gens, qui n'ont Ie 
cæur rien qu'à la guerre. I'ay compaffion de vous, 
dit-il, Tout Ie long de l'Eíté vous viuez au milieu des 
perils, & vous tremblez de crainte, [64] comme fi déja 
l'Ennemy vous brûloit. Le feu que vous craignez, 
n'eít qu'vne peinture de l'Enfer. On en eít quitte 
pour vne ou deux nuiéts, tombant entre les mains des 
Iroquois, & encores quelquefois on s'échape: Dans 
l'Enfer on y brûle pour vne eternité, & pas vn iamais 
n'en eít forty. Que ne redoutez-vous ces flâmes 
impitoyables.
 V ous allez en guerre pour faire paroi- 
ítre voítre courage, & ie ne fçay fi vous fçauez ce 
que c'eít qu'eítre courageux. On a eu quelque eítime 
de moy, mais ie confeffe que ie craignois all ant aux 
coups, & qu'il n'y auoit que la crainte d'eítre jugé 
coüard, qui me donnoit quelque courage. Croyez d'vne 
bonne forte, & vous fentirez voítre cæur tout autre 
dans Ie peril. Ce n'eít pas que ie vueille prodiguer 
ma vie, mais deux chofes m'affeurent: Premierement, 
que c'eít DIE V feul qui en difpofera: fecondement, 
que fi ie meurs, ie feray heureux dans Ie Ciel. Auant 
que d'eítre baptifé, mon corps & mon ame trembloient 
dans les dangers, maintenant mon Arne eít en lieu 
d'affeurance, quoy que mon corps redoute Ie peril. 
[65] Se trouue-t'il en d'autres Compagnies, Auant, 
dit-il, que ie fuffe tout refolu de me ranger du party 
de la Foy, on me croyoit heureux; i'auois trois forts 
bien éprouuez: 1 'vn me donnoit bon f uccés à la chafíe ; 
l'autre eítoit pour la pefche, & Ie dernier feruoit 
dedans mes Traittes. I'ay tout jetté ces forts dedans 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


91 


at their threats, and felt more courageous than ever 
I was when fighting in battle against my Enemies." 
It is a pleasure to hear him speak of the ad van- 
tages of the Faith. \Vhen with young men whose 
thoughts are all of war, he says: " I feel compassion 
for you. All the Summer, you live in the midst of 
perils, and you tremble with fear, [64] as if the 
Enemy were already burning you. The fire that you 
dread is but a representation of Hell. 'Vhen in the 
hands of the Iroquois, it lasts but one or two nights, 
and sometimes even one may escape. In Hell they 
burn throughout eternity, and no one has ever gone 
out thence. 'Vh y do you not fear those pitiless 
flames? You go to war to show your courage, and I 
know not whether you understand what it is to be 
brave. I have been held in some esteem; but I con- 
fess that I was afraid when we came to blows, and 
that it was only the fear of being deemed a coward 
that gave me some courage. Believe in earnest and 
you will feel that your courage is very different in 
peril. It is not that I am anxious to throwaway my 
life, but two things reassure me,- in the first place, 
that it is GOD alone who will dispose of my life; 
secondly, that if I die, I shall be happy in Heaven. 
Before I was baptized, my body and my soul trembled 
in the midst of dangers; while now my Soul is in a 
place of safety, although my body dreads the peril." 
[65] If he happen to be in other Company, he says: 
" Before I was fully resolved to range myself on the 
side of the Faith, I was considered fortunate. I had 
three well-tried charms,-one brought me success in 
the chase, another in fishing; and the third served 
me in my Trading. I threw all these charms into 
the fire for fear of being cast therein myself. I 



92 


LES RELATIONS DES/ÊSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Ie feu, de peur d'y eftre precipité moy-mefme: i'ay 
abandonné toutes les danfes, OÙ vous fçauez Ie 
pouuoir que i 'y auois: ie me fuis priué en fuite de la 
plufpart des feftins du Pais. Vne femme qui mainte- 
nant í'adreíIeroit à moy, n'en remporteroit que les 
coups. Vous penfez que i'aye fait du fol, d'auoir 
quitté ce que vous eftimez Ie bonheur de la vie, mais 
c'eft vous qui me faites pitié. 1Ion jugement eft 
preferable au voftre, puifque i'ay efprouué en moy 
ce que vous eftes, & vous n' éprouuez pas ce que ie 
fuis. Faites-vous tous Chreftiens d'vne bõne façon, 
& alors ie feray fans réponfe fi vous me démentez: 
Mais croiez-moy, vous eftes tous miferables & Ie 
Diable vous traite comme nous faifons nos Captifs: 
Nous n'auons pour eux que des carreffes vn iour 
deuant leur mort, lors [66J mefme que noftre efprit 
n'eft rem ply que de cruautez: dont par apres nous 
prenons tout noftre plaifir à leur en faire fentir la 
rjgueur. 
lamais ie n'aurois fait, de raconter des difcours qui 
n' ont point de fin: car ce font fes entretiens les plus 
ordinaires. Et fans doute, fi pour efire Chreftien, il 
fuffifoit d'eftre conuaincu de veritez de noftre Foy, 
il feroit quafi autant de Chreftiens qu'il trouue d' Au- 
diteurs. Mais ceux qui luy ont dit: Nous fommes 
refolus de te fuiure; n'ont pas tous fon courage, quand 
leurs æuures doiuent con firmer leurs paroles. Toute- 
fois dans fa feule Cabane, il yen a déja plus de douze 
qui font baptifez, & fi neantmoins eftoit-ce l'vne des 
plus attachée du Pais, au feruice du Diable. 
N'eft-ce pas témoigner qu'on eftime la Foy, eftant 
au plus fort de fa pefche, éloigné de cinq lieuës, de 
quiter tout, & venir en courant, crainte de manquer 



1642 - 43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


93 


abandoned all the dances, wherein you know what 
power I had. I afterward deprived myself of attend- 
ing most of the feasts of the Country. If any wom- 
an were to accost me now, she would receive nothing 
but blows. You think that I have acted foolishly, 
in giving up what you consider the happiness of life; 
but it is you who arouse my pity. 
ly judgment is 
better than yours, because I have felt in myself what 
you are, and you do not feel what I am. Become 
Christians, all of you, in real earnest; and then I 
will not answer a word, if you deny what I say. But, 
believe me, you are all miserable; and the Devil 
treats you as we do our Captives. \Ve have nothing 
but caresses for them a day before their death, even 
when [66] our minds are filled with cruelties, the 
severity of which we afterward find all our pleasure 
in making them feel. .. 
I would never finish, were I to repeat these endless 
discourses, for they are the usual subjects of his con- 
versation. And, beyond a doubt, if to be a Christian 
it were sufficient to be convinced of the truths of our 
Faith, he would make almost as many Christians as 
he finds Hearers. But not all of those who have said 
to him, " We are resolved to follow thee," have his 
courage, when it is necessary that their deeds should 
confirm their words. Nevertheless, in his Cabin 
alone there are already more than twelve who have 
been baptized; and yet it was one of the most attached 
in the Country to the service of the Devil. 
Is it not a proof that a man esteems the Faith 
when, during the busiest time in the fishing season, 
he leaves everything, and from a distance of five 
leagues comes on the run, for fear of missing Mass 
on a Sunday? There are many in France who would 



94 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[V OL. 23 


vn Dimanche à la 11effe. II y en a beaucoup en 
France, qui euíIent pris plaifir de Ie voir arriuer tout 
nud, fa robe en pacquet fous Ie bras, crainte de la 
moüiller durant [67J vn orage de pluye. Ce fpeétacle 
n'a rien de fauuage qu'au jugement des yeux; mais 
l'efprit de la Foy y confidere ie ne fçay quoy, qui 
donneroit de la confufion à plufieurs bons Chrefiiens. 
Sïl auoit foin de feruir DIE V, DIE V auoit foin de 
luy. II y eut fept iours de tempefie, qui ne permet- 
toit nullement qu'on mift Ie canot en l'eau, pour aller 
leuer les retz qui eftoient tendus: ce mauuais temps 
luy donnoit Ie loifir de prier dauantage. Le calme 
efiant venu, les Infideles trouuerent leurs filets tous- 
rompus & emportez de cet orage, & luy trouua les 
fiens au mefme lieu OÙ illes auoit mis fains & entiers. 
Cela & femblables exemples, qui fouuent font 
arriuez à nos Chreftiens, font des Leçons, bien à la 
portée de leurs fens, qu'il fait bon auoir recours à 
DIE V . V n jeune enfant Chrefiien, fut cet H yuer 
furpris bien auant dedans la nuiét, dans vne cam- 
pagne de neiges: Ie froid, qui tous les H yuers arrefte 
& fait auffi mourir au milieu des chemins, les per- 
fonnes les plus robufies, l'abat quafi de dans ces neiges. 
Ie fuis mort. s'écrie-t'il, IE S V S, [68] ayez pitié de 
moy. II fent à l'infiant vne chaleur qui forti fie fes. 
membres, & Ie fait plûtoft courir que marcher Iente- 
ment. Apres vne traite de chemin affez longue, il 
retombe en foibleffe; fon recours eft à fa priere, 
IE S V S, ayez pitié de moy. Ses forces fe redoublent 
au mefme moment, & [il] continuë fa courfe. Sou- 
uent fes forces s'affoibliffent, mais chaque fois il 
repete la mefme Priere, & éprouue Ie mefme fecours. 
En-fin fur les deux heures apres minuiét, il arriue en 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


95 


have found pleasure in seeing him arrive, all naked, 
with his clothes in a bundle under his arm, for fear 
of their getting wet during [67J a shower of rain. 
Such a spectacle is a savage one only to the eyesight; 
but the spirit of Faith sees in it something undefin- 
able which would cause confusion to many good 
Christians. 
If he was attentive in serving GOD, Go D took care 
of him. There was a storm that lasted seven days, 
and rendered it impossible to launch a canoe for the 
purpose of taking up the nets that were set. This 
bad weather gave him leisure to pray still more. 
\Vhen calm returned, the Infidels found all their nets 
broken and carried away by the storm; while his 
were safe and sound, in the same place where he had 
put them. 
This and similar instances, which have frequently 
happened to our Christians, are so many Lessons 
well within the scope of their understanding, which 
show that it is good to have recourse to Go D. Last 
\Vinter, a young Christian child unexpectedly found 
himself, late at night, in a plain all covered with 
snow. The cold, which every \Vinter stops the most 
robust persons, and even causes them to die in the 
middle of the road, almost overcame him amid the 
snow. "I shall die," he cried; " J E S US, [68J have 
pity on me." He at once felt a warmth which gave 
new vigor to his limbs, and made him run rather 
than walk slowly. After traversing a long stretch 
of road, he again felt weak. He had recourse to his 
prayer: "J E S US, have pity on me." His energy 
was redoubled at the same moment, and he continued 
to run. His strength often failed him; but on each 
occasion he repeated the same Prayer, and experi- 



96 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


fa Cabane, & tous beniffent DIE V de l' auoir confer- 
ué: mais luy s'accufe qu'au milieu de fes courfes, il 
auoit perdu la memoire de celuy qui luy donnoit ces 
forces pour courir. 
Vne Chreftienne venant d'vn feftin, fe fentit atta- 
quée de la fiéure: elle craint que ce ne foit quelque 
fort qu'on ait jetté dedans fon plat: Car, difent-ils, 
c'eft là Ie temps que prennent fubtilement les Sor- 
ciers, pour les faire mourir. Nenny, dit Ie mary, 
Qui croit bien, ne craint point Ie Diable. N'as-tu 
pas prié DIEV auant que de manger? I'eftois feule 
Chreftienne, répondit candidement la femme, i'ay eu 
peur qu'on fe mocquaft de moy. Tu as [69J done 
jufte occafion de craindre, repartit Ie mary: Qui a 
honte de DIE V ne me rite pas que DIE V luy aide. 
A ce propos, vn bon Enfant s'accufoit il y a quel- 
que temps, qu'eftant injurié, il s'étoit mis en grande 
cholere, & auoit rendu injure pour injure. Et qu'as- 
tu dit, luy demanda Ie Pere qui luy parloit. Vn tel, 
répondit-il, qui n'a pas encores d'efprit (c'eft à dire, 
qui ne croit pas encore) s'eft efcrié en me voyant: 
\... oila la Foy qui marche. Ie n'ay pû fupporter cela; 
& luy ay reparty auffi en me mocquant de luy : Voila 
Ie fonge, voila la danfe, voila Ie Diable qui marche. 
Tu es vn poltron, m'a-t'il dit, tu crains Ie feu d'En- 
fer. Oüy dea, ie Ie crains, luy ay-je répondu; Viens 
en noftre Cabane, & faute dans Ie feu que ie t'y feray, 
& là tu me feras paroiftre ton courage; & alors tu 
auras raifon de m'appeller poltron: Tu ne crains pas 
Ie feu quand i1 eft bien loin de toy. Ce bon Enfant 
croyoit auoir commis quelque grand peché. 
Vne ieune fille, ãgée de quinze à feize ans, eftant 
allée couper du bois, auec fes compagnes Infideles, 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I6.p 


97 


enced the same assistance. Finally, about two hours 
after midnight, he reached his own Cabin and all 
thanked GOD for having preserved him; but he 
accused himself for having, while running, forgotten 
to remember him who had enabled him so to run. 
A Christian woman felt herself attacked by fever, 
on her return from a feast; she feared that this 
resulted from some spell that had been cast in her 
plate,- for, they say, that is the moment that the 
Sorcerers craftily seize, to make them die. ,. Not at 
all," said her husband; "whosoever truly believes, 
fears not the Devil. Didst thou not pray to GOD 
before eating? .. "I was the only Christian there," 
candidly replied his wife; " I feared that they would 
scoff at me." "Thou hast [69J then, good reason 
to fear," replied her husband; "whosoever is 
ashamed of GOD, does not deserve that GOD should 
help him." 
In this connection, a good Child confessed some 
time ago that, on being insulted, he had flown into a 
great rage, and had returned insult for insult. "And 
what didst thou say?" asked the Father who spoke 
to him. "So and so," he replied, " who has not yet 
any sense" (that is, who does not yet believe) "called 
O".1t on seeing me: ' Here is the Faith walking about! ' 
I could not endure that; and I also replied, mocking 
him: ' Here is the dream, here is the dance, here is 
the Devil, walking about!' 'Thou art a coward;' 
he said to me, ' thou fearest the fire of Hell.' 'Yes, 
indeed, I do fear it,' I replied to him. 'Come to our 
Cabin, and jump into the fire that I shall prepare for 
thee, and thus thou wilt show me thy courage; and 
then thou wilt have reason to call me a coward. 
Thou fearest not fire, when it is very far from thee.' " 



98 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


s'accufoit pareillement [70J de les auoir tancée, parce 
qu' elles difoient des chofes deshonneftes. Tu deuois 
les quitter là, luy dit-on, Auffi ay-ie fait, répondit- 
elle: & eftant toute feule vn peu eíloignée d' elles, ie 
difois en moy-mefme, Helas! que ne croyent-elles? 
elles font fans efprit; ie profite autant comme elles 
en terre, mon bois eft auffi bon que Ie leur, & outre 
tout cela, ie merite Ie Ciel, cependant qu'elles fe 
damnent de la forte. 



Hi42-43] 


RELA TIQ.N OF ./642 


99 


This good Child thought that he had committed a 
great sin. 
A young girl, fifteen or sixteen years old, who had 
gone to cut wood with her Infidel companions, like- 
wise accused herself [70] for having rebuked them 
because they talked about immodest things. "Thou 
shouldst have left them," she was told. "I did so," 
she replied, "and when I was all alone, some dis- 
tance away, I said to myself: 'Alas! why do they 
not believe? They have no sense. I derive as much 
benefit from the earth as they,-my wood is as good 
as theirs; and, in addition to that, I deserve Heaven 
while they are damning themselves thus. ' " 



100 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


CHAPITRE VII. 


EXERCICES ORDINAIRES DES CHRESTIENS DE LA MESME 
MISSION. 


Q VELQVES robufies que foient nos corps, difoit 
vn iour vn de nos Sauuages, Chrefiien, à 
quelques Infideles qu'il enfeignoit. Si nous 
manquons de nourriture, nos forces rnanquent, & vn 
enfant nous pourroit terracer. Quelques refolutions 
que prenne nofire cæur, fi la grace de DIE V ne for- 
tifie puiffarnment nofire [7 I] Arne, Ie moindre heurt 
nous fait tornber, & fans difficulté Ie Diable nous ren- 
uerfe. Ie fentois ces foibleffes, leur difoit-il, aupara- 
uant que deftre baptifé; rnais depuis ce temps-Ià, ie 
fens rnon Arne de plus en plus remplie de forces: 
parce que DIE V va augmentant fa grace à ceux qui 
.continuent à bien faire. Puifque nos Sauuages d'eux- 
mefmes reconnoiffent cette verité. nous pouuons bien 
dire apres eux, que fi DIE V leur a donné quelque 
courage, ce n'a efié qu'en fuite de leur fidelité, dans 
les exercices de la Foy. 
Dés Ie Inatin, quelque rigueur de froid qu'i1 fifi, 
Hommes, Femmes & Enfans, rempliffoient la Cha- 
pelle pour entendre la Meffe, auec autant de deuotion 
que fi chaque iour leur eufi efié vn iour de Fefie: Ie 
leuer du Soleil eft la cloche qui les aduertit. Ils ne 
fortoient point de ce lieu, qu'on ne leur euft donné 
à tous en cornrnun quelque aduis, pour pafíer plus 
Chrefiiennement Ie refie de la iournée. 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I6p 


101 


CHAPTER VII. 


USUAL EXERCISES OF THE CHRISTIAKS OF THE SAME 
MISSION. 


, , H OWEVER robust our bodies may be," said 
one of our Christian Savages one day, to 
some Infidels whom he was teaching, " if 
food fails us, we lose our strength, and a child could 
throw us to the ground. \Vhatever resolutions our 
hearts may take, if the grace of GOD do not power- 
fully fortify our [71J Souls, the slightest shock causes 
us to fall, and the Devil overthrows us without any 
difficulty. I felt such weakness," he said to them, 
" before I was baptized; but since then I feel my 
Soul more and more strengthened, because GOD 
gives an increased measure of his grace to those who 
continue to do well." Since our Savages acknowl- 
edge this truth of their own accord, we may well 
say with them that, if GOD has given them some 
courage, it has been solely in consequence of their 
fidelity in the practice of the Faith. 
Early in the morning, however cold the weather 
might be, :Men, \Vomen, and Children filled the 
Chapel to hear Mass, with as much devotion as if 
every day had been a Feast day for them. The. 
rising of the Sun is the bell that warns them. They 
did not leave the place until some advice had been 
given to them in common about passing the remain- 
der of the day in a more Christian manner. 
During the day, the Fathers went to their Cabins, 



102 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[V OL. 23 


Pendant Ie iour. les Peres alloient les enfeigner 
dans leurs Cabanes, non feulement leur Catechifme, 
mais toutes les veritez les plus importantes de noftre 
[72J Foy: Le tout eftant tellement difpofé en que- 
fiions & réponfes, felon la portée des Sauuages, qu'il 
n'y a quafi chofe aucune dont ils ne foient capables. 
C'eft vn plaifir d'eftre en cecy témoin de leur ferueur: 
On verroit des Vieillards, des ieunes Hommes, des 
Femmes & des Enfans, n'auoir point de recreation 
plus fenfible que de fe faire interroger, & fe répondre 
les vns aux autres; & ce qui nous confole Ie plus eft, 
qu'il n'y a point d'autre atrait, ny efperance d'autre 
recompenfe pour eux, que celle du Paradis. Tel âgé 
de cinquante & de foixante ans, rencontrant vn 
Enfant, luy dira: Mon nepueu, tu as vn bon efprit, 
-enfeigne-moy? fais-moy fuër à te répondre. La 
femme interrogera Ie mary, Ie fils enfeignera pareille- 
ment fa mere, & fi elle manque à bien répondre, il fe 
mocquera d'elle, la menaçant de ne la plus inftruire, 
puis qu'elle ne veut pas retenir ce qu'on luy veut 
apprendre: & le bon eft, que la mere ne s' en fâchera 
pas. II a raifon, dira-t'elle, de me tancer, car ie n'ay 
pas bien retenu ma leçon. 
Auant que ie fuffe baptifé, nous difoit vn certain, 
ie m'ennuyois fouuent nonobftant [73J to us les diuer- 
tiffemens du Pais, que ie recherchois autant qu'vn 
autre, maintenant eftant feul, ie repete à part-moy 
les belles chofes qu'on m'enfeigne, & ie m'entretiens 
dans les defirs d'en fçauoir dauantage. Ce íont-Ià 
mes plaifirs, mes danfes, mes feftins, & tout ce que 
i'ay abandonné pour deformais embraffer la Foy. 
Tandis qu'on faifoit dans Ie Bourg l'Ononhoüa- 
roia, dont cy-deffus il a efté parlé, & que les Infideles 



1642-43] 


RELATION OF J642 


103 


to teach them not only their Catechism but also the 
most important truths of our [72] Faith,-the whole 
being so arranged in questions and answers, accord- 
ing to the capacity of the Savages, that there is hard- 
ly anything that they cannot understand. It is a 
pleasure to witness their fervor in this respect. One 
sees Old Men, young Men, Women, and Children, 
who can find no more pleasant recreation than to be 
questioned by and to answer one another; and what 
consoles us the most is, that there is no other attrac- 
tion or other hope of reward for them than that 
of Paradise. One who is between fifty and sixty 
years of age, on meeting a Child, will say to him: 
" My nephew, thou art clever, teach me; make me 
sweat to answer thee." A wife will question her 
husband; a son will likewise teach his mother, and, 
if she fail to answer properly, he will laugh at her, 
threatening to give up instructing her, because she 
will not remember what he wishes her to learn. And 
the best of it is, that the mother will not be angry at 
him. "He is right," she will say, " in scolding me, 
for I have not remembered my lesson well." 
" Before I was baptized," a certain man said to us, 
" I often felt dull, in spite of [73] all the amusements 
of the Country, which I sought as much as any other. 
Now, when I am alone, I repeat to myself the excel- 
lent things that are taught me, and I encourage 
myself in the desire to know more. Such are my 
pleasures; my dances and my feasts, and all that, I 
have abandoned to embrace henceforth the Faith." 
While they were celebrating in the Village the 
feast of Ononhouaroia, which has been mentioned 
above, and while the Infidels were demanding, by 
means of enigmas, their desires,-that is to say, the 



104 


LES Rl!."'LATIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


fe demandoient par enigme leurs defirs, c' eft à dire, 
celuy de leur Demon; nos Chrefiiens s' affembloient 
pour fe propofer auffi leurs defirs. Pour moy, difoit 
l'vn, ie defire aller au Ciel; & moy, difoit l'autre, ie 
fouhaiterois de voir tous nos Freres qui font dans ce 
Païs, Chrefiiens, & qu'ils fuffent raffemblez tous dans 
vne Bourgade où Ie peché n'eufi point d'entrée: quant 
à moy, difoit vn troifiéme, ie voudrois voir tout Ie 
Païs bien conuerty: & moy, difoit vn autre, fi on me 
vouloit fendre la tefie d'vn coup de hache, pour me 
faire trouuer Ie defir de ces DiabIes, ie me laifferois 
maffacrer plûtoft que de parler vn mot: pour moy, 
[74J difoit Ie fuiuant, ie parlerois bien-haut, & voicy 
ce que ie dirois au fol qui me propoferoit fon enigme: 
Tu de fire brûler dans Ie feu, auec Ie Diable dont tu 
recherches les defirs, jette toy dans ces braziers, ton 
defir & Ie fien fera accomply. Lors qu'ils fe recre- 
oient de la forte, ces infenfez ne laiffoient pas de 
pafíer à trauers de la Cabane, & tel deuenoit fage 
f' arrefiant à ces bons difcours. 
Le frui6t de ces bonnes infiruétions, nous à paru à 
l'æil fi fenfiblement, que nous en efperons encore 
beaucoup dauantage: Car comme la plufpart des 
Chrefiiens poffedent les principales veritez de nofire 
Foy, par ces quefiions & réponfes faciles, ils font bien 
plus que nous pour infiruire les autres Sauuages. Et 
au moins auons-nous cette confolation, que fi la pluf- 
part ne font pas baptifez, ce n'efi pas marque qu'ils 
ne fçachent tout ce qui efi necefíaire pour l' efire. 
Les Hurons eurent cet Hyuer vne veritable crainte, 
en fuite d'vne faufíe alarme qui leur efioit venuë: 
Qu'vne Armée d'Iroquois efioit fur Ie point d'enleuer 
Ie bourg de Kontarea, principal bouleuard [75J du 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF 1642 


105 


desire of their Demon,- our Christians met together 
to state their desires also. "As for me," said one, 
" I wish to go to Heaven." "And I," said another, 
" would like to see all our Brothers in this Country 
Christians, and all gathered together in a Village 
where sin could not enter." "As for me," said a 
third, " I would like to see the whole Country thor- 
oughly converted." "And I, It said another, "if 
anyone wished to split my head open with a blow 
from a hatchet, to make me find out the desire of 
those Devils, I would let myself be murdered, rather 
than say a word." "For my part," [74] said the 
next, " I would speak out aloud, and this is what I 
would say to the fool who should propound his enig- 
ma to me: 'Thou wishest to burn in the fire with 
the Devil, whose desires thou seek est ; throw thyself 
into those fireplaces, and thy desire and his will be 
accomplished. ' " While they were amusing them- 
selves in this manner, the foolish ones ceased not to 
pass through the Cabin, and some became wise while 
stopping to hear such pious discourse. 
The fruit of these good instructions has been so 
apparent to our eyes, that we hope to derive still 
greater benefit therefrom. For, as most of the Chris- 
tians possess the principal truths of our Faith through 
those easy questions and answers, they do much more 
than we can for the instruction of the other Savages. 
And at least we have this consolation, that, if the 
majority of them be not baptized, it is not a sign 
that they do not know all that is required for it. 
Last \Vinter, the Hurons had a real fright, in con- 
sequence of a false alarm that had reached them that 
an Army of Iroquois was on the point of carrying the 
village of Kontarea, the chief bulwark [75] of the 



106 


LES RELA TIONS DES J
SUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Pais. Ceux de la Conception nous firent demander, 
fi nous ne les Baptizerions pas tous lorfque l'Ennemy 
paroifiroit; que pour eux ils defiroient aller dans Ie 
Ciel apres la mort. Cela monfire qu'ils connoiffent 
la Verité; mais en France, auffi bien qu'aux Hurons, 
il n'y en a que trop, qui viuans en Barbares, vou- 
droient bien apres, mourir bons Chrefiiens. 
Lors que Ie Soleil fe recouche, il aduertit les Chre- 
fiiens de fe raffembler en la Chapelle: Les Peres qui 
ont foin d'eux y font pour l'ordinaire; mais c'efi quel- 
qu'vn des plus anciens Chrefiiens, qui chacun à fon 
tour, de Semaine en Semaine, prefide à cette Affem- 
blée, dit tout haut les Prieres, les autres Ie fuiuant: 
& à la fin, lors que les Peres font abfens, exhorte tous 
les autres à bien faire les deuoirs de Chrefiien. 
Les Samedis, tous fe confeffent, pour fe bien 
difpofer au fainét lour, (c'efi ainfi qu'ils nomment Ie 
Dimanche) auquel auant la Meffe, on leur fait vn 
petit Sermon. Quoy que tous fe foient confeffez, 
toutefois d'ordinaire on ne les fait Communier 
[78 i.e., 76] qu'vne fois chaque moisT Ie me fou- 
uiens d' auoir leu dans les Epiftres de ce grand 
Apofire de l'Orient fainét François Xauier, que des 
lndiens, tant noirs que blancs, dont il en auoit bap- 
tifé des milliers, il n'y auoit quafi que les Enfans & 
tres-peu d'autres, qui fe fauuaffent. Plus ie confi- 
dere les Epiftres de ce grand Sainét, & plus il me 
femble que ces Peuples icy où nous fommes en 1'lnde 
Occidentale, font plus capables des myfteres de nofire 
Foy: au moins les fentimens de DIE V, entrent plus 
au ant dedans leurs cæurs, quand vne fois ils fe font 
conuertis. S'il plaift au Ciel continuer fes bene- 
diétions fur les autres, & en faire d'auffi bons Chre- 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF 1642 


107 


Country.3 Those who resided at la Conception asked 
us whether we would not Baptize them all when the 
Enemy should appear, because they wished to go to 
Heaven after death. This shows that they know the 
Truth; but, in France as well as among the Hurons, 
there are but too many who, after having lived as 
Barbarians, are very anxious to die good Christians. 
The setting of the Sun warns the Christians to 
collect in the Chapel. The Fathers who have charge 
of them are generally there; but it is always one of 
the older Christians who-each in turn, from \Veek 
to 'Veek - presides over the 1tleeting; who recites 
the Prayers aloud, while the others follow him; and 
who at the end, when the Fathers are not present. 
exhorts all the others properly to perfor
 their 
duties as Christians. 
On Saturday, all go to confession, to prepare them- 
selves for the holy Day (so they call Sunday), on 
which a short Sermon is preached to them before 
Mass. Although all have confessed their sins, never- 
theless, as a rule, they are allowed to receive Com- 
munion [78 i.e., 76J but once a month. I remember 
having read in the Epistles of that great Apostle of 
the East, saint François Xavier, that of the Indians, 
both black and white, whom he had baptized by thou- 
sands, only the Children and a very few others were 
saved. The more I read the Epistles of that great 
Saint, the more does it seem to me that these Peoples 
among whom we are in Western India are more cap- 
able of understanding the mysteries of our Faith; at 
least, the perception of GOD penetrates more deeply 
into their hearts, when once they are converted. If 
Heaven be pleased to continue to grant its blessings 
to the others, and to make as good Christians of them 



108 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


fiiens que font ceux qu'il nous donne pour Ie prefent, 
ie dirois auec affeurance que la plufpart, & quafi tous, 
feront du nombre des Eleuz. 
La vraye Foy fait de grands l\1iracles; elle change 
vn cæur barbare, en vn cæur felon Ie cæur de D I EV. 
On Ie void plus clairement dans la tendreffe de leur 
confcience, qu'ailleurs. Tel f'accufe de ce que la 
nuiét f'étant refueil1é, crainte du froid, il n'a ofé tirer 
Ie bras de deffous fa [79 i.e., 77] robe, pour faire Ie 
figne de la Croix, fe contentant de Ie faire fur fa poi- 
étrine. Ie me fuis comporté comme feroit vn Infi- 
dele, dira vn autre, eftant à mon trauail, i'auois déja 
dõné huiét ou neuf coups deffus vn arbre, pour l'aba. 
tre, fans demander l' affiftance de DIE V. I' ay enduré 
du froid, dira vn autre, comme les beftes qui font 
dedans les bois, i1 veut dire, qu'il n'a pas offert à 
DIE V , fes petites fouffrances. Que f'ils tombent fur 
la Semaine, en quelque peché plus grief, ils vien. 
dront fouuent à l'heure mefme, f'en accufer: & quel- 
quefois il y a plus de fainéteté que de mal en ce en 
quoy ils penfent auoir efté grandement criminels. 
Tu fçauras, diront-ils, que ie me fuis trouué au Con- 
feil, où on a refolu de faire vne telle danfe, pour 
appaifer Ie Diable. Y efiant engagé par furprife, 
fans en pouuoir fortir, i'ay demandé pardon à DIE V , 
i'ay bien dit des injures au Diable, & me fuis endor- 
my. Lors qu'on f'eft leué pour fortir, ie me fuis 
refueil1é, & ay dit aux Capitaines qu'ils auoient tort 
de m'inuiter à femblables Confeils, puis qu'ils fçauent 
bien que ie n'ay que l'horreur pour les Demons. 
[80 i.e., 78] Vn jeune Enfant penfoit eftre perdu, 
quelques iours apres fon Baptefme: Ie viens d'enten- 
dre, difoit-il, de méchantes paroles; ie haïffois ces 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


109 


as those whom it now gives us, I may safely say that 
most and nearly all of them will be of the number of 
the Elect. 
True Faith works great .Miracles; it changes a sav- 
age heart into one that is in accord with the heart of 
GOD. \V e observe this more clear! y in the tender- 
ness of their conscience than in anything else. One 
accuses himself because, on awakening during the 
night, he has, on account of the cold, been afraid to 
withdraw his arm from beneath his [79 i.e., 77J cover- 
ing, in order to make the sign of the Cross, contenting 
himself with making it on his breast. "I behaved as 
an Infidel would have done," another will say; " I 
was at work, and had already struck eight or nine 
blows on a tree to fell it, and I had not asked GOD'S 
assistance." "I have endured cold," still another 
will say, "like the beasts that live in the woods." 
By this he means that he has not offered his petty 
sufferings to GOD. If during the \Veek they commit 
some more grievous sin, they often come at once to 
confess it; and sometimes there is more holiness than 
evil in acts which they think have been highly crimi- 
nal. "Thou must know," they will say, "that I 
was present at the Council when it was resolved that 
such a dance should be performed to appease the 
Devil. Being caught there by surprise, without 
being able to get away, I begged pardon of GOD; I 
said many insulting things to the Devil, and I went 
to sleep. \Vhen they rose to depart, I a woke, and 
told the Captains that they did wrong in inviting me 
to such Councils, because they knew that I had 
nothing but horror for the Demons." 
[80 i.e., 78J A young Child thought that he was 
lost, some days after his Baptism. "I have just 



110 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


chofes là de tout mon cæur, & priois ÐIEV qu'il 
n'effaçafi pas mon Baptefme; ie leur difois qu'ils fe 
t'euffent Ese. teuffent], que Ie Grand 
Iaifire les puni- 
roit, & qu'illes entendoit bien; nonobftant ce que ie 
leur difois, iis fe mocquoièt de moy. 
Vn Chef de Cabane Chreftienne, vn iour ayant 
repris fa fæur, encore Catechumene, d'vn zele vn 
peu trop aétif: Hé quoy, luy difoit-il, veux-tu done 
eftre miferable, & que moy feul ie fois heureux? tu 
fais ce qui merite que iamais on ne te Baptife. Cette 
pauure femme f' en prend à fes yeux, elle pleure fa 
faute & luy en demande pardon, Ie priant de ne Ie 
pas dire aux Peres. 
Ia fæur, i'ay peché plus que 
toy, luy répond ce bon Chreftien, car eftant Baptifé, 
ma perfonne eft facrée, & mon peché en eft plus 
grand: mais c'efi l'amour que ie te porte qui m'a 
ainfi mis en cholere. II n'y a que I'efprit de D I EV 
qui donne cet' horreur du peché, & n'y a pas d'autre 
Iumiere que la fienne, qui efc1aire [8 I i.e., 79] vne 
Arne, à reconnoifire iufqu'aux petites fautes. 
V n Infidele demandoit vn iour à vne Chrefiienne, 
ce qu'ils alloient faire l'vn apres l'autre dans la Cha- 
pelle; & elle luy ayant répondu fimplement, qu'ils 
alloient fe confeffer de leurs pechez. Et comment, 
dit-il, pechons-nous? pour moy, ie ne reconnois point 
de pechez. 11 ne faut pas f'en étonner, repartit cette 
bonne Femme, ta vie n'efi qu'vne iuite continuelle 
de pechez, comment les diftinguerois- tu ? N ous 
autres qui auons la Foy, nous fommes toûjours fur 
nos gardes, & par ainfi nous reconnoiffons bien nos 
fautes. 
Lors qu'ils fe doiuent Confeffer, ils fe preparent 
auec vn foin tout à fait Ioüable. On verra quelque- 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


111 


heard bad words," he said. "I detested those things 
with all my heart, and prayed GOD not to blot out 
my Baptism. I told them to be silent,- that the 
Great :Master would punish them, and that he heard 
them well. In spite of what I said to them. they 
scoffed at me." 
The Head of a Christian Cabin one day reproved 
his sister, who was still a Catechumen, with a little 
too much zeal. "What," said he, " dost thou wish 
to be miserable, and that I alone should be happy? 
"\Vhat thou art doing is enough to prevent thee from 
ever being Baptized." The poor woman, not know- 
ing what to do, takes refuge in tears; she laments 
her error, and begs him not to tell the Fathers of it. 
" 
ly sister," replies this good Christian, "I have 
sinned more than thou hast, for, inasmuch as I am 
Baptized, my person is consecrated, and my sin is all 
the greater; but it is the love that I bear thee, which 
has caused me to be so angry. " The spirit of GOD 
alone gives such a horror of sin, and there is no other 
light than his which illumines [81 i.e., 79J a Soul so 
that it recognizes even its slight faults. 
An Infidel one day asked a Christian woman what 
they all went to do, one after the other, in the Chap- 
el; and she replied simply that they went to confess 
their sins. "And how," said he, " do we sin? As 
for me, I do not recognize any sins." "There is 
nothing surprising in that," replied the good vVom- 
an; "thy life is but one continual succession of sins; 
how couldst thou distinguish them? vVe who have 
the Faith are always on our guard, and thus we easily 
recognize our faults." 
"\Vhen they aTe about to go to Confession, they 
prepare themselves with most praiseworthy care. 



112 


LES RELA TIONS DES J
SUITES 


(VOL. 23 


fois la femme & Ie mary, qui taus deux fe deman- 
dent leurs fautes: f'aduertiffent de ce qu'ils ont peché 
Ie long de la femaine, & rapprennent comment i1 
f'en faut accufer. Ie croy que Ie Ciel prend plaifir à 
leur fimplicité. D'autrefois on verra Ie Pere contre 
fon Enfant, Ie fils contre fa mere, & toute vne Fa- 
mille qui s'accuferont les vns les autres, [82 i.e., 80] 
quand les Peres qui Ies vont inftruire entrent dans la 
Cabane. Mon fils, dira Ia mere, n'a pas voulu nous 
faire prier DIEV, s'en eft-il confeffé? Oüy dea, 
répond I'Enfant, ie ne l'ay pas voulu; car tandis que 
ie fais Ies Prieres, vous ne faites que badiner: foyez 
fage, & ie vous feray prier D I EV. Oüy, mais tu n'as 
pas obey, dira Ie Pere: il eft vray, répondra Ie fils: 
mais vous auez auffi peché, car ce matin vous auez 
raconté vn fonge que vous auiez eu Ia nuiét. En vn 
mot, c'eft vne diuifion toute pleine de paix, c'eft vne 
guerre aimable que Ia Foy apporte dans vne Maifon. 
Puifque nous fommes fur la Confeffion, ie ne puis 
raporter en lieu plus conuenable, vne penfée d'vn 
Chreftien, Sauuage, qui m'a femblé digne d'eftre 
couchée icy. On luyauoit enfeigné que les pechez 
eftans vne fois effacez, jamais ne retournoient, mais 
que Ia Grace perduë par Ie peché, nous eft renduë 
quand nous nous Confeffons. Cherchant en fon efprit 
Ia caufe de cette difference, voicy Ie raifonnement 
qu'il faifoit: La Grace, difoit-il, eft comme vne belle 
robe de Caftor, [83 i.e., 81] dont Dieunoftre pere va 
reueftant l'ame de fes bons enfans. Quãd vn de nos 
enfans nous a fafché, nous Iuy oftons fa belle robe, 
& Ie laiffons tout nud; mais nous ne jettons pas la 
robe dans Ie feu, c'eft vne chofe trap pretieufe, nOUi 
Ia referuons quelque part, pour Iuy rendre, quand il 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF r642 


113 


Sometimes one will hear the husband and wife ask- 
ing each other their faults; they inform each other 
of the sins that they have committed during the week, 
and each teaches the other how he should confess. 
I think that Heaven takes pleasure in their simplicity. 
At other times, one will see the Father with his Child, 
the son with his mother, and an entire Familyaccus- 
ing one another, [82 i.e., 80] when the Fathers who 
go to teach them enter the Cabin. "
ly son," the 
mother will say, " would not hear us say our prayers 
to GOD. Has he confessed it? " , , Yes, indeed," the 
Child replies; " I would not do so because, when I 
say the Prayers, you do nothing but jest; behave 
properly, and I will hear you pray to GOD." "Yes, 
but thou didst not obey," the Father will say. "It 
is true," the son will answer; "but you also have 
sinned, for this morning you related a dream that you 
had during the night." In a word, it is a most peace- 
ful discord, a pleasing strife, that Faith brings into a 
House. 
While on the subject of Confession, I cannot find 
a more suitable occasion to speak of the opinion ex- 
pressed by a Christian Savage, which has seemed to 
me to be worthy of mention here. He had been 
taught that, when sins are once forgiven, they never 
return, but that Grace lost through sin comes back 
to us when we Confess. Seeking in his own mind 
for the cause of this difference, he reasoned as fol- 
lows: " Grace," said he, " is 1ike a beautiful robe of 
Beayer fur, [83 i.e., 81] with which God our father 
clothes the souls of his good children. 'Vhen one of 
our children offends us, we take his fine robe from 
him and leave him quite naked, but we do not throw 
the dress into the fire. It is too valuable a thing, and 



114 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


voudra nous obëyr. De mefme Dieu, quand nous 
auons peché, defpouïlle noftre ame de fa grace, mais 
i1 ne veut pas que cette grace foit perduë, elle luy eft 
trop pretieufe, il la conferue cherement dedans fes 
threfors, tous preft de nous la rendre quand nous 
luy demandons pardon. l\lais Ie Peché eft vne chofe 
fi diforme, que Dieu en a horreur; quand nous nous 
confeffons, ill'aneantit tout à fait, voudroit i1 mettre 
dans fes threfors vn monftre fi hideux? ce n' eft done 
pas merueille, que iamais il ne retourne dans noftre 
Arne, en eftant vne fois effacé. Si ce raifonnement 
n'eft pas receu dedans l'Efchole, on doit excufer vn 
Barbare, qui iamais n'a leu fainét Thomas. 



1642-43] 


RELA TIOiV OF I6p 


115 


we put it away somewhere to give it back to him 
when he is willing to obey us. In the same manner, 
God, when we have sinned, deprives our soul of its 
grace; but he does not wish that grace to be lost, 
for it is too precious to him. He preserves it very 
carefully in his treasury, being quite ready to give 
it back to us when we ask his pardon. But Sin is so 
hideous a thing, that God has a horror of it. When 
we confess ourselves he destroys it entirely. \V ould 
he place so frightful a monster among his treasures? 
It is therefore not surprising that it never returns 
into our Souls, when once it is washed away." If 
this argument be not received in the School, we must 
excuse a Barbarian who has never read saint Thomas. 



116 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


[84 i.e., 82] CHAP1TRE \"'111. 


DE LA MISSION DE SAINCT IOSEPH AUX ATTINGUEE- 
NONGNAHAK. 


C ETTE :11iffion eft échuë en partage au P. Charles 
Garnier & au P. Simon Ie Moine; qui ont fait 
leur refidence plus ordinaire dans Ie bourg de 
Sainét 1ofeph. A peine y font-ils arriuez, qu'ils 
aprennent qu'vn petit enfant au berceau, eft aban- 
dõné affez loing de dans la campagne, comme vne 
proye dont la mort auoit déja pris poffeffion. lIs y 
courent de mefme pas, & trouuent cet enfant qui 
tiroit à la fin, Ie Baptizent, & l'enuoyent au Ciel 
accroifire Ie nombre des Eleus. 
Peu de iours apres, entrant en la cabane du plus 
grand Magicien, qui foit dans cette Nation, ils aper- 
çoiuent vne fille de treze à quatorze-ans, qui fe mou- 
roit. lIs iugent bien qu'en vne cabane fi maudite, 
où Ie Diable eft Ie maiftre, pour tirer cette viétime 
de fes mains, i1 faut y proceder [85 i.e., 83J douce- 
ment, & inftruire l'enfant, fans témoigner Ie vouloir 
faire. lIs font monftre d'vne image de N oftre Sei- 
gneur, qui agrée à la mere de cette malade; & prenèt 
occafion là deffus, de parler des grãdeurs de Dieu, 
du Paradis, & de l'Enfer, & des veritez principales 
de noftre foy. Dés Ie moment, que cet infame Magi- 
cien, entendit parler du Baptefme, il fe met à vomir 
mille blafphemes contre Dieu. N os Peres voyent 
affez, qu'il eft temps de découurir nettement leur 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


1]7 


[84 i.e., 82J CHAPTER VIII. 


OF THE MISSION OF SAINT JOSEPH AMONG THE AT- 
TINGUEENONGNAHAK. 


T HIS :Mission has fallen to the lot of Father 
Charles Garnier and Father Simon Ie :Moine, 
who usually reside in the village of Saint 
Joseph. Hardly had they arrived when they learned 
that a little child, still in its cradle, had been aban- 
doned at a considerable distance in the open country, 
as a prey of which death had already taken posses- 
sion. They hastened thither at once, found the 
child, whose end was approaching, Baptized it, and 
sent it to Heaven, to be added to the number of the 
Elect. 
A few days afterward, when they entered the cabin 
of the greatest :Magician of that Nation, they observed 
a girl thirteen or fourteen years of age, who was dy- 
ing. They decided that in so cursed a cabin, where- 
in the Devil was master, it was necessary to proceed 
with care in order to pluck this victim from his 
clutches, [85 i.e., 83] and to instruct the child with- 
out declaring that they wished to do so. They 
exhibited a picture of Our Lord, which pleased the 
mother of the sick girl; and they took advantage of 
the opportunity to speak of the greatness of God, of 
Paradise, of Hell, and of the principal truths of our 
faith. As soon as the infamous :Magician heard them 
speak of Baptism, he commenced to pour forth a 
thousand blasphemies against God. Our Fathers 



118 


LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


deffein. Que dif-tu la deffus? demandent-ils à la 
malade; veux-tu à iamais eftre bruílée dans l'Enfer? 
NOD, Don s'écrie ce fupoft de Satan, refolument elle 
ne fera pas Baptizée: fortés de ma 
1aifon. Sa pau- 
ure fille languiffante, qui iufqu'alors n'auoit dit pas 
vn mot prend d'elle mefme la parole. Ce n'eft pas 
vous, dit-elle, courageufement à fon pere, qui en cela 
difpoferez de moy: ie defire, fans delay, eftre Bap- 
tizée: car ie veux aller dans Ie Ciel. A cette réponfe, 
que pas vn n'attendoit, ce malheureux demeure sãs 
parole: mais la mere de l'Enfant, parle pour Ie mary. 
Ce n'eft pas, s'efcrie elle, vne maladie ordinaire qui 
fait [86 i.e., 84J mourir ma fille; c'eft vn tel Demon 
qui la tuë depuis quatre moys: c'eft à luy feul, & à 
nos danfes que nous auõs recours, auec cela tu ne 
peux pas la Baptizer. Pourquoy non, répond la 
malade, ie detefte tous les demons, ie renonce à 
nos danfes, & toy ie te prie, ne me refufe pas Ie 
Baptefme, dit-elle, au Pere qui la venoit d'infiruire. 
Quand Dieu vient poffeder vn cæur, il n'a ny oreilles, 
ny fentiment pour tout ce qui eft de plus tendre dans 
la nature. C' eût efté vne cruauté de refufer à cette 
Arne, l'entrée du Paradis, où Ie Sang de Iefus-Chrifi 
& fon courage luy auoient donné droit; Mais il faloit 
que la grace remportaft vne glorieufe viétoire. Ma 
fìlle, luy dit Ie Pere .qui la venoit dinfiruire, ta 
demande eft bien raifonnable, mais ie ne dois pas 
expofer Ie Baptefme, à Ie veoir profané. Auant cela i1 
faut que tes parens me promettent de ne plus auoir 
recours au Diable & aux danfes, pour ta guerifon. 
Ne crains pas ceIa, replique cet enfant, plufiofi ie 
mourray, que de Ie permettre. Puis donc que tu Ie 
defires, Iuy difent fes parens, qu'il te Baptize s'il 



1642-43] 


RELATION OF I642 


119 


saw well enough that it was time to expose clearly 
their design. "What dost thou say about it?" they 
asked the patient. "Dost thou wish to burn forever 
in Hell?" " No, no," boldly exclaimed this instru- 
ment of Satan, " she certainly shall not be Baptized. 
Get out of my House." His poor suffering daugh- 
ter, who until then had not said a word, began her- 
self to speak. "It is not you," she said resolutely 
to her father, "who shall dispose of me on that 
point. I desire to be Baptized without delay. for I 
wish to go to Heaven." On hearing this answer, 
that no one expected, the miserable man remained 
speechless; but the mother of the Child spoke for 
her husband. "It is not," she exclaimed, " an ordi- 
nary disease that is causing [86 i.e., 84] the death of 
my daughter; it is such and such a Demon who has 
been killing her during the last four months. To 
him alone and to our dances have we recourse; there- 
fore thou canst not Baptize her." "\Vhy not?" re- 
plied the sick girl. "I detest all the demons; I 
renounce our dances, and thou, I pray thee, refuse 
me not Baptism," she said to the Father who had 
just instructed her. \Vhen God comes to possess a 
heart, it has neither ears nor feeling for all that is 
tenderest in nature. It would have been cruel to 
refuse this Soul entrance to Paradise, to which the 
Blood of Jesus Christ and her own courage had 
entitled her. But it was necessary that grace should 
win a glorious victory. "1Iy daughter," said the 
Father who had just instructed her, " thy request is 
indeed reasonable, but I must not expose Baptism to 
be profaned. Before that, thy parents must promise 
me that they will no longer have recourse to the 
Devil, or to dances, to obtain thy cure." "Fear it 



120 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


veut, nous n'aurons plus iamais pour toy recours à 
[87 i.e., 85J ces remedes, fi toy-mefme tu ne Ie 
demandes. Ce fut vne confolation bien grãde, & 
pour celuy qui confera ce fa[i]nd Baptefme, & pour 
celIe qui Ie reçeut de veoir & de fentir ce que fait Ie 
fainét Efprit dedans vne Arne, quãd il la prepare 
pour foy. Oüy, difoit cette fille au momet que les 
eaux du baptefme la rendoient innocente, ie detefte 
tous mes pechez! grand maiftre de nos vies, ayés 
pitié de moy! Elle mourut bien toft apres. 
C E sames, & quelques femblables, ayant efté auffi- 
toft dans Ie Ciel, qu'elles ont trouué l'entrée de 
l'Eglife, n'ont pas eû befoing de grande affiftance. 
Auffi n'eft-ce pas pour elIes, qu'on a employé Ie plus 
fort du trauail. Le principal foin a efté de former 
les Chreftiens Adultes, qui y compofent vne petite 
Eglife; qui cette Année, s'eft veuë acrüe en nom- 
bre, & plus encore en Saindeté. 
V N de ces bons Chreftiens eftoit malade depuis 
l'Efté, i1 fut foudainement guery à la venuë des Peres, 
qui alloient les inftruire, foit pour la ioye qu'i1 en 
receût, ou plûtoft felon fon fentiment, pour s'eftre 
confeffé. 
[88 i. e., 86J Le mefme iour vne Femme d' enuiron 
feptante ans, entendant les Enfans qui crioient dans 
Ie Bourg: Les deux veftus de noir arriuent, fut auffi 
deliurée d'vne fiéure qui la tounnentoit. Ie gueri- 
ray, f'écria-t'elIe, ie verray mes Freres: au mefme 
moment elle recouure la fanté, elle fort pour la pre- 
miere fois, & apporte pour remerciement aux deux 
Peres, vn pain cuit fous la cendre. 
La Foy de cette bonne Femme nommée Anne 
Outenen, depuis trois ans qu'elle fut baptifée, a efié 



1642-43] 


RELATION OF I642 


121 


not, " replied the child, " I will die rather than per- 
mit them to do so." "Since thou desirest it," her 
parents said to her, " let him Baptize thee, if he will. 
We will never again have recourse on thy behalf 
to [87 i.e., 85J those remedies unless thou thyself 
shouldst ask it." It was a very great consolation, 
both for him who administered holy Baptism and for 
her who received it, to see and feel what the holy 
Ghost effects in a Soul when he prepares it for him- 
self. "Yes," said the girl at the moment when the 
waters of baptism made her innocent, " I detest all 
my sins. Great master of our lives, have pity on 
me. " She died short! y afterward. 
THE S E souls and others like them, which went to 
Heaven as soon as they found entrance into the 
Church, did not need much assistance; therefore it 
was not for them that the greatest amount of labor 
has been performed. The chief care has been to 
train the Adult Christians who constitute a small 
Church there, which this Year has increased in 
numbers and still more in Godliness. 
ONE of these good Christians had been ill since 
the Summer, and he was suddenly cured on the ar- 
rival of the Fathers who came to teach them,-either 
through the joy that he felt therefrom, or rather, 
according to his own opinion, because he had made 
his confession. 
[88 i.e., 86J On the same day, a Woman about sev- 
enty years of age, on hearing the Children cry out 
in the Village: "Here come the two clothed in 
black," was also cured of a fever that tormented her. 
" I shall be cured," she exclaimed, " I shall see my 
Brothers." At the same moment she recovered her 
health, went out for the first time, and carried to the 



122 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


toûiours f'augmentant, & fa pieté eft fi fenfible, qu'il 
eft aifé de voir que DIEveft dans foncæur. EUe 
ieufne íouuent, & quelquefois iuíqu'à la nuiét, parti- 
culierelnent Ie Samedy, pour íe diípoíer au íainét 
lour. Elle a vne affeétion fi tendre pour nous, & 
pour tous les Fideles, que chaque fois qu'elle entend 
mal parler, elle fe fent faifie dans Ie cæur, & n'en 
peut quelquefois retenir fes larmes. Vn des princi- 
paux Capitaines ayant dit qu'il falloit maffacrer les 
Chreftiens, & en íuite vn fien frere la íollicitant 
fortement d'abandonner la Foy. Qu'on commence 
par moy, [89 i.e., 87J dit-elle, la Foy m'eft plus pre- 
cieufe que la vie; ie vay luy preíenter ma tefte; & 
i1 verra que ie fuis prefte de receuoir Ie coup. Le 
chaud, Ie froid, les affliétions, les maladies, les peines 
& les trifteffes, elle offre tout à DIE V, pour la remif- 
fion de fes fautes: f' eftimant criminelle mefme dans 
les pechez d'autruy. Elle en a telle horreur, que 
quelquefois elle n'a peû coucher en fa Cabane, parce 
qu'alors elle y euft veu DIE v offenfé: Elle couchoit 
dehors. Et vne fois ayant íceu que quelquesvns 
d vne confrairie Diabolique, auoient couché deffus 
fa natte, iamais de puis n'a voulu f'en feruir. Eft- 
eUe à fon trauail bien loin dedans les champs, la 
Priere eft íon plus grand repos: elle dit íon Chape- 
let, & fa íeule deuotion luy a eníeigné de fe tourner 
Ie corps & l'efprit vers noftre Chapelle de Sainéte 
Marie, où repofe Ie tres-Sainét Sacrement; parce, 
dit-elle, que ie me fens attirée de ce cofté là. 
V ne femme Infidele receut en fonge commande- 
ment de fon Demon, de contraéter amitié auec vne 
felnme Chreftienne. Pour commencer cette alliance, 
[90 i.e., 88J fçachant qu'vn chien qu'elle auoit chery, 



1642-43] 


RELATION OF z642 


123 


two Fathers, in token of thanks, a loaf of bread baked 
in the embers. 
The Faith of this good vVoman, whose name is 
Anne Outenen has constantly increased since she was 
baptized, three years ago; and her piety is so mani- 
fest that it is easy to see that GOD is in her heart. 
She fasts often, and sometimes until night, especially 
on Saturday, in order to prepare herself for the holy 
Day. She has so tender an affection for us and for 
all the Faithful that whenever she hears anyone 
speak harshly, she feels greatly troubled in her 
heart, and sometimes she cannot restrain her tears. 
When one of the chief Captains said that the Chris- 
tians must be massacred, and when afterward one of 
her brothers strongly urged her to abandon the Faith, 
"Let him begin with me," [89 i.e., 87] she said; 
" Faith is more precious to me than life. I will pre- 
sent my head to him, and he shall see that I am ready 
to receive the blow." Heat, cold, affliction, sick- 
ness, trouble, and sorrow J she offers all to GOD for 
the remission of her sins, considering herself guilty 
even in the faults of others. She has such a horror 
of them that she sometimes has been unable to lie 
down in her Cabin, because then she would have wit- 
nessed offenses against GOD. She would sleep out- 
side; and, on one occasion, having heard that some 
members of a Diabolical confraternity had slept upon 
her mat, never afterward would she use it. When 
she is at work far away in the fields, Prayer is her 
greatest rest. She says her Rosary, and her devo- 
tion alone has taught her to turn her body and mind 
towards our Chapel of Sainte :'Marie, where the Blessed 
Sacrament reposes,-" Because," she says, "I feel 
attracted in that direction." 



124 


LES RELATIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


efioit mort, elle luy en fait prefent d'vn autre (c'efi 
comme fi en France on donnoit à vn amy vn beau 
cheual d'Efpagne) outre cela, elle la prie d'agreer vne 
couuerture qu'elle luy enuoya; & pour la foulager 
en fon ménage, luy fait apporter quelque charge de 
bois. Puis inuitant & Ie mary & la femme au feftin, 
publiquement, l"amitié f'y noüa, qui efiãt tres-auan- 
tageufe à cette Famille Chrefiienne, leur caufa vne 
ioye bien fenfible. :Mais depuis ayant fceu que tout 
eel a ne f'étoit fait que pour obeïr au fonge de cette 
femme Infidele, ce fut lors que ces bons Chrefiiens 
commencerent à trembler. Le Diable, difoient-ils, 
a quelque deffein fur nous, ces prefens qu'il nous a 
procuré, feront noftre malheur. Oüy bien, dit Ie 
mary, fi nous voulions les retenir/ mais ils ne cou- 
cheront pas en ma maifon. Auffi toft dit, auffi toft 
fait; i1 commãde qu'on remporte Ie bois, il prend & 
Ie chien & la couuerture, puis all ant trouuer cette 
femme Infidele, luy dit: Ie te viens rendre tes pre- 
fens, tu fçais bien que noftre Cabane eft Chrefiienne; 
[91 i.e., 89] cette alliance que tu veux contraéter 
auec nous, n'ayant pour autheur que Ie Diable qui 
te l'a commandé en fonge, nous pecherions de luy 
obeïr en cela. Ie ne fçay fi les Cafuifies euffent efté 
fi rigides en cette occafion. Quoy qu'il en foit, ce 
coup là efioit difficile; mais il n'y a point de lien 
d'amitié que la Fay ne fepare plûtoft que de nous 
voir feparez d'auec DIE V. 
C'eft ce que difoit vn Chrefiien de ce mefme Bourg, 
fe voyant fur Ie poinét d'eftre abandonné de fa femme 
& de fes enfans, par les pourfuites d'vne belle mere, 
qui Ie voyant Chreftien, ne Ie pouuoit fupporter chez 
el1e. Non, difoit-il, ie n'euffe iamais penfé, que 



1642-43] 


RELATION OF I642 


125 


An Infidel woman received in a dream a command 
from her Demon to contract a friendship with a Chris- 
tian woman. In order to commence this intimacy, 
[90 i.e., 88J as she knew that a dog which the other 
had cherished was dead, she made her a present of 
another one (this is just as if in France one were to 
give a friend a fine Spanish horse). In addition, she 
begged her to accept a blanket that she sent her; and 
in order to assist her in her housekeeping, she had a 
load of wood taken to her. Then she invited both 
husband and wife publicly to a feast. A friendship 
was formed, which as it was of great advantage to 
the Christian Family, caused them great joy. But, 
when they afterwards learned that all this was done 
merel y in order to 0 bey the dream of that Infidel 
woman, these good Christians began to trem ble. 
"The Devil," they said, "has some designs on us; 
these presents that he has caused to be sent to us 
will bring us misfortune." "Yes indeed," said the 
husband, "if we were willing to keep them; but 
they shall not pass the night in my house." This 
was no sooner said than done. He gave orders that 
the wood be returned, took the dog and the blanket, 
and went to the Infidel woman, to whom he said: 
" I have come to return thy presents; thou knowest 
well that ours is a Christian Cabin; [91 i.e., 89] this 
friendship that thou wishest to contract with us has 
no other author than the Devil, who has commanded 
it to thee in a dream; and we would sin, were we to 
obey him in this." I do not know whether the 
Casuists would have been so strict on this occasion. 
In any case, it was not an easy thing to do. But 
there is no bond of friendship that Faith will not 
sever, rather than see us separated from GOD. 



126 


LES RELA TIOiVS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


chofe au mõde m'eufi peu feparer de ma femme; il 
y a quinze ou feize ans que nous fommes enfemble, 
cinq enfans que nous auons eus, me fembloient autant 
de liens qui rendroient nofire mariage indiffoluble. 
Elle & moy apres auoir receu Ie fainét Baptefme, 
auons promis à DIE V de iamais ne nous feparer: 
maintenant elle a quitté la Foy, ou au moins pour 
complaire à fa mere, elle n'a plus Ie courage d'en 
faire [92 i.e., 90J profeffion; elle ne laiffe pas de 
m'aimer, & ie l'aime auffi, & toutefois fa mere la 
contraint de m'abandonner, fi ie n'abandonne la Foy. 
Cette diuifion m'efi fenfible, mais i'y fuis refolu 
plûtofi que iamais me feparer d'auec DI EV. 
Ce bon Chrefiien a vn fils de douze à treize ans, 
qui a imité Ie courage de fon pere. On a fait Ie 
poffible afin qu'il defifiafi de la Foy, on a tâché de Ie 
corrom pre par douceur, par menaces, & par les 
rigueurs qu' on a peu. En-fin, fe voyant tourmenté 
d'vne grand-mere, qui nuiét & jour ne luy donnoit 
aucun repos, efperant emporter de luy qu'il defifiafi 
des exercices de Chrefiien. comme auoit fait fa mere. 
Sçachez, dit cet enfant à cette 11egere d'Enfer, qu'on 
me peut bien brûler tout vif, voila mes bras, mes 
pieds, & mon corps tout difpofé à Ie fouffrir, mais 
iamais ie n'abandonneray la Foy. 
Ces refolutions ne font pas dans la portée de la 
nature, auffi efi-ce celuy feul pour qui on fait ces bons 
propos, qui dõne en mefme temps la force d'executer 
tout ce qu'il exige de nous. Les Infideles [93 i.e., 9 1 ] 
mefmes ne font pas à Ie connoifire, & à fe plaindre 
en mefme temps de leur mifere. Les Demons, difoit 
vn certain, nous commandent des chofes impoffibles: 
ils ne nous donnent pas pour faire fefiin & veulent 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF r6.p 


127 


That is what a Christian of this same Village said, 
when he saw himself about to be abandoned by his 
wife and children, in consequence of the persecutions 
of his mother-in-law, who could not bear to have him 
in her house when she found that he was a Christian. 
" No," he said, "I never would have thought that 
anything in the world could separate me from my 
wife. We have lived together for fifteen or sixteen 
years. The five children that we have had seemed 
so many bonds that would render our marriage indisw 
soluble. After she and I had received holy Baptism, 
we promised GOD that we would never separate. 
Now she has abandoned the Faith, or at least, to 
please her mother, she no longer has the courage 
[92 i.e., 90] to profess it. She still loves me, and I 
also love her; and nevertheless her mother compels 
her to leave me, if I do not abandon the Faith. Such 
a separation is painful to me, but I am resolved to 
endure it rather than ever separate myself from 
Go D." 
This good Christian has a son twelve or thirteen 
years of age, who has imitated his father's courage. 
Everything that could be done was tried, to make 
him desist from the Faith. They endeavored to cor w 
rupt him by kindness, by threats, and by such rigor w 
ous measures as were within their power. At last, 
when he saw himself tormented by his grandmother, 
who allowed him no rest by night or by day, hoping 
to prevail upon him to give up the Christian prac w 
tices as his mother had done, the child said to this 
Hellish Megera: "Know that they may burn me 
alive,- here are my arms, my feet, and my body, 
all ready to suffer it; but never will I abandon the 
Faith." 



128 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


qu'on en faffe: ils no us obligent quelquefois fi nous 
voulons éuiter quelque grand malheur, à leur offrir 
ce que nous n'auons pas, ny ne pouuons auoir. 
N'eft-ce pas ou fe mocquer de nous, ou qu'ils fe plai- 
fent à nous voir miferables? l\1ais Ie DIE V des 
Chreftiens ne leur commande rien qui ne leur foit 
poffible, & s'ils y manquent, c' eft de leur volonté. 
C'eft en cela, difoit-il, que ie reconnois qu'il eft luy 
feul Ie Maiftre de nos vies, puis qu'il ne veut que 
nofire bien. Ie prie 1e fainét Efprit, que cette con- 
noiffance ne ferue point vn iour à la condamnation 
de cet Homme, qui nonobftant cela ne rend pas encore 
à DIE v toute la gloire qu'il void bien luy eftre deuë. 
L E S meilleurs efprits des Hurons, ne font pas ceux 
qui fe rendent plûtofi aux veritez qu'ils recognoiffent: 
De fimples femmes font bien fouuent, plus tendres, 
[94 i.e., 92J aux fentiments du fainét Efprit. Vne 
bonne Chreftienne, ayant vn iour affifté au Sermon 
qui s'eftoit fait de la Refurreétion, ne peût contenir 
en fon cæur, la ioye dont elle eftoit remplie. C'eft 
cela, s' écria-elle à toute I' Affiftance, qui fait que 
nous croyons: c' eft dans cette efperance, que nous 
fouffrons en patience les médifances, & les iniures: 
on nous menaçe de la mort, on dit qu'il faut maffacrer 
les Chreftiens; qu'ils nous tuent s'ils en ont l'affeu- 
rance, vn iour ie refufciteray dans ce corps qu'ils 
auront affommé. 
V N E autre aagée d'enuiron quatre-vingt-ans, atten- 
dant I'heure de la mort, apres auoir reçeu l'abfolutiõ; 
fuplia, qu'on Ia leuafi à fon feant, pour prier DIEV 
auec plus de refpeét. Puis d'vne voix mourante; 
IE S V S, dit-elle, ayez pitié de moy, tirez moy dans 
voftre Paradis; ie f uis con ten te de mourir, ie n' af pire 



1642-43J 


RELA TION OF J642 


129 


Such determination is not within the capacity of 
nature; and he alone for whom such good resolutions 
are taken gives at the same time the strength neces- 
sary for performing what he requires of us. The Infi- 
dels [93 i.e., 91J themselves are not unaware of it, 
and they also complain of their own unhappiness. 
" The Demons," said one of them, " command us to 
do impossible things. They do not give us what is 
necessary for a feast, and they require us to make 
one. Sometimes they compel us, if we would avoid 
some great misfortune, to offer what we do not pos- 
sess, and cannot get. Does not this show that they 
either trifle with us, or that they are pleased to 
see us miserable? But the GOD of the Christians 
commands them to do nothing that is impossible for 
them; and, if they fail, it is of their own will. It is 
by this," he said, "that I recognize that he alone is 
the Master of our lives, since he desires only our 
good." I pray the holy Ghost that this knowledge 
may not serve one day for the condemnation of this 
Man, who, in spite of it, does not yet give to GOD 
the praise that he knows very well is due to him. 
THE best minds among the Hurons are not those 
which soonest yield to the truths that they acknowl- 
edge; some simple women are often more suscep- 
tible [94 i.e., 92J to the influence of the holy Ghost. 
A good Christian woman, hearing one day a Sermon 
preached on the Resurrection, could not contain in 
her heart the joy with which she was filled. "This 
it is," she called out aloud to the entire Audience, 
"that makes us believe. It is through this hope 
that we suffer calumnies and insults in patience. 
Weare threatened with death; it is said that the 
Christians must be massacred. Let them kill us, if 



180 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 28 


qu'au Ciel, IEsvs ayez pitié de moy. Dieu auoit 
preferué cette bonne Femme, tout Ie long de fa vie, 
dans vne pureté tout à fait rare en ce Païs; & de- 
puis fon baptefme, elle s'efioit conferuée dedans l'in- 
nocence, ne prenant point plus grãd plaifir, qu'à prier 
[95 i.e., 93J Dieu, quoy qu'elle ne fceût quafi que 
ces deux mots. IE S 0 V S T A Ï TEN R ; IESVS ayez 
pitié de moy. 
IE fus touché il ya quelque temps entendant racon- 
ter vn trait de Charité, que ie ne puis obmettre. Vne 
pauure Chreftiene, aagée d'enuiron foixante-ans, 
ayant oüy parler de la ferueur qui fe voit en France, 
pour enrichir les lieux de deuotion, & que plufieurs 
fe dépouïlloient, pour offrir à Nofire Seigneur tout 
ce qu'ils ont, fe fentit, en mefme temps, touchée d'vn 
femblable defir; & quoy que la faifon fut froide, 
n'ayãt rien de precieux qu'vne robe de Cafior, dont 
elle efioit couuerte, s'en efiant dépoüillée: I'en fay, 
dit-elle, vne offrande à N ofire Seigneur, ce fera pour 
tapiffer nofire Chapelle, quand on l'aura accommo- 
dée; fi i'auois quelque chofe de plus, ie Ie donnerois 
de bon cæur, afin que Dieu ait pitié de moy. 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF J642 


131 


they have the boldness to do so. I shall rise again 
some day, in the body that they shall have killed." 
ANOTHER, about eighty years of age, who was 
awaiting the hour of her death, after having received 
absolution, begged to be raised in a sitting posture 
in order to pray to GOD with more respect. Then in 
a dying voice, she said: "J E S US, have pity on me; 
take me into thy Paradise. I am content to die; I 
aspire but to Heaven. J E S US, have pity on me." 
God has preserved this good Woman, throughout 
her life, in a state of purity that is very rare in this 
Country; and, after her baptism, she retained her 
innocence, having no greater pleasure than to pray 
[95 i.e., 93] to God, although she knew hardly more 
than these two words: JESOUS TAÏTENR, "JESUS, 
have pity on me." 
I W AS touched, some time ago, when I heard a 
deed of Charity related which I cannot avoid repeat- 
ing. A poor Christian woman, about sixty years of 
age, who had heard of the zeal that is manifested in 
France for adorning places of devotion, and that 
many stripped themselves to give all they had to Our 
Lord, felt herself at the same time affected with the 
like desire. Although the weather was cold, as she 
had nothing of value except a robe of Beaver fur that 
covered her, she took it off, and said: "I offer it to 
Our Lord; it will serve, when fitted thereon, as a 
carpet for our Chapel. If I had anything else, I 
would give it cheerfully, so that God may have pity 
on me. " 



132 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


[96 i.e., 94] CHAPITRE IX. 


PERSECVTIONS DES CHRESTIENS DE LA MESME 
MISSION. 


L ES Chrefiiens & Catechumenes de cette Miffiõ, 
auoient paffé quafi tout 1'Hyuer, dans des 
épreuues de leur foy, qui nous faifoient affez 
paroiftre, que Ie Ciel trauailloit plus fortement à leur 
infiruétion, que les Hommes. Les enfeignemens 
qu'on leur donnoit, entroient fi doucement dãs leurs 
efprits, & y faifoient des impreffiõs fi viues, que nous 
fufmes étonnez au bout d'vn & deux mois, qu'il euffent 
plus profité dans les cognoiffances de nos Myftere, & 
dans les fentimens de Dieu, qu'on n'eût ozé attendre, 
apres Ie trauail d'vne & de deux années, mais man- 
que de Chapelle, & de lieu feparé des vfages de la 
vie commune, ils auoient ce regret d'eftre priuez du 
Sacrifice de la Meffe, & du plus fainét de tous les 
Sacremens; finon aux grãdes Fefies de I' Année, auf- 
quelles nous [97 i.e., 95] tafchons de faire affembler 
la plufpart de nos Chreftiens, dans nofire Maifon de 
Séìe. Marie, pour y faire leurs deuotions, aux autres 
temps, il falloit qu'ils fe contetaffent de s'affembler 
dans la Cabane de quelqu'vn des Chrefiies, & là y 
faire leurs Prieres, en la prefence mefme des Infi- 
delles; qui, felon la coufiume du Païs, entrent quãd 
i1 leur plaifi, en quelque Cabane que ce foit; & y 
font témoins de tout ce qui s'y paffe. C' efioit efire 
expofé aux railleries de mille langues médifantes, 



1642-43] 


RELATION OF I6.p 


133 


[96 i.e., 94J CHAPTER IX. 


PERSECUTIONS OF THE CHRISTIANS OF THE SAME 
MISSION. 


T HE Christians and Catechumens of this 11ission 
had passed nearly the whole Winter in trials 
of their faith, which showed us that Heaven 
worked more energetically than 1vlen for their in- 
struction. The teaching that we had given them so 
easily penetrated their minds and produced so vivid 
impressions therein, that we were surprised after one 
or two months at their having made more progress 
in the knowledge of our Mysteries, and in the love of 
God, than we had dared to expect after one or two 
years' labor. But owing to the want of a Chapel, 
and of a place separated from the uses of common life, 
they had the regret of being deprived of the Sacrifice 
of the Mass, and of the most holy of all the Sacra- 
ments, except at the great Festivals of the Year - on 
which we [97 i.e., 95J endeavor to gather most of 
our Christians together in our House of SteT :Marie, 
in order that they may perform their devotions there: 
at other times, they had to be content with meeting 
in the Cabin of some one among the Christians, and 
with reciting their Prayers there in the very presence 
of the Infidels, who, according to the custom of the 
Country, enter any Cabin whenever they please, and 
witness all that passes therein. This exposed them 
to the jests of a thousand slanderous tongues, which 
blasphemed against things of which they are igno- 



134 


LES RELA TID.NS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


qui blafphement contre ce qu'ils ignorent. En effet, 
on commèce à médire d' eux; on les apelle MAR I AN 
par mocquerie, à caufe que fouuent on entendoit dans 
leurs Prieres, Ie Nom de la treí-Sainéte Vierge. On 
dit publiquement qu'ils ont des forts pour caufer des 
naufrages, & que leurs Chapelets & 11edailles, font 
vomir & l' Arne & Ie fang à ceux qui les enuifagent 
d'vn certain afpeét. 
S v R la fin de l'Hyuer, vn des meilleurs Chrefiiens 
confacra vne partie de fa Cabane, pour en faire vn 
lieu de deuotion. On y bafiifi, de quelques planches & 
efcorces, vne Chapelle affez raifonnable: [98 i.e., 9 6 ] 
& on commença, à la Sainét Iofeph, â donner aux 
Chrefiiens la confolation d'y entendre la Meffe. Mais 
ce fut lors que les perfecutions redoublerent. Ce 
fera là, dit-on, Ie malheur du Pais! On veut chaffer 
tous les Chreftiens du Bourg; & mefme leurs plus 
proches parens leur difent, qu'ils aillent fe loger 
ailleurs, ou qu'ils abandõnèt la Foy, s'ils ont quelque 
amour de la vie. Vn des chefs du Confeil, dit Ie mot 
à l'oreille à vn de fes nepueux, Onhoüa Etfitenrou- 
taoüa. N ous vous allons arracher de la terre, racine 
empoifonnée; c'eft Ie mot dont les Hurons menaçent 
ceux qu'ils foupçonnent d'efire Sorciers, quand ils 
les veulen t maffacrer. 
Vn nommé Eftienne Totihri, quoy que des mieux 
apparentez du Bourg, fe trouua plus auant dans la 
perfecution, comme i1 étoit Ie plus feruent dedans la 
Foy; & que cette Chapelle eftant baftie dans fa 
Cabane, on s'attaquoit plus viuement à luy: mais ny 
luy, ny toute fa famille, ne braníla pas pour toutes 
ces menaçes. Oüy dea, dit-il, ie íortiray tref-volon- 
tiers, fi les Peres, qui nous inftruifent, abandonnent 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF z642 


135 


rant. Indeed, they began by speaking ill of them, 
and called them lVl A R I A N in mockery, because they 
frequently heard the Name of the most Blessed Virgin 
repeated in their Prayers. It was publicly stated that 
they possessed charms that caused shipwrecks, and 
that their Rosaries and 
Iedals caused both Soul and 
blood to pour forth from those who looked at them 
in a certain manner. 
Tow ARD the end of the Winter, one of the best 
Christians set apart a portion of his Cabin as a place 
of devotion. \Vith a few boards and some bark, a 
fairly adequate Chapel was made therein; [98 i.e., 96] 
and on the feast of Saint Joseph we commenced to 
give the Christians the consolation of hearing Mass 
in it. Then the persecutions redoubled. " This," 
it was said, " will be the misfortune of the Country. " 
They wished to expel all the Christians from the 
Village; and even the nearest relatives of the latter 
told them that they must go and dwell elsewhere, 
or abandon the Faith, if they had any desire to live. 
One of the chiefs of the Council whispered in the 
ear of one of his nephews: 01llzoua Etsitellroutaoua, 
" We will tear you out of the earth as a poisonous 
root." This is the expression with which the 
Hurons threaten those whom they suspect of being 
Sorcerers, when they wish to kill them. 
One Estienne Totihri, although connected with 
the best families of the Village, endured the greatest 
persecution, because he was the most fervent in the 
Faith; and he was attacked the most sharply, because 
the Chapel was erected in his Cabin. But neither 
he nor his family wavered, in spite of all these 
threats. " Yes, indeed," he said; "I will go quite 
cheerfully if the Fathers who teach us give up the 



136 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Ie foing de ce Bourg, mais ce ne fera que [99 i.e., 97] 
pour les fuiure en quelque lieu qu'ils aillent: ie fuis 
plus attaché à eux qu'à ma Patrie, & à tous mes 
parens, puis qu'ils nous portent les paroles d'vn bon- 
heur eternel. Ie ne crains point la mort, depuis que 
DIE V a ouuert mon efprit, & In'a fait voir des chofes 
plus importantes que la vie de ce corps, fur qui feul 
on peut auoir quelque deffein. Qu' on tuë ma mere, 
ma femme, mes enfans & mes freres, ie verray apres 
eux, venir fondre fur moy Ie coup de mon bonheur! 
Mon Arne ne tient pas à Inon corps, vn moment peut 
les feparer, mais iamais on ne me rauira la Foy. 
C'efi vne confolation bien grande, d'efire tefmoing 
de la ferueur de toute fa famille. Ce font eux qui 
ont Ie foin d'affembler les Fideles, les encourager & 
infiruire, en l'abfence des Peres; & qui ont l'æil fur 
ce petit Troupeau, auec vne fidelité & yne zele tout 
à fait Chrefiien. Au plus fort mefme de ces perfe- 
cutions, vne femme fe mouroit, ayant refufé Ie 
baptefme à nos Peres, qui la vouloient infiruire: Hé 
quoy. dit ce Chrefiien, faut-il que cette Arne fe perde? 
11 va trouuer cette malade. [100 i.e.. 98] Ma bonne 
mere, luy dit-il, fi vous fçauiés Ie haux prix de la 
Foy, vous auriés plus de de fir d'efire enfeignée, que 
nous de vous infiruire; mais quoy que ie ne fois pas 
appellé, ie ne puis pas me taire, crainte, qu'vn iour, 
vous ne m' en fiffiez les reproches, lors que vous 
feriez dans les flâmes eternelles de l'Enfer. Le peu 
de têps qui vous refie de vie, fuffit pour vous deliurer 
de ce grand malheur. qui n'efi pas plus éloigné de 
vous que la mort. 11 tâche en fuite de cela, à émou- 
uoir ce cæur; mais c'étoit vn cæur de rocher, qui 
n'ayant eû en la fanté, que des blafphemes contre 



1642-43] 


RELATION OF I642 


137 


care of this Village; but it will be only [99 i.e., 97] 
to follow them wherever they may go. I am more 
attached to them than to my Country and to all my 
relatives, because they bring us the promise of 
eternal happiness. I fear not death, since GOD has 
enlightened my mind, and has shown me things 
more important than this bodily life, against which 
alone any design can be harbored. Let them kill 
my mother, my wife, my children, and my brothers; 
after them, the blow that is to give me happiness 
will fall on me! :My Soul is not attached to my 
body,- a single instant can separate them; but Faith 
shall never be ravished from me." 
It is a great consolation to witness the fervor of 
his whole family. To them is assigned the duty of 
gathering the Faithful together, of encouraging and 
instructing them, in the absence of the Fathers; 
and they watch over this little Flock with a faithful- 
ness and zeal that are truly Christian. At the very 
height of these persecutions, a woman lay dying, 
who had refused to allow herself to be baptized by 
our Fathers, who wished to instruct her. "What?" 
said this Christian, "must this Soul be allowed to 
perish? ' , He went to see the sick woman, [100 
i.e',98J and said to her: "
Iy good mother, if you 
knew the great value of Faith, you would have more 
desire to be taught than we would have to teach 
you. But, though I am not called upon, I cannot 
remain silent, lest some day you may reproach me 
when you will be in the eternal flames of Hell. 
The short time that you have still to live is sufficient 
to deliver you from that great misfortune, which is 
no further from you than death." He afterward 
endeavored to produce an impression on that heart, 



138 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


DIE V , mourut Ie mefme iour dans fon impieté, & 
fit cognoifire à ce bon Chrefiien, que Ie don de la 
Foy, n'efi pas vn prefent de la terre; & que ÐIEV 
feul efi celuy qui touche les cæurs. 
V N autre Chef de famille, nommé Thomas Saoüen- 
hati, n'a pas eû de moindres coups à fuporter. :11ais 
la Foy, difoit-il, eft trop auant dedans mon Arne, on 
ne peut pas me l'arracher, tandis qu'il me refiera Ie 
moindre mouuement de vie. Ce bon homme autre- 
fois, nous auoit affez contenté, mais dans quelques 
rencontres, [101 i.e., 99] où ÐIEV voulut efprouuer fa 
fidelité, la chair auoit efié plus forte que l'efprit; & 
quoy que iamais depuis fon Baptefme, i1 n'ayt perdu 
la Foy, i1 n'oza toutefois continuer dedans l'exercice, 
lors qu' on menaçoit les Chrefiiens, i1 y a deux ans, 
de les maffacrer auec nous. Cette année icy i1 s' eft 
remis en fon deuoir, & s'efi comporté fi genereufe- 
ment en diuerfes rencontres, qu'il a fait voir aux 
Infideles que quand Dieu nous appuye, nos foibleffes 
paffées font paroifire auec plus d'éc1at la force de la 
Grace, puifque pour lors ce qui eftoit l' objet de nofire 
crainte, eft l'entretien de nos defirs. 
L'experience que nous auons icy de 1'efprit des 
Sauuages, nous rend fort referuez à les receuoir au 
Baptefme, & plus encore à leur permettre l'vfage de 
la Communion. C'efi toutefois de là que la plufpart 
de nos Chrefiiens ont receu ce courage: & nommé- 
ment les deux derniers dont ie viens de parler, y ont 
fenty vn changement fi foudain de leur cæur, qu'ils 
en furent tout hors d'eux-mefmes: & depuis nous 
auons veu dans leurs aétions, la verité de leurs 
paroles. [102 i.e., 100] Ce n'efi point vn menfonge 
que IE S V S - C II R 1ST foit en l'Hofiie, nous dit vn 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I6.p 


139 


but it was a heart of stone, which, while in good 
health, could utter nothing but blasphemies against 
GOD; and she died the same day in her impiety, 
showing the good Christian that the gift of Faith is 
not a present from earth, and that GOD alone can 
touch the heart. 
AN 0 THE R Head of a family, named Thomas 
Saouenhati, has had to endure as many stripes. 
" But Faith," he said, " has entered too deeply into 
my Soul to allow of its being torn from me while 
the least impulse of life remains to me." This 
good man had formerly given us fair satisfaction, but 
on some occasions, [101 i.e., 99] when GOD willed 
to try his faithfulness, the flesh had been stronger 
than the spirit; and, although he had never lost 
Faith after his Baptism, nevertheless he had not 
dared to continue in its exercise when they threatened 
to massacre the Christians with us, two years ago. 
This year he returned to his duty, and behaved so 
courageously in various emergencies that he proved 
to the Infidels that, when God supports us, our past 
weakness shows out the strength of Grace more 
clearly, since what was then the object of our fears 
now sustains our desires. 
The experience that we have here of the Savage 
disposition makes us very cautious in admitting them 
to Baptism, and still more in allowing them to 
receive Communion. Nevertheless, it is from this 
rite that most of our Christians have derived so much 
courage; and, in particular, the two last 'W horn I 
have mentioned experienced therein so sudden a 
change in their hearts that they were quite beside 
themselves. Since then, we have witnessed in their 
actions the truth of their words. [102 i.e., 100J" It 



140 


LES RELA TIO./.VS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


jour Efiienne, ie l'y fentis Ie iour de Noël apres auoir 
communié: mais ie ne fçay fi depuis ce temps-Ià, il 
demeure toûiours dedans mon cæur: car bien fou- 
uent faifant toute autre chofe, ie me fens tout chan- 
gé, comme s'il y auoit dedans moy-mefme quelqu'vn 
qui me parlafi, & fouuent ie luy parle, fans dire mot: 
il me répond, & ie voy bien pour lors qu'il entend 
mes defirs. 
Ie ne doute plus maintenant des veritez qu'on nous 
enfeigne, dit fort fouuent Thon1as, lors qu'il exhorte 
les autres Chrefiiens à tenir ferme dans la Foy; à 
I 'heure mefme que ie Communiay, ie fentis IE S V S- 
C H R 1ST dans mon cæur, & i'aperceu à mefme temps 
que c'efioit luy qui m'élenoit à foy, & m'enfeignoit 
ce que iamais ie n'auois fceu comprendre. l'auois 
efté iufqu'alors comme vn Homme qui s'égare, ou 
qui craint de s'égarer au milieu de la nuiét; mais 
maintenant ie marche en affeurance comme nous fai- 
fons en plain iour. Croyez, dit-il, tout ce qu'on nous 
enfeigne, mais fur [103 i.e., 101] tout, croyez ferme- 
ment que IE S V S - C H R 1ST entre dans nofire cæur, 
lors que nous mangeons Ie Pain facré. 
Les calomnies contre la Foy, redoublerent apres 
Pafques; & ce fut lors que les Chrefiiens connurent 
plus éuidemment que iamais, que toutes ces tempefies 
font fufcitées par les Demons. En voicy l'occafion. 
V n Capitaine du bourg de Sainét Iofeph, nommé 
AfiifKoüa, apres auoir donné fatisfaétion aux Peres 
qui l'enfeignoient, & auoir infiamment demandé Ie 
Baptefme, fut apel1é pour fe trouuer en l'Affemblée 
des Chrefiiens & Catechumenes, qui fe fit à Pafques, 
en noftre 
Iaifon de Sainéte 
Iarie. Comme il eft 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


141 


is not a lie that J E S U S C H R 1ST is in the Host," 
said Estienne to us one day. "I felt it on Christmas 
day, after I had received communion. But I do not 
know whether he has always remained in my heart 
since then, for very often, while I am doing some- 
thing else, I feel quite changed, as if there were 
some one inside of me who speaks to me, and I 
frequently speak to him without saying a word. He 
answers me, and then I see very well that he under- 
stands my desires." 
" I no longer doubt the truths that are taught us," 
frequently says. Thomas, when he exhorts the other 
Christians to remain steadfast in the Faith. At the 
very moment when I received Communion, I felt 
J E S U S C H R 1ST in my heart, and I perceived at the 
same time that it was he who raised me up to him, 
and who taught me what I had never been able to 
understand. I had until then been like a :Man who 
is lost, or who fears to be lost, in the middle of the 
night; but now I walk in security, as we do in the 
full light of day. Believe," said he, "all that is 
taught us; but, above [103 i.e., 10lJ all, believe 
firmly that J E S us C H R 1ST enters into our hearts 
when we eat the consecrated Bread." 
The calumnies against the Faith redoubled after 
Easter, and then the Christians saw, more clearly 
than ever, that all these tempests are raised by the 
Demons. This was the occasion thereof. A Captain 
of the village of Saint Joseph, named Astiskoua, 
after having given satisfaction to the Fathers who 
taught him, and having earnestly demanded Baptism, 
was summoned to appear before the Assembly of 
Christians and Catechumens that was held at Easter, 
in our House of Sainte :Marie. As he had a good 



142 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


d'vn bon efprit, & que la Foy fembloit eftre dedans 
fon cæur, fes fentimens n'auoient rien de fauuage, 
fes difcours eftoient pleins de zele & de ferueur, fes 
refolutions tout à fait dignes d'vn Chrefiien: mais 
comme il n'y a que DIE v qui connoiffe Ie fecret des 
cæurs, auffi par tout, fes fainétes Prouidences font 
autant cachées qu'admirables. Cet Homme fe pre- 
fentant pour entrer dans l'Eglife, fent vne force 
occulte qui Ie repouffe [104 i.e., 102J violemment; 
il tente pour la feconde & la troifiéme fois, il ne void 
pas pourtant ce qui l'arrefie, ains toufiours il fe fent 
repouffé. En mefme temps fon efprit eft troublé, 
fans toutefois qu'ille paroiffe; il void tous les Chre- 
ftiens entrer, & Iuy feul ne peut neantmoins auancer 
vn pas. En vain fa Femme qui eftoit venuë auec 
luy, Ie preffe de fuiure les autres, en vain auffi i1 fe 
fait force pour furmonter cette refifiance inuifible, il 
eft en-fin contraint de reculer. 11 fort done de Ia 
Maifon fans dire mot. Apres trois lieuës ou enuiron 
de chemin, il fait paroiftre ce qu'il eft: il entre furi- 
eux dans les bourgs de Sainét lean & de Sainét 
Ignace, enfonce les Cabanes, brife les portes, rompt 
les Canots, & pas vn ne l'ofe aborder. 
11 crie qu'vn Diable luy eft entré dans Ie corps, 
que ce Demon luy auoit dit qu'il Ie prift pour fon 
pere, qu'il fuiuift fes conduites, & s'affeuraft qu'il 
auoit de l'amour pour luy, mais qu'il fal10it refolu- 
ment tuër tous les François, qu'eux feuls ruinoient 
tout Ie Pais. On ne peut retenir fes fougues, il va 
courir dedans les bois, [105 i.e., 103J il trouue fon 
chemin par tout; les ronces & les épines defchirent 
tout fon corps, mais ne peuuent pas l'arrefter. 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


143 


mind, and as Faith seemed to have entered into his 
heart, there was nothing savage about his senti- 
ments; his discourse was full of zeal and fervor; his 
resolutions were in every way worthy of a Christian. 
But as GOD alone knows the secrets of all hearts, so 
also everywhere are his holy Providences as hidden 
as they are admirable. When this Man wished to 
enter the Church, he felt an occult force that 
repelled him [104 i.e., 102J violently; he tried a 
second and a third time, still he could not see what 
stopped him, but he always felt repulsed. At the 
same time his mind was troubled though he did 
not manifest this. He sawall the Christians go in, 
and he alone could not advance a step. In vain did 
his vVife, who had come with him, urge him to fol- 
low the others; in vain also did he strive to overcome 
this invisible resistance; he was at last compelled 
to retire. He therefore went from the House, with- 
out saying a word. After walking three leagues, or 
thereabout, he showed what he was; he furiously 
entered the villages of Saint Jean and of Saint 
Ignace, burst into the Cabins, smashed the doors 
and broke the Canoes, while no one dared to ap- 
proach him. 
He cried out that a Devil had entered into his 
body, and that this Demon had told him to take him 
for his father, to follow his guidance, and to rest 
assured that he had an affection for him; but that he 
must boldly kill all the French, as they alone were 
ruining the whole Country. It was impossible to 
restrain his violence. He ran about in the woods, 
[105 i.e., 103J forcing his way everywhere. The 
briars and thorns tore his whole body but could not 
stop him. 



144 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Apres de longs égaremens, il arriue en fon Bourg, 
i1 bat, il frappe, il veut tuër tous ceux qu'i1 rencon- 
tre. En-fin on Ie faifit, on Ie lie, & on I 'interroge; 
c'efi toûjours ce Demon qui parle, cet ennemy de 
Paix. Les Chrefiiens eftans de retour, Ie lendemain 
de Pafques, trouuent tout Ie Bourg en émeute. On 
dit, on crie qu'il faut maffacrer les François. II faut 
donc me tuër auec eux, s'écrie Eftienne Totihri, f'ils 
font coulpables, ie ne fuis pas plus innocent qu'eux; 
car ie voy bien que c'efi à la Foy qu'on en veut. Ce 
Demoniac1e rompt fes liens, force ceux qui Ie tien- 
nent, fe iette luy-mefme dans Ie feu, ne veut ny 
boire ny manger, difant que fon Demon luy a ainfi 
ordonné. 
Mais il cherche nommément les Chrefiiens: II 
trouue vne bonne Femme en fon chemin, c'eft l'eau, 
luy dit-il, que vous aimez vous autres Chreftiens, 
puifque vous prifez tant voftre Baptefme & en mefme 
temps illuy verfe quantité d'eau deffus la tefte. Les 
autres qu'il rencontre, [106 i.e., 104] n'en font pas 
quittes pour fi peu de chofe; i1 brife tout dans les 
Cabanes, on luy fernle les portes, mais i1 monte deffus 
les toits. II va pour rompre la Chapelle, illeue les 
écorces dont elle efioit couuerte, i1 cherche Efiienne 
& luy reproche qu'i1 eft Chrefiien. II fe jette deffus 
vn autre, & efiant arnlé de tifons, c'efi fur toy, luy 
dit-il, que ie me veux vanger, il faut que ie te brûle. 
Ce bon Chreftien fe recommande à DIE V , fe refigne 
à fa fainéte volonté, & s'étant refolu à tout, prefente 
à ce pofíedé íes deux bras joints enfemble & taus 
nuds, pour eítre brûlez. Courage, luy dit-il. brúle 
moy fi tu veux. A ces mots ce Furieux s'arrefte, 



1642-43J 


RELA TION OF J642 


145 


After long wanderings, he arrived at his own 
Village; he beat, he struck, he wished to kill all 
whom he met. At last he was seized, bound, and 
questioned. It was ever the Demon, that enemy of 
Peace, that spoke. \Vhen the Christians returned, 
on the day after Easter, they found the entire Vil- 
lage in a state of excitement; all were saying and 
calling out that the French must be massacred. "I 
must, then, be killed with them," exclaimed Estienne 
Totihri. "If they are guilty, I am not more inno- 
cent than they, for I see very well that it is on 
account of the Faith that you bear them ill will." 
The Demoniac burst his bonds, broke away from 
those who held him, threw himself into the fire, 
and refused to eat or to drink, saying that his Demon 
had thus commanded him. 
But he sought the Christians chiefly. :Meeting a 
good Woman on his way, he said to her: "It is 
water that you Christians like, since you so highly 
prize your Baptism;" and at the same time he 
poured a quantity of water on her head. The others 
whom he met [106 i.e., 104J did not get rid of him 
so easily. He smashed everything in the Cabins. 
They closed the doors to him, but he climbed on the 
roofs. He tried to break into the Chapel, and tore 
off the pieces of bark with which it was covered. He 
.sought Estienne, and reproached him with being a 
Christian. He threw himself upon another, and, 
being armed with firebrands, he said to him: "It 
is on thee that I wish to avenge myself; I must burn 
thee. " The good Christian commended himself to 
GOD, resigned himself to his holy wil1, and, being 
resolved to endure everything, he held out to the 
possessed man both his arms, clasped together and 



146 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[V OL. 23 


paffe plus outre, & va décharger vne partie de fa 
fureur. 
V n Infidele de nos meilleurs Amis, Capitaine de ce 
mefme Bourg, vient en hafie nous donner aduis de 
tout ce qui fe paffe; nous prie de ne pas paroiftre fi 
toft, crainte d'vn plus grand malheur: :11ais ce petit 
Troupeau de Fideles auoit befoin de fon Pafteur. 
Les Peres y courent, trouuent cette pauure Eglife 
bien auant dedans les fouffrances, & plus encore 
[107 i.e., 105J dans la crainte de ce qui deuoit fuiure: 
mais tous ces pauures Chreftiens font difpofez à tout 
f ouffrir pour l' amour de DIE V , & f' animen tIes vns 
les autres, dans les efperances du Paradis qu'on ne 
pouuoit pas leur rauir. 
Comme cet homme poffedé auoit quafi efté cinq 
ou fix iours fans boire ny manger, fans repofer ny 
dormir: les Peres craignent qu'il ne meure fans 
affifiance; ils s'y tranfportent pour voir ce qu'ils y 
pourroient faire. A leur venuë ce Furieux fe fent 
tout appaifé.; il entend leur difcours, mais pour 
toutes chofes ils n'en remportent que des coups, & 
des marques de fa folie, & voyent bien que c'eft à 
DIE V feul qu'il faut renuoyer 1'iffu
 de cet affaire. 
En-fin apres quelques iours, cette poffeffion ceffe, 
Ie Diable quitte fa demeure. Ce pauure homme eft 
tout honteux, lors qu' on luy dit ce qu'il a fait: i1 
vient nous trouuer en noftre 1laifon, nous raconte, 
autant qu'il peut f'en fouuenir, les commencemens 
de fon mal, les operations du Demon deffus luy, 
témoigne qu'il n'a perdu ny la Foy, ny les defirs de 
[108 i.e., 106] fe voir Baptizé, nous demande pardon 
de tout ce qu'il a fait; fi toutefois on peut luy impu- 



1642 - 43] 


RELA TIOJ.V OF 1642 


147 


quite naked, to be burned. I' Courage, t) said he; 
"burn me, if thou wilt." At these words the 
:Madman stopped, then passed on, and gave partial 
vent to his fury elsewhere. 
An Infidel, who was one of our best Friends and 
the Captain of this same Village, came in haste to 
inform us of all these occurrences. He begged us 
not to make our appearance too soon, for fear of a 
greater misfortune. But the little Flock of Faithful 
ones needed their Pastor. The Fathers hastened to 
the spot, and found the poor Church in great afflic- 
tion and in still greater [107 i.e., IOsJ dread of what 
might follow. But all these poor Christians were 
determined to endure everything for the love of 
GOD, and animated one another with the hope of 
Paradise, which no one could ravish from them. 
As this possessed man had been almost five or six 
days without eating or drinking, without rest or 
sleep, the Fathers feared that he might die with no 
one to assist him, and they went to see what they 
could do. On their arrival, the 1Iadman felt quite 
calmed. He listened to their discourse, but for all 
they said they obtained only blows and other tokens 
of his madness; so they saw very plainly that the 
issue of this affair must be referred to GOD alone. 
Finally, after some days, this possession ceased, 
and the Devil quitted his abode. The poor man 
was quite ashamed, when he was told what he had 
done. He came to see us at our House, and told us, 
as well as he could remember, how his disease had 
commenced, and how the Demon had worked upon 
him. He showed that he had lost neither Faith nor 
the desire [108 i.e., 106J to be Baptized, and asked 
pardon of us for what he had done,- if indeed he 



148 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


ter quelque crime, où fa yolonté n' a eu aucune part, 
& dans lefquels i1 a fouffert plus qu'aucun autre. 
Nous ne nous fommes pas refolus de rien precipiter 
en ce Baptefme, Ie temps nous donnera plus de 
connoiffance; no us efperons auec l'aide de DIE V , 
que tout reüffira à la confufion des Demons, & au bien 
.de cette petite Eglife. 



1642-43] 


RELA TIO.J.V OF I642 


149 


could be charged with any crime, in acts in which 
his will had had no share, and from which he had 
suffered more than any other. \Ve are determined 
to do nothing rash in this Baptism; time will bring 
us more knowledge. \tVe hope that, with GOD'S 
assistance, everything will result in the confusion of 
the Demons, and in the welfare of this little Church.. 



150 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


CHAPlTRE X. 


DE LA MISSION DE SAINCT lEAN BAPTISTE, AUX 
ARENDAENHRONON. 


O lEVa tellement reüny Ie plus fort de Chrefiiens, 
qui font en ce Pais dans Ies Millions de Ia Con- 
ception & de Saind: lofeph, les deux parties 
les plus confiderables des Hurons; que neantmoins il 
fe retrouue bon nombre tant de Chrefiiens que de 
Catechumenes, çà & là difperfez en plufieurs autres 
endroits. [log i.e., 107J Cela nous a obligez, quoy que 
nous foyons au milieu d'vn Peuple fedentaire, d'y 
faire vne Millon Errante, qui eufi Ie foin de cultiuer 
ces Ames, qui ont dautant plus befoin de fecours 
qu'elles fe voyent priuées de l'exemple des autres 
Chrefiiens. 
Le P. Antoine Daniel, & Ie P. lofeph Marie. Chau- 
monot, ayans eu ce departemêt, ont demeuré tantofi 
en vn Bourg, tantoft en vn autre, felon Ie trauail 
qu'ils y trouuoient; toutefois leur plus long fejour 
ayant efié dans Ies Bourgs des Arendaenhronon, 
cette Miffion en a porté Ie nom. 
Auant que nous euffions la connoiffance de ces 
Peuples, telle que Ie temps nous l'a donnée: ne 
voyant aucun culte qu'ils rendiffent à quelque fauffe 
Diuinité, nous jugions que leur Conuerfion en feroit 
dautant plus facile; puifque comme fur yne table 
rafe, n'y ayant rien à effacer, on y pourroit fans 
refifiance imprimer les ldées d'vn vray DIE V, & les 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF J642 


151 


CHAPTER X. 


OF THE MISSION OF SAINT JOHN THE BAPTIST AMONG 
THE ARENDAENHROXON. 


G OD has thus far gathered together most of the 
Christians of this Country in the Missions of 
la Conception and of Saint Joseph, the two 
most important localities among the Hurons. Never- 
theless, there are many, both Christians and Cate- 
chumens, who are scattered here and there in several 
other places. [109 i.e., 107] This has compelled us, 
although we are in the midst of a sedentary People, 
to establish among them an Itinerant :Mission, which 
shall be charged with the instruction of these Souls, 
which are all the more in need of succor that they 
are deprived of the example of other Christians. 
Father Antoine Daniel and Father Joseph 1\1arie 
Chaumonot, who have had charge of this depart- 
ment, have dwelt sometimes in one Village and 
sometimes in another, according to the work that 
they had to do. However, as their longest sojourn 
has been in the .Villages of the Arendaenhronon, 
this !vIission has borne that name. 
Before we had obtained that knowledge of these 
Peoples which has come to us in course of time, when 
we saw no worship paid by them to any false 
Divinity, we concluded that their Conversion would 
be all the easier; because - as upon a bare tablet, 
from which there was nothing to erase - we might 
without opposition impress on them Ideas of a true 



152 


LES RELA TIOj\lS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


conduire au refped & à l' Adoration qui luy eft deüe 
par toute la Terre. :Mais l' experience nous a fait 
voir qu'ils font [110 i.e., 108] remplis de Superfti- 
tions Diaboliques, prenans leurs Songes pour leurs 
Diuinitez, d'où dépend Ie bonheur de leur vie. Outre 
cela, nous voyons qu'ils reconnoiffent des Genies 
plus puifIans qui difpofent des affaires Publiques, 
qui caufent les Famines, qui ont Ie maniment des 
Guerres, & donnent la Vidoire à ceux qui fe rendent 
plus fouples à leurs volontez. 
Ce n'eft pas feulement vne faufIe opinion qui ait 
pris pied dans leur efprit, l'ayans receüe par tradi- 
tion de leurs Anceftres; mais fouuent ces Demons ne 
fe rendent que trop vifibles, & fe donnent en forte à 
connoiftre, qu'ils n'en peuuent douter. Ondoutaehte, 
qu'ils reconnoifIent pour Ie Dieu de la Guerre, leur 
apparoift fort fouuent; mais comme i1 eft terrible, 
ce n'eft jamais qu'auec effroy, empruntant quelquefois 
Ie vifage d'vn homme forcené de rage, d'autrefois 
d'vne femme qui n'a que des traits de fureur. 
C E T Hyuer, vn ieune Homme enuiron de trente 
ans, vit entrer fur Ie foir, vn fpedre en fa Cabane, 
en forme d'vne ß1egere, [I II i.e., 109] armée de 
tifons & de flammes, qui s' efcrioit qu' on Ie brûlaft. 
Son efprit eft troublé aux horribles regards de cette 
furie enragée.; il entre luy-mefme en fureur, fe iette 
dans les feux, qui eftoient allumez; & quoy qu'il fe 
brûlaft, il n'en refIent point la douleur. II chante 
continuellement, plufieurs iours, ou plufiofi, il pouffe 
fans cefIe, des hurlemês terribles, fans toutefois 
perdre rien de fa voix. En fin on faifit cet homme 
forcené, on interroge ce Demon de fureur, qui l'anime 
& qui Ie poffede. II répond qu'il demande en offrãde, 



1642 -43] 


RELA TION OF .r642 


153 


GOD, and guide them into that respect and Adora- 
tion which are due to him throughout the Earth. 
But experience has shown us that they are [110 i.e., 
108] full of Diabolical Superstitions, looking upon 
their Dreams as their Divinities, upon whom the 
happiness of their lives depends. Besides that, we 
see that they acknowledge more powerful Genii who 
settle Public affairs, who cause Famine, who control 
Wars, and give Victory to those who become most 
obedient to their will. 
It is not only an erroneous opinion that has obtained 
footing in their minds, through their having received 
it as a tradition from their Ancestors; but frequently 
these Demons show themselves only too visibly, and 
make their appearance in such a manner that these 
people cannot doubt their existence. Ondoutaehte, 
whom they recognize as the God of War, often 
appears to them,- but never without inspiring fright, 
for he is terrible. Sometimes he assumes the coun- 
tenance of a man mad with rage; again, that of a 
woman whose features are only those of fury. 
LAST Winter, a young Man about thirty years of 
age saw, one evening, a spectre enter his Cabin 
having the appearance of a Megera, [I I I i.e., 109J 
armed with firebrands and flames, who exclaim.ed 
that she would burn him. His mind is disturbed by 
the horrible glances of this enraged fury; he himself 
becomes furious, and throws himself into the fires 
that had been lighted, and, although he burns him- 
self, he feels no pain. He sings continually, for 
several days, or rather he utters, without ceasing, 
terrible yells, without at all weakening his voice. At 
last the madman is seized, and the Demon of fury 
that animates and possesses him is questioned. It 



154 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


vne armure fauuage, qui Ie couure de pied en tefie, 
vne enfeigne de muzeau de loup, & quelque autre 
equipage de guerre. Ces chofes n'ayant peû luy 
efire fournies, cette Megere apparoift pour la feconde 
fois, tenant par les cheueux vne tefte effroyable, 
& criant que c' étoit la tefte d'vn certain Capitaine 
Iroquois: En fuite, il aperçoit la ceruelle d'vn homme, 
encore toute fanglante: Et en ce mefme temps illuy 
fut dit, que c'efioit la ceruelle d'vn autre de leurs 
Ennemis, qui toutes les années eft la terreur de nos 
Hurons. C'eft ainfi que vous euffiés emporté [112 
i.e., 110] les dépoüilles de ces Capitaines Iroquois, 
& des troupes que cet Efté ils mettront en campagne, 
pour vous faire la guerre, s'écrie cette Furie. 
I' ESTOIS venuë d'Onontaé (c'efi vne Nation en- 
nemie des Hurons) mais puis qu'icy on me refufe les 
honneurs, que i'attendois d'y reçeuoir, ie yay de ce 
pas. à Agnée (c'eftoit vne autre Natiõ Iroquoife, la 
plus voyfine de Kebec) & là ie feray honorée. Aces 
mots ce Monftre difparut, & laifIa l'épouuante & Ia 
crainte dans Ie cæur des Hurons. 
Nous verrons cet Efté. fi ces menaces auront eû 
quelque mauuais effet. Quoy qu'il en foit, il eft 
afIeuré que fouuent Ies paroles de ces Demons fe 
trouuent veritables. Puis que ie m'y vay engagé, en 
voicy vn exemple qui merite de trouuer icy place. 
V N certain, qui nous preffe de Ie Baptizer, n'eftant 
encore âgé que de quinze à feize ans, s' eftoit retiré 
dans Ies bois, pour f'y difpofer par vn ieufne; à I'ap- 
parition de queIque Demon, (apres auoir ieufné feize 
iours, fans manger, mais beuuant feulement de l'eau) 
il entendit tout d'vn coup, [113 i.e., I I I] cette voix 
qui venoit du Ciel: Prens Ie foin de cet homme, & 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


155 


replies that it demands, as an offering, a set of 
armor, of savage fashion, which covers a man from 
his head to his feet; 4 an ensign consisting of a wolf's 
muzzle; and certain other warlike equipment. As 
these things cannot be supplied her, this :Megera 
appears a second time holding up by the hair a hor- 
rible head, and calling out that it was the head of a 
certain Iroquois Captain. Then he saw a man's 
brains, still quite gory; and at the same time he was 
told that they were the brains of another of their 
Enemies, who is the terror of our Hurons every 
year. "Thus," called out the Fury, "would you 
have carried off [112 i.e., I1o] the spoils of those 
Iroquois Captains, and of the troops that they will 
put in the field next Summer to make war on you. 
"I HAD come from Onontaé " (a Nation hostile to 
the Hurons) "but since I am refused the honors that 
I expected to receive, I will go at once to Agnée ,. (this 
was another Iroquois Nation, the nearest to Ke bec) 
" and there I shall be honored." At these words 
the Monster disappeared, leaving terror and fear in 
the hearts of the Hurons. 
We shall see this Summer whether these threats 
will have any evil effect. In any case, it is a fact 
that these words of the Demons often turn out to be 
true. While I atn on this subject, I will relate an 
instance that deserves to be recorded here. 
A CERTAIN man, who urges us to Baptize him, 
had, when but fifteen or sixteen years of age, retired 
into the woods to prepare himself by fasting for the 
apparition of some Demon. (After having fasted 
sixteen days without eating anything, and drinking 
water only) he suddenly heard [113 i.e., II I] this 
utterance, that came from the Sky: " Take care of 



156 


LES RELA TIONS DES ./ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


qu'il mette fin à fon ieufne. A mefme temps il aper- 
çoit vn vieillard: d'vne rare beauté, qui décendãt du 
Ciel, f'aproche de luy, & l'enuifageant d'vn regard 
fauorable.;' Courage, luy dit-il, i'auray foin de ta vie, 
c'eft vn bonheur pour toy, de m'auoir pris pour 
Maiftre: Tous les Demons qui hantent ces contrées 
n'auront pas Ie pouuoir de te nuire: Vn iour tu verras 
ta cheuelure blanche cõme la mienne: Tu auras 
quatre enfans, les deux premiers & Ie dernier ferõt 
mafies, & la troifiéme fera vne fille; apres cela ta 
femme te tiendra lieu de freur. Finiffant ces paroles, 
il luy prefente vn morceau de chair humaine toute 
cruë. Ce ieune enfant en ayant horreur, deftourne 
vn peu la tefte: mange donc de cecy, dit Ie vieil- 
lard, luy prefentant vn morceau de graiffe d'ours. 
L'ayant mangé, ce Demon fe retire, remontant vers 
Ie Ciel d'où il eftoit venu. Du depuis illuy eft fou- 
uent apparu, & luy a promis affiftance: de ce qu'il 
luy auoit predit, quafi Ie tout eft arriué. Cette 
homme a eû quatre enfans, dõt Ie troifiéme a efté 
vne fille: apres cela vne [114 i.e., I 12J certaine in fir- 
mité l'a obligé à la continece, que Ie Diable deman- 
doit de luy. Du refte, il eft de tref-bonne fanté, & 
quoy qu'il aproche de fa vieilleffe, il a paffé plufieurs 
maladies contagieufes fans en auoir efté atteint. II 
a toufiours efté tres-heureux à la chaffe; de forte que 
lors qu'il eftoit dans les bois, entendant quelque 
nombre de crys du Ciel, ce luy eftoient des marques 
qu'il prendroit autãt d'ours: & d'autrefois voyant 
luy feul quantité de cerfs & de biches entrer en la 
Cabane, il en donnoit aduis aux autres, qui veritable- 
ment trouuoient Ie lendemain dedans leurs pieges, Ie 
mefme nombre qu'il leur auoit dit. II attribuë ce 



1642-43] 


RELATION OF I642 


157 


this man, and let him end his fast." At the same 
time, he saw an aged man of rare beauty \vho came 
down from the Sky, approached him, and, looking 
kindly at him, said: " Have courage, I will take care 
of thy life. It is a fortunate thing for thee, to have 
taken me for thy :Master. None of the Demons who 
haunt these countries, shall have any power to harm 
thee. One day thou wilt see thy hair as white as 
mine. Thou wilt have four children; the first two 
and the last will be males, and the third will be a 
girl; after that, thy wife will hold the relation of a 
sister to thee." As he concluded these words, he 
held out to him a piece of human flesh, quite raw. 
The youth in horror tu
ned away his head. "Eat 
this, " said the old man, presenting him with a piece 
of bear's fat. When he had eaten it the Demon 
withdrew, ascending toward the Sky, whence he had 
come. After that, he often appeared to him and 
promised to assist him. Nearly all that he predicted 
to him has happened. This man has had four chil- 
dren, the third of whom was a girl; after which a 
[114 i.e., 112] certain infirmity compelled him to the 
continence that the Devil asked of him. Apart from 
that, he is in excellent health; and although he is 
approaching old age, he has been exposed to many 
contagious diseases without having been attacked by 
them. He was always very fortunate in the chase; 
thus, while in the woods, whenever he heard a certain 
number of cries from the Sky, they were signs that 
he would take so many bears. At other times, when 
he alone saw a number of stags and does entering 
the Cabin, he would inform the others of it; and 
they would really find in their snares on the follow- 
ing day the same number of animals that he had told 



158 


LES RELA TIONS DES ./ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


grand bonheur qu'il a toûjours eu dedans fes chaffes, 
à ce morceau de graiffe d'ours que ce Demon luy 
auoit fait manger, & juge de là qu'il auroit eu vn 
pareil fuccez à la guerre, s' il eufi mangé ce morceau 
de chair humaine qu'il refufa. 
Semblables chofes font fi communes en ce Païs, 
que ce n'efi pas merueille que ces pauures Barbares 
foient fi fortement attachez au feruice du Diable, 
qu'ils luy facent des Sacrifices d'Ours, de Cerfs 
[115 i.e., 113J & de Chiens, qui brûlent & confom- 
ment en fon honneur. Mais f'il arriue quelquefois 
que fes promeffes fe trouuet veritables, Ie plus 
íouuent auffi il les deçoit, & les precipite tout à fait 
dans Ie malheur. 
Les Arendaenhronon l'éprouuerent l'Efié paffé. 
Auant qu'ils allaffent en guerre, Ie Diable leur auoit 
promis qu'ils auroient la viétoire fur leurs Ennemis, 
en fuite d'vne impudicité publique dont ils luy auoient 
fait hommage, & toutefois ils y furent vaincus. Les 
Chefs de cette guerre infortunée efioient vn Capi- 
taine dont autrefois il a efié parlé, nommé Atironta, 
& vn fien frere nommé Aëotahon: Tous deux fuffi- 
famment . infiruits des chofes de la Foy, & qui 
fouuent nous auoient demandé Ie Baptefme; mais 
parce qu'illeur manquoit encore quelque difpofition 
neceffaire pour cet effet, DOUS n'auions pû leur accor- 
der. L'vn fut pris & brûlé par les Ennemis, & 
l'autre f'échapa. Nous efperons que Ie premier aura 
trouué mifericorde aupres de DIEV, au moins on 
nous a affeuré qu'il eut recours à fa Bonté, lors qu'il 
fe vid dans ce malheur. 
[116 i.e., 114J Celuy qui f'échapa de la meílée, à 
reconnu cette faueur venir du Ciel, dont il auoit 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF r6p 


159 


them. He attributes this excellent fortune that he 
has always had in the chase, to the piece of bear's fat 
that the Demon made him eat j and he judges from 
this that he would have had equal success in war, had 
he eaten the piece of human flesh that he refused. 
Such things are so common in this Country that it 
is no wonder that these poor Barbarians are so at- 
tached to the service of the Devil that they Sacrifice 
to him Bears, Stags, [115 i.e., 1I3J and Dogs, which 
are burned and consumed in his honor. But, if it 
sometimes happen that his promises are fulfilled, he 
more frequently deceives them and overwhelms them 
with misfortune. 
The Arendaenhronon had an experience of this 
last Summer. Before they went to war the Devil 
promised them that they should be victorious over 
their Enemies, in consequence of a public act of 
shamelessness that they had performed in his honor, 
and nevertheless they were defeated. The Chiefs in 
that ill.fated war were a Captain who has already 
been mentioned, named Atironta, and one of his 
brothers, named Aëotahon. Both had been suffi- 
ciently instructed in matters of Faith and had 
frequently asked us for Baptism; but, as they still 
lacked some necessary preparation therefor, we had 
been unable to grant it to them. One was taken pris- 
oner, and burned by the Enemies, and the other 
escaped. \Ve hope that the former will have found 
mercy with GOD,- at least, we have been assured 
that he had recourse to his Goodness, when he found 
himself in that misfortune. 
[116 i.e., 114J He who escaped from the combat 
has acknowledged that this favor came from Heav- 
en, whose assistance he had frequently implored 



160 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


imploré l'affifiance auant que de combatre, & d'où i1 
attendoit fon plus puiiIant fecours; ayant confiam- 
ment refufé de rendre au Diable les hommages impu- 
diques qu'auoient fait ceux qui demeurerent en ce 
rencontre. Auant que de partir, vn Demon luy eftant 
apparu en fonge, luy auoit fait cette menace: Tu 
te repentiras de t'efire feparé de moy, ie te feray 
fentir les veritables cruautez du feu des Iroquois, 
puifque la crainte d'vn feu imaginaire de I' Enfer te 
fait trembler, & te fait quitter mon feruice. Mais 
DIE v qui jamais n'abandonne les fiens, ny mefme 
les pauures miferables qui mettent en luy leur con. 
fiance, ayant deliuré ce bon Catechumene, lors qu'il 
fe voyoit à deux doigts du malheur dont Ie Diable 
l'auoit menaiIé, luy a apris que tous les Demons ne 
peuuent rien fur noftre vie quand nous les méprifons, 
pour honorer celuy qui feul au monde doit eftre 
redouté. 
Vne Grace de DIE v bien receuë, en attire beau- 
coup d' autres apres foy. Ce Guerrier efiant de re- 
tour, fe met en fi [117 i.e., 115] bon efiat, que nous 
[ne] pûmes pas luy refufer Ie íainét Baptefme. On 
luy donne Ie nom de lean Baptifte, pource qu'il efioit 
Ie premier Adulte de la Million dediée à ce Sainét, 
qui eufi efté admis en I' Eglife en efiat de fanté. 
C'eft la coufiume en ce Pais d'inuiter au feftin fes 
Amis, & tous les principaux du Bourg, lorfque quel- 
qu'vn veut témoigner au Public quelque grand' joye 
ou trifteiIe: La compagnie des Conuiez eft quelque- 
fois de deux trois & quatre cens. Ce Neophyte n'eft 
pas fi toft Chreftien, qu'i1 veut publiquement fe faire 
reconnoiftre pour tel. II prepare vn fefiin magnifique 
à leur mode; tout Ie monde eftant affemblé: Mes 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


Hi! 


before the fight, and whence he expected his most 
powerful aid, having constantly refused to render to 
the Devil the unchaste homage paid by those who 
were engaged in this battle. Before he left, a De- 
mon had appeared to him in a dream and had threat- 
ened him in this wise: "Thou shalt repent of hav- 
ing separated thyself from me. I will make thee 
feel the real cruelties of the Iroquois fire, since the 
fear åf an imaginary Hell fire makes thee tremble, 
and causes thee to leave my service." But Go D, 
who never abandons his own,-not even poor 
wretches who place their confidence in him,- by 
delivering this good Catechumen, who saw himself 
within a finger-length of the misfortune with which 
the Devil had threatened him, showed him that all 
the Demons have no power over our lives, when we 
despise them in order to honor him who alone in 
the world is to be dreaded. 
A Grace from GOD that is well received attracts 
many others after it. When this 'Varrior returned, 
he prepared himself so [117 i.e., II 5J well that we 
could not refuse him holy Baptism. He was named 
Jean Baptiste, because he was the first Adult of the 
1vlission dedicated to that Saint, who was admitted 
into the Church while in good health. 
It is the custom of this Country to invite to a feast 
one's Friends, and all the leading men of the Village, 
when one wishes to declare before the Public some 
great joy or some great sorrow. The number of the 
Guests is sometimes two, three, or four hundred. 
No sooner had this :Neophyte become a Christian 
than he wished to be publicly recognized as such. 
He had a splendid feast prepared, in their fashion. 
When all were assembled, he said to them: " 11 y 



162 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Camarades, leur dit-iI, ie ne fuis plus ce que vous 
eftes, & ce qu'autrefois i'ay efté, vn efc1aue des Son- 
ges & des Diables que vous honorez. Ie quitte leur 
feruice, i' abandonne leurs pernicieufes ceremonies, 
ie me fepare entierement d'auec vous, m'efiant donné 
à vn plus puiffant Maiftre. V ous fçaurez mainte- 
nant que ie fuis baptifé, & que ie lle rougiray iamais 
d'efire appel1é Chrefiien. I'admire vos courages, 
d'efire [118 i.e., I 16J fans crainte, & de ne point trem- 
bler de peur, aux nouuelles qu'on nous apporte de 
ces feux Eternels, qui brûlent à iamais au centre de 
la Terre, ceux qui durant leur vie n'ont pas adoré cet 
Efprit Tout-puifIant, qui d'vn mot a creé & la Terre 
& Ies Cieux. Pour moy ie confefIe ma lafcheté; ces 
nouuelles m'ont d'abord fait trembler, & l'horreur 
qui me faifit lors que i'y penfe, m'a fait à jufie rai- 
fon, prendre Ia refolution d'éuiter ce malheur, main- 
tenant qu'il efi en mon pouuoir. Si vous craignez 
autant que moy Ie feu des Iroquois, excufez-moy, 
pardonnez à ma lafcheté. fi ie crains mille fois dauan- 
tage Ie feu d'Enfer qui efi cent-mille fois plus 
dangereux & plus cuifant. Non, non, mes Freres, ie 
n'ay plus de courage, quand on viendra m'inuiter au 
peché, ie trembleray de peur & d'apprehenfion, & en 
cela ie vous laifferay tous feuls dans Ie peril; mais s'il 
faut attaquer l'Ennemy, s'il faut vanger la mort de 
nos parens, s'il faut defendre Ie Païs, ie vous tien- 
dray fidele compagnie, ie ne fuyray pas Ie danger, 
& i'efpere que Ie courage ne me manquera pas à 
I' occafion. 
[119 i.e., 117J Depuis ce temps là, ce nouueau 
Chrefiien a eu des attaques bien fortes. Souuent on 
a tafché de l'engager dans les fuperfiitions du Païs, & 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF r642 


163 


Comrades, I am no longer what you are, and what I 
formerly was,-a slave to the Dreams and to the 
Devils that you honor. I quit their service; I aban- 
don their pernicious ceremonies; I separate myself 
completely from you, for I have given myself to a 
more powerful Master. You must know now that I 
am baptized, and that I will never blush at being 
called a Christian. I admire your courage in being 
[118 i.e., 116] without fear, and in not trembling at 
the news that is brought to us of those Eternal fires 
that consume forever, in the center of the Earth, 
those who during their lives have not adored that 
All-powerful Spirit who with a single word has 
created both Earth and Heaven. For my part, I con- 
fess my cowardice. That news caused me to tremble 
at the start, and the horror that seizes me when I 
think of it has given me good reason to take the reso- 
lution to avoid that misfortune, now that it is in my 
power to do so. If you dread the fire of the Iroquois 
as much as I do, excuse me and forgive my lack of 
bravery if I dread a thousand times more the fire of 
Hell, that is a hundred thousand times more danger- 
ous and more painful. No, no, my Brothers, I have 
no more courage; when urged to sin, I shall tremble 
with fear and apprehension, and in this respect I 
shall leave you all alone in the peril. But if we have 
to attack the Enemy, if we have to avenge the death 
of our relatives, if we have to defend the Country, I 
will be your faithful companion; I will not fly from 
danger, and I hope that courage will not fail me on 
that occasion." 
[119 i.e., 117] From that time, this new Christian 
has had many violent attacks. Frequent attempts 
have been made to draw him into the superstitions 



164 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


toufiours il a refifté. Iufque là mefme, qu'vn fien fils 
étant tombé malade, & luy iamais n'ayant voulu per- 
mettre, qu'en fa Cabane, on eût recours à ces remedes 
diaboliques; fa femme l'a abandonné, luy a enleué 
cet enfant, & a pris vn autre mary. Sa chafieté n'a 
pas eu de moindres affauts. En vn . Pais, ou les 
femmes & les filles n' ont rien qui les retiennèt; ou, 
la pudeur que la nature a donné pour defenfe à leur 
fexe, paffe pour vn opprobre; ou par honneur, elles 
font obligées de fe def-honorer; il eft bien difficile, 
à vn ieune Homme, qui toute fa vie s'y eft veu enga- 
gé, de parer à ces coups, lors qu'il veut faire vne 
retraite. Mais la crainte de Dieu, a efté toute fa 
defenfe. En vain on l'a follicité, il a refufé des pre- 
fens, & a trèblé de peur, felõ qu'il auoit dit, lors qu'il 
s'eft veû fuyant Ie danger de perdre, ce que la 
feule Foy luy auoit apris de cherir, plus que Ie plai- 
fir & la vie. Ie marche par Ie Bourg, a-t'il dit quel- 
quefois parlant mefme à des Infidelles, [20 i.e., I 18] 
comme fur vne terre ennemie: ie crains Ie rencontre 
des femmes, comme celIe d'vn Iroquois, encore vn 
Ennemy me fait-il moins de peur, car ie l'enuifage 
auec affeurance; mais ie n'oze leuer la veuë, lors 
qu'vne Femme vient à moy. 
En ce Pais, il n'en va pas des Noms affeclez aux 
FamilIes, de mefme qu'en Europe: Les Enfans ne 
portent pas Ie nom du Pere, & n'y en a aucun qui 
foit commun à toute la Famille, chacun a Ie fien diffe- 
rent; en telle forte neantmoins que f'il fe peut faire, 
jamais aucun Nom ne fe perd: ains quand quelqu'vn 
de la Famille eft mort, tous Ies parens f'affemblent, 
& deliberent enfemble lequel d'entr'eux portera Ie 
nom du deffunét, donnant Ie fien à queIque autre 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I6.p 


165 


of the Country, but he has always resisted. So far, 
even, have these efforts gone, that when one of his 
sons fell ill, and when he refused ever to allow 
recourse to be had, in his Cabin, to such diabolical 
remedies, his wife left him, carried the child away 
from him, and took another husband. His chastity 
was exposed to equally violent assaults. In a Coun- 
try where women and girls have nothing to restrain 
them; where the modesty which nature has given 
them as a protection for their sex passes for a dis- 
grace; where for honor's sake they are compelled to 
dishonor themselves; it is very difficult for a young 
Man who has been engaged in such affairs all his 
life, to parry these blows when he wishes to effect a 
retreat. But the fear of God was his sole defense. 
In vain did they solicit him; he refused presents, 
and trembled with fear, as he had said, when he fled 
from the danger of losing what Faith alone had 
taught him to cherish above pleasure and above life. 
"I walk through the Village," he has sometimes 
said, speaking even to Infidels, [20 i.e., 118] "as in 
an enemy's country. I dread meeting women as I 
would an Iroquois. Even an Enemy would cause me 
less fear, for I can look at him boldly; but I dare not 
lift my eyes when a Woman approaches me. " 
In this Country, there are no Names appropriated 
to Families, as in Europe. The Children do not 
bear their Father's name, and there is no name that 
is common to the whole Family,-each one has his 
own different name. Nevertheless, it is so arranged 
that, if possible, no Name is ever lost; on the con- 
trary, when one of the Family dies all the relatives 
assemble, and consult together as to which among 
them shall bear the name of the deceased, giving 



166 


LES RELA TIONS DES ./ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


parent. Celuy qui prend vn nouueau nom, entre 
auffi dans les Charges qui y font annexées, & ainfi il 
efi Capitaine, fi Ie defund l'efioit. Ceia fait, iis 
retiennent leurs Iarmes, iis ceffent de pleurer Ie mort, 
& Ie mettent en cette forte au nombre des viuants, 
difans qu'il efi refufcité, & à pris vie en la perfonne 
de celuy qui a receu fon nom, & la [121 i.e., 119] 
rendu immortel. De là fe fait que jamais vn Capi- 
taine n'a d'autre nom, que fon predeceffeur, ainfi 
qu'autrefois dans l'Egy[p]te, tous les Roys portoient 
Ie nom de Ptolemée. 
Cette éledion done des Capitaines, ou (com-me par- 
lent les Hurons) la refurreétion des defunéts, ne fe 
faifant qu'auec pompe & éc1at; lors qu'il falut refuf- 
citer Ie frere de ce nouueau Chrefiien, c'efi 'à dire, 
lors qu'il fallut créer vn nouueau Capitaine, on con- 
uoqua tous les principaux du Païs, & nous y fûmes in- 
uitez, comme à vne Ceremonie où les François auoient 
vne grande part; puis qu'il efioit quefiion de faire 
reuiure Ie nom d' Atironta, celuy qui autrefois Ie 
premier des Hurons auoit defcendu à Kebec, & 1ié 
amitié auec les François. Les Nations efians affem- 
blées, on nous defera cet honneur, de choifir qui nous 
voudrions, pour prendre & ce nom & la charge de 
Capitaine. Nous renuoyâmes ce choix à la difcre- 
tion & prudence des Parents. Nous jettons done les 
yeux fur vn tel, dirent-ils, nous monfirans lean 
Baptifie, & ne defirons point que fon nõ [122 i.e., 120] 
foit dauantage d' Aëoptahon, mais Atironta, puifqu'il 
Ie refufcite. 
Cela fait, chaque Nation fit fes prefens, qui, felon 
la coufiume font diuerfement qualifiez. Les vns 
faifans leur don, difent, Qu'ils prennent Ie bras du 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


167 


his own to some other relative. He who takes a new 
name also assumes the Duties connected with it, and 
thus he becomes a Captain if the deceased had been 
one. This done, they dry their tears, and cease to 
weep for the deceased. In this manner, they place 
him among the number of the living, saying that he 
is resuscitated, and has come to life in the person of 
him who has received his name, and has [121 i.e., 119] 
rendered ;,him immortal. Thus it happens that a 
Captain never has any other name than that of his 
predecessor, as formerly in Egypt all the Kings bore 
the name of Ptolemy. 
Therefore, as this election of the Captains, or (as 
the Hurons say) the resurrection of the dead, is 
always celebrated with pomp and splendor, when it 
became necessary to bring back to life the brother of 
this new Christian,- that is, when a new Captain had 
to be elected,- all the chief men of the Country were 
called together; and we also were invited, as to a 
Ceremony in which th
 French were greatly inter- 
ested because it was a question of reviving the name 
of Atironta, he who had formerly been the first of the 
Hurons to go down to Kebec, and to form a friend- 
ship with the French. When the Nations were as- 
sembled, they conferred on us the honor of selecting 
him whom we wished to assume that name and the 
office of Captain. We deferred the choice to the dis- 
cretion and prudence of the Relatives. "We there- 
fore, " said they, " cast our eyes on that man, ., poin t- 
ing out Jean Baptiste to us; "and we do not wish 
his name [122 i.e., 120] to be any longer Aëoptahon, 
but Atironta, since he brings him back to life." 
When this was done, each Nation gave its presents, 
which, according to custom, were differently charac- 



168 


LES RELA TIONS DES ./ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


deffunét pour Ie retirer du tombeau; les autres, 
Qu'ils fouftiennent fa tefte, crainte qu'il ne retombe. 
Vn autre, faifant toûjours quelque nouueau prefent, 
adjoûtera dabondant, qu'il luy donne des armes pour 
repouffer les Ennemis. Et moy, dira vn quatriéme, 
j'affermis la Terre fous luy, à ce que pendant fon 
regne elle foit inébranlable. De noftre part, nous 
fifmes trois prefens; & produifans Ie plus confide- 
rable: Ce prefent, difmes-nous, eft pour rendre la 
V oix au deffunét, mais vne V oix qui ne foit plus 
l'inftrument des Demons à proclamer & commander 
des Ceremonies defenduës, ie dis vne V oix digne d'vn 
Chreftién, qui aime & encourage tout Ie monde à la 
defenfe du Païs, à la deftruétion de I' Impieté & à la 
publication du fainét l'Euangile. A ces mots toute 
rAffiftance répondit. Ao! qui chez eux eft la 
marque d'vn fentiment [123 i.e., 12 I] d'approbation. 
DIE V beniffe ce nouueau Capitaine ChrefHen, & luy 
donne la grace de faire tout Ie bien dont il eft capable. 
Quelques autres ont efté baptifez en eftat de fanté: 
mais nous n'y allons qu'auec choix; iugeant que 
nous deuons dans ces commencemens eftre pI us refer- 
uez à les admettre dedans I' Eglife, afin qu'elle en 
foit plus fainéte. 
Entre les autres Bourgs de cette Million, celuy de 
fainét Michel paroiffoit en ces commencemens tout 
remply d'efperances; la plufpart fe faifoient inftruire, 
& il fembloit que la Semence qu'on jettoit lors dans 
ces cæurs y auoit pris quelque racine. Mais Ie 
Diable yayant furfemé fon yvroye, ie veux dire, Que 
plufieurs ayans receu en fonge commandement de 
leur Demon, d'auoir recours aux fuperftitions åncien- 
nes du Païs, s'ils vouloient éuiter les malheurs dont 



1642-43J 


RELA TION OF I642 


169 


terized. Some, as they presented their gifts, said: 
" 
lay these grasp the arm of the deceased, to draw 
him from the grave." Others said: "May these 
support his head, lest he fall back again." Another, 
giving still a new present, would add volubly, that 
he gave him weapons to repel the Enemies. "And 
I," a fourth would say, " I make the Earth solid un- 
der his feet, so that it may remain immovable during 
his reign. ' , On our part, we gave three presents; 
and, as we produced the most valuable, we said: 
"This gift is intended to restore the Voice of the 
deceased, but a Voice that will no longer be the 
instrument of the Demons to proclaim and command 
forbidden Ceremonies,- I say, a Voice worthy of a 
Christian, who loves and encourages everyone to 
defend his Country, to overthrow Impiety, and to 
promulgate the holy GospeL" To these words the 
entire Audience replied: "Ao!" which with them 
indicates a sentiment [123 i.e., 121] of approval. 
1lay GOD bless this new Christian Captain, and 
grant him the grace to do all the good in his power. 
Some others have been baptized, who are in good 
health; but we make a careful selection, considering 
that at the outset we should be more cautious in 
admitting them into the Church, in order that it may 
thereby be made more holy. 
Among the other Villages of this Mission, that of 
saint :Michel appeared at the beginning to be most 
hopeful. The majority of the inhabitants sought 
instruction; and it seemed as if the Seed then sown 
in those hearts had taken root to some extent. But, 
as the Devil afterwards sowed his tares,- I mean 
that many received in dreams a command from their 
Demon to have recourse to the old superstitions of 



170 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


on les menaçoit, tout ce bon grain fut bien-toft 
eftouffé: Au moins Ie peu qui a refté, n'a pas eu cette 
vigueur que nous fouhaitons en tous ceux qui parrent 
en noftre eftime pour folides Chreftiens. V olontiers 
[124 i.e., 122] ils croyroient en DIE V, pourueu que 
Ie Diable les affeuraft que DIE v dift vray. Ie fuis 
tout difpofé à embraffer la Foy & me faire Chreftien, 
quelque horreur que i'en aye, nous difoit vn de ces 
pauures efclaues de Satan, pourueu que mon Songe 
me Ie commande. En effet, rien ne leur femble 
difficile quand il faut obeir au Songe. 
Ie pourrois dire en verité, que Ie Songe eft en effet 
Ie Dieu de ces pauures Infideles, puis que c'eft luy 
qui commande dans Ie Pais, que luy feul s'y fait obeir 
& qu'il y eft par tout honoré: & que s'ils ont des 
craintes, des efperances, des defirs, des paffions, & des 
amours; quafi Ie tout fe fait en fuite de leurs Songes. 
Vn certain auoit fongé au plus profond de fon fommeil, 
que les Iroquois l'auoient pris & Ie brûloient comme 
vn Captif. II n'eft pas fi toft refueillé, qu'on tient 
Confeil fur cet affaire. II faut, dit-on, effuyer Ie 
malheur de ce Songe. Incontinent les Capitaines 
font allumer douze ou treize feux dans Ie lieu où ils 
auoient couftume de brûler leurs Ennemis: chacun 
s' arme de tifons & de torches enflâmées; [125 i. e., 123] 
on brûle ce Captif de Songe, il crie comme vn enragé; 
lors qu'il éuite vn feu, il retombe tout incontinent 
dans vn autre: il fait de la forte trois fois Ie tour dans 
la Cabane; & lors qu'il paffe ainfi tout nud comme 
la main, chacun luy applique fes flambeaux allumez; 
en luy difant: Courage, mon Frere, c'eft de cette 
façon que nous auons pitié de toy. Pour conclufion, 
on luy ouure vne iffuë afin qu'il forte de la captiuité. 



16-12 - 43] 


RELA TION OF 1642 


171 


the Country, if they wished to avoid the evils with 
which they were threatened,-all this good grain 
was soon choked; at least, the little that remained 
had not the strength that we wish to see in all who 
pass in our opinion for firm Christians. [124 i.e., 122] 
They would willingly believe in GOD, provided that 
the Devil would assure them that GOD tells the 
truth. "I am quite ready to embrace the Faith, and 
to become a Christian, whatever dread I may have 
of it, " one of these poor slaves of Satan said to us, 
"provided my Dream commands me to do so." In 
fact, nothing seems difficult to them when they have 
to obey a Dream. 
I might truly say that Dreams are indeed the God 
of these poor Infidels, because it is they who com- 
mand in the Country,-theyalone are obeyed and 
honored by all. If they have any fears, hopes, 
desires, passions, and affections,- everything they do 
is a result of their Dreams. A certain man had 
dreamed, while in the soundest slumber, that the 
Iroquois had taken and burned him as a Captive. No 
sooner was he a wake than a Council was held on 
the matter. "The ill fortune of such a Dream," it 
was said, " must be averted." The Captains at once 
caused twelve or thirteen fires to be lighted, on the 
spot where they were accustomed to burn their 
Enemies. Each one armed himself with firebrands 
and flaming torches, [125 i.e., 123] and they burned 
this Captive of a Dream; he shrieked like a madman. 
'Vhen he avoided one fire, he at once fell into an- 
other. In this manner, he made his way three times 
around the Cabin; and, as he thus passed, as naked 
as one's hand, each one applied to him a lighted 
torch, saying: "Courage, my Brother, it is thus that 



172 


LES RELA TIO.NS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


En fortant il fe faifit d'vn chien qu'on luy tenoit tout 
preparé, ille charge à l'inftant fur fes efpaules & Ie 
porte par les Cabanes comme vne viétime facrée, dont 
il fait vne offrande publique au Demon de la guerre, Ie 
priant qu'il agrée cette feinte, au lieu de la verité de 
fon Songe. Et afin que ce Sacrifice foit entierement 
confommé, on affomme ce chien, on Ie grille & on Ie 
roftit dedans les flammes, & apres toutes ces chofes, 
on Ie mange dans vn feftin public, en la mefme façon 
qu'ils ont couftume de manger leurs Captifs. 
A peine auroy-je peu Ie croire, fi ie ne l'auois veu 
de mes yeux, quoy que [126 i.e., 124J ie fceuffe bien 
que Ie Diable eft vn maiftre cruel, & qui mefme 
n'épargne pas dés cette vie, ceux qu'il tient fous fa 
feruitude. Mais ce qui eft de plus déplorable en ces 
pauures gens, eft qu'ils cheriffent cette malh[eurJeufe 
captiuité, encore qu'ils fentent & voyent leur mifere 
pour la plufpart, & qu'ils foient contraints d'auoüer 
eux-mefmes, que Ie joug de la Foy n'eft que douceur 
pour ceux qui l'embraffent. Ils en ont maintenant 
des exemples deuant leurs yeux fi manifeftes qu'ils 
ont efté contraints d'en rendre à DIE V la gloire, fans 
toutefois luy rendre les veritables homages qu'ils 
voyent luy eftre deus. 
L'Efté dernier, quelques guerriers du Inefme Bourg 
de fainét lvIichel, s'en retournans des terres Enne- 
mies, fe virent accueillis d'vn orage extremement 
furieux au milieu d'vn grand lac d'enuiron vingt 
lieuës de largeur, qu'ils ne penfoient plus qu'à la 
mort, leurs petits Canots faits d'écorces, n'eftans pas 
pour refifter dans ces tepeftes. lIs chantent tous vne 
chanfon lugubre, comme ils ont accouftumé de faire 
en guerre lors qu'ils [127 i.e., 125] font dans Ie 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


173 


we have pity on thee." At the conclusion, they left 
him an opening by which he might issue from cap- 
tivity. As he went out, he seized a dog that was 
held there ready for him, placed it at once on his 
shoulders, and carried it among the Cabins as a 
consecrated victim, which he publicly offered to the 
Demon of war, begging him to accept this semblance 
instead of the reality of his Dream. And, in order 
that the Sacrifice might be fully consummated, the 
dog was killed with a club, and was singed and 
roasted in the flames; and, after all this, it was eaten 
at a public feast, in the same manner as they usually 
eat their Captives. 
I could hardly have believed this, had I not seen 
it with my own eyes; although [126 i.e., 124J I knew 
very well that the Devil is a cruel master, and does 
not spare, even in this life, those whom he keeps 
under his thraldom. But what is most deplorable in 
these poor people is, that they cherish this miser- 
able servitude even though most of them feel and see 
their misery, and are themselves compelled to admit 
that the yoke of Faith is gentleness itself for those 
who embrace it. They now have such manifest ex- 
amples of it before their eyes that they are constraine.d 
to praise Go D therefor, without, however, paying 
him the true homage that they see is due to him. 
Last Summer , while some warriors of the same 
Village of saint Michel were returning from the 
Enemy's country, they were caught in an extremely 
violent storm in the middle of a great lake, about 
twenty leagues wide. They expected nothing but 
death, for their little bark Canoes are not strong 
enough to withstand such tempests. They sang a 
doleful chant, as they are in the habit of doing in war, 



174 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


defefpoir de la vie: & cependant les vagues les fur- 
montans, leur Canot fe remplit, & ils attendent, à 
chaque moment, de fe voir fubmergez; les Demons 
qu'ils auoient inuoqué à leur aide, ne leur prefians 
pour lors aucun fecours. Vn feul Chreftien efioit de 
cette compagnie: Mes Camarades, leur dit-il, vos 
voix fe noyent dans ces orages, elles ne vont pas 
jufques aux Enfers, où brûlent ces malheureux Demõs 
qu'en vain vous appellez, qui ne vous peuuent enten- 
dre: pour moy, i' auray recours à mon DIE v, car ie 
fçay bien qu'il eft par tout, & qu'affurément i1 écou- 
tera ma Priere; & s'il veut, il nous fera mifericorde, 
quoy que vous l'ayez offenfé. II dit à celuy qui 
eftoit affis au gouuernail, qu'il cede pour vn temps 
aux vagues, afin que luy qui eftoit au deuant du 
Canot, euft moyen de prier DIE V d'vn efprit plus 
raffis, n'ayant pas à parer aux flots, qui fans relache 
les battoient. II n'a pas fi toft finy fa Priere, & fait 
vn væu à DIE V où fa deuotion Ie porta, fans pref- 
qu 'il y euft penfé, que Ie Canot fe trouue en repos, que 
les vagues s'appaifent, & que l'endroit [128 i.e., 126) 
par où ils paffent fe rencontre auffi vny qu'vne glace, 
quoy que de part & d'autre Ie vent continuaft tou- 
fiours dans fa fureur, & qu'il y euft de la tempefie 
affez pour abyfmer mille Canots s'ils y auoient efié. 
Les lnfideles adorent au mefme moment ce grand 
DIE V des mers & des vents; & de puis fort fouuent 
ils ont rendu auec admiration témoignage à la verité, 
confeffans ingenuement qu'ils deuoiêt leur vie à la 
Priere de ce bon Chreftien, nommé lean Annand 
Andeoüarahen. C' eft vn jeune Homme qui ayant 
demeuré deux ans au Seminaire des Hurons, qu'au- 
trefois nous auions à Ke bee, apres y auoir efié Baptifé, 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


175 


when they [127 i.e., 125] despair of their lives. Still 
the waves grew higher; their Canoe filled, and they 
expected at every moment to be submerged. The 
Demons whom they called upon to assist them did not 
bring them any succor. A single Christian was among 
the band. "M y Comrades, " he said to them, " your 
voices are drowned in the roaring of the storm; they 
do not reach Hell, where those wretched Demons are 
burning whom you call in vain, and who cannot hear 
you. For my part, I will have recourse to my GOD j 
for I know well that he is everywhere, and that he 
will surely hear my Prayer. If he choose, he will 
have mercy on us, although you have offended him." 
He told him who steered to give way to the waves 
for a while, in order that he, who was in the bow of 
the Canoe, might be able to pray to Go D with a 
more settled mind than if he had to protect himself 
against the billows that broke over them without ces- 
sation. No sooner had he finished his Prayer and 
made a vow to GOD, as his devotion inspired him, 
almost without his thinking of it, than the Canoe 
was at rest, the waves fell, and the tract [128 i.e., 126] 
through which they passed became as smooth as a 
mirror,-though all around them the wind continued 
to blow furiously, and the storm was violent enough 
to have engulfed a thousand Canoes, had they been 
there. 
At that moment, the Infidels adored the great GOD 
of the sea and of the winds, and since then they have 
often admiringly borne testimony to the truth, frank- 
ly confessing that they owed their lives to the 
Prayer of that good Christian, named Jean Armand 
Andeouarahen. He is a young 
Ian who spent two 
years in the Seminary of the Hurons, that we for- 



176 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


remonta icy haut, plein de zele & de Foy, il y a 
enuiron quatre ans; & depuis ce temps-Ià, quoy qu'il 
ait toûjours vefcu parmy les Infideles, dans vn âge 
affez fujet aux débauches & à l'inconftance, jamais 
neantmoins fa Foy n'a pû eftre ébranlee, & par tout 
où il s'eft trouué, il a tenu à tres-grande gloire & 
honneur d' eftre recogneu pour Chreftien. 
Vne autrefois eftant en guerre efchaufé [129 i.e., 
127] au combat, il f'enfonça fi auant dans les darts 
& les fléches des Ennemis, qu'il fut abandonné des 
fiens dans Ie plus fort de la meílée: ce fut alors qu'il 
fe recommanda plus particulierement à DIE V: il 
fentit pour lors vn fecours fi prefent, que du depuis, 
appuyé fur cette mefme confiance, il eft toûjours Ie 
premier & Ie plus auant dans les perils, & jamais ne 
pâlit, pour quelque danger qu'il enuifage. Ie voy- 
ois, difoit-il, comme vne greíle de fléches venir fondre 
fur moy, ie n'auois point d'autre bouclier pour les 
arrefter, que la croyance feule que DIE v difpofant 
de ma vie, il en feroit felon fa volonté. Chofe 
étrange! les fléches f'écartoient à mes deux coftez, 
ainfi, difoit-il, que fait l'eau lors qu'elle rencontre la 
pointe d'vn vaiffeau qui va contre marée. En effet, 
fes Compagnons qui Ie tenoiêt pour mort, furent tout 
étonnez de voir qu'il s'eftoit retiré d'vne fi furieufe 
décharge fans aucune bleffure. 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


177 


merly had at Kebec. 5 After having been Baptized, 
he came up here, about four years ago, full of zeal 
and Faith; and since then, although he has always 
lived in the midst of Infidels, at an age very prone 
to debauchery and inconstancy, nevertheless his Faith 
has never been shaken, and, wherever he has been, 
he has considered it a very great glory and honor to 
be recognized as a Christian. 
On another occasion, during a war and in the heat 
[129 i.e., 127] of battle, he fought his way so far amid 
the spears and arrows of the Enemies, that he was 
abandoned by his own people in the thick of the fray. 
He then commended himself more especially to GOD, 
and thereupon felt such immediate aid that ever since 
then, supported by this same confidence, he is always 
the first and foremost in all perils, and has never 
turned pale, whatever danger might confront him. 
" I saw," said he, " as it were, a hailstorm of arrows 
about to pour upon me. I had no other buckler with 
which to stop them than this belief alone, that, as 
Go D disposed of my life, he would do so according 
to his will. Strange to say, the arrows parted on 
either side of me, as the water does when it meets 
the prow of a vessel advancing against the tide." In 
fact, his Companions, who thought him dead, were 
utterly astonished when they saw him retire from so 
furious a discharge without a single wound. 



178 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


[130 i.e., 128] CHAPITRE XI. 


DIVERSES CHOSES QVI N'ONT PÛ ESTRE RAPORTÉES 
AUX CHAPITRES PRECEDENS. 


P OVR fatisfaire au defir de quelques perfonnes 
qui nous ont demandé quelque obferuation des 
Ec1ypfes que nous remarquerions en ce Pais j 
en voicy vne de Lune fort remarquable, qui nous 
apparut Ie foir du quatorziéme d' Auril, de cette pre- 
fente Année 1642. Le commencement ne nous pût 
efire affeuré, à caufe que la Lune, qui alors fe leuoit, 
efioit encore cachée des bois. La fin de l'Ec1ypfe 
fut à dix heures huiét ou neuf minutes. Et ainfi 
(fuiuant Ie calcul de Noël Duret, qui a fupputé cette 
Ec1ypfe dans fes Ephemerides, pour Ie Meridien de 
Paris) nous fommes difians de Paris, de cinq heures 
& demy quart. Car il met la fin de cette Ec1ypfe, à 
lefgard de Paris, Ie quinziéme d' Auril, à trois heures 
& vn quart. 
[131 i.e., 129] L'an paffé, nous auions fait Million 
aux Kionontatehronon ou Nation du petun; & mefme 
nous auions pouffé iufqu'aux AttioüendaronK, appel- 
lée Nation Neutre. 
Iais apres auoir confideré 
combien grand efioit l'obfiac1e, au deffein que nous 
auions, de la publication & progrez de l'Euangile en 
ces Contrées, les calomnies que les Barbares qui font 
plus proches de nous, femoient & faifoient courir par 
tout, de nos perfonnes, & de nos fonétions; nous auons 
iugé plus à propos, pour Ie prefent, de rallier nos 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


179 


[130 i.e., 128] CHAPTER XI. 


DIVERS MATTERS WHICH COULD NOT BE RELATED 
IN THE FOREGOIKG CHAPTERS. 


I 
 order to gratify the desire of certain persons 
who have asked us for some remarks on the 
Eclipses that we might observe in this Country, 
here is one regarding a very remarkable Eclipse of 
the 1100n that appeared to us on the evening of the 
fourteenth of April of the present Year, 1642. We 
were unable to ascertain the time at which it com- 
menced, because the Moon, then rising, was still 
hidden by the woods. The end of the Eclipse was 
about eight or nine minutes past ten o'clock. Thus 
(according to the calculation of N oël Duret, who has 
computed that Eclipse in his Ephemerides, for the 
Meridian of Paris), we are distant from Paris five and 
half-a-quarter hours; for he gives the end of that 
Eclipse as regards Paris, as being at a quarter past 
three on the fifteenth of April. 
[131 i.e., 129] Last year, we had held a Mission 
among the Kionontatehronon, or tobacco Nation, and 
had even pushed as far as the Attiouendaronk, called 
the Neutral Nation. But-after having considered 
how great an obstacle was presented to our design of 
preaching and spreading the Gospel in these Coun- 
tries, by the calumnies that the Barbarians who dwell 
nearest to us had repeated and published everywhere, 
about our persons and our functions- we deemed it 
more expedient for the present to unite our forces, 



180 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


forces, & ne pas eftendre nos trauaux à ces Nations 
plus efloignées; eu égard particulierement au petit 
nombre d'Ouuriers; que celles qui nous font plus 
voyfines ne foient gaignées, au moins pour la pluf- 
part, & ne fe foient rendües aux veritez, que nous 
venons leur annoncer. L'experience femble nous 
faire voir, que cette voye eft la meilleure, & la plus 
auantageufe à la conuerfion de ces Peuples; qui fans 
doute fe reduiront facilement, les vns apres les 
autres, lors que ceux aupres defquels nous trauail- 
Ions, s'eftans fais bons Chreftiens, prefcheront plus 
[132 i.e., 130] fortement que nous, & de parole, & 
encore plus efficacement par leurs exemples. 
Nous n'auons laiffé de faire quelques voyages à la 
miffion des Apoftres, n'ayans pas pû ny deu entiere- 
mët abandonner quelques Chreftiens que Dieu nous 
y auoit donnés. La Foy à de grands efIets dans les 
cæurs, & des attraits mille fois plus puiffans, que 
toutes les douceurs & les charmes de la nature. 
Quelques vns de ces pauures Chreftiens s'eftans reti- 
rez en ce Païs, & approchez de nous, beniffët Dieu, 
chaque iour, de fe voir, difent-ils, moins éloignez du 
Paradis, eftans moins éloignez de ceux qui leur ont 
ouuert ce chemin. Quelques autres, qui font reftez 
nous viennent quelquefois voir; & nous auffi de fois 
à autres, auons pris Ie temps de les vifiter. Le P. 
Charles Garnier, & Ie P. Pierre Pijart ont fait ces 
courfes fi à propos pour quelques Ames qui n'atten- 
doient que leur venüe pour s'enuoler au Ciel, qu'il 
eut femblé que leur voyage eut efté à deffein pour 
les Baptizer, quoy que ce ne fut qu'vn hazard: fi 
toutefois il ya du hazard dans cette Prouidence eter- 
nelle, [133 Le., 131] qui va difpofant nos penfées, 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


181 


and not to extend our labors to the more remote 
Nations, especially in view of the small number of 
Laborers, until those that are nearest to us have been 
won over, at least for the greater part, and have 
acknowledged the truths that we come to preach to 
them. Experience seems to show us that this way is 
the best, and the most advantageous for the conver- 
sion of these Peoples, who without doubt will easily 
submit, one after the other, when those with whom 
we labor shall have become good Christians; and 
will preach [132 i.e., 130] better than we can, by 
word, and still more effectively by their example. 
We nevertheless made some journeys to the mis- 
sion of the Apostles, for we were not able nor was it 
consistent with our duty entirely to abandon the few 
Christians whom God had given us there. Faith 
produces great effects on hearts, and its attractions 
are a thousand times more powerful than all the 
allurements and charms of nature. Some of those 
poor Christians, who have removed to this Country 
and settled close by us, bless God every day when 
they see themselves, they say, less remote from Para- 
dise, by being nearer to those who have opened them 
the road to it. Others, who remained behind, some- 
times come to see us; and we also have occasionally 
taken leisure to visit them. Father Charles Gar- 
nier and Father Pierre Pijart have made these excur- 
sions, which have been so opportune in the case of 
some Souls, that awaited but their coming to soar to 
Heaven, that it seemed as if their journey had been 
undertaken expressly for the purpose of Baptizing 
them, although it was a mere chance if indeed there 
be such a thing as chance in that eternal Providence 
[133 i.e., 131] which directs our thoughts, our de.. 



182 


LES RELATIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


nos deffeins, nos voyages & tous nos mouuemens, 
pour Ie falut de fes Eíleus. 
En l'vne de ces courfes, on fit rencontre de quel- 
ques Capitaines de la Nation Neutre, ou Miffion des 
Anges, qui nous inuiterent à les retourner voir. 
Mais outre l'abfence du P. lean de Brebeuf qui ayant 
eu cette miffion pour fon partage à Kebec où Ie cours 
de nos affaires nous auoit obligé de l'enuoyer; il 
femble que trauaillant plus fortement à la conuerfion 
des Hurons, nous auançons en mefme temps la 
conuerfion des autres. Et ainfi nous attendrons Ie 
temps & les moments du Ciel, pour entrepredre ces 
voyages: & fur tout, Ie renfort d'Ouuriers. 
Ie ne puis icy retenir ma plume, & i1 faut que mon 
cæur fe defcharge fur ce papier. Les fentimens de 
compaffion que i'ay pour tous ces pauures Peuples 
qui font à l'entour de nous, qui ont des Ames auffi 
precieufes aux yeux du Fils de DIE V , que celles qui 
liront cette Relation; au moins Iuy ont-elles autant 
coûté, & fon Sang & fa vie: La neceffité que ie voy 
d'vn prefent & puiffant fecours.; [134 i.e., 132J pour 
cooperer à leur Salut, auec les Anges Tutelaires de 
ces Contrées; L'Efprit de DIE V & Ia fidelité à fes 
Graces dont nous fommes témoins en Ia plufpart de 
ceux que Ie fainét Efprit a vne fois touchez.; Les 
efperances plus grandes que iamais, que tous tant 
que nous fommes icy, auons conceuës depuis vn An, 
que Ie temps eft venu que la Gloire de DIE V appa- 
roiftra dans ce N ouueau :Monde. Tout cela fait que 
nous crions à I' aide, que nous demandons affiftance. 
Ce n'eft pas pour Ie temporel, car ce n'eft pas à nous 
de pouruoir en ce point; mais à celuy qui nous 
employe, qui y a engagé la verité de fa parole. N ous 



1642-43] 


RELATION OF I6p 


183 


signs, our travels, and all our movements, for the 
salvation of the Elect. 
On one of these excursions we met some Captains 
of the Neutral Nation, or Mission of the Angels, who 
invited us to return and see them. But in addition 
to the absence of Father Jean de Brebeuf-who had 
had this mission as his share of the work -at Kebec, 
whither the course of our affairs has obliged us to 
send him, it seems to us that by working more ener- 
geticallyat the conversion of the Hurons, we at the 
same time further the conversion of the others. 
Therefore we will await from Heaven the time and 
the moment for undertaking these journeys, and above 
all a reinforcement of Laborers. 
I cannot here restrain my pen, and my heart must 
overflow upon this paper. The feeling of compas- 
sion that I have for all these poor Peoples around us, 
who have Souls as precious in the eyes of the Son of 
GOD as those of the persons who will read these Re- 
lations,-at least, they have cost him as much, both 
his Blood and his life; the necessity that I see for 
immediate and powerful assistance [134 i.e., 132] to 
coöperate for their Salvation with the Guardian An- 
gels of these Countries; the Spirit of GOD, and the 
fidelity to his Graces that we witness in the majority 
of those whom the holy Ghost has once touched; the 
hopes, greater than ever, that we all here have enter- 
tained for a Year, that the time has come when GOD'S 
Glory will appear in this New World,-all these in- 
duce us to cry out for help and to ask assistance,-not 
in temporal matters, because it is not for us to make 
any provision in this respect; but for him who em- 
ploys us, and who has pledged his word to it. 'Ve 
are greatly in need of Laborers. It is they whom we 



184 


LES RELATIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


auons grand befoin d'Ouuriers. Ce font ceux-Ià que 
nous appellons à nofire fecours, ce font là les plus 
riches prefens que nous attendons de la France. 
Qui que ce foit qui fe fente appellé du Ciel, quel- 
ques auantages qu'il puiffe auoir, foit de Nature, foit 
de Grace, ie Ie puis affeurer qu'il trouuera icy de l'em- 
ploy plus qu'il n'aura de vie; & que plus il aura 
quitté, dans Ie defir de ne trouuer icy que des croix 
& des peines, plus i1 benira DIE V, de l'auoir 
[135 i.e., 133] amené en vn Païs auffi abondant dans 
les confolations du Ciel, qu'il efi fierile pour les 
biens de la terre. 
Aimer DIE V, faire beaucoup, bien fouffrir, & 
s'efiimer au bout fort inutile, ie croy que ce font les 
quatre Elemens pour faire vn bon Ouurier des H u- 
rons. Et ce font ces gens là que nous appellons au 
fecours; Car il efi vray qu'il fe trouue des difficultez 
quafi infurmontables pour la Conuerfion de ces 
Peuples. 
Efire Capitaine parmy eux, & efire Chrefiien, c'efi 
joindre Ie feu & l'eau: tout l'employ des Capitaines 
n'efiant quafi que d'obeir au Diable, de prefider à 
des Ceremonies d'Enfer, d'exhorter la jeuneffe à des 
danfes, des fefiins, des nuditez, & à des impudicitez 
tres-infames. 
Efire Chrefiien, & fe condamner à mourir fans fe 
defendre contre les maladies, il femble que ce foit Ie 
mefme: tous leurs remedes efians ou veritables forti- 
leges, ou tellement remplis de fuperfiitions defen- 
duës, qu'ils ne peuuent prefque fe guerir, qu'en 
commettant vn crime. 
[136 i.e., 134] L'efperance qu'ils ont dans leurs 
chaffes, leurs pefches, & leurs traites auec les 



1642 -43] 


RELA TIOiV OF I6p 


185 


call to our help; they are the most valuable gifts that 
we expect from France. If anyone should feel 
called by Heaven, whatever advantages of Nature or 
of Grace he may have, I can assure him that he win 
find here more employment than his life can com- 
pass, and the more he shall have abandoned, in the 
desire to find here but crosses and trouble. the more 
will he bless GOD for having [135 i.e., 133J brought 
him to a Country, that abounds as much in Heavenly 
consolations as it is sterile in earthly blessings. 
To love GOD, to work hard, to suffer much, and 
to consider oneself after all as very useless,- such 
are, I consider, the four Elements necessary to con- 
stitute a good Worker among the Hurons. Such are 
the men whom we call to our aid, for it is true that 
almost insurmountable difficulties exist with regard 
to the Conversion of these People. 
To be a Captain among them and to be a Christian, 
is to unite fire and water, as almost the entire occu- 
pation of the Captains consists in obeying the Devil, 
in presiding over Hellish Ceremonies, in exhorting 
young people to dances, to feasts, to nudity, and to 
most infamous lewdness. 
To be a Christian, and to condemn oneself to die 
without defense against disease, seems to be the same 
thing, for all theIr remedies are either veritable sor- 
ceries, or are so full of forbidden superstitions that 
they can hardly become cured without committing a 
cnme. 
[136 i.e., 134J Their hopes of success in hunting, 
fishing. and trading with outside Nations, are in most 
instances founded solely on spells and charms,- so 
much so, that they are convinced that by embracing 



186 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Nations eftrangeres, n'efi fondée Ie plus fouuent que 
fur des forts & charaéteres. Tellement qu'ils fe per- 
fuadent qu'en embraffant la Foy, ils fe condamneront 
à iamais de ne f'y voir heureux. 
La plufpart des Fefiins, qui font la douceur du 
Pais, font autant de facrifices au Diable, ou bien 
feront meí1ez de quelque autre impieté: it faut vne 
Foy bien viue pour s'en bannir foy-mefme, & fe 
refoudre à jeufner vne bonne partie de l' Année, plus 
eftroittement qu'au pain & à l'eau. Car hors de ces 
Feftins, leur ordinaire n'eft fouuent que du bled 
rofiy dans les cendres, ou reduit en farine detrempée 
dans 1'eau. 
La licence dans les Mariages eft fi grande, & la 
liberté de fe quitter dés la moindre occafion tellement 
receuë pour Loy fondamentale de ces Peuples, que 
quelque Chrefiien que ce foit, pour lors mefme qu'il 
fe marie, f'expofe à vn danger de fe voir Ie lende- 
main de fes Nopces, obligé de garder tout Ie refie 
de fa vie, la continence. Que fera done vn 
[137 i.e., 135J jeune Homme Chrefiien, fi Ie mefme 
jour de fes Nopces, fa femme abandonnant la Foy, 
rompt auffi par mefme moyen ce lien facré? Elle 
prendra auffi-tofi party ailleurs; & deufi-il brûler 
mille & mille fois, il faudra qu'il vieilliffe vierge fans 
iamais en auoir fait væu. L'Eglife n'a point icy de 
glaiue: Vne femme qui l'auroit fait ainfi, n'en feroit 
point blâmée parmy les Infideles. Nous auons efié 
plufieurs fois dedans ces craintes, & auons admiré la 
refolution tout à fait genereufe, & tout à fait fainéte 
de quelques vns qui fe voyoient à la veille de cette 
mifere: Mais Ie bon DIE V a arrefié ces coups, & a 
beny iufqu'à maintenant la charité de ceux qui ont 



1642-43] 


RELATION OF I6p 


187 


the Faith they would condemn themselves to per- 
petual ill luck. 
Most of the Feasts, which are the chief pleasure of 
the Country, are so many sacrifices to the Devil, or 
else some other impiety is mixed up with them. It 
requires a very ardent Faith to banish oneself from 
them, and to be resolved to fast for a good part of 
the Year, more strictly than on bread and water; for, 
outside of these Feasts, their meals consist frequent- 
ly but of corn roasted in the embers, or ground into 
meal and mixed with water. 
License in Marriages is so great, and the freedom 
of leaving one another on the slightest pretext is so 
generally admitted as a fundamental Law of these 
Peoples, that every Christian who marries is exposed, 
on the morrow of his Nuptials, to the danger of be- 
ing compelled to observe continence for the remain- 
der of his life. \Vhat therefore can a [137 i.e., 135] 
Christian young 11an do if, on his very Wedding 
day, his wife should abandon the Faith, and thereby 
at the same time break that sacred tie? She will at 
once take a new husband; and, were he to burn with 
passion a thousand times over, he must grow old in 
chastity without having ever made a vow to do so. 
The Church has in this case no sword. A woman 
who would act thus would not be at all blamed for it 
by the Infidels. "\Ve have often feared such things, 
and have admired the altogether brave and saintly 
resolution of some who saw themselves on the brink 
of such unhappiness. But the good Go D has stayed 
these blows, and has hitherto blessed the charity of 
those who have been pleased to contribute their Alms 
for the purpose of giving stability to the :Marriages 
of Christians. \Ve have more fear for the future; for 



188 


LES RELA TIONS DES JJ1s UITES 


[V OL. 23 


voulu contribuer par leurs Aumofnes, à l'affermiffe- 
ment des Mariages des Chrefiiens. N ous craignons 
plus pour l'aduenir; car nous voyons bien que nos 
foins, nos aumofnes, & tous les fecours que nous pou- 
uons efperer de la terre, ne peuuent pas arrefier ce 
malheur, fi Ie Ciel, ne lie luy-mefme & les cæurs & 
les affeétions. A cet effet, nous auons fait vn V æu 
à DIE V en l'honneur de fainét Iofeph Patron de ce 
Pais. 
[138 i.e., 136J En-fin il fe trouue des cæurs telle- 
ment endurcis dans leur impieté, que ne pouuans pas 
refifier à la verité qu'ils reconnoiffent; au lieu de fe 
foufmettre à DIE v, ils entrent dans des rages, & 
refufent d'écouter ce qu'ils voudroient bien ne pas 
craindre. 
Si tu veux me parler de l'Enfer, difent-ils quel- 
quefois, forts promptement de ma Cabane, ces 
penfées troublent mon repos, & m'inquiettent dans 
mes plaifirs. Ie voy bien qu'i1 y a vn DIE v, dira 
quelqu'autre, mais ie ne puis fouffrir qu'il puniiIe 
nos crimes. Vn certain fe voyant vn iour trop 
preffé, difoit à celuy qui Ie venoit infiruire: Ie fuis 
content d'efire damné; en luy portant vn coup de 
coutteau, qui toutefois ne luy déchira que la fotane. 
En vn autre Bourg, vne femme qui ne vouloit pas écou- 
ter la parole de DIE V , f' efiant bouché les oreilles, 
jetta des cendres toutes rouges au vifage d'vn de nos 
Peres qui parloit à elle, f'écriant qu'elle deuenoit 
folIe, quand elle entendoit fes difcours. Non, difoit 
vn impie, que fes parens auoient faifi lors qu'il vou- 
loit tuër vn de nos Peres, qui efioit allé [139 i.e., 137] 
dans fa Cabane pour Confeffer vne malade, non, 
difoit-il, ie ne veux pas entendre ce qu'ils nous pref- 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I6p 


189 


we see very clearly that our care, our alms, and all 
the assistance we can hope to receive from earth, can- 
not arrest this evil if Heaven itself do not bind hearts 
and affections. \Vith that view, we have made a Vow 
to GOD in honor of saint Joseph, the Patron of this 
Coun try. 
[138 i.e., 136J Finally, there are some hearts so 
hardened in their impiety, that, although they are 
unable to resist the truth of what they acknowledge, 
instead of submitting to GOD, they become furious, 
and refuse to listen to what they would be very glad 
not to fear. 
" If thou wishest to speak to me of Hell," they 
sometimes say, " go out of my Cabin at once. Such 
thoughts disturb my rest, and cause me uneasiness 
amid my pleasures." "I see very well that there is 
aGo D," another will say; "but I cannot endure 
that he should punish our crimes. " A certain man, 
who one day found himself pressed too hard, said to 
him who came to instruct him: "I am content to be 
damned," while dealing him a blow with a knife, 
which, however, merely cut his cassock. In another 
Village, a woman who would not listen to GOD' 5 
word, and had closed her ears, threw live coals in the 
face of one of our Fathers who spoke to her, calling 
out that she became crazy when she heard his dis- 
course. "No," said an impious man,-whose rela- 
tives had seized him when he tried to kill one of our 
Fathers, who had gone [139 i.e., 137J into his Cabin 
to hear the Confession of a sick woman,-" no, I will 
not listen to what they preach to us about Hell. It 
is these impostors who, because they have no other 
defense in this Country than the fear of an imagi- 
nary fire of Hell, intimidate us by such penalties, in 



190 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


(VOL. 23 


chent de l'Enfer. Ce font des impofteurs, qui n'ayant 
point en ce Pais d'autre defenfe, que la crainte d'vn 
feu imaginaire de l'Enfer, nous intimident de ces 
peines pour conferuer leur vie, & arrefter Ie coup que 
déja nous deurions auoir fait, fi nous auions quelque 
refolution. 
Sans doute ces oppofitions font bien grandes à la 
grace du Chriftianifme: Et de cæurs rebelles iufqu'à 
ce point, au faind: Efprit, en faire des Fideles, des 
Sainéts, & fi befoin eft des Martyrs, c' eft vn ouurage 
qui furpaffe nos forces. Mais tout cela n'eft rien à 
DIE v: Ie Ciel eft plus remply de Criminels, que 
d'Innocens. Si autrefois d'vne eau infeéte & d'vn 
bourbier puant, on a tiré des flammes pures pour con- 
fommer les Sacrifices, la main de DIE V n' eft en rien 
racourcie depuis ce temps-Ià. II vaincra cette dure- 
té, fa Bonté eft plus grande que nos malices; & fi ce 
Peuple eft miferable où fera-t'il paroiftre dauantage 
fes Mifericordes? 
[140 i.e., 138J Nous auons maintenant des Chre- 
ftiens difpofez à mourir pour la Foy, qu'autrefois ils 
auoient en horreur: La pureté a trouué place dans 
leurs cæurs: Ils ont plus d'amour pour Ie Ciel, que 
iamais ils n'en ont eu pour les biens de la Terre: En 
vn mot où Ie peché a plus efté dans fon regne, la 
Grace y eft plus abondante. Pourquoy n'efpererons- 
nous pas Ie mefme de ceux qui reftent à conuertir? 
Si ce n'eft que les faueurs du Ciel foient efpuifées, 
ou que Ie Sang de IESVS-CHRIST n'ait pas merité 
dauantage. 
Non, difoit vn Huron Chreftien, parI ant aux Infi- 
deles, tout ce Pais fe verra quelque iour conuerty; 
tous ceux qui f'y oppofent, fe trouueront alors trop 



1642- 43] 


RELA TION OF I6p 


191 


order to save their own lives, and to arrest the blow 
that we would already have struck, had we any 
resolution. " 
Of course such opposition is a great obstacle to the 
grace of Christianity; and to form, from hearts that 
have hitherto rebelled against the holy Ghost, Believ- 
ers, Saints, and, if necessary, :Martyrs, is a work 
beyond our strength. But all this is as nothing to 
GOD; Heaven contains more Criminals than Inno- 
cents. If, of old, pure fire for burning Sacrifices was 
obtained from putrid water and from a foul quagmire, 
the arm of GOD has not shortened in any wise since 
that time. He will overcome this obstinacy; his 
Goodness is greater than our evil acts; and, if this 
People be miserable, where will he make his Mercies 
more manifest? 
[140 i.e., 138] We have, at present, Christians who 
are prepared to die for the Faith of which they 
formerly had a horror. Purity has found a place in 
their hearts. They have a greater love for Heaven 
than they ever had for the good things of the Earth. 
In a word, wherever sin has held most sway, there is 
Grace more abundant. vVhy should we not hope the 
same for those who still remain to be converted? un- 
less it be that the favors of Heaven are exhausted, or 
tha t the Blood of J E S U S C H R 1ST has not deserved 
more. 
" No," said a Christian Huron, speaking to the 
Infidels, "the whole Country will one day be con- 
verted; all who are opposed to it will then be too 
weak, for they carry the word of the Devil, and we 
that of GOD. Who, then, ought to win of the two? " 
A Woman one day begged one of our Fathers to 
come and instruct her, saying that she was resolved 



192 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


foibles; car ils portent la parole du Diable, & nous 
celIe de DIE v, qui Ie doit done em porter des deux? 
V ne Femme priant vn iour vn de nos Peres, de la 
venir infiruire, difant qu'elle efioit refoluë de croyre. 
Cela n'efi pas poffible, adjoûta fon Mary, tu es d'vne 
humeur fi fafcheufe, que perfonne ne la peut fuppor- 
ter. La Foy me changera, repartit cette pauure 
Femme, ils appriuoifent [141 i.e., 139] bien leurs 
chi ens : quand ils m'auront bien infiruite, ils vien- 
dront à bout de moy. 
En effet l'experience nous fait voir que la grace du 
Baptefme opere puiffamment dans vn cæur. La 
nuiét auant que d'efire baptifé, difoit vn certain 
Neophyte, ie n'en peus pas dormir de joye. Ie 
paffay tout ce temps à me refoudre deuant DIE V , de 
tout abandonner ce qu'il nous a deffendu. Ie me 
fentois affez de forces & de courage pour toutes les 
autres chofes, les Femmes feules me faifoient peur: 
il me fembloit voir des vifages auprés de moy qui 
me faifoient trembler: mais en-fin ie me confiay que 
Dieu me changeroit dans Ie Baptefme, & ie n'ay pas 
efié trompé; car iamais depuis vne femme ne f'efi 
adreffée à moy pour la feconde foisT 
Vne Chrefiienne fe voyant malade, auec fon petit 
enfant qui ne fucçoit plus que du laiét contagieux, 
au lieu de bonne nourriture: Auant que d'efire bap- 
tifée, difoit-elle, ie me fuffe affiigée dans mon mal; 
mais depuis que la Foy m'a fait recognoifire que 
cette vie n'eft rien, ie laiffe [142 i.e., 140] faire à 
DIE v, fi c'efi fa volonté, ie fuis contente de mourir. 
Ie ne demande la fanté ny pour moy ny pour mon 
enfant, mon efprit ei1 main tenant tout en repos, car 
DIE V fçait bien ce qui m'efi neceffaire. 



1642-43] 


RELATION OF I642 


193 


to believe. "That is impossible," added her Hus- 
band; "thou hast so bad a temper that nobody can 
endure it." "Faith will change me," replied the 
poor 'V oman. " They tame, [141 i.e., 139J indeed, 
their dogs. vVhen they shall have taught me well, 
they will easily manage me." 
In fact, experience has shown us that the grace of 
Baptism works powerfully in a heart. "The night 
before I was baptized," a Neophyte said, " I was un- 
able to sleep for joy. I spent all my time in resolv- 
ing before GOD to abandon all that is forbidden to 
us. I felt sufficient strength and courage for any- 
thing. Women alone caused me fear. I seemed to 
see faces near me that made me tremble; but at last 
I felt confident that God would change me in Bap- 
tism, and I have not been deceived, for never since 
then has any woman addressed me a second time." 
A Christian woman lay sick with her little child, 
which sucked nothing but infectious milk, instead of 
wholesome nourishment. "Before I was baptized," 
she said, " my sickness would have caused me sor- 
row; but now that Faith has shown me that this life 
is nothing, I leave [142 i.e., 140J everything to GOD. 
If it be his will, I am quite content to die; I do not 
ask for health, either for myself or for my child. :\fy 
mind is now quite easy, for GOD knows well what I 
need." 
A girl fifteen or sixteen years of age, who had suf- 
fered for three entire days from a pain in her side, 
was asked whether she had not manifested or felt 
some impatience during the violence of her suffer- 
ings. "N ot at all," she replied; "far from it. I 
prayed to God that the pain might continue, if such 
were his will, because during that time I felt more 



194 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Vne fille de quinze à feize ans, apres auoir efié 
trois iours entiers dans les douleurs d'vn mal de 
cofté; efiant interrogée fi quelquefois elle n'auoit 
point tefmoigné ou conceu quelque impatience dans 
la force de fon mal. Nenny, refpondit-elle, tant s'en 
faut; ie priois Dieu que la douleur continuafi, fi c'e- 
fioit fa volonté: parce que durant ce temps-Ià i'auois 
plus de plaifir dans les penfées du Paradis, & ne 
fongeois quafi à autre chofe. I'ayapris par occafion, 
que cette mefme Fille, Ie iour qu'on maffacra feu 
Iofeph Chihoatenhoüa fon onc1e, qui luy tenoit lieu 
de pere & de mere: à la premiere nouuelle qu' elle en 
eut, ne pouuãt arrefter ny fes cris ny fes larmes, ny 
contenir fes mains qu'elle ne s'arrachafi les cheueux; 
n'auoit point toutefois en bouche d'autres paroles 
que celle-cy: Non, ie ne lairray point pour cela de 
croyre; [143 i.e., 141] Mon ÐIEV, ayez pitié de moy, 
qu'on nous maffacre tous, & qu'on me tuë moy- 
mefme, iamais ie ne vous abandonneray. 
Charles Tfondatfaa, dont i1 a efié parlé cy-deffus, 
infiruifant vn iour quelques Infideles, des auantages 
de nofire Foy: apres auoir long-temps parlé de la 
Bonté & de la PuiíIance de DIE V, í'adreíIa au plus 
confiderable de l' AíIemblée: Si, difoit-il, ie te don- 
nois la difpofition de moy-mefme, aurois-tu bien Ie 
courage de me jetter dans les dangers, preuoyant 
mon malheur? Tous les Chrefiiens, adjoûta-t'il en 
fuite, difent à DIE V tous les iours dedans leurs Pri- 
eres, qu'il difpofe & de leur Arne & de leur vie, felon 
fa volonté; efi-il pour nous trahir? luy qui n'a pas 
vn cæur efiroit comme Ie tien... II nous protege & 
nous conferue, car il a de l'amour pour ceux qui Ie 
craignent. Que quelque affliétion nous arriue, dit-il 



1642-43] 


RELA TIO.N OF J6,p 


195- 


pleasure in thinking of Paradise, and I thought of 
hardly anything else." I learned by accident that, 
on the day on which they slew the late Joseph Chi- 
hoatenhoua,-her uncle, who took the place of her 
father and mother,-when this Girl first heard of it, 
she could not stop her cries or her tears, or restrain 
her hands from tearing her hair. Nevertheless, her 
only words were: U No, I will not cease to believe 
on that account. [143 i.e., 141] )Iy GOD, have pity 
on me. Even if they massacre all of us, and if they 
kill me, I will never abandon you." 
Charles Tsondatsaa, who has been already men- 
tioned, was one day engaged in instructing some In- 
fidels on the advantages of our Faith. After having 
spoken at length of the Goodness and Power of GOD, 
he addressed the chief person of the Assembly, say- 
ing: "If I gave thee the disposal of my person, 
wouldst thou have the courage to cast me into' 
dangers, foreseeing my destruction? All the Chris- 
tians, ., he then added, "tell GOD every day, in 
their Prayers, to dispose of both their Souls and their 
lives according to his pleasure. Will he betray us, 
he who has not a heart as narrow as thine? He pro- 
tects and preserves us, for he loves those who fear 
him. Whatever affliction may happen to us," he 
further added, "you Infidels must not imagine that 
he has forgotten us. He loves us even while he 
afflicts us, for, instead of the eternal fire which our 
sins have justly deserved, he is satisfied with a pun- 
ishment which, however [144 i.e., 142] severe it may 
appear, is still very slight, for it ends with our lives." 
"Whatever may happen to me, continue always 
in the Faith," he said one day to all his Family, when 
he was going forth to war, scarcely a month ago.. 



196 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


encore, ne croyez pas vous autres Infideles, qu'il 
nous ait oublié: il nous ayme en nous affiigeant; car 
au lieu d'vn feu eternel que nos pechez ont iuftement 
merité, il fe contente d'vne peine, qui quelque 
[144 i.e., 14 2 J grande qu'elle paroiffe, eft toûjours 
tres-petite, puis qu'elle trouue fin auec noftre vie. 
Quoy qu'il m'arriue, continuez toûjours dans la 
Foy, difoit vn iour Ie mefme à toute fa Famille, lors 
qu'il partit pour marcher en guerre, il n'y a pas vn 
mois: Nous ne deuons pas croyre en intention de 
iamais ne mourir, mais pour Refufciter vn iour à la 
gloire Eternelle. 
Si ie fuis pris des Ennemis, & fi ie fuis brûlé, 
difoit-il en continuant, à vn de nos Peres, tu prieras 
D I EV pour moy; & ie luy offriray mes tourmens, 
afin qu'il recompenfe ta charité. 
Ces bons fentimens font dignes d'vn Chreftien: 
Mais fi DIE V fait leuer fon Soleil, autant pour les 
Impies comme pour les Iuftes, il fait auffi par mefme 
moyen fentir les effets de fa Grace & de fa Bonté au 
cæur mefme des plus Infideles. 
Deux ieunes Hommes d u Bourg de Sainét Iofeph, 
ayans efté pris Captifs en guerre par les Iroquois, 
auoient dé-ja perdu toute efperance de la vie, dans 
l'attente [145 i.e., 143J des mefmes cruautez, dont 
ils auoient veu tourmenter leurs autres Compagnons 
de malheur. Déja les ongles leur auoient efté arra- 
chez & quelques doigts coupez; on leur auoit grillé 
les jambes & les bras, & fait vomir Ie fang à force 
de coups de bafton qu'on leur auoit donné fur les 
reins & fur l'eftomach: lors qu'ils trouuerent moyen 
de s'échaper durant la nuiét: 11ais fuyant vne mort, 
Us en trouuoient vne plus longue, portans outre la 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


191 


" We must not believe with the idea that we shall 
never die but that we shall Rise again one day to 
Everlasting glory." 
"If I be taken by the Enemies, and if I be 
burned," he afterward said to one of our Fathers, 
" thou shalt pray to Go D for me, and I will offer him 
my tortures so that he may reward thy charity." 
Such good sentiments are worthy of a Christian. 
But, if GOD causes the Sun to rise as much for the 
Impious as for the Just, he also by the same means 
makes the effects of his Grace and of his Goodness 
felt in the hearts of even the greatest Infidels. 
Two young :Men of the Village of Saint Joseph, 
who had been taken Prisoners of war by the Iroquois, 
had already lost all hope of life, in the expectation 
[145 i.e., 143] of the same cruelties with which they 
had seen their Companions in misfortune tormented. 
Already had their nails been torn out, and some of 
their fingers cut off; already had their legs and arms 
been scorched; and they had vomited blood from the 
force of the blows struck with clubs on their loins 
and their stomachs,- when they found means to 
escape during the night. But, as they fled from one 
death, they were confronted with a more lingering 
one, for in addition to their fear they carried with 
them an internal enemy, a raging hunger that tor- 
mented them night and day. At the end of three 
days, they were reduced to despair. Then one of 
them began to think of us. "Comrade," said he to 
the other, "the French are people who never lose 
hope; in their misfortunes and needs they have re- 
course to him who, they say, has made all things and 
who is the :Master of our lives. Let us apply to 
him." The other did not see that such a remedy 



198 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


crainte, vn ennemy domeftique auec eux, vne faim 
enragée qui iour & nuiét les tourmentoit. Au bout de 
trois iours ils fe voyent reduits dans Ie defefpoir. Ce 
fut alors qu'vn d' eux commença à fonger à nous. 
Camarade, dit-il à l'autre, les François font des gens 
qui ne perdent iamais efperance, ils ont recours dans 
leurs miferes & neceffitez, à celuy qu'ils difent auoir 
tout fait, & eftre Ie Maiftre de nos vies; Ayons 
recours à luy. Celuy-cy ne voyoit pas que ce remede 
fuft affez efficace pour 1'extreme neceffité & Ie defef- 
poir dans lequel ils eftoient. Mais neantmoins tout 
autre fecours leur manquant, il eft contraint de 
[146 i.e., 144J recourir à DIE V auec fon Compagnon. 
Efcoute, dirent-ils, Toy qui as fait Ie Ciel & la Terre, 
c'eft à toy maintenant à qui nous parlons, Nous ne 
t'auons pas honoré, parce que nous n'auons pas eu 
d'efprit: Pardonnes-nous nos fautes; & puis que rien 
ne t'eft impoffible quand tu Ie veux, tire-nous de 
cette mifere; Ayes pitié de nous. Ils font fortifiez 
apres cette Priere, & fentent auoir affez de courage 
pour continuer leur chemin. Apres vne affez longue 
traitte, ils trouuerent en terre quelques racines, & 
mangerent quelques herbes, en forte qu'ils laifferent 
leur faim toute entiere. Mais, Camarade, dit celuy 
qui Ie premier auoit fongé à nous, fouuiens-toy que 
les François remercient DIE V apres auoir fait leur 
repasT Oüy dea, repart l'autre, fouuent ie les ay 
veus, mais c'eft apres auoir mangé vn grand plat de 
Sagamité; mais icy n'ayans que de l'eau, & ce que 
mangeroient des beftes, dequoy remercierions-nous 
DIE v? Toutefois fon compagnon l' emporte, ils font 
leur Priere felon que la neceffité les enfeignoit; & fe 
trouuerent apres plus vigoureux. En-fin apres 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF r642 


199 


was very efficacious in the dire necessity and for the 
desperate condition in which they were placed. But, 
nevertheless, as all other assistance failed them, he 
was constrained to [146 i.e., 144J have recourse to 
G,o D, with his Companion. "Listen!" they said, 
"Thou who hast made the Sky and Earth; it is to 
thee that we now speak. Vve have not honored 
thee before, because we had no sense. Forgive our 
sins; and, since nothing is impossible to thee when 
thou wilIest it, extricate us from this misery. Have 
pity on us." After this Prayer, they were strength- 
ened, and felt enough courage to continue their way. 
After walking a considerable distance, they found 
some roots in the ground, and ate some herbs, which 
completely relieved their hunger. "But, Comrade, " 
said he who had first thought of us, "remember 
that the French thank GOD after eating their meal. ' , 
4' Yes, indeed," replied the other; " I have often seen 
them do so, but it was after eating a great dishful of 
Sagamité. But, as we have only water here, and 
what the beasts would eat, for what should we thank 
GOD? " However, his companion prevailed; they 
offered their Prayer, as necessity taught them, and 
afterward felt stronger. Finally, after [147 i.e., 145J 
a journey of twenty days and more, they reached this 
Country, where, on their arrival, they met one of 
our Fathers, to whom they related all that had hap- 
pened to them during their wandering. And they 
proved to us that he who blasphemes and rages 
against GOD afterward blesses and adores him, 
when the holy Ghost has been pleased to cause fruit 
to grow from the Seed that we have sown in a soil 
that seemed infertile. 
Some Infidels, who were about to go to war not long 



200 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[V OL. 23 


[147 i.e., 145J vingt jours & dauantage de chemin, 
ils arriuent en ce Païs, où ayans rencontré dés leur 
abord vn de nos Peres, auquel ils raconterent tout ce 
qui leur efioit arriué pendant leur voyage. Et [ilsJ 
nous ont fait cognoifire que tel blafpheme & vomit 
rage contre DIE v, qui par apres Ie benit & l'adore, 
lors qu'il a pleu au fainét Efprit faire pouffer les 
fruiéts à la Semence que nous auons jettée dans vne 
terre qui fembloit infertile. 
Quelques Infideles deuans aller en guerre, il n'y a 
pas long-temps, commencerent à fonger à leur Arne, 
autant ou plus qu'à leurs corps, & pour efire affurez 
de'trouuer à leur mort la Grace qu'ils refufoient pen- 
dant leur vie, demanderent à vn de nos Chrefiiens 
qui deuoit efire de la partie, f'il ne fçauoit pas bien 
les paroles qu'il falloit dire pour baptifer. Oüy dea, 
répondit-il, mais ie ne puis pas m'en feruir qu'en la 
neceffité. C' efi affez pour nous, repliquerent-ils, fi 
dauenture quelque malheur nous arriue, tu nous 
Baptiferas. Nenny, dit Ie Chrefiien, il n'efi pas temps 
alors de fe mettre au feruice de DIE v, quand nous 
perdons [148 i.e., 146J les efperances de la vie: il 
abandonne à l'heure de la mort, ceux qui ne luy ont 
iamais voulu obeïr qu'en ce temps là. Ie feray comme 
luy, ie me mocqueray de vous en cette extremité. Le 
zele de ce bon Chrefiien efioit vn peu trop rigoureux, 
auffi l'auons-nous bien infiruit cõme il fe doit com- 
porter en femblables rencontres. 
Ces Infideles commencerent à trembler, l'enten- 
dant parler de la forte, ils n' ont point de repos qu'ils 
ne nous foient venus trouuer, ils nous fupplient de 
les vouloir infiruire, nous demandêt d' efire Baptifez, 
nous affeurans qu'ils croyoient tout ce que nous pref- 



1642 - 43] 


RELA TION OF r6p 


201 


ago, began to think of their Souls as much as, if not 
more than, of their bodies; and, that they might be 
sure to find at death the Grace that they refused dur- 
ing life, they asked one of our Christians who was to 
be of their party, whether he knew well all the words 
that must be said in baptizing. "Yes, indeed," said 
he; "but I can only avail myself of them in a case 
of necessity." "That is enough for us," they replied. 
" If peradventure any misfortune should happen to 
us, thou shalt Baptize us." " Not at all," said the 
Christian; "it is not the time to enter the service of 
Go D when we lose [148 i.e., 146] the hope of living. 
He abandons at the hour of death those who have 
never wished to serve him except at that time. I 
will do like him. I will laugh at you in that extrem- 
ity." The zeal of this Christian was somewhat too 
severe, so we taught him thoroughly what he was to 
do on such occasions. 
Those Infidels began to tremble when they heard 
him speak thus, and did not rest until they came to 
us. They begged us to teach them, and asked to be 
Baptized, assuring us that they believed all that we 
preached,- that, if they had scoffed at the fires of 
Hell, they had nevertheless feared them, arid had 
considered fortunate those who have courage to do 
what God commands. We began therefore to teach 
them; they came twice, thrice, or four times a day, 
to hasten their instruction. But we do not grant 
Baptism so easily; we require a Faith tested by 
works, before admitting them into the Church. So 
we put them off until their return [149 i.e., 147] from 
the war. "At least," they said when they saw 
themselves so delayed; "tell all the Christians with 
whom we are going, to teach us on the way, and not 



202 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


chions: que s'ils fe font mocquez des feux d'Enfer, 
ils n' ont pas pourtant laiffé de les craindre, & d'efii- 
mer heureux ceux qui ont Ie courage de faire ce que 
Dieu commande. On commence donc à les enfei- 
gner, ils viennent deux, trois & quatre fois Ie iour 
pour auancer leur infiruétion: mais nous n' expofons 
pas fi facilement Ie Baptefme, nous voulons vne Foy 
efprouuée par les æuures, auant que de les admettre 
en l'Eglife; nous les remettons apres Ie retour 
[149 i.e., 147J de leur guerre. Au moins nous dirent- 
ils, fe voyans ainfi reculez, dites à tous les Chrefiiens, 
auec qui nous allons, qu'ils nous enfeignent par Ie 
chemin, & qu'ils ne nous foient pas fi cruels que de 
nous refufer Ie Baptefme, s'il fe peut auparauant que 
de mourir. Priez DIE v qu'il ait pitié de nous; & en 
cas que par malheur nous deuions mourir fans 
Baptefme, qu'il nous ouure l'efprit, afin que nous 
detefiions auparauant tous les pechez de nofire vie, 
comme vous nous auez enfeigné. 
11 efi veritable que la voix de DIE V fe fait enten- 
dre quand il veut: qu'il n'y a point de cæurs infen- 
fibles à fes touches quand i1luy plaifi: i1 rompt mef- 
mes les Cedres du Liban, il fend les pierres, & brife 
les rochers: Et quelques barbares que puiffent efire 
ces Peuples, i1 fera adoré dans ce Nouueau Monde, 
& fe fera des Temples où Ie Diable s'efi fait adorer 
par tant de fiecles. Mais pour cela il faut des Ouuri- 
ers, & de bons Ouuriers: Dieu nous en enuoye, s'il 
luy plaifi. 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


203 


to be so cruel as to refuse us Baptism, if that be pos- 
sible before we die. Entreat Go D to have pity on 
us, and, in case we should unfortunately die without 
Baptism, to enlighten our minds, so that we may 
first detest all the sins of our lives, as you have taught 
us to do." 
Verily, the voice of GOD makes itself heard when- 
ever he wills; no hearts are insensible to his touch 
when he pleases; he breaks even the Cedars of Leb- 
anon; he rends the rocks, and shatters the stones. 
And, however barbarous these Peoples may be, he 
will be adored in this New World, and will make 
for himself Temples where the Devil has been 
worshiped for so many centuries. But, for that, 
Laborers are needed, and good Laborers; may God 
be pleased to send us some. 



204 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


[150 i.e., 148] CHAPITRE XII. 


DE LA MISSION DV SAINCT ESPRIT AUX ALGONQUINS 
PLUS VOYSINS DES HURONS. 


E N ce Pais & auec des Peuples qui ne font pas 
plus differens de nous, pour Ie Climat & pour 
la Langue, qu'ils Ie font en leur naturel: leur 
procedé, leurs opinions, & tout ce qui peut eftre en 
l'Homme, hormis Ie corps & l' Arne; i1 faut du temps 
pour fe recognoiftre foy-mefme: & plus encore pour 
y mettre les cognoiffances & les Idées d'vn DIE v 
qui iamais n'y a efté nommé, d'vne Loy qui iamais 
n'y a efté receuë, d'vne façon de vie toute contraire à 
celle qu'ils ont toûjours menée depuis deux, trois & 
quatre mille ans. Maintenant l'experience du paffé, 
nous fait voir vn affez grand iour dans les moyens 
qu'il faut tenir pour la Conuerfion des Hurons: mais 
i1 faut confeffer que nous fommes encore dans 
[151 i.e., 149] de grandes tenebres, pour ce qui con- 
cerne les Algonquins qui habitent en ces Contrées, 
plus efioignées du Fort de nos François. 
C'eft vne vie errante de gens diffipez çà & là, felon 
que la chaffe & la pefche les meine: tantoft dedans 
les bois, tantoft fur les rochers, ou dans les Iiles au 
milieu de quelque grand lac, tantoft fur Ie bord des 
riuieres, fans toiét, fans maifon, fans demeure affeu- 
rée, ny fans recueillir rien de la terre, fin on ce 
qu' elle donne en vn Pais ingrat à ceux qui ne l' ont 
iamais cultiué. II faut fuiure ces Peuples, fi on veut 
les rendre Chreftiens: mais comme ils fe diuifent 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


205 


[150 i.e., 148J CHAPTER XII. 


OF THE MISSION OF THE HOLY GHOST AMONG THE AL- 
GONQUINS, THE NEAREST TO THE HURONS. 


I N this Country,-and with Nations who do not 
differ from us more in Climate and in Language 
than they do in their nature, their way of acting, 
and their opinions, and in everything that can exist 
in Man, except body and Soul,-it takes time to re- 
alize the situation. Still more is needed to introduce 
among them the knowledge and Ideas of aGo D 
whose name has never been mentioned here; of a 
Law that has never been received here; of a manner 
of life wholly different from that which has been led 
here for two, three, even four thousand years. Now, 
the experience of the past has enlightened us consid- 
erably as to the means that must be adopted for the 
Conversion of the Hurons; but it must be confessed 
that we are still [151 i.e., 149] very much in the 
dark as regards the Algonquins who dwell in these 
Countries that are more remote from the Fort of our 
French people. 
They lead the nomad life of people scattered here 
and there, wherever the chase or the fishing may 
lead them,- sometimes in the woods, sometimes 
over rocks, or in Islands in the middle of some great 
lake; sometimes on the banks of rivers,-without a 
roof, without a house or fixed residence; and without 
gathering anything from the earth, beyond what it 
yields in a barren Country to those who have never 



206 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


toûjours, on ne peut fe donner aux vns, qu'en f'éloi- 
gnant des autres. 
L'an pafíé, nous n'auions icy que deux de nos 
Peres, pour la langue Algonquine: Ie P. Claude 
Pijart, & Ie P. Charles Raymbaut. Comme la Proui- 
dence de Dieu, leur auoit amené, à nos portes, 
durant I'Hyuer, les Nipiffiriniens, dont ils auoient 
commencé l'infiruétion; ces Peuples nous quittans, 
les glaces efiant fonduës, les mefmes Peres les 
fuiuirent. 
[152 i.e., 150J S'il y a des dangers, dans cette vie 
errante, plus fur les eaux, que fur la terre; s'il y a 
des peines à fouffrir, dans ces Maifons volantes. Si 
durant les ardeurs de l'Efié, il Y a des fatigues, à faire 
des voyages, où vous ne trouuez point de gifie, point 
de viures, point de meubles. que Ie peu que vous 
y portez, & où mefme fouuent vous vous voyez 
contraint, de vous charger, en trauerfant les terres, du 
Canot qui vous a parté fur l'eau; Si quelque chofe 
plus penible que tout cela, efi difficile à la nature: Le 
Ciel ne manque pas en ces befoins, & on voit dans 
l'experience, qu'il n'efi pas toufiours vray, que Ie 
corps fatigué appefantiffe l' Arne. Quoy qu'il en 
foit, les deux Peres y demeurerent tout l'Efié, conti- 
nuans à infiruire ces pauures Peuples. Mais d'vn 
Barbare, faire vn Chrefiien, ce n'efi pas l'ouurage 
d'vn iour. La femen[c]e qu'on iette, vne année, dãs 
la terre, ne porte pas fi tofi fon fruiét: C'efi beau- 
coup auancé, que de recognoifire fon mande, d'en- 
trer dans les efprits, de fe faire à leur langue, à leurs 
coufiumes, à leur façon de vie; & s'il efi befoing, fe 
faire Barbare auec eux, pour les gaigner [153 i.e., 15 1 ] 
à Iefus-Chrifi. 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


207 


cultivated it. It is necessary to follow these Peo- 
ples, if we wish to Christianize them; but, as they 
continually divide themselves up, we cannot devote 
ourselves to some without wandering from the others. 
Last year, we had here only two of our Fathers 
who spoke the Algonquin language,- Father Claude 
Pijart and Father Charles Raymbaut. God's Provi- 
dence brought to them at our doors, during the 
Winter, the Nipissiriniens whom they had commenced 
to instruct. When these Peoples left us after the ice 
had melted, the same Fathers followed them. 
[152 i.e., 150] If in this wandering life there be 
greater danger on the water than on land; if suffer- 
ings must be borne in these shifting Houses; if, dur- 
ing the heat of Summer, fatigue must be endured in 
making journeys whereon can be found no shelter, 
no provisions, no furniture, other than the little that 
one carries with him, and whereon one is even obliged 
in going across the land to transport on his shoulders 
the Canoe that has borne him over the water; if 
anything still more arduous than all that, is trying 
to one's nature,- Heaven does not fail us in these 
necessities; and we find by experience that it is not 
always true that the fatigued body weighs down the 
Soul. In any case, the two Fathers remained there 
all Summer, continuing to instruct those poor Peo- 
ples. But to make a Christian out of a Barbarian is 
not the work of a day. The seed that is sown one 
year in the earth does not bear fruit so soon. A great 
step is gained when one has learned to know those 
with whom he has to deal; has penetrated their 
thoughts; has adapted himself to their language, 
their customs, and their manner of living; and, when 



208 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Ce n'a pas efié vn petit attrait, pour adoucir ces 
Peuples, & effacer de leur efprit, les mauuaifes im- 
preffions qu'on leur auoit donné des veritez de noftre 
Foy; Que Dieu ait tellement beny Ie trauail de nos 
Peres; que de plufieurs enfants griefuement malades, 
aufquels ils confererent Ie Baptefme, tous foient reue- 
nus en fanté. Auffi efioit-ce les parens, qui voyans 
eette benediétion du Ciel, fur ces petits Chreftiens, 
leur procuroient au plufioft, ce bonheur, lors qu'ils 
les voyoient en danger. 
Sur la fin de l'Efié, ces Peuples tournerent toutes 
leurs penfées à celebrer leur fefie des morts: c' eft à 
dire, à recueillir les os de leurs parens defunéts, & 
pour honorer leur memoire, leur procurer vn fepul- 
ere plus honnorable, que celuy qui depuis leur decez, 
les auoit renfermez. Cette folennité, parmy les 
Peuples Errans de deça, ayant des coufiumes affez 
eonfiderables, bien differentes de celles de nos 
Hurons, qu'on a peû voir dans les Relations prece- 
dentes j peut eftre fera-on bien ayfe d' en apprendre 
encores quelques [154 i.e., 152] particularitez que ie 
pourray deduire en ce lieu. 
Le iour efioit donné, pour Ie commencement de 
Septem bre, à toutes les Nations confederées, qui y 
font inuitées par Deputez exprés. Le lieu deftiné à 
ce fujet fut en vne Baye du grand Lac, efioignée des 
Hurõs, enuiron de vingt lieuës. Yayant efié con- 
uié, ie creus que ie deuois me feruir de I' occafion que 
D I EV me prefentoit, de confpirer à vne plus eftroite 
vnion auec ces Barbares, pour y trouuer à l'aduenir 
plus de moyen d'y auancer fa Gloire. Le nombre 
des perfonnes qui f'y trouuerent, efioit d' enuiron 
deux mille. 



1642-43] 


RELATION OF I642 


209 


necessary, has been a Barbarian with them, in order 
to win them over [153 i.e., 151J to Jesus Christ. 
This has been no slight influence in soothing these 
People, and in removing from their minds the bad 
impressions that had been given them of the truths 
of our Faith, that God has so blessed the labors of 
our Fathers that, out of many children who were 
dangerously ill and who were Baptized, all recovered 
their health. Therefore it was that the parents, who 
witnessed this blessing of Heaven conferred on these 
little Christians, procured this happiness for them as 
soon as possible, when they saw them in danger. 
Toward the end of the Summer, these Peoples 
turned their thoughts to the celebration of their feast 
of the dead,-that is, to collect the bones of their 
deceased relatives, and, by way of honor to their 
memory, to procure for them a more honorable 
sepulchre than that which had enclosed them since 
their death. This solemnity, among the Nomad 
Tribes up here, is accompanied by rites of some 
importance, differing much from those of our Hu- 
rons, which may be seen in previous Relations; and 
it may perhaps be interesting to learn some further 
[154 i.e., 152] particulars about them, which I shall 
set down here. 
The day was appointed, at the beginning of Sep- 
tember, for all the confederated Nations, who were 
invited thereto by Envoys expressly sent. The spot 
selected for the purpose was at a Bay of the great 
Lake, distant about twenty leagues from the country 
of the Hurons. Having been invited to attend, I 
thought that I ought to take advantage of the oppor- 
tunity that GOD gave me to establish closer relations 
with these Barbarians, so as to secure, in the future, 



210 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Chaque Nation, auant que de mettre pied à terre, 
pour faire fon entrée auec plus de magnificence, 
difpofe fes Canots tout de front, & attend qu'on luy 
vienne au deuant. Lors que Ie Peuple efi affemblé, 
Ie Chef fe leue au milieu du Canot, & declare Ie 
deffein qui I' amene: puis chacun jette en proye vne 
partie de fes richeffes. Les vnes flottent deffus l' eau, 
les autres vont au fonds. La jeuneffe y accourt: l'vn 
fe faifira d'vne natte ouuragée, [155 i.e., 153] comme 
font en France les tapifferies; l'autre de quelque 
Cafior, qui d'vne hache, qui d'vn plat, qui de Pour- 
celaine, ou de quelque autre chofe, felon l' adreffe 
d'vn chacun, & Ie bonheur qui luy en vient. Ce n'efi 
que joye, que cris, qu'acclamations publlques, dont 
les Rochers qui bordent ce grand Lac, rendent vn 
Echo qui 1'emporte au defíus de toutes ces voix. 
Les Nations affemblées, & diuifées chacune en leur 
feance, on met en veuë les Robes de Cafior, les 
peaux de Loutre, de Caribou, de Chat fauuage & 
d'Orignac, les Hacbes les Chaudieres. la Pourcelaine, 
& tout ce qu'il y a de precieux en ce Pais. Chaque 
Chef de Nation fait fon prefent à ceux qui font la 
Fefie, donnant à chacun des prefents les noms qui 
leur femblent les plus conuenables. Pour nous, les 
prefens que nous fifmes, ne furent pas pour effuyer 
leurs larmes, & les confoler dans la mort des deffunéts ; 
mais pour fouhaitter aux viuans, Ie mefme bonheur 
que nous efperons dans Ie Ciel, apres qu'ils auront 
recognu Ie mefme DIE V que nous feruõs [I 56 i.e., 154] 
en Terre. Cette qualité de prefent les étonna d'a- 
bord, n'efiant pas felon leurs formules: mais nous 
leur fifmes entendre, que la feule efperance que nous 
auions de les voir Chrefiiens. nous faifoit cherir leur 
amitié. 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


211 


better means for the advancement of his Glory among 
them. The number of persons present was about 
two thousand. 
Those of each Nation, before landing, in order to 
make their entry more imposing, form their Canoes 
in line, and wait until others come to meet them. 
W hen the People are assembled, the Chief stands up 
in the middle of his Canoe, and states the object that 
has brought him hither. Thereupon each one throws 
away some portion of his goods to be scrambled for. 
Some articles float on the water, while others sink to 
the bottom. The young men hasten to the spot. 
One will seize a mat, wrought [155 i.e., 153] as tapes- 
tries are in France; another a Beaver skin; others 
get a hatchet, or a dish, or some Porcelain beads, or 
other article,- each according to his skill and the 
good fortune he may have. There is nothing but 
joy, cries, and public acclamations, to which the Rocks 
surrounding the great Lake return an Echo that 
drowns all their voices. 
'Vhen the Nations are assembled, and divided, 
each in their own seats, Beaver Robes, skins of 
Otter, of Caribou, of wild Cats, and of Moose; 
Hatchets, Kettles, Porcelain Beads, and all things 
that are precious in this Country, are exhibited. 
Each Chief of a Nation presents his own gift to those 
who hold the Feast, giving to each present some 
name that seems best suited to it. As for us, the 
presents that we gave were not for the purpose of 
drying their tears, or consoling them for the death 
of the deceased; but that we might wish to the liv- 
ing the same happiness that we hope to enjoy in 
Heaven when they shall have acknowledged the same 
GOD whom we serve [156 i.e., 154J on Earth. This 



212 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


En fuitte de cela, ce fut vn plaifir qui n'eut rien de 
fauuage, de voir au milieu de cette Barbarie vn Balet 
danfé par quarante perfonnes, au fon des voix & d'vne 
efpece de tambour, auec vn accord fi heureux, qu'ils 
rendoient tous les tons les plus agreables de la 
Mufique. 
La danfe eut trois parties: La premiere fe pafía en 
la reprefentation de diuerfes rencontres d'ennemy, 
homme à hõme: l'vn pourfuiuant fon ennemy, la 
hache en main, pour luy porter la mort... à mefme 
temps, il femble la receuoir luy-mefme perdant fon 
auantage: ille reprend, & apres mille feintes, toutes 
en cadence, terrafíe en-fin fon homme, & retourne 
viétorieux. V n autre, dans des mouuemens differents, 
fait fon efcrime l'efpée en main; celuy-cyeft armé 
de fléches, fon ennemy fe pare d'vne rondache qui le 
couure, & luy porte vn coup [157 Le., 155] de mafíuë. 
Ils font trois diuers perfonnages; pas vn n'eft armé 
de mefme façon, leurs geftes, leurs mou uemens, 
leurs pas, leurs æillades, en vn mot, tout ce qui fe 
void, eft different en vn chacun, & dans vn raport 
des vns aux autres tellement accomply, qu'il eufi 
femblé qu'vn mefme efprit euft reglé ces mouuemens 
fans regIe. 
A peine ce combat eft finy, que les Muficiens fe 
leuent, & pour vne Seconde Partie, on void vn gros 
de danfe: Premierement de huiét, puis de douze, 
puis de feize, toufiours multiplians à proportion, 
haftans & retardans leurs pas fuiuant les voix qui 
les mefurent. 
Les Femmes furuiennent à l'impourueu, qui firent 
vne Troifiéme Partie de ce Bal, qui fut auffi agre- 
able que les autres, & n'eut rien de moins pour la 



1642-43] 


RELATION OF r642 


213 


kind of present astonished them at first, as not being 
according to their usages. But we gave them to 
understand that only the hope that we had of seeing 
them become Christians led us to desire their friend- 
ship. 
After that, it was a pleasure characterized by noth- 
ing of savagery, to witness in the midst of this Bar- 
barism a Ballet danced by forty persons, to the sound 
of voices and of a sort of drum, in such harmonious 
accord that they rendered all the tones that are most 
agreeable in Music. 
The dance consisted of three parts. The first rep- 
resented various encounters of enemies in single com- 
bat,- one pursuing his foe, hatchet in hand, to give 
him the deathblow, while at the same time he seems 
to receive it himself, by losing his advantage; he 
regains it, and after a great many feints, all per- 
formed in time with the music, he finally overcomes 
his antagonist, and returns victorious. Another, with 
different movements, fences, javelin in hand; this 
one is armed with arrows; his enemy provides him- 
self with a buckler that covers him, and strikes a 
blow at him [157 i.e., 155] with a club. They are 
three different personages, not one of whom is armed 
like the others; their gestures, their movements, 
their steps, their glances,- in a word, everything 
that can be seen, is different in each one; and yet in 
so complete accord with one another that it seems as 
if but one mind governed these irregular movements. 
Hardly was this combat ended than the Musicians 
arose; and we witnessed, as the Second Part, a dance 
on a large scale,- first by eight persons, then by 
twelve, then by sixteen, ever increasing in propor- 



214 


LES RELATIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


modefiie. Les habitans du Saut, venus pour cette 
Fefie, de cent ou fix-vingt lieuës, efioient Aéteurs en 
ce Balet. 
Il y auoit vn May planté, d'vne hauteur affez rai
 
fonnable. \irn Nipiffirinien efiant monté au haut, y 
attach a deux prix, fçauoir vne Chaudiere, & vne 
peau [158 i.e., 156] de Cerf: inuitant la jeuneffe à 
faire paroifire fon agilité. Outre que Ie May efioit 
fans écorce & fort liffé, il Ie graiffa pour en rendre 
la prife plus difficile. Il ne fut pas plufiofi defcen
 
du, qu'il y eut preffe à y monter, qui perdit courage au 
cõmencement, qui à moins, qui a plus de hauteur, 
& tel fe voyant quafi arriué iufqu'au haut, qui tout 
d'vn coup fe voyoit en bas. Perfonne n'y pouuant 
arriuer; il y eut vn Huron qui fe garnit d'vn co ute au 
& de cordes, & ayant fait fes efforts raifonnables iuf
 
qu' à la moitié du May, eut recours aux fineffes; il 
tire fon couteau, entaille l'arbre, y arrefie fa corde, 
puis faifant vn efirié, il fe foufiient, & fe leue plus 
haut, il fait tant qu'il arriue iufqu'aux prix qui 
efioient là pendus, nonobfiant les huées & les c1a- 
meurs de toute l' Affifiance. S'en efiant faifi, il fe 
laiffe couler en bas, fe rem barque pour defcendre à 
Kebec où fon voyage Ie menoit. 
Ce defordre porta les Capitaines Algonquins, à vne 
plainte Publique, qui efiant jugée raifonnable, les 
Hurons fe taxerent à vn prefent de Pourcelaine, pour 
reparation de cette injufiice, qui [159 i.e., 157] fai
 
foit pleurer les Ames des defunéts. 
En fuite de cecy, on proceda à l'éleétion des Chefs 
Nipiffiriniens. Les fuffrages efians recueillis, Ie 
grand Capitaine fe leua, & les appella chacun par leur 
nom. Ils parurent couuerts de leurs belles robes. 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF 1Ó42 


215 


tion, who quickened or checked their steps according 
to the voices that gave the measure. 
The Women then suddenly appeared, and danced 
the Third Part of this Ball, which was as agreeable as 
the others, and in no wise offensive to modesty. The 
inhabitants of the Saut, who came to this Feast from 
a distance of a hundred or a hundred and twenty 
leagues, were Actors in this Ballet. 
A Pole of considerable height had been set in the 
ground. A Nipissirinien climbed to the top of it, 
and tied there two prizes,-a Kettle, and the skin 
[158 i.e., 156J of a Deer,-and called upon the young 
men to display their agility. Although the bark had 
been stripped from the Pole, and it was quite smooth, 
he greased it, to make it more difficult to grasp. No 
sooner had he descended, than several pressed forward 
to climb it. Some lost courage at the beginning, 
others at a greater or lesser height; and one, who 
almost reached the top, suddenly found himself at the 
bottom. Noone could attain the top; but there was a 
Huron who provided himself with a knife and some 
cord, and, after having made reasonable efforts until 
he reached the middle of the Pole, he had recourse 
to cunning. He drew his knife, and cut notches in 
the tree, in which he placed his cord; then making 
a stirrup of it, he supported and raised himself high- 
er, and continued to do so until he attained the prizes 
suspended there, in spite of the hooting and shouting 
of the Audience. Having grasped these, he s1id to 
the ground, and reëmbarked to go to Kebec, whither 
his journey led him. 
This unfair conduct led the Algonquin Captains to 
make a Public complaint, which was deemed reason- 
able; and the Hurons taxed themselves for a present 



216 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


A yans receu leurs Commiffions, ils firët largeffe 
d'vne quantité de Cafiors & peaux d'Orignac, pour 
fe faire cognoifire, & efire receus auec applaudiffe- 
ment dans leurs Charges. 
Cette Eleétion fut fuiuie de la Refurreétion des 
Perfonnes de marque, decedez depuis la derniere 
Fefie: c'efi à dire, que felon la coufiume du Pais, on 
tranfporta leurs noms à quelqu'vn de la parenté, pour 
en conferuer la memoire. 
Le iour fuiuant, les Femmes f' occupent à parer 
fuperbement vne Cabane, courbée en berceau, longue 
enuiron de cent pas, dont la largeur & la hauteur 
efioient à proportion. 
Quoy que les Richeffes de ce Pais, ne foient pas 
recherchées dans les entrailles de la Terre, & que pour 
la plufpart, [160 i.e., 158] ce ne foient que les dépoüil- 
les des Animaux; fi toutefois elles efioient tranf- 
portées en Europe, elles y auroient leur prix. Les 
feuls prefens que firent les Nipiffiriniens aux autres 
Nations, auroient coufié en France, quarante voire 
cinquante mille francs. 
Apres cela, les mefmes Femmes apporterent les os 
de leurs Morts dans cette Sale magnifique. Ces os 
font renfermez dans des caiffes d'écorce, couuerts de 
robes neufues de Cafior, enrichies de colliers & échar- 
pes de Pourcelaine. 
Aupres de chaque Mort, les femmes f' efians affifes 
à terre, en deux rangs oppofites: ou void entrer les 
Capitaines qui feruent de Maifires-d'Hofiel, pour 
apporter les plats de feruice. Ce Fefiin n'efi que 
pour les Femmes, à caufe qu'elles témoignent efire 
plus auant dans Ie dueil. 
En fuitte, vne douzaine d'Hommes, les voix les 



1642-43J 


RELA TION OF r6.p 


217 


of Porcelain Beads to repair this injustice, which 
[159 i.e., 157J caused the Souls of the deceased to 
weep. 
After this, the election of the Nipissirinien Chiefs 
took place. When the votes were taken, the chief 
Captain arose, and called them each by name. They 
made their appearance, clothed in their finest robes. 
When they had received their Commissions, they 
gave largess of a quantity of Beaver skins and 1100se 
hides, in order to make themselves known, and that 
they might be received with applause in their Offices. 
This Election was followed by the Resurrection of 
those Persons of importance who had died since the 
last Feast; which means that, in accordance with 
the custom of the Country, their names were trans- 
ferred to some of their relatives, so as to perpetuate 
their memory. 
On the following day, the Women were occupied 
in fitting up, in a superb manner, a Cabin with an 
arched roof, about a hundred paces long, the width 
and height of which were in proportion. 
Although the Riches of this Country are not sought 
for in the bowels of the Earth, and although most 
of them [160 i. e., 158] consist only in the spoils of 
Animals,-nevertheless, if they were transported to 
Europe, they would have their value. The presents 
that the Nipissiriniens gave to the other Nations 
alone would have cost in France forty or even fifty 
thousand francs. 
After that, the same Women carried the bones of 
their Dead into this magnificent Room. These 
bones were enclosed in caskets of bark, covered with 
new robes of Beaver skins, and enriched with collars 
and scarfs of Porcelain Beads. 



218 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


mieux choifies, entrent au milieu de la Cabane, & 
commencent vn chant fort lugubre, qui efiant fecon- 
dé des Femmes, dans les reprifes, fut extremement 
doux & trifie. 
[161 i.e., 159] L'horreur de la nuiét ne feruoit pas 
peu à ce Dueil; & les tenebres qui n'efiant efclairées 
que d'vne lumiere mourante de deux feux qu'on 
auoit allumez en chacun bout de la Cabane, receuoient 
ces plaintes & foûpirs. Le fujet de la lettre conte- 
noit vne forte d'hommage fait au Demon qu'ils 
inuoquoient, luy adreffant leurs plaintes. Ce chant 
continua toute la nuiét dans vn grand filence des 
Affifians, qui n'auoient ce femble, que du refpeét & 
de l'admiration pour vne ceremonie fi íainéte. 
Le matin íuiuant, ces Femmes firent vne difiribu- 
tion de bled, de fouliers fauuages, & autres petits 
meubles qui íont de leur reffort, & dependent de leur 
indufirie. Leur chant toufiours plainétif & entre- 
coupé de íoûpirs, íembla depuis í'adreffer aux Ames 
des defunéts, qu' elles congedioient, comme il fem- 
bloit, auec vn grand regret, par l'agitation continu- 
elle d'vn rameau qu'elles tenoient en main, crainte 
que ces pauures Ames efians íurprifes de l'effroy de 
la guerre & de la terreur des armes, leur repos n' en 
fufi troublé. Car en meíme temps on [162 i.e., 160] 
aperçoit vn gros d' Armée qui deícendoit d'vne Mon- 
tagne voifine, auec des cris & heurlemens effroyables; 
courans premierement en rond, puis en ouale: & 
apres mille autres figures, enfin viennent fondre à 
l'entour de la Cabane, & {'en rendent les Maifires, 
les Femmes ayans quitté la place comme à des 
Ennemis. 
Ces Guerriers deuiennent Baladins apres cette 



1642-43] 


RE"LA TION OF I642 


219 


Near each Dead body sat the women, in two lines, 
facing each other. Then entered the Captains, who 
acted as Stewards, and carried the dishes containing 
food. This Feast is for the Women only, because 
they evince a deeper feeling of mourning. 
Afterward, about a dozen Men with carefully 
selected voices entered the middle of the Cabin, and 
began to sing a most lugubrious chant, which, being 
seconded by the Women in the refrains, was very 
sweet and sad. 
[161 i.e., 159] The gloom of the night conduced 
not a little to this Mourning; and the darkness, 
lighted only by the flickering flames of two fires which 
had been kindled at each end of the Cabin, received 
their wailings and their sighs. The theme of the 
song consisted in a sort of homage paid to the Demon 
whom they invoked, and to whom their lamentations 
were addressed. This chant continued through the 
night, amid deep silence on the part of the Audience, 
who seemed to have only respect and admiration for 
so sacred a ceremony. 
On the following morning, these Women distrib- 
uted corn, moccasins, and other small articles that 
are within their means, or the products of their indus- 
try. Their chant-ever plaintive, and interspersed 
with sobs-seemed to be addressed to the Souls of 
the deceased, whom they sped on their way-as it 
appeared, with deep regret- by continually waving 
branches that they held in their hands, for fear that 
these poor Souls might be surprised by the dread of 
war and the terror of arms, and that their rest 
might thus be disturbed. For, at the same time, 
[162 i.e., 160] the body of an Army could be observed 
descending a neighboring Mountain with frightful 



220 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Viétoire. Chaque Nation à fon tour eut la Sale du 
Bal, pour y faire paroifire fon adreffe, iufques à ce 
que les Capitaines Algonquins, Maifires des Ceremo- 
nies, entrerent dix ou douze en ordre, portans des 
farines, des cafiors & quelques chiens tous vifs, dont 
ils preparerent vn Fefiin magnifique pour les Hurons. 
Les Nations Algonquines furent traittées à part: 
comme auffi leur Langue efi entierement differente 
de la H uronne. 
En fuite fe firent deux Affemblées L'vne des AI. 
gonquins, qui auoient efié inuitez à cette Solennité, 
aufquels on fit des prefens differens felon les degrez 
de l' Alliance que les Nipiffiriniens auoient auec eux. 
Les offemens des Morts pafferent [163 i.e., 161] entre 
les prefens qui furent faits aux plus intimes Amis, 
& furent accompagnez de robes les plus precieufes, & 
des coliers de pourcelaine, qui efi l'or, les pedes & 
1es diamans de ce Pais. 
La feconde Affemblée fut celIe des Natiõs Huron- 
nes, où les Nipiffiriniens nous donnerent la premiere 
Seance, les premiers titres d'hõneur, & témoignages 
d'affeétion, au deffus de tous leurs Confederez: Et là 
fe firent de nouueaux prefens, & en fi grand nombre 
qu'il n'y eut aucun Capitaine qui fe retirafi les mains 
vuides. 
La Fefie f' acheua par quelque prix qu' on donna à 
la force du bras, à l'adreffe du corps, & à l'agilité. 
Les Femmes mefmes firent partie de ce combat, & Ie 
tout fe paffa auec tant de moderation & retenuë, qu'à 
moins de Ie voir, on n'eufi iamais creu efire au milieu 
d'vne affemblée de Barbares, tant ils fe portoiêt de 
refpe6\:, mefme en contefiant la viétoire. 
M A I S pour ne nous pas égarer trop loin, reuenons 



1642-43] 


RELATION OF z642 


221 


cries and yells, running around at first in a circle, 
then in an oval; and, at last, after a thousand other 
figures they rushed upon the Cabin, of which they 
became Masters,- the Women having yielded the 
place, as if to an Enemy. 
These Warriors became Dancers after this Victory. 
Each Nation, in turn, occupied the Ballroom, for 
the purpose of displaying their agility, until the Al- 
gonquin Captains, who acted as Masters of Ceremo- 
nies, entered ten or twelve in line, bearing flour, 
beavers, and some dogs still alive, with which they 
prepared a splendid Feast for the Hurons. The Al- 
gonquin Nations were served apart, as their Language 
is entirely different from the Huron. 
Afterward, two 11eetings were held; one consisted 
of the Algonquins who had been invited to this 
Solemnity, to whom various presents were given, 
according to the extent of the Alliance that existed 
between the Nipissiriniens and them. The bones of 
the Dead were borne [163 i.e., 161J between the pres- 
ents given to the most intimate Friends, and were 
accompanied by the most precious robes and by collars 
of porcelain beads, which are the gold, the pearls, and 
the diamonds of this Country. 
The second Assembly was that of the Huron 
Nations, at which the Nipissiriniens gave us the 
highest Seat, the first titles of honor, and marks of 
affection above all their Confederates. Here new 
presents were given, and so lavishly that not a single 
Captain withdrew empty-handed. 
The Feast concluded with prizes given for physical 
strength, for bodily skill, and for agility. Even the 
Women took part in this contest, and everything was 
done with such moderation and reserve that - at 



222 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


aux affaires de DIE V: La plus heureufe de toute 
l' Affemblée, fut vne pauure VieiUe, d'enuiron quatre- 
vings ans, qui paroiffoit aux yeux des Hommes, la 
plus proche de fon malheur. Depuis vn long-temps, 
[164 i.e., 162J eUe auoit perdu l'vfage de la veuë, & 
ne pouuant pas foûtenir Ie peu qui luy reftoit de vie, 
eUe eftoit eõtrainte de fuiure fes enfans quelque part 
qu'ils aUaffent. lamais Ie Nom de DIE V n'eftoit 
venu iufqu'à eUe; mais quand Ie fain& Efprit veut 
Cemparer d'vn eæur, il eft bien-toft gagné. Cette 
Femme prend feu aux premieres nouueUes de fon 
Salut: elle fe veut du mal d'auoir efté toute fa vie 
dans l'ignoranee des Veritez qu'on luy propofe. Elle 
detefte fes pechez, demande Ie Baptefme, & ne veut 
plus fonger qu'au Ciel. Le Pere Claude Pijart la 
baptife; Elle apperçoit en mefme temps vne joye fi 
fenfible fur fon vifage, qu'il eft aifé de voir que 
DIE V opere puiffamment dans fon cæur. Ainfi ne 
pouuoit elle affez fe conjoüyr de fon bonheur; & pour 
témoigner Ie reffentiment qu'elle en auoit; elle pre- 
fente en don vne"peau de Caftor, n'ayant rien de plus 
precieux; mais Ie Pere la refufa, eftant trap riche- 
ment payé de voir vne Arne fi-toft difpofée pour Ie 
Ciel. 
Dans ee eoneours de tant de Nations affemblées, 
nous nous efforçames de gagner l'affe&ion des plus 
confiderables, par quelques feftins & prefens. En 
effet, les PaüoitigoüeieuhaK nous inuiterent de les 
aUer voir [165 i.e., 163J en leur Païs, (e'eft vne Na- 
tion de la Langue Algonquine, eíloignée des Hurons 
de cent ou fix-vingt lieuës, tirant vers l'Occident, que 
nous appellons les Habitans du Sault) nous leur 
promifmes vne vifite, pour voir qu'elle difpofition i1 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF r642 


223 


least, in watching them - one would never have 
thought that he was in the midst of an assemblage 
of Barbarians,- so much respect did they pay to one 
another, even while contending for the victory. 
BUT, not to wander too far, let us return to the 
affairs of GOD. The happiest person in the whole 
Assemblage was a poor Old Woman about eighty 
years of age, who in the eyes of Men seemed nearest 
to unhappiness. For a long while [164 Le., 162] she 
had lost the use of her sight; and, as she was unable 
to support herself during the short time she had still 
to live, she was compelled to follow her children 
wherever they went. The Name of GOD had never 
come to her ears; but, when the holy Ghost wishes 
to take possession of a heart, it is soon won. This 
Woman took fire at hearing the first news of her 
Salvation. She was angry with herself for having 
remained all her life in ignorance of the Truths that 
we propounded to her. She detested her sins, asked 
for Baptism, and would think of nothing but Heav- 
en; Father Claude Pijart baptized her. Such manifest 
joy appeared on her features that it was easy to see 
that GOD exerted a powerful influence on her heart. 
Thus she could not sufficiently congratulate herself 
on her happiness; and, to show how much she felt 
it, she tendered as a gift a Beaver skin, having noth- 
ing more valuable. But the Father refused it, being 
already amply repaid at seeing a Soul so soon pre- 
pared for Heaven. 
In this gathering of so many assembled Nations, 
we strove to win the affections of the chief person- 
ages by means of feasts and presents. In conse- 
quence of this, the Pauoitigoueieuhak invited us to go 
and see them [165 i.e., 163] in their own Country. 



224 


LES RELATIONS DES.lÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


pourroit y auoir, afin de trauailler à leur Conuerfion; 
veu nommément que nous aprenions qu'vne certaine 
Nation plus eíloignée, qu'ils appellent Pouteatami, 
auoit abandonné fon Païs, & f'étoit venuë refugier 
auec les Habitans du Sault, pour f' éloigner de quel- 
que autre Nation ennemie, qui les vexoit par des 
guerres continuelles. Nous jettâmes les yeux fur Ie 
Pere Charles Raymbaut, pour entreprendre ce voy- 
age, & parce qu' en mefme temps quelques Hurons 
deuoient efire de la partie, Ie P. lfaac rogues y fut 
defiiné, pour agir auec eux. 
Ils partirent de noftre Maifon de Séte. Marie, fur la 
fin de Septembre, & apres dix-fept iours de nauiga- 
tion fur ce grand Lac, ou mer douce, qui vient bai- 
gner les terres des Hurons, ils aborderent au Sault, 
y trouuerent enuiron deux mille Ames, & f'affeure- 
rent des nouuelles d'vn grand nombre d'autres Peu- 
pIes fedentaires, qui iamais n'ont cognû les Europe- 
ans. & iamais n'ont entendu parler de [166 i.e., 164] 
DIE V : Entr'autres d'vne certaine Nation Nadoüeffis, 
fcituée au N oroüefi ou Oüefi du Sault, à dix-hui& 
journées plus auant. Les neuf premieres fe font par 
Ie trauers d'vn autre grand Lac, qui commence au 
deffus du Sault: les neuf derniers iours, il faut monter 
vne Riuiere qui coupe dans les terres. Ces Peuples 
cultiuent la terre à la façon de nos Hurons, recueillent 
du bled d'Inde, & du Petun. Leurs Bourgs font plus 
gros & de plus de defenfe, à raifon des guerres con- 
tinuelles qu'ils ont auec les Kirifiinons, Irinions, & 
autres grãdes Nations qui habitent les mefmes Cõ- 
trées. Leur Langue eft differente de I' Algonquine, 
& de la Huronne. 
Les Capitaines de cette Nation du Sault, inuitent nos 



"T. 
);- 
r: 
'J; 
?;: 
r 
r:- 
C 


,,
 \. 




 

 . 

.\
 

 
o 
'''' 
- '" 
".. 
rr'
 
oJ'-..J 


\ 


r\


 1 
;:
 f'" 
:::",..a
" 
.. """"" 
 \..... .1 
... po 
 
 .. 
"'t"; 

 t.." 
 
 
 ..., 
.. 'fC'....... 
 \ 

 
 , 
,
.... 
 
- 
J-...:f' 
 :- 
 
 
 ..
 

 r:- r 
 
 


:;. 
- 
- ......... - ..... 

.
 r. v--._
 
 
 
_ ..t 
 
 
 ::. 

 
 
 I" 
 \;-,>"" , 
_ 
 
 \.J 

 
 t 
'1 .. 
 ....) 
 \.. -. 
,


'

 

.
 
'"'1 \ 
, 
 
_ ".t ' t'_ ..... 

 r Fe. ( t" ? p 
 
_ ) fl- 
 
I 
 r l 

 r 
 t 
--
 
__
 t"":r
. .

 
-t. .. --.:.r.:.. $ò 
 I:: 
, 

 -... ()... r "' 
:= - - .
.... . 


 "i 

."t' 
;' 
 . t.> ï<- '-
 ;:' \" 
 
\ 

 ..., ' 
 - ;,'} 
 
· t r< · .;. 
 



:.
 
 ;;.
. 

, 

 t
 
 ..
 
 
. 
... ._ ? f'" 
_
 "' __ 
 t' 
 '\.:....) 
 
_ '- 
 J) -
 

'
 r 

:::t"

-- 
' 
 .. .. .,...-.-. .. t 
 
 :; 
" ,"II .;
 
 ... 

 :;... (': 
 T Sr 
 it 
\ - ..
 - 
 - ' 
\ , ...--" r -......
 
, 
 't' '" 
 - - ..
 
....... '. c..... 
 _ :J-. 
 
 
,'<'" ;:;.
.,..... 
-. 
,.. . \ , .. ;;..---s:. 

 :"" 
 ........- 

 -'::'
;: r 

./">:; 
... ="" - . ""<. f"" -, r .. 
" 
:: N f':,,-
 
, :::... .. r"'" .,F::Þ - 
. 

-\ '-> &.. '--t' 
 
 (r-: 
" 
 . 
- " . - 
 
\ .... .
 \ .... :r. oro t 
 
 
t
 ... .... 
 ;: p' · 
I" 
 f ::: 
 r 
. 
I \ f ):::::.-J ì 
<:)
 
"' \t r. r .- 'C.J \..- . 
, .,.. :--, ;.., 
, ) 
 r ,) f I 


if, 
Ô 
z 
);- 
....J 
C 
:::0 
rn 
if 
. C 
"T, 


.r; 
. :r: 
.[":1 
< 
);- 
C 
r.: 
it' 
C- 
. rn 



 
1 

 tf 


 \'3 
f'
 \ \
 

 
 \ 

i 
"- 
" 
c
 
r
 
 
f 
j-J 
"" ....:::--. 
'-'1 ;t.... 
"" 
 .) f ' 

 
, 



 
. c 
. Z 
....J 
3: 
, );- 
CJ 
z 
:
 


(') 
:r: 
)> 
: ^ 
r- 
IT] 
. (f 
.;::: 
);- 
..." 
?;: 
. 0: 
.
 

 
. u 
c...... 


. I"" 
...' 
.C: 
,r- 
r- 
. );- 
c 
::::: 
[":1 
:c 
. rr:. 
tv 
rr: 
'::t' 
: 
-J 
c...... 
tT1 
);- 
. z 
0: 
C 
C 
;z:; 
t1 
C 

'Z. 
rr: 
....J 


\ 

 

 '" 
..... . 

 
..... 
..- '."' "" 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


:2:!5 


(They are a Nation of the Algonquin Language, dis- 
tant from the Hurons a hundred or a hundred and 
twenty leagues towards the West whom we call the 
Inhabitants of the Sault.)6 'Ve promised to pay them 
a visit, to see how they might be disposed, in order 
to labor for their Conversion,-especially as we 
learned that a more remote Nation whom they call 
Pouteatami 7 had abandoned their own Country and 
taken refuge with the Inhabitants of the Sault, in 
order to remove from some other hostile Nation who 
persecuted them with endless wars. We selected 
Father Charles Raymbaut to undertake this jour- 
ney; and as, at the same time, some Hurons were to 
be of the party, Father Isaac J ogues was chosen, that 
he might deal with them. 
They started from our House of SteT Marie, about 
the end of September, and after seventeen days 
of navigation on the great Lake or fresh-water sea 
that bathes the land of the Hurons, they reached the 
Sault, where they found about two thousand Souls, 
and obtained information about a great many other 
sedentary Nations, who have never known Europeans 
and have never heard of [166 i.e., 164J GOD ,-among 
others, of a certain Nation, the Nadouessis, situated 
to the Northwest or West of the Sault, eighteen days' 
journey further away.8 The first nine days are occu- 
pied in crossing another great Lake that commences 
above the Sault; during the last nine days one has 
to ascend a River that traverses those lands. These 
Peoples till the soil in the manner of our Hurons, 
and harvest Indian corn and Tobacco. Their Villages 
are larger, and in a better state of defense, owing to 
their continual wars with the Kiristinons, the Irini- 
ons, and other great Nations who inhabit the same 



226 


LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Peres à faire quelque forte de demeure parmy eux. 
On leur fait entendre que cela n'efi pas impoffible, 
pourueu qu'ils fuffent difpofez à receuoir nos infiru- 
étions. Apres auoir tenu Confeil, ils répondirent 
qu'ils defirent grandemët ce bon-heur; qu'ils nous 
embrafferont cõme leurs Freres, & qu'ils feront profit 
de nos paroles. Mais il nous faut des Ouuriers pour 
cet effet: il faut auparauãt tafcher de gagner les 
Peuples qui nous font plus voyfins, & cependant prier 
Ie Ciel, qu'il hafie les moments de leur Conuerfion. 
[167 i.e., 165] Le P. Charles Raymbaut ne fut pas 
plufiofi de retour de ce voyage du Saut, qu'il fe rem- 
barque dans vn autre Canot, pour aller chercher les 
Nipiffiriniens au lieu de leur Hyuernement, & conti- 
nuer leur infiruétion. Le P. René Menard, qui fraif- 
chement nous efioit venu au fecours, fe joignit auec 
luy; car nous jugeames à propos de retenir Ie P. 
Claude Pijart, afin de ne pas entie[re]ment aban- 
donner quantité d'autres troupes Algonquines qui 
toutes les Années viennent hyuerner icy dans Ies 
Hurons. 
Le Lac fe trouua fi émeu, les vents fi opiniafires, 
les tempefies fi grandes, que ce Canot fut contraint 
de relafcher à noftre Port d'où il efioit party, & les 
glaces furuenant incontinent apres, rendirent ce 
voyage impoffible. Le P. Charles Raymbaut tomba 
deílors griefuement malade, & depuis n'a pas eu vn 
iour de fanté. 
Quantité d' Algonquins aborderent à mefme temps 
proche de nofire Maifon, auec deffein d'y paffer l'Hy- 
uer. DIE v voulant donner de l'employaux deux 
Peres, de la Langue Algonquine, qui refioient en 
fanté, & fauuer par mefme moyê quelques Ames qu'il 



1642-43] 


RELATION OF I642 


227 


Country. Their Language differs from the Algon- 
quin and Huron tongues. 9 
The Captains of this Nation of the Sault invited 
our Fathers to take up their abode among them. 
They were given to understand that this was not 
impossible, provided that they were well disposed to 
receive our instruction. After having held a Coun- 
cil, they replied that they greatly desired that good 
fortune,-that they would embrace us as their Broth- 
ers, and would profit by our words. But we need 
Laborers for that purpose; we must first try to win 
the Peoples that are nearest to us, and meanwhile 
pray Heaven to hasten the moment of their Conver- 
sion. 
[167 i.e., 165] Father Charles Raymbaut had no 
sooner returned from this journey to the Saut than 
he reëmbarked in another Canoe, to seek the Nipissi- 
riniens at their Winter quarters and to continue 
instructing them. Father René Menard, who had 
recently come to our assistance, went with him, for 
we deemed it advisable to retain Father Claude Pi- 
jart, so as not to abandon entirely a number of other 
Algonquin bands who come here every Year to 
winter with the Hurons. 
The Lake was so agitated, the winds so contrary, 
and the storms so great, that the Canoe was compelled 
to put back to our Port, whence it had started; and, 
as the ice formed immediately afterward, it rendered 
the voyage impossible. Father Charles Raym baut 
thereupon fell seriously ill, and has not had one day's 
good health since. 
A great many Algonquins landed at the same time 
near our House, with the intention of spending the 
Winter here. GOD wished to give employment to 



228 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[V OL. 23 


auoit choifies pour Ie Ciel. Car la maladie ayant em- 
porté plufieurs enfans, ie ne fçay f'il en eft mort vn 
feul, fans auoir receu Ie Baptefme, quelque oppofi- 
tion que fouuent les parens y ayent pû apporter. 
[168 i.e., 166] Vn pere craignãt qu'on ne baptifaft 
fon enfant, auoit toûjours tenu fa maladie cachée. 
Le P. Menard veut entrer dans cette Cabane; on Ie 
rebute brufquement. II fe doute de ce qui eftoit, il 
y retourne deux & trois fois, toufiours ce Barbare eft 
à la porte comme vn Cerbere, qui en defend I' entrée. 
Le Pere all ant vifiter en quelque autre Cabane, fe 
fent interieurement pouffé de retourner d'où fi fou- 
uent il f' étoit veu chaffé. II y entre fans refiftance, 
il ne trouue plus que la femme de ce Barbare, luy 
eftant forty pour aller au feftin, il luy demande des 
nouuelles de fon enfant, elle dit qu'il eft mort. En- 
fin apres quelques difcours qui adoucirent fon efprit, 
elle leue vne robe qui cachoit ce petit innocent, qui 
rendoit les derniers foûpirs, & prie Ie Pere de n'en 
pas aprocher, parce que fon mary luy auoit defendu. 
C' euft efté perdre vne trop belle occafion de faire vn 
Ange du Paradis de ce petit agonifant: il n'eft pas fi 
toft baptifé, fans que la mere fen pûft apperceuoir, 
que fon Arne f' enuole ou Ciel. 
S'il y eut de la peine à fauuer les Enfans, l'in- 
firuétion qu'on donnoit aux Adultes, ne fut pas moins 
penible. C'eftoient gens ramaffez qui n'auoient 
iamais rien entendu que du mal de nous: Leur efprit 
efioit tout remply de foupçons & de craintes. Les 
veritez de noftre Foy eftoient defcriées aupres d'eux. 
En vn mot, ils reffembloient [169 i.e., 167] à ces 
malades, qui ont horreur de ceux qui leur veulent 
rendre la fanté. Quand on n'auroit rien gaigné autre 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF z642 


229 


the two Fathers who knew the Algonquin Language, 
and who remained in health, so as thereby to save 
some Souls that he had chosen for Heaven; for dis- 
ease carried off several children, and I do not think 
that a single one of them died without having 
received Baptism whatever opposition the parents 
may often have shown thereto. 
[168 i.e., 166J A father, who feared that his child 
might be baptized, had always kept its sickness 
concealed. When Father Menard tried to enter his 
Cabin, he was rudely repulsed. He suspected the 
cause of this, and returned two or three times; but 
the Barbarian was always at the door like a Cerberus, 
defending the entrance. While the Father was visit- 
ing another Cabin, he felt inwardly impelled to return 
to the place whence he had been so often driven away. 
He entered without resistance, and found there only 
the wife of the Barbarian, for he had gone out to a 
feast. He asked news of her child, and she said that 
it was dead. Finally, after some conversation that 
soothed her mind, she lifted the robe that hid the 
little innocent, who was about to draw his last breath, 
and begged the Father not to approach, because her 
husband had forbidden her to allow it. That would 
have been the loss of too good an opportunity for 
making an Angel of Paradise of this little sufferer. 
No sooner was he baptized, without the mother 
perceiving it, than his Soul flew to Heaven. 
If it was difficult to save the Children, it was no 
less arduous to give instruction to the Adults. The 
people gathered here had heard nothing but evil of 
us; their minds were filled with suspicion and fear j 
they had received disparaging accounts of our Faith; 
in a word, they were like [169 i.e., 167J those sick 



230 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


chofe que de leuer tous ces foupçõs, de diffiper ces 
craintes, & de gagner leur amitié, I'Hyuer n'eufi pas 
efté mal employé. Outre cela, il n'y en a pas vn qui 
n'ait efié fuffifamment infiruit: au moins auons-nous 
cette confolation, que f'ils f'écarterent de nous, dés 
que Ie Printemps fut venu, ils ont remporté auec eux 
affez de cognoiffances des chofes de la Foy pour fe 
fauuer; ou bien en cas qu'ils en abufent, pour jufii- 
fier les mifericordes de DIE V . 
Le P. Claude Pijart fit auffi quelques courfes 
pendant 1'Hyuer, à dix ou douze lieuës d'icy, pour 
infiruire quelques troupes paffageres d' Algonquins. 
Outre les enfans qu'il enuoya au Ciel par les eaux du 
Baptefme, il Confeffa quelques Chrefiiens, qui auoient 
efié infiruits & baptifez à Kebec & aux Trois-Riui- 
eres. C' efi vne confolation bien grande, de voir de 
pauures gens, fans Eglife, fans Sacremens, fans Sacri- 
fice, fans Predicateur, fans Infiruétion, fans liures; 
enfin priuez de tout fecours, au milieu des forefis, 
menans vne vie au dehors, plus femblable à celIe des 
befies, qu'à celIe du refie des Hommes; nonobfiant 
tout cela, fe conferuer dedans la Foy, continuer dans 
la crainte de DIE V, dans les fentimens de pieté, 
viure dans l'innocence. 
[170 Le., 168J lIs prioient DIE v publiquement, 
chantoient des Cantiques de Deuotion, compofez en 
leur Langue, profeffoient hautement la Foy; Benif- 
foient DIE V de leur auoir ouuert l'efprit pour Ie 
cognoifire; & ne refpiroient plus qu'à vn fejour proche 
les François, où ils peuffent efire plainement infiruits, 
& viure dans les exercices d'vne vie vrayement Chre- 
fiienne, dont ils ont goufié quelque temps la douceur. 
Mais les Iroquois ont tellement remply toutes .ces 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642 


231 


persons who have a horror of those who wish to 
restore them to health. Even if we had gained noth- 
ing more than to remove all these suspicions, dispel 
their fears, and win their friendship, the Winter 
would not have been so badly spent. Besides this, 
there is not one who has not been sufficiently in- 
structed; at least, we have this consolation that, if 
they wandered away from us when the Spring came, 
they took with them a sufficient knowledge of 
matters of the Faith to save them, or, in the event 
of their making a bad use of it, to justify GOD'S 
mercies. 
Father Claude Pijart also made some excursions 
during the Winter, to a distance of ten or twelve 
leagues from here, to teach some roving bands of 
Algonquins. Besides the children whom he sent to 
Heaven by means of the waters of Baptism, he Con- 
fessed some Christians, who had been instructed and 
baptized at Kebec and at the Three Rivers. It is a 
very great consolation to see poor people without a 
Church, without the Sacraments, without the Sacri- 
fice, without a Preacher, without Instruction, with- 
out books,- in fine, deprived of all assistance, in the 
midst of the forests, leading a life externally more 
like that of beasts than that of other Men; notwith- 
standing all that, maintaining themselves in the 
Faith, persevering in the fear of GOD and in senti- 
ments of piety, and living in innocence. 
[170 i.e., 168J They prayed to GOD publicly, sang 
Devotional Hymns composed in their Language, and 
openly professed the Faith; they blessed GOD for 
having enlightened their minds so that they might 
know him, and desired nothing better than to dwell 
near the French, where they could be fully instructed 



232 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Contrées de frayeur, que ces pauures Chrefiiens font 
contrai[n]ts de fe bannir eux-mefmes, & viure dedans 
les bois: jufqu'à ce que quelque bras plus puiffant 
ait reprimé l'infolence de leurs Ennemis. 


Les Peres Claude Pi jart, & René Menard nous 
quittent à la fin d' Auril, pour retourner aux Nipiffi- 
riniens en leur Païs, pour continuer à les infiruire: 
Car c'eft la Nation qui femble la moins eíloignée de 
la Foy, de tous ces Peu pIes Errans. 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I6.p 


233 


and live in the practices of a truly Christian life, 
whose pleasures they have enjoyed for a time. But 
the Iroquois have inspired such terror throughout all 
these Countries that these poor Christians are com- 
pelled to banish themselves, and to live in the woods, 
until some more powerful arm shall have subdued 
the insolence of their Enemies. 


Fathers Claude Pijart and René Menard leave us 
at the end of April, to return to the Nipissiriniens 
in their own Country, and to continue instructing 
them; for that Nation seems of all these Wandering 
Peoples, the least averse to the Faith. 




 


."'-
 


A1ER 



- 



i 
 
":\ r&r.\,
 
"11. 


;
 

 .'}

 Î.'2\\
 
J). /). 
 .,..;' .
,
)." - 


A..I" 



 


/\. 


A 



 
"""'- 


/""\ 
/). 
,. 


-- _ NEW FRANCE, 16 43, 
llR"'U"'" {,oro the ",lot<<! 




 -
 ) . 
 ; 
f

LI\N 
 
 

)
7

 DI
'
' 

 -"" 
#{? 


... P
';J 
A,. J,... Bo1Ji:...E..I","in.",
u 
R".1. 
..r I.. (..,.1,.. (i,
,.,h'f*U ." 
7:./. J.. PQ"" u la R.oyo/" . . 
F-":f 
 

 -' "'V 
-0 1
 
 a ?
 0 '" 0 I 
E.,,,<<..... ale: 1'10 L'...'.. 


W FRANCE, 1643, BY JEAN BUISSEAU. 


-duced (rom the printed original in Lenox Library_] 




XLIX-L 


Two LETTERS OF 1643 


XLIX.- Lettre du P. Charles Garnier à Monsieur J. M. J. j 
Stet Marie aux Hurons, ce 23 -, 16 43 
L.- Epistola Patris Joannis de Brébeuf ad R. P. Mutium 
ViteIleschi, Præpositum Generalem Societatis 
Jesu, Romæ; ex residentia Conceptionis ad Tria 
Flumina in Nova Francia, 23 Sept., 16 43 


SOURCE: For XLIX., we foIlow a contemporary copy of 
the original, in the archives of St. Mary's CoIlege, Montreal j 
for L., we follow Father Martin's apograph of the original, 
also in St. Mary's archives. 



236 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Lettre du P. Charles Garnier à Monsieur 
J. M. J. 


Au :Monsieur J. M. J. 
M ON TRES CHER FRERE 
Notre Sr. võ donne son st. amour et sa ste. 
palx. 
11 a plu a Dieu que touttes les letres quon nõ ecri- 
uoit I An passe de France ayent eté prises par les 
yroquois Auec Ie bon P. Jogues et deux autres fran- 
çois parmy quelqunes quon a apporte icy s'estoient 
trouuees les Votres Celles du P Buteux Celles de ma 
tante la Relligieuse et de Mon Cousin et de Ma Cousine 
Bué V oyla tout Ce qe. jay receu de france, J e ne scay 
pas si mon frere de SteT Marie m'auoit ecrit Je nay 
point reçu les siennes põ vous je Croy que vous auez 
recu tout ensemble la lettre que je vous ecriuois 
l' An passé et CelIe de I' Année precedente qui etoit 
arriué a quebec apres Ie depart des Vaisseaux. nous 
De scauons pas en cor au sur Ce qui est arriué a nos 
trois francois que les Iroquois ont pris neamoins nõ 
auons entendu de plusieurs endroits qu'ils ont ete 
brulez et tuez a leur arriuée dans Ie pays des Enne- 
mis et Cela est plus qe probable. Hi sunt Martyres 
Caritatis et obedientiæ Võ les verrez dans la relation 
et si Vous estez Dans Vne Ville où i1 yait des notres 
vous pouuez en prier quelqun de vous montrer leur 
petit [recit?] que nõ enuoyons d'icy du P Isaac Jogues 



1642-43] 


GARNIER TO J. M. J 


237 


Letter of Father Charles Garnier to Monsieur 
J. M. J. 


To Monsieur J. .nil. J. 
M y DEAREST BROTHER, 
Our Lord give you his holy love and his 
blessed peace. 
It pleased God that all the letters that were writ- 
ten to us last Year from France should be taken by 
the yroquois, Together with the good Father J ogues 
and two otber frencbmen: among some that were 
brought here were Yours, Father Buteux's, my aunt 
the Nun's, and those from My Cousins Bué. That 
is all That I have received from france. I know not 
whether my brother de SteT Marie had written to 
me,- I have not received his letters. As for you, I 
Suppose that you have received, both together, the 
letter which I wrote to you last Year and the One of 
the preceding Year, which had reached quebec after 
the departure of the Vessels. We do not yet know 
with certainty What has befallen our three frenchmen 
whom the Iroquois have captured; nevertheless, we 
have heard from several sources that they were 
burned and killed at their arrival in the country of 
the Enemies; and That is more than probable. Hz' 
sun! Martyres Carz"tatis et obedielltiæ. You will see 
them in the relation, and if You are In A City where 
there are some of ours, you can pray some one of 
them to show you their little [narrative] by Father 
Isaac J ogues, which we send from here, when they 



238 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


quand on Aura 
eceu je Croy qe faute d autre Le P. 
fauyer võ fera bien Cette charité il est vray que nõ 
sommes icy dans de grands dangers de nõ vies mais 
Ie bon est qe Cest pour Ie seruice de Nõ Mre. põ qui 
mourir vaut plus que miles vies que si võ n'estez pas 
dans de si grandes occasions de souffrances Courage 
neamoins mon cher frere Consolez võ de la Croix 
que n. s. võ presente que si võ me dites que V otre 
laschete võ empesche de la receuoir de ses mains 
Comme vous desirez regardez Cette lascheté Comme 
vne Autre Croix quil võ faut aussi suporter doucem t . 
Je veux dire que Vous ne Vous en affiigiez [pas] auec 
Exces. Helas il faut bien que nò nous suportions 
nous mesmes He qui na rien a suporter en soy meme 
en Cette Vie? Cela n'appartient qua N. S. et a N. D. 
Et qui simpatientera Contre soy meme põ ses imper- 
fections en Cela-meme sen rendra plus imparfait qu'il 
nest mon cher frere bo1tu'm habemus domintt11Z il vous 
ayme trop põ vous quitter Consolez võ Ce nest pas 
peu que vous portiez les liurés de N. S. et de sa 
sainte mere et que Võ soyez de leur maison võ ferez 
beau coup Auec vn peu de Courage et beaucoup de 
patience a attendre la Vi site de Dieu dans vostre 
Cæur vne chose que je Craindrois põ vne personne 
de votre naturel seroit vn peu d'ennuy si vous n'a- 
uiez de loccupation mais je Croy que Vous võ endon- 
neriez suffisament que si lobeissance ne võ endonnoit 
assez je prie N. S. quil võ Con solIe et vous façe trou- 
uer d u plaisir dans vos Em ploys V ous me ferez plaisir 
de me mander quels ils sont põ Ce qui est des notres 
C est d estre en mission six mois Continuellement 
scauoir Est pendant l'automne et 1 hyuer et meme 



1642-43] 


GARNIER TO J. .1.1-1. J 


239 


shall Have received it. I Think that, for want of 
another, Father fauyer will gladly do you This 
kindness. It is true that we are here in great dan- 
gers of our lives; but the advantage is, that It is for 
Our lvlaster's service for whose sake to die is worth 
more than a thousand lives. What if you have not 
so great opportunities for suffering? Courage, never- 
theless, my dear brother: Console yourself with the 
Cross which our lord offers you; and if you tell me 
that Your cowardice prevents you from receiving it 
at his hands As you desire, regard This cowardice 
As Another Cross, which you must also bear quietly. 
I mean that You should not grieve Yourself to Ex- 
cess. Alas, we must needs endure our own selves. 
Why, who has nothing to endure in himself, in This 
Life? That belongs only to Our Lord and to Our 
Lady. And he who shall lose patience With himself 
for his imperfections, in That very thing will render 
himself more imperfect than he is: my dear brother, 
bonum habemus domiml1n; he loves you too much to 
forsake you. Console yourself. It is not a little 
thing, that you bear the liveries of Our Lord and of 
his holy mother, and that You are of their house; 
you will do much With a little Courage and much 
patience, to await the Visit of God in your Heart. 
A thing which I would Fear for a person of your 
nature would be a little weariness, if you had no 
occupation; but I Think that You would adequately 
supply yourself therewith. And, if obedience should 
not supply you enough, I pray Our Lord that he Con- 
sole you, and always cause you to find pleasure in 
your Tasks ; You will do me a favor to apprise me 
what they are. As Touching ours, It is to be on a 
mission six months Continually,-to wit, Both dur- 



240 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


pendant l'eté faire souuent des Voyages au bourg que 
nõ auons põ partage nõ auons encor passé Cette hyuer 
Le P. Le Moyne et moy au Bourg de St. Joseph de 
Teanaostriae Lequel Bourg fut aftligé L'Eté Dernier 
de Ia mort de deux chrestiens et vne Chrestienne qui 
nõ etoient bien Considerables scauoir est de Eustache 
ahatsistari qui etoit Ie premier guerrier de Ce pays 
et qui fut pris des ennemis auec Le p J ogues de 
Thomas savenhati qui fut tué vers L automne par Ies 
ennemis auec plusieurs autres de son bourg qui etoient 
allé Cueillir vne Certaine Espece de Chanure et de 
christine Tarihia Mere d' Estienne Totiry chef de la 
Cabanne ou est notre petitte Chapelle de st. Joseph 
mais N. S. a repare abondament Ces pertes nous don- 
nant Cet hyuer dans Ce bourg plusieurs bons chre- 
stiens nouueaux et fortifiant de plus en plus les 
anciens entre Autres Neophytes qu'i11uy a plu de nõ 
donner est un Capitaine nommé Thomas Tsondak
a 
qu y etoit notre hoste depuis quatre Ans enfin i1 a 
plu a Dieu de Luy toucher Le Cæur auec vne sienne 
sæur nomme andiora que nõ auons nommé marie 
depuis qu'ils sont Chrestiens nõ auons quitté leur 
Cabanne põ loger chez Etienne ou est Ia chapelle 
ayant trop d'incommodité a etre dans vne autre 
Cabanne que Celle ou est Ia chapelle ou nous auons a 
entrer fort souuent põ y faire prier les chrestiens. 
Ce Tomas Tsondakga est homme fort exact a faire 
bien son deuoir de chrestien il est tous les matins 
des premiers a la porte de la chapelle põ entendre Ia 
messe et tous Ies soirs ne manque pas a y aller prier 
Dieu non obstant Ies affaires que sa charge Iuy donne 
vn Autre Capitaine nonlmé Assisk
a Cest aussy fait 



1642-43] 


GARNIER TO.f. M..f 


241 


ing the autumn and winter, and even during the sum- 
mer; to make frequent Journeys to the village which 
we have as our portion. We also went, This last 
winter, Father Le 1Ioyne and I, to the Village of St. 
Joseph of Teanaostriae; \Vhich Village was afflicted 
Last Summer by the death of two christian men and 
a Christian woman, who were greatly Esteemed by 
us,-namely, of Eustache ahatsistari, who was the 
first warrior of This country, and who was taken by 
the enemies, with father J ogues; of Thomas sauen- 
hati, who was killed toward Autumn by the enemies, 
with several others of his village, who had gone to 
Gather a Certain Kind of Hemp; and of christine 
Tarihia, Mother of Estienne Totiry, chief of the 
Cabin in which is òur little Chapel of st. Joseph. 
But Our Lord abundantly made good These losses, 
by giving us This last winter in This village several 
good new christians, and strengthening the former 
ones more and more; among Other Neophytes whom 
it has pleased him to give us, is a Captain named 
Thomas Tsondakwa, who had been our host for four 
Years; at last it has pleased God to touch His Heart, 
with that of a sister of his named andiora, whom we 
have named marie. Since they have become Chris- 
tians, we have left their Cabin to lodge with Etienne, 
where the chapel is,-finding too much inconven- 
ience in being in another Cabin than That where the 
chapel is, which we have to enter very often, to have 
the christians pray there. This Tomas Tsondakwa 
is a very strict man in doing well his duty as a chris- 
tian,- he is every morning among the first at the 
door of the chapel to hear mass; and every evening 
he fails not to go thither and pray to God, notwith- 
standing the business which his office occasions him. 



242 


LES RELATIONS DES./ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Chrestien grace aDieu et nõ Contente bien Ie jeune 
hõe a quitte sa Capitainerie põ etre Exemp de plu- 
sieurs soins superstitieux des malades qui appartienent 
aux Capitaines il disoit vn jour a quelques de ses 
parentes qui Ie detournoient daller prier dieu a la 
chapelle; quand je scaurois que 20 Hommes m'y au- 
roient dresse des Ambusches põ me tuer et qu'on me 
diroit demain ils my seront plus attends a Demain a 
aller prier Dieu je n'en ferois rien tous les samedys 
nos chrestiens se Confessent et les dimanches nous 
leurs faisons cathechisme ou nõ les interogeons tous 
il y a plaisir a voir des Capitaines et des femmes 
vieilles repondre. Estienne fait de sa Cabanne vne 
Ecolle de deuotion ne prenant plaisir a parler d Autre 
chose a Ceux qui Ie viennent voir Et il ne se Con- 
tente pas de Cela &c Au lieu de leur faire Ie Cathe- 
chisme Ie dimanche nõ leur faisons dire leur Chape- 
let a deux Chæurs ils y trouuent bien du plaisir ils 
ayment bien leur chapelet et Ie portent põ la plus 
part pendant a leur Cous nõ nõ seruons dune Inuen- 
tion põ les accoutumer a Cognoitre Ie Dimanche qui 
est de leur faire réciter la premiere dizaine de leur 
Chapelet Ie lundy la 2 Ie mardy &c puis Ie dimanche 
ils Ie disent tout Entier et Ainsy ils s accoutument 
a Conoitre Ie dimanche etant meme a la Chasse. 
Les ministres de Satan ont pris plaisir a susciter 
Cet hyuer quantité de mauuaises Langues Contre nõ 
Chrestiens on se mocque deux on les menaçe de les 
tuer ou du moins de les chasser du bourg on ne les 
inuite que rarem t . aux festins mais ce sont Ces perse- 
qutions qui affirmisent I eglise de Dieu Veritablem t . 
C est vne gran de Consolation que de Voir dans vne 



1642-43] 


GARNIER TO.f. M. J 


243 


Another Captain, named Assiskwa, has also become 
a Christian, thanks to God, and Contents us well; the- 
young man has left his Captaincy in order to be Ex- 
empt from several superstitious attentions to the sick, 
which belong to the Captains. He said one day to 
some of his female relatives who were diverting him 
from going to pray to God in the chapel: "Though I 
knew that 20 Men had laid Ambushes there to kill 
me, and one should say to me 'To-morrow they will 
no longer be there; wait till To-morrow to go and 
pray to God,' I would do nothing of the kind. .. Every 
saturday our christians Confess, and on sundays we 
instruct them in the catechism, in which we question 
them all: it is a pleasure to see Captains and old 
women respond. Estienne makes of his Cabin a 
School of devotion,- not taking pleasure in speaking 
of Anything else to Those who come to see him. 
And he is not Satisfied with That, etc. Instead of 
teaching them the Catechism on sunday, we have 
them say their Rosary in two Choirs; they find much 
pleasure therein. They are very fond of their chap- 
let, and most of them wear it hanging on their 
N ecks. We use a Device to accustom them to Know 
Sunday, which is to have them recite the first decade 
of their Rosary on monday, the 2nd on tuesday, 
etc.; then on sunday they say it Completely, and 
Thus they accustom themselves to Know sunday, 
even when Hunting. 
The ministers of Satan have taken pleasure in ex- 
citing, This past winter, many evil Tongues Against 
our Christians; they mock them, they threaten to 
kill them, or at least to drive them from the village; 
they rarely invite them to the feasts; but These 
persecutions are what establishes the church of God. 



244 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Barbarie plusieurs Ames Aussy pures que sont Celles 
des bons Religieux M. C. fro Je brise icy võ Conju- 
rant de prier bien particulierem t . põ Celuy qui est &c 
C. G. 


de Ste. Marie A ux Hurons ce 23 1643 


Le P. chastelain Le P. Pijart et Le P. René Me- 
nard qui sont icy se recommandent bien avos bonnes 
Prieres Helas que deuiendra M. f. de SteT Marie je 
Iuy escris. 



1642-43] 


GARNIER TO J. .
f. .I 


245 


Truly It is a great Consolation to See in a Barbarous 
land several Souls As pure as are Those of the good 
Religious. 1Iy Dear brother, I close here: Beseech. 
ing you to pray very specially for Him who is, etc. 
C. G. 
From Ste. Marie Of the Hurons, this 23rd, 1643. 


Father chastelain, Father Pijart, and Father René 
Menard, who are here, commend themselves earn- 
estly to your good Prayers. Alas, what will become 
of My brother de SteT Marie? I am writing to him.. 



246 


LES RELATIOIVS DES ./ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Epistola Patris Joannis de Brébeuf ad Reveren- 
dissimum Patrem Mutium Vitelleschi, Præpo- 
situm Generalem Societatis Jesu, Romæ. 


R. A P. 
Potuit noscere P. V. statum pristinum ha- 
rum Canadensium missionum turn ex litteris 
nostris, turn maxime ex relatione anno superiore 
italice scripta a P. Jos. Bressani qui tota hac hyeme 
curionis officio Quebec egregie functus est. Statum 
vero præsentem nostræ missionis huronicæ cujus ego 
hie procurationem ago satis etiam agnoscit P. V. 
ex litteris P. hier. Lalemant superioris illius mis- 
sionis. Duo tam en sunt aut tria quæ meum esse 
putem perscribere, turn quia P. Lalemant ea non 
potu it scribere, quia ignorat, turn quia expedit ad 
Rea. V. scire. 
Primum est cymbas illas huronicas quæ et relati- 
ones hujus anni et litteras pene omnes Patrum huro- 
nicorum et alia quædam præter se afferebant captas 
direptasq. ab inimicis hac exeunte æstate cum jactura 
omnium pene rerum plurimorumq. Ca- 
noæ erant undecim, 23 hurones partim occisi, partim 
in captivitatem seu ad flammas abducti 
vero merces omnes nostraque etiam suppellex capta 
.direptaq. litterarum pars maxima aut ablata una cum 



1642-43] BRÉBEUF TO FATHER GENERAL 247 


Letter of Father Jean de Brébeuf to the Very 
Reverend Father Mutius Vitelleschi, Gen- 
eral of the Society of Jesus, at Rome. 


V ERY REVEREND FATHER, 
Your Paternity has been able to learn the 
early state of these Canadian missions, both 
from our letters, and especially from the relation 
written in Italian last year by Father Joseph Bres- 
sani,lo who throughout this winter has discharged the 
office of parish priest at Quebec in an excellent man- 
ner. The present state of our Huron mission, of 
which I here conduct the administration, Your Pater- 
nityalso sufficiently knows from the letters of Father 
Hierosme Lalemant, superior of that mission. There 
are two or three things, nevertheless, which I think 
it my duty to relate,- both because Father Lale- 
mant was unable to write them, as he did not know 
them; and also because it is important that Your 
Reverence should be informed thereof. 
The first is, that those Huron canoes which con- 
veyed both the relations for this year, and almost all 
the letters of the Huron Fathers, and certain other 
things with them, were captured and plundered by 
the enemies, at the close of this summer, with the 
loss of near! y everything, and of most [of the 
men]. There were eleven canoes; 23 
Hurons were in part killed, in part carried away to 
captivity or to the flames. 110reover, all 
the merchandise and even our furniture was cap- 



248 


LES RELA TIO.NS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


relatione aut lacerata et in aquam projecta sunt. 
Quare non mirabitur P. V. si aut nullas a Patribus 
huronensibus litteras accipiat, aut saltern paucas easq. 
laceras et deletas. Ut autem prætermittam cæteras 
inimicorum incursiones quæ tota hac æstate continuæ 
fuerunt. ut etiam taceam cædem nostrorum Gallo- 
rum qui in novo præsidio Montis regalis capti cæsiq. 
sunt, ex hoc solo quæ dixi satis concipit P. V. quantis 
tandem in angustiis versetur canadensis negotiatio 
totaq. res christiana, quantaq. pericula sub ire debeant 
qui ex huronibus hue descendunt vel qui illuc hinc 
proficiscuntur. Atque ob earn causam P. Jos. Bres- 
sani, P. Gab. Druillete et a [sc. ego] Quebec iterum 
su bsistere h yemareq. fortasse cogem ur. 
Alterum quod velim scire P. V. pertinet ad P. lsa- 
acum Jogues. de cujus captivitate nondudum certi 
facti sumus et de quo tan quam de mortuo scribunt 
Patres qui apud hurones sUnt. lmo et ejus elogium 
tan quam de mortuo mittunt ad P. V., nos autem cer- 
tis nuntiis nempe ab ejus concaptivis qui aufugerunt 
hucque ad nos venerunt, imo et ex ipsiusmet litteris 
accepimus eum Dei gratia adhuc vivere et libere apud 
inimicos agere more aliorum captivorum. Pater 
certe et duo illi domestici ejus captivi ubi primum 
ad sedes inimicorum pervenerunt variis atque exqui- 
sitis tormentis affecti sunt omnes. Patri abscissus 
est pollex sinistræ, dextræ vero index contritus et 
mutilus redditus. Alteri etiam ex domesticis index 
amputatus est omnibus vero barb a et ungues avulsi, 



1642-43] BRÉBEUF TO FATHER GENERAL 249 


tured and plundered; most of the letters were either 
carried away, along with the relation, or torn and 
thrown into the water. Therefore, Your Paternity 
will not wonder if either you receive no letters from 
the Huron Fathers, or, at all events, only a few, and 
those torn and obliterated. Though I pass over the 
other incursions of the enemies, which were uninter- 
rupted throughout this summer; though I also pass 
in silence the massacre of our French, who were cap- 
tured and slain in the new post of Montreal,- from 
what I have said alone, Your Paternity sufficiently 
understands in what great straits are the canadian 
trade and the whole christian cause, and how great 
dangers those must undergo who come down hither 
from the Hurons, or who depart hence to go thither. 
And on this account Father Joseph Bressani, Father 
Gabriel Druillete,11 and I shall perhaps be compelled 
again to stay and winter at Quebec. 
The other thing that I would have Your Paternity 
know, pertains to Father Isaac J ogues,- of whose 
captivity we have recently been informed, and of 
whom the Fathers who are with the Hurons write as 
if he were dead,-nay, more, they even send his 
eulogium to Your Paternity, as of one dead. 12 But we 
have assuredly learned, by positive messages through 
his fellow captives who have fled and come hither to 
us,-nay, also, from his own letters,-that by the 
grace of God he is still alive, and freely goes about 
among the enemies, in the manner of the other cap- 
tives. The Father, it is true, and those two captive 
attendants of his, when they first arrived at the hab- 
itations of the enemies, were all subjected to mani- 
fold and excruciating tortures. The Father's left- 
hand thumb was cut off, and the forefinger of his 



250 


LES RELA TIONS DES .1ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


ignes etiam admoti, tandem tamen vita donati sunt 
omnes franci. N uncque [spes] illis est fore ut liberi, 
salvi et incolumes ad nos reducerentur, sed ut in- 
constans est et mutabile barbarorum ingenium pau- 
cos post dies mutata sunt corda, unus nostrorum ex 
improviso interfectus est, reducendorumque aliorum 
consilium abreptum atque ex eo tempore usque in 
hodiernum diem non cessarunt nobis insidias et 
. sicut et huronibus et algonquinis. atque 
adeo dum hæc scribo ecce refert nuntius hurones 
internecioni datos novem, multos vulneratos nos- 
trasq. omnes sarcinulas quas revehebant penitus 
amissas. ea autem erant non pauca atque ad victum 
nostrorum qui illic sunt, imprimis necessariæ: Sit 
nomen Domini benedictum, Dominus Dedit, Dominus 
abstulit. 
Ex his liquet quam pessimo in statu sitæ sint res 
Canadenses. sed aliunde hæ infelices plagæ tantis 
donis cælestibus sunt locupletiores quanto sUnt mise- 
riores: Non regnat hie viti urn sed virtus et pietas 
non solum apud nostros qui ubique sese viros et ger- 
manos Societatis filios ostendunt, sed etiam apud 
nostros Gallos et apud Barbaros, nee solum apud eos 
Barbaros qui jam fidei nomen dederunt sed etiam 
apud cæteros qui nondum fidem profitentur. Vix 
enim easdem sUas superstitiones exercent, speran- 
dumque esset si pace nunc fueremus [sc. frueremur] 
brevi omnes ad fidem aggregandos esse. 
Commendo me impense P. væ SS. sacrificiis et preci- 



1642-43] BRÉBEUF TO FA THER GENERAL 251 


right hand was crushed and mutilated; one of the 
attendants also had a forefinger cut off. Indeed, all 
had their beards and nails torn out, and fire was also 
applied;-finally, however, all the Frenchmen were 
granted their lives. They now had hope that they 
might be led back to us, free, safe, and unharmed: but, 
as the barbarians' character is inconstant and fickle, 
their inclinations were changed, after a few days. 
One of ours was suddenly killed, and their intention 
of conducting the others home was renounced; 
and, besides, from that time even to the present 
day, they have not ceased [to lay] snares for us and 
. just as they do for both the Hurons and 
the Algonquins. Indeed, even while I am writing 
these things, ]0, a messenger reports that nine Hu- 
rons have been given over to massacre, and many 
wounded, and all our little baggage, which they were 
carrying back, totally lost. Moreover, there were 
not a few of these articles, and they were most neces- 
sary for the sustenance of ours who are there. May 
the Lord's name be blessed; the Lord Gave, the 
Lord has taken away. 
From these things it is evident in what a very 
evil condition Canadian affairs are placed; but, on 
another side, these unhappy afflictions are by so much 
richer in heavenly gifts, as they are more lament- 
able. Not vice rules here, but virtue and piety: not 
only among ours, who everywhere show themselves 
men, and true sons of the Society; but also among 
our French and among the Barbarians,- nor alone 
in the case of those Barbarians who have already en- 
rolled their names for the faith, but also in the case 
of others who do not yet profess the faith. For they 
scarcely practice their fonner superstitions; and we 



252 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


bus, et positis genibus ejus benedictionem obnixe 
efflagito utpote qui sum 
P. Vr. 
Servus in x to . humill. atq. 
obedientiss. 
JOAN. DE BREBEUF 


Ex residentia Conceptionis 
ad tria flumina in Nova francia 
23 Sept. 16 43. 



1642-43] BRÉBEUF TO FATHER GENERAL 253 


might hope, if we now enjoyed peace, to bring all, in 
a short time, to the faith. I earnestly com- 
mend myself to Your Paternity's Holy sacrifices and 
prayers; and on my knees I do urgently beseech 
your blessing; inasmuch as I am 
Your Paternity's 
Most humble and obedient 
Servant in Christ, 
JEAN DE BREBEUF. 
From the residence of the Conception, 
at the three rivers in New france. 
September 23, 16 43. 



LI 


RELATION OF 1642-43 


PARIS: SEBASTIEN ET GABRIEL CRAMOISY, 1644 


SOURCE: We follow a copy of the original Cramoisy 
edition (H. 81), in Lenox Library. 
There is but one part to this Relatz"on, of which we give 
herewith the first three chapters; the rest will be contained 
in Volumes XXIV. and XXV. 




RELATION 
DE CE QVI S'EST PASS
 
EN LA 
NOVVELLE FRANCE 
EN L'ANNEE 16 42.. & 1643- 
Ent1oyé
 au R. P. IE-A N Fl L LEA \' 
!)roulncial de la COlnpagnJe de 11:5'1$) 
en la'Prouince de I;rancc. 
l' ar Ie R. P. 13 A Ii T H f L E M 
 V I M -0 NT, dt. 
14 me/me Compa:
nle'J Sttpcrìem'dd 
tottte la 
ij?t'o.>>'). 



 J iI 

J1-ð' 
 .f) C),
, ;;;) 
fi
 ' , 
 'j'1. 
 9.
 . ìF. 
 
"'
 
 'I:
 ' Y;
 
 
., .\ ' 
. 
,.'" ..=- 
.'1 
I'
h'
r 'é
J=-
 ll,. 


-, itJ'.' 
 
 
 
.. 
I
 :::;. 
 ,;.:" <<c 
 I&;. 


 
'!. <
 
'

:\
 'h"'::
'," '
i
. 

 
t 

 f1 
 :
 
 


,'" 

þ 
,tJt,
:
,,
 ;



I;" 
'1' 
 

 E 
""f1" 
 
I t
< -- . '. "iiII/f!" ,. 
'"" . 
 
 .. 
. 
X.
\\ 
r:A-A\-; t"" 

 .,I;'
 -;:-It:..; 
 


A PAR I '5, 
. SEBASTIEN 

A !\iOISY) 
 rlJë S. lac'; 
,..1. 1 hnpnmeUt û(chnaue du Roy>> - s .... u .., 

e]. E T (.l
'" s 
 .... 
GAD RI E Í.. CRA
10rSY.' ClcolgnCL- 
. . 
ìvi. DC. XLIV. 
4uec 
.ri
ilege 
 Rg)': _ 



RELA TION 
OF OCCURRENCES 
IN 
NEW FRANCE 
IN THE YEAR 1642 AND 1643. 
Sent to Rev. Father JEAN FILLEAU, 
Provincial of the Society of J E S US, 
in the Province of France. 
By REV. FATHER BARTHELEMY VIMONT, 
of the same Soc'Z'ety, Superl"or of 
all tile lrfÙsion. 


PARIS, 
r S E BAS TIE N eRA MOl S Y, j ruë St. Jac- 
Print- { Printer in Ordinary to the King, ques, at the 
ed by AND Sign of the 
GAB R I E L eRA MOl S Y. Sto rks. 
M. DC. XLIV. 
By Rqyal License. 



260 


LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Table des Chapitres contenvs en ce Livre. 


R ELA TION de ce qui s' efl paßI en la Nouuellt 
France, en I' A 1lnle 1642. & 1643. pag. I 
Chapitre I. De la Rejidence de Kebec, & de 
I' eflat de la colonz'e, 4 
Chap. II. Du Sem1:naz're des Vrfu lines , 19 
Chap. III. De la Rejidence de Sillery, & comme 
les Sauuages y 01lt paffl I' annle. 28 
Chap. IV. De la fafon de viure des Clzrefliens de 
Sillery. 4 1 
Chap. V. ContÙzuatz'oll du me.fme fubt"efl 59 
Chap. VI. De la venuë des Attz"camegues & de leur 
Baptefme. 7 6 
Chap. VII. Des Hurons qui ont Izyuernl à Quebec 
& à Sillery. 10 3 
Chap. VIII. De la Mtßz'01z de Tadoufac. 119 
Chap. IX. De l' Hofpital. 145 
Chap. X. De ce qui s' eft paßI aux trois Riut"eres, 
& au Fort de Richelt"eu. 17 2 
Chap. XI. De ce qui s' efl pafjl à Mont-real. 195 
Chap. XII. Des courfes des Iroquois, & de la 
captz"uitl du Pere Iogues. 234 
Chap. XIII. De quelques remarques, touchant les 
Hurons. 26 3 
Chap. XIV. De la deliurance du Pere Ifaac logues, 
& de Jon arriule en France. 28 3 



1642 -43] 


RELA TION OF r6.p-43 


261 


Table of the Chapters contained in this Book. 


R ELA TION of occurrences in New France, ,in 
the Year 1642 and 1643. page I 
Chapter 1. Of the Residence at Kebec, and the 
state of the colony, 4 
Chap. II. Of the Ursuline Seminary, 19 
Chap. III. Of the Resz"dence at Sz11ery, and how 
the Savages there spent the year. 28 
Chap. IV. Of tlze manner of lz"vÙzg among the 
Cllristians at Sillery. 41 
Chap. V. Continuation of the same subject. 59 
Chap. VI. Of the coming of some Atticamegues, 
and of their Baptism. 76 
Chap. VII. Of the Hurons who wz'ntered at Quebec 
and Sillery. 103 
Chap. VIII. Of the Mission at Tadousac. 119 
Chap. IX. Of tlte Hospital. 145 
Chap. X. Of events at tIle three Rivers, and at 
the Fort of Richelieu. 17 2 
Chap. XI. Of occurrences at Mont-real. . 195 
Chap. XII. Of incursions by the Iroquois, and the 
captivity of Father Jogues. 234 
Chap. XIII. Some observations touching the 
Hurons. 26 3 
Chap. XIV. Of tlte deliverallce of Father Isaac 
Jogues, and his arrival in France. 28 3 



262 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Extraiét du Priuilege du Roy. 


P AR Grace & Priuilege du Roy, z1 efl perm is A 
SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY Marc/tant Libraire Juri, 
bnprimeur Ordinaire du Roy, Directeur de I'Im- 
primerie Royalle du Cilafteau du Louure, & Ancien Efche- 
uin de nofire bonne ville de Paris, d'Imprimer, oùfaire 
ImprÙner vn Liure IntÜull Relation de ce qui s' eft paffe 
en la Nouuelle Fra1lce, en l'annee 1642. & 1643. En- 
uoyee au R. P. lEAN FILLEA V Prouincial de la Compagnie 
de IESVS en la ProuÙlce de France, par Ie R. P. Barthe- 
lemy Vi11lO1lt de la me.íme Comþagnie SUþerieur de toute 
la Mißion. Et ce pendant Ie temps & efpace de cinq 
ans confecutifs, auec deffêces à tous Libraires & Im- 
primeurs d'Imprimer ou faire Imprimer ledit Liure, 
fous pretexte de deguifement, ou changement qu'ils 
y pourroient faire, à peine de confifcation & de 
l'amende portee par Iedit Priuilege. Donné à Paris 
Ie 24. Decembre 1643. 
Par Ie Roy en fon Confeil. 
CRA110ISY. 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I6p-43 


263 


Extract from the Royal License. 


B y Grace and Prh'ilege of the King, SEBASTIEN 
CRAMOISY, Sworn il:lerchant Bookseller, Printer in 
OrdÙzary to the King, Director of the Royal Press 
at the Castle of the Louvre, and Sometime Aldennan of 
our good city of Paris, is authorized to Print, or cause 
to bc Printed, a Book Entitled: Relatz"on de ce qui s' est 
passe en la Nouvelle France, en l'annee 1642. et 1643. 
Envoyee au R. P. JEAN FILLEAU ProvÙzcial de la Com- 
pagnie de JESUS en la Province de France, par Ie R. P. 
Barthelemy Vimont de la mesme Compagnie Superieur de 
toute la .i}lission. And during the time and space of 
five consecutive years, all other Booksellers and Print- 
ers are forbidden to Print, or cause to be Printed, 
the said Book, under pretext of disguise, or possible 
alterations therein, on penalty of confiscation and 
the fine provided by this License. Given at Paris, 
the 24th of December, 1643. 
By the King in his Council, 
CRA1vIOISY. 



264 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Permif sion du R. P. Prouincial. 


N OVS I E A NFl L LEA V Prouincial de la Compa- 
gnie de I E S V S en la Prouince de France, 
auons accordé pour l'aduenir au fieur SEBAS- 
TIEN CRAMOISY Marchand Libraire I uré Imprimeur 
Ordinaire du Roy, Direéteur de l'Imprimerie Roy- 
ale du Chafteau du Louure, & Ancien Efcheuin de 
la ville de Paris, l'impreffion des Relations de la 
Nouuelle France, faid à Paris Ie Ianuier. 14. 
lEAN FILLEA V. 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF r6p-43 


265 


Permission of the Reverend Father Provincial. 


W E, J E A NFl L LEA U , Provincial of the Society 
of J E S us in the Province of France, have 
granted, from this time forth, to sieur 
SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, Sworn 
Ierchant Bookseller, 
Printer in Ordinary to the King, Director of the Roy- 
al Press at the Castle of the Louvre, and Sometime 
Alderman of the city of Paris, the right to print the 
Relations of New France; done at Paris, Jan- 
uary. 14. 


JEAN FILLEAU. 



266 


LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


[I] Relation de ce qvi s'efi paffé en la nouuelle 
France, en l'annee 1642. & 1643- 


PAX CHRISTI. 
Y OSTRE REVERENCE, 
N'aura pas cefte annee tout Ie contentement 
accouftumé de la Relation: Car la meilleure 
partie qui eft celIe des Hurons à eftre prife par les 
Hiroquois, auec les lettres de nos Peres, en vne dé- 
faite de 40. Hurons, qui arriua Ie 9. de Iuin dernier, 
prés de Montreal. Le Pere Ifaac Iogues, qui eft 
captif parmy les Barbares, nous efcrit du dernier de 
Iuin, [2] qu'elle eft tom bee en fes mains auec plu- 
fieurs lettres de nos Peres des Hurons. Ie ne fçay 
s'il pourra bien l'adreffer à Voftre R. par quelque 
voye que nous ne fçauons pas, ie ne doute nullement 
qu' elle ne foit pleine de grande confolation; nous 
auons aprins en gros, que les principaux Hurons 
commencent à goufter à bon efcient les chofes de 
Dieu, & fe difpofer au Baptefme, qu'enuiron cent 
ont efté choifis cette année pour eftre receus au 
nombre des en fans de Dieu. I'ay veu cette année aux 
3. Riuieres les Hurons Chreftiens commencer à faire 
ban de à part, & publiquement, de maniere qu'il y 
auoit d'vn cofté la bande des Croyans qui groffit tous 
les iours & fait profeffion publique du Chriftianifme, 
& de l'autre celIe des Infideles, qui commence à 
d[i]minuer d'eftime & de hardieffe. I'enuoye à voftre 
R. la Relation de çà bas, laquelle fournira des 



1642-43] 


RELA T ION OF I6p-43 


267 


[I] Relation of occurrences in new France, in 
the year 1642 and 1643- 


PAX CHRISTI. 
Y OUR REVERENCE 
W ill not this year find your usual satisfac- 
tion in the Relation; for the best part of it, 
which is that concerning the Hurons! was taken by 
the Hiroquois, together with our Fathers' correspon- 
dence, in a defeat of 40 Hurons, which occurred on 
the 9th of last June, near Montreal. Father Isaac 
J ogues, now captive among the Barbarians, wrires to 
us, on the last day of June, [2] that it has fallen into 
his hands, along with sundry letters of our Fathers 
among the Hurons; I know not whether he can at 
all convey it to Your Reverence by some way un- 
known to us. I doubt not that it is full of great 
consolation; for we have learned, in general, that the 
principal Hurons are beginning to relish the things 
of God in good earnest, and to dispose themselves to 
Baptism, so that about a hundred have been chosen 
this year to be received into the number of the chil- 
dren of God. At the 3 Rivers this year, I saw that 
the Huron Christians were beginning to separate 
themselves, and that public1y,-so that on one side 
was a daily increasing band of Believers, openly pro- 
fessing Christianity; and on the other, that of the 
Infidels, who begin to decrease in both esteem and 
boldness. I send your Reverence the Relation for 
this region, which will furnish examples of virtue, 



268 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


exemples de vertu, & des accroiffemens du Chrifiia- 
nifme remarquables, mais ce fera à l'ordinaire, auec 
l'amertune de plufieurs mauuaifes nouuelles proue- 
nantes de la part des Hiroquois, [3] lefquels fans 
doute, fi nous n'auõs quelque fecours de la France, 
feroit pour ruiner icy & la foy & Ie commerce. 11 
n'y a quafi plus de paffages ouuerts pour aller aux 
Hurons, nos pacquets l'an paffé, furent prins en 
mon tan t; cette année, ils l' on t efié en def cendan t. 
Comme i'efcry cecy I'apprens que les voila prins 
pour la troifiefme fois en remõtant, cela nous a obligé 
d'enuoyer à vofire R. Ie P. Ie Ieune, comme experi- 
menté de lõg-têps aux affaires de ces cõtrees, pour Ie 
remonfirer plus efficacement à ceux qui ont de l'af- 
feétipn pour ce pauure pays. C'a ei1:é l'aduis & Ie 
fouhait de Monfieur de Mõ[t]magny nofire Gouuer- 
neur, & de tous les habitâs qui m'en ont infiamment 
prié. Ie ne doute nullement que la charité de vofire 
R. n'embraffe efficacement l'affaire de Dieu & du 
falut de ces peuples delaiffés depuis tant de fiec1es: 
nous experimen tons tous les ans des effeéts rares de 
fon affeétion cordiale & paternelle, fur tout i'implore 
Ie fecours de fes SS. SS. & de tous nos PP. & FF. qui 
font fous fa charge. 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF r6p-43 


269 


and show notable increase of Christianity; but it 
must, as usual, be tempered with the bitterness of 
manifold evil tidings, arising from the side of the 
Hiroquois, [3] who, had we not some help from 
France, would undoubtedly ruin here both the faith 
and commerce. There is hardly an open passage left 
for us to reach the Hurons; our baggage last year 
was taken going up,- this year, coming down. At 
this writing, I learn that it is now captured for the 
third time on the way upward; and therefore we are 
obliged to send to your Reverence Father Ie Jeune, 
as one of long experience in the affairs of these re- 
gions, that he may more effectually represent them to 
those whose thoughts are favorable to this poor land. 
Such has been the ad vice and desire of Monsieur de 
Montmagny, our Governor, and of all the inhabit- 
ants, who have urgently besought me to the same 
end. I doubt not that your Reverence's charity will 
effectually embrace the cause of God and the salva- 
tion of these peoples, forsaken throughout so many 
generations; every year we experience the singular 
fruits of your cordial and fatherly affection; and 
above all I beseech the help of your Holy Sacrifices 
and of all our Fathers and Brethren who are under 
your charge. 



270 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


[4] CHAPITRE PRE1IIER. 


DE LA RESIDENCE DE QUEBEC & DE L'ESTAT DE LA 
COLONIE. 


L A Colonie des François eft Ie premier moyen & 
l'vnique fondement de la conueru.on de tous 
ces peuples: on ne peut mieux ny plus efficace- 
ment procurer leur falut qu'en fecourant cefte peu- 
plade, laquelle graces à Dieu, va peu à peu croiffant, 
furmontant les grands empefchemens qui s'y rencõ- 
trent comme font l' eloignement des fecours d' Eu- 
rope, Ie peu de gens de trauail, la difficulté du 
cõmerce, la longueur de l'Hyuer qui couure la terre, 
cinq, voire fix mois de neiges: nonobfiant tout cela 
chaque famille Françoife, au moins pour la plufpart 
fait maintenant fa petite prouifion de froment, feigle, 
poix, orge, & autres grains neceffaires à la vie hu- 
maine, qui plus qui moins; les vns quafi pour la moi- 
tié de 1'annee, les autres pour vne [5] partie: & com- 
mencent à cognoiftre Ie genie du lieu, & les faifons 
propres à la culture de la terre, l'ouurage eft bien 
commencé, i1 a encor befoin de fecours: mais il 
auance notablement graces à Dieu. V ous voyez de 
plus en chaque maÏfon quantité d'enfans, biens-faits, 
& de bon efprit, & ce qui eft de principal en tous vn 
deu.r ardent de fon falut, & vne eftude particuliere 
de la vertu. II sëble que la refolution de fe donner 
entierement à Dieu naift auec la penfee de s'eftablir 
en la Nouuelle France. Ce n'eft pas une petite 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642-43 


271 


[4] CHAPTER FIRST. 


OF THE RESIDENCE AT QUEBEC, AND THE STATE OF 
THE COLONY. 


T HE French Colony is the chief means and only 
foundation for the conversion of all these 
tribes: there is no better or more efficacious 
way of procuring their salvation than by succoring 
this settlement, which, thanks be to God, increases 
little by little, and overcomes the great impediments 
it encounters,-as the remoteness of help from 
Europe, the scarcity of laborers, difficulties of trade, 
and the long \Vinter which covers the earth, five and 
even six months, with snow. Notwithstanding all 
these hindrances, nearly every French household 
now provides its little store of wheat, rye, peas, bar- 
ley, and other grains necessary to the life of man,- 
some more, some less,- some making provision for 
haply six months; others, for only a [5] part of that 
time. N ow they begin to understand the nature of 
the place, and the right seasons for tilling the soil. 
The work is well started: it still has need of help, 
but, thanks be to God, it makes notable progress. 
:Moreover, in every household you will see many chil- 
dren, comely and of good wit; and in them all you 
will find what is most important,-a warm desire for 
their own salvation, and a singular zeal for virtue. 
It would seem that the purpose of entire devotion to 
God is born with the thought of establishing oneself 
in New France. Nor is this a small favor of God to 



2i2 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


faueur de Dieu, fur Ie pays; elle a toufiours paru & 
paroift encor de nouueau plus que iamais en la per- 
fonne de Mellieurs de la Cõpagnie de Montreal, & de 
tous ceux qui demeurent par-deça en leur habitatiõ. 
La Frãce en void vne partie nous voyons icy l'autre. 
Au refte il feroit difficile d' expliquer les foins & les 
peines que Monfieur de Mõtmagny noftre Gouuerneur 
a pris & prëd encor tous les iours pour applanir les 
difficultez de la Colonie, tout autre auroit cent fois 
perdu courage. Le Pere Breffany a eu foin cette 
annee de l'inftruétion [6J des François, de Quebec: 
il s'en eft dignement acquité, & a fait vn fruiét nota- 
ble par fes Predications. Le Pere Enemond Maffe 
l'a affifté: & quoy que caffé d'[aJage, il a genereufe- 
ment trauaillé, fuppleãt aux forces, par fon courage, 
auec grande edification de tous les habitans. Le Pere 
de Brebeuf & moy venions toutes les Feftes & Di- 
manches de Sillery à Quebec pour les aider à entëdre 
les Confellions, & pour faire vn mot d'exhortation 
aux François, & contribuer à la confolation de tous. 
N oftre Seigneur a appellé à foy cette année Ie Pere 
Charles Raymbault" c'eft Ie premier Religieux de 
noftre Compagnie qui foit mort en ces quartiers icy. 
11 auoit vn zele tres-grand pour I' eftabliffement de 
la Colonie Françoife, & pour la conuerfion de ces 
peuples: il auoit procuré en France quelques années 
les affaires de noftre Million auec beaucoup de pru- 
dence & de charité, fon zele Ie porta à demander auec 
inftance d'eftre du nombre des ouuriers de cette nou- 
uelle Eglife: Ce qui luy fut accordé, il fut enuoyé 
il y a quatre ans aux Hurons, [7] à la Requefie de 
nos Peres qui font là, qui cognoiffoient fa prudence 
& fon courage, ils efperoient s'en feruir pour la 



1642-43J 


RELA TION OF ró42-4.J 


273 


the land; it has ever appeared, and is manifest still 
more than ever in the persons of the Gentlemen in 
the Company of Montreal, and of all the dwellers in 
their settlement on this side. France may see this 
favor in part; we here see the rest. After all, it 
would be a difficult task to set forth the care and 
pains continually taken by l\Ionsieur de 
lontmagny, 
our Governor, both hitherto and now, in relieving 
the Colony's hardships,-wherein all others would 
have lost courage, times without number. Father 
Bressany has had charge this year of the religious 
instruction [6] of the French at Quebec; which office 
he has worthily fulfilled, and has produced remark- 
able effects by his Preaching. He has been assisted 
by Father Enemond :Masse, who has nobly labored, 
though broken with age,- supplying by courage his 
want of strength, unto the great edification of all the 
residents. Father de Brebeuf and I went every 
Feast day and Sunday from Sillery to Quebec. to help 
them in hearing the Confessions, to speak a word of 
exhortation to the French, and to minister to the 
consolation of all. 
Our Lord has called to himself, this year, Father 
Charles Raymbault, the first Religious of our Society 
to die in these quarters. He was very zealous for the 
establishment of the French Colony, and for the con- 
version of these tribes; he had managed the affairs 
of our :Mission with much prudence and fervor, 
during several years in France, and the same zeal 
prompted him to ask urgently that he be numbered 
with the laborers of this new Church. His request 
being granted, he was sent four years ago to the 
Hurons, [7] at the Request of our Fathers there, who, 
knowing his prudence and courage, hoped to employ 



274 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


defcouuerture de quelques nations plus efloignées, & 
comme la langue Algonquine y eft neceffaire, on 
l'ennuoya aux Nipiffiriniens peuples Algonquins auec 
Ie P. Claude Piiart, où les voyages & les trauaux 
font incroyables, il y gaigna vne maladie lente qu'il 
Ie confommoit peu à peu: Ce qui obligea nos Peres 
de l'enuoyer icy-bas, où la commodité de viures & de 
remedes eft plus grande, mais noftre bon Dieu Ie 
trouua mur pour Ie Ciel, il mourut l'an paffé Ie 22. 
d'Oétobre, aprés vne langueur de trois mois qu'il 
paffa dans vne grande tranquillité d'efprit, vne enti- 
ere cõformité à la volõte de Dieu, & vne cõfolatioõ 
bien particuliere de mourir en la nouuelle Frãce, & 
d'auoir gaigné sõ mal en trauaillãt pour Ie falut des 
Sauuages. :Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur, qui eftimoit fa 
vertu defira qu'il fuft enterré prés du corps de feu 
Monfieur de Champlain, qui eft dans vn fepulchre 
particulier, erigé exprés pour honorer la memoire 
de ce fignalé [8] perfonnage qui a tant obligé la 
Nouuelle France. 
I' adiouftera y icy vn mot de la vie & de la mort de 
Monfieur Nicollet, Interprete & Commis de Meffieurs 
de la Compagn[i]e de la N ouuelle France, il mourut 
dix iours apres Ie Pere, il auoit demeuré vingt-cinq 
ans en ces quartiers. Ce que i'en diray feruira pour 
la cognoiffance du pays, il arriua en la N ouuelle 
France, l'an mil fix cents dix-huit, fon humeur & fa 
memoire excellente firent efperer quelque chofe de 
bõ de luy, on l'enuoya hiuerner auec les Algonquins 
de l'Ifle, afin d'aprendre leur "langue, il y demeura 
deux ans feul de François, accompagnant toufiours les 
Barbares dans leurs courfes & voyages, auec des fati- 
gues qui ne font imaginables qu'à ceux qui les ont 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF ró42-43 


275 


him for the discovery of some remoter nations. And, 
as the Algonquin speech was necessary for this, they 
sent him, in company with Father Claude Pijart, to 
the Nipissiriniens, an Algonquin people,- in which 
mission, journeys and labors are past belief. There 
he was seized with a slow sickness, which wasted 
him little by little, insomuch that our Fathers had 
to send him down here, for greater convenience of 
food and medicine. But our good God found him 
ripe for Heaven; and, on October 22nd of last year, 
he died, after languishing during the space of three 
months,-which he spent in great peace of mind, in 
full resignation to the will of God, and with a very 
special solace at dying in new France, and having 
gained his disease while working for the salvation of 
the Savages. l\Ionsieur the Governor, esteeming 
his virtue, desired that he be buried near the body 
of the late 
lonsieur de Champlain; which is in a 
separate tomb, erected expressly to honor the re- 
membrance of that illustrious [8] personage, to whom 
New France has owed so much. 
I will now speak of the life and death of :Monsieur 
Nicollet, Interpreter and Agent for the Gentlemen of 
the Company of New France. He died ten days after 
the Father [Raymbault], and had lived in this region 
twenty-five years. \Vhat I shall say of him will 
aid to a better understanding of the co un try. He 
came to New France in the year sixteen hundred and 
eighteen; and forasmuch as his nature and excellent 
memory inspired good hopes of him, he was sent to 
winter with the Island Algonquins, in order to learn 
their language. He tarried with them two years, 
alone of the French, and always joined the Barba- 
rians in their excursions and journeys,- undergoing 



276 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


(VOL. 23 


veües, il paffa plufieurs fois les fept & huiét iours 
fans rien manger, il fut fept femaines entieres fans 
autre nourriture qu'vn peu d'efcorce de bois: il 
accompagna quatre cents Algonquins, qui alloient en 
ce temps là faire la paix auec les Hyroquois, & en 
vint à bout heureufement; [9J pleuft à Dieu qu'elle 
n'euft iamais efté rompuë, nous ne fouffririons pas à 
prefent les calamitez qui nous font gemir, & donne- 
ront vn eftrange empefchemêt à la conuerfion de ces 
peuples. Apres cette paix faite, il alIa demeurer 
huiét ou neuf ans auec la nation des Nipiffir[in]iens, 
Algonquins, là il paffoit pour vn de cette nation, 
entrant dans les confeils forts frequents à ces peuples, 
ayant fa cabane & fon mefnage à part, faifant fa 
pefche & fa traitte, il fut enfin rappellé & eftably 
Commis & Interprete. Pendant qu'il exerçoit cet[t]e 
charge, il fut delegué pour faire vn voyage en la 
nation appelIée des Gens de mer, & traiter la paix 
auec eux, & les Hurons, defquels ils font efloignés, 
tirant vers l'Oüeft d'enuiron trois cents lieuës. 11 
s'embarqua aux pays des Hurons auec fept Sauuages, 
ils pafferent par quantité de petites nations, en allant 
& en reuenant, lors qu'ils y arriuoient, ils fichoient 
deux baftonens [sc. baftons en] terre, auquel ils pen- 
doient des prefens, afin d'ofter à ces peuples la pen- 
fée de les prendre pour ennemis, & de les maffacrer. 
A deux iournées de cette nation il [10] enuoya vn de 
ces Sauuages porter la nouuelle de la paix, laquelle 
fut bien receuë, nommément quand on entendit que 
c'eftoit vn European qui portoit la parole, on depef- 
cha plufieurs ieunes gês pour aller au deuant du 
Manitouiriniou, c' eft à dire de l'homme merueilleux: 
on y vient, on Ie conduit, on porte tout fon bagage, 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642-43 


277 


such fatigues as none but eyewitnesses can con- 
ceive; he often passed seven or eight days without 
food, and once, full seven weeks with no other nour- 
ishment than a little bark from the trees. He 
accompanied four hundred Algonquins, who went 
during that ti.me to make peace with the Hyroquois, 
which he successfully accomplished; [9J and would 
to God that it had never been broken, for then we 
would not now be suffering the calamities which move 
us to groans, and which must be an extraordinary 
impediment in the way of converting these tribes. 
After this treaty of peace, he went to live eight or 
nine years with the Algonquin Nipissiriniens, where 
he passed for one of that nation, taking part in the 
very frequent councils of those tribes, having his 
own separate cabin and household, and fishing and 
trading for himself. He was finally recalled, and 
appointed Agent and Interpreter. While in the 
exercise of this office, he was delegated to make a 
journey to the nation called People of the sea, and 
arrange peace between them and the Hurons, from 
whom they are distant about three hundred leagues 
\Vestward. He embarked in the Huron country, 
with seven Savages; and they passed by many small 
nations, both going and returning. \Vhen they 
arrived at their destination, they fastened two sticks 
in the earth, and hung gifts thereon, so as to relieve 
these tribes from the notion of lnistaking them for 
enemies to be massacred. When he was two days' 
journey from that nation, he [IOJ sent one of those 
Savages to bear tidings :of the peace, which word 
was especially well received when they heard that 
it was a European who carried the message; they 
despatched several young men to meet the 
Ianitoui- 



2ï8 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[Y OL. 23 


il eftoit reueftu d'vne grande robbe de damas de la 
Chine, to ute parfemée de fleurs, & d'oyfeaux de 
diuerfes couleurs: Si toft qu'on l'apperceut, toutes 
les femmes & les enfans s'enfuïrent, voyant vn 
homme porter Ie tonnerre en ces deux mains. C'eft 
ainfi qu'ils nommoiët deux piftolets qu'il tenoit, la 
nouuelle de fa venuë s'efpandit incontinent aux lieu 
circonuoifins, il fe fift vne affemblée de quatre ou 
.cinq mil hommes, chacù des principaux fift sõ feftin, 
en l'vn defquels on feruit au moins fix vingt Caftors, 
la paix fut concluë, il retourna aux Hurons, & dela 
à quelque tëps aux trois Riuieres, où il continua fa 
charge de Commis & Interprete auec vne fatisfaétion 
grande des François & des Sauuages, defquels il 
eftoit efgalement & vniquement [I I] aymé, il confpi- 
roit puiffamment, autant que fa charge Ie permettoit 
auec nos Peres pour la conuerfion de ces peuples 
lefquels il fçauoit manier & tourner où il vouloit 
d'vne dexterité qui à peine trouuerra fon pareil. 
Monfieur Oliuier Commis General de 
ieffieurs de la 
Cõpagnie, eftãt venu l'an paffé en France, ledit fieur 
:Kicollet defcendit à Quebec en fa place, auec vne 
ioye & confolation fenfible qu'il eut de fe voir dans 
la paix, & la deuotion de Quebec, mais il n'en ioüit 
pas long temps: car vn mois ou deux aprés fon 
arriuée, faifant vn voyage aux trois Riuieres pour 
la deliurance d'vn prifonnier Sauuage, fon zele luy 
coufta la vie qu'il perdit dans Ie naufrage, il s'em- 
barqua à Quebec fur les fept heures du foir, dans la 
chalouppe de Monfieur de Sauigny, qui tiroit vers les 
trois Riuieres, ils n'eftoient pas encore arriuez à Sil- 
lery qu'vn coup de vent de 
 ord-Eft, qui auoit excité 
vne horrible tempefte fur la grande riuiere, remplit 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642-43 


279 


riniou,-that is to say, " the wonderful man." They 
meet him; they escort him, and carryall his bag- 
gage. He wore a grand robe of China damask, all 
strewn with flowers and birds of many colors. No 
sooner did they perceive him than the women and 
children fled, at the sight of a man who carried thun- 
der in both hands,- for thus they called the two 
pistols that he held. The news of his coming quick- 
ly spread to the places round about, and there assem- 
bled four or five thousand men. Each of the chief 
men made a feast for him, and at one of these ban- 
quets they served at least sixscore Beavers. The 
peace was concluded; he returned to the Hurons, 
and some time later to the three Rivers, where he 
continued his employment as Agent and Interpreter, 
to the great satisfaction of both the French and the 
Savages, by whom he was equally and singularly 
[I I] loved. In so far as his office allowed, he vigor- 
ously coäperated with our Fathers for the conversion 
of those peoples, whom he could shape and bend 
howsoever he would, with a skill that can hardly be 
matched. 110nsieur Olivier, Chief Agent of the Gen- 
tlemen of the Company, having gone to France last 
year, sieur Nicollet came down to Quebec in his- 
place, with joy and lively consolation at sight of the 
peace and devotion at Quebec: but his joy was not 
long. A month or two after his arrival, he made a 
journey to the three Rivers for the deliverance of a 
Savage prisoner; which zeal cost him his life, in a 
shipwreck. He sailed from Quebec, toward seven 
0' clock in the evening, in the shallop of 110nsieur de 
Savigny, bound for the three Rivers. Before they 
reached Sillery, a gust of wind from the Northeast, 
which had raised a horrible storm upon the great 



280 


LES RELA TIOJ\/S DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL 23 


la chalouppe d'eau, & la coula à fond, apres luy auoir 
fait faire deux ou trois tours dans l'eau. [12] Ceux 
qui efioient de dans n'allerent pas incontinent à fond, 
ils s'attacherent quelque temps à la chalouppe. :Mon- 
fieur Nicollet eut loifir de dire à Monfieur de Saui- 
gny, Monfieur fauuez-vous, vous fçauez nager. Ie 
ne Ie fçay pas? pour moy ie m'en vay à Dieu. Ie 
vous recommande ma femme & ma fille, les vagues 
les arracherent tous les vns aprés les autres de la cha- 
louppe qui fiottoit renuerfée contre vne roche. Mon- 
fieur de Sauigny feu I fe ietta à l'eau & nagea parmy 
des fiots & les vagues, qui reffembloiêt à de petites 
montagnes, la chalouppe n'efioit pas bien loin du 
riuag
, mais il efioit nuiét toute noire, & faifoit vn 
froid afpre, qui auoit des-ia glacé les bors de la riuiere, 
ledit fieur de Sauigny s'entant [sc. fentant] Ie cæur & 
les forces qui luy manquoient, fifi vn væu à Dieu, & 
peu aprés frappant du pied il fent la terre, & fe tirant 
hors de l'eau, s'en vint en nofire maifon à Sillery à 
demy mort, il demeura affez long-temps fans pouuoir 
parler, puis enfin il no us racompta Ie funefie accident, 
qui outre la mort de Monfieur Nicollet, dommageable 
à tout Ie pays, [13] luy auoit perdu trois de fes meil- 
leurs homme, & vne gran de partie de fon meuble, 
& de fes prouifions, luy & Madamoifelle fa femme 
ont porté cette perte fignalée dãs vn pays barbare, 
auec vne grande patience & refignation à la volonté 
de Dieu, & fans rien diminuer de leur courage. Les 
Sauuages de Sillery au bruit .du nauffrage de Mon- 
fieur Nicollet, courent fur Ie lieu, & ne Ie voyant 
plus paroifire en tefmoignent des regrets indicibles. 
Ce n' efioit pas la premiere fois que cét homme s' efioit 
expofe au danger de la mort pour Ie bien & Ie falut 



1642 -43J 


RELA TION OF I642-43 


281 


river, filled the shallop with water and caused it to 
sink, after two or three turns in the waves. [12] 
The passengers did not immediately sink, but clung 
for some time to the shallop. :Monsieur Nicollet 
had leisure to say to Monsieur de Savigny, " Sir, 
save yourself; you can swim. I cannot; as for me, 
I depart to God. I commend to you my wife and 
my daughter." One by one, the waves tore them all 
from the shallop, which was floating overturned 
against a rock. :Monsieur de Savigny alone plunged 
into the water, and swam amid the billows and 
waves, which were like small mountains. The shal- 
lop was not very far from shore, but it was now black 
night, and there prevailed a sharp frost, which had 
already frozen the borders of the stream; so that the 
sieur de Savigny, perceiving his heart and strength 
fail, made a vow to God, and, soon afterward strik- 
ing with his foot, he felt the ground. Drawing him- 
self out of the water, he came to our house at Sillery, 
half dead, and remained a long time without strength 
to speak; then at last he told us of the woeful mis- 
chance, which, besides the death of Monsieur Nicol- 
let, so grievous for all the country, [13] had lost him 
three of his best men, and a great part of his furni- 
ture and stores. He and 1Iadamoiselle his wife 
endured this notable affliction in a barbarous country 
with great patience and resignation to the will of 
God, and without abating a jot of their courage. 
The Savages of Sillery, at the noise of Monsieur 
Nicollet's shipwreck, ran to the spot, and manifested 
unspeakable grief to see him appear no more. This 
was not the first time that this man had exposed him- 
self to the peril of death for the weal and salvation 
of the Savages,- he did so very often, and left us 



282 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


des Sauuages, il l' a faiét fort fouuent, & nous à laiffe 
des exemples qui font au deffus de l'eftat d'vn homme 
marié, & tiennet de la vie Apoftolique, & laiffent vne 
enuie au plus feruent Religieux de l'imiter. Douze 
iours aprés leur naufrage Ie prifonnier, pour la deli- 
urance duquel il s'eftoit embarqué, arriua icy. Mõ- 
fieur des Roches commandãt aux trois Riuieres, fui- 
uant l'ordre de :Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur l'auoit racheté, 
il mit pied à terre à Sillery, & de là fut conduit à 
I'Hofpital pour eftre penfé des playes & [14] bleffures 
que les AIgõquins luy auoient fait apres fa capture, 
Hluy auoiet emporté la chair des bras, en quelques 
endroits iufques aux os, les Religieufes hofpitalieres, 
Ie receurent auec beaucoup de charité, & Ie firent pen- 
fer fort foigneufement, en forte qu'en trois femaines 
ou vn mois il fut en eftat de retourner en fon pays, 
tous nos Neophytes luy tefmoignerent autant de com- 
paffion & de charité que les AIgõquins de là haut luy 
auoient montré de cruauté, ils luy donnerent deux 
bons Sauuages Chreftiens, pour Ie conduire iufques 
aux pays des Abnaquiois, qui font voifins de fa 
nation, Charles Meiafcha
at affez cogneu és prece- 
dentes Relations, & dont ie feray encor mention cy- 
aprés, fut vn des deux deftinez à Ie remener, il fut 
rauy d'aife de faire ce voyage, & auoir cette occafion 
de pouuoir parler de noftre fainéte foyaux Abna- 
quiois & autres nations voifines. Au refte tout l'hy- 
uer s'eft paffé à Quebec, dans la paix & la deuotiõ 
accouftumee, mais tout Ie Printemps n'a efté qu'vne 
continuation de plufieurs nouuelles affiigeantes du 
cofté [15J des Hiroquois, apres lefquelles font furue- 
nuës les plus trifles, & les plus funeftes qui euffent 
iamais peu nous arriuer: c' eft la mort du grand 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642-43 


283 


examples beyond one's expectations from a married 
man, which recall Apostolic times, and inspire even 
the most fervent Religious with a desire to imitate 
him. Twelve days after their shipwreck, the pris- 
oner for whose deliverance he had embarked arrived 
here. Monsieur des Roches, commander at the three 
Rivers, had ransomed him, according to :Monsieur 
the Governor's order. He came ashore at Sillery, 
and was thence conducted to the Hospital, to be 
dressed for the sores and [14] wounds inflicted by the 
Algonquins after his capture. They had stripped 
the flesh from his arms, in some places even to the 
bones; but the hospitable Nuns received him with 
much charity and had him dressed with such care 
that in three weeks or a month he was able to return 
to his own country. All our Neophytes showed him 
no less compassion and charity than the Algonquins 
up there had shown him cruelty. They gave him 
two kind Christian Savages to guide him unto the 
lands of the Abnaquiois, who are neighbors to his 
nation. Charles 1Ieiaschawat, well known in the 
former Relations, and whom I shall again mention 
hereinafter, was one of those appointed to conduct 
him back. He was exceedingly glad to make this 
journey, and to have this opportunity of speaking of 
our holy faith to the Abnaquiois and other neigh- 
boring peoples. In fine, the entire winter at Quebec 
passed with its wonted peace and devotion; but the 
whole of Spring was one continued season of mani- 
fold heavy tidings from the direction [15] of the 
Hiroquois. Then came the saddest and most woeful 
news that could ever have reached us,- the death of 
great Louys the Just, which grieved the Christian 
Savages equally with the French since those esteemed 



284 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


Louys Ie Iufte, qui a autant attrifté les Sauuages 
Chreftiens que les François, ceux-Ià ne s'eftimants 
pas moins fes naturels fubiets, que ceux cy, auffi a-on 
toufiours tafché de les obliger à Ie recognoiftre pour 
leur fouuerain, & à conferuer pour luy leur affeétiõ 
toute entiere, la fouuenance des prefens qui leur 
auoit fait autrefois eftoit encore fi fraifche, qu'a la 
premiere nouuelle qu'ils en eurent, on les vit tous 
abbatus, nous eufmes peine à les confoler, n'ayant 
pas moins befoin de confolation qu'eux dans la perte 
d'vn fi bon Prince: ils s'appaiferent vn peu quand on 
leur dit qu'il viuoit encore en la persõne de fon fils, 
qui auoit fuccedé à fes Eftats & à fa Couronne, & 
s'en allerent prier Dieu pour luy. 
A cefte trifte nouuelle on en adioufta vne autre 
qui renouuella l'affiiétion, ce fut Ie decez de Monfieur 
Ie Cardinal Due, qui outre Ie foin qu'il auoit pour 
l'ancienne Frãce, n'oublioit pas la nouuelle, laquelle 
[16] parmy fes gran des difficultez, & parmy fes 
dangers refpiroit au fouuenir & aux promeffez de ce 
grand cæur, & attendoit auec ioye & efperance vn 
fecours neceffaire, lors qu'on nous annonça fa mort. 
Quand nous nous fouuenions cét Ryuer de ce que 
Madame la Ducheffe d'Eguillon, & Madame la Con- 
teffe de Brienne qui ont toufiours fi puiffammêt porté 
les interefts de la Colonie & des Sauuages nous en 
efcriuoient, & les fecours tres-certains que nous en 
efperiõs les plus grands maux nous fembloient bien 
petits; mais i1 a pleu à Dieu en difpofer autrement 
par des fecrets de fon infinie fageffe qui nous font 
incognus. I'efpere pourtant que nous ne ferons point 
fruftrez de nos efperances, puifque les perfonnes 
aufquelles la diuine prouidence a mis en main Ie 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642-43 


285 


themselves his natural subjects no less than these; 
and therefore had we ever sought to oblige them to 
acknowledge him for their sovereign, and yield him 
their fullest affection. The remembrance of his 
former gifts to them was still so fresh that, on first 
hearing the news, they were all dejected, and we 
could hardly comfort them, seeing that we had the 
like need of consolation for the loss of so kind a 
Prince. But they were somewhat calmed when told 
that he was yet living in the person of his son, who 
had succeeded to his Estates and Crown; and so they 
went to pray to God for him. 
This sad news was augmented by other tidings, 
which renewed our affliction; this was the death of 
Monsieur the Cardinal Duke, who, besides the care 
that he had for old France, was not forgetful of the 
new, which [16] amid its great difficulties, and its 
dangers, breathed afresh at the remembrance and 
the promises of that great heart, and was with joy 
and hope awaiting a necessary aid, when we learned 
of his death. \Vhen we remembered, that Winter, 
what 11:adame the Duchess d'Eguillon and Madame 
the Countess de Brienne, who have always so vigor- 
ously supported the cause of the Colony and of the 
Savages, wrote to us of him, and the assured help 
that we expected from him, the greatest evils ap- 
peared to us small, indeed; but it has pleased God 
to dispose affairs differently, in the secrets of his 
infinite wisdom, which are to us unknown. I trust, 
however, that we shall not be disappointed in our 
expectations; since the persons to whom divine prov- 
idence has committed the Government of France, 
have no less of zeal and power than they had, to 
succor these poor countries, and contribute to the 



286 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[V OL. 23 


Gouuernement de la France, n'ont pas moins de zele 
& de pouuoir qu'ils auoient pour fecourir ces pauures 
contrees, & contribuer à la conuerfion de ces peuples, 
nous en fommes bien affeurez, nous ne doutons 
aucunement que la diuine bonté qui à fait fucceder 
nofire ieune Roy aux grãdeurs [17] de fon pere, ne 
Ie faffe auffi heritier du zele qu'il auoit pour Ie falut 
de nos Sauuages, & de toutes ces nations. 
Nous fommes auffi bien certains de la bonne volon- 
té & affeétion de la Royne Regente, nous en auons eu 
iufques à prefent des tefmoignages trop euidens, 
pour ne pas receuoir vne confolation fenfible, & des 
efperances bien grandes parmy tant de fafcheux acci- 
dens. En vn mot elle nous monfire vn cæur de 
mere. 
Nous receumes toutes ces trifies nouuelles à la 
fainét lean, par Ie vaiffeau de Mifcou, qui donna iuf- 
ques à Tadouffac les autres nauires de la flotte ont 
tardé cette annee plus que iamais, ce qui nous efioit 
vn notable furcroifi d'affliétion, & aux Sauuages auffi. 
Nous commencions à craindre quelque nouueau mal- 
heur. En fin Dieu nous les dõna en l'heureux iour 
de l' Affomption de nofire-Dame. Comme nous alli- 
ons commencer la Meffe deux voiles parurent à vne 
lieüe de nofire port, la ioye & la confolatiõ faifirët Ie 
cæur de tous les habitãs, mais elle redoubla bien fort 
quand vne [18] chalouppe nous vint donner la nou- 
ueUe des perfonnes qui y efioient: Ie P. Quëtin auec 
trois braues ouuriers Religieux de no fire Compagnie, 
& tres-propres à la langue, fçauoir, les Peres Leonard 
Garreau, Gabriel Druillet, & Noël Chabanel. II y 
auoit auffi trois Religieufes bien choifies, & dont Ie 
courage furpaffe Ie fexe, fçauoir la :\1:ere Marie de 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642-43 


287 


conversion of these peoples. We are well assured, we 
nowise doubt, that the divine goodness which has 
made our young King succeed to the grandeurs [17] 
of his father, will also make him heir to the zeal 
which he had for the salvation of our Savages and of 
all these nations. 
Weare also very certain of the good will and affec- 
tion of the Queen Regent, of which we have hitherto 
had proofs too manifest not to receive a sensible 
consolation and very strong hopes amid so many 
grievous accidents. In a word, she shows for us a 
mother's heart. 
We received all these sad tidings on saint John's 
day, by the 11:iscou vessel, which came as far as Ta- 
doussac; the other ships of the fleet were later than 
ever this year, which was a notable increase of afflic- 
tion to us, and also to the Savages. vVe were begin- 
ning to fear some new misfortune. Finally, God 
sent them to us, on the holy day of our Lady's 
Assumption. As we were about to begin Mass, two 
sails appeared a league distant from our port; joy 
and consolation seized the hearts of all the inhabit- 
ants, but it very greatly redoubled when a [18] shal- 
lop came and brought us the news of the persons 
who were there: Father Quentin, with three worthy 
workers. Religious of our Society. and very apt for 
the language - to wit. Fathers Leonard Garreau,13 
Gabriel Druillet. and N oël Chabane1. 14 There were 
also three well-chosen Nuns. whose courage exceeds 
their sex - to wit. 11:other 11arie de Ste. Geneviefve.l
 
and Mother Anne de S1. Joachim. Hospital nuns from 
the house of Diepe; and 11:other Anne des Seraph ins. 
Ursuline. from the Convent of Plermel in Brittany. 
It required great strength for these good women to 



288 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


S. Geneuiefue, & la M. Anne de S. Ioachim, Hofpi- 
taliere[s] de la maifon de Diepe, & Ia M. Anne des 
Seraph ins, Vrfuline du Conuent de Plermel en Bre- 
tagne. Il a fallu vne grande force à ces bõnes filles 
pour furmonter les dangers de l'Ocean, la crainte du 
pays Barbare, & Ies difcours importuns de ceux qui 
ont voulu les deftourner en France d'vne fi fainéte 
entreprife. 110nfieur d' Alibouft tres-honnefte, & tres- 
vertueux Gentil-homme, aiIocié en la Compagnie 
de Meffieurs de Montreal auec fa .femme, & fa belle 
freur de pareil courage & vertu eftoient dans vn de 
ces deux nauires: toute cette fainéte troupe aborda 
à Kebec, & fe vint confacrer à Dieu & au falut des 
Sauuages, fous Ia proteétion & la [19] faueur de rEm- 
periere de l'Vniuers, I'oubliois la pieté d'vn hõnefte 
Preftre nõmé M. Chartrier, qui grofiiIoit la troupe, 
& eft venu fe dõner au feruice des Meres Vrfulines, 
auec defir & deiIein de feruir Dieu en ces pays Ie 
refte de fes iours, & contribuer ce qu'il pourra de 
force & d'induftrie pour Ie falut des Sauuages. 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642-4J 


289 


overcome the dangers of the Ocean, the fear of the 
Barbarous country, and the importunate words of 
those who wished to turn them aside in France from 
so holy an enterprise. Monsieur d' Aliboust, 16 a very 
honest and most virtuous Gentleman, associated in 
the Society of Gentlemen of 1:1ontreal. with his wife 
and his sister-in-law, of similar courage and virtue, 
were in one of these ships: all this blessed company 
landed at Kebec, and came to consecrate itself to 
God and to the salvation of the Savages, under the 
protection and the [19] favor of the Empress of the 
Universe. I was forgetting the piety of an honest 
Priest named :Monsieur Chartrier, 17 who increased 
the company, and came to devote himself to the 
service of the Ursuline Mothers, with the desire and 
purpose of serving God in this country the rest of his 
days, and contributing what he can, in the way of 
strength and industry, to the salvation of the Savages. 



290 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


CHAPITRE II. 


DU SEMINAIRE DES VRSULINES. 


P VISQUE les Meres Vrfulines font eftablies à 
Quebec, ie mettray icy en fuite ce qui les 
regarde. Ce Seminaire eft vn des plus beaux 
ornemens de la Colonie, & vn ayde fignaIé pour 
l' arreft & conuerfion des Sauuages. Elles allerent en 
leur nouueau logis, quittant celuy qu'elles tenoient à 
loüage Ie 2 I. Nouembre l'an paffé, iour auquel la 
tres-fainéte Vierge fe confacra à Dieu dans Ie temple, 
leur [20] baftiment eft grand & folide, fait à chaux 
& à fable. Elles ont trouué vne affez belle fontaine 
dans les fondemens du logis qui leur eft extremément 
commode. Elles font en lieu d'affeurance autant 
qu'il eft poffible dans Ie Canada, eftant placee à 80. 
ou 100. pas du fort de Kebec. Elles ont eu toufiours 
vn affez bon nombre de filles Sauuages, tant penfion- 
naires arreftees que paffageres outre les petites filles 
Francoifes, & quantité de Sauuages, hommes & fem- 
mes qui les vont fouuent vifiter & receuoir quelque 
fecours & inftruétion. V oicy en particulier ce qui 
s'eft paffé cette annee dans cette fainéte maifon. Les 
petites filles feminariftes ont excellé dans Ie foin de 
fe preparer à la fainéte Communion, elles l'ont ordi- 
nairement demandee 8. iours auparauant que s'en 
approcher. Elles employoient ce temps à s'y dif- 
pofer, elles fe iettoient queIquefois à genoux deuant 
leur maiftreffe, pour tefmoigner leur defir, & luy 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I6p-43 


291 


CHAPTER II. 


OF THE URSULINE SEMINARY. 


S INCE the Ursuline :Mothers are established at 
Quebec, I will here set forth what pertains to 
them. This Seminary is one of the fairest orna- 
ments of the Colony, and a marked help for the 
detention and conversion of the Savages. The sis- 
ters went into their new dwelling, quitting the one 
which they held by lease, on the 21st of November 
of last year, day on which the most blessed Virgin 
consecrated herself to God in the temple. Their [20] 
building is large and substantial, and thoroughly and 
carefully constructed. They have discovered an ex- 
cellent spring of water in the foundations of the dwell- 
ing, to their very great convenience. They are in 
a place of safety so far as is possible in Canada, being 
located from 80 to 100 paces from the fort of Kebec. 
They have always had a fairly good number of 
Savage girls, both permanent and temporary boarders, 
besides the little French girls: and many Savages, 
men and women, often come to visit them and to 
receive some help and instruction. Here are some 
details of the events of this year in that holy house. 
The little seminary girls have excelled in care to 
prepare themselves for holy Communion, which they 
have usually asked 8 days before approaching it. 
They would spend this time in preparation for it: 
sometimes they would cast themselves on their knees 
before their mistress, in order to manifest their 



292 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


declarer les intentions qu'elles auoient pour appli- 
quer la fainéte Communion, laquelle regarde tou- 
fiours la conuerfion de leur compatriotes [2 I] & Ie 
bien de ceux qui leur font des charitez en France. 
II y en a lefquelles outre les prieres ordinaires & 
l'examen qu'elles font Ie foir, employent encore vn 
bon ef pace de teps à prier Dieu en leur particulier, 
auant que fe coucher. Ces prieres particulieres 
s'addreffent d'ordinaire à la fainéte Vierge. C'eft vn 
grand coup pour leur falut que de leur donner cette 
deuotion. 
Elles difent quelquesfois aux rencontres fort naïfue- 
ment les prieres iaculatoires qu'elles font. Ma Mere, 
difent-elles, ie parle fort fouuent à Dieu dans mon 
cæur. Ie prends grand plaifir à prononcer les fainéts 
noms de Iefus & Marie. Elles font fort facilement 
touchees du remords de leurs pechez, & les declarent 
fort candidement à leurs maiftreffes, & n'ont aucun 
repos qu'elles ne s'en foient confeffees. Les Reli- 
gieufes les ont veuës plufieurs fois s'arrefter à dreffer 
leur intention auant que commencer leurs aétions 
particulieres, & prononcer tout haut Ie nom de Dieu, 
ou de la Vierge, ou de quelque Sainét qu'elles 
vouloien t honorer pour lors. 
[22] Vne Sauuageffe eftant venüe demeurer au 
feminaire pour quelques iours, afin de fe difpofer au 
fainét Baptefme qu'elle fouhaittoit auec ardeur, edifia 
grandement les Religieufes par fa ferueur. Elle les 
preffoit fans ceffe pour eftre inftruite de ce qui eftoit 
neceffaire, elle alloit mefme trouuer toutes les petites 
penfionnaires les vnes apres les autres, pour repeter 
ce qu'on luy auoit donné à apprendre. Vne Reli- 
gieufe l'ayant trouuee vn iour qu'elle fautoit de ioye, 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I6p-43 


293 


desire, and to declare to her their inteiltions of stead- 
fastly applying the holy Communion to the conver- 
sion of their fellow countrymen [2 I] and to the 
good of those who bestow upon them charities in 
France. There are some who, in addition to the cus- 
tomary prayers and the evening examination, spend 
considerable time in private prayer to God, before 
going to sleep. These private prayers are usually 
addressed to the blessed Virgin. It is a great aid to 
their salvation to give them this form of worship. 
They sometimes very artlessly mention in conver- 
sations their ejaculatory prayers. "1Iy Mother," 
they say, " I very often speak to God in my heart. I 
take great pleasure in pronouncing the holy names of 
Jesus and :1Iary." They are very easily touched with 
remorse for their sins, and declare them very candidly 
to their teachers, and have no rest until they have 
made their confession. The Nuns have repeatedly 
seen them stop to fix their attention before beginning 
their private tasks, and pronounce aloud the name of 
God, or of the Virgin, or of some Saint whom they 
wished to honor at that moment. 
[22] A Savage woman, having come to sojourn at 
the seminary for some days,-in order to prepare 
herself for holy Baptism, which she ardently desired,- 
great! y edified the Nuns by her fervor. She inces- 
santly urged them to instruct her in that which was 
necessary; she would even go in quest of all the 
little boarders, one after the other, to rehearse what 
had been given her to learn. A Nun, having one 
day found her leaping for joy, asked her the reason. 
"The Father," she said, "has assured me that I 
should soon be baptized, and that I had learned well." 
A Seminary pupil, named Barbe, having been se- 



294 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


luy en demanda la caufe. Le Pere, dit-elle, m'a 
affeuré que ie ferois bien-toft baptifée, & que i'auois 
bien appris. 
V ne Seminarifte nommee Barbe, ayãt efté rudemèt 
reprife de fa faute, i'ay bien merité cela, dit-elle, car 
moy qui fuis inftruite & baptizee, ie fais bien vne plus 
groffe faute, que celles qui faillent & ne fçauent pas 
encore les prieres. 
Cét enfant a d'excellens fentimens de Dieu, ie luy 
ay fouuent parlé moy-mefme hors du feminaire, elle 
a l'efprit vif, & Ie iugement fort bon, & l'humeur 
docile, elle appartient à vn homme fort [23] groffier 
& charnel, & qu'on na peu encore admettre au bap- 
tefme pour ce fubieét, il Ie fouhaitte, mais il ne veut 
pas encore quitter ces mauuaifes habitudes. Dés 
que cét enfant fçait qu'il s'approche du feminaire, 
elle {e va cachero On la trouua vn iour en vn 
coin toute tranfie de crainte pour ce fubieét, on luy 
demande ce qu'elle a. C'eft Kimichfamifman, cét 
hommes s'appelle ainfi, qui me veut amener. que 
feray-ie? on ne prie point Dieu dans fa cabane, fi 
mefme il en auoit enuie, fa femme l'en empefcheroit, 
on ne fait que du mal là dedans, il n'ya du tout 
qu'vne perfonne qui y prie Dieu, ie ne veux point 
fortir d'auec vous que ie ne fçache lire & efcrire. & 
tout ce qui eft neceffaire pour aller au Ciel, pour- 
uoyez moy quand ie feray grande, afin que ie puiffe 
viure auec les bons Chreftiens de Sillery fans crainte 
de cét homme. 
V ne petite fille aagee de huiét, ou neuf ans fortit 
du feminaire I' Automne dernier, pour retourner auec 
fes parens, & hyuerna auec eux prés du [24] fort de 
Richelieu. Le Printemps venu ils retournèt: cette 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF r6p-4.J 


295 


verely reproved for her fault, " I have well deserved 
that," said she, "for I who am instructed and bap- 
tized commit a much greater fault than they who 
transgress, and have not yet a knowledge of the 
prayers. " 
This child has excellent notions of God; I myself 
have often talked with her outside the seminary. 
She has a lively wit and very good judgment, and a 
docile temper; she belongs to a man very [23] rude 
and carnal, whom, on that account, it has not yet 
been expedient to admit to baptism; he wishes it, 
but he is not yet willing to forsake his bad habits. 
As soon as this child knows that he is approaching 
the seminary, she goes to hide herself. They found 
her one day in a corner, all chilled with fear on that 
account; they asked what ails her. "It is Kimichsa- 
misman, "-that man is thus called,-" who wishes 
to take me away; what shall I do? They do not 
pray to God in his cabin,- even if he desired to, his 
wife would stop him; they do nothing but evil in 
there; there is only one person at all there who 
prays to God. I do not at all wish to go from you 
till I can read and write, and know all that is neces- 
sary for going to Heaven. Provide for me when I 
shall be grown up, so that I can live with the good 
Christians of Sillery without fear of this man." 
A little girl, aged eight or nine years, left the semi- 
nary last Autumn, to return to her parents, and win- 
tered with them near the [24] fort of Richelieu. At 
the coming of Spring, they returned; this poor child 
came to beg the :Mothers to take her back; they 
refused her at first, for some just reasons, and ex- 
pressly because her parents wished to have her. She 
began to weep, and would stay in spite of them, and 



296 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


pauure enfant vint prier les 
1eres de la reprendre, 
elles la refuferent d'abord pour quelques iuftes rai- 
fons, & nommément pource que fes parens la vou- 
loient auoir, elle fe met à pleurer, & veut demeurer 
malgré eux, & malgré les Religieufes, on la renuoya 
pourtant, elle reuint peu apres, on la refufe derechef, 
enfin elle prend l'occafiõ de la Proceffion du S. Sacre- 
ment pour retourner la troifiefme fois. Les Religi- 
eufes faifoient ce iour-Ià feftin aux Sauuages, fes 
parens y eftoient, & lors qu'ils s'en voulurent aller à 
Sillery, la fille s'efchappe d'auec eux, & fe va cou- 
cher aupres la porte des Meres, & leur dit, ie veux 
eftre inftruite, ayez pitié de moy, ie n'ay que faire 
de mes parës pour ce fubiet, la pluye furuient, elle 
ne fe remuëpoint pour cela. Elle euft paffe la nuiét, 
fi fes larmes n'euffent obligé les Religieufes de luy 
ouurir la porte de la maifon, où elle entra comme 
dans vn paradis. La pauure enfant n'a pas l'efprit 
.des plus vifs du monde, elle fait ce qu'elle peut, fa 
bonne volonté fupplée au [25] defaut de l'efprit. 
Nous auons apris des nouuelles de la petite The- 
refe Huronne qui a demeuré deux ans en ce femi- 
naire, & fuft prife l'an paffé par les Hiroquois, auec 
1e Pere Iogues, & auec fon oncle, appellé Iofeph, 
lequel s'eft efchappé à ce Printemps des mains des 
Iroquois. I'en parleray cy-apres plus au long. II 
vint à Kebec apres fa deliurance, & alla falüer les 
Meres Vrfulines. V oicy ce qu'il racontoit de fa 
niepce captiue. Elle n'a point de honte, difoit-il, 
de fon Baptefme. Elle prie publiquement Dieu, elle 
dit qu'elle croit, elle fe confeffe fouuent au P. Iogues, 
elle m'obeyffoit en tout. Ie l'exhortois fouuent de 
bien-faire, & de ne perdre point courage: ie vous 



1642-43] 


RE"LA TION OF r642-43 


297 


in spite of the Nuns; nevertheless, they sent her 
back. She returns soon afterward,- they refuse her 
again; finally, she seizes her opportunity, at the 
Procession of the Blessed Sacrament, to return the 
third time. The Nuns were that day feasting the 
Savages: her parents were there, and, when they 
wished to go away to Sillery, the girl escaped from 
them, and went to lie down near the door of the 
10th- 
ers, saying to them: " I wish to be instructed; have 
pity on me; I have nothing to do with my parents in 
this matter." The rain comes on; she stirs not for 
that. She would have spent the night there, if her 
tears had not constrained the Nuns to open the door 
of the house to her, where she entered, as into a para- 
dise. The poor child has not one of the quickest 
wits in the world,- she does what she can; her good 
will supplies the [25] want of intellect. 
We have learned some news of the little Huron 
Therese who sojourned two years in this seminary, 
and was taken last year by the Hiroquois, with 
Father Jogues, and with her uncle, called Joseph. who 
escaped this Spring from the hands of the Iroquois. 
I will speak of this at more length hereinafter. He 
came to Kebec after his deliverance, and went to 
greet the Ursuline :Mothers. This is what he related 
of his captive niece. "She is not ashamed," he said, 
'c of her Baptism. She prays publicly to God; she 
says that she believes; she often confesses herself to 
Father J ogues; and she obeys me in everything. I 
would often exhort her to do well, and not to lose 
courage. I am much obliged to you, my 110thers," 
the poor man said, C C for the good instructions that 
you have given her,- she forgets them not, she 
knows all that you teach. She speaks to Father 



298 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


fuis bien obligé mes :Meres, difoit Ie pauure homme, 
des bõnes inftruétions que vous luy auez donné, elle 
ne les oublie point, elle fçait tout ce que vous enfei- 
gnez, elle parle au P. Iogues toutes les fois qu'elle Ie 
void cela n'empefche pas qu'elle ne foit gran dement 
trine, viuant parmy nos cruels ennemis, elle a bien 
enduré du froid & des incommoditez l' Hyuer, elle a 
efté fort [26] malade, mais Dieu luya rendu la fanté, 
ie luy difois fouuêt: aye courage, cette vie eft courte, 
tres [sc. tes] trauaux prendront fin, & tu feras bien- 
heureufe au Ciel, fi tu perfeueres, elle n'a point de 
chapelet, elle fe fert de fes doigts pour Ie dire, ou de 
petites pierres qu'elle met à terre a chaque Aue Maria, 
queUe dit, eUe me parloit fouuêt de vous. Helas difoit 
elle, fi les fiUes vierges me voyoient en cét eftat parmy 
ces mefchans Iroquois qui ne cognoiffent pas Dieu, 
qu'eUes auroiët pitié de moy! Ce bon Iofeph racon- 
tant cecy aux Religieufes, eftoit accompagné de trois 
ou quatre autres Hurons qui s'eftoient efchapez auec 
luy. 
Le parloir de ces bonnes fiUes fert fouuent de claffe, 
les Sauuages de dehors y venant exprez les voir, & 
demander à eftre inftruits, ou reciter les prieres, il 
y en a qui ont pris Ie temps que les enfans faifoient 
les prieres ou l'examen, pour entrer au parloir ou en 
la ChapeUe, & fe ioindre à leur deuotiõ. Les Atika- 
megues qui font peuples Montaignets du cofté du 
Nord pendant Ie tëps qu'ils ont feiourné aupres de 
Quebec, ont efté fouuent [27] vifiter les Religieufes 
pour efcouter ou apprendre quelque bon mot, ils 
entroient au parloir foir & matin auec importunité 
mefme pour repeter leurs prieres ou Ie Catechifme. 
Les frais qui fuiuent ces fainétes vifites & inftruétions 



1642-43] 


RELA TIO.N OF J6p-4.J 


299 


J ogues whenever she sees him; but these things do 
not prevent her from being exceedingly sad, living 
among our cruel enemies. She has well endured the 
cold and inconveniences of the Winter; she was very 
[26] sick, but God has restored her health. I would 
often say to her: ' Have courage,- this life is short; 
your labors will have an end, and you will be very 
happy in Heaven, if you persevere.' She has no 
rosary; she uses her fingers to recite it, or little peb- 
bles, that she lays on the ground at each Ave filaria 
that she says. She often spoke to me of you. 'Alas,' 
she said, , if the virgin sisters should see me in this 
condition among these wicked Iroquois who know 
not God, how they would pity me!'" The good 
Joseph, who related this to the Nuns, was accom- 
panied by three or four other H urons who had escaped 
with him. 
The parlor of these good ladies often serves as 
classroom,-the Savages from without coming thith- 
er purposely to see them, and to ask to be instructed, 
or to repeat the prayers; there are some who have 
taken the time when the children were saying their 
prayers or answering questions, to enter the parlor 
or the Chapel, and join in their devotion. The Ati- 
kamegues, who are Montagnais peoples in the direc- 
tion of the North, during the time that they sojourned 
near Quebec, often came [27] to visit the Nuns, in 
order to hear or learn some good word; they would 
enter the parlor evening and morning, with impor- 
tunity even, for the sake of repeating their prayers 
or the Catechism. The expenses attending these 
holy visits and necessary instructions are great and 
unavoidable, and perhaps hardly yield to those 
incurred for the seminary pupils ordinarily detained 



300 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


neceffaires font grands & ineuitables, & ne cedêt 
peut-eftre gueres à ceux qu' on fait pour les femina- 
riftes arreftés d'ordinaire apres l'inftruétion, il faut 
foulager la faim de ces pauures gens. Ie ne dis riê 
icy de Madame de la Pelterie: car il y euft vn an au 
Printemps qu'elle alla à Montreal pour affifter au 
commencement de cette nouuelle & fainéte habita- 
tion. Les Religieufes ont fait aggrandir cette annee 
leur corps de logis pour auoir vne Chapelle, & loger 
dauantage de Religieufes & Seminariftes. II eft vray 
que cette augmentation n'eft bonnement que com- 
mencee, il y refte plus à faire qu'il n'y a de fait, la 
patience gagnera tout. Cette vertu eft Ie miracle du 
Canada. 



1642-43] 


RELATION OF z6p-43 


301 


after the lesson; it is necessary to relieve the hunger 
of these poor people. I say nothing here of Madame 
de la Pelterie; for a year ago from Spring she went 
to Montreal, to be present at the beginning of that 
new and holy settlement. The Nuns have this year 
enlarged their buildings, in order to have a Chapel, 
and to accommodate more Nuns and Seminary pupils. 
It is true that this extension is only just begun,- there 
is more left to do than there has been done; patience 
will conquer everything. This virtue is the miracle 
of Canada. 



302 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


[28] CHAPITRE III. 


DE LA RESIDENCE DE SILLERY, & COM:\IE LES SAU- 
UAGES Y ONT PASSÉ L'ANNEE. 


L A bourgade de S. Iofeph, dite SilIery, difiance 
de Quebec de deux petites lieües efi compofée 
d'enuiron 35. ou 40 familIes de Sauuages Chre- 
fiiens qui s'y font arrefiez, & y demeurent toute 
l' année, excepté les tëps de leur chaffe: à ceux-cy fe 
viennent fouuent ioindre plufieurs de ceux qui font 
encore errans, partie pour receuoir quelque fecours, 
partie pour efire infiruiéts dans les m yfieres de 
nofire fainéte foy. Ce nombre femblera petit à ceux 
qui ne cognoiffent pas ce que c'efi qu'vn Sauuage 
errant: mais affez grand à ceux qui en ont la co- 
gnoiffance, & fçauent la vie que menoient auparauant 
ces pauures miferables. Au refie, quoy qu'il foit 
petit, il n'a pas laiffé d'auoir vne grande efficace, car 
[29] ç'à efié comme la femence du Chrifiianifme 
parmy cette grande Barbarie. La bonne odeur des 
Sauuages qui s'y font retirez, & y font publiquement 
l'exercice de Chrefiien, s'efi refpanduë de tous cofiez. 
Depuis Tadouffac & MisKou iufques aux Hurons quafi 
tous parlent de les imiter. Ces familles arrefiees 
font cõpofees de deux fortes de persõnes, les vns 
Montaignets, les autres Algonquins. Les Montai- 
gnets font ceux qui ont leur pays plus prés de Kebec, 
& s' appellent ainfi, à raifon de nos hautes montaignes. 
Les Algonquins font de plus hault: les derniers font 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF z6p-43 


303 


[28] CHAPTER III. 


OF THE RESIDEKCE AT SILLERY, AKD HOW THE SAV- 
AGES THERE SPENT THE YEAR. 


T HE little village of St. Joseph, called Sillery, two 
scant leagues distant from Quebec, is composed 
of about 35 or 40 families of Christian Savages 
who have settled there, and live there all year, 
except the times for their hunting; these are often 
joined by many of those who are still roving,- partly 
to receive some assistance, partly to be instructed in 
the mysteries of our holy faith. This number will 
seem small to those who are not acquainted with the 
state of a roving Savage; but sufficiently large to 
those who are thus acquainted, and know the life 
which these poor wretches formerly led. Moreover, 
small though it be, it has certainly been very efficient; 
for [29] it has been like the seed of Christianity 
amid this great Barbarism. The good reputation 
of the Savages who have betaken themselves thither, 
and who there publicly exercise their Christian duties, 
has spread abroad on all sides; from Tadoussac and 
:Miskou even to the Hurons, nearly all speak of imi- 
tating them. These resident families are composed 
of two sorts of persons,- one Montagnais, the other 
Algonquins. The Montagnais are those who reside 
nearer Kebec, and are thus called on account of our 
high mountains. The Algonquins are further back; 
the latter are of two sorts,- some are of the Island, 
and from various places, extending toward the Hu- 



304 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


de deux fortes; les vns font de rIlle, & de diuers 
lieux, tirant vers les Hurons, les autres font voifins 
des Montaignets, & comme mellez auec eux. La 
cognoiffance de Dieu & Ie commerce des François de 
Kebec a rendu ceux-cy plus fouples & plus dociles, 
les autres quoy que prefque tous ruinez & reduits à 
rien font demeurez dans vn orgueil eftrange, & nous 
ont donné iufques à prefent de grands empefchemens 
à la conuerfion des autres Algonquins & des Hurons 
mefmes, qui doiuent paffer par [30] leur pays, pour 
venir icy bas. Nous n'auons encore pour toutes ces 
familles arreftees que quatre petites maifons à la 
Françoife, aufquelles nous en allõs Dieu aidant cét 
Automne ioindre deux autres commencees des 
l'Hyuer dernier, par Ie moyen de quelques aumofnes 
qu'on nous a donnees pour ce fubieét. Ce font quel- 
ques perfonnes fignalees en vertu & en merite de 
noftre ancienne France, qui ont entrepris en particu- 
lier l'auancement de quelques-vnes de ces familIes, 
c' eft vn æuure de charité excellemment bien appliqué 
nous en difpofons encore vn autre pour Ie Printemps 
prochain qui fera dediee à fainét François, celuy à 
qui elle eft promife porte defia Ie mefme nom: c'eft 
Ie fouhait & la deuotion d'vne perfonne de merite, de 
noftre ancienne France, qui a de l'affeétion pour nos 
Sauuages, & a choisy cette famille pour luy faire du 
bien, & la tenir comme fienne. Ces maifons font 
bafties moitié de noftre cofté, & moitié du cofté de 
l'Hofpital, qui eft feparé d'auec nous d'vne colline 
ou platon large d'enuiron foixante pas. Les [3 I] 
Montaignets ont choisy noftre cofté: Ies Algonquins 
ont pris celuy de l'Hofpital, Ies principaux Sauuages 
font logez en ces maifons à la Françoife, les autres fe 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I6p-43 


305 


rons; the others are neighbors of the Montagnais, 
and as if mingled with them. The knowledge of 
God, and intercourse with the French of Kebec, has 
rendered the latter more supple and more docile; the 
others, although nearly all ruined and reduced to 
nothing, have remained in a strange pride, and have 
hitherto occasioned us great hindrances to the con- 
version of the other Algonquins, and of the Hurons 
themselves, who are obliged to pass through [30] 
their country, in order to come down hither. We 
have, as yet, for all these resident families only four 
little houses, on the French plan; to these, God help- 
ing, we are going to add this Autumn two others, 
begun last "\Vinter, by means of some alms which have 
been given us for this purpose. Some persons dis- 
tinguished in virtue and in merit, of our old France, 
are the ones who have undertaken in private the 
advancement of some of these families,- it is a work 
of charity excellently well applied. "\Ve are plan- 
ning for still another, for next Spring, which is to 
be dedicated to saint François; the man to whom it is 
promised already bears the same name; such is the 
wish and the devotion of a person of merit, of our 
old France, who has affection for our Savages, and 
has chosen this family for the sake of doing it good, 
and of regarding it as his own. The houses are built 
half on our side, and half on the side of the Hospital, 
which is separated from us by a hill or mound about 
sixty paces wide. The [3 I] l\lontagnais have chosen 
our side, the Algonquins have taken that of the 
Hospital; the principal Savages are lodged in these 
houses on the French plan, the others dwell, in their 
fashion, under cabins of bark,- each on the side 
chosen by his own tribe, waiting until we can procure 



306 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


cabanent à leur facon fous des efcorces, chacun du 
cofté de fon party attendant qu'on leur puiffe auffi 
procurer quelques petits baftimens, comme à leurs 
compagnons la principale vtilité de ces maifons font 
les petits greniers OÙ ils ferrent leurs viures, & leur 
petis meubles, qui auparauant fe diffipoient & fe 
perdoient faute de lieu à les conferuer. On n'a pas 
peu en faire dauantage: car à proportion des maifons, 
il faut aider à deferter des terres à ceux qui font logez, 
du commencement nous auions moyen de nourrir 
huiét hommes de trauail à Sillery, ils font à prefent 
reduits à quatre, & encore nous efcrit on de France 
que Ie fond de la donation de feu 
1:onfieur de Sillery 
deftiné à leur entretien, eft arrefté en France. Ie ne 
fçay que penfer la deffus, finon que tout cét affaire 
eft l' æuure de Dieu. C' eft fa bonté & puiffance qui 
luy ont donné commencement, & luy [32] donneront 
maintenant tel progrez qu'il voudra. Ie fuis bien 
certain d'vne chofe qu'il eft encore plus difficile 
de Ie continuer & maintenir qu'il n'a efte de Ie 
commencer. 
Or voicy comme les Sauuages ont paffé leurs 
annees à Sillery. Les nauires leuerent l'anchre de 
deuant Kebec Ie 7. d'Oétobre de l'an paffé 1642. Leur 
depart fait icy vn merueilleux filence, & applique 
chacun à fa famille dans vne tranquilité profonde. 
Nos Sauuages de Sillery auec quelques autres qui 
s'eftoient ioins à eux cõtinuerent leur pefche d' An- 
guille qu'ils auoient commencee quelque temps aupa- 
rauant, c'eft vne tres-fertile moiffon que Dieu fait 
cüeillir tous les ans à Kebec & aux enuirons, depuis 
Ie commencement de Septembre iufques à la fin 
d'Oétobre dans la grande riuiere de S. Laurens, il s'y 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I6p-43 


30ï 


for them also some small buildings, as for their com- 
panions. The principal advantages of these houses 
are the little lofts in which they bestow their provi- 
sions, and their little belongings, which formerly 
became scattered and lost for want of a place in which 
to keep them. It has not been feasible to do more: 
for, in proportion to the houses, it is necessary to aid 
in clearing lands for those who are lodged. At the 
start, we had means of supporting eight workmen at 
Sillery; they are at present reduced to four; and still 
we hear from France that the amount of the dona- 
tion of the late Monsieur de Sillery, intended for 
their maintenance, is detained in France. I know 
not what to think of this, except that all this matter 
is the work of God. It is his goodness and power 
which have given it a start, and [32J will now give 
it such progress as he wills. I am very certain of 
one thing,- that it is still more difficult to continue 
and maintain it than it was to begin it. 
Now let us observe how the Savages have spent 
their years at Sillery. The ships weighed anchor 
from before Kebec the 7th of October of last year, 
1642. Their departure produces a wonderful silence 
here, and directs each man's attention to his own 
family, in deep tranquillity. 
Our Savages of Sillery, and some others who had 
united with them, continued their fishing for Eels 
which they had begun some time before; this is a 
very fertile harvest which God offers for the gather- 
ing, at Kebec and in the surrounding regions, every 
year, from the beginning of September to the end of 
October, in the great river of St. Lawrence. At that 
time, they found this fish in prodigious abundance; 
the French salt it, the Savages smoke it, both make 



308 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


en trouua pour lors vne quantité prodigieufe, les 
François la falent, les Sauuages la boucanent: les 
vns & les autres en font prouifion pour 1'Hyuer, les 
Sauuages quittent leur petites maifons pour faire 
cette pefche, & fe cabanent [33J à vne portee de mouf- 
quet afin que les ordures de poiffon qu' on accommode, 
ne les infeéte pas. Efiant là ils venoient tous les 
iours à la fainéte Meffe, quoy qu'ils euffent fouuent 
paffé la nuiét à la pefche, vn de nos Peres leur fai- 
foit vn mot d' exhortation auant la :Meffe. Le foir Ie 
mefme Pere alloit aux cabanes les faire prier Dieu. 
Leur pefche eftant finie, qui fuft fur Ie commence- 
ment de Nouembre ils retournerent à leurs maifons, 
& emplirent leurs petits magazins de poiffon bou- 
cané. Ceux qui n'ont pas encore de maifon fe 
cabanerent chacun de leur cofté. lIs ne furent pas 
plufiofi ramaffez, que treize canots de la nation des 
Atikamegues les veinrent voir pour hyuerner auec 
eux, & fe faire inftruire. lIs fe logerent du cofté des 
1Ylontaignets prés de lean Baptifie qui en eft Ie Capi- 
taine. Le P. Buteux qui efioit defcendu des trois 
Riuieres pour hyuerner à Sillery eufi charge de l'in- 
firuétion des vns & des autres, c' efi à dire des Mon- 
taignets & des AtiKamegues. lIs demeuroient enfem- 
ble, comme parlant mefme lãgue. Le P. Dequen 
eufi [34J pour fa part les Algonquins à en feigner. 
Voicy l'ordre qu'on y a tenu tout l'hyuer, Le P. De- 
quen alloit tous les matins à l'hofpital au quartier des 
Algonquins dire la Meffe: hommes, femmes & enfans 
tous s'y trouuoient. La Chapelle & la fale des 
malades efioit fouuent remplie, auant la Meffe Ie P. 
prononcoit tout haut les prieres en leur langue que 
chacun repetoit auffi tout haut. Apres illeur expli- 



1642-43J 


RELA TION OF I6p-43 


309 


provision thereof for "\Vinter. The Savages leave 
their little houses to carryon this fishing, and encamp 
[33J a musket range away, so that the refuse of the 
fish which they prepare may not infect them. "\Vhile 
there, they came every day to holy 
lass, although 
they had often spent the night in fishing. One of 
our Fathers gave them a word of exhortation before 
the :Mass. At evening, the same Father went to the 
cabins to have them pray to God. Their fishing 
done, which was toward the beginning of November, 
they returned to their houses, and filled their little 
stores with smoked fish. Those who have as yet no 
house, lodge in cabins, each on his own side. They 
were no sooner assembled, than thirteen canoes of 
the nation of the Atikamegues came to see them, in 
order to winter with them, and receive instruction. 
They lodged on the side of the :Montagnais, near 
Jean Baptiste, who is their Captain. Father Buteux, 
who had come down from the three Rivers to winter 
at Sillery, had charge of the instruction of both 
parties,- that is to say, of the :Montagnais and of the 
Atikamegues. They lived together, speaking the 
same language. Father Dequen had [34J for his 
share the instruction of the Algonquins. This is the 
plan we followed all the winter: Father Dequen went 
every morning to the hospital, in the Algonquin 
quarter, to say 1Ylass: men, women, and children all 
were there. The Chapel and the ward of the sick 
were often filled. Before 11ass, the Father pro- 
nounced aloud in their language the prayers, which 
each one also repeated aloud. Afterward he explained 
to them, at length, one of the mysteries of our holy 
Faith. :ßlass being said, the Father went through the 
cabins to teach in private those who were to be bap- 



310 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[YOLo 23 


quoit au long vn des myfteres de noftre fainéte Foy. 
La Meffe eftant dite Ie P. alloit par les cabanes enfei- 
gner en particulier ceux qui deuoient eftre baptifez, 
ou qui fe difpofoient à cõmunier. Apres midy ie 
prenois Ie foing de faire Ie catechifme aux enfans 
Algonquins. Ils s'aiIembloient à la fale des malades 
auec autant d'affiduité & de feruer que ceux de noftre 
France. Si leur arreft eftoit auffi folide, ils ne leur 
cederoient en rien: Ie prix du catechifme efioit vn 
coufteau, ou vn morceau de pain, d'autrefois vn cha- 
pelet, quelquesfois vn bonnet, ou vne hache aux plus 
grands & aux plus fçauans, c'eft vne belle occafion 
de foulager la mifere de ces pauures peuples les [35J 
parens eftoient rauis de voir la ferueur de leurs 
enfans qui alloient par les cabanes faire monftre de 
leur prix. Le foir Ie P. Dequen retournoit à la 
Chapelle, où ils s'aiIembloient derechef pour faire les 
prieres. Le P. s'approchant de l'Hofpital crioit tout 
haut, venez tous aux prieres: à ce cry chacun fortoit 
en filence & couroit à la Chapelle, où les prieres du- 
roiët enuiron vn quart d'heure, & l'infiruétion autant, 
Ie tout en grande modeftie & deuotion. V oyant les 
Sauuages en cet eftat, ie me fuis fort fouuent efionné 
de la pareiIe d'vne infinité de Chreftiens de nofire 
ancienne France, qui n'ont iamais peu fe refoudre de 
donner à Dieu vn demy quart d'heure Ie foir à genoux 
pour fa ire leur priere. Ie ne fcay ce qu'ils refpondront 
au iugement de Dieu. 
Les Religieufes Hofpitalieres entonnoient fouuent 
aux prieres & au catechifme quelque hymne en lan- 
gue Algonquine. Les Sauuages fe plaifent fort au 
chant & y reüffiiIent tres bien. D'ordinaire auffi elles 
prenoient les filles à part pour leur faire Ie catechifme 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I642-43 


311 


tized, or who were preparing to receive communion. 
After noon I assumed the charge of teaching the 
catechism to the Algonquin children. They assem- 
bled in the ward of the sick, with as much diligence 
and fervor as those of our France. If their stability 
were equally firm, they would yield to them in 
nothing. The reward for catechism was a knife, or 
a piece of bread, at other times a chaplet,- some- 
times a cap, or an axe, for the tallest and the most 
intelligent; it is an excellent opportunity for reliev- 
ing the misery of these poor peoples. The [35] par- 
ents were charmed to see the fervor of their children, 
who went through the cabins to show their prizes. 
At evening, Father Dequen returned to the Chapel, 
where they again assembled for prayers. The Fa- 
ther, approaching the Hospital, cried aloud, " Come, 
all, to prayers;" at this cry each went forth in 
silence, and ran to the Chapel; where the prayers 
lasted about a quarter of an hour, and the instruction 
likewise,- all in great modesty and devotion. See- 
ing the Savages in this condition, I have very often 
been astonished at the indolence of countless Chris- 
tians in our old France, who have never been able to 
bring themselves to accord God a half-quarter of an 
hour an evening, on their knees, to say their prayer. 
I know not what they will answer at the judgment 
of God. 
The Hospital Nuns often intoned, at prayers and 
at catechism, some hymn in Algonquin speech. The 
Savages take much pleasure in singing, and succeed 
in it very well. Usually, too, they took the girls 
aside to hear them in the catechism, in the [36] ward 
of the sick, or at their grating, while the boys were 
instructed separately" so that all could say their les- 



312 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


en la [36] fale des malades, ou à leur grille, pëdant 
qu'on infiruifoit feparement les garcons, afin que tous 
peuffent dire leur leçon: car fi on en omettoit quel- 
qu'vn, il fe mettoit à pleurer. Difiribuãt vn iour vn 
pain aux enfans apres Ie catechifme, i'en prefentay à 
vn qui me refufa de Ie receuoir, & fe mit a pleurer, 
difant, commet veux-tu que ie mange n'ayant rien 
dit: quand ils efioient dans la neceffité, Ie catechifme 
efioit fuiuy d'vn petit fefiin ou fagamité pour foula- 
ger leur faim. Les Religieufes cõtribuoient à leur 
tour aux defpenfes neceffaires, & vniuerfellemet par- 
lant outre Ie foing & Ie fecours des malades, elles ont 
exercé vne finguliere charité tout Ie long de l' annee 
enuers ces familIes arrefiees, nommément enuers les 
Algonquins: qui font de leur quartier elIes en ont eu 
fouuent deux ou trois cabanes des plus pauures fur 
les bras: c'efi chofe incroyable des defpefes qu'on 
efi obligé de faire en ces rencontres, la mifere & la 
neceffité efi telle que la confcience y efi obligee. 
V oila pour les Algonquins. 
Le P. Buteux a gardé Ie mefme ordre pour les 
Montaignets & AtiKamegues, [37] excepté que les 
derniers s'efiant retirés vn peu auant dans les bois 
fur vne petite montagne proche de Sillery, il efioit 
obligé d'y alIer tous les iours apres la Meffe, & fur 
Ie foir, où il affembloit les hommes & les femmes à 
part. Les neiges efioient hautes de 3. à quatre pieds. 
Ie l' ay veu plufieurs fois retourner Ie foir efiant ià 
nuiét auec vne lanterne à la main, que Ie vent impe- 
tueux luy arrachoit ou efieignoit, & puis Ie renuer- 
foit dãs les neiges de haut en bas de la montagne: 
cela peut efionner ceux qui l'ont cogneu en France 
infirme au dernier point, & prefque toufiours valetu- 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF .r61-2-43 


313 


son; for, if anyone were omitted, he began to weep. 
Distributing one day a loaf of bread to the children 
after catechism, I offered some to one, who declined 
to receive it, and began to weep, saying, "HQw? 
would you have me eat, when I have said nothing?" 
When they were in need, the catechism was followed 
by a little feast, or sagamité, to relieve their hunger. 
The Nuns contributed in their turn to the necessary 
expenses; and, generally speaking, in addition to the 
care and succor of the sick, they have practiced a sin- 
gular charity throughout the year toward these resi- 
dent families,-notably toward the Algonquins who 
are of their precinct. They have often had two or 
three cabins of the poorest of these on their hands; 
it is incredible what expenses one is obliged to incur 
on such occasions; the misery and necessity is such 
that conscience is compelled thereto. So much for 
the Algonquins. 
Father Buteux has observed the same plan for the 
Montagnais and Atikamegues, [37] except that when 
the latter had betaken themselves a little way into 
the woods on a small eminence near Sillery, he 
was obliged to go thither every day after Mass, and 
toward evening, when he assembled the men and the 
women apart. The snows were from 3 to four feet 
deep. I have repeatedly seen him return at even- 
ing-night having already set in-with a lantern 
in his hand, which the impetuous wind snatched from 
him or extinguished, and then overturned him in the 
snows from top to bottom of the hill. That may 
astonish those who have known him in France,- in- 
firm to the last degree, and nearly always on the sick 
list. I will mention in a separate Chapter the prin- 
cipal incidents of the Baptism of the Atikamegues. 



314 


LES RELATI01VS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


dinaire. Ie remarqueray en vn Chapitre à part ce 
qui s'eft paffé de plus notable au Baptefme des AtiKa- 
megues. 
Voila comme les Sauuages ont paíIé la premiere 
partie de l'hyuer. Sur la my-Ianuier les neiges 
eftant defia grandes & fortes, ils decabanerent tous 
de Sillery, & allerent enuiron à vn quart de l1euë de 
Kebec, pour y faire leurs traifnes, & commencer leur 
premiere chaffe, ils y demeurerent enuiron trois 
femaines Ie P. Buteux fuiuit les AtiKamegues, & alIa 
[38] loger dans leur cabanes: ces bonnes gens furent 
rauis d'aife de Ie voir logé chez eux, & s'efcrierent 
tous, En verité tu es de noftre natiõ, en verité tu nous 
aymes. lIs faifoient tous les iours vn quart de lieuë 
pour venir à Quebec entendre la Meffe, nonobftant la 
rigueur du froid & des neiges, pour l' ordinaire ils 
entroient dans la Chapelle des Vrfulines où Ie P. 
Buteux les enfeignoit. lIs alloient auffi fort fouuent 
au parloir des Religieufes, & demandoient à repeter 
leurs prieres, afin de les mieux apprendre. Les Vr- 
fulines leur tefmoignerent toute forte de charité, leur 
donnerent tous les iours à manger apres la Meffe, ou 
l'inftruétion, & n'efpargnerët rië de ce qu'elles auoiët 
pour les affifter, & cooperer à leur conuerfion. Elles 
n'en font pas moins tout Ie long de l'année aux AI- 
gonquins & Montaignets quand ils vont à Kebec. Ce 
font des frais ineuitables à ceux qui ont entrepris 
l'ayde des Sauuages. lIs décabanerent tous fur Ie 
commencement de Feurier, & entrerent dans les 
grands bois pour la chaffe de l'Orignac. Le lende- 
main de leur depart comme [39] i'allois de Kebec à 
Sillery, ie trouuay vne feule cabane de douze ou treize 
infirmes, vieillards & enfans, que les Sauuages 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF Z61-2-43 


315 


In this manner the Savages spent the first part of 
the winter. Toward the middle of January, the 
snows being already deep and abundant, they all with- 
drew from the cabins at Sillery, and went to about 
a quarter of a league from Kebec, to make their 
sledges there, and to begin their first hunt; they 
remained there about three weeks. Father Buteux 
followed the Atikamegues, and went [38] to lodge in 
their cabins; these good people were delighted to 
see him lodged with them, and all exclaimed, II In 
truth you are of our nation; in truth you love us." 
They went a quarter of a league every day, so as to 
come to Quebec and hear Mass, notwithstanding the 
rigor of the cold and the snows. Usually they went 
into the Chapel of the Ursulines, where Father 
Buteux taught them. They also went very often to 
the Nuns' parlor, and asked to repeat their prayers, in 
order to learn them better. The U rsulines showed 
them every sort of charity,- gave them to eat, every 
day, after Mass or instruction; and spared nothing 
of what they had to assist them, and to coöperate in 
their conversion. They do no less than this, through- 
out the year, for the Algonquins and Montagnais, 
when they come to Kebec. These are inevitable 
expenses, for those who have undertaken to aid the 
Savages. They all left their cabins toward the 
beginning of February, and went into the great woods 
for the chase of the Moose. The day after their 
departure, as [39] I was going from Kebec to Sillery, 
I found a single cabin of twelve or thirteen invalids, 
old men, and children, whom the Savages had com- 
mended to .me the evening before, and had asked me 
to send them to the Hospital. When they saw me 
pass, they took their coverings of bark, followed 



316 


LES Rr..LA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


m' auoiêt recommandes Ie foir auparauant & prié de les 
enuoyer à l'Hofpital: comme ils me virent paffer, ils 
leuerent leurs efcorces, & me fuiuirent, comme ils 
peurent, & s'en vinrent à l'Hofpital paffer leur hyuer 
partie dans la fale des malades, partie dans vne ca- 
bane proche de l'Hofpital. Les Sauuages ne demeure- 
rent gueres que 2. mois en leur grande chaffe, plufieurs 
retournerent pour les fefies de Pafques, chafque ca- 
bane porte d'ordinaire vn papier, qui marque les iours 
de fefie, afin qu'ils s'abfiiennent du trauail, finon en 
cas de neceffité, & employent plus de temps à la pri- 
ere. lean Baptifie auec fa bande retourna Ie Mer- 
credy fainét, & fe trouua fort à propos Ie lendemain 
au lauement des pieds qui fe fit à l'Hofpital, & les 
cõfola Jort: on choififi 12. hommes & 12. femmes, 
nous lauafmes les pieds des hommes, & les Religi- 
eufes les lauerent aux femmes, puis leur firent à tous 
vn fefiin magnifique felon Ie pays. Cinq [40] Hurons 
qui ont hyuerné à Sillery & y ont fait vn petit femi- 
naire, admirerent cefie celebrité que Ie P. de Bre- 
bæuf leur expliqua (ils ne manquent pas de raconter 
ces nouuelles en leur pays.) Sur la fin d'Auril tous 
les Sauuages fe trouuerent raffemblés, chacun re- 
tourne en fon quartier & dreffe fa cabane, faiét fon 
petit magazin, paffe fes peaux, & vient à l'infiruétiõ, 
où l'õ garde Ie mefme ordre qu'à l'automne. Quand 
la terre efi entierement defcouuerte de neiges, cha- 
cun vifite fon champ, & commence à Ie cultiuer. 
C'efioit vn contentemêt de les voir aller au trauail 
apres auoir entêdu la fainéte Meffe, & puis venir tous 
les foirs faire les prieres à la Chapelle, & entendre 
l'inftruétion. Mais ce contentement ne dura gueres. 
Car à peine auoient ils acheué de femer leur bled 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF I6p-43 


317 


me as best they could, and came away to the Hos- 
pital to spend their winter, partly in the ward of the 
sick, partly in a cabin near the Hospital. The Sav- 
ages remained hardly 2 months in their great hunt; 
several returned for the Easter holidays. Each cabin 
usually contains a paper which marks the feast days, 
so that they may abstain from work, save in case of 
necessity, and spend more time in prayer. Jean Bap- 
tiste with his band returned on Wednesday in Passion 
Week, and was present in good time next day for the 
washing of the feet, which occurred at the Hospital, 
and greatly consoled them. They chose 12 men and 
12 women; we washed the feet of the men, and the 
Nuns washed those of the women; then we prepared 
for all a feast that was magnificent for this country. 
Five [40] Hurons who wintered at Sillery, and formed 
a little seminary there, marveled at this festival, 
which Father de Brebæuf explained to them (they 
do not fail to relate these tidings in their own coun- 
try). Toward the end of April, all the Savages again 
rally together; each returns to his own quarter and 
sets up his cabin, prepares his little store, dresses 
his skins, and comes to instruction, where the same 
order is observed as in the autumn. When the earth 
is altogether free from snow, each one visits his field, 
and begins to till it. It was a pleasure to see them 
going to work after having heard holy Mass, and 
then coming every evening to say their prayers in 
the Chapel, and hear instruction. But this pleasure 
hardly lasted; for, scarcely had they finished plant- 
ing their Indian corn, when the rumors of incursions 
and ravages by the Iroquois obliged them to fonn a 
small body of warriors, and go to the fort of Riche- 
lieu and to the 3 rivers, in order to confront their 



318 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 23 


d'Inde, que les bruits des courfes & rauages des 
Iroquois les obligerent de faire vn petit gros de guer- 
riers, & aller au fort de Riche-lieu & au 3. riuieres 
pour s'oppofer à leurs ennemys. Mais les funeftes 
nouuelles de la mort du Roy & de Mõfeigneur Ie Car- 
dinal, & en fuite Ie manque des fecours d'armes [4 1 ] 
& foldats qu'on efperoit de Frãce les firet redefcedre 
à Sillery tous triftes, & comme les nauires tardoient 
beaucoup, & que les viures leur manquoient, ils fe 
diuiferent par petites bandes, & allerent à la chaffe 
vers Tadouffac, s' eí10ignans toufiours de leurs enne- 
mis, & attendans les nauires. 



1642-43] 


RELA TION OF .r61-2-43 


319 


enemies. But the disastrous news of the death of 
the King and of Monseigneur the Cardinal, and then 
the want of the succor of arms [41] and soldiers 
which we were expecting from France, made them 
return to Sillery, quite sad; and as the ships were 
very late, and as provisions failed them, they broke 
up into little bands, and went hunting toward 
Tadoussac, continually removing from their enemies, 
and awaiting the ships. 




BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XXIII 


XL VIII 
For particulars of this document, see Vol. XXII. 
XLIX 


This is a letter written by Garnier to a friend in 
France (" Monsieur J. M. J."), from the Huron coun- 
try, upon the 23rd of some unnamed month (possibly 
August), 1643. \Ve follow a contemporary copy 
presumably by a member of the Garnier family in 
France, and now in the archives of St. Mary's College, 
Montreal. Although he addresses his correspondent 
as "brother," it is evident that this is only in the 
ecclesiastical sense. 


L 
In publishing the letter of Brébeuf to the Father 
General. dated at Three Rivers, September 23, 16 43, 
we follow Father 11artin's apograph (now in the 
archives of St. :Mary's College, Montreal) of the orig- 
inal Latin ex .JI.1SS. Soc. Jes. 


LI 
Owing to the fact that the first MS. of the Huron 
report for the year ending in the spring of 1643 fell 
into the hands of the Iroquois, (the report was rewrit- 
ten, and published in connection with the Huron part 
of the Relation for 1643 -44), the Relation for 1 6 4 2 -43 
consists of but one part, by Vimont, the superior; to 



322 LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


this being added a brief Declaration of the Directors 
of the Company of New France. 
In reprinting the text of this Relation, we follow a 
copy of the original Cramoisy edition in the Lenox 
Library. It is generally referred to as "H. 8 I," 
because described in Harrisse's lVotes, no. 81. The 
" Priuilege," which is signed" Par Ie Roy en fon 
Confeil. CRAMOISY," is dated" Paris Ie 24. De- 
cembre 1643;" and the "Permifsion," with the 
signature" lEAN FILLEAV," is dated" Paris Ie [sþace] 
Ianuier. 14." 
Collation: Title, with verso blank, 1 leaf; "Table 
des Chapitres," pp. (3); " Extraict du Priuilege du 
Roy," p. (I); "Permifsion du R. P. Prouincial," with 
verso blank, pp. (2); text, pp. 1 - 309; " Declaration 
de I Meffieurs les Directeurs, & Af- I fociez en la 
Compagnie de la I Nouuelle France. I ," pp. (3). 
Peculz"arÜz"es: In the imprint of the title-page" Ci- 
cognes " is misprinted" Cicoignes." Page 1 of the 
text is usually not numbered, though we have met 
with copies in which the numeration is distinctly 
indicated. Copies of an early issue have pp. 306 and 
3 0 7 mispaged 326 and 327, while in later impressions 
the mispagination has been rectified. In all copies 
which we have examined, the endings of the lines of 
the last two paragraphs on p. I 15 are more or less 
imperfect. The imprint of this Relation bears the 
names of Sebastien Cramoisy and Gabriel Cramoisy. 
A letter in Ottawa, with an interlinear translation 
in French, covers pp. 56- 58. 
Copies of the Relation of 1642 -43 have been sold 
or priced as follows: O'Callaghan (1882), no. 1222, 
sold for $ 17, and had cost him $30.50 in gold; 
Barlow (1890), nos. 1286 and 1287, sold for $6 and 



BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XXIII 323 


$12, respectively; Dufossé, priced (1891 -92) at 150 
and 190 francs; Chadenat (1893), no. 11862, priced 
at 200 francs; and Lenox duplicate, sold by Bangs 
& Co. of New York, April 29, 1895, at S3I. 
Copies in libraries: Lenox (two copies. with both 
varieties of pagination); Harvard (correctly paged, 
but having sig. V, containing pp. 305 to the end, 
added from another copy); St. Mary's College, Mont- 
real; Laval University, Quebec; Library of Parlia- 
ment, Ottawa; Brown (private); and British Museum 
(two copies, correctly paged). 



NOTES TO VOL. XXIII 


(Figures in þarentheses,following number of note, refer to þages 
of English text.) 


I {po 39).-These four villages are the same mentioned by Lale- 
mant in his report for 164.0 (vol. xix., p. 167), except that St. Jean is 
here replaced by St. François Xavier, the latter village being classed 
in 1640 under the Attignawantan mission. In this interval of two 
years, there was probably a redistribution of the field of work, 
rather than a removal of the mission itself: for St. Jean was east of 
Sturgeon River, fully ten miles distant.-A. F. HUNTER. 
2 {po 55).-This native hemp may have been Ascleþias incarnata 
(vol. xiii., note 17), or Aþocynum cannabinum, which latter is men- 
tioned by Kalm (1750) and other early writers as employed by the 
Indians in the manufacture of various fabrics. See Holmes's 
"Prehistoric Textile Art," in U. S. Bur. Eth1ZOI. Reþ., 1891 -9 2 , 
pp.21-45. 
3 {po 107).-On location of Kontarea, see vol. x., note 8. 
4 (po 155).- For descnption of armor and weapons used by North 
American aborigines, see vol. xiii., note 18, and vol. xv., note 2. 
5 (po 177). - The origin of this Huron seminary is described in vol. 
vi., note 9. The funds used for its support were afterward devoted 
to the Sillery colony (vol. xviii., p. 79)' 
6 (p. 225).-The Sauteurs, or Ojibwas (vol. xviii., note 16). 
7 (po 225).-Pouteatami{Pottawattomies): anAJgonkin tribe, occu- 
pying the region around Lake Michigan. Nicolet found them (1634) 
about the entrance to Green Bay; and in this same region Allouez 
undertook a mission to them, 1667-70. The Relation of 1671 (chap. 
v.) states that" they had been driven, by fear of the Iroquois, from 
their lands, which were between the Lake of the Hurons and that 
of the Ilinois." In 1681, one of their bands was located on the 
Chicago River: other bands, at various historic periods, occupied 
the vicinity of St. Jo!"eph, Mich., the neighborhood of Detroit, and 
the Manitoulin Islands. Their tribal location is often indistinct, 
through their frequent migrations and extensive affiliations with 
other tribes, especially the Foxes and \Vmnebagoes. 



326 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


8 (p. 22s).-Nadouessz: or Nadouessioux: now known by the ab- 
breviated name of Sioux; the chief tribe of the Dakota stock, occu- 
pying the region of the upper :Missouri and :Mississippi Rivers; 
hostile to most of the Algonkin tribes. 
A. F. Hunter says: .. This Algonkin name of the Sioux tribes 
came to be applied generally to any other Indian nation of different 
language.-thus. to the Iroquois (see Copway's and Jones's histories 
of the Ojibways); also to the Hurons, which application of the name 
is preserved in Nottawa, a village, and in Nottawasaga, river and 
township, all three in Simcoe Co., Ont., in the district once occupied 
by the Huron and Tobacco nations. The name exists also in con- 
nection with the Nahdoway River, flowing into James Bay." 
9 (p. 227).-Kiristinons.' the Cree tribes (vol. xviii., note 15). 
Irini: the Illinois tribe, occupying the valley of the river thus 
named; also of Algonkin stock. 
10 (p. 247).-Francesco Gioseppe Bressani was born at Rome, 
May 6, 1612, and became a Jesuit novice Aug. 15, 1626. His studies 
were pursued at Rome and Clermont; the customary service as 
instructor being rendered at Sezza, Tivoli, and Paris. Arriving in 
Canada in 1642, he ministered for a time to the French at Quebec; 
in the following year, to the Algonkins at Three Rivers. In April, 
16 44, he set out, with an escort of Christian Indians, for the Huron 
mission; but, on the way, they were captured by the Iroquois, and 
carried to one of the villages of the latter, where he was cruelly tor- 
tured, at intervals, for over two months. Finally, he was ransomed 
by the Dutch at Fort Orange, and sent to France, where he arrived 
in the following November. The next year, he returned to Canada, 
and. after a short stay at Three Rivers, joined the Huron mission, 
where he labored until its destruction by the Iroquois, four years 
later. In the summer of 1648, he came down to Quebec for addi- 
tional missionaries, returning to his field of labor with a reinforce- 
ment of five brethren. In the following year, he went with the 
fugitive Hurons to St. Joseph (Christian) Island; but their situation 
there was so perilous that Bressani was sent by his superior to Que- 
bec to ask for succor,- a vain quest, however. since the authorities 
there could spare none of their slender force of soldiers. The dan- 
gers of the road preventing his return to his flock, he was obliged to 
remain at Quebec, where, at various times. he officiated in the church. 
Nov. 2, 1650, Bressani was obliged to return to Europe - on account 
partly of the limited resources of the mission. partly of his own pre- 
carious health. Having regained sufficient strength in his own coun- 
try, he spent many years as a missionary and preacher in the prin- 
cipal Italian cities, and died at Florence Sept. 9, 1672. Soon after 
his return to Italy, Bressani published his Bre'lle Relatione d'al- 



NO TES TO VOL. XXIII 


327 


cvne Jfisszimi . . . lzelfa .lVuoua Francia (Macerata, 1653), which 
wil1, in due course, appear in the present series. 
II (p. 249).-Gabriel Druillettes. born Sept. 29, 1610, began his 
novitiate in the Jesuit college at Toulouse, July 28, 1629. His studies 
were pursued in that college and at Puy; and he was a teacher in the 
institutions, successively, at Mauriac, Béziers. and Puy. In 1643, he 
came to Canada, his first year being devoted to the study of the 
Algonkin tongue. Becoming proficient therein, he accompanied wan- 
dering bands of those savages on their hunting expeditions, as Le 
Jeune before had encamped with the Montagnais. In August, 1646, 
Druillettes set out on a mission to the Abenaki tribes of Maine, 
who, interested in the new religion through the SilIery converts. had 
asked for a teacher. He remained with these people one year, then 
three years with the Montagnais about Tadoussac. In June, 1651, 
he again went to the country of the Abenakis, not only for their in- 
struction, but as an envoy from the Canadian authorities to secure, 
if possible, an alliance with the New England colonists against the 
Iroquois (vol. ix., 1tote 4); his efforts were unsuccessful. Return- 
ing to Quebec in the following spring, he resumed his labors among 
the Montagnais, which, with ministrations at SilIery, Three Rivers. 
and other posts, occupied most of his time for twenty years there- 
after. He accompanied Dablon on a mission to the Cree tribes, 
1661 -62; and in 1671 -72 was in charge of the mission at Sault SteT 
Marie. Druillettes ended his days at Quebec, Apr. 8, 1681. Two 
documents written by him will appear in this series. 
12 (p. 249).-Lalemant wrote to Vitelleschi (March 27, 1643), a 
letter announcing the deaths of J ogues and the two donnés, and stat- 
ing that he had written a eulogy on the Father, to be sent with this 
letter. An apograph of this epistle (in Latin) is in the archives of 
St. Mary's College, Montreal. 
13 (p. 287).-Leonard Garreau was born at St. Yrieix, France, in 
September, 1610. At the age of eighteen, he became a Jesuit 
novice; he studied at Pau and Rome, and in turn gave instruction 
at Poitiers, Agen, and Bordeaux. At the close of his final year of 
probation (1643), he embarked for Canada. In the following year, 
he joined the Huron mission, and during nearly two years labored 
among the Nipissing Indians, with Claude Pijart; thereafter, he 
was probably employed in the Huron churches, until their ruin by 
the Iroquois. He is mentioned in the Relation of 1652 (chap. iii.) 
as one of the priests in charge of the Huron colony on the Isle of 
Orleans. In August, 1656, he set out, with Druillettes, to accom- 
pany a band of Ottawas to their country. Attacked on the way by 
the Iroquois, Garreau was mortally wounded; and, having been 
carried to Montreal, he died there, Sept. 2. 



328 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


The manner of Garreau's death is narrated othenvise by Perrot. 
He says (Mémoire, Tailhan's ed., p. 84) that the Father was shot by 
a renegade Frenchman; see Tailhan's comments thereon (ut suþra, 
pp. 228- 2 3 1 ). 
14 (p. 28 7).- Noël Chabanel was born Feb. 2, 1613, in the diocese 
of Mende. At seventeen, he entered upon his novitiate in the Jesuit 
college at Toulouse, where his priestly studies were carried on; his 
term of instruction was also served there (163
- 39), and at Rodez 
( 16 4 1 -4 2 ). His course completed, he at once joined the Canadian 
mission (1643), at the same time with Garreau (see preceding note); 
and together they went to the Huron mission. Chabanel remained 
there until the overthrow of the Huron nation; and, on his way to 
SteT Marie, was slain by a Huron apostate, Dec. 8 or 9, 16
9. 
IS (p. 287).-The only record we have, concerning this nun, is 
one pathetic line in Journ. des Jésuites, under date of June 21, 16 47: 
.. Mother de Ste. Geneviève, at the Hospital, fell into a demented 
condi tion. " 
16 (p. 289).-Louis d'Ailleboust, one of the Montreal proprietors, 
succeeded Montmagny (September, 1648) as governor general of 
Canada; three years later. he was replaced by Jean de Lauson. In 
16 52, he obtained a grant of land on the Isle of Orléans (St. Francis 
parish). In the following year, he was chosen as a syndic of Quebec. 
During the interval between De Lauson's departure and D'Argen- 
son's arrival (September, 1657- July, 1658), D' Ailleboust was acting 
governor of the country. He died at Montreal, May 3 1 , 1660, leav- 
ing but one child, Barbe, who married De Lauson, the governor. 
17 (p. 289).-René Chartier was the chaplain of the Ursulines at 
Quebec during his stay there, which lasted until October, 16.n, when 
he returned to France. This event was, perhaps, hastened by a 
curious episode occurring in the month of June preceding, which is 
thus related in the Journ. des Jésuites: .. The room of Monsieur 
the Prior, priest of the Ursulines, was searched; and more than 260 
livres weight of Beaver skins were taken thence, after his boast 
that he had these, and that he would not deliver them to the [Com- 
pany's] store, except at a good price." 






ï 


"3.::] ":II 



 


-- 


. - 
- - 
- 
... . 
- 
. - . 
-.. ,.. 
.. - - 
-II "II ) . 
... ... 
 
-. -- 
. .. 
.. ... .. 
. 
.l
 




 



 
 -- 
.. ... 
.. 



 - 
.y ... 

 ..... 
x 


. 
.. 


- 
.. ... 


. 
,. 
. 


. 
,. 


.: 


. 
. 


. 


,. 


- 
.. 
. . 
. ... 


.. 


:r: ... 
<II . 
.. 
- ... 
); 

.. ) 
.. .J . 
- 
... . . 
. 

 .. 

 
 . . 
- 
 -. 
.. 
- .. .. --- 
. - .. ...- 

 . . . 
. . 
. . . 
. 



 


... 
.. 


... 
.. 
. 
- 



 


..:r 


... 
. . 
. . 
.. . 
- 


... 
.. 


t;:L, 


. 


- 
-- 
.. 


.... 


:; 


.....- 
---- 
........... - 
-- 


... 


-- 
..- 


.. 


- 


.. 
. 


,.. .... . 
. 
. 


- 
-- 


". 
.. 
. "':. .J-. . 
. 
. -- 
a . 
. . 
.... ...,.... - . 
.. __ _ ...... .-.a 
- .. 
,. ... 
-- 


.- 
.a 


- _.. .J) 


..... .. 

... .. 
.. - .;t!.... 
. 

 
... 
... 


,. 


.. 


.. 
.. 


. 
. 
-- 
. 


"':. 


-;:Ii 


. 
. 


J. 


,. 
.. 
. 
- 
.. 


. 
-. .. 
- . . 
... . .. 
- ...... . 
....... .. 
. .. 
. . . 
. . 
... .. 


. 
- 
- . 


... 
... ...- .... 
... ... 
. 
... 
:- 
... .. 
. . . 
- 
.. . 
.. 
--- . 


- 


. 
- 



 -......... ". 
. 
... .- .. . 
. . 
. ..... . 
. --- 
....;fa _ 


. 


. 
. 


. . .-. 
 
. ..... . 
.. 
 -. . 
. . 
. ...... ::- 
. ... ... 
---.. . 
... - 
.... 
 . ............. ... 
 .. .. 
..... .. 
-. .... . . 
. ...... 
... .......... 
. . . . . . . . . 
. . . . 

 ....... 
.. .. . 
. . ..... 
,. - --
. .... w.. 
- -........ 
.. ,....... . 


a 
- . 
. .. 


- 
. 


. . 
..... 
. 
.. ........ 
.. -. 
.. .. 
. .... .... . 
. . .
 . . . . 
........ . 
.. ,. 
. ..... 
. -- 
... ,...... . 
. . . 


. 
.. . 
" ... ... 
.. 


. 
. 
. . 


. 


( 



 a ow 
.. . 
... 


- 
... 
. . 
.- ....- 
. . . 


... 


... 


I!.- 


. 
. 


.. 


.. 


. 
. 
..... 
.. 
.. 


. 
-,. 


. 
. 


. 
. 


.. .. 
..-. 
. 
. 


.... 


... 
. . . 
. . 
. . 
. .....'. -. 
.-- . -."- . w-. ......... 
.. .. 
. ..
..... ..... 
.. ..a .. 
...... .. .....'!a. 
-. -.. ..... 
-.. ..... . . . . . 
... ...---. .-. 
. 
.. -. ..... ...." .........- 
. .-.. . 
. . . . a a . 
.-. .....-..... 
.. .... 
. . . . . 
. .. .. 
- ...... 
....--...... - .."'* 
. -a... 
...... .... 
. .... 


.w 


. . 
... 


. 
.. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. .. . 
.-.. ....... 
.- . .. . 



