Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 8: Quebec, Hurons, Cape Breton, 1634-1636
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1897 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits08jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits08jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits08jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 8 of 73.

---


CO 





f6 

3)7 



THE JESUIT RELATIONS 

AND 

ALLIED DOCUMENTS 


VOL. VIII 



TJie edition consists of sev- 
en Imndred and fifty sets 
all numbered 


No.. 


.MJ. 



i^ . r. THE PROPERTY 0: 

-/•^W THE LAW SOCIETY 

The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 


Travels and Explorations 
OF THE Jesuit Missionaries 

IN New France 

1610-1791 

THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN. AND ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES ; ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 

EDITED BY 

REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 


Vol. VIII 

Quebec, Hurons, Cape Breton 

1634- 1636 


CLEVELAND; XlbC J3urtOW0 JStOtbeW 

Company, publishers, mdcccxcvii 




Copyright, 1897 

BY 

The Burrows Brothers Co 


ALL RIGHTS RESERVBD 


The Imperial Press, Cleveland 


EDITORIAL STAFF 


Editor . . Reuben Gold Thwaites 

Translator from the 
French . . John Cutler Covert 

Assistant Translator from 
the French . Mary Sifton Pepper 

Translator from the 

Latin . William Frederic Giese 

Translator from the 

Italian . . Mary Sifton Pepper 

Assistant Editor . Emma Helen Blair 

Bibliographical Adviser Victor Hugo Paltsits 


CONTENTS OF VOL VIII 

Preface to Volume VIII . . . i 

Documents: — 
XXV. Relation de ce qui s'est passe en la Nov- 
velle France, en Tannic 1635 [Chap- 
ters iii., iv., etc., completing the docu- 
ment]. Paul le Jeune; Kebec, August 
28, 1635; Jean de Br^beuf; Ihonatiria, 
May 27, 1635; Julien Perrault; 1634-35 7 

XXVI. Relation de ce qui s'est passe en la Nov- 
velle France, en I'ann^e 1636 [Chap- 
ters i. , ii. , first installment of the docu- 
ment]. Paul le Jeune; K6bec, August 
28, 1636 . . . -199 

Bibliographical Data: Volume VIII . 283 

Notes ...... 287 


ILLUSTRATION TO VOL VIII 


I. Photographic facsimile of title-page, Le 

Jeune's Relation of 1636 . . . 202 


PREFACE TO VOL. VIII 


Following is a synopsis of the documents contained 
in the present volume : 

XXV. A summary of the contents of the first two 
chapters of the Relation of 1635 was given in Volume 
VII, of our series. Continuing his narrative, Le 
Jeune urges that French colonies be sent to Canada, 
to develop and hold the country for the French crown. 
Still more important, in his view, is the aid which 
these would afford to his favorite project, — that of 
rendering the nomadic tribes stationary, by furnish- 
ing nuclei for Indian settlements. He then, as 
usual, closes his yearly letter by a resum6, in the 
form of a journal, of the chief events during the past 
year, beginning with the departure of the French 
fleet, in August, 1634. He relates how he and Bu- 
teux went, in September, to Champlain's new settle- 
ment at Three Rivers, and describes the region there- 
about. An elk-hunt, a funeral, the cruel treatment 
of an Iroquois prisoner, an Indian dance, and various 
conversations on religion, with the savages, are nar- 
rated. The superior gives a sad account of the fam- 
ine among the Indians that winter, and the conse- 
quent epidemic, which often proves fatal, even among 
the French. He has heard ill news of his brethren 
who had ventured into the Huron country, but let- 
ters from them show that these reports are in a meas- 


PREFACE TO VOL. VIII 


ure false. In May, Le Jeune and a companion go to 
Quebec, to meet the French fleet, which, however, 
is delayed until July, when it brings a reinforcement 
of six Jesuit priests and two brothers, whereat there 
is great rejoicing among the missionaries. Cham- 
plain holds a council with the Hurons, and recom- 
mends to their friendship Fathers Le Mercier and Pi- 
jart, who depart with them. Le Jeune remains at 
Quebec. Again he urges that efforts should be made 
to render the wandering Indians sedentary, — intimat- 
ing that not only could they thereby be more easily 
converted, but that the beaver might thus be kept 
from extermination. He mentions the crafty at- 
tempts of the Iroquois to arouse hostilities among 
the tribes on the St. Lawrence, and thus to divert 
the Indian trade from the French to the Dutch and 
English, at Albany. The journalist describes the 
conversion of a young French Huguenot, and closes 
by giving directions to his correspondents in France 
as to the forwarding of their letters. 

In his report on the Huron mission, sent to Le 
Jeune the preceding May (1635), Br^beuf describes 
his journey to Lake Huron, with its attendant hard- 
ships and perils. He, with his companions, settles at 
Ihonatiria, near the place where he had formerly 
lived, when on his first mission to the Hurons. 
These savages welcome his return, and build a cabin 
for the French. The former suffer much from the 
same epidemic that had attacked Three Rivers ; but 
the French keep in good health. Brebeuf describes 
his cabin, which is at once a dwelling and a church ; 
and relates the astonishment of the natives at the 
sight of various articles brought by the French, — a 
small mill, a clock (which the Indians thought was 


PREFACE TO VOL. VIII 8 

alive), a loadstone, a magnifying glass, etc., — but 
especially at the art of writing, which is utterly in- 
comprehensible to their simple minds. 

Br^beuf writes of the Huron myths of creation, the 
morals and superstitions of that tribe, the doings of 
their medicine men ; he praises their spirit of hospi- 
tality, their patience in sickness, their courage in 
view of death, — upon which qualities he hopes to 
build a Christian faith and life in their hearts. He 
describes the baptisms and the apparent conversions 
that had rewarded the efforts of the missionaries ; the 
kind of religious instruction they give the savages; 
the condition of their affairs ; and the friendly rela- 
tions existing between them and the Hurons. He 
adds a postscript, to mention a new baptism, and the 
mildness of the recent winter and spring. 

Julien Perrault, of the mission in Cape Breton Is- 
land, describes in a letter to his superior (Le Jeune), 
the situation, climate, resources, and people of that 
island. He praises the docility and honesty of the 
natives, and the decency of their behavior and con- 
versation. 

The Relation ends with an interesting collection of 
" various sentiments and opinions of the Fathers who 
are in New France, taken from their last letters of 
1635," — embodying their religious experiences, ob- 
servations and opinions concerning their work, and 
the qualifications they consider necessary in those 
who would come to Canada as missionaries. 

XXVI. Like the preceding document, the Relation 
of 1636, although throughout styled by bibliograph- 
ers Le Jeune's, because he was the superior and the 
editor, is a composite : the first half being a Relation 
(or annual report) of eleven chapters, sent by Le 


PREFACE TO VOL. VIII 


Jeune to his provincial at Paris, and dated Quebec, 
August 28, 1636; the second half consists of a Rela- 
tion on the Huron mission, by Brebeuf , dated at Iho- 
natiria, July 16 of the same year, and sent down to 
Le Jeune by a native messenger. Brebeuf s Relation 
is divided into two parts, one of four chapters, the 
other of nine. 

We have space in the present volume but for the 
two opening chapters of Le Jeune 's own yearly nar- 
rative. He begins by describing the arrival of Mont- 
magny, Champlain's successor as governor of New 
France. The missionaries are rejoiced to find that 
the new governor has brought with him Chastelain 
and Garnier, priests of their order, to aid them in 
their great task ; and, still more, that Montmagny is 
a pious man, and greatly interested in their work. 
This is evinced by his becoming sponsor in bap- 
tism for a savage, almost as soon as he has landed at 
Quebec. Le Jeune mentions also the arrival of Fa- 
ther Nicolas Adam, as well as several families of 
colonists, especially those of De Repentigny and La 
Poterie. He then relates how interest in the Cana- 
dian mission is spreading in France, not only in re- 
ligious circles, but among the nobility, court officers, 
and persons of wealth. He praises the piety and 
generosity of the Marquis de Gamache, who largely 
supports the Quebec mission; and several members 
of the Hundred Associates, whose letters are quoted, 
showing their zeal and liberality. He is especially 
pleased at the intention of a wealthy lady, Madame 
Combalet, to establish a hospital in New France. 
He continues, as usual, with circumstantial accounts 
of conversions among the savages, and the pious 
deaths of several. 


PREFACE TO VOL. VIII 


The translation of Br^beuf 's portion of the Relation 
of 1635 (Doc. XXV.) is the work of the late James 
McFie Hunter, M. A., principal of the Collegiate In- 
stitute at Barrie, Ont. Mr. Hunter had intended to 
publish an English translation of all the Relations 
emanating from the Huron country, but his death in 
1893 terminated the project. 

R. G. T. 

Madison, Wis., May, 1897. 


XXV (concluded) 

Le Jeune'S Relation, 163^ 

Paris: SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, 1636 


Chaps, i.-ii., of the opening Relation by Le Jeune, ap- 
peared in Volume VII. Chaps, iii.- iv., concluding Le Jeune's 
part, here follow ; the document closes with reports on the 
Huron and Cape Breton missions, by Br^beuf and Perrault 
respectively; and a collection of "sentiments and opinions 
of the Fathers who are in New France." 


LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.8 


[51] CHAPITRE III. 

QUE C'EST VN BIEN POUR L'VNE & L'AUTRE FRANCE, 

d'enuoyer icy des colonies. 

1L eft k craindre que dans la multiplication de nos 
Fran9ois en ces contr^es, la paix, la ioye, & la 
bonne intelligence ne croiffent pas [52] k propor- 
tion que croiftront les Habitans de la Nouuelle France. 
II eft bien plus facile de contenir vn petit nombre 
d'hommes, que des peuples entiers ; fi faut-il neant- 
moins confeffer, que ce feroit vne chofe tres-hono- 
rable, & tres-profitable ^ I'Ancienne France, & tres- 
vtile k la Nouuelle, de faire icy des peuplades, & d'y 
enuoyer des Colonies. 

Les Fran9ois feront-ils feuls entre toutes les Na- 
tions de la terre, priuez de I'honneur de fe dilater, & 
de fe refpandre dans ce Nouueau Monde. La France 
beaucoup plus peuplee, que tous les autres Royaumes, 
n'aura des Habitans que pour foy? ou bien fi fes en- 
fans la quittent, s'en vont qui de-gk, qui de-1^ perdre 
le nom de Franjois chez I'Eftranger. 

Les Geographes, les Hiftoriens, [53] &r experience 
mefme nous fait veoir, qu'il fort tous les ans de la 
France vn grand nombre de perfonnes, qui vont 
prendre party ailleurs : Car encor que le Sol de noftre 
patrie foit tres-fecond, les Fran9oifes ont cefte bene- 
didtion, qu'elles le font encore dauantage : de 1^ vient 
que nos anciens Gaulois manquans de terres, en ont 
eft^ clierclier en diuers endroits de 1' Europe. Les 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELA TION, 1635 


[51] CHAPTER III. 

HOW IT IS A BENEFIT TO BOTH OLD AND NEW 
FRANCE, TO SEND COLONIES HERE. 

IT is to be feared that in the multiplication of our 
French, in these countries, peace, happiness, and 
good feeling may not increase [52] in the same 
ratio as do the Inhabitants of New France.^ It is 
much easier to control a few men than whole multi- 
tudes ; yet it must be confessed that it would be an 
enterprise very honorable and very profitable to Old 
France, and very useful to the New, to establish set- 
tlements here, and to send over Colonies. 

Shall the French, alone of all the Nations of the 
earth, be deprived of the honor of expanding and 
spreading over this New World? Shall France, much 
more populous than all the other Kingdoms, have 
Inhabitants only for itself? or, when her children 
leave her, shall they go here and there and lose the 
name of Frenchmen among Foreigners? 

Geographers, Historians, [53] and experience it- 
self, show us that every year a great many people 
leave France who go to enroll themselves elsewhere. 
For, although the Soil of our country is very fertile, 
the French women have this blessing, that they are 
still more so ; and thence it happens that our ancient 
Gauls, in want of land, went to seek it in different 
parts of Europe. The Galatians draw their origin 
from them ; they have crossed Italy, they have passed 
into Greece, and into many other regions. At pres- 


10 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.8 

Galates tirent d'eux leur origine, ils ont trauerf^ I'l- 
talie, ils font paffez dans la Grece, & en plufieurs 
autres endroits. Or maintenant nos Frangois ne font 
pas en moindre nombre que nos vieux Gaulois ; mais 
ils ne fortent plus en troupes, ains s'en vot efpars, 
qui d'vn cofte, qui d'autre, bufquer leur fortune chez 
I'Eflranger. Ne vaudroit-il pas mieux decharger 
I'Ancienne France dans la Nouuelle, par des Colonies 
[54] qu'on y pent enuoyer, que de peupler les pays 
Eflrangers ? 

Adiouftez, s'il vous plaifl, qu'il y a vne infinite 
d'artifans en France, qui faute d'employ, ou faute de 
poffeder quelque peu de terre, paffent leur vie dans 
vne pauurete, & dans vne difette pitoyable. Vn tres- 
grand nombre vont mandier leur pain de porte en 
porte : plufieurs f e iettent dedans les vols & dans les 
brigandages publics ; d'autres dans les larcins & 
tromperies fecrettes, chacun s'effor9ant de tirer k foy 
ce que plufieurs ne fgauroient poffeder. Or comme 
la Nouuelle France efl de fi grande eflendue, on y 
pent enuoyer fi bon nombre d'habitans, que ceux qui 
refteront k I'Ancienne auront dequoy employer leur 
induftrie honneftement, fans fe letter dans des vices 
qui perdent les Republiques ; ce n'efl pas qu'il falluft 
[55] enuoyer icy des perfonnes perdues, & de mau- 
uaife vie ; car ce feroit baftir des Babylones ; mais les 
bons faifant places aux mediants, leurs donneroient 
occafion de fuyr I'oyfiuete qui les corrompt. 

De plus fi ces Contrees fe peuplent de nos Fran- 
5ois, non feulement on affoiblit les forces de I'Eftran- 
ger, qui tient dans fes vaiffeaux, dans fes villes, & 
dans fes armees, grand nombre de Fran9ois k fes 
gages : Non feulement on bannit la famine des mai- 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s5 H 

ent, our French people are no less numerous than 
our old Gauls ; but they do not go forth in bands, 
but separately, some going in one direction, some in 
another, to make their fortunes among Strangers. 
Would it not be better to empty Old France into 
New, by means of Colonies [54] which could be sent 
there, than to people Foreign countries? 

Add to this, if you please, that there is a multitude 
of workmen in France, who, for lack of employment 
or of owning a little land, pass their lives in poverty 
and wretched want. Many of them beg their bread 
from door to door; some of them resort to stealing 
and public brigandage, others to larceny and secret 
frauds, each one trying to obtain for himself what 
many cannot possess. Now as New France is so im- 
mense, so many inhabitants can be sent here that 
those who remain in the Mother Country will have 
enough honest work left them to do, without launch- 
ing into those vices which ruin Republics ; this does 
not mean that [55] ruined people, or those of evil 
lives, should be sent here, for that would be to build 
Babylons; but if the good were to make room for 
the bad, it would give the latter an opportunity to 
escape the idleness that corrupts them. 

Besides, if these Countries are peopled by our 
French, not only will this weaken the strength of 
the Foreigner, — who holds in his ships, in his towns, 
and in his armies, a great many of our Countrymen 
as hostages, — not only will it banish famine from 
the houses of a multitude of poor workmen, but it 
will also strengthen France ; for those who will be 
born in New France, will be French, and in case of 
need can render good service to their King, — a thing 
which cannot be expected from those who dwell 


12 LES RELATIONS DES JP:SUITES [Vol.8 

fons d'vne infinite de pauures artifans, mais encore 
fortifie-on la France; car ceux qui naiflront en la 
Nouuelle France, feront Frangois, & qui pourront 
dans les befoins rendre de bons feruices "k leur Roy, 
ce qu'on ne doit pas attendre de ceux qui s'habituent 
chez nos voifms, & hors la domination de leur Prince. 

[56] En fin fi ces pays fe peuplent de Frangois, ils 
s'affermiront "k la Couronne, & I'Eflranger ne les 
viendra plus troubler. Et on nous dit que cefte an- 
n6e les Anglois ont rendu ^ Monfieur le Commandeur 
de Rafilly I'habitation de Pemptegoiis, qu'ils prirent 
aux Frangois I'annee mil fix cens treize. D'icy pro- 
uiendra vn bien, qui attirera fur I'vne & I'autre 
France vne grande benedidtion du Ciel ; c'eft la Con- 
uerfion d'vne infinite de Nations Sauuages, qui ha- 
bitent dans les terres, lefquelles fe vont tous les iours 
difpofans a receuoir le flambeau de la Foy. 

Or il ne faut point douter qu'il ne fe trouue icy de 
I'employ pour toutes fortes d'artifans. Pourquoy les 
grands bois de la Nouuelle France ne pourroient ils 
pas bien fournir de Nauires k I'Ancienne? qui doute 
qu'il n'y ait icy des mines de fer, de [57] cuiure, & 
d'autre metail? On en a defia fait la decouuerte de 
quelques vnes, qu'on va bien-tofl drefl:er; & par con- 
fequent tous ceux qui trauaillent en bois & en fer, 
trouueront icy dequoy s'occuper. Les bleds n'y 
manqueront non plus qu'en France. le ne fais pas 
profeflion de rapporter les biens du pays, ny de mon- 
flrer ce qui pent occuper icy I'efprit & le corps de nos 
Frangois. le me cotenteray de dire, que ce feroit vn 
honneur & vn grand bien ^ I'vne & ^ I'autre France, 
de faire pafTer des Colonies, & dreffer forces peu- 
plades dans les terres, qui font en friche depuis la 
nailTance du monde. 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib35 18 

among our neighbors and outside the dominion of 
their Prince. 

[56] Finally, if this country is peopled by the 
French, it will be firmly attached to the Crown, and 
the Foreigner will come no more to trouble it. And 
they tell us that this year the English have restored 
to Monsieur the Commander de Rasilly the settle- 
ment of Pemptegoiis, that they took from the French 
in the year one thousand six hundred and thirteen.'^ 
From this will result a good which will draw down 
upon both old and new France a great blessing from 
Heaven; it is the Conversion of a vast number of 
Savage Nations, who inhabit these lands and who 
are every day becoming disposed to receive the light 
of the Faith. 

Now there is no doubt that there can be found 
here employment for all sorts of artisans. Why can- 
not the great forests of New France largely furnish 
the Ships for the Old? Who doubts that there are 
here mines of iron, [57] copper, and other metals?^ 
Some have already been discovered, which will soon 
be worked ; and hence all those who work in wood 
and iron will find employment here. Grain will not 
fail here, more than in France. I do not pretend to 
recite all the advantages of the country, nor to show 
what can give occupation here to the intelligence and 
strength of our French people ; I will content myself 
by saying that it would be an honor and a great ben- 
efit to both old and new France to send over Emi- 
grants and establish strong colonies in these lands, 
which have lain fallow since the birth of the world. 

They will tell me that the Gentlemen of the Com- 
pany of New France have taken it upon themselves 
to do this ; I answer that they are discharging their 


14 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 

On me dira que Meffieurs de la Compagnie de la 
Nouuelle France fe font chargez de le faire ; ie r^- 
pods qu'ils s'acquittet parfaictemet bien de leur de- 
uoir, qtioy qu'auec de tres [58] grands frais: mais 
quand ils feroient palTer trois fois autant de per- 
fonnes qu'ils ont promis, ils d^chargeroient de fort 
peu TAncienne France, & ne peupleroient qu'vn pe- 
tit Canton de la Nouuelle. Neantmoins auec le temps 
il fe fera progres, & auffi-toft que par le d^friche- 
ment on pourra recueillir de la terre, ce qui est ne- 
celTaire pour la vie, on trouuera mille vtilitez fur le 
pays, qui feront encore profitables, h. la Frace : mais 
il femble qu'il foit neceffaire qu'vne grande eftendue 
de bois foit chang^e en terres labourables, aupara- 
uant que d'introduire plus grand nombre de families, 
autrement la faim les pourroit egorger. 

Ie m'eftens trop fur vn point, qui seble ^loign6 de 
mon fujet, quoy qu'il y foit tres-conforme ; car fi ie 
voyois icy quelques villes ou bourgades, recueillir 
fuffifamment des fruidts de [59] la terre pour leurs 
befoins, nos Sauuages errans fe rangeroiet bien-toft 
h. leur abry, & fe faifans fedetaires ^ noftre exemple, 
notamment fi on leur rendoit quelque affiflance, on 
les pourroit aifement inftruire en la Foy. Pour les 
peuples ftables qui font bien auant dans les terres, on 
iroit en grand nombre les fecourir, & auec d' autant 
plus d'authorite & moins de crainte qu'on fe fentiroit 
appuye de ces Villes ou Bourgades. Plus la puif- 
fance de nos Frangois aura d'6clat en ces Contrees, 
& plus aifement feront-ils receuoir leur creance k ces 
Barbares, qui fe menent autant & plus par les fens 
que par la raifon. 


1634-36] LE JEUNE-S RELATION, i6ss 16 

duty perfectly, although at very [58] great expense; * 
but even if they should bring over three times as 
many people as they have promised, they would but 
slightly relieve Old France, and would people only 
a little Canton of the New. Nevertheless, in time 
they will make some progress ; and as soon as, 
through the clearing of the land, they can obtain 
from it what is necessary for life, thousands of use- 
ful things will be found in the country which will 
also be profitable to France. But it seems necessary 
that a great extent of forest should be converted into 
tillable land, before introducing many families, other- 
wise famine might consume them. 

I enlarge upon a point which seems remote from 
my subject, although it is closely related thereto; 
for if I could see here a number of towns or villages, 
gathering enough of the fruits of [59] the earth for 
their needs, our wandering Savages would soon range 
themselves under their protection; and, being ren- 
dered sedentary by our example, especially if they 
were to be given some help, they could easily be in- 
structed in the Faith. As to the stationary tribes 
farther back in the interior, we would go in great 
numbers to succor them ; and would have much more 
authority, and less fear, if we felt that we had the 
support of these Towns or Villages. The more im- 
posing the power of our French people is made in 
these Countries, the more easily they can make their 
belief received by these Barbarians, who are influ- 
enced even more through the senses, than through 
reason. 


16 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.8 


[60] CHAPITRE IV. 

RAMAS DE DIUERSES CHOSES DRESS6 EN FORME DE 

JOURNAL. 

TOVT ce qui fe dira en ce Chapitre, n'efl qu'vn 
melange qui n'aura pas beaucoup de fuitte, ny 
de liaifon, finon peut-eftre du temps auquel les 
chofes font arriuees : encore ne fe fuiura-il que de 
loin h. loin. 

Le douziefme d'Aouft de I'annee precedente mil 
fix cens trente quatre, Monfieur du Pleffis Bochard 
General de la flotte, leua Tancre, & quitta la Rade de 
Kebec, pour tirer k Tadouffac, & de Ik en France, oh. 
Ton nous dit qu'il arriua enuiron la my-Septembre, 
n'ayant efte qu'vn mois a trauerfer la mer. 

[61] Le vingt-fixiefme du mefme mois d'Aoufl, 
quelques Sauuages palTans proche de noftre Maifon 
nous firent veoir des prunes qu'ils auoient cueilly 
dans les bois, non pas bien loin de noftre Maifon: 
elles eftoient auffi groffes que les petits abricots de 
France, leur noyau efl plat comme celuy de I'abricot : 
cela me fait dire que les froids de ces Gentries, n'em- 
pefcherot pas qu'on n'en retire des fruits. Nous en 
verrons 1' experience dans quelques annees; car nous 
auons greffe quelques antes qui ont fort bien repris. 

Le troifiefme de Septembre nous nous embar- 
quafmes le Pere Buteux & moy, pour aller fecourir 
nos Frangois en la Nouuelle Habitation, qu'on com- 
mengoit aux trois Riuieres. Nous paffafmes proche 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i63S 17 


[60] CHAPTER IV. 

A COLLECTION OF VARIOUS MATTERS PREPARED IN 
THE FORM OF A JOURNAL. 

ALL that will be said in this Chapter is a mere 
medley, in which there will be but little se- 
quence or connection, except perhaps that of 
the time in which the things happened; and still 
they will follow each other only at wide intervals. 

On the twelfth of August of the preceding year, one 
thousand six hundred and thirty-four, Monsieur du 
Plessis Bochard,^ Commandant of the fleet, weighed 
anchor and left the Roadstead of Kebec, to go to 
Tadoussac and thence to France, where we are told 
he arrived about the middle of September, having 
been only a month in crossing the sea. 

[61] On the twenty-sixth of the same month of 
August, some Savages who were passing our House 
showed us some plums they had gathered in the 
woods not far from there ; they were as large as the 
little apricots of France, their stone being flat like 
that of the apricot. This leads me to say that the 
cold of these Countries does not prevent fruit from 
growing. We shall know from experience, in a few 
years, for we have grafted some cuttings which have 
started very well. 

On the third of September, we, Father Buteux and 
I, embarked to go and help our French in the New 
Settlement they are beginning at the three Rivers. 
We passed near the Island of Rich[e]lieu, called by 


18 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.8 

de riflet de Rich[e]lieu, noinm6 des [62] Sauuages Ka 
ouapafsiniskakhi. Monfieur de Champlain y a fait 
dreffer vne platte-forme, fur laquelle on a pof^ du 
Canon, pour commander ^ toute la Riuiere. Depuis 
cet Iflet iufques ^ vne bonne traite de chemin au de- 
1^, le palTage eft fort dangereux, "k qui n'a cognoif- 
fance du vray chenal, nous touchafmes vne fois, 
efchoiiafmes vne autre, & noftre barque dans vn 
grand nordefl, frifa vne roche, qui donna de I'hor- 
reur a tons ceux qui la virent. Dieu femble auoir 
arm^ ce paffage pour la conferuation du Pays, entre 
les mains des Fran9ois qui le poffedent, 

Le huidtiefme nous arriuafmes aux trois Riuieres, 
le feiour y eft fort agreable, la terre fablonneufe, la 
pefche en fon temps tres-abodante. Vn Sauuage rap- 
portera quelquefois dans fon Canot douze ou quinze 
[63] Efturgeons, dont le moindre fera par fois de la 
hauteur d'vn homme. II y a quantite d'autres poif- 
fons tres-excellens. Les Fran9ois ont nome ce lieu 
les trois Riuieres, pource qu'il fort des terres vn affez 
beau fleuue, qui fe vient degorger dans la grande 
Riuiere de fainc5l Laurens par trois principales em- 
boucheures, caufees par plufieurs petites Ifles, qui fe 
rencontrent k 1' entree de ce fleuue, nomm6 des Sau- 
uages Metaberoutin. le decrirois volon tiers la beauts 
de ce lieu, mais ie crains d'eftre long; Tout le pays 
entre Kebec & cefte nouuelle Habitation, que nous 
appelleros la Refidence de la Conception, m'a femble 
fort agreable, il eft entrecoupe de ruiifeaux & de 
fleuues, qui fe dechargent d'ef paces en ef paces dans 
le Roy des fleuues, c'eft "k dire, dans la grande riuiere 
de S. Laurens, [64] qui a bien encore en ce lieu Ik 
quelque deux k trois mille pas de large quoy qu'il 
foit a trente lieues au deffus de Kebec. 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, tbjs l» 

the [62] Savages Ka ouapassiniskakhi. Monsieur de 
Champlain has had a platform erected there, upon 
which they have placed some Cannon in order to 
command the whole River. ^ From this Islet to a 
considerable distance above, the passage is very dan- 
gerous to any one who does not know the real chan- 
nel. Once we touched bottom, another time we were 
stranded ; and in a strong northeaster our bark grazed 
a rock, which filled with horror all those that saw it. 
God seems to have armed this passage for the pre- 
servation of the Country in the hands of the French, 
who now possess it. 

On the eighth, we arrived at the three Rivers. 
We found living there very agreeable; the ground 
is sandy, the fish very abundant in its season. A 
Savage will sometimes bring in his Canoe twelve or 
fifteen [63] Sturgeon, the smallest of which is occa- 
sionally as long as the height of a man ; besides these, 
there are also a number of other very good fish. The 
French have named this place the three Rivers, be- 
cause there emerges here a very beautiful river which 
flows into the great River saint Lawrence through 
three principal mouths, caused by several little Is- 
lands which are found at the entrance of this river, 
which the Savages call Metaberoutin? I would like 
to describe the beauty of this place, but I am afraid 
of being tedious. The whole country between Ke- 
bec and this new Settlement, which we will call the 
Residence of the Conception, seems to me very 
pleasant; it is intersected by brooks and streams, 
which empty at short distances from each other into 
the King of rivers, that is, into the great river St. 
Lawrence, [64] which is, even at this place, fully two 
or three thousand paces wide, although it is thirty 
leagues above Kebec. 


20 


LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 8 


Le vingt-feptiefme du mefme mois de Septembre 
vn Elan parut de 1' autre bord de cefte grande riuiere, 
nos Frangois en donnerent aduis ^ quelques Sauuages 
cabanez proche de 1' Habitation, quelques- vns d'eux 
s'en vont attaquer ce grand animal, qui fe rafraichif- 
foit dedans I'eau, I'allant prendre du cofle des terres, 
pour le pouffer plus auant dans le fleuue, ils voloient 
apres dans leurs petits Canots d'^corce, ils I'appro- 
cherent ^ la portee d'vn iauelot, & I'vn d'eux luy 
langa vne ef pee qui le fit bondir, & chercher le chemin 
de la terre pour fe fauuer ; ce qu'il euft fait aifement, 
s'il euft peu aborder; mais voyant fes ennemis de ce 
cofte la, il [65] fe iette ^ I'eau, ou il fut bien-toft 
larde de coups d'efpees. Comme il tiroit k la mort, 
ils le repoufferent vers le bord du fleuue, & 1^ le 
mirent en vn momet en pieces, pour le pouuoir ap- 
porter en leur cabane. Nous voyons cefte challe de 
noftre Habitation efleuee fur vne platte forme natu- 
relle, qui a veue fur la grande Riuiere. le confide- 
ray particulierement la tefte de ceft animal, il auoit 
pouffe vn bois de la longueur feulement des cornes 
d'vn boeuf ; car il eftoit encore tout ieune; ce bois 
eftoit tout velu, allez mince, & d'vne grofl!eur quafi 
6gale partout. 

Le vingt-huidtiefme le Pere Buteux & moy trou- 
uafmes vne troupe de Sauuages, qui faifoient feftin 
aupres des f off es de leurs parens tref paff ez ; ils leur 
donnerent la meilleure part du banquet qu'ils ietterent 
[66] au feu, & s'en voulans aller vne femme rompit 
des branches, & des rameaux d'arbres, dont elle cou- 
urit ces fofl!es; ie luy en demanday la raifon, elle 
repartit qu'elle abrioit I'ame de fes amis trefpalfez, 
contre I'ardeur du Soleil, qui a efte fort grande cet 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ibss 21 

On the twenty-seventh of the same month of Sep- 
tember, an Elk appeared on the other bank of this 
great river ; our Frenchmen gave notice of it to some 
Savages who were encamped near the Settlement, 
and some of them went to attack this great animal, 
which was standing in the water drinking. Ap- 
proaching it from the land side, to drive it farther 
into the water, they flew after it in their little bark 
Canoes; and, approaching it within range, one of 
them launched a javelin at it, which made it give a 
bound and start for the shore to save itself ; it might 
easily have done this if it had been able to touch the 
shore; but seeing its enemies there, it [65] rushed 
into the water where it was soon run through with 
javelins. When it was near its death, they drove it 
to the shore, and there in a moment they had cut it 
in pieces, to be able to carry it to their cabin. We 
saw this chase from our Settlement, which is on a 
natural elevation and commands a view of the great 
River. I carefully examined the head of this ani- 
mal ; its antlers had grown only as long as the horns 
of an ox, for it was still young; these antlers were 
covered with hair which was quite fine and almost 
equally thick throughout. 

On the twenty-eighth. Father Buteux and I found 
a band of Savages who were having a feast near the 
graves of their deceased relatives; they gave them 
the best part of the banquet, which they threw [66] 
into the fire ; and, when they were about to go away, 
a woman broke some twigs and branches from the 
trees, with which she covered these graves. I asked 
her why she did this, and she answered that she was 
sheltering the souls of her dead friends from the heat 
of the Sun, which has been very great this Autumn. 


22 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.8 

Automne. lis philofophent des ames des hommes 
& de leurs neceffitez, comme des corps, conform^- 
ment ^ leur dodtrine, fe figurans que nos ames ont 
les mefmes befoins que nos corps; nous luy difmes 
affez que les ames des creatures raifonnables defcen- 
doiet aux enfers, ou montoient au Ciel ; elle ne laifia 
pas, fans nous rien refpondre, de garder la vieille 
couftume de fes ayeux. Ceux qui ne refentent pas 
les obligations qu'ils ont ^ Dieu, d'auoir pris naif- 
fance en vn lieu ou il eft cogneu & adore, peuuent 
icy veoir k I'oeil quel preciput \(iy'\ ils ont par dellus 
vn monde de barbares. 

Le vingt-troifiefme iour d'Odtobre, quinze ou vingt 
Sauuages reuindrent de la guerre, amenans vn pri- 
fonnier. Si toft qu'il peurent d^couurir noil:re Ha- 
bitation & leurs cabanes, ils raffemblerent leurs ca- 
nots, & s'en vindrent doucement par le milieu du 
grand fleuue, poulTant de leur eftomach des chants 
tout remplis d'allegreffe; fi toft qu'on les apperceut, 
il f e fit vn grand cry dans les cabanes ; chacun f ortit 
au deuant pour veoir ces gueriers, qui fireht leuer 
tout debout le pauure prifonnier, & le firent danfer k 
leur mode au milieu d'vn canot; il chatoit & eux 
frappoient de leurs auirons k la cadence ; il eftoit lie 
d'vne corde qui luy palloit de bras en bras derriere 
le dos, & d'vne autre aux pieds, & encore d'vne autre 
[68] affez longue par le trauers du corps; ils luy 
auoient arrache les ongles des doigts, afin qu'il ne fe 
peuft delier. Admirez ie vous prie la cruaute de ces 
peuples, vne Sauuage nous ayant apperceu le Pere 
Buteux & moy dans la meflee auec les autres, nous 
vint dire toute remplie de ioye & de contentement, 
Tapoue kouetakiou nigajnouau ; en verite ie mangeray 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i635 28 

They reason about the souls of men and their neces- 
sities as they do about the body ; according to their 
doctrine, they suppose that our souls have the same 
needs as our bodies. We told her repeatedly that 
the souls of reasonable beings descended into hell or 
went up into Heaven; but, without giving us any 
answer, she continued to follow the old custom of 
her ancestors. Those who do not appreciate the 
obligations they are under to God, for having been 
born in a place where he is known and worshiped, 
can see here at a glance what an advantage [67] they 
have over a world of barbarians. 

On the twenty-third day of October, fifteen or 
twenty Savages returned from the war, bringing a 
prisoner. As soon as they could descry our Settle- 
ment and their cabins, they collected their canoes 
and sailed slowly down the middle of the great river, 
uttering from their chests songs full of gladness ; as 
soon as they were seen, there was a great outcry 
among the cabins, each one coming out to see these 
warriors, who made the poor prisoner stand up and 
dance in their fashion in the middle of a canoe. He 
sang, and they kept time with their paddles ; he was 
bound with a cord which tied his arms behind his 
back, another was around his feet, and still another, 
[68] a long one, around his body ; they had torn out 
his finger-nails, so that he could not untie himself. 
Marvel, I pray you, at the cruelty of these people. 
A Savage, having perceived Father Buteux and me 
mingling with the others, came up to us and said, 
full of joy and satisfaction, Tapoue kouetakiou niga- 
mouau; " I shall really eat some Hiroquois." Final- 
ly this poor man came out of the canoe, and was 
taken into a cabin, the children, girls, and women 


24 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 

de THiroquois. En fin ce pauure homme forty du 
canot fut conduit dans vne cabane, k 1' entree les en- 
fans, les filles & les femmes le frappoient, qui d'vn 
bafton, qui d'vne pierre: vous eulTiez dit qu'il eftoit 
infenfible, paffant chemin, & receuant ces coups, fans 
deftourner la veue: fi toft qu'il fuft entre, on le fit 
dancer ^ la cadence de leurs hurlemens. Apres auoir 
fait quelques tours, frappant la terre, & s'agitant le 
corps, en quoy confifle toute [69] leur dance, on le fit 
affeoir, & quelques Sauuages nous apoftrophans, nous 
dirent que cet Hiroquois eftoit I'vn de ceux qui I'an- 
nee precedente auoient furpris & maffacre trois de 
ncs Fran9ois, c' eftoit pour eftouffer en nous la com- 
paffion que nous en pouuios auoir, ils oferent bien 
demander a quelques- vns de nos Frangois, s'ils n'en 
mangeroient pas bien leur part, puis qu'ils auoient 
tu6 de nos Compatriotes. On leur repartit que ces 
cruautez nous d6plaifoient, & que nous n'eftions point 
des antropophages. II ne mourut point neantmoins; 
car ces Barbares ennuyez de la guerre, parlerent h. ce 
ieune prifonnier, qui eft homme fort, & d'vne riche 
& haute taille, de faire la paix ; ils ont efle long-teps 
k la traiter, mais en fin ils I'ont conclue. le croy 
bien qu'elle ne durera gueres, [70] car le premier 
vertige qui prendra a quelque eftourdy, fur le fou- 
uenir que I'vn de fes parens aura efle tue par les Hi- 
roquois, en ira furprendre quelqu'vn, & le malTacrera 
en trahifon : & ainfi recommencera la guerre. II ne 
faut pas attendre de fidelite des peuples qui n'ont 
point la vraye Foy. 

Le vingt-quatriefme du mefme mois grand nombre 
d'Algonquains eflans arriuez, ie m'en allay chercher 
par leur[s] cabanes, vne petite fillette que i'auoisbapti- 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib35 26 

striking him, some with sticks, others with stones, 
as he entered ; you would have said he was insen- 
sible, as he passed along and received these blows 
without looking around ; as soon as he entered, they 
made him dance to the music of their howls. After 
having made a few turns, striking the ground and 
agitating his body, which is all there is of [69] their 
dancing, they made him sit down ; and some of the 
Savages, addressing us, told us that this Hiroquois was 
one of those who the year before had surprised and 
killed three of our Frenchmen; this was done to 
stifle in us the pity that we might have for him, and 
they even dared to ask some of our French if they 
did not want to eat their share of him, since they had 
killed our Countrymen. We replied that these cru- 
elties displeased us, and that we were not cannibals. 
He did not die, however ; for these Barbarians, weary 
of the war, spoke with this young prisoner, who was 
a strong man, tall and finely formed, about making 
peace ; they have been treating about it for a long 
time, but at last it is concluded. In truth, I believe 
it will not last long ; [70] for the first impulse that 
seizes some hot-headed fellow, at the remembrance 
that one of his relations was killed by the Hiroquois, 
will make him go and surprise one of them, and 
treacherously assassinate him ; and thus the war will 
begin again. Fidelity cannot be expected from 
people who have not the true Faith. 

On the twenty-fourth of the same month, a great 
many Algonquains having arrived, I went through 
their cabins, looking for a little girl I had baptized 
and named Marguerite, the year before. Her moth- 
er readily recognized me, and told me that she was 
dead; that was so much gained for Heaven; I had 


26 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.8 

f6e, & nommee Marguerite I'a paff6: fa mere me re- 
cogneut bien, & me dit qu'elle eftoit morte, c'eft 
autant de gaigne pour le Ciel, ie ne I'auois pas fait 
Chreftienne qu'^ fin qu'elle y allafl. Come ie vins ^ 
demader des nouuelles du pere de cet enfant que i'a- 
uois comenc^ d'inftruire, vn Sauuage me refpondit 
qu'il eftoit mort; a cefle [71] parole vne fienne fille 
aagee de dix-huidt k vingt ans, fit vn grand cry toute 
eplor^e ; on me fit figne que ie ne parlaffe point de 
la mort, dont le feul nom leur femble infupportable. 
Le vingt-neufiefme il arriua vne chofe affez faceti- 
eufe, que ie coucheray icy, pour faire veoir la fimpli- 
cite d'vn efprit qui ne cognoift point Dieu. Deux 
Sauuages eftans entrez en noftre Habitation, pendant 
le Diuin Seruice, que nous faifions ^ la Chapelle, fe 
difoient I'vn k 1' autre, lis prient celuy qui a tout fait, 
leur donnera-il ce qu'ils demandent? Or comme nous 
tardions trop k leur gre, Afleurement, difoient-ils, il 
ne leur veut pas donner : voyla ils orient tous tant 
qu'ils peuuent (nous chantions Vefpres pour lors). 
Or vn ieune truchement venant a fortir, ils I'abor- 
derent, & [72] luy dirent. He bien! celuy qui a tout 
fait, vous a-il accorde ce que vous demandiez? Ouy, 
refpond-il, nous I'aurons. Affeuremet, repartent-ils, 
il ne s'en eft gueres fallu qu'il ne vous ait econduit; 
car vous auez bien crie & bien chante pour I'auoir: 
nous difions a tous coups, que vous n'auriez rien; 
mais encore que vous a-il promis? Ce ieune homme 
foufriant, leur refpondit, conformement k leur grande 
attente, II nous a promis que nous n'aurions point 
faim: c'eft la grande beatitude des Sauuages d'auoir 
dequoy contenter leur ventre. 

Le cinquiefme de Nouembre, i 'allay veoir les reli- 


1634-36] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1635 27 

only made her a Christian that she might go there. 
When I came to ask news of the father of the child 
whom I had begun to instruct, a Savage told me that 
he was dead; at this [71] answer, one of his daugh- 
ters, about eighteen or twenty years old, uttered a 
loud cry and burst into tears ; they made me a sign 
that I should not speak of death, its very name 
seeming to them unbearable. 

On the twenty-ninth, a rather amusing thing hap- 
pened, which I shall relate here to show the simpli- 
city of a mind that does not know God. Two Sav- 
ages having entered our Settlement during Divine 
Service, which we were holding in the Chapel, said 
to each other, " They are praying to him who made 
all things; will he give them what they ask?" Now 
as we were going rather slowly, according to their 
ideas, " Certainly," they said, " he does not want to 
give it to them, see how they are all shouting as 
loud as they can," (we were singing Vespers at the 
time). Now, as a young interpreter was going away, 
they approached him and [72] said, " Well, now, he 
who made all things, has he granted what you ask ? ' ' 
" Yes," he answered, " we shall get it." " Certain- 
ly," they replied, " he must have very nearly refused 
you, for you have cried and sung so hard to get it; 
we were saying all the time that you would not get 
anything; but tell us now, what did he promise 
you?" This young man, smiling, answered them 
according to their expectations, "He promised us 
that we should not be hungry." It is the highest 
state of happiness for the Savages to have something 
with which to satisfy their stomachs. 

On the fifth of November, I went to see the re- 
mains of a good palisade, which formerly surrounded 


28 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.8 

quas d'vne bonne pallilTade, qui a autrefois entour6 
vne Bourg-ade, au lieu mefme ou nos Fran9ois ont 
plante leur Habitation. Les Hiroquois ennemis de 
ces Peuples ont tout brufle; on voit encore [73] le 
bout des pieux tons noirs; il y a quelques arpens de 
terre defrichee, ou ils cultiuoient du bled d'Inde. 
I'efpere qu'auec le temps nos Canadiens reprendront 
cet exercice, qui leur fera autant profitable pour le 
Ciel, que pour la terre; car s'ils s'arreftent, on aura 
moyen de les inftruire. 

Le feptiefme on nous decriuit vne fagon de dance 
des Sauuages que nous n 'anions point encore veue. 
L'vn d'eux commence, pendant que les autres chan- 
tet; la chanfon finie, il va donner le bouquet, c'eft ^ 
dire, qu'il va faire vn prefent k celuy qu'il veut faire 
dancer apres foy; 1' autre finiffant la dance en fait de 
mefme, & fi nos Frangois fe trouuent auec eux, on 
leur porte le bouquet & le prefent auffi bien qu'aux 
autres. 

Le dix-huidtiefme de ce mois, [74] tons les Sau- 
uages s'efcarterent, qui de9a, qui de la dans les bois, 
pour aller pendant I'hyuer chercher I'Elan, le Cerf 
& le Caribou, dont ils viuent; Si bien que nous de- 
meurafmes fans voifins, nos feuls Fran9ois reftans en 
noftre nouuelle Demeure. 

Le trentiefme de Decembre la neige n'eftant ny 
alf ez dure ny alTez profonde, pour arrefter les grandes 
iambes de I'Elan, vne troupe de ces pauures Bar- 
bares, s'en vindrent crier mifericorde en noftre Habi- 
tation ; la famine qui fut cruelle I'an paffe les a en- 
core traic5te plus rudement cet hyuer, du moins en 
plufieurs endroits ; on nous a rapporte que vers Gafp^ 
les Sauuages ont tue & mang6 vn ieune gar9on que 


1634-36] LE /RUNE'S RELATION, i635 29 


a Village in the very place where our French have 
established their Abode. The Hiroquois enemies of 
these Tribes have burned everything ; there can still 
be seen [73] the ends of the blackened stakes; there 
are some arpents of cleared land, where they culti- 
vated Indian corn. I hope in the course of time our 
Canadians will resume this industry, which will be 
as profitable to them for Heaven as for earth ; for, if 
they stop their wanderings, there will be opportuni- 
ties of instructing them. 

On the seventh we had described to us a kind of 
Savage dance that we had not yet seen. One of them 
begins while the others sing ; the song finished, he 
goes and gives the bouquet, that is, he goes and 
makes a present to the one whom he wishes to dance 
after him ; the other does the same thing when he 
finishes the dance ; and, if our French are with them, 
they bring the bouquet and the present to our men 
as well as to the others. 

On the eighteenth of this month, [74J all the Sav- 
ages dispersed, some here and some there into the 
woods, to go during the winter to hunt the Elk, the 
Deer and the Caribou, upon which they live; so that 
we were without neighbors, our French alone re- 
maining in our new Dwelling place. 

On the thirtieth of December, the snow having 
been neither hard nor deep enough to arrest the long 
legs of the Elk, a troop of these poor Barbarians came 
crying for pity at our Settlement; the famine, which 
was cruel last year, has treated them still worse this 
winter, at least in several places ; we have heard a 
report that, near Gaspe, the Savages killed and ate a 
young boy whom the Basques left with them to learn 
their language. Those of Tadoussac, with whom I 


30 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 

les Bafques leur auoient lailTe pour appredre leur 
langue. Ceux de TadoufTac auec lef quels i'hyuernay 
il y a vn an, fe font mangez les vns les autres [75] 
en quelques endroits. Monlieur du Pleflis Bochart 
montant k Kebec, nous a dit qu'il y en auoit encore 
quelques-vns dans les bois, qui n'ofoient paroiftre de- 
uant les autres, ^ raifon qu'ils ont mefchamment fur- 
pris, maffacre, & mang6 leurs compagnons. Nous 
auons efte t^moins de leur famine aux trois Riuieres : 
ils venoient par bandes, tons defigurez, decharnez 
comme des fquelets, aymans, difoient-ils autant mou- 
rir aupr^s des Fran9ois, que dans leurs Forefts: le 
malheur pour eux, eftoit, que comme cefte Habita- 
tion ne faifoit que de commencer, il n'y auoit point 
encore de magafms aux trois Riuieres, nos Fran5ois 
& nous n'ayans apporte de Kebec que les viures ne- 
ceffaires pour le nombre des hommes qui y refidoient ; 
nous nous effor9afmes pourtant de les fecourir, cha- 
cun de fon cofte leur \y6\ faifant la charite felon fes 
forces, ou felon fon affedtion, pas vn de ceux qui 
vindrent vers nous ne mourut de faim. 

Le Pere Buteux & moy entrans dans vne cabane, 
vne femme nous dit, qu'il n' eftoit refte qu'elle & fa 
compagne, de tous ceux auec lefquels elles auoient 
hyuerne dans les bois. On a trouu6 des Chaffeurs 
roides morts fur la neige, tuez du froid & de la faim, 
entre autres, celuy qui auoit pris le prifonnier Hiro- 
quois duquel i'ay parle cy-deffus. 

Vn Sauuage me dit dans cefte famine, que fa 
femme & fa belle foeur eftoient en deliberation de 
tuer leur propre frere: Ten demanday la raifon, nous 
craignons, fit-il, qu'il ne nous aflomme pendant noftre 
fommeil pour nous manger. Nous vous apportons. 


1634-36] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1633 81 

passed the winter a year ago, have eaten each other 
[75] in some localities. Monsieur du Plessis Bochart, 
on his way to Kebec, told us that there were still 
some in the woods who do not dare appear before the 
others because they had wickedly surprised, mas- 
sacred, and eaten their companions. We have been 
witnesses to their famine at the three Rivers; they 
came in bands, greatly disfigured and as fleshless as 
skeletons, liking, they said, as well to die near the 
French as in their own Forests ; the misfortune for 
them was that, as this Settlement was only in its first 
stages, there was not yet a storehouse at three Riv- 
ers, our French and we having brought from Kebec 
only the food necessary for the number of men who 
were residing there; we tried, however, to help 
them, each on his side [76] exercising charity accord- 
ing to his means, or according to his inclinations; 
not one of those who came to us died of hunger. 

When Father Buteux and I entered a certain cabin, 
a woman told us that no one remained but she and 
her companion, of all those with whom they had win- 
tered in the forest. Hunters had been found stiff 
in death upon the snow, killed by cold and starva- 
tion, — among others, the one who had taken pris- 
oner the Hiroquois of whom I have spoken above. 

A Savage told me, during this famine, that his 
wife and sister-in-law contemplated killing their own 
brother; I asked him why, " We are afraid," he re- 
plied, "that he will kill us during our sleep, to 
eat us." " We supply you," said I, " a part of our 
food every day \j'j'\ to help you." " That is true," 
he replied, "thou givest us life; but this man is 
half -mad; he does not eat, he has some evil design; 
we wish to prevent him, wilt thou be displeased at 


32 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.8 

luy dif-je, tous les iours vne partie de nos viures [yjl 
pour vous fecourir. Cela eft vray, refpond-il, tu 
nous donne la vie, mais cet homme eft a demy fol; 
il ne mange point, il a quelque mechant deffein, nous 
le voulons preuenir, en feras-tu marry? le me trou- 
uay vn peu en peine, de confentir a fa mort, ie ne 
pouuois: ie croyois d'ailleurs qu'ils auoient iull:e oc- 
calion de craindre. Nous luy donnafmes confeil de 
ne point laiffer de haches ny d'efpees en fa cabane, 
finon celle dont il auroit a faire, laquelle il poferoit 
fous fa tefte en dormant; il s'accorda h. cela, «& nous 
donna fes haches & fes efpees, pour les emporter en 
noftre chambrette. A trois iours de 1^ ce pauure mi- 
ferable s'en alia a Kebec, ou ayant voulu tuer quelque 
Fran§ois, Monfieur le Gouuerneur recognoiflant fa 
folic, le fit enchaifner pour le rendre aux premiers 
Sauuages qui [78] viendroient. 

Or ces allees & venues des Sauuages affamez ont 
dur6 quafi tout I'hyuer; nous faifions ordinairement 
quelque feftin de pois & de farine boiiillie h. toutes 
les nouuelles bandes; i'en ay veu tel d'entre-eux qui 
en mangeoient plus de huidt efcuellees, deuant que 
de fortir de la place. 

Pendant qu'on leur preparoit le banquet, nous leur 
parlions de Dieu, nous leur reprefentions leurs mi- 
feres ; ils auoient tous la meilleure volont6 du monde 
de cultiuer au Printemps, ce qu'ont fait quelques vns : 
mais ils ne demeurerent pas affiduement aupr^s de 
leurs bleds d'Inde, les abandonnans pour aller pefcher, 
qui deja, qui delk. 

Quand aux propofitions que nous leur faifions de 
croire en Dieu, I'vn d'eux me dit vn iour. Si nous 
[79] croyons en voftre Dieu, neigera-il? II neigera, 


1634 - 36 J LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1633 33 


that?" I found myself a little troubled; I could not 
consent to his death, and yet I believed they had 
good cause for their fear. We advised him not to 
leave any hatchets or javelins in his cabin, except 
one which he would have to use, and he should place 
that under his head when he was sleeping ; he agreed 
to this, and gave us his hatchets and javelins, to put 
them away in our little room. Three days later, this 
poor wretch went to Kebec, where, having tried to 
kill some Frenchman, Monsieur the Governor, see- 
ing that he was mad, had him put in chains, to sur- 
render him to the first Savages that [78] might come 
along. 

Now these comings and goings of famished Sav- 
ages lasted almost all winter; we usually made a 
little feast of peas and boiled flour for all the new 
bands, and I have seen certain ones among them eat 
more than eight bowlfuls of this before leaving the 
place. 

While the banquet was being prepared, we talked 
to them about God, we represented to them their 
poverty ; they all had the best intentions in the world 
to cultivate the land in the Spring, as some of them 
have done ; but they did not remain constantly near 
their Indian corn, — abandoning it to go fishing, 
some in one direction, some in another. 

As to the proposals we make to them to believe in 
God, one of them said to me one day, " If we [79] 
believe in your God, will it snow ?" "It will snow, ' ' 
I said to him. " Will the snow be hard and deep?" 
" It will be." " Shall we find Moose?" " You will 
find them." " Shall we kill some?" " Yes; for as 
God knows all things, as he can do all things, and as 
he is very good, he will not fail to help you, if you 



34 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUJTES [Vol.8 

luy dif je. La neige fera-elle dure & profonde? Elle 
le fera. Trouueros nous des Orignaux? Vous en 
trouuerez. Les tuerons nous? Ouy; Car comme 
Dieu fgait tout, qu'il peut tout, & qu'il eft tres bon, 
il ne manquera pas de vous affifter, li vous auez re- 
cours en luy, li vous receuez fa Foy, & luy rendez 
obeyffance. Ton difcours eft bon, repart-il, nous 
penferons ^ ce que tu nous as dit. Cependant ils s'en 
vent dans les bois, & mettet bien-toft en oubly ce 
qu'on leur a dit: II eft bien vray qu'^ la parfin on 
fera quelque impreffion fur leur efprit, s'il n'eft plus 
dure que la pierre qui fe caue par des gouttes d'eau. 
Vne autrefois ayant vn affez long-temps difcouru 
fur noftre creance k vne efcouade, qui s'en retournoit 
diercher dequoy nourrir [80] leurs femmes & leurs 
enfans, ie leur confeillay, au cas qu'ils ne peuffent 
rien trouuer, de fe mettre k genoux, & de s'addreffer 
k celuy qui a fait le Ciel & la terre, de luy promettre 
qu'ils croiront en luy, s'il les vouloit fecourir: ils me 
promirent qu'ils le feroient ; nous leur prefentafmes k 
cet effedt vne petite Image de noftre Seigneur lefus- 
Chrift, & les aduertifmes de la fagon qu'ils la de- 
uoient placer dans leur[s] grandes neceflitez, des prieres 
qu'ils deuoient faire h. celuy qu'elle reprefentoit, leur 
donnant bonne efperace qu'ils feroient fecourus. Ie 
mis cette Image entre les mains d'vn nomme Saka- 
pouan, dont i'ay fait mention cy-deffus. II me pro- 
mit qu'il feroit de point en point ce que nous luy 
anions ordonn6: mais le miferable ne tint pas fa 
promeffe; car il n'ofa iamais produire cefte Image, 
de [81] peur d'eftre gaulI6 de fes Compagnons, voire 
mefme il fe rioit auec les autres de ce que nous leur 
anions prefch6. Auffi Dieu le chaflia-il, car il tomba 


1634-36] LE JE UNE ' 5 RELA TION, 163s 36 

have recourse to him, if you receive the Faith, and if 
you render him obedience. " " Thy speech is good, ' ' 
answered he, " we will think upon what thou hast 
told us." Meanwhile, they go off into the woods, 
and soon forget what has been said to them. It is 
indeed true that, in the end, some impression will 
be made upon their minds, if they are not harder 
than the stone hollowed out by drops of water. 

Another time, having talked a long time upon our 
belief with a squad of them, who had returned to 
seek food for [80] their wives and children, I advised 
them, in case they could not find anything, to fall 
upon their knees and to address themselves to him 
who has made Heaven and earth, to promise him they 
would believe in him if he would relieve them ; they 
promised that they would do so; we gave them for 
this purpose a little Image of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
and instructed them in the way in which they were 
to place it in the time of their great need, and in 
some prayers they were to make to him whom it rep- 
resented, giving them strong hope that they would 
be helped. I placed this Image in the hands of a 
certain one named Sakapotian, of whom I have spoken 
above. He promised me that he would do every- 
thing just as we had directed ; but the wretch did 
not keep his promise, for he never dared produce this 
Image, lest [81] he should be sneered at by his Com- 
panions ; yes, he even laughed with the others about 
what we had preached to them. And indeed God 
chastised him, for he fell sick and was obliged to 
come seeking the French ; we asked for the Image 
and he returned it. When asked why he had not 
prayed to the Son of the All-powerful, " I went 
away," he replied, " with the good will to pray to 


36 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 8 


malade, & fut contraint de venir rechercher les Fran- 
9ois; nous luy redemandafmes 1' Image & la rendit. 
Interroge pourquoy il n'aiioit point prie le Fils du 
Tout-puiffant, le m'en eftois alle, refpond-il, auec 
bonne volonte de le prier, i'auois conceu vne bonne 
efperance, qu'il nous donneroit a manger, i'auois 
mefme retenu la meilleure de toutes les oraifons que 
tu nous as enf eigne : mais eftant arriue h. nos cabanes, 
i'ay eu peur que fi ie produifois I'lmage, qu'on ne 
s'en moquafl, & que celuy qui a tout fait ne fe faf- 
chaft cotre moy, & nous fift mourir. En vn mot le 
refpec5t humain retiet ce peuple. I'eus beau luy dire, 
que s'il euft efte fidele dans [82] ces gaufferies, s'il 
n'euft point adhere a ces mocqueurs, que Dieu I'auroit 
puillamment alTifle, II faut, dit-il, parler a nos Capi- 
taines. Et en effet qui les auroit gaignez, il auroit 
tout gagne. Ie reuiens toufiours fur mes brifees, qui 
fcauroit parfaic5tement la langue pour les accabler 
de raifons, & pour refuter promptement leurs niaife- 
ries, feroit bien puiiTant parmy eux. Le temps appor- 
tera tout, & Dieu donnant fa benedidtion, Populus qid 
eji in tenebris videbit lucent niagnam. 

Or pour vuider tout c6t article ; ie demanday ^ ce 
Sauuage, quelle eftoit cefle Oraifon qu'il preferoit 
aux autres. Tu nous dis plufieurs chofes, me fit-il, 
mais cefte priere m'a femble la meilleure de toutes. 
Mirinan oukachigakhi nimitchiminan: donne nous au- 
iourd'huy noftre nourriture: donne nous h manger; 
[83] voyla vne excellente Oraifon, difoit-il. Ie ne m'e- 
ftonne pas de cefte Philof ophie ; Anintalis homo, non 
percipit ea qum funt Spiritus Dei. Qui n'a iamais efl6 
qu'k I'efcole de la chair, ne f§auroit parler le langage 
de I'efprit. 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, idjs 37 

him ; I felt a strong hope that he would give us some- 
thing to eat, I had even kept in mind the best of all 
the prayers thou hast taught us ; but, when I arrived 
at our cabins, I was afraid that if I brought out the 
Image they would make sport of me, and that he 
who has made all would be angry with me, and make 
us die. ' ' In one word, these people are restrained 
by worldly considerations. It was in vain I told 
him that if he had been faithful in [82] the midst of 
these mockeries, if he had not clung to these mock- 
ers, God would have given him powerful assistance ; 
" It is necessary," he said " to talk to our Captains." 
And, in fact, one who could gain them could gain 
all. I am always retracing my footsteps, in saying, 
that one who knew the language perfectly, so that 
he could crush their reasons and promptly refute 
their absurdities, would be very powerful among 
them. Time will bring all things ; God giving his bless- 
ing, Populus qui est in tenebris videbit lucem niagnam. 

Now to end this whole story, I asked this Savage 
what this Prayer was that he preferred to all others. 
" Thou hast told us many things," he replied; " but 
this prayer has seemed to me the best of all : Miri- 
nan oukachigakhi nimitchiminan, ' Give us to-day our 
food, give us something to eat.' [83] This is an ex- 
cellent Prayer," he said. I am not surprised at this 
Philosophy; Anima/is homo, non percipit ea quce sunt 
Spiritus Dei. He who has never been at any school 
but that of the flesh, cannot speak the language of 
the spirit. 

On the twenty-seventh of the same month of Janu- 
ary, a Savage came to acquaint me with a secret well 
known among the Algonquains, but not among the 
Montagnais ; neither is it known in this part of the 


38 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 8 

Le vingt-feptiefme du tnefme mois de lanuier vn 
Sauuage me vint apprendre vn fecret bien cogneu 
des Algonquains, mais non pas des Montagnais ; aufli 
n'eft-il pas de ce pays-cy, ains de bien auant dans 
les terres. II me dit done, que 11 quelqu'vn de nos 
Fran9ois vouloit raccompagner, qu'il s'en iroit pef- 
cher fous la glace d'vn grand eftang, place a quelque 
cinq mille pas au del^ de la grande Riuiere, vis-k-vis 
de noftre Habitation. II y alia en effet, & rapporta 
quelques poiff ons ; ce qui conf ola fort nos Fran§ois : 
car ils peuuent maintenant au plus fort [84] des 
glaces, tendre des rets dans c6t eftang. Fay veu 
cefte pefche: voicy comme ils s'y comportent, lis 
font a grands coups de hache vn trou affez grandelet 
dans la glace de I'eflang; ils en font d'autres plus 
petits, d'ef paces en ef paces, & auec des perches ils 
paflent vne fifcelle de trous en trous par deflous la 
glace: cefte fifcelle aufli longue que les rets qu'on 
veut tendre, fe va arrefter au dernier trou, par lequel 
on tire, & on eftend dedans I'eau toute la rets qui luy 
eft attachee. Voyla comme on tend les filets poar la 
premiere fois, quand on les veut vifiter, il eft fort 
aife : car on les retire par la plus grande ouuerture, 
pour en recueillir le poifl!on, puis il ne faut que reti- 
rer la fifcelle pour les retendre, les perches ne fer- 
uans qu'a paffer la premiere fois la fifcelle. Quand 
Dieu aura beny ces contrees d'vne peuplade de Fran- 
gois, [85] on trouuera mille biens, & mille commodi- 
tez fur le pays, que ces Barbares ignorent. 

Le fixiefme de Feurier la grande Riuiere fut gel^e 
tout ^ fait, en forte qu'on pafl!oit delTus en afl!eu- 
rance ; elle gela mefme deuant Kebec, ce qui eft fort 
extraordinaire, a raifon que les marees font Ik fort 


1634-36] LEJEUNE'S RELATION, i6ss 39 

country, but farther into the interior. He told me 
that, if some one of our Frenchmen would accompa- 
ny him, he would go and fish under the ice of a 
g^eat pond, located some five thousand paces beyond 
the great River, opposite our Settlement. One of 
them did, in fact, go there, and brought back some 
fish, which greatly comforted our French people, for 
they can now, in the thickest [84] ice, stretch their 
nets in this pond. I have seen them fish in this way ; 
now see how they do it. With great blows of the 
axe they make a tolerably large hole in the ice of the 
pond ; then at intervals they make other smaller 
ones, and by the use of poles they pass a cord from 
hole to hole under the ice; this cord, which is as 
long as the nets they wish to stretch, stops at the last 
hole, through which it is drawn, and they spread 
out in the water the whole net which is attached to 
it. This is the way they spread the nets the first 
time. When they wish to examine them, it is very 
easily done, for they draw them out through the 
largest opening, to collect the fish from them ; then 
it is only necessary to draw back the cord to respread 
the nets, the poles serving only to put the cord 
through the first time. When God has blessed these 
countries with a colony of French ,[85] there will result 
a thousand benefits and a thousand conveniences for 
the country, of which these Barbarians are ignorant. 

On the sixth of February, the great River was 
completely frozen over, so that one could walk over 
it in safety ; it even froze opposite Kebec, which is 
very extraordinary, as the tides there are very strong. 
It seems to me that the severity of the winter makes 
itself especially felt during this month. 

On the eigfhth of March occurred the death of the 


40 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.8 

violentes. II me femble que la rigueur de I'hyuer 
s'eft fait fentir particulierement en ce mois cy. 

Le huidtiefme de Mars moumt cefte femme Sau- 
uage nommee Anne, dont i'ay parle au Chapitre fe- 
cond: come les douleurs de la mort approchoient, 
elle difoit par fois toute feule, nitapoueten, nitapoueten, 
le croy, ie croy, ni/adkihau, nifadkihau. le I'ayme, 
ie I'ayme: ouaskoucki nioui itoutan. Ie veux aller au 
Ciel: & vne fois elle me dit/comme ie la quittois, 
apres I'auoir inflruite & [86] vifitee en famaladie; 
Tu m'as feruy de pere iufques icy, continue iufques 
^ ma mort, qui ne tardera pas ; retourne moy voir au 
pluftoft, & fi tu me vois li has, que ie ne puilTe par- 
ler, fouuienne toy que ie penferay toufiours a ce que 
tu m'as dit, & que ie croiray touliours en mon coeur. 
Vn Sauuage m'ayant informe qu'elle n'eftoit point 
de ce pays-cy, ie I'interrogeay quelques iours deuant 
fa mort de fa patrie : elle me dit, que ceux de fa Na- 
tion s'appelloient 07iperigo7ie ouaouakhi, qu'ils habitoiet 
bien auant dans les terres plus bas que Tadouffac, de 
mefme cofte ; qu'on pouuoit par des fleuues defcendre 
de leur pays dans la grande riuiere de f aindt Laurens ; 
que fes Compatriotes n'auoient aucun commerce auec 
les Europeans ; c'eft pourquoy, difoit-elle, ils fe fer- 
uent de baches de pierres; qu'ils ont des [87] Cerfs, 
& des Caftors en abondance, mais fort peu d'Elans; 
qu'ils parlent le langage Montagnais, & qu'ils ne 
manqueroient de venir k la traitte auec les Fran9ois, 
n'efloit que les Sauuages de Tadouffac les veulent 
tuer quand ils les rencontrent. Ie ne f9ay fi ce ne 
font point ceux que nous appellons Berfiamites, dont 
quelques- vns ont efle cruellement maffacrez cette an- 
nee k Tadouffac. Ces perfides Sauuages les accueilli- 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i63S 41 

Savage woman named Anne, of whom I have spoken 
in Chapter second; as the angfuish of death ap- 
proached, she said at times to herself, nitapoueten, ni- 
tapoueten, " I believe, I believe;" nisadkihau, nisadki- 
haii, " I love him, I love him;" ouaskoiicki nioui itou- 
tan, " I wish to go to Heaven;" and once she said to 
me, as I was leaving her after having instructed 
and [86] visited her in her sickness ; ' ' Thou hast been 
a father to me up to the present; continue so until 
my death, which will not be long; come back and see 
me very soon, and if thou seest me so low I cannot 
speak, remember that I shall always think of what 
thou hast said to me, and that I shall always believe 
in my heart. " As a Savage had informed me that 
she did not belong to this region, I asked her a few 
days before her death about her native country : she 
told me that the people of her Nation were called 
ouperigoue ouaouakhi, that they dwelt farther back in 
the interior, below Tadoussac, and on the same side; 
that they could descend through the rivers from their 
country to the great river saint Lawrence ; that her 
Countrymen had no commerce with the Europeans ; 
" that is why," she said, " they use hatchets made 
of stone;" that they have [87] Deer and Beavers in 
abundance, but very few Elk; that they speak the 
Montagnais language, and that they would certainly 
come and trade with the French, were it not that the 
Savages of Tadoussac try to kill them when they en- 
counter them. I do not know whether these are the 
ones that we call Bersiamites, some of whom have 
been cruelly massacred this year at Tadoussac. These 
perfidious Savages received them very kindly, and, 
when they had them in their power, treacherously 
put them to death. 


42 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 

rent fort humainement, & quand ils les eurent en leur 
puiflance, ils les mirent k mort traiftreufement. 

Le cinquiefme d'Auril vn Sauuage Montaignais 
vint rapporter au Pere Buteux, que nos Peres, & nos 
Fran9ois qui les accompagnoient auoient efl6 delaif- 
fez dans les bois, & liez k des arbres par les Hurons 
qui les menoient en leur pays, lefquels [88] s'eflans 
trouuez mal d'vne certaine epidemie qui affligea I'Au- 
tomne paffe toutes ces Nations, creurent que cefle 
maladie leur eftoit caufee par les Fran9ois, ce qui les 
auoit reduits a les traitter de la forte, & ce fauuage 
afleuroit auoir appris cefle nouuelle de la bouche de 
quelques BilTiriniens, voifins des Hurons. Nous re- 
mifmes toute cefle affaire entre les mains de N. Sei- 
gneur, qui prendra nos vies dans les temps, & dans 
les occafions qu'il luy plaira. Nous auios defia ap- 
pris, comme i'efcriuy I'an paffe des mauuaifes nou- 
uelles du P. Anthoine Daniel qu'on nous faifoit quafi 
mort : mais en fin la bont6 de Dieu nous a conf olez ; 
car la plufpart de ces bruits fe font trouuez faux. II 
eft vray que le Pere Daniel, & tous les autres, ont 
fouffert incomparablement en leur voyage, comme V. 
R. pourra veoir [89] par la Relation du Pere Brebeuf . 

Le quatorziefme du mefme mois, toutes les glaces 
eftant parties, ie m'embarquay dans vn canot auec 
vn de nos Fran9ois, & vn Algonquain, pour aller 
veoir ce beau lac ou eflang, dont i'ay parle cy deffus, 
que i'auois veu tout glace pendant I'hyuer. En che- 
min ie vis la chaffe du Rat muf que ; cet animal a vne 
fort longue queue, il y en a de gros comme des la- 
pins: quand il[s] paroiffent fur I'eau les Sauuagesles 
f uiuent dans leurs petits canots ; auffi-tofl ces Rats f e 
voyant pourfuiuis fe plongent en I'eau, & leurs enne- 


1634-36] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, rdjs 43 

On the fifth day of April, a Montaignais Savage 
came to report to Father Buteux that our Fathers 
and our Frenchmen who accompanied them had been 
abandoned in the woods and tied to trees, by the 
Hurons who were taking them to their country, — 
who, [88] falling ill with a certain epidemic which 
last Autumn afflicted all these Nations, believed that 
this malady was caused by the French, and it was 
this which made them treat the French in this way ; 
this savage declared that he had heard the news 
from the lips of some Bissiriniens, neighbors of the 
Hurons. We placed the whole matter in the hands 
of Our Lord, who will take our lives at the time and 
in the manner that shall please him. We had al- 
ready learned, as I wrote last year, the bad news 
about Father Anthoine Daniel, who had been re- 
ported to us as almost dead ; but at last the goodness 
of God has comforted us, for most of these reports 
are found to be false. It is true that Father Daniel 
and all the others have endured incomparable suffer- 
ings in their voyage, as Your Reverence can see [89] 
by the Relation of Father Brebeuf. 

On the fourteenth of the same month, as the ice 
was completely broken up, I embarked in a canoe 
with one of our Frenchmen and an Algonquain, to 
go and see the beautiful lake or pond of which I 
have spoken above, and which I had seen all frozen 
over during the winter. On the way, I saw a Musk- 
rat hunt. Some of these animals are as large as rab- 
bits; they have very long tails. When they appear 
upon the water, the Savages follow them in their 
little canoes ; these Rats, upon seeing themselves pur- 
sued, immediately dive into the water, their enemies 
hurrying quickly to the place where they expect 


44 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol. 8 

mis s'en vont vifle, ou ils preuoyent qu'ils reuien- 
dront au deffus pour prendre haleine: bref ils les 
pourfuiuent tant qu'ils les laflent, en forte qu'ils font 
contraints de refler quelque teps au deflus de I'eau, 
pour n'eftre fuffoquez: alors ils les [90] allomment 
auec leurs auirons, ou les tuent a coups de fleches. 
Quand cet animal a gaign6 la terre, il fe fauue ordi- 
nairement dans fon trou. On I'appelle Rat mufqu^, 
pource qu'en effect vne partie de fon corps prife au 
Printemps fent le mufc, en autre temps elle n'a point 
d'odeur. 

Le vingt-vniefme, ie partis des trois Riuieres pour 
venir ^ Kebec, afin de m'y trouuer, felon le defir de 
nos Peres, k la venue des vailleaux. Nous les atten- 
dions de bonne heure, ils font venus bien tard, le 
manuals temps leur a cauf e vne rude trauerf e ; nous 
efperions de les veoir fur la fin de May, & nous n'en 
auons eu nouuelle que le vingt-cinquiefme de luin ; 
auquel temps arriua vn canot enuoye de Tadouffac, 
qui rapporta qu'vn vaiffeau eftoit a I'lfle du Bic, & 
qu'il en venoit encore cinq ou fix, auec bonne [91] 
deliberation de combattre tons ceux qu'ils trouue- 
roient dans la Riuiere fans Commiffion. 

Le quatriefme de luillet, vne chalouppe enuoyee 
de la part de Monlieur du Pleffis Bochart, general de 
la fiotte, refioiiit tons nos Fragois, & nous affeura de 
fa venue, & qu'il eftoit fuiuy de huidl forts nauires, 
fix pour Tadouffac, & deux pour Mifcou, fans ce que 
Ton enuoyoit au Cap Breton, & cofte de I'Acadie k 
M'- le Com. de Razilly. 

Le dixiefme vne barque montant en haut, nous ap- 
porta le Pere Pijart. A mefme temps deux de nos 
Fran9ois defcendant des Hurons, nous prefenterent 


1634-36] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1635 45 

them to come up again to take breath ; in short, they 
pursue them until they are tired out, so that they 
must remain above the water a little while, in order 
not to suflfocate; then they [90] knock them down 
with their paddles, or kill them with arrows. When 
this animal has gained the land, it usually saves it- 
self by hiding in its hole. It is called Muskrat be- 
cause, in fact, a part of its body smells of musk, if 
caught in the Spring, — at other times, it has no odor. 

On the twenty-first, I left three Rivers to come 
to Kebec, in order to be there, according to the wish 
of the Fathers, at the coming of the ships. We ex- 
pected them early, but they came very late, the bad 
weather having caused them to have a rough passage ; 
we hoped to see them towards the end of May, and 
we had no news of them until the twenty-fifth of 
June, when a canoe arrived, sent from Tadoussac, 
which reported that a ship was at the Island of Bic, 
and that five or six more of them were coming, with 
the firm [91] determination to attack all those they 
found in the River without Commissions. 

On the fourth of July, a shallop sent from Mon- 
sieur du Plessis Bochart, commandant of the fleet, 
gladdened all our French, — assuring us of his com- 
ing, and that he was followed by eight strong ships, 
six for Tadoussac and two for Miscou, not including 
the one sent to Cape Breton and the coast of Acadia, 
to Monsieur the Commandant de Razilly. 

On the tenth, a bark which was ascending the 
river brought us Father Pijart.^ At the same time, 
two of our Frenchmen, coming down from the Hu- 
rons, presented to us the letters of our Fathers who 
are in that country ; so we received cheering news 
from all sides. On the one hand, the Father testi- 


46 LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUJTES [Vol. 8 

les lettres de nos Peres qui font en ce pays-la ; c'efloit 
nous r^joiiyr de toutes parts. D'vn cofte le Pere 
nous temoignoit que V. R. nous enuoyoit 4. de nos 
Peres, & 2. de nos Freres pour renfort, [92] & deux 
autres Peres pour la Reiidece de S. Charles. Qu'vne 
infinite de perfonnes cheriffoient cefle Miffion, & que 
V. R. toute pleine de coeur, nous donneroit tons les 
ans autant d'ouuriers Euangeliques, que la Miffion en 
pourroit nourrir; I'ardeur de venir fouffrir quelques 
chofes en ces contr6es pour la gloire de noftre Sei- 
gneur, eftant quali incroyable. D'autre cofte la sate de 
nos Peres dans les Hurons, oil on les faifoit morts, les 
bonnes difpofitions de ces Peuples, pour receuoir les 
veritez Chreftiennes ; I'affedtion qu'ils nous portent, 
nous faifoit benir le faindt Nom de Dieu, & luy rendre 
graces de tant de benedidtions, qu'il va refpandant fur 
cefte entreprife. 

Le douziefme, Monfieur le Cheualier de la Roche- 
lacquelin, commandant le nauire nomme le Saindt [93] 
lacques, vint moiiiller I'ancre deuant Kebec. Noftre 
Frere Pierre Feaut6 1' ay ant remercie de fa bienueil- 
lance, nous vint veoir en noflre petite Maif on de noftre 
Dame des Anges. Le lendemain noflre ioye s'accreut 
par la venue du Pere Claude Quantin & de noflre 
Frere Pierre Tellier, portez dans le vaiffeau du Capi- 
taine de Nefle. 

Le vingtiefme, Monfieur le General nous rendit le 
Pere le Mercier, qu'il amena dans fa barque; tons 
ces iours nous eftoient des iours de ioye & de contente- 
ment, voyant & nos Franjois & nos Peres en bonne 
fant^, apres beaucoup de tourmente fur la mer. 

Le vingt-deuxiefme de luillet fe fit vne AfCemblee 
ou vn Confeil entre les Francois & les Hurons. Le 


1634-36] LE JEUNBS RELATION, i635 47 

fied to us that Your Reverence was sending us 4 of 
our Fathers, and 2 of our Brothers, as a reinforcement, 
[92] and two other Fathers for the Residence of St. 
Charles ; that a vast number of people cherished this 
Mission, and that Your Reverence, in the fulness of 
your heart, would every year give as many Gospel 
workers as the Mission could support; the zeal to 
come and suffer something in these countries for the 
glory of our Lord, being almost incredible. On the 
other hand, the good health of our Fathers among 
the Hurons, where they were reported dead, and the 
good disposition of those Peoples to receive the Chris- 
tian truths, and the affection they bear us, make us 
bless the holy Name of God, and render him thanks 
for so many blessings as he is about to pour down 
upon this enterprise. 

On the twelfth, Monsieur the Chevalier de la 
Roche- Jacquelin, commandant of the ship called 
" Sainct [93] Jacques," cast anchor before Kebec. 
Our Brother Pierre Feaute,^ having thanked him for 
his kindness, came to see us in our little House of 
nostre Dame des Anges. The next day our joy was 
increased by the arrival of Father Claude Quantin ^° 
and of our Brother Pierre Tellier, who were brought 
in the ship of Captain de Nesle. 

On the twentieth. Monsieur the General conveyed 
to us Father Mercier," whom he had brought in his 
bark. All these days were for us days of joy and 
contentment, seeing both our French and our Fa- 
thers in good health after much suffering upon the 
sea. 

On the twenty-second of July, there was held an 
Assembly or Council between the French and the 
Hurons. Father Buteux, who had come down from 


48 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 

Pere Buteux qui eftoit defcendu de la Refidence de 
la Conception, & moy [94] y affiftafmes. Apres les 
affaires communes, Monlieur de Champlain noftre 
Gouuerneur, recommanda auec vne affedtion ener- 
gigue nos Peres, & les Fran9ois qui les accompa- 
gnoient a ces Peuples; il leur fit dire, que s'ils vou- 
loient conferuer & accroiftre Tamitie qu'ils ont auec 
les Fran9ois, qu'il falloit qu'ils receuffent noftre cre- 
ance, & adoraffent le Dieu que nous adorons; que 
cela leur f eroit grandement profitable : car Dieu pou- 
uant tout, les benira, les protegera, leur donnera la 
vidtoire contre leurs ennemis ; que les Fran9ois iront 
en bon nombre en leur Pays; qu'ils epouferont leurs 
filles quand elles feront Chreftiennes : qu'ils enfeigne- 
ront h. toute leur nation k faire des baches, des cou- 
fteaux, & autres chofes qui leur font fort necefl!aires, 
& qu'a cet effet ils deuroient des I'an prochain [95] 
amener bon nombre de leurs petits gar§ons, que nous 
les logerons bien, que nous les nourrirons, & que 
nous les inftruirons & cherirons comme s'ils eftoient 
nos petits Freres. Et pour autant que tous les Capi- 
taines ne pouuoient des defcendre en bas, qu'ils tien- 
droient Confeil fur ce fujet en leur Pays, auquel ils 
appelloient Echom, c'eft ainfi qu'il[s] appellent le Pere 
Brebeuf : & la deffus leur donnant vne lettre pour luy 
porter, il adioufta: Voicy que i'informe le Pere de 
tous ces points. II fe trouuera en voftre Affemblee, 
& vous f era vn pref ent que f es Freres luy enuoyent : 
Ik vous ferez paroiftre fi veritablement vous aymez 
les Fran9ois. I'auois fuggere ces penfees k Monfieur 
noflre gouuerneur qu'il approuua; mais encore il les 
amplifia auec mille loiianges & mille tefmoignages 
d'affectio enuers noftre [96] Compagnie. Monfieur 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i635 49 

the Residence of the Conception, and I [94] partici- 
pated therein. After public affairs, Monsieur de 
Champlain, our Governor, very affectionately recom- 
mended our Fathers, and the French who accompa- 
nied them, to these Tribes; he told them, through 
an interpreter, that if they wished to preserve and 
strengthen their friendship with the French, they 
must receive our belief and worship the God that we 
worshiped; that this would be very profitable to 
them, for God, being all-powerful, will bless and 
protect them, and make them victorious over their 
enemies ; that the French will go in goodly numbers 
to their Country ; that they will marry their daugh- 
ters when they become Christians; that they will 
teach all their people to make hatchets, knives, and 
other things which are very necessary to them ; and 
that for this purpose they must next year [95] bring 
many of their little boys, whom we will lodge com- 
fortably, and will feed, instruct and cherish as if 
they were our little Brothers. And that, inasmuch 
as all the Captains could not come down there, they 
should hold a Council upon this matter in their Coun- 
try, to which they should summon Echom, — it is 
thus they call Father Brebeuf;^^ and then, giving 
them a letter to bear to him, he added, " Here I in- 
form the Father of all these points. He will be in 
your Assembly, and will make you a present that his 
Brothers send him; there you will show whether 
you truly love the French." I suggested these 
thoughts to Monsieur our governor, and he approved 
them ; but he also amplified them with a thousand 
praises and a thousand proofs of affection towards 
our [96] Society, Monsieur the General also said a 
few words upon this subject, and did all he could to 


50 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.8 

le General prit aufll la parole fur ce fujet, & fit tout 
fon pofllble pour donner k cognoiftre ^ ces Peuples, 
reftime que font les grands Capitaines de France des 
Peres qu'on leur enuoye; & tout cela pour les difpo- 
fer k recognoiftre le Dieu des Franjois, & de tout 
rVniuers. A ce difcours vn Capitaine repartit, qu'ils 
ne manqueroient pas de rendre cefle lettre, & de te- 
nir Confeil fur les Articles propofez. Qu'au refte 
que toute leur Nation aymoit tous les Fran9ois, & 
qu'il fembloit neantmoins, que les Fran§ois n'ay- 
moient qu'vne feule de leurs Bourgades, puifque 
tous ceux qui montoient en leur Pays la prenoient 
pour leur demeure. On leur refpondit, que iufques 
icy ils n'auoient eu qu'vn petit nombre de nos Fran- 
gois, & que s'ils embraffoient noftre creance, qu'ils 
en auroient [97] en toutes leurs Bourgades. 

Au fortir du Confeil nous allafmes veoir ceux qui 
voudroient embarquer le P. le Mercier & le Pere Pi- 
jart auec leur petit bagage, pour les porter en leur 
Pays: le Pere Brebeuf m'en auoit affigne quelques- 
vns dans fes lettres, mais plufieurs fe pref entoient ; 
ils regardoient les Peres attentiuement, les mefu- 
roient de leurs yeux, ils demandoient s'ils n'eftoient 
point mef chants, s'ils rameroient bien, ils les pre- 
noient par les mains, «& leur faifoient figne qu'il fau- 
droit bien remuer I'auiron. 

En fin le vingt-troifiefme du mefme mois de luillet 
nos Sauuages bien contens, embarquerent nos deux 
Peres, & vn ieune gargon Frangois, qui a defia palI6 
vne ann6e dans le pays: iamais ie ne vy perfonnes 
plus ioyeufes que ces bons Peres, on les fit mettre 
pieds nuds k 1' entree [98] de leur nauire d'efcorce, 
de peur de les gafter, ils s'y mettent gayement, por- 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i63S 51 

let these Peoples know the high estimation in which 
the great Captains of France hold these Fathers that 
they send over to them ; and all this was done to dis- 
pose them to recognize the God of the French and of 
the whole Universe. To this discourse a Chief re- 
plied that they would not fail to deliver this letter, 
and to hold a Council upon the Matters proposed. 
That, as to the rest, their whole Nation loved all the 
French ; and yet, notwithstanding this, the French 
loved only one of their Villages, since all those who 
had come up to their Country selected that as their 
dwelling place. They were answered that, up to the 
present, they had had only a few of our Frenchmen ; 
and that, if they embraced our belief, they would 
have some of them [97] in all their villages. 

At the conclusion of the Council, we went to see 
those who were to take on board Father le Mercier 
and Father Pi j art, with their little baggage, to con- 
vey them into their Country ; Father Brebeuf had des- 
ignated certain ones to me in his letter, but several 
presented themselves. They gazed attentively at 
the Fathers, measured them with their eyes, asked 
if they were ill-natured, if they paddled well; then 
took them by the hands, and made signs to them 
that it would be necessary to handle the paddles well. 

At last, on the twenty-third of the same month of 
July, our Savages, well pleased, embarked our two 
Fathers and a young French boy who has already 
passed a year in the country. I never saw persons 
more joyful than were these good Fathers ; they had 
to go barefooted into the [98] bark ships, for fear of 
spoiling them, and they did this gayly, with glad 
eyes and faces, notwithstanding the sufferings they 
were about to encounter. I was reminded of St. An- 


52 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 

tans vn oeil, & vn vifage tout ioyeux, dans les fouf- 
f ranees qu'ils vont reneontrer. le me reprefente vn 
S. Andre volant a la Croix ; on les fepara en trois ca- 
nots ; celuy qui portoit le Pere Pijart eftant le pre- 
mier preft tira droit au bord, c'eft a dire au vailTeau 
de Monfieur le Cheualier, pour luy donner le dernier 
adieu, & le remercier encore vne fois, des courtoifies 
fort particulieres qu'il auoit receu de luy, palTant 
dans fon nauire depuis la France iufques k Tadouflac. 
Apres I'auoir faliie Monlieur le Cheualier fit ietter 
des pruneaux das fon canot pour les Sauuages qui le 
menoient, & fit tirer trois volees de canon par hon- 
neur. Ces pauures Barbares treffailloiet d'aife, met- 
tant la main fur leur bouche en figne d'eftonnement. 

[99] Le Pere le Mercier vint apres dans fon canot, 
pour recognoiftre les obligations qu'il a k Monfieur 
le General, & prendre conge de luy ; il ne fgauoit en 
quels termes nous tefmoigner le foin qu'il a des no- 
ftres, qui palTent auec luy dans fon vailTeau. Apres 
les adieux, on ietta aulfi des prunes a fes condudteurs, 
le canon du vaifl!eau & de la barque, faifant entendre 
aux Sauuages, qu'ils deuoient auoir grand foin de 
ceux que nos Capitaines Frangois honoroient auec 
tant d'affedtion. 

II arriua vne chofe plaifante en ces entrefaites, le 
Pere Buteux en mefme temps remontoit aux trois 
Riuieres dans vn canot, les Sauuages qui le condui- 
foient, voyans I'accueil qu'on faifoit aux Peres, & aux 
Sauuages qui alloient aux Hurons, tirerent comme 
auoient fait [100] les deux autres canots au vaifl!eau 
oil eftoit Monfieur le General, & Monfieur le Cheua- 
lier. Le Pere Buteux leur crie, Ce n'eft pas Ik oti il 
faut aller, ie ne vay pas aux Hurons. II n'importe, 


1634-38] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib35 53 

drew flying to the Cross. They were taken in three 
different canoes; the one that carried Father Pijart 
being the first ready, it went directly alongside, that 
is, of the ship of Monsieur the Chevalier, to say to 
him his last adieus and to thank him once more for 
very especial courtesies received from him while 
crossing in his ship from France to Tadoussac. 
After having saluted him, Monsieur the Chevalier 
had some prunes thrown into his canoe for the Sav- 
ages who were taking him, and had the cannon fired 
off three times in his honor. These poor Barbarians 
were thrilled with delight, placing their hands over 
their mouths as a sign of astonishment. 

[99] Father le Mercier came afterward in his ca- 
noe, to acknowledge the obligations he was under to 
Monsieur the General, and to take leave of him ; the 
latter did not know how to express the interest he 
felt in those of our society who had come over with 
him in his ship. After the farewells, they also threw 
some prunes to his boatmen, the cannon of the ship 
and of the bark making these Savages understand 
that they must take good care of those whom our 
French Captains honored with so much affection. 

In the midst of these ceremonies a laughable in- 
cident occurred. Father Buteux was starting at the 
same time to return to the three Rivers in a canoe ; 
the Savages who were taking him, seeing the honors 
bestowed on the Fathers and the Savages who were 
going to the Hurons, turned, as [100] the other two 
canoes had done, to the ship where Monsieur the 
General and Monsieur the Chevalier were. Father 
Buteux called to them, " You must not go there; I 
am not going to the Hurons." It did not matter; 
since favors had there been bestowed upon those who 


64 LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 8 

puis qu'on faifoit \k du bien a ceux qui portoient nos 
Peres, ceux-cy en vouloient goufter auffi bien que 
les autres ; auffi leur fit on la mefme courtoifie. 

Le premier iour d'Aouft le Pere Buteux m'efcriuit 
des trois Riuieres, ou il eftoit alle, comme i'ay dit, 
que les Sauuages Montaignais auoient efleu vn nou- 
ueau Capitaine, celuy qu'ils auoient auparauant nom6 
Capitanal eftant mort d^s rAutomne palTe: ce Capi- 
tanal eftoit vn homme de bon fens, grand amy des 
Frangois ; affemblant les Principaux de fa Nation k 
la mort, il leur enioignit de conferuer cette bonne 
[loi] intelligence auec fes amis, leur difant que pour 
preuue de I'amour qu'il nous portoit, qu'il defiroit 
encore apres fa mort demeurer auec nous, & fur 
I'heure il fe fit rapporter de delk le grand fleuue ou 
il eftoit, pour mourir aupres de la nouuelle Habita- 
tion. II demanda auffi qu'il fuft porte en terre par 
les mains de nos Fran9ois, aufquels il deftina vn pe- 
tit prefent; bref il fupplia, qu'on luy donnaft fepul- 
ture aupres de fes amis. Tout cela luy fut accord6, 
Monfieur de Champlain a fait mettre vne petite 
clofture h. I'entour de fon tombeau, pour le rendre 
remarquable. Si nous euffions efte pour lors aux 
trois Riuieres, ie ne doute point qu'il ne fuft mort 
Chreftien: I'ay vn grand regret k la mort de c^t 
homme : car il auoit t6moign6 en plein Confeil, que 
fon defCein eftoit d'arrefter ceux [102] de fa Nation 
aupres du fort de la riuiere d' Anguien ; il m'en auoit 
auffi donne parole en particulier, il eftoit aym^ des 
fiens & des Franfois: c'eft ce Capitaine qui rauit il y 
a deux ans tous fes auditeurs en vne Harangue, dont 
ie fis mention pour lors. S'il viuoit encore, il fauo- 
riferoit fans doute ce que nous allons entreprendre ce 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, idjS 55 

were taking our Fathers, these wished to taste some 
of them, as well as the others ; so they were shown 
the same courtesy. 

On the first day of August, Father Buteux wrote 
me from the three Rivers, — where he had gone, as 
I have said, — that the Montaignais Savages had 
elected a new Captain, the one whom they had for- 
merly called Capitanal having died the previous 
Autumn. This Capitanal was a man of good sense, 
and a great friend of the French. Assembling the 
Principal Men of his Nation at the time of his death, 
he charged them to preserve this good [loi] under- 
standing with his friends, telling them that, as a 
proof of the love he bore us, he would like, even 
after death, to live with us; and he straightway had 
himself carried from beyond the great river, where 
he was, to die near the new Settlement. He also 
asked to be borne to the grave by the hands of our 
French, for whom he designated a little present; in 
short, he begged that he might be buried near his 
friends. All this was granted him; Monsieur de 
Champlain has had a little enclosure placed around 
his grave, to distinguish it. If we had then been at 
three Rivers, I do not doubt that he would have 
died a Christian. I was very sorry when this man 
died ; for he had shown in open Council that his pur- 
pose was to have the people [102] of his Nation settle 
near the fort of the Anguien river ; ^^ he had spoken 
to me also about this in private. He was loved by 
his people and by the French ; it was this Captain 
who delighted all his hearers by a Speech he made 
two years ago, which I mentioned at the time. If 
he still lived, he would without doubt favor what 
we are going to undertake this Spring, to be able 


56 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.8 

Printemps, pour les pouuoir rendre fedentaires petit 
k petit. 

Comme ainli foit que ces pauures Barbares foient 
des long temps accouftumez a eftre faineants, il eft 
difficile qu'ils s'arreftent a cultiuer la terre, s'ils ne 
font fecourus. Nous auons done deffein de voir, fi 
quelque famille veut quitter fes courfes; s'il s'en 
trouue quelqu'vne, nous employ erons au renouueau 
trois hommes "k planter du bled d'Inde, proche de la 
nouuelle Habitation [103] des trois Riuieres, ou ce 
peuple fe plaift grandement. Si cette famille s'ar- 
refte pendant I'hyuer, nous la nourrirons de bled de 
noftre recolte & de la fienne ; car elle mettra auffi la 
main k I'oeuure : fi elle ne s'arrefle point nous retire- 
rons noftre part, & la laifferons aller. 

Ce feroit vn grand bien, & pour leurs corps, & pour 
leurs ames, & pour le trafique de ces Meffieurs, fi ces 
Nations eftoient ftables, & fi elles fe redolent dociles 
^ noftre diredtion ; ce qu'elles f eront comme i'efpere 
auec le temps. S'ils font fedentaires, & s'ils cul- 
tiuent la terre, ils ne mourront pas de faim comme il 
leur arriue f ouuent dans leurs courfes ; on les pourra 
inflruire aif^ment, & les Caftors fe multiplieront 
beaucoup; ces animaux font plus feconds que nos 
brebis de France, [104] les femelles portent iufques 
^ cinq & fix petits chaque annee : mais les Sauuages 
trouuans vne cabane tuent tout, grands & petits, & 
mafles & femelles: il y a danger qu'en fin ils n'exter- 
minent tout "k fait I'efpece en ces Pays, comme il en 
eft arriue aux Hurons, lefquels n'ont pas vn feul 
Caftor, allans traitter ailleurs les pelleteries qu'ils 
apportet au Magazin de ces Meffieurs. Or on fera en 
forte que nos Montaignais, auec le temps, s'ils s'ar- 


1634 - 36] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1635 57 

to make them, little by little, a sedentary people. 

As it happens that these poor Barbarians have 
been for a long time accustomed to be idlers, it is 
hard for them to locate and cultivate the soil unless 
they are assisted. Our plan now is to see if some 
family is not willing to give up these wanderings ; if 
one be found, we will in the spring employ three 
men to plant Indian corn near the new Settlement 
[103] at the three Rivers, with which these people 
are greatly pleased. If this family settles there dur- 
ing the winter, we will maintain them with corn 
from our harvest and from theirs, for they will also 
work; if they do not stay with us, we will with- 
draw our assistance and let them go. 

It would be a great blessing for their bodies, for 
their souls, and for the traffic of these Gentlemen, if 
those Tribes were stationary, and if they became 
docile to our direction, which they will do, I hope, 
in the course of time. If they are sedentary, and if 
they cultivate the land, they will not die of hunger, 
as often happens to them in their wanderings ; we 
shall be able to instruct them easily, and Beavers 
will greatly multiply. These animals are more pro- 
lific than our sheep in France, [104] the females 
bearing as many as five or six every year ; but, when 
the Savages find a lodge of them, they kill all, great 
and small, male and female. There is danger that 
they will finally exterminate the species in this Re- 
gion, as has happened among the Hurons, who have 
not a single Beaver, going elsewhere to buy the skins 
they bring to the storehouse of these Gentlemen. 
Now it will be so arranged that, in the course of 
time, each family of our Montaignais, if they become 
located, will take its own territory for hunting, with- 


58 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.8 

reftent, que chaque famille prenne fon cartier pour 
la chaffe, fans fe letter fur les brifees de fes volUns: 
de plus on leur confeillera de ne tuer que les mafles, 
& encore ceux qui feront grands. S'ils gouftent ce 
confeil, ils auront de la chair & des peaux de Caflor 
en tres-grande abondance. 

Quant aux hommes que nous defirons employer 
pour raffiftance [105] des Sauuages, Monfieur de 
Champlain nous a promis qu'il nous en accommode- 
roit de ceux qui font en 1' habitation des trois Riuieres, 
"k raifon que ne faifant point defricher pour nous 1^ 
haut, nous n'y tenons point d'homnaes, mais deux 
Peres tant feulement qui ont foin du falut de nos 
Fran9ois. Nous fatisferons pour les gages, & pour 
la nourriture de ces ouuriers, ^ proportion du temps 
que nous les occuperons k defricher & cultiuer auec 
les Sauuages : fi i'en pouuois entretenir vne douzaine, 
ce feroit le vray moyen de gaigner les Sauuages : No- 
ftre Seigneur pour lequel nous entrons dans ce deffein 
la veille benir par fa bont^, & ouurir les oreilles a ce 
pauure Peuple abandonn^. 

Le dixiefme de ce mois le Pere Malle, & le Pere 
Buteux nous ecriuent [106] de la Refidence de la Con- 
ception, que le bruit eft la haut, que les Hiroquois 
ont defait fept canots de la petite Nation des Algon- 
quains; fi cela eft la paix dont i'ay parle cy-deflus efl 
defia rompue : Car nos Montagnais alliez des Algon- 
quains fuiuront leur party. 

On m'a rapporte, ie ne f§ay s'il efl vray, qu'vn cer- 
tain Sauuage nomme la Grenoiiille, qui fait icy du 
Capitaine, a dit que les Hiroquois, auec lef quels il 
auoit traitte la paix, les ont incite ^ tuer quelques 
Hurons, & de prendre guerre auec eux. 


1634-36] LE JE UNE S RELA TION, 1635 69 

out following in the tracks of its neighbors; besides, 
we will counsel them not to kill any but the males, 
and of those only such as are large. If they act upon 
this advice, they will have Beaver meat and skins 
in the greatest abundance. 

As to the men whom we wish to employ for the 
assistance [105] of the Savages, Monsieur de Cham- 
plain has promised us that he would let us have those 
who are at the settlement of the three Rivers ; for, 
as they have not cleared any land there for us, we 
do not keep any workmen there, but merely two Fa- 
thers who care for the religious needs of our French. 
We will arrange for the wages and food of these 
workmen, according to the time we shall employ 
them in clearing and cultivating the land with our 
Savages ; if I had the means of supporting a dozen, 
this would be the true way to gain the Savages. May 
Our Lord, for whom we enter into this project, bless 
it through his goodness, and open the ears of these 
poor abandoned People. 

On the tenth of this month. Father Masse and Fa- 
ther Buteux wrote me [106] from the Residence of 
the Conception that it was reported there that the 
Hiroquois had destroyed seven canoes of the petite 
Nation of the Algonquains ; ^'^ if this be true, the 
peace, of which I have spoken above, is already 
broken, for our Montagnais allies of the Algonquains 
will take sides with them. 

I have heard a report, I do not know how true it 
is, that a certain Savage named ' ' the Frog ' ' [la Gre- 
noiiille], who acts as Captain here, has said that the 
Hiroquois, with whom he had made a treaty of peace, 
have incited them to kill some of the Hurons, and 
to make war against them. 


60 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 

Les plus auifez croient que c'eft vne rufe de ceux 
qui traittent auec ces Peuples, & qui s'efforcent par 
leur entremife. de diuertir les Hurons de commerce 
qu'ils ont auec nos Fran9ois; ce qui arriueroit, fi nos 
Montagnais leur faifoient la [107] guerre, & alors ils 
les attireroient 'k leurs Habitations, d'oii s'enfuiuroit 
vn tres-notable detrimet pour Meffieurs les Affociez 
de la Compagnie de la Nouuelle France. 

Le dix-feptiefme du mefme mois d'Aouft, le Pere 
de Quen arriua ^ Kebec dans vne chalouppe, qu'en- 
uoyoit le Capitaine Bontemps pour donner aduis de 
fa venue a Tadouffac. Or comme on a veu cefle an- 
n6e les glaces efpouuantables fur la mer ; vne entre 
autres de trente k quarante lieues, d'autres difent de 
foixante lieues d'eftendue; vn Pilote m'a alTeur^ 
qu'ils la coftoierent trois iours & trois nuits ayans vn 
affez bon vent en poupe, & qu'en quelques endroits 
elle auoit des campagnes toutes rafes, & en d'autres 
elle fe releuoit en collines, & en hautes montagnes. 
De plus on a veu quelques vailTeaux Turcs, au fortir 
[108] de la Manche, & quelques nauires degradez 
voguer en mer §k & Ik fans vergues & fans voiles, 
qu'on croit auoir efle pris de ces infideles, lefquels 
abandonnent fouuent les vaiffeaux qu'ils rauilTent, 
apres auoir enleue tout ce qui eft dedans. Comme 
difie tous ces bruits couroient, nous anions tons per- 
du I'efperance de veoir le Capitaine Bontemps, la fai- 
fon de voguer icy fe paffant; c'eft pourquoy fa venue 
inefperee a cauf6 d'autant plus de ioye, qu'on euft 
efte marry qu'vn li braue Capitaine & vn fi bel equi- 
page fe fuft perdu. Le Pere de Quen nous raconta 
I'occafion de leur retardement, & nous donna fujet 
de loiier Dieu, qui les a tir6 des ombres de la mort, 


1634 - 36] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1635 61 

Those best informed believe that this is a ruse of 
those who trade with these Tribes, and who are 
striving to divert, through their agency, the Hurons 
from their commerce with our French ; which would 
happen if our Montagnais made [107] war against 
them ; and then they [the traders] would attract them 
to their Settlements, and there would result a very 
considerable injury to the Associated Gentlemen of 
the Company of New France. 

On the seventeenth of the same month of August, 
Father de Quen ^^ arrived at Kebec in a shallop which 
Captain Bontemps sent to give the news of his ar- 
rival at Tadoussac. Now as frightful icebergs have 
been seen this year upon the sea, — among others, 
one from thirty to forty, others say sixty leagues in 
extent, so large that a Pilot has assured me that he 
coasted along it for three days and three nights hav- 
ing a fair wind astern, and that in some places it had 
level plains, in others it rose into hills and high 
mountains: and since some Turkish vessels had 
been seen sailing out [108] of the English Channel, 
and some damaged ships floating here and there 
on the sea without masts and without sails, — which 
are believed to have been captured by those infidels, 
who often abandon ships which they plunder, after 
having robbed them of all they contain :^^ now as all 
these reports were being circulated, we had all lost 
hope of seeing Captain Bontemps, the season for 
sailing to this country having passed. It was this 
that made his unexpected arrival give us all the 
more joy, for we would have been sorry if so brave 
a Captain and so fine a crew had been lost. Father 
de Quen related to us the cause of their delay, and 
gave us reason to thank God, who drew them back 


62 LES RELATIONS DESjtSUITES [Vol.8 

les fauTiant d'vn naufrage qui fembloit ineui table. 

Le vingt-lixiefme du mefme mois [109] vn ieune 
homme qui eft paffe en la Nouuelle France, comme 
Soldat volontaire dans le vaiffeau commade par Mon- 
lieur le Cheualier de la Roche lacquelin, a abiure pu- 
bliquement les erreurs de Caluin, & embraffe les veri- 
tez Chreftiennes & Catholiques. Monfieur le Cheua- 
lier le voyant d'vn affez bon naturel, & I'ayant difpof6 
k nous prefter I'oreille, prit la peine luy-mefme de 
Tamener en noftre petite Maifon, oil par apres il 
m'efl venu trouuer plufieurs fois luy tout feul, pour 
conf erer auec moy ; en fin apres luy auoir eclaircy les 
principaux points de noftre creance, il a voulu reporter 
a r Ancienne France, le threfor de la verite que Dieu 
luy a fait trouuer en la Nouuelle. 

Le vingt-feptiefme du mefme mois, nous auons veu 
fur les neuf [no] heures du foir ou enuiron vne 
grande eclypfe de Lune, laquelle "k mon aduis n'aura 
paru en France que fur les deux ou trois heures apres 
minuit. 

Mais il eft temps d'arrefter ma plume, laquelle ne 
pourra pas cette annee refpondre a plufieurs lettres, 
qu'vne barque qui defcend a TadoufCac nous appor- 
tera apres le depart des vaiffeaux. II arriue par fois, 
foit par oubliance ou autrement, qu'on nous rend les 
lettres quand la flotte a defia fait voile, ce qui fait 
qu'on ne pent enuoyerles refponfes la mefme annee. 
Pour nos Francois, & pour nos Peres qui font au pays 
des Hurons, on ne doit attendre la refponfe des lettres 
qu'on leur enuoye de France que deux ans apres: 
voire mefme fi on nous donne icy les lettres qu'on 
leur adrefl!e [i 1 1] pour leur faire tenir, apres le depart 
des Hurons qui ne defcendent a Kebec qu'vne fois 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ibss 63 

from the shades of death, saving them from a ship- 
wreck which seemed inevitable. 

On the twenty-sixth of the same month [109] a 
young man who came over into New France as a 
volunteer Soldier, in the ship commanded by Mon- 
sieur the Chevalier de la Roche Jacquelin, publicly 
abjured the errors of Calvin, and embraced the 
Christian and Catholic truths. Monsieur the Cheva- 
lier, seeing he had a very good disposition, and hav- 
ing inclined him to lend us an ear, himself took the 
trouble to bring him to our little House, where he 
afterwards came to see me several times alone, to 
confer with me. Finally, after having enlightened 
him upon the principal points of our belief, he de- 
sired to carry back to Old France the treasure of 
truth which God had led him to find in the New. 

On the twenty- seventh of the same month, we 
saw, towards nine [no] o'clock in the evening or 
thereabout, a great eclipse of the Moon, which in my 
opinion did not appear in France until two or three 
hours after midnight. 

But it is time to drop my pen, which will not be 
able this year to answer several letters that a bark 
which goes down to Tadoussac will bring us after 
the departure of the ships. It sometimes happens, 
either from forgetfulness or for some other reason, 
that they deliver the letters after the fleet has already 
set sail, so that we cannot send the answers the same 
year. As to our Frenchmen and our Fathers who 
are in the country of the Hurons, answers to letters 
sent from France should not be expected until two 
years afterwards ; indeed, even if letters addressed to 
them are given to us here [m] to hold for them, 
after the departure of the Hurons, who come down 


64 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.8 

I'an, les refponfes ne feront portees en France qu'au 
bout de trois ans. Fay donne cet aduis tout expr^s, 
pour nous excufer enuers plufieurs perfonnes qui 
nous font Fhonneur de nous efcrire, & qui ne voyent 
point de reponfes la mefme annee, & quelques-fois 
n'en voyent point du tout, les lettres ou les refponfes 
fe perdans dans vne fi grande longueur de temps & 
de chemin. le prie Dieu que celles-cy arriuent a 
bon port auec toute la flotte, elles porteront a voftre 
Reuerence, pour derniere conclufion, vne fupplica- 
tion tres-humble de fe fouuenir a I'Autel, & a I'Ora- 
toire de nos pauures Sauuages, & de nous tons qui 
fommes fes enfans, & de moy particulierement [112] 
qui en ay plus de befoin que les autres, & qui me 
diray auec voftre permiffion, ce que ie fuis, 
MON R. P. 
Elle nous permettra, s'il luy plaift, d'implorer 
les prieres de tons nos Peres & de tons nos 
Freres de fa Prouince, ce que nous faifons en- 
core tous tant que nous fommes, moy qui fuis 

En la Refidencc de nojlre Voftre tres-humble, & 

Dame des Anges, proche tres-oblige feruiteur en 

Kebec, en la Nouuelle noftre Seigneur, 
France, ce 28. d' Aouji 

i6jS' Pavl le Ievne. 

ET 

P. Charles I'Allemant. P. Frangois Mercier. 

P. lean Brebeuf. P. Charles Turgis. 

P. lean Daniel. P. Charles du March^. 

P. Ambroife d'Auoft. P. Claude Quantin. 

P. Anne de Noiie. P. lacques Buteux. 

P. Enemond MalTe. P. lean de Quen. 

P. Antoine Richard. P. Pierre Pijart. 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6js 66 

to Kebec only once a year, the answers will not be 
carried to France until the end of three years. I 
have given this information purposely, so as to ex- 
cuse ourselves to persons who have done us the honor 
of writing to us, and who do not get their answers 
the same year, and sometimes do not get them at 
all, the letters or the replies being lost in so great a 
lapse of time and so long a journey. I pray God that 
these may arrive safely, together with all the fleet; 
they will bear to your Reverence, as a final conclu- 
sion, a very humble supplication to remember, at the 
Altar and in the Oratory, our poor Savages, and all 
of us who are your children, — especially me, [112] 
who have more need of it than the others, and who 
will call myself, with your permission, what I am, 
My Reverend Father, 
You will permit me, if you please, to implore 
the prayers of all our Fathers and of all our 
Brothers in your Province, — as, moreover, do 
all of us, — I who am. 

At the Residence of nos- Your very humble and 

tre Dame des Anges, near greatly obliged servant 

Kebec, in New France, in our Lord, 

this 28th of August, 

/^Ji- Paul le Jeune. 

AND 

Father Charles I'Allemant. Father Frangois Mercier. 

Father Jean Brebeuf. Father Charles Turgis." 

Father Jean Daniel. Father Charles du March6.'* 

Father Ambroise d'Avost. Father Claude Quantin. 

Father Anne de Noiie. Father Jacques Buteux. 

Father Enemond Masse. Father Jean de Quen. 

Father Antoine Richard." Father Pierre Pijart. 


66 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.8 

Et nos Freres Gilbert Burel, lean Liegeois, Pierre 
le Tellier, Pierre Feaute. 


1634-36] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, ibjs 67 

And our Brothers Gilbert Burel, Jean Liegeois,^ 
Pierre le Tellier, Pierre Feaute. 


68 


LES RELA TIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol. 8 


[113] Relation de ce qui s'eft paffe avx Hvrons, 
en I'annee 1635. 

Enuoyie d Kebec au Pere le leune, par le P. Brebeuf. 

MON R. Pere, 
C'eft pour vous rendre compte de noflre 
voyage en ce Pays des Hurons, lequel a efte 
remply de plus de fatigues, de pertes & de coufts que 
r autre, mais auffi qui a efte fuiuy & le fera, Dieu 
aidant, de plus de benedicflions du Ciel. 

[114] Des que I'an paffe mil fix cens trente quatre, 
nous arriuafmes aux trois Riuieres, ou fe faifoit la 
traitte, nous-nous trouuafmes dans plufieurs difficul- 
tez & perplexitez. Car d'vn cofte il n'y auoit qu'onze 
canots de Hurons pour nous embarquer dix perfonnes 
que nous eftions de furcroift, & qui pretendions aller 
en leur Pays. D' autre cofte on eftoit extremement 
en doute s'il en defcendroit cette ann6e Ik d'autres, 
attendu le grand efchet qu'ils auoientreceu en guerre 
par les Hiroquois, nommez SonontrerrJtonons au Prin- 
temps dernier, & la crainte qu'ils auoient d'vne nou- 
uelle armee. Cela nous mettoit fort en doute, fi 
nous deuions prendre I'occafion d'aller telle qu'elle 
s'offroit, ou en attendre vne meilleure. 

En fin tout bien confidere nous [115] refolufmes de 
tenter fortune, iugeans qu'il importoit du tout, d'a- 
uoir vn pied dans le Pays, afin d'en ouurir la porte, 
qui fembloit eflroittement fermee a la Foy. Cette 
refolution fut encore plus aifee que I'execution, qui 
parauanture euft efte impoffible fans le foin, la fa- 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i635 69 


[113] Relation of what occurred among the Hu- 
rons in the year i6^^. 

Sent to Kebec to Father le Jeuiie, by Father Brebeuf. 

MY Reverend Father, 
I send you an account of our journey into 
this Huron Country. It has been filled with 
more fatigues, losses and expenses than the other, 
but also has been followed, and will be, God aiding, 
by more of Heaven's blessings. 

[114] When last year, one thousand six hundred 
and thirty-four, we arrived at the three Rivers, 
where the trading post was, we found ourselves in 
several difficulties and perplexities. For, on the one 
hand, there were only eleven Huron canoes to em- 
bark our ten additional persons who were intending 
to go into their Country. On the other, we were 
greatly in doubt whether any others would descend 
this year, considering the great loss they had experi- 
enced in war with the Hiroquois, named Sonontrerrho- 
nons,^^ last Spring, and the fear they had of a new in- 
vasion. This placed us much in doubt whether we 
ought to take advantage of the opportunity which 
was presented, or wait for a better one. 

At last, after full consideration, we [115] resolved 
to try our fortune, judging that it was of vital impor- 
tance to have a footing in the Country in order to 
open the door which seemed firmly closed to the 
Faith. This resolution was far easier than the ex- 
ecution of it, which perchance would have been im- 


70 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 

ueur & la liberalite de Monfieur du Pleflis Bochard 
General de la flotte : car incotinent apres f on arriuee, 
qui fut le cinquiefme luillet 1634. il fit tenir Confeil 
auec les Biffiriniens, aufquels il propofa le dellein 
qu'il auoit d'enuoyer quelques-vns auec eux, & de 
nous ioindre aux Hurons. lis en firet plufieurs diffi- 
cultez, & I'vn des Capitaines de I'lfle nomme la Per- 
drix par deffus tous; neantmoins les raifons & les 
prefens les gagnerent. 

Le lendemain matin 1' AlTemblee fe fit de rechef , par 
le commandement [116] de Monfieur du Pleflis Bo- 
chard, ou les Biffiriniens & les Hurons fe trouuerent. 
Le mefme defl!ein leur fut repref ente ; mais pour re- 
fpec5t les vns des autres ils refoluret tous enf emble de 
n'embarquer aucun Frangois, & n'y eut pour lors 
aucune raifon qui les peuft flechir. Surquoy noftre 
entreprif e f embloit encore eflre rompue pour ce coup ; 
mais au depart de 1' AlTemblee vn des Attiguenongha^ 
me tirant &, quartier, me dit que ie TallafTe veoir en 
fa cabane. La il me fait entendre que luy & fon 
camarade en embarqueroient trois; ie refpons que 
nous ne pouuions aller moins de cinq, f9auoir nous 
trois, & deux de nos hommes. 

Sur cela les Arendarhonons s'eftant efchauffez k 
nous embarquer, nous trouuafmes place pour fix ; fi 
bien que nous refolufmes de [117] partir, & laiffer les 
deux petits gar9ons que nous deuions mener iufqu'k 
quelque autre occafion : aufli toft nous diftribuafmes 
nos pacquets, & fifmes des prefens k vn chacun pour 
les encourager, & le lendemain feptieme du mois, 
M"" du Pleflis Bochard leur en fit encore d'autres, en 
confideration feulement de ce qu'ils nous embar- 
quoiet, & les feftoya tous enfemble d'vn feftin de 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6ss 71 

possible without the care, the favor, and the liberali- 
ty of Monsieur du Plessis Bochard, General of the 
fleet. For immediately after his arrival, which was 
on the fifth of July, 1634, he held a Council with the 
Bissiriniens, to whom he proposed the plan he had 
of sending some men with them, and of joining us 
to the Hurons. They made several objections, and 
one of the Chiefs of the Island, named "the Part- 
ridge" [la Perdrix],^ more than all the rest; never- 
theless, arguments and presents won them over. 

The next morning, the Assembly met again, by 
the command [116] of Monsieur du Plessis Bochard, 
and both the Bissiriniens and the Hurons were pres- 
ent. The same plan was again presented to them ; 
but out of respect for one another they all agreed not 
to embark any Frenchmen ; and no arguments could, 
for the time being, move them. Thereupon our en- 
terprise seemed again cut off, by this action. But, 
at the close of the Assembly, one of the Attiguenon- 
gha,^ drawing me aside, asked me to visit him in his 
cabin. There he gave me to understand that he and 
his companion would embark three of us. I replied 
that we could not go unless five went, namely, we 
three and two of our men. 

Thereupon the Arcndarhonons^ became eager to 
embark us; we found place for six, and so we re- 
solved to [117] set out, and leave until some other 
time the two little boys we were to take. We began 
to distribute our baggage, and made presents to each 
one, to encourage them; and on the morrow, the 
seventh of the month. Monsieur du Plessis Bochard 
gave them still others, on the single consideration 
that they would embark us, and feasted all of them 
at a great feast of three large kettles. But the con- 


72 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.8 

trois grandes chaudieres. Mais la contagion qui a 
couru I'annee paff^e parmy tons ces Peuples, auec de 
grands rauages, ayant en vn inftant faifi plufieurs 
de nos Sauuages, & remply tout le refte de peur, nous 
caufa derechef vne grande confufion, & nous mit en 
de grandes peines, veu qu'il falloit partir fur le 
champ. Nos fix canots eftans reduits k trois, & nos 
deux Peres & moy nous trouuans def embarquez ; 
[ii8] il me falloit chercher de nouueaux hommes; 
reprendre noftre petit equipage; deliberer qui s'em- 
barqueroit, & qui demeureroit ; choifir entre nos pac- 
quets ceux que nous porterions, & donner ordre pour 
le refte, & tout cela en moins de demye-heure, oil il 
eull efte befoin des iournees entieres, Neantmoins 
recognoiffans bien que noftre embarquement eftoit 
vn coup de partie pour le Ciel, nous penfafmes qu'il 
falloit y faire tons nos efforts, pour refifter k ceux de 
I'ennemy commun du falut des hommes, que nous 
ne doutions nullement s'eflre mefle dans cet affaire. 
I'y fis tout mo pouuoir, nous redoublafmes les pre- 
fens, nous diminuafmes noftre petit bagage, & prifmes 
feulement ce qui concernoit le faindt Sacrifice de la 
Meffe, & ce qui eftoit abfolument neceffaire pour la 
vie. Monfieur [119] du Pleffis y interpofa fon autho- 
rite, Monfieur Oliuer & Monfieur Coullart leur in- 
duftrie, & tons les Frangois leur affedlion. Cepen- 
dant ie vis par plufieurs fois tout renuerfe & defef- 
pere, iufqu'a ce que i'eus particulierement recours "k 
noflre Seigneur Iesvs, pour I'vnique gloire duquel 
nous entreprenions ce penible voyage, & que i'eus 
fait vn voeu au glorieux faindt lofeph nouueau Patri- 
arche des Hurons. Car auffi-toft ie vis tout fe cal- 
mer, & nos Sauuages fi contens, que ceux qui embar- 


1634 - 36] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1635 


78 


tagion which spread among all these Tribes last year, 
with great destruction, having suddenly seized sev- 
eral o'f our Savages, and filled the rest with fear, 
again threw us into confusion, and put us to great 
trouble, seeing that we had to set out immediately. 
Our six canoes being reduced to three, and our two 
Fathers and I being disembarked, [118] I had to find 
new men, to unload our slender baggage, to decide 
who should embark and who should remain, to choose 
among our packages those we were to carry, and to 
give orders as to the rest,— and all this in less than 
half an hour, when we would have needed entire 
days. Nevertheless, recognizing clearly that our 
embarkment was a decisive stroke for Heaven, we 
thought it necessary to put forth our utmost energies 
to resist the efforts of the common enemy of man's 
salvation, who, we doubted not. was mixed up in 
this matter. I therefore did everything I could; we 
doubled the presents, we reduced the amount of our 
baggage, and took only what belonged to the holy 
Sacrifice of the Mass, and what was absolutely neces- 
sary for life. Monsieur [119] du Plessis interposed 
his authority. Monsieur Oliver and Monsieur Coul- 
lart their ingenuity, and all the Frenchmen their 
affection. Yet several times I was completely baf- 
fled and desperate, until I had special recourse to 
our Lord J E s u s , for whose glory alone we were un- 
dertaking this painful journey, and until I had made 
a vow to glorious saint Joseph, the new Patriarch of 
the Hurons. Immediately I saw everything become 
quiet, and our Savages so satisfied that those who 
embarked Father Daniel had already placed him in 
their canoe, and it seemed as if they were going to 
take him without even receiving the ordinary pay. 


74 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.8 

querent le Pere Daniel I'auoient defia mis dans leur 
canot, & fembloit qu'ils I'alloiet emmener, fans auoir 
encore receu la paye ordinaire. Mais ledit Pere voy- 
ant qu'ils n'auoient point de capots comme les autres, 
fort du canot, m'en aduertit, & ie leur en fais donner. 
En fin done apres auoir brieuement [120] remerci^ 
M'' du Pleffis, luy auoir recommande 1' embarquement 
du refte de nos gens, fi I'occafion fe prefentoit, & luy 
auoir dit adieu, & k tous nos Frangois: Ie m'embar- 
quay auec le Pere Antoine Daniel, «& vn de nos 
hommes; les deux autres venoient auec les Algon- 
quains. Monfieur du Pleffis honora noftre depart de 
plufieurs canonnades, afin de nous rendre encore plus 
recommandables h. nos Sauuages. Ce fut le feptiefme 
luillet. Le P. Ambroife Dauoft s'embarqua huicft 
iours apres auec deux autres de nos gens. Le refte 
fuiuit huidt iours apres, pour prendre fa part des fa- 
tigues d'vn voyage tres fafcheux, non feulement k 
raifon de fa longueur, & de la mauuaife eh ere qu'on 
y fait, mais encore pour les circuits qu'il faut faire 
de Kebec iufques icy par les Biffiriniens & la petite 
Nation; ie [121] croy qu'il y en a pour plus de trois 
cens lieues. II eft vray que le chemin eft plus court 
par le Saut de S. Louys, & par le Lac des Hiroquois, 
mais la crainte des ennemis, & le peu de commodite 
qui s'y rencontre, en red le paffage defert. De deux 
difficultez ordinaires, la premiere eft celle des fauts 
& portages. Voftre Reuerence a defia affez veu de 
fauts d'eau vers Kebec, pour f5auoir ce qui en eft: 
toutes les riuieres de ces Pays en font pleines, & no- 
tamment la riuiere de S. Laurens, depuis qu'on a 
paffe celle des Prairies. Car de la en auant elle n'a 
plus fon lit egal, mais fe brife en plufieurs endroits, 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i63S 75 

But the Father, seeing that they had not cloaks like 
the others, stepped out of the canoe, told me about 
it, and I had some given to them. 

At last, then, after having briefly [120] thanked 
Monsieur du Plessis, having entrusted to him the 
embarkation of the rest of our people, if opportunity 
presented itself, and having bid him and all our 
Frenchmen adieu, I embarked with Father Antoine 
Daniel and one of our men; the two others were 
coming with the Algonquains. Monsieur du Plessis 
honored our departure with several volleys, to rec- 
ommend us still more to our Savages. It was the 
seventh of July. Father Ambroise Davost embarked 
eight days later, with two others of our people. 
The rest followed eight days after, to take their part 
in the fatigues of a journey extremely wearisome, 
not only on account of its length and of the wretched 
fare to be had, but also on account of the circuits that 
have to be made in coming from Kebec to this place 
by way of the Bissiriniens and the petite Nation ; I 
[121] believe that they amount to more than three 
hundred leagues. It is true the way is shorter by 
the Saut de St. Louys and the Lake of the Hiroquois; 
but the fear of enemies, and the few conveniences 
to be met with, cause that route to be unfrequented. 
Of two ordinary difficulties, the chief is that of the 
rapids and portages. Your Reverence has already 
seen enough of the rapids near Kebec to know what 
they are. All the rivers of this Country are full of 
them, and notably the St. Lawrence after that of the 
Prairies ^ is passed. For from there onward it has 
no longer a smooth bed, but is broken up in several 
places, rolling and leaping in a frightful way, like an 
impetuous torrent ; and even, in some places, it falls 


76 LES RELATIONS DBS j£SUITES [Vol.8 

roulant & fautant effroyablement, k guife d'vn torrent 
impetueux, & mefmes en quelques endroits elle 
tombe tout k coup de haut en bas, de la hauteur de 
plufieurs braffes. le me fouuenois [122] en palTant 
des Catadoupes du Nil, a ce qu'en difent nos Hifto- 
riens. Or quand on approche de ces cheutes ou tor- 
rens, il faut mettre pied a terre, & porter au col k 
trauers les bois, ou fur de hautes & facheufes roches, 
tous les pacquets & les canots mefmes. Cela ne fe 
fait pas fans beaucoup de trauail, car il y a des por- 
tages d'vne, de deux & de trois lieues, ioint qu'il faut 
en chacun faire plufieurs voyages, fi on a tat foit peu 
de pacquets. En quelques endroits, qui ne font pas 
moins rapides que ces portages ; mais neantmoins 
plus aifez k I'abord, les Sauuages entrans dans I'eau, 
trainent & conduifent h. la main leurs canots, auec 
d' extremes peines & dangers; car ils en ont par fois 
iufques au col, fi bien qu'ils font contraints de quitter 
prife, & fe fauuer comme ils peuuent de la rapidity 
de I'eau, qui emporte & [123] leur arrache le canot. 
Cela eft arriue k vn de nos Francois, qui demeura 
feul dans le canot, tous les Sauuages I'ayans laiff^ 
aller au gre du torrent mais fon adreffe & fa force luy 
fauuerent la vie, & le canot auffi, auec tout ce qui 
eftoit dedans. I'ay fuppute le nombre des portages, 
& ie trouue que nous auons port6 trente cinq fois, & 
traifne pour le moins cinquante. Ie me fuis quelque- 
fois mefle d'aider a mes Sa[u]uages: mais le fond de 
la riuiere eft de pierres ^i tranchantes, que ie ne pou- 
uois marcher long-temps eftant nuds pieds. 

La deuxiefme difficulte ordinaire eft pour le viure ; 
fouuent il faut ieufner, fi Ton vient k perdre les 
caches qu'on a faites en defcendant, & quand on les 


1634 - 36 j LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1635 11 

down suddenly from a height of several brasses. I 
remembered, [122] in passing, the Cataracts of the 
Nile, as they are described by our Historians. Now 
when these rapids or torrents are reached, it is nec- 
essary to land, and carry on the shoulder, through 
woods or over high and troublesome rocks, all the 
baggage and the canoes themselves. This is not 
done without much work ; for there are portages of 
one, two, and three leagues, and for each several 
trips must be made, no matter how few packages 
one has. In some places, where the current is not 
less strong than in these rapids, although easier at 
first, the Savages get into the water, and haul and 
guide by hand their canoes with extreme difficulty 
and danger; for they sometimes get in up to the 
neck and are compelled to let go their hold, saving 
themselves as best they can from the rapidity of the 
water, which snatches [123] from them and bears off 
their canoe. This happened to one of our French- 
men who remained alone in the canoe, all the Sav- 
ages having left it to the mercy of the torrent ; but 
his skill and strength saved his life, and the canoe 
also, with all that was in it. I kept count of the 
number of portages, and found that we carried our 
canoes thirty-five times, and dragged them at least 
fifty. I sometimes took a hand in helping my Sav- 
ages ; but the bottom of th^ river is full of stones, so 
sharp that I could not walk long, being barefooted. 
The second ordinary difficulty is in regard to pro- 
visions. Frequently one has to fast, if he misses the 
caches that were made when descending ; and, even 
if they are found, one does not fail to have a good 
appetite after indulging in them; for the ordinary 
food is only a little Indian corn [124] coarsely broken 


78 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 8 

retrouue, on ne laiffe pas d'auoir bon appetit apres 
s'y eflre traidte. Car le manger ordinaire n'efl que 
d'vn pen de bled d'Inde [124] caff6 affez groffiere- 
ment entre deux pierres, & quelqnefois tout entier 
dans de I'eau pure. Cela n'efl pas de grand gouft. 
Quelquesfois on a du poilTon, mais c'eft hazard, 
excepte quand on paffe quelque Nation ou Ton en 
peut acheter. Adiouflez ^ ces difficultez, qu'il faut 
coucher fur la terre nue, ou fur quelque dure roche, 
faute de trouuer dix ou douze pieds de terre en quarr^ 
pour placer vne chetiue cabane; qu'il faut fentir in- 
cefTammet la puanteur des Sauuages recreus, mar- 
clier das les eaux, das les fanges, dans I'obfcurite & 
Tembaras des forefls, ou les piqueures d'vne multi- 
tude infinie de moufquilles & coufms vous importu- 
nent fort. 

le laiffe k part vn long & ennuyeux filence ou I'on 
eft reduit. I'entends pour les nouueaux qui n'ont 
par fois en leur compagnie perfonne de leur langue, 
& ne f9auent [125] celle des Sauuages. Or ces diffi- 
cultez comme elles font ordinaires, auffi nous ont elles 
efte communes auec tous ceux qui viennent en ces 
Pays. Mais en noftre voyage nous en auons eu tous 
d'extraordinaires. La premiere a efte qu'il nous a 
fallu continuellement ramer, ny plus ny moins que 
les Sauuages: de forte que ie n'auois le loifir de reci- 
ter mon Breuiaire finon a la couchee, lors que i'euffe 
eu plus de befoin de repos que de trauail. L' autre a 
eft6 qu'il nous falloit porter nos pacquets, es portages, 
ce qui nous efloit auffi dur que nouueau, & encore 
plus aux autres qu'k moy, qui f9ait defia vn peu ce 
que c'eft que de fatigue. A chaque portage il me 
falloit faire au moins quatre voyages, les autres n'en 


1634 - 36] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1635 


79 


between two stones, and sometimes taken whole in 
pure water ; it is no great treat. Occasionally one 
has fish, but it is only a chance, unless one is passing 
some Tribe where they can be bought. Add to these 
difficulties that one must sleep on the bare earth, or 
on a hard rock, for lack of a space ten or twelve feet 
square on which to place a wretched hut ; that one 
must endure continually the stench of tired-out Sav- 
ages; and must walk in water, in mud, in the ob- 
scurity and entanglement of the forest, where the 
stings of an infinite number of mosquitoes and gnats 
are a serious annoyance. 

I say nothing of the long and wearisome silence to 
which one is reduced, I mean in the case of newcom- 
ers, who have, for the time, no person in their com- 
pany who speaks their own tongue, and who do not 
understand [125] that of the Savages. Now these 
difficulties, since they are the usual ones, were com- 
mon to us as to all those who come into this Coun- 
try. But on our journey we all had to encounter 
difficulties which were unusual. The first was that 
we were compelled to paddle continually, just as 
much as the Savages ; so that I had not the leisure 
to recite my Breviary except when I lay down to 
sleep, when I had more need of rest than of work. 
The other was that we had to carry our packages at 
the portages, which was as laborious for us as it was 
new, and still more for others than it was for me, 
who already knew a little what it is to be fatigued. 
At every portage I had to make at least four trips, 
the others had scarcely fewer. I had once before 
made the journey to the Hurons, but I did not then 
ply [126] the paddles, nor carry burdens; nor did 
the other Religious who made the same journey. 


80 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.8 

faifoiet gueres moins. Teftois defia venu aux Huros 
vne autre fois, mais ie n'auois point manie [126] I'a- 
iiiron, ny porte de fardeaux non plus que les autres 
Religieux, qui auoient auffi fait le mefme chemin. 
Mais en ce voyage il nous a fallu tous commencer par 
ces experiences a porter la Croix que Noflre Seigneur 
nous prefente pour fon honneur, & pour le falut de 
ces pauures Barbares. Certes ie me fuis trouue quel- 
quesfois fi las, que le corps n'en pouuoit plus. Mais 
d'ailleurs mon ame reffentoit de tres-grands contente- 
mens, confiderant que ie f ouffrois pour Dieu : nul ne 
le fgait, s'il ne rexperimente. Tous n'en ont pas 
efte quittes a fi bon marche. 

Le Pere Dauofl, entre autres, a eft6 tres-mal men6 ; 
on luy a derobe beaucoup de fon petit equipage ; on 
Ta contraint de ietter vn petit moulin d'acier, & quafi 
tous nos liures, quelques linges, & vne bonne partie 
[127] du papier que nous portions, dont nous auons 
grand befoin. On I'abandonna k I'lfle parmy les Al- 
gonquains, ou il a eu dequoy fouffrir a bonnes en- 
feignes. Quand il arriua aux Hurons, il eftoit H d4- 
fait & abbatu, que de long-temps il ne put fe remettre. 

Le Pere Daniel fut delaiffe & contraint de changer 
de canot, comme auffi pareillemet Pierre I'vn de nos 
hommes; le petit Martin fut bien rudement traitte, 
& en fin abandonne aux Biffiriniens, oil il demeura fi 
long-temps, qu'il fut quelques deux mois en chemin, 
& n' arriua aux Hurons que le dix-neufieme de Sep- 
tembre. Baron fut vol6 par les fiens la mefme iour- 
nee qu'il arriua en ces contr6es, & euft encore bien 
plus perdu, s'il ne les eufl contraints par la peur de 
fes armes luy en rendre quelque partie. Bref [128] 
tous les Frangois y ont fouffert de grandes peines, 


1634 - 36] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1635 81 

But, in this journey, we all had to begin by these 
experiences to bear the Cross that Our Lord presents 
to us for his honor, and for the salvation of these 
poor Barbarians. In truth, I was sometimes so 
weary that the body could do no more, but at the 
same time my soul experienced very deep peace, 
considering that I was suffering for God; no one 
knows it if he has not experienced it. All did not 
get off so cheaply. 

Father Davost, among others, was very badly 
treated. They stole from him much of his little out- 
fit. They compelled him to throw away a little steel 
mill, and almost all our books, some linen, and a 
good part [127] of the paper that we were taking, and 
of which we have great need. They deserted him 
at the Island, among the Algonquains, where he suf- 
fered in good earnest. When he reached the Hu- 
rons, he was so worn-out and dejected that for a long 
time he could not get over it. 

Father Daniel was abandoned, and compelled to 
seek another canoe, as also was Pierre, one of our 
men. Little Martin was very roughly treated, and 
at last was left behind with the Bissiriniens, where 
he remained so long that he was about two months 
on the road, and only arrived among the Hurons on 
the nineteenth of September. Baron ^ was robbed 
by his savages on the very day he arrived in these 
regions ; and he would have lost much more if he 
had not compelled them, through fear of his arms, to 
give him back a part of what they had taken. In 
short, [128] all the Frenchmen suffered great hard- 
ships, incurred g^reat expense, considering the few 
goods they had, and ran remarkable risks. And 
whosoever will come up here must make up his mind 


82 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.8 

fait de groffes depenfes, eu egard ^ leurs petites com- 
moditez, & couru de notables dangers. Et quiconque 
montera icy haut, fe doit refoudre ^ tout cela, & ^ 
quelque chofe de plus; mefme "k la mort, dont on 
voit k chaque moment 1' Image deuant les yeux. Pour 
moy qui ne f9ais point nager ie m'en fuis veu vne 
f ois fort proche : car au partir des Biffiriniens en def- 
cendant vn faut, nous-nous en allions tomber dedans 
vn precipice, fi mes Sauuages n'eullent promptement 
& habilement faut6 en I'eau, pour deftourner le canot 
que le courant emportoit. II eft croyable que les 
autres en pourroient bien dire autant & plus, veu le 
nombre qu'il y a de femblables rencontres. Trois 
autres difficultez m'ont donn6 de la peine en mon 
particulier. La premiere, [129] 1' importunity que 
mes gens me firent du commencement, pour cacher en 
quelque part vne quaiffe qu'vn de nos Franyois auoit 
mife das noftre canot. La feconde, le foing de ceux 
de nos gens, que nous anions laiffe derriere. La troi- 
fiefme, que les Algonquains par ou nous paffions ta- 
fchoient de nous intimider, difans que les Hurons 
nous tueroiet, comme ils auoient fait en la perfonne de 
Brul6, defirans de nous retenir chez eux, auec beau- 
coup de demonftration de bienueillance. Depuis no- 
fire arriu6e, i'ay appris que le Maiftre de mon canot 
auoit iett6 en auant de me degrader en quelque part, 
auec mon petit bagage ; mais que fa propofition auoit 
eft6 auffi-toft rebutt6e; auffi ne m'en fit-on iamais au- 
cun femblant. Tout cela, Dieu mercy, ne me tour- 
menta pas beaucoup. Car leur ayant declare [ 1 30] que 
ie porterois moy-mefme la quaiffe dont il efloit que- 
flion, quoy qu'ils en euffent receu le port; ie me re- 
fign6, quant au refte, k la volenti de Dieu, prefl ^ 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib35 83 

to all this, and to something more, even to death it- 
self, whose Image we see every moment before our 
eyes. For myself, not knowing how to swim, I once 
had a very narrow escape from drowning. As we were 
leaving the Bissiriniens, while descending a rapid we 
would have gone over a precipice, had not my Sav- 
ages promptly and skillfully leaped into the water, to 
turn aside the canoe which the current was sweeping 
on. It is probable that the others might say as 
much, and more, considering the number of such in- 
cidents there are. Three other difficulties gave 
trouble to me in particular. The first [129] was the 
importunity of my men, at the start, to hide some- 
where a box that one of our Frenchmen had put 
into our canoe. The second was anxiety for those of 
our men we had left behind. The third, that the Al- 
gonquains, through whose territory we were passing, 
tried to intimidate us, saying that the Hurons would 
kill us as they had Brule, and desiring to keep us 
among them, with abundant demonstrations of good 
will. Since our arrival, I have learned that the Mas- 
ter of my canoe had proposed to land me somewhere 
with my little baggage, but that his proposal had 
been at once repelled, and so I saw no sign of any- 
thing of the kind. All that, thank God, did not 
trouble me much; for having declared to them [130] 
that I would myself carry the box about which the 
trouble arose, although they had received pay to 
carry it, I resigned myself as far, as everything else 
was concerned, to the will of God, ready to die for 
the honor of his Son, our good Lord, and for the 
salvation of these poor Peoples. 

I do not know when they spoke of leaving me; 
but my Savages exhibited so much affection for me, 


84 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 8 


mourir pour I'honneur de fon Fils noftre bon Sei- 
gneur, & pour le falut de ces pauures Peuples. 

le ne fgay pas quand on parla de me quitter ; mais 
mes Sauuages me temoignoient tat d'affedtion, & di- 
foiet tat de bien de nous aux autres, qu'ils faifoiet 
enuie h. tous les Huros que nous rencotrions, d'em- 
barquer quelqu'vn des noflres. Cela me fait douter, 
li ce qu'on m'a dit du Maiftre de mon canot eft vray. 
Car ceux qui auoiet embarque le Pere Daniel & Ba- 
ron, voulurent les quitter a I'Ifle; mais le Maiftre du 
canot oti eftoit le Pere Daniel, le voyant mefcontent 
de cela, le fit auffi-tofl embarquer, & le porta iufques 
^ ce qu'ils euffent rencontre [131] le Capitaine de la 
Rochelle, lequel eftant de la cognoiffance du Pere, 
pour I'auoir voulu conduire I'an pafCe, le mit volon- 
tiers dans fon canot, auec fes deux pacquets. II luy 
fit plaifir, & aux Sauuages aufli ; car le Pere euft eu 
encore bien de la peine dans vn canot fort chetif , qui 
n'auoit que trois hommes languilTans, & dont la de- 
meure efloit k douze lieues loing de la noflre : la ou 
ce Capitaine demeuroit au village, oil nous auios quel- 
que deffein de nous habituer, & affez proche du lieu 
oil nous fommes; & d'ailleurs fon canot eftoit fort, 
& equippe de fix puiffans Sauuages tous fains & gail- 
lards. Ce bon ef change luy arriua la veille de faindt 
Ignace au matin, ay ant fait le iour precedent nau- 
frage par deux fois. Pour Baron, n'eufl efle le Capi- 
taine de rifle qui fit remettre fes pacquets dans les 
canots, [132] il y fufl demeurd. Encore fes gens ne 
luy furent pas fi barbares, comme furent autresfois a 
vn de nos Fran9ois, ceux qui le ramenoient des Hu- 
rons a Kebec. Ce ieune bomme furnomme la Marche 
fuft mort dans les bois, fi nous n'euffions eu le foin 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j635 86 

and said so much that is kind about us to others, 
that they excited the desire in all the Hurons we met 
to embark some one of our people. This makes me 
doubt the truth of what has been said about the Mas- 
ter of my canoe. For those who had embarked Fa- 
ther Daniel and Baron wished to leave them at the 
Island ; but the Master of the canoe in which Father 
Daniel was, seeing him dissatisfied at that, caused 
him to embark at once, and carried him until they 
met [131] the Captain of la Rochelle,^ who, knowing 
the Father from having wished to take him last year, 
willingly received him with his two packages into 
his canoe. It pleased him, and the Savages also ; for 
the Father would have still had much trouble in a 
wretched canoe which had only three sick men in it, 
whose home was twelve leagues distant from ours ; 
this Captain lived at a village where we had some 
intention of settling, and quite near the place where 
we are. Besides, his canoe was strong, and manned by 
six powerful Savages, quite healthy and good-natured. 
This happy exchange happened to him the morning 
of the day before the festival of saint Ignace, he 
having been shipwrecked twice the previous day. 
As to Baron, had it not been for the Captain of the 
Island, who caused his baggage to be put back into 
the canoes, [132] he would have remained there. 
Still, his people were not so barbarous as formerly 
were those who brought back one of our Frenchmen 
from the Hurons to Kebec. This young man, sur- 
named la Marche, would have died in the woods, if 
we had not had the care and the interest to send 
back in search of him more than a league from the 
place where we missed him. 

Sometimes a word, or a dream, or a fancy, or even 


86 


LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 8 


& le credit de le renuoyer chercher plus d'vne lieue 
loing du lieu oti nous-nous en apperceufmes. 

II ne faut quelquefois qu'vn mot, quelquefois 
qu'vn fonge, quelque fantaifie, ou la moindre penfee 
d'incommodit6, pour faire degrader ou mettre k 
terre, i'ofe dire, pour faire maffacrer vn home, ainli 
qu'il arriua Tan paff^ k vn pauure Algoquain, qui fut 
abandonne en vn faut par fon propre neueu: & il n'y 
a pas vn mois qu'vn pauure ieune homme auffi Al- 
gonquain, eftant tomb6 dans le feu, fut tu6 aupres de 
noflre village par ceux de fa Nation, de peur qu'ils 
auoient [133] d'en eftre incommodez dans le canot. 
Ce qui me perfuade qu'ils raflommerent, c'eft la 
couftume qu'ils en ont; que les Hurons le difoient; 
& que le foir auparauant il mangeoit bien, & en 
bonne quantite de ce que nous luy donnions ; outre 
que deux Algonquains nous affeurerent, qu'on efloit 
dans la penf6e de le trepaner d'vn coup ou deux de 
hache. Voftre Reuerence a veu ou fceu de femblables 
cas en fon hyuernement auec les Sauuages. En vn 
mot, il faut fe refoudre a beaucoup de dangers eui- 
dens, & de grandes fatigues, qui veut venir icy. 
I'attribue neantmoins toutes ces difficultez extraordi- 
naires k la maladie de nos Sauuages. Car nous f$a- 
uons affez combien les maladies alterent les humeurs, 
& les complexions mefmes des plus fociables. le ne 
f9ay pas ^ quel prix nos Franfois, & les Montagnais 
[134] en aurot efle quittes. Bie fgay je que la plus- 
part des Motagnais qui eftoient aux trois Riuieres 
quand nous-nous embarquafmes, eftoient malades, & 
que plufieurs en mouroient; comme auffi, qu'il n'efl 
quafi point reuenu de canot de la traitte, qui n'aye 
efl6 afflige de cefle contagio. Elle a efl6 li vniuer- 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i635 87 

the smallest sense of inconvenience, is enough to 
cause them to illtreat, or set ashore, and I dare say- 
to murder one, — as happened last year to a poor Al- 
gonquain, who was abandoned in a rapid by his own 
nephew ; and, not a month ago, a poor young man, 
also an Algonquain, having fallen into the fire, was 
killed near our village by his own Tribesmen, for 
fear he might [133] be an inconvenience in the canoe. 
What makes me believe they killed him is that it is 
the custom among them; that the Hurons said so; 
and that, the evening before, he ate heartily a good 
quantity of what we gave him ; besides, two Algon- 
quains assured us that they had a mind to brain him 
with one or two blows of an axe. Your Reverence 
has seen or known of similar cases in your winter's 
stay among the Savages. In a word, he who thinks 
of coming here must make up his mind to many ob- 
vious dangers and to great fatigues. I attribute, 
nevertheless, all these extraordinary difficulties to the 
sickness among our Savages. For we know very 
well how sickness alters the disposition and the in- 
clinations even of the most sociable. I know not at 
what price our French and the Montagnais [ 1 34] will 
have become rid of it. I know, indeed, that the 
greater part of the Montagnais who were at the three 
Rivers when we embarked were sick, and that many 
of them died ; and also that almost no one who re- 
turned by canoe from trading, was not afflicted with 
this contagion. It has been so universal among the 
Savages of our acquaintance that I do not know if 
one has escaped its attacks. All these poor people 
have been much inconvenienced by it, particularly 
during the Autumn, as much in their fishing as in 
their harvesting. Many crops are lying beneath the 


88 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.8 

felle parmy les Sauuages de noftre cognoiffance, que 
ie ne f9ay li auctin en a emt6 les atteintes. Tons ces 
pauures gents en ont efl6 fort incommodez, notam- 
ment pendant 1' Automne, tant en leurs pefches qu'en 
leurs moiffons. Plufieurs bleds font demeurez fous 
les neiges, grand nombre de perfonnes font mortes ; 
il y en a encore a prefent qui ne font pas gueris. 
Cette maladie conimen9oit par des ardeurs violentes, 
qui efloient fuiuies d'vne efpece de rougeolle, ou petite 
verolle, differente [135] toutesfois de celle de Frace, 
accompagn^e en plufieurs d'aueuglement pour quel- 
ques iours, ou obfcurciffement de veue, & en fin fe ter- 
minoit en vn flux de ventre, qui en a conduit plufieurs, 
& en conduit encore quelques-vns au tombeau. 

Parmy ces peines & dangers, nous auons de grandes 
obligations S. la prouidence & bonte paternelle de 
noftre Seigneur: car ny par les chemins, ny dedans 
le Pays, pas vn de nous n'a efte pris de ce mal, ny 
ced6 k la faim, ou perdu I'appetit. Quelques-vns 
ont eu du depuis quelque legere atteinte de maladie, 
mais cela s'eft paffe en peu de iours, Noftre Seigneur 
foit loii^ ^ iamais, & la tres-immaculee Vierge, auec 
fon tres-chafte Efpoux, de cette finguliere faueur, 
qui nous a beaucoup aide pour authorifer noftre Foy 
parmy ces Peuples. 

[136] I'arriu6 aux Hurons le cinquiefme d'Aouft, 
lour de noftre Dame des Neiges ; ayant demeure 
trente iours par les chemins, en continuel trauail, ex- 
cept6 vn iour de repos que nous prifmes au pays des 
Biffiriniens. Tons les autres, excepte Robert le Coq 
& Dominique, demeurerent bien dauantage, quoy que 
d'ordinaire le voyage ne foit que de 20. iours ou en- 
uiron. Ie pris terre au port du village de Toancli6 


1634-36] LE JEUNBS RELATION, i635 89 

snow ; a large number of persons are dead ; there are 
still some who have not recovered. This sickness 
began with violent fever, which was followed by a 
sort of measles or smallpox, different, [135] however, 
from that common in France, accompanied in several 
cases by blindness for some days, or by dimness of 
sight, and terminated at length by diarrhoea which 
has carried off many and is still bringing some to the 
grave. 

Among these troubles and dangers, we owe much to 
the care and fatherly goodness of our Lord ; for nei- 
ther on the journey hither, nor while in this Coun- 
try, has one of us been taken with this sickness, nor 
yielded to hunger, nor lost appetite. Some have had 
since then light attacks of sickness, but they have 
passed away in a few days. Our Lord be forever 
praised, and the most immaculate Virgin with her 
most chaste Spouse, for this singular favor, which 
has aided us much in giving authority to our Faith 
among these Peoples. 

[136] I arrived among the Hurons on the fifth of 
August, the day of our Lady of the Snows, after be- 
ing thirty days on the road in continual work, except 
one day of rest, which we took in the country of the 
Bissiriniens. All the others, except Robert le Coq 
and Dominique, took much longer; although usual- 
ly the journey is only 20 days, or thereabout. I 
landed at the port of the village of Toanche or of 
Teafideouiata, where we had formerly lived; but it 
was with a little misfortune, our Lord wishing us to 
recognize from the beginning that he is calling us 
here to suffer. My Savages, — forgetting the kind- 
ness I had lavished upon them and the help I had 
afforded them in their sickness, and notwithstanding 


90 LES RELATIONS DES JJ&SUITES [Vol.8 

ou de Teandeou'iata, oil autresfois nous eftions habi- 
tuez; mais ce fut auec vne petite difgrace, noftre 
Seigneur nous voulant faire cognoiftre des F entree, 
qu'il nous appelle icy afin d'y endurer. Mes Sau- 
uages s'oublians des carelTes que ie leur auois fait, 
& de raffiflance que ie leur auois rendu, pendant 
leurs maladies, & outre cela des belles paroles & pro- 
melTes qu'ils m'auoient faites, apres m'auoir [137] 
debarque, auec quelques ornemens d'Eglife, & quel- 
que autre petit equipage, m'abandonnerent la tout 
feul, fans viures, ny fans cabane, & reprindrent leur 
route vers leurs villages, diftans de quelques fept 
lieues ; Ie mal eiloit, que Ie village de Toanch6 auoit 
change depuis mon depart, & que ie ne f§auois pas 
bonnement en quel endroit il eftoit fitue, & que ce 
riuage n'eftant plus hante, ie ne pouuois pas bien 
m'affeurer du chemin, & que quand ie I'eufTe fceu, 
ny ma foiblelTe ne m'euft pas permis de porter tout 
mon petit bagage a la fois, ny Ie hazard du lieu d'en 
faire a deux. C'eft pourquoy ie priois mes Sauuages 
de m'accompagner iufques au village, ou au moins 
de coucher en ce bord pour cette nuidt, & garder mes 
hardes tandis que i'irois prendre langue. Mais leurs 
oreilles eftoient fourdes [138] a mes prieres, & a mes 
remonftrances. Pour toute confolation ils me dirent 
que quelqu'vn me viendroit trouuer Ik. II fallut 
auoir patience : ils partent, & ie me profterne auffi- 
toft "k genoux, pour remercier Dieu, noflre Dame, & 
fainct lofeph, des faueurs & des graces que i' auois 
receu durant Ie voyage. Ie faluay I'Ange tutelaire 
du Pays, & m'offris a noftre Seigneur, auec tous nos 
petits trauaux, pour Ie falut de ces pauures Peuples, 
prenant efperace que Dieu ne m'abandonneroit point 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i63S 91 

all the fair words and promises they had given me, — 
after having [137] landed me with some Church or- 
naments and some other little outfit, left me there 
quite alone, without any provisions and without shel- 
ter, and resumed their route toward their villages, 
some seven leagues distant. My trouble was that the 
village of Toanche ^ had changed since my depar- 
ture, and that I did not know precisely in what place 
it was situated. The shore being no longer fre- 
quented, I could not easily ascertain my way ; and, 
if I had known it, I could not from weakness have 
carried all my little baggage at once ; nor could I 
risk, in that place, doing this in two trips. That is 
why I entreated my Savages to accompany me as far 
as the village, or at least to sleep on the shore for the 
night, to watch my clothes while I went to make in- 
quiries. But their ears were deaf [138] to my pray- 
ers and my remonstrances. The only consolation 
they gave me was to tell me that some one would 
find me there. I was obliged to be patient; they 
went away, and I prostrated myself at once upon my 
knees to thank God, our Lady, and saint Joseph, for 
the favors and mercies I had received during the 
voyage. I saluted the tutelary Angel of the Coun- 
try, and offered myself to our Lord, with all our little 
labors, for the salvation of these poor Peoples, taking 
hope that God would not abandon me there, since 
he had preserved and led me with so many favors. 
Then, having considered that this shore was deserted, 
and that I might indeed remain there a long time be- 
fore any one in the village would come to find me, I 
hid my packages in the woods; and, taking with me 
what was most precious, I set out to find the [139] 
village, which fortunately I came upon at about 


92 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.8 

Ik, puis qu'il m'auoit confenie & conduit auec tant 
de faueurs. Apres ayant confidere que cet abbord 
eftoit defert, & que i'y pourrois bien demeurer long- 
temps, auant qu'aucun du village m'y vinft trouuer; 
ie cach6 mes pacquets dedans les bois, & prenant auec 
moy ce que i'auois de plus precieux, ie m'en all6 
chercher Ie [139] village, que ie rencontr6 heureufe- 
met enuiron a trois quarts de lieues, ayant en pallant 
veu auec attendriffement & reffentiment Ie lieu oti 
nous anions habite, & celebre Ie S. facrifice de la 
Meffe trois ans durant, couerty en vn beau champ; 
comme auffi la place du vieux village, ou excepte vne 
cabane rien ne reftoit que les mines des autres. Ie 
vis pareillement I'endroit ou Ie pauure Eftienne Bru- 
le auoit efte barbarement & traiftreufement alTom- 
me; ce qui me fit pefer que quelque iour on nous 
pourroit bien traitter de la forte, & defirer au moins 
que ce fuft en pourchaffant la gloire de N. Seig. 
Des auffi-toft que ie fus apperceu au village, & qu'on 
euft cri6, voyla Echom reuenu, c'eft ainfi qu'ils me 
nommet, tout Ie monde fortit pour me faliier & bien- 
ueigner, chacun m 'appellant par mon nom, & me 
[140] difant: Quoy Echom, mon nepueu, mon frere, 
mon coufin, es tu done reuenu? Mais fans m'arre- 
fter, parce que la nuidt s'approchoit, ie prends logis, 
& m'y eftant bien peu de temps rafraifchy, ie fors 
auffi-toft auec vne bande de ieunes gens volontaires, 
pour aller reprendre mon petit bagage. II eftoit 
vne heure de nuict quand nous fufmes de retour au 
village. Ie me logeay chez vn nomme Aouando'id, le- 
quel eft, ou au moins a eft^ vn des plus riches des 
Hurons. Ce que ie fis k dellein, par ce qu'vn autre 
moins fort euft pu eftre incommode du grand nombre 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i635 93 

three-quarters of a league, — having seen with tender- 
ness and emotion, as I passed along, the place where 
we had lived, and had celebrated the Holy sacrifice 
of the Mass during three years, now turned into a 
fine field ; and also the site of the old village, where, 
except one cabin, nothing remained but the ruins of 
the others. I saw likewise the spot where poor Es- 
tienne Brule was barbarously and traitorously mur- 
dered, which made me think that perhaps some day 
they might treat us in the same manner, and to de- 
sire at least that it might be while we were earnestly 
seeking the glory of Our Lord. As soon as I was 
perceived in the village, some one cried out, " Why, 
there is Echom come again ' ' (that is the name they 
give me) ; and at once every one came out to salute 
and welcome me, each calling me by name and [140] 
saying: "What, Echom, my nephew, my brother, 
my cousin, hast thou then come again?" But with- 
out stopping, for night was approaching, I found a 
place to lodge; and, having rested a short time, I 
quickly set out with a volunteer band of young peo- 
ple to bring my slender baggage. It was an hour 
after sunset when we returned to the village. I 
lodged with a man named Aouandoi^, who is, or at 
least was, one of the richest of the Hurons. I did 
this on purpose, because another with smaller means 
might have been inconvenienced with the large num- 
ber of Frenchmen whom I was expecting, and who 
had to be provided with food and shelter until we 
had all gathered together, and our cabin was ready. 
You can lodge where you please ; for this Nation 
above all others is exceedingly hospitable towards all 
sorts [141] of persons, even toward Strangers; and 
you may remain as long as you please, being always 


94 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.8 

de Fran9ois que i'attendois, & qu'il falloit nourrir 
iufques ^ ce que nous fuffions tous affemblez, & que 
noftre cabane fuft faite. Vous pouuez vous loger oti 
vous voulez, car cefte Nation entre toutes les autres, 
eft fort hofpitaliere enuers toute forte [141] de per- 
fonnes, mefmes enuers les Eftrangers: & vous y de- 
meurez tant qu'il vous plaift, toufiours bien trait6 k 
la fagon du pays, & au partir de la vous en voyla 
quitte pour vn, ho, ho, ho, outo^£ti, ou vn grand mer- 
cy, au moins par entre-eux. Car des Fran9ois ils at- 
tendent quelque recompenfe, k difcretion toutesfois. 
II eft bien vray que tous ne font pas egalement hof- 
pitaliers, il y a du plus & du moins. Mon hofte eft 
des premiers en cefte vertu, & peut-eftre eft-ce pour 
ce fujet que Dieu I'a coble iufques ^ prefent de bene- 
didtios temporelles, & I'a preferue entre tous fes Con- 
citoyens. Car leur village nomm6 Teandeouihata, 
ayant efte brufle par deux fois, il n'y a eu en toutes 
les deux fois, que fa feule maifon exempte de I'em- 
brafement. Quelques vns attribuent cela au fort; 
pour moy ie le rapporte "k vne [142] caufe plus noble ; 
& fi ie me fouuiens d'vn bon trait, foit de prudence, 
foit d'humanite, dont il fe feruit au premier embrafe- 
ment ; car I'enuie s'eftant allumee contre luy, & quel- 
ques-vns voulant perdre fa cabane, que le feu auoit 
efpargn^e, auffi toft il fait mettre chaudiere haute, 
apprefte vn bon feftin, conuie tout le village, & les 
ayant allemblez, leur fait cefte harangue. Mes 
freres, i'ay vn tres-fenfible deplaifir de I'accident qui 
eft arriu^ ; mais qu'y ferions nous, e'en eft fait. Pour 
moy ie ne fyay pas ce que i'ay fait au Ciel, pour 
auoir efte efpargne entre tous les autres. Or pour 
vous tefmoigner mon deplaifir, & le defir que i'ay de 


1634 - 36] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1635 95 

well treated according to the fashion of the country. 
On going away, one acknowledges their hospitality 
by a ho, ho, ho, outoMi, or " many thanks! " at least 
among themselves ; but from Frenchmen they expect 
some recompense, always at one's discretion. It is 
quite true that not all are equally hospitable, there 
are some more and some less so. My host is one of the 
first in this virtue ; and perhaps it is on this account 
that God has crowned him until now with temporal 
blessings, and has preserved him among all his Fel- 
low Countrymen ; for their village, named Teandeoui- 
hata, having been burned twice, each time his house 
alone escaped the conflagration. Some attribute this 
to chance; for myself, I ascribe it to a [142] nobler 
cause, and so I recall a fine trait, call it prudence or 
call it humanity, which he displayed on the occasion 
of the first conflagration. For jealousy having been 
enkindled against him, and some wishing to destroy 
his cabin that the fire had spared, at once he caused 
a large cauldron to be hung, prepared a good feast, 
invited the whole village, and, having assembled 
them, delivered this harangue: " My brethren, I am 
very deeply grieved at the misfortune that has hap- 
pened ; but what can we do about it? It is over. For 
myself, I know not what I have done for Heaven, to 
be spared before all others. Now, in order to testify 
to you my deep grief and my desire to share in the 
common misfortune, I have two bins of corn " (they 
held at least one hundred to one hundred and twenty 
bushels); " I give one of them freely to the whole 
[143] village." This action calmed their jealousy, 
and put an end to their wicked designs which they 
were already forming against him. It was a wise 
action, this losing a part to save the rest. 


96 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.8 

participer k la calamite commune, voyla deux quaiffes 
de bled (elles tenoient pour le moins cent ou fix 
vingts boifleaux) i'en donne vne de bon coeur "k tout 
le [143] village. Cette adtion appaifa I'enuie, & eftei- 
gnit les manuals delleins que Ton couuoit defia 
contre luy. C'eft faire fagement, que de perdre vne 
partie pour fauuer le refte. 

le me logeay done chez cet homme, ou ie demeu- 
ray auec nos deux Peres, & vn de nos gens, I'efpace 
de plus d'vn mois & demy, iufques a ce que nous- 
nous tranfportafmes en noftre nouuelle cabane. Ce- 
pendant ces pauures Sauuages nous faifoient toutes 
les carelTes poffibles, les vns portez par leur bon na- 
turel, les autres par la confideration de quelques pe- 
tits prefens que ie leur auois fait, & I'efperance de 
quelques autres. 

Ie departis le refte de nos gens en vne autre ca- 
bane, pour euiter I'importunite & I'incommodit^, 11 
nous euflions efte tons en vn feul logis. 

[144] Le foir & le lendemain fe paffa en careffes, 
vifites, falutations & applaudiffemens de tons ceux 
du village. Les iours fuiuans plufieurs des autres 
villages, qui eftoient de ma cognoiffance, me vindrent 
veoir, & remporterent tons en ef change de leur vifite 
quelques petits prefens; c'eft pen de chofe en de- 
tail, mais tout mis en gros fait beaucoup, & monte 
allez haut pour les lieux. Les vns me difoient; 
Quoy Echom? ^s tu done reuenu? A la bonne heure, 
nous te fouhaittions & demandions grandement, ad- 
iouftans les raifons telles qu'ils iugeoient, & nous 
fufmes fort refioiiis, quand on nous difl que tu eftois 
"k Kebec "k deffein de remonter icy. D'autres difoient. 
Nous voyla bien aifes. Les bleds ne mourront plus, 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6ss 97 

I lodged therefore with this man, and lived there 
with our two Fathers and one of our people, for the 
space of more than a month and a half, until we took 
possession of our new cabin. Yet these poor Sav- 
ages lavished upon us all possible kindnesses, — some 
influenced by their good natural disposition ; others, 
by a few trifling gifts I made them, and the hope of 
some others. 

I distributed the rest of our people in another cab- 
in, to avoid the annoyance and inconvenience of be- 
ing all in one lodging. 

[144] That evening and the next day passed in the 
exchanges of affection, visits, salutations, and encour- 
aging words from the whole village. On the follow- 
ing days, several from other villages, who were of 
my acquaintance, came to see me; and all took away 
with them, in exchange for their visit, some trifling 
presents. This is a small thing in detail, but on the 
whole it exerts a great influence and is of great im- 
portance in these regions. Some said to me: " What, 
Echom, and so thou hast come back! That's right; 
we were wishing and asking earnestly for thee" (add- 
ing their reasons), " and we were heartily glad when 
they told us that thou wert at Kebec, with the pur- 
pose of coming up here." Others said: " We are 
indeed very glad ; the crops will no longer fail ; dur- 
ing thy absence we have had nothing but famine." 
And, in truth, at our arrival there were, I believe, 
[145] only two families in the whole village who had 
a store of corn ; all the others were going to buy else- 
where, and this was the case in several other vil- 
lages. Since our arrival, there has been a very 
great abundance throughout the whole Country, al- 


98 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 

pendant ton abfence nous n* anions en que famine. 
Et en effet, ie croy qu'a noftre arriuee, [145] il n'y 
auoit que deux families en tout le village, qui euffent 
prouifion de bled. Tout le relle en alloit acheter 
ailleurs, ce qui eftoit commun a plufieurs autres vil- 
lages. Depuis noftre arriuee il y en a eu tres-grande 
abondance par tout le Pays, quoy qu'au Printemps 
il aye fallu femer par trois fois, k I'occafion des ge- 
16es blanches, & des vers. 

Bref ceux de noftre village me difoient, Si tu ne 
fulTes reuenu, la traite des Francois eftoit perdue 
pour nous : car les Algonquains, & mefmes les Hu- 
rons des autres villages, ne nous mena9oiet que de 
mort, fi nous y allions, a cauf e du malTacre de Brule ; 
mais maintenant nous iros traiter sas crainte. Pay 
efte quelques quinze iours a vifiter les villages, & h. 
ramaff er auec beaucoup de frais & de peine tout noftre 
monde, qui abordoit 9a & Ik, & qui ne fyachant [146] 
pas la langue, n'euft pu venir nous trouuer qu'apres 
beaucoup d'ennuy. II eft vray qu'vn de nos hommes 
n'a pas laifT^ de venir sas autre adreffe, que de ces 
deux mots, Echom Ihonatiria, qui font mon nom, & 
celuy de noftre village. Entre tons les Frangois, ie 
n'en trouue point qui aye eu plus de peine que le P. 
Dauoft & Baron. Le Pere pour le manuals traitement 
de fes Sauuages, Baron pour la longueur du voyage. 
II a demeure quarante iours par les chemins, fouuent 
il eftoit luy feul auec vn Sauuage, k nager dans vn 
canot fort grand & fort charg^. II luy f alloit porter 
luy-mefme tons fes pacquets. II a couru rifque trois 
ou quatre fois dans les torrens, & pour comble de fes 
peines, on luy a derobe beaucoup de fes marchandifes. 
Certes il faut icy auoir bien de la force & de la pati- 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i635 99 

though in the Spring it was necessary to sow three 
times by reason of white frosts and worms. 

In short, those of our village told me, " If thou 
hadst not returned, the trade with the French was 
lost for us ; for the Algonquains and even the Hurons 
of the other villages, threatened us with death if we 
went there on account of the murder of Brul6 ; but 
now we shall go to trade without fear. ' ' I was occu- 
pied some two weeks in visiting the villages, and 
bringing together, at much expense and trouble, all 
our party, who landed here and there, and who, not 
knowing [146] the language, could only have found 
us out after much toil. It is true that one of our men 
was able to come without any other address than 
these two words, Echom, Ihonatiria, which are my 
name and that of our village. Among all the French 
I do not find any who had more trouble than Father 
Davost and Baron ; the Father from the wicked treat- 
ment of his Savages, Baron from the length of the 
journey. He occupied forty days on the road ; often 
he was alone with a Savage, paddling in a canoe very 
large and very heavily laden. He had to carry all 
his packages himself ; he had narrow escapes three 
or four times in the torrents ; and, to crown his diffi- 
culties, much of his property was stolen. Truly, to 
come here much strength and patience are needed; 
and he who thinks of coming here [147] for any other 
than God, will have made a sad mistake. 

Jean Nicolet,^ in the voyage that he made with us 
as far as the Island, suffered also all the hardships 
of one of the most robust Savages. Being at last all 
gathered together, we decided to dwell here at Ihona- 
tiria, and to build here our cabin, for the following 
reasons : First, after having earnestly recommended 


100 LES RELATIONS DES jlSUITES [Vol.8 

ence, & qui croira y venir [147] chercher autre que 
Dieu, n'y trouuera pas fon conte. 

lean Nicolet, en fon voyage qu'il fit auec nous iuf- 
ques "k rifle, fouffrit auffi tous les trauaux d'vn des 
plus robuftes Sauuages. Eftans en fin tous ralliez, 
nous prifmes refolution de nous habituer icy k Ihona- 
tiria, & y baftir noftre cabane, pour les raifons fui- 
uantes. La premiere eft, qu'apres auoir ferieufement 
recommande c6t affaire k Dieu, nous iugeafmes que 
telle eftoit fa volonte, parce que la moiffon des ames 
y eft plus meure qu'en aucun autre endroit, tant h. 
caufe de la cognoiffance que i'ay auec les habitans 
du lieu, & de I'affecftion qu'ils m'ont tefmoignee au- 
tresfois, que pource qu'ils font defia k demy inftruits 
en la Foy. En effet nous y en auons baptiz6 huidt, 
dont les fept font allez au Ciel, auec la grace du Ba- 
ptefme, [148] &toutle village eft en telle difpofition, 
qu'il ne tient qu'^ nous de le baptifer. Mais nous 
attendons qu'ils foient mieux inftruits, & qu'ils ayent 
quitte par effedt leurs principales fuperftitions. 

La feconde raifon eft, que horfmis ce village, il n'y 
auoit que la Rochelle oii nous deuffions auoir inclina- 
tion de nous arrefter; & 9'auoit efte noftre penf^e 
d6s I'an paffe. Tous les habitans qui le defiroiet fort, 
nous y inuitoient, difans que nous ferions comme au 
centre de la Nation, & adioutans d'autres motifs & 
raifons qui nous aggreoient alfez. Mefme fur le che- 
min ie m'entretenois en cefte penfee, que ie ne quit- 
tay que long-temps apres eftre icy arriu6 ; fi bien que 
nous laillafmes affez bon efpace de temps k ce village 
de la Rochelle, les pacquets du Pere Daniel chez le 
Capitaine, qui [149] I'auoit accueilly dans fon canot, 
en intention d'y faire porter les autres, & nous y lo- 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6js 101 

the matter to God, we judged that such was his will, 
because the harvest of souls is more ripe here than in 
any other place, — as much because of the acquain- 
tance I have with the inhabitants of the place, and 
of the affection they showed for me formerly, as be- 
cause they are already partly instructed in the Faith. 
In truth, we have baptized eight of them, of whom 
seven have gone to Heaven with the grace of Bap- 
tism, [148] and the whole village is of such a disposi- 
tion that it is only a question of our readiness to bap- 
tize it. But we are waiting until they are better 
instructed, and until they have forsaken for good 
their principal superstitions. 

Secondly, except this village there was only la Ro- 
chelle at which we might have had any inclination 
to stop, and that had been our intention from last 
year. All the inhabitants desired it very much, and 
invited us there, saying that we would be, as it were, 
in the center of the Nation, and adding other motives 
and reasons which pleased us well. Even on the 
road I entertained this thought, and only laid it aside 
a long time after my arrival here, — so long, indeed, 
that we left for a considerable space of time the bag- 
gage of Father Daniel at this village of la Rochelle, 
with the Captain who [149] had received him into 
his canoe, — intending to carry the rest thither, and 
to abide there. But, having taken into account that 
they were intending this Spring to change the loca- 
tion of the place, as they have already done, we did 
not wish to build a cabin for one winter. Besides, 
although it is a desirable thing to gather more fruit, 
and to have more listeners in our assemblies, which 
would make us choose the large villages rather than 
the small, nevertheless, for a beginning we have 


102 LES RELATIONS DBS JASUITES [Vol.8 

ger. Mais ayant confidere, qu'ils deuoient k ce Prin- 
temps changer de place, comme ils ont d6ja fait, 
nous ne voulufmes point baftir vne cabane pour vn 
hyuer. D'ailleurs, quoy qu'il nous foit fort k delirer, 
pour cueillir plus de fruit, d'auoir beaucoup d'audi- 
teurs en nos affemblees, ce qui nous pent faire choiflr 
les grand[s] villages, pluftoft que les petits ; neant- 
moins pour le commencement, nous auons trouu6 
plus a propos de nous tenir comme "k I'ombre, pr6s 
d'vne petite bourgade, oil les habitans font deja faits 
k banter les Frangois, que de nous mettre tout a coup 
en vne grade, ou Ton ne fuft point accouflume ^ nos 
famous de faire. Autrement c'euft efte expofer des 
hommes nouueaux & ignorans en la langue, a vne 
[150] ieuneffe nombreufe, qui par fes importunitez 
& mocqueries eufl peu apporter quelque defordre. 
De plus fi nous fuffions allez ailleurs, ceux de ce vil- 
lage euffent creu eflre encore en la difgrace des 
Fran9ois, & euffent peut-eftre abandonne le com- 
merce auec eux, veu mefmement que cet Hyuer der- 
nier le Borgne de I'lfle a fait icy courir le bruit, que 
Monfieur de Champlain n'en vouloit pas demeurer 
1^, pour la mort de Brule, & qu'il demandoit quatre 
teftes; & il eft croyable que fi nous n'euffions efl6 
icy, & fi nous n'y demeurions comme pour gages, 
plufieurs craignans d'eftre arreftez, foit pour leurs 
fautes, foit pour celles d'autruy, ne retourneroient 
plus a la traidle. En outre ces bonnes gents ont pre- 
tendu que nous deuios demeurer chez eux, s'il eftoit 
vray que nous les aimaflions: car, difoiet-ils, [151] fi 
vous allez ailleurs, no feulemet nous aurions fujet de 
craindre pour noftre particulier, mais encore pour 
tout le Pays, nos interefts eftans vnis enfemble; 
mais maintenat que vous nous prenez pour vos hoftes, 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i635 103 


thought it more suitable to keep in the shadow, as it 
were, near a little village where the inhabitants are 
already disposed to associate with the French, than 
to put ourselves suddenly in a great one, where the 
people are not accustomed to our mode of doing 
things. To do otherwise would have been to expose 
new men, ignorant of the language, to a [150] nu- 
merous youth, who by their annoyances and mockery 
would have brought about some disturbance. Be- 
sides, if we had gone elsewhere the people of this 
village would have thought themselves still in dis- 
grace with the French, and perhaps would have 
abandoned trade with them, — especially as during 
this last Winter Le Borgne,^ of the Island, spread 
the report that Monsieur de Champlain did not wish 
us to remain there, on account of the death of Brul6, 
and that he was demanding four heads; and it is 
probable that, if we had not been here, and if we had 
not remained as pledges, several, fearing to be ar- 
rested for their own faults or for those of others, 
would not have returned again to the trade. Besides, 
these good people have claimed that we ought to re- 
main among them if it were true that we loved them ; 
"for," said they, [151] "if you go elsewhere, not 
only shall we have cause to fear on our own account, 
but for the whole Country besides, our interests be- 
ing bound together. But, now that you take us for 
your hosts, we have no longer to fear as we would ; 
for if you had chosen another place, and if some 
wicked person had done you harm, not only the 
French but the Hurons also would have blamed us 
for it." I might bring forward some other reasons 
and considerations which are not to be despised, — as, 
for example, it would be a more convenient place, as 


104 LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 8 

nous n'auons plus que craindre comme nous euffions 
fait: car li vous euffiez choili vn autre lieu, & que 
quelque mef chant vous euft fait du mal, non feule- 
ment les Frangois, mais encore les Hurons s'en 
fuffent pris k nous. le pourrois encore icy alleguer 
quelques autres raifons & confiderations qui ne font 
pas a meprifer, comme feroit vne plus grade com- 
modite, tant pour le poilTon & pour le gibier, comme 
pour I'embarquement. Mais la principale eft la pre- 
miere que i'ay apportee, entre les villages qui nous 
ont voulu auoir, ceux 6! Oenrio en ont fait plus d'in- 
ftance. Ce petit village alTez proche [152] du no- 
ftre, faifoit autresfois vne partie de celuy oh. nous 
eftions iadis: mais nous n'auons pas iuge a propos 
de nous y arrefter cefte fois, feulement ayant recon- 
neu qu'il eftoit expedient, que de ce village & du 
noftre il s'en fift vn en quelque autre part, tant pour 
leurs affaires communes, que pour nos fondtions & 
minifteres particuliers. Nous auons fait depuis pen 
quelques prefens a tons les deux enfemble k cette 
fin. Nos prefents font de grande confideration par- 
my eux: neantmoins ils ne font pas encore refo- 
lus. Ayant done arrefte de nous tenir ou nous 
fommes, il fut queftion de baftir vne cabane. Les 
cabanes de ce pays, ne font ny des Louures ny des 
Palais, ny rien de femblable aux riches baftimens de 
noftre France, no pas mefmes aux plus petites chau- 
mines; c'eft neantmoins quelque [153] chofe de meil- 
leur & plus commode, que les tandis des Montagnais. 
le ne vous f9aurois mieux exprimer la fa§on des de- 
meures Huronnes, que de les comparer a des berceaux 
ou tonnelles de iardin ; dont au lieu de branches & 
de verdure, quelques-vnes font couuertes d'efcorce 
de cedres, quelques autres de groffes efcorces de 


1634-36] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6js 105 

well for fish and game as for embarking. But the 
principal reason is the first I mentioned. Among 
the villages that wished to have us, the people of 
Oenrio'^^ have entreated us most. This little village, 
quite near [152] ours, used to be a part of the one in 
which we were formerly; but we have not judged it 
expedient for us to stop there this time, simply hav- 
ing recognized it to be best that from this village and 
from ours one should be formed at some other place, 
both for their common interests and for our own 
special functions and ministrations. We made, not 
long ago, some presents to both of them at the same 
time, for this purpose. Our presents have great in- 
fluence among them, nevertheless they have not yet 
decided the question. Having, therefore, determined 
to stay where we are, the question of building a 
cabin arose. The cabins of this country are neither 
Louvres nor Palaces, nor anything like the buildings 
of our France, not even like the smallest cottages. 
They are, nevertheless, somewhat [153] better and 
more commodious than the hovels of the Montagnais. 
I cannot better express the fashion of the Huron 
dwellings than to compare them to bowers or garden 
arbors, — some of which, in place of branches and 
vegetation, are covered with cedar bark, some others 
with large pieces of ash, elm, fir, or spruce bark; 
and although the cedar bark is best, according to 
common opinion and usage, there is, nevertheless, 
this inconvenience, that they are almost as suscep- 
tible to fire as matches. Hence arise many of the 
conflagrations of entire villages ; and, without going 
farther than this year, we have seen in less than ten 
days two large ones entirely consumed, and another, 
that of Louys, partially burned. [154] We have also 


106 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.8 

frefnes, d'orme & de fapin, ou peruffe: & quoy que 
celles de cedres foient les meilleures, ftiiuant I'aduis 
& I'vfage le plus commun, il y a neantmoins cefte in- 
commodite, qu'elles font quafi auffi fufceptibles du 
feu que des allumettes, d'ou precede quantite d'em- 
brafemens des bourgades entieres, & fans aller plus 
loing que cefte annee, nous en auons veu en moins 
de dix iours deux grandes entierement conf ommees ; 
& vne autre, qui eft celle de Louys, bruflee [154] en 
partie. Nous auons veu auffi vne fois noftre propre 
cabane en feu ; mais Dieu mercy nous I'efteignifmes 
auffi toft. II y a de ces cabanes ou berceaux de di- 
uerfe grandeur, les vnes de deux brafles en longueur, 
d'autres de dix, d'autres de vingt, de trente, & de 
quarante: la largeur ordinaire eft d'enuiron quatre 
braffes, la hauteur eft prefque pareille. II n'y a point 
de diuers eftages; il ne fe voit icy ny caue, ny 
chambre, ny grenier. On n'y veoit autre feneftre ny 
cheminee qu'vn mefchant trou au haut de la cabane, 
qu'on y laiffe a dellein pour chaffer la fumee. C'eft 
ainfi qu'on nous a bafty la noftre. 

Ceux d'Oenrio & de noftre village s'y font employ- 
ez, au moyen de quelque pref ent que nous leur fifmes. 
Nous n'auons pas manque d'exercice pour la faire 
acheuer, tant [155] ^ caufe de la maladie vniuerfelle 
de quafi tous les Sauuages, qu'a caufe de la coopera- 
tion de ces deux villages. Car encore que I'ouurage 
ne fuft pas grand ; toutesfois ceux de noftre village, 
regardans ceux d'Oenrio, qui fous efperance de nous 
attirer a eux k la longue, ne faifoiet que s'amufer 
fans rien auacer. Nous eftions quafi au mois d'Oc- 
tobre auant que nous fuffions a couuert. Pour le de- 
dans nous I'auons accomode nous mefmes; en forte 
que bien que ce ne foit pas grand' chofe, les Sauuages 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j6ss 107 

once seen our own cabin on fire ; but, thank God, we 
extinguished it immediately. There are cabins or 
arbors of various sizes, some two brasses in length, 
others of ten, others of twenty, of thirty, of forty; 
the usual width is about four brasses, their height 
is about the same. There are no different stories; 
there is no cellar, no chamber, no garret. It has 
neither window nor chimney, only a miserable hole 
in the top of the cabin, left to permit the smoke to 
escape. This is the way they built ours for us. 

The people of Oenrio and of our village were em- 
ployed at this, by means of presents given them. It 
has cost us much exertion to secure its completion, 
not only [155] on account of the epidemic, which af- 
fected almost all the Savages, but on account of the 
cooperation of these two villages ; for although the 
work was not great, yet those of our village followed 
the example of those of Oenrio, who, in hopes of 
finally attracting us to their village, simply amused 
themselves without advancing the work ; we were 
almost into October before we were under cover. As 
to the interior, we have suited ourselves; so that, 
even if it does not amount to much, the Savages never 
weary of coming to see it, and, seeing it, to admire 
it. We have divided it into three parts. The first 
compartment, nearest the door, serves as an ante- 
chamber, as a storm door, and as a storeroom for 
our provisions, in the fashion of the Savages. The 
second is that in which we live, and is our kitchen, 
our [156] carpenter shop, our mill, or place for grind- 
ing the wheat, our Refectory, our parlor and our bed- 
room. On both sides, in the fashion of the Hurons, 
are two benches which they call Endicha, on which 
are boxes to hold our clothes and other little conven- 


108 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 

ne lailTent de la venir veoir, & la voyant de Tadmi- 
rer. Nous I'auons feparee en trois. La premiere 
partie du cofl6 de la porte, fert d'antichambre, de 
brifeuent, & de magazin pour nos prouifions de bled, 
k la fagon des Sauuages. La feconde eft, celle que 
nous habitons, & ou eft noftre cuiline, noftre [156] 
menuiferie, noftre moulin, ou lieu ^ battre le bled, 
noftre Refedtoire, noftre falle, & noftre chambre. 
Aux deux coftez h. la fa9on des Hurons font deux 
eftablies, qu'ils nomment Endicha, fur lefquelles font 
des quaiffes pour mettre nos habits & autres petites 
commoditez ; mais au dellous, au lieu que les Hu- 
rons y logent leur bois, nous y auons pratiqu^ de pe- 
tites cabanes pour nous coucher, & retirer quelque 
chofe de nos hardes, hors de la main larronnefTe des 
Hurons. Pour eux ils couchent aupr6s du feu : mais 
cependant eux & nous n'auons que la terre pour cha- 
lit ; pour paillalTe & pour matelats quelque efcorce, 
ou quelque branchage couuert d'vne nate de ionc; 
car pour les linceuls & couuertes, nos habits & quel- 
ques peaux en font Toffice. La troifiefme partie de 
noftre cabane eft encore [157] diuifee en deux, par 
le moyen d'vn ouurage de menuiferie, qui luy donne 
alTez bonne grace, & qui fe fait admirer icy pour fa 
nouueaut6. En I'vne eft noftre petite Chapelle, oil 
nous celebrons tous les iours la faindte MelTe, & nous 
y retirons de iour pour prier Dieu. II eft vray que 
le bruit qu'on fait quafi continuellement nous en em- 
pefche d'ordinaire, horfmis le matin & le foir, que 
tout le monde eft retire, & nous contraint de gaigner 
le dehors pour faire nos prieres. En I'autre partie 
nous y mettons nos vtenfiles. Toute la cabane n'a 
que ili:!^ brafles de longueur, & enuiron trois & demie 
de large. Voyla comme nous fommes logez, non 


1634-36] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, j6s5 109 

iences; but below, in the place where the Hurons 
keep their wood, we have contrived some little bunks 
to sleep in, and to store away some of our clothing 
from the thievish hands of the Hurons. They sleep 
beside the fire, but still they and we have only the 
earth for bedstead; for mattress and pillows, some 
bark or boughs covered with a rush mat ; for sheets 
and coverings, our clothes and some skins do duty. 
The third part of our cabin is also [157] divided into 
two parts by means of a bit of carpentry which gives 
it a fairly good appearance, and which is admired here 
for its novelty. In the one is our little Chapel, in 
which we celebrate every day holy Mass, and we re- 
tire there daily to pray to God. It is true that the al- 
most continual noise they make usually hinders us, — 
except in the morning and evening, when everybody 
has gone away, — and compels us to go outside to say 
our prayers. In the other part we put our utensils. 
The whole cabin is only six brasses long, and about 
three and a half wide. That is how we are lodged, 
doubtless not so well that we may not have in this 
abode a good share of rain, snow, and cold. How- 
ever, as I have said, they never cease coming [158] 
to visit us from admiration, especially since we have 
put on two doors, made by a carpenter, and since our 
mill and our clock have been set to work. It would 
be impossible to describe the astonishment of these 
good people, and how much they admire the intelli- 
gence of the French. But they have said all when 
they have said they are ondaki, that is. Demons ; and 
indeed we make profitable use of this word when we 
talk to them: " Now, my brothers, you have seen 
that and admired it, and you think you are right, 
when you see something extraordinary, in saying on- 


no LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.8 

fans doute fi bien que nous n'ayons dedans ce logis 
affez bonne part a la pluye, a la neige, & au froid. 
Cependant, comme i'ay didt, on ne lailTe pas de nous 
venir [158] vifiter par admiration; principalement 
depuis que nous auons eu deux portes de menuiferie, 
& que noftre moulin & noflre horloge ont commence 
k ioiier. On ne fgauroit dire les eftonnemens de ces 
bonnes gens, & combien ils admirent I'efprit des 
Fran9ois. Mais ils ont tout dit, quand ils ont dit 
qu'ils font ondaki, c'eft ^ dire des Demons: & nous 
releuions bien ce mot a leur profit, quand nous leur 
difons, Or 9a mes freres, vous auez veu cela; & I'a- 
uez admire, & vous penfez auoir raifon, voyant quel- 
que chofe d'extraordinaire, de dire ondaki\ qu'il faut 
que ceux qui font tant de merueilles foient des De- 
mons. Et qu'y a t'il d' admirable, comme la beauts 
du Ciel «& du Soleil? qu'y a-t'il d'admirable, comme 
de voir tous les ans les arbres quafi morts durant 
I'Hyuer, tous nuds & defigurez, reprendre [159] fans 
maquer k chaque Printemps vne nouuelle vie & vn 
nouuel habit ? Le bled que vous f emez pourrit, & de 
fa pourriture va poullant de fi beaux tuyaux, & de 
meilleurs ef pics ? Et ce pendant vous ne dites point, 
II faut que celuy qui a fait tat de beautez, & qui nous 
eftalle tous les ans deuant les yeux tant de merueilles, 
foit quelque excellent oki, & quelque intelligece fure- 
minete, &c. II n'eft venu persone qui n'aye voulu 
tourner le moulin ; neantmoins nous ne nous en fer- 
uons point, d'autat que nous auos par veu experiece 
que nos Sagamit^s font meilleures eftant pil6es de- 
dans des mortiers de bois, "k la fa9on des Sauuages, 
que broyees dedans le moulin. le croy que c'eft "k 
caufe que le moulin fait la farine trop fine. Pour 
ce qui eft de I'horloge, il y auroit mille chofes "k dire. 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ibjs 111 

daki, to declare that those who make so many marvels 
must be Demons. And what is there so wonderful 
as the beauty of the Sky and the Sun ? What is there 
so wonderful as to see every year the trees almost 
dead during the Winter, all bare and disfigured, 
resume [159] without fail, every Spring, a new life 
and a new dress? The corn that you plant rots, and 
from its decay spring up such beautiful stalks and 
better ears. And yet you do not say, ' He who made 
so many beauties, and who every year displays before 
our eyes so many marvels, must be some beneficent 
oki, and some supereminent intelligence,' " etc. No 
one has come who has not wished to turn the mill ; 
nevertheless we have not used it, inasmuch as we 
have learned by experience that our Sagamites ^^ are 
better pounded in a wooden mortar, in the fashion of 
the Savages, than ground within the mill. I believe 
it is because the mill makes the flour too fine. As to 
the clock, a thousand things are said of it. They 
all think [160] it is some living thing, for they can- 
not imagine how it sounds of itself; and, when it is 
going to strike, they look to see if we are all there 
and if some one has not hidden, in order to shake it. 
They think it hears, especially when, for a joke, 
some one of our Frenchmen calls out at the last 
stroke of the hammer, " That's enough," and then 
it immediately becomes silent. They call it the 
Captain of the day. When it strikes, they say it is 
speaking; and they ask when they come to see us 
how many times the Captain has already spoken. 
They ask us about its food; they remain a whole 
hour, and sometimes several, in order to be able to 
hear it speak. They used to ask at first what it said. 
We told them two [161] things that they have re- 


112 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.8 

lis croyent tons [i6o] que c'efk quelque chofe viuante; 
car ils ne fe peuuent imaginer comment elle fonne 
d'elle mefme, & quand elle vient a fonner, ils re- 
gardent fi nous fommes tous la, & s'il n'y a pas quel- 
qu'vn de cache, pour luy donner le branle. 

Ils ont penfe qu'il entendoit, principalement quand 
pour rire quelqu'vn de nos Franjois s'efcrioit au der- 
nier coup de marteau, c'eft affez fonn6, & que tout 
auffi toft elle fe taifoit. Ils I'appellent le Capitaine 
du iour. Quand elle fonne ils difent, qu'elle parle, & 
demandent quand ils nous viennent veoir, combien 
de fois le Capitaine a defia parle. Ils nous inter- 
rogent de fon manger. lis demeurent les heures en- 
tieres, & quelquesfois plufieurs, afin de la pouuoir 
ouyr parler. Ils demandoient au commencement ce 
qu'elle difoit; on leur refpondit deux [i6i] chofes, 
qu'ils ont fort bien retenues; I'vne que quand elle 
fonnoit k quatre heures du foir pendant I'hyuer, elle 
difoit, Sortez, allez vous en, afin que nous fermions 
la porte ; car auffi toft ils leuent le fiege, & s'en vont : 
I'autre qu'a midy elle difoit yo eioiiahaoua, c'eft k dire, 
fus drefsos la chaudiere, & ils ont encore mieux rete- 
nu ce langage. Car il y a de ces 6cornifleurs, qui ne 
manquent point de venir a cette heure 1^, pour par- 
ticiper k noftre Sagamite. lis mangent a toutes 
heures, quand ils ont dequoy. Cependant d'ordinaire 
ils ne font que manger deux chaudieres par iour, 
f9auoir eft, au matin & au foir. Partant ils font bien 
aifes pendant le iour de prendre part k la noftre. 

A propos de leurs admirations, i'en pourrois icy 
coucher plufieurs faites au fujet de la pierre d'ay- 
mant; en laquelle ils regardoient s'il y auoit [162] de 
la colle, & d'vne lunette "k onze facettes, qui leur re- 
prefentoit autant de fois vn mefme obiet, d'vne petite 


1634 - 36] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1633 1 13 

membered very well ; one, that when it sounded four 
o'clock of the afternoon, during winter, it was say- 
ing, " Go out, go away that we may close the door," 
for immediately they arose, and went out. The 
other, that at midday it said, yo etouahaoua, that is, 
" Come, put on the kettle ; " and this speech is better 
remembered than the other, for some of these spongers 
never fail to come at that hour, to get a share of our 
Sagamite. They eat at all hours, when they have 
the wherewithal, but usually they have only two 
meals a day, in the morning and in the evening; 
consequently they are very glad during the day to 
take a share with us. 

Speaking of their expressions of admiration, I 
might here set down several on the subject of the 
lodestone, into which they looked to see if there was 
[162] some paste; and of a glass with eleven facets, 
which represented a single object as many times ; of 
a little phial in which a flea appears as large as a 
beetle; of the prism, of the joiner's tools; but above 
all of the writing, for they could not conceive how, 
what one of us, being in the village, had said to 
them, and put down at the same time in writing, an- 
other, who meanwhile was in a house far away, could 
say readily on seeing the writing. I believe they 
have made a hundred trials of it. All this serves to 
gain their affections, and to render them more docile 
when we introduce the admirable and incomprehen- 
sible mysteries of our Faith ; for the belief they have 
in our intelligence and capacity causes them to accept 
without reply what we say to them. 

[163] It remains now to say something of the coun- 
try, of the manners and customs of the Hurons, of 


114 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.8 

phiole dans laquelle vne pulce paroift comme vn han- 
neton, du verre triangulaire, des outils de menuife- 
rie. Mais fur tout de Tefcriture ; car ils ne pouuoient 
conceuoir comme ce qu'vn de nous, eftat au village 
leur auoit dit & couche en mef me temps par efcrit ; 
vn autre qui cependant eftoit dans la maifon bien 
efloignee, le difoit incontinent en voyant I'efcriture. 
le crois qu'ils en ont fait cent experiences. Tout 
cela fert pour gaigner leurs affedtions, & les rendre 
plus dociles, quand il eft queftion des admirables & 
incomprehenlibles myfteres de noftre Foy. Car la 
croyance qu'ils ont de noftre efprit & de noftre capa- 
city, fait que fans replique ils croyent ce qHi'on leur 
annonce. 

[163] Refte maintenant k dire quelque chofe du 
pays, des meurs & couftumes des Hurons, de la difpo- 
fition qu'ils ont k la Foy, & de nos petits trauaux. 

Quant au premier, le peu de papier & de loifir que 
nous auons, m' oblige k vous dire en peu de mots ce 
qui pourroit faire vn iufte volume. Le pays des Hu- 
rons n'eft pas grand, fa plus longue eftendue fe pent 
trauerfer en trois ou quatre iours, I'affiette en eft 
belle, la plus part toute en plaines. II eft enuironn6 
& entrecoupe d'vne quantit6 de tres-beaux lacs, ou 
pluftoft mers, d'ou vient que celuy qui leur eft au 
Nord, & au Nord-nordoueft, eft appell6 mer douce. 
Nous pafsos par Ik en venat des BilTiriniens. Le fol 
de ce pays eft tout fablonneux, quoy que non efgale- 
ment. Cependant il produit quantity de tres-bon 
bled d'Inde, & peut-on [164] dire, que c'eft le gre- 
nier de la plus part des Algonquains. II y a vingt 
Bourgades, qui difent enuiron trente milles ames, 
fous vne mef me langue, & encore affez facile a qui a 
quelque maiftre. Elle a diftin^ion de genres, de 


1634-36J LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i635 115 

the inclination they have to the Faith, and of our in- 
significant labors. 

As to the first, the little paper and leisure we have 
compels me to say in a few words what might justly 
fill a volume. The Huron country is not large, its 
greatest extent can be traversed in three or four days. 
Its situation is fine, the greater part of it consisting 
of plains. It is surrounded and intersected by a 
number of very beautiful lakes or rather seas, whence 
it comes that the one to the North and to the North- 
northwest is called " fresh-water sea " [mer douce]. "^ 
We pass through it in coming from the Bissiriniens. 
The soil of this country is quite sandy, although not 
equally so. However, it produces a quantity of very 
good Indian corn, and one may [164] say that it is 
the granary of most of the Algonquains. There are 
twenty Towns, which indicate about 30,000 souls 
speaking the same tongue, which is not difficult to 
one who has a master. It has distinction of genders, 
number, tense, person, moods; and, in short, it is 
very complete and very regular, contrary to the 
opinion of many. I am rejoiced to find that this 
language is common to some twelve other Nations, 
all settled and numerous ; these are, the Conkhandeen- 
rhonons, khionontaterrhonons, Atiouandaronks, Sononto- 
errhonons, Onontaerrhonons , Oiiioenrhonons, Onoiochrho- 
nons, Agnierrhonons, Andastoerrhonons , Scahentoarrho- 
nons, Rhiierrhonons, and Ahouenrochrhonons . ^ The 
Hurons are friends of all these people, except the 
Sonontoerrhonons , Onontaerrhonons , Ouioenrhono7is, Onoi- 
ochrhonons [165] and Agnierrhonons, all of whom we 
comprise under the name Hiroquois. But they have 
already made peace with the Sonontoerrhonons , since 
they were defeated by them a year past in the Spring. 


116 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.8 

nombre, de temps, de perfonnes, de moeuds, & en vn 
mot tres-parfaite & tres accomplie, centre la penfee 
de plufieurs. Ce qui me refioiiit, c'eft que i'ay appris 
que cette langue eft commune a quelques douze au- 
tres Nations toutes fedentaires & nombreufes. S9a- 
uoir eft aux Conkhandeenrhonons , khionontaterrhonons ^ 
Atiouandaronks, Sotwntoerrhonons, Onontacrrhonons, Oii- 
ioenrhonons, Onoiochrho7ions, Agnierrhonons, Andajioer- 
rhonons, Scahentoarrhonds, Rhiierrhonotis, & Ahouenroch- 
rhonons. Les Hurons font amis de tous ces peuples, 
excepte des Sonontoerrlionons, Onontacrrhonons , Oiiioen- 
rhonons, Onoiochrhonons [165] & Agnierrhonons, que nous 
comprenons tous fous le nom d'Hiroquois. Encore 
ont ils defia la paix auec les Sonontoerrhonofis, depuis 
qu'ils furent par eux defaits I'annee paffee au Prin- 
temps. 

Les deputez de tout le Pays font allez &. Sonontoen 
pour cofirmer cette paix, & dit on que les Onontae- 
rhononSy Ouioenrhonons, Ouiochrhonons & Agnierrho- 
nons, veulet entrer en ce party. Mais ce n'eft pas 
chofe affeuree; que fi cela eft, voila vne belle grande 
porte ouuerte ^ I'Euangile. On m'a voulu mener 
audit Sonofttoen, mais ie n'ay pas iug6 k propos d'aller 
encore en aucune part, iufques h. ce que nous ayons 
icy mieux eftably les fondemens de la Loy Euange- 
lique, & que nous y ayons tir6 vn crayon, fur lequel 
les autres Nations qui fe conuertiront fe puiffent rei- 
gler. Ie voudrois bien n'aller en aucu lieu qu'on 
[166] ne nous recogneuft aufG toft pour Predicateurs 
de lefus-Christ. 

II eft fi clair & fi euident, qu'il eft vne Diuinit6 
qui a fait le Ciel & la terre, que nos Hurons ne la 
peuuent entierement mecognoiftre. Et quoy qu'ils 
ayent les yeux de I'efprit fort obfcurcis des tenebres 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, jbjs 117 

The deputies of the whole Country have gone to 
Sonontoen ^ to confirm this peace, and it is said that 
the Onontacrhonons, Otiioenrhonons, OiiiochrJionoiis and 
Agnierrhonons wish to become parties to it. But that 
is not certain ; if it were, a noble door would be open 
to the Gospel. They wanted me to go to this Sonon- 
toen, but I did not judge it wise to go yet into any 
other part, until we have better established here the 
foundation of the Gospel Law, and until we have 
drawn a line by which the other Nations that shall 
be converted may guide themselves. Indeed, I 
would not go to any place where [i66] we would not 
be immediately recognized as Preachers of Jesus 
Christ. 

It is so clear, so evident that there is a Divinity 
who has made Heaven and earth, that our Hurons 
cannot entirely ignore it. And although the eyes of 
their minds are very much obscured by the darkness 
of a long ignorance, by their vices and sins, they still 
see something of it. But they misapprehend him 
grossly, and, having the knowledge of God, they do 
not render him the honor, the love, nor the service 
which is his due. For they have neither Temples, 
nor Priests, nor Feasts, nor any ceremonies. 

They say that a certain woman named Eataentsic ^ 
is the one who made earth and men. They give her 
an assistant, one ndiXn^dL Jouskeha, whom they declare 
to be her little son, with whom she governs [167] the 
world. This Joiiskeha has care of the living, and of 
the things that concern life, and consequently they 
say that he is good. Eataentsic has care of souls; 
and, because they believe that she makes men die, 
they say that she is wicked. And there are among 
them mysteries so hidden that only the old men, who 


118 LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 8 

d'vne longue ignorance, de leurs vices & pechez, fi 
eft-ce qu'ils en voyent quelque chofe. Mais ils fe 
meprennent lourdement, & ayant la cognoilTance de 
Dieu, ils ne luy rendent pas I'lionneur, ny I'amour, 
ny le feruice qu'il conuient : car ils n'ont ny Temples, 
ny Preftres, ny Feftes, ny ceremonies aucunes. 

lis difent qu'vne certaine femme nomm6e Eataentfic, 
eft celle qui a fait la terre & les hommes. lis luy 
baillent pour adioint vn certain appelle louskeha, 
qu'ils difent eftre fon petit fils, auec lequel elle gou- 
uerne [167] le monde; cefl louskeha a foin des viuans 
& des chofes qui concernent la vie, & par confequent 
ils difent qu'il eft bo: Eataentfic a foin des ames, & 
parce qu'ils croyent qu'elle fait mourir les hommes, 
ils difent qu'elle eft mefchante. Et ce font parmy 
eux des myfteres fi cachez, qu'il n'y a que les vieil- 
lards qui en puiffent parler auec credit & authorite, 
pour eftre creus. D'ou vient qu'vn certain ieune 
homme m'en ayant difcouru, me dift en fe ventant, 
Ne fuifie pas bien fgauant? Quelques vns me difent 
que la maifon de ces deux Diuinitez eft au bout du 
monde vers 1' Orient. Or chez eux le monde ne paffe 
point leur Pays, c'eft a dire I'Amerique, d'autres les 
logent au milieu. 

Ce Dieu & cette Deeffe viuent comme eux, mais 
fans difette; font des feftins comme eux, font lafcifs 
auffi. bien qu'eux : bref ils fe les figurent [168] tons tels 
qu'ils font eux mefmes. Et encor qu'il[s] les facent 
hommes & corporels, ils femblent neantmoins leur at- 
tribuer vne certaine immenfite en tous lieux. lis 
difent que cette Eataentfic eft tombee du Ciel, ou il y 
a des habitans comme icy, & que quand elle tomba, 
elle eftoit enceinte. Que fi vous leur demandez qui 
a fait le Ciel & fes habitans, ils n'ont autre repartie, 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib35 119 

can speak with credit and authority about them, are 
believed. Whence it comes that a certain young 
man, who was talking to me about this, said boast- 
ingly, * ' Am I not very learned ? ' ' Some told me 
that the house of these two Divinities is at the end of 
the world to the East. Now with them the world 
does not pass beyond their Country, that is, America. 
Others place their abode in the middle. 

This God and Goddess live like themselves, but 
without famine; make feasts as they do, are lustful 
as they; in short, they imagine them [i68] exactly 
like themselves. And still, though they make them 
human and corporeal, they seem nevertheless to at- 
tribute to them a certain immensity in all places. 
They say that this Eataentsic fell from the Sky, where 
there are inhabitants as on earth ; and, when she fell, 
she was with child. If you ask them who made the 
Sky and its inhabitants, they have no other reply 
than that they know nothing about it. And when 
we preach to them of one God, Creator of Heaven 
and earth, and of all things, and even when we talk 
to them of Hell and Paradise and of our other mys- 
teries, the headstrong savages reply that this is good 
for our Country and not for theirs ; that every Coun- 
try has its own fashions. But having pointed out to 
them, by means of a little globe that we had brought, 
that there is [169] only one world, they remain with- 
out reply. I find in their marriage customs two 
things that greatly please me; the first, that they 
have only one wife; the second, that they do not 
marry their relatives in a direct or collateral line, 
however distant they may be. There is, on the other 
hand, sufficient to censure, were it only the frequent 
changes the men make of their wives, and the women 


120 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 

finon qu'ils n'en fgauent rien. Et quand nous leur 
prefchons vn Dieu, Createur du Ciel & de la terre & 
de toutes chofes: de mefme quand nous leur parlous 
d'vn Enfer & d'vn Paradis, & du refle de nos my- 
fteres; les opiniaftres refpondent, que cela eft bon 
pour noftre Pays, non pour le leur ; que chaque Pays 
a fes famous de faire : mais leur ayant monftre par le 
moyen d'vn petit globe que nous auons apport^, qu'il 
n'y a [169] qu'vn feul monde, ils demeuret fans re- 
plique. le trouue dans leur mariage deux chofes qui 
me plaifent fort; I'vne qu'ils n'ont qu'vne femme, 
I'autre qu'ils ne fe marient point k leurs parens en 
ligne direc5te ou collaterale, pour efloignez qu'ils puif- 
set eftre. II y a aflez d'ailleurs a y reprendre, quand 
ce ne feroit que le frequent cbangement que les 
hommes font de leurs femmes, & les femmes de leurs 
maris: ils croyent I'immortalite des ames, qu'ils fei- 
gnent eftre corporelles. Toute la plus grande partie 
de leur Religion confifte en ce poincft. Ce ne font 
d'ailleurs que fuperftitions, que nous efperons auec 
la grace de Dieu changer en vraye Religion, & comme 
defpoiiilles enleuees fur I'ennemy, les confacrer h. 
I'honneur de noftre Seigneur & en profiter pour leur 
foulagement particulier. Certes fi [170] eftas vn iour 
Chreftiens, ils viennent a les aider h. proportion de ce 
qu'ils font h. prefent pour elles en vain ; il faudra que 
nous leur cedions, ou que nous les imitions ; car ils 
n'y efpargnent rien, non pas mefmes les plus auari- 
cieux. Nous en auons veu quelques-vns denuez, ou 
peu s'en faut, de toutes leurs commoditez, pour ce que 
plufieurs de leurs amis eftoient morts, aux ames def- 
quels ils en auoient fait largeffe. Au furplus les 
chiens, les cerfs, les poilTons & autres animaux ont 
des ames immortelles & raifonnables ^ leur dire : Pour 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i635 121 

of their husbands. They believe in the immortality 
of the soul,*'' which they believe to be corporeal. 
The greatest part of their Religion consists in this 
point. There are, besides, only superstitions, which 
we hope by the grace of God to change into true Re- 
ligion, and, like spoils carried off from the enemy, to 
consecrate them to the honor of our Lord, and to 
profit by them for their special advantage. Certain- 
ly, if, [170] should they some day be Christians, these 
superstitions help them in proportion to what they do 
for them now in vain, it will be necessary that we 
yield to them, or that we imitate them; for they 
spare nothing, not even the most avaricious. We 
have seen several stripped, or almost so, of all their 
goods, because several of their friends were dead, to 
whose souls they had made presents. Moreover, 
dogs, deer, fish, and other animals have, in their 
opinion, immortal and reasonable souls. In proof of 
this, the old men relate certain fables, which they rep- 
resent as true ; they make no mention either of pun- 
ishment or reward, in the place to which souls go after 
death. And so they do not make any distinction be- 
tween the good and the bad, the virtuous and the 
vicious; [171] and they honor equally the interment 
of both, even as we have seen in the case of a young 
man who had poisoned himself from the grief he felt 
because his wife had been taken away from him. 
Their superstitions are infinite ; their feasts, their 
medicines, their fishing, their hunting, their wars, — 
in short, almost their whole life turns upon this piv- 
ot; dreams, above all, have here great credit. 

This whole country, and I believe it is the same 
elsewhere, is not lacking in wicked men, who, from 
motives of envy or vengeance, or from other cause, 


122 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 8 

preuue dequoy les vieillards racontent certaines fables 
qu'ils font palTer pour veritez ; ils ne font mention ny 
de peine ny de recompenfe au lieu ou vont les ames 
apres la mort ; auffi ne mettent-ils point de diftinc5tion 
entre les bons & les mauuais, les vertueux & les vi- 
cieux, [171] & ils honorent egalement la fepulture des 
vns & des autres : ainfi que nous auons veu en celle 
d'vn ieune homme qui s'eftoit empoifonne du deplai- 
fir qu'il auoit conceu, k raifon qu'on luy auoit ofte fa 
femme. lis ont vne infinite de fuperftitions, leurs 
feftins, leur[s] medecines, leurs pefches, leurs chalTes, 
leurs guerres ; bref quafi toute leur vie ne roule que 
fur ce piuot; les fonges fur tout ont icy grand credit. 

Tout ce pays, & ie crois qu'il en va de mefme ail- 
leurs, ne manque pas d'hommes mefchans, lefquels 
par enuie ou par vengeance, ou autre motif, empoi- 
fonnent ou enforcellent, & en fin toft ou tard font 
mourir ceux qu'ils entreprennent. Quand telles gens 
font furpris, on les execute fur le champ, fans autre 
forme de proces, & il n'en eft autre bruit. Pour les 
autres meurtres ils [172] les vengent fur toute la Na- 
tion du meurtrier; auffi ne f9ay-je que cette forte de 
gens qu'ils facent mourir impunement. I'ay bien 
connu vne fille larronneffe, qui fut auffi toft affommee 
fans aucune recherche, mais g'auoit efte par fon propre 
frere : s'il paroift quelque traiftre qui machine la ruine 
du Pays, ils tafchent en commun de s'en d6faire au 
pluftoft ; mais ces accidens font fort rares. 

lis dif ent que ces Sorciers les ruinent ; car fi quel- 
qu'vn a reiiffy en quelque entreprife, fi la traitte, 11 la 
chaffe luy a fuccede; auffi-toft ces m^chans 1' enfor- 
cellent, ou quelque autre de fa maifon, afin qu'il con- 
fomme tout en Medecins & Medecines. Auffi pour 
remedier a ces forts, & autres maladies, il y a vne in- 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib35 123 

poison or bewitch, and, in short, put to death sooner 
or later those whom they wish to injure. When such 
people are caught, they are put to death on the spot, 
without any form of trial, and there is no disturbance 
about it. As to other murders, they [ 1 72] are avenged 
upon the whole Nation of the murderer; so that is 
the only class I know about that they put to death 
with impunity. I knew indeed a girl that stole, who 
was at once killed without any inquiry, but it was by 
her own brother. If some traitor appears, who is 
planning the ruin of the Country, they endeavor in 
common to get rid of him as soon as possible ; but 
these accidents are very rare. 

They say that the Sorcerers ruin them ; for if any 
one has succeeded in an enterprise, if his trading or 
hunting is successful, immediately these wicked men 
bewitch him, or some member of his family, so that 
they have to spend it all in Doctors and Medicines. 
Hence, to cure these and other diseases, there are a 
large number of Doctors whom they call Arendiouane. 
These persons, in [173] my opinion, are true Sorcer- 
ers, who have access to the Devil. Some only judge 
of the evil, and that in divers ways, namely, by Py- 
romancy, by Hydromancy, Necromancy, by feasts, 
dances, and songfs ; the others endeavor to cure the 
disease by blowing, by potions, and by other ridicu- 
lous tricks, which have neither any virtue nor natural 
efficacy. But neither class do anything without gen- 
erous presents and good pay. 

There are here some Soothsayers, whom they call 
also Arendiouane and who undertake to cause the rain 
to fall or to cease, and to predict future events. The 
Devil reveals to them some secrets, but with so much 
obscurity that one is unable to accuse them of false- 


124 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol. 8 

finite de Medecins qu'ils appellent Arendiouane. Ces 
gens k [173] mon aduis fon[t] vrays Sorciers, qui ont 
accez au Diable. Les vns ne font que iuger du mal, & 
ce en diuerfes facons, ffauoir eft, par Pyromantie, par 
Hydromantie, Negromantie, par feftins, par danfes 
& chanfons. Les aiitres s'efforcent de guerir le mal 
par f ouflemens, breuuages & autres lingeries ridicules, 
qui n'ont aucune vertu ny efficacit6 naturelle. Mais 
les vns & les autres ne font rien fans grands prefens, 
& fans bonnes recompenfes. 

On void en ce Pays quelques Deuins, qu'ils appel- 
lent encore Arendiouane, & qui fe meflent de faire tom- 
ber ou cefler la pluye, & predire les chofes futures. 
Le Diable leur reuele quelques fecrets, mais auec 
tant d'obfcuritez, qu'on n'a garde de les arguer de 
menfonge: t^moin vn du village de Scanonaenrat [174] 
lequel vn peu auparauant rembrafement des bour- 
gades cy deffus metionnees, auoit veu en fonge trois 
flammes qui tomboient du Ciel fur lefdites bourgades. 
Mais le Diable ne luy auoit declare le fens de cet 
enigme : car ayant obtenu du village vn chien blanc 
pour en faire feftin, & en impetrer I'intelligence, il 
demeura auffi ignorant apres comme auparauant. 

Dernierement comme i'eftois chez Louys de faindte 
Foy, vne vieille forciere ou deuinereffe dudit village, 
dift qu'elle auoit veu ceux qui eftoient allez a la 
guerre, qu'ils reuenoient, & amenoient vn prifonnier. 
Nous verrons fi elle a dit vray : f on procede eft par 
pyromantie : elle vous figure en fa cabane le lac des 
Hiroquois, puis d'vn coft6 elle fait autant de feux 
comme il y a de perfonnes qui ont marche en [175] 
campagn[e] ; & de 1' autre cofte encore autant de feux, 
qu'ils ont d'ennemis a combattre. Puis fi fon fort 
reiiflit, elle donne "k entendre que les feux de deca ont 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s3 125 

hood ; witness one of the village of Scanonaenrat^ 
[174] who, a little while before the burning of the 
villages before mentioned, had seen in a dream three 
flames falling from the Sky on those villages. But 
the Devil had not declared to him the meaning of 
this enigma ; for, having obtained from the village a 
white dog, to make a feast with it and to seek in- 
formation by it, he remained as ignorant afterward 
as before. 

Lastly, when I was in the house of Louys de saincte 
Foy, an old woman, a sorceress, or female soothsayer 
of that village, said she had seen those who had gone 
to the war, and that they were bringing back a pris- 
oner. We shall see if she has spoken the truth. Her 
method is by pyromancy. She draws for you in her 
hut the lake of the Hiroquois ; ^ then on one side she 
makes as many fires as there are persons who have 
gone on [175] the expedition, and on the other as 
many fires as they have enemies to fight. Then, if 
her spell succeeds, she lets it be understood that the 
fires from this side have run over, and that signifies 
that the warriors have already crossed the lake. One 
fire extinguishing another marks an enemy defeated ; 
but if it attracts it to itself without extinguishing it, 
that is a prisoner taken at mercy. It is thus, — to 
finish my discourse, which would be too long if I 
tried to say everything, — that the Devil amuses this 
poor people, substituting his impieties and supersti- 
tions in place of the compliance they ought to have 
with the providence of God, and the worship they 
ought to render him. 

As regards morals, the Hurons are lascivious, 
although in two leading points less so than many 
Christians, who will blush [176] some day in their 


126 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.8 

trauerfe, & cela lignifie, que les guerriers ont defia 
palle le lac. Vn feu qui y efteint I'autre, marque vn 
ennemy defait, que fi il I'attire a foy fans I'efteindre, 
c'eft vn prifonnier pris ^ mercy. C'eft ainfi, pour 
finir ce difcours, qui feroit trop long, {i ie voulois tout 
dire, que le Diable amufe ce pauure peuple, fubftitu- 
ant fes impietez & fuperftitions, en la place de la con- 
formite, qu'ils deuroient auoir ^ la prouidence de 
Dieu, & du culte qu'ils luy deuroient rendre. 

Quant k ce qui concerne les moeurs, les Hurons font 
lafcifs, quoy qu'en deux chefs moins que plufieurs 
Chrefliens, qui rougiront [176] vn iour deuant eux. 
Vous n'y verrez point de baifers, ny de carelTes des- 
honneftez ; & dans le mariage vn homme y demeure- 
ra les deux & trois ans entiers, fans cognoiftre fa 
femme, tandis qu'elle efl nourrice. lis font gour- 
mands iufques a rendre gorge : vray eft que cela n'eft 
pas fouuent, mais feulement en quelques feftins fu- 
perftitieux. Encore ne s'y trouuent-ils pas volon- 
tiers ; & d'ailleurs ils fupportent beau coup mieux la 
faim que nous ; fi bien qu'apres auoir ieuf ne les deux 
ou trois iours entiers, vous en verrez encore ramer, 
porter, chanter, rire, gauffer, come s'ils auoiet bie 
difne. lis font fort faineants, menteurs, larrons, im- 
portuns demandeurs. Quelques-vns les eftiment vin- 
dicatifs ; mais pour moy ie crois que ce vice eft plus 
notable ailleurs qu'icy. On y voit reluire d'affez 
belles vertus [177] morales. Vous y remarquez en 
premier lieu vne grande amour & vnion, qu'ils font 
foigneux de cultiuer par le moyen de leurs mariages, 
de leurs pref ens, de leurs feftins, & de leurs f requentes 
vifites. Au retour de leur pefche, de leur chaffe, & 
de leur traitte, ils s'entredonnent beaucoup: s'ils y 
ont pris quelque chofe d'exquis, ou mefme s'ils I'ont 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i635 127 

presence. You will see no kissing nor immodest ca- 
ressing; and in marriage a man will remain two or 
three years apart from his wife, while she is nursing. 
They are gluttons, even to disgorging; it is true, that 
does not happen often, but only in some superstitious 
feasts, — these, however, they do not attend willingly. 
Besides, they endure hunger much better than we, — 
so well that after having fasted two or three entire 
days you will see them still paddling, carrying loads, 
singing, laughing, bantering, as if they had dined 
well. They are very lazy, are liars, thieves, pertina- 
cious beggars. Some consider them vindictive ; but, 
in my opinion, this vice is more noticeable elsewhere 
than here. We see shining among them some rather 
noble moral [177] virtues. You note, in the first 
place, a great love and union, which they are careful 
to cultivate by means of their marriages, of their 
presents, of their feasts, and of their frequent visits. 
On returning from their fishing, their hunting, and 
their trading, they exchange many gifts ; if they have 
thus obtained something unusually good, even if they 
have bought it, or if it has been given to them, they 
make a feast to the whole village with it. Their 
hospitality towards all sorts of strangers is remark- 
able ; they present to them in their feasts the best of 
what they have prepared, and, as I have already said, 
I do not know if anything similar, in this regard, is 
to be found elsewhere. I think I have read, in the 
lives of the Fathers, that a Pagan army was converted 
on seeing the charity and hospitality of a Christian 
town, the inhabitants of which vied with each other 
in [178] caressing and feasting the Strangers, — judg- 
ing well that those must profess the true Religion 
and worship the true God, the common Father of all, 


128 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 8 

achete, ou fi on le leur a donne, ils en font feflin k 
tout le village; I'hofpitalit^ enuers toute forte d'e- 
ftragers y eft remarquable. Ils leur prefentet en ces 
feflins ce qu'ils ont prepare de meilleur, & come i'ay 
defia dit, ie ne f9ay fi ailleurs il fe recontre rien de 
pareil en ce fujet. II me femble auoir leu dans les vies 
[des] Peres, qu'vne armee Payenne fe conuertit, voy- 
ant la charite & I'hofpitalite d'vne ville Chreftienne, 
dont les habitans s'efforgoient a I'enuy de [178] ca- 
reller & feftoyer les Eftrangers. lugeant bien que 
ceux-la deuoient profeffer la vraye Religion, & ado- 
rer le vray Dieu Pere commun de tous, qui auoient 
vn coeur fi benin, & faifoient indifferemment tant de 
bien a toute forte de perfonnes. Nous auons auffi ef- 
perance que noftre Seigneur donnera en fin la lumiere 
de fa cognoilfance, & communiquera I'ardeur de fes 
graces k cette Nation, qu'il femble y auoir difpofee 
par la pratique de cette belle vertu. Ils ne refufent 
iamais la porte a vn Eftranger; & I'ayans receu vne 
fois en leur maifon, ils luy font part de ce qu'ils y 
ont de meilleur; ils ne luy donnent iamais fon con- 
ge ; & quand il le prend de foy-mefme, il en eft quitte 
pour vn fimple grand-mercy. Cela me fait efperer, 
que fi vne fois il plaift a Dieu de les illuminer, ils cor- 
ref pondront parf aidtement [ 1 79] aux graces & aux in- 
fpirations de fon Fils. Et puis qu'il eft venu comma 
Eftranger en fa propre maifon, ie me promets que 
ces bonnes gens le receuront a toutes heures en leur 
coeur, fans le faire attendre k la porte par trop de du- 
rete; fans luy rien efpargner en toute I'eftendue de 
leurs affedtions ; fans le trahir & le chaffer dehors par 
quelque faute flgnalee, & fans rien pretendre en fon 
feruice que fon honneur & fa gloire : qui eft tout ce 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, idjs 129 

who had hearts so benign and who did so much good 
to all sorts of persons, without distinction. We have 
also hope that our Lord will give at last the light of 
his knowledge, and will communicate the fire of his 
graces, to this Nation, which he seems to have dis- 
posed thereto by the practice of this noble virtue. 
They never close the door upon a Stranger, and, once 
having received him into their houses, they share 
with him the best they have ; they never send him 
away, and, when he goes away of his own accord, he 
repays them by a simple "thank you." This makes 
me hope that, if once it pleases God to illumine 
them, they will respond perfectly [179] to the grace 
and inspiration of his Son. And, since he has come 
as a Stranger into his own house, I promise myself 
that these good people will receive him at all hours 
into their hearts without making him wait too long on 
account of their hardness, without withholding from 
him anything in the whole range of their affections, 
without betraying him or driving him outside by any 
serious fault, and without claiming anything in his 
service other than his honor and glory ; which is all 
the fidelity one can ask in a soul for the good use and 
holy employment of the favors of Heaven. 

What shall I say of their strange patience in their 
poverty, famine, and sickness? We have seen this 
year whole villages prostrated, their food a little in- 
sipid sagamite ; and yet not a word of complaint, not 
a movement [180] of impatience. They receive in- 
deed the news of death with more constancy than 
those Christian Gentlemen and Ladies to whom one 
would not dare to mention it. Our Savages hear of 
it not only without despair, but without troubling 
themselves, without the slightest pallor or change of 


130 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.8 

qu'on peut fouhaitter de fidelite en vne ame, pour le 
bon vfage & fainc5t employ des faueurs du Ciel. 

Que diray-je de leur eftrange patience dans leur 
pauurete, difette & maladies? Nous auons veu cette 
ann^e les villages entiers fur la litiere, nourris d'vn 
peu de fagamite infipide, & cependant pas vn mot 
pour fe plaindre, pas vn mouuement [i8o] d' impa- 
tience, lis regoiuent bien plus conftamment la nou- 
uelle de la mort, que ces Meffieurs & Dames de la 
Chrefliente, k qui on en oferoit ouurir la bouche. Nos 
Sauuages I'entendent non feulement fans defefpoir, 
mais fans fe troubler, fans pallir ou blefmir tant foit 
peu. Nous auons fur tout admir6 la conftance de nos 
nouueaux Chrefliens: le penultieme qui eft mort, 
nomm6 lofeph Oatij a demeure fur la dure I'efpace 
de quatre ou cinq mois, tant deuant qu'apres fon Ba- 
ptefme, fi decharne qu'il n'auoit que les os; das vne 
cabane fi chetiue, que les vents y fouffloient de tous 
coftez, couuert pendant les froidures de I'hyuer d'vne 
peau fort legere, de beftes noires ou d'efcurieux noirs, 
nourry fort pauuremet. On ne I'a cependant iamais 
ouy faire aucune plainte. Noflre Seigneur lefus- 
Chrifl foit k iamais [i8i] loii6. C'eft fur ces difpofi- 
tions & fondemens, que nous efperons auec la grace 
de Dieu baftir 1' edifice de la Religio Chreftienne par- 
my ce peuple, qui delia d'ailleurs nous eft grandemet 
affedtione, & a vne grade opinion de nous. C'eft k 
nous maintenat k correfpodre k noftre vocatio, & k la 
voix de N. S. qui nous dit, videte regiones, guoniam alba 
funt iam ad mej^e. II eft vray, mon R. P. que mefiis 
multa, operarij pauci, & de plus nous nous trouuos fort 
foibles pour vne fi grade entreprif e ; au moins moy ; 
& partant ie fupplie noflre R. P. Prouincial & V. R. 
de nous enuoyer du fecours. Sur quoy ie m'efcrie- 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i635 131 

countenance. We have especially admired the con- 
stancy of our new Christians. The next to the last one 
who died, named Joseph Oatij, lay on the bare ground 
during four or five months, not only before but after 
his Baptism, — so thin that he was nothing but bones; 
in a lodge so wretched that the winds blew in on all 
sides ; covered during the cold of winter with a very 
light skin of some black animals, perhaps black squir- 
rels, and very poorly nourished. He was never heard 
to make a complaint, however. May our Lord Jesus 
Christ be ever [i8i] praised. It is on such disposi- 
tions and foundations that we hope, with the grace of 
God, to build the edifice of the Christian Religion 
among these people, who, besides, are already affec- 
tionately inclined toward us and have a great opinion 
of us. It is now our part to correspond to our voca- 
tion, and to the voice of Our Savior, who says to us, 
videte regiones, quonimn albce sunt iani ad niessem. It 
is true, my Reverend Father, that messis mnlta, opera- 
rii pauci, and, besides, we are very weak for so great 
an enterprise, at least I am, and therefore I beseech 
our Reverend Father Provincial and Your Reverence 
to send us help. For this I could cry willingly to the 
good God, mitte quern missurus es ; as for us, we are 
children, who can only stammer. Yet see what we, 
trusting in the goodness of Our Lord, and not in our 
own strength and skill, [182] have done for the con- 
version of this People since our arrival. In the first 
place, we have been employed in the study of the 
language, which, on account of the diversity of its 
compound words, is almost infinite. One can, never- 
theless, do nothing without this study. All the 
French who are here have eagerly applied themselves 
to it, reviving the ancient usage of writing on birch- 


182 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.8 

rois volotiers au bon Dieu, mitte quern mijjfurus es; 
car pour nous, nous somes des enfans qui ne faifons 
que begayer. Cependant nous confians en la bont6 
de N. Seign. & non en nos propres forces & indu- 
flries, voicy ce que [182] nous auons fait pour la con- 
uerfion de ce Peuple, depuis noftre arriu^e. Premi- 
erement nous-nous fommes employ ez en I'eftude de 
la langue, qui a caufe de la diuerfite de fes mots com- 
pofez eft quafi infinie. On ne pent neantmoins rien 
faire fans c6t eflude. Tous les Franjois qui font icy 
s'y font ardemment portez, ramenant I'ancien vfage 
d'efcrire fur des efcorces de bouleau faute de papier. 
Les P. Dauoft & Daniel y ont trauaille par deffus 
tous. lis y fgauet autant de mots que moy, & peut- 
eftre plus. Mais ils n'ont pas encore la prattique 
pour les former & affembler promptement ; quoy que 
le Pere Daniel s'explique defia palTablement. Pour 
moy qui y fais le9on a nos Frangois, 1^i Dieu ne m'af- 
fifle extraordinairement, encor me faudra-il aller long 
temps a I'efcole des Sauuages, telle eft la fecondit^ 
[183] de leur langue. Cela n'empefche pas que ie 
n'entende quafi tout ce qu'ils difent, & que ie ne leur 
face affez comprendre mes conceptions, mefmes dans 
I'explication de nos plus ineffables myfteres. Apres 
cela, nous nous fommes employez k la vifite, follicita- 
tion & inftrudtion des malades, qui ont eft6 comme 
i'ay dit en tres-grand nombre; §'a efl6 das ce pieux 
exercice que nous auons acquis des ames b. noftre 
Seigneur, iufques au nombre de treize. La premiere 
fut vne petite fil[l]ette de ce village aagee feulement 
de quatre ou cinq mois, elle mourut vn quart d'heure 
apres fon baptefme, auquel elle fut nom^e lofephe, 
pour accomplir vn voeu que i'auois faidt de donner ce 
nom au premier que nous regenererions des faindles 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, r6js 133 

bark, for want of paper. Fathers Davost and Daniel 
have worked at it, beyond all; they know as many 
words as I, and perhaps more; but they have not yet 
had practice in forming and joining them together 
promptly, although Father Daniel already explains 
himself passably well. As for me, who give lessons 
therein to our French, if God does not assist me ex- 
traordinarily, I shall yet have to go a long time to 
the school of the Savages, so prolific is [183] their 
language. That does not prevent me from under- 
standing almost all they say, and from making them 
fairly understand my meaning, even in the explana- 
tion of our most ineffable mysteries. In addition, 
we have employed ourselves in visiting, entreating, 
and instructing the sick, who have been, as I have 
said, very numerous. It has been in this pious ex- 
ercise that we have won souls for our Lord, to the 
number of thirteen. The first was a little girl of this 
village, only four or five months old; she died a 
quarter of an hour after her baptism, in which she 
was named Josepha, to fulfill a vow I had made to 
give this name to the first that we should regenerate 
with the holy waters, — in gratitude for so many fa- 
vors that we have received and are receiving [ 1 84] by 
the interposition of that gp-eat Saint. This was on 
the sixth of September, 1634. The second was an- 
other little girl, about two years of age, whom we 
baptized on the next day. She died on the eleventh 
of the same month and year, having been named 
Marie. 

On the 26th of the same month, I baptized Marie 
Oquiaendis, the mother of the Captain of this village, 
grandmother of the other Marie. She is still living, 
and attributes her recovery to the virtue of Holy Bap- 


134 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 

eaux, en recognoiffance de tant de faueurs que nous 
auons receu & receuons [184] par I'entremife de ce 
grand Saindl. Ce fut le lixiefme Septembre 1634. 
La deuxiefme, fut vne autre petite fille d'enuiro deux 
ans, que nous baptifames le lendemain ; elle mourut 
ronziefme du mefme mois & an, ayant efl6 nonini6e 
Marie. 

Le 26. du mefme mois ie baptifay Marie Oquiaendis 
mere du Capitaine de ce village, ayeule de 1' autre 
Marie. Celle-cy vit encore, & attribue fa gueriso ^ 
la vertu du S. Baptefme, le publiant par tout. En 
effet elle eftoit quafi aux abois, & des qu'elle fut la- 
u6e de ces facrees eaux, elle commen9a ^ fe mieux 
porter. Le 20. d*0(5tobre, ie partis pour aller k la 
Nation du Petun : en ce voyage Dieu me fit la f aueur 
de baptifer & enuoyer au Ciel trois petits enfans, 
I'vn def quels entre autres alloit letter les derniers 
foufpirs quad i'arriuay das fa cabane, oil a peine euf- 
je le loifir [185] de I'ondoyer. Au retour du voyage, 
ie trouuay que le P. Daniel auoit baptife lofeph lou- 
taya, qu'on croyoit deuoir expirer fur le chap. Ie 
I'auois inftruit auparauat. II a furuecu long temps, 
toufiours languiflant, & faifant beaucoup d'adtes de 
vertu. Nous I'auons affifte corporellement & fpiri- 
tuellement; fi bien que luy & toute fa cabane n'attri- 
buoient la prolongatio de fa vie, qu'au double fecours 
qu'il a receu de noftre part. En fin eftant mort heu- 
reufement das la cofeffion & inuocatio du vray Dieu, 
& dans la repentace de fes pechez, nous I'enterrafmes 
folenellement comme il I'auoit defire. Nous auos ad- 
mire le foin, la charite & la perfeuerace de fa feme, 
das les deuoirs & feruices qu'elle luy redoit pendat 
vne fort longue, fort falle, & fort puate maladie. 
Elle & toute fa cabane (ou nous en auons d6ja baptif6 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, jb35 135 

tism, publishing it everywhere. In truth, she was 
almost gone ; and as soon as she was washed with 
the sacred waters she began to improve. On the 
20th of October, I set out to go to the Tobacco Na- 
tion.'*" In this journey God granted me the favor of 
baptizing and sending to Heaven three little chil- 
dren, one of whom, among others, was about to give 
forth his last breath when I reached the lodge and 
had scarcely time [185] to sprinkle him. When I re- 
turned from the journey I found that Father Daniel 
had baptized Joseph Joutaya, who was believed to be 
at the point of death. I had instructed him previ- 
ously. He survived a long time, in a languishing 
condition, and doing many acts of virtue. We helped 
him both bodily and spiritually ; so well that he and 
all his family attributed the prolongation of his life 
to nothing but the double assistance he had received 
from us. At last, having happily died in the confes- 
sion and invocation of the true God, and in repen- 
tance for his sins, we solemnly interred him as he 
had desired. We admired the care, the charity, and 
the perseverance of his wife in the duties and services 
she rendered to him during a long, very dirty, and 
very disgusting sickness. She and all her house, 
(where we have already baptized three) have con- 
tinued [186] warmly attached to us; and they have 
often protested to me that they will all be, in life, in 
death, and beyond, at our service. But we do not 
judge them yet sufficiently instructed. It is this cab- 
in where lives the first Huron I ever baptized, which 
was in the year one thousand six hundred and twen- 
ty-nine, before our departure from this Country. It 
was a little child, looked upon as dead, who seemed 
to be born and live again in a double sense, in the 


136 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 

trois) nous eft demeur^e [i86] fort affedtionn^e, & ils 
m'ont protefle plulieurs fois qu'ils feroient tous h. la 
vie, k la mort, & au dela en noftre difpofition. Mais 
nous ne les iugeons pas encore affez inftruits. C'eft 
en cefle cabane oh demeure le premier Huron que 
i'aye iamais baptize, qui fut Tan mil fix cens vingt- 
neuf, auant noftre depart de ce Pays. C'eftoit vn 
petit enfant tenu pour mort, lequel fembla renaiftre 
& reuiure doublement dans les eaux viuifiantes du 
faindt Baptefme. II vit encore aage d'enuiron cinq 
ans, & eft fort gentil. 

Le vingt-vniefme d'Octobre fut baptiz6 lofeph Son- 
daaroukane, aage d'enuiron quarante ou cinquante ans ; 
il auoit vne grande bonte & douceur naturelle, & m'e- 
ftoit de longue main affedlionne ; il rendit f on bien- 
heureux efprit h. Dieu le vingtiefme Nouembre. Le 
mefme [187] iour fut baptife loachim TJindacaiendoua, 
vieillard de 80. ans. C'eftoit vn des Hurons du meil- 
leur naturel que i'aye connu, le lendemain il quitta 
cette vie pour en commencer vne meilleure, comme 
nous croyons: nous I'enterrafmes folemnellement en 
vn lieu fepare. Cette ceremonie attira fur nous les 
yeux de tout le village, & caufa k plufieurs le defir 
qu'on honoraft leur fepulture de cette fa^on, notam- 
ment k lofeph loutaia, cy deffus mentionne : lequel 
apres les obfeques acheuees me dit qu'il euft eft6 
bien aife que nous euffions palle au trauers de fa ca- 
bane en I'eftat que nous eftions habillez, pour nous 
veoir du lieu ou la maladie le tenoit attache : car on 
luy en auoit fait tant de cas, qu'il declara authen- 
tiquement vouloir eftre enterre de nos mains, ce qui 
fut fait. 

[188] Puifque ie fuis retombe fur le propos de cet 
homme, ie diray vne chofe memorable qui luy arriua 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib35 137 

life-imparting waters of holy Baptism. He still lives, 
being about five years of age, and is very gentle. 

On the twenty-first of October, was baptized Jo- 
seph Sondaarouhand, about forty or fifty years of age. 
He had great goodness and natural sweetness, and 
had been attached to me for a long time. He yielded 
up his blessed spirit to God, on the twentieth of No- 
vember. On the same [187] day was baptized Joa- 
chim Tsmdacaioidoua, an old man of 80 years. He 
was one of the best-natured Hurons I have ever known. 
The next day he left this life, to begin a better one, 
as we believe ; we interred him solemnly in a sepa- 
rate place. This ceremony attracted upon us the eyes 
of the whole village, and caused several to desire 
that we should honor their burial in the same way, — 
notably Joseph Joutaia, the one above-mentioned, 
who, after the obsequies were over, told me that he 
would have been very glad if we had passed through 
his cabin in the style in which we were dressed, so 
that he might see us from the place in which sickness 
kept him bound ; for they had talked so much to him 
about the matter that he declared of his own will that 
he wished to be interred by our hands, which was 
done. 

[188] Since I have referred to this man's decision, 
I will tell a memorable thing which happened to him 
after his Baptism. The Devil appeared to him in the 
form of one of his deceased brothers. Entering his 
cabin without any salutation, he sat down on the other 
side of the fire opposite our new Christian, and re- 
mained a long time without speaking. At last begin- 
ning to speak, he said to him, "How now, my broth- 
er, do you wish to leave us?" Our Joseph, who was 
not yet sufficiently equipped for this warfare, replied, 


138 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.8 

apres fon Baptefme. Le Diable luy apparut vn iour 
en forme d'vn lien frere deced^. Entrant dans fa ca- 
bane, il ne le faliia pas, & s'alleyant de I'autre cofl6 
du feu, vis k vis de noftre nouueau Chrefkien, il de- 
meura long-temps fans parler. En fin prenant la pa- 
role, il luy dit, Quoy done mon frere, vous nous vou- 
lez quitter? Noftre lofeph, qui n'eftoit pas encore 
aflez duit en cette milice, refpondit : non, mo frere, 
ie ne vous veux pas quitter, ie ne vous quitteray 
point ; & dit-on qu'alors ce faux frere commenga k le 
carefTer. Toutesfois il a depuis protefl6 plufieurs 
fois qu'il defiroit aller au Ciel. 

Le vingt-feptiefme de Nouembre Martin Tficok, 
vieillard delia [189] fort aage, & d'vne humeur fort 
douce, futbaptife. Cebon home ne ceffa d'inuoquer 
lefus & Marie depuis fon baptefme iufques au 15. 
Decembre qu'il mourut. Ie commen9ay h. I'inftruire 
par cette verity : que nos ames apres la mort alloient 
toutes en Enfer ou en Paradis : Que le Paradis efloit 
vn lieu remply de delices & de contentemens : & au 
contraire, 1' Enfer, vn lieu de feux, de peines & de 
tourmens eternels. Qu'au refte, il auifafl, tandis qu'il 
efloit encore en vie, auquel de ces deux lieux il vou- 
loit aller, & demeurer pour iamais. Alors ce bon 
vieillard fe tournant vers fa femme. Ma femme, luy 
dit-il, ne vaut-il pas bien mieux aller au Ciel? I 'ay 
peur de ces effroyables feux d'enfer: fa femme fut 
de mefme aduis ; & ainfi il prefta volontiers I'oreille 
aux inftrudtios qu'on luy dona. 

Le dixneufiefme lanuier, ie partis [190] pour aller 
en la maifon de Louys de faindle Foy, diftante de no- 
fire village de fept ou liuic5l lieues. Ie n'auois peii 
ny deu y aller plufloU, pour ce qu'il efloit all6 en la 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6ss 139 

" No, my brother, I don't wish to leave you; I will 
not leave you," and it is said this false brother then 
began to caress him. Still, he has since declared 
several times that he desired to go to Heaven. 

On the twenty-seventh of November, Martin Tsi- 
cok, already a very [189] old man and of a very gentle 
disposition, was baptized. This good man did not 
cease to invoke Jesus and Mary from his baptism un- 
til the 15th of December, when he died. I began to 
instruct him with this truth, that our souls after death 
all go to Hell or to Paradise ; that Paradise is a place 
full of delights and contentment, and on the contrary 
that Hell is a place of fires, of pains, and eternal tor- 
ments; that, besides, he should think, while he was 
yet in life, to which of these places he desired to go 
and dwell forever. Then this good old man, turning 
to his wife, said to her, "My wife, is it not indeed 
better to go to Heaven ? I am afraid of those horrible 
fires of hell." His wife was of the same opinion, 
and thus he willingly listened to the instructions we 
gave him. 

On the nineteenth of January, I set out [190] for 
the house of Louys de saincte Foy, distant from our 
village seven or eight leagues. I had been neither 
able nor willing to go sooner, as he had gone to the 
neutral Nation *^ to seek his father, who had remained 
there, a cripple. 

On this journey passing through Onnentissati,'^^ I 
went to see a man named oukhahitoiia, who last year 
embarked one of our men. Finding him dying, I in- 
structed him ; he believed, he detested his past life, 
he was baptized under the name of Fran9ois, and two 
days later quitted this world to fly to Heaven. 

On the twenty-ninth of March, we solemnly baptized 


140 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.8 

Nation neutre querir fon Pere, qui y eftoit demeur^ 
perclus. 

En ce voyage, paffant par Onnentijfati, i'allay voir 
vn nomme oukhahitoiia, qui auoit I'an paff^ embarqu^ 
vn de nos hommes: le trouuant h. I'extremit^, ie I'in- 
ftniifis, il creut, il detefta fa vie paffee, il fut baptif6 
fous le nom de Fran9ois, & deux iours apres quitta ce 
monde pour s'enuoler au Ciel. 

Le vingt-neufiefme de Mars nous baptifames fo- 
lemnellement en noftre petite Chapelle lofeph Oatij : 
Fran9ois petit Pr6 luy feruit de Parain, plufieurs y 
aflifterent. II y auoit long-temps que nous I'inflrui- 
fions; c'est pourquoy il refpondit [191] luy-mefme 
aux interrogations que ie luy faifois en langue Hu- 
ronne. Ce bon ieune homme eftoit d'vne complexion 
fort valetudinaire ; nous I'auions gaigne par vne con- 
tinuelle affiftance, qui I'auoit remis par deux fois: de 
forte que tres-volontiers il remit entre nos mains le 
foin de fon ame, laquelle alia heureufement h. Dieu le 
quatorziefme Auril, apres auoir efle fortifi^e du Sa- 
crement d'extreme-Ondtion. 

Nous auons fur tout admir6 fa patience, & fa tran- 
quillite d'efprit, principalement depuis le baptefme. 
A peine anions nous commence h. I'inftruire, qu'il 
commenja a dire fort f ouuent & de iour & de nuidt ; 
lefus ayez pitie de moy. Marie & lofeph fecourez 
moy. 

Finalement le vingtiefme d' Auril, ie baptifay ^ 
Oenrio vne femme fort vieille. Elle deceda le vingt- 
quatriefme; [192] du commencement que ie I'abbor- 
day, & que ie luy demanday fi elle vouloit aller au 
Ciel ou en Enf er : elle ne refpondoit autre chofe, fmon 
qu'elle iroit ou fon fils voudroit. Mais luy ayant efl6 


1634-36J LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j635 141 

in our little Chapel Joseph Oatij ; Francois petit Pre ^ 
was his Godfather, and many were present. We had 
been instructing him a long time, and hence he replied 
[191] personally to the questions I put to him in the 
Huron tongue. This good young man was of a very 
sickly constitution ; we had gained him by continual 
assistance, which had twice saved his life ; so that he 
willingly put in our hands the care of his soul, which 
went happily to God on the fourteenth of April, after 
having been fortified by the Sacrament of extreme 
Unction. 

We especially admired his patience and tranquility 
of mind, especially after his baptism. Scarcely had 
we begun to instruct him when he began to say very 
often, both by day and by night, "Jesus, have pity 
on me! Mary and Joseph, help me I" 

Lastly, on the twentieth of April, I baptized at 
Oenrio a very old woman, who died on the twenty- 
fourth. [192] At first, when I talked to her, and 
asked her whether she wished to go to Heaven or 
to Hell, she did not answer, except to say that she 
would go where her son wished. But having told 
her that her father, the late Joachim Tsindacaiendoua, 
had gone to Heaven, she said, "Then I wish to go 
there ! ' ' 

These, then, are the fruits that we have gathered 
from our visits and private instructions. I believe 
the .harvest would have been greater if I could have 
left our village, and visited the others. May it please 
our Lord to accept these few first fruits, and give us 
strength and opportunities to gather more of them. 
We have instructed many others, who asked very ur- 
gently for Baptism ; but not seeing them in danger 


142 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.8 

dit que fon pere feu loachim TJindacaiendoua eftoit 
all6 au Ciel: I'y veux done aller, dit-elle. 

Ce font 1^ les fruidts que nous auons recueilly de 
nos vifites, & inftrudtions particulieres. le croy que 
la moiffon euft efte plus grande, fi i'euffe peu aban- 
donner noflre village, & parcourir les autres. Plaife 
k noftre Seigneur accepter ces petites premices, & 
nous donner les forces & les moyens d'en faire dauan- 
tage. On en a inftruit beaucoup d' autres, qui deman- 
doient le Baptefme fort inftament. Mais ne les voy- 
ant pas en dager de mort, nous les auons referuez 
pour vne plus grade inftrudlio. 

[193] Enuiron le mois de Decembre les neiges com- 
mencerent "k prendre pied, & les Sauuages fe ren- 
dirent fedentaires dans le village. Car tout I'Efle, 
& tout TAutomne, ils font la plus-part ou dans des 
cabanes cliapeftres ^ prendre garde k leurs bleds, ou 
fur le lac k la pefche, ou en traite; ce qui n'efl pas 
vne petite incommodit6 pours les inftruire. Les voy- 
at done ainfi reiinis, au commencemet de cefte annee, 
nous refolufmes de prefcher publiquement ^ tous, & 
leur faire cognoiftre le fujet de noflre venue en leur 
Pays, qui n'eft pas pour leurs pelleteries, mais pour 
leur annoncer le vray Dieu, & fon fils lefus-Chrifl, 
Sauueur vniuerfel de nos ames. 

Nous faifons cette Inftrudtion ou Catechifme en 
noflre cabane: car nous n' auons point encore d' autre 
Eglife capable. C'eft le plus fouuent [194] que nous 
pouuons : car leurs feftins, leurs danf es, & leurs ieux, 
les occupent tellement, qu'on ne les affemble pas 
comme Ton veut. 

La fa9on ordinaire que nous y tenons eft cette-cy. 
Nous appellons le monde par le moyen du Capitaine 
du village, qui les affemble tous chez nous comme en 


1634-36] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6js 143 

of death, we have kept them back for further in- 
structions. 

[193] About the month of December, the snow be- 
gan to lie on the ground, and the Savages settled 
down in the village. For, during the whole Summer 
and Autumn, they are for the most part either in their 
rural cabins, taking care of their crops, or on the 
lake fishing, or trading ; which makes it not a little 
inconvenient to instruct them. Seeing them, there- 
fore, thus gathered together at the beginning of this 
year, we resolved to preach publicly to all, and to 
acquaint them with the reason of our coming into 
their Country, which is not for their furs, but to de- 
clare to them the true God and his son, Jesus Christ, 
the universal Savior of our souls. 

We gave the Instruction or Catechism in our cab- 
in, for we had as yet no other suitable Church. This 
is often the most [194] we can do; for their feasts, 
dances, and games so occupy them that we cannot 
get them together as we would like. 

The usual method that we follow is this : We call 
together the people by the help of the Captain of the 
village, who assembles them all in our house as in 
Council, or perhaps by the sound of the bell. I use 
the surplice and the square cap, to give more majesty 
to my appearance. At the beginning, we chant on 
our knees the Pater noster, translated into Huron 
verse. Father Daniel, as its author, chants a couplet 
alone, and then we all together chant it again ; and 
those among the Hurons, principally the little ones, 
who already know it, take pleasure in chanting it 
with us, and the others in listening. That done, 
when every one is seated, I rise and make [195] the 
sign of the Cross for all; then, having recapitulated 


144 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.8 

Confeil, ou bien an fon de la clochette. le me fers 
du furplis & du bonnet carre, pour donner plus de 
maieft^. An commencement nous chantons k genoux 
le Pater nojler reduit en vers Hurons. Le P. Daniel 
comme autheur de cela chante vn couplet tout feul, 
& puis nous le rechantons tons enfemble, & ceux 
d'entre les Hurons, principalement les petits enfans 
qui le f9auent defia, prennent plaifir de chanter auec 
nous, & les autres d'efcouter, Cela fait, comme vn 
chacun eft affis, ie me leue, & fais [195] faire le figne 
de la Croix k tons, puis ayat recapitule ce que i'ay dit 
la derniere fois, i'explique quelque chofe de nouueau. 
Apres cela nous interrogeons les ieunes enfans, & 
les filles, donnans ou vn petit canon de verre, ou de 
la racade ^ ceux qui I'ont merite. Les parents font 
fort aifes de veoir leurs enfans bien dire, & rempor- 
ter quelque petit prix, dont ils fe rendent dignes par 
le foin qu'ils ont de venir en particulier fe faire in- 
ftruire. Nous de noftre cofte, pour leur donner plus 
d 'emulation, faifons reprendre chaque le9on, par nos 
deux petits gar9ons Fran9ois, qui s'entreinterrogent 
I'vn r autre; ce qui rauit les Sauuages en admiration. 
En fin tout fe conclud par le difcours des Anciens, 
qui propofent leurs difficultez, & quelquesfois me 
[196] font efcouter a mon tour le narre de leur creance. 
Nous commen9afmes nos Catechifmes par cette ve- 
rity memorable, que les ames qui font immortelles, 
vont toutes apres la mort en Paradis ou en Enfer. Et 
c'eft ainfi que nous les abordons, foit en public, foit 
en particulier. I'adiouftay qu'ils auoiet le choix pen- 
dant la vie, de prendre party apres la mort icy ou Ik, 
ou ils aduiferoient prefentement. A quoy vn bon 
veillard m'ayant dit, Aille qui voudra dans les feux 
d' Enfer, pour moy ie defire aller au Ciel. Tous les 


1634 - 36] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1635 145 

what I said the last time, I explain something new. 
After that we question the young children and the 
girls, giving a little bead of glass or porcelain to 
those who deserve it. The parents are very glad to 
see their children answer well and carry off some 
little prize, of which they render themselves worthy 
by the care they take to come privately to get in- 
struction. On our part, to arouse their emulation, 
we have each lesson retraced by our two little French 
boys, who question each other, — which transports the 
Savages with admiration. Finally the whole is con- 
cluded by the talk of the Old Men, who propound 
their difficulties, and sometimes [196] make me listen 
in my turn to the statement of their belief. 

We began our Catechizing by this memorable truth, 
that their souls, which are immortal, all go after 
death either to Paradise or to Hell. It is thus we 
approach them, either in public or in private. I 
added that they had the choice, during life, to partic- 
ipate after death in the one or the other, — which 
one, they ought now to consider. Whereupon one 
honest old man said to me, " Let him who will, go 
to the fires of Hell ; I want to go to Heaven ; " all 
the others followed and making use of the same an- 
swer, begged us to show them the way, and to take 
away the stones, the trees, and the thickets therein, 
which might stop them. 

Our Hurons, as you see, are not so dull as one 
might think them; [197] they seem to me to have 
rather good common sense, and I find them univer- 
sally very docile. Nevertheless, some of them are 
obstinate, and attached to their superstitions and evil 
customs. These are principally the old people ; for 
beyond these, who are not numerous, the rest know 


146 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.8 

autres le fuiuirent, & vfans de la mefme refponfe, 
nous prierent de leur en monflrer le chemin, & ofter 
les pierres, les arbres & les halliers qui y font, & qui 
pourroient les arrefter. 

Nos Hurons comme vous voyez ne font pas fi maf- 
fifs qu'on croiroit bie, [197] ils me femblent auoir le 
fens comun affez bon, & ie les recognois vniuerfelle- 
met fort dociles. II y en a neantmoins d'opiniaftres, 
& attachez ^ leurs fuperftitios & mauuaifes cou flumes ; 
ce font notamment les vieillards : car horfmis ceux 1^, 
qui ne font pas en grand nombre, tout le refle ne fgait 
rien en leur croyance. Nous en auons en noflre vil- 
lage deux ou trois de ce nombre. Ie fuis fouuent 
aux prifes auec eux, oh ie les conuaincs & les mets 
en contradidtion, de telle forte qu'ils aduoiient inge- 
nuement leur ignorance, & les autres fe mocquent 
d'eux; neantmoins ils ne fe rendent pas, ayant pour 
tout refuge, que leur Pays n'eft pas comme le noftre, 
qu'ils ont vn autre Dieu, vn autre Paradis, en vn mot 
d' autres couflumes. 

lis nous racontent que cette femme nomme Eata- 
£nfjic tombs, du Ciel [198] dedans les eaux, dont efloit 
couuerte la terre, & que peu a peu la terre fe defcou- 
urit. Ie leur demande qui a cre6 ce Ciel, ou cette 
femme n'a pu fe tenir, & ils demeurent muets; 
comme auffi quad ie les preffe de me dire qui auoit 
produit la terre, veu qu'elle eftoit au fond des eaux 
auparauant la cheute de cefte femme. Vn certain 
me demanda aflez fubtilement fur ce propos, ou eftoit 
Dieu auant la creation du monde. La refponfe me 
fut plus facile, apres S. Auguftin, qu'k eux I'intelli- 
gence de la queftion qu'ils me faifoient. Vn autre 
bon vieillard eflant tomb6 malade, ne vouloit point 
oiiyr parler d'aller au Ciel, difant qu'il defiroit aller 


1634 - 3«] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1635 147 

nothing of their own belief. We have two or three 
of this number in our village. I am often in conflict 
with them ; and then I show them they are wrong, 
and make them contradict themselves, so that they 
frankly admit their ignorance, and the others ridicule 
them ; still they will not yield, always falling back 
upon this, that their Country is not like ours, that 
they have another God, another Paradise, in a word, 
other customs. 

They tell us how the woman, named Eataentsic, 
fell from Heaven [198] into the waters with which 
the earth was covered; and that little by little, the 
earth became bare. I ask them who created the 
Heaven in which this woman could not stay, and 
they remain mute ; as also when I press them to tell 
me who formed the earth, seeing that it was beneath 
the waters before the fall of this woman. One man 
asked me very cunningly, in this connection, where 
God was before the creation of the world. The re- 
ply was more easy for me, following St. Augustine, 
than the grasp of the question put to me was for 
them. Another good old man, having fallen sick, 
did not wish to hear of going to Heaven, saying he 
desired to go where his ancestors were. Some days 
afterwards, he came to me and told me a pleasant 
story: "Rejoice," he said, "for I have returned from 
the country of souls, and I have found none there 
any longer; [199] they have all gone to Heaven." 
There is nothing which does not serve for salvation 
when God pleases, not even dreams. 

Two things among others have aided us very much 
in the little we have been able to do here, by the 
grace of our Lord ; the first is, as I have already said, 
the good health that God has granted us in the midst 


148 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 

oti eftoient fes anceftres. Quelques iours apres il fe 
rendit, & me fit vn plaifant conte. Refioiiys toy, me 
dit-il, car ie fuis reuenu du. pays des ames, & ie n'y 
en ay plus trouue, [199] elles font toutes allies au 
Ciel. II n'y a rien qui ne feme a faint, quand il 
plaifl h. Dieu, iufques aux fonges. 

Deux chofes entre autres nous ont fort ayd6, pour 
fl pen de profit que nous auons defia fait icy, par la 
grace de noftre Seigneur, La premiere eft, comme 
i'ay defia dit, la fante que Dieu nous a conferu6e par- 
my vne fi grande & fi vniuerf elle contagion : car nos 
Hurons ont penfe que s'ils croyoient en Dieu, & Ie 
feruoient comme nous, il[s] ne mouroient pas en fi 
grand nombre. 

La feconde eft I'aififtance temporelle, qu'on a ren- 
du aux malades. Ayans apporte pour nous quelques 
petits rafraichillemens, nous leur en donnions, h. I'vn 
vn pen de prunes, k I'autre vn pen de raifins; aux au- 
tres quelque autre chofe. Les pauures gens venoient 
[200] de fort loin pour en auoir tons leur part. 

Nos Frangois ayant aflez heureufement reiifl^y a la 
chafiie pendant I'Automne; nous en portions quelque 
morceau k tons les malades. Cela leur gagnoit Ie 
cceur. Veu principalemet, qu'ils mouroient n'ayat 
ny chair ny poifso, pour afl!ais6ner leur fagamite. 
Adiouftez que tons nos Fran9ois fe font Dieu mercy 
comportez fi vertueufement, & fi paifiblemet dedas & 
dehors, pedant toute cette annee, qu'ils ont attire la 
benedidtion du Ciel. Nous deuons aufli beaucoup au 
glorieux faindt lofeph efpoux de noftre Dame, & pro- 
tedteur des Hurons, dont nous auons touche au doigt 
I'affiftace plufieurs fois. Ce fut vne chofe remar- 
quable, que Ie iour de fa fefte, & durant I'Odtaue, les 
commoditez nous venoient de toutes parts. 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i635 149 

of sickness so general and so widespread. For our 
Hurons have thought that, if they believed in God 
and served him as we do, they would not die in so 
large numbers. 

The second is the temporal assistance we have ren- 
dered to the sick. Having brought for ourselves 
some few delicacies, we shared them with them, giv- 
ing to one a few prunes and to another a few raisins, 
to others something else. The poor people came 
[200] from great distances to get their share. 

Our French servants having succeeded very well in 
hunting, during the Autumn, we carried portions of 
game to all the sick. That chiefly won their hearts, 
as they were dying, having neither flesh nor fish 
to season their sagamite. Add that all our French 
have borne themselves, thank God, so virtuously and 
so peaceably on all sides, during the whole year, that 
they have drawn down the blessing of Heaven. We 
owe much also to our glorious saint Joseph, spouse 
of our Lady, and protector of the Hurons, who has 
rendered us tangible aid several times. It was a re- 
markable thing that on the day of his feast, and dur- 
ing the Octave, accommodations came to us from all 
sides. 

[201] Before drawing to a close, I shall say only 
this one word about Louys de saincte Foy, which I 
would prefer not to say were it not that it may help 
to make this Nation more correctly known ; it is 
this, — he is not such as he ought to be, and as we 
had wished. Nevertheless, we still have good hope. 
He was taken prisoner last year by the Hiroquois, in 
the common defeat, and carried away a captive. It 
cost him a finger. This severe stroke ought to suffice 
to bring him back to duty. His Father was not tak- 


150 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 

[201] Auant que de finir, ie diray feulement ce mot 
de Louys de faindte Foy, que i'aymerois mieux taire, 
n'eftoit qu'il peut feruir pour reconnoiftre plus iudi- 
cieufement cette Nation. C'eft qu'il n'eft pas tel 
qu'il deuroit eftre, & que nous reulTions fouhaitte; 
neantmoins nous en auos encore bonne efperance. II 
fut pris I'annee paff6e par les Hiroquois en la d^faite 
commune, & emmene prifonnier. II luy en a coufle 
vn doigt ; ce coup de f oUet deuroit eftre baflant pour 
le remettre en f on deuoir. Son Pere ne fut pas pris : 
11 fe fauua a la fuite, mais en fuyat il patit h. bon ef- 
cient dedans les bois, oil il demeura, a ce qu'il dit, 
trente iours, combattu de trois puiffans ennemis; fca- 
uoir eft du froid, car c'eftoit au Printemps, & il eftoit 
nud & fans feu: de la maladie, car il demeura comme 
perclus des deux iambes & [202] n'en eft pas encore 
guery ; & en fin de la faim. A propos de laquelle il 
raconte vne chofe remarquable, fi elle eft vraye. II 
dit qu'ayant demeure dix ou douze iours fans man- 
ger, & priant Dieu, duquel il auoit ouy parler a fon 
fils, il vit comme vn pot de grais tel qu'il en auoit 
veu a Kebec, remply d'vne tres fuaue liqueur, & 
oiiyt vne voix, qui luy difoit, Saranhes, aye bon cou- 
rage, tu n'en mourras pas; prens, boy de ce qui eft 
dans ce pot afin de te fortifier: ce qu'il fit, & en fut 
merueilleufement foulage. Que peu apres il rencon- 
tra en vn arbriffeau vn fachet de bled, dont il fuflen- 
ta petitement fa vie, iufques ^ ce que quelques Sau- 
uages de la Nation neutre, I'ayant fortuitement trou- 
ue, I'enleuerent en leur village. 

Get homme m'a temoigne qu'il defiroit fe conuertir, 
luy & toute fa [203] famille, & cooperer k ce que tout 
fon village feruift a Dieu, comme nous. Mais c'efl 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, idjs 151 

en ; he escaped by flight, but in fleeing he suffered in 
good earnest in the woods, where he remained, ac- 
cording to his account, thirty days struggling against 
three powerful enemies, — namely, cold, for it was 
Spring, and he was naked and fireless ; sickness, for 
his two legs were powerless, and [202] he has not yet 
recovered; and, lastly, against hunger, in reference 
to which he relates a remarkable story, if it be true. 
He says that, having gone for ten or twelve days 
without eating, and praying to God, of whom he had 
heard his son speak, he saw what seemed a pot of 
grease, such as he had seen at Kebec, full of a very 
savory liquor, and heard a voice that said to him, 
''Saranhes, be of good cheer; thou wilt not die; take, 
drink what is in the pot and strengthen thyself," 
which he did, and was marvelously solaced by it. A 
little later, he found in a thicket a small bagful of 
corn, with which he barely sustained life until some 
Savages of the neutral Nation, having accidentally 
found him, brought him to their village. 

This man has declared to me that he and his whole 
family were desirous of being converted, [203] and of 
helping to bring the entire village to God's service. 
But his is a crafty spirit, as well as his son's, and I do 
not trust him yet. Our hope is in God, and in our 
Lord Jesus Christ, who shed his blood for the sal- 
vation of the Hurons, as well as for the rest of the 
world. 

It is through this support, and not our own efforts, 
that we hope one day to see here a flourishing Chris- 
tianity. Indeed, their minds are docile and flexible ; 
I see only the liberty with which they change their 
wives at pleasure, and some superstitions, difficult to 
abolish, for in other respects they have no aversion 


152 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.8 

vn efprit defli6 auffi bien que fon fils, ie ne me fie pas 
encore en luy. Noftre efperance eft en Dien, & en 
noftre Seigneur lefus-Chrift, qui a refpandu fon fang 
pour le falut des Hurons, auffi bien pour le refle du 
monde. 

C'eft fur c^t appuy, & non fur nos induftries, que 
nous efperons de veoir vn iour icy vne Chreftient^ 
floriffante. Les efprits certes y font dociles & flex- 
ibles, ie ne voy que la liberty des femmes qu'ils chan- 
gent ^ plaifir, & quelques fuperftitions difficiles a abo- 
lir. Car d'ailleurs ils n'ont point d'auerfion de la 
Foy, ny de la Loy Chreflienne ; ils recourent volon- 
tiers k Dieu en leurs [204] neceffitez : viennent faire 
benir leurs bleds auant que de les f emer, & demandent 
ce que c'eft que nous defirons d'eux. Nous n'auons 
k apprehender que nos pechez & imperfedlions, & 
moy fur tous. Certes ie me fens extremement i[n]- 
digne de cet employ ; mais enuoyez nous des faindts, 
ou faites enuers Dieu noftre Seigneur, que nous 
foyons tels qu'il defire. Mille recommandations aux 
faindts facrifices de voftre Reuerence, & de tous nos 
Peres & Freres. 

De V. R. 
De noftre petite Maifon de S. lofeph au vil- 
lage d'lhonatiria 6s Hurons ce 27. May 1635. 
iour auquel le S. Efprit defcendit vifiblement 
fur les Apoftres. 

Tres-humble & tres-obeyfCant 
feruiteur en noftre Seigneur, 

Iean de Brebevf. 


1634-36] LE JEUNES RELATION, ibss 153 

to the Faith nor to the Christian Law. They turn 
willingly to God in their [204] necessities ; they come 
to get their crops blessed, before sowing them ; and 
ask us what we desire of them. All we have to fear 
is our own sins and imperfections, and I above all. 
In truth, I feel myself extremely unworthy of this 
employment; but send holy ones to us, or pray to 
God our Lord that we may be such as he desires. A 
thousand entreaties for the holy sacrifices of your 
Reverence and of all our Fathers and Brothers. 
Your Reverence's 
From our little House of St. Joseph, in the vil- 
lage of Ihonatiria in the Huron country, this 
27th of May, 1635, the day on which the Holy 
Spirit descended visibly upon the Apostles. 

Very humble and obedient 
servant in our Lord, 

Jean de Brebeuf. 


154 LES RELA TIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol. 8 


[205] 71 yf ON R. Pere, 

^ y 1^ Depuis la pref ente ef crite nous auos 
baptif^ vn enfat malade, arriere petit 
neueu de feu loachim TJindacaiendoua, & ce d'autant 
plus hardiment que cefte famille femble eftre toute 
difpofee h. la Foy. Noftre Seigneur luy a rendu la 
fante auec admiration de fes parens, qui remarquerent 
qu 'incontinent apres le baptefme, il repofa fort dou- 
cement, Cela feruira pour renuerfer vne mauuaife 
opinion que le Diable va femant dans quelques ef- 
prits, aufquels il perfuade qu'on ne guerit iamais 
apres le baptefme. C'eft Yk vne des rufes du Diable 
contre nous ; il en a bien d'autres dont il a fait I'effay 
defia en partie, mais N. Seigneur le confondra ; c'eft 
en luy en qui nous nous confions. Paraduenture V. 
R. fera-elle [206] bie aife de fgauoir que I'Hyuer a 
efl6 icy fort court, 8c fort modere, le Pays eft tel, qu'il 
porte alTez pour la nourriture des habitans. Tout ce 
Printemps a efte grandement beau & fee, les bleds 
commencent k patir faute de pluye. le prie noftre 
Seigneur, qu'il luy plaife y remedier, & nous donner 
ce qui fera neceffaire pour fa gloire, pour les heureux 
commencemens de cefte Clireftient6, & pour la bene- 
dic5tion des petits trauaux que noftre Compagnie en- 
treprend en ces terres 61oignees, fous la protedtion 
des Fleurs de Lys, & de noftre Grand Roy, qui les 
fait fleurir auiourd'huy li glorieufement. 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6ss 155 


M 


[205] ]V y^ "k' Reverend Father, 

Since the above was written, we have 
baptized a sick child, grandnephew of 
the late Joachim Tsindacaiendoua ; and this the more 
boldly, as this family seems to be disposed to the 
Faith. Our Lord has restored his health, to the 
wonder of his parents, who remarked that immedi- 
ately after the baptism he rested very sweetly. This 
will serve to overthrow a bad opinion that the Devil 
goes about sowing in some minds, whom he persuades 
that they will never get better after baptism. This 
is but one of the ruses of the Devil against us ; he 
has many others, which he has already attempted in 
part ; but Our Lord will confound him ; it is in him 
that we put our trust. Your Reverence will perhaps 
[206] be glad to hear that the Winter here has been 
very short and moderate. The Country is such that 
it bears sufficient for the nourishment of its inhabi- 
tants. All this Spring has been extremely clear and 
dry; the crops are beginning to suffer for want of 
rain. I pray our Lord that it may please him to rem- 
edy this, and to give us what will be necessary for 
his glory, for the happy beginnings of this Christian- 
ity, and for the blessing of the insignificant labors 
that our Society is undertaking in these distant lands, 
under the protection of the Fleurs de Lys and of our 
Great King who to-day is causing them to bloom so 
gloriously. 


156 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.8 


[207] Relation de qvelqves particularitez, du lieu 
& des Habitans de I'lOe du Cap Breton. 

Enuoyee par le P. lulten Perrault, de la Cotnpagnie de lefus, d 
/on Prouincial, en France, r an 1634. (Sr^ 35. 

L^ISLE du Cap Breton eft efloignee de noftre 
France d'enuiron neuf cens lieues par mer. 
Elle en a foixante & dix ou quatre vingts de 
circuit. Les motagnes y font fort hautes & en 
nombre, au pied defquelles [208] fe voyent de grandes 
fondrieres & precipices affreux. La terre y eft cou- 
uerte de toutes fortes d'arbres, comme de chaifnes, 
haiftres, bouleaux, pins, fapins & autres. 

Le Chibou principale partie de cefle Ifle, eft vne 
grande Baye d'enuiron deux lieues de large en fon 
entre, qui va peu a peu s'eftreffifTant le long de fix 
ou fept lieues, qu'elle comprend en eftendue. Sur 
le milieu, a main gauche en montant, au haut de la 
cofte, qui regarde le Nor-oiiefl, eft bafti le fort de 
faindte Anne, a I'entree du port, vis "k vis d'vne pe- 
tite Ance. L'afliete du lieu eft fi auantageufe, au 
rapport de ceux qui s'y cognoiffent, qu'auec dix ou 
douze pieces de canon, on pourroit couler ^ fonds tous 
les vaifleaux ennemis qui s'y prefenteroient. 

Ceux qui ont vieilly fur mer, proteftent qu'ils n'ont 
iamais veu vn [209] Port plus recommandable pour fa 
capacity, ny pour la facility de fon abord. Trois mille 
nauires y peuuent eftre ^ I'aife, & a I'abry de tout 
vent, en vn beau rond tres-agreable a veoir; car fa 
figure eft circulaire, ou peu s'en faut. Les marees y 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ibjs 157 


[207] Relation of certain details regarding the 
Island of Cape Breton and its Inhabitants. 

Sent by Father Julien Perrault, of the Society of Jesus, to his Pro- 
vincial, in France, in the years 1634 ««^35.'** 

THE Island of Cape Breton*^ is about nine hun- 
dred leagues distant from our France by sea. 
It is seventy or eighty leagues in circumfer- 
ence. The mountains here are very high and nu- 
merous, at the foot of which [208] are seen great 
bogs and frightful precipices. The land is covered 
with all sorts of trees, such as oak, beech, birch, pine, 
hemlock, and others. 

Chibou,**® which is the principal part of this Island, 
is a great Bay about two leagues wide at its entrance, 
becoming narrower little by little, in the six or seven 
leagues which form its extent. In the middle, on 
the left hand in ascending, on the summit of the 
shore that faces the Northwest, is built the fort of 
sainte Anne, at the entrance of the harbor, opposite 
a little Cove. The situation of the place is so ad- 
vantageous, according to the report of those who are 
acquainted with it, that with ten or twelve pieces of 
cannon, all the hostile ships that might present them- 
selves could be sent to the bottom. 

Those who have grown old upon the sea protest 
that they have never seen a [209] more desirable 
Port, either in extent or for its facility of access. 
Three thousand ships could easily anchor there, and 
be sheltered from every wind, in a beautiful enclo- 


158 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.8 

font fort donees & reigl^es ; il y a toufiours de dix ^ 
douze bralT6es d'eau: an refte nonobftant que toute 
rifle foit de quarante-fix degrez & demy en fon ele- 
uation; fi eft-ce qne le froid y efl extreme, parmy 
des neiges de cinq k fix mois I'annee. Voila ponr ce 
qui eft de la fituation du lieu : venons aux commodi- 
tez de la vie, qu'il offre aux habitans: furquoy on 
pent dire en general, que les Sauuages font icy plus 
k leur aife, qu'en beaucoup d'autres endroits. Si 
I'Hyuer leur y fournit moins de Caftors fur eau, il 
leur donne aufll en recompenfe plus d'Orignacs [210] 
fur terre. En efte ils y viuent afCez doucement de 
Marmettes, de Perroquets, de Cormorans, & autres 
oyfeaux de marine. lis y ont auffi les Outardes, I'Ef- 
plan, les Maquereaux, les Morues, & femblables pro- 
uifions felon la diuerfite des faifons, dans les forefts, 
ou fur les coftes de la mer. 

Quant k eux, pour ce qui eft du corps, ils n'ont rien 
de monftrueux; vous y voyez des ges bien-faits, d'vn 
beau vifage, & d'vne riche taille, forts & puilTans. 
Leur charnure eft blanche naturellement, comme en 
font foy les petits enfans ; mais le hafle du Soleil, & 
les fridtions d'huile de Loup marin, & de graiffe d'O- 
rignac, les rend fortbazanez, ^ mefure qu'ils croillent. 
lis vont la plus-part la tefte nue, & portent de longs 
cheueux noirs, auec fort pen ou point de barbe, tene- 
ment que les femmes n'y font recogneiies, [211] qu'en 
ce qu'elles fe feruent d'vne ceinture, & qu'elles font 
moins d^couuertes que les hommes ; tout au rebours 
de ce qui fe prattique en plufieurs lieux de la Chrefli- 
ent6, ^ la bonte du Chriftianifme. On void icy des 
vieillards de quatre-vingts & cent ans, qui n'ont pref- 
que pas vn poil gris. Pour le regard de I'efprit, s'il 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s3 159 

sure very pleasant to look upon ; for its form is cir- 
cular, or nearly so. The tides here are very mild 
and regular; there is always from ten to twelve 
fathoms of water. Furthermore, notwithstanding 
that the Island is in forty-six and a half degrees 
north latitude, the cold is extreme, the island lying 
in the midst of snow five or six months of the year. 
This is the situation of the place, let us come to the 
conveniences of life which it offers to its inhabitants. 
On this subject we may say, in general, that the Sav- 
ages are more comfortable here than in many other 
places. If the Winter supplies them with fewer 
Beavers upon the water, it gives them, by way of 
compensation, more Moose [210] upon the land. In 
summer, they live very well on Marmots and Parrot 
fish,"*^ with Cormorants and other marine birds. They 
have also Bustards, Smelts, Mackerel, Codfish, and 
like supplies, according to the different seasons, in 
the forests or upon the coasts of the sea. 

As to the people, there is nothing anomalous in 
their physical appearance; you see well-formed men, 
good-looking, of fine figures, strong and powerful. 
Their skin is naturally white, for the little children 
show it thus; but the heat of the Sun, and the rub- 
bing with Seal oil and Moose fat, make them very 
swarthy, the more so as they grow older. Most of 
them go bareheaded, and they have long, black hair, 
with very little or no beard, so that the women can- 
not be distinguished, [211] except that they use a 
girdle and are less naked than the men ; quite the 
reverse of what is practiced in many Christian lands, 
to the shame of Christianity. One sees here old men, 
of eighty and a hundred years, who have hardly 
a gray hair. As to their intelligence, if we may 


160 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.8 

en faut iuger de leurs deportemens, & de leurs fa9ons 
de traitter auec nos Fran9ois, ils ne I'ont pas mau- 
uais. Vous ne voyez paroiftre en leurs gefles & de- 
marches auctine fottife on niaiferie, mais plutofl vne 
certaine granite & modeftie naturelle, qni les rend 
aimables. Ils font bien fi induftrieux, que de degui- 
fer leur langage, adiouftans a chaque mot vne fyl- 
labe, qui ne fert qu'a troubler 1' imagination de ceux, 
dont ils ne veulent point eftre entendus. 

[212] Ce qui leur manque, eft la cognoiffance de 
Dieu, & du feruice qu'ils font obligez de luy rendre, 
comme auffi de I'eftat des ames apres la mort: c'eft 
merueille, que nous n'en auons fceu encore d6couurir 
aucun veftige, en ce que nous fgauons de leur langue. 
Peut-eftre qu'en defcouurirons nous quelque chofe de 
plus, quand nous y ferons plus fgauans: car il n'eft 
pas croyable que la lumiere naturelle foit tout k fait 
efteinte en eux pour ce regard, ne I'eftant point en 
d'autres Natios plus barbares; ou qu'ils ne parlent ia- 
mais entre-eux de ce qu'ils ne peuuent tout k fait 
ignorer. Tant y a que iufqu'a maintenant, nous n'a- 
uons non plus remarque de Religion parmy ces pau- 
ures Sauuages, que parmy les beftes. C'eft ce qui 
nous fend le coeur de compalTion, pour des ames ra- 
chetees au mefme [213] prix que nous, & dont elles 
feroient leur profit volontiers mieux que nous, fi elles 
f§auoient ce qu' elles valient, & ce qu' elles ont coufte 
k celuy qui nous a tant aimez tons enfemble. 

Or ce qui nous confole parmy cette ignorance & 
barbaric, & ce qui nous fait efperer d'y veoir vn iour 
la Foy plant6e bien auant; c'eft en partie la docility 
qu'ils nous font paroiftre a vouloir eftre inftruits, & 
en partie la fidelite & I'honneftete que nous y remar- 
quons. 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, j635 161 

judge from their conduct and from their way of deal- 
ing with the French, they are not at a great disad- 
vantage. You do not see in their gestures and bear- 
ing any foolishness or nonsense, but rather a certain 
gravity and natural modesty, which makes them 
agreeable. They are indeed so clever that, in order 
to disguise their language, they add to every word a 
syllable, which only serves to confUvSe the minds of 
those by whom they do not wish to be understood. 

[212] What they do lack is the knowledge of God 
and of the service that they ought to render to him, 
'as also of the state of the soul after death; it is won- 
derful that we have not yet been able to discover any 
trace of this knowledge in what we know of their 
language. Perhaps we shall discover something 
more, when we become better versed in it; for it is 
not credible that the light of nature should be alto- 
gether extinct in them in this regard, when it is not 
in other more barbarous Nations, or that they never 
talk among themselves of that of which they cannot 
be entirely ignorant. For all that, we have not up 
to the present noticed any more Religion among these 
poor Savages than among brutes. This is what 
wrings our hearts with compassion for souls redeemed 
at the same [213] price as ours, by which they would 
willingly profit better than we, if they could know 
what they themselves are worth, and what they cost 
him who has loved us all so much. 

Now what consoles us in the midst of this igno- 
rance and barbarism, and what makes us hope some 
day to see the Faith widely planted, is partly the 
docility they have shown in wishing to be instructed, 
and partly the honesty and decency we observe in 
them. 


162 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.8 


lis fe rendent fort aflidus & attentifs aux inftru- 
dtions que nous leur donnons: ie ne l"9ay, fi c'eft par 
complaifance, car ils en ont beaucoup naturellement, 
ou par inflindt d'enhaut, qu'ils nous efcoutent fi vo- 
lontiers fur les myfleres de noftre Foy, & redifent 
apres nous, foit qu'ils I'entendent ou non, tout ce 
[214] que nous leur en declarons. Ils font tres-vo- 
lontiers le figne de la Croix, comme ils nous voyent 
faire, leuans les mains & les yeux au Ciel, pronon- 
§ans, lefus Maria, comme nous: iufque-lk qu'ayans 
remarqu6 I'honneur que nous rendons a la Croix, les 
pauures gens fe la peignent au vifage, k I'eflomach, 
aux bras, & aux iambes, fans en eftre priez. Ie veux 
bien qu'ils faffent tout cela en ces commencemens 
par vne fimplicit6 naturelle, qui les porte k imiter 
tout ce qu'ils voyent, plus que pour aucune meilleure 
confideration ; fi eft-ce qu'auec le temps, ils en peuuet 
eftre aidez ; & ils ne f eront pas les premiers, quad ils 
viendront k pratiquer par eledlion, ce qui leur a eft6 
en vfage, comme par rencontre & par hazard. Au 
furplus, ce qui n'eft pas peu, ils nous prellent par- 
fois de prier noftre bon lefus pour eux, [215] pour les 
fuccez de leurs chaffes, & pour la deliurance de leurs 
maladies, 

L' autre aduantage que nous remarquons icy, pour 
la predication de I'Euangile, eft en la fidelity, & en 
rhonneftet6 que nous y voyons reluire, comme deux 
clairs rayons de lumiere, au milieu des tenebres. On 
n'a que faire de fe defier de nos Sauuages, ou de 
prendre garde k leurs mains & k leurs pieds, comme 
en quelques autres, qui attirent tout k eux, & s'ac- 
commodent de tout ce qu'ils treuuent a leur bien- 
feance. Tout leur eft ouuert en tout lieu, & fi rien 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ibjs 163 

They are very diligent and attentive to the in- 
structions we give them ; I do not know whether it 
is through complaisance, for they have a g^reat deal 
of this naturally, or through an instinct from above, 
that they listen to us so willingly concerning the 
mysteries of our Faith, and repeat after us, whether 
they understand it or not, all that [2 14] we declare 
to them. They very willingly make the sign of the 
Cross, as they see us make it, raising their hands and 
eyes to Heaven and pronouncing the words, ''Jesus, 
Mary," as we do, — so far that, having observed the 
honor we render to the Cross, these poor people paint 
it on their faces, chests, arms, and legs, without be- 
ing asked to do so. I am very willing that they 
should do all these things in the beginning from a 
natural simplicity, which causes them to imitate all 
they see, rather than from any greater consideration ; 
because in time they may be helped by it, and they 
will not be the first, who come to practice by choice 
that to which by casual encounter they have become 
accustomed. Besides, what is of no small impor- 
tance, they sometimes urge us to pray our good Jesus 
for them, [215] for the success of their hunting and 
for relief from their diseases. 

The other encouragement we see here, for the 
preaching of the Gospel, is in the honesty and de- 
cency that we see shining forth in them like two 
bright rays of light in the midst of darkness. We 
never think of distrusting our Savages, or of watch- 
ing their hands and their feet, as with some others 
who attract everything to them and appropriate all 
they find at their convenience. Everything is free to 
them in all places, and yet nothing is in danger in 
their presence, even if they are alone in a cabin and 


164 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.8 

n'eft en danger deuant eux, qnand ils feroient feuls 
en vne cabane, & fans pouuoir eftre apperceus de per- 
fonne. Pour I'honneftet^, ils I'ont en telle recoman- 
dation, an moins quat a ce qui fe void k I'exterieur, 
en leurs adtions & paroles, qu'il y a de I'apparence 
[216] qu'ils fe leueront an dernier iour, & condamne- 
ront plufieurs Chreftiens, qui I'auront moins cultiuee 
en la Loy de grace, que ne font ces pauures gens, en 
celle de nature. 

Nous ne leur auons iamais oiiy dire parole melTe- 
ante, ny veu faire aucune acftion trop libre, quoy que 
nous ayons vefcu alTez familierement auec eux, de- 
dans & hors de leurs cabanes. 

Vous diriez qu'ils veulent pratiquer par aduance 
ce beau mot de I'Apoftre, qui commande aux Chrefti- 
ens, de n'auoir pas mefme, fi faire fe pent, en leur 
bouche, vne parole qui fignifie le vice contraire. 
Quelqu'vn repliquera volontiers, que fi nous euffions 
efte plus verfez en leur langue, nous n'euffions pas 
manque d'y en remarquer. Mais n'eft-ce pas beau- 
coup, que fi peu [2 1 7] que nous en f gauons ne nous 
ait encore appris rien de femblable? Et n'y a-t'il pas 
grande occafion de rougir pour beaucoup de Nations 
Chreftiennes, parmy lefquelles il ne faut pas auoir 
fait grand apprentiflage en leur Grammaire, pour fe 
trouuer honteux & conf us es compagnies, k qui a tant 
foit peu I'honneur en affedtion. Que fi nous n'auons 
pas encore les oreilles alTez ouuertes, pour rendre 
tefmoignage affeure de 1' indifference, ou de rho- 
neflet^ de leurs difcours; somes nous aueugles, ou 
ne pouuons nous pas recognoiftre ce que c'eft qu'vn 
gefte ou vn deportement honteux ? & neantmoins nous 
n'y auons rien veu de femblable, non pas mefme par- 


1634-36] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6sj 165 

where no one can see them. As to decency, they 
hold it in such high estimation, at least as far as ex- 
ternal appearances are concerned, in their actions and 
words, that there is a probability [216] that they will 
rise up on the last day and condemn many Christians, 
who will have cultivated this virtue less under the 
Law of grace, than these poor people have under that 
of nature. 

We have never heard them use unseemly words, 
nor seen any actions too free, although we have lived 
on familiar terms with them inside and outside their 
cabins. 

You would say they are trying to practice in ad- 
vance that beautiful motto of the Apostle, which com- 
mands Christians not even to have, if they can help 
it, upon their lips a word which signifies indecency. 
Some one will readily reply that, if we were better 
versed in their language, we would not fail to notice 
it therein. But is it not a great deal, that the little 
[2 1 7] we know of it has not taught us anything of 
the kind ? And is there not great reason to blush for 
many Christian Nations, among whom one does not 
have to serve a long apprenticeship to their Grammar, 
to find oneself embarrassed and confused in company, 
if he has even a little regard for propriety? And if 
our ears are not yet sufficiently opened to give posi- 
tive evidence of the unconcern or decency of their 
talk ; are we blind, or are we incapable of recogniz- 
ing a shameful gesture or action? And yet we have 
never seen anything of this kind, not even among 
married people. But what shall I say about noticing 
one day a young Savage kissing a woman, who I did 
not think [2 1 8] was his wife ; as that seemed some- 
thing extraordinary among them, I straightway asked 


166 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.8 

my les gens mariez. Que diray-je, fur ce que m'e- 
ftant vn iour apperceu, qu'vn ieune Sauuage auoit 
baife fa femme, que ie ne croyois [218] pas eftre la 
lienne ; comme cela me f embloit extraordinaire par- 
my eux, ie luy demanday fur le champ, li c'eftoit fa 
femme; & il me refpondit, qu'oiiy; mais ce ne fut 
pas fans confufion de I'vn & de I'autre, qui fe trou- 
uerent furpris. loignez cela auec cette granite, que 
i'ay defia dit leur eftre naturelle, & vous iugerez que 
Dieu aidant, ils receuront a bras ouuerts vne Loy qui 
ne recommande rien tat que cette vertu, qui red les 
hommes femblables aux Anges; & qu'ils n'auront 
pas fi grande difficulte, qu'ont plufieurs Chreftiens 
mal appris, de fe conformer "k tout ce qui eft des pa- 
roles de I'Euangile, quand on le leur annoncera aux 
termes de I'Apoftre; qu'ils ayet "k faire paroiftre leur 
modeftie aux yeux de tout le mode, veu que le Sei- 
gneur eft proche. II eft vray, qu'ils ont la polyga- 
mic, & ne gardent point I'indiHolubilit^ [219] du Ma- 
nage. Mais il faut efperer, que quand ils viendront 
a recognoiftre les obligations qu'ils ont, auec toutes 
les Nations de la terre, "k vn Dieu qui s'eft fait homme 
pour eux, ils fe foumettront volontiers k fes Loix 
toutes faindtes, nommemet en ce qui concerne une 
vertu, au moyen de laquelle il veut que nous le por- 
tions & glorifions fans celle en nos corps, luy qui a 
liure le lien pour nous aux tourmens, & qui nous le 
donne tons les iours en viandes, pour cet effedt fm- 
gulier. 


1034 - 36] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1635 1 67 

him if that was his wife, and he replied that she was ; 
but it was not without embarrassment on the part of 
the two who had been taken by surprise. Add to this 
modesty the ^avity which I have said is natural to 
them, and you will judge that, God helping, they 
will receive with open arms a Law which recommends 
nothing so much as this virtue, which makes men 
like unto Angels; and that they will not have as 
much difficulty as many badly taught Christians have, 
to conform entirely to the injunctions of the Gospel, 
when it shall be declared to them in the words of the 
Apostle that they have to show their modesty in the 
eyes of all the world, since the Lord is near. It is 
true they have polygamy, and pay no attention to the 
indissolubility [219] of Marriage. But we must hope 
that, when they come to recognize the obligations 
they are under, together with all the Nations of the 
earth, to a God who made himself man for them, they 
will willingly submit to his most holy Laws, espe- 
cially in that which concerns a virtue by means of 
which he wishes us to bear witness to and glorify 
without ceasing, in our bodies, him who for us has 
delivered his own up to torture, and who gives it to 
us every day as food, for this sole purpose. 


168 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 


[220] Divers Sentimens & aduis des Peres qui 
font en la Nouuelle France. 

Tirez de leurs dernieres lettres de 163s- 

1 T A Nouuelle France eft vn vray climat ou on 
I J apprend parfaidtement bien k ne chercher 

que Dieu, ne defirer que Dieu feul, auoir I'in- 
tention purement a Dieu, & k ne s'attendre & ne s'ap- 
puyer qu'en fa diuine & paternelle Prouidence; & 
cela c'efl vn riche threfor du coeur, qui ne fe peut 
eftimer. 

2 Viure en la Nouuelle France, c'eft ^ vray dire vi- 
ure dans le fein de [221] Dieu, & ne refpirer que I'air 
de fa Diuine conduite ; on ne fgauroit croire la dou- 
ceur de cet air 1^, fi ce n'efb quand adtuellement on 
le refpire. 

3 II n' eft pas k propos que tout le monde fgache, 
combien il fait bon dans les facrees horreurs de ces 
forefts, & combien on trouue de lumieres du Ciel 
dans les tenebres efpailfes de cette barbaric: nous 
aurions trop de monde qui y voudroit venir, & nos 
Habitatios ne feroient pas capables de loger tant de 
gens : & c'eft ce qui nous conf ond qui Dieu nous ait 
choifis, pour nous faire participans de cette miferi- 
corde, voyat qu'il y a tant de nos Peres en France, 
qui feroient mieux que nous. 

4 La ioye qu'on a quand on a baptife vn Sauuage, 
qui fe meurt peu apres, & qui s'enuole droit au Ciel, 
pour deuenir vn Ange, certainemet [222] c'eft vne 


1634-36] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6ss 169 


[220] Various Sentiments and opinions of the Fa- 
thers who are in New France. 

Taketi from their last letters of i6j^. 

1 ]V TEW FRANCE is truly a region where one 
I \ learns perfectly to seek God alone, to desire 

God alone, to have sincere intentions toward 
God, and to trust to and rely solely upon his divine 
and paternal Providence ; and it is a rich heart treas- 
ury, impossible to estimate. 

2 To live in New France means truly to live in the 
bosom of [22 1] God, and to breathe only the air of his 
Divine guidance ; the sweetness of that air can be re- 
alized only by actually breathing it. 

3 It is not fitting that every one should know how 
agreeable it is in the sacred awe of these forests, and 
how much Heavenly light one finds in the thick dark- 
ness of this barbarism ; we would have too many per- 
sons wishing to come here, and our Settlements would 
not be capable of accommodating so many ; and what 
confounds us is that God has chosen us, to make us 
participants in this mercy, seeing that there are so 
many of our Fathers in France, who would do better 
than we. 

4 The joy that one feels when he has baptized a Sav- 
age who dies soon afterwards, and flies directly to 
Heaven to become an Angel, certainly [222] is a joy 
that surpasses anything that can be imagined; one 
no longer remembers the sea, nor seasickness, nor 
the horror of past tempests ; but one would like to 


170 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.8 


ioye qui furpafle tout ce qu'on fe peut imaginer: on 
ne fe fouuiet plus ny de la mer, ny du mal de la mer, 
ny de I'horreur des tempeftes paff6es; on voudroit 
auec la f ouffrance de dix mille tempeftes pouuoir 
aider ^ fauuer vne ame, puifque lefus-Chrift pour 
vne feule ame auroit volontiers refpandu tout fon 
pretieux fang. 

5 Le plus grand combat que nous ayons eu parmy 
nous, c'eft qui feroit celuy qui auroit la bonne ad- 
uenture d'eftre choifi pour aller aux Hurons. Dieu 
a fait tomber le fort fur ceux qu'il luy a plu choifir, 

6 qui font allez a ces Nations barbares, comme fi 
c'eufl efte le Paradis Terreftre. Vne fois qu'on a 
goufke k bon efcient la douceur de la Croix de lefus- 
Chrifl, on la prefere k tons les Empires de la terre. 
6 Nous trouuans nagueres dans [223] vne tempefte 
fi furieufe, que tout 1' Ocean fembloit fe bouleuer- 
fer, on nous dit que nous eftions caufe de cet hor- 
rible orage ; cela nous eftonna d'abord, eftant dit par 
des gens de bien; & en demandant la raifon, il nous 
fut dit, que voyant vne fi furieufe & enragee tour- 
mete, il falloit croire que I'Enfer enrageat de nous 
veoir aller en la Nouuelle France, pour conuertir les 
infidelles, & diminuer fa puiffance, par d6pit il fouf- 
leuoit tous les Elemens contre nous, & vouloit abyf- 
mer la flotte, & tout ce qui eftoit dedans. Mais nous 
leur difmes tout doucement; Souuenez vous, Mef- 
fieurs, que Dieu eft plus puillant pour nous defendre, 
que Lucifer pour nous perfecuter : Que la mer s'e- 
fleue tant qu'elle voudra, fi faut-il que Dieu foit le 
Maiftre. Mirabiles elationes maris, mirabilis in altis Do- 
minus. Nous craignons bien [224] plus la cholere de 
Dieu contre nos infidelitez, que celle de la mer contre 
nos infirmitez humaines. 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib35 171 

have the suffering of ten thousand tempests that he 
might help save one soul, since Jesus Christ for one 
soul would have willingly shed all his precious blood. 

5 The greatest strife we have had among ourselves 
was to see which would have the good fortune of be- 
ing chosen to go to the Hurons. God has made the 
lot fall upon those he was pleased to choose, and who 
are going to these barbarous Nations as if to a Ter- 
restrial Paradise. When once a person has tasted in 
earnest the sweetness of the Cross of Jesus Christ, he 
prefers it to all the Empires of the earth. 

6 Finding ourselves lately in [223] a tempest so 
furious that the whole Ocean seemed to be in a tur- 
moil, they told us that we were the cause of this hor- 
rible storm ; this astonished us at first, as it was said 
by honest people ; on asking the reason, we were told 
that, seeing so furious and raging a tempest, it must 
be that Hell was enraged at seeing us go to New 
France to convert infidels and to diminish its power ; 
for revenge it raised up all the Elements against us, 
and was trying to sink the fleet and all that was 
within it. But we said to them very gently: "Re- 
member, Sirs, that God is more powerful to defend 
us, than Lucifer is to persecute us ; that the sea may 
rise as high as it will, yet God must be its Master. 
Mirabiles elationes maris, mirabilis in altis Dominus. 
We fear indeed [224] the anger of God against our 
unfaithfulness, more than that of the sea against our 
human weakness. 

7 In Europe they are accustomed to say that who- 
ever would learn to pray to God must go upon the 
sea; but it is quite a different thing to be there in 
reality. Lately we were more than two days and two 
nights in continual danger of being engulfed by the 


172 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 

7 En Europe on a couftume de dire, que quicon- 
que veut apprendre k prier Dieu, il faut aller fur 
la mer: mais c'eft toute autre chofe d'y eftre effe- 
dliuement. Dernierement nous fufmes plus de deux 
iours & deux nuidts en continuel danger d'eflre ab- 
forbez de I'Ocean ; chaque moment fembloit deuoir 
eflre le dernier moment de nos vies. Vous voyez 
venir des montagnes, qui fembloient nous deuoir en- 
gloutir: Nous eftions nous deux profternez k genoux, 
priant Dieu de bon coeur; la plus grande peur eftoit 
que quelqu'vn ne mouruft fans Confeffion : c'eft Ik oti 
on fait bien les Oraifons iaculatoires, & ou on re- 
garde le Ciel de bon oeil : mais on ne croiroit iamais 
Tefficace de la grace, & les [225] puiffantes alTeu- 
rances que Dieu donne k fes feruiteurs, au milieu des 
tempeftes, & des defefpoirs les plus efpouuantables. 

8 Jamais ie n'auois entendu que c'eft d'arriuer k 
vn poindt de vertu, que pour palTer plus auant il fau- 
droit faire miracle : tant il eft vray qu'on fe trouue 
quelquefois {\. auant ou dans la fouffrance, ou dans 
les hazards, ou dans I'abandonnement des creatures, 
qu'on ne trouue plus rien que Dieu, Mais on le trouue 
toufiours au bout de Tefchelle de lacob, k bras & 
coeur ouuerts, pour embraffer les Anges, & les ames 
qui volent droit k luy : & c'eft chofe admirable comme 
Dieu prend plaifir a fe communiquer abondamment 
aux ames qui ont tout abandonne, & fe font toutes 
abandonn^es a luy. Perdre tout pour trouuer Dieu, 
c'eft vne douce perte, & vne faindte vfure. 

[226] 9 Le coeur croift a mefure que les trauaux 
croiffent pour lefus-Chrift ; & la Nouuelle France eft 
le pays du monde le plus propre, pour entendre le 
fens literal de ces belles paroles, Sicut mijit me viuens 


1634-36] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s5 178 

Ocean ; every moment, it seemed, mu.st be the last of 
our lives. We saw mountains coming toward us, 
which seemed about to swallow us up ; we two were 
prostrate upon our knees, praying God with earnest 
hearts ; the greatest fear was that some one would die 
without Confession ; it is there that jaculatory Pray- 
ers are made, and that one looks gladly toward Heav- 
en ; but one can never believe the power of grace and 
the [225] invincible confidence that God gives to his 
servants in the midst of tempests and the most fear- 
ful despair. 

8 I have never understood what it was to reach such 
a point of virtue that, to pass beyond, a miracle would 
have to be performed; so true is it that a person 
sometimes finds himself so far plunged into either 
suffering, or danger, or desertion by his fellow-crea- 
tures, that nothing is left to him but God, who never- 
theless is always found at the end of Jacob's ladder, 
with arms and heart open to embrace the Angels and 
the souls which fly straight to him ; and it is wonder- 
ful how God takes pleasure in abundantly communi- 
cating himself to souls which have abandoned all and 
given themselves wholly to him. To lose all, that 
one may find God, is a sweet loss and a holy usury. 
[226] 9 The heart grows according as its works for 
Jesus Christ increase ; and New France is the most 
suitable country in the world in which to understand 
the literal meaning of these beautiful words, Sicut 
misit me vivens Pater, ita et ego mitto vos, "I send you, 
even as my Father has sent me." Ecce ego mitto vos 
sicut oves in medio luporum. "Behold, I send you as 
sheep in the midst of wolves. ' ' Among these forests, 
at the sight of these Savages, what can we poor For- 
eigners and servants of God expect but to feel their 


174 • LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.8 

Pater, ita & ego mitto vos. le vous enuoye de mefme 
forte, que mon Pere m'a enuoye. Ecce ego mitto vos 
Jicut ones m medio luporum. Voicy que ie vous enuoye 
come des brebis au milieu des loups. Parmy ces fo- 
refts, en voyant ces Sauuages, nous pauures Eftran- 
gers, & feruiteurs de Dieu, que pouuons nous at- 
tendre fmon vn coup de dent, & quelque effedt de 
leur barbarie naturelle. Qui craind bien Dieu, ne 
fgauroit plus rien craindre en ce monde. 

10 II eft vray que faire neuf cens lieues fur les 
flots de la mer, & auec cent & cent rencontres de 
Turcs, de glaces, de bancs, d'orages affez horribles, 
[227] cela pent eftonner la nature; & donner de la 
palpitation au coeur humain; Ik on experimente ce 
que veut dire Dauid, Anima mea in minibus meis fem- 
per. Ie tiens mon ame touliours dans mes mains, & 
ie fuis tout preft k tout moment de la f acrifier a Dieu ; 
trop heureux helas ! de pouuoir faire tant de f ois vn 
pretieux holocaufte de moy-mefme; mais les infu- 
fions de Dieu dans les coeurs, & le renfort qu'il verfe 
dans nos ames furpalle tous nos maux. Ie confelTe 
que i'ay mieux appris fur la mer que fur la terre, que 
c'eft qu'infufion de Dieu dans vne ame bien faite. 

11 Quand on void ces Sauuages, bien faits, forts, 
de bonne fa^on, doiiez d'vn bon fens naturel, & qu'il 
ne tient qu'a vne goutte d'eau qu'ils ne deuiennent 
enfans de Dieu, & que lefus-Chrift a refpandu tout 
[228] fon fang pour eux, on fent vne ardeur incroy- 
able de les attirer k I'Eglife, & a Dieu; & il eft vray 
qu'on aimeroit mieux la conuerfion d'vn de ces pau- 
ures Sauuages, que la conquefte d'vn Empire tout 
entier. La peine qu'on y prend eft fi agreable, qu'on 
ne la prend point pour vne peine, mais pour vne fa- 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1635 175 

teeth and some of the effects of their natural barbar- 
ism. He who truly fears God can fear nothing more 
in this world. 

10 Truly, to make nine hundred leagues upon the 
waves of the sea, with hundreds of encounters with 
Turks, icebergs, reefs, and horrible storms — [227] all 
these things can appall human nature, and cause the 
human heart to throb; there one experiences what 
David meant, Anima mea in manibus meis semper. 
"I hold my soul always in my hands," and I am al- 
ways ready at any moment to sacrifice it to God ; too 
happy, alas ! to be able to make so many times a pre- 
cious offering of myself ; but the infusion of God into 
our hearts, and the relief he pours into our souls, ex- 
ceed all of our ills. I confess that I have learned 
better upon the sea than upon the land what the in- 
fusion of God into a well-trained soul is. 

1 1 When we see these Savages, well formed, strong, 
of good mien, endowed with natural good sense, — 
and that it needs only a drop of water to make them 
children of God, and that Jesus Christ has shed all 
[228] his blood for them, we feel an incredible ardor 
to attract them to the Church and to God ; and it is 
true that we would prefer the conversion of one of 
these poor Savages to the conquest of a whole Em- 
pire. The trouble we take in this is so pleasant that 
we do not consider it trouble, but a truly extraordi- 
nary favor of Heaven. Car it as Dei urget ?ios, so true 
is it that charity presses our hearts. 

12 I passed twenty-four hours when, seeing that we 
were pursued by the Turks in leaving la manche [Eng- 
lish Channel], I expected nothing else than to fall 
into their hands, to be loaded with chains and to live 
in slavery. In the midst of these natural fears, lo ! a 


176 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.8 

ueur du Ciel bien extraordinaire. Car it as Dei vrget 
nos, tant il eft vray que la charite preiTe les coeurs. 

12 le fus vingt-quatre heures, que nous voyant 
pourfuiuis par les Turcs au fortir de la manche, ie 
n'attendois plus rien que de tomber entre leurs mains, 
& eftre couuert de chaifnes, & viure en efclauage. 
Parmy ces frayeurs naturelles, voyla vne forte pen- 
f 6e qui fe va faifir de mon coeur, & me dit : Ha ! quel 
bon-heur feroit-ce de pouuoir imiter faindt Paul, & 
me veoir enchaifner [229] pour 1' amour de lefus, qui 
fut \\€ pour moy, & traitte comme vn efclaue, & 
comme le Roy des voleurs. Cefte douce penf^e eut 
tant de pouuoir fur mon ame, que i'auois plus d'enuie 
de ces chaifnes, que de crainte de la captiuite. 

13 Trois puilf antes penfees confolent vn bon coeur, 
qui eft dans les forefts infinies de la Nouuelle France, 
ou parmy les Hurons. La premiere efl, ie fuis au 
lieu oil Dieu m'a enuoy6, oil il m'a mene comme par 
la main, oil il eft auec moy, & oti ie ne cherche que 
luy feul. La deuxieme eft, ce que dit Dauid; felon 
la mefure des douleurs que ie fouffre pour Dieu, fes 
Diuines confolations rejoiiyfCent mo ame. La troili- 
6me, que iamais on ne trouue ny Croix, ny cloux, 
ny ef pines, que li on regarde bien, on ne trouue L C. 
au milieu. Or peut-on eftre mal quand on eft en 
[230] compagnie du Fils de Dieu viuant. 

14 Quand ie me veois affiege de flots homicides, 
de forefts infinies, & de mille dangers, il me vient k 
I'efprit cefte riche parole de S. Ignace martyr: Nunc 
incipio ejfe Chrijii di/cipulus : c'eft auiourd'huy que ie 
commece d'eftre de la Copagnie de lefus; car k quoy 
feruent tant d'exercices, tant de Meditations feruentes, 
tant de defirs boiiillans? tout cela n'eft que du vet, fi 


1634 - 36] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1633 1 77 

Strong thought took possession of my heart, and said 
to me ' ' Ha ! what good fortune it would be to be able 
to imitate saint Paul, and to see myself in fetters 
[229] for the love of Jesus, who was bound for me, 
and treated as a slave and as the King of thieves. ' ' 
This sweet thought had so much power over my soul 
that I had more desire for those chains than fear of 
captivity. 

13 Three mighty thoughts console a good heart 
which is in the infinite forests of New France, or 
among the Hurons. The first is, "I am in the place 
where God has sent me, where he has led me as if by 
the hand, where he is with me, and where I seek him 
alone." The second is, in the words of David, "ac- 
cording to the measure of the pain I endure for God, 
his Divine consolations rejoice my soul. ' ' The third, 
that we never find Crosses, nails, nor thorns, in the 
midst of which, if we look closely, we do not find J. C. 
[Jesus Christ]. Now, can a person go wrong when he 
is in [230] the company of the Son of the living God? 

14 When I see myself surrounded by murderous 
waves, by infinite forests, and by a thousand dangers 
there comes to mind that precious saying of the mar- 
tyred St. Ignace, Nmic incipio esse Christi discipulus: 
to-day I begin to be of the Company of Jesus. For 
what avail so many exercises, so many fervent Medi- 
tations, so many eager desires? all these are nothing 
but wind, if we do not put them into practice. So 
old France is fitted to conceive noble desires, but the 
New is adapted to their execution ; that one desires 
in old France is what one does in the New, 

15 I do not know what the country of the Hurons is, 
where God sends me in his infinite mercy, but I do 
know that I would rather go there than to an Earthly 


178 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.8 

on ne les met en pratique ; tellement que la vieille 
France eft bonne pour conceuoir de bons delirs, mais 
la Nouuelle eft propre pour 1' execution : ce qu'on de- 
lire en I'ancienne France, c'eft ce qu'on fait dans la 
Nouuelle. 

15 le ne f9ay que c'eft que le pays des Hurons, 
oil Dieu m'enuoye par vne mifericorde infinie: mais 
ie f9ay bien que i'ayme mieux y aller qu'au Paradis 
Terreftre, puifque ie vois [231] que Dieu en a ordon- 
n6 de la forte. Chofe eftrange! que plus i'y vois de 
Croix preparees, & plus le coeur me rit, & y voile ; 
car quel bo-heur de ne voir rien de fes yeux que des 
Sauuages, des Croix, & lefus-Chrift : en ma vie ie 
n'ay bien compris en France, que c'eftoit de fe defier 
totalement de foy-mefme, & fe confier en Dieu feul : 
mais ie dis feul, & fans meflange d'aucune creature. 
Maior ejl Deus corde nojlro. Dieu eft plus grand que 
nos coeurs : cela eft euidet en la Nouuelle France, & 
c'est vne confolation du tout ineffable, que quand on 
ne trouue plus rien, auffi toft on rencontre Dieu, qui 
fe communique plus abondamment aux bons coeurs. 

16 Ma confolation parmy les Hurons, c'eft que 
tous les iours ie me confeffe, & puis ie dis la Meffe, 
comme li ie deuois prendre le Viatique, & mourir ce 
iour Ik, & ie ne crois pas [232] qu'on puille mieux 
viure, ny auec plus de fatisfadtion & de courage, & 
mefme de merites, que viure en vn lieu, ou on pefe 
pouuoir mourir tous les iours, & auoir la deuife de S. 
Paul. Quotidie morior fratres, &c. mes freres ie fais 
eftat de mourir tous les iours. 

17 Pour conuertir les Sauuages, il n'y faut pas 
tant de fcience que de bonte & vertu bien folide. 
Les quatre Elemens d'vn homme Apoftolique en la 


1634-36J LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib3S 179 

Paradise, since I see [231] that God has so ordained. 
Strange thing ! the more Crosses I see prepared for 
me there, the more my heart laughs and flies thither ; 
for what happiness to see with these eyes nothing but 
Savages, Crosses, and Jesus Christ. Never have I un- 
derstood in my life in France what it was to distrust 
self entirely and to trust in God alone; I say alone, 
and without the presence of any creature : Major est 
Deus corde tiostro, ' ' God is greater than our hearts ; ' ' 
this is evident in New France, and it is an unutter- 
able consolation that when we find nothing else we 
immediately encounter God, who communicates him- 
self most richly to good hearts. 

16 My consolation among the Hurons is that I con- 
fess every day, and then I say Mass as if I were to 
take the Viaticum and die that very day ; and I do 
not think [232] that a person can live better, nor with 
more satisfaction and courage, and even merit, than 
to live in a place where he expects every day to die, 
and to have the motto of St. Paul, Qiwtidie morior fra- 
tres, etc., "I protest, brethren, that I die daily." 

17 To convert the Savages, not so much knowledge 
is necessary as goodness and sound virtue. The four 
Elements of an Apostolic man in New France are 
Affability, Humility, Patience, and a generous Chari- 
ty. Too ardent zeal scorches more than it warms, 
and ruins everything; great magnanimity and com- 
pliance are necessary to attract gradually these Sav- 
ages. They do not comprehend our Theology well, 
but they comprehend perfectly our humility and our 
friendliness, and allow themselves to be won. 

18 The Huron Nation is becoming disposed [233] to 
receive the light of the Gospel, and inestimable good 
is to be hoped for in all those regions ; but two kinds 


180 LES RELATIONS DES jiSUITES [Vol.8 

Nouuelle Frace, font 1' Affability, rHumilite, la Pa- 
tiece & vne Charite genereufe. Le zele trop ar- 
dent, brufle plus qu'il n'efchauffe, & gafte tout; il 
faut vne grande magnanimite & condefcendence pour 
attirer peu a peu ces Sauuages. lis n'entendent pas 
bien noflre Theologie, mais ils entendent parfaidte- 
ment bien noftre humilite, & noflre affability, & fe 
laiffent gaigner. 

1 8 La Nation des Hurons fe difpofe [233] ^ rece- 
uoir la lumiere de I'Euangile, & on efpere vn bien 
incroyable en tous ces quartiers 1^: mais il y faut 
deux fortes de perfonnes pour bien faire cela: les 
vns en I'anciene France affiflat de leurs faindtes pri- 
eres, & de leur charite ; les autres en la Nouuelle, 
trauaillant auec grande douceur, & infatigabilite de 
la bonte de Dieu, & de ce doux cocert depend la con- 
uerfion de plufieurs milliers d'ames, pour chacune 
defquelles lefus-Chrift a verfe tout fon pretieux sag. 

19 Si on pouuoit fonder "k Kebec vn petit Semi- 
naire d'vne douzaine de petits Hurons, dans peu 
d'annees on en tireroit vn fecours incroyable, pour 
aider k conuertir leurs Peres, & planter vne Eglife 
fleuriffante dans la Nation des Hurons. Helas ! com- 
bien y en a t'il en Europe qui perdet a trois coups de 
dez, plus qu'il ne faudroit pour conuertir vn monde. 
[234] 20 Vne des penf^es qui preffent dauantage 
ceux qui font fi heureux, que de feruir Dieu parmy 
ces forells, c'eft d'eftre indignes d'vne vocation Apo- 
flolique, & fi releuee, & auoir fi peu de vertus dignes 
d'vn bel employ. Qui ne void la Nouuelle Frace que 
par les yeux de chair & de nature, il n'y void que 
des bois & des croix : mais qui les confidere auec les 
yeux de la grace, & d'vne bonne vocation, il n'y void 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6ss 181 

of persons are necessary to accomplish this, — those 
in old France, assisting by their holy prayers and 
their charity ; the others in the New, working with 
great gentleness and tirelessness ; on the goodness of 
God and on this sweet harmony depends the conver- 
sion of many thousand souls, for each one of whom 
Jesus Christ has shed all his precious blood. 
19 If a small Seminary of a dozen little Hurons 
could be founded at Kebec, in a few years incredible 
assistance could be derived therefrom, to help in con- 
verting their Fathers, and in planting a flourishing 
Church in the Nation of the Hurons. Alas! how 
many there are in Europe who lose in three casts of 
the dice more than would be needed to convert a 
world. 

[234] 20 One of the thoughts which weigh most 
upon those who are so fortunate as to serve God among 
these forests, is their unworthiness of their Apostolic 
and so exalted calling, and that they have so few of 
the virtues worthy of a noble work. He who sees 
New France only through the eyes of the flesh and 
of nature, sees only forests and crosses ; but he who 
looks upon these with the eyes of grace and of a noble 
vocation, sees only God, the virtues, and the graces ; 
and he finds therein so many and so firm consolations, 
that, if I were able to buy New France by giving in 
exchange all the Terrestrial Paradise, I would cer- 
tainly buy it. My God! how good it is to be in the 
place where God has placed us by his grace ; truly I 
have found here what I had hoped for, a heart in har- 
mony with God's heart, which seeks God alone. 
[235] 21 It is said that the pioneers who found 
Churches are usually saints; this thought so softens 
my heart that, although I see I am of but little use 


182 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.8 

que Dieu, les vertus, & les graces, & on y trouue tant 
& de fi solides confolations, que li ie pouuois acheter 
la Nouuelle France, en donnant tout le Paradis Ter- 
reflre, certainement ie Tacheterois. Mon Dieu qu'il 
fait bon eflre au lieu ou Dieu nous a mis de fa grace, 
veritablement i'ay trouue icy ce que i'auois efper6, 
vn coeur felon le coeur de Dieu, qui ne cherche que 
Dieu. 

[235] 21 On dit que les premiers qui fondent les 
Eglifes, d' ordinaire font faindts: cefte penf^e m'at- 
tendrit fi fort le coeur, que quoy que ie me voye icy 
fort inutile dans cefte fortunee Nouuelle France, fi 
faut-il, que i'auoiie que ie ne, me f9aurois defendre 
d'vne penfee qui me prelTe le coeur. Cupio impendi, 
& fuperimpendi pro vobis: Pauure Nouuelle France, ie 
defire me facrifier pour ton bien, & quand il me de- 
uroit coulter mille vies, moyennant que ie puilTe 
aider k fauuer vne feule ame, ie feray trop heureux, 
& ma vie tres bien employee. 

22 Ie ne f9ay pas que c'eft d'entrer en Paradis, 
mais ie fgaybien qu'en ce monde, il eft mal-aife de 
trouuer vne ioye plus exceffiue & furabondante, que 
celle que i'ay fentie entrant en la Nouuelle France, 
& y difant la premiere MelTe, le iour de la [236] Vifi- 
tation. Ie vous affeure que ce fut bien voirement le 
iour de la Vifitation. Par la bonte de Dieu & de no- 
ftre Dame, il me fembla que c'eftoit Noel pour moy, 
& que i'allois renaiftre en vne vie toute nouuelle, & 
vne vie de Dieu. 

23 Le mal de la mer qui m'auoit donn6 de la 
peine flottant fur la marine, fut bien-toft efface par 
le bien du Ciel, & la ioye que Dieu refpandit en mon 
ame touchant le Cap Breton. En rencontrant nos 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i635 183 

here in this fortunate New France, yet I must con- 
fess that I cannot forbid one thought which presses 
upon my heart. Cupio impendi, et superimpendi pro 
vobis : Poor New France, I desire to sacrifice myself 
for thy welfare ; and though it should cost me a thou- 
sand lives, if thus I can aid in saving a single soul, I 
shall be too happy, and my life will be well spent. 

22 I do not know what it is to enter Paradise; but I 
know well that in this world it is difficult to find a 
greater and fuller joy than I had upon entering New 
France, and saying the first Mass here on the day of 
the [236] Visitation. I assure you that this was very 
truly the day of the Visitation. Through the good- 
ness of God and of our Lady, it seemed to me that it 
was Christmas for me, and that I was going to be re- 
bom into an altogether new life, and a life of God. 

23 The seasickness which troubled me, when sail- 
ing upon the ocean, was soon effaced by the mercy of 
Heaven and the joy that God shed in my soul, upon 
landing at Cape Breton. In meeting our Fathers it 
seemed to me I was embracing Angels from Par- 
adise ; I could not refrain from exclaiming, ' * Ah ! 
what will it be when we shall enter Paradise, and 
when God and the Angels shall receive a beautiful 
soul, which will emerge from the tempests of the 
wretched life that we lead upon earth ! 

24 I had thought that miracles were necessary to 
convert these flying Savages; but I was mistaken, 
[237] for the real miracles of New France are the fol- 
lowing: To do them much good, and endure many 
pains ; to complain to God alone ; to judge oneself un- 
worthy, and to feel one's uselessness. He who has 
these virtues will perform miracles greater than mir- 
acles, and will become a Saint. Indeed, it is harder 


184 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.8 

Peres, il me fembla d'embraffer des Anges du Para- 
dis, ie ne me pu empefcher de crier, helas ! que fera- 
ce quand on entrera en Paradis, & que Dieu & les 
Anges receuront vne belle ame, qui fortira des orages 
de la vie miferable qu'on mene fur la terre. 

24 I'auois creu qu'il falloit des miracles pour con- 
uertir ces Sauuages volans ; mais ie me fuis tromp6, 
[237] car les miracles propres de la Nouuelle France 
font ceux-cy. Leur faire bien du bien, & fouffrir 
bien des maux, ne s'en plaindre qu'k Dieu, s'en 
eftimer indigne, & fe tenir pour fort inutile. Qui- 
conque aura ces vertus, fera des miracles plus grands 
que les miracles, & deuiendra vn Saindt. En effedt 
il y a bien plus de peine de s'humilier profondement 
deuant Dieu & les hommes, & de s'aneantir, que de 
refufciter vn mort; car cela ne coufte que Ie dire, 
quand on a Ie don des miracles, & pour s'humilier 
comme il faut "k vray dire, il y faut la vie toute en- 
tiere d'vn homme. 

25 Nous auons efte fort eftonnez & infiniment re- 
lioiiys, voyant que dans nos petites cabanes, & dans 
nos Habitations la difcipline Religieufe y eftoit auffi 
exadtement gardee, qu'aux plus grands Colleges [238] 
de la France, & que la ferueur interieure eft d'autant 
plus grande, que I'exterieur femble y eflre plus fu- 
iette ^ beaucoup de diuertiff ements : c'eft I'ordinaire 
de la bonte infinie de Dieu, qui felon les befoins 
multiplie la benedic5tion de f es graces ; & en effedt k 
mefure qu'vn feruiteur de Dieu s'abandonne a fa 
faindte conduite, noftre Seigneur s'eflargit aulTi da- 
uantage, & refpand plus abodamment la pluye pre- 
tieufe de fes graces. 

26 Ces pauures Barbares ont couftume de nomer 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ib35 185 

to humiliate oneself deeply before God and men, and 
to annihilate oneself, than to raise the dead ; for that 
needs only the word, if one has the gift of miracles, 
but to humiliate oneself as one ought to, — truly, that 
requires a man's whole life. 

25 We were greatly astonished and infinitely glad 
to see in our little cabins, and in our Settlements, the 
Religious discipline as strictly observed as in the 
largest Colleges [238] of France, and that the internal 
fervor is so much the greater as the external seems 
to be subjected to so many diversions; it is God's or- 
dinary practice, in his infinite goodness, that accord- 
ing to our needs he multiplies the gift of his graces ; 
and, in truth, to the same extent as a servant of God 
gives himself up to his holy guidance, our Lord ex- 
pands so much the more and sheds more abundantly 
the precious shower of his graces. 

26 These poor Barbarians are accustomed to call all 
the Priests, Patriarchs,"** and they show great respect 
to men of integrity. They promise to bring us their 
children, when they are sick unto death, to be bap- 
tized; in fact, some have been baptized who died 
shortly after baptism. They are indeed the elect, be- 
yond a doubt, and so blessed as to go forth from Bar- 
barism [239] and enter immediately into Paradise. 
If one should never do anything else, what happiness 
to have been instrumental in placing these little souls 
among the elect ! 

27 One meets men so devoid of every notion of Reli- 
gion, that one cannot find a name to make them under- 
stand God; we have to call him the great Captain of 
men, he who feeds all the world, he who lives on high. 
We do all we can ; what obligations will they be un- 
der to those who instruct them and who try to make 


186 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 8 

tous les Preflres Patriarches, & portent grand refpedl 
aux hommes vertueux. lis nous promettent de nous 
apporter leurs enfans, quand ils feront malades k la 
mort, pour les baptifer; en eflfedt on en a baptif6 
quelques vns qui font morts peu apres le baptefme. 
Ils font bien predeftinez k bon efcient, & bien-heu- 
reux de fortir de la Barbarie, [239] & entrer auffi toft 
dans le Paradis. Quand on ne feroit iamais autre 
chofe, quel bon-heur d'auoir eft6 inftrument de la 
predeftination de ces petites ames. 

27 On en trouue de fi ignorants de toute forte de 
Religion, qu'on ne f9auroit trouuer vn nom pour leur 
faire entendre Dieu ; il le faut appeller le grand Capi- 
taine des hommes ; celuy qui nourrit tout le monde ; 
celuy qui demeure Ik haut. On fait tout ce qu'on 
pent : quelle obligation auront-ils k ceux qui les in- 
ftruifent, & qui s'efforcent de leur faire cognoiftre vn 
Dieu, pour le feruir le moins mal qu'ils pourront. 
La il ne faut pas grande dodtrine, mais vne profonde 
humilite, vne patience inuincible, & vne charite Apo- 
flolique pour gaigner ces pauures Sauuages, qui d'ail- 
leurs ont vn bon fens commun. Que fl vne fois on 
commence a les [240] gaigner, le fruidt fera inefli- 
mable. 

28 La penfee de faindt Francois Xauier nous pafle 
mille fois par I'efprit, & a vn grand pouuoir. Si les 
hommes du fiecle pour auoir des peaux de Caftor, de 
la moulue, & ie ne fjay quelles denrees, n'appre- 
hendent ny les orages de la mer, ny les Sauuages de 
la terre, ny la mer, ny la mort; quelle horrible con- 
fufion feroit-ce k des feruiteurs de Dieu, d'apprehen- 
der cela, ou quelques petits trauaux, pour tafcher 
de gaigner des ames rachetees auec le fang pretieux 


1634-36] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, tdjs 187 

them know a God in order to serve him as well as 
they can. Here deep learning is not needed, but 
a profound humility, an unconquerable patience, and 
an Apostolic charity, to win these poor Savages, who 
in other respects have good common sense. And if 
we begin once to gain [240] them, the fruit will be 
incalculable. 

28 A thousand times the thought of saint Fran9ois 
Xavier passes through our minds, and has great pow- 
er over us. If the men of the world, in order to have 
Beaver skins, and codfish, and I know not what com- 
modities, do not fear either the storms on the sea, or 
the Savages on land, or the sea, or death ; how dread- 
ful will be the confusion of God's servants for being 
afraid of these things, or of a few little hardships, in 
trying to win souls ransomed by the precious blood 
of Jesus Christ, and empurpled by his blood of ines- 
timable value? On the day of judgment will not 
these petty traders and fishers of cod rise up to 
condemn us, if they take more pains to gain a piece 
of money than we do to help save the Savages ? This 
thought stings our hearts so [241] deeply that we do 
not feel our sufferings, or if we feel them we do not 
dare to complain of them. 

29 There are many persons in France who are of no 
use, and have nothing to do there; they are scholars 
and that is all, and that is of no use in the Church of 
God ; alas ! in New France these men would be Apos- 
tles, if they would come here to use their talents; 
less wisdom, and more humility and zeal, would per- 
form miracles here, and it is possible they would gain 
more in one year than they will do in a lifetime in 
France. 

30 Experience shows us that those of the Society 


188 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 8 

de lefus-Chrift, & empourpr^es de fon fang de va- 
leur ineftimable? Se leueront-ils point au iour du 
iugement cotre nous ces petits fadteurs, & pefcheurs 
de moulue pour nous condamner, s'ils prennent plus 
de peine pour gaigner vne piece d'argent, que nous 
pour aider a fauuer les Sauuages. Cefte penfee pique 
fi fort nos [241] coeurs, qu'on ne fent point fon mal, 
ou fi on le fent on ne s'en oferoit plaindre. 

29 II y a mille perfonnes en France qui font fort 
inutiles, & qui n'ont nul employ; ils font f9auans, 
& puis c'eft tout, & cela ne fert de rien du tout k 
I'Eglife de Dieu; helas! en la Nouuelle France ce fe- 
roient des Apoftres s'ils vouloient y venir employer 
leur talent; moins de f^auoir & plus d'humilite & de 
zele, feroit miracle icy, & ils gagneroient polTible 
plus en vn an, qu'ils ne feront toute leur vie en 
France. 

30 L'experience nous fait voir, que ceux de la Com- 
pagnie qui viennent en la Nouuelle France, il faut 
qu'ils y foient appellez par vne vocation fpeciale 
& bien forte; que ce foit gens morts & a foy, & au 
monde; homes veritablement Apoftoliques, qui ne 
cherchent que Dieu, & le [242] falut des ames, qui 
aiment d 'amour la Croix, & la mortification; qui ne 
s'efpargnent point; qui fgachent fupporter les tra- 
uaux de la mer & de la terre, & qui defirent plus la 
conuerfion d'vn Sauuage, que 1' Empire de toute 1' Eu- 
rope; qui ayent des coeurs de Dieu, & tous remplis 
de Dieu ; qui foient comme des petits lean Baptiftes, 
criant parmy ces deferts & ces forefls, comme des 
voix de Dieu, qui appellent tous ces pauures Sau- 
uages k recognoiftre lefus-Chrift; en fin que ce foient 
des hommes qui ont tous leurs contentemens dans 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6j5 189 

who come to New France should be impelled to it by a 
special and very forcible call ; persons who are dead 
to themselves and to the world ; men truly Apostolic, 
who seek God alone, and the [242] salvation of souls, 
who love with real love the Cross and self-mortifica- 
tion ; who do not spare themselves ; who can endure 
the hardships of the sea and of the land, and who de- 
sire the conversion of a Savage more than the Empire 
of all Europe ; who have Godlike hearts, all filled with 
God; who are like little John the Baptists, crying 
through these deserts and forests like voices from God, 
which summon all these poor Savages to acknowl- 
edge Jesus Christ; in fine let them be men whose 
sole satisfaction is in God and to whom suffering is 
the greatest delight. That is what experience shows 
us every day ; but it is also true that it seems as if 
God shed the dew of his grace much more abundant- 
ly upon this New France than upon the old, [243] and 
that the internal consolations and the Divine infusions 
are much stronger here, and hearts more on fire. 
Novit Dominiis qui sunt ejus. But it belongs to God 
alone to choose those whom he will use, and whom 
he favors by taking them into New France, to make 
saints of them. Saint Fran9ois Xavier said that 
there was an Island in the Orient which was quite 
capable of making a person lose his sight, by crying 
from excessive joy of the heart ; I know not if our 
New France resembles this Island, but we know from 
experience that,, if any one here gives himself up in 
earnest to God, he runs the risk of losing his sight, 
his life, his all, and with great joy, by dint of hard 
work ; it belongs only to those who are here and who 
enjoy God to speak from experience. 
[244] 3 1 We clearly recognize that it must be Heav- 


190 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 8 

Dieu, & aufquels les fouffrances foient leurs plus 
cheres delices. Voila ce que 1' experience nous fait 
veoir tous les iours : mais auffi il eft vray, qu'il femble 
que Dieu refpande bien plus abondamment les rof6es 
de fes graces fur cette Nouuelle France, que fur la 
vieille, [243] & que les cofolations interieures, & les 
Diuines infufions y font bien plus folides, & les coeurs 
bien plus embrafez. Nouit Dominus qui funt eius. 
Mais il n'appartient qu'a Dieu de faire le choix de 
ceux dont il fe veut feruir, & aufquels il fait cette 
mifericorde de les amener en la Nouuelle France, 
pour en faire des faindts. Saindt Fran§ois Xauier 
difoit qu'il y auoit vne Ifle en Orient, qui eftoit bien 
propre pour faire perdre la veue ^ force de plorer de 
ioye excefTiue du coeur ; ie ne f9ay fi noftre Nouuelle 
France reffemble point cefte Ifle : mais nous experi- 
metons que fi quelqu'vn icy s'abandonne k Dieu ^ 
bon efcient, il court hazard d'y perdre la veue, & la 
vie, & tout, & auec grande ioye h. force de trauailler; 
il n'appartient qu'^ ceux qui y font, & qui gouflent 
Dieu, d'en parler par experience. 
[244] 31 Nous recognoilTons euidemmet, qu'il faut 
que ce foit le Ciel qui conuertiffe la terre de la Nou- 
uelle Frace, & que nous ne somes pas affez forts. 
Nous ne craignos rien tat, fmon que nos imperfecftios 
n'empefchet la couerfio de ces pauures Sauuages; 
c'eft pourquoy nous auos tous eft6 d'auis de recourir 
au Ciel, & k la tres faindte Vierge Mere de Dieu, par 
laquelle Dieu a couftume de faire ce qui ne fe pent 
faire, & conuertir les coeurs les plus abandonnez. A 
cet effet nous auons refolu de faire vn vceu fort folem- 
nel, dont voicy la teneur. 

Mon Dieu & mon Sauueur lefus, quoy que nos pe- 


1634-36] LE JE UNE' S RELA TION, 1633 191 

en which shall convert the land of New France, and 
that we are not strong enough. We fear nothing so 
much as that our imperfections may prevent the con- 
version of these poor Savages ; that is why we have 
all been minded to have recourse to Heaven and to 
the very holy Virgin, Mother of God, through whom 
God is accustomed to do what seems impossible, and to 
convert the hearts of the most abandoned. To this 
end, we have resolved to make a very solemn vow, 
of which the following is the purport : — 

My God and my Savior Jesus, although our sins 
ought to banish us from your presence, yet being in- 
spired with a desire to honor you and your very Holy 
Mother, urged by a wish to see ourselves in the faith- 
ful correspondence [to your graces] that you desire in 
your servants, wishing [245] besides to see you ac- 
knowledged and adored by these poor people : We 
promise and make a vow unto you and also to the very 
holy Virgin your Mother, and to her glorious Spouse 
St. Joseph, to celebrate twelve times in twelve suc- 
ceeding months the sacrifice of the Holy Mass, for 
those who are Priests; and for the others to say 
twelve times the Crown or Chaplet of the Virgin, in 
honor of and as an act of grace for her immaculate 
Conception, and all to fast the day before this festi- 
val; promising you further that, if a permanent 
Church or Chapel is erected in this country within 
this specified time, we will have it dedicated to God 
under the title of the immaculate Conception, if it is 
in our power, — all this, to secure by the goodness of 
Our Lord the conversion of these Peoples, through 
the mediation of his holy Mother and of her holy 
Spouse. In [246] the meantime receive, O Empress 
of Angels and of men, the hearts of these poor aban- 


192 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 8 


Chez nous doiuent efloigner de voflre prefence, fi eft- 
ce qu'epris d'vne affedtion de vons honorer & voflre 
tres-S^^ Mere, pouffez d'vn defir de nous veoir dans 
la fidelle correfpondance que vous defirez de vos fer- 
uiteurs, fouhaittas en [245] outre de vous veoir re- 
coneu & adore de ces pauures peuples : Nous vous 
promettons & faifons voeu, comme auffi k la tres- 
faindte Vierge voflre Mere, & k so glorieux Efpoux 
S. lofeph, de celebrer douze fois es douze mois fui- 
uant le facrifice de la S'^ Meffe, pour ceux qui font 
Preflres ; & pour les autres de reciter douze fois la 
Couronne ou le Chappellet de la Vierge en I'honneur 
& en adlion de grace de fon immaculee Coception, & 
de ieufner tons la veille de cefte f efle : vous promet- 
tans en outre que fi on erige quelque Eglife ou Chap- 
pelle flable das ces pais, dans le cours de ce teps li- 
mite, que nous la feros dedier a Dieu fous le tiltre 
de I'immaculee Coception, fi cela eft en noftre pou- 
uoir, le tout pour obtenir de la bote de N. S. la con- 
uerfion de ces Peuples, par I'entremife de fa faindte 
Mere, & de fon fainct Efpoux. Receuez [246] ce- 
pendant, 6 I'Emperiere des Anges & des hommes, les 
cceurs de ces pauures Barbares abandonnez, que nous 
vous prefentons par les mains de voftre glorieux Ef- 
poux, & de vos fidelles feruiteurs S. Ignace & S. 
Francois Xauier, & de tous les Anges Gardiens de 
ces miferables contrees, pour les offrir a voftre Fils, 
afin qu'il leur donne fa cognoiffance, & leur applique 
le merite de fon pretieux fang. Ainfi foit-il. 

Dieu par fon infinie bont6 nous rende dignes de 
cette excellente vocation, pour dignement cooperer k 
fa grace, au profit de ces pauures Sauuages. 


1634 - 36] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 163s 193 

doned Barbarians that we present to you through the 
hands of your glorious Spouse and of your faithful 
servants, St. Ignace and St. Fran9ois Xavier, and of 
all the Guardian Angels of these wretched countries, 
to offer them to your Son, that he may give them 
knowledge of himself and apply to them the efficacy 
of his precious blood. Amen, 

May God in his infinite goodness render us worthy 
of this noble calling, worthily to cooperate with his 
grace, to the benefit of these poor Savages. 


194 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.8 


Extraid du Priuilege du Roy. 

PAR Grace & Priuilege du Roy il eft permis k 
Sebaftien Cramoify, Marchand Libraire lure 
en rVniuerfite de Paris, & Imprimeur ordi- 
naire du Roy, d'imprimer ou faire imprimer vn liure 
intitule, Relation de ce qui s eji paj^d en la Nouuelle France 
en Vann^e mil fix cens trente cinq. Enuoyee au R. P. Pro- 
uincial de la Compagnie de lefus en la Prouince de France. 
Par le Pere Paul le leune de la me/me Compagnie, Supe- 
rieur de la Refidence de Kebec : & ce pendant le temps & 
efpace de cinq annees confecutiues. Auec defenfes 
k tous Libraires & Imprimeurs d'imprimer ou faire 
imprimer ledit liure, fous pretexte de defguifement, 
ou changement qu'ils y pourroient faire, ^ peine de 
confifcation, & de I'amende portee par ledit Priui- 
lege. Donne k Paris le douziefme lanuier, mil fix 
cens trente fix. 

Par le Roy en fon Confeil. 

ViCTON. 


1634-36] LE/EUNE'S RELATION, i6ss 195 


Extract from the Royal License. 

BY the Grace and License of the King, permis- 
sion is granted to Sebastien Cramoisy, Book- 
seller under Oath in the University of Paris, 
and Printer in ordinary to the King, to print or to 
have printed a book entitled. Relation de ce qui s est 
passd en la Nouvelle France en V ann^e mil six cens trente 
cinq. Envoy^e au R. P. Provincial de la Compagnie de 
Jesus en la Province de France. Par Ic Pere Paul le Jcune 
de la mesme Compagnie, Superieur de la Residence de Ke- 
bec : and this during the time and space of five consec- 
utive years. Prohibiting all Booksellers and Print- 
ers to print or to have printed the said book, under 
pretext of disguise or change that they might make 
therein, on pain of confiscation of the copies, and of 
the fine provided by the said License. Given at 
Paris on the twelfth of January, one thousand six 
hundred and thirty-six. 

By the King in Council. 

ViCTON. 


196 LES RELATIONS DBS j£SUITES [Vol.8 


Approbation. 

NOVS ESTIENNE BiNET Prouincial de la Compa- 
gnie de Iesvs en la Prouince de France. Sni- 
uant le Priuilege qui nous a efte octroye par 
les Roys Tres-Chrefliens Henry III. le lo. May 1583. 
Henry IV. le 10. Decembre 1605. & Louys XIII. h. 
prefent regnant le 14. Feurier 16 12. par lequel il eft 
defendu a tons Libraires de n'imprimer aucun Liure 
de ceux qui font compofez par quelqu vn de noftre 
dite Compagnie, fans permiffion des Superieurs d'i- 
celle : Permettons k Sebaftien Cramoif y Marchand Li- 
braire lure a Paris, & Imprimeur ordinaire du Roy, 
de pouuoir imprimer pour dix ans la Relation de ce qui 
s'ejl paJJ^ en la Nouuelle France, en V ann^e 1635. ^ nous 
enuoyee par le Pere Paul le leune de noftre mefme 
Compagnie, Superieur de la Refidence de Kebec. 
En foy dequoy nous auons fign6 la prefente k Paris 
ce quinziefme lanuier 1635. 

Sign6, 

E. BiNET. 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, rb35 197 


Approbation. 

WE, ESTIENNE BiNET, Provincial of the Society 
of Jesus in the Province of France, in accord- 
ance with the License that has been granted 
to us by the Most Christian Kings, Henry III. May 
loth, 1583, Henry IV. December loth, 1605, and 
Louys XIII. now reigning February 14th, 1612, by 
which all Booksellers are prohibited from printing 
any of the Books which are composed by any one of 
our said Society, without the permission of the Su- 
periors thereof: We permit Sebastien Cramoisy, 
Bookseller under Oath in Paris, and Printer in ordi- 
nary to the King, to print for ten years the Relation 
de ce qui s' est pass^ en la Nouvelle France en V ann^e i6j^, 
sent to us by Father Paul le Jeune of our same So- 
ciety, Superior of the Residence of Kebec. In testi- 
mony whereof we have signed the present at Paris, 
this fifteenth of January, 1635. 

Signed, 

E. Binet. 


XXVI 

Le Jeune's Relation. 1636 

Paris: SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, 1637 


Source : Title-page and text reprinted from the copy of 
the first issue (H. 65), in Lenox Library. 

The document consists of two parts ; the first by Le Jeune, 
as superior, the second by Brebeuf. In the present volume 
we give chaps, i.-ii., of Part I.; the remainder of Part l. 
will occupy Volume IX. In Volume X., will appear all of 
Part II. 


•■naamexiPTw:: 


'" "Ih 


rRELATION 

DE CE Q^yi S'EST PA.SSE' 

EN LA 

NOVVELLE FRANCE 

EN l'a N N EE l6j6. 
Enuoyce au 

R. PERE PROVINCIAL 

dc la Compagnie *dc Iesvs 

^ en la Prouinccdc France. 

i>Ar U r . f .?/.'/ /^* U^ne as U mefrne Cowfagnk^ 



A PARIS, 

r T< AS { I F N C R A M o 1 t. V Inu.uinicur 
' ■ x.\t du Rov, rue rauict lacqucs , 

'.: . p c;. X X X V 1 1 

' J V lLh<J L Uy /, V ^' 


RELATION 

OF WHAT OCCURRED 
IN 

NEW FRANCE 

IN THE YEAR 1636. 
Sent to the 

REVEREND FATHER PROVINCIAL 

of the Society of Jesus in the 
Province of France. 

By FatJur Paul le Jeiine of the same Society, 
Superior of the Residence of K^bec. 


PARIS, 

S E B A s T I E N C R A M o I s y, Printer in ordinary 

to the King, rue sainct Jacques, 

at the Sign of the Storks. 

M. DC. XXXVII. 
BY ROYAL LICENSE. 


204 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.8 


Extraict du Priuilege du Roy. 

PAR Grace & Priuilege du Roy il eft permis ^ 
Sebaftien Cramoify, Marchand Libraire lure 
en rVniuerfite de Paris, & Imprimeur ordi- 
naire du Roy, d'imprimer ou faire imprimer vn Liure 
intitule, Relation de ce qui s'eji pajjfd en la Nouuelle 
France en V ann^e mil fix cens trente-fix. Enuoy^e au R. 
P. Prouincial de la Compagnie de le/us en la Prouince de 
France. Par le Pere Paul le leune de la me/me Compa- 
gnie, Superieur de la Refidence de K^bec : & ce pendant 
le temps & efpace de dix annees confecutiues. Auec 
defenfes a tons Libraires & Imprimeurs d'imprimer, 
ou faire imprimer ledit Liure, fous pretexte de des- 
guifement, ou changement qu'ils y pourroient faire, 
h, peine de confif cation, & de I'amende port^e par le- 
dit Priuilege. Donne a Paris, le 22. Decembre, 1636. 
Par le Roy en fon Confeil, 

ViCTON. 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 205 


Extract from the Royal License. 

BY the Grace and License of the King, permis- 
sion is granted to Sebastien Cramoisy, Book- 
seller under Oath in the University of Paris 
and Printer in ordinary to the King, to print or to 
have printed a Book entitled, Relation de ce qui s' est 
pass^ en la Nouvelle France en V ann^e mil six cens trente- 
six. Envoy^e an R. P. Provincial de la Compagnie de 
Jesus en la Province de France. Par le Pere Paul lejeune 
de la mesnie Compagnie , Stiperieur de la Residence de K^- 
bec : and this during the time and space of ten consec- 
utive years. Prohibiting all Booksellers and Print- 
ers to print or to have printed the said Book under 
pretext of disguise or change that they might make 
therein, on penalty of confiscation, and of the fine 
provided by said License. Given at Paris on the 22nd 
of December, 1636. 

By the King in Council, 

ViCTON. 


206 LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol. 8 


Approbation. 

NOVS EsTiENNE BiNET Prouincial de la Compa- 
gnie de I E s v s en la Prouince de France. Sui- 
uant le Priuilege qui nous a efl6 octroy e par 
les Roys Tres-Chreftiens Henry III. le lo. May 1583. 
Henry IV. le 10. Decembre 1605. & Louys XIII. ^ 
prefent regnant le 14. Feurier 1612. par lequel il eft 
defendu k tons Libraires de n'imprimer aucun Liure 
de ceux qui font compofez par quelqu'vn de noftre 
dite Compagnie, fans permiffion des Superieurs d'i- 
celle: Permettons k Sebaftien Cramoify Marchand 
Libraire lure k Paris, & Imprimeur ordinaire du Roy, 
de pouuoir imprimer pour dix ans la Relation de ce 
qui s' ejl paj^d en la Nouuelle France, en V ann^e 1636. k 
nous enuoyee par le Pere Paul le leune de noftre 
mefme Compagnie, Superieur de la Refidence de 
Kebec. En foy dequoy nous auons fign6 la prefente 
k Paris ce quinzieme Decembre 1636. 

Sign6, 

E. BiNET. 


1634-36J LE JEUNE'S RELATION, ibjt 207 


Approbation. 

WE, EsTiENNE BiNET, Provincial of the Society 
of J E s u s in the Province of France, in ac- 
cordance with the License granted to us by 
the Most Christian Kings, Henry III. May loth, 1583, 
Henry IV. December loth, 1605, and Louys XIII. 
now reigning, February 14th, 16 12, by which all 
Booksellers are forbidden to print any Book of those 
composed by any one of our said Society, without 
permission of the Superiors thereof — permit Sebas- 
tien Cramoisy, Bookseller under Oath at Paris and 
Printer in ordinary to the King, to print for ten years 
the Relation de ce qui s' est pass^ en la Nouvelle France 
en r annexe 1636, sent to us by Father Paul le Jeune of 
our same Society, Superior of the Residence of Kebec. 
In testimony whereof we have signed the present at 
Paris, this fifteenth of December, 1636. 
Signed, 

E. BiNET. 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 8 


Table des Chapitres contenus en ce Liure. 

RELATION de ce qui s'eji paj^e en la Nouuelle 
France, en V annie 1636. . page i. 

Chapitre I. Des fcntimens d' affection quont 
plufieurs per/onnes de nierite pour la Nou- 
uelle France. . . . .7. 

Chap. II. Des Sauuages baptifez cette armde, & de 

quelques enterremens. . . .23. 

Chap. III. Continuation de la mef me matiere. . 51. 
Chap. IV. Continuation des Sauuages baptifez. 73. 

Chap. V. De la mort niiferable de quelques Sau- 
uages. ..... 97. 

Chap. VI. Des efperanccs de la conuerjion de ce 

Peuple. . . . . .110. 

Chap. VII. De quelques particularitez remarqua- 

bles en ces quartiers. . . .128. 

Chap. VIII. De V ejiat prefent de la Nouuelle 

France, fur le gravid Fleuue de S. Laurens. 144. 
Ch. IX. R^ponfes h quelques propofitions qui m ont 

efi^ faites de France, . . .157. 

Chap. X. Quelques aduis pour ceux qui defirent 

paffer en la Nouuelle France. . . 183. 

Chap. XL ou, Journal des chofes qui n ont peu 

eflre rapport^es fouz les Chapitres precedens. 189 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 209 


Table of Chapters contained in this Book. 

RELATION of what occurred in New France 
in the year 1636. . . page i. 

Chapter I. The sentiments of affection that 
many persons of merit entertain for New 
France. . . . - ?• 

Chap. II. Of the Savages baptized this year, and 

some burials. . . . .23. 

Chap. III. Continuation of the same subject. 51. 

Chap. IV. B apt is7ns of Savages, continued. . 73. 

Chap. V. Of the wretched death of some Savages. 97. 
Chap. VI. Of the hopes of converting this People, no. 
Chap. VII. Of some remarkable peculiarities of 

these regions. . . . .128. 

Chap. VIII. Of the present condition of New 

France on the great St. Lawrence River . 144. 
Ch. IX. Answers to some propositions submitted to 

me from France. . . . -IS?. 

Chap. X. Some advice to those who wish to cross 

over into New France. . . .183. 

Chap. XI. or, A Journal of the things which could 

not be related in the preceding Chapters. 1 89. 


210 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 


Relation de ce qvi s'eft paffe dans le Pays des 
Hurons en I'annee 16^6. 


E 


NUO YEE a K^bec au R. P. Paid le leiine, Su- 
per ieur de la MiJ^ion de la Compagnie de 
I E S V S , en la Nouuelle France. page 

PREMIERE PARTIE. 


Chap. I. De la Conner Jion, Bapte/me & heureufe 
niort de quelques Hurons^ & de V ejiat du Chri- 
Jlianifme en cctte Barbarie. . . 4. 

Chap. II. Contenant felon V ordre des temps, les aii- 
tres chafes remarquables aduenues pendant cette 
annde. . . • • .21. 

Chap. III. Aduertijfentent d' importance pour ceux 
quil plairoit ci Dicu d'appeller en la Nouuelle 
France, & principalement au Pays des Hurons. 58. 

Chap. IV. De la langue des Hurons. . . 79- 

SECONDE PARTIE. 

DE LA CREANCE, DES MCEURS, & DES COUSTUMES 
DES HURONS. 

Chap. I. Ce que penfent les Hurons de Ieur origine. 85. 

Chap. II . Quel efl le fentiment des Hurons touchant 
la nature & V eflat de Fame, tant en cette vie, 
qii apres la mort. . • • .96. 

Chap. III. Que les Hurons recognoiffent quelque 
diuinit^: de leurs fuperflitions, & de la creance 


1634 - 36] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TJON, 1636 211 


Relation of what occurred in the Country of the 
Hurons in the year 1636. 

SENT to K^bec to Reverend Father Paullejeune, 
Superior of the Mission of the Society of 
Jesus, in New France. . page i . 

PART FIRST. 

Chap. I. Of the Conversion, Baptism, and happy 
death of some Hurons ; and on the condition of 
Christianity amid this Barbarism. . . 4. 

Chap. II. Containing in the order of time the other 
remarkable things that happened during this 
y^ar. , . . . .21. 

Chap. III. Important advice for those whom it 
shall please God to call to New France, and es- 
pecially to the Country of the Hurons. . 58. 
Chap. IV. Of the language of the Hurons. . 79. 

PART SECOND. 

ON THE BELIEF, MANNERS, AND CUSTOMS OF THE 
HURONS. 

Chap. I. What the Hurons think of their origin. 85. 

Chap. II. The ideas of the Hurons regarding the 
nature and condition of the soul, both in this 
life and after death. . . . 96. 

Chap. III. That the Hurotis recognize some divin- 
ity ; of their superstitions, and their faith in 


212 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.8 

quHls ont aux fonges. . . . io8. 
Chap. IV. Des fejiins, dan/eSy ieux de plat, & de 

croffe, de ce qu'ils appellent Ononharoia. 120. 

Chap. V. S'il y a des Sorciers aux Hurons. . 132. 
Chap VI. De la police des Hurons, & de leur gou- 

uernement. .... 145. 
Chap. VII. De Vordre que les Hurons tiennent en 

leurs Con/eils. . . • • I75« 
Chap. VIII. Des ceremonies qu'ils gardent en leur 

/epulture, & de leur deiiil. . . . 1 84. 

Ch3.^.lX.DelafeJie/olemnelled€sMorts. 193. 


1634 - 38] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1636 213 

dreams. . . . . .108. 

Chap. IV. Concerning feasts, dances; the games 

of dish and crosse; what they call Ononharoia. 1 20. 
Chap. V. Whether there are Sorcerers among the 

Hurons. ..... 132. 

Chap. VI, Of the polity of the Hurons, and their 

government. .... 145, 

Chap. VII. Of the order the Hurons observe in 

their Councils. . . . .175, 

Chap. VIII. Of the ceremonies they observe in their 

burials and mourning. . . . 184. 

Chap. IX. Of the solemn feast of the Dead. 193. 


214 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.8 


[I] Relation de ce qui s'efl paffe en la Novvelle 
France, en I'annee 1636. 

MON Reverend Pere, 
Puis qu'il faut payer le tribut annuel, 
qu'exige de nous, non feulement V. R. mais 
auffi vn grand nombre de perfonnes de vertu, de me- 
rite, & de condition, qui fe vont intereffant dans les af- 
faires de la Nouuelle France, comme dans celles de 
Dieu ; le commenceray par la ioye que noflre Seigneur 
a verf6 dans nos coeurs k I'arriu^e de la flotte. Quel- 
ques-vns efloient dans I'incertitude fi nous verrions 
cette ann^e des Vaiffeaux, k raifon des grands prepa- 
ratifs de guerre, qu'on faifoit en I'ancienne France: 
mais [2] les plus aduifez n'en pouuoient douter, 
comme ayans cognoilTance de I'affedtion du Roy en- 
uers fes nouuelles Terres, qui fe vont rendre I'vn 
des beaux fleurons de fa Couronne. N'ignorans pas 
d'ailleurs que Monfeigneur le Cardinal eftant le Chef 
de cette honnorable Compagnie, I'appuy des families 
qui paffent en ces contrees, le Pere de cette nouuelle 
Patrie, & le Genie puiffant, qui doit faire reiiffir fouz 
la faueur & I'authorite de fa Majefte, les deffeins, 
que Dieu a de la conuerfion de ce nouueau monde, 
ne manqueroit pas de faire cognoiflre, quelle place 
tient en fon coeur cette faincte entreprife. Vne autre 
apprehenfion nous tenoit entre la crainte & I'efpoir, 
fur le changement de Gouuerneur. Monfieur de 
Champlain nous ayant quitt6 en la derniere ann6e de 


1634-36] LEJEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 215 


[I] Relation of what occurred in New France, in 
the year 1636. 

MY Reverend Father, 
Since it is necessary to pay the annual trib- 
ute which is exacted from us not only by Your 
Reverence but also by many persons of virtue, merit, 
and rank, who continue to interest themselves in the 
affairs of New France as in those of God, I shall 
begin by referring to the joy with which our Lord 
filled our hearts on the arrival of the fleet. Some 
were doubtful whether we would see the Vessels this 
year, on account of the great preparations for war 
which were being made in old France ; ^^ but [2] those 
who were wisest could not doubt it, as knowing the 
affection of the King for his new Possessions, which 
are destined to become one of the bright jewels in 
his Crown ; and, moreover, not ignorant that Monsei- 
gneur the Cardinal,— being the Head of this honor- 
able Company, the support of families that come over 
to these lands, the Father of this new Country, and 
the powerful Genius who is to bring about, under the 
favor and authority of his Majesty, the designs of God 
for the conversion of this new world, — would not fail 
to show what place this holy undertaking holds in his 
heart. Another anxiety kept us between fear and 
hope, arising from the change of Governor. Mon- 
sieur de Champlain having left us in the last year of 
his Administration, to go to Heaven, we were anxious 
as to what zeal his successor would have for this in- 


216 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 

fon Gouuernement pour s'en aller au Ciel, nous 
eftions en fufpens, quel zele auroit fon fucceffeur 
pour cette Eglife naiffante. Mais les Nauires paroif- 
fans, toutes ces craintes fe font diflipees; le nombre 
des vailleaux nous a fait cognoiflre que les affaires 
de la Nouuelle France tiennent [3] rang dans les 
grands foins de I'Ancienne, & que les affections de 
Meffieurs de la Compagnie fe vont tons les iours aug- 
mentant, & les premieres actions de Monfieur de 
Montmagny noftre Gouuerneur, nous ont fait efpe- 
rer tout ce qu'on peut attendre d'vn efprit remply de 
piet6, de refolution, & de conduitte. On m'a dit au- 
trefois, que la premiere action que fit noftre grand 
Roy au moment de fa naiffance, fut vne augure de 
fa grande piete: car le premier vfage qu'il fit de fes 
mains innocentes fut de les ioindre, comme s'il euft 
voulu prier Dieu, & le premier mouuement de fes 
yeux luy porta la veue vers le ciel. Si les premieres 
actions font les prognoftiques des fuiuantes, nous 
auons dequoy benir Dieu en la perfonne de Monfieur 
de Montmagny, comme ie feray voir dans la fuitte de 
cette Relation. Eftant arriue deuant Kebec la nuict 
de la fainct Barnabe, il moiiilla I'ancre fans fe faire 
cognoiflre ; le lendemain matin nous eufmes aduis 
qu'il eftoit dans le Vaiffeau, que la nuict nous auoit 
cache ; nous def cendifmes fur le bord du grand Fleuue 
pour le receuoir ; le P. Pierre [4] Chaftellain, & le P. 
Charles Gamier etoient en fa compagnie : apres les 
coplimens ordinaires, nous le fuiuifmes droit k la 
Chapelle; en chemin ayant apperceu I'Arbre de no- 
fire falut, Voicy, dit-il, la premiere Croix que ie ren- 
contre fur le Pais, adorons le Crucifie en fon image ; 
11 fe iette ^ deux genoux, & k fon exemple, toute fa 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 217 

fant Church. But, when the Ships appeared, all these 
fears were dissipated; the number of the vessels 
showed us that the affairs of New France rank [3] 
among the chief concerns of the Mother country, and 
that the interest of the Gentlemen of the Company 
continues daily to increase ; and the first acts of Mon- 
sieur de Montmagny, our Governor, have made us 
hope everything that can be expected from a spirit 
filled with piety, with firmness, and with discretion.^ 
I was told once that the earliest act which our great 
King performed, at the time of his birth, was a pre- 
sage of his great piety ; for the first use he made of his 
innocent hands was to clasp them, as if he were try- 
ing to pray to God, and the first movement of his eyes 
directed his sight toward heaven. If first actions are 
prognostications of those to come, we have that for 
which to bless God in the person of Monsieur de 
Montmagny, as I shall show in the course of this Re- 
lation. Having arrived before Kebec on the night of 
saint Barnabas, he cast anchor without announcing 
himself ; the next morning, we had word that he was 
in the Vessel which the night had concealed from us. 
We went down to the shore of the great River to re- 
ceive him ; Father Pierre [4] Chastellain ^^ and Father 
Charles Gamier ^'^ were in his company. After the 
usual courtesies, we accompanied him at once to the 
Chapel ; on the way, perceiving the Tree of our salva- 
tion, " Here," said he, " is the first Cross that I en- 
counter in the Country ; let us adore the Crucified in 
his image." He throws himself upon his knees, as, 
following his example, do all his attendants, as well 
as all those who were coming to salute him. Thence 
he entered the Church, where we solemnly chanted 
the Te Deum, as well as the Prayers for our good 


218 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.8 

fuitte, comme auffi tons ceux qui le venoient faliier: 
de 1^ il entre dans TEglife, oti nous chantafmes fo- 
lemnellement le Te Deum, comme auffi les Prieres 
pour noftre bon Roy. A Tiffue de fon action de 
graces, & des loiianges que nous rendifmes a Dieu 
pour fa venue, Monfieur de Chafleaufort, qui tenoit 
la place de defunct Monfieur de Champlain, luy vient 
pref enter les clefs de la f orterelTe ; oii il fut receu par 
plufieurs falues de moufqueteries. & par le tonnerre 
de plufieurs canons. A peine eftoit-il entre, qu'on 
luy fit demander s'il auroit agreable d'eftre Parrain 
d'vn Sauuage, qui defiroit le Baptefme: Tres volon- 
tiers, dit-il, fe refioiiiiTant d'auoir ce bon-heur qu'k 
I'entr^e de fon Gouuernement il aidaft ^ ouurir les 
portes de I'Eglife h. vne pauure [5] ame, qui fe vou- 
loit ranger dans le bercail de lefus-Chrift : & afin que 
les Peres qui I'auoient accompagne, milTent la main 
k la moiffon, mettant pied ^ terre ; le P. qui auoit in- 
ftruit ce barbare, demande au P. Chaftellain, s'il ne 
feroit pas bien aife de donner commencement k fes 
actions en la Nouuelle France, par vn Baptefme. 
Dieu ! quel f entiment de ioye ne fit-il point paroiftre 
^ cette propofition ! Le voila tout difpofe, Monfieur 
le Gouuerneur fe tranfporte aux Cabanes de ces pau- 
ures barbares, fuiuy d'vne lefte Nobleffe. le vous 
laille "k penfer quel eflonnement h. ces Peuples de voir 
tant d'6carlate, tant de perfonnes bien faites fouz 
leurs toits d'6corce! quelle confolation recent ce 
pauure malade, quand on luy dit que le grand Capi- 
taine qui venoit d'arriuer vouloit luy donner nom, & 
eflre fon Parrain. Le Pere I'interroge derechef fur 
les myfteres de noftre creance, il r^pond, qu'il croit 
^ celuy qui a tout fait, & ^ fon fils lefus, comme aufll 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, J636 219 

King. At the conclusion of his act of thanksgiv- 
ing, and of the praises we rendered to God for his 
coming, Monsieur de Chasteaufort,^^ who filled the 
place of the late Monsieur de Champlain, came to 
present to him the keys of the fortress, where he was 
received with several volleys of musketry and the 
thunder of numerous cannon. Scarcely had he en- 
tered when one came to ask him if it would be agree- 
able to him to be Godfather to a Savage who desired 
Baptism. "Very willingly," said he, rejoicing in 
this good fortune, that, upon entering his Administra- 
tion, he could help open the doors of the Church to 
a poor [5] soul who wished to enter the sheepfold of 
Jesus Christ. That the Fathers who had accom- 
panied him might put their hands to the harvest at 
the moment of setting foot on land, the Father who 
had taught this barbarian asks Father Chastellain if 
he would not be glad to begin his labors in New 
France with a Baptism. O God! what a sentiment 
of joy he manifested at this proposal ! Behold him 
quite ready ! Monsieur the Governor proceeds to the 
Cabins of these poor barbarians, followed by a brisk 
retinue of Nobles. I leave you to imagine the aston- 
ishment of these People at seeing so much scarlet, so 
many elegant personages under their bark roofs! 
What comfort this poor sick man experienced when 
they told him that the great Captain who had just ar- 
rived wished to bestow a name upon him, and to be 
his Sponsor! The Father questions him anew upon 
the mysteries of our belief. He replies that he be- 
lieves in him who made all things, and in his son, 
Jesus, and also in the good Spirit ; that he is sorry he 
has offended him who made himself man, and who 
died for us; and that he greatly regrets [6] having 


220 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.8 

au bon Efprit ; qu'il eft f af ch6 d'auoir offenf^ celuy 
qui s'eft fait homme, & qui eft mort pour nous, bien 
marry [6] de I'auoir cogneu li tard. Monfieur le Gou- 
uerneur le nomma lofeph, S, I'honneur du fainct Ef- 
poux de la Vierge, Patron de la Nouuelle France, & 
le Pere le baptifa. Pendant le difner, car tout cecy 
fe paffa le matin, ce noble Parrain dit tout baut en 
bonne compagnie, qu'il auoit receu ce iour-lk le plus 
grand-honneur, & le plus fenfible contentement qu'il 
auroit pen fouhaitter en la Nouuelle France. Sont- 
ce pas Ik des fujets capables de nous r^ioiiir? Ce 
n'eft pas tout ; ce mefme iour parut vn Vaifleau com- 
mands par Monfieur de Courpon, qui nous rendit le 
P. Nicolas Adam, & noftre Frere Ambroife Cauuet. 
Ces entreueues en vn pais fi Sloigne de noftre Patrie, 
apres auoir trauerfe tant de mers, font fenfibles par 
fois aux yeux, auffi bien qu'au coeur. Noftre ioye 
ne fe tint pas-Ik, la quantity de families qui venoient 
groffir noftre Colonic, I'accreut notablement; celles 
entre autres de Monfieur de Repentigny, & de Mon- 
fieur de la Poterie, braues Gentilshommes, compo- 
fees de quarante cinq perfonnes. C'eftoit vn fujet 
ou il y auoit k loiier [7] Dieu, de voir en ces contrSes, 
des Damoifelles fort delicates, des petits enfans ten- 
drelets fortir d'vne prifon de bois, comme le iour fort 
des tenebres de la nuict, & ioiiir apres tout d'vne 
auffi douce fante, nonobftant toutes les incommoditez 
qu'on regoit dans ces maifons flotantes, comme fi on 
s'eftoit proumene au cours dans vn caroffe. Voila 
comme ce iour nous fut doublement vn iour de fefte 
& de rSioiiifTance : mais entrons en dif cours. le diftri- 
bueray tout ce que i'ay k dire cette ann6e en quelques 
Chapitres, que i'abregeray ou eftendray felon le loifir 
que Dieu m'en donnera. 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 221 

learned so late to know him. Monsieur the Governor 
named him Joseph, in honor of the holy Spouse of 
the Virgin, Patron of New France; and the Father 
baptized him. During dinner, for all this happened 
in the morning, this noble Godfather said aloud, in 
the presence of a distinguished company, that he had 
received that day the greatest honor and the most 
genuine satisfaction that he could have desired in 
New France. Are not these things that give us cause 
for rejoicing? This is not all; that same day ap- 
peared a Vessel commanded by Monsieur de Cour- 
pon,^ which brought to us Father Nicolas Adam* 
and our Brother Ambroise Cauvet.^ These meet- 
ings in a country so far from our Native Land, after 
having crossed so many seas, affect sometimes the 
eyes as well as the heart. Our joy did not end there. 
The number of families, which came over to increase 
our Colony, made it considerably larger. Among 
others, were those of Monsieur de Repentigny^" and 
of Monsieur de la Poterie,^ gallant Gentlemen, com- 
posed of forty-five individuals. It was a matter for 
which to praise [7] God, to see in this country deli- 
cate Maidens and little children of tenderest age come 
forth from a prison of wood, as the day comes forth 
from the darkness of night, — and enjoying, after all, 
as perfect health, notwithstanding the many hard- 
ships to which one is subjected in these floating habi- 
tations, as if they had been driving on the street in a 
carriage. See then how this day was for us doubly 
a day of festival and of rejoicing ; but let us begin 
our discourse. I will divide all I have to say this 
year into several Chapters, which I will shorten or 
extend according to the leisure which God shall grant 
me for it. 


222 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.8 


CHAPITRE PREMIER. 

DES SENTIMENS D'AFFECTION QU'ONT PLUSIEURS PER- 
SONNES DE MERITE POUR LA NOUUELLE FRANCE. 

IE ne ffay pas quel fuccez auront les affaires de la 
Nouuelle France, ny quand nous y verrons la 
porte pleinement ouuerte k I'Euangile: mais ie 
fjay [8] bien neantmoins, que c'eft Dieu qui conduit 
cette entreprife. La nature n'a pas les bras affez longs 
pour atteindre au point, oti elle eft paruenue; elle 
ayme trop fes interefts fenlibles, pour reiinir tant de 
coeurs, & tant d'affections k la pourfuitte d'vn bien, 
qu'elle ne cognoit pas. Fuir fes parens, & fes amis, 
abandonner fes cognoiffances, fortir de fa patrie fi 
douce, & li polie ; paffer les mers, defier 1' Ocean, & fes 
tempeftes, facrifier fa vie aux fouffrances, quitter les 
biens prefens, pour fe letter dans des efperances ^loi- 
gn6es de noftre veue, conuertir le trafic de la terre en 
celuy du ciel, vouloir mourir dans la Barbarie, eft vn 
langage qui ne f e parle point dans I'^cole de la nature. 
Ces actions vont au delk de fa portee, & cependant ce 
font les actions & le langage de mille perfonnes de 
merite, qui s'attachent aux affaires de la Nouuelle 
Frace, auec autat & plus de courage qu'ils feroiet aux 
leurs propres en 1' Ancienne. Ie ne voy pas, ny ie ne 
peux entendre tout ce qui tend a ce deffein ; on ne 
me parle qu'vne fois I'an de ces affaires, & encore fur 
vn morceau de papier, qui reffemble ^ [9] ces muets 
du grand Seigneur, qui parlent fans dire mot. Si 


1634-36] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1636 223 


CHAPTER FIRST. 

OF THE SENTIMENTS OF AFFECTION WHICH MANY PER- 
SONS OF MERIT ENTERTAIN FOR NEW FRANCE. 

1KNOW not what success the affairs of New France 
will have, nor when we shall see its doors opened 
wide to the Gospel ; but I know [8] well, never- 
theless, that it is God who directs this enterprise. 
Nature has not arms long enough to reach the point 
to which this has attained ; she loves too well material 
interests to bring together so many hearts and so 
many affections in the pursuit of a good of which she 
has no knowledge. To forsake one's parents and 
one's friends, to relinquish one's associates, to go 
forth from one's native land, so sweet and so refined; 
to cross the seas, to dare the Ocean and its storms, to 
give up one's life to sufferings, to abandon present 
advantages that one may launch out into hopes re- 
mote from one's vision, to convert the business of 
earth into that of heaven, to be willing to die in the 
midst of Barbarism, — is a language which is not 
spoken in the school of nature. Such deeds go be- 
yond her range, and yet they are the deeds and lan- 
guage of a thousand persons of merit, who are devot- 
ing themselves to the affairs of New France with as 
much and more of courage than they would give to 
their own in the Old. I do not see nor can I under- 
stand all that leads to this design ; they speak to me 
but once a year about these matters, and then upon 
a piece of paper, which is like [9] those mutes of the 


224 LES RELATIONS DES j£SUITES [Vol.8 


eft-ce que ie puis dire, voyant tant de feu, tant de 
zele, tant de fainctes affections en des perfonnes fi 
differentes d'age, de fexe, de condition, de profeffion ; 
qu'autre qu'vn Dieu ne pent caufer ces penf^es, ny 
allumer ces brafiers, qui ne fe nourriffent que des 
bois aromatiques du Paradis. Ie ne dis rien des 
tendres & nobles affections qu'a noftre grand Roy 
pour la conuerfion de ces Peuples ; c'eft pour ce def- 
fein qu'il a Stably la Compagnie de la Nouuelle 
France, I'a honoree de fa faueur, & de plufieurs 
grands Priuileges. Ie ne parle non plus des foins de 
Monfeigneur Ie Cardinal ; c'efl aff ez de dire qu'il s'eft 
fait Chef de cette honorable Compagnie, & qu'il a re- 
leue, fouftenu & anime cette grande entreprife, qu'on 
ne peut choquer k moins que de toucher h. la prunelle 
de fes yeux. Monfeigneur Ie Due d'Anguien fils 
aifn6 de Monfeigneur Ie Prince, m'honorant d'vn mot 
de fa propre main, m'affeura Tan palf6, qu'il auoit 
de grands fentimes pour nous, & que nous en ver- 
rions les effects, a mefure que Dieu luy [lo] feroit 
la grace de croiftre en age. I'ay d'autant plus volon- 
tiers remerci^ noftre Seigneur, d'auoir defia infpire k 
ce ieune Prince ces bons deffeins pour fon feruice, 
qu'il a I'efprit plus capable de s'en acquiter. Ie f9ay 
de bonne part & fans flatterie, qu'il I'a fait parol ftre 
auec autant d' admiration, durant Ie cours de fes 
eftudes, au iugement de ceux qui I'y ont veu, que fa 
quality Ie rendra toufiours digne de refpect, enuers 
ceux qui Ie cognoiftront. Dieu foit loii^ ! tout Ie ciel 
de noftre chere Patrie, nous promet de fauorables in- 
fluences, iufques a ce nouuel aftre, qui commence ^ 
paroiftre parmy ceux de la premiere grandeur. 

Perfonne ne peut ignorer, que Monfieur Ie Marquis 


1634-36] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1636 ^'iJb 

grand Seigneur, who talk without saying a word. 
Yet I can say, — seeing so much fire, so much zeal, so 
much holy love, in persons so different in age, in sex, 
in condition, and occupation, — that none other than 
a God can cause these thoughts, can kindle these 
coals, which are fed only by the aromatic woods of 
Paradise. I say nothing of the tender and noble de- 
sires of our great King for the conversion of these 
Tribes ; it is for this purpose that he has established 
the Company of New France, honored it with his 
favor and with many important Privileges. Nor do 
I speak about the attentions of Monseigneur the Car- 
dinal ; it is enough to say that he has become Head 
of this honorable Company, and that he has uplifted, 
sustained, and animated this grand enterprise, which 
cannot be attacked without touching the apple of his 
eye. The Duke d'Anguien,^^ eldest son of Monsei- 
gneur the Prince, honoring me with a word from his 
own hand, assured me last year that he had high 
esteem for us, and that we should see the effects 
of it in proportion as God should [10] grant him the 
favor of added years. I thanked our Lord for already 
having inspired this young Prince with these good 
intentions of serving him, the more gladly as he has 
a mind well qualified to fulfill them. I know from 
good authority and without flattery that he showed 
this so admirably, during the course of his studies, in 
the opinion of those who saw him engaged in them, 
that his character will always render him worthy of 
respect among those who shall know him. God be 
praised ! The whole sky of our dear Native Land 
promises us favorable influences, even to this new 
star, which begins to shine among those of the first 
magnitude. 


226 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 


de Gamache, eft le principal appuy de noftre Miffion. 
I'ay appris cette annee qu'il a receu lettres de Fon- 
dateur d'vn College en la Noutielle France: noftre 
R. P. General me I'a ainfi r^crit, & de I'heure que ie 
parle on a prefente mille & mille facrifices k fa diuine 
Majeft6, dans toute I'eftendue de la terre ou fe r€- 
pand noftre Compagnie, pour la profperit6 de fa Mai- 
fon, [ii] & pour le bon fuccez de ce deffein. Nous 
auons commence k enfeigner d^s I'ann^e paff6e: le 
Pere Lallemant, & puis apres le Pere de Quen ont 
inftruit nos petits Francois, & moy quelques petits 
Sauuages. Nous nous etonnons de nous voir defia 
enuironnez de tant de ieunelTe, en ces commencemens. 

I'apprends que quelque perfonne benifte du ciel 
penf e k fonder vn Seminaire de petits Hurons ; 6 la 
fainte penfee! c'eft de ces ieunes plantes qu'on doit 
efperer de bons fruicts. Dieu foit "k iamais beny du 
foin qu'il a de cette nouuelle Colonic, la fauorifant 
du fecours de perfonnes qui cherifTent ces pauures 
barbares, beaucoup plus qu'ils ne fe font iamais ay- 
mez eux-mefmes. 

Ie ne voulois pas quafi parler de Meffieurs les AfTo- 
ciez de cette Compagnie: car ce n'eft pas merueille 
s'ils ont de I'amour pour vn pays, dont le Roy les a 
fait Seigneurs: mais cette amour en la plus faine 
partie de leur corps, me femble fi epuree, que ie fuis 
ioyeux & confus tout enfemble de voir vn degage- 
ment auffi grand en des perfonnes attacli6es au monde 
par leur condition, [12] qu'on en trouueroit dans vne 
ame ^loignee de prefence, & d'affection, des ennuis 
& des tracas de la terre : ie ne parle point par coeur, 
ces Meffieurs m'ayant fait I'honneur de m'6crire par 
la main de Monfieur I'Amy leur Secrettaijre, me con- 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 227 

No one can be ignorant that Monsieur the Marquis 
de Gamache is the chief support of our Mission. ^^ I 
have learned this year that he has been acknowledged 
as Founder of a College in New France ; our Reverend 
Father General has written me also to this effect ; and 
at this writing thousands of holy masses have been of- 
fered up to his divine Majesty, throughout the whole 
extent of the earth where our Company is scattered, 
for the prosperity of his House, [11] and for the good 
success of this plan. We began last year to teach; 
Father Lallemant, and afterwards Father de Quen, 
instructed our little French boys, and I some little 
Savages. We wonder to see ourselves already sur- 
rounded by so many children, in the very beginning 
of our work. 

I learn that some one, blessed of heaven, thinks of 
founding a Seminary for young Hurons. Oh, holy 
thought ! it is from these young plants that one is to 
expect good fruits. God be forever blessed for the 
care he takes of this new Colony, favoring it with the 
aid of persons who cherish these poor barbarians far 
more than they have ever loved themselves. 

I had hardly intended to speak of the Associated 
Gentlemen of this Company ; for it is not strange that 
they have some affection for a country over which 
the King has made them Lords; but this love, in the 
most important members of their body, seems to me 
so pure that I am at once rejoiced and confounded to 
see as great disinterestedness in persons, attached to 
the world by their position, [12] as one would find in 
a soul far removed from the scenes and affections of 
earth, from its cares and confusion. I do not speak 
by rote ; these Gentlemen, having done me the honor 
of writing to me by the hand of Monsieur I'Amy,^ 


228 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.8 

fondent en ces termes. La lettre quit vous a pleu nous 
efcrire, a tellement fatisfait fiojire Compagnie, que nous 
confejfons tons, que nos peines, & nos Joins, ont d(ja receu 
leur recompenfe. Ce que nous faifons pour la Colonie de 
la Nouuelle France, peut bien ejire recommandahle h caufe 
du zele an feruice de Dieu, & de I' affection que nous auons 
au foulagement des hommes: maisd'auoir la deffus V aide 
& la confolation de ceux qui font les Maijlres experimentez 
en ces vert us, c ejl estre payez dis V entrie, & receuoir fon 
falaire entier pour le trauail des premieres heures de la 
iourn^e. Le remerciment que vous nous faites vaut beau- 
coup mieux, que tout ce que nous auons fait ; mais il con- 
uiendroit bien h ce que nous defirons faire, quand Dieu 
nous aura doting la grace de V executer. 

Voila les propres mots de leur lettre : ce n'eft pas 
tout, apres auoir tefmoign6 que leurs plus grands 
deffeins ne tendent [13] qu'a la gloire de noftre Sei- 
gneur, lis fe refiouyffent d'eftre deliures de I'impor- 
tunite d'vn homme dont il a fallu lier les mains auec 
des chaifnes d'or: Et encor que cela nous coufie beaucoup, 
difent-ils, fi efi-ce que nous eflimons y avoir gaignd, puis 
que perfonne ne peut plus pretendre aucun droit fur la 
Nouuelle France, & que nous la pouuons dedier toute enti- 
ere ti Dieu par vojlre fainct miniflcre. Ne pouuant en- 
cherir fur ces penf6es, & fur ces affections, ie ne di- 
ray qu'vn mot "k ces MelTieurs ; que s'ils font les 
affaires de Dieu, Dieu fera les leurs, qu'ils ne per- 
dront rien au change, s'ils pourfuiuent dans ces gene- 
reux deffeins, & qu'ils fement des benedictions que 
leurs enfans recueilliront en la terre & au Ciel. Voila 
les fentimens de Meffieurs les Directeurs & Affociez 
de cette honorable Compagnie. 

Ie fuis fafch6 que des perfonnes grandes en verity 


1634-36] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 229 

their Secretary, put me to the blush in these terms: 
The letter which it Jias pleased you to write us has satisfied 
our Company to such a degree, that we all acknowledge 
that our efforts and our cares have already received their 
reward. What we do for the Colony of New France may 
indeed be commendable , by reason of our zeal in the service 
of God, and our desire to aid our fellow-men; but to have 
therein the sympathy and the help of those who are experi- 
enced Masters in these virtues is to be rewarded from, the 
beginning, and to receive one' s full remuneration for the 
work of the first hours of the day. The gratitude which 
you express to us is worthy of much more than all that 
we have done; but it would suit well what we desire to 
do when God shall have given us the grace to perform it. 

These are the very words of their letter. This is 
not all ; after having testified that their greatest pur- 
poses aim [13] only at the glory of our Lord, they re- 
joice to be delivered from the importunity of a man 
whose hands it has been necessary to bind with chains 
of gold. And although that costs us much, they say, yet 
we consider that we have gained thereby, since no one can 
longer claim any right over New France, and we can offer 
it entire to God through your holy ministry. ^^ Being able 
to add nothing to such thoughts and feelings, I will 
say to these Gentlemen but one word, that if they at- 
tend to the interests of God, God will attend to theirs ; 
that they will lose nothing in the exchange, if they 
continue in these generous purposes ; and that they 
are sowing blessings which their children shall reap 
upon the earth and in Heaven. Such are the senti- 
ments of Messieurs the Directors and Associates of 
this honorable Company. 

I regret that some persons, great, in truth, in the 
eyes of God and of men, bind my hands so tightly, 


230 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.8 

deuant les yeux de Dieu & des hommes, me lient li 
fort les mains, & m'obligent "k garder le fecret de 
leurs lettres, ou pluftoft de leurs vertus ; ils d^robent 
aux yeux de la France les tendres & fortes affections 
qn'ils ont pour [14] la gloire de noflre faincte foy 
dans I'etendue de cette Barbaric, fe contentans d'en 
donner la veue "k celuy auquel il ne la f9auroient ca- 
cber. le parle de perfonnes employees dans les pre- 
mieres charges du Royaume: I'vn d'eux embraffe 
tout le pais, il a foin & des Fran9ois & des Sauuages, 
& fait du bien k tous. Vn autre va proteftant qu'il 
s'efl voulu intereffer dans cette Compagnie, non pour 
I'efperance d'aucun lucre, mais pour I'amplification 
du Royaume de Dieu. Voici quelques paroles tirees 
de I'vne de fes lettres addrelT^e k quelque perfonne 
qui me I'a cofidemment communiqu6e: Fay interest 
de fqauoir des nouuelles du pays, par le dejir que tay de 
V aduancement de la Religion. C'eft I'vnique raifon, k 
ce qu'il affeure, qui I'a meu de s'allier de ces Mef- 
fieurs : & plus bas il dit que les plus grandes villes & 
les plus celebres ont commence par vn ramas de va- 
gabons, & que nous auons icy c6t aduantage qu'il y a 
des gens de bien parmy nous, Que le plus grand foin quon 
y doit auoir, ejl que Dieu fait feruy fidellement, qu'on ver- 
ra vn notable changement quand la Compagnie generale 
entrera dans V entiere [15] adminijlration des affaires, 
la refolution ejlant de laiffer tout le profit pour ameliorer 
le pays, & y /aire paffer grand notnbre de Francois, fans 
rien rapporter d'vn long temps entrc les Affociez du profit 
qui prouiendra de la Nouuelle France. Voila parler en 
homme des-intereff6 : les inclinations de la nature ne 
nous incitent point k tranfporter en vn pays barbare 
les vtilitez dont nous pouuos iouyr dans vn Royaume 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 231 

and oblige me to keep the secret of their letters, or 
rather of their virtues ; they conceal from the eyes of 
France the tender and strong desires they feel for 
[14] the glory of our holy faith throughout the extent 
of this Savage Land, contenting themselves with re- 
vealing them to him from whom they could not con- 
ceal them. I speak of persons employed in the high- 
est offices of the Realm ; one of them is in charge 
of the whole country, concerning himself with both 
the French and the Savages, and does good to all. 
Another protests that he is willing to interest himself 
in this Company, not through the hope of any gain, 
but for the extension of the Kingdom of God. Here 
are some words taken from one of his letters ad- 
dressed to a person who has communicated it to me 
in confidence : / am interested in hearing news of the 
country, through the desire which I have for the advance- 
fnent of Religion. This is the only reason, as he as- 
serts, that induced him to ally himself with these 
Gentlemen. Farther on, he says that the largest and 
most celebrated cities have begun with a rabble of 
vagabonds; and that we have here this advantage, 
that there are honest people among us ; that the great- 
est care that one must have here is, that God be faithfully 
served. There will be seen a notable change ivhen the gen- 
eral Company shall enter into the complete [15] administra- 
tion of affairs, — the determination being to disregard all 
gain, in order to better the condition of the country and to 
send over a large number of French people, without the 
Associates receiving for a long time any of the profit which 
shall accrue from New France. See how a disinterested 
man speaks of it ! The inclinations of nature do not 
incite us to transfer to a barbarous land the advan- 
tages which we can enjoy in a well-governed Realm. 


232 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.8 

bien polled. Difons done que ees mouuemens fecrets 
viennent des rellorts de la faeree prouidence du grand 
Dieu, qui femble auoir de grands deffeins pour tant 
de pauures Peuples abadonnez depuis vn li long 
temps. Voicy ce que d'autres AlTociez me mandent : 
V efpere que le fecours quon vous enuoye fera augmenter 
la moijfon: c eji la principale fin quont ceux qui fe me- 
Jlent de c^t affaire, ie voudrois auoir autant de pouuoir que 
V ay d' affection pour V aduancement de la gloire de Dieu en 
ce pays, & pour la conuerfion de ces pauures Sauuages. 
Vn autre me tient ce dif cours : II y a apparence que 
nojire Cojupagnie continuant /on trafic fans fortune, voflre 
colonic pour le fpirituel s' augment era de plus en plus ; V in- 
tention de la plus part des [i6] inter effez d' ice lie n'a esti 
h autre deffein, que pour ayder a la conuerfion de ces pau- 
ures Sauuages ; ce qui ne peut efire faict fans vos peines, 
trauaux & grandes incommoditez, voire de vostre vie. 

Ie n'aurois iamais faict, li ie voulois recueillir tout 
ce qu'efcriuent fur ce fuiet vn grand nombre de per- 
fonnes, dont la modeftie me condamne au filence, au- 
tant que leur bon exemple m'obligeroit "k en parler, 
fi ie ne craignois de les off enf er : c'efl pour cette rai- 
fon que ie me tais fur les faincts defirs de plufieurs 
Religieux, fur les fortes affectios qu'ont vn tres grand 
nombre de nos Peres, de venir trauailler en cette 
nouuelle vigne de noftre Seigneur, & defricher cette 
Barbaric: il eft vray que ces volontez de viure & 
mourir en la Croix de I e s v s , font conf ormes k leur 
prof effion ; mais c'eft chof e bien plus eftonnante de 
voir des hommes attachez comme de grandes intelli- 
gences aux plus hautes fpheres des affaires du monde, 
fe d^laffer dans les foins de la Nouuelle France, tant 
ils la cherillent. Bien plus, il fe trouue des Dames 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 233 

Let US say then that these hidden impulses come from 
the springs of the sacred providence of the great God, 
who seems to have grand purposes for so many poor 
Peoples, abandoned for so long a time. Here is what 
other Associates write me. / hope that the aid which 
is sent you will cause the harvest to increase; that is the 
chief aim which those have who interest themselves in this 
■matter. I wish I had as much power as I have desire for 
the advancement of the glory of God in this country, and for 
the conversion of these poor Savages. Another writes to 
me as follows : There is likelihood that, while our Com- 
pany continues its business without gain, your colony in 
spiritual matters will increase more and more. The inten- 
tion of the greater part of those [i6] interested in it has 
been for no other purpose than to aid in the conversion of 
these poor Savages, which cannot be done zvithout your 
sufferings, toils, and hardships, nay, even at the peril of 
your life. 

I should never finish were I to review all that is 
written on this subject by a great number of persons, 
whose modesty condemns me to silence as much as 
their good example would oblige me to speak, if I 
did not fear to offend them. It is for this reason that 
I say nothing about the holy wishes of many Reli- 
gious, and the strong desires which a great number of 
our Fathers have to come to work in this new vine- 
yard of our Lord, and to clear this land of Barbarism. 
It is true that these desires to live and to die in the 
Cross of J E s U S are in keeping with their profession ; 
but it is a thing much more astonishing to see men 
who are engaged, because of their great abilities, in 
the highest spheres of the affairs of the world, 
take their recreation in working for New France, so 
dearly do they love her. Much more, there are found 


234 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 

qui veulent partager cette gloire auec eux, furmon- 
tant rinfirmit^ [17] de leur fexe par la generofite de 
leur courage. 

le cherchois I'an paff6 vne ame courageufe qui petit 
arborer le grand eftendart de la charit6 en ces con- 
trees: ce grand Dieu des bontez y a pourueu. I'ap- 
prends que Madame de Combalet y veut mettre la 
main, & fonder vn Hofpital en la Nouuelle France. 
Voicy comme il luy a pleu m'en donner aduis. Dieu 
m aya7it donne le defir d' aider an falut des pauures Sau- 
uages, apres auoir leu la Relation que vous eu auez faicte, 
il in a fernhle que ce que vous croyez qui puijfe le plus fer- 
uir a leur conuer/ion, est V cjlabliffement des Religieu/es 
Hofpitalieres dans la Nouucllc France; de forte que ie me 
fuis resolue d'y enuoyer cette ann^e fix ouuriers, pour d^- 
f richer des terres, & /aire quelquc logement pour ces bonnes 
Filles. Ie vous fupplie de vouloir prendre Join de cdt 
establijjfemetit : t ay pri^ le P. Chajlelain de vous en par let 
de ma part, & de vous declarer plus particulierement mes 
intentions : fi ie puis contribuer quelque autre chofe pour le 
falut de ces pauures gens, pour lef quels vous prenez tant de 
peine, ie m eflimeray bien-heureufe. Lk delTus que di- 
ray-ie autre chofe, fi ce n'eft que [18] tout le Ciel 
prefente deuant le throfne de Dieu ces fainctes pen- 
fees, ces grandes refolutions, & que tons les Anges 
redoublent leurs Cantiques d'honneur & de loiianges 
pour vne fi faincte entreprif e ; ce font les actions de 
graces que nous faifons k cette illuftre Dame, au nom 
de tons les faincts Anges gardiens de ces pauures 
Barbares, qui ne fgauroient comprendre la grandeur 
de r amour qu'on leur porte. Ie leur ay faict en- 
tendre qu'vne grande Dame alloit faire dreffer vne 
grande maifon, ou on receuroit tons leurs malades, 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 235 

some Ladies who wish to share this glory with them, 
rising above the weakness [17] of their sex through 
the generosity of their courage. 

I sought last year a brave soul who might plant 
the great standard of charity in these lands; the 
mighty God of bounties has provided one. I learn 
that Madame de Combalet wishes to put her hand to 
the work, and found a Hospital in New France. ^^ 
See how it has pleased her to inform me of it : God 
having given me the desire to aid in the salvation of the 
poor Savages, it has seemed to me, after reading the Ac- 
count which you have written of it, that what you consider 
can best serve for their conversion is the establishment in 
New France of Hospital Nuns. I have therefore resolved 
to send thither this year six workmen, to clear some land 
and to construct a lodging for these good Sisters. I en- 
treat that you will take care of this establishment. I Iiave 
asked Father Chaste lain to speak to you about it for me, 
and to explain to you my plans more in detail. If I can 
do anything else for the salvation of tJiese poor people, for 
whom you take so much trouble, I shall consider myself 
happy. With regard to that, what shall I say, save 
that [18] all Heaven presents before the throne of God 
these holy thoughts, these noble resolutions; and 
that all the Angels redouble their Chants of honor 
and praise for so holy an undertaking. These are 
the thanks that we render to this illustrious Lady, in 
the name of all the holy guardian Angels of these 
poor Barbarians, who cannot comprehend the great- 
ness of the love that is felt for them. I informed 
them that a great Lady was about to erect a large 
house, where all their sick would be received; that 
they would be laid on soft beds, and daintily fed ; 
that they would be supplied with the medicines and 


236 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.8 

qu'on les coucheroit dans de bons lits, qu'on les nour- 
riroit delicatement, qu'on leur donneroit des mede- 
cines & des onguens neceffaires pour les guerir, & 
qu'on ne leur en demanderoit aucune recompenfe. 
lis me refpondent auec eftonnement, que cela va 
bien : mais neantmoins ie cognois par leurs foufris, 
qu'ils ne croiront point ce miracle que par les yeux. 
En vn mot, ils ne fgauroient comprendre la grandeur 
de cette charite ; fuffit que le Dieu des coeurs, qui 
fait germer cette faincte penf6e dans vn bon coeur, 
voit fon diuin ouurage, & y prend [19] plaifir; certes 
il n'y a rien fi puiffant que cette inuention pour atti- 
rer ces pauures Barbares, voire mefme pour peupler 
parmy eux des feminaires de gar9ons & de filles. 
Noftre Seigneur foit beny dans les temps, & dans 
r eternity. 

Si ie m' engage plus auat dans les fentimens de de- 
uotio qu'vne infinite d'ames fainctes, qu'vn tres-grand 
nombre mefme de Religieufes nous tefmoignent auoir 
pour r amplification de la foy en la Nouuelle France, 
ie pafferay de beaucoup la iufte grandeur d'vn Cha- 
pitre; mais n'importe la charite couure tout. I'ap- 
prends qu'en I'Eglife de Mont-martre, lieu fi facr6 
pour les defpoiiilles de tant de Martyrs, & par la pre- 
fence de tant d'ames ef purees, les Religieufes font a 
leur tour oraifon iour & nuict pour folliciter & forcer 
le Ciel h. refpandre fes fainctes benedictions fur nos 
trauaux. Les Carmelites font toutes en feu: les Vr- 
fulines remplies de zele: les Religieufes de la Vifita- 
tion n'ont point de paroles allez fignificatiues pour 
t^moigner leur ardeur. Celles de Noftre Dame con- 
iurent qu'on leur donne part aux fouff ranees qu'il 
faut fubir parmy [20] ces Peuples ; & les Hofpitalieres 


1634 - 36] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 163b 3Sn 

ointments needed for their cure, and that no pay 
would be required for them. They answer me with 
astonishment that that is good ; but, nevertheless, I 
know by their smiles that they will believe this mir- 
acle only with their eyes. In one word, they cannot 
understand the greatness of this charity ; it is suffi- 
cient that the God of hearts, who causes this holy 
thought to spring up in a pious heart, sees his divine 
work and takes [19] pleasure therein. Verily there 
is nothing so powerful as this device to win these 
poor Barbarians, nay, even to fill among them the 
seminaries for boys and girls. Our Lord be blessed, 
through time and through eternity. 

If I were to occupy myself further with the senti- 
ments of devotion manifested by a multitude of pious 
souls, and by a very great number even of Nuns, for 
the extension of the faith in New France, I would 
considerably exceed the proper length of a Chapter ; 
but no matter, charity covereth all. I learn that in 
the Church of Mont-martre,^ a place sacred as the 
depository of so many Martyrs and by the presence 
of so many purified souls, the Sisters take turns pray- 
ing, by day and by night, to solicit and to constrain 
Heaven to bestow its holy benedictions upon our la- 
bors. The Carmelites are all on fire; the Ursulines 
are filled with zeal ; the Nuns of the Visitation have 
no words significant enough to show their ardor; 
those of Nostre Dame implore permission to share in 
the sufferings which must be undergone among [20] 
these Peoples ; and the Hospitalieres insist that they 
be brought over here next year.*^ Nature has no 
breath sacred enough to light these fires ; these flames 
arise from a fire all divine, from an increate and liv- 


LES RE LA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 8 


crient qu'on les paffe des I'ann^e prochaine. La na- 
ture n'a point de fouffles fi facrez, qui puiffent allu- 
mer ces brafiers: ces flammes prouiennet d'vn feu 
tout diuin, d'vn feu incre6 & fubfiftant. Notts vous 
pOTtons plus d'enuie, qtie de compaj^ion dans vos fouf- 
fra?ices, ecriuent quelques vnes. Nous vous accompa- 
gfions de nos petites prieres, particulierement vers lafaincte 
Vierge, it qui nous fommes dedi^es, & vers nojire Pere 
fainct Fofeph, & nojire Mere faincte Terefe, & aux Anges 
du pays oh vous ejles, afin que leurs forces & leur puijjance 
foient auec vous. O le grand fecours! S'il ejioit auj^t 
facile, dit vn autre, de bajlir vn Conuent de Carmelites, 
que de dreffer vne Cabane de Sauuages, & que nous cuj^ions 
autant de pouuoir, que d' impuiffance & de foiblejfe, vous 
trouueriez des ^ prefent grand nombre de Soeurs ires dif- 
pos^es de vous aller ayder. 

Voicy les propres termes d'vne autre. II faut que 
vous f<^achiez que la Nouuelle France commence d'entrer 
dans les efprits de plujteurs perfonnes, ce qui me fait croire 
que Dieu la regarde d'vn ceil fauor able. Helas\ que di- 
rih\vous, mon R. Pere, \^\\ fi fa diuine Majefl^ difpofoit 
les affaires en forte, que nous euj^ions bien toft le courage, 
& le moyen de vous aller trouuer. le vous diray que fi 
telle efi la volenti de Dieu, quil n'y a rien en ce fnonde, 
qui 7nen puiffe'cfnpefcher, quand mefme ie deurois efire 
engloutie des ondcs en chcmtn. 

Voila le coeur d'vne vraye Vrfuline. qui me va d6- 
couurant les voyes par ou fon Ordre pourra ^^l iour 
palTer en ces grandes forefts. Pendant que i'^cris 
cecy, i'ay deuant mes yeux les noms de treize Reli- 
gieufes duj mefme Ordre, qui proteftent dans vne 
lettre commune enuoyee au R. P. Adam, qu'elles ont 
toutes le mefme deffein, & leur Superieure brude du 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, J636 389 

ing fire. We bear you more envy than compassion in your 
sufferings, write some of them. We accompany you with 
our feeble prayers, particularly to the holy Virgin, to 
whom we are dedicated, and to our Father, saint Joseph, 
and our Mother, saint Theresa, and to the Angels of the 
country where you are, that they may be with you in their 
strength and power. Oh, what great help! If it were 
as easy, says another, to build a Carmelite Convent as it 
is to raise one of the Cabins of the Savages, and if we 
were as powerful as we are impotent and weak, you would 
find from now on a great many Sisters very ready to go 
to your aid. 

Here are the exact words of another. You must 
know that New France is beginning to enter the minds of 
a great many people, which makes me think that God is 
looking upon it with a favorable eye. Ah, what would 
you say, my Reverend Father, [21] if his divine Majesty 
were so to shape events that we would soon have the cour- 
age and the means to go to you. I will tell you that if 
such be the will of God, there is nothing in this world that 
can prevent me, even if I were to be engulfed in the waves 
on the voyage. 

This is the spirit shown by a true Ursuline, who 
goes on to show me in what ways her Order will 
some day be able to cross over into these great for- 
ests. While I am writing this, I have before my 
eyes the names of thirteen Sisters of the same Order, 
who protest, in a general letter sent to Reverend Fa- 
ther Adam, that they all have the same purpose and 
that their Superior burns with the same fire : / have 
allowed, says she, our good Sisters to give full scope to 
their desires which they Jiave set down on this paper accord- 
ing to their zeal; there is nothing of m,yself in it, except 


240 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.8 

mefme feu; Vay laij^^, dit-elle, prendre V effor aux de- 
firs de nos bonnes Sceurs, quelles ont couchd fur ce papier 
felon leur ferueur\ il n y a rien de moy que V approbation 
que i' en fay par V appofition de mon nom, pour vous t^moi- 
gner que ie n en quitte pas la partie. le vous porte plus 
d'enuie que vous ne me faites de piti^ dans les trauaux ok 
vous allez entrer, Mais ecoutons ces ames refolues. 
// ny a point de difficultez qui nous ^pouuantent, & bien 
que lafoiblejfe & V infirmity de nofire fexe [22] foit grande, 
noflre Seigneur fortifie, & rehaujfe fi puiffamment nofire 
courage, que nous nous enhardijfons de dire auec fainct 
Paul, nous pouuons tout en celuy qui nous conforte ; la mer 
ny les tempefies n ont point affez d" horreur pour ipouuan- 
ter des coeurs, qui n ont ny vie, ny mouuemens, que pour 
celuy qui a mis la fienne pour les racketer, & qui ne de- 
fir ent rien tant que de pouuoir donner la leur pour f on 
amour, & pour le falut des Sauuages. N'eft il pas vray 
de dire apres cela, que la parfaite amour bannit la 
crainte. Ie paffe fouz filence d'autres termes auffi 
pathetiques, & des affections auffi fortes que celles- 
cy, forties des coeurs & de la bouche d'vn grand 
nombre de bonnes ames d'autres faincts Ordres, voire 
mefme de perfonnes engag^es dans le monde. Si 
des femmes tendres & delicates pour ie ne fqay quels inte- 
refis, difent quelques-vnes, fe font iettdes courageufe- 
ment dans le hazard des mers, nofire coeur blefmira-il h la 
veu'e des mefmes dangers} puis que nous ne pretendons pajfer 
dans cette Barbarie, que pour honorer & benir le Dieu des 
mersl Celles qui pretendent paffer les premieres, 
apres s'eflre deffiees de leur foibleffe, difent tout [23] 
haut, que fe confiant en Dieu, elles ne craignent plus 
rien, finon que le trop grand delay. Or ie r^ponds 
aux vnes & aux autres, qu'elles ne fgauroient auoir 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 241 

the approbation I show by affixing my name, as an evi- 
dence that I do not abandon the party. I envy you more 
than I pity you in the labors you are about to begirt. But 
let us hear further from these resolute spirits : There 
are no difficulties which daunt us; and, although the weak- 
ness and infirmity of our sex [22] is great, our Lord so 
powerfully fortifies and enhances our courage, that we 
are emboldened to say with saifit Paul, we can do all 
in him who strengtheneth us; neither the sea nor tem- 
pests have horrors enough to frighten hearts which live 
and throb only for him who has given his own to redeem 
them., and who desire nothing so much as to be able to give 
theirs for his love and for the salvation of the Savages. 
Is it not right to say, after that, that perfect love 
casteth out fear? I pass over in silence other words 
as touching, and expressions of interest as strong as 
these, uttered from the hearts and lips of many good 
souls of other holy Orders, yea even from people of 
the world. If delicate and refined women, actuated by 
we know not what interests, say some of them, have 
cast themselves bravely into the hazards of the deep, shall 
our hearts fail at the sight of the same dangers, since we 
do not claim to cross over into this land of Barbarism., 
except to ho?ior and bless the God of the sea ? Those 
women who expect to cross first, after having dis- 
trusted their own weakness, say quite [23] boldly 
that, trusting themselves to God, they no longer fear 
anything, unless it be the too great delay. Now I 
answer both that they cannot have too much devotion 
in praying Heaven to favor this enterprise ; but that 
they can have too much haste, if they should come 
over here before being notified that the Country is in 
a condition to receive them. Everything in its time ; 


242 


LES RELA TIONS DES jiSUITES [Vol. 8 


trop de deuotion, pour prier le Ciel de fauorifer cette 
entreprife; mais qu'elles pourroient auoir trop de 
precipitation, fi elles palloient fans qu'on leur donnaft 
aduis, que le Pais eft en eftat de les receuoir : chaques 
chofes ont leur temps, Dieu prend le fien quand il 
luy plaift; c'eft celuy qu'il faut attendre en patience 
& en douceur. Finiflons, i'en ay affez dit pour faire 
voir que la Nouuelle France eft bien auant dans le 
cceur de Dieu, puis qu'elle a fi bonne place dans ceux 
de tant de perfonnes, qui luy font fi cberes. 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 243 

God takes his as it pleases him, and it is upon him we 
must wait in patience and in meekness. Let us fin- 
ish. I have said enough on this subject to show that 
New France is near to the heart of God, since it holds 
so good a place in those of so many persons who are 
so dear to him. 


244 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.8 


CHAPITRE II. 

DES SAUUAGES BAPTISEZ CETTE ANNEE, & DE QUEL- 
QUES ENTERREMENS. 

1L femble que noftre Seigneur veiiille authorifer la 
puret6 de immacul6e Conception de fa faincte 
Mere, par les [24] grands fecours qu'il donne ^ 
ceux qui honnorent cette premiere grandeur de la 
Vierge. I'enuoyay Tan palle a V. R. la formuled'vn 
voeu, que nous fifmes fuiuans fon confeil dans toutes 
nos Refidences le huictiefme de Decembre, iour dedi^ 
a cette Conception facree ; nous cachions cette deuo- 
tion, & V. R. I'a publi^e la faifant imprimer en mef- 
mes termes que nous I'auons voii^e, & que nous la voiie- 
rons encore Dieu aydant tous les ans ^ mefme iour. 
La benediction que le ciel a verf6 fur nos petits tra- 
uaux depuis ce temps-1^, eft fi fenfible ; que ie conuie- 
rois volontiers tous nos Peres de 1' Ancienne France, 
voire de tout le monde, & toutes les bonnes ames qui 
cheriilent la conuerfio de ces Peuples, de s'allier de 
nous par ces faincts voeux, vniffant tous les ieufnes, 
toutes les prieres, toutes les fouffraces, toutes les 
faintes actions les plus f ecrettes de ceux qui entreront 
dans ces alliances, pour eftre prefent^es k la Diuinit6 
en I'honeur & en action de grace de l'immacul6e Con- 
ception de la faincte Vierge : afin d'obtenir par fon 
entremife I'application du fang de fon Fils [25] k nos 
pauures Sauuages, I'entier denuement & 1' amour de 
lESVS en la Croix, auec vne mort vrayment Chrefti- 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 246 


CHAPTER IL 

OF THE SAVAGES BAPTIZED THIS YEAR, AND SOME 
BURIALS. 

IT seems that our Lord wishes to authorize the pur- 
ity of the immaculate Conception of his holy 
Mother, by the [24] great assistance he gives to 
those who honor this chief dignity of the Virgin. I 
sent last year to Your Reverence the formula of a 
vow which we made according to your advice in all 
our Residences, on the eighth of December, a day 
dedicated to this sacred Conception. We concealed 
this act of devotion, and Your Reverence has pub- 
lished it, using the same words in which we made the 
vow, and in which we will pledge ourselves again, 
God helping, every year on the same day. The 
blessings that heaven has bestowed upon our insig- 
nificant labors, since that time, are so evident that I 
would like to urge upon all our Fathers of Old 
France, yea even of all the world, and all the good 
souls who cherish the conversion of these Tribes, to 
ally themselves with us through these holy vows, 
uniting all the fasts, all the prayers, all the sufferings, 
all the most secret acts of virtue, of those who will 
enter into this alliance, to be presented to the Divin- 
ity in honor of and as an act of thanks for the im- 
maculate Conception of the holy Virgin, in order to 
obtain through her mediation the application of the 
blood of her Son [25] to our poor Savages, the entire 
abnegation and love for J E s u s on the Cross, with a 


246 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 8 


enne, ^ ceux qui procurent leur faint, & k tons les af- 
fociez en la pratiqne de cette deuotion, dont la for- 
mnle eft h. la fin de la Relation de I'an paff6. I'^cri- 
nois dans cette Relation, que nous anions baptize 
vingt deux perfonnes, nous en auons baptize cette 
annee plus d'vne centaine depuis cesvoeux prefentez 
a Dieu, & fort pen auparauant. En tout on a fait en- 
fans de I'Eglife depuis le depart des Vaifleaux iuf- 
ques a prefent cent quinze Sauuages. De plus, Dieu 
nous a donne de grandes ouuertures pour le falut de 
ces Peuples, les faifant refoudre a deux points, qui 
font voir que la foy entre dans leur ame. Le premier 
eft, qu'ils ne font pas marris qu'on baptize leurs en- 
fans malades, voire ils nous appellent pour ce faire. 
Le deuxiefme, que les plus agez mefmes commencent 
a defirer de mourir Chreftiens, demandans le ba- 
ptefme en leurs maladies, pour ne point defcendre 
dans les feux, dont on les menace. Bref nous auons 
obtenu ce que nous n'ofions quafi demander, tant [26] 
nous les voyons alienez de ces penfees; c'eft de don- 
ner quelques petites filles : mais ie parleray de cecy 
en fon lieu. Toutes ces faueurs font venues du ciel 
par les merites de la fainte Vierge, & de fon glorieux 
Efpoux, depuis les voeux dont i'ay fait mention. 
Defcendons en particulier, & fuiuons I'ordre du temps 
de ces Baptefmes. 

Le neufiefme de Decembre, iufbement le lendemain 
de la fefle de la Conceptio: Le fieur lean Nicolet, 
Truchement pour les Algonquins aux trois Riuieres, 
vint donner aduis aux Peres, qui demeuroient en la 
Refidence de la Conception, fcize au mefme lieu, 
qu'vn ieune Algonquin fe trouuoit mal, & qu'il feroit 
a propos de le vifiter. Les Peres fe tranfportent in- 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 247 

truly Christian death, to those who procure their sal- 
vation and to all those associated in the practice of 
this act of devotion, the formula of which is given at 
the end of last year's Relation. I wrote in that Re- 
lation that we had baptized twenty-two persons ; this 
year, since these vows were presented to God, we 
have baptized more than a hundred, and, before that, 
very few. In all, since the departure of the Ships 
up to the present, we have made one hundred and 
fifteen Savages children of the Church. Further- 
more, God has given us great openings for the salva- 
tion of these Tribes, making them resolve upon two 
points which show that the faith has entered into 
their souls. The first is, that they are not vexed at 
us for baptizing their sick children ; indeed, they 
even summon us to do this. The second is, that the 
more aged ones are likewise beginning to wish to die 
Christians, asking for baptism when they are sick, 
in order not to go down into the fires with which 
they are threatened. In short, we have obtained 
what we hardly dared to ask for, so greatly [26] do 
we see them alienated from their former inclinations ; 
that is, the promise to give us some little girls, but 
I will speak of this in its place. All these favors 
have come from heaven, through the merits of the 
holy Virgin and of her glorious Spouse, since the 
vows which I have mentioned. Let us come down 
to particulars, and follow the order of time of these 
Baptisms. 

On the ninth of December, the very next day after 
the feast of the Conception, sieur Jean Nicolet,^ In- 
terpreter for the Algonquins at the three Rivers, 
came to inform the Fathers who lived in the Resi- 
dence of the Conception, situated at the same place, 


248 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 


continent en fa Cabane, demandant permiffion k fon 
pere de I'inflrtiire, Dieu fembloit auoir difpofe les 
coeurs de ces Barbares, que nous luy anions prefen- 
tez, faifant nos voeux le iour precedent. Ce pauure 
Barbare fe monflre fort content du bien qu'on procu- 
roit k fon fils: le Pere Buteux I'inftruit, & pource 
que le malade eftant Algonquin n'entendoit qu'^ de- 
my la langue Montagnefe, dont fe [27] feruoit le Pere, 
vne femme Sauuage bien verfee en ces deux langues, 
feruoit d'interprete, faifant couler par fa bouche la 
foy & les veritez Chreftiennes dans I'ame de ce pau- 
ure ieune gar9on, fans les retenir pour foy : iuftement 
a la fa9on de ces canaux, ou de ces aqueducs, qui 
verfent les fources d'eau toutes entieres, fans rien re- 
feruer pour eux. Enfin le douziefme du mois, voy- 
ant que leur malade abaiffoit, ils le baptiferent apres 
I'auoir inftruit, & luy donnerent nom Claude ; il mou- 
rut bien toft apres, prononcant les faincts noms de 
lESVS & de Marie, fes parens demanderent aux 
Peres, s'ils ne feroient pas bien contents qu'on mifl 
ce corps aupres des Fran9ois; C'eft bien noftre defir, 
repartent-ils. Nous luy feros vn honneur, leur difmes 
nous, que nous denierions au plus grad Capitaine du 
mode, s'il n'efloit Chreflie. Haflez vous done de 
preparer ce qui eft neceffaire pour I'enterrer a voftre 
mode, dirent-ils, puis qu'il eft a vous. II fe fit vn 
beau conuoy de tons nos Fran9ois, apres lefquels ve- 
noient les Sauuages deux a deux, auec vne modeflie 
qui ne fentoit rien du Barbare. A I'ilfue de I'enter- 
rement le pere du defunct [28] fit vn feftin aux Sau- 
uages, pendant lequel, comme il ne mangeoit point 
felon leur couflume ; tantoft il chantoit, maintenant 
il difcouroit; I'ay perdu I'efprit, difoit-il, la mort de 


1634-36] LEJEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 249 

that a young Algonquin was sick, and it would be 
well to visit him. The Fathers immediately has- 
tened to his Cabin, and asked his father's permission 
to instruct him ; God seemed to have prepared the 
hearts of these Barbarians, whom we had presented 
to him in our vows the day before. This poor Bar- 
barian appeared very glad at the good that was being 
done to his son ; Father Buteux instructed him ; and, 
as the sick man was an Algonquin, and only half un- 
derstood the Montagnese tongue, which [27] the Fa- 
ther used, a Savage woman, well versed in both these 
languages, served as interpreter, allowing the faith 
and Christian truths to flow from her lips into the 
soul of this poor young man without retaining them 
for herself, — precisely like those canals or aqueducts 
which discharge whole fountains of water, without 
reserving any for themselves. Finally, on the 
twelfth of the month, seeing their patient was sink- 
ing, they baptized him, after having given him in- 
struction, and named him Claude; he died shortly 
afterwards, pronouncing the holy names of Jesus 
and Mary. His parents asked the Fathers if they 
would not like to have his body placed near the 
French. "That is indeed our desire," they an- 
swered. "We will show him an honor," we told 
them, " that we would refuse to the greatest Captain 
in the world, if he were not a Christian. " " Hasten 
then and prepare what is necessary to bury him in 
your way," they said, " since he is yours." A fine 
escort was formed, consisting of all our Frenchmen ; 
and after them came the Savages, two by two, with 
a modesty which savored in no wise of Barbarians. 
After the burial, the father of the dead man [28] 
gave a feast to the Savages, during which, — as he 


250 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 

mon fils me tire hors de moy-mefme ; ie me fuis veu 
autrefois entre les mains de nos ennemis, tout preft 
d'eflre mis en pieces, & d'eftre d^chir^ a belles dents, 
iamais ie ne perdy courage, il ne faut pas que ie le 
perde maintenant; i'ay dequoy me confoler, puis que 
mon fils, s'il euft vefcu, n'auroit pas manqu6 de tirer 
vengeance des Hiroquois. Et fe tournant vers les 
Peres, Vous auez de beaucoup allege ma douleur, 
rendans les derniers honneurs a mon fils. Voila la 
harangue de ce pauure Barbare, fur les funerailles de 
fon fils, qui a bien d'autres penf6es maintenant dans 
le ciel. 

Le vingt-deuxiefme du mefme mois, les mefmes 
Peres refl^entirent T effect des bontez de la faincte 
Vierge, au baptefme d'vn ieune gar9on age d'enui- 
ron dix ans: c6t enfant ne vouloit point du tout ouir 
parler de noftre creance, s'imaginant qu'eftre bapti- 
ze, & mourir incontinent apres, eftoit la mefme chofe. 
Et en effect [29] comme nous ne confions pas aif6- 
ment ces eaux facrees, finon h. ceux qu'on voit n'en 
deuoir point abufer pour eftre voifins de la mort, ces 
Barbares ont eu pour vn temps cette penfee, que le 
Baptefme leur eftoit fatal. Nous anions beau leur 
reprefenter que nous eftions tons baptifez, & que 
nous viuions plus long temps qu'eux: Ces eaux, di- 
foient-ils, font bonnes pour vous, mais non pas pour 
nous. Les Peres voyans ces refiftances, s'addreffent 
k noftre commune Mere, & luy demandent cette ame 
pour fon Fils. Chofe eftrange! I'enfant non feule- 
ment ne les fuit plus, mais il demande d'eftre port6 
en leur maifon. Le Pere Quentin h. ces paroles, le 
prend, I'embraffe, I'apporte tout languiffant en fa 
chambre, oii il fut baptize, & nomm^ Andr6 par Mon- 


1634-36] LE JE UNE ' S RELA TION, 1636 251 

did not eat, according to their custom, now singing, 
now talking, — he said, " I have lost my courage, 
the death of my son has undone me ; at other times 
I have seen myself in the hands of our enemies, 
about to be cut to pieces and torn by their teeth, and 
I have never lost courage; I ought not to lose it now, 
for I have something to console me, since my son, 
if he had lived, would not have failed to wreak ven- 
geance upon the Hiroquois." And turning towards 
the Fathers, "You have greatly soothed my grief, 
by rendering the last honors to my son." Such was 
the discourse of this poor Barbarian at the obsequies 
of his son, whose thoughts are now quite different in 
heaven. 

On the twenty-second of the same month, the same 
Fathers experienced the effects of the goodness of 
the holy Virgin, in the baptism of a young boy about 
ten years of age. This child did not wish to hear us 
speak of our belief at all, imagining that to be bap- 
tized and to die immediately after was the same 
thing. And, in fact, [29] as we do not readily be- 
stow these sacred waters except upon those who we 
see are not going to abuse them, on account of their 
proximity to death, these Barbarians for a while had 
this idea that Baptism was fatal to them. We ex- 
plained clearly to them that we were all baptized, 
and that we lived longer than they did. ' ' These 
waters," they said, "are good for you, but not for 
us." Our Fathers, seeing this resistance, addressed 
themselves to our common Mother, and asked from 
her this soul for her Son. Wonderful thing! the 
child not only no longer avoids them, but he asks to 
be brought to their house. At these words. Father 
Quentin takes him in his arms, and carries him, weak 


252 LES RELATIONS DBS /^SUITES [Vol.8 

fieur de Malapart, fon parrain. Ce pauure petit 
eftoit d'vne humeur fi douce, & fi facile, qu'il fe ren- 
doit aymable a tout le monde : voila pourquoy le Pere 
Buteux I'ayant autrefois demande a fa mere; le n'ay 
garde, fit-elle, de te le donner, ie I'ayme comme mon 
coeur. C'eft vne prouidence bien particuliere du bon 
Dieu, que cette mere fufl abfente pendant [30] fon 
inftruction & fon baptefme. Car il eft croyable 
qu'elle y auoit apporte de I'empefchement, fuiuant 
I'erreur qui les a tenu long-temps, que ce qui nous 
donne la vie leur caufe la mort ; on eut bien de la 
peine d'auoir le corps de ce petit innocent apres fa 
mort, comme ie vay dire tout maintenant. 

Le vingt-feptiefme, Monfieur de Maupertuis donna 
le nom de Marie a vne petite fiUe ag6e de deux ans, 
que les Peres baptizerent ; elle eftoit fille de defunct 
Capitanal, Capitaine des Sauuages, homme vaillant, 
& fort fage pour vn Barbare. II auoit lailfe trois en- 
fans a fa femme, vn gargon age d'enuiron dix-fept 
ans, & deux petites filles : la plus petite de ces filles 
eft au ciel, le gargon eft mort tres-miferablement, 
comme ie diray cy apres. A mefme temps qu'il mou- 
rut, le petit Andre trefpaffa: or comme ils eftoient 
parens, on les enterra dans vn mefme fepulchre, au 
defceu de nos Peres, qui en ayant eu le vent fe vin- 
drent plaindre a la grande mere d' Andre, de ce qu'on 
auoit enterre ce petit baptize fans les aduertir. Le 
Pere Buteux prie qu'on leur rende le corps pour le 
placer auec ,nous : , vn Sauuagejsi] luy repart, Va- 
t'en, on ne t'entend pas; c'eft vne reponfe que nous 
font par .fois''les Sauuages, quand^on les preffe de 
faire vne chofe qui ne leur agree pas. II eft vray que 
nous ne parlos encore qu'en _.begayant, mais neant- 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 263 

and languid, into his own room, where he is baptized 
and named Andre, by Monsieur de Malapart,^ his 
godfather. This poor child was of a disposition so 
sweet and gentle, that he made himself loved by 
every one ; hence when Father Buteux once asked 
his mother for him, " I have no intention," said she, 
"of giving, him to thee, I love him as my own 
heart." It is a very special providence of the good 
God that this mother was absent during [30] his in- 
struction and baptism. For it is probable that she 
would have thrown some impediments in the way, in 
accordance with the error so long prevalent among 
them, that what gives life to us gives death to them. 
There was considerable trouble in getting the body 
of this little innocent after his death, as I am now 
going to relate. 

On the twenty-seventh, Monsieur de Maupertuis®* 
gave the name Marie to a little girl two years old, 
whom the Fathers baptized; she was the daughter 
of the late Capitanal, Captain of the Savages, — a 
brave man and very wise for a Barbarian. ^^ He had 
left his wife with three children, a boy of about sev- 
enteen years, and two little girls; the smaller of 
these girls is in heaven, the boy died very pitiably, 
as I shall tell hereafter. At the same time that he 
died, little Andre passed away; now, as they were 
relations, they were buried in the same grave, without 
our Fathers knowing it ; they, when they had heard 
about it, went to Andre's grandmother to complain 
that this little baptized boy had been buried without 
their knowledge. Father Buteux begged them to 
give him the body to place in our cemetery ; a Sav- 
age [31] answered him, " Go away, we do not under- 
stand thee." This is an answer that the Savages oc- 


254 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES L^ol. 8 


moins quand nous leur difons quelque chofe conforme 
^ leurs defirs, iamais ils ne nous font ces reproches. 
Le Pere voyant cela va querir I'lnterprete, on luy r^- 
pond que I'affaire efl faite, que I'enfant eft enterr6 
auec le fils du Capitanal, & que la femme du Capi- 
tanal s'offenferoit, fi on fouilloit en la foffe de fon fils. 
Le Pere la va trouuer, la prie de laiffer tirer du fe- 
pulchre le corps de ce petit enfant, elle ne repond 
aucun mot : vn Capitaine f e trouuant Ik deffus, prend 
la parole. H6 bien, dit-il, les deux corps font a toy, 
porte les auec les Fran9ois : mais ne les f epare point, 
car il s'entr'ayment. Si font-ils bien loing I'vn de 
I'autre, fit le Pere, I'vn a efl6 baptife, & I'autre non, 
& par confequent I'vn efl bien heureux, & I'autre ge- 
mit dans les flammes. Ne tient-il qu'k cela pour eftre 
enfemble, & pour eftre bien heureux, fit ce Sauuage, 
tu n'as point d'efprit, d^uelope celuy qui n'eft pas 
baptif6, & luy iette [32] tant d'eau fur la tefte que tu 
voudras, & puis les enterre en mefme fepulcbre. Le 
Pere fe foufrit, & luy fit entendre que cela ne ferui- 
roit de rien. Ce Barbare en fin acquief9a, & nos Peres 
tireret le petit Andre du fepulchre profane, & le mi- 
rent en terre faincte. Vnus ajjfumetur , & alter relinque- 
tur. Apres I'enterrement la mere de celuy qui eftoit 
mort fans Baptefme, voyant qu'on auoit rebute fon 
fils, come le corps d'vne ame damn6e, pleuroit k 
chaudes larmes. Ah mon fils, difoit-elle, que ie fuis 
marrie de ta mort : le Pere alors qui auoit veu les 
longleurs foufiians ce ieune gargon en fa maladie; 
luy dit, voila la guerifon que ces badins promettoient 
k ton fils : ta petite fille efl malade, donne toy bien 
de garde de les appeller, ny de la faire chanter. Ja- 
mais, dit-elle, ils n'en approcheront, fi elle empire ie 


1634-36] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1636 256 

casionally make to us, when we urge them to do 
something that does not suit them. It is true that, 
as yet, we speak only stammeringly ; but, still, when 
we say something which conforms to their wishes 
they never use these reproaches. The Father, see- 
ing this, went in search of the Interpreter ; he is told 
that the affair is ended, that the child is buried with 
Capitanal's son, and that Capitanal's wife would be 
offended if we were to ransack the grave of her son. 
The Father goes to see her, and begs her to allow 
them to take the body of this little child out of the 
grave; she answers not a word; a Captain who is 
present begins to talk. "Oh well," says he, "the 
two bodies belong to thee, take them to the French; 
but do not separate them, for they are fond of each 
other." " Yet they are quite distant from each oth- 
er," said the Father; "the one has been baptized 
and the other has not, and consequently the one is 
happy and the other groans in the flames." " If that 
is all it depends upon to be together and to be hap- 
py," said this Savage, " thou hast no sense; take up 
the one who has not been baptized, and throw [32] as 
much water on his head as thou wishest, and then 
bury them in the same grave." The Father smiled, 
and gave him to understand that that would avail 
nothing. This Barbarian finally acquiesced ; and our 
Fathers took little Andre from the profane grave, 
and placed him in holy ground. Unus assumetur, et 
alter relinquetur. After the burial, the mother of the 
one who died without Baptism, seeing her son had 
been discarded like the body of a lost soul, shed bit- 
ter tears. "Ah, my son," she said, "how sorry I 
am for thy death." Then the Father, who had 
seen the Jugglers blowing upon this youth in his 


256 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.8 


vous appelleray: quelque temps apres les Peres la 
iugeant bien malade, la baptiferent au grand contente- 
ment de la mere. 

Le trente-vniefme vne fille ag6e d'enuiron seize ans 
fut baptif^e, & nommee Anne par vn de nos Fran9ois. 
Le Pere Buteux I'inftruifant luy dit, que fi eftant 
Chreftienne elle venoit a mourir, fon [33] ame iroit au 
Ciel das les ioyes eternelles. A ce mot de mourir 
elle eut vne fi grande frayeur, qu'elle ne voulut plus 
iamais prefter I'oreille au Pere: on luy enuoya le 
Sieur Nicolet truchement, qui exerce volontiers fem- 
blables actions de cliarit6, elle I'efcoute paifiblement ; 
mais comme fes occupations le diuertiffent ailleurs, 
il ne la pouuoit vifiter fi fouuent: c'eft pourquoy le 
Pere Quentin s'e£for§a d'apprendre les premiers rudi- 
mens du Chriftianifme en Sauuage, afin de la pouuoir 
inftruire : cela luy reliffit fi bien, que cette pauure fille 
ayant pris gouft a cette doctrine falutaire, defira le 
Baptefme, que le Pere luy accorda. La grace a plu- 
fieurs effects ; on remarqua que cette fille fort def dai- 
gneufe & altiere de fon naturel, deuint fort douce & 
traittable eftant Chreftienne. 

Le feptiefme de lanuier de cette annee mil fix cens 
trente fix, le fils d'vn grand Sorcier ou longleur fut 
faict Chreftien, fon pere s'y accordant apres de 
grandes refiftances qu'il en fit: car comme nos Peres 
6uentoient fes mines, & le decreditoient, il ne pou- 
uoit les fupporter en fa Cabane. Cependant comme 
[34] fon fils tiroit k la mort, ils prierent le fieur Nico- 
let de f aire fon poffible pour fauuer cette ame : ils 
s'en vont done le Pere Quentin & luy en cette maifon 
d'ecorce, prelfent fortement ce Sauuage de confentir 
au baptefme de fon petit fils: comme il faifoit la 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 267 

sickness, said to her, " Behold the cure that these 
triflers promised to thy son; thy little girl is sick, 
be careful not to summon them nor have them sing 
to her." " Never," said she, " shall they come near 
her; if she grows worse, I will call you." Some 
time afterward the Fathers, deeming her very sick, 
baptized her, to the great satisfaction of the mother. 

On the thirty-first a girl about sixteen years old 
was baptized and named Anne by one of our French- 
men. Father Buteux while instructing her, told her 
that, if she were a Christian, when she came to die 
iier [33] soul would go to Heaven to joys eternal. 
At this word, " to die," she was so frightened that 
she would no longer listen to the Father. Sieur Ni- 
colet, the interpreter, who willingly performs such 
acts of charity, was sent to her, and she listened to 
him quietly ; but, as his duties called him elsewhere, 
he could not visit her very often. Hence Father 
Quentin tried to learn the first rudiments of Chris- 
tianity in the Savage tongue, in order to be able to 
instruct her ; he succeeded in this so well that the 
poor girl, having tasted this wholesome doctrine, de- 
sired Baptism, which the Father granted her. Grace 
produces many results; it was remarked that this 
girl, naturally very disdainful and proud, grew very 
gentle and tractable on becoming a Christian. 

On the seventh of January of this year one thou- 
sand six hundred and thirty-six, the son of a great 
Sorcerer or Juggler was made a Christian, his father 
consenting to it after having offered a great deal of 
opposition; for, as our Fathers were revealing his 
schemes and throwing discredit upon him, he could 
not endure them in his Cabin. However, as [34] his 
son was on the verge of death, they begged sieur Ni- 


258 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 8 


fourde oreille, vne bonne vieille luy dit ; Quoy penfe- 
tu que I'eau que ietteront les Robes noires fur la tefte 
de ton enfant, le faffe mourir? Ne vois tu pas qu'il 
eft d6ja mort, & qu'k peine peut-il refpirer? Si ces 
gens la te demandoient ta Pourcelaine, ou tes Caftors, 
pour les offices de charite qu'ils veulent exercer en- 
uers ton fils, tu aurois quelque excufe ; mais ils don- 
nent & ne demandent rien, tu f9ay le foin qu'ils ont 
des malades, laiffe les faire; fi ce pauure petit meurt 
ils I'interreront mieux que tu ne f9aurois faire. Le 
malade fut done baptiz6, & nomme Adrien par le 
fieur du Chefne, Chirurgien de I'habitation ; il mou- 
rut quelque temps apres. Le Pere Buteux le deman- 
da pour I'enfeuelir a noftre fagon. Non, non, dirent 
les parens: tu ne I'auras pas tout nud, attends que 
nous I'ayons pare, & puis nous te le donnerons. Ils 
luy peignent la face de [35] bleu, de noir & de rouge; 
ils le veftent d'vn petit Capot rouge, puis I'enfour- 
rent de deux peaux d'Ours, & d'vne robe de peau de 
Chat fauuage, & par deffus tout cela d'vn grand drap 
blanc, qu'ils auoient achete au Magazin, ils accom- 
modent ce petit corps dans tout ce bagage, en forme 
d'vn paquet bien 116 de tons coftez, & le mettent 
entre les mains du Pere, qui baife doucement ces fa- 
crees d^poiiilles pour temoigner aux Sauuages I'eftime 
que nous faifons d'vn petit Ange baptize. On I'en- 
terra au Cimetiere de nos Fran9ois, auec f olemnit^ : 
ce qui plaift fort k ces Barbares, & qui les induit bien 
fouuent a permettre qu'on face Chreftiens leurs en- 
fans. 

Le huictief me du mefme mois de lanuier, vne ieune 
fille vniquement aymee de fes parens, mais encor 
plus de Dieu, s'en alia au Ciel, apres auoir eft6 lau6e 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 259 


colet to do all he could to save this soul. So they 
went, Father Quentin and he, to his bark house, and 
strongly urged this Savage to consent to the baptism 
of his little son ; as he turned a deaf ear, a good old 
woman said : ' ' What ! dost thou think the water the 
black Robes will throw upon the head of thy child 
will make him die ? Dost thou not see that he is al- 
ready dead, and that he can hardly breathe? If these 
people were asking thy Porcelain or thy Beavers, for 
the charitable acts which they exercise towards thy 
son, thou wouldst have some excuse; but they give 
and ask nothing ; thou knowest how they care for the 
sick, let them go on ; if this poor little one dies, they 
will bury him better than thou couldst." So the 
sick child was baptized and named Adrien by sieur 
du Chesne,«8 Surgeon of the settlement; he died 
some time afterwards. Father Buteux asked for 
him, to bury him in our way. " No, no," said the 
parents, ' ' thou canst not have him naked ; wait un- 
til we have adorned him, and then we will give him 
to thee." They painted his face [35] blue, black, and 
red; they dressed him in a little red Cloak, and lined 
it with two Bear skins and a robe of wild Cat skin, 
and over all placed a large white sheet which they 
had bought at the Store. They arranged the little 
body in all this paraphernalia, in the form of a pack- 
age tied closely on all sides, and placed it in the 
hands of the Father, who gently kissed these sacred 
remains, to show the Savages how greatly we es- 
teemed a little baptized Angel. It was buried in our 
French Cemetery, with solemnity. This greatly 
pleases these Barbarians, and often influences them 
to allow their children to be made Christians. 

On the eighth of the same month of January, a 


260 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.8 

dans le fang de I'Agneau. le remarqueray en c6t 
endroit les folies que fit fon pauure pere pour la pou- 
uoir guerir. Son beau frere luy vint dire qu'il auoit 
fonge que fa niepce gueriroit, li on la faifoit coucher 
fur vne peau de mouton, variee de diuerfes figures; 
on en cherche aufli [36] tofl, on en trouua, on peint 
deflus mille grotefques, des canots, des auirons, des 
animaux, & chofe femblable : les Peres qui n'auoient 
pas encore inflruit cette fille, font infbance que ce 
remede eft inu[ti]le : mais il le faut ^prouuer. La ma- 
lade repofe fur ces peintures, & n'en regoit aucune 
reelle guerifon. Vn autre Charlatan fut d'auis, que 
fi on donnoit k la malade vn drap blanc pour che- 
uet, fur lequel on auroit figure des hommes chantans 
& danfans, que la maladie s'en iroit. On fe met in- 
continent en deuoir de peindre des hommes fur vn 
drap ; mais ils ne firent que des marmoufets, tant ils 
font bons Peintres : ce remede ne fucceda non plus 
que le premier. La pauure fille fe couche fur ce 
drap, fans repofer, ny fans guerir. Que ne peut 
I'affection naturelle des peres & des meres enuers 
leurs enfans? Ces bonnes gens cherchoient par tout 
la fante de leur fille, horfmis en celuy qui la pouuoit 
donner. lis confultent vne fameufe Sorciere, c'eft "k 
dire vne fameufe badine. Cette femme dit qu'elle 
auoit appris, foit du Manitou, foit d'vn autre, ie m'en 
rapporte, qu'il falloit tuer vn chien, & que les hommes 
le mangealfent [37J en feflin. De plus, qu'il falloit 
faire vne belle robe de peau de Cerf, I'enrichir de 
leurs matachias rouges faits de brins de Pore epic, la 
donner ^ la malade, & qu'elle en gueriroit. Comme 
on preparoit ce feflin, vn Sauuage fongea, que pour 
la guerifon de cette fille, il falloit faire vn banquet 


1634-36] LE /EUNE'S RELATION, 1636 261 

young girl peculiarly loved by her parents, but still 
more so by God, went to Heaven after having been 
washed in the blood of the Lamb. I will notice in 
this place the follies her poor father committed, in 
order to be able to cure her. His brother-in-law 
came to tell him that he had dreamed his niece would 
recover, if they had her lie upon a sheepskin painted 
with various figures ; a search was made for one [36] 
immediately, one was found, and they painted there- 
on a thousand grotesque figures, canoes, paddles, 
animals, and such things. The Fathers, who had 
not yet instructed this girl, urged earnestly that this 
remedy was useless ; but they must try it. The pa- 
tient rested upon these paintings, but received no 
real benefit. Another Charlatan was of the opinion 
that, if they gave the sick girl a white sheet as pil- 
low, upon which had been drawn pictures of men 
singing and dancing, the sickness would disappear. 
They began immediately to paint men upon a sheet, 
but they made nothing but monkeys, such good 
Painters are they ; this remedy succeeded no better 
than the first. The poor girl lay down upon this 
sheet without resting, and without recovering. What 
cannot the natural affection of fathers and mothers 
do for their children? These good people sought 
everywhere the health of their daughter, except in 
him who could have granted it. They consulted a 
famous Sorceress, that is, a famous jester. This 
woman said she had learned, — whether from Mani- 
tou or some one else, I cannot say, — that they would 
have to kill a dog and that the men should make [37] 
a feast of it. Furthermore, that they would have to 
make a beautiful robe of Deer skin, trim it with their 
red matachias made of Porcupine quills, and give it 


262 LES RELATIONS DES jtSUITES [Vol.8 

de vingt teftes d' Elans: voila les parens de la fille 
bien en peine: car comme il n'y anoit gueres de 
neige, on ne pouuoit courre, encore moins prendre 
I'Eflan. Sur cette grande difficult^ on confnlte les 
Interpretes des fonges, il fut conclud qu'il falloit 
changer ces vingt teftes d'Orignac en vingt grads 
pains tels qn'ils en achetent de nos Francois, & que 
cela auroit le mefme effect, lis ne fe tromperent pas, 
d'autant que ces pains & ce feflin de chien, ne firent 
autre chofe que remplir le ventre des Sauuages; c'eft 
tout ce qu'auroient peu faire ces vingt teftes d'Ori- 
gnac: car pour guerir vn malade, ny les banquets, 
ny les belles robes ne feruent de rien. 

Pendant qu'on appliquoit ces beaux remedes, les 
Peres s'addreffoient k Dieu pour le falut de cette 
pauure ame: ils venoient voir cette pauure fille; 
mais les [38] parens ne vouloient pas permettre qu'on 
luy parlaft de noftre creance, s'imaginant que le Ba- 
ptefme nuifoit au corps, quoy qu'il en fuft de I'ame. 
Attendez, difoient-ils, quand noftre fille n'en pourra 
plus, quand nous aurons cherch^ tons les remedes, 
dont nous nous feruons, s'ils ne reiifTiffent, nous vous 
permettrons de I'inftruire. Les Peres voyans cela defi- 
fterent pour vn temps de vifiter la malade, traictant de 
la guerifon de fon ame auec Dieu. La mere de la fille 
fe fentit portee a defirer qu'on la vinft inftruire, fon 
mary y contrarioit. Enfin, Dieu qui tient les coeurs 
de tons les hommes entre fes mains, amolit ceux de 
ces Barbares, pour le bien de leur enfant ; non f eule- 
ment ils n'ont plus d'auerfion des Peres, mais au con- 
traire ils les font inuiter, leur donnant affeurance que 
leur fille les ^couteroit volontiers. Les Peres y 
volent aulTi toft, le Pere Buteux prend la parole, d6- 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 263 

to the patient; and that she would thus recover. 
While they were preparing this feast, a Savage 
dreamed that, for the recovery of this girl, they 
would have to prepare a banquet of twenty head of 
Elk. Now the girl's parents were placed in great 
anxiety, for, as there was but little snow, they could 
not pursue and much less capture the Elk. In this 
great difficulty, they consulted the Interpreters of 
dreams; it was decided that they must change the 
twenty head of Moose to twenty big loaves of bread, 
such as they buy from our French, and that this 
would have the same effect. They were not mistak- 
en, inasmuch as this bread and this dog feast did 
nothing but fill the stomachs of the Savages ; and this 
is all the twenty Moose heads could have done, for, 
to cure the sick, neither banquets nor beautiful robes 
avail. 

While they were making use of these fine reme- 
dies, the Fathers were addressing themselves to God 
for the salvation of this poor soul ; they came to see 
the wretched girl, but her [38] parents would not 
permit them to talk to her about our belief, imagin- 
ing that Baptism injured the body, whatever it might 
do for the soul. "Wait," said they; ''when our 
daughter is completely exhausted, when we have 
tried all the remedies of which we can avail our- 
selves, — if they do not succeed, we will permit you 
to instruct her." The Fathers, upon hearing this, 
desisted for a while from visiting the sick girl, nego- 
tiating for the recovery of her soul with God. The 
mother of the girl felt inclined to have her instructed, 
her husband was opposed to this. At last, God, who 
holds the hearts of all men in his hands, softened 
those of these Barbarians, for the good of their child. 


264 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.8 

duit le mieux qu'il peut les principaux articles de 
noflre foy. Les parens, pour ayder le Pere qui n'a 
pas encore la perfection de la langue, & pour foula- 
ger leur enfant, rei'teroient doucement, & expliquoient 
en termes plus fignificatifs [39] ce qu'on difoit k cette 
pauure ame, qui fe montroit alter^e de cette doctrine, 
comme vne terre f eiche de la rof^e du Ciel : on em- 
ploye quelque temps ^ I'enfeigner, toufiours auec le 
contentement des parens, & beaucoup plus de la ma- 
lade. Pendant la nuict elle difoit par fois k fa mere, 
Ne fera-il pas bien toft iour, le Pere ne viendra-il pas 
de bon matin, puis s'addrelfant a Dieu, luy difoit. 
MiJ^i ka khichitaien chaouerimitou, toy qui as tout fait, 
fais moy mifericorde. Khiranau, oue ka nipien khita 
pouetatin k hi/ad ki hit in. Toy qui eft mort pour nous, 
ie crois en toy, ie t'ayme, fecours moy. Le Pere la 
vifitant, elle luy difoit, Tu me r6ioiiis quand tu me 
viens voir, i'ay retenu ce que tu m'as enfeigne, & 1^ 
deffus luy expliquoit fidelement. Le foir auant fa 
mort, vn fien oncle eftant venu voir les Peres, & fou- 
pant auec eux, leur dit. Ma niepce eft bien malade, 
vous la deuriez baptifer: on luy replique, qu'on la 
veut plainement inftruire ; Si toutesfois, luy dit-on, 
tu la voyois notablement baiffer, appelle nous, & 
nous I'irons voir. Sur les dix ou onze heures de 
nuict, ce pauure Sauuage s'en vint au trauers de la 
neige, & d'vn [40] froid tres piquant, crier k pleine 
tefte proche de I'habitation de nos Francois, qu'ils 
vinlTent vifle baptifer la malade, & qu'elle s'en alloit 
mourant. Les peres s'eueillent k ces cris bien eton- 
nez, que ny les grands chiens qu'on d^tache la nuict, 
ny la rigueur du froid n'auoient point empefche ce 
bon homme de les venir appeller, Le fieur Nicolet, 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 265 


Not only were they no longer averse to the Fathers, 
but on the contrary they had them invited there, as- 
suring them that their daughter would listen to them 
willingly. The Fathers immediately fly thither ; Fa- 
ther Buteux begins to talk, presenting as well as he 
can the principal articles of our faith. The parents, to 
assist the Father, who is not yet well versed in the 
language, and to soothe their child, repeat softly and 
explain in clearer terms [39] what was said to this 
poor soul, which showed itself as thirsty for this 
doctrine as the dry earth for the dew from Heaven ; 
some time was employed in instructing her, the pa- 
rents always contented, and the patient still more so. 
During the night, she would sometimes say to her 
mother, ' ' Will it not soon be day ? Will the Father 
not come early in the morning?" Then addressing 
God, she would say to him : Missi ka khichitaien cha- 
ouerimitou, " Thou who hast made all, have pity 
upon me." Khiranau, oue ka nipien khita pouetatin 
khisadkihitin. " Thou who hast died for us, I believe 
in thee, I love thee, help me." When the Father 
visited her, she said to him, " Thou givest me joy 
when thou comest to see me; I have remembered 
what thou hast taught me," and thereupon she ex- 
plained it to him accurately. The evening before 
her death, one of her uncles, having come to see the 
Fathers and remaining to sup with them, said, " My 
niece is very sick, you ought to baptize her." They 
replied that they wished to instruct her sufficiently. 
"If, however," they said to him, "thou see her 
perceptibly weakening, call us, and we will go and 
see her." At ten or eleven o'clock at night, this 
poor Savage came through the snow and the [40] 
piercing cold, and cried out in a loud voice when he 


266 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 

& le fieur de Launay les accompagnerent, celuy cy 
fut le Parrain, & la nomma Marie, fon pere & fa mere, 
quoy que Barbares, temoignerent receuoir du conten- 
tement de cette action, & remercierent les Peres & 
nos Fran9ois, d'auoir pris la peine de fortir pendant 
vne nuict fi fafcheufe, que le fieur Nicolet s'en trouua 
mal. La pauure fille n'eut qu'autant de paroles, qu'il 
en falloit pour accepter le baptefme, qu'elle auoit 
tant defire : car fi toft qu'elle I'eut receu elle entre en 
I'agonie, & bien toft apres s'en alia en Paradis, auec 
I'etolle d'innocence, dont le Ciel la venoit de couurir. 
Son oncle la voyant morte, fit appeller le Pere Bu- 
teux, & luy dit, Vous n'aymez pas feulement pendant 
la vie, mais encore apres la mort, ma niepce eft k 
vous, enterrez la k voftre [41] mode. Faites vne 
grande foffe ; car mon frere k qui la trifteffe a d6rob6 
la parole, veut loger auec elle fon petit bagage : ils 
vouloient enterrer auec cette fille deux chiens, & plu- 
fieurs autres chofes: pour les chiens, on leur dit que 
les Frangois ne feroient pas bien aifes qu'on logeaft 
auec eux de fi laides beftes ; Permets nous done, 
dirent-ils, de les enterrer pres de voftre Cimetiere ; 
car la defuncte les aymoit, & c'eft noftre couftume 
de donner aux morts, ce qu'ils ont ayme ou polled^ 
pendant leur vie. On combat tant qu'on pent cette 
fuperftition, qui fe va abolillant tous les iours ; neant- 
moins on tolere en ces premiers commencemens beau- 
coup de chofes, qui fe d^truiront d'elles mefmes auec 
le temps. Si on refufoit 'k ces pauures ignorans, de 
mettre dans la folTe de leurs trefpafl^ez leur petit equi- 
page, pour aller en I'autre vie, difent-ils, ils nous 
refuferoient aufli I'abord de leurs malades, & ainfi plu- 
fieurs ames fe perdroient, qu'on va petit "k petit reciieil- 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 267 

neared the French settlement, that they should come 
quickly and baptize the sick girl, for she was going 
to die. The fathers, awakened by these cries, were 
indeed astonished that neither the great dogs that are 
let loose at night, nor the rigor of the cold, had pre- 
vented this good man from coming to call them. 
Sieur Nicolet and sieur de Launay*^^ accompanied 
them; the latter was Godfather and gave her the 
name Marie. Her father and mother, although Bar- 
barians, showed that they were pleased at this act, 
and thanked the Fathers and our Frenchmen for hav- 
ing taken the trouble to come out on a night so bad 
that sieur Nicolet was made sick by it. The poor 
girl had only words enough to accept the baptism 
which she had so much desired ; for, as soon as she 
had received it, she entered into the pangs of death, 
and soon after went to Paradise, clad in the robes of 
innocence with which Heaven had just covered her. 
When her uncle saw that she was dead, he had Fa- 
ther Buteux called and said to him, " You love, not 
only during life, but even after death ; my niece be- 
longs to you, bury her in your [41] way. Make a 
big grave, for my brother, whom grief has stricken 
dumb, wishes to place with her her little belong- 
ings." They wished to bury with this girl two dogs, 
and several other things. As to the dogs, they were 
told that the French would not be pleased if such 
ugly beasts were placed among them. " Permit us, 
then," said they, "to bury them near your Ceme- 
tery ; for the dead girl loved them, and it is our cus- 
tom to give to the dead what they loved or possessed 
when they were living. ' ' We do all we can to op- 
pose this superstition, which is every day becoming 
less general; nevertheless, one tolerates, in these 


268 LES RELATIONS DBS jASUITES [Vol.8 

lant, iufques k ce que les iours de la grande moilTon 
viennent. lis enueloperent done le corps mort de 
plufieurs robes, ils luy donnerent fes affiquets, fes [42] 
braueries, quatite de porcelaine, qui font les diamans 
& les perles du pais, & de plus on mit dans la folle 
deux auirons, & deux grands facs remplis de leurs 
richelles, & de diuers outils ou inftrumens, dont fe 
feruent les filles & les femmes. Pour conclufion le 
pere de cette fille tant aymee, voyant I'honneur qu'on 
rendoit a fon enfant, & comme on luy auoit fait faire 
vn beau cercueil, ce qui plaift infiniment k ces Bar- 
bares, il fe ietta fur le col du Pere Buteux, & luy dit 
Nikanis, mon bien-ayme, en verity ie cognois que tu 
m'ayme, & tous vous autres qui portez cet habit, vous 
cberilTez noftre Nation. Puis apoftrophant fon en- 
fant; Ma fille que tu es heureufe d'eftre fi bien logee: 
c6t homme eft I'vn des principaux de fa nation, fa 
femme s'eft fait'Chreflienne, comme nous dirons en 
fon lieu, nous efperons qu'il mourra Chreftien, aufll 
bien que fes plus proches. Ainfi foit-il. 

Le vingtiefme du mefme mois Dieu fit paroifcre fa 
bonte en la conuerfion & au Baptefme d'vn Sauuage, 
dont nos Peres fembloient quafi auoir defefpere: ce 
ieune homme eftant malade, le Pere Buteux [43] I'alla 
vifiter: comme il y alloit grand nombre de perfonnes 
dans fa cabane, il I'inuita de venir faire vn tour en 
noftre maifon, fi fa maladie luy permettoit: il s'y 
tranfporte incontinent, apres quelques difcours le 
Pere le iette fur les articles de noftre creance, mais 
auec peu de fucc^s: car ayant efpoufe la fille d'vn 
des plus grands Charlatans du pais, il n'efloit pas 
pour fe rendre a la premiere f emonce : comme on le 
prelloit fur les biens de la vie future, s'il n'en vouloit 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6j6 269 

first beginnings, many things which in time will dis- 
appear of themselves. If these poor ignorant people 
were refused the privilege of placing in the graves 
of their dead their few belongings, to go with them 
to the other life, they say, they would also refuse to 
allow us to approach their sick ; and thus many souls 
would be lost which we are gathering in little by 
little, until the days of the great harvest come. So 
they enveloped the dead body in several robes ; they 
gave her her trinkets, [42] her ornaments, a quantity 
of porcelain, which is the diamonds and pearls of this 
country ; ™ and besides this they put in the grave two 
paddles, and two large bags filled with their wealth, 
and with different utensils or instruments which the 
girls and women use. Finally, the father of this girl, 
so dearly beloved, — seeing the honor they were show- 
ing his child, and that they had made her a beautiful 
coffin, a thing which gives infinite pleasure to these 
Barbarians, — threw himself upon Father Buteux's 
neck and said, "■ Nikanis, my well-beloved, in truth I 
recognize that thou lovest me, and that all of you, 
who wear this gown, cherish our Nation." Then 
apostrophizing his child: " My daughter, how happy 
thou art to be so well lodged ! ' ' This man is one of 
the principal men of his nation ; his wife has become 
a Christian, as we shall relate in the proper place. 
We hope that he will die a Christian as well as his 
family. So may it be. 

On the twentieth of the same month, God showed 
his goodness in the conversion and Baptism of a Sav- 
age, of whom our Fathers had almost despaired. This 
young man was sick, and Father Buteux [43] went 
to visit him. As a great many people were going 
into his cabin, he invited him to make a visit to our 


270 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 

pas iomr, il repartit, qu'il ne pouuoit pas croire cela; 
car mon ame, difoit-il, apres ma mort n'aura point 
d'efprit, & par confequent ne fera pas capable de ces 
biens. Comment f9ais tu, luy fit le Pere, que les 
ames apres lenr trefpas font ftupides, & fans con- 
noilTance ; deux de nos hommes, replique-il, font re- 
tournez autresfois apres leur mort, & I'ont dit ^ ceux 
de noftre nation. Ces ames qui retournerent auoient- 
elles de I'efprit? Non, fit-il. Tu te trompes, dit le 
Pere, car c'eft auoir de I'efprit, de cognoiftre qu'on 
n'a point d'efprit; mais laifTons cette fubtilite, eft-ce 
pas auoir de I'efprit que d'eftre bon cbalTeur? iamais 
les Sauuages ne nieront [44] cette propofition, car 
leur plus grande Philofophie & Theologie n'eft pas 
en leur tefte, mais en leurs pieds. Or efl-il, pourfui- 
uit le Pere, qu'il y a des ames des Sauuages qui 
chalTent brauement aux ames des Caftors & des Eflans, 
done elles ont de I'efprit. A cet argument vn peu 
trop preffant pour vn Sauuage il ne refpondit autre 
chofe, fmo que puis que fes gens n'alloient point au 
Ciel, qu'il n'y vouloit point aller; Vous autres, di- 
foit-il, vous alfeurez que vous allez 1^ haut, allez y 
done a la bonne heure, chacun aime fa nation, pour 
moy i'iray trouuer la mienne. Le Pere voyant bien 
qu'il s'opiniaftreroit chage de difcours, I'interroge 
fur fon mal; C'eft, refpond-il, vn mefchant Algon- 
quain qui m'a procure cette maladie qui me tient dans 
le corps, pource que m'eftant fafcli6 contre luy, la 
peur qu'il eut que ie ne le tuaffe I'a induit a traitter 
de ma mort auec le Manitou. Et comment f§ais-tu 
cela? I'ay faict confulter le Manitou, qui m'a dit 
que ie me haftaffe de faire des prefens aux Manitou- 
Jiouekhi, ce font leurs longleurs, & qu'il preuie droit 


1634-36J LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 271 

house, provided his illness would permit it; he went 
there immediately. After some conversation, the 
Father reverted to the articles of our belief, but with 
little success; for, having married the daughter of 
one of the greatest Charlatans of the country, he 
would not surrender at the first summons. When 
the blessings of the future life were urged upon him, 
and he was asked if he did not wish to enjoy them, 
he answered that he could not believe those things. 
" For," said he, " after my death my soul will have 
no intelligence, and hence will not be capable of en- 
joying these blessings." "How dost thou know," 
replied the Father, ' ' that souls, after their departure 
from this life, are without sensibility and knowl- 
edge?" "Two of our men," he answered, "once 
returned, after their death, and told this to the peo- 
ple of our nation." " Did those souls that returned 
have any intelligence?" " No," he replied. " Thou 
art mistaken," said the Father. " for it is intelligence 
to know that one has not intelligence; but let us 
leave these subtleties. Does it require intelligence 
to be a good hunter?" The Savages will never deny 
[44] this proposition, for their greatest Philosophy 
and Theology is not in their heads, but in their feet. 
" Now is it true," continued the Father, " that there 
are souls of Savages that are bravely hunting the 
souls of Beavers and of Elks? Then they must have 
intelligence." To this argument, a little too forcible 
for a Savage, he answered nothing, except, that as 
his people were not going to Heaven, he did not 
wish to go there. " You people," said he, " are sure 
of going up yonder. Well and good, go there, then ; 
each one loves his own people ; for my part, I shall 
go and find mine." The Father, seeing clearly that 


272 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 8 

mon ennemy, luy oftant la vie, & par ainfi que ie 
guerirois: mais [45] mo malheur eft que ie n'ay plus 
rien, i'ay donne ma Pourcelaine & mes Caftors, & k 
faute de pouuoir continuer ces prefens il faut que ie 
meure. Voila I'vnique vtilite de I'art de ces Jon- 
gleurs, c'eft qu'ils tirent tout ce qu'ils peuuent des 
pauures malades, & quand ils n'ont plus rien ils les 
abandonnent. Les laponois ont des erreurs toutes 
femblables, ils croyent que les pauures ne pouuans 
rien donner aux Bonzes, ne fgauroient aller en Para- 
dis. Les Chreftiens font obligez d'adorer & de re- 
cognoiftre la bont6 de leur Dieu. Que la foy a de 
clarte pour eftre vn flambeau obfcur, & que noftre 
creance pour eftre releuee par defl!us les forces de la 
nature, s'accorde bien auec la raifon ! Les Theolo- 
giens difent bien h. propos, qu'il faut aMoir piam moti- 
onem, pour donner confentement aux propofitions de 
noftre foy ; il faut que la volont6 s'amolifl!e, & qu'elle 
quitte fa durete naturelle ; ce qui fe fait par vn doux 
foufle ou mouuement du S. Efprit, lequel nous in- 
duit h. croire. Ie voy tous les iours des hommes con- 
uaincus fur cette verity, que noftre creance eft bonne, 
qu'elle eft faincte, qu'elle eft conforme ^ la raifon, 
& apres [46] tout cela, ne voyant aucune conclufion 
de ces premices, ie m'efcrie, Qu'auons nous faict k 
Dieu pour nous auoir donne la Foy, qui a tant de 
peine d'entrer en I'ame de ces pauures Sauuages! 
Mais pour retourner a noftre ieune homme, les Peres 
auoient comme defefpere de fon falut; neantmoins 
comme la conuerfion d'vne ame depend de celuy qui 
eft tout-puillant, ils ne lailToient pas de Ie vifiter, 
pour luy donner de fois h autre quelque crainte de 
I'enfer, ou quelque efperance de la vie eternelle. En 


1634 - 36] LE JE UNE ' S J? EL A T/ON, 1636 273 

he would be obstinate, changed the subject and asked 
him about his disease. " It is, " he replied, ' ' a wicked 
Algonquain who has given me this disease which 
sticks in my body, because I was angry at him ; and 
his fear that I would kill him induced him to bargain 
for my death with the Manitou." *' And how dost 
thou know that?" "I have had the Manitou con- 
sulted, and he told me I should make haste and give 
presents to the Maniiousiouekhi," — these are their 
Jugglers,—" and that he would forestall my enemy, 
taking his life, and that thus I would be cured ; but 
[45] my misfortune is that I have nothing more,— I 
have given my Porcelain and my Beavers; and, be- 
cause I cannot continue these presents, I must die." 
So the only use to which these Jugglers put their 
art is to draw what they can from poor sick people ; 
and, when they have nothing more, they abandon 
them. The Japanese have similar errors. They be- 
lieve that, as the poor can give nothing to the 
Bonzes, they cannot go to Paradise. Christians are 
obliged to adore and to acknowledge the goodness of 
their God. What light there is in faith, though it be a 
dark lantern ; and how well our belief, though it may 
be elevated above the forces of nature, conforms to 
reason ! Theologians say very truly that it is neces- 
sary to have the piam motionem in order to consent to 
the propositions of our faith ; the will must be sof- 
tened and must give up its natural hardness. This is 
done by the gentle breathing or stirring of the Holy 
Spirit, which leads us to believe. I daily see men 
who are convinced of this truth, that our belief is 
good, that it is holy, that it conforms to reason ; and, 
after [46] all that, seeing no conclusions drawn from 
these premises, I exclaim, "What have we done to 


274 


LES RELA TIONS DES jlSUITES [Vol. 8 


fin ce pauure ieune homme fut touche tout a coup, 
cet entendement plein de tenebres commence a voir 
le iour, & fa volont6 deuient foupple & obeyffante 
aux volontez de Dieu, comme vn enfant bien ne aux 
defirs de fes parens. Les Peres entrans certain iour 
en fa Cabane il leur fait prefent d'vn morceau d'Eflan 
qu'on luy auoit donne : le Pere Buteux luy dit, Nous 
ne venons pas icy pour receuoir, mais pour te don- 
ner ; nous ne cherchons pas tes biens, mais nous te 
voulons donner ceux du Ciel ; fi tu voulois croire en 
Dieu que tu ferois heureux! Oiiy, dit-il i'y veux 
croire, & ie veux aller auec luy; il difoit [47] cela 
les mains iointes, les yeux efleuez au Ciel, d'vn ac- 
cent fi deuot, auec vne poflure fi compofee, que les 
Peres refterent tons remplis de ioye & d'eftonnement, 
voyant que Dieu en fait plus en vn moment que tons 
les hommes en cent ans; auffi eft-il le Dieu des 
coeurs. Voila ce coeur de pierre change en vn coeur 
de chair, il efcoute auidemet ce qu'il croioit deja, il 
eft tout plein de regrets de fes refiflances, il ne peut 
affez admirer la bonte de celuy qui I'a fi doucement 
vaincu. Les Peres I'ayant veu fi bien difpof6, offrent 
pour luy le facre fainct facrifice de la Meffe, & apres 
vne bonne inflruction luy changerent en fin le nom 
fauuage ^ Amiskoiieroui au nom de Nicolas, qui luy 
fut donn6 au fainct Baptefme. Dieu fgait predre fon 
temps quand il luy plaifl. A I'heure qu'il fut tou- 
che, qu'il fut baptife, & qu'il mourut, certains gauf- 
feurs & badins qui demeuroient en fa Cabane, & qui 
auroiet faict leur poffible pour le detourner du Chri- 
flianifme efloient allez a la chaffe, ils retournerent 
iuftement deux heures apres fa mort, bien eflonnez 
de ce qui c'efloit paff6 : mais quis vt Deusl Qui pour- 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 276 

God that he gives us this Faith, which enters with so 
much difficulty into the souls of these poor Sav- 
ages!" But to return to our young man. The 
Fathers had, as it were, despaired of his salvation ; 
nevertheless, as the conversion of a soul depends 
upon him who is all-powerful, they did not cease to 
visit him, to impart to him, from time to time, some 
fear of hell, or some hope of eternal life. At last, 
this poor young man was touched all at once; this 
understanding full of darkness began to see the day ; 
and his will became supple and obedient to the will 
of God, like a dutiful child to the desires of its par- 
ents. One day, when the Fathers entered his Cabin, 
he made them a present of a piece of Elk-meat which 
had been given him; Father Buteux said to him, 
"We do not come here to receive, but to give to 
thee ; we are not seeking thy goods, but wish to give 
thee those of Heaven; if thou wouldst believe in 
God, how happy thou wouldst be !" " Yes," said he, 
" I wish to believe, and I wish to go to him." He 
said [47] this with his hands clasped, his eyes raised 
to Heaven, with an accent so devout and a manner 
so composed, that the Fathers were filled with joy 
and astonishment, seeing that God does more in a 
moment than all men can do in a hundred years ; he 
is indeed the God of hearts. Behold this heart of 
stone changed into a heart of flesh. He listens eager- 
ly to what he already believes ; he is full of regret at 
his former opposition ; he cannot sufficiently admire 
the goodness of him who has so gently vanquished 
him. The Fathers, seeing him so well disposed, 
offered for him the holy sacrifice of the Mass ; and, 
after thorough instruction, finally changed the savage 
name Amiskoueroui to the name Nicolas, which was 


276 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 8 


ra daourner la bonte de Dieu, [48] non plus que fes 
foudres? Non ejl qui fe abfcondat h calore eius. II n'y 
a coeur de bronze qui ne fe liquefie, quand Dieu le 
veut brufler. 

Le vingt-cinquiefme, iour de la Conuerfion de 
fainct Paul, vn ieune Sauuage fut nomme Paul, fon 
pere luy procura dans fa maladie, ce qu'il ne prenoit 
pas pour foy dans la fant6: tant s'en faut qu'il fe 
monftrafl fafcli6 qu'on inflruififl fon fils, age de 
quinze k feize ans, qu'au contraire il I'exhortoit ^ 
prefler I'oreille aux Peres, & par fois les venant vifi- 
ter luy-mefme, & les ayant ouy parler des chofes de 
I'autre vie, il racontoit par apres k fes enfans ce qu'il 
auoit apris, n' ayant pas allez de courage d'embraffer 
& profeffer les veritez qu'il aprouuoit en fon coeur. 
Les refpects humains font bien du mal par tout. 

Le vingt-buictiefme & vingt-neufiefme, deux f ceurs 
ont efle enroll6es au Catalogue des enfans de Dieu. 
La plus petite, ag6e de deux ans, chante maintenant 
fes grandeurs parmy les Cboeurs des Anges. L'aif- 
n^e I'a fuiuie quelque temps apres, elle auoit enui- 
ron feize ans, quand elle prit vne nouuelle naiffance 
en lefus-Chrift, [49] eflant tombee malade, il ne fut 
pas difficile de luy perfuader qu'elle fe fifl Cbrefli- 
enne. II femble qu'elle auoit d6ja la foy deuant que 
les Peres luy parlalTent ; fon f rere f requentoit en no- 
flre Maifon, inftruifant nos Peres en fa langue, & 
comme on luy parloit fouuent de nos Myfleres, il ra- 
contoit ^ fa foeur ce qu'il auoit appris. II eftoit plus 
heureux iettat cette femence faerie, que les Peres 
mefmes: car on n'a point remarque qu'elle ait encore 
gerni6 en fon ame, & elle a porte des fleurs & des 
fruicts dans le coeur de fa foeur: laquelle interrogee 


1634-3C] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, i6s6 111 

given to him in holy Baptism. God knows how to 
take his time when he pleases. At the time he 
was converted, when he was baptized and when he 
died, certain scoffers and triflers who lived in his 
Cabin, and who would have done all they could to 
divert him from Christianity, had gone to the chase ; 
they returned exactly two hours after he died, very 
much astonished at what had taken place ; but quis 
ut Deus ? Who can turn away the goodness of God, 
[48] any more than his thunderbolts? Non est qui se 
abscondat h calore ejus. There is no heart of bronze 
that will not melt when God wishes to heat it. 

On the twenty-fifth, the day of saint Paul's Con- 
version, a young Savage was named Paul. His fa- 
ther secured for him in his sickness what he did not 
take for himself in health. So far was he from show- 
ing anger at the instruction given his son, a boy of 
fifteen or sixteen, that on the contrary, he urged 
him to listen to the Fathers ; and having sometimes 
visited them himself, and having heard them speak of 
the realities of the other life, he related afterwards to 
his children what he had learned, not having enough 
courage to embrace and profess the truths that he 
approved in his heart. Fear of the world does a 
great deal of harm everywhere. 

On the twenty-eighth and twenty-ninth, two sis- 
ters were enrolled in the Catalogue of the children 
of God. The smaller, about two years old, now 
sings his greatness among the Choirs of the Angels. 
The elder followed her, a short time afterward. She 
was about sixteen years old when she received a new 
birth in Jesus Christ ; [49] having fallen sick, it was 
not hard to persuade her to become a Christian. It 
seems that she had already possessed the faith, be- 


278 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 8 


en fa maladie, fi elle ne vouloit pas eftre baptifee, 
r^pondit, qu'elle en auoit vn grand defir. Les Peres 
la voulans inftruire, trouuerent qu'elle en fgauoit 
affez pour receuoir le fainct Baptefme, ce qui les 
6tonna & confola: Elle fut done nommee leanne, 
receuant auec ce nom fi grande abondance de grace, 
qu'il fembloit que le Fils de Dieu prift vn plaifir par- 
ticulier en cette nouuelle Efpoufe. Le Pere Buteux 
la voyant fur fon depart pour s'en aller dans les bois 
auec fa mere, & les autres Sauuages, luy dit. Adieu 
ma fille, fouuenez vous que vous eftes maintenant 
[50] amie de Dieu, & que fi vous mourez, il vous me- 
nera dans fa maifon, remplie de tout bon-heur. 
Adieu mon Pere, repartit-elle, ie ne vous verray plus; 
mais il importe peu que ie meure, puisque ie dois 
aller en fi bon lieu. Elle dit cela auec vn tel fenti- 
ment de piete, que les larmes en vindrent aux yeux 
des deux Peres, rauis de voir vne petite Barbare, 
parler en Ange de Paradis. Mais que vous pourrions 
nous donner, leanne, puis que vous nous quittez pour 
vn fi long-temps? luy dirent-ils. Si vous auez du 
raifm donnez m'en vn peu, ce fera la derniere fois 
que vous me foulagerez en ma maladie, car ie m'en 
vais mourir dans les bois : mais ie croy que i'iray au 
Ciel; k voftre auis, mon Pere? Oiiy ma fille, vous y 
irez, fi vous perfeuerez en la foy. Affeurez vouz, 
dit-elle, que ie croy en Dieu, & que i'y croiray toute 
ma vie. lis luy donnerent tout le raifin qu'ils auoient 
de refte, qui n'eftoit pas grande ctiofe, le peu qu'on 
leur auoit enuoye, ay ant deja efte diftribue k beau- 
coup d'autres malades. Quand on vint k lier cette 
pauure fille auec fa petite foeur, toutes deux nouuelle- 
ment baptifees, fur leurs longues traifnes, pour les 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, jb36 279 

fore the Fathers talked with her ; her brother was in 
the habit of visiting our House to instruct our Fa- 
thers in his language; and, as they often spoke to 
him of our Mysteries, he related to his sister what 
he had learned. He was happier than the Fathers 
themselves in scattering this sacred seed ; although 
it has not been observed to have as yet germinated 
in his soul, it has borne flowers and fruit in the heart 
of his sister. When she was asked during her sick- 
ness if she did not wish to be baptized, she answered 
that she greatly desired it. The Fathers, intending 
to instruct her, found that she knew enough to re- 
ceive holy Baptism, which surprised and consoled 
them. So she was called Jeanne, receiving with this 
name so great an abundance of grace, that it seemed 
as if the Son of God took particular pleasure in this 
new Spouse. Father Buteux, seeing her at her de- 
parture to go into the woods with her mother and 
the other Savages, said to her, "Farewell, my 
daughter; remember that you are now [50] a friend 
of God, and that if you die he will take you to his 
house, filled with all blessings." " Farewell, my 
Father," she replied, " I shall see you no more; but 
it matters little if I die, since I am to go to such a 
good place." She said this with so deep a sense of 
piety, that tears came to the eyes of the two Fathers, 
who were carried away at seeing a little Barbarian 
speak like an Angel of Paradise. ' ' But what can we 
give you, Jeanne, since you are going to leave us for 
so long a time?" they said to her. " If you have 
any raisins, give me a few ; this will be the last time 
you will relieve me in my sickness, for I am going to 
die in the woods. But I believe that I will go to 
Heaven. Do you think so, my Father?" "Yes, my 


280 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 8 


mener [51] dans ces grandes forefls, il fembloit aux 
Peres qu'on leur arrachaft le coeur: car ces panares 
gens n'auoient autres viures qu'vn pen de pain qu'ils 
leur donnerent ; leur dif ner & leur f ouper efloit en la 
prouidence de Dieu, lenrs hoftelleries la neige & les 
arbres, & vn pen d'ecorce. Vn grand Nordoiieft, qui 
eft le vent le plus froid de ces Contrees, fouffloit fur 
ces pauures malades, & cependant ils s'en alloient 
tous auffi contens, comme s'ils euffent deu entrer dans 
vne terre de promiffion. O que ie me voulois de mal, 
m'ecrit le Pere qui m'a enuoye ces memoires, voyant 
ce beau f pectacle ! ces gens me condamnoient de pu- 
mianimit6, ne iettant pas fi fortement ma confiance 
en Dieu, qu'ils la iettent en leurs arcs & en leurs 
flecbes, & ne faifant par vertu, ce que ces Barbares 
font par nature. 


1634-36] LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1636 281 

daughter, you will go there, if you continue in the 
faith." " Be assured," she said, " that I believe in 
God, and that I will believe in him all my life." 
They gave her all the raisins they had left, which 
were not many, — the few that had been sent them 
having already been distributed to many other inva- 
lids. When they came to tie this poor girl with her 
little sister, both newly baptized, upon the long 
sledges, to take them [51] into these great forests, it 
seemed to the Fathers like tearing out their hearts ; 
for these poor people had no other food than a little 
bread that they gave them ; their dinner and supper 
depended upon the providence of God, their hostel- 
ries were the snow and trees, and a little bark. A 
strong Northwester, the coldest wind of these Coun- 
tries, blew upon these poor invalids, and yet they 
went away as contented as if they were about to en- 
ter a promised land. "Oh, how disgusted I was 
with myself, ' ' writes the Father who sent me these 
memoirs, "when I saw this beautiful sight! These 
people condemned me of cowardice, for not placing my 
confidence in God as strongly as they do theirs in 
their bows and arrows, and in not doing from virtue 
what these Barbarians do from nature." 


• » 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. VIII 

XXV 

See Vol. VIL, for particulars of this document. 
XXVI 

As with its predecessor for 1635, the Relation of 
1636 (Paris, 1637), although for the convenience of 
bibliographers styled Le Jeune's, is a composite. 
The first half, closing with p. 272, is the annual re- 
port of Le Jeune, as superior, dated August 28, 1636; 
the second half, separately paged, is a special report 
on the Huron mission, by Brebeuf, dated Ihonatiria, 
July 16, 1636. 

For the text of the document, we have had re- 
course to the Lamoignon copy of the original Cra- 
moisy edition in the Lenox Library, which is there 
designated as " H. 65," because described in Har- 
risse's Notes, no. 65, 

Collation (H. 65). Title, with verso blank; " Ex- 
traict du Privilege du Roy" (dated Paris, Dec. 22, 
1636), p. (i) ; "Approbation" by the provincial 
(dated Paris, Dec. 15, 1636), p. (i); " Table des Cha- 
pitres," pp. (4); Le Jeune's Relation (11 chaps.), pp. 
1-272; Brebeuf 's Huron Relation, (in two parts, 4 
and 9 chaps, respectively), pp. 1-223; verso of last 
leaf blank. 

There are two copies in the Lenox Library, in 
which we have discovered a number of textual varia- 
tions which have never been noted before. For the 
sake of convenience we shall designate these as La- 


284 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 


moignon and Bancroft, the names of former owners 
whose individual impress they bear. Our reprint, as 
previously stated, is from the Lamoignon copy. The 
Quebec reprint (vol. i, 1858) follows a copy with the 
text corresponding with the Bancroft variations. All 
the differences which we have discovered occur in 
the Huron Relation, and the references are to the 
pagination of that part. We give the principal ones 
below. 


Lamoignon. 


p. 85, last line ends with: 
" s'il ne leur fufl" 

The last four lines of p. 85 
are spaced freely to make up 
for the elision of "arriu6." 

P. 146, 1. 2, reads: " d'ou ils 
tirent" 

P. 146, 1. 22, reads: "alliance. 
Si leurs champs" 

P. 146, 1. 23, reads: "les 
occupe ils font ' ' 

P. 158, 1. 9, reads: "cotre" 

P. 158, 1. 10, reads: "les 
tourmentet : le " 

P. 158, 1. 13, reads: "queces 
pauures miferables chante- 
ront" 

P. 158, 1. 18, reads: "s'ils 
eftoiet vaillas hommes, ils leur 
arrachet ' ' 

P. 159, last line ends with: 
"quelque Peuple auec qui ils " 


Bancroft. 


p. 85, last line ends with: 
's'il ne leur fuft arriu6 " 


P. 146, 1. 2, reads: " dont ils 
tirent" 

P. 146, 1. 22, reads: "al- 
liances, fi leurs champs ' ' 

P. 146, 1. 23, reads: "les oc- 
cupe ; ils font ' ' 

P. 158, 1. 9, reads: " contre " 

P. 158, 1. 10, reads: "les 
tourmentent ' ' 

P. 158, 1. 13, reads: "que ce 
pauure mif erable chantera ' ' 

P. 158, 1. 18, reads: "s'il 
efloit vaillant homme, ils luy 
arrachent " 

P. 159, last line ends with: 
' 'quelques Peuples auec lef quels 
ils" 


There is still another edition of this Relation in 
which the matter was reset entirely, and in which 
the text-page is much larger than in the one described 
above. Pilling {Bibliography of the Iroquoian Lan- 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. VIII 285 

guages, p. 1 8) describes the British Museum copy, and 
the following collation is based on his very careful 
account of it. 

Collation (H. 66). Title, with verso blank, i leaf; 
" Table des Chapitres," pp. (2); Le Jeune's Relation, 
pp. I -199; Brebeuf's Huron i?^/rt//^«, pp. i - 164. 

Copies of H. 65 may be found in the following 
libraries: Lenox (two variations), Harvard, Library 
of Parliament (Ottawa), Brown (private). Archives of 
St. Mary's College (Montreal), and the British Mu- 
seum. The Barlow copy (1889), no. 1276, sold for 
$17.50. Priced by Harrassowitz (1882), no. 23, at 
125 marks. Copies of H. 66 are in the British Mu- 
seum, and in the Bibliotheque Nationale (imperfect). 
We know of no example in America. 


NOTES TO VOL VIII 

(Figures in parentheses, following number of note, refer to pages 
of English text,) 

r (p. 9).— Concerning the increase of French colonists at this 
time, see vol. vii., note 8. 

2 (P- i2>)-—Pemptegous : one of numerous variants of the name 
Penobscot (often mentioned by Lescarbot and Biard as Pentegoet). 
Specific reference is here made to the peninsula of Matchebiguatus 
(contracted later to Bagaduce), the site of the present Castine, at 
the mouth of Penobscot River (see vol. ii., note 6). It was visited 
by Champlain in 1604, and by John Smith, twelve years later. From 
that time, it was more or less frequented by English fishing vessels ; 
and, in 1630, the Plymouth Company established here a post for 
traffic with the Indians. It is this trading station to which Le Jeune 
refers; in 1635, it was taken for the French by Charles d'Aulnay de 
Charnisay, a lieutenant of the Commander de Razilly. 

The family of Razilly (Razilli or Rasilly), of Touraine, was one 
of rank, ability, and renown. Early in the seventeenth century it 
was represented mainly by three brothers — Francois, who in 161 2 
undertook, with Daniel de la Touche de la Ravardiere, to found a 
French colony at Maranham, in Brazil ; Claude, seigneur de Launay, 
who also went to Maranham — this colony being destroyed by the 
Portuguese in 161 5 ; and Isaac, a chevalier of Malta, and commander 
of the isle Bouchard. All of these men held positions of honor and 
responsibility in the court, the army, or the navy. Frangois served 
later as field marshal in the army, and was also sent as ambassador 
to Savoy. Guerin says that Claude and Isaac became two of the 
most skillful and renowned seamen of their age ; they were comman- 
ders of squadrons, and even admirals, in many important naval con- 
tests. A memoir relating to "colonies, in view of the increase in 
the maritime power of France," was presented (1626) by Isaac de 
Razilly to Richelieu, to which Guerin ascribes much influence in 
securing the formation of the Company of New France, in the fol- 
lowing year. 

Isaac was one of the Hundred Associates, and after 1628 was their 
naval commander. In the spring of 1629, the company, hearing 
that Kirk's expedition was about to set out from England, prepared 


288 LES RELA TIONS DES J t SUITES 

a fleet, loaded with supplies for the suffering colonists at Quebec. 
Orders were given that some of the vessels should sail directly from 
Dieppe or La Rochelle for Canada, leaving the rest to go later, 
under Razilly. These orders were neglected, so that, instead of 
reaching Quebec by the end of May, and thus affording timely aid 
to Champlain, the ships waited for Razilly — whose commission for 
Canada was, however, revoked upon the conclusion of the peace of 
Susa (April 24, 1629), and he was instead sent to Morocco. The 
vessels finally set sail from La Rochelle, but were delayed by bad 
weather, thus failing to reach Quebec before its capture by Kirk. 
The ship commanded by De Caen was taken by the English ; that 
belonging to the Jesuits was wrecked off Canso (see vol. iv., doc. 
xix. ) ; and those under Desdames and Joubert made their way back 
to France. In the spring of 1630, another expedition was fitted out 
by the Company of New France, under Razilly's command, for the 
recapture of Canada ; but it was not despatched thither, owing to 
the promise of Charles I. to restore Quebec to France — an agree- 
ment that was, however, not carried into effect until 1632, because 
of Louis's delay in paying the dowry that he had promised with 
Henrietta Maria, Charles's queen. Finally, in that year, De Caen 
was sent to occupy Quebec for his "king. At the same time, Razilly 
was commissioned to ' ' put the Company of New France in posses- 
sion of Port Royal" — for which purpose he was given an armed 
ship named " Esperance en Dieu," and the sum of 10,000 livres; he 
was also to take with him three Capuchin missionaries. The docu- 
ment authorizing this enterprise was signed by Richelieu March 27, 
1632, two days before the treaty of St. Germain-en-Laye. Razilly's 
formal commission to receive Port Royal from the English bears 
date of May 10 in the same year. These documents are given by 
Margry, in MSS. re I. Nouv. France, vol. i., pp. 85, no. 

Razilly was appointed governor of Acadia, "D'Aulnay and Charles 
de la Tour being his lieutenants ; he also obtained from the Company 
of New France (May 29, 1632) a concession at St. Croix river and 
bay, 12 by 20 leagues in extent. He established his seat of govern- 
ment at La Hgve. In January, 1635, was formed an association — 
headed by Isaac and Claude de Razilly, and Cardinal Richelieu — to 
colonize Port Royal and La Hgve. Isaac de Razilly died in Novem- 
ber of that year, and was succeeded by D'Aulnay as governor of 
Acadia. Claude de Razilly inherited his brother's estates, which, 
with his own interests m Acadia, he subsequently transferred to 
D'Aulnay. Harrisse says {Notes, p. 57): "He seems to have died 
in poverty, about the year 1666— at least, we have reason to sup- 
pose this, from the petition in verse addressed to the king in 1667, 
by his sister Marie, a celebrated poetess known as ' Calliope ' [1621- 


NOTES TO VOL. VIII 289 


1704] to whom Louis XIV. granted a pension of 2,000 livres, in con- 
sideration of the straitened circumstances to which she had been 
reduced by her brother's losses (Titon du Tillet, Parnasse Frangois, 
Paris, 1732, fol., p. 487)." 

Concerning the Razillys, see Guerin's Navtg. Frangazs, pp. 
313-338; Harrisse's Notes, pp. 53-57; and Moreau's Histoire de 
I'Acadte Frangozse (Pax\&, 1873), PP- 112-X17, 129-144. 

3 (P- 13)-— Quebec, like the other Canadian provinces, possesses 
great mineral wealth. Magnetic and hematite iron ores are abun- 
dant ; and a rich vein of chromic iron has recently been found and 
worked, at Coleraine. A considerable quantity of copper is also 
mined in Quebec; gold to the amount of $260,905 was produced dur- 
ing the years 1877-94; and in 1894, this province yielded 101,318 
ounces of silver. Among its other important mineral productions 
are asbestos, phosphates, petroleum, and building-stones. 

Pierre Boucher (governor of Three Rivers in 1653-58 and 1662- 
67) thus mentions the mineral products of Canada, in his Histoire 
veritable et natvrelle de la Novvelle France, (Paris, 1664), chap, 
i. : " Springs of salt water have been discovered, from which excel- 
lent salt can be obtained; and there are others, which yield miner- 
als. There is one in the Iroquois Country, which produces a thick 
liquid, resembling oil, and which is used in place of oil for many 
purposes. There are also many mines, according to report ; I am 
certain that there are mines of iron and copper in many places. 
Various reliable persons have assured me that there is a great abun- 
dance of lead, and that not far from us ; but, as it is along the road 
by which our Enemies pass, no one has yet dared to go thither to 
make its discovery. ' ' 

4 (P- 15).— In regard to the Canadian policy of the Hundred As- 
sociates, see vol. iv., notes 21, 38; and vol. vii., note 18. Cf. Faillon 
{Col. Fr., pp. 343-352); he complains that the company, although 
at first making some efforts to bring over colonists, soon evaded the 
obligations imposed by their charter, and sent to Canada few be- 
sides their own fur-trade employees ; that they cleared no land, and 
only sent provisions to the colony; that they made concessions (as 
to Giffard, Bourdon, and many others) obliging those to whom 
lands were given to assume the company's duties of clearing lands, 
and sending and supporting colonists — which acts should at the 
same time inure to the benefit of the Associates, and be credited to 
their account, as if performed by them. 

5 (P- 17)-— Concerning Duplessis-Bochard, see vol. v.. note 34. 

6 (p. 19).— Le Jeune states, in the Relation for 1634 (vol. vii. of 
this series, p. 229), that this fort was built on St. Croix Island (see 
vol. ii., note 66). The island was afterwards known by the name of 


290 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 


the fort. Ferland (Cours d'Histoire, vol. i., p. 260, note) thus cites 
Faucher: "The little island below Richelieu, where now is a light- 
house, is precisely the same where was formerly situated a fort, to 
intercept passage in time of war. The channel adjacent to the 
island has been measured, and its greatest width is seven arpents; 
vessels generally pass at a distance of three or four arpents from the 
island. In all the river, there is no place more suitable for the erec- 
tion of a fort. At low tide, no water remains in the channel." 

7 (p. i()).— Metaberoutm: the Three Rivers (St. Maurice); see 

vol. ii., note 52. 

8 (p. 45).— Pierre Pijart was born at Paris, May 17, 1608, and, 
soon after attaining his majority, became a Jesuit novice. His 
studies were successively pursued at Paris, La Fleche, and Caen; 
and, in July, 1635, he came to Canada. He was at once assigned to 
the Huron mission, where he remained five years. In November, 
1640, he went with Gamier to open the Mission of the Holy Apostles 
among the Tionnontates or Tobacco Nation. This tribe, however, 
refused to listen to them; and within a year they were obliged to 
abandon this mission for a time. Pijart was employed at the Ste. 
Marie residence for some three years. In September, 1645, he was 
located at Three Rivers, being mentioned by Lalemant, in the Jour- 
nal des Jesidtes (Quebec, 1871). p- 5, as " procureur des Hurons." 
In August, 1650, he returned to France. 

g (p. 47)._ Pierre Feaut6, a lay brother in the Jesuit order, came 
to Canada in the summer of 1635; occasional mention of him in 
/ourn. des Jesu. shows that he was employed in the Jesuit residence 
of Notre-Dame des Anges in 1636, and, later, at Quebec. In No- 
vember, 1 65 1, he made a voyage to France, whither he seems to 
have finally returned in October, 1657. 

Rochemonteix fjesuztes, vol. i., p. 212) cites Catalogus Pro- 
vince Francia- to show that Brother Pierre le Tellier was, toward 
1665, in charge of the petite icole, or primary department, of the 
college of Quebec. 

10 (p. 47)._ Claude Quentin came to Canada in July, 1635. and 
was assigned soon afterwards to the residence of Three Rivers, with 
Buteux, where he remained two years. In the summer of 1638, he 
was sent to the station at Miscou, returning some time later to Que- 
bec, on account of ill-health. In the autumn of 1641. he was ap- 
pointed procuror of the Canadian missions, occupying this position 
aboutsixyears — during which time he made several journeys be- 
tween Canada and France, apparently making a final return to the 
latter country Oct. 21, 1647. 

11 (p. 47).— Francois Joseph le Mercier was born at Paris, Oct. 
4, 1604, and, at the age of eighteen, entered the Jesuit novitiate. In 


NOTES TO VOL. VIII 291 


1635, he came to Canada, and labored in the Huron mission until its 
destruction; he was at Ossossane in 1641-42, and at Ste. Marie-on- 
the-Wye in 1644. In June, 1656, he went, with other Jesuits, on the 
mission to the Onondagas, returning to Quebec the following year. 
He remained on the St. Lawrence during the rest of his labors in 
Canada, being superior of the missions in that province from Au- 
gust, 1653, until 1658, and again from 1665 to 1670. In November, 

1659, he was assigned to a mission at Cote de Beaupre, where he 
labored nearly a year, being declared vicar of Quebec in October, 

1660. Sommervogel says that Le Mercier returned to France in 
1673, and was then sent to Martinique as superior of that mission, 
where he remained until his death, June 12, 1690. 

Le Mercier, as superior, wrote various Relations of the Canadian 
missions, which will appear in later volumes of this series. The 
Hurons named him Chaiiose ; the Iroquois, Teharonhiagannra. 

12 (p. 49)-— -^'f'^^w (correctly spelled Echon): see vol. v. , «i?/^ 44. 

13 (P- SS)-— Anguten river : named for the eldest son of the 
prince of Conde, whose titular designation was duke of Anguien, or 
Enghien, from the city of that name in Hainault, near Brussels. 
The nobleman thus referred to (also mentioned in Relation for 1636, 
chap, i.) was later known as "the great Conde;" in 1642, he mar- 
ried a niece of Richelieu. The last scion of the house of Conde who 
bore this name was the unfortunate Louis Antoine, duke of Enghien, 
court-martialed and shot at Vincennes, March 21, 1804, by order of 
Napoleon Bonaparte. 

The Anguien River cannot well be identified; the name does not 
appear on maps of that time. 

14 (P- 59)- — Petite Nation: see vol. v., note 56. 

15 (p. 61).— Jean de Quen was born at Amiens in May, 1603, and 
became a Jesuit novice Sept. 13, 1620, at Rouen. His studies were 
pursued at Paris ; and he afterwards became a teacher in the colleges 
at Amiens (1630-31), and Eu (1632-35). Coming to Canada in the 
summer of 1635, he was employed for several years at Quebec — at 
the college, and at Notre-Dame de Recouvrance. In 1640, he was 
at Sillery, of which mission he was the head from 1641 to 1649. 
During this time, he also made evangelizing journeys to neighbor- 
ing tribes ; and, at times, labored in the Ste. Croix mission at Ta- 
doussac, and at Three Rivers. In June. 1 651, he went on a mission 
to the Oumaniwek tribe, and apparently spent the ensuing two years 
in labors with this and other tribes on the upper Saguenay, with 
his headquarters at Tadoussac. To him is ascribed the honor of 
having, while engaged in this work, discovered Lake St. John. In 
1655-56, he was superior of the missions of New France, and seems 
to have remained at Quebec until his death, which occurred Oct. i, 


292 


LES RELA TIONS DES jASUITES 


1659, occasioned by a contagious fever brought on a French vessel, 
whose sick and dying sailors De Quen was nursing at the hospital. 
In August, 1878, the demolition of the old Jesuit College at Que- 
bec brought to light the remains of De Quen, Du Peron, and Jean 
Liegeois. For detailed accounts of this discovery and its attendant 
circumstances, with valuable historical information regarding this 
and other buildings in that city, see Faucher de Saint-Maurice's 
Relation des fouilles dans le ColUge des Jisuites (Quebec, 1879); 
also Rochemonteix's/f^«/^^5, vol. i., pp. 225-227, 456-465. 

16 (p. 61).— Concerning these Turkish pirates, and others, see 

vol. iv., note 29. 

17 (p. 65). — Andre Richard (here written Antoine, apparently 
by some error), born Nov. 23, 1600 (or 1599), became a Jesuit, Sept. 
26, 1621, at Paris. A student successively at Pans, La Fleche, and 
Rouen, he was a teacher at Amiens (1624-26), Orleans (1626-28), 
Caen (1629-30), and Nevers (1631-33)- In February, 1634. he de- 
parted for Canada, and, with Perrault, was stationed at Cape Bre- 
ton, replacing Daniel and Davost. Richard remained at this mission 
about six years, being then sent to Miscou as a co-worker with Jean 
d'Olbeau, who had gone there in the preceding year; the latter fell 
ill with scurvy in December, 1642, and, afflicted with paralysis re- 
sulting therefrom, he was obliged to leave for France in the follow- 
ing summer — dying, however, while on the voyage, through an 
accidental explosion of powder, which destroyed the ship. 

In 1646, Richard was joined by De Lyonne; and he remained on 
the coast of Gaspe — during most of the time, at Miscou — until 1661, 
making voyages to France in 1658 and 1659. According to Dionne 
("Miscou," in Canada-Frangais, July, 1889), he spent the year 
1661-62 at Chedabouctou in Acadia, after which he went back to 
France. Returning to Canada in 1666, he became superior of the 
Jesuit residence at Three Rivers; he is said to have died in 1696. 

18 (p. 65).— Charles Turgis was born at Rouen, Oct. 14, 1606, 
and became a Jesuit as soon as he attained his majority. He studied 
at La Fleche and Clermont, and was a teacher in the former college 
during two years. In 1635, he arrived in Canada, and was sent to 
Miscou with Du Marche, to minister to the French (then 23 in num- 
ber) residing at that post. The climate of Miscou, although now 
salubrious, seems to have been, at that early time, full of danger to 
Europeans; the island was repeatedly swept by the scurvy, which 
was usually fatal. The missionaries soon became its victims ; Du 
Marche was compelled to return to France, and Turgis, although 
more robust, and longer resisting the disease, was laid low by it in 
March, 1637, dying on May 4. An account of his illness and death 
is given in the Relation for that year, which says of him: "He was 


NOTES TO VOL. VIII 293 

equally regretted by the French and by the Savages, who honored 
and tenderly loved him." 

19 (p. 65). — Charles du March6 was assigned to the Miscou sta- 
tion at the same time as Turgis (1635), the missionary residence 
being named St. Charles. Within a year of their arrival, Du March6 
was attacked by the prevalent scourge of that region — the mal du 
terre, or scurvy — and was compelled to return to Quebec. Here 
he remained a few months, being employed at the chapel as con- 
fessor; in Augfust, 1636, he was aiding Buteux at Three Rivers; 
later, he returned to France. 

20 (p. 67). — Concerning Jean Liegeois, see vol. vii., note 7. 
Gilbert Burel, a lay brother, had come to Canada with the first 

Jesuit missionaries (1625), and again, with Le Jeune, in 1632. The 
latter mentions him in 1626 (see vol. iv., p. 163); but his name does 
not occur in the Relations, excepting in this passage in our text. 

21 (p. 69). — Sonontoerrhonons, also variously written Entou- 
honorons (Champlain), Sonnontouans, Tsonnontouans : the western- 
most and also the largest of the five Iroquois tribes or cantons ; by 
early Dutch writers called Sennecas or Sinnekens, by the English 
Senecas, and among themselves Nun-dd-wa-o-no (Morgan) or Nan- 
do-wah-gaah (Marshall). The latter writer says that the name Son- 
nontouan is derived from the Seneca words onondah, "hill," and 
go waah, "great," — "the people of the great hill," alluding to 
Boughton Hill, where was located their principal village, Ga-o-sa- 
eh-ga-aah (or Gandagaro); and that "Seneca" is a corruption of 
Nan-do-wah-gaah. — See his pamphlet. First visit of De la Salle to 
the Senecas [Buffalo, 1874], p. 44. 

Beauchamp, in his "Origin and Early life of the N. Y. Iroquois," 
Transactions of Oneida Hist. Society, 1887-89, (Oneida, N. Y., 
1889), p. 124, derives the Senecas "from the Eries, perhaps within 
historic times. That the Senecas differed from the other Iroquois, 
in religious observances, totems and clans, habits of life, and other 
things, is very clear." He also writes, in a recent letter: "The 
Senecas always had two g^eat villages, and were probably at first a 
minor confederacy — the two branches being clearly distingpuished 
in all historic times, and even now. Among the leading founders 
of the League they had two g^eat chiefs where the others had but 
one, in every account. In the last half of the seventeenth century, 
the two great Seneca towns, held by their two branches, were at 
Mendon, and at Boughton Hill, Victor. In 1660, the easternmost 
Seneca village was 20 miles west of Geneva, and all were comprised 
within a very few miles. ' ' Their villages are shown on J. S. Clark's 
map of "Seneca Castles and Mission Sites," in Hawley's "Early 
Chapters in Seneca History," Cayuga Co. Hist. Collections, No. 3, 


294 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES 

(Auburn, N. Y., 1884); see also his note identifying their sites, pp. 
25, 26. This paper is a careful and minute account of the Jesuit 
missions among the Senecas (1656-84), with valuable annotations 
by both Hawley and Clark. The chief Seneca villages in recent 
times were near the sites of the present Geneva, Canandaigua, 
Lima, and Avon. 

22 (p. 71). — This chief. La Perdrix, is mentioned also in the Re- 
lation for 1634. In regard to the Island tribe, see vol. v., note 57. 

23 (P- 71)- — Attiguenongha (Atignenongach, Attigneenongna - 
hac, Attiniatoenten): this and the Attignaouantan, or Bear Nation, 
(see vol. v., note 17), were not only the most important, but the old- 
est of the Huron tribes, ' ' having received into their country, and 
adopted, the others" {Relation for 1639, chap, i.), and being able to 
trace their tribal history for two centuries back. This tribe was the 
southernmost of the Huron clans ; one of its most important towns 
was Teanaustay6, located in what is now Medonte township. Here 
was situated the Jesuit mission of St. Joseph, destroyed by the 
Iroquois in 1649. 

24 (p. 71). — Arendarhonons, Ahrendarrhonons, or Renarhonons 
(Sagard, who also calls them "nation de la Roche"): the eastern- 
most tribe of Hurons, located west of the Severn River. They were 
the first of the Hurons to engage in trade with the French, and 
regarded themselves as the special allies of the latter. It was with 
this tribe that Champlain spent the winter of 161 5 -16 (see vol. v., 
note 52), at their village of Cahiagu^, where, later, was established 
the Jesuit mission of St. Jean Baptiste. 

25 (p- 75)- — The Ottawa and St. Lawrence Rivers have many 
and often dangerous rapids ; but both rivers are now rendered navi- 
gable by canals around the rapids. The Chaudiere Falls above Otta- 
wa, and the Lachine Rapids above Montreal, are the most noted of 
these obstructions. In the St. Lawrence River are 30 miles of 
rapids. The elevation between Lake Ontario and tidewater is 240 
feet. 

The name " Riviere des Prairies " was at first applied to the Otta- 
wa River (see vol. ii., note 53); but it is now restricted to the chan- 
nel that separates Isle J^sus from the island of Montreal. 

26 (p. 81). — Simon Baron was one of the Jesuit donnes. Suite 
says {Can.-Frangais, vol. li., p. 53): "He had lived at Chibou, 
Cape Breton Island, about 1631, and had there acquired some surgi- 
cal knowledge. In 1634, he was in the service of the Jesuits, and 
accompanied the missionaries to the Huron country, whence he 
returned in 1637. He is mentioned at Three Rivers in 1637, 1658, 
and 1664." During the epidemic of 1637, Baron acquired renown 
through his facility in handling the lancet. 


NOTES TO VOL. VIII 295 


27 (p. 85).— Concerning La Rochelle, see vol. v., note 60. 

28 (p. 91).— For location of Toanch^, see vol. v., note 61. 

29 (p. 99).— Jean Nicolet, a native of Cherbourg, France, came 
to Quebec in i6r8, probably at the age of about 20 years. Like 
Marsolet, Brul^, and others, he was sent by Champlain to live among 
the Indians, that he might acquire a knowledge of the country, of 
the natives, and of their language. For this purpose, Nicolet went 
(1620) to the Algonkins of AUumettes Island, where he remained 
two years ; while among this tribe, he accompanied a large body of 
their warriors to the Iroquois country, in order to arrange a treaty 
of peace — an enterprise successfully accomplished. He then spent 
some nine years among the Nipissings, during which time he wrote 
an account of these savages, their customs, etc., as Le Jeune in- 
forms us in the Relation for 1636. 

Upon the recovery of Canada by the French, Nicolet returned to 
Quebec, probably early in 1633. In June, 1634, Champlain sent him 
on an exploring expedition westward — partly in the hope of finding 
the "sea of China" which was at that time supposed to lie not far 
west of the regions of America then known, and thereby discover- 
ing the long-looked-for short passage to Asia; partly to become ac- 
quainted with the savage tribes lying beyond the " Mer douce" 
(Lake Huron), and to extend the French trade for peltries. Upon 
this trip (accompanying Brebeuf as far as AUumettes Island), Nico- 
let went to his old abode. Lake Nipissing. Thence, with a bark 
canoe, and an escort of seven Hurons, he voyaged by French River 
into Lake Huron, and northward to St. Mary's Straits and Macki- 
nac ; and thence by Lake Michigan, Green Bay, and the Fox River, 
as far as a village of the Mascoutins, probably in what is now Green 
Lake county, Wisconsin. He was thus the first white man who, so 
far as is recorded, had entered this region. From the Mascoutin 
village, he journeyed southward to what is now Northern Illinois,— 
afterwards returning to Canada by the same route on which he had 
set out; he reached Quebec early in the autumn of 1635. This 
notable voyage was generally supposed to have occurred in 1639, 
until Suite advanced the theory, in Milanges d'Histotre et de Lit- 
terature (Ottawa, 1876), pp. 426, 436, that it must have been in 
1634-35 — a theory apparently verified by Butterfield, in his pains- 
taking Discovery of the Northwest by Jean Nicolet (Cincinnati 
1881). 

Nicolet, after his return to Canada, resumed his employment (be- 
gun in 1633) as clerk and interpreter at Three Rivers. Oct. 7, 1637, 
he married Marguerite (then aged eleven years), second daughter 
of Guillaume Couillard. Probably about this time, he obtained, 
jointly with his brother-in-law, Le Tardif (see vol. v., note 49), the 


296 LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES 

estate of Belleborne (so named from the brook of Belleborne, which 
traverses the "plains of Abraham"). In 1641, the Iroquois having 
attacked the Algonkins in the near vicinity of Three Rivers, Nicolet, 
with the Jesuit Ragueneau, attempted, but with little success, to 
turn aside the hostile savages. 

Nicolet died Oct. 29, 1642, being drowned at Sillery; he left but 
one child. Marguerite, who in 1656 married Jean Baptiste le Gardeur. 

Full accounts of Nicolet and of his discoveries are given in But- 
terfield's monograph, and by Suite, ut supra ; also in Jouan's "Jean 
Nicolet," and Butterfield's bibliography of the subject, IVtsconsin 
Historical Collections, vol. xi., pp. 1-25. Cf. also Suite's "Notes 
on Jean Nicolet," A/., vol. viii., pp. 188-194. Nicolet river and 
lake, in Wolfe county. Que. , are named for this noted explorer ; the 
river had been, until about 1640, known as the St. Jean. 

30 (p. 103). — Le Borgne : this name, meaning "the one-eyed," 
was applied by the French, during many years, to the Algonkin 
chief at the head of the Island tribe (see vol. v., note 57), whose 
native name was Tessouehat (or Tessoueatch). 

Champlain mentions that, in June, 1603, he met at Tadoussac an 
Algonkin sagamore named Besouat; Laverdiere (Champlain, p. 
76) thinks this is simply an error for Tesouat. Just ten years later, 
Champlain visited Tessouat at AUumettes Island, and speaks of the 
latter as " a good old Captain." 

Again, in 1629, he mentions Le Borgne (apparently the successor 
of the first-named) as "a good Savage and a man of intelligence" 
(Laverdiere's ed., p. 1198). It was this man who is mentioned in 
our text as alarming the Hurons by reports of Champlain's intended 
vengeance for Brule's murder; he died in August, 1635. In the 
spring of that year, he had gone (as Br^beuf tells us) with an Algon- 
kin embassy to the Huron country, to ask the latter tribes to unite 
with them in an attack upon the Iroquois, which proposal was de- 
clined by the Hurons. 

A third Le Borgne was Tessouehat (called by the Hurons Andes- 
son or Ondesson), characterized by the missionaries as "unusually 
arrogant and malicious" {Relation for 1641). Much to their sur- 
prise, he came down to Montreal in March, 1643, ^or Christian in- 
struction, and was baptized under the name of Paul. In the Rela- 
tion for that year, Vimont says of this chief: " As soon as he became 
a Christian, God gave him the gentleness and meekness of a little 
child;" and the missionaries were greatly delighted and edified by 
his piety. 

In May, 1646, a chief of this name took part in a council held at 
Three Rivers with an embassy from the Iroquois ; but, as he invoked 
the sun to be a witness of the negotiations, he must have been a 


NOTES TO VOL. VIII 297 

heathen, and therefore a successor to the preceding chief. This 
same man was rebuked by a converted Indian at Sillery for not be- 
ing a Christian ; but his pious death, after an illness of two years, is 
recorded in the Relation for 1654. He, too, like his predecessor, 
was renowned as much for his arrogance as for his eloquence. 

31 (p. 105). — Oenrio (Ouenrio, or VVenrio): the site of this village, 
which was located in a populous Huron neighborhood, has not been 
identified beyond question. Du Creux's map places it near the head 
of an inlet — evidently the one now known as Dault's Bay, on the 
west side of Tiny township ; and he associates it with the mission 
of St. Charles. There are remains which correspond very nearly to 
this position ; though some have supposed that Oenrio was nearer 
Penetanguishene Bay, where the remains of another village have 
been found. As it contained part of the Hurons from Toanche, it 
may be assumed that it was not far from Thunder Bay. — A. F. 
Hunter. 

32 (p. III). — Sagamiti : see vol. v., ttote 28. 

33 (p. 115). — Mer douce : see vol. i., note 54. 

34 (p. 115). — Brebeuf here gives the Huron names of the other 
tribes composing the great Huron-Iroquois family. Concerning the 
Khionontaterrhonons (Tobacco Nation), see vol. v., note 18. 

Atiouandaronks (Attiwandarons, Atiraguenrek, or Atirhangen- 
rets): called by the French " Nation Neutre," because they were at 
peace with both the Hurons and the Iroquois, between whom they 
lived. Harris thus endeavors to account for this neutrality, in his 
paper, "The Flint-Workers," Publications of Buffalo Historical 
Society, vol. iv. (Buffalo, 1896), p. 239: "There is but one solution of 
this problem, and that is to be found in the immense quantities of 
flint along the east end of Lake Erie. Without flint arrow and 
spear heads, the Iroquois could not cope with the Hurons, nor the 
Hurons with the Iroquois ; and, as the Neutrals controlled the chert 
beds, neither nation could afford to make the Neutrals its enemy. ' * 

Eastward of the Neutrals, lay the territories of the Five Nations, 
or Iroquois League. Clark's map of this region, showing locations 
of the several tribes and of their villages, is given in Hawley's 
Early Chapters of Cayuga History, 1656-84 (Auburn, N. Y., 
1879); Morgan (Iroq. League) also gives a map, showing locations 
in recent times. For historical sketch of the tribes included in the 
League, see Beauchamp's Origin of N. V. Iroquois (cited in note 
21, ante) pp. 119- 142; he says: "The Huron-Iroquois family thus 
seems to have been the last wave of the migratory tribes advancing 
from the west and northwest, and had not reached the sea 300 years 
ago, except a few individuals on the St. Lawrence. The Tuscaroras 
might also be excepted. . . . Almost parallel with these [the 


298 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 

Algonquins], but a little later as a whole, the Huron-Iroquois, find- 
ing the southern regions occupied, advanced along the north, through 
Michigan, Canada, and Ohio, pressing toward the sea, but generally 
prevented from reaching it by the Algonquins. This is very nearly 
the tradition of the Delawares, who represent the Iroquois as mov- 
ing from the west in a line parallel with their own migrations, but a 
little in the rear. The Huron-Iroquois occupied temporarily the 
solitudes of Canada and New York, as well as Michigan and North- 
ern Ohio, gathering strength within their narrow limits, until they 
could force a passage south along the Susquehanna. There the 
Andastis stopped and grew strong. The Eries passed along the 
south shore of their lake, the Hurons and Neutrals on the north. 
The Tuscaroras reached North Carolina, and all the southern Iro- 
quois may have had temporary homes in New York at an early day." 
For estimates of the military strength of the respective tribes, in 
1660 and 1677, see 'Pa.v\ima.n'% Jestizts, p. 297. 

(i) Sonontoerrhonons (Senecas): see note 21, ante. (2) Ouioen- 
rhonons (Ouiogweronons, Oiogouins, or Goyogoums): the Cayugas, 
next east from the Senecas, and probably kindred with them. The 
name of the tribe is derived from that of the lake, the meaning of 
which is variously rendered. Beauchamp says {Iroq. Trail, p. 57): 
" D. Cusick makes it Go-yo-goh, 'mountain rising from water;' Al- 
bert Cusick, Kwe-u-kwe, ' where they drew their boats ashore ; ' L. 
H. Morgan, Gwe-u-gweh, ' at the mucky land. ' All seem to refer 
to the higher and firm land beyond the Montezuma marshes." 
Much valuable information regarding this tribe is given in Hawley's 
Early Cayuga Hist, (cited supra); on p. 21, a note by Clark thus 
mentions their chief towns: "Their principal village, Goi-o-gouen 
(a name also applied by the early French writers to the country and 
canton of the Cayugas), appears to have been located at this time 
[1657] about zyi miles south of Union Springs, near Great Gully 
Brook. Thiohero, ten miles distant, was on the east side of Seneca 
River, at the northern extremity of Cayuga Lake. The archaeologi- 
cal remains m the vicinity of Goi-o-gouen indicate different locations 
occupied at different periods, one of which was on a point at the 
junction of two ravines about four miles from the lake; this was 
very ancient, and probably occupied in the prehistoric age. " The 
site of Thiohero has been recently identified, 2^ miles east of Savan- 
nah. (3) Onontaerrhonons (Onnontaes, Onnondaetonnons, or On- 
nontagu^s): the Onondagas (in their own tongue, Onondahka). 
Beauchamp says {Orig. of N. V. Iroquois, pp. 123, 124, 130): "It 
is very likely that there was an earlier Huron-Iroquois settlement 
of Central New York [before the coming of the Mohawks] from 
Jefferson county, where there are many fort sites. Among these 


NOTES TO VOL. VIII 299 


are traces of Huron burial customs, and the earthenware is gen- 
erally finer than that farther south, there being often temporary 
deterioration in such things, as men recede from the parent stock. 
From that region the Onondagas certainly came, as they relate. 
. . . I have little doubt that the Onondagas were driven out of 
Jeflferson county by the Hurons, about the same time that the Mo- 
hawks had to leave Montreal." An interesting mention of this 
tribe, at nearly the same time as Br^beuf 's (possibly a little earlier), 
is made by Arent Van Curler (who calls them "Onnedagens"), in 
his Journal of 1634-35, (accompanied by an Iroquois vocabulary), 
a translation of which, with notes by James G. Wilson, is published 
in Annual Report of Amer. Hist. Association, 1895, pp. 81-101. 
This was probably the most influential of the Five Nations; their 
village of Onnontagu^ (Onondaga) was the capital of the confeder- 
acy, where their principal councils were held. Clark says {Early 
Cayuga Hist., p. 9): "This was situated on a considerable eleva- 
tion between two deep ravines, formed by the west and middle 
branches of Limestone Creek, in the present town of Pompey, N. 
Y., two miles south of the village of Manlius. It contained at this 
time [1656] 300 warriors, with 140 houses, several families often oc- 
cupying a single house. Their cornfields extended for two miles, 
north and south, and in width from one-half to three-fourths of a 
mile, interspersed with their dwellings. The grand council cham- 
ber was here, in which all matters of interest, common to the sev- 
eral nations of the League, were decided. This site was abandoned 
about 1680." Beauchamp writes: "At the time of Champlain's 
attack on the Oneida town, the Onondagas were living on the east 
side of Limestone Creek, about i j^ miles west of Cazenovia Lake. 
Alarmed by this invasion, they went farther south, selecting a site 
which commanded the whole valley. Then, as the Huron war 
progressed favorably, they went northward again, crossing the 
ridge and reaching the west branch of Limestone Creek, being on 
its banks a little south of Pompey Center about 1640. In 1654, Le 
Moyne visited them at their great village still farther north, at In- 
dian Hill, two miles south of Manlius village. Thence, by a grad- 
ual removal, they went to the east side of Butternut Creek, where 
their fort was burned in 1696. Soon afterward, they occupied the 
east side of Onondaga Valley, but were almost entirely on the west 
side of the creek by 1750; and after the sale of their lands they 
retired to their present reservation." (4) Onoiochronons {Oneioxx- 
chronons, Oneiouts, or Onneyouts): "the people of the stone," com- 
monly known as Oneidas. This tribe and the Cayugas were of 
somewhat inferior rank among the other Iroquois tribes. According 
to Pyrtaeus, "the alliance having been first proposed by a Mohawk 


300 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 

chief, the Mohawks rank in the family as the eldest brother, the 
Oneidas as the eldest son ; the Senecas, who were the last that con- 
sented to the alliance, were called 'Cae, youngest son.'' Cf. Relation 
for 1646, chap. i. : "Onnieoute is a tribe which, the greater part of 
its men having been destroyed by the upper Algonquins, was com- 
pelled to call upon the Annierronnons to repeople it ; whence it comes 
that the Annierronnons call it their daughter. " They lived almost 
entirely in Madison county, having usually one village, but some- 
times two. Their settlements were entirely confined to the valleys 
of Oneida and Oriskany Creeks, — mainly the former." (5) Agnier- 
rhonons (Agnongherronons, Anniengehronnons, Agniers, or Aniers): 
"the people of the flint," called Maquas by the Dutch, and Mohawks 
by the English ; the easternmost of the Iroquois tribes, occupying 
the lower part of the Mohawk River valley. They were probably 
the inhabitants of Hochelaga (Montreal), whom Cartier found in 
1535; and the name Canada, then first used by the French, is itself 
a Mohawk word. Their own traditions represent the Mohawks as 
living on the St. Lawrence, in alliance with the Algonkin tribe of 
Adirondacks ; a dispute arising between them, the former were 
driven out by their Algonkin neighbors, probably late in the six- 
teenth century. — See Beauchamp's N. V. Iroquois ; cf. Suite's 
sketch of the Algonkin-Iroquois wars, in vol. v. of this series, note 
52 ; the latter thinks that the Montreal Iroquois had retired to Lake 
Simcoe by 1615. Beauchamp says {Irog. Trail, p. 55): "The three 
Mohawk castles were in Montgomery county. When first visited 
by the Dutch, there was a castle for each clan, the Bear, Wolf, and 
Turtle. Two villages only were in existence about 1600, as the 
Wolf clan sprang out of the Bear (according to an early writer), 
having probably lived with them. One of the two villages is on the 
south side of the river ; the other is in Ephrata, in Fulton county. ' ' 
Wilson says, in a note on Van Curler's Journal {Affi. Hist. Asso. 
Rept., 1895, p. 99): "The abandoned castle pointed out by the Mo- 
hawks seems to have marked their farthest eastern extension. 
Their early villages were in a radius of a dozen miles from Canajo- 
harie, but they moved eastward until checked by the Mohicans. 
Later, European pressure forced them back until the western castle 
was at Danube." The sites of these Mohawk towns in 1642, as 
identified by Clark, are thus given by Shea, in his translation of 
Martin's Life of Jogues (3rd ed., N. Y., 1885), p. 85: " Ossernenon 
(Osserinon, Agni^, Oneougiour^, or Asserua), later Cahniaga or 
Caughnawaga, was near the present station of Aunesville; Tion- 
nontoguen, on a hill just south of Spraker's Basin, about 13 miles 
west of Ossernenon; Andagaron, or Gandagaron, between them, 
and also on the south side of the river. ' ' Beauchamp makes some 


NOTES TO VOL. VIII 


corrections on Clark's map, which will be noted in later volumes. 
It was at Ossemenon that the martyrdom of Isaac Jogues occurred — 
an event which is now being commemorated by the erection of a 
costly memorial church, at Auriesville. 

Andastoerrhonons {ox Knd.a.s,X.&%): called Minquas by the Dutch, 
and Susquehannocks or Conestogas by the English. Ragueneau 
{Relation for 1648) mentions "the Andastoeronons, allies of our 
Hurons, and who talk like them." Clarke (Early Cayuga Hist., 
p. 36, notej^hw?, describes them: ''Andastes, a term used generi- 
cally by the French, and applied to several distinct Indian tribes 
located south of the Five Nations, in the present territory of Penn- 
sylvania. They were of kindred blood and spoke a dialect of the 
same language as the Iroquois of New York. The most northerly 
of these tribes, called by Cham plain in 161 5 Carantouannais, were 
described by him as residing south of the Five Nations, and distant 
a short three days' journey from the Iroquois fort attacked by him 
that year, which fort is supposed to have been located in the town 
of Fenner, Madison Co., N. Y. Late researches appear to warrant 
the conclusion that the large town called Carantouan by Champlain 
was located on what is now called "Spanish Hill," near Waverly, 
Tioga Co. , N. Y. One of the most southerly tribes was located at 
the Great Falls between Columbia and Harrisburg, Pa., and in the 
vicinity of the latter place; described by Gov. Smith in 1608 as oc- 
cupying five towns, and called by him Sasquesahanoughs or Sus- 
quehannas. At an early date, a tribe resided in the vicinity of 
Manhattan, called Minquas ; and the Dutch colonists appear to have 
applied this term to all cognate tribes west of them and south of the 
Five Nations. The Jesuit Fathers had no missions among them, 
although frequent reference is made in the Relations to the wars 
between them and the Iroquois. These tribes were engaged in 
various wars with the Iroquois, which began as early as 1600 and 
continued with more or less frequency until 1675, those nearest the 
Five Nations being first overthrown. At the latter date, their 
power for further resistance appears to have been completely 
broken, and they were incorporated into the League ; a part, how- 
ever, retreated southward, and were menaced by the Maryland and 
Virginia troops, the last remnant falling victims to the butchery of 
the 'Paxton boys' [1763]." Cf. Shea's paper on these tribes, Hist. 
Mag., vol ii., pp. 294-297. In 1651, apart of the Minquas, then 
living on the Delaware River, sold their lands to the Dutch West 
India Company, reserving only the right of hunting and fishing 
thereon (A'^ Y. Colon. Docst, vol. i., pp. 593-600). There was also 
a division known as the " Black Minquas," who were claimed by the 
Mohawks as an offshoot. 


302 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 


Rhiierrhonons (Riguehronons, Eriechronons, Errieronons, or 
Erigas): called by the French "Nation du Chat" (" Cat Nation"). 
This appellation was given, according to the Relation for 1654, "be- 
cause in their country are a prodigious number of wild cats." But 
on this point Beauchamp writes thus: "Albert Cusick, my Onon- 
daga interpreter, tells me that Kah-kwah [another name applied to 
this tribe] means 'an eye swelled like a cat's,'— that is, prominent 
rather than deep-set; this would indicate that the name refers to a 
physical characteristic, rather than to the wild cats mentioned by 
the missionaries." This tribe inhabited the south shore of Lake 
Erie ; they were fierce and warlike, and used poisoned arrows ; they 
had frequent wars with the Iroquois, and were vanquished and ut- 
terly destroyed by the latter in 1655-56. 

Ahouenrochrhonons ( Awenrherhonons, or Wenrohronons) : a 
small tribe at the eastern end of Lake Erie, lying between the Eries 
and the Neutrals. According to the Relation for 1639, this tribe 
was for some time allied to the Neutrals; but, some dispute arising 
between them, the Awenrherhonons left their own country in that 
year, and took refuge with the Hurons. The Relation for 1641 
(chap, vi.) mentions them as living at the town of Khioetoa (St. 
Michel), and as well disposed towards the missionaries. 

The two remaining tribes in Brebeuf 's list have not yet been iden- 
tified. Beauchamp thinks the Scahentoarrhonons may have been 
the Skenchiohronons, mentioned as a sedentary tribe in the Rela- 
tion for 1640 (indicated on Sanson's map as Squenguioron, at the 
west end of Lake Erie) ; the Conkhandeenrhonons he conjectures to 
have been the Carantouans, or possibly one of the divisions of the 
Senecas (q.v., ante). 

35 (p. 117).— 5i7«tf«/^^«(Sonnontouan, Tsonnontouan, or Tegarn- 
hies): see note 21, ante: the chief town of the Senecas. It was 
also known by the names of Totiakton, Theodehacto, and Da-u-de- 
hok-to (Morgan), meaning "at the bend," or "bended stream." It 
is in the town of Mendon, on the N. E. bend of Honeoye Creek, two 
miles N. of Honeoye Falls, and i2>^ miles due S. from the centre of 
Rochester; see Clark's map, cited in note 21, ante. 

Franquelin's Carte de la Louisiana (1684) shows Sonontouan east 
of the present Genesee River; south of it a point is thus designated, 
fontaine d'eau qui brule, " spring of water which burns." Cf. the 
fontaine brulante on Bellin's map in Charlevoix's Nouv. France, 
tome i., p. 440. Ren6 de Galin^e, in his journal of La Salle's voy- 
age (1669-70), also mentions this spring, as situated four leagues 
south of Sonnontouan. Marshall, commenting on this in his pam- 
phlet, De la Salle among the Senecas, p. 23, note, describes the 
spring (one of many in Western New York), in which an inflam- 


NOTES TO VOL. VIII 


mable gas rises from the water, and is readily lighted with a match. 

At Sonnontouan was located the Jesuit mission of La Conception. 

36 (p. 117).— A similar description of Ataentsic and Jouskeha is 
given by Sagard {Canada, Tross ed., pp. 452-455), from whom 
Br^beuf seems to have obtained part of the information given in the" 
text — two sentences being the same, word for word, as in Sagard — 
an appropriation easily explained, in view of Br^beuf 's recent ar- 
rival among the Hurons, and consequent difficulties in obtaining a 
knowledge of their beliefs. Sagard says that they told him that 
"this God Youskeha existed before this Universe, which, with all 
that was therein, he had created; that, although he grew old, like 
all things in this world, he did not lose his being and his power ; and 
that, when he became old, he had power to rejuvenate himself in a 
moment, and to transform himself into a young man of twenty-five 
or thirty years; thus he never died, and remained immortal, al- 
though, like other human beings, he was to some extent subject to 
corporeal necessities. ' ' 

Lafitau {McKurs des Sauvages, t. i., pp. 244, 401) also mentions 
Ataentsic — "the Queen of the Manes " — but names her grandson 
Tharonhiaouagon. Parkman thinks this latter personage (also 
written Tarenyowagon) was a divinity peculiar to the Iroquois Five 
Nations. Brinton discusses these legends at length in American 
Hero-Myths (Phila., 1882). pp. 53-62 ; and also in Myths of the New 
World {^xA&±), pp. 156, 203-205; in the latter work, he considers 
that Taronhiawagon was but Jouskeha (loskeha) under another 
name, and explains the stories of all these deities as myths of the 
Sun and Moon, of Night and Day, of the conflict between light and 
darkness. Cf. Parkman's/^j«//j-, Ixxv.-lxxvii., and the outline of 
Huron cosmogony given by Hale m four. Amer. Folk-Lore, vol. i., 
pp. 177-183; see also Cusick's account of the creation, in Beau- 
champ's /rf^wf/.r Trail, pp. 1-5. 

37 (p. 121).— For references on the subject of the immortality of 
souls, see vol. vi., note 17. 

38 (p. 125).— Scanonaenrat( where was the mission of St. Michael) 
was one of the largest towns of the Huron country — itself compris- 
ing the entire nation of the Tohontahenrats. It was on the forest 
trail leading from the upper mission towns in Tiny township to 
Teanaustay^ (St. Joseph), and about 1% leagues from the latter 
{Relation for 1639). Du Creux's map places it at a short distance 
northwest of the small body of water now known as Orr Lake ; and 
there are extensive remains in the tract between this lake and the 
modem village of Waverley that correspond very well with the 
numerous references to St. Michael in the Relations. Here have 
been found, in a space about two miles square, traces of a large town, 


304 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 

and of half a dozen others, smaller, but similar. With each of these 
sites there is, instead of the usual ossuary, a cemetery of isolated 
graves. In this respect the Tohontahenrats appear to have differed 
from the other Huron nations, who adopted the ossuary almost to 
the exclusion of every other mode of burial. One small ossuary, 
however, was found in this tract in 1895 {Ontario Archceol. Rept., 
1894-95, p. 42). Among its contents were four brass finger-rings, 
on which can be distinctly seen the cross and the initials I. H. S. 
Patches of ground strewn with iron tomahawks — indubitable signs 
of Indian conflict — are common in this neighborhood, confirming 
the Jesuits' accounts of the battles of 1648-50, when seven hundred 
Huron warriors were quartered here (i?^/a//i3« for 1649, chap. iii. ), 
and suggesting other conflicts which these chroniclers had probably 
overlooked in the general confusion of that period. Several farms 
in the first concession of Medont^ township (lots 68 to 74 inclusive), 
in the immediate neighborhood of St. Michael, abound in this class 
of relics. Dr. Tach6's location of this mission town, as given in the 
map of the Huron country in Parkman'sy<?.y«//^, is several miles 
from the correct position. — A. F. Hunter. 

39 (p. 125). — Lake of the Hiroquois : see vol. i., note 67. 

40 (p. 135). — See Hunter's note on the Tobacco Nation, vol. v., 
note 18. Hale found, in 1872-74 {Jour. Amer. Folk-Lore, vol. i., 
p. 178), among the Wyandots of the Anderdon Reserve, "the most 
archaic form of the Huron-Iroquois speech that had yet been discov- 
ered. I believe it to be the dialect which was spoken by the tribe 
formerly known to the French colonists as the ' Tobacco People ' 
(Nation du Petun), but among the Hurons and Iroquois as the Tio- 
nontates (corrupted by the English to Dionondaddies), which 
means, apparently, ' people beyond the hills. ' ' ' 

41 (p. 139). — Neutral Nation ( Atiwandaronks) : see note 34, 
ante. Their villages were situated north of Lake Erie, mainly on 
the western side of Niagara (Onguiaahra) River. The R^coUet La 
Roche-Daillon, writing in 1627, says (Shea's Le Clercq, vol. i., pp. 
265, 266) that the Neutrals had then twenty-eight towns, cities, and 
villages, under one renowned chief, Souharissen, who "acquired 
this honor and power by his courage, and by having been repeatedly 
at war with seventeen nations that are their enemies, and taken heads 
or brought in prisoners from them all. ' ' Coyne writes us : " The 
early reports and maps show clearly that they occupied the entire 
north shore of Lake Erie, from river to river, besides extending a 
short distance east of the Niagara. There can be no reasonable 
doubt that the numerous earthworks and village sites from Detroit 
to Buffalo, on the north shore, are remains of the Neutral tribes or 
nation. Sanson's map of 1656, and Du Creux'sof 1660, are perfectly 


NOTES TO VOL. VIII 305 

clear on this point, and entirely consistent with Lalemant's relation 
of the visit of Br^beuf and Chaumonot to this nation in 1640-41, 
as well as with Champlain's brief reference and Daillon's letter 
describing his sojourn there in 1626-27." Beauchamp writes: "A 
fort and cemetery in Cambria, Niagara county, I consider a town 
of the Neutrals. It contains French articles, and there were no 
Seneca towns in that vicinity at any time." Cf. the description of 
these remains given by O. Turner, in Pioneer History of Holland 
Purchase (Buffalo, 1850), pp. 26-28. 

Morgan says (Iroq. League, p. 41, note): "The Neuter nation 
were known to the Iroquois as the ' Cat Nation ' — the word itself, 
Je-go-sa-sa, signifying ' a wild cat. ' Charlevoix has assigned this 
name to the Eries." Marshall thinks, in his Niagara Frontier 
(rev. ed., Buffalo, 1881), p. 6, that "the Neutral Nation were called 
Kah-kwas by the Senecas, and were exterminated by them as early 
as 1651." Beauchamp differs from this opinion, saying: "On the 
map of 1680, the Kakouagoga, 'a nation destroyed,' is placed near 
Buffalo, but no mention is made of the Eries ; for this reason I think 
Marshall mistaken in identifying the Kah-kwas with the Neutrals. ' ' 

For a more detailed account of this tribe, see Harris's Flint- 
Workers, cited in note 34, ante; and Coyne's Country of the 
Neutrals. 

42 (p. 139). — The village of Onentisati (Onnentisati) was situated 
about midway on the west side of Tiny township. In the Ontario 
Archaeological Museum are some relics taken from a bone-pit at the 
supposed site of Onentisati — three portions of beavers' jaws with 
teeth, two bone awls, one trumpet-mouthed pipe-head, and one of 
cylindrical shape. — A. F. Hunter. 

43 (p. 141). — Frangois Petit-Pr^ was one of the Jesuit engag^ ; 
he remained with the missionaries in the Huron country during 
several years, and was the only Frenchman at the mission who 
escaped the pestilence of 1637. The registers of Three Rivers men- 
tion him as present there in 1635, and again in 1641. The river 
Petit-Pr^, in Montmorency county. Que. (granted to Jean de 
Lauson, m 1652), may have been named for him. 

44 (P- 157)- — Julien Perrault arrived in Canada April 30, 1634, 
and, with Andr6 Richard, was sent to the Cape Breton mission. He 
must have returned to France within a year, for his name does not 
appear in the list given by Le Jeune at the end of the Relation for 
1635, nor is his name mentioned elsewhere in the Relations. 

45 (P- 157)- — For various names applied to Cape Breton Island, 
see vol. ii. , note 62. For its history, with copious bibliographical 
and statistical notes, see Bourinot's valuable monograph, Historical 
and Descriptive Account of the Island of Cape Breton (Montreal, 


306 


LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 


1892). An excellent map of the island is given at the end of 
Brown's Cape Breton. 

46 (p. isi)-—Chtbou: also known as Grand Chibou or Cibou; the 
inland estuary or lake now called Bras d'Or, which extends from 
the eastern to the southwestern part of the island, almost sever- 
ing it in two. The name Bras d'Or is modern (perhaps a corrup- 
tion of Labrador, the name given the inlet on old charts, both 
French and English). See Bourinot's Cape Breton, p. 93; and 
Brown's Cape Breton, pp. 2, 5, 77- 

47 (p. 1S9).— Marmot: either the hoary marmot (see vol. vi., 
note 22), or the allied species, Arctomys monax, commonly called 
"woodchuck," which abounds throughout the northern United 
States and Canada. 

Parrot fish : a name given to various species of the families La- 
bridce and Scaridce, from their brilliant colors, or the peculiar shape 
of the head. Most of these species belong to tropical or semi-tropi- 
cal regions, but several are found along the northern Atlantic coast. 
That mentioned in the text may be the cunner or blue-perch, Cteno- 
labrus adspersus. 

48 (p. 185).— For origin of the term "patriarch," as apphed to 
priests, see vol. i., pp. 161, 163, and note 25. 

49 (p. 215).— The war here referred to was a part of the Thirty 
Years' War. Gustavus Adolphus, the leader of the Protestant 
alliance, was killed at the battle of Lutzen, Nov. 16, 1632. Richelieu 
had, in 1631, formed a treaty of alliance between France and Swe- 
den'; this was renewed in 1633, with Oxenstiern, the successor of 
Gustavus; and France, in accordance therewith, gave moral and 
financial support to the Protestants in their struggle against Austria 
and Spain. Finally, in May, 1635, France, having formed an 
alliance with Holland, declared war against Spain, and the allied 
armies invaded the Netherlands; while other French armies were 
sent into Lorraine, Germany, and Italy. Thus scattered, and often 
under inefficient commanders, the armies of France could accom- 
plish little; and for years the war continued with but slight advan- 
tage for either side. Not until Oct. 24. 1648, was the long conflict 
ended by the treaty of Westphalia. 

50 (p. 217).— The death of Champlain, who had long been govern- 
or of New France (see vol. ii., note 42), occurred Dec. 25, 1635- 
His successor was Charles Huault de Montmagny, a chevalier of the 
military order of St. John of Jerusalem, more commonly known as 
Knights of Malta. His commission was dated March 10, 1636; but 
Suite {Can.-Frangais, vol. ii.. p. 59) notes that certain official 
"acts" of the Hundred Associates, dated at Paris Jan. 15, 1636, 
mention Montmagny as "governor for the said company, under the 


NOTES TO VOL. VIII 307 

authority of the king and of the cardinal duke of Richelieu, of Que- 
bec and of other places on the river St. Lawrence. ' ' This would 
imply that the Associates had appointed him to this post in anticipa- 
tion of Champlain's death, or possibly to supersede the latter. He 
arrived at Quebec on June ii following. 

The praises lavished by the missionaries upon Montmagfny seem 
largely justified by his conduct as governor, and by the opinions of 
other historians. He was a man of great personal courage, execu- 
tive ability, good judgment, and profound piety. He was a warm 
friend and supporter of the Jesuit missions, as also of the new re- 
ligfious colony founded at Montreal, which he escorted thither in 
May, 1642. Montmagny's commission was renewed June 6, 1645. 
Eleven months later, he received from the Company of New France 
a concession of land at Riviere du Sud, i^ leagues along the St. 
Lawrence, and four leagues in depth; also of two islands in the 
same river, lie aux Oies and lie aux Grues. 

Recalled to France, Montmagny left Canada Sept. 23, 1647. He 
remained at Paris at least four years ; Ferland fCours d'Hzsiotre, 
vol. i., p. 363, note) cites a MS. of Aubert de la Chesnaye as stating 
that Montmagny spent the last years of his life with a relative at St. 
Christopher's, W. L, but thinks there is no proof of the correctness 
of this assertion. 

51 (p. 217). — Pierre Chastellain and Charles Gamier arrived at 
Quebec with Montmagny, June 11, 1636; and on July 21 they left 
Three Rivers with the Indian trading canoes, to join the mission in 
the Huron country-. Both were attacked by the smallpox in the fol- 
lowing September, but in due time recovered their health. Chastel- 
lain labored at Ihonatiria about two years; was at Ossossan^ in 
1638-39; then at St. Joseph (Teanaustay^). In November, 1640, he 
was left in sole charge of the residence of Ste. Marie-on-the-Wye, 
and was there in 1644. The Joiirn. des Jdsu. mentions him as 
officiating at Quebec from December, 1650, to March, 1664. The 
Hurons called him Arioo. 

52 (p. 217). — Charles Gamier was born May 25, 1606, and became 
a Jesuit novice Sept. 5, 1624, at Paris. His studies were pursued at 
Clermont, 1626-36, except while he was an instructor at Eu (1629- 
32). In 1636 he came to Canada (see note 51, ante), and labored 
among the Hurons. In November, 1639, ^'^ went with Isaac Jogues 
on a mission to the Tobacco Nation ; but this tribe feared them as 
sorcerers, owing to the calumnies of certain Hurons, and after a few 
months the Jesuits were driven away, and obliged to return to the 
Huron missions. A year later. Gamier, with Pierre Pijart, made 
another though similarly unavailing attempt to reach this tribe. 
But in 1647 a third effort proved successful, and Gamier, with sev- 


308 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 

eral assistants, established in the Tobacco Nation two missions, St. 
Jean and St. Mathias. These were highly prosperous until Dec. 7, 
1649, when the town of Etarita (St. Jean) was destroyed by an Iro- 
quois band, most of the inhabitants killed or made prisoners, and 
Garnier himself slain. The Relation for 1650 (chap. iii.)givesa 
long account of the life, death, character, and devoted piety of this 
missionary. Among the Hurons he was known as Ouaracha (Wara- 
cha). Two of his brothers were also priests — Henry a Carmelite, 
and Joseph a Capuchin. 

53 (p. 219). — Upon the death of Champlain (see note 50, ante), a 
temporary successor was appointed. Marc Antoine de Brasdefer, 
sieur de Chasteaufort, the commandant of the new post at Three 
Rivers, whose commission had been for some time in the hands of 
Le Jeune — the former, according to Kingsford {Canada, vol. i., p. 
149), having "been appointed to act as Governor in case of any ex- 
traordinary event. The Jesuit Father had accordingly possessed 
the unusual power of superseding Champlain, when he had deemed 
it advisable." Chasteaufort accordingly administered the affairs of 
the colony until the arrival of Montmagny (June, 1636). He then 
resumed command of the post at Three Rivers, where he still was 
in February, 1638. 

54 (p. 221). — M. de Courpon was admiral of the fleet of Canada in 
1641. Suite says (Can.-Fran^ais, vol. ii., p. 119, note) that De 
Courpon, in that year, gave his own surgeon to Maisonneuve for the 
new colony at Montreal. 

55 (p. 221). — Nicolas Adam, four days after his arrival (June 12, 
1636), was seized by a fever which brought on a stroke of paralysis, 
disabling his hands and feet. In the Relation for 1637 (chap, xv.) 
he relates how he was cured, after an illness of three months, by a 
novena of communions in honor of the Virgin. He remained at 
Notre-Dame des Anges, giving religious instruction to the residents 
there. In the summer of 1642, he returned to France, at the com- 
mand of his superiors ; according to Rochemonteix (Je suites, vol. 
i-. P- 433. note), because he could not learn the Indian language. 

56 (p. 221). — Ambroise Cauvet, a lay brother, is mentioned by 
Journ. des Jisu. as at Quebec in 1645, 1646, and 1648, employed in 
various ways as a domestic and artisan ; he returned to France Sept. 
18, 1657. 

57 (p. 221). — The Norman families of Le Gardeur and Le Neuf 
(allied by marriage) came together to Canada with Montmagny 
(June, 1636), and were prominent and influential among the early 
colonists. Catherine de Cord^, widow of Ren6 le Gardeur, sieur de 
Tilly, came with two sons and a daughter ; and Jeanne le Marchant, 
widow of Mathieu le Neuf de H^risson, brought two sons and two 


NOTES TO VOL. VIII 309 

daughters. Some of these had also wives and children ; in all, they 
numbered i8 persons; Suite gives a list of their names and relation- 
ships in Can.-Fran^ais, vol. ii., p. 60. The remainder of the 45 per- 
sons mentioned in the text probably included their servants, and 
families brought over as colonists. 

Pierre le Gardeur, sieur de Repentigny, (born about 1610?) had at 
this time three children, and fixed his residence at Quebec. During 
1642-47, he was commander of the Canadian fleet of the Hundred 
Associates; and in his care Dauversiere placed the provisions, 
arms, and other supplies purchased by the latter for the colony of 
Montreal (1642). In the autumn of 1644, Le Gardeur and Jean Paul 
Godefroy (afterwards his son-in-law), went to France as delegates 
from the inhabitants of Canada, to obtain from the government 
some restriction of the fur-trade monopoly hitherto enjoyed by the 
Company of New France ; they also requested that RecoUets might 
be sent to Canada as parish priests, for the benefit of the French 
population — the Jesuits being mainly missionaries to the Indian 
tribes. The latter effort failed ; but the fur trade was ceded by the 
company to the French colonists of the St. Lawrence valley ; the 
latter were obliged to support their government, the garrisons, and 
the religious establishments, and to pay the company 1,000 pounds 
of beaver skins annually as a seig^orial rent. For particulars of 
this arrangement, see Ferland's Cours d'Htstotre, vol. i., pp. 338, 
339; the royal decree confirming it (dated March 6, 1645) is given in 
£dits du Conseil du Roi concernant le Canada (Quebec, 1854), 
pp. 28, 29. Other decrees (March 27, 1647, and March 5, 1648) re- 
organized the government, and granted a considerable degree of 
autonomy to the inhabitants. — See Ferland, ut supra, pp. 356-358, 
363-365; and Suite's Can.-Frangais, vol. iii., pp. 7, 8, 14; cf. Fail- 
Ion's Col. Fr., vol. ii., pp. 92-94. 

Pierre le Gardeur had done much to bring about these political 
changes ; but, for some reason, he opposed the new ordinances, so 
strongly that he was superseded in the command of the fleet. De- 
parting immediately afterwards for Canada, he died at sea (July, 
1648), from an epidemic disease that prevailed on shipboard. He 
had obtained from the Company of New France (April 16, 1647) two 
concessions on the St. Lawrence — the seigniory of Lachenaye, and 
that afterwards known as Cournoyer, opposite Three Rivers. 

58 (p. 221). — Jacques le Neuf de la Poterie (born 1606) came to 
Canada in 1636, with Pierre le Gardeur, whose sister Marguerite 
was his wife (see note 57, ante). In the preceding January, De la 
Poterie had obtained a grant of the seigniory of Portneuf, above 
Quebec, on which he made improvements, and where at first he re- 
sided. He was governor of Three Rivers during November, 1645- 


310 LES RELA TIONS DES j£SUITES 

August, 1648; June, 1650- August, 1651 ; September, 1652 -July, 
1653; and July, 1658 -December, 1662. In 1649, "^^ purchased a fief 
at Three Rivers from Champflour ; and in the same year he obtained 
a grant of the Isle aux Cochons, at the mouth of the St. Maurice 
River. About this time, he was active in the organization of a 
volunteer militia. In 1665, De Mezy (then governor of New France) 
a few days before his death gave De la Poterie a commission ap- 
pointing the latter as his successor, in case of that event ; but the 
council refused to recognize his authority, excepting over the militia. 
In October, 1666, he went to France; but it is not known whether he 
returned thence. 

Suite says {Can.-Frangm's, vol. vii., p. 42) that the Le Neuf 
family became extinct after the conquest of Canada. 

59 (p. 227).— Concerning the Marquis de Gamache, see vol. vi., 
note 9. 

60 (p. 227). — Various acts of the Hundred Associates, from 1634 
to 1647, are signed by Lamy (L'Amy), "for the company;" but 
other information regarding him is not available. 

61 (p. 229). — This was Emery de Caen; concerning his indemnifi- 
cation for losses incurred at the capture of Quebec by Kirk, see vol. 
iv., p. 258, note 21; and vol. vii., }tote 18. 

62 (p. 235). — Marie Madeleine de Wignerod (Vignerot) was the 
daughter of Ren^ de Wignerod, marquis du Pont de Courlai (who 
died in 1625), and of Fran^oise Duplessis, sister of Cardinal Riche- 
lieu. About 1620, Marie became the wife of Antoine de Beau voir 
de^ Roure, marquis de Combalet ; two years later, an officer in the 
Huguenot war, he fell in battle at Montpellier. His widow refused 
to marry again, and devoted her time and fortune to works of piety 
and charity. Le Jeune's Relation for 1635 directed her attention to 
the Canadian missions, and his suggestion as to the foundation of a 
hospital at Quebec at once appealed to her heart — an impression 
doubtless strengthened by the counsel of Vincent de Paul, who was 
an intimate friend of the Cardinal. She offered to send thither, at 
her own expense, some Hospital nuns from Dieppe ; the Company of 
New France granted them lands ; and the undertaking was aided 
not only by Madame de Combalet, but by Richelieu himself, who 
also gave his niece (1638) the estate of Aiguillon, and conferred 
upon her the title of duchess. After various delays, the Hotel-Dieu 
of Quebec was established in 1639. '^^® Duchess d' Aiguillon con- 
tinued for many years to aid this and other charitable enterprises ; 
she died April 17, 1675. 

63 (p. 237). — iJ/^«/;«ar/r^ .• an eminence on the western side of 
Paris, about three hundred feet in height; so called (Lat. mons mar- 
tyr um) because St. Denis, bishop of Paris in the third century, and 


NOTES TO VOL. VIII 311 

two other Christians, were beheaded at the foot of the hill. The 
Chapel of Martyrs built here was still visible in the seventeenth 
century ; and in it Igfnatius Loyola pronounced his first vows, Aug. 
15. 1534- The church of St. Pierre de Montmartre, evidently the 
one referred to in the text, was built in the twelfth century, by Louis 
VI. It served as a chapel for the Benedictine convent also founded 
by that monarch, and rebuilt by Louis XIV. ; this was a "royal con- 
vent," the abbess being appointed by the king, not elected by the 
nuns. During the Reign of Terror, the abbess and all the inmates 
of this house were guillotined. A costly church has recently been 
erected on the highest point of Montmartre, where formerly stood 
temples dedicated to Mars and Mercury. 

The heights of Montmartre were long famous for quarries of 
gypsum (hence the name "plaster of Paris"). Here, too, was be- 
gun the Communist insurrection of 1871. — See Hare's Walks in 
Paris (N. Y. and London, 1888), pp. 481-486. 

64 (p. 237). — Concerning the Ursulines, see vol. v., note 3. Suite 
says {Can.-Frangais, vol. ii., p. 67): "The seigniory of Ste. -Croix, 
in Lotbiniere county, measuring one league of frontage by six in 
depth, was granted Jan. 15, 1637, by the company, to Jean de Beau- 
vais, commissary of the French marine, in order to found at Quebec 
a convent of Ursuline nuns." 

There were many orders of hospital nuns, formed mainly to nurse 
the sick, but often also caring for neglected children and repentant 
women. The one introduced by the duchess d'Aiguillon was ap- 
parently that of the Hospital Sisters of the Mercy of Jesus, estab- 
lished in 1630, according to the rule of St. Augustine ; it was con- 
firmed eight years later by letters patent, and in 1664 and 1677 by 
papal bulls. 

Both the Ursuline and the Hospital nuns arrived at Quebec Aug. 
I, 1639. 

65 (p- 253). — Suite {Can.-Frangais, vol. ii., pp. 40. 54, 92) gives 
this information regarding him: "Andre de Malapart, a native of 
Paris, a soldier and a poet, wrote , an account of this campaign [the 
expulsion of Stewart's colony from Cape Breton by Charles Daniel; 
see vol. iv. of this series, note 46], which he addressed to M. Jean de 
Lauson, and which was published in 1630. In 1635, he was at Three 
Rivers, and four years later was commandant at that post. He was 
still in Canada in 1641." Tanguay {Diet. Gindal., vol. i., p. 406) 
says: "In 1649, the registers designate him as ' arcis moderator ' 
[commandant] ; ' ' but the date here given is apparently a typograph- 
ical error. 

66 (p. 253). — M. de Maupertuis was in charge of the trading post 
at Three Rivers, in 1635-36. 


812 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 

67 (p. 253). — Capitanal, or Kepitanal (Creuxius, Hist. Canad., pp. 
116, 182): a Montag^ais chief of great ability. Le Jeune gives at 
length (vol. v., pp. 205-211) the speech delivered by this man at a 
conference between Champlain and the Montagnais savages, May 
24, 1633, and highly praises his intellect and eloquence. Capitanal 
died in the autumn of 1634; his traits of character, and his relations 
with the French, are described by Le Jeune in the Relation for 1635, 
ante, p. 55. 

68 (p. 259). — Adrien du Chesne (Duchene), a surgeon, came from 
Dieppe to Canada, probably about 1620. He remained with his 
wife at Quebec during the English occupation ; and, after the return 
of the French, practised his profession at Quebec and Three Rivers. 
In October, 1645, he is mentioned by t\iQ Jottrn. des Jisu. (p. 9), in 
connection with his nephew Charles le Moyne, the father of the 
noted explorer Le Moyne d' Iberville.— See '^vW.o.'s Can.-Fran<^ais, 
vol. ii., pp. 7. 144- 

69 (p. 267). — Pierre de Launay (born 1616), a native of the pro- 
vince of Maine, France, is first mentioned in January, 1636, as an 
agent of the Hundred Associates ; this position he seems to have re- 
tained at least until 1645 ; in that year he married Frangoise Pinguet, 
at Quebec. Certain Indians from Tadoussac made complaints to 
the Quebec council (June, 1646) concerning De Launay's methods 
of trade, and the exorbitant prices charged by him. He was killed 
by the Iroquois, Nov. 28, 1654. 

70 (p. 269). — Porcelain, which is the diamonds and pearls of this 
country : According to Littre, porcelain (a word of Italian origin ; 
adopted, with slight variations, into nearly all European languages) 
was a name given, from very early times, to a univalvular, gastrop- 
odous mollusk, Cyprcea ; especially used for the species C. moneta, 
the money cowry of Africa and the East Indies, and for its shell. 
The same term was applied to the nacre (from which were made 
vases, ornaments, etc. ) obtained from the shells of this and many 
other mollusks ; and the enameled pottery brought from the Orient 
about the i6th century was also called "porcelain," from its resem- 
blance to this nacre. 

The early explorers on this continent found shells, or beads made 
therefrom, everywhere in use among the natives as currency. Car- 
tier mentions this article as called " esurgny " by the Indians at 
Montreal; Champlain and other French writers applied the term 
already familiar to them, "porcelain;" the English colonists 
adopted the name in use among the natives of New England, 
"wampum" (from wompi, "white"); while the Dutch traders 
called it "sewan" (seawant, or zee-wand; a corruption of seah- 
whdun, "scattered, loose"). 


NOTES TO VOL. VIII 313 

An interesting account of this Indian money is given by Roger 
Williams, in his Key into the Language of America (London, 
1643), — reprinted, with careful and extensive annotations (mainly 
philological) by J. H. Trumbull, in Publications of the Narragan- 
sett Club, vol. i. (Providence, R. I., 1866). In chap. xxvi. of this 
work, pp. 173-178, "Concerning their Coyne," the author says: 
" The Indians are ignorant of Europes Coyne; yet they have given 
a name to ours, and call it Moneash from the English Money. 
Their own is of two sorts ; one white, which they make of the stem 
or stocke of the Periwincle, which they call Meteauhock, when all 
the shell is broken off: and of this sort six of their small beads (which 
they make with holes to string the bracelets) are currfnt with the 
English for a peny. The second is black, inclining to blew, which 
is made of the shell of a fish which some English call Hens, Po- 
quauhock, and of this sort three make an English peny. 
This one fathom of this their stringed money, now worth of the Eng- 
lish but five shillings (sometimes more), some few yeeres since was 
worth nine, and sometimes ten shillings per Fathome : the fall is 
occasioned by the fall of Beaver in England : the Natives are very 
impatient, when for English commodities they pay so much more 
of their money, and not understanding the cause of it ; and many 
say the English cheat and deceive them, though I have laboured to 
make them understand the reason of it. . . . Their white they 
call Wompam (which signifies white) : their black Suckduhock 
{Siicki signifying blacke). Both amongst themselves, as also the 
English and Dutch, the blacke peny is two pence white : the blacke 
fathom double, or two fathom of white. Before ever they had 
A tale blades from Europe, they made shift to bore this their shell 
money with stone, and so fell their trees with stone set in a wooden 
staff, and used wooden howes : which some old & poore women 
(fearfull to leave the old tradition) use to this day. They hang these 
strings of money about their necks and wrists, as also upon the 
necks and wrists of their wives and children." Trumbull (pp. 140, 
175, ut supra) says that the Poquauhock was the Venus mercenaria, 
the round clam, or quahaug; the Meteauhock was probably the 
Pyrula carica or P. canaliculata, which have retained the name 
of "periwinkle " on the coast of New England. (The two latter spe- 
cies are also known as Fulgur carica and Scycotypus canaliculata. ) 
From these shells were cut beads of cylindrical shape, through 
which holes were drilled ; these beads were then strung upon cords, 
or the sinews of animals, and, when woven into plaits about as broad 
as the hand, made wampum ' ' belts. ' ' In early times, various articles 
were used as substitutes for the shell beads — colored sticks of wood, 


314 LES RELA TIONS DES /^SUITES 

porcupine quills, and glass or porcelain beads, brought from Europe 
by the traders. 

The early traders readily adopted wampum as a medium of ex- 
change in their transactions with the Indians, in both purchase and 
sale. Thus it "quickly became a standard of values, the currency 
of the colonists to a great extent in their transactions with each 
other, and even a legal tender." In Massachusetts, "wampam- 
peag" was legal tender (Act of 1648) for all debts less than forty 
shillings, "except county rates to the treasurer," — the white at 
eight for a penny, and the black at four for a penny. ' ' So slow 
were the red men to relinquish this currency, that wampum con- 
tinued to be fabricated until within fifty years in several towns of 
New York State (chiefly at Babylon, L. I.) to meet the demand for 
it by Western fur traders." — See Ingersoll's "Wampum and its 
History," in American Naturalist, vol. xvii. (1883), pp. 467-479. 

Beauchamp says f^A^. Y. Iroquois): " I have mentioned the lack 
of wampum among the early New York Iroquois, as a proof that 
they had not reached the sea ; but it was not abundant even on the 
coast in prehistoric times. On early Iroquois sites it is not found, 
nor anything resembling it. ... A few stray, prehistoric, 
small wampum beads might be expected low down in the Mohawk 
valley, but I know of none ; west of this, they are absolutely un- 
known. When, therefore, we are told of ancient wampum belts in 
New York, coeval with and recording the formation of the Iroquois 
league, we may settle it in our minds that such do not exist and 
never did. The most ancient Onondaga belt is modem, and it is 
doubtful if any one is much over a century old. ' ' 

Wampum was used not only as money, and for purposes of orna- 
ment ; it was sent with a messenger as his credentials, and was the 
mark of a chief's authority; it was used for "presents" or gifts, 
both within and without one's tribe; it was paid as ransom for a 
prisoner, or as atonement for a crime ; and was used in negotiating 
and in recording treaties. The wampum ' ' means nothing to white 
man, all to Indian," said recently a prominent Onondaga. Cf. 
Hale's " Indian Wampum Records," in Popular Science Monthly, 
February, 1897. 







I 



