Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 3
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1897 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits03jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits03jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits03jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 3 of 73.

---


Koar.>»o:RAir.ju, 


3»7 

IS 

v. 3 
■ 1 R 



THE JESUIT RELATIONS 

AND 

ALLIED DOCUMENTS 


VOL. Ml 



The edition consists of sev- 
en hundred and fifty sets 
all numbered 


No. 



£ 68tf 

The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 


Travels and Explorations 

of the Jesuit Missionaries 

in New France 

1610-1791 

THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES ; ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 

EDITED BY 

REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 


Vol. Ill 

ACADIA: 1611-1616 


Cleveland: XLtoc ^Burrows JBrotbere 
Company, publishers, mdcccxcvii 


Copyright, 1897 

liY 

The Burrows Brothers Co 


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 


The Imperial Press, Cleveland 


EDITORIAL STAFF 


Editor . . Reuben Gold Thwaites 

Translator from the 

French . . John Cutler Covert 

Assistant Translator from 
the French . Mary Sifton Pepper 

Translator from the 

Latin . . William Frederic Giese 

Translator from the 

Italian . . Mary Sifton Pepper 

Assistant Editor . Emma Helen Blair 


CONTENTS OF VOL. Ill 

Preface to Volume III l 

Documents: — 

XIII. Epistola ad Reverendissimum Patrem 

Claudium Aquavivam, Prsepositum 
Generalem Societatis Jesu, Romae. 
Pierre Biard ; Amiens, May 26, 1 6 14. 3 

XIV. Relation de la Novvelle France, de fes 

Terres, Natvrel du Pais, & de fes Habi- 
tans. [Chapters i-xxv.] Pierre Biard; 
Paris, 1616 . • • .21 

Bibliographical Data: Volume III . . 285 

Notes ..-••• 2 9 l 



ILLUSTRATION TO VOL. Ill 


Photographic facsimile of title-page, Biard's Re- 
lation of 1616 . . . .24 


PREFACE TO VOL. Ill 


Following is a synopsis of the documents contained 
in the present volume : 

XIII. Biard writes from Amiens (May 26, 1614) 
to the general of the order, reporting the planting of 
St. Sauveur mission, the attack by Argall, the cap- 
tivity of the Jesuit missionaries, and their safe return 
to France. 

XIV. Biard's Relation of 1616 opens with an his- 
torical sketch of French discoveries in New France. 
The climate of the country, its forests, and its in- 
habitants, are described ; the writer discourses on the 
mode of life among the savages, their dwellings, 
tribal organization, polity, women, marriage, medi- 
cine, practices of witchcraft, burials, etc. As a basis 
for missionary work, he advocates the establishment 
of a colony which shall be properly supported in 
France, and to this end appeals to the sympathies of 
Catholics at home. Much space is devoted to answer- 
ing the attacks on the Jesuit missions of New France, 
made by an anonymous pamphleteer, who has been 
supposed to be Lescarbot himself. Continuing with a 
report of his own movements, Biard describes the voy- 
age made by himself and Biencourt as far as the Ken- 
nebec River, and the privations and hardships of the 
colony during the ensuing winter (161 1-12). He again 
recounts the manner in which Mme. de Guercheville 


PREFACE TO VOL. Ill 


obtained a grant of New France, and sent a colony 
to St. Sauveur, on Mt. Desert Island; the disputes 
between Biencourt and the Jesuits ; the stay of Mas- 
se among the savages on St. John River; his own 
trip to Chignectou, with Biencourt ; and the hardships 
endured by both, as also those of the entire colony, 
during the winter of 1612-13. The Jesuits, during 
this winter, build a boat, and are thus enabled to go 
fishing. La Saussaye arrives at Port Royal under 
Mme. de Guercheville's auspices, and takes the Jesuits 
away with him to St. Sauveur. The settlement there 
is well begun, when Argall comes upon it, and takes 
the French captive. Owing to the great length of 
this Relation, we have space in the present volume 
but for the first twenty-five chapters ; the remaining 
twelve will form the opening part of Volume IV. 

R. G. T. 

Madison, Wis., November, 1896. 


XIII 

BlARD'S EPISTOLA 

ad Reverendissimum Patrem Claudium 
Aquavivam 

(26 Maii, 1614) 


SOURCE : We follow Father Martin's apograph (in the Ar- 
chives of St. Mary's College, at Montreal) of the original 
Latin MS. in the Archives of the Gesu, at Rome. 


LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 3 


Epistola Patris Petri Biardi ad Reverendissimum 

Patrem Claudium Aquavivam, Praepositum 

Generalem Societatis Jesu, Romae. 

(26 Maii, 161 4.) 

( Transcripsit Pater Felix Martinus ex codicc Latino 
qui Romae in Archivis Jesu conscrvatur.) 

a DMODUM REVERENDE IN CHRISTO PATER, 

J^ Pax Christi. 

Et affectus et debitum cogunt ut ego nunc re- 
cens et multis maximisque periculis summo Dei bene- 
ficio et vestrae Paternitatis precibus ereptus, earn 
salutem et quoad possum ejus genibus provolutus 
amplectar ; grato certe ao [animo] ac magno spiritu. 
Etenim velut aspicere me debeo ad pcenitentiam, ut 
spero, agendam et gratias exhibendas; tanti sunt ii 
casus e quibus me nunc liberatum admiror. Sed quo- 
niam nunc forte [2] importunum foret longam rerum 
oium [omnium] historiam texere et credibile est Ves- 
tram Paternitatem multa jam ex P. Enemundo Mas- 
saeo inaudivisse ; omissis aliis hoc nunc solum explica- 
bo, quonam modo post nostram ab Anglis in Nova 
Francia oppressionem, circumducti simus variis locis 
ac tandem hue in patriam restituti. 

Eramus ut Vestra Paternitas scit in Nova Francia 
quatuor [3] omnino e societate, anno superiore 161 3. 


1611-16] BIARD TO THE GENERAL 


Letter of Father Pierre Biard, to the Very Reverend 

Father Claude Aquaviva, General of the 

Society of Jesus, at Rome. 

(May 26, 1614.) 

(Copied by Father Felix Martin, from the original Latin 
preserved in the Archives of the Gesit at Rome.) 

VERY REVEREND FATHER IN CHRIST, 
The peace of Christ be with you. 
Both affection and duty urge me, fresh from 
such multiplied and mighty perils, from which I 
have been rescued by the surpassing favor of the 
Lord and by the prayers of your Paternity, to send 
you my greetings; and, in so far as it is possible, I 
throw myself at your knees and embrace you, as- 
suredly with the utmost gratitude and devotion. 
And, indeed, I am bound, as it were, to contemplate 
myself, both to do penance, as I hope, and to express 
my gratitude ; so great are the perils out of which I 
now marvel to see myself delivered. But, as it may 
at this time 1 2 | be wearisome to weave a long story 
of all these things, and as it is probable that Your 
Paternity has already learned many of them from 
Father Enemond Masse, I shall pass over all the rest, 
and confine myself for the present to this one matter : 
in what manner, after our violent capture by the 
English in New France, we were taken from place 
to place, and at last restored to this our native land. 
There were, as Your Paternity knows, only four 
[3] of our society in New France in the last year, 


LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 3 


Et quidem tunc primum incipiebamus novam moliri 
commodo loco habitationem, novam coloniam &c. 
Ecce subito nescio quo casu (casus certe fuit non con- 
silium) injecti nostrum in littus Angli Virginenses, 
maeno furore navem nostram invadunt, oibus [omni- 
bus] prope defensoribus in terra occupatis. Pugna- 
tum tamen est aliquandiu, sed necessario facta est 
non multo post deditio. In certamine duo e gallis 
occisi, quatuor vulnerati et insuper f rater noster Gil- 
bertus Duthet, vulneratus [4] ad mortem fuit. Is 
postridie inter manus meas religiose expiravit. 

Capta navi et rebus oibus [omnibus] direptis ; mul- 
tum nobis fuit, nobis inquam sacerdotibus et jesuitis, 
non occidi. Verum et hoc ipsum non occidi, si solum 
fuisset, omni nace \sc. nece] atrocius erat. Nam quid 
sane ageremus in locis omnino desertis et incultis re- 
rum omnium nudi et egentes? Sylvatici quidem ad 
nos clam et de nocte ventitabant, infortunium nos- 
trum complorabant, quae poterant pollicebantur et 
magno certe animo et fideli. [5] Verum ea erat loco- 
rum rerumque conditio ut nusquam nisi mors, aut cala- 
mitosior morte miseria occurreret. Et eramus omnino 
triginta in his angustiis. Una res molliores reddebat 
Anglos, quod videlicet una e nostris scapha ipsis ne- 
quicquam obversantibus evaserat ; hanc quia f oro [sc. 
fore] testem nostras oppressionis non dubitabant, 
vitae nostras parcere cogebantur. Timebant enim 
talionem et regem nostrum. Ergo tandem (magnum 
scilicet beneficium) nobis triginta qui supereramus 


ltill-16] /HARD TO THE GENERAL 


1613. Then, too, we first began to build in a conven- 
ient place a new settlement, a new colony, etc. But 
most unexpectedly, by some hazard or other (for a 
hazard it certainly was, and not a premeditated plani, 
some English from Virginia were driven upon our 
shores, who attacked our ship with the utmost fury, 
at a time when nearly all its defenders were occupied 
on land. Resistance was nevertheless made for a 
time, but we were soon obliged to surrender. In 
the struggle, two of the French were killed, four 
were wounded; and, in addition, our brother Gilbert 
Duthet received [4] a mortal wound. He made a 
most Christian end, the following day, under my 
ministration. 

Our ship having been captured and everything 
pillaged, it was a great concession to us, — that is, to 
us priests and Jesuits, — that we were not killed. 
And yet this sparing of our lives, if considered in it- 
self only, would have been worse than any death. 
For what were we to do in an absolutely desert and 
barren region, despoiled and destitute of every- 
thing? The Savages, indeed, used to come to us 
stealthily and by night; and, with great generosity 
and devotion, commiserated our misfortune, and 
promised us whatever they could. [5] Truly the con- 
dition of things was such that either death itself, or 
a more calamitous misfortune, everywhere threatened 
us. There were in all thirty of us, in these distress- 
ing circumstances. One consideration rendered the 
English less severe, namely, that one of our boats 
had escaped, in spite of their watchfulness; and, as 
they had no doubt that it would bear witness to 
the violence done us, they were obliged to spare our 
lives, for they feared reprisals and dreaded our king. 


LES RELATIONS DES J A SUITES [Vol. 3 


tmam aiunt [6] sese velle scapham relinquere quo 
per earn circumeamus oram maritimam si quam 
forte navem gallicam reperiamus quae nos in patriam 
revehat. Demonstratum est in earn scapham plures 
quam quindecim ingredi non posse. Verum aliud 
nihil obtineri potuit, nee de nostris quidem navigiis. 
Ne morere [sc. morer] in hac difhcultate sibi quisque 
ut potuit consuluit : P. Enemundus Massaeus in earn 
quam dixi scapham ingressus est cum aliis quatuor- 
decim ; eique favit Deus uti jam Vestra Paternitas cog- 
novit. [7] Ego ducem anglum adii obtinuique pro 
me et P. Jacobo Quentino socio meo, itemque pro 
Joanne Dixon qui admissus erat in societatem et ser- 
vo item uno ut deveheremur ad insulas vicinas in qui- 
bus Angli piscari solent, inibique ut Angli [s] illis pis- 
catoribus commendaremur. Quo per eos in Angliam 
delati inde, quod facile est, in Galliam rediremus. 
Obtinui hoc quidem inquam verbis, sed verbis fides 
non fuit. Nos enim una cum reliquis gallis qui res- 
tabamus in universum quindecim detulerunt [8] ipsi 
recta in suam Virginiam longe ab eo loco in quo capti 
fueramus leucis facile ducentis quinquaginta. At in 
Virginia novum periculum. Etenim qui ibi prasest 
suspendi nos omnes volebat, sed in primis jesuitas. 
Sed restitit is qui nos ceperat capitaneus, fidemque 
datam opposuit. Et valuit tandem vel fides vel regis 
timor. 

His peractis, datum est negotium ei capitaneo qui 
nos ceperat, ut rediret in earn Novae Franciae partem 


1611-16] BIARD TO THE GENERAL 9 

Therefore they finally offered (a great favor, for- 
sooth) to leave for our thirty survivors [6] a single 
boat, in which we might coast along the seashore, 
on the chance of finding some french vessel to take 
us back to our own country. It was shown that this 
boat could not hold over fifteen men ; but nothing 
further could be obtained, even from among our own 
boats. To be brief: in this perplexity each of us 
took counsel as he could; Father Enemond Masse 
embarked with fourteen companions in the boat I 
have mentioned, and the Lord favored him, as Your 
Paternity has already learned. [7] I went to the 
english captain and obtained a promise from him 
that I and Father Jacques Quentin, my companion, 
and also John Dixon — who had been admitted into 
the society — and one servant, should be transported 
to the neighboring islands where the English usually 
fish, and that we should there be recommended to 
these English fishermen; so that, having been car- 
ried by them to England, we might easily return 
thence into France. I obtained, as I say, a promise 
to this effect, but there was no good faith in this 
promise. For they carried us off, together with the 
frenchmen who remained, fifteen in all, [8] straight 
to their own country, Virginia, distant from the place 
in which we had been captured at least two hundred 
and fifty leagues. In Virginia, however, a new peril 
arose; for the governor there wished to hang us all, 
and especially the Jesuits. But the captain who had 
taken us resisted, alleging his promise to us. Final- 
lv this promise, or their fear of our king, prevailed. 
After this episode, the captain who had taken us 
was commissioned to return to that part of New 
France where he had plundered us, and to plunder 


10 LES RELA TIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol. 3 

ubi nos spoliaverat, ibique quotquot reperiret naves 
francicas diriperet et omnes habitationes domosqne 
incenderet. [9] Restabant enim ibi duae Gallorum 
habitationes, una Sanctae Cruris et altera Portus- 
regalis ubi per biennium manseram. Hanc in expe- 
ditionem tres naves instructae sunt, duae quas nobis 
ceperant, et tertia ilia major et bellica, ut appellant, 
quas nos ceperat. Ita accepti sumus in has naves 
octo solum Galli si qua forte opportunitas daretur 
emittendi nos in patriam. Has naves redierunt pri- 
mum in eum locum ubi capti fueramus crucesque 
quas statueramus dejecerunt omnes. Sed ecce vin- 
dictam. Ibidem [10] antequam discederamus unum 
e suis suspenderunt quern machinatum esse nescio 
quid deprehenderant. Crux pro crucibus fuit. 

Hie quoque iterum nobis periculum. Volebant 
ire Angli, ut ante dictum est, ad habitationem Sanctae 
Crucis, etsi in ea nulli tunc habitatores essent. Sed 
erat sal ibi relictum. Nemo praeter me viam sciebat; 
atque ibi me aliquando fuisse Angli norant. Rogant 
igitur ut eos deducam. Ego qua possum tergiversari 
et evadere; sed [11] nihil proficio. Vident aperte 
me nolle. Hie nimirum incenditur capitaneus, et 
eram jam periculo propior ; cum subito sine me ipsi 
locum reperiunt, diripiunt et incendunt. Quin etiam 
per earn occasionem sylvaticum quemdam compre- 
henderunt, cujus ductu ad Portum regalem perducti 
sunt. Quae me res periculo majore cum exemerit, 
aliunde tamen induxit in majus. Namque direpto et 


1611-16] BIARD TO THE GENERAL U 

any French ships he might find, and burn all the 
houses and settlements. [9] There remained two 
French settlements there, that of Sainte Croix and 
that of Port Royal, where I had remained for two 
years. Three ships were equipped for this expedi- 
tion, — two which they had taken from us, and a third 
and larger one, the man-of-war, as they call it, which 
had taken us. So eight of us Frenchmen were taken 
in this vessel, in view of any opportunity that might 
arise of sending us back to our own country. These 
vessels returned first to the place where we had 
been captured, and all the crosses that we had set 
up they overthrew. But not unavenged! On the 
same spot, [10] before our departure, they hanged 
one of their number whom they had apprehended 
in some plot. Thus one Cross took the place of 
many. 

Here a new peril arose. The English, as I have 
previously stated, wished to go to the settlement of 
Sainte Croix, although it had at this time no in- 
habitants. Some salt, however, had been left there. 
No one except myself knew the way ; and the Eng- 
lish knew that I had been there formerly. They 
accordingly demand that I lead them. I do all I can 
to evade and refuse this proposal; but [11] it avails 
me nothing. They perceive clearly that I am un- 
willing to obey. At this the captain grows very an- 
gry, and my peril becomes imminent ; when suddenly 
they find the place, without my help, and plunder and 
burn it. They, moreover, on this occasion captured a 
savage, who guided them to Port Royal. Although 
this had delivered me from one great danger, it nev- 
ertheless involved me in another greater one. For 
after they had plundered and burnt Port Royal (which 


12 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 3 

incenso Portu regali (quern nescio quo casu destitu- 
tum a suis repererunt) ecce nescio quis Gallus ex ip- 
sis qui portum [12] ilium regal em deseruerant, accu- 
sationem mittit adversum me; Me videlicet germa- 
num ac naturalem Hispanum esse atque adeo ob 
scelera quaedam in Gallia commissa, eo redire non 
audere. Hie capitaneus jam infensus, nimirum dato 
iracundise colore, proponit suis ecquid sentiant. 
iEquumne videatur me in littus ejicere ibique dese- 
rere? Valuit plurium opinio satius esse reducere me 
in Virginiam, atque ibi me infelici arbori, quam 
evaseram ex aequo et legibus, redonare. [13] Sic 
tunc evasi ; sicque paulo post ad iter in Virginiam 
regressi sumus. Sed ecce biduo post tarn saeva tem- 
pestas accidit, ut distractis navibus alii quid aliis 
accident nesciamus. Nostras navis capitaneus post- 
quam per tres ipse hebdomadas tempestatem susti- 
nuit, jamque sibi plurima sed aquam maxime deesse 
vidit, nee esse spem Virginiae diu repetendae ; consi- 
lium cepit refugiendi ad insulas portugalensium quas 
terceras appellant. Hoc capto consilio ego qui parato 
suspendio exemptus videbar rursum incido in ma jus 
discrimen ac vere majus, quandoquidem socios hie 
habebam discriminis. Angli sedecim cum ad insulas 
[14] illas appropinquarent cogitare caeperunt actum 
esse de se si nos sacerdotes et jesuitae appareremus. 
Illico etenim a catholicis Lusitaniae viris nos in liber- 
tatem vindicaremur. Ipsi contra veluti piratae ac 
vexatores ecclesiasticorum pcenas darent. Angebat 


1611-16] BIARD TO THE GENERAL 13 

by some inexplicable chance they had found aban- 
doned by its inhabitants), some Frenchman, one of 
those very men who had deserted port [12] royal, 
brought an accusation against me, which was nothing 
less than this: that I was a genuine, native Spaniard; 
and that, on account of certain crimes committed 
in France, I dared not return there. Hereupon, the 
captain, already incensed against me, having found a 
fine pretext for his wrath, asked his followers whether 
they did not think it would be just to cast me forth 
on the shore and abandon me there. The opinion of 
the majority prevailed, who thought it better to take 
me back to Virginia, and there to return me to that un- 
lucky tree which, in accordance with law and justice. I 
had escaped. [13] Thus I escaped death for the 
moment ; and so we soon after started on our return 
voyage to Virginia. But, two days later, so fearful a 
tempest arose that the ships were separated, and none 
of us knew what became of the others. The captain of 
our ship, after he had endured the storm for three 
weeks, and had begun to run short of various necessa- 
ries, particularly of fresh water, concluding that there 
was no hope of getting back to Virginia for a long time, 
decided to run to the portuguese islands called terceras 
[Azores]. Through this decision I, who appeared to 
have escaped from the death by hanging that awaited 
me, again found myself in a greater peril; greater I 
may truly call it, since I had here companions in my 
danger. The sixteen Englishmen, on approaching 
[14] these islands, began to reflect that they were lost if 
we priests and Jesuits appeared ; for we would be set at 
liberty on the instant by these Portuguese catholics, 
and they, on the contrary, would be punished as 
pirates and persecutors of priests. This anxiety 


14 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

eos hsec cura. Sed quid agerent? Nos ne darent in 
praeceps? An occulere nos sufficeret? In hoc aestu 
et dubitatione vocat me capitaneus, remque proponit. 
Dico ei, mihi gravius malum non esse mortem quam 
esse aliis occasionem [15] mali. Si plaeeat ei nos 
occulere polliceor ei me latebras bona fide adjuturum. 
Quid immisit Deus in ejus mentem ut mihi crederet? 
Nescio certe; hoc scio quod si prsevidisset pericula 
in quae post incidit, non credidisset. Ergo occuluit 
nos in fundo navis: tribus hebdomadis solem non 
vidimus; sed ei tot difficultates in portu insulae Faal 
inciderunt et toties visitata fuit trium hebdomadarum 
tempore navis, ut mirum sit quomodo non simus de- 
prehensi. Sed hoc quoque providit Deus ad majorem 
laudam \sc. laudem] Societatis: manifeste namque 
Angli [16] ipsi viderunt quod si nos aperire ipsosque 
detegere voluissemus, in nostra id saepe manu fuisset. 
Ipsi met postea saepe ac coram ministris nostram 
fidem collaudarunt in Anglia ipsis admirantibus ini- 
micis veritatis. His defuncti periculis, Angli consti- 
tuerunt in Angliam redire potius quam in Virginiam 
quae tanto distabat longius et ad quam repetendam 
deerant necessaria omnia. Ita in Angliam tetendi- 
mus. Longa fuit navigatio et varia : tandem caligine 
ac nubibus decepti recto [17] cursu decidimus inque 
Walliam non longe ab Hybernia delati sumus. In 
Wallia capitaneus noster cum ad urbem Pembrochium 
excendisset victus petendi causa ad certa quaedam 
indicia velut pirata captus est ac detentus. Ille enim 


lrUl-16] BIARD TO THE GENERAL 15 

troubled them. But what were they to do? Should 
they throw us overboard, or would it suffice to con- 
ceal us? In this embarrassment and uncertainty, the 
captain sent for me, and laid the matter before me. 
I said to him that death itself was not a greater evil, 
in my estimation, than to be the occasion [15] of mis- 
fortune to others. I promised, in case he chose to 
conceal us, that I would lend myself to this scheme 
in good faith. With what idea did God inspire him, 
to make him believe me? I know not, truly; but 
this I do know — that, if he had foreseen the dangers 
into which he subsequently fell, he would not have 
trusted me. Accordingly he hid us in the hold of the 
vessel ; during three weeks we did not behold the 
sun; but the captain encountered so many difficulties 
in the port of the island Faal, and the vessel was 
visited so frequently during this space of three 
weeks, that it seems marvelous that we escaped de- 
tection. But this also God purposed for the greater 
glory of the Society; for the English [16] clearly saw 
that if we had wished to show ourselves, and to ex- 
pose them, it would frequently have been in our 
power to do so. They themselves afterwards, when 
in England, often eulogized our good faith in the pres- 
ence of their ministers, and to the admiration even 
of the enemies of the truth. Escaping from these 
perils, our captors decided to return to England 
rather than to Virginia, which was so much farther 
distant, and which was to be reached only by a long 
voyage, for which they lacked all the necessaries. 
Accordingly we set sail for England. Our voyage 
was a long one, and was marked by many vicissi- 
tudes: finally, losing our bearings in the fog and the 
cloudy weather [17] we deviated from the right course 


16 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

vero lit se liberaret negat se piratam ; argumentumque 
innocentiae suae profert Jesuitas duos quos in navi 
haberet, quosque si placeat accersere ex ipsis cog- 
nosci posse veritatem. O artificium divinas Providen- 
tiae! Erat tunc hyems adulta, et omnia in navi de- 
erant. Ideoque nisi nobis provisum fuisset et frigore 
ac malis peribamus. Quid multa? [18] Extemplo 
accersuntur Jesuitas et in urbem mirantibus omnibus 
deducuntur. Jubemur pro testimonio dicere. Nos 
enim vero quae vera erant proferimus, capitaneum 
scilicet nostrum officiarium esse regium non piratam, 
et quae in nos fecisset parendi necessitate magis quam 
voluntate f ecisse : Ita capitaneus noster liberatus est 
et nos cum ipso in urbe usquedum Londino respon- 
sum acciperetur perhumaniter retenti sumus. Diu 
expectatum est responsum, at nos interea saepe cum 
ministris saepius cum aliis disputavimus : licebat 
enim fere [19] omnibus adire nos; etsi nobis exire 
domo non licebat. Verum caetera omnia humaniter ut 
dixi tribuebant. Pembrochio denique jubemur Lon- 
dinum navigare. Sed iter fuitlongum. Otiosissimae- 
que intercesserunt morae quas ne usque percenseam 
hoc sufficiat dicere, anglici regis jussu nos ab itinere 
abductos esse ad urbem Dueram atque inde Caletum 
in Galliam missos. Caleti liberaliter accepti sumus 
a domino Gubernatore et decano urbis ac per tres 
dies recreati; hinc venimus Ambianium ubi nunc 
sumus. 

Tenuit nos captivitas nostra [20] per novem menses 


1611-16] BIARD TO THE GENERAL 17 


and were carried to Wales, not far from Ireland. In 
Wales our captain, having- landed near the town of 
Pembroke to lay in provisions, was seized and de- 
tained as a pirate, because of certain appearances 
pointing that way. He, however, to recover his 
liberty, denied being a pirate ; and, as a proof of his 
innocence, he adduced the fact that he had in his 
vessel two Jesuits from whose own lips they could 
learn the truth, if they pleased to summon them. 
Oh skillful hand of divine Providence ! Winter was 
then fully upon us, and in the ship we were in want 
of everything. Thus, had we not been provided 
for, we should have died of cold and hardships. But 
what need of a long story? [18] The Jesuits are at 
once summoned, and, gazed at by all, are led into the 
town. We are ordered to give our evidence. We, 
of course, attest what was perfectly true, — that our 
captain was a royal officer and not a pirate, and that 
what he had done to us had been done in obedience 
to orders, rather than from his own free will. Ac- 
cordingly, our captain was set at liberty ; and in com- 
pany with him we were detained in the town, and 
very well used, while awaiting orders from London. 
These were long delayed ; and in the interval we fre- 
quently engaged in arguments with the ministers, 
and more frequently still with others, — for nearly 
every one was permitted [19] to have access to us, 
although we were not allowed to go out. In every 
other respect, as I have said, we were very kindly 
treated. Finally we received orders to sail from 
Pembroke to London. But the voyage proved a 
long one. Protracted delays intervened ; to avoid a 
long enumeration of these, let it suffice to say that 
by order of the english king we were landed at 


18 


LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol. 3 


et dimidium. Semper in navi, nisi cum, uti dixi, 
excendimus ad Pembrochium. Tres menses fuimus : 
cum nobis in die non darentur nisi circiter unciae duae 
panis et non multum salsi piscis et aqua fere semper 
foetida; ideoque miramur quomodo in morbum non 
inciderimus. Quod pauci Anglorum evadere potue- 
runt, imo ejusdem etiam aliquot mortui sunt. Sed 
nimirum Deus nos custodivit placatus Vestrae Pater- 
nitatis ac totius Societatis precibus ; f axit ipse pro sua 
bonitate ut id cedat ad majorem ipsius gloriam emen- 
dationemque morum meorum ac salutem. Hoc spero 
per preces ac [21] benedictionem Vestrae Paternitatis 
quam humillime et quanto affectu possum nixus ge- 
nibus flagito. Dmus [Dominus] Jesus Vestram Pa- 
ternitatem custodiat semper et Sanctissimis suis gra- 
tiis augeat, Pater optime et suavissime. 

Vestrae Paternitatis 
Alius obediens ac servus indignus 

Petrus BIARD 
Ambiani, 26 Maii, 16 14. 


1611-16] IUARD TO THE GENERAL 19 


Dover, and thence sent to Calais in France. At 
Calais we were hospitably received by the Governor 
and the dean of the city, and rested three days; 
thence we came to Amiens, where we now are. 

We remained in captivity [20] during nine months 
and a half. We were in the ship all the time, ex- 
cept when we landed at Pembroke, as related. There 
were three months during which we daily received 
only about two ounces of bread, and a small quantity 
of salt fish, with water that was nearly always fetid; 
so that we marvel at not having fallen sick. Few of 
the English escaped illness, and some of them even 
died as the result. But God doubtless watched over 
us in answer to the prayers of Your Paternity and 
of all our Society ; may he grant in his goodness 
that it result to his own greater glory and in my sal- 
vation and better life. This I hope for, through the 
prayers and [21] the blessing of Your Paternity, 
which, with all possible humility and affection, I 
solicit on my knees. May the Lord Jesus ever 
watch over Your Paternity and may our Father with 
utmost goodness and favor increasingly bestow upon 
you his Most Holy grace. 

Your Paternity's 
obedient son and unworthy servant, 

Pierre BIARD. 

Amiens, May 26, 161 4. 


XIV 

Biard's Relation de la Nouvelle France 

LYONS: LOUIS MUGUET, 1616 


SOURCE : Text is reprinted from the original, in Lenox 
Library ; Title-page is photographic facsimile of original, in 
Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris. 

Peculiarities of Original: The text only, is paged. 
P. 191 is wrongly numbered, 181 ; p. 256 to the last page 
(340), are wrongly numbered, 263 to 338. Chap. xi. is 
wrongly numbered xii.; succeeding chapters are consecutive- 
ly numbered therefrom, xiii., xiv., etc., except that Chap, 
xix. in this arrangement, is wrongly numbered xxi.; but this 
transposition of letters has not affected the numbering of sub- 
sequent chapters. 

Chaps, i.-xxv. (correct numbering) are given in the pres- 
ent volume ; the rest of this document will appear in Vol- 
ume IV. 


RELATION 

D E LA 

NOVVELLE 

FRANCE,DE SES 

TERRES, NATVKEL .0' 

Pais,&defesHabicans, 


Duvoy 


iulqt 


IT E M, 

Peres lefuices au 
ce qu'ils y am faibt. 
tife pas 
les Anglois. 

F A I CTE 


;U P.'P !!RU Bl ARDjC 

de la Compagnic de I e s 





<A LYON, 

Zhd LOWS MVGVET , 
rue Mercierc. 


id, DC XVI. 

Aacc Priuikgc du Ko) 




RELATION 

OF 

NEW FRANCE, 

OF ITS LANDS, 

NATURE OF THE COUNTRY, 

and of its Inhabitants, 

ALSO, 

Of the voyage of the Jesuit Fathers to said 
country, and of their work there up 
to the time of their cap- 
ture by the English. 

WRITTEN 

By Father Pierre Biard, of Grenoble, 
of the Society of JESUS. 


L YONS, 

LOWS MVGVET, 

rue Merciere. 


1616. 
By Royal License. 


26 LES RELATIONS DES f£SUITES [Vol. 3 


[iii] Av Roy. 

SIRE, 
Si ie prejente a vojlre Majefte 1 ces Dijcours de vojlre 
nounelle France, la defcription dn pais, & le recit 
des mceurs, & f aeons de /aire ejirange, & fauuage des 
Canadins : Ie fuis oblige' par toutes fortes de deuoir a ce 
faire. Son commandement cxpres, ioincl a celuy de la 
Royne vojlre tres-honnore'e mere lors Regent e, m 'y a port if, 
auec quelques miens Compagnons, phis Jauorablement que le 
vent, & la mare'e, vojlre liber alite Roy ale my a entrctenu 
quelques anne'es, & Jon author it e* puijjante m'a deliure' des 
mains de certains Corjaires Anglois, qui ennemis de 7ioJtrc 
Jaincle [iv] Joy {de laquelle nous jcttions quelque Jemence 
en ces Terres Neuucs, auec ejperance d'en Jaire vne moijfon 
planturcuje,jeul motij de ?wjlre voyage, & de vojlre iujsion, 
SIRE,) nous ont Jaicl quitter la place a nojlre grand regret, 
&nous ont tenu comme prijonnicrs quelques moys dans leur 
vaifjeau, & prepare cent Jois la hart, & la pot ence pour 
nous Jaire perdre la vie : le Jeul rejpeel de V. Majcjle les 
ayant empejehez d'executcr leurs manuals defjeings, par- 
ticulierement Jur ma perjonnc, laquelle pojsible la diuine 
prouidence a voulu rejerucr par V entremije vojlre, pour 
ejlre commande'e dcrcchej de Jaire voile aux mejmes contre'es, 
& continuer la culture de ce peuple fauuage. EJchappe done 
de ce danger, & tout mouilli encores du naujrage Jur le port 
de vojlre France ; t offrc a vospieds ce pen de cayers, comme 
vne table de tres-humblc rccognoiffancc, que Ji i'ejeris, Ji ie 
vis, c'ejl (apres Dicu) par vojlre moyen, & Jaucur, SIRE. 
Et [v] cejle obligation Jig na lec in ejlant ton fours deuant 
les yeux, Jera que ie prieray Dicu coutinuellement , auec tons 


1611-16] WARD'S RELATION, i6f6 27 


[iii] To the King. 

SIRE, 
If I present to your Majesty these Discourses upon 
your new France, the description of the country, 
and the account of the manners and strange and barbarous 
ways of the Canadians, I a?n bound to do it by every con- 
sideration of duty. Your express command, with that of 
the Queen, your highly esteemed mother, then Regent, car- 
ried me and some of my Companions thither more propi- 
tiously than wind and tide ; your Royal generosity sup- 
ported 'me there for some years ; and your mighty authority 
delivered me from the hands of certain EnglisJi Pirates, 
enemies of our holy [iv] faith, {of which we cast some 
seeds in this New World, with the hope of one day having 
a plentiful harvest, sole object of our voyage and of your 
royal command, SIRE,) they compelled us to leave the 
place, to our great regret, and held us prisoners several 
months in their ship, and a hundred times prepared the rope 
and the gallows for our execution; respect for Your Majesty 
alone having prevented them from carrying out their zvicked 
designs, particularly upon my person, which possibly 
divine providence has wished to preserve through your 
agency, to be again ordered to sail away to the same coun- 
try, and to continue the education of this barbarous people. 
Delivered now from this danger, ajid still wet from the 
shipwreck in the port of your France, I lay at your feet 
this little book as an evidence of very humble gratitude that, 
if I am living and writing, it is due (after God) to your 
help and favor. SIRE. And [v] this signal obligation, be- 
ing always before my eyes, will cause me to pray God con- 


28 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

ceux dc ma robbe, que V. Majejle' croiffant d'aage, & dc 
zele puiffc vn tour arborcr V cftcndart dc la Croix auec fes 
flairs de lys Royales, aux terrcs plus cfcarte'cs des Infidclcs : 
tandis que ce grand Roy des Roys luy prepare au del vne 
couronne tiffuc d'/ionncur, & de gloirc pcrpctuellc , que ie 
vous fouhaitte, apres auoir porte' la vojlre en terre longue- 
mcnt, & hcureufcmcnt ; dc mcfmc cosur, & affeclion que ic 
fuis, De vojlre MajcJlc, 

Tres-humble, & tres-obeiffant 

fubjedt, & feruiteur, 

Pierre Biard. 


1611-161 BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 29 


tinually, -with all those of my order, that, as Your Majesty s 
years and zeal //urease, you may one day plant the standard 
of the Cross with its Royal feu rs de lys upon the most dis- 
tant Infidel lands, while the great King of Kings prepares 
for you in Heaven a crown of honor and of everlasting 
glory, which I wish for you, after having worn your crown 
upon earth long and happily, with the same love and devo- 
tion from which I am your Majesty's 
Very humble and very obedient 

subject and servant, 

Pierre Biard. 


30 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 


[vi] Avant-Propos. 

A GRANDE raifon (amy Ledteur) vn des plus 
ancies Prophetes, nous depeignant myflique- 
ment foubs le fenfible, & hiftorial degaft de 
la Iud6e, les horribles rauages, exterminations, & 
ruines, que Satan opere, ou fa fureur peut auoir le 
domaine, a dit emphatiquement ; Au dcuant de luy la 
tcrre eft vn Paradis de deliees, & derriere luy la folitude 
d'vn de/ert. Car certes, qui iettera fes yeux fur tout 
le vafte contour de la terre, & y confiderera les nations 
illuminees du Soleil de Iuftice, noflre Sauueur Iesvs- 
Christ, arroufees de fon fang, & precieux Sacrement ; 
nourries de fa grace & parole; viuifiees, & refiouyes 
de fon [vii] efprit ; cultiuees, & regies de fes diuins 
Offices, honnorees de fon oracle, & prefence r6elle; 
Qui, dy-ie, contemplera cecy, aura grade occafion 
de s'ef crier, Qu'au deuant du deftrucleur infernal, Et, 
oh il ne pent atteindre ; la terre eft vn Paradis de deliees, 
ou toutes benedictions, mefmement temporelles, & 
feculiere felicite accompagnet les peuples ; eftant 
plante au milieu d'eux, le vray arbre de vie, noftre 
Redempteur Iefus-Chrift. Mais au contraire, fi Ion 
deftourne la veue, & que Ion regarde derriere ce 
maudit tyran, Lucifer, & par ou il a peu exercer fes 
intolerables cruautez, on ne trouuera que deftrudtions 
& folitudes, cris & lamentations, que defolatio, & 
ombre de mort. Ores il n'eft ja befoin, que nous for- 
tions hors de noflre hemifphere, pour voir a l'ceil, & 
recognoiftre [viii] cefle verite ; La Grece, & la Palef- 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 31 


[vi] Preface. 

VERY appropriately (dear Reader) one of the 
earlier Prophets, depicting to us allegorically, 
under the visible and historical downfall of 
Judah, the horrible ravages, exterminations, and ruin 
wrought by Satan, where his fury can have full sway, 
has said emphatically : Before him the land is a Garden 
of pleasure, and behind Aim a desolate wilderness. For 
truly, whoever will cast his eyes over all the vast 
circumference of the earth, and will consider the 
nations thereof which are illuminated by the Sun of 
Justice, our Savior Jesus Christ; bedewed with his 
blood and precious Sacrament; nourished by his 
grace and word; animated and gladdened by his 
[vii] spirit; enlightened and governed by his divine 
Offices, honored by his utterances and actual pres- 
ence; whoever, I say, will contemplate this, will 
have great reason to cry out, Beyond the infernal 
destroyer, and, Where he does not extend, the earth is a 
Garden of delight, where all blessings, even temporal 
and worldly happiness, follow the people, the real 
tree of life, our Redeemer, Jesus Christ, being 
planted in their midst. On the contrary, if we turn 
aside our gaze, and look behind this cursed tyrant, 
Lucifer, and upon the places where he has exer- 
cised his intolerable cruelties, we shall find only 
destruction and solitude, cries and lamentations, only 
desolation and the shadow of death. Now we need 
not go out from our own hemisphere to see and 
recognize [viii] this truth ; Greece and Palestine con- 


32 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

tine, jadis vn bel Eden, auiourd'huy vn pitoyable 
defert nous font deuant les yeux. Que s'il vous plaift 
que nous nous regardions nous mefmes, pour, touchat 
a la main cela mefme, rendre loiiange au liberal dona- 
teur de nos biens : Ie vous prie fuiuons ce Soleil cor- 
porel, qui nous efclaire, & l'accompagnons en fon 
couchant, pour fcauoir, a qui par droidte ligne de nous, 
il va donner le bon iour au dela de noftre Ocean, 
nous ayant icy recommande au repos de la nuidt. 
C'eft la nouuelle France, cefte nouuelle terre, dy-ie, 
defcouuerte premierement au dernier fiecle, par nos 
Francois, terre iumelle auec la noftre, fubiedte a 
mefmes influences, rangee en mefme parallele, fituee 
en mefme climat; terre vafle, & pour ainfi dire, in- 
finie: [ix] terre que nous faluons, regardans noftre 
Soleil en fon vefpre : terre cependant, de laquelle vous 
pourrez meritoirement dire, fi vous confiderez Satan 
en front, & venant de 1' Occident pour nous abbatre: 
Deuant luy cjl vn Paradis de de/iees, & derriere luy la 
folitude d'vn defert : Car en pure verite toute cefte 
region, quoy que capable de mefme felicite que nous, 
toutefois par malice de Satan, qui y regne, n'eft qu'vn 
horrible defert, no guiere moins calamiteux pour la 
malencontreufe difette des biens corporels, que pour 
celle, qui abfoluement rend les hommes miferables, 
l'extreme nudite des parements, & richeffes de Fame: 
& ne faut ja en accufer le fol, ou malignite de la 
terre, l'air, ou les eaux, les hommes, ou leurs hu- 
meurs: Nous fommes tous faidts, & releuons de 
mefmes principes: [x] Nous refpirons foubs mefme 
eleuation de pole, mefmes conftellations nous tempe- 
rent : & ne croy point, que la terre, laquelle produit la 
d'auffi hauts, & beaux arbres que les noftres, ne pro- 


lf»l 1-16J BIA RD'S RELA TION, 1616 33 

front us, formerly as beautiful as Eden, to-day a 
mournful desert; but if you wish that we should 
look upon our own country, that, having a striking 
proof thereof, we may render praise to the liberal 
giver of our blessings ; I pray you let us follow this 
corporal Sun, which gives us light, and accompany 
it to its setting, to learn to whom, in a direct line 
from us, it goes forth to give good day across our 
Ocean, leaving us here to the stillness of the night. 
It is new France, this new land, first discovered 
in the last century, by our countrymen, a twin land 
with ours, subject to the same influences, lying in 
the same latitude, and having the same climate; a 
vast country, and so to speak, infinite; [ix] a country 
which we greet, facing our Sun at eventide: a land 
moreover, of which you may well say, if you con- 
sider Satan opposite and coming up from the West 
to smite us; A Garden of delight lies before kirn, behind 
him a solitary wilderness. For verily all this region, 
though capable of the same prosperity as ours, never- 
theless through Satan's malevolence, which reigns 
there, is only a horrible wilderness, scarcely less 
miserable on account of the scarcity of bodily com- 
forts than for that which renders man absolutely 
miserable, the complete lack of the ornaments and 
riches of the soul; and neither the sun, nor malice 
of the soil, neither the air nor the water, neither 
men nor their caprices, are to be blamed for this. 
We are all created by and dependent upon the same 
principles : [x] We breathe under the same sky ; the 
same constellations influence us; and I do not be- 
lieve that the land, which produces trees as tall and 
beautiful as ours, will not produce as fine harvests, 
if it be cultivated. Whence, then, comes such great 


34 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 3 

duifift d'auffi belles moiffons, fi elle eftoit cultiuee, 
D'ou vient done vne fi grande diuerfite? d'ou ce tant 
inegal partage de bon, & mal heur? de jardin & de- 
fert? de Paradis, & d'Enfer? Que m'interrogerez- 
vous? Interrogez cehiy, qui du Ciel aduifoit fon 
peuple, de confiderer cefte tant oppofite diuifion entre 
Efaii & Iacob, freres iumeaux, & comme ceftuy-la 
eftoit loge en l'air auec les dragos, & beftes fauuages; 
& ceftuy-cy en la mouelle, & mammelle de la terre 
auec les Anges. 

Cefte confideration de vray eft puiffante, & deuroit 
occuper d'admiration tous nos fentimens, [xi] nous 
retenat en vne pieufe crainte, & affedtionee volonte 
de communiquer charitablement ce comble de bie du 
Chriftianifme ; qui nous vient fi gratuitement au ren- 
contre: Car autrement certes il eft facile a noftre 
benin Pere de croifer fes bras comme fit Iacob, & 
mettre fa dextre fur le puyfne, & fa gauche fur le 
plus grand. O mon Dieu! ou eft icy l'ambition des 
Grands ? ou la contention des forts ? ou la monftre des 
riches? ou 1'efTort des vertueux? y a-il champ de Mar- 
athon, ou lices Olympiques plus propres aux coura- 
geux? ou eft-ce que la gloire d'vn Chreftien le peut 
efleuer plus heureufement, que oil elle apporteroit la 
felicite" corporelle tout enfemble, & la fpirituelle a fes 
conforts; & ou comme grand outil de Dieu, il feroit 
d'vn defert vn Paradis? oil [xii] il dompteroit les 
Monftres infernaux, & introduiroit la police, & la 
milice du ciel en terre? oil les generations, & genera- 
tions a milliers, & iufques aux derniers fiecles beni- 
royent fon nom & memoire fans ceffe, & le ciel 
mefme (qui fe peupleroit de fes biefaits) fe refiouyroit 
des graces, & benedictions, verfees deffus luy? 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 35 


diversity? Whence such an unequal division of 
happiness and of misfortune ? of garden and of wil- 
derness? of Heaven and of Hell? Why do you ask 
me? Ask him, who from Heaven counsels his peo- 
ple, to consider the so opposite division between Esau 
and Jacob, twin brothers, the former cast out to dwell 
with dragons and wild beasts; the latter in the lap 
and bosom of the earth with the Angels. 

This consideration is certainly powerful, and ought 
to inspire all our sentiments with admiration, [xi] 
keeping us in pious fear, and in loving desire to be- 
nevolently impart this highest of all the blessings of 
Christianity, which comes to us so gratuitously and of 
its own accord. For otherwise it is certainly easy for 
our kind Father to cross his hands as did Jacob, and put 
his right upon the younger, and his left upon the 
elder. Oh, my God! where is here the ambition of 
the Great? where, the contention of the strong? where. 
the display of the rich? where, the endeavor of the 
virtuous? is there a field of Marathon, or are there 
Olympian games, more fitting to the brave? Where 
can the glory of a Christian more successfully ennoble 
him, than there where it brings both bodily and 
spiritual happiness to his brethren; and where, as 
one of God's great instruments, he would make a 
Garden out of the wilderness; where [xii] he would 
subjugate satanic Monsters, and would introduce the 
order and discipline of heaven upon earth ; where 
generations upon generations, by thousands and to 
the remotest ages, would forever bless his name and 
memory, and heaven itself (which would be peopled 
by his good deeds) would rejoice at the thanksgiv- 
ings and blessings bestowed upon him. 

Now (dear Reader) it is this my eagerness and ardent 


36 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol. 3 

Or c'eft (amy Ledteur) l'ardent defir, & zele de 
voir cefte nouuelle France, que ie dy, coquife a 
noftre Seigneur: qui m'a fait prendre la plume en 
main pour vous depeindre brief uement, & en toute 
verite ce que i'ay recogneu de fes cStrees. II y a 
quatre ans, que i'y fus enuoye' pas mes Superieurs: 
&, Dieu puniffant mes pechez, i'en ay efle defpuis 
enleue par les Anglois, ainfi que ie raconteray cy- 
apres. 


1611-16] WARD'S RELATION, 1616 37 

desire to see this new France converted to our Lord, 
which has made me take my pen in hand to describe 
to you briefly, and in all truth, what I have found 
out about these lands. It is four years since I was 
sent there by my Superiors; and, as God's punish- 
ment for my sins, I was taken away from there by 
the English, as I shall relate hereafter. 


38 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 3 


Relation de la Novvelle France, et le Voyage des 
Peres Iesvites en icelle. 

CHAPITRE I. 

[i] QUEL PAIS EST LA NOUUELLE FRANCE, & CEUX QUI 
PREMIEREMENT L'ONT VOULU HABITER. 

NOVS appellons Notmelle France ; les terres, & pais 
de 1' Amerique, ou Indes Occidentales, qui font 
a l'autre bord de 1' Ocean de Guienne, vers le 
Soleil couchant, oppolites a nous, & droidtement corre- 
fpondantes en mefrne ligne de 1' Orient a 1' Occident. 
[2] On leur a impose ce nom de Nouuelle France, 
pour deux raifons principalement. La premiere, 
d'autant que (comme i'ay dit) ces terres font paralleles 
a noftre France, n'y ayant rien entre la Guienne & 
ces didtes contrees, fmon noftre mer d'Occident, large 
en fon plus eftroidt, de huidt cens lieiies & d'auantage ; 
En fon plus ample peu moins de mille lieiies ou enui- 
ron. La feconde raifon eft d'autant que ce pais a efte 
premierement defcouuert par les Francois Bretons, 
Tan 1504. II y ja cent & onze ans; Et qui defpuis 
n'ont ceffe de la frequenter. Les Normans de 
mefme ont contribue a ce trauail des premiers; 
entre lefquels nous lifons, que le Capitaine Thomas 
Aubert, Dieppois y fit voile, Tan 1508. & en ramena 
des Sauuages du pais, lefquels il fit voir auec admira- 
tion, [3] & applaudiffement a la France. Deux ans 
auant luy le Capitaine lea Denys de Honfleur auoit 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 39 


Relation of New France, and the Jesuit Fathers' 
Voyage to that country. 

CHAPTER I. 

[i] ON THE LOCATION OF NEW FRANCE, AND THOSE 
WHO FIRST ATTEMPTED TO SETTLE THERE. 

WE call New France, 1 the lands and countries of 
America or the West Indies, which are upon 
the other shore of the Ocean of Guienne, 2 
towards the setting Sun, opposite us and lying di- 
rectly in the same line from East to West. [2] They 
have given it this name of New France principally 
for two reasons. The first, because (as I have said) 
these lands are parallel to our France, nothing lying 
between Guienne and said countries, except our West- 
ern sea, in its narrowest part more than eight hundred 
leagues wide; in its widest, a little less than a thou- 
sand leagues, or thereabout. The second reason is 
that this country was first discovered by French 
Bretons, in the year 1 504, one hundred and eleven 
years ago, and since then they have not ceased to 
visit it. The Normans also assisted in these early 
discoveries; among whom we read that Captain 
Thomas Aubert, 3 of Dieppe, sailed in the year 1508, 
and brought back from there some of the Natives, 
whom he exhibited to the wonder [3] and applause 
of France. Two years before him, Captain Jean 
Denys, 4 of Honfleur, had made the same discovery; 
but, as he brought back only some fish, and Geograph- 


40 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 


fait la mefme defcotmerte ; Mais par ce qu'il n'en 
auoit rapporte que des poiflons, & des cartes Geogra- 
phiques, fon renom en eft demeure plus obfcur, que 
de Thomas Aubert. Depuis l'an 1523. lean Verazan 
courut toute la cofte, des la Floride iufques au Cap 
Breton, & en prit poffeffion au nom de Francois I. 
fon maiftre. Ie croy que c'a efte ce lean Verazan, 
qui a efte le Parrain de cefte denomination de Nou- 
uelle France: Parce que Canada, (duquel nom aufii 
on l'appelle communement) n'eft point a. proprement 
parler toute cefte tenue de pais, qu'ores on nome 
Nouuelle France; Ains eft celle tant feulement, la- 
quelle s'eftend au long des riuages du grand Fleuue 
Canadas, & [4] le Gelfe de S. Laurens ; qui n'eft feule- 
ment, que la partie la plus Septentrionale de la Nou- 
uelle France ; ainfi qu'il vous appert par la carte Geo- 
graphique, que nous vous appofons icy. 

A Canada touche l'Acadie, ou pays des Souriquoys 
plus bas vers le Sud : Et plus bas encores au dela de 
la Baye Francoife eft la Norambegue. De ces deux 
mots de Norambegue & de Acadie, il n'en refte plus 
aucune memoire fur le pays; ouy bien de Canada, 
laquelle fut principalement defcouuerte par Iacques 
Cartier, l'an 1524. & puis par vn fecond voyage dix 
ans apres l'an 1534. 

Or des le commencement de ces defcouuertes, les 
Francois ont beaucoup traidte du cultiuage, & habita- 
tion de ces deferts. (Deferts font-ce voirement, tout 
le pays n'eftant qu'vne foreft infmie.) [5] Aucuns 
particuliers en font encores venus iufques aux tenta- 
tiues, comme Roberual & le Marquis de la Roche, & 
autres. Mais l'entreprinfe la plus haute diuulgu6e, & 
recente pour ceft effedt, a efte" celle du fieur de Monts 


1611-16] WARD'S RELATION, 1616 41 

ical charts, he has not become so renowned as 
Thomas Aubert. After the year 1523, Jean Verazan r> 
skirted all the coast from Florida to Cape Breton, and 
took possession of it in the name of his master, 
Francis I. I believe it was Jean Verazan who was 
Godfather to this title of " New France;" ■ for Can- 
ada (a name by which they also frequently call it) 
is not, properly speaking, all this extent of country 
which they now call New France ; but it is only that 
part, which extends along the banks of the great 
River Canada, and [4] the Gulf of St. Lawrence ; ,; 
this being only the most Northern part of New France, 
as will be seen from the Geographical chart which we 
insert herein. 7 

Acadie, or the Souriquoys country farther South, 
is next to Canada, and still farther down, on the 
other side of French Bay, is Norambegue. Of these 
two words, Norambegue and Acadie, there no longer 
remains any remembrance in the country ; B yet there 
is of Canada, which was discovered principally by- 
Jacques Cartier in 1524, and then in a second voyage 
ten years afterwards in 1 534- 

Now ever since the first of these discoveries, the 
French have been talking about cultivating and in- 
habiting these wildernesses. (Wildernesses they 
certainly are, the whole country being but an inter- 
minable forest.) [5] Certain individuals, such as 
Roberval and the Marquis de la Roche, and others, 
have even attempted it. 9 But the most widely 
known and latest voyage undertaken for this pur- 
pose was that of sieur de Monts, Pierre du Gas, who 
has been very highly commended for it. Having 
considerable money at his disposal, and having as- 
sociated with him for this object certain Merchants 


42 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 3 

Pierre du Gas, qui s'en eft acquis grande recomman- 
dation. Iceluy ayant fait vn affez notable fonds 
d'argent; & a ceft effedt affocie aucus Marchands de 
Rouen, de faindt Malo, & de la Rochelle; receut de 
feu d'heureufe memoire Henry le Grand, pleine puif- 
fance, & authorite de Lieutenant de Roy fur ces 
dictes contrees des le quarantiefme degre d'eleuation, 
iufques au quarantefixiefme : car la aboutiffoit la 
puiffance, qui luy eftoit donee de difpofer des terres; 
Ses priuileges neantmoins de la traitte, & gouuerne- 
ment s'eftendoiet iufques au 54. degre, ainfi qu'on 
[6] peut recognoiftre par les lettres Royaux qui luy 
en furent expedites. Par ainfi de cefte Commiflion 
du fieurde Monts, il femble, qu'on aye prins occafion 
de retrecir les limites de la Nouuelle Frace; Car 
(comme nous auons dit) auparauat elle s'eftendoit 
iufques a la Floride vers le Sud, la ou maintenat on 
la borne quafi communement du trenteneufuiefme 
degre de latitude Auftrale, ainfi que vous la voyez en 
noftre carte. Ses limites a l'Orient, font noftre mer; 
a 1' Occident ce fera la mer de la Chine, fi nous auons 
affez de valeur & vertu: car autres bornes n'y a-il, 
qui foient certaines, le pays extant infiny, & plus 
eftendu dix & douze fois que n'eft toute noftre France. 

Or le fieur de Monts ayant 1' authorite & puiffance 
cy-deuant didte, & affez bien muny, & accompagne [7] 
partit de France Tan 1604. iuftement cent ans apres 
la premiere defcouuerte de ces terres, il s'alla loger 
en la Cofte de la Norembegue entre les peuples Ete- 
minquoys, en vne petite Ifle, qu'il appella de faindte 
Croix: Mais le malheur l'y accueillit: car il perdit 
dc maladie vne grande partie de fes gens. 

Et partant l'annee fuyuante, cotrainct par la ne- 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 43 

of Rouen, of saint Malo and of la Rochelle, he re- 
ceived from the late Henry the Great, of happy- 
memory, full power and authority, as Lieutenant of 
the King in these said countries, from the fortieth to 
the forty-sixth parallel of latitude, for there ended 
the power given him to dispose of lands. However, 
his rights of trade and government extended to the 
54th parallel, as [6] can be learned from the Royal 
letters that were sent to him. Thus, by sieur de 
Monts's Commission, it seems that they took occasion 
to narrow down the boundaries of New France : for 
(as we have said) hitherto it had extended as far 
South as Florida, while now it is generally bounded 
on the South by the thirty-ninth parallel of latitude, 
as you see by our chart. Its Eastern boundary is 
our sea; its Western, will be the China sea, if we 
have force and courage enough ; as to other bound- 
aries, it has none which are definite, the country be- 
ing unlimited, and ten or twelve times more exten- 
sive than our entire France. 

Now sieur de Monts, having the authority and 
power mentioned, and being well equipped and [7] ac- 
companied, left France in the year 1604, just a 
hundred years after the discovery of this country, 
and went to live upon the Coast of Norembegue among 
the Eteminquoys people, upon a small Island, which 
he called sainte Croix. But misfortune overtook him 
there, for he lost a great many of his people by sick- 
ness. 

Leaving there the following year, forced by neces- 
sity, he changed his dwelling place to Port Royal, 
towards the East Southeast, some twenty-six leagues 
away, in Acadie or the Souriquoys country. Here 
he remained only two years, for the associated Mer- 


44 LES RELATIONS DES JltSUITES [Vol.3 

ceflite, il changea de demeure a Port Royal vers 1'Eft 
Sueft, a quelques vingt fix lieiies de la, en l'Acadie 
aii pais des Souriquoys, la ou il ne demeura que deux 
ans, d'autant que les Marchands afTociez, voyants que 
leur mife furmontoit la recepte ne vouluret plus te- 
nir coup : Ainfi falluft, que tous reuinffent en Frace, 
ne laiflans pour monument de leur exploidt, finon 
deux alogements tous vuides, celuy de faindte [8] 
Croix, & celuy de Port Royal; Et n'en rapportant 
autre guieres plus grand fruidt, que les Topographies, 
& defcriptiSs des Mers, Caps, Coftes, & Riuieres, 
qu'ils auoient parcouru. Voila tous les principaux 
adtes de nos diligeces, iufques aux annees 1610. & 
161 1. defquelles nous parlerons tantolt, quad il nous 
y faudra conduire les Iefuites. Mais au preallable, 
felon noflre promeffe, & comme Texige la condition 
de noflre defTein, nous monflrerons l'Horofcope, & 
Geniture de ces terres: Ie veux dire les afpects du 
ciel, fur icelles, leurs temps, faifons, temperature, & 
qualitez. 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6t6 45 


chants, seeing that their outlay exceeded their re- 
ceipts, no longer cared to continue the experiment. 
So they all had to return to France, leaving- nothing 
as a monument of their adventure, except two dwell- 
ings entirely empty, that of sainte [8] Croix, and 
that of Port Royal ; and bringing no greater spoils 
back with them, than the Topography and description 
of the Seas, Capes, Coasts, and Rivers, which they had 
traversed. These are all the chief results of our efforts 
up to the years 1610 and 161 1 , of which we shall speak 
hereafter in conducting the Jesuits there. But as a 
preliminary, according to our promise, and as the na- 
ture of our purpose demands, we shall show the Horo- 
scope and Geniture of these lands, I mean their cli- 
mate, their weather, seasons, temperature, and condi- 
tions. 


46 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 


CHAPITRE II. 

[9] DES TEMPS, SAISONS, & TEMPERATURE DE LA NOU- 
UELLE FRANCE. 

CES terres eflant, comme nous auons dit, paralleles 
a noftre France, c'efl a dire, en mefme climat, 
& mefme eleuation, par reigle d'Aftrologie, 
elles doiuent auoir mefmes influeces, mefmes inclina- 
tions, & temperatures: car elles ne different en cela, 
que come differet entre nous par exeple Grenoble, 
Vienne, & Bourdeaux, Paris & Cornoaille, Marfeille, 
& Bay one, fcauoir eft, q feulemet vn lieu eft plus 
Orietal, que 1' autre; quant au refte, il a mefme gran- 
deur de iours, mefme afpedt des eftoilles, mefmes fai- 
fons, & temperature. Vray eft que la nouuelle 
France defcend trois degrez [10] plus bas vers le mi- 
dy, que ne faict la noftre, laquelle s'arrefte a Fon- 
tarabie, c'eft a dire, au 42. degre; la ou la Nouuelle 
franchit iufques au 39. pour le moins, & plus loin, s'il 
plaift a fa Majefte de ne rien rabatre de ce que fon 
predeceffeur Francois I. auoit acquis. 

Neantmoins, quoy qu'en difent les Aftrologues, G 
faut-il aduouer que ce pais la (parlant vniuerfelle- 
ment, & come il eft a cefte heure) eft plus froid que 
n'eft noftre Frace, & qu'il y a diuerfite grande quant 
aux temps & faifons de l'vn a l'autre: Dequoy les 
caufes n'en eftas au ciel, il les faut rechercher en 
terre. Ie tefmoignerai fidelemet des effects lef quels 
i'ay experimete deux ans & demy continuels; Ie 


1611-16] /WARD'S RELATION, 1616 47 


CHAPTER II. 

[9] ON THE WEATHER, SEASONS, AND TEMPERATURE 
OF NEW FRANCE. 

THIS country being, as we have said, parallel to 
our France, that is, in the same climate and lati- 
tude, by a principle of Astrology it ought to 
have the same physical forces, deviations and temper- 
atures ; for it does not vary in those particulars any 
more than, for example, Grenoble, Vienne, and Bour- 
deaux, Paris and Cornoaille, 10 Marseilles and Bay- 
onne, vary among us; that is, only as one place is 
farther to the East than the other; also, its days are 
of the same length, its astral conditions the same, it 
has the same seasons and temperature. It is true that 
new France extends three degrees [10] farther south 
than ours does, which stops at Fontarabie, 11 that is, 
at the 42nd parallel; while New France extends at 
least to the 39th, and farther, if it pleases his Majesty 
not to give up anything that his predecessor, Francis 
I., had acquired. 

Nevertheless, whatever the Astrologers may say, 
it must be confessed that that country (generally 
speaking, and as it is at present) is colder than our 
France, and that they differ greatly from each other 
in regard to weather and seasons. The causes there- 
of not being in the sky, we must seek them upon 
the earth. I shall show accurately some experiments 
I made continuously for two years and a half, I 
might say three years and a half, only I consumed 


48 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 3 


dirois trois ans & demy, n'eftoit que i'ay confume 
prefqu'vn an a diuerfes reprinfes en nauigations 
faict.es loin du Continent. Le lieu [n] de ma plus 
longue demeure a efte Port Royal, prefque a 45. de- 
grez de hauteur polaire. La done la neige nous arri- 
uoit fur la fin de Nouembre, & ne fe fondoit iamais 
entierement dedans les bois, que fur la fin de Feurier, 
s'il n'arriuoit, comme fouuent, quelque groffe pluye, 
ou quelque fort vent de Midy qui la fondift. Mais 
elle n'eftoit pas fi toft fondue qu'il en tomboit 
d'autre. Hors des bois, & au defcouuert elle n'y 
croupit guiere plus qu'en Frace, mais il y nege plus 
fouuent que d'ordinaire en France: la plus haute 
nege, que i'y aye veu c'a efte d'vn pied & demy, en- 
core non pas. Quand le Noroueft. (qu'icy nous ap- 
pellos Galerne) fe met en fes fougues, le froid y eft 
intolerable, mais cela ne dure que huidt, ou dix iours 
pour le plus, puis le temps s'adoucit pour vn efpace, 
come en France; [12] & ne feroit on non plus empef- 
che de trauailler a quelque meftier, voire d'aller & 
venir, qu'en France; fi Ion y eftoit accommode, 
comme en France. Mais ce n'aefte qu'vne extreme 
pauurete de tout ce que i'y ay veu. Des miferables 
cabanes ouuertes en plufieurs endroits: noftre viure 
pois, & febues, encores bie ef charfement ; noftre 
boire l'eau pure: les hardes, & habits de nos gens 
tous frippez; nos prouifions, d'aller au bois du iour a 
la iournee, nos medicaments, vn verre de vin aux 
bonnes feftes; nos reftaurans, quelque peu de chaffe, 
ou de gibier par bonnes auentures; le lieu inhabite, 
les chemins fans veftige aucun, la chauffure du pied 
propre pour le foyer. Allez auec cela & dittes qu'il 
ne fait point d'hyuer en Canada. Mais au moins ne 


1611-16] lil A KD'S RELATION, i6i6 49 

nearly a year at various times in voyages away from 
the Mainland. The place [i i] where I remained the 
longest was Port Royal, almost on the 45th parallel 
of north latitude. Now at that place the snow came 
towards the end of November, and it never entirely 
thawed in the woods until about the last of Febru- 
ary, unless, as often happened, a heavy rain, or strong 
South wind came to melt it. But no sooner did this 
snow melt than more fell. Outside the woods, and 
in the open places, it did not last any longer than it 
does in France, but it snows oftener there than it 
usually does in France. The deepest snow I have 
seen in that country was not quite a foot and a half. 
When the Northwest wind (which we call here 
Galerne) lashes itself into a fury, the cold there is 
insufferable, but it lasts only eight or ten days at 
the most, then the weather becomes milder for a 
while, as it is in France, [12] and people would no 
longer be prevented from going on with their work, 
or even from going back and forth, as in France, 
if they had the same accommodations we have here. 
But whatever I saw here was extreme poverty. Some 
wretched cabins, open in many places; our food, 
peas and beans, rather scarce in quantity; our drink, 
pure water ; the clothes of our people all in rags ; our 
supplies found in the woods from day to day ; our 
medicine a glass of wine on great holidays; our re- 
storatives, perchance a trifle from the chase of a little 
feathered game ; the place uninhabited, no footprints 
upon the paths, our shoes only fit for the fireside. 
After this, go and say there is no winter in Can- 
ada. But at least do not .say that the water there is 
not [13] excellent, and the air not healthful; for 
it is certainly wonderful that, notwithstanding all 


LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.. 3 


dittes, que les eaux n'y foyent fort [13] bonnes, & l'air 
fort falubre: car c'eft de vray chofe merueilleufe 
comme nonobflant toutes ces miferes nous nous 
fommes toufiours fort bien portes, eftans toufiours 
pour le moins vingt en nombre ; Et 11 en trois ans 
n'en font morts de maladie que deux tant feulement, 
vn de S. Malo, & vn autre Breton : encores ce dernier 
mourut plus a faute d'auoir vn peu de pain & de vin 
pour fe reftaurer, (tout cela nous eftant failly) que 
non pour atrocite de fymptome ; ou cruaute de ma- 
ladie. 

Que fi nous nous fouuenons comme Iacques Quar- 
tier perdit quafi toutes fes gens, la fois qu'il hiuerna 
premieremet en ces pays ; & comme de mefme le fieur 
de Monts en perdit bien la moitie la premiere ann£e 
de S. Croix, & Tan fuiuant, qui fut le premier de port 
Royal, encores fentit-il grad [14] dechet, moindre 
toutesfois, & puis moindre la troifiefme annee. De 
mefmes auffi que depuis a Kebec la premiere annee 
plufieurs furet troufl^s, & non pas tant a la feconde. 
Celt amas de mefmes accidents nous pourra feruir a 
recognoiftre les caufes des maladies & de la fante, 
que tant diuerfement nous auons fenti. La maladie 
commune a efte le Scorbut, qu'on appelle maladie de 
la terre. les iambes, cuiffes & face enflent; les leures 
fe pourriffent, & leur furuiennent de grandes excroif- 
fances, l'haleine eft courbe, auec vne fafcheufe toux, 
les bras meurtris, & le cuir tachete, toute la perfonne 
languit auec grand ennuy, & douleur, fans rien pou- 
uoir aualer, fmon quelque peu de liquide. Le fieur 
Champlain philofophant fur cecy, attribue la caufe de 
ces maladies aux vapeurs [15] que ceux-la boiuent, 
qui labourent, renuerfent, & habitent premierement 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, j6j6 51 

these discomforts, we always kept our health, being 
never less than twenty in number, and that in three 
years only two of us died of disease, one a man from 
St. Malo and the other a Breton ; yet the latter died 
more for want of a little bread and wine to restore 
him (there being a dearth of all those things) than 
from the gravity of the symptoms or malignancy of 
the disease. 

Let us recall how Jacques Quartier lost almost all 
his people, the first winter he passed in this country ; 
and also how sieur dc Monts lost about half of his 
the first winter at Ste. Croix, and the following one, 
which was the first at port Royal, he also ex- 
perienced great [ 14] loss, but not so much, and the 
third year still less. Likewise at Kebec, afterwards r 
several died the first year, and not so many the second. 
This collection of incidents will serve to show us the 
causes of sickness and of health, which we have experi- 
enced so differently. The common disease was Scur- 
vy, which is called land disease. The limbs, thighs, 
and face swell ; the lips decay, and great sores come out 
upon them ; the breath is short, and is burdened with 
an irritating cough ; the arms are discolored, and the 
skin covered with blotches; the whole body sinks 
under exhaustion and languor, and nothing can be 
swallowed except a little liquid. Sieur de Cham- 
plain, philosophizing upon this, attributes the cause 
of these diseases to the dampness [15] inhaled by 
those who plow, spade, and first live upon this 
ground, which has never been exposed to the sun. 
His statements are plausible and not without exam- 
ples; but they may be confronted by the fact that 
sailors, who only go to the coast to fish, and do not 
clear the land at all, nor live upon it, often fall ill of 


52 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

ces terres, lefquelles n'ont iamais efle defcouuertes 
dti foleil. Son dire n'eft pas impertinent, ny fans 
exemples : neantmoins on peut oppofer, que les mari- 
niers, qui ne vont qu'a la code pour pefcher, & ne 
defrichent aucunes terres, ny ne les habitent: non- 
obftant fouuent tombent en ce mal, & fur tous les 
Bretos. Car il femble que ce mal les va triant d'entre 
tous les autres. Item, que nous, qui nous fommes bien 
portes, comme i'ay dit, renuerfions neantmoins prou 
de terres, & les euentions, & fi n'auons nous iamais 
fceu que c'eftoit de ce mal, horfmis vn peu moy, qui 
au fecod hyuer, que i'y ay paffe deuins fort enfle auec 
vne fieure, & alteratio incroyable: Mais i'eus touf- 
iours les genciues, & leures entieres, & [16] mon mal 
fe perdit en dix, ou douze iours. Ie croy bien, que 
cela y feruoit de beaucoup, que noftre logis n'eftoit 
point nouueau, & que tout eftant effarte a l'entour 
de noftre habitatio des long teps, nous auions l'air 
pur & libre. Et c'eft a mon aduis ce que Champlain 
a principalement voulu dire. 

Ten ay ouy d 'autres, qui philofophoyent autre - 
ment, & non fans Phyfique. Ceux-cy opinoyent, que 
le demeurer acroupy pendant vn long, & fombre hy- 
uer, tel qu'eft celuy de Canada, auoit caufe ce mal 
aux nouueaux habitans. Que de toutes les gens du 
fieur de Monts, qui premierement hyuernerent a 
Sainole Croix, onze feiilement demeurerent en fante. 
C'eftoyent les chafleurs, qui en gaillards compagnons 
aimoyent mieux la picoree, que l'air du foyer; [17] 
courir vn eftang, que de fe renuerfer parefleufement 
dans vn lict, de peftrir les neiges en abbattant le 
gibier, que non pas de deuifer de Paris & de fes ro- 
tiffeurs aupres du feu. Aufli de vray quad a nous 


161 l-lt>] BIARD' S RhJ. . I Th W, 1616 53 

this malady, and especially the Bretons, for it seems 
to pick them out from all the others. Also, that 
we, who were well as I have said, worked a great 
deal in the soil and out in the open air, yet we 
scarcely knew what this evil was, except I myself, to 
a slight degree, during the second winter, when I 
became very much bloated from fever and extreme 
weakness; but my gums and lips were not affected, 
and [16] my illness passed off in ten or twelve days. 
I believe it was a great benefit to us that our dwell- 
ing was not new, and that, the space around the set- 
tlement having been cleared for a long time, we had 
a free and pure circulation of air. And I believe 
that this is principally what Champlain meant. 

I have heard of others, who argued differently, 
and not without Logic. They believed that living 
inactive during a long and gloomy winter, like that 
of Canada, had been the cause of this disease among 
the new inhabitants. Of all sieur de Monts's people 
who wintered first at Sainte Croix, only eleven re- 
mained well. These were a jolly company of hunt- 
ers, who preferred rabbit hunting, to the air of the 
fireside; [17] skating on the ponds, to turning over 
lazily in bed; making snowballs to bring down 
the game, to sitting around the lire talking about 
Paris and its good cooks. Also, as to us who were 
always well at Port Royal, our poverty certainly re- 
lieved us of two great evils, that of excessive eating 
and drinking, and of laziness. For we always had 
good exercise of some kind, and on the other hand 
our stomachs were not overloaded. I certainly be- 
lieve that this medicine was of great benefit to us. 

Let us return to our discourse upon the weather and 
seasons. I noticed once, that two Februarv davs, 


M LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 3 


autres, qui auons toufiours efte fains a Port Royal ; 
la difette, en laquelle auons efte, nous a affranchi de 
deux grands maux; fcauoir d'exces au boire, & au 
manger ; & de faineantife. Car toufiours nous 
auions quelque bo exercice: noftre eftomach d'autre 
part n'eftoit point furcharge. Certes ie croy que 
cefte oppiate nous a beaucoup ferui. 

Reprenons noftre tafche des temps, & faifons. 
I'ay remarque vne fois les deux iours de Feurier 26. 
& 27. eftre auffi beaux, doux, & printaniers qu'on 
en voye point en France enuiron ce temps-la ; neant- 
moinsle troifiefme iour [18] fuiuant il negea quelque 
peu, & le froid reuint. En efte quelque fois. Ie 
chaud y eft autant, ou plus intolerable qu'en France: 
mais il ne dure pas. Bien toft le temps fe broiiille. 
Les arbres y fueillet plus tard qu'en France pour 1' or- 
dinaire, & qu'ils n'ont fait cefte prefente annee 1614. 
Car arriuant en Picardie fur la fin d'Auril, ie n'y ay 
pas trouue la faifon plus auancee. Encores me fern - 
bloit-il qu'en Canada tout poufToit d'auantage. Et 
parlant vniuerfellement, le temps, & faifon de ce 
pays-la, eft du tout reilemblant a celuy que nous 
auons experimente cefte dicte annee icy, a Paris, & 
en Picardie, horfmis quant aux brumes & broiiillars. 
aufquels ledit pays eft plus fubjedt. A Port Royal 
nous n'en auions gueres l'Efte, finon pres la cofte 
de mer ; mais aux Etechemins & a Pentegoet ces [19] 
brouees tiennent fouuent en Efte les trois & quatre 
iours, c'eft chofe fort melancholique, & nous a donne 
apprehenfion qu'elle ne permettroit point que nos 
moiffons peuffent meurir; neantmoins nous auons 
trop d' arguments au ^contraire. Car a. Port Royal, 
qui eft plus froid, & inegal, elles meuriffent, & enjiy 


Uill-16] BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 55 


the 26th and 27th, were as beautiful, mild, and spring- 
like as are those in France about that time ; never- 
theless, the third day [18] after, it snowed a little 
and the cold returned. Sometimes in summer the 
heat is as intolerable, or more so than it is in France; 
but it does not last long, and soon the sky begins to be 
overcast. The foliage appears upon the trees later 
than it usually does in France, yet it has not done so 
this year, 1614, for when I arrived in Picardie to- 
wards the end of April, I did not find the season any 
more advanced there. Indeed it seemed to me that 
in Canada everything sprouted sooner. And, speak- 
ing in general, the weather and season over there 
are just like what we have experienced here this 
year in Paris and Picardie, except for the drizzling 
rains and fogs, which are more common in that coun- 
trv. At Port Royal we had scarcely any during the 
Summer, except near the coast. But among the 
Etechemins and at Pentegoet, these [19] fogs often 
continue for three and four days, a very discouraging 
thing, and we were afraid they would keep our crops 
from ripening ; nevertheless, we have too many argu- 
ments to the contrary. For at Port Royal, which is 
colder, and more changeable, they ripened, and I had a 
three years' experience there. Also, Champlain as- 
serts that at Ste. Croix, which is upon this same coast 
(in a very chilly and cloudy location") their wheat and 
other crops always ripened. 

But in truth what can be the cause of these hoar- 
frosts and cold, so much greater than we usually have 
in France? For it is well to consider it, since even 
Norembegue, where our settlement of St. Sauveurwas 
located, is as far South, as our most Southern Provin- 
ces, [20] (uiienne, Languedoe, and Dauphine. But 


56 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol, 


l'experience de trois ans. Item Cham plain affeure 
qu'a S. Croix, qui eft en cefte mefme cofte, (en vn 
endroit fort frilleux & nuageux ) toutesfois leurs 
bleds, & femailles vindrent a maturite. 

Voire, mais quelle peut eftre la caufe de ces fri- 
mas, & de ce plus grand froid, que nous ne fentons 
d' ordinaire en France? Car il y a bien a confiderer, 
veu mefmes que la Norembegue, oil eftoit noftre ha- 
bitation de S. Sauueur, eft autant Auftrale, que nos 
Prouinces, [20J qui le font le plus, la Guiene, Lan- 
guedoc, & Dauphine. Si n'en faut-il point affigner la 
caufe aux montagnes. Car nous n'en voyons point 
la de fort hautes, telles que font nos Seuenes, Me- 
fain, la Chartreufe, & vne grande partie d'Auuergne, 
Velay, Dauphine & Prouence, & feroit hors de toute 
apparence que ce pen de haut pays, qu'on remarque 
en la Norembegue, peuft caufer fi grandes alterations 
en fi vafte eftedue de Prouince ; mefmes que le grand 
froid de ce pays la ne vient pas du cotte ou plus y a de 
haut pays, qui eft le Nordefl, (ainfi que vous pouues 
apperceuoir en la charte) ains du Noroiieit, qui eft 
tout plat. 

Les defenfeurs des influences tiennent icy bon 
dans leur Cafematte, & auancent leurs amies defen- 
iiues eftre tout, fcauoir eft, [21 j leurs caufes in- 
cogneues ; difants qu'il y a ie ne fcay quoy au ciel, qui 
caufe ceft effedt en ces terres: & femblablement le 
Drach, paffant par la nier Occidcntale de ces regions, 
a l'endroit de la nouuelle Albion, au deffous du de- 
ftroidt d'Auian, a 40. 42. &44. d'eleuation Septentri- 
onale, il y trouua fi grand froid, qu'il fuit contrainct 
de rebroufler chemin. De mefmes qu'au pays de 
Counibas, qui elt en mefme latitude au dedans des 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, ibib 57 


we cannot assign the cause to the mountains, for we 
have not seen any very high ones there, such as our 
Sevenes, Mesain, Chartreuse, and a large part of 
Auvergne, Velay, Dauphine and Provence; and it 
would be out of all question that so slight an eleva- 
tion as is to be seen in Norembegue, could cause so 
great a variation in such a vast extent of country; 
also the great cold of that country does not come from 
the coast, where the greatest elevations are to be found, 
which is the Northeast (as you can see from the 
chart), but from the Northwest, which is entirely flat. 
Here the defenders of silent forces hold them- 
selves well intrenched in their Fortress and simply- 
advance their defensive weapons, i. e., [21] their un- 
known causes, saying that there is an inexplicable 
something in the sky which causes this effect upon 
these lands: and also Drake, traversing the sea West 
of this country, in the region of New Albion, below 
the strait of Auian, at 40 , 42 , and 44 North lati- 
tude, encountered such severe cold that he was forced 
to turn back. 12 Likewise that in the Counibas u coun- 
try, which is in the same latitude in the interior of 
the continent, the Spaniards found high mountains, 
and such severe cold, that they could not remain 
there; that those countries, from which comes the 
most severe cold, are West of us, and that this might 
well be the cause of these frosts and fogs, through a 
continuous current of air. But why, both in new 
Albion and in the Connibas country, does it become 
so cold? We [22] cannot know the cause thereof, 
they say, and must believe that there are certain in- 
fluences, which we do not discover. They must give 
the cold rather strong wings to make it come to us 
from four or five hundred leagues. For I believe 


LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 


terres, les Efpagnols y ont trouue de grandes mo- 
tagnes, & fi grand froid, qu'ils n'y ont peu durer. 
Que ces pays la font a noftre Oiieft, d'ou les plus 
horribles froidures procedent, & que celte pourroit 
bien eftre la caufe de ces gelees, & gry-temps par 
vne continuation d'air. Mais pourquoy, & en la nou- 
uelle Albion, & au pays de Connibas y glace -il ii fort? 
On [22] n'en peut pas bien fcauoir la caufe, difent- 
ils, & faut croire qu'il y a certaines influences, que 
nous ne defcouurons pas. C'eft bien certes bailler 
de fortes aifles au froid, le nous faire venir de quatre, 
ou cinq cens lieues. Car ie croy qu'il y en a bien 
autant, voire plus, iufques a la nouuelle Albion: ce- 
pendant nous voyos que fouuent vne feule lieue de 
pays & encores moins, donne changement notable de 
chaud, & de froid, de clair & d'obfcur, de fee & d'hu- 
mide, & toutes autres telles variations ainfi qu'il eft 
notoire. De plus cela eft ridicule, apres auoir fait 
cinq cents lieues pour trouuer le froid en fon gifte, 
& cauerne originaire, ne rencontrer fmon ie ne feay 
quelles influeces, qu'on ne peut nommer, & certaines 
impreffions occultes. N'euffiez vous pas pluftoft fait 
defloger [23] ces af pedis, impreffions, & caufes ano- 
nymes, & abfeonfes que vous dites fur Canada 
mefme, ou deffous elle, ou dedans, que de les aller 
chercher fi loing en vn pays ou vous ne fuftes iamais? 
Quant a nous, apres auoir prou difpute, nous n'a- 
uons trouue que deux caufes de la dif proportion qu'il 
y a entre ce pays la, & ceftui-cy, quant au temps & 
faifons: l'vne eft, que Canada eft plus Aquatique: & 
I' autre quell' eft inculte. Car premierement fi vous 
regardez mefmes la charte Geographique, vous verrez 
ceite region eftre fort entrecoupee de feins & bayes 
de mer, & fes terres ei'chancrees d'eau, ell'eft outre 


IfUl-ltil BIARD'S RELATION, /6/6 50 


there are as many and more than that, up to new 
Albion ; however, we often notice that a single league 
and even less makes a noticeable difference in the 
heat and cold, light and darkness, dryness and hu- 
midity, and all such other variations, so much so 
that it is remarkable. Moreover, it is ridiculous, 
after having gone five hundred leagues to find the 
cold in its native lair, not to encounter anything ex- 
cept inexplicable influences, which cannot be named, 
and certain mysterious agencies. Would you not 
rather seek out [23] these aspects, agencies, and un- 
known and hidden causes which you talk about, in 
Canada itself, either below or within it, rather than 
to look for them so far away in a country where you 
have never been ? 

As to us, after having sufficiently discussed the 
matter, we found only two causes for the difference 
between the two countries, as to weather and seasons ; 
one is that Canada has more Water, and the other that 
it is uncultivated. For, in the first place, if you 
merely look at the chart, you will see that this region 
is very much indented with gulfs and bays, and that 
its lands, hollowed out by the waters, are much more 
intersected by rivers, and occupied by a number of 
ponds and lakes, which would be a great ornament 
and convenience to the country if it were inhabited; 
but all this also causes the [ 24] cold and fogs, as well 
upon the borders of the sea and rivers. Now we have 
never lived anywhere else, for we have not pene- 
trated into the country except through the sea and 
rivers. Acadie, otherwise called the Souriquoys, 
where Port Royal is, is almost a peninsula; also it is 
more chilly and more variable than Norambegue, 


60 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.3 

plUvS fort arroufee de riuieres, & occupee de pluficurs 
eftangs, & lacs, ce qui feroit vn grand ornement, & 
commodite du pays s'il eftoit habite, mais auffi tout 
cela caufe du [24] froid, & des bruifnes, mefmement 
aux bords de la mer, & riuieres. Or nous n'auons 
iamais demeure autre part. Car nous ne fommes 
point entres dedans les terres, fmon par les moyen 
de la mer & des riuieres. L'Acadie autrement ditte 
les Souriquoys, ou eft Port Royal, eft quafi penin- 
fule: auffi eft elle plus frilleufe, & plus inegale, que 
n'eft la Norambegue, laquelle fans doute eft meil- 
leure, & en toutes facons plus habitable, & plantu- 
reufe. 

La feconde caufe du froid eft toute femblable, fca- 
uoir eft la fauuagine & friche du pays: car ce n'clt 
tout qu'vne foreft infinie : Partant le fol ne peut eftre 
de log temps efchauffe par le foleil, foit pource qu'il a 
la croufte dure, n'eftant iamais laboure, foit a caufe 
des arbres, qui l'ombragent perpetuellement, foit 
parce que la nege, [25] & les eaux y croupiffent long 
temps, fans pouuoir eftre confumees. Par ainfi de 
ces terres ne fe peuuent efleuer, que des vapeurs 
froides, mornes & relentes : & ce font les bruines lors 
que le vent ceffe, ce font auffi nos gelees cuifantes, 
lors que 1 'agitation & le fouffle les met en cholere. 
La ou fi la terre eftoit habitee, & cultiuee, outre que 
d'elle, & des logis des habitans monteroyent des ex- 
halations, c'eft a dire, des fumees chaudes, & feches: 
le foleil de plus la trouueroit difpof^e a fentir fes 
rayons, & diffipper le froid, & broiiillars: ce qui nous 
eftoit fort oculaire, & fenfible. Car en ce peu que 
nous auions laboure, toufiours la nege s'y fondoit 
pluftoft qu'autre part, & de la d 'ordinaire les brouees 
commencoyent a fe diffiper. & peu a peu s'efuanoufr. 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 61 


which without doubt is better and in every way more 
habitable and fertile. 

The second cause of the cold is very similar; 
namely, the wild and primitive condition of the land; 
for this is only a boundless forest, and so the soil can- 
not be readily warmed by the sun, either because it 
has a hard crust, never having been ploughed, or on 
account of the trees, which cast upon it a perpetual 
shade, or because the snow [2 5] and water stagnate 
there for a long time with no possibility of being 
consumed. Thus, from these lands nothing can arise 
except cold, gloomy, and mouldy vapors; and these 
are the fogs when the wind ceases, and our piercing 
cold when they are put in motion and blown into a 
fury. Whereas, if the land were inhabited and cul- 
tivated, from it and from the dwellings of the inhab- 
itants would arise exhalations, that is, warm and dry 
fumes ; furthermore, the sun would find it prepared to 
feel its rays, and to scatter the cold and fogs ; this was 
very evident to us from actual observation. For 
upon the small part which we ploughed, the snow 
always melted sooner than upon the other parts, and 
from there, the fogs usually began to scatter, and 
little by little to disappear. 


62 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 3 


CHAPITRE III. 

[26] DES TERRES, DE EEURS PEUPLES, & DE CE 
qu'y ABONDE. 

LES terres, a mon aduis, principalement en la No- 
rambegue, font auffi bonnes qu'en France: cela 
cognoiffez-vous a leur coulenr noire, aux arbres 
hauts, puiffants, & droidts, qu'elles nourrifTent, aux 
herbes & foin auffi haut fouuent qu'vn homme, & 
chofes femblables. A S. Sauueur, nous auions feme 
a la my-Iuin des grains, des pepins, des poix, des 
febues, & toutes fortes d'herbes de jardinage. Trois 
mois apres, c'eft a fcauoir, a la my-Septebre, nous re- 
uinfmes voir noftre labourage : le froment n'apparoif- 
foit point (auffi auoit-il efte feme hors de faifon,) 
1'orge eftoit efpie, mais non pas meur, les pois & 
faifoles bonnes parfaict.ement, mais encores vertes, 
les febues [27] n'eftoyent qu'en fleur: tout le refte 
eftoit admirablement bie venu, mefmement les 
oignons, & ciboules, les pepins auoyent iette, les au- 
cuns d'vn pied tout entier, les moindres d'vn demy 
pied. 

Ie vous ay dit cy deuant, que tout le pays n'ett 
qu'vne perpetuelle foreit: car il n'a rien d'ouuert 
iinon les marges de la mer, les lacs & riuieres & ou le 
flux de la mer. & des riuieres fe defbordants caufent 
des prairies, il y a quelques tels endroits bien beaux, 
& vaftes en herbage, & pafturages, comme eft la Baye 
de Chinidtou, & la riuiere de Port Royal, & autres. 
Mais icy faut efuiter vne illuiion, de laquelle plufieurs 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, 161b 63 


CHAPTER III. 

[26] ON THE SOIL, TRIBES AND VEGETATION. 

THE soil, it seems to me, principally in Noram- 
begue, is as good as that of France; you know 
this by its black color, by the high trees, strong 
and straight, which it nourishes, by the plants and 
grasses, often as high as a man, and similar things. 
At St. Sauveur, in the middle of June, we planted 
some grain, fruit seeds, peas, beans, and all kinds of 
garden plants. Three months afterwards, i. e. , in the 
middle of September, we returned to see the results of 
our husbandry ; the wheat had not come up (it was 
not sown in season) the barley was tufted, but not 
ripe, the peas and phasels perfectly good, but still 
green, the beans [27] were only in blossom; all the 
rest had come up admirably, even the onions and 
scallions ; the fruit seeds had shot up, some a whole 
foot, the lowest ones a half a foot high. 

I have said before that the whole country is simply 
an interminable forest ; for there are no open places 
except upon the margins of the sea, lakes, and rivers, 
and where meadows have been made by the over- 
flows of the sea and rivers; there are many such 
places which are very beautiful, immense fields of 
grass and pasture, like those near Chinictou Bay, 
and the river of Port Royal, and others. But here 
we must avoid an illusion by which many have been 
inadvertently imposed upon. For hearing those who 
come from foreign countries tell about their wealth 


64 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 3 

par mef garde font abufez. Car oyants parler ceux qui 
viennent de pays loingtains, & qui en racotent les biens, 
& fertilite prou fouuent auec amplification, (car [28] 
ainfi penfent-ils deuoir faire pour eftre plus attentiue- 
met efcoutez. ) lis eftimet que ce qu'on leur magnine 
de ces pays, fe trouue tout par tout abondamment. 
Comme par exeple, qui parlant de la Frace diroit, Qu'il 
y a veu les bois & forefts n'eftre to 9 que chaftagniers, 
oregiers & oliuiers, que poiriers & pommiers, tous fi 
charges qu'ils en ropoiet : certes celui-la diroit vray, car 
il eft ainfi. L'eftrangier neantmoins efcoutat y feroit 
trope : parce qu'il s'imagineroit qu'e tous les quartiers 
de la Fra.ce, ou en la plufpart, tout cela fe trouue : Et 
nc cofidereroit pas, que les chaftagniers font en Peri- 
gord, a cent lieues des orangiers, qui font en Pro- 
uence ; & les pommiers font au pays de Caux en Nor- 
madie, a cent lieues des chaftagniers, & a deux cents 
des oliuiers. Or quand le pays eft bien peuple, & 
habite ainfi qu'eft la France, cefte recommandation 
[29] monftre grand heur, parce qu'au moyen du char- 
roy & commerce, on fe communique toutes ces opu- 
lences; mais en vn pays inculte & non ciuilife, 
comme eft Canada, il n'y a guiere plus de difference, 
que s'il n'y auoit qu'vne chofe en vn lieu. Ie dy 
cecy parce que cefte prudence importe de beaucoup 
a ceux qui vont defricher nouuelles contrees, ainfi 
que nous autres Francois y allons volontiers a. yeux 
clos, & tefte baiffee: croyants par exeple, qu'eftants 
en Canada, & ayants faim nous ne ferons qu'aller en 
vn' Ifle, & la efcrimats d'vn gros bafton a dextre, & 
a feneftre, autant de coups, autant arrefterons nous 
d'oifeaux, defquels chacun vaudra bien vn canart. 
Voila qui eft bien dit, & ainfi l'ont fait nos gens plus 


1611-l«i] BIARD'S RELATION, 16/6 60 


and fertility, very often with exaggeration (for [2 8 J 
thus they think they will get a better hearing), they 
suppose that the things boasted about in these coun- 
tries are found everywhere in abundance. As, for 
example, if some one were speaking of France, he 
might sav that he had seen groves and forests of 
nothing but chestnut, orange, olive, pear, and apple 
trees, so loaded that they were breaking down ; in- 
deed, he could say this truthfully, for it is so. But 
the stranger hearing this would be deceived by it; 
for he would suppose that in all parts of France, or 
in nearly all, he would find this condition of things; 
not taking into consideration the fact that the chest- 
nuts are in Perigord, a hundred leagues away from 
the oranges, which are in Provence ; and the apples are 
in the region of Caux in Normandy, a hundred leagues 
from the chestnuts and two hundred from the olives. 
Now when the country is well peopled and settled, 
as France is, this favorable representation [29] may 
show great good fortune, for, by means of transporta- 
tion and trade, all these riches can be interchanged; 
but in an uncultivated and uncivilized country, like 
Canada, it makes no more difference than if they 
only had one thing in a place. I say this because 
prudence is of great importance to those who go to 
clear new lands, as we Frenchmen are so willing to 
go there with our eyes shut and our heads down ; 
believing, for example, that in Canada, when we are 
hungry, all we will have to do is to go to an Island, 
and there by the skillful use of a club, right and left, 
we can bring down birds each as big as a duck, with 
every blow. This is well said, as our people have 
done this more than once and in more than one place. 
It is all very well, if you [30 j are never hungry except 


66 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [Voi . :\ 


que d'vne fois, & plus qu'en vn lieu. Cela va fort 
bien, fi vous [30] n'auies iamais faim fmon au teps 
que ces oifeaux fe trouuent en ces Ifles, & fi lors 
mefme vous efliez proches d'eux. Car fi vous en 
eftes a cinquante, ou foixante lieues, que ferez vous? 

Pour reuenir a mon propos, il n'y a point de diffi- 
culte de rencotrer vn bon endroit en vne chofe. Vn 
bon & bel haure : des belles prairies, vn fol bien fe- 
cond; vne colline de bel afpedt, vne agreable riuiere, 
ou ruifTeau, &c. Mais lotir vne place, ou toutes les 
qualitez defirables vniment fe r'afTemblent, ce n'etl 
pas la bonne fortune d'vn homme prattiquant, dit 
tres bien Ariftote; ains le projedt & idee d'vn fake- 
ment enquerat : car en fin en la pradtique, le bo fort 
& perfection d'vne place, come d'vn homme, ce n'eft 
pas que rien ne manque, ains que rien d'effentiel, & 
principal ne manque. [31] C'eft ce qui m'a fait dire, 
que le tout confldere\ le prenant tant pour tant, i'ef- 
time que les terres de la, vaudroyent celles d'icy, 
quand elles feroyent bien cultiuees : mais nous vou- 
drions, que la tout fuft en vn petit deflroit : ce que 
mefmes nous ne trouuons pas icy en vn bien ample 
Royaume, apres fi long temps de cultiuage. 

En plufieurs endroits nous auons trouue de la 
vigne, & des lambruches meures en leur teps. Ce 
n'eftoit point le meilleur terroir ou nous les trouuios: 
c'eftoit quafi fable, & grauier, seblable a celuy de 
Bourdeaux. II y en a beaucoup a la riuiere S. lean 
a 46. d'eleuation, la void on aufli plufieurs noyers & 
coudriers, & fi le fods de terre n'y eft guiere bo. On 
ne trouue point autre forte d'arbres fruictiers en 
tout ce pais, ouy bie toute efpece de fauuageons, & 
foreftiers, comme [32] chefnes, heftres, charmes, peu- 


1 til 1 -16] />'/. I A'/rS RELA WON, 1616 67 


when these birds are on the Islands, and if even then 
you happen to be near them. But if you are fifty or 
sixty leagues away, what are you going to do? 

To return to my theme. There is no difficulty in 
finding a place that is good for one thing — a good 
and beautiful harbor; fine meadows and a very fer- 
tile soil ; a picturesque hill, a pleasant river, or brook, 
etc. But to choose a place where all desirable 
qualities are united, is not the good fortune of an or- 
dinary man, as Aristotle truthfully says, but the pur- 
pose and idea of a wise investigator: for, after all, 
the uses, success, and perfection of a place, as of a 
man, is not really that it be complete, but that there 
be no lack of what is essential and important. [31] 
That is why I say that all things considered, and tak- 
ing it upon the whole, I believe that the country over 
there will be worth as much as this one, after it is well 
cultivated : but we should prefer that there every- 
thing be in a small space, which we ourselves do not 
find here in our extensive Kingdom, after so long a 
period of cultivation. 

In several places we found the grape, and wild 
vines which ripened in their season. It was not the 
best ground where we found them, being full of sand 
and gravel, like that of Bourdeaux. There are a great 
many of these vines at St. John river, in 46 of lati- 
tude, where are to be seen also many walnut and 
hazel trees, and yet the under layer of soil is not 
good there. No other kinds of fruit trees are found 
in all this country ; but there is every species of wild 
shrub and forest trees, such as [32] the oak, beech, 
elm, poplar, etc., and some cedars, at least what the 
French call cedars. 14 

If the country were inhabited there might be some 


05 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 3 

pliers, &c. Et des cedres, au moins que les Francois 
appellet cedres. 

Si le pays eftoit habite, il pourroit approfiter fes 
mines : car il y en a vne d' argent en la Baye S. Marie, 
au rapport du lieur Chaplain: & deux de beau, & 
franc cuiure, l'vne a l'entree de Port Royal, & l'autre 
a la Baye des mines: vne de fer a la riuiere S. lean, 

6 d'autres autre part. Le gre, l'ardoife, la taille, le 
charbon de terre, & toutes fortes de pierres n'y 
manquent pas. 

Toute cefte nouuelle France elt diuifee en diuers 
peuples, chafque peuple a fa langue, & fa contree a 
part. lis s'affemblent l'El'te pour trocquer auec nous, 
principalement en la grande riuiere. La aufli 
viennent de bien loing plufieurs autres peuples. lis 
trocquet leurs peaux de caftors, de loutres, [33] d'ef- 
lants, de martres, de loups marins, &c. contre du 
pain, pois, febues, pruneaux, petun, &c. ehauderons, 
haches, fers de neche, aleines, poincons, capots. cou- 
uertes, & toutes autres telles commoditez, que les Fra- 
cois leur apportent. Aucuns peuples ont maintenant 
implacable guerre contre nous. Comme les Excom- 
minquois, qui font ceux qui habitent au cofte Boreal 
du grand Golfe S. Laurens, & nous font de grands 
maux. Cefte guerre a comence (comme Ion dit) a 
l'occafion de certains Bafques, qui voulurent faire vn 
mef chant rapt : mais ils payeret bie leur maudite in- 
continence, & non feulement eux, ains a leur occafion 
& ceux de S. Malo, & beau coup d'autres ont paty, & 
patilfent beaucoup tous les ans. Car ces Sauuages 
sot furieux, & s'abandonnent defefperemet [34] a la 
mort, pourueu qu'ils ayent efperance de tuer, ou 
mesfaire. II n'y a que trois peuples qui nous foyet 


lcii-16] BIARLTS RELATION, 1616 m 

profit made from its mines ; for there is a silver one at 
the Baye Ste. Marie, according to sieur Champlain; 
and two of beautiful and pure copper, one at the en- 
trance to Port Royal, and the other at the Bay of the 
mines; one of iron at the river St. John, and others 
elsewhere. Sandstone, .slate, mica, coal, and all kinds 
of stone are not lacking. 15 

All this new France is divided into different tribes, 
each one having its own separate language and coun- 
trv. They assemble in the Summer to trade with us, 
principally at the great river. To this place come 
also several other tribes from afar off. They barter 
their skins of beaver, otter, [33] deer, marten, seal, 
etc., for bread, peas, beans, prunes, tobacco, etc.; 
kettles, hatchets, iron arrow-points, awls, puncheons, 
cloaks, blankets, and all other such commodities as 
the French bring them. Certain tribes are now our 
implacable enemies, such as the Exeomminquois. 
who inhabit the Northern coast of the great Gulf of 
St. Lawrence and do us a great deal of harm. This 
warfare was begun (as they say) when certain Basques 
tried to commit a wicked outrage. However, they 
paid well for their cursed incontinence, but not only 
they, for on their account both the St. Malo people and 
many others suffered, and still suffer a great deal 
everv vear. For these Savages are passionate, and 
give themselves up | 34] to death with desperation, if 
thev are in hopes of killing, or doing any one an in- 
jury. There are only three tribes which are on good 
terms of friendship with us, the Montaguets, the 
Souriquois. and the Eteminquois. I myself can wit- 
ness to the friendship of the Etechemins and Souri- 
quois, for I have lived among them, and for the Mon- 
taguets I have heard others speak. As to other tribes, 


70 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [V 


familiers, & bos amis. Les Montaguets, les Souri- 
quois, & les Eteminquois. Pour les Etechemins, & 
Souriquois i'en fuis tefmoin, car i'ay demeure parmy 
eux, pour les Montaguets i'en ay ouy parler. Quant 
aux autres peuples, il n'y a point de fiance. Auffi les 
Francois ne les hantent, que pour defcouurir leurs 
riuages, & encores s'en font-ils mal trouues, horfmis 
Champlain en fes dernieres defcouuertes contremont 
la grade riuiere, qui ne s'en plaint point. 

Ceft'amitie & fidelite defdits peuples enuers les 
Francois a paru remarquablement apres noftre def- 
route faidte par les Anglois, ainfi qu'ouyrez. Car 
eux l'ayants fceu s'en vindret a nous de nuidt, [35] 
& nous cofoloyet au mieux qu'ils pouuoyent, nous 
prefentats leurs cauots, & leur peine pour nous con- 
duire ou nous voudrions. lis nous offroyent encores, 
que s'il nous plaifoit de demeurer auec eux, ils 
eftoyent trois Capitaines Betfabes, Aguigueou & Af- 
ticou : def quels vn chacun predroit pour fa part dix 
de noftre troupe, (puis que nous reftions trente,) & 
nous nourriroit iufques a l'an fuiuant, quand les na- 
uires Francoifes arriueroyent a la cofte, & qu'en 
cefte facon nous pourrions repaffer en noftre pays 
fans tober aux mains de mefchats Ingres. Car ainfi 
appellet-ils pour dire les Anglois. Ce n'eltoyent 
point mines, ou pieges a nous furprendre : car vous 
entendres cy apres le bon traidtement qu'ils firent au 
P. Enemond, & a fa troupe, & a Port Royal durant 
trois hyuers, qu'on a eu bon [36] befoin d'eux, on les 
a experimente fideles & fecourables. Que fi leur 
deffein euft efte de nous mesfaire, les belles & op- 
portunes occafions ne leur ont pas manque. 


10U-16J BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 71 


no confidence can be placed in them. The French 
have nothing to do with them except to explore their 
coasts, and even then they are badly treated, although 
Champlain does not complain of these savages at all, 
in his latest explorations up the great river. 

This friendship and fidelity of the said tribes was 
especially noticeable after our rout by the English, 
as you will hear. For, as soon as they heard about 
it, they came to us at night, [35] and consoled us as 
best they could, offering us their canoes and their 
help to take us anywhere we wished to go. They 
also made the proposition, that if we wanted to live 
with them, there were three Captains — Betsabes, 
Aguigueou and Asticou, 16 each one of whom, for his 
share, would take ten of our band (since there were 
thirty of us left), and would take care of us until the 
following year, when the French ships would arrive 
upon the coast; and that in this way we should be 
able to go back to our own country without falling 
into the hands of the wicked Ingres, as they call the 
English. These were not false pretenses nor snares 
to entrap us, for you will hear farther on of the good 
treatment received from them by Father Enemond 
and his band; and at Port Royal during three win- 
ters, when we had great [36] need of them, how faith- 
ful and reliable we found them, — although, if they 
had intended to do us any harm, excellent and con- 
venient opportunities for doing so were not wanting. 


72 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [V,.t,. % 


CHAPITRE IV. 

DU NATUREL DES SAUUAGES, 1)E LEURS HABITS, IIA- 
BITATIONS, & VIURE. 

LE naturel de nos Sauuages eft de foy liberal, 8c 
point malitieux: ils ont l'efprit alTez gaillard & 
net, quant a l'eftime, & iugement des chofes 
fenfibles, & communes & deduifent fort gentiment 
leurs raifons, les affaifonnant toufiours auec quelque 
iolie fimilitude. Ils ont fort bonne memoire des 
chofes corporelles, come de vous auoir veu, des qua- 
litez d'vne place, oil ils auront efte, [37] de ce qui 
aura efte fait deuat eux, defpuis vingt & trente ans, 
&c. Mais d'apprendre par cceur, la eft l'efcueil : il 
n'y a moyen de leur mettre dans la caboche vne 
tirade rengee de paroles. Ils n'ont point de barbe, 
autant peu les homes que les femes, horfmis quel- 
ques vns plus robuites, & virils. Souuent ils m'ont 
dit, q nous leur femblions du commencemet fort laids, 
auec nos cheueux, auffi bien fur la bouchc que deffus 
la teite : mais peu a peu ils s'accoultumcnt, 8c nous 
commengons a ne plus leur paroiftre G difformes. 
Vous ne fcauriez recognoiftre les ieunes garcos 
d'auec les ieunes filles, finon a la fa9on de fe ceindre. 
Parce que les femmes fe ceignet deiTus & derTous le 
ventre, & font plus couuertes que les mafles: elles 
font auffi d' ordinaire plus parees de matachias: e'eit 
a dire, de [38] chaines, & affiquets, & femblables pa- 
rures a leur mode : a ce que vous fcachiez que par 


1611-16] BIARirS RELA r/OA r , 1616 73 


CHAPTER IV. 

ON THE CHARACTER, DRESS, DWELLINGS, AN'D FOOD 
OF THE SAVAGES. 

THE nature of our Savages is in itself generous and 
not malicious. They have rather a happy dispo- 
sition, and a fair capacity for judging and valu- 
ing material and common things, deducing their rea- 
sons with great nicety, and always seasoning them 
with some pretty comparison. They have a very good 
memory for material things, such as having seen you 
before, of the peculiarities of a place where they may 
have been, [37] of what took place in their presence 
twenty or thirty years before, etc. ; but to learn any- 
thing by heart — there's the rock ; there is no way of 
getting a consecutive arrangement of words into their 
pates. They have no beards, the men no more than 
the women, except some of the more robust and virile. 
They have often told me that at first we seemed to 
them very ugly with hair both upon our mouths and 
heads; but gradually they have become accustomed 
to it, and now we are beginning to look less de- 
formed. You could not distinguish the young men 
from the girls, except in their way of wearing their 
belts. For the women are girdled both above and 
below the stomach, and are less nude than the men; 
also they are usually more ornamented with mata- 
chias, that is, with [38] chains, gewgaws, and such 
finery after their fashion ; by which you may know 
that such is the nature of the sex everywhere, fond of 


LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol. 8 


tout telle eft la nature du fexe, amcmreufe d'embel- 
liffemet. Vniuerfellemet parlant ils font de taille vn 
peu moindre que nous, principalemet quant a l'ef- 
paiffeur: Belle toutesfois & bien prinfe, comme fi 
nous demeurions en l'eflat qu'auons a l'age de vingt 
& cinq ans. Vous ne recotreriez point entr'eux vn 
vetru, boffu, ny contre-fait: ladres, gouteux, pier- 
reux, infenfes, ils ne fcauent que c'eft: ceux d'entre 
nous qui font tarez, comme borgnes, loufches, camus, 
&c. font auffi toft remarques par eux, & mocques 
largement, fpecialemet par derriere, & quand ils font 
entr'eux: car ils font bons compagnons, & ont le mot 
& fobriquet a commandement, fort aifes quand ils fe 
penfent auoir occafion de [39] nous mefprifer. Et 
certes (a ce que ie vois) c'eft vne contagion dont per- 
fonne n'eft exempte que par la mifericorde de Dieu: 
que de fe trop eftimer foy-mefme. Vous verriez ces 
pauures barbares, nonobftant leurs fi grands manque- 
ments de police, de puiffance, de lettres, d'arts & de 
richeffe: neatmoins tenir fi grad compte d'eux, qu'ils 
nous en depriset beaucoup, fe magnifiants par deffus 
nous. 

Leurs habits font chamarres de peaux, que les 
femmes paffent, & conroyent du cofte, qui n'eft pas 
velu: elles conroyent fouuent les peaux d'elan de 
tous les deux coftes, comme noftre buffetin, puis le 
barricolent de peinture en forme de paffements bien 
ioliment, & en font des robes : de ces mefmes peaux 
elles leur font des fouliers, & des greues. Les mafles 
ne portent point de hauts [40] de chauffes, parce que 
(difent-ils) cela les entraue trop, & met comme aux 
ceps, ils portent feulemet vn linge au deuat de leur 
nature, l'Efte ils vfent fort de nos capots, & l'Hyuer 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 74 

adornment. Generally speaking, they are of lighter 
build than we are ; but handsome and well-shaped, just 
as we would be if we continued in the same condition 
in which we were at the age of twenty-five. You do 
not encounter a big-bellied, hunchbacked, or de- 
formed person among them : those who are leprous, 
goutv, affected with gravel, or insane, are unknown 
to them. Any of our people who have some defect, 
such as the one-eyed, squint-eyed, and flat-nosed, are 
immediately noticed by them and greatly derided, 
especially behind our backs and when they are by 
themselves. For they are droll fellows, and have a 
word and a nickname very readily at command, if 
they think they have any occasion to [39] look down 
upon us. And certainly (judging from what I see) 
this habit of self-aggrandizement is a contagion from 
which no one is exempt, except through the grace of 
God. You will see these poor barbarians, notwith- 
standing their great lack of government, power, let- 
ters, art and riches, yet holding their heads so high 
that they greatly underrate us, regarding themselves 
as our superiors. 

Their clothes are trimmed with leather lace, which 
the women dress and curry on the side which is not 
hairy. They often curry both sides of elk skin, like 
our buff skin, then variegate it very prettily with 
paint put on in a lace-like pattern, and make gowns 
of it ; from the same leather they make their shoes 
and strings. The men do not wear [40] trousers, be- 
cause (they say) they hinder them too much, and 
place them as it were, in chains; they wear only a 
piece of cloth over their middle; in Summer they 
often wear our capes, and in Winter our bed-blankets, 
which they improve with trimming and wear double. 


76 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.3 

de nos cotmertes de licts, lefquelles ils s'accom- 
modent en chamarre les redoublants : ils s'aident atiffi 
fort volontiers de nos ehapeaux, fouliers, bonnets de 
laine, chemifes, & du linge, pour nettoyer leurs en- 
fants de maillot, car on leur trocque toutes ces den- 
rees contre leurs peaux. 

Quelque part qu'ils foyent arriues, la premiere 
chofe c'eft de faire du feu, & fe cabaner, ce qu'ils ont 
faidt dans vn heure, ou deux: fouuent en demy 
heure. Les femmes vont au bois, & en apportent 
des perches, lefquelles on difpofe par en bas en rond 
a lentour du feu ; & par en haut on les enf ourche 
entr'elles pyramidalement, [41] de maniere qu'elles 
fe repofent l'vne contre l'autre droit au deffus du 
feu ; car la eft la cheminee. Sur les perches on iette 
des peaux, ou bien des nattes, ou des efcorces. Au 
pied des perches deffous les peaux fe mettent les facs. 
Toute la place a l'entour du feu eft ionchee de 
fueilles de pin, a fin de ne fentir l'humidite de la 
terre : deffus les fueilles de fapin ils iettet fouuet des 
nattes ou des peaux de loup marin auffi delicates que 
le velours; la deffus ils s'eftendent a l'entour du feu 
ayant la tefte fur leurs facs. Et ce qu'on ne croiroit 
pas, ils font tres-chaudement leans dedans a petit 
feu, voire aux plus grandes rigueurs de l'Hiuer. Ils 
ne fe cabanet point, qu'aupres de quelque bonne eau. 
& en lieu de plaifant afpedt. En Efte leurs logis 
changent de figure: car ils les font larges & longs. 
[42] a fin d'auoir plus d'air; auffi les couurent-ils lors 
quafi d' efcorces, ou de nattes, faidtes de rofeaux ten- 
dres, & font beaucoup plus minces & delicates que les 
noflres de paille, fi artiftement tiffues, que quand elles 
pendet, l'eau coule tout au long, fans point les percer. 


1611-14] BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 77 

They are also quite willing to make use of our hats, 
shoes, caps, woolens and shirts, and of our linen to 
clean their infants, for we trade them all these com- 
modities for their furs. 

Arrived at a certain place, the first thing they do 
is to build a fire and arrange their camp, which they 
have finished in an hour or two; often in half an 
hour. The women go to the woods and bring back 
some poles which are stuck into the ground in a 
circle around the fire, and at the top are interlaced, 
in the form of a pyramid, [41] so that they come to- 
gether directly over the fire, for there is the chimney. 
Upon the poles they throw some skins, matting or 
bark. At the foot of the poles, under the skins, they 
put their baggage. All the space around the fire is 
strewn with leaves of the fir tree, so they will not 
feel the dampness of the ground; over these leaves 
are often thrown some mats, or sealskins as soft as 
velvet ; upon this they stretch themselves around the 
fire with their heads resting upon their baggage ; And, 
what no one would believe, they are very warm in 
there around that little fire, even in the greatest 
rigors of the Winter. They do not camp except near 
.some good water, and in an attractive location. In 
Summer the shape of their houses is changed; for 
then they are broad and long, [42] that they may- 
have more air; then they nearly always cover them 
with bark, or mats made of tender reeds, finer and 
more delicate than ours made of straw, and so skill- 
fully woven, that when they are hung up the water 
runs along their surface without penetrating them. 

Their food is whatever they can get from the chase 
and from fishing ; for they do not till the soil at all ; 
but the paternal providence of our good God, which 


78 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol. 3 

Leur viure eft ce que la chalTe, & la pefche leur 
donnent: car ils ne labourent point: mais la proui- 
dence paternelle de noftre bon Dieu, laquelle n'aban- 
donne pas les pafTereaux mefmes, n'a point laiffe ces 
pauures creatures, capables de luy, fans prouifio co- 
u enable, qui leur eft comme par eftape, affignee a 
chafque lune, car ils cotent par Lunes, & en mettet 
treze en l'an: Par exemple done, en Ianuier ils ont la 
chalTe des loups marins : car ceft animal, quoy qu'il 
foit aquatique, fraye neantmoins [43] fur certaines 
Ifles enuiron ce temps. La chair en eft auffl bone 
q du veau ; & de plus ils font de fa graiffe vn'huyle, 
qui leur fert de faulfe toute l'annee, ils en repliffent 
plufieurs veflies d'orignac, qui font deux ou trois fois 
plus amples & fortes que les noftres de pore ; & voila 
leurs tonneaux de referue. En ce mefme mois de 
Feurier, & iufques a la my-Mars, eft la grande chalTe 
des Caftors, loutres, orignacs, ours (qui font fort bons) 
& des caribous, animal moitie afne, moitie cerf. Si 
le teps leur dit, ils viuent lors en grand 'abondance, 
& font auffi fiers que Princes & Roys; mais s'il leur 
eft eontraire, e'eft grade pitie d'eux, & fouuent 
men rent de miferable faim. Le temps leur eft eon- 
traire, quand il pleut beaucoup, & ne gele pas; parce 
que lors ils ne peuuent chaffer ny aux eflans. ny aux 
[44 1 caftors. Item, quand il nege beaucoup, & ne 
gele pas la deffus, car ils ne peuuent pas mener leurs 
chiens a la chalTe, pource qu'ils enfoncet dedans, ce 
qu'ils ne font pas eux. parce qu'ils s'attachent des 
raquettes aux pieds a l'aide defquelles ils demeurent 
deffus; fi ne peuuent-ils tant courir qu'il faudroit, la 
nege eftat trop molle. Autres tels miferables acci- 
dents leur arriuent, qui feroyent longs a racontcr. 


1611-16] HI A RD'S RELATION, ibi6 79 


does not forsake even the sparrow, lias not left these 
poor ereatures, worthy of his care, without proper 
provision, which is to them like fixed rations as- 
signed to every moon ; for they count by Moons, and 
put thirteen of them in a year. Now, for example, 
in January they have the seal hunting: for this ani- 
mal, although it is aquatic, nevertheless spawns [43] 
upon certain Islands about this time. Its flesh is as 
good as veal ; and furthermore they make of its fat 
an oil, which serves them as sauce throughout the 
year; they fill several moose-bladders with it, which 
are two or three times as large and strong as our pig- 
bladders; and in these you see their reserve casks. 
Likewise in the month of February and until the 
middle of March, is the great hunt for Beavers, ot- 
ters, moose, bears (which are very good), and for 
the caribou, 17 an animal half ass and half deer. If the 
weather then is favorable, they live in great abun- 
dance, and are as haughty as Princes and Kings ; but 
if it is against them, they are greatly to be pitied, 
and often die of starvation. The weather is against 
them if it rains a great deal, and does not freeze; for 
then they can hunt neither deer nor [44] beavers. 
Also, when it snows a great deal, and does not freeze 
over, for then they cannot put their dogs upon the 
chase, because they sink down; the savages them- 
selves do not do this, for they wear snowshoes on 
their feet which help them to stay on top : yet they 
cannot run as fast as would be necessary, the snow 
being too soft. They have other misfortunes of this 
kind which it would be tedious to relate. 

In the middle of March, fish begin to spawn, and 
to come up from the sea into certain streams, often 
so abundantly that everything swarms with them. 


80 LES RELATIONS DES JESU/TES [Vol. 3 


Sur la my Mars le poiffon commence a frayer, & 
monter de la mer en haut contre certains ruiffeaux, 
fouuent en fi grand' abondance, que tout en formille. 
A peine le croiroit, qui ne l'auroit veu. On ne fcau- 
roit mettre la main dans l'eau, qu'on ne rencotre 
proye. Entre ces poiffons l'eplan eft le premier: 
celt eplan eft deux & trois fois plus grand que [45] 
n'eft le noflre de riuiere: apres l'eplan fuit le harenc 
a la fin d'Auril, & au mefme temps les outardes ar- 
riuent du Midy, qui font grofTes Cannes au double 
des noftres, & font volontiers leurs nids aux Ifles. 
Deux oeufs d'outarde en valent richement cinq de 
poule. A mefme termoyement vient l'ef bourgeon, 
& le faumon, & la grande quefle des ceufs par les 
Ifletes, car les oifeaux pefcherets, qui font la en tref 
grande foifon, pondent lors, & fouuent couuret de 
leurs nids ces Iflettes. Des le mois de May iufques 
a la my-Septembre, ils font hors de tout efmoy pour 
leur viure: car les moulues font a la colte, toute 
forte de poiffon & coquillage ; & les nauires Francois 
auec lefquels ils trocquent; & fcauez vous s'ils en- 
tendent bien a fe faire courtifer. Ils tranchent des 
freres auecques [46] le Roy, & ne leur faut rien rab- 
battre de toute la piece. II faut leur faire des pre- 
fents, & les bien haraguer auant qu'ils accordent la 
traidte; & icelle faidte, faut encores les Tabagier, 
c'eft a dire, les banqueter. Alors ils danferont, ha- 
rangueront & chanteront Ade/quidcx, Adcfquidex, Sca- 
uoir eft, qu'ils font les bons amys, allies, affocies, 
confederes, & comperes du Roy, & des Francois. 

Le gibier d'eau y abonde ; celuy de terre non, fmon 
a certain temps les oifeaux paffagiers, comme ou- 
tardes & oyes grifes & blaches. On y trouue des per- 


nil 1-16] BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 81 


Any one who has not seen it could scarcely believe 
it. You cannot put your hand into the water, with- 
out encountering them. Among these fish the smelt 
is the first ; this smelt is two and three times as large 
as [45 1 that in our rivers; after the smelt comes the 
herring a t the end of April ; and at the same time 
bustards, which are large ducks, double the size of 
ours, come from the South and eagerly make their 
nests upon the Islands. Two bustard eggs are fully 
equal to five hen's eggs. At the same time come the 
sturgeon, and salmon, and the great search through 
the Islets for eggs, as the waterfowl, which are there 
in great numbers, lay their eggs then, and often cov- 
er the Islets with their nests. From the month of 
May up to the middle of September, they are free 
from all anxiety about their food; for the cod are 
upon the coast, and all kinds of fish and shellfish; 
and the French ships with which they traffic, and you 
may be sure they understand how to make them- 
selves courted. They set themselves up for brothers 
of [46 1 the King, and it is not expected that they will 
withdraw in the least from the whole farce. Gifts 
must be presented and speeches made to them, before 
they condescend to trade; this done, they must have 
the Tabagie, i.e. the banquet. Then they will dance, 
make speeches and sing Adesquidtx, AcUsquidex, That 
is, that they are good friends, allies, associates, confed- 
erates, and comrades of the King and of the French. 
Water game abounds there, but not forest game, 
except at certain times birds of passage, like bustards 
and gray and white geese. There are to be found 
there gray partridges, which have beautiful long tails 
and are twice as large as ours ; there are a great many 
wild pigeons, which come to eat raspberries in the 


82 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol. 9 

drix grifes, qui ont vne fort belle queue, & font deux 
fois plus groffes que les noftres; on y voit force 
tourtes, qui viennent manger les fraboifes au mois de 
Iuillet. Plufieurs oifeaux de prove & quelques lapins 
& leuraux. 

[47] Or nos fauuages fur la my-Septembre fe re- 
tirent de la mer, hors la portee du flux, aux petites 
riuieres, oil les anguilles frayent & en font prouifion, 
elles font bones & grailes. En Odtobre & Nouembre 
eft la f econde chaffe des caftors & des eflans : & puis 
en Decembre (admirable prouidence de Dieu) vient 
vn poiffon appelle d'eux ponamo, qui fraye fous la 
glace; Item lors les tortues font leurs petits, &c. 
Tels done mais en bien plus grand nombre font les 
reuenus, & cenfiues de nos Sauuages, telle leur table 
& entretie, le tout cotte & affigne chafque chofe en 
fon endroit & quartier. Iamais Salomon n'euft fon 
hoftel mieux ordonne & police en viuandiers, que le 
font ces penfions & les voidturiers d'icelles. Aufli 
vn plus grand que Salomon les a conftitues. A luy 
foit gloire a tout'eternite\ 

[48] Pour bien iouyr de ce leur appanage ; nos fy- 
luicoles s'en vont fur les lieux d'iceluy auec le plaifir 
de peregrinatio & de proumenade, a quoy facilement 
faire ils ont l'engin, & la grande commodite des ca- 
uots qui font petits efquifs faicSts d'efcorce de bou- 
leau, eftroits & refferres par les deux bouts, comme 
la crefte d'vn morion ; le corps eft en facon de ber- 
ceau large, & ventru ; Ils font logs de huidt, ou dix 
pieds; au refte fi capables, que dans vn feul logera 
tout vn mefnage de cinq, ou fix perfonnes auec toils 
leurs chiens, facs, peaux, chauderons & autre bagage 
bien pefant. Et le bon eft qu'il prennent terre, oil 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 83 

month of July, also several birds of prey and some 
rabbits and hares. 

[47] Now our savages in the middle of Septem- 
ber withdraw from the sea, beyond the reach of 
the tide, to the little rivers, where the eels spawn, of 
which they lay in a supply ; they are good and fat. 
In October and November comes the second hunt for 
elks and beavers ; and then in December (wonderful 
providence of God ) comes a fish called by them 
ponamo,™ which spawns under the ice. Also then the 
turtles bear little ones, etc. These then, but in a 
still greater number, are the revenues and incomes 
of our Savages; such, their table and living, all pre- 
pared and assigned, everything to its proper place 
and quarter. Never had Solomon his mansion better 
regulated and provided with food, than are these 
homes and their landlords. But then a greater one 
than Solomon has made them; to him be the glory 
through all eternity. 

[48] In order to thoroughly enjoy this, their lot, 
our foresters start off to their different places with as 
much pleasure as if they were going on a stroll or an 
excursion; they do this easily through the skillful 
use and great convenience of canoes, which are little 
skiffs made of birch-bark, narrow and closed at both 
ends, like the crest of a morion ; the body is like a 
large hollow cradle; they are eight or ten feet long; 
moreover so capacious that a single one of them will 
hold an entire household of five or six persons, with 
all their dogs, sacks, skins, kettles, and other heavy 
baggage. And the best part of it is that they can 
land wherever they like, which we cannot do with our 
shallops or sailing boats ; for the most heavily-loaded 
canoe can draw only half a foot of water, and un- 


84 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.3 

leur plaift, ce que nous ne pouuos faire auec nos cha- 
loupes ou bateaux mariniers ; parce que le cauot le 
plus charge ne fcauroit cueillir demy pied d'eau, & 
def charge il eft fi [49] leger, que vous le foufpeferies 
facilement, & tranfporteriez de la main gauche; fi 
vifte a l'auiron qu'a voftre bel-aife de bon temps 
vous feres en vn iour les trente, & quarente lieues: 
neantmoins on ne voit guieres ces Sauuages poftilon- 
ner ainfi : car leurs iournees ne font tout que beau 
palfetemps. lis n'ont iamais hafte. Bien diuers de 
nous, qui ne fcaurions iamais rien faire fans preffe & 
opprelfe; opprelfe di je, parce que noftre defir nous 
tyrannife & bannit la paix de nos adtions. 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 85 


loaded it is so [49] light that you can easily pick it up 
and carry it away with your left hand; so rapidly 
sculled that, without any effort, in good weather you 
can make thirty or forty leagues a day; neverthe- 
less we scarcely see these Savages posting along at 
this rate, for their days are all nothing but pastime. 
They are never in a hurry. Quite different from us, 
who can never do anything without hurry and worry ; 
worry, I say, because our desire tyrannizes over us 
and banishes peace from our actions. 


86 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.3 


CHAPITRE V. 

LA POLICE & GOUUERNEMENT DES SAUUAGES. 

ON ne pent auoir plus de police, que de Commu- 
naute, [50] puis que police n'eft autre, que 
l'ordre & regime de la Communaute. Or ces 
Sauuages n'ayants point grande Communaute ny en 
nobre de perfonnes, puis qu'ils font rares, ny en 
biens, puis qu'ils font pauures, ne viuans qu'au iour 
a la iournee, ny en lien & coniondtion, puis qu'ils 
font efpars, & vagabonds, ils ne peuuent auoir grande 
police. Si ne peuuent-ils s'en paffer, puis qu'ils font 
homes & affocies. Celle done qu'ils ont, eft telle. 
II y a le Sagamo, qui eft l'aifne* de quelque puiflante 
famille, qui par confequent auffi en eft le chef & con- 
dudteur. Tous les ieunes gents de la famille, font a 
la table & fuitte d'iceluy; auffi eft-ce a luy d'entre- 
tenir des chiens pour la chaffe, & des cauots pour les 
voituriers, & des prouifions, & referues pour le mau- 
uais temps, & voyages. Les ieunes gens le [5 1] cour- 
tifent, chaffent, & font leur apprentifTage fous luy, 
incapables de rien auoir auant qu'eftre mari6s: car 
lors feulemet ils peuuent auoir chien & fac: e'eft a 
dire, auoir du propre, & faire pour foy, toutesfois ils 
demeurent encores fous 1' authority du Sagamo, & le 
plus fouuent en fa compagnie, comm' auffi plufieurs 
autres, qui manquent de parents, ou encores qui de 
leur propre gre fe rangent fous fa protection, & con- 
duidte, pour eftre foibles d'eux-mefmes, & fans fuitte. 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 87 


CHAPTER V. 

THE POLITY AND GOVERNMENT OF THE SAVAGES. 

THERE can be no more polity than there is Com- 
monwealth, [50] since polity is nothing else than 
the regulation and government of the Common- 
wealth. Now these Savages not having a great Com- 
monwealth, either in number of people, since they are 
few; nor in wealth, since they are poor, only living 
from hand to mouth ; nor in ties and bonds of union, 
since they are scattered and wandering ; cannot have 
great polity. Yet they cannot do without it since they 
are men and brethren. So what they have is this. 
There is the Sagamore, who is the eldest son of some 
powerful family, and consequently also its chief 
and leader. All the young people of the family are 
at his table and in his retinue ; it is also his duty to 
provide dogs for the chase, canoes for transportation, 
provisions and reserves for bad weather and expedi- 
tions. The young people [51] natter him, hunt, and 
serve their apprenticeship under him, not being al- 
lowed to have anything before they are married, for 
then only can they have a dog and a bag; that is, 
have something of their own, and do for themselves. 
Nevertheless they continue to live under the authori- 
ty of the Sagamore, and very often in his company ; 
as also do several others who have no relations, or 
those who of their own free will place themselves un- 
der his protection and guidance, being themselves 
weak and without a following. Now all that the 


88 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

Tout ce done que les garcons conqueftet, appartient 
au Sagamo: mais les maries ne luy en donnent 
qu'vne partie, que 11 ces maries fe departant d'a- 
uecques luy, com'il le faut fouuent pour la commodite 
de la chaff e, & du viure, retournants apres ils payent 
leur recognoiffance, & hommage en peaux, & [52] 
femblables prefents. A cefle caufe il y a des que- 
relles, & des ialoufies entr'eux auffi bien qu'entre 
nous, mais non pas fi atroces. Quand quelqu'vn par 
exemple commence a s'emanciper, & faire le Sagamo, 
quand il ne red point le tribut, quand fes gents le 
quittent ou que d'autres les luy fouftrayent ; & 
comm'entre nous, auffi entr'eux y a des reproches 
& mefpris, ceftuy-la n'eft qu'vn demy Sagamo, e'eft 
vn nouuellement efclos, comm'vn poufiin de trois 
iours, la crefte ne luy fai<5t que de naiftre: e'eft vn 
Sagamochin, e'eft a dire, vn Aubereau de Sagamo, 
vn petit nain. Et a celle fin que vous feachies que 
l'ambition a fon regne encores deffous le chaume, & 
les rof eaux, auffi bien que deffous les toidts dores : Et 
qu'il ne faut point no 9 tirer beaucoup l'aureille pour 
appredre ces lecons. 

[53] Ces Sagamies fe partagent la region, & font 
quaff diftribuees par bayes, ou riuieres. Par ex- 
emple, en la riuiere de Pentegoet vn Sagamo ; vn 
autre a celle de S. Croix ; vn autre a celle de S. lean, 
&c. Quand ils fe vifftent e'eft au recepuant de bien- 
veigner, & faire tabagie a fes hoftes, autant de iours 
qu'il peut ; les hoftes luy font des prefents: mais 
e'eft a la charge que le vifft6 reciproque, quand ce 
vient au depart, ff le vifftant eft Sagamo, autrement 
non. 

C'eft rEfte* principalemet qu'ils font leurs vifftes, 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 89 

young men capture belongs to the Sagamore ; but 
the married ones give him only a part, and if these 
leave him, as they often do for the sake of the chase 
and supplies, returning afterwards, they pay their 
dues and homage in skins and [52] like gifts. From 
this cause there are some quarrels and jealousies 
among them as among us, but not so serious. When, 
for example, some one begins to assert himself and 
to act the Sagamore, when he does not render the 
tribute, when his people leave him or when others 
get them away from him; then as among us, also 
among them, there are reproaches and accusations, 
as that such a one is only a half Sagamore, is newly 
hatched like a three-days' chicken, that his crest is 
only beginning to appear ; that he is only a Sagamo- 
chin, that is, a Baby Sagamore, a little dwarf. And 
thus you may know that ambition reigns beneath the 
thatched roofs, as well as under the gilded, and our 
ears need not be pulled much to learn these lessons. 

[53] These Sagamies divide up the country and are 
nearly always arranged according to bays or rivers. 
For example, for the Pentegoet river there is one 
Sagamore ; another for the Ste. Croix ; another for the 
St. John, etc. When they visit each other it is the 
duty of the host to welcome and to banquet his guests, 
as many days as he can, the guests making him 
some presents; but it is with the expectation that 
the host will reciprocate, when the guest comes to 
depart, if the guest is a Sagamore, otherwise not. 

It is principally in Summer that they pay visits and 
hold their State Councils ; I mean that several Saga- 
mores come together and consult among themselves 
about peace and war, treaties of friendship and trea- 
ties for the common good. It is only these Saga- 


90 LES RELATIONS DES /ES CITES [Vol. 3 

& tiennent leurs E flats : ie veux dire, que plufieurs 
Sagamos s'affemblent, & confultent par entr'eux de 
la paix. & de la guerre, des traictes d'amitie, & du 
bien commun. II n'y a que lefdits Sagamos, qui 
ayent voix en chapitre, & qui harenguent, ne fuffent 
quelques neux, & renommes [54] Aut mains, qui font 
comme leurs Prefixes, car ils les honnorent fort, & 
leur donnet feance la mefme qu'aux Sagamos. II ar- 
riue quelque fois, qu'vn mefme eft tout enfemble & 
Autmoin & Saga mo, & lors il eft grandement redoute. 
Tel a efte le renome Membertou, qui fe fit Chreftien, 
ainfi que vous ouyrez bien toft. En ces affemblees 
done, s'il y a quelques nouuelles d'importance, 
comme que leurs voifins leurs veulet faire la guerre, 
ou qu 'ils ayent tue quelqu'vn, ou qu'il faille renou- 
ueller alliance, &c. Lors meffagers volent de toutes 
parts pour faire la plus generale affemblee, qu'ils 
peuuent de tous les confederez qu'ils appellent Ric- 
mancn, qui font quafi tous ceux de mefme langue. 
Xeantmoins fouuent la confederation s'efted plus 
loin, que ne faict la langue, & contre [55] ceux de 
mefme langue, s'efleuant quelquefois des guerres. 
En ces affemblees ainfi vniuerfelles fe refout ou la 
paix, ou trefue, ou guerre, ou rien du tout, ainfi 
qu'arriue fouuent es deliberations, ou y a plufieurs 
teftes fans ordre, & fubordinatio, d'oii Ion fe depart 
plus confus fouuent & des-vny qu'on n'y eftoit venu. 
Leurs guerres ne fe font quafi que de langue a 
langue, ou de pays a. pays, & toufiours par furprinfe 
& trahifon. Ils ont l'arc & le pauois, ou targue, mais 
ils ne fe mettet iamais en bataille ragee, au moins de 
ce que i'en ay peu apprendre. Et de vray ils font de 
leur naturel paoureux & coiiards, quoi qu'ils ne 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION. 1616 91 

mores who have a voice in the discussion and who 
make the speeches, unless there be some old and re- 
nowned [54] Autmoins, who are like their Priests, for 
they respect them very much and give them a hearing 
the same as to the Sagamores. It happens sometimes 
that the same person is both Autmoin and Sagamore, 
and then he is greatly dreaded. Such was the re- 
nowned Membertou, who became a Christian, as you 
will soon hear. Now in these assemblies, if there is 
some news of importance, as that their neighbors 
wish to make war upon them, or that they have killed 
some one, or that they must renew the alliance, etc., 
then messengers fly from all parts to make up the 
more general assembly, that they may avail them- 
selves of all the confederates, which they call Ricma- 
nen, who are generally those of the same language. 
Nevertheless the confederation often extends farther 
than the language does, and war sometimes arises 
against [55] those who have the same language. In 
these assemblies so general, they resolve upon peace, 
truce, war. or nothing at all, as often happens in the 
councils where there are several chiefs, without order 
and subordination, whence they frequently depart 
more confused and disunited than when they came. 
Their wars are nearly always between language 
and language, or country and country, and always by 
deceit and treachery. They have the bow and the 
shield, or buckler, but they never place themselves 
in a line of battle, at least from what I have been 
able to learn. And. in truth, they are by nature fearful 
and cowardly, although they are always boasting, 
and do all they can to be renowned and to have the 
name of ' ' Great-heart. ' ' kir Kanuramon, ' * Great- 

heart," among them is the crowning virtue. 


92 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

ceffent de fe vanter, & facent leur poffible d'eftre 
cenfes, & auoir le nom de Grand cceur. Meskir Kam- 
eramon, Grand coeur chez enx, c'efttoute vertu. 

[56] Si les offenfes ne font pas de peuple a peuple, 
ains entre compatriotes, & combourgeois, lors ils fe 
battent par entr'eux pour les petites offenfes, & leur 
facon de cobat, eft com'icy celle des femmes, de fe 
voler aux cheueux: faifis par la, ils fe luittet & fe- 
coiient d'vne terrible facon, & s'ils font fort efgaux, 
ils demeureront tout vn iour voire deux fans fe quit- 
ter iufques a ce qu'on les fepare, & de vray pour 
la force du corps, & bras, ils nous font efgaux, le 
prenant de pareil a pareil, & fi font plus adextres a la 
luidte, & plus agiles a courir: mais ils n'entendent 
point a l'ef crime des poings. Fay veu vn de nos pe- 
tits garcons faire fuir deuant foy vn Sauuage plus 
grad que luy d'vn pied: quad fe mettant en poiture 
de noble combattant, il fermoit le pouce fur les doigs, 
luy difant, Approche: [57] mais auffi, quand le Sau- 
uage pouuoit le happer par le tronc du corps, il luy 
faifoit crier mercy. 

Reuenant a mon propos les petites offenfes & que- 
relles font facilement appaifees par les Sagamos & 
communs amis. Et certes ils ne s'offenfent guieres, 
qu'on f cache. Ie dy qu'on f cache. Car nous n'en 
auons rien veu, ains ^.toufiours vn grand refpedt, & 
amour entr'eux. ; Ce qui nous donnoit vn grad 
creue-cceur lors que nous tournions les yeux fur 
noftre mifere. ; Car de voir vne affemblee de Fran- 
cois fans reproch.es, mefpris, enuies, & noifes de l'vn 
a l'autre, c'eft autant difficile, que de voir la mer fans 
ondes, ne fuft dedans les Cloiftres & Conuents, ou la 
grace predomine a la nature. 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELA TION, 1616 93 

[56] If the offenses are not between tribes, but be- 
tween compatriots and fellow-citizens, then they fight 
among themselves for slight offenses, and their way 
of fighting is like that of women here, they fly for 
the hair ; holding on to this, they struggle and jerk 
in a terrible fashion, and if they are equally matched, 
they keep it up one whole day, or even two, without 
stopping until some one separates them ; and certain- 
ly in strength of body and arms they are equal to us, 
comparing like to like ; but if they are more skillful 
in wrestling and nimble running, they do not under- 
stand boxing at all. I have seen one of our little 
boys make a Savage, a foot taller than himself, fly be- 
fore him ; placing himself in the posture of a noble 
warrior, he placed his thumb over his fingers and 
said, " Come on! " [57] However, when the Savage 
was able to catch him up by the waist, he made him 
cry for mercy. 

Returning to my subject. The little offenses and 
quarrels are easily adjusted by the Sagamores and 
common friends. And in truth they are hardly ever 
offended long, as far as we know. I say, as far as we 
know, for we have never seen anything except always 
great respect and love among them ; which was a 
great grief to us when we turned our eyes upon our 
own shortcomings. For to see an assembly of 
French people without reproaches, slights, envy, and 
quarrels with each other, is as difficult as to see the 
sea without waves, except in Monasteries and Con- 
vents, where grace triumphs over nature. 

The great offenses, as when [58] some one has 
killed another, or stolen away his wife, etc., are to 
be avenged by the offended person with his own 
hand; or if he is dead, it is the duty of the nearest 


94 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.3 

Les grandes offenfes, comme fi [58] quelqu'vn auoit 
tu6 vn autre, s'il luy auoit defrobe" fa femme, &c. 
C'eft a roffenfe" de les venger de fa propre main: ou 
s'il eft mort, c'eft a fes plus proches parents, ce 
qu'arriuant perfonne ne s'en remue, ains tous de- 
meurent contents fur ce mot, habenqnedouic, il n'a pas 
commence^ il le luy a rendu: quittes & bons amis. 
Que fi le delinquant, repentant de fa faute defire faire 
fa paix, il eft receu d'ordinaire a fatisf action, moyen- 
nant prefents & autres reparatios conuenables. 

lis ne font nullement ingrats entr'eux, ils s'entre- 
donnent tout. Nul oferoit efconduire la priere d'vn 
autre, ny manger, fans luy faire part de ce qu'il a. 
Vne fois que nous eftions alles bien loin a la pefche, 
pafferent par la cinq ou fix femmes, ou filles bien 
chargees & laffes: nos gents par courtoifie, [59] leur 
donnerent de leur prinfe, ce qu'elles mirent cuire 
tout auffi toft dans vn chauderon, que nous leur pref- 
tafmes, a peine le chauderon boiiilloit, que voicy vn 
bruit, que d' autres Sauuages eftoyent la qui venoyet, 
alors nos pauures femmes a s'enfuir vifte dans les 
bois a tout leur chauderon demy cuit : car elles auoyent 
bonne faim. La raifon de la fuite eftoit pour-autant 
que fi elles euffent efte veues, il euft fallu par loy de 
ciuilit6, qu'elles euffent faidt part aux furuenants de 
leur viande, qui n'eftoit point trop grande. L'on rit 
bien alors; & plus encores quand elles apres auoir 
mange, voyants lefdits Sauuages venus aupres de 
noftre feu, firent femblant de n'y auoir pas touche\ 
& de paffer tout ainfi, que fi elles ne nous euffent 
point veu au parauant, elles dirent a nos gents [60] 
tout bas ou c'eft qu'elles auoyent laiffe le chauderon, 
& eux comme bons compagnons, cognoiffans le myf- 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 95 

relatives ; when this happens, no one shows any ex- 
citement over it, but all dwell contentedly upon this 
word Jiabenqucdoiiic, "he did not begin it, he has paid 
him back : quits and good friends. ' ' But if the guilty 
one, repenting of his fault, wishes to make peace, he 
is usually received with satisfaction, offering presents 
and other suitable atonement. 

They are in no wise ungrateful to each other, and 
share everything. No one would dare to refuse the 
request of another, nor to eat without giving him a 
part of what he has. Once when we had gone a long 
way off to a fishing place, there passed by five or six 
women or girls, heavily burdened and weary ; our 
people through courtesy [59] gave them some of our 
fish, which they immediately put to cook in a kettle, 
that we loaned them. Scarcely had the kettle begun 
to boil when a noise was heard, and other Savages 
could be seen coming; then our poor women fled 
quickly into the woods, with their kettle only half 
boiled, for they were very hungry. The reason of 
their flight was that, if they had been seen, they 
would have been obliged by a rule of politeness to 
share with the newcomers their food, which was not 
too abundant. We had a good laugh then ; and were 
still more amused when they, after having eaten, see- 
ing the said Savages around our fire, acted as if they 
had never been near there and were about to pass us 
all by as if they had not seen us before, telling our 
people [60] in a whisper where they had left the 
kettle ; and they, like good fellows, comprehending 
the situation, knew enough to look unconscious, and 
to better carry out the joke, urged them to stop and 
taste a little fish; but they did not wish to do any- 
thing of the kind, they were in such a hurry, saying 


96 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

tere fceurent bien feruir aux belles mines, & pour 
mieux aider au jeu, les prefloyent de s'arrefter & 
goufter vn peu de leur pefche, mais elles ne vou- 
lurent rien faire, tant elles auoyent de hafte, difants, 
coupouba, conpouba, grand mercy, grand mercy. Nos 
gets refpondiret: Or allez de part Dieu, puis qu'auez 
li grand hafle. 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 97 

coupouba, coupouba, " many thanks, many thanks." 
Our people answered : ' ' Now may God be with you 
since you are in such a hurry." 


LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol. 3 


CHAPITRE VI. 

DE LEURS MARIAGES & PETIT NOMBRE DE PEUPLE. 

AV cotraire de nous, ils font en leurs manages, 
non que le pere donne doiiaire a fa fille pour 
la loger auec quelqu'vn ; ains [61] que le pour- 
fuiuant face de bons, & beaux prefens au pere, a ce 
qu'il luy donne fa fille pour efpoufe. Les prefents 
f eront proportionnement a la qualite du pere, & beaute 
de la fille; des chiens, des caftors, des chauderons, & 
haches, &c. Mais la facon de courtifer, eft bien fau- 
uage: car 1'anioureux des qu'il fe prof effe pour tel, 
n'oferoit regarder la fille, ny luy parler, ny demeurer 
aupres d'elle, finon par occafion, & lors il faut qu'il 
fe commande de ne la point enuifager, ny donner au- 
cun figne de fa paffion, autrement il feroit la moc- 
querie de tous, & fa fauourie en rougiroit. Apres 
quelque temps, le pere affemble la paretee, pour auec 
eux deliberer de 1' alliance. Si le recherchant eft de 
bon aage; s'il eft bon, & difpos chaffeur, fa race, fon 
credit, fa gaillardife; & s'il leur aggree, ils luy [62] 
allongeront, ou accourciront, ou conditionneront le 
temps, & facon de fa pourfuitte, ainfi qu'ils aduife- 
ront, au bout duquel temps pour les nopces y aura 
folemnelle Tabagie & feftin, auec harangues, chants, 
& danfes. 

Selon la couftume du pais, ils peuuent auoir plu- 
fieurs femmes, neantmoins la plufpart de ceux que 
i'ay veu n'en ont qu'vne: plufieurs des Sagamos pre- 


1611-16] lUARD'S RELATION, i6i6 91) 


CHAPTER VI. 

ON THEIR MARRIAGES, AND SPARSENESS OF I'OPU- 
LATION. 

CONTRARY to our custom, in their marriages 
the father does not give a dower to his daughter 
to establish her with some one, but |6iJ the 
lover gives beautiful and suitable presents to the 
father, so that he will allow him to marry his daugh- 
ter. The presents will be in proportion to the rank 
of the father and beauty of the daughter; dogs, 
beavers, kettles, axes, etc. But they have a very rude 
way of making love; for the suitor, as soon as he 
shows a preference for a girl, does not dare look at 
her, nor speak to her, nor stay near her, unless acci- 
dentally ; and then he must force himself not to look 
her in the face, nor to give any sign of his passion, 
otherwise he would be the laughingstock of all, and 
his sweetheart would blush for him. After a while, 
the father brings together the relatives, to talk over 
the match with them, — whether the suitor is of 
proper age, whether he is a good and nimble hunter, 
his family, his reputation, his youthful adventures; 
and if he suits them, they will [62] lengthen or 
shorten, or make stipulations as to the time and 
manner of his courtship as they may think best ; and 
at the end of this time, for the nuptials there will be 
solemn Tabagie and feasts with speeches, songs and 
dances. 

According to the custom of the country, they can 


100 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol. 3 

tendent ne fe pouuoir paffer de cefte pluralite, non 
ja pour caufe de luxure (car cefte nation n'eft point 
fort incontinente, ) ains pour autres deux raifons, 
l'vne a fin de retenir leur authorite, & puiffance 
ayants plufieurs enf ans ; car en cela gift la force des 
maifons, en multitude d'allies, & confanguins : la 
feconde raifon elt leur entretien & feruice, qui eft 
grand, & penible, puis qu'ils ont grande famille & 
[63 I fuitte, & partant requiert nombre de feruiteurs & 
mefnagers: or n'ont ils autres feruiteurs, efclaues, 
ou artifants que les femmes. Les pauurcttes en- 
durent toute la mifere & fatigue de la vie: elles font 
& dreffent les maifons, on cabannes, les fourniffent 
de feu, de bois & d'eau, appreftent les viandes, bou- 
cannent les chairs & autres prouifions, c'eft a dire les 
feichent a la fumee pour les eonferuer; vont querir 
la chafTe ou ell' a efte tuee, content & radoubent les 
cauots, accommodent & tendent les peaux, les con- 
royent, & en font des habits, & dcs fouliers a toute 
la famille; vont a la pefche, tirent a l'auiron: en fin 
fubifTent tout le trauail, hors celuy feulement de la 
grande chaff e: outre le foin & la tant oppreffante 
nourriture de letirs petits. Elles emmaillottent leurs 
enf ans [64] fur des petits ais, tels que font ceux qui 
pendet aux efpaules des crocheteurs de Paris, les aides 
en eftat oftees. Ces ais pendet a vne large courroye 
attachee a leur front, & ainfi chargees de leurs en- 
fans sen vont a l'eau, au bois, a la pefche. vSi 1* en- 
fant crie elles fe mettent a danfotter & chanter, ber- 
fants ainfi leur petit, lequel ceffant de plourer, elles 
pourfuiuent leur befongne. 

Pour ces raifons doncques aucnns Satmages veulent 
defendre leur Polygamic allegans outre ce, qu'ils 


1611-16] BIARIfS RELATION, 1616 


101 


have several wives, but the greater number of them 
that I have seen have only one ; some of the Saga- 
mores pretend that they cannot do without this plu- 
rality, not because of lust (for this nation is not very 
unchaste) but for two other reasons. One is, in 
order to retain their authority and power by having 
a number of children ; for in that lies the strength of 
the house, in the great number of allies and connec- 
tions; the second reason is their entertainment and 
service, which is great and laborious, since they have 
large families and [63] a great number of followers, 
and therefore require a number of servants and 
housewives; now they have no other servants, slaves. 
or mechanics but the women. These poor creatures 
endure all the misfortunes and hardships of life; 
they prepare and erect the houses, or cabins, furnish- 
ing them with fire, wood, and water; prepare the 
food, preserve the meat and other provisions, that is, 
dry them in the smoke to preserve them ; go to bring 
the game from the place where it has been killed; 
sew and repair the canoes, mend and stretch the 
skins, curry them, and make clothes and shoes of 
them for the whole family ; they go fishing and do 
the rowing; in short, undertake all the work except 
that alone of the grand chase, besides having the 
care and so weakening nourishment of their children. 
They bind their babies I64I upon little slats like 
those which hang from the shoulders of street-por- 
ters in Paris, with the wings taken away. These slats 
hang from a broad strap fastened to their foreheads ; 
thus burdened with their children, they go to the wa- 
ter, to the woods, and to fish. If the child cries they 
begin to dance and sing, thus rocking their little one, 
and when it stops crying they go on with their work. 


102 LES RELATIONS DES jASUITES [Vol.3 


viendroyent autrement a defaillance par extreme 
paucite ; ignorants la benediction du mariage Chref- 
tien. Et partant eft digne de plus grande loiiange 
ce leur infigne Membertou, qui quoi qu'il ait efte le 
plus grad Sagamo, le plus fuiuy, & le plus redoute 
qu'ils ayet eu de plufieurs fiecles, [65] fi n'a-il voulu 
auoir plus que d'vne femme a la fois, mefmes eftant 
Pay en, iugeant par inftinc naturel, que cefle pluralite 
eftoit & infame, & incommode a raifon des riottes, 
qui en fourdent toufiours, tat entre les femmes. 
qu'entre les enfans de diuers lidts. 

Or les femmes, quoy qu'elles ayent tant de peine, 
comme i'ay dit, fi n'en font elles pas plus cheries. 
Les maris les battent comme plaftre, & fouuent pour 
bien leger fubjedt. Vn iour certain Francois ofa 
tancer quelque Sauuage, a ceft'occafion: le Sauuage 
luy repliqua en cholere. Et quoy? Mais as-tu que 
voir dans ma maifon, fi ie bats mon chien? La com- 
paraifon eftoit mauuaife, la refponfe eftoit aigue. 
Peu de diuorces arriuent entr'eux, & (comme ie 
croy) peu d'adulteres. Si la femme s'oublioit en 
cela, ie ne penfe pas qu'il [66] y allaft de moins que 
de la vie de tous les deux adulterans. La faute des 
filles n'eft pas tant eftimee, ny elles ne perdent point 
pour cela de trouuer party, c'eft toufiours honte ne- 
antmoins. 

Quant a l'exterieur habit, port & facon, les femmes 
& filles font fort pudiques & honteufes, les hommes 
aufil ne font point impudens, & font fort mal edifies, 
quad quelque fol Francois ofe fe iouer auec leurs 
femmes. certain efceruele s'eftant vne fois licentie 
en cela, ils vindrent aduifer noftre Capitaine qu'il re- 
primaft fes gets, l'aduertiffant que celuy n'auroit pas 


Kill-16] BIARD'S RELATION, ibib MS 

So for these reasons some of the Savages try to de- 
fend their Polygamy, further alleging that otherwise 
there would be an extinction of the family for lack 
of descendants ; ignoring the blessings of Christian 
marriage. And therefore their renowned Membertou 
is worthy of greater praise, because although he was 
the greatest Sagamore, the most followed, and the 
most feared, that they had had for several centuries, 
[65 1 yet he did not care to have more than one wife 
at a time ; although a Pagan, judging from instinct 
that this plurality was both infamous and trouble- 
some, on account of the quarrels which always arose 
from it, as much among the wives as among the chil- 
dren of different mothers. 

Now these women, although they have so much 
trouble, as I have said, yet are not cherished any 
more for it. The husbands beat them unmercifully, 
and often for a very slight cause. One day a certain 
Frenchman undertook to rebuke a Savage for this ; 
the Savage answered angrily: "How now, have you 
nothing to do but to see into my house, every time I 
strike my dog?' ' The comparison was bad, the retort 
was keen. Few divorces occur among them, and (as 
I believe) little adultery. If the wife should so far 
forget herself, I do not believe that it [66] would be 
less than a matter of life and death to the two adul- 
terers. The immorality of the girls is not considered 
so important, nor do they fail for this reason to find 
husbands; yet it is always a disgrace. 

As to their dress, demeanor, and manners, the 
women and girls are very modest and bashful ; the 
men also are not immodest, and are very much in- 
sulted, when some foolish Frenchman dares to 
meddle with their women. Once when a certain mad- 


104 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. ft 

beau jeu, qui le recommenceroit, qu'ou l'eftendroit 
par terre. On dreffe toufiours vne cabane a l'efcart 
pour les femmes, qui ont leurs mois, car ils les 
eftimet eftre alors contagieufes. 

Ils s'eftonnent & fe plaignent \6y\ fouuet de ce que 
des que les Fracois hantent & ont commerce auec 
eux, ils fe meurent fort, & fe depeuplent. Car ils 
affeurent qu'auant cefte hantife, & frequentation, 
toutes leurs terres eftoyent fort populeufes, & hif- 
torient par ordre cofte par cofle, qu'a mefure qu'ils 
ont plus comence a traffiquer auecques nous, ils ont 
plus efte rauagez de maladies : adjouftans, que la 
caufe pourquoy les Armouchiquoys fe maintiennent 
en leur nombrofite, c'eft a leur aduis, parce qu'ils ne 
font point nonchalants. La deffus ils alambiquent 
fouuent leur cerueau, & tantoft ils opinent, que les 
Francois les empoifonnent, ce qui eft faux: tantoft 
qu'ils donnent du poifon aux fcelerats, & peruers de 
leur natio, pour s'en feruir a l'exequution de leur 
malice. Cefte pofterieure coniedture n'elt pas fans 
[68] exemple: car nous auons veu du reagal, & du 
fublime entre leurs mains, lequel ils difoyent auoir 
achete de certains Chirurgiens Francois, a fin de faire 
mourir tous ceux qu'il leur plairoit, & fe vantoyent 
l'auoir ja experimente fur vn captif, lequel (difoyent- 
ils) eftoit mort vn iour apres la prinfe. Autres fe 
plaignent qu'on leur defguife fouuent, & fophiltique 
les marchandifes, & qu'on leur vend des pois, febues, 
prunes, pain, & autres chofes gaftees? & que c'eft 
cela qui leur corromp le corps, & dont s'engendret les 
dyfenteries & autres maladies, qui ont couftume de 
les faifir en Automne. Cefte raifon de mefme ne fe 
propofe pas fans productio d'exemples, dont ils ont 


1611-16] HI J Kirs RELATION, 1616 105 


cap took some liberties, they came and told our Cap- 
tain that he should look out for his men, informing 
him that any one who attempted to do that again 
would not stand much of a chance, that they would 
kill him on the spot. They always put up a separate 
cabin for the women when they have their menses, 
for then they believe them to be infectious. 

They arc astonished and often complain \6y\ that, 
since the French mingle with and carry on trade with 
them, they are dying fast, and the population is thin- 
ning out. For they assert that, before this associa- 
tion and intercourse, all their countries were very 
populous, and they tell how one by one the different 
coasts, according as they have begun to traffic with 
us, have been more reduced by disease ; adding, that 
the reason why the Armouchiquois do not diminish 
in population is because they are not at all care! 
Thereupon they often puzzle their brains, and some- 
times think that the French poison them, which is 
not true ; at other times that they give poison to the 
wicked and vicious of their nation to help them vent 
their spite upon some one. This last supposition is not 
without [68] foundation ; for we have seen them have 
some arsenic and sublimate which they said they 
bought from certain French Surgeons, in order to kill 
whomsoever they wished, and boasted that they had 
already experimented upon a captive, who (they said ) 
died the day after taking it. Others complain that 
the merchandise is often counterfeited and adulter- 
ated, and that peas, beans, prunes, bread, and other 
things that are spoiled are sold to them ; and that it 
is that which corrupts the body and gives rise to the 
dysentery and other diseases which always attack 
them in Autumn. This theorv likewise is not offered 


198 L US REL. 1 1 IONS DES JES L J I ES [\\n.. a 

efte fouuent fur le poindt de rompre aueeques nous, 
& de nous faire la guerre. Certes il y auroit bon be- 
foin de [69] pouruoir a ces meurtres execrables, par 
remedes conuenables fi Ion en pouuoit trouuer aucun. 
Neantmoins la principale caufe de toutes ces morts 
& maladies n'eft pas ce qu'ils difent: ains e'eft a 
leur honte ; que l'Efte nos nauires venus ils ne ceffent 
de plufieurs fepmaines s'engorger outre mefure de 
plufieurs viandes non accouftumes auec oifmete, 
d'yurongner, & au vin adioufter encores l'eau de vie; 
dont n'eft pas de merueille fi defpuis l'Automne fui- 
uant, il faut qu'ils endurent des trenchees de ventre. 
Cefte nation eft fort peu foucieufe de l'auenir, ainli 
que tous les autres Americains, qui iouyffent du pre- 
fent: & ne font poufTez au trauail, que par la neceffite 
prefente. Tandis qu'ils ont dequoy, ils font tabagie 
perpetuelle ; chants, danfes & harangues: & s'ils font 
1 70] en troupe, n'attendez pas autre chofe ; il y a lors 
belles treues par les bois. Parler de referue s'ils ne 
font en guerre, font propos de f edition. Ils auront 
faim l'Hyuer, leur dires vous: Endriex, vous refpon- 
dront: c'eft tout vn; nous l'endurons facilement: 
nous paffons les fept & huidt iours, voire les dix au- 
cunefois fans manger, fi n'en mourons point pour 
cela. Toutesfois s'ils font a part, & ou leurs femes 
puiffent eitre creues (car les femmes font par tout 
pkis mefnageres) ils feront aucunesfois des magalins 
pour l'Hyuer, oil ils fe referueront quelques chairs 
boucanees: quelques racines, du gland efpeluche en 
noyaux, quelques pois, ou febues, ou pruneaux de la 
trocque, &c. La facon de ces magafms eit telle. Ils 
mettent ces prouillons dans des facs, qu'ils enue- 
loppent dans des [7 1 | grandes & amples efcorces ; 


1611-ltf] BIARD'S RELATION, t6i6 107 

without citing- instances, for which they have often 
been upon the point of breaking with us, and mak- 
ing war upon us. Indeed there would be gTeat need 
of [69J providing against these detestable murders by- 
some suitable remedy if one could be found. 

Nevertheless the principal cause of all these deaths 
and diseases is not what they say it is, but it is some- 
thing to their shame; in the Summer time, when our 
ships come, they never stop gorging themselves ex- 
cessively during several weeks with various kinds of 
food not suitable to the inactivity of their lives; they 
get drunk, not only on wine but on brandy; so it is 
no wonder that they are obliged to endure some 
gripes of the stomach in the following Autumn. This 
nation takes little care for the future, but, like all the 
other Americans, enjoys the present ; they are not 
urged on to work except by present necessity. As 
long as they have anything, they are always celebrat- 
ing feasts and having songs, dances and speeches ; if 
there is [ 70] a crowd of them you need not expect 
anything else ; there are then some fine truces in the 
w r oods. To speak of restraint, when they are not at 
war, is equal to proposing a riot. If you tell them 
that they will be hungry in the Winter: Endricx, 
they will answer you, "It is all the same to us, we 
shall stand it well enough : we spend seven and eight 
days, even ten sometimes, without eating anything, 
yet we do not die." Nevertheless, if they are by 
themselves and where they may safely listen to their 
wives (for women are everywhere better managers), 
they will sometimes make some storehouses for the 
Winter, where they will keep smoked meat, roots, 
shelled acorns, peas, beans, or prunes bought from us, 
etc. The storehouses are like this ; — They put these 


108 LES RELATIONS DES JltSUITES [Vox, 3 

lefquelles ils fuf pendent en l'air aux branches de 
deux ou trois arbres, liees par enfemble, a ce que les 
rats ny les autres beftes, ny l'humidite de la terre, 
ne les endommage. Voila leurs magafins. Qui les 
gardera? eux s'en allants: car s'ils demeuroyent, 
leurs magafins iroyent bien toft par terre; ils s'en 
vont doncques autre part iufques au temps de famine : 
Telles font les gardes, qu'ils y mettent. Aufli de 
vray cefte nation n'eft point larronnelle. Pleuft a 
Dieu, que les Chreftiens, qui vont a eux ne donaffent 
en cela point de fcandale. Mais auiourd'huy fi on 
foupconne aucun Sauuage d'auoir defrobe, aufli toft 
il vous mettra deuant le nez cefte belle defenfe. Nous 
ne fommes point Wtrrons, comnte vans, Tlinenauio aciquoan 
guiro derquir. 

Reuenants a la paucite de ce [72] peuple, il y a en- 
cores des autres raifons d'icelle, cefte-cy principale- 
ment: qu'en vne vie tant inegale, fi difetteufe, & 
tant laborieufe, le naturel luy petit durer, s'il n'eft 
bien fort ; & le fort mefme y recoit des accidents fou- 
uent, & heurts irremediables. Leurs femmes aufli a 
caufe du grand trauail ne font pas fi fecondes: car 
c'eft le plus, fi elles enfantent de deux en deux ans. 
Aufli ne pourroyent elles nourrir leur fruict,, fi elles 
accouchoyet plus fouuent ; veu mefmes qu' elles 
alaidtent leurs enfans iufques a trois ans, fi elles 
peuuet. Leur couche ne dure guieres, deux heures: 
fouuent en ehemin elles fe deliurent, & vn peu apres 
reprendront leur trauail comme deuant. 

Ie me fuis enquis fouuent, combien grand pourroit 
eftre le nombre de ce peuple: Lay trouue par [73] la 
Relation des Sauuages mefmes, que dans l'enclos de 
la grande riuiere, des les Terres Neufues iufques a 


1H11-16] B I ARD'S RELATION, 1616 L09 

provisions in sacks, which they tic up in [7 1 ] big- pieces 
of bark; these they suspend from the interlacing- 
branches of two or three trees so that neither rats 
nor other animals, nor the dampness of the ground, 
can injure them. These are their storehouses. 
Who is to take care of them when they go away? 
for, if they stay, their stores would soon be con- 
sumed; so they go somewhere else until the time of 
famine. Such are the only guards they leave. For 
in truth this is not a nation of thieves. Would to 
God that the Christians who go among them would 
not set them a bad example in this respect. Hut as 
it is now, if a certain Savage is suspected of having 
stolen anything he will immediately tjirow this fine 
defense in your teeth, We arc not thieves, like you. lli- 
nen auto aciquoan guiro dcrquir. 

Returning to the sparseness of the | 72 J population, 
there are still some other reasons for it ; this being 
the principal one, that in a life so irregular, so neces- 
sitous and so painful, a man's constitution cannot 
hold out unless it be very strong, and even then he 
is liable to accidents and irremediable injuries. 
Their wives, on account of their heavy work, are not 
very prolific, for at most they do not have children 
oftener than every two years, and they are not able 
to nourish their offspring if they have them oftener, 
as they nurse them for three years if they can. 19 Their 
confinement lasts hardly two hours ; often the chil- 
dren are born on the march, and a little while after- 
ward the mothers will go on with their work as be- 
fore. 

I have often wondered how many of these people 
there are. I have found from | 73J the Accounts of 
the Savages themselves, that in the region of the great 


110 LES RELATIONS DES fESUITES [Vol. 8 


Chouacoet, on ne fcauroit trouuer plus de neuf ou 
dix miU'ames. Regardez la carte, & ie vous en 
donneray le denombrement. Tous les Souriquoys 
3000. ou 3500. Les Eteminquois iufques a Pentegoet 
2500. Des Pentegoet iufques a Kinibequi, & de Ki- 
nibequi iufques a Chouacoet 3000. Les Montaguets 
1000. Voila enuiron dix miU'ames, & ie crois que 
c'eft pour le plus. Les autres peuples ne nous sot 
pas cogneus. Aduifez combien veritablement, & em- 
phatiquement a parle le S. Efprit par la bouche 
d' If aye de ces pauures Sauuages difperfez, foubs la 
metaphore propre & conuenable d'vn grad vergier, 
ou parterre fauuagin, & foreftier. // nc fait que florir 
encores, fur le temps de la rccolte, [74] dit-il, II germe, 
quand il deuroit eflre venu a maturite : II le fant lors 
e'monder, & tailler; C eft pourquoy fes fruicls font de- 
laiffez aux oyfeaux des montagnes tf defies de la terre : 
Les oyfeaux fucheront fur luy tout I ' Este ; & toutes les 
bestes de la terre Jiyuerneront fur luy. Car certaine- 
ment, ce pauure peuple, comme vn grand plan de 
fauuageons mal nez, & de mauuaife venue, quand par 
le laps & experience des fiecles, il deuroit eftre venu 
a quelque perfection des arts, fciences, & raifon : 
Ou'il en deuroit auoir produidt fruict abondant en 
philofophie, police, mceurs, & commoditez de la vie; 
qu'il deuroit eftre ja difpofe a la maturite du S. 
Euangile, pour eftre recueilly en la maiso de Dieu : 
voila qu'on ne le voit fmon chetif & rare, donne la 
pafture des corbeaux, hiboux & cocus infernaux: & 
la curee maudite des renards, [75 J ours, fangliers, & 
dragons fpirituels. (J Dieu de mifericorde! n'aurez 
vous point pitie de ce defaftre? Ne ietterez-vous 
point vos yeux de douceur fur ce pauure defert? 


1611-16] WARD'S RELATION, i6t6 111 


river, from Newfoundland to Chouaeoet, there eannot 
be found more than nine or ten thousand people. 
Look at the chart and I will give you the enumera- 
tion of them. The Souriquoys, in all, 3000, or 3500. 
The Eteminquois to Pentegoet, 2500. From Pente- 
goet to Kinibequi and from Kinibequi to Chouaeoet, 
3000. The Montaguets, 1000. This is about ten 
thousand souls, and I believe it is the highest number. 
The other tribes are not known to us. Consider how 
truly and emphatically the Holy Spirit has spoken 
through the mouth of Isaiah about these poor scat- 
tered Savages, under the fitting and appropriate 
comparison of a great orchard or garden, wild and 
uncultivated. He says : At the time of the harvest there 
are still nothing but buds, [74] At the time 0/ the ripening, 
they are springing up : Then must he cut off the sprigs with 
pruning hooks : There/ore the fruits are left to the fowls 
of the mountain, and to the beasts of the earth ; the fowls 
shall Summer upon them, and all the beasts of the earth 
shall winter upon them. For in truth this people, who, 
through the progress and experience of centuries, 
ought to have come to some perfection in the arts, 
sciences and philosophy, is like a great field of 
stunted and ill-begotten wild plants, a people which 
ought to have produced abundant fruits in philos- 
ophy, government, customs, and conveniences of 
life ; which ought to be already prepared for the com- 
pleteness of the Holy Gospel, to be received in the 
house of God. Yet behold it wretched and dispersed, 
given up to ravens, owls, and infernal cuckoos, and 
to be the cursed prey of spiritual foxes, [75] bears, 
boars, and dragons. O, God of mercy! wilt thou 
not have pity upon this misery ? Wilt thou not look 
upon this poor wilderness with a favoring eye ? Kind 


112 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol. 3 

Benin, & pieux laboureur, faidtes que la prophetie, 
qui fuit fe verifie en nous en noftre age. En ce teps lit 

prcfent /era apporte an Seigneur des Armc'cs par Ic peuple 
rontpu, & defehire, par le peuple terrible, apres qui n en y 
a point d autre ; La nation attenddte, attendaute, & mef- 
pri/ee, de qui les flcuues ont gajlc la tcrre ; au lieu ok cjl 
inuoquc le norn du Seigneur des Armeies a la montagne de 
Siou. Ainfi foit-il. 


1611-1GJ BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 113 


and pious husbandman, so act that the prophecy 
which follows may be fulfilled upon us and in our 
time. /// that time shall a present be brought unto the 
Lord of Hosts fro>n a people rent, and lorn in pieces, a ter- 
rible people, after which there hath been no other ; A nation 
expecting, expecting, and trodden under foot, whose land 
the rivers have spoiled ; to the place of the name of the 
Lord of Hosts, the mount Stan. Amen. 


114 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 


CHAPITRE VII. 

[76] DE LA MEDECINE DES SAUUAGES. 

1L eft affeure, que les difettes grandes fuffoquent 
l'efprit, & l'oppreffent de leur importun & tyran- 
nique feruice, en forte qu'a peine peut-il reuenir 
a foy iamais, ou fe regaillardir en quelques gentiles 
confiderations : non pas mefme fonger aux autres 
moindres neceiutez pour leur aller au deuant, ou les 
alleger ; preoccupe toufiours & violente par les plus 
fortes. Nous voyons cecy en nos pauures Sauuages, 
lef quels pour ne viure qu'au iour a la iournee, & par 
confequent toufiours afferuis a la crainte de la faim, 
premiere, & plus forte neceflite de toutes, n'ont moyen 
de cultiuer leur efprit en la recherche des [77] 
f ciences ; non pas mefme de fe pouruoir des ars, & in- 
duftries pour l'aifance, & ameliorement de la vie, ny 
pour fournir aux autres defauts, quoy que bien 
prefTants. A cefte caufe done ils manquent non feu- 
lement de toutes lettres & beaux artifices ; ains auffi 
(chofe miferable) de medecine, foit pour l'entrete- 
nement de leur fante, foit pour le fecours de leurs 
maladies, fmon en ce peu que ie diray. 

Ils entretiennent leur fante (l'Efte principalement) 
par l'vfage des eftuuees & fueurs, & du baigner. Ils 
fe feruent auffi de friction, apres laquelle ils s'oignent 
tout le corps d'huyle de loup marin. Ce qui les rend 
fort fafcheufement puants a qui n'y eft accouftume. 
Neantmoins cefte onction faidt, que le chaud & le 
froid leur en font plus tolerables. que leurs [78] che- 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 115 


CHAPTER VII. 

[76] ON THE MEDICINE OF THE SAVAGES. 

IT is true that great poverty stifles the spirit, and 
overwhelms it with its importunate and despotic 
sway, so that it can seldom turn to itself, or revel 
in agreeable meditations, nor even dream of something 
better to prevent or lighten it, being always absorbed 
in and possessed by the greatest needs. We see this 
in our poor Savages, who live only from hand to 
mouth, and hence are always subject to the fear of 
hunger, first and strongest of all wants ; they have 
no opportunity of developing their minds in the pur- 
suit of [77] knowledge; not even of providing arts 
and trades for the relief and amelioration of life, nor to 
satisfy other wants however pressing. Now for this 
reason they not only lack all literature and fine arts, 
but also (unfortunately) medicine, whether for the 
preservation of their health, or for the cure of their 
diseases, except the little that I shall describe. 

They keep themselves well (principally in Summer) 
by the use of hot rooms and sweat boxes, and by the 
bath. They also use massage, afterwards rubbing 
the whole body with seal oil, causing them to emit 
an odor which is very disagreeable to those not accus- 
tomed to it. Nevertheless, when this oiling process 
is over, they can stand heat and cold better, and their 
[78] hair is not caught in the branches, but is slip- 
pery, so that rain and tempest do not injure the head, 
but glide over it to the feet ; also that the mosquitoes 


116 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.3 

ueux ne sot prins par les bois, ains gliffent, que la 
pluye & mauuais temps ne leur nuit a la telle, ains 
coule en bas & iufques aux pieds. Item, que les 
moucherons (qui la font cruels en Efte, & plus qu'on 
ne croiroit) ne les tourmentent point tant es parties 
nues, &c. lis vfent auffi du petun, & en boiuent la 
fum6e, de la fagon commune en France. Cela leur 
profite fans doute, voire leur eft du tout neceflaire, 
veu les grandes extremitez qu'ils enduret de froid & 
mauuais temps, de faim, & de repletion ou faturite\ 
mais auffi beaucoup de maux leur en aduiennent ; a 
caufe de leur exc6s en cela. c'eft tout leur deduit quad 
ils en ont, & de certains Francois auffi bien que 
d'eux, qui s'y accoquinent, tellement que pour boire 
de ces fumees, ils vendroyent leur chemife. Tous 
leurs deuis, [79] traidtes, bien-veignements, & careffes 
fe font auec ce petun. Ils fe mettet en rond a l'en- 
tour du feu, deuifants, & fe baillants le petunoir de 
main en main, & s'entretenants en cefte fagon plu- 
fieurs heures auec grand plaifir. Tel eft leur gouft, 
& couftume. 

Or ceux qui profeiTent entre eux la medecine, font 
les mefmes, qui maintiennent 1'eflat de la Religion, 
fcauoir eft, les Autmoins, qui en charge reprefente- 
royent nos Preftres d'icy, & nos Medecins. Mais en 
verity, ils ne font Preftres, ains vrais forciers; ny 
Medecins, ains Triacleurs menfongers, & trompeurs. 
Toute leur fcience eft en la cognoiflance de quelque 
peu de fimples laxatifs, ou aftringents, chauds ou 
froids, lenitifs, ou corrofifs, pour le foye, ou pour le 
roio-non: & le hafart de bonne fortune, voila tout. 
[80] Mais leurs malices, & tromperies font grandes, 
defquelles ie vous prefenteray icy vn efchantillon ; 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 117 

(which are very vicious there in Summer, and more 
annoying than one would believe) do not sting so 
much in the bare parts, etc. They also use tobacco, 
and inhale the smoke as is done in France. This is 
without doubt a help to them, and upon the whole 
rather necessary, considering the great extremes of 
cold and bad weather and of hunger and overeating 
or satiety which they endure; but also many ills 
arise from it, on account of its excessive use. It is the 
sole delight of these people when they have some of it, 
and also certain Frenchmen are so bewitched with it 
that, to inhale its fumes, they would sell their shirts. 
All their talks, [79] treaties, welcomes, and endear- 
ments are made under the fumes of this tobacco. They 
gather around the fire, chatting and passing the pipe 
from hand to hand, enjoying themselves in this way 
for several hours. Such is their inclination and cus- 
tom. 

Now those among them who practice medicine, are 
identical with those who are at the head of their Relig- 
ion, i.e. Autjnoins, whose office is the same as that of 
our Priests and our Physicians. But in truth they are 
not Priests, but genuine sorcerers; not Physicians, 
but Jugglers, liars, and cheats. All their science con- 
sists in a knowledge of a few simple laxatives, or as- 
tringents, hot or cold applications, lenitives or irri- 
tants for the liver or kidneys, leaving the rest to 
luck ; nothing more. [80] But they are well versed 
in tricks and impositions, of which I shall give you 
a sample, assuring you that I have not misrepre- 
sented or fabricated anything of all that I shall tell 
you, although it may seem incredible. 

A Savage, feeling very ill, stretches himself out 
near the fire : then they say ; Ouescouzy, Onescouzy, " he 


118 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

vous affeurant n'y auoir rien de feint, ou controuue 
en tout ce que ie vous en raconteray, quoy qu'il 
femble incroyable. 

Le Sauuage fe fentant mal extraordinairement, fe 
couche tout au long du feu : lors on dit ; Ouefcouzy. 
Ouefcouzy. II eft malade. En fon temps on luy 
donnera fa part de ce qu'on aura roufty, bouilly, ou 
traine par les cendres; tout ainfi qu'aux autres, car 
de luy chercher ou apprefter quelque chofe de parti- 
culier, ils n'en ont point l'vfance. Si done le malade 
mange ce qu'on luy aura bailie, bon prou luy face; 
fmon, Ion dira, qu'il eft bien malade. Et apres quel- 
ques iours (fi Ion peut) on mandera querir Y Autmoin, 
que les Bafques appellent Pilotoys, e'eft a dire, for- 
cier. [81] Or ce Pilotoys ayant confidere fon malade, 
le foume, & refoume auec ie ne fcay quels enchante- 
ments; vous diries que ces vents pedtoraux doiuent 
diffiper la cacochymie du patient. Que s'il voit apres 
quelques iours, que pour tout fon bourfoufflement le 
mal ne difparoit point, il en trouue bien la caufe a 
fon aduis, e'eft dit-il, pour-autant que le Diable eft 
la, au dedans du malade, le tourmentant, & empef- 
chant la guerifon. Mais qu'il faut l'auoir le mau- 
uais, l'enleuer de force, & le tuer. Lors tous fe pre- 
parent a cefte heroique action, que le tuer Belzebut: 
Et V Autmoin les aduertit d'eftre bien fur leurs gardes : 
car il fe peut bie faire que ceft audacieux fe voyant 
mal mene par luy, fe rue fur quelqu'vn de la troupe, 
& l'eftrangle la. Pour cefte caufe il diftribue a chaf- 
cun fon adte de la [82] fable: mais elle feroit trop 
longue a raconter, car elle dure bien trois heures. 

Le fommaire eft, que le Iongleur enfoiiit dans vn 
creux bien profond en terre vne cheuille, a laquelle 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, ibib 119 

is sick." When his turn comes, they give him his 
share of whatever they have boiled, roasted, or 
dragged over the coals, just the same as the others, 
for they are not accustomed to seek or prepare any 
special food for him. Now if the sick man eats what 
is given him, it is a good sign ; otherwise, they say 
that he is very sick, and after some days (if they can) 
they will send for the Autmoin, whom the Basques 
call Pilot oys; i.e., sorcerer. 20 [8 1 ] Now this Pilotoys, hav- 
ing studied his patient, breathes and blows upon him 
some unknown enchantments; you would say that 
these chest winds ought to dispel the vitiated humors 
of the patient. If he sees after some days, that not- 
withstanding all his blowing the evil does not disap- 
pear, he finds the reason for it according to his own 
ideas, and says it is because the Devil is there inside 
of the sick man, tormenting and preventing him from 
getting well ; but that he must have the evil thing, 
get it out by force and kill it. Then all prepare for 
that heroic action, the killing of Beelzebub. And 
the Autmoin advises them to be upon their guard, for 
it can easily happen that this insolent fellow, seeing 
himself badly treated by him, may hurl himself 
upon some one of the crowd, and strangle him upon 
the spot. For this reason he allots to each one his 
part of the [82] farce ; but it would be tedious to de- 
scribe, for it lasts fully three hours. 

The sum and substance of it is that the Juggler 
hides a stick in a deep hole in the ground, to which is 
attached a cord. Then, after various chants, dances, 
and howls over the hole, and over the sick man, who 
is not far away, of such kind that a well man would 
have enough of it to deafen him, he takes a naked 
sword and slashes it about so furiously that the sweat 


120 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

il attache vne corde. Puis ayant fait diuers chants, 
danfes & hurlements fur le trou, & fur le malade, qui 
n'en eft pas loin, tel qu'il y en auroit affez pour 
eftourdir vn homme bien fain; il prend vn' efpee 
toute nue, & s'endemene fi furieufement ca & la, 
qu'il en fue a groffes gouttes par tout le corps, & 
baue comm'vn cheual. Sur quoy les fpedtateurs 
eftant ja intimides: luy d'vn effroyable & vrayement 
energumenique ton, redouble fes denontiations, & 
mugifTements, qu'on fe garde, il eft en fougues le 
Satan, il y a du grand danger. A ce cry les pauures 
abufez deuiennet pafles, [83] a. demy morts comme 
linge, & tremblent comme la fueille fur l'arbre. En 
fin ceft affronteur s'efcrie d'vn autre accent plus gail- 
lard. // en a le maudit coma : le le vols la tout cflendu 
aux abois, & pantelant dedans la foffe. Mais courage; 
il le faut auoir du tout, & l'exterminer entierement. 
Adonc le monde prefent bien-aife, & tous les plus 
robuftes de grande ioye fe iettent a la corde pour en- 
leuer Satan, & tirent, tirent. Mais ils n'ont garde de 
l'auoir: l'Autmoin ayat trop bie fiche la cheuille. 
Ils tiret encore vn' autrefois tant qu'il peuuet, mais 
pour neant. Tandis le Pilotoys de temps en temps va 
defcharger fes blafphemes deffus la fofle, & faifant 
femblant de donner a l'ennemy d'enfer de grandes 
eftocades, defchaufTe peu a peu la cheuille, laquelle 
en fin a force de tirer s'arrache, apportant [84] auec 
foy quelques badineries, que le charlatant auoit atta- 
chee au bout, comme des ofTements pourris de mou- 
lue, de roigneures de peaux chargees de fiente, &c. 
Alors ioye par tout ; il a efte tue le mef chant Lucifer. 
Nepq. Nepq. Tenez, en voyez-vous les marques? O 
victoire! vous guerirez, malade; Ayez bonne efpe- 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 121 

comes out in great drops all over his body and he 
froths like a horse. Thereupon the spectators, be- 
ing already intimidated, he, with a frightful and 
truly demoniac voice, redoubles his roars and threats 
that they must take care, that Satan is furious and 
that there is great peril. At this cry the poor dupes 
turn pale [83] as death, and tremble like the leaf 
upon the tree. At last this impostor cries out in an- 
other and more joyous tone: " There is the accursed one 
with the horn : I see him extended there at bay and panting 
within the ditch. But courage, we must have him 
all and exterminate him entirely." Now the audi- 
ence being relieved, all the strongest with great joy 
rush for the cord to raise Satan, and pull and pull. 
But they are far from getting him, as the Autmoin 
has fastened the stick too well. They pull again as 
hard as they can, but without success, while the Pilo- 
toys goes, from time to time, to utter his blasphemies 
over the hole ; and, making as if to give great thrusts 
to the diabolical enemy, little by little uncovers the 
stick which, at last, by hard pulling, is torn out, 
bringing [84] with it some rubbish, which the char- 
latan had fastened to the end, such as decayed and 
mouldy bones, pieces of skin covered with dung, etc. 
Then they are all overjoyed ; wicked Lucifer has 
been killed. Nepq. Nepq. Stop, do you see his 
tracks? Oh victory! You will get well, sick man; be 
of good cheer, if the evil is not stronger than you, I 
mean, if the Devil has not already given you your 
deathblow. 

For this is the last Scene of the farce. The Aut- 
moin says, that the Devil being already killed, or 
seriously hurt, or at least gone away, whether very 
far or not, I do not know, it remains to be seen if he 


122 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 


ranee, fi le mal n'eft point plus fort que vous: ie 
veux dire, fi le Diable ne vous a ja bleffe a mort. 

Car icy eft la derniere Scene de la farce. L'Aut- 
moin dit, que ja le Diable eftant tue, ou bien bleffe, 
ou du moins dehors, ie ne fcay, ou bien loin : II refte 
a fcauoir s'il aura point laiffe* le malade bleffe a mort 
Pour deuiner cela il faut qu'il fonge: auffi a-il bon 
befoin d'aller dormir: car il eft fort trauaille: cepen- 
dant il gaigne temps pour voir les crifes de la mala- 
die. [85] Ayant bien dormy, & fonge, il reuoit fon 
malade, & felon les prognoftiques, qu'il recognoit, il 
le prononce deuoir, ou viure, ou mourir. II n'eft ja 
fi fot de dire, qu'il viura, s'il n'en a des prorretiques 
affeurez: II dira doncques qu'il mourra, par exemple 
dans trois iours. Or oyez maintenant vne belle facon 
de verifier fes propheties. Premierement le malade 
des qu'il eft ainfi iuge a mort ne mange point, & Ion 
ne luy donne rien plus. Que fi le troifiefme iour 
venu il ne meurt point encores, ils difent, qu'il y a 
ie ne fcay quoy du Diable, qui ne le permet pas ex- 
pirer a fon aife: par ainfi on s'en court a l'ayde: Oil? 
A l'eau. Quoy faire? En apporter des pleins chau- 
derons. Pourquoy ? Pour la luy verf er toute froide 
deffus le vetre, & ainfi luy efteindre toute chaleur 
vitale fi aucune [86] luy refte. II faut bien qu'il tref- 
paffe le troifiefme iour, puis que s'il ne vent mourir 
de foy, on le tue. 

Le Pere Enemod Maffe fe rencontra vne fois en vn 
tel badinage, & en conuainquit manif eftement la pipe- 
rie, & fauffete. Mais on ne fcauroit dire combien 
peut la couftume, & l'authorite ja preiugee, encores 
mefmes contre les demonftratios oculaires. Car 
toutes vos raifons, & apportez-en mille fi vous vou- 


1611-16] B/ARD'S RELATION, i6i6 123 

has given a death wound to the patient. To guess 
this he will have to dream ; indeed he is in great 
need of sleep, for he has worked hard. Meanwhile 
he gains time to observe the crisis of the disease. [85] 
Having slept well and dreamed, he looks again at 
his patient and, according to the symptoms which he 
observes, he declares that he is either to live or to 
die. He is not so foolish as to say that he will live, 
if the symptoms are not encouraging. He will then 
say, for instance, that he will die in three days. Hear 
now in what a fine fashion he verifies his prophecies. 
In the first place the sick man, since he has been 
thus appointed to die, does not eat, and they no 
longer offer him anything. But if he does not die 
by the third day, they say that he has something of 
the Devil in him, I know not what, which does not 
permit him to die easily, so they rush to his aid. 
Where? To the water. What to do? To bring 
kettles full of it. Why? To pour the cold water 
over his navel, and thus extinguish all vital heat, if 
any [86] remain to him. He is indeed obliged to 
die the third day, since if he is not going to do it of 
himself, they kill him. 

Father Enemond Masse once found himself in the 
midst of this kind of foolery, and demonstrated to 
them plainly the trickery and falsity of it. But it is 
impossible to tell to how great a degree custom and 
influence can prejudice, even in the presence of ocu- 
lar proof. For all your arguments, and you can 
bring on a thousand of them if you wish, are anni- 
hilated by this single shaft which they always have 
at hand, Aoti Chabaya, (they say) " That is the Sav- 
age way of doing it. You can have your way and 
we will have ours ; every one values his own wares. ' ' 


124 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.3 

lez, font biffees, par ce feul traidt, qui leur eft en 
main. Aoti Chabaya, c'eft (difent-ils) la facon de faire 
des Sauuages. Vous vfez de la voftre, nous de la 
noftre. Chacun prife fes merceries, mais en defpit 
de ces malencontreufes predictions Autmoinales nous 
en auons veu par la grace de Dieu, qui font efchap- 
pez & reuenus en fante, par le bon foin & [87] cure 
des Francois, comme Membertou, que Monfieur de 
Potrincourt retira d'vne toute telle mort, & defpuis 
de noftre temps fon fils Aftodin. Ce qui a grande- 
ment decredite ces defaftrez Magiciens, & a ouuert 
les yeux a cefte pauure Gentilite, a la grande gloire 
de noftre Sauueur, & confolation de fes feruiteurs. 

Pour la cure des playes, les Autmoins n'y entendent 
guieres plus : car ils ne fcauent que fuccer la blef - 
feure & la charmer, y appofant quelques fimples au 
rencontre de la bonne auenture. Cependant la co- 
mune opinion eft, qu'il faut faire plufieurs & bons 
prefents a l'Autmoin, a celle fin qu'il aye meilleure 
main : car, difent-ils, cela y fait beaucoup en toutes 
fortes de fymptomes. Les mefmes Pilotoys ont aufli 
ce priuilege, que de receuoir de tons, & de ne [88] 
doner a. perfonne; Ainfi que s'en venta vn faux vieil- 
lard, audidt P. Enemond Maffe. C'eft vne belle ex- 
emption de taille, que cefte-la: Ne rien donner, & re- 
ceuoir tout. 


1611-16] BIAR1VS RELATION, ibi6 125 

But in spite of these lugubrious Autmoinal predic- 
tions, we have seen some who, by the grace of God, 
have been saved and have recovered their health, 
through the good care and [87] nursing of the 
French, as for instance Alcmbertou, whom Monsieur 
de Potrincourt delivered from just such a death as 
this; and in our time his son, Actodin; which has 
greatly discredited these baleful Magicians, and has 
opened the eyes of these poor Heathen, to the great 
glory of our Savior, and satisfaction of his servants. 
In regard to the cure of sores, the Autmoins know 
no more ; for all they can do is to suck the wound 
and charm it, applying to it some simple remedies at 
random. However, the general impression is, that 
they must make many and valuable presents to the 
Autmoin, so that he may have a more skillful hand: 
for they say that that counts a great deal in all 
kinds of diseases. Likewise the Pilotoys have also 
this privilege, that of receiving from all and [88] giv- 
ing to none, as a wicked old man boasted to Father 
Enemond Masse. This is a fine exemption from 
taxes, indeed: Give nothing and take all. 


126 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 


CHAPITRE VIII. 

DE LEUR TESTAMENT, LEURS OBSEQUES, & ENTERRE- 
MENT, & DE LEUR RELIGION. 

LE malade ayant efte iug6 a mort par l'Autmoin, 
ainfi que nous auons dit: Toute la parentee, 
& les voyfms s'affemblet, & luy, au plus haut 
appareil qu'il peut, fait la harangue funebre: recite 
fes geftes, donne des enfeignements a fa famille, re- 
commande fes amis: en fin, dit a Dieu. Voyla tout 
leur teftament: Car de dons, ils n'en font point, ains 
tout au contraire de nous, les furuiuants [89] en font 
en mourant, ainfi qu'ouyrez. Seulement faut excep- 
ter la Tabagie, parce qu'elle eft vne rubrique gene- 
rale qu'il faut obferuer par tout, a fin que les cere- 
monies foyent felon le droidt. 

Doncques, fi le mourat a quelques prouifions, il 
faut qu'il en face Tabagie a tous fes parents, & amis. 
Cependant qu'elle cuit, les affiftants luy font reci- 
proquemet leurs prefents en figne d'amitie, des 
chiens ; des peaux, de flefches, &c. On tue ces 
chiens pour les luy enuoyer au deuat en 1' autre 
monde. Lefdits chiens encores feruet a la Tabagie, 
car ils y trouuent du gouft. Ayant banquete, ils 
commencent leurs harengues de commiferatio, & leurs 
Adieus pitoyables, que le coeur leur pleure, & leur 
faigne de ce que leur bon amy les quitte, & s'en va; 
mais qu'il s'en aille hardimet puis [90] qu'il laiffe de 
beaux enfans, qui feront bons chaffeurs, & vaillants 
hommes: & des bons amis, qui bien vengerot les 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, ibib 127 


CHAPTER VIII. 

ON THEIR WILLS, FUNERAL RITES, AND BURIALS, 
AND ON THEIR RELIGION. 

THE sick man having been appointed by the Aut- 
moin to die, as we have said, all the relations 
and neighbors assemble and, with the greatest 
possible solemnity, he delivers his funeral oration: 
he recites his heroic deeds, gives some directions to his 
family, recommends his friends : finally, says adieu. 
This is all there is of their wills. As to gifts, they 
make none at all ; but, quite different from us, the 
survivors [89] give some to the dying man, as you will 
hear. But we must except the Tabagie, for it is a 
general injunction which must be observed every- 
where, so that the ceremonies may be according to 
law. 

So if the dying man has some supplies on hand, he 
must make Tabagie of them for all his relatives and 
friends. While it is being prepared, those who are 
present exchange gifts with him in token of friend- 
ship; dogs, skins, arrows, etc. They kill these dogs 
in order to send them on before him into the other 
world. The said dogs are afterwards served at the 
Tabagie, for they find them palatable. Having ban- 
queted they begin to express their sympathy and sor- 
rowful Farewells, their hearts weep and bleed be- 
cause their good friend is going to leave them and go 
away; but he may go fearlessly, since [90] he leaves 
behind him beautiful children, who are good hunters 
and brave men: and good friends, who will avenge 


128 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

torts qu'on luy a faidts, &c. Ce train dure iufques a 
ce que le trefpaffant expire, ce qu'arriuant ils iettet 
des crys horribles, & eft chofe furieufe, que de leurs 
Naenies, lefquelles ne ceffent ny iour, ny nuidt, quel- 
que fois duret toute vne fepmaine; felon que le 
defunct, eft grand, & que les complorants ont de pro- 
uifion. Si la prouifion defaut entierement, ils ne font 
qu'enterrer le mort, & different ces obfeques, & cere- 
monies a vn autre temps, & lieu, au bon plaifir du 
ventre. 

Cependant tous les parents & amis fe barboiiillent 
la face de noir: & prou fouuent fe peignent d'autres 
couleurs; mais c'eft pour fe faire plus beaux & iolis; 
le noir leur est marq du dueil & triftefle. 

[91] Ils enterrent leurs morts en cefte facon. Pre- 
mierement ils emmaillottent le corps, & le garrotent 
dans des peaux; non de fon long, ains les genoux 
contre le ventre, & la tefte fur les genoux tout ainfi 
que nous fommes dans le ventre de noftre mere. 
Apres, la foffe eftant faidte fort creufe, il l'y logent, 
non a la renuerfe ou couche comme nous : ains affis. 
Pofture en laquelle ils s'aimet fort, & qui entr'eux 
fignifie reuerence. Car les enfans, & ieunes, s'affient 
ainfi en prefence de leurs peres & des vieux qu'ils 
refpedtent. Nous autres nous en rions, & difons, 
que c'eft s'affeoir en guenon, eux prifent cefte facon 
& la trouuent commode. Depuis le corps loge\ & 
n'arriuant pas a fleur de terre pour la profondeur de 
la foffe ; Ils voutent laditte foffe auec des baftons, a 
celle [92] fin que la terre ne retombe dedans, & ainfi 
couurent le tombeau au deffus. Si c'eft quelqu' 
illuftre perfonnage, ils baftiffent vne forme de Pyra- 
mide, ou monument a tout des perches liees par en- 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 129 

his wrongs, etc. They go on in this way until the 
dying man expires and then they utter horrible cries ; 
and a terrible thing are their Naenias [funeral dirges] 
which continue day and night, sometimes lasting a 
whole week, according to how great the deceased is, 
and to the amount of provisions for the mourners. 
If there are none at all, they only bury the dead 
man, and postpone the obsequies and ceremonies 
until another time and place, at the good pleasure of 
their stomachs. 

Meanwhile all the relatives and friends daub their 
faces with black, and very often paint themselves 
with other colors ; but this they do to appear more 
pleasing and beautiful. To them black is a sign of 
grief and mourning. 

[91] They bury their dead in this manner: First 
they swathe the body and tie it up in skins; not 
lengthwise, but with the knees against the stomach 
and the head on the knees, as we are in our mother's 
womb. Afterwards they put it in the grave, which 
has been made very deep, not upon the back or lying 
down as we do, but sitting. A posture which they like 
very much, and which among them signifies reverence. 
For the children and the youths seat themselves thus 
in the presence of their fathers, and of the old, whom 
they respect. We laugh at them, and tell them that 
way of sitting is the fashion with monkeys, but they 
like it and find it convenient. When the body is 
placed, as it does not come up even with the ground 
on account of the depth of the grave, they arch the 
grave over with sticks, so [92] that the earth will not 
fall back into it, and thus they cover up the tomb. If 
it is some illustrious personage they build a Pyramid 
or monument of interlacing poles ; as eager in that for 


130 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

femble : auffi cupides de gloire en cela, que nous en 
nos marbres, & porphyres. Si c'eft vn homme, ils y 
mettent pour enf eignes & marque fon arc, fes flefches, 
& fon pauois : Si vne femme des cueilliers, des mata- 
chias, ou iouyaux, & parures, &c. 

I'ay penfe m'oublier du plus beau: c'eft qu'ils in- 
hument auec le defunct tout ce qu'il a, comme fon 
fac, fes fleches, fes peaux, & toutes fes autres befon- 
gnes & bagage, & encores fes chiens, s'ils n'ont efte" 
manges. Voire les viuants y adiouftent encores 
plufieurs telles offrandes pour amitie. Eftimes par 
la, fi ces bonnes [93] gens font loing de cefte maudite 
auarice, que nous voyons entre nous; laquelle pour 
auoir les richeffes des morts, defire & pourchaffe la 
perte, & trefpas des viuants. 

Ces obfeques ainfi faidtes, ils s'en fuyent du lieu, 
& hayffent deflors toute la memoire du mort. S'il 
arriue, qu'il en faille parler, c'eft fous vn autre nom 
nouueau. Comme par exemple le Sagamo Schoudon, 
eftant mort, il fut appelle le Pere ; Membertou nom- 
me le grand Capitaine. Et ainfi du refte. 

Or toute leur Religion, pour le dire en vn mot, 
n'eft autre qu'es forceleries & charmes des Autmoins, 
tels que nous vous auons recite cy deuant, parlants 
de leurs maladies. Ils ont beaucoup d'autres fem- 
blables facrifices faidts au Diable, pour auoir bonne 
fortune [94] a la chaff e, pour la vidtoire, pour le bon 
vent, &c. Ils croyent auffi aux fonges, a fin que 
nulle forte de folie ne leur manque. Auffi, dit-on, 
que fouuent ces Necromantiens de Pilotoys pro- 
uoquent des fpedtres, & illufions aux yeux de ceux 
qui les croyent, faifants apparoiftre des ferpents & 
autres beftes, qui entrent & fortent de leur bouche 


1611-16] KURD'S RELATION, 1616 131 


glory as we are in our marble and porphyry. If it is a 
man, they plaee there as a sign and emblem, his bow, 
arrows, and shield; if a woman, spoons, matachias or 
jewels, ornaments, etc. 

I have nearly forgotten the most beautiful part of 
all ; it is that they bury with the dead man all that 
he owns, sueh as his bag, his arrows, his skins and 
all his other articles and baggage, even his dogs if 
they have not been eaten. Moreover, the survivors 
add to these a number of other such offerings, as 
tokens of friendship. Judge from this whether these 
good [93] people are not far removed from this cursed 
avarice which we see among us; who, to become 
possessed of the riches of the dead, desire and seek 
eagerly for the loss and departure of the living. 

These obsequies finished, they flee from the place, 
and, from that time on, they hate all memory of the 
dead. If it happens that they are obliged to speak 
of him sometimes, it is under another and a new 
name. As for instance, the Sagamore Schoudon ~ iX be- 
ing dead, he was called " the Father " [Pere.] Mem- 
bertou was called "the great Captain," and so on. 

Now all their religion, to speak briefly, is nothing- 
else than the tricks and charms of the Autmoins, as 
we have related before in speaking of their illnesses. 
They have many other similar sacrifices which they 
make to the Devil, so they will have good luck I94J 
in the chase, victory, favorable winds, etc. They be- 
lieve also in dreams, that no kind of nonsense may be 
wanting to them. Furthermore, they say that the 
Magic of the Pilotoys often calls forth spirits and op- 
tical illusions to those who believe them, showing 
snakes and other beasts which go in and out of the 
mouth while they are talking ; and several other 


132 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

tandis qu'ils harenguent : & pluiieurs autres fem- 
blables traidts de Magicien. Mais ie ne me fuis 
iamais rencontre en tels fpe&acles. On nous don- 
noit auffi. a entendre deuant qu'arriuer la, que le ma- 
lin efprit tourmetoit fenfiblemet le corps de ces pau- 
ures gets auat le baptefme. & non apres; ie n'ay rien 
veu de tout cela, ny ouy dire eftant fur le lieu, quoy 
que ie m'en fois fort enquefte. Ce que ie mets icy, 
a fin de rembarrer les [95] faux tefmoins de Dieu, 
comme les appelle S. Paul: c'ett a dire, ceux qui 
racontent des faux miracles pour honnorer Dieu. 
Combien que l'efcriuain du factum, qui a controuue 
tel menfonge, n'auoit pas deffein d'honnorer Dieu, 
en auancat ces miracles : ains de charger les Iefuites 
comet que ce full. 

Les Sauuages m'ont bien founent dit, que du temps 
de leurs Peres, & auant la venue des Francois, le 
Diable les maftinoit fort, mais qu'il ne le faidt plus 
maintenant, comm'il appert. Membertou auffi m'a 
affeure qu' eftant encores Autmoin (car il l'auoit efte, 
& fort celebre) le Diable s'eftoit apparu fouuetesfois 
a luy : mais qu'il l'auoit quittc, ay ant fort bien cogneu 
qu'il eltoit mefchant, parce qu'il ne commandoit 
iamais que de mal faire. Voila tout ce que i'en ay 
peu apprendre. 

[96] lis croyent vn Dieu, ce difent-ils: mais ils ne 
f5auent le nommer que du nom du Soleil Nifcaminou, 
Ny ne fcauent aucunes prieres, ny facon de 1 'adorer. 
Vn ieune Autmoin interroge par moy fur cela, re- 
fpondit : Que quand ils eftoyent en neceffite il prenoit 
fa robe facree, (car les Autmoins ont vne robe pre- 
cieufe, expres pour leurs Orgies) & fe tournant vers 
1' Orient difoit, Nifcaminou hignemouy niuem marcodam : 


1611-16] BIARirs RELATION, 1616 133 


Magical deeds of the same kind. But I never hap- 
pened to be present at any of these spectacles. We 
were given to understand before we went there, that 
the evil spirit greatly tormented the bodies of these 
poor people before baptism, but not afterwards; I 
saw nothing of all this, nor heard of it while I was 
there, although I inquired into the matter very care- 
fully. I put this down here in order to confute the 
[95] false witnesses of God, as St. Paul calls them; 
namely, those who relate false miracles in order to 
glorify God ; to show that the writer of the memoir,'"' 
who has forged such a lie, does not intend to glorify 
God in advancing these miracles so much as to charge 
that they were manufactured by the Jesuits. 

The Savages indeed have often told me that, in 
their Fathers' time, and before the coming of the 
French, the Devil tormented them a great deal, but 
that he does not do it any more, as it appears. Mem- 
bertou has assured me that when he was still Aut- 
moin ( for he was one, and very celebrated too ), the 
Devil appeared to him many times ; but that he had 
avoided him, knowing well that he was wicked, be- 
cause he never commanded him to do anything but 
evil. Now this is all I have been able to learn on this 
subject. 

[96] They believe in a God, so they say; but they 
cannot call him by any name except that of the Sun, 
Niscaminou> m not do they know any prayers or manner 
of worshipping him. When I asked a young Aut- 
moin about this, he answered, that when they were 
in great need he put on his sacred robe (for the Aut- 
moins have a precious robe, expressly for their Or- 
gies) and turning toward the East said, Niscaminou, 
hignemoiiy ninem marcodam : " Our Sun, or our God, 


134 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol. % 

Noftre Soleil, ou noftre Dieu, donne nous a manger. 
Qu'apres cela ils alloy et a la chaff e, & volontiers 
auec boheur: autre chofe ne me fceuft il dire. Ils 
tiennent l'immortalite de l'ame, & la recompenfe des 
bons & des mauuais, cofufement & en general ; mais 
ils ne paflent point plus auant en recherche ny foucy, 
comment cela doit eftre, occupes toufiours & preoc- 
cupes ou [97] des neceffitez de la vie, ou de leurs vs 
& couftumes. Voila briefuement le plus principal 
de ce que i'ay peu apperceuoir de ces nations, & de 
leur vie. 

Mais fi ores nous venons a fommer le tout, & appa- 
rier leurs bies, & leurs maux auec les noftres, ie ne 
fcay fi en verite ils n'ont point bonne raifon de pre- 
ferer (comm' ils font) leur felicite a la noftre, au moins 
fi nous parlons de la felicite temporelle, que les riches 
& mondains cherchent en cefte vie. Car fi bien ils 
n'ont pas toutes ces delices, que les enfans de ce fiecle 
recherchent, ils font fra.cs des maux qui les fuiuent. 
& ont du contentement, qui ne les accompagne pas. 
II eft vray neantmoins, qu'ils font purement, & abfo- 
luement miferables, tant parce qu'ils n'ont aucune 
part en la felicite naturelle, qui eft en la contempla- 
tion [98] de Dieu, & cognoiffance des chofes grandes, 
& perfectio des parties nobles de l'ame, comme prin- 
cipalemet parce que ils font hors la grace de noftre 
Seigneur Iesvs-Christ, & le chemin du falut Eternel. 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 I3r> 


give us something to eat;" that after that they went 
hunting cheerfully and with good luck ; he could not 
tell me anything more. They have an incoherent and 
general idea of the immortality of the soul and of 
future reward and punishment : but farther than this 
they do not seek nor care for the causes of these things, 
occupied and engrossed always either \gy\ in the ma- 
terial things of life, or in their own ways and customs. 
Now these are briefly the principal features of what I 
have been able to learn about these nations and their 
life. 

But now if we come to sum up the whole and com- 
pare their good and ill with ours, I do not know but 
that they, in truth, have some reason to prefer (as they 
do) their own kind of happiness to ours, at least if 
we speak of the temporal happiness, which the rich 
and worldly seek in this life. For, if indeed they 
have not all those pleasures which the children of 
this age are seeking after, they are free from the 
evils which follow them, and have the contentment 
which does not accompany them. It is true, never- 
theless, that they are purely and absolutely wretched, 
as much because they have no part in the natural 
happiness which is in the contemplation [98] of God, 
and in the knowledge of sublime things and in the 
perfection of the nobler parts of the soul, but chiefly 
because they are outside the grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, and the way of Eternal salvation. 


136 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Voi .. 3 


CHAPITRE IX. 

QUEL MOYEN IL Y PEUT AUOIR D' AIDER CES NATIONS 
A LEUR SALUT ETERNEL. 

VOVS auez ouy iufques icy, quel eft le naturel des 
terres de la nouuelle France, & les f aeons, arts, 
& couftumes principales des habitans. Or 
maintenant le tout bien confidere, en fin, ie croy, que 
le refultat de toutes les opinions, aduis, experiences, 
raifons, & conie&ures des Sages ne pourroit eftre 
guieres que [99] ceftui-cy, fcauoir eft, qu'il n'y a 
point d'apparence de iamais pouuoir couertir, ny 
aider folidement a falut ces Natios, fi Ion ny fonde 
vne peuplade Chreftienne, & Catholique, ayant fufn- 
fance de moyens pour viure, & de laquelle toutes ces 
contrees dependent, mefmes quand aux prouifions, & 
neceffites temporel. Tel eft le refultat, & conclufion 
des aduis. 

Or comment eft-ce que s'y pourroit dreffer, fournir, 
& entretenir cefte colonie, & peuplade? Ce n'elt 
point icy le lieu d'en minuter, & articuler les chefs. 
Seulement aduertiray-ie, que c'eft vne grande folic a 
des petits compagnons, que de s'imaginer des Baron- 
nies, & ie ne fcay quels grands fiefs, & tenements en 
ces terres, pour trois ou quatre mille efcus, par ex- 
emple, qu'ils auront a y f oncer. Le pis feroit. quand 
[100] cefte folle vanite arriueroit a gens qui fuyent la 
ruine de leurs maifons en France : car a tels conuoi- 
teux infailliblement aduiendroit, non que, borgnes ils 


1611-16] WARD'S RELATION, 1616 187 


CHAPTER IX. 

ON THE MEANS AVAILABLE TO AID THESE NATIONS 
TO THEIR ETERNAL SALVATION. 

YOU have heard up to the present about the nature 
of the lands of new France, and the more im- 
portant habits, arts, and customs of the inhab- 
itants. Now, after considering the whole subject 
thoroughly, the result of all these opinions, senti- 
ments, experiments, arguments, and conjectures of the 
wise can hardly be otherwise than [99] this; namely, 
that there is no probability of ever being able to con- 
vert or really help these Nations to salvation, if there 
is not established there a Christian and Catholic 
colony, having a sufficiency of means to maintain it, 
and upon which all the countries depend, even as to 
provisions and temporal needs. Such is the result 
and conclusion of our investigations. 

Now how can these colonists and emigrants be 
sheltered, provided for, and kept together there? 
This is not the place to go into details about it or 
even to enumerate the chief points. I shall only sug- 
gest that it is great folly for small companies to go 
there, who picture to themselves Baronies, and I 
know not what great fiefs and demesnes for three or 
four thousand ecus, for example, which they will have 
to sink in that country. It would be still worse if 
[100] this foolish idea would occur to people who flee 
from the ruin of their families in France : for to such 
covetous people it invariably happens, not that, be- 


138 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol. 3 

regneroient entre les aueugles, ains qu'aueugles ils 
s'yroient precipiter en la foffe de mifere, & poffible 
feroiet-ils an lien d'vn chafteau Chreftie, vne cauerne 
de larrons, vn nid de brigands, vn receptacle d'efcu- 
meurs, vn refuge de pendarts, vn attelier de fcandale, 
& toute mefchancete. Qui feroit lors plus en peine a 
voftre aduis? ou des gens de bien & craignats Dieu, 
fe trouuans enueloppes emmy telle compagnie, ou telle 
compagnie fe trouuant liee, & contrainte par des gens 
de bien entremeflez? II y auroit des fecouffes infail- 
liblement des vns contre les autres, & Dieu fcait, 
quelle en pourroit eftre ryffue. 

[101] AufQ de 1'autre cofte; fi ne faut-il point tant 
exaggerer les defpenfes, difficultez, & inconueniens 
poffibles, qu'on en defefpere les moyens, & bon eue- 
nement. Car a la verite, pourueu qu'il y euit du 
mefnage & bonne conduitte; i'eftime qu'il y a plu- 
fieurs maifons particulieres dans Paris, & autre part, 
qui ont les moyens efgaux a l'entreprinfe, voire & 
fans grandement incommoder leurs affaires par deca ; 
fi Dieu leur en donnoit la volonte\ 


ltill-ltij BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 iw 


ing one-eyed, they would be kings among the blind, 
but that, blind, they would go to throw themselves 
into a wretched pit ; and possibly instead of a Chris- 
tian stronghold, they would found a den of thieves, a 
nest of brigands, a receptacle for parasites, a refuge 
for rogues, a hotbed of scandal and all wickedness. 
Who would then be more afflicted, do you think ; 
the honest and God-fearing people finding themselves 
surrounded by such company, or such company, find- 
ing itself hemmed in and restrained by the presence 
of honest people? There would undoubtedly be 
some friction among them, and God knows what 
would be the result thereof. 

[101] Also, on the other hand, the expenses, difficul- 
ties, and possible inconveniences ought not to be so 
greatly exaggerated that the resources and success of 
the enterprise are despaired of. For in truth, if it 
should be managed and conducted well, I believe that 
there are several private houses in Paris, and else- 
where which have the means necessary for such an 
undertaking, even without greatly interfering with 
their affairs over here, if God would but give them 
the desire to do it. 


140 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. S 


CHAPITRE X. 

DE LA NECESSITY, QU'lL Y A DE BIEN CATECHISER 
CES PEUPLES AUANT QUE LES BAPTISER. 

C'EST contre nature en quelque efpece que vous 
le [102] voudrez prendre, que l'enfant aufli 
toft ne, auffi toft fe nourriffe, & fouftienne de 
foy-mefme: car en fin, ce n'eft pas en vain que les 
mammelles grofliilent aux meres pour vn temps. 
Aufli eft-ce contre raifon ce que quelques vns fe font 
imaginez iufques icy: qu'il n'eft point neceffaire de 
faire autre defpenfe apres cefte peuplade, que nous 
eftabliiTons en la nouuelle France, fmon pour du 
commencement y porter, & loger nos gens : eftimans 
du refte qu'ils y trouueront afles de quoy s'entrete- 
nir, foit par la trocque, foit autrement. Cela eft vou- 
loir faire naiftre des enfants auec les dents & la 
barbe; & introduire des meres fans mammelles, & 
fans laict: ce que Dieu ne veut pas. II y faudra 
toufiours defpenfer les premieres annees, iufques a ce 
que la terre fufnfamment cultiuee, [103] les artifices 
introduidts, & les mef nages accommodes, le corps de la 
colonie ait prins vne iufte accroiffance, & fermete: & 
a cela faut fe refoudre. Or tout de mefme, faut proce- 
der pour le teporel ; aufli conuient-il le faire, & a fem- 
blable proportion pour le fpirituel. Bien catechifer, 
inftruire, cultiuer, & accouftumer les Sauuages, & 
auec longue patience, & n'attendre pas, que d'vn an, 
ny de deux ils deuiennent Chrefties, qui n'ayet be- 
foin ny de Cure, ny d'Euefque; Dieu n'a point faidt 


HJ11-16J WARD'S RELATION, i6i6 141 


CHAPTER X. 

ON THE NECESSITY OF THOROUGHLY CATECHIZING 
THESE PEOPLE BEFORE BAPTIZING THEM. 

IT is against nature, in whatever aspect you may 
[102] wish to take it, that the child, as soon as it 
is born, is able to nourish and sustain itself: for it 
is not in vain that the mother's breasts become large 
for a time. So what some have imagined up to the 
present is also unreasonable, that no other outlay is 
necessary for this colony which we arc establishing 
in new France, except enough in the beginning to 
transport and locate our people yonder; supposing 
that they will find enough to maintain them there, 
either by trading or otherwise. That is like wishing 
to have children born with teeth and beards, and in- 
troducing mothers without breasts or milk, which 
God does not desire. Expenses will always be nec- 
essary there during the first years, until the land is 
sufficiently cultivated, | 1 03 J trades introduced, house- 
holds arranged; and until the main parts of the colo- 
ny have shown a reasonable and steady growth : and 
to that we must make up our minds. So, just as we 
must proceed with the temporal, as it is convenient 
to do, so in the same proportion with the spiritual ; 
catechize, instruct, educate, and train the Savages 
properly and with long patience, and not expect that 
in one year, or in two, we can make Christians of 
people who have not felt the need of either a Priest 
or a Bishop. I am sure that God has never made any 
such Christians, and that he never will make them. 


142 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol. 3 

encores de tels Chreftiens, ny n'en fera, comme ie 
croy. Car noftre vie fpirituelle depend de la Doc- 
trine, & des Sacrements, & par confequent de ceux 
qui nous adminiftrent l'vn & l'autre, felon fon infti- 
tution faindte. 

Mais fi par tout il faut diligemment Catechifer les 
peuples auat [104] que les introduire dansl'Eglife; 
& leur communiquer le Sacrement de regeneration; 
c'efl en ces lieux, oil fur tout il le faut. La raifon 
eft, parce que ces Canadiens font vagabonds (comme 
nous auons dit,) & ayans leur vie ca & la fans arreft; 
& qui partant ne pourront affifter ordinairement ny a. 
mefTes, ny a prieres ou offices publics, ny frequeter 
fermons, ny receuoir les facrements, ny auoir des 
Preltres auec eux: comment eft ce done que vous 
voulez qu'ils fe puiifent entretenir en la foy & grace 
de Dieu, s'ils ne sot bien inftruits, & au double des 
autres? Car nous, qui viuons entre les troupes des 
Religieux, & fous la garde de tant de Pafteurs, & en 
1' affluence de tant de bons liures, exemples, loix & 
police, a peine le pouuons nous, qui fommes vieux, 
& pour le dire ainfi, [105] naturalifes Chreftiens, com- 
ment le pourront-ils faire tous nouueaux qu'ils font, 
feuls, fans garde, fans lettres, fans inftitution, fans 
eoultume? Or de dire que c'efl affes d'engendrer, 
fans penfer coment on donnera l'entretien, e'eft iufte- 
ment dire, que c'efl bien fait de donner vie, pour 
Toiler auec cruaute, ce qui n'eft pas acle de Pere, 
ains de pire que menrtrier. Tout de mefme en eft-il 
en la regeneration fpirituelle, laquelle fe faict par le 
Baptefme. Car la donner, fans pouruoir a la nourri- 
ture du regenere, e'eft faire ce qu'a dit noftre Sau- 
ueur; chaffer le Diable d'vne maifon, a celle fin qu'i- 


1611-16] WARD'S RELATION, 1616 143 


For our spiritual life depends upon the Doctrine and 
the Sacraments, and consequently upon those who ad- 
minister them, according to his holy institution. 

But if it is necessary throughout the world to dili- 
gently Catechize the people before | 104] introducing 
them into the Church, and to communicate to them 
the Sacrament of regeneration, it is necessary above 
all to do it in these places ; the reason being that the 
Canadians are a wandering people (as we have said) 
and pass their lives here and there without perma- 
nent settlements; therefore they cannot ordinarily 
attend mass nor prayers nor public services, nor hear 
sermons, nor receive the sacraments nor have Priests 
with them. How then do you think that they can 
maintain themselves in the faith and grace of God, 
if they do not receive instruction, and twice as much 
of it as the others? For we who are surrounded by 
the Religious, and are under the care of so many Pas- 
tors, and have such an abundance of good books, ex- 
amples, laws and polity, can scarcely do it ourselves, 
who are old and, so to speak, [105] naturalized Chris- 
tians; then how can they do it, all crude as they 
are, alone, without care, without letters, without 
precepts, without practice? Now to say that it is 
enough to beget, without thinking of how to main- 
tain, is really saying that it is good to give life in or- 
der to take it away cruelly, which is not the act of a 
Father, but is worse than that of a murderer. Never- 
theless this is done in the spiritual regeneration 
which is accomplished through Baptism. For to give 
it without providing for the nourishment of the re- 
generated, is doing what our Savior has said ; driv- 
ing the Devil out from a house so that when it is 
swept and garnished the vanquished enemy may re- 


144 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. •> 

celle eftant bailee, & paree, l'ennemy dechaffe y 
rentre de notmeau, non ja feul, ains accompagne" de 
fept autres, pires que luy, & par ainii faire que le 
miferable regenerS foit apres fon Baptefme [106] en 
plus piteux eftat de beaucoup. qu'il n'eftoit deuant 
qu'eftre baptife. D'auatage la pradtique a des-ja 
moftre ceite neceffite de bien eateehifer auant le Bap- 
tefme en vn pais ou la get n'eftoit point Sauuage, 
ains eiuile; non coureufe, mais arreftee; non aban- 
donee, ains fur-veillee de Pafteurs, fcauoir eft, au 
Peru & Mexique. Car au commencemet on y baptifa 
fort facilemet. Qu en aduint-il? On fe trouua fu- 
bitemet fur les bras, pluitoft vne Synagogue de Sama- 
ritains. qu'vn' Eglife de fiddles. Car ces toft Bap- 
tifez venoyent bien a 1' Eglife, mais ils y marmotoyent 
leurs anciennes idolatries Ils chommoyent les feft.es 
commandees ; mais en faif ant leurs anciens facrifices, 
danfes, & fuperflitions, ils alloyent a la faindte Com- 
munion, fi Von vouloit, mais e'eftoit fans feauoir ny 
Credo, [107] ny Confiteor. Et au fortir de la, s'en al- 
loyent enyurer, & chanter au Diable leurs forceleries 
accouftumees. Quel remede a ces malheurs ? Quelle 
couuerture a ces infamies? O qu'il a fallu que ceux- 
laayent fue, qui font furuenus depuis: la oil facile- 
ment, & en peu de temps cefl'yuraye euft peu eflre 
defracinee des le commencement, en bien labourat le 
chap auant que l'enfemeneer. Ie veux dire, en gar- 
dant Tancien vfage de 1' Eglife de donner le Baptefme 
referuement, ayant premierement des Poftulans & 
Requerans, & puis des Catechumenes, & a la parfin 
des Baptifes. Auffi le maiftre de toute Sapience a dit 
treflagement : Que la tcrre fruclifie premierement Vherbe, 
puis re/py, & en fin le plan froumcnt en Vcfpy. Iofeph 


ltill-ld] B1A R D ' S REL A TION, 1616 1 4o 


enter, not alone but aceompanied by seven others, 
more wicked than himself; and thus bring it about 
that the unhappy regenerated is after Baptism | io6| 
in a much more pitiable state than he was before be- 
ing baptized. Furthermore, experience has already 
shown this need of properly catechizing before Bap- 
tizing, in a country where the people are not Savage 
but civilized ; not wandering, but stationary ; not 
abandoned, but under the watchful care of Pastors, 
namely in Peru and Mexico. For at first they bap- 
tized them very readily. What happened then ? 
They unexpectedly found on their hands a Synagogue 
of Samaritans rather than a Church of the faithful. 
For these who were too soon Baptized willingly came 
to Church but it was to mutter there their ancient 
idolatries. They observed the appointed saints' days, 
but it was while carrying on their ancient sacrifices, 
dances, and superstitions; they went to holy Com- 
munion, if it was desired, but without knowing either 
the Creed [107] or Confession, and emerging from 
there, they went off to get drunk and to sing to the 
Devil their usual sorceries. What remedy for these 
evils ? What cloak for these infamies ? how 
those who have come since, have been obliged to toil 
there where these tares might quickly and easily 
have been eradicated at first, if the field had been 
well ploughed before sowing it. I mean by observ- 
ing the ancient practice of the Church in giving Bap- 
tism cautiously, first having Postulants and Seekers, 
then Catechumens, and at last Baptism. For the 
master of all Wisdom has said very wisely : That the 
earth first bringeth forth the blade, then the ear, then the 
full eom in the ear. Joseph Acosta a3 has very proper- 
ly observed this fault, which I have mentioned above, 


146 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.3 


Acofta a tres bien remarque la faute, que i'ay dite cy 
deuant, & elle [108] n'eft point excufable apres le 
iugemet formel & fentence de l'Eglife. Voyez le 
Canon, Ante baptifmum. de con/ec. dijiincl. 4. & les fui- 
uants. 

Certes ie fuis marry de le dire, & m'en tairois fort 
volontiers, n'eftoit la neceffite, qui me eontraint. a 
caufe que, ou par malice, ou bien par ignorance 
lourde, on accufe les Iefuites en chofe, oil toutesfois 
ils ont paru eflre vrayement finceres, & coftants fer- 
uiteurs de Dieu. Car il eft vray qu'iceux arriues en 
la nouuelle France, ils trouueret qu'on y auoit ja bap- 
tife (a ce qu'on difoit) enuiron quatre vingts per- 
fonnes, mais ils n'e peurent auoir la lifte, quoy qu'ils 
miffent peine de la recouurer. Or recontrans aucuns 
de ces nouueaux baptifez, ils tafcherent a recognoiltre 
leur portee, & recogneurent pour tout, qu'ils ne fca- 
uoyent [109] pas mefme faire le figne de la Croix; 
aucuns ignoroyent leur nom de Baptefme, & inter- 
roges s'ils eftoyent Chreftiens, ils faifoyent figne de 
n' auoir iamais ouy ce mot. Ils ne f§auoyent point 
de prieres, ny de creance, & ne monftroyent aucun 
changement du paffe, retenoyent toufiours les mefmes 
forceleries anciennes, ne venas encores a l'Eglife q 
comme les non baptifes, c'eft a dire aucunefois, par 
copagnie, ou curiofite, & affez indeuotemet. Voire 
quelques Francois nous rapportoyent, que quand ils 
eftoyent a part ils fe mocquoyet infolement de nos 
ceremonies, & qu'au fonds, & a les bien fonder, ils 
n'auoyent prins le Baptefme, que pour vne marque 
d'eftre amis des Normans, car ainfi nous appellent-ils. 
On exceptoit de ce nombre, le grand Membertou, car 
de vray ceftuy-la [no] eftoit Chreftien de coeur. & 


1611-16] BI/IRD'S RELATION, 1616 147 

and it [108] is not excusable, after the formal judg- 
ment and decree of the Church. See the Canon, 
Ante baptifmum. dc con fee. diftinft. 4. and what follows. 
I am truly grieved to say it, and would willingly be 
silent were it not necessity which constrains me, be- 
cause, either through malice or very gross ignorance, 
they accuse the Jesuits of things in which neverthe- 
less they have seemed truly sincere and faithful ser- 
vants of God. But it is true that when they arrived 
in new France, they found that about eighty persons 
had already been baptized there (as they said) ; but 
they could not get the list of names, although they 
put themselves to some trouble to do so. Now, en- 
countering some of these new converts, they tried to 
find out the extent of their knowledge, and for all 
found out that they did not know [109] even how to 
make the sign of the Cross ; some did not know their 
Baptismal names, and when asked if they were Chris- 
tians, they made signs to show that they had never 
heard the word. They did not know any prayers, 
nor articles of faith, and gave no evidence of any 
change from the past, always retaining the same 
old sorceries, coming to Church moreover, only as 
the unbaptized, that is, occasionally, for company's 
sake, or through curiosity, and not in a devotional 
spirit. Indeed some of our countrymen tell us, that 
when they were by themselves, they insolently made 
sport of our ceremonies, and that really, when they 
were well sounded, it was learned that they had ac- 
cepted Baptism solely as a sign of friendship with the 
Normans, for thus they call us. An exception to this 
number was the great Membertou, for truly he [no] 
was a Christian at heart, and desired nothing better 
than to be able to receive thorough instruction so he 


148 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

ne defiroit rien tant que de pouuoir eftre bien in- 
ftruidt, pour inftruire les autres. Les Iefuites doc 
apperceuants tout cecy, fe refolurent de ne point bap- 
tifer aucun adulte, lino apres que felon les Saincts 
Canons, il auroit efte* bien initie, & catechife\ Car le 
faire autremet ils recognoiffoyet fort bien eftre non 
feulement vne prophanation du Chriftianifme, ains 
auffi vn'iniuftice enuers les Sauuages. Car puis que 
c'eft iniuftice d'induire quelqu'vn a figner vne pro- 
meffe, ou ferment obligatoire fans luy donner a en- 
tendre les conditions aufquelles il s'aftraint: combien 
plus le fera-il de pouffer vn home de fens, & d'aage 
competent a faire profeffion folemnelle de la loy de 
Dieu, (ce qui fe faidt par le Baptefme,) fans qu'il ait 
efte* iamais au parauat nouice, ny qu'on [i 1 1] luy ait 
donne* a entendre les regies & deuoirs de faditte pro- 
feffion? Les Sauuages n'ont point efte* fi hebet£s, 
qu'ils n'ayent fort bien fceu nous reprocher ceft' in- 
iuftice, d'autant qu'apres ces baptefmes, que nous 
auons dit, comme les Iefuites requeroyent, qu'ils 
quittaffent la Polygamic, & vefcuffent Chreftienne- 
ment, puis qu'ils s'y eftoyent obliges; ils leur dirent, 
que nous eftions de mefchantes gents, qui leur vou- 
lions faire accroire qu'ils euffent cotradte* a des con- 
ditions, lefquelles ils n'auoyent iamais entendu, ny 
peu entendre. A ces caufes doc les Iefuites dilay- 
ants le Baptefme de ceux, qui le defiroyent, fe mirent 
auec toute diligece poffible a traduire en Canadois 
l'oraifon Dominicale, & la falutation de l'Ange, le 
Symbole, & les Commandements de Dieu, & de l'E- 
glife [112] auec vne petite explication des Sacremens, 
& quelques oraifons, car c'eftoit toute la Theologie, 
de laquelle ils auoyent befoin. Si n'y euft-il moyen 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 149 

could teach the others. Now the Jesuits, perceiving 
all these things, resolved not to baptize a single 
adult, unless he had, according to the Holy Canons, 
been well initiated and catechized. For they well 
understood that to do otherwise would not only be a 
profanation of Christianity, but also an injustice to- 
wards the Savages. For, inasmuch as it is an injus- 
tice to induce any one to sign a promise, or compul- 
sory oath, without giving him to understand the con- 
ditions to which he binds himself: how much worse 
is it to force a rational being of competent age to 
make a solemn profession of the law of God (which 
is done through Baptism), when he has never before 
been a novice, nor [i 1 1] been made to understand the 
rules and duties of this profession? The Savages 
were not so stupid but that they knew enough to re- 
proach us for this injustice, inasmuch as, after these 
baptisms of which we have spoken, when the Jesuits 
requested that they should give up Polygamy, and 
should live like Christians, since they were in duty 
bound to do so ; they told them that we were wicked 
people, that we had tried to make them believe that 
they should agree to conditions that they had never 
understood, nor been able to understand. Now for 
these reasons the Jesuits, delaying the Baptism of 
those who desired it, put themselves to work with all 
possible diligence to translate into Canadian the 
Lord's prayer, the Angelic salutation, 24 the Creed, 
and the Commandments of God and of the Church, 
[112] with a brief explanation of the Sacraments, and 
some prayers, for this was all the Theology they 
needed. However, there was no way of accomplish- 
ing either a third or fourth of all this, as we shall 
show by and by. 


150 


LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 3 


d'en venir a bout; no pas d'vn tiers, ou quart de tout 
cela, ainfi que nous monftrerons tantoft. 

Cependant voicy vn grad murmure, qui s'efleue 
entre nos Francois, de ce qu'on ne baptifoit point. 
Car nous fommes en vn fiecle, auquel, qui fcait lire, 
eft a fon opinion, grand Theologien: & qui a le 
moindre foin de fon ame, eft a fon aduis le plus apte 
pour regir l'Eglife de Dieu, & pour entreprendre fur 
les oingts du Sauueur. Cecy n'eft point tolerable 
(difoient-ils, ainfi que le Faclum le profeffe) ces gens 
cy font inutiles: II en faut efcrire en Frace: & autres 
menaces, lefquelles ils vindrent faire au P. Biard, 
[113] lequel tafcha de les appaifer, & entre autres 
chofes leur dit : Mes amys, fi les Iefuites eufTent efte 
conuoyteux de vaine gloire, vous leur monftrez la 
route, qu'ils deuoyent tenir; de toft baptifer le plus 
de gens, qu'ils euffent peu; parce qu'il y a bien a 
prefumer, que ces conuerfions eftans fceiies en France, 
les Imprimeurs de Paris n' euffent pas efte plus negli- 
gents, ny les Colporteurs plus enroiiez a crier telles 
nouuelles par les rues de la ville en leur recom- 
mandation. Mais a Dieu ne plaife, (difoit-il) que 
nous voulions fembler Apoftres, n' eftans que mifera- 
bles pecheurs ; ny que nous voulions acquerir le 
bruict. de bons mefnagers, & diligens feruiteurs, en 
diffipant 1' heritage de noftre Maiftre. On mefdira de 
nous, nous le fentons prou : ne croyez pas que nous 
foyons fi ftupides. [114] Mais il ne faut non plus 
laiffer le bien pour l'infamie, que 1' entreprendre pour 
les loiianges. C'eft a Dieu a qui nous feruons, & a 
la maifon de qui fi nous deuons apporter aucun fruidt, 
c'eft en patience, car ainfi l'a-il dit, II apportera fruicl 
en patience. Nous baptifons les petits enfans, comme 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 151 

Meanwhile, many complaints arose among our 
French people because no one was being baptized. 
For we live in an age in which any one who knows 
how to read is, in his own opinion, a great Theolo- 
gian ; and whoever has the least care for his own 
soul, believes himself to be the most proper person 
to rule the Church of God, and to infringe upon the 
duties of the Lord's anointed. "This is not to be 
tolerated" (they were saying, according to the Fac- 
tum 25 ) ; "these people are useless here ; we must write 
to France about them;" and other threats, which 
were made to Father Biard, [113] who tried to pacify 
them, and among other things said: "My friends, if 
the Jesuits were ambitious for mere glory, you would 
show them the right way to attain it ; i.e., to baptize, 
as soon as possible, as many people as they can ; for 
it is certainly to be supposed that, these conversions 
being known in France, the Printers of Paris would 
not have delayed to make the Hawkers hoarse, crying 
and commending such news through the streets of 
the city. But God forbid" (said he) "that we should 
wish to assume the role of Apostles, being only miser- 
able sinners ; or that we should try to acquire the 
reputation of good managers, and diligent servants, 
while squandering our Master's inheritance. We 
shall be slandered, we are well aware of it ; do not 
believe that we are so stupid. [114] But just as little 
must you desist from doing good for fear of calumny 
as you must undertake it for love of praise. It is God 
whom we serve, and if we are to bring any fruit to his 
house it must be in patience, for thus he has said it, 
He bringcth forth fruit with patience. We baptize the 
little children, as you see, in accordance with their 
parents' wishes, and with the hope that we shall have 


152 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.3 

vous voyez de la volont6 de leurs parens, & foubs l'ef- 
perace, que nous aurons moyen de les inftruire, 
quand ils viendront a l'vfage de raifon. Les aagez, 
qui meurent, nous les baptisos auffi, les catechifants 
du mieux que nous pouuos, & que le temps le permet ; 
Quant aux autres, qui font hors le peril de mort, nous 
les baptiferons auffi, quand par voftre ayde nous les 
pourrons inftruire en leur langage, & qu'eux nous 
fcaurot refpondre. Car il faut que le baptife adulte 
refponde luy-mefme, & [115] non le parrain pour luy. 
Aydez-nous, & priez pour cela felon voftre grand 
zele, & ne vous tourmentez, penfants qu'ils periront, 
s'ils n'ont receu le Baptefme: car auffi bien periront- 
ils, & piremet, s'ils l'auoyent receu fans bonne difpo- 
fition: comme fi apres le Baptefme, ils meurent en 
peche mortel, ils perifTent. Que fi vous repliquez, 
qu' apres le Baptefme leurs pechez leur feront pardon- 
nez par la feule contrition, en cas qu'ils n'ayent point 
de Prophetes pour fe confefTer; Auffi vous dy-ie, que 
par la mefme deteftation de leurs pechez, auec la vo- 
lonte de receuoir le Baptefme, ils feront fauuez, en 
cas qu'ils ne rencontret aucu qui puiffe le leur appli- 
quer. Partant vouz voyez, que la premiere chofe, 
que nous tafchons de leur apprendre, c'eft la maniere 
de fe conuertir a Dieu de tout leur [116] cceur par 
vraye contrition, & defir, de s'vnir, & incorporer auec 
noftre Sauueur Iesvs-Christ. Car c'eft vne dif por- 
tion pour receuoir le Baptefme mefme: Et elle eft 
telle, qu'elle fuffit a falut, quand on ne peut receuoir 
le Sacrement par effetf:. II eft vray, nous auons la 
jambe fort pefante pour monter mefme ce premier 
degre" ; mais courage par vos prieres, Dieu nous ren- 
forcera de fon S. Efprit. Telles & autres femblables 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 153 

means of instructing them, when they come to a rea- 
sonable age. The aged, who die, we also baptize, 
catechizing them as well as we can, and as time per- 
mits. As to the others, who are not in immediate 
danger of death, we shall baptize them also when, 
with your help, we shall be able to instruct them in 
their own language, and when they will know how 
to answer us. For the adult who is baptized, must 
answer for himself, and [115] not the godfather for 
him. Help us, and pray for this in proportion to 
your own great zeal, and do not worry, thinking they 
will perish if they have not received Baptism; for 
surely they will perish, and in a worse manner, if 
they have received it in a bad spirit : just as, after 
Baptism, if they die in mortal sin, they perish. But 
if you reply that after Baptism their sins will be par- 
doned through repentance alone, if they have no 
Prophets to receive their confession ; I say to you 
also that through the same detestation of sin, with 
the wish to receive Baptism, they will be saved if 
they do not find any one who will administer it to 
them. Therefore you see that the first thing we try 
to teach them is, how to bring themselves to God 
with their whole [116] hearts through true repent- 
ance, and the desire to unite and incorporate them- 
selves with our Savior, Jesus Christ. For this is 
the proper spirit in which to receive Baptism itself; 
and it is such, that it suffices for salvation, when the 
Sacrament cannot actually be received. It is true our 
legs drag in reaching this first step; but courage! 
through your prayers, God will strengthen us by his 
Holy Spirit. ' ' These, and other similar reasons, were 
at that time deduced by the said Father Biard, and 
have often been repeated since, but they have never 


154 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

raifons furent pour lors deduidtes par ledit P. Biard, 
& ont efte fouuent repet6es defpuis, fans que iamais 
on s'en foit voulu contenter; marque infaillible, que 
Ion cherchoit quelque autre chofe, que raifon. 

Or a l'occafion des Colonies, & de leur bon eftablif- 
femet, duquel nous parlions; nous fommes deualez 
fur le propos du Catechifme, [117] & fur la defenfe 
des Ief uites : non fans neceffite a mon aduis, ny fans 
profit bien grand. Ores, puis que nous auons fait 
mention du Fattiim, efcrit contre lefdits Iefuites, & 
qu'il nous faudra d'ores-en-auant coup fur coup, en 
conuaincre les menfonges: c'eft icy a nous d'expofer, 
quel eft ce Fattiun, qui fon Efcriuain, & quelles 
caufes il fe dit auoir eu de fortir au monde. 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 155 

carried conviction: an infallible sign, that something 
else besides reason was sought for. 

Now as to the Colonies, and their proper establish- 
ment, of which we were speaking; we have stepped 
down from them to the subject of the Catechism [117] 
and to the defense of the Jesuits, not without neces- 
sity in my opinion, nor without great profit. For 
since we have mentioned the Factum written against 
the said Jesuits, and as we must from now on expose, 
one by one, the lies therein contained, it is for us 
here to explain what that Factum is, who was its Au- 
thor, and what are said to have been the causes for 
its being issued to the world. 


156 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.3 


CHAPITRE XII. [i.e.,xi.] 

A QUELLE OCCASION LES IESUITES ALLERENT EN LA 

NOUUELLE FRANCE, L'AN l6ll. & CE QUE LES 

FRANgOIS Y FIRENT DES L'AN 1608. 

IUSQUES A LEUR VENUE. 

NOVS auons cy-deuant difcouru des terres, & peu- 
ples de la Nouuelle France, & parlats [i 18] du 
moyen de pouuoir ayder ces Nations : a cefte 
occafion nons fommes tombez fur le Fattum efcrit, & 
publie contre les Iefuites. Or d'autant, que ce difa- 
mateur, & fadtieux (ainfi le nommeray-ie d'ores-en- 
auant,) commencant d£s l'embarquement des Iefuites, 
les pourfuit, comme a la trace en Canada par boys, & 
riuieres, mer, & terres, de iour & de nuidt, en tous 
leurs voyages & demeures, efpiant par tout de tirer 
fur eux a couuert & proditoirement quelques impof- 
tures, & calomnies. A cefte caufe il nous faut de 
neceffite' reprendre mefmes erres pour defendre 1' in- 
nocence, & rapporter au vray ce qui eft de leurs 
actions, & deportements : ainfi que i'ay promis de 
faire en l'Auant-propos. Et jacoit qu'a ceft'occa- 
fion nous ferons contraindts fouuent de particularifer 
plufieurs [119] petits affaires, non guiere bien conue- 
nables a la grauite* d'vn' hiftoire, ny a la dignite d'vn 
Ledteur honnorable ; toutesfois i'eftime que de cefte 
mienne diligece on pourra tirer trois grands fruidts, 
outre la recognoiflance de la verite d'auec les fraudes, 
& bourdes, qui de foy mefme feroit fort profitable. 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 157 


CHAPTER XII. [i. e.,xi.] 

ON THE CAUSES WHICH LED THE JESUITS TO GO TO 
NEW FRANCE IN l6ll, AND WHAT HAD BEEN ACCOM- 
PLISHED THERE BY THE FRENCH FROM THE 
YEAR 1608 UP TO THE TIME OF THEIR ARRIVAL. 

WE have discoursed above upon the countries 
and peoples of New France, and in speaking 
[118] of the means of aiding these Nations, 
we stumbled upon the Factum, written and published 
against the Jesuits. Now inasmuch as this slanderer 
and factionist (which I shall call him hereafter), be- 
ginning with the embarkation of the Jesuits, pursues 
them , dogging their footsteps in Canada through woods 
and rivers, upon sea and land, day and night, in all 
their travels and dwelling places, — everywhere spy- 
ing them out, to draw down upon them, covertly and 
treacherously, his impostures and calumnies ; for this 
reason we must of necessity go back upon our route, 
to defend the innocent and to give a true account of 
their actions and conduct, as I promised to do in the 
Preface. And although on this account we shall often 
be obliged to go into details about many [119] little 
things which are scarcely in harmony with the gravity 
of a history or the dignity of an honorable Reader ; 
nevertheless I believe that if I give heed to these 
things three great results will be derived therefrom, 
besides the discrimination of truth from falsehood and 
imposition, which in itself would be very profitable. 


158 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

Le premier emolument, que le fage Ledteur en ti- 
rera eft, que de la pradtique, actions, voyages, & 
accidents, que nous luy fpecifierons l'vn apres 1 'autre, 
il recognoiftra beaucoup mieux, ce qui eft de ces 
terres, de leur naturel, du moye de les aider, & les 
accides de telles expeditions & entreprinfes. 

Le fecond qu'il rencontrera tat d'euenements, & fi 
diuers, tant de fortunes, & incidents auec leurs mo- 
ments & articles, que fa prudece pourra beaucoup s'y 
former. [120] Car en verite, c'eft tout autre chofe 
de philofopher en thefe, & de pradtiquer en hypo- 
thefe: de mouler fes idees en chambre, & d'efclorre 
fes adtions entre les homes : de faire f on compte fur 
la liberie du genre, & fe trouuer puis apres afTeruy 
au lieu, temps, perfonnes, & mille petits incidents, 
mais qui eftreignent bien fort; de nul prix, mais qui 
fouuent neantmoins font changer de refolutio, & de 
fortune. Or c'eft en l'exercice de ces particulieres 
circoftaces, & pradtique, qu'on acquiert la prudence; 
non en vne veue, & recognoiffance fommaire, & vni- 
uerfelle. 

Le tiers fruidt fera de recognoiftre vne vrayement 
paternelle, douce & admirable prouidence de Dieu 
fur ceux, qui l'inuoquent, & fe fient en luy parmy les 
hazards, & varietes de cefte [121] vie, tels qu'on en 
verra icy beaucoup. Ces trois profits, a mon aduis, 
pourront bien contre-balancer la logueur du temps, qui 
s'employera en cefte ledture. 

Mais a celle fin, que le tout s'entende mieux, il 
nous conuient retourner a ceux, qu'auons ja des fi 
long temps laiff es : fcauoir eft, aux Francois, qui re- 
tournerent de Canada en leur pays, l'an 1607. 

II vous a efte raconte, comme fur la fin de ladidte 


1611-16] WARD'S RELATION, 1616 159 

The first advantage that the wise Reader will derive 
from this, is that from the experiences, actions, jour- 
neys, and accidents which we shall relate to him, one 
after the other, he will understand much better what 
these countries are, their nature, the means of helping 
them, and the vicissitudes of such expeditions and en- 
terprises. 

The second is that he will encounter so many and 
so different events, so many fortunes and incidents 
with their opportunities and details, that his discre- 
tion will be thus greatly strengthened. [120] For in 
truth, it is a very different thing for a man to philos- 
ophize in thesis, and to practice by hypothesis: to 
mould his ideas in his chamber, and to give form to 
his deeds among men : to count upon the liberty of 
the race, and then to find himself enslaved by place, 
time, people, and a thousand incidents which are 
trifling, but which very effectually bind him ; of no 
value, yet they often change his purpose and his des- 
tiny. Now it is through experience with these par- 
ticular circumstances and practices, that prudence is 
acquired ; not in a comprehensive and general survey 
and examination. 

The third fruit will be in the recognition of a truly 
paternal, gentle, and admirable providence of God 
over those who invoke it, and trust themselves to him 
among the dangers and changes of this [121] life, such 
as will be often seen here. These three benefits, it 
seems to me, will certainly offset the tediousness of 
the time which will be employed in this reading. 

But to the end that all may be better understood, 
it is well for us to return to those whom we have left 
for so long a time, namely, to the French, who re- 
turned to their own country from Canada, in 1607. 


160 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

annee 1607. tout le train du fieur de Monts s'en re- 
uint en France, & fut lors cefte nouuelle France enti- 
eremet abandonnee des Fran9ois. Neantmoins l'an 
fuiuant 1608. le fieur de Monts conftitua fon Lieute- 
nat le lieur Champlain, & le manda defcouurir au long 
de la grande riuiere S. Laurens; Champlain y fit 
vaillamment, & fonda l'habitation de Kebec. Mais 
quant aux [122] faidts, voyages, & defcouuertures 
dudit Champlain, il n'eft ja befoin, que ie les vous 
crayonne, puis que luy mefme les a fi bien, & fi au 
long depeint en fes liures. 

Or le fieur lean de Biencourt, appelle de Potrin- 
court auant que le fieur de Monts partift de la nou- 
uelle France, luy demanda en don Port Royal. Le 
fieur de Monts le luy accorda, moyennant, que dans 
les deux ans prochains ledit de Potrincourt s'y tranf- 
portaft auec plufieurs autres families pour le cultiuer, 
& habiter ainfi qu'il promettoit de faire. Doncques 
l'an 1607. tous les Francois eftants reuenus (ainfi 
qu'a efte diet.,) le fieur de Potrincourt prefenta a feu 
d' immortelle memoire Henry le Grand la donnation 
a luy faidte par le fieur de Monts, requerant humble- 
met fa Majefte de la ratifier. Le Roy [123] euft pour 
agreable ladidte Requefte, & proiettant en foy de 
puiflamment remettre fus cefte Francoife peuplade, 
dit au P. Coton, qu'il vouloit fe feruir de leur Com- 
pagnie en la conuerfion des Sauuages. Qu'il en 
efcriuit au P. General: & qu'on defignaft aucuns, qui 
fe difpofaflent a ces voyages. Qu'il les appelleroit 
au premier temps; promettant des lors deux mille 
liures pour leur entretien. 

Le Pere Coton obei't a fa Majefte, & bien toft par 
tous les Colleges de la France fut entendu, qu'on en 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 161 

You have been told how, towards the end of the 
year 1607, sieur de Monts's entire company returned 
to France, and this new France was then entirely 
deserted by our countrymen. However, in the fol- 
lowing year, 1608, sieur de Monts chose as his Lieu- 
tenant sieur de Champlain, and sent him on a tour 
of discovery along the great St. Lawrence river; 
Champlain did admirably there, establishing the set- 
tlement of Kebec. 26 But as to the [122] deeds, jour- 
neys, and discoveries of the said Champlain, there is 
no need of my outlining them to you, as he himself 
has given such long and excellent descriptions of them 
in his books. 

Now sieur Jean de Biencourt, called de Potrin- 
court, before sieur de Monts left new France, asked 
from him the gift of Port Royal. Sieur de Monts 
granted it to him, stipulating that within the two suc- 
ceeding years sieur de Potrincourt should go there 
with several other families to cultivate and inhabit it, 
which he promised to do. Now in 1607, all the 
French having returned (as has been said), sieur de 
Potrincourt presented to the late Henry the Great, of 
immortal memory, the deed of gift made to him by 
sieur de Monts, humbly requesting his Majesty to 
ratify it. 27 The King [123] favored the Request, and, 
contriving some way by which he could give effective 
aid to this French colony, told Father Coton that he 
would like to make use of his Society for the conver- 
sion of the Savages ; that he should write to the Fa- 
ther-General about it ; and that they should designate 
some persons who should prepare to undertake these 
voyages; that he would summon them at the first 
opportunity; promising henceforward two thousand 
livres for their support. 


162 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

deuoit choifir quelques vns pour cefte miffion. Plu- 
fieurs fe prefenterent pour eftre de la partie, comme 
eft la couftume en telles expeditions beaucoup pe- 
nibles, & peu honorables; & entre autres fe prefenta 
le P. Pierre Biard, enfeignant [124] pour lors la 
Theologie a Lyon, Dieu vouluft que ledit Pere fut 
choifi, & enuoye a Bourdeaux fur la fin de l'an 1608. 
Parce qu'on penfoit a Lyon, que le projedt d'vn 
Prince tant efficace, ayant efte fignifie" des tant de 
mois, l'execution n'en pouuoit eflre que bien proche. 
Mais le P. Biard fut autant deceu du lieu, que du 
temps. Car a Bourdeaux on fut eftonne, quand on 
ouyt ce pourquoy il y venoit. Nulle nouuelle d'em- 
barquement pour Canada, ouy bien du debris, & def- 
route paffee, de laquelle chacun philofophoit a fa 
facon. Nul appreft, nul bruit ou nouuelle. 

Sur la fin de l'an fuiuant 1609. Le fieur de Potrin- 
court vint a Paris, ou fa Majefte ayant fceu, que 
contre fon opinion ledit fieur n'auoit bouge de 
France (car le Roy le croyoit auoir paffe la mer auffi 
[125] toft apres auoir obtenu la confirmation de Port 
Royal.) II fe fafcha cotre luy. Dequoy ledit fieur 
fort touche, refpondit, que puis que fa Majefte auoit 
ceft affaire tant a cceur deflors il prenoit conge 1 d'elle, 
& que de ce pas il s'en alloit mettre ordre a s'equip- 
per pour fon voyage. Or le P. Coton, qui eftoit en 
peine pour le Pere Biard, & pour la grande femonce, 
qu'il auoit faidt au nom du Roy, ayant fceu le conge 
prins du fieur de Potrincourt, l'alla trouuer, & luy 
offrit compagnie d'aucuns de fon Ordre. II receut 
refponfe que mieux feroit d'attendre l'an fuiuant; 
qu'aufli toft eftat arriue a Port Royal il renuoyeroit 
fon fils en France; & qu'auec iceluy toutes chofes 


1611-16] BIARjyS RELATION, 1616 163 

Father Cotoil obeyed his Majesty, and soon through 
all the colleges of France it was understood that per- 
sons were to be chosen for this mission. Many- 
offered themselves to take part in the work, as is 
usual in such expeditions, in which there is a great 
deal of work and very little honor ; and among others 
who presented themselves was Father Pierre Biard, 
then teaching |" 124.] Theology at Lyons; God willed 
that the said Father should be chosen and sent to 
Bourdeaux towards the end of the year 1608. For 
they thought at Lyons that the project of so power- 
ful a Prince, having been known so many months be- 
fore, could not be otherwise than speedily executed. 
But Father Biard was as much deceived in regard to 
the place, as the time. For at Bourdeaux they were 
very much surprised when they heard why he had 
come there. There was no news of any embarkation 
for Canada, but there was of the former wreck and 
ruin, upon which each one philosophized in his own 
fashion. No preparation, no reports or tidings. 

Towards the end of the year 1609, sieur de Potrin- 
court came to Paris, where his Majesty, having 
learned that, contrary to his belief, the said sieur 
had not stirred from France, (for the King supposed 
that he had crossed the sea immediately [125] after 
having obtained confirmation of the Port Royal 
grant), was angry with him. Whereupon the said 
sieur, very much aggrieved, answered that, since his 
Majesty had this affair so much at heart, he would 
take leave of him at once, to go directly and look 
after the equipment for his voyage. Now Father 
Coton, who was troubled about Father Biard, and 
about the great invitation he had given him in the 
King's name, having heard of the farewell of sieur 


164 LES RELA TIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol. S 


eftant mieux difpofees, ceux-la viendroyet, qu'il 
plairoit au Roy d'enuoyer. Sur ce il partit de Paris, 
& confuma tout [126] l'Hyuer a fe preparer. 

L'an fuiuant 16 10. il s'embarqua fur la fin de Fe- 
urier, & n'arriua que bien tard a Port Royal, fgauoir 
eft fur le commencement de Iuin, ou ayant affemble 
le plus de Sauuages qu'il peut, il en fit baptifer enui- 
ron 24. ou 25. le iour de la fainct. lean, par vn Preftre 
appelle Mefiire Ioffe Flefche, furnomme le Patri- 
arche. Peu apres, il renuoya en France le fieur de 
Biencourt fon fils, aage" d'enuiron 19. ans, pour ap- 
porter ces nouuelles du baptefme des Sauuages; & 
rapporter bien toft fecours: car on eftoit affez mal 
pourueu, pour paffer l'Hyuer contre la faim. 

Le moyen de pouuoir trouuer fecours eftoit vne 
affociation, qu'il auoit contradtee auec le S r . Thomas 
Robin, dit de Coloignes, fils de famille, & en puif- 
fance de pere; par laquelle affociation il conuenoit 
[127] entre eux, que ledicl de Coloignes fourniroit 
V habitation de Port Royal durant cinq ans, de toutes 
chofes neceffaires, & fonferoit abondamment pour 
pouuoir trocquer auec les Sauuages ; & que moyen- 
nant ce, il auroit les emoluments, qu'il feroit icy trop 
ennuyeux de raconter. 

Lefdicts de Coloignes, & Biencourt arriuerent a 
Paris le moys d'Aouft fuiuat, & par eux on fceut en 
Court ces Baptefmes, & nouuelles conuerfios que nous 
auons dit. Tous en furent bien-aifes; mais le mal 
fut, que cefte fefte ne fe trouua pas eftre celle des 
eftreines. 

Or Madame la Marquife de Guercheuille, comme 
entre fes autres rares & fingulieres vertus, elle eft 
ardamment zelee a la gloire de Dieu, & conuerfion 


lrill-16] WARD'S RELATION, /6/6 165 


de Potrincourt, went to see him and offered him the 
company of some of his Order. He received the an- 
swer that it would be better to wait until the follow- 
ing- year ; that as soon as he arrived at Port Royal he 
would send his son back to France, and that with 
him, all things being better arranged, such persons 
should come as it might please the King to send. 
Thereupon he left Paris, and consumed the entire 
[126) Winter in making preparations. 

The following year, 1610, he embarked towards 
the end of February, but arrived very late at Port 
Royal, to wit, about the beginning of June: here, 
having assembled as many Savages as lie could, he 
had about 24 or 25 of them baptized on saint John's 
day, by a Priest named Messire Josse Flesche," 28 sur- 
named "the Patriarch." A little while afterwards, 
he sent buck to France sieur de Biencourt, his son, 
about nineteen years old, to take this news of the 
baptism of the Savages, and to speedily bring back 
relief ; for they were very poorly provided against 
hunger for the coming Winter. 

He was able to find assistance through an associa- 
tion which he had formed with S r . Thomas Robin, 
called de Coloignes,'"' belonging to a good family, 
and under the authority of his father; through this 
association it was | 1 27 | agreed that the said de Co- 
loignes should provide the settlement of Port Royal 
for five years, with all necessary things, and that 
he shoiild furnish abundant means for traffic with 
the Savages; and in return for this he would have 
emoluments which it would be too tedious here to 
enumerate. 

De Coloignes and Biencourt arrived at Paris the 
following August, and through them the Court 


166 LES RELATIONS DES JJESUITES [Vol. & 


ties ames: voyant vne ft belle oecafion, [128] deman- 
da au Pere Coton fi a celle foys aucuns de leur com- 
pagnie ne s'en iroyent point a la nouuelle France. 
Le Pere Coton refpondit, qu'il s'eltonnoit fort du 
fieur de Potrincourt, qui luy auoit promis, que ren- 
uoyant fon fils il appelleroit ceux de fon ordre, qui 
auoyent efte deftines par le Roy ; & ce nonobftant il 
ne faifoit aucune mention d'eux, ny par fes lettres, 
ny par fes commiflions. Madame la Marquife voulut 
fgauoir comm'alloit tout cet affaire, & s'en enquit du 
fieur Robin: qui refpondit, que toute la charge de 
l'embarquement luy auoit efte baillee, mais qu'il 
n' auoit point de commiffion particuliere pour les Ie- 
fuites; neantmoins qu'il fcauoit affez, que le fieur de 
Potrincourt fe fentiroit fort honore de les auoir au- 
pres de foy, que pour leur entretenement luy [129] 
mefme s'en chargeroit, comme il faifoit auffi du reite 
de toute la defpenfe: vous n'en feres point charge 
refpodit madame la Marquife, parce que le Roy les 
defraye. Et auec tel propos enuoya ledit de Co- 
loignes au P. Chriitofie Baltafar Prouincial. Lequel 
fur ces promeffes manda au P. Pierre Biard, (qui lors 
eftoit a Poictiers,) de venir a Paris, & luy fut donne 
pour compagnon le P. Enemond Maffe, Lyonnois. 
Eux deux ainfi deftines a ce voyage de Canada, s'ab- 
boucheret auec les fieurs Robin & Biencourt, & partie 
faidte le rendez-vous fut affigne a Dieppe au 24. 
d'Orftobre de la mefme annee 16 10. Car en ce temps 
la difoyent-ils, tout fera preft, fi le vent, & la maree 
le font. 

Ainfi les Iefuites furent bientoft en conche. Car 
la Royne leur fit deliurer cinq cents efcus promis 
[130] par le feu Roy, & adioufta vne fort honnorable 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6tt Iti7 

learned of these Baptisms, and new conversions 
which we have mentioned. All were very much 
pleased about it, but unfortunately this holiday was 
not the one of gifts. 

Now Madame la Marquise de Guercheville, among 
her other rare and extraordinary virtues, is ardently 
zealous for the glory of God and the conversion of 
souls: seeing such an excellent opportunity, [ 128] she 
asked Father Coton if some of his order were not 
going to new France this time. Father Coton replied 
that he was very much surprised at sieur de Potrin- 
omrt, who had promised him that, when his son re- 
turned, he would summon those of his order who had 
been chosen by the King; but, in spite of this, he 
made no mention of them either in his letters, or in 
his commissions. Madame la Marquise, wishing 
to know all about the matter, made inquiries of sieur 
Robin: he answered that all the responsibility of 
embarkation had been delegated to him, but he had no 
especial commission for the Jesuits ; that nevertheless 
he knew very well that sieur de Potrincourt would 
feel very highly honored to have them with him ; 
and, as to their maintenance, he 1 129] himself would 
take charge of that, as he was doing in regard to all 
the rest of the expenses. ' ' You will not be burdened 
with them," answered madame la Marquise, "be- 
cause the King defrays their expenses." And with 
these words she sent de Coloignes to Father Christo- 
fle Baltasar, Provincial. He, upon hearing these 
promises, summoned Father Pierre Biard (who was 
then at Poictiers) to come to Paris, and to him was 
given, as a companion, Father Enemond Masse, of 
Lyons. These two, thus destined for the voyage to 
Canada, conferred with sieurs Robin and Biencourt, 


168 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.8 

recommandatio de bouche. Madame la Marquife de 
Vernueil les meubla richemet d'vteniiles & habits 
facres pour dire Meffe ; Madame de Sourdis les four- 
nit liberalement de linge, & Madame de Guercheuille 
leur aumofna vn bien honnefte viatique. Ainu gar- 
nis ils fe rendirent a Dieppe au temps affigne\ 


1611-16] BJARD'S RELATION, 1616 169 

and having perfected arrangements, the meeting- 
place was appointed at Dieppe on the 24th of October 
of the same year, 16 10. " For by that time," they 
said, " everything will be ready, if the wind and the 
tide are favorable." 

So the Jesuits were soon in a state of preparation. 
For the Queen had sent to them the five hundred 
ecus promised ( 1 30] by the late King, and had added 
a very favorable recommendation by word of mouth. 
Madame la Marquise de Vernueil furnished them 
amply with sacred vessels and robes for saying Mass ; 
Madame de Sourdis furnished them liberally with 
linen, and Madame de Guercheville granted them a 
very fair viaticum. 30 Thus provided for, they reached 
Dieppe at the time appointed. 


170 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. S 


CHAPITRE XIII. [i. e.,xii.J 

LES CONTRADICTIONS, & DIFFICULTES, QUI S'ESLE- 

UERENT A DIEPPE : ET COMMENT ELLES 

FURENT ROMPUES. 

LA perfecutee, & triomphate Dame, que S. lean 
vit en fon Apocalypfe, fgatioir eft, l'Eglife de 
Dieu, ou encores myftiquement toute ame 
efleue, Cruciatur [131] vt pariat ; endure beaucoup de 
conuulfions, & tranchees, a pouuoir enfanter. Auffi. 
la conception, & le proiect de toute bonne ceuure a 
befoin de grace. Car en fin fans cefte femence, & 
germe celefte nos cceurs ne peuuent rien concepuoir, 
ny former d'organique, fecond & viuant. Mais 
quand ce vient a efclorre le bon ceuure, ie veux dire, 
quand le terme de ce pieux enfantement de vertu 
approehe, lors il femble que tout confpire a la fuffo- 
cation de cefte diuine creature, lors faut-il fentir des 
douleurs, & trafes, que Satan fufcite, & craindre 
pluftoft d'vn auortemet infrudtueux, qu'auoir efpe- 
rance d'vn heureux accouchement. Les Iefuites ont 
experimente cecy par tout, & nommemet aux effets 
falutaires, qu'ils ont defire produire a la conuerfion 
de la nouuelle France. Nous [132] auons dit cy de- 
uant, que l'amgnatio leur auoit efte baillee a Dieppe 
au 24. d'Odtobre, qu'en ce temps-la le nauire deuoit 
eftre come l'oifeau fur la branche n' attendant rien 
plus, que de voler. Mais bien loin de conte : lis 
trouuerent a Dieppe, que le nauire n'eftoit pas feule- 
ment radoube. De plus, a leur arriuee grad bruit 


1611-16] BIAR&S RELATION, i6t6 171 


CHAPTER XIII. [i.e.,xii.| 

THE OPPOSITIONS, AND DIFFICULTIES, WHICH 

AROSE AT DIEPPE: AND HOW THEY 

w ERE < IVERCOME. 

THE persecuted and triumphant Woman, whom 
St. John saw in his Revelation, namely, the 
Church of God, or more mystically, any heroic 
soul, Cruciatur [131] /// pariat; endures many con- 
vulsions and pains, in order that it may bear fruit. 
So the conception and development of every good 
work requires grace. For, in fine, without this ce- 
lestial seed and germ, our hearts could not conceive 
nor fashion a living and fruitful organism. But 
when it comes time for the good work to ripen, I 
mean when the time of this pious birth of virtue ap- 
proaches, then it seems that all conspire for the suf- 
focation of this divine creature, then it seems neces- 
sary to experience the pains and torments which 
Satan arouses, and to fear a fruitless abortion, rather 
than to hope for a happy deliverance. The Jesuits 
have experienced this everywhere, and especially in 
regard to the beneficial results which they wished to 
obtain by the conversion of new France. We [132] 
have said before that the rendezvous had been ap- 
pointed for them at Dieppe the 24th of October, for 
at that time the ship would be like the bird upon the 
branch, only waiting to fly. But very far from this; 
they found at Dieppe that the ship had not even 
been repaired. Furthermore, at their arrival there 


172 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITFS [Vol. 3 


parmy la Reforme. Car le fieur Robin, qui (corame 
nous auons dit) fouftenoit, toute la charge de l'em- 
barquement, auoit donne comiffion a deux marchands 
de la Pretendue, appelles du Chefne, & du Iardin, 
de vacquer au radoub & eargaifon du nauire foubs 
promeffe de fatis-faire a leurs vacations, & parties. & 
enfemble de les affocier a quelque part du profit, qui 
reuiendroit de la traicte de pelleterie, & de la pefche 
des molues. Or lcs Marchands n'auoyent [133] gui- 
eres auance de la befongne iufques a lors, ie ne fcay 
pourquoy: & des lors mefme ils commencerent en- 
cores a reculer. Car ils s'opiniaftrerent, iurants par 
leur plus haut iuron, que fi les Iefuites deuoyent 
entrer dans ce nauire, ils n'auoyent que faire d'y 
rien mettre. Qu'ils ne refufoyent point tous autres 
Preftres, oil Ecclefiaftiques, voire qu'ils s'offroiet a 
les nourrir; mais que pour des Iefuites: infociable an- 
tipathic 

On efcriuit de cecy en Cour: & la Royne mada au 
fieur de Cigoigne, Gouuerneur de Dieppe, qu T il fit 
f9auoir aux furintendans Confiftoriaux eftre de fa 
volonte, ce que fon feu Seigneur, & mary auoit pro- 
jette de fon viuant, f9auoir eft, que les Iefuites allafset 
en fes terres de la nouuelle France, & partant, que 
s'ils s'oppofoyent a ce voyage, ils l'e bandoyent contre 
[134] fon intention, & bon plaifir. Mais pauure efpe- 
ron. Nos Marchands n'en auacerent point d'vn pas, 
& a faute d' argent les fieurs Biencourt, & Robin 
eftoyent cotraindts de paffer fous leur barre : qui a 
cefte caufe leur promirent, & iurerent, que iamais les 
Iefuites n'entreroyent dans leur nauire. Sous ceite 
promefle les Marchads fe mirent a equipper. veu 
mefmement, que les Iefuites n' eftoyent plus deuant 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6r6 ITS 


was great excitement among those of the Reformed 
Religion. For sieur Robin, who (as we have said) 
took entire charge of the shipping, had given a com- 
mission to two merchants of the Pretended M Faith, 
called du Chesne and du Jardin, to attend to the re- 
pairing and loading of the ship, under promise to re- 
munerate them for their time and expense, and to 
form a partnership with them to divide the profits 
which would be derived from the trade in skins, and 
from the cod fisheries. Xow the Merchants had, 
| 133] up to that time, advanced but little in the work, 
I know not why: and from then on they began to 
delay more than ever. For they were very obstinate, 
swearing with their loudest oaths, that, if the Jesuits 
had to enter the ship, they would simply put nothing 
in it ; that they would not refuse all other Priests or 
Ecclesiastics, and would even support them, but as to 
the Jesuits, they would not abide them. 

The Court was informed of this, and the Queen or- 
dered sieur de Cigoigne, Governor of Dieppe, to sig- 
nify to the superintendents of the Consistory,*- that 
.she desired what her deceased Lord and husband had 
planned in his lifetime, namely, that the Jesuits 
should go to the countries of new France ; and there- 
fore, if they opposed this voyage, they were opposing 
[134] her purpose and good pleasure. But this was 
a poor spur to action. Our Merchants would not ad- 
vance one step, and for lack of money sieurs Bien- 
court and Robin were obliged to pass under their 
rod ; and for this reason they promised and swore to 
them, that the Jesuits should never enter their ship. 
Under this promise, the Merchants set to work to 
equip it, especially as the Jesuits were no longer un- 
der their eyes, having retired to their College at Eu. 


174 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 3 

leurs yeux, car ils s'eftoyent retirez a leur College 
d'Eu. 

Or madarae la Marquife de Guercheuille ayant ouy 
ce mefpris formel des volont£s de la Royne, comme 
ell'eft d'vn cceur genereux, s'indigna que des petits 
mercadants fuffent efle fi outrecuides; & partant efti- 
ma qu'il les falloit punir iuftement en ce qu'ils ont 
de plus fenfible, c'eft [135] qu'on fe paffafl d'eux. 
Ayant docques fceu, que tout ce que lefdits Marchands 
pourroyet auoir fourni n'euit fceu monter plus haut 
de quatre mille liures, elle ne fe defdaigna point (a 
fin que plufieurs euffent part a. la bonne ceuure) de 
faire vne quefte par tous les plus grands Princes, & 
Seigneurs de la Cour ; moyennant laquelle cefte dicte 
fomme de quatre mille liures fut bien-toft cueillie. 

Or ladidte Dame s'auifa, comm'ell'eft fort pru- 
dente, que cefte-didte fomme en payant les Marchands, 
qui auoyent faidt la carguaifon, & les deboutant de 
toute affociation, pourroit encores faire deux grands 
biens pour la nouuelle France. Le premier que ce 
feroit vn bon fonds pour y perpetuellemet entretenir 
les Iefuites, fans qu'ils fuffent a charge au fieur de 
Potrincourt, ou autre [136] quelconque, ou qu'il fal- 
luft tous les ans retourner pour eux a la quefte. Le 
fecond que par ainfi le profit des pelleteries, & pefche, 
que ce nauirc rapporteroit, ne reuiendroit point en 
France pour fe perdre entre les mains des Marchands, 
ains redonderoit fur Canada, & la veu qu'il demeuroit 
en la poffeffio, & puiffance des fieurs Robin, & Potrin- 
court, & s' employ eroit a l'entretien de Port Royal, & 
des Fran5ois y refidants. A cefte caufe fut conclud, 
que celt argent ayant efle mis, & employe au profit 
de Canada, les Iefuites auroyent part, & affociatio 


1611-16] /HARD'S RELATION, 1616 175 

Now madame la Marquise de Guercheville. having 
heard about this open contempt for the wishes of the 
Queen, as she is a generous-hearted woman, was 
indignant at seeing some insignificant peddlers so 
overbearing: and so she decided justly that they 
ought to be punished in a way that would hurt them 
most; namely, [135] that they should be set aside. 
Now having learned that all the Merchants could have 
furnished, would not amount to more than four thou- 
sand livres, she did not disdain (to the end that many 
might participate in the good work) to ask a contri- 
bution from all the greatest Princes and Grandees of 
the Court; in this way, the sum of four thousand 
livres was soon collected. 

Now this Lady, being very discreet, considered 
that this sum, in paying the Merchants who had fur- 
nished the cargo, and in dismissing them from all as- 
sociation, would also accomplish two great benefits 
for new France. The first was, that this would al- 
ways be a good fund with which to maintain the 
Jesuits there, so that they would not be a burden to 
sieur de Potrincourt, or any [ 1 36] one else, nor would it 
be necessary to repeat every year the taking up of col- 
lections for them. The second was, that by this ar- 
rangement the profit from peltries and fish, which 
this ship would bring back, would not return to 
France to be lost in the hands of the Merchants, but 
would redound to the interests of Canada, and there 
would remain in the possession and power of sieurs 
Robin and Potrincourt, and would be used for the 
maintenance of Port Royal and the French residing 
there. For this reason, it was concluded that this 
money, having been applied and used for the benefit 
of Canada, the Jesuits should participate in the busi- 


176 LES RELATIONS DES JESUIT ES [Vol .. 8 

auec les iieurs Robin, & Biecourt, & partageroyent 
auec eux les emolumets, qui en prouiendroyet ; le 
gouuernement & debite defdidtes marehandifes de- 
meurant riere lefdits Robin, & Biencotirt, ou leurs 
Agents. Voila le contract [137] d'affociatio, duquel 
Ton a tat crie iufques a l'enrouement, fi auec caufe, 
on le peut voir. Dieu face, qu'on ne crie iamais 
contre nous auec plus de raifon. 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6s6 177 


ness with sieurs Robin, and Biencourt, and should 
share with them the profits which would be derived 
therefrom ; the management and sales of said mer- 
chandise to remain with said Robin and Biencourt or 
their Agents. This was the contract [137] of partner- 
ship,*'' over which they have cried until they are 
hoarse, whether or not with reason, may be seen. 
God grant, that they never have greater cause to rail 
at us. 


178 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol. 


CHAPITRE XIV. [i. e.,xiii.) 

IK VOYAGE, & L'ARRIUEE A PORT ROYAL. 

1AMAIS forte maree n'arriua plus a propos a nauire 
affable pour le degager des baffes eaux, & le re- 
mettre en haute mer pour gaigner pais, que l'af- 
fociatio des Iefuites fe rencontra propice au fieur 
Robin, pour auoir comodite de fournir so vaiffeau de 
Canada, & le deliurer des barres, entre lefquelles il 
fe trouuoit arrefte. Car il eftoit fils de famille, & 
partant vous pouuez eftimer qu'il n'auoit pas les 
millions a commadement ; [138] fon pere auffi n'auoit 
que faire d'entendre aux nauigations d'outre-mer, 
ayat tout fraifchement entrepris le grand party du 
fel, qui requiert vn fonds, & vne occupatio fi grande, 
que chacun fcait. Ie dis cecy, parce que le faCtieux 
efcriuain, iugeat mal des benefices de Dieu, impute 
aux Iefuites, que le fieur de Biecourt ne partit pluftoit 
de Dieppe pour la nouuelle France, eftat neatmoins 
le contraire: car a leur occafion Ion trouua de Target 
pour mettre vifte la voile au vent: ce qu'on ne pou- 
uoit faire fans cela. On defmare donques le vingt 
fixieme de Ianuier l'an 161 1, auec d'autat plus de re- 
iouiffance, que les difputes & l'attente auoyent caufe 
d'ennuy. Encores partit-on trop toft, pour arriuer 
fi tard : car on cofuma quatrc moys en la nauigation ; 
& alia on furgir premierement [139] a Campfeau, a 
caufe de quoy on fut contraint puis apres de eoftoyer 
la terre auec furfeance en plufieurs endroits. Celte 


1611-16] WARD'S RELATION, i6i6 179 


CHAPTER XIV. [i. e.,xiii.] 

THE VOYAGE, AND ARRIVAL AT PORT ROYAL. 

NEVER was the coming of the high tide more op- 
portune to a stranded ship to free it from the 
shallow waters, and place it again upon the 
high sea with its prow turned toward home, than was 
the meeting of the Jesuit partners with sieur Robin, 
to arrange for the equipment of his vessel for Canada, 
and to deliver it from the bars among which it was 
entangled. For he was the son of a gentleman 
and you may judge that he did not have millions at 
command; [138] his father also did not want to hear 
about the voyages beyond the sea, having quite re- 
cently undertaken the great salt enterprise, which re- 
quired so great a capital and investment, as every one 
knows. I say this because the factionist writer, mis- 
judging the blessings of God, lays it at the door of the 
Jesuits that sieur de Biencourt did not depart sooner 
from Dieppe to new France; it was, however, just 
the contrary, since it was for their sake that money 
was found to unfurl the sails to the wind, which 
could not have been done without it. So they left 
their moorings the twenty-sixth of January, 161 1, 
with all the more joy since the disputes and delays 
had caused so much vexation. Yet they departed too 
soon for such a late arrival, for four months were 
consumed in the voyage ; and first they went to land 
[1 39] at Campseau, on account of which they were com- 
pelled thereafter to keep near the shore, with stops 


180 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.3 

colie iufques a Port Royal eft d'enuiron fix vingts 
lieiies. 

En noftre route nous eufmes le rencontre du fieur 
Champlain, qui tiroit a Kebec parmy les glaces fur la 
fin du moys d'Auril. Ces glaces eftoyent monftru- 
eufes, car en aucuns endroits la mer en eftoit toute 
couuerte, autant qu'on pouuoit eftendre la veue. Et 
pour paffer a trauers, falloit les rompre auec barres & 
leuiers appofez aux efcobilles, ou bee du nauire; 
elles eftoyent d'eau douce & auoyent efte charriees 
plus de cent lieues auant en haute, & pleine mer par 
la grande riuiere S. Laurens. En aucuns endroits 
apparoiffoyent des hauts, & prodigieux glaeons na- 
geants, & flottans, efleuez de [140] trente & quarante 
braffes, gros, & larges come fi vous ioigniez plufiears 
chafteaux enfemble, & comme vous diries, li l'Eglife 
noftre Dame de Paris auec vne partie de fon Ifle, mai- 
fons, & palais alloit flottant deffus l'eau. Les Hola- 
dois en ont bien veu de plus enormes & prodigieux a. 
Spitbergen, & au deftroit de Vbai'gats, fi ce qu'ils en 
ont publie eft veritable. Nous arriuafmes a port 
Royal le 22. de Iuin de la mefme annee 161 1. le S. 
iour de la Pentecofte. 

Mais auant que mettre pied a terre difons vn mot 
touchant Teftat auquel les Iefuites ont vefcu pendant 
le voyage. Car quoy que ce foyent chofes de peu de 
confequence elles font toutesfois neceflaires pour fer- 
mer la bouche au menfonge. La verite doncques eft, 
Premierement, qu'il n'eurent aucun feruiteur en tout 
ce voyage, [141] find leur propres pieds, & bras: s'il 
falloit lauer leur linge, fi nettoyer leur habits, fi les 
rapiecer, fi pouruoir a aultres neceifit£s ils auoyent 
priuilege de le faire eux mefmes auffi bie que le 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 181 

at several places. Along this coast to Port Royal, it is 
about one hundred and twenty leagues. 

On our way, towards the last of April, we had seen 
sieur Champlain, who was making his way through 
the icebergs to Kebec. These masses of ice were 
enormous, for the sea was in some places covered 
with them as far as the eye could reach. And, to 
cross them, they had to be broken with bars and 
pointed irons inserted in the escobilles or beak of the 
ship; it was fresh-water ice, and had drifted down 
more than a hundred leagues to the deep and open 
sea through the great St. Lawrence river. In some 
places there appeared vast and lofty pieces of floating 
and wavering ice, [140] thirty and forty fathoms out 
of the water, as big and broad as if several castles 
were joined together, or, as you might say, as if the 
Church of notre Dame de Paris, with part of its Is- 
land, houses, and palaces should go floating out upon 
the water. The Hollanders have seen still more 
enormous and wonderful ones at Spitsbergen, and 
in the strait of Ubaigats, 34 if what they have pub- 
lished about them is true. We arrived at port Royal 
the 22nd of June of the same year, 161 1, the Holy 
day of Pentecost. 35 

But before going ashore, let us say a word about 
the way in which the Jesuits lived during the voyage. 
For although these are things of little consequence, 
they are, nevertheless, necessary to close the mouth 
of falsehood. The truth then is this: First, that 
they had no servant during the entire voyage, [141] 
except their own hands and feet : if their linen was 
to be washed, their clothes cleaned and patched, if 
other needs had to be provided for, they had the 
privilege of doing it themselves, as well as the least. 


182 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

moindre. Secondement ils ne fe mefloyent d'aucun 
gouuernement, ny ne faifoyent aucun femblant d'a- 
uoir point de droidt ou puiffance dans le nauire ; le 
fieur de Biencourt faifoit tout, feul maiftre, & abfolu : 
laquelle forme d'humilite ils ont toufiours cotinuee 
defpuis a port Royal. Leurs ordinaires exercices 
eftoyent de chanter le feruice diuin les Dimanches, 
& f eftes, auec vne petite exhortation ou f ermo : tous 
les iours le matin, & foir ils affembloyet toute la 
troupe pour la priere, & le Carefme par l'hexhorta- 
tion, trois fois feulemet la femaine. Leur conuerfa- 
tion eftoit telle, que le capitaine lean d'Aune [142] 
& le pilote Dauid de Bruges, tous deux de la Pre- 
tendue en redirent tefmoignage auec grande approba- 
tion au fieur de Potrincourt, & ont depofe fouuent 
depuis dans Dieppe, & autre part, qu'ils auoyent 
cogneu lors les Iefuites pour tout autres, qu'on ne les 
leur auoit figure auparauant, fcauoir eft pour gens 
honneftes, courtois, & de bonne conuention & con- 
fcience. 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 183 

Secondly, they did not meddle with any one's au- 
thority, or make any pretense of having control or 
rights over the ship : sieur de Biencourt was in every- 
thing, sole and absolute master : and this kind of sub- 
missiveness they always continued afterward at port 
Royal. Their usual exercises were singing divine 
service Sundays and holidays, with a little exhorta- 
tion or sermon: every morning and evening, they 
assembled the whole crew for prayer, and during 
Lent for exhortation, only three times a week. 
Their conversation was such, that captain Jean 
d'Aune [142] and the pilot, David de Bruges, both 
of the Pretended Religion, 31 have often expressed 
their approval of it to sieur de Potrincourt ; and fre- 
quently since then, in Dieppe and other places, have 
affirmed that they then found the Jesuits quite dif- 
ferent from what they had previously been pictured 
to them, namely, honest and courteous men, of good 
conduct and pure consciences. 


184 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 


CHAPITRE XV. [i. e.,xiv.] 
l'estat, auquel estoit le sieur de potrincourt 

LORS DE CEST'ARRIUEE, & SON VOYAGE 
AUX ETECHEMINS. 

LA ioye de l'arriuee fut grade d'vn cofte, & 
d' autre. Grande aux arriuants a caufe de leur 
defir, & de l'ennuy fupporte en vne fi longue 
nauigation: [143] mais bien plus redoublee au fieur 
de Potrincourt, qui auoit efte en de grandes peines, 
& apprehenfions durant tout l'Hyuer. Car ayant eu 
auec foy vingt & trois perfonnes, fans prouifions fuffi- 
f antes pour les nourrir, il auoit efte contraindt d'en 
cogedier aucuns pour s'en aller auec les Sauuages, 
viure auec eux : aux autres le pain auoit manque fix, 
ou fept fepmaines durant, & fans raffiftance des 
mefmes Sauuages, ie ne fcay fi tout ne leur euft mi- 
ferablement failly. Or le fecours, que nous leur 
apportions n'eftoit quafi que, comme Ton dit, vn 
verre d'eau a vn bien altere. Premierement parce 
que nous efiions trente-fix en noftre equipage, lef- 
quels adiouitez a 23. homes, qu'il y auoit, cinquate 
neuf bouches fe retrouuoyent tous les iours a fa table. 
Et Membertou le Sauuage [144] par deflus, auec fa 
fille, & fa fequelle. En apres nous auions demeure 
quatre mois fur mer : & par ainfi nos prouifions 
efloyent fort diminuees, veu mefmement, que noftre 
vaiffeau efloit fort petit, fcauoir eft de cinquante, ou 
foixante tonneaux, & plus prouifionne pour la pefche, 
que pour autre chofe. A ceft'occalion done ce fut a 


1611-16] 


BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 185 


CHAPTER XV. [i. e.,xiv.] 

SIEUR DE POTRINCOURT'S CONDITION AT THE TIME 

OF THEIR ARRIVAL, AND HIS JOURNEY TO 

THE ETECHEMINS. 

OUR arrival caused great joy on both sides — great 
on the part of those arriving, because of their 
longings, and the tediousness of so long a voy- 
age; [143] but more than double was that of sieur de 
Potrincourt,who had been in great distress and appre- 
hension during the entire Winter. For having had 
with him twenty-three people, without sufficient food 
to nourish them, he had been obliged to send some off 
among the Savages, to live with them: the others 
had had no bread for six or seven weeks, and with- 
out the assistance of these same Savages, I do not 
know but that they would all have perished misera- 
bly. Now the succor that we brought them, was 
little else, as the saying is, than a glass of water to 
a very thirsty man. First, because there were 
thirty-six of us in our company, and these, added to 
the 23 men that he had, made fifty-nine mouths 
every day at his table ; and Membertou the Savage 
[144] besides, with his daughter and crew. After 
living four months upon the sea, our provisions were 
very much diminished, especially as our vessel was 
quite small, being only fifty or sixty tons burden, 
and provisioned more for fishing than anything else. 
For this reason, then, it was left to Monsieur de Po- 
trincourt to think how he could promptly send back 


186 


LES RELATIONS DES JE'SUITES [Vol.3 


Monfieur de Potrincourt de penfer pluftoft cornm'il 
renuoyeroit promptement cefte fi grande famille, de 
peur qu'elle ne confumaft tout, que non pas de pro- 
curer la trocque, & la pefche, efquelles neantmoins 
gifoit tout l'efpoir de reffource pour vn fecod voyage. 
Si ne pouuoit-il s'empefcher totalement de trocquer; 
car il falloit faire de 1' argent, & pour payer les gages 
de fes feruiteurs, & pour eftant en France, aller, & 
venir. 

[145] A ces fins doncques il partit dans ce fien na- 
uire, quelque iours apres auec quafi toutes fes gens, 
pour aller en vn port des Etechemins, appelle la 
Pierre Blanche, a 22. lieues de Port Royal droidt a 
rOiieft. II efperoit de trouuer la quelque fecours de 
viures au moyen des nauires Francois qu'il fcauoit y 
trafiquer. Le P. Biard l'y voulut accompagner, a fin 
de recognoiftre le pays, & difpofition des Nationaires, 
ce qui luy fut accorde. lis y trouuerent quatre vaif- 
feaux Francois, vn appartenat au au fieur de Monts, 
vn Rochelois, vn Maloiiin, ou de S. Malo, de du Pont 
Graue, auquel commandoit vn fien parent appelle 
Capitaine la Salle, duquel nous parlerons tatoft; & 
vne barque auffi Maloiiine, il fe faut fouuenir de ces 
quatre vaiffeaux pour bien entendre ce qui fuit. 

[146] Le fieur de Potrincourt appellant vn chacun 
de ces quatre l'vn apres l'autre leur fit recognoiftre 
fon fils pour vice- Admiral : puis leur demanda aide, 
remonftrant les neceffites, aufquelles il auoit efte re- 
duit l'Hyuer paffe\ promettant de les rembourfer en 
France, chacun contribua. Mais Dieu pardoint aux 
Rochelois, car ils tromperent la Gabelle, donnant des 
barils de pain gafte pour du bon. 

Cependant que tout cecy fe traffiquoit, le P. Biard 


1611-16] BIARD' S RELATION, i6i6 187 

such a large family, lest everything should be con- 
sumed, rather than to secure traffic and fish, in 
which, however, lay all hope of resources for a sec- 
ond voyage. But he could not entirely refrain from 
doing some trading ; for he had to make money, both 
to pay the wages of his servants, and for journeys 
here and there when in France. 

[145] For these purposes then, he departed some 
days afterward in his ship, with nearly all his crew, 
to go to one of the Etechemins' ports, called Pierre 
Blanche, 22 leagues from Port Royal, directly to the 
West. He hoped to find there some help in food sup- 
plies from the French ships which he knew were in the 
habit of trading in that place. Father Biard wished to 
accompany him, to study the country and character of 
the Natives, and his wish was granted. They found 
there four French ships, one belonging to sieur de 
Monts, one from La Rochelle, one Maloiiin or St. 
Malo ship, belonging to Pont Grave, commanded by 
a relation of his named Captain la Salle, of whom we 
shall speak by and by, and also a Maloiiine barque ; 
these four vessels must be well remembered, in 
order to understand what follows. 

[146] Sieur de Potrincourt, calling up each one of 
these four vessels in succession, made them recognize 
his son as vice- Admiral : then he asked them for help, 
dwelling upon the dire necessity to which he had 
been reduced during the past Winter, and promising 
to reimburse them in France. Each one contributed. 
But God pardon the Rochelois, for they defrauded 
the Excise, giving spoiled bread for good. 

While this business was going on, Father Biard 
learned that young du Pont was on shore, among 
the Savages ; that the year before he had been made 


188 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.3 


ouyt, que le ieune du Pont eftoit a terre auec les Sau- 
uages, que l'ann6e prochainement paffee il auoit efte 
faidt prifonnier par le fieur de Potrincourt, d'ou 
s'eftant euade fubtilement, il auoit efte contraindt 
courir les bois en grande mifere, & lors mefme il 
n'ofoit aller a fon nauire, de peur qu'il n'y fuft faifi. 
Le P. Biard ouyant tous ces accidents, [147] fupplia 
le fieur de Potrincourt d'auoir efgard aux grands me- 
rites du fieur du Pont le pere, & aux belles efperances 
qu'il y auoit du fils ; adiouftant que vrayement 
c'eftoit bien eftre malheureux, fi les Francois cou- 
rants au bout du monde pour conuertir les Sauuages, 
y venoyent perdre leurs propres concitoyens. Le 
fieur de Potrincourt fe flechift a ces remonftrances, 
& permit audit P. Biard d'aller chercher le ieune 
homme auec promefle, que s'il pouuoit l'induire a 
venir librement, pour faire la reuerence audit fieur 
de Potrincourt, aucun mal ne luy feroit faidt, & tout 
le pafie feroit mis fous les pieds, & enfeuely. Le 
Pere y alia, & fut heureux en so effort, car il amena 
ledit du Pont au fieur de Potrincourt, & paix, & re- 
conciliation faidte, on tira le canon. Du Pont [148] 
en adtion de graces, & pour 1' edification des Francois, 
& des Sauuages voulut fe confeffer le iour fuiuant, 
& faire fes Pafques, car il ne les auoit point faidtes 
de ceft'annee la. Auffi les fit-il auec fort bon ex- 
emple de tous, au bord de la mer, ou fe chantoit le 
feruice. Ses deuotions acheuees il fupplia le fieur 
de Potrincourt de permettre que le P. Biard vinft 
difner a fon nauire, ce qui luy fut accorde. Mais le 
pauure inuitat ne fcauoit pas quelle defferte l'atte- 
doit. Car ie ne fcay coment fon nauire luy fut faifi, 
& emmene. Lequel pour le faire court, luy fut ren- 


1611-16] BIARD' S RELATION, i6i6 189 

a prisoner by sieur de Potrincourt, and, having made 
his escape from him, he had been forced to roam the 
woods in great distress, and even then did not dare 
go to his ship, lest he should be caught. Father 
Biard, hearing all these things, [147] begged sieur 
de Potrincourt to have some consideration for the 
great merits of sieur du Pont, the father, and to 
think of the high hopes he had entertained for his 
son : adding that it would indeed be a great misfor- 
tune, if the French, in running to the ends of the 
earth to convert the Savages, should happen to lose 
their own citizens there. Sieur de Potrincourt 
yielded to his remonstrances, and permitted Father 
Biard to go in search of this young man, with the 
promise that, if he could induce him to come freely 
and acknowledge the authority of the said sieur de 
Potrincourt, no harm would be done to him, and all 
the past would be put under foot and buried. The 
Father departed, and was successful in his efforts, 
for he brought du Pont to sieur de Potrincourt, and 
after peace and reconciliation were effected, they 
fired off the cannon. Du Pont, [148] as an act of 
thanksgiving, and for the edification of the French and 
Savages, wished to confess on the following day, and 
to receive his Easter Sacrament, for he had not done 
so that year. Accordingly, he performed these du- 
ties, to the great edification of all, on the shore of 
the sea, where the service was sung. His devotions 
finished, he begged sieur de Potrincourt to allow 
Father Biard to come and dine with him upon his 
ship, and his request was granted. But the poor 
host did not know what dessert was awaiting him, 
for somehow his ship had been seized and taken 
away; and, to make the story short, it was given 


190 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

du a la follicitation inftante dudit P. Biard, qui en 
auoit le cceur tout tranfi. En quoy le fieur de Po- 
trincourt fe moftra fort equitable. Et voulut obliger 
ledit Pere, qui luy en fcaura gre a iamais. 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 191 

back to him at the earnest solicitation of Father Bi- 
ard, whose heart was very heavy over this mishap. 
At this time sieur de Potrincourt showed how very 
just he was, by trying to oblige the said Father, who 
will always be grateful to him for it. 


192 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 


[149] CHAPITRE XVI. [i.e., xv.] 

LE RETOUR DU SIEUR DE POTRINCOURT EN FRANCE, 

& LA DIFFICULTE D'APPRENDRE LA LANGUE 

DES SAUUAGES. 

NOVS auons explique cy deuant la neceffite, la- 
quelle preffoit le fieur de Potrincourt de ren- 
uoyer toft fes ges en Frace. Or ie voulut les 
reconduire luy mefme en perfonne, a fin de pins effi- 
cacement donner ordre a tontes chofes, & principale- 
ment a vn prochain rauitaillement : car fans iceluy 
ceux, qu'il delaiffoit a Port Royal, eftoyent fans 
moyen de paffer l'Hyuer, en manifefte danger d'eftre 
trouffes par la famine. Pour cefte caufe done il par- 
tit enuiron la my-Inillet de la mefme annee 161 1. & 
arriua en France fnr la fin du mois d'Auoft prochain 
[150] fuiuat: il laiffa fon fils en fa place, le fieur de 
Biencourt auec vingt & deux perfonnes, en contant 
les deux Iefuites, lefquels voyants que pour la con- 
uerfion de Payens la langue du pais leur eftoit totale- 
ment neceffaire, fe refolurent d'y vaquer en toute 
diligence. Mais on ne fcauroit croire les grandes 
difficules, qu'ils y rencontrerent : parce principale- 
ment, qu'ils n'auoyent aucuns interpretes, ni maif- 
tres. Le fieur de Biecourt, & quelques autres y 
fcauoyet bien quelque peu, & aflez pour la trocque, & 
affaires communes; mais quand il eftoit queftio de 
parler de Dieu, & des affaires de religion ; Ik eftoit le 
faut, la le cap-no. Partant ils eftoyent contraints 
d'apprendre le lagage d'eux mefmes, s'enqueftats 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 193 


[149] CHAPTER XVI. [i.e., xv.] 

SIEUR DE POTRINCOURT'S RETURN TO FRANCE, AND 
THE DIFFICULTY OF LEARNING THE LAN- 
GUAGE OF THE SAVAGES. 

WE have heretofore explained the necessity 
which was urging sieur de Potrincourt to 
send his people back to France without delay. 
Now he wished to take them there himself, to more 
efficiently arrange all the affairs and especially to pro- 
cure an immediate supply of provisions : for unless he 
did this, those whom he was leaving at Port Royal 
would be without means of passing the Winter, in evi- 
dent danger of being carried off by famine. For this 
reason then, he departed about the middle of July of 
the same year, 161 1, and arrived in France at the end 
of the following month of [150] August; he left his 
son, sieur de Biencourt, in his place, with twenty-two 
persons, counting the two Jesuits, who, seeing that 
for the conversion of the Pagans the language of the 
country was absolutely necessary, resolved to apply 
themselves to it with all diligence. But it would be 
hard to understand the great difficulties which they 
here encountered : the principal one being, that they 
had neither interpreter nor teacher. To be sure sieur 
de Biencourt, and some of the others, knew a little of 
it very well, enough for trade and ordinary affairs ; but 
when there was a question of speaking about God and 
religious matters, there was the difficulty, there, the 
"not understand." Therefore, they were obliged to 


194 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

des fauuages comme il appelloyet chafque chofe. Et 
la befongne n'e eftoit point fort penible, tandis [151] 
que ce qu'on demandoit fe pouuoit toucher ou mon- 
ftrer a l'oeil; vne pierre, vne riuiere, vne maifon; 
frapper, fauter, rire, s'affeoir. Mais aux actions inte- 
rieures, & fpirituelles, qui ne peuuent fe demonftrer 
aux fens, & aux mots, qu'on appelle ab (tracts, & vni- 
uerfels; comme croire, douter, efperer, difcourir, 
apprehender, vn animal, vn corps, vne fubftance, vn 
efprit, vertu, vice, peche, raifon, iuftice, &c. En 
cela il falloit ahanner, & fuer, la eftoyent les tran- 
chees de leur enfantemet. lis ne fgauoyent par quel 
endroit le prendre, & fi en tentoyent plus de cent ; il 
n'y auoit gefte, qui exprimaft fumfamment leur con- 
ception, & fi ils en employoyent dix mille. Cepen- 
dant nos meffers de Sauuages a fin de fe donner du 
paffetemps, fe mocquoyent liberalement d'eux; touf- 
iours quelque [152] fornette. Et a fin que la mocque- 
rie fuft encores profitable, fi vous auies voftre papier, 
& plume pour efcrire, il falloit qu'ils eufient deuant 
eux le plat remply, & la feruiette deffous. Car a tel 
trepier fe rendent les bons oracles: hors de la, & 
Apollon & Mercure leur defaillent: encores fe faf- 
choyent-ils, & s'en alloyent quad on les vouloit rete- 
nir vn peu long temps. Qu'euffiez vous faidt la 
deffus? Car de vray ce trauail ne peut eftre appre- 
hende, que par ceux, qui l'experimentent. En apres 
comme ces Sauuages n'ont ny Religion formee, ny 
police, ny villes, ny artifices, les mots auffi, & les 
paroles propres a tout cela leur manquent; Saindt, 
Bien-heureux, Ange, Grace, Myftere, Sacrement, 
Tentation, Foy, Loy, Prudence, Subiedtion, Gouuer- 
nement, &c. D'ou recouureres [153] vous tout cela 


1611-16] WARD'S RELATION, i6m6 195 

learn the language by themselves, inquiring of the 
savages how they called each thing. And the task 
was not so very wearisome as long [151] as what was 
asked about could be touched or seen: a stone, a 
river, a house; to strike, to jump, to laugh, to sit 
down. But when it came to internal and spiritual 
acts, which cannot be demonstrated to the senses, 
and in regard to words which are called abstract and 
universal, such as, to believe, to doubt, to hope, to 
discourse, to apprehend, an animal, a body, a sub- 
stance, a spirit, virtue, vice, sin, reason, justice, 
etc., — for these things they had to labor and sweat; 
in these were the pains of travail. They did not 
know by what route to reach them, although they 
tried more than a hundred ; there were no gestures 
which would sufficiently express their ideas, not if 
they would use ten thousand of them. Meanwhile 
our gentlemen Savages, to pass away the time, made 
abundant sport of their pupils, always telling them 
a lot of [152] nonsense. And yet if you wanted to 
take advantage of this fun, if you had your paper and 
pencil ready to write, you had to set before them a 
full plate with a napkin underneath. For to such 
tripods do good oracles yield; without this incentive, 
both Apollo and Mercury would fail them ; as it was, 
they even became angry and went away, if we wished 
to detain them a little. What would you have done 
under the circumstances? For in truth, this work 
cannot be understood except by those who have tried 
it. Besides, as these Savages have no formulated 
Religion, government, towns, nor trades, so the 
words and proper phrases for all those things are 
lacking ; Holy, Blessed, Angel, Grace, Mystery, Sacra- 
ment, Temptation, Faith, Law, Prudence, Subjection, 


196 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.3 

qui leur manque? Ou come vous en pafferez vous? 
O Dieu que nous deuifons bien a noftr'aife en 
France. Et le beau eftoit, qu'apres qu'on s'eftoit 
rompu le cerueau a force de demandes, & recherches, 
comme Ion fe penfoit en fin d'auoir bien rencotre la 
pierre philof ophale ; on trouuoit neantmoins puis 
apres, que Ion auoit pris le phantofme pour le corps, 
& 1' ombre pour le folide: & que tout ce precieux 
Elixir s'en alloit en fumee. Souuent on s'eftoit 
mocque de nous au lieu de nous enfeigner, & aucunes- 
fois on nous auoit fuppofe des paroles des-honneftes, 
que nous allions innocemment prefchotat pour belles 
fentences de l'Euangile. Dieu fcait, qui eftoyent les 
fuggefteurs de tels facrileges. 

Vn expedient fe prefenta aux Iefuites pour fe de- 
peftrer heureufement [154] de ces embrouillements, 
& entraues. C'eftoit d'aller trouuer le ieune du Pont 
duquel on apportoit nouuelle, qu'il s'eftoit refolu 
d'hyuerner a la riuiere S. lea, a quelques dix-huidt, 
ou vingt lieues de Port Royal. Car d'autat que ledit 
du Pont auoit ja long temps vefcu au pays, & mefmes 
a la Syluatique parmy les Originaires, on difoit de 
luy, qu'il entendoit fort bie la lague. Et ne f alloit 
point douter, qu'au moins il fcauroit propremet expli- 
quer les demandes pour tirer des fauuages la refponf e 
a propos: ce qui eftoit neceffaire pour coucher par 
efcrit vn petit Catechifme, & inftrudtion Chreftienne. 
Le P. Biard done fe refolut d'aller chercher ledit du 
Pont, fe determinant de pluftoft paffer la Baye Fran- 
coife dans vn cauot, deuant que de ne fe feruir de 
cefte occafion de bien faire. [155] Mais le fieur de 
Biencourt s'oppofa fort a. cefte deliberation, entrant 
a cefte occafion en de grads ombrages, aufquels il 
fallut ceder, pour auoir paix. 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 197 

Authority, etc. Where will [153] you get all these 
things that they lack ? Or, how will you do without 
them? O God, with what ease we make our plans 
in France ! And the beauty of it is, that, after hav- 
ing racked our brains by dint of questions and re- 
searches, and after thinking that we have at last 
found the philosopher's stone, we find only that a 
ghost has been taken for a body, a shadow for a sub- 
stance, and that all this precious Elixir has gone up 
in smoke ! They often ridiculed, instead of teaching 
us, and sometimes palmed off on us indecent words, 
which we went about innocently preaching for beau- 
tiful sentences from the Gospels. God knows who 
were the instigators of such sacrileges. 

An expedient presented itself to the Jesuits, by 
which they could extricate themselves happily [154] 
from these perplexities and obstacles. It was to go 
and find young du Pont, who, we had heard, had 
made up his mind to pass the winter on the St. 
John river, some eighteen or twenty leagues from 
Port Royal. For since this du Pont had already lived 
a long time in the country, even leading the life of 
a Sylvan among the Natives, it was said of him that 
he understood the language very well, and there was 
no doubt that he could at least properly explain the 
questions so as to get from the savages suitable an- 
swers ; these were necessary in order to write down 
a little Catechism, and some Christian instruction. 
Father Biard then decided to go and look for du 
Pont, deciding to cross French Bay in a canoe, rather 
than not to avail himself of this opportunity of doing 
good. [155] But sieur de Biencourt was very much 
opposed to this decision, taking great offense at it; 
and we had to yield to him, to have peace. 


198 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 


CHAPITRE XVII. [i. e.,xvi.] 

VN VOYAGE FAICT A LA RIUIERE DE S. CROIX, & LA 
MORT DU SAGAMO MEMBERTOU. 

SVR la fin du moys d'Aouft de la mefme ann6e 
1611. le fieur de Biencourt ayant eu nouuelles, 
que le nauire du Capitaine Plaftrier de la ville 
de Honneur faifoit pefcherie au Port aux Coquilles, 
a vingt vne lieue de Port Royal vers l'Oueft: il fe 
delibera de Taller trouuer, a celle fin de luy recom- 
mander vn de fes gens, qu'il renuoyoit en France 
auec lettres, [156] pour preffer le fecours attendu, & 
repref enter l'eftat pitoyable auquel on eftoit. Le P. 
Biard l'accompagna; & ils rencontrerent ce nauire 
tant a propos, que s'ils euffent tarde d'vn demy quart 
d'heure, la commodite en eftoit perdue: car ja il fai- 
foit voyle pour reuenir en France. Eftans dedans, 
nous apprinfmes que le Capitaine Platrier s' eftoit re- 
folu de paffer l'Hyuer en l'lfle faindte Croix, & qu'il 
y eftoit refte luy cinquiefme. Cefte nouuelle fit 
prendre refolution au fieur de Biencourt d'aller a 
Saindte Croix de cefte mefme tirade, auant que le 
Capitaine Platrier euft moye de fe fortifier: car il 
vouloit tirer de luy le Quint de toutes fes marchan- 
difes, & traidte, parce qu'il hyuernoit fur le pays. 
L'lfle Sain<5te Croix eft a fix lieiies du Port aux Co- 
quilles, au milieu d'vne riuiere. 

[157] Doncques le fieur de Biencourt y vint, accom- 
pagne" de huidt perfonnes, & y entra en armes, ayant 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 199 


CHAPTER XVII. [i.e.,xvi.] 

A VOYAGE MADE TO THE STE. CROIX RIVER, AND THE 
DEATH OF THE SAGAMORE, MEMBERTOU. 

TOWARD the end of the month of August of the 
same year, 1 6 1 1 , sieur de Biencourt having heard 
that the ship of Captain Plastrier, from the town 
of Honfleur, was engaged in fishing at the Port aux 
Coquilles, 36 twenty-one leagues Westward from Port 
Royal, decided to go and find him, to recommend to 
him one of his men, whom he wished to send back 
to France with letters, [156] to urge the expected 
help, and to represent their pitiable condition. Fa- 
ther Biard accompanied him, and they encountered 
this ship so opportunely, that if they had been eight 
minutes later, their chance would have been lost; 
for already it was unfurling its sails to return to 
France. When we had boarded it, we learned that 
Captain Platrier had decided to pass the Winter on 
the Island of sainte Croix, and that he [Sieur de 
Biencourt] would get his fifth therefrom. This news 
made sieur de Biencourt resolve to go to Sainte 
Croix at once, before Captain Platrier had means of 
fortifying himself : for he wished to collect from him 
the Fifth of all his merchandise and trade, for winter- 
ing in the country. The Island of Sainte Croix is 
six leagues from Port aux Coquilles, in the middle of 
a river. 

[157] Accordingly sieur de Biencourt went to this 
place, accompanied by eight people, and, well-armed, 


200 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

laille le P. Biard en vn bout de l'lfle, fur des roches 
attendant l'euenement, parce que ledidt Pere auoit 
conuenu auec ledidt fieur, qu'en cas d'aucune inua- 
fion, ou adtes de guerre, ou force contre les Francois, 
il feroit delaifle en quelque lieu a l'efcart, en telle 
facon, qu'vn chacun peuft fcauoir, qu'il eftoit amy de 
tous les deux party s, & qu'il s'entremettroit fort vo- 
lontiers pour accorder les differents, mais nullement 
pour eftre partialifte. 

Dieu mercy, tout paffa heureufement : Platrier 
nous traidta le mieux qu'il peut: Et a fon ayde le 
fieur de Biencourt recouura vne barque, laquelle 
eftoit au Port aux Coquilles, auec laquelle il s'en re- 
tourna a Port Royal, oil [158] on trouua nouuelle be- 
fongne: car Henry Membertou, le Sagamo de Sau- 
uages, qui premier d'iceux auoit receule S. Baptefme, 
eftoit venu de la Baye faindte Marie, pour fe faire 
penfer d'vne maladie, qui l'auoit furprins. Le pere 
Enemond Maffe l'auoit loge dans fa petite Cabane, au 
lidt mefme du P. Biard, & la le feruoit comme vn fien 
pere & domeftique. Le P. Biard trouuant ce malade 
dans fon lidt, fut bien ayfe de l'occafion de charite, 
que Dieu luy enuoyoit: Et tous deux fe mirent a le 
feruit de iour, & de nuidt, fans qu' autre quelconque 
les y foulageaft, hors l'Apoticaire Hebert, qui appor- 
toit des medecines, & viandes qu'il luy falloit doner. 
Vne de leurs plus grandes peines eftoit de tat couper 
& aporter de bois qu'il en falloit pour le iour, & la 
nuidt : Car la nuidt commencoit a eftre [159] bien 
frilleufe, & toufiours il falloit bon feu, a caufe de la 
mauuaife fenteur, d'autant que c' eftoit la dyfenterie. 
Au bout de cinq, ou fix iours de tel feruice, la femme, 
& la fille dudidt Membertou vindrent a luy, a caufe 


1611-16] BIARD' S RELATION, ibi6 201 

marched into the place, having left Father Biard in 
one end of the Island upon the rocks, awaiting the 
outcome ; because the Father had arranged with the 
sieur, that in case of any invasion, or warlike act or 
force against the French, he should be left in some 
place apart, so that every one might know that he was 
a friend of both parties, and that he would very will- 
ingly interpose to make peace between those at vari- 
ance, but under no circumstances would he take sides 
with either. 

Thank God, all passed off happily : Platrier treated 
us as well as he could: and with his aid, sieur de 
Biencourt recovered a barque, which was at Port aux 
Coquilles, with which he returned to Port Royal, 
where [158] a new duty awaited them: for Henry 
Membertou, the Sagamore of the Savages who was the 
first to receive Holy Baptism, had come from the Baye 
sainte Marie to have himself treated for a disease 
which had overtaken him. Father Enemond Masse 
had put him in his little Cabin, even in Father Biard 's 
bed, and was there taking care of him like a father 
and servant. Father Biard, finding the patient in 
his bed, was very glad of this opportunity for chari- 
ty, which God had sent him ; and both set to work to 
attend him day and night, without any one else to 
relieve them in the work, except the Apothecary He- 
bert, 37 who brought medicines and food which were 
to be given him. One of their greatest hardships 
was to cut and carry all the wood that was needed 
day and night : for the nights began to be [159] quite 
chilly, and there always had to be a good fire on ac- 
count of the bad odor, for the disease was dysentery. 
At the end of five or six days of such service, the wife 
and daughter of Membertou came to stay with him, 


202 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 


dequoy le P. Biard pria le fieur de Biencourt de faire 
changer le malade en quelque autre des cabanes de 
l'habitation, puis qu'il y en auoit deux ou trois 
vuides; parce qu'il n'eftoit ny beau, ny bien feant 
que des f emmes fuffent iour, & nuidt en leur cabane : 
& moins encores qu'elles n'y fuffent, eftans la 
femme, & la fille du malade. D'autre part, la ca- 
bane eftoit fi petite, que quand on y effort quatre 
afiemblez, Ion ne s'y pouuoit tourner. 

Ces raifons eftoient par trop euidentes, mais ledidt 
fieur ne fut pas d'aduis, qu'on remuaft le malade en 
aucune des cabanes de [160] l'habitation, ains luy en 
fit dreffer vne au dehors, ou le malade fut tranfporte. 
Ce changement ne luy profita point : car il deteriora 
deflors manifeftement, & mourut quatre ou cinq iours 
apres. Ce neantmoins les Iefuites ne maqueret ia- 
mais de 1' aider, & affifter, luy fourniffants toutes 
chofes a leur poffible: & le feruants iufques a fa 
mort. Ce bon Sauuage s'eftant confeffe, & receu 
l'extreme-ondtion dit au fieur de Biencourt, qu'il 
vouloit eftre enterre auec fes peres & progeniteurs. 
Le P. Biard refifta fort a cefte propofition, l'admo- 
neftant ne luy eftre loifible eftant Chreftien de vou- 
loir eftre enterre" auec des Payes damnes ; veu mefmes 
qu'en cela il bailleroit vn grand fcandale, d'autant 
que les Sauuages oyants, & voyants qu'il n'auroit 
voulu eftre enterre auecques nous; facilemet [161] 
entreroyent en foupgon qu'il n'auroit efte Chreltien, 
que par apparence. En tout cas, que tout cela fem- 
bleroit toufiours vn mefpris de la fepulture Chref- 
tienne, &c. Le fieur de Biencourt repliqua pour 
Membertou qu'on feroit benir le lieu, & qu'on l'auoit 
ainfi promis audit Membertou. Le P. Biard refpon- 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, ibib 203 

and so Father Biard begged sieur de Biencourt to 
have the invalid moved to some of the other cabins 
of the settlement, since there were two or three of 
them empty ; for it was neither good nor quite seem- 
ly that there should be women in their cabin day and 
night ; and still less that they should not be there, be- 
ing the wife and daughter of the sick man. On the 
other hand, the cabin was so small, that when four 
persons were in it, they could not turn around. 

These considerations were only too evident, but 
the sieur was not inclined to have the patient re- 
moved to any of the cabins of [160] the settlement; 
but he had one put up outside, where the invalid 
was taken. This change did not do him any good, 
for he became evidently worse from that time on, 
and died four or five days later. Nevertheless, the 
Jesuits never failed to aid and attend him, furnish- 
ing everything they could, and waiting on him up to 
the time of his death. This good Savage, having 
confessed and received extreme unction, told sieur 
de Biencourt that he wished to be buried with his 
fathers and ancestors. Father Biard was very much 
opposed to this proposition, admonishing him that it 
was not lawful for him, a Christian, to wish to be 
buried with Heathen whose souls were to be lost ; es- 
pecially as in doing so he would cause great scandal, 
inasmuch as, when the Savages heard and saw that 
he had not wanted to be buried with us, they would 
readily [161] entertain the suspicion that he had 
been a Christian only in appearance. In any case, 
that all this would always seem like contempt for 
Christian burial, etc. Sieur de Biencourt replied for 
Membertou that they would have the burial place 
blessed, and that such a promise had been made to 


204 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

dit, que cela ne fe pouuoit faire: d'autant que pour 
benir ledit lieu il faudroit deterrer les Payens y en- 
feuelis, ce qui feroit pour fe faire abominer de tous 
les Sauuages, & fentiroit par trop fon impiete\ Les 
raifons ne feruoyent de rien, parce que le malade 
eftimant que le fieur de Biencourt fuft de fon cofte, 
perfiftoit en fa deliberation. Le P. Biard pour leur 
donner a entendre que ceft affaire eftoit plus impor- 
tant, qu'ils ne penfoyent, leur denonca, que ceft en- 
terrement fe feroit [162] fans luy, & qu'il le leur 
donnoit a entendre des lors, proteftant qu'il renon- 
coit a tous tels confeils, & refolutions, & fur ce s'en 
alia. Toutesfois, a ce que le malade ne penfaft, que 
ce qu'eftoit deuoir & charite ne fuft cholere; il re- 
uint en moins d'vn' heure apres, & retourna feruir le 
malade comm' au parauant. Dieu fauorifa fon bon 
deffein, car le matin fuiuant le Sauuage de foy mefme 
changea d'aduis, & dit vouloir eftre enterre au com- 
mun cemetiere des Chreftiens, a fin de tefmoigner a 
tous fa foy, & pouuoir eftre participat des prieres, 
qu'il y auoit veu faire. II mourut en fort bo Chref- 
tien, & fon deces contrifta fort les Iefuites, car ils 
l'aimoyent, & eftoyent aimes de luy reciproquement. 
Souuent il leur dif oit : Apprenes toft noftre langage : 
car quand vous l'aures apprins vous [163] m'enfei- 
gnerez, & moy enfeigne deuiendray prefcheur come 
vous autres, nous conuertirons tout le pays. Les 
Sauuages n'ont pas memoire d'auoir eu iamais vn 
plus grand Sagamo ny plus autorife. II eftoit barbu 
comm'vn Francois. Et pleuft a Dieu, que tous les 
Fracois fuffent autat auifes & difcrets comm'il eftoit. 
Tel eft le recit veritable de la maladie, & mort de 
Membertou. Sur lequel ie ne m'amuferay pas plus 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, ibib 205 

Membertou. Father Biard answered that that would 
not do; for, in order to bless the said place, they 
would have to disinter the Pagans who were buried 
there, which would cause them to be abominated by 
all the Savages, and would savor too much of impiety. 
These reasons did not avail, because the sick man, 
believing that sieur de Biencourt was on his side, 
persisted in his determination. In order to make 
them understand that this affair was of greater im- 
portance than they thought, Father Biard informed 
them that the interment would take place [162] with- 
out him, and he wanted them to understand it from 
that time on, protesting that he would have nothing 
to do with any such counsels and decisions, and 
thereupon he departed. However, so the sick man 
would not think that what was mere duty and charity 
was anger, he returned less than an hour afterwards, 
and began again to wait upon him as before. God 
looked kindly upon his good intention, for the next 
morning the Savage, of his own free will, changed 
his mind, and said that he wanted to be buried in the 
common burying ground of the Christians, to prove 
his faith to all, and to be able to participate in the 
prayers which he had there seen offered. He died a 
very good Christian, and his death greatly saddened 
the Jesuits, for they loved him, and were loved by 
him in return. He often said to them; "Learn our 
language quickly, for when you have learned it, you 
[163] will teach me; and when I am taught I will 
become a preacher like you, and we will convert the 
whole country. ' ' The Savages have no recollection 
of ever having had a greater or more powerful Saga- 
more. He was bearded like a Frenchman ; and 
would to God that all the French were as circum- 


206 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

long temps a refuter les calomnies du fadtieux ; eitant 
aflez & icy, & par tout conuaincu. Parquoy ie ra- 
conte la verite du faidt fans perdre le temps a com- 
battre les larues. 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 207 

spect and prudent as he was. Such is the true story 
of the sickness and death of Membertou. With it I 
shall no longer waste time in refuting the calumnies 
of the factionist, he being sufficiently convicted both 
here and elsewhere. Therefore I tell the truth of the 
thing, without losing time in fighting larvae. 38 


LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 


CHAPITRE XVIII. [i.e.,xvii.] 

[164] LE VOYAGE A LA RIUIERE S. IEAN : & LA QUE- 
RELLE QUI Y SURUINT. 

1} AY didt cy deuant que le fieur de Biencourt auoit 
amene" vne barque du Port aux Coquilles, a fin 
qu'auec icelle il peuft faire vn voyage iufques 
aux Armouchiquois. Ainfi Ion appelle les peuples, 
qui font des le quarentetroifiefme degre" en bas vers 
le Sur-oiieft. Leur commencemet eft des Chouacoet, 
& a ce qu'on dit, ils font en grand nombre. La di- 
f ette prefToit le fieur de Biencourt a ce voyage ; parce 
que ces peuples labourats, & faifants prouifion de 
grains, il efperoit par le moyen de la trocque, ou au- 
trement tirer d'eux quelque fecours pour fe munir 
contre la famine [165] qui nous attendoit au pas de 
l'Hiuer. Sa barque fut trop tard equipped pour vne 
fi longue traidte: car nous ne fufmes prefts qu'au 
troifiefme d'Odtobre; & encores vouluft-il aller a la 
riuiere Sainc5t lean auant que de predre cefte route. 
La riuiere de faindt lean eft au Noroiieft de Port 
Royal, y ayant entre-deux la Baye Francoife, large 
de 14. lieues. L' entree de cefte riuiere eft fort 
eftroidte, & tres-dangereufe : car il faut paffer au mi- 
lieu de deux roches, defquelles l'vne iette fur l'autre 
le courant de la mar6e, eftat entre deux auffi vifte 
qu'vn traidt. Apres les roches fuit vn affreux, & 
horrible precipice, lequel fi vous ne paffez a propos, 
& quand il eft comble doucemet, de cent mille barques 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 209 


CHAPTER XVIII. [i.e., xvii.] 

[164] THE VOYAGE TO THE ST. JOHN RIVER: AND THE 
QUARREL WHICH OCCURRED THERE. 

IS AID above that sieur de Biencourt took a barque 
away from Port aux Coquilles, that he might 
make a journey therewith to the Armouchiquois. 39 
This is the name of the people who live below the 
forty-third parallel, toward the Southwest. They be- 
gin at Chouacoet, and are said to be very numerous. 
Lack of provisions urged sieur de Biencourt to make 
this voyage, because, as these people till the soil and 
put away stores of grain, he hoped, by means of trade 
or in some other way, to get help from them to pro- 
vide against the famine [165] which awaited us in the 
course of the Winter. His barque was equipped too 
late for such a long journey, for we were not ready 
until the third of October, and he still wanted to go to 
the Saint John river before making this voyage. 

The river saint John is to the Northwest of Port 
Royal, the intermediate space being occupied by 
French Bay, 14 leagues wide. The entrance to this 
river is very narrow and very dangerous : for the ship 
has to pass between two rocks where the current of 
the tide is tossed from one to the other, flashing be- 
tween them as swift as an arrow. Beyond these rocks 
lies a frightful and horrible precipice, and if you 
do not pass over it at the proper moment, and when 
the water is smoothly heaped up, of a hundred thou- 
sand barques not an atom would escape, but men and 
goods would all perish. 


210 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 


vn poil n'efchapperoit pas, que corps & biens tout 
ne perift. 

Le ieune du Pont & le Capitaine [166] Merueille 
s'eftoyent alle loger a quelques fix lieues auant dedans 
cefte riuiere S. lean, n'eftants en tout que fept ou 
huidt, tous Maloiiins. Le fieur de Biencourt vouloit 
exiger d'eux le Quint de toutes leurs marchandifes, 
pource qu'ils refidoyent dans le pays, come il a efte 
didt, a cefte caufe il auoit entreprins ce voyage. 
Nous eftions en tout feize Francois & deux Sauuages, 
qui nous conduifoyent. 

Or comme nous nauigions cotremont, eftants ja 
prefque a vne lieue & demy de 1' habitation des Ma- 
loiiins fur le commencement de la nuidt ; vn fignacle 
nous apparut, qui nous efpouuanta. Car le ciel rou- 
gift extraordinairement a cofte de 1' habitation defdits 
Maloiiins, & puis la rougeur fe decoupant en longs 
fufeaux, & lances s'en alia fondre droit deffus cefte 
[167] maifon. Cela fe fit par deux fois. Nos Sau- 
uages voyants ce prodige crieret en leur langage. 
Gar a gar a : Maredo. Nous aurons guerre, il y aura 
du fang. Les Fragois faifoyet auffi. des Almanachs 
la deffus chacun felon fon fens. Nous arriuafmes au 
deuant de leur habitation ja la nuidt toute clofe, & ny 
euft autre chofe pour lors, finon que nous les falu- 
ames d'vn coup de fauconneau, & ils nous refpon- 
dirent d'vn coup de pierrier. 

Le matin venu, & les prieres accouftumees faidtes, 
deux Maloiiins fe prefenterent a la riue, & nous figni- 
fierent, qu'on pouuoit aborder pacifiquement ; ce 
qu'on fit. On fceut d'eux que leurs Capitaines n'y 
eftoyent point, ains s'en eftoyent allez bien haut 
contre la riuiere, defpuis trois iours, & qu'on ne fga- 


1611-16] WARD'S RELATION, 1616 211 


Young du Pont and Captain [166] Merveille had 
gone to stay some six leagues up this river St. John, 
with a company of not more than seven or eight, all 
Maloiiins. Sieur de Biencourt wished to exact from 
them the Fifth of all their merchandise, because they 
were residents of the country, as has been said; it 
was for this purpose he undertook this voyage. We 
were in all sixteen Frenchmen, and two Savages, who 
conducted us. 

Now as we were sailing up the river, being already 
about a league and a half from the Maloiiin settlement, 
towards nightfall a phenomenon appeared to us, 
which filled us with terror. For the heavens became 
wonderfully red over the Maloiiin habitation, and 
then the glow, separating into long rays and flashes 
of light, moved on and melted away over this [167] 
settlement. This appeared twice. Our Savages, when 
they saw this wonder, cried out in their language : 
Gar a gar a : Marcdo. "We shall have war, there will 
be blood." The French also made some Prophecies 
thereupon, each according to his own idea. We ar- 
rived opposite their settlement when the night had 
already closed in, and there was nothing we could 
do then, except to fire a salute from the falconet, 
which they answered with one from the swivel gun. 

When morning came, and the usual prayers were 
said, two Maloiiins presented themselves upon the 
bank, and signified to us that we could disembark 
without being molested, which we did. It was 
learned from them that their Captains were not there, 
but had gone away up the river three days before, 
and no one knew when they would return. Mean- 
while Father Biard [168] went away to prepare his 
Altar, and celebrated holy Mass. 


212 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

uoit quand ils reuiendroyent. Cependant le P. Biard 
[168] s'en alia preparer fon Autel, & celebra la faindte 
MeiTe. 

Apres la Meffe le fieur de Biecourt pofa vn corps 
de garde a la porte de 1' habitation, & des fentinelles 
tout a l'entour. Les Maloiiins furent bien eftonnes 
de eefte facon de faire. Les plus timides s'eftimoyent 
eftre perdus, les plus courageux en efcumoyent & 
defpitoyent. 

La nuidt venue, & ja clofe, le Capitaine Merueille 
s'en reuint a fon logis, ne fcachant rien de fes hoftes. 
La fentinelle l'oyant approcher cria fon qui voila ? 
Le Malouin, qui pefoit que ce fuft quelqu'vn des fiens, 
refpondit fe mocquant, mais qui voila timefme? Et 
toufiours pourfuiuoit auancant. La fentinelle tout de 
bon luy delafcha fon moufquet contre. Et bien mer- 
ueille fut que Merueille ne fut ny tue ny bleffe. 
Mais il fut [169] bien eftonne, & plus encores voyant 
auffi toft des genfd'armes fur foy l'efpee nue, qui le 
faifirent & emmeneret dans la maifon, comme vous 
pouuez penfer en tel accident, que font gens de 
pouldre & de corde; leurs crys, leurs menaces, & 
leurs faicts. Le pauure homme ne fe trouuoit point 
bien de fa perfonne ja des plufieurs iours, & lors il 
eftoit tout haraff6 du chemin. Plufieurs inconuenies 
de perte, & de maladie luy eftoiet arriuez cefte ann£e 
la, comme pour l'accabler; Partant fe voyant ainfi 
tombe comme dans vn abyfme fubitement, il ne f£a- 
uoit ou il eftoit. II fe coucha aupres du feu tout de 
fon long, fe lamentat: les gardes eftoient tout a l'en- 
tour de luy. Le P. Biard voyant la confufion en 
laquelle eftoit toute la maifon, & n'y pouuant donner 
ordre fe mit a prier Dieu au pied [170] d'vn banc, qui 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 213 

After Mass sieur de Biencourt placed a bodyguard 
at the door of the habitation, and sentinels all around 
it. The Maloiiins were very much astonished at this 
-way of doing things. The more timid considered 
themselves lost, the more courageous stormed, and 
fumed, and defied them. 

When night came on and it was already quite dark, 
Captain Merveille returned to his lodgings, knowing 
nothing of his guests. The sentinel, hearing him 
approach, uttered his, "Who goes there t " The Ma- 
loiiin, thinking this was one of his own people, an- 
swered mockingly, "But who goes there thyself?" 
and continued upon his way. The sentinel fired off 
his musket at him in earnest, and it was a great won- 
der [Fr. merveille\ that Merveille was not killed or 
wounded. But he was [169] very much astonished, 
and still more so when he saw some soldiers upon 
him with naked swords, who seized him and took him 
into the house ; you may imagine how men of powder 
and of rope act at such times, with their cries, their 
threats, and their gesticulations. The poor man had 
not been well for several days, and just then was very 
much wearied from his journey. He had had several 
discouraging losses and sicknesses that year, enough 
to break him down. So, seeing himself thus, as it 
were, suddenly fallen into an abyss, he knew not 
where he was. He lay down at full length before 
the fire, and began to lament: the guards were all 
around him. Father Biard, seeing the confusion of 
the whole house, and not being able to restore order, 
began to pray to God, kneeling at the foot [170] of a 
bench which was against one of the beds, some dis- 
tance from the fire. Merveille, having had some 
chance to realize his unfortunate condition and to 


214 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

eftoit contre vn des lidts affez loin du feu. Merueille, 
ayant eu quelque refpit pour fentir fes miferes, & fe 
recognoiftre, & ayant apperceu le P. Biard qui prioit, 
fe leuant fubitement en furfaut, tout trouble, & a 
coup s'alla ietter a genoux aupres dudit Pere, a qui 
neantmoins il n'auoit iamais parle auparauant, & luy 
dit: Mon Pere, ie vous prie confeffez-moy, ie fuis 
mort. Le P. Biard fe leua pour le confoler, s'apper- 
ceuant bien, qu'il eftoit trouble; Tout le corps-de- 
garde tourna les yeux de mefme fur eux, & chacun 
aduifoit autour de foy s'il y auoit rien a craindre. 
De fortune, ou a deflein, comme que ce foit, ie n'en 
fcay rien, vn certain eceruele va trouuer a deux bons 
pas de Merueille vn poidtrinal tout charge, amorce, 
le chien abatu, & s'efcria: O le traiftre! il auoit en- 
uie [171] de fe faifir de ce poytrinal, & faire quelque 
coup. Le Malouin refpondit, que cela ne pouuoit 
eftre, parce que des fa venue il auoit toufiours efte en 
leurs mains; & partant il eftoit impoffible, qu'il euit 
prepare, ny mefmes veu ce poytrinal, & que quand 
mefmes il l'euft veu, qu'il en eftoit trop loin pour s'en 
faifir fans eftre preuenu. Mais nonobftant tout fon 
dire, il fut garrotte, luy, & trois de fes gens, qui fem- 
bloyent eftre les plus mauuais. 

Merueille eftoit garrotte les mains derriere le dos, 
& fi eftroidtement que ne pouuant prendre aucun 
repos, il fe lamentoit fort pitoyablement. Le P. 
Biard en ayant companion pria le fieur de Biencourt 
de faire deflier ceft afflige, lequel il plegeoit corps 
pour corps, alleguant que fi on fe craignoit dudit 
Merueille, qu'on l'enferraft [172] dans vn des lidts 
faidts a la Chartreufe, & qu'il fe tiendroit a la porte, 
a fin de luy empef cher la f ortie : Que fi on entendoit 


1611-16] WARD'S RELATION, i6i6 215 


collect himself, and, having perceived Father Biard 
praying, started up in great agitation, and ran, and 
threw himself on his knees before the said Father ; 
and, although he had never before spoken to him, 
said: "My Father, I pray you to confess me, I am a 
dead man." Father Biard got up to console him, 
seeing clearly that he was troubled ; the whole body- 
guard likewise turned their eyes upon them, and each 
one looked about him to see if there was anything to 
fear. By chance or design, whichever it was, I know 
not, a certain madcap stepped forward and picked up, 
at two good paces from Merveille, a carbine, all loaded 
and primed, with the trigger down, and cried: " Oh, 
the traitor ! He wanted [i 7 1] to get hold of this carbine 
and have a few shots from it." The Maloui'n an- 
swered that that could not be, because since his ar- 
rival he had always been in their hands; and so it 
was impossible for him to have prepared or even 
seen this carbine; and, if he had seen it, he was too 
far away to get hold of it without being prevented. 
But in spite of all he said, he, and three others of his 
men, who seemed to be the worst, were bound. 

Merveille had his hands bound behind his back so 
tightly, that he could not rest, and he began to com- 
plain very pitifully. Father Biard taking pity on 
him, begged sieur de Biencourt to have the sufferer 
untied, whom he pledged man for man, alleging 
that, if they had any fears about the said Merveille, 
they might enclose him [172] in one of the Carthusian 
beds, 40 and that he would stay at the door to prevent 
his going out: that if any noise were heard the 
punishment therefor should fall upon him as well as 
upon the other. Sieur de Biencourt granted Father 
Biard's request, and Merveille was untied and con- 


216 LES RELATIONS DES JESUIT IS [Vol.3 


du remuemet, qu'on frappafl fur luy auffi toft que 
fur l'autre. Le fieur de Biencourt accorda au P. 
Biard fa demande, & Merueille fut deflie & confine 
dans vn des lidts, le P. Biard eftant a la porte. 

Or quelle fut cefte nuidt, ie ne vous le fcaurois ex- 
pliquer : car elle paffa toute en alarmes, en efcopete- 
rie & impetuofitez de quelques vns, telles, qu'a bon 
droidt pouuoit-on craindre que les prognoftiques veus 
au ciel la nuidt precedente n'euffent lors leurs effedts 
fanguinaires en terre. Le P. Biard fit promeffe de 
ramenteuoir ce benefice toute fa vie, s'il plaifoit a 
Dieu de brider ces efprits mutins, & meurtriers, qui 
fembloiet d'eftre eftaches & voler par [173] deffus la 
maifon attendans leur curee. Dieu par fa bonte l'ex- 
auca, & les feruentes prieres du Capitaine Merueille, 
car certes il moftra vn cceur vrayement Chreftie dds 
qu'il fut a part deflie, ne ceffant quafi toute la nuidt 
de louer, & benir fon Createur, nonobftant toutes les 
algarades, qui luy furet faidtes. Et le matin venu il 
fe confeffa, & fit fon bon-jour luy & trois de fes gents 
auec vne grande tranquillite d'efprit. De vray c'eft 
vn exemple bien rare, & bien excellet a qui fcait 
eflimer la vertu. 

L'apres-difnee le P. Biard demanda conge d'aller 
trouuer du Pont, fous promeffe du fieur de Biencourt, 
que tout bon traidtement luy feroit faidt. Mais comme 
ledit Pere fut a vn quart de lieiie ; de f oy-mefme ledit 
du Pont arriua, & toutes efmotions furent accoifees. 
Le fieur de Biencourt emprunta [174J la barque de 
Merueille, & l'emmena auec foy, & vn des Maloiiins, 
qui defpuis mourut de maladie a Port Royal. 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 217 

fined in one of these beds, Father Biard being at the 
door. 

Now I could not describe to you what a night this 
was : for it passed in continual alarms, gunshots and 
rash acts on the part of some of the men ; so that it 
was feared with good reason that the prognostications 
seen in the heavens the night before would have 
their bloody fulfillment upon earth. Father Biard 
promised to keep this favor in mind as long as he 
lived, if it pleased God to restrain these mutinous and 
murderous spirits which seemed to be in ecstasy and 
to fly [173] over the house waiting for their prey. 
God in his goodness hearkened to him, and to the 
sincere prayers of Captain Merveille, for he certainly 
showed a truly Christian spirit, as soon as he was 
partially released, never ceasing, nearly all night, to 
praise and bless his Creator, notwithstanding all the 
insults that had been heaped upon him. And when 
morning came he confessed, and, together with three 
of his men, received the sacrament, in great tran- 
quillity of mind. In truth it was a very rare and very 
excellent example to those who know how to esteem 
virtue. 

In the afternoon Father Biard asked leave to go 
and find du Pont, with sieur de Biencourt's promise 
that he would receive nothing but good treatment. 
But when the said Father had gone a quarter of a 
league, the said du Pont came up of his own accord, 
and all disturbances were quieted. Sieur de Bien- 
court borrowed [174] Merveille's barque, and took it 
away with him, together with one of the Maloiiins, 
who afterwards died at Port Royal. 


21 X LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol. 3 


CHAPITRE XXI. [i.e., xviii.] 

LE VOYAGE DE QUINIBEQUI, & LE RETOUR A PORT 

ROYAL. 

NOVS auons remarque peu au parauant, que ce 
voyage a la riuiere S. lean, n'eftoit qu'vn def- 
tour du plus grand entreprins aux Armouchi- 
quois pour auoir du bled. Comme done nous eufiions 
ainfi tranfige auec les Maloiiins, nous mifmes la voile 
au vent, prenants la route des Armouchiquois. Auant 
que partir, le fieur du Pont & Merueille prierent le 
P. Biard de vouloir demeurer auec eux ; mais il leur 
refpondit, [175] que pour lors il ne le pouuoit faire, 
d'autant que ce ne luy feroit point beau de quitter le 
fieur de Biencourt en vn voyage tant perilleux : Et 
qu'il importoit a fa charge de recognoiftre les gens, 
& difpofition des lieux ; & peu a peu domeftiquer le 
fens des Sauuages a la veue, vs, & facon du Chriftia- 
nifme, les vifitant, & leur en donnant quelq; gouft 
de piete\ bien que ce ne fuft qu'en pafTant. Mais 
qu'il efperoit auec la benediction de Dieu, le voyage 
accomply de venir paff er 1 ' Hyuer auec eux : & auec 
leur ayde compofer fon Catechifme. A quoy il pria 
le fieur du Pont de fe preparer, s'enquerant des Sau- 
uages de la propriete des mots, qui peuuent corref- 
podre a ceux de noftre langue, & Religion. Et a fin 
qu'il le peuft faire commodement, il luy laiffa vne 
explication bien ample des [176] principaux articles 
de noftre faindte Foy. 


1611-16] /WARD'S RELATION, i6i6 219 


CHAPTER XXI. [i.e., xviii.] 

THE VOYAGE TO QUINIBEQUI, AND THE RETURN TO 
PORT ROYAL. 

WE remarked a little while ago that this visit to 
St. John river was only a diversion from 
the greater expedition to the Armouchiquois 
to get some corn. Now when we had thus come to 
terms with the Malouins, we unfurled our sails to 
the wind and turned towards the land of the Armou- 
chiquois. Before departing, sieur du Pont and Mer- 
veille begged Father Biard to consent to remain with 
them; but he answered [175] that for the present he 
could not do it, as it would not be right to leave 
sieur de Biencourt in such a dangerous voyage ; and 
that it was important to him in his mission to study 
the people and location of the places, and, little by 
little, to familiarize the minds of the Savages with the 
sight, uses, and ways of Christianity, visiting them 
and giving them some taste of piety, although it 
might be only in passing by. But that he hoped, 
with God's blessing, when this journey was over, to 
come and pass the Winter with them, and with their 
aid to compose his Catechism. For this he begged 
sieur du Pont to prepare himself, questioning the 
Savages about the fitness of words which might 
correspond to those of our language and Religion. 
And in order that he might be able to do it properly, 
he left him quite an ample explanation of the [176] 
principal articles of our holy Faith. 


220 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 3 


Nous arriuafmes a Kinibequi fur la fin d'Octobre. 
Kinibequi eft vne riuiere proche des Armouchiquoys 
a quarante trois degrez, & deux tiers d'eleuation, & 
au Suroiieft de Port Royal, a foixante dix lieues, ou 
enuiron. Elle a deux emboucheures bien grandes, 
diftantes l'vne de l'autre au moins deux lieues, elle a 
auffi pluiieurs bras, & Ifles, qui la decoupent. Au 
refte, belle & grande riuiere, mais nous n'y vifmes 
point de bonnes terres, non plus qu'a la riuiere S. 
lean. On dit toutesfois qu'en haut, loin de la mer, 
elles y font fort belles, & le fejour aggreable, & que 
les peuples y labourent. Nous ne montafmes pas 
plus auant de trois lieues, nous tournoyames par tant 
de vireuoltes, & fautames tant de precipices, [177] 
que grand miracle de Dieu fut que ne perifmes plu- 
fieurs fois. Aucuns de nos gens s'efcrierent par deux 
diuerfes fois, que nous eftions perdus ; mais ils cri- 
erent auant le temps; Noftre Seigneur en foit beny. 
Les Sauuages nous emmielloyent de l'efperance d'a- 
uoir du bled ; puis ils changerent la promeJTe du bled 
en trocque de caftors. 

Or pendant qu'on faifoit cefte trocque, le P. Biard 
s'en eftoit alle en vne Ifle proche, auec vn garco pour 
celebrer la faindte MefTe. Les Sauuages a l'occafion 
de la traidte qui fe deuoit faire, fe ietterent fort auide- 
ment, & a la foule dans noftre barque; de curiofite 
(comme i'eftime) pource qu'ils ne voyent pas fouuet 
tels fpedtacles. Nos gens auoient peur, que ce ne 
fuft malice, & que foubs couleur de trocque, ils ne fe 
vouluiTent [178] faifir de la barque: auffi s'eftoyent 
ils armez, & barricadez, a fin de n'eltre furprins voy- 
ant done, que nonobftant leurs menaces, & crieries, 
ils ne ceffoyent d'entrer a la file, & que ja ils eftoyent 


nil 1-16] BIARD'S RELATION, ibi6 221 


We arrived at Kinibequi 41 towards the end of Octo- 
ber. Kinibequi is a river near the Armouchiquois, 
in latitude forty-three and two-thirds degrees, and 
Southwest of Port Royal about seventy leagues or 
thereabouts. It has two quite large mouths, one dis- 
tant from the other at least two leagues ; it is also 
cut up by numerous arms and branches. Besides, 
it is a great and beautiful river; but we did not 
see good soil there any more than at the St. John 
river. They say, however, that farther up, away 
from the sea, the country is very fine and life there 
agreeable, and that the people till the soil. We did 
not go farther up than three leagues; we whirled 
about through so many eddies, and shot over so many 
precipices, [177] that several times it was a great 
miracle of God that we did not perish. Some of our 
crew cried out at two different times that we were 
lost: but they cried too soon, blessed be Our Lord. 
The Savages cajoled us with the hope of getting 
corn; then they changed their promise of corn to 
that of trade in beaver skins. 

Now, while this trading was going on, Father Biard 
had gone, with a boy to an Island near hy, to cele- 
brate holy Mass. The Savages, on account of the 
trading to take place, crowded very eagerly into our 
barque; from curiosity (I think) because they did 
not often see such sights. Our people were afraid 
that this was only a trick, and that under the pre- 
tense of trading they wanted [178] to get posses- 
sion of the barque ; therefore they armed and barri- 
caded themselves not to be taken unawares. See- 
ing then that, notwithstanding their threats and cries, 
they continued to file in, and there were already 
about thirty of them upon the deck, they decided 


222 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol. 3 

bien trente fur le tillac, ils cuiderent que tout a faidt 
c'efloit a bon jeu, qu'on les vouloit furprendre: & ja 
couchoiet en ioue pour tirer. Mofieur de Biencourt a 
fouuent dit, & fouuent repete defpuis, qu'il eut plu- 
fieurs fois fur la langue de crier, tue', tue: Mais que 
cefte confideration le retint, que le Pere Biard eftoit 
a terre, qui ne falliroit d'eflre maffacre fi Ion meffai- 
foit a aucun Sauuage. Cefte confideration obligea le 
P. Biard, & nous fauua treftous: car fi Ion euft com- 
niece la charge, il n'eft pas croyable, qu'on eult 
iamais peu ef chapper la chaude chole & furieufe pour- 
fuite des Sauuages dedas vne [179] riuiere, qui a tant 
de tours, & retours, & fouuent bien ellroicts, & peril- 
leux: outre que de cent ans apres cefte cofte n'euft 
peu eftre reconciliable, ny hofpitaliere aux Francois, 
tant les Sauuages eufset eu cefte offenfe deffus le 
coeur. Dieu doncques nous fauua par cefte confide- 
ration. Et de la tous Capitaines retiendront de 
n' eftre point trop fubits aux executions de perilleufe 
fuite. Or les Sagamos s'apperceuans d'eux mefmes 
de la iufte apprehenfion, ou leurs gens pouffoient 
nos Francois, fe prindrent a les retirer haftiuement, 
& mirent ordre a la confufion. 

Ce peuple ne monftre point d'eftre mefchant, quoy 
qu'il aye deffaidt les Anglois, qui vouloient habiter 
parmy eux Tan 1608. & 1609. ils s'excufoient a nous 
de ce faidt, & nous racontoient les outrages, [180] 
qu'ils auoyent receu defdidts Anglois, & nous flat- 
toient; difans qu'ils nous aymoient bien, parce qu'ils 
fcauoient, que nous ne fermions point nos portes aux 
Sauuages comme les Anglois, & que nous ne les 
chaffions pas de noftre table a coups de bafton, ny ne 
les faifions point mordre a nos chiens. t Ils ne font 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 223 


that it was all in good earnest and that they were 
trying to take them by surprise, so they had al- 
ready taken aim to shoot. Monsieur de Biencourt 
has often said, and often repeated since then, that 
several times he had at his tongue's end the 
words, "Kill, kill." But that he was restrained by 
the consideration that Father Biard was on shore, and 
that he would not escape being massacred if harm 
were done to any of the Savages. This consideration 
was a blessing to Father Biard, and saved us all: for 
if the attack had been begun it is not to be supposed 
that they could ever have escaped the passionate wrath 
and furious pursuit of the Savages, in a [179] river 
which has so many turns and windings, and which 
is often very narrow and dangerous; besides, this 
coast could not have become hospitable or reconciled 
towards the French for a hundred years afterwards, 
so much would the Savages have taken the offense to 
heart. So on this account God saved us; hence, all 
Captains should restrain themselves from rash and 
perilous conduct. Now the Sagamores, themselves 
perceiving to what a state of just apprehension their 
people had driven the French, began to draw them 
off hastily and to bring order out of the confusion. 

These people do not seem to be bad, although they 
drove away the English who wished to settle among 
them in 1608 and 1609. 41 They made excuses to us 
for this act, and recounted the outrages [180] that 
they had experienced from these English ; and they 
nattered us, saying that they loved us very much, be- 
cause they knew we would not close our doors to the 
Savages as the English did, and that we would not 
drive them from our table with blows from a club, 
nor set our dogs upon them. They are not thieves 


224 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

point larrons comme les Armouchiquoys, & font les 
plus grands harangueurs du monde. lis ne font rien 
fans cela. Le P. Biard les alia voir par deux fois: 
& (ce qu'il faifoit par tout) pria Dieu en leur pre- 
fence, & leur moftra des images, & marques de noftre 
creance, lefquelles ils baifoient volontiers, faifants 
faire le figne de la faindte Croix a leurs enfans, qu'ils 
luy onroyent, a fin qu'il les benift: & oyoient auec 
attention grande, & refpedt ce qu'on leur annoncoit. 
Le mal [181] eftoit, qu'ils ont vne langue toute di- 
uerfe, & falloit qu'vn Sauuage feruift de truchemant, 
lequel fgachant bien peu de la Religion Chreftiene, fe 
bailloit neantmoins du credit enuers les autres Sati- 
uages: & a voir fa contenance, & ouyr fon long par- 
ler, il faifoit gradement du Dodteur: fi bien ou mal, 
ie m'en rapporte. 

Nous fufmes a Kinibequi iufques au quatre, ou cin- 
quiefme de Nouembre, faifon ja trop auancee pour 
paffer outre felon noftre premier deffein: c'eft pour- 
quoy le fieur de Biencourt fe mit au retour d'autant 
qu'il penfoit eftre moindre mal de fouffrir l'Hyuer, & 
la difette a Port Royal, y eftans bien log6s, & chauf- 
fes, & attendats la mifericorde de Dieu ; que non pas 
de rifquer fur mer en vn temps de tempeftes, parmy 
des Barbares & ennemis, ayants [182] encores de plus 
la faim a craindre ; car nos prouifions commencoyet 
fort a faillir : ainfi done nous adreff af mes a Petegoet 
pour nous en retourner a Port Royal. 

A Pentegoet nous trouuafmes vn'afTemblee de 
quatre vingts cauots Sauuages, & vne chaloupe. 
C eftoit en tout enuiron trois cents ames. De la 
nous repaffafmes a l'Ifle S. Croix, ou Platrier nous 
donna deux barils de pois, ou de febues: l'vn & 
l'autre nous fut vn bien grand prefent. 


1611-16] BIARD' S RELATION, 1616 


like the Armouchiquoys, and are the greatest speech- 
makers on earth. Nothing is done without speeches. 
Father Biard went to see them twice, and (as he did 
everywhere) prayed God in their presence, and 
showed them some pictures and tokens of our faith, 
which they willingly kissed, having their children 
make the sign of the holy Cross, and presenting them 
to him for his blessing : they listened with great at- 
tention and respect to what was told them. The 
trouble [181] was, that they have an altogether differ- 
ent language, and a Savage had to serve as inter- 
preter, who, knowing very little of the Christian Re- 
ligion, nevertheless acquitted himself with credit in 
the eyes of the other Savages; and to look at his face 
and hear his talk, he played the Doctor very grandly; 
whether successfully or not, I cannot tell. 

We were at Kinibequi until the fourth or fifth of 
November, a season already too advanced to go on 
any farther, according to our first intention; hence 
sieur de Biencourt set out upon his return, thinking 
it the lesser evil to endure Winter and want at Port 
Royal, comfortably lodged and warm, awaiting God's 
mercy, than to risk passage upon the sea in this 
stormy season, being now among Barbarians and 
enemies, with [182] famine to fear besides; for our 
provisions began to be very scarce: therefore we 
turned towards Pentegoet, on our way back to Port 
Royal. 

At Pentegoet we found an assemblage of eighty 
canoes of Savages, and a boat, in all about three hun- 
dred souls. Thence we passed on to the Island of 
Ste. Croix, where Platrier gave us two barrels of peas 
or beans ; they both proved a very great boon to us. 

Here Father Biard begged sieur de Biencour to let 


226 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

Icy le P. Biard fupplia le fieur de Biencour de le 
faire pailer a la riuiere S. lea a ce qu'il peuft aller 
trouuer du Pont & trauailler au Catechifme, ainfi 
qu'ils auoyent conuenu au depart. Mais ledit fieur 
ne luy vouluft point accorder fa requefte, fmon aux 
conditions, qu'il entretinft & nourrift auec foy les 
matelots, qui le conduiroyent [183] iufques au Prin- 
temps fuiuant ; Condition totalement impouTble. Ainfi 
falluft qu'il laiffaft fon Catechifme, & s'en reuinft 
auec les autres a Port Royal a fon grand regret. 

Tandis que nous eftions en voyage aucun n'eftoit 
refte das l'habitation de Port Royal, fmon le P. Ene- 
mond Mafle, & vn ieune Parifien, appelle Valentin 
Pageau. Ledit Pere viuoit en Hermite bien auitere, 
ne voyant aucun, fmon quel que fois deux, ou trois 
Francois qui labouroyent a deux lieues de la: & fi 
par fortune, quelque Sauuage paffoit. Le P. Biard 
tomba peu apres fon retour en vne legere maladie, 
mais lente, & chronique, qui donna fubiedt de charite 
audit Pere Enemond. 

On leur auoit affigne vn garcon pour les aider en 
leurs neceffites; [184] & ils l'auoyent accommode 
bien honneftement : mais il les quitta au gros des 
neges, & au cceur de l'Hyuer. 

Les neges commencerent le 26. de Nouembre, & 
auec elles (ce qui fafchoit le plus) le retranchement 
des viures. On ne donnoit a chaque perfonne pour 
toute la fepmaine, qu'enuiron dix onces de pain, de- 
my liure de lard, trois efcuel^es de pois, ou de febues, 
& vne de pruneaux. Les Iefuites n'en eurent iamais 
plus, ny autrement qu'vn chacun de la troupe. Et 
eft menfonge tres-impudente ce que le Fadtieux al- 
legue du contraire. 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 227 

him go on to the river St. John so that he could find 
du Pont and go to work on the Catechism, as they 
had agreed at his departure. But the said sieur was 
not willing to grant his request, unless on the condi- 
tion that he would feed and keep with him, [183] un- 
til the following Spring, the sailors who would take 
him there; a Condition totally impossible. There- 
fore he had to give up his Catechism, and return 
with the others to Port Royal, much to his regret. 

While we were away, no one had remained at the 
settlement of Port Royal except Father Enemond 
Masse and a young Parisian, called Valentin Pageau. 
The Father lived very austerely, in the manner of 
a Hermit, seeing no one, except occasionally two 
or three Frenchmen who were cultivating the land 
two leagues away, and perchance some Savage who 
was passing by. Shortly after his return, Father 
Biard fell ill of a light but slow and chronic malady, 
which gave to Father Enemond an occasion for 
charity. 

They had been given a boy to help them in their 
needs, [184] whom they had treated very kindly; but 
he left them in the depths of the snow and in the 
heart of Winter. 

The snow began on the 26th of November, and 
with it (what grieved them the most) the cutting down 
of their rations. There was given to each individual 
for the entire week only about ten ounces of bread, 
half a pound of lard, three bowls of peas or beans, 
and one of prunes. The Jesuits never had more nor 
different things than the other members of the com- 
pany, and it is a very impudent lie which the Fac- 
tionist alleges to the contrary. 

During all this time the Savages did not come to 


228 


LES RELA TIONS DES JESUJTES [Vol. 3 


Pendant tout ce temps les Sauuages ne nous ve- 
noyet point voir, fmon rarement quelques vns de la 
maifon de Membertou, pour nous apporter quelque 
prefent de leur chaffe. C'eftoit lors bonne [185] 
fefte, & jouine: nos gens en reprenoient vn peu de 
courage. Ce qui fafchoit le plus, eftoit l'apprehenfion 
du temps, quand on confideroit l'eftendue logue des 
mauuais moys, qu'on auoit a paffer. 

Les Iefuites tafchoient, & en priue, & en public de 
confoler tous, & vn chacun parmy cefte mifere. Et 
aduint, que le troifiefme Dimeche apres Noel, auquel 
on lit l'Euangile Vinum non habent : Le P. Biard ex- 
horta la Compagnie a bien efperer, & prendre la glo- 
rieufe vierge Marie pour aduocare enuers fon mife- 
ricordieux Fils, en toutes neceffitez, & fpirituelles, & 
corporelles, eftant ainfl, que par fon interceffion ia- 
mais le vin de confolation ne manque a ceux qui l'ont 
pour hofteiTe & pour mere. Le feruice finy, le P. 
Biard s'addreffant au fieur de Biecourt, & luy mon- 
ftrant les compagnos, [186] luy dit en riant: Vinum 
non habent. Le priant de leur en donner de ce peu 
qui reftoit, adiouftant, que le coeur luy difoit qu'on 
auroit bien toft fecours, & au plus long, dans le moys 
qui couroit, feauoir eft, dans Ianuier: & que peut 
eftre verroit-on, qu'il deuineroit fans y penfer. Les 
Compagnons furent bien-aifes, & fe gaudiffants apres 
auoir beu, difoyent: Or bien, nous voy-cy de bon 
courage, pour attendre fi le Pere fera point Prophete. 
Et certes il le fut de bonne aduenture : car vn nauire 
nous arriua iuftement huidt iours apres, lequel il 
nous fallut aller querir alfez loin. 


1611-16] BIARD' S RELATION, i6i6 229 

see us, except rarely some of Membertou's family, 
to bring us some offering from the chase. Then there 
was great [185] feasting and hilarity, and our people 
would begin to feel a little encouraged. The most 
grievous thing was their dread of the season, when 
they considered the long duration of disagreeable 
months to be endured. 

The Jesuits tried, both privately and in public, to 
comfort all and every one during this season of mis- 
ery. And it happened that on the third Sunday 
after Christmas, when the Gospel Vinum non habent 
is read, Father Biard exhorted the Company to be of 
good cheer, and to take the glorious virgin Mary for 
an advocate with her compassionate Son in every 
need, spiritual and corporal, as through her interces- 
sion the wine of consolation would never be wanting 
to those who have her as a guest and a mother. The 
service ended, Father Biard addressed himself to 
sieur de Biencourt, and, pointing to his companions, 
[186J said laughingly, Vinum non habent: begging 
him to give them the little that remained, adding that 
his heart told him they would soon have succor, — at 
the farthest, during the present month, namely, in 
January ; and perhaps it would be seen that he had 
unwittingly prophesied. His Companions were de- 
lighted, and, in their joy after drinking, said, "Now, 
truly, we have the courage to wait and see if the 
Father is a Prophet." And certainly he made a 
lucky hit, for a ship reached us just one week after- 
ward, which we had to go a long way out to seek. 


230 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 


CHAPITRE XX. [i.e., xix.] 

COMME MADAME LA MARQUISE DE GUERCHEUILLE 

OBTINT DU ROY LES TERRES DE LA [187] 

NOUUELLE FRANCE, & LE SECOURS 

QU'ELLE Y MOYENNA. 

LE fieur du Potrincourt eftat reuenu en France au 
mois d'Aouft de l'an 161 1. ainfi qu'a efle dit cy 
deuant, efuentoit de tous coftes la trace, & le 
moyen de pouuoir fecourir fes gets, lef quels il fcauoit 
ne pouuoir long temps durer fans renfort, & rauitail- 
lement nouueau. La peine eftoit de trouuer quel- 
que bon iEole, Roy des Autans Burfms, qui les vou- 
luft donner, non comme ils le furent a Vlyffes, lies 
dans le cuir pour ne fouffler pas, ains deli6s, & de 
bon cours pour bouffer dans les voiles, car fans cela 
point de nauire ne fcauroit auancer. Or confiderant 
que Madame la Marquife de Guercheuille affedtion- 
noit extremement la conuerfion des Sauuages ; qu'ell' 
auoit [188] ja procure des aumofnes aux Iefuites, a 
laquelle ils faifoit fort bo accueil, & voyat que plu- 
fieurs rares vertus brilloyent en elle, il cuida qu'elle 
pourroit bien encliner a cefte bonn'oeuure. II luy 
en parla, & ladidte Dame refpondit, que volontiers 
ell'entreroit en l'affociation que le fieur Robin, & 
les Iefuites auoyent auecques luy pour le fecours de 
Canada, moyennant que ce fuft de la bonne volonte" 
des aflocies, & qu'elle les aideroit treftous de bonn'af- 
fedtio. Vous pouuez eftimer fi les Iefuites deuoyent 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 231 


CHAPTER XX. [i.e., xix.] 

HOW MADAME LA MARQUISE DE GUERCHEVILLE OB- 
TAINED FROM THE KING THE LANDS OF [187] 
NEW FRANCE, AND THE HELP WHICH 
SHE SENT THERE. 

SI EUR du Potrincourt having returned to France 
in the month of August of the year 161 1, 
as has been said above, searched on all sides 
for ways and means of being able to help his peo- 
ple, who he knew could not continue long without 
reinforcements and fresh food. The trouble was to 
find some good ^olus, King of the South and North 
winds, who would be willing to give them, not as 
they were given to Ulysses, bound up in a leather 
bag so as not to blow, but free and propitious to 
swell the sails, for without this no ship could ad- 
vance. Now considering that Madame la Marquise 
de Guercheville had the conversion of the Savages 
very much at heart; that she had [188] already pro- 
cured some donations for the Jesuits, which they re- 
ceived very gratefully; and seeing that many rare 
virtues shone in her character, he thought that she 
might readily favor this good work. He spoke to her 
about it, and the Lady responded that she would 
willingly enter into the partnership which sieur Robin 
and the Jesuits had formed with him for assisting 
Canada, provided that this was the wish of the part- 
ners, and that she would aid them all with affection- 
ate interest. You may judge whether the Jesuits 


232 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

refifter a cefte propofition, ou fi le fieur Robin en 
eftoit malcontent, a qui ja Canada ne pefoit que 
trop. Ainfi done contradt fut pafle d'afTociation. 
Ladidte Dame eflant a ce autorifee par le fieur de 
Liencourt premier Efcuyer de fa Majefte, & Gouuer- 
neur de Paris fon honnor6, [189] & digne mary. Par 
ce contradt eftoit arrefte qu'icelle Dame doneroit pre- 
fentement mille efcus pour la cargaifon d'vn nauire, 
& moyennant ce ell'entreroit en part, & des profits 
que ledit nauire rapporteroit du pays, & des terres 
que fa Majefte - auoit donne audit fieur de Potrincourt, 
ainfi qu'il eft amplement porte dans la minute. En 
ce contradt, le fieur de Potrincourt fe referue Port 
Royal & fes terres, & dit n'entendre point, qu'il 
entre en diuifion, ny communication des autres Sei- 
gneuries, Caps, Haures, & Prouinces, qu'il donne a 
entendre d'auoir audit pays, outre Port Royal. Or 
Madame la Marquife fomma ledit fieur de Potrin- 
court de produire les papiers & inftruments, par lef- 
quels il conftaft de ces fiennes appartenances & do- 
maine fi grand; il s'excufa, difant, [190] qu'il les 
auoit laiffe* en la nouuelle France. Cefte refponfe 
fit foupconer ladidte Dame & comme, ell 'eft pru- 
dente, engin ne luy manqua pas pour fe garder 
d'eftre furprife: car elle fit auec le fieur Pierre du 
Gua, dit de Monts, qu'il luy retrocedaft tous les 
droidts, adtios, & pretentions qu'il auoit, & auoit 
oncques eu, en la nouuelle France a caufe de la dona- 
tion a luy faidte par feu Henry le Grand. Item 
d'autre part, elle impetra lettres de fa Majefte a pre- 
fent regnant, par lefquelles donation luy eft faidte de 
nouueau de toutes les terres, portes & haures de la 
nouuelle France des la grande riuiere, iufques a la Flo- 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 233 

ought to have refused this proposition, or whether 
sieur Robin, upon whom Canada already weighed 
rather heavily, was dissatisfied with it. Thus then 
the contract of association 33 was entered into, the 
Lady being authorized to do this by sieur de Lien- 
court, chief Equerry of his Majesty, and Governor of 
Paris, her honored [189] and worthy husband. 42 By 
this contract it was arranged that the Lady should 
give at once a thousand ecus for the lading of a ship, 
and in consideration of this she would have a share 
both in the profits which said ship would bring back 
from the country, and in the lands which his Majesty 
had given to sieur de Potrincourt, as is amply set 
forth in the minutes. In this contract, sieur de Po- 
trincourt reserves for himself Port Royal and its 
lands, and says that it is not to be understood that 
he enters into partition or transference of other Sei- 
gneuries, Capes, Harbors, and Provinces, which he 
gives to understand he possesses in that country, out- 
side of Port Royal. Now Madame la Marquise sum- 
moned sieur de Potrincourt to produce the papers 
and documents, by which he could prove these his so 
great appurtenances and domains ; he excused him- 
self, saying [190] that he had left them in new 
France. This answer made the Lady suspicious, and, 
as she is prudent, means were not lacking to guard 
against fraud ; for she arranged with sieur Pierre du 
Gua, called de Monts, that he should give up to her 
all rights, claims and pretensions that he had, and 
ever had had, in new France, based upon the deed 
of gift made to him by the late Henry the Great. 
Also on the other hand she secured letters from his 
Majesty now reigning, by which a deed of gift was 
newly granted her of all the lands, ports, and harbors 


234 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

ride, horsmis {exilement Port Royal. Et en cefte 
facon celuy qu'on euft penfe eftre le plus fin fe re- 
trouua contre fon opinion ferre" & confine* comm'en 
prifon dedans fon Port [181 i.e., 191] Royal, parce 
qu'en verity, il n'a, ny n'a iamais eu autres terres, 
Caps, ny aures, Ifles, ny continent, fmon Port Royal, 
& fa cofte: La ou maintenant la dicte Dame tient 
tout le refte par double tiltre, fcauoir eft, & de dona- 
tion ou ceffion du fieur de Monts, & de donation nou- 
uelle faidte par fa Majefte a prefent regnant. 

Or icelle craignant, que fon argent ne fift naufrage 
auat que de monter fur mer, elle l'auoit confie entre 
les mains d'vn Iefuite coadiuteur, qu'on enuoyoit a 
la nouuelle France, pour aider les Preftres qui ja y 
eftoyent. Le Iefuite deuoit configner ceft argent a 
Dieppe entre les mains d'vn marchand, qui l'em- 
ployaft en l'achept de vidtuailles, marchandifes, & 
affretement ; mais il fut trop a la bonne foy. Car a 
la requifition du fieur de Potrincourt il s'en laiffa 
[192] tirer quatre cets efcus fans autre caution, que 
d'en retirer vne cedule. Ainfi il n'y euft que fix 
cents efcus employez en tout cet affretement; Em- 
plete bien digne de Canada. 

Ce n'eft pas tout. Le fieur de Potrincourt comit a 
l'adminiftratio du nauire, & maniemet des affaires vn 
certain fien feruiteur, appelle Simon Imbert, ancien- 
nement tauernier a Paris, & alors cherchant parmy 
les bois de la nouuelle France de quoy payer fes cre- 
ancers. Le nauire appartenoit a vn Capitaine, ap- 
pelle Nicolas l'Abbe, de Dieppe, honnefte, & fage 
perfonne. Ce nauire done ainfi equippe & frete" par- 
tit de Dieppe le 31. de Decembre au le plus fort de 
l'hyuer, & paruint heureufement a Port Royal le 23. 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 235 

of new France from the great river to Florida, with 
the sole exception of Port Royal. And in this way 
he, who was thought to be so shrewd, found himself, 
against his choice, locked up and confined as in a 
prison within his Port [181 i.e., 191] Royal; because, 
in truth, he has not and never has had, other lands, 
Capes or harbors, Islands or continent, except Port 
Royal and its coasts. Whereas now this Lady holds 
all the rest by a double title ; namely, by donation or 
cession of sieur de Monts, and by a deed of gift 
newly granted by his Majesty now reigning. 

Now she, fearing her money might be wrecked 
before it had embarked upon the sea, confided it to 
the hands of a Jesuit lay brother, 48 who was being sent 
to new France to help the Priests who were already 
there. The Jesuit was to deliver this money at 
Dieppe into the hands of a merchant, that he might 
use it in the purchase of food, merchandise, and 
freight ; but he was too confiding. For at the requisi- 
tion of sieur de Potrincourt, he allowed [192] four 
hundred ecus to be drawn without other security than 
a note of hand. Therefore he used only six hundred 
ecus for this entire cargo ; an investment very worthy 
of Canada. 

This is not all. Sieur de Potrincourt confided the 
administration of the ship and the management of 
affairs, to a certain servant of his called Simon Im- 
bert, a former innkeeper at Paris, and at that time 
seeking in the woods of new France something with 
which to pay his creditors. The ship belonged to a 
Captain, called Nicolas 1' Abbe, of Dieppe, an honest 
and prudent man. So this vessel, thus equipped and 
freighted, departed from Dieppe the 31st of Decem- 
ber in the very depth of winter, and arrived happily 


236 LES RELATIONS DES JASUITES [Vol.3 

de larmier en l'an iuiuant 1612. n'ayant confirme" que 
deux moys en chemin. 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 237 

at Port Royal on the 23rd of January in the following 
year, 16 12, having consumed only two months in the 
journey. 


238 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 


CHAPITRE XXL [i.e., xx.] 

[193] LE COMMENCEMENT DES DISPUTES ENTRE LE 

SIEUR DE BIENCOURT, & LES IESUITES & 

LES CAUSES D'lCELLES, L'ACCUSATION, 

QU'ON FIT DE GILBERT DU THET, 

& SA DEFENSE. 

LA ioye fut grande aux fecourus de cefte arriu^e 
de nauire pour l'eftroitte neceffite oil ils fe re- 
trouuoyent, & les frayeurs, qu'ils auoyent 
conceu de l'aduenir. Mais cefte refiouiffance ne fut 
pas longue, le lieur de Biencour n'eftant point a fon 
aife des que Simon Imbert, luy euft porte nouuelles 
de l'aflociation faidte auec Madame la Marquife de 
Guercheuille. Or parce que le Iefuite Gilbert du 
Thet, eftant dans le nauire, quoy qu'il ne fe fuft 
mefle des affaires, toutesfois [194] n'auoit pas efte ii 
borgne (comme Ton dit) qu'il ny euft toufiours veu 
d'vn ceil; comme il en auoit charge, & commande- 
ment. Iceluy doncques pour s'acquitter de fon de- 
uoir, & garder le droit, s'en alia trouuer le fieur de 
Biencourt, en prefence du P. Biard luy dit, Qu'il s'ef- 
merueilloit bien fort, que Simon Imbert ayant eu 
radminiftration de tout l'embarquement, ce neant- 
moins il n'auoit apporte" aucun roolle, ny charte-par- 
tie, ny memoires de ce qui auoit efte embarque, ny 
ou, ny comment 1' argent de Madame la Marquife 
auoit efte" employe. Qu'il deuoit bien l'auoir faidt 
au moins pour iuftification de fa probite, & bonne foy 
mefmes, puis qu'il apportoit plufieurs marchandifes 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 239 


CHAPTER XXL [i.e., xx.] 

[193] THE BEGINNING OF THE DISPUTES BETWEEN 
SIEUR DE BIENCOURT AND THE JESUITS, AND 
THE CAUSES THEREOF; THE ACCUSA- 
TION MADE AGAINST GILBERT DU 
THET, AND HIS DEFENSE. 

GREAT was the rejoicing over the relief afforded 
by the arrival of this ship, on account of the 
severe straits to which the colonists had been 
reduced, and the dread which they felt for the future. 
But this joy did not last long, sieur de Biencour being 
ill at ease on account of the news brought by Simon 
Imbert about the partnership formed with the Marquise 
de Guercheville. Now the Jesuit, Gilbert du Thet, 
being in the ship, although he had not meddled with 
affairs, nevertheless [194] had not been so blind of 
one eye (as the saying is) that he had not always kept 
watch with the other, as he had been charged and 
commanded to do. Now in order to acquit himself 
of his duty, and to uphold the right, he went to see 
sieur de Biencourt; and, in the presence of Father 
Biard, he said to him: That he was very much sur- 
prised that, as Simon Imbert had had the manage- 
ment of the entire embarkation, nevertheless he had 
not brought any list of the ship's company, nor 
charter party, 44 nor invoice of what had been shipped, 
nor statement of where or how the money of Madame 
la Marquise de Guercheville had been spent. That 
he ought to have done this at least for the vindication 
of his own honesty and good faith, since he had 


240 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

qu'il afleuroit eftre a luy en propriety, & defquelles on 
pourroit auoir foupgon, qu'il fe fuft accommode [195] 
au detriment de la didte Dame, & d'eux. Qu'ils ne 
vouloyent point l'accufer auant que de 1' auoir trouue" 
coulpable, neatmoins qu' auant auffi de le recognoiftre 
non coulpable, il y auoit bien de quoy s'enquerir en 
tout cela, & mefmes de ce qu'il auoit vendu a Dieppe 
du bled, qui luy auoit efte done" pour l'embarque- 
ment: chofe qui tournoit au grand preiudice de 1 'ha- 
bitation, laquelle defailloit principalement en vidtu- 
ailles. Item, qu'il comptoit fept barrils de Galette 
defpenfez durant le voyage, & il ne difoit rien que 
de ces fept il y en auoit deux, qu'vn certain Robert 
de Rouen auoit fourny pour fa part: car en cefte 
facon il ne falloit pas compter fur la compagnie fept 
barrils, ains cinq tant feulement. Qu'on fupplioit 
ledit fieur de s'enquefter de tout l'affaire prudem- 
ment, [196] & s'y conduire toufiours comme nous de- 
uons par tout, auec charit6, & retenue. Telle fut la 
fimple remonftrance, que luy fit le Iefuite, & le fieur 
de Biencourt a fouuent depuis rendu tefmoignage, 
qu'on ne luy pouuoit indiquer ce mefnage, auec plus 
de modeftie que Ion fit. Neantmoins au lieu de faire 
ce dequoy on l'auoit requis, & a quoy il eftoit tenu, 
il s'en alia rapporter le tout audit Simon Imbert, 
adiouftant que le Iefuite coadiuteur l'auoit accuse. 

Or quels confeils furent prins la deffus, & quelles 
menees, ou pretentions, ie n'en fgay rien. Tant y a, 
que comme de petites exhalaifons & vapeurs, qui au 
commencement ne font rien, s'efleuent d'efpaiifes 
nuees, vents furieux, & horribles tempeftes qui a 
traidt de temps s'effarouchent & [197] gaftent les ca- 
pagnes & moiffons: Ainfi de ce peu de caufe par 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, ibi6 241 

brought a great deal of merchandise which he claimed 
belonged to him, and which it would be suspected he 
had appropriated [195] to the detriment of the said 
Lady, and of themselves. That they did not wish 
to accuse him before having found him guilty ; nev- 
ertheless, before admitting his innocence, there was 
a great deal to investigate in the whole matter, and 
especially in regard to his having sold at Dieppe 
wheat which had been given him to be shipped — an 
act which would prove to be a great disadvantage to 
the settlement, which was in need of provisions more 
than of anything else. Also, that he counted seven 
barrels of Sea-biscuits dispensed during the voyage, 
and he did not say that of these seven, two were fur- 
nished by a certain Robert de Rouen as his share ; so, 
for this reason, seven barrels should not have been 
charged to the company, but only five. That the 
sieur was entreated to investigate the whole affair 
prudently, [196] and to conduct himself always in the 
matter as we ought to do in all things, with charity 
and dignity. Such was the simple remonstrance that 
was made to him by the Jesuit ; and sieur de Bien- 
court has often testified since then, that this matter 
could not have been called to his attention with 
greater delicacy than it was. But, instead of doing 
what he was requested, and what he was bound to 
do, he went and reported the whole affair to Simon 
Imbert, adding that the Jesuit lay brother had ac- 
cused him. 

Now what counsels were held thereupon, and what 
underhand dealings or claims, I know not. How- 
ever, as from little exhalations and vapors, which at 
first amount to nothing, arise dense clouds, furious 
winds, and horrible tempests, which suddenly sweep 


242 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.3 

1 'agitation de l'efprit malin fe groffit en vn tourbillon 
malencontreux de difcorde, qui a difllpe, & rauage 
tous les fruidts, & les efperances de ce premier eflar- 
temet. Car Imbert luy depeignit l'affociation faidte 
atiec la Dame Marquife de de Guercheuille comm'vn 
moyen inuente par les Iefuites, a fin de l'expulfer 
hors de fes amples Seigneuries de Canada. 

Or les Iefuites n'eftants point aifes de fe voir 
loger en fi ioly predicament, par deux fois en pre- 
fence du fieur de Biencourt, & de toute l'habitation 
conuainquirent de fauffete ledit Imbert par les tef- 
moins mefmes qu'il alleguoit; & en la fecode le 
prefferent tellement qu'il fut contraindt de dire qu'il 
auoit efte yure quand il auoit ainfi parle. Defquelles 
verites [198] & innocence, y a bons & authentiques 
adtes, & tefmoignages faidts & rendus iuridiquemet 
a Dieppe par deuant le Magiftrat, apres le retour du 
nauire. 


1611-16] BIARITS RELATION, 1616 M8 

over and [197] destroy fields and harvests; so from 
this slight cause, through the agitation of the evil 
spirit, the trouble increased to a mischievous whirl- 
wind of discord, which has scattered and ravaged all 
the fruits and hopes of this first clearing. For Im- 
bert represented to him that the partnership formed 
with Madame la Marquise de Guercheville was a 
means invented by the Jesuits to drive him out of 
his broad Seigneuries of Canada. 

Now the Jesuits, not pleased at seeing themselves 
placed in such a pretty predicament, twice in the pres- 
ence of sieur de Biencourt and of the whole settle- 
ment, convicted the said Imbert of duplicity, by the 
very same witnesses which he had put forward ; and 
the second time they pressed him so hard that he was 
compelled to say he had been drunk when he had 
spoken thus. Of their truth [198] and innocence in 
this, there are good and authentic records and proofs, 
made and rendered according to law at Dieppe, be- 
fore the Magistrate, after the return of the ship. 


244 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 


CHAPITRE XXIII. [i.e., xxi.] 

VN VOYAGE DU PERE ENEMOND MASSE" & VN AUTRE 
DU P. BIARD. 

LA reconciliation ayant efte* faidte du depuis, & 
toutes chofes pacifiees, les Iefuites fe r'adon- 
nans a l'eftude, & apprentiffage du langage 
Sauuaginois, eftimerent vn bon moyen de s'y co- 
traindre, & d'apprendre mieux les vs, facons, & vie 
du pays, s'ils alloyent, & demeuroyent auec les 
naturels, errants, & courants auec eux par monts 
& valines; & viuants a leur mode quant au ciuil, 
[199] & corporel. lis s'offrirent a Louys Membertou, 
pour en cefte facon demeurer auec luy, s'il luy plai- 
foit l'agreer: ce qu'il accepta fort volontiers. Le P. 
Enemond Maffe, comm'il eft courageux, voulut que 
ceft'entreprinfe fuft pour luy; auffi fut-il iug6 plus 
propre a cela par la comune voix de ceux de l'habita- 
tion, a caufe de fon induftrie, & engin pradtic, idoine 
de trouuer tous remedes a tons inconueniens. II 
s'en alia doc auec Louys Membertou, & fa famille, 
au dela de la Baye Fran9oife a la riuiere S. lean, & 
commenca fon nouitiat de cefte vie Nomadique, bien 
afpre de vray, & de fort eflay. 

Cefte vie eft fans ordre, & fans ordinaire, fans 
pain, fans fel, & bien fouuent auec rien; toufiours en 
courfes, & changements, au vent, a l'air, & mauuais 
temps ; [200] pour toidt, vne mef chante cabane : pour 
repofoir, la terre : pour repos les crys, & chants odi- 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 245 


CHAPTER XXIII. [i.e., xxi.] 

A JOURNEY MADE BY FATHER ENEMOND MASS£, AND 
ANOTHER BY FATHER BIARD. 

A RECONCILIATION was effected afterward, 
and everything calmed down. The Jesuits, 
devoting themselves to the study and appren- 
ticeship of the Savage language, thought a good way 
to force themselves to this, and to better learn the 
usages, habits and life of the country, would be to go 
away and live with the natives, wandering and roving 
about as they did through mountains and valleys, and 
adopting their ways, civil [199] as well as physical. 
They offered themselves to Louys Membertou, to live 
with him in that way, if he were pleased to receive 
them: he agreed to do so very willingly. Father 
Enemond Masse, as he was full of courage, desired 
that this enterprise should fall to him ; also he was 
judged more suitable for it by the common voice of 
the settlement, on account of his industry and prac- 
tical ingenuity, ready to find a remedy for every in- 
convenience. He went away then, with Louys Mem- 
bertou and his family, beyond French Bay to St. John 
river, and began his novitiate in this Nomadic life, 
truly a very hard and trying ordeal. 

This life is without order and without daily fare, 
without bread, without salt, and often without any- 
thing; always moving on and changing, in the wind, 
in the air, and in bad weather; [200] for roof, a 
wretched cabin; for couch, the earth; for rest and 


246 LES RELATIONS DES JltSUITES [Vol. 3 

eux: pour remedes, la faim, & le trauail. C'eftoit a 
la verite, vne regie bien forte. Ledit P. Enemond a 
fin de garder par tout l'honneftete religieufe auoit 
araene auec foy vn ieune garco Fran9ois bie gaillard, 
qui l'aidoit, luy affiftoit par tout, & luy feruoit a la 
Meffe. Mais & maiftre & feruiteur tous deux fe trou- 
uerent bien toft rudement examines par vne diete fi 
diftemperee; tout leur en-bon-point decheut; leurs 
forces, couleur, & gaillardife; les iambes leur de- 
uindrent groffes & pefantes, les efprits aflopis, & 
fucceda vne fieure lente: laquelle toutesfois fe paffa 
bien tofl : & depuis peu a peu ils prindrent ply, & re- 
uindrent aucunement a leur vigueur. Le Pere Ene- 
mond y penfa perdre la veue [201] fans aucun mal 
des yeux: L'atrophie a mon aduis caufoit cefte debi- 
lite de fens, & des efprits. 

Ce temps pendant, le P. Biard demeuroit a Port 
Royal, ayant pris auec foy vn Sauuage, lequel il 
nourriffoit, & s'en feruoit comme de maiftre en langue 
Sauuagine. II le nourriffoit, dis-je, de ce qu'il auoit 
peu efpargner de fon ordinaire, & mefme le feruoit, 
parce que les Sauuages, ou de pareffe, ou pluftoft de 
hautainete" de courage ne fe daigneroyent faire aucuns 
feruice, comme d'aller a l'eau, au bois, a la cuifme, 
&c. d'autant que, difent-ils, cela appartient aux 
femmes. II entretint done ce Sauuage, & fut fon ap- 
pretif au lagage trois femaines durant, mais il ne 
peut plus long temps, faute d'auoir dequoy le nour- 
rir, ce qui luy fut fort grief, parce que le Sauuage 
eftoit de [202] bon naturel, & demeuroit auec luy bien 
volontiers. 

Or tandis que le P. Enemond eftoit malade entre 
les Sauuages, arriua vn plaifant rencontre. Ledit 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 247 


quiet, odious cries and songs; for medicine, hunger, 
and hard work. It was, in truth, a very painful mode 
of living. Father Enemond, in order to everywhere 
preserve a religious propriety, had taken with him a 
young and vigorous French boy, who helped him, at- 
tended him wherever he went, and assisted him at 
the Mass. But both master and servant soon found 
themselves in a bad condition through such irregular 
diet: they became thin, and lost their strength, color, 
and cheerfulness ; their legs grew big and heavy, their 
minds were dulled, and a low fever set in; however, 
this soon passed away, and then little by little they 
regained their usual appearance, and each was re- 
stored to his customary vigor. Father Enemond 
thought he was going to lose his sight, [201] without 
any disease of the eyes; atrophy, it seems to me, 
caused this debility of the senses and of the mind. 

During this time, Father Biard remained at Port 
Royal, having with him a Savage whom he fed and 
made use of as a master in the Savage tongue. He 
fed him, I say, from what he had been able to save 
from his own daily fare, and even waited on him ; 
for the Savages, either from laziness, or from lofty 
courage, do not deign to do any work, such as 
going for water, for wood, to the kitchen, etc., for 
they say that belongs to the women. So he enter- 
tained this Savage, and was his apprentice in the lan- 
guage for three weeks, but he could keep it up no 
longer, for want of something to give him to eat; 
this grieved him exceedingly, for the Savage was 
1 202] good-natured, and willing to live with him. 

Now while Father Enemond was sick among the 
Savages, an amusing incident occurred. As the 
Father was in a cabin, apart from the others on ac- 


248 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.3 


Pere s'eftant cabane a part pour caufe de fa maladie, 
Loys Membertou le vint trouuer fort en peine (comm'il 
monftroit,) & luy dit: Efcoute Pere. Tu t'en vas 
mourir, ie le deuine. Efcry done a Biencourt, & a, ton 
frere, que tu es mort de maladie, & que nous ne t'a- 
uons pas tue\ Ie m'en garderay bien (dit le P. Ene- 
mond:) car poffible apres que i'aurois efcrit la lettre, 
tu me tuerois, cependant tu porterois ta lettre d' in- 
nocence, que tu ne m'aurois pas tue. Icy le Sauuage 
reuint a foy, & fe recogneut (car il n'eft pas lourd:) 
& fe prenant a rire. Bien done (dit-il,) prie Iefus 
que tu ne meure pas, a fin qu'on ne nous accufe de 
t'auoir [203] faidt mourir. Auffi fais-je, dit le P. 
Enemond, n'aye peur, ie ne mourray pas. 

Sur la fin d'Aouft d'icell'ann^e 16 12. le fieur de 
Biencourt voulut aller a la Baye des Mines a 2 1 . ou 
22. lieues de Port Royal: de vray il y alloit bien mal 
en conche, dans vne pietre chaloupe, n'ayant que 
pour huict iours de viures, & manquant de toutes 
autres prouifions. Le P. Biard neantmoins s'offrit a 
l'accompagner, parce que ledit fieur promettoit de 
s'enquefter, & rechercher nouuelles du P. Enemond, 
duquel ja des deux mois nous n'auions rien ouy, & 
nous nous craignions fort, qu'il ne fuft tombe" en 
quelque inconuenient, ou maladie. 

Or quoy que fi mal prouifionnes, toutesfois nous 
n'allafmes pas feulement a la Baye des Mines: ains 
auffi a Chinidtou; Champlain [204] appelle cefte 
Baye, la Baye de Genes. A ce Chinidtou y a de fort 
belles, & grandes prairies a perte de veue, plufieurs 
riuieres fe defchargent dans ladidte Baye, & par au- 
cunes d'icelles on monte bien haut pour aller a Gache- 
pe. Les Sauuages de cefl endroit peuuent monter a 


1611-16] /HARD'S RELATION, 1616 24'J 

count of his illness, Loys Membertou, apparently in 
great trouble, came to see him, and said to him : 
''Listen, Father. Thou art going to die; I predict 
it. Write now to Biencourt and to thy brother, that 
thou hast died of disease, and that we did not kill 
thee. " "I shall take care not to do that ' ' (said Father 
Enemond), " for possibly after I had written this let- 
ter, thou wouldst kill me, and then thou wouldst take 
there thy innocent letter, saying thou hadst not killed 
me." Here the Savage, seeing what was meant (for 
he is not dull) and recovering his equanimity began to 
laugh. "Well then" (said he), "pray Jesus that thou 
may est not die, so they will not accuse us of hav- 
ing [203] killed thee. " " Indeed, I am doing so, ' ' said 
Father Enemond; "do not fear, I shall not die." 

Towards the end of August of this year, 16 12, sieur 
de Biencourt wished to go to the Bay of Mines, 2 1 or 
22 leagues from Port Royal: he was certainly ill-pre- 
pared to go there, in a wretched boat, having food 
for only eight days, and lacking all other provisions. 
Father Biard, however, offered to accompany him, 
because the sieur promised to inquire about and seek 
news of Father Enemond, of whom we had heard 
nothing for two months, and who, we greatly feared, 
had fallen into some trouble or sickness. 

Now although so badly provisioned, nevertheless 
we went not only to the Bay of Mines, but also to 
Chinictou; Champlain [204] calls this Bay, the Baye 
de Genes. At this Chinictou there are many large 
and beautiful meadows, extending farther than the eye 
can reach ; many rivers discharge their waters into 
it, through some of which one can sail quite far up 
on the route to Gachepe. 45 The Savages of this place 
may number sixty or eighty souls, and they are not so 


250 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

foixante, ou quatre vingts ames, & ne font point fi 
vagabons, que les antres, foit pource que le lieu eft 
plus retire, foit qu'il eft plus abondant en chaffe, 
n'eflant point de befoin d'en fortir pour viure. Le 
pays eft pour la plufpart agreable; & a mon aduis, 
de grande fertilite s'il eitoit cultiue\ II eft dans le 
quarente fix degre d'eleuation polaire. 

A noftre retour de la didte Baye Dieu nous pre- 
ferua euidemment deux fois emmy la tempefte. Et 
la troifiefme fut celle que [205] ie m'en vais racon- 
ter. Nous n'auions apporte que pour huit iours de 
viures, & ja y en auoit quinze de noftre defpart. Le 
mauuais temps nous tenoit au dela de la Baye des 
mines, du cofte de la riuiere S. lean, fi le contraftre 
ou contrariete de vents euft dure, e'en eftoit fait, il 
falloit mourir de faim, car nous n'auions rien. La 
nuidt venue le P. Biard perfuada a la compagnie de 
faire vn vceu a noftre Seigneur, & a fa benoifte Mere, 
que s'il leur plaifoit nous donner vent propice, les 
quatre Sauuages qui eftoyent auec nous fe feroyent 
Chreftiens. Les Sauuages en furent bien contans, & 
ainfi le vceu fut faidt. Le matin venu le vent fut 
cfueille tel qu'il le nous falloit, & a fon ayde nous 
trauerfafmes la didte Baye, qui eft de huidt lieiies de 
large. Or arriuez a terre du cofte de Port Royal 
[206] le vent nous manqua. Et ft auions mar6e 
contre nous & quinze lieiies iufques a Port Royal. 

A cefte caufe le fieur de Biencourt nous quitta, ay- 
mant mieux s'en aller a pied auec les Sauuages: Mais 
il fut trompe, car auffi toft, qu'il nous euft delaiffez, 
le bon temps nous reuint a l'aide duquel, & du bon 
courage des compagnons, nous arriuafmes ce mefme 
iour a Port Royal; la ou ledit fieur n'y reuint, que 


1611-16] WARD'S RELATION, 1616 361 

nomadic as the others, either because the place is 
more retired, or because game is more abundant, 
there being no need of their going out to seek food. 
The country is, for the most part, agreeable, and, in 
my opinion, would be very fertile if it were cultivated. 
It is within the forty-sixth degree of north latitude. 

Upon our return from this Bay, God manifestly 
preserved us twice in the midst of the tempest. And 
the third escape is that which [205] I am going to 
describe. We had carried with us food for only eight 
days and it had already been fifteen since our depar- 
ture. Bad weather kept us beyond the Bay of mines, 
on the St. John river side ; and, if the contrary or 
adverse winds had continued, it would have been all 
over with us, as we would have had to die of hunger, 
for we had nothing. When night came, Father Biard 
persuaded the company to make a vow to our Lord, 
and to his blessed Mother, that if it pleased them 
to send propitious winds, the four Savages who were 
with us would become Christians. The Savages 
were willing to do this, and the vow was made. In the 
morning the wind arose, such a one as we were in 
need of, and by its aid we crossed the Bay, which 
is eight leagues wide. Now when we reached shore 
on the Port Royal side, [206] the wind failed us ; also 
we had the tide against us, and we were fifteen 
leagues from Port Royal. 

For this reason sieur de Biencourt left us, preferring 
to go on foot with the Savages: but he made a mis- 
take, for immediately after his departure, good 
weather returned, by the aid of which, and owing to 
the good courage of our companions, we arrived the 
same day at Port Royal; whereas the sieur did not 
get there until three days later, after much suffering. 


252 LES RELATIONS DES J ^SUITES [Vol.3 

trois iours apres ay ant prou paty. Or les Sauuages 
eftoyent prefts a receuoir le S. Baptefme, mais on 
n'auoit pas dequoy les nourrir quatre ou cinq iours, 
qu'il euft fallu ponr les Catechifer. Car tout nous 
manquoit. On les differa iufques a ce que le nauire 
fut venu qu'on attendoit de iour a autre. Mais l'at- 
tente fut vayne, ainfi qu'ouirez. Et ainfi l'occafion 
de ce bien fe perdit a [207] noftre grand regret. 

Or le P. Biard reuenu a la maifon comme il eftoit 
bien aife d'auoir fi merueilleufement euade" la mort, 
la faim & les orages; Aufli eftoit-il en trifteffe fort 
grande pour n'auoir fceu nouuelles aucunes de fon 
eher Confrere le P. Enemond, qu'il aymoit vnique- 
ment. Mais Dieu le refiouyt plenierement ce mefme 
iour. Car comme fi le rendez-vous leur euft efte 
donne a mefme affignation, il arriua ce mefme iour 
fur le vefpre, fain & fauue, & charge de merites & 
bonnes ceuures : tant pour auoir beaucoup paty, 
comme pour auoir mis au Paradis quelques ames, qui 
eftoyent paffees auffi toft apres le S. Baptefme. De 
vray ils eurent tous deux grande occaiion de benir 
d'vn grand coeur leur bon Dieu, & Seigneur, qui les 
cofoloit fi paternellement, [208] & fi oculairement les 
protegeoit en tout, & par tout. 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 258 


Now the Savages were ready to receive Holy Bap- 
tism, but there was nothing for them to eat during 
the four or five days in which they would have to be 
Catechized. For we were in need of everything. It 
was put off until the coming of the ship, which was 
expected from day to day ; but the expectation was 
vain, as you will hear. And thus the opportunity for 
this good deed was lost, to [207] our great regret. 

Now Father Biard, being again at home, although 
he was very happy at having so wonderfully escaped 
death, famine, and tempest; nevertheless was exceed- 
ingly cast down at not having heard any news of his 
dear Brother, Father Enemond, for whom he had a 
singular attachment. But God completely relieved 
his fears that very day. For, as if the rendezvous 
had been assigned them at this very place, he arrived 
the same day, safe and sound, and loaded with merit 
and good works: as much for having suffered so 
greatly, as for having placed in Paradise some souls, 
which had passed away immediately after Holy Bap- 
tism. In truth they both had reason to bless with 
full hearts their good God and Lord, who comforted 
them like a father, [208] and so visibly protected 
them in all things, and everywhere. 


254 LES RELA TIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol. 3 


CHAPITRE XXIV. [i. e., xxii.] 

CE QU'ARRIUA L'HYUER, & LE PRINTEMPS SUIUANT, 
DE L'AN 1613. 

LE fieur de Biencourt s'attendoit totalement de 
receuoir fecours de France auant l'Hyuer, 
voyre mefme on auoit dit qu'il y auoit trois, 
ou quatre nauires en chemin, & ja recherchoit-on, oil 
Ton pourroit loger tant & tant de biens, qui venoyent 
en flotte. Sur cefte confiance le fieur de Biencourt 
auoit trocque quafi tout. Et partant fe vit bien esba- 
hy, quand a la Touffaincts il fe trouua hors de tout 
efpoir de fecours pour cefte annee la. 

[209] Or les Iefuites, qui n'auoyent point mis cuire 
(comme Ton dit) fur ces imaginatiues attentes, auoyent 
referue" dans leur magafin cinq grands poingons de 
bled; quatre de pur froment, & vn d'orge qu'on leur 
auoit enuoye" de France pour leur particulier. Tout 
cela faifoit quatorze barils de bon grain. Eux done 
voyants la neceffite du fieur de Biencourt, l'allerent 
trouuer, & luy offrirent leurs moyens de bonne vo- 
lonte\ & qu'il prinft tout leur bled, hors feulement 
deux barrils de froment, & vn d'orge, qu'ils fe defi- 
royent referuer pour diuers accidents de neceffitez, & 
maladies tant d'eux, que des autres. Quant au refte, 
qu'on n'innoueroit rien, ains a leur accouftumee ils 
receuroyent la distribution quotidienne a l'egal des au- 
tres. Le fieur de Biencourt accepta l'ofrre, & les [2 10] 
conditios, & felon icelles on commenga de viure. 

Ce pendant les Iefuites ayants Dieu pour appuy, ne 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION. i6i6 266 


CHAPTER XXIV. [i.e., xxii.j 

WHAT HAPPENED DURING THE WINTER AND SPRING 
FOLLOWING, OF THE YEAR 1613. 

SI EUR de Biencourt fully expected to receive 
help from France before Winter, especially 
as it had been said that there were three or 
four ships on the way, and already we were looking 
about to see where we could store so many things as 
were coming in this fleet. Trusting in this, sieur de 
Biencourt had traded almost everything. He was 
therefore very much astonished, when on All Saints' 
day, he found himself without hope of any relief that 
year. 

[209] Now the Jesuits, who had not built much (as 
the saying is) upon these visionary expectations, had 
reserved in their storeroom five large puncheons of 
grain, four of pure wheat and one of barley, which 
had been sent from France for their own use. It 
made in all fourteen barrels of good grain. Now. 
when they saw sieur de Biencourt 's necessity, they 
went to him and cheerfully offered him their means, 
saying that he should take all their grain with the 
sole exception of two barrels of wheat and one of bar- 
ley, which they wished to reserve for various emer- 
gencies of want and sickness, both for themselves and 
the others. As to the remainder, they would not 
touch it, except to receive as usual their daily portion 
like the others. Sieur de Biencourt accepted the 
offer, and its [210] conditions, and according to these 
we began to live. 


256 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.3 


perdoyent point courage, ains felon la lumiere, & 
l'engin, que leur eftoit donne, pouruoyoyent a l'ad- 
uenir. Partant ils s'auiferent de baftir vne chaloupe, 
tandis que les autres demeuroyent au pres du feu a 
leur aife fans trauailler. Car ils preuoyoyent, que 
fans bateau, il leur conuiendroit mourir de faim apres 
deux mois que leur pourroit durer leur orge, parce 
qu'ils ne pourroyent aller fans bateau ny au gland, 
ny aux coques, ny aux racines, ny a la pefche, ny 
autre part, ou feroit quelque efperance de quefte. 
Parce que le chemins de ce pais la font les riuieres, 
& la mer. 

Au commencements de cefte leur entreprinfe de 
baftir vne [211] chaloupe, on fe mocquoit deux: car 
le codudteur de l'ceuure eftoit leur garcon, qui n'en 
fcauoit pas plus qu'vn apprentif : fes aides eftoyent 
deux Preftres, qui iamais n'auoyent faidt tel meftier. 
Neatmoins (difoit-on) le P. Enemond fcait tout faire, 
& au befoin il fe trouuera bon Scieur d'ais, bon cal- 
feutreur, & bo Architedte. Mais le P. Biard dequoy 
feruira-il a cela? Ne fcais-tu pas, (difoit l'autre,) 
que quand la chaloupe fera faidte, il luy donnera la 
benedidtion. Ainfi caufoyent-ils, & en auoyent beau 
loilir, aupres du feu. Mais les Iefuites ne perdoyent 
point de temps a fcier planches, a raboter ais, recher- 
cher courbes, a faire eftoupes des bouts de cordages 
qu'ils recouuroyent, a courir les bois pour amafler de 
la refine. Que voulez-vous? A la my-Mars leur 
gaillarde chaloupe fut [212] dans l'eau equippee, paree, 
accommodee brauement auec l'admiration de ceux 
qui s'en eftoyent moquez: & tout au contraire, le 
fieur de Biencourt, qui au commencement de l'Hyuer 
auoit eu trois bonnes chaloupes, a la fin ne s'en trou- 
ua du tout point, & fut contraint du bris d'icelles 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 257 

Meanwhile the Jesuits, with God as their support, 
did not lose heart, but, according to the light and in- 
genuity given them, provided for the future. Thus 
they decided to construct a boat while the others were 
sitting around the fire doing nothing. For they fore- 
saw that, without this, they would surely die of hun- 
ger after the two months in which their barley would 
last ; and, having no boat, they could not go for acorns, 
shells, roots, or fish, nor to any place where there 
would be hope of finding something. For the roads 
in that country are the rivers and the sea. 

When they began to carry out this plan of con- 
structing a [211] boat they were both laughed at; for 
the master of the work was their servant, who knew 
nothing more about it than an apprentice ; his assist- 
ants were two Priests, who had never followed this 
trade. " Nevertheless " (some one said) "Father En- 
emond can do anything ; and in case of need he will 
be found to be a good Sawyer of planks, a good caulk- 
er, and a good Architect. But of what use will Father 
Biard be in such work?" "Dost thou not know" 
(answered the other) ' ' that when the boat is done he 
will give it his blessing?" Thus they chattered, and 
talked it over leisurely around the fire. But the Jes- 
uits lost no time in sawing planks, planing boards, 
seeking bent wood, making oakum out of bits of rope 
which they found, and tramping over the woods in 
search of resin. What came of it? In the middle 
of March their jolly-boat was [212] upon the water 
equipped, adorned and fitted up bravely, to the ad- 
miration of those who had sneered at it: and on the 
other hand, sieur de Biencourt, who in the beginning 
of Winter had had three good shallops, at the end did 
not have any at all; and he was obliged, out of the 


258 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 3- 

faire rauauder vn malotru bateau pour trois perfonnes 
au plus, qui n'euft fceu faire trois lieiies continuelle- 
ment en mer, qu'il ne fufl pery, tant il faifoit d'eau. 

Or la chaloupe eftant prefte, & appareillee, le P. 
Biard s'en alia premierement en haut contre la riui- 
ere auec leur feruiteur, & vn tiers qui fe ioignift a 
eux, appelle lean Baptifte Charpetier. lis allerent a 
la quelle du gland, & des racines. Ces racines font 
appellees en Sauuageois Chiquebi, & s'engendrent vo- 
lontiers aupres [2 1 3] des chef nes. Elles font comme 
des truffes, mais meilleures, & croiffent fous terre 
enfil^es l'vne a l'autre en forme de chapelet. II y en 
a beaucoup en certains endroits. Vray eft qu'il eft 
bien difficile d'aller aucune part ou les Sauuages 
n'ayent de ja fouille, par ainfi on n'en trouue guieres 
que des bien petites. Et encores faut-il bien trauail- 
ler pour en viure vn iour. 

Apres auoir couru en haut contre la riuiere pour 
les glands, & racines, il s'en alia a l'Eplan. Eplan 
ou Epela eft vn petit poiffon come les fardines de 
Roue, qui venat de la mer, fraye contre certains 
ruiffeaux fur le commencement d'Auril. II y en a 
vn a quatre lieiies de 1' habitation de Port Royal, qui 
aucunesfois en fourmille tout en ce temps la. Pour 
cefte caufe les Sauuages auffi s'y vont cabaner, & en 
viuent. 

[214] Apres l'Eplan fuccedent les Harencs, qui 
frayent de mefme en vn autre riuiere. Le P. Ene- 
mond Mafse entreprit cefte pefche des harencs, & 
apres celle-cy celle de moliies, ja le mois de May 
eftant venu. En ceite facon nous boutames le temps 
(comme Ton dit) auec les efpaules; ou plus toft auec 
les pieds & bras, trainants noftre miferable vie iufques 
a ce que le nauire arriua. Le voyage, & route du- 
quel il nous faut reprendre de plus haut. 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 259 

wrecks of these, to patch up a clumsy boat large 
enough for three people at the most, which leaked 
so badly that it could not go three continuous leagues 
upon the sea, without sinking. 

Now the boat being ready and under sail, Father 
Biard, with the servant and another who had joined 
them, named Jean Baptiste Charpentier, first made 
a trip up the river. They went in search of acorns 
and roots. These roots in the Savage language are 
called Ckiquebi, 4 * and grow readily near [213] oak 
trees. They are like truffles, but better, and grow 
under the ground strung to each other like a rosary. 
There are many of them in certain places, yet it is 
very difficult to find any place where the Savages 
have not already been digging, and thus only very 
small ones are to be found. Also we must work hard 
to get enough of them for a day's food. 

After having gone to the upper part of the river 
for acorns and roots, he went to get some Smelts. 
The Eplan or Epelan is a little fish like the sar- 
dine of Rouen, which, coming from the sea, spawns 
in certain brooks toward the beginning of April. 
There is one of these brooks four leagues from Port 
Royal, which sometimes completely swarms with 
them at that season. For this reason the Savages 
also go there to camp and live. 

[214] After the Smelts come the Herrings, which in 
like manner spawn in another river. Father Enemond 
Masse engaged in this fishing for herring, and later 
for cod, until the coming of the month of May. And 
thus we were butting against time (as the saying is) 
with our shoulders, or rather with our hands and 
feet, dragging on our miserable lives until the ar- 
rival of the ship, whose voyage and route we must 
take up from farther back. 


260 


LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. 3 


CHAPITRE XXV. [i.e., xxiii.] 

l'arriuee de la saussaye A port royal, & & de 
lA, A s. sauueur. 

ON dreffoit en France vn equipage pour retirer 
les Iefuites de Port Royal, & fonder [215] vne 
nouuelle habitation de Francois en vn autre 
lieu plus commode. 

Le chef de cet equipage eftoit le Capitaine la Sauf- 
faye ayant trente perfonnes, qui deuoyent hyuerner 
fur le pays, en contant les deux Iefuites, & leur fer- 
uiteur qu'il deuoit prendre a Port Royal. II auoit 
de plus auec foy deux autres Iefuites, le Pere Quan- 
tin, & Gilbert du Thet qu'il conduifoit: mais ils de- 
uoyent reuenir en France au cas que les deux de Port 
Royal ne fuffent pas morts, de quoy on fe doutoit. 
Tout V equipage en contant les Matelots, montoit a 48. 
perfonnes. Le maiftre du nauire eftoit Charles 
Flory de Habbe-ville, homme iudicieux, hardy & 
paifible. La Royne de fa grace auoit cotribue" aux 
defpenfes quatre tentes ou pauillons du Roy, & quel- 
ques munitions [216] de guerres. Le fieur Simon le 
Maiftre auoit vacque ferieufement a tout l'affretement 
& auitaillement. Et Gilbert du Thet, Iefuite coad- 
iuteur, homme fort induftrieux, ne s'y eftoit point 
efpargne, de maniere qu'on eftoit richement proui- 
fionne de toutes chofes pour plus d'vn an. Outre 
les cheuaux, & cheures qu'on y conduifoit ja pour 
commencemet de mefnage. Le nauire eftoit de cent 
tonneaux. 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 261 


CHAPTER XXV. [i.e., xxiii.] 

LA SAUSSAYE'S ARRIVAL AT PORT ROYAL, AND AFTER- 
WARDS, AT ST. SAUVEUR. 

THEY fitted up a ship in France to take the Jes- 
uits away from Port Royal, and to found [215] 
a new French settlement in a more suitable 
place. 

The chief of this expedition was Captain la Saus- 
saye, who was to winter in the country with thirty 
persons, counting in the two Jesuits and their ser- 
vant, whom he was to take up at Port Royal. He 
had with him, besides, two other Jesuits, Father Quan- 
tin and Gilbert du Thet, whom he was to take there; 
but they were to return to France in case the two at 
Port Royal were not dead, of which there was some 
doubt. The entire company, counting the Sailors, 
numbered 48 persons. The master of the ship was 
Charles Flory of Habbe-ville, a discreet, hardy and 
peaceable man. The Queen in her goodness had 
contributed four of the King's tents or pavilions, and 
some munitions [216] of war. Sieur Simon le Maistre 
had devoted himself earnestly to the freighting and 
provisioning, and Gilbert du Thet, the Jesuit lay 
brother, a very industrious man, had not spared him- 
self; so they were amply provided with everything 
for more than a year, besides the horses and goats 
which were being taken over for domestic purposes. 
The ship was of a hundred tons burthen. 

This expedition, thus fitted out, departed from 


262 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

Cest equipage ainfi ordonne partit de Honfleur le 
12. de Mars, Tan 1613. & territ premierement au Cap 
de la Heue en la cofte de l'Acadie, le 16. de May 
ayant confume* en fon traiedt deux mois entiers. Au 
Cap de la Heue ils dirent Meffe, & drefferet vne 
Croix, y appofants les armoiries de Madame la Mar- 
quife de Guercheuille, pour marque de poffemon 
[217] prinfe en fon nom. De la fe remettans en mer, 
ils vindrent a Port Royal. 

A Port Royal ils ne trouuerent que cinq perf onnes, 
fcauoir eft, les deux Iefuites, leur feruiteur, 1' Apothi- 
caire Herbert, & vn autre. Le fieur de Biecourt & 
fes autres gens eftoyent tous bien loin, qui ca, qui la. 
Or parce que Hebert tenoit la place dudit fieur: on 
luy prefenta les lettres de la Royne, par lefquelles 
iuffion eftoit faidte de relacher les Iefuites, & leur 
permettre d'aller, ou bon leur sebleroit: ainfi les 
Iefuites retirerent leurs hardes en bonne paix. Et 
tant ce iour-la, que le fuiuant on fit la meilleur chere 
qu'on peut a Hebert, & a fon compagnon, a fin que 
cefte venue ne leur fuft point trifle. Au depart 
(quoy qu'ils ne fufset point en difette:) on leur laiffa 
vn barril de pain, & quelques [218] flaccons de vin, a 
ce que 1' Adieu fuft pareillement de bonne grace. 

La contrariete des vents nous retint enuiron cinq 
iours a Port Royal, d'ou s'efleuant vn profpere Nord- 
eft, nous partimes, en intention d'aller a la riuiere de 
Pentegoet, au lieu appelle Kadefquit, lieu qu'on auoit 
deftine pour la nouuelle habitation, & ayant a tel 
effect, beaucoup de grads auatages. Mais Dieu en 
difpofa autrement. Car comme nous fufmes au Sueft 
de l'Ifle de Menauo, le temps fe change, & furuint 
en mer vne fi efpaiffe brume, que nous n'y voyons 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 263 

Honfleur on the 12th of March, 1613, and landed first 
at Cap de la Heve on the coast of Acadie, on the 
1 6th of May, having consumed two entire months in 
the passage. At Cap de la Heve Mass was said, 
and a Cross erected, upon which was placed the coat 
of arms of Madame la Marquise de Guercheville, as 
a sign of having taken [2 1 7] possession of it in her 
name. Thence putting to sea again, they came to 
Port Royal. 

At Port Royal they only found five persons ; name- 
ly, the two Jesuits, their servant, the Apothecary 
Herbert 37 , and another. Sieur de Biencourt and the 
rest of his people were all quite far away, some here, 
some there. Now because Hebert was taking the 
place of the sieur, they presented to him the Queen's 
letters, which contained the royal command to re- 
lease the Jesuits and to let them go wherever they 
pleased ; so the Jesuits took away their property in 
great peace. And on that day as well as on the fol- 
lowing, they made it as pleasant for Hebert and his 
company as they could, so that this arrival would 
not be a cause of sadness to them. At their depar- 
ture, (although they were not in need of anything) 
they left them a barrel of bread and some [2 1 8] bot- 
tles of wine, that the Farewell might be received with 
equally good grace. 

Unfavorable winds kept us about five days at Port 
Royal, and then a propitious Northeaster arising, we 
departed, intending to go to the river Pentegoet, to 
the place called Kadesquit*~ the site destined for the 
new colony, and having many great advantages for 
such a purpose. But God ordained otherwise. For 
when we were to the Southeast of the Island of Me- 
nauo, 48 the weather changed, and there came upon 


264 LES RELATIONS DES J^SUITES [Vol.3 

non plus de iour que de nuidt. Nous apprehendions 
grandement ce danger, pourtat qu'en ceft endroit y 
a beaucoup de brifants, & rochers, contre lefquels 
nous craignions de donner parmy les tenebres; le 
vent ne nous [219] permettant point de nous tirer 
hors, & nous mettre au large. Nous demeurafmes 
en cefte faco deux iours & deux nuidts, virants tan- 
toft d'vn cofte, tantoft de 1' autre comme Dieu nous 
infpiroit. L'afnidtion nous efmeut de faire prieres 
& voeux a Dieu a ce qu'il luy pleuft nous deliurer du 
peril, & nous adreffer a quelque bon lieu pour fa 
gloire. De fa bonte il nous exauca, car au foir nous 
comencames a voir des eftoiles, & auec le matin les 
brouees fe diffiperent. Nous nous recogneufmes eftre 
au deuant des Monts deferts, Ifle que les Sauuages 
appellent Pemetiq. Le Pilote adreffa au cofte* Oriental 
de l'lfle, ou il nous logea en vn beau, & grand port, 
& nous y rendifmes nos vceus, efleuants vne Croix, & 
chantans a Dieu fes loiianges auec le facrifice de la 
faindte Meffe. Nous appellafmes [220] ce lieu & 
port Saindt Sauueur. 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 265 

the sea such a dense fog that we could see no more 
by day than by night. We had serious misgivings 
in this time of danger, because in this place there 
are breakers and rocks, against which we were afraid 
of striking in the darkness; the wind not [219] per- 
mitting us to draw away and stand out to sea. We 
continued thus two days and two nights, veering now 
to one side, now to the other, as God inspired us. 
We were moved by our affliction to offer prayers 
and vows to God, that he might be pleased to de- 
liver us from the danger, and direct us to some good 
place for his glory. In his goodness he hearkened 
to us, for when evening came on we began to see the 
stars, and by morning the fogs had all disappeared. 
We recognized that we were opposite Mount desert, 
an Island, which the Savages call Pemctiq. 4 ® The pilot 
turned to the Eastern shore of the Island, and there 
located us in a large and beautiful port, where we 
made our thanksgiving to God, raising a Cross and 
singing to God his praises with the sacrifice of the 
holy Mass. We called [220] this place and port Saint 
Sauveur. 


266 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.3 


CHAPITRE XXVI. [i.e., xxiv.] 

A QUELLE OCCASION NOUS NOUS ARRESTAMES A 
SAINCT SAUUEUR, LA BONTE DU LIEU. 

OR en ce Port icy de S. Sauueur grande conten- 
tion s'efleua entre les Matelots, & noftre equi- 
page on nous autres paffagers. La caufe en 
efloit, parce que la charte partie, & l'accord palfe" en 
France portants, que lefdits Matelots feroyent tenus 
anchrer en vn Port de l'Acadie, que nous leur nom- 
merions; & la feiourner l'efpace de trois mois: Lef- 
dits Matelots fe maintenoyet eflre arriu6s en vn Port 
de l'Acadie, & que partant ledit terme de trois mois 
deuoit courir d6s ceft'arriu£e. On leur repliquoit 
[221] que le Port n'eftoit point celuy qu'on leur 
auoit nomine" Kadefquit, & partant, que le temps ne 
courroit point auant qu'ils y fuflent. Le Pilote s'opi- 
niaflroit la cotre, maintenant, que iamais nauire 
n'eftoit alle iufques a Kadefquit, & qu'il ne vouloit 
point fe faire vn defcouureur de nouuelles routes: il 
y auoit auffi faute, au nom de l'Acadie, pour dire la 
Norambegue, ce qui augmentoit la difpute: raifons 
deca, raifons dela. Rien que plaidoyerie, mauuais 
augure de l'aduenir. 

Sur ces conteftes, des Sauuages nous firent de la 
fum£e. Ce fignal veut dire, qu'on les aille reco- 
gnoiftre, fi on a befoin d'eux, ce qu'on fit. Le Pilote 
par occafion leur dit, que les Peres de Port Royal 
eftoyent en fon nauire. Les Sauuages repliquerent, 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 267 


CHAPTER XXVI. [i.e., xxiv.] 

WHY WE STAYED AT SAINT SAUVEUR; THE GOOD 
QUALITIES OF THE PLACE. 

NOW here in this Port of St. Sauveur a great 
contention arose between the Sailors and our 
company, or us other passengers, because the 
charter party and contract, drawn up in France, 
stipulated that the Sailors should be held at anchor 
in a Port of Acadie, which we should name to them, 
and should remain there for the space of three 
months ; the sailors maintained that they had arrived 
at a Port of Acadie, and that therefore the said term 
of three months should begin to run from the time 
of this arrival. It was explained to them [221] that 
the Port was not the one that had been designated to 
them by the name of Kadesquit, and therefore the 
time would not begin to be counted until they were 
there. The Pilot obstinately opposed this, maintain- 
ing that a ship had never gone as far as Kadesquit, 
and that he had no intention of becoming a discov- 
erer of new routes; there was also some mistake 
about the name Acadie meaning Norambegue, 8 which 
strengthened the dispute ; reasons here, reasons there ; 
nothing but argument, a bad augury for the future. 

During these quarrels, the Savages signaled to us 
with smoke. This means that we can go and find 
them if we need them, which we did. The Pilot in- 
cidentally remarked to these Savages that the Port 
Royal Fathers were in his ship. They answered 


268 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

qu'ils verroyent bien volotiers celuy qu'ils [222] 
auoyent cogneu y auoit deus ans, a Pentegoet. Ce 
cogneu, eftoit le P. Biard qui les alia incontinent 
trouuer, & s'informat d'eux touchant la route de 
Kadefquit, leur fignifia, qu'il s'y vouloit habituer. 
Mais (dirent-ils) fi tu veux te loger en ces quartiers, 
que ne demeures tu pluftoft icy auecques nous, qui 
auons bien vne autant belle & bonne place que Ka- 
defquit? Et commencerent a luy raconter les loii- 
anges de leur demeure, affeurants qu'elle eftoit fi 
faine, & fi agreable, que quand les Sauuages font 
malades autrepart, ils fe font porter en ce lieu, & y 
gueriffent. Ces benedidtions n'efmouuoyent pas 
beaucoup le P. Biard, parce qu'il fcauoit affez que 
les Sauuages ne manquoyet point de ce en quoy quafi 
tout chacun abonde; c'eft de fcauoir prifer fes den- 
ies. Mais ils fceuret [223] bie bander la machine 
pour l'enleuer. Car (dirent-ils) il faut que tu viennes : 
d'autant que Afticou noftre Sagamo eft malade a la 
mort, & fi tu ne viens il mourra fans baptefme, & 
n'ira pas au ciel. Tu en feras la caufe, car pour luy 
il voudroit bien eftre baptife. Cefte raifon ainfi 
naifuement deduidte, fit eftonner le P. Biard, & luy 
perfuada totalement de s'y en aller, veu mefmes qu'il 
n'y auoit que trois lieues a faire: & que pour tout il 
n'y entreuenoit pas plus grande perte de temps, que 
d'vne apres difnee; ainfi il fe mit dans vn de leurs 
cauots auec le fieur de la Mote Lieutenant, & Simon 
l'interprete, & s'en allerent. 

Arriues aux cabanes d'Afticou, nous le trouuames 
malade voirement: mais non pas a mort, car ce 
n'eftoit qu'vn rheume, qui le tourmentoit: partant 
l'affeurance de [224] fes forces nous donna beau loifir 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 269 

that they would like very much to see the one with 
whom they [222] had become acquainted two years 
before at Pentegoet. This was Father Biard, who 
went immediately to see them, and in asking about 
the route to Kadcsquit, said he wished to go there to 
live. " But " (said they) " if thou wishest to stay in 
these regions, why dost thou not rather remain here 
with us, who have truly as good and beautiful a place 
as Kadesquit ? " And they began to sing the praises 
of their home, assuring him that it was so healthy, 
and so agreeable, that when the Savages are sick in 
other parts, they have themselves brought to this 
place and here recover. These blessings did not 
affect Father Biard much, for he knew that the Sav- 
ages did not lack that with which almost every one is 
abundantly provided, namely, the ability to praise 
their own wares. But they knew [223] well how to 
use their machinations against him to carry him off. 
' ' For, ' ' (said they) " it is necessary that thou comest, 
since Asticou, 16 our Sagamore, is sick unto death; and 
if thou dost not come he will die without baptism, 
and will not go to heaven. Thou wilt be the cause 
of it, for he himself wishes very much to be bap- 
tized." This argument, so naively deduced, aston- 
ished Father Biard, and fully persuaded him to go 
there, especially as it was only three leagues away, 
and in all there would result no greater loss of time 
than one afternoon ; so he got into one of their canoes 
with sieur de la Mote, Lieutenant, and Simon the in- 
terpreter, and went off. 

When we arrived at Asticou' s cabins, we found him 
truly sick, but not unto death, for it was only a cold 
that troubled him; so having assured ourselves of 
[224] his good condition, we had plenty of leisure to go 


270 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [Vol.3 

d'aller vifiter ce lieu tant vante\ & meilleur que Ka- 
defquit pour vn' habitation Francoife. Et de vraye 
nous ne trouuafmes point, que les Sauuages euffent 
eu mauuaife raifon de le haut louer, car nous mefmes 
nous en efmerueillions ; & en ayants porte* les nou- 
uelles aux principaux de noftre equipage : & eux 
encores l'eftants venu recognoiftre tous vnanimet 
confentirent, qu'il falloit s'arrefter la, & ne point 
chercher mieux, veu mefmement, qu'il fembloit que 
Dieu le nous difoit par les heureux rencontres, qui 
nous eftoyent arriu£s, & par vn euident miracle, qu'il 
fit en la guerifon d'vn enfant, de laquelle nous par- 
lerons autre-part. 

Ce lieu, eft vne iolie colline efleu^e doucement 
deffus la mer, & baign6e a fes coftes de deux [225] 
f ontaines ; la terre y eft eflart6e a vingt, ou vingt & 
cinq arpes, herbue en quelques endroits prefque a la 
hauteur d'vn homme. Son afpect eft au Midy & 
Orient, quafi a l'emboucheure de Pentegoet, & oil fe 
defcharget plufieurs agreables, commodes, & poiflon- 
neufes riuieres, le terroir y eft noir, gras, & fertile ; 
Le Port & Haure font des plus beaux, qu'on puifle 
voir, & en endroit propre pour commander a toute la 
cofte; le Haure fpecialement eft affeure' comm'vn 
eftang. Car outre qu'il eft repare" de la grande Ifle 
des Mots deferts, il l'eft encores de certaines petites 
Iflettes, qui rompent les flots & les vents, & forti- 
fient fon entree. II n'y a flotte, de laquelle il ne foit 
capable, ny fi haut nauire, qui ne puifle s'approcher 
de terre pour def charger, iufques a la longueur d'vn 
chable. Sa fituation [226] eft a quarante quatre de- 
gr6s, & vn tiers d'eleuation; pofition moins encores 
boreale, que celle de Bourdeaux 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, i6i6 271 

and visit this place, so greatly boasted about and so 
much better for a French settlement than Kadesquit. 
And in truth we found that the Savages were not 
wrong in praising it so highly, for we ourselves were 
wonderfully astonished ; and having carried the news 
to the chiefs of our company, and they having come 
to view the place, all unanimously agreed that we 
ought to stay there and not look for anything better, 
especially as it seemed as if God told us to do so 
through the fortunate events which had happened to 
us, and through an evident miracle which he per- 
formed in the restoration of a child, of which we 
shall speak elsewhere. 

This place is a beautiful hill, rising gently from 
the sea, its sides bathed by two [225] springs; the 
land is cleared for twenty or twenty-five acres, and in 
some places is covered with grass almost as high as a 
man. It faces the South and East, and is near the 
mouth of the Pentegoet, where several broad and 
pleasant rivers, which abound in fish, discharge their 
waters; its soil is dark, rich and fertile; the Port and 
Harbor are as fine as can be seen, and are in a posi- 
tion favorable to command the entire coast; the Har- 
bor especially is as safe as a pond. For, besides being 
strengthened by the great Island of Mount desert, 
it is still more protected by certain small Islands 
which break the currents and the winds, and fortify 
the entrance. There is not a fleet which it is not 
capable of sheltering, nor a ship so deep that could 
not approach within a cable's length of the shore to 
unload. It is situated [226] in latitude forty- four and 
one-third degrees, a position still less northerly than 
that of Bourdeaux. 

Now having landed at this place and planted here 


272 LES RELATIONS DES /^SUITES [Vol.3 

Or eftants defcendus en ce dit lieu, & y ayans 
plante la Croix, nous commencames a trauailler, & 
auec le trauail commencerent auffi nos conteftations, 
fecond lignal, & prodige de nos mal-heurs. La caufe 
de ces conteftations eftoit d'autat que la Sauffaye, 
noftre Capitaine, s'amufoit trop a cultiuer la terre, & 
tous les principaux le prefloyent de ne point diftraire 
en cela les ouuriers, ains de vacquer fans refpit aux 
alogement & fortification, ce qu'il ne vouloit pas 
faire. De cefte cotention en fourdirent des autres 
iufques a ce que l'Anglois nous mit treftous de bon 
accord, ainfi que vous ouyrez tout maintenant. 


1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 273 

the Cross, we began to work ; and with the beginning 
of work also began the quarrels, a second sign and 
augury of our ill luck. The cause of these dissen- 
sions was principally that la Saussaye, our Captain, 
amused himself too much in cultivating the land, 
while all the chiefs of the enterprise were urging him 
not to employ the laborers for that purpose, but to 
get to work without delay upon the houses and forti- 
fications, which he did not wish to do. From these 
disputes sprang others, until the English brought us 
all to an understanding with each other, as you will 
hear immediately. 


274 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 


CHAPITRE XXVII. [i.e., xxv.] 

[227] NOSTRE PRINSE PAR LES ANGLOIS. 

LA Virginie eft le continent de terre, que les an- 
ciens appelloyent, Mocofa. entre la Floride, & 
la nouuelle France fur les 36. 37. & 38. degrez 
d'eleuation. Ce pais auoit premierement efte def- 
couuert, & faifi par lean Verazan au nom de Francois 
premier (ainfi que nous auons dit cy deuant) mais les 
Anglois l'ayants recognu defpuis, fcauoir eft l'an 
1593. & 1594. en fin l'a sot venus habiter, defpuis 
feulement fept, ou huidt ans. Leur demeure prin- 
cipale, qu'ils appellent Ieutom, eft diftante de S. 
Sauueur ou nous nous eftions logez d'enuiron 250. 
lieiies par droidtes routes Regardez [228] s'ils ont 
bien dequoy nous quereller. 

Or ces Anglois de la Virginie ont accouftume tous 
les ans de venir aux Ifles de Peucoit, qui font a 25. 
lieiies de nostre S. Sauueur, a celle fin de fe pour- 
ueoir de moulues pour leur hyuer. S'y acheminants 
doncques felon cefte couftume en l'Efte de l'ann£e 
de laquelle nous parlons 16 13. aduint qu'en mer ils 
furent furprins des brumes, & broiiillas, que nous 
auons dit cy deuant, s'efpandre fouuent l'Efte fur 
ces terres & mer. Pendant qu'elles durerent quel- 
ques iours, la maree les ietta infenfiblement beaucoup 
plus loin au Nordefl, qu'ils n'eufTent pense\ Car ils 
eftoyent bien quatre vintgs lieiies plus auat dans la 
nouuelle France, qu'ils ne croyoyent, au pres de 


1611-16] B/ARD'S RELATION, 1616 


275 


CHAPTER XXVII. [i.e. xxv.] 

[227] OUR CAPTURE BV THE ENGLISH. 

VIRGINIA is that continent which our forefathers 
called Mocosa, between Florida and new France 
under the 36th, 37th, and 38th parallels of north 
latitude. This country was first discovered and taken 
possession of by Jean Verazan in the name of Francis 
first (as we have said before) ; but the English, hav- 
ing explored it since then; namely, in the years 1593 
and 1594, finally came there to inhabit it only seven 
or eight years ago. Their principal settlement, 
which they call Jeutom [Jamestown] is distant from 
St. Sauveur, where we were located, about 250 leagues 
in a direct line. Judge [228] if they have any good 
reason for quarreling with us. 

Now these English of Virginia are accustomed 
every year to come to the Peucoit Islands, 50 which are 
25 leagues from our St. Sauveur, to lay in a supply 
of codfish for the winter. They were making for 
this place, as usual, in the Summer of the year of which 
we are speaking, 161 3, when they happened to be 
caught in the fogs and drizzling rains which, as has 
been stated, often spread over these lands and seas 
during the summer. In the few days that they con- 
tinued, the current imperceptibly cast them much 
farther to the Northeast than they thought. For 
they were fully eighty leagues nearer to new France 
than they supposed, being in the neighborhood of 
our port. But not recognizing the place, [229] un- 


276 


LES RELA T10NS DES J ^SUITES [Vol. 3 


noftre port. Mais ne fe cognoiffants point au lieu, a 
[229] la mal'heure quelques Sauuages pafferent par 
la, qui les allerent trouuer cuidants que ce fuffent 
Francois, qui nous cherchaffent. les Anglois n'enten- 
doyent rien en Sauuage : mais aux geftes, & facons 
de faire ils recogneurent affez qu'on leur faifoit figne, 
qu'il y auoit vn vaiffeau la aupres, & qu'iceluy vaif- 
feau eftoit Francois, car ils entendoyet le mot de 
Normandia, duquel il nous appellent: & aux cere- 
monies, que les Sauuages faifoyent pour leur com- 
plaire, ils recognoiffent, que c'eftoyent ceremonies 
de courtoifie, & ciuilite Francoife. Doncques les 
Anglois, qui eftoyet en neceffite\ & de viures, & de 
tout; defchirez, demy-nuds & ne queftans que proye ; 
s'enquirent diligemment combien grand eftoit noftre 
vaiffeau, combien nous auions de Canons, combien 
de gens, &c. [230] Et ayants eu refponfe fuffifante, 
& qui leur plaifoit, firent vn cry ioyeux demonftrants, 
que c'eftoit bien ce qu'ils cherchoyent, & qu'on les 
menait a nous: car ils ne defiroyent autre. Auffi ne 
faifoyent-ils, mais ce n' eftoit pas en la fa^on, que les 
Sauuages l'entendoyent ; car les Sauuages eftimoyent 
que ce fuffent aucuns de nos bons amis, eftants en 
grande peine de nous: & qui d' auntie" defiraffent fur 
tout de nous voir. Par ainfi vn d'entre eux demeura 
dans leur nauire pour les conduire a nous; ce qu'il 
fit le bon vent venu. L'Anglois des qu'il nous def- 
couurit commenca a fe preparer au combat, & ce fut 
lors que le bon homme de Sauuage recogneuft, qu'il 
auoit efte" trompe, dont il fe print a plourer & lamen- 
ter fa faute, & maudire ceux qui l'auoyent ainfi 
de§eu. Souuent [231] defpuis il a ploure, & demande* 
pardon de cefte fienne defaduenture, & a nous & aux 


lf.U-16J BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 


277 


fortunately some Savages passed that way, who went 
to see them, supposing they were French people look- 
ing for us. The English understood nothing of the 
Savage language, but from their gestures and actions 
they easily gathered that they were trying to make 
them understand that a vessel was near by, and it was 
a French vessel, for they heard the word "Norman- 
dia," the name by which we were called: and the 
acts of courtesy which the Savages performed to 
please them, they recognized as French ceremonies of 
civility and politeness. Therefore the English, who 
were in need of food and all other things, ragged and 
half-naked, seeking nothing but booty, inquired dili- 
gently as to the size of our ship, how many Cannon 
we had, how many men, etc. [230] Having received 
full and satisfactory answers, they uttered a joyful 
shout, indicating that this was just what they had 
been looking for, and that they might lead them to 
us, for they desired nothing better. Nor were they 
pretending, but it was not in this way that the Sav- 
ages understood the matter; for they thought that 
these were some good friends of ours, who were in 
great anxiety about us, and who, through friendship, 
wished to see us above all other things. Hence one 
of them remained in their ship to conduct them 
thither; this he did, a favorable wind having arisen. 
The English, when they discovered us, began to pre- 
pare themselves for the fight, and it was then that the 
poor simple Savage recognized that he had been im- 
posed upon, when he began to weep and to deplore 
his mistake, and to curse those who had thus deceived 
him. Often [231] since then he has lamented and 
begged forgiveness for his misadventure, both from 
us and from the other Savages ; for they wished to 


278 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

autres Sauuages ; parce que les autres Sauuages vou- 
loyent venger noftre mal'heur fur luy, penfants que 
de malice il en euft efte la caufe. 

Or nous, conftderants ce nauire venir ainfi de loin 
a pleines voyles, ne fcauions que penfer, fi c'eftoyent 
amis, ou ennemis, Fran9ois ou eftrangiers. A cefte 
caufe le Pilote s'en alia au deuant dans vne chaloupe 
pour les recognoiftre, tandis que les autres s'ar- 
moyent. La Sauflaye demeura a terre & y retint la 
plufpart des hommes: la Mote Lieutenant, Ronfere" 
Enfeigne, & Ioubert Sergent, & tous les plus delibe- 
rez allerent au nauire. Auffi eftoit-ce la ou Ion deuoit 
recognoiftre les gens de bien. 

[232] Le nauire Anglois venoit plus vifte qu'vn 
dard, ayant le vent a fouhait, tout pauis de rouge, les 
pauillons d' Angleterre flottans, & trois t[r]ompettes & 
deux tambours faifants rage de fonner. Noftre pilote, 
qui eftoit alle defcouurir ne reuint point a fon nauire, 
parce (dit-il) que les Anglois auoyent le vent fur luy, 
& partant pour ne tomber en leurs mains, il s'en alia 
prendre le circuit d'vne Ifle. Tant y a qu'a cefte 
occafion le nauire fe trouua deftitue' de la moitie de 
fes Matelots, & n'auoit autres gens de defenfe que 
dix en tout, encores n'y en auoit-il aucun de tous qui 
fuft entendu aux combats de mer, hors le Capitaine 
Flory, qui de vray ne manqua ny de conduidte ny de 
courage. Mais il n'auoit ny affez de temps pour fe 
preparer, ny des gens, a caufe dequoy il ne peut le- 
uer l'anclire pour fe [233] def engager : ce qu'eft toutes- 
fois la premiere chofe qu'on doit faire es combats de 
la mer, combien qu'auffi en vain euft-on leue l'anchre, 
confidere que les voyles eftoyent empeftrees. Car a 
caufe que c'eftoit l'Efte, & qu'on feiournoit au port 




1611-16] BIARD'S RELATION, 1616 279 


take revenge upon him for our misfortune, thinking 
he had been the malicious cause of it. 

Now we, gazing upon this ship bearing down upon 
us thus from afar off, with full sails, did not know 
what to think, whether they were friends or foes, 
French or strangers. Whereupon the Pilot went out 
in a boat on a tour of discovery, while the others 
armed themselves. La Saussaye remained on shore 
and there kept the greater part of the men : Lieuten- 
ant la Mote, Ensign Ronsere, Sergeant Joubert, and 
all the more resolute men went to the ship. For it 
was there that the good men ought to be found. 

[232] The English ship came on swifter than an 
arrow, driven by a propitious wind, all screened in 
pavesade 51 of red, the banners of England flying, and 
three trumpets and two drums making a horrible din. 
Our pilot, who had gone out reconnoitering, did not 
return to his ship, because (said he) the English had 
the wind of him, and therefore, not to fall into 
their hands, he started to go round an Island. At all 
events the ship was now deprived of half its Sailors, 
and had only ten men altogether to defend it ; and 
of these there were none who understood naval war- 
fare except Captain Flory, who certainly lacked 
neither courage nor the ability to command. But he 
had not time enough to prepare, nor the men, hence 
he could not heave the anchor to [233] free the boat; 
which is, however, the first thing to be done in a 
battle at sea. But how useless would it have been to 
heave anchor, when the sails were all disarranged. 
For as it was Summer, and, as the vessel was lying 
in port without apprehension of danger, they had 
stretched their sails in the form of a cradle from 
Stern to bitts, to shade the deck, hence they could 


280 


LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [Vol. i 


fans crainte, on les auoit tendues en forme de berceau 
&6s la Dunette iufques a la bite pour auoir ombre 
fur le tillac, d'oii Ion ne pouuoit les deffaire en fi peu de 
temps Mais ce malheur euft fort bonne chance : car 
a cefte occafion nos gents demeurerent fort bien cou- 
uerts pendant le combat, de maniere que les Anglois 
n'en pouuants choifir aucun durant leur efcopeterie, 
moins de gents furent ou tuez, ou bleffez. 

A l'approche, comme c'estla couftume de fommer, 
a dire, qui Ton eft: Nos gens crierent a la [234] Ma- 
rinefque leur O O. Mais 1' Anglois ne refpondit en 
ce ton, ains d'vn autre plus furieux, a grands coups 
de mofquet, & de canon. II auoit quatorze pieces 
d'artillerie, & foixante foldats mofquetaires duits au 
nauigage, &c. venants a la charge fur les coftez, fur 
le beau pre, a la dunette & ou il falloit, a la file, & 
en ordre, auffi bien que gens de pied font fur terre. 

La premiere efcopeterie fut terrible du cofte" de 
1' Anglois; tout le nauire eftoit en feu, & en fum6e. 
De noftre part on refpodoit froidement, & l'artillerie 
eftoit du tout muette. Le Capitaine Flory crioit 
bien lafche le canon, lafche; mais le Canonier n'y 
eftoit pas. Or Gilbert du Thet, qui de fa vie n' auoit 
efte paoureux, ny couart, ouyant ce cry, & ne voy- 
ant perfonne, qui obeift, print la mefche & nous fit 
parler auffi haut que [235] l'ennemy. Le mal fut 
qu'il ne mira pas, que s'il l'euft faidt, peut-eftre y 
euft-il eu quelque chofe de pis, que le bruit. 

L'Anglois apres cefte premiere, & furieufe efco- 
peterie mit fon nauire de cofte, & tenoit vn Anchre 
prepare" pour accrocher noftre bite. Le Capitaine 
Flory rila du chable fort a propos, ce qui arrefta l'en- 
nemy, & luy fit tourner a cofte: car il euft peur 


1611-16] WARD'S RELATION, 1616 281 


not be undone in so short a time. But this proved 
to be quite a lucky mischance : for in this way our 
people were well shielded during the fight, so that 
the English were not able to pick out any particular 
one for their musket shots, and fewer men were killed 
or wounded. 

At their approach, as it is usual to call upon them 
to say who they are, our people called out in [234] 
sailor- fashion their "OO." But the English did not 

respond in this tone, but in another far more violent 

with loud volleys from musket and cannon. They 
had fourteen pieces of artillery and sixty musketeers, 
trained to serve on ships, etc., and came to attack us 
upon the flanks, in front, behind, and wherever there 
was need, in regular order, as well as foot soldiers do 
on land. 

The first volley from the English was terrible, the 
whole ship being enveloped in fire and smoke. On 
our side they responded coldly, and the artillery was 
altogether silent. Captain Flory cried, " Fire the 
cannon, fire, ' ' but the Cannoneer was not there. Now 
Gilbert du Thet, who in all his life had never felt 
fear or shown himself a coward, hearing this com- 
mand and seeing no one obey it, took a match and 
made us speak as loudly as [235] the enemy. Unfor- 
tunately, he did not take aim; if he had, perhaps 
there might have been something worse than mere 


noise. 


The English, after this first and furious volley, 
came alongside of us, and held an Anchor ready to 
grapple our bitts. Captain Flory very opportunely 
paid out more cable, which stopped the enemy and 
made them turn away, for they were afraid if they 
pursued us we would draw them into shallow water ; 


2K2 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.3 

qu'en pourfuiuant on ne le vouluit attirer fur des 
baffes; defptiis voyant noftre nauire a requoy, & 
s'eftant rafleure, il recommenca les approches auec 
efcopeterie comme deuant. Ce fut en cefte feconde 
charge, que Gilbert du Thet receut vn coup de mof- 
quet dans le corps & tomba eftendu a l'enuers fur le 
tillac. Le Capitaine Flory fut auffi blefse" au pied, & 
autres trois autre part, ce qui fit faire figne, & [236] 
crier qu'on fe rendoit. Auffi certes la partie n'eftoit 
pas egale. A ce cry, l'Anglois fe ietta dans fon ba- 
teau pour venir a noftre nauire. Nos gents auffi par 
inauuais confeil, fe ietterent dans le leur, pour faire 
a terre: car ils craignoyent l'arriuee du vidtorieux. 
Le vainqueur fut pluftoft dans noftre nauire, qu'eux 
ne furent loin, & partant il fe print a leur crier, qu'ils 
retournaffent, & pour les y contraindre tiroit fur eux. 
Dequoy efpouuatez deux de nos ges fe ietterent dans 
leau pour a mo aduis gaigner terre a la nage, mais 
ils furent noyez, foit que ja ils euflent efte" bleffez, 
foit (ce qui eft plus vray femblable) qu'ils fuffent at- 
taints, & percez dans l'eau. C'eftoyent deux ieunes 
compagnons de bonne expectation, l'vn de Dieppe, 
appelle" le Moyne, l'autre dit Nepueu, de la ville de 
[237] Beauuais: leurs corps ne comparurent que neuf 
iours apres. On euft moyen de les prendre & religi- 
eufement les enterrer: telle fut la prinfe de noftre 
nauire. 


1611-16] WARD'S RELATION, 1616 283 


then seeing our vessel fall back, and thus being reas- 
sured, they again began to approach us, firing off the 
muskets as before. It was during this second charge 
that Gilbert du Thet received a musket shot in his 
body and fell stretched out across the deck. Captain 
Flory was also wounded in the foot, and three others 
in other places, which made them signal and [236] 
cry out that we surrendered, for it was evidently a 
very unequal match. At this cry the English jumped 
into their boat to come to our ship. Our men also, 
misled by bad advice, jumped into theirs with the 
hope of gaining the shore, for they feared the arrival 
of the victors. These, however, reached the ship be- 
fore our men could get away from it, and so they be- 
gan to yell to them to come back, and, to enforce the 
order, fired upon them. Frightened at this, two of 
our men threw themselves into the sea, in order, I be- 
lieve, to swim to the shore ; but they were drowned, 
either because they were already wounded, or (what 
seems more probable) because they were struck and 
wounded in the water. These were two very promis- 
ing young fellows, one from Dieppe, called le Moyne, 
the other named Nepveu, of the town of [237] Beau- 
vais ; their bodies did not appear until nine days later, 
when means were found to recover them and they 
were given a religious burial. Such was the capture 
of our ship. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. Ill 

XIII 

The original Latin MS. of Biard's letter to his gen- 
eral, dated at Amiens, May 26, 1614, is in the archives 
of the Gesu, at Rome. In 1858, Father Martin there 
copied this document, with others of like character; 
and in the present publication we follow his apograph, 
which is now preserved in the archives of St. Mary's 
College, Montreal. Martin's translation of the letter 
into French appears in Carayon's Premiere Mission, 
pp. 106-116. 

See Bibliographical Data in Volume I. of the pres- 
ent series, for particulars of Carayon's collection. 
The originals of the letters in Carayon, were writ- 
ten in three different languages: nos. 2, 5, 9, 12, 18, 
25, 27-31, were in French; nos. 13, 14, 15, 16, in Ital- 
ian; and the others in Latin. Letters to the general 
in Rome were for the most part in Italian or Latin, 
but those to the provincial in Paris were in French. 
The Italian and Latin letters were translated for 
Carayon, into French, in most cases by Martin, who 
had copied them for that publication. In our series. 
we have followed the printed pages of Carayon, for 
the French letters; but for the Italians and Latins 
(except Documents III., V., and VI., in Volume I.). 
have reverted for our copy to Martin's own apo- 
graphs, at Montreal, and our translations into Eng- 
lish are made directly from these. 

XIV 
We reprint Biard's Relation of 16 16 directly from 


286 LES RELA TIONS DES J&SUITES 

the printed original in Lenox Library. The Lenox 
copy has no original title-page, its place being sup- 
plied by a clever facsimile in pen-and-ink, said to be 
by Pilinski. For the present edition, we supply a 
photographic facsimile of the original title-page of 
the copy at the Bibliotheque Nationale (formerly 
Bibliotheque Royale), Paris; the plate shows the 
old library stamp, " Biblioteque Royale." The Paris 
copy is the only one known to us, at this writing, 
which has an original title-page. 

O'Callaghan issued a special reprint, " presque en 
facsimile," of this Relation (Albany, 1871), the edi- 
tion being limited to 25 copies, at $25 a copy. 

The Lenox Catalogue (p. 4), says that O'Calla- 
ghan followed the copy owned by Rufus King, of 
Jamaica, L. I. The whereabouts of this copy is un- 
known to us. The late Charles H. Kalbfleisch, of 
New York, at one time had a copy; but a letter to 
us from his son, Charles C, dated May 11, 1896, 
states that he does not know its present location. 
In the announcement of his facsimile, O'Callaghan 
said (see Murphy's Sale Catalogue, 1884, p. 33): 

" The owner of, we believe, the only copy in this country of the 
original edition of this Relation, has obligingly loaned it to me. In 
order to enable collectors who possess some of the Jesuit Relations 
to place at least beside these an exact reprint of this extremely rare 
volume, I have undertaken a small edition, reproducing the original, 
page for page, line for line. 

"The edition in the Collected Relations, published at Quebec, 
was printed from a transcript made from the only other known copy 
in the National Library at Paris. This transcript was to all appear- 
ances hastily and carelessly executed. The consequence is, that the 
Quebec edition abounds, as a minute collation proves, with grave 
errors of omission and alteration. 

' ' The present reprint will be limited to twenty -five copies, and 
will be supplied, in sheets, to subscribers at $25 a copy." 

The Lenox copy is marked on front fly leaf, "A 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. Ill 2*7 

very rare book," and it is understood that it cost 
1,000 francs, notwithstanding its pen-and-ink title- 
page. In the " Privilege," on the last page, the syl- 
lable u pro " has been accidentally omitted. O'Cal- 
laghan's facsimile reprint supplies this omission. In 
both, the " privilege "is in ten lines, but the con- 
tents of the lines differ. 

Harrisse says (no. 30), concerning Biard's Relation 
of 1616: " Some bibliographers cite, but without 
having seen, a relation published at Lyons in 161 2, 
and which was the first edition of the one we have 
just described; but that is hardly possible, since the 
events described in that relation extend up to the 
year 16 14. As for the relations, the titles of which 
are given in Latin, we think that they are the letters 
addressed by Father Biard [given in Volumes I. and 
II. of this series]. That of January 31, 161 1 [1612J, 
was published in the Annua Littcrce Socictatis Jesu, 
printed at Lyons by Claude Cayne, but not till 161 8. 
It is probably the same of which Jouvency gives the 
text in his Histoire de la SoaVte de Jesus. Sotwell also 
cites \Bibliothcca Script. Soc. Jesu], a Relatio Expedition is 
Anglorum in Canada ;u, of Father Biard, which is 
probably the letter which Father Biard wrote to 
Father Claude Aquaviva regarding the act of piracy 
committed upon him by Argall. It is possible that 
there were, at that period, publications of these let- 
ters both in Latin and French ; but we have been 
able to find only one instance of this." Brunet's 
Supplement says the alleged 16 12 edition of the Nou- 
velle France is spurious. All of the foregoing letters 
by Biard, cited by Harrisse, are given in Volumes I. 
and II. of the present series. 

See other references in Brown's Genesis of the United 


28K 


LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES 


States (Boston, 1890), vol. ii., p. 707; Leclerc, no. 2482 ; 
Sabin, vol. ii., no. 5136; Ternaux, no. 380; Lenox, 
p. 4; Winsor, p. 300; Brown, vol. ii., no. 178; and 
the Barlow (no. 251) and Murphy (no. 244) sale cat- 
alogues. Leclerc describes the Lenox copy ; most of 
the others, the O'Callaghan facsimile reprint. 

Title-page. Photographic facsimile, from original 
in Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris. 

Collation of Lenox copy . Title, 1 p.; blank, reverse 
of title, 1 p.; dedication "Av Roy," 3 unnumbered 
pp. ; Avant-Propos, 7 unnumbered pp. ; text, pp. 
1-338. Table, 34 unnumbered pp. ; privilege, 1 p. 

Peculiarities. Only the pages of the text are num- 
bered; p. 191 is, from typographical error, wrongly 
numbered 181. The numbering of the chapters is 
erratic. From i. to x. they are correctly numbered, 
but thereafter the variations are as follows : 


CHAP. 

CHAP. 

CHAP. 

CHAP 

xi. ( 

incorrectly numbered xii. 

XXV., incorrectly nu 

mbered xxvii. 

xii., 

" " xiii. 

xxvi. , ' ' 

" xxviii. 

xiii., 

" " xi v. 

xxvii. , ' ' 

" xxix. 

xiv., 

" " XV. 

xxviii., " 

" xxx. 

XV., 

" " xvi. 

xxix. , " 

" xxxii. 

xvi., 

" " xvii. 

xxx. , ' ' 

" xxxi. 

xvii., 

" " xviii. 

xxxi. , " 

" xxxii. 

xviii., 

" " xxi. 

xxxii., correctly 

" xxxii. 

xix., 

" " XX. 

xxxiii. , incorrectly 

" xxxi v. 

XX.. 

" " xxi. 

xxxi v., " 

" XXXV. 

xxi., 

" " xxiii. 

XXXV., " 

" xxxvi. 

xxii., 

" " xxiv. 

xxxvi., " 

" xxxvii. 

xxiii., 

W 1 \7 

" " XXV. 

t * 1 * w\ri 

xxxvii., " 

' ' xxxviii 


XXIV., 

The editor of the Quebec reprint overcame the 
difficulty without explanation, by correcting the 
enumeration throughout. O'Callaghan, without com- 
ment, corrects numbering of p. 191, in his facsim- 
ile, but follows original in numbering the chapters. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. Ill 289 

Owing to the length of this document, we give only 
the first twenty-five chapters thereof, in the present 
volume ; the others will appear in Volume IV. 


NOTES TO VOL. Ill 

{Figures in parentheses, follozving number of note, refer to pages 
of English text. ) 

i (p. 39). — See vol. ii., note 71. 

2 (p. 39). — Ocean of Guienne: one of many names applied to 
the Atlantic Ocean. The Catalan Mappemonde (1375) names it 
Mare Ochceanum; Fra Mauro's "World" (1439), Oceanus Athlanti- 
cus; Ptolemy's map (ed. 1482), Oceanus Occidentalis ; Hondius's 
(1595), Mar del Nort. Cf. H. H. Bancroft's Central America, vol. 
i-. P- 373- 

3 (p. 39). — Ferland says (Cours d'Histoire, vol. i., pp. 11-13) 
of Aubert that in 1508 " he visited the Gulf of St. Lawrence; if we 
may believe the Dieppe chronicles, he ascended the river eighty 
leagues above its mouth, and brought to France a Canadian sav- 
age. " — Cf. vol. i., note 7. He also cites these Dieppe historians as 
declaring that Verrazano was commander of one of the two ships 
with which Aubert made the above voyage. The ship commanded 
by Aubert himself was named " La Pensee," and belonged, accord- 
ing to the "Gran Capitano " (Raimisio, iii., 359), to "Jean Ango, 
father of Captain Ango, and viscount of Dieppe." 

4 (p. 39). — Denys is said by many writers to have made a chart 
of the St. Lawrence ; but this is now seriously questioned. Dexter 
(in Winsor's N. and C. Hist., vol. iv., p. 4) says: "What now 
passes for such a chart is clearly of later origin." Harrisse says 
{Jean et Sebastien Cabot, pp. 250, 251) that it could not be found 
at Paris ; and that the chart in the Library of Parliament at Otta- 
wa, purporting to be a copy of Denys's, is " utterly apocryphal; " 
he also states (Discov. N. Amer., p. 181), that researches in the 
archives of Honfleur have proved fruitless for any information as 
to the expedition of Denys. Some information concerning his family 
is given by Breard, cited by Dionne {Nouv. France, p. 107, note 3). 

5 (p. 41). — Giovanni da Verrazano: probably born at Florence, 
Italy, soon after 1480. He was apparently a corsair in French em- 
ploy, by the year 1521, harassing the commerce of Spain with the 
New World; while thus engaged, he assumed the name of Juan 
Florin, or Florentin. Under commission from Francis I. of France, 
he made a voyage during the first half of the year 1524 (not 1523), 


292 


LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES 


" to discover a western passage to Cathay." In the " Dauphine," 
with a crew of fifty men, he explored the Atlantic coast from about 
27 to 43° north latitude (that is, _ from Florida to Maine) ; then sailed 
to " the country already discovered by the Bretons," thence return- 
ing to France. His letter to the court, announcing his safe arrival 
at Dieppe, was published by Ramusio, in vol. iii. of his Raccolta 
(1556). A translation of this letter (with a note by Edwin D. Mead, 
the editor), is given in Old South Leaflets, general series, no. 17. 
Little is known of Verrazano's subsequent history; but it is gener- 
ally supposed that he was hanged as a pirate, at Cadiz, Spain, in 
November, 1527. — See Dexter, in Winsor's N. and C. Hist., vol. iv., 
pp. 5-9; and Margry's Navig. Fr. pp. 194-19°. 205-218. H. C. Mur- 
phy ( Voyages of Verrazano, N. Y., 1875), and others, have doubted 
whether Verrazano ever made this voyage ; Harrisse gives an ex- 
haustive discussion of the whole matter in his Discov. N. Amer., 
pp. 214-228, as does Winsor, in N. and C. Hist., vol. iv., pp. 16-27. 
The discoveries of Verrazano are shown on a mappa-mundi, made 
in 1529 by his brother Hieronimo; this is fully described by Winsor, 
in above citation. 

6 (p. 41). — See vol. ii., note 48. 

7 (p. 41).— This chart is probably the one mentioned by Biard in 
doc. x. ; see vol. ii., note 12. 

8 (p. 41).— On Norembega, see vol. i., note 11.— Cf. Dionne's 
Nouv. France, pp. 257-263. Biard himself uses this term {post) to 
designate the region wherein lay St. Sauveur. 

The name Acadia (see vol. i., note 2) was in general use up to the 
downfall of the French regime (1763)- 

9 (p. 41).— The first of these attempts at colonization was in- 
spired by the explorations of Jacques Cartier (who, according to 
Harrisse, was born at St. Malo, December 31. 1494; died September 
1, 1557)- Having obtained letters patent from Francis I., he sailed 
to Canada in April, 1534, with two ships, and explored the coasts 
of Newfoundland, Labrador, and the Gulf of St. Lawrence, but did 
not enter the great river. On his second voyage, however (1535). 
he explored the St. Lawrence, Saguenay, and St. Charles, and 
ascended as far as Hochelaga, on the island of Montreal. Building 
a fort near Quebec, he spent the winter there, losing many of his 
men through sickness, and returned to France in July, 1536- A 
list of the ship's company on this voyage, taken from an old register 
of St. Malo, is given by Rame in his Documents Inidits sur Jacques 
Cartier (Paris, 1865), pp. 10-12. Cartier's third voyage was made 
in 1 541, as master-pilot of an expedition undertaken by Jean Fran- 
cois de la Roque, Sieur de Roberval (a town near Boulogne), whom 
the king had appointed lieutenant and governor of Canada. (For 


NOTES TO VOL. Ill 293 


the latter's commission, with other documents concerning him, 
see Harrisse's Notes, pp. 243-247.) Cartier sailed several months 
earlier than his patron, whose preparations were not completed; 
again ascended the St. Lawrence, and again spent the winter in 
that region,— this time about four leagues above Quebec. Mean- 
while, Roberval carried from France some 200 persons, including a 
few adventurous gentlemen, but largely recruited from the con- 
demned criminals of Paris, Toulouse, and other cities, both men 
and women. According to Gosselin (cited by Dionne, Nouv. 
France, p. 25, note 3), there were among them, also, fifty from St. 
Malo, convicted of heresy and lese-majeste. With this motley 
throng, he established a residence at Cartier's abandoned fort, below 
Quebec, and spent the ensuing winter there, many of the people 
dying from famine and scurvy. It is uncertain whether Cartier was 
with him during any part of this sojourn ; but the former seems to 
have returned to France in 1542; some writers claim that this action 
resulted from a quarrel between him and Roberval. In 1543, how- 
ever, Cartier went, by command of the king, to rescue Roberval 
and what remained of his unfortunate colony.— See Harrisse's Notes, 
pp. 1-5, 11, 12; Faillon's Col. Fr., vol. i., pp. 38-55, 496-523; Win- 
sor's N. and C. Hist., vol. iv., pp. 56-59; and Dionne's Nouv. 
France, pp. 9-54. 

The next enterprise of this sort was attempted in 1598, by a 
nobleman, Troilus de Mesgouez, marquis de la Roche, etc. ; gover- 
nor of Morlaix from 1568 to 1586, afterwards of St. Lo. Lescarbot 
gives, in his Nouv. France (1612), pp. 422-429, La Roche's commis- 
sion from Henry IV. Gathering from the prisons a shipload of con- 
victs, as material for a colony, and landing them temporarily on 
Sable Island (see vol. ii., note 20), he was driven thence by a storm, 
and forced to return to France. Broken by misfortunes, he died in 
1606.— See Faillon's Col. Fr., vol. i., pp. 66-71; Dionne's Nouv. 
France, pp. 151-189, 299-310; and Harrisse's Notes, pp. 12-14. 
Ferland (Cours d'Histoire, vol. i., pp. 60, 61) argues that La 
Roche's voyage was made in 1578, or soon afterward. 

No other colonial enterprises seem to have been actually under- 
taken until those of Champlain. 

10 (p. 47 )._Now Cornouaille; a district, then a part of Lower 
Brittany ; also the name of a port near Quimper. 

11 (p. 47).— Now Fuenterrabia, in the province of Guipuzcoa, 
Spain, close to the French boundary-line ; noted for its strong fort- 
ress (until 1494), and for Wellington's passage here of the Bidassoa 
(1813). 

is (p. 57).— Sir Francis Drake, one of England's most renowned 
navigators and explorers; named "the Dragon" (by a play upon 


294 


LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES 


his name), in Spanish annals of the time, on account of his fiery and 
merciless attacks upon the commerce and colonies of Spain. He 
was a native of Devonshire, England, probably born about 1540; and 
became a sailor in his boyhood. After several voyages to foreign 
lands, he commanded one of Sir John Hawkins's ships (the 
"Judith"), on a voyage to the West Indies, in 1567-68; and from 
this time until his death was actively engaged in navigation, in war, 
or in the public service. His most famous voyage is that around the 
world (December, 1577 -September, 1580), in which he discovered 
(March -July, 1579), the coasts of California and Oregon, of which 
he took possession in the name of England — a claim never advanced, 
however, by the English crown. To this country he gave the name 
of New Albion, which for some time was applied by cartographers to 
the present Oregon ; it is shown on Lady Virginia Ferrer's map 
(London, 1651). Another notable voyage was that to America 
(September, 1585 -July, 1586), in which Drake, under royal commis- 
sion, ravaged the Spanish main, taking many towns and much 
treasure. While on a voyage with Hawkins, he died (January 28, 
1596), and was buried at sea. 

The reference in the text is to a passage in the narration of 
Francis Fletcher, Drake's chaplain, The World Encompassed by Sir 
Francis Drake (London, 1628): "June 3, we came into 42 deg. of 
North latitude, where in the night following we found such altera- 
tion of heate, into extreame and nipping cold, that our men in gen- 
erall did grieuously complaine thereof, some of them feeling their 
healths much impaired thereby; ... the next day . . . 
the very roapes of our ship were stiff e, and the raine which fell was 
an vnnatural congealed and frozen substance. . . . In 38 d eg. 
30 min. we fell with a conuenient and fit harborough, and June 17 
came to anchor therein, where we continued till the 23 day of July 
following. During all which time, notwithstanding it was in the 
height of summer, and so neere the sunne, yet were wee continually 
visited with like nipping colds as we had felt before." This was 
the experience of the English (according to Fletcher, though his 
veracity is questioned by some writers), while sailing along the west- 
ern coast of North America, from the region of Cape Blanco to Cape 
Mendocino.— See Hakluyt Society reprint of The World Encom- 
passed (London, 1854), PP- «*-«»■ Cf - H - H " Bancroft's History 
oj the Northwest Coast (San Francisco, 1886), vol. 1., pp. I39-M5- 
Drake's aim in this voyage was to find a northern passage from 
the Pacific to the Atlantic. Such a passage was supposed to exist, 
and was termed "the Straits of Anian;" Cortereal having found, 
as he imagined, its eastern end in Hudson's Straits. This supposed 
passage across the continent is shown on Zaltieri's map (1566), 


NO TES TO VOL. Ill 295 


Mercator's (1569), Porcacchi's (1572), Furlano's (1574). and others. 
For various theories as to the origin of the name Anian, see Ban- 
croft, ut supra, vol. i., pp. 53-50. 

13 (P- 57)- — On some early charts was shown an imaginary lake, 
Conibas,— its waters flowing through a river or strait into the great 
Northern sea, as in the Wytfleit-Ptolemy map (1597); or into the 
mythical " Straits of Anian," as in Judaeis's map (1593). an d Low's 
(1598). On Wytfleit's map is shown, within the lake, an island and 
town of the same name. See Bancroft's N. W. Coast, vol. 1., pp. 
84-85: and Winsor's N. and C. Hist. vol. ii., p. 457. Bancroft 
thinks that the notion of the lake was ' ' probably owing to Canadian 
aboriginal rumors," doubtless of Hudson Bay. 

14 (p. 67). — The white cedar (a name commonly given to the 
arbor-vitee, Thuya occidentals) is found in abundance along the 
Atlantic slope. The red cedar (Juniperus Virginiana) is abundant 
from Canada to the Gulf of Mexico; its odor is offensive to most 
insects. It is probably the tree thus referred to by Sagard 
{Canada, p. 7S3): " In the forests [of the Huron country] are seen 
abundance of cedars ; the odor of this tree is disliked by serpents, 
and on this account its branches are used by the savages for their 
beds, when on their journeys." 

15 (p. 69). — Champlain's statement, here referred to, is in his 
Voyages (Prince Soc), vol. ii., p. 16: "From Long Island passage 

we sailed north-east two leagues, when we found a cove where ves- 
sels can anchor with safety [Little River, on Digby Neck, St. Mary's 
Bay]. ... In this place there is a very good silver mine, ac- 
cording to the report of the miner, Master Simon, who accompanied 
me." He adds: " Quarter of a league from here [the place now 
known as Sandy Cove] there is a good harbor for vessels, where we 
found an iron mine, which our miner estimated would yield fifty per 
cent. Advancing three leagues farther on, to the north-east [proba- 
bly near Rossway], we saw another very good iron mine, near which 
is a river surrounded by beautiful meadows. The neighboring soil 
is red as blood." 

Nova Scotia is rich in minerals of many kinds, and is one of the 
chief mining districts of the Dominion. Murdoch says (Nova Scotia, 
p. 3): " The discovery of gold, along the whole Atlantic shore of 
the peninsula of Nova Scotia, has taken place chiefly since I began 
this work in i860; and it now gives steady remunerative employment 
to about 800 or 1,000 laborers, with every expectation of its expan- 
sion." In 1895, there were in this province 37 mines, yielding 22,112 
ounces of gold. It is estimated that gold may be found in an area of 
from 5,000 to 7,000 square miles; but less than forty square miles 
have as yet been worked. The industry supports 3,000 to 4,000 


296 LES RELA TIONS DES J ^SUITES 

persons. From 1862 to 1895, the total yield was 602,268 ounces, the 
average value of the ores during that time being $14.50 a ton. 

Copper is mined to some extent. Gesner says, in Industrial Re- 
sources of Nova Scotia (Halifax, 1849), p. 289: "Thin seams of 
copper ore are seen in the red sandstones of Mmudie. At Tatma- 
gouche, Carriboo, and the rivers of Pictou, small deposits of the sul- 
phuret and green carbonate of copper have been found among the 
strata of the coal series." An interesting statement on this subject 
is made in a " Memoir upon Acadia," written in 1735, by one Duvi- 
vier, a descendant of Charles de la Tour, and cited by Murdoch 
{Nova Scotia, vol. L, pp. 508-511): "In the seigneurie of Mines, 
which is six leagues square (and belongs to the family [of La Tour's 
descendants] with donations of mines, etc.), a lead mine, a consid- 
erable silver mine, an especial mine of red copper of a color like 
gold, and one of another metal, the value of which is not known to 
the Sr. Duvivier or anybody. . . . The English having ob- 
tained likewise the knowledge of a copper mine resembling gold, at 
a place called Beaubassin, joining to Mines, have sent thirty miners 
there, with an officer, according to the report of one Fougere. They 
have formed a company for this undertaking, in which the Gover- 
nor, Lieutenant du Roi, and Major are secretly interested, to estab- 
lish there a so-called copper work. ' ' 

Gesner says (ut supra, p. 264): " Narrow veins of galena occur 
in the limestones of the Shubenacadie, Stewiacke, and Brookfield, 
and the ore sometimes contains a small percentage of silver. No 
profitable veins have so far been discovered. ' ' 

The coal fields of Nova Scotia (including those of Cape Breton), 
cover about 635 square miles, and are of great richness, the veins 
being 30 to 70 feet deep. It has been estimated that they contain 
7,000,000,000 tons of coal. The present annual output is about 
2,400,000 tons. 

The Statistical Year- Book for 1893 (p. 361) cites Sir William Fair- 
bairn as saying: " In Nova Scotia some of the richest ores yet dis- 
covered occur in boundless abundance. The iron manufactured 
from them is of the very best quality, and is equal to the finest 
Swedish material." The ores are found through almost the entire 
length of the province. The product of Nova Scotia for 1895 was 
79,636 tons. Gesner {ut supra, p. 255) says: "The most common 
variety of iron ore in the oldest f ossilif erous strata is brown hematite. 
At Clements, in the county of Annapolis, and three miles from the 
mouth of Moose river, it outcrops, and may be traced a mile on the 
surface, with an average thickness of 9 feet 6 inches. It yields from 
33 to 40 per cent, of cast metal, and the quality of the iron is very 
superior. ' ' 


NOTES TO VOL. Ill 297 

Granite, sandstone, limestone, marble, gypsum, salt, and other 
valuable materials, are found in great abundance and of excellent 
quality. For an account of these and other mineral products, see 
Gesner, already cited ; also Statistical Year-Book, Report of Min- 
ister of Mines, and other Government publications. 

16 (p. 71). — Betsabes: written also Bessabes (Champlain); the 
"sagamore of Kadesquit " (Biard); identical with the "Bashaba" 
of Gorges. The most powerful sachem in New England, ruling 
over many inferior sagamores in the country called Moasham 
(Gorges), or Mawooshen (Hakluyt), corresponding to the southern 
part of Maine and New Hampshire; Poor (in "Vindication of 
Gorges," Pop ham Memorial, p. 50) thinks his authority extended 
to Narragansett Bay. His residence is supposed to have been at 
Pemaquid, or the semi-mythical Arambec (see vol. i., note 11). 
Gorges says he was "killed by the Tarentines;" Lescarbot, in 
Nouv. France, p. 561, avers that he was slain by the English. — See 
Godfrey's "Bashaba and the Tarratines," Maine Hist. Colls., vol. 
vii., pp. 93-102. 

Asticou : Lescarbot calls this chief "sober, valiant, and feared, 
who could at a moment's notice, gather a thousand Savages." He 
says that, after the death of Bessabes, Asticou was successor to the 
former's authority. — Nouv. France, p. 561. Champlain says (La- 
verdiere's ed., p. 862) that the basin of the Falls of Chaudiere, on 
the Ottawa River, was called by the natives Asticou, meaning "a 
boiling kettle." Maurault (Hist. Abenaki's, p. 95, note 2) says that 
asticou is an Algonkin word, meaning "caribou." He adds (p. 
in), that the chief of that name was probably an Algonkin who 
had migrated to the Abenaki country. A post office on Mt. Desert 
Island is called Asticou. 

*7 (P- 79)- — Caribou: the American woodland reindeer (Cervus 
tarandus, or Rangifer caribou), inhabiting the northern regions as 
far as the timber line. Specimens are still found in Nova Scotia and 
New Brunswick; it is smaller than the moose or elk. Sagard 
{Canada, p. 750) calls it " caribou, or wild ass." 

18 (p. 83). — Ponamo : Shea {Charlevoix, vol. vi., p. 124) trans- 
lates this "dogfish," and cites J. H. Trumbull as authority for the 
statement that the ponamo is the "torn cod" {Morrhua pruinosa), — 
the apounanmesou of Rale, and the paponaumsu of Roger Williams. 

19 (p. 109). — See Garneau's statement, in History of Canada 
(Bell's ed., Montreal, 1S66), vol. i., p. 132: "As soon as the young 
attained nubile years, they were allowed all freedom, — ' thought no 
harm of it, ' to use the words of Lescarbot. From this early and un- 
restrained frequentation, we may deduce one cause of the limited 
fecundity of the native women ; as well as from their practice of 


298 


LES RELATIONS DES J ^SUITES 


suckling their children for several years." Cf. Sagard's Canada, 
p. 324; in the same place (and on p. 342), he also describes the easy 
accouchements of the women. 

20 (p. 119). — See vol. ii., note 23. 

21 (p. 131).— The sagamore of St. John's river; called Secondon 
by Champlain; accompanied Poutrincourt on his expedition to 
Chouacoet, and (according to Lescarbot, who calls him Chkoudun) 
offered to oppose, single-handed, a hostile band of natives who at- 
tacked the French. — Nouv. France, p. 575- 

22 (p. 133).— Cartier gives the native Canadian word for " sun " as 
Ysnay or Zs*<?*.— Tross ed. of Discovrs dv Voyage par /agues 
Cartier (Paris, 1865), vol. i., pp. 13, 69- Lescarbot says it was 
achtek. — Nouv. France, p. 691. 

23 (p. 145).— Joseph de Acosta, born 1540, at Medina del Campo, 
near Valladolid, Spain, entered the Jesuit order in his fourteenth 
year, and devoted himself to the study of sacred and classical litera- 
ture. In 1570, he sailed to the New World, with other Jesuit breth- 
ren, spending thirteen years in Peru, and nearly four in Mexico, in 
missionary and literary labors. In Peru, he resided partly at Lima, 
and partly at Juli, near Lake Titicaca, then the principal seat of the 
Jesuits, where a college was established, the native language studied, 
and a printing-press erected; here was printed, in 161 1, Bertonio's 
Aymara dictionary. Acosta returned to Spain in 1587, and soon be- 
gan the publication of his manuscripts. The most important of 
these is the Historia natural y moral de las Indias (Seville, 159°)* 
two books of which were earlier published in Latin (Salamanca, 
1588). This is considered by modern historians a valuable and au- 
thoritative account of the New World and of the Mexican and Pe- 
ruvian nations. It was translated into Dutch, by Van Linschoten 
(Enckhuysen, 1598); into French, by Regnauld (Paris, 1597); into 
German, by De Bry (Frankfort, 1601) ; and into English, by Grimston 
(London, 1604). 

Acosta was head of the Jesuits' college at Valladolid, and, later, 
of that at Salamanca, where he died February 15, 1600. His brother 
Bernardo also became a Jesuit; was a resident of the City of Mexico 
in 1586, dying there May 29, 1613. For a fuller account of the 
former's life and works, see Introduction to Hakluyt Society's 
translation of his Historia natural y moral (London, 1880). 

24 (p. 149).— Angelic Salutation: the salutation, "Ave Maria, 
gratia plena, Dominus tecum," with which the archangel .greeted 
the Virgin when he announced to her that she was to become the 
mother of Christ.— See Lee's Glossary of Liturg. and Eccl. Terms. 

25 (p. 151).— The apparent omission of chap, xi., arising from a 
typographical error, is explained in the "Bibliographical Data," 


NOTES TO VOL. Ill 299 

ante. The Factum alluded to was a controversial pamphlet " writ- 
ten and published against the Jesuits." The only copy known to us 
is in the Bibliotheque Nationale at Paris. It was reprinted in 1887, 
with an introduction by G. Marcel, under the title, Factum du 
prods entre Jean de Riencourt it tes Pires /Ward et Masse', 
Jesuites : pp. xix-91. The publication was anonymous, but its au- 
thorship has been ascribed by many to Lescarbot. The succeeding 
six chapters of the present Re I at km are devoted by Biard to answer- 
ing the Factum. — See Rochemonteix's Jesuites, vol. i., pp. 81-82. 

26 (p. 161). — See vol. ii., notes 42, 59. 

27 (p. 161). — See vol. i., note 2. 

28 (p. 165). — See vol. i., note 25. 

29 (p. 165). — See vol. i., notes 31, 37. 

30 (p. 169). — See vol. i., notes 35, 3d. 

31 (p. 173).— In the Edict of Nantes, the Huguenots are referred 
to as followers of la religion pretendue reformec. Upon the sig- 
nificance of this term, see Atlantic Monthly vol. lxxvt., p. 414. 

32 (p. 173).— The consistory was a council or assembly composed 
of the ministers and elders of the Reformed churches. 

33 (P- 177)— The Contract d' association des Jesuit es au Tra- 
Jique du Canada, entered into before a notary of Dieppe, ]anuary 
20, 161 1 (see vol. i., note 31). It is given in Lescarbot's Nouv. 
France (1618), p. 665; and has been reprinted by Tross (on vellum, 
12 copies only, of which the Lenox and Brown libraries have each 
one). This contract occasioned much hostile comment against the 
Jesuits, whom their enemies accused of profiting by the Canadian 
trade.— See Champlain's Voyages (1632), p. 101 ; Faillon's Col. /<>-., 
vol. i., p. 104; Harrisse's Notes, pp. 35-36; and Biard's Relation, 
post, chap. xix. 

34 (P- 181).— This is now Kara Strait, between Nova Zembla and 
Siberia, connecting the Kara and Archangel Seas ; and the large 
island at its eastern end is named Waigatz. Jenkenson's map (Lon- 
don, 1562), shows the island as Vaigatz ; Sanson's (1674), Dcstroit 
du Vaigatz; Schenck's (1720, ca.) Fret. IVeygatz al. Nassovicum. 
Both the strait and the island were discovered in 1594, by an expe- 
dition sent out by Count Maurice of Nassau. 

35 (p. iSi).— By an oversight, Biard here says that they arrived 
June 22, instead of May 22 (as in his former letters). Whitsundav 
(on which was celebrated the festival of Pentecost) fell on May 22, 
in 1611. A similar discrepancy occurs on pp. 235-237,/^/, where 
Biard says that Poutrincourfs ship left Dieppe on December 31, 161 1, 
and arrived at Port Royal January 23, 161 2, after a voyage of two 
months. The latter date is correct ; so the departure from France 
was probably in November, not December. 


300 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES 

36 (p. 199). — Probably Head Harbor, near the N.E. point of 
Campobello Island. 

37 (p. 201). — See vol. ii., note 80. 

38 (p. 207). — Larva or Lemures, the spirits of the dead, be- 
lieved by the Romans to return to the upper world, wandering about 
at night as spectres, and tormenting the living. 

39 (p. 209). — See vol. i., note 9. 

40 (p. 215). — The beds used in the Carthusian monasteries seem 
to have been simply pallets of straw covered by skins; but the bed 
here mentioned, as one into which a man could be shut, is evidently 
of the kind still used by the peasants of Brittany — built into the 
wall, and closed by sliding doors, to keep out dampness. 

41 (p. 221). — See vol. ii., notes 2, 5. 

42 (p. 233). — Madame de Guercheville (see vol. i., note 33) mar- 
ried (February, 1594), as her second husband, Charles du Plessis, 
seigneur de Liancourt ; but she would not use his name, because it 
had been borne by Gabrielle d'Estrees, a favorite of the king. 

43 (P- 235). — Robert du Thet (see Relation of 1613-14, vol. ii., 

P- 233). 

44 (p. 239). — See vol. ii., note 45. 

45 (p. 249). — Now called Gaspe, and sometimes Gaspesia; the 
peninsula occupying the southeastern extremity of the province of 
Quebec, extending from the St. Lawrence to the Bay of Chaleurs 
and Restigouche River. Cartier, on his first voyage, landed on this 
coast, and took possession of the country in the name of France. 
From 1636 to 16S5, it was governed by Nicholas Denys, Sieur de 
Fronsac (for whom the strait of Canso was named; see vol. i., note 
40); for an account of him, see Murdoch's N«va Seotia, vol. i., pp. 
124- 131. For descriptive and statistical account of this region, see 
Langelier's Sketch of Gaspesia (Quebec, 1884). 

Lavcrdiere {C/iamplain, p. 68, note 2) cites Abbe Maurault as de- 
riving the name Gaspe from the Abenaqui word Katsepioui, "that 
which is separated," referring to Cape Forillon (known to Cartier 
as Honguedo) — a remarkable mountainous headland, 700 feet high, 
extending into the sea between Cape Rosier and the Bay of Gaspe; 
it is the most eastern point in the Shickshock Mountains (described 
in vol. ii., note 40). 

The Recollet, Christian Le Clercq, was a missionary in Gaspe 
from 1675 to 1687, and wrote an account of his work there — Rela- 
tion de la Gaspesie (Paris, 1691). He is noted as the inventor of a 
system of hieroglyphics, by which he taught the Micmacs to read 
and write, and which those tribes still use. In 1866, a volume of 
catechism, hymns, prayers, etc., was printed in these characters, by 
the Leopold Society of Vienna, Austria. 


NOTES TO VOL. II f 301 


46 (p. 259).— See vol. ii., notes 35, 77. 

47 (p. 263).— See vol. ii., note il. 

4- (p. 263). — Mena no ; probably a misprint for Menano (as it 
appears post): is now known as Grand Manan Island, a favorite 
summer resort. 

49 (p. 265).— See vol. j., note 61. 

50 (p. 275).— See vol. ii., //,// 

?i (p. 279). — Pavesade ; a sort of screen made of canvas, ex- 
tended along the side of a vessel in a naval engagement, to prevent 
the enemy from seeing what is done on board. 


■ _• m Jfm ■"»* 







