Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 28: Hurons, Iroquois, Lower Canada, 1645-1646
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1898 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits28jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits28jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits28jesuuoft_djvu.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 28 of 73.

---

"FC- 




The edition consists of sev 
en hundred and fifty sets 
all numbered 

1 / 





NEW AMSTERDAM (NOW NEW YORK), IN 1670. 

[Reduced facsimile of plate in Montanus s De Nieuwe en Onbekende Weereld, 

Amsterdam, 1671.] 



The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 



TRAVELS AND EXPLORATIONS 
OF THE JESUIT MISSIONARIES 

IN NEW FRANCE 

1610-1791 

THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA 
TIONS AND NOTES ; ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 

EDITED BY 

REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 



Vol. XXVIII 

HURONS, IROQUOIS, LOWER CANADA 
1645-1646 



CLEVELAND: CbC JButtOWS 

Company, PUBLISHERS, MDCCCXCVIII 



COPYRIGHT, 1898 

BY 
THE BURROWS BROTHERS Co 



ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 



The Imperial Press, Cleveland 



EDITORIAL STAFF 



Editor 



Translators . 



Assistant Editor 
Bibliographical Adviser 



REUBEN GOLD THWAITES 
FINLOW ALEXANDER 
PERCY FAVOR BICKNELL 
CRAWFORD LINDSAY 
WILLIAM PRICE 
HIRAM ALLEN SOBER 
EMMA HELEN BLAIR 
VICTOR HUGO PALTSITS 



CONTENTS OF VOL XXVIII 



PREFACE TO VOLUME XXVIII 
DOCUMENTS : 

Relation de ce qvi s est passe en la Nov- 
velle France, es annees 1644. & 1645. 
[Chap. xii. to close of document.] 
Barthelemy Vimont, Quebec, October 
i, 1645; Hierosme Lalemant, Des 
Hurons, May 15, 1645 

Nouum Belgium. Isaac Jogues; 3 Ri 
vieres, August 3, 1646 

Notice sur Rene Goupil. Isaac Jogues; 

undated 

. 

Lettre au R. P. Andr6 Castillon. Isaac 
Jogues; Montreal, September 12, 1646 

Journal des PP. Jesuites. Hierosme 
Lalemant; Quebek, January - Decem 
ber, 1646 

Relation de ce qvi s est passe .... en 
la Novvelle France, es anne*es 1645. 
& 1646. [Chaps, i., ii., Part I.] Hie 
rosme Lalemant; Quebek, October 28, 
1646 . . 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOLUME XXVIII 
NOTES 



LVI. 



LVII. 



LVIII. 



LIX. 



LX, 



21 
104 

116 
136 

142 



253 
305 
313 



ILLUSTRATIONS TO VOL. XXVIII 

I. New Amsterdam in 1670; reduced photo 
graphic facsimile from Montanus s De 
Nieuwe en Onbekende Weereld Frontispiece 

II. Photographic facsimile of handwriting of 
Isaac Jogues, selected from original MS. 
of his Novum Belgium . . Facing 104 

III. Map of New Netherland, etc., in 1630; re 

duced photographic facsimile from De 
Laet s Novus Orbis . . Facing 112 

IV. Photographic facsimile of title-page, Rela 

tion of 1645-46 .... 256 



PREFACE TO VOL XXVIII 



Following is a synopsis of the documents contained 
in the present volume : 

LV. The Relation of 1644-45 consisted of one 
part, dated at Quebec, October i, 1645, written by 
Vimont, supplemented by a letter from Jerome Lale- 
mant, dated in the Huron country, May 1 5 previous. 
The first eleven chapters of Vimont s account were 
contained in Vol. XXVII. of our series; we now 
present the remainder of the document, by both 
Vimont and Lalemant. 

Chap. xii. is Richard s account of the Miscou (or 
rather Gaspesian) mission. During the year, four 
teen persons have been baptized six in illness, and 
a family of eight. The converts show edifying piety 
and obedience ; and even the unbelievers have great 
respect for baptism. The savages " themselves say 
that they would all be Christians by this time, were 
it not for the liquor that is traded to them ; and the 
lack of restraint on that pernicious traffic ruins every 
thing. The Indians are fond of singing, and offer 
their prayers with great delight since these have 
been set to music. Several war parties, passing that 
way, are interested in the chapel services ; they come 
back from their forays, with several prisoners and 
scalps, over which they hold rejoicings. The French 
men who winter at the Bay des Chaleurs, and the 
sailors on the fishing vessels, also receive spiritual 
ministrations from the missionaries. But the liquor 



10 PREFACE TO VOL. XX VI II 

traffic is "the scourge of this region," and only 
Heaven can furnish a remedy therefor. 

Lalemant s supplemental letter is addressed to the 
provincial, at Paris, and concerns the Huron mis 
sion. In accordance with the latter s orders, he has 
relegated his duties there, as superior, to Ragueneau, 
and is about to go down to Quebec. He glances at 
the history of the mission since his arrival thereat in 
1638, mentioning the calamities that have " crowded 
upon this poor Church" pestilence, famine, and 
war. So great are the obstacles to the establishment 
of the faith here, most of all, in the self-will and 
unrestrained freedom which prevails among these 
savages, that human judgment alone must consider 
the task almost hopeless. There is among them but 
little law, and that obeyed only so far as each 
pleases; their habits are licentious, and their mar 
riages unstable; and, above all, "superstition has 
contaminated nearly all the actions of their lives," 
and they are the slaves of the devil in everything. 
For such, the law of God is too heavy a burden. 
Moreover, the constant raids of the Iroquois threaten 
to ruin the Huron tribes and to break up their trade 
with the French; this would compel the abandon 
ment of the missions. But, notwithstanding all 
these hindrances, the missionaries trust in God s 
promises and power, and consider nothing impos 
sible to him. Every year secures them a goodly 
number of baptisms, and they are comforted by see 
ing the constancy and devotion displayed by their 
converts. The progress made during these seven 
years has, on the whole, been all that could reason 
ably be expected. Various incidents are related to 
show the earnestness and sincerity of these new 



PREFACE TO VOL. XXVIII 11 

Christians ; and the seven Huron churches are enu 
merated. Lalemant closes with an earnest appeal 
for more men and funds to maintain and defend this 
important enterprise. 

LVI. In his so-called Novum Belgium, Isaac Jogues 
gives (August 3, 1646) an account of the Dutch colo 
ny at New Amsterdam (later, New York City), for 
which he obtained material during his stay there in 
the autumn of 1643. He describes the river, and the 
fort and other buildings ; the character of the popu 
lation, "men of eighteen different languages" and 
of almost as many religious sects, none of which, 
however, save the Calvinists, exercise religious func 
tions; and the inducements offered to colonists by 
the West India Company. He mentions the settle 
ments made by various nations, from the Connecticut 
to the Delaware, adding that " the English prefer 
to have lands among the Dutch, who require nothing 
from them, to depending upon English Milords, who 
exact rents and like to put on airs of being absolute." 
Jogues describes the land and climate ; the dwellings 
of the Dutch settlers ; their culture of the land, and 
trade with the Indians; the savage tribes adjoining 
the white settlements ; and the recent war between 
the Dutch and Indians. 

LVII. In this document (always published, how 
ever, in connection with his Novum Belgium], Jogues 
gives a biographical sketch of the young physician, 
Ren6 Goupil (a Jesuit donne), who for a time shared 
Jogues s captivity, and who met death at the hands 
of the Iroquois, September 29, 1642. A graphic and 
pathetic account is given of the painful journey, the 
cruel torture inflicted on the captives, and the young 
donna s murder; still more impressive are the 



12 PREFACE TO VOL. XXVIII 

fortitude, patience, and holy resignation exhibited 
by Goupil amid his sufferings, and the self -forgetful 
altruism which leads him to aid not only his fellow- 
captives, but a sick Iroquois. On the journey to the 
village of their captors, Goupil takes, under Jogues s 
direction, the final vows of entrance into the Jesuit 
order, which, in France, he had been unable to do, 
on account of his frail health. The Iroquois murder 
him, and often threaten to slay Jogues also, be 
cause of his praying aloud, and making the sign of 
the cross, as they afterward plainly tell the Father. 
The latter endeavors at the peril of his own life, but 
in vain, to save his follower s corpse from desecra 
tion. 

LVIII. This is a letter from Jogues (September 
12, 1646) to Andre* Castillon, a fellow- Jesuit, and is 
apparently the last message penned by the martyred 
missionary. He gives an account of the journey 
made by him and Bourdon, a few months earlier, to 
the Iroquois country, whither he is on the eve of 
departing for a winter sojourn. He describes the 
beneficial results of the peace concluded last year 
with the Iroquois; both population and commerce 
show a notable increase. He prays for similar bless 
ings in spiritual affairs ; and closes with an especial 
petition that prayers may be offered in his own 
behalf, since he must spend nearly a year away from 
the sacraments of the Church. A postscript (dated at 
Three Rivers, September 21) adds the information 
that he is soon to embark for the Iroquois country. 

LIX. The Journal des Jtsuites is continued, giv 
ing the record for 1646. The greater part of the 
Journal is occupied with descriptions of the manner 
in which the various feast days and other functions 



PREFACE TO VOL. XXVIII 13 

of the church are celebrated ; but many little inci 
dents are related which throw light on social, eco 
nomic, and political conditions in the early days of 
Canada; and on the relations existing between the 
French and the aborigines. On New Year s Day, 
gifts are exchanged between all the French people 
of the colony ; those given and received by the Jes 
uits are enumerated in detail. The French settle 
ments above Quebec are doing well, on the whole ; 
though a quarrel that arises between the Algonkins 
at Three Rivers, and some Mohawks sojourning 
there, causes temporary apprehension. The Sillery 
Indians go (January 15) on their usual hunt for game; 
and those left behind, twenty-five in number, are 
subsisted by the Jesuits and the Hospital nuns. On 
one occasion, a zealous lady undertakes to send, in 
array befitting its holy use, the bread for consecra 
tion; she adorns it with " a toilet a crown of gauze 
or linen puffs," and, if she had been allowed, would 
gladly have added tapers and golden coins. Vimont, 
however, " before consecrating the bread, had all 
that removed, and blessed it with the same simplicity 
that I had observed with the preceding portions, and 
especially with that of Monsieur the Governor 
fearing lest this change might occasion Jealousy and 
Vanity. Toward the end of January, a disturbance 
arises among the petty habitants, headed by Marso- 
let and Maheu; they claim that " M. des Chastelets, 
the general agent, is living too high, etc." One of 
Montmagny s household takes part with the malcon 
tents, " whence arose many difficulties, and offensive 
words, and dissatisfaction; and pasquinades were 
composed. Monsieur the Governor having punished 
the guilty, everything became quiet." 



14 PREFACE TO VOL. XXVIII 

On February 12, tidings arrive of Father de Noue s 
death ; separated from his companions, while on the 
way to Fort Richelieu, he loses his way, and is frozen 
to death on the ice. On the 15th, two men are pun 
ished on the chevalet, or " wooden horse," one for 
blasphemy, the other for assaulting his companion ; 
and, later, another man is thus punished for glut 
tony. The nuns of both convents send the Jesuits, 
during the Shrovetide season, and on other festal 
occasions, various delicacies pastries, Spanish 
Wine, etc. ; many liberal gifts from Montmagny 
are also mentioned. 

News is brought from Three Rivers, March 10, 
that Couture had returned from the Iroquois coun 
try, with Mohawk envoys, and confirmation of the 
peace recently negotiated. 

April 7, one Master Jaques, " surnamed the her 
mit, began his entrance into our service; it would 
appear that he became one of the donnes of the 
Jesuits. Since the first of February, the savages left 
behind at Sillery have been encamped near Quebec, 
but they return to their homes after Easter; soon 
after, their hunting expedition comes back. Lale- 
mant, while on a visit to Sillery, meets there Cou 
ture, " whose savage name had been changed at 3 
Rivers, at a feast made for him by father buteux, 
from Ihandich, which sounds ill in yroquois, to 
Achirra, the name of the late Monsieur Nicolet, 
to the joy of all the Huron, Algonquin, and Anniero- 
non savages." At a consultation held on the 26th, 
the Fathers decide to send Jogues to the Mohawk 
country, and to retain Druillettes in Canada; and 
they approve of Couture s proposed marriage. The 
opening of the St. Lawrence occurs this year on April 



PREFACE TO VOL. XXVIII 15 

17 or 1 8, and planting is begun a little before that, 
not only by the French, but by the savages whom 
the missionaries have colonized at Sillery and else 
where. 

During the first part of May, negotiations with the 
Iroquois are carried on at Three Rivers ; and, on the 
1 6th, Jogues sets out thence on his journey to the 
Iroquois. Father Masse dies at Quebec, on the i ith. 
Lalemant records various quarrels, occurring among 
both the savages and the French. Forest fires have 
made great havoc about Quebec; one colonist is 
burned out, but receives liberal aid from the others. 
During this month, brother Ambroise is engaged in 
brewing beer. A gunner at Richelieu, weary of 
life, wishes to commit suicide, but is restrained by 
his fear of hell. He then accuses himself of a scan 
dalous offense, invented for the occasion, " since, 
on the one hand, he would die, which was what he 
sought ; and, on the other, they would first have him 
confess, which would enable him to avoid Hell." 
Father Du Peron, however, mingles reproof and 
comfort in his treatment, and leaves the man " in a 
good frame of mind." Good news is brought from 
Tadoussac, regarding both commercial and religious 
matters. 

On the 4th of June, it is decided to rebuild the mill 
on the Jesuits farm at La Vacherie. A marriage 
occurs on the i8th, at which five soldiers dance a 
ballet. Indians from Tadoussac bring furs to Que 
bec, and make complaints of their treatment by De 
Launay, a French trader at Tadoussac. June 23, 
St. John s day is celebrated with cannon shots and 
bonfires lighted by Montmagny himself, while 
Lalemant chants prayers. The governor and Lale- 



16 PREFACE TO VOL. XXVIII 

mant view the lands along the St. Charles River, in 
order to ascertain the boundaries of a grant there to 
the Ursulines ; but the decision is left till the return 
of Bourdon, the surveyor of the colony, from the 
Iroquois country. The Jesuits receive an increase 
in the lands of La Vacherie, to replace a tract ceded 
by them to Quebec. Lalemant here gives interest 
ing information as to the nature of the various land 
grants in Canada made to the Jesuits. The grant of 
meadow lands made to the Hospital nuns by Vimont, 
in the previous year, is retroceded by the nuns, in 
consideration of other lands obtained by them. The 
Ursulines promise to do the same, when they shall 
have secured the lands which they expect to receive. 
News comes from Miscou that two Indian families 
have been rendered sedentary. 

Father Jogues and Bourdon arrive from the Iro 
quois country on July 3. The next day, Abenaki 
chiefs come to Quebec, to ask that a " black gown 
be sent to their tribe, to give them instructions; 
Lalemant " puts them off till Autumn, in order to 
take time to consider the matter." On the isth, the 
Jesuit property at La Vacherie is increased by eight 
een arpents of land. 

This year, the fleet from France does not arrive 
until August 7 ; with it comes Father Daran. On 
the next day Charles de la Tour, noted in the annals 
of Acadia, comes to Quebec for refuge, his fort at 
St. John having been captured by his rival D Aul- 
nay. The Sillery Indians kill a Frenchman s cow, 
which has injured their corn, and are obliged to pay 
a fine of six beaver skins. At a consultation held on 
the 2ist, the Fathers decide that they will rent their 
Beauport estate and have a clergy-house built; send 



PREFACE TO VOL. XXVIII 17 

Dreuillettes to the Abenaki tribes, and Jogues to the 
Iroquois ; and ask for additional concessions from the 
habitants. De la Poterie sends a messenger in haste 
to Montmagny, to inform him of a fancied discovery 
of gold and copper mines ; but the specimens prove 
valueless being probably iron pyrites. Des Gro- 
seilliers, the explorer, comes down from the Huron 
country, and apparently returns thither soon after. 

Early in September, disputes arise concerning the 
Jesuit estates at Three Rivers ; but they remain for 
the time unsettled. The Huron fleet this year 
numbers 80 canoes; and they carry away " a dozen 
bundles of skins, for want of merchandise." Father 
Quentin brings from France several men for the 
Jesuit missions. Among these is a young gentleman 
of good family, who had professed conversion to the 
Catholic faith, and made a vow to go to the Hurons ; 
but he proves to be a liar and swindler, concerning 
whom various scandals are reported. He finally 
leaves the colony, after having cheated the Jesuits 
out of more than 200 livres. 

Lalemant notes the large increase in the habitants 
income from the fur trade, under the new arrange 
ment with the Hundred Associates, the habitants 
share this year being valued at 320,000 livres. The 
Jesuits ask the Council for an increased allowance ; 
they obtain 1,200 francs additional for each of the 
missions, but are compelled to furnish their own 
fuel. Several prominent persons return to France 
October 31, Maisonneuve, Giffard, and Tronquet, 
" all firmly resolved that they would strive to obtain 
some regulation for their affairs, each one seeking 
his own private Interests." On another vessel 
embarked several young men, sons of the leading 



18 PREFACE TO VOL. XXVIII 

colonists, " all rogues, for the most part, who had 
played a thousand tricks on the other voyage ; and 
they all were given high salaries. At this time, 
work is begun on the new clergy-house and church 
at Quebec, and on a brewery and oven at Sillery. 

Mother Marie de St. Ignace, the first superior of 
the Quebec hospital, dies November 5. On the I2th, 
Marguerite, widow of the explorer Jean Nicolet, is 
married to Nicolas Macard. On the 2ist, Madame 
de la Peltrie, her maid, Charlotte Barre, and one 
Catherine, begin their novitiate with the Ursulines. 
The same day, comes news of " the greatest disaster 
which had yet occurred in Canada," the wreck of 
the brigantine which went from Quebec to Three 
Rivers, and carried most of the necessary supplies 
for the settlers at the latter post. These were lost, 
with nine men, a loss shared by the Jesuits to some 
extent, in goods and in the death of a donn6, Gaspar 
Goiiaut, of Poitiers. Later advices show that much 
of the cargo was saved. November 29, Vimont says 
mass at the hospital, in acquittal of the obligation 
laid upon the Hospital nuns, by the terms of their 
land grants, for the members of the Hundred Asso 
ciates. The Jesuits owe a like ceremony, " for the 
deceased associates of the Company; " and Lalemant 
adds: " I certainly intend to say it, but not to invite 
Monsieur the governor to it, in order not to preju 
dice our former rights from Monsieur de Vanta- 
dour (the first Canadian viceroy). 

In December, a soldier, named De Champigny, 
abjures heresy, and becomes a Catholic ; as this man 
understands music, and can sing the treble part, the 
Jesuits are now able to have in the church a choir of 
four voices. On the last day of the year, a dramatic 



PREFACE TO VOL. XXVIII 19 

performance is given at the warehouse, at which is 
apparently enacted Corneille s tragedy of Le Cid. 
" Our Fathers were present, in deference to Mon 
sieur the governor, who took pleasure therein, as 
also did the savages, that is, fathers de Quen, 
[Gabriel] Lalemant, and defretat; all went well, and 
there was nothing which could not edify. I begged 
Monsieur the governor to excuse me from attend 
ance." The price of wood is this year placed at 
100 sols, and some interested persons secure control 
of the market; besides, the wood is of poor quality 
and short measure. Hence arise "great disorder 
and Jealousy," which are with difficulty quieted. 

LX. The Relation of 1645-46 is, like most of its 
predecessors, in two parts: the first, by Jerome Lale 
mant, appointed in 1646 to succeed Vimont as supe 
rior of his order in Canada, consists of a preliminary 
letter to the provincial, in France (dated Quebek, 
October 28, 1646), and ten chapters giving a general 
view of the missions, particularly of the lower coun 
try ; Part II. is the Huron report, by Ragueneau, con 
sisting also of a preliminary note to the provincial 
(dated Des Hurons, May i, 1646), and eight chapters 
detailing the particulars of the work in Huronia. 
We herewith present the first two chapters of Part 
I., and will conclude the document in Vols. XXIX. 
and XXX. 

Lalemant briefly mentions the present prosperous 
condition of the French settlements, and the good 
work accomplished therein by the religious orders. 
The savages are gradually being attracted within 
religious influences, and thus encourage the mission 
aries with brighter hopes for their conversion ; over 
300 baptisms have occurred during the year. The 



20 



PREFACE TO VOL. XXVIII 



superior then reverts to the peace recently concluded 
with the Mohawks which, however, unfortunately 
does not include the other Iroquois tribes, who are 
still hostile. The Sokokis and Mohicans are not 
friendly to the French, but, fearing the Mohawks, 
are quiet. A detailed account is given of the Mo 
hawk council in which peace with the French was 
arranged, based on the reports of Couture, who had 
formerly been a captive with that tribe. 

In February, 1646, Couture returns to Three Riv 
ers, accompanied by seven Mohawk envoys, who 
come to ratify the treaty with the French, and ex 
tend it to their Indian allies. This is accomplished 
in May following, when Montmagny meets them for 
that purpose ; the speeches and presents are described 



R. G. T. 

MADISON, Wis., August, 1898. 



LV (concluded) 

RELATION OF 1644-4^ 

PARIS: SEBASTIEN ET GABRIEL CRAMOISY, 1646 



Chaps, i.-xi. were published in Volume XXVII.; here 
follows the remainder of the document. 



22 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



[124] CHAPITRE XII. 

DE CE QUI S EST PASSE A MISCOU. 

DIEU continue fes graces fur nos pauures Sau- 
uages, ils ouurent maintenant les yeux, 
defirent le Baptefme, & demandent les inftru- 
dlions Chreftiennes : ie ne les ay iamais veu en 
meilleure difpoiition, dit le P. Richard, nous en auos 
baptife" 14. depuis ma derniere, vne famille de huidt 
perfonnes, & fix en extremit6 de maladie, qui font 
quafi tous morts peu apres, entre lefquels vn ieune 
gar9on tout plein d efprit fit paroiflre en fes refponfes 
& en fa ferueur que c eftoit vne ame deftinee pour 
le Ciel, pour cette famille elle deuoit eftre baptife"e 
des 1 an paile", mais le chef nomme" lariet, ayant fait 
quelque excez de boiffon, donna fujet de ce retarde- 
ment : fa f emme toutef ois craignant de mourir dans 
fes couches, dont le terme eftoit palfe", difoit-elle, 
long-temps y auoit, & fe trouuoit extraordinairement 
indifpofee, defira le Baptefme auant noftre depart, 
& 1 obtint, non feulement a raifon du danger ou elle 
fe trouuoit, mais auffi pour fes [125] merites, qui la 
font pafler aupres d vn chacun pour la plus honnefte, 
la plus fage & modefte de toutes les femmes 
Sauuages, on differa les ceremonies au temps du Bap 
tefme de fon mary. Ce fut le 30. de luillet qu on 
luy accorda ce bien & a toute fa famille, il fut norn- 
m6 Denis par Monfieur Preuoft Capitaine pour le 
Roy en la marine, commendant le Nauire de S. 



1645 - 46] RELA TION OF 1644 - 45 



[124] CHAPTER XII. 

OF WHAT OCCURRED AT MISCOU. 

4 4 f^ OD continues his favors toward our poor 
\J Savages, they now open their eyes ; they 
desire Baptism and ask for Christian in 
struction. I have never seen them better disposed," 
writes Father Richard. "We have baptized 14 
since my last letter a family of eight persons; and 
six in the extremity of illness, who nearly all died 
shortly afterward. Among these, a young man, who 
was very intelligent, showed by his answers and his 
fervor that his was a soul destined for Heaven. As 
to the family, it was to have been baptized last year; 
but its head, whose name is lariet, had been guilty 
of intemperance, and this occasioned the delay. His 
wife, however, feared that she might die in child 
birth, for she said that her time had long passed, 
and she was exceedingly ill, and desired Baptism 
before our departure. She obtained it, not only on 
account of her dangerous condition but also owing 
to her own [125] merits, which cause her to pass with 
every one for the most virtuous, the wisest, and most 
modest of all the Savage women. The administra 
tion of the rites was deferred until the Baptism of 
her husband. On the 3Oth of July, this favor was 
granted to him and to all his family. He was named 
Denis by Monsieur Prevost, Captain in the King s 
navy, commanding the Ship St. Joseph; and his 
wife was named Marguerite. This good woman was 



24 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28 

lofeph, & fa femme Marguerite. Cette bonne femme 
non contente de refpondre a tout auec la deuotion & 
les fentimens que le S. Efprit luy infpiroit, aydoit 
encor a fon mary 1 exhortoit & luy fuggeroit les ref- 
ponces, ils receurent en fuite la benediction Nuptiale 
& furent adtnis a la table de Noftre Seigneur, an 
fortir de la Denis lariet me dift: C eft a cette heure 
que tout de bon ie vais prier & feray homme de bien, 
i ay regret de ma vie paffe e, ie hay le pech6 ie veux 
mener d orefnauant vne meilleure vie : & tirant peu 
apres quantite" de Porcelaine ie fuis marry, difoit-il 
de me voir fi pauure, ie n ay ny Orignac, ny Caftor 
a prefenter a ces Meffieurs qui nous ont tant oblig6 a 
noftre Baptefme, ie voudrois auoir dequoy recon- 
noiftre le bien que nous auons receu, mais puis que 
ie n ay [126] rien autre chofe, ie feray content s ils 
daignent receuoir ce petit prefent de ma part. On 
le remercia, & fe contenta-on des tefmoignages de fa 
bonne volonte. II fe retire done fort fatisfait, & s en 
retourne a Nepegigoiiit pour continuer la chaffe de 
Caffcor, & ayder en ce qu il pourroit a acheuer le 
baftiment que M r 1 Abbe" de fainte Magdelene & 
Meffieurs les Affociez pour Mifkou, ont fait commen- 
cer aupres de nous pour luy & pour lofeph Nepfuget 
baptife 1 an paffe. Ils font tous deux de bonne intel 
ligence, fe tiennent bonne compagnie, font leur 
chaffe enfemble 1 Efte & 1 Hyuer, ils eurent beau- 
coup a fouffrir au commencement de 1 Hyuer paffe, 
& Dieu efprouua leur conftance & courage. Ils 
auoient pris le quartier de leur chaffe bien auant 
dans les bois y penfans trouuer mieux leur compte, 
ils deuoient faire prouifion de Saulmon mais les 
gelees les preuinrent, & fermerent les riuieres, ce qui 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1644- 45 25 

not content to answer all questions with the devotion 
and sentiments with which the Holy Ghost inspired 
her, but she also assisted her husband, she ex 
horted him and suggested to him the answers. They 
afterward received the Nuptial benediction, and were 
admitted to Our Lord s table. On leaving it, Denis 
lariet said to me : Now I will pray in earnest, and 
will be a good man. I regret my past life; I hate 
sin, and wish to lead a better life in future. Then, 
drawing out a quantity of Porcelain beads, he said : 
I am sorry that I am so poor ; I have neither Moose 
nor Beaver to present to those Gentlemen who so 
greatly obliged us at our Baptism. I wish that I 
had something by which I might acknowledge the 
kindness that we have received, but since I have 
[126] nothing else, I shall be pleased if they will 
deign to accept this little present from me. We 
thanked him, and were satisfied with this manifesta 
tion of his good will. He therefore withdrew, quite 
content, and returned to Nepegigouit to continue the 
hunt for Beaver, and to help as much as he could in 
completing the building that Monsieur the Abb6 of 
sainte Magdalene, 1 and Messieurs the Associates for 
Miskou, have caused to be begun near us for him and 
for Joseph Nepsuget, who was baptized last year. 
They are on good terms with each other ; they are 
good comrades, and hunt together in Summer and 
in Winter. They had much to suffer at the begin 
ning of last Winter and God tried their constancy and 
courage. They had selected their hunting district 
very far within the forest, hoping there to meet bet 
ter success. They had intended to lay in a supply 
of Salmon ; but the frost forestalled them, and closed 
the rivers, which quickly reduced them to want. 



26 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [You 28 

les mit defia dans la neceffite, ils roulerent comme 
ils peurent iufques aux Aduents, ce fut lors qu ils 
fe trouuerent tout k fait depourueus de viures, ils 
cherchent & chaflent par tout fans pouuoir rien trou- 
uer que quelques Pores Efpics & ce fort rarement, 
ils font [127] contraints de manger leurs chiens, 
leurs cuirs & fouliers, & paffer fouuent plulieurs iours 
fans manger, il arriua pendant ce temps-Ik vne chofe 
eftrange a vn ieune Frangois qui hyuernoit auec eux, 
vn iour qu on auoit tue vn chien pour conferuer la 
vie a quantit^ de perfonnes qui languiff oient : ce 
gargon n eflant pas content du peu qu on luy auoit 
donne comme aux autres, fe iette fur le foye de la 
befte que Ton auoit iette", le fait cuire & le mange, on 
1 aduertit de quitter cette viande, qu elle luy fera 
tort, & tomber la peau, il n en croit rien, il continue 
fon repas, mais k fes defpens, car il luy en coufta la 
peau, qui luy tomba toute par grands lambeaux fans 
aucune douleur, fi bien qu en peu de temps il vift fa 
peau toute changed, les Sauuages ont 1 experience de 
cet effet en ceux qui ont vfe de cette viande. 

Cette affliction cependant ne defgoufta point nos 
gens de la priere, au contraire ils y ont recours dans 
leur plus grande foibleffe, & en fortent k ce qu ils 
m ont dit, moins incommodez de la faim, ils attri- 
buent ce mal-heur k leurs pechez & reconnoiffent 
que Dieu les punit pour leurs fautes: il eft vray, 
difoit lofeph Nepfuget, [128] que nous auons donne" 
fujet h Dieu de fe fafcher centre nous, mais moy prin- 
cipalement par mes choleres & impatiences, par mes 
yurognerie paffees, c eft iuftement qu il nous punit/ 
Sus recourons a luy, demandons-luy pardon il aura 
pitie" de nous, il eft noftre Pere, il ne m arriuera 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 27 

They subsisted as best they could until Advent, 
when they found themselves completely destitute of 
provisions. They searched and hunted everywhere 
without finding anything but a few Porcupines, and 
that very seldom. They were [127] compelled to 
eat their dogs, their skins, and their shoes, and often 
passed several days without food. During that time, 
a strange thing happened to a young Frenchman who 
wintered with them. One day, when a dog had been 
killed to save the lives of numerous persons who 
were starving, this boy, who was not satisfied with 
the little that they had given to him as to the others, 
seized the liver of the animal, that had been thrown 
away, and cooked and ate it. He was warned to 
leave that meat, that it would do him harm, and 
make his skin fall off. He would not believe it , and 
continued his repast, but to his regret, for it cost 
him his skin, which fell off in great flakes without 
any pain, so that in a short time his skin was entirely 
changed. The Savages know by experience this 
result on those who have eaten that meat. 

This affliction however did not inspire our people 
with any distaste for prayer. On the contrary, they 
had recourse to it in their greatest weakness; and, 
as they told me, they arose therefrom less incon 
venienced by hunger. They attributed the misfor 
tune to their sins, and acknowledged that God pun 
ished them for their offenses. It is true, said 
Joseph Nepsuget, [128] that we have given God 
cause to be angry with us; but I, principally, have 
done so by my anger and impatience, and by my 
former drunkenness. He punishes us justly. Let 
us therefore have recourse to him; let us ask pardon 
of him. He will have pity on us; he is our Father. 



28 



LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28 

iamais plus de 1 offencer, iamais plus ie ne me laiffe- 
ray tranf porter a la cholere, ny a la boiffon, ie veux 
contenter Dieu deformais, & eftre homme de bien. 
En fuite ils fe mettent en prieres qu ils continiient 
longuement & recommen9ent fouuent. Enfin Dieu 
euft pitie d eux, & apres les auoir Iaiff6 tremper dans 
cette grande famine depuis Ie huidtieme Decembre 
iufques au fixieme lanuier ils leur enuoya des viures 
abondamment & au triple des autres Sauuages. Ils 
tuerent premierement vn Orignac auec bien de la 
peine, car ils eftoient extremement foibles, & & peine 
fe pouuoient-ils fouftenir, cette nourriture leur ayant 
vn peu fait reuenir les forces & Ie courage ils fe met 
tent en campagne d vn cofle & d autre, & en peu de 
temps ils replirent leur cabane de viade, ils n en font 
pas ingrats, ils remerciet Dieu a chaque befte qu ils 
mettent bas, & a la fin de 1 Hyuer [129] racontent par 
tout les biens que Dieu leur a fait, lofeph fe rend 
aupres de nous auffi-toft que les glaces eurent Iaiff6 
les riuieres libres, & Denis peu apres, ils nous font 
recit du bien & du mal qu ils ont eu pendant 1 Hy 
uer, du foin qu ils auoient de prier Dieu, de garder 
les Dimanches, & fe fouuenir de ce qu on leur auoit 
enfeigne": Pour moy, difoit Denis lariet pour lors 
Catechumene, i ay veu fouuent par experience que 
ie n aduan9ois & ne gagnois rien pour chaffer les 
Dimanches, mais fi apres auoir chomme ce iour-la, ie 
me mettois Ie lendemain en deuoir de chaffer ie ne 
manquois d y trouuer du bon-heur, auffi ne feray-je 
iamais rien qui y contreuienne. II y a de la confola- 
tion a voir Ie foucy que ces bonnes gens ont d ob- 
feruer les Feftes & les Dimanches, ils n auoient pas 
eu Ie loifir de mettre tout leur petit mefnage en ordre, 



1645-46] RELA TION OF 1644-45 29 

I will never offend him again ; I will never allow 
myself to be overcome by anger or by liquor; I 
wish for the future to please God, and to be a good 
man. After that, they began their prayers which 
they continued for a long time, and frequently recom 
menced. Finally, God had pity on them ; and, after 
allowing them to suffer much through famine from the 
eighth of December to the sixth of January, he sent 
them an abundance of food, and three times as much 
as the other Savages had. In the first place, they 
killed a Moose with much difficulty, for they were 
extremely weak and could hardly stand. This food 
restored their strength and courage to some extent ; 
so they took the field in all directions, and in a short 
time they filled their cabin with meat. They were 
not ungrateful, but thanked God for every animal 
that they killed, and at the end of the Winter [129] 
they related everywhere the favors that God had 
conferred on them. Joseph came to us as soon as 
the ice had left the rivers free, and Denis came short 
ly afterward. They told us of their good and evil 
fortunes during the Winter, and of the care they 
had taken to pray to God, to observe the Sundays, 
and to remember what they had been taught. For 
my part, said Denis lariet, who was then a Catechu 
men, I often found by experience that I derived no 
benefit and gained nothing by hunting on Sundays ; 
but if, after having rested on that day, I went to 
hunt on the morrow, I never failed to be successful. 
Therefore I will never do anything to transgress 
that day. It is consoling to see how careful these 
good people are to observe the Festivals and Sun 
days. If they had no time to put their few house 
hold effects in order, and to prepare their provisions 



30 LES RELATIONS DES jS UITES [ VOL. 28 

& leurs prouifions en eftat & hors de danger de fe 
gafter, fi n ofoient-ils pourtant y toucher fans auoir 
au prealable fceu de nous fi cela eftoit permis : de 
mefme pour les Vendredis & iours de ieufnes, ie les 
ay fouuent veu beaucoup patir plutoft que de rien 
faire contre 1 abftinence de ces iours-la. 

[130] Mais quoy nous fommes hommes & les plus 
fermes ne font point affurez de demeurer debout. 
Ce lofeph dont nous parlons ayant trouue moyen 
d auo[i]r quelque baril de vin fe laiffa emporter a la 
boiffon, & en fuite dans vn defordre & vne faute 
fcandaleufe. C eft le mal-heur que nous deplorons 
icy il y a long-temps, & la liberte" de cette perni- 
cieufe traitte ruine tout comme nous auons fouuent 
efcrit a V. Reuerence, ils feroient, difent-ils, eux- 
mefmes defia tous Chreftiens, n eftoit la boiffon qu on 
leur traitte. Ce pauure homme eftant reuenu a f oy , f ut 
fi confus qu il n ofoit paroiftre, mais comme fa faute 
eftoit publique, il falloit auffl faire vne fatisfadtion 
publique, qu il accepta volontiers, vn Dimanche ma 
tin en la Chappelle en prefence de tous, tant Fran- 
Sois que Sauuages auec de grands fignes de douleur. 
Dieu luy veille continuer fes graces, & fortifier le 
courage. 

Pour le refte de nos Sauuages, ils font pleins de 
bonne volonte & de difpofition. Plufieurs d entr eux, 
quoy qu infidelles font foigneux de procurer le Bap- 
tefme a leur malades, nous aduertiffent volontiers fi 
toft qu ils voyent quelqu vn en danger [131] & nous 
prient de les alter baptifer, les plus apparents font 
gloire d appeller & faire venir les autres aux prieres: 
les aflemblent, les haftent & les preffent, quoy qu ils 
n ayent pour la plufpart befoin d efperon. Noftre 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 31 

so that they might not be spoiled, still they did 
not venture to touch them, without previously ascer 
taining from us whether it was permitted to do so. 
In the same manner, I often observed that on Fridays 
and fast days they suffered much, rather than do 
anything contrary to abstinence on those days. 

[130] " But we are human, and the strongest are 
not always sure to remain upright. This Joseph of 
whom we speak found means to procure a cask of 
wine ; he gave himself up to intemperance, and after 
ward to disorder, and committed a scandalous sin. 
This is the evil that we have for a long time deplored 
here; and the lack of restraint on that pernicious 
traffic ruins everything, as we have frequently writ 
ten to Your Reverence. They themselves say that 
they would all be Christians by this time, were it not 
for the liquor that is traded to them. When this 
poor man came to his senses, he was so ashamed that 
he did not dare to show himself ; but, as his offense 
had been public, he also had to make public repara 
tion. This he willingly agreed to, on a Sunday 
morning in the Chapel, in the presence of all, both 
French and Savages, with great manifestations of 
sorrow. May God continue to grant him grace and 
to strengthen his courage. 

As for the remainder of our Savages, they are 
very willing and well disposed. Many of them, 
although they are infidels, are anxious to procure 
Baptism for their sick ; they promptly inform us as 
soon as they see any one in danger, [131] and beg us 
to go and baptize them. The principal men among 
them glory in calling and bringing the others to 
prayers, they assemble, urge, and press them 
though most of them need no spur. Our Chapel is 



32 L ES RELATIONS DES jS UITES [VOL. 28 

Chappelle eft fouuent trop petite pour les tenir tons, 
il faut faire les prieres & diuerfes fois, & monftrent 
bien par leur ferueur & modeftie qu ils les gouftent. 
En effedl, depuis que nous auons mis leurs prieres 
en chant, ils prennent vn fmgulier plaifir d y affifter, 
& fe piquent de bien chanter, auffi y en a-il qui ont 
de tres-belles voix, & ceux qui ont veu & demeure k 
Kebec, ne trouuent point nos Sauuages moins loii- 
ables que les Montagnets. Deux perfonnes de con 
federation parmy eux, vinrent vn iour que toutes les 
prieres eftoient acheu6es demandans qu on les fift 
prier Dieu : Et ou eftiez-vous, leur dit-on, quand on 
a fait les prieres? Pourquoy ne vous y eftes-vous 
trouue, nous n en fgauions rien, dirent-ils, nous 
eftions vn peu efloignez & n en auons rien oiiy, 
faites-nous prier Dieu, nous fommes trifles d auoir 
manque" a ce deuoir, il les fallut contenter, & apres 
auoir fatisfait a leur deuotion, ils tefmoignerent 
d effedt & de paroles qu ils [132] eftoient contens, 
mais ce qui eft rauiffant, c eft de voir aux Catechif- 
mes qu on leur fait, le foin & la peine que les parens 
prennent de redre attentifs leurs enfans & leur incul- 
quer ce qu on leur enfeigne, & aux grands par ce 
moyen, ils prendront deuant eux leurs enfans qu ils 
cheriffent tendrement, leur feront faire le Signe de 
la Croix, leur repeteront ce que le Reuerend Pere 
dit, I amplineront vn peu & 1 expliqueront en d au- 
tres termes, les exhorteront & bien retenir, & n ou- 
blieront pas de leur ietter 1 horreur du peche" dans 
Tame. Vne troupe de Sauuages & des principaux 
de 1 Acadie, conduite par vn braue Capitaine nomine 
Herout paffa par icy, s en allant en guerre au Prin- 
temps, ils amfterent aux prieres & exhortations qu on 



1645-46] RELA TION OF 1644-45 33 

often too small to hold them all ; the prayers have 
to be repeated at various times ; and they show by 
their fervor and modesty that they relish them. In 
fact, since we have set their prayers to music they 
take a remarkable pleasure in attending them, and 
pride themselves on singing well. Some of them, in 
truth, have very fine voices; and those who have 
seen and have lived at Kebec, do not find our Sav 
ages less deserving of praise than the Montagnais. 
Two persons of rank among them came one day, 
when all the prayers were over, to ask that they be 
made to pray to God. And where were you, they 
were asked, when the prayers were said? Why 
were you not there? We knew nothing about it, 
they said ; we were at some distance, and heard 
nothing of them. Make us pray to God; we are 
sorry to have failed in that duty. They had to be 
satisfied, and, when they had performed their devo 
tions, they showed by deed and by word that they 
[132] were pleased. But truly delightful it is to see, 
when we teach the Catechism to them, the care and 
the trouble that the parents take to make their chil 
dren attentive, and to impress on their minds what 
by this means we teach them and the older ones. 
They will take before them their children whom they 
tenderly love, and have them make the Sign of the 
Cross; they will repeat to them what the Reverend 
Father says, and then enlarge upon the subject, and 
explain it in other words ; they will exhort them to 
remember it well, and will not forget to instill into 
their souls a horror for sin. A band of Savages, of 
the chief men of Acadia, led by a brave Captain 
named Herout, passed here last Spring, on their 
way to war. They attended the prayers and the 




34 LES RELATIONS DES J&SUITES [ VOL. 28 

faifoit en leur langue dans la Chappelle de cette 
habitation, & tons rauis d entendre des chofes fi belles 
& fi nouuelles; Helas, difoient-ils, il y a tant de 
temps que nous hantons les habitations Frangoifes 
qui font en nos coftez, & iamais on ne nous a enfei- 
gne de la fagon, nous ne fgauons que c eft de prier 
au moins en noftre langue, on n inftruit point nos 
enfans comme vous faites par dega. Quoy que s en 
foit, ils s en font retournez [133] dans de bos fenti- 
mes, & peut-eflre que cette femece Diuine portera 
fon fruidt en fon temps. Au retour de leur guerre 
vne partie paila par noftre Maifon de Nepegigoiiit, 
oil ils fe monftrerent auffi affidus & zelez pour les 
prieres qu ils auoient fait a Mifcou, ils venoient fe 
conjoiiir auec nos Sauuages des beaux exploidls de 
guerre qu ils auoient fait & Chichedek, Pays des Ber- 
fiamites, ou ils auoient tue fept Sauuages & emmene" 
treize ou quatorze prifonniers la plufpart enfans. 
Ceux de cette Baye-cy, qui auoient pris le deuant 
dans le mefme deffein de leur guerre, fe monftre 
rent bien plus referuez & n oferent iamais offenfer 
quelques Canots qu ils rencontrerent de ces quar- 
tiers-1^ fur 1 opinion qu ils coceurent a leur parole 
qu ils prioiet Dieu. Mais ces autres moins affedtion- 
nez k la priere & moins inftruits, ne fe mirent point 
en peine fur cela, ils fe iettent fur la premiere proye 
qui leur tombe entre les mains, & s en reuiennent 
vidtorieux, & defireux d appaifer par ces maffacres 
1 ennuy & la trifteffe de tout le Pays afflige de la 
mort de quantite de perfonnes deced6es depuis quel 
ques annees. Ils iettent d abord les cheuelures des 
pauures maffacrez k terre, [134] & efpandent en 
mefme temps la ioye par toutes les cabanes. Ce fut 



1645 - 46 j RELA TION OF 1644 - 45 35 

exhortations that we addressed to them in their lan 
guage in the Chapel of this settlement, and were 
all delighted to hear things so beautiful and so 
new. Alas ! said they, we have so long fre 
quented the French settlements on our shores, and 
we have never been taught in that fashion. We know 
not what it is to pray, at least in our own lan 
guage ; our children are not taught as you teach them 
here. At all events, they went away [133] inclined 
to right sentiments, and perhaps this Divine seed 
will bear fruit in its time. On their return from 
war, a party of them passed by our House of Nepegi- 
gouit where they showed themselves as assiduous and 
as zealous for the prayers, as they had been at Mis- 
cou. They came to rejoice with our Savages at the 
brave exploits of the war that they had performed 
at Chichedek, in the Country of the Bersiamites, 
where they had killed seven Savages and taken thir 
teen or fourteen prisoners, most of whom were chil 
dren. Those from the Bay here, who had gone 
before them with the same purpose of war, showed 
themselves much more reserved and never ventured 
to attack any Canoes that they met in that quarter, 
because they imagined, from their speech, that they 
prayed to God. But these others, who have less 
love for prayer and are not so well instructed, did 
not disturb themselves on that account. They threw 
themselves on the first prey that fell into their 
hands ; they came back victorious, and desired by 
these massacres to allay the grief and sorrow of all 
the Country, which is afflicted by the death of many 
persons who have died during the past few years. 
They threw on the shore, at landing, the scalps of 
the poor massacred people, [134] and at the same time 



36 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

a qui d entre les femmes fe faifiroit la premiere de 
ces Trophies, chanteroit & danferoit le mieux, il n y 
auoit ny pluye ny vent qui les empefchaft depuis le 
matin iufques au foir. C eft chofe eftrange comme 
raffiduite" & continuation de ces danfes & chanfons 
pendant plufieurs iours ne les lafloit ou ennuyoit point; 
mais vne fauffe alarme, & le bruit que 1 ennemy 
auoit paru, interrompit cette ioye, & les ietta dans 
les craintes & apprehenfions des mains des Hiro- 
quois, & les fift penfer a la fuite: ils fe retirerent 
tous a Miskou, ou ils continuerent encore long-temps 
leurs funeftes chanfons a la cadence de ces cheue- 
lures. 

Voila pour ce qui eft de nos Sauuages : pour les 
Fran9ois, Voftre Reuerence fgait bien que nous nous 
employ ons pour les hyuernans en cette habitation, & 
pour plufieurs nauires pefcheurs qui viennent tous 
les ans & demeurent tout l Eft6 k ces Coftes, & ie 
puis dire a la gloire de Dieu, que cette Miffion ne 
fert pas moins pour le fpirituel a ceux-cy, qu a ceux- 
la & aux Sauuages du Pays. Les Predications & 
Catechifmes, la frequence des [135] Confeffions & 
Communions, les differens & les querelles vuidez & 
appaif ez ; mefme entre les principaux qui en eftoient 
venus iufques a vn appel, monftrent affez 1 impor- 
tance de ces excurfions dans lefquelles les Sauuages 
ont encore part: Car comme ils font volontiers au- 
pr6s des nauires, nous ne pouuons affifter les vns que 
nous n ayons encore moyen d ayder les autres. Mais 
la boiffon qui s y traite & debite impunement eft le 
fleau de ce quartier: Quand eft-ce que le Ciel y 
mettra remede, puis qu en vain nous 1 attendons de 
la terre, ce fera par les prieres de V. Reuerence, 
aufquelles ie me recommande inftamment. 



1645 -46J RELATION OF 1644-43 37 

spread joy throughout the cabins. The women vied 
with one another who should first seize these 
Trophies, and who should sing and dance the best. 
Neither rain nor wind could stop them, from morning 
to night. It is strange that this constant and continued 
dancing and singing for several days did not tire or 
weary them. But a false alarm, and the rumor that 
the enemy had appeared, interrupted their rejoicing, 
threw them into fear and apprehension of falling 
into the hands of the Hiroquois, and made them 
think of flight. They all withdrew to Miskou, 
where for a long time they continued their baleful 
songs to the cadence of the waving scalps. 

" So much for our Savages. As for the French, 
Your Reverence is aware that we devote ourselves 
to those who winter in this settlement, and to sev 
eral fishing ships that come here every year and 
spend the Summer on these Coasts ; and I may say, 
to the glory of God, that this Mission supplies the 
spiritual needs not only of the latter but also of the 
former, and of the Savages of the Country. Ser 
mons, and the teaching of Catechism; the frequent 
[135] Confessions and Communions ; the disputes and 
quarrels that have been settled and appeased, even 
among the principal persons, who had gone so far as 
to challenge each other, sufficiently show the im 
portance of these excursions in which the Savages also 
have a share. For, as they readily remain near the 
ships, we cannot assist the one without also having 
the means of assisting the other. But liquor, which is 
here traded and sold with impunity, is the scourge of 
this region. When will Heaven furnish a remedy 
therefor, since we await it in vain from earth? It 
will be through the prayers of Your Reverence, to 
which I earnestly commend myself." 



38 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



[136] Lettre du P. Hierofme Lalemant, efcrite 

des Hurons au R. P. Prouin- 

cial de la Compagnie 

de IESVS. 

MON REUEREND PERE, 
Ie fus priue Van patfe" d vne fmguliere 
confolation, les lettres que V. R. m efcriuoit 
eftant tombees entre les mains des Hiroquois nos 
ennemis. I appris toutefois fur la fin de 1 Efte", les 
ordres qu elle auoit enuoye: en fuite defquels i ay 
Iaiff6 le foin de cette Miffion des Hurons au P. Paul 
Ragueneau, & me fuis difpof6 au depart de ces 
contr6es plus hautes, pour defcendre a Kebec. 

Dans 1 incertitude de ce qui me peut arriuer en 
chemin, i ay penf6 a propos d efcrire la prefente 
auant mon depart, & la laiffer icy pour eftre enuoyee 
apres moy, afin qu en tout cas V. R. puiffe auoir mes 
dernieres penf6es, & les fentimens que i ay touchant 
la conuerfion de ces Pays, apres y auoir demeure 
quafi fept ans, tefmoin des trauaux des Peres de 
noflre Compagnie; [137] veu les fruidts que le Ciel 
en a recueilly, & les efperances que i y laiffe pour 
1 aduenir, fi Dieu continue fes benedictions fur ces 
Peuples, comme il a commenc6. 

Lors que i arriuay icy dans les Hurons, les mala 
dies contagieufes, qui auoient preced6, auoient don- 
n6 de Vexercice au zele de nos Peres, & les auoient 
oblig6 de baptizer quelques Sauuages dans 1 extre- 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1644- 45 3S&gt; 



[136] Letter from Father Hierosme Lalemant, writ 
ten from the Huron country to the Rev 
erend Father Provincial of the 
Society of JESUS. 

MY REVEREND FATHER, 
I was deprived last year of an especial con 
solation, because the letters that Your Rever 
ence had written to me had fallen into the hands of 
the Hiroquois, our enemies. I learned, however, 
at the end of the Summer, the orders that you had 
sent, in accordance with which I have left the care 
of this Huron Mission to Father Paul Ragueneau and 
have prepared to depart from these upper countries 
and go down to Kebec. 

In my uncertainty as to what might happen to me 
on the way, I have deemed it advisable to write this 
letter previous to my departure, and to leave it here 
to be sent after me, so that in any case Your Rever 
ence might know my latest thoughts and opinions 
concerning the conversion of these Countries, after 
I have dwelt here nearly seven years, witnessed the 
labors of the Fathers of our Society, [137] and seen 
the fruits that Heaven has reaped from them, and 
the hopes that I leave here for the future, if God 
continue to pour his blessings on these Peoples as 
he has begun. 

When I arrived here in the Huron country, the 
contagious diseases that had previously raged there 
had given our Fathers an opportunity for showing 



40 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

mite de leur mal. Mais vn grand nombre ayans pris 
leur party dans le Ciel, mourans heureufement dans 
1 innocence du Baptefme; La vie fut mal-heureufe 
aux autres, qui abandonnerent & la Foy, & le nom 
de Chreftien, quafi en mefme temps qu ils recouure- 
rent la fante: excepte vne ou deux families, qui a 
peine ozoient leuer la tefte, au milieu d vne terre 
infidelle depuis tant de milliers d ann6es. Mais 
neantmoins ce fut vn grain, qui depuis a multiplte au 
centuple. Et nonobftant mille perfecutions eleuees 
centre nous; quoy que 1 Enfer & fes Demons ayent 
excite" toute leur rage, la Foy a depuis efte toufiours 
croiffant, & en faindlete", & en nombre: elle a paru 
auec eclat, & fait gloire de fe voir efprouuee par tout 
ce qui eft comme plus redoutable [138] en ce monde, 
au moins a ceux qui n ayans point ce courage in- 
domptable, que donne la vraye Foy, craignent moins 
Dieu que les miferes. le veux dire que toutes fortes 
de mal-heurs font venus a la f oulle fur cette pauure 
Eglife, pour 1 eftouffer en fon berceau. 

Les maladies fe font fuiuies les vnes apres les autres, 
& il fembloit qu elles en vouluffent plus aux Chre- 
ftiens qu aux Infidelles, depeuplant plus cruellement 
leurs families, & pardonnant le plus fouuent a ceux 
qui auoient refuf 6 le Baptefme ; en mefme temps que 
dans vne mefme cabane, & dans vn mefme licit, la 
mort nous rauiff oit les autres qui auoient embraffe la 
Foy. Quoy qu en effet par cette voye Dieu accreut 
dans le Ciel le nombre de fes Eleus, pour lefquels 
feuls il a voulu que fon faindt Nom foit annonce a 
ces Peuples barbares; toutefois ce n eftoient pas ce 
femble des difpofitions fouhaitables pour rendre 
noftre Foy plus aymable, & augmenter le nombre de 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 41 

their zeal, and had compelled them to baptize some 
Savages in the extremity of their illness. But, 
though a great many found their portion in Heaven, 
as they fortunately died in the innocence of Baptism, 
life was unhappy for the others, who abandoned 
both the Faith and the name of Christian almost as 
soon as they recovered their health, with the ex 
ception of one or two families, who hardly dared to 
lift their heads in the midst of a land that has been 
infidel for so many thousand years. Nevertheless, 
this was a seed that has since multiplied a hundred 
fold. And in spite of a thousand persecutions raised 
up against us, although Hell and its Demons excited 
all their fury, the Faith has since then continued to 
increase in godliness and in numbers; it has shone 
brilliantly, and has gloried in undergoing trials by 
everything that is most to be dreaded [138] in this 
world, at least by those who, not being endowed 
with the indomitable courage that is inspired by 
true Faith, fear God less than adversity. I mean to 
say that all sorts of misfortunes crowded upon this 
poor Church, to stifle it in its cradle. 

Maladies succeeded one another, until it seemed 
as if they singled out the Christians more than the 
Infidels, cruelly decimating their families, and more 
frequently sparing those who had refused Baptism, 
while at the same time, in the same cabin, and in 
the same bed, death snatched others from us who 
had embraced the Faith. Although by this means 
God indeed increased in Heaven the number of his 
Elect, for whose sake alone he has chosen that his 
holy Name be announced to these barbarous Peo 
ples, nevertheless it was not, it would seem, a desir 
able preparation for making our Faith more lovable 



42 



LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

cette Eglife militante; c eftoit pluftoft pour en don- 
ner de 1 auerfion & de 1 horreur autant qu on en a de 

la mort. 

Les Famines ont eu leur tour; & on a [139] creu 
qu ayant change de Maiftre, & que mettant fes con- 
fiances pluftoft en Dieu qu aux Demons de 1 Enfer, 
la Foy auoit attire ces mal-heurs apres foy; & que 
celuy qu elle adoroit, eftoit ou impuiffant a nous faire 
du bien, ou qu il manquoit d amour pour ceux qui 
vouloient en auoir pour luy. 

Les guerres ont eft6 plus impitoyables; & quoy 
qu elles ayent eft&lt; rauageant dans leur fureur plus 
cruellement ce Pays, fans pardonner a aucun fexe, a 
aucun aage ny a aucune condition de perfonnes/ 
toutefois nous pouuons dire en verite", qu il femble 
que Dieu ait voulu moiffonner la fleur de nos Eglifes 
par ce glaiue tranchant. Dans le coeur du Pays, & 
aux portes des bourgs ou la Foy eftoit le plus dedans 
fon regne, les Hiroquois font venus de cent lieues y 
maffacrer ceux qui en eftoient le fouftien, & qui par 
1 exemple & la faindtet6 de leur vie, par 1 ardeur de 
leur zele, & 1 efficace des paroles enflammees que le 
S. Efprit animoit en leur bouche, auoient defia les 
qualitez d Apoftres de leur patrie, y prefchans plus 
puiffamment que nous, les grandeurs de celuy qui 
des barbares en fait des Saindts. 

[140] C eftoient des pertes bien f enables a vne Eglife 
qui ne f aif oit que de naiftre : mais celles qui ont f uiuy 
depuis nos dernieres Relations, ont paru plus fu- 
neftes, non feulement pour 1 aduancement de la Foy, 
mais pour tous ces Pays, qui vont s afToibliffant de 
iour en iour, & tirent ce femble a leur ruine, fi quel- 
que bras plus puiffant que les noftres, ou quelque 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-43 43 

and for increasing the number of this Church mili 
tant ; it was more fitted to produce aversion therefor, 
and to inspire a horror of it as great as of death. 

Then Famines had their turn; and the people 
[139] thought that, because they had changed Mas 
ters, and had placed their confidence in God rather 
than in the Demons of Hell, the Faith had 
drawn these misfortunes after it; and that he whom 
it adored was either powerless to do us good, or 
was wanting in love for those who wished to love 
him. 

Wars have been more pitiless, and, although they 
have ravaged this Country most cruelly, without 
sparing any sex, age, or condition of persons, never 
theless we may truly say that it seems as if God had 
chosen to reap the flower of our Churches with that 
sharp sword. Into the heart of the Country, and to 
the doors of the villages where the reign of the Faith 
most prevailed, the Hiroquois have come from a 
hundred leagues distance, to slay those who supported 
it and who by the example and holiness of their 
lives, by the ardor of their zeal, and the efficacy of 
the impassioned words that the Holy Ghost placed 
m their mouths, already possessed the qualities of 
Apostles of their country, wherein they preached 
more powerfully than we the greatness of him who 
makes Saints of barbarians. 

[140] These were deeply-felt losses for a Church 
newly born ; but those that have followed since our 
last Relations have seemed more disastrous, not 
only to the advancement of the Faith, but also to all 
these Countries, which become weaker day by day, 
and seem to be drawing near their ruin, if some arm 
more powerful than ours or some intervention of 



44 LES RELATIONS DES JESUTTES [VOL. 28 

coup du Ciel n arrefle 1 infolence & la profperite de 
leurs Ennemis. 

Nos Chreftiens, il y eut vn an 1 Efte" paffe", auoient 
fait vne bande d enuiron cent homines choiiis, fe 
ioignans a quelques guerriers Infidelles, pour aller 
dreffer des embufches fur les frontieres du Pays 
ennemy : ils furent rencontrez par f ept ou huit cens 
Hiroquois, & apres le combat d vne foire"e, & d vne 
nuit entiere, demeurerent tous fur la place, ou pris 
captifs, fans qu aucun fe put efchapper. 

Vn mal-heur en attire vn autre, la mefme ann6e 
deux bandes de Hurons tomberent entre les mains 
d autres Hiroquois plus voifms de Kebec, qui les atten- 
dent au paffage fur la Riuiere qu ils defcendent pour 
aller trouuer les Francois, & traiter auec eux leurs 
Caftors & leur pelleterie. 

[141] Et 1 an parle", trois autres flottes, la plufpart 
des Chreftiens, trouuerent auffi fur le mefme chemin 
ou la mort, ou la captiuite : les vns d6s leur defpart 
des Trois-riuieres, les autres vn peu au deffous de 
Ville-Marie, les derniers enuiron foixante lieues plus 
haut; car le peril continue cent lieues de chemin, 
n y ay ant pas vn feul moment ou on puiffe eflre en 
affeurance d vn ennemy cache dedans des joncs qui 
bordent la riuiere, ou dans 1 efpaiffeur des forefts 
qui les couurent a voftre veue, lors qu ils vous voyent 
venir de quatre, cinq ou fix lieues, ayans tous le 
loiilr de fe difpofer au combat, s ils vous voyent les 
plus foibles; ou de fonger a leur retraite, ou demeu- 
rer cachez dans leurs embufches, s ils vous croyent 
les plus forts. 

Vne feule bande ayant trauerfe ces dangers, re- 
tourna icy a bon port, & nous rendit le Pere lean de 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 45 

Heaven do not arrest the insolence and success of 
their Enemies. 

A year ago last Summer, our Christians had mus 
tered a band of about a hundred picked men, who 
joined some Infidel warriors to go and lay ambushes 
on the frontiers of the enemy s Country. They were 
met by seven or eight hundred Hiroquois; and, 
after fighting for a whole evening and a whole night, 
they were all killed on the field of battle or taken 
prisoners, not one effecting his escape. 

One misfortune attracts another. In the same 
year, two bands of Hurons fell into the hands of 
other Hiroquois who are nearer Kebec, and who lay 
in wait for them on the River which they descend 
to go and see the French, and to trade their Beaver 
skins and furs with them. 

[141] And last year three other fleets, mostly of 
Christians, also met with death or captivity on the 
same road, one, soon after their departure from 
Three rivers ; another, a little above Ville-Marie ; 
the last, about sixty leagues higher up. For the 
peril continues over a hundred leagues of road. 
There is no safety for a moment from an enemy 
hidden in the rushes along the banks of the river, or 
in the depths of the forest, which screen them from 
your sight while they can see you coming from a 
distance of four, five, or six leagues, thus having 
time to prepare for a combat, if they see that you 
are weaker; or to retreat, or remain hidden in their 
ambush, if they consider you the stronger. 

A single band, which had passed through these 
dangers, reached here safely, and brought to us Father 
Jean de Brebeuf , whose absence during three years 
had been greatly felt by us, and Fathers Leonard 



46 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

Brebeuf, dont Tab fence de trois ans, nous auoit efte" 
bien fenflble/ & les Peres Leonard Gareau, & Noel 
Chabanel, venus de nouueau a noftre fecours, dont 
rarriue"e nous confola extremement dans les regrets 
de la perte que fraifchement nous auions faite du 
Pere Breflany tombe" entre les mains des Hiroquois. 
[142] Cette bande fut efcorte"e du fecours que Mon- 
fieur de Montmagny noftre Gouuerneur nous enuoya 
tres-heureufement, non feulement pour la confer- 
uation de ces pauures Hurons, qui couroient vn grand 
rifque de tomber pareilletnent dans les embufches 
des ennemis; Mais plus encore pour aff ermir ce Pays 
qui eftoit menace" de voir en Hyuer vne arm6e d Hi 
roquois venir rauager leurs bourgades, & traifnant 
apres foy vne defolation generale mettre tout a feu 
& a fang: mais la venue de ce fecours leur a fait 
changer de deilein. Que fi cette mefme efcorte de 
Soldats Fran9ois, qui eft fur le point de s en retour- 
ner, pour accompagner les Hurons qui defcendront 
la riuiere, arriuet auec autant de bon-heur k Kebec, 
qu ils monterent icy Tan paffe: le Ciel aura beny 
entierement tous les deffeins de Moniieur noftre Gou 
uerneur. Quoy qu il en foit, ie prie Dieu de confer- 
uer touliours a la Nouuelle France vne perfonne qui 
nous doit eftre li precieufe, car ie ne croy point de- 
puis neuf ans qu il en a le Gouuernement, qu on euft 
peu agir auec vn plus grand zele qu il en a fait 
paroiftre, vne prudence plus degage"e des propres 
interefts, vne [143] force d efprit, & vn courage plus 
veritablement Chreftien, dans les difficultez quafi 
infurmontables qui fe font rencontrees, & qui euffent 
abattu vn cceur moins ferme que le fien. 

Mais pour reprendre mon difcours, & dire a voftre 
Reuerence les fentimens que i ay, touchant la con- 



1645 - 46] R EL A TION OF 1644 - 43 47 

Gareau and Noel Chabanel, who had newly come to 
our assistance. Their arrival consoled us exceed 
ingly in our regret for our recent loss of Father 
Bressany, who had fallen into the hands of the Hiro- 
quois. [142] This band was escorted by the troops 
which Monsieur de Montmagny, our Governor, sent 
us most opportunely, not only for the preservation 
of the poor Hurons, who ran a great risk of also fall 
ing into the ambushes of the enemies, but still more 
for strengthening this Country, which was threat 
ened this Winter with the sight of a Hiroquois army 
coming to ravage their villages, bringing with it 
general desolation, and wasting everything with fire 
and sword. But the arrival of this relief made them 
alter their plans. And if this same escort of French 
Soldiers, which is about to return, in order to accom 
pany the Hurons who are going down the river, 
reach Kebec as safely as they came up last year, 
Heaven will have fully blessed all the designs of 
Monsieur our Governor. In any case, I pray God 
ever to preserve for New France a person who should 
be so precious to us; for I do not think that, in the 
nine years during which he has had the Government 
of it, any one could have acted with more zeal than 
he has displayed, with more disinterested prudence, 
with more [143] strength of mind, and with a more 
truly Christian courage, amid the almost insurmount 
able difficulties that have been encountered, and 
that would have discouraged a heart less firm than 
his. 

But to return to our subject, and to tell your Rev 
erence my sentiments respecting the conversion of 
this country, I may frankly confess that, if we had 
to judge the establishment of the Faith in these 



48 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [ VOL. 28 

uerfion de ce pays; ie luy confefferay ingenuement, 
que s il falloit iuger de 1 eftablillement de la Foy en 
ces contre es, felon les veues de la prudence humaine, 
a peine croirois-je qu il y euft lieu au monde plus 
difficile & foufmettre aux Loix de IESVS-CHRIST. 
Non feulement a caufe qu ils n ont aucun vfage de 
lettres, aucuns monumens de 1 Hiftoire, & aucune 
ide"e d vne Diuinit6 qui ayt cre6 le monde, & ayt foin 
de f on gouuernement : mais plus encore par ce que 
ie ne croy pas qu il y ayt peuples fur la terre, plus 
libres que ceux-cy, & moins capables de voir leurs 
volontez contraintes & quelque puiffance que ce foit: 
en forte que les Peres n ont icy aucun pouuoir fur 
leurs enfans, les Capitaines fur leurs fujets & les Loix 
du pays fur les vns & les autres, qu autant qu il 
plaift a vn chacun de s y foufmettre; n y ayant aucun 
chaftiment dont [144] on punifle les coulpables, & 
aucun criminel qui ne foit affeur6 que fa vie & fes 
biens ne feront en aucun danger, fut-il conuaincu de 
trois & quatre meurtres, d auoir receu penfion des 
ennemis pour trahir fa patrie, ou de fon propre mou- 
uement d auoir rompu la paix qu on auroit arrefte e 
par vn confentement general de tout le pays: Ce 
font crimes que i ay veu commettre, & dont ie vois 
les autheurs en tirer leur gloire, fe vantans que les 
guerres qu ils ont fufcite es rendront leur nom immor- 
tel: Ce n efl pas qu il n y ayt des Loix & des puni- 
tions proportionnees aux crimes, mais ce ne font pas 
les coupables qui en portent la peine, c eft au public 
a fatisfaire pour les fautes des particuliers : en forte 
que fi vn Huron auoit tue vn Algonquin, ou quel- 
qu autre Huron, tout le pays s ailemble, on conuient 
du nombre de prefens qu il faut faire & la Nation, ou 
aux parens de celuy qui a efte" tu6, afin d arrefter la 



1645 - 46] RELA TION OF 1644 - 45 49 

countries from the standpoint of human prudence, I 
could hardly believe that there is any place in the 
world more difficult to subject to the Laws of JESUS 
CHRIST. Not only because they have no knowl 
edge of letters, no Historical monuments, and no idea 
of a Divinity who has created the world and who 
governs it; but, above all, because I do not believe 
that there is any people on earth freer than they, 
and less able to allow the subjection of their wills to 
any power whatever, so much so that Fathers here 
have no control over their children, or Captains over 
their subjects, or the Laws of the country over any 
of them, except in so far as each is pleased to submit 
to them. There is no punishment which [144] is 
inflicted on the guilty, and no criminal who is not 
sure that his life and property are in no danger, even 
if he were convicted of three or four murders, of 
having received a reward from the enemy for betray 
ing his country, or breaking off by his own act a 
peace, that is decided upon by the general consent 
of the whole country. These are crimes that I have 
seen committed, the authors whereof have gloried in 
them and have boasted that the wars that they had 
aroused would make their names immortal. It is not 
because there are no Laws or punishments propor 
tionate to the crimes, but it is not the guilty who 
suffer the penalty. It is the public that must make 
amends for the offenses of individuals ; so that, if a 
Huron has killed an Algonquin or another Huron, 
the whole country assembles ; and they come to an 
agreement respecting the number of presents to be 
given to the Tribe or to the relatives of him who 
has been killed, to stay the vengeance that they 
might take. The Captains urge their subjects to 



50 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

vangeance qu ils en pourroient prendre. Les Capi- 
taines exhortent leurs fujets k fournir ce qui eft 
neceffaire; pas vn n y eft contraint, mais ceux qui 
font de bonne volonte apportent publiquement ce 
qu ils veulent y contribuer, & ce femble k 1 enuy 
[145] 1 vn de 1 autre, felon qu ils font plus ou moins 
riches, & que le defir de la gloire & de paroiftre 
affedtionnez au bien public les inuite en femblables 
occafions. Or quoy que cette forme de iuftice con- 
tienne tous ces peuples, & empefche ce femble plus 
efficacement les defordres, que ne fait en France la 
punition perfonnelle des criminels; c eft toutefois vn 
proced^ qui n eft remply que de douceur, & qui laiffe 
les particuliers dans cet efprit de liberte", de ne fe 
voir iamais foufmis h Loix aucunes, & ne fuiure 
aucuns mouuemens finon celuy de leur volonte, ce qui 
fans doute eft vne difpofition toute contraire a 1 ef 
prit de la Foy, qui doit foufmettre non feulement 
nos volontez, mais noftre efprit, nos iugemens, & tous 
les fentimens de I homme vne puiffance inconnue, 
a nos fens, a vne Loy qui n a rien de la terre, & qui 
en tout eft oppofee aux loix & fentimens de la nature 
corrompue. 

Adjouftez a cela que les loix du Pays, qui leur 
paroiffent les plus iuftes, combattent en mille chofes 
la purete du Chriftianifme : principalement en ce qui 
eft des mariages, dont la dilfolution, & en fuite la 
liberte de fonger h vn autre party, eft [146] icy plus 
frequente & plus libre qu il n eft en France & vn 
maiftre de prendre vn autre feruiteur, celuy qu il a 
ne luy aggreant pas : en forte qu & vray dire, en leurs 
mariages les plus fermes, & qu ils eftiment les plus 
conformes & la raifon, la foy qu ils fe donnent 
n a rien de plus qu vne promeffe conditionelle de 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 51 

provide what is needed; no one is compelled to it, 
but those who are willing bring publicly what they 
wish to contribute; it seems as if they vied [145] 
with one another according to the amount of their 
wealth, and as the desire of glory and of appearing 
solicitous for the public welfare urges them to do on 
like occasions. Now although this form of justice 
restrains all these peoples, and seems more effectu 
ally to repress disorders than the personal punish 
ment of criminals does in France, it is nevertheless 
a very mild proceeding, which leaves individuals in 
such a spirit of liberty that they never submit to any 
Laws and obey no other impulse than that of their 
own will. This, without doubt, is a disposition 
quite contrary to the spirit of the Faith, which re 
quires us to submit not only our wills, but our minds, 
our judgments, and all the sentiments of man to a 
power unknown to our senses, to a Law that is not of 
earth, and that is entirely opposed to the laws and 
sentiments of corrupt nature. 

Add to this that the laws of the Country, which to 
them seem most just, attack the purity of the Chris 
tian life in a thousand ways, especially as regards 
their marriages, the dissolution of which, with free 
dom to seek another consort, is [146] more frequent 
and easy here than it is in France for a master to 
take another servant, when the one he has does not 
please him. The result is, truth to tell, that, in the 
closest of their marriages, and those which they con 
sider most conformable to reason, the faith that they 
pledge each other is nothing more than a conditional 
promise to live together so long as each shall con 
tinue to render the services that they mutually expect 
from each other, and shall not in any way wound the 



52 LES RELATIONS DES js UITES [ VOL. 28 

demeurer enfemble, tandis qu vn chacun continuera 
a rendre les feruices qu ils attendent mutuellement 
les vns des autres, & n offenfera point I amiti6 qu ils 
fe doiuent; cela manquant on iuge le diuorce eftre 
raifonnable du coft6 de celuy qui fe voit offenfe, quoy 
qu on blafme 1 autre party qui y a donn6 occafion. 

Mais la plus grande oppofition que nous voyons en 
ces Pays a 1 efprit de la Foy, eft en ce que leurs 
remedes centre les maladies, leurs plus grandes recre 
ations lors qu ils font en fante, leurs pefches, leurs 
chaffes & leur trafic, la profperite" de leurs champs, 
de leurs guerres, & de leurs confeils, tout eft quafi 
remply de ceremonies diaboliques. De forte que la 
fuperftition ayant corropu quafi toutes les actions de 
la vie, il femble que pour eftre Chreftien, il faut fe 
priuer non feulement des [147] pafle-temps, qui d ail- 
leurs font tout k fait dans 1 innocence, & des dou 
ceurs les plus aymables de la vie; mais des chofes 
les plus neceffaires, & en vn mot mourir au monde, 
en mefme temps qu on veut prendre la vie de Chre 
ftien. 

Non pas qu ayant examin6 leurs fuperftitions de 
plus pre"s, nous voyons que le Diable fe mefle & leur 
prefte aucun fecours qui furpaffe 1 operation de la 
nature/ mais toutefois ils ont recours a luy, ils croy- 
ent qu il leur parle en fonge, ils 1 inuoquent a leur 
ayde, ils luy font des prefens & facrifices, tantoft 
pour 1 appaifer, tantoft pour fe le rendre fauorable, 
ils luy referent leur fante, leurs guerifons, & tout le 
bon-heur de leur vie: en cela d autant plus mife- 
rables qu ils fe font efclaues du Diable fans rien 
gagner a fon feruice, non pas mefme en ce monde, 
dont il eft appel!6 le Prince, & femble auoir quelque 
pouuoir. 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 53 

affection that they owe each other. If this fail, 
divorce is considered reasonable on the part of the 
injured one, although the other party who has given 
occasion for it is blamed. 

But the greatest opposition that we meet in these 
Countries to the spirit of the Faith consists in the 
fact that their remedies for diseases ; their greatest 
amusements when in good health ; their fishing, 
their hunting, and their trading ; the success of their 
crops, of their wars, and of their councils, almost all 
abound in diabolical ceremonies. So that, as super 
stition has contaminated nearly all the actions of 
their lives, it would seem that to be a Christian, one 
must deprive himself not only of [147] pastimes which 
elsewhere are wholly innocent, and of the dearest 
pleasures of life, but even of the most necessary 
things, and, in a word, die to the world at the 
very moment that one wishes to assume the life of a 
Christian. 

Not that, after examining their superstitions more 
closely, we find that the Devil interferes and gives 
them any help beyond the operation of nature ; but 
nevertheless they have recourse to him ; they believe 
that he speaks to them in dreams ; they invoke his 
aid ; they make presents and sacrifices to him, some 
times to appease him and sometimes to render him 
favorable to them ; they attribute to him their health, 
their cures, and all the happiness of their lives. In 
this, they are all the more miserable that they are 
slaves of the Devil, without gaining anything in his 
service, not even in this world, of which he is called 
the Prince, and wherein he seems to have some 
power. 

If lesser difficulties have caused trouble in convert- 



54 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

Si de moindres difficultez ont donne de la peine a 
conuertir des Peuples policez; & s il a fallu des fiecles 
entiers pour y planter la Foy, quoy que Dieu affiftaft 
pour lors ceux qui annongoient fa parole d vne infi 
nite" de miracles, du don des guerifons, [148] du don 
des langues, des propheties, & de tout ce qui efl 
capable d eftonner la nature, & faire reconnoiflre aux 
plus impies le pouuoir & la majefte de celuy dont on 
publioit la grandeur. Que doit-on attendre de ces 
peuples barbares, n ayant pas plu a Dieu nous benir 
de la frequence des miracles; & leur rendre la Foy 
plus aymable par les douceurs qu elle feroit pleuuoir 
du Ciel des cette vie, fur ceux qui fe foufmettroient 
a fes Loix; mais mefme n ayans pas icy ces aydes 
temporels des fecours, des bien-faits & des dons, 
dont aux autres contre"es du Monde on s eft feruy 
aupre*s des Sauuages, pour procurer leur conuerfion. 
En fin ne pouuans pas auoir icy la force en main, & 
le fouftien de ce glaiue tranchant qui fert faindte- 
ment a 1 Eglife, pour authorifer fes Arrefts, foufte- 
nir la luftice, & reprimer 1 infolence de ceux qui 
foulent aux pieds la faindtete" de fes Myfteres. 

La Foy n eftant pas naturelle a ces peuples, comme 
il femble qu elle foit en France, ou on la fucce auec 
le laidt, ce n eft quafi rien fait, d auoir fait homme 
vn Chreftien. II faut plus de combats, plus de 
peines & plus de fueurs, pour le conferuer & [149] 
retenir dedans 1 Eglife, que pour 1 auoir gagne" a 
Dieu. Les tentations leur font connoiftre leur foi- 
bleffe; leur efprit n eft pas toufiours dans la ferueur; 
le Ciel n arrefte pas toufiours leur veue, la terre n a 
pas perdu tous fes attraits pour eux, il efl aife" dans la 
fuite de plufieurs anne"es qu ils tobent dans leur 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1644- 45 55 

ing civilized Nations, and if it has taken entire cen 
turies to implant the Faith in them, though God 
then assisted those who preached his word, with a 
multitude of miracles, with the gift of cures, [148] 
the gift of tongues, of prophecies, and everything 
that can astonish nature and make even the most 
impious acknowledge the power and majesty of him 
whose greatness they proclaimed, what can be ex 
pected from these barbarous nations when it has not 
pleased God to bless us with frequent miracles, and 
to make the Faith more agreeable to them by the 
pleasant things that it would cause Heaven to shower, 
even in this life, on those who should submit to his 
Laws ; and when we have not here even such temporal 
aids as the succor, the benefits, and the gifts which 
have been employed with the Savages in the other 
countries of the World to procure their conversion? 
Finally, we cannot here have force at hand, and the 
support of that sharp sword which serves the Church 
in so holy a manner to give authority to her Decrees, 
to maintain Justice, and curb the insolence of those 
who trample under foot the holiness of her Mysteries. 
As Faith is not natural to these peoples, as it 
seems to be in France, where it is imbibed with one s 
mother s milk, it is not a mere trifle to have 
made a man a Christian. More contests, more pains, 
and more labors are needed to retain and [149] keep 
him in the Church than were required to win him to 
God. Temptations show them their feebleness ; their 
minds are not always fervent ; Heaven does not 
always fix their gaze ; earth has not lost all its attrac 
tions for them ; it is easy for them in the course of 
many years to fall back into their frailties ; grace is 
but transitory, while nature ever remains; in a 



56 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

foiblefle: la grace eft paffagere, la nature demeure 
tou.fiou.rs, en vn mot, ie veux dire que la perfeuerance 
dans 1 exercice de la Foy, n eft pas icy moins diffi 
cile, qu il eft en France a la plufpart de conferuer 
leur innocence du Baptefme, & ne point perdre par 
le peche la grace, qui nous rend agreables a Dieu. 

Adjouftez a cela les fureurs d vn ennemy Hiro- 
quois, qui va nous fermant le paffage, qui nous rauit 
les neceffitez de la vie, & les fecours qu on nous peut 
enuoyer en vn pays abandonn6 : qui tue & qui maf- 
facre ceux qui viennent a noftre ayde, qui chaque 
ann6e va croiffant en fon infolence, qui va depeuplant 
ce pays, & qui fait prendre a nos Hurons, les deffeins 
d abandonner leur commerce auec les Francois, voy- 
ans qu il leur coufte fi cher, & aymans mieux fe 
paffer des marchandifes de 1 Europe, que de s expofer 
chaque annee, non [150] pas a vne mort, qui feule 
feroit tolerable, mais a des feux & a des flammes, 
dont on a mille fois plus d horreur. 

Or en fuitte que pouuons-nous attendre au milieu 
d vne nation barbare, ou nous n aurons plus les 
fecours de la vie, ou on n of era plus nous enuoyer le 
renfort d ouuriers qui feroient icy necellaires pour y 
auancer les affaires de Dieu; ou tous ceux qui y 
refteront, feront abandonnez a la rage d vn peuple 
defefpere, & qui ne fera plus retenu de nous maffa- 
crer tous, par la crainte de perdre leur commerce 
auec les Francois, qu ils verront leur eftre impoffible, 
& eftre pour eux entierement ruine. Ou alors les 
Chreftiens qui compofent cette Eglife naiffante, fe 
verront fans Pafteurs, fans Sacremens, fans Sacri 
fice, & hors des moyens de recourre a ceux, qui feuls 
font leur refuge en leurs defolations, leur appuy 
dedans leur foibleffe, le nceud facre qui les lie auec 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-43 57 

word, I mean to say that perseverance in the exercise 
of Faith is no less difficult here than it is in France 
for the majority to retain the innocence of Baptism, 
and not to lose through sin the grace that makes us 
agreeable to God. 

Add to this the fury of a Hiroquois enemy who 
closes the way to us ; who deprives us of the neces 
sities of life, and of the help that may be sent us in 
a forsaken country; who kills and massacres those 
who come to our aid ; whose insolence grows from 
year to year; who depopulates the country, and 
makes our Hurons think of giving up the trade with 
the French, because they find that it costs them too 
dear, and they prefer to do without European goods 
rather than to expose themselves every year, not 
[150] to a death that would be endurable, but to fires 
and flames, for which they have a thousand times 
greater horror. 

Now, therefore, what can we expect in the midst 
of a barbarous nation where we shall no longer have 
the necessaries of life ; where they will no longer 
venture to send us the reinforcement of laborers that 
would be required here to promote the affairs of God ; 
where all who shall remain will be abandoned to the 
fury of a desperate people, who will no longer be 
restrained from massacring us all by the fear of losing 
their trade with the French, which they will find 
impossible to them, and which will be completely 
ruined, as far as they are concerned? In that case, 
the Christians who compose this nascent Church will 
then see themselves without Pastors, without Sacra 
ments, without Sacrifice, and without the means of 
having recourse to those who alone are their refuge 
in their desolation, their support in their weakness, 



58 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [ VOL. 28 

Dieu, & le renfort qu ils ont centre les puiffances 
d Enfer. 

Sans doute ce font la des craintes raifonnables, des 
difncultez capables d arrefter les efprits, des obftacles 
infurmontables k nos foibleffes, & des mal-hetirs ce 
femble ineuitables, fi la France ne fait des [151] 
efforts extraordinaires pour renuerfer cet ennemy 
qui va ruinant d vn mefme coup, & ces Peuples & la 
Foy qu on leur prefche. Et a dire vray, tant de 
mal-heurs furuenus 1 vn fur 1 autre, & des oppofi- 
tions fi puiffantes aux deffeins qui nous amenent icy, 
nous auroient fait perdre courage, fi nous ne leuions 
les yeux plus haut, & fi. le Ciel n eftoit 1 appuy de 
nos confiances. Mais quand nous penfons que ce 
font les affaires de Dieu plus que les noftres, que la 
Foy n a efle fondle en aucun lieu du Monde qu au 
milieu des tempeftes, que toufiours Dieu s eft pleu 
de faire paroiftre fon pouuoir ou il y auoit moins de 
rhumain, que fa main n eft pas racourcie, quand 
nous penfons que le Sang de IBS vs-Cn RIST n a 
pas efte" moins refpandu pour ces peuples que pour 
le refte de la terre, & que les fruidts de fon amour 
ne font pas epuifez fur ceux qui 1 ont defia reconnu 
pour leur Sauueur, qu il doit eftre adore de tous 
les peuples de la terre, & loiie d autant de langues 
qu il y en a dans 1 Vniuers. Quand nous voyons des 
Peuples qui nous enuironnent de toutes parts, & vn 
monde quafi entier ou fon faindt Nom n a eft6 iamais 
adore, [152] & ou toutefois il faut que 1 Euangile ait 
penetre" auant la fin des fiecles, puifque Dieu y a en 
gage fa parole. Quand nous voyons de nos yeux ce 
qu il y a defia commence, & que luy feul y a trauail- 
le plus que nous, qu il y fait tous les iours des mira 
cles plus grands que ne feroit la creation d vn Monde 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-43 59 

the sacred tie that binds them to God, and their 
succor against the powers of Hell. 

Beyond a doubt, these are reasonable fears, diffi 
culties capable of arresting our minds, obstacles in 
surmountable to our weakness, and misfortunes that 
seem inevitable, if France does not make [151] 
extraordinary efforts to overthrow this enemy, who 
with one and the same blow destroys these Nations 
and the Faith that we preach to them. To tell the 
truth, so many misfortunes that have followed one 
another, and so powerful opposition to the designs 
that bring us here, would have caused us to lose cour 
age, did we not raise our eyes higher, and if our 
confidence were not upheld by Heaven. But when 
we think that these are the affairs of God more than 
ours ; that the Faith has not been founded anywhere 
in the World except in the midst of tempests ; that 
God has always been pleased to manifest his power 
where there is least of human strength ; that his arm 
is not shortened ; when we think that the Blood of 
JESUS CHRIST has been shed no less for these 
nations than for the remainder of the earth, and that 
the fruits of his love are not exhausted for those who 
have already acknowledged him as their Savior ; that 
he must be adored by all the peoples of the earth, 
and be praised by as many tongues as there are in 
the Universe ; when we see Nations surrounding us 
on all sides and almost an entire world where his 
holy Name has never been adored, [152] and where 
nevertheless it must be that the Gospel shall have 
penetrated before the end of the ages, since God has 
pledged his word to it; when we see with our own 
eyes what he has already begun there, and that he 
alone has worked there more than we have, that 



60 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

tout notmeau, changeant des coeurs de Barbate en 
des cceurs de Chreftiens. Enfin quand nous penfons 
que Dieu ne laiile iamais fon ouurage imparfait, qu il 
y va de fa gloire & non pas de la noftre : alors nous 
ne iugeons rien impofllble, nous efperons contre toute 
efperance, nos confiances font auffi fortes que iamais, 
& des gages de fon amour par le paffe deffus ces 
peuples, & de ce qu il y fait maintenant, nous 
prenons affeurance qu il ne leur manquera pas k 
1 aduenir. 

Car nonobftant tous ces rauages, de pefles, de 
famines, & de guerres, quelque oppolition qu ayent 
ces peuples en leur naturel, en leurs loix & en leurs 
couftumes h la faindtete de la Foy, quelque Empire 
qu y ayent les Demons, nous n auons pas laiffe cha- 
que anne"e d en baptifer bon nombre, & encore cette 
derniere annee plus de cent feptante, & quoy que 
Dieu ait difpofe [153] de la plufpart, dont plufieurs 
font dans le Ciel, comme nous auons tout fujet de 
croire. Nous auons toutesfois la confolation de voir 
au milieu de cette barbaric fept petites Eglifes, oil 
la main de Dieu a trauaille bien plus que nous, ou 
1 Efprit de la Foy y regne, & ne trouue rien de bar- 
bare, dans les coeurs qu il veut s affujettir, ou 1 Inno 
cence fe conferue au milieu de 1 impurete. Ce qui 
nous fait dire, fans qu il nous en refte aucun doute, 
Digitus Dei eft hie. Or li Dieu eft pour nous, pour- 
rions nous bien craindre au milieu de nos entre- 
p[r]ifes, fans nous expofer aux reproches que fift le 
Sauueur du monde k S. Pierre: Modica fidei quare 
dubitafti ? 

Mais ie crains qu on ne craigne par trop pour nous, 
& i ay peur que les defiances de ceux qui font e"loi- 
gnez des combats, n arreflent le cours des vidtoires 



1645-46] RELATION OF it&gt;44- 45 61 

he performs every day miracles greater than the cre 
ation of a new World would be, changing the hearts 
of Barbarians into Christian hearts ; finally, when we 
think that God never leaves his work unfinished; 
that his glory is at stake and not ours : then we con 
sider nothing impossible ; we hope against all hope ; 
our confidence is as great as ever ; both on account of 
the pledges of his love in the past, in favor of these 
nations, and of what he does there now, we feel 
assured that he will not fail them in the future. 

For notwithstanding all these ravages of plagues, 
of famines, and of wars; whatever opposition there 
may be in the nature of these peoples, in their laws, 
and in their customs, to the holiness of the Faith; 
whatever Dominion the Demons may have we have 
not failed each year to baptize a goodly number, and 
even this past year more than one hundred and 
seventy. And though God has disposed [153] of the 
majority, several of whom are in Heaven as we 
have every reason to believe, we have, neverthe 
less, the consolation of seeing in the midst of this 
barbarism seven small Churches, wherein the hand 
of God has worked far more than we ; wherein the 
Spirit of the Faith reigns, and finds nothing barba 
rous in the hearts of those whom it chooses to subdue 
to itself ; wherein Innocence preserves itself in the 
midst of impurity. This induces us to say, without 
the shadow of a doubt, Digitus Dei est hie. Now, 
as God is for us, can we really feel fear amid our 
undertakings, without exposing ourselves to the 
reproaches addressed by the Savior of the world to 
St. Peter: Modica fidei quare dubitasti ? 

But I am afraid that too much fear is felt for us, 
and that want of confidence on the part of those who 



62 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [ VOL. 28 

qu emporte icy la Foy fur 1 impiete. le veux dire 
que les derates qu on pourroit auoir dans la France de 
la comierfion de ces peuples, ne foil vn des plus 
grands empefchemens qu on y put apporter, & que 
Dieu ne retire fes faueurs de deffus ces pays infi- 
delles, k caufe qu au milieu des tempeftes, on auroit 
retire fes confiances en luy. Car en [154] effet il eft 
aife de defefperer de la conuerfion de ces peuples, 
mefme dans ce feul preiuge qu eftans barbares, a 
peine d aucuns peuuent croire qu ils foient hommes, 
& qu on puifle en faire des Chreftiens. Mais on a 
tort d en iuger de la forte, car ie puis dire en verite 
que pour 1 Efprit ils n ont rien de moins que les 
Europeans, & demeurant dedans la France, ie n eufle 
iamais creu, que fans inftrudtion la nature euft pu 
fournir vne eloquence plus prompte & plus vigou- 
reufe, que i en ay admire en plufieurs Hurons; ny 
de plus clairvoyant dans les affaires, & vne conduite 
plus fage dans les chofes qui font de leur vfage. 
Pourquoy done feroient-ils incapables des connoif- 
fances d vn vray Dieu? 

Leurs couflumes en mille chofes font en effet bar- 
bares/ mais apres tout, dans les chofes qui parmy 
eux font cenfe"es au nombre des mauuaifes, & con- 
damnees par le public, nous y voyons fans comparai- 
fon beaucoup moins de defordre qu il n y a dedans 
la France, quoy qu icy la feule honte d auoir commis 
le crime foit la peine du criminel. Quelle feroit 
done leur innocence, li la Foy regnoit parmy eux? 

Maintenant nous auons plus grande [155] con- 
noiffance que iamais de leur langue, de leurs cou- 
ftumes, & des moyens qu il faut tenir pour entrer 
dans leur efprit, dedans leur coeur, & les gagnant a 
nous, les gagner pour le Ciel. Nous trouuons beau- 



1645 -46J RELATION OF 1644-45 63 

are far from the fight will arrest the course of the 
victories that the Faith gains here over impiety. I 
mean to say that the doubts that may exist in France 
with reference to the conversion of these nations is 
one of the greatest impediments that can be offered ; 
and that God may withdraw his favors from these 
pagan countries because, in the midst of tempests, 
confidence in him has been withdrawn. For, in 
[154] truth, it is easy to despair of the conversion of 
these nations, even in this presumption alone, that, 
because they are barbarians, some can hardly believe 
them to be men, and that we can hardly make Chris 
tians of them. But it is wrong to judge thus; for 
I can say in truth that, as regards Intelligence, they 
are in no wise inferior to Europeans and to those who 
dwell in France. I would never have believed that, 
without instruction, nature could have supplied a most 
ready and vigorous eloquence, which I have admired 
in many Hurons ; or more clear-sightedness in affairs, 
or a more discreet management in things to which 
they are accustomed. Why, then, should they be 
incapable of having a knowledge of a true God ? 

In truth, their customs are barbarous in a thou 
sand matters; but after all, in those practices which 
among them are regarded as evil acts and are con 
demned by the public, we find without comparison 
much less disorder than there is in France, though 
here the mere shame of having committed the crime 
is the offender s punishment. What, therefore, 
would their innocence be if the Faith reigned among 
them? 

At present we have a greater [155] knowledge than 
ever of their language, of their customs, and of the 
means that must be taken to enter into their minds 



64 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Voi~ 28 

coup de facility a leur expliquer les veritez de noftre 
Foy, qui du commencement nous fembloient les plus 
ineffables, a caufe de la pauurete" de leur langue en 
ces matieres, & de 1 ignorance dans laquelle ils ont 
toufiours vefcu, des chofes qui furpaflent la porte"e 
de la veue & des fens. Ils ne peuuet plus nous 
refpondre, qu en effet la Loy de IESVS-CHRIST, 
que nous prefchons eft faindte, mais qu elle leur eft 
impoffible, ayant veu leurs compatriotes nays dans la 
barbarie auffi bien qu eux, eleuez dedans leurs cou- 
ftumes, nourris dedans leurs vices, & abyfmez autant 
qu ils font dedans 1 impiete qui inonde tous ces pai s, 
fe retirer de ce naufrage, defpoiiiller la nature, fe 
reueftir des Vertus les plus faindtes du Chriftianifme, 
& n auoir plus que de 1 horreur pour les plaifirs du 
monde, ny de 1 amour que pour le Ciel. Ils font con- 
trains de confeffer que Dieu eft le maiftre des coeurs, 
& qu il a plus de bont6 que ne font grades nos ma 
lices, lors qu ils voyent [156] tous les iours que ceux 
qu y ont eu plus d auerfion de nos Myfteres, font des 
premiers a fe rendre a la verite, que la Foy leur 
ouure 1 Efprit, & que Dieu ayant pris poffeffion de 
leur ame ils font plus fortement touchez du bien, 
qu ils n auoient d attraits pour le mal. 

La conftance & longanimite de nos Peres en vne 
vie fi penible, dans vn employ dont la nature & tous 
les fens ne peuuent auoir que de 1 horreur, en vne 
affaire qui n eft pas noftre, ou au moins dont nos Sau- 
uages voyent bien que nous ne retirons aucun profit, 
vn courage fi inuincible dans des oppofitions fi puif- 
fantes aux deffeins qui nous amenent icy; leur fer- 
uent maintenant d vn tres-puiffant motif, qui leur 
rend plus croyables & plus adorables les veritez de 
noftre Foy. En vn mot, ils aduoiient qu il faut fans 



1645 - 46] RELA T1ON OF 1644-43 65 

and hearts, and, by winning them over to ourselves, 
to gain them for Heaven. We find it very easy to 
expound to them the truths of our Faith which, at 
the beginning, seemed to us the most difficult to 
explain, owing to the poverty of their language in 
such matters, and the ignorance in which they had 
always lived of things beyond the reach of sight and 
of the senses. They can no longer reply to us that 
indeed the Law of JESUS CHRIST that we preach 
to them is holy, but that it is impossible for them ; 
for they have seen their countrymen born in bar 
barism as well as they, brought up in their customs, 
fed on their vices, and engulfed as much as they in 
the impiety that floods all these countries save 
themselves from the wreck, cast off nature, clothe 
themselves with the holiest Virtues of Christianity, 
and have nothing but horror for earthly pleasures, 
and no love but for Heaven. They are compelled to 
confess that God is the master of all hearts, and that 
his goodness is greater than our evil deeds; when 
they see [156] every day that those who had had the 
greatest aversion for our Mysteries are the first to 
submit to the truth, that Faith opens the Mind ; and 
that, when God has taken possession of their souls, 
they are more strongly affected by good than they 
had been attracted by evil. 

The constancy and long-suffering of our Fathers 
in so laborious a life, in an employment for which 
nature and all the senses can feel nothing but aver 
sion, in a matter which is not ours, or, at least, from 
which our Savages see very well that we derive no 
profit; a courage so invincible in the midst of so 
strong opposition to the designs that bring us here,- 
these now serve them as a very powerful reason for 



66 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

doute que les plaifirs du Ciel furpaffent tons ceux de 
la terre, puif que la feule efperance d y paruenir, fait 
m6prifer a ceux qui viuent en cette Foy, tout ce qu il 
y a de plus doux en la vie, & leur adoucit les amer- 
tumes & de la vie & de la mort. 

N auons-nous pas raifon apres cela de releuer nos 
confiances plus que iamais? & [157] de croire que 
cette main toute-puiffante, qui d vn rien a produit 
ces commencemens, continuera dans fon ouurage, 
que le S. Efprit benira cette heureufe femence, & 
qu ayant mis luy-mefme des dif petitions fi aduanta- 
geufes a ce qu on peut efperer de plus, il la rendra 
feconde, pour faire d vne terre infertile, & d vn 
monde infidelle, vne terre de faindtete, & vn monde 
Chreftien. 

Si nous n auions que les Hurons a conuertir, encore 
pourroit-on peut-eftre penfer, que dix & vingt mille 
ames ne font pas vne conquefte fi confiderable qu il 
faille s expofer a tant de hazards, & effuyer tant de 
perils pour les gagner a Dieu. Mais nous ne fommes 
qu a 1 entree d vne terre, qui du cofte" de 1 Occident 
iufques a la Chine, eft remplie de Nations plus nom- 
breufes que les Hurons: vers le Midy nous voyons 
d autres Peuples innombrables ou on ne peut auoir 
accez que par cette porte ou nous fommes. Puis 
done que Dieu nous a appelle les premiers pour luy 
cultiuer cette vigne, n eft-ce pas a nous a luy eftre 
fidelle, auec cette patience qu il recommande a fes 
Apoftres : Fruttum afferet in patientia, attendant que 
luy mefme en [158] recueille les fruicts, aux temps 
& aux moments qu il luy plaira. Si nous n auons 
cette confolation en ce fiecle, ce nous fera vne affez 
grande recompenfe d y auoir employe nos efforts, 
& quoy qu il en arriue, au moins nous mourrons 



1645 - 46] RELA T ION OF 1644 - 45 67 

rendering the truths of our Faith more credible and 
more adorable to them. In a word, they admit that 
it must, beyond a doubt, be true that Heaven s pleas 
ures surpass all those of earth, since solely the hope 
of gaining it makes those who live in that Faith 
despise all that is pleasant in life, and sweetens for 
them the bitterness both of life and of death. 

After this, are we not right in raising our hopes 
more than ever, and [157] in believing that that all- 
powerful hand, which out of nothing produced these 
beginnings, will continue its work; that the Holy 
Ghost will bless this propitious seed ; and that, after 
having himself inspired dispositions so advantageous 
to what we most hope for, he will make it fruitful 
and turn an unfertile soil and an infidel world into a 
land of holiness and into a Christian world? 

If we had but the Hurons to convert, it might even 
be thought, perhaps, that from ten to twenty thou 
sand souls are not so great a conquest that one should 
expose himself to so many hazards and encounter so 
many dangers, to win them to God. But we are 
only at the entrance of a land which on the side of 
the West, as far as China, is full of Nations more 
populous than the Hurons; toward the South, we see 
other Peoples beyond number, to whom we can have 
access only by means of this door at which we now 
stand. Therefore, since God has called us the first 
to cultivate this vine for him, should we not be faith 
ful to him with that patience that he recommends 
to his Apostles, Fructum afferet in patientia, waiting 
until he himself [158] gathers the fruits thereof at 
such time and at such moment as will please him? 
If we have not that consolation in this life, it will be 
a sufficient reward for us to have devoted our efforts 



68 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [ VOL. 28 

volontiers dans la penfee que ces paroles de Noflre 
Seigneur s accompliront en nous : Alius eft qui feminat , 
& alius qui metit; que d autres entreront dans nos 
trauaux, qu ils joiiyront de la moiffon dont nous 
auons iette les premieres femences, qu ils cueilliront 
les fruicls arroufez de nos fueurs & de noftre fang; 
Et qu enfin Dieu tirera fa gloire & le falut de fes 
Efleus, des volontez que nous auons de viure & de 
mourir dans ce faindt employ, oti noftre vocation 
nous engage fi heureufement, que ie puis dire en 
verite que Dieu a furmonte mes efperances, & qu a- 
uant mon depart de ces Pays des Hurons, dont 1 obe- 
y fiance me rappelle, ie voy de mes yeux accomply 
au bout de fept ans, ce que ie me fuffe eftime heu- 
reux d apprendre de bien loin a la fin d vne longue 
vie, & que peut-eftre i euffe eu de la peine a me 
perfuader, fi moy-mefme ie n en auois efte" vn te"moin 
occulaire. 

Nos precedentes Relations ont pu en [159] donner 
quelque idee, & peut-eftre qu elles auront affez fait 
connoiftre, que Dieu n a point acception de perfon- 
nes, que fon Amour, ne defdaigne point les Barbares, 
que ces douceurs fe font fentir autant a nos pauures 
Sauuages, qu aux peuples les plus policez de la terre, 
que les graces du Ciel ne tombent pas fur les pays, a 
proportion qu ils ont les richeffes de la nature, & en 
vn mot que nos Hurons ne font pas moins nays pour 
le Ciel, que ceux qui ont joiiy des threfors de la Foy, 
mille & deux mille ans deuant eux. Or depuis ce 
temps-la Dieu n a pas retire fes faueurs de deffus ces 
petites Eglifes, il eft toufiours leur Pere, & toufiours 
riche a 1 endroit de ceux qui 1 inuoquent. 

C eft en deux lignes auoir dit ce qui feroit capable 
de fournir vne Relation toute entiere, fi i auois pris 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 69 

to it ; and, whatever happens, at least we will cheer 
fully die in the thought that these words of Our Lord 
will be accomplished in us: Alius est qui seminat, et 
alius qui metit; that others will enter into our work ; 
that they will enjoy the harvest of which we have 
sown the first seeds ; that they will gather the fruits 
watered with our sweat and with our blood; and, 
finally, that God will derive his glory and the salva 
tion of his Elect from our willingness to live and to 
die in that holy employment to which our vocation 
so happily pledges us, that I may say in truth that 
God has exceeded our hopes, and that before my 
departure from this Huron Country, from which 
obedience recalls me, I see with my own eyes accom 
plished in seven years what I would have considered 
myself very happy to have learned from afar, at the 
end of a long life, and of which perhaps I would have 
had some trouble in convincing myself, if I myself 
had not been an eyewitness of it. 

Our previous Relations may have [159] conveyed 
some idea of it, and perhaps they will have suffi 
ciently shown that God makes no distinction of per 
sons ; that his Love does not despise Barbarians ; that 
his kindness makes itself felt as much by our poor 
Savages as by the most civilized nations of the earth : 
that Heaven s graces do not fall upon countries in 
proportion to the riches bestowed by nature ; and, in a 
word, that our Hurons are no less born for Heaven 
than those who have enjoyed the treasures of the 
Faith a thousand and two thousand years before they 
have. Now, since that time God has not withdrawn 
his favors from those little Churches; he is ever 
their Father, and ever liberal to those who invoke 
him. 



70 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

deffein de defcendre plus en particulier, & fi la brief - 
uete d vne lettre ne m obligeoit de fonger a finir la 
prefente. Mais toutesfois, pour 6uiter vne autre 
extremite, & peut-eflre le blafme ^ auoir efte trop 
court, en des chofes qui font paroiftre les bontez de 
Dieu fur ces peuples, & qui nous obligent d en louer 
fes mif ericordes : i en rapporteray quelques-vnes, 
[160] mais fans autre ordre, que celuy que la memoire 
confufe que i en ay me les prefentera. 

Vn Chreflien fraifchement echappe de la captiuite, 
fe voyant a fon arriuee enuironne" de fes parens, qui 
venoient pour le confoler, eflonna toute I affiftance 
dans les paroles qu il leur tinft. Mes amis, difoit-il, 
Dieu ne m a pas abandone dans ma captiuite, s il 
faut fouuent fonger en luy dans les profperitez, on 
doit fans ceffe le prier au fort de nos miferes. On 
entend comme vne voix en foy qui nous refpond, 
Que les mal-heurs de cette vie ne font rien, qu il y a 
vn Paradis qui nous attend, & que la mort, qui eft 
d autant moins eloignee de nous, que nous fortunes 
plus auant dedans les fouffrances, nous mettra bien- 
toft dans la poffemon d vn bon-heur, que nos plus 
cruels ennemis ne pourront nous rauir. 

C eftoient la, difoit-il, les penfe"es qui me confo- 
loient, au milieu des plus effroyables tourmens, que 
les Hiroquois me firent endurer, lors qu ils appli- 
quoient deffus moy les feux & les flammes ardentes. 
Alors ie fentois bien que Dieu m aydoit, qu il eftoit 
dedans moy, & animoit mon [161] cceur: ie ne fcay 
comment cela fe pouuoit faire, mais il eft vray que 
mo ame reffentoit des plaiurs ineffables, a mefme 
temps que mon corps eftoit dans le plus fort de fes 
douleurs. Apres ces premieres fouffrances on con- 
fulta fi ie ferois deftine" a la mort, ou fi on me deuoit 



1645-46] RELA TION OF 1644-45 71 

This is saying in two lines what an entire Relation 
could have contained, had I chosen to enter more 
into details, and had not the briefness of a letter 
compelled me to think of concluding this one. How 
ever, to avoid another extreme, and perhaps blame 
for having been too brief in matters which show the 
goodness of God to these peoples, and which oblige us 
to praise his mercies, I shall relate some of these, 
[160] but with no other order than that suggested by 
the confused recollection that I have of them. 

A Christian who had recently escaped from captiv 
ity, and who saw himself on his arrival surrounded 
by his relatives, who came to console him, astonished 
all present by the words that he used. My friends, " 
he said, " God did not abandon me in my captivity. 
If we should often think of him in prosperity we 
should also pray to him unceasingly in the height of 
our troubles. We hear, as it were, a voice within, 
replying to us that the evils of this life are noth 
ing, that there is a Paradise awaiting us, and that 
death which is all the less remote from us, the 
greater are our sufferings will soon place us in 
possession of a happiness of which our cruelest 
enemies cannot deprive us. 

"Such," said he, "were the thoughts that con 
soled me in the midst of the most frightful tortures 
that the Hiroquois made me endure, when they 
applied fire and glowing flames to me. Then I felt 
truly that God helped me ; that he was within me, 
and animated my [161] heart. I know not how it 
could have been, but it is true that my soul felt un 
speakable pleasures, at the very time when my body 
endured the greatest pain. After these first suffer 
ings, they consulted whether I was destined for 



72 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28 

donner la vie: ie ne fgauois que defirer des deux, & 
n ofois demander a Dieu, fmon qu il m enuoyaft ou 
la vie, ou la mort, felon qu il le iugeroit pour mon 
falut: puifque ie n eflois qu vn enfant, & qu il eftoit 
mon Pere, qui feul auoit plus de connoiffance de mon 
bien, & plus d amour pour moy, que ie n en puis 
auoir moy-mefme. 

Quafi en mefme temps vn autre Chreftien qui alloit 
k la guerre, eftant interroge comment il fe comporte- 
roit, s il efboit pris des ennemis. Ie ne puis pas, 
refpondit-il, me promettre rien de moy-mefme, con- 
noiffant le peu que ie puis pour le bien : mais il y a 
plus de fix mois que ie m interroge moy-mefme, & 
que ie f onde la portee de mon cceur ; & il me f emble 
k chaque fois, que chofe au monde ne feroit capable 
de me faire oublier du Ciel. Dieu, difoit-il, m a 
rauy quafi tous mes parens, il m a defpouille" de mes 
biens, i attens maintenant [162] qu il m efprouue en 
ma propre perfonne, & peut-eftre il permettra que ie 
fois pris des ennemis, & que ie brule dedans leurs 
feux, i en ay peur, il eft vray, mais toutesfois ie me 
retiens lors que ie luy fay mes prieres : Ie luy dy 
feulement qu il void bien ce que mon coeur redoute 
dauantage, mais que ie n ofe luy demander qu il 
m en deliure, fi bien qu il me conferue dans 1 Efprit 
de la Foy, & dans 1 efperance du Paradis; me pro- 
mettant qu apres cela ny les feux, ny les flammes 
des Hiroquois ne me rauiront pas les defirs que i ay 
de viure & de mourir Chreftien, en quelque eftat 
que ie me voye. 

Vn autre qui ce"t Efte fuft pris des Hiroquois, & 
rompift fes liens deux heures auant qu on le brulafi, 
fe fauuant tout nud, k la fuite, & trauers les ronces & 
les efpines, par ou les ennemis le pourfuiuirent vne 



1645 - 46] RELA TION OF 1644 ~ 45 73 

death, or whether my life should be spared. I knew 
not which of the two to desire, and I did not dare to 
ask God, except that he might send me either life or 
death, as he deemed best for my salvation, since I 
was but a child, and he was my Father who alone 
knew what was best for me, and loved me more than 
I can love myself. 

Almost at the same time, another Christian, who 
was about to go to war, was questioned how he would 
behave if he were captured by the enemy. " I can 
not," he replied, "promise anything of myself, 
knowing the little good that I can do ; but for more 
than six months I have been questioning myself, and 
sounding the depths of my heart, and it seems to me 
each time that nothing in the world could make me 
forget Heaven. God," said he, "has deprived me 
of nearly all my relatives ; he has stripped me of my 
goods. I am waiting now [162] until he tries me in 
my own person; and perhaps he will permit that I 
be captured by the enemies and burned in their fires. 
I dread this, it is true; but I nevertheless control 
myself when I say my prayers to him. I merely say 
to him that he sees very well what my heart fears 
the most, but that I do not ask him to deliver me 
from it so long as he preserves me in the Spirit of 
Faith and in the hope of Paradise, promising my 
self that, after that, neither the fires nor the flames 
of the Hiroquois can deprive me of the desire that 
I have to live and die a Christian, in whatever situa 
tion I may be." 

Another, who was taken prisoner by the Hiroquois 
this Summer, broke from his bonds two hours before 
they were to burn him, escaped quite naked, and 
fled through briers and thorns, wherein the enemy 



74 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

iourne e quafi entiere, trouue qu ayat euite" vn mal- 
heur il eftoit tombe en dix autres. II fuft errat de 
dans les bois, trois iotirs fans manger, les moufquites 
& nuit & iour luy oftoient le repos, le pergant de 
leurs efguillons depuis les pieds iufqu a la tefte/ tout 
fon corps n eftoit plus qu vn vlcere, & enfin il fe croy- 
oit dans le defefpoir de fa [163] vie, fe voyant encor 
eloigne plus de foixante lieue s de toute habitation, 
en vn pays ou les Hiroquois font toufiours a la chaffe 
des hommes, & ou a chaque pas qu il faifoit pour 6ui- 
ter ce t ennemy, il craignoit que ce ne fuft celuy qui 
le menoit dans leurs embufches. Enfin les forces 
luy manquant, & ne pouuant plus auancer, il s eftoit 
refolu de mourir fur vne roche nue, qu il choififToit 
pour fon tombeau, lors que quelques canots Hurons 
1 apperceurent heureufement, & le recueillirent des 
portes de la mort. Helas ! difoit ce bon Chreftien, 
ie ne fongeois pas a mes maux, ou au moins ils m e- 
ftoient fupportables dans la penfe"e que i euitois vn 
plus grand mal; Que fi la crainte d vn feu, qui ne 
m euft brule* qu vne nuit, me rendoit quafi infenfible 
a tant de miferes, pourrois-ie maintenant, difoit-il, 
trouuer le joug de la Foy difficile, & les peines qu il 
faut fubir au feruice de Dieu peuuent-elles nous 
paroiftre des peines, fi vraymet nous croyos qu il y ait 
vn Enfer, & qu il faut fouffrir en ce monde pour ne pas 
fouffrir vn iamais? 

Lors que ie me trouuay deffous les feux des Hiro 
quois, difoit vn autre Chreftien, qui en auoit efprou- 
ue" les rigueurs, cette [164] penfee me confoloit, que 
Dieu en auoit ainfi ordonne. Mes douleurs eftoient 
exceffiues, & toutesfois ie ne pouuois aucunement me 
plaindre de fa bonte, & quelque mal qu il veiiille 
permettre m arriuer, ie croy d orefnauant que ce ne 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 75 

pursued him almost an entire day. He found that, 
after escaping one misfortune, he fell into ten others; 
he wandered in the woods for three days without 
food; the mosquitoes disturbed his rest night and 
day, piercing him with their stings from head to 
foot; the whole of his body was but one sore; and 
finally he despaired of his [163] life. Finding him 
self still at a distance of more than sixty leagues 
from any settlement, in a country where the Hiro- 
quois are ever hunting men, and where every step 
that he took to avoid the enemy would, he feared, 
lead him into their ambushes, his strength at last 
failed him; and, as he could proceed no farther, he 
resolved to die upon a bare rock that he chose for his 
tomb, when some Huron canoes fortunately caught 
sight of him, and drew him from the gates of death. 
"Alas!" said that good Christian, "I thought not 
of my misfortunes, or, at least, I could bear them in 
the thought that I escaped a greater evil. If dread 
of a fire that would have burned me but for one night 
made me insensible to so much misery, could I 
now, he said, find the yoke of the Faith a heavy 
one, and can the troubles that have to be endured in 
God s service really seem troubles to us, if we truly 
believe that there is a Hell, and that we must suffer 
in this world in order not to suffer forever? " 

" When I was in the fires of the Hiroquois," said 
another Christian, who had felt their severity, " this 
[164] thought consoled me, that God had ordered it. 
My sufferings were excessive, and yet I could not in 
any way complain of his kindness; and, whatever 
evil he may allow to happen to me, I hereafter 
believe that it can be only through love, since he 
has shown it to me by calling me to the Faith, and 



76 



LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

peut eftre que par amour, depuis qu il me 1 a fait 
paroiftre m appellant k la Foy, & m ayant ouuert fon 
Paradis. Apres cela qu on me brufle, qu on me tour- 
mente, qu on me faffe endurer mille morts, on ne 
pourra m empefcher de 1 aymer. 

Dedans ce mefme fentiment vn bon Vieillard ref- 
pondift a des Infidelles qui luy reprochoient que fa 
Foy luy eftoit inutile, puifque le Dieu qu il adoroit ne 
le gueriffoit point d vne maladie douloureufe, qui 
luy rendoit la vie, non plus vn bien dont il le deuft 
remercier, mais vne charge infupportable. Mes 
amis, leur refpondift-il, vous condamneriez vos pa 
roles, fi vous leuiez les yeux au Ciel ou ie tafche de 
tenir mon cceur attache. Vous contez les maladies 
du corps au nombre des mal-heurs, & en effet elles 
font vn mal-heur pour vous, qui ne connoiffez point 
d autre bon-heur qu en cette vie; mais les Chreftiens 
les enuif agent comme vn bien, [165] lors qu ils 
penfent a ce que la Foy nous enfeigne, que Dieu 
nous recompenfera dans le Ciel, felon la mefure de 
nos douleurs & de nos joyes, pourueu, que nous le 
beniffions egalement des deux, comme en effet il en 
ordonne & de 1 vn & de 1 autre pour noftre bien, 
eftant fans doute qu il nous ayme de*s cette vie, puis 
qu il nous aymera a iamais. 

La refponce d vn autre Vieillard aage" de 70. ans, 
n efloit pas moins dans 1 Efprit de la Foy, lors qu on 
luy reprochoit, que Dieu n auoit aucunement pitie de 
luy dedans vne paralyfie qui luy auoit ofte" 1 vfage 
d vn bras. He quoy, refpondift-il, voudriez vous 
qu il n y euft point d arbres fees dans les bois, & 
point de branches mortes dans vn arbre qui va vieil- 
liffant? pour moy ie prends plaifir a voir mes mem- 
bres deffecher, & les approches de la mort, ne m ont 



1645-46] RELA TION OF 1644-43 77 

opening to me his Paradise. After that, they may 
burn me, they may torture me, and make me suffer a 
thousand deaths ; but they cannot prevent my loving 
him." 

Animated by the same sentiment, a good Old Man 
replied to some Infidels, who reproached him, saying 
that his Faith was useless, since the God whom he 
adored did not cure him of a painful disease, which 
made his life not a blessing for which he should 
thank him, but an unbearable burden. My friends, " 
he said to them, " you would condemn your own 
words if you would raise your eyes to Heaven, to 
which I try to keep my heart attached. You count 
the diseases of the body in the number of misfor 
tunes; and, in truth, they are a misfortune for you, 
who know no other happiness than in this life. But 
the Christians look upon them as a blessing, [165] 
when they think of what the Faith teaches us, that 
God will reward us in Heaven according to the meas 
ure of our sorrows and of our joys, provided we 
thank him alike for both, because he orders both of 
them for our good, the reason being, doubtless, that 
he loves us even in this life since he will love us 
forever." 

The answer of another Old Man, aged 70 years, was 
no less inspired by the Spirit of Faith, when the 
reproach was cast at him that God had no pity 
on him, because of a stroke of paralysis that had 
deprived him of the use of an arm. " What! " he 
replied, "would you wish that there should be no 
dried trees in the woods and no dead branches on a 
tree that is growing old ? For my part, I take pleas 
ure in seeing my limbs wither; and the approach of 
death has not frightened me, since I have the Faith 



78 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28 

plus eftonne depuis que i ay la Foy, qu vn iour ie 
refufciteray pour la gloire, & que ce corps mourant 
doit pourrir dans la terre auant qu il deuienne 
immortel. 

Le mefme ayant appris qu vn fien fils vnique, qui 
luy reftoit pour le fupport de fa vieilleffe, eftoit tom- 
be" entre les mains des ennemis, voyant tout le 
monde de fa [166] Cabane dans les pleurs, a 1 abord 
de cette nouuelle: pour moy, dit-il, ie n ay point de 
larmes pour luy, il m auoit fuiuy en la Foy, & il m a 
deuance dans le bon-heur qui nous attend apres la 
mort. A ce mefme moment, il vient promptement 
en 1 Eglife a dix heures du foir, offrir a Dieu ce fils 
vnique, mais auec vne refignation digne d vn cceur 
vrayment Chreftien. Mon Dieu, s efcria-il, que la 
Foy eft vn don aymable, & qu elle appaife douce- 
ment les efmotions d vn coeur, qui met fes confiances 
en vos promefles; Vous me 1 auiez donne auant que 
i euffe le bon-heur de vous reconnoiftre pour mon 
Dieu, & pour mon bien-fadteur: depuis que i ay la 
Foy, ie vous I ay prefente mille fois, & vous qui pene- 
trez le fonds des cceurs, auez connu que mon offrande 
n eftoit point par feintife; Vous m auez pris au mot, 
receuant ce qui eftoit a vous, auant mefme que ie 
vous 1 euffe offert. Puis ie me plaindray de ce que 
vous auez aggree le don que ie vous auois fait? 
Soyez beny, mon Dieu, & fi apres 1 Enfant vous 
daignez receuoir le Pere, ie m offre a vous de mefme 
cceur que ie vous ay offert mon fils, ayez pitie" & de 
1 vn & de 1 autre. A peine [167] auoit-il acheue" fa 
priere, qu vn nouueau Meffager qui s eftoit trouue 
au combat, arriue hors d haleine, & dit que ce fils, 
qu on auoit creu pour mort, s eftoit 6chapp6 auec 
luy, les autres eftant demeurez fur la place. Ce fuft 



1645 - 46J RELA TION OF 1644 - 43 79 

that one day I shall rise again in glory, and that this 
dying body must rot in the ground before it can 
become immortal." 

When the same man heard that his only son, who 
remained to him as a support in his old age, had 
fallen into the hands of the enemies, and when he 
saw all the people in his [166] Cabin weeping at the 
news, he said: " For my part, I have no tears for 
him ; he had followed me in the Faith ; he has gone 
before me to that happiness which awaits us after 
death." At the same time, he came promptly into 
the Church at ten o clock at night, to offer his only 
son to God, but with a resignation worthy of a truly 
Christian heart. " My God," he exclaimed, " what 
a precious gift is Faith, and how gently it allays the 
emotions of a heart that confides in your promises ! 
You had given him to me before I had the happiness 
of acknowledging you as my God and my benefactor. 
Since I have had Faith, I have offered him to you a 
thousand times; and you, who penetrate into the 
depths of our hearts, have known that my offering 
was not a feigned one. You have taken me at my 
word, and have received what belonged to you even 
before I had offered it to you. Can I complain 
because you have accepted the gift that I made you? 
Praise be to you, my God ; and if after the Child you 
deign to receive the Father, I offer myself to you as 
willingly as I offered my son. Have pity on both." 
Hardly [167] was his prayer ended, when another 
Messenger, who had been present at the fight, arrived, 
quite breathless, and reported that his son whom 
they thought dead had escaped with him, while the 
others had remained on the field. It was like that 
Angel who stayed Abraham s sword, already raised 



80 LES RELATIONS DES J&S UITES [VOL. 28 

comme cet Ange qui retint 1 epee d Abraham, defia 
leuee fur 1 Innocent Kaac. Mon Dieu, (s 6cria ce 
bon Pere, continuant fa priere) fi i ay receu de voflre 
main les mauuaifes nouuelles, n ay-ie pas mainte- 
nant fujet de vous benir de la vie de mon fils, que 
vous me rendez comme vn homme reffufcite" au mo 
ment que ie le penfois mort. C eft vous qui 1 auez 
retire du peril/ mais ie vous prie que ce foit, afin 
que iamais il ne tombe en peche, & faites-moy la 
mefme grace, afin que luy & moy nous vous beniffions 
dans le Ciel de cette faueur, & des autres que nous 
ne pourrons iamais reconnoiftre icy bas en terre. 

La Foy ne trouue point de diftindtion entre les 
fexes, & tout aage eft meur pour le Ciel. Vne fem- 
me Chreftienne parlant vn iour a quelques infidelles, 
qu elle exhortoit a embraffer la Foy. Helas! leur 
difoit-elle, quand il n y auroit point de Paradis apres 
la mort, & que noftre Foy [168] nous trompafl, ie 
voudrois croire nonobftant, pour joiiir mefme des 
cette vie d vne paix & d vn repos d efprit, qui eft 
inconceuable a ceux qui demeurent dans rinfidelite. 
I eftois tous les iours remplie d inquietudes auant 
mon baptefme, les maux prefens me tourmentoient, 
les craintes des miferes, qui pouuoient m arriuer, & 
qui peut eftre n arriueront iamais, ne laiffoient pas 
de m affliger auant leur temps; La nouuelle des maux 
paffez renouuelloit en moy les trifteffes, & les larmes 
que i auois defia effuye es, & mefme le fouuenir de 
mes anciens plaifirs, me caufoit des regrets, parce 
qu ils n eftoient plus, & que ie ne pouuois les regar- 
der fmon comme perdus pour moy. Maintenant rien 
de tout cela ne m afrlige, mais plutoft ie tire mon 
bien de mon mal, parce que chafque fois que les 
craintes, les trifteffes ou les malheurs m acueillent, 



1645 - 46] RELA TION OF 1644 - 45 81 

over the Innocent Isaac. " My God " (exclaimed this 
good Father, continuing his prayer), if I have received 
evil tidings from your hand, have I not cause now to 
bless you for the life of my son whom you give back 
to me as one risen from the dead, at the moment 
when I thought that he was killed? It is you who 
have withdrawn him from the peril ; but I beg you 
that he may never fall into sin ; and confer the same 
grace upon me, so that he and I may praise you in 
Heaven for this favor and for others, that we can 
never acknowledge here on earth." 

Faith makes no distinction between the sexes, and 
all ages are ripe for Heaven. A Christian woman, 
while speaking one day to some infidels whom she 
exhorted to embrace the Faith, said to them : "Alas ! 
even if there were no Paradise after death, and if our 
Faith [168] should deceive us, I would still believe, in 
order to enjoy even in this life a peace and repose of 
mind that cannot be conceived by those who remain 
in infidelity. Before my baptism, I was every day full 
of anxiety ; present ills tormented me ; fear of mis 
fortunes that might happen to me, but which perhaps 
will never occur, failed not to afflict me before their 
time. The tidings of ills that were past renewed my 
sorrow, and the tears that I had already dried; and 
even the recollection of my former pleasures caused 
me regret, because they existed no longer and be 
cause I could look upon them only as lost to me. 
Now, nothing of all that afflicts me ; but, on the con 
trary, I derive my good from my evil, because when 
ever fears, sorrows, or misfortunes assail me, I think 
of the happiness promised to us by the Faith which 
is free from any bitterness." 

" Not long ago," she added, "while I wept for 



82 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

ie penfe au bon-heur que nous promet la Foy, qui 
n eft detrempe d aucune amertume. 

II n y a pas long-temps, adjouftoit-elle, que ie 
pleurois la mort d vn de mes freres, & d vn de mes 
enfans, ie n eufle iamais creu que les larmes euffent 
tant de douceur, mais en mefme-temps qu elles [169] 
de"couloient de mes yeux, mon coeur eftoit tout con- 
fole dans la penf6e, que ceux que ie pleurois eftoient 
dedans Ie Ciel, & qu vne Eternite" nous joindroit en- 
femble, fans que la mort nous peuft feparer. Mais, 
luy dit-on, que dirois-tu fi ton mary mouroit, luy qui 
refufe de fe faire Chreflien? Ie me confolerois, 
repondit-elle, dans la penfee, que c eft Dieu qui doit 
dif pof er a fa volonte de ce qui eft k luy : il fgait ce 
qui eft pour Ie mieux, & peut eftre qu il attend a 
1 heure de la mort, a luy faire vne grace dont il fe 
rend indigne durant Ie cours de fa vie. 

Vne ieune femme Chreftienne dans fes premieres 
couches n auoit pas temoigne" aucun fentiment de 
douleur; comme on luy demande fi en effect elle 
n auoit point paty? Helas, repondit-elle, ce font des 
douleurs exceffiues, mais i auois ma penfee en Dieu, 
& ie fongeois au bon-heur de la Foy, qui m a deliure" 
d vn tourment eternel : ie luy offrois en mefme-temps 
1 enfant que ie mettois au monde & Ie priois que plu- 
toft il mouruft apres auoir receu Ie faindt Baptefme, 
que de permettre qu il tombaft en vn peche mortel. 

Ce n eft pas que tous nos Chreftiens [170] foient 
dans ces fentimens, il y en a qui n ont pas ce cou 
rage, d autres tombent dans Ie peche", & font des 
cheutes affez funeftes, quelques-vns perdent cceur au 
milieu de leur courfe; tous ne font pas robuftes en 
1 efprit de faindtete". Mais ie ne fgay en quel lieu 
de la terre nous trouuerons tout Ie monde parfaidt; li 



1645 - 46] RELA TION OF 1644 - 45 83 

the death of one of my brothers and of one of my 
children, I would never have believed that tears 
could be so sweet; but, while they [169] flowed from 
my eyes, my heart was quite consoled by the thought 
that those for whom I wept were in Heaven, and that 
an Eternity would unite us so that death could not 
separate us." But," they said to her, "what wouldst 
thou say if thy husband were to die, he who refuses 
to become a Christian ? "I would console myself, " 
she replied, " with the thought that God must dis 
pose as he wills of what belongs to him ; he knows 
what is best, and perhaps he awaits the hour of his 
death to grant him a grace of which he renders him 
self unworthy during the course of his life." 

A young Christian woman in her first confinement 
betrayed no sign of pain. When she was asked if, 
in reality, she had not suffered, she replied: " Alas, 
the pains were excessive ; but I thought of God and of 
the blessing of the Faith, which has delivered me 
from eternal torment. I offered him at the same 
time the child that I brought into the world, and 
begged that he might die after receiving holy Bap 
tism, rather than be permitted to fall into mortal 
sin." 

Not all our Christians [170] have such sentiments. 
Some have not that courage ; others fall into sin, and 
have disastrous relapses; some lose heart in the 
middle of their career ; all are not strong in the spirit 
of holiness. But I know not in what spot on earth 
we can find every one perfect. If the seed that 
JESUS CHRIST himself came to sow on earth fell 
sometimes among thorns, sometimes on rocks, and 
sometimes in sterile places; and if a good portion 
that had fallen on good ground was eaten by the 



84 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

la femence que lESVS-CHRiST eftoit venu letter 
luy-mefme en terre, eft tombee tantoft fur les ef pines, 
tantoft fur des rochers, & en des lieux fteriles ; Et fi 
vne grande partie qui eftoit tombee en vn terroir 
fecond a efte" enleuee des oyfeaux, auant que d auoir 
produit les fruidts qu on en attendoit, il ne faut pas 
nous eftonner que le mefme nous arriue icy; Non 
erit difcipulus fuper Magijlrum. C eft affez qu vne 
partie vienne & maturite, & c eft beaucoup qu en 
quelques-vns cette femence frudtifie au centuple. 
Mais ie ne puis affez le dire, qu il faut en tout vne 
patience a Tefpreuue, qui ne fe rebute de rien. Tel 
eft maintenant des plus foibles, qui vn iour fera vn 
grand Saindt. 

Ie me fouuiensa cepropos d vne reponce que fift il 
y a quelque temps vn bon Chreftien a vn de nos Peres, 
qui le voyant [171] dans des fentimens d vne per- 
fedtion eminente, & s eftonnant des graces que Dieu 
luy faifoit, luy demanda depuis quand il eftoit venu 
a ce poindt-la. Vous me mettez autant en peine, ref- 
pondit-il, que fi vous me demandiez depuis quand i en 
fuis venu au poindt de la grandeur que i ay. Comme 
mon corps a creu depuis ma naiffance, fans que ie 
m en fois appergeu; de mefme en a-il efte de ma Foy 
depuis mon Baptefme. Ie ne fgay pas, adjouftoit-il, 
ce qu il faut faire pour re"pondre a ces graces, ny 
mefme comment il faut prier, mais ce que ie ne puis 
me laffer de dire a Dieu lors que ie prie, eft, que ie 
croy de tout mon cceur, & qu il m enuoye plutoft la 
mort que le peche. 

Vn Capitaine des plus confiderables de tout le 
Pays, eftant interroge auant fon Baptefme, fi vraye- 
ment il croyoit les veritez de noftre Foy. Ma parole, 
dit-il, peut tromper, mais ie veux que mes adtions & 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 85 

birds before producing the fruits that were expected 
of it, we must not be astonished if the same thing 
happen here. Non erit discipulus super Magistrum. It 
is sufficient that a portion comes to maturity, and it 
is notable that in some cases this seed brings forth a 
hundredfold. But I cannot too often repeat that a 
patience is needed which can withstand every trial, 
and be discouraged by nothing. He who is now 
among the weakest will one day be a great Saint. 

Apropos of this, I remember an answer given some 
time ago by a good Christian to one of our Fathers, 
who, observing in him [171] sentiments of eminent 
perfection, and being astonished at the graces that 
God gave him, asked him how long it was since he 
had attained that degree. " You embarrass me as 
much," he replied, as if you asked me how long it 
is since I have reached my present stature. As my 
body has grown since my birth, without my perceiv 
ing it, so has my Faith grown since my Baptism. 
I know not," he added, " what I should do to respond 
to these graces, or even how to pray; but what I 
cannot weary of telling God when I pray to him is 
that I believe with all my heart, and that he send me 
death rather than sin." 

A Captain, who is one of the highest in rank in 
the whole Country, was asked before his Baptism if 
he really believed the truths of our Faith. " My 
words," he said, "may mislead; but I wish my 
actions and my conduct to reply instead of my 
tongue. Wait until Winter comes, until the devils 
are unchained, and I am solicited to sin ; then you 
and I shall be able to see, without being deceived, 
whether the Faith reign in my [172] heart." In 
fact, since then his actions have not belied his words ; 



86 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

mes d6portemens vous repondent an lieu de ma 
langue. Attendez que 1 Hyuer foit venu, que les 
diables foient dechaifnez, & qu on me follicite au 
pech6, c eft alors que vous & moy pourrons voir fans 
eftre trompez, fi la Foy regne dans mon [172] cceur. 
En effet fes adlions du depuis n ont dementy fes 
paroles, fa vie a efte fans reproche, & toufiours on a 
reconnu fa Foy dedans fes oeuures. Mille fois il s eft 
veu attaqu6 de me difances & calomnies, fes parens 
fe font foufleuez centre luy, fes amis luy ont fait 
ouuertement la guerre, & en fecret les beautez qui 
autrefois 1 auoient vaincu ont entrepris en 1 aymant 
de le perdre, mais toufiours il a efte luy-mefme, & 
en tout arm6 de la Foy, il s eft rendu vidtorieux. 

Peu de temps apres fon Bapt6me, voyant que felon 
le deu de fa charge de Capitaine, on vouloit 1 obliger 
d affifter & quelques fuperftitions def endues aux 
Chreftiens, il fortit de la Compagnie, commande en 
fa cabane, qu on porte ailleurs les marques de fon 
au thorite", & les prefens publics dont il eftoit charge" ; 
ce ne font pas des Royautez, & des richeffes immenfes 
des Princes de 1 Europe, mais c eft icy ce qu il y a 
de plus e"clatant en 1 honneur, & les threfors les plus 
precieux du Pays. Les Infidelles s eftonnent de ce 
coup, fon pere, fa femme, fes parens, luy demandent 
ce qu il pretend faire? le fuis Chreftien, repondit-il, 
& fi pour e"uiter [173] le peche" il faut encore quitter 
la vie, mon ame ne tient rien en mon corps. Le 
bourg eft en e"meute, le confeil s affemble la-deffus: 
on luy depute les plus confiderables, qui le prient de 
ne pas les abandonner: le fuis Chreftien, leur dit-il 
pour toute reponce, la Foy m eft plus chere que 
1 honneur & les biens, on paffe & la nuict & le iour 
pour flechir fon efprit: mais il n a point de repartie, 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 87 

his life has been beyond reproach and his Faith has 
always been known by his works. He has been 
assailed a thousand times by slanders and by calum 
nies ; his relatives have risen against him ; his friends 
have openly made war on him ; and in secret the 
beauties who formerly had vanquished him have 
endeavored to ruin him by loving him ; but he has 
always been true to himself, and, armed at all points 
with Faith, he has been victorious. 

Shortly after his Baptism, when he saw that, in 
the performance of the duties of his office of Cap 
tain, he was called upon to be present at some super 
stitious ceremonies forbidden to Christians, he left 
the Company, and gave orders in his cabin to bear 
elsewhere the symbols of his authority and the pub 
lic presents of which he was the custodian. These 
are not the Regalia nor the immense riches of Euro 
pean Princes; but they are what is here considered 
the most honored and the most precious treasures 
of the Country. The Infidels were astonished at 
this act; his father, his wife, his relatives asked him 
what he meant to do. "I am a Christian," he re 
plied ; " and if to avoid [173] sin I must abandon even 
life, my soul is not attached to my body." The 
village is in a commotion ; the council meets to delib 
erate on the matter; the leading men are deputed 
to wait on him, and they beg him not to abandon 
them. I am a Christian, is his only answer ; " the 
Faith is dearer to me than honor and wealth." They 
spend the night and day in endeavoring to bend his 
will; but his only answer is that he is a Christian. 
Then," said the Elders, " we must resign ourselves 
to seeing our Country ruined, since our chief Cap 
tains range themselves on the side of the Faith. 



88 



LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 



fmon qu il eft Chreftien. II faut done, difent les 
Anciens, fe refoudre a voir noftre Pai s perdu, puif- 
que nos premiers Capitaines fe rangent du party de 
la Foy, comment empefcherons-nous ce defordre? 
Vous y penfez trop tard, leur refpondit-il, il falloit 
vous oppofer aux progrez de la Foy, auant qti elle 
entrafl dans nos coeurs; Maintenant elle y regnera 
mal-gre" vous, & pluftoft on nous arrachera Tame du 
corps, que la crainte du feu d Enfer, & le defir du 
bon-heur qui nous attend dedans le Ciel fortent de 
noftre efprit. Enfin pour trouuer iour en cette affaire 
dont les Anciens craignoient la diffolution de leur 
bourg, le premier ou du moins des plus confiderables 
qui foient dans les Hurons, & le Confeil refolut qu il 
falloit partager cette charge, dont ce Capitaine [174] 
Chreftien vouloit opiniaftrement fe demettre. Que 
quelqu autre prendroit d orefnauantle foin des chofes 
que la Foy deffend, & qu on le pourroit appeller le 
Depute" des Diables: Que le Chreftien continueroit 
dans le maniement des affaires publiques, & toufiours 
feroit reconnu pour leur vray Capitaine. On le pria 
de l aggre"er, puis qu ainfi le deliurant des chofes qui 
luy faifoient horreur, il n auoit plus dequoy fe plain- 
dre; Oiiy bien maintenant, leur dit-il, mais i9achez 
vne fois pour toutes, qu vn vray Chreftien, n eftime 
rien plus precieux que la Foy, & que la terre luy eft 
peu de chofe quand il enuifage le Ciel. 

Des hommes de la forte font fans doute de puiffants 
fupports pour la Foy : mais il f emble que Dieu ne 
veiiille pas que nous mettions nos confiances en autre 
qu en luy feul. Nos Chreftiens eftant allez en 
guerre, auoient attire auec eux deux Capitaines Infi- 
delles des plus belliqueux du pays, & ayant entrepris 
de les gagner a noftre Foy, les inftruifirent fi 



1 645 - 46] R EL A TION OF 1644 - 45 89 

How can we prevent this disorder? "You are 
thinking of it too late," he replies; " you should 
have opposed the progress of the Faith before it had 
entered our hearts. Now it will reign there in spite 
of you ; and it will be easier to tear our souls from 
our bodies than to remove from our minds the fear 
of Hell-fire, and the desire for the happiness that 
awaits us in Heaven." At last, to find a way out of 
this difficulty, which the Elders feared would bring 
about the dissolution of their village, which is the 
largest, or at least one of the largest, in the Huron 
country, the Council decided that it was necessary to 
divide the office that this Christian Captain [174] so 
obstinately persisted in resigning; that some one 
else should thereafter take charge of the matters for 
bidden by the Faith, who might be called the Devils 
Deputy ; that the Christian should continue to admin 
ister public affairs, and should always be acknowl 
edged as their real Captain. He was begged to 
accept, inasmuch as, by thus delivering him from the 
things of which he had a horror, he had nothing 
more to complain of. Yes, I can do so now," he 
replied ; but know once for all that a true Chris 
tian considers nothing more precious than the Faith, 
and that he thinks little of earth when he looks at 
Heaven." 

Such men are, without doubt, powerful supporters 
of the Faith ; but it seems that God intends that we 
should place our confidence in none other than him. 
Our Christians on going to war had taken with them 
two Infidel Captains, who were among the most war 
like in the country, and undertook to win them over 
to our Faith ; they instructed them so successfully, 
during the two months that the campaign lasted, 



90 



LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



heureufement 1 efpace de deux mois qu ils furent en 
campagne, qu ils fe virent obligez de les baptifer, ne 
pouuant refifter aux demaiides [175] preffantes qu en 
faifoient ces bons Catechumenes, qui, difoient-ils, ne 
pouuoient plus marcher auec courage dans les terres 
ennemies, quand ils penfoient que chaque iour feroit 
peut-eflre le dernier de leur vie. Que s ils mouroient 
auant que leurs pechez euffent eft6 noyez dans les 
eaux du Baptefme, ils fe voyoient damnez pour vne 
eternite, & qu ainfi chacun de leurs pas les condui- 
foit autant a 1 Enfer qu a la mort. 

II fallut done leur obei r en vne demande fi iufte; 
ils fe profternent a genoux au riuage du lac des 
Hiroquois; Deux Chreftiens qui auoient pris foin de 
leur inftrudtion, les baptizent publiquement, chacun 
celuy qu il auoit eu pour difciple. le croy que les 
Anges du Ciel prenoient plaifir a confiderer ce 
fpedtacle de faindtete, en vn lieu ou iamais ils n a- 
uoient veu Dieu ador6 : & fans doute que les Anges 
tutelaires de ces deux nouueaux baptizez auoient 
preffe cette adtion, preuoyans le moment de leur 
bon-heur & de leur mort. Car 1 ennemy ne fut pas 
long-temps a paroiftre; nos Chreftiens firent incon 
tinent leurs prieres publiques, pour fe difpofer au 
combat. Ces deux bons Neophytes fe [176] iettent 
& la tefte de leur armee, & fouftinrent long-temps 
I eftort de 1 ennemy: enfin leur mort fut la perte de 
nos Hurons, & laiffa la vidtoire entiere aux Hiro 
quois, qui eftoient fept contre vn. Mais quoy, fi 
noftre Eglife a perdu en la mort de ces deux Capi- 
taines, & de quantite de Chreftiens, qui y demeure- 
rent auec eux, pas vn feul n ayant pris la fuite, ce 
nous doit eftre affez que Dieu en ait tir6 fa gloire, 
& que le Ciel f oit enrichy de nos defpouilles : Nouit 



1645-46] RELA TION OF 1644-43 91 

that they were obliged to baptize them because they 
could not refuse the urgent requests [175] made to 
them by these good Catechumens, who, they said, 
could no longer march bravely in the enemies coun 
try when they thought that each day would be the 
last of their lives, and that, if they died before being 
immersed in the waters of Baptism, they would be 
damned for eternity; and that, consequently, each 
step that they took led them as much toward Hell as 
toward death. 

So reasonable a request on their part had to be 
complied with. They knelt on the shore of the lake 
of the Hiroquois. Two Christians, who had taken 
charge of instructing them, baptized them publicly, 
each baptizing him whom he had had for his disciple. 
I think that the Angels of Heaven took pleasure in 
watching this holy spectacle in a place where they 
had never seen God adored ; and that doubtless the 
guardian Angels of these two newly-baptized men 
had hastened this action, in prevision of their happi 
ness and of their death ; for the enemy soon made 
his appearance. Our Christians at once said their 
public prayers, to prepare themselves for battle. 
The two good Neophytes [176] placed themselves at 
the head of their army, and long withstood the 
assaults of the enemy ; finally, their loss caused the 
defeat of the Hurons, and left the victory entirely in 
the hands of the Hiroquois, who were seven to one. 
But, if our Church has lost by the death of those 
two Captains and of many Christians who remained 
on the field with them, for not one fled, it must suffice 
for us that God has derived his glory from it, and 
that Heaven has been enriched by our spoils: Novit 
Dominus qui sunt ejus. God knows his Elect, and 



92 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

Dominus qui funt eius. Dieu connoift fes Eleus, & 
choifit le moment qu il faut pour leur ouurir fon 
Paradis. En voicy vn exemple qui m a fait fouuent 
adorer fes diuines conduites. 

Vn ieune homme Catechumene n ayant pu obtenir 
de nous le Baptefme, a caufe que nous ne voyons pas 
affez clair en fa Foy, fe refolut d aller en guerre auec 
quelques Chreftiens. Us font foir & matin les prieres 
publiques, le plus ancien des Chreftiens y prefide, & 
les Dimanches il les exhorte a paffer plus f aindtement 
ce facre" iour, & puis qu ils ne peuuent ioiiyr du bon- 
heur de la confeffion, au moins qu ils ayent recours 
a Dieu, deteftent leurs pechez, & fe tiennent prefts 
pour la mort. [177] le ne fgay pas qui preffoit fi 
fortement ce ieune Neophyte, mais il fut plus de 
feptante iours h folliciter fon Baptefme aupres du 
plus ancien de nos Chreftiens, auec tant de ferueur 
en fes pourfuites, qu enfin on luy promit, que le 
Dimanche il feroit baptife. Non, difoit-il, mon ame 
ne refpire que les eaux facrees du Bapteme, ie detefte 
de tout mon coeur les pechez de ma vie paffee, & i ef- 
pere que Dieu aura pitie de moy, parce qu il a veu 
les defirs veritables que i ay de viure & de mourir 
Chreftien. On le baptife done, chofe eftrange! on 
n auoit pas encor acheue les prieres, que les auant- 
coureurs apportent la nouuelle qu ils ont appergeu 
1 ennemy. On court incontinent aux armes, on fe 
iette en campagne, 1 ennemy prend la fuite, on le 
pourfuit fix heures entieres, ce nouueau baptife" laiffe 
apres foy fes camarades, & aduance fi puiffamment 
qu il fe trouue engage luy feul au milieu de trente 
Hiroquois, qui le pergent k coups d ep6e, luy enleuent 
fa cheuelure, & continuent dedans leur fuitte, fans 
qu on en peuft atteindre aucun. 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 93 

chooses the proper moment for opening his Paradise 
to them. Here is an example which has often made 
me adore his divine ways. 

A young man a Catechumen, who could not ob 
tain Baptism from us because we did not see clearly 
enough into his Faith resolved to go to war with 
some Christians. They said their public prayers, 
night and morning ; the oldest of the Christians pre 
sided at them, and on Sundays he exhorted them to 
pass that sacred day in a more holy manner, and, 
since they could not enjoy the blessing of confession, 
at least to have recourse to God, to detest their sins, 
and to keep themselves prepared for death. [177] I 
know not what pressed this young Neophyte so 
strongly; but, for over seventy days, he kept asking 
for Baptism from the oldest of our Christians, with 
such fervor in his requests that finally he was prom 
ised that he should be baptized on the Sunday. 
" No," said he, " my soul pants but for the sacred 
waters of Baptism. I detest with all my heart the 
sins of my past life ; I hope that God will have pity 
on me, because he has witnessed the true desire that 
I have to live and die a Christian." He was there 
fore baptized; and, strange to say, the prayers were 
not yet ended when the advance guard brought the 
news that they perceived the enemy. All immedi 
ately hasten to arms, and take the field; the enemy 
flees, and is pursued for six whole hours. The 
newly-baptized man leaves his comrades behind, and 
advances so far that he finds himself alone, sur 
rounded by thirty Hiroquois, who pierce him with 
javelin-thrusts, remove his scalp, and continue their 
flight without one of them being caught. 

One of the most right-minded men of this Coun- 



94 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

Vn des meilleurs efprits de ce Pai s, & des mieux 
informez de la Foy, auoit fix ans [178] entiers refufe 
le Baptefme, nous auouant qu il voyoit bien la veri- 
te", mais qu il ne fentoit pas en foy affez de forces 
pour fe refoudre a quitter tout de bon le peche. Vn 
iour enfin il vint trouuer vn de nos Peres : mainte- 
nant, luy dit-il, ie te prie de me baptifer, mon coeur 
me dit que ie porteray dans le Ciel mon innocence 
du Baptefme, pourquoy done differer plus long- 
temps? On le baptife au commencement de 1 Au- 
tomne, tout le long de 1 Hyuer, les Chreftiens & les 
Infidelles admirent en luy la force du Bapt6me. II 
fe priue volontairement des feftins, crainte de s y 
voir engage dans quelque occafion de pech6, il s ab- 
fente des compagnies; les femmes qui auoient plus 
poffede fon coeur n y trouuent plus d entrees, il n a 
plus d yeux ny de langue pour elles, le plus doux de 
fes entretiens eft en la compagnie du Pere qui 
1 inftruit; l Eft6 venu il s embarque pour defcendre a 
Kebec, & pour dernier Adieu a fa femme & a fes 
enfans; Ie ne fcay, leur dit-il, fi ie ne vay point a la 
mort, mais quoy qu il me puiffe arriuer, fyachez que 
ie mourray Chreftien : & fi vous me cherchez eftant 
party de cette vie, & s il vous refte quelque amour 
pour [179] moy, leuez vos yeux au Ciel, car c eft la 
ou refpire mon ame, & oil ie croy fans aucun doute 
que la Foy me conduit pour vne Eternite : en effedt 
il fit rencontre des ennemis, & fe deffendant vail- 
lament, il auoit defia renuerfe vn de leurs Canots 
dedans 1 eau, lors qu vn coup d arquebuze luy tranf- 
perce la tefte de part en part, & le mit dans la ioui f- 
fance du bon-heur qu il auoit efper6, puis qu vne vie 
fi innocente ne pouuoit pas eftre fuiuie que d vne 
fain&e mort. 



1645-46] RELATION OF i6 4 4-45 95 

try, and one of the best informed as regards the 
Faith, had for six whole years [178] refused Baptism; 
he admitted to us that he saw the truth very clearly, 
but that he did not feel within himself enough 
strength thoroughly to give up sin. Finally, he 
came one day to one of our Fathers and said to him : 
" Now I beg thee to baptize me. My heart tells me 
that I shall bear with me to Heaven the innocence of 
my Baptism; why therefore should I defer it any 
longer?" He is baptized at the beginning of the 
Autumn ; and, throughout the Winter, the Christians 
and Infidels admire the power of Baptism in him. 
He voluntarily abstains from feasts, lest he find 
therein some occasion for sin ; he keeps away from 
company ; the women who had formerly most pos 
sessed his heart now find no entrance there, he has 
neither eyes nor tongue for them ; the conversations 
most agreeable to him are those with the Father who 
instructs him. When Summer comes, he embarks 
to go down to Kebec, and, for his last Adieu to his 
wife and children, he says: " I know not whether I 
am going to death; but, whatever may happen to 
me, know that I will die a Christian ; and if you seek 
me when I have departed this life, and if you retain 
any love for [179] me, lift your eyes to Heaven for it 
is thither that my soul aspires, and whither I believe 
without any doubt that Faith leads me for an Eter 
nity." In fact, he met the enemies and defended 
himself bravely. He had already overturned one of 
their Canoes in the water, when a shot from an 
arquebus pierced his head through and through, and 
placed him in the enjoyment of the happiness that 
he had hoped for, since so innocent a life could only 
be followed by a saintly death. 



96 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

Nous fommes te"moins tons les lours de mille ren 
contres femblables oh nous voyons les bontez de Dieu 
fur ces peuples, fon amour fur ces pauures barbares, 
& les diuines Prouidences fur fes Efleus, dont pas 
vn ne luy fera rauy, quelque oppofition que 1 enfer 
& les diables fufcitent centre les progrez de la Foy. 

Mais c efl eftre trop long pour vne fimple lettre, 
& le peu que i ay dit, eft affez pour nous faire raifon- 
nablement efperer que le Ciel ne retire pas fes bene 
dictions de deffus cette Eglife naiffante, puis qu il en 
prend vn foin fi amoureux. 

Des fept Eglifes que nous auons icy, il y en a fix 
a demeure. La premiere en noftre [80 i.e., 180] 
Maifon de faindte Marie, les cinq autres dans les 
cinq principales bourgades des Hurons; de la Con 
ception, de faindt lofeph, de faindt Michel, de faindt 
Ignace & de faindt lean Baptifte. La fepti&lt;me Eglife 
dite du faindt Efprit, eft compofee d Algonquins, qui 
ont hyuerne cette ann6e plufieurs Nations enfemble, 
fur le grand Lac de nos Hurons, enuiron a vingt cinq 
lieues de nous. Ce qui a oblige le Pere Claude 
Pijart, & le Pere Leonard Gareau deftinez k leur in- 
flrudtion, de paffer 1 Hyuer auec eux, auec des peines 
& des trauaux inconceuables, mais non pas fans 
confolation, lors qu ils voyent qu ils vont formant des 
Epoufes a IESVS-CHRIST dedans ces bois, ces lacs & 
ces riuieres. 

Voila mon Reuerend Pere, vne partie de ce que ie 
m eftois oblige de reprefenter a V. R. en cette lettre, 
vne groffiere id6e de 1 eftat ou ie laiffe cette Mifiion 
de noftre Compagnie dans les Hurons; & les fenti- 
mens qui m en reftent auant mon depart, apres y 
auoir demeure fept ans feruiteur inutile. Car fi Dieu 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 97 

We witness every day a thousand similar events, 
in which we see the kindness of God toward these 
peoples, his love for these poor barbarians, and the 
intentions of his divine Providence, toward his Elect, 
not one of whom shall be taken from him, whatever 
opposition hell and the devils may excite against the 
progress of the Faith. 

But this is too long for a mere letter, and the little 
that I have said is sufficient to lead us reasonably to 
hope that Heaven does not withdraw its blessings 
from this nascent Church, since it takes such loving 
care of it. 

Of the seven Churches that we have here, six are 
stationary; the first is at our [80 i.e., 180] House of 
sainte Marie, the five others in the principal Huron 
villages, la Conception, saint Joseph, saint Michel, 
saint Ignace, and saint Jean Baptiste. The seventh 
Church, called that " of the holy Ghost," consists 
of Algonquins, several Tribes of whom wintered 
together this year on the great Lake of our Hurons, 
about twenty-five leagues from us. This compelled 
Father Claude Pijart and Father Leonard Gareau 
who were appointed for their instruction, to pass the 
Winter with them, with inconceivable trouble and 
labors, but not without consolation, when they see 
that they prepare Spouses for JESUS CHRIST within 
these woods, and amid these lakes and rivers. 

This, my Reverend Father, is a portion of what I 
had undertaken in order to give Your Reverence in 
this letter a general idea of the state in which I leave 
this Mission of our Society in the Huron country, 
and the opinions that I have concerning it before my 
departure, after having lived there, a useless servant, 
for seven years. For if God secure his glory in 



98 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

tire fa gloire en ces Pai s, & s il y a eu quelque bien 
dans les commencemens de la conuerfion de ces 
Peuples, il faut aduoiier qu apres [181] Dieu tout eft 
deu aux trauaux de nos Peres, dont Noftre Seigneur 
a voulu que i aye efte" temoin, voyant la ferueur de 
leur zele, leur courage indomptable, leur patience a 
tout fouffrir, leur adtiuite k tout faire, leur humilite 
dans vne vie vrayement cach6e en vn monde incon- 
nu/ perfonnes qui d ailleurs ne manquent pas pour 
la plufpart de qualitez qui les euffent rendus recom- 
mandables en France. Quand ie les voy embraffer 
la Croix auec plaifir, les fouff ranees auec ioye, & les 
mepris auec amour, qu ils portent chaque iour leur 
ame entre leurs mains, eftans continuellement expo- 
fez k mille dangers de la mort; & que peut-eftre la 
plufpart font pour mourir au milieu des feux & des 
flammes d vn ennemy cruel, qui va de iour en iour 
rauageant ces Pai s : quand ie voy que ces dangers les 
animent plutoft que d affoiblir Ie moins du monde 
leur courage, il me vient fouuent en penfee que Dieu 
vouloit qu vne vertu fi forte, fi conftante & fi vigou- 
reufe, fuppleaft au defaut des miracles, dont il fem- 
ble que fa diuine Prouidence ne veuille pas fe feruir 
en ces fiecles derniers, pour aduancer la conuerfion 
de ces terres infidelles. 

[182] Mais quoy, Ie nombre de ces ouuriers eft trop 
petit pour tant de peuple; nous auons befoin de 
fecours plus en cela qu en aucune autre chofe; nous 
demandons de 1 ayde, & nous efperons que 1 An- 
cienne France ne Ie deniera pas & la Nouuelle. 
eft vray que les dangers font redoutables, & que qui- 
conque voudra venir & nous, il doit auoir quitte d6s 
la France tout 1 amour de la vie, pour s abandonner 
fans referue k ce dont la nature peut auoir plus 



1645 - 46] RELA TION OF 1644- 45 99 

these Countries, and if he has obtained any good in 
these beginnings of the conversion of these Peoples, 
it must be admitted that, after [181] God, all is due 
to the labors of our Fathers, of which Our Lord has 
chosen that I should be a witness. I have seen the 
fervor of their zeal, their indomitable courage, their 
patience in enduring everything, their activity in 
performing all duties, their humility in a life truly 
hidden in an unknown world, persons moreover, 
for the most part, who are not wanting in qualities 
that would have rendered them commendable in 
France. When I see that they embrace the Cross 
with pleasure, sufferings with joy, and scorn with 
love ; that they each day carry their souls in their 
hands, being continually exposed to a thousand 
dangers of death, and that perhaps the majority of 
them are destined to die in the midst of the fires and 
flames of a cruel enemy, who ravages these Coun 
tries from day to day ; when I see that these dangers 
animate their courage rather than depress it in the 
least : the thought frequently comes to my mind that 
God willed that so strong, so constant, and so vigor 
ous a virtue should supply the absence of miracles, 
which it seems that his divine Providence does not 
consent to employ in these latter ages, to further the 
conversion of these pagan lands. 

[182] But the number of these laborers is too small 
for so many people ; we need help in this more than 
in anything else ; we ask assistance, and we hope that 
Old France will not deny it to New France. It is 
true that dangers are to be dreaded, and that who 
ever comes to us must have left behind him in France 
all love of life, to abandon himself without reserve 
to whatever can cause most horror to nature. But 



100 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

d horreur. Mais c efl ie croy ce qui doit animer vn 
bon coeur au defir de venir en ces terres perdues, pour 
s y perdre faindtement foy-mefme, & ne trotmer plus 
en ce monde rien d aymable que Dieu. Si des 
perfonnes de merite, dont la vie eft precieufe & vn 
Royaume tout entier, s expofent volontiers k 1 affaut 
d vne breche, qui fouuent n eft pas raifonnable; & fi 
la mort de ceux qui ont aduanc6 les premiers, n ar- 
refte pas vne NoblefTe courageufe, qui la plufpart 
n eft picquee bien fouuent que des interefts d vn hon- 
neur ou d vn bien temporel; fans doute que la con- 
quefte de tant d ames, dont chacune eft vn Royaume 
k IESVS-CHRIST, la veue d vne recompenf e eter- 
nelle, & les defirs [183] de viure & de mourir au fer- 
uice d vn Dieu, qui le premier eft mort pour nous, 
aurons mille fois plus de force pour fouftenir le 
courage de ceux que Noftre Seigneur voudra nous 
enuoyer au trauers des perils qu il faut effuyer quoy 
qu il coufte, fi on vent aduancer fa gloire en ces Pai s, 
ou nous voyons qu il veut eftre adore. 

C eft 1 vnique demande que ie fais k V. R. en quit- 
tant ces Pai s, la priant de nous procurer ce fecours, 
& nous enuoyer ceux que Dieu voudra choifir par fon 
moyen, & c eft dans cette efperance que ie finiray la 
prefente, la fuppliant de recommander cette Miffion 
aux prieres de tous nos Peres & Freres, & s en 
reffouuenir particulierement en fes faindts Sacrifices. 
C eft mon R. Pere, 

De Voftre Reuerence, 

Des Hurons, ce i$. May 1645. 

Le tres-humble & tres-oblige* 
feruiteur en N. Seigneur, 
HIEROSME LALEMANT. 



1645-46] RELA TION OF 1644-45 101 

this I think is what should excite in a good heart the 
desire to come to these lost lands ; to lose himself here 
in a holy manner, and to find in this world nothing 
lovable but God. If persons of merit, whose life is 
precious to an entire Kingdom, expose themselves 
willingly in the assault of a breach, which frequently 
is not reasonable ; and if the death of those who have 
stood in the van does not daunt a brave Nobility, 
most of whom are often incited but by interests of a 
temporal honor or benefit, doubtless the conquest 
of so many souls, each of whom is a Kingdom for 
JESUS CHRIST, the prospect of an eternal reward, 
and the desire [183] of living and dying in the 
service of a God who was the first to die for us, will 
have a thousand times more force to sustain the cour 
age of those whom Our Lord may send us, through 
the perils that must be encountered at any cost, if 
we wish to advance his glory in these Countries, 
where we see that it is his will to be adored. 

This is the only request that I make to Your Rev 
erence on leaving these Countries, begging you to 
procure that assistance for us, and to send us those 
whom God may select through you ; and in this hope 
I shall conclude the present letter, begging you to 
commend this Mission to the prayers of all our 
Fathers and Brethren, and to remember it particularly 
in your own holy Sacrifices. This, my Reverend 
Father, from 

Your Reverence s 
From the Huron country, this i^th of May, 1645. 

Very humble and greatly obliged 
servant in Our Lord, 

HIEROSME LALEMANT. 



LVI LIX 

MISCELLANEOUS DOCUMENTS, 1646 

LVI. Novum Belgium (1643), par le P. Isaac Jogues ; 3 
Rivieres, 3 Augusti, 1646 

LVII. Notice sur Rene Goupil (donne), par le P. Isaac 
Jogues; undated 

LVIII. Lettre du R. P. Jogues au R. P. Andre Castillon; 

Montreal, ce 12 septembre, 1646 
LIX. Journal des PP. Jesuites, en 1 annee 1646 



SOURCES : Docs. LVI. and LVII. are from the original 
MSS. thereof, in the archives of St. Mary s College, Mont 
real. Doc. LVIII. we obtain from Rochemonteix s Jesuites 
et la Nouvelle-France, ii., pp. 450-452. In republishing 
Doc. LIX., we follow the original MS. in the library of Laval 
University, Quebec. 



104 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



Nouum Belgium (164$), par le P. Isaac Jogues. 

LA Nouuelle Hollande que les Hollandois appel 
lant en Latin Nouum Belgium ; en leur langue 
Nieuw Nederland c eft a dire Nouueaux pays- 
has eft fltuee entre la Virginie et la Nouuelle Angle- 
terre. L entree de la Riviere que quelques vns 
appellent la Riviere Naffau ou la grande Riviere du 
Nord pour la difference d une autre quils appellent 
du Zud, quelques cartes ce me f emble que i ay vu 
nouvellemS Riviere Maurice eft a 40 deg. 30 min. 
Son canal eft profond et capable des plus gros 
nauires, qui montent a Manhattes Ifle qui a 7 lieues 
de circuit ou eft un fort qui deuoit fervir de com- 
mencem 1 a une ville qui fe deuoit faire et que 1 on 
deuoit appeler Nouueau Amfterdam. 

Ce fort qui eft a la pointe de 1 ifle enuiron 5 ou 6 
lieues de 1 emboucheure sappelle le fort d Amfter 
dam, il a 4 baftions reguliers munis de plufieurs pieces 
d artillerie. Tous ces baftions et les courtines n e- 
ftoient en Ian 1643 que de teraffes qui la plufpart 
etoient tout 6boulees et par les quelles on entroit 
dans le fort de tous les endroits, il n y auoit point de 
foffez, il y auoit pour la garde dud 1 fort et d un autre 
qu ils auoient faidt plus loing centre les incurfions 
des sauvages leurs ennemis 60 foldats, on commen- 
coit a reuetir de pierre les portes et les baftions. 
Dans ce fort il y auoit un temple bafty de pierre qui 
etoit affez capable le logis du Gouuerneur qu ils 



*- 



* 



5 



14 1 

N ! 



v 

s 

v 



s 







v ^. 



V, w w 

^ . v -. .* O 

^ j ^ . * -^r^ * 




4 



% a 



*. -*: 5 i 



K 

u 



o 
O 



"s. 




(/) 


X 


i 




U] 


o 

u 


" ^. 




D 


CC 


4 &lt;3 


1 


O 
O 

) 


u 


* 


sS 




o 


j 


^* 


u 


I/ 


^ ^ 


^ 


&lt; 


s 


^ ; 


^ 


en 











CM 


^ 

s 


^ 


u. 
O 


c 

C 



-1 1 




u 
z 


p 


-5 


y 


H 









Q 


t 


Z 




&lt; 


s" 


T^ 


8 




"&gt;, 




Si 


tu 


v 


o 


5 




5 


u 


s 


u 


t- 
^ 





^ 




j. 


en 


,c 


U 


Vu 


&lt; 


o 


tu 


en 



&lt;^ 

o 
& 

CD 



o 

V 



I/ 

CC 



1645-46] JOGUES S NOVUM BELGIUM 105 



Novum Belgium (1643), by Father Isaac Jogues. 

NEW Holland --which the Dutch call, in Latin, 
Novum Belgium; in their own language, 
Nieuw Nederland ; that is to say, New neth- 
erlands is situated between Virginia and New- 
England. The entrance to the River, which some 
call the River Nassau, or the great River of the 
North, to distinguish it from another which they 
call South River, and some charts, I believe, that 
I have recently seen, the River Maurice, is in the 
latitude of 40 degrees, 30 minutes. 2 Its channel is 
deep, and navigable by the largest ships, which go 
up to Manhattes Island, which is 7 leagues in cir 
cumference ; thereon is a fort intended to serve as 
nucleus for a town to be built, and to be called New 
Amsterdam. 

This fort, which is at the point of the island, about 
5 or 6 leagues from the river s mouth, is called fort 
Amsterdam ; it has 4 regular bastions, provided with 
several pieces of artillery. All these bastions and the 
curtains were, in the year 1643, merely earthworks, 
most of which had quite given way, and through 
them the fort could be entered from all sides ; there 
were no trenches. For the defense of this fort, 
and of another which they had built, farther on, 
against the incursions of the savages, their enemies, 
there were 60 soldiers. They were beginning to 
case the gates and the bastions with stone. In this 



106 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [ VOL. 28 

appellent le diredteur Gnal bafty de brique affez 
gentiment, les magazins et logements des foldats 

II peut bien y avoir en cette Ifle de Manhate et 
aux environs 4 a cinq cens homines de differentes 
fedtes et nations, le Diredteur Gnal me difoit qu il y 
auoit de dix-huidt fortes de langues, ils font re"pan- 
dus de 9a et de la riuiere en hant et en bas, felon 
que la beaute" et commodite des lieux a invite" tin 
chacun a fe placer, quelques artifans neantmoins qui 
trauaillent de leur metier font rangez foubs le fort, 
touts les autres etants expofez aux incurfions des 
Sauuages qui en 1 an 1643 comme i eftois la auoient 
bien tue" une quarantaine de Hollandois et brufle 
beaucoup de maifons et granges pleines de bled 

La Riuiere qui eft fort droituriere et va reglement 
Nord et Sud eft large pour le moins d une lieiie 
devant le Fort. Les navires font a 1 ancre en vne 
baye qui faidt 1 autre coft6 de 1 ifle et elles peuuent 
eftre defendues du Fort 

Peu de temps deuant que i y arrivaffe il y e"toit 
venu 3 gros navires de 300 tonneaux pour charger 
du bled deux auoient eu leur charge le 3 e . navoit pu 
etre charge a caufe que les sauvages auoient brufle 
vne partie des grains ces navires etoient partis des 
Indes Occidentales ou la Compagnie des Weft-indes 
entretient d ordinaire dix-fept vaifleaux de guerre. 

II n y d exercice de Religion que de la Caluinifte et 
les ordres portent de n admettre autre perfonne que 
Calviniftes, neantmoins cela ne fe garde pas, y ayant 
dans cette habitation outre les Calviniftes, Catho- 
liques, Puritains d Angleterre, Lutheriens, Anabap- 
tiftes qu ils appellent Mniftes &c. 

Quand quelqu un vient de nouveau po r habiter le 



1645-46] JOGUES S NOVUM BELGIUM 107 

fort there was a house of worship, built of stone, 
which was quite spacious ; the house of the Govern 
or, whom they call the director General, built 
quite neatly of brick ; and the storehouses and sol 
diers quarters. 

There may be, on the Island of Manhate and in its 
environs, about 4 or five hundred men of various 
sects and nations, the Director General told me 
that there were men of eighteen different languages ; 
they are scattered here and there, up and down the 
stream, according as the beauty or convenience of 
the sites invited each one to settle. Some artisans, 
however, who work at their trades, are located under 
cover of the fort ; while all the others are exposed to 
the incursions of the Savages, who, in the year 1643, 
when I was there, had actually killed about forty 
Hollanders, and burned many houses, and barns full 
of wheat. 

The River, which is very straight, and flows direct 
ly from North to South, is at least a league wide 
before the Fort. The ships are at anchor in a bay 
which forms the other side of the island, and they 
can be defended by the Fort. 

Shortly before I arrived there, 3 large ships of 300 
tons had come to load wheat ; two had received their 
lading, but the 3rd could not be laden, because the 
savages had burned a part of the grain. These ships 
had sailed from the West Indies, where the West 
india Company usually maintains seventeen war 
vessels. 3 

There is no exercise of Religion except the Cal- 
vinist, and the orders declare that none but Calvin- 
ists be admitted ; nevertheless, that point is not ob 
served, for besides the Calvinists, there are in this 



108 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

pays on le monte de chevaux vaches &c on luy donne 
des viures, il rend tout cela quand il eft accommode 
et pour les terres au bout de dix ans il bailie a la 
Compag 6 . de Weft-indes la dixime des biens qu il 
recueille. 

Ce pays a pour bornes du cofte" de la Nouuelle An- 
gleterre vne Riuiere qu ils appellent la Riuiere Fref- 
che qui fert de borne entre eux et les Anglois, neant- 
moins les Anglois f approchent fort deux aymans 
mieux auoir des terres chez les Hollandois qui ne 
leur demandent rien que de dependre des Millords 
Anglois qui exigent des redeuances et qui veullent 
trencher des abfolus. De 1 autre cofte Du sud vers 
la Virginie, elle a pour limites La Riuiere qu ils 
appellent du Zud dans laquelle il y a auffi une habita 
tion de Hollandois, mais a 1 entree les Suedois y en 
ont une extrem 1 bien munie de canon et de gens. On 
croit que ce font marchands d Amfterdam qui entre- 
tiennent ces Suedois fafches de ce que la Compag e . 
des Indes ocidentales a elle feule tou le commerce 
de ces contrees. C eft vers cette Riuiere qu on a 
trouue" a ce que 1 on dit vne mine d or. 

Voyez dans le liure du s. De Laet D Anuers la table 
et le difcours de la nouuelle Belgie comme il 1 ap- 
pelle quelqueffois ou la mappemonde. Noua Anglia, 
Nouu Belgium et Virginia. 

II y a bien 50 ans que les Hollandois vont en ces 
quartiers. L an 1615 le fort fut commence depuis 
enuiron 20 ans on a commence" a 1 habituer et main- 
tenant il y deja quelque petit commerce de la Vir 
ginie et de la Nouuelle Angleterre 

Les premiers venus y ont trouu6 des terres toutes 
propres defert6es autrefois par les fauuages qui y 



1645-46] JOGUES S NOVUM BELGIUM 109 

settlement Catholics, English Puritans, Lutherans, 
Anabaptists, whom they call Mnistes, 4 etc. 

When any one comes for the first time to dwell in 
the country, they furnish him horses, cows, etc., and 
give him provisions, all which he repays when he 
is well settled ; and, as for lands, at the end of ten 
years he gives the Company of the West indies a 
tenth of the produce that he harvests. 5 

This country has for limits on the New England 
side a River which they call the Fresh River, which 
serves as boundary between them and the English ; 6 
nevertheless, the English approach them very close 
ly, preferring to have lands among the Dutch, who 
require nothing from them, to depending upon Eng 
lish Milords, who exact rents and like to put on 
airs of being absolute. On the other side, the 
Southern, toward Virginia, it has for limits the 
River which they call South River, on which there 
is also a Dutch settlement ; but at its entrance the 
Swedes have another, extremely well equipped with 
cannon and people. It is believed that these Swedes 
are maintained by Amsterdam merchants, incensed 
because the Company of the west Indies monopolizes 
all the trade of these regions. It is toward this 
River that they have found, as is said, a gold mine. 7 

See in the book of sieur De Laet, of Antwerp, the 
table, and the account of new Belgium, 8 as he some 
times calls it; or the great map of " Nova Anglia, 
Novum Belgium, et Virginia. 

During fully 50 years the Dutch have frequented 
these regions. In the year 1615, the fort was be 
gun; about 20 years ago, they began to make a 
settlement; and now there is already some little 
trade with Virginia and New England. 



110 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

faifoient leurs champs, ceux qui font venus depuis 
ont defrich6 dans les bois qui font po r 1 ordinaire des 
chefnes, les terres font bonnes. La chaife des cerfs 
vers 1 automne abondante. II y a quelques logis 
baftys de pierre : ils font la chaux auec des coquilles 
d huiftres dont il y a de grans monceaux faits autre- 
f ois TJ les fatmages qui viuent en partie de cette 
pefche. 

Le climat y eft fort doux comme eftant a 40, deux 
tiers il y a force fruits d Europe comme pommes, 
poirls Cerifes. I y arriue" en odtobre et i y trouue 
encore quantity de Pefches 

Montant le long de la Riuiere iufques aux 43* 
degre vous trouuez la 2 e habitaon a laquelle le flux 
et Reflux monte et ne paffe pas plus auant: les 
nauires de 100 et fix vingts y peuuent aborder. 

II y a deux chofes en cette habitation qui s appelle 
Renfelaerfwick comme qui diroit 1 habitaon de Renfe- 
laers qui eft un riche marchand d Amfterdam. Pre- 
mierem 1 un mef chant petit fort nomme le Fort d o- 
renge bafty de pieux auec 4 ou 5 pi[e]ces de canon de 
Breteuil et autant de pierriers que la Compag e de 
Weft-indes s eft referue et qu elle entretient. ce 
fort etoit autreffois dans vne Ifle que faidt la Riviere, 
maintenant il eft en terre ferme du cofte des Hiro- 
quois un peu au deffus de la d te . Ifle Secondem 1 une 
Colonie qu y a enuoye ce Renfelaers qui en eft le 
Patron. Cette colonie eft compofe"e d enuiron cent 
perfonnes qui demeurent en 25 ou 30 maifons bafties 
le long de la Riuiere felon que chacun a trouue la 
commodite. Dans la principale maifon eft loge 
celuy qui eft de la part du Patron, le Miniftre a la 
fienne a part dans laquelle fe faidt le Prefche. II y a 



1645-46] JOGUES S NOVUM BELGIUM 111 

The first comers found lands quite suitable for use, 
cleared in former times by the savages, who tilled 
their fields there. Those who have come since have 
made clearings in the woods, which are commonly of 
oak; the lands are good. Deer hunting is abun 
dant toward autumn. There are some dwellings 
built of stone : they make the lime with oyster shells, 
of which there are great heaps made in former times 
by the savages, who partly live by that fishery. 

The climate there is very mild ; as that region is 
situated at 40 and two-thirds degrees, there are 
plenty of European fruits, as apples, pears, Cherries. 
I arrived there in October, and even then I found 
many Peaches. 

Ascending the River as far as the 43rd degree, you 
find the 2nd settlement, which the flow and Ebb of 
the tide reaches, but extends no further; ships of 100 
and a hundred and twenty tons can land there. 

There are two items in this settlement, which is 
called Renselaerswick, as if one should say, " the 
settlement of Renselaers, who is a wealthy merchant 
of Amsterdam: first, a wretched little fort, named 
Fort orange, built of logs, with 4 or 5 pieces of 
Breteuil cannon, and as many swivel guns, which 
the Company of the West indies has reserved for 
itself, and which it maintains. This fort was for 
merly on an Island formed by the River; it is now 
on the mainland on the side of the Hiroquois, a 
little above the said Island. 9 There is, secondly, a 
Colony sent thither by that Renselaers, who is its 
Patron. This colony is composed of about a hundred 
persons, who live in 25 or 30 houses built along the 
River, as each has found convenient. In the prin 
cipal house is lodged the Patron s representative; 



112 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

aufly comme un Baillif qu ils appellent Senechal qui 
a foin de la luftice. toutes leurs maifons ne font 
que de planches, et font cotmertes de chaume. II ny 
encor point de maffonerie finon dans les cheminees. 

Les bois portans beaucoup de gros pins, ils font de 
planches par le moyen de leurs moulins qu ils ont a 
cet effedt 

Ilz ont trouu6 quelques terres toutes propres que 
les fauuages auoient autreff ois prepares ou ils fement 
du bled et de 1 avoine p r . la bierre et p r . les chevaux 
dont ils ont grande quantite. II y a peu de teres 
ppres pour eftre labourees etans preffez des coftes 
qui font mauuaifes terres cela les oblige de fefloi- 
gner les vns des autres et tiennent deja deux ou 3 
lieiies de pays. 

La traitte eft libre a tout le monde, ce qui faict que 
les fauuages ont toutes chofes a grand march6 vn 
chacun des Hollandois allant au deffus de fon com- 
pagnon et fe contentant pourueu qu il puiffe gangner 
quelque petite chofe 

Cette habitation n eft pas eloigne e de plus de 20 
lieues des Agniehronons, on y va ou par terre ou par 
eau la Riuiere fur laquelle font les Iroquois allant 
tomber en celle qui paile aux Hollandois, mais il y a 
beaucoup de baffes rapides, et un fault dune petite 
demie lieiie ou il faut porter le canot 

II y a plufieurs nations entre les deux habitations 
des Hollandois eloignees 1 une de lautre de 30 lieues 
d Allemagne c eft a dire de 50 ou 60 lieues Fran- 
coifes. Les Loups que les Iroquois appellent Agot- 
faganens font les plus proche de laabitation Renfe- 
laerfwick ou du fort d orange. II y a deja quelques 
anne"es que la guerre etant entre les Iroquois et les 



114 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

Loups les Hollandois fe loignirent a ces derniers 
centre les atitres, mais 4 ayant ete pris et brufle"s 
la paix fe fit. Depuis quelques nations proche de 
la mer ayans tiie quelques Hollandois de la plus 61oi- 
gnee habitaon, les Hollandois tuerent 1 50 fauuages 
tant hoes que femtnes que petits enfans, eux ayants 
tue a diuerfes reprifes 40 Hollandois, brufle" beau- 
coup de maifons et faidl un dommage eftime" des le 
temps que i eftois la de 200000!! deux cens mille 
liures on leua des troupes en la Nouuelle Angle- 
terre; au commencem 1 done de 1 hyver les herbes 
etant abbattiies et quelques neiges etants fur terre on 
leur donna la chaffe de fix cens hommes y en ayant 
tou jours deux cens en courfe et fe relay ant continu- 
ellem 1 les vns les autres de forte qu enfermes dans 
vne grand Ifle et ne pouuants s enfuyr leftem* a caufe 
des femmes et des enfans il y en eut iufques a feize 
cens de tiies compris les femmes et enfans ce qui 
obligea la refte des fauuages a faire la paix qui 
continue encor cela arriva en 1643 et 1644. 

Des 3 Riuieres en la 

Nouuelle France, 

3 Augufti, 1646 



1645-46] JOGUES S NOVUM BELGIUM 

between the Iroquois and the Wolves, the Dutch 
Joined these latter against the others ; but, 4 having 
been taken and burned, peace was made. Later, 
some nations near the sea having slain some Dutch 
of the most remote settlement, the Dutch killed 150 
savages, not only men and women, but little chil 
dren. The savages having, in various reprisals, killed 
40 Dutch, burned many houses, and wrought damage 
reckoned, at the time when I was there, at 200, ooo//, 
two hundred thousand livres, troops were levied 
in New England. Accordingly, at the beginning of 
winter, the grass being short, and some snow on the 
ground, they gave the savages chase with six hun 
dred men, two hundred being always on the march 
and one set continually relieving another. The 
result was, that, being shut up on a great Island, and 
unable to flee easily, because of the women and chil 
dren, there were as many as sixteen hundred killed, 
including women and children. This compelled the 
remainder of the savages to make peace, which still 
continues. That occurred in 1643 and 1644. 

From 3 Rivers, in 

New France, 
August 3, 1646. 



114 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

Loups les Hollanders fe loignirent a ces derniers 
centre les atitres, mais 4 ayant ete pris et brufl6s 
la paix fe fit. Depuis quelques nations proche de 
la met ayans tiie quelques Hollandois de la plus eloi- 
gnee habitaon, les Hollandois tuerent 1 50 fauuages 
tant h5es que femmes que petits enfans, eux ayants 
tue a diuerfes reprifes 40 Hollandois, brufle" beau- 
coup de maifons et faidt un dommage eftime" des le 
temps que i eftois la de 200000!! deux cens mille 
liures on leua des troupes en la Nouuelle Angle- 
terre ; au commencem 4 done de 1 hy ver les herbes 
etant abbattiies et quelques neiges etants fur terre on 
leur donna la chaffe de fix cens hommes y en ayant 
toujours deux cens en courfe et fe relayant continu- 
ellem* les vns les autres de forte qu enfermes dans 
vne grand Me et ne pouuants s enfuyr leftem 1 a caufe 
des femmes et des enfans il y en eut iufques a feize 
cens de tiies compris les femmes et enfans ce qui 
obligea la refte des fauuages a faire la paix qui 
continue encor cela arriva en 1643 et 1644. 

Des 3 Riuieres en la 

Nouuelle France, 

3 Augufti, 1646 



1645-46] JOGUES S NOVUM BELGIUM 115 

between the Iroquois and the Wolves, the Dutch 
Joined these latter against the others ; but, 4 having 
been taken and burned, peace was made. Later, 
some nations near the sea having slain some Dutch 
of the most remote settlement, the Dutch killed 150 
savages, not only men and women, but little chil 
dren. The savages having, in various reprisals, killed 
40 Dutch, burned many houses, and wrought damage 
reckoned, at the time when I was there, at 200, ooo//, 
two hundred thousand livres, troops were levied 
in New England. Accordingly, at the beginning of 
winter, the grass being short, and some snow on the 
ground, they gave the savages chase with six hun 
dred men, two hundred being always on the march 
and one set continually relieving another. The 
result was, that, being shut up on a great Island, and 
unable to flee easily, because of the women and chil 
dren, there were as many as sixteen hundred killed, 
including women and children. This compelled the 
remainder of the savages to make peace, which still 
continues. That occurred in 1643 and 1644. 
From 3 Rivers, in 

New France, 
August 3, 1646. 



116 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



Notice sur Rene Goupil (donne), par le P. Isaac 

Jogues. 



REN Goupil e"toit Angeuin, qui en la fleur 
de fon age demanda auec preffe deftre receu 
en notre Nouitiat de Paris, ou il demeura 
quelques mois auec beaucoup d edificaon. Ses indif- 
politions corporelles luy ayant ofte" le bonheur de fe 
confacrer en la s te . Religion, comme il en auoit de 
grands defirs, lorfqu il fe porta mieux il fe tranfporta 
en la Nouuelle France pour y feruir la compagnie, 
puifqu il nauoit pas eu le bien de s y donner dans 
1 ancienne. Et pour ne rien faire de fon chef quoy 
qu il fut pleinem 1 maiftre de fes actions, il fe foub- 
mit totalem 1 a la conduite du superieur de la Miffion 
qu il 1 employa deux anne"es entieres aux plus vils 
offices de la maifon defquels il s acquitta auec beau- 
coup d humilit6 et de Charite". On luy donna auffy 
le foin de penfer les malades et les bleffe"s de 1 hofpi- 
tal ce qu il fit auec autant d adreffe, etant bien intel 
ligent en la chirurgie que d affedtion et d amour 
regardant continuellement N S. en leur perfonne. 
II laiffe une fi douce odeur de fa bont6 et de fes 
autres vertus en ce lieu, que fa memoire y eft encore 
en benediction 

Comme nous defcendifmes des Hurons en luillet 
1642. nous le demandafmes au RP. Vimont pour 
I emmener auec nous, parceque les Hurons avoient 
grand befoin d un Chirurgien. il nous 1 accorda. 



1645-46] JOGUES S NOTICE SUR GOUPIL 117 



Account of Rene Goupil (donne), by Father Isaac 

Jogues. 

RENE Goupil was a native of Anjou, who, in 
the bloom of his youth, urgently requested to 
be received into our Novitiate at Paris, where 
he remained some months with much edification. 
His bodily indispositions having taken from him the 
happiness of consecrating himself to God in holy 
Religion, for which he had a strong desire, he 
journeyed, when his health improved, to New France, 
in order to serve the society there, since he had not 
had the blessing of giving himself to it in old France. 
And, in order to do nothing in his own right, al 
though he was fully master of his own actions, he 
totally submitted himself to the guidance of the 
superior of the Mission, who employed him two 
whole years in the meanest offices about the house, 
in which he acquitted himself with great humility 
and Charity. He was also given the care of nursing 
the sick and the wounded at the hospital, which he 
did with as much skill for he understood surgery 
well as with affection and love, continually seeing 
Our Lord in their persons. He left so sweet an odor 
of his goodness and his other virtues in that place, 
that his memory is still blessed there. 

When we came down from the Hurons in July, 
1642, we asked Reverend Father Vimont to let us 
take him with us, because the Hurons had great 
need of a Surgeon ; he granted our request. 



118 LES RELATIONS DES JESUJTES [VOL. 28 

II ne fe pent dire la ioye que recent ce bon jetme 
homme quand le fup r . luy dit qu il fe preparaft po. le 
voyage, il fcavoit bien neantmoins les grands dan 
gers qu il y avoit fur la riviere, il fcavoit comme 
les Iroquois etoient enragez centre les Franois. 
Neantmoins cela ne fut pas capable qu au moindre 
figne de la vol[on]te" de celuy auquel il s eftoit remis 
volontairement de tout ce qui le touchoit, il ne fe 
mit en chemin pour aller aux 3 Rivieres 

Nous en partifmes le i r . d aoufl le lendemain de la 
fefte de N. B. P. Le 2 d . nous rencontrafm.es les enne- 
mis lef quels divifes en deux bandes nous attendoient 
auec 1 auantage que peut avoir un grand nombre de 
gens choifis par deffus un petit de toute forte, qui 
combattent a terre contre d autres qui font fur 1 eau 
en diuers canots d efcorces. 

Prefque tous les Hurons s eftoi[e]nt enfuis dans le 
bois et nous ayant laiffe nous fufmes pris. Ce fut la 
ou fa vertu parut beaucoup car des qu il fe vit pris. 
O mon pere ce me dit il dieu foit beny, il 1 a permis, 
il 1 a voulu, fa s te . volonte foit faidte, ie 1 aime ie la 
veux ie la cheris et ie 1 embraffe de toute 1 eftendiie de 
mon coeur. Cependant que les ennemis pourfuiui- 
rent les fuyarts ie le confeffe et luy donne 1 abfolu- 
tion ne fachant pas ce qui nous devoit arriver, en 
fuite de notre prife. Les ennemis eflant retournes 
de la chaffe fe ietterent fur nous comme des chiens 
enragez a belles dents, nous arrachant les ongles 
nous escrafans les doigts, ce qu il enduroit auec 
beaucoup de patience et de courage. 

Le prefence de fon efprit dans un fi facheufe acci 
dent, parut en ce pri[nci]palem t qu il m aydoit non- 
obflant la douleur de fes playes en ce qu il pouvoit a 



1645-46] JOGUES S NOTICE SUR GOUPIL 119 

I cannot express the joy which this good young 
man felt when the superior told him that he might 
make ready for the journey. Nevertheless, he well 
knew the great dangers that await one upon the 
river; he knew how the Iroquois were enraged 
against the French. Yet that could not prevent 
him at the least sign of the will of him to whom 
he had voluntarily committed all his concerns from 
setting forth for 3 Rivers. 

We departed thence on the ist of August, the 
day after the feast of Our Blessed Father. On the 
2nd, we encountered the enemies, who, separated 
into two bands, were awaiting us with the advan 
tage which a great number of chosen men, fighting on 
land, can have over a small and promiscuous band, 
who are upon the water in scattered canoes of bark. 

Nearly all the Hurons had fled into the woods, 
and, as they had left us, we were seized. On this 
occasion his virtue was very manifest ; for, as soon 
as he saw himself captured, he said to me: " O my 
father, God be blessed ; he has permitted it, he has 
willed it, his holy will be done. I love it, I desire 
it, I cherish it, I embrace it with all the strength of 
my heart. Meantime, while the enemies pursued 
the fugitives, I heard his confession, and gave him 
absolution, not knowing what might befall us after 
our capture. The enemies having returned from their 
hunt, fell upon us like mad dogs, with sharp teeth, 
tearing out our nails, and crushing our fingers, which 
he endured with much patience and courage. 

His presence of mind in so grievous a mishap 
appeared especially in this, that he aided me, not 
withstanding the pain of his wounds, as well as he 
could, in the instruction of the captive Hurons who 



120 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [You 28 

1 inftrudtion des Hurons prifonniers qui n eftoient 
pas xfliens. Com me ie les inftruifois feparem* et 
comme ils fe trouvoient, il me fit prendre garde 
qu un pauure vieillard nomine" Ondb terraon, pourroit 
bien eftre de ceux qu on feroit mourir fur la place, 
leur couftume eftant d en facrifier ton jours quelqu un 
a la chaleur de leur rage, ie 1 inftruiiis a loifir pen 
dant que les ennemis eftoient attentifs a la diftribu- 
tion du pillage de 12 canots, dont une partie eftoient 
chargez des nec[essi]t6s de nos Peres des Hurons. Le 
butin eftant partag6 ils tuerent ce pauure vieillard 
au mefme moment prefque que ie venois de luy don- 
ner une nouvelle naiilance g les eaux falutaires du s l . 
Bapteme. Nous eufmes encor cette confolation du- 
rant Ie chemin que nous fifmes allant au pays enne- 
my d eflre enfemble ou ie fus temoin de beaucoup 
de vertus. 

Durant Ie chemin il eftoit toujours occupe" dans 
Dieu. Ses parolles et les difcours qu il tenoit 
eftoient toutes dans une foubmiffion aux ordres de 
la D. providence, et une acceptation volontaire de la 
rnort que dieu luy envoyroit. II Ie donnoit a luy en 
holocaufle pour eftre reduit en cendres p les feux 
des Iroquois que la main de ce bon Pere allumeroit. 
il cherchoit les moyens de luy plaire en tout et par 
tout. Vn jour il me dit ce fut peu apres notre prife 
eftans encor dans Ie chemin. Mon Pere Dieu m a 
toujours donne de grands defirs de me confacrer a 
fon s 1 . feruice rj les voeux de la Religion en fa s te . 
compagnie, mes peches m ont rendu indigne de 
cette grace iufques a ceft heure. I efpere neant- 
moins que N S. aura pour agreables 1 offrande que 
ie luy veux faire maintenant, et faire de la fagon la 



1645-46] JOGUES S NOTICE SUR GOUPIL 121 

were not Christians. While I was instructing them 
separately, and as they came, he called my attention 
to the fact that a poor old man, named Ondouterraon, 
was among those whom they would probably kill on 
the spot, their custom being always to sacrifice 
some one in the heat of their fury. I instructed this 
man at leisure, while the enemies were attending to 
the distribution of the plunder from 12 canoes, some 
of which were laden with necessaries for our Fathers 
among the Hurons. The booty being divided, they 
killed this poor old man, almost at the same mo 
ment in which I had just given him a new birth 
through the salutary waters of holy Baptism. We 
still had this consolation, during the journey that 
we made in going to the enemy s country, that we 
were together; on this journey, I was witness to 
many virtues. 

Upon the road, he was always occupied with God. 
His words and the discourses that he held were all 
expressive of submission to the commands of the 
Divine providence, and showed a willing acceptance 
of the death which God was sending him. He gave 
himself to him as a sacrifice, to be reduced to ashes 
by the fires of the Iroquois, which that good Father s 
hand would kindle. He sought the means to please 
him in all things, and everywhere. One day he 
said to me, it was soon after our capture, while we 
were still on the way, " My Father, God has always 
given me a great desire to consecrate myself to his 
holy service by the vows of Religion in his holy 
society ; my sins have rendered me unworthy of this 
grace until this hour. I nevertheless hope that Our 
Lord will be pleased with the offering which I wish 
now to make him, by taking, in the best manner that 



122 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

meilleure que ie pourray les voeux de la compagnie 
en la prefence de mon dieu et devant vcms. luy 
ay ant accorde il les fit auec beaucoup de devotion. 

Tout bleffe qu il eftoit il penfoit les autres bleffes 
tant des ennemis qui dans la meflee auoient recu 
quelque coup que les prifonniers mefmes. il ouvrit 
la veine a un Iroquois malade, et tout cela auec 
autant de charite que fil 1 euft faict a des perfonnes 
fort amies. 

Son humilite et 1 obeiffance qu il rendoit a ceux 
qui 1 avoient pris me confondoit. Les Iroquois qui 
nous menoient tous deux dans leur canot me dirent 
que i euff e a prendre un aviron et nager, ie n en 
voulus rien faire efhant fuperbe iufques dans la mort. 
Us s adrefferent a luy quelque temps apres, et tout 
incontinent il fe mit a nager et comme ces barbares 
par fon exemple me vouloient reduire a en faire au 
tant, luy s eftant apperceu de cela me demanda par 
don. Ie luy fournis quelques fois durant Ie chemin 
la penfee de s enfuyr, comme la liberte qu on nous 
donnoit luy en fourniffoit affez d occaon. car pour 
moy ie ne pouuois pas laiffer les francois et 24 ou 25 
prifonniers hurons. il ne vouloit jamais Ie faire fe 
remettant en tout a la volcnte" de N S. qui ne luy 
donnoit point de penfe"e de Ie faire. 

Dans Ie lac nous rencontrafmes 200 Iroquois qui 
vindrent a Richelieu lors qu on commencoit & baftir 
Ie fort, ils nous chargeoient de coups, nous mirent 
tout en fang, et nous firent experimenter la rage de 
ceux qui font poffedez par Ie demon. II endura tous 
ces outrages et ces cruautez auec grande patience et 
charite a 1 endroit de ceux qui Ie mal traitoient. 

A 1 abord du premier bourg ou nous fufmes fi cru- 



1645 - 46] JO G UES S NO TICE S UR GO UPIL 123 

I can, the vows of the society in the presence of my 
God and before you." This being granted to him, 
he tittered the vows with much devotion. 

Covered with wounds as he was, he dressed those 
of other persons, the enemies who had received 
some blow in the fight, as well as the prisoners 
themselves. He opened a vein for a sick Iroquois; 
and all that with as much charity as if he had done 
it to persons very friendly. 

His humility, and the obedience which he rendered 
to those who had captured him, confounded me. 
The Iroquois who conveyed us both in their canoe 
told me that I must take a paddle, and use it; I 
would do nothing of the kind, being proud even in 
death. They addressed him in the same way, some 
time afterward, and immediately he began to paddle ; 
and when those barbarians tried to drive me, by his 
example, to do the like, he, having perceived it, 
asked my pardon. I sometimes suggested to him, 
along the way, the idea of escaping, since the liberty 
which they gave us furnished him sufficient oppor 
tunities for this ; but as for myself, I could not leave 
the french and 24 or 25 huron captives. He would 
never do so, committing himself in everything to 
the will of Our Lord, who inspired him with no 
thought of doing what I proposed. 

On the lake we met 200 Iroquois, who came to 
Richelieu while the French were beginning to build 
the fort; these loaded us with blows, covered us 
with blood, and made us experience the rage of those 
who are possessed by the demon. All these outrages 
and these cruelties he endured with great patience 
and charity toward those who ill-treated him. 

On approaching the first village, where we were 



124 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [ VOL. 28 

ellem 1 traites il fit paroiftre une patience et une dou 
ceur tout extraordinaire, eftant tombe fous la grefle 
des coups de bafton et de verge de fer dont on nous 
chargeoit et ne fe pouuant releiier, il fut apporte 
comme demy mort fur 1 echafaut ou nous eftions 
dejd au milieu du bourg, mais dans un etat fi pitoy- 
able qu il euft faidt pitie a la cruaute mefme, il eftoit 
tout meurtry de coups et dans le vifage on ne luy 
voyoit que le blanc des yeux ; mais il etoit d autant 
plus beau aux yeux des Anges qu il etoit defigure et 
femblable a celuy duquel il eft dit Vidimus eum quafi 
leprofum &c non erat ei fpecies neque decor 

A peine auoit il pris un peu d haleine auffy bien 
que nous qu on luy vint donner 3 coups fur les 
efpaules d un gros bafton comme on nous avoit faict 
auparavant. Quand on m euft couppe" le poulce 
comme au plus apparent, on s adreffe a luy et luy 
couppe on le poulce droidt a la i re . joindture difant 
inceflament durant ce tourment IESVS MARIA 
JOSEPH. Durant fix jours que nous fufmes expo- 
fez a tous ceux qui nous vouloient faire quelque mal 
il fit pareftre une douceur admirable, il euft toute la 
poitrine bruflee p les charbons et cendres chaudes que 
les ieunes garcons nous iettoient fur le corps, la nuidt 
eftant lies a plate tere. la nature me fourniffoit plus 
d adreffe qu a luy pour efquiuer une partie de ces 
peines. 

Apres qu on nous eut donne la vie au mefme temps 
qu un peu auparauant on nous avoit avertis de nous 
preparer pour eftre bruflez, il tomba malade avec de 
grandes incommodites pour tout et nommern* pour 
le viure auquel il n efloit pas accouftume, c eft la ou 
on pourroit dire plus veritablem 1 non cibus vtilis 



1645 - 46J JOG UES S NO TICK SUR GO UPIL 125 

treated so cruelly, he showed a most uncommon 
patience and gentleness. Having fallen under the 
shower of blows from clubs and iron rods with which 
they attacked us, and being unable to rise again, he 
was brought as it were, half dead upon the scaf 
fold where we already were, in the middle of the 
village ; but he was in so pitiful a condition that he 
would have inspired compassion in cruelty itself. 
He was all bruised with blows, and in his face one 
distinguished nothing but the whites of his eyes; 
but he was so much the more beautiful in the sight 
of the Angels as he was disfigured, and similar to 
him of whom it is said : Vidimus eum quasi leprosum, 
etc. ; non erat ei species neque decor. 

Hardly had he taken a little breath, as well as we, 
when they came to give him 3 blows on his shoul 
ders with a heavy club, as they had done to us be 
fore. When they had cut off my thumb, as I was 
the most conspicuous, they turned to him and cut 
his right thumb at the ist joint, while he continu 
ally uttered, during this torment: " JESUS, MARY, 
JOSEPH." During six days, in which we were 
exposed to all those who wished to do us some harm, 
he showed an admirable gentleness; he had his 
whole breast burned by the coals and hot cinders 
which the young lads threw upon our bodies at 
night, when we-were bound flat on the earth. Na 
ture furnished more skill to me than to him for avoid 
ing a part of these pains. 

After they had given us life, at the very time 
when, a little before, they had warned us to prepare 
for being burned, he fell sick, suffering great 
inconveniences in every respect, and especially in 
regard to the food, to which he was not accustomed. 



126 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [ VOL. 28 

segro. le ne le pouuois foulager eftant auffy bien 
malade et n ayant aucun de mes doigts fain et entier. 

Mais ie me preffe pour venir & fa mort a laquelle 
y ny a rien manque pour le faire d un Martyr. 

Apres fix femaines que nous eufmes efte dans le 
pays comme la confufion ce fut mis dans les confeils 
des Iroquois dont une partie vouloit bien qu on nous 
remenat. nous perdifmes 1 efperance que ie n auois 
guere grande, de reuoir cette anne"e la les 3 Rivieres. 
Nous nous confolions done 1 un 1 autre dans la difpo- 
fition divine et nous appreflions a tout ce quelle 
ordonneroit de nous. II n auoit pas tant de veiie du 
danger dans lequel nous eftions, ie le voyois mieux 
que luy. ce qui me faifoit fouuent luy dire que nous 
nous tinffions prets. Vn jour done que dans les pei- 
nes de notre efprit nous eftions fortis hors du Bourg 
po prier plus decemm* et auec moins de bruict. Deux 
jeunes hommes vinrent apres nous nous dire que 
nous euffions a retourner a la maifon. I eus quelque 
prefentim 1 de ce qui devoit arriuer et luy dit Mon 
tres cher f. recommandons nous a N. S. et nre bonne 
mere la s te . Vierge ces gens ont quelque mauvais 
deffein comrne ie penfe, nous nous eftions offerts a 
N. S. peu auparavant auec beaucoup d affection, le 
fuppliant de receuoir nos vies et nre fang et de les 
vnir a fa vie et h fon fang pour le falut de ces 
pauures peuples. nous nous en retournons done vers 
le Bourg recitant nre chappellet duquel nous auions 
deja dit 4 dixaines. Nous eftants arreftes vers la 
porte du Bourg pour voir ce qu on nous voudroit dire 
un de ces deux Iroquois tire une hache qu il tenoit 
cachee foubs fa couuerture et en donneun coup fur 
la tefte de Rene qui eftoit devant luy il tombe roide 



1645 - 46] JO G UES S NO TICE S UR GO UPIL 127 

In that, one might say most truly, Non cibus utilis 
cegro. I could not relieve him, for I was also very 
sick, and had none of my fingers sound or entire. 

But this urges me to come to his death, at which 
nothing was wanting to make him a Martyr. 

After we had been in the country six weeks, as 
confusion arose in the councils of the Iroquois, some 
of whom were quite willing that we should be taken 
back, we lost the hope, which I did not consider 
very great, of again seeing 3 Rivers that year. We 
accordingly consoled each other in the divine arrange 
ment of things ; and we were preparing for every 
thing that it might ordain for us. He did not quite 
realize the danger in which we were, I saw it bet 
ter than he ; and this often led me to tell him that 
we should hold ourselves in readiness. One day, 
then, as in the grief of our souls we had gone forth 
from the Village, in order to pray more suitably and 
with less disturbance, two young men came after us 
to tell us that we must return home. I had some 
presentiment of what was to happen, and said to 
him : My dearest brother, let us commend ourselves 
to Our Lord and to our good mother the blessed 
Virgin; these people have some evil design, as I 
think." We had offered ourselves to Our Lord, 
shortly before, with much devotion, beseeching 
him to receive our lives and our blood, and to unite 
them with his life and his blood for the salvation of 
these poor peoples. We accordingly return toward 
the Village, reciting our rosary, of which we had 
already said 4 decades. Having stopped near the 
gate of the Village, to see what they might say to us, 
one of those two Iroquois draws a hatchet, which he 
held concealed under his blanket, and deals a blow 



128 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

la face fur terre, pronon9ant le s 1 . nom de IESVS 
(fouuent nous nous auertiffions que ce s 1 . nom fer- 
maft et nre voix et fire vie) ; au coup ie me tourne et 
vois une hache toute enfanglantee, ie me mets a 
genoux pour recevoir le coup qui me devoit joindre a 
mon cher compagnon, mais comme ilz tardoient ie 
me releue ie cours au moribond qui eftoit tout pro- 
che, auquel ils donnerent deux aues coups de hache 
fur la tefte et 1 acheuerent, luy ayant premierem 1 
donne 1 abfoluon que ie luy donnois depuis nre 
captivite touiours de deux jours 1 un apres s eftre 
confeife". 

Ce fut le [deux afterward erased, in orig.~\ de Sep- 
temb. fefle de s 1 . Michel que cet Ange en innocence et 
ce Martyr de I. C. donne fa vie pour celuy qui luy auoit 
donne la lienne. On me fit commandem 1 de me 
retourner en ma cabane ou j attendis le refte du jour 
et le lendemain le mefme traitem*. et c eftoit bien la 
penfee de touts que ie ne la ferois pas longue puifque 
celuy la avoit commence et en effedt ie fus plufieurs 
jours qu on venoit pour me tuer mais N. S. ne le 
permit pas par des voyes qui feroient trop longues a 
expliquer. Le lendemain matin ie ne laiffe pas de 
fortir, de m enquefter ou on avoit iette ce B. corps, 
car ie le voulois enterrer a quelque prix que ce fuft. 
Quelques Iroquois qui avoient eues quelque enuie de 
me conferuer me dirent. Tu n as pas d efprit tu 
vois qu on te cherche par tout pour te tuer et tu fors 
encor tu veux aller chercher un corps deja demy 
grefle qu on a traine loin d icy. ne vois tu pas cette 
jeuneffe qui fort, qui te tuera quand tu feras hors 
des pieux. Cela ne m arrefta pas et N. S. me don 
na affez de courage pour vouloir mourir dans cette 



1645-46] JOGUES S NOTICE SUR GOUPIL 129 

with it on the head of Rene", who was before him. 
He falls motionless, his face to the ground, pro 
nouncing the holy name of JESUS (often we admon 
ished each other that this holy name should end 
both our voices and our lives). At the blow, I turn 
round and see a hatchet all bloody; I kneel down, 
to receive the blow which was to unite me with my 
dear companion ; but, as they hesitate, I rise again, 
and run to the dying man, who was quite near. 
They dealt him two other blows with the hatchet, 
on the head, and despatched him, but not until I 
had first given him absolution, which I had been 
wont to give him every two days, since our captiv 
ity; and this was a day on which he had already 
confessed. 

It was the [29th] of September, the feast of st. 
Michael, when this Angel in innocence, and this 
Martyr of Jesus Christ, gave his life for him who 
had given him his. They ordered me to return to 
my cabin, where I awaited, the rest of the day and 
the next day, the same treatment; and it was indeed 
the purpose of all that I should not long delay, since 
that one had begun. Indeed, I passed several days 
on which they came to kill me ; but Our Lord did 
not permit this, in ways which it would be tedious 
to explain. The next morning, I nevertheless went 
out to inquire where they had thrown that Blessed 
body, for I wished to bury it, at whatever cost. Cer 
tain Iroquois, who had some desire to preserve me, 
said to me : Thou hast no sense ! Thou seest that 
they seek thee everywhere to kill thee, and thou still 
goest out. Thou wishest to go and seek a body 
already half destroyed, which they have dragged far 
from here. Dost thou not see those young men 



130 



LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

office de charite". le vais ie cherche et a 1 ayde d un 
Algonquin pris aueffois et maintenant vray Iroquois 
ie le trouue. Les enfans apres qu on 1 euft tue" 
1 auoient de pouille et traine" la corde au col dans vn 
torrent qui paffe au pied de leur Bourg. Les chiens 
luy avoient deja mange une ptie des reins, ie ne 
pus tenir mes larmes a ce fpedtacle ie pris ce corps 
et a layde de cet Algonquin ie le mis a fond de 1 eau 
charge de groffes pierres affin qu on ne le vit, fai- 
fant mon conte que ie viendrois le lendemain auec 
un hoyau lors qu il ny auroit perfonne que ie ferois 
vne foffe et que ie 1 y mettrois. Ie croiois que ce 
corps fut bien cache" mais peuteftre quelques uns quj 
nous virent pripalem 1 de la jeuneffe le retirerent. 
Le lendemain comme on me cherchoit pour me 
tuer ma tante m envoya a fon champ pour ef quiver 
comme ie penfe, ce qui fut caufe que ie remis au len 
demain jour auquel il pint toute la nuidt, de forte 
que ce torrent groffit extraord remt . I emprunte un 
hoyau hors de chez nous pour mieux cacher mon 
deffein mais comme iapproche du lieu ie ne trouve 
plus ce B. depoft ie me mets a leau qui eftoit deja 
bien froide ie vais et viens ie fonds auec mon pied fi 
leau n a point foufleve et entraifne le corps, ie ne 
trouue rien. Combien verfe-je de larmes qui tom- 
boient iufques dans le torrent chantant comme ie 
pouvois des pfeaumes que 16glife a couftume de reci 
ter p r . les morts. En fin ie ne trouue rien, et une 
femme de ma connoiffance qui paffa p la et me vit 
en peine, me dit lorfque ie luy demande fi elle ne 
fcavoit point ce qu on en avoit faidt, qu on 1 avoit 
traine a la riuiere qui eftoit un quart de lieiie de la 
et que ie ne connaiffois pas. Cela eftoit faux la jeu- 



1645-46] JOGUES S NOTICE SUR GOUPIL 131 

going out, who will kill thee when thou shalt be out 
side the stockade? &gt;: That did not stop me, and Our 
Lord gave me courage enough to wish to die in this 
act of charity. I go, I seek ; and, with the aid of an 
Algonquin, formerly captured, and now a true Iro- 
quois, I find him. The children, after he had been 
killed, had stripped him, and had dragged him, with 
a rope about his neck, into a torrent which passes at 
the foot of their Village. The dogs had already 
eaten a part of his loins. I could not keep back my 
tears at this sight ; I took the body, and, by the aid 
of that Algonquin, I put it beneath the water, 
weighted with large stones, to the end that it might 
not be seen. It was my intention to come the next 
day with a mattock, when no one should be there, in 
order to make a grave and place the body therein. 
I thought that the corpse was well concealed; 
but perhaps some who saw us, especially of the 
youths, withdrew it. 

The next day, as they were seeking me to kill me, 
my aunt sent me to her field, to escape, as I think; 
this caused me to delay until the morrow, a day on 
which it rained all night, so that the torrent swelled 
uncommonly. I borrowed a mattock from another 
cabin, the better to conceal my design; but, when I 
draw near the place, I no longer find that Blessed 
deposit. I go into the water, which was already very 
cold; I go and. come, I sound with my foot, to see 
whether the water has not raised and carried away 
the body; I find nothing. How many tears did I 
shed, which fell into the torrent, while I sang, as 
well as I could, the psalms which the church is accus 
tomed to recite for the dead. After all, I find noth 
ing; and a woman of my acquaintance, who passed 



132 



LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28 

neffe 1 avoit retire et train6 dans vn petit bois proche 
ou 1 automne et 1 hyuer les Chiens les Corbeaux et les 
Renards le mangoient ; le Printemps coe on me dit 
que c eftoit la quon 1 avoit train6 i y alle plufieurs 
fois fans rien trotmer en fin la 4 me . fois ie trouue la 
tefte quelques os demy range s que ienterrS dans le 
deffein de les emporter fi on me remenoit aux 3 R. 
coe on en parloit, ie les baiff6 bien devoten 1 par 
plufieurs fois coe les os d un martyr de I C. 

Ie luy donne ce titre non feulem* par ce qu il a efl6 
tu6 par les ennemis de dieu et de fon Eglife et dans 
1 employ d une ardente charite a lendroit du pro- 
chain, fe mettent dans le peril evident p r . 1 amour de 
dieu ; Mais particulierem 1 parcequ il a eft6 tu6 po r les 
prieres et nommem 1 pour la s te Croix. 

II eftoit dans vne Cabane ou il faifoit prefque tou- 
jours des prieres cela ne plaifoit gueres a vn vieillard 
fupfticieux qui y etoit. Vn jour voyant un petit 
enfant de 3 ou 4 ans de la cabane, par un exces de 
devotion et d amour a la Croix, et par une fimplicit6 
que nous autres qui fommes plus prudents felon la 
chair que luy n euffions pas faidte, ofta fon bonnet le 
mit fur la tefte de cet enfant et luy fit un grand figne 
de croix fur le corps ce vieillard voyant cela com- 
mande k vn jeune homme de fa cabane qui devoit 
partir pour la guerre de le tiier, ce qu il executa 
comme nous avons dit. 

La mere mefme de 1 enfant dans un voyage ou ie 
me trouu6 auec elle me dit que c eftoit . caufe de ce 
figne de Croix qu il auoit eft6 tiie, et le vieillard qui 
avoit faict le commandemS qu on le tuaft, un jour 
qu on m appella dans fa cabane pour manger, comme 
ie faifois le figne de la Croix devant, me dit. Voyla 



1646-46] JO G UES S NO TICE S UR GO UPIL 133 

there and saw me in pain, told me, when I asked her 
whether she knew what they had done with him, 
that they had dragged him to the river, which was a 
quarter of a league from there, and which I was not 
acquainted with. That was false: the young men 
had taken away the body, and dragged it into a little 
wood near by, where, during the autumn and 
winter, the Dogs, Ravens, and Foxes fed upon it. In 
the Spring, when they told me that it was there that 
they had dragged him, I went thither several times 
without finding anything. At last, the 4th time, I 
found the head and some half-gnawed bones, which 
I buried with the design of carrying them away, if I 
should be taken back to 3 Rivers, as they spoke of 
doing. I kissed them very devoutly, several times, 
as the bones of a martyr of Jesus Christ. 

I give him this title not only because he was killed 
by the enemies of God and of his Church, and in the 
exercise of an ardent charity toward his neighbor, 
placing himself in evident peril for the love of God, 
but especially because he was killed on account of 
prayer, and notably for the sake of the holy Cross. 

He was in a Cabin where he nearly always said 
the prayers, which little pleased a superstitious old 
man who was there. One day, seeing a little child 
of 3 or 4 years in the cabin, with an excess of devo 
tion and of love for the Cross, and with a simplicity 
which we who are more prudent than he, according 
to the flesh, would not have shown, he took off his 
cap, put it on this child s head, and made a great 
sign of the cross upon its body. The old man, see 
ing that, commanded a young man of his cabin, who 
was about to leave for the war, to kill him, which 
order he executed, as we have said. 



134 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

ce que nous haiffons, voila pourquoy on a tu& ton 
compagnon, et pourquoy on te tiiera. Nos voyfms 
les Europeans ne font point cela. Quelques fois auffy 
comme ie priois a genoux durant la chaffe, on me 
difoit qu on haiffoit cet facon de faire pour lefquelles 
on auoit tue" 1 autre Francois, et que pour cette rai- 
fon on me tueroit quand ie revenois dans le Bourg. 
Ie demande pardon a V. R. de la precipitation 
auec laquelle i efcris cecy et du manque de refpedl 
que iy commets elle m excufera s il luy plaift ie crai- 
gnois de manquer a cette occaon a m aquiter d un 
devoir duquel ie deurois m eftre deja aquit6 il y a 
long temps. 



1645-46J JOG UES S NOTICE SUR GOUPIL 135 

Even the child s mother, on a journey in which I 
happened to be with her, told me that it was because 
of this sign of the Cross that he had been killed; 
and the old man who had given the command that 
he should be slain, one day when they called me 
to his cabin to eat, when I previously made the sign 
of the Cross, said to me: " That is what we hate; 
that is why they have killed thy companion, and why 
they will kill thee. Our neighbors the Europeans 
do not do so." Sometimes, also, when I was pray 
ing on my knees during the hunt, they told me that 
they hated this way of doing, and on account of it 
they had killed the other Frenchman ; and that, for 
this reason, they would kill me when I came back to 
the Village. 

I ask Your Reverence s pardon for the haste with 
which I write this, and for the want of respect of 
which I am thus guilty. You will excuse me, if you 
please ; I feared lest I should fail at this opportunity, 
to discharge a duty which I ought to have performed 
long ago. 



136 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28 



[450] Lettre du R. P. Jogues au R. P. Andre 

Castillon, de la Compagnie 

de Jesus. 

Montr6al ce 12 septembre 1646. 

MON R. PERE, 
P. C. 

J ai re$u celle qu il a plu a votre R. de 
m escrire; elle nous oblige de vous mander quelque 
chose de notre nouvelle France et nomme ment de ce 
qui me concerne en parti culier. 

J ai passe* 1 hyver a Montreal avec le P. Le Jeune; 
a la demy-may, je partis des trois Rivieres en compa- 
gnie de M. Bourdon ingenieur de la Nouvelle- France, 
pour faire un voyage aux Iroquois, desquels nous 
retournames en bonne sante" au commencement de 
Juillet. Mons. notre Gouverneur fut bien aise qu il 
m accompagnast affin qu il connust le pays; nous 
fismes une carte assez exacte de ces centre" es, 1 et fus- 
mes bien re9us tant des Hollandais par lesquels nous 
passames que par les sauvages. Les principaux des 
Europeans ny estoient pas, estant allez ^ 1 autre habi 
tation qui est vers la mer et qui est la principale pour 
les affaires. Nous ne manquames pas d exercice en 
ce voyage tant sur 1 eau que sur terre; nous fismes 
pour le moins 100 lieues a pied et pour 1 ordinaire 
bien charges. Je baptizai dans le bourg ou nous de- 
meurasmes quelques jours, quelques enfants malades 

1 Nous n avons pu retrouver cette carte. 



1645-46] JOGUES TO CASTILLON 137 



[450] Letter from the Rev. Father Jogues to the 

Rev. Father Andre Castillon, of 

the Society of Jesus. 

Montreal, this I2th of September, 1646. 

MY REVEREND FATHER, 
Pax Christi. 

I have received what it has pleased your 
Reverence to write me. It obliges us to give you 
some information of our new France, and especially 
of what concerns me in particular. 

I passed the winter at Montreal with Father Le 
Jeune. In the middle of May, I departed from three 
Rivers in company with Monsieur Bourdon, engineer 
of New France, 11 to make a journey to the Iroquois, 
from which we returned in good health at the begin 
ning of July. Monsieur our Governor was very glad 
to have him accompany me, that he might become 
acquainted with the country. We made a tolerably 
accurate map of these regions,* and were well re 
ceived both by the Dutch, through whose territory 
we passed, and by the savages. The principal Euro 
peans were not there, having gone to the other 
settlement, which is toward the sea, and is the chief 
one for business. We did not lack exercise in this 
journey, either on water or on land ; we made at least 
100 leagues on foot, and were usually well laden. I 
baptized, in the village where we remained a few 
days, some sick children who, as I believe, are now 

* We have not been able to find this map. [Rochemonteix.] 



138 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [ VOL. 28 

qui sont maintenant devant Dieu, comme je crois; je 
confessai des chrestiens Hurons qui y estoient, nous 
fismes des presens et en resumes de re"ciproques. Je 
suis sur le point d y retourner pour y passer 1 hyver, 
et ne revenir, sije ny [451] meurs, qu au mois de juin 
de Tan prochain; 1 affaire se traite maintenant aux 
3 rivieres, que si on ne m y envoyait pas maintenant, 
ce seroit, Dieu aydant, pour le printemps. Mais je 
voys les affaires bien disposees pour partir bientot et 
notre R. P. Superieur y est bien port6 ; il n y a que 
mes lachete s et mes miseres qui forment de puissants 
obstacles au dessein que Dieu a dessus moy et sur ce 
pays. Priez le, mon R. P., qu il me fasse selon ce 
qu il d6sire, et que je sois un homme selon son cceur, 
det mihi dominus latitudinem cordis sicut arenam qua est 
in littore marts. Qu il 61argisse un peu mon pauvre 
coeur qui est si 6troit, et que par 1 experience du 
pass6 et des profusions de ses bonte"s et mis6ricordes 
dessus moi, j apprenne a me confier totalement en 
luy, estant tres assure qu il ne se retirera pas pour 
me laisser tomber, quand je me jetterai amoureuse- 
ment dans les bras de sa divine et paternelle provi 
dence. N. S. nous a fait un beau present que la 
paix; priez sa divine bonte" qui nous 1 a faite, qu elle 
continue, car c est d elle que nous en esperons 1 a- 
chevement. Cette paix jointe a la traitte que le pays 
a maintenant, fait qu il change de face notablement, 
qu il croit en nombre d habitants et que tout s ad- 
doucit. II ne paroist plus si rude qu auparavant et 
on connoit par experience qu il peust porter de bons 
bleds et autres commodite s pour la vie, principale- 
ment cet endroit de Montreal ou nous sommes, qui 
est bien plus doux et tempere" que Quebec ; aussi est- 



1645-46] JO CUES TO CASTILLON 139 

with God. I confessed some Huron Christians who 
were there, to whom we made presents and received 
some in return. I am about to go back there to pass 
the winter, and not to return, unless I [45 1] die there, 
until the month of June next year. The matter is 
now being- discussed at 3 rivers ; they think that, if I 
am not sent there now, I shall be, God helping, in 
the spring. But I see considerable preparations made 
for an early departure, and our Reverend Father Su 
perior is favorably inclined to it. It is only my own 
cowardice and bodily weakness which form powerful 
obstacles to the designs God has for me and for this 
country. Pray him, my Reverend Father, that he 
will make of me what he desires, and that I may be a 
man after his own heart, det mihi dominus latitudinem 
cordis sicut arenam qua est in littore marts. Would 
that he would somewhat enlarge my poor heart, 
which is so narrow ; and that by the experience of 
the past, and by the abundance of his goodness and 
mercy toward me, I may learn to trust myself entire 
ly to him, being very sure that he will not draw back 
and let me fall, when I shall cast myself lovingly 
into the arms of his divine and paternal providence. 
Our Lord has made us a noble gift in giving us 
peace; pray his divine goodness, which has given it 
to us, that it may continue, for it is from this good 
ness that we shall hope for the fulfillment of this 
prayer. This peace, together with the trade which 
the country now has, causes a notable change in its 
appearance, an increase in the number of inhabitants, 
and greater comfort in all respects. The country 
no longer seems as rough as before; and we know 
through experience that it can produce good wheat 
and other necessaries of life, especially this locality 



140 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

il an milieu du temperament, savoir est k 45 degre"s. 
Plus^de 80 canots hurons viennent de descendre avec 
quantity de pelleteries, ce qui fait esperer une anne"e 
encore meilleure que la precedente qui estoit fort 
bonne. Je ne sais pas si cela ne donnera pas dans la 
veiie de Messieurs de la Compagnie, qui & peine 
pouvoient-ils fournir aux embarquements, quand ils 
avoient la traitte. C est un bon rencontre que Dieu 
a donne la paix dans ce changement qui est fort 
avantageux pour le pays. Dieu la fasse croistre en 
be"ne" dictions spirituelles encore plus qu en tempo- 
relies et si Magnificat quietem, magnificet et latittam, 
mais principalement qu il r6pande une abondance de 
son Saint- Esprit sur ceux qui travaillent au spirituel 
de ces contre*es. C est ce dont je supplie V. R. de 
prier N. S., et de vous souvenir nommement a 1 au- 
tel d un pauvre prestre, qui est ^ la veillej d estre 8 
ou 9 mois sans sacrifice. Ce me sera un surcroit 
d obligation de luy estre plus que [452] jamais, mon 
R. Pere, son tres humble et obe"issant serviteur selon 

Dieu. 

Is. JOGUES. 

A Montreal ce 12 sept. 1646. 

Je partirai dans 2 ou 3 jours pour le voyage des 

Iroquois. 

Encore pour vie tout en N. S. 

21 sept, aux 3 Rivieres. 



1645-46] JOGUES TO CASTILLON 141 

of Montreal, where we are, which is much milder 
and more temperate than Quebec ; besides it is in a 
middle latitude, namely, 4$ degrees. More than 80 
huron canoes have just come down bearing a quan 
tity of skins, which gives hopes of a still better year 
than the preceding one, which was very good. I do 
not know whether this will catch the eyes of the 
Gentlemen of the Company, who could scarcely fur 
nish shipping when they had the trade. It is a for 
tunate occurrence that God has bestowed the peace 
with this change, which is very advantageous to the 
country. May God make it grow in spiritual bless 
ings even more than in temporal, and if Magnificat 
quietem, magnificet et l&titiam; but principally may 
he bestow an abundance of his Holy Spirit upon those 
who labor for the spiritual interests of these coun 
tries. It is this for which I beg Your Reverence to 
entreat Our Lord, and especially to remember at the 
altar a poor priest, who is about to remain 8 or 9 
months without mass. It will be to me an increase 
of obligation to be, more than [452] ever, my Rev 
erend Father, your very humble and obedient servant 
in God, 

ISAAC JOGUES. 
Montreal, this I2th of September, 1646. 

I shall depart in 2 or 3 days for the Iroquois jour 
ney. 

Still, for life, all in Our Lord. 

September 21, at 3 Rivers. 



142 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28 



Journal des Peres Jesuites, en 1 annee 

1646. 



O 



IANUIER 1646. 

salua Mons r . le Gouuerneur scauoir 
la soldatesque auec leur arquebuse, Ite 
les Habitans en corps : il nvf preuint 
& estoit icy a 7. h. pour saluer tous nos pp. 
qu il demanda les vns apres les autres: ie 
Extremes Talle" saluer apres la grande messe : (vne autre 

fois il le faut preuenir) Mons r . giffar aussy nvf 
vint voir & les religieuses enuoyerent les 
lettres de grand matin p r . faire leur Compli 
ment; & les Vrsulines force belles estreines 
auec bougies, chapelets, crucifix &c. & sur le 
disner deux belles pieces de tourtiere. Ie 
leur enuoye deux Images de S 1 . Ignace & de 
S 1 . fr. Xauier en email : on donna a Mons r . 
Giffar vn liure du p. bonnet de la vie de fire 
Seign r . a Mons r . des Chastelets, vn des petits 
tomes de Drexellivf de ^Eternit e . a Mons r . 
bourdon vne lunette de galilee ou il y auoit 
vne boussole, & a d autres des reliquaires 
Chapelets Medailles Images &c. on donna vn 
Crucifix a celle qui blanchit le linge de 1 E- 
glise. 4. mouchoirs a la femme d Abraha & 
a luy vne bouteille d eau de vie & a d autres 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 143 



Journal of the Jesuit Fathers, in the year 

1646. 

JANUARY, 1646. 

THEY saluted Monsieur the Governor, 
to wit, the soldiery with their arque 
buses; Item, the Habitans in a body. 
He forestalled us, and was here at 7 o clock 
to greet all our fathers, for whom he inquired, 
one after another; I went to greet him after 
high mass; (another time we must anticipate New-year s gifts. 
him). Monsieur giffar also came to see us, and 
the nuns sent letters early in the morning, to 
offer their Compliments. The Ursulines also 
sent many beautiful New-year s gifts, with 
tapers, rosaries, crucifix, etc. ; and, toward 
the dinner, two handsome pieces of pastry. I 
sent them two Images of St. Ignace and 
St. franois Xavier in enamel. We gave 
Monsieur Giffar a book of father bonnet s 
about the life of our Lord; to Monsieur des 
Chastelets one of the little volumes of Drexel- 
lius de ALternitate; 12 to Monsieur bourdon a 
galilean telescope, 13 in which there was a com 
pass; and to others, reliquaries, Rosaries, 
Medals, Images, etc. We gave a Crucifix to 
the woman who washes the Church linen; 4 
handkerchiefs to the wife of Abraham, 14 and 
to him a bottle of brandy ; and to others some 
little books of devotion : two handkerchiefs to 



144 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28 

quelques liurets de deuoon, deux mouchoirs 
a robert hache & puis deux autres qu il de- 
manda. le fus voir M. giffar, M. Couillar, & 
Madatnoys. de repentigny. les Vrsulines 
m enuoyerent prier que ie les allassent voir 
deuant la fin de la lourne e, i y a!16 & salue" 
aussy Mad. de la pelleterie qui enuoya Es- 
treines ie pense obmettre cela & il n est pas a 
propos de 1 obmettre. Ie ne donne rien le 
soir d auparauant aux Litanies, mais le lour 
ie donne" a nos pp & ff. ce que ie peus, & ce 
que ie pense leur pouuoir estre aggreable. 
I auois donne au p. de Quen auparauant p r . 
Sillery tout ce qu il iugea a propos de ce que 
i auois en ma chambre particul. p r . le p. masse. 

Deudons extraordin. Pour entretenir la deuoon le reste de 1 hy- 
Saluts des jeudys. uer Qn declara que les saluts du gt&gt; Sacrement 
&*c 

se feroient le leudy a la paroisse, & les festes 

& Dimanches aux maisons religieuses entre 
quatre & cinq: outre la deuoon ordinaire des 
Samedys a la paroisse ; depuis Noel iusques a 
la purificaon les Vrsulines faisoient le salut a 
la Cresche. 
present de mr. le le 3. ou quatre de lanuier M. le Gouuerneur 

gouuemr. enuoya 3. chapons & 6. pigeons. 

Traitemt. des MM. le 5. au soir M. Giffar donna vne bouteille 
hospital. d hypocras, les M. hospitalieres vn gasteau 

& 6 Chandeles de Cire & le lendemain elles 
enuoyerent vn beau disner. 
lour des roys. le 6 lour des roys il n y eut point de pain 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 145 

robert hache and then two more that he asked 
for. I went to see Monsieur giffar, Monsieur 
Couillar, and Madamoyselle de repentigny. 
The Ursulines sent to beg that I would go to 
see them before the end of the Day; I went 
thither and also greeted Madame de la pelle- 
terie, who sent New-year s gifts: I came near 
omitting that, and it is not proper to omit it. 
I gave nothing the evening beforehand, at 
the Litany ; but on the Day itself I gave to 
our fathers and brethren what I could, and 
what I thought might be agreeable to them. 
I had previously given father de Quen for Sil- 
lery everything that he judged suitable, from 
what I had in my private room, for father 
masse. 

To maintain devotion during the remainder Devotions extraordi- 
of the winter, it was declared that the bene- nary. 

dictions of the Blessed Sacrament should be Thursd &lt;*y benedic- 

, tions, etc. 

on Thursday at the parish church, and on 

feasts and Sundays at the religious houses, 
between four and five, besides the ordinary 
Saturday devotion at the parish church. From 
Christmas until the purification, the Ursu 
lines made the benediction before the Manger. 

On the 3rd or fourth of January, Monsieur Present from mon- 
the Governor sent 3 capons and 6 pigeons. sieur the governor. 

At evening on the 5th, Monsieur Giffar gave Entertainment from 
a bottle of hippocras; the hospital Mothers, a the hospital Mothers. 
cake and 6 Wax Candles ; and the next day 
they sent a fine dinner. 

On the 6th, the Day of the kings, there Epiphany. 

was no bread consecrated, and not until the 
Sunday following. The two churchwardens 



146 



LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



Nouuelles des habi- 
taons d en haut 



benit, mais seulem 1 . le Dimanche d apres, 
tous les deux marguillers le firent ensemble, 
scauoir M. des Chastelets & M. Giffar; & puis 
on le donna a M. Maheu la plvf proche mai- 
son sur le Costeau de S 1 . geneuieue p r . conti- 
nuer. 

le 8 arriua vn Huron nomm6 Tandihetsi 
des 3. riu. qui apporta lettres de Montreal de 
richelieu & des 3. riuieres qui contenoient en 
substance qu a Montreal tout se portoit bien, 
& qu il y auoit quatre Cabanes de sauuages. 
qu aux 3. riu. il y en auoit 12. mais que le 
meslange des fideles auec des Infideles & 
Apostats y estoit tousiours fascheux: que les 
Anniehronons qui y estoient en estoient partis 
p r . s en retourner; qu ils auoient este poursui- 
uis par Vn Algonquain enyure deau de vie 
dont ceux qui 1 auoient traite"e auoient este" 
mis a de grosses amendes, qu on n auoit pu 
empescher que 1 yurongne ne donnast vn coup 
de baston a vn Annieronon, qui s en plei- 
gnist encores en partant, les Algonq. les vou- 
loient retenir par force iusques au retour de 
Cousture, mais nos PP. 1 empescherent disant 
qu ils n estoient point captifs mais libres, & 
que le traite" de paix ne paroissoit point en 
cores rompu vn d entr eux resta qui deuint 
comme possede a ce que 1 on disoit. 

Ce huron Tandihetsi ne vint pas expres p r . 
d* Importance, qui appor ter des lettres, mais p r . inuiter Atironta 

aboutit a rien. , 

qui hyuernoit icy & estoit loge a 1 hospital, 



bruit &lt;Sr* conseil 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



147 



settlements. 



prepared it together, to wit, Monsieur des 
Chastelets and Monsieur Giffar; and then 
they gave it to Monsieur Maheu, the nearest 
house on the Costeau de St. gene vie ve, 15 to 
proceed with it thence. 

On the 8th, a Huron named Tandihetsi ar- News from the upper 
rived from 3 rivers ; he brought letters from 
Montreal, from richelieu and from 3 rivers, 
which contained, in substance, that all was 
well at Montreal, and that four Cabins of sav 
ages were there ; that at 3 rivers there were 
12 of these, but that the mingling of the faith 
ful with Infidels and Apostates there was 
always injurious. They informed us that 
the Anniehronons who were there had gone 
away, to return home; that they had been 
pursued by An Algonquain, drunken with 
brandy for which those who had supplied it 
to him had been heavily fined ; that they had 
not been able to prevent the drunken man 
from dealing a blow with a club to an Annie- 
ronon, who still complained of it on going 
away. The Algonquains wished to detain him 
forcibly until Cousture s return, but our Fa 
thers prevented this, saying that these were 
not captives, but free ; and that the treaty of 
peace was apparently not yet broken. One 
of them stayed behind, and became like one 
possessed, according to what they said. 

This huron Tandihetsi did not come ex 
pressly to bring letters, but to invite Atiron- 
ta, who was wintering here, and was lodged 
at the hospital, to come to the Council at 3 
rivers, on the part of Annerahwy and of 



Important rumor 

and council, which 

ends in nothing. 



148 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

de venir au Conseil aux 3 riu. de la part d An- 
nerahHy & de ceux de sa nation parens d A- 
tironta ou des Arendaer. le suiet du Conseil 
fut publi6 par touts les Algonq. & estoit tel ; 
les Annier. au nombre de 3. ou 4. s en retour- 
nant parlerent en confiance a Tandihetsi qui 
les accompagnoit, & luy dirent le secret de 
leur pays scauoir qu on n y vouloit point de 
paix auec les Aticha^ata, si bien auec les Hu- 
rons & les frangois ; que les francois y auoient 
consenti, & qu en suite on n atendoit plvf que 
1 occasion d exterminer les Atichatfata, & que 
300. Annier. pouroient bien venir a la my- 
febur. p r . 1 execuon de ce dessein. 

Tandihetsi ayant quitte les Annier. a riche- 
lieu poursuit son chemin iusques a Montreal, 
& donne aduis de cecy a Annerahtfy qui vint 
aux 3. riu. & deputa celuy-cy p r . venir querir 
Atironta. 

le mesme Tandihetsi adioustoit que M. de 
la poterie ayant entendu la Confirmaon de cela 
par 1 Annier. qui restoit aux 3. riu. il auoit 
assemble le Conseil des Algonq. qui sont la, 
& leur auoit declare" le tout affin qu ils pris- 
sent garde a leurs affaires ; ce qui estoit admi 
rable la dedans estoit que nos PP. ne nvf 
mandoient rien de tout cela. 

Mais le plvf considerable estoit qu erat 
fundamentu in re : Vbi enim ista a nobis s 1 . 
relata a me silicet & P. de Quen, D. Guberna- 
tori, ipse nobis totu negotiu aperuit, scilicet 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 149 

those of his nation who were kinsmen of Ati- 
ronta or of the Arendaeronons. The reason 
for the Council was published by all the Al- 
gonquains, and was as follows : the Anniero- 
nons, to the number of 3 or 4, while return 
ing, spoke in confidence to Tandihetsi, who 
was accompanying them, and told him the 
secret of their country, to wit, that no peace 
was desired with the Atichawata, but it was 
desired with the Hurons and the french ; that 
the french had consented thereto, and that 
consequently nothing but the opportunity 
was now awaited for exterminating the Ati 
chawata, and that 300 Annieronons could 
certainly come by the middle of february for 
the execution of this plan. 

Tandihetsi, having left the Annieronons at 
richelieu, continued his way as far as Mont 
real, and gave notice of this to Annerahwy, 
who came to 3 rivers, and commissioned this 
man to come in quest of Atironta. 

The same Tandihetsi added that Monsieur 
de la poterie, having heard a Confirmation of 
that through the Annieronon who remained 
at 3 rivers, had assembled the Council of the 
Algonquains who are there, and had declared 
to them the whole matter, to the end that 
they should look to their affairs. What was 
surprising therein was that our Fathers sent 
us no word of all that. 

But the most important was that, erat 

fundamentum in re: Ubi enim ista a nobis sunt 

relata, a me scilicet et Patre de Quen, Domino 

Gubernatori, ipse nobis totum negotium aperuit, 



150 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28 

superior! aestate du venere legati Annier. cu 
Cousture tractaturi de pace, cu pala multa 
dixissent & fecissent, petierunt dux sell. eor m 
cognominatus le crochet vt singular! congressu 
sib! liceret D. gub m . alloqui; habebat insig- 
ne munvf faciendu D. Gubernat 1 . vt pro se 
ttum. & pro Huronib. pace vellet, Algonq 08 . 
in medio relinqueret : hsec vbi resciuit Onon- 
tio ne videre quide voluit tale munvf nee passvf 
e extrahi, & dixit re non es possibile: gra- 
uiter tulit hanc repulsa le crochet, & pax ex 
inde visa e nutare, haec vbi vidit D. gub. & P. 
Vimont sup. & p. le leune censuerunt rem 
mitiganda, & 2. priuato congressu in quo 
sicut & in priori erant ttm. d. gub. le Crochet 
& Cousture, dixit d. gub. duo es Algonq. g ra . 
Vnu simile nobis Xstiani intelligebantur ; 
alteru dissimile; sine priorib. nobis certu es 
pace non facere: de posteriorib. ipsos es d nos 
suaru actionu, nee nobis ita esse coniunctos 
sicut & priores: vt dictu a d no Gub r . Ita & 
forte peiori raoe [i.e., ratione] relatu suis a 
legato, qd. ab oib. Annier. in sua patria rescitu 
ab his exeuntib. propalatu e; sed merito a 
gallis negatu e. 

depart d Atironta Atironta partit d icy le 12. de lanu. & s en 

alia auec Acharo & Tandihetsi, il laissa sa 
femme & son fils a 1 hospital, il fut equipp6 
de toute piece luy & laques ils eurent cha- 
qu vn vn Tapabor, des raquettes, victuailles, 
&c partie du magasin partie de 1 hospital &c. 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 151 

scilicet: superiori testate, dum venere legati An- 
nieronenses cum Cousture tractaturi de pace, cum 
palam multa dixissent et fecissent, petierunt, dux 
scilicet eorum cognominatus " le crochet," ut sin- 
gulari congressu sibi liceret Dominum guberna- 
torem alloqui; habebat insigne munus faciendum, 
Domino Gubernatori, ut pro se tantum et pro 
Huronibus pacem vellet, Algonquinos in media 
relinqueret. Hcec ubi rescivit Onontio, ne videre 
quidem voluit tale munus, nee passus est extrahi, 
et dixit rem non esse possibilem. Graviter tulit 
hanc repulsam le crochet, et pax ex inde visa est 
nutare. Hcsc ubi vidit Dominus gubernator, et 
Pater Vimont, superior, et pater le Jeune, censue- 
runt rem mitigandam; et 2do private congressu, in 
quo sicut et in priori erant tantum dominus guber 
nator, le Crochet, et Cousture, dixit dominus guber 
nator duo esse Algonquinorum genera, Unum 
simile nobis, Christiani intelligebantur; alterum 
dissimile. Sine prior ibus nobis certum esse pacem 
non facere; de posterioribus ipsos esse dominos sua- 
rum actionum, nee nobis ita esse conjunctos sicut et 
priores. Ut dictum a domino Gubernatore Ita 
et forte pejori ratione relatum suis a legato; quod 
ab omnibus Annieronensibus in sua patria rescitum 
ab his exeuntibus propalatum est, sed merito a 
gallis negatum est. 16 

Atironta left here on the 1 2th of January, Departure of 
and went away with Acharo and Tandihetsi; Atironta. 

he left his wife and his son at the hospital. 
He was equipped with every requisite; he 
and Jaques each had a Storm-cap, snowshoes, 
victuals, etc., partly from the warehouse, 
partly from the hospital, etc. 



152 



LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



I Annier. demande 
de s en aller. 



Enfant Estouffe 



sauuages vont a la 
chasse. 



Nouueaute touchant 
le pain benit 



En ce mesme temps 1 Annierohron qui 
restoit demanda son conge, il hiy auoit este 
donne p r . s en retourner a son pays auec son 
compagnon des 3. riu. qui le demandoit p r . s en 
retourner de Compagnie, mais le p. de Quen 
ayant donne" aduis que les Algonq. de Sillery 
estoient p r . luy ioiier vn mauuais tour passant 
par leur quartier, M. le Gouu. trouua bon de 
1 arrester & il fut remis ou magazin p r . y de- 
meurer la compagnie de la femme d Atironta 
a 1 hospital ne pouuant estre que dangereuse. 

La nuit du 10. ou n.de lanuier fut estouffe 
dans le lict vn petit enfant de 4. moys fils de 
la niepce de Mathurin gangnon. 

depuis le 15. iusques au 21. les sauuages 
partirent p r . s en aller a la chasse resterent a 
Sillery enuiron 22. sauuages; que 1 hospital & 
nvf PP. entreprirent d assister, ils demeure- 
rent partie proche de 1 hospital partie a Sille 
ry, & furent assistes de plusieurs endroits 
mais sur tout de Sillery & de 1 hospital. 

le Dimanche deuant la ;g e . Madame Marso- 
let deuant faire le pain benit desira le presen 
ter auec le plvf d apareil qu elle pouroit; elle 
y fit mettre vne toilete, vne couronne de bouil 
lons de gaze ou de linge a 1 entour, elle desi- 
roit y mettre des cierges & des quarts d escvf 
aux Cierges au lieu d escu d or qu elle eut 
bien desir6 y mettre, mais voyant qu on ne 
luy vouloit point permettre, elle ne laissa pas 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



153 



At this same time, the Annierohron who 
stayed behind asked for his dismissal ; it had 
been granted him, in order to return to his 
own country with his companion of 3 rivers, 
who also asked leave to go, that they might 
return in Company. But father de Quen 
having given notice that the Algonquains of 
Sillery were intending to play him an evil trick, 
while passing through their district Mon 
sieur the Governor found it desirable to stop 
him, and he was sent back to the warehouse 
to remain there, as the company of Atironta s 
wife at the hospital could only be dangerous. 

In the night of the loth or nth of Janu 
ary, a little child of 4 months was smothered 
in bed, a son of Mathurin gangnon s niece. 17 

From the igtli to the 2ist, the savages de 
parted to go to the chase ; there remained at Sil 
lery about 22 savages, whom the hospital and 
our Fathers undertook to assist. They lived 
partly near the hospital, partly at Sillery, and 
were assisted from several quarters, but es 
pecially from Sillery and from the hospital. 

On the Sunday before Septuagesima, Ma 
dame Marsolet, having to prepare bread for 
consecration, desired to present it with the 
greatest possible display ; she had it furnished 
with a toilet, a crown of gauze or linen puffs 
around it. She wished to add candles, and 
quarter-e"cus at the Tapers, instead of the 
gold e"cus pieces which she would indeed 
have desired to place thereon ; but seeing that 
we were not willing to allow her this, she 
nevertheless had it carried with the toilet and 



The Annieronon asks 
to go away. 



Child Smothered. 



Savages go to the 
chase. 



Innovations regard 
ing the consecrated 
bread. 



154 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28 



Pierre boucher. 



uoiage du p. de Quen 
chez M. de Chauigny. 



retour d A tironta 



commencemt. de re- 

muement entre les 

habitans. 



de le faire porter auec la toilete & la Coronne 
de bouillons ; mais deuant que le benir ie fis 
tout oster & le benis auec la tnesme simplicite 
que i auois fait les precedens & particul. celuy 
de M. le Gouuerneur, crainte que ce change- 
m*. n aportast de la lalousie & de la Vanite". 

le 23. arriua Pierre boucher, & Toupin son 
beau frere, auec vn Annier. des 3. riu. qui 
venoit voir son compagnon & le venoit querir ; 
ils aporterent lettres & Confirmoient que tout 
ce qu auoit dit le Huron Tandihetsi estoit 
faux au moins p r . la plvf part. 

le 25. partit le P. de Quenp r . aller chez M. 
de Chauigny a 1 occasion de son seruit r . ma- 
lade; & en outre p r . leur faire gangner le 
Iubil6 & assister spirituellem 1 . la famille ; ro- 
bert hache accompagna le pere, & vn Chirur- 
gien & deux autres soldats y allerent aussy de 
Comp ie . 

le 27. retourna Atironta & Acharo: le 
Conseil p r . lequel il estoit all 6 aboutit a rien, 
chaqu vn nioit auoir este autheur des bruits & 
en reiettoient la faute sur son Compagnon 

le dernier de lanuier retourna le p. de Quen, 
qui raporta p r . nouuelle que M. de Chauigny 
auoit pense mourir aussy bien que son serui- 
teur a son retour d icy a faute d auoir assez 
de monde p r . trainer sa traisne. 

Sur la fin de ce moys les petits habitans 
sembloient se vouloir mutiner centre ceux qui 
auoient les charges & offices; on tenoit M. 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 155 

the Crown of puffs. However, before conse 
crating it, I had all that removed, and blessed 
it with the same simplicity that I had observed 
with the preceding portions, especially with that 
of Monsieur the Governor, fearing lest this 
change might occasion Jealousy and Vanity. 

On the 23rd, Pierre boucher arrived, and Pierre bouc her. 
Toupin his brother-in-law, also an Anniero- 
non from 3 rivers, who came to see his com 
panion and take him away. They brought 
letters and Confirmed the idea that everything 
which the Huron Tandihetsi had said was 
false, at least, in the main. 

On the 25th, Father de Quen set out to go Father de Quen s 
to Monsieur de Chavigny s, on account of his J ourne y to Monsieur 
sick servant, and, besides, to have them gain de Cha&lt;vi S n y s - 
the Jubilee, and to be of spiritual assistance 
to the family ; robert hache accompanied the 
father, and a Surgeon and two others, sol 
diers, also went thither in their Company. 

On the 27th, Atironta and Acharo returned ; Atlanta s return. 
the Council, for the sake of which he had 
gone, ended in nothing ; each one denied hav 
ing been the author of the rumors, and cast 
back the blame upon his Companion. 

On the last of January, father de Quen 
returned; he reported, by way of news, that 
Monsieur de Chavigny, as well as his servant, 
had come near dying upon his return from 
here, for want of having enough people to 
draw his sledge. 

Toward the end of this month, the petty Beginning of a dis- 
habitans seemed disposed to rebel against turbance among the 
those who had the public duties and offices ; habitant. 



156 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

Mar sole t et Maheu. Marsolet & surtout la femme & M. Maheu 

autheurs de cela; le tout fut apaise" par M. le 
Gouuerneur ; ces mentis habitans auoient tort, 
n y ayant aucun fondement raisonable en leur 
pleinte: ils disoient que M. des Chastelets 
commis g nal faisoit trop bonne cheire &c. Vn 
leune homme de chez M. le Gouuerneur nom- 
me M. robineau se porta p r . les mescontens; 
de la vinrent bien des peines & des paroles & 
des mescotentemens on fit des pasqttains: 
Mons r . le Gouuerneur ayant fait punion des 
coulpables, tout fut apais6. 

FEBURIER. 1646. 

A la purificaon on disposa trois pains de 
bougie en 115. pieces qui f urent benistes auec 
6. chandeles de Cire, & deux cierges; des 
deux Cierges vn seruit p r . le prestre qui disoit 
la messe, 1 autre fut porte* par vn de nos ff . en 
surplis a M r . le Gouuerneur a sa place & apres 
que ce frere & vn autre de nos ff qui seruoit 
aussy en surplis auec luy eurent pris deux des 
chandeles de cire selon les ceremonies des 
rubriques; apres done le Cierge presente* a M. 
le Gouuerneur on donna a celuy qui distribue 
le pain beny, vn petit panier ou estoient les 
115. pieces qui f urent distributes a tout le 
monde qui estoit la; il n y en eut pas assez, 
mais cela fut fort aprouu6 & alia bien; on les 
auertit apres la benediction chantee d estein- 



feste de la Chande- 
leur. 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. jASUITES 157 

Monsieur Marsolet, and especially his wife, MarsoletandMaheu. 
and Monsieur Maheu were accounted the 
authors of that; but the whole trouble was 
quieted by Monsieur the Governor. These 
paltry habitans were in the wrong, having no 
reasonable foundation for their complaint; 
they said that Monsieur des Chastelets, gen 
eral agent, was living too high, etc. A 
Young man from Monsieur the Governor s 
house, named Monsieur robineau, was on the 
side of the malcontents, thence arose many 
difficulties, and offensive words, and dissatis 
factions; and pasquinades were composed. 
Monsieur the Governor having punished the 
guilty, everything became quiet. 

FEBRUARY, 1646. 

At the purification, we arranged three cakes Feast of Candlemas. 
of candle-wax in 115 pieces, which were con 
secrated with 6 Wax candles and two tapers. 
Of the two Tapers, one served for the priest 
who was saying mass; the other was borne 
by one of our brethren in surplice, in the 
priest s place, to Monsieur the Governor. 
After this brother and another of our breth 
ren, who also served in surplice with him, 
had taken two of the wax candles according to 
the ceremonies of the rubrics, and had pre 
sented the Taper to Monsieur the Governor, 
we gave to the one who distributes the conse 
crated bread a little basket, in which were 
the 1 1 5 pieces, which were distributed among 
all who were there. There were not enough 
of these pieces, but the proceeding was much 



158 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

dre leurs lumieres & les rallumer p r . 1 Euan- 
gile & p r . 1 Eleuaon iusques apres la Comion 
du prestre, ce que fut fait. II e necessaire de 
faire comme cela crainte de tomber dans les 
Intrigues des preseances & preferences. 

depart des Annie- le 3 e - s en retournerent les deux Annier. 

nomme"s 1 vn soentiakonk qui auoit este icy 
long temps selon qu il e marque cy dessus ; 
1 autre ho ( ou sta venu des 3. riu. depuis peu, 
qui estoit venu querir son Compagnon ils fai- 
soient estat de s en retourner aux 3. riu. mais 
on se doutit qu il dusse passer outre ; il y auoit 
long temps qui faisoient instance p r . s en re 
tourner, on eut bien de la peine de les arres 
ter iusques a ce lour qui partirent enfin bien 
aiuste s de tout; ils se pleignirent toutesfois 
qu on ne leur auoit point donne" de Cornier - 
tures; 1 vn & 1 autre firent les endiable"s p r . 
se faire donner leur conge, 1 vn aux 3. riu. 
1 autre icy. 

Attronta a la chasse. le 6. partit Atironta auec sa f emme & son 

petit mathieu & laques Acharo p r . la chasse, 
ils furent equipped de tout reuint le 16. 

saluts aux lours le ii. qui estoit le Dimanche gras on fut 
ras - aduerti de trois choses au prosne: la i re . qu il 

y auroit salut les 3. lours de Quaresme 
prenant: le Dimanche done a la paroisse fut 
expose le S*. Sacrem 1 . des le commencem 1 . de 
Vespre, & a Tissue on chanta Tantu ergo &c 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 159 

approved and went well. They were noti 
fied, after the benediction had been sung, to 
put out their lights, and to light them again 
for the Gospel and for the Elevation, until 
after the Communion of the priest, which 
was done. It is necessary to do thus, for fear 
of falling into the Complications of prece 
dences and preferences. 

On the 3rd, the two Annieronons returned Departure of the 
homeward, the one, named soentiakonk, Annieronons. 
who had been here for a long time, as was 
noted above; the other, ho ( ou sta, recently 
come from 3 rivers, who had come to seek 
his Companion. They were professing to 
return to 3 rivers, but it was suspected that 
they would pass beyond. For a long time 
they had been urging that they might return ; 
it was very difficult to detain them until this 
Day when they finally started, well furnished 
with everything; they nevertheless com 
plained that no Blankets had been given 
them. Both acted as if possessed, in order to 
procure their dismissal, the one at 3 rivers, 
the other here. 

On the 6th, Atironta left with his wife and Atironta goes hunt- 
his little mathieu, and Jaques Acharo, for the in s- 

chase: they were fully equipped; they came 
back on the i6th. 

On the nth, which was the Sunday before Benedictions on the 
Lent, three things were published at the shrove Days. 
sermon: ist, that there would be benediction 
on the 3 Days of Shrovetide. On Sunday, 
then, at the parish church the Blessed Sac 
rament was exposed at the beginning of 



160 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

& apres 1 oraison du S l . Sacrem 1 . quelques oral- 
sons de penitence & puis les ordinaires du S*. 
Esprit, In gratiaru actione, & pro deuotis ami- 
cis : le lendemain entre trois & quatre on fit 
le salut a 1 hospital les religieuses commence- 
rent le pange lingua & le magnificat & la 
paroisse disoit 1 autre verset, le magnificat fut 
chante en fauxbourdon cela reussit fort bien 
la paroisse chanta 1 Antienne o sacra &c le 
Mardy le mesme se fit aux Vrsulines excepte 
qu elles chanterent deuant le magnificat 1 An- 
tienne o sacra & nvf apres; pour signal de 
partir de sa maison on sonna le i er . coup du 
salut a la paroisse & le 2 on . aux maisons reli 
gieuses. le mardy nos pp. de Sillery vinrent 
disner auec nvf, la Iourne"e e bien pre. p r . les 
Inuiter. 

festes de deudon icy la 2. chose dont on aduertit fut que le mer- 

credy des cendres, il n y auoit point d obli- 
gaon de cesser le trauail, entendre la messe & 
prendre des cendres soubs peine de p. m. sed 
tantu sub veniali: & que tels lours comme 
encore celuy des morts le leudy Vendr. & 
samedy s 1 . estoient festes de deuoon iusques 
apres 1 office Vbi Consuetude aliud non In- 
duxit, nihil a. aliud hie induxit. 
Particularity es- La 3 e . fut de satisfaire a toutes les difficul- 

claircies p r . le leusne ,, , T ^ ~, 

du Quaresme. t6s sur le Ieusne du Quaresme ; ce qui se fit 

en lisant ce qu en a le petit bertaut. 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



161 



Vespers ; and at the end was sung the Tantum 
ergo, etc. ; and, after the prayer of the Blessed 
Sacrament, some penitential prayers, and then 
the usual prayers to the Holy Ghost, In grati- 
arum actionem, and pro devotis amicis. On the 
next day, between three and four, the bene 
diction was held at the hospital: the nuns 
began the pange lingua and the magnificat, and 
the parish said the other verse. The magni 
ficat was sung in faux-bourdon, that suc 
ceeded very well ; the parish sang the Anthem 
o sacrum, etc. On Tuesday, the same was 
done at the Ursulines , except that they sang 
before the magnificat, the Anthem o sacrum, 
and we after it. For signal to leave one s 
house, the ist stroke of the benediction was 
rung at the parish church, and the 2nd at 
the religious houses. On tuesday, our fathers 
at Sillery came to dine with us; the Day was 
very appropriate for Inviting them. 

The 2nd thing of which they were in 
formed was, that on ash Wednesday there 
was no obligation to cease from work, to hear 
mass, and to take ashes, under penalty of 
peccatum mortale, sed tantum sub veniali: and 
that such Days as also that of all souls, 
and Thursday, Friday, and Saturday in holy 
week were feasts of devotion until after the 
office, Ubi Consuetude aliud non Induxit, nihil 
autem aliud hie induxit. 

The 3rd was to satisfy all difficulties about 
Fasting in Lent, which was done by reading concerning the Lent- 
what the small manual of bertaut gives on 
this subject. 



Feasts of devotion 
down here. 



Details explained 



162 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

nouuelle de la mort Le 12. retournant du salut de 1 hospital, ie 
dup. Anne denote. fig rencontre de deux H urons venant des trois 

riuieres; qui rapportoient la nouuelle de la 
mort du p. Anne de noiie: il partit de 3. riu. p r . 
s en aller a richelieu consoler & assister spiri- 
tuellem 1 . la garnison le 30. de lanuier en 
compagnie de deux soldats & d vn Huron: ils 
coucherent a 6. lieiies au dessus des 3. riu. 
mais le P. voyant ses compagnons vn peu pe- 
sants & qui alloient difficilem 1 . a raquettes & 
partant qu ils [ne] pouroient y arriuer a temps 
les quitta apres la minuit pour faire venir au 
deuant d eux & les soulager de leur traisne & 
se mit en chemin a la liieur de la lune. mais 
coe il fut auance, le ciel se chargea & se mit a 
neiger, ce qui luy derobant la veiie des Isles 
& de tout il s esgara sans se pouuoir retrou- 
uer; ses compagnons qu il auoit laisse arriue s 
qu ils furent le i er . du moys de febur. a riche 
lieu furent bien estonne"s de n y point voir le 
Pere, on le suit a la piste de ses raquettes & 
en fin on le trouue quatre lieiies au dessvf de 
richelieu, a genoux dans vn creux de neige 
les bras en croix & les yeux esleues au Ciel, 
son chapeau & ses raquettes proche de luy : il 
fut ramene sur vne traisne par vn nomine Ca- 
ron, m re . valet p r . lors de richelieu qui 1 auoit 
este chercher auec deux Hurons qui se com- 
porterent dignem*. en cette occasion, le same- 
dy 3 e . de febur. & mene aux 3. riu. le 5. ou 



1645 -46J JOURNAL DES PP. J&SUITES 163 

On the 1 2th, while returning from the News of the death of 
benediction at the hospital, I met two Hurons father Anne de noue. 
coming from three rivers, who reported the 
news of the death of father Anne de none. He 
started from 3 rivers to go to richelieu, to 
console and spiritually assist the garrison, on 
the 3oth of January, in company with two 
soldiers and a Huron. They lay down for the 
night, 6 leagues above 3 rivers ; but the Fa 
ther, seeing that his companions were rather 
slow, and with difficulty making their way on 
snowshoes, and that, consequently, they could 
not reach their destination in time, left them 
after midnight, in order to send people to 
meet them and relieve them of their sledge ; 
and he set forth by the light of the moon. But, 
as he proceeded, the sky became overcast, 
and it began to snow ; this shutting out from 
his sight the Islands and all other objects, he 
went astray, without being able to recover his 
bearings. His companions whom he had left, 
having arrived at richelieu on the ist of the 
month of february, were much astonished not 
to see the Father there. They follow him 
by the trail of his snowshoes, and at last they 
find him, four leagues above richelieu, 
kneeling in a hollow of the snow, with his 
arms crossed and his eyes raised to Heaven, 
his hat and his snowshoes near him. He was 
brought back on a sledge by one Caron, 
master- valet at richelieu just then, who had 
gone to seek him on Saturday, the 3rd of 
february, with two Hurons, who conducted 
themselves worthily on that occasion, and 



lour des cendres. 



164 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

il arriua le 7. & fut enterre le tnesme lour au 
Cemetiere : 

cette nouuelle done estant arriues le lundy au 
Soir, le mardy nvf dismes nos Messes & a la 
fin vn De profundis: au Salut des Vrsulines 
vn De profundis aussy : 

le 14. lour des Cendres, on sonna trois 
coups p r . la grand Messe le i er . a 6. h. qui fut 
aussy le signal de la i er . Messe basse ou on fit 
la benediction des cendres more solito societ is . 
le dernier a 7. h. ; a Tissue de la grand messe 
apres la Conion on donna des Cendres. on 
auoit este" auerti qu elles ne se metroient ny 
sur les Calottes ny sur les Coeffes des femrnes 
mais qu il falloit presenter les cheueux, on y 
manqua, mais il e facile au prestre de supleer 
en les mettant dessoubs la Coiffe 

Le mesme lour des Cendres on aduertit que 
les mercredys il y auoit predicaon en Caresme 
aux Vrsulines & le Vendredy a 1 hospital, & 
ce sur les 7^ auec la messe en suite: que p r . 
ce lour la predicaon se seroit aux Vrsulines 
sur les 3. h. & qu en suite les religieuses 
selon leur deuoon diroient solemnellem*. les 

le pere denote par des morts & le i en demain vne haute 

les rehgteuses. 

messe de requiem p r . le p. de noiie ; elles desi- 
roient faire dauantage & entr autres de chan 
ter les Vigiles. mais ie ne voulus permettre 
sinon de les dire a voix basse ; le mesme fut 



predictions du 
Caresme 



Office des morts 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



165 



on the 5th was taken to 3 rivers, where he 
arrived on the 7th, and was buried the same 
Day in the Cemetery. 

This news, then, having arrived on monday 
Evening, on tuesday we said our Masses, and 
at the close a De profundis, also a De profun- 
dis during the Benediction at the Ursulines . 

On the 1 4th, Ash Wednesday, three strokes Ash Wednesday. 
were rung for high Mass, the ist at 6 
o clock, which was also the signal for the ist 
low Mass, at which the blessing of the ashes 
took place, more solito societatis; the last, at 7 
o clock; at the end of high mass, after the 
Communion, we gave Ashes. The people 
had been notified that these would be placed 
neither on the men s Caps nor on the wom 
en s Headdresses, but that it was necessary 
to present the hair; this was neglected, but 
it is easy for the priest to accomplish it by 
putting the ashes under the Headdress. 

On the same Ash Wednesday, notice was Lenten sermons. 
given that on Wednesdays there would be 
preaching in Lent at the Ursulines , and on 
Friday at the hospital, and this about ^ past 
7, with mass following; that for this Day the 
preaching would take place at the Ursulines , 
about 3 o clock, and that afterward the nuns, 
according to their devotion, would solemnly 
say the vespers of the dead, and the next day office of the dead for 
a requiem high mass for father de noiie. They father de none, by 
desired to do more, and, among other things, 
to sing the Vigils ; but I would not allow it, 
except to say these in a low tone. The same 
decision was made for the Hospital nuns. On 



the nuns. 



166 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



retour des Hurons 

aux 3. riu. &* leur 

recopece 



baterie 



lustice d -vn blas- 
phemateur. 



arreste" p r . les Hospitalieres. les lours sui- 
uans; sur la fin de la predicaon, il y eut quel- 
que petit bout d oraison funebre p r . le p. de 
noiie. le preschois ce Caresme aux Vrsulines 
les Mercredys & Dimanches, & le p. Vimont 
les Vendredys a 1 hospital & le p. Dendemare 
les Dim. 

Ce mesme lour repartirent les Hurons qui 
auoient aporte" les lettres de la mort du P. de 
noiie en compagnie de Pierre boucher, & Tou- 
pin & Gabr. du Clos : Tandihetsi eut vn tapa- 
bor tout neuf Atfenhas Catecumene de quoy 
faire vne paire de chauffes le tout donne" par 
les Vrsulines & en outre chaqu vn vn calumet 
d Estain: M. des chastelets Commis gnal au 
Magazin leur fournit leur viures. 

La nuit du Mardy gras au mercredy des 
Cendres quelques homines de 1 hospital estant 
venus visiter ceux de m. Couillar, vn de chez 
m. Couillar nomine" lean le blanc prit querelle 
auec vn de ceux de 1 hospital nomine" laques 
pairieu & apres quelques houspillades s estant 
separes, lean le blanc accourt apres Tautre & 
le pensa assommer sur la place a coups de bas- 
ton, il auoit plusieurs trous a la teste. il en 
garit, & lean le blanc condamne a la reparaon 
du Ciuil; & au Cheualet; 

le 1 5 . fut mis sur le Cheualet vn Domesti- 
que de M. Couillar blasphemateur public; il 
reconnut sa faute, 1 auoir bien merite, & vint 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 167 

the following Days, toward the end of the 
sermon, there was some little passage of 
funeral prayer for father de noiie. I preached, 
this Lent, to the Ursulines on Wednesdays 
and Sundays; and, at the hospital, father Vi- 
mont preached on Fridays, and father Dende- 
mare on Sundays. 

This same Day, the Hurons who had Return of the 
brought the letters concerning the death of Hurons to 3 rivers, 
Father de noiie departed in company with and their reward. 
Pierre boucher and Toupin, and Gabriel du 
Clos. 19 Tandihetsi had a brand-new storm- 
cap; Awenhas, a Catechumen, the materials 
for making a pair of breeches ; all was given 
by the Ursulines. Each one had, besides, a 
Pewter calumet ; and Monsieur des chastelets, 
general Agent at the Warehouse, furnished 
them their provisions. 

On the night of shrove Tuesday to Ash A fight. 

Wednesday, some men from the hospital hav 
ing come to visit those at monsieur Couil- 
lar s, one of monsieur Couillar s, named Jean 
le blanc, began to quarrel with one of those 
from the hospital, named Jaques pairieu. 
When they had been separated, after some 
grappling and struggling, Jean le blanc ran 
after the other, and came near beating him 
to death on the spot, with a club. Pairieu had 
several gashes on his head, but recovered 
from them ; and Jean le blanc was sentenced 
to make reparation, by the Civil authority, 
and to mount the Chevalet. 

On the i sth, a Domestic of Monsieur Couil- justice to a bias- 
lar s, a public blasphemer, was put on the phemer. 



168 



LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



Liberalites des reli- 
gieuses. 



itr. Dim. du 
Quaresme. 



presens de M le 
gouuern r . 



sauuages de Sillery. 



Xstiennot sort de noe 
seruice. 



retour de Cousture. 



de soy mesme se confesser le soir ou le lende- 
main. 

Pendant les lours gras les Vrsulines & par- 
ticul. 1 hospital nvf enuoyerent plusieurs fois 
des pieces de four Vin d Espagne &c. 

le i er . Dimanche de Quaresme fut publi6e 
1 Indulgence des stations de rome qu on pou- 
uoit gangner a 1 Eglise; & la copie des Indul 
gences de cette nature fut leiie & affigee. 

Simeon & la neigerie nos homines de Sille 
ry vinrent icy trauailler p r . nvf trois sepmaines 
durant ils s en retournerent le 10. de Mars. 
Mons r . le Gouuerneur enuoya pendant le 
Quaresme du poisson fraits enuiron deux fois 
la sepmaine; on luy enuoya deux fois plein 
vn pot de terre d oliues. 

les sauuages de Sillery abandonnerent leur 
maisons & toute la demeure des le commence- 
in 1 , du moys & s en vinrent demeurer asses 
proche de Quebek. 

Enuiron ce temps, Xstiennot Cuisinier aux 
3. riuieres quitta noe seruice & fut mis au 
fort, & a sa place le pere buteux Sup. aux 3. 
riu. choisit qui il voulut de ceux du fort. Ce 
Xstiennot fit tant du sol au fort qu on le mit 
sur le Cheualet ou il se rompit. 

1646. MARS. 

Le 10. arriua des trois riuieres vn fran9ois 
& vn Huron oatentak apportant lettres & 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. J&SUITES 169 

Chevalet. He acknowledged his fault, saying 
that he had well deserved punishment, and 
came of his own accord to confess, that even 
ing or the next day. 

During the shrove Days, the Ursulines, Liberalities of the 
and especially the hospital nuns, often sent nuns. 

us pastries, Spanish Wine, etc. 

On the ist Sunday in Lent was published ist Sunday in Lent. 
the Indulgence of the stations of rome, which 
one might gain at the Church ; and the copy 
of the Indulgences of this nature was read 
and posted. 

Simeon and la neigerie, our men at Sillery, 
came here to work for us during three weeks ; 
they returned on the loth of March. 

Monsieur the Governor sent fresh fish about Gifts of Monsieur the 
twice a week during Lent ; we twice sent him governor. 

an earthen jar full of olives. 

The savages of Sillery abandoned their Savages of Sillery. 
houses and the whole residence, at the begin 
ning of the month, and came to dwell quite 
near to Quebek. 

About this time, Chrestiennot, Cook at 3 Chrestiennot leaves 
rivers, left our service, and was put in the our service. 
fort ; and in his place father buteux, Superior 
at 3 rivers, chose one to his liking from those 
of the fort. This Chrestiennot acted at the 
fort as such a glutton, that he was put on the 
Chevalet, on which he was ruptured. 

1646, MARCH. 

On the loth, a frenchman and a Huron, Return of Cousture. 
oatentak, arrived from three rivers, bring 
ing letters and news of the return of Cous- 



170 



LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



depart a" Atironta 



Titulaire de la 

e de i 

tal. 



Oatentak 



Mort de Vincent 
sauuage. 



nouuelles du retour de Cousture auec 7. 
Annier. & les Hurons qui estoient partis d icy. 
ils apportoient force presens p r . la Confirmaon 
de la paix &c & entr autres vn desadueu 
manifeste des meurtres de 1 Automne fait 
par les Soriquois ou sokokiois. 

Le lendemain qui estoit Dimanche on 
exposa le S 1 . Sacrement au Commecem 1 . de 
vespres & dit on le Tantu ergo a la fin p r . le 
salut in gratiaru actione. 

le 13. partit Atironta & sa famille p r . 
s en retourner aux 3. riu. ils s en allerent 
charges de biens, ils receurent & donnerent 
contentem 1 . iusques au bout, on leur donna 
leur Viatique au magazin, & partout ailleurs 
force biens. 

le 1 6. fut beniste la chapelle de 1 hospital 
au sang du fils de Dieu par le p. Vimont, le 
samedy fut posee la pierre de marbre au 
dessus de la porte qui en contient 1 escriteau; 
& le Dimache de la passion choisy p r . la feste 
de la dedicace ou Titulaire : on y alia apres 
Vespres dire vn salut de la passion : vexilla, 
Antiph. festi Exalt, magnificat, Aue regina &c. 

Ce mesme iour partit oatentak & le fran9ois 
qui auoient apport6 les nouuelles cy dessvf ; 
oatentak quitta le frangois a Sillery. 

le 14. mourut sainctem 1 . Vincent le sauuage 
qui en 1 Automne auoit este" surpris par les 
Souriquois & Iaiss6 pour mort en mesme temps 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



171 



Departure of 
A fir on fa. 



ture, with 7 Annieronons and the Hurons 
who had gone hence. They brought many 
gifts for the Confirmation of the peace, etc., 
and, among others, an explicit disavowal of 
the murders in the Autumn, perpetrated by 
the Soriquois or the sokokiois. 

The next day, which was Sunday, we ex 
posed the Blessed Sacrament at the Begin 
ning of vespers and said the Tantum ergo at 
the close, for the benediction in gratiarum 
actionem. 

On the 1 3th, Atironta and his family went 
away, to return to 3 rivers. They went 
away laden with goods; they received and 
gave satisfaction even to the end. Provisions 
for the journey were given them at the ware 
house, and, everywhere else, abundance of 
good things. 

On the i6th, the chapel of the hospital was 
blessed, in honor of the blood of the son of 
God, by father Vimont; on Saturday the 
marble slab was put in position above the 
door, containing the inscription ; and passion 
Sunday was chosen for the feast of the dedica 
tion or Titulary patron. We went thither 
after Vespers to say a benediction of the pas 
sion, the vexilla, Antiphona festi Exaltationis, 
magnificat, Ave regina, etc. 

This same day, oatentak and the frenchman 
who had brought the aforesaid news went 
away ; oatentak left the frenchman at Sillery. 

On the 1 4th, piously died Vincent, the sav- Death of Vincent, a 
age, who in the Autumn had been surprised savage. 

by the Souriquois and left for dead at the 



Titulary patron of 
the hospital chapel. 



Oatentak. 



172 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 28 

qu vn nomine" robert excellent Xstien vn sien 
nepueu & vn fils furent tues; la femme du 
mesme Vincent eut la cheuelure enleue"e, elle 
s en porta bien & assista constament son mary 
iusques au bout : Vincent f ut enterre au Cime- 
tiere de Quebek ou son feu Pere, mort aussy 
saintem 1 ., scauoir fran9ois boule" vn des pre 
miers & excellens Xstiens auoit este" enterr6 
5. ou 6. ans auparauant. 

S*. Joseph le 1 8. veuille de S 1 . Joseph (laquelle veuille 

tomboit le Dimanche de la passion selon que 
dessvf) entre sept & huict du soir se fit le feu 
de loye de la S 1 . Joseph ; Mons r . le Gouuern r . 
nvf vint querir, nvf soupions. le p. Vimont 
y alia qui fit mes excuses sur quelque Incom- 
modite que i auois. Mons r . le Gouuerneur 
mit le feu les soldats firent 3 salu6s, & quatre 
coups de Canon furent tires; il y eut aussy 
quelque fusee. 

le 19. quand on sonna 1 Angelvf on tira vn 
coup de Canon ; & a la messe a 1 Eleuaon trois 
ou quatre auec quelques salues de mousquets ; 
la grande messe se commenga sur les 10. h. & 
les vespres ensuite; mais M. le Gouuern 1 ". s en 
trouua Incommode* & trouua qu il eut este" plvf 
a propos de separer la messe du Vespres, 
dire la messe a 1 ordinaire & les vespres sur 
les ii. heures : les Complies se dirent entre 
deux & trois, le sermon ensuite & puis on alia 
aux Vrsulines faire le salut de S 1 . Joseph, Iste 
Confessor, hie vir despiciens, magnificat, 



1645-46] JOURNAL DBS PP. J&SUITES 173 

same time with one robert, an excellent Chris 
tian ; his nephew and a son were killed. The 
wife of this same Vincent had her scalp torn 
off; she bore it well, and steadfastly assisted 
her husband, even to the end. Vincent was 
buried in the Cemetery of Quebek, where his 
late Father, who had also died holily, to 
wit, francois boule", one of the first and excel 
lent Christians, had been buried 5 or 6 years 
before. 30 

On the 1 8th, eve of St. Joseph (which eve St. Joseph. 

fell on passion Sunday, as above), between 
seven and eight in the evening, St. Joseph s 
Bonfire was made. Monsieur the Governor 
came to get us; we were at supper; father 
Vimont went thither, and made my excuses, 
because of some Inconvenience that hindered 
me. Monsieur the Governor lit the fire ; the 
soldiers gave 3 salvos, and four Cannon shots 
were fired ; there were also some rockets. 

On the i Qth, when the Angelus was rung, 
they fired one Cannon shot, and at the mass, 
at the Elevation, three or four, with some 
salvos of musketry. High mass began about 
10 o clock, and vespers followed; but Mon 
sieur the Governor was Inconvenienced by 
this, and thought that it would have been 
more suitable to separate mass from Ves 
pers, to say mass as usual, and vespers 
about 1 1 o clock. Compline was said between 
two and three; the sermon followed; and 
then we went to the Ursulines to have the 
benediction in honor of St. Joseph : Iste Con 
fessor, hie vir despiciens, the magnificat, alternis 



174 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28 



Sepmaine Saincte 



Annonciaon. 



alternis vocib. les religieuses & la paroisse; 
puis le Taiitu ergo pendant lequel on descen- 
dit le S*. Sacrem 1 . & le reste a 1 ordinaire 

le Dimanche de rameaux qui estoit le 25. 
de mars (& par consequent concouroit auec 
1 Annonciation), on ne prescha pas a la grande 
messe, mais a Tissue de 1 eau beniste, on 
donna vn mot d aduis sur la benediction des 
rameaux & la distribuon qui s alloit faire & 
comme il les falloit tenir en main pendant la 
passion p r . tesmoigner sa foy que cette mort 
& passion n estoit pas vne victoire par la mort 
sur le sauueur du monde, mais plustost du 
sauueur du monde sur la mort: ensuite on 
chanta au leutrin ce qu il y auoit a chanter 
pendant quoy se fit la benediction du pain 
benit & se chanta en suite toute la benedic 
tion des rameaus: la distribuon s en fit comme 
des chandeles a la chandeleur: & puis on 
chanta Veni creator: pendant la passion ie 
tenois mon rameau a la main gauche, ce qui 
ne faut pas quand on la chante. 

le soir apres vespres nvf dismes les litanies 
de noe Dame en consideraon du lour qui luy 
estoit dedie, son Image fut mise au milieu de 
1 Autel vtroq. choro ide simul respondente. 

les Vrsulines & Hospitalieres dirant les 
Tenebres sur les 3. heures: les Hospitalieres 
vn nocturne & laudes; les Vrsulines toutes 
entieres. 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. J&SUITES 175 



vocibus, by the nuns and the parish ; then the 
Tantum ergo, during which the Blessed Sacra 
ment was taken down ; and the rest, as usual. 

On palm Sunday, which was the 25th of 
march (and consequently coincided with the 
Annunciation), there was no sermon at high 
mass ; but at the end of the asperges we gave 
a word of advice concerning the blessing of 
the palms, and the distribution of them which 
was about to be made, and how they must be 
kept in the hand during the passion, in order 
to testify one s faith that this death and pas 
sion was not a victory for death over the 
savior of the world, but rather for the savior 
of the world over death. Then the choristers 
sang what there was to be sung, during which 
the blessing of the bread occurred. After 
that, the whole blessing of the palms was 
sung; the distribution of them took place as 
with the candles at candlemas ; and then we 
sang the Veni creator. During the passion I 
held my palm in the left hand, which is not 
the rule when that is sung. 

At evening, after vespers, we said the litany 
of our Lady, in consideration of the Day, 
which was dedicated to her; her Image was 
placed at the middle of the Altar, utroque 
choro idem simul respondente. 

The Ursulines and Hospital nuns said the 
TenebrcB about 3 o clock, the Hospital nuns, 
a nocturn and lauds ; the Ursulines, the full 
office. 

On Holy Thursday, the paradises were 
made, with us, at the Corner of the Altar, 



Holy Week. 



The Annunciation, 



176 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

le leudy S 1 . les paradis furent fails ; chez 
nvf au Coin de 1 Autel du coste de 1 Epistre, 
cela estoit bien : il y cut quelque manque aux 
Hospitalieres en ce qu il estoit en noir. 

on commenga icy ce lour la la messe a 7^ 
c eft trop tost il ne 1 a faut commencer qu a 
dix & demie, tant affin que la paroisse sonne 
la derniere que parcequ il e dauantage con^ 
forme au commun vsage. elle fut chante"e. 
il n y auoit que nos ff. a seruir. 

II n y eut point de salut chez nvf, c estoit 
assez qu il y eut pour lors tenebres aux deux 
maisons religieuses ; peu communieret ; il eut 
este souhaitable qu il y en eut eu dauantage. 

II y eut lauement des pieds a 1 hospital ou 
assista le p. Vimont M. des chastelets & autres 
y lauement les pieds a 18. sauuages, qui 
furent ensuite regales. 

le Vendredy S 1 . le p. Vimont commenca vn 
peu apres 7. h. a prescher il finit apres 9. h. 
ensuite on fit le seruice ou la passion fut 
chante e a trois scauoir, deM.de S*. Sauueur 
Euangeliste, & de M. le prieur qui faisoit la 
synag. & de moy : ie pense pour lors que le 
p. de Quen eut mieux fait que M. de S*. Sau 
ueur p r . cet article, mais non pas p r . le reste 
du seruice: apres 1 Adoraon de la Croix M. de 
S 1 . Sauueur & M r . le prieur allerent au lutrein, 
i acheue le seruice auec nos deux ff. a 1 Au- 
tel ; on retira la Croix & la reporta-t-on apres 
le seruice: le tout fut fait a u. h. 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 177 

on the Epistle side; that was a success. 
There was some lack with the Hospital nuns, 
as their paradise was in black. 

On that Day, we beg an mass here at ^ 
past 7. This is too soon; it ought not to be 
begun till half-past ten, both so that the 
parish church may ring last, and also because 
this is more conformable to the common 
usage. It was sung; there were only our 
brethren to serve it. 

There was no benediction with us : it was 
enough that there were tenebrcz at that time 
at the two religious houses. Few received 
communion : it would have been desirable 
that there had been more. 

The washing of feet took place at the 
hospital, at which father Vimont was present. 
Monsieur des chastelets and others washed 
the feet of 18 savages there, who were after 
ward regaled with food. 

On Good Friday, father Vimont began to 
preach a little after 7 o clock; he finished 
after 9 o clock. Then the service took place 
at which the passion was sung by three 
voices, to wit, by Monsieur de St. Sau- 
veur, Gospeller ; by Monsieur the prior, who 
represented the synagogue; and by me. I 
thought at the time that father de Quen would 
have done better than Monsieur de St. Sau- 
veur, in this part, but not for the rest of the 
service. After the Adoration of the Cross, 
Monsieur de St. Sauveur and Monsieur the 
prior went to the lectern ; I finished the serv 
ice with our two brethren at the Altar ; the 



178 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

le samedy S 1 . le feu & sa benediction se 
firent a la sacristie & le reste auec les mesmes 
ministres que le lour precedent ; il me sembla 
derechef que p r . 1 Exultet le p. de Quen 1 eut 
mieux chante" ; on ne parla point de TEmpe- 
reur ny le Vendredy ny le Samedy: le fus 
trouuer M. le Gouuern r . a sa place p r . com- 
mencer par luy a donner de 1 eau beniste des 
f onds de baptesme : le manque" a dire vn petit 
mot deuant la procession aux fonds p r . inui- 
ter a prier Dieu p r . la benediction, on com- 
menga vne heure trop tost, c est assez de com- 
mencer a 9. heures, on commenga a 8. on tira 
au gloria plusieurs coups de Canon : les hos- 
pitalieres sonnerent sur les 9. h. & hoc male. 

1646 AURIL 

Pasque le i er . lour estoit pasque qui fut fort beau: 

ie fis ou plustost donne a la messel eau beniste 
du lour precedent. 

rintime" le salut p r . les 3. festes le lour de 
pasque chez nvf, le lundy a 1 hospital, & le 
mardyaux Vrsulines. le i er . Coup sonna a la 
paroisse a 5 . heures : on y chanta les litanies 
du nom de lesvf racourcies de la moitie e: I o 
filii & regina cceli : apres les litanies ie dis 
1 oraison du lour; & a la fin de regina coeli 
1 oraison qui luy est propre. 

salut a la quasi le 8. on fit le soir le salut en 1 honneur de 
modo noe Dame de 1 Annonciaon de laquelle on 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



179 



Cross was removed and carried back after the 
service; all this occurred at n o clock. 

On Holy Saturday the fire was made and its 
blessing took place at the vestry, and the rest 
with the same ministers as on the preceding 
Day; it seemed to me again that, as for the 
Exultet, father de Quen would have sung it 
better. There was no mention of the Em 
peror, either on Friday or Saturday. I went 
to find Monsieur the Governor in his place, in 
order to begin with him in giving holy water 
from the baptismal fonts. I omitted to say a 
brief word before the procession to the fonts, 
to invite them to pray God for the blessing. 
We began an hour too soon ; it is enough to 
begin at 9 o clock, and we began at 8. At 
the gloria several Cannon shots were fired ; the 
hospital nuns rang at 9 o clock, et hoc male. 

1646, APRIL. 

The ist Day was easter, which was very Easter. 

beautiful : I prepared, or rather gave, at mass 
the holy water of the Day before. 

I Announced the benediction for the 3 
feasts, on easter Day with us, on monday at 
the hospital, and on tuesday at the Ursulines . 
The ist Bell rang at the parish church at 5 
o clock; there we sang the litany of the name 
of Jesus, abridged by half, the o filii, and the 
regina cceli. After the litany, I said the prayer 
for the Day; and, at the end of the regina 
casli y the prayer which belongs to it. 

On the 8th, we made at evening the bene- Benediction at 
diction in the honor of our Lady of the sunday. 



t. laques I her- 
mite. 



Visite de la Coste 

de beauport & de 

richelieu 



Peintures de 
V Eg Use 



Charitds de M. le 
gomiernr. 



180 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

faisoit 1 office de lendemain; ce salut consista 
aux Litanies de noe Dame & au regina Coeli. 
Le 7. commen9a a entrer a noe seruice M. 
laques surnomme Thermite, il estoit a 1 hos- 
pital, il desiroit Instament d en sortir; il nvf 
fit instance par plusieurs fois de le receuoir 
chez nvf a telle condition que Ton voudroit, 
on le manda au p. buteux qui auoit besoin de 
quelqu vn il 1 aggrea; on le retira done chez 
nvf auec 1 aggrement de 1 hospital iusques an 
depart de quelque barque qui allast aux 3. 
riu. mais auparauant on luy proposa par plu 
sieurs fois tout ce qu on desiroit de luy scauoir 
le p. de Quen & noe f. liegeois il accepta 
tout & ne voulut faire aucun marche" faisant 
profession de ne desirer que sa vie & son 
entretien bien petitem*. 

Le p. Vimont alia couch er a beauport le 
lour de Pasque & visita toute la coste & en 
reuint le leudy: le p. buteux a richelieu a 
pasque fleurie. 

La m. de 1 Incarnaon Vrsuline employa 
presque tout le Caresme a peintre deux pieces 
d Architecture pour accompagner le Taber 
nacle de la paroisse : Mons r . bourdon peignit 
quelques marches. 

Mons r . le Gouuerneur ayant enuoye plvf 
que toutes les sepmaines du poisson frais, 
1 octaue de pasque ayant regeu deux oyes, il 
nvf en enuoya vne. Nvf luy enuoyasmes 
pendant le Caresme deux pots d oliues &c. 



1646-4(5] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 181 

Annunciation, whose office was on the mor 
row; this benediction consisted of the Litany 
of our Lady, and of the regina Cceli. 

On the 7th, Master Jaques, surnamed the Master Jaques the 
hermit," began his entrance into our service. hermit. 

He was at the hospital, but desired Urgently 
to leave it; he repeatedly besought us to re 
ceive him with us on such terms as we chose. 
He was referred to father buteux, who had 
need of some one, and who received him ; he 
was then withdrawn to our house, with the 
consent of the hospital, until the departure 
of some bark bound for 3 rivers ; but before 
hand we several times set forth to him all 
that we desired of him, to wit, father de 
Quen and our brother liegeois. He accepted 
everything, and would make no bargain, 
professing to desire only his living and his 

maintenance on a very small footing. 

Father Vimont went to stop over night at Visit to the Coast of 

beauport, on Easter Day, and visited the beauport, and to 

whole coast, and came back on Thursday; 

father buteux was at richelieu on palm 

Sunday. 

The Ursuline mothers of the Incarnation Church Paintings. 

employed nearly the whole of Lent in paint 
ing two pieces of Architecture to match the 

Tabernacle of the parish church; Monsieur 

bourdon painted some steps. 

Monsieur the Governor, who had sent fresh Charities of Mon- 

fish more than once a week, having received sie vr the governor. 

two geese on the octave of easter, sent one of 

them to us. During Lent, we sent him two 

jars of olives, etc. 



182 



LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



saluts continues 



Arriuee du p. p. 

piiart &&amp;gt; de Cous- 

ture. 



Sauuages a Sillery. Sauuages retournent loger a Sillery depuis 

pasques. 

Apres pasques on Intima la Continuaon des 
saluts du S 1 . Sacrem*. les leudys iusques a la 
feste Dieu; en y changeant 1 oraison du S*. 
Esprit qui se disoit la 2 e . en celle pro naui- 
gantib. p r . la 3 e . In gratiaru actione, & p r la 
4 e . pro deuotis amicis. 

le 15. I alle a Sillery p r . faire les Exercices, 
& la visite de la maison; i en retourne" le 25. 
au soir: le p. piiart & Cousture arriueret la le 
24. on auoit change le nom sauuage a Cous 
ture aux 3. riuieres en vn festin que luy fit le 
p. le buteux ou au lieu de son ancien nom 
Ihandich qui sonne mal en yroquois, on luy 
donna le nom de Achirra le nom de feu M. 
Nicolet auec la loye de tous les sauuages 
hurons Algonq. & Annieronons: ie fis festin a 
Sillery aux Chrestiens qui y estoient. le p. 
piiart & sa compagnie repartiret le 28. ensui- 
uant. 

les sauuages retournerent de la chasse sur 
le milieu d Auril & reuinrent asse"s riches & 
charges. 

le 26. Ie tins Consulte p r . le voyage du p. 
logues aux Annier. les Consulteurs estoient 
p. Vimont, p. de quen, p. Dendemare, p. p. 
piiart ; omnium consensu approbata prof ectio : 
Ite p r . le mariage de Cousture, approbatu ite 
oium consensu: Ite p r . vn voyage de robert 



retour des sauuages 
de la chasse 



Consultes 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 183 

The Savages return to lodge at Sillery Savages at Sillery. 
after caster. 

After easter we Announced the Continua- Benedictions con- 
tion of the benedictions of the Blessed Sacra- tinued. 

ment on Thursdays even till Corpus Christi, 
changing in them the prayer of the Holy 
Ghost, which was said 2nd, to the one pro 
navigantibus : for the 3rd, In gratiarum actio- 
nem; and for the 4th, pro devotis amicis. 

On the 1 5th, I went to Sillery to perform 
the Exercises and the visitation of the house ; 
I returned thence on the 25th, in the even 
ing. Father pijart and Cousture arrived there Arrival of father p. 
on the 24th; Cousture s savage name had pijart and of 
been changed at 3 rivers, at a feast made for 
him by father le buteux, when instead of his 
former name, Ihandich, which sounds ill in 
yroquois, they gave him the name of Achir- 
ra, that of the late Monsieur Nicolet, to 
the Joy of all the huron, Algonquain, and An- 
nieronon savages. I gave a feast, at Sillery, 
to the Christians who were there. Father 
pijart and his company went away again on 
the 28th following. 

The savages returned from the chase to- Return of the sav- 
ward the middle of April and came back a s es f rom the chase. 
quite rich and burdened. 

On the 26th, I held a Consultation with ref- Consultations. 
erence to father Jogues s journey to the Annie- 
ronons; the Advisers were father Vimont, 
father de quen, father Dendemare, father p. 
pijart; omnium consensu approbata profectio. 
Item, concerning Cousture s marriage; appro- 
batum item omnium consensu. Item, respecting 



184 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



St. Marc 



Prmtemps 



reiglemt. de Sillery. 



en f ranee ; & de la demeure des p. Druilletes par 
dega omniu etia consensu approbata ilia oia. 

le 25. lour de S l . Marc on ne fit point de 
procession p r . n y auoir encore asses de che- 
min honneste p r . le f aire ; on auoit intime" les 
litanies qui ne se chanterent pas par erreur 
mais se dirent a voix basse: le p. p. piiart y 
officioit qui ne pouuoit pas pouruoir a cela : 
on mit du Violet ce lour la ce qu il ne falloit 
pas; il le falloit suppos6 qu on eut dit la 
messe des rogaons. 

le 17. ou 1 8. d Auril la riuiere fut libre, & 
on commenca a semer vn peu auparauant. 

sur la fin de ce moys, en suite de la visite 
de Sillery, fut fait le reiglement p r . le tempo- 
rel; la chose passa par 1 aduis du p. Vimont 
& du P. Dendemare; & du consentement du 
p. de Quen : 

Culture de la terre Les sauuages se mirent puissament par tout 

a trauailler a la terre ; ils firent de nouueau a 
Sillery plus de 15. arpens de terre: aux 3. riu. 
plvf de 30. families sauuages se mirent a cul- 
tiuer; Ite a Montreal: les frangois de leur 
coste n en firent pas moins. 

1646. MAY. 

Le dernier d Auril sur les 5. h. nvf partismes 
auec le brigantin & deux chaloupes pour les 
3. riu. ou nvf n arriuasmes que le 5. du moys 
de may, il fallut quitter le brigantin & alter 



voyage aux 3. 
riuieres 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



185 



St. Mark. 



robert s voyage to france, and as to father 
Druilletes s continuation on this side; omnium 
etiam consensu approbata ilia omnia. 

On the 2 5th, St. Mark s Day, we made no 
procession, because there was not, as yet, 
enough road suitable for forming it. We had 
announced the litany, which, through an 
error, was not sung, but recited in a low tone : 
father p. pijart was officiating then, and he 
could not attend to that. Violet was used on 
that Day, which was not proper; it would 
have been proper, in case the rogation mass 
had been said. 

On the i ;th or i8th of April, the river was 
free, and planting began a little before that. 

Toward the end of this month, after the 
visitation of Sillery, regulations were made 
concerning temporal affairs. The matter 
passed by the advice of father Vimont and of 
Father Dendemare, and by the consent of 
father de Quen. 21 

The savages vigorously began everywhere 
to till the soil. At Sillery they freshly pre 
pared more than 15 arpents of land; at 3 
rivers, more than 30 savage families began 
cultivation; Item, at Montreal. The french 
on their side did no less. 

1646, MAY. 

On the last of April, about 5 o clock, we Journey to 3 rivers. 

started with the brigantine and two shallops 
for 3 rivers, where we did not arrive till the 
5th of the month of may; we had to leave 
the brigantine, and proceed with the shallops. 



Spring. 

Regulations for 
Sillery. 



Cultivation of soil. 



depart des veaus p&gt; 
les Hurons. 



Mart du p. Masse 

premier miss* . Du 

Canada. 



Querelle de sau- 
uages trahison 



Querelle s de 
franqois. 



186 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

auec les chalouppes : le lundy 7. commence- 
rent les Conseils dont 1 histoire se voira dans 
le factum qui e dans les Archiues tit. yro 
quois: nvf en partismes le 17. & arriuasmes 
icy le 1 8. Caron qui menoit des veaux aux 
Hurons partit le n.de May des 3. riu. Le 
p. logues p r . les yroquois le 16. 

I y trouue le P. Enemond Masse mort la 
nuidt du n. au 12. sur la minuit & enterre* en 
la nouuelle Chapelle non encore acheuee: 
compendia vitae & mortis eivf sicut & alioru 
se trouuera dans les Archiues. 

Ite le trouue qu vn Xstien nomme Ignace 
yroquois de nation, mais depuis longtemps 
habitue icy ayant pris querelle au leu auec vn 
Abnaquiois, estoit alle par le dehors de sa ca- 
bane vis a vis de la place ou il pensoit qu il 
fut pour le transpercer de son espee, mais au 
lieu de le trouuer il rencontra vne femme qui 
fut transpercee mais toutesfois fauorablem 1 . 
cela fit bien du bruit parmy les sauuages, 
& embrouilla fort les affaires de tous coste"s, 
toutesfois celuy qui auoit fait le coup venant 
s excuser aux parens de la femme, presenta 
sa teste: on luy donna a etendre qu on luy 
pardonnoit, toutesfois la chose sembloit de- 
pendre de Tissue de la blessure. 

Ite le trouu6 que deux hommes des Vrsu- 
lines s estoient ape!6s & prouoques & s estoient 
alles batre auec leurs espees: ce qu auoient 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 187 

On Monday, the ;th, the Councils began, the 

records of which will be seen in the factum 

which is in the Archives, titulo yroquois ; we 

left that place on the i/th, and arrived here 

on the 1 8th. Caron, who was taking some Calves sent to the 

calves to the Hurons, left 3 rivers on the Huron*. 

nth of May; father Jogues for the yroquois, 

on the 1 6th. 

I found here that Father Enemond Masse Death of father 
had died on the night of the nth and i2th, Masse, first mission- 
about midnight, and was buried in the new ary To Canada - 
Chapel, not yet finished; compendium vitce et 
mortis ejus sicut et aliorum will be found in the 
Archives. 23 

Item, I found that a Christian named Quarrel among the 
Ignace, an yroquois by nation, but long sarva s es ; treachery. 
settled here, having picked a quarrel while 
Gambling with an Abnaquiois, had gone to 
the outside of the latter s cabin, to the place 
at which he supposed that this man was, in 
order to run him through with his javelin ; 
but, instead of reaching the man, it encoun 
tered a woman, who was wounded, but not 
dangerously. That made much commotion 
among the savages, and greatly complicated 
matters on all sides. Nevertheless, the man 
who had dealt the stroke, coming to excuse 
himself before the woman s relatives, offered 
his own head ; they gave him to understand 
that they pardoned him, but the affair seemed 
to depend on the result of the wound. 

Item, I found that two of the UrSUlines Quarrels among 

men had challenged and provoked each other, thefrench. 

and had proceeded to fight with their swords. 



degast dufeu 



Vol 



saluts a la pente- 
coste. 



depart pr* Tadoussak 



188 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [V OL . 28 

aussy fait deux soldats aux 3. riu. la groye & 
la f ontaine pendant que nvf y estions ; la groye 
fut blesse en deux endroits p r . s estre com- 
porte sagem 1 . Xstiennement, ce qui ayant este" 
verifi6 par les sauuages la fontaine fut mis 
en vne fosse. 

Ite ie trouuS que le feu, pousse par vn vent 
furieux auoit fait partout vn grand degast & 
qu vn nomme Guill. bance y auoit tout perdu, 
sa maison & tout ce qu il y auoit dedans ayant 
este brusle: il fut assiste de tous costes & 
bientost se trouua sur pied 

Ite Ie trouue qu on auoit vo!6 & crochete 
vn Coffre ou on auoit pris tout le pauure butin 
d vn homme montant a plvf de 25. escvf ; on 
declama fort la centre en chaire comme contre 
vn commencem 1 . de vice qui n auoit point en 
core este vn parde9a, ou on alloit sans deffiance. 
On fit salut du S 4 . Sacrem 1 . le lour de la 
Pentecoste & les deux festes suiuantes coe 
a Pasque p r . remercier du succes du voyage 
des 3. riu. recommeder le voyage du p. logues 
& de m r . bourdon, demander de la pluye &c 
aux Hospit. le lundy & aux Vrsul ns . le mar- 
dy : le mercredy y commenca a pleuuoir. 

Le P. de Quen partit de Quebek p r . Tadous 
sak le 21. de may Mons r . de launay Commis 
estoit parti dans vne barque des le 7. le p. 
de Que partit dans vn Canot auec vn fran9ois 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



189 



Two soldiers at 3 rivers had also done the 
same, la groye and la fontaine, while we 
were there; la groye was wounded in two 
places, for having behaved discreetly, like a 
Christian; this having been verified by the 
savages, la fontaine was put in a trench. 

Item, I found that the fire, driven by a furi 
ous wind, had everywhere made great havoc, 
and that a certain Guillaume bance had thus 
lost everything, his house and all in it hav 
ing been burned ; he was aided on all sides, 
and soon found himself on his feet. 

Item, I found that some one had stolen and 
broken open a Chest, from which had been 
taken all the man s poor spoil, amounting to 
more than 25 ecus; we vigorously denounced 
that in the pulpit, as a beginning in a vice 
which had not yet been characteristic of this 
side, where all went about without distrust. 

The benediction of the Blessed Sacrament 
was held on the Day of Pentecost and on the 
two following feasts, as at Easter, in order 
to give thanks for the success of the journey 
to 3 rivers; to recommend the journey of 
father Jogues and of monsieur bourdon; to 
ask for rain, etc., at the Hospital nuns on 
monday, and at the Ursulines on tuesday. On 
Wednesday it began to rain. 

Father de Quen left Quebek for Tadoussak 
on the 2ist of may; Monsieur de launay, 
Agent, had started in a bark, as early as the 
7th. Father de Quen left in a Canoe, with a 
french blacksmith named Charles, and a sav 
age; his provisions were furnished by the 



Havoc by fire. 



Theft. 



Benedictions at 
pentecost. 



Departure for Ta~ 
doussak. 



190 



LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [Voi, 28 



Profession de foy 
d vn huguenot 



baptesme de 
ArenhXton. 



on fait du gru 



on commence la 
pesche 



Chapelle chez M. de 

Chauigny &** voyage 

chez luy. 



forgeron nomm.6 Charles, & vn sauuage: on 
1 assura de sa nouriture par le magazin sur les 
lieus ; & p r . le voyage on luy offrit du maga 
zin touts les rafraichissemens necessaires, noe 
f. liegeois 1 auoit aussy fourni 

le mesme 2 1 . vn nomme Thomas [blank space] 
natif de la rochelle qui iusques alors n auoit 
este qu aparement Catholique & au fond estoit 
Huguenot fit abiuraon & profession de la foy 
en particulier entre mes mains en suite de 
quoy il fit sa Confession generalle. 

le 23. fut baptist aux Vrsulines vn nomme 
Arenh&ton, Huron & fut nomme rene. M. le 
prieur fut son parrain. 

noe f Ambroise depuis le i er . de May iusques 
au 20. fut eploye a faire le gru a noe dame 
des Anges & la biaire. 

Enuiron le 1 5 . de May on commen9a la pes- 
che noe f . feaute* & robert hache au commen- 
cem 1 ., puis robert tout seul auec laques lunier 
le i re . saulmon fut pris le 1 1 de luin. 

le 24. partit noe f Ambroise & M re . laques 
p r . les 3. riu. dans vn Chaloupe ofr estoit M r . 
de Chauigny qui emporta auec soy la Chapelle 
de beauport qui luy fut accorded pour Iusques 
a La Toussaints: le p. Vimont en mesme 
temps aller iusques chez M. de Chauigny pour 
conferer les Ceremonies du baptesme a sa fille. 

Sur la fin de May se rencontra la feste du 
S 1 . Sacrem 1 . le S 1 . Sacrem*. fut expose" le lour 
de la feste & le Dimanche iusques apres 



1645 -46J JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 191 

warehouse, on the premises; and for the jour 
ney he was offered, from the warehouse, all 
the necessary fresh food ; our brother liegeois 
had also supplied him. 

On the same 2ist, one Thomas [blank space], A huguenot s Pro- 
a native of la rochelle, who till that time 
had been only in appearance a Catholic, and 
in reality was a Huguenot, abjured heresy 
and privately made profession of the faith, 
under my direction, after which he made his 
general Confession. 

On the 23rd, one Arenhouton, a Huron, was Baptism of Arenhou- 
baptized at the Ursulines , and named rene. ton - 

Monsieur the prior ^ was his godfather. 

Our brother Ambroise was employed, from The barley is made 
the ist of May till the 2oth, in preparing barley ready. 

at notre dame des Anges, and the beer. 

About the i$th of May, the fishing began; Fishing begins. 
our brother feaute and robert hache were 
engaged therein, at first, then robert alone, 
with Jaques Junier. The ist salmon was 
taken on the nth of June. 

On the 24th, our brother Ambroise and Chapel at Monsieur 

Master Jaques started for 3 rivers in a Shal- de Chavignfsand 
J . journey to hts house. 

lop, in which was Monsieur de Chavigny, 

who carried with him the beauport Oratory, 
which was granted him Until All Saints. Fa 
ther Vimont at the same time went as far as 
Monsieur de Chavigny s, to confer the Cere 
monies of baptism on his daughter. 

Toward the end of May, occurred the feast 
of the Blessed Sacrament ; the Blessed Sacra 
ment was exposed on the Day of the feast, 
and on Sunday till after vespers; and there 



192 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



vespres; & il y eut salut tous les lours de 
1 octaue. 
Procession du St. Pour la Procession, il fut arreste que M. le 

Sacremt. 6 r . Porter le r^ 

* Gouuerneur nommeroit qui il luy plairoit p r . 

porter le Daiz de sa part, que les deux mar 
guillers le porteroient aussy, & vn Sauuage : 
que les annees d apres les marguillers auec le 
Cure" aduiseroient a qu il le faudroit offrir de 
le porter la disposition de trois bastons leur 
estant laissee libre &la dispoon du i er . a M. le 
gouuern r . Ceux qui le porterent cette anne 
furent M. Tronquet de la part de M. le Gouu. 
Mons r . des Chastelets & M. giffar marguil- 
liers, & noel negabamat. 

le tour en ckemin Les Hospitalieres ayant represent^ leur 

droit d anciennete dans le pays par dessvf les 
Vrsulines p r . y auoir fait bastir deux ans au- 
parauant elles : Ite a raison que les Hospitaux 
sont tousiours priuilegies & ont les premiers 
rangs : le tour de la procession fut par le repo- 
soir du fort proche de 1 arbre, puis a 1 hospi 
tal; puis au reposoir de M. Couillart; puis 
aux Vrsulines & de la on reuint a la paroisse. 
Deux Clochetes marchoient deuant, puis la 
banniere celuy qui la portoit auoit vn chapeau 
de fleurs: La Croix suiuoit portee par vn 
leune garfon de 20. ans en Aube & lisets; a 
ses deux costes deux Enfans en surplis & 
lisets: Suiuoient les torches 6. en nombre p r . 
la i e . fois; on destina p r . les porter les 



ordre 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



193 



Procession of the 



Line of march. 



was a benediction every Day in the octave. 
As for the Procession, it was decided that 
Monsieur the Governor should name, on his Blessed 

,., about bearing the 

part, whomsoever he pleased to bear the Can- Canopy. 

opy ; that the two churchwardens should also 

bear it, and one Savage : that, in subsequent 

years, the churchwardens, with the Cure, 

should settle who might properly be invited 

to bear it, the disposition of three staves 

being left free to them, and the disposition of 

the ist to Monsieur the governor. Those 

who carried it this year were Monsieur Tron- 

quet, on behalf of Monsieur the Governor; 

Monsieur des Chastelets and Monsieur giffar, 

churchwardens; and noel negabamat. 

The Hospital nuns having represented their 
right of seniority in the country over the Ur- 
sulines, by virtue of having built in it two 
years before the latter, Item, because the 
Hospitals are always privileged and have the 
first rank, the course of the procession was 
past the temporary altar at the fort, near the 
flagstaff; then to the hospital; then to the 
temporary altar at Monsieur Couillart s; then 
to the Ursulines ; and thence we came back 
to the parish church. 

Two Bell-ringers marched in front, then 
the banner : the one who carried it had a hat 
of flowers. The Cross followed, borne by a 
Youth of 20 years, in Alb and silk sash, on 
either side of him, two Boys in surplices and 
sashes. The torches followed, 6 in number; 
for the ist time we appointed the local crafts 
to bear them, to wit, Carpenters, masons, 



The order. 



194 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



Quelgu vn ayant 
fait souuenir qu il 

falloit garder 

I ordre de / honneur 

des mestiers noe f 

liegois ayant mis 

pr. fondement qu il 

ne falloit point auoir 

esgard du tout a 

I honneur mats que 

du reste Us s accomo- 

dasset par entr eux; 

quelqu vn d eux 

ayant dit qu il falloit 

done que les Peres 

menassent les 

Enfans, les deux 

pl-vf ?&gt;ieux marche- 

rent les premiers, 

uoir Zacherie 

lean Guyon. 



sonnerte 



metiers du pays, scauoir Charpentiers magons, 
matelots,Taillandiers, brasseurs & boulangers ; 
ausquels ce coup on enuoya la veuille des 
Torches faites par noe Industrie & de noe 
Cire, & il les accommoderent de festons, & 
lean guion ma9on mit vn escusson a la sienne 
ou estoient les armes de son metier marteau, 
compas & reigle : apres les torches suiuoient 
quatre chantres laiques puis M. de S l . Sau- 
ueur, & M. Nicolet en surplis & estolle puis 
le p. Vimont & le p. Dendemare; puis 6. 
anges frangois, & deux petits sauuages en leur 
habit, tous portoient des chandeliers ou des 
cierges excepte les deux derniers qui portoient 
deux corporaliers, apres eux deux de nos ff 
en surplis auec encensoirs fumans ; puis soubs 
le Daiz aux deux costes du S 1 . Sacrement; le p. 
Dmilletes faisant le Diacre en Dalmatique & 
M. le prieur soubsdiacre en aube & estolle: 
noe f liegeois en surplis marchoit le dernier 
derriere le S 1 . Sacrement, & faisoit office de 
m re . des Ceremonies. 

on sonna a la paroisse au sortir, & partout 
en arriuant & sortant au reposoir du fort. 3. 
coups de Canon ; en passant derriere M r . Couil- 
lart il y eut vn salue de mousquets & fusils. 
Ite a 1 hospital; & de rechef au reposoir de 
m. Couillart on tira & fit-on vne autre salue ; 
Ite en repassent deuant le fort vne autre salue 
de trois coups de Canon : on sonna a la paroisse 
en passant soubs vn Arcade du pont qui estoit 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



195 



sailors, Toolmakers, brewers, and bakers ; to 

whom this time we sent, on the day before, 

T. -, -, 01 -11 i 

some Torches made by our Skill and or our 

+ 

Wax. These they hung with festoons ; and 

Jean guion, a mason, put an escutcheon on 
his, on which were the arms of his trade, ham- 
mer, compasses, and rule. After the torches 
followed four lay choristers ; then Monsieur 
de St. Sauveur and Monsieur Nicolet, in 

... , ., , , TT . , 

surplice and stole; then father Vimont and 
father Dendemare; then 6 french angels, and 
two little savages in their costume : all car- 
ried candlesticks or tapers, except the last 
two, who bore corporal-cases. After these 
came two of our brethren in surplices, with 
smoking censers; then beneath the Canopy, 
on either side of the Blessed Sacrament, father 
Druilletes serving as Deacon in Dalmatic, and 
Monsieur the prior as subdeacon in alb and 
stole: our brother liegeois, in surplice, 
marched last, behind the Blessed Sacrament, 
and officiated as master of Ceremonies. 

The bell was rung at the parish church at 
the end, and everywhere on arriving and 
leaving ; at the temporary altar of the fort, 3 
Cannon shots were fired; on passing behind 
Monsieur Couillart s there was a salute of 
muskets and guns. Item, at the hospital; 
and again, at monsieur Couillart s tempo 
rary altar, they fired and gave another sa 
lute; Item, on passing before the fort again, 
another salute of three Cannon shots. The 
bell at the parish church was rung as they 
passed under an Arch of the bridge, which 



Some one having 
called to mind that 
it was proper to ob- 

,, 

serve the honorable 

or der of the trades; 

our brother liegois 

having laid down th* 

principle that tt was 

no t at all requisite to 
consider the matter 

f honor &lt; but that 

withal they shoutd 

arrange / hemselves 

by mutual agree- 
ment; some one of 
them having said 

that the Fathers 

ought then to lead 
the Sons; the two 
seniors marched 



Bell-ringing. 



196 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

tapissee ; on fit aussy vne salue aux Vrsulines ; 
& enfin retournant a 1 Eglise vne autre salue 
de 3. coups de Canon. 

Chan M. de S*. Sauueur entretint fort bien le 

chan ; Aux reposoirs on tascha de faire chan 
ter a deux Enfans quelques articles des lita 
nies du nom de lesvf 5. ou 6. mais il fallut 
que M. le prieur les aydast; puis on chanta 
Tantu ergo; ou Ecce pants &c. 1 oraison, lau- 
date, encensem*. & benediction : aux maisons 
religieuses le mesme : le tout alia bien comme 
cela, les religieuses y chanterent au lieu des 
Enfans. 

le temps. La grande messe se dit a 1 ordinaire 7^, & 

la procession qui se fit apres ne fut finie que 
sur les ii. heures ; le S 1 . Sacrement fut expose 
ce lour la & le Dim. iusques apres vespre; le 
reste de 1 octaue salut a 7^ du soir seulem 1 . 
Aux maisons religieuses le S*-. Sacrem 1 . fut 
expose tout le long de 1 octaue depuis leur 
messe iusques a 5. h. du soir, & le lour de 
1 octaue on y fit les saluts solemnels. 
pm.bestialiti* . publice La veuille de la feste qui estoit le 31. ou 

dedaratu ab eo, qui Dernier de May on apporta la nouuelle d vn 
fecerat, vel finxerat 

malheur arriue a ricnelieu : vn nomme Jum- 
kerke Norman, Canonier & matelot a riche- 
lieu aage de 40. a 45. ans marie" en france, & 
demeurant p r . la 3 e . ann6e a richelieu, sur la 
fin de ce mois parut 1 espace de deux ou trois 
lours dans vn desespoir, se voulant de luy 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 197 

was carpeted ; a salute was also given at the 
Ursulines ; and finally, on returning to the 
Church, another salute of 3 Cannon shots. 

Monsieur de St. Sauveur excellently sus- Music, 

tained the music. At the temporary altars we 
tried to have two Boys sing some clauses of 
the litany of the name of Jesus, 5 or 6; but 
Monsieur the prior had to aid them. Then 
they sang Tantum ergo, or Ecce panis, etc., fol 
lowed by the prayer laudate, incense, and 
benediction : at the religious houses the same. 
All went well in that way; the nuns sang 
there instead of the Children. 

High mass was said as usual, at y 2 past 7, The time, 

and the procession which was afterward made 
was finished only about 1 1 o clock ; the Blessed 
Sacrament was exposed on that Day, and on 
Sunday, till after vespers ; for the remainder 
of the octave, benediction at ^ past 7 in the 
evening only. At the religious houses the 
Blessed Sacrament was exposed throughout 
the octave from their mass until 5 o clock in 
the evening; and on the Day of the octave 
solemn benedictions were held there. 

On the eve of the feast, which was the 3ist Peccatum bestiaiitatis 
or last of May, the news was brought of an P ublice declaratum 

. 1 ab eo, qui fecerat, vel 

unfortunate affair which happened at riche- fmxerat. 

lieu. One Dumkerke, a Norman, a Gun 
ner and sailor at richelieu, aged between 40 
and 45 years, married in france, and living 
for the 3rd year at richelieu, toward the end 
of this month appeared for the space of two 
or three Days to be in despair, trying to 
destroy and cast himself headlong, and saying 



198 



LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

mesme perdre & precipiter disant qu il estoit 
perdu & damne interroge pourquoy il disoit 
cela, respondit que depuis le depart des vais- 
seaux il auoit eu afaire dix on douse fois a vne 
chienne du fort appelee plate, & que c estoit 
la le suiet de son desespoir: le Capitaine nom- 
me la Crapaudiere se saisit de sa personne, & 
de la Chienne, & les fit enf ermer : il en escri- 
uit au p. buteux aux 3. riu. & a M. le gouu. 
a Quebek. le p. buteux y enuoya le p. dupe- 
ron: & M. le Gouuern 1 ". ne respondit rien 
attendant d y voir plvf de lour: on iugea de 
premier abord qu il eut fallu plustost tiier la 
chienne que de I enfermer: & enfin que le 
meilleur estoit de declarer & tenir p r . fol 
celuy qui auoit dit cela de luy mesme. le p. 
duperon de retour raporta qu a son arriuee, cet 
homme luy dit que ce qu il auoit dit n estoit 
qu vne feinte affin qu on le fit mourir, n ayent 
este empesch6 de se desfaire soy mesme que 
p r . la crainte de 1 Enfer lequel il pouuoit es- 
perer d euiter, se procurant la mort de la sorte 
puisqued vncoste il moureroitqui est ce qu il 
cherchoit, & de 1 autre on le fairoit Confesser 
auparauat ce qui luy fairoit euiter 1 Enfer: le 
p. duperon 1 obligea de declarer publiquem . 
le tout, puis le Confessa, luy remit 1 esprit, & 
le laissa en bonne dispoon. 

off. de Tadousak le lour mesme du S l . Sacrement dernier de 

May, vint la nouuelle de Tadoussak qu il y 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. J&SUITES 199 

that he was lost and damned. On being 
asked why he said that, he answered that since 
the departure of the vessels he had ten or 
twelve times had intercourse with a bitch of 
the fort, called plate ; and that that was the 
cause of his despair. The Captain, named la 
Crapaudiere, arrested him in person, and 
seized the Bitch, and had them shut up ; he 
wrote of the matter to father buteux at 3 riv 
ers, and to Monsieur the governor at Quebek. 
Father buteux sent father duperon thither, 
and Monsieur the Governor answered noth 
ing, waiting to obtain more Light on the 
matter. They thought, at first, that it would 
be their duty to kill the bitch rather than 
to lock her up ; and, finally, that the best plan 
was to declare and account as crazy the one 
who had said that about himself. Father 
duperon on his return reported that, at his 
arrival, this man told him that what he had 
said was only a feint, to the end that he be 
made to die, having been hindered from 
destroying himself only by the dread of Hell, 
which he might hope to avoid by procuring 
death in this way ; since, on the one hand, he 
would die, which was what he sought; and, 
on the other, they would first have him Con 
fess, which would enable him to avoid Hell. 
Father duperon obliged him to declare every 
thing publicly, then heard his Confession, 
composed his mind again, and left him in a 
good frame of mind. 

On the very Day of the Blessed Sacrament, Matters at Tadou- 
the last of May, came the news from Tadous- sak - 



200 



LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



auoit dix grandes Cabanes de sauuages en- 
tr autres des bersiamites, 15. Chaloupes; qu on 
y auoit desia traite plvf de cinq poinsons de 
Castor & is i- peaus d orignak: & que iamais 
la ferueur & la deuoon au Xstianisme n y fut 
plus grande. 

Sauuage de gaspt. Vn sauuage de Gaspe se disent Catecumene 

arriua icy sur la fin du moys auec force viande 
dont il fit present aux sauuages de Sillery, 
qui entr autres choses luy donnerent du ble ; 
il s en retourne auec lettres p r . Tadoussak & 
Misktf a nos PP. & a Mons r . desdasmes de la 
part de m. le Gouuerneur; il repartit d icy en 
sa chaloupe le 1 1 . de luin 

layer des ouuriers. En ce temps il falloit donner 30. & 35. s. a 

vn homme p r . sa lournee & ses despends. 

1646. IUIN. 

Moulin Le 4. entra a noe seruice p r . Charpentier & 

ayder au moulin vn nomm6 Estienne bou- 
goust: on se mit premierem 1 . a abatre ce qui 
restoit de bois sur les terres de la Vacherie : 
puis on delibera de la place ou le metteroit ; 
le p. Vimont le p. dendemare & moy nvf nvf 
y transportasmes & fut dit qu on le pouuoit 
mettre a vn endroit, ou il y restoit quelque 
Inconuenient ; mais qu on croyoit auec le 
temps deuoir estre ost&lt;; qu il n y auoit qu a 
le bien f aire : la cause pour laquelle principa- 
lem 1 . on le refaisoit de nouueau estant que 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 201 

sak that ten large Cabins of savages were 
there, among others, some bersiamites, 
and 1 5 Shallops ; that there had already been 
traded more than five casks of Beaver, and 
1 5 i moose skins ; and that fervor and devotion 
to Christianity were never greater at that 
place. 

A savage of Gaspe, calling himself a Cate- Savage from 
chumen, arrived here about the end of the 
month with plenty of meat, of which he made 
a present to the savages of Sillery, who, 
among other things, gave him some corn. 
He returns with letters for Tadoussak and 
Miskou, to our Fathers, and to Monsieur des- 
dasmes from monsieur the Governor: he set 
out again in his shallop on the nth of June. 

At this time it was necessary to give 30 and Workmen s hire, 
35 sols to a man for his Day s work and his 
expenses. 

1646, JUNE. 

On the 4th, there entered our service one Mill. 

Estienne bougoust, as Carpenter and to help 
at the mill. We first proceeded to fell what 
wood remained on the lands of la Vacherie ; ** 
then we deliberated about the site on which 
the mill should be placed. Father Vimont, 
father dendemare, and I betook ourselves 
thither, and we decided that it might be put 
in a place in which there was still some 
Disadvantage, which, however, we believed 
would be removed in course of time ; that the 
only question was, that it be well built. The 
chief reason why it was rebuilt anew was, 



202 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

1 autre pour auoir est6 mal fait mena9oit de 
mine a chaque bout de champ. 

M re . maturin venu pour ce suiet de france 
1 an passe", & mis cependant au seruice des 
Vrsulines fut mis a n5e seruice & commeca a 
demeurer auec nvf le n. de luin. La neige- 
rie commenga a y seruir le 18. il estoit a 
Sillery. on demanda par plusieurs fois a M. 
le Gouuerneur qu il voulut ou nvf accorder la 
place voisine, ou establir qu elle demeurast en 
Commune; il ne voulut ny 1 vn ny 1 autre. 

on va secourir Guill. le io. de luin qui estoit vn Dimanche, on 

banse publia a la paroisse que qui voudroit le lende- 

main lour de S 1 . barnabe" aller ayder a redres- 

ser la maison brusle*e de Guillaume bance 

qu on en donnoit la permission, & qu on y 

exhortoit; il y alia 15. ouuriers. 

separcion des Le ii. se fit la separation de nos f ermiers 

fermiersdebeauport. ^ beauport, boucher s en alia & Thomas 

hayot demeura charg6 de tout, ce fut par vn 
accord par entr eux sans que nvf ayons fait 
autre chose que d y cosentir. 

Mariage le 18. se fit le mariage de Montpellier sol- 

dat & Cordonnier auec la fille de seuestre : on 
y dansa vne espece de balet; scauoir 5. soldats. 

Abnaquiois arriuent Le 22. arriuerent 3. Canots d Abnaquiois 

qui disoient qu vne maladie qui faisoit vomir 
le sang auoit perdu vne bonne partie de leur 
nation: qu il y auoit en grande guerre entre 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



203 



They go to assist 
Guillaume banse. 



that the other mill, having been ill con 
structed, threatened to fall at any moment. 

Master maturin who had come for this 
purpose from france the year before, and had 
been placed meanwhile in the service of the 
Ursulines was employed in our service, and 
began to live with us on the nth of June. 
La neigerie began to serve here on the 1 8th ; 
he was at Sillery. We repeatedly asked Mon 
sieur the Governor that he consent either to 
grant us the neighboring place, or to decree 
that it should remain as Commons ; he would 
do neither one nor the other. 

On the icth of June, which was a Sunday, 
it was published at the parish church that 
whoever would go on the morrow, the Day 
of St. barnabas, and help to rebuild the 
burned house of Guillaume bance, was given 
permission thereto, and that we urged them 
to do this; 15 workmen went there. 

On the iith occurred the separation of our 
farmers at beauport, boucher went away, f armers at beauport. 
and Thomas hayot 85 remained in sole charge ; 
this was by an agreement between them, with 
out our having done aught else than consent 
to it. 

On the 1 8th occurred the marriage of Mont- 
pellier, a soldier and a Shoemaker, to the 
daughter of sevestre ; * they danced there a 
kind of ballet, to wit, 5 soldiers. 

On the 22nd, 3 Canoes of Abnaquiois ar 
rived, who said that a malady which caused 
vomiting of blood had destroyed a good part 
of their nation ; that there had been a great 



Separation of the 



Marriage. 



Some Abnaquiois 
arrive. 



Ceux de TadSsak 
arriuent. 



Diuorce. 



feu de la St. lean. 



204 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

les Etechemins & sauuages de gasp6 : que les 
yroquois ne mentoient point en ce qu ils atioient 
maintenu que ce n estoit pas eux qui auoient 
fait le coup de c&t Automne, mais les Soquo- 
quiois on attendoit a scauoir le reste : Us rame- 
nerent le fils de otsatonkHi Huron. 

Le 23. arriua EtHet & labmets Capitainede 
Tadtfsak Xstiens auec vne Chaloupe pleine de 
leur gens, ils firent deux presens de Castors 
a M. le gouu. & dans le Conseil firent force 
pleintes de la cherte & faons de traiter de M. 
de launay : ils estoient Estb et sur tous habil- 
les p r . la plus part a la fran9oise chemise de 
toile de Hollande blanche, vn rabat a dentelle 
& Casoque d Escarlate, qui tachoit d aller de 
pair auec M r . le gouuern r . & en tout faisoit le 
Souuerain: ie luy donne la Colaon, & vn sac 
de b!6 d Inde & vne liure de poudre a la 
recomm. du p. de Quen. 

le 22. se vinrent mettre prisonniers d eux 
mesme vn mary & vn femme Xstienne, qui ne 
se pouuoient accorder, 1 vn dans le Cachot au 
fort, 1 autre aux Vrsulines; & ce en suite de 
leur sentence qui leur fut prononcee a Sillery 
sur les pleintes des Capitaines: le factu s en 
trouuera dans les Archiues titulo Sillery. 

le 23. se fit le feu de la S l . Jean sur les 8}^ 
du soir M. le gouuern 1 ". enuoya M. Tronquet 
p r . scauoir si nvf irions; nvf allasmes le 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



205 



Those of Tadousak 
arrive. 



war between the Etechemins and the savages 
of gaspe"; that the yroquois did not lie in 
what they had maintained, that it was not 
they who had made the attack of last Autumn, 
but the Soquoquiois; they were waiting to 
know the rest. They brought back the son 
of otsatonkwi, a Huron. 

On the 23rd, Etwet and labmets Captains 
of Tadousak, and Christians arrived, with 
a Shallop full of their people ; they made two 
presents of Beavers to Monsieur the govern 
or; and in the Council they uttered many 
complaints about the high prices and methods 
of trading of Monsieur de launay. They 
were, Estwet especially, dressed for the most 
part in french style, a shirt of white Holland 
linen, a neckband of lace, and a Scarlet Cloak. 
Etwet was trying to be on an equal footing 
with Monsieur the governor, and in every way 
acted the Sovereign. I gave him a Luncheon, 
a bag of Indian corn, and a pound of powder, 
by recommendation of father de Quen. 

On the 22nd, there came, to constitute 
themselves voluntary prisoners, a husband 
and a Christian wife, who could not agree, 
the one to the Dungeon in the fort, the other 
to the Ursulines, and this after their 
sentence, which was pronounced on them at 
Sillery, upon the complaints of the Captains. 
The factum will be found in the Archives, 
titulo Sillery. 

On the 23rd, the fire for St. John s day Fire for St. John s 
was made about y 2 past 8 in the evening. 
Monsieur the governor sent Monsieur Tron- 



Divorce. 



day. 



206 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

trouuer le p. Vimont & moy dans le fort, nvf 
allasmes ensemble an feu, M. le gouu. 1 y mit 
& lors qu il le metoit ie chante le Vt queant 
laxis & puis 1 oraison: M. de S l . Sauueur n y 
estoit point, il 1 y faut Inuiter vne autre fois: 
on tira 5. coups de Canon & on fit deux ou 3. 
fois la decharge de mousquets : nvf en retour- 
nasmes entre 9. & 10. 
voyage au sault de Le 22. estant alle voir auec M. le gouu. la 

la riuieredeSt. ^ ^^ au dessyf du SauU & t 

Charlespr. les terres 

des Vrsulines. visite tout ce qui est entre deux, il me sembla 
que les Vrsulines deuoient se tenir a vn ruis- 
seau que ie nomm6 de S te . Vrsule, & descen 
dant vers laques Caulmont tascher a faire que 
dans leur concession fut comprise vne petite 
prairie qui e entredeux: M. le gouu. ne me 
voulut accorder pour elles que 12. Arpens sur 
la riuiere & en profondeur ce qu il faudroit p r . 
parfournir leur 200. Arpens, Si depuis ce ruis- 
seau de S . Vrsule iusques a Caulmont il y a 
plvf de 12. Arpens, il faut tacher d auoir ce 
surplvf p r . y comprendre au moins la prairie; 
s il y a moins, on prendra le reste au dela du 
ruisseau Mons r . le gouu. ne voulut rien resou- 
dre, renuoyant le tout au retour de M. bour 
don, qui estoit alle aux yroquois. 

&* a I Isle d Orleans. le mesme lour le p. Vimont alia a 1 Isle 

d Orleans p r . y choisir des prairies p r . les deux 
maisons religieuses, nvf auions este aupara- 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. J&SUITES 207 

quet to know whether we would go ; we went 
to find him, father Vimont and I, in the fort, 
and we went together to the fire. Monsieur 
the governor set it, and while he lighted it, 
I sang the Ut queant laxis and then the 
prayer. Monsieur de St. Sauveur was not 
there; he must be Invited thither, another 
time. 5 Cannon shots were fired, and two or 
3 times occurred the discharge of muskets; 
we returned thence between 9 and 10. 

On the 22nd, I went with Monsieur the Journey to the sault 
governor to see the land of bance above the f the river SL 

. Charles, on account 

Sault, and inspected all that lies between O f the i an ds of the 
them. It seemed to me that the Ursulines Ursulines, 

should confine themselves to the brook that I 
call Ste. Ursule, and, descending toward 
Jaques Caulmont, endeavor to arrange that 
the small meadow between the brook and Caul- 
mont s land be comprised in their concession. 
Monsieur the governor would not grant me 
for them more than 12 Arpents on the river, 
and whatever depth might be necessary to 
complete their 200 Arpents. If there be more 
than 12 Arpents between the Ste. Ursule 
brook and Caulmont s land, an effort should 
be made to obtain that surplus, so that at least 
the meadow may be included. If there are 
fewer, the remainder will be taken beyond the 
brook. Monsieur the governor would decide 
nothing, referring it all to the return of Mon 
sieur bourdon, who had gone to the yroquois. 

On the same Day, father Vimont went to and to the Isle of 
the Isle of Orleans, in order to choose some 
meadows there for the two religious houses ; 



208 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

uant a la longue pointe de 1 autre cost6 p r . 
le mesme dessein le tout se trouuera dans la 
Conuention dressee p r . cela. 

p dendemare a le 25. partit d icy le p. Dendemare p r . Mont- 

Montreal -, 

real 

Promesse de le 26. M r . le gouu. me donna assurace de 

I augment aon des -,, 

de la Vachtrie l augmentaon des terres de la Vacherie p r . 
remplacer 6. Arpens, que nvf auions ced6 a 
Quebek; il alia sur sa monture le dire le 
mesme lour a noe f liegeois, qui trauailloit 
en ce quartier-la au moulin : 

n. F. Liegeois II me dit en mesme temps que ny cette adi- 

tion ny la Vacherie ne deuoient point estre 
prises qu en roture, qu il ne le soufriroit iamais 
autrem*. & que tout ce qui estoit dans la 
banlieiie deuoit estre cense de ceste nature. 

nature de nos Cela me donna suiet d examiner plvf parti- 

culierem 1 . les lettres de nos Concessions, & ie 
trouue" que celles de nos six cents Arpens de 
terre aux 3. riu. donn&lt;es en 1634. estoient a la 
perfection sans aucune charge en toute propri- 
et6 & Seigneurie vt rex concesserat conceden- 
tib. Pour les lettres des terres de noe Dame 
des Anges, beauport & la vacherie de 1637. ie 
n y trouue de charge qu vne messe par an sans 
aucune autre redeuance, & 1 adueu de la con 
cession de 20. en 20. ans, mais il n est fait 
mention d aucune seigneurie. Pour celles de 
1 Isle aux ruaux, elles sont aussy fort bien & 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



209 



we had previously been at the long point on 
the other shore, for the same purpose ; it will 
all be found in the Agreement drawn up to 
that effect. 

On the 25th, father Dendemare left here 
for Montreal. 

On the 26th, Monsieur the governor gave 
me assurance of an increase in the lands of la 
Vacherie, in order to replace 6 Arpents which 
we had ceded to Quebek ; he went on horse 
back to mention this on the same Day to our 
brother liegeois, who was working in that quar 
ter at the mill. 

He told me at the same time that neither 
this addition nor la Vacherie should be taken 
otherwise than en roture; that he would never 
suffer it otherwise, and that everything in the 
banlieue should be deemed of the same nature. 

This gave me occasion to examine more 
closely the letters patent of our Concessions, 
and I found that those of our six hundred 
Arpents of land at 3 rivers, granted in 1634, 
conferred a perfect title upon us without any 
charge, giving us full ownership and all Seign 
iorial Rights, ut rex concesserat concedentibus. 
As regards the letters patent for the lands of 
nostre Dame des Anges, beauport, and la 
vacherie, dated 1637, I found no charge upon 
such concessions beyond the saying of a mass 
every year with no other dues and the 
avowal of concession every 20 years ; but there 
is no mention of any seigniorial right. As 
for the titles to those of Isle aux ruaux, they 
are also very good, and similar to that of 3 



Father dendemare 
goes to Montreal. 

Promise of an in 
crease in the lands 
of la Vacherie. 



Our Brother 
Liegeois. 



Nature of our 
Grants. 



210 



LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28 



comme celle des 3. riuier. P r . 1 Isle de lesvf 
il n y a point de grosse en parchemin, il n y a 
qu vn seul extrait de I assemblee g nle & vne 
prise de possession par de mons r . le gouuern r . 
qui fait mention d vn mandem*. qu il en a 
regeu en vertu duquel il nvf met en cette pos 
session, sans qu il soit faite mention d aucune 
condion. 

Celles qui ont est6 concedees a Mons r . Gif- 
far, des Chastelets &c sont auec plvf de 
seigneurie mais aussy auec beaucoup plvf de 
charge. 

Les plvf desaduantageuses sont celles de 
Sillery qui n estant qu vn transport fait par 
mons r . gan ont aussy toutes les charges qu il 
auoit & entr autres vn denier de cens par 
arpen. 

Enuiron ce temps les Hospitalieres ayant 
rendu 1 escrit du p. Vimont par lequel on leur 
auoit accorde des prairies sur nos terres pour 
6. ans; en suite de ce qu on leur auoit procu 
re a la longue pointe & a 1 Isle d orleans: le p. 
Vimont en aduertit les Vrsulines a ce qu elles 
fissent le mesme : elles y eurent de la peine & 
prierent que cela se faisant scauoir de leur 
oster nos prairies p r . les donner a fief, qu elles 
Ce qu il y a a donner fussent preferees a d autres : la Conclusion fut 

^^ iusques a ce qu e lles fussent assumes de 

ce qui leur auoit est6 assigne a la longue 
pointe & a 1 Isle d orleans nvf reseruerions 
15. ou 16. Arpens de terre p r . elles, desquels 



prairies pr. les re- 

ligieuses sur nos 

terres. 



a Cens de nos terres. 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 211 



rivers. As for the Isle de Jesus, there is no 
deed on parchment ; there is merely an extract 
from the proceedings of the general assembly, 
and a certificate of taking possession by 
monsieur the governor, which mentions a 
mandate that he received, in virtue whereof he 
so put us in possession, without any mention 
being made of any condition. 

Those which were conceded to Monsieur 
Giffar, des Chastelets, etc., confer more seign 
iorial rights, but are also subject to many 
more charges. 

The most disadvantageous are those of Sil- 
lery which, being ours only by a transfer 
made by monsieur gan, are also subject to all 
the charges borne by him, and among others 
a rent of a denier an arpent. 27 

About this time, the Hospital nuns hav 
ing in consequence of what had been pro 
cured for them at the long point and at the 
Isle of Orleans returned the written agree 
ment of father Vimont, by which they had 
been granted some meadows on our lands for 
6 years, father Vimont notified the Ursulines 
that they should do the same. They found 
it hard to do this, and requested that, in case 
that were done, to wit, taking our meadows 
from them, in order to let them out, they 
should be preferred to others. The Conclu 
sion was that, until they had been assured of 
what had been assigned to them at the long 
point and at the Isle of Orleans, we should 
reserve for them 15 or 16 Arpents of land, 
which we should dispose of, when they should 



Meadows on our 
lands for the nuns. 



What of our lands 

are to be offered for 

Rent. 



212 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [Vol.. 28 

nvf disposerions lors qu elles en auroient este" 
assurees ; & disposerions des autres y en ayant 
encore autres 15. on 16. arpens a donner: en 
tout depuis la cabanne aux topiers iusques a la 
riuiere de M. giffar, il y en a 47. Arpens; il 
en faut reseruer 17. p r . la f erme de beauport, 
& donner le reste comme dessvf . 

de Misku. le 28. la barque retournant de Tadousak nvf 

aporta nouuelle de misktf, le p. laplace estoit 
a 1 habitaon des francois auec le p. lyonne ; le 
p. richar auec noe f . laques ratel a la nouuelle 
habitaon de Nepegigb it ou on a fait vne reduc 
tion de sauuages qui estoient pour lors deux 
families de 1 5 . personnes : ils se portoient bien 
& estoient pleins de bonnes esperances: ils 
demandoient en france deux ou trois PP. de 
renfort. 

Nouuelles du retour le 30. nouuelles arriuerent que 2. Algonq. 
up. ogu Compagnons de voyage du p. logues aux yro- 

quois estoient de retour aux 3. riu. que le p. 
logues n estoit pas loing auec Mons r . bour 
don: ils apportoient lettres du p. logues. En 
effect le p. logues estoit arriue le 27. a riche- 
lieu le 29. aux 3. riu. & arriua & Quebek auec 
M. bourdon le 3. de luillet : tout ce qui regarde 
son voyage se trouuera aux Archiues titulo 
yroquois. 

IUILLET. 1646. 

AlaVisitaonsaluts. le i er . de luillet salut a 1 hospital & le 

lendemain aux Vrsulines en 1 honneur de la 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 213 

have received the above assurance, and 
should dispose of the others, there being still 
15 or 1 6 arpents more to be granted. In all, 
from the [river] cabanne-aux-topiers even to 
Monsieur giffar s river, there are 47 Arpents; 
17 must be reserved for the farm at beauport, 
and the remainder be granted as above. 

On the 28th, the bark returning from Ta- 
dousak brought us news from miskou; father 
laplace was at the french settlement with 
father lyonne ; father richar, with our brother 
Jaques ratel, at the new residence of Nepe- 
gigwit, where a settlement of savages has 
been formed, consisting at that time of two 
families, of 1 5 persons. Ours were in good 
health, and were filled with hope; they re 
quested, from f ranee, two or three Fathers, 
as a reinforcement. 

On the 30th, news arrived that 2 Algon- 
quains, traveling Companions of father Jogues 
among the yroquois, were back at 3 rivers; 
and that father Jogues was not far away, 
with Monsieur bourdon ; they brought letters 
from father Jogues. Indeed, father Jogues 
had arrived on the 2 7th at richelieu ; on the 
29th, at 3 rivers; and he reached Quebek, 
with Monsieur bourdon, on the 3rd of July; 
all that concerns his journey will be found in 
the Archives, titulo yroquois. 

JULY, 1646. 

On the ist of July, benediction at the hos 
pital, and the next day at the Ursulines , in 
honor of the visitation. The eve of this feast 



Of Miskou, 



News of father 
Jogues s return. 



Benedictions at the 
Visitation. 



214 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



Les Abnaguiois de- 

mandent vne 

Mission. 



Mort & enterrement 
de Charitt. 



visitaon : la veuille de cette f este vint vn Di- 
manche qui fit qu a 1 hospital p r . le salut on 
y chanta les litanies sur les 5. h. & le lour de la 
feste aux Vrsulines on chanta les vespres 
depuis Thymne, a 7. h. du soir. 

le 4 e . Deux Capitaines Abnaquiois dont le 
principal qui estoit Xstien se nommoit Claude ; 
auec Noel & lean bapt. vinrent trouuer M. le 
gouu. p r . le prier de faire en sorte qu vne robe 
noire allast aux Abnaquiois p r . les Instruire: 
que cela estant vne fois, il ne viendroient plvf 
icy & ne donneroient aucun obrage a M. le 
gouu. pour la traite: M. le gouu. me les ren- 
uoya & moy ie les remits a 1 Automne p r . 
prendre temps p r . y songer: on leur donna 
vn sac de ble d Inde p r . Viatique, du petun, 
du poisson &c & leur fit-on festin, & aux 
principaux de Sillery. lean bapt. & noel en 
mesme temps prierent M. le gouu. de leur 
donner vn present p r . couurir les morts de 
1 Automne p r . empescher leur leunes gens 
d aller en guerre: M. le gouu. le fit. 

le 8 e . mourut vn petite sauuagesse aux Vr 
sulines nomm6e Charit6 aagee de 5 . ^ elle f ut 
enterre"e au Cemetiere des fran9ois ou estoit 
son Pere enterre": elle y fut porte"e par 4. 
domestiques des Vrsulines, auec 4. autres por- 
tant des torches & 2. filles fran9oises & deux 
sauuagesses tenant les coins du drap. M r . le 
prieur alloit le premier portant vne croix 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



215 



The Abnaquiois 
request a 
Mission. 



came on Sunday, for which reason at the hos 
pital they sang, for the benediction, the lita 
ny about 5 o clock; and on the Day of the 
feast, at the Ursulines , they sang vespers 
after the hymn, at 7 o clock in the evening. 

On the 4th, two Abnaquiois Captains, the 
principal one of whom, who was a Christian, 
was named Claude, together with Noel and 
Jean baptiste, came to find Monsieur the gov 
ernor, in order to beg him to make arrange 
ments for a black gown to go to the Abna 
quiois, to Instruct them. They said that, if 
that were once done, they would no longer 
come here, and would give no offense to 
Monsieur the governor regarding the trade. 
Monsieur the governor sent them back to me, 
and I put them off till Autumn, in order to 
take time to consider the matter. They were 
given a bag of Indian corn for a Parting Gift, 
some tobacco, some fish, etc. ; and we gave 
them a feast, and also one to the principal 
persons of Sillery. Jean baptiste and noel at 
the same time begged Monsieur the governor 
to give them a present for covering the dead 
of the Autumn , to stop their Young men from 
going to war; Monsieur the governor did so. 

On the 8th, a little savage girl named Chari- Death and burial of 
t6, aged 5^, died at the Ursulines ; she was Charite. 

interred at the french Cemetery, where her 
Father was buried. She was borne thither by 
4 domestics of the Ursulines, with 4 others 
bearing torches, and 2 french girls and two 
savage girls holding the corners of the pall. 
Monsieur the prior went first, bearing a cross 



216 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

sans baston & son rituel & moy apres, puis le 
corps &c. 

Arriuee du pere le Ce mesme iour arriua le p. le leune de 
leune. montreal, auec noe f Ambroise qui reuenoit 

des 3. riti. 

Consultep". leretour le 9. le tins Consulte p r . le retour aux yro- 
dup*. logues aux . d logues le p. le leune le p. Vimont 

yroquots. 

& le P. logues y estoient: il fut Conclu que 

si autre chose n arriuoit il n y iroit point 
hyuerner; & se tiendroit a Montreal ou aux 3. 
riu. que si quelque oraison \sc. occasion] belle 
se presentoit d y aller, il ne la falloit pas 
refuser 

le 14. partit le p. logues & le p. Drouillet 
auec deux sauuages Xstiens p r . Montreal. 

depart des beufspr. le 13. partit la barque qui portoit des beufs 
les 3 nu. &c au p^ buteux aux 3. riu. 

18. Arpens accordes Ce mesme lour nvf furent accorded par 
alavacherie. Mons r . le gouuern r . 1 8. Arpens de terre en 
augmentaon de celles de la Vacherie & ce sur 
la representaon de la necessite" que nvf auions 
p r . le moulin de quelque augmentaon; & 
surtout sur la representaon que p!j. la occasion 
\sc. cession] de 6. arpens de terre que nvf auions 
auoient fait autrefois a Quebek, ou au lieu de 
12. qui nvf auoient este" accordes, on ne nvf eu 
donna que 6. rien ne nvf auoit este" donne" les 
MM. Vrsulines & Hospitalieres ayant este 
recompencees de 30. Arpens dans la banlieiie. 
nvf entrasmes en possession de cela & de 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



217 



without staff and his ritual, and I after him; 
then the body, etc. 

On this same day, father le Jeune arrived 
from montreal, with our brother Ambroise, 
who was returning from 3 rivers. 

On the gth, I held a Consultation about fa 
ther Jogues s return to the yroquois; father le 
Jeune, father Vimont, and Father Jogues were 
present. It was Resolved that, if nothing 
else happened, he should not go to winter 
there, but should stay at Montreal or at 3 riv 
ers; but that, if some excellent opportunity 
occurred for going thither, it must not be 
refused. 

On the 1 4th, father Jogues and father 
Drouillet started, with two Christian savages, 
for Montreal. 

On the 1 3th, the bark left which carried 
some cattle, etc., to father buteux at 3 rivers. 

This same Day, there were granted us by 
Monsieur the governor 18 Arpents of land, 

as an addition to the lands of la Vacherie, 

and this upon our representation of the neces 
sity that we should have some addition for 
the mill ; and especially upon our statement 
that, for the cession of 6 arpents of land that 
we had made formerly at Quebek, where, 
instead of 12, which had been granted us, 
they gave us only 6, nothing had been 
given us, the Ursuline and Hospital Mothers 
having been compensated by 30 Arpents in 
the suburbs. 

We entered into possession of that, and of 
all our lands of nostre dame des Anges and of 



Arrival of father le 
Jeune. 



Consultation about 
father Jogues s re 
turn to the yroquois. 



Cattle for 3 rivers 
sent away. 

18 Arpents granted 
at la vacherie. 



218 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28 



nouuelle prise de 

possession de toutes 

nos terres. 



procession contre les 
chenilles. 



Nouuelles d vn 

vaisseau basque de 

Tadousak 



Nouuelles des 
Hurons. 



Neufuaine 



toutes nos terres de noe dame des Anges & de 
la Vacherie, par le titre des lettres de Mess, 
de la Comp ie . le 24. de luillet, & ce lour en 
furent expedi6s les Actes. 

le 15. fut faite procession a 1 hospital & aux 
Vrsul es . a Tissue de vespres apres le benedi- 
camvf D no : il y eut clochetes banniere, Croix 
deux chandeliers, deux chantres; puis noe f. 
Ambroise & pierre Gontier (qui duo se ipsis 
hunc acceperunt locu Immo & cu opositu Insi- 
nuasse quo spiritu nescio, toleraui & dissimu- 
laui) puis Mons r . de S 1 . Sauueur & M. le pri- 
eur en surplis qui chantoient les litanies: le p. 
Vimont & moy auec vn petit reliquaire. Aux 
maisons religieuses, on chanta quelques cou 
plets du litanies de noe dame ; & en suite les 
oraisons Conuenables. 

Ce mesme lour vinrent les nouuelles de 
Tadtfsak d vn basque qui traitoit dans la riuiere 
proche d eux: il fallut prendre patience; car 
& on n auoit point de forces, & quoyqu on en 
eut, ce ne seroit que perdre son temps, deuant 
estre plus tost rendu a son gros que nvf sor- 
tis de Quebek. 

le 21. me furent rendues les premieres 
lettres & nouuelles des Hurons du 10. de luin 
par ceux de la nation d yroquet. 

le 19. nvf commen9asmes vne neufuaine de 
saluts du S l . Sacrement pour le bon estat & 
succes des affaires surtout p r . les biens de la 
terre & retour des vaisseaux. 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



219 



la Vacherie, by right of the letters given by 
Messieurs of the Company, on the 24th of 
July ; and on this Day the Deeds therefor were 
drawn up. 

On the 1 5th, a procession was made to the 
hospital and to the Ursulines , at the end of 
vespers, after the benedicamus Domino. There 
were bells, banner, Cross, two candlesticks, 
two chanters; then came our brother Am- 
broise and pierre Gontier (qui duo se ipsis hunc 
acceperunt locum, Immo et cum oppositum Insinuas- 
sem, quo spiritu nescio, toleravi et dissimulavi); 
then Monsieur de St. Sauveur and Monsieur 
the prior in surplices, who sang the litany; 
and father Vimont and I, with a small reli 
quary. At the religious houses we sang some 
couplets of the litany of our lady ; and after 
ward the Appropriate prayers. 

On this same Day came the news from 
Tadousak of a basque who was trading in the 
river near them. It was necessary to use pa 
tience, for we had no forces, and, even if we 
had some, it would only be a waste of time, 
since he would have reached his fleet before 
we had set out from Quebek. 

On the 2ist, the first letters and news from 
the Hurons were delivered to me, dated the 
loth of June, by persons from the yroquet 
nation. 

On the i Qth, we began a novena of benedic 
tions of the Blessed Sacrament for the good 
condition and outcome of affairs, especially 
for the fruits of the earth and the return of 
the vessels. 



New act of possession 
for all our lands. 



Procession against 
the caterpillars. 



News of a basque 
vessel at Tadousak. 



News from the 
Hurons. 



Novena. 



220 



LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



. retour du p. de 
quen 



saulmon 



La St. Ignace 



le 29. arriua le p. de Quen de Tadousak p r . 
la i. fois, ce qu il y fit se trouuera dans la 
relaon : II y fut fort bien nouri & trait6 sur le 
Comrrmn : on nvf enuoya de la deux barriques 
de saulmon outre quatre de nostre pesche, & 
vn de M. le gouu. de 1 Isle aux Oyes. on 
prit cette ann6e plvf de 200. Saulmons ius- 
ques a la fin de ce moys. 

A la S 1 . Ignace salut la veuille a la paroisse; 
la grande messe le lour a 7. heures; Vespres 
solemnelles aux Vrsulines, & le sermon a Tis 
sue; salut le soir a I hospital: auec resoluon 
de faire alternis annis Vespres solemnelles & 
le sermon a ces deux maisons religieuses. Le 
Dimanche d auparauant, cette feste fut decla- 
ree feste de Deuoon & non d obligaon. M. 
le gouu. me parla de faire tirer le Canon a 
1 ordinaire, ie luy tesmoigne" que ie n y auois 
point d Inclinaon: il partit toutesfois d auec 
moy auec la resoluon de le faire ; il ne le fit 
pas toutesfois, peut estre que la raison que ie 
luy en apporte que les vaisseaux n estant pas 
venus cela fairoit rumeur 1 arresta. les Vrsu 
lines ce lour la nvf traiterent magnifique- 
ment. II y eut manquement en ce que tvf 
ceux de Sillery estant venus icy ils n assiste- 
rent qu au disner & point au vespres ny 
au sermon non plvf que les PP. Ie fus 
retenu de 1 intimer parceque c estoit moy qui 
faisois la predicaon (ce qui cependant n en 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



221 



On the 29th, father de Quen arrived from 
Tadousak for the ist time: what he is doing 
there will be found in the relation. He was 
very well supported and treated there, at the 
charge of the Association. There were sent 
us thence two kegs of salmon, besides four 
from our own fishery ; and one from Monsieur 
the governor, from the Isle aux Oyes. This 
year, more than 200 Salmon were caught, up 
to the end of this month. 

On St. Ignace s day, benediction the day 
before at the parish church; high mass on 
the Day itself, at 7 o clock; solemn Vespers 
at the Ursulines , and the sermon at the 
end ; benediction in the evening, at the hospi 
tal, with the resolution to hold solemn Ves 
pers and deliver the sermon, alternis annis, at 
these two religious houses. On the preceding 
Sunday, this feast was declared a feast of 
Devotion, and not of obligation. Monsieur the 
governor spoke to me of having the Cannon 
fired as usual ; I showed him that I had no 
Inclination for this. He left me, however, 
with the resolve to have it done, yet he did 
not do so; perhaps the argument which I 
adduced to him that, as the vessels had not 
come, such an act might cause a disturbance 
stopped him. The Ursulines that Day treated 
us magnificently. There was a failure in this 
respect, that all those of Sillery, having come 
here, attended only the dinner, and neither 
at vespers nor at sermon, were there other 
than the Fathers. I was restrained from call 
ing attention to it, because I was the one who 



ist return of father 
de guen. 



Salmon. 



Day of St. Ignace. 



222 



LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



Neufuaine nouuelles 

du retour des vais- 

seaux., le 6. d Aoust 



seruice pr. M. de 
Montmagnyfrere du 
gouuerneur. 



Arrzude de M. de le 
Tour. 



Assomption de nde 
dame. 



deuoit pas empescher) vne autre fois il y 
faudra obliger. 

AOUST. 1646. 

Vne neufuaine commencee bien a propos le 
lour de S te . Marie aux Neiges : beatvf venter, 
& ce pour se preparer a la feste, & pour impe- 
trer le retour des nauires; le lendemain 
arriuerent les nouuelles: le p. Daran vint 
dans vn Canot; & M. de launay dans vne 
barque. 

Par ces nouuelles ayant apris les nouuelles 
de la mort d Mons r . de Montmagny le Con- 
seiller, frere de M r . le Gouuerneur, on dit vne 
grande messe de requiem le lendemain: les 
religieuses luy firent compliment des le soir 
dirent vespres des morts : & la messe le lende 
main : on en fut aduerti au salut. 

le 8. sur le soir parurent le nauire du Capit. 
Poullet & le phlibot de M. de la Tour qui se 
venoit refugier icy : ils arriuerent icy le lende 
main matin : on tira a 1 arriue e du dit S r . de le 
Tour & a sa descente il fut loge" au fort & 
mons r . le gouu. le i er . lour luy donna le 
deuant il 1 accepta p r . le i er . lour & puis le 
refusa, coe il deuoit. 

le 15. se fit la procession les sauuages hom- 
mes marchoient apres la Croix ; les femmes a 
la queue: i y portois vne noe dame peinte en 
Argent des Vrsulines. il y eut vn reposoir a 



1645 -46J JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 223 

preached the sermon (which, however, should 
not have hindered them) ; another time, it will 
be necessary to make attendance obligatory. 

AUGUST, 1646. 

A novena having a very timely beginning, Novena; news of 

on the Day of St. Mary of the Snows, 28 the return of the ves- 

, , 1 . . , r sels. 6th of August, 

beatus venter; and this in order to prepare for 

the feast, and to obtain the return of the 
ships. On the next day, the news arrived; 
father Daran 29 came in a Canoe, and Monsieur 
de launay in a bark. 

Having learned by these advices the tidings Service for Monsieur 
of the death of Monsieur de Montmagny, the de Montmagny, the 
Counselor, brother of Monsieur the Govern- 8 
or, we said a requiem high mass the next 
day. The nuns paid him a compliment, 
that evening, they said vespers for the dead, 
and mass the next day; notice thereof was 
given at the benediction. 

On the 8th, about evening, appeared the Arrival of Monsieur 
ship of Captain Poullet and the flyboat of de le Tour - 
Monsieur de la Tour, who was coming to take 
refuge here ; 30 they arrived here the next 
morning. A salute was fired at the Sieur de 
le Tour s arrival and at his landing; he was 
lodged at the fort, and monsieur the governor 
on the ist Day gave him the precedence; he 
accepted this for the ist Day, and then refused 
it, as was becoming. 

On the 1 5th occurred the procession; the Assumption of our 
savage men marched after the Cross, the lady. 

women at the rear ; I carried an image of our 
lady, painted in Silver by the Ursulines. 



224 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

la Croix du mont Carmel ou les sauuages, 
chanteront 1 Aue Maria en leur langue, Les 
femmes sauuages y estoient deuant 1 arriuee 
de la procession. 

deffaite du borgne Enuiron ce temps vint la nouuelle de la 
del Isle. deffaite du borgne, par les oneiochronons ; ils 

prirent vne femme & tuerent vn homme : puis 
se vinrent excuser disans qu ils pensoient que 
ce fussent Hurons. on dit qu il y auoit deux 
ou 3. Annieronons en leur Comp ie . cela se fit 
au dessvf du long Sault : les vainqueurs en s en 
retournant furent deffaits par ceux d yroquet; 
on amena vn prisonnier, & la captiue fut 
deliure e. 

sauuages condamnds les sauuages de Sillery tiient vne vache de 
a6.Castorspr.auotr m&lt; Nicolas { auoit est6 dans leur bl g 
tue vne vache. 

elle fut estimes 7 5 It. les sauuages furent 

apeles par M. le gouu. p r . en faire Justice & 
ordonna qu ils payeroient 6. Castors ce qui 
fut fait : auec assurance que quand ils se plein- 
droient on leur fairoit Justice du tort qu au- 
roient fait les vaches dans leur b!6s. 

Consulte Le 2 1 . le tins Consulte ou estoient les pp. 

d Importdce. le Ieune&gt; yimont, & dequen. la il fut arreste 

i. qu on donneroit les terres de beauport a 
cens, oium consensu. 2. que non obstantib. 
quibuscumq. on bastiroit p r . nvf, unvf p. le 
leune hsesitauit in hoc artic. non negauit 
neque affirmauit. Depuis le p. le leune fut 
dedans qu on bastit: Ite le p. buteux p. 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



225 



There was a temporary altar at the Cross of 
mount Carmel, where the savages sang the 
Ave Maria in their own language. The 
savage women were there before the arrival 
of the procession. 

About this time came the news of the de 
feat of le borgne by the oneiochronons ; they 
captured a woman and killed a man, then 
came to excuse themselves, saying that they 
thought that those were Hurons. It is said 
that there were two or 3 Annieronons in their 
Company. That took place above the long 
Sault ; the victors, returning, were defeated by 
the yroquet people ; one prisoner was brought 
in, and the captive woman was set free. 

The savages of Sillery kill a cow of mon 
sieur Nicolas, which had been in their corn ; 
she was valued at 75 livres. The savages 
were summoned by Monsieur the governor, 
to do Justice in this matter, and he ordered 
that they should pay 6 Beavers, which was 
done, with the assurance that when they 
should complain, Justice would be done them 
for the damage which the cows might have 
wrought in their corn. 

On the 2ist, I held a Consultation, at which 
were present fathers le Jeune, Vimont, and 
dequen ; it was there decided : 

ist, that the lands at beauport should be 
offered for rent, omnium consensu. 2nd, that, 
non obstantibus quibuscumque , they should build 
for us; unus, pater le Jeime, hcesitavit in hoc 
articulo; non negavit neque affirmavit. Later, 
father le Jeune was in favor of building ; Item, 



Defeat of le borgne 
of the Island. 



Savages sentenced to 

a fine of 6 Beavers 

for having killed a 

COTV. 



Important Consul 
tation. 



226 



LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



Salut a 



arriuee des Hurons 

&* voyage aux j. 

riuieres. 



mines. 



Dendemare. [3] Ite I hyuernemt. du p. Druil- 
letes aux Abnaquiois, & celuy du p. logues 
aux yroquois. 

4. qu on demanderoit augmentaon aux 
Habitans. 

5. p r . la perpetiiit6 du salut du S l . Sacre- 
ment, hsesitatio fuit, ludicao tamen in perpe- 
tuitate: Conclusio mea de continiier sans 
engagem . iusques a ce que Dieu & le temps 
nvf y fissent voir plvf clair. 

Le 26, d Aoust arriua Pierrot Cochon des 
Hurons ou il nvf auoit serui 5. ans il fut 
habille & eut 50!!. il aporta la nouuelle de 
quelques Canots Hurons & de la flotte entiere 
qui suiuoit. 

le 28. ie partis seul dans vn Canot p r . aller 
aux 3. riu. ie mene* auec moy dans vn Cha- 
loupe 2. hommes & vn Enfant. L vn des 
hommes estoit le fils du gobloteur nomine" 
Guillaume Pelletier, deserteur, scieur de long, 
Charpentir, Charbonnier &c. il se donna tout 
d vn coup; on promit toutesfois a ses parens 
cent francs p r . sa i e . anne"e; & on ne laissa pas 
de 1 habiller tout de neuf. 

L autre estoit Pierre boiiencha Masson a 
looll. de gages son marche par escrit se trou- 
uera dans les Archiues. 

1 Enfant estoit vn nomme leger qui estoit 
marmiton au fort aage de 1 5 . ans. 

Arriuant aux 3. riu. i y trouue" Gilles bacon: 
qui Incontinent vint trouuer M. le gouu. a 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 227 

father buteux, father Dendemare. 31 3rd, Item, 
the wintering of father Druilletes among the 
Abnaquiois, and that of father Jogues among 
the yroquois. 

4th, that we should ask an increase from 
the Habitans. 

5th, as to the perpetual observance of the Perpetual observ- 
benediction of the Blessed Sacrament, hcesita- ance f the Benedic-\ 
tio fuit, Judicatio tamen in perpetuitatem; Con- 
clusio mea, to continue without binding our 
selves until God and time should enable us to 
see more clearly. 

On the 26th of August, Pierrot Cochon ar- Arrival from the 
rived from the Hurons, where he had served Hurons, and journey 
us 5 years; he was clothed and had 50 livres. to 3 rivers. 

He brought tidings of some Huron Canoes, 
and of the whole fleet, which was following. 

On the 28th, I started alone in a Canoe to 
go to 3 rivers; I took with me, in a Shallop, 
2 men and a Boy. One of the men was the 
son of the tippler named Guillaume Pelle- 
tier, a deserter, sawyer, Carpenter, Char 
coal-burner, etc. He gave himself up entire 
ly; we nevertheless promised his parents a 
hundred francs for his ist year, and we did not 
fail to clothe him quite anew. 

The other was Pierre bouencha, a Mason, 
at 100 livres in wages; his contract in writ 
ing will be found in the Archives. 

The Boy was one leger, who was scullion 
at the fort ; aged 1 5 years. 

Arriving at 3 rivers, I found Gilles bacon, Mines. 

who Straightway came to find Monsieur the 
governor at Quebek, by order of Monsieur de 



228 



LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



mission aux Abna- 
quiois. 



Ceux gui retourne- 
rent des Hurons. 



Ponfar 



disputes pour les 
terres des j. riu. 



Quebek par ordre de M. de la poterie p r . don- 
ner aduis des Mines d or & de Cuiure qu il 
auoit trouuees, dont il aportoit des pierres. 
il y fut renuoye" & on trouua que ce n estoit 
rien qui vaille. 

Ayant expedie toutes mes lettres p r . les 
Hurons ie reuins a Quebek la veuille de la 
Natiuite de noe Dame, & i en repartis auec M. 
le gouuer r . le 1 1 . 

le 29. partit seul de frangois p r . la mission 
de 1 Assomption aux Abnaquiois le p. gabriel 
Drliilletes auec deux Canots de sauuages dont 
le chef estoit Claude bon Xstien. 

Ceux qui retournerent cette anne"e des 
Hurons furent Pierrot Cochon, Gilles bacon; 
Daniel Carteron, lean le Mercier, desgrosil- 
lers, racine, & Eustache lambert qui s estoit 
donne, & deuoit remonter; & en effect il re- 
monta auec les susdits susnommes ; & en outre 
il se chargea de deux veaus. 

SEPT. 1646. 

le 9. benoist ponfar fit marche auec nvf pour 
vn an a loott. 

Le ii. Ie partis auec M. le gouu. p r . les 3. 
riu. ce qui se passa auec les sauuages se voira 
dans les Archiues. 

le p. buteux demanda remuement de bornes 
& fut refuse de M. le gouu. reciproquem 1 . il 
refusa M. de la poterie p r . d autres aligne- 
mens. 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



229 



Mission among the 
Abnaquiois. 



Those who returned 
from the Hurons, 



la poterie, so as to give information of the 
Mines of gold and Copper that he had found, 
of which he brought some ores. He was sent 
back, and they found that it was nothing of 
value. 

Having despatched all my letters for the 
Hurons, I came back to Quebek on the eve of 
the Nativity of our Lady ; I went away again 
with Monsieur the governor, on the nth. 

On the 2 Qth father gabriel Driiilletes started 
for the mission of the Assumption among the 
Abnaquiois, the only frenchman with two 
Canoes of savages, whose chief was Claude, a 
good Christian. 

Those who returned this year from the 
Hurons were Pierrot Cochon, Gilles bacon; 
DanielCarteron,JeanleMercier,desgrosillers, 32 
racine, and Eustache lambert. This last man 
had given himself in service and was to go up 
again ; and he did indeed go up again with 
the above-named persons, and, moreover, he 
took charge of two calves. 

SEPTEMBER, 1646. 

On the gth, benoist ponfar made a contract Ponfar. 

with us for one year, at 100 livres. 

On the i ith, I started with Monsieur the 
governor for 3 rivers : what came to pass with 
the savages will be seen in the Archives. 

Father buteux requested the moving of Disputes about the 
boundaries, and was refused by Monsieur the lands at 3 rivers. 
governor; in turn, he refused Monsieur de la 
poterie in the matter of other lineations. 

Monsieur de la Poterie vigorously disputed 



230 



LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



depart des Hurons. 



M. de la Poterie disputa puissament le 
Cap des 3. riu. affecte aux Sauuages, en ayant 
la Concession de cette annee de M de la 
magdelaine: 1 affaire fut Indecise 

II y auoit 80. Canots, ils remporterent vne 
dousain de paquets de robe a faute de Mar- 
chandises & partirent p r . s en retourner le 
mesme lour que nvf scauoir le 22. ondi^aharea 
quitta la grande bande & voulut aller par le 
grand lac, il fut attrape par les ennemys ils 
estoient deux Canots deux hommes se sauue- 
rent. 

depart du p. logues. le p. logues deuoit partir le 29. p r . son hy- 

uernement aux yroquois auec lalande, otrih^re 
huron yroquise, & deux ou trois autres 
Hurons qui alloit voir leur parens captifs. 

Auec les Hurons remonta Eustache, & les 
trois dont i ay parle y dessvf, Ite deux veaus 
& plvf de 50. paquets. 

En reuenant a Quebek, nvf rencontrasmes 
au Cap a 1 Arbre vne Chaloupe qui portoit le 
p. Daran qui nvf apporta les nouuelles de 
1 arriues de M. de Maisonneuue & de M. de 
repentigny & des autres qui estoient proches ; 
ce fut le 20 e . qu arriua M. de maisonneuue & 
de 23. arriua M. de repentigny & nvf aussy 
quelques heures auparauant. 

Auec M. de repentigny estoit le/*. Quentin 
& quelques hommes p r . les Hurons, & p r . icy 
le sr. de I aubintere bas : Ite vn leune gentilhomme de la maison 

de Courtent, qui s estoit conuerti a la rochelle, 



arriuie des vais- 
seaux de f ranee 



Le P. Quentin 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



231 



the Cape at 3 rivers, set apart for the Sav 
ages, since we had the Grant of it for this 
year, from Monsieur de la magdelaine: the 
matter was Undecided. 

There were 80 Canoes ; they carried away 
a dozen bundles of skins, for want of Mer 
chandise, and left in order to return the same 
Day as we, to wit, the 22nd. Ondiwaharea 
parted from the main band, and chose to go 
by the great lake; he was caught by the 
enemies, of whom there were two Canoes ; two 
men escaped. 

Father Jogues was to start on the 29th, for 
his wintering among the yroquois, with 
lalande, otrihoure, a huron-yroquise, and 
two or three other Hurons, who were going 
to see their captive relatives. 

With the Hurons Eustache went up, and 
the three of whom I have spoken above ; Item, 
two calves, and more than 50 bundles. 

On returning to Quebek, we encountered 
at the Cap a 1 Arbre a Shallop, which carried 
father Daran, who brought us the news of the 
arrival of Monsieur de Maisonneuve and of 
Monsieur de repentigny and others, who were 
near. It was the 2Oth, when Monsieur de 
maisonneuve arrived; and on the 23rd arrived 
Monsieur de repentigny, and we, too, some 
hours previously. 

With Monsieur de repentigny were father 
Quentin and some men both for the Hurons 
and for work down here : Item, a Young gen 
tleman from the house of Courtene", who had 
been converted at la rochelle and had subse- 



Departure of the 
Hurons. 



Departure of father 
Jogues. 



Arrival of -vessels 
fromfrance. 



Father Quentin. 

The sieur de 
I aubiniere. 



232 



LES RELA TIONS DES JES UITES [VOL. 28 



& en suite auoit fait vceu d aller aux Hurons: 
mais il s est trouue", que ce n estoit quvn 
fourbe; qui auoit paru en Angleterre comme 
petit fils de la maison de Sancerre & nepueu 
de M. desnoyers qui faisoit mine de se vou- 
loir faire heretique, & sentant que les nou- 
uelles de f ranee venoient sur 1 aduis qu on en 
auoit donne, s enfuit: on eut en mesme temps 
aduis de plusieurs autres fourbes, il fit mille 
Benedict apostat, pieces icy, & enfin aduoiia ou mentist qu il 
vagabond.... estoit religieux benedict in prof 6s de plusieurs 
annees; qu il estoit soubsdiacre, & on deposa 
icy qu il estoit pass/ a Alenqon en vn monastere 
de benedictines ou il auoit confesse vne reli- 
gieuse mourante: il fit mine de vouloir de- 
meurer, & faisoit rage sur ce qu on auoit 
estoit [sc. ecrit Laverd. } de luy qu il estoit 
bastar: mais ceux qui 1 auoient veu en An 
gleterre luy dirent a 1 oreille, qu il se teust; il 
s en alia done, il nvf a affronte de plvf de 2Oott. 
qu on auan9a p r . luy. 
Ceux qui vinrent Ceux done qui arriuerent cette annee, outre 

cette annee def ranee ^ Q ue ntin furent le P. Daran, le p. gabr. lale- 
pour nvf. 
G. Laleman ment, le p. Amable de fret at; noe frere Pierre 

masson: p r . les Hurons, desforges, pierre 
tourmente masson, lean guiet menusier; fr. 

Le S r . de Laubiniere Goiiaut Apdtiq. & le dit S r . de laubiniere. 

P r . icy bas Pierre deschamps laboureur, 
Simon gabory laboureur, Charles Droiiillar & 
gilles Henar. 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 233 

quently made a vow to go to the Hurons. But 
it proved that he was only a swindler, who had 
appeared in England as grandson to the house 
of Sancerre, and nephew to Monsieur desnoy- 
ers, who made a pretense of intending to 
become a heretic. But, learning that news 
from france was on the way, in consequence 
of information that had been given about 
him, he fled; they had warning, at the same 
time, of several other knaves. He played a 
thousand tricks here, and finally avowed, or A Benedictine apos- 
lied, that he was a benedict ine religious, a pro- tate &gt; a vagabond. 
fessed, for several years, and that he was a 
subdeacon ; and it was affirmed here that he 
had entered, at Alen^on, a monastery of benedic- 
tine nuns, where he had heard the confession 
of a dying nun. He affected to wish to re 
main, and was enraged because they had writ 
ten about him that he was a bastard; but 
those who had seen him in England whispered 
to him to keep quiet ; and he then went away. 
He cheated us by more than 200 livres, which 
we advanced for him. 

Those, then, who arrived this year, besides Those who came this 
father Quentin, were Father Daran, father year from france 

gabriel lalemant, father Amable de fretatJ and ., r T US J 

Gabriel Laleman. 

our brother Pierre masson. For the Hurons, 

came desforges; pierre tourmente, a mason; 

Jean guiet, a joiner; brother Gouaut, an 

Apothecary ; and the said Sieur de laubiniere. The Sieur de Lau- 

For work down here, came Pierre deschamps, biniere. 

a laborer ; Simon gabory, a laborer ; Charles 

Drouillar, and gilles Henar. 

Our brother masson and desforges were 



depart de ndef mas- 
son &-&gt; desforges. 



arriute de la 
derniere barque 
de M. le Tardif 



bastien 



la traite de ces deux 
anndes. 



Mariage de la fille 
de m. de repentigny: 
ou le p. Vtmont 6^ le 

p. le leune assiste- 
rent. 



234 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

noe f masson & desforges furent enuoy6s 
aux Hurons & partirent le iour de S 1 . Michel, 
par 1 occasion de deux canots qui se trouue- 
rent heureusem*. a Quebek. 

1646. OCTOBRE 

le 14. arriua la barque qui estoit le dernier 
de tvf les vaisseaux qu on attendoit de france, 
& ce mesme vaisseau apporta les nouuelles de 
I arriu6e a Tadoussac de M. le Tardif arreste 
en france par Mons r . de repentigny, lequel M. 
le Tardif ne fut que 44. lours en cheimn. & 
arriua a Quebek le 17. 

le 28. entra a noe seruice bastien a looll. de 
gages & vn paire de souliers. 

L an 1645. qui fut 1 annee du changem 1 . de 
la traite & que Mess, de la Comp ie . generale 
partagerent la traite auec les Habitans les 
seuls habitans eurent pour leur part 98. poin- 
ons de Castor, & en 1646. plvf de 160. dans 
vn poingon il y a 200. liures de Castor, & la 
liure vendue ictt. sans les peaux d orignak &c. 

le 2. de ce moys se fit le mariage de la fille 
de mons r . de repentigny auec m. godefroy, a 
petit bruit, & les nopces 10. iours apres. 

& tout le moys se traiterent les affaires; 
Mons r . de repentigny fut continue Admiral, 
& les autres capitaines aussy; mais Mons r . 
des chastelets fut constitue commis generale 
sur les vaisseaux pour tvf les achapts. 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 235 

sent to the Hurons, and started on Michael 
mas, availing themselves of two canoes 
which fortunately happened to be at Quebek. 

1646, OCTOBER. 

On the 1 4th, the bark arrived which was 
the last of all the vessels that were expected 
from france; and this same vessel brought 
the news of the arrival at Tadoussac of 
Monsieur le Tardif, detained in france by 
Monsieur de repentigny. This Monsieur le 
Tardif was only 44 Days on the way, and 
arrived at Quebek on the I7th. 

On the 28th, bastien entered our service 
for 100 livres in wages and a pair of shoes. 

In the year 1645, which was the year 
of the change in trade, and that in which 
Messieurs of the general Company shared the 
trade with the Habitans, the habitans alone 
had for their part 98 casks of Beaver, and, in 
1646, they had more than 160; in a cask there 
are 200 pounds of Beaver, and the pound is 
sold at 10 livres. That does not include the 
skins of elk, etc. 

On the 2nd of this month occurred the mar 
riage of the daughter of monsieur de repen 
tigny to monsieur godefroy, quietly ; and the 
nuptial feast 10 days later. 

And all this month, business was carried 
on; Monsieur de repentigny was continued 
Admiral, and the other captains in their posts ; 
but Monsieur des chastelets was appointed 
general agent on board the vessels for all the 
purchases. 



Departure of our 

brother masson and 

desforges. 



Arrival of the last 
bark, and of Mon 
sieur le Tardif. 



Bastien. 

The trade in these 
two years. 



Marriage of the 
daughter of mon 
sieur de repentigny, 

at which father 
Vimont and father 
le Jeune were 
present. 



236 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

Conseils &lt;S^ assem- II sembla dans toutes les assemblies qui se 
bides pr. les affaires. firent que cellx qu j n a uoient point ayme" le 

transport de la traite voulurent faire voir les 
desordres elle estant entre les mains des Ha- 
bitans de sorte qu au lieu de les empescher, 
ils sembloient les fomenter: ou en ne faisant 
rien n agissant point & laissant tout aller, ou 
en quelqu autre maniere: c est ce qui donna 
suiet de dresser les memoires pour vn bon 
reiglement 

Augment aon de ce Nvf presentasmes requeste pour auoir aug- 
qu onnvfdonnoit. mentaon de ce qu on nv f donnoit, on donna 

douse cent francs a chaqu vne des trois mai- 
sons Quebek, 3. riu. & Hurons, mais aussy on 
se dechargea du chaufage, & nvf demeurasmes 
obliges de nvf en f ournir nvf mesmes ; voyes 
le papier dans les Archiues. 

mais ensuite aussy tvf ceux du Conseil se 
tirent puissament augmenter leur gages & re- 
compenser de leur seruice ce qui apporta vne 
telle confusion me [sc. que] cela fit honte, & 
M. de maisonneuue n ayant point voulu signer, 
rien ne fut signe de ces gratifications-la: 

salut du St. Sacremt. dans vne des premieres assembles, on de- 

establi. manda que le salut du S l . Sacrem 1 . fut establi 

raisons prguoy, pour iamais tvf les leudis, en action de grace 

de la paix exterieure & p r . sa continuaon ; & 

en outre pour obtenir la paix Interieure, & 

bonne vnion & Intelligence entre tvf les corps 

& personnes interess6es aux affaires du pays. 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



237 



It seemed, at all the assemblies which were 
held, that those who had not favored the 
transfer of the trade, wished to bring to light 
the disorders while it lay in the hands of the 
Habitans. Thus, instead of preventing these, 
they seemed to foment them, either by 
doing nothing, taking no action, and letting 
everything go, or in some other manner. It 
is this that gave occasion to draw up memorials 
for a suitable regulation. 

We presented a petition for an increase in 
what was allowed us : they gave twelve hun 
dred francs to each of the three houses, 
Quebek, 3 rivers, and Hurons, but they also 
exempted themselves from supplying fuel, 
and we remained obliged to furnish ourselves 
with it ; see the paper in the Archives. 

But then, too, all those of the Council make 
strenuous efforts to augment their own pay 
and to requite their own services ; which re 
sulted in such confusion as was disgraceful. 
But, as Monsieur de maisonneuve had not con 
sented thereto, none of these gratuities were 
subscribed to. 

At one of the first assemblies, it was re 
quested that the benediction of the Blessed 
Sacrament should be instituted forever, every 
Thursday, by way of thanksgiving for peace 
without, and on behalf of its continuation; 
and furthermore, to obtain Internal peace, 
and full union and Harmony between all the 
corporations and persons interested in the 
country s affairs. 

On the last Day of October, the vessels 



Councils and assem 
blies/or business. 



Increase in what 
they allowed us. 



Benediction of the 

Blessed Sacrament 

instituted. 

Reasons why. 



238 



LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28 



depart des vaisseaus Le dernier lour d oct. partirent les vais- 

seaux; le p. Quentin y estoit seul des NN. 
auec luy repassa robert hache: Ite M. de mai- 
sonneuue M. giffar, M. Tronquet & tvf auec 
bonne resoluon de poursuiure quelque reigle- 
ment p r . leurs affaires chaqu vn pretendant 
ses Interests particuliers. II sembloit y deuoir 
auoir crise a cause du retardem . de m le Tardif . 

En mesme temps aussy repassa le vaisseau 
qui auoit apporte" M. le Tardif, & vn nomine" 
Laual6e repassa, qui estoit venu auec M. le 
Tardif. 

Auec eux repasserent le fils de M. de repen- 
tigny de M. Couillar, de mons r . giffar, la nep- 
ueux de M. deschastelets tvf fripons p r .la plvf 
part qui auoient fait mille pieces a 1 autre voy 
age, & on donnoit a tvf de grands apointe- 
mens. 

On fait vn nouueau four & vne brasserie a 
Sillery 

On commence auec 6. hommes a tirer de la 
pierre & a disposer la place p r . le presbytere 
& 1 Eglise 

On prit cette annee quarante milliers d an- 
guille qu on vendit la plvf part demy escu le 
cent: on commenca a en pescher en Aoust & 
on finit sur le 9. ou 10. de nouembre. 

En oct. le p. le leune fit a Sillery 1 expoon 
d vn tableau aux Sauuages venu de la part de 
la royne, de son portrait, de celuy du roy &c. 
on donna en mesme temps trois Couuertes & 



bastimens. 



peso he d Anguzlle, 
40. milliers. 



presens aux 
sauuages. 

Portraits du roy Et 
de la reyne a Sillery. 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



239 



sailed; father Quentin was the only one of 
Ours on board. With him returned robert 
hache; Item, Monsieur de maisonneuve, 
Monsieur giffar, Monsieur Tronquet, and all 
firmly resolved that they would strive to ob 
tain some regulation for their affairs, each 
one seeking his own private Interests. It 
seemed that a crisis was likely to occur, on 
account of monsieur le Tardif s delay. 

At the same time, also, the vessel went back 
which had brought Monsieur le Tardif, and 
one Lavalee went over again, who had come 
with Monsieur le Tardif. 

With them returned the sons of Monsieur 
de repentigny, Monsieur Couillar, and mon 
sieur giffar, and the nephews of Monsieur 
deschastelets, all rogues, for the most part, 
who had played a thousand tricks on the other 
voyage ; and they all were given high salaries. 

They are making a new oven and a brew 
ery at Sillery. 

We begin with 6 men to quarry stone, and 
to prepare the site for the clergy-house and 
the Church. 

They caught, this year, forty thousand eels, 
most of which were sold at half an ecu the 
hundred. They began to fish for them in 
August, and they finished about the Qth or 
loth of november. 

In October, father le Jeune exhibited a pic 
ture to the Savages at Sillery, which had come 
from the queen, containing her portrait, 
that of the king, etc. At the same time, 
they were given three Blankets and three 



Departure of the 
vessels. 



Buildings. 



Eel fishery; 40 
thousand. 



Presents to the 
savages. 

Portraits of the king 

and of the queen, at 

Sillery. 



240 



LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



la 7^oussaincts 



salut du St. Sacre- 
ment 



dernier depart des 
vaisseaux 



Mart de la m. de St. 

Ignace i e . Sup. de 

L hot el D. 



trois arquebuses aux despends du magazin, & 
nvf leur fismes festin. 

1646. NOU. 

La veuille de la Toussaincts il y eut salut 
ou furent chante es les litanies des saincts auec 
le salue. 

Le lour de la Toussaincts qui estoit vn 
leudy fut publie I establissement du salut du 
S 1 . Sacrement, & fut ce lour la fait a Vespres : 
le reste des deux iours se passa coe I ann6e 
d auparauant except^ que les soldats ne vin- 
rent point sonner parceque nvf ne le lugasmes 
point a propos nos hommes sonnerent p r . la 
solemnite du morts ; & les soldats sonnerent 
au fort, mais ie n y voy point de raison. 

le 4 e . Les vaisseaux n estant encores qu a 
4. ou 5. lieiies d icy on en eut encores nou- 
uelles ; ils eurent vn vent f auorable ce lour-la. 

les 5. mourut la m. Marie de S 1 . Ignace 
premiere Superieure de 1 hospital de Quebek 
sur les 5. h. du matin elle ne fut enterree que 
le lendemain, ie dis la grande messe en leur 
Eglise respondue par mons r . de S 1 . Sauueur 
& autres chantres: apres 1 Euangile ie dis 
1 espace de deux ou trois miserere quelques 
consideraons sur la mort a 1 occasion de celle 
de cette bonne mere ; nvf entrasmes dans leur 
Cheur 5. prestres & vn chantre seculier S 1 . 
Martin pour faire 1 office de la Sepulture. 

le 6. rene Oheraenti Huron voulut s en aller 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



241 



arquebuses, at the expense of the warehouse ; 
and we made a feast for them. 

1646, NOVEMBER. 

On the eve of All Saints there was benedic 
tion, at which was sung the litany of the 
saints, with the salve. 

On the Day of All Saints, which was on 
Thursday, the institution of the benediction of 
the Blessed Sacrament was announced, and on 
that Day it was held at Vespers. The remain 
der of the two days was spent as in the pre 
ceding year, except that the soldiers did not 
come to ring the bell, because we did not 
Judge it proper. Our men rang for the 
solemnity of the dead, and the soldiers rang 
at the fort ; but I see no reason for this. 

On the 4th, since the vessels were as yet 
no more than 4 or 5 leagues from here, we 
still had news of them ; they had a favorable 
wind on that Day. 

On the 5th, mother Marie de St. Ignace, 
first Superior of the hospital at Quebek, died 
about 5 o clock in the morning; she was not 
buried until the next day. I said high mass 
in their Church, at which monsieur de St. 
Sauveur and other choristers made the re 
sponses. After the Gospel I spoke, for the 
space of two or three misereres, upon death, on 
the occasion of that of this good mother ; we 
entered their Choir, 5 priests and a lay chor 
ister, St. Martin, to perform the Burial office. 

On the 6th, rene Oheraenti, a Huron, wished 
to go to 3 rivers by land, for want of a Canoe ; 



A II Saints. 



Benediction of the 
Blessed Sacrament. 



Final departure of 
the vessels. 



Death of mother de 

St. Ignace, ist 

Superior of the 

Hotel Dieu. 



depart de rent 
oheraenti. 



le temps de la gelte 
&lt;&= de la neige 



Mariage de Mad. 
Nicolet. 



present de madame 
de la Pelterie 



de charlotte 



mort de loachim. 



242 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

aux 3. riu. par terre a faute de Canot, il alia 
coucher a Sillery ; il f ut arreste icy auec Ar- 
mand au moys de Sept. de la part de M. le 
gouu. & des Habitans pour y hyuerner : il ser- 
uit i. a aller reconnoistre les mines preten- 
dues ; puis estant de retour icy a Quebek il y 
demeura quelque temps & puis s y ennuya: il 
arriua heureusem*. aux 3. riu. 

le 7. il commenga a geler a glace sans qu il 
eut encore neige" pour en parler & fort legere- 
ment & passagement. 

le lendemain la neige commen9a. 

le 12. mariage de Champagne & de Madame 
Nicolet a 5. h. du matin; le p. Vimont se 
deliure de 1 Importunite d aller aux nopces & 
fait en sorte qu on enuoye de la nopce quel 
que chose a la maison. 

le 14. Mad. de la pelleterie enuoya ceans vn 
present: c estoit vn paquet, ou il y auoit, vne 
pierre d Autel, & vn petit missel, deux napes 
dont 1 vne estoit Damassee; deux dousaines 
de seruietes, & deux linceuils qui furent don- 
nes a noe f. liegeois; six mains de papier; & 
vn beau Chapelet. 

Quelques iours apres la Soeur Charlote 
enuoya quatre brasses & plvf d estoffe bleiie, & 
vne brasse & demie d estoffe rouge; & plu- 
sieurs milliers de porcelaine le tout pour les 
sauuages comme chose qui luy auoit este 
donnes pour ce suiet 

Enuiron ce temps vn nomine" loachim Xstien 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



243 



he went to stay over night at Sillery : he was 
stopped here with Armand in the month of 
September, by Monsieur the governor and the 
Habitans, to winter here. He was employed 
at ist, to go and reconnoitre the alleged mines ; 
then, returning to Quebek, he remained here 
some time, and then grew tired of the place. 
He arrived safely at 3 rivers. 

On the /th, it began to freeze hard, though 
there had as yet been no snow worth mention 
ing, except a very light and transient fall. 

On the next day the snow began. 

On the 1 2th, the marriage of Champagne 
and of Madame Nicolet at 5 o clock in the 
morning ; &gt;34 father Vimont escaped from the 
Annoyance of attending the nuptials, and so 
contrived that something for the wedding 
should be sent to the house. 

On the 1 4th, Madame de la pelleterie sent 
a present here. It was a package, in which 
there was an Altar-stone and a small missal ; 
two cloths, of which one was Damask; two 
dozen napkins, and two sheets, which were 
given to our brother liegeois ; six quires of 
paper; and a handsome Rosary. 

A few days later, Sister Charlote sent four 
brasses, and more, of blue cloth, and a brasse 
and a half of red cloth ; and several thousand 
porcelain beads, all for the savages, as 
something which had been given her for this 
purpose. 

About this time one Joachim, a Christian 
savage, and the son of Jean Guion, while pass 
ing the long point were surprised by a gust 



Departure of rend 
oheraenti. 



The season of ice and 
snoiv. 



Marriage of 
Madame Nicolet. 



Present from 

mad ante de la 

Pelterie, 



and from charlotte. 



Death of Joachim. 



244 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



Nouices aux Vrsu- 
lines 



Perte du brigantin 
&lt;& de q. homines 



leur seruice a 
VEglise 



Cierges aux 3. riu. 



sauuage, & le fils de lean Guion passant la 
longue pointe furent surpris d vn coup de 
Nord-est, & penserent renuerser, ils se iette- 
rent a 1 eau; mais estant tout glac6s, & le sau- 
uage moins habille que le fra^ois le sauuage 
arriue au bord mourut, & le francois 1 eschapa 
belle. 

le 2 1 . Commencerent leur nouitiat aux Vr- 
sulines Madame de la Pelterie, Charlote, & la 
S r . Caterine. 

Ce mesme lour arriua la nouuelle assured 
du plvf grand desastre qui fut encores arriu6 
en Canada : scauoir la perte ou debris du bri 
gantin qui alloit de Quebek aux 3. riu. dans 
lequel estoit vne bonne partie de ce qui estoit 
necessaire pour le magasin & habitans des 3. 
riu. nvf y perdismes beaucoup ; mais la prin- 
cipale perte fut de 9. hommes, dont 1 vn estoit 
a nvf nomme gaspar goiiaut de Poitiers Apoti- 
quaire venu pour les Hurons, fort bon gar9on. 

On fit pour eux vn salut du morts le leudy 
apres celuy du S*. Sacrement. 

Le lendemain on dit vne grande messe; & 
le Dimanche, vespres des morts apres celle du 
lour. 

Les 3. riu. manquant sur tout de Cierges, on 
prit 1 occasion d vn Canot qui s y en alloit pour 
y enuoyer deux dousaines de Cierges launes 
pris a la paroisse de Quebek & deux dousaines 
de Chandele de cire blanche pris dans mon 
armoire. 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



245 



No-vices at the 
Ursulines . 



from the Northeast, and came near upsetting. 
They jumped into the water, but being cov 
ered with ice, and the savage clothed more 
lightly than the frenchman, the savage died 
on reaching shore, and the frenchman had a 
narrow escape. 

On the 2ist, Madame de la Pelterie, Char 
lotte, and Sister Caterine Began their novi 
tiate with the Ursulines. 

This same Day, the certain news arrived of Loss of the brigan- 
the greatest disaster which had yet happened tine and of g men. 
in Canada, to wit, the loss or wreck of the 
brigantine which went from Quebek to 3 
rivers ; in this vessel was a great part of what 
was necessary for the warehouse and habitans 
of 3 rivers. We lost much therein ; but the 
main loss was of 9 men, one of whom was 
ours, named gaspar gouaut, of Poitiers, an 
Apothecary who had come for the Hurons, and 
a very good fellow. 

We held for them a benediction for the 
dead, on Thursday, after that of the Blessed 
Sacrament. 

On the next day, we said high mass; and 
on Sunday, vespers for the dead, after those 
of the Day. 

As 3 rivers lacked Candles more than any 
thing else, we availed ourselves of a Canoe 
which was leaving, to send thither two dozen 
Yellow Tapers taken from the parish church 
of Quebek, and two dozen white wax Candles 
taken from my cupboard. 

On the 29th, the mass of the Holy Ghost 
was said by father Vimont at the hospital, for 



Their service at the 
Church. 



Candles for j 
rivers. 



246 



LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 28 



Messe pr. Mess, de la 
Compie. generale. 



bastimens a Sillery. 



Xstiens de Sillery 

M. Nicolet a beau- 
port 



St. Xauier. 



Le 29. la messe dii S*. Esprit dite par le p. 
Vimont a 1 hospital pour Mess, de la Comp ie . 
g nle , en acquit de ce qu en cela estoit oblige 
1 hospital: ie ne scay si mons r . le gouuern r . 
presumera que c est aussy en acquit de la 
Messe que nvf deuons selon la concession de 
Mess, de la Comp ie . en vertu de laquelle nvf 
auons pris cette annee possession de nos ter- 
res: mais la messe que nvf deuons dire e p r . les 
defuncts associes de la Comp ie . & se doit dire 
le i er . mardy de Dec. & ie pretends bien la dire, 
mais non pas y inuiter M r . le gouu. pour ne 
point preiudicier a nos anciens droits de M. 
de Vantadour &c., & a la declaration faite en 
mesme temps de cette prise de possession au 
greffe. 

A Sillery on y bastit cette annee vne brasse 
rie; & vn four nouueau. Les sauuages y 
furent a leur ordinaire au commencem*. de 
I hyuer, & parmy eux 120. Xstiens. 

M. Nicolet, a qui M r . le gouu. donnoit cent 
escus p r . dire les messes, alloit a beauport la 
dire les Dimanches & festes d 1 ordinaire 

On eut nouuelles que la perte n auoit pas 
este si grande, & qu on auoit recouur6 2. tiers 
pour le moins de ce qui estoit dans le brigantin. 

1646. DECEMBRE. 

Le lour de S 1 . fr. xauier estant tomb6 cette 
ann6e 1646. la i er . Dim. de 1 Aduent, on ne fit 
rien de luy sinon a Vespres : le lendemain la 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. fESUITES 



247 



Mass for Messieurs 

of the general 

Company. 



Messieurs of the general Company in acquit 
tal of the hospital s obligation to this. I know 
not whether monsieur the governor will not 
suppose that this is also to fulfill the obliga 
tion of saying the Mass which we owe in 
consequence of the grant of Messieurs of the 
Company, by virtue of which we have this year 
taken possession of our lands. But the mass 
which we are to say is for the deceased asso 
ciates of the Company, and is to be said on 
the first tuesday of December; and I certainly 
intend to say it, but not to invite Monsieur 
the governor to it, in order not to prejudice 
our former rights from Monsieur de Vanta- 
dour, etc., and the declaration made, at the 
same time with that act of possession, at the 
record office. 

At Sillery, a brewery has been built this Buildings at Sillery. 
year, and a new oven. The savages were 
there as usual at the beginning of winter, and 
among them 120 Christians. 

Monsieur Nicolet, to whom Monsieur the 
governor gave a hundred ecus to say masses, 
went regularly to beauport to say mass on 
Sundays and ordinary feasts. 

We had news that the loss had not been so 
great, and that they had recovered at least 2 
thirds of what was in the brigantine. 

1646, DECEMBER. 

The Day of St. frangois xavier having 
occurred this year, 1646, on the ist Sunday in 
Advent, we did nothing on his account except 
at Vespers: the next day, high mass and the 



Christians of 
Sillery. 

Monsieur Nicolet at 
beauport. 



St. Xavier. 



248 



LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28 



la Conception 



Mort d Abdon 



Abiuraon du Sf. de 
Champigny 



Musique a 4 parties. 



Noel 



grande messe & le reste coe 1 an passe: i inti- 
me le Dimanche d auparauant les Indulgences 
mais asses froidement pour n estre pas assur6 
de ces Indulgences; & que celles de la feste 
de la Conceptio estoient proches : la veuille se 
renouuela le veu de le Conception. 

la veuille de la Cone, a midy on lira du fort 
vn coup de Canon a bale ; le soir nvf fismes vn 
salut les litanies de la vierge auec 1 Alnia: le 
lour a la pointe du lour on tira vn autre coup 
de Canon, & le soir aux vespres nvf dismes 
les litanies apres le benedicamvf D no . 

1 octaue de S*. fr. xauier estant venue le 2. 
Dim. de 1 Aduent on n en fit que commemora 
tion partout a 1 office du Dimanche. 

Ce mois on reeut nouuelle de la mort d vn 
malheureux Apostat des trois riuieres nomme 
Abdon, ou la grenoiiille. 

le lour de la Conception vn soldat nomme de 
Champigny, natif de fontainebleau, fit abiura- 
tion de son heresie auparauant la grand messe . 

Ce mesme soldat scachant la musique, & pou- 
uant chanter vn dessvf nvf commen^asmes le 
lour de S 1 . Thomas a chanter a quatre parties. 

On sonna la veuille de Noel an. heures, on 
dit 1 air Mortels, & ensuite les litanies du nom 
de lesvf , on tira vn Coup de Canon a minuit 
& aussy tost on commensa le Tedeu & puis la 
messe, ie dis deux messes coe 1 an passe vne 
haute & vne basse, le p. Vimont en dit deux 
ensuite & la 3 e . a 1 Aurore a Thospital: Sur 



1645-46] JOURNAL DBS PP. J&SUITES 



249 



rest as last year. I gave notice, on the Sun 
day before, of the Indulgences, but rather 
coldly, because I was not quite certain about 
these Indulgences, and because those for the 
feast of the Conception were near; at the 
vigil, the vow of the Conception was renewed. 

On the eve of the Conception, at noon, a The Conception. 
Cannon was fired at the fort, with balls; at 
evening, we held a benediction, the litany 
of the virgin, with the Alma. On the Day 
itself, at Daybreak, another Cannon was fired ; 
and in the evening, at vespers, we said the 
litany, after the benedicamus Domino. 

The octave of St. francois xavier having 
fallen on the 2nd Sunday in Advent, nothing 
but the commemorations were made at the 
Sunday office. 

This month we received news of the death 
of a wretched Apostate at three rivers, named 
Abdon, or la grenouille, [" the frog"]. 

On the Day of the Conception, a soldier 
named de Champigny, a native of fontaine- Sieur de Champigny. 
bleau, abjured his heresy before high mass. 

This same soldier, understanding music and Music in 4 -voices. 
being able to sing the treble part, we began on 
the Day of St. Thomas to sing in four voices. 

We rang on Christmas eve, at 1 1 o clock ; Christmas. 

we recited the air, Mortels, and then the 
litany of the name of Jesus ; a Gun was fired 
at midnight, and immediately we began the 
Te deum, and then mass. I said two masses, 
as last year, one high, and one low; father 
Vimont afterward said two, and the 3rd at 
Dawn, at the hospital. Between 6 and 7 



Death of Abdon. 



Abjuration of the 



250 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28 

les entre 6. & 7. le p. gabr. lalement en dit 
deux & la 3 e . aux Vrsul es . ie dit la grande 
messe a 8. h. & le p. defretat ensuite ses 3. 
messes: le temps fut si doux qu on n eut pas 
besoin de rechau sur 1 Autel pendant toutes 
les messes, on tira 5. coups a 1 Eleuaon de la 
messe de minuict. 

voyage dup. Vimont. le p. Vimont partit le mesme lour de Noel 

pour la visite de beauport, il en reuint le 
penultieme de 1 an sur les 10. h. 

Saluts, On alia le lour de Noel faire le salut a 1 hos 

pital, & le lendemain aux Vrsulines 

Comedie le dernier lour de 1 an on representa vne 

Action dans le magazin du sit, Nos Peres y 
assisterent p r . la consideraon de Mons r . le 
gouu. qui y auoit de 1 affection & les sauuages 
aussy scauoir les pp. de Quen, Lalement, & 
defretat: le tout se passa bien, & n y eut rien 
qui put mon \sc. mal Laverd.~\ edifier. ie 
prie Mons r . le gouu. de m en exepter. 

desordre, manque de Cette anne"e on mit la corde de bois a cent 
police. sols; c estoit ceux qui y auoient interest qui 

vendoient & acheptoient pour eux-mesme : il 
y auoit en ce poinct vn grand desordre qui 
donnoit de la Jalousie; ce qui adoucissoit 
estoit que cela tournoit au profit du pays & de 
quelques habitans. 

Mais le mal principal estoit que les demy 
cordes deuant auoir 4. pieds en tout sens, 
elles n en auoient pas trois, & c estoit de fort 
mauuais bois. 



1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 



251 



o clock, father gabriel lalement said two, and 
the 3rd at the Ursulines . I said high mass 
at 8 o clock, and father defretat, afterward, 
his 3 masses. The weather was so mild that 
we had no need of a warmer on the Altar 
during all the masses. 5 cannon shots were 
fired at the Elevation, at the midnight mass. 

Father Vimont started, this same Christmas 
Day, for the visitation at beauport ; he came 
back the day before the last of the year, about 
10 o clock. 

On Christmas Day, we went to give bene 
diction at the hospital ; and, on the next day, 
at the Ursulines . 

On the last Day of the year, they gave a 
performance at the warehouse, Enacting 
the sit. 35 Our Fathers were present, in 
deference to Monsieur the governor, who took 
pleasure therein, as also did the savages, 
that is, fathers de Quen, Lalement, and defre 
tat : all went well, and there was nothing which 
could not edify. I begged Monsieur the 
governor to excuse me from attendance. 

This year, the cord of wood was placed at a 
hundred sols; it was those who were inter 
ested therein who sold and bought for them 
selves. There was great disorder on this 
score, which caused Jealousy. What quieted 
matters was, that that went to the profit of 
the country and of some habitans. 

But the principal evil was, that, whereas 
the half-cords should have been 4 feet on each 
side, they were not so much as three; and it 
was very poor wood at that. 



Father Vimonfs 
journey. 



Benedictions. 



Comedy. 



Disorder; lack of 
police regulations. 



LX 

RELATION OF 164^-46 

PARIS: SEBASTIEN ET GABRIEL CRAMOISY, 1647 



SOURCE : For the text of this Relation we follow a copy 
of the original Cramoisy, in Lenox Library; the facsimile of 
the title-page we obtain from a like copy in possession of the 
Wisconsin State Historical Society. 

Owing to the length of the Relation, we herewith publish 
only the first two chapters of Part I. ; the remainder of the 
document will appear in Volumes XXIX. and XXX. 



RELATION 

DECEQVIS EST PASSE 

DB PLVS REMARQVABLE 

cs Miffions des Peres dc la 
m Compagnie de I E $ y s, 



NO WELLE FRANCE 

ES ANNEES i* 4J . & 1646. 

Enuoyeai!R.P.Prouincial delaFroumce 
dc France. 

/&lt; Sitperifitr des "Mi/tons de h me/ne 




A PARIS, 

TIEN CR.A MOISY,^ , 
J Iniprimeur ordinaire du Roy, | J 11 

\ &de laRevne Re^entc, V* 

faux Ct 



E-T 



G A B R I f t CR A H O I S Y. 



M. DC. 



RELATION 

OF WHAT OCCURRED 

MOST NOTEWORTHY 

in the Missions of the Fathers 

of the Society of JESUS, 

IN 

NEW FRANCE, 

IN THE YEARS 1645 AND 1646. 

Sent to the Reverend Father Provincial of 
the Province of France. 

By the Superior of the Missions of the same 
Society, 



Print 
ed by 



PARIS, 

SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY,\ 
Printer in ordinary to the King,/ rue St * Jac " 
and to the Queen Regent, g ues a ^ e 

AN D ( Slgn of the 

I Storks. 
GABRIEL CRAMOISY. / 

M. DC. XLVII. 
WITH ROYAL LICENSE. 



258 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



Extraid du Priuilege du Roy. 

PAR grace & priuilege du Roy, il eft permis & 
Sebaftien Cramoify Marchand Libraire lure en 
I Vniuerute de Paris, & Imprimeur ordinaire 
du Roy & de la Reyne Regente, Bourgeois de Paris, 
d imprimer ou faire imprimer vn Liure intitule", Rela 
tion de ce qui s eft pafte de plus remarquable /s Miftions 
des Peres de la Compagnie de lESVS, en la Nouuelle 
France, /s annees 1645. & 1646. enuoye e au R. P, Pro- 
uincial de la Prouince de France, par le Superieur des 
Miftions de la mefme Compagnie. Et ce, pendant le 
temps & efpace de dix annees confecutiues, auec 
deffenfes h tous Libraires & Imprimeurs d imprimer 
ou faire imprimer ledit Liure, fous pretexte de de- 
guifement ou changement qu ils y pourroient faire, 
a peine de confifcation & de 1 amende portee par ledit 
Priuilege. Donn6 k Paris le 6. Decembre 1646. 

Par le Roy en fon Confeil, 

CRAMOISY. 



1645 - 46J RELA TION OF 1643-46 259 



Extract from the Royal License. 

BY the grace and privilege of the King, Sebastien 
Cramoisy, Sworn Merchant Bookseller in the 
University of Paris, Printer in ordinary to the 
King and to the Queen Regent, and Citizen of Paris, 
is permitted to print, or cause to be printed, a Book 
entitled : Relation de ce qui s est passe" de plus remarquable 
e"s Missions des Peres de la Compagnie de JESUS, en la 
Nouvelle France, e"s anne es 1645. et 164.6. envoye"e au R. 
P. Provincial de la Province de France, par le Superieur 
des Missions de la mesme Compagnie. And this, during 
the time and space of ten consecutive years, with pro 
hibition to all Booksellers and Printers of printing, 
or causing to be printed, the said Book, under pretext 
of disguise or change that they might make therein : 
under penalty of confiscation and the fine imposed by 
the said License. Given at Paris, the 6th of Decem 
ber, 1646. 

- By the King in his Council, 

CRAMOISY. 



260 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [You 28 



Permiffion du P. Prouincial. 

NOVS Eftienne Charlet Prouincial de la Compa- 
gnie de IESVS en la Prouince de France, 
auons accorde* pour 1 aduenir an fieur Sebaftien 
Cramoify Marchand Libraire, Imprimeur ordinaire 
du Roy, 1 impreffion des Relations de la Nouuelle 
France. Fait k Paris ce 8. lanuier 1647. 

ESTIENNE CHARLET. 



1645-46] RELA T10N OF 1643-46 261 



Permission of the Father Provincial. 

WE, Estienne Charlet, Provincial of the Society 
of JESUS in the Province of France, have 
granted for the future to sieur Sebastien 
Cramoisy, Merchant Bookseller, Printer in ordinary 
to the King, the right to print the Relations of New 
France. Done at Paris, this 8th of January, 1647. 

ESTIENNE CHARLET. 



262 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



Table des Chapitres contenvs en ce Liure. 

RELA TION de ce qui seft pafSe" en la Nouuelle 
France, fur le grand fleuue S. Laurens, en 
V anne"e 1646. . . . page I 

CHAP. I. De ce qui s eft pafte" entre les Francois, les 
Hurons & les Algonquins, pour la conclufion de 
la paix auec les Iroquois. . . fol. 7 

II. De la venue de fept Ambaffadeurs Iroquois vers 

les Francois, & de leur negociation. . : . 18 

III. De r keureufe mart du Pere Anne de Noiie, 

& du P. Enemond Maffe. . . 27 

IV. De la Miftion des Martyrs commence e au pays 

des Iroquois. . . . . -47 

V. De la rejldence de S. lofeph a Siller y. . 60 

VI. De la rejldence de la Conception aux trois 
Riuieres, . . . . .81 

VII. De la Miftion de fainfte Croix & Tadouffac. 102 

VIII. De r habitation de Ville-Marie, en / IJle de 
Montreal. . . . . .118 

IX. De quelques bonnes actions, & de quelques 
bons fentimens des Sauuages Chreftiens. . 146 

X. De quelques particularitez du pays, & autres 
chofes qui n ont pu eftre rapport e es fous les 
Chapitres precedens. . . . .166 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1643-46 263 



Table of the Chapters contained in this Book. 

RELA TION of what occurred in New France, 
on the great river St. Lawrence, in the year 
1646. . . . page i 

CHAP. I. Of what occurred between the French, 
the Hurons, and the Algonquins, for the con 
clusion of the peace with the Iroquois. fol. 7 

II. Of the coming of seven Iroquois Ambassadors 

to the French, and of their negotiations. . 18 

III. Of the blessed deaths of Father Anne de Noile 
and Father Enemond Masse. . . 27 

IV. Of the Mission of the Martyrs, begun in the 
country of the Iroquois. . . -47 

V. Of the residence of St. Joseph at Sillery. . 60 

VI. Of the residence of la Conception at three 
Rivers. . . . , .81 

VII. Of the holy Cross Mission at Tadoussac. . 102 

VIII. Of the settlement of Ville-Marie, in the 
Island of Montreal. . . . .118 

IX. Of some good deeds and some good sentiments 

of the Christian Savages. . . .146 

X. Of some peculiarities of the country, and 
other things which could not be related under the 
preceding Chapters. . . .166 



264 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



RELA TION de ce qui s eft pa fit de plus remar- 
quable en la Miftion des Peres de la Compa- 
gnie de I E S V s aux Hurons pays de la Nou- 
uelle France, depuis le mois de May de I anne e 

1645. iufques au mois de May de I anne e 

1646. .... page i 
CHAP. I. De T ejiat du pays. . . fol. $ 

II. De I eftat du Chriftianifme. . .11 

III. Actions remarquables du zele de quelques 
Chreftiens. . . . . J 5 

IV. Efpreuue de la con fiance & du courage de 
cette Eglife parmy les oppofitions des Infideles. . 37 

V. Bons fentimens de quelques Chrefiiens. 54 

VI. Prouidence de Dieu fur quelques particuliers. 85 

VII. De la Miftion du Saintt-Efprit. . .102 

VIII. De ce qui s efi paftd a Miskou. . .116 

Fin de la Table des Chapitres. 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 265 



RELA TION of what occurred most noteworthy 
in the Mission of the Fathers of the Society of 
JESUS among the Hurons, a country of New 
France, from the month of May in the year 1645 , 
to the month of May in the year 1646. page I 
CHAP. I. Of the state of the country. . fol. 5 

II. Of the state of Christianity. . .11 

III. Remarkable instances of the zeal of some 
Christians. . . . . .15 

IV. Trial of the constancy and courage of this 
Church amid the opposition of the Infidels. . 37 

V. Good Sentiments of some Christians. . 54 

VI. Providence of God over certain individuals. 85 

VII. Of the Mission of the Holy Ghost. . 102 

VIII. Of what occurred at Miskou. . .116 

End of the Table of Chapters. 



266 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 



[i] Relation de ce qvi s eft paffe en la Nov- 

velle France fvr le grand Fleuue de S. 

Laurens, en 1 annee mil fix 

cens quarante-fix. 

Av R, P. Eftienne Charlet Prouincial de la Compagnie de IESVS, 
en la Prouince de France, 

MON R. PERE, 
Me trouuant oblige de rendre d orefnauant 
vn compte plus particulier a Voflre Reuer. 
des chofes qui fe paffent es Minions d icy bas, ie luy 
diray qu apres auoir confere" ce que i y ay veu depuis 
vn an, auec ce que i ay remarque la haut, aux [2] 
Miffions Huronnes dans 1 efpace de plufieurs annees, 
ie ne puis que ie ne me confirme en la creance que 
digitus Dei eft Me, que c eft 1 ouurage d vne proui- 
dence toute particuliere, & d vne bonte" veritablement 
infinie. 

I aurois bien de la peine d expliquer les raifons 
qui caufent en moy ce fentiment: il y a des fecrets 
cachez auffi bien dans les ouurages de la prouidence, 
que dans les merueilles de la nature, on les conoift 
moins qu on ne les admire. Peut-eftre que la face 
du pays, qui me parut toute affreufe dans la guerre, 
quand ie le vis pour la premiere fois, s eftant changee 
& deuenue toute belle dans la douceur de la paix, 
forme en moy cette penfee & me donne ce fenti 
ment: mais c6t ouurage, quoyqu excellent, furpaffant 
toutes nos efperances, ne feroit pas fuffifant de me 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 267 



[i] Relation of what occurred in New France, 

on the great River St. Lawrence, in 

the year one thousand six 

hundred and forty-six. 

To the Reverend Father Estienne Charlet, Provincial of the 
Society of JESUS in the Province of France. 

MY REVEREND FATHER, 
Finding myself obliged to render hereafter 
a more detailed account to Your Reverence 
of matters which occur in the Missions down here, I 
will say to you that after having compared what 
I have seen in these within one year, with what I 
observed up yonder in the [2] Huron Missions during 
the space of several years I can only confirm my 
self in the belief that digitus Dei est hie, that it is 
the work of a very special providence, and of a good 
ness truly infinite. 

I would have much difficulty in explaining the 
reasons which cause in me this feeling ; there are 
hidden secrets in the works of providence, as well as 
in the wonders of nature : one understands them less 
than one admires them. Perhaps the aspect of the 
country, which appeared to me wholly frightful in 
war, when I saw it for the first time, having 
changed and become very beautiful in the quiet of 
peace, forms in me this thought and gives me this 
feeling; but that work though excellent, and sur 
passing all our hopes would not be sufficient to 



268 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

donner tant de fatisfadtion, s il n eftoit accompagn6 
de fa fin principale, reftabliffement & 1 aduancement 
du Royaume de Dieu. 

En fuite done les Sauuages des autres nations atti- 
rez par 1 odeur des premiers Chreftiens de la redu 
ction de S. lofeph k Sillery, abordent de toutes parts, 
[3] pour fe faire inflruire, & pendant que les vns 
cherchent la Foy, les autres croiffent & s augmentent 
dans la charite" : en vn mot ceux qui fuyoient IESVS- 
CHRIST, & qui le regardoient comme la caufe de 
leur mort en la terre, le viennent maintenant cher- 
cher en leurs maladies, comme la fource de leur vie 
dans le Ciel, & ceux qui 1 ont trouue, font dans des 
reffentimens & des reconnoiffances toutes particu- 
lieres du bon-heur qu ils ont rencontre". 

Or ayant veu les mefmes benedictions fur les 
nations plus hautes & plus eloignees, c eft ce qui me 
fait penfer que le temps enfin eft venu de la conuer- 
lion de ce nouueau monde, que 1 Efprit de Dieu veut 
conduire ces pauures peuples & la fin pour laquelle il 
les a cre6s, & qu apres vne nuit de tant de fiecles, la 
lumiere a paru fur ces contre"es, la Foy y eft dans 
fon Aurore, elle aura fon afcendant, & ceux qui vien- 
dront apres nous, la verront en fon Midy. 

Plufieurs chofes i ce que ie puis reconnoiftre de 
plus pres, ont contribue h ce bon-heur. Le bon eftat 
dans lequel Meffieurs de la Compagnie de la nouuelle 
[4] France, ont mis le pays & la Colonie ; le fecours 
& 1 anlflance qu ont donne" Meffieurs de Montreal; 
la piete & le bon exemple des habitans, & particu- 
lierement le courage, le zele & la charite des deux 
families Religieufes de 1 Hofpital & des Vrfulines, 
qui apres auoir furpaffe le commun de leur condition, 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1643-46 269 

give me so much satisfaction, if I could not view it in 
connection with its principal design, the establish 
ment and advancement of the Kingdom of God. 

As a result, then, the Savages of the other nations, 
attracted by the reputation of the first Christians at 
the reduction of St. Joseph at Sillery, approach from 
every direction, [3] in order to become instructed; 
and, while some seek the Faith, others increase and 
expand in charity. In a word, those who shunned 
JESUS CHRIST and who regarded him as the cause of 
their death on the earth, now come to seek him in 
their diseases, as the source of their life in Heaven ; 
and those who have found him, are filled with emo 
tion and gratitude for the happiness which they have 
encountered. 

Now, having seen the same blessings upon the 
upper and more distant nations, this makes me think 
that the time has at last come for the conversion of 
this new world; that the Spirit of God will guide 
these poor peoples to the end for which he has 
created them ; and that, after a night of so many 
centuries, the light has appeared upon these countries. 
The Faith is in its Dawn here: it will have its 
ascendant, and those who shall come after us will see 
it in its Noon. 

Several things, as nearly as I can ascertain, have 
contributed to this blessing : the good condition in 
which Messieurs of the Company of new [4] France 
have placed the country and the Colony ; the succor 
and assistance given by Messieurs of Montreal ; the 
piety and the good example of the habitans; and 
especially the courage, zeal, and charity of the Reli 
gious families, the Hospital nuns and Ursulines, 
who, after having surpassed the average of their 



270 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [ VOL. 28 

en paffant la mer, femblent tons les icmrs fe furmon- 
ter elles-mefmes dans tons les exercices de charite" 
enuers Dieu & le prochain, qu on pent attendre 

d elles. 

I ay quelquefois pris plaifir de comparer la charit6 
des vnes a affifter iour & nuit de pauures Barbares tons 
chancreux & mourans, mettans en cela tout leur plai 
fir & contentement ; & le zele des autres a apprendre 
les langues & ramaffer de tons coftez en leur Semi- 
naire des filles & des femmes Sauuages, pour leur 
expofer & debiter les marchandifes du Ciel: mais 
i aduoiie que ie n en ay pu conclure autre chofe, fmon 
que ces fpedtacles eftoient dignes d attirer les yeux 
du Paradis fur ce pauure pays, & de le luy rendre 
fauorable. Dieu beniffe a iamais les perfonnes qui 
fauorifent & qui foufliennent de fi faindtes entre- 

prifes. 

[5] Monfieur le Cheualier de Montmagny noftre 
Gouuerneur a auffi efte" 1 vn des principaux inftru- 
mens, dont la Diuine Prouidence s eft feruie, pour 
mettre les affaires dans le poindt & dans le iour 
qu elles paroiffent: le trauail de dix ans n a point 
6branl6 fa conftance, ny diminue fes foins pour tout 
ce qui regarde I auancement de la Religion, & du 

bien public. 

Ie ne parle point de la premiere & principale roue 
qui fait mouuoir ce nouueau monde, auffi bien que 
1 ancien, ny des autres roues qui luy font coniointes, 
& qui luy donnant & receuant d elle vn faindt mouue- 
met, 1 impriment fur ce grand ouurage: il n y a que 
Dieu qui puiffe eflre le prix & la recompenf e de ces 
belles & grandes ames, qui feront bien aifes d ap- 
prendre que nous auons cette anne"e augment^ nos 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 271 

station, by crossing the sea, seem every day to outdo 
themselves in all the exercises of charity toward God 
and their neighbor that can be expected from them. 

I have sometimes taken pleasure in comparing the 
charity of those who assist, day and night, poor Bar 
barians all full of sores, and dying, finding therein 
their whole pleasure and satisfaction, and the zeal 
of the others, in learning languages and gathering 
from all directions into their Seminary Savage girls 
and women, in order to set forth and sell to them the 
merchandise of Heaven. But I avow that I could 
form no other conclusion therefrom, save that these 
sights were worthy to attract the eyes of Paradise 
upon this poor country, and to render it favorable to 
it. May God forever bless the persons who foster 
and who support such holy enterprises. 

[5] Monsieur the Chevalier de Montmagny, our 
Governor, has also been one of the principal instru 
ments which the Divine Providence has used for put 
ting affairs at the point and in the light in which 
they appear ; the labor of ten years has not shaken 
his constancy, or diminished his cares for all which 
regards the advancement of Religion and of the 
public good. 

I do not speak of the first and main wheel which 
moves this new world as well as the old, nor of the 
other wheels which are conjoined with it, and which, 
giving to it and receiving from it a blessed motion, 
impart that to this great work. Only God can be the 
reward and the recompense of those beautiful and 
lofty souls, who will be very glad to learn that we 
have this year augmented our little Churches by 
three hundred Neophytes, newly baptized. 

For the rest, my Reverend Father, here follows 



272 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

petites Eglifes de trois cens Neophytes notmellement 
baptizez. 

Au refte, mon R. Pere, voicy la Relation des chofes 
principales qui fe font paff e"es depuis vn an : elle y 
verra la mort de deux des plus anciens ouuriers qu ait 
eu noftre Compagnie en ces contrees, c eft le Pere 
Anne de Noiie, & le Pere Enemond Maffe : ie ne voy 
icy perfonne [6] de ceux qui les ont connus qui ne 
die de bon coeur, viuat & moriatur anima mea vitd & 
morte iujlorum iftorum. Or jagoit que leur mort doiue 
donner plus d enuie que de companion, ie ne laiffe 
pas de les recommander aux fuffrages & aux faindtes 
prieres de voftre Reuer. & de toute la Prouince, come 
auffi toutes nos Miffions. 

L arriue e des trois Peres qu il luy a pleu nous 
enuoyer de renfort, nous a bien confole"; mais ce 
nombre eftant defia au deffous de celuy que i auois 
demande pour les Miffions Huronnes, elle peut voir le 
befoin que nous en auons d autres, & le verra encore 
dauantage dans la Relation, y rencontrant les nou- 
uelles Miffios dont Dieu nous a donne les ouuertures : 
c eft ce que nous efperons de fa charite, & du zele de 
nos Peres pour ces petites Eglifes naiffantes, que ie 
ne puis alfez recommander aux faindts Sacrifices & 
aux faindtes prieres de tous en general, & de chacun 
en particulier. 

De Voftre Reuerence, 

De Quebek ce Tres-humble & tres-obei ffant 

28. OElobre 1646. feruiteur, felon Dieu, 

HIEROSME LALEMANT. 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1643-46 273 

the Relation of the principal things which have 
occurred within a year ; you will see in it the death 
of two of the most veteran workers whom our Society 
has had in these countries Father Anne de Noiie 
and Father Enemond Masse. I see no one here, [6] 
of those who have known them, who does not say 
with good heart: vivat et moriatur anima mea vitd et 
morte justorum istorum. Now, though their death 
must occasion more envy than compassion, I never 
theless commend them, as also all our Missions, to 
the suffrages and the holy prayers of your Rever 
ence and of the whole Province. 

The arrival of the three Fathers whom you have 
been pleased to send us as a reinforcement, has much 
consoled us ; but, this number being even below that 
which I had requested for the Huron Missions, you 
can see the need that we have of others ; and you 
will see it still more in the Relation, on encounter 
ing therein mention of the new Missions of which 
God has granted the beginnings. This is what we 
hope from your charity, and from the zeal of our Fa 
thers for these little infant Churches, which I cannot 
sufficiently commend to the holy Sacrifices and to 
the blessed prayers of all in general, and of each in 
particular. 

Your Reverence s 

From Quebek, this Very humble and most obe- 
2%th of October, 1646. dient servant in God, 

HIEROSME LALEMANT. 



274 LES RELATIONS DES fS UITES [ VOL. 28 



[7] CHAPITRE I. 

DE CE QUI S EST PASSE ENTRE LES FRANgOIS, LES 
HURONS & LES ALGONQUINS, POUR LA CONCLU 
SION DE LA PAIX AUEC LES IROQUOIS. 

IL eft & propos de faire quelques remarques a Ten- 
tree de ce Chapitre, pour auoir vne ide"e plus 
nette & vne connoiflance plus particuliere des 
affaires qu on a traitees auec ces peuples. 

le dy done en premier lieu, que fous le nom 
d Iroquois nous auons iufques a maintenant compris 
plufieurs Nations confedere"es, toutes ennemies des 
Sauuages qui nous font Alliez : ces Nations ont leurs 
noms particuliers, les Annierronnons, les Oniontche- 
ronons, les Onontagueronons, les SonontHaeronons, 
& autres. Nous n auons encor proprement la paix 
qu auec les Annierronnons, qui font les plus voifins 
de nos habitations, & ceux qui nous donnoient plus 
de peine, d orefnauant nous les diftinguerons par [8] 
leurs noms propres & particuliers, afin d (Suiter la 
confulion. 

En fecond lieu, outre ces Iroquois il y a d autres 
Nations plus au Nord qui femblent vouloir entrer en 
guerre auec nos Sauuages, comme les Sokoquiois que 
nos Sauuages appellent Affoktfekik, les Mahingas, ou 
Mahinganak, auec lefquels les Algonquins ont eu 
autrefois de grandes alliances; mais les Iroquois 
Annierronnons les ayans domtez, ils fe font iettez de 
leur party: il y en a d autres, comme les Abnaquiois, 
qui nous font amis. 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 275 



[7] CHAPTER I. 

OF WHAT OCCURRED BETWEEN THE FRENCH, THE 
HURONS, AND THE ALGONQUINS, FOR THE CON 
CLUSION OF THE PEACE WITH THE IROQUOIS. 

IT is fitting to make some remarks at the begin 
ning of this Chapter, to give a more distinct 
idea and a more definite knowledge of the affairs 
which have been transacted with these peoples. 

I say then, in the first place, that under the name 
of "Iroquois" we have hitherto included several 
confederated Nations, all enemies of the Savages who 
are Allied to us. These Nations have their separate 
names the Annierronnons, the Oniontcheronons, 
the Onontagueronons, the Sonontwaeronons, and 
others. We have as yet no peace, in a proper sense, 
except with the Annierronnons, who are nearest our 
settlements, and who were giving us most trouble. 
Henceforth we will distinguish these tribes by [8] 
their proper and special names, so as to avoid 
confusion. 

In the second place, besides these Iroquois there 
are other Nations, more to the North, who seem 
disposed to undertake war with our Savages, as the 
Sokoquiois, whom our Savages call Assokwekik ; and 
the Mahingans, or Mahinganak, with whom the 
Algonquins formerly had extensive alliances, but, 
the Annierronnon Iroquois having subdued them, 
they have ranged themselves upon their side. There 



276 LES RELATIONS DES J^S UITES [VOL. 28 

Ie remarqueray en troifI6me lieu, que 1 an pafI6 au 
depart de la flotte, comme nous gouftions la douceur 
de la paix encommencee, on nous vint apporter la 
nouuelle que trois Sauuages de la bourgade de S. 
lofeph ou de Sillery, auoient efte tuez, & quelques 
autres fort bleffez: ce bruit detrempa noftre ioye 
d abfynthe fur le doute que les Annierronons n euf- 
fent agy de mauuaife foy auec nous. Enfin apres 
toutes les perquifitions poffibles, nous trouuafmes 
que 1 vn des plus feruens Chreftiens de Sillery ou 
de faindt lofeph, auoit efte" traitreufement maffacre, 
auec deux ieunes gar9ons baptizez, [9] que le fils de 
Frangois Xauier Nenask^mat, 1 vne des deux pre 
mieres colomnes de la reduction des Sauuages, auoit 
efte" blefTe" a mort: en effet il eft venu rendre 1 ame 
tres-faindtement entre nos bras, apres auoir receu en 
1 Hofpital de Kebec tous les charitables traitemens 
dont vn pauure malade peut eftre affifte. Sa femme 
dans cette trahifon fut laiffe e pour morte, on luy en- 
leua vne partie de la peau & des cheueux de la tefte, 
mais Noftre Seigneur luy a rendu la fante. Ce nous 
fut vne confolation que ces deux derniers n expire- 
rent pas fur la place : car ils nous aff eurerent que le 
langage des meurtriers eftoit entieremet different du 
langage des Iroquois: cela arrefta les baches des 
Algonquins, qui n auroiet point manqu6 d ailommer 
quelques Annierronnons qui fe trouuoient pour lors 
parmy eux & parmy nous: enfin on a d6couuert que 
ce*t aflaffinat auoit efte commis par les Sokoquiois, 
deux defquels s eftans rencontrez quelques annees 
auparauant dans les confins des Iroquois, auoient 
efte" tuez par quelques foldats montagnais, & vn 
autre auoit efte" fort mal traite" des Algonquins, mais 



1645-46] RELA TION OF 1645-46 277 

are others, as the Abnaquiois, who are friends to us. 
I will remark, in the third place, that last year, at 
the departure of the fleet, when we were tasting the 
sweetness of the incipient peace, news was brought 
to us that three Savages of the village of St. Joseph, 
or Sillery, had been killed, and some others severely 
wounded. This report tempered our joy with worm 
wood, in the doubt lest the Annierronnons had acted 
in bad faith with us. Finally, after all possible 
investigation, we found that one of the most fervent 
Christians of Sillery, or of saint Joseph, had been 
treacherously slain, with two baptized young lads; 
[9] that the son of Fra^ois Xavier Nenaskoumat 
one of the two chief pillars of the Savage reduction 
had been mortally wounded. Indeed, this man came 
to give up the ghost very piously in our arms, after 
having received in the Hospital at Kebec all the 
charitable attentions with which a poor sick man can 
be assisted. In that treacherous attack, his wife was 
left for dead ; they removed a part of the skin and 
the hair from her head, but Our Lord restored her 
health. It was a consolation to us that these last 
two did not die on the spot ; for they assured us that 
the language of the murderers was altogether differ 
ent from the language of the Iroquois ; that stayed 
the hatchets of the Algonquins, who would not have 
failed to beat to death some Annierronnons who at 
that time happened to be among them and among 
us. At last, it was discovered that this murder had 
been committed by the Sokoquiois, two of whose 
tribe having chanced to be, some years before, on 
the borders of the Iroquois had been killed by 
some montagnais warriors; and another had been 
very badly treated by the Algonquins, but ransomed 



278 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

rachet6 [10] & renuoye" de \_sc. dans] fon pai s par 
Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur. 

Le Diable preuoyant que la paix troubleroit fon 
royaume, s eftoit efforce de la rompre: mais 1 Ange 
de 1 Eglife de Dieu 1 a tenu a la cadene, il a fait 
conclure auec benedidtion ce qu on a fouhait6 depuis 
tant d anne"es, auec vne confidente humilit6 & vne 
patience Chreflienne. 

Les Iroquois Annierronnons ont charI6 auec toute 
libert^ dans les confins des Algonquins, & ceux-cy 
les ont veu & receu de bon oeil, les ont amenez en nos 
habitations: il n y a lieu en tous ces quartiers ou on 
n ait veu de temps en temps quelques Annierronnons. 
Ceux qui f^auent 1 antipathic de ces peuples, & les 
e"pouuentables inclinations qu ils ont a la vengeance, 
penfent voir autant de miracles qu ils voyent de 
bonne intelligence entre vn Algonquin & vn Iroquois. 
On efcriuit 1 an paffe" comme les Ambaifadeurs 
Annierronnons ayans negocie" auec les Frangois fur 
la paix vniuerfelle, s eftoient retirez en leur pai s 
pour reporter la parole & la voix d Onontio, c eft a 
dire les penfees de Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur. Le 
Fran9ois qui auoit efte long-temps [i i] captif en leur 
pais, les accompagnoit, auec ordre de fe trouuer en 
toutes leurs affemble es: voicy ce qu il en a remarqu6. 
Ayant quitte les Frangois, ils furent dix-hui(5t 
iours en chemin, & trois iours apres leur arriue"e dans 
le pai s, les principaux s eftant affemblez de diuers 
endroits, fe comporterent en cette forte. 

Auant que ces Ambaffadeurs parlaffent, on leur fit 
vn prefent pour adoucir le conduit de leur voix, arm 
que les paroles d Onontio qu ils auoient receu par 
leurs oreilles, fortilfent sas peine & fans rudeffe de 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 279 

[10] and sent back to his own country by Monsieur 
our Governor. 

The Devil, foreseeing that the peace would trouble 
his kingdom, had striven to break it ; but the An gel 
of the Church of God has kept it fast locked ; he has 
brought to a happy conclusion that which has been 
desired for so many years with a confident humility 
and a Christian patience. 

The Annierronnon Iroquois have hunted with 
every liberty in the borders of the Algonquins, and 
the latter have seen and received them with friend 
liness, and have conducted them to our settlements ; 
there is no place in all these quarters where from 
time to time some Annierronnons have not been 
seen. Those who know the antipathy between these 
peoples and their frightful proneness to vengeance, 
regard it as a miracle whenever they see a friendly 
understanding between an Algonquin and an Iro 
quois. 

It was written last year, how the Annierronnon 
Ambassadors, having negotiated with the French for 
a universal peace, had withdrawn to their own coun 
try in order to report the word and the voice of 
Onontio, that is to say, the opinions of Monsieur 
our Governor. The Frenchman who had long been 
a [n] captive in their country, accompanied them, 
with orders to be present in all their assemblies; 
here follows what he has observed therein. 

Having left the French, they were eighteen days 
on the way ; and, three days after their arrival in the 
country, the principal persons having assembled 
from various places, behaved in this manner : 

Before those Ambassadors spoke, they were given 
a present, in order to soften the tones of their voices, 



280 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

leur bouche. Ce prefent fait, le Fra^ois qui a con- 
noiffance de leur langue, & ces Ambaffadeurs deploy- 
eret les prefens dot ils eftoient chargez, & en fuite 
haranguerent auec la fatisfadtion de tout le monde, 
leurs difcours finis, les Capitaines firent auffi d au- 
tres prefens pour eftre apportez a Onontio & a fes 
confederez. 

Le premier feruit comme d vn bain, dans lequel 
ces Ambaffadeurs recrus du chemin fe pouuoient 
delaffer; ou comme d vn onguent qui gueriroit les 
bleffeures que les pierres, les ronces & les halliers 
qu on rencontre en vn fi long voyage, auroient [12] 
pu faire k leurs pieds. 

Le fecond publioit que leur hache d armes fufpen- 
due en 1 air fans ramener fon coup iufques a la ref- 
ponfe des Hurons & des Algonquins fuiuant le defir 
d Onontio, auoit perdu fon vfage, qu on 1 auoit iettee 
fi loin qu homme du monde ne la pourroit iamais 
retrouuer, c eft k dire que les Hurons & les Algon 
quins eftans entrez dans la paix, les Annierronnons 
n auoient plus d armes que pour la chaffe. 

Le troifi6me tefmoignoit la douleur que receuoient 
les Annierronnons de leur miferable fille onnietfte, 
laquelle meprifoit la voix de fa mere & le confeil de 
fon pere, qu elle eftoit fi infolente d auoir encor 
enuoye de fes enfans vers Montreal, pour furprendre 
ceux qui fe trouueroient en cette contree. Onniete 
eft vne bourgade dont la plus grande partie des 
hommes ayant efte deconfis en guerre par les hauts 
Algonquins, elle fut contrainte d appeller des Annier 
ronnons pour fe repeupler; de la vient que les 
Annierronnons 1 appellent leur fille. Monfieur le 
Gouuerneur 1 ayant inuitee comme fon enfant a 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1643-46 281 

so that the words of Onontio, which they had received 
by their ears, might issue without difficulty and with 
out roughness from their lips. This gift made, the 
Frenchman, who has knowledge of their language, 
and those Ambassadors, displayed the presents with 
which they were charged, and then harangued to the 
satisfaction of all the people. Their speeches fin 
ished, the Captains also made other presents, to be 
conveyed to Onontio and to his confederates. 

The first served as a bath in which those Ambas 
sadors, fatigued from the journey, might refresh 
themselves ; or as an ointment which would cure the 
wounds that the stones, the briars, and the thickets, 
encountered in so long a journey, might [12] have 
caused to their feet. 

The second proclaimed that their war hatchet 
according to the desire of Onontio, suspended in the 
air without finishing its blow until the answer of the 
Hurons and of the Algonquins had lost its use; 
and that it had been thrown so far that not a man in 
the world could ever find it again, that is, that, the 
Hurons and the Algonquins having entered into 
peace, the Annierronnons had no more arms except 
for the chase. 

The third indicated the grief which the Annier 
ronnons received from their miserable daughter onni- 
eoute, who despised the voice of her mother and the 
counsel of her father ; that she was so insolent as even 
to have sent some of her children to Montreal, in 
order to surprise those who should happen to be in 
that country. Onnieoute is a village which, the 
greatest part of its men having been defeated in war 
by the upper Algonquins, was constrained to call the 
Annierronnons to repeople it ; thence it comes that 



282 



LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

entrer dans vne paix generale par 1 entremife des 
Annierronnons, [13] difent qu elle eft rebelle & fon 
pere & a fa mere. Le temps amenera tout, & Dieu 
donnera des fruidts en fa faifon. 

Le quatri6me fut vn tefmoignage public de la 
reconnoiffance de toutes les bourgades des Annier 
ronnons, de ce qu Onontio auoit aplany la terre & 
reiiny les coeurs. 

Le cinquieme eftoit vne adtion de grace au mefme 
Onontio, qu ils reconnoiffoient comme le pere com- 
mun de toutes ces Nations, luy donnant mille loii- 
anges de ce qu il auoit rendu 1 efprit aux Algon- 
quins; ce que nul autre n auoit pu faire deuant luy. 

Le fixie"me eftoit vne requefte qu ils luy prefen- 
toient a ce qu il fit allumer des feux dans toutes les 
habitations de fon gouuernement, afin que toutes les 
Nations s y venans chauffer en alfeurance, puiflent 
efcouter fa voix & joiiir de fon amitie; & en cas qu il 
arriue quelque different, qu il foit 1 arbitre des Iro- 
quois, des Hurons & des Algonquins. 

Ces prefens faits, on ne parla plus que de feftins, 
que de danfes, & que de refjoliiffances publiques: on 
employa dix iours en ces bals & en ces feftes, & puis 
[14] on renuoya le Fra^ois auec fept Ambaffadeurs 
pour porter ces prefens, & pour fe refioiiir auec les 
Fran9ois & auec leurs alliez fur la paix conclue. 

Ces Ambaffadeurs eftans venus par terre iufques au 
lac ou il fe faut embarquer, ne trouuerent point leurs 
canots ou leurs bateaux d ecorces, quelque mecontent 
ou quelque larron les auoit brifez ou enleuez, fi bien 
qu ils furent contraints de retourner fur leurs pas, 
pour pouruoir a leur voyage : ce retour fut vn coup 
du Ciel, qui nous voulut donner des preuues de la 



1645- 46J RELA TION OF 1645-46 283 

the Annierronnons call it their " daughter." Mon 
sieur the Governor having invited it, as his child, to 
enter upon a general peace through the mediation of 
the Annierronnons, [13] they say that it is rebellious 
to its father and mother. Time will bring about 
everything, and God will give fruits in his season. 

The fourth was a public token of the gratitude of 
all the villages of the Annierronnons, that Onontio 
had leveled the earth and united the hearts. 

The fifth was an act of thanks to the same Onon 
tio, whom they recognized as the common father of 
all those Nations, giving him a thousand praises 
for having restored sense to the Algonquins, which 
no other had been able to do before him. 

The sixth was a request which they submitted to 
him, that he should cause fires to be kindled in all 
the settlements of his government, so that all the 
Nations coming thither to warm themselves in safe 
ty, may listen to his voice and enjoy his friendship; 
and, in case there occurs some difference, that he be 
the umpire of the Iroquois, the Hurons, and the 
Algonquins. 

These presents made, there was mention only of 
feasts, of dances, and of public rejoicings. They 
spent ten days in these balls and feasts, and then 
[14] they sent away the Frenchman with seven Am 
bassadors to convey those gifts, and to rejoice with 
the French and with their allies over the conclusion 
of peace. 

These Ambassadors having reached, by land, the 
lake where they must embark, did not find their 
canoes or their boats of bark ; some disaffected person 
or some thief had broken these, or carried them 
away ; insomuch that they were constrained to retrace 



284 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

fincerit6 des Iroquois Annierronnons ; car & mefme 
temps que le Fran9ois entra dans leur principale bour- 
gade, arriuerent quelques Ambaffadeurs Sokoquiois 
deleguez de leur nation pour faire rompre la paix 
entre les Annierronnons & les Algonquins: 1 audi 
ence leur eftant donnee celuy qui portoit la parole 
harangua en ces termes: II y a long-temps que ie 
vous ay entendu dire que les Algonquins eftoient vos 
ennemis irreconciliables, & que vous les haiffez au 
de la du tombeau, en forte que fi vous les pouuiez 
rencontrer en 1 autre vie que voftre guerre feroit 
eternelle, comme nous fommes [15] vos alliez, nous 
entrons dans vos paffions & dans vos interefts : voila 
les teftes de quelques-vns que nous auons maflacrez, 
& vn lien que nous vous prefentons pour en garoter 
auec nous autant qu il nous fera poffible. La deffus 
ils prefentent les cheuelures des Chreftiens de S. 
lofeph tuez 1 Automne derniere, comme i ay dit au 
commencement de ce Chapitre, & vn grand collier 
de porcelaine qui deuroit feruir de fers pour les 
mettre a la cadene. 

Les Iroquois refpondirent auec indignation : Nous 
nous eftonnons de voftre hardieffe, ou pluftoft de 
voftre temerite, vous nous iettez la honte fur le 
vifage, vous nous faites paffer pour des fourbes. 
Onontio auec lequel nous auons traite la paix n eft 
point vn enfant, fi nous vous regardions de bon ceil, 
il auroit fujet de dire, les Annierronnons n ont pas 
tue" mes alliez, mais bien leurs haches, ie penfois 
agir auec de vrays hommes, & i ay traite auec des 
trompeurs & auec des fourbes. 

Ce n eft pas tout, les Algonquins apprenans 
que les tefles de leurs freres font en nos cabanes 



1645 - 46] R EL A TION OF 164.3 - 4& 285 

their steps, to provide for their journey. This return 
was an act of Heaven, which willed to give us proofs 
of the sincerity of the Annierronnon Iroquois ; for, 
at the same time when the Frenchman entered their 
principal village, some Sokoquiois Ambassadors 
arrived, delegated by their nation, in order to break 
the peace between the Annierronnons and the Algon- 
quins. Audience being given them, he who was 
spokesman harangued in these terms : For a long 
time I have heard you say that the Algonquins were 
your irreconcilable enemies, and that you hated them 
even beyond the grave, so that, if you could meet 
them in the other life, your war would be eternal. 
As we are [15] your allies, we enter into your pas 
sions and into your interests. Behold the heads of 
some whom we have massacred, and a cord which we 
present to you for the sake of binding with us as 
many of them as we possibly can." Thereupon they 
present the scalps of the Christians of St. Joseph, 
killed last Autumn, as I have said at the beginning 
of this Chapter, and a great necklace of porcelain, 
which was to serve as irons to put them in chains. 

The Iroquois answered, with indignation: " We 
are astonished at your boldness, or rather at your 
temerity ; you cast shame on our faces ; you make us 
pass for knaves. Onontio, with whom we have 
treated peace, is not a child; if we looked at you 
with favor, he would have reason to say, The Anni 
erronnons have not killed my allies, but it was done 
by their hatchets. I thought to deal with true men, 
and I have treated with deceivers and with knaves. 
This is not all; the Algonquins, learning that 
the heads of their brothers are in our cabins, will 
cut off those of our [16] fellow countrymen who are in 



286 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

couperont celles de nos [16] compatriotes qui font en 
leur pai s,voila les defordres de voftre temerite, retirez 
vous, cachez ces teftes, emportez ces liens, comme 
nous n auons qu vn coeur, nous ne voulons qu vne 
langue. 

S il y a de la tromperie dans cette ac5tion, elle eft 
plus que tres-raffinee, & il femble que la raifon con- 
uie ces peuples a embraffer la paix, Dieu leur a donne" 
vn fentiment que le demon de la guerre qui les auoit 
toujours fauorifez, les alloit quitter, la refolution de 
quelques Algonquins & Hurons qui ayas fur la fin 
genereufement combatu auoient pris quelques-vns 
d eux captifs, fouftenoit cette penfee. En fecond 
lieu, comme ils font chaffeurs & que la plufpart des 
animaux font fur les marches des Algonquins, ils 
ont vne paffion d en tirer k leur aif e & fans crainte : 
en effet ils ne s y font pas 6pargnez : car on dit qu ils 
ont tue plus de deux mille cerfs cet hyuer. 

Troifi6mement, le prifonnier Annierronnon que les 
Hurons auoient pris proche de Richelieu, & qu ils 
auoient emmene en leur pai s, eftant de retour en 
fa patrie, a parle" hautement des Fran9ois; il a fait 
entendre a fes compatriotes que fi [17] Onontio prefte 
la main aux Hurons, le mal-heur tombera fur leurs 

teftes. 

Apres tout, le grand Dieu des armees eft le feul & 
vnique autheur de cette paix, ie le prie qu il en foit 
le conf eruateur : nos raif onnemens eftoiet trop cours 
dans vne fi grande barbarie, la fureur eftoit trop 
allum6e pour eftre affoupie ou efteinte par vne con- 
duite humaine, & nous confeffons ingenuement que 
fi celuy qui a fait la paix, ne la conferue, nous n a 
uons pas affez d induftrie pour retenir 1 inconftance 
de ces Barbares dans la fermete. 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 287 

their country, such would be the evil results of your 
temerity. Begone; hide these heads, take away 
these bonds; as we have but one heart, we desire 
but one tongue." 

If there is deceit in this act, it is more than very 
subtle ; and it seems that reason invites these peoples 
to embrace the peace. God has given them a feel 
ing that the demon of war, which had always favored 
them, was about to leave them; the resolution of 
some Algonquins and Hurons who, having bravely 
fought toward the last, had taken some Iroquois 
captive confirmed this idea. In the second place, 
as they are hunters, and as most of the animals are on 
the marches of the Algonquins, they have a great 
desire to shoot these at their ease and without fear. 
Indeed, they have not stinted themselves in this; 
for it is said that they have killed more than two 
thousand deer this winter. 

Thirdly, the Annierronnon prisoner whom the 
Hurons had taken near Richelieu, and whom they 
had led away to their own country, having returned 
to his native land, has spoken highly of the French ; 
he has given his countrymen to understand that if 
[17] Onontio lends a hand to the Hurons, the misfor 
tune will fall on their own heads. 

After all, the great God of hosts is the one and 
only author of this peace ; I entreat him that he will 
be the preserver thereof. Our arguments were too 
limited in so great a barbarism ; fury was too much 
kindled to be quelled or extinguished by human 
effort; and we candidly confess that if he who has 
made the peace does not preserve it, we have not 
enough skill to restrain the inconstancy of these 
Barbarians within firm bounds. 



288 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

IESVS-CHRIST vent fanner quelques-vns de ces 
peuples, & enuoye defia fes precurfeurs ou fes auant- 
couriers, les maladies peftilentielles, les afflictions, 
& la mort mefme: ce font des fleaux qui humilient 
les ames, & qni les font recourir a celuy qui a la force 
en main : les Iroqnois nons croiront bien-toft, & que 
les Magiciens canfent ces mal-heurs, mais ce feroit 
vne folie de chercher vn autre chemin, que celuy 
de la Croix pour faire connoiftre les grandeurs du 
Crucifie". 



1645-46] RELATION OF 1643-46 289 

JESUS CHRIST wills to save certain ones of these 
peoples, and already sends his precursors or his 
forerunners, pestilential diseases, afflictions, and 
death itself; these are scourges which humiliate 
souls, and which make them have recourse to him 
who has the power in hand. The Iroquois will credit 
us soon, and believe that the Magicians cause these 
misfortunes ; but it would be a folly to seek another 
way than that of the Cross, to make known the gran 
deurs of the Crucified. 



290 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [You 28 



[18] CHAPITRE II. 

DE LA VENUE DE SEPT AMBASSADEURS IROQUOIS VERS 
LES FRANgOIS, & DE LEUR NEGOCIATION. 

LE 22. de Feurier de cette anne"e prefente 1646. 
fept Iroquois Annierronnons & deux Hurons, 
accompagnez du Frangois dont i ay fait men 
tion cy-deffus, parurent a Montreal, apres auoir 
relioiiy cette habitation, ils defcendent aux trois 
Riuieres. De la on enuoye donner aduis a Monfieur 
noftre Gouuerneur de leur venue : or comme ce che- 
min s eftoit fait fur les neiges, & que le froid faifoit 
encor rouler les glaces fur noftre grand fleuue, les 
Annierronnons s en allerent a la chafle qui dega qui 
dela, en attendant le mois de May, que Monfieur le 
Gouuerneur monta en cette habitation. 

Le f eptie"me de ce mois il leur donna audiance : 
voicy ce qui fe paffa dans cette affemblee. 

Le plus confiderable eleuant fa voix, entonna [19] 
vne chanfon d actio de graces: Nous eftios morts, 
difoit-il, & nous voila viuans, nous apportions nos 
teftes pour eftre facrifiees aux ombres des Algonquins 
ou des montagnais qui ont efte maffacrez 1 Automne 
dernier, nous doutans bien qu on nous feroit coupa- 
bles de cet affaffinat; mais Onontio arreftant la cho- 
lere des Algonquins, a done" iour k noftre innocence. 
La deffus ils tirent vn prefent, le iettent aux pieds 
des parens & des alliez des defundls, difant que 
c eftoit pour nettoyer la place toute fanglante d vn 



1645 - 46] R EL A TION OF 1645 - 46 291 



[i 8] CHAPTER II. 

OF THE COMING OF SEVEN IROQUOIS AMBASSADORS TO 
THE FRENCH, AND OF THEIR NEGOTIATIONS. 

ON the 22nd of February in this current year, 
1646, seven Annierronnon Iroquois and two 
Hurons, accompanied by the Frenchman whom 
I have mentioned above, appeared at Montreal; after 
having rejoiced that settlement, they come down to 
the three Rivers, whence advice is sent to Monsieur 
our Governor of their coming. Now, as this jour 
ney had been made over the snows, and as the cold 
was still causing the ice to accumulate upon our great 
river, the Annierronnons went away to the chase, 
some on this side, some beyond, while waiting for 
the month of May, when Monsieur the Governor 
went up to that settlement. 

On the seventh of that month, he gave them audi 
ence ; here follows what occurred in that assembly. 

The most considerable person, raising his voice, 
chanted [19] a song of thanksgiving. " We were 
dead," said he, " and behold us alive ; we were bring 
ing our own heads to be sacrificed to the shades of 
the Algonquins or of the montagnais who were 
massacred last Autumn, surely anticipating that we 
should be held guilty of that murder; but Onontio, 
staying the wrath of the Algonquins, has made our 
innocence manifest." Thereupon they draw forth a 
gift, and cast it at the feet of the relatives and allies 
of the departed, saying that it was to cleanse the 



292 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

meurtre commis par trahifon, proteftans qu ils n en 
auoient eu aucune connoiffance qu apres le coup don- 
ne", que tons les Capitaines du pays auoient condamne" 
cet attentat. 

C efl la couftume des peuples de ces contre"es, 
quand quelque perfonne de confideration parmy eux, 
eft morte, d effuyer les larmes de leurs parens par 
quelque prefent. Ce Capitaine ayant apris a fon 
arriuee la mort autant glorieufe que funefte du Pere 
Anne de Noiie de noftre Compagnie, voulut garder 
la loy de fon pays: il eleue les yeux au Ciel, comme 
fe plaignant de fa rigueur, puis fe tournant [20] vers 
les robes noires, ietta des braffelets de Porcelaine: 
voila, dit-il, pour rechauffer la place ou le froid a 
fait mourir ce bon Pere : mettez ce petit prefent en 
voftre fein pour vous diuertir des penfe"es qui vous 
pourroient atrifter. 

Us firent en fuite les prefens qu on leur auoit 
confiez dans leur pays, defquels i ay fait mention an 
Chapitre precedent, tefmoignant leur ioye de fe voir 
vnis & alliez des Fra^ois, des Hurons & des Algon- 
quins, qui font les trois plus confiderables Nations 
auec lefquelles ils ont traite" la paix, toutes les autres 
eftant comprifes fous ces trois chefs. Ils firent quel- 
ques autres prefens aux Hurons, pour leur donner 
aduis de fe tenir fur leurs gardes, dans les chemins, 
iufques a ce que les hauts Iroquois, les Onontague- 
ronons, les SonontHeronons, & quelques autres euffent 
les oreilles perches, c eft a dire ouuertes a la douceur 
de la paix. 

Bref ils offrirent vne braffe de Porcelaine pour 
allumer vn feu de cSfeil aux trois Riuieres, & vn 
grand collier de trois mille grains pour feruir de bois 



1645 - 46] RELA TION OF 1643 ~ 4& 293 

place, all bloody, from a murder committed by 
treachery; and protesting that they had had no 
knowledge of it until after the act was done, and that 
all the Captains of the country had condemned this 
outrage. 

It is the custom of the peoples of these countries, 
when some person of consideration among them is 
dead, to dry the tears of his relatives by some pres 
ent. This Captain having learned, on his arrival, of 
the death no less glorious than sad of Father 
Anne de Noiie of our Society, wished to observe the 
law of his country. He lifted his eyes to Heaven, 
as if complaining of its severity ; then, turning [20] 
toward the black robes, he threw down some Porce 
lain bracelets. " That," said he, " is to warm again 
the place where the cold has caused this good Father 
to die; put this little gift in your bosom, to divert 
yourself from the thoughts which might sadden 
you." 

They next offered the presents which had been 
confided to them in their own country, which I 
have mentioned in the preceding Chapter, betoken 
ing their joy to see themselves united and allied to 
the French, the Hurons, and the Algonquins, who 
are the three most considerable Nations with which 
they have negotiated peace, all the others being 
comprised under these three most important. They 
made some other presents to the Hurons, in order to 
give them warning to be on their guard in the roads, 
until the upper Iroquois the Onontagueronons, the 
Sonontweronons, and some others should have 
their ears pierced, that is to say, open to the benig 
nity of peace. 

In short, they offered a brasse of Porcelain to 



294 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [ VOL. 28 

ou d aliment a ce feu. Les Sauuages ne font quafi 
aucune aflemble e que le calumet auec le petun [21] en 
la bouche, & comme le feu eft neceffaire pour pren- 
dre le tabac, ils en allument quafi toullours en toutes 
leurs affemble es, fi bien que c eft vne mefme chofe 
chez eux allumer vn feu de confeil ou tenir vne place 
propre pour s affembler, ou vne maifon pour s entre- 
uifiter, comme font les parens & les amis. 

Deux iours apres cette affemble e Monfieur noftre 
Gouuerneur s accommodant fort prudemment aux 
facons de f aire de ces peuples, fit venir ces deputez : 
il agift auec eux felon leurs couftumes, les Hurons 
qui eftoient la & les Algonquins, ne manquerent pas 
de s y trouuer. 

Le Franfois qui entend la langue Iroquoife, offrit 
vn prefent de la part d Onontio, pour gratuler les 
Iroquois Annierronnons, & pour marque de 1 eflime 
qu il faifoit de leur nation, d auoir tenu fa parole. 

II en fit vn autre pour tefmoigner le contente- 
ment qu il receuoit, voyant la terre aplanie & la 
hache leue"e & eloign6e des teftes des Hurons & des 
Algonquins : car pour les Franois leur paix fut faite 
d6s la premiere entreueue. 

En troifieme lieu, on offrit vn collier de [22] mille 
grains de Porcelaine, pour affeurer qu on tiendroit 
allume ce feu de confeil qu ils auoient demande aux 
trois Riuieres, & que le bois n y manqueroit pas, 
c eft a dire qu ils feroient toufiours les bien-venus, & 
qu on prefteroit 1 oreille aux Capitaines qui vien- 
droient pour traiter d affaires. 

On fit vn quatrie"me prefent, pour donner a enten 
dre qu Onontio defiroit voir le petit Fra^ois qui feul 
eftoit refte prifonnier en leur pai s. 



1 645 - 46] RELA T1ON OF 1643-46 295 

kindle a council fire at three Rivers, and a great 
necklace of three thousand beads to serve as wood, 
or fuel for this fire. The Savages hold scarcely any 
assembly without the calumet filled with tobacco [21] 
in their mouths ; and, as fire is necessary to the use of 
tobacco, they nearly always kindle fires at all their 
assemblies, insomuch that it is the same thing with 
them to light a council fire, or to keep a place 
suitable for assembling, or a house for visiting one 
another, as do relatives and friends. 

Two days after this assembly, Monsieur our Gov 
ernor, very prudently adapting himself to the usages 
among these peoples, sent for those deputies; he 
dealt with them according to their customs; the 
Hurons who were there, and the Algonquins, did not 
fail to be present. 

The Frenchman who understands the Iroquois lan 
guage offered a gift on behalf of Onontio, to congrat 
ulate the Annierronnon Iroquois, and in token of 
the esteem in which he held their nation for having 
kept its word. 

He made another, to signify the satisfaction that 
he received on seeing the earth leveled, and the 
hatchet lifted and removed from the heads of the 
Hurons and the Algonquins; for, as regards the 
French, their peace was made from the time of the 
first interview. 

In the third place, he offered a necklace of [22] 
a thousand Porcelain beads, for assurance that he 
would keep lighted that council fire which they had 
requested at three Rivers, and that the fuel should 
not fail for it, that is to say, that they would always 
be welcome, and that hearing would be given to the 
Captains who should come to treat of affairs. 



296 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28 

Et vn cinquieme, pour faire reuenir fa fille nom- 
me"e Therefe, afin qu elle preparaft du bled d Inde a 
leur fa9on, pour les feftiner, quand ils nous vou- 
droient viliter. 

II a efte" fouuent parle dans les Relations de cette 
fille: c eft vne Huronne, laquelle ayant efte inftruite 
au Seminaire des Vrfulines, fut prife auec fes parens 
par les Iroquois, lors qu ils la remenoient en fon 
pays. Les Meres Vrfulines ne pouuant fupporter 
que cette pauure petite creature demeuraft dans cette 
captiuite eloignee de tous les fecours qui luy pou- 
uoient ouurir les portes du falut, n ont rien e"pargne, 
& ont remue Ciel & terre pour luy procurer fa liberte". 

[23] Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur approuuant ce 
grand zele & cette grande charite", n a perdu aucune 
occafion de la tirerde cet efclauage, & d y contribuer 
de tout fon pouuoir. 

Tefouehat, appelle des Hurons & des Iroquois On- 
deffon, & des Fra^ois le Borgne de 1 Iile, voyant que 
noftre Interprete ne parloit plus, entonna vne chan- 
fon affez lugubre, puis leuant fes yeux au Ciel pria 
le Soleil d eftre le fpedtateur & de feruir de tefmoin 
de tout ce qui fe paffoit dans cette adtion, & de 
decouurir auec fa lumiere, la fincerit6 de fon coeur & 
de fes intentions. II entonne derechef vne autre 
chanfon, & puis eleuat fa voix il harangue au nom 
de tous les Algonquins, dont il portoit la parole. La 
premiere fut vne proteftation que la rupture de la 
paix ne prouiendroit point de fon cofte, & pour 
tefmoignage de cette verite", il prefente deux robes de 
peaux d Elan, adiouftant qu il auoit quelque deffiance 
des Annierronnos qu il vouloit banir par ce prefent. 

Le fecond prefent fut auffi de deux robes, fur 



1645 - 46] RELA TION OF 1643 ~ 4*&gt; 297 

A fourth present was made, to give them to under 
stand that Onontio desired to see the little French 
man who alone had remained a prisoner in their 
country. 

And a fifth, for causing the return of his daugh 
ter, named Therese, so that she might prepare In 
dian corn in their fashion, to feast them when they 
should wish to visit us. 

Mention has often been made, in the Relations, 
of this girl: she is a Huron, who, having been in 
structed at the Seminary of the Ursulines, was cap 
tured by the Iroquois, with her relatives, when the 
latter were taking her back to her own country. The 
Ursuline Mothers not being able to endure that 
this poor little creature should remain in that captiv 
ity, remote from all the helps which could open for 
her the gates of salvation have spared no pains, 
and have moved Heaven and earth to procure her 
liberty. 

[23] Monsieur our Governor, approving this great 
zeal and this great charity, has lost no opportunity 
for releasing her from that slavery, and of cooperat 
ing in the matter with all his power. 

Tesouehat, called by the Hurons and the Iro 
quois, Ondesson ; and by the French, le Borgne of 
the Isle, seeing that our Interpreter spoke ; no more, 
chanted a rather lugubrious song; then, lifting his 
eyes to Heaven, prayed the Sun to be a spectator and 
to serve as witness of all that occurred in this action, 
and with his light to make evident the sincerity of 
his heart and of his intentions. Again he chanted 
another song; and then, raising his voice, he ha 
rangued in the name of all the Algonquins, whose 
words he conveyed. The first was a protestation 



298 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES [VOL. 28- 

lefquelles fe deuoient repofer ces Ambaffadeurs, pour 
fe delaffer du trauail de leur chemin. 

[24] Le troifieme portoit vne humble priere a 
Onontio h ce qu il ne marchaft point tout feul en 
affeurance dans les chemins qu il auoit applanis & 
frayez ; mais que ce bon-heur f ut auffi commun aux 
Algonquins & aux Hurons : en vn mot cet homme 
deffiant & foupgonneux au poffible, auoit peur que 
les Frangois ne fiffent leur paix en particulier, fans 
fe mettre en peine des Sauuages leurs alliez. 

Le quatrieme prefent affeuroit que les Algonquins 
auoient auffi pofe les armes & iette" leurs haches en 
vne terre inconnue & tous les homines. 

Le cinquieme demandoit qu on ne donnaft point 
de fauffes alarmes, que la chaffe fut libre par tout, 
que les bornes & les limites de toutes ces grandes 
contre"es fuffent Ieu6es, & qu vn chacun fe trouuaft 
par tout, dans fon pais. 

Le fixi6me affeuroit les Annierronnons qu ils pou- 
uoiet librement fe venir chauffer au feu qu Onontio 
leur auoit allume, aux trois Riuieres, que les Algon 
quins & les Iroquois y petunneroient auec plaifir, & 
que leurs pipes ou leurs calumets ne bruleroient 
point, c eft a dire que la peur n y feroit trembler per- 
fonne. Tous ces [25] prefens eftoiet compofez chacun 
de deux robes d Elan, bien peintes & bien paffemen- 
te"es a leur mode. 

Le dernier comprenoit douze de ces belles robes, 
quatre pour chacune des trois bourgades des Annier 
ronnons, fuppliant ces peuples de donner la liberte" 
aux enfans des Algonquins, ou mefme aux grandes 
perfonnes qui feroient encor en leur pai s, auec 
affeurance qu on n e"pargneroit point la graiffe aux 



1645-46] RELA TION OF 1643-46 299 

that a breach of the peace would not proceed from 
his side; and, in token of this truth, he presented 
two robes of Elk skins, adding, that he had some 
distrust of the Annierronnons, which he wished to 
banish by this gift. 

The second gift was also of two robes, on which 
those Ambassadors were to repose themselves, in 
order to be refreshed from the toil of their journey. 

[24] The third conveyed a humble prayer to Onon- 
tio, that he should not walk all alone in safety with 
in the roads which he had leveled and broken ; but 
that this happiness should also be common to the 
Algonquins and to the Hurons. In a word, this man, 
utterly distrustful and suspicious, was afraid that the 
French might make their peace in private, without 
troubling themselves about the Savages, their allies. 

The fourth gift gave assurance that the Algon 
quins had also laid down their arms, and thrown 
their hatchets into a land unknown to all men. 

The fifth requested that no false alarms be given ; 
that the chase be everywhere free; that the land 
marks and the boundaries of all those great coun 
tries be raised ; and that each one should find him 
self everywhere in his own country. 

The sixth assured the Annierronnons that they 
could freely come to warm themselves at the fire 
which Onontio had kindled for them at three Rivers ; 
that the Algonquins and the Iroquois would smoke 
there with pleasure, and that their pipes or their 
calumets would not burn, that is to say, that fear 
would cause no one to tremble there. All these [25] 
gifts were each composed of two Elk robes, hand 
somely painted and well trimmed in their fashion. 

The last included twelve of these beautiful robes, 



300 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [ VOL. 28 

eftomacs de ceux qui les rameneroient, & qu ils 
trouueroient des onguents pour oindre leur tefte : en 
vn mot il vouloit dire qu on leur feroit bonne chere, 
& que leur peine feroit amplement recompenfee. 

Ces prefens acceptez, KiHtfaeton principal Am- 
baffadeur des Annierronnons, apoftrophant les Hu- 
rons, leur fit vn prefent d action de graces de ce qu ils 
n auoient fait aucun mal aux prifonniers Annierron 
nons qu ils auoient pris 1 an paffe* : il leur dift comme 
par parenthefe, qu ils euffent bien fait de diftribuer 
ces prifonniers aux autres nations Iroquoifes leurs 
alliees, qu ils les auroient obligees par cette deffe- 
rence d entrer das vne paix vniuerfelle, qu auec le 
temps on pourroit [26] obtenir ce bon-heur, mais 
qu ils fe deuoient encor defner d eux fur leurs 
chemins. 

II leur fit vn fecond prefent, pour les inuiter a dreff er 
vn feftin aux Annierronnons qui les iroient vifiter en 
leur pays comme leurs vrays amis, & que s ils tar- 
doient quelque temps, qu ils mangeaffent ce qu ils 
auroient prepare", a condition de remettre incontinent 
le pot au feu de peur d eftre furpris, puifque 1 on fe 
difpofoit a ce voyage. 

Le treizieme du mefme mois de May Monfieur 
noftre Gouuerneur traita ces Deputez en la cabane 
d vn Capitaine Algonquin; on leur porta deux pa 
roles par deux prefens, la premiere n eftoit qu vn 
remerciement de ce qu ils n auoient pas voulu accep 
ter les teftes ou les cheueleures de fes alliez par les 
Sokoquiois. 

La feconde leur fignifioit qu il auoit refolu d en- 
uoyer deux Francois en leur pai s, & qu ils pouuoient 
partir dans trois iours. Ce qui fit refoudre les 



1645 - 46] RELA TION OF 1645 - 46 301 

four for each of the three villages of the Annierron- 
nons, entreating those tribes to give liberty to the 
children of the Algonquins, or even to the adult 
persons who should still be in their country; with 
assurances that the fat would not be spared for the 
stomachs of those who should lead them back, and 
that they would find ointments with which to anoint 
their heads, in a word, he meant that they would 
be given good cheer, and that their trouble would 
be amply rewarded. 

These gifts accepted, Kioutsaeton, principal Am 
bassador of the Annierronnons, addressing the Hu- 
rons, made them a present of thanksgiving because 
they had done no harm to the Annierronnon prison 
ers whom they had taken the year before. He told 
them, parenthetically, that they would have done 
well to distribute those prisoners among the other 
Iroquois nations, their allies ; that they would have 
obliged them, by this deference, to engage in a uni 
versal peace; that, in course of time, they might [26] 
obtain this good fortune, but that they should still 
beware of them upon their journeys. 

He made them a second present, to invite them 
to prepare a feast for the Annierronnons, who would 
go to visit them in their country as their true friends ; 
saying that if these delayed for some time, the 
Hurons should eat what they might have prepared, on 
condition of immediately setting the pot back on the 
fire, for fear of being surprised, since his people 
were making ready for this journey. 

On the thirteenth of the same month of May, Mon 
sieur our Governor entertained these Deputies in the 
cabin of an Algonquin Captain. Two speeches were 
conveyed to them by two gifts ; the first was only an 



302 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [ VOL. 28 

Algonquins de leur donner deux de leur nation pour 
eftre de la partie. 

La conclufion de ces affemble es fe faifoit toufiours 
auec des relioiiiflances publiques, [27] mais ceux qui 
penetroient plus auant que 1 ecorce, admiroient la con- 
duite de Dieu, & luy donnoient mille benedictions de 
fes bontez: car il faut auoiier qu a luy feul appar- 
tient de donner le poids aux vents, de changer le 
poifon en medecine, la maladie en la {ante", la mort 
en la vie, & la fureur de la guerre en la douceur de 
la paix. Sa bonte" vueille accorder cette benedidtion 
a noftre France. 



1645-46] RELA TION OF 1645-46 303 

expression of thanks because they had not been will 
ing to accept the heads or the scalps of his allies 
from the Sokoquiois. 

The second indicated to them that he had resolved 
to send two Frenchmen into their country, and that 
they would probably start in three days. This made 
the Algonquins resolve to give them two of their 
nation, to be of the party. 

The conclusion of these assemblies was always 
marked by public rejoicings; [27] but those who 
penetrated deeper than the bark admired the con 
duct of God, and gave him a thousand blessings for 
his kindnesses ; for it must be acknowledged that to 
him alone it belongs to give force to the winds, to 
change poison into medicine, sickness into health, 
death into life, and the fury of war into the mildness 
of peace. May his goodness grant this blessing to 
our France. 



BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA : VOL XXVIII 

LV 

For particulars of this document, see Vol. XXVII. 

LVI 

In presenting the text of Father Isaac Jogues s 
description of New Netherland, called NOUUM 
BELGIUM from the form of its endorsement, we fol 
low the original manuscript preserved in the archives 
of St. Mary s College, Montreal. The history of this 
document s preservation is most interesting. John 
Gilmary Shea gave a partial account of its pedigree 
in Collections of the New York Historical Society (2nd ser. , 
vol. iii., part i.), which we are enabled to elaborate 
through the kindness of Rev. Arthur E. Jones, S.J., 
archivist of St. Mary s. 

Father Jean Joseph Casot, the last of the old 
race of the Jesuits of the French colony, who died 
March 16, 1800, seeing that his order was about " to 
expire by the enactments of the English conquerors, 
which prevented their receiving new members, 
wished to save for Catholicity at least a few of the 
most valuable of the papers in the archives." He, 
therefore, having made a selection, placed them in the 
custody of the Augustine nuns of the Hotel Dieu, at 
Quebec. There they remained until 1843, when 
they were restored to the Society, being entrusted to 
the Rev. Felix Martin, then superior of the Jesuits 



306 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES 

in Canada, and founder of St. Mary s College, Mont 
real. 

Father Martin presented the regents of the Univer 
sity of the State of New York with a transcript of 
the original French manuscript of the NOUUM 
BELGIUM, accompanying it with an English trans 
lation ; and this translation was used in the Docu 
mentary History of the State of New-York, vol. iv. 
(Albany, 1851) see the octavo edition, pp. 21-24; 
and the quarto edition, pp. 15-17. This was the 
document s first appearance in print, in any form. 

In 1852, Father Martin printed the French text 
for the first time in the appendix (pp. 306 -309) to 
his translation of Bressani s Italian Relation of 1653. 

In 1857, a new translation appeared in the Collec 
tions of the New York Historical Society, 2nd ser., vol. 
iii., part i., pp. 215-219, among the" Jogues Papers. 
Translated and arranged, with a memoir by John 
Gilmary Shea." In 1856, while the above volume 
was in press, a separate edition of the "Jogues 
Papers" (pp. 69) was struck off, apparently for Dr. 
Shea s use. 

In 1862, Dr. Shea issued in a privately-printed 
volume another translation, which varies somewhat 
from all predecessors. It collates as follows: 

Novum Belgium: | an | Account of New Nether- 
land | in 1643-4. | By Rev. Father Isaac Jogues, | of 
the Society of Jefus. | With a Facfimile of his Orig 
inal Manufcript his Portrait a Map and Notes by 
John | Gilmary Shea. [ Cut with storks ] | New 
York: | Privately Printed. | 1862. 

Quarto; title, with verso blank, i leaf; " Preface," 
with verso blank, i leaf; " Sketch of the Life of Fa 
ther Isaac Jogues, " pp. 5-16; facsimile of the Jogues 



BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XXVIII 307 

manuscript, four unnumbered leaves; printed text, 
pp. 9-21; p. 22 blank; translation, pp. 23-35; P- 
36 blank; notes, pp. 37-53, with the verso of p. 53 
blank; coat-of-arms, etc., with verso blank, i leaf. 
The plates, etc., are: (i) Portrait frontispiece of 
Jogues; (2) Autograph of Jogues, bet. sig. Aij and 
Aiij ; (3) Facsimile of De Laet s map; (4) View of 
New Amsterdam, from Montanus. The impression 
of the printed text (pp. 9-21) is the same as that of 
the following. It will be noticed, in the facsimile of 
the original MS., given in the edition just described, 
that the endorsement apparently in Jogues s own 
handwriting reads: " Nouum Belgium | 1644 | a p 
Is Jogues." The MS. takes its name in bibliography 
from this endorsement; the date, however, is mis 
leading, for Jogues s experience in New Amsterdam 
was only in 1643, although at the close of his account 
(written in 1646) he, cursorily, alludes to events 
occurring in 1644. 

Dr. Shea s Cramoisy series of Relations (1857- 
1868), though not having a series numbering, is, 
nevertheless, usually treated so for the sake of con 
venience. According to the form usually adopted, 
the Novum Belgium is numbered 16 in the series. It 
was printed on both large and small paper, and 
limited to one hundred copies. A collation follows: 

Novum Belgium, | description de | Nieuw Nether- 
land | et | Notice sur Rene" Goupil. | Par le R. P. 
Isaac Jogues, | de la Compagnie de Jefus. | [Cut with 
storks ] | A New York, dans 1 Ancien Niew [sic] 
Netherland, | Preffe Cramoify de J. M. Shea. | 1862. 

Title, with certification (of copies printed) on the 
verso, i leaf; contents, with verso blank, i leaf; 
text of Novum Belgium, pp. 9-21; p. 22 blank; 



308 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES 

notice of Rene Goupil, pp. 23-44. Facsimile of De 
Laet s map of " Nova Anglia, Novvm Belgivm et 
Virginia." 

The French text of Novum Belgium, annotated, is 
also to be found in Martin s life of Jogues, where it 
forms appendix H, and covers pp. 344-350. There 
are two issues of this biography, one with the im 
print: " Paris | Joseph Albanel, Libraire | 7, Rue 
Honore Chevalier, 7 | 1873; and the other: 
" Quebec | Ovide Frechette, Libraire 43, Cote de la 
Montagne, 43 | 1874." The Paris edition has a por 
trait of Jogues and five plates, which are not in the 
Quebec edition. Both issues are exactly alike, from 
the " Avant-propos &gt;: (pp. v-xi) to the end of the 
volume (p. 352), and are from the same type. They 
vary in that the Quebec copy has a new half-title and 
a new title-page, and the verso of the half-title shows 
that these were printed at Paris. Imprimerie 
Jules Le Clere et C ie , Rue Cassette, 29." 

Other editions of Novum Belgium have, of course, 
since appeared in print. 

LVII 

In the Collections of the New York Historical Society 
(2nd ser., vol. iii., part i., p. 221), Dr. Shea gives a 
letter of Father Jogues to his superior, dated Mont 
real, April, 1646," in which the missionary says: I 
owe your Reverence the account of the Capture and 
death of good Rene" Goupil, which I should have 
sent already. If the bearer of this give [sic] me 
time, I will send it along." The Notice sur Ren/ 
Goupil here reproduced, is the account thus promised. 

The history of the original MS. of this interesting 
document is identical with that of the Novum Belgi- 



BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XXVIII 309 

um, already given (see LVL, above) having been 
entrusted to the nuns of Quebec by Father Casot, 
and restored to the Jesuit order by the nuns in 1843. 

An English translation of the Notice, by Shea, was 
given in the volume of New York Historical Society 
Collections, above cited, pp. 221-257. 

It was also given in the separate edition of the 
Jogues Papers (see data under LVL) with this title: 
" Narrative of a Captivity among the Mohawk In 
dians, a description of New Netherland in 1642-3, 
and other Papers. By Father Isaac Jogues, of the 
Society of Jesus. With a Memoir of the Author, by 
John Gilmary Shea. New York: Edward Dunigan 
& Brother. 1856; also with the imprint: "New 
York: Press of the Historical Society. 1856." 

The French edition bears the following title: 
" Novum Belgium, | description de ] Nieuw Nether- 
land | et | Notice sur Rene Goupil. Par le R. P. 
Isaac Jogues, | de la Compagnie de Jefus. {Cut with 
storks] | A New York, dans 1 Ancien Niew [sic] 
Netherland, | Preffe Cramoify de J. M. Shea. | 
1862." The account of Goupil covers pp. 23-44. 
For more complete details, see LVL above. 

LVIII 

The original of this letter from Jogues to Father 
Andre Castillon (dated Montreal, September 12, 1646), 
rests in the archives of the Jesuit Province of Lyons, 
France, having first been published in Rochemon- 
teix s Je suites et la Nouve He- France, ii., pp. 450-452, 
We follow Rochemonteix. 

LIX 

For bibliographical particulars of the Journal des 
Jtsuites, see Vol. XXVII. 



310 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES 

LX 

In reprinting the Relation of 1645-46 (Paris, 1647), 
we follow the text of the original Cramoisy edition, 
from a copy in Lenox Library. This copy is inter 
esting from association for it bears on the title-page 
the autograph of " Robert Southey 20 May 1817. 
Paris." Our title-page is a facsimile of the copy in 
the possession of the Wisconsin State Historical 
Society. 

The " Priuilege " is dated " Paris le 6. Decembre 
1646," and the " Permiffion " Paris ce 8. lanuier 
1647." This Relation consists of two parts, both of 
which are addressed to the provincial, Estienne 
Charlet. Part I. is Jerome Lalemant s regular New 
France Relation; and part II. is the Huron Relation 
from May, 1645 to May, 1646, signed " Paul Ra- 
gneav," and dated " Des Hurons ce i. May 1646." 
The volume is generally referred to as " H. 86," 
because described in Harrisse s Notes, no. 86. His 
description, however, is not precise. 

Collation : Sig. a in four (consisting of one blank 
leaf; title, with verso blank, i leaf; " Table des 
Chapitres," pp. (2); and "Priuilege," with "Per 
miffion" on the verso, i leaf); prefatory epistle by 
Lalemant to Part I., pp. 1-6; text of Part L, pp. 7- 
184; title to Part II., with verso blank, i leaf; epistle 
by Ragueneau, and text to Part II., pp. 3- 128. 

Peculiarities: All copies examined have but one case 
of mispagination ; namely, in Part II., where p. 25 
is numbered 33. In the Lenox copy from which 
we reprint, the sentence in Montagnais commencing 
on line 10 of p. 176, in Part I., begins: " Tapoue" 
Nama Nitirinifm ; " but in another copy in that 



BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XXVIII 311 

Library, formerly George Bancroft s, this sentence 
begins : Tap de Nama. Evidently the latter is the 
earlier impression, in which "one "of " Tapoue " 
was thought to be " de." Otherwise, typographically 
and textually, the two volumes are identical. 

Copies of H. 86 have been sold or priced as 
follows: Harrassowitz (1882), priced at 160 marks; 
O Callaghan (1882), no. 1224, sold to the Library of 
Parliament, Canada, for $24, and had cost him $32.50 
in gold; Barlow (1890), no. 1291, sold for $10; 
Dufosse", of Paris, priced (1891 and 1892) at 22 5 and 175 
francs, respectively; Lenox duplicate, sold April 29, 
1895, by Bangs & Co., New York City, to Dodd, 
Mead & Co., for $35, and was priced by them in 
their list of April, 1896, no. 42, at $50. Copies in 
collections: Lenox (two variations), Harvard, Wis 
consin State Historical Society, New York State 
Library, Laval University (Quebec), Brown (private), 
Bibliotheque Nationale (Paris), and British Museum. 



NOTES TO VOL XXVIII 

(Figures in parentheses, following number of note, refer to pages 

of English text.) 

1 (p. 25). This ecclesiastic (vol. xxv., note g) was a member of 
the commercial company that controlled the trade of Miscou. 

2 (p. 105). Both these names, Maurice and Nassau, were given 
to the Hudson River, at that early day, in honor of Prince Maurice 
of Nassau (1567-1625), the celebrated Dutch general. 

3 (p. 107). For information regarding the West India Company, 
see vol. xxi., note 20. Shea, in his privately-printed edition of 
Novum Belgium (see Bibliographical Data in this volume), states 
(1862) that "the papers of the West India Company were but a few 
years since sold as waste paper." 

4 (p. 109). Mnistes: apparently an abbreviation of Mennonistes, 
modernized as Mennonites, the followers of Simon Menno, who 
organized them in 1535 as an independent body, though really one 
of the branches of the great Protestant reformation of that time. 
They believed in the personal coming and reign of Christ upon 
earth for a thousand years ; opposed infant baptism ; and regarded 
war, capital punishment, and the taking of oaths as unlawful. 
Persecuted in Germany and Switzerland in the i6th century, many 
of this sect fled to Holland, where their co-religionists were already 
numerous ; and not a few found new homes in the Dutch foreign 
colonies. The Mennonites are, at the present day, a large body; 
many of them have formed flourishing colonies in the Western 
States of America, largely driven hither by persecution in their 
native lands, especially in Russia. 

5 (p. 109). In regard to the conditions of settlement in New 
Netherlands, cf. N. Y. Colon. Docs., vol. i., p. 114; and O Calla- 
ghan s New Netherland, vol. i., p. 206. 

6 (p. 109). Fresh River: thus named by the Dutch explorer, 
Adrien Block (1614). Connecticut is a corruption of the aboriginal 
name, Quinnehtukqut, meaning "land on the long tidal river." 
(Trumbull, Ind. Names, p. 60). 



314 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES 

7 (p. 109). This "South River" was, even then, also known as 
the Delaware, a name applied to the bay by Argall, in 1610, in 
compliment to the first governor of Virginia, although these waters 
were discovered by Hendrik Hudson in the preceding year. The 
river was first explored in 1616, by Hendrickson, a Dutch captain. 
The first settlement was made by the Dutch, in 1623, at Fort Nas 
sau, near the site of the present Gloucester, N. J. Three years 
later, Gustavus Adolphus granted to a Swedish company (organized 
mainly by William Usselincx) a charter for lands in this region; 
but it was not until 1638 that they sent colonists thither. In that 
year, a Swedish settlement was made at Fort Christina, on the site 
of the present Wilmington, Del. 

8 (p. 109). Jogues here refers to the French edition of De Laet 
(Leyden, 1640), and, therein, to chapters treating of New Bel 
gium, vii., x., and xi., of book iii. At the beginning of De Laet s 
volume is an extensive Table des Chapitres qui sont contenus 
en chaque Livre;" this, no doubt, is "la table" mentioned by 
Jogues. V. H. PALTSITS. 

9 (p. in). Concerning this settlement and fort, see vol. xxiv., 
note 22. 

10 (p. 113). Wolves: see vol. xxvi., note 4. 

11 (p. 137). For sketch of Bourdon, see vol. xi., note 11. 

12 (p. 143). Jean Bonnet a member of the Jesuit order, 1599- 
1654, and rector at Saintes wrote Image Sacre de la vie et de la 
doctrine de Je sus-Christ (Poitiers, 1634). 

Jeremias Drexel was born at Augsburg, Aug. 15, 1581. When 
barely seventeen, he became a Jesuit novice, and studied at Augs 
burg and Dillingen. During twenty-three years he was court 
preacher for the Elector of Bavaria, and died at Munich, Apr. 19, 
1638. He was a prolific writer of religious works; among these, 
was De ^Eternitate Consider ationes (Munich, 1620), which went 
through numerous editions, and was translated into eight languages. 

13 (p. 143). The telescope was invented about 1609, by Jakob 
Metzu, of Alkmaer, Holland, whence it was called lunette de Hol 
land. The appellation given in our text, lunette de Galilee, arose 
from its use by Galileo, who mentions the instrument in his Nuncius 
sydereus (1610); he made one for himself, after the model of 
Metzu s, in order to examine the motions of Jupiter s satellites. 
Felice s Encyclopddie (Yverdon, 1773), t. xxvi., pp. 727, 728. 

14 (p. 143). This was Marguerite Langlois, wife of the pilot 
Abraham Martin, from whom the " Plains of Abraham " derive their 
name. Marguerite was probably a relative of the Norman pilot 
Noel Langlois, one of the early settlers in Canada. Martin had ten 



NOTES TO VOL. XXV III 315 

children all, save one, girls. One of these, Helene, was the first 
wife of the explorer Chouart des Groseilliers (note 32, post). 

15 (p. 147). This was Jacques Maheu, a native of Perche, who 
came to Quebec before 1639. The Journal mentions him, in this 
same month, as aiding Marsolet in arousing discontent among the 
habitants; and, in 1659-61, as engaged in the cod-fishery on the 
Gaspe coast. 

16 (p. 151). Following is the translation of the Latin passage in 
the text: 

When these things were reported by us that is, by me and 
Father de Quen to Monsieur the Governor, he himself disclosed to 
us the whole matter, thus: Last summer, when the Annieronon 
envoys came with Cousture to treat for peace, after they had dis 
cussed and transacted many things in public, they demanded their 

leader being a man named le crochet [ the hook ] that Monsieur 
the Governor would consent to talk with them in a private confer 
ence. This man thought that a considerable present should be 
made to Monsieur the Governor, that, if he desired peace for both 
himself and the Hurons, he should abandon the Algonquins without 
shelter. When Onontio was informed of this, he would not even 
look at any such present, nor would he suffer it to be delivered ; and 
he said that the thing was impossible. Le crochet was chagrined 
at this repulse, and from that time the peace seemed to be endan 
gered. Monsieur the Governor saw this ; and both Father Vimont, 
the superior, and Father le Jeune thought that the difficulty might be 
smoothed over. In a 2nd private conference, at which, as at the 
former, were present Monsieur the Governor, le Crochet, and Cous 
ture, Monsieur the Governor said that there were two kinds of 
Algonquins, one like ourselves, recognized as Christians; the 
other, unlike us. Without the former, it is certain, we do not make 
a peace ; as for the latter, they themselves are the masters of their 
own actions, nor are they united with us like the others. This, as 
uttered by Monsieur the Governor, was, and perhaps for a worse 
reason, thus repeated by the envoy to his own people, which, being 
understood by all the Annieronons in his country, was made public 
by such of them as left it, sed merit o, denied by the french." 

17 (P- 153)- Mathurin Gagnon, with his brothers Jean and Pierre, 
settled at Chateau-Richer, probably by 1640. From them, accord 
ing to Suite, " have sprung innumerable families, who have spread 
into all regions where Canadians are found." Among these are, 
in the present generation, several men of prominence in Canadian 
literature and public affairs. 

18 (p. 155). Pierre Boucher, a native of Perche (1622), came 



316 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES 

with his father s family to Canada in 1634. He spent the years 
1639-41 in the service of the Jesuits, in their Huron missions, and 
four years more as a soldier of the Quebec garrison ; and, in 1645, 
became an interpreter at Three Rivers. From that time, he secured 
rapid promotion, occupying many important positions in business 
and in public affairs, notably that of governor of Three Rivers 
(1653-58, and 1662-67). In 1661, Boucher was ennobled; and, in 
the same year, he went to France, in order to represent there the 
enfeebled condition of the Canadian colonies, and their urgent need 
of aid. He was partially successful, returning the next year with 200 
colonists and 100 soldiers, and having awakened in France renewed 
interest in the Canadian enterprise. It was for this purpose, and at 
the king s request, that Boucher undertook to write his Histoire 
veritable (vol. viii., of this series, note 3), a sketch of the natural 
resources of Canada. In 1667, retiring from the governorship of 
Three Rivers, he settled upon his estate at Boucherville, and devoted 
his energies to the improvement and colonization of this and other 
lands in which he had an interest He died in 1717, aged 95, leav 
ing a numerous family. Boucher s first wife was an Indian girl, 
educated at the Ursuline convent ; her death soon left him a childless 
widower. He then married (1652) Jeanne Crevier, by whom he had 
sixteen children. Most of the particulars here given are obtained 
from Suite s excellent paper, " Pierre Boucher et son livre," Canad. 
Roy. Soc. Proc., 1897, vol. ii., sect, i., pp. 99-168. This is a reprint 
of the Hist vdrit., accompanied by a biographical sketch of 
Boucher, and bibliographical notice of his book. 

Toussaint Toupin, here mentioned, was husband of Boucher s 
sister Marguerite, and " an influential citizen of Quebec" (Suite): 
he was an ancestor of the noted Charles de Langlade. 

19 (p. 167). Gabriel Duclos de Celles, sieur de Sailly, spent the 
winter of 1645-46 at Quebec, but apparently removed thence to 
Montreal, where he married (1652) Barbe Poisson. He was a judge, 
in both civil and criminal affairs, and was granted lands in 1654. 

20 (p. 173). Reference is evidently here made to the Indian 
Frangois Xavier Nenaskoumat, one of the original two settlers at 
the Sillery reduction, who died in 1639; but it is difficult to explain 
why he should also be named Boule, unless, possibly, on account 
of some special circumstance connecting him with a Frenchman of 
that name. Tanguay (Diet. Gtndal. } mentions one Francois Boule, 
" located at Sillery," whose infant child was buried at Three Rivers, 
Jan. 31. 1639. In a document dated Feb. 8, 1652, one of this name 
is mentioned among the landholders near Cap Rouge ; he was slain 
there by the Iroquois in June, 1653. Both references may be to the 
same person. Nenaskoumat s surname may, with more probability, 






NOTES TO VOL. XXVIII 317 

be connected with Francois Boulle, mentioned as " one of our domes 
tics," in the Sillery baptismal register (vol. xx., note 10), which 
states that he was (June 24, 1639) godfather to an Indian boy bap 
tized there. 

21 (p. 185). " This paragraph ends with the following sentence, 
which has been crossed off, probably by Father Jerome himself: 
But, this rule having proved difficult of observance to our Brother 
Claude, we were obliged to set it aside, and to continue in these 
matters the practice customary in our Company. " Queb. ed. of 
Jo urn,, p. 43, note. 

22 (p. 187). For sketch of Masse, see vol. i., note 39. The 
monument to his memory, there mentioned, was unveiled June 25, 
1870. In a private note to the Editor, Crawford Lindsay, of Quebec, 
thus describes it: "The monument, plain but elegant, is about 
twenty feet in height, and stands within an enclosure. It is of cut 
stone, with four marble tablets, surmounted by a marble crown. 
One of the tablets bears the following inscription (in French): 
The inhabitants of Sillery have erected this monument to the 
Memory of Pierre Enemond Masse, S.J., first missionary in Can 
ada, buried in 1646, in the church of Saint Michel, on the Domain 
of Saint Joseph of Sillery. On another tablet is inscribed : The 
Church of Saint Michel, which formerly stood on this spot, was 
built by the Commander of Sillery, founder (in 1637) of the Saint 
Joseph Domain. Facing the monument, and on the opposite side 
of the road, stands the building occupied by the Jesuit missionaries. 
It is a two-story house, with very thick walls, and is still in very 
good condition; it is occupied by a family." 

23 (p. 191 ). M. le prieur: Rene Chartier, chaplain of the 
Ursulines (vol. xxiii., note 17). 

24 (p. 201). "The Jesuit Fathers had their cattle-pen at Point 
aux Lievres, at the place where now stands the Marine Hospital, 
opposite Notre Dame des Anges." Queb. ed. of Journ., p. 51, 
note 2. 

25 (p. 203). Thomas Hayot, a native of Perche, connected by 
marriage with the family of Pierre Boucher (note 18, ante), was 
farmer of the Jesuit lands at Beauport ; he came to Canada probably 
about 1637. The Journal mentions him (August, 1653) as deputy 
from Cap Rouge for the election of a syndic. Numerous families 
trace their origin to him. 

26 (p. 203). The bridegroom in this marriage was Antoine 
Martin, nicknamed " Montpellier " from his birthplace, the city of 
that name in France. He married Denise, daughter of Charles 
Sevestre a native of Paris, who had come to Quebec about 1635; 



318 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES 

he died there in 1657. Martin died two years later, leaving six 
children; his widow, in less than three months, married Philip 
Nepveu, by whom she had eleven children. 

27 (p. 211). For information concerning lands belonging to 
Jesuits, see: Three Rivers, vol. iv., note 24; Notre Dame des 
Anges, vi., note 7; St. Gabriel, vi., note 8; Sillery, vii., note 22, 
and ix., note 32; Caughnawaga, xii., note n; Isle of Orleans, xviii., 
note i ; Batiscan and Cap de la Madeleine, xxv., note 9. 

28 (p. 223). Our Lady of the Snows: an ancient feast in the 
Roman Catholic Church, celebrated on the fifth day of August. It 
originated thus: A wealthy Roman patrician, named John, prayed 
for Divine enlightenment on the best way to spend his money. The 
Virgin appeared to him in a dream, telling him to build in her honor 
a church on Mount Esquiline, at a spot where he would next day 
find the ground covered with snow. This sign being given, al 
though the heat of summer prevailed, John erected at this place the 
church of St. Mary Major, which, several times rebuilt, is now one 
of the great basilicas of Rome. This miraculous event took place 
under Pope Liberius, in the fourth century A. D. ; and August 5, the 
day of its occurrence, is commemorated as the day of Our Lady 
of the Snows." T. E. HAMEL. 

The church of St. Mary Major is thus named because it is, both 
in antiquity and dignity, the first church in Rome among those that 
are dedicated to God in honor of the Virgin Mary. It was conse 
crated under the title of the Virgin Mary by Sixtus III., about the 
year 435. It is also called St. Mary ad Nives ("at the Snows "). 
Butler s Lives of the Saints, vol. iii., p. 322. 

29 (p. 223). Adrien Daran, a spiritual coadjutor of the Jesuit 
order, was born at Rouen, Sept. 9, 1615, and became a novice at the 
age of twenty, at Paris. His studies were pursued at Clermont and 
Rouen, his term as instructor being spent at Nevers and Alencon. 
Coming to Canada in 1646, he spent two years in the French settle 
ments on the St. Lawrence, and, in August, 1648, was sent to the 
Huron country. Upon the ruin of that mission, in the following 
year, it would appear that Daran went with the fugitive Huron 
Christians to their new residence on Christian Island, and accom 
panied them on their subsequent flight to Quebec (June- July, 1650). 
Daran returned to France in the following September; he spent 
a year at Alengon, and the rest of his life at Vannes, where he died 
in 1670. 

30 (p. 223). Charles Amador de la Tour, at the age of fourteen, 
was brought from Paris by his father, Claude, who settled in 
Acadia, near Poutrincourt (vols. i.-ii., of this series). Upon the 



NOTES TO VOL. XXVIII 319 

destruction of the French establishments by Argall (1613), Charles 
took refuge, with his friend Biencourt, among the Souriquois In 
dians; and the latter, when dying (1623), appointed Charles his suc 
cessor in command of the few Acadian posts they had established 
after the departure of the English, and in his rights at Port Royal. 
These were not disturbed until 1627, when Kirk seized Port Royal 
in the name of Sir William Alexander (vol. iv., note 46). La Tour, 
however, retained an estate and a fort near Cape Sable; and in 
1632, when Acadia was restored to France, Razilly appointed him 
one of his lieutenants, the other being Charles d Aulnay (vol. viii., 
note 2). After Razilly s death (1635), quarrels arose between 
these officers, owing to conflicting interests and authority ; D Aulnay 
had the greater influence at the French court, and obtained (1641) 
a royal order revoking La Tour s commission, and commanding him 
to return to France. This he refused to do; and, as he was of 
Huguenot birth, he endeavored to secure aid from the Protestant 
English of Boston. This, however, they declined to give, further 
than to allow him (1643) to hire soldiers and purchase supplies at 
his own expense. With these, La Tour returned to his fort at the 
mouth of St. John River (N. B.), and drove away D Aulnay, who was 
besieging the place. The latter again attacked the fort (apparently 
in the spring of 1646), which, though valiantly defended by Madame 
de la Tour in her husband s absence, was captured, D Aulnay 
treacherously putting to death the entire garrison, notwithstanding 
his promise to spare their lives ; and the lady is said to have died 
soon afterward from grief. This disaster compelled La Tour to take 
refuge in Canada, where he seems to have remained till about 1651. 

31 (p. 227). This refers to the statement in the Journal, in Octo 
ber preceding (vol. xxvii., p. 89), that a sum of money had been 
set apart by the habitants for the erection of a church and clergy- 
house for the Jesuits. 

32 (p. 229). Medard Chouart, sieur des Groseilliers, from Brie, 
in France, was born in 1621 (according to Tanguay; but 1625, 
Suite). He came to Three Rivers in 1641, and, later, spent some 
time in the Huron country. (Suite claims that, in 1645, Chouart was 
sent to the Lake Superior region by the Jesuits, in whose service 
he was.) Returning thence (August, 1646, as mentioned in our 
text), he became, at first, a soldier in the Quebec garrison, and then 
a pilot on the St. Lawrence; and, a year later, he married Helene, 
daughter of Abraham Martin. She died in 1651, leaving a son; and, 
in 1653, ne took for his second wife Marguerite, sister of his friend 
Radisson. These two adventurous men made various important 
explorations together, to the west and north, and were the original 
promoters of the Hudson s Bay Company. Regarding the first of 



320 LES RELA TIONS DES JESUITES 

these voyages, there has been much uncertainty and discussion ; the 
subject is exhaustively considered in Campbell s " Radisson and 
Groseilliers, " Parkman Club Pubs., no. 2 (Milw., 1896). He ad 
duces much evidence to show that these two Frenchmen were the 
nameless explorers mentioned in the Jesuit Relation of 1656, who 
spent the two preceding years in the regions about Lakes Michigan 
and Superior, bringing back much information about the Indian 
tribes therein. They again journeyed westward, in the summer of 
1659, and spent the winter near Lake Pepin, among the Sioux tribes 
then located southwest of Lake Superior. On this voyage, they 
gained information which led them to plan further explorations 
northward; and, after several unsuccessful attempts to secure aid 
for this enterprise, they finally obtained ships and men from 
Charles II. of England, in the spring of 1668. Radisson s ship was 
driven back by a storm, but that of Groseilliers succeeded in reach 
ing Hudson s Bay, the objective point of this expedition. In con 
sequence, an English fort was established that year, at the mouth 
of Rupert s River; and, in the following year, Radisson took posses 
sion of Port Nelson in the name of the English king. Another 
result of these explorations was the formation (1670) of the Hudson s 
Bay Company. Radisson and Groseilliers remained at Hudson s 
Bay till 1673, i n the employ of the English; and would seem then 
to have gone to France. Five years later, they returned to Canada, 
and Groseilliers remained for a time with his family at Three 
Rivers. In 1681, the two friends commanded another expedition to 
Hudson s Bay, this time to establish a French post there; but, two 
years later, they returned to Europe, and were induced by the Eng 
lish to reenter the service of the Hudson s Bay Company. Radis 
son went back to the Bay, and spent several years there; but 
Groseilliers apparently remained and died in England. By his 
second wife, he had five children. 

33 (p. 233). Amable Defretat came to Canada in September, 
1646; he remained but one year, probably at Quebec and Sillery; 
and in September, 1647, he was sent back to France. 

34 (p. 243). This was the widow of Jean Nicolet (vol. viii., note 
29), and daughter of Guillaume Couillard (vol. xii., note 27). She 
married Nicolas Macart (Macard), nicknamed "Champagne," from 
his native province. He came to Canada before 1640, and lived at 
Quebec, where at one time he was agent for the habitants. His 
daughters made excellent marriages, and his youngest son became 
a member of the Sovereign Council. Macart died in October, 1659. 

35 (p. 251). Le sit: probably Le Cid of Corneille, which had been 
first represented in Paris about ten years before. 






W 





