Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 21: Quebec and Hurons, 1641-1642
Creator: Jesuit missionaries of New France (the Relations and letters); Reuben Gold Thwaites
  (editor); Thwaites's translators (English rendering)
Publisher: Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers Company, 1896-1901 (73 vols; this is the original Burrows
  edition, not a modern facsimile reprint)
Publication Date: 1898 (this volume; the series ran 1896-1901)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Printed at Cleveland in 1896-1901 (title page: Burrows Brothers Company); public
  domain by the project's date rule (published 1930 or earlier). On Internet Archive, the item
  metadata carries no rights field; that tag is supporting evidence only. The scan is of the
  original Burrows printing (University of Toronto copy), not a modern facsimile reprint. Checked
  2026-09-30.
Language: fra (original French texts with the English translation on facing pages; some documents in
  Latin and Italian)
Source: Internet Archive item jesuits21jesuuoft (archive.org/details/jesuits21jesuuoft), full-text
  OCR file jesuits21jesuuoft.txt, fetched directly (curl, raw bytes) 2026-09-30 by the Library
  thread; the body below is that file unaltered. The item has no *_djvu.txt file; the plain .txt
  file of the same OCR was used.
Provenance note: Body unaltered, including its own OCR errors. Header prepended by the Library
  thread. The OCR interleaves the French original pages with the English translation pages; the
  front cover pages read as noise.
Content note: Volume 21 of 73.

---

. 
. . 


. 


. 
. 
.w_ 
· ß _-=--- 0 
...J
 
· <5 = _ OJ .. 
u _ ,... 
· 
 --- -- C\I 
· 
 
 o 
· 
 = C\I 
· u -,... 
- 
 
 (O 
....: 
 o 
(/) 
U-----=,... 

 
 
(/)
,... 
0: = 

 _ M 
z - 
:=1 


. 
- 


. 
. 
-. 


.-- 


. . 


. . . . 
- 
. .. .... 
.. -. .-. . . 
.-:-::. . . . 
.. .. -. 
-- . .- . . 
. 
. .:.. . . . . 
. .. . -. 
- .. . 

 . 


. 
. 
.. 
. 
.. 
. . - 'ii. "'... 
. 4 . 
- . 
 - 41 "I 
. .4
 . 
.. 
"'
r · . . . 
l' -. 

 . ... 
.. ! .(> tf Of 
... 
. "ir " . to 

d -# 
:g ... . >
 
. . ( I 

 
" . 
. 
. - 'Çì: ;:,ì H 
 J I ' H' \ . r 
-.. 
. 
- 
. .. 
-. 
. 
. 
. . 
. - 
- 
. . 
. . 
. 
.. 
.. . -. 
"": ... 


.. 


. 


.. 


- . 
. . 
. . . 
. 
:: 
. . 


. 
. 



f6 
B/1 
'
J.f.ï(j 
! 8 q Co 
v. 
I 
..;MR 



THE JESUIT RELATIONS 


AND 


ALLIED DOCUMENTS 


VOL. XXI 



The edition consz"sts of sev- 
en hundred and fifty sets 
all numbered 


'J /lj 
No. _
..f.:::._...___..... 



" 




, 


/ 


,,;, 
.. 



rð..J/-/6 


The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 


TRAVELS AND EXPLORATIONS 
OF THE JESUIT MISSIONARIES 
IN NE\V FRANCE 


1610 - 1791 


THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL- 
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA- 
TIONS AND NOTES; ILLUSTRATED BY 
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES 


EDITED BY 


REUBEN GOLD THW AITES 
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin 


Vol. XXI 
QUEBEC AND HURONS: 1641 - 1 6 4 2 


CLEVELAND: ttbe !3utfOWa :J.Gtotbete 
COmpan12, PUBLISHERS. M DCCCXCVIII 



COPYRIGHT. 1898 
BY 
THE BURROWS BROTHERS Co 


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 


The Imþeria/ Press. Cleve/and 



EDITORIAL STAFF 


Translators . 


REUBEN GOLD THW AITES 
r FINLOW ALEXANDER 
I PERCY FAVOR BICKNELL 
WILLIAM FREDERIC GIESE 
CATHARINE S. KELLOGG 


Edi tor 


CRAWFORD LINDSAY 


WILLIAM PRICE 
l HIRAM ALLEN SOBER 
Assistant Editor EMMA HELEN BLAIR 
Bibliographical Adviser VICTOR HUGO PALTSITS 




CONTENTS OF YOLo XXI 


PREFACE TO VOLUME XXI 9 
DOCUMENTS :- 
XLIV. Relation de ce qvi s'est passé en la Nov- 
yelle France, és années 1640. et 16 41. 
[Chaps. ix.- xiii. of Part I., and Part 
II., concluding the document.] Paul 
Ie Jeulle; Kebec and Paris, undated. 
Jerome Lalemant; Ste. Marie aux Hu- 
rons, May 19, 1641 19 
XLV. Lettre au P. Étienne Charlet, Assistant 
de France à Rome. Clzarles Lalemant; 
Paris, February 28, 1642 268 
XL VI. Lettre à son frère. Clzarles Garnzer; des 
Hurons, 1Iay 22, 1642 . 274 
XLVII. Mémoire touch ant les Domestiques. 
[Jerome Lale11la1lt; 1642] . 29 2 
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: V OLU
IE XXI . 3 0 9 
NOTES . 3 1 I 



PREFACE TO VOL. XXI 


Following is a synopsis of the documents contained 
t1 the present volume: 
XLIV. In Vol. XX., we gave the first eight chap- 
ters of Part I. of the Relatz"on of 1640-41; the re- 
mainder of this part (written by Le J eune at Quebec, 
without date) is herewith presented, also the whole 
of Part II. (the Huron report, by Jerome Lalemant, 
dated May 19, [641), thus completing the Relation. 
Commencing with Chap. ix., Le Jeune recounts 
the capture (February, 1641) of François Marguerie 
and Thomas Godefroy by the Iroquois, who take them 
away to their own country. The two Frenchmen at 
first expect death; but the Iroquois decide, at a coun- 
cil, to liberate the prisoners in the spring; mean- 
while, the latter are treated by their captors" like 
their own children." In June, a numerous band of 
Iroquois appear before Three Rivers, with their pris- 
oners, of whom they send JYlarguerie, on parole, to 
demand an interview with the commandant; Champ- 
flour immediately sends to Quebec for Montmagny. 
The latter hastens, with armed men and vessels, to 
Three Rivers; and a long parley ensues between 
him and the Iroquois, in which many speeches and 
presents are mutually made. The Iroquois are full 
of treachery; it is obvious that they wish only to 
patch up an alliance with the French, in order to 



10 


PREFACE ro VOL. XXI 


have better opportunity for attacking the allied Hu
 
rons and Algonkins. Finally, finding Montmagny 
their match in sagacity and adroitness, they openly 
show their hostility, but are quickly dispersed by 
shots from the French cannon,- fortunately, not till 
after they have liberated the two prisoners. 
About the same time, Father Brébeuf narrowly 
escapes capture by another Iroquois band, while on 
his way from the Huron country to Quebec. Reach
 
ing his destination in safety, he tries to secure an 
escort for the returning Hurons, to protect them from 
the enemy. He obtains a few French soldiers, and 
some Christian Indians from St. Joseph; but, on 
arriving at Three Rivers, dissensions arise among 
the Algonkins who await them there, on account of 
the presence of two Abenaki Indians who have come 
to render satisfaction for the murder in their country 
of Makheabichtichiou, the Montagnais chief, for some 
time a resident at St. Joseph. The Algonkins with- 
draw their promises to help escort the Hurons, and 
Champflour is unwilling to expose the Christian 
Indians to the danger of defeat; but news is brought 
that the Iroquois marauders have gone home, and 
the way is now clear. The Hurons accordingly 
return in peace, accompanied by Ragueneau and 
Ménard. Certain other Hurons who came down to 
Three Rivers, spread calumnies about Brébeuf, de- 
claring tbat be bas conspired witb the Iroquois to 
ruin the Hurons. 
Le J eune gives an account of the mission recently 
formed at Tadoussac, the credit for which is mainly 
due to the neophytes of St. Joseph, who, visiting 
their Tadoussac tribesmen, commend to the latter the 
Christian faith by both word and deed. In June, 



PREFACE TO VOL. XXI 


11 


1640, a missionary (De Quen, according to Roche- 
monteix) is sent to them, for whom they erect a bark 
house and chapel combined, and listen attentively to 
his teachings. He spends the month of June with 
them, finds them very teachable and affectionate, 
and baptizes about fifteen. 
An important event occurs late in the summer of 
16 4 1 ,- the coming of the Sieur de Maisonneuve, 
with the first installment of the new colony at Mont- 
real. With them comes also the Jesuit De la Place. 
But a little while before the coming of the fleet, the 
missionaries drape their altars in mourning for the 
death of François de Gand, one of the Hundred As- 
sociates, and a pious and benevolent man; and that 
of the Chevalier de Sillery, founder of the Christian 
Indian settlement at St. Joseph. Le Jeune also 
mentions the death, last year, of René Rohault, the 
first to give money for the education of the Indian 
children. 
The death of De Sillery had at first checked the 
aid given by him to the Canadian missions; but other 
wealthy persons in France, who II are not willing that 
this great work should cease," are supplying this 
deficiency. One of these wishes to charge himself 
with the settlement of an Indian family,- building 
them a house, and supporting them during the first 
year. The Father recounts some of the acts of devo- 
tion performed in Europe for the benefit of these 
missions. Among these, I' there has been found, 
even in the country, a Curé so zealous for the salva- 
tion of the poor Savages, and Parishioners so full of 
kindness, that they have made three general proces- 
sions and seventy-five fasts; they have taken the 
discipline a hundred and twenty-four times: they 



12 


PRE"FACE TO VOL. XXI 


have offered eighteen almsgivings, and a great many 
prayers,- an for the conversion of these tribes; is 
not that delightful?" Being told of the deep inter- 
est thus manifested in their welfare, the Christian 
Indians inform Le Jeune that they have resolved to 
spend a whole day in fasting and prayer for these 
good friends across the sea. 
He is encouraged, by the success already attained 
in their enterprise, to predict great things for the 
future,- the assembling and colonization of the St. 
Lawrence tribes at Quebec and Three Rivers, and of 
the Ottawa tribes, the Hurons, "and even some Hi- 
roquois," at Montreal; he even trusts that the gospel 
shall one day penetrate into the regions of the South 
and West. For this last, as well as for the Company's 
trade, and the safety of the French colonists, it is 
absolutely necessary that the Iroquois should be over- 
come. Le J eune mentions their methods of warfare, 
and complains that the Dutch supply them with fire- 
arms. He closes the Relation with some extracts from 
letters he has received from Claude Pijart, describing 
his labors among the Indians of Lake Nipissing, the 
prospect among whom is encouraging; and from 
Pierre Pijart, who has been on a mission among the 
Tobacco tribe, with whom he finds many Algonkins. 
He also hears there of certain Southern tribes, who 
"plant and harvest Indian corn twice a year, and 
their last harvest was made in December." 


Jerome Lalemant opens the Huron Relation by stat- 
ing that, " in their seven missions, they have preached 
the Gospel to 16,000 or 17,000 Barbarians." Two of 
these missions are new,-one being for the benefit 
of the Algonkins, and in the charge of Raymbault and 



PREFACE TO VOL. XX} 


13 


Claude Pijart, who have been sent from Quebec for 
this especial work. As the savages are now in good 
health, and have been blessed with an abundant 
harvest, they have, in general, become tolerant of 
the missionaries, who no longer encounter serious 
hindrances to their efforts,- although they are sore- 
ly tried by the worldliness, fickleness, and supersti- 
tious follies of their hearers. 
The evangelists now possess II a little Church com- 
posed of about thirty Frenchmen, and about fifty 
Savages making profession." These last have re- 
mained constant, since the panic and storms of the 
previous year; and it is they who form the leaven 
that shall yet be effectual among these tribes. Lale- 
mant sees the urgent necessity of rendering Indian 
marriages stable; "and-inasmuch as one of the 
principal causes of their dissolution comes from this, 
that one of the parties is not able to supply the needs 
and necessities of the other, which causes that other 
to go and seek them elsew here - one of the most 
effective means of binding them indissolubly will be 
to assist them in such a case." He is greatly encour- 
aged by the aid promised him from France for this 
very purpose. "Certain persons of merit have re- 
solved to make perpetual foundations of the ten or 
twelve écus necessary for the establishment of these 
marriages," setting aside a sum of money to produce 
the above income. Some of these persons are child- 
less, and I I believe that they might here gain chil- 
dren for God and for themselves, by this manner of 
holy adoption;" and, to keep their memories green, 
" they desire that their names should be given to the 
families proceeding from these marriages procured 
by the efforts of their charity. II 



14 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXI 


Each of the Huron missions has a chapter, in Lale- 
mant's report, assigned to its work and progress for 
the past year. The residence of Ste. Marie is the 
headquarters of all the Jesuit missions; hither all the 
gospel laborers come for their annual reunion, and 
it is likely to become a refuge for the Christian In- 
dians who find it too hard to resist the heathen influ- 
ences around them. As it is, these converts come 
on Saturday evenings, from even twelve leagues' 
distance, to celebrate the Sabbath with their teachers. 
Montmagny's prudent and just treatment of the 
savages has done them much good; they admire his 
liberality, yet fear his sternness. Certain tribes, 
under this dread, have rendered satisfaction to the 
missionaries for the injuries inflicted upon them. 
On November 2, the Fathers depart from Ste. Marie 
on their itinerant missions, leaving Chastellain alone 
to guard the house, and entertain the Christian 
Indians who might come hither. 
J\10st of the Huron converts are found in the vil- 
lage of Ossossané, where was established the first of 
these missions, La Conception. The pillar of this 
little church was Joseph Chihwatenhwa, slain last 
year by the Iroquois; but this disaster seems on the 
whole to have confirmed the other Christians in their 
faith. "\Ve could hardly desire more content and 
satisfaction than we receive from this little flock. 
It appears to us like a small lump of gold refined 
in the furnace of many tribulations." Joseph's 
brother, Teondechorren, is converted, and takes his 
dead brother's name; the missionaries have much 
hope from him. A new chapel has been erected 
there, where regular services are held. In one of 
his missionary journeys, Father Le Mercier falls into 



PREFACE TO VOL. XXI 


15 


the water, while crossing the ice, and barely escapes 
death. 
The missions of St. Joseph and of St. Jean Bap- 
tiste-respectively the most southern and the most 
eastern in the Huron region-are under the care of 
Fathers Daniel and Le Moyne. This is a laborious 
field, on account of its great extent; and dangerous, 
because the forest trails are infested by the Iroquois. 
An Iroquois prisoner is baptized, before his torments 
begin. A man who in health had scorned the truth, 
and abused its preachers, sends for these when he is 
about to die; and his soul is, by baptism, saved from 
endless woe. 
Next is mentioned the mission to the Tobacco 
Nation, where the difficulties of their work are unusu- 
ally great, because this tribe, not going to the trad- 
ing posts of the French, know but little of them, 
and look upon them as utter strangers. However, 
the missionaries, who last year were driven from the 
villages of these people, are now at last tolerated, 
and some Indians even desire instruction. 
The new mission to the Neutral Nation is under- 
taken by Brébeuf and Chaumonot. This tribe and 
their country are described, as also their relations 
with other tribes about them, and their customs. 
From this region the missionaries have a wide out- 
look upon other tribes hitherto unknown to them 
except by name; and they recount various items of 
information concerning these. Lalemant mentions 
the journey of the Récollet Daillon, in 1626, to this 
Neutral tribe. He then relates the present experi- 
ences of Brébeuf and Chaumonot; the former, hav- 
ing a widespread reputation as a sorcerer, is greatly 
dreaded by the Neutrals, who for some time perse- 



16 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXI 


cute the Fathers, and threaten them with death. 
The latter are compelled to retreat; but at the vil- 
lage of Teotongniaton, they find an oasis in the 
desert-a good woman receives them into her house, 
and treats them with the utmost kindness. This 
opportunity enables them to compare the Neutral 
language with the Huron, to their great aid in using 
the Indian tongues. One village in this tribe" gives 
them the hearing that their Embassy merited II - 
Khioetoa, largely inhabited by the Awenrehronons, 
part of which tribe had, as we have already seen (Vol. 
XVII.), earlier fled to the Hurons. After returning 
from this mission, Chaumonot is attacked by an 
Indian, who attempts to kill him; but the Father 
escapes with only a slight wound. 
The final chapter details the work among the 
Nipissing Indians, who winter in the Huron country, 
not far from Ste. :Marie. Raymbault and Claude 
Pijart minister to these people during the winter, 
and to other Algonkins who have come hither, and 
find them all much more docile and receptive than 
the Hurons. 
The Relatio1l ends with a specimen of the Huron 
language (accompanied by a French translation), for 
which Lalemant chooses "one of the most ordinary 
communions which Joseph Chihwatenhwa, that ex- 
cellent Christian, had with God toward the end of 
his days. " 
XLV. Charles Lalemant writes from Paris (Feb- 
ruary 28, 1642) to Father Charlet, at Rome, in regard 
to Le J eune's request to the French government for 
assistance in driving the Iroquois out of Canada, and 
the Dutch from New Amsterdam. Lalemant thinks 
the former can be done, and states that Richelieu is 



PREFACE TO VOL. XXI 


17 


well disposed thereto; but he thinks the latter scheme 
costly, impracticable, and useless. He asks Char- 
let's opinion on the matter. 
XLVI. Charles Garnier writes to his brother (May 
22, 1642), from the Huron country. He regrets that 
his letter of last year failed to reach Quebec in time 
for the returning French fleet, and is therefore still 
waiting for its despatch. After various religious 
exhortations, Garnier speaks of another brother 
(mentioned in last year's letter), " the poor prodigal 
child; II and he cites letters written by the latter, 
which indicate much affection, and a desire to return 
to God. The writer then mentions the present status 
of the Huron mission, and outlines his own work 
(apparently in the village of St. Joseph, or Teanaus- 
tayaé). A good convert there has given one end of 
his cabin for a chapel, where the services of the 
church are regularly held. This man and his family 
are earnest Christians, and various instances of their 
piety and devotion are recounted. Other converts 
are mentioned, and a baptism for which he secures 
opportunity through a mass offered in honor of a 
sain t. 
XLVII. Jerome Lalemant sends to the Father 
General (apparently in 1642) a memoir upon the don- 
nés employed in the Huron mission. He explains 
why these laymen are more desirable than the coad- 
jutors of the Society; also what arrangements had 
been made with the provincial of France (1638) for 
this service. The whole plan has been opposed by 
some of their superiors; but Lalemant urges that the 
Society accept the donnés,-not only in the Huron 
country but in all the missions of New France,- 



18 


PREFACE TO VOL. XXI 


binding them by certain vows, and providing for 
their lifelong support. To this memoir are ap- 
pended forms of acceptance and contract with a 
donné, and of consecration on the latter's part. 
R. G. T. 


MADISON, WIS., April, 1898. 



XLIV (concluded) 


RELATION OF 1640-41 


PARIS: SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, 1642 


Chaps. i.- viii. of Part I. were presented in Volume XX.; 
we herewith give chaps. ix.- xiii. of Part I., and all of Part 
II., thus concluding the document. 



20 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


[136] CHAPITRE IX. 


DE LA PRISE DE DEUX FRANÇOIS CONDUITS AU PAis 
DES HIROQUOIS, & DE LEUR RETOUR 
AUX TROIS RIUIERES. 


S ODS Ie nom d'Hiroquois nous entendons fix Na- 
tions, ennemiës des Hurons, des Algonquins, 
des Montagnais, & maintenant des François, 
nous auons des peuples au Sud, tirãt du cofté de 
l' Acadie: ils s'efiendent à l'O[u]efi de la Virginie, 
dedans les terres; Or com me leurs Bourgades font 
éloignées, les vnes des autres, il n'ya que la feule 
Nation des Agnieeronons, à proprement parler, qui 
fe foit declarée ennemie des François; elle a trois 
Bourgades bien peuplées, fituées affés proches les 
vnes des autres fur trois petites montagnes; il eft 
vray que ces Nations fe preftent la main dans leurs 
guerres, comme font auffi celles qui ont quelque com- 
merce auec les François: Les Agnieeronons tuerent 
vn François en leur païs, il y a plufieurs années, con- 
tre Ie droit commun [137J des peuples; car il eftoit 
enuoyé auec quelques Sauuages, pour traiter la paix 
auec eux. L'an 1633. Ie fecond iour de Iuin, ils 
tuerent en trahifon trois autres François, fort proche 
du Heuue que no us appellons les Trois Riuieres: De- 
puis ce temps là ils ont maffacré plufieurs Hurons, & 
Algonquins, cõme i'ay fait voir és Relations prece- 
dentes; En vn mot, ils font venus à tel point d'info- 
lence, qu'il faut voir perdre Ie païs, ou y apporter 
vn remede prompt & efficace: Si les Francois efioient 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


21 


[136J CHAPTER IX. 


OF THE CAPTURE OF TWO FRENCHMEN WHO WERE 
TAKEN TO THE COUNTRY OF THE HIROQUOIS, 
AND THEIR RETURN TO THE THREE RIVERS. 


U NDER the name of Hiroquois we include six 
Nations, who are enemies of the Hurons, of 
the Algonquins, of the Montagnais, and now 
of the French. We have these people at the South, 
stretching from the coast of Acadia; they extend 
from Virginia vVestward into the interior. Now, as 
their Villages are distant from one another, there is 
only the one Nation of the Agnieeronons, properly 
speaking, which has declared itself the enemy of the 
French; this nation has three well-peopled Villages, 
situated rather near each other, on three little moun- 
tains; it is true that these Nations lend a hand to 
one another in their wars, as do also those who have 
some intercourse with the French. Several years 
ago, the Agnieeronons killed a Frenchman in their 
own country, contrary to the common law [137] of 
peoples, for he had been sent with some Savages to 
negotiate a peace with them. On the second day of 
June, in the year 1633, they treacherously killed 
three other Frenchmen, very near the stream which 
we call the Three Rivers. Since that time, they 
have massacred many Hurons and Algonquins, as I 
have shown in preceding Relations: in a word, they 
have reached such a degree of insolence, that we 
must see the country lost or bring to it a prompt and 



22 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


ralliés les vns aupres des autres, il leur feroit bien 
aifé de maifirifer ces Barbares; mais efians difper- 
fés, qui deça, qui dela, nauigeans à toute heure fur 
Ie grand fleuue dans des chaloupes, ou dans des 
canots; ils peuuent efire aifement furpris de ces 
traifires, qui chaffent aux hommes, comme on fait 
aux befies, qui peuuent offen fer fans efire quafi 
offenfés: car efians découuerts, ils n'attendent pas 
pour l'ordinaire Ie choc; mais ils font plutofi hors de 
la portée de vos armes, que vous n'efies en difpofition 
de les tirer. \T oyons main tenant ce qu'ils ont fait 
depuis l'an paffé. 
[138J Sur la fin de l'Automne ils partirentde leur 
païs enuiron quatre vingts & dix hõmes, ils fe répan- 
dirent, qui deça qui dela, dans les petits fleuues, & 
dans les riuieres, où ils fçauent que les Sauuages nos 
alliés vont chercher les cafiors, vne trentaine ayãs 
trouué leur proïe au deffus de Montreal, l'enleuent 
en leur païs, les autres s'en vindrent roder à l'entour 
de l'Habitation des Trois Riuieres. Deux ieunes 
François, l'vn Interprete en la Langue Algonquine, 
pour Meffieurs de la N ouuelle France, nommé Fran- 
çois Marguerie, l'autre appellé Thomas Godefroy, 
qui efi frere d'vn honnefie habitant du païs, efians 
allés faire vn tour à la chaffe, furent découuerts par 
ces Barbares, qui fuiuans la trace de leurs raquetes, 
imprimées fur la neige, les aborderent à pas de lar- 
rons pendant la nuiét, & tout à coup fe voulans jetter 
fur eux, firent des cris & des hurlemens épouuen- 
tables; l'vn des deux François eut loifir de prefenter 
fon arquebufe au premier qui Ie voulut faifir; mais 
par vn bon-heur, ou plutofi par vne prouidence de 
nofire Seigneur, elle fait vne fauffe amorce: Si eUe 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


23 


efficacious remedy. If the French were gathered 
near one another, it would be very easy for them 
to master these Barbarians; but being dispersed, 
some here, some there, gliding at all hours over the 
great river in shallops, or in canoes, they can be 
easily surprised by these traitors, who hunt men as 
we do wild beasts, who can injure and scarcely be 
injured,-for, when they are discovered, they do not 
ordinarily await attack, but are beyond the reach of 
your arms before you are in readiness to discharge 
them. Let us see now what they have done within 
the last year. 
[138J Toward the end of Autumn about ninety men 
set out from their country; they scattered them- 
selves, some here, some there, by the little streams 
and by the rivers, where they know that our Savage 
allies go in search of beavers. About thirty of them 
having found their prey above Montreal, carried it 
away to their own country; the others came to prowl 
around the Settlement of the Three Rivers. Two 
young Frenchmen,- one an Interpreter of the Algon- 
quin Tongue for the Gentlemen of New France, 
named François Marguerie; the other called Thomas 
Godefroy, who is brother to a worthy inhabitant of 
the country, 1_ having gone on a hunting trip. were 
discovered by these Barbarians, who, following the 
track of their snowshoes imprinted on the snow, 
approached them with stealthy steps during the 
night, and suddenly attempting to spring upon them, 
uttered frightful shrieks and howls. One of the two 
Frenchmen had time to present his arquebus to the 
first one who endeavored to seize him; but by good 
luck, or rather by a providence of our Lord, it flashed 
in the pan. If it had taken fire, [I 39J and he had 



24 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


euft pris feu, [139J & qu'il euft tué ce Barbare, ils 
auroient tous deux perdu la vie, il en fut quitte pour 
vn coup d'épée que luy darda fon ennemy dans la 
cuiffe; l'autre François s'eftant leué promptement au 
bruit, met la main à l'épée, vn Hiroquois luy tire vn 
coup de Heche, qui luy paffa fous Ie bras; vn autre 
Ie voulant aborder, fit vne mauuaife démarche, & 
tomba dans la neige, auffi-toft Ie François luy pre- 
fente l'épée nuë à la gorge, les Hiroquois Ie regar- 
doient faire fans branler?- pas vn ne faifant mine de 
l'empefcher, ou de Ie tuer, de peur qu'il ne tranfper- 
çaft fon ennemy, qu'il auoit à fes pieds: Enfin ce 
ieune homme voiant qu'il feroit maffacré en vn in- 
ftant, s'il paffoit outre, jette bas fon épée & fe rend, 
pour auoir loifir de penfer à fa confcience, quoy qu'il 
fe fuft confeffé & communié Ie Dimanche precedent, 
aimant mieux eftre bruf1é, rofty, & mangé, que de 
mourir dans cette precipitation fans penfer à Dieu. 
Voila donc ces deux pauures viétimes entre les mains 
de ces Tygres, ils les lient, les garottent, les emmei- 
nent en leur pais auec des cris & des huées, ou plu- 
toft auec des hurlemens de loups. [140J Aians neant- 
moins reconnu qu'ils eftoient François, ils ne les 
traiterent pas comme ils font les Sauuages, vfans 
d'vne plus grande douceur; car ils ne leur arrache- 
rent ny les ongles des doigts, ny ne les meurtrirent 
en aucune partie de leur corps. 
Cependant comme ils ne retournoient point au iour 
affigné, on commence à douter qu'il ne leur foit 
furuenu quelque malheur: on attend encor quelque 
temps, mais comme ils ne paroiffoient point, les Fran- 
çois les vont chercher au lieu où ils auoient dit qu'ils 
iroient chaffer, ils rencontrerent vne perche plantée 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


25 


killed this Barbarian, both of them would have lost 
their lives; he came off with only the stroke of a 
javelin which the enemy thrust into his thigh. The 
other Frenchman, having promptly risen at the noise, 
seized his sword; a Hiroquois shot an arrow at him, 
which passed under his arm. Another, intending to 
approach him, made a false step and fell into the 
snow; immediately the Frenchman presented his 
naked sword at his throat; the Hiroquois saw him 
do this without stirring,-not one made a show of 
hindering him, or of killing him, for fear he might 
transfix his enemy whom he had at his feet. At 
length this young man seeing that he would be mas- 
sacred in a moment, if he went further, threw down 
his sword and surrendered, in order that he might 
have leisure to examine his conscience, although he 
had confessed and received communion the preced- 
ing Sunday,-preferring to be burned, roasted, and 
eaten, to dying in this headlong haste without think- 
ing upon God. Behold, then, these two poor victims 
in the hands of these Tigers; they bind them, pinion 
them, and take them away into their own country 
with shrieks and yells, or rather with the howling of 
wolves. [140J Nevertheless, having recognized that 
they were Frenchmen, they did not treat them as 
they do the Savages, but used greater gentleness; for 
they neither tore off their finger-nails, nor mutilated 
them in any part of their bodies. 
However, as they did not return on the day ap- 
pointed, their friends began to suspect that some 
misfortune had happened to them; they were awaited 
some time longer, but as they did not appear, the 
French went to seek them in the place where they 
said they were going to hunt; they found a pole fixed 



26 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


dans la neige, à laquelle efioit attaché vn mefchant 
papier, grifonné auec vn charbon; ils Ie prennent, Ie 
lifent, treuuent ces paroles efcrites: Les Hiroquois 
nous ont pris entrés dedans Ie bois: Ils entrent dans 
Ie bois, treuuent vn gros arbre duquel on auoit frai- 
chement enleué l'écorce, fur lequel efioient efcrits 
ces mots auec du charbon: Les Hiroquois nous ont 
pris la nuiét, ils ne nous ont fait encor aucun mal, 
ils nous emmeinent en leur pais; il y auoit quelques 
autres paroles qu'on ne pût lire. Cecy [141] arriua 
enuiron Ie vingtiefme de Fevrier: Ce coup efionfla vn 
peu nos François, qui recommanderent à Dieu auec 
ferueur, ces deux pauures captifs; on chercha toutes 
. 
les voyes poffibles pour les déliurer, mais on ne voioit 
point de iour à cét affaire: Nos Sauuages voifins nous 
difoient, que c' efioit fait de leur vie, qu'ils auoient 
efié boüillis & rofiis, & mangés; mais Dieu qui fe 
plaifi d' exaucer les prieres de ceux qui ont con fiance 
en fa bonté, en difpofoit autrement; il nous les a 
rendus, & nous auons appris ce qui fuit, de leurs 
bouches. 
Nous arriuafmes dans la Bourgade de ceux qui nous 
ont pris, apres dix-fept ou dix-huiét iours de chemin; 
au bruit de noftre arriuée chacun accourt pour nous 
voir, non [eulement les Bourgades voifines, mais 
encor les autres Nations fe vouloient donner ce 
contentement, de voir des captifs François; on nous 
faifoit tenir debout à toute heure, pour nous contem- 
pIer depuis la tefie iufques aux pieds: Quelques-vns 
fe mocquoient de nous, d' autres nous menaçoient de 
nous bruDer, d'autres no us portoient compaffion; 
quelques [142] Hiroquois qui auoient efié prifon- 
niers à Kebec, & aux Trois Riuieres, & qui auoièt 



1641-42] 


Rr.."'LA TION OF I640-4I 


27 


in the snow, to which was attached a wretched paper, 
scribbled upon with a coal; they took it, read it, and 
found these words written: "The Hiroquois have 
captured us: go into the woods." They entered the 
woods, and found a large tree from which the bark had 
recently been removed, and on which were written 
these words with charcoal: "The Hiroquois have 
captured us to-night; they have not yet done us any 
harm,-theyare taking us away to their own coun- 
try;" there were some other words which could not 
be read. This [141] happened about the twentieth 
of February. This blow somewhat bewildered our 
Frenchmen, who fervently commended to God these 
two poor captives; all possible ways were sought to 
deliver them, but none seemed feasible. Our neigh- 
boring Savages told us, that it was all over with 
them, that they had been boiled or roasted, and 
eaten; but God, who is pleased to grant the prayers 
of those who have confidence in his goodness, dis- 
posed of them otherwise; he restored them to us, 
and, from their own lips, we learned what follows: 
" We arrived at the Village of those who captured 
us, after a journey of seventeen or eighteen days. 
At the report of our arrival, everyone ran to see 
us,-not only the neighboring Villages, but also the 
other Nations wished to have the satisfaction of see- 
ing the captive Frenchmen; they made us stand up 
at all hours, that they might look us over from head 
to foot. Some derided us, others threatened to burn 
us, others had compassion on us; some [142] Hiro- 
quois who had been prisoners at Kebec, and at the 
Three Rivers, and who had been favorably treated 
by the French, looked kindly on us, and told us that 
we should not die. One among them, to whom 



28 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


efté fauorablement traités des François, nous regar- 
derent de bon æil, & nous dirent que nous ne mour- 
rions point; vn entre autres que François Marguerie 
auoit fort careffé, & que nos Peres auoient íecouru 
dans ía neceffité, dit tout haut, que les François 
eftoient bons, & qu'il ne les falloit pas faire mourir: 
Vn bienfait n'eft iamais en oubly deuant Dieu, il en 
íçait rendre la recompeníe en íon temps; il fait bon 
exercer des aétes de charité & de mifericorde pour 
íon amour. 
V n ieune prifonnier Algonquin, à qui les Hiro- 
quois auoient donné la vie, reconnoiffant nos Fran- 
çois, leur dit: Prenés courage, vous ne mourrés point, 
puis que vous fçaués prier Dieu, il ne manquera pas 
de vous fecourir. Ie ne íçay pas fi ce ieune homme 
auoit quelque confiance en íon fouuerain Seigneur; 
mais quoy que c'en foit, i1 s'eft fauué des mains de 
íes ennemis. 
Nonobftant tous ces difcours, ces ieunes hommes 
auoient tout fujet de craindre, fe voyans au milieu 
de la barbarie & [143J de la cruauté, fans fecours 
d'aucune creature. II n'y alIoit pas mains que du 
feu, de la rage, & de la dent de ces barbares, qui 
exercent des tourmens eftranges fur leurs prifonniers. 
Quelques Sauuages des Nations plus hautes, ne 
voulans pas irriter les François, firent des prefens, à 
ce qu'on deliuraft ces deux pauures captifs: Enfin 
on tint confeil dans Ie païs, & la conc1ufion fut prife 
de traiter de paix auec les François; cela fait, on 
promet aux prifonniers qu' on les remenera au Prin- 
temps aux Trois Riuieres. En attendant on les donne 
en garde à deux chefs de familIes, qui les traiterent 
comme leurs enfans. L'vn d'eux voyant que fon 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF r64o-4I 


29 


François 11arguerie had been very kind, and whom 
our Fathers had aided in his necessity, said aloud 
that the Frenchmen were good, and must not be put 
to death." An act of kindness is never forgotten by 
God,- he knows how to reward it in his own time; 
it is well to practice acts of charity and mercy, for 
the sake of his love. 
A young Algonquin prisoner, whose life had been 
spared by the Hiroquois, recognizing our French- 
men, said to them: "Take courage, you will not 
die; inasmuch as you know how to pray to God, he 
will not fail to succor you." I do not know whether 
that young man had any confidence in his sovereign 
Lord; but, at all events, he escaped from the hands 
of his enemies. 
Notwithstanding all these declarations, these young 
men had every reason for fear, seeing themselves in 
the midst of barbarism and [143J of cruelty, without 
help from any creature. The question was of noth- 
ing less than fire, and of the fury and teeth of these 
barbarians, who practice strange tortures on their 
prisoners. 
Some Savages of the upper Nations, not wishing 
to irritate the French, made presents that these two 
poor captives might be set free. At length a coun- 
cil was held in the country, and they concluded to 
negotiate peace with the French; that being done, 
they promised the prisoners that in the Spring they 
should be taken back to the Three Rivers. In the 
meantime, they were given in keeping to two heads 
of families, who treated them like their own chil- 
dren. One of these, seeing that his prisoner prayed 
to God night and morning, and that he made the 
sign of the Cross before each meal, asked him what 



30 


LES RELATIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


prifonnier prioit Dieu foir & matin, & qu'il faifoit 
Ie figne de la Croix deuant Ie repas, luy demanda ce 
que fignifioit ce figne facré, ayant eu pour refponfe, 
que Ie Dieu qui a fait Ie ciel & la terre, les animaux 
& tous les bleds, conferuoit ceux qui l'honoroient, & 
qui auoient recours à luy; ie veux donc faire Ie 
mefme, refpond-il, afin qu'il me conferue & qu'il me 
nourriffe. 
Vne autre fois plufieurs de ces Barbares [144] inui- 
terent l'vn de leurs prifonniers à chanter à la Fran- 
çoiíe: tenés vous donc dans Ie refpeét, fit-il, car Ie 
Dieu du Ciel & de la terre, que nous honorons par 
nos voix & par nos Cantiques, vous pourroit chaftier 
rudement, fi vous entriés dans quelque mépris; ils 
promirent tous de ne point rire, & de fe com porter 
fagement; Ie François entonne l' A lte lIlaris jlella, 
qu'ils efcouterent la tefte baiffée auec beaucoup de 
modeftie & de refpeét, témoignant par apres que ce 
chant leur auoit aggreé: La fainéte Vierge qui fai- 
foit tous les iours chanter cét Hymne à Kebec, pour 
la deliurance des prifonniers, preuoyoit dés lors leur 
liberté, & peut-eftre encor demandoit à fon fils la 
conuerfion de ces peuples, qui entendront bien-toft 
Ie c1airon de l'Euangile, fi l'ancienne France ayme la 
Nouuelle, comme vne fæur aifnée doit aymer fa 
Cadette. 
Or ces deux pauures François fe trouuans incom- 
modés dans les rigueurs du froid/ car ils auoient 
donné partie de force, partie de bon gré, Ie meilleur 
de leurs habits à ces Barbares; l'vn deux ayant 
connoiffance de la langue Angloife, [145] écriuit aux 
Holandois qui fe font emparés d'vne partie de l'Aca- 
die, qui appartient au Roy, les fuppliant d'auoir pitié 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


31 


this sacred sign meant; having had for answer that 
the God who had made heaven and earth, the ani- 
mals, and all the grains, preserved those who honored 
him and who had recourse to him, - " I wish then 
to do the same," responded he, " that he may pre- 
serve me and feed me." 
Another time several of these Barbarians [144] 
invited one of their prisoners to sing after the French 
fashion. "Then," answered he, " be respectful; for 
the God of Heaven and of earth, whom we honor by 
our voices and by our Hymns, could punish you 
severely, if you should begin any scornful actions; " 
they all promised not to laugh, and to conduct them- 
selves discreetly. The Frenchmen intoned the Ave 
maris stella, to which they listened, their heads being 
bowed with much modesty and respect; they de- 
clared afterward that the song had pleased them. 
The blessed Virgin who caused that Hymn to be sung 
every day at Kebec for the deliverance of the pris- 
oners, foresaw from that time their liberty, and 
perhaps also asked from her son the conversion of 
these tribes, who will very soon hear the clarion of 
the Gospel, if old France love the New, as an elder 
sister should love the Younger. 
Now, these two poor Frenchmen being distressed 
by the severity of the cold,-for, partly through 
force, and partly out of good will, they had given 
the best of their clothing to these Barbarians,- one 
of them, having a knowledge of the English lan- 
guage, [145J wrote to the Hollanders who have seized 
a part of Acadia, which belongs to the King, beg- 
ging them to have pity upon their poverty; he used 
a beaver skin for paper, a little stick for a pen, and 
some rust or soot sticking to the bottom of a kettle, 



32 


LES RELATIONS DES JÉSUITES 


(VOL. 21 


de leur mifere; il fe feruit de la peau d'vn cafior 
pour papier, d'vn petit bafion pour plume, & de la 
craffe ou fuie attachée au deffous d'vn chauderon, 
pour encre; Ie Sauuage à qui appartenoit ce cafior, 
Ie portant aux Hollandois, ils reconnurent cette efcri- 
ture, & touchés de compaffion, ils enuoyerent à ces 
deux pauures prifonniers vne couple de chemifes, 
deux couuertures, quelques viures, & vne efcritoire, 
& du papier, auec vn mot de lettre. Le Sauuage 
rendit tout fidelement, excepté la lettre, difant que 
l' efcriture des François efioit bonne, mais que celIe 
des Hollandois ne valoit rien. François Marguerie 
aiant du papier, efcriuit toute l'hifioire de leur prife, 
& pour ce qu'ils craignoient que les Hollandois n'en- 
tendiffent pas la langue Françoife, il coucha fa lettre 
en François, & en Latin comme il pût, & en Anglois, 
il croit qu' elle fut portée; mais il ne vit point de 
refponce, les Hiroquois fans doute ne leur voulurent 
pas rendre. lIs ne voulurent auffi iamais leur per- 
mettre [146J d'aller vifiter les Hollandois, ces gens 
leur difoient, ils font cruels, ils nous mettront aux 
fers, ils pilleront nos Compatriotes, s'ils viennent 
en ces quartiers, pour vous deliurer. Les François ne 
croioient rien de tout cela; d' ailleurs, ils ne vouloient 
pas s'éfchapper des mains de ces Barbares, pour les 
mieux difpofer à vne bonne paix. 
Sur la fin du mois d' Auril, la conclufion de recher- 
cher cette paix auec les François, efiant prife, cinq 
cens Hiroquois ou enuiron, partirent de leur païs 
bien armés, ramen ant auec eux les deux François: 
quelques-vns s'en retournerent, d'autres fe débande- 
rent du gros, pour s'en aller au deuant des Hurons, 
& des Algonquins, à deffein de piller, de tuer, & de 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF r64o-4r 


33 


for ink. The Savage to whom the beaver belonged 
carrying it to the Dutch, they understood this writ- 
ing, and, touched with compassion, they sent to these 
two poor prisoners a couple of shirts, two blankets, 
some provisions, an inkstand, some paper, and a 
short letter. The Savage delivered all faithfully 
except the letter, saying that the writing of the 
French was good, but that of the Hollanders was 
worth nothing. François :Marguerie, having paper, 
wrote the whole history of their capture; and, as 
they feared the Hollanders might not understand the 
French language, he inscribed his letter in French, 
and in Latin as he was able, and in English. He 
believed that it was carried; but he saw no reply,- 
the Hiroquois doubtless were not willing to deliver 
one. Neither would they ever pernlit them [146J to 
visit the Dutch. "Those people," said they to 
them, " are cruel,- they will put us into irons, they 
will plunder our Countrymen, if they come into 
these quarters to liberate you." The Frenchmen 
believed nothing of all this; besides, they did not 
wish to escape from the hands of these Barbarians, 
in order that, being with them, they might better 
incline them to an advantageous peace. 
Toward the end of the month of April, the deci- 
sion to seek this peace with the French having been 
made, five hundred Hiroquois, or thereabouts, set 
out from their country, well armed, taking with them 
the two Frenchmen. Some went back, others broke 
from the ranks in great numbers to go and meet the 
Hurons and the Algonquins, with the design of pil- 
laging, killing, and nlassacring all those whom they 
could surprise; the remainder went directly to the 
Three Rivers. On the fifth of June, at daybreak, 



34 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


maffacrer tout ceux qu'ils pourroient furprendre, Ie 
refte tire droit aux Trois Ri uieres. Le cinquiefme 
de Juin, fur Ie point du iour parurent vingt canots, 
plus bas que la demeure des François, tous chargés 
d'hommes bien armés; il en parut d'autres au milieu 
de la riuiere dans Ie mefme equipage : Voila auffi-toft 
l'alarme parmy les François, & parmy les Algon- 
quins, qui [147] demeurent auprés de nous, ceux-cy 
s'écrient que c'eftoit fait de leurs gens, qui eftoient 
allés chaffer au caftor; là-deffus vn canot Algonquin 
íortant de 1'embouchure du fieuue, que nous appel- 
Ions les Trois Riuieres, fut pris de fes ennemis à la 
veüe des François & des Sauuages, fans qu'on luy 
peut donner aucun fecours, comme on eftoit dans 
cette alarme parut vn autre canot, conduit par vn 
homme feul, fortant du quartier de l'ennemy, tirant 
vers Ie fort des François, ce canot portoit vn petit 
guidon pour nlarque de paix, on iette les yeux fur 
fon nocher, à l'habit i1 paroiffoit comme vn Sauuage, 
mais à la voix on reconnut que c'eftoit François Mar- 
guerie, l'vn des deux prifonniers, ayant mis pied à 
terre, on Ie conduit au fort pour faluër Ie fieur de 
Chanfiour, qui Ie commande; tout Ie monde accourt, 
chacun l' embraffe, on Ie regarde comme vn homme 
refufcité, & comme vne vidime échappée du cou- 
fteau, qui l'alloit facrifier, & du feu qui l'alloit con- 
fonlmer; on luy fait quiter fes haillons, on Ie reueft 
à la Françoife, chacun eft dans la ioye, on Ie traite 
auec amour; & apres les [148] premieres careffes, 
chacun fe met dans Ie filence pour l' écouter: II dit 
donc que les Hiroquois íouhaitans l'alliance des 
François, les auoient doucement traités; qu'ils 
eftoient partis cinq cens du païs, qu'on en voioit trois. 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


35 


twenty canoes appeared below the habitation of the 
French, all laden with well-armed men; others 
appeared in the middle of the river, equipped in like 
manner; immediately there was an alarm among the 
French, and among the Algonquins who [147J dwell 
near us; these last cried out that all was over with 
their people who had gone to hunt beavers. At that 
moment, an Algonquin canoe, going out of the 
mouth of the stream which we call the Three Rivers, 
was taken by its enemies in the sight of the French 
and of the Savages, without anyone being able to 
render it assistance. While we were in this alarm, 
another canoe appeared, guided by a single man, 
coming out from the quarter of the enemy and ad- 
vancing toward the fort of the French; this canoe 
carried a little flag, as a sign of peace. vVe cast our 
eyes upon the pilot; in dress he appeared to be a 
Savage, but by the voice we recognized that it was 
François :Marguerie, one of the two prisoners. Hav- 
ing set foot on land, he was conducted to the fort, 
that he nlight pay his respects to the sieur de Chan- 
flour, who commands there. Everyone ran, each 
one embraced him,-he was looked upon as a man 
raised from the dead, and as a victim escaped from 
the knife that was ready to sacrifice him, and from 
the fire that was ready to consume him; they made 
him abandon his rags, and rec10thed him like a 
Frenchman. All were full of joy, and treated him 
affectionately, and after the [148J first caresses every 
one becanle silent, in order to listen to him. He 
said then, that the Hiroquois, desiring the alliance 
of the French, had treated them mildly; that they 
had set out from the country five hundred in num- 
ber, of whom three hundred and fifty were seen 



36 


LES RELA TIOlv
S DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


cens cinquante roder fur la gran de riuiere, à la veuë 
du fort, qu'ils l'auoient deputé pour parler de paix 
auec les François, & non auec les Sauuages, Algon- 
quins, & Montagnais, qu'ils haïffent à mort, & qu'ils 
veulent exterminer entierement; 11s ont, dit-il, 
trente-fix arquebufiers, auffi adroits que les François, 
Ie refie efi fort bien armé à la Sauuage; ils font munis 
de poudre, de plomb, d'arcs, & de fiéches, d'épées, 
& de viures abondamment: Ils s'attendent qu'on leur 
fera prefent de trente bonnes arquebufes, ce font 
gens refolus, aufquels il ne fe faut fier que de bonne 
forte; veu nlefme qu'vne femme Algonquine, habi- 
tuée depuis quelque temps dans leur païs, de laquelle 
ces Barbares fe cachoient peu, nous a aduertis en fe- 
cret, que ces peuples fe vouloient íeruir de nos corps 
comme d'vne amorce, pour prendre tous les Sau- 
uages nos confederés, perdre tout Ie païs, [149J & fe 
rendre maifires abfolus de la gran de Riuiere; i'ay 
commiffion, faifoit-il de retourner fans delay, ils ont 
retenu auec eux mon cOlnpagnon pour hofiage; & 
moy ie leur ay donné parole que ie les reuerrois au 
plutofi. Le fieur de Chanflour donna pour reíponíe, 
que cét affaire efiant de gran de importance, il falloit 
que Ie grand Capitaine des François en fufi aduerty; 
qu'on ne doutoit pas qu'il n'agreafi les recherches de 
la paix, qu' on luy alloit deleguer des l\leffagers, & 
qu'il feroit dans peu de temps aux Trois Riuieres. 
Nofire priíonnier & vn François qui l'accompagne, íe 
rembarque auec cette refponfe, affaifonnée de quan- 
tité de viures & de petites douceurs, pour gagner ces 
Barbares; 11s approuuerent nofire procedé, mais ils 
ne laifferent pas de íe bien fortifier, en attendant la 
venuë d'Onontio, c'efi ainfi qu'ils appellent Mon- 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF r64 o -4 I 


37 


prowling along the river, in sight of the fort; that 
they had deputed him to speak concerning peace with 
the French, but not with the Savages,- the Algon- 
quins, and the :Montagnais, whom they hate unto 
death, and whom they wish to exterminate entirely. 
" They have, II said he, "thirty-six arquebusiers, as 
skillful as the French,- the remainder are very well 
armed in Savage fashion; they are abundantly fur- 
nished with powder, with lead, with bows, arrows, 
and javelins, and with provisions. They are hoping 
that a present will be given them, of thirty good 
arquebuses; they are resolute people, whom you 
must trust only with reserve, since an Algonquin 
woman,-who has lived for some time in their coun- 
try, and from whom these Barbarians concealed 
little,- warned us in secret that these people wished 
to use our bodies as a bait, in order that they might 
take all the Savages, our confederates, ruin the whole 
country, [149J and make themselves absolute masters 
of the great River. I am commissioned," said he, 
"to return without delay; they have retained with 
them my companion as hostage, and I have given 
them my word that I will see them again as soon as 
possible. II The sieur de Chanflour gave as answer, 
that, this matter being of great importance, it was 
necessary that the great Captain of the French should 
be notified of it,- that they did not doubt he would 
approve of the pursuit of peace, that they were going 
to send 1\Iessengers to him, and that he would short- 
ly be at the Three Rivers. Our prisoner, and a 
Frenchman who accompanied him, reëmbarked with 
this answer, set off by a quantity of provisions and 
little presents, in order to win these Barbarians. 
They approved our procedure, but they did not neg- 
lect to fortify themselves well, while awaiting the 



38 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


fieur Ie Gouuerneur. Ils renuoyerent vne autre fois 
François :Marguerie & Thomas Godefroy fon concap- 
tif, fuppliant Ie Capitaine des Trois Riuieres, de les 
venir voir pour parlementer, en attendant la venuë 
du grand Capitaine. Le Pere Paul [150] Ra[g]ueneau 
& Ie fieur Nicolet, tous deux bien verfés en la Langue 
Huronne, qui a du rapport auec la Langue Hiro- 
quoife, s'y tranfporterent au lieu du Capitaine, qui, 
auec raifon, ne voulut pas quitter fon fort: Arriués 
qu'ils furent dans Ie reduit de ces Barbares, ils leur 
témoignerent, que les François auoient receu vn 
grand contentement à la veuë de leurs Compatriotes, 
qu'ils prenoient tous plaifir aux nouuelles de la paix, 
& qu'on les auoit enuoyés fçauoir ce qu'ils fouhai- 
toient du Capitaine, qu'ils auoient demandé: Ils ref- 
pondirent, qu'ils vouloient parler, c'eft à dire, qu'ils 
vouloient faire des prefens, tant pour no us rendre 
nos prifonniers, que pour nous inuiter à faire vne 
Habitation vers leur pais, où toutes les Nations Hi- 
roquoifes aborderoient pour leur commerce: Illeur 
fut refpondu, qu'on les écouteroit volontiers, mais 
qu' on attendoit Ie grand Capitaine, auquel on auoit 
donné aduis de tout ce qui fe parfoit: Ils firent de 
longues harangues de l' eftat de leur pais, des defirs 
qu'auoient toutes les Nations Hiroquoifes, de fe voir 
1iées auec les François; & pour preuue de leur parole, 
[151] ils font vn petit prefent par auance, en atten- 
dant la venuë d'Onontio. 
Le lendemain trois canots ennemis fe vindrent 
promener deuant Ie fort, à la portée de la voix; 1'vn 
des plus âgés de cette efcoüade s'écria à pleine tefte, 
parlant aux Sauuages! Preftés moy 1'oreille, ie viens 
pour traiter la paix auec toutes les Nations de ces 
quartiers, auec les Montagnais, auec les Algonquins, 



1641-42] 


RELATION OF I640-4I 


39 


coming of Onontio,- it is thus they call 1\Ionsieur 
the Governor. They again sent back François 1\lar- 
guerie and Thomas Godefroy his fellow captive, 
beseeching the Captain of the Three Rivers to come 
and parley with them while awaiting the arrival of 
the great Captain. Father Paul [I 50J Ragueneau and 
the sieur Nicolet,- both well versed in the Huron 
Language, which is related to the Hiroquois Lan- 
guage,-went to them instead of the Captain, who, 
with reason, was unwilling to leave his fort. Hav- 
ing arrived at the rendezvous of these Barbarians, 
they stated to them that the French had had great 
satisfaction in seeing their Countrymen: that they 
all took pleasure in the news of peace; and that they 
themselves had been sent to learn what was desired 
from the Captain whom they had asked to come. 
They replied that they wished to talk,-that is to 
say, that they wished to make presents,-not only 
about restoring our prisoners, but about inviting us 
to make a Settlement near their country, to which 
all the Hiroquois Nations could come for their trade. 
They were answered, that they would be willingly 
heard, but that we were awaiting the great Captain, 
who had been informed of all that had occurred. 
They made long harangues upon the condition of 
their country, and upon the desire that all the Hiro- 
quois Nations had to see themselves allied with the 
French; and, as evidence of their sentiments, [15 IJ 
they made a little present beforehand, while await- 
ing the coming of Onontio. 
The next day three hostile canoes moved up and 
down before the fort, within hearing; one of the old- 
est men belonging to this squadron cried with a loud 
voice, speaking to the Savages: " Listen to me! I 
come to treat for peace with all the Nations of these 



40 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


auec les Hurons, la terre fera toute belle, la riuiere 
n'aura plus de vagues, on ira par tout fans crainte: 
Vn Capitaine Algonquin reconnoiffant la fourbe de 
cét impofteur, luy refpondit d'vne voix plus forte, & 
d'vn ton piquant: Ie reprefente toutes les Nations 
que tu as nommées, en leur abfence, & ie te dy de 
leur part, que tu es vn menteur: Si tu venois pour 
parler de paix, tu déliurerois du moins vn de nos 
prifonniers, felon noftre couftume; tu ne ferois aucun 
aéte d'hoftilité, & tous les iours tu es aux aguets 
pour nous furprendre, tu maffacres to us ceux que 
tu peux attraper; cela dit, chacun fe retire en fon 
q uartier . 
Cependant Ie canot qu'on auoit depefché à Kebec, 
fit vne tres-grande diligence: [I 52] 
lonfieur Ie Gou- 
uerneur ayant receu les nouuelles, arma en vn inftant 
vne barque & quatre chaloupes, prit auec foy Ie Pere 
Vimont noftre Superieur, vogue contre les vents & 
contre les marées; mais voiant que la barque n'auan- 
çoit point, il prend Ie deuant auec fes chaloupes; les 
matelots & les foldats ramoient à to utes forces: En- 
fin, ils arriuerent aux Trois Riuieres plutoft qu' on 
n'efperoit. Si toft que l'ennemy les apperceut, il fe 
refferra dans fon fort; il eftoit neantmoins fi enragé 
contre les Algonquins, qu'vne heure auparauant que 
Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur les allafi treuuer, ils fe 
jetterent fur vn canot Algonquin, conduit par deux 
hommes & vne femme; celle-cy fut tuée, l'vn des 
hommes fut pris prifonnier, & l'autre fe fauua. Le 
iour precedent Anera
i, Capitaine de guerre des plus 
hauts Algonquins, s'eftoit fauué de leurs mains, les 
ayans apperceus de loin à l'emboucheure du grand 
Lac, voifin des Trois Riuieres, où ils gardoient toutes 
les auenuës, par la multitude de leurs canots. 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


41 


parts, with the :Montagnais, with the Algonquins, 
with the Hurons; the land shall be beautiful, the 
river shall have no more waves, one may go every- 
where without fear. II An Algonquin Captain, per- 
ceiving the knavery of this impostor, answered him 
in a louder voice, and in a harsh tone: "I represent, 
in their absence, all the Nations thou hast named; 
and I tell thee, in their name, that thou art a liar. 
If thou camest to treat for peace, thou wouldst de- 
liver at least one of our prisoners, according to our 
custom, and thou wouldst commit no act of hostility; 
but every day thou art on the watch to surprise us, 
and thou massacrest all whom thou canst entrap." 
This being said, each one retired to his own quarters. 
In the meantime. the canoe that had been sent to 
Kebec made all possible haste. [152] Monsieur the 
Governor, having received the news, armed in a trice 
a bark and four shallops, took with him Father Vi- 
mont, our Superior, and voyaged against winds and 
against tides; but, seeing that the bark did not ad- 
vance, he took the lead with his shallops, the sailors 
and soldiers rowing with aU their might. At length 
they arrived at the Three Rivers, sooner than they 
had hoped. As soon as the enemy perceived them, 
they withdrew into their stronghold; they were, 
however, so enraged against the Algonquins that, an 
hour before :Monsieur the Governor went to them, 
they fell upon an Algonquin canoe, managed by two 
men and one woman; the latter was killed, one of 
the men was taken prisoner, and the other escaped. 
On the preceding day, Anerawi, a war Captain of the 
upper Algonquins, had escaped from their hands, 
having seen them far off at the mouth of the large 
Lake near the Three Rivers, all the avenues of which 
they guarded with a multitude of their canoes. 



42 


LES RELA TIOA
S DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


[153] CHAPITRE X. 


DE LA DELIURANCE DES PRISOKNIERS FRANÇOIS, & DU 
POURPARLER DE PAlX, AUEC LES 
HIROQUOIS. 


M ONSIEUR Ie Cheualier de Montmagny, ayant 
appris des prifonniers François, l'humeur de 
ces Barbares, & reconnu leur malice par leurs 
aétions, fe comporte auec vne grande prudence & 
dexterité; il s'en va moüiller l'ancre deuant leur fort, 
à la portée du moufquet; ces Barbares luy font vn 
falue de trente-fix ou quarante coups d'arquebufe, 
fort adroitement; cela fait, deux canots d'Hiroquois 
Ie vindrent aborder, dans lefquels ils fit embarquer 
Ie Pere Ragueneau & Ie fieur Nicolet, pour aller 
reprefenter les deux prisõniers, les tirer de leurs 
mains, & entendre les propofitions de la paix, qu'ils 
venoient rechercher: I1s entrent donc tous quatre 
dans Ie reduit, ou fort des Hiroquois, qu'ils trouuent 
[154J affis en rond, en affés bon ordre, fans tumulte 
& fans bruit; ils firent affeoir les deux mediateurs de 
la paix fur vn bouclier, & les deux prifonniers à 
terre, les liant par forme de contenance, pour mon- 
firer qu'ils efioient encor captifs. Là deffus, l'vn 
des Capitaines, nommé Onagan, fe leue, prend Ie 
Soleil à témoing de la fincerité de fon procedé, puis 
parle en ces termes. 
Ces deux ieunes hommes que vous voyés, font 
Hiroquois, ils ne font plus François, Ie droit de la 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


43 


[153J CHAPTER X. 


OF THE DELIVERANCE OF THE FRENCH PRISONERS 
AND THE PARLEY CONCERNING PEACE 
WITH THE HIROQUOIS. 


M ONSIEUR the Chevalier de Montmagny, hav- 
ing learned from the French prisoners, the 
mood of these Barbarians, and having dis- 
covered their malice by their actions, conducted him- 
self with great prudence and tact. He cast anchor 
before their fort, within musket-range; these Bar- 
barians made, very adroitly, a salute of thirty-six or 
forty shots from their arquebuses. That being 
done, two canoes came from the Hiroquois to meet 
him, on board of which were put Father Ragueneau 
and the sieur Nicolet, that they might go and speak 
for the two prisoners, withdraw them from their 
hands, and hear the propositions for the peace which 
they came to seek. All four then entered the strong- 
hold or fort of the Hiroquois, whom they found [154] 
seated in a circle, in very good order, without tumult 
and without noise. They had the two negotiators of 
the peace sit upon a shield, and the two prisoners 
on the ground, binding these as a matter of form, to 
show that they were still captives. Thereupon, one 
of the Captains, named Onagan, arose, took the Sun 
as a witness of the sincerity of his proceeding, and 
then spoke in these terms: 
" These two young men whom you see, are Hiro- 
quois, they are no longer Frenchmen, the right of 



44 


LES RELA TIONS DES jÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


guerre les a fait nofires; jadis Ie feul nom de Fran- 
çois nous jettoit la terreur dedans l'ame, leur regard 
nous donnoit l'épouuante, & nous les fuions comme 
des Demons, qu'on n'ofe aborder; mais enfin, nous 
auons appris à changer les François en Hiroquois, 
ces deux que vous voyés deuant vos yeux, ont efié 
pris cét hyuer par vne efcouade de nos ieunes gens. 
Se voyans entre nos mains, ils eurent peur qu'on ne 
les mal-traitafi; mais on leur dit, que les Hiroquois 
recherchoient l'alliance des François, & qu'on ne 
leur feroit aucun tort: Si cela efi, dirent-ils, que l'vn 
de [I 55] nous retourne vers les François, pour les 
informer de vos bonnes volontés, & que l'autre s'en 
aille en vofire pais: nous repliquafmes, qu'il efioit 
plus à propos qu'ils vinHent to us deux confoler to utes 
les Nations Hiroquoifes par leur prefence, puis qu'elles 
auoient toutes de l'affeétion pour les François: En 
effet, les peuples les plus éloignés, nous ont fait des 
prefens pour leur fauuer la vie; il ne falloit point 
de fes attraits pour nous donner de l'amour, & de 
l'affeétion vers vous, nos cæurs y efioient defia tout 
portés, vous fçaurés d'eux qu'on les à traittés en 
amis, & non en efc1aues: fi tofi que Ie Printemps à 
paru, nous nous fommes mis en chemin pour les 
ramener; ils font encor Hiroquois, mais tout mainte- 
nant ils feront François; difons plutofi qu'il feront 
François, & Hiroquois tout enfemble: car nous ne 
ferons plus qu'vn peuple: difant cela, il prit les mains 
du Pere Ra[g]ueneau, & du fieur Nicolet, delegués 
pour traitter la paix, puis les touchant au vifage, & 
fur Ie menton, leur dit: Non feulement nos cou- 
fiumes, feront vos coufiumes, mais nous ferons fi 
étroittement vnis, que nos mentons [156J fe reuefii- 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


45 


war has made them ours; formerly the mere name 
of Frenchmen struck terror to our hearts, their look 
appalled us, and we fled from them as from Demons, 
whom one does not dare to approach; but at last, we 
have learned to change Frenchmen into Hiroquois. 
These two whom you see before your eyes were tak- 
en this winter by a squad of our young men. Find- 
ing themselves in our hands, they feared lest they 
should be ill treated; but they were told that the 
Hiroquois were seeking the alliance of the French, 
and that no one would harm them. 'If that be so,' 
said they, , let one of [155] us return to the French, to 
inform them of your good intentions, and let the 
other go away into your country.' '\Ve replied that 
it would be more to the purpose if both of them 
should come to comfort all the Hiroquois 
 ations by 
their presence, since these all had affection for the 
French. Indeed, the more distant tribes made us 
presents, in order to save their lives. Their attrac- 
tions were not needed to inspire in us love and affec- 
tion towards you, our hearts were already wholly 
inclined thereto; you will learn from them that they 
have been treated as friends, and not as slaves. As 
soon as Spring appeared, we set out upon our way 
to bring them back; they are still Hiroquois, but im- 
mediately they will be French; let us rather say that 
they will be French and Hiroquois at the same time, 
for we shall be only one people." Saying that, he 
took the hands of Father Ragueneau, and of the 
sieur Nicolet, the delegates to negotiate peace, then 
touching them on the face and on the chin, he said 
to them: " Not only shall our customs be your cus- 
toms, but we shall be so closely united that our chins 
[156] shall be reclothed with hair, and with beards 



46 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


ront de poil, & de barbe comme les vofires. Apres 
quelques autres ceremonies, il s'approche des captifs, 
brife leurs liens, les jette pardeffus la palliffade de 
leur fort; s'écriant, Que la riuiere emporte fi loin ces 
liens, que iamais il n'en foit de memoire, ces ieunes 
gens ne font plus captifs, leurs liens font brifés, ils 
font maintenant tous vofires: Puis tirant vn collier 
de Porcelaine, il Ie prefente aux 
lediateurs de la 
paix, auec ces paroles: Gardés pour vn iamais ce 
collier, comme vne marque de leur pleine & entiere 
liberté; puis faifant apporter deux pacquets de peaux 
de cafiors: Ie ne veux pas, fit-iI, vous rendre tous 
nuds à vos freres, voila dequoy leur faire chacun vne 
belle robe. II fit en fuite quantité de prefens, felon 
la coufiume du païs, où Ie mot de prefens fe nomme 
parole: Pour faire entendre que c'efi Ie prefent qui 
parle plus fortement que la bouche, il en fit quatre 
au nom des quatre Nations Hiroquoifes, pour mar- 
que, qu'elles fouhaitoient nofire alliance; éleuant 
vne robe de cafior: Voicy, dit-il, l'efiendart que vous 
planterés fur vofire fort, lors que vous verrés paroifire 
nos [157J canots fur cette grande riuiere; & no us 
autres voiant ce fignal de vofire amitié, nous aborde- 
rons auec affurance à vos ports; tirant vn autre 
collier de porcelaine, ille mit en rond fur la terre: 
V oicy, dit-il, la maifon, que nous aurons aux Trois 
Riuieres, quand nous y viendrons traiter auec vous, 
nous y petunerons fans crainte, puis que nous aurons 
Onontio pour frere. 
Les Deputés pour la paix, témoignerent à ces Bar- 
bares vne grande fatisfaétion de tout ce qui s'efioit 
paffé en ce confeil; ils adioufierent, qu'[iJls s'en 
alloient faire vn ample rapport de tout à :Monfieur Ie 



1641- 42] 


RELA TION OF I64o-4I 


47 


like yours." After some other ceremonies, he ap- 
proached the captives, broke their bonds, and tossed 
these over the palisades of their fort, exclaiming: 
"Let the river carry these cords so far away that 
there may never be a remembrance of them; these 
young men are no longer captives,- their bands are 
broken, they are now wholly yours." Then taking 
a Porcelain collar, he presented it to the Negotiators 
of the peace with these words: " Keep forever this 
collar, as a sign of their full and entire liberty." 
Then causing two packages of beaver skins to be 
brought, " I do not wish," said he, "to restore you 
wholly destitute to your brothers; here is something 
to make for each of them a beautiful robe." He 
made then a number of presents, according to the 
custom of the country, in which the term" present .. 
is called" the word," in order to make clear that it 
is the present which speaks more forcibly than the 
lips; he made four of these in the name of the four 
Hiroquois Nations, as a sign that they desired our 
alliance. Lifting up a beaver robe, " Behold," said 
he, "the standard that you shall plant upon your 
fort, when you shall see our canoes appear [157] 
upon this great river; and, when we see this signal 
of your friendship, we shall land with confidence at 
your ports. II Taking another porcelain collar, he 
put it on the ground in the form of a circle; "See," 
said he, " the house that we shall have at the Three 
Rivers, when we corne there to trade with you; we 
shall smoke therein without fear, since we shall have 
Onontio for a brother." 
The peace Deputies expressed to these Barbarians 
a great satisfaction in all that had taken place in this 
council; they added that they were going to make a 



48 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


Gouuerneur, lequel ne leur pourroit parler que Ie iour 
fuiuant, pource qu'il efioit defja tard; ils emportent 
les prefens, & remenent les deux prifonniers mis en 
liberté: Comme ils fortoient, ce Capitaine leur cria; 
Dites à Onontio, que no us Ie prions de cacher les 
haches des Montagnais & des Algonquins fous fa robe, 
pendant que nous traiterons de la paix; Ils promirent 
de leur cofié, quils ne courroient aucun canot Algon- 
quin, & qu'ils ne leur drefferoient aucune embufche; 
mais leur promeffe n'eítoit que perfidie: car les Fran- 
çois [158] n'efioien[t] quafi pas retirés au port des 
Trois Riuieres, qu'ils pourfuiuirent quatre canots 
Algonquins qui reuenoient de la chaffe, bien chargés 
de viures & de pelteries; à peine les hommes fe 
purent-ils fauuer, tout leur bagage fut pillé, & vne 
pauure femme chargée de fon enfant, fut prife. 
Monfieur Ie Cheualier de Montmagny iugea par Ie 
rapport qui luy fut fait, & par la contenance qu'il 
remarqua en cét ennemy rufé & déloyal, que la crainte 
des armes Françoifes luy faifoit fouhaiter la paix 
auec nous, pour pouuoir auec plus de liberté maffa- 
crer, mefme deuant nos yeux, les peuples qui nous 
font confederés: N eantmoins, comme il efi prudent 
& adroit, il rechercha les moyens d'induire ces Bar- 
bares, à entrer dans vne bonne paix vniuerfelle auec 
toutes les Nations qui nous font alliées: Le lende- 
main, iour de Sainét Barnabé, ces Barbares, qui n' 0- 
foient aborder du fort, pour crainte des Algonquins, 
attendoient auec impatience Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur: 
1vlais les vents & la pluie l'arrefierent, il ne s'embar- 
qua que Ie iour fuiuant, dans fes chaloupes, [159] 
chargées de foixante & dix hommes bien armés J ' il 
s'en vient moüiller deuant leur fort: mais la mau- 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF z640-1,I 


49 


full report of the w hole to JYlonsieur the Governor, 
who would not be able to speak to them until the 
following day, because it was already late; they car- 
ried away their presents, and took back the two 
liberated prisoners. As they were going away, this 
Captain called to them: "Say to Onontio that we beg 
him to conceal the hatchets of the Montagnais and 
of the Algonquins under his robe, while we are 
negotiating peace." They promised, on their part, 
that they would chase no Algonquin canoe, and that 
they would set no ambush for them; but their prom- 
ise was only perfidy, for the Frenchmen [158] had 
hardly withdrawn to the port of the Three Rivers 
before they pursued four Algonquin canoes, which 
were returning from the chase well laden with pro- 
visions and with pelts; the men were scarcely able to 
escape, all their baggage was plundered, and a poor 
woman, burdened with her child, was taken. 
Monsieur the Chevalier de Montmagny judged 
from the report that had been made to him, and from 
the behavior that he had observed in this crafty and 
treacherous enemy, that the fear of the French arms 
made them desire peace with us in order that they 
might be able to massacre with more liberty, even 
before our eyes, the tribes which are our confeder- 
ates; nevertheless, as he is prudent and skillful, he 
sought means of inducing these Barbarians to enter 
into a firm, universal peace with all the Nations 
which are allied to us. The next day, the feast of 
Saint Barnabas, these Barbarians, who did not dare 
to approach the fort, for fear of the Algonquins, 
awaited with impatience Monsieur the Governor; but 
the winds and the rain detained him, so that it was 
not until the following day that he set out in his 



50 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


uaife foy de ces Barbares les rendans coupables, les 
fit entrer en deffiance, fondée fur Ie retardement d'vn 
iour, qu'on auoit pris pour Ie mauuais temps, & fur 
les aétes d'hoftilité qu'ils auoient commis, fe doutans 
bien que nous en auions connoiffance: On attendoit 
qu'ils viendroient querir les Deputés de la paix, 
comme ils auoient defia fait; mais la deffiance les 
arrefta: I1s pouffent vn canot vuide vers nos cha- 
10upes, inuitans :Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur, Ie Pere 
Ra[g]ueneau, & Ie fieur Nicolet, de s'embarque[r] 
pour les aller trouuer; leur deffein efioit de les maffa- 
crer, à ce qu'vn ieune Algonquin, qui fe fauua de leurs 
mains, nous rapporta puis apres: Ce procedé tout 
brutal, fit qu'on fe tint plus fur fes gardes que iamais: 
On inuite les Capitaines de venir écouter nos paroles, 
comme on auoit efté écouter les leur; à cela, point 
de nouuelle: on les preffe d'enuoyer quelques Hu- 
rons, de ceux qui fe font naturalifés parmy eux, & 
qui font deuenus Hiroquois; ils en firent de gran des 
difficultés: [160J Enfin, deux aborderent nos cha- 
loupes dans vn canot, ils regardoient par tout, s'ils 
ne verroient point quelque Algonquin caché parmy 
nous; n'en ayant apperceu aucun, trois Capitaines 
Hiroquois s'embarquerent dans vn autre canot: nous 
ayans approchés à la portée du piftolet, ils inuiterent 
Onontio, c'eft Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur, à parler, 
c'eft à dire, à faire fes prefens. 
Ie ne deduiray point la harangue qu'illeur fit faire 
par fon truchement, fuffira de dire deux petits mots de 
la façon qu'illeur fit offrir fes prefens, fe conformant 
aux loix de ces peuples, fes dons furpaffoient de 
beaucoup ceux de ces Barbares. 
II en fit vn pour remerciement de la bonne chere 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF r64o-4r 


51 


shallops, [159] laden with seventy men, well armed. 
He came to anchor before their fort; but the bad 
faith of these Barbarians making them guilty, aroused 
in them distrust, based upon a day's delay which was 
caused by the bad weather, and upon the acts of 
hostility which they themselves had committed, sus- 
pecting with reason that we had knowledge of them. 
We expected that they would come for the Deputies 
to the peace, as they had already done, but their mis- 
trust hindered them. They pushed an empty canoe 
towards our shallops, inviting :ðlonsieur the Govern- 
or, Father Ragueneau, and the sieur Nicolet to em- 
bark and come to them; their design was to slay 
them, as a young Algonquin who had escaped from 
their hands told us afterward. This wholly brutal 
proceeding caused us to be more than ever on our 
guard. The Captains were invited to come and listen 
to our words, as we had listened to theirs; no news 
from that! They were urged to send some Hurons, 
those who had been naturalized among them, and 
had become Hiroquois; to this they raised great 
objections. [160] At last, two approached our shal- 
lops in a canoe; they looked around on all sides, to 
see if some Algonquin might not be concealed among 
us; but not perceiving any, three Hiroquois Captains 
embarked in another canoe; when they had ap- 
proached within pistol-shot, they invited Onontio, 
that is, 110nsieur our Governor, to speak,-in other 
words, to offer his presents. 
I shall not relate the speech he made to them by 
his interpreter; it will suffice to say a few words of 
the manner in which he offered his presents to them, 
in compliance with the code of these peoples; his 
gifts surpassed by far those of the Barbarians. 



52 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


qu'ils auoient fait à nos François en leur païs, il offrit 
des couuertures pour les nattes qu'ils auoient efiè- 
duës fous eux pendant la nuiét, il donna des haches 
pour Ie bois qu'ils auoient couppé durant l'hiuer, 
pour les chauffer, des robes ou des capots pour les 
auoir reuefius, des coufieaux en la place de ceux 
dont ils s'efioient feruis, coupant la tefie aux [161] 
cerfs, dont ils leur auoient fait fefiin: D'autres pre- 
fens pour les Nations qui recherchoient noftre alli- 
ance, & d'autres encor pour marque qu'ils verroient 
fur nos bafiions des efiendarts de paix: & qu'ils 
trouueroient vne maifon d'affeurance auprés de nous. 
Tous ces prefens furent acceptés de ces Barbares, 
auec de grands témoignages d'affeétion en appa- 
rence: mais comme ils ne voyoient point d'arque- 
bufes dõt ils auoient vne paffion eftrange, ils dirent 
qu'on n'auoit point parlé de la rupture des liens de 
nos captifs, qu'ils auoient mis en liberté; là-deffus on 
leur fait encor d'autres prefens pour auoir couppé ces 
liens: mais on ne parloit point d'armes à feu, qui eftoit 
Ie plus ardent de leurs fouhaits, cela les incita à par- 
ler derechef; ils prefentent donc vn collier de porce- 
laine pour nous inuiter à faire vne habitation dans 
leur païs. lIs en donnent vn fecond pour feruir de 
traiét, ou de ranles à nos barques pour y monter; ils 
en offrent vn troifiefme au nom de la ieuneffe Hiro- 
quoife, à ce que leur onc1e Onontio grand Capitaine 
des François, leur fit prefent de quelques [162] arque- 
bufes, ils en tirent vn quatriefme pour marque de 
paix qu'ils vouloient contraéter auec les :Montagnais, 
.auec les Algonquins, & auec les Hurons nos alliés; 
ils produifent quelques peaux de caftor pour affeu- 
rance qu' eftans de retour en leurs Bourgades, ils 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


53 


He made one as thanks for the good cheer that had 
been given to our Frenchmen in their country.-he 
offered blankets, for the mats that had been spread 
under them during the nights; he gave hatchets, for 
the wood that had been cut in order to warm them 
in the time of winter; robes or hoods, for having 
reclothed them; knives, in the place of those that 
had been used in cutting off the heads of [161J deer, 
of which they had made them feasts. Some other 
presents were for the Nations who sought our alli- 
ance, and others still, as a sign that they should see 
upon our bastions the standards of peace, and that 
they should find a house of security near us. 
All these gifts were accepted by these Barbarians- 
apparently with great evidences of affection; but as 
they saw no arquebuses, for which they have a 
strange longing, they said we had not spoken of 
breaking the bonds of our captives whom they had 
set at liberty. Thereupon, still other presents were 
made to them for having struck off these bonds; but 
as we did not mention firearms, which was the most 
ardent of their wishes, that incited them to speak 
again. They then presented a porcelain collar as an 
invitation to us to make a settlement in their coun- 
try; they gave a second one to serve as a convey- 
ance, or as oars to our barks, that we might ascend 
thither; they offered a third one in the name of the 
Hiroquois youth, that their uncle Onontio, the great 
Captain of the French, might present to them some 
[162J arquebuses; they brought forward a fourth one 
as a pledge of the peace which they wished to make 
with the 1Ylontagnais, with the Algonquins, and with 
the Hurons, our allies. They produced some beaver 
skins, as security that on returning to their Villages 



54 


LES RELA TIONS DES .1ÉS UITES 


[VOL. 21 


feroient vne affemblée generale des perfonnes plus 
confiderables de toutes les Nations Hiroquoifes, pour 
publier par tout la generofité & la liberalité des Fran- 
çois: Bref, ils font vn dernier prefent, pour témoi- 
gner qu'ils donnoient vn coup de pied aux Hollan- 
dois, auec lefquels ils ne vouloient plus auoir de 
commerce, difoient-ils: Remarqués, ie vons fupplie en 
paffant, Ie procedé de ces peuples, & ne me dites 
plus, que les Sauuages font des beftes brutes; affu- 
rement ils ne manquent pas de bonne education: 
Leur deffein eftoit de faire vne paix fourrée auec 
nous pour fe déliurer de la peur qu'ils ont de nos 
armes, & pour maffacrer, fans crainte, nos confede- 
rés: Nous pouuoient-ils plus finement induire à leur 
donner des armes? Se pouuoient-ils plus finement 
infinuer en noftre amitié? qu'en nous rendant nos 
prifonniers, [163] nous offrant des prefens, qu'en 
témoignant qu'ils vouloient entrer en bonne intelli- 
gence auec ceux que nous protegions en leur pre- 
fence, qu'en nous inuitant en leur pais, nous affurans 
qu'ils nous preferoient aux Hollandois, nous extol- 
1ans pardeffus Ie commun des hommes : Voila leur 
conduite qui manque à la verité, du vray Efprit des 
enfans de Dieu; mais non pas de l'efprit des enfans 
du fiecle. 1Ionfieur noftre Gouuerneur plus auifé, 
& plus prudent que ces bonnes gens ne font rufés, 
demanda l'auis du Reuerêd Pere Vimont, & du Pere 
Ragueneau, fur Ie prefent fujet; mais s'eftans excu- 
fés de parler en matiere de guerre, il conclud, apres 
auoir recueilly les penfées des principaux de ceux 
qui l'accompagnoient, qu'il ne falloit point faire la 
paix auec ces peuples, à l'exclufion de nos confede- 
rés; autrement, qu' on pourroit entrer dans vne guerre 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF z640-4z 


55 


they would call a general assembly of the mo<:;t dis- 
tinguished persons of all the Hiroquois Nations in 
order to publish eyerywhere the generosity and the 
liberality of the French; in short, they made a last 
present to declare that they would give a kick to the 
Dutch, with whom they no longer wished to have 
any intercourse, they said. Observe, I beseech you 
by the way, the procedure of these people and no 
longer tell me that the Savages are brute beasts; cer- 
tainl y they do not lack good training. Their design 
was to make a patched-up peace with us, so as to be 
free from the dread they have of our arms, and to 
massacre, without fear, our confederates. Could 
they more artfully induce us to give them arms? 
could they more ingeniously insinuate themselves 
into our friendship, than by restoring to us our pris- 
oners [163] and offering to us gifts, than by indicat- 
ing their willingness to be on good terms with those 
whom we protect in their presence, than by inviting 
us into their country, assuring us that they prefer us 
to the Dutch, extolling us above the generality of 
men? Such is their conduct, which lacks indeed the 
true Spirit of the children of God, but not the spirit 
of the children of the world. Monsieur our Govern- 
or, more discreet and prudent than these simple 
people are crafty, asked the advice of the Reverend 
Father Vimont, and of Father Ragueneau, on the 
present occasion; but, they having excused them- 
selves from speaking upon a matter of war, he con- 
cluded, after having gathered the opinions of the 
leading men who accompanied him, that he ought 
not to make peace with these people to the exclusion 
of our confederates,- otherwise, we might enter into 
.a more dangerous war than that which we wished to 



56 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


plus dangereufe que celle qu'on voudroit éuiter: car 
fi ces peuples auec lefquels nous viuons tous les iours, 
& qui nous enuironnent de tous coftés nous atta- 
quoient, comme il fe pourroit faire, fi nous les aban- 
donnions; ils nous donneroient [1641 bien plus de 
peine que les Hiroquois. De plus, fi les Hiroquois 
auoient vn libre accés dans nos ports, Ie commerce 
des Hurons, des Algonquins, & des autres peuples qui 
viennent vifiter les magazins de :ßleffieurs de la N ou- 
uelle France, feroit entierement rompu: Ie dy bien 
dauantage, que dés à prefent Ie commerce fe va 
perdre, fi on n'arrefte les courfes de ces Barbares: 
Enfin, ny Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur, ny aucun des 
François, ne fe pouuoient refoudre à jetter dans la 
gueule de l'ennemy les nouueaux Chreftiens, qui fe 
profeffent publiquement François: Auffi eft-il vray 
que noftre bon Roy, que Dieu beniffe dans Ie temps, 
& dans l'eternité, les regarde & les reconnoift pour 
fes Sujets, dans Ie don qu'il a fait de ces contrées à 
Meffieurs de la Nouuelle France. 
l\lonfieur Ie Cheualier de :Montmagny penetrant la 
force de ces raifons, iugea qu'il falloit faire parler 
nettement les Hiroquois/ il leur fit dire, que s'ils 
vouloient vne paix vniuerfelle, qu'elle leur feroit 
accordée, auec vne grande fatisfaétion des François, 
& de [165] leurs confederés; & que fi Ie prefent qu'ils 
auoient fait aux Algonquins, pour entrer en paix auec 
eux, eftoit fans feintife, qu'ils déliuraffent prefente- 
ment l'vn des prifonniers dont ils s'eftoient nouuelle- 
ment faifis, telle eftant la couftume des peuples amis 
& confederés: Ils refpondirent, que Ie iour fuiuant 
ils pafferoient Ie grand fleuue, pour s'en venir traiter 
de cét affaire auec les Algonquins dans noftre fort, 
& que nous nous retiraffions. Monfieur Ie Gouuer- 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


57 


avoid; for if these peoples, with whom we live day 
by day, and who surround us on all sides, attacked 
us, as they might do, should we abandon them, they 
would give us [164J much more trouble than the 
Hiroquois. 1\loreover, if the Hiroquois had free 
access to our ports, the trade of the Hurons, of the 
Algonquins, and of the other tribes who come to the 
warehouses of the Gentlemen of New France, would 
be entirely stopped; I say still more,-that from 
this very moment the trade is going to be ruined 
unless the inroads of these Barbarians be prevented. 
After all, neither Monsieur our Governor, nor any 
of the Frenchmen, could decide on throwing into the 
jaws of the enemy the new Christians who publicly 
profess themselves Frenchmen: it is also true that 
our good King, whom may God bless in time and in 
eternity, looked upon them and recognized them as 
his 
ubjects in the gift that he made of these regions 
to the Gentlemen of New France. 
Monsieur the Chevalier de :Montmagny, appre- 
hending the force of these reasons, judged that it 
would be necessary to make the Hiroquois speak 
plainly; he gave notice to them that, if they wished 
a universal peace, it would be granted to them with 
great satisfaction by the French, and by [165J their 
confederates; and that, if the present which they had 
made to the Algonquins for the purpose of entering 
into a peace with them were without pretense, they 
would immediately deliver one of the prisoners they 
had recently seized, such being the custom of friend- 
ly and allied nations. They replied that on the fol- 
lowing day they would cross the great river, in order 
to come and treat of this affair with the Algonquins 
in our fort, and that we should withdraw. 1\:1onsieur 
the Governor, seeing well that their design was to 



58 


LES RELATIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


neur voiant bien que leur deffein eftoit de s'enfuir 
dans 1'obfcurité de la nuiét, repliqua, qu'il fouhaitoit 
remener auec foy vn captif Algonquin, pour Ie ren- 
dre à fes freres alliés, en témoignage de la paix qu'ils 
vouloient conc1ure. Ils firent femblant d'en vouloir 
donner vn; mais enfin ils refpondirent: qu'on fe reti- 
raft, & que cét affaire eftant important, ils en con- 
fereroient entr'eux pendant la nuiét: Monfieur Ie 
Gouuerneur leur fit refpondre, qu'ils en traitaffent, 
à la bonne heure; mais qu'il ne s'éloigneroit point 
qu'il n'euft veu Ie cours de leur refolution. Comme 
on parlementoit, voila fept canots Algonquins, igno- 
rans de la venuë de [166] 1'ennemy, qui paroiffoient 
au haut du grand Reuue, remplis d'hommes, & de 
chaffe, & de caftors; les ieunes guerriers Hiroquois 
les ayans apperceus, fe retenoient à peine, les mains 
leur demangeoient, comme on dit; mais la pre fence 
de nos chaloupes armées, & de la barque, qui n'ayant 
pû encor monter, commença à paroiftre, tirant vers 
nous auec fes voiles defployés, les arrefta, & les fit 
retirer dans leur fort, auec quelques paroles de met- 
tre au plutoft vn captif Algonquin en liberté. On 
attend 1'effet de leurs promeffes; il s'écoule yne 
bonne demie heure dans vn profond filence, puis tout 
à coup on entend vn tintamarre & vn cliquetis de 
haches, fi horrible & fi épouuentable, vne cheute & 
vn débris de tant d'arbres, qu'il fembloit que toute la 
foreft s' en alloit renuerfer; & alors on con nut leur 
fourbe plus que iamais. Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur les 
voulant mettre tout à fait dans leur tort, deuant que 
d'en venir aux mains, fe délibera de paffer la nuiét 
fur l' eau auec fa barque & fes chaloupes, pour les 
empefcher de fuir & pour les fonder encore vne fois 
fur leurs penfées de la paix. 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF r64o-4r 


59 


escape in the obscurity of the night, replied that he 
desired to take back with him an Algonquin captive 
in order to restore him to his allied brothers, as an 
evidence of the peace which they wished to conclude. 
They pretended a willingness to give up one; but 
they finally replied that we should retire, and that, 
this affair being important, they would confer upon 
it among themselves during the night. 1'lonsieur 
the Governor had them told that they might treat of 
it at their pleasure, but that he would not withdraw 
until he had seen the course of their resolution. 
While they were parleying, lo! seven Algonquin 
canoes,-ignorant of the coming of [166] the enemy, 
and filled with men, and game, and beavers,-ap- 
peared above on the great river. The young Hiro- 
quois warriors, having perceived them, with diffi- 
culty restrained themselves,-their hands itched, as 
one says; but the presence of our armed shallops 
and of the bark - which, not having yet been able to 
ascend, began to appear drawing toward us with its 
sails unfurled - stopped them, and caused them to 
retire into their fort with some talk of setting at 
liberty, as soon as possible, an Algonquin captive. 
The execution of their promises was awaited; a full 
half-hour slipped by in profound silence; then sud- 
denly was heard so horrible and frightful an uproar 
and clashing of hatchets, a fall and wreck of so 
many trees. that it seemed as if the whole forest 
were being overthrown; and then we were more 
than ever aware of their knavery. Monsieur the 
Governor, wishing to put them completely in the 
wrong before coming to hostilities, decided to spend 
the night on the water with his bark and shallops, 
in order to prevent their flight, and to sound them 
yet once more on their opinions concerning peace. 



60 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


[167] CHAPITRE XI. 


DE LA GUERRE AUEC LES HIROQUOIS. 


L E lendemain matin :Monfieur Ie Cheualier de 
Montmagny, fait équiper vn canot auec vn 
guidon pour inuiter les Capitaines à parler, 
ils mefprifent Ie canot, & Ie guidon, & Ie herault, ils 
nous chargent de brocards, auec des huées barbaref- 
ques, il nous reprochent qu'Onontio ne leur a point 
donné à manger d'arquebufes: c'efi leur façon de 
parler, pour dire qu'it ne leur en a point fait prefent; 
ils arborent vne cheuelure, qu'ils auoient arrachée à 
quelque Algonquin, deffus leur fort comme vn gui- 
don, denotant la guerre; ils tirent des fleches fur nos 
chaloupes; toutes ces infolences firent refoudre Mon- 
fieur Ie Gouuerneur, de leur donner à manger des 
arquebufes, non à la façon qu'ils demandoient, i1 fit 
décharger fur leur fort, les pieces de fonte de la 
barque, les pierriers des chaloupes & toute la [168] 
moufqueterie: tout cela fe fit auec vne telle ardeur 
des François, & auec vn tel redoublement, qu' encor 
bien que l'ennemy par vnerufe qu'on n'attenderoit pas 
des Sauuages, fe fut mis en feureté; neantmoins i1 
prit vne telle épouuante, qu'auffi-tofi qu'il fe vit cou- 
uert des tenebres de la nuiét, i1 em porte fes canots 
au trauers du bois, pour s'aller embarquer vn quart 
de lieuë plus haut que nous, & fe fauuer de nos 
mains; efiant decouuert on Ie voulut fuiure, les cha- 
loupes rament de toutes leurs forces: mais Ie vent & 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF r64o-4r 


61 


[167J CHAPTER XI. 


OF THE WAR WITH THE HIROQUOIS. 


T HE next morning, Monsieur the Chevalier de 
Montmagny had a canoe equipped with a flag, 
in order to invite the Captains to a parley; they 
despised the canoe, the flag, and the herald. They 
assailed us with jeers and barbaric yells; they re- 
proached us that Onontio had not given them arque- 
buses to eat-this is their way of speaking, to say 
that he did not make them a present of these; they 
erected above their fort, as a flag denoting war, a 
scalp which they had taken from some Algonquin; 
they shot arrows at our shallops. All these acts of 
insolence made Monsieur the Governor resolve to 
give them arquebuses to eat, but not in the way that 
they asked: he ordered to be discharged upon their 
fort the brass pieces of the bark, the swivel guns of 
the shallops, and all the [168] musketry; all this was 
done by the French with such ardor, and so repeat- 
edly, that although the enemy, by a stratagem that 
would not be expected from the Savages, indeed put 
themsel ves in safety, they nevertheless took such 
fright that, as soon as they were shielded by the 
darkness of the night, they carried their canoes 
through the woods, that they might embark a quar- 
ter of a league further above us and escape from our 
hands. '\Vhen this was discovered, we resolved to 
pursue them; the shallops were rowed with all force, 
but the adverse wind and tide hindered them. Some 



62 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


la marée contraires les arrefierent; quelques canots 
Algonquins leur voulurent donner la chaffe, comme 
ils efioient en petit nombre, à comparaifon des Hiro- 
quois, :11onfieur Ie Gouuerneur les rappella: vn ieune 
homme Algonquin, qui eftoit depuis deux ans par- 
my les Hiroquois s'eftant fauué dans cette retraite, 
nous rapporta que ces Barbares auoient eu peur de 
nos canons, que fi on les eût peu aborder qu' on 
les auroit defaits, c'efi à dire qu'on les auroit mis en 
fuite dans les bois; car d'en tuer beaucoup, c' eft ce 
que les François ne doiuent pas pretendre, dautant 
[169J qu'ils courent comme des cerfs, ils fautent 
comme des daims; ils connoiffent mieux les efires 
de ces grandes & épouuantables forefts que les befies 
fauuages, qui les ont pour demeure, les François 
n'oferent s'engager aÏÍement dans ces grands bois. 
Apres leur retraite on reconnut leur rufe & leur 
adreffe plus que iamais, ils auoient vn fort affés 
proche des riues du grand Reuue; d' où ils nous par- 
loient; ils en auoient vn autre fecret plus éloigné 
dans les bois; mais fi bien fait & fi bien muny, qu'il 
eftoit à l'epreuue de toutes nos batteries. Or fe dou- 
tant bien que nous en pourrions venir aux mains, 
dans la refolution qu'ils auoient, de continuer la guerre 
auec les Sauuages nos alliés, ils mirent pendant la 
nuiét leurs canots en fauueté; ils tranfporterent dans 
leur fecond fort tout leur bagage, où ils fe retire rent 
eux-mefmes en cachettes, & afin que nous penfaffions 
qu'ils efioient dans Ie premier, contre lequel nous 
tirions, n'ayans pas connoiffance du fecond; ils y 
tenoient touuours du feu allumé, ils y laifferent auffi 
leurs arquebufiers, [170J lefquelsapres auoir tiré quel- 
ques coups, en fortirent pour nons choifir de plus 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF r64o-4r 


63 


Algonquin canoes attempted to give them chase; but, 
as they were few in number compared with the Hir- 
oquois, 1\Ionsieur the Governor called them back. 
A young Algonquin, who had been for two years 
among the Hiroquois, and who escaped in this retreat, 
reported to us that these Barbarians were afraid of 
our cannon, and that if we had been able to approach 
them they would have been defeated,-that is to say, 
we should have put them to flight in the woods; for, 
as to killing many of them, that is something to 
which the French cannot pretend, inasmuch [169J as 
they run like deer, they bound like harts, and they 
know better the ways of these vast and dreadful for- 
ests than do the wild beasts, whose dwelling they 
are; the French did not lightly venture to entangle 
themselves in these dense woods. 
After their retreat we saw, more than ever, their 
cunning and ability; they had a fort rather near the 
shore of the great river, from which they spoke to 
us; they had another, hidden further within the 
woods, but so well constructed and so well supplied 
that it was proof against all our resources. Now, 
mistrusting that we might come to hostilities with 
them, on account of the resolution they had made to 
continue war with our Savage allies, during the 
night they put their canoes in safety; they trans- 
ported all their baggage to their second fort, to which 
they themselves secretly retired; and, to the end 
that we should believe them to be in the first one at 
which we were firing, having no knowledge of the 
second, they kept therein a fire continually burning. 
They left there also their arquebusiers, [170J who, 
after having fired some shots, came out to take closer 
aim at us, skulking behind trees and shooting very 



64 


LES RELATIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


prés, fe cachans d'arbres en arbres, tirans fort adroite- 
ment; ils déchargeoient toute leur fureur fur la 
barque, fçachans que Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur eftoit 
dedans; & en effet, fi elle n 'euft efté bien pauoifée, ils 
auroient bleffé & tué plufieurs de nos hommes; vne 
épée Françoife paroiffant au deffus des pauois, fut 
emportée d'vn coup d'arquebuze, plufieurs cordages 
couppés, & les pauois tous remplis de bales. Ils 
firent leur retraite dans vne bonne conduite; car its 
enchargerent à leurs arquebufiers de combatre vail- 
lamment, comme ils firent, pendant qu'ils tranfporte- 
rent à trauers des marais & des bois, leur bagage & 
leurs canots, pour n'eftre point apperceus. La nuiét 
venuë ils éuaderent, comme i'ay remarqué cy-deffus: 
Voila comme la guerre, auec ces peuples, s'eft decla- 
rée plus que iamais; mais voions ce qui fuit. 
I1s eftoient partis cinq cens bons guerriers de leur 
païs, comme i'ay defia dit, vne trouppe s'en eftoit 
allée au deuant des Hurons, pour leur dreffer des 
embufches, [171] & les attendre comme on attend 
vne befte à la fuë; eftans aux aguets, ils apperceurent 
deux canots qui nous amenoient Ie Pere de Brebeuf, 
& quelques François; mais les ayans découuerts vn 
peu tard, dans vn lieu où ils fe pourroient fauuer à 
force de rames, ils les laifferent paffer fans leur donner 
la chaffe, ny fans fe découurir: Ce fut vn grand trait 
de la bonté, & de la prouidence de noftre Seigneur 
enuers Ie Pere, & enuers ceux qui l'accompagnoient: 
car cinq autres canots de Hurons, venans vn peu 
apres, furent attaqués de ces voleurs, qui en maffa- 
crerent quelques-vns, d'autres fe fauuerent, d'autres 
tomberent tous vifs entre leurs mains, pour eftre Ie 
ioüet des fiammes & de leur rage, & la pafture de 



1641- 42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


65 


skillfully. They let loose their whole fury upon our 
bark, knowing that 1Ionsieur the Governor was there- 
in; and truly, if it had not been well shielded, they 
would have wounded and killed several of our men,- 
a French sword, being visible above the screens, 
was carried away by an arquebus shot, many ropes 
were cut, and all the screens were filled with balls. 
They effected their retreat with good management, 
for they had charged their arquebusiers to fight val- 
iantly, as they did, so that they might not be per- 
ceived while they carried across marshes and woods 
their baggage and their canoes. When night came 
they made their escape, as I remarked above. Thus 
the war with these tribes has broken out more fierce- 
ly than ever; but let us see what fol1owed. 
They had set out from their own country five hun- 
dred warriors strong, as I have already said; one 
band had gone to meet the Hurons, in order to set 
ambushes for them, [171] and to await them as one 
awaits a wild beast in its flight. \Vhile these were 
on the watch, they perceived two canoes which were 
bringing to us Father de Brebeuf and some French- 
men, but having descried them rather late, in a place 
where it was possible to escape by vigorous pad- 
dling, they let them go on without pursuing them or 
revealing themselves. It was a great proof of the 
goodness and of the providence of our Lord towards 
the Father, and towards those who accompanied him; 
for five other canoes filled with Hurons, coming 
shortly after, were attacked by these robbers, who 
massacred some of them; others escaped, and others 
fell alive into their hands, to be the sport of flames 
and of their rage, and to be the food of their wretched 
.stomachs. Such is the funeral and such the tomb 



66 


LES RELA l'IONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[V OLe 21 


leurs malheureux efiomachs: Voila les funerailles, 
& Ie fepulchre que nous attendons, fi iamais nous ve- 
nons à tomber entre les griffes de ces tigres, & dans 
la fureur de ces Demons. 
L'vn de ceux qui fe fauuerent de cette embufcade, 
tira droit aux Trois Riuieres, les autres remonterent 
vers les Hurons, pour auertir ceux qui defcendoient, 
du danger où ils s'efioient perdus. Quelque [17 2 ] 
temps apres cette defaite, Ie Pere Paul Ragueneau, 
& Ie Pere René Menard, remontans au païs des Hu- 
rons, conduits par quelques canots, firent rencontre 
de huiét ou dix Sauuages, qui leur dirent, que c'efioit 
fait de leur vie s'ils paffoient outre; que l'ennemy 
ne s'efioit pas encor retiré. A cette nouuelle inopi- 
née, ces canots retournent aux Trois Riuieres, pour 
demander fecours aux Algonquins; ceux-cy les ex- 
hortent de donner iufques à Kebec, pour obtenir 
quelques armes du fort, & quelque affiftance des Sau- 
uages Chreftiens de Sainét Iofeph, promettans de Ie 
ioindre à cette efcorte. Le Pere de Brebeuf, Ie Pere 
Ragueneau, & Ie bon Charles Sondatfaa fe chargent 
de cette commiffion, ils viennent voir 1Ionfieur Ie 
Gouuerneur, qui fit embarq[u]er quelques foldats bien 
armés, & bien refolus, les recommandans aux nou- 
ueaux Chreftiens de Sainét Iofeph, qui armerent 
huiét canots de leur part, pour ce mefme deffein. 
Comme ils efioient prefts de partir, arriuent deux 
Sauuages, du païs des Abnaquiois, qui difent pour 
nouuelles, que tout Ie païs des Hiroquois ne refpire 
que la [173] guerre. Que les Anglois ont quitté l'ha- 
bitation qu'ils auoient à Quinibequi; qu'vn nommé 
Makheabichtichi
, dont i'ay par1é cy-deffus, auoit 
efté miferablement maffacré en leur païs, par vn 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF IÓ4o-4I 


61 


that awaits us, if ever we happen to die by the claws 
of these tigers, and the fury of these Demons. 
One of those who had escaped from this ambuscade 
went at once to the Three Rivers, the others ascended 
towards the country of the Hurons, to warn those 
who were coming down of the danger by which they 
might be lost. Some [172] time after this defeat, 
Father Paul Ragueneau and Father René :Menard, 
while reascending to the country of the Hurons, 
escorted by some canoes, met eight or ten Savages 
who told them that their lives would be lost if they 
went further, as the enemy had not yet withdrawn. 
At this unexpected news, these canoes returned to 
the Three Rivers for the purpose of asking assistance 
from the Algonquins; these last exhorted them to go 
as far as Kebec in order to procure arms from the 
fort, and aid from the Christian Savages of Saint 
J oseph,- promising themselves to meet that escort. 
Father de Brebeuf, Father Ragueneau, and the good 
Charles Sondatsaa undertook this commission; they 
came to Monsieur the Governor, who shipped some 
well-armed and very resolute soldiers, commending 
them to the new Christians of Saint Joseph, who on 
their part armed eight canoes for the same purpose. 
\Vhen they were ready to set out, two Savages arrived 
from the country of the Abnaquiois, who told as newS 
that the whole country of the Hiroquois breathed 
only [173] war; that the English had abandoned 
the settlement they had made at Quinibequi; and 
that a man named 1Iakheabichtichiou, of whom I 
have spoken above, had been wretchedly slain in 
their own country, by an A bnaquiois nearer to the sea. 
They said that this deed was done in drunkenness; 
that all his Countrymen had strongly disapproved of 



.68 


LES RELATIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


Abnaquiois plus voifin de la mer: que ce coup s'efioit 
fait dans l'yurognerie, que to us fes Compatriotes l'a- 
uoient fort improuué, & qu'ils efioient enuoiés pour 
fatisfaire aux parens & aux alliés, & à toute la Nation 
du defunét; Or comme fes parens efioient pour la 
plufpart aux Trois Riuieres, ces deux Abnaquiois 
s'embarquerent auec la flotte, pour les aller trouuer; 
Ie bruit de leur venuë aiant defia couru, nos guer- 
riers, qui auoient receu dans leurs canots ces deux 
Ambaffadeurs, furent affés mal receus des Algon- 
quins. 
On leur dit d'abord, que ces Algonquins fe vou- 
loient faifir des Abnaquiois, pour les mettre à mort, 
contre Ie droiét de to utes les Nations; car ils venoient 
pour traiter de la paix. lean Baptifie EtinechKa
at, 
& Noël Negabamat, qui font les deux principaux 
Chefs de Sainét lofeph, voians que les Algonquins 
fe tenoient preffés, & que quelques-vns d'eux efioient 
[174] armés, commandent à ceux qui les fuiuoient, 
de faire alte, & de charger leurs arquebufes à balle: 
Là-deffus, vn ieune Algonquin s'auance Ie coufieau 
en la main pour Ie jetter fur l'vn des Abnaquiois; 
mais celui-cy faifant vne démarche en arriere, luy 
prefente Ie bout de fon arquebufe: Les Algonquins 
s'écrient, que c'efi vne feinte, que leur coufiume efi 
d'épouuanter ceux qui apportent nouuelle de la mort 
de quelqu'vn de leur Nation, quoy qu'ils viennent 
comme Delegués & comme :Mediateurs de la paix. 
A ces paroles chacun s'arrefte, on fe vifite, quoy 
qu'affés froidement, les Abnaquiois traitent leur 
.affaire, & vn Capitaine Algonquin, proche parent de 
l'vn de nos Chrefiiens de Sainct Iofeph, l'abordant, 
& Ie falüant, luy dit: :Mon nepueu, ie fuis bien aife 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


69 


it, and that they had been sent to give satisfaction to 
the parents and to the relatives and to the whole 
Nation of the deceased. Now, as his relatives were 
for the most part at the Three Rivers, these two 
Abnaquiois had embarked with the fleet to go to them; 
the report of their arrival having already spread, 
our warriors, who had taken into their own canoes 
these two Ambassadors, met a rather unfriendly 
reception from the Algonquins. 
They were told at first, that these Algonquins 
were inclined to seize the Abnaquiois, that they 
might put them to death, contrary to the law of all 
Nations; for they came to treat of peace. Jean Bap- 
tiste Etinechkawat and Noël Negabamat, who are 
the two principal Chiefs of Saint Joseph, seeing that 
the Algonquins were crowding together, and that 
some were [174J armed, commanded those who were 
following them to make a halt and to load their 
arquebuses with balls. At these words, a young 
Algonquin advanced, knife in hand, to thrust it at 
one of the Abnaquiois, but this last, taking a step 
backward, presented to him the muzzle of his arque- 
bus. The Algonquins exclaimed that it was a 
feint,-that their custom is to terrify those who 
bring news of the death of anyone of their Nation, 
even though they come as Delegates and as 
1edia- 
tors of peace. 
At these words, each one stood still; they looked, 
although rather coldly, on the Abnaquiois discussing 
their affair; and an Algonquin Captain, a near rela- 
tive of one of our Saint Joseph Christians, approach- 
ing and addressing him, said: "My nephew, I am 
very glad at thy coming." "And I," said this young 
Christian, " was much astonished, on landing at the 



70 


LES RE'LA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


de ta venuë: Et moy, fit ce ieune Chreftien, ie me 
fuis trouué bien eftonné à l'abord des Trois Riuieres, 
voyant qu'on mettoit la main aux armes. Quoy 
donc, faifois je à part moy, fommes nous defia arri- 
ués au pais de l'ennemy? Quand ie fuis party de 
Sainct Iofeph, ie difois dans mon cæur, ie trouueray 
mes [175] parens aux Trois Riuieres, ie feray bien 
confolé de les voir, & auffi-toft que i'ay mis pied à 
terre, i'ay rencontré Ie païs des Hiroquois; car on 
nous à commandé de charger à balle: Y as-tu char- 
gé, luy dit fon oncle? ouy, refpond-il, i'ay mis deux 
balles dans mon arq ue buf e. A urois- tu tiré fur tes 
parens? i'aurois obëi à nos Capitaines, & tiré à tort 
& à trauers; Ie fuis du party de ceux qui croyent en 
Dieu. Ces refponfes me font dautant plus voir la 
force de la foy, que les Sauuages font étroitement 
liés à leurs parens: mais Iefus-Chrift eft venu rom- 
pre ce lien. Veni feparare hOlll'illelll aduer .IllS patrem 
.fUUlIl. 
Ce tumulte eftant appaifé, Ie fieur de Chanflour fit 
appeller les principaux Sauuages, 1fontagnais, & 
Algonquins, illeur fit demander quand ils partiroient 
pour efcorter les Hurons. Les Algonquins firent 
figne à lean Baptifte EtinechKa
at Capitaine :Monta- 
gnais, que c'efioit à luy à parler, fa harangue ne com- 
prit qu'vn feul mot: Ie fuis François, dit-il, ie n'ay 
rien à dire dauantage, ce mot en valloit dix-mille, il 
vouloit dire qu'il eftoit Chreftien, & François tout 
enfemble, [176] qu'il eftoit preft d'obeïr aux volon- 
tés de celuy qui commandoit aux François, & que 
dans vne affaire fi preffé, il n'eftoit pas queftion de 
long difcours, mais de marcher fans delay. 
L' Apoftat 
mafatiKeie prit la parole, dit mille 



1641-42] 


RELA TJON OF I64 0 -4 I 


71 


Three Rivers, to see that arms had been seized. 
, Indeed,' said I to myself, , have we already arrived 
in the country of the enemy?' \Vhen I left Saint 
Joseph, I said in my heart, 'I shall find my [175] 
relatives at the Three Rivers,- I shall surely be con- 
soled by seeing them;' but as soon as I had set foot 
on land I found the country of the Hiroquois, for we 
were commanded to load with balls." "Didst thou 
load? " said his uncle to him. "Yes, " responded 
he, " I put two balls into my arquebus." "\V ouldst 
thou have fired on thy relatives? II "I would have 
obeyed our Captains, and fired right and left: I am 
on the side of those who believe in God." These 
responses made me see the strength of faith so much 
the more as these Savages are closely bound to their 
relatives: but Jesus Christ came to break this bond. 
Veni separare h011Z'illem adversus patrem SUU1Jl. 
When this tumult was appeased, the sieur de Chan- 
flour ordered the chief Montagnais and Algonquin 
Savages to be called, and to be asked when they 
would set out to escort the Hurons. The Algon- 
quins made a sign to Jean Baptiste Etinechkawat, a 
Montagnais Captain, that this was for him to say; 
his speech was comprised in a single word,-" I am 
a Frenchman," said he, " I have nothing more to 
say. II This word was worth ten thousand; he meant 
that he was a Christian and a Frenchman at the same 
time, [176] that he was ready to obey the will of him 
who commanded the French, and that, in so urgent 
an affair, it was not a question of much speaking, but 
of marching without delay. 
The Apostate Oumasatikeie began to speak with a 
thousand impertinences; at last he came to the con- 
clusion that the enemy had departed, and conse- 



72 


LES RE-LA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


impertinences; Enfin, i1 conc1ud que l'ennemy efioit 
party, & par confequent qu'il n'efioit pas befoin de 
faire efcorter les Hurons. 
Charles Sondatfaa Huron, harangue là deffus puif- 
famment, reprefente Ie danger, preffe les Algonquins; 
mais il parla à des oreiUes fermées, qui fortirent de 
l'affemblée, fi tofi qu'ils eurent tiré leur coup; il 
s'agit donc maintenant de voir fi les huiét canots de- 
Chrefiiens qui portoient quelques foldats François, 
pafferoient outre auec les Hurons. Leur petit nom- 
bre, à comparaifon de l'ennemy, efioit pour les 
épouuanter, on demande aux foldats François, fi fe 
voyans defiitués du fecours des Algonquins, ils vou- 
droient bien marcher plus auant: ils refpondent auec 
vne con fiance vraiement genereufe, que Monfieur Ie 
Gouuerneur leur ayant commandé d'accompagner les 
[177] Sauuages Chrefiiens de Sainét Iofeph, qu'ils 
ne les quitteront iamais pour aucun danger; la foy a 
ie ne fçay quel1ien, qui vnit les cæurs, les foldats au 
retour dirent tout plain de bien de nos Neophytes, 
& nos Neophytes ne fe pouuoient affés loüer des 
foldats. Voila donc nos foldats Frãçois prefis de 
s'embarquer, fi ces huiét canots de Chrefiiens veulent 
marcher: On leur demande, queUe efioit leur pen- 
fée; ils refpondent, que ce n'efi pas à eux d'en deter- 
miner, qu'ils efioient tous difpofés; de receuoir l'or- 
dre & Ie com man dement des François: cela mit en 
peine Ie fieur de Chanflour & to us ceux qui efioient 
prefens; pas vn n'opina iamais, qu'il leur fallufi 
commander ce voiage, perfonne ne voulant expofer 
ces bons Neophytes dans les grands dangers qu'on 
apprehendoit; Ce petit nombre de Chrefiiens, difoit 
quelqu'vn, efi comme Ie leuain, qui doit faire leuer 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF IÓ4o-4I 


73 


quently that there was no need of giving an escort 
to the Hurons. 
Charles Sondatsaa, a Huron, thereupon vigorously 
harangued,- he pictured the danger and urged the 
Algonquins; but he spoke to those who had closed 
ears, and who rushed from the assembly as soon as 
they had inflicted their blow. The question now 
was, to see if the Christians in these eight canoes, 
which also bore a few French soldiers, would go on 
with the Hurons; their small number in comparison 
with the enemy was enough to terrify them. The 
French soldiers were asked if, seeing themselves 
destitute of help from the Algonquins, they were 
willing to go on further; they answered with a truly 
generous firmness that, Monsieur the Governor hav- 
ing commanded them to accompany the [177] Chris- 
tian Savages of Saint Joseph, they would never aban- 
don them on account of any danger. Faith has an 
indescribable bond which unites hearts. The sol- 
diers, on their return, spoke in the highest terms of 
our Neophytes, and our Neophytes could not suffi- 
ciently praise the soldiers. Here then were our 
French soldiers ready to embark, if the Christians 
in these eight canoes wished to go on. They were 
asked what their opinion was; they answered that it 
was not for them to decide it, that they were wholly 
disposed to receive the orders and commands of the 
French. This troubled the sieur de Chanflour, and 
all those who were present; not even one voted that 
they ought to command this voyage, no person was 
willing to expose these good Neophytes to the great 
dangers that were dreaded. "This small number 
of Christians," said some one, "is like the yeast 
which ought to leaven the whole mass of Christianity 



74 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


toute la maffe du Chrifiianifme en ces contrées; s'il 
efi defait, les Infideles fe rendront plus difficiles que 
iamais, & nous accuferont d'auoir jetté à la mort ceux 
qui ont receu nofire creance. Sur ces difficuItés, Ies 
pauures [lï8] Hurons fe voyans abandonnés de tout 
fecours, efioient bien en peine, & nous auffi bien 
qu'eux; car Ie Pere Paul Ragueneau, & Ie Pere René 
Menart, les deuoient accompagner. 
Enfin, nofire Seigneur nous confola; car au mefme 
temps qu'on vouloit partir, arriue vn canot de 
Huron, qui nous apprend, que l'ennemy s'eftoit reti- 
ré: Si bien que les Peres font paffés. auec Ie bon 
Charles Sondatfaa & les autres Hurons, fans autre 
mal que les grandes fatigues d'vn chemin tres-affreux. 
QueIque temps apres leur depart, arriuerent quel- 
ques autres canots de Hurons, qui calomnierent puif- 
famment Ie pauure Pere de Brebeuf; ils difoient, 
qu'ayant rencontré vn Huron fauué des mains de 
l'ennemy, ils auoient appris de luy ce que ie vais 
raconter. Efiant entre les mains des Hiroquois, 
difoit ce prifonnier échappé, l'vn d'eux m'a tenu ce 
difcours: N ous auons connoiffance, & bonne intel- 
ligence auec les François vefius de noir, qui font en 
vofire païs, & notamment auec vn certain que vous 
nommés Echon, c'efi ainfi qu'ils appellent Ie Pere 
lean de Brebeuf; [lï9] cét homme a paffé l'hyuer 
dans la Nation neutre, où i1 a eu communication auec 
les Hiroquois nos confederés, i1 s' eft lié auec eux & 
auec nous, pour vous perdre: Courage, leur difoit-il, 
nous fommes entrés dans Ie païs des Hurons pour 
les exterminer; nous en auons defia fait mourir 
grand nombre par nos prieres; comme par de puif- 
fans charmes; mais nous n'auons pû Ies confommer 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF r64o-4r 


75 


in these regions; if they are defeated, the U nbeliev- 
ers will become more troublesome than ever, and 
will accuse us of having forced to their death those 
wbo have received our belief. " On account of these 
objections, the poor [178] Hurons, seeing themselves 
abandoned by all aid, were much distressed, and we 
as well as they; for Father Paul Ragueneau and 
Father René Menart were to accompany them. 
At length, our Lord consoled us; for, at the very 
time they had resolved to set out, a Huron canoe 
arrived, and we learned that the enemy had retired; 
so that the Fathers went on with the good Charles 
Sondatsaa and the other Hurons without any other 
discomfort than the great fatigues of a most fright- 
ful road. 
A short time after their departure, some other 
canoes arrived, bearing Hurons, who greatly slan- 
dered poor Father de Brebeuf: they said that, hav- 
ing met a Huron who had escaped from the hands of 
the enemy, they had learned from him what I am 
going to relate. "Being in tbe hands of the Hiro- 
quois," said this escaped prisoner, "one of them 
spoke to me in this wise: 'We have an acquaintance 
and a good understanding with the black-robed 
Frenchmen who are in your country, and especially 
with a certain man whom you call Echon,' "-it is 
thus they name Father Jean de Brebeuf; [179] " , this 
man spent the winter among the neutral Nation, 
where he had communication with the Hiroquois, 
our confederates; he combined with them and with 
us that he might ruin you. "Take courage," said 
he to them; "we entered into the country of the 
Hurons in order to exterminate them; we have al- 
ready caused a great number of them to die by our 



76 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


entierement, il faut que vous les acheuiés par vos 
guerres, & par vos furprifes; quand ils feront tout à 
fait détruits, nous irons demeurer auec vous en vofire 
païs. Nos confederés nous aians donné aduis de tout 
cecy, nous vous fommes venus dreffer des embufches, 
nous auons reconnu Echon, nous l' auons vifité pen- 
dant la nuiét, il nous a fait des prefens, nous l' auons 
laiffé paffer, i1 nous a auerty des canots qui Ie 
fuiuoient; & voila comment vous efies tombés entre 
nos mains, difoient les Hiroquois à ce prifonnier, au 
rapport de ces calomniateurs, qui controuuoient ces 
impoftures, pour nous perdre. Sainét Paul a bien 
raifon de dire, que, SZ" -in Izac vita talltz'tm Ùz Clzrijlo 
fþerantes [180] fumus, miferabiliores fumus omnibus ho- 
mr:nt.bus: Si nous n'attendons rien en l'autre vie, nous 
fommes plus miferables que Ie refie des hommes: 
Car ceux pour qui nous donnons nos vies dans des 
trauaux immenfes, nous procurent la mort par des 
voyes les plus iniques du monde. 
Auant que de conc1ure ce chapitre il faut que ie 
remarque vn traiét de generofité de nos Chrefiiens 
de Sainét Iofeph, pendant Ie fejour qu'ils ont fait aux 
Trois Riuieres; leur Capitaine aiant dit en pleine 
affemblée, qu'il efioit François, puis qu'il auoit 
embraffé leur creance: Vn certain Infidele, homme 
impudent, luy voulut faire vn affront, & à tous fes 
gens; fe promenant à l'entour de fa cabane, luy cria 
tout haut: Va-t'en donc, François, va-t'en, à la bonne 
heure, en ton païs, embarque toy dans les Nauires, 
puis que tu es François, paffe la mer, & t'en va en 
ta patrie, il y a trop long-temps que tu nous fais icy 
mourir. Ce Capitaine me vint trouuer tout fur l'heure, 
fans rien repartir: Mon cæur veut efire mefchant, 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


77 


prayers, as by powerful charms; but we have not 
been able to destroy them entirely. You must give 
the finishing stroke to them, by your wars and by 
your sudden attacks; w hen they shall be w holl y 
destroyed, we will dwell with you in your country." 
When our confederates had informed us of all this, 
we came to lie in am bush for you. vVe recognized 
Echon, and visited him at night; he made us pres- 
ents, and we let him go away. He apprised us of 
the canoes which were following him, and thus you 
have fallen into our hands,' " said the Hiroquois to 
this prisoner, according to the report of the cal umni- 
ators who contrived these impostures in order to 
ruin us. Saint Paul was quite right in saying that, 
Si in hac 'l/Üa ta1ltÙm Ùz CkrÙto spcralltcs [180J SU1JlUS, 
mÙcrabiliores sumus om1libus homÙtibus. If we expect 
nothing in the other life, we are more miserable than 
the rest of men: for those to whom we give our lives 
in these immense labors, procure our death by the 
most iniquitous means in the world. 
Before concluding this chapter, I must notice an 
act of magnanimity in our Christians of Saint Joseph, 
during the sojourn they made at the Three Rivers; 
their Captain having said in open assembly that he 
was a Frenchman, since he had embraced their be- 
lief, a certain Unbeliever-an impudent man, wish- 
ing to affront him and all his people-walked around 
his cabin, and cried aloud to him: "Go then, thou 
Frenchman, that is right, go away into thine own 
country. Embark in the Ships, since thou art a 
Frenchman; cross the sea, and go to thine own land; 
thou hast for too long a time caused us to die here." 
This Captain came to me immediately, without reply- 
ing a word. "M y heart wishes to be wicked," said 



78 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


difoit-il, mais ie ne luy obeïray pas; fi ie n'auois [18 I] 
quitté mes anciennes façons de faire, i'abatrois bien 
l' orgueil de cét im puden t; mais puis q u 'il ne fa u t 
pas eftre Chreftien à demy, ie ne luy diray mot, ie ne 
luy feray aucun mal; ie fçay bien qu'ils difent que 
ie n'ay point d'efprit d'auoir embraffé la foy, ils 
m'accufent de les faire mourir, pource que ie les ay 
in uités de fe faire inftruire; leurs calomnies m' a u- 
roit troublé en autre temps: mais puis que i'ay donné 
ma parole à Dieu, ie veux faire tout ce qui m'eft com- 
mandé, ie ne leur feray aucun reproche; ce qui me 
feroit bien facile, non feulement pource que leur vie 
n'eft pas meilleure que la noftre, mais pource que ie 
n'ay iamais receu aucun de leurs prefens, quoyque 
nous leur en aions fait par plufieurs fois. La grace 
a d'eftranges effets; auffi eft-il vray, que Ie Dieu 
qui la donne, eft vn Dieu tout-puiffant. 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


79 


he, " but I shall not obey it; if I had not [181J given 
up myoId habits, I would certainly lower the pride 
of that impudent man; but since one must not be a 
halfway Christian, I will say no word to him, I will 
do him no harm. I know well that they say I have 
no sense, because I have embraced the faith; they 
accuse me of causing their death since I have begged 
them to be instructed. Their calumnies would have 
troubled me, formerly; but, as I have given my word 
to God, I intend to do all that is commanded me. I 
will not cast at them any reproach, which would be 
very easy for me to do,- not only because their life 
is no better than ours, but because I have never 
received any of their presents, although we have 
several times made presents to them. II Grace has 
strange effects; it is also true that the God who gives 
it is an all-powerful God. 



80 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


[182J CHAPITRE XII. 


D'VNE MISSION FAICTE À TADOUSSAC. 


E NCOR que les Sauuages de Tadouffac foient 
quafi les premiers que nos vaiffeaux rencon- 
trent, fi eft-ce qu' on ne leur a porté les bonnes 
nouuelles de l'Euangile qu'apres plufieurs autres, & 
encor faut-il confeffer que ce n'eft pas nous qui les 
auons attirés; mais nos Neophytes, ou nouueaux 
Chreftiens de la Refidence de Sainét Iofeph. Comme 
ils fe font vifités de part & d'autre, & qu'ils ont veu 
que les principaux Sauuages de cette Refidence, 
faifoient profeffion publique de la foy, ils s'en font' 
mocqués au commencement: mais enfin, Ie bon ex- 
emple & Ie bon difcours de leurs Compatriotes, leur 
ont fait aimer ce qu'ils haïffoient, & rechercher ce 
qu'ils abhorroient. L'an paffé nos Neophytes, com- 
me i'ay remarqué, les allerent inuiter par vn beau 
prefent, de venir demeurer auec eux à Sainét Iofeph, 
[183J pour entendre parler des biens de 1'autre vie; 
lIs refpondirent par vn autre prefent, qu'ils n'eftoient 
point allienés de la foy; mais qu'ils defiroient qu' on 
les vint inftruire en leur païs: En effet, ils delegue- 
rent Charles Meiachka
at, qui n'eftoit pas encor bap- 
tifé, pour venir querir vn Pere de noftre Compagnie, 
& l' emmenerent à Tadouffac, où quelques Sauuages 
des peuples du Sagné, fe deuoient auffi trouuer; 
comme Ie Pere qu'ils demandoient eftoit occupé 
ailleurs, on leur promit qu'on ne manqueroit pas de 
les fecourir au Printemps. 



1641- 42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


81 


[182J CHAPTER XII. 


OF A MISSION HELD AT TADOUSSAC. 


A LTHOUGH the Savages of Tadoussac are al- 
most the first ones that our vessels meet, yet 
the good news of the Gospel was carried to 
them only after it had been taken to many others; 
and still it must be confessed that it was not we who 
won them, but our Neophytes, or new Christians of 
the Residence of Saint Joseph. \Vhen they visited 
one another on both sides, and saw that the chief 
Savages of this Residence made public profession of 
the faith, they derided them in the beginning; but, 
at length, the good example and the good conversa- 
tion of their Tribesmen made them love that which 
they had hated, and seek that which they had ab- 
horred. Last year our Neophytes, as I have observed, 
went to invite them by means of a fine present to 
come and dwell with them at Saint Joseph, [183J that 
they might hear of the blessings of the other life. 
They answered by another pres en t that they were 
not estranged from the faith, but desired that some 
one should come and instruct them in their own 
country. Indeed, they appointed Charles Meiach- 
kawat, who was not yet baptized, to come for a Father 
of our Society, and conduct him to Tadoussac, where 
would also be found some Savages of the tribes from 
the Sagné; as the Father for whom they asked was 
occupied elsewhere, they were promised that we 
would not fail to assist them in the Spring. 



82 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


(VOL. 21 


Le douziefme de May, Ie Capitaine de Tadouffac 
vint fommer noftre Reuerend Pere Superieur de fa 
promeffe, Ie Pe
e luy accorda tres-volontiers celuy 
de noftre Compagnie qu'il demandoit: fi toft que nos 
Chrefiiens de Sainét Iofeph eurent connoiffance de 
ce voyage, ils vindrent trouuer Ie Pere, Ie fuppliant 
de parler à Tadouffac, c'efi à dire, de faire des pre- 
fens pour attirer à Sainét Iofeph Ie reliqua de ces 
pauures peuples. Prie Monfieur noftre Capitaine, 
luy difoient-ils, qu'il parle auffi, peut-eftre qu'ils 
refpeéteront [184J fa parole, s'ils viennent demeurer 
auec nous, nous paderons de noftre cofié, c' eft à 
dire, nous leur ferons des prefens pour applanir la 
terre, fur Iaquelle ils placeront leurs cabanes, ou 
leurs maifons. Monfieur Ie Gouuerneur voiant que 
ce deffein tendoit à la gloire de noftre Seigneur, fit 
fon prefent auec lequel nous ioignifmes Ie noftre, 
pour les offrir felon l'inftruétion que nos Neophytes 
nous auoient donnée; car ils nous informerent par Ie 
menu, comme il falloit parler. Cela fait, Ie Pere 
monte dans vne barque, qui defcendoit à Tadouffac, 
les vents contraires Ie retarderent affés long temps 
en chemin, mais écoutons-Ie parler de fon voyage. 
Le Mercredy veille du tres-Sainét Sacrement, vn 
canot de Sauuages nous vint aborder, comme ie vy que 
les vents, qui fembloient vouloir faire quelque tréue 
auec nous, recommençoient leur guerre, ie m'em- 
barquay auec eux, promettant à nos François, que ie 
leur viendrois dire la fainéte :Meffe Ie iour fuiuant, 
fi Ie temps Ie permettoit; les Sauuages m'emmene- 
rent en vn lieu où il n'y auoit ny terre ny [185J bois; 
c'eftoit fur des roches, où ils auroient paffé la nuiét 
fans autre couuerture que Ie del, fi ie ne me futre 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


83 


On the twelfth of :May, the Captain of Tadoussac 
came to our Reverend Father Su perior to claim the 
fulfillment of his promise; the Father most willingly 
granted him the one of our Society for whom he 
asked. As soon as our Saint Joseph Christians were 
aware of this voyage, they came to the Father im- 
ploring him to speak to Tadoussac,- that is to say, 
to make presents in order to draw to Saint Joseph 
the remains of tbese poor tribes. "Beg Monsieur 
our Captain," said they to him, "to speak also,- 
perhaps they will respect [184J his word; if they 
come to dwell with us, we will speak on our own 
part,"-that is to say, " we will make them pres- 
ents,"-" that they may clear up the ground on 
which they shall place their cabins or their houses." 
:Nlonsieur the Governor, seeing that this plan tended 
to the glory of our Lord, made his present, with 
which we joined our own, that we might offer them 
according to the instructions given us by our N eo- 
phytes, for they informed us minutely how we should 
speak. This done, the Father entered a bark which 
was going down to Tadoussac, and contrary winds 
detained him for some time on the way; but let us 
bear him speak of his voyage. 
" On Wednesday, the eve of the most Holy Sacra- 
ment, the Savages came in a canoe to meet us; as I 
saw that the winds, which had seemed inclined to 
make a truce with us, were recommencing their war, 
I set out with them, promising our Frenchmen that 
I would come to say holy Mass for them on the fol- 
lowing day, if the weather permitted. The Savages 
conducted me to a place where there was neither 
soil nor [185] tree; it was on the rocks, where they 
would have passed the night with no other covering 



84 


LES RELATIOP:S DES JÉ;SUITES 


[YOLo 21 


trouué auec eux; ie les excite incontinent à chercher 
quelque mefchant lieu pour nous cabaner; en ayant 
fait rencontre, ils jettent leurs écorces fur cinq ou fix 
perches: & bien leur en prit, & à moy auffi, dit Ie 
Pere; car nous fufmes battus to ute la nuiét du vent 
& de la pIuïe, 
Le lendemain ne pouuant aborder Ia barque, ie 
paffay Ia grande fefie de nofire Seigneur dans cette 
maifon tres-pauure des biens de la terre, mais riche- 
ment pourueuë des biens du ciel: La meilleure par- 
tie des Sauuages eítoient Chrefiiens; ie leur parlay 
de l'honneur qu'on rendoit ce iour Ià au Fils de Dieu 
auec pompe & magnificence, dans toute l'Europe: 
Là-deffus ie dreffe vn petit Autel pour dire Ia fainéte 
Meffe; ils m'aidoient auec tant d'affeétion que i'en 
eftois tout attendry: voyans que Ie lieu où ie deuois 
marcher, eftoit tout humide & fangeux, ils jettent par 
terre vne robe pour me feruir de marchepied. I'efien- 
dy vne petite nappe de communion au trauers de Ia 
cabane, pour feparer les [186J fideles d'auec Ies infi- 
deIes: Là deffus ie commence Ia íainéte Meffe, non 
fans eftonnement, que Ie Dieu des dieux s'abaiffaft 
vne autre fois, dans vn lieu plus chetif que l'eftable 
de Bethleem; ces bonnes gens fe vouloient con- 
feffer & communier, mais ie Ies remis au Dimanche 
fuiuant.; les Sauuages qui n'eítoient pas baptifés, 
garderent vn profond filence pendant ce diuin Sacri- 
fice.; auffi ont-ils bonne enuie d'eftre Chreftiens. 
La tempefte no us retint deux iours & deux nuiéts 
prifonniers fous ccs écorces, plus ouuertes qu'vne 
porte cochere: Comme nous fongions à noftre depart, 
Ie fieur 11arfolet qui commando it la barque, m' efcri- 
nit ce peu de mots par vn ieune Sauuage, qui m'ap- 



1641-42] 


RELATION OF I640-4I 


85 


than the sky if I had not been with them. I urged 
them immediately to seek a place, however poor, 
where we might erect a cabin; having found one, 
they spread their sheets of bark on five or six poles, 
and well it was for them, and for me also," said the 
Father, " for we were beaten all night by the wind 
and the rain. 
"The next day, not being able to approach the 
bark, I spent the great feast of our Lord in this 
house,-very poor in worldly goods, but richly pro- 
vided with the blessings of heaven. The greater 
part of the Savages were Christians; I told them of 
the honor that was paid on that day to the Son of 
God, with pomp and magnificence, in the whole of 
Europe. Then I erected a little Altar that I might 
say holy :Mass; they aided me with so much affection 
that I was greatly moved thereby; on seeing that 
the place where I should walk was very damp and 
muddy, they threw a robe upon the ground to serve 
me for a carpet. I stretched a little altar cloth across 
the cabin, to separate the [186] faithful from the un- 
believers; then I began holy :Mass, not without aston- 
ishment that the God of gods should stoop once more 
to a place more wretched than the stable of Bethle- 
hem. These good people wished to confess and 
receive communion, but I put them off until the fol- 
lowing Sunday. The Savages who had not been 
baptized maintained a profound silence during this 
divine Sacrifice, and they also had a great desire to 
be Christians. 
"The tempest detained us two days and two 
nights, prisoners under this bark shelter, which was 
more open than a courtyard. As we were thinking 
of our departure, the sieur 1Iarso1et, 2 who com- 



86 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


porta la lettre J ' Ie Sauuage furnommé Boyer, eft arri- 
ué en noftre barque, il dit, qu'il vous eft venu querir 
tout exprés, pour vous mener à Tadouffac; il vous at- 
tend icy, faites luy, s'il vous plaift, vn petit mot de ref- 
ponfe; i'ay donné au prefent porteur vn peu de pain & 
de pruneaux, fçachant bien que vous en auiés befoin. 
Aiant receu ce petit mot, ie vais trouuer [187J la 
barque, Ie Sauuage qui eftoit venu au deuant de 
moy, me preffe d'entrer à Tadouffac, difant, que tous 
ceux qui eftoient là, fouhaitoient ardemment d'eftre 
inftruits: Ie m'y tranfporte dans les canots qui me 
vindrent querir; eftant arriué, ils me témoignerent 
toute forte de bonne volonté, ils m' accueillirent tous 
auec beaucoup de bienueillance; ie vifite les malades, 
ie trouue vne femme en danger, ie l'inftruy, ie la 
baptife, & Dieu l'enleue au del: Cltt"US vult, 1llzj"ere- 
tur, Dieu choifit ceux qui luy plaift; cette pauure 
femme attendoit ce paffeport pour entrer en Paradis. 
Si toft que ie fus arriué, pourfuit Ie Pere, les Sau- 
uages me baftirent vne maifon à leur mode, elle fut 
bien-toft dreffée, les ieunes hommes vont chercher 
des écorces, les fines & les femmes, des branches de 
fapin pour la tapiffer d'vn beau verd, les hommes 
plus âgés, en font la charpente, qui confifte en quel- 
ques perches qu'ils arrondirent en berceau; on iette 
là-deffus des écorces de frefne ou de pruffe; & voila 
vne Eglife & vne maifon bien-toft baftie: Au com- 
mencement ie fongeois, [188J où on coupperoit les 
écorces pour faire des feneftres: mais la maifon 
eftant faite, ie reconnu qu'il ne falloit point prendre 
cette peine; car il y auoit affés de iour & de lumiere 
fans feneftres, ie dreffe là dedans vn Autel, ie fay 
ma petite retraite tout auprés, & ie me trouue plus 



1641-42] 


RELA TIOl\,T OF I640-4I 


87 


manded the bark. wrote me these few words, and a 
young Savage brought me the letter: 'The Savage 
surnamed Boyer has come to our bark: he says he 
has come expressly for you, to take you to Tadous- 
sac. He awaits you here: send him, if you please, a 
word of reply. I have given to the bearer of this a 
little bread and some prunes, knowing well that you 
have need of them.' 
"\Vhen I received these few words, I went to 
[187J the bark; the Savage who had come to meet 
me urged my going to Tadoussac, saying that all 
who were there ardently desired to be instructed; I 
went there in the canoe which came for me. When 
I arrived, they manifested to me every sort of good 
will; they all received me with great friendliness. I 
visited the sick; I found a woman dangerously ill; I 
instructed and baptized her, and God took her to 
heaven. Cu/us vult, mÚerclur, God chooses whomso- 
ever he pleases. This poor woman was waiting for 
this passport that she might enter Paradise. 
" As soon as I had arrived, II continued the Father, 
" the Savages built me a house after their fashion. 
It was soon set up; the young men went to search 
for bark, the girls and the women for branches of fir, 
to line it with a beautiful green; the older men did 
the carpentry, which consisted of some poles that 
they bent to form a bower, and spread thereon the 
bark of ash or of spruce; and lo! a Church and a 
house were quickly built. In the beginning, I won- 
dered [188J where they would cut the bark, so as to 
make windows; but, when the house was finished, I 
saw that it was not necessary to take that trouble, 
for there was enough air and light without windows. 
I erected within an Altar; I made my little retreat 



8R 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


content, & auifi bien logé, que dans vn Louure; la 
porte íeule me mettoit en peine, car ie defirois la 
pouuoir fermer quand ie íortirois, les Sauuages qui ne 
íe íeruent que d'vne ecorce, ou d'vne peau pour fer- 
mer leurs cabanes, ne me íembloient pas affés bons 
charpëtiers pour fermer, mon palais; :ðlais Charles 
}Vleiachka
at, me monftra que fi; il s'en va chercher 
deux bouts de planche, les cloüe par eníemble, fait 
vne petite porte: i'auois auec moy vn cadenat pendu 
à vn petit íac, il trouue l'inuention de s'en feruir 
pour fermer ma maifon à clef: me voila donc logé 
comme vn petit Prince dans vn Palais, bafty en trois 
heures: comme ie craignois l'importunité des enfans, 
Ie Capitaine fait vn grand cry par les cabanes, & 
recommande à la ieuneffe de ne point entrer en ma 
demeure, que par ma permiffion: Ieuneffe, difoit-il, 
& [I 89J vous enfans, refpeétés noitre Pere, allés Ie 
vifiter: mais quand il priera, ou qu'il fera empefché, 
retirés vous fans bruit, portés luy du poiffon, quand 
vous en prendrés; les enfans me fuiuoient par tout, 
& m'appelloient leur Pere; ils m'apportoient de leur 
pefche, & ie leur donnois vn peu de galette; en vn 
mot, i'efiois en paix quand ie voulois, dans ma mai- 
fon d'écorce; car ie pris la liberté dés Ie premier 
commencement, de renuoyer tous ceux que ie vou- 
drois, quand i'auois quelque empefchement: encor 
que ce foit choíe inoüie, qu'vn Sauuage refufe la 
porte de ía cabane à vn autre Sauuage, perfonne 
neantmoins ne fe formalifoit de la façon d'agir du 
Pere: 11 faut dés voftre premiere entrée donner Ie 
ply que vous defirés à ces bonnes gens, capables de 
raifon, & ils ne s'efionnent pas que nous ayons des 
façons de faire differentes des leurs. 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


89 


hard by, and I was more content than in a Louvre, 
and as well lodged. The door alone troubled me, 
for I desired the means of fastening it when I went 
out; the Savages, who use only a piece of bark or a 
skin to close their cabins, did not seem to me suffi- 
ciently good carpenters to make my palace secure; 
but Charles 1Ieiachkawat showed me that they were. 
He went in search of two pieces of board, nailed 
them together, and made a little door; I had with 
me a padlock dangling from a small bag, and he dis- 
covered a way of using it to lock up Iny house. 
Here I am, then, lodged like a young Prince, in a 
Palace built in three hours. As I apprehended an- 
noyance from the children, the Captain made a great 
shout among the cabins and charged the young 
people not to enter my dwelling except with my 
permission: '0 youth!' said he, 'and [189J you, 0 
children! respect our Father. Go and visit him; 
but when he is praying, or is engaged, retire without 
noise; carry him fish, when you catch them.' The 
children followed me everywhere, and called me 
their Father; they brought me their fish, and I gave 
them a little biscuit; in a word, I was at peace in my 
house of bark, when I chose to be, for I took the 
liberty from the very beginning of sending away all 
whom I would, when I was occupied." Although 
it is an unheard-of thing for a Savage to refuse the 
door of his cabin to another Savage. nevertheless, no 
one took offense at the Father's manner of dealing 
with them. It is necessary from the very beginning 
to give the bent you desire to these simple people; 
they are reasonable, and are Dot surprised that our 
ways are different from theirs. 
" Some time after .my arrival, I made for the Sav- 



!)O 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


Quelque temps apres mon arriuée ie fis feftin auec 
les Sauuages d'vn bled d'Inde, qu'ils aimet beau- 
coup, ie l'auois fait apporter exprés dans la barque 
pour ce fujet, ie voulu parler pendãt ce feftin, mais 
les Sauuages [90 i.e., 190] ayans éuenté mon def- 
fein, me remirent en vn autre temps,' fur Ie foir Ie 
fieur :Marfolet & moy, voulans produire les prefens 
de 110nfieur Ie Gouuerneur & Ies noftres, Ie Capi- 
taine nous courut au deuant, & me parla en ces ter- 
meso Mon Pere, i1 n' eft pas befoin de nous faire des 
prefens pour nous inuiter à croire en Dieu, nous y 
fommes defia tous refolus: Ie Ciel eft vne affés grande 
recompenfe, nous ne defirons point d'eftre orgueiI- 
leux, ny nous vanter d'eftre honorés de vos prefens, 
pour toute parole fuffit, que vous nous enfeigniés Ie 
chemin du ciel: Sans entrer en d'autres difcours, 
tous ceux que vous voiés icy font dans la refolution 
de
prier, mais non pas de quitter leur pais pour mon- 
ter là haut; i1 apporta plufieurs raifons, pour faire 
voir qu'illeur eftoit important, de ne fe point retirer 
de Tadouffac: En effet, fon difcours eftoit bon, mais 
fondé fur les confiderations humaines & temporelles: 
Voila donc nos prefens arreftés, Charles MeiachKa
at, 
qui s'eft retiré, comme i'ay defia dit, de Tadouffac, 
pour viure en enfant de Dieu, à Sainét Iofeph, leur 
parla plufieurs fois tres-fortement, [191] mais par- 
deffus leur portée; car les hommes ne fe deprennent 
pas fi toft des interefts de Ia terre, quoy qu'elle ne 
foit qu'vn point, à comparaifon du ciel. Ah! ie voy 
bien, fit ce bon-homme, que Ie Diable vous arrefte 
icy, i1 vous donne des penfées, que vous ferés pau- 
ures, fi vous quittés voftre pais, il vous fait apprehen- 
der que les richeffes de la terre font de grande 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF r64o-4r 


91 


ages a feast of Indian corn, which they like exceed- 
ingly; I had had it brought in the bark expressly 
for this purpose. I meant to speak during this feast, 
but the Savages [90 i.e., 190J having discovered my 
intention, put me off until another time. Toward 
evening, when the sieur Marsolet and I wished to 
exhibit the presents of Monsieur the Governor and 
our own, the Captain ran to meet us, and spoke to 
me in these terms: ' My Father, there is no need of 
making us presents to invite us to believe in God; 
we have all before this resolved to do so. Heaven 
is a sufficiently great recompense; we do not wish to 
be proud, nor to boast of being honored by your 
presents; let it suffice for all speech that you teach 
us the way to heaven. Without entering upon fur- 
ther discussion, all those whom you see here have 
resolved to pray, but not to leave their country to 
ascend the river.' He brought forward many rea- 
sons to show that it was important to them, not to 
withdraw from Tadoussac. In fact, his remarks 
were good, but based upon human and temporal con- 
siderations. Thus, then, we were checked in mak- 
ing our presents. Charles Meiachkawat who had 
retired, as I have already said, from Tadoussac, that 
he might live as a child of God at Saint Joseph, 
spoke to them several times, very earnestly, [191] 
but above their comprehension, for men do not 
promptly lay aside the interests of the world, although 
that be but a point in comparison with heaven. 
, Ah! I see well,' said this good man, , that the Devil 
detains you here; he gives you notions that you will 
be poor if you abandon your country,-he makes 
you imagine that the riches of the earth are of great 
im portance; and how will all that help you at the 



92 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


importance; & que vous feruira tout cela à l'heure 
de Ia mort? il voit bien qu'il ne fçauroit vous rauir la 
voIonté que vous aués de croire en Dieu; il vous jet- 
tera dans l'impoffibiIité de I'executer, vous attachant 
en vn lieu, où vous ne pouués efire inftruits: Si toft 
que vous ne verrés plus Ie Pere, vous ne penferés 
plus à Dieu; qui vous confeillera dans vos difficu1tés? 
qui vous empefchera de retomber dans vos chants 
fuperfiitieux, & dans vos fefiins? Si queIqu'vn a vn 
tambour, qui prendra Ia hardieffe de luy ofier? Nous 
les auons tous jettés, dirés-vous? com me fi vous n'en 
pouuiés pas refaire d'autres: Moy mefme, encor que 
ie croye de tout mon cæur, il me femble que quand ie 
fuis long-temps abfent des [192J Peres, que mes 
vieilles idées veulent retourner; voila pourquoy, 
quand ie deurois efire Ie plus pauure du monde, ie ne 
les quitteray iamais. Ce bon Neophyte ne ceffoit 
matin & foir, & la nuiét mefme, de preffer fes Com- 
patriotes, de venir demeurer auprés de ceux qui enfei- 
gnent Ie chemin de falut. Les Sauuages preffés de 
ces raifons, ne conc1uoient pas qu'il fallufi monter à 
Kebec, mais qu'il efioit à propos que nous defcen- 
diffions à Tadouffac, pour y dreffer vne MaHon, afin 
de les infiruire: Les Nations voifines y viendront 
demeurer, difoient ils, elles embrafferont la foy fans 
contredit: :Mais ce païs eft fi miferable, qu'à peine y 
trouue-t'on de la terre pour leurs fepulcres, ce ne font 
que rochers, fteriles & affreux, fi neantmoins 
10n- 
fieur Ie general, & la Rotte de 
Ieffieurs de la N ou- 
uelle France, qui paffe tous les ans quelque mois à 
Tadouffac, y faifoit baítir vne maifon par leur ordre, 
comme :ßIonfieur du Pleffis Bochart auoit commencé, 
cela feroit du bien à tout fon équipage & aux pau- 



1641-42] 


R.E."LA TION OF r64o-4r 


93 


hour of death? He well knows that he cannot 
deprive you of the determination that you have to 
believe in God; but he will put you under the impos- 
sibility of carrying it into effect, by keeping you in 
a place where you cannot be instructed. As soon as 
you no longer see the Father, you will no longer 
think of God; who will counsel you in your difficul- 
ties? who will hinder you from falling back into your 
superstitious chants, and into your feasts? If any 
one have a drum, who will have the hardihood to 
take it from him? "'VV e have thrown them all 
away," you say-as if you could not make others! 
Although I myself believe with all my heart, yet it 
seems, when I am a long time absent from the [192] 
Fathers, that myoId ideas are inclined to return; 
this is why, even should I become the poorest crea- 
ture in the world, I would never leave them.' This 
good Neophyte did not cease morning and evening, 
and even at night, to urge his Tribesmen to come 
and dwell with those who teach the way of salva- 
tion. The Savages, when urged by these reasons, 
concluded, not that it was necessary to ascend to 
Kebec, but that it was expedient for us to descend 
to Tadoussac, and set up a House there, that we 
might instruct them. 'The neighboring Tribes 
will come and dwell there,' they said, , they will un- 
questionably embrace the faith. ' " But the country 
is so wretched, that soil is scarcely found therein for 
their graves; there are only barren and frightful 
rocks. If, nevertheless, 110nsieur the general, and 
the fleet of the Gentlemen of New France, which 
passes some months of every year at Tadoussac, 
should cause a house to be built there by their order, 
like the one Monsieur du Plessis Bochart 3 had com- 



94 


LES RELA TIO.NS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


ures Sauuages; car quelques Peres de nofire Compa- 
gnie fe pourroient retirer là, [193] depuis Ie Prin- 
temps iufques au depart des vaiffeaux, pour fecourir 
les François & les Sauuages dans leurs befoins fpiri- 
tuels; d'y demeurer pendant l'hyuer, c'efi chofe que 
ie ne confeillerois à aucun François; car les Sauuages 
s'en éloignent pendant ce temps-Ià, abandonnans leur 
rochers au froid, & à la neige, & aux glaces, dont on 
voioit encor quelques reliquats, cette année bien 
auant dans Ie mois de Iuin. Au refie, ie ne doute 
nullement, que fi la fureur des Hiroquois peut efire 
arrefiée, que tous les Sauuages de Tadouffac, du Sa- 
gné, & de plufieurs autres petites Nations, ne montent 
plus haut, fi on continuë de les fecourir; mais voions 
toutes les remarques du Pere. 
Pendant Ie feiour que i'ay fait Ià, ces bonnes gens, 
dit-il, m'appelloient ordinairement à leurs confeils, 
ils me communiquoient leurs petites affaires, ils m'in- 
uitoient à leurs fefiins, me traitant comme leur pere: 
lIs firent vn fefiin fur les foffes de leurs morts, incon- 
tinent apres mon arriuée, auquel ils emploierent 
huiét orignaux & dix cafiors; Ie Capitaine haran- 
guant, dit, que les ames des defunéts [194] prenoient 
grand plaifir à l' odeur de ces bonnes viandes, ie vou- 
Ius parler pour refuter cét erreur; mais ils me dirent, 
ne te mets pas en peine, ce n'efi pas cela qui nous 
empefchera de croire, nous allons bien-tofi jetter à 
bas nos vieilles façons de faire. 
Voicy comme i'emploiois Ie temps auec eux, dés Ie 
petit iour, qui efioit enuiron trois ou quatre heures du 
matin, ie m'en allois faire prier Dieu par les cabanes; 
puis ie difois la fainéte :Meffe, où tous les Chrefiiens 
qui efioient defcendus à Tadouffac, pour aller en 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


95 


menced, that would be a benefit to all their crews, 
and to the poor Savages; for some Fathers of our 
Society could withdraw there [193J in the Spring and 
remain until the departure of the vessels, so that 
they might aid the Frenchmen and the Savages in 
their spiritual needs. To dwell there during the 
winter is a thing I should never advise any French- 
man to do; for the Savages go away at that time, 
abandoning their rocks to the cold and the snow and 
the ice, of which some remains are still seen this 
year very late in the month of June. :Moreover, I 
do not doubt in the least that, if the fury of the Hi- 
roquois can be checked, all the Savages of Tadous- 
sac, and of the Sagné, and of many other small 
Tribes, will go farther up the river, if we continue 
to aid them. But let us hear all the observations 
of the Father. 
" During the stay I made there, these good peo- 
ple, II said he, " invited me ordinarily to their coun- 
cils; they imparted to me their little affairs; they 
asked me to their feasts, treating me as their father. 
They made a feast over the graves of their dead, im- 
mediately after my arrival. at which they served eight 
moose and ten beavers; the Captain, haranguing, 
said that the souls of the deceased [ I 94 J took 
great pleasure in the odor of these good viands. I 
wished to speak, in order to refute this error, but 
they said to me: ' Do not be troubled; this will not 
hinder our believing, and we are going soon to throw 
aside all of our old customs.' 
" See how I employed my time among them. At 
daybreak, which was about three or four o'clock in 
the morning, I went and offered up prayers to God 
in their cabins; then I said holy 
Iass, at which all 



9ð 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


traiéte, affiítoient tous les iours, íe confeffans & com- 
munians affés fouuent. La J\leffe eftans dite, ie me 
retirois à l'écart, hors Ie bruit des cabanes, pour vac- 
quer vn petit à moy mefme, i'aUois en fuitte vifiter 
les malades, puis i' affem blois les enfans pour leur 
faire Ie Catechifme, Ie Solei I ne regloit ny mon leuer, 
ny mon coucher, ny l'heure de mes repas: mais la 
feule commodité qui n'eftoit guere auantageufe ny 
fauorable au corps. 
Ie donnois vn temps apres Ie difner, tantoft aux 
hommes, & puis aux femmes [195J qui s'affembloient 
pour eftre inftruites, & fur Ie foir, apres m'eftre reti- 
ré quelque temps, ie faifois faire les prieres auec vne 
inftruétion publique, où les enfans rendoient compte 
deuant leurs peres & meres, de ce qu'ils auoient 
apris au Catechifme, cela les encourageoit, & confo- 
loit infiniment leurs parens. 
I'en ay veu de fi ardens à fe faire inftruire, qu'ils 
ont paffé les nuiéts auprés de nos Chreftiens, fe fai- 
fans dire & redire vne mefme chofe, pour la mettre 
dans leur memoire. I'interrogeois les plus âgés 
publiquement comme des enfans, & tous me ren- 
doient compte de ce que ie leur auois enfeigné: En 
vn mot, fi cette Million eft penible, eUe eft affaifon- 
née de beaucoup de confolation. 
Ie leur diíois certain iour, que quelques François 
m'auoient dit à mon depart de Kebec, que ie ferois 
d'eux tout ce que ie voudrois deuant la venuë des 
Vaiffeaux; mais qu'à l'abord des Nauires, on ne les 
pourroit plus retenir, qu'ils íeroiët yures de puis Ie 
matin iuíques au foir: L'vn d'eux prenant la parole, 
me dit auec bonne grace; Mon Pere, fay gageure 
auec [196J ceux qui t'ont dit cela, & nous te ferons 



1641-42] 


RELA TIOl\' OF I640-4I 


97 


the Christians who had come down to Tadoussac, in 
order to trade, were present eyery day,-not unfre- 
quently making confession and receiving commun- 
ion. 
Iass having been said, I withdrew apart, be- 
yond the noise of the cabins, in order to have a little 
time for myself; afterward I visited the sick, then I 
brought the children together, to teach them the 
Catechism. The Sun did not regulate my rising up, 
or my lying down, or the hour of my repasts, but 
convenience alone, which \vas hardly advantageous 
or favorable to my body. 
" I gave some time after dinner,-now to the men, 
and then to the women, [195] who assembled that they 
might be instructed; and toward evening, after hav- 
ing retired by myself for some time, I had prayers 
offered, with a public instruction, when the children 
gave an account before their fathers and mothers of 
what they had learned in the Catechism; this encour- 
aged them, and infinitely gratified their parents. 
" I have seen some of them so eager to be instructed 
that they have spent whole nights with our Christians 
waiting to be told and retold a single thing, that it 
might be fixed in their memories. I questioned pub- 
licly the most aged, as I did the children, and all 
gave me an account of what I had taught them. In 
a word, if this :Uission is arduous, it is enriched with 
much consolation. 
" On a certain day, I told them that some French- 
men had said to me, on my leaving Kebec, that I 
could do with them anything I would, before the 
arri val of the Vessels; but that on the landing of the 
Ships they could no longer be restrained,- that they 
would be intoxicated from morning until night. 
One of them, beginning to speak, said to me good- 



98 


LES R
LA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


gagner: car affurement nous ne nons enyurerons 
point, demeure auec nous iufques à la flotte, & nous 
t'apporterons toutes les boiffons que nous aurons, tu 
en feras l'Echanfon & Ie diftributeur, tu nous en 
verferas de tes mains, & nous ne pafferons point la 
mefure que tu nous donneras. 
Ie vy aborder icy quelques ieunes gens du Sagnê, 
qui n'auoient iamais veu de François; ils furent bien 
eftonnés de m'entendre parler leur Langue: Ils 
demandoient de quel pais i'eftois; on leur dit, que 
i'eftois de Kebec, & de leurs parens; mais ils n'en 
pouuoient rien croire: car nos barbes mettent vne 
difference quafi effentielle, pour ainfi dire, entre vn 
European & vn Sauuage: I'ay communiqué auec 
quelques famines, venuës des Terres, ce font gens 
fimples, & tres-capables de receuoir Ie bon grain, & 
la riche femence de l'Euangile. 
Eftant certain iour en vne affemblée, où les Sau- 
uages traitoient d'enuoyer la ieuneffe en marchan- 
dife vers ces Nations plus éloignées; ie me prefentay 
pour les accom pagner, afin de parler de Dieu à [197] 
ces pauures peuples: cela les mit vn peu en peine, 
car ils ne veulent pas que les François ayent con- 
noiffance de leur commerce, ny de ce qu'ils donnent 
à ces autres Sauuages pour leurs pelteries; & cela fe 
garde fi bien que perfonne ne Ie fçauroit découurir: 
Ils me faifoient les chemins horribles & épouuan- 
tables, comme ils Ie font en effet; mais ils en aug- 
mentoient l'horreur pour m'étonner, & pour me diuer- 
tir de mon deffein. Aiant reconnu leur crainte, 
ie me mets à difcourir des malheurs, & des biens 
eternels; les voiant touchés, ie leur demanday, s'ils 
feroient bien aifes que ces pauures peuples de leur 



1641-42] 


RELA TIO.N OF I640-4I 


99 


naturedly: c 
Iy Father, make a wager with [19 6 ] 
those who told thee that, and we will see that thou 
dost win, for assuredly we will not be intoxicated. 
Remain with us until the fleet comes, and we will 
bring thee all the liquors that we have,- thou shalt 
be the Cupbearer and the distributer of them; thou 
shalt pour them out for us with thine own hand, and 
we will not exceed the measure that thou shalt give 
us.' 
" I saw some young men of the Sagné here, who 
had never seen any Frenchmen; they were much 
astonished to hear me speak their own Language. 
They asked from what place I was; they were told 
that I was from Kebec, and was one of their rela- 
tives; but they could not believe it at all, for our 
beards put a difference, almost essential, so to speak, 
between a European and a Savage. I have had in- 
tercourse with some families from the Interior; they 
are simple people, and very capable of receiving the 
good grain and rich seed of the Gospel. 
" Being present, on a certain day, at a meeting 
where the Savages discussed sending their young 
men with merchandise to these more distant Tribes, 
I offered to accompany them, that I might speak of 
God to [197] those poor people; this somewhat 
troubled them, for they are unwilling that French- 
men should have a knowledge of their trade. and of 
what they give to other Savages for their furs, and 
this they keep so secret that no one is able to dis- 
cover it. They described to me the horrible and 
frightful roads, as they are, indeed; but they mag- 
nified the horror of them so as to astound me and 
divert me from my plan. Having perceived their 
apprehension, I began to discourse upon eternal woes 



100 


LES RELA TIOJ.VS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


connoiffance, tombaffent dans ces feux: lIs refpon- 
dent, que non. Illes faut donc inftruire, reparty-je, 
Qui Ie fera fi vous me fermés la porte? II eft vra y, 
dit l'vn des principaux, il faut qu'il foit permis au 
Pere d'aller par tout, il n'eft point chargé ny de cou- 
fieaux, ny de haches, ny d'autres marchandifes, c' eft 
noftre Pere, il nous aime, ie fuis d'auis qu'il aille où 
il voudra. Tous les autres s'y eftans accordés; vn 
Capitaine s'écria: Va où tu voudras. mon Pere, la 
porte t'eft ouuerte [198J dans toutes les Nations dont 
nous auons connoiffance, nous t'y porterons dans nos 
canots; mais demeure auec nous pour ce Printemps: 
car eftant venu pour nous inftruire, il ne faut pas 
nous quitter que nous ne fçachions les prieres, tu 
pourras aller vifiter ces bonnes gens vne autre année. 
Les voiant dans cette apprehenfion ie leur dis, qu'ils 
fçauoient bien mon deffein: II eft vray, fit l'vn des 
principaux, Ie Pere ne vient pas icy pour nos pelte- 
ries, il n'a aucune marchandife entre les mains, il 
nous aime, c'eft noftre Pere, il faut que la porte luy 
foit ouuerte par toutes les Nations dont nous auons 
connoiffance; Tous les autres furent de mefme auis; 
mais ils me prierent neantmoins de refter là: Ceux 
qui n'eftoient pas baptifés, me demanderent des 
Chreftiens pour les embarquer & pour parler de ma 
part à ces peuples. Ie mis des prefens entre les 
mains de deux Chreftiens pour inuiter deux Nations 
à venir prefter l'oreille aux bonnes nouuelles de 
l' Euangile ; Ils me renuoyerent d'autres prefens auec 
parole, que fi ie voulois m'arreíter à Tadouffac, qu'ils 
y viendroient, l'vn de nos Chreftiens de [199J Sainét 
Iofeph, frere d'vn Capitaine des Sauuages qui font 
de dans les Terres, l'inuitant de venir voir leurs 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


101 


and blessings; and, seeing them touched, I asked 
them if they would be content that these poor peo- 
ples of their acquaintance should fall into those fires. 
They answered, , Certainly not.' 'They must then be 
instructed,' I replied; 'who will do it, if you shut 
the door to me? ' 'It is true,' said one of the chiefs; 
, the Father must be permitted to go anywhere; he 
is not laden with knives, or hatchets, or any goods,- 
he is our Father, and he loves us; I am of opinion 
that he should go wherever he will.' All the others 
having agreed to this, a Captain exclaimed: 'Go 
whither thou wilt, my Father: the door is open to 
thee, [198] to all the Tribes with which we have 
acquaintance. We will take thee there in our canoes; 
but remain with us for this Spring, because, having 
come to instruct us, thou oughtst not to leave us until 
we have learned the prayers; thou canst go and visit 
these good people another year.' When I saw them 
thus afraid, I told them that they were well aware 
of my purpose. 'It is true,' said one of the chiefs; 
, the Father does not come here for our furs; he has 
no merchandise in his hands. He loves us, he is our 
Father; the door to all the Tribes with which we 
have acquaintance must be opened for him. I All the 
others were of the same opinion, but they, never- 
theless, besought me to remain there. Those who 
had not been baptized asked me for Christians who 
might embark with them, and speak in my place to 
these peoples. I put some presents into the hands 
of two Christians in order that they might invite two 
Tribes to come and lend ear to the good news of the 
Gospel. They sent back to me other presents, with 
a message that, if I would stay at Tadoussac, they 
would come there. One of our Christians of [199] 



102 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


champs, & leurs bleds, pour l'inciter à cultiuer la 
terre/ celuy-cy refpondit: Trauaillés courageufe- 
ment, priés les François de vous aider fortement à 
defricher la terre, fi toft que vous aurés des bleds, 
pour nous pouuoir fecourir, nous irons tous vous voir, 
& demeurer auprés de vous; mais nous craignons les 
Hiroquois. 
Quelque temps apres Charles MeiachKa
at alla de 
luy mefme, inuiter vne autre Nation, de croire en 
Dieu, il trouua ces gens fi bien difpofés, qu'il s' en 
eftonna; voicy comme il entra en difcours auec eux: 
comme ils auoient defia ouy parler de noftre creance, 
par Ie bruit qui en court par tout ces grands bois; ils 
luy demanderent s'il en auoit quelque connoiffance: 
Ouy dea, fit-iI, moy mefme ie fuis baptifé, & ie croy en 
celuy qui a fait Ie ciel & la terre; Inftruy donc, 
dirent-ils, ce pauure malade, que tu as vifité, & qui 
s'en va mourant, il l'aborde, luy parle du pouuoir de 
Dieu fur tous les hommes, du recours qu'il deuoit 
auoir en luy, Ie fait prier, [200] & demãder fecours à 
fa bonté J ' Le malade apres cette priere, fe trouue à 
demy guery, il fe leue, il marche, auec l'eftonnement 
de fes Compatriotes, Charles les voyant attentifs, 
leur parle de la creation du mõde, de l'Incarnation 
du Verbe; en vn mot, leur enfeigne ce qu'il a appris; 
& nous eftans las de parler, il fe retiroit feul, recitoit 
fon chapellet, & s'entretenoit en quelque fainéte pen- 
fée, fe pourmenant à l' écart; fans auoir égard fi fes 
gens s'en eftonnoient, ou non, imitant ce qu'il auoit 
veu faire au Pere, qui inftruifoit les Sauuages de 
Tadouffac. Si toft qu'il rentroit dans la cabane du 
malade, tous les autres Sauuages accouroient, ils fe 
mettoient en rond à l'entour de luy, dans vn profond 



1641-42] 


RELA T/ON OF I640-4I 


103 


Saint Joseph, brother to a Captain of the Savages who 
are in the Interior, inviting him to come and see 
their fields and their grain, so that he might incite 
him to cultivate the land, the latter responded: 
, VV ork courageously; beg the French to aid you 
energeticall y in clearing the land; as soon as you 
shall have grain, so that you can assist us, we will 
all go to see you and remain with you; but we fear 
the Hiroquois.' II 
Some time after this, Charles 
leiachka wat went, 
on his own account, to invite another Tribe to be- 
lieve in God; he found these people so well disposed 
that he was surprised. This is the way in which he 
entered upon the subject with them: as they had 
already heard of our faith, by the report of it which 
had spread throughout these great forests, they 
asked him if he had any knowledge of it: " Yes, 
indeed," said he; "I myself have been baptized, 
and I believe in him who made heaven and earth." 
" Then, II said they, "instruct this poor sick man 
whom thou hast visited, and who is dying." He 
approached him, spoke to him of the power of God 
over all men, and of the recourse he should have to 
him, and caused him to pray [200J and to ask aid of 
God's goodness. The sick man after this prayer was 
half cured; he arose and walked, to the astonish- 
ment of his Tribesmen. Charles, seeing them atten- 
tive, told them of the creation of the world, of the 
Incarnation of the '\Vord,-in short, he taught them 
w hat he had learned from us. Being weary of 
speaking, he went away alone, recited his rosary, 
and communed with himself in holy thoughts,- 
walking apart, regardless whether his people were 
astonished at it or not, imitating what he had seen 
done by the Father who instructed the Savages at 



104 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


filence, & luy les infiruifoit felon fa portée, ne fça- 
chant plus que dire, il fe mit à crier fi fort contre 
leurs fuperfiitions, contre leurs fefiins à tout man- 
ger, monftrant la brutalité de leurs mæurs, & benif- 
fant Dieu, d'auoir quitté fon ancienne barbarie, il 
dit tant de chofe contre 1'inutilité, & la folie de leurs 
tambours que tous ceux qui en auoient, les allerent 
tout foudainement querir, & les mirent en mille [201J 
pieces en fa prefence, cela l' eí tonna, & Ie confola 
fort: quand il fut de retour, il ne fçauoit fe compren- 
dre: NiKanis, me faifoit-il, ie les ay penfé amener icy 
auec moy; s'il euffent eu dequoy acheter des viures 
pour paffer l'hiuer, ils m'auroient fuiuy, tous ceux 
que i'ay veus font dans la refolution de fe faire in- 
firuire, & de quitter leurs anciennes coufiumes, pour 
embraffer les nofires. Enfin, ie n
 doute point que 
toutes ces pauures petites Nations qui font dans les 
bois, où nos Chrefiiens frequentent, ne fe viennent 
ranger au bercail de l'Eglife, fi on les peut fecourir. 
Pour conc1ufion, Ie Pere arriua à Tadouffac Ie 
fecond iour de Iuin, & en fut rappel1é Ie vingt-neuf, 
il baptifa quatorze ou quinze Sauuages, notamment 
des enfans & des perfonnes âgées; il en auroit bap- 
tifé bien dauantage, fi ces pauures gens euffent efié 
en vn lieu, où ils pourroient efire conferués en la 
foy, tout cela arriuera en fon temps: Le Dieu qui 
les a touchés, & qui les appelle, leur ouurira la porte, 
& leur donnera Ie moyen d' executer fes fainétes 
volontés. Ainfi foit-il. 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


105 


Tadoussac. As soon as he reëntered the cabin of the 
sick man, all the other Savages ran toward him; 
they placed themselves around him in a circle, in 
profound silence, and he instructed them according 
to his ability. No longer knowing what to say, he 
began so strongly to denounce their superstitions and 
their eat-all feasts,- showing the brutality of their 
manners, and blessing God that he had forsaken his 
old barbarism,-and said so many things against the 
uselessness and the folly of their drums, that all 
those who had these went immediately for them, 
and broke them into a thousand [201J pieces in his 
presence; this astonished him and greatly consoled 
him. When he came back, he did not know how to 
contain himself. "Nikanis, II said he to me, " I did 
think of bringing them here with me; if they had 
had anything with which to buy provisions to suffice 
for the winter, they would have followed me. All 
those whom I saw are resolved to be instructed, and 
to abandon their old customs in order to embrace 
ours. ' , Indeed, I do not dou bt that all those poor 
little Tribes that are in the woods to which our 
Christians resort, will come and place themselves 
within the fold of the Church, if they can be assisted. 
To conclude, the Father arrived at Tadoussac on 
the second day of June, and was recalled thence on 
the twenty-ninth. He baptized fourteen or fifteen 
Savages, principally children and aged persons; he 
would have baptized many more, if these poor peo- 
ple had been in a place where they could have been 
kept in the faith; all that will come in its own time. 
God, who has touched them and who calls them, 
will open to them a door and will gi ve them the 
means of accomplishing his holy will. Amen. 



106 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


[202J CHAPITRE XIII. 


DES BONNES ESPERANCES, & DES OBSTACLES, DE LA 
CONUERSION DES SAUUAGES. 


L A venuë des Vaiffeaux apporte ordinairement vn 
mefiange de ioie & de trifteffe; nous auons 
receu du contentement à la veuë des hommes 
de Meffieurs de Montreal, pource que leur deffein eft 
entierement à la gloire de noftre Seigneur, s'il reüffit. 
Ce contentement a receu du mefiange par Ie retarde- 
ment du fieur de Maifon-neufue qui commande ces 
hommes, lequel a relafché trois fois en France; & 
enfin eft arriué fi tard, qu'il ne fçauroit monter plus 
haut que Kebec pour cette année; & Dieu veüille que 
les Hiroquois ne ferment point les chemins, quand il 
fera queftion de paffer plus auant. Quiconque a pris 
vne forte refolution de trauailler pour Iefus-Chrift, 
doit aimer la Croix de Iefus-Chrift. Non ejl di.fczjm- 
Ius .fuper magijlrum. La Croix eft [203J l'arbre de 
vie, qui porte les fruiéts du Paradis, & folia lz"gni ad 
.fanitatem gentium. La conuerfion des Sauuages ne fe 
fera que par la Croix. 
Ce nous eft encor vne douce confolation, de voir 
que les longues fatigues de la mer n'ont point alteré 
la fanté des paffagers qui viennent groffir noftre 
petite Colonie; Ie Pere Iacques de la Place & noftre 
Frere Ambroife Broüet font arriués en bonne fanté, 
Dieu mercy. Vne ieune Damoifelle, qui n'auoit pas 
pour deux doubles de vie en France, à ce qu'on dit, 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


107 


[202J CHAPTER XIII. 


OF THE GOOD PROSPECTS FOR THE CONVERSIOK OF 
THE SAVAGES, AND OBSTACLES THERETO. 


T HE arrival of the Vessels ordinarily brings a 
mingling of joy and sorrow. "\Ve took satis- 
faction in seeing the men of the Gentlemen of 
Montreal, because their design is wholly for the 
glory of our Lord. should it succeed. This satisfac- 
tion was alloyed by the delay of the sieur de Maison- 
neufve, 4 who commands these men, and who put 
into port three times while in France; and, at last, 
he arrived so late that he was not able to ascend the 
river above Kebec this year. God grant that the 
Hiroquois may not shut up the roads, when it shall 
be a question of going farther forward. Vlhoever 
has made a strong resolution to work for Jesus 
Christ ought to love the Cross of Jesus Christ. Non 
est disâpulus super magistrlllll. The Cross is [203] the 
tree of life, which bears the fruits of Paradise, et 
folz"a ligni ad sflJlitatem gelltz"um. The conversion of 
the Savages will be made only by the Cross. 
It was however a welcome consolation to us to see 
that the long hardships of the voyage had not 
impaired the health of the passengers who came to 
increase our little Colony; Father Jacques de la 
Place 5 and our Brother Ambroise Brouet arrived in 
good health, thank God. A young Lad y, who had 
not in France two doubles' worth of life, as they 
say, lost more than half of it on the Vessel, so much 



108 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


en a perdu plus de la moitié dans Ie Vaiffeau, tant 
elle a fouffert; mais elle en a trouué à Kebec plus 
qu'elle n'en auoit embarqué à la Rochelle; les hom- 
mes de trauail arriuent ordinairement icy, Ie corps 
& la dent bien fain"e; & fi leur ame a quelque mala- 
die, elle ne tarde gueres à recouurer vne bonne fanté. 
L'air de la Nouuelle France eft tres-fain pour I'ame 
& pour Ie corps. On nous a dit, qu'il couroit vn 
bruit dans Paris, qu'on auoit mené en Canada, vn 
Vaiffeau tout chargé de filles, dont la vertu n'auoit 
I'approbation d'aucun Dodeur; c'eft vn faux bruit, 
i'ay [204J veu tous les Vaiffeaux, pas vn n'eftoit 
chargé de cette marchandife. Changeons de propos. 
11 n'y auoit pas long-temps que nos Autels auoient 
porté Ie deüi1 de la mort de :Monfieur Gand, quand la 
flotte a paru; cét homme de bien fecouroit fortement 
les Sauuages qui fe retirent à Sainét Iofeph: Leurs 
conuerfions Iuy touchoient les yeux, & gagnoient Ie 
cæur. II eft mort dans vn fublime exercice de pa- 
tience; en vn mot, i1 eft mort comme il auoit vefcu, 
c'eft à dire, en homme qui cherche Dieu auec verité. 
A peine auoit-on acheué les derniers deuoirs qui luy 
eftoient deubs, qu'il nous a fallu vne autre fois reue- 
ftir de noir nos Chappelles, pour faire Ie feruice de 
Monfieur Ie Commandeur de Sillery, Monfieur de 
:110ntmagny nofire Gouuerneur, :Monfieur Ie Cheua- 
lier de l'Ifle, & plufieurs autres, y affi1terent; Quel- 
ques Sauuages voulurent communier ce iour là, & 
tous prierent pour fon arne, n'ignorans pas les gran- 
des obligations qu'ils ont à ce fainét Homme, qui a 
jetté les fondemens de l'arreft de ces pauures peuples 
errans, en la Refidence de [205] Sainét Iofeph. 
Pleufi à Dieu, que ceux qui fuccederont à l'affeétion 



1{)41- 42] 


RELA TJON OF I640-4I 


109 


did she suffer; but she has found at Kebec more life 
than she had when she sailed from la Rochelle. The 
workmen generally arrive here with very sound bo- 
dies and teeth; and if their souls have any sickness, 
it is not long before they recover good health. The 
air of New France is very healthy for the soul and 
for the body. "\Ve have been told that it was 
reported in Paris, that there had sailed to Canada a 
Vessel laden with girls whose virtue had not the 
approval of any Doctor; it is a false report,- I have 
[204J seen all the Vessels, not one was laden with 
these wares. Let us change the subject. 
Our Altars had not been a long time in mourning 
for the death of :Monsieur Gand,6 when the fleet ap- 
peared. This man of wealth acti vel y aided the Sa v- 
ages who retired to Saint Joseph; their conversion 
moved him to tears, and won his heart. He died in 
a sublime practice of patience; in a word, he died as 
he had lived,-that is to say, as a man who seeks 
God in truth. Hardly had we finished the last serv- 
ices which were his due, when we were again obliged 
to drape our Chapels in black, that we might perform 
the service for :Monsieur the Commander de Sillery; 7 
:Monsieur de :Mon tmagn y, our Governor, :Monsieur the 
Chevalier de I'Isle, and many others were present 
thereat. Some Savages wished to receive commun- 
ion on that day, and all prayed for his soul, know- 
ing the great obligations under which they are to 
this holy Man, who has laid the foundations for the 
settlement of these wandering tribes, in the Resi- 
dence of [205J Saint Joseph. :Jlay it please God that 
those who shall profit by the kind interest of this 
noble 
ian may see a slight portion of the great re- 
ward that he is enjoying in heaven. His death had 



110 


LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


de ce grand Homme, viffent vn petit brin des gran- 
des recompenfes dont il ioüit dedans les cieux. Sa 
mort auoit arrefié Ie fecours qu'il nous donne: :Mais 
i'apprens que quelques perfonnes de merite n'ont 
pas voulu que ce grand ouurage ceffafi, fortifians nos 
bras qui s'alloient affoiblir par Ie decés de ceux qui 
meritent de porter Ie nom de vrais Peres des Chre- 
fiiens Sauuages. 
Monfieur Ie 
Iarquis de Gamache defunét, a merité 
Ie premier, de porter ce tiltre; car i1 a ouuert Ia pre- 
miere porte aux grandes 1Iiffions que nous auons en- 
treprifes en ces derniers confins du Monde. Son fils 
s'eftant donné à nofire Compagnie, finit fes iours 
l'an paffé, auec la couronne d'vne riche perfeue- 
ran[cJe en Ia vertu; ils voient main tenant tous deux, 
combien fainétement & vtilement ces grandes libera- 
lités font emploiées, & comme vne belle aétion faite 
dans les temps, fruétifie pour l'Eternité. 
On m'a fait voir vne deuotion, dont ie ne doute 
nUllement que Ie Sainét Efprit n'en foit l'autheur, 
la Charité eft induftrieufe; [206J vn homme de me- 
rite & de condition, veut prendre Ie foin d'vne famille 
de Sauuages, il defiine vne centaine d'efcus pour luy 
baftir vne petite maifon; il veut qu'on luy efcriue Ie 
nombre des perfonnes qui la compofent, & comme 
ils s'appellent: II demande ce qu'ils auront de befoin 
pour s'efiablir, Ia premiere année, & quel ordre il 
faut garder pour la faire fubfifier: Cette inuention 
ne vient point d' Archimede, mais d'vn plus grand 
efprit. Voila iufiement Ie moien de donner à Iefus- 
Chrifi tous les defcendans de cette famille, & nati 
natorll1JZ, & qzu" nafcentllr ab ilIÚ. Tous les enfans de 
leurs enfans, leurs neueux, & leurs arriere-neueux 



1641-42] 


RELA TJON OF I640-4I 


III 


checked the aid that he gave US; but I learn that 
some persons of merit are not willing that this great 
work should cease, and they are strengthening our 
hands which were being weakened by the d
cease of 
those who are worthy to bear the name of true 
Fathers of the Christian Savages. 
:Monsieur the Marquis de Gamache, 8 deceased, was 
the first who deserved to bear this title, for he opened 
the first door to the great 11issions that we have un- 
dertaken in these last limits of the VV orld. His son, 
having consecrated himself to our Society, ended his 
days last year, with the crown of a rich perseverance 
in virtue; both of them now see how devoutly and 
how usefully these great gifts have been employed, 
and how a noble action performed in time bears fruit 
for Eternity. 
An act of piety has been brought to my notice, of 
which, I do not at all doubt, the Holy Ghost was the 
inspirer; Charity is skillful. [206] A man of merit 
and of position wishes to provide for a family of Sav- 
ages; he has set apart a hundred écus to build them 
a small house, he wishes to be told the number of 
persons who compose this family, and how they are 
named; he asks what will be needed to establish 
them for the first year, and what rule must be ob- 
served for their support. This thought did not come 
from Archimedes, but from a higher spirit. This is 
precisely the way in which to give to Jesus Christ 
all the descendants of this family, ct lWti llatorum, et 
qui llascentur ab ittis. All the children of their chil- 
dren, their nephews, and their latest posterity will 
believe in God. He who converts a sinner in France, 
ordinarily converts but one man; he who attracts to 
the faith the head of a Savage family, attracts to it 



112 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


croiront en Dieu. Qui conuertit vn pecheur en 
France, ne conuertit ordinairement qu'vn homme: 
Qui appelle à la foy vn chef de famille Sauuage, y 
appelle tous fes defcendans; 'lifque ad tertz"am & quar- 
tam generatz'ollem, & 'i}/tra. Ie ne fçaurois croire que 
Dieu ne verfe toft ou tard, fes benediétions fur la 
famille de ceux qui procurent l'amplification de la 
famille de Iefus Chrift fon Fils. 
I'vferay de redites, fi ie fais mention [207J des 
grandes prieres, des grandes deuotions, des ieufnes, 
& des autres mortifications qui fe font en beaucoup 
d'enc:troits de l'Europe, pour la conuerfion de ces 
peuples, notãment en quelques Maifons de Filles 
fignalées en vertu. Ie fcay vn Monaftere, où depuis 
plufieurs années i1 y a incéfamment iour & nuiét, 
quelque Religieufe deuant Ie S. Sacrement, follici- 
tant ce Pain de vie, de fe faire donner à connoiftre, 
& de fe faire goufter aux pauures Sauuages. 11 s'eft 
trouué mefme dans la campagne vn Curé fi zelé pour 
Ie falut des pauures Sauuages, des Paroiffiens fi pleins 
de bonté, qu'ils ont fait trois proceffions generales, 
foixante & quinze ieufnes, cent vingt-quatre difcipli- 
nes, dix-huiét aumofnes, & quantité de prieres, pour 
la conuerfion de ces peuples; cela n' eft-il pas rauif- 
fant? Ie prie Ie grand Berger d'auoir vn foin tout 
particulier de ce bon Pafieur, & de fon trouppeau. 
Quand on me dit que les alnes les plus fainétes de la 
France, preffent les cieux pour pleuuoir des bene- 
diétions fur ces contrées. Quand nous voions de 
ieunes filles delicates, renfermées dans leurs Inaifons, 
fur les riues de [208] noftre grand fieuue, prendre 
part aux trauaux de ce nouueau Mõde, auec vne 
gaieté nompareille: Quand ie confìdere vne Dame, 


. 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


113 


all his descendants, usque ad tertz"alll et quartalll gene- 
ratiollem, et ultra. I can only believe that sooner or 
later God will pour his blessings upon the families of 
those who procure the extension of the family of 
Jesus Christ his Son. 
I shall make use of repetitions, if I lnention [207J 
the earnest prayers, devotions, fasts, and other self- 
denials which are made in many places in Europe, 
for the conversion of these peoples, and especially in 
the Houses of some Nuns remarkable for piety. I 
know a Monastery where for several years there has 
been, continually, day and night, some Nun before 
the Blessed Sacrament, soliciting this Bread of life to 
make itself known to the poor Savages, and enjoyed 
by them. There has been found, even in the coun- 
try, a Curé so zealous for the salvation of the poor 
Savages, and Parishioners so full of kindness, that 
they have made three general processions, and sev- 
enty-five fasts; they have taken the discipline a 
hundred and twenty-four times; they have offered 
eighteen almsgivings, and a great many prayers,- 
all for the conversion of these tribes; is not that 
delightful? I pray the great Shepherd to have a 
very special care of this good Pastor, and of his flock. 
When I am told that the most saintly souls of France 
urge heaven to pour out its blessings upon these 
countries; when we see delicate young girls, shut up 
in their houses on the banks of [208J our great river, 
taking part in the labors of this new "\V orld with 
unparalleled cheerfulness; when I observe a Lady, 
more than a thousand leagues distant from her own 
country, giving her means, and her life for these 
Barbarians, preferring a roof of bark to a ceiling of 
azure, taking more pleasure in conversing with Sav- 



114 


LES RELATIONS DES j'ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


éloignée de pI us de mille lieuës de fon païs, donner 
fes biens, & fa vie, pour ces Barbares, preferer vn 
toiét d'écorce à vn lambris d'azur, prendre plus de 
plaifir à conuerfer des Sauuages, qu'à vifiter les plus 
Grands de la Cour: Quand ie contemple vne ieune 
Damoifelle, à qui vn frimas donnoit Ie rheume en 
France, trauerfer l'Ocean, pour venir deffier nos 
grands hi uers: Et cela, pour dire trois bonnes paro- 
les à quelque Sauuage deuant fa mort, & en voir 
quelqu'vn de fes propres yeux, inuoquer Ie fainét 
N om de Dieu. Quand ie voy des Sauuages deuenus 
Predicateurs, & des mangeurs de chair humaine, 
s'approcher de la Table de Iefus-Chrifi, auec vne 
modefiie, & auec des fentimens de vrais enfans de 
Dieu; ie ne puis quafi douter, que Dieu qui a com- 
mencé Ie grand ouurage de la conuerfion de ces peu- 
pIes, ne Ie conduife à chef, malgré tous les obfiac1es 
qui s'y rencontrent. 
Ie racontois il n'y a pas long temps à [209] nos 
Sauuages Chrefiiens, les fecours que les ames d'élite 
leur donnoient, les grandes prieres qu'on faifoit 
pour eux en France; cela les toucha: 11ais comme 
ils paroiffent fort froids, ils n'en firent paroifire pour 
lors aucun femblant: Le lendemain deux des princi- 
paux me vindrent trouuer, & me dirent; NiKanis, 
nous nous fommes affemblés fur ce que tu nous 
difois hier, nous fommes pauures, nous n'auons pas 
Ie moyen de reconnoifire ceux qui nous affifient; 
mais nous auons conc1u que nous ieufnerions pour 
eux, & que nous prierions pour ceux qui prient tant 
Dieu pour nous: Nous ieufnerons fans boire ny man- 
ger tout Ie iour, difoient ces bons Neophytes,' cette 
refolution me toucha, & me fit dire: Que ceux qui 



1641-42] 


RELA TJON OF I640-4I 


115 


ages, than in visiting the greatest Nobles of the 
Court; when I behold a young Lady, to whom, in 
France, a white frost would give a cold, crossing the 
Ocean, and coming to defy our long winters, and 
that, in order to speak a few helpful words to some 
Savage before her death, and with her own eyes to 
see some of them invoke the sacred Name of God; 
when I see Savages become Preachers; and when I 
see eaters of human flesh draw near to the Table of 
Jesus Christ with modesty, and with the feelings of 
true children of God,- I can scarcely doubt that 
God, who has begun the great work of conversion 
among these tribes, will bring it to completion, not- 
withstanding all the obstacles that may be encoun- 
tered. 
N at long ago, I told [209J our Christian Savages 
of the aid that elect souls were giving them, and of 
the fervent prayers that were offered for them in 
France. That touched them; but, as they appear 
very cold, they seemed to take no notice of it then. 
The next day. two of the leading men came to me 
and said: "Nikanis, we have met together because 
of what thou didst tell us yesterday; we are poor, 
we have no way of repaying those who aid us; but 
we have decided that we will fast for them, and that 
we will pray for those who pray to God so much for 
us. \Ve shall fast, without eating or drinking all 
day long, II said these good Neophytes. This reso- 
lution moved me and made me say: "1Iay those 
who plead before divine Justice for the Savages gain 
their cause, through the favor of Jesus Christ. ,t 
I am neither a Prophet, nor the son of a Prophet, 
as says the proverb; but, seeing what God has done 
in one France and in the other for the salvation of 



114 


LES RELA TIONS DES j'ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


éloignée de plus de mille lieuës de fon païs, donner 
fes biens, & fa vie, pour ces Barbares, preferer vn 
toiét d'écorce à vn lambris d'azur, prendre plus de 
plaifir à conuerfer des Sauuages, qu'à vifiter les plus 
Grands de la Cour: Quand ie contemple vne ieune 
Damoifelle, à qui vn frimas donnoit Ie rheume en 
France, trauerfer l'Ocean, pour venir deffier nos 
grands hi uers: Et cela, pour dire trois bonnes paro- 
les à quelque Sauuage deuant fa mort, & en voir 
quelqu'vn de fes propres yeux, inuoquer Ie fainét 
N om de Dieu. Quand ie voy des Sauuages deuenus 
Predicateurs, & des mangeurs de chair humaine, 
s'approcher de la Table de Iefus-Chrift, auec vne 
modeftie, & auec des fentimens de vrais enfans de 
Dieu; ie ne puis quafi douter, que Dieu qui a com- 
mencé Ie grand ouurage de la conuerfion de ces peu- 
pIes, ne Ie conduife à chef, malgré tous les obftacles 
qui s'y rencontrent. 
Ie racontois il n'y a pas long temps à [209J nos 
Sauuages Chreftiens, les fecours que les ames d'élite 
leur donnoient, les grandes prieres qu'on faifoit 
pour eux en France; cela les toucha: :1lais comme 
ils paroiffent fort froids, ils n'en firent paroiftre pour 
lors aucun femblant: Le lendemain deux des princi- 
paux me vindrent trouuer, & me dirent; NiKanis, 
nous nous fommes affemblés fur ce que tu nous 
difois hier, nous fommes pauures, nous n'auons pas 
Ie moyen de reconnoiftre ceux qui nous affiftent; 
mais nous auons conclu que nous ieufnerions pour 
eux, & que nous prierions pour ceux qui prient tant 
Dieu pour nous: Nous ieufnerons fans boire ny man- 
ger tout Ie iour, difoient ces bons :N eophytes J . cette 
refolution me toucha, & me fit dire: Que ceux qui 



1641-42] 


RELATION OF I640-4E 


115 


ages, than in visiting the greatest Nobles of the 
Court; when I behold a young Lady, to whom, in 
France, a white frost would give a cold, crossing the 
Ocean, and coming to defy our long winters, and 
that, in order to speak a few helpful words to some 
Savage before her death, and with her own eyes to 
see some of them invoke the sacred Name of God; 
when I see Savages become Preachers; and when I 
see eaters of human flesh draw near to the Table of 
Jesus Christ with modesty, and with the feelings of 
true children of God,- I can scarcely doubt that 
God, who has begun the great work of conversion 
among these tribes, will bring it to completion, not- 
withstanding all the obstacles that may be encoun- 
tered. 
Not long ago, I told [209J our Christian Savages 
of the aid that elect souls were giving them, and of 
the fervent prayers that were offered for them in 
France. That touched them; but, as they appear 
very cold, they seemed to take no notice of it then. 
The next day, two of the leading men came to me 
and said: "Nikanis, we have met together because 
of what thou didst tell us yesterday; we are poor, 
we have no way of repaying those who aid us; but 
we have decided that we will fast for them, and that 
we will pray for those who pray to God so much for 
us. \Ve shall fast, without eating or drinking all 
day long," said these good Neophytes. This reso- 
lution moved me and made me say: "May those 
who plead before divine Justice for the Savages gain 
their cause, through the favor of Jesus Christ. " 
I am neither a Prophet, nor the son of a Prophet, 
as says the proverb; but, seeing what God has done 
in one France and in the other for the salvation of 



118 


LES RELA TIONS DES ./ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


dit des AttiKamegues, des KaK
azakhi, & des Berfia- 
mites, ceux-cy font des agneaux, & ceux la font 
farouches comme des loups: mais, habitabit lupus cum 
agno, & puer paruulus nzÌ1labit eos. 
En quatriefme lieu, apres Montreal: Video turbam 
1Jlag1lam quam dinumerare 1lemo poteSl ex omnibus gentz'- 
bus; Ie voy au Midy, & à l'Occident, vn grand nom- 
bre de Nations qui cultiuent la terre, qui font toutes 
fedentaires; mais qui iamais n'ont oüy parler de 
Iefus-Chrift, la porte nous eft fermée à to us ces 
peuples, par les Hiroquois, il n'y a dans toutes ces 
grandes eftenduës que les Hurons, & quelques autres 
Nations circonuoifines, à qui nous aions porté les 
bonnes nouuelles de l'Euangile; mais encor les faut- 
i1 aborder par des chemins horribles, par des longs 
détours, par des dangers continuels d'eftre boüillis, 
& roftis, & puis deuorés à belles dents par les mife- 
rabIes Hiroquois. Nous [212J ne perdons point cou- 
rage pour cela, nous croyons que Dieu fera iour dans 
ces tenebres, & que quelque grand Genie ouurira la 
porte à l'Euangile de Iefus-Chrift, dans ces vaftes 
cõtrées, & que l'ancienne France fauuera la vie à la 
N ouuelle, qui fe va perdre fi elle n' eft fortement, & 
promptement fecouruë, Ie commerce de ces Meffieurs, 
la Colonie des François, & la Religion qui commence 
à fiorir parmy les Sauuages font à bas, fi on ne 
dompte les Hiroquois. Cinquante Hiroquois font 
capables de faire quitter Ie païs à deux cens François, 
non pas s'ils combatoient de pied ferme; car en tel 
cas, cinquante François deferoient cinq cens Hiro- 
quois: fi les Hollandois ne leur donnoient point 
d'armes à feu. Si ces Barbares s'acharnët à nos 
François, iamais ils ne les laifferont dormir d'vn bon 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF r64o-4r 


119 


magnanz quam dinu1llerare nemo potcst ex omnibus genti- 
bus
', I see at the South and at the \Vest a great num- 
ber of Tribes that cultivate the land and that are 
entirely sedentary, but have never heard of Jesus 
Christ; the door to all these peoples has been shut 
against us by the Hiroquois. In all these vast tracts 
there are only the Hurons, and some other neighbor- 
ing Tribes, to whom we have carried the good news 
of the Gospel; but then we are obliged to approach 
them by horrible roads and long detours, and in con- 
tin ual danger of being boiled or roasted and then 
eagerly devoured by the wretched Hiroquois. \Ve 
[2 12] do not lose courage on account of this: we 
believe that God will make a light in this darkness, 
and that some powerful Spirit will open the door to 
the Gospel of Jesus Christ in these vast regions, and 
that old France will save the life of the New, which 
is going to be lost, unless it be vigorously and speed- 
ily succored; the trade of these Gentlemen, the 
French Colony, and the Religion which is beginning 
to flourish among the Savages, will be subverted, if 
the Hiroquois be not overcome. Fifty Hiroquois are 
capable of making two hundred Frenchmen leave the 
country,-not if they fought unflinchingly, for in 
that case fifty Frenchmen would rout five hundred 
Hiroquois, if the Dutch did not give them firearms. 
If these Barbarians become enraged at our French- 
men, they will never let them sleep soundly; a Hiro- 
quois will remain for two or three days without food 
behind a stump, fifty paces from your house, in 
order to slay the first person who shall fall into his 
ambush. If he be discovered, the forest serves him 
for an asylum; where a Frenchman would find only 
hindrance, a Savage will bound as lightly as a deer. 



. 


120 


LES RELATI01VS DES ./ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


fommeil, vn Hiroquois fe tiendra deux ou trois iour[s] 
fans manger derriere vne fouche, à cinquante pas de 
vofire maifon, pour maffacrer Ie premier qui tombera 
dans fes embufches; s'il efi découuert, les bois luy 
feruent d'azile, où vn François ne trouuera que de 
l'embaras, vn Sauuage y fautera lefiement comme vn 
cerf, Ie moien de refpirer dedans ces [213J preffes, fi 
on n'a ce peuple pour amy, ou fi on ne l'extermine, 
i1 faut abandonner à leur cruauté tant de bons N eo- 
phytes. i1 faut perdre tant de belles efperances, & 
voir rentrer les Demons dãs leur empire. 
Ie penfois finir ce chapitre; mais voicy quelques 
fragmens de lettre qui en feront vne bonne conc1u- 
fion. Ie party l' an paffé, des Trois Riuieres, dit Ie 
Pere Claude Pijart pour aller au païs des Nipifirini- 
ens, Dieu nous deliura des embufches des Hiroquois, 
& d'vn naufrage, où ie pen fay perdre la vie. les Sau- 
uages qui me conduifoient ayans mis Ie pied en l'eau 
dans vn torrent, contre Ie courant duquel ils traif- 
noient Ie canot qui me portoit, la rapidité de l' eau 
leur ayant fait quitter prife, ie me vy emporté par Ie 
torrent dans vne precipitation d' eau toute pleine 
d'horreur, i'efiois tout viuant à deux doigts de la 
mort, quand vn ieune Huron qui efioit refié feul 
au
c moy dans Ie canot, faute allegrement dans les 
boüillons d'eau, pouffe Ie canot hors du courant, & 
en fe fauuant luy-mefme, me fauua, & tout nofire 
petit bagage: I'ay encouru en cor d'autres dangers: 
defquels, Enpll'it me Do 11Zz'nus, & mater 11lifericordiæ. 
Dieu m'a [214J deliuré, & la :\lere de :Mifericorde. 
N ous auons fait quelques courfes cét hiuer, Dieu à 
recompenfé nos petits trauaux, de quelques ames 
predefiinées, qui fembloient n' attendre que Ie S. 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF r64o-4r 


121 


What opportunity is there to take breath, in such 
[2 13J anxieties? If we do not make friends with 
these people, or if they be not exterminated, we 
must abandon to their cruelty many good Neophytes; 
we must lose many beautiful hopes, and see the 
Demons reënter their empire. 
I thought to finish this chapter; but here are some 
fragments of a letter which will be a good conclusion. 
" I set out last year from the Three Rivers," says 
Father Claude Pijart, " to go to the country of the 
Nipisiriniens. God delivered us from the ambushes 
of the Hiroquois, and from a shipwreck, in which I 
thought I should lose my life; the Savages who were 
conducting me having stepped into the water, in a 
torrent against the current of which they were drag- 
ging the canoe that bore me, and the rapidity of the 
water having made them lose their hold, I saw my- 
self being carried away by the torrent into a precip- 
itous rush of water full of horror. I was, while full of 
life, at two finger-lengths from death, when a young 
Huron, who alone had remained with me in the canoe, 
sprang nimbly into the seething water, pushed the 
canoe out of the current, and, in escaping himself, 
saved me and all our little baggage. I encountered, 
besides, other dangers, from which Er-i'puit me DOl1n"- 
nus, et mater m-i'scricordz'æ. God [214J and the Mother 
of 
Iercy delivered me. We have made several jour- 
neys this winter; God has rewarded our humble 
labors with some predestined souls, that seemed only 
to await Holy Baptism that they might enter heaven. 
Our usual dwelling place during the winter has been 
in the country of the Hurons, which we left on the 
eighth of May, that we might go and instruct the 
Nipisiriniens. vVe say holy :Mass every day in their 



122 


LES RELA TIONS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


Bapteíme pour aller au ciel; nofire demeure ordi- 
naire pendant l'hiuer, à efté au païs des Hurons que 
nous auons quitté Ie huiétiefme de May, pour aller 
infiruire Ies Nipifiriniens, nous difons tous Ies jours 
la íainéte Meffe dans leurs cabanes, faifans vn petit 
retranchement, ou vne petite Chapelle de nos couuer- 
tures: ces peupies me femblent fort doux, bien mo- 
defies, & nullement fuperbes: ils font bons mefna- 
gers, Ies femmes ne fçauent que c'efi d'oifiueté, Ies 
ieufnes enfans vont à la pefche, fi tofi qu'ils font vn 
peu grandelets, Ia ieuneffe teímoigne vne gran de 
ardeur à apprendre ce que nous leur enfeignons de la 
doétrine de Iefus-Chriít, ils font fort portés à chan- 
ter, les hommes vont en traite, ou en marchandife 
vers d'autres Sauuages, du cofté du Nord, d'où ils 
rapportent quantité de pelteries, vn feul Sauuage 
ayant fa prouifion de bleds, auoit de refie trois cens 
cafiors, qui font Ia meilleure mõnoïe du païs, fi Dieu 
donne fa benediétion à ces pauures [2 I 5J gens, on 
aura befoin d'vn bon nombre de braues ouuriers, qui 
s'addonnent à la langue Algonquine, tous ces païs cy 
font remplis de gens qui la parlent, i'efpere que nos 
Nipifiriniens defcendront aux Trois Riuieres, auec 
Ie Pere Charles Raimbault, trouués-vous, s'il vous 
plaifi., en ces quartiers là, auec les nouueaux Chre- 
fiiens, leur exemple & leurs difcours auront beaucoup 
de pouuoir fur nos Sauuages. 
Dans vne autre lettre, vofire R. ne fçauroit croire 
combien elle feroit la bien-venuë en ces quartiers- 
cy, pour y affermir nos Miffions errantes; ie prie 
no fire Seigneur qu'il difpofe Ie tout à fa plus gran de 
gloire. Ie n 'ay rien de nouueau depuis ma derniere, 
fin on que Ie Pere Paul Ragueneau, & Ie Pere Me- 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF r64o-4r 


123 


cabins, making a little recess, or a little Chapel, with 
our blankets. These peoples seem to me very gen- 
tle, truly modest, and in no wise proud; they are very 
thrifty,-the women do not know what idleness is, 
and the children go to fish as soon as they are some- 
what grown. The young people show a great eager- 
ness to learn what we teach them of the doctrine of 
Jesus Christ, and they are much given to singing. 
The men go to trade or barter with other Savages in 
the North, whence they bring back a quantity of 
furs; one Savage alone, having his supply of grain, 
had besides three hundred beavers, which are the 
best money of the country. If God give his blessing 
to these poor [2 15] peoples, we shall need a goodly 
number of brave workers, who will devote them- 
selves to the Algonquin tongue; all these regions 
are filled with people who speak it. I hope that our 
Nipisiriniens will go down to the Three Rivers with 
Father Charles Raimbault; I beg you to be present, 
if you please, with the new Christians, in that neigh- 
borhood; their example and their conversation will 
have much influence with our Savages." 
From another letter: "Your Reverence can hard- 
1 y believe how welcome you would be in these parts, 
for the establishing of our itinerant Missions; I pray 
our Lord that he may order all things to his great- 
est glory. I have no news since my last letter, ex- 
cept that Father Paul Ragueneau and Father Menard 
arrived here in good health, on the day preceding 
the Assumption; in the evening, prayers were 
chanted in our Chapel of bark, in Latin, in Algon- 
quin, and in Huron. \Vhat you have been told con- 
cerning the men who are beyond the Sagné is true; 
our Nipisiriniens, returning not long since from the 



124 


LES RELA TIONS DES ./ÉSUITES 


(VOL. 21 


nard, font arriués icy en bonne fanté, la veille de 
l' Affomption; Ie foir les prieres furent chantées en 
noftre Chapelle d'écorce, en Latin, en Algonquin, & 
en Huron/ Ce qu'on vous a dit des hommes qui font 
au dela du Sagné, eft veritable, nos Nipifiriniens 
retournés depuis peu des Kyrifiin
ns, qui trafiquent 
en la mer du Nord, nous affeurent qu'ils ont trouué 
quatre cens hommes qui parlent tous Montagnais, 
cela monte à quatre mille ames. 
[216] Voicy deux mots du Pere Pierre Pijart; ray 
efté en 1\Iiffion à la Nation du petun: i'ay veu deux 
Bourgades qui parloient Algonquin, en l'vne def- 
quelles les hommes vont tous nuds fans referue; il 
eft affeuré que les peuples de la Nation de feu, 
parlent auffi Algonquin, & vne autre Nation qu'on 
appelle A
anchronons, voila vne belle efienduë pour 
nos Peres, qui apprendront cette langue, voila de- 
quoy animer leur zele: vn prifonnier de la Nation 
de feu, ma dit, qu'il auoit appris en fon païs, qu'on 
trouuoit certains peuples au l\Iydy de ces contrées, 
qui femoient & recüeilloient deux fois 1'année, du 
bled d'lnde, & que la derniere recolte fe faifoit au 
mois de Decembre, ce font les paroles du Pere. 
Quiconque arreítera ou domptera la fureur des 
Hiroquois, ou qui fera reüffir les moiens de les gai- 
gner, ouurira la porte à lefus-Chriít dans toutes ces 
contreés, c'eft vn grand honneur que Dieu fait aux 
hommes de les rendre participans des trauaux de la 
Croix de fon Fils, en la conuerfion des ames. 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF r64o-4r 


125 


Kyristinouns,lO who trade on the Northern sea, as- 
sured us that they found four hundred men who all 
speak Montagnais,-that is equivalent to four thou- 
sand souls." 
[2 I 6] Here are a few words from Father Pierre 
Pijart: "I have been on a Mission to the tobacco 
Nation; I found two Yillages where Algonquin was 
spoken, in one of which the men go entirely nude. 
It is asserted that the people of the fire Nation, and 
of another that is called the A wanchronon Nation, 
also speak Algonquin; here is a fine extent of coun- 
try for our Fathers who shall learn this language,- 
here is indeed something to animate their zeal. A 
prisoner belonging to the fire Nation told me that he 
had heard, in his own country, that there were found 
certain people at the South of those lands, who 
planted and harvested Indian corn twice a year, and 
that the last harvest was made in the month of 
December. II These are the Father's own words. 
\Vhoever shall check or vanquish the fury of the 
Hiroquois, or shall succeed in means of winning them, 
will open the door to Jesus Christ in all these regions 
It is a great honor that God grants to men, to make 
them partakers in the labors of the Cross of his Son, 
for the conversion of souls. 



126 LES RELATIONS DES .fBSUITES [VOL. 21 


Relation de ce qvi s'eft pafsé de plus remar- 
quable en Ia Mifsion des Peres de Ia Com- 
pagnie de Iefus avx Hvrons pays de Ia 
Nouuelle France, depuis Ie mois de 
I uin de I' année mil fix cens quarante, 
iufques au mois de Iuin de l' an- 
née 1641. Addressee au R. P. 
Iacques Dinet Prouincial de 
Ia Compo de I E S V S, en 
la Prouince de France. 
M. DC. XLII. 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I64 0 -4 I 


127 


Relation of the most remarkable things that oc- 
curred in the Mission of the Fathers of the 
Society of Jesus in the Huron country of 
New France, from the month of June in the 
year one thousand six hundred and forty, 
to the month of June in the year 
16 4 1 . Addressed to the Reverend 
Father Jacques Dinet, Provincial 
of the Society of JESUS, in 
the Province 0 f France. 
M. DC. XLII. 



128 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


PAX CHRISTI. 
M ON R. PERE, 
La Relation de cette année que i'enuoye à 
vofire Reuerence, luy fera voir comme nos 
Peres qui eftoient icy, ont el1é difiribuez en fept 
Miffions, où ils ont prefché & pub1ié l'Euangile à 
feize ou dix-fept mille Barbares. Si les fouffrances 
endurées dans vn fi noble employ, font la mefure des 
efperances que nous deuons auoir de la conuerfion de 
ces peuples; nous auons occafion de croire qu'en fin 
de ces pauures infideles nous en ferons de bons Chre- 
{Hens: & quelque refiftance que la terre & l'enfer 
apportent aux defIeins que nous auons, nous n'en 
perdrons pas vn poind: de noftre confiance. Le fang 
de Iefus-Chrifi qui a efié refpandu pour eux auffi [4] 
bien que pour nous, y fera en fin adoré: & non feule- 
ment les Hurons, mais quantité de nations encore 
plus peuplées qui nous enuironnent quafi de toutes 
parts, s'afIujettiront à ce grand Roy de gloire, à qui 
toutes les nations de la terre doiuent en fin rendre 
hommage. Ce font ces feules efperances qui foufiien- 
nent tous nos trauaux; & afin qu'elles ne foient pas 
vaines, ie fupplie V. R. de nous affifier de fes SSe & 
prieres, 


De V. R. 
De la refidence fixe de 
S Marie aux Hurons, 
ce 19. de May 1641. 


Tres-humble & tres-obeïf- 
fant feruiteur en 
. s. 
H L'ALEMANT. 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


129 


PAX CHRISTI. 


M y REVEREND FATHER, 
The Relation of this year, that I send to 
your Reverence, will show you how our Fa- 
thers who were here, have been distributed in seven 
Missions, in which they have preached and published 
the Gospel to sixteen or seventeen thousand Bar- 
barians. If the sufferings endured in so noble an 
employment are a measure of the hopes which we 
should entertain for the conversion of these tribes, 
we have reason to believe that at last we shall make 
good Christians of these poor unbelievers: and what- 
ever resistance earth and hell may bring to the de- 
signs that we have, ,ve shall not for that lose a jot of 
our confidence. The blood of Jesus Christ, which 
was shed for them as [4] well as for us, shall be at 
last adored there; and not only the Hurons, but a 
multitude of nations still more populous, which sur- 
round us on almost all sides, will submit themselves 
to this great King of glory, to whom all the nations 
of the earth shall at last render homage. It is these 
hopes alone that sustain all our labors; and to the 
end that they be not vain, I supplicate Your Rever- 
ence to assist us by your Holy Sacrifices and prayers. 
Your Reverence's 
From the permanent 
residence of Ste. Marie 
among the Hurons, this 
19th of May, 1641. 


Very humble and very 
obedient servant in Our 
Lord, 
H. L'ALE1IANT. 



130 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


[5J CHAPITRE 1. 


DE L'ESTAT GEKERAL DU CHRISTIAN"ISl\IE EN CES 
CONTRÉES. 


N OS Barbares ayans iouy cette année d'vne par- 
faite fanté, & des fruiéts d'vne belle & heu- 
reufe recolte, ne nous ont pas rebuté dans nos 
vifites, ny fait fi mauuais vifage que la precedente. 
Ie ne fçay toutesfois ce que nous leur deuons plufiofi 
fouhaitter, l'aduerfité ou la profperité; la maladie, ou 
la fanté. Car fi les fains ne deuiennent pas plus fages 
au temps de l'vne que de l'autre; quelques malades 
au moins durant les maladies, nous donnent en mou- 
rant, l'afIeurance, ou du moins l'efperance de leur 
bonheur. 
Depuis Ie mois de ruin de I 'année precedente, iuf- 
ques au mois de N ouembre enfuiuant, nofire occupa- 
tion a [6J efié, d'entretenir ce peu de Chrefiiens qui 
nous efioient refiez apres la bourafque de l'hyuer pre- 
cedent: de faire quelques courfes aux :Miffions en- 
commencees; & nous difpofer aux :Miffions de l'hyuer. 
Sur Ie milieu de l' Automne, ayant confideré nos 
forces en la langue, & ce qu'il y auoit à faire aupres 
des peuples, aufquels on auoit par Ie paffé publié 
l'Euãgile; nous troU11âmes que fans faire tort aux 
cinq ßIiffions de l'année precedente, nous pouuions 
en entreprendre deux nouuelles: l'vne de la langue 
Huronne, & l'autre de l' Algonquine; & celle-cy à la 
faueur de deux de nos Peres nouuellement arriuez 
de Quebeq, & enuoyez à ce deffein. 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF r640-4I 


131 


[5J CHAPTER 1. 


OF THE GENERAL CONDITION OF CHRISTIANITY IN 
THESE COUNTRIES. 


O UR Barbarians having enjoyed this year perfect 
health, and the fruits of a great and prosper- 
ous harvest, have not rebuffed us in our visits, 
nor cast so black looks upon us as in the preceding 
year. I do not know, nevertheless, which we ought 
rather to wish them, - ad versi ty, or prosperity; sick- 
ness, or health. For, if the healthy do not become 
wiser in time by one than by the other, some sick 
ones, at least during their maladies, give us in dying 
the assurance-or, at all events, the hope-of their 
happiness. 
From the month of June in the preceding year, 
until the month of November following, our occupa- 
tion [6J was to keep together the few Christians who 
had remained with us after the violent storm of the 
preceding winter; to make some trips to the Missions 
already begun; and to prepare ourselves for the 
:Missions of the winter. 
Towards the middle of Autumn,- having consid- 
ered our proficiency in the language, and what there 
was to do among the peoples to whom we had 
proclaimed the Gospel in the past,-we found that, 
without doing harm to the five :Missions of the pre- 
ceding year, we could undertake two new ones,-one 
in the Huron language, and one in the Algonquin; 
and this last, with the help of two of our Fathers 



132 


LES RELA TIOJ\TS DES .IÉSUITES 


[YOLo 21 


N ous voila donc incontinent apres diftribuez en 
fept miffions, où on a prefché & publié Ie Royaume 
de Dieu à feize ou dix fept mille Barbares de diuer- 
fes nations. I1 n'y a eu bourg ny bourgade, cabane 
ny feu où on a pû aborder, où on ne fe foit acquité 
de fa fonétion. Et fi nous n'y voyons tant de con- 
uerfions que nous defirerions, au moins [7] auons 
nous la confolation de trouuer dans les efprits beau- 
coup plus de difpofition à Ia Foy que les années pre- 
cedentes. 
Cependant c'eft vne chofe pitoyable que de voir 
les idées & les imaginations dans lefquelles Ie malin 
efprit entretiêt encore ces pauures peuples. Les vns 
entrent dans des frayeurs auffi toft qu'ils nous voy- 
ent, & demandent fi Ia maladie ne reuient point auec 
nous: les autres apres nous auoir entendu n'ont 
autre replique finon qu'ils n'ont point d'efprit. 
Quelques vns deuant que de s'engager, demandent fi 
on leur donne affeurance qu'ils vieilliront: d'autres 
font inftance que nous entreprenions donc tout en- 
femble la guerifon de tous les malades, puis que nous 
defendons les feftins & les danfes de ceremonie, qui 
font les remedes du pays. D'autres demandent de- 
quoy ils viuront, & à quoy ils pafferont leur temps, 
puis qu'on leur defend de defrober, & d entretenir 
les femmes. D'autres ne ceffent de protefter qu'ils 
croyêt, auec mille complaifances & cajolleries, qui 
n'aboutiffent [8] en fin qu'à demander ou defrober 
quelque chofe fils peuuent. 
II s'en trouue qui efcoutent ferieufement, & con- 
fen tent volontiers à tout, demeurans cõuaincus de la 
verité; mais prefIez d'en venir à 1 'execution, & de 
quitter toutes leurs fuperftitions; & particulierement 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


133 


recently arrived from Quebeq, and sent for this pur- 
pose. 
Behold us then, immediately after, distributed 
among seven missions, where we preached and pub- 
lished the Kingdom of God to sixteen or seventeen 
thousand Barbarians of divers tribes. There was no 
village or hamlet, cabin or fireside, to which we could 
approach, where we did not discharge our duty. 
And if we do not see in them so many conversions 
as we might desire, at least [7J we have the consola- 
tion of finding in their minds much more inclination 
to the Faith than in preceding years. 
Notwithstanding, it is a pitiable thing to see the 
ideas and imaginations in which the evil spirit still 
keeps these poor tribes. Some of them are seized 
with fright as soon as they see us, and ask if the 
malady does not return with us; others, after having 
heard us, have no reply except that they have no 
mind. Some, before pledging themselves, ask if we 
will assure them that they shall grow old; others en- 
treat that we should then undertake wholly the heal- 
ing of all the sick, since we forbid the feasts and the 
ceremonious dances, which are the remedies of the 
country; others ask upon what they shall live, and 
how they shall spend their time, since they are for- 
bidden to steal, and to cherish the women; others do 
not cease to protest that they believe, with a thou- 
sand politenesses and flatteries, which end [8] at last 
only in asking for something or in stealing it if 
they can. 
There are some who listen seriously and consent 
willingly to everything, remaining convinced of the 
truth; but on being urged to come to the performance 
of it, and to forsake all their superstitions,- and 



134 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


leurs AafK
andiKs ou diables familiers, vrais ou ima- 
ginaires, perdent courage, ne pouuans fe refoudre à 
quitter ce que depuis tant de fiec1es ils fe font per- 
fuadez eftre Ie principe de leur conferuation & de celle 
de leur fami11e, & la fource de tout leur bon-heur. 
On trouue à l'ordinaire parmy cette pouffiere quel- 
que perle, ie veux dire quelque ame predeftinée, qui 
profite de nos vifites. Mais Ie nombre en eft en 
effet tel que celuy des predeftinez, petit en comparai- 
fon des autres. Le nombre de ceux qui ont efté 
baptifez cette année eft d'vne centaine, dont plu- 
fieurs font morts heureufement: fans parler de plu- 
fieurs petits enfans decedez qui auoient efté baptifez 
les années precedentes. 
[9J Apres tout, nous voyons icy au milieu de cette 
grande Barbarie, vne petite Eglife cõpofée d'vne 
trentaine de François, & d'vne cinquantaine de Sau- 
uages faifans profeffion, affiftez & fauorifez continu- 
e11ement d'vne Prouidëce de Dieu to ute fpeciale; 
nous ne pouuõs penfer autre chofe, finon que c'eft 
vn peu de leuain qui fe forme petit à petit, qui en 
fon temps produira fon effete 
Or en quelque temps que ce foit qu'il plaife à 
Dieu donner benediétion pleine & entiere à cet ou- 
urage; par OÙ il faudra cõmencer, ce fera d'arrefter 
& affermir les mariages qui n'õt icy aucune ftabilité, 
& fe rõpent plus facilemët que les promefIes que les 
enfans fe font en Frãce les vns aux autres. Et d'au- 
tant qu'vne des principales caufes de leur difIolutiõ, 
vient de ce que quelqu'vne des parties ne peut four- 
nir à l'autre fes befoins & neceffitez, ce qui fait 
qu' elle les va chercher ai11eurs; l'vn des plus puif- 
fans moyens de les lier auec indifIolubilité fera de 
les affifter en telle rencontre. 



1641-42] 


RELA TIO.f..' OF I640-4I 


135 


especially their Aaskwandiks or familiar demons, real 
or imaginary,- they lose courage, not being able to 
resolve on abandoning that which for so many ages 
they have persuaded themselves to be essential to 
their preservation and that of their families, and the 
source of all their good fortune. 
"\Ve find generally in this dust some pearl, I mean 
some predestined soul, which profits by our visits. 
But the number of these is indeed like that of the 
elect,-small in comparison with the others. The 
number of those who have been baptized this year 
is about a hundred, of whom several have died hap- 
pily,-without speaking of many little children 
deceased, who had been baptized in preceding years. 
[9] After all, we find here, in the midst of this 
great Barbarism, a little Church composed of about 
thirty Frenchmen, and about fifty Savages making 
profession, assisted and continually favored by a 
very special Providence of God: we can believe no 
other thing, but that it is a bit of leaven which, little 
by little, is growing, and which in its own time will 
produce its effect. 
Now-in whatever time it may be that it please 
God to give full and entire blessing to this work- 
the way by which we must begin will be to fix and 
confirm the marriages, which have here no stability, 
and are broken more easily than the promises which 
children make to one another in France. And,- in- 
asmuch as one of the principal causes of their disso- 
lution comes from this, that one of the parties is not 
able to supply the needs and necessities of the other, 
which causes that other to go and seek them else- 
where,-one of the most effective means of binding 
them indissolubly will be to assist them in such a case. 



136 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


Ie ne fçaurois affez admirer la Prouidence diuine, 
ny affez adorer fa bõté & [10] mifericorde, en ce 
qu'ayant infinué vn petit mot de ce fuiet, aux prece- 
dentes Relatiõs, il luy a pleu fufciter tout plein de 
fainétes ames, dont la charité a furmonté toutes nos 
efperances: en forte que nous auons affeurance, au 
moins pour quelque temps, qu'il ne tiendra pas aux 
moyens d'affifier plufieurs de ces pauures barbares, 
que leurs mariages ne foient redus fiables. C'efi à 
quoy moyennant cette affifiance, nous auons com- 
mencé à trauailler. 
Quelques perfonnes de merite ne fe contentant pas 
d'vne aumofne paffagere, ont refolu de faire des fon- 
dations perpetuelles de ces dix ou douze efcus, auec 
lefquels ie difois qu'on pouuoit affermir chacun de 
ces mariages; afin qu'ils y foient continuellement 
appliquez par l'ordre des Peres de noftre Compagnie, 
tandis que la Foy fe trouuera fermemet enracinée 
dans les conjoints, & dans les maifons: & au cas 
qu'elle vint à manquer en eux, qu'on la puiffe proui- 
gner dans d' autres familles qui fe Chrifiianiferont; 
à quoy Ie fonds de telle rente fera defiiné. Ce qui 
eft en [I I] effet efiablir & entretenir Ie Chrifiianifme 
dans ces contrées, par vne deuotion auffi iudicieufe 
que charitable. 
Entre ceux qui fe font portez à cette charité, s'en 
font trouuez quelques vns, à ce que i'apprens, defga- 
gez du mariage & fans enfans; ou mefme qui ont 
toufiours vefcu libres de ce lien, qui ont creu qu'ils 
pouuoient icy acquerir des enfans pour Dieu & pour 
eux, par cette voye de fainéte adoption, & pour per- 
petuer leur nom en cette terre d'Eglife naiffante, 
lors qu'il fe perd en la leur. Et faire que par ce 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF z640-4Z 


137 


I cannot sufficiently admire divine Providence, nor 
sufficiently adore his goodness and [10] mercy,- 
since, having slightly alluded to this subject in pre- 
ceding Relations, it has pleased him to quicken many 
holy souls, whose charity has surpassed all our hopes; 
so that we have assurance, at least for some time, 
that means will not be lacking to assist many of these 
poor barbarians, that their marriages may be rendered 
stable. It is for this purpose, with the help of this 
aid, that we have begun to work. 
Certain persons of merit, not being contented with 
a temporary alms, have resolved to make perpetual 
foundations of the ten or twelve écus with which I 
said that each of these marriages could be established; 
so that they may be continually thus employed, by 
order of the Fathers of our Society, while the Faith 
shall be firmly rooted in these husbands and wives and 
in their families; and in case it happen to be lacking 
in them, that we may propagate it in other families 
which shall be Christianized; the principal for such 
income shall be set aside for this. This is in [I [] 
truth to establish and maintain Christianity in these 
regions, by a devotion as judicious as charitable. 
Among those who are inclined to this charity have 
been found some, as I learn, who are freed from 
marriage and without children, or even who have 
always lived free from such bond, and who have 
believed that they might here gain children for God 
and for themselves, by this manner of holy adoption, 
and thus perpetuate their names in this land of a ris- 
ing Church, when these are lost in their own. And 
to cause that by this means remembrance of them 
may be always more present in the prayers of these 
people, they have desired that their names should be 



138 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


moyen leur memoire y fuft toufiours plus prefente 
dans les prieres; ils ont defiré que leur nom fuft 
donné aux familIes prouenantes de ces mariages, 
procurez par les efforts de leur charité. N ous en 
attendons la memoire pour commencer à executer 
leur deffein, pendant que Ie liure de vie conferuera 
Ie nom de tous, pour rendre vn iour à vn chacun 
felon fon merite & charité; c'eft dequoy nous fuppli- 
ons tres-humblement la diuine Maiefté. 
Tant de fainétes penfées & inuentions pour fecou- 
rir nos pauures Sauuages, [12J jointes au courage de 
Meffieurs de la Compagnie de la Nouuelle France, 
qui ne fe rebuttent d'aucune difgrace du temps, 
pour faire marcher Ie principal de nos affaires, qui 
depend beau coup de leur refolution & bonne volonté, 
nous confirme dans la penfée que Dieu toft ou tard 
fera queIque chofe de grand. 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF Z640-4Z 


139 


given to the families proceeding from these mar- 
riages, procured by the efforts of their charity. We 
are awaiting the list of these, that we may begin the 
execution of their design; while the book of life will 
preserve the names of all, in order one day to render 
to each one, according to his merit and his charity: 
for this we supplicate most humbly the divine 
1:aj- 
esty. 
So many holy thoughts and plans for aiding our 
poor Savages [12] joined to the courage of 11essieurs 
of the Company of New France,-which is never dis- 
heartened by any misfortune of the times in advanc- 
ing the chief object of our work, which depends much 
upon their firmness and good will,-confirm us in the 
opinion that sooner or later God will do some great 
thing. 



140 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


CHAPITRE II. 


DE LA RESIDENCE FIXE & MISSION DE SAINCTE 
MARIE. 


D v nombre des Peres que nous eítions dans les 
Hurõs, au temps de la derniere Relation, Ie 
Pere Paul Ragueneau, & Ie Pere Iofeph Pon- 
cet defcendirent à QuebeK l'Eíté dernier pour y 
paffer l'Hyuer, & fur Ie commencement de l'Au- 
tomne arriuerent icy Ie Pere Claude Pijart, & Ie Pere 
Charles Raymbault pour la langue Algonquine, qui 
accomplirent Ie mefme nombre de [13J tre[iJze Peres 
que nous eítions ran paffé. C'eít en cette Maifon 
àe la Mere de Dieu où quelquefois l'année nous nous 
voyons tous reünis, & mefme nous efperons qu'elle 
pourra feruir de retraiéte aux pauures Sauuages Chre- 
ítiens, qui fe fentans emportez par Ie torrent des 
defbauches & des couítumes barbares & infernales du 
Pays, demeurans dans les bourgs, auront moyen de 
fe fauuer du naufrage fe retirant proche de nous: 
quelques vns l'ont defia fait, & nous donnerons volon- 
tiers Ie voifinage aux familIes entieres qui voudront 
s'en approcher, dont d'aucuns nous ont donné parole. 
Quoy qu'il en foit, ce nous eít à tous vne confola- 
tion bien fenfible de voir icyarriuer de deux, trois, 
& quatre lieuës loin les Samedys au foir nombre de 
nos Chreítiens qui s'y rangent des bourgades plus 
proches pour y celebrer Ie Dimanche, & rendre tous 
enfemble au milieu de cette Barbarie, les homages 



(1641-42 


RELA TION OF Z640-4Z 


141 


CHAPTER II. 


OF THE PERMANENT RESIDENCE AND MISSION OF 
SAINTE MARIE. 


O F the number of Fathers who were with us in 
the Huron country at the time of the last Re- 
lation, Father Paul Ragueneau, and Father 
Joseph Poncet went down to Quebek last Summer 
to spend the Winter there; and, toward the begin- 
ning of Autumn, Father Claude Pijart and Father 
Charles Raymbault came here, on account of [their 
knowledge of] the Algonquin language; and they 
complete the same number of [13] thirteen Fathers 
which we had last year. It is in this House of the 
Mother of God that at some time in the year we see 
ourselves all reunited; and we even hope that it may 
serve as a retreat to the poor Christian Savages, 
who,- feeling themselves carried away by a torrent 
of debaucheries, and by the barbarous and infernal 
customs of their Country, while dwelling in their 
own villages,- will have a means of escaping ship- 
wreck by taking refuge near us; some of them have 
already done so, and we shall willingly welcome as 
neighbors entire families who may wish to approach 
us, some of whom have given us their word. 
At all events, it is a very great consolation to us 
to see arrive here from two, three, and four leagues' 
distance on Saturday evenings, a number of our 
Christians, who dispose themselyes in villages very 
near [the residence], in order to celebrate Sunday 



142 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


qui depuis [14J la creation du monde y auoient efié 
deniez à celuy qui feul les meritoit. Nombre d' AI- 
gonquins ayant hyuerné cet hyuer prés de nous, 
c'efioit vn doux motet d'entendre en mefme temps 
les loüanges de Dieu en trois & quatre langues; en 
vn mot, ie puis dire que cette maifon efi la maifon 
de paix, iufques là mefme que les Sauuages qui ail- 
leurs nous font plus ennemis & les plus infolens 
contre nous, prennent ce femble des fentimens & vne 
humeur toute contraire, lors que nous les voyons 
chez nous. Nous efperons qu'auec Ie temps les 
chofes s'adouciront de plus en plus. & qu'en fin on 
les verra reduits en leur deuoir. 
L' ordre que 1Ionfieur Ie Cheualier de 
:1ontmagny 
nofire Gouuerneur, apporta l'an paffé au temps qu'ils 
efioiêt defcendus en traiété pour punir & reprimer 
les infolences qu'icy haut ils auoient commis contre 
nous, a eu defia de bons effeéts dans l'efprit de ces 
Barbares, qui apres leur retour n' ont pas moins ad- 
miré la fageffe de fa conduite & de fa iufiice fur Ie 
paffé, qu'ils ont [ISJ redouté ces menaces pour l'ad- 
uenir. Iufques là mefme que quelques nations enti- 
eres nous ont icy rendu iufiice du tort que nous 
auions receu de quelques vns d'entr'eux pour euiter 
la punition & Ie reproche qu'ils craignoient de rece- 
uoir là bas aux trois Riuieres. C'efi fagement fe 
feruir de fon authorité, de reduire fous les loix de la 
iufiice vn peuple barbare, efloigné de trois cens 
lieuës de vous; & c' efi employer fainétement fon 
pouuoir, de Ie rendre efficace pour maintenir en paix 
les Predicateurs de la Foy, dans vn païs où l'impieté 
& l'infolence ont regné depuis Ie commencement du 
monde. Vn tel appuy de l'Euangile ne feruira pas 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


143 


therein, and in the midst of this Barbarism to render 
all together the homage which since [14] the crea- 
tion of the world has been there denied to him who 
alone has merited it. A number of Algonquins hav- 
ing wintered near us this year, it was a sweet 
anthem to hear at the same time the praises of God in 
three or four languages; in a word, I can say that this 
house is the house of peace,- so much so, that the 
very Savages who elsewhere are most hostile and 
most insolent towards us, take on an appearance of 
feeling and disposition wholly different, when we 
see them in our home. vVe hope that, with time, 
matters will become more and more quiet, and that, 
at last, we shall see the people brought to their duty. 
The order that Monsieur the Chevalier de Mont- 
magny, our Governor, established last year at the 
time when they went down to the trade, in punish- 
ing and repressing the acts of insolence that had 
been committed against us up here, has already had 
a good effect on the minds of these Barbarians. 
They, after their return, did not less admire the wis- 
dom of his conduct and of his justice in the past than 
they [ISJ feared his menaces for the future; indeed, 
even a few entire tribes have rendered us justice 
here for the wrong we had received from some among 
them, in order to avoid the punishment and the re- 
proach which they feared to receive down at the 
three Rivers. It is using his authority wisely to 
bring under the law of justice a barbarous people, 
three hundred leagues from you, and it is a pious 
employment of power to render it efficacious in main- 
taining in peace the Preachers of the Faith, in a 
country where impiety and insolence have reigned 
from the beginning of the world. Such a support of 



144 


LES RELATIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


moins à la conuerfion de ces peuples, que ceux mef- 
mes qui leur annoncent la parole de Dieu. II n'y a 
que Dieu feul qui en puiffe efire la iufie recompenfe: 
nous Ie prions que cela foit. 
Le 2. iour de Nouembre nous quittafmes tous la 
maifon, nous feparant auec autant de ioye pour com- 
mencer nos Millions, que nous en auions reffenty, 
nous voyans to us de compagnie. [16J Le Pere Pierre 
Chafielain y fut laiffé tout feul pour y receuoir & 
entretenir les Chrefiiens, & pouruoir à la paix & au 
repos du dedans & du dehors, lors que les Sauuages 
y aborderoient: ce qu'il a fait auec vne benedidion 
de Dieu particuliere. 
Le foin de la 1\1:iffion qui porte Ie nom de cette 
MaHon, qui comprend quatre ou cinq bourgs des plus 
voifins efioit efcheu au Pere Ifaac Iogues, & au Pere 
François du Peron, yayans eu les mefmes emplois & 
les mefmes difficultez que nous verrons dans les 
Millions fuiuãtes: ils ont auffi participé aux confola- 
tions qu'il y a de trauailler dans la vigne du grand 
1vlaifire qui nous yemploye. 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF z640-4Z 


145 


the Gospel will not avail less for the conversion of 
these tribes than even they who announce to them 
the word of God. It is God alone who can be there- 
for the just reward; we pray that so it may be. 
On the 2nd day of November, we all left the 
house,-separating, in order to begin our 11:issions, 
with as much joy as we had experienced in finding 
oursel ves all together. [16] Father Pierre Chaste- 
lain was left there quite alone, to receive and enter- 
tain the Christians, and provide for peace and quiet 
within and without when the Savages should ar- 
rive,-which he did with a special blessing of God. 
The care of the Mission which bears the name of 
this House, and which includes four or five of the 
nearest villages, fell to Father Isaac J ogues, and to 
Father François du Peron; having had therein the 
same employments and the same difficulties that we 
shall see in the following Missions, they have like- 
wise participated in the consolations that there are 
in laboring in the vineyard of the great Master who 
employs us therein. 



146 


LES RELATIO
VS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


[17] CHAPITRE III. 


DE LA MISSION DE LA CONCEPTION. 


L E Pere François Ie Mercier a eu Ie principal foin 
de cette 11iffion; i'ay eu la confolation de l'y 
accompagner & de voir fouuent de mes yeux Ie 
plus agreable obieét, & Ie plus grand threfor que 
nous ayons en ces contrées. C'efi la premiere 
Eglife qui y foit, compofée de quelque nombre de 
Chrefiiens qui viuent en la crainte de Dieu, & l'ado- 
rent en verité au milieu d'vne nation qui depuis cinq 
mille ans n' a recogneu que les demons pour maifires. 
La plus part de ces bons Chreftiens fe retrouuent 
dans Ie principal bourg de la 1Effion, qui s'eftend fur 
plufieurs autres bourgs & bourgades. 
C' eft de ce bourg de la Conception, (qui porte Ie 
nom de toute la Miffion) qu'eftoit ce braue & gene- 
reux Chrefiien Iofeph Chih
atenh
a, dont il a efté fi 
fouuent parlé dans les relations [18J precedentes, & 
que les Iroquois maffacrerent l'Efié paffé, s'efians 
ruez inopinement deffus luy. 
Qui n'euft iugé que tout l'edifice ne deufi tomber 
en ruyne apres vne mort fi funefte, ce femble, de 
celuy que tous, tant infideles que Chreftiens, regar- 
doiêt comme Ie pilier & la colomne de cette petite 
Eglife naiffante? Et fur qui en effeét nous iettions 
Ies yeux comme fur vn Apoftre de ce pays, puis que 
ne refpirant que la gloire de Dieu, n'ayant de l'amour 
que pour luy, & ne faifant eft at que des veritez de 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


147 


[17J CHAPTER III. 


OF THE MISSION OF LA CONCEPTION. 


F ATHER François Ie :Mercier has had the prin- 
cipal care of this l\Iission; I have had the satis- 
faction of accompanying him to it and of often 
seeing with my own eyes the most pleasing object, 
and the greatest treasure that we have in these re- 
gions,- that is, the first Church which was planted 
here composed of a small number of Christians who 
live in the fear of God, and adore him in truth, in 
the midst of a nation which for five thousand years 
has recognized only demons as masters. The great- 
er part of these good Christians are found in the 
chief village of the :Mission, which extends over 
several other villages and hamlets. 
It was to this village of la Conception (which 
bears the name of the whole Mission) that the brave 
and generous Christian Joseph Chihwatenhwa be- 
longed. of whom there has been so often mention in 
preceding relations, [18J and whom the Iroquois 
slew last Summer, having rushed unexpectedly upon 
him. 
vVho would not have thought that the whole edifice 
must fall into ruin after the apparently so disastrous 
death of him whom all, unbelievers as wen as Chris- 
tians, regarded as the pillar and column of this little 
rising Church? and upon whom, in truth, we had 
looked as an Apostle of this country, since-existing 
only for the glory of God, having love only for him, 



148 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[V OLe 21 


la foy, qui fans ceffe efc1airoient fon efprit, & ani- 
moient quafi tous fes defirs; non feulement il en auoit 
les qua1itez, mais auffi en auoit fait fouuent 1'0ffice 
au peril de fa vie, n 'y ayant Heu dans toutes ces con- 
trées où de fon viuãt nous ayons mis Ie pied, que par 
tout il n'yait prefché hautement des grandeurs de 
celuy qu'ils deuoient adorer pour Dieu, & des obliga- 
tions que nous auons au Sang & à la Croix de Iefus- 
Chrifi. 
Mais tant s'en faut que la foyait receu aucun dom- 
mage de ce coup dans Ie [19] cæur des Croyans que 
plufiofi e11e femble s'efire affermie plus qu'aupara- 
uant. 
Sa femme, qui fembloit deuoir efire la plus abba- 
tuë de cet accident, nous a dit que lors que la nou- 
ue11e luy en fut apportée, e11e demeura quelque tèps 
interdite, fans penfer à rien, & que la premiere pen- 
fée qui luy vint, fut ce que fi fouuent e11e auoit en- 
tendu dire au defunét en plufieurs occafions. Celuy 
qui ell eJlle maijlre ell a dispoje de la .forte, qu'y ferz"01ls- 
n02is? E11e s'efi en fuitte comportée de la forte dans 
fon affiiétion, que ie ne fçai ce que pourroit faire de 
mieux vne des mei11eures Chrefiiennes de nofire 
Europe. Plufieurs de la fami11e nous ont dit que les 
difcours que fi fouuent Ie defunét leur auoit faits 
pendant fa vie, ne les ayans point conuaincu de fon 
viuant, au temps de fa mort, leur reuindrent dans 
l'efprit, & les toucherent fi fort, qu'ils conceurent ce 
que iamais ils n'auoient bien entendu, & prirent refo- 
lution de changer de vie. 
En effet fon frere aifné nommé Teondechorren, 
qui auparauant n'auoit fait beaucoup d'eftat de fes 
infiruétions, [20] & bons aduis, nous vint trouuer trois 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


149 


relying only upon the verities of the faith, which 
unceasingly illuminated his mind and animated 
almost all his desires - he not only had the qualities 
of one, but he had even performed the office of one 
at the peril of his life. There was no place in all 
these regions, in which we had set foot while he 
lived, where he had not boldly preached the great- 
ness of him whom they ought to adore as God, and 
the obligations under which we are to the Blood and 
to the Cross of Jesus Christ. 
But so far from the faith having received any harm 
from this blow, in the [19] hearts of the Believers, 
it seems rather to have become firmer than before. 
His wife - who, it seemed, should have been the 
most cast down by this occurrence - told us that, 
when the news of it was brought to her, she remained 
some time speechless, without realizing anything; 
and that the first thought which came to her was 
what she had so often heard the deceased say on many 
occasions. He who Ù tIle master of it has thus arranged 
it J . what could we do in the matter.
 She afterward so 
bore herself in her affliction, that I do not know how 
anyone of the best Christians in our Europe could 
have done better. Several of the family told us that 
the conversations which the deceased had so often 
held with them while he lived-not having con- 
vinced them in his lifetime -came again into their 
minds at the time of his death, and so forcibly 
affected them that they apprehended that which 
they had never well understood, and made resolu- 
tions to change their lives. 
In fact, his elder brother named Teondechorren, 
who before had not had a high regard for his instruc- 
tions [20] and good advice, came to us three days 



150 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


iours apres Ie maffacre, pour nous demander infiam- 
ment Ie Baptefme. On l'examine, on Ie fonde, on 
Ie trouue infiruit & informé de tout ce qui efioit 
neceffaire a cela. On prit toutesfois quelque temps 
pour mieux encore recognoifire fa difpofition, à 
laquelle ne trouuant rien à redire, il fut baptifé à la 
fefie de la Natiuité de Nofire Dame. On luy donna 
Ie nom de Iofeph, qui efi Ie nom du defunét, dans 
l'efperãce que l'on eut que la vertu de fon feu frere, 
auffi bien que fon nom refufciteroit en fa perfonne. 
Nous ne fçauons pas quels en feront les progrez & 
l'iffuë, mais à ce commencement nous ne receuons 
pas moins de contentement de luy que nous en auons 
receu autresfois de feu fon frere, lors qu'il commença 
d'efire Chrefiien, voire mefme y trouuons-nous quel- 
que chofe de plus, auec cette difference neantmoins, 
que fon frere n'auoit eu perfonne deuant foy qu'il 
eût pû imiter: mais celuy-cya eu l'exemple de fon 
frere, qui femble auoir efié toute la caufe de fon bon 
heur. 
[2 I] La conuerfion de ce nouueau Iofeph femble 
d'autant plus confiderable, qu'il a trempé vingt ans 
durant dans l' exercice de l' A
taenhrohi ou fefiin & 
danfe de feu, Ie plus diabolique, & cependant Ie plus 
ordinaire remede des maladies qui foit dans Ie pays. 
11 nous a confirmé tout ce qui en a defia efié efcrit 
autrefois: & nous a raconté qu'enuiron l'aage de 
vingt ans, il fe mit par fantafie de ieuneffe à fuiure 
ceux qui s'en meí1oient: mais que comme il eut veu 
qu'il n'auoit pas comme les autres, les mains & la 
bouche à l'efpreuue du feu, il fe gardoit bien de tou- 
,cher à ce qui efioit trop chaud, mais qu'il en faifoit 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF r64o-4I 


151 


after the murder. to ask us urgently for Baptism. 
He was examined, was sounded, and was found 
instructed and informed upon all that was necessary 
for it. However, some time was taken in order the 
better further to observe his disposition, in which 
finding nothing to criticize, he was baptized on the 
feast of the Nativity of Our Lady. 'VVe gave him 
the name of Joseph, which was the name of the 
deceased, in the hope we had that the virtue of his 
late brother, as well as his name, might be made to 
live again in his person. \Ve do not know what will 
be the progress and outcome for him, but at this be- 
ginning we are not receiving less satisfaction from 
him than we received formerly from his late brother, 
when he began to be a Christian; nay, we even find 
in him something more,- yet with this difference, 
that his brother had had no one before him whom he 
could imitate; but this one has had the example of 
his brother, which seems to have been the whole 
cause of his good fortune. 
[2 I] The conversion of this new Joseph seems so 
much the more important, as he had been for twenty 
years steeped in the practice of the Aoutaenhrohi, or 
festival and dance of fire,- the most diabolical, and, 
at the same time, the most general remedy for mala- 
dies that there is in the country. He has corrobo- 
Tated for us everything that has been already written 
about it; and he related to us that when about twen- 
ty years old he began, through a youthful fancy, to 
follow those who turned their attention to this; but 
when he saw that he had not, like the others, hands 
and mouth which were fireproof, he was very care- 
ful not to touch what was too hot, but he made only 



152 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


feulement Ie femblant, & couuroit fon ieu du mieux 
qu'il pouuoit. 
Au bout de quelque temps il eut vn fonge, dans 
lequel il fe vid afsifier à vne de ces danfes ou fefiins, 
& manier Ie feu comme les autres, & entendit en 
mefme temps vne chanfon, laquelle il fut efionné à 
fon refueil de fçauoir en perfeétion. Au premier 
fefiin qui fe fit de cette nature, il fe mit à chanter fa 
chanfon, & voila petit à petit qu'il fe [22] fent en- 
trer en fureur: il prend les braizes & les pierres arden- 
tes auec les mains & les dents du milieu des braziers, 
il enfonce fon bras nud tout au fonds des chaudieres 
boüillãtes, Ie tout fans lezion ny douleur; en vn mot 
Ie voila maifire paffé. Et depuis, l'efpace de vingt 
ans illuy eft arriué quelquefois d'affifter à trois & 
quatre feftins ou danfes de cette nature en vn iour, 
pour la guerifon des malades. 
11 nous a affeuré que tant s'en faut pour lors qu'on 
fe brune, qu'au contraire on fent de la fraifcheur aux 
mains & à la bouche, mais que Ie tout fe doit faire 
en fuitte & dependemment de la chanfon qu' on a 
apprife dans Ie fonge; qu'autrement rien d'extraordi- 
naire ne fe fait. 
11 nous difoit en outre que pour lors de temps en 
temps il fe voyoit en fonge affifier à ces fefiins, & 
que là on luy donnoit ou prefioit quelque chofe qu'il 
portoit fur foy pendant la ceremonie. Cela lui efioit 
vn aduertiffemêt qu'il ne falloit pas qu'il l'entreprit 
la premiere fois, qu'il n'eut fur foy ce qu'il auoit veu 
en fonge, [23] ce qui faifoit qu'à la premiere danfe 
il dec1aroit fon defir, & auffi toft on luy iettoit ce qu'il 
auoit dec1aré luy efire neceffaire pour ioüer fon per- 
fonnage. Cela à mon iugement, fe doit appeller de 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


153 


a pretense of doing it and played his part to the best 
of his ability. 
At the end of some time he had a dream, in which 
he saw himself present at one of these dances or 
festivals, and handling fire like the others, and he 
heard at the same time a song, which he was aston- 
ished to know perfectly on awaking. At the first 
feast of this kind which was made, he began to sing 
his song, and behold, by degrees he [22] felt himself 
becoming frenzied,- he took the burning embers 
and the hot stones with his hands and with his teeth 
from the midst of the live coals, he plunged his bare 
arm to the bottom of the boiling kettles, and all with- 
out any injury or pain, in a word, he was master of 
his trade. And since then for the space of twenty 
years, it has befallen him sometimes to be present at 
three or four festivals or dances of this kind in one 
day, for the healing of the sick. 
He assured us that, far from being burned then, 
one felt, on the contrary, a coolness of the hands 
and mouth; but that all must be done following and 
depending upon the song that has been learned in 
the dream; that otherwise nothing extraordinary 
takes place. 
He told us, besides, that then from time to time 
he saw himself in dreams present at these feasts, and 
that then something was given or lent him that he 
should wear about his person during the ceremony. 
This was a warning to him that he must not under- 
take it the next time, unless he had about him that 
which he had seen in his dream; [23] for this reason, 
at the next dance, he declared his wish, and immedi- 
ately there was thrown him that which he had de- 
clared to be necessary to him, in order that he might 



154 


LES RELATIO/l/S DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


fon vray nom, renouuellement d'hommage & de recon- 
noiffance que Ie malin efprit tire de teps en teps 
de ces pauures PeupIes, cõme des efclaues de fa 
puiffance. 
:Maintenant ce pauure hõme eft tout rauy, de fe 
voir en l'efiat où il efi. II ya fouuent fe reprefen- 
tant qu'il eft comme vn prisõnier de guerre de ces 
quartiers, efchappé de la main de fes ennemis; pen- 
dant que fes compagnons attachez aux liens, font à 
la veille de fouffrir d 'horribles tourmens: ce font fes 
propres penfées. II a tout d'vn coup rompu auec 
toutes les fuperfiitions du pays; & en tous les feftins 
où il a efté inuité depuis fon baptefme, il a gene- 
reufement gardé la liberté que nous demandons de 
nos Chrefiiens en telles rencontres: & par tout où il 
fe trouue, il fait ouuertemet profeffion de ce qu'il eft. 
11 a voulu que la volonté du defunét fut executée, 
touchant la petite Therefe fa niepce, [24] & qu'elle 
fut menée à QuebeK, & mife entre les mains des Meres 
Vrfulines, refolu à tout ce que Dieu en ordonneroit. 
Et en vn mot, il nous donne tout contentement. 
Ce bon homme iufques icy n'eftoit pas beaucoup 
confiderabIe parmy ceux de fa Nation: mais depuis 
qu'il s'efi fait Chrefiien il a efté regardé de tout 
autre æil par Ies Capitaines mefmes, & Ies plus con- 
fiderables de fon bourg, qui l'ont voulu mettre dans 
les affaires. Or vn iour comme il fe fut engagé à 
nous rendre quelque feruice (c' efioit pour faire Ie 
voyage de la Nation Neutre, & afsifier au retour les 
Peres qui y eftoient en Mifsions) s'efiant en mefme 
temps rencontré qu'on Ie voulut employer pour Ies 
affaires du public, il tafcha de ioindre l'vn auec l'au- 
tre, & en propofa les expediens au Confeil: mais 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


155 


play his part. This, in my judgment, ought to be 
ca11ed by its true name, a renewal of homage and of 
recognition that the evil spirit now and then draws 
from these poor Tribes, as from slaves to his power. 
Now this poor man is wholly charmed at finding 
himself in his present condition. He is often imagin- 
ing that he is like a prisoner of war in these quarters, 
escaped from the hands of his enemies, while his 
com panions, bound with chains, are on the eve of 
suffering horrible torments; these are his own 
thoughts. He broke away, at once, from aU the 
superstitions of his country; at all the feasts to which 
he has been invited since his baptism, he has cour- 
ageously kept the liberty that we ask for our Chris- 
tians on such occasions; and, wherever he has been, 
he has openly made profession of what he is. He 
wished that the will of the deceased should be car- 
ried out, concerning the little Therese, his niece,- 
[24] that she should be taken to Quebek and put into 
the hands of the Ursuline Mothers,-saying that he 
was resolved upon anything that God should order 
concerning her; in a word, he gives us complete 
satisfaction. 
This good man, until now, was not of much impor- 
tance among those of his Tribe; but since he has 
become a Christian he has been looked upon in a 
very different light by the Captains themselves, and 
by the most influential men of his village, who have 
wished to employ him in public affairs. Now, one 
day, when he had engaged to render us a certain serv- 
ice (it was to make a journey to the Neutral Nation, 
and to attend on their return the Fathers who were 
there on Missions), having found that they wished 
to employ him at the same time in public business, 



156 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


n'ayant peu eftre agreez par ceux qui y prefidoient, 
les deux affaires eftans deuenus incompatibles, il pria 
qu'on ne trouuaft point mauuais qu'il ne fe meflaft 
point de cel1es du Public, faifant vne proteftation 
folemnel1e, Que par tout [25] où il s'agiroit du 
feruice de Dieu & du noftre, il n'y auoit affaire qu'il 
ne poftpofaft à celIe là. 
Sa femme d'vn tres-bon efprit & d'vne belle hu- 
meur eftant deuenuë Catechumene en mefme temps 
que fon mary fut baptifé, fut en fin baptifée elle 
mefme à Pafques dernier, & nommée Catherine: 
nous en efperons beaucoup. Plaife à Dieu benir 
ce mariage confirmé Chreftiennement dans toute la 
ftabilité fouhaitable. 
Ce n'eft pas feulement fur la famille du defunét 
Iofeph Chih
atenh
a, que les benediétions du Ciel 
font tombees heureufement depuis fa mort, mais 
nous en voyons des effeéts pleins de confolation fur 
tous les autres Chreftiens qui compofent cette petite 
Eglife; car à peine pourrions nous defirer plus de 
contentement & de fatisfaétion que nous receuons de 
ce petit troupeau, qui nous paroitt comme vne petite 
maffe d'or efpurée à la fournaife de plufieurs tribu- 
lations, qui ont en fin feparé Ie vray d'auec Ie faux: 
de forte que nous ne voyõs prefque plus perfonne 
parmy nos ChrefUens, [26] de la fincerité duquel 
nous ayons fuiet de douter. 
Le bruit eftãt venu au bourg de la Cõception enui- 
ron la my-Iãuier, que nos PP. de la 
Iiffiõ des Apofi. 
aux Khionõtatehronons s'eítoiët perdus dãs les nei- 
ges, en retournãt ici faire vn tour, quelques vns de 
ces bõs Chreftiês auffi toft fe mirêt en deuoir de les 
aller chercher ou fecourir; mais les ayãt trouué à 2. 



1641-42] 


R1:-"LA TION OF I640-4I 


157 


he endeavored to join one with the other, and pro- 
posed expedients for that to the Council. But, as 
these could not be accepted by those who presided 
thereat,- the two affairs having been incompatible,- 
he begged they would not take it amiss should he 
not engage in the Public business, making a solemn 
protestation, that whenever [25] it was a question of 
the service of God or of ourselves, there was no busi- 
ness which he would not defer thereto. 
His wife, who has a very good mind and a beauti- 
ful disposition, having become a Catechumen at the 
same time that her husband was baptized, was finally 
herself baptized last Easter, and named Catherine: 
we hope much from her. I\1ay it please God to bless 
with all desirable stability this marriage which has 
been confirmed in a Christian manner. 
It is not only upon the family of the deceased 
Joseph Chihwatenhwa, that the blessings of Heav- 
en have fallen favorably since his death; but we see 
its effects, full of consolation, on all the other Chris- 
tians who compose this little Church; for we could 
hardly desire more content and satisfaction than we 
receive from this little flock. It appears to us like a 
little lump of gold refined in the furnace of many 
tribulations, which have at last separated the true 
from the false; so that we scarcely see any person 
among our Christians [26] whose sincerity we have 
reason to doubt. 
The report having reached the village of la Con- 
ception, about the middle of January, that our Fa- 
thers of the 1Iission of the Apostles to the Khionon- 
tatehronons had been lost in the snow, in returning 
here to make a trip, a few of these good Christians 
immediately set about going to seek or aid them; but 



158 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[V OLe 21 


ou 3. lieuës du bourg qui s'en venoiêt, apres auoir 
paffé la nuit dãs les bois affez heureufemêt par vne 
bõne rencontre ou plufiofi cõduite de Dieu; ils prirêt 
Ie deuãt pour faire pre parer à mãger à ces pauures 
PP. qui n'auoiêt mangé de ce iour. 
Le defunt depuis Ie trãfport de nofire demeure 
hors de sõ bourg, auoit defiiné vne partie de fa 
cabane pour vne chapelle. Cela de fon viuãt n'auoit 
pû efire executé, fa mort efiãt furuenuë au têps que 
Ie bourg chãgeoit de place, & que chacun fe faifoit 
vne nouuelle cabane. Mais au mois d 'Oétobre enfui- 
uant, Ie tout fe trouuãt difpofé, la Chappelle fort 
cõmode y fut dreffée, & la premiere 11effe dite Ie 14. 
du mefme mois. C'efi en cette [27J Chapelle (de 
laquelle en nofire abfence ce nouueau Chrefiien a la 
clef) que s'affemblêt matin & foir les Chrefiiês, pour 
faire leurs prieres, aufquelles prefide Ie Chrefiien Ie 
plus ancië & Ie plus cõfiderable pour Ie presêt, de 
cette petite Eglife, nõmé René Tfondih
ane. C'efi 
luy fur tous qui a Ie foin de remarquer Ie SaÙzél lour. 
c'efi à dire, Ie Dimanche: ce qu'il fait auec les 
autres, difant tous les iours de la femaine vne dixaine 
de fon chapellet à ce deffein. 
I1s s'affemblent en cette mefme Chapelle, tous les 
Dimãches, ou pour entendre la :Meffe & l'infiruétiõ 
publique lors que nous y sõmes, ou pour dire en 
communauté leur chapellet. Quãd ils pensët que 
nous ne sõmes pas pour nous trouuer auec eux Ie 
Dimãche, raremët quelqu'vn d'eux mãque-il à fe 
trouuer chez nous pour celebrer ce S. iour. Celui 
dõt ie parlois maintenãt René Tfondih
ane y a paffé 
quelquefois les 8. iours. Or deuant que cõclure ce 
qui appartient à cette petite Eglife; ie ne puis ob- 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


159 


having found them 2 or 3 leagues from the village 
to which they were coming,-after having passed 
the night safely in the woods by a favorable chance, 
or rather a leading of God,- they preceded them, 
in order to have food prepared for these poor Fathers, 
who had eaten nothing that day. 
The deceased, after the transfer of our residence 
from his village, had intended to give a part of his 
cabin for a chapel. This during his life could not 
be accomplished, his death happening at the time 
the site of the village was being changed, and when 
everyone was making himself a new cabin. But in 
the month of October following, everything having 
been arranged, a very comfortable Chapel was set up, 
and the first Mass was said on the 14th of the same 
month. In this [27J Chapel (of which in our absence 
this new Christian has the key) the Christians as- 
semble morning and evening in order to say their 
prayers, at which the oldest Christian-and at pres- 
ent, the most influential one of this little Church- 
presides, who is named René Tsondihwane. It is he, 
above all, who has the care of observing the Holy 
Day, that is to say, Sunday; which he does in the 
presence of the others, saying every day of the week 
a decade of his rosary for this purpose. 
They meet together in this same Chapel, every 
Sunday, either to hear :\Iass and the public instruc- 
tion when we are there, or to repeat in common their 
rosary. When they think that we are not to be 
with them on Sunday, some one of them rarely fails 
to be present with us, that he may celebrate this 
Holy day. He of whom I was just speaking, René 
Tsondihwane, has sometimes spent 8 days with us. 
Now, before concluding what concerns this little 



160 


LES RELATIONS DES./ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


mettre ce qui eft arriué à ce bon Sauuage, qui eft:oit 
bien capable d'ébranler la foy, fi Dieu ne l'eut affifté 
biê particulieremêt. 
[28] 11 eft aagé d'enuiron foixante ans. Au com- 
mencement qu'il fut en aage de faire des feftins & 
d'y affifter, il eut vn fonge dans lequel il luy fut 
defendu de faire iamais fefiin de chien, ny fouffrir 
qu'on luy en fifi, qu'autrement malheur luyarriue- 
roit: il auoit toufiours eu vn grand foin d'obferuer 
ce fonge, iufques à ce que l' année paffée au com- 
mencement de I hyuer, eftant allé en vifite en quel- 
que bourg, quelque fien amy luy defira faire fefiin 
de chien: il fe fouuint auffi tofi de fon fonge, toutes- 
fois penfant en mefme temps qu'il efioit Chrefiien & 
que fes fonges ne luy deuoient plus efire confide- 
rabIes, il accepta l
 fefiin. 11 ne fut pas pluftofi de 
retour à fa maifon que voila vne fienne fille & vn de 
fes fils malades, & en fuitte qui meurent. Ce coup 
l'efbranna, & luy fit faire Ie faux pas, que nous auons 
remarqué en la precedente Relation. ,Mais s'eftant 
releué de fa cheute au bout de quelques iours, par 
l' affifiance & les bonnes paroles de feu nofire Chre- 
ftien, qui l'ayant premierement gaigné à Dieu, Ie 
regaigna derechef cette feconde [29J fois. 11 nous 
auoit depuis dõné beaucoup de contentement, mais 
voicy vne occafion dans laquelle il a du tout reparé 
la faute de fa cheute par la fermeté de fa foy, & par 
la con fiance qu'il y a fait paroifire. 
René donc vn peu apres fon baptefme, fe trouuant 
à la pefche auec nofire feu Chrefiien Iofeph Chih
a- 
tenh
a; celuy-cy vint à fonger tout ce qui en effet 
luy eft arriué enuiron quatorze mois apres. Sçauoir 
que trois ou quatre Iroquois l'attaquoient, que s'efiant 



1641-42] 


RELA TIOJl,' OF I640-4I 


161 


Church, I cannot omit what happened to this good 
Savage, which was perhaps enough to shake his faith, 
if God had not very specially helped him. 
[28J He is about sixty years old. At the begin- 
ning, when he was at an age to make feasts and to 
be present at them, he had a dream, in which he was 
forbidden ever to make a dog feast, or to permit that 
anyone should make one for him, or else misfortune 
would happen to him. He had always taken great 
care to obey this dream, until last year, at the begin- 
ning of winter, having gone on a visit to some vil- 
lage, one of his friends desired to make a dog feast 
for him. He immediately remembered his dream; 
nevertheless, thinking at the same time that he was 
a Christian and that his dreams ought no longer to 
be important to him, he accepted the feast. He had 
no sooner returned to his house than he found one of 
his daughters and one of his sons sick, who afterward 
died. This stroke unsettled him, and caused him to 
make a false step, which we noticed in the preced- 
ing Relation. But having recovered from his fall at 
the end of a few days, by the assistance and the good 
words of our late Christian,- who, having first won 
him to God, won him anew this second [29] time,- 
he has since given us great satisfaction; but here is 
an occasion upon which he wholly repaired the error 
of his fall by the firmness of his faith and by the 
constancy which he displayed. 
René, a short time after his baptism, was fishing 
with our late Christian Joseph Chihwatenhwa, and 
the latter happened to dream all that really befell 
him about fourteen months afterward,-namely, that 
three or four Iroquois attacked him; that, having 
defended himself, he was thrown to the ground; that 



162 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


defendu il auoit efié teraffé, qu'on luy auoit enleué 
fa moufiache..' & qu'on luy auoit donné vn coup de 
hache à l'endroit de la tefie d'où on la luy auoit en- 
leuée. Le feu Chrefiien s' efueillant apres ce fonge, 
s'addreffe à René fon compagnon. Ah! mon cama- 
rade, dit-il, c'efi à ce coup que fi nous n'efiions 
Chrefiiens, il nous faudroit auoir recours à nos chan- 
fons & fefiins, pour effacer Ie malheur de mon fonge: 
mais ce n'efi pas luy qui a efié Ie maifire de nos 
vies; c'efi cell1Y qu'on nous a enfeigné, & en qui nous 
croyons, qui feu 1 en difpofera [30J felon fon bon plaifir. 
Et là deffus luy racõte Ie fonge que ie vies de dire. 
Nous auõs fuiet de pefer que ce mefme fonge lui 
reuint plufieurs fois depuis: car ceux de la famille 
deposet que fouuet Ie matin ils l'ont entedu parler 
en fe réueillant, & dire (Ejl-ce toy qui cn es Ie maijlre? 
non, non, il1l'y a que Dicu qui cn dzfpo.fera. Or ce qu'il 
auoit fongé luy efiant arriué de poind en poind, & 
Ie bruit efiant dãs Ie pays, qu'il efioit mort pour 
n'auoir pas gardé fon fonge, qui Ie menaçãt des 
ennemis, luy cõmandoit vn facrifice ou fefiin de 2. 
chiens: cela efioit bie capable de réueiller dãs l'ef- 
prit du pauure René, auffi bien que des autres bons 
Chrefiies, la creance generale, & la deference que 
tous ces Peuples rendet en fonge, cõme au maifire 
de la vie & de la mort. 11 a plû toutefois à Dieu Ie 
deliurer de cette têtation, & affermir du tout fon 
efprit & fon courage. 11 efi Ie premier à foudre les 
difficultez qui fe prefentent là deffus, qui ne font pas 
petites. 
Cõme nous efiions à fa cabane cet hyuer, on luy 
vint 8.pporter la nouuelle qU'vD fie fils auoit efié pris 
des ennemis, [3 I] & emmené vif en leur pays. Cette 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF z640-4I 


163 


they took off his scalp, and gave him a. blow with a 
hatchet on the head from which they had removed 
it. The late Christian awaking after this dream, 
spoke to René, his companion. "Ah, my comrade," 
said he, "it is now, if we were not Christians, that 
we should be obliged to have recourse to our songs 
and feasts, in order to efface the calamity of my 
dream. But it is not that which is the master of our 
lives,- it is he of whom they have taught us, and in 
whom we believe, who alone disposes of it [30] ac- 
cording to his good pleasure." And thereupon he 
related to him the dream that I have just stated. We 
have reason to think that this same dream returned 
to him several times afterward; for members of his 
family declared that often in the morning they heard 
him speak on awaking, and say. Art thou the master 
of Ü.9 No, no, Ü z"s 01lly God w/w shall dispose of it. Now 
that which he had dreamed having happened to him 
in every point, and the report being abroad in the 
country that he had died on account of not having 
observed his dream,- which, menacing him with 
enemies, commanded him to make a sacrifice or feast 
of 2 dogs,- this was very likely to revive in the 
mind of the poor René, as well as those of the other 
good Christians, the general belief and deference 
that all these Tribes render to a dream, as to the 
master of life and of death. However, it pleased 
God to deliver him from this temptation, and to 
strengthen thoroughly his spirit and his courage. 
He was the first to solve the difficulties which are 
therein presented, and which are not trifling. 
As we were in his cabin this winter, the news was 
brought to him that one of his sons had been taken 
by the enemy, [3 I] and led away alive into their 



164 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


nouuelle Ie toucha de premier abord, & cõme ren- 
trant en foy mefme, helas! mon Dieu, dit-il, que 
puis-ie trouuer à redir
 apres ce que vous en auez 
ordonné? 
Voila l' eftat de noftre petite Eglife naiffante, dãs 
laquelle fi nous ne voyõs pas vn grãd troupeau, au 
moins auõs n0 9 la cõfolation d'y voir la crainte de 
Dieu, & Ie feruice de fa Maiefté en recõmãdation. 
Sur tout, pêdant l' Aduët & Ie Carefme on n'a pas 
mãqué matin & foir à l'iffuë de leurs prieres, de leur 
faire vne petite inftruétion en cõmun, pour eftablir 
dãs leur efprit & dans leur cæur les principes de 
la vie Chreftiêne Le fruiét s'en eft enfuiuy tel que 
nous euffions pû fouhaitter. 
Nous auõs vifité tous les autres bourgs & bour- 
gades appartenãtes à cette Miffion, nous en fommes 
reuenus auec cette penfée, que toft ou tard ils feront 
à nous, ou pluftoft à Dieu. Ie ne puis obmettre la 
finguliere obligation que nous auons à Dieu, de nous 
auoir conferué Ie Pere François Ie :Mercier; qui en 
l'vn des voyages d'hyuer paffant par neceffité par 
deffus vn lac glacé, fe vid plutôt [32] tombé dans 
1'eau, qu'il ne fe fut apperceu de Ia foibleffe de Ia 
glace. Quelques Sauuages qui venoient apres luy 
s'arrefterent tout court, fongeans plus au danger où 
ils eftoient qu'à fecourir Ie Pere; ce qu'ils ne voy- 
oient pas mefme pouuoir faire fans fe mettre dans vn 
plus grand danger. Le Pere eftendant fes coudes fe 
fouftenoit Ie moins mal qu'il pouuoit de glace en 
glace, & en fin ayant rencontré vn endroit vn peu 
plus ferme que Ie refte, fe hazarda de faire vn effort, 
& Ieuer vne jambe fur Ia glace. Le Sauuage Ie 
moins enoigné de luy Ie voyant en cet eftat, met bas 



1641- 42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


165 


country. This news moved him at first, and, as if 
communing with himself, "Alas! my God," said 
he, " what can I find amiss in that which you have 
ordered for him? " 
This is the condition of our little, growing Church, 
in which, if we do not see a great flock. at least we 
have the consolation of seeing the fear of God and 
the service of his 
Iajesty honored. Above all, dur- 
ing Advent and Lent, we have not failed morning 
and evening, at the close of their prayers, to give 
them a little instruction in common, in order to estab- 
lish in their minds and in their hearts the principles 
of the Christian life. Such fruit has followed there- 
from as we could have desired. 
We have visited all the other villages and hamlets 
appertaining to this Mission; we have returned from 
them with this thought, that sooner or later they 
will belong to us, or rather to God. I cannot pass 
over the peculiar obÍigation under which we are to 
God, for having preserved to us Father François Ie 
:Mercier, who in one of his winter journeys, passing 
by necessity over a frozen lake, happened [32] to fall 
into the water, before he had perceived the weak- 
ness of the ice. A few Savages who were following 
him stopped suddenly, thinking more of the danger 
in which they were, than of helping the Father, 
which they saw not even the possibility of doing 
without putting themselves into a greater danger. 
The Father, stretching out his elbows, supported 
himself as well as was possible, from one cake of ice 
to another; and at length, having chanced on a place 
a little firmer than the rest, he ventured to make an 
effort, and lifted his leg upon the ice. The Savage 
least distant from him, seeing him in this condition, 



166 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


vn fac de bled qu'il auoit fur Ie dos, & s'approche 
doucement du Pere, & Ie faififfant par l'efpaule & 
par la jambe, il fit vn effort pour Ie tirer; mais y 
fentant trop de refiftance, ille quitte pour retourner 
promptement en lieu de plus grande affeurance. Là 
apres auoir confideré Ie Pere, qui de fon cofté conti- 
nuoit à faire ce qu'il pouuoit pour faciliter Ie fecours 
dont il auoit befoin, i1 ne fe pût tenir qu'il ne retour- 
naft faire vn fecond effort plus grand que Ie premier, 
par lequel [33] en fin il tira Ie Pere hors de l'eau. 
Voila quelques-vns des hazards qui font infeparable- 
ment attachez à la recherche de nos pauures brebis 
errantes en ces quartiers, ainfi que nous verrons en- 
core cy apres, mais ce font les delices des feruiteurs 
-du bon Pafteur. 



1641-42] 


RELA TIO.N OF I640-4I 


167 


put down a sack of grain which he had on his back, 
cautiously approached the Father, and, seizing him 
by the shoulder and the leg, made an effort to draw 
him out; but finding him too heavy, he left him, 
that he might return quickly to a place of greater 
safety. There, after having looked at the Father, 
who on his part continued to do what he could to 
facilitate the help of which he had need, he could 
not refrain from returning to make a second effort, 
greater than the first, by which [33J at last he drew 
the Father out of the water. 
These are some of the dangers that are inseparably 
attached to the search for our poor wandering sheep 
in these regions, as we shall see still further herein- 
after; but these are the delights of the servants of 
the good Shepherd. 



168 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


CHAPITRE IV. 


DES MISSIONS DE S. IOSEPH AUX ATTINGUEENONGNA- 
HAK, & DE S. lEAN BAPTISTE. AUX 
ARENDAERONONS. 


C ES deux 
Iifiìons font affez heureufement peu- 
plées pour donner vn raifonnable employ à 
fix & à huiét ouuriers: mais Ie peu de nombre 
que nous fommes dans les Hurons, n'eftant pas mef- 
me fuffifant de fournir deux Peres à chaque :Miffion, 
nous nous fommes veus obligez de reünir ces deux 
fous Ie foin du Pere Antoine Daniel, & du Pere Si- 
mon Ie 1Ioyne. Leur peine en eft accreuë notable- 
ment, quand mefme il n'y auroit que la diftance des 
bourgs [34J qu'ils doiuent cultiuer dont les chemins 
de l'vn à l'autre, font tres-fouuent infeftez des Iro- 
quois ennemis des Hurons; mais leur ioye croift à 
proportion puis que les démarches que l'on fait à la 
conquefte d'vne feule arne, font autant de pas vers 
Ie Ciel. 
On va bruí1er vn Iroquois en vn bourg affez eí1oi- 
gné; queUe confolation de partir dans Ie fort des 
chaleurs de l'Efté pour deliurer cette pauure viétime 
de l'enfer qui luy eft preparé. On l'aborde, & on 
l'inftruit lors mefme qu'il gemit fous la cruauté des 
fupplices, incontinent la foy trouue place dans fon 
cæur; il recognoift & adore pour autheur de fa vie, 
celuy dont iamais il n'auoit entendu Ie nom qu'à 
l'heure de la mort. II reçoit la grace du Baptefme, 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


169 


CHAPTER IV. 


OF THE 
IISSIONS OF ST. JOSEPH TO THE ATTINGUEE- 
NONGNAHAK, AND OF ST. JEAN BAPTISTE 
TO THE ARENDAERONONS. 


T HESE two Missions are sufficiently well peopled 
to give adequate employment to six or eight 
workers; but the small number that we have 
among the Hurons not being even ample enough to 
furnish two Fathers to each lv:1ission, we have found 
ourselves obliged to unite these two under the care 
of Father Antoine Daniel and of Father Simon Ie 
Moyne. Their labor has been thereby considerably 
increased, were one to mention only the distance of 
the villages [34] in which they are to teach, as the 
paths from one to the other are very often infested 
by the Iroquois, the enemies of the Hurons; but 
their joy increases in proportion, since the steps that 
one takes for the conquest of a single soul are so 
many steps towards Heaven. 
An Iroquois was to be burned in a rather distant 
village; what a consolation to set out, in the height 
of Summer heat, in order to deliver this poor victim 
from the hell which was prepared for him! He 
was approached and instructed, even while he was 
groaning under the cruelty of tortures; suddenly 
faith found a place in his heart,- he recognized and 
adored, as the author of his life, him whose name 
he had never heard until the hour of his death. He 
received the grace of Baptism, and then longed only 



170 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


& ne refpire plus qu'au Ciel: on redouble les feux & 
les flammes, & tout ce que la cruauté fournit à des 
efprits enragez de fureur. Ce nouueau, mais ce 
genereux Chreftien monté fur l'efchafaut qui eft Ie 
lieu de fon fupplice, à la veuë de mille perfonnes qui 
font fes iuges, fes bourreaux [35] & fes enemis; eíleue 
& fes yeux & fa voix vers Ie Ciel, n'y ayant rien deffus 
la terre qui arrefte fon cæur; il s'efcrie d'vne voix 
vigoureufe, & fait fçauoir à tout Ie monde les caufes 
d'vne ioye qui paroift fur fon front dans Ie plus fort 
des tourmens qu'il endure: 10 fakhrihotat de SaraK
- 
nentai, onne ichien aihei aronhiae eeth de Eihei. 
Soleil qui es tefmoin de mes tourmens, efcoute mes 
paroles; ie fuis fur Ie poinét de mourir: mais apres 
cette mort, c' eft Ie Ciel qui fera ma demeure. II 
redouble & repete fouuent ces mots, & meurt dedans 
ces douces efperances: Quel bon-heur pour cette ame? 
mais queUe ioye reffent celuy qui a couru huiét & 
dix lieuës pour luy procurer cette grace. Cet heu- 
reux prifonnier fe nommoit TehondaK
ae, & en fon 
baptefme lofeph nõ du bourg dãs lequel il fut brûlé. 
Dans Ie bourg de S. lean Baptifte, vn ieune hom- 
me tomba fubitement malade, & malade à la mort, 
fouuent depuis quelques années on luy auoit parlé 
de Dieu, foit à QuebeK où il [36] auoit efté fept ou 
huiét mois dans noftre feminaire, foit apres fon re- 
tour au païs dans les frequentes vifites qu'on auoit 
fait en fa cabane; mais iamais ny la foy ny la crainte 
de Dieu n'eftoit entrée en cet efprit; fes difcours 
n'eftoient rien que des calomnies contre nous, que 
des blafphemes contre Dieu, & ce fembloit des mar- 
ques infaiUibles d'vne ame reprouuée. Que les pen- 
fées de Dieu font eíloignées des noftres! Ce ieune 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-41 


171 


for Heaven; they increased their fires and flames, 
and everything that cruelty supplies to spirits mad- 
dened by rage. This new but courageous Chris- 
tian,- having ascended the scaffold which was the 
place of his torment, in the sight of a thousand peo- 
ple who were his judges, his executioners, [35J and 
his enemies,-raised both his eyes and his voice to 
Heaven, there being nothing upon the earth to at- 
tract his heart; and, shouting in a loud voice, made 
known to everyone the cause of a joy which appeared 
on his brow in the fiercest tortures that he was endur- 
ing: "10 sakhrihotat de Sarakounentai, onne ichien 
aihei aronhiae eeth de Eihei; II "Sun, who art wit- 
ness of my torments, listen to my words. I am at 
the point of death; but, after this death, Heaven 
shall be my dwelling." He repeated and reiterated 
often these words, and died in this sweet hope. 
What happiness for that soul! but what joy does he 
experience who has sped eight or ten leagues that 
he may procure for him this grace! This fortunate 
prisoner was named Tehondakwae, and in his bap- 
tism, Joseph-the name of the village in which he 
was burned. 
In the village of St. Jean Baptiste, a young man 
fell suddenly sick, and sick unto death. For several 
years he had been often spoken to concerning God,- 
both in Quebek, where he [36] had been seven or 
eight months in our seminary, and, after his return 
home, in frequent visits that had been made to his 
cabin; but neither faith nor the fear of God had ever 
entered his soul; his words were nothing but calum- 
nies against us, but blasphemies against God, and 
seemed infallible signs of a reprobate soul. How 
remote from ours are the thoughts of God! This 



172 


LES RELA TIONS DES jÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


homme n'eft pas pluftoft tombé malade qu'il ouure 
de luy-mefme les yeux à la verité: la crainte de l'en- 
fer que iufqu'alors iI auoit reputé des fables, luy fait 
penfer au Paradis: helas! s' efcrie iI, ie me meurs, & 
les Peres ne font pas icy. Courez, ie vous en prie, 
mon frere, en quelque part qu'ils foient (dit-il à vn 
fien frere aifné principal Capitaine de cette nation) 
courez vifte, & qu'iIs fçachent au pluftoft Ie peril où 
ie fuis. Ce frere part en hafte & vient trouuer nos 
Peres à 12. lieuës de là. Dieu fçait de queUe part 
ils volerent à ce pauure malade, qui leur ouure les 
bras, leur demande pardon, & foufpire apres Ie Bap- 
tefme. Quand [37J Dieu difpofe vne ame & luy 
parle au profond du cæur, il ne faut pas tant de pa- 
roles. II reçoit bien toft Ie Baptefme, & enfemble 
la paix de l'efprit, & ce peu qui luy reftoit de vie, il 
l'employe iufqu'au dernier moment à Ie deliurer du 
malheur eternel. 
Quelque reuolté que puiffe eftre vn efprit contre 
les veritez de noftre foy, il ne faut pas defefperer de 
luy auant la mort. Si Dieu qui eft feul offenfé 
attend l'heure de noftre falut auec tant de patience & 
de longanimité, c'eft à nous à fuiure fes conduites, 
& adorer en tout les refforts de fa diuine prouidence. 
Nous l'auons veu encore depuis peu en la perfonne 
d'vn autre ieune homme du bourg fainét Ignace 
nommé Iofeph Te
atirhon. Le Seminaire de QuebeK 
l'auoit nourry deux ans entiers, & n'en efioit forty 
qu' auec la grace de Chreftien & la crainte de Dieu: 
mais en cet aage il efi bien difficile de conferuer vn 
fi precieux threfor dans Ie regne de l'impudicité: fe 
reuoyãt dans fon païs, il n'efi pas long-temps fans 
fe voir engagé dans les vices qui y paffent pour des 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


173 


young man had no sooner fallen sick than he of his 
own accord opened his eyes to the truth; the fear of 
hell, which until then he had considered a fable, 
made him think of Paradise: "Alas!" exclaimed 
he, "I am dying, and the Fathers are not here. 
Run to them, I beg you, my brother, wherever they 
may be .. (said he to one of his elder brothers, chief 
Captain of this tribe) "run quickly, and let them 
know as soon as possible the peril in which I am. II 
This brother set out in haste and came to our 
Fathers, who were 12 leagues distant. God knows 
with what anxiety they flew to this poor sick man, 
who opened his arms to them, asked their pardon, 
and longed for Baptism. \Vhen [37] God prepares a 
soul, and speaks to the depths of a heart, many words 
are not needed. He very soon received Baptism and 
at the same time peace of mind; and the little that 
remained to him of life he employed, even to the 
last moment, in saving himself from eternal woe. 
However rebellious a soul may be against the 
truths of our faith, we must not despair of it before 
death. If God, who is the only one injured, await 
the hour of our salvation with so much patience and 
long-suffering, it is for us to follow his leadings and 
to reverence in all things the movements of his 
divine providence. 
We have seen this again recent! y, in the person of 
another young man of the village of saint Ignace, 
who was named] oseph Tewatirhon. The Seminary 
of Quebek had maintained him two whole years, and 
he went out from it with the grace of a Christian and 
the fear of God; but at such an age it is very difficult 
to preserve so precious a treasure in the reign of 
shamelessness,- when he was again in his own 



174 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


[38J vertus. Nos remonftrances & les touches de 
Dieu Ie reduifoient de fois à autres en fon deuoir, 
mais quoy dans les Hurons auffi bien qu'au milieu 
de la France, qui n' eft pas fortifié d'vn fecours extra- 
ordinaire du Ciel, fe voit bien toft retombé dedans 
fon malheur; & Ie pis eft, que plus on tãbe, plus on 
enfonce auant dedãs Ie precipice, vn abyfme en attire 
vn autre; & bien fouuent la foy fe voit eftouffée all 
milieu de tant de pechez. N ous craigniõs ce mal- 
heur pour ce ieune Chreftien; mais Ie moment de 
fon falut eftoit venu. II eft furpris d'vn accident de 
feu qui penfa l'emporter fur Ie champ: ce feu en 
eftouffe vn plus infernal qui deuoroit fon ame: il ne 
fallut plus penfer qu'au Ciel; nos Peres y courent & 
luy preftent affiftance. La 1Iere de 
Iifericorde qu'il 
rec1ama iufques à la mort sãs doute Ie fecourut en ce 
moment, d'où dependoit l'eternité; & nous fit voir 
que pas vn ne fe perd de ceux que Dieu choifit pour 
fes efleus. 
Noftre confolation parmy nos peines eft d'aller 
ainfi de bourg en bourg, [39J de village en village 
recueillir ces efpics de froment que les Anges fepa- 
rent de l'yuroye, pour que dans Ie Ciel ils compofent 
cette couronne des efleus, qui a coufté tant de fueurs 
& de fatigues au Fils de Dieu. 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


175 


country, it was not long before he was seen drawn 
into the vices which there are accounted [38J virtues. 
Our remonstrances and the strokes of God brought 
him back, from time to time, to his duty; but, among 
the Hurons as well as in the midst of France, he who 
is not fortified by an extraordinary help from Heaven, 
is seen to fall again very soon into his wretched- 
ness. And the worst is, that the more he falls, the 
more he plunges forward toward the precipice,- one 
abyss leads to another; and very often faith is found 
stifled in the midst of so many sins. We feared this 
misfortune for this young Christian, but the moment 
of his salvation had come. He was overtaken by an 
accident of fire which was near destToying him on 
the spot; this fire extinguished a more infernal one 
that was devouring his soul,- it was necessary now 
to think only of Heaven. Our Fathers ran to him, 
and lent him assistance. The :\Iother of Mercy, 
whom he implored until death, without doubt aided 
him in that moment on which eternity depended, 
and made us see that not one of those whom God 
has chosen as his elect is lost. 
Our consolation in the midst of our trials is to go 
thus from town to town, [39J from village to village, 
gathering these ears of grain that the Angels are 
separating from the tares, so that in Heaven they 
may compose that crown of the elect, which has cost 
so many labors and fatigues to the Son of God. 



176 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


(VOL. 21 


CHAPITRE V. 


DE LA MISSION DES APOSTRES AUX KHIONONTATE- 
HRONONS OU NATION DU PETUN. 


L E P. Charles Garnier & Ie P. Pierre Pijart ont 
eu Ie foin de cette Miffion; à la culture de 
laquelle ils n'ont rien oublié de tout ce qu'on 
pouuoit attendre de bons ouuriers. Les difficultez fe 
trouuent d'autant plus gran des en cette Miffion, que 
cette Nation u'eft point du nombre de celles qui def- 
cendent [pqurJ la traite des Hurons, ceux qui s'en 
attribuënt, ne Ie permettant pas comme nous auons 
defia dit autrefois. Ce qui fait qu'ils nous confiderent 
comme eftrangers, & comme perfonnes auec [4 0 ] 
lefquelles ils n'ont aucune liaifon. Mais en outre 
les calomnies ordinaires de ceux parmy lefquels nous 
viuons, rempliffans tous les iours leurs oreilles, & 
leurs efprits, ils ne nous regardent que d'vn reil fou- 
pçonneux, de quelque malheur que nous leur venons 
apporter; d'où vient qu'ils tournent incontinent en 
mal tout ce qu'i1s nous voyent faire, & fur tout les 
aétions les plus fainétes; n'apportans au refie autre 
raifon de leur défiance, que Ie fujet que leur en don- 
nent les Hurons par leurs difcours. 
Pour adoucir & appriuoifer ces efprits, nous iu- 
geafmes qu'il feroit à propos, que les Peres allans 
cette année en leur Miffion, fiffent Ie poffible pour y 
tenir quelque affemblée generale des principaux du 
pays, pour les informer deuëme[n]t de nos intentiõs. 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


177 


CHAPTER V. 


OF THE MISSION OF THE APOSTLES TO THE KHIO- 
NONT A TEHRONONS OR TOBACCO NATION. 


F ATHER Charles Garnier and Father Pierre 
Pijart have had care of this Mission, in the in- 
struction of which they have neglected nothing 
that could be expected of good workers. The diffi- 
culties are so much the greater in this Mission, as 
this Nation is not of the number of those that go 
down for the Huron trade,-those who claim the 
trade for themselves not permitting it, as we have 
already said. This causes them to look upon us as 
strangers, and as persons with [40] whom they have 
no connection. But, besides the ordinary calumnies 
of those among whom we live, which fill their ears 
and minds continually, they look upon us only with 
an eye suspicious of some misfortune that we have 
come to bring them; for which reason, they put 
forthwith a bad construction on everything that they 
see us do, and above all on the most holy acts; never- 
theless they bring forward no other motive for their 
mistrust, than the cause that the Hurons give them 
for it by their conversation. 
In order to soothe and calm these minds, we 
judged it would be fitting that the Fathers when 
they went on their Mission this year, should do their 
best to hold there some general meeting of the chief 
men of the country, in order duly to inform them of 
.our intentions. And since they saw no better means 



178 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


Et ne voyans meilleur moyen d'arriuer Ià, que celuy 
des prefens, ils en emporterent auec eux, & efians 
arriuez au pays donne rent à entendre leur deffein. 
Ie ne fçay fi iamais affaire y a efié debattuë 
comme celle-là; les vns agreans la propofition, les 
autres ne voulans ouir [41] parler ny d'affembIée, ny 
de prefens venans de nofire main, difans haut & 
clair, que c'efioit le charme duquel nous nous vou- 
lions feruir, pour ruiner Ie pais, comme nous auions 
fait iufques icy ceux où nous auions efié. L'.affem- 
blée toutesfois fe tint, mais les prefens y furent refu- 
fez: ce qu'on gaigna fut, qu'en cette affemblée des 
plus Notables du Pays, nofire commiffion de la part 
de Dieu leur fut fignifiée, & l'obligation intimée de 
reconnoifire & honorer fa Maiefié diuine, & N. Seign. 
Iefus-Chrifi, comme Ie maifire de leur vie & de leur 
falut. Peut-efire y auoit-il là quelque Predefiiné, 
qui en fon temps fera fon profit d'vn fi fainét 
difcours. 
Depuis ce temps, les Peres n'ont pas Iaiffé d'aller 
par tous les bourgs & bourgades de leur departement, 
& y ont fait leur fonétion auec toute Iiberté, comme 
ayans vn pouuoir independant de toutes ces ceremo- 
nies. Et ils y ont trouué tout autre vifage & accueil 
que celuy que leur auoit voulu donner à entendre vn 
Capitaine, qui en plein Confeil leur fit commande- 
ment de vuider au plufiofi [42] Ie païs s'ils n'efioient 
fages; voire mefme il n'ya point eu de bourg, où 
depuis ils ayent efié mieux receus que celuy où 
demeure ce Capitaine, Ies habitans s'efforçans, ce 
femble, de reparer la faute de leur chef. 11ais ils 
en demeurent là pour Ie prefent, & ne parlent point 
encore tout de bõ d'êbraffer la Foy. Nous verrons, 



1641-42] 


RELA TI01V OF I640-4I 


179 


of accomplishing this than that of presents, they 
carried some with them; and, after arriving in the 
country, they made known their purpose. 
I do not know that ever any matter was argued 
there as this was,- some agreeing to the proposi- 
tion. others not wishing to hear [4 I] mentioned 
either the meeting, or presents coming from our 
hands, saying boldly and clearly, that this was a 
charm which we intended to use in order to ruin 
their country, as we had hitherto ruined those in 
which we had been. However, the meeting was 
held, but the presents were refused; what we gained 
was that, in this assembly of the most Notable men 
of the Country, our commission in the name of God 
was declared to them, and the obligation of recogniz- 
ing and honoring his divine :Majesty and Our Lord 
Jesus Christ as the master of their lives and their 
salvation, was enjoined upon them. Perhaps there 
was present some Predestined soul, which in its own 
time will profit by so blessed a discourse. 
Since that time, however, the Fathers have gone 
through all the villages and hamlets of this district, 
and have discharged their duties therein with all 
freedom, as having a power independent of all these 
ceremonies; and they have found in these people a 
totally different manner and reception from that 
which had been intitnated to them by a Captain,- 
who, in open Council, gave them a command to 
vacate [42] the country as soon as possible, if they 
were wise. Indeed, there has been no village in 
which they have since been better received than in 
the one where this Captain dwells,- the inhabitants 
endeavoring, it would seem, to repair the fault of 
their chief; but they stop there for the present, and 



180 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


auec le temps, ce que la conftance produira dans ces 
efprits, fi ce n'eft que Dieu follicité par quelques 
fainétes ames, ait agreable d'ouurir vn chemin plus 
court. 
Nous commençons à douter fi les fìeaux & les puni- 
tions qui arriuent à ceux qui mefprifent les vifites 
& douces femonces du Ciel, ne ferõt point vne des 
inuentions de fa bonté, pour faire ouurir les yeux à 
ces pauures aueugles. Quoy que s'en foit, il eft 
affeuré qu'au bourg d'Eh
ae furnommé S. Pierre & 
S. Paul principal bourg de cette Miffion, d'où Ie P. 
Garnier fut chaffé l'année paffée, tous les malheurs 
imaginables sõt arriuez deuãt la fin de l'année. La 
plus part des cabanes furent bruílées par les enne- 
mis, enuirõ trois mois apres [43] Plufieurs font morts 
de faim, de froid, ou de verole; d'autres ont pery 
dans les eaux; plufieurs ont efté pris des ennemis. 
En fin, la chofe a paru fi extraordinaire, qu'vn Capi- 
taine d'vn bourg voifin l'a bien fceu remarquer, n'at- 
tribuãt à autre caufe la defolation de ce bourg, qu'au 
refus qu'ils auoiêt fait des Predicateurs de l'Euangile 
l'an paffé. 
Ie groffirois de beaucoup ce Chapitre fi i'auois 
entrepris de declarer icy par Ie menu tout ce qu'il a 
fallu que les Peres ayent fouffert de ces Barbares 
l'efpace de 4. ou 5. mois qu'a duré Ie temps principal 
de leur 11iffion. Car pour ne rien dire de ce qui eft 
commun à tous les Miffionnaires de ces contrées, dont 
on a pû voir quelque chofe dãs la derniere Relation, 
& qui a efté d'autant plus cõfiderable cette année, que 
les neiges icy ont efté extraordinairemêt hautes. 
Allãs vn iour d'vn bourg à vn autre, chargez de leur 
pacquet, fortis qu'ils furent d'vn petit boquet, ils sèti- 



1641-42] 


RELA TI01V OF I640-4I 


181 


do not yet speak of embracing the Faith in earnest. 
'Ve shall see, in time, what constancy will produce 
in these people, unless God, solicited by some devout 
souls, be pleased to open a quicker way. 
'Ve begin to question if the scourges and punish- 
ments, which happen to those who despise the calls 
and sweet invitations of Heaven, may not be one of 
the expedients of his goodness, to cause the eyes of 
these poor blind ones to be opened. At all events, 
it is certain that to the village of Ehwae, surnamed 
St. Pierre and St. Paul,- the principal village of this 
:Mission, whence Father Garnier was driven last 
year,- all imaginable misfortunes happened before 
the end of the year. The greater part of the cabins 
were burned by the enemy about three months 
afterward. [43J 
Iany died of hunger, of cold, or of 
smallpox; others perished in the water, and many 
were taken by the enemy. In fact, the matter ap- 
peared so extraordinary that the Captain of a neigh- 
boring village might well notice it,- attributing the 
desolation of this village to no other cause than to 
the refusal they made to the Preachers of the Gospel, 
last year. 
I would greatly lengthen this Chapter if I un- 
dertook to set forth here in detail all that the Fa- 
thers were compelled to suffer from these Barbarians, 
in the space of the 4 or 5 months that the prin- 
cipal term of their 
1ission continued,-to say noth- 
ing of tþat which is common to all the Missionaries 
of these regions, of which something could be seen 
in the last Relation, and which has been so much 
the more considerable this year, as the snow has 
been here extraordinarily deep. One day, as they 
were going from one village to another, laden with 



182 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


ret foudain chacü vne main les faifir par les efpaules, 
& vne voix criant; vous eftes morts! Auffi toft ils fe 
virent par terre. lIs [44] n'attendoient en fuitte rien 
mains que Ie coup de hache ou de coufteau; mais 
rien autre chofe ne s'enfuiuit. lIs fe releuent donc, & 
apperceurent des Sauuages tous nuds, qui s'enfuyoient 
l'vn d'vn cofté, l'autre de l'autre, fans qu'on ait pû 
fçauoir ny conjeéturer ce quïls auoient pretendu en 
cette aétion, ou ce qui auoit arrefté leur deffein. 
.Vne autre fois faifans voyage, ils fe rencontrerent 
dãs les neiges iufques au deffus des genoux, Ies pieds 
dans l'eau, & Ie vet fi rude, que deux Sauuages faifans 
ce mefme iour Ie mefme chemin, y moururent de froid. 
Vne chofe remarquable fe paffa à la mort de l'vn des 
deux. Celuy-cy faifoit Ie voyage auec vne fienne 
fæur iumelle: la voyant en auffi grand danger de 
mourir que luy, il prit la peau d'Ours, dont eftoit 
couuerte fa fæur, & luy donna fa peau ou robe de 
Caftor, comme eftant chaude: & en effet la fille ref- 
chappa, & Ie ieune homme mourut. 
A propos de cet aéte de pieté, i'en diray icy vn 
autre arriué à la Nation Neutre pendant que nos 
Peres y eftoiêt [45] vn ieune enfant allant puifer de 
l'eau dans vne riuiere glacée, tomba dans Ie trou: vn 
fien frere en ayant efté aduerty s'en court auffi toft, 
& fe iette apres luy: il fut fi heureux que d'attrap- 
per fon petit frere, & Ie retirer de l'eau par vn autre 
trou, encore affez à temps pour luy fauuer la vie. 
La confolation que les Peres ont receu à la fin de 
leur voyage, a efté, outre quelques enfans baptizez 
l'année paffée qu'ils ont trouué morts, & d'autres 
qu'ils ont nou uellement baptifé; de voir generalement 
parlant ces Peuples adoucis & appriuoifez de la moi- 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


183 


their bundles, when they issued from a little thicket, 
each one felt a hand seize him by the shoulder and 
a voice cried: "You are dead men! II Immediately 
they found themselves upon the ground. They 
[44] expected next nothing less than a blow from a 
hatchet or a knife; but nothing else followed. Then 
they arose, and perceived the naked Savages who 
were fleeing, some to one side, and some to the 
other, without being able to know or to conjecture 
what they had intended by this action, or what had 
arrested their design. 
At another time, when they were making a jour- 
ney, they found themselves in snow above their 
knees, their feet in water, and the wind so rough, 
that two Savages, taking on that same day that same 
path, died therein from cold. A remarkable thing 
occurred at the death of one of the two. This latter 
was making the journey with a twin sister; seeing 
her in as great danger of death as himself, he took 
the Bear skin with which his sister was covered, and 
gave her his Beaver skin or robe, as it was warm; 
and, in fact, the girl escaped, and the young man 
died. 
In connection with this act of piety, I will speak 
here of another, that occurred in the Neutral Nation 
while our Fathers were there. [45] A young child 
went to draw water from a frozen river and fell into 
the hole; one of his brothers, having been told of it, 
immediately ran and threw himself in after him; he 
was so fortunate as to seize his little brother and 
draw him out of the water by another hole, and also 
in time enough to save his life. 
The consolation that the Fathers had at the end 
of their stay was,- besides some children baptized 



184 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


tié plus que l'année pafíée: plufieurs qui commen- 
cent à entendre volontiers parler de Dieu, & quelques 
vns mefmes qui fembleroient fuffifamment difpofez 
pour Ie Baptefme, fi l'experience ne nous auoit fait 
voir qu'en fait de Barbares, Ie plufiofi baptifer n'efi 
pas Ie meilleur. Quelques Algonquins de ce quar- 
tier commencent mefme defia à prier & chanter les 
loüanges de Dieu. L'exemple de quelques-vns de 
leur langue qu'ils ont veu icy en nofire maifon, & [46J 
d'autres dont ils ont entendu parler, leur donne, ce 
femble quelque fainéte emulation. Dieu la leur 
veüille accroifire & confirmer. 
Ces Algonquins nous font d'autant plus confide- 
rabIes que nous fçauons qu'ils ont commerce auec des 
Nations Occidentales, où nous n' auons encore pû 
trouuer moye d'aborder. Peut-efire efi ce là la porte 
que Dieu en fon temps nous ouurira, fi nous luy 
íommes fideles à ce que nous auons en main. 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


185 


last year, who they found had died, and otbers 
whom they recently baptized,- to see, generally 
speaking, these People gentler and more docile by 
half than they were last year; many of them begin 
willingly to hear of God, and a few of them would 
even seem sufficiently prepared for Baptism, if ex- 
perience had not shown us that, as regards Barbari- 
ans, immediate baptism is not best. Some Algon- 
quins in these parts begin even now to pray, and to 
sing the praises of God. The example of some of 
their own tongue, whom they have seen here in our 
house, and [46] of others of whom they have heard, 
gives them, it appears, some holy emulation. 
Iay 
it please God to increase and strengthen it in them! 
These Algonquins are especially important to us, 
as we know that they have dealings with the West- 
ern Nations, which we have not yet found any means 
of reaching. Perhaps this is the door that God in his 
own time will open to us, if we are faithful to him 
in that which we have in hand. 



186 


LES RELATIONS DES/ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


CHAPITRE VIII. [i.e., vi.] 


DE LA MISSION DES ANGES AUX A TTIKADARON 
[sc. ATTI
ANDARONS] OU PEUPLES 
DE LA NATION NEUTRE. 


C ' EST icy vne des Miffions nouuelles, que nous 
auons commencé cette année à vne des Na- 
tions des plus confiderables qui foit en ces 
contrées. II yauoit long-temps que l'on iettoit les 
yeux de ce cofté là, conformément au fouuenir de 
tout plein de perfonnes. Mais nombre d'ouuriers en 
langues eftrangeres ne fe trouuent ou ne fe forment 
pas fi toft; fi Ie S. [47] Efprit n'y met la main d'vne 
façon extraordinaire: lors particulierement qu'on eft 
deftitué du fecours & de l' affiftance de Maiftres, Tru- 
chemens ou Interpretes qui les enfeignent; comme 
nous Ie fommes en ces quartiers. 
En outre, ce n'eftoit pas l'ordre d'aller aux extre- 
mitez, fans paffer par Ie milieu; & de s'appliquer à 
cultiuer les Nations plus eíloignées, deuant que d'a- 
uoir trauail1é aux plus proches. Ce qu'ayant efté 
fait les années precedentes, nous nous trouuâmes en 
eftat, au commencement de l' Automne, de pouuoir 
deftiner deux Ouuriers à cette Mifsion, fans faire 
aucun tort aux precedentes. 
Celuy fur lequel Ie fort tomba, fut Ie P. lean de 
Brebeuf, lequel ayant autrefois efté choifi pour nous 
introduire Ie premier, & établir en ces cõtrées; & 
Dieu luy ayant donné pour ce regard vne finguliere 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


187 


CHAPTER VIII. [i. e., vi.] 


OF THE MISSION OF THE ANGELS TO THE ATTIWAN- 
DARONS, OR PEOPLES OF THE 
NEUTRAL NATION. 


T HIS is one of the new Missions that we have 
begun this year, to one of the most important 
Nations in these regions. For a long time, 
according to the recollection of many persons, we 
had cast our eyes on this quarter. But many work- 
ers in strange languages are not found, or very 
quickly trained, unless the Holy [47J Ghost engage 
therein in an extraordinary manner; especially when 
one is destitute, as we are in these parts, of the aid 
and assistance of 
1asters, Dragomans, or Interpret- 
ers, who teach them. 
Besides, our orders were, not to go to the limits 
without passing through the centre, or devote our- 
selves to teaching more distant Nations before labor- 
ing among those nearer. As this had been done in 
preceding years, we found ourselves at the beginning 
of Autumn ready and able to allot two Workers to 
this Mission without doing any harm to the former 
ones. 
The lot fell upon Father Jean de Brebeuf, who 
before had been the first one chosen to introduce and 
establish us in these regions; and as God had given 
him for this purpose a special blessing,-namely, in 
the language,- it seemed that this ought to be to us 
a presumption of what his divine Majesty demanded 



188 


LES RELA TIO.NS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


benediétiõ, nõmement en la lãgue; il sebloit que ce 
n09 deuoit eftre vn preiugé de ce que fa cliuine 
1Iaiefté demãdoit en ce rencõtre, où il eftoit queftiõ 
d'vne introduétion toute nouuelle, dans vne Nation 
differente de langage, au moins en plufieurs chofes, 
[4 8 J & où (s'il plaifoit à Dieu donner fa benediétion) 
il feroit neceffaire d'eftablir vne demeure fixe & per- 
manente, qui feroit la retraitte des 
Iiffionnaires d'a- 
lentour, comme celle-cy où nous fommes à prefent, 
I' eft des 1Iiffionnaires des quartiers de deça. 
Celuy qui luy fut donné pour compagnon fut Ie 
Pere Iofeph 
Iarie Chaumonot, venu de France l'an- 
née d'auparauant que l'on auoit reconneu tres-propre 
pour les langues. 
Cette nation eft gran dement peuplée: l'on y conte 
enuiron quarante bourgs ou bourgades. Partant de 
nos Hurons pour arriuer aux premiers & plus proches, 
on chemine q uatre ou cinq iournées; c' eft à dire, 
enuiron quarante lieuës, tirant toufiours droit au 
Sud. De forte que nous pouuons dire, que fi felon 
la derniere & plus exaéte obferuation qu'on a pû 
faire, noftre nouuelle maifon de Sainéte lYlarie (qui 
eft au milieu du païs des Hurons) eft à quarante- 
quatre degrez & enuirõ vingt & cinq minutes d'ef1e- 
uation, l'entrée de la Nation Neutre du cofté de nos 
[49J Hurons, aura d'ef1euation 4 2 . degrez & demy ou 
enuiron. Car de pen fer en faire pour Ie prefent vne 
plus exaéte recherche & obferuation dãs Ie païs 
mefme, c'eit ce qui ne fe peut. La veuë du feul 
inítrument feroit pour porter à l'extremité ceux qui 
n' ont pû fouffrir celle des efcritoires, comme nous 
verrons cy apres. 
Du premier bourg de la Nation Neutre, que l'on 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


189 


on this occasion in which it was a question of an en- 
tirely new introduction into a Nation different in lan- 
guage, at least in many respects, [48] and in which 
(if it should please God to grant his blessing) it 
would be necessary to establish a fixed and perma- 
nent dwelling, which should be the retreat of the 
neighboring Missionaries, as this one, in which we 
are at present, is for the Missionaries of the quarters 
on this side. 
He who was given to him as companion was Fa- 
ther Joseph :Marie Chaumonot, who came from France 
the year before, and had been acknowledged very 
gifted in languages. 
This nation is very populous; about forty villages 
or hamlets are counted therein. Setting out from 
our Huron people to reach the first and nearest 
villages, we travel four or five days,-that is to say, 
about forty leagues,- going always directly South. 
So we can say that if, according to the latest and 
most exact observation which we have been able to 
make, our new house at Sainte Marie (which is in 
the midst of the Huron country) is in forty-four de- 
grees and about twenty-five minutes of latitude, the 
entrance to the Neutral Nation from the side of our 
[49] Huron people will have a latitude of 42 degrees 
and a half, or thereabouts. For to think of making, 
for the present, a more exact research and observation 
in the country itself, is what cannot be done. The 
sight of the instrument alone would drive to extremi- 
ties those who have not been able to endure that of 
inkstands, as we shall see hereafter. 
From the first village of the Neutral Nation which 
one finds on arriving there from this place, and 
continuing to travel South or Southeast, it is about 



190 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


rencontre y arriuant d'icy, continuant de cheminer 
au Midy ou Sudeft, il y a enuiron quatre iournées de 
chemin iufques à l'emboucheure de la Riuiere fi 
celebre de cette Nation, dans l'Ontario ou lac de S. 
Louys. Au deçà de cette Riuiere, & non au delà, 
comme Ie marque quelque Charte, font la plus part 
des bourgs de la Nation N eutre. II y en a trois ou 
quatre au delà, rangez d'Orient à l'Occident, vers la 
Nation du Chat, ou Erieehronõs. 
Cette Riuiere ou Fleuue, eft celuy par lequel fe 
defcharge noftre grand lac des Hurons, ou Mer 
douce; qui fe rend premierement dans Ie lac d'Erié, 
ou de la Nation du Chat; & iufques là elle [soJ entre 
dans les terres de la Nation Neutre, & prend Ie nõ 
d'Onguiaahra, iufques à ce qu'elle fe foit defchargée 
dãs l'Ontario ou lac de fainét Louys, d'où en fin fort 
Ie Heuue qui paffe deuant QuebeK, dit de S Lau- 
Tens. De forte que fi vne fois on eftoit maiftre de la 
cofte de la mer pI us proche de la demeure des Iro- 
quois, on monteroit par Ie Heuue de faind Laurens 
fans danger, iufques à la Nation Neutre, & au delà 
de beaucoup; auec efpargne notable de peine & de 
temps. 
Suiuant l'eftime des Peres qui y ont efté, il y a 
bien au moins douze mille ames dans toute l'eftenduë 
du pays qui fait eítat de pouuoir encore fournir qua- 
tre mille guerriers, nonobftant les guerres, la famine, 
& la maladie qui depuis 3. ans Y ont extraordinaire- 
met regné. 
Apres tout, ie croy que ceux qui ont autre fois 
donné tant d'eftenduë à cette Nation, & luy ont don- 
né tant de peuples ont entendu par la Nation N eutre, 
toutes les autres Nations qui font au Sud & Suroüeft 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


191 


four days' journey to the entrance of the so celebrated 
River of that Nation, into the Ontario or lake of St. 
Louys. On this side of that River,-and not beyond 
it, as a certain Chart indicates,- are the greater part 
of the villages of the Neutral Nation. There are three 
or four beyond, ranging from East to West, towards 
the Nation of the Cat, or Erieehronons. 
This Stream or River is that through which our 
great lake of the Hurons, or fresh-water Sea, emp- 
ties; it flows first into the lake of Erié, or of the 
Nation of the Cat,ll and at the end of that lake, it [so] 
enters into the territory of the Neutral Nation, and 
takes the name of Onguiaahra,12 until it empties into 
the Ontario or lake of saint Louys, whence finally 
emerges the river that passes before Quebek, called 
the St. Lawrence. So that, if once we were masters 
of the coast of the sea nearest to the dwelling of the 
Iroquois, we could ascend by the river saint Lawrence 
without danger, as far as the Neutral Nation, and far 
beyond, with considerable saving of time and trouble. 
According to the reckoning of the Fathers who 
have been there, there are at least twelve thousand 
souls in the whole extent of the country, which re- 
lies upon being still able to furnish four thousand 
warriors, notwithstanding the wars, famine, and sick- 
ness which for 3 years have been unusually prevalent 
there. 
After all, I believe that those who formerly as- 
cribed such an extent to this Nation, and assigned 
to it so many tribes, understood by the term " N eu- 
tral Nation, II all the other Nations which are South 
and Southwest of our Hurons,-which indeed are 
very numerous, but which in the beginning [5 I] hav- 
ing been only confusedly known, were comprised 



192 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


de nos Hurons, qui en effeét font en grand nombre, 
mais qui au commencement [5 I] n'ayans efté connuës 
que confufément, auoient efté prefque cõprifes fous 
vn mefme nom. La cognoiffance plus gran de qu' on 
a euë depuis ce temps là, foit de la langue, foit du 
pais, a fait qu'on a diftingué dauantage. 
Au refte, de plufieurs Nations differentes dont on 
a maintenant la cognoiffance, il ne s'en trouue pas 
vne qui n'ait commerce ou guerre auec d'autres plus 
ef1oignées. Ce qui confirme qu'en effet la multitude 
eft grande de ces Peuples qui nous reftent à voir: & 
que s'il n'y a pas encore grãde moifsõ à faire il y a 
de grands champs à labourer & ferner, 
Nos François qui les premiers ont efté icy, ont 
furnommé cette Nation, la Nation Neutre, & non 
fans raifon. Car ce pais eftant Ie paffage ordinaire 
par terre de quelque Natiõ d'Iroquois & des Hurõs 
ennemis iurez; ils fe cõferuêt en paix égalemêt auec 
les deux. Voire mefme autresfois les Hurons & les 
Iroquois fe rencontrans en mefme cabane ou mefme 
bourg de cette Nation, les vns & les autres eftoient 
en affeurance tant qu'ils ne fortoient à la campagne; 
[52] mais depuis quelque temps la furie des vns con- 
tre les autres eft fi grande qu'en quelque lieu que ce 
foit, il n'y a pas d'affeurance pour Ie plus foible, 
particulierement s'i1 eft du party Huron, pour lequel 
cette Nation, pour la plus part, femble auoir moins 
d'inclination. 
Nos Hurons appellent la Nation Neutre Atti
an- 
daronK, comme qui diroit, Peuples d'vne langue vn 
peu differente: car quant aux Nations qui parlent 
d'vne langue qu'ils n'entendent aucunement, ils les 
appellent AK
anaKe, de quelque Nation quïls puif- 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


193 


almost under one and the same name. The greater 
knowledge that we have gained since that time, both 
of the language and of the country has made us 
more discriminating. 
Besides, of many different Nations with whom we 
now have acquaintance, there is not found one that 
has not trade or war with others more distant; this 
assures us that really there is a great multitude of 
these Tribes, which remain for us to see; and that, 
if there are not yet abundant harvests to gather, 
there are great fields to plough and to sow. 
Our Frenchmen who were first here surnamed this 
Nation" the Neutral Nation," and not without rea- 
son; for this country being the ordinary land route 
of some Iroquois Tribes and of the Hurons, who are 
sworn enemies, they keep themselves equally in 
peace with both.l:
 Nay, even, formerly the Hurons 
and the Iroquois, when they met in the same cabin 
or in the same village of this Nation, were both in 
security so long as they did not go out into the fields; 
[52] but for some time the rage of one against the 
other has been so great that, in whatever place they 
be, there is no security for the most feeble,- espe- 
cially if he be of the Huron side, for which this Na- 
tion, for the most part, seems to have less inclination. 
Our Hurons call the Neutral Nation" Attiwanda- 
ronk," which is to say" Peoples of a slightly differ- 
ent language: II for, as to the Nations who speak a 
language which they in no wise understand, they call 
them" Akwanake, "-of whatever Nation they may 
be,- which is to say, "strangers." Those of the 
Neutral Nation, reciprocally, for the same reason call 
our Hurons Attiwandaronk. 
We have every reason to believe that not long ago 



194 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


fent eftre, comme qui diroit eftrangers. Ceux de la 
Nation Neutre reciproquement pour la mefme raifon 
appellent nos H urons Atti
andaronK. 
Nous auons tout fujet de croire qu'il n'y a pas 
long temps qu'ils ne faifoient tous qu'vn Peuple, & 
Hurons & Iroquois, & ceux de la Nation Neutre; & 
qu'ils viennent d'vne mefme famille, ou de quelques 
premieres fouches abordées autrefois aux coftes de 
ces quartiers. Mais que par fucceffion de temps, ils 
fe font efioignez & feparez les vns [53J des autres, 
qui plus, qui moins de demeure, d'interefts & d'af- 
feétion: de forte que quelques vns font deuenus enne- 
mis, d'autres Neutres, & d'autres font demeurez 
dans quelque liaifon & communication plus particu- 
liere. 
Ces Peuples qui font N eutres entre les Hurons & 
les Iroquois, ont de cruelles guerres auec d'autres 
Nations Occidentales; & particulierement auec les 
Atfiftaehronons, ou Nation du Feu: de laquelle l'an 
paffé ils prirent cent prifonniers, & cette année, y 
eftans retournez en guerre auec vne armée de deux 
mille hommes, ils en ont encore amené plus de cent 
feptante: enuers lefquels ils fe comportent quafi 
auec les mefmes cruautez que les Hurons enuers 
leurs ennemis; toutesfois ils ont cela de plus, qu'ils 
brufient les femmes prifonnieres de guerre, auffi bien 
que les hommes: ce que ne font pas les Hurons, qui, 
ou leur donnent la vie, ou fe contentent de les affom- 
mer à la chaude, & emporter quelque partie du corps. 
Le viure & Ie veftir de cette Nation ne femble pas 
beau coup different de celuy [54J de nos Hurons. Ils 
ont Ie bled d'Inde, les faizoles & les citroüilles en 
efgale abondance. La pefche pareillement y femble 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF T640-4I 


195 


they all made but one People,- both Hurons and 
Iroquois, and those of the Neutral Nation; and that 
they came from one and the same family, or from a 
few old stocks which formerly landed on the coasts 
of these regions. But it is probable that, in prog- 
ress of time, they have become removed and sepa- 
rated from one [53] another-some more, some less- 
in abode, in interests, and in affection; so that some 
have become enemies, others Neutral, and others 
have remained in some more special connection and 
communication. 
These Tribes which are Neutral between the 
Hurons and the Iroquois, have cruel wars with other 
Western Nations, and especially with the Atsistae- 
hronons. or Fire Nation,- from which they took last 
year a hundred prisoners; and this year, having 
returned there for war with an army of two thousand 
men, they again brought away more than a hundred 
and seventy, toward whom they conduct themselves 
with almost the same cruelties as the Hurons do 
towards their enemies. However, they practice the 
further cruelty of burning the women prisoners of 
war, as well as the men,-which is not done by the 
Hurons, who either give them their lives, or content 
themselves with knocking them down in the heat of 
the moment, and bearing off some portion of their 
bodies. 
The food and the clothing of this Nation do not 
greatly differ from those [54] of our Hurons: they 
have Indian corn, beans, and squashes in equal 
plenty; the fishing likewise seems equal, as regards 
the abundance of fish, of which some species are 
found in one region. that are not in the other. The 
people of the Neutral Nation greatly excel in hunt- 



196 


LES RELA TIOl'lS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


efgale, pour l'abondance de poiffon, dont quelques 
efpeces fe trouuent en vn lieu, qui ne font point en 
l'autre. Ceux de la Nation Neutre l'emportent de 
beaucoup pour la chaffe des Cerfs, des Vaches & des 
Chats fauuages, des loups, des beftes noires, des 
Caftors & autres animaux, dont les peaux & les 
chairs font precieufes. L'abondãce de chair y a efté 
grande cette année pour les neiges extraordinaires 
qui font furuenuës, qui ont facilité la chaffee Car 
eftant chofe rare que de voir dans Ie païs plus d'vn 
demy pied de neige, il y en auoit cette année plus de 
trois pieds. Ils ont auffi quantité de coqs d'lnde fau- 
uages, qui vont par troupes dans les champs & dans 
les bois. 
Pour Ie rafraifchiffement des fruiéts, il ne s'y en 
trouue pas plus qu'aux Hurons, fi ce n'eft des cha- 
ftaïgnes dont ils ont quantité, & des pommes de bois 
vn peu plus groffes. 
Ils vont couuerts d'vne peau fur la chair nuë com- 
me tous les Sauuages; mais [55J auec moins de rete- 
nuë que les Hurons pour Ie brayé, dõt plufieurs ne 
fe feruet point du tout: d'autres s'en feruent, mais 
pour l'ordinaire de la forte qu'à grãd peine ce qui ne 
fe doit voir fe trouue caché. Les femmes toutefois 
font ordinairement couuertes au moins depuis la cein- 
ture iufques aux genoux. Ils femblent plus defbordez 
& impudents en leurs impudicitez, que nos Hurons. 
Ils paffent leurs peaux auec beaucoup de foin & 
d'induftrie, & s'eftudient à les enjoliuer en diuerfes 
façõs; mais encore plus leur propre corps, fur lequel 
depuis la tefte iufqu'aux pieds ils font faire mille 
diuerfes figures auec du charbon picqué dans la chair, 
fur laquelle auparauãt ils ont tracé leurs lignes. De 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


197 


iug Stags, Cows, wild Cats, wolves, black beasts,14 
Beaver, and other animals of which the skin and the 
flesh are valuable. The supply of meat has been 
great there this year on account of the heavy snows 
which have fallen and which have facilitated hunt- 
ing; for it is a rare thing to see in the country more 
than half a foot of snow, and they have had this year 
more than three feet. They have also multitudes of 
wild Turkeys, which go in flocks through the fields 
and woods. 
As for the refreshment of fruits, not more of them 
are found there than among the Hurons, unless it 
be chestnuts, of which they have plenty; and wild 
apples, a little larger than these. 
They cover the bare flesh with a skin, like all Sav- 
ages; but [55] with less modesty than the Hurons 
as to the breechcloth, which many do not use at 
all; others use it, but generally in such a way that 
with great difficulty is that concealed which should 
not be seen. The women, however, are ordinarily 
covered, at least from the waist as far as the knees; 
they seem more dissolute and shameless in their 
licentious acts than are our Hurons. 
They dress their pelts with much care and skill, 
and study to beautify them in many ways; but still 
more their own bodies, upon which, from the head 
even to the feet, they cause to be made a thousand 
different figures with charcoal pricked into the flesh, 
upon which previously they have traced their lines,- 
so that sometimes one sees the face and breast orna- 
mented with figures, as are in France the helmets, 
breastplates, and gorgets of military men; and the 
remainder of the body is appropriately decorated. 
As for the rest of their customs and manners, they 



198 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


forte qu' on leur void quelquefois Ie vifage & l'efio- 
mac figuré, cõme Ie font en France les morions & les 
cuiraffes & les hauffecols des gens de guerre, & Ie 
refie du corps à l'aduenant. 
Pour Ie refie de leurs coufiumes & façõs de faire, 
ils font prefque en tout seblables aux autres Sauuages 
de ces contrées; fpecialemet en leur irreligiõ & gou- 
uernemet, [56] foit politiq; foit æconomiq;. 
11 y a toutesfois quelques chofes en quoy ils fem- 
blent vn peu differens de nos Hurons Premierement, 
ils paroiffent plus grãds, plus forts & mieux faits. 
Secondement, l'affeétiõ enuers leurs morts, fem- 
ble efire bien plus grandee Nos Hurons inconti- 
nent apres la mort, portent les corps au cimetiere, & 
ne les en retirent que pour la fefie des Morts: ceux 
de la Nation Neutre, ne portent les corps au cime- 
tiere que Ie plus tard qu'ils peuuent, lors que la pour- 
riture les rendroit infupportables. Ð'où ce fait que 
les corps paffent fouuent l'hyuer entier dans les ca- 
banes; & les ayànt vne fois mis dehors fur vn efchaf- 
faut pour pourrir, ils en retirent les os Ie plufiofi 
qu'il fe peut, & les expofent en veuë, arrangez de cofié 
& d'autre dans leurs cabanes, iufques à la fefie des 
Morts. Cet objeét qu'ils ont deuant les yeux, leur 
renouuellant continuellement Ie reffentiment de leurs 
pertes, leur fait ordinairement ietter des cris, & faire 
des lamentations tout à fait lugubres, Ie tout en chan- 
fon. Mais cela ne fe fait que par les femmes. 
[57] La troifiefme chofe en quoy ils femblent diffe- 
rens de nos Hurons, c'en en la multitude & qualité 
des fols. On ne trouue autre chofe, all ant par Ie 
pays, que des gens qui font ce perfonnage auec toutes 
les extrauagances poffibles, & libertez qu'ils pren- 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


199 


are, in almost all things, like the other Savages of 
these regions, especially in their irreligion and 
government, [56] whether political or domestic. 
However, there are some things in which they 
seem a little different from our Hurons. First, they 
appear taller, stronger, and better proportioned. 
Secondl y, their affection toward their dead seems 
to be much greater. Our Hurons immediately after 
death carry the bodies to the burying ground and 
take them away from it only for the feast of the 
Dead. Those of the Neutral Nation carry the bodies 
to the burying ground only at the very latest mo- 
ment possible when decomposition has rendered them 
insupportable; for this reason, the dead bodies often 
remain during the entire winter in their cabins; and, 
having once put them outside upon a scaffold that 
they may decay, they take away the bones as soon 
as is possible, and expose them to view, arranged 
here and there in their cabins, until the feast of the 
Dead. These objects which they have before their 
eyes, renewing continually the feeling of their losses, 
cause them frequently to cry out and to make most 
lugubrious lamentations, the whole in song. But 
this is done only by the women. 
[57] The third respect in which they seem differ- 
ent from our Hurons, is in the multitude and sort of 
lunatics. In going through the country, one finds 
nothing else but people who play this part with all 
possible extravagances, and any liberties they choose, 
and who are suffered to do all that is pleasing to 
them, for fear of offending their demon. They take 
the embers from the fire, and scatter them around; 
they break and shatter what they encounter, as if 
they were raving,- although in reality, for the most 



200 


LES RELA TI01VS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


nent, & qui font tolerés de faire tout ce qui leur 
plaift, crainte de defplaire à leur demon. lIs iettent 
& efparpillent les braifes des foyers, rompent &brifent 
ce qu'ils rencontrent, comme s'ils eftoient furieux, 
quoy qu'en effeét, pour la plus part ils foient auffi 
prefens à eux mefmes, que ceux qui ne font pas ce 
perfonnage. 
Iais ils fe comportent de la forte, pour 
donner, difent-ils, ce contentement à leur demon 
particulier, qui demande & exige cela d'eux: fçauoir à 
celuy qui leur parle en fonge, & qui leur fait efperer 
l'accompliffement de leurs fouhaits pour Ie bon 
fuccez de la chaffee 
Les Peres eftans en ces quartiers apprirent que les 
Oneiochronons (qui font vne des cinq Nations d'Iro- 
quois) auoiêt vne façon de gouuernement fort particu- 
Her. Les hommes & les femmes y [58] manient 
alternatiuement les affaires: de forte que fi c'eft 
maintenãt vn hõme qui les gouuerne, ce fera apres 
fa mort vne femme, qui de fon viuant les gouuernera 
à fon tour, excepté ce qui regarde la guerre; & apres 
la mort de la femme, ce fera vn homme qui repren- 
dra derechef Ie maniement des affaires. 
Quelques anciens racontoient à nos Peres qu'ils 
auoient cognoiffance d'vne certaine Natiõ Occidêtale, 
vers laquelle ils alloiêt faire la guerre, qui n'eftoit 
pas beaucoup eíloignée de la mer. Que les habitãs 
du lieu y pefchoiêt les Vignots, qui font vne efpece 
d 'huiftres, dont l' efcaille fert à faire la pourcelaine, 
qui font les pedes du païs. V oicy la façon qu'ils 
defcriuent leur pefche. lIs obferuent quand la mer 
mõte aux endroits où ces Vignots abondent; & lors 
que la violence des flots les pouffe vers Ie bord, ils fe 
iettent à corps perdu dans les eaux, & fe faififfent 



1641-42] 


RELA TI01V OF I640-4I 


201 


part, they are as self-collected as those who do not 
play this character. But they conduct themselves in 
this way, in order to give, they say, this satisfaction 
to their special demon, who demands and exacts this 
of them,-that is to say, to him who speaks to them 
in dreams, and who makes them expect the fulfill- 
ment of their wishes for good success in hunting. 
While the Fathers were in these quarters, they 
learned that the Oneiochronons (who form one of the 
five Iroquois Nations) had a very peculiar form of 
government. The men and the women therein [58] 
administer alternately the affairs; so that, if now it 
is a man who governs them, after his death it will 
be a woman, who during her life will govern them 
in her turn, except in what regards war; and, after 
the death of the woman, it will be a man who will 
resume again the administration of affairs. 
Some old men related to our Fathers that they had 
acquaintance with a certain W estern Nation, against 
which they were going to make war, and which was 
not far removed from the sea; that the inhabitants 
of the place fished for Vignots, that are a kind of 
oyster, the shell of which serves to make porcelain 
beads, which are the pearls of the country. This is 
the way they describe their fishing: they observe 
when the sea rises in places where these Vignots 
abound, and when the violence of the waves drives 
them towards the shore, they throw themselves 
headlong into the water and seize those that they 
can catch. Sometimes they find them so large, that 
it is all they can do to stretch their arms around one 
of them. Now, many affirm that it must be [59] 
young men, who have not yet had knowledge of 
woman, who can carryon this fishery, as otherwise 



202 


LES RELA TI01VS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


de ceux qu'ils peuuent atrapper. Ils en trouuent 
quelquefois de fi gros, que c'eft tout ce qu'ils peu- 
uent faire que d'en embrafíer vn. Or plufieurs 
afíeurent, qu'il faut que ce íoient [59] ieunes gens 
qui n'ayent encore eu cognoifíance de femme, qui 
faffent cette peíche, qu'autrement ces animaux íe 
retiret d'eux. Ie m'en rapporte à la verité. 
Ils racontoient que ces meímes Peuples ont vne 
eípece de guerre auec certains animaux aquatiques, 
plus grands & plus legers à la couríe que les Ori- 
gnaux. Les ieunes gens vont agacer dãs l'eau ces 
animaux, qui ne manquent pas auffi toft de gaigner 
la terre, & pouríuiure leurs agrefíeurs. Ceux-cy íe 
íentans íuiuis de trop prés, iettent quelque piece de 
cuir, cõme íouliers íauuages, à ces animaux qui s'ar- 
reftêt & s'amuíent, pendãt que les chafíeurs gaignent 
Ie deuãt: qui autant de fois qu'ils íe íentent íuiuis 
de trop prés, font Ie meíme que la premiere fois, 
iuíques à ce qu'ils íoient arriuez à vn fort ou embuí- 
cade d'vne troupe de leurs gens, qui enuironnans la 
befte, s'en rendent en fin les maiftres. Voila ce que 
nous auons apris de plus confiderable de ces contrées. 
Plufieurs de nos François qui ont efté icy, ont fait 
autrefois voyagé en ce païs de la Natiõ Neutre, pour 
en tirer les [60] profits & les auantages de pelleterie, 
& autres petites denrées qu'on en peut eíperer. 
Mais nous n' auons cognoifíance d' aucun qui y íoit 
pafíé à defíein d'y preícher l'Euangile, finon du 
Reuerend Pere Ioíeph de la Roche Daillon Recolleét; 
qui en 1626. y fit vn voyage, & y pafía l'hyuer. Mais 
les François qui eftoient pour lors icy, ayans appris 
Ie mauuais traittement qu'il yauoit receu; craignans 
que les choíes ne paffaffent à l'extremité, Ie retour- 



1641-42] 


RELA TI01V OF I640-4I 


203 


these creatures withdraw from them. I will not 
decide the truth of this. 
They related that these same Tribes have a kind 
of war with certain aquatic animals larger and lighter 
in running than the Moose. The young men go into 
the water to tease these animals, which do not fail 
immediately to gain the land and pursue their assail- 
ants. The latter finding themselves too closely fol- 
lowed, throw some piece of leather, as the shoes of 
the savages, to these animals, which stop and amuse 
themselves therewith, while the hunters gain the 
advance, and as often as they see themselves fol- 
lowed too closely they do the same that they did at 
Brst, until they have arrived at a fort or ambush of 
a band of their people, who, surrounding the beasts, 
make themselves at last their masters. These are the 
most important things we have learned in these 
regions. 
Many of our Frenchmen who have been here have, 
in the past, made journeys in this country of the 
Neutral Nation for the sake of reaping [60] profit and 
advantage from furs and other little wares that one 
might look for. But we have no knowledge of any 
one who has gone there for the purpose of preach- 
ing the Gospel, except the Reverend Father Joseph 
de la Roche Daillon, a Recollect,15 who in 1626 made 
a journey thither, and spent the winter there. But 
the Frenchmen who were then here, having learned 
the evil treatment that he had received there, fear- 
ing lest matters should go to the extreme, went for 
him, and brought him back in the Spring of the fol- 
lowing year. The zeal which led the aforesaid Fa- 
ther to make this journey, as soon as he had set foot 
in the Huron country, not having permitted him to 



204 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


nerent querir, & ramenerent au Printemps de l'année 
d'apres. Le zele qui porta Ie fufdit Pere à faire ce 
voyage, auffi tofi qu'il eut mis Ie pied aux Hurons, 
ne luy ayant pas perm is de fe former auparauant à 
la langue; & fe trouuant Ia plus part du temps fans 
Truchement, il efioit contraint d'infiruire ceux qu'il 
pouuoit, plufiofi par fignes que de viue voix. comme 
i1 raconte luy-mefme en vne fienne lettre imprimée. 
Cela ioint aux mauuais tours que luy ioüerent pour 
lors les Hurons; qui craignoient Ie tranfport de la 
traiéte, femblables à ceux dont nous parlerons tan- 
tofi, ne luy permit pas en fi [61] peu de temps, de 
faire ce qu'il eufi defiré pour Ie feruice de Dieu. 
Quatorze ans done apres, les deux Peres de nofire 
Compagnie, qui ont eu charge de cette Miffion, par- 
tirent de cette :MaÎÍon de S. Marie, Ie fecond iour de 
Nouembre de l'année paffée 1640. 
Arriuez qu'ils furent à S. Iofeph ou Teanaufiajae 
dernier bourg des Hurons, où ils deuoient faire leurs 
prouifions pour leur voyage, & trouuer des guides 
pour Ie chemin. Ceux qui leur auoient donné parole 
leur ayant manqué, ils ne peurent faire autre chofe, 
que de s'addreffer au Ciel, apres quelque væu fait, 
Ie Pere de Brebeuf, rencontra vn ieune homme qui 
n'auoit aucun deffein de faire ce voyage, ie ne fçay 
par quel mouuement il s'addreffa à luy, quoy que 
c'en foit, ne luy ayant dit que ces deux mots, Quio 
acK
e: fus allons nous-en de cõpagnie: ce ieune 
homme fans refifiance les fuiuit fur Ie champ, & leur 
tint fidelle compagnie. Ils auoient auec eux deux de 
nos François domefiiques, tant pour les affifier en 
leur voyage que pour prèdre Ie pretexte de trafiquer 
par leurs [62] mains, & paffer comme marchands dans 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


205 


train himself beforehand in the language, and he 
being the greater part of the time without an Inter- 
preter, he was constrained to instruct those whom 
he could, rather by signs than by word of mouth, as 
he himself relates in one of his printed letters. This, 
joined to the evil tricks which were played on him 
then by the H urons,- who feared the removal of 
their trade, as did those of whom we shall speak pres- 
ently,-did not permit him in so [61] short a time, 
to do what he had desired for the service of God. 
Then, fourteen years afterward, the two Fathers 
of our Society who have had charge of this Mission 
set out from this House of Ste. Marie the second day 
of November of last year, 16 4 0 . 
'Vhen they had arrived at St. Joseph, or Teanaus- 
taiae,-the last village of the Hurons where they were 
to make provision for their journey, and find guides 
for the way,-those who had given them a promise 
having failed them, they could do nothing else than 
appeal to Heaven; after having offered a prayer, 
Father de Brebeuf met a young man who had no 
thought of making this journey. I do not know by 
what impulse he addressed him; ho,V'ever, having 
said to him onl y these two words, "Quio ackwe," 
" Come, let us go away together," this young man, 
without opposition, immediately followed them, and 
remained their faithful companion. They had with 
them two of our French domestics, as much to assist 
them in their journey as to make a show of trading 
with their [62] help, and to pass as merchants in the 
country, in case that without this inducement the 
doors of the cabins should be shut against them, as 
in reality happened. 
They slept four nights in the woods; and on the 



206 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


Ie pais, en cas que fans cette cõfideratiõ les portes 
des cabanes leur deufsêt eftre fermées, comme en 
effet i1 fut arriué. 
11s coucherent quatre nuiéts dans les bois, & Ie 
cinquiefme iour ils arriuerent au premier bourg de. 
la Nation Neutre, nommé Kand
cho, qu'ils furnom- 
merent de tous les Sainéts. 
Comme on n'ignoroit pas la mauuaife difpofition 
des efprits de ces Peuples, abreuuez feulement de 
tOllS les mau[u]ais difcours qui s'eftoient tenus de 
nous en nos quartiers les années paffées, & qui n'en 
auoiêt d'ailleurs autre cõnoiffance; on iugea à propos 
d'y aller auec pre fens & de vi fer à quelque affemblée 
des Capitaines & Anciens que l' on efc1airciroit de 
nos intentions. 
11 falloit pour ce deffein s'addreffer à celuy des 
Capitaines qui manie les affaires du public, nommé 
Tfohahiffen. Son bourg efioit au milieu du pais: 
pour yarriuer i1 falloit paffer par plufieurs autres 
bourgs & bourgades: aufquelles les Peres arriuans 
ils efioient tous eftonnez, que l'effroyauoit marché 
deuant eux, & auoit par tout fait fermer [63] les 
portes des cabanes. Le nom d'Echon (qui eft celuy 
que les Sauuages ont dõné de tout temps au P. de 
Brebeuf) retentiffoit par tout, cõme celuy d'vn des 
plus fameux forciers ou demons qu'on fe fut iamais 
imaginé. Toutefois Ie pretexte de la traite adou- 
ciffoit tout, & céte confideratiõ les fit arriuer affez. 
heureufemët iufques au bourg de ce principal Capi- 
taine, qui fe trouua efire allé à la guerre, pour ne 
reuenir qu'au Printêps. 
os Peres s'adreffent à ceux 
qui en fon abfence faifoient les affaires, ils leur ex- 
pofent leur deffein de publier l'Euangile par toute 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I64o-4I 


207 


fifth day they arrived at the first village of the N eu- 
tral Nation, named Kandoucho, to which they gave 
the surname of " all Saints." 16 
As we were not ignorant of the evil tendency in 
the minds of these People,- saturated solely with all 
the ill-natured remarks that had been made concern- 
ing us in our quarters in past years, and who, besides, 
had no other knowledge of us,- we deemed it expe- 
dient to go to them with presents, and to have in 
view some assembly of the Captains and Aged men 
whom we could enlighten as to our intentions. 
For this purpose it was necessary to apply to one 
of the Captains, named Tsohahissen, who managed 
the public affairs. His village was in the midst of 
the country; 17 in order to reach it, we were obliged 
to pass through many other villages and hamlets, on 
arriving at which the Fathers were much surprised 
to find that terror had gone before them and had 
caused [63] the doors of tbe cabins everywhere to be 
closed. The name of Echon (which the Savages 
have given at all times to Father de Brebeuf) re- 
sounded on all sides, as that of one of the most 
famous sorcerers or demons that had ever been imag- 
ined. However, the pretext of trade made every- 
thing easy, and this consideration enabled them to 
reach quite successfully even the village of the chief 
Captain, who chanced to be away at war, and would 
not return until Spring. Our Fathers appealed to 
those who were conducting the affairs in his absence; 
they explained to them their plan of publishing the 
Gospel throughout the extent of these territories, and 
of forming, by this means, a special alliance with 
them. As a proof of this, they had brought a collar 



208 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSl'ITES 


[VOL. 21 


l'efienduë de leurs terres, & de contraéter par ce 
moyen vne particuliere alliance auec eux. Pour 
preuue dequoy ils auoient apporté vn collier de deux 
mille grains de pourcelaine, dont ils defiroient faire 
prefent au Public. 
Les Capitaines apres auoir tenu confeil, dirêt pour 
refponfe, Que Ie chef du païs efiãt abfent, on ne 
pouuoit deuãt sõ retour accepter les Presês, qui felõ 
leurs coufiumes, les obligeoient à en faire de reci- 
proques. Que fi nous voulions attêdre iufques là 
nous pouuions cependant [64] aller librement dans 
Ie pais, pour y donner telle infiruétion qu'il nous 
plairoit. 
Rien, ce femble, ne pouuoit arriuer plus à propos 
pour donner temps d'informer en particulier quel- 
ques-vns des plus Anciens, & commencer à appriuoi- 
fer ces efprits fauuages. 1Iais deuant que commen- 
cer, les Peres iugerent à propos de retourner fur 
leurs pas pour reconduire nos domefiiques hors du 
pais; puis reprendre pour la feconde fois leur che- 
min, & commencer leur fonétion. Ce qu'ils firent, 
mais Ie pretexte de la traiéte leur manquant, ils 
eurent bien à fouffrir en fuitte de mille calomnies 
qu'on fufcitoit à l'occafion de leur voyage. 
Nos Hurons difoient, qu'Echon mettant pour la 
premiere fois Ie pied dans leur païs, auoit dit: I'y 
feray tant d'années, pêdant lefquelles i'en feray mou- 
rir tant, & puis i'irayailleurs en faire autant, iuf- 
ques à ce que i'aye perdu toute la terre. 
D'autres difoient, qu'Echon apres auoir fait mou- 
rir par maladie vne partie [65] des Hurons, efioit 
allé faire alliance auec les Sonont
ehronons, qui 
font vne Nation d'Iroquois, la plus redoutée & la 



1641-42] 


RELATION OF I640-4I 


209 


of two thousand porcelain beads, which they desired 
to present to the Public. 
The Captains, after having held a council, said in 
reply that, as the chief of the country was absent, 
they could not accept the Presents before he came 
back, since according to their customs this would 
oblige them to make others in return; but, if we 
were willing to wait until then, we could in the mean- 
time [64] go freely into the country, in order to give 
therein such instruction as we pleased. 
Nothing, it seems, could have happened more op- 
portunely for giving time to instruct in private some 
of the most Aged men, and to begin to tame these 
fierce spirits. But, before commencing, the Fathers 
deemed it expedient to retrace their steps, in order 
to lead our domestics out of the country, then to take 
for the second time their way, and begin their duties. 
This they did, but the pretense of trade failing 
them, they had much to suffer afterward from a 
thousand calumnies which were stirred up on account 
of their journey. 
Our Hurons related that, when Echon set his foot 
in their country for the first time, he had said: "I 
shall be here so many years, during which I shall 
cause many to die, and then I shall go elsewhere to 
do the same, until I have ruined the whole land." 
Others related that Echon, after having ca
sed the 
death, by disease, of a part [65] of the Hurons, had 
gone to make an alliance with the Sonontwehronons, 
who form one of the Iroquois Nations,-the one most 
feared by the Hurons, and the one nearest to them, 
as the former are distant but a day's journey from 
the last village of the Neutral Nation, on the side of 
the East, which is named Onguiaahra, the same name 



210 


LES RELATIQ,NS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


plus voifine de nos Hurons; comme n'eftans eíloi- 
gnez que d'vne iournée du dernier bourg de la 
Nation Neutre du cofié de l'Orient, nommé Onguia- 
ahra, du mefme nom que la Riuiere. Qu'illes eftoit 
allé trouuer pour leur faire prefent de colliers de 
pourcelaine & fers de flefche, & les exciter à venir 
acheuer de ruiner Ie pais. 
D'autres nous aduertiffoient à l'oreille, que nous 
priffions garde à cette affaire. Qu'il n'y auoit eu 
autre caufe du maffacre d'vn de nos François fait icy 
il y a quelques années, que des voyages femblables, 
qui mettoient Ie pais en ialoufie, & en crainte du 
tranfport de la traite. 
D'autres difoient que lors qu'on auoit enterré cet 
excellent Chrefiien Iofeph Chi
atenh
a, Echon fe 
tournant du cofié du pais des Sonont
ehronons, qui 
l'auoient tué, dit tout haut (Sonont
ehronon, c'eft 
fait de toy, tu es mort) & qu'auffi toft apres Ie Pere 
s'efioit acheminé [66J vers leur quartier pour leur 
porter la maladie; laquelle en effeét fe trouuoit parmy 
les ennemis bien forte, pendant Ie fejour des Peres à 
la Nation Neutre. Surquoy les Hurons nous prioient 
de prendre bon courage, & de faire mourir tous leurs 
ennemis. 
Ie ne fçay fi depuis leur depart iufques à leur re- 
tour i1 s'efi paffé fepmaine, qu'on ne nous foit venu 
apporter nouuelles, qu'ayans efié trouuez dans la 
Nation Neutre par les ennemis, ils auoient efié maf- 
facrez de leur main. Mais ie ne fçay s'il y a à dou- 
ter, fi ces bruits ne venoient point de la part des Bar- 
bares de nos quartiers mefmes, qui couuoient de 
long temps quelque mauuais deffein, qu'ils voyoient 
ne pouuoir iamais executer plus impunement que 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I64o-4I 


211 


as the River. They said he had gone to visit them, 
in order to make them a present of porcelain collars 
and arrowheads and to instigate their coming to com- 
plete the ruin of the country. 
Some warned us privately to beware of this under- 
taking, as there had been no other cause for the 
murder of one of our Frenchmen, that occurred here 
some years ago, than just such journeys which made 
the country uneasy and fearful of a transference of 
trade. 
Others said that when that excellent Christian, 
Joseph Chiwatenhwa, was buried, Echon, turning in 
the direction of the country of the Sonontwehronons,. 
who had killed him, said aloud (" Sonontwehronon, 
it is all over with thee,- thou art dead "); and that,. 
immediately after, the Father had proceeded [66] 
toward their district, that he might carry the disease 
to them,- which in truth was raging fiercely among 
the enemy during the sojourn of the Fathers in the 
Neutral Nation. Upon this, the Hurons begged us 
to have good courage and to cause the death of all 
their enemies. 
From the departure of these Fathers until their 
return, I do not know that a week passed without 
some one's coming to bring us news that, these hav- 
ing been found in the Neutral Nation by the enemy, 
they had been slain by their hands. But I cannot 
doubt that these reports came from the Barbarians 
of our own region, who for a long time were medi- 
tating some evil design that they saw no possibility 
of ever executing with more impunity than then,- 
such a murder being likely to be attributed to any 
one else rather than to them; and, it being com- 



212 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


pour lors, ce maffacre deuant eftre attribué à tout 
autre pluftoft qu'à eux; & lequel fe faifant dans vne 
Nation eftrangere, leur pais n'en demeuroit aucune- 
ment refponfable. 
Quoy que c'en foit, i1 eft affeuré qu'vn de nos Hu- 
rons, nommé A
enhoK
i, neveu d'vn des principaux 
Capitaines de [67] ce pais, en compagnie d'vn autre 
Huron a efté par plufieurs bourgs de la Nation Neu- 
tre, lors que nos Peres y eftoient; fe difant enuoyé 
de la part des Capitaines & anciens de ce quartier, 
auec prefens de haches qu'il mõftroit, pour dõner 
aduis aux Capitaines que l'on fe defift de ces Fran- 
çois, s'ils ne vouloiet voir la ruine du pais, pour ne 
nous auoir pas preuenu. Et ces porteurs d'aduis 
adiouftoient qu'en cas qu'õ fift refus de faire Ie coup, 
que la refolutiõ eftoit prife aux Hurõs, de l'executer 
incontinent apres Ie retour des Peres: & que la chofe 
eut defia efté executée fi nous ne nous fuffions tous 
raffemblez enfemble en vne mefme maifon. 
Cet A
enhoK
i ayant en fon chemin rencõtré les 
Peres dãs vn bourg, leur fit mille careffes, & les 
inuitoit & quafi forçoit de cõtinuer à cheminer plus 
auãt dãs" Ie pais auec luy. Mais eux ayãs à fa ire ail- 
leurs Ie laifferent aller. Depuis ayãs apris les dif- 
cours & propofitiõs du perfonage ils ont fait reflexion 
auec quelques Sauuages du pais, fur Ie deffein que 
pouuoit auoir cet A
enhoK
i, les preffant fi fort [68] de 
faire voyage auec luy; & ils n'en ont rien conie<5turé 
que de mauuais. 
Celuy-cy, quoy que Ie plus dangereux, ne fut pas 
toutefois Ie plus effronté. l\lais vn nommé Oëntara 
eftant venu à la Nation 
eutre, apres auoir entre- 
tenu Ie pais de tous les mauuais difcours & calom- 



1641-42] 


RELA TIOJV OF I640-4I 


213 


mitted in a strange Nation, their own country would 
be in no wise responsible. 
However, it is certain that one of our Hurons, 
named A wenhokwi, a nephew of one of the chief 
Captains of [67] this country, in company with an- 
other Huron, had been through many villages of the 
Neutral Nation while our Fathers were there, and 
said he had been sent in the name of the Captains 
and aged men of this neighborhood, with presents 
of hatchets, which he showed, in order to inform the 
Captains that they should beware of these French- 
men unless they were willing to see the country 
ruined from their not having anticipated us. And 
these bearers of advice added that, in case they 
should refuse to carry out the scheme, the Hurons 
had resolved to accomplish it immediately after the 
return of the Fathers; and that the thing would have 
been done before this, had we not all been gathered 
together in the same house. 
\Vhile this Awenhokwi was on his way, he met the 
Fathers in a village, showed them a thousand atten- 
tions, invited them and almost forced them to con- 
tinue traveling further into the country with him; 
but they having business elsewhere let him go on. 
Afterward, when they had heard of the speeches and 
propositions of this fellow, they consulted with some 
Savages of the country concerning the design this 
A wenhokwi could have had in urging them so strong- 
ly [68] to make the journey with him, and they 
surmised nothing but evil therein. 
This man, although the most dangerous, was not 
however the most shameless. But one named Oën- 
tara, who came to the Neutral Nation, after having 
entertained the country with all the evil speeches 



-214 


LES RELATIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


nies, dont les precedentes Relations font pleines: 
Que nous nouriffions la maladie à nofire maifon: que 
nos efcritures n' efioient que forcelleries: que nous 
auions fait mourir tout Ie monde dans les Hurons, 
fous pretexte de prefens: que nous nous difpofions 
à faire mourir tout Ie refie de la terre. Adioufioit, 
qu' on eufi hardiment à nous fermer par tout les 
portes des cabanes. fi on n' en vouloit bien tofi voir 
la defolation. Et il fut fi impudent que de foufienir 
Ie tout en prefence de nos Peres, & de quelques an- 
ciens du pais, qui voulurent confronter les vns auec 
les autres. 
Or quoy que Ie Pere de Brebeuf refuta pertinem- 
ment tous ces mauuais efprits, leur fermât à tous la 
bouche, & les rempliffant de confufion: Si efi-ce que 
[69] Ie yen in vne fois ietté ne fortoit pas fi facile- 
ment du cæur de ces pauures barbares qui craignèt 
tout, pour ne pas cõnoifire celuy qui feul merite 
d'efire craint & redouté. Et plufieurs autres Hurons 
furuenus là deffus, qui confirmoient tous ces difcours, 
donnerent en fin tant d'ombrages de nous aux chefs 
.& aux Capitaines; qu'au bout d'enuiron deux mois 
& demy que les Peres auoient commencé leur 
fonétion, ceux a qui ils s'efioient adreffez au com- 
mencement, pour tenir confeil, & qui auoient ren- 
uoyé l'affaire au retour de Tfohahiffen principal 
Capitaine, les manderèt & leur dec1arerent Ie pou- 
uoir qu'ils auoient de decider les affaires preffantes, 
en l'abfence de Tfohahiffen. Qu'ils commençoient 
à iuger que no fire affaire efioit de cette nature, & 
partant qu'ils en vouloient deliberer fur Ie champ. 
Là deffus faifans mine de tenir confeil, & deliberer 
fur cet affaire defia refoluë par entr'eux, l'vn d'eux 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


215 


and calumnies with which the preceding Relations 
are filled,- that we had bred the malady in our own 
house; that our writings were only sorceries; that 
we had caused everyone among the Hurons to die, 
under pretense of presents; that we were arranging 
to bring all the rest of the world to the grave,- 
added that they should everywhere boldly close the 
doors of the cabins against us, unless they wished 
shortly to see desolation therein; and he was so 
impudent as to affirm everything in presence of our 
Fathers, and some aged men of the country, who had 
desired to confront them with each other. 
Now, although Father de Brebeuf pertinently 
refuted all these evil persons, silencing each one and 
filling them with confusion, still [69] venom once 
dropped into the heart of these poor barbarians is not 
very easily cast out; for they fear everything, since 
they do not know him who alone is worthy to be 
feared and dreaded. And many other Hurons arrived 
unexpectedly at that time, who confirmed all these 
remarks, and, in fact, inspired the chiefs and Cap- 
tains with so many suspicions respecting us, that at 
the end of about two months and a half after the Fa- 
thers had entered upon their duties, those to whom 
they had spoken at first about holding a council, and 
who had deferred the matter until the return of 
Tsohahissen, the chief Captain, sent for them and 
declared that they had power to decide pressing 
affairs in the absence of Tsohahissen, that they be- 
gan to think our undertaking was of this nature, and 
that, therefore, they would deliberate upon it imme- 
diately. Thereupon they made a pretense of hold- 
ing a council to consider this matter, which was 
already resolved upon among them; and one of them 



216 


LES RELA TIONS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


s'approcha des Peres pour leur intimer Ie refultat, 
qui eftoit; qu'on refufoit leur prefent. Les Peres 
dirent que ce n'eftoit pas la feule [70] chofe qui les 
amenoit; mais principalement Ie defir de leur don- 
ner la cõnoiffance d'vn Dieu, & de fon Fils Iefus- 
Chrift noftre Seigneur, & partant qu'ils defiroient 
fçauoir s'ils refufoient d'eftre enfeignez, auffi bien 
qu'ils refufoient Ie prefent. A cela ils refpondirent, 
Que pour la Foy qu'on leur auoit prefchée, ils l'accep- 
toient, n'y trouuans rien que de bon: mais que pour 
Ie prefent ils Ie refufoient abfolument. 
Les Peres affez contens & fatisfaits de cette ref- 
ponfe, comme penfans auoir Ie principal de ce qu'ils 
pretendoient, qui eftoit la liberté de prefcher & pu- 
blier l'Euangile dans Ie païs, iugeret cependãt à pro- 
pos de demander la caufe du refus du prefent, difans 
auoir eu commiffion de Ie faire, & eftre obligez de 
redre cõpte de ce refuse I1s dirent au cõmencement 
que Ie Fifc eftoit pauure, & qu'ils n'auoiêt moyen de 
leur en faire de reciproque. Les Peres firêt refponfe 
que s'il n'y auoit que cela, ils ne fiffent point de 
difficulté d'accepter Ie presêt, qu'ils renonçoient au 
retour, & à la recognoiffance de cette nature; qu'il 
leur fuffifoit [7 I] qu'ils nous tinffent pour freres. Ils 
perfifterent au refus, & ne pouuans apporter de 
pretexte qui ne fuft auffi toft leué; en fin Ie chef du 
Confeil dit, Hé! quoy dõc, ignorez-vous ce qu' A
en- 
hOK
i dit, & eft venu faire icy? & en fuitte Ie danger 
où vous eftes, & où vous mettez Ie païs? A cela on 
s'efforça de refpondre comme au refte; mais on ne 
trouua plus d'oreille capable d'êtêdre, il fallut fe 
retirer. 
Les Peres cependant ne fe tin rent pas chaffez du 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


217 


went to the Fathers to notify them of the result, 
which was, that their present was refused. The Fa- 
thers said that this was not the only [701 thing which 
had brought them, but the principal thing was the 
desire to give them a knowledge of the one God, and 
of his Son Jesus Christ, our Lord; and therefore they 
would like to know if they refused to be taught, since 
they had refused the present. To that they answered 
that, as for the Faith which had been preached to 
them, they accepted it, finding therein nothing but 
good; but as for the present, they refused it abso- 
lutely. 
The Fathers were sufficiently content and satisfied 
with this answer, because they believed they had 
gained the principal thing to which they aspired, 
which was the liberty of preaching and publishing 
the Gospel in the country; however, they deemed it 
fitting to ask a cause for the refusal of the present, 
saying they had been commissioned to give it and 
would be obliged to render an account of this refusal. 
They said, at first, that the Treasury was poor, and 
that they had no means of making one in return. 
The Fathers answered that if it were only that, they 
should have no difficulty in accepting the present, as 
they themselves disclaimed a compensation or reward 
of this nature; that it would suffice [7 I] that they 
should regard us as brothers. They persisted in the 
refusal, and, not being able to bring forward any 
pretext which was not immediately set aside, at last 
the chief of the Council said: " Ah! indeed, do you 
not know what A wenhokwi said, and came here to 
do? and do you not know besides, the danger in 
which you are and in which you are putting the coun- 
try? .. They endeavored to reply to this as to the 



218 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


Pais par l'iffuë de ce Confeil. lIs iugerent bien 
toutefois que fi par Ie paffé ils auoient eu de la peine, 
allans par les bourgs, ils en auroient d'orefnauant 
plus que iamais. En effeét ils n'approchoient pas 
plufiofi d'yn bourg, qu'on crioit de tous cofiez, voicy 
les Ag
a qui viennèt (c'efi Ie nõ qu'ils donnent à 
leurs plus grãds ennemis) barrez vos portes: de forte 
que les Peres fe pre fen tans aux cabanes pour y 
entrer felon l'ordre & la coufiume du pais, n'y trou- 
uoient pour l' ordinaire que vifage de bois, n' efians 
regardez que comme des forciers qui portoient la 
mort & Ie malheur par tout: que fi [72J d'aucuns les 
receuoient, c'efioit fouuent par crainte qu'ils ne fe 
vangeaffent du refus, que pour l'efperance qu'on 
eufi de grand profit, Dieu fe feruant de tout pour 
nourrir fes feruiteurs. 
Au refie, il n'efi pas croyable dans quelles fray- 
eurs les difcours de nos Hurons auoient ietté les 
efprits de ces pauures Barbares, defia de leur naturel 
extremément défians, particulierement des eítran- 
gers, & fur tout de nous, defquels ils n'auoient iamais 
entendu que du mal. Tous les difcours & les calom- 
nies forgées par nos Hurons, les années precedentes, 
ayant dés lors remply leurs oreilles & leurs efprits. 
La feule veuë des Peres faits & vefius d'vne façon 
fi efioignée de la leur, leurs démarches, leurs gefies, 
& tous leurs deportemens leur fembloient autant de 
conuiétion & de confirmation de ce qu' on leur auoit 
dit. Les Breuiaires, efcritoires & efcritures efioient 
cenfez par eux infirumens de magie: s'ils fe met- 
toient à prier Dieu, c'efioit iufiement dans leur idée, 
exercice de forciers. On difoit qu'allans au ruiffeau 
pour lauer leurs [73J plats, ils empoifonnoient les 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF r64o-4I 


219 


rest; but as no one was found willing to listen, it 
was necessary to withdraw. 
Notwithstanding, the Fathers did not consider 
themselves driven out of the Country by the result 
of this Council. However, they thought that if, in 
the past, they had had trouble in going through the 
villages, they possibly would have more than ever in 
the future. Indeed, they no sooner approached a 
village, than from all sides was screamed: "These 
are the Agwa who are coming" (this is the name 
they give to their greatest enemies), ,( fasten your 
doors; II so that the Fathers coming to cabins in 
order to enter them, according to the rule and cus- 
tom of the country, found there generally only closed 
doors; for they were looked upon as sorcerers who 
carried death and misfortune everywhere. And if 
[72] any received them, it was more often through 
fear that a refusal might be resented than for the 
hope they had of great gain,- God utilizing all 
things to maintain his servants. 
Besides, it is inconceivable into what terrors the 
reports of our Hurons had put the minds of these 
poor Barbarians, - already by nature extremely sus- 
picious, particularly of strangers; and above all of 
us, of whom they have never heard anything but 
evil; all the reports and calumnies forged by our 
Hurons in preceding years, have, since that time, 
filled their ears and their minds. The very sight of 
our Fathers, clothed and arrayed in a fashion so 
different from their own, their gait, their gestures, 
and all their manners, seemed like convincing proof 
and confirmation of what they had been told. Bre- 
viaries, inkstands, and writings were considered by 
them as instruments of magic; if the Fathers began 



220 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


eaux: que par toutes les cabanes par tout où ils paf- 
foient, les enfans efioient faifis d'vne toux & d'vn 
flux de fang: que les femmes deuenoient fieriles. 
Bref, il n'y auoit malheur prefent & à venir, dont ils 
ne fuffent confiderez comme la fource. Et plufieurs 
de ceux chez lefquels ettoient logez les Peres, n'en 
dormoièt ny iour ny nuiét: ils n'ozoient toucher à 
leur refie, ils rapportoient leurs prefens, tenans tout 
pour fufpeét. Les bonnes vieilles fe tenoient defia 
pour perduës, & ne regrettoient que leurs petits 
enfans, qui euffent pû repeu pIer la terre. 
Les Capitaines intimidoient les Peres de l' arnuée 
des Sonont
ehronons, qu'ils affeuroient n'efire pas 
loin. Ð'autres ne diffimuloient pas que nos prefens 
n'ayant pas efié acceptez, c'efioit à dire, qu'il n'y 
auoit point d'affeurance pour eux au pais. L'info- 
lence fur..tout, & la tyrannie de quelques hofies efioit 
infupportable, qui leur commandoient comme à des 
efc1aues, & vouloient en tout efire obeis. Quelque- 
fois ils ne leur [74] dõnoient prefque riè pour viure; 
& d'autresfois ils les cõtraignoièt d'aller chez tous 
leurs parens. pour manger ce qu'on leur prefenteroit, 
& puis payer ce qu'ils ordonneroient. 
Bref on ne parloit plus que de tuer & mãger ces 
deux pauures Peres. Les fols cependant couroient 
par Ie bourgs & par les cabanes. Trois vne fois 
pour vn coup entrerent nuds cõme la main, dãs la 
cabane où ils efioient; & apres y auoir fait plufieurs 
tours de leur mefiier, s'en allerent: d'autres fois ces 
fols s' en venoient affeoir proche d'eux, & deman- 
doient à foüiller dans leurs facs; & apres leur auoir 
rauy ce qu'ils auoient entre les mains, s'en alloient 
faifans les fols. Bref, il femble que les Peres fuffent 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF IÓ40-4I 


221 


to pray, it was, in their thought, only the perform- 
ance of sorcerers. It was said that when they 
went to the brook to wash their [73J dishes, they 
poisoned the water; that in all the cabins, wherever 
they went, the children were seized with a cough 
and a bloody discharge; and that the women became 
barren. In short, there was no misfortune present 
or to come, of which they were not considered the 
source. And many of those persons, in whose cab- 
ins the Fathers were lodged, did not sleep either day 
or night: they dared not touch the food they left, 
and they brought back their presents, holding every- 
thing in suspicion. The poor old women considered 
themselves as already lost and only regretted their 
grandchildren, who might have been able to repeo- 
ple the land. 
The Captains threatened the Fathers with the 
arrival of the Sonontwehronons, who, they asserted, 
were not far away. Others did not conceal that as 
our presents had not been accepted, that meant there 
was no security for them in the country. Above all 
the insolence and the tyranny of some of their hosts 
were insupportable, who commanded them as slaves, 
and wished to be obeyed in all things. Sometimes 
they [74J gave them almost nothing for food; and at 
other times they compelled them to go to the cabins 
of all their relatives, to eat what was set before them, 
and then to pay what they should dictate. 
In short, they spoke of nothing but of killing and 
eating these two poor Fathers. In the meantime, 
the madmen were running through the villages and 
the cabins. Once, three of them, as bare as one's 
hand, suddenly entered the cabin in which the Fa- 
thers were, and, after having performed several tricks 



222 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


comme vne balle de laquelle fe ioüoiêt les demons 
au milieu de cette Barbarie, mais auec ordre de la 
diuine Prouidence, que rien ne leur manquafi. 
Comme en effeét en quatre mois qu'ils ont efié là, 
rien iamais ne leur a manqué de ce qui efioit necef- 
faire pour la vie, ny gifie, ny nourriture fuffifante, 
& fe font toufiours bien portez parmy des peines [75] 
& des incommoditez, qui fe peuuent mieux conceuoir 
qu'expliquer. Leur indufirie confifioit à faire pro- 
uifion de quelque pain cuit fous la cendre, à la mode 
du paIs, qu'ils conferuoient les trente & quarante iours 
durant, pour s'en feruir dans la neceffité. 
Les Peres ont parcouru en leur voyage dix-huiéts 
bourgs ou bourgades, à toutes lefquelles ils ont donné 
vn nom Chrefiien, duquel nous nous feruirons cy 
apres aux occafions. I1s fe font arreftez particuliere- 
ment à dix, aufquels ils ont donné autãt d'inftruétion 
qu'ils ont pû trouuer d'audiêce. lIs font efiat d'en- 
uiron cinq cês feux, & de trois mille perfonnes que 
peuuët cõtenir ces dix bourgades, aufquels ils ont 
propofé & publié l'Euangile. 
lais il efi bien diffi- 
cile que Ie fon n'en ait retenty dans tout Ie paIs. 
Nous ne faifons toutefois efiat dans no fire fupputa- 
tion que de ces trois mille. 
Or les Peres ne voyans pas les efprits affez difpo- 
fez, les bruits & les frayeurs s'augmentans toufiours 
de plus en plus, iugerent à propos de retourner fur 
leurs pas, & s'en reuenir au premier bourg de 
[67 i.e., 76) Kand
cho ou de tous les Sainéts; où ils 
fembloient efire Ie moins mal venus; & là trauaillant 
à l'infiruétion des habitans du lieu, atendre Ie Prin- 
temps que nous auiõs arrefié de les renuoIer querir. 
Mais Dieu en difpofa autrement, & de leur cofté & du 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


223 


of their trade, went away; at other times, these mad- 
men came to sit down by them, and asked to search 
their pouches, and, after snatching what they had in 
their hands, went away, feigning insanity. In a 
word, it seemed that the Fathers were like a ball 
with which the demons in the midst of this Barba- 
rism were playing, but with a command from divine 
Providence, that nothing should be lacking to them,- 
for, really, in the four months that they were there, 
they lacked nothing that was necessary to life, nei- 
ther lodging, nor sufficient food; and they were always 
in good health, amid hardships [75] and inconven- 
iences which can be better imagined than explained. 
They showed their ingenuity by laying in a supply 
of bread, baked under the cinders after the manner 
of the country, and which they kept for thirty or 
forty days, that they might have it in case of neces- 
sity. 
The Fathers in their journey passed through eigh- 
teen hamlets or villages, to all of which they gave a 
Christian name, which we shall use hereafter when 
occasion arises. They made a special stay at ten, 
where they gave instruction as often as they could 
find a hearing. They estimated about five hundred 
fires, and three thousand persons, that might be con- 
tained in these ten villages in which they set forth 
and published the Gospel; but it is very probable 
that the tones thereof have resounded throughout the 
country. However, in our reckoning we rely only 
upon the three thousand. 
Now as the Fathers saw that these people were not 
sufficiently willing, and the reports and terrors were 
continually increasing more and more, they deemed 
it expedient to retrace their steps, and return to the 



224 


LES RELA TIO.NS DES .IÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


noftre. Car pour eux eftans arriuez à my-chemin 
de leur retour, au bourg de Teotongniaton, furnom- 
mé de S. Guillaume; la neige furuint en fi grande 
quantité, qu'illeur fut impoffible de paffer outre. Ce 
malheur, s'ille faut ainfi appeller, fut caufe du plus 
grand bien, & de la plus grande confolation qu'ils 
ayent receu en tout leur voyage. Car n'ayans pû 
fubfifter en aucun lieu en paix & en repos, pour eftu- 
dier au moins quelque peu Ie langage du païs, & fe 
rendre encor plus capables d'agir à l'aduenir; ils fe 
trouuerent dans ce bourg logez chez vne hofteffe, 
qui s'eftudioit de leur donner autant de contentement 
que tous les autres par Ie paffé leur auoient donné 
fuiet de defplaifir. 
Elle auoit vn foin tout particulier de leur faire la 
meilleure chere qu'elle pouuoit. Et voyant qu'à 
caufe du Carefme [77J ils ne mangeoient point de 
chair, dont cependant en cette faifon elle auoit abõ- 
dance, & de laquelle feule on faifoit à manger dans 
fa cabane; elle prenoit la peine de leur faire vn pot 
à part, affaifonné de poiffon, beau coup meilleur 
qu'elle n'eut fait pour elle mefme. Elle prenoit vn 
fingulier plaifir de les inftruire en la langue, leur 
diétant fyllabe par fyllabe les mots, comme feroit yn 
maiftre à vn petit efcolier; leur diétant mefme des 
Narrations entieres, telles qu'ils les defiroient. A 
fon exemple les petits enfans, qui ailleurs par tout 
s'enfuyoient ou fe cachoient en leur prefence, icy à 
l'enuy des vns des autres leur rendoient mille bons 
offices; & ne fe pouuoient laffer de les entretenir, & 
leur donner tout contentement, foit pour la langue, 
foit pour quoy que ce fuit. 
Ce n'eft pas tout. Toutes les autres cabanes du 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF IÓ40-4I 


225 


first village of [67 Le., 76] Kandoucho, or all Saints, 
in which they seemed to be the least unwelcome; 
and, laboring there for the instruction of the inhab- 
itants of the place, to wait until Spring, when we had 
engaged to send for them. But God arranged differ- 
ently both for them and for us. For when they had 
arrived midway on their return journey, at the village 
of Teotongniaton, surnamed St. Guillaume,18 snow 
unexpectedly came, in so great quantity that it was 
impossible for them to go further. This misfortune, 
if such it must be called, was the cause of the great- 
est good and the greatest comfort they had had in 
their whole journey: for, while they had been un- 
able to live anywhere in peace and quiet,-so as to 
study, at least somewhat, the language of the coun- 
try, and become still better qualified for work in the 
future,-in this ,
illage they happened to lodge in 
the cabin of a woman, who endeavored to giye them 
as much satisfaction as all the others in the past had 
given them occasion for sorrow. 
She took most special care to give them the best 
fare that she could; and, when she saw that on ac- 
count of Lent [77] they ate no meat,-of which, not- 
withstanding, she had an abundance at that season, 
and on which alone the inmates of her cabin lived,- 
she took the trouble of making them a separate dish 
seasoned with fish, which was much better than she 
would have made for herself. She took rare pleas- 
ure in teaching them the language, dictating the 
words to them, syllable by syllable, as a teacher 
would do to a little pupil; she even dictated to them 
entire Narrations, such as they desired. In imitation 
of her, the little children, who everywhere else ran 
away or kept out of their sight, yied with one another 



226 


LES Rl::..LA TIOIVS DES J
SUITES 


(VOL. 21 


bourg, ne ceffant de crier apres elle qu'elle eufi a 
chaffer les Peres; & à l'intimider de tous les mal- 
heurs dont on les faifoit les porteurs; elle fe moc- 
quoit de tout, & refutoit fi pertinemment toutes les 
calomnies qu'on [78J leur impofoit, qu'elle recon- 
noiffoit n'efire qu'impofiures, parce qu'elle voyoit & 
remarquoit elle mefme en leurs façõs de faire, que 
nous n'euffions pû Ie faire plus pertinemmet. Lors 
que quelqu'vn la menaçoit de la mort, & de la defo- 
lation de fa famille, qui s'enfuiuroit apres Ie depart 
des Peres, & ce pour les auoir accueillis en fa mai- 
fon: elle repliquoit que c'efioit vne chofe ordinaire 
aux hõmes de mourir, & qu'elle s'y attedoit bie; mais 
que ceux qui parloient de la forte, efioiët ceux-Ià 
mefme qui la vouloient enforceler, & faire mourir 
elle & fes enfãs. Qu'au refie, elle aimeroit mieux 
s'expofer & fa famille au danger de la mort, que de 
les congedier en vn temps, où ils pourroient perir 
dans les neiges. 
Non feulement elle auoit à ref põdre à ceux de de- 
hors, mais encore à quelques vns de fa pro pre cabane, 
qui luy reprochoient entr'autres chofes, que fon pere 
efiãt forcier, ce n'efioit pas merueille fi elle fe plai- 
foit tant à retirer des forciers, mais cela ne l' efbran- 
loit non plus que Ie refie. Les petits enfãs auoiët 
d'ordinaire des querelles fur ce mefme fuiet auec 
leurs cõpagnõs; iufques à fe battre pour [79J la de- 
fëfe des PP. Ce qui eft fur tout cõfiderable efi que 
cette bõne femme ne fe laffa iamais ny ne fouffrir tãt 
d'importunitez, ny de cõtinuer fon foin & fa bõne 
chere enuers les Peres iufques au iour de leur depart. 
Le feul regret qui refia aux peres fe feparãs d'auec 
elle, fut de ne lui pouuoir encore dõner Ie bië que no9- 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


227 


here in rendering them a thousand kind services, and 
could not be weary in talking with them, and giving 
them every satisfaction, either in the language or 
whatever it might be. 
This is not all. In all the other cabins of the vil- 
lage, they did not cease to cry after her that she must 
drive away the Fathers, and they intimidated her 
with all the misfortunes of which these were consid- 
ered the bearers. She laughed at everything, and 
so cleverly refuted all the calumnies that were [7 8 ] 
loaded upon them,- which she discovered to be only 
impostures, because she herself was considering and 
observing their manner of proceeding,-that we our- 
selves would not have been able to do so more perti- 
nently. \Vhen anyone menaced her with death, and 
the desolation of her family,-which would follow 
after the departure of the Fathers, and this for hav- 
ing welcomed them to her house,- she replied that 
it was a common thing for men to die, and that she 
indeed expected to die; but that those who were talk- 
ing in this way, were themselves the ones who were 
attempting to bewitch her and to cause her and her 
children to die; however, she would prefer exposing 
herself and her family to the danger of death, to 
sending the Fathers away at a time when they might 
perish in the snow. 
Not only was she obliged to reply to those with- 
out, but also to some within, her own cabin, who 
reproached her, among other things, with her father's 
being a sorcerer,- saying that it was no wonder she 
took such delight in receiving sorcerers; but this 
did not disturb her more than the rest. The little 
children frequently had quarrels over this same sub- 
ject with their companions; they even fought in [79] 



228 


LES RELATIOiVS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


sômes venus aporter aux plus barbares de ces cõtrées; 
la difpofitiô pour ce faire n'efiant pas encore fuffi- 
fante. lIs efperèt que les bônes prieres de ceux qui 
entendront parler de cette hofpitalité, obtièdront 
l'accompliffement de ce qu'ils ont cãmencé à operer 
dans fon efprit. 
Le plus grãd defplaifir que receut cete fème, fut 
de ne pouuoir èpefcher la violèce qu'elle voyoit fou- 
frir à ces PP. Vn fol de fa cabane fe mit à cracher 
fur Ie P. Chaumonot, à luy dechirer fa fotane, à Ie 
vouloir brûler, à chãter tãt d'iniures, & à faire tãt de 
tintamares plufieurs nuits durãt, que les PP. ne pûrèt 
dormir. D'autres venoièt qui leur enleuoièt en fa 
pre fence par force ce qu'ils auoient de plus precieux, 
& pour toute fatisfaétion ne parloient de rien moins 
que de les bruner, & peut-efire l'euffent-ils fait, [80] 
fi leurs bons Anges n'y euffent mis la main. 
Le pere de cefie bonne hofieffe furuenant fur la 
fin, agrea tout ce que fa fille auoit fait pour les Peres, 
& leur tefmoigna vne fort particuliere affeétion, pro- 
mettant de nous venir voir à nofire maifon. Ie prie 
nofire Seigneur que fes pas ne foient pas perdus. 
Ce fut fans doute vne prouidence de Dieu toute 
fpeciale, que Ie retardemet des Peres en ce lieu: car 
en vingt cinq iours qu'ils demeurerent en cette ca- 
bane, ils eurent Ie moyen d'ajufier Ie Diétionnaire, 
& les Peuples [sc. Regles] de la langue Huronne, à 
celIe de ces Peuples, & faire vn ouurage qui feul 
meritoit qu'on fifi yn voyage de plufieurs années 
dans Ie païs: nos Sauuages fe plaifans beaucoup plus 
auec ceux qui parlent leur propre langue, qu'auec 
ceux qui n'en font qu'approcher, qu'ils tiennent iuf- 
ques là pour efirangers. 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


229 


defense of the Fathers. It was especially noticeable 
that this good woman was never impatient in bear- 
ing so many annoyances, and in continuing her atten- 
tions and good cheer to the Fathers until the day of 
their departure. The only regret which the Fathers 
experienced in separating from her, was their inabil- 
ity to give her then the blessing which we came to 
bring to the most barbarous of these regions, as her 
inclination to receive this was not yet sufficient. 
They hope that the fervent prayers of those who 
shall hear of this hospitality will obtain the accom- 
plishment of that which they had begun to effect in 
her mind. 
The greatest sorrow this woman had, was that she 
could not prevent the outrages which she saw these 
Fathers endure. A madman of her own cabin began 
to spit upon Father Chaulnonot, to tear his cassock, 
to attempt burning it, and to call him very hard 
names; and during several nights he made so great a 
din that the Fathers were not able to sleep. Others 
came, who took away from them by force, in her 
presence, their most precious things; and, for all 
amends, spoke of nothing less than of burning 
them,-and perhaps they would have done so, [80] 
had not their good Angels interfered. 
Toward the last, the father of this good hostess 
came unexpectedly, and approved of all that his 
daughter had done for the Fathers; and he expressed 
a very special liking for them, promising to come 
and see us in our own house. I pray our Lord that 
his steps may not be in vain. 
The delay of the Fathers in this place was, doubt- 
less, an exceptional providence of God: for, in the 
twenty-five days that they remained in this cabin, 



230 


LES RELA TIOJ\
S DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


D'autre part nous autres ne receuans icy que rare- 
ment de leurs nouuelles; les Hurons à qui on con- 
fioit les lettres, les perdans en chemin, ou les iettans 
par [81J malice ou par crainte; nous efiions en peine 
de ce qui fe paffoit. Ce qui nous fit refoudre à y 
enuoyer quelques vns qui les accompagnaffent à leur 
retour, à quoy s'offrirent volontiers nos Chrefiiens 
de la Conception, nonobfiant tous les bruits qui cou- 
roient de ce qui fe paffoit, dont deux accompagnez 
de deux de nos domefiiques firêt Ie voyage; Et il 
pleût à Dieu nous les rendre apres huiét iours de 
chemin & de fatigue dans les bois, Ie propre iour de 
S. Iofeph, Patron du païs, encore affez à têps pour 
dire la Meffe, qu'ils n'auoient peû dire depuis leur 
depart. 
Pendant toutes ces bourafques & têpefies, les Peres 
n'ont pas laiffé de pouruoir au falut des petits en- 
fans, vieillards, & malades qu'ils ont peû aborder, 
& qu'ils en ont trouué capables. En tous ces dix- 
huiét bourgs qu'ils ont vifité, il ne s'en efi trouué 
qu'vn, fçauoir celuy de Khioetoa, furnommé de faint 
Michel, qui leur ayt donné l'audience que meritoit 
leur Ambaffade. Dans ce bourg s'efi refugié depuis 
quelques annees, pour la crainte de leurs ennemis, 
[82J vne certaine Nation efirangere, qui demeuroit 
au delà d'Erie ou de la Nation du chat, nommée 
A
enrehronon, qui femble n'efire venuë en ces quar- 
tiers que pour ioüyr du bonheur de cette vifite, & y 
auoir efié conduite par la prouidence du bon Pafieur, 
pour y entendre fa voix. On les a fuffifamment in- 
firuits: mais les Peres n'ont pas iuré à propos de 
paffer encore outre à les baptizer; Ie fainét Efprit fera 
meurir cette femêce qu' on a ietté dedãs leurs cæurs, 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


231 


they were able to harmonize the Dictionary and the 
Syntax of the Huron language with those of these 
Tribes, and accomplish a work which of itself would 
deserve that one make a stay of several years in the 
country,-as our Savages take much more pleasure 
in those who speak their own language than in those 
who only attempt it, and whom they consider for 
that reason as strangers. 
On the other hand, we ourselves only rarely re- 
ceived news of them,-the Hurons, to whom they 
intrusted letters, losing them on the journey, or cast- 
ing them away through [81) malice or through fear; 
we were anxious about what was taking place. This 
made us resolve to send some people who should 
accompany them on their return, for which service 
our Christians of la Conception willingly offered 
themselves, notwithstanding all the reports which 
were current of what was happening. Two of these, 
accompanied by two of our domestics, made the jour- 
ney; and it pleased God to return them to us after 
eight days of travel and fatigue in the forest, the 
very day of St. Joseph, the Patron saint of the coun- 
try, and they even came early enough to say Mass, 
which they had not been able to say since their 
departure. 
During all these gusts and tempests, the Fathers 
had not failed to provide for the salvation of the 
little children, the old men, and the sick, whom they 
could approach and whom they found fitted therefor. 
In all the eighteen villages which they visited, there 
was found only one, to wit, that of Khioetoa, sur- 
named saint Michel, which had given them the hear- 
ing that their Embassy merited. Some years ago, 
through fear of their enemies, there took refuge in 



232 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


& en fon tèps on ira recueillir la moiffon qu'on a defia 
arroufé de tant de fueurs. 
C'efi en cette Nation que les Peres firent Ie 
premier Baptefme d' Adultes, en la perfonne d'vne 
bonne vieille, qui auoit defia prefque perdu l' oüye. 
Au Baptefme de laquelle efi remarquable l'affeétion 
d'vne bonne femme de la mefme cabane, qui feruit 
aux Peres de truchement, luy declarant les myfieres 
de nofire Foy, plus clairement & efficacement, que 
les Peres, difent-ils, n'auoient fait auparauant à elle 
mefme. La pauure femme n'eut rien à repliquer, 
finon que pour efire defia vieille, elle [83J auroit 
trop de peine d'arriuer iufques au Ciel: en outre 
qu'elle n'auoit rien dont elle peût faire prefent aux 
Peres: & qu'il eut fallu attèdre fes enfans qui efioient 
à la chaffe, afin d'auoir d'eux les habits neceffaires 
pour fe parer. II fut facile de la contenter là deffus: 
& elle fut en fin heureufement baptizée. Deux ou 
trois autres adultes ont auffi participé au bonheur de 
cette vifite: Et quelque nombre de petits enfans, qui 
par aduance s'en font allez au Ciel. Entr'autres vn 
petit Huron aagé de deux ans qui efioit pour lors à 
la Nation N eutre, & fe trouua malade: il en refchapa 
pour ce coup, mais quelques mois apres, retourné 
qu'il fut au pais, il fut tué par les ennemis entre les 
bras de fa mere. 
Les Peres ont remarqué en leurs memoires, qu'vne 
des plus fpeciales Prouidences de Dieu en leur en- 
droit a efié qu'on leur eût enuoyé pour les ramener, 
vn de nos domefiiques, qui l'année paffée fut atteint 
& gafié de petite verole. Car les Barbares de ces 
contrées Ie voyant fe defabufoient de la creance qu'on 
leur auoit donnée, & dãs laquelle [84J ils efioient; 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


233 


this village [82] a certain strange 
ation, who had 
dwelt beyond the Erie or cat Nation, called Awen- 
rehronon; and they seemed to have come into these 
quarters only to enjoy the good fortune of this visit, 
and to have been led by the providence of the good 
Shepherd, that they might hear his voice therein. 
They were sufficiently instructed; but the Fathers 
did not think it expedient to go still further, and 
baptize them. The holy Ghost will cause this seed 
that has been dropped into their hearts to ripen, and, 
in his own time, the harvest that has been already 
watered by so many tears will be gathered. 
It is in this Nation that the Fathers administered 
the first Adult Baptism, in the case of a good old 
woman, who had already nearly lost her hearing. A 
remarkable thing at her Baptism was the devotion of 
a good woman of the same cabin, who served the 
Fathers as interpreter, making known to her the 
mysteries of our Faith,-more clearly and effectually 
than the Fathers had to herself, in the first place, so 
they said. The poor woman had nothing to reply, 
except that, as she was now old, she [83] would have 
too much trouble to reach Heaven; besides, she had 
nothing of which she could make the Fathers a pres- 
ent, and she must await her children who were hunt- 
ing, so as to have the necessary garments to adorn 
herself. It was easy to satisfy her regarding these 
things, and she was, at last, safely baptized. Two 
or three other adults participated in the happiness of 
this visit, and a small number of little children, who 
have gone early to Heaven,-among others, a little 
Huron boy two years old, who was then with the 
Neutral Nation, and was sick. He recovered from 
that attack, but, a few months after, when he returned 



234 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


Que nous eftions des demons immortels, & maiftres 
des maladies, dont nous difpofions à noftre bon plai- 
fir, puifque fi peu de chofe a efté capable de com- 
mencer à leur defiller les yeux; ils pourront bien, 
auec Ie temps, fe defabufer entierement, & fe rendre, 
en ce faifant, plus capables des lumieres & des vifites 
du ciel. Cependant nous voyons affez que c' eft Dieu 
feul qui nous a protegez dãs cette nation eftrangere, 
puifque mefme dans les Hurons qui nous font alliez, 
fouuent on y a attenté fur nos vies. Voicy vn acci- 
dent qui eft arriué depuis peu. 
Le Pere Iofeph 11arie Chaumonot retourné de la 
Nation Neutre, fut quelque temps apres donné pour 
compagnon au Pere Antoine Daniel, qui cãmençoit 
en fon quartier les 11iffions d'Efté. Arriué qu'ils 
furent à fainét Michel, bourg de la 11iffion de fainét 
Iofeph, vn ieune efceruelé, dont Ie diable s'eftoit 
defia voulu feruir pour plufieurs autres mefchants 
coups contre nous, prend la refolution d'en tuer vn 
des deux. II fe cache à cofté d'vne cabane, [85J où 
les Peres eftoient en vifite, pour inftruire; de laquelle 
eftans fortis i1 prend fon temps, qu'ils auoient Ie dos 
tourné; & prenant de la main gauche Ie chapeau du 
Pere Chaumonot, qui marchoit Ie dernier, luy def- 
charge de la main droite vn coup de pierre qu'il te- 
noit, fur Ie haut de la tefte nuë. Ie ne fçay ce qui 
empefcha Ie mal qu'il auoit enuie de faire; tant y a 
que celuy cy s'aperceuant que fon coup ne reüffiffoit 
pas comme il auoit pretendu, il court à vne hache, la 
leue pour la rabatre fur Ie Pere. 1:1ais dans cet 
entre-deux, Ie Pere Daniel fon compagnon, & quel- 
ques Hurons accourent, qui arrefterent Ie bra
 & Ie 
coup. Vn de nos Chreftiens de ce bourg, voyant Ie 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


235 


to his own country, he was killed by the enemy in 
the arms of his mother. 
The Fathers remarked in their account that one of 
the most special Providences of God, in respect to 
them, was that one of our domestics, who last year 
was attacked and marked by smallpox, had been 
sent to bring them back: for the Barbarians of these 
regions, when they saw him, were disabused of the 
belief they had received, and which [84] they held,- 
that we were undying demons, and masters of mala- 
dies, of which we disposed at our good pleasure. 
Since so slight a thing was enough to begin the open- 
ing of their eyes, in time they may indeed be entire- 
ly disabused, and become thereby more fit for the 
enlightenment and the visitations of heaven. How- 
ever, we see wen that it is God alone who has pro- 
tected us in this strange nation, since even among 
the Hurons, who are our allies, our lives have often 
been attempted. Here is an incident that happened 
not long ago. 
Shortly after Father Joseph :Marie Chaumonot 
returned from the Neutral Nation, he was given as 
companion to Father Antoine Daniel, who was begin- 
ning the Summer Missions in his district. vVhen 
they had arrived at saint IvHchel, a village of the :Mis- 
sion of saint Joseph, a harebrained young fellow, 
whom the devil had already attempted to use in sev- 
eral other wicked deeds against us, resolved to kill 
one of these two. He concealed himself near a cab- 
in [85] where the Fathers were making a visit of 
instruction; when they went out and had turned 
their backs, he chose his time, and with his left hand 
seizing the hat of Father Chaumonot, who was walk- 
ing last, he dealt him a blow on his bare head with 



236 


LÆS RELA TIONS DES jÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


Pere Chaumonot en cet efiat, entreprend fa cure & 
fa guerifon. En efIet n'ayant trouué que contufion 
& tremeur en la partie offen fee, ilIa fcarifie auec vne 
pierre, la fouffie, & l'abreuue de faliue, puis il appli- 
que deffus Ie mafiic de certaines racines, auec quoy 
il Ie mit en efiat de nous reuenir voir Ie lêdemain: 
Quant au meurtrier, la iufiice qui s'en [86] enfuiuit 
fut, que quelques-vns de fes plus proches luy dirent 
qu'il n'auoit point d'efprit. Nous fupplions nofire 
Seigneur de deuenir Ie Pere de ces pauures aueugles, 
& qu'ils foient en fin fes heritiers, nos coheritiers & 
confreres. 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


237 


a stone he was holding in his right hand. I do not 
know what prevented the harm he desired to do; how- 
ever this latter, perceiving that his act had not suc- 
ceeded as he had expected, ran for a hatchet and 
raised it to let it fall upon the Father. But at this 
point, Father Daniel, his companion, and a few Hu- 
rons came in haste and kept back the arm and the 
blow. One of our Christians in this village, seeing 
Father Chaumonot in this condition, undertook to 
care for him and to heal him. Having actually found 
only a bruise and swelling in the injured part, he 
scarified it with a stone, breathed thereon, and mois- 
tened it with saliva; then he applied to it the gum of 
certain roots, by which he was enabled to return to 
us the next day. As for the murderer, the punish- 
ment which [86J followed him was, that some of his 
nearest relatives told him that he had no sense. We 
beseech our Lord to become the Father of these poor 
blind creatures, and that they may at last be his 
heirs, ånd our fellow heirs and brothers. 



238 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


CHAPITRE VII. 


DE LA MISSION DITE DV SAINCT ESPRIT AUX NIPISSI- 
RINIENS. 


L ES AfKiK
anehronons felon nos Hurons, ou 
Nipiffiriniens felon les Algonquins, font vne 
Nation de la langue Algonquine, qui tient plus 
des errantes que des fedentaires. I1s femblent auoir 
a utant de demeures, que I' année a de faifons: au Prin- 
temps partie demeurent pour la pefche, où ils la pen- 
fent meilleure, partie s'en va en traite à des peuples 
qui s'affemblent au riuage de la mer du Nort, ou 
glaciale [87] fur laquelle ils voguent dix iours, apres 
en auoir fait trente par les riuieres pour y arriuer. 
En efié ils fe raffemblent tous, fur Ie paffage des 
Hurons aux François, au bord d'vn grand lac qui 
porte leur nom eíloigné de Quebeq enuiron deux cens 
lieuës, & de nos Hurons enuiron feptante, de forte 
que leur demeure principale eft comme aux deux 
tiers du chemin de Quebecq à nos Hurons. 
Enuiron Ie milieu de l'Automne ils partent pour 
s'aprocher de nos Hurons, fur les terres defquels ils 
paffent ordinairement l'hyuer: mais deuant que d'y 
arriuer, ils pefchent du poiffon Ie plus qu'ils peuuent, 
lequel ils font fecher: c' eft la monnoye ordinaire de 
laquelle ils acheptent leur principale prouifion de 
bled, quoy qu'ils viennent garnis de toute autre mar- 
chandife, eftans gens riches & accommodez. I1s cul- 
tiuent quelque peu de terre proche de leur demeure 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


239 


CHAPTER VII. 


OF THE MISSION CALLED "THE HOLY GHOST," TO 
THE NIPISSIRINIENS. 


T HE Askikwanehronons, according to our Hu- 
rons; or Nipissiriniens, according to the Algon- 
quins,- form a Nation of the Algonquin tongue 
'which contains more wandering than settled people. 
They seem to have as many abodes as the year has 
seasons,- in the Spring a part of them remain for 
fishing, where they consider it the best; a part go 
away to trade with the tribes which gather on the 
shore of the North or icy sea, [87J upon which they 
voyage ten days, after having spent thirty days upon 
the rivers, in order to reach it. 
In summer, they all gather together, on the road 
of the Hurons to the French, on the border of a 
large lake which bears their name, and is about two 
hundred leagues distant from Quebeq, and about 
seventy from our Hurons; so that their principal 
dwelling place is, as it were, two-thirds of the way 
from Quebecq to the country of our Hurons. 
About the middle of Autumn, they begin to ap- 
proach our Hurons, upon whose lands they generally 
spend the winter; but, before reaching them, they 
catch as many fish as possible, which they dry. This 
is the ordinary money with which they buy their 
main stock of corn, although they come supplied 
with all other goods, as they are a rich people and 
live in comfort. They cultivate a little land near 



240 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


d'Efié: mais c'efi plus pour delices, & pour manger 
en verd, que pour en faire mefnage. 
[88J Nos Peres de Quebec, & des Trois-riuieres, 
ayans par Ie paffé heureufement trauaillé à la culture 
de tous les peuples errans, qui efioient les plus 
proches d'eux, les ayans tantofi tous rendus hõmes 
& Chrefiiens, iettoient les yeux fur cette Nation, la 
plus proche de la derniere qui efi defcenduë, pour fe 
venir habituer proche d'eux. :Mais comme ils ne 
venoient plus à la Traite, à raifon de quelque em- 
pefchement qu'y mettoient les autres d'au-deffous, 
on ne fçauoit comme entamer cette affaire. L'Efié 
paffé Dieu eût agreable de difpofer les chofes de la 
forte, qu'ils fe refolurent de fonder Ie gué, & d'en- 
uoyer quelque canots à la Traite aux François. lIs y 
arriuerent heureufement, fans aucun empeíchement, 
& rie ne pouuoit venir plus à propos pour ce que 
nous pretendions. 
On leur parle donc, non pas de quitter leur pais, 
& fe venir ranger proche des autres Algonquins defia 
habituez: mais bien de receuoir auec eux quelques 
vns de nos Peres, pour les infiruire. I1s tefmoigne- 
rent qu'ils l'auoient [89J fort agreable. Ce qui fit 
que les Peres Claude Pijart, & Charles Raymbaut, 
partans de là bas pour nous venir affifier, eurent 
charge de s'offrir en paffant, à eux. Mais ne les 
ayans pas trouué à leur demeure d'Efié, & ayans ap- 
pris qu'ils deuoient venir hyuerner en nos quartiers, 
ils aborderent icy, fans perdre efperance d'y voir 
ceux pour lefquels particulierement ils efioient 
enuoyez. 
lIs n'ont pas efié frufirez de leur attente. Ces 
Sauuages quelque temps apres arriuerent, au nombre 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


241 


their Summer dwelling; but it is more for pleasure, 
and that they may have fresh food to eat, than for 
their support. 
[88J Our Fathers at Quebec, and at the Three 
rivers,-who in the past have successfully labored 
for the improvement of all the wandering tribes 
which were nearest to them, and have made nearly 
all of them men and Christians,- cast their eyes 
upon this Nation, the nearest to the last one which 
came down in order to settle near them. But as 
these no longer came for Trade, on account of some 
opposition which others from below made against 
them, they did not know how to broach this matter. 
Last Summer, God was pleased so to order things 
that they themselves resolved to feel their way, and 
to send some canoes for the Trade with the French. 
They arrived safely, without any difficulty, and noth- 
ing could have happened more opportunely for that 
which we desired. 
Consequently we spoke to them, not of abandon- 
ing their country and coming to place themselves 
near the other Algonquins already settled, but rather 
of receiving a few of our Fathers among them, that 
they might be instructed; they declared that this 
would be [89J very acceptable to them. This is why 
Fathers Claude Pijart, and Charles Raymbaut, set- 
ting out from below to come and help us, had direc- 
tions to offer themselves, on the way, to them. But 
not having found them at their Summer dwelling, 
and having learned that they were to come and win- 
ter in our quarters, they landed here without losing 
hope of seeing those to whom they were specially 
sent. 
They were not disappointed in their expectation. 



242 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


d'enuiron deux cent cinquante ames, & prirent en ce 
pais vn tel departement, pour leur hyuernement, 
qu'il femble que ce foit Ie fainét Efprit, & point autre 
qui les ayt conduit. 
Ce fut à deux portees d'arquebuze de noftre mai- 
fon, du mefme cofté de la riuiere, fur laqueUe eUe 
eft fituee, qu'ils prirent leur place. C'eftoit iufte- 
ment pour n'auoir l'incommodité de leur voyfinage, 
& pour n'en eftre d'aiUeurs fi efioignez, que nos Peres 
ne peuiTent commodement, tous les iours, [90J les 
aUer trouuer pour les inftruire; à quoy ils n' ont pas 
manqué. 
II faut aduoüer que ces fortes de Nations ont ie ne 
fçay queUe difpofition d'efprit, plus grãde pour la 
femence de la Foy que nos Hurons. Les Peres ne 
les eurent pas entretenu quinze iours, qu'ils s'af- 
feétionneret entieremet à les efcouter: & n'auoient 
point plus grand contentement que lors qu' on leur 
faifoit chanter les grandeurs de Dieu, les articles de 
la creance & des Commandemens. Bref, il ne fe peut 
rien voir de plus complaifant, que la façon & maniere 
auec laqueUe d'abord ils fe comportent auec les 
Peres. 
Le principal Capitaine de cette Nation nommé 

iKafoumir, fit au commecement vn cry public; que 
chacun eût à prier & honorer Dieu, de la maniere 
que l'enfeignoient les François. 
Les petits enfans en fuitte fe mirent & s'applique- 
rent de forte à aprendre les premiers principes de la 
Foy, qu'en peu de temps ils s'y trouuerent notable- 
ment aduancez. 
IIs ne font aucune difficu1té de laiiTer inftruire & 
baptifer leurs malades. [91J Voire mefme quelques 



1641-4
] 


RELA TI01V OF I640-4I 


243 


These Savages, numbering about two hundred and 
fifty souls, arrived shortly after, and took such a 
district in this country, for their winter quarters, that 
it seems to have been the holy Ghost, and no other, 
who guided them. 
They chose their ground on the same side of the 
river, upon which we were, and at two arquebus 
shots from our house. It was precisely from not 
being inconvenienced by their nearness to us, and 
also from our not being very distant from them, that 
our Fathers were easily able, every day, [90J to go 
and instruct them; which they did not fail to do. 
"VVe must admit that Tribes like these have an in- 
describably greater aptitude of heart for the seed of 
Faith than have our Hurons. The Fathers had not 
talked with them for a fortnight, before they took 
the utmost delight in listening to them; and they 
had no greater satisfaction than when they were 
taught to chant the greatness of God, the articles of 
belief, and the Commandments. In a word, noth- 
ing more pleasing can be found, than the way and 
manner in which, from the first, they bore them- 
selves toward the Fathers. 
In the beginning the chief Captain of this Tribe, 
named Wikasoumir, made a public announcement 
that everyone should pray to God and honor him, 
in the way taught by the French. 
After that, the little children began to learn the 
first principles of the Faith, and applied themselves 
so, that in a short time they were found remarkably 
advanced therein. 
They make no difficulty about permitting their 
sick to be instructed and baptized; [91J some of them 
even contribute willingly to their own instruction. 



244 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


(VOL. 21 


vns d'eux contribuënt volontiers à leur infiruétion. 
Quelques-vns ont efié baptifez en cet efiat, à qui il a 
pleu Dieu de rendre la fanté. 
Les Peres toutesfois ne fe font point encore pû 
refoudre d'en baptifer aucun qui fût en fanté, pour 
in fiance qu'ils ayent fait de l'efire, defirans vne plus 
lõgue efpreuue de leur refolution & con fiance : & 
pour ce faire ils ont pris refolution de les fuiure, la 
part où ils iroient refie d'année: & par mefme moyen 
s'aduancer & fe fortifier toufiours de plus en plus 
en l'vfage de leur lãgue, qui fe trouue en plufieurs 
chofes differente de celIe dont ils ont eu la premiere 
teinture, auec les Algonquins des quartiers d'en bas. 
lIs partirent dicy Ie huiétiefme de 1\1ay, veille de 
r Afcenfion, tous enfemble de compagnie, auec efpe- 
rance d'arriuer à la principale demeure de cette 
Nation à la Pentecofie. Plaife à cet adorable Efprit 
dont leur Million porte Ie nom, prendre en mefme 
temps vne parfaiéte poffellion des efprits, & des 
cæurs de ces pauures [92J Peuples, & des nofires, y 
regner eternellemen t. 
La commodité qu'il yauoit d'infiruire les Nipilli- 
riniens, à raifon du voyfinage, & la bonne difpofitiõ 
qu'ils faifoient paroifire à receuoir l'infiruétion, fit 
que dans Ie peu de temps que dure leur hyuerne- 
ment: on ne peût fe refoudre de les quitter, pour 
s'appliquer à d'autres de mefme langue, qui efioient 
venus aulli hyueruer dans Ie païs. Le Pere Claude 
Pijart, toutefois vifita quelques autres endroits: en 
l'vn defquels il trouua bien cinq cens perfonnes 
affemblees, de diuerfes Nations, aufquelles en paffant 
il annõça Ie Royaume de Dieu, & leur fit chanter fes 
loüanges. Prefque par tout il y trouua quelque pre- 



1641-42] 


RELA TIOIV OF I640-4I 


24-5 


A few have been baptized in that condition, to whom 
it pleased God to restore health. 
Nevertheless the Fathers have not yet been able 
to decide upon baptizing anyone who is in health, 
although they have been urgently entreated to do 
so, as they desire to make a longer proof of their firm- 
ness and constancy; and, in order to do this, they 
resolved to follow them to the place where these 
were going for the rest of the year, and by this very 
means to advance and become still more and more 
proficient in the use of their language,- which in 
many respects appears to be different from that of 
which they had the first smattering with the Algon- 
quins in the districts below. They set out from 
here, all together, on the eighth of 1\Iay, the day 
before the Ascension, with the hope of arriving at the 
principal dwelling place of this Tribe by Whitsun- 
day. May it please that adorable Spirit whose name 
their 1Iission bears, to take perfect possession both 
of the minds and hearts of these poor [92] Tribes, 
and of our own, and to reign therein eternally. 
The opportunity we had of instructing the Nipis- 
siriniens, on account of their nearness, and the great 
aptitude they showed in receiving instruction during 
the short time that their wintering lasted, made us 
unable to abandon them and devote ourselves to 
others of the same language, who had also come to 
winter in the country. However, Father Claude 
Pijart visited a few other places, in one of which he 
found perhaps five hundred persons gathered to- 
gether of different Tribes, to whom, in passing, he 
spoke of the Kingdom of God, and caused them to 
sing God's praises. Nearly everywhere he found 
some predestined soul, which was only awaiting his 



246 


LES RELA TIONS DES j'ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


deftiné, qui n'atendoit que fa vifite, pour s'en aller 
au Ciel. En voicy vn exemple affez remarquable. 
Les Tontthrataronons, Nation Algonquine, hyuer- 
noient au nombre de quinze cabanes, fur les terres 
de la Million de fainét lean Baptifte aux Arendaehro- 
nons. Le Pere Claude Pijart [93J les allant vifiter, 
y receut toute forte de bon accueil. Le foir eftant 
venu, comme il eftoit prés de s'endormir, il entend 
vne voix plaintiue; il demãde que c' eft? on luy dit 
que c'eftoit vne pauure vieille malade, qui eftoit en 
la cabane voyfine, qui s'en alloit mourir. Le Pere 
demãde à l'aller voir, Ie chef de la cabane, Capitaine 
confiderable, fe leue, & allume vn flambeau, c'eft à 
dire vne efcorce d' arbre: & Ie Pere eftant en peine 
d'eau pour Ie baptefme, ce Capitaine luy fait promp- 
tement fondre de la neige; Ie Pere entre, inftruit 
cette pauure creature, l'interroge; elle luy donne 
toute fatisfaétion, comme fi elle eût efté inftruite de 
longue main, ilIa baptife, & vn peu apres elle meurt 
heureufement. 
Le Pere trouua en tous ceux qu'il vifita, vne fem- 
blable difpofition d'efprit, à celle qu'il auoit trouué 
aux Nipifsiriniens; mais beaucoup meilleure en ceux 
qui auoient Ie plus fait de voyages, & hanté dauan- 
tage les magazins de nos François aux Trois-riuieres, 
& à Quebeq depuis quelques annees en çà. [94J 
Nous verrons ce qu'auec Ie tëps, & auec Ie renfort 
que nous efperõs de cette lãgue, nous pourrons faire 
dauantage à l'aduenir, pour toutes ces pauures brebis 
errãtes, tãt de l'vne que de l'autre lãgue. 
Ie ne fçaurois me perfuader que Ie manquement du 
progrez de cette affaire, doiue venir du cofté dont on 
nous menace en France, qui eft l'impuiffance de four- 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


247 


visit, that it might ascend to Heaven. I will note a 
rather remarkable instance of this. 
The Tontthrataronons, an Algonquin Tribe, num- 
bering 
about fifteen cabins, were wintering upon the 
lands of the Mission of saint Jean Baptiste to the 
Arendaehronons. Father Claude Pijart, [93J on go- 
ing to visit them, received from them every manner 
of hearty welcome. \Vhen the evening came, as he 
was almost asleep, he heard a plaintive voice; he 
asked what it was, they told him that it was a poor 
sick old woman, who was in the next cabin, and who 
was dying. The Fa.ther begged to go and see her; 
the head of the cabin, an important Captain, arose and 
lighted a torch,- that is to say, a piece of bark; and, 
the Father being at a loss for water for the baptism, 
this Captain quickly melted some snow for him. The 
Father entered, instructed this poor creature, and 
questioned her; she gave him full satisfaction, as if 
she had been long before instructed; he baptized her, 
and shortly after she died happily. 
The Father found in all those whom he visited, a 
disposition of mind similar to that which he found in 
the Nipissiriniens; but it was much better in those 
who had traveled most, and had most frequented the 
warehouses of our Frenchmen at the Three rivers 
and at Quebeq for some years past. [94J We shall 
Sße that with time, and with the reinforcement that 
we are hoping for in this language, we shall be able 
to do more, in the future, for all these poor wander- 
ing sheep, as well of the one language as of the 
other. 
I cannot believe that the lack of progress in this 
matter ought to come from the quarter whence they 
in France threaten us,-which is their inability to 



248 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


nir aux frais de l'entretien & entreprife de tous ces 
deffeins. Le maiítre du banquet qui nous enuoye 
pour inuiter & forcer nos eítropiats, d'entrer dans la 
fale du feítin, n'a que trop de puiffance & de fageffe, 
pour nous maintenir & fouítenir iufques au bout: & 
i1 n'eít pas croyable qu'il nous vueille laiffer en fi 
beau chemin. Parmy tant de fainétes & genereufes 
ames, qui font maintenant en France, qui femblêt 
n'auoir autre occupation, que de voir où & en quoy 
elles pourrõt employer, pour Ie feruice de Dieu & 
de leur Redepteur; & par ce moyen s' affeurer ce peu 
de bies de la terre, dont la mort ne leur fait que trop 
voir qu'ils n'en peuuent autrement auoir que l'vfu- 
fruiét; quelle apparence [95J de defefperer de voir, 
deuant que de mourir, cette maifon fixe de fainéte 
Marie matrice de tous les :\liffionnaires; & chacune 
de ces fept Miffions & celles encore qui fuiuront, Dieu 
aidant, cy apres eftablies & fondées à perpetuité: 
particulierement n'eítant queítion que de la nourri- 
ture & entretie de deux ouuriers Euangeliques en 
chaque Miffion. Ces Miffions portet des titres & des 
nõs affez capables de fatisfaire à la deuotion de ceux 
qui en voudroient eítre les Peres: mais fi leur incli- 
natiõ les portoit à les nommer autrement, ie ne voy 
aucune loy qui les peût empefcher d' en eítre tout 
enfemble & les peres & les parains, Le fainét Efprit 
au fainét iour de la defcente duquel ie ferme cette 
Relation, fera Ie maiítre & Ie conduéteur de cette 
affaire; laquelle auffi bien que toutes les autres qui 
regardent ces contrées, ie ne puis affez recommander 
aux SSe prieres & deuotions de ceux qui en auront 
quelque cognoiffance. 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I64o-4I 


249 


supply means for undertaking and maintaining all 
these plans. The master of the feast, who sends us 
to invite and constrain our crippled ones to enter the 
banquet hall, has only too much power and wisdom 
not to support and sustain us to the end; and it is 
not conceivable that he would forsake us in so glori- 
ous a path. Among the many devout and generous 
souls that are now in France,-and that appear to 
have no other occupation than that of seeing where 
and in what they may be able to use, for the service 
of God and their Redeemer, and by this means to 
secure, these few worldly goods, of which death shows 
them only too well that they can otherwise have but 
the usufruct,- what probability [95] of discourage- 
ment can there be of seeing before death this perma- 
nent house of sainte :Marie, the mother of all the 
l\Iissionaries, and each on
 of these seven Missions, 
and those also which shall follow hereafter, by the 
help of God, established and endowed forever; and 
especially as the question is only of the support and 
maintenance of two Evangelistic workers in each 
:Mission? These 1Iissions bear titles and names 
sufficiently fitted to satisfy the devotion of those who 
might wish to be Fathers of them; but if their in- 
clination lead them to change the names, I know no 
law which can hinder their being. at the same time, 
both fathers and godfathers of them. The holy 
Ghost, on the blessed day of whose descent I am clos- 
ing this Relation, will be the master and guide of 
this affair,-which, as well as all the others that con- 
cern these regions, I cannot sufficiently commend 
to the Sacrifices, prayers, and devotions of those who 
shall have any knowledge of them. 



250 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


[96J Q VELQ VES vns ont sov/taitte de voir vn ef- 
cllantillon de la langue Huronne pour en 
recognoiflre l' æconomie & leur fafoll de s' e- 
noncer: ie n' ay pa clzoijir rien de meilleur qu'vn des 
entrctiès des plus ordz'naires qu' cut auec Dieu fur la fin 
de fes 'iours Iofep/z Chz'/z
atcn/z
a ce braue Cllreflien don! 
no us auons fait mention; on y pourra par mefme moyen 
rccognoiflre l' Efprit de Dieu qui Ie pouffoit. 


S Seigneur Dieu en fin done ie te 
A chie
endio Di
 onné ichien onè- 
eonnois: à la bonne heure maintenant ie te eo- 
tere 
toeKti ichien nonh
a onen- 
gnois; e'eft toy qui as fait eette terre 
terre : !fa ichien fateienondi de Ka on- 


que voilá, & ee Ciel que voila: 
dechen, din de Ka aronhiaie: 
fait nous autres qui fommes appellez 
chiae dajon
e 
Tout ainfi eomme 
To ichien iotti 


tu 
if a 


nous as 
sK
aati- 


hommes. 
a
aatfi. 


maiftres 
dio 


du eanot 
de ïa 


que nous auons fait eanot, 
aa
ahonichien, 


fommes 
a
a
en- 
& 
din 
de mef- 
to ati 


nous autres 
onionh
a ichien 


de la eabane 
de anonchia 
[97] me 
hiotti 
C' eft peu 
Oehron 


que nous auons fait cabane; 
aa
anonchichien ; 
tu es maiftre toy 
de fa chie
endio de 


toutesfois 
itochien 


que nous 
nendi 


qui nous as ereé. 
sK
aatichiai. 
fommes maiftres 
da
a
endio 


de tout ee que nous auons; 
de fian ïefia nonaen: 


peu de temps 
ïonda
aK 


feulement 
ato 



1641-42] 


RELATION OF r64o-4f 


251 


[96J C ERTAIN persolls have desz'red to see a specimen 
of the Huron language, in order to ascertain 
its structure and their methods of expression. 
I cannot select allY thing better than one of the most ordi- 
nary communions wlzich Joseph Chihwatenhwa, that excel- 
lellt Christian W/L011l we have mentio1led, Izad with God 
toward the end of his days; by the same means can be 
recognized the Spirit of God whicll animated him. 


S Lord 
A chiewendio 
thee, happily 
tere outoekti ichien 


God, 
Diou 


at last, then, 
onné ichien 


now 
nonhwa 


I know 
onen - 
I know 


onen- 
this earth 
de ka on- 


thee. It is thou who hast made 
terre: Isa ichien sateienondi 
that we behold, and this Heaven that we behold: thou hast 
dechen, din de ka aronhiaie: isa skwaati- 
made us who call ourselves men. 
chiae daionwe awaatsi. 
Just as we ourselves 
To ichien iotti onionh wa ichien 


are 


awawen- 
of the canoe which we have made a canoe, and 
de ia aawahonichien, din 
which we have made a cabin, so al- 
aa wanonchichien ; to ati 
thou art master, thou who hast created us. 
de sa chiewendio de skwaatichiai. 


masters 
dio 


of the cabin 
de anonchia 
[97] so 
hiotti 


It is for a short time, 
Oehron 
of all 
de stan iesta 


however, 
i tochien 


that we have; 
nonaen; 


that we are masters 
nendi dawawendio 
a short time onl y 
iondawak ato 



252 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉS UITES 


[VOL. 21 


nous fommes les maifires 
a
a
endio 


fait canot, 
chien, 
fait cabane, 
chien, 
nous les maifires. 
ien. 


ichien 
mes appellez 


en vie, 


& pour lors 
to haonoe 


du canot 
de ia 


que no us auons 
aa
ahoni- 


& de la cabane 
din de anonchia 
peu de temps feulement 
ïonda
ak ato 
Quant à toy 
Tan de fa 


tu feras Ie maifire 
chie
endio 


hommes: 
a
aatfi : 


pourroit on douter 
aioehron a ti 
principalement 
aat anderaKti 


& pendant que 
din d'affon 


que nous auons 
aa
anonchi- 
en fommes- 
a
a
endio 
pour toufiours 
aondechaon 
de nous qui fom- 
a
aton de aion
e 


l'on efi encore 
aondhai. 


que tu n'en fois Ie maifire 
chie
endio? 


tu es Ie maifire 
chie
endio 


quand 
de 


nous venons à mourir. 
aa
enhei. 


Toy feul 
Son
a 


tu es maifire 
chie
endio 


autre auec toy. 
ta tefii. 


deurions craindre; 


parfaitement; 
aat; 
princi palemen t 
aat 


Tu es 
Ifa ichien 


tout à fait 
aat aKhiaondi 


il n'y en a pas aucun 
fian d
a tfatan 


celuy que nous 
aiefatandihi ; 
celuy que nous 
aiefannon- 
qui es tres-puif- 
aat ifia
t 


tu es 
ifa ichien 


principalement 
aat 


deurions aimer; parce que c'efi toy 
h
eha ; aerhon if a ichien 
[9 8 ] fant & veritablement c'en toy auffi 
aat attoain aa if a ichien 


qui nous ayme 
aat SK
annon- 


quant 
atan 


aux autres 
d'
a 


extremement: tres-veritablement 
h
e: daaK attoain aa 
qui font hommes, & aux autres 
non
e, din d'
a 
ny les vns ny les autres ne font point puiffans, 
fian ichien deKa te hattinda
r, 


hommes 

e 


ny les demons: 
din d' ondaKi : 


qui font demons, 
d' ondaKi, 
n) Jes 
enon- 


non non 
fian ichien 


ils ne- 
te hat- 



1641-42] RELA TION OF I640-4I 253 
are we masters of the canoe which we have 
awawendio deia aawahoni- 
made a canoe, and of the cabin which we have 
chien, din de anonchia aawanonchi- 
made a cabin; a short time only are 
chien, iondawak ato awawendio 
we masters thereof. As for thee, forever 
ien. Tan de sa aondechaon 


ichien 
called 


in life, 


And, then, 
to haonoe 


welcome to die. 
aawenhei. 


art master 
chiewendio 
beside thee. 
ta testi. 
ought to fear, 


shalt thou be master 
chiewendio 


men: 
awaatsi: 
can we doubt 
aioehron ati 
especiall y 
aat anderakti 


completely; 
aat; 
Thou art 
Isa ichien 
thou art 
isa ichien 


of us who are 
awaton de aionwe 
and while we are still 
din d'asson aondhai. 


that thou art the master of it ? 
chiewendio? 


thou art the master 
chiewendio 


when 
de 


Thou alone, 
Sonwa 


entirely, 
aat akhiaondi 


no other is there 
stan dwa tsatan 
principally he whom we 
aat aiesatandihi; 
principally he whom we 
aat aiesannon- 


who art most power- 
aa t istaou t 


because it is thou 
aerhon isa ichien 
and truly thou art also 
aat attoain aa isa ichien 
to the utmost. 1\Iost truly, as 
hwe: daak attoain aa atan 


ought to love; 
hweha; 
[98] ful, 


who are men, and 
nonwe, din 
neither these nor those 
stan ichien deka te 
men nor demons; 
we din d' ondaki : 


he who loves us 
aat skwannon- 
for others 
d'wa 


for others 
d'wa 
are powerful, 
hattindaour, 


who are demons, 
d' ondaki, 
neither 
enon- 
they 
te hat- 


no, no, 
stan ichien 



254 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


font point puiffans 
tinda
r 


nous ayment pas. 
Kinnonh
e. 
C'efi pourquoy 
Ondaie ati 


re 


ie rends graces, 
atones 


les demons, 
ondaKi, 


de plus auffi 
e
a ichien 


ils ne 
te on- 


maintenant 
nonh
a 


d'vne façon particulie- 
anderaKti 


maintenant 
nonh
a 


ie te fais mon maifire 
on
endiofii 


de ce que tu as voulu 
d'iferi 


qu-n me co- 
ahaiente- 


gnoiffe. Extremement tu nous ayme: en fin 
ha. Daat anderaKti SK
anno
e : onne 
maintenant ie me confacre à toy moy que 
chien non
a onataanK
as de KÏiK- 


fouffre 
ea tonnhontaiona, 
aduifera feulement 
dionraan itochien 
[99] que voicy. Toy 
khon. Ifa ichien 


voicy: en fin 
hon: onne ichiê 


principalement Ie maifire 
aK chie
endio 


feulement 
dionran itoch 


de moy que voicy 
de K'iiKhon 


de moy que voicy: 
de k'iiKhon: 


n'importe 
niané 
feulement, 
itochien 


ie penferay 
eerhon 


Ie maifire abfolu 
daak a
endio 


tu es 
da- 


ordonne 
fen- 
que ie 
to de 
ily 
ehê- 
de moy 
de K'ii- 


en nofire famille: 
d'a
ah
atfia : 
ie n'y fuffes prefent, 
te ikhontak, 
en nofire famille ie penferay 
d' a
ah
atfia, eerhon 
qui principalement nous 
ichien daak 


tu nous as tous pour crea- 
a
etti SK
aata
an 
encore bien que 
a
anchkran ichien de 
& quelque accident nous arriuafi 
chia fian onata
an 
feulement, celuy là void 
itochiê, tehaagnra 


tures 


mais pour moy 
tan nendi, 
i'y euffes efié 
ikhontak, 


a pour 
fonaata
an 


creatures: 


aa: 


ie ne fuis rien du tout, quand bien 
!tan ichien ea teen, de te 
nonobfiant nous fuffions morts, 
oont ichien aia
enheonnen, 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF r64o-4r 


255 


are not powerful, 
tindaour 
do not love us. 
kinnonhwe. 
For this, 
Ondaie ati 
I render thanks, 
atones 


know thee. 
ha. 


these demons; 
ondaki, 


moreover, 
ewa ichien 


they 
te on- 


now 
nonh wa 


in a special manner 
anderakti 


that thou hast permItted 
d. iseri 


me to 
ahaien te- 


To the utmost dost thou love us: at last, 
Daat anderakti skwannowe: onne 
now, I consecrate myself to thee, myself whom 
chien nonwa onataankwas de kiik- 
thou beholdest; at last now I take thee for my master; thou art 
hon: onne ichien nonhwa onwendiosti da- 


entirely the master of him who is before thee. Direct, 
ak chiewendio de k'iikhon. sen- 
thou alone, me whom thou beholdest. It does not matter what! 
dionran i toch de k' iikhon : niané to de 
suffer; I shall think only, " He 
eatonnhontaiona, eerhon itochien ehen- 
will order for me alone - he, the absolute master of myself 
dionraan itochien daak awendio de k'ii- 
[99] now before thee." Thou thyself, thou holdest us all as thy crea- 
khon. Isa ichien awetti skwaatawan 
tures in our family: even although 
d'awahwatsia: awanchkran ichien de 
I should not be present there, 
te ikhontak, 


in our family, 
d'awahwatsia 
who above 
ichien 
As for me, 
tan nendi, 
I had been there, 
ikhontak, 


and some accident should happen to us 
chia stan onatawan 
simply, " He sees it 
itochien, tehaagnra 
us as his creatures. " 
sonaatawan aa: 


I shall think 
eerhon 
all holds 
daak 


I am nothing at all; 
stan ichien ea teen, 
nevertheless 
oont ichien 


if, indeed, 
de te 
we might have died, 
aiawenheonnen, 



256 


LES RELA TI01\/S DES JÉSUITES 


[V OLe 21 


quand bien i'y euffes efté. 
de te ikhontaK. 


dement 
rakti 


ie remercie! 
atones aa! 


pour ce qui regarde tes deffeins: 
ilaat ifendionr
ten aa: 


ger 
dionraenton 
que chofe: 


ie penferay 
eerhon 


Dieu 
de Di
 


qui nous aime.- 
fonnanh
e : 


deuiennent pauures 
tieffaha 


Voila donc 
Onne ichien 


que gran- 
ande- 
que ie te cognois 
onentere 
ie ne yeux pas fon- 
te
aftato aen- 


voila 
onne ichien 


fi en noftre famille il arriuera quel- 
d'a
ah
a[tJfia, t'ea
anK: 
feulement, il y aduifera 
itochien, ehendionran 
foit qu'il ait deffein qu'ils 
din d'eherhon ahat- 


en leur famille: 
to d'atti
atfia: 


ie penfera y 
eerhon 


feule- 
ito- 
qui 
fo- 


ment 
chien 


voila Ie deffein 
kond' ihondionr
ten 


de Dieu 
de Diou 


foit qu'il ait deffein 
din d' eherhon 


nous ayme .- 
nannonh
e: 
[ 100] riche: 
hafen : 
tend Dieu: 
de Diou: 


que celuy là foit 
ahoKi
ane- 


ie penferay feulement ie ne fçay ce que pre- 
eerhon itochien Han ne iherhai 
i'en feray d'autant plus en crainte, & 
anderakti eatandihi, ea- 
à la façon que ie vis: il eft 
t'iondhai: akief- 


prendray garde 
teienfta itochien 


bien aifé 
fen itochien 


que les riches foient pecheurs: 
d' aorrihouanderafKõ dao- 


parce que fans qu'on s'en apperçoiue: voila 
ki
anne : aerhon te
ahente : onne 
a uffi toft Ie diable qui les accompagne. Helas! c'eft 
ichien oki hi
ei. O! onek 
en vain que font les glorieux quelques hommes qui 
atochien attinaendae non
e d'
a on- 


font riches .- 
daie d'ondakiouane: 
nous entref urpaffol1s pas 
tehðichegnonch 


non affeurement nous ne 
Ô ichien te onata- 


foit riches 
de ondaki
ãt 


foit pauures. 
din d'e- 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I64o-4I 


257 


..even had I been there. 
-de te ikhontak. 
ly I thank thee! 
rakti atones aa! 


Behold, then, 
Onne ichien 
Behold, 
onne ichien 


how great- 
ande- 
how I discern thee 
onen tere 


in what concerns thy plans. I will not 
staat isendionrouten aa: tewastato aen- 
think, .. 'Vhat if in our family something should happen?" 
dionraenton d'awahwa[t]sia, t'eawank: 
I shall think only, .. He will attend to it, 
eer hon itochien, ehendionran 
God, who loves us. " If he intend that they 
de Diou sonnanhwe: din d'eherhon ahat- 


shall become poor 
tiessaha 
ly, II Behold the purpose 
chien kond' ihondionrouten 


in their family, 
to d'attiwatsia: 


I shall think 
eer hon 
of God 
de Diou 


loves us!" Or, if he intend 
nannonhwe: din d'eherhon 
[100] rich, I shall think only, 
hasen: eerhon itochien 


God means." 
de Diou: 
would be careful 
teiensta itochien 


very easy 
sen itochien 


because, 
kiwanne: aerhon 


mere- 
ito- 
who 


so- 
that it shall be 
ahokiwane- 


.. I do not know what 
stan ne iherhai 


Much more would I fear this, 
anderakti eatandihi, 
how I lived. 
t'iondhai: 


and 
ea- 
It is 
akies- 


for the rich to be sinners: 
d' aorrihouanderaskon dao- 
without their being aware of it, behold 
tewahente : onne 


at once the devil who accompanies them. Alas! itis 
ichien oki hi wei. O! onek 
in vain that play the braggart some men who 
atochien attinaendae non we d'wa on- 


.are rich: 
daie d' ondakiouane : 
excel one another 
.tehwichegnonch 


surel y we do not 
Ô ichien te onata- 


whether rich 
de ondakiwant 


or poor. 
din d'e- 



258 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[V OLe 21 


Tu nous ayme également & les 
Chia te sk
annonh
e ichien d'a
- 
& Ies riches. 0 que c'efi donc à Ia bonne 
din d'aoki
ane. 0 outoekti 


eíIas. 


pauures 
kaota 


qu'en fin 
onne 
qui nous aime 
Ikouannonhoue 


ie te cognois 
onentere 
Dieu; 
de Di
; 


heure 


mercie, 
nes, 
moy que voicy 
ek'iikhon, 
fecouë de moy 
hiatehoue 


d'autant plus 
anderakti ichien 


me voila 
onne ichien 
tout ce 
enftan iefta 


en tes deffeins toy 
ti fendionr
ten de 


d'autant plus 
anderaKti 


ie re- 
ato- 


ie m'abandonne à toy 
onatonchiens 


maintenant 
nonhoua 


que ie 
aak- 


que nous efiimons 
a
andoronkoua 


[101] pendant que nous viuons: en fin donc ie n'en fais plus 
d'aíIon aiond'hay: onne ichien tesKan- 
d'efiat, toy feul vniquement difpofe de moy 
doron, fonh
a to hara fendionran de 


que voicy 
K'iiKhon 


qui en es Ie maifire. 
daat chieouendio aa. 


C'eut efié beaucoup 
AioutektiK 
que Ies hommes foient: 
on
e ichien aionton, 
uroit t'en remercier 
tones 


feulement 
ichien 


que tu euffes voulu 
de te ferinen 


nonobfiant 
oont ichien 
i1 y auroit encore beau coup 
ae
ane ichien 


on iouyroit 
tenhnraK
at 


fur la terre 
deK' ondechen 


on de- 
aion- 
dont 
aiõ- 


de toutes 
iaen de ftã 


Ies chofes que tu nous as laiffées: mais de plus en cela 
iefta sk
aentandi : onek ichiê kõ- 
grandement tu nous as obligé; que tu as vou- 
daie anderakti sk
atharatãdi ; d'i!eri, 
lu, qu'ils aillent au ciel quãd ils mour- 
aronhiaie ichien ahendeta de hendi- 
ront là où à iamais ils vi- 
hei to ati de aondechahaon ichien de to 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


259 


Equally thou lovest us, both the 
essas. Chia te skwannonhwe ichien d'aou- 
poor and the rich. Ah! happily 
kaota din d'aokiwane. 0 outoekti 
at last I see thee in thy designs, thyself 
onne onentere ti sendionrouten de 
who lovest us, 0 God; especially do I 
ikouannonhoue de Diou; anderakti ato- 
thank thee, especially do I resign myself to thee, 
nes, anderakti ichien onatonchiens 
I who am before thee. Behold me now as I 
ek'iikhon, onne ichien nonhoua aak- 
cast from me all things that we value 
hiatehoue enstan iesta awandoronkoua 
[101] while we live; at last now, I no longer 
d'asson aiond'hay: onne ichien teskan- 
care for them. Thou alone and solely, do thou dispose of me 
doron, sonhwa to hara sendionran de 
who am in thy presence, thou who art my master. 
k'iikhon daat chieouendio aa. 
This alone would have been much, that thou shouldst will 
Aioutektik ichien de te serinen 


that men should exist; nevertheless 
on we ichien aionton, oont ichien 
to thank thee that there is still much 
tones aewane ichien 


we can enjoy 
tenhnrakwat 


upon the earth 
dek' ondechen 


we ought 
aion- 
that 
aion- 
among all 
iaen de stan 


the things which thou hast given us: but moreover in this 
iesta skwaentandi: onek ichien kon- 
especially hast thou laid us under obligation - that thou hast willed 
daie anderakti skwatharatandi; d'iseri, 
that they should go to heaven when they 
aronhiaie ichien ahendeta de hendi- 
die, there where forever they shall 
hei to ati de aondechahaon ichien de to 



260 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[V OL. 21 


uront. 
aondhei. 


Ie ne veux pas 
Te
aftato 


c'eft veritablement 
iOKirren 
par trop de moy 
itochien 


e'en eft; auffi bien 
onek inde 


maintenant examiner ce que 
nõh
a aatoretta ftaat 


du Paradis ie prefumerois 
de aronhiae, anaendaek 
fi ie penfois, que ie recherche ce que 
de erhai, t' aiatoretta; 
ie ne fuis rien cela feul me 
ea te ondaie ichien ai
- 


deuroit fuffit 
toektiK 
[102] mandemens. 
d
ten. 


de ce que ie fçay 
de erri
atere 
En fin voila 
Onne ichien 


& tout 
daak 


de bon: 
attoain aa: 


doute aucunement, 
te
aendionr hatandik, 
point menteur 
chiendachi
ane 


quoy que tu dife: 
de ftan chihon: 


i1 n'y à rien 
{tan ichien 


cela 
ondaie 


dit: 


ie ne vous refuferay rien 
ftan te
anonftatindihai 


parce que 
onek inde 


de plus 
diK, e
a ichien 
de mon efperance 
akhrendaentak
a 


il pas donc vra y 
ichien 


té de fouffrir 
a
atonnhontaiona 


ce qui en arriuera: 
claie echa aa::;ank: 


rons de profit 
nrak
at 


ce que c'eft de tes com- 
ti chie::;en- 


que maintenant 
nonh
a 


du tout 
agnaktan 


car 
onekinde 


ie croy 
rih::;iofta 


dontie 
ta 


tu n' es 
te 


tu dis toufiours la verité 
ara ito ti chrieieriata 
me fuffit, que tu ayes 
is en to, difen 
dans Ie ciel, 
de aronhaie: 
ne t'eft difficile 
te fatandoronk
an- 
Yoila Ie fujet 
Kondaie në- 


quoy que ce foit 
ftan iefta 


tu nous aime. 
sk::;anno
e. 


ta parole. 
ti chie
end::;ten. 


K'eft 
Ou 


que nous deuons plus faire de difficul- 
teskandoron attoain 


dans Ie del: 
earo[ n Jhaie : 


pendant 
affon 


noftre vie: 
aiondhai : 


d'autant plus 
e::;ane 


outre que 
e
a ichien 


voila 
Kon- 


nous en tire- 
ea::;ateng- 
on eft 
tetfaon- 



1641-42] 


RELA TIOiV OF IÓ40-4I 


261 


Paradise; I would presume 
de aronhiae, anaendaek 
if I thought that I could search out what 
de erhai, t'aiatoretta; 
moreover, I am nothing. This alone ought 
onek inde ea te ondaie ichien aiou- 


live. 
aondhei. 


really is 
iokirren 


too much, 
itochien 


iUs; 


I do not intend 
Tewastato 


to inquire 
aatoretta 


what 
staat 


to suffice me that I know what thy com- 
toektik de erriwatere ti chiewen- 
[102] mandments are. At last, then, now I believe- 
douten. Onne ichien nonhwa rihwiosta 
and wholly in earnest; nothing there is at all of which I 
daak attoain aa: stan ichien agnaktan ta 
have the least doubt, for thou dost not 
tewaendionrhatandik, onek inde te 
lie, always thou speakest the truth 
chiendachiwane ara ito ti chrieieriata: 
whatever thou sayest: it is enough for me, that thou hast 
de stan chihon: ondaie is en to, disen 
said: II Nothing will I refuse you in heaven," 
stan tewanonstatindihai de aronhaie: 


because, 
onek inde 


now 
nonhwa 


whatever it be, 
stan iesta 


it is not difficult for thee; 
te satandoronkwan- 
This is the cause 
Kondaie nen- 


thou lovest us. 
skwannowe. 


moreover 
dik, ewa ichien 
of my hope, 
akhrendaentakwa 
then, true that 
ichien 


even thy word. 
ti chiewendouten. 
we might have more 
teskandoron 


during 
asson 


our lives? 
aiondhai : 


to suffer 
awatonnhontaiona 
would happen: 
daie echa aa wank : 


gain thereby 
nrakwat 


so much the more 
ewane 


in heaven; 
earo[ n ]haie : 


and, besides, 
ewa ichien 


Is it not, 
Ou 


hardships 
attoain 
This 
Kon- 
would we 
eawateng- 
one 
tetsaon - 



262 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


moins tenant 
nonfte 


de fa vie 
d' aondhai 


Ah! veritablement 
Ou! ichien 


quand on eft dans l'affiiétion 
d' aotetfirati. 


ee n'eft plus vne chofe à craindre 
tesKandoron 


que la mort, e'eCl pour neant 
de enheon, onek atochien 
[103] fi fort de mourir pendant que 
de enheon t' affon 


que nous eraignons 
ti a
atandiK 
nous viuons: veritable- 
adiõdhai : ô ichiê 
en mefme temps 
to haonoe ichiê 


ment 


nous n'auons point d'efprit, 
te onediont: 


qu'au del on va lors que l'on meurt, en mef- 
aronhiae haient d' onna aihei, to hao- 
me temps precifement on eft heureux au del. 
noe aat aionk
afta de arõhiae. 


Nous fommes femblables 
To itochien iotti 


pendant que 
d'affon 


ichien 


fi on fe refioüit, 
aontones. 


feulement 
itochien 
bout 
dionhia 


nous viuons: 
aiondhai : 


ceux qui vont en traite.- 
d' onnonches : 


à ceux qui vont en traite, 
d'aononches, 
ils fouffrent eontinuellement 
te hõtõnhontaïonach 
ie vous laiffe à penfer 
aioehron ati 


quand on eft fur Ie retour: 
onne tfaoonhaKe: 


voila que nous allons arriuer, 
onne tfonaonhaK, 
de nos fouffranees: 
nonatonnhontaionan: 


en deuroit il arriuer 
haia
ank 


mourir, 


ie feray au bout 
eendionhia 


on deuroit penfer 
aiaenr hon 


on penfe 
aenr hai 


nous voiey au 
onne a
ê- 
de mefme 
to ati 


lors que l'on eft fur Ie poind de 
don' on taiheonche, 
feulement tout maintenant 
itochien on
a toat 


de me peines. 
d'atonnhontaionach. 


mon fentlment 
daie nendi hi
aendionr
ten 


Dieu: 
dio Di
: 


en fin done 
onne ichien 


ie ne erains plus 
tesKatãdiK 


Voila 
Kon- 


SeIgneur 
de chi
en- 
la mort, 
enheõ 



1641-42] 


RELA TION OF I640-4I 


263 


-clings less to life when one is in affliction. 
nonste d'aondhai d'aotetsirati. 
Ah! truly it is no longer a thing to be feared, 
Ou ! ichien teskandoron 
death; it is for naught that we fear 
de enheon, onek atochien ti awatandik 
[ 10 3] so greatly to die, while we are living; tru- 
de enheon t'asson adiondhai: ô ichien 


ly 


that to heaven 
aronhiae 


moment 


noe 


We are like 
To itochien iotti 


while 
d' asson 


we have no mind: 
te onediont: 


for at the moment 
to haonoe ichien 
when one dies, at that 
d' onna aihei, to hao- 
one is happy in heaven. 
aionkwasta de aronhiae. 


one goes 
haient 
precisely 
aat 


those who go to trade, 
d'aononches, 
they suffer continually 
te hontonnhontaionach 


we are living: 
aiondhai : 


I leave you to imagine 
aioehron ati 


those who go to trade. 
ichien d' onnonches : 
if one be happy, when one is returning home: 
aontones, onne tsaoonhake: 
only, .. Look, we are going to arrive; see, we are at the 
itochien onne tsonaonhak, 


end 
dionhia 
ought it to be 
haia wank 


of our sufferings." 
nonatonnhontaionan : 


one thinks 
aenr hai 


onne a wen- 
Thus 
to ati 


when one is at the point of 
don' ontaiheonche, 


only, 
itochien 


death; one ought to think 
aiaenrhon 
I shall be at the end 
eendionhia 
my thoughts, 
daie nendi hiwaendionrouten 
God: at last, now I no longer fear 
dio Diou: onne ichien teskatandik 


of my trials." 
d' atonnhontaionach. 


.. Now 


on wa toat 
These are 
Kon- 
Lord 
de chiwen- 
death. 
enheon 



264 


LES RELA TIOiVS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


ie me refioüira y 
eatones 


quand ie feray fur Ie poinét de 
ichien de K'iheonche. 


[10-1-] mourir. 


Ie ne veux pas 
Te
aftato 


m'affiiger 
eatõnhontaiona 


m'at- 
e
a- 


trifiant pour la mort de quelqu'vn de mes 
endionrachenK de eathei de KennõhõK, 
proches, ie penferay feulement, i1 en difpofe 
eerhon itochien, hendionran de 
Dieu, il aura deffein qu'ils partent, qu'en Pa- 
Di
, eherhon ichien aionrasK
a, aron- 
radis ils aillent, & pour moy ie penferay feu- 
hiae ichien haient, endi-de eerhõ ichie, 
lement, grandement illes aime, puis qu'il a voulu 
anderakti faonnonh
e, de ha
eri, 
qu'ils partent, & que parfaiétement ils foient heureux. 
ahonraSK
a, anderaéti ahonK
afta. 



1641-42] 


RELATION OF .r640-4I 


265 


I shall rejoice 
eatones 
[104] death. 


when I am at the pomt of 
ichien de k'iheonche. 


I will not mourn and be 
Tewastato eatonnhontaiona ewa- 
sad at the death of any of my 
endionrachenk de eathei de kennonhonk, 
relatives; I will consider only, II It is ordered 
eerhon itochien, hendionran de 
by God; he intends that they should depart, that to Par- 
Diou, eherhon ichien aionraskwa, aron- 
adise they may go." And, for myself, I shall think on- 
hiae ichien haient, endi-de eerhon ichien, 
ly, II How greatly he loves them, since he has willed 
anderakti saonnonhwe, de haweri, 
that they should depart, and that perfectly they should be happy!" 
ahonraskwa, anderacti ahonkwasta. 




XLV-XLVII 


MISCELLANEOUS DOCUMENTS, 1642 


XL V.- Lettre du P. Charles Lalemant au P. Etienne Char- 
let, à Rome; Paris, 28 février, 1642 
XL VI.- Lettre du P. Charles Garnier à son Frère; des 
Hurons, 22 e may, 1642 
XL VlI.- Mémoire touchant les Domestiques; [par Hierosme 
Lalemant, 1642] 


SOURCE: Document XL V., we obtain from Rochemon- 
teix's JésuÜes et la Nouvelle-France, ii., pp. 470, 471. 
No. XL VI. is from a contemporary copy of the original. No. 
XLVII. is from a copy by Rev. Thomas Hughes, S.l., of the 
original, ex 11155. Soc. Jes.-this being, so far as we are 
aware, the first publication of the document. 



268 


LES RELA TIONS DES jÉSUITES 


[VOL 21 


[470] Lettre du P. Charles Lalemant au P. Étienne 
Charlet, Assistant de France 
à Rome. 


Paris, 28 février 16 4 2 . 


M ON R. P., 
P. c. 
]'ai reçu celle qu'il a plu à V. R. de m'es. 
crire en faveur des affaires pour lesquelles Ie P. Le 
Jeune est venu faire un tour en ce pais. Or, quoique 
toutes les affaires de la Nouvelle-France me soient 
extrêmement recommandées, si est-il vrai que ce 
que votre R. m'en escrit, augmente beau coup mon 
affection, suivant laquelle je n'ai pas manqué de l'as- 
sister. 11 a obtenu dix mille escus pour envoyer des 
hommes par de là, afin de fortifier contre les Iroquois 
et empescher leurs courses. 11 eût bien encore dé- 
siré un secours plus puissant pour chasser ceux qui 
entretiennent les dits iroquois dans cette guerre, en 
leur fournissant des armes à feu, mais cette entre- 
prise a esté jugée très hasardeuse: 1 0 parce qu' on 
ne sait pas leurs forces; 2 0 quand on les scauroit, il 
faudrait une somme notable pour fournir à la des- 
pense des hommes et des vaisseaux qui seront néces- 
saires à ce dessein; 3 0 après tout cela, on ne seroit 
pas asseuré de l'emporter, et si Ie coup manquait, 
voilà une grande despense que nous aurions faict au 
Roy sans aucun succez, ce qui feroit que nous ne 
serions plus ouis, lorsque nous aurions besoing de 



1641-42] 


C LALE

fANT TO CHARLET 


260 


[47 0 ] Letter from Father Charles Lalemant, to 
Father Étienne Charlet, Assistant 
of France at Rome. 


Paris, February 28th, 1642. 
M y REVEREND FATHER, 
Pax Christi. 
I have received what it has pleased Your 
Reverence to write me in favor of the affairs for 
which Father Le Jeune has just made a journey to 
this country.19 Now, although I am extremely inter- 
ested in all the affairs of New France, yet it is true 
that what your Reverence has written me about these 
greatly increases my affection, according to which I 
have not failed to assist him. He has obtained ten 
thousand écus, with which to send men over there to 
fortify against the Iroquois, and prevent their incur- 
sions. Indeed, he would also have desired more 
effectual assistance, in order to drive away those who 
are sustaining the said iroquois in this war, and fur- 
nishing them with firearms. But this enterprise has 
been deemed very hazardous: I st, because their 
strength is not known. 2nd, if it were known, a 
considerable sum would be needed to defray the ex- 
penses of the men and ships that would be necessary 
for this purpose. 3rd, after all that, we would not 
be certain of prevailing over them; and, if the at- 
tempt failed, what great outlays we would cause the 
King without gaining anything, which would result 
in our not being listened to when we might need 



270 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


quelque secours plus aisé; 4 0 je veux que nous em- 
portions la place par force; je demande après cela, 
qui est-ce qui asseurera nos flottes contre ceux qui 
auront esté chassez, et mesme Ie païs qu'ils tasche- 
ront de surprendre comme nous les aurons surpris: 
et est à remarquer que c'est la Compagnie [471] des 
Indes qui tient là cette habitation, qui s'en ressentirait 
si on l'avait enlevée; 50 si Ie coup manque, cela ne 
laissera pas de les animer contre ceux de Kébec et 
fourniront plus que jamais des armes aux Iroquois et 
se pourront bien joindre à eux pour nous faire du 
mal dans Ie pais; 6 0 queUe assurance certaine avons- 
nous que cela obligera les Iroquois de faire la paix 
avec nos sauvages; et pourtant, c' est sur l'asseurance 
de cette paix que tout ce dessein est basty. Or, on 
demande si sur cette seule espérance dont nous 
n'avons pas d'asseurance, on doibt faire une despense 
certaine d' une si grande somme nécessaire pour ce 
dessein, et s'exposer dans les dangers ci dessus 
remarquez. J e prierais volontiers votre R. de me 
faire escrire son sentiment là dessus et afin qu'eUe 
puisse mieux Ie donner, voicy les raisons que Ie P. 
Le Jeune produit pour poursuivre l'entreprise. 
Si on ne chasse ces gens là par composition ou par 
armes Ie païs est toujours en danger de ruine, la 
mission en danger de se rompre, les religieuses en 
danger de retour et la colonie se peut perdre, la porte 
de l' évangile est fermée à quantité de nations fort 
peuplées, nos pères dans les périls d'estre pris et 
brulez. 
II y a espérance qu'on les peut chasser, J\1. de 
Noyers lui a faict espérer comme de la part de Mon- 
seigneur Ie Cardinal, et a comme donné parole qu' on 



1641-42] 


C. LALE1WANT TO CHARLET 


271 


some lesser help. 4th, I grant that we might take 
the place by force; I ask, after that is done, who 
will secure our fleets against those that have been 
driven away, and likewise the country, which they 
will try to surprise as we shall have surprised them? 
And it is to be observed that it is the Company [47 1 ] 
of the Indies 20 that occupies the settlement there, 
and that would resent it if that were removed. 5 t h, 
if the attempt failed, that would certainly incite 
them against the people of Kébec, and they would 
furnish more arms than ever to the Iroquois; they 
might, indeed, join with them to do us harm in the 
country. 6th, what certainty have we that that will 
oblige the Iroquois to make peace with our savages? 
and yet it is upon the assurance of such peace that 
this whole project is founded. Now we ask if, upon 
this hope alone, of the fulfillment of which we have 
no certainty, we should make a definite outlay of so 
great a sum as is necessary for this purpose. and 
should expose ourselves to the dangers mentioned 
above? I would like to request your Reverence to 
have your opinion of this matter written to me; and, 
in order that you may better give it, here are the 
arguments that Father Le J eune urges in favor of 
undertaking the enterprise: 
If these people are not driven away by making 
terms with them, or by force of arms, the country is 
always in danger of being ruined, the mission of be- 
ing broken up, the nuns of returning, and the colony 
of being destroyed; the door of the gospel is closed 
to many very populous nations, and our fathers are 
in peril of being taken and burned. 
There is hope that they can be driven away. 
:Monsieur de N oyers has encouraged him to expect, 



2ï2 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


donnera ce qu'il faut pour les chasser, pourveu que 
leurs forces ne soient pas excessives. 
De composition il n'y a point d'apparence, ear on 
lui a dit qu'il n'en fallait point attendre, d'autant 
que c'estoient des Arabes; il fault donc y aller par 
force. Voilà ses raisons. 
J e prie done V. R. de me faire escrire là dessus 
son sentiment. 



1641-42] 


C. LALEi
fANT TO CHARLET 


273 


as if on the authority of Monseigneur the Cardinal, 
and has almost promised, that whatever is necessary 
to expel them will be given, provided their forces 
are not too great. 
Of making terms with them there is no prospect,- 
for he was told that it could not be expected from 
them, inasmuch as they were Arabs; therefore, force 
must be used with them. These are his arguments. 
I pray Your Reverence, then, to have your opinion 
of this matter written to me. 



274 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


Lettre du P. Charles Garnier à son Frère. 


M ON TRES CHER FRERE, 
La paix de N. S. J. C. soit auec võ 
Ce Me fut vne affliction enuoyée du Ciel 
quand j appris l'an passé au mois de septembre que 
la letre que je võ auois ecri pendant lété etoit arriuée 
a quebec auec plusieurs autres apres Ie depart des 
Vaisseaux põ retourner en france: :Mais il me fut 
d'autant plus facil de me resigner à la Volonté de 
Dieu que j'estois assuré que je n'auois peu faire mes 
letres ny les Enuoyer plus tost j'espere que N. S. 
aura suplée abondam t . par soy meme a la Consolãon 
qu'il võ eut donné par mes letres puisque vous dites 
qu'il s'en sert d'ordinaire põ võ en donner j'espere 
que Cette letre se joindre a quebec a Celle que je 
vous ecriuais l' an passé et pour repondre premiere- 
ment a Celle que je reçu de Vous l'eté dernier dattée 
a Falaix Le 4 e . de Mars. Continuez je võ en prie de 
plus en plus a benir dieu des graces qu'il ma fait et 
me Continue de faire de Jour en jours C est un des 
principaux tesmoignages que vous me puissiez don- 
ner de votre Amour en mon endroit ou pour mieux 
dire puisqu'il ny a rien a separer entre nous deux, et 
que nõ ne sommes q'un Cæur, Cest un tres St. et 
tres profitable entretien põ nous que de remerçier 
dieu Continuellem t des faueurs qe. nõ a fait. Car Je 
Les regardes Commune a lun et a lAutre. 
II ny a que mes peschez et mes Ingratitudes et mes 



1641-42] 


GARJ'7IER TO HIS BROTHER 


275 


Letter from Father Charles Garnier to his Brother. 


M y DEAREST BROTHER, 
The peace of Our Lord Jesus Christ be 
with you. 
It was a Heaven-sent affliction to 11e when I 
learned, in the month of september last year, that 
the letter which I had written to you during the sum- 
mer had reached quebec, with several others, after 
the departure of the Vessels returning to france; But 
it was all the easier for me to resign myself to the 
\Vill of God, because I was sure that I had not been 
able to write my letters or Send them sooner. I 
hope that Our Lord will have abundantly compen- 
sated, through himself, for the Consolation which he 
might have given you through my letters, since you 
say that he commonly uses them to afford you some. 
I hope that This letter will join, at quebec, That 
which I wrote to you last year, and so as to answer 
first That which I received from You last summer, 
dated at Falaix The 4th of :March. Continue, I beg 
you, more and more to bless God for the favors that 
he has shown me, and Continues to show me from 
Day to day. It is one of the principal testimonies 
that you can give me of your Love toward me; or to 
speak more correctly, since there is nothing to sepa- 
rate us two, and since we are but one Heart, It is 
a very Holy and very profitable converse for us to 
thank God Continually for the favors that he has 
bestowed on us. For I regard Them as Common to 
us Both. 



276 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


Infidelitez Continuelles aux quelles \T ous n'auez point 
de part je vous supplie neamoins de tout mon Cæur 
dy en prendre par charité non pas vous en charg(iant, 
mais V ous tenant oblige de faire des Efforts Conti- 
nuels põ les Aneantir par vos SSe SSe prieres &c et 
je VÕ puis assurer qu'en Ce faisant võ auancez bien 
la gloire de Dieu dans les Hurons. Car dieu m'ay- 
ant donné par sa bonté quelques Auantages de grace 
et de nature põ Ie seruir en Cette Mission, je suis 
assuré qe l'abbus qe je fais de Ses Graces et la negli- 
gence qe j'apport a son St. seruice empesche gran- 
dem t . un employ fructueux du Talent quil ma donné 
Au reste mon cher frere je Vous prie de traiter dou- 
cem t . Votre Cæur et ne jamais l'humilier par la Con- 
sideration de Vos imperfections qu'en mesme terns 
V oUS ne Ie releuiez par une Confiance filialle en 
notre bon Mre. mais j' espere reçeuoir Cette Année de 
\7 os letres par lesquelles vous me mendrez que N. S. 
a mis V otre Cæur dans un estat de Consistance et de 
fermeté, je Ie prie quil y mette Ie mien Au plutost. 
je me suis apperceu par la grace De Dieu q'une des 
choses qui m' empeschoit de seruir Dieu etoit que J e 
demandois trop de moy meme et qe dans les desseins 
que je me formois je regardois plutost Ce qui m'e- 
toit a de
irer, qu'a entreprendre et que je n'auois pas 
assez d' Egard a l' etat de perfection et de \T ertu ou 
j'estois, et a la mesure de la grace que dieu me don- 
noit sans doute je Croy qu'il y faudroit bien Auoir 
egard, et quil ne faudroit pas deuancer l'unique 
guide de nos Cæurs si je pouuois receuoir de N. S. 
quelque bon mot põ votre bien et põ votre Consola- 
tion je vous Ie dirois de fort bon Cæur par ceque võ 
Ie voulez mais quoy que Ce sera quand il plaira a 



1641-42] 


GARlvIER TO HIS BROTHER 


2i7 


It is only my sins, and my Ingratitude, and my 
Continual Unfaithfulness, in which You have no 
part; I nevertheless beg you with all my Heart to 
take some part therein for charity ,- not burdening 
yourself with them, but holding Yourself obliged to 
make Continual Efforts to Abolish them by means of 
your Holy Sacrifices, prayers, etc. ; and I can assure 
You that by So doing you are indeed promoting the 
glory of God among the Hurons. F or God, in his 
goodness, having given me some .A.dvantages of grace 
and nature, to serve him in This l\-Iission, I am sure 
that the abuse which I make of His Graces, and the 
negligence that I bring to his Holy service, greatly 
hinder a fruitful employment of the Talent that he 
has given me. Howbeit, my dear brother, I beg 
You to treat Your Heart gently, and never to humble 
it by the Survey of Your imperfections without at 
the same time uplifting it by a filial Confidence in 
our good J\laster. But I hope to receive letters from 
You This Year, in which you will send me word that 
Our Lord has put Your Heart in a condition of Sta- 
bility and firmness; I pray him that he so dispose 
mine As soon as possible. I have perceived, by the 
grace Of God, that one of the things which hindered 
me from serving God, was that I required too much 
of myself; and that, in the plans which I formed, I 
rather considered \Vhat was to be desired by me 
than to be undertaken; and that I had not sufficient 
Respect for the state of perfection and Virtue that I 
was in, and for the measure of grace which God was 
giving me; undoubtedly I Believe that one should 
certainly Consider this, and not anticipate the sole 
guide of our Hearts. If I could receive from Our 
Lord some good word for your weal and for your 



278 


LES RELA TIONS DES j'ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


Dieu mais J e me plains encor de vous qui ne me vou- 
Iez rien mander de Ce que võ Croyez me pouuoir 
seruir. etant quitte des etudes vous auez en effet 
plus de facilité a vous entretenir auec dieu et moins 
de diuertissements Dieu dispose tont põ notre bien 
je len benis de tout mon Cæur et Ie prie de vous Con- 
duire au point de perfection ou i1 vous appellee J e 
vous aduoue põ moy que jay tousiours eu de la peine 
a Conceuoir quoment il se trouuoit des personnes 
dans de bonnes religions qui ne trouuassent par Ie 
1Ioyen de s' entretenir soy mesme se prescriuant quel- 
ques occupations quand la relligion ne leur en Impose 
je ne scay quels sentiments ont telles personnes de 
L'Oraison de la lecture de la bible des sts. PP. des 
Vies des Saintes et quoy quils puissent repondre 
qu'ilz ne prennent pas plaisir a l'estude au moins 
seroient ils honteux de repondre qu'ils n'ayment 1'0- 
raison et quand ils en auroient de l'auersion s'y de- 
uroient ils s'y adonner vn peu et au bout d'un pen de 
terns un peu d'auantage, et ainsy faisant je ne doutte 
point qu'ils ne vinsent a y trouuer du Contentem t non 
habet amaritudinem Conversão Illius Pour võ mon 
tres cher frere je võ estime bien heureux si dieu 
V ous appelle a Cette lntime Communication Auec 
Luy qe s'il võ Jette dans L' Ambaras des affaires je 
võ prie prenez bon Courage il ny a point de fonction 
dans la relligion a laquelle Dieu nõ appelle ou nõ ne 
Ie puissions et deuions louer. j'espere quil nõ en 
fera la Grace a tous deux et quil nõ mettra ou il faut 
qe. nõ soyons ne nõ en mettons point en peine soit que 
võ soyez ou Auec st. Pierre ou Auec st. Jean quid ad 
te nõ suffise que C' est luy qui nõ y mettra põ Ce qui 
regarde la demande qe Ie st. Esprit fit põ võ Ie jour 



1641-42] 


GARNIER TO HIS BROTHER 


2ï9 


Consolation, I would tell you it with very good 
Heart, because you wish it: but what then? This 
will be when it shall please God; but I still com- 
plain of you, who will send me no word of \Vhat you 
Believe you can serve me in. Being free from stud- 
ies, you have in fact more facility for conyersing 
with God, and fewer distractions. God disposes 
everything for our good: I bless him for it with all 
my Heart, and pray him to Lead you to the point of 
perfection whither he calls you. I avow to you, for 
my part, that I have always found it difficult to Con- 
ceive how there happened to be persons in good 
religions who could not discover the Means to enter- 
tain themselves by prescribing to themselves some 
occupations, when religion Imposes none on them. 
I know not what opinions such persons have of Pray- 
er, of the reading of the bible, of the holy Fathers, 
of the Lives of the Saints; and although they may 
answer that they take no pleasure in study, at least 
they would be ashamed to answer that they do not 
love prayer. And, even though they had aversion 
for it, they ought to apply themselves to it a little,- 
and, after a little time, a little more; and by so do- 
ing, I doubt not that they would come to find Con- 
tentment in it: non Ita bet amaritudillem Conversatio 
Illius. As for you, my dearest brother, I account 
you very happy if God call You to This Intimate Com- 
munication \Vith Him; and, if he Cast you into Per- 
plexity of business, I beg you, take good Courage,- 
there is no office in religion to which God calls us, 
w herein we cannot and should not praise him. I 
hope that he will grant both of us the Grace thereto, 
and that he will place us where we ought to be; let 
us not trouble ourselves herein, whether you be 



280 


LES RELA TIONS DES j'ÉSUITES 


[V OLe 21 


de Votre profession jen remercie sa diuine Bonté de 
Ce qu'il võ Confirme dans l'esperance de la voir ac- 
complie vn JOT. et je Ie prie de tout mon Cæur quil 
I'accomplise quand ce sera pT. sa gloire al10ns moD. 
cher frere tous deux au Martyr eamus et nos et mori- 
amur Cum illo. helas C'est en sa bonte et Miseri- 
corde que nõ mettons toutte notre Confiance quand 
a Ce qui est de võ reuoir encor vne fois Ce me seroit 
vne Consolãon bien particuliere mais je prie Dieu 
qu'il en façe ce que est põ sa gloire faschons touttes 
fois et quand que nõ nõ Ressouuiendrons l'un de 
I'autre de jetter et arrester nõ veüe sur J. C. Et Cest 
en luy que nõ trouuerons toutte n Te Consolãon force 
et Vertu Si jauois principalem t . egard a mon Inte- 
rest je desirerois que võ R. P. Prouincial V ous enuoy- 
ast souuent accompagner des Predicateurs affin qe ne 
dependant point dun sacristain võ me donnassiez plus 
de part avos sts. SSe J e V ous remercie bien fort de 
Ceque Võ lauez fait Comme vous me Ie demandez 
Continuons a prier põ Ie pauure Enfant prodigue il 
est Vray qu'il me fait grandissime Compassion i1 me 
mande qu'il a eté fort Consolé de mes letres et qu'i1 
les a Iu et relu põ s'entretenir plus longtems dans 
les pensées de mes bonnes Instructions et ouurir la 
porte de son Cæur aDieu qu'il s'imaginoit parler a 
son Arne par ma bouche. II m' offre son seruice põ 
m'enuoyer tout Ce que je luy demanderay, je suis 
tout a vous dit i1 et tout Ce que je possede (que je 
ne deurois pas posseder ne desistons pas de prier et 
de faire prier dieu põ luy taschez de faire que quel- 
ques personnes des Votres Continuent de Ie Visiter 
et moy aussy je tasçheray de Iuy procurer Ie meme 
ma Cousinne Bué, son gendre et ma Cousinne Chau- 



1641- 42] 


GARNIER TO HIS BROTHER 


281 


\Vith st. Peter or With st. John,-qzàd ad te.? 
Suffice it for us that He is the one who will so be- 
stow us. Concerning the request which the holy 
Ghost made for you on the day of Your profession, 
I thank his divine Goodness for the Fact that he 
Confirms you in the hope of seeing it one day ful- 
filled; and I pray him with all my Heart that he fulfill 
it when it shall be to his glory. Let us both go, 
my dear brother, to :11artyrdom; eamus et nos et mori- 
amur Cum illo. Alas, It is in his goodness and :Mercy 
that we put our entire Confidence. As for seeing 
you once again, This would be a very special Con- 
solation to me: but I pray God that he do in the 
matter what is for his glory. Let us try, at all 
events, whenever we Remember each other, to direct 
and fix our gaze upon Jesus Christ; And in him we 
shall find all our Consolation, strength, and Virtue. 
If I had respect mainly to my own Interest, I would 
desire that your Reverend Father Provincial would 
send You often, to accompany Preachers; so that, 
not depending on a sacristan, you might give me 
more share in your holy Sacrifices. I thank You 
very much for having done so. As you request of 
me, let us Continue to pray for the poor prodigal 
Child; it is True that he arouses in me exceeding 
great Compassion. He sends me word that he has 
been much Consoled by my letters, and that he has 
read and reread them, in order to maintain himself 
longer in the thoughts of my good Instructions, and 
to open the door of his Heart to God,-that he fan- 
cied that God spoke to his Soul through my lips. 
He offers me his service to send me vVhatever I shall 
ask of him; "I am wholly yours," he says, "and 
\Vhatever I possess (which I ought not to possess)." 



282 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


(VOL. 21 


fourneau m'ont Escrit Je leur recriray dieu aydant- 
:Mais parlons un peu des Hurons Võ sauez bien que 
les Années precedentes nõ auions passe l'hiuer a la 
lYIission des Apostres ou Nation du Petun et d'autres 
auoient eté a la nation Neutre ou :11:ission des Anges 
et que nõ Auions entrepris de Cultiuer Ces nations 
aussy bien qe CelIe des hurons mais Cette annee nõ 
auons seulem t . fait quelques voyages a la mission des 
apostres sans y guere arrester et auons quitté la na- 
tion neutre tant accause qe, Ie P. jean de brebeuf qui 
y auait ete l' annee precedente est demeuré en hyuer 
a Quebec Cõe par Ceque 1'experience nõ a appris que 
Ces peuples cy ne se Conuertissent qu'apres vne 
longue et solide instruction, si bien que nõ auons 
reuny Cet hyuer nõ ff. les reduisant a la Culture 
Bourgs principaux des Hurons Le P. Mercier et Le 
P. Ragneau ont passé L'Hyuer a Instruire Ie bourg 
de L'Immaculée Conception Le R. P. L'allemant et 
Ie P Chaumonet Ie Bourg de St. Michel et de st. Jean 
bapt. Le P. Chatelin et Ie P. Pijart faisoient des 
Courses a quelques bourgs les plus proches de Cette 
Maison et Le P. Le Moyne et moy avons eu põ par- 
tage Ie bourg de st. joseph par tout nõ auons plus 
concu d'esperance que jamais mais nõ Voyons bien 
que Ce ne sera pas sans trauail et longanimité que 
dieu veut planter son Eglise en Ces quartiers il a 
plu a sa bonté de nõ donner des Chrestiens en tous 
Ces bourgs susnommez mais particulierem t. dans 
Celuy de l'Immaculée Conception et dans Celuy de 
St. Joseph Comme etant les deux bourgs ou on a tra- 
uailIé depuis longtems et meme ou nõ auions eu des 
residences lespace de pI usieurs années et põ võ parler 
plus particulierem t . de mon occupation nõ allions 



1641-42J 


GARNIER TO HIS BROTHER 


283 


Let us not cease to pray and to have others pray to God 
for him; try to arrange that some persons of Yours 
Continue to Yisit him; and I, too, will try to procure 
for him the same. My Cousin Bué, her son-in-law, 
and my Cousin Chaufourneau, have \Vritten to me; I 
will write back to them, God helping. 
But let us speak a little of the Hurons. You know 
well that, in the preceding Years, we had spent the 
winter in the :Mission of the Apostles, or Nation of 
the Tobacco; and others had been in the Neutral 
nation, or Mission of the Angels; and that we Had 
undertaken to Cultivate These nations as well as That 
of the hurons; but This year we have merely made 
some journeys to the mission of the apostles,-hardly 
more than stopping there,-and have left the neu- 
tral nation,- both because Father jean de brebeuf, 
who had been there the year before, has remained 
for the winter at Quebec; And Because experience 
has taught us that These peoples become Converted 
only after a long and solid instruction. Therefore 
we have reunited our brethren This winter,- hold- 
ing them to the Culture of the principal Villages of 
the Hurons. Father Mercier and Father Ragneau 
have spent The \Vinter in Instructing the village of 
L'Immaculée Conception; The Reverend Father 
L'allemant and Father Chaumonot, the Village of 
St. Michel, and that of st. Jean baptiste. Fa- 
ther Chatelin and Father Pijart made Excursions to 
some villages nearest This House, and Father Le 
Moyne and I had for our portion the village of st. 
joseph. Everywhere we have conceived more hope 
than ever; but we See, indeed, that It will not be 
without labor and long-suffering, that God will plant 
his Church in These quarters. It has pleased his 



284 


LES RELA TIONS DES j'ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


tous les jours pour instruire quelques chrestiens du 
bourg de st. joseph mais eux et nõ etions priuez de 
la Consolation de la ste. :Messe n'y ayant pas de cha- 
pelle dans Ce bourg Ce qui nõ etoit Ie plus sensible 
en Ce point etoit de ne pouuoir mettre les chrestiens 
dans l'exercice de la Deuotion N. S. suscita vn de 
Nos chrestiens qui s'offrit de nõ donner un bout de 
sa Cabanne enfermant la porte par ou il sortoit et se 
resoluant de sortir par l' Autre bout de sa Cabanne 
sans doute st. joseph nõ procura Cette faueur nõ fimes 
donc une petitte chapelle a Ce bout de Cabanne qui 
porte Le Nom de st. Joseph elle fut preste pour sa 
feste nõ y auons depuis assemblé nos chrestiens auec 
bien de la Consolation et Cet exercice de deuotion 
leur a bien serui ils y venoient põ la plus part enten- 
dre la messe tous les jours et tous les Samedys ils sy 
Venoient Confesser reglem t . deux de Nos francois 
etant Venus trauailler a Cette Chapelle nommé Es- 
tienne Totihri leur fit mil Caresses estimant quon 
luy faisoit une Grande faueur et Cepandant i1 n'est 
pas Croyable de Combien de Commoditez il se pri- 
uoit bouchant Ce bout de sa Cabanne et donnant la 
place ou ils reseruoient d'ordinaire leur bled et leur 
bois mais j estois bien aise de lentretenir dans la pen- 
see que Dieu luy faisoit bien de 1'honneur et en effet 
en Comme je luy en dit a Cette fin que plusieurs per- 
sonnes en france auoient employé tout leur bien a 
faire batir des chapelles je fus bien etonne q'une 
demye heur apres Ce bon jeune homme me vint ap- 
porter de la part de sa mere la Robe de Castor dont 
elle se Cou uroit disant quelle en faisoit present a 
Ceux qui trauaillent a la chapelle Cette action nõ 
toucha d'autant plus qe nous scauions qe Ces pauures 



1641-42] 


GARJI/IER TO HIS BROTI-IER 


285 


goodness to give us Christians in all Those above- 
mentioned villages,- but particularly in That of 
l'Immaculée Conception and in That of St. Joseph, 
As being the two villages in which we have worked for 
a long time, and in which we even had had residences 
during several years. N ow to tell you more especially 
of my own occupation, we went every day to instruct 
some christians of the village of st. joseph; but 
they and we were deprived of the Consolation of holy 
Mass, there being no chapel in This village. vVhat 
we felt most deeply in This matter was that we could 
not practice the christians in the exercise of Devo- 
tion. Our Lord raised up one of Our christians, who 
offered to give us one end of his Cabin,-closing the 
door by which he went out, and resolving to go out 
through the Other end of his Cabin; no doubt st. 
joseph procured us This favor. \Ve then built a 
little chapel at That Cabin's end, which bears The 
Name of st. Joseph; it was ready for his feast. 
\Ve have since then assembled our christians with 
much Consolation, and This exercise of devotion has 
served them well. They came to it, for the most 
part, to hear mass every day; and every Saturday 
they Came thither to regular Confession. Two of 
Our frenchmen haying Come to work at This Chapel, 
one Estienne Totihri showed them a thousand 
Courtesies, thinking that they did him a Great favor; 
and Yet it is Incredible, how :Many Conveniences he 
deprived himself of, by closing That end of his Cab- 
in, and giving the place in which they usually stored 
their corn and their wood. But I was very glad to 
maintain him in the thought that God did him much 
honor; and in fact, \Vhen I told him, to This end, 
that seyeral persons in france had employed all their 



286 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


Gens etoient fort mal Couuerts et qu'il faisoit bien 
froid nõ luy tesmoignasmes que Dieu prenoit plaisir 
auoir leur bonne volonté et leur rendisme leur Robe 
Cette famille nõ donne bien de Ia Consolãon elle Com- 
prend Ie dit etienne sa femme :1iadeleine, sa mere 
Christienne et Vn jeune Homme frere d'Estienne qui 
fut Batisé a Pasques et nomme Paul ]'oubliois de 
parler de la petitte fine d'Estienne nomme catherine 
elle na que deux Ans et fait jolim t . Ie signe de la 
Croix et prend elle meme de l'Eau benite et Vne 
fois se mit a Crier sortant de la chapelle accause que 
sa mere qui la portoit ne Iuy auoit donné Ie loisir d'en 
prendre ilIa faUut reporter en prendre Ie bon etienne 
et sa femme et son frere scauent fort bien leurs pri- 
eres et leur Cathechisme et en notre absence ils pre- 
nent Ie soin de faire prier Dieu les autres chrestiens 
de Ce bourg qui ne sont pas encor beaucoup Car J e 
ne tiens Compte que des bonnes nõ auons encor ba- 
tisé dieu mercy a Pasques vn homme de Ce bourg de 
4 0 Ans nomme Ahatsistari II a receu Le nom d' Eus- 
tache C'est vn homme d un naturel noble et gene- 
reux grand guerrier et qui dieu aydant en attirera 
apres soy plusieurs s'il Continue bien Comme i1 a 
bien Commence priez Dieu pour luy et pour tous les 
autres Cõe aussy põ touttes nos :Missions il y a plus 
de chrestiens a Ia Conception qua St. Joseph et Certes 
il y en a qui font tres bien graces aDieu Le frere du 
defunt Joseph qui prit au bateme Ienom de son frere 
est merueiUeusem t . changé et Auance fort en Vertu 
aussy fait sa femme catherine aussi fait N eueu pierre 
sa Niece Cecile &c On batisa l' An passe a Quebec 
vn J eune homme nomme Tsondatsa qui etoit aUe 
dans Ie Canot du P. Brebeuf lequel fait tres bien i1 



1641-42] 


GARNIER TO HIS BROTHER 


287 


wealth in having chapels built, I was much aston- 
ished that, a half-hour later, This good young man 
came to bring me, on behalf of his mother, the Beaver 
Robe with which she Covered herself,-saying that 
she made a present of it to Those who work at the 
chapel. This act touched us the more because we 
knew that These poor People were very poorly Cov- 
ered, and that it was very cold weather. We assured 
him that God took pleasure in having their good 
will, and we gave them back their Robe. This 
family gives us much Consolation; it Includes the 
said etienne, his wife :l\1adeleine, his mother Chris- 
tienne, and A young :Nlan, Estienne's brother, who 
was Baptized at Easter and named Paul. I was for- 
getting to speak of Estienne's little daughter, named 
catherine; she is only two Years old and prettily 
makes the sign of the Cross, and herself takes holy 
vVater; and Once she began to Cry, on leaving the 
chapel, because her mother, who was carrying her, 
had not given her leisure to take some: it was neces- 
sary to carry her back to get it. The good etienne, 
his wife, and his brother know their prayers and 
their Catechism very well; and in our absence they 
take care to have the other christians of This village, 
who are not yet many,- For I make Account only 
of the good ones,-pray to God. \Ve further bap- 
tized at Easter-thank God-a man of This village 
40 Years old, named Ahatsistari. He received The 
name of Eustache. He is a man of a noble and gener- 
ous nature, a great warrior, and one who-God help- 
ing-will draw after him many others, if indeed he 
Continues As he has Begun; pray to God for him 
and for all the others, As also for all our :1Iissions. 
There are more christians at la Conception than at 



288 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


y a de la Consolation a l'entendre parler a ses Com- 
patriotes des 
iisteres de notre ste. foy mais la rela- 
tions V ous apprendra Ie Reste et Ie tout Car Ce que 
Jay ecrit icy nest que pour ,;r.ous donner un petit 
Auant goust des faueurs que N. S. nõ fait N. S. ma 
fait la grace de batiser Cette automne vn petit en- 
fant Auec des Circonstances qui vous donneront de 
la Consolation. Jauois Euité trois batailles au Pere 
et a la mere de Cet enfant sans pouuoir obtenir d'eux 
la permission de pouuoir batiser Ce petit moribond. 
J e m'addresse a free Joseph notre bon chrestien et a 
vne Certaine Bienheureuse du Serron d'Italie dont 
Ie P. Poncet ma donné des reliques elle Auoit vn 
talent de batiser les Enfants qui sans elle fussent 
morts sans batesme je dis en leur Honneur vne 
messe Votiue Ie lendemain m'estant arresté Auec vn 
de nos Peres deuant vne Cabanne du Bourg Le Pere 
de Cet enfant vint a sortir de sa Cabanne aportant 
son fils sur son dos qui etoit depuis deux jours dans 
vne grande oppression auec quelque Espece de Rai1le 
Cet enfant nõ voyant dit a son Pere Ceux la, son Pere 
luy dit que Cestoit des françois Cet enfant ajouta 
ouy. etant rentré dans sa Cabanne la pensee luy 
vint de nõ enuoyer guerir põ batiser son fils et Ce a 
loccasion du mot qu auoit dit Enfant en nõ voyant J y 
allay Ie batiser dieu mercy II mourut la nuit sui- 
uante priez Ie et tant d' Autres petites Anges qu'ils 
auancent la Conuersion de leur pays et quils prient 
Auec võ pour moy je võ prie de me recommander 
bien particulierem t . au Prieres des RR PP. bernard 
prosper et bertaud. Le R P. Lallem t . Ie P. chaste- 
lain Le P. Pi jart et N. F. Scot se recommande bien 



1641-42] 


GARNIh1? TO HIS BROTHER 


289 


St. Joseph, and Certainly there are some who do 
excellently, thanks to God. The deceased Joseph's 
brother, who at his baptism took his brother's name, 
is wonderfully changed, and greatly Advances in 
Virtue, as do his wife catherine, his Nephew pierre, 
his Niece Cecile, etc. They baptized at Quebec last 
Year a Young man named Tsondatsa, who had gone 
in Father Brebeuf's Canoe-who is doing very well; 
there is Consolation in hearing him speak to his Fel- 
low countrymen about the Mysteries of our holy 
faith: but the relation win apprise You of the Rest 
and of everything. For \Vhat I have written here 
is only to give You a little Foretaste of the favors 
which Our Lord shows us. Our Lord has done me 
the grace of baptizing, This autumn, a little child 
With Circumstances which win give you Consolation. 
I had Undergone three battles with the Father and 
the mother of This child, without being able to ob- 
tain from them the permission to be able to baptize 
This little dying one. I address myself to brother 
Joseph, our good christian, and to a Certain Blessed 
du Serron in Italy,21 of whom Father Poncet gave 
me some relics: she Had a talent for baptizing Chil- 
dren who, without her, would have died without bap- 
tism; I say in her Honor a Votive mass. The next 
day, having stopped vVith one of our Fathers before 
a Cabin of the Village,- The Father of This child 
came to leave his Cabin, carrying his son on his 
back;-he had been for two days greatly oppressed 
with some Sort of Rattle in the throat. This child, 
seeing us, said to his Father: "Those yonder? "_ 
his Father told him that They were french. This 
child added, " Yes. II Having returned to his Cabin 
the thought came to him to send and fetch us to bap- 



290 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


fort avos Prieres il mont promis de se ressouuenir 
de Võ dans leurs prieres Je suis. 


c. G. 


des Hurons. ce 22 e . may 1642. 


mon tres cher fro je võ prie de me mander si je me 
suis autrefois oblige a dire quelques messes reglem t . 
pour nõ chaque mois je ne m en souuiens pas et je 
ne Ie pourrois pas faire nõ perdons icy souuent nos 
messes quoy que d'ailleurs nõ en soyons assez char- 
gez je ne võ parle pas des C. dont je vous escriuis it 
y a deux "ans põ võ obtenir vne bonne mort et vne 
promte deliurance du purgatoire j'en dis quelques 
fois põ vous quand je Ie puis. 



1641-42] 


GAR.NIER TO HIS BROTHER 


291 


tize his son, and That on account of the word which 
the Child had said on seeing us. I went thither to 
baptize him, thank God; He died the following night. 
Pray to him, and so many Other little Angels, that 
they may advance the Conversion of their country, 
and that they pray vVith you for me. I beg you to 
commend me very particularly to the Prayers of the 
Reverend Fathers bernard, prosper, and bertaud. 
The Reverend Father Lallemant, Father chastelain, 
Father Pijart, and Our Brother Scot urgently com- 
mend themselves to your Prayers; they have prom- 
ised to remember You in their prayers. I am, 
C. G. 


From the Hurons, this 22nd of May, 1642. 


:\1 y dearest brother, I beg you to send me word 
whether I formerly bound myself to say any masses 
regularly for us 
ach month. I do not remember it, 
and I could not do so: we often lose our masses here, 
although we are withal quite burdened therewith. 
I do not speak to you of the Rosaries about which I 
wrote to you two years ago, to obtain for you a pious 
death and a prompt deliverance from purgatory. I 
say them for you sometimes, when I can do so. 



292 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


+ 


Mémoire touchant les Domestiques 
Qui se donnent a Nre Compagnie 
aux Hurons. 


' L A difficu1té qu'il y a de faire monter icy haut, et 
encore plus d'y entretenir plusieurs personnes, 
a toujours fait juger entre plusieurs autres 
raisons, qu' outre les Ouvriers Evangeliques neces- 
saires pour la besongne que Dieu nous y presenteroit, 
Ie moins qu'on pourroit auoir icy d'autres personnes 
seroit Ie meilleur. Et d'autant qu'un Seculier Do- 
mestique peut faire tout ce que feroit un Frere Coad- 
iuteur; et non pas un Coadiuteur ce que peut faire 
un Domestique, cõme de porter et se servir d'arque- 
buze &c on a tousiours differé a y receuoir des Freres 
Coadiuteurs, et a-on souhaité d'auoir en leur place 
des Domestiques Seculiers, qui se donnassent pour 
Ie reste de leur vie aux seruices de nos Peres qui 
sont icy aux Hurons. 
Le Pere Hierosme Lallemant partant de France 
ran 1638 traita de cette affaire auec Ie R. P. Provin- 
cialle feu P. Estienne Binet, et receut par escrit son 
consentem t . pour la reception de tels Domestiques; et 
de plus vne fonne de reception ou Contract civil pour 
telles personnes, fait sur vn qui auoit autrefois esté 
passé a la Province de Champagne, et aggreé de N. 
R. P. General. 
Le R. P. Binet toutefois laissa libre d'yadiouter, 
ou retrancher ce qui se trouveroit necessaire sur les 



1641-42] 


.lJfE1IIOIR ON THE DOl\Y,NÉS 


293 


+ 


Memoir concerning the Domestics - - -- 
Who give themselves to Our Society 
among the Hurons. 


T HE difficulty that exists in bringing many per- 
sons up here, and still more in maintaining 
them, has, among other reasons, always made 
us judge that, beyond the Gospel Laborers necessary 
for the work that God should present to us, the fewer 
other persons we could have here, the better. And 
inasmuch as a Secular Domestic can do all that a 
Brother Coadjutor would do, and as a Coadjutor can- 
not do what a Domestic can, such as carrying loads, 
using an arquebus, etc., we have always deferred 
receiving Brother Coadjutors here, and have desired 
to have in their places Secular Domestics, who would 
give themselves for the rest of their lives to the serv- 
ice of our Fathers who are here among the Hurons. 
Father Hierosme Lallemant, upon leaving France 
in the year 1638, discussed this matter with the Rev- 
erend Father Provincial, the late Father Estienne 
Binet, and received in writing his consent for the 
reception of such Domestics,- and, furthermore, a 
form of reception or civil Contract for such persons, 
worded according to one which had formerly been 
granted to the Province of Champagne, and accepted 
by Our Reverend Father General. 
The Reverend Father Binet, however, left them 
free to add thereto, or take away, what might be 
found necessary to add or take away for each oc- 



-294 


LES RELA TIG.NS DES /ÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


lieux d'estre adjouté ou retranché. II adjouta qu'il 
pensoit que Ie dit Donne de la Prouince de Cham- 
pagne auoit fait quelque væu. 
Le P. Hierosme Lalemant, passant par Quebek, 
communiqua Ie tout au R. P. Paul Ie Jeune, pour lors 
Superieur; qui agrea toute l' affaire, et adiouta de 
luy mesme, qu'il pensoit qu'il seroit à propos de leur 
faire faire quelques væux; laissant toutefois Ie tout 
à ce que nos Peres des Hurons en jugeroient. 
Arrivé que fut Ie P. Hierosme Lalemant aux Hu- 
rons, il proposa l'affaire aux Peres qui y etoient, qui 
tous jugerent convenable qu'ils fissent quelques 
væux: et dautres ne semblerent plus a propos que 
ceux qui se font d'ordinaire à n re Com pie. et condi- 
tionels, comme ceux qui s'y font, mais avec la diffe- 
rence essentielle de væux de Religion et de Devo- 
tion, semblable à celle qui se retrouve aux væux que 
font les Novices devant la fin de leur Nouiciat; ou 
de quelque Penitent, qui les voudroit faire à son 
Confesseur. En suite donc six ou sept ont ete receûs 
de cette maniere. Mais quelques vns desirant se 
donner d'une façon plus devote et plus despoüillee, 
que celle qui etoit portee dans Ie Contract Civil; vne 
Forme de se donner fut dressee, conforme à leur 
devotion, laquelle semblant desgager plustost notre 
Compie. de toute obligation, que de la charger, ne 
sembloit pas deuoir receuoir plus de difficulté 
qu'aucune autre. 
L' annee 1639, fut enuoyé en France Ie memoire de 
tout ce qui s'etoit passé, touch ant cet article; & par 
consequent les deux sortes de se Donner. Et l'an- 
nee suivante 1640 lettres sont venuës de la part des 
Superieurs: Qu' on nageoit pas en cette affaire deux 



1641-42] 


lJfE1WOIR ON THE DONA'ÉS 


295 


casion. He added that he thought the said Donné of 
the Province of Champagne had made some vow. 
Father Hierosme Lalemant, passing through Que- 
bek, communicated all this to Reverend Father Paul 
1e J eune, at that time Superior, '\vho was favorable 
to the whole matter, and added, of his own accord, 
that he thought it would be well to have them make 
some vows,-leaving it all, however, to the judg- 
ment of our Fathers who are among the Hurons. 
"\Vhen Father Hierosme Lalemant reached the Hu- 
ron country, he proposed the matter to the Fathers 
who were there, who all judged it proper that they 
should make some vows; and none seemed more suit- 
able than those which are commonly made in our 
Society, and conditional, like those which are made 
therein,- but with the essential difference between 
vows of Religion and vows of Devotion, similar to 
that which is found in the vows made by Novices be- 
fore the end of their Novitiate, or by some Penitent 
who would like to make them to his Confessor. Ac- 
cordingly, six or seven were afterward received in 
this way. But, as some desired to give themselves 
up more devotedly and unreservedly than in the man- 
ner provided by the Civil Contract, a Form of dona- 
tion was arranged, conformable to their devotion,- 
which, appearing rather to relieve our Society of all 
obligation, than to burden it, seemed unlikely to 
encounter more objection than any other. 
In the year 1639, the relation of all that had taken 
place regarding this matter was sent to France, and 
çonsequently the two methods of Donation. And in 
the following year, 1640, letters came from the 
Superiors, saying that they did not in this affair, 
'.approve two things,- one, that we should require 



296 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


choses. L'vne qu'on leur eût fait faire des væux: 
L'autre que dans Ie Contract on oblige toute nostre 
Compagnie, ou il neût fallu obliger que la mission 
des Hurons à les assister Ie reste de leurs iours. 
En suite donc de ces aduis, on a premierement 
dressé Ie Contract, fait sur celui qui s'est Donné Ie 
de[r]nier, cette annee, en la façon qu'on l'envoye, 
lequel on renuoira approuvé ou improuvé, de qui il 
appartient: et en cas d'improbation, on enuoyra 
quelq3 autre forme de Contract, selon laquelle on 
puisse doresnauant agir auec assurance, & stabilité, 
quand il en sera besoin. Car pour Ie passé, il n'y 
en a eu aucun de fait, qui ne puisse estre pris, selon 
qu'on aura agreable de l'interpreter, & ainsi il ne 
sera besoin de rien reformer aux precedens. 
Or en quelq3 façon que Ie Contract se dresse, il sem- 
ble à propos d'aduertir de deux choses. La premiere, 
que Ie plus aduantageux et charitable qu'on Ie pour- 
ra faire, pour ceux qui se donnent, sera Ie plus iuste, 
et Ie meilleur, et Ie plus expedient pour no us ; veu 
la necessité que nous auons de telles personnes, qui 
soient d'aage competent, et de merite selon leur con- 
dition; et la difficu1té d' en recouurer icy et ailleurs, 
pour vn paÿs tel que celuy cy. La seconde, Qu'il ne 
semble pas raisonnable d'obliger à eux la seule mis- 
sion des Hurons, mais en outre toutes celles de la 
Nouvelle France. 
1 0 . Parce qu'ils ne se donnent pas seulement pour 
les Hurons, mais pour Ie service des Peres de toute 
la nouvelle France; qui en effet par tout en pourra 
bien auoir besoin; com me dez à present les Peres qui 
sont allez aux Nipissiriniens, en ont ou deuoient auoir 
un. V oyre mesme on en a receu, et en pourra-on 



1641-42] 


jWE
J10IR ON THE DONNÉS 


297 


them to make vows; the other, that in the Contract 
our entire Society is bound, while only the Huron 
mission should have been bound, to assist them all 
the rest of their days. 
Accordingly, after these advices, the Contract was 
drawn up this year for the first time in the manner 
in which it is sent, worded with reference to him 
who has last Given himself; and it will be sent back, 
approved or disapproved, by him to whom that apper- 
tains; and in case of disapproval, some other form 
of Contract will be sent, according to which we can 
henceforth act with assurance and stability, when 
there shall be need therefor. For, in regard to the 
past, there has been none, in fact, which could not 
be taken according to the approval of the interpreter; 
and thus there will be no necessity of amending any- 
thing in previous contracts. 
Now, in whatever manner the Contract is drawn 
up, it seems wise to notice two considerations. First, 
that the more advantageous and charitable are the 
terms that can be offered those who give themselves, 
the more just, the better, and the more expedient it 
will be for us,- considering the need we have of 
such persons, who should be of suitable age, and of 
a merit conformable to their condition; and the 
difficulty of getting them, here and elsewhere, for a 
country such as this is. Secondly, it does not seem 
reasonable to lay the Huron mission alone under obli- 
gation to them, but all those of New France besides. 
1St. Because they do not give themselves solely 
for the Hurons, but for the service of the Fathers of 
all new France, who, in fact, may have great need of 
them everywhere,- as, at present, the Fathers who 
have gone to the Nipissiriniens have or ought to have 



298 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


receuoir la bas cy aprez qu'on iugera peut estre à 
propos de nous enuoyer icy haut; et reciproquement 
de ceux d'icy haut, la bas: auquel cas, se trouueroit 
vne grande confusion dans les affaires, si quelques 
missions seulement leur estoient obligées, et non pas 
tou teSt 
zO. Par ce qu'il ne semble juste, que de jeunes 
gens à la fleur de leur aage se donnent à la COmpie., 
pour luy rendre en ces quartiers de meilleurs ser- 
vices, que des Freres Coadiuteurs, en vn paÿs bar- 
bare, plein de tant de dangers et d'incommoditez; et 
n' avoir cependant que des asseurances de leur vie 
si foibles; comme seroit quelques aumosnes qu' on 
fait à quelq3 mission particuliere, ou quelque legere 
fondation. En outre en ces quartiers les missions 
dependent de la phantasie de nos barbares: Or on au- 
roit de la peine de se justifier deuant Dieu, et deuant 
Ie monde, s'il falloit renuoyer telles personnes, pour 
la seule rupture d'vne telle mission. 
3 0 . Cette procedure tiendra toutes les missions de 
la Nouvelle France bien plus vnies, quand les Peres 
et les Domestiques seront communs à toutes les mis- 
sions. Pour ne point parler des inconueniens de la 
Separation de biens des missions de la Nouuelle 
France, qui auec Ie temps se trouvera impossible, ou 
suiette à de gran des disgraces, et diuorces d'esprits 
et d' affections. 
Quant à l'artic1e des væux, on a retranché toutes 
les ceremonies exterieures: comme de prononcer la 
forme tout haut, Ie iour de la reception; Item la 
Renouation publique qui s' en faisoit; et Ie tout se 
passe main tenant au particulier d'vn chacun, auec la 
direction du Confesseur. 



1641-42] 


flfEflfOIR ON THE DOJlll\/ÉS 


299 


one of them. Indeed, they have received some, and 
may receive hereafter some down there, whom it 
may be judged expedient, perhaps, to send to us up 
here; and likewise some of those up here may be 
sent down there,-in which case, there would be a 
great confusion in our affairs if some missions alone 
were bound to them, and not all. 
2nd. Because it does not seem just that young 
men in the flower of their youth should give them- 
selves to the Society,-to render it in these regions 
better service than Brother Coadjutors, in a barba- 
rous country, full of so many dangers and discom- 
forts,-and yet have only such weak assurances of a 
livelihood, as would be the alms that have been 
given to some particular mission, or some trifling 
fund. Besides, in these quarters, the missions de- 
pend upon the whims of our barbarians. Now we 
would be at a loss to justify ourselves before God 
and before the world, if it were necessary to send 
back such persons, merely on account of breaking 
up a certain mission. 
3 rd . This plan will keep all the missions of New 
France much more united, if the Fathers and Domes- 
tics are common to all the missions,-not to speak 
of the inconveniences arising from a Division of the 
property of the missions of New France, which .will 
in time be found impossible, or will be subject to 
great misfortunes, or to diversity of ideas and inter- 
ests. 
As for the matter of the vow, all external ceremo- 
nies have been discontinued, such as pronouncing 
the form aloud on the day of reception; Also, the 
public Renewal of it which they made. All is now 
done privately by each one, under the direction of 
his Confessor. 



300 


LES RELA TIO,NS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


Or ces væux particuliers nous sont plus aduanta- 
geux et necessaires en ce paÿs, qu'on ne penseroit de 
premier abord, n'y ayant icy aucun moyen de retenir 
Ie monde en bride, que par la voye de la conscience. 
11 est à propos de se representer des Domestiques 
qui ont Ie maniement de tout Ie temporel; et d'autres 
Domestiques passagers, qui sont à la maison: auec 
lesquels aussi bien qu'auec les Sauvages se pourroient 
passer beaucoup de choses, contre Ie bien de la 
maison, sans beau coup de scrupule de la part de nos 
Donnez, s'ils n' etoient retenus par quelq3 lien extra- 
ordinaire de conscience. On en peut facilement 
apercevoir plusieurs autres aduantages, que ie serois 
trop long de deduire. 
V oyla pour les difficultez du passé. Pour Ie futur, 
on est en peine de la maniere comme on pourra 
rendre les Donations, qu'ils font, valides; veu les 
difficultez survenues, et representées par l\Ions r . Ie 
Gouverneur, en la donation que Cousture faisoit à sa 
mere, de tout ce qui luy apartenoit en France: la 
mesme difficulté se retrouvera encore pI us grande, 
leur arrivant quelq3 succession de nouveau, de la- 
quelle ils voudront disposer. 
A propos de cecy, est à remarquer que ceux qui se 
Donnent, apres auoir signé Ie Contract auec Ie Supe- 
rieur, font vne declaration de ce qu'ils ont, et leur 
apartient, et de ce qu'ils desirent qu'il en soit fait: 
de quoy on fait vn memoire signé de la main de celny 
qui fait cette disposition, qu'on enuoye aux Procu- 
reurs de Quebek et de France, pour meUre en execu- 
tion autant qu'ils Ie peuuent. 
[Endorsed: :Memoire põ Les Donnés aux Hurons 
quand Ie Proc r . uiendra a la Congr on . 
De Canada, Des Oblats. ] 



]641-42] 


fiIEJ.JfOIR ON THE DONNES 


301 


Now these private vows are more advantageous 
and necessary to us in this country, than one would 
at first suppose, since we have here no means of re- 
straining people except by way of conscience. It is 
well to take into consideration Domestics who have 
the management of temporal matters, and other tran- 
sient Domestics who are in the house,- with whom, 
as well as with the Savages, many things could take 
place contrary to the good of the house, without 
much scruple on the part of our Donnés, if they were 
not retained by some extraordinary bond of con- 
science. One can easily perceive other advantages, 
which it would take me too long to enumerate. 
These were the difficulties of the past. As to the 
future, we are troubled to know in what manner the 
Donations that they make can be rendered valid,- 
considering the difficulties that arose, and that were 
represented by :110nsieur the Governor, over the 
donation that Cousture 2
 made to his mother of all 
that belonged to him in France. The same difficulty 
will prove still greater, if some new inheritance 
come to them, of which they shall wish to dispose. 
In reference to this, it is to be remarked that those 
who Give themselves, after having signed the Con- 
tract with the Superior, make a declaration of what 
they have, and what belongs to them, and of what 
they wish to be done with it,- a memorandum of 
which is made, signed by the hand of him who makes 
this disposition, which is sent to the Procurors of 
Quebek and of France, to be put into execution as 
soon as possible. 2 :3 
[Endorsed: :Memoir concerning the Donnés, among 
the Hurons, when the Procuror shall come to the 
Congregation. 
From Canada; Of the Oblates.] 



302 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


[Form of Contract, accompanying above Docu- 
ment; written by the same hand:] 
+ 
Je soubsigné Superieur des :Missions de la Compie. 
de JESUS aux Hurons, certifie par ces presentes, 
Que Jean Guerin nous ayant instamment representé 
son desir, de se consacrer au Service de Dieu et de 
nostre Compie. en se voüant pour Ie reste de sa vie, 
au service de nos Peres qui sont aux Hurons, et autres 
endroits de la Nouuelle France, ainsy qu'on iugera 
estre pour la plus grande gloire de Dieu; Iceluy 
nous ayant donné suffisante preuve de sa pieté et 
fidelité; Nous, l'acceptons par ces presentes, comme 
Donné, en qualité de Serviteur Domestiq3 sa vie du- 
rant, pour continuer les mesmes services que pour Ie 
passé, ou autres tels qu'aviserons bien estre, aux 
dits Hurons, ou ailleurs: luy promettant de n re part, 
de l'entretenir selon sa condition en son viure et ves- 
tir, sans autres gages ou pretensions de sa part, et 
dë Ie soulager charitablement en cas de maladie, ius- 
ques à la fin de sa vie, sans Ie pouuoir congedier en 
ce cas, sinon de son consentement. Pourueû que de 
son costé i1 continue à viure auec probité, diligence 
et fidelité à n re service, ainsy que par ces presentes il 
promet et s'oblige. 
Fait à la Residence fixe de Sainte }Iarie aux Hu- 


rons, ce 
[In the copy is added: 
19 de :Mars 16 4 2 . 
hierosme Lalemant (with paraph) 
Jean Guerin] 



1641-42] 


.I.1fE.JfOIR OiV THE DONl\/ÉS 


303 


[Form of Contract, accompanying above Docu- 
ment; written by the same hand:] 


+ 


I, the undersigned, Superior of the Missions of the 
Society of JESUS among the Hurons, certify by these 
presents, that Jean Guerin 24 having earnestly repre- 
sented to us his desire to consecrate himself to the 
Service of God and of our Society, by vowing him- 
self for the rest of his life to the service of our Fa- 
thers who are among the Hurons, and in other places 
of New France, as shall be decided to be for the 
greater glory of God,-the Same having given us 
sufficient proof of his piety and fidelity: We, by 
these presents, accept him as Donné in the capacity of 
a Domestic Servant during his lifetime, to continue 
in the same services as in the past, or in such others 
as we shall deem advisable, among the said Hurons, 
or elsewhere; promising, on our part, to maintain 
him according to his condition with food and cloth- 
ing, without other wages or claims on his part, and 
to care for him kindly in case of sickness, even to 
the end of his life, without being able to dismiss him 
in such case, except with his own consent; provided 
that, on his part, he continue to live in uprightness, 
diligence, and fidelity to our service, even as by 
these presents he promises and binds himself to do. 
Done at the permanent Residence of Sainte Marie 
of the Hurons, this- 
[In the copy is added: 
19th of 
1arch, 1642. 
hierosme Lalemant (with paraph) 
Jean Guerin] 



304 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


[Form of Donation; also in same hand:] 


+ 
Je Soubsigné declare que de ma propre et franche 
uolonté, ie me suis donné a la Compagnie de JESUS 
pour seruir et assister de tout mon pouuoir et indus- 
trie les Peres de ladicte Compagnie qui travaillent 
au salut et a la conuersion des ames, et particuliere- 
ment ceux qui sont employez a la conuersion des 
pauvres sauvages et barbares de la Nouuelle France 
aux Hurons, et ce en telle forme et habit que l'on 
uoudra, et que l'on jugera plus a propos pour la plus 
grande Gloire de Dieu-sans plus rien pretendre au 
monde que de uiure et mourir auec lesdicts Peres en 
quelque part du monde ou il Me faille trouuer auec 
eux, laissant en leur libre disposition tout ce qui me 
regarde et pouroit appartenir (sauf ce qui se trouu[e]ra 
dec1aré dans un. memoire particulier dressé a cette 
fin) sans que ie desire que du reste on en fasse aucun 
inuentaire desirant tout quitter pour Dieu sans 
aucune reserue ou resource que de Lui mesme. En 
foy dequoy iay signé la presente declaration que ie 
prie Dieu de benir et d' auoir pour jamais agreable; 
Faict a la Residence de Ste :MARIE aux Hurons ce 23 
de Decembre. 1639 


Ie Coq [with paraph] 


J e soubs-signé Superieur de la :ð1ission de la Com- 
pagnie de JESUS aux Hurons certifie auoir accepté la 
susdite donation entant que besoin est a ce qu'elle 
sortisse son plain et entier effet selon les formes et 



1641-42] 


.J.1fEJI0IR ON THE DONNÉS 


305 


[Form of Donation; also in same hand:] 


+ 


I, the Undersigned, declare that of my individual 
and free will I have given myself to the Society of 
JESUS, to serve and assist with all my power and dili- 
gence the Fathers of the said Society, who work for 
the salvation and conversion of souls, and particular- 
ly those who are employed in the conversion of the 
poor savages and barbarians of New France among 
the Hurons, and this in such method and dress as 
shall be required, and as shall be judged most suit- 
able for the greater Glory of God, without claiming 
anything else whatever except to live and die with 
the said Fathers in whatever part of the world I am 
required to be with them; leaving to their free dis- 
position all that concerns me and may belong to me 
(except what shall be found declared in a special 
memorandum drawn up for this purpose). without 
desiring that any inventory besides should be made 
of it,- wishing to give up all for God without any 
reserve, or any resource except Himself. In attesta- 
tion of which I have signed the present declaration 
which I pray God to bless and forever find accept- 
able. Done at the Residence of Ste. :MARIE of the 
Hurons, this 23rd of December, 1639. 
Ie Coq 25 [with paraph] 


I, the undersigned, Superior of the Mission of the 
Society of JESUS to the Hurons, certify that I have 
accepted the aforesaid donation, insomuch as it is 
needful that it should have its full and entire effect, 



306 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


[VOL. 21 


l'esprit de nostre Compagnie dont Ie susdit donateur 
a esté deüement informé. 
Fait au mesme Lieu An, et Jour. 
Hierosme Lalemant [with paraph] 
Ie Coq [with paraph] 



1641-42] 


JfE
JIOIR ON THE DONNÉS 


307 


according to the forms and the spirit of our Society, 
of which the aforesaid donator has been duly in- 
formed. 
Done in the same Place, Year, and Day. 
Hierosme Lalemant [with paraph] 
Ie Coq [with paraph] 




BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: YOLo XXI 


XLIV 


For particulars of this document, see Vol. XX. 


XLV 


Charles Lalemant writes in French from Paris, 
February 28, 1642, to Father Étienne Charlet, assist- 
ant of France, at Rome. We find the document in 
Rochemonteix's JésuÜes et la Nouvelle-France, ii., pp. 
470, 47 I; but that editor does not give the location 
of the original. 


XLVI 
In publishing this letter (written in the Huron 
country, May 22, 1642) of Charles Garnier to his 
brother,- see reference thereto, in Bibliographical 
Data to Document No. XLI!., in Vol. XX.,-we 
follow a contemporary copy, presumably by a member 
of the Garnier family in France; this apograph is now 
in the archives of St. Mary's College, Montreal. It 
is supposed that the original is not now in existence. 


XLVII 


This is a memoir written by Jerome Lalemant,- 
although unsigned,- apparently in the year 1642. 
The original is in the domestic archives of the So- 
ciety of J esus. We are indebted for our copy thereof 
to Rev. Rudolf J. Meyer, S.]., assistant to the Father 
General, and to Rev. Thomas Hughes, S.J., who 
have added two brief documents in the same chirog- 
raphy, which are attached to the original :MS. 



NOTES TO YOLo XXI 


(Figures in þarentheses, following number of note, refer to þages 
of English text.) 


1 (p. 23).- For sketch of Marguerie, see vol. X., note 4. 
Thomas Godefroy, sieur de Normanville, was a brother of Jean 
Godefroy de Linctot, and a relative of Jean Paul Godefroy (vol. ix., 
note 4). Like them, he was an Indian interpreter under Champlain. 
During the English occupation of the country, he remained in 
Canada, and resided at Three Rivers from 1634 to the end of his 
life. On the occasion described in our text, he escaped from the 
hands of the Iroquois: but in the summer of 1652 he was slain by 
them, near Three Rivers. 
2 (p. 85).- For sketch of Marsolet, see vol. v., note 35. 
3 (p. 93).- For sketch of Duplessis-Bochart, see vol. v., note 34. 
It has generally been assumed by historians that Duplessis-Bochart 
and Duplessis-Kerbodo were the same person. But Sulte queries 
this, adducing various circumstances which render it probable that 
these were different persons, and that Duplessis-Kerbodot did not 
arrive in Canada until 1651 (Bulletin des Recherches Historiques, 
vol. ii., pp. 178-182). 
4 (p. 10 7).- The colony of Montreal was a religious enterprise. 
Its founders were J érôme Royer de la Dauversière, receiver of taxes 
at La Flèche, in Anjou; and Jean Jacques Olier, a young priest of 
Paris. To both these men came, at nearly the same time (about 
16 3 6 ), the idea of founding a religious colony at Montreal: uniting 
their designs, they formed (1640) an association of, at first, but six 
members - a number increased, within two years, to forty-five, 
largely persons of rank and wealth. Notable among these was 
Madame de Bullion, who gave 42,000 livres for the erection and sup- 
port of a hospital for the colony. They secured from the intendant 
Lauson (vol. vi., note 2) a grant of Montreal Island (vol. xii., note 
13); and in 1641 sent thither forty soldiers and laborers, to begin the 
new settlement. These men were under the command of Paul de 
Chomedey, sieur de Maisonneuve, an experienced soldier, and a man 
.of great piety and courage. He was accompanied by Mlle. Jeanne 
Mance,- a young woman belonging to an honorable family of 



312 


LES RELATIONS DESJÉSUITES 


Nogent-Ie-Roi, near Langres,- who, like the other associates, was 
inspired by religious zeal for the conversion of the savages. At their 
arrival, the s
ason was too far advanced for such an enterprise, so 
they spent the winter at Quebec; proceeding to Montreal in the fol- 
lowing spring, they took possession of the island on May 17, 1642. 
They were joined by Madame de la Peltrie; and, in 1643, additional 
colonists came from France, under command of Louis d' Ailleboust. 
The new settlement was named Ville-Marie, in honor of the Virgin 
Mary, to whom it was especially dedicated. 
Meanwhile, two religious orders were founded in France for the 
benefit of the new colony,- by Dauversière, at La Flèche, the Hos- 
pital nuns of St. Joseph; and by Olier, at Vaugirard, a society.of 
priests, that soon developed into the Seminary of St. Sulpice, in 
Paris. The hospital endowed by Madame de Bullion was built in 
1644; and the nuns of St. Joseph came to Montreal in 1659. As for 
the religious interests of the colony, its earliest spiritual advisers 
were Jesuits from Quebec; but in May, 1657, the Sulpitians replaced 
them. Six years later, the Associates of :Montreal surrendered the 
colony to the Sulpitians (vol. xii., note 13). 
The earliest publication concerning the foundation of Montreal 
appeared in 1643, probably at Paris: Les Véritables motifs de 
M.Jf. et Dames de la Soczëté de N. D. de i1/ontréal þour la conver- 
sion des Sauvages de la Nouvelle France,- a defense of their 
project, called forth by hostile criticisms. This has been reprinted 
(1880), by the Société Historique of Montreal, with introduction and 
notes by Abbé H. A. Verreau. This editor regards the work as the 
production of Olier; but Faillon thinks it was written by Laisné de 
la :M:arguerie, an associate of Olier's. François Dollier de Casson's 
Histolre de .JfontréaI covers the period 1640-72; this MS. was pub- 
lished, in 1871, by the Literary and Historical Society of Quebec. 
The same soc.iety had published (1840) the :\IS. Histoire du Canada, 
by Abbé de Belmont (superior of the seminary at Montreal, 
17 1 3- 2 4), which relates many particulars of the early history of this 
city. See also Faillon's Col. Fran.; Parkman's Jesuits; Vie de 
./"fademoise/le ..VIance (Paris, 1854; 2 vols.); and De Launay's 
Re/ig. Hosþzï. de St. Joseþh. 
5 (p. 107).- Du Marché and Turgis (vol. viii., notes 18, 19) were 
replaced in the Miscou mission (1637) by Nicolas Gondoin and 
Jacques de la Place. The former soon returned to France; but De 
la Place, aided by Claude Quentin, remained until 1640, when they 
were compelled, by illness and lack of means, to return to Quebec. 
De la Place must have gone to France in the autumn of that year; 
for he came thence with )1lle. Mance (1zote 4, ante) in the summer 
of 16.p. He '\vas in Miscou the following year, and apparently 



lVOTES TO VOL. XXI 


313 


remained there until the autumn of 1647, when he went back to 
France; but in August, 1649, returned to Quebec, where he labored 
for several years. In November, 1653, he was sent to Three Rivers, 
to replace Richard; the JOUY1l. des Jésuites mentions his arrival at 
Quebec (August, 1657) from that place, but it is uncertain whether 
he spent the time between those dates at Three Rivers. He 
returned to France Sept. 6, 1658. 
The brother Ambroise Brouët is mentioned in the Relations of 
1656 and 1657 as going to the Iroquois country. 
6 (p. 109),- Concerning M. de Gand, see vol. vii., note 22. 
7 (p. 109),- For sketch of Chevalier de Sillery, see vol. xiv., note 12. 
8 (p. 111).- The gifts of Marquis de Gamache and his son are 
referred to in vol. vi., note 9. 
9 (p. 117).-Concerning the Abenaki tribe, see vol. xii., note 22; 
the Porcupine, vol. xiv., note 13; the others here mentioned, 
vol. xviii., notes 11, 13. 
10 (p. 12s).-Regarding the Kiristinouns (Crees), see vol. xviii., 
note 15. 
II (p. 191).-Concerning the Eries, or Cat Nation. see vol. viii., 
note 34. p. 302. Parkman (Jesuits, p. xlvi) thinks that this tribe 
were the Carantouans of Champlain. He also says of the Neutrals 
(p. xliv, note 3): II They, and not the Eries, were the Kahkwas of 
Seneca tradition." This statement gives the scope of a considera- 
ble controversy among antiquarians as to the identity of the 
Kahkwas. Marshall agrees with Parkman; he says (Niagara 
Frontier, p. 6, note): II The latter [Eries] lived south of the west- 
ern end of Lake Erie until they were destroyed by the Iroquois, in 
1655. The Kah-kwas were exterminated by them as early as 1651. 
On Coronelli's map, published in 1688, one of the villages of the lat- 
ter, called · Kakouagoga, a destroyed nation,' is located at or near 
the site of Buffalo." 
Several other writers take the opposite ground, arguing that the 
Eries were the Kahkwas. Morgan says (League of the Iroquois, 
p. 337) that the Eries were known to the Iroquois by the name 
Gä-quä-ga'-o-no [o-no signifying merely II the people at "]; that 
II they were an offshoot of the Iroquois stock, and spoke a dialect of 
their language." He adds: II It is a singular fact that the 
Neuter Nation, who dwelt on the banks of the Niagara river, and 
who were expelled by the Iroquois about the year 1643, were 
known among them as the Je-go'-sä-sa, or Cat Nation. The word 
signifies . a wild cat; , and, from being the name of a woman of great 
influence among them, it came to be the name of the nation." Cf. 
Schoolcraft, Notes on the Iroquois (N. Y., 1846), pp. 176-179, 221; 



314 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


he narrates (as told him by an Alleghany chief, Ha-yek-dyoh-kunh 
- called by the English" Jacob Blacksnake ") the tradition of the 
final contest between the Senecas and Kahkwas. This chief" stated 
that the Kah-Kwahs had their chief residence, at the time of their 
final defeat, on the Eighteen-mile creek. The name by which he 
referred to them, in this last place of their residence, might be writ- 
ten perhaps with more exactitude to the native tongue, Gah-Gwah- 
ge-o-nuh." Cf. vol. viii., of this series, note 41. 
J. G. Henderson, of Chicago, after referring to above citations, 
and to Coronelli's map, writes us as follows: .. On another map, 
· without title or maker's name,' which Parkman thinks was of date 
about 1673 (La Salle, p. 452),- but evidently of later date, because 
the Ohio is laid down as entering the Mississippi. a fact not known 
until a later period,- at the east end of Lake Erie we find the 
· Kakouagoga, a nation destroyed' ('Vinsor's Narr. and Crit. 
Hist., vol. iv., pp. 215, 217). So far as I know, this Kakouagoga of 
Coronelli's map (1688), and the same name and legend found on the 
anonymous map above referred to, are the only instances where the 
Kah-kwas are mentioned under that name upon any map. A strong 
argument for the identity of this tribe with the Eries is found in the 
Indian name of Eighteen Mile Creek, a small stream entering Lake 
Erie southwest of Buffalo. Marshall (Niagara Frontier, p. 35) 
gives Its Seneca name as Gah-gwah-ge'-gd-aah, . the residence of 
the Kah-kwas.' In a document executed by the Senecas in 1797, the 
name of this stream is given as Koghquauga (U. S: Statutes at 
Large, vol. vii., p. 602); and, in a treaty with the Senecas in 1802, 
we find it written Kogh-quaw-gu (Id., p. 71). Morgan also gives 
the Seneca name of Caugwaga Creek, Erie county, N. Y., as Gä- 
gwä-ga, · the creek of the Cat Nation;' and an Indian village in 
Cattaraugus county as Gä-quä' -ga-o-no Wä-ä' -guen-ne-yuh, · the trail 
of the Eries' (League of the Iroquois, p. 466). This village must 
have been thus named because it was on the ancient trail leading 
from the Senecas to the Kahkwas. A careful examination of all 
available data shows that the home of the Eries was south of Lake 
Erie, bordering on the lake; and it is highly probable that Eighteen 
Mile Creek-the Kogh-quaw-gu of the Senecas-marked the east- 
ern limit of their territory, while the Neutrals occupied the north 
side of the lake,- their territory extending, perhaps, across the 
Niagara river, but never stretching around the end of the lake 
westward.. But it is possible, after all, that the term Kah-kwas 
was applied alike to both the Neuters and Eries. Morgan states 
elsewhere that · it seems probable that the two were bands of the 
same nation;' and he adds that both the Eries and !'\eutrals spoke 
dialects so near the Seneca, that the three could understand one 



l.VOTES TO VOL. XXI 


315 


another's speech (Systems of Cònsanguinity, p. 152). Indeed, he 
suggests that the Gakwas or Eries, are supposed to have been a 
subdivision of the Senecas (br.dian .Jfisce//anles, p. 227). The 
term Altr.wandaronk- signifying · those who speak a somewhat 
different language' - was applied to the Neuters by the Hurons, 
and vice versa; and this name would be equally applicable to the 
Eries, from either a Huron or Seneca standpoint. Considering also 
their other appellation, · the Cat Nation,' it is certainly a curious 
coincidence, if nothing more, that the Neuters, too, were known to 
the Iroquois as Je-go' -sä-sa, · the Cat Nation.' II 
It is desirable here to consider what animal is meant by chat 
sauvage, the II wild cat II so often mentioned by early writers, espe- 
cially in connection with the Erie tribe. Some suppose it to be the 
common American wild cat, Lynx rufus, or possibly the Canadian 
lynx, Lynx Canadensis. J. G. Henderson, in a paper read before 
the Amer. Asso. for Adv. of Science, at its meeting of 1880, takes 
issue with this idea, saying: II These two species of lynx were not 
differentiated by the early French explorers, who classed both as 
wolves, under the appellation louþ cervler; while they gave to the 
raccoon the name chat sauvage. Sagard clearly distinguishes these 
animals (Canada, Tross ed., pp. 679. 680), as louþs cervlers 
(lynxes), named by the Hurons Toutsitoule; common wolves, 
A natisqua; and' a species of leopard, or wild cat. that they call 
Tiron.' He adds: · In this vast extent of land there is a country 
that we surname II the Nation of the Cat, II on account of these 
cats,- small wolves or leopards which are found in their country, 
which furnish their robes. These cats are hardly larger than 
foxes; but they have fur closely resembling that of the common 
wolf, for I myself was deceived in choosing between them.' II This 
view is corroborated by Clapin (Diet. Canad.-Français), who de- 
fines chat sauvage as the raton of France (raccoon,- given by 
Littré as Ursus totor, but generally known to scientists as Procyon 
lotor, belonging to ProcyonÙlæ, a group coördinate with Ursùlæ). 
\Ve may here note another animal sometimes called II wild cat "- 

}Iustela þemz.antl, of the Mustelidæ, another group of the great 
Arctoid order; it is commonly known as II fisher," II black cat, II 
II black fox, II or II pekan. II This last name is a Canadian-French 
word, and was used as early as 1684, for it occurs in a document of 
that date, II Memoir touching the expenses incurred by Sieur de 
Lasalle at Fort Frontenac,"-a translation of which is given in 
N. Y. Colon. Docs., vol. ix., pp. 216-221. 
12 (p. 191).- 01r.guÙz.ahra: :r\iagara. Cartier, when at Hochelaga 
(Montreal), heard vague rumors of the great cataract. Champlain's 
map of 1632 locates it quite definitely, at the western end of Lake 



316 


LES RELATIONS DES.lÉSUITES 


St. Louis (Ontario); he describes it as .. a fall of water at the end 
of the falls of St. Louis,- very high, in descending which many 
kinds of fish are stunned." Its location on the map shows that 
.. sault St. Louis" is a mere slip of the pen, or a typographical er- 
ror, for" lac St. Louis." Sanson's map of 1656 gÏ\-es it as " Ongiara 
Sault;" Coronelli (1688) names it Niagara. O'Callaghan's index to 
N. Y. Colon. Docs. enumerates thirty-nine other variants on this 
name. Ragueneau mentions the cataract (in Huron Relation of 
1648, chap. i.), as " of frightful height." 
The name Niagara, or Onguiahra, is generally regarded.as of Mo- 
hawk (or the kindred :r\eutral) origin, and signifying" neck," refer- 
ring to the strip of land between Lakes Erie and Ontario, cut off by 
this river. The easternmo
t village of the Neutrals, probably near 
the Falls, bore the same name. Concerning Lalemant's statement 
in the text, that the Neutrals had forty villages, A. F. Hunter says: 
.. So many village sites are found at the present day in the districts 
north of Lake Erie that this estimate is fully confirmed." 
Valuable information in regard to this region is given in Mar- 
shall's .Niagara Frontier (Buffalo, 1881); Coyne's Cou1ltry of Neu- 
trals; and Holley's Niagara (N. Y., 1872). For the physical his- 
tory of the river, see Gilbert's paper in Smithsonian Reþ., 18 90, 
pp. 23 1 - 2 58. 
13 (p. 193).- For information regarding the Neutrals, see vol. 
viii., notes 34, 41, and vol. xviii., 1zote 19. Cf. Harris's Catholic 
Church in Niagara Peninsula (Toronto, 1895), chap. i.-v. 
14 (p. I97).-These .. black beasts II were black squirrels (vol. 
xvii., 1zote 8). Concerning the .. cow, II see vol. ix., 1lote 33; the 
.. wild cat," 1zote II, ante. 
15 (p. 203).- For sketch of the Récollet Daillon, see vol. iv., 
note 23. 
16 (p. 207).- Kandoucho (All Saints) was, according to Lalemant, 
the Neutral village nearest the Hurons; but opinions as to its loca- 
tion are conflicting. The most satisfactory suggestion is that of 
Arthur Harvey (Toronto Jfail, Dec. II, I885)-that the site of Kan- 
doucho was probably one of those found at Lake Medad, Halton 
county, Onto Lalemant here states that this village was between 
four and five days' journey from Teanaustayaé. and (near the begin- 
ning of this chapter) four days from the mouth of Niagara River. 
This halfway position between the two points named corresponds 
very closely to that of Lake Medad. This locality was used as a 
place of residence by the aborigines for some time after the arrival 
of the French, as may be inferred from the numbers of French relics 
found there. 1'\umerous other iemains have been found, including 



NOTES TO VOL. XXI 


317 


some bonepits which were examined by B. E. Charlton of Hamilton, 
Ont., all showing that it was a place occupied for a long time by the 
Neutrals. Lalemant's estimate of the position of Kandoucho as 
about latitude 420 30' is inconsistent with our present knowledge, but 
he appears to have made no instrumental observation. His men- 
tion of its distance from the Hurons, forty leagues, renders probable 
its location at Lake Medad. Ragueneau says that in 1648 the Neu- 
tral village nearest the Hurons was only thirty leagues distant 
(Huron Relation of 1648, chap. i. and iv.); and that the Senecas 
captured it in that year. But, during this interval of eight years, 
the Neutrals may have moved nearer to the Hurons, and established 
new villages.-A. F. HUNTER. 
Coyne conjectures that Kandoucho may have been not far from 
the present Brantford; Clark, as cited by Harris (Niagara Pe1tllz- 
sula, p. 341), says that it was not far from Brampton, Peel county. 
It should be noted that Lalemant states its distance as .. about forty 
leagues [from the Hurons], going all the time directly South." 
Daillon, in journeying to the Keutrals (1626), arrived at their first 
village in six days from the Tobacco Nation (Sagard's Canada, 
Tross ed., pp. 799,800); he does not give its name, although it is 
supposed to have been Kandoucho. 
17 (p. 207).-Tsohahissen's village would seem to be identical with 
the Notre Dame des Anges of Sanson.s map, located on the west 
side of Grand River, near Brantford, Ont.; the Jesuits would nat- 
urally give to the chief village of the Neutrals the name of their 
mission to that tribe, .. Mission des Anges."-A. F. HUNTER. 
Coyne thinks that N. D. des Anges was at the Neutral village of 
Kandoucho (see preceding note), and that the village of Tsohahis- 
sen was the S. Alexis of Sanson's map; and he conjectures that the 
latter was upon the site now indicated by the" Southwold Earth- 
work "-an aboriginal fortification still remaining, in the township 
of Southwold, Elgin county, Onto (Country of Neutrals, pp. 1-3, 
13, 14.). 
18 (p. 22s).-Teotongniaton (St. Guillaume) was probably-as 
suggested by Coyne (ul suþra, p. I9)-the place mentioned by 
Ragueneau (Huron Relation of 1651, chap. ii.) as captured in 16S1; 
but Coyne thinks that it .. was perhaps in the vicinity of .W oodstock, 
Ont." Harris opposes this view (.J.Yiagara Pe1zÙzsula, pp. 34 0 , 
341); but the locations therein conjectured are equally unacceptable. 
A more probable site than anyone of these is in Beverley township. 
lot 12, concession 7; there many iron tomahawks have been found, 
indicating a conflict. This location for St. Guillaume would also 
agree with the text, as it is halfway betweetJ Kandoucho and the 
village of Tsohahissen. Four miles east of this site is another, at 



318 


LES RELA TIONS DES JÉSUITES 


which 3 00 iron tomahawks have been picked up; this is in the same 
township, in lot 26, concession 8. Another Neutral village had been 
captured in the :previous autumn by the Iroquois, as stated by Ra- 
gueneau; and the occurrence of these two sites in Beverley, both 
bearing tokens of conflict, suggests the strong probability that here 
stood St. Guillaume and the other captured village just mentioned.- 
A. F. HUNTER. 
19 (p. 269).-Le Jeune mentions this journey, and his errand, in 
the introductory note at the beginning of the Relation of 16 4 0 -4 1 . 
20 (p. 271).-Reference is here made to the Dutch \Vest India 
Company, chartered June 3, 1621 -successor to the United New 
Netherland Company, which received its charter Oct. II, 161 4. 
O'Callaghan, in History of New Netherland (N. Y., 1855), vol. i., 
p. 89, thus characterizes the new association: .. It was modelled 
after that granted in the beginning of the seventeenth century to the 
celebrated East India Company, with which body it was designed to 
co-operate in extending national commerce, in promoting coloniza- 
tion, in crushing piracy, but, above all, in humbling the pride and 
might of Spain. II Under its auspices were formed the settlements 
of New Netherlands on the Delaware and Hudson rivers, ami the 
"patroon II system inaugurated (1629)' The \Vest India Company 
practically ruled the Dutch colonies in that region until their cap- 
ture by the English (1664). 
21 (p. 289).-This was Françoise du Serron, of St. Sevérin, Italy. 
22 (p. 3 01 ).-Guillaume Coûture, an interpreter, and for a time a 
Jesuit donné, came from Rouen to Canada, probably in 164 1 . In 
the following year, he was captured with J ogues, because he would 
not abandon the Father, and with him suffered cruel tortures from 
the Iroquois,- who, however, took him back to Three Rivers, after 
a captivity of two years. Soon afterward, he returned to their 
country with Iroquois envoys, to negotiate a peace between them 
and the French, in which effort he succeeded. Returning to Quebec 
in April, 1646, he seems to bave severed his connection with the 
Jesuits; for theJourn. des Jésuites mentions that the Fathers, at a 
consultation held Apr. 26, approved Coûture's marriage. That 
event, however, appears on the registers only under date of Nov. 16, 
1649,-his wife being Anne Aymard; they had ten children. In 
1648, he obtained a grant of land at Côte de Lauson; he became a 
captain of militia, and a judge in his seigniory. In 1666, he was 
sent to the Dutch at Albany on a mission concerning public affairs. 
His death occurred in 1702. 
23 (p. 301).- This 
11bnoire regarding the donnés summarizes the 
reasons for their employment in the Canadian missions, and the con- 



NOTES TO VOL. XXI 


319 


troversy arou!-'ed thereby. Notwithstanding the explanations made 
in this document by Lalemant, Vitelleschi ordered (Jan. 25, 16-t3) 
the dissolution of this branch of the mission service; but further 
remonstrance and explanation from Lalemant, accompanied by a 
modification in the terms and requirements of the donnés' connec- 
tion with the Society, finally procured (Dee. 25, 16-t4) the revocation 
of this decree. During the continuance of the Huron mission, these 
donnés rendered it invaluable service. On this subject, see Roche- 
monteix'sJésuites, vol. i., pp. 388-395. 
24 (p. 303).- Jean Guérin was another of these donnés; his name 
does not often occur in records of the time, but Lalemant, in the 
Relation of 1663, chap. viii., says that Guérin had been in the em- 
ploy of the Jesuits over twenty years, and eulogizes his virtue, 
devotion, and fidelity. He had served the missionaries in all their 
fields of labor-among the Iroquois, Hurons, Abenakis, and Algon- 
kins. His last voyage was with the ill-fated Ménard (vol. xviii., note 
5); they left Three Rivers in August, 1660, and Ménard perished in 
the forests of \Visconsin, a year later. In September, 1662, Guérin, 
while still in the mission service, was killed by the accidental dis- 
charge of a gun. Laverdière, Shea, and other historians have made 
Guérin the companion of Ménard at the time of his death; but this 
opinion is controverted by Campbell, in his" Ménard" (Parkman 
Club Pubs., Milw., no. II), pp. II, 12; he maintains that Guérin 
was left behind by Ménard, in charge of the infant church at 
Keweenaw Bay, and that the latter was accompanied by a French 
.armorer, or blacksmith. 
25 (p. 3 0 5).-Regarding Le Coq, see vol. xix., note 5. 




J 



. . . 
. . 
. . .. . 
.... . 
. . . 
... .. 
It _ .., 
.... .. 
.. .. . 
-. .... --- .- 
. .... II . 
... .. 
. .. 
. 
& . 
.. .. 
-. .--... . 
... . 
. .. 
... - 
. . .. a 
.. .-. .. 
. ..-.. .. 
.. .. 
. . 


. . - 
. . . . . ... 
. . . 
. . . 
.. 
... . . 
. . 
. - 
.. . - 
. . . . .11 . 
. . . - .. 
.. I .. .. .- 
. - 


:II 
. . 
. . 
. . 


. 
..- 
.. 
. 
. 


.. 
. 
. 


. 


. 


. 
. . 


. 
. 
.. 


. . 
.. ..... 
. 
. 


. 
. . 
. . 
... 


. 
. 
. 


. 


.. 


. . 
.... .- 
.. . ... ... 
. . 
. -.- 
II- ... 
. 
. 


. 
.. -s.. 
. . 
. 
. 
. . 
. 'II 
--- .. 


.. 


.. 


... 


.. 
. 
II 


..,. .. . . . 
.... ... 
.. ,. . ... -. .. 
.. . . 
. . . . .. . 
. ...... 
. . . ..... 
. . . .. .. 
.- . . . . . 
.. . . . . .. . .... . . . . . 
. .. '" . . . 
. ....... -.. .... . 
.. 
. . 
.. - . 

 . . . 
. 
,. . .. .. . '- 
... . . 
. .. 
. . 
. . . '. 
. . 
. . - 
. .. . 

 
>> 
. . . 
J: 
. . . .. . 
. . . . ... 
. . . . . .. 
. . 


. 
. 
. . 
. . .. 
.... .. 
.... . .. 
-. ..... -.... ........ . 
..: : .
"-'- .. .... ::...:.... ....;.. 
... ..... ......... 
. . .... II ....... 
. .-. -. .. .. .............. . 
.. . 
 ......... 
. :...... I.... :-:.;..... .:_:. 
.... .... . .. .... 
. ..... ......... 
.-. ...... . ...... .. 
-.- :.- -. :.:...:...... :. :.:.- .:.:-:.-. 
. -. . . . . -.. .. .... 
__a .. ..... .. ... 
..- -. : -.-:-:.- -. -.. . .. ...... 
-.- .. -...-.-.-. -. . 


ttX 


- 
.
 
. 
-. ..... 
... ..... 
: .-. .... 


... 


. 
. 
.. 
.. 
. 


.. 


... 
. .. 
. 
..... 
. 
.. .. 
... 
. . . 
. 
.'111 
.. 


- 
. 


. 


. 
. 


- 


? 



- 


. 
.. . 
.- . 
. . . 
...... -. 
.. ... 
. .-. 
.. . 
. . 
. .-. 
.... . 
-. . -. 
. 
. 



 


. 
.. 


. . 
. 


.. . . 
. 
. := 


. 
. .. 
. -. : 


.. 
. 


.. 


. .. 
. .. 
. . 


.. 
.... 
.. . 
:-. .- 
... . 
.... . . . 
..... 
. .. . . 
. ..... 
. .. 
. 
. . 
-. ..... .- 
-.- ..... -. 
. ..... 
. . - . 
..... 
, . .. 
. . . . 
.. .. . .. .- 
.. 


. . . . 
.. . 
. 
. . 
.....- 
. . . 
..:.-. 
.. . 


.. 


. 


.. 


. 
. 


. 


.. 
.- 
. 


.- 
. . 
..a 


. 
. 


..... 
,. . 
. 
. 


.. . 
. . . . 
.. . 
- .. 
. . .. 
..... 
. 
.. 
.. - 
.. 


. 
.- 


. 
. 
. 


. 
. 


. . . . 
. . 
. . 
. 
. 
. . 
. . 
. . . 
. . . 
. .. 
. 


. 


. 


.. 
. . ... 
.. . ."1 
. . . 
. . . . 
..: . 
..... 
. 
... 


. 
. 


. . 
. . 
. 
... 
. . . . 
..... ... 
. . .. 
. . 
. . 
. .. 
.. .. 
... 
. . .. .. 
.... . 
. . .. 
. . 
. .- 
... . 
.. . 


. 
..... 
. 


-:. 


. .; . 
. ...-..... .- 
. -II ... 
.... . 
.... w. ._: _:. . 
. . .... . 
. - . 
.. -. . 
. .... 
.-.. .. 


. 


. 


III 
.. 
.. .. 
.. . ..... 
. . . . . 
. .... . 
. ... .. 
.... -. 
... .... 
. ..-.. . 
...... .. 
. .... . 
.... ... 
. ......- - . 
. . . .. . 
... a._ _ _ . _. 
.. 
. .. 
.. . !.. 


. 
. 
. . 
. -.- 
. .. 
... . - ..: . 
. . 
. . 


. 
- . 
. . 


. 
.. 


.- 


. 
.. 


- 
. 


. 
. 
. 
. 
.. 
. 
. 


. 
.. 


.. 


. 
. 


. 


. 
. 
.. 
. 
. 


. 


.. 


. 
. 
. 
. 


. 
" 


.. 


. . 
. 
..... 
.IJII... . _ 
--- 
. .. . 
. . 


.. 


II. 


. 
. 
. .. 


. 
....- 
. . . . 
. ... 
. . 
. 
. 


. 
. 


.- 


. 
. 
.. . 
. . . . 
. -.. 
. . . 
-.-. 


. 
.. . 
. .. . . 
..... a. 
. 
. -. -- .- 
. . .. 
. . .. 
II. . . 
. -II . . 
. . 
. 


. . . 
. 
. 


. . 
. . . 
. 
.. 


.. .... 


. 
.. 


.... 


. 
. 


.. -. 
.: . . 


-. 
. . 
=::. . 
.. 


.. . . 
.. 


. ... 
. . . . 
.. .. . 
-. -. 
. . . - 
. . 
.. .. 
. ... 
- .. . 
.: -.. -. 
.... . . 
II . 
-. .. 
. ..- 


.. 
. . 


. 
--- . - 
. .. 
:.-. 



